Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_1886

Abstract:
Approximating Cycles in Directed Graphs: Fast Algorithms for Girth and Roundtrip Spanners Jakub Pachocki  arXiv:1611.00721v1 [cs.DS] 2 Nov 2016  Roei Tov  §  ∗  Liam Roditty  †  Aaron Sidford  Virginia Vassilevska Williams  ‡  ¶  Abstract The girth of a graph, i.e. the length of its shortest cycle, is a fundamental graph parameter. Unfortunately all known algorithms for computing, even approximately, the girth and girthrelated structures in directed weighted m-edge and n-node graphs require Ω(min{nω , mn}) time (for 2 ≤ ω < 2.373). In this paper, we drastically improve these runtimes as follows: • Multiplicative Approximations in Nearly Linear Time: We give an algorithm that e e in O(m) time computes an O(1)-multiplicative approximation of the girth as well as an e e O(1)-multiplicative roundtrip spanner with O(n) edges with high probability (w.h.p).  • Nearly Tight Additive Approximations: For unweighted graphs and any α ∈ (0, 1) 1−α e we give an algorithm that in O(mn ) time computes an O(nα )-additive approximation α of the girth as well as an O(n )-additive roundtrip spanner with Õ(n2−α ) edges w.h.p. We show that the runtime of our algorithm cannot be significantly improved without a breakthrough in combinatorial Boolean matrix multiplication, and that unconditionally the size of our spanner is essentially optimal. Our main technical contribution to achieve these results is the first nearly linear time algorithm for computing roundtrip covers, a directed graph decomposition concept key to previous roundtrip spanner constructions. Previously it was not known how to compute these significantly faster than Ω(min{nω , mn}) time. Given the traditional difficulty in efficiently processing directed graphs, we hope our techniques may find further applications.  ∗  Harvard University, meret@seas.harvard.edu Bar Ilan University, liamr@macs.biu.ac.il ‡ Stanford University, sidford@stanford.edu § Bar Ilan University, roei81@gmail.com ¶ Stanford University, virgi@cs.stanford.edu †  1  Introduction  The girth of a graph G is the length of the shortest cycle in G. It is a natural and fundamental graph parameter that has been extensively studied (see Diestel’s book [Die00] for a discussion) with research on its computation dating back to the 1960s. Perhaps, the most straightforward algorithm for the girth is simply to compute All-Pairs Shortest Paths (APSP). Surprisingly, this simple relationship leads to the best known algorithm for girth in a n-node graph with nonnegative √ weights: log n) time. 3 Θ( the breakthrough APSP algorithm of Williams [Wil14] can compute the girth in n /2 For sparse weighted graphs with m edges, an O(mn) runtime was recently obtained by Orlin [Orl17], improving upon an O(mn + n2 log log n) runtime that follows from using the best known sparse APSP algorithm [PR05]. When the graph can be dense, all known girth algorithms run in n3−o(1) time (unless the weights are e nω ) time is known [RW11]). small integers bounded in absolute value by M in which case an O(M Vassilevska W. and Williams [VW10] explained this by showing that the girth in weighted graphs is equivalent to APSP in the sense that if one of the two problems has a “truly subcubic”, O(n3−ε ) time algorithm for some ε > 0, then both do. As it is a longstanding open problem whether APSP has a truly subcubic time algorithm, computing the girth in O(n3−ε ) time would be a huge breakthrough. For unweighted graphs, in the 1970s Itai and Rodeh [IR78] showed that the girth can be computed in O(nm) time via BFS, or in O(nω ) ≤ O(n2.373 )-time using fast matrix multiplication [CW90, Vas12, Gal14]. These are still the best runtimes for the problem. Similarly to the relationship to APSP, [VW10] showed that the girth in unweighted graphs is subcubically equivalent to Boolean Matrix Multiplication (BMM). A large open question in BMM is whether there exist truly subcubic “combinatorial” algorithms, that can avoid the sophisticated but often impractical tools for Strassenlike fast matrix multiplication (e.g. [CW90, Vas12, Gal14]). The reduction from [VW10] shows that either both BMM and girth have truly subcubic combinatorial algorithms, or neither of them does. Because of these cubic barriers for exact computation, efficient approximation algorithms are of interest. Fast approximations for girth in undirected graphs are possible and have been studied extensively. It is well known ([ADD+ 93]) that for any integer k ≥ 1, every weighted undirected n-node graph G contains an O(n1+1/k ) edge (2k − 1)-spanner, i.e. a subgraph that (2k − 1)-approximates 1/k ) time [TZ05], and e all pairwise distances in G. Such (2k − 1)-spanners can be computed in O(mn immediately imply efficient approximation algorithms for girth in undirected weighted graphs. In unweighted undirected graphs even better results are known. Itai and Rodeh [IR78] gave an O(n2 ) time additive 1-approximation algorithm, and follow-up work [RW12, LL09] developed even more efficient, combinatorial, truly subquadratic, approximation algorithms. Although impressive approximate girth algorithms are possible for undirected graphs, they all exploit properties particular to undirected graphs. In particular, not only do sparse spanners exist in undirected graphs, but it is also known [BS74] that undirected graphs with Ω(n1+1/k ) edges must contain a 2k-cycle. This fact is at the heart of obtaining fast girth approximation algorithms. In contrast, directed graphs do not always contain sparse spanners and dense digraphs might not have any cycles at all (a directed bipartite clique is an example of each). It is completely unclear what (if any) structure there is to exploit in directed graphs to obtain fast girth approximation algorithms. Due to the close relationship between girth and APSP [VW10], a-priori it could be that the girth problem in directed graphs suffers from the same problem as APSP in directed graphs and no finite approximation is even possible without resolving a major open problem about BMM.  1  A potential saving point is that while directed graphs may not contain sparse spanners, they do contain sparse roundtrip spanners. That is, if one uses d(u, v) + d(v, u) for the distance between u and v instead of d(u, v), then one can obtain a very similar result for directed graphs as in the undirected case: for all k ≥ 1 and ε > 0, every n node directed graph G contains a (2k+ε)-roundtrip spanner on O(k2 /εn1+1/k ) edges. Unfortunately, while such roundtrip spanners have been known to exist for over a decade, the fastest algorithms for computing them run in O(mn) time, essentially the time to solve APSP. 1.1  Our Results  In this paper we provide the first non-trivial approximation algorithms for computing the girth and related properties on directed graphs that run substantially faster than the roughly Ω(min{nω , mn}) time currently needed to solve APSP on a n-node, m-edge directed graph with non-negative weights. e We show how to compute O(1)-multiplicative approximations to the girth and construct multiplicative roundtrip spanners in nearly linear time (See Section 1.1.1), and we show how to compute additive approximations to the girth and construct additive roundtrip spanners with bounds that are nearly tight under standard assumptions (See Section 1.1.2). To achieve these results we provide the first nearly linear time algorithms for computing roundtrip covers, a natural directed graph decomposition notion in prior work on roundtrip spanners [CW04, RTZ08] (See Section 1.2). 1.1.1  Multiplicative Approximations in Nearly Linear Time  [VW10] showed that the girth problem in weighted graphs is subcubically equivalent to APSP in general graphs. Thus, obtaining a truly subcubic algorithm for girth in weighted graphs would imply a major breakthrough, and is a daunting task for current techniques. In fact, no nontrivial combinatorial approximation algorithms were previously known even for the restricted case of unweighted directed graphs. On the other hand, we show how to obtain an O(log n) approximation to girth in weighted graphs in slightly super-linear time (See Theorem 1.1). Setting k := log n in this theorem allows us to compute an O(log2 n) approximation to the girth in nearly linear time. Theorem 1.1 (Multiplicative Girth Approximation) For any n-node, m-node directed graph with nonnegative integer edge weights, with unknown girth g and integer k ≥ 1, in time O(mn1/k log5 n) we can compute an estimate ḡ such that g ≤ ḡ ≤ O(k log n) · g with high probability. Using our new directed graph decomposition algorithm we also show how to compute multiplicative roundtrip spanners in nearly linear time. A spanner is a sparse subgraph that preserves the distances of the original graph with some multiplicative or additive approximation. Since even preserving the asymmetric reachability structure of directed graphs may require Ω(n2 ) edges (e.g. the complete directed bipartite graph), no sparse spanner yielding a finite multiplicative approximation is possible. Instead, we consider spanners under the roundtrip distance metric, i.e. roundtrip spanners. Given vertices u and v the roundtrip distance between u and v is the distance from u to v plus the distance from v to u. Roundtrip distances were studied by Cowen and Wagner [CW04] in the context of routing. Later Roditty, Thorup and Zwick [RTZ08] obtained roundtrip spanners for directed graphs that are almost as good in terms of their sparsity/approximation tradeoff as the spanners of undirected graphs [ADD+ 93]: (2k − ε)-multiplicative approximation with Õ((k2 /ε)n1+1/k ) edges for any integer k ≥ 1 and ε ∈ (0, 1). However, the construction of these spanners requires precomputing the roundtrip distances between all pairs of vertices, resulting in a running time of roughly Ω(min{mn, nω }). We show how to nearly match this size/approximation tradeoff while decreasing the time need to construct them to nearly linear in the number of edges in the graph.  2  Theorem 1.2 (Multiplicative Roundtrip Spanners) Given any n-node, m-edge directed graph with nonnegative integer edge weights and any k ≥ 1 in time O(mn1/k log5 n) we can compute an O(k log n)-multiplicative roundtrip spanner with O(n1+1/k log2 n) edges with high probability. Our techniques are inherently parallelizable, and we provide the first work-efficient parallel algorithms for computing both the approximate girth and the strongly connected components of an unweighted directed graph with depth linear in the diameter of the computed objects (See Section 5.2). 1.1.2  Nearly Tight Additive Approximations  Our techniques can also be used to obtain fast combinatorial algorithms that achieve additive approximations of the girth on unweighted graphs as follows. Let a ∈ (0, 1) be any constant and suppose the girth g is < na / log n. Then, the algorithm from Theorem 1.1 will return w.h.p. in Õ(m) time a cycle of length O(na ), which is (trivially) an additive O(na ) approximation of g. If on the other hand g ≥ na / log n, then if we take a random sample S of Cn1−a log2 n nodes for large enough constant C, then w.h.p. S will contain a vertex of the shortest cycle. Then, running BFS from each node of S will find the shortest cycle containing a node of S and hence compute g exactly: Corollary 1.3 (Additive Girth Approximation) For any unweighted n-node, m-edge directed graph with unknown girth g and a ∈ (0, 1) in time Õ(mn1−a ) we can compute an estimate ḡ such that g ≤ ḡ ≤ g + O(na ) with high probability. Our algorithms for Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.3 are combinatorial, but randomized. It is unclear whether they can be derandomized without incurring a large runtime cost. In particular, our algorithms use sampling to crudely estimate the sizes of reachability sets for all vertices in the graph. As far as we know, there are no faster deterministic ways to do this in the worst case than explicitly computing the reachability sets which requires Ω(min{nω , mn}) time. We partially derandomize Corollary 1.3 using different techniques: Theorem 1.4 (Deterministic Additive Girth Approximation) There is a deterministic combinatorial algorithm that for any unweighted n-node m-edge directed graph with unknown girth g and parameters a, ǫ ∈ (0, 1) computes in Õ(ǫ−2 mn1−a ) time an estimate ḡ such that g ≤ ḡ ≤ g + O(nα ) if g ≤ na and g ≤ ḡ ≤ (1 + ǫ)g if g > na . A natural question is whether the Õ(mn1−a ) runtime for na -additive approximation is necessary. Surprisingly, we show that when it comes to combinatorial algorithms, Theorem 1.4 and Corollary 1.3 are optimal up to constant factors in the additive error, barring a breakthrough in BMM algorithms: Theorem 1.5 (Hardness for Improving Additive Running Time) Suppose there is a combinatorial algorithm for some ε > 0 and a = 1/2 that computes an additive na − 1 approximation to the girth of any unweighted n-node m-edge directed graph in O(mn1−a−ε ) time. Then for some constant δ > 0 there is an O(n3−δ ) time combinatorial algorithm for n × n BMM. Finally, we note that these algorithm can also be extend to produce additive roundtrip spanners: Corollary 1.6 (Additive Roundtrip Spanners) Given any unweighted n-node, m-edge directed graph and any a ∈ (0, 1) in time Õ(mn1−a ) we can compute an O(na )-additive roundtrip spanner with Õ(n2−a ) edges edges with high probability. Another natural questions is whether the O(n2−a ) edges needed to create a na -additive roundtrip spanner is necessary. We give a lower bound construction that this is indeed the case:  3  Theorem 1.7 (Bounds on Additive Spanner Size) For all a ∈ (0, 1), there exist (arbitrarily large) n-vertex directed graphs where all na -additive roundtrip spanners have Ω(n2−a ) edges. 1.2  Algorithmic Techniques : Roundtrip Covers in Nearly Linear Time  Our key technical contribution towards achieving the majority of our algorithmic results is the first nearly linear time algorithm for computing roundtrip covers of directed graphs. Informally, a roundtrip cover is a decomposition of a directed into an overlapping collection of balls, i.e. roundtrip distance induced subgraphs. It is required that the radius, or maximum roundtrip distance, in each ball be bounded and that any pair of vertices of bounded roundtrip distance appear together in some ball (See Section 5 for formal definition). Computing such covers naturally yields multiplicative roundtrip spanners and has been considered in previous work [CW04, RTZ08]. Unfortunately, all known roundtrip cover computation algorithms prior to this paper ran in at least Ω(min{nω , mn}) time. It was not clear how to efficiently manipulate the roundtrip metric for the purposes of computing such decompositions. It seemed that, in the worst case, one would have to compute almost the entire roundtrip metric explicitly, i.e. solve APSP. We overcome this difficulty through a careful application of a few techniques. The first is natural: cluster the graph by growing balls of exponentially distributed radii or using exponential distribution based clustering techniques. (Similar ideas were used recently for parallel algorithms for undirected graph decomposition [MPX13] and directed maximum flow [EMPS16]). This does not distort too many roundtrip distances, but may fail to produce clusters of significantly smaller size. The second is our key insight: we show that if we carefully seed such a clustering routine we can ensure that we either find a large cluster with small roundtrip diameter or we break the graph into significantly smaller pieces while sufficiently preserving roundtrip distances. Unfortunately, naively implementing such a procedure would be expensive (i.e. involve solving APSP). To circumvent this, we use another trick: a known sampling based approach to estimate the fraction of vertices that each vertex can reach or is reachable by within a given distance and show this suffices to pick seeds for clustering. In short, we achieve our multiplicative approximations via a delicate combination of several powerful tools that have been defined and used before: (1) low diameter graph decompositions first introduced in [Awe85], (2) using the exponential distribution for decomposition (e.g. in [LS91, Bar96, MPX13, EMPS16]), (3) recursive graph decomposition (e.g. in [Bar96, FRT04, EMPS16]), and (4) sampling based reachability set estimation ([Coh97]). However, despite the prevalence of this machinery, it was an open question whether or not it could be leveraged to yield any running time improvement for the directed problems we consider. It was unclear a-priori if there was structure to exploit to quickly decompose the roundtrip metric and if the problems we consider were as hard as APSP. Our key contribution is to show that this is not the case and there is in fact a way to rapidly reveal non-trivial directed graph structure sufficient to achieve our results. There are several pitfalls that occur when naively applying standard machinery to this problem and we believe the strength of our result is to show how to methodically overcome them (see Section 3). The lack of fast combinatorial primitives for directed graphs is occasionally referenced as indicative of the gap between recent progress on approximate undirected network optimization problems [CKM+ 11, Mad10, LRS13, She13, KLOS14, Pen14, She16] and directed problems [Mad13, LS14, CMSV16]. We hope our results and the insights that underlie them may find future use.  4  1.3  Additional Related Work  For girth in undirected unweighted graphs, besides Itai and Rodeh’s [IR78] original O(n2 ) time ade 3 /m)-time ditive 1-approximation algorithm, Roditty and Vassilevska W. [RW12] presented an O(n additive 3-approximation algorithm. The additive 1-approximation of [IR78] is also a multiplicative 4/3-approximation. Lingas and Lundell [LL09] presented the first algorithm that breaks the quadratic time bound of [IR78], at the price of a weaker approximation: their algorithm runs in e 3/2 ) time and returns a multiplicative 8/3-approximation. Roditty and Vassilevska W. [RW12] O(n e 5/3 )-time deterministic multiplicative 2-approximation algorithm. They also presented an O(n showed how to obtain a less than 2 multiplicative approximation in truly subquadratic time for triangle-free graphs. The history of combinatorial algorithms for BMM of n × n matrices is as follows. Bansal and Williams [BW12] obtained an O(n3 / log2.25 n) time combinatorial algorithm improving on the 40year record of O(n3 / log2 n) by the Four-Russians Algorithm [ADKF70]. The result of [BW12] was further improved by Chan [Cha15] to O((n3 / log3 n) logO(1) log n) time and most recently by Yu [Yu15] to Ô((n3 / log4 n) logO(1) log n). Obtaining a truly subcubic time algorithm for APSP is among the most studied longstanding open problems in graph algorithms. In the 1970s Fredman [Fre76] showed that the O(n3 ) time classical Floyd-Warshall algorithm is not optimal by giving an O(n3 (log log n/ log n)1/3 ) time running time. Many polylogarithmic improvements followed, the last being O(n3 log3 log n/ log2 n) by Chan [Cha07]. Two years ago, Williams [Wil14] used techniques from circuit complexity, namely the polynomial method, to shave all polylogs, thus obtaining the current best bound for APSP, √ 3 Θ( log n) n /2 . Spanners in undirected weighted graphs were first studied by Awerbuch [Awe85] and Peleg and Schäffer [PS89]. Althöfer et al. [ADD+ 93] showed that for every integer k ≥ 1, every n-node graph, even if it is weighted, contains a multiplicative (2k − 1)-spanner on O(n1+1/k ) edges. This result is optimal, conditioned on a well-known (and partially proven [Wen91]) conjecture by Erdös [Erd63] about the existence of graphs of high girth. 1.4  Organization  The remainder of the paper is structure as follows. We introduce notation in Section 2, provide an overview of our approach in Section 3, and show how to compute roundtrip covers in Section 4. We then provide our algorithms for multiplicative approximations in Section 5 and our algorithms for additive approximations in Section 6. We conclude with our lower bounds in Section 7.  2  Preliminaries  Here we introduce various terminology we use throughout the paper. Graphs: Throughout this paper we let G = (V, E, l) denote a directed graph with vertices V , edges E ⊆ V × V , and non-negative edges lengths l ∈ RE ≥0 . At times we consider unweighted graphs, that is graphs in which le = 1 for all e ∈ E and in this case we will omit the l altogether. Distances: We let dG (u, v) denote the (shortest path) distance from u to v in G and we abbreviate this as d(u, v) when G is clear from context. At times we consider shortest path distances over edge subgraphs F ⊆ G and write dF (u, v) to denote the length of the shortest path from u to v using only the edges in F . In all cases we define d(u, v) = ∞ if there is not a path from u to v. def  Roundtrip Spanners: For a, b ∈ V we refer to d(a ⇄ b) = d(a, b) + d(b, a) as the roundtrip  5  distance between a and b. We call a subgraph S ⊆ E an α-multiplicative roundtrip spanner if dS (a ⇄ b) ≤ α · (dG (a ⇄ b)) for all a, b ∈ V and we instead call it an α-additive roundtrip spanner if dS (a ⇄ b) ≤ dG (a ⇄ b) + α. Distance Measures: For a directed graph G = (V, E, l) we call minv∈V maxv′ ∈V d(v, v ′ ) the radius of G. We call maxv,v′ ∈V d(v, v ′ ) the diameter of G.  Balls: For a given metric, a ball of radius r around v is the set of vertices within distance r of v. We generally use the term ‘ball’ to refer to balls in the roundtrip metric. For a directed graph G, we use inballG (v, r) and outballG (v, r) to denote the subsets of vertices of G that can reach v within distance r or be reached from v within distance r, respectively.  Trees: Given a directed graph G = (V, E, l) we call a Tout ⊆ E an out-tree with root r ∈ V if the edges form an undirected tree and are all oriented away from r (i.e. there is a r to v path for every node v in the tree). Similarly, we call Tin an in-tree with root r ∈ V if the edges form an undirected tree and are all oriented towards r ∈ V (i.e. there is a v to r path for every node v in the tree). Paths and Cycles: A directed (simple) path P = hu = v1 , v2 , . . . , vk = vi ⊆ V from u to v is an ordered set of vertices, where for every i ∈ {1, . . . , k − 1}, (vi , vi+1 ) ∈ E. A cycle C = hu = v1 , v2 , . . . , vk = vi is a direct (simple) path with an additional requirement that (vk , v1 ) ∈ E. If P is a path and u, v ∈ P such that u precedes v in P then we denote by P (u, v) the subpath of P from u to v. If P1 and P2 are paths in G, then we denote by P1 · P2 the concatenation of P1 and P2 . e e (n)) = O(f (n) logc f (n)). Running Times: We use O-notation to hide logarithmic factors, i.e. O(f  Probability: We use with high probability (w.h.p) to denote that an event happens with probability at least 1 − 1/O(poly(n)) where n is the size of the input to the problem.  3  Overview of the Approach  Our approach for computing multiplicative roundtrip spanners is broadly inspired by the following simple general strategy for computing spanners in undirected unweighted graphs: 1. Repeat until there are no vertices left: • Grow a ball of random radius from a vertex. • Add the edges in the computed shortest path tree to the spanner. • Remove all vertices in the ball from the graph. 2. Recurse on the subgraph induced by the edges that have endpoints in different balls. If the radii are chosen appropriately one can show that the shortest path trees approximately preserve the distance between the endpoints of all edges inside a ball and that not too many edges are cut (i.e. have endpoints in different balls). While there is a great body of work on efficiently constructing spanners with many desirable properties [BKMP05, Coh99, DHZ00, EP04, TZ05], this simple strategy suffices to provide a polylogarithmic multiplicative spanner in nearly linear time. Unfortunately there are two serious issues that prevent us from easily extending this approach to compute roundtrip spanners for directed graphs: • Recursing on cut edges does not work (or even make sense). • There may be problematic vertices that are at a small distance to (or from) all the vertices, but have a large roundtrip distance to every vertex. We derive our algorithm by carefully addressing these two issues. 6  Issue #1: How to Recurse? The first issue is immediate. If we grow multiple balls in a directed graph and attempt to recurse on cut edges, it may be the case that we disconnect the graph and the roundtrip distances for the cut edges become infinite. Consequently, if we recurse on the cut edges alone we simply do not have enough information to recover the path information we lost. Therefore, it is not clear if there is any reasonable way to recurse on the edges that we may distort. To alleviate this issue we instead build a randomized scheme where we reason directly about the probability of cutting or distorting the roundtrip distance between any particular pair of vertices. Building on previous work on graph decomposition [LS91, Bar96, MPX13] and directed maximum flow [EMPS16] we use the fact that if we grow a ball where the radius are chosen from an exponential distribution then we can directly reason about the probability that removing that ball cuts a cycle. We then proceed to repeatedly grow balls of exponential radii, removing them in each iteration. Since the exponential distribution is memoryless, we can show that the probability that this approach cuts a cycle depends only on the parameter of the exponential distribution we use. For completeness, in Appendix C we prove formally that repeated exponential ball growing works. For our algorithms we instead use a slightly more sophisticated clustering technique described in Section 4.1. This scheme works for similar reasons, but is more easily parallelizable. Ultimately, both techniques allow us to reason about the probability of distorting a cycle (rather than an edge) and repeat until all cycles corresponding the roundtrip distances between vertex pairs are preserved with high probability. The difficulty remains in ensuring that we can actually terminate such a procedure in a small number of iterations (i.e. Issue #2). Issue #2: How to Avoid Problematic Vertices? The second issue seems even more troubling. Suppose that there is a graph with non-trivial cycle structure we would like to approximate. To create a harder instance one could simply create a new graph by adding many new vertices each of which has one short length edge to every original vertex and one long length edge from every vertex. Clearly these new vertices do not affect the cycle structure of the original graph that we wish to approximate. However, any shortest path query from these new vertices will quickly explore the entire graph. Consequently, starting any sort of clustering from these vertices could be quite expensive in terms of running time, yet reveals very little information about the graph’s cycle structure. Even if we take a different approach and simply attempt to improve the running time of constructing the roundtrip spanners from prior work [RTZ08], a similar issue arises. Here the immediate issue is that the algorithm computes balls in the roundtrip metric. However, to do this, again we need to explore many vertices at a large distance in the roundtrip metric for analogous reasons. To alleviate this issue, we use sampling to estimate, in near linear time, the fraction of vertices in |V | of O(r)-balls around all nodes, up to a small additive error ǫ. This can be done in nearly linear time due to a clever technique of Cohen [Coh97] (For completeness, see Appendix however, we give a self-contained construction tailored to our purposes in Section A.) This allows us to find the problematic vertices that can reach many vertices at distance r yet are reachable by few at distance r (or vice versa). By using this technique to find problematic vertices we can better bias the seeds of our decomposition routines and make more progress in nearly linear time. This is crucial to our algorithm.  7  Building the Algorithm Combining our ideas to deal with these two issues yields our algorithm. We estimate for every vertex the number of vertices at distance O(r) both from and to it. In one case there is a vertex that can both reach and is reachable by many vertices. In this case, we can compute a large enough ball (in the roundtrip metric) that contains vertices of small roundtrip distance, and then we recurse on the rest of the vertices outside the ball. In the other case, there are many vertices that either do not reach or are not reached by too many vertices at distance O(r) and we can grow clusters from them and recurse on all the clusters. In either case we show that we do not need to recurse too many times and that ultimately, with constant probability (see Section 4.3), any particular pair of vertices at small roundtrip distance is together in a cluster. Repeating this procedure multiple times yields our nearly linear time roundtrip cover algorithm (see Section 4). With our our roundtrip cover algorithm in hand, nearly we use them to compute multiplicative roundtrip spanners and obtain multiplicative estimates of the girth. A naive application of our procedure would yield a logarithmic dependence on the range of lengths in the graph. To avoid this, we show how to break a directed graph into smaller graphs reducing to subproblems where lengths vary only polynomially in the number vertices. Furthermore, we show that our algorithm is inherently parallel and we obtain new work / depth tradeoffs for these problems. As discussed, this also yields faster additive approximation for the girth, though new insights are needed to obtain deterministic results (see Section 5). As discussed in the introduction, our roundtrip cover algorithm is also used to compute additive approximations to the girth and additive roundtrip spanners as discussed earlier (see Section 6).  4  Roundtrip Covers  In this section we provide our main results on graph partitioning. In particular we show how to efficiently construct roundtrip covers, first introduced in [RTZ08]. Definition 4.1 (Roundtrip Covers, definition 2.4 in [RTZ08]) A collection C of balls is a (k, R)-roundtrip-cover of a directed graph G = (V, E, l) if and only if each ball in C is of radius at most kR, and for every u, v ∈ V such that dG (u ⇄ v) ≤ R, there is a ball B ∈ C such that u, v ∈ B. The main result of this section is the following theorem, stating that we can construct a (O(k log n), R)1/k ) time. e roundtrip-cover with high probability in O(mn Theorem 4.2 (Fast Roundtrip Cover) The algorithm Fast-Roundtrip-Cover(G, k, R), returns a collection C that is an (O(k log n), R)-roundtrip-cover of directed graph G = (V, E, l), w.h.p. in time O(mn1/k log4 n). Moreover, every vertex v ∈ V belongs to O(n1/k log n) elements of C.  Note that if G has integer edge lengths between 0 and U we can immediately apply Theorem 4.2 for a value of R that is a power of 2 and obtain O(k log n)-multiplicative roundtrip spanners of with O(n1+1/k log2 n log U ) edges in time O(mn1/k log4 n log U ) as well as compute an O(k log n) multiplicative approximation to the girth in the same running time. Consequently, proving Theorem 4.2 encapsulates much of the difficulty in achieving our desired algorithmic results. However, in Section 5 we show how a more careful application of Theorem 4.2 yields even stronger results, completely removing the dependence on U . The remainder of this section is dedicated to providing the algorithm Fast-Roundtrip-Cover and proving Theorem 4.2. First in Section 4.1 we provide our main graph clustering tool, then in Section 4.2 we provide our technique for estimating the fraction of vertices reachable to and from each vertex at some radius. Finally, in Section 4.3 we put these tools together to provide Fast-Roundtrip-Cover and prove Theorem 4.2.  8  4.1  Clustering  Here we provide the primary clustering/partitioning technique we use for our algorithm. We provide an algorithm that partitions the vertices into regions of bounded radius of our choice centered around a chosen subset of the vertices so that the probability of separating any two vertices of bounded roundtrip distance is small. The ability to control the radii and choose the starting vertices is key to deriving our algorithm. As discussed in the introduction we use an exponential-distribution-based clustering procedure so that we can argue directly about the probability of cutting any particular cycle. This allows us to apply this procedure multiple times and argue by union and Chernoff bounds that with high probability we do not cut any cycle that we want to approximate, and thus obtain a good approximation of any relevant cycle. However, rather than simply growing balls of exponentially distributed radius and repeating (as discussed in Section 3), we provide a different scheme in the flavor of [MPX13, EMPS16] that better parallelizes. For completeness we complement our analysis with a proof that this sequential ball growing scheme also works in Appendix C. Our algorithms, Cluster-Out and Cluster-In are given in Figure 1. Given a graph G = (V, E, l), a set of vertices S ⊆ V and a target radius r, the algorithm uses the exponential distribution to assign vertices in G to clusters for each of the v ∈ S. The assignment is done in a way that ensures that these clusters each have bounded radius. By our choice of assignment rule and distribution we formally show that the probability that two vertices of small roundtrip distance are not in the same cluster is sufficiently small. (V1 , . . . , Vt ) = Cluster-Out(-In)(G, S, r), where G = (V, E, l) is a directed graph, S ⊆ V and r > 0. 1. Set β := log(n)/r. 2. For every vertex v ∈ S, pick xv ∼ Exp(β). 3. For each vertex u ∈ V , assign u to the cluster rooted at the vertex v ∈ S which minimizes −xv + dG (v, u), unless that quantity is positive; in that case, do not assign u to any cluster. (use dG (u, v) for Cluster-In) 4. Let V1 , . . . , Vt−1 be the clusters produced by the above step. S 5. Return (V1 , . . . , Vt−1 , V \ i Vi ). Figure 1: The clustering algorithm. In the remainder of this section we formally analyze this algorithm proving Lemma 4.3. The analysis we present is very similar to that of [MPX13] and uses a subset of the ideas of [EMPS16]. The main difference is that we start only from a subset of the vertices S. Our analysis makes use of several facts regarding the exponential distribution which for completeness we prove in Appendix B. Lemma 4.3 Let (V1 , V2 , . . . , Vt ) be the partition of V returned by Cluster-Out(G, S, r) (analogously of Cluster-In). Then, for any c ≥ 1 we have 1. with probability at least 1 − n1−c for all i < t, the radius of the tree corresponding to Vi is at most c · r, 2. for any pair of vertices u, v at roundtrip distance at most R in G, they are in the same set Vi with probability at least exp(− log(n)R/r). Furthermore, the algorithm runs in time O(m log n). Proof:  We prove the lemma for Cluster-Out (the proof for Cluster-In is analogous). We use  9  various facts about the exponential distribution though this proof (See Section B for their proof). Note that the maximum radius of any cluster, Vi is upper bounded by maxi xi by design. For every i ∈ 1, . . . , t, we have P r [xi ≥ c · r] ≤ exp(−c · βr) = n−c . By a union bound the maximum radius of is at most c · r with probability at least 1 − n1−c . To prove the remainder of the lemma, fix u, v ∈ V with roundtrip distance at most R in G. Assume s ∈ S is the vertex minimizing −xs + min(dG (s, u), dG (s, v)), and that this quantity is less than 0 (otherwise we have u, v ∈ Vt ). Let T be the second smallest value of this quantity, or 0, whichever is smaller. Condition on the values of s and T and assume without loss of generality that dG (s, u) ≤ dG (s, v). Then u is assigned to the cluster rooted at s, and u and v can be separated only if −xs + dG (s, v) > T . By the triangle inequality, this would imply −xs + dG (s, u) + R > T . By assumption, we have −xs + dG (s, u) < T , or equivalently xs > dG (s, u) − T . By the memoryless property of the exponential distribution (See Lemma B.1), we see that the probability that the cluster rooted at s contains both vertices u and v is at least h i h i Pr xs > dG (s, u) − T + R | xs > dG (s, u) − T = Pr Exp(β) ≥ R = exp(−βR), yielding the desired result. 4.2    Estimating Ball Sizes  To compute part of a roundtrip cover, ideally we would just partition the graph using the decomposition scheme of the previous graph and repeat until the clusters have good roundtrip diameter. Unfortunately, as discussed in Section 3 this approach fails as there may be problematic vertices that have a large low-radius ball in one direction, and a small low-radius ball in the other direction. In other words, calls to Cluster-In and Cluster-Out with the wrong set S might only yield trivial partitions, i.e. V1 = V . To alleviate this issue, we use a fast sampling approach to estimate the sizes of the O(r)-balls of all vertices, that allows us to identify these problematic vertices efficiently. Lemma 4.4 ([Coh97]) For all ǫ ∈ (0, 1) there is an algorithm Estimate-Balls(G, r, ǫ) that in O(mǫ−2 log2 n) time computes n-length vectors sout , sin , with the following property. For any vertex u, let s̄out u be the fraction of vertices in V such that dG (u, vi ) ≤ r. Then, w.h.p., for all vertices u, out out corresponding to u. An analogous statement |s̄out − sout u u | ≤ ǫ, where su is the component of s holds for sin . For completeness, we provide a self-contained proof of Lemma 4.4 in Appendix A. 4.3  Fast Roundtrip Covers  Combining the techniques of Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 here we provide our efficient algorithm for constructing roundtrip covers, i.e. Fast-Roundtrip-Cover, and prove the main theorem of this section, Theorem 4.2, analyzing this algorithm. We push much of the work of this algorithm to a subroutine Probabilistic-Cover that performs the simpler task of constructing probabilistic roundtrip cover: that is a partition of the vertex set such that any two vertices close enough in the roundtrip metric are in the same cluster with at least some fixed probability. Our main roundtrip cover construction is then simply a union of sufficiently many probabilistic roundtrip covers computed by Probabilistic-Cover.  10  {B1 , B2 , . . .} = Probabilistic-Cover(G, r), where G = (V, E, l) is a directed graph and r > 0. 1. Set c > 1 to a sufficiently large constant (for high probability bounds). 2. If V is empty, return ∅. 3. Let sout , sin := Estimate-Balls(G, c · r, 18 ). 3 in := {v ∈ V : sin ≥ 3 }. 4. Let S out := {v ∈ V : sout v ≥ 4 }, S v 4 5. If S out ∩ S in 6= ∅: (a) Choose an arbitrary vertex u ∈ S out ∩ S in . (b) (failure) If |S out ∩ S in | < 41 · |V |, return {V }. (c) Pick rB uniformly at random in [2c · r, 2(c + 1) · r]. (d) Let B be a ball of radius rB in the roundtrip metric around u. (e) Let G′ be the graph induced by G on V \ B. (f) Return {B} ∪ Probabilistic-Cover(G′ , r). 6. If |S out | ≤ 21 · |V |: (a) Let (V1 , . . . , Vt ) := Cluster-Out(G, V − S out , r). Otherwise (we have |S in | ≤ 21 · |V |): (b) Let (V1 , . . . , Vt ) := Cluster-In(G, V − S in , r). 7. (failure) If maxi |Vi | > 87 · |V |, return {V }. 8. For i = 1, . . . , t, let Gi be the graph induced by G on Vi . 9. Return Probabilistic-Cover(G1 , r) ∪ . . . ∪ Probabilistic-Cover(Gt , r). Figure 2: Single pass of cover construction. The statement and analysis of Probabilistic-Cover are the most technically involved results of this section. Our algorithm, Probabilistic-Cover, takes as input a directed graph G, a target radius r, and proceeds as follows. First we use Estimate-Balls from Section 4.2 to estimate the fraction of vertices in all balls of radius O(r) up to an additive 1/8. Then we consider two cases. In the first case we find that there is some vertex that can reach a large fraction of the vertices at distance O(r) and can be reached by a large fraction of the vertices at distance O(r). In this case we know that many vertices have a small roundtrip distance to this vertex so we simply output a roundtrip metric ball around this vertex and recurse on the remaining vertices. Otherwise, we know that there are many vertices that do not reach (or are not reachable by) many vertices at distance O(r) and we can cluster to or from these vertices using Cluster-Out(-In) analyzed in Section 4.1 and recurse on the clusters. In either case we recurse on subsets of vertices that are a constant fraction of the original size and hence only need to recurse a for a logarithmic number of iterations. We formally analyze this algorithm and prove that it has the desired properties in the following Lemma 4.5. Lemma 4.5 Let C := Probabilistic-Cover(G, r). Then: 1. each B ∈ C is a ball of radius O(r) in the roundtrip metric, w.h.p., 2. any pair of vertices u, v at roundtrip distance at most R in G are in the same element of C with probability at least exp(−6 log2 (n)R/r), and 3. every vertex v ∈ V belongs to exactly one element of C. Furthermore, the algorithm runs in time O(m log3 n). Proof:  Property 3. is easily verified.  To prove property 1., first note that for large enough c w.h.p. all calls to the subroutines Cluster-In, Cluster-Out  11  and Estimate-Balls yield the guarantees described in Lemmas 4.3 and 4.4. Conditioning on this event, we show the failures in steps 5(b) and 7 of Probabilistic-Cover never occur; this is enough to show the thesis. First assume that there exists a vertex u ∈ S out ∩ S in . Then, by assumption, we have |outballG (u, c · r)| ≥ ( 34 − 18 ) · |V | ≥ 85 · |V | and |inballG (u, c · r)| ≥ 85 · |V |. Hence |outballG (u, c · r) ∩ inballG (u, c · r)| ≥ 14 · |V |, which implies |S out ∩ S in | ≥ 41 · |V |. Hence the failure in step 5(b) cannot occur. Now assume that |S out | ≤ 21 · |V | (the case |S in | ≤ 21 · |V | is analogous). By assumption, the radii of all balls grown in calls to Cluster-Out are at most c · r, and so the sizes of the clusters constructed are at most 87 · |V | (by assumption on accuracy of Estimate-Balls). The last cluster cannot be larger than 21 · |V | by construction. Hence the failure in step 7 cannot occur. To prove property 2., first note that in every recursive call, the size of the vertex set is multiplied by at most 7/8. Therefore, there are at most ⌈log8/7 n⌉ levels of recursion. Now fix two vertices u and v at roundtrip distance at most R ≤ r in G. In each level of recursion, the vertex set is partitioned by a call to Cluster-In or Cluster-Out, or growing a roundtrip metric ball of radius chosen uniformly at random from [2c · r, 2(c + 1) · r]. For the first two cases, the probability u and v are not separated if they have not been separated previously is at least exp(− log(n)R/r)) by Lemma 4.3. For the last case, the probability is easily seen to be at least 1 − R/(2 · r) ≥ exp(− log(n)R/r). Hence, the probability that u and v are not separated at all is at least exp(− log(n)R/r)⌈log8/7 n⌉ ≥ exp(−6 log2 (n)R/r). Note that computing the ball in the roundtrip metric in step 5(d) reduces to two single source shortest path computations from u. Consequently, the running time is dominated by the O(log n) calls to Estimate-Balls.  With Probabilistic-Cover in hand, we are ready to present the complete efficient algorithm for constructing roundtrip covers. The algorithm, Fast-Roundtrip-Cover is given in Figure 3 and we conclude with its analysis, i.e. the proof of Theorem 4.2. {C1 , C2 , . . .} = Fast-Roundtrip-Cover(G, k, R), where G = (V, E, l) is a directed graph and k, R > 0. 1. Let r := 6Rk log n. 2. Let c > 1 to a sufficiently large constant (for high probability bounds). 3. Let C0 := ∅. 4. For i = 1, . . . , c · ⌈n1/k ⌉ · ⌈log n⌉: Ci := Ci−1 ∪ Probabilistic-Cover(G, r). 5. Return C. Figure 3: The fast roundtrip cover algorithm. Proof of Theorem 4.2: By Lemma 4.5, w.h.p. all balls in C have the desired radius properties and the size assertions are easily verified. It remains to show that w.h.p. any two vertices at short roundtrip distance share at least one cluster in C. Fix two vertices u and v at roundtrip distance at most R in G. By Lemma 4.5, the probability they are in the same cluster in any single cover pass is at least exp(−6 log2 (n)R/r) = exp(− log(n)/k). Hence, the probability they are separated in ⌈n1/k ⌉ = ⌈exp(log(n)/k)⌉ inde-  12  pendent passes is at most exp(−1). Therefore, the probability they are separated in all the of c · ⌈n1/k ⌉ · ⌈log n⌉ passes is at most exp(−c log n) = n−c .   5  Roundtrip Spanners and More  The analysis in Section 4 as encompassed by Theorem 4.2 yields our best result for unweighted graphs G; the union of Fast-Roundtrip-Cover(G, k, R) for R = 20 , 21 , . . . , 2⌈log 2 n⌉ is w.h.p. an O(k log n)-multiplicative roundtrip-spanner of G. More generally, for weighted graphs we obtain the following corollary: Corollary 5.1 Given a directed graph G = (V, E, l) we can construct w.h.p. a O(k log n)-roundtripspanner of G with O(n1+1/k log n log(nW )) edges in O(mn1/k log4 n log(nW )) time, where W is the ratio between the largest and the smallest length in G. The first aim of this section is to remove the dependence on W from both the size of the spanner and the running time (Section 5.1). This allows us to prove the following result on spanner construction, and Theorem 1.1 as its corollary. Theorem 5.2 The algorithm Fast-Roundtrip-Spanner(G, k) in O(mn1/k log4 n) time computes w.h.p. an O(k log n)-roundtrip-spanner of G of size O(n1+1/k log2 n). Then we shall investigate parallel algorithms that result from our scheme, obtaining the following results (Section 5.2). Theorem 5.3 Given an unweighted directed graph G and an upper bound R on the maximum diameter of any strongly connected component of G, we can w.h.p. compute the strongly connected e e components of G in O(m) work and O(R) depth.  Theorem 5.4 Given an unweighted directed graph G, we can w.h.p. compute an O(k log n) ap1/k ) work and O(girth(G)) e e proximation to the girth of G in O(mn depth. 5.1  Removing the Dependence on Edge Lengths  Our algorithm for constructing the spanner will remain based on the idea of taking a union of (O(k log n), R)-roundtrip-covers over R ∈ R, for some set R such that every roundtrip distance in G is a constant factor smaller than some element of R. The main idea in removing the dependence on the lengths of the edges is that for a fixed value of R, we do not have to consider all the edges in G when constructing a (O(k log n), R)-roundtripcover. First, note that we can remove all the edges longer than R, as that does not change any roundtrip distance smaller than R. Simultaneously, for any strongly connected component of edges shorter than R/n, we can replace it by a single vertex. Indeed, uncontracting all such vertices after obtaining a roundtrip cover will increase the length of any path found by only an additive R. Finally, we can remove all the edges that do not participate in any strongly connected component, as that does not impact any roundtrip distances. The idea is similar to those given in [CMP+ 14, EMPS16]; the main difference from the scheme of [EMPS16] is in preserving only edges that are parts of connected components of edges shorter than R. The described process is formalized in Definition 5.5. Definition 5.5 Let G = (V, E, l) be a directed graph and xL , xR ∈ R be such that 0 < xL < xR . We construct G collapsed to [xL , xR ] by: • merging any vertices that can reach each other while following only edges of length at most xL , • removing all edges longer than xR ,  13  • removing all edges whose endpoints cannot reach each other while following only edges of length at most xR , and • removing all vertices of degree 0 remaining after the above operations. To simplify notation, we define the L∞ -roundtrip distance d∞ G (u, v):  Definition 5.6 For a directed graph G = (V, E, l) and a pair of vertices u, v ∈ V , we define the L∞ -roundtrip distance between u and v, denoted d∞ G (u, v), as the minimum value of d such that there is a cycle C containing u and v such that le ≤ d for all e ∈ C.  We now show that performing the process for all R ∈ {2t : t ∈ Z} results in a collection of graphs with a bounded size. Lemma 5.7 Let G = (V, E, l) be a directed graph. For every t ∈ Z, let G(t) be G collapsed to [2t /n, 2t ]. Then the total number of edges in all G(t) is O(m log n), and the total number of vertices in all G(t) is O(n log n). Proof: Fix an edge e = (u, v) ∈ E and t such that e is an edge in G(t) . Note that since e is not t contracted, we must have d∞ G (u, v) > 2 /n. Simultaneously, since e is part of a strongly connected t component in G consisting of edges of length at most 2t , we must have d∞ G (u, v) ≤ 2 . Hence (t) t − log2 d∞ G (u, v) ∈ [0, log 2 n). Therefore e is included in O(log n) of the graphs G . Assume that u is a vertex of G(t) . By construction, it must be part of a nontrivial strongly con′ nected component in G(t) , and so it is merged with another vertex in G(t ) for all t′ ≥ t + log2 n. Since there are only O(n) possible vertices that can result from merging vertices in V , and each of them appears in O(log n) graphs G(t) , we obtain the thesis.  If we can construct all the graphs G(t) efficiently, we can simply run Fast-Roundtrip-Cover on each of them to obtain a spanner for G. Following the idea of the proof of Lemma 5.7, to construct all of G(t) , is enough to compute for each edge (u, v) ∈ E the value of d∞ G (u, v). This is obtained by the algorithms Roundtrip-L∞ -Spanner and Find-Collapse-Times, described below. The algorithm Find-Collapse-Time computes d∞ G (u, v) for every edge (u, v) in G, assuming that all the edges have distinct weights from 1 to m. s = Find-Collapse-Times(G, (eL , . . . , eR )), where G = (V, E) is a directed graph, L, R ∈ N with 1 ≤ L ≤ R. 1. If L = R, set se = L for all e ∈ E and return s. 2. Let M = ⌊(L + R)/2⌋. 3. Let E ′ := {e ∈ E|e is contained inside a SCC of the graph (V, {eL , . . . , eM })}. 4. 5. 6. 7.  Let V ′ be V with edges in E ′ contracted. Let s′ := Find-Collapse-Times((V, E ′ ), (eL , . . . , eM )). Let s′′ := Find-Collapse-Times((V ′ , E \ E ′ ), (eM +1 , . . . , eR )). Return s′ merged with s′′ . Figure 4: The recursive algorithm for computing collapse times.  Lemma 5.8 Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph and (eL , . . . , eR ) be a sequence of edges on V . Assume that every edge in E is contained in a strongly connected component of (V, {eL , . . . , eR }). Let s = Find-Collapse-Times(G, (eL , . . . , eR )). Then for every e ∈ E, it holds that se is the min14  imum i such that e is contained in a strongly connected component of (V, {eL , . . . , ese }). Moreover, the algorithm runs in O((|V | + |E| + (R − L + 1)) log(R − L + 1)) time. Proof: Correctness is easily proven by induction. To bound the running time, it is enough to observe that every recursive call halves (R − L + 1), and every edge in E is only passed to one recursive call.  The algorithm Roundtrip-L∞-Spanner constructs an O(n)-sized subset F of the edges of G that preserves the L∞ -roundtrip distances between vertices of G. It also returns a tree T containing all the vertices that can result from collapsing cycles of maximum edge length lower than some bound, with edges of T describing the hierarchical structure on them. Lowest common ancestor queries on T enable us to efficiently compute d∞ G (u, v) for any u, v. (F, T ) = Roundtrip-L∞ -Spanner(G), where G = (V, E, l) is a directed graph. 1. Remove from G any edges that are not part of a strongly connected component. 2. Let e1 , . . . , em be the edges of G, ordered by increasing length. 3. Let s := Find-Collapse-Times(G, (e1 , . . . , em )). 4. Let V0 = V, F0 = ∅. 5. Let T = (V, ∅). 6. For i in 1, . . . , m: (a) Let Ei be the set of edges e for which se = i. (b) Let Ei′ be union of any out- and in-trees for the strongly connected components of (Vi−1 , Ei ). (c) Let Fi := Fi−1 ∪ Ei′ . (d) Let Vi be the set of vertices obtained from Vi−1 by contracting all of Ei (equivalently Ei′ ). (e) Label every vertex of Vi \ Vi−1 by l(ei ). (f) Add all vertices of Vi \ Vi−1 to T . (g) For every vertex u ∈ Vi−1 that was contracted into a vertex v ∈ Vi \ Vi−1 , add an edge between v to u to T . 7. Return (Fm , T ). Figure 5: The recursive algorithm for computing collapse times. Lemma 5.9 Let G = (V, E, l) be a directed graph. Let (F, T ) = Roundtrip-L∞ -Spanner(G). Then: 1. F ⊆ E is such that for any pair of vertices u, v contained in a cycle in G with maximum edge length R, there exists a cycle in (V, F ) containing u and v with maximum edge length R, 2. |F | = O(n), and 3. for any two vertices u, v ∈ V , the label of the lowest common ancestor of u and v in T is equal to d∞ G (u, v). Moreover, the algorithm works in O(m log n) time. Proof: By Lemma 5.8, the application of Find-Collapse-Times computes for each edge (u, v) ∈ E the value of d∞  G (u, v). The claims of the lemma follow by construction. Finally, we describe our complete algorithm for computing roundtrip distance spanners of weighted graphs. The algorithm first computes all graphs G(t) using a call to Roundtrip-L∞ -Spanner and 15  the ideas of the proof of Lemma 5.7. It then invokes Fast-Roundtrip-Cover for each of G(t) and returns the union of the results, together with a L∞ -roundtrip distance spanner for G to account for the collapsed clusters in G(t) . F = Fast-Roundtrip-Spanner(G, k), where G = (V, E, l) is a directed graph and k ≥ 1. 1. Let (F0 , T ) := Roundtrip-L∞ -Spanner(G). 2. For all t ∈ Z, let G(t) be G collapsed to [2t /n, 2t ]. 3. Let i := 0. 4. For every t such that G(t) is nonempty: (a) Ci := Fast-Roundtrip-Cover(G(t) , k, 2t ). (b) Fi+1 := Fi ∪ shortest path trees to and from roots of each ball in Ci . (c) i := i + 1. 5. Return Fi . Figure 6: The roundtrip spanner algorithm. Theorem 5.2 The algorithm Fast-Roundtrip-Spanner(G, k) in O(mn1/k log4 n) time computes w.h.p. an O(k log n)-roundtrip-spanner of G of size O(n1+1/k log2 n). Proof of Theorem 5.2: First note that for each t, F0 provides a low-cost spanner for every (t) collapsed vertex of G . By uncollapsing the collapsed vertices of G(t) and adding in edges from F0 , the length of any path in the roundtrip cover at radius 2t increases by at most an additive 2t . Since edges larger than 2t have no influence on roundtrip distances not larger than 2t , we see that the roundtrip covers computed for each G(t) are also roundtrip covers for G (after adding the edges of F0 ). To obtain the claimed running time, we need to show that the nonempty graphs G(t) can be computed efficiently. Following the idea of the proof of Lemma 5.7, we see that it is sufficient to compute for every edge (u, v) the value of d∞ G (u, v). By Lemma 5.9, this is easily done using lowest common ancestor queries on T .  Theorem 1.1 is an immediate corollary of Theorem 5.2. Theorem 1.1 (Multiplicative Girth Approximation) For any n-node, m-node directed graph with nonnegative integer edge weights, with unknown girth g and integer k ≥ 1, in time O(mn1/k log5 n) we can compute an estimate ḡ such that g ≤ ḡ ≤ O(k log n) · g with high probability. It is sufficient to execute Fast-Roundtrip-Spanner(G, k). The Proof of Theorem 1.1: smallest diameter of any cluster computed in calls to Fast-Roundtrip-Cover will be no larger than O(k log n) · girth(G).  5.2  Parallel Strongly Connected Components and Girth Estimation  Our main subroutine, Fast-Roundtrip-Cover, is inherently parallelizable. This enables us to obtain a new parallel algorithm for computing strongly connected components in nearly linear work, and depth proportional to the maximum diameter of a strongly connected component (assuming access to a known upper bound). To our knowledge, no previous guarantees of this type have been known, despite the classical status of analogous guarantees for problems such as parallel u-v reachability in directed graphs. Theorem 5.3 Given an unweighted directed graph G and an upper bound R on the maximum 16  diameter of any strongly connected component of G, we can w.h.p. compute the strongly connected e e components of G in O(m) work and O(R) depth.  To prove this result, we first formally state the parallel runtime guarantees of Fast-Roundtrip-Cover. Lemma 5.10 For unweighted graphs, a parallel version of Fast-Roundtrip-Cover(G, k, R) can 1/k ) work and O(R) e e be implemented to work in O(mn depth.  Proof: Since Probabilistic-Roundtrip-Cover has only O(log n) levels of recursion, and the separate calls to it can be made in parallel, the bottleneck for depth is computing shortest paths. Since for unweighted graphs any paths computed in calls to Estimate-Balls, Cluster-Out and e Cluster-In are of length O(R), the thesis follows by employing standard parallel breadth first  search (cf. [MPX13]). We now proceed to prove Theorem 5.3. Proof of Theorem 5.3: We start by computing C := Fast-Roundtrip-Cover(G, log n, R). Now note that w.h.p., for any pair of vertices u and v, they are part of the same cluster in C if and only if they are in the same strongly connected component of G. Hence, it is enough to compute weakly connected components of the relation of being part of the same cluster in C; this is achieved  with classical parallel algorithms [SV82, RS92]. Another corollary is that we can parallelize our girth estimation algorithm for unweighted graphs. Theorem 5.4 Given an unweighted directed graph G, we can w.h.p. compute an O(k log n) ap1/k ) work and O(girth(G)) e e proximation to the girth of G in O(mn depth.  It suffices to invoke Fast-Roundtrip-Cover(G, k, R) for R ∈ Proof of Theorem 5.4: 20 , 21 , . . . until it returns a nonempty result. The work and depth bounds follow from Lemma 5.10.   6  Additive Approximations  6.1  Additive Roundtrip Spanners  We are given an unweighted directed graph G on n nodes and we want to show that for any 0 < a < 1 we can find in Õ(mn1−a ) time a subgraph H ⊆ G on Õ(n2−a ) edges such that for every pair of vertices u, v ∈ V , we have that dH (u, v) + dH (v, u) ≤ dG (u, v) + dG (v, u) + na . The algorithm will proceed using the idea from the introduction about how to approximate the girth. First run the algorithm from Corollary 5.1 to obtain an O(log n) roundtrip spanner H ′ of G on O(n2−a ) edges1 . Consider any u, v ∈ V with dG (u, v) + dG (v, u) ≤ na /(k log n) for k = 1/(1 − a). Then H ′ approximates the roundtrip distance between u and v to an additive factor of na . On the other hand, if dG (u, v) + dG (v, u) > na /(k log n), then we can select O(n1−a log2 n) nodes S uniformly at random. S will hit any of the ≤ n2 roundtrip cycles that are longer than na /(k log n) w.h.p. Thus, adding in- and out- BFS trees to and from all nodes of S will cover every such roundtrip cycle. Thus adding ≤ 2|S|n = O(n2−a log2 n) edges to H ′ to form H gives an additive na roundtrip spanner of G. The running time is Õ(mn1−a ). Now we consider whether the sparsity of our roundtrip spanner can be improved. Surprisingly we show that the answer is no. 1  One can set 2 − a = 1 + 1/k and get that k = 1/(1 − a) is a constant.  17  Theorem 6.1 For every a ∈ (0, 1), there exists a directed graph Gn on n nodes and Θ(n2−a ) edges, such that the only additive na roundtrip spanner of Gn is Gn . Proof: Let ℓ ≥ 1 be any integer s.t. k = ℓa/(1−a) is also an integer. Let n = ℓk and m = kℓ2 . We create a directed graph Gn on n nodes and m edges as follows. The vertex set of Gn consists of k partitions V1 , . . . , Vk such that |Vi | = ℓ for each i. The edge set is as follows: for every i, for every u ∈ Vi and for every v ∈ Vi+1 mod k , add a directed edge (u, v). That is, the Vi form a virtual directed k-cycle each edge of which is a complete bipartite ℓ × ℓ graph. Suppose that some edge (u, v) of Gn is omitted, where u ∈ Vi and v ∈ Vi+1 . The distance from u to v becomes at least k + 1: the best you can do is go from u to some other v ′ ∈ Vi+1 and then around the virtual cycle to some other node u′ ∈ Vi and then take the edge (u′ , v). Thus no additive k roundtrip spanner can omit any edge. Let’s see how m and k relate to n. As k = ℓa/(1−a) and n = kℓ, we get that n = ℓ1/(1−a) and k = na . We also get that m = kℓ2 = ℓ2+a/(1−a) = ℓ(2−a)/(1−a) = n2−a .  6.2  Additive Approximation for the Girth  As discussed in the introduction, combining Theorem 1.1 with the BFS computation of the lengths of shortest cycles through all nodes in a random sample of size Õ(n1−a ), yields the following corollary: Reminder of Corollary 1.3 For all a ∈ (0, 1), there is an Õ(mn1−a ) time combinatorial algorithm that w.h.p returns an O(na ) additive approximation to the girth of an unweighted directed graph. It is unclear whether the algorithm from the above corollary can be derandomized. The algorithm uses randomization in many places: (1) it uses a random sample to hit long cycles that we don’t have a handle on otherwise, (2) it uses sampling quite heavily to obtain estimates of the sizes of reachability sets of all vertices, (3) it grows random neighborhoods according to an exponential distribution. We are not aware of any deterministic approach that achieves running time O(mn1−ε ) for ε > 0 for any of the above cases. In fact, as far as we know, the only way to achieve (2) deterministically is to compute the reachability trees explicitly. Despite this, we show that the result can be partially derandomized using different techniques: Reminder of Theorem 1.4 Let G = (V, E) be a directed unweighted graph with unknown girth g, and let 0 < a, ε < 1 be parameters. There is a deterministic combinatorial algorithm that computes in Õ((1/ε2 )mn1−a ) time a cycle whose length is 1. an O(na ) additive approximation of g if g ≤ na , and 2. a (1 + ε) multiplicative approximation of g if g > na . In the the reminder of this section we prove Theorem 1.4. Roughly speaking, our algorithm works in iterations, where each iteration takes Õ((1/ε)m) time. Let C be a shortest cycle in G = (V, E). The idea of the algorithm is as follows. In each iteration we consider a shortest path of ⌈ε · na ⌉ vertices. If no such path exists, then the diameter of G must be smaller than εna , and we can pick any cycle and return it as our approximation. Assume now that there is a shortest path P with at least ⌈ε · na ⌉ vertices. Either P ∩ C 6= ∅, or we can remove P from G and recurse on the remaining graph. If P ∩ C 6= ∅, our algorithm finds an approximation for C by constructing a new weighted graph G′ and a shortest path P ′ between two nodes s and t 18  in G′ whose second shortest simple path length is a good approximation to the length of C. If we could compute this second shortest path exactly, then we would be done. Unfortunately, the fastest known algorithm for second shortest path takes O(mn + n2 log log n) time [GL09], and moreover Vassilevska W. and Williams [VW10] showed that the problem is subcubically equivalent to APSP, so that a truly subcubic algorithm for it would be a breakthrough. Our goal is to obtain an almost linear time algorithm, however, since we might need to repeat the procedure n1−a times (removing na nodes in each iteration). Fortunately, Bernstein[Ber10] developed an Õ(m/ε) time algorithm that computes a (1 + ε) multiplicative approximation for the second shortest simple path in directed weighted graphs. We use this algorithm for our Õ(mn1−a ) mixed approximation algorithm. Before we formally describe our algorithm, we note that a cycle in a directed graph must be contained in a strongly connected component (SCC). We can assume that G is strongly connected, as otherwise we compute in O(m)-time its SCCs and run the algorithm in every non-singleton SCC. If all SCCs are singletons, then the graph is a directed acyclic graph and has no cycles. We start by taking an arbitrary vertex z of G and using BFS in O(m) to find the longest shortest paths Qin , Qout , in and out of z, respectively. Let Q be the longer of Qin and Qout . By the triangle inequality, Q must have length at least half of the diameter of G (notice that since G is stronglyconnected, the diameter is well-defined). Let d = ⌈ε · na ⌉. If the length of Q is < d, then the diameter is < 2d, and any vertex of G is on a cycle of length at most 2d: take the edge (x, y) on a shortest cycle C̃ through x; the length of C̃ is 1 + d(y, x) ≤ 1 + (2d − 1) = 2d. Therefore, by running a BFS from an arbitrary vertex and stopping when the first backward edge is detected, we find a cycle that is an O(εna ) additive approximation to the shortest cycle. Otherwise, the diameter is at least 2d. Let P = hvd , . . . , v0 i be a portion of d edges from the path that we have computed. We construct a new directed weighted graph G′ as follows. 1. Initialize G′ to be G. Set all weights to 1. 2. Add the following vertices and edges to G′ . (a) For each vi ∈ P , where i ∈ {0, . . . , d}, create new nodes ui and u′i . (b) For each i ∈ {0, . . . , d} add an edge from ui to u′i , and for each i ∈ {0, . . . , d − 1} add an edge from u′i to ui+1 . All edges are of weight 1. 3. For each vi ∈ P , where i ∈ {0, . . . , d}, add the following new edges to G′ . (a) Add a new edge of weight 4d − 3i from ui to vi . (b) For each outgoing edge (vi , x) ∈ E of vi , add a new edge of weight 4d − 3i from ui to x. (c) For each incoming edge (y, vi ) ∈ E of vi , add a new edge of weight 3i from y to u′i . From the above construction it follows that there is a path P ′ = hu0 , u′0 , u1 , u′1 , . . . , ud , u′d i in G′ of length 2d + 1. Moreover, P ′ is the shortest path from u0 to u′d . To see this, notice first that there is no edge from u to v, where u, v ∈ P ′ are not consecutive. Therefore, any path from u0 to u′d other than P ′ , contains a vertex v ∈ / P ′ . The length of such a path is at least 4d > 2d + 1 since it must use an edge of weight 4d − 3i to leave P ′ and an edge of weight 3j to return P ′ , where 0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ d. Next we apply Bernstein’s algorithm to find a second shortest path for P ′ in G′ . Similarly to prior work on replacement paths, given a shortest path Q we say that a path D(u, v) is a hu, videtour of Q if D(u, v) is a simple path for which D(u, v) ∩ Q = {u, v} and u precedes v on Q. It is easy to show that the second shortest path Q′ of Q = hv0 , . . . , vk i has the following form:  19  Q′ = Q(v0 , u) · D(u, v) · Q(v, vk ), where Q(v0 , u) and Q(v, vk ) are the subpaths of Q from v0 to u and from v to vk , respectively, and D(u, v) is a hu, vi-detour of Q (e.g. see Lemma 2.1 in [Ber10]). The following fact follows easily from the construction of G′ and P ′ above. Fact 6.2 If P ′ has a hui , u′j i-detour then it has the following structure: (ui , x) · Q′ · (y, u′j ), where Q′ is a path from x to y in G, and x is an out-neighbor of ui in G and y is an in-neighbor of vj in G. Notice Q′ might be an empty path. In the next lemmas we establish the relationship between a shortest cycle that intersects P in G and a second shortest path for P ′ in G′ . Lemma 6.3 Let 0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ d. If P ′ has a hui , u′j i-detour D(ui , u′j ), then there is a cycle in G that contains P (vj , vi ) and has length ≤ |D(ui , u′j )| + |P (vj , vi )| = |D(ui , u′j )| + (j − i). Furthermore, if G has a simple cycle C that contains P (vj , vi ), then P ′ has a hui , u′j i-detour of length at most |C| − |P (vj , vi )| + 1. Proof: Let Q be a hui , u′j i-detour of P ′ . From the construction of G′ it follows that Q = (ui , x) · Q′ · (y, u′j ) where Q′ is a path from x to y in G2 . We show that C = (vi , x) · Q′ · (y, vj ) · P (vj , vi ) is a cycle in G. From the construction of G′ it follows that the edges (ui , x) and (y, u′j ) in G′ correspond to the edges (vi , x) and (y, vj ) in G, respectively, and since the path Q′ is also in G it follows that C is a cycle in G. Let C be a simple cycle such that P (vj , vi ) ⊆ C for some i, j (possibly equal). If C = hvj , . . . , vi i (i.e. (vi , vj ) ∈ E), then i 6= j and we have the following hui , u′j i-detour : D(ui , u′j ) = hui , vi , u′j i. Otherwise, we have a shortest path B from vi to vj , such that B ∩ P = {vi , vj } and B 6= {vi , vj }. Let x be the vertex that follows vi in B and y the vertex the precedes vj in B (it might be that x = y), then we have the following hui , u′j i-detour : D(ui , u′j ) = (ui , x) · B(x, y) · (y, u′j ).  Lemma 6.4 Let C ∗ be a shortest cycle in G. If P (vj , vi ) ⊆ C ∗ , where j ≥ i, then the length of a second shortest path of P ′ is at most 6d − 2 + |C ∗ |. Proof: It follows from Lemma 6.3 that P ′ has a hui , u′j i-detour. From Fact 6.2 it has the following structure: (ui , x)·Q′ (x, y)·(y, u′j ). Consider the path P ′ (u0 , ui )·(ui , x)·Q′ (x, y)·(y, u′j )·P ′ (u′j , u′d ). Its length is 2i+(4d−3i)+dG (x, y)+3j+2(d−j) = 6d+(j−i)+dG (x, y) = 6d−2+dG (x, y)+2+(j−i) ≤ 6d − 2 + dG (vi , vj ) + dG (vj , vi ) = 6d − 2 + |C ∗ |.  According to Lemma 6.3, a second shortest path implies a cycle C in G consisting of the detour of the second shortest path together with the path in G corresponding to the subpath of P ′ that was circumvented. Notice it is easy to derive from C a simple cycle in G, which might be shorter. Denote by L the length of a second shortest path. The length of C is then at most d + L. Let C ∗ be a shortest cycle in G. If P ∩ C ∗ 6= ∅, according to Lemma 6.4, L ≤ 6d − 2 + |C ∗ |. Since we are using a (1 + ε)-approximation for the second shortest path (ε < 1), we get a cycle of length at most: d + (1 + ε)L = d + (1 + ε)(6d − 2 + |C ∗ |) = 7d − 2 + ε(6d − 2) + (1 + ε)|C ∗ | ≤ O(d) + (1 + ε)|C ∗ |. If g ≤ na , then we found a cycle of size O(na ). If g > na , then since d ≤ O(εna ), we have a 1 + O(ε) 2  Notice it is possible that x = y, and then hvi , xi · Q′ · hy, vj i is actually hvi , x, vj i. It is also possible, in addition, vi = x = y, and then hvi , xi · Q′ · hy, vj i is actually hvi , vj i; this is the reason for adding the edges (ui , vi ) in G′ . For simplicity of the presentation, we assume the concatenation notation subsume all these cases.  20  multiplicative approximation for the girth. Thus, if an approximate second shortest path of length ≤ 16d is found, we can conclude that L ≤ 16d and hence |C ∗ | ≤ O(d), so we can stop and return. Otherwise, we can conclude that none of the vertices of P are on cycles of length ≤ d in G, as otherwise the algorithm would return an approximate second shortest path of length 7d − 2 + ε(6d − 2) + (1 + ε)|C ∗ | < 13d − 4 + 2d < 16d. We can thus remove all the vertices of P from G and repeat the process above on the new graph. Consider the first iteration in which P ′ contains a vertex of C ∗ . Since up to this iteration no vertices of P ′ are removed, the graph will contain a detour corresponding to the portion of C ∗ not on P , and the approximate cycle returned will be of length ≤ O(d) + (1 + ε)|C ∗ |, as argued above. If the girth is ≤ 2d, the approximation is additive O(d), and otherwise it is multiplicative 1 + O(ε). The correctness of the algorithm follows from the discussion above. The runtime is as follows. The time to decompose the graph to its strongly-connected components is O(m + n) [Tar72]. The time to construct G′ is O(m), and the running time of Bernstein’s algorithm for the second shortest path on G′ is Õ(m/ε). We conclude that the running time for a single iteration is Õ(m/ε). The number of iterations we have in the algorithm is at most ⌈(1/ε)n1−a ⌉, since we are removing ⌈ε · na ⌉ vertices from G in each iteration. It follows that the total running time of the algorithm is Õ((1/ε2 )mn1−a ), thus proving Theorem 1.4.  7  Lower Bounds  In this section we provide a conditional lower bound for the problem of computing additive approximations for the girth of a directed unweighted graph. Let us begin with our plausible hypothesis: Hypothesis 7.1 Any combinatorial (possibly randomized) algorithm for triangle detection in nnode m-edge graphs with m = Θ(n2 ) requires (expected) n3−o(1) time. Combinatorial algorithms informally do not use Strassen-like matrix multiplication, and hopefully do not hide high constants in the big-O. The current best combinatorial algorithms for triangle detection run in time min{O(n3 / log4 n), O(m3/2 )} time [Yu15, IR78]. It is a major open problem to design a truly subcubic, i.e. an O(n3−ε ) time combinatorial algorithm for constant ε > 0 for triangle detection. Triangle detection is known [VW10] to be subcubically equivalent to Boolean Matrix Multiplication (BMM) under combinatorial fine-grained reductions, and thus the above hypothesis is equivalent to the hypothesis that combinatorial BMM of n × n matrices requires n3−o(1) time. We now state our result: Theorem 7.2 Under Hypothesis 7.1, any combinatorial algorithm that computes an additive n1/2 − 1 approximation to the girth of all directed n-node, m = O(n)-edge graphs requires mn1/2−o(1) time. Proof: Let G = (V, E) be an n-node, m-edge directed graph for m = Θ(n2 ), so that we want to detect the presence of a 3-cycle in G. We now create a new directed H as follows: • H has n2 vertices: for every v ∈ V we create n copies v1 , . . . , vn . • For every edge (u, v) ∈ E of G, we create directed edges (un , v1 ) and (ui , vi+1 ) for all i ∈ {1, 2}. • For every vertex v ∈ V , create directed edges (vi , vi+1 ) for all i ∈ {3, . . . , n − 1}. Every triangle a1 → a2 → a3 → a1 in G is represented by an n-cycle in H: a1n → a21 → a32 → a13 → a14 → . . . → a1n . Every n-cycle in H must correspond to a 3-cycle in G, as there is a path from v3 to wn if and  21  only if v = w. Moreover, any cycle in H has length that is a multiple of n as each cycle must go through all n partitions of the graph over and over until it lands at the same node. The girth of H is thus either n if G has a 3-cycle, or at least 2n otherwise. H has N = n2 vertices and M ≤ 3m + n2 = Θ(n2 ) edges. Suppose that there is some constant ε > 0 such that for all a there is an O(M N 1/2−ε ) time algorithm that achieves an additive N 1/2 − 1 approximation to the girth of M -edge, N -node directed graphs. Let’s apply this algorithm to H. If it finds an additive N 1/2 − 1 = n − 1 -approximation to the girth of H, it will be able to detect whether G contains a triangle. The running time of the algorithm would be O(M N 1/2−ε ) = O(n2 · n1−2ε ) = O(n3−2ε ), which contradicts Hypothesis 1.    Considering multiplicative approximation for the girth in directed unweighted graphs, it is known that any truly subcubic combinatorial algorithm that computes a 2 − ε approximation (0 < ε < 1) for the girth in directed unweighted graphs, implies a truly subcubic time combinatorial algorithm for triangle detection. This is formalized in the next probably folklore theorem. A formal proof of it appears in [RW12]. Theorem 7.3 (Folklore) Under Hypothesis 7.1, any combinatorial algorithm that for ǫ ∈ (0, 1) computes a multiplicative 2 − ε approximation for the girth of a directed n-node, m-edge graph requires n3−o(1) time.  Acknowledgments Jakub Pachocki is partially supported by ONR grant N00014-15-1-238 and NSF award 1065106. Virginia Vassilevska Williams is supported by NSF awards 1417238, 1528078, and 1514339, and BSF Grant 2012338. Jakub Pachocki was a student at Carnegie Mellon University and Aaron Sidford was a postdoctoral researcher at Microsoft Research New England while part of this work was done. Part of this work was done while some of the authors were visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley.  References [ADD+ 93] I. Alth´’ofer, G. Das, D. Dobkin, D. Joseph, and J. Soares. On sparse spanners of weighted graphs. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 9(1):81–100, 1993. 1, 1.1.1, 1.3 [ADKF70] V. L. Arlazarov, E. A. Dinic, M. A. Kronrod, and I. A. Faradzev. On economical construction of the transitive closure of an oriented graph. Soviet Math. Dokl., 11:1209– 1210, 1970. 1.3 [Awe85]  Baruch Awerbuch. Complexity of network synchronization. J. ACM, 32(4):804–823, October 1985. 1.2, 1.3  [Bar96]  Y. Bartal. Probabilistic approximation of metric spaces and its algorithmic applications. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1996. Proceedings., 37th Annual Symposium on, pages 184–193, 1996. 1.2, 3  [Ber10]  Aaron Bernstein. A nearly optimal algorithm for approximating replacement paths and k shortest simple paths in general graphs. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2010, Austin, Texas, USA, January 17-19, 2010, pages 742–755, 2010. 6.2, 6.2  22  [BKMP05] Surender Baswana, Telikepalli Kavitha, Kurt Mehlhorn, and Seth Pettie. New constructions of (α, β)-spanners and purely additive spanners. In Proc. 16th Ann. ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 672–681, 2005. 3 [BS74]  J.A Bondy and M Simonovits. Cycles of even length in graphs. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 16(2):97 – 105, 1974. 1  [BW12]  Nikhil Bansal and Ryan Williams. Regularity lemmas and combinatorial algorithms. Theory of Computing, 8(1):69–94, 2012. 1.3  [Cha07]  T. M. Chan. More algorithms for all-pairs shortest paths in weighted graphs. In Proc. STOC, pages 590–598, 2007. 1.3  [Cha15]  Timothy M. Chan. Speeding up the four russians algorithm by about one more logarithmic factor. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, January 4-6, 2015, pages 212–217, 2015. 1.3  [CKM+ 11] Paul Christiano, Jonathan A. Kelner, Aleksander Madry, Daniel A. Spielman, and Shang-Hua Teng. Electrical flows, laplacian systems, and faster approximation of maximum flow in undirected graphs. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, STOC ’11, pages 273–282, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM. 1.2 [CMP+ 14] Michael B. Cohen, Gary L. Miller, Jakub W. Pachocki, Richard Peng, and Shen Chen Xu. Stretching stretch. CoRR, abs/1401.2454, 2014. 5.1 [CMSV16] Michael B. Cohen, Aleksander Madry, Piotr Sankowski, and Adrian Vladu. Negativeweight shortest paths and unit capacity minimum cost flow in õ(m10/7 log W) time. CoRR, abs/1605.01717, 2016. 1.2 [Coh97]  Edith Cohen. Size-estimation framework with applications to transitive closure and reachability. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55(3):441 – 453, 1997. 1.2, 3, 4.4, A  [Coh99]  Edith Cohen. Fast algorithms for constructing t-spanners and paths with stretch t. SIAM J. Comput., 28(1):210–236, February 1999. 3  [CW90]  Don Coppersmith and Shmuel Winograd. Matrix multiplication via arithmetic progressions. J. Symb. Comput., 9(3):251–280, 1990. 1  [CW04]  L. J. Cowen and C. G. Wagner. Compact roundtrip routing in directed networks. Journal of Algorithms, 50(1):79–95, 2004. 1.1, 1.1.1, 1.2  [DHZ00]  Dorit Dor, Shay Halperin, and Uri Zwick. All-pairs almost shortest paths. SIAM J. Comput., 29(5):1740–1759, March 2000. 3  [Die00]  R. Diestel. Graph theory. Springer-Verlag, 2 edition, 2000. 1  [EMPS16] Alina Ene, Gary Miller, Jakub Pachocki, and Aaron Sidford. Routing under balance. In to appear in STOC 2016, 2016. 1.2, 3, 4.1, 4.1, 5.1 [EP04]  Michael Elkin and David Peleg. (1 + ǫ, β)-spanner constructions for general graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 33(3):608–631, March 2004. 3  [Erd63]  P. Erdös. Extremal problems in graph theory. Theory of Graphs and its Applications (Proc. Sympos. Smolenice, 1963), pages 29–36, 1963. 1.3  [Fre76]  M.L. Fredman. New bounds on the complexity of the shortest path problem. SIAM  23  Journal on Computing, 5:49–60, 1976. 1.3 [FRT04]  Jittat Fakcharoenphol, Satish Rao, and Kunal Talwar. A tight bound on approximating arbitrary metrics by tree metrics. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 69(3):485–497, 2004. 1.2  [Gal14]  François Le Gall. Powers of tensors and fast matrix multiplication. In International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation, ISSAC ’14, Kobe, Japan, July 23-25, 2014, pages 296–303, 2014. 1  [GL09]  Zvi Gotthilf and Moshe Lewenstein. Improved algorithms for the k simple shortest paths and the replacement paths problems. Inf. Process. Lett., 109(7):352–355, 2009. 6.2  [IR78]  Alon Itai and Michael Rodeh. Finding a minimum circuit in a graph. SIAM J. Comput., 7(4):413–423, 1978. 1, 1.3, 7  [KLOS14] Jonathan A. Kelner, Yin Tat Lee, Lorenzo Orecchia, and Aaron Sidford. An almostlinear-time algorithm for approximate max flow in undirected graphs, and its multicommodity generalizations. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA, January 5-7, 2014, pages 217–226, 2014. 1.2 [LL09]  Andrzej Lingas and Eva-Marta Lundell. Efficient approximation algorithms for shortest cycles in undirected graphs. Inf. Process. Lett., 109(10):493–498, 2009. 1, 1.3  [LRS13]  Yin Tat Lee, Satish Rao, and Nikhil Srivastava. A new approach to computing maximum flows using electrical flows. In Proceedings of the Forty-fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’13, pages 755–764, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM. 1.2  [LS91]  Nathan Linial and Michael Saks. Decomposing graphs into regions of small diameter. In Proceedings of the Second Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’91, pages 320–330, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1991. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. 1.2, 3  [LS14]  Yin Tat Lee and Aaron Sidford. Path finding methods for linear programming: Solving linear programs in õ(vrank) iterations and faster algorithms for maximum flow. In 55th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2014, Philadelphia, PA, USA, October 18-21, 2014, pages 424–433, 2014. 1.2  [Mad10]  Aleksander Madry. Fast approximation algorithms for cut-based problems in undirected graphs. In FOCS, pages 245–254. IEEE Computer Society, 2010. 1.2  [Mad13]  Aleksander Madry. Navigating central path with electrical flows: From flows to matchings, and back. In 54th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2013, 26-29 October, 2013, Berkeley, CA, USA, pages 253–262, 2013. 1.2  [MPX13]  Gary L. Miller, Richard Peng, and Shen Chen Xu. Parallel graph decompositions using random shifts. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, SPAA ’13, pages 196–203, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM. 1.2, 3, 4.1, 4.1, 5.2  [Orl17]  J. Orlin. An o(nm) time algorithm for finding the min length directed cycle in a weighted graph. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’17, page to appear, 2017. 1  [Pen14]  Richard Peng. A note on cut-approximators and approximating undirected max flows.  24  CoRR, abs/1411.7631, 2014. 1.2 [PR05]  Seth Pettie and Vijaya Ramachandran. A shortest path algorithm for real-weighted undirected graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 34(6):1398–1431, 2005. 1  [PS89]  D. Peleg and A. Schäffer. Graph spanners. Journal of Graph Theory, 13(1):99–116, 1989. 1.3  [RS92]  John Reif and Paul Spirakis. Expected parallel time and sequential space complexity of graph and digraph problems. Algorithmica, 7(1):597–630, 1992. 5.2  [RTZ08]  L. Roditty, M. Thorup, and U. Zwick. Roundtrip spanners and roundtrip routing in directed graphs. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 4(3):29:1–29:17, 2008. 1.1, 1.1.1, 1.2, 3, 4, 4.1  [RW11]  Liam Roditty and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Minimum weight cycles and triangles: Equivalences and algorithms. In IEEE 52nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2011, Palm Springs, CA, USA, October 22-25, 2011, pages 180–189, 2011. 1  [RW12]  Liam Roditty and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Subquadratic time approximation algorithms for the girth. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2012, Kyoto, Japan, January 17-19, 2012, pages 833–845, 2012. 1, 1.3, 7  [She13]  Jonah Sherman. Nearly maximum flows in nearly linear time. In 54th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2013, 26-29 October, 2013, Berkeley, CA, USA, pages 263–269, 2013. 1.2  [She16]  Jonah Sherman. Generalized preconditioning and network flow problems. abs/1606.07425, 2016. 1.2  [SV82]  Yossi Shiloach and Uzi Vishkin. An o(logn) parallel connectivity algorithm. Journal of Algorithms, 3(1):57 – 67, 1982. 5.2  [Tar72]  Robert Endre Tarjan. Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms. SIAM J. Comput., 1(2):146–160, 1972. 6.2  [TZ05]  Mikkel Thorup and Uri Zwick. Approximate distance oracles. J. ACM, 52(1):1–24, 2005. 1, 3  [Vas12]  Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Multiplying matrices faster than Coppersmith-Winograd. In Proceedings of the 44th Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference, STOC 2012, New York, NY, USA, May 19 - 22, 2012, pages 887–898, 2012. 1  [VW10]  Virginia Vassilevska Williams and Ryan Williams. Subcubic equivalences between path, matrix and triangle problems. In 51th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2010, October 23-26, 2010, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, pages 645–654, 2010. 1, 1.1.1, 6.2, 7  [Wen91]  R. Wenger. Extremal graphs with no C4’s, C6’s, or C10’s. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 52(1):113 – 116, 1991. 1.3  [Wil14]  Ryan Williams. Faster all-pairs shortest paths via circuit complexity. In Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2014, New York, NY, USA, May 31 - June 03, 2014, pages 664–673, 2014. 1, 1.3  [Yu15]  Huacheng Yu. An improved combinatorial algorithm for boolean matrix multiplication. In Automata, Languages, and Programming - 42nd International Colloquium, ICALP  25  CoRR,  2015, Kyoto, Japan, July 6-10, 2015, Proceedings, Part I, pages 1094–1105, 2015. 1.3, 7  A  Ball Size Estimation  Here we present a routine that can estimate the sizes of neighborhoods of all vertices. The approach is similar to that of [Coh97]. We provide the algorithm, Estimate-Balls, that when invoked on a graph G with radius parameter r and error parameter ǫ computes w.h.p. for every vertex the fraction of vertices that it can reach at distance at r and the fraction of vertices that can reach it. (sout , sin ) = Estimate-Balls(G, r, ǫ), where G = (V, E, l) is a directed graph and r, ǫ > 0. 1. Sample t = ⌈20 · log n/ǫ2 ⌉ vertices v1 , . . . , vt independently uniformly at random from V with replacement. 2. Compute the distances between every vertex in V and each of v1 , . . . , vt . 3. For each u ∈ V , let sout u be the fraction of v1 , . . . , vt such that dG (u, vi ) ≤ r. in 4. For each u ∈ V , let su be the fraction of v1 , . . . , vt such that dG (vi , u) ≤ r. 5. Return (sout , sin ). Figure 7: The algorithm for estimating the sizes of out- and inballs at radius r for a given graph. Our algorithm simply samples vertices with replacement and computes distances to and from them to estimate the ball sizes. The analysis of Estimate-Balls reduces to a simple application of Chernoff bounds and union bound. We prove that it works in Lemma A.1. Lemma A.1 Let sout , sin be the output of Estimate-Balls(G, r, ǫ). For any vertex u, let s̄out u be the fraction of vertices in V such that dG (u, vi ) ≤ r. Then, whp., for all vertices u it holds that out in −2 log 2 n). |s̄out u − su | ≤ ǫ. An analogous statement holds for s . The algorithm runs in time O(mǫ Proof:  By a standard Chernoff bound, we have out 2 −40 Pr[|s̄out . u − su | > ǫ] ≤ 2 exp(−2tǫ ) ≤ 2 exp(−40 log n) = 2n  An analogous bound holds for sin .  B    Exponential Distributions  Here we recall some basic facts about the exponential distribution we use in the paper. Lemma B.1 (Exponential Distribution Facts) We let Exp(α) denote the exponential distribution with parameter α. This distribution is supported on R≥0 with PDF given by p(x) = α·exp(−αx). This distribution has the following properties: • CDF: Pr[Exp(α) ≤ x] = 1 − exp(−αx) for x ≥ 0. • Expected Value: EExp(α) =  1 α  • Memoryless: Pr [Exp(α) ≥ s + t | Exp(α) ≥ s] = Pr [Exp(α) ≥ t] • High Probability: The maximum of n independent r.v.s drawn from Exp(α) is O( logα n ) with high probability. Proof:  Direct calculation reveals that Z x α exp(−αx) = − exp(−αx) + exp(0) = 1 − exp(−αx) Pr [Exp(α) ≤ x] = −∞  26  giving the formula for the CDF. Furthermore, integration by parts yields that Z ∞ Z ∞ ∞ − exp(−αx)dx αx exp(−αx)dx = [−x exp(−αx)] |0 − EExp(α) = 0  0  1 1 1 = − exp(−α∞) + exp(−α0) = α α α giving the expected value formula. Direct calculation again yields Pr[exp(α) ≥ s + t] exp(−α(s + t)) = Pr [exp(α) ≥ s] exp(−αs) = exp (−αt) = Pr [Exp(α) ≥ t]  Pr [Exp(α) ≥ s + t | Exp ≥ s] =  proving the memoryless property. Finally the high probability bound is immediate from the CDF and the definition of high probability.   C  Sequential Clustering Algorithm  Here we formalize and prove the alternative approach to clustering described in Section 3. (V1 , V2 , . . .) = Sequential-Cluster-Out(-In)(G, (v1 , . . . , vt−1 ), r), where G = (V, E, l) is a directed graph, v1 , . . . vt−1 ∈ V , and r > 0. 1. Set β := log(n)/r. 2. Let G0 := G. 3. For i in 1, . . . , t: (a) If vi is not in Gi−1 , let Gi := Gi−1 , Vi := ∅ and continue the loop. Otherwise: (b) Pick xi ∼ Exp(β). (c) Let Vi := outballGi−1 (vi , xi ). (inballGi−1 (vi , xi ) for Cluster-In) (d) Let Gi := Gi−1 with Vi S and incident edges removed. 4. Return (V1 , V2 , . . . , Vt−1 , V \ i Vi ) Figure 8: The sequential clustering algorithm. Lemma C.1 Let (V1 , V2 , . . . , Vt ) = Sequential-Cluster-Out(G, (v1 , . . . , vt ), r0 , r) (analogously of Sequential-Cluster-In). Then for any c ≥ 1 we have 1. with probability at least 1 − n1−c for all i < t, the radius of the tree corresponding to Vi is at most c · r, whp., 2. for any pair of vertices u, v at roundtrip distance at most R in G, they are in the same set Vi with probability at least exp(− log(n)R/r). Proof: Note that the maximum radius of any constructed tree is upper bounded by maxi xi . For every i ∈ 1, . . . , t, we have P r [xi ≥ c · r] ≤ exp(−c · βr) = n−c , and so by union bound the maximum radius is at most c · r with probability at least 1 − n1−c . To prove the remainder of the lemma, fix two vertices u and v at roundtrip distance at most R in G. Assume the i-th cluster is the first one to contain an element of the set {u, v}. By the memoryless property of the exponential distribution we see that conditioned on this event the probability that  27  cluster i contains both vertices u and v is at least Pr [Exp(β) ≥ R] = exp(−βR), yielding the desired result.    28

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
