Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_1706

Abstract:
Point Neurons with Conductance-Based Synapses in the Neural Engineering Framework  arXiv:1710.07659v1 [q-bio.NC] 20 Oct 2017  Andreas Stöckel, Aaron R. Voelker, and Chris Eliasmith Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience, University of Waterloo October 24, 2017  Abstract The mathematical model underlying the Neural Engineering Framework (NEF) expresses neuronal input as a linear combination of synaptic currents. However, in biology, synapses are not perfect current sources and are thus nonlinear. Detailed synapse models are based on channel conductances instead of currents, which require independent handling of excitatory and inhibitory synapses. This, in particular, significantly affects the influence of inhibitory signals on the neuronal dynamics. In this technical report we first summarize the relevant portions of the NEF and conductance-based synapse models. We then discuss a naïve translation between populations of LIF neurons with current- and conductance-based synapses based on an estimation of an average membrane potential. Experiments show that this simple approach works relatively well for feed-forward communication channels, yet performance degrades for NEF networks describing more complex dynamics, such as integration.  1 Introduction As a central assumption, the Neural Engineering Framework (NEF, [1]) relies on linear interaction of pre-synaptic activity in the form of synaptic currents injected into the neuron membrane. This assumption is readily fulfilled by current-based synapse models. Biological synapses however are not perfect current sources. Instead, currents injected into the cell membrane are caused by changes in receptor channel conductance directly or indirectly gated by neurotransmitters released in the pre-synapse. Consequently, current flow into the membrane is modulated both by pre-synaptic spikes, as well as—due to the nature of ion channels—the difference between the neuron membrane potential and the  1  specific ion species reversal potential. This nonlinear interdependence is modelled by conductance-based synapse models [2, 3].1 For various reasons, conductance-based synapses are a useful addition to the NEF. Foremost, when modelling functional, biologically plausible neural networks, more realistic synapse models pose additional constraints on the network design and reduce degrees of freedom. For example, conductance-based synapses strictly differentiate between excitatory and inhibitory synapses, allowing the network designer to map their parameters to those derived from neurophysiological evidence. Furthermore, some neuromorphic hardware systems (e.g. Spikey, BrainScaleS; [5, 6]) exclusively implement conductancebased synapses, which must be taken into account when assembling networks for these platforms. Finally, nonlinear synaptic interaction has been argued to be an important element of biological neural networks, and as a site for biological computation [2]. Exploiting these nonlinearities in the NEF increases the computational power per neuron. In the future, conductance-based synapses may thus be utilized to increase the efficiency of certain mathematical operations such as multiplication, requiring fewer neurons at the same precision. The remainder of this report is structured as follows: section 2 gives a short overview of the relevant equations in the NEF. Section 3 summarizes the biological background of conductance-based synapses and describes the underlying theoretical model. Section 4 elaborates on the actual integration of conductance-based synapses into the NEF and provides an equation highly similar to the original NEF formalism, yet containing additional, voltage-dependent scaling factors. Section 5 provides estimations for these factors based on the expected value for the average membrane potential. Section 7 presents two benchmark experiments, followed by concluding remarks in section 8.  2 Current sources in the Neural Engineering Framework The NEF is a systematic approach to the representation of low-dimensional vectors in populations of spiking neurons and the approximation of arbitrary functions in the connections between these populations [1]. As an example, consider two populations of n spiking neurons with all-to-all connectivity from the first (pre-synaptic) to the second (post-synaptic) population. Let ~ x (t ) be the value represented by the pre-synaptic population, and ~ y (t ) the value represented by the post-synaptic population. Given a function f , the NEF allows us to compute connection weights w i j such that the resulting activity in the post-population represents ~ y (t ) ≈ f (~ x (t )). 1 Not to be confused with conductance-based neuron models, such as the Hodgkin-Huxley model of action potential generation [4, 2].  2  The formalism underlying the NEF assumes that each neuron j receives its input in the form of a current J (t ) injected into its (virtual) neuron membrane.2 This current is the sum of a constant bias current J bias , and a synaptic current J syn (t ). The latter is calculated from a weighted sum of filtered input spike events: spikes produced by the i th pre-synaptic neuron are modelled as a sum of Dirac pulses a i (t ), and a filter h(t 0 ) defines the shape of the post-synaptic current in response to a single input spike: J (t ) = J bias + J syn (t ) = J bias +  n X i =1  w i j (a i ∗ h)(t ) .  (1)  Central to the NEF is the idea of factorizing the connection weight matrix W into e j , where w i j = gain factors α j , decoding vectors d~i , and unit-length encoding vectors ~  α j 〈~ e j , d~i 〉. Correspondingly, eq. (1) can be written as J (t ) = J bias + J syn (t ) = J bias + α j ~ e Tj  ³X n i =1  ´ d~i (a i ∗ h)(t ) .  (2)  The decoders d~i linearly project the high-dimensional activity of the pre-synaptic population onto the desired low-dimensional representation ~ y (t ) = f (~ x (t )). Multiplication  with unit-length encoders ~ e j corresponds to a projection of this low-dimensional representation onto the preferred direction of each post-synaptic neuron j . Correspondingly, the transformed value is again represented as a high-dimensional population coding, allowing to chain an arbitrary number of neuron populations and transformations. As a side-effect, factorization of the weight matrix W into decoders and encoders simplifies the calculation of w i j . Instead of optimizing weights w i j individually, we can randomly select bias currents J bias , gain factors α j , and encoders ~ e j , and calculate j decoders d~j from a least squares linear regression ¡ ¢−1 Y = D A ⇒ D ≈ Y A T A A T + I σ2 ,  (3)  where the matrix D is composed of the decoding vectors, A is a matrix of neuron responses in the post-synaptic population for a set of sample points, and Y is a matrix of the desired function outputs for these points. The expression I σ2 is a regularization term which accounts for uncertainty and noise in the neuron response. Crucially, the above equations contain the implicit assumption that the input current J (t )—and in turn the effect of each individual input spike—is independent of the neuron state at time t . Furthermore, all input spikes are treated equally (except for the scaling factor w i j ), and there is no distinction between excitatory and inhibitory synapses. Having 2 Note that J (t ) (as well as other currents and conductances) should be read with a subscript j in mind – all  equations, unless explicitly stated otherwise, refer to the j th neuron in the post-synaptic population.  3  gL J syn (t )  J bias  Cm  v(t )  EL  Figure 1: Equivalent circuit diagram of a LIF neuron with current-based synapses (subthreshold behaviour; without spike generation/reset mechanism).  synaptic currents which are independent of the neuron state, is commonly referred to as using “current-based synapses” [2, 7]. The subthreshold circuit diagram of a LIF neuron with current-based synapses is depicted in fig. 1. The dynamical system describing this circuit is3 Cm  dv(t ) = g L (E L − v(t )) + J bias + J syn (t ) , dt  (4)  which has a stable attractor (the equilibrium potential E eq ) at E eq (t ) =  J bias + J syn (t ) + EL . gL  (5)  The synaptic current J syn (t ) drives the membrane potential v(t ) towards more positive values for input spikes received at excitatory synapses (w i j > 0) and towards more negative  values for spikes received at inhibitory synapses (w i j < 0). Importantly, the equilibrium  potential E eq in eq. (5) can be driven to arbitrary values if the input currents J are large enough. In practice this is not an issue for positive J , as the maximum membrane potential is limited by the neuron threshold potential v th . However, such a natural limitation does not exist for negative currents, and the NEF puts no constraint on the negative current strength, for neither J bias , nor J syn . A solution to this problem is to modify the LIF model, such that the membrane potential is clamped to a minimum value4 , i.e., the reset potential v reset . Note that all experiments in this report are based on LIF neurons with such a minimum membrane potential. This problem does not occur for conductance-based synapses. Conductance-based synapses are not only biologically motivated, but eliminate the physically implausible, 3 The ratio between the membrane capacitance and the leak channel conductance is the membrane time  constant τRC = C m /g L . 4 This is for example implemented in the LIF neuron model in the software neuron simulator included in Nengo, the reference software implementation of the NEF.  4  (-)  v  (+)  v  (-)  + + + + - - - - +  + + + + - - - -  220 mosm  (a) Membrane without K+ -channel  -  10 mmol K+ 100 mmol Na+ 110 mmol Cl-  10 mmol K+ 100 mmol Na+ 110 mmol Cl-  +  K+ Na+ ClA-  + + + + - - -  100 mmol 10 mmol 10 mmol 100 mmol  Osmotic/electrical forces  +  + + + + + - - - - 100 mmol K+ 10 mmol Na+ 10 mmol Cl100 mmol A+  (+)  K+ channel  (b) Added K+ -channel  Figure 2: Illustration of the ion channel reversal potential caused by equalling osmotic and electric forces. Although the intra- and extracellular fluids are electrically neutral (a), an open, selectively permeable ion channel causes a change in the membrane potential (b). Illustration adapted from [8]. See [2, 9] for more details.  perfect current sources altogether. Unfortunately, and what will be the focus of the remainder of this report, conductance-based synapses introduce a dependency between the neuron membrane potential v(t ), and the injected current J syn (t ). As a result, the post synaptic currents (PSCs) of pre-synaptic spikes no longer combine linearly. Consider two excitatory input spikes which do not trigger an action potential at the receiving neuron. Due to the increased membrane potential v(t ), the PSC induced by the second spike is smaller than the PSC induced by the first spike. Furthermore, conductance-based synapses require excitatory and inhibitory synapses to be handled differently. Both issues are not accounted for in the standard NEF eqs. (1) and (2).  3 Conductance-based synapses In biology, changes in the neuron membrane potential are primarily caused by variations in the permeability—or conductance—of selective ion channels embedded into the lipid bilayer cell membrane [2, 9]. As depicted in fig. 2a, ions are dissolved in different concentrations in the intra- and extracellular fluid. Ion channels provide a way for a specific ion species to follow the osmotic concentration gradient, which in turn causes a charge imbalance and an electrical force countering the osmotic force (fig. 2b). The charge imbalance itself is measurable as a change in the membrane potential v(t ). Once a certain membrane potential is reached, the osmotic and electric forces cancel and the ion flow stops. Further increase/decrease of v(t ) reverses the ion flow through a particular 5  gL  g Na+ (t )  g K+ (t ) Cm  EEL Na+  v(t )  E K+  Figure 3: Equivalent circuit diagram of a LIF neuron with conductance-based synapses (without spike generation/reset mechanism), see also [2].  channel, giving rise to the name reversal potential for this particular v(t ).5 The exact value of the reversal potential differs between ion channel types. For example, in mammalian + cells, the reversal potential for a sodium channel is E Na ≈ 67 mV, while for potassium the  reversal potential is E K+ ≈ −83 mV. In the resting state, the membrane is slightly permeable for a mixture of ions, resulting in an equilibrium potential6 of E L ≈ −65 mV [3, 10].  An equivalent circuit diagram of a cell membrane popularized by Hodgkin and Hux-  ley [4] (though in the context of action potential generation, and not synaptic input) with leak, sodium and potassium channel is shown in fig. 3. Post-synaptic currents can be modeled as a change of permeabilies in the Na+ and K+ ion channel.7 For example, excitatory input spikes could cause the sodium channels to be open for a certain period of time, driving the membrane potential towards E Na+ . Conversely, inhibitory input spikes might cause potassium channels to open, driving the membrane potential towards E K+ . In the following, we refer to E Na+ as E E (the excitatory reversal potential) and to E K+ as E I (the inhibitory reversal potential). The dynamics for conductance-based synapses in response to incoming spikes a(t ) can be described with a linear filter h(t 0 ), where the channel conductance g (t ) is g (t ) = (a ∗ h)(t ). Possible filters include simple exponential  filters, the alpha function, or the difference of exponentials [7]. Of course, in biology, channel dynamics involve the release of a neurotransmitter, diffusion of the transmitter through the synaptic cleft, and a chemical cascade causing ion channels to open as soon as the transmitter reaches the post-synaptic neuron. More detailed models of these highly nonlinear processes exist [7]. Nevertheless, in the remainder of this report we 5 Since ion diffusion is a stochastic process, ions will always diffuse in and out of the cell as long as the channel is open. The above claims holds for the average ion flow only. 6 To clarify the difference between reversal and equilibrium potential: the reversal potential is the potential at which the flow of a single ion species reverses direction, the equilibrium potential is the potential at which the sum of all currents is zero. 7 In biology, a large number of channels are embedded into the neuron cell membrane. Individual ion channels are either fully open or fully closed, following a stochastic process. The conductance g (t ) can be interpreted as the probability of individual channels to be open.  6  assume the synaptic dynamics to be describable as a linear filter, and in particular focus on normalized exponential low-pass filters with time constant τsyn where  h(t ) =     1 τsyn  exp(−t /τsyn ) t ≥ 0  0  t <0  ,  and  ´ n X dg (t ) 1 ³ w i j a i (t ) . =− g (t ) + dt τsyn i =1  Note that while the synaptic dynamics are linear with respect to the input, the post synaptic current is not (see section 2). The differential equation describing a LIF point neuron with conductance-based channels is Cm  dv(t ) = g L · (E L − v(t )) + g E (t ) · (E E − v(t )) + g I (t ) · (E I − v(t )) . dt  (6)  The equilibrium potential E eq (t ) for this model is a weighted average of the individual reversal potentials E eq (t ) =  g L · E L + g E (t ) · E E + g I (t ) · E I . g L + g E (t ) + g I (t )  (7)  This implies that—in contrast to current-based models, which, as noted at the end of the previous section, can provide arbitrarily large input—the membrane potential can never be driven to values outside the voltage range spanned by E L , E E , and E I , or, in biological terms, the ion channel reversal potentials.  4 Conductance-based synapses in the NEF One of the initial challenges when implementing conductance-based synapses in the NEF is the different handling of excitatory and inhibitory synapses. Spikes arriving at excitatory synapses will influence the excitatory ion channel conductance, whereas spikes arriving at inhibitory synapses influence the inhibitory ion channel conductance. This issue is virtually nonexistent when adhering to Dale’s Principle [11]. Each prepopulation of neurons will either project with excitatory or inhibitory connections to the post-population, and influence one of the two channel types only. In the general case, the weight matrix W (section 2) can be split into two non-negative matrices W + and W − . The matrix W + contains positive, excitatory weights, whereas W − contains negative, inhibitory weights with all other weights set to zero: w i+j = max{0, w i j } ,  w i−j = max{0, −w i j } .  7  This non-negative decomposition of W unfortunately ruins the factorization into encoders and decoders employed by the NEF. For two reasons, this is not a real issue. First, decomposition happens after encoders and decoders have already been computed, maintaining the entire NEF pipeline. Second, to increase the computational efficiency during simulation, artificial decoder and encoder matrices E ± , D ± can be calculated, e.g., by performing a singular value decomposition of W + and W − : ~ ± = U [k] , E  W ± = U SV ,  ~ ± = V [k] · S[k] . D  Here, k is the number of non-zero eigenvalues or, alternatively, eigenvalues above a certain threshold, and M [k] refers to the first k columns in the matrix M . Under most circumstances, this factorization yields little to no error, since the weight matrix W is an outer product and thus of low rank. Usually, k is equal to the number of dimensions represented by the population plus one (caused by clamping the weights). As mentioned in the previous section, the channel conductance time-dynamics g E (t ) and g I (t ) can be modeled as a linear filter of the input spike trains. Essentially, we can just reuse the post-synaptic current filter h(t ) from eq. (1) and apply it to the individual channel conductances instead. Assuming (as in section 2 and without loss of generality) that all synapses have the same synaptic filter h(t ), the conductances g E (t ) and g I (t ) for the j th neuron are g E (t ) =  n X i =1  w i+j · (a i ∗ h)(t ) ,  g I (t ) =  n X i =1  w i−j · (a i ∗ h)(t ) .  (8)  As per eq. (6) the synaptic current J syn (t ) injected into a single neuron j with conductancebased synapses is J syn (t ) = g E (t ) · (E E − v(t )) + g I (t ) · (E I − v(t )) .  (9)  Combing eqs. (8) and (9) yields J syn (t ) =  n ³ X i =1  ´ w i+j · (E E − v(t )) + w i−j · (E I − v(t )) · (a i ∗ h)(t ) .  (10)  This equation is almost equivalent to eq. (1), except for the dynamic scaling factors αE (t ) = E E (t ) − v(t ) and αI (t ) = E I − v(t ). For biologically plausible neuron parameters v(t ) ¿ E E , so one might argue that αE (t ) is almost constant. However, for E I , the difference  between the reset or resting potential—if any—is just a few millivolts, causing a strong interdependence between the inhibitory current and v(t ) [7]. These potential deviations for inhibitory synapses are supported by the experiments  8  λI = 1000 s−1  λI = 600 s−1  λI = 800 s−1  λI = 400 s−1  λI = 200 s−1  a cond  λI = 0 s−1  a cur  400 350  Output rate [s−1 ]  300 250 200 150 100 50 0 0  200  400 600 Excitatory rate λE [s−1 ]  800  1000  (a) Response curves λI = 1000 s−1  λI = 600 s−1  Output rate difference a cond − a cur [s−1 ]  λI = 800 s−1  λI = 400 s−1  λI = 200 s−1 λI = 0 s−1  0  −20 −40 −60 −80  0  200  400 600 Excitatory rate λE [s−1 ]  800  1000  (b) Response curve difference Figure 4: Neuron response curves a cur (λE ), a cond (λE ) of a LIF neuron with current-based or conductance-based synapses under varying inhibitory bias currents J bias . The excitatory input spike train is Poisson-distributed with rate λE over 10 s. Lines represent the mean over a thousand trials, shaded areas the standard deviation.  9  λI = 1000 s−1  λI = 600 s−1  λI = 800 s−1  λI = 400 s−1  λI = 200 s−1  a cond  λI = 0 s−1  a cur  400 350  Output rate [s−1 ]  300 250 200 150 100 50 0 0  200  400 600 Excitatory rate λE [s−1 ]  800  1000  (a) Response curve λI = 1000 s−1  λI = 600 s−1  Output rate difference a cond − a cur [s−1 ]  λI = 800 s−1  λI = 400 s−1  λI = 200 s−1 λI = 0 s−1  0  −20 −40 −60 −80  0  200  400 600 Excitatory rate λE [s−1 ]  800  1000  (b) Response curve difference Figure 5: Neuron response curves a cur (λE ), a cond (λE ) of a LIF neuron with current-based or conductance-based synapses for an input spike train arriving at an inhibitory synapse. Both, the excitatory and the inhibitory input spike trains are Poisson-distributed with rates λE , λI over 10 s. Lines represent the mean over a thousand trials, shaded areas the standard deviation.  10  J bias = −30.0 nA  J bias = −18.0 nA  Average membrane current 〈J (t )〉 [nA]  J bias = −24.0 nA  J bias = −12.0 nA  J bias = −6.0 nA  J cond J cur  J bias = 0.0 nA  30 20 10 0  −10 −20 −30 0  200  400 600 Excitatory rate λE [s−1 ]  800  1000  (a) Average membrane current for inhibitory J bias λI = 1000 s−1  Average membrane current 〈J (t )〉 [nA]  λI = 800 s−1  λI = 600 s−1 λI = 400 s−1  λI = 200 s−1 λI = 0 s−1  J cond J cur  30 20 10 0  −10 −20 −30 0  200  400 600 Excitatory rate λE [s−1 ]  800  1000  (b) Average membrane current for inhibitory input spikes. Figure 6: Average membrane current J of a LIF neuron with conductance-based synapses for an input spike train arriving at an inhibitory synapse. Both, the excitatory and the inhibitory input spike trains are Poisson-distributed with rates λE , λI over 10 s. Lines represent the mean over a thousand trials, shaded areas the standard deviation.  11  Table 1: Neuron and synapse parameters used throughout this report unless specified otherwise. “Normalized values” refers to the scaled LIF model commonly used in neuron simulators such as Nengo. Parameters for the conductance-based synapses are scaled according to the linear transition model in section 5, eq. (11). Synaptic filters are assumed to be normalized to unit area – whenever this is not the case divide the synaptic weights by τsyn for the denormalized values. Neuron and synapse parameters Neuron parameters Parameter  Value  Membrane capacitance Membrane time constant Leak conductivity Resting potential Reset potential Threshold potential Refractory period  CM τRC gL EL v reset v th τref  1.00 20.00 50.00 −65.00 −65.00 50.00 2.00  Normalized value  nF ms nS mV mV mV ms  1.00 20.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 2.00  ms s−1  ms  Current-based synapses Parameter  Synaptic time constant Excitatory weight Inhibitory weight  Value  τsyn w+ w−  5.00 35.00 −35.00  Normalized value  ms pA pA  5.00 2.33 −2.33  ms 10−9 10−9  Conductance-based synapses Parameter  Synaptic time constant Excitatory reversal potential Inhibitory reversal potential Excitatory weight Inhibitory weight  Value  τsyn EE EI w+ w−  5.00 0.00 −80.00 0.61 1.56  Normalized value  ms mV mV nS nS  5.00 4.33 −1.00 40.60 103.70  ms  10−9 10−9  presented in figs. 4 and 5. In each individual experiment, a single LIF neuron with either current or conductance-based synapses is simulated (see table 1). Parameters for the conductance-based synapses are matched to the current-based synapses with the linear transition model discussed in section 5, eq. (11), so the neuron should behave similarly in both cases. The neuron receives an excitatory input spike train with Poisson statistics and rate λE . In fig. 4 an inhibitory bias current J bias is injected into the neuron, whereas in fig. 5 the neuron receives spikes at an inhibitory synapse with rate λI . The inhibitory currents/rates were matched such that the average neuron rate surpasses zero for approximately the same excitatory input (the x-intercepts are in similar locations). Strikingly, for excitatory input only (J bias = 0, λI = 0), there are only minor deviations between the  neuron response curves. For an inhibitory J bias , the neuron with conductance-based synapses has a slightly smaller output rate than the neuron with current-based synapses,  12  though this difference converges to zero for high output rates. However, if the inhibitory bias current is replaced by an inhibitory synaptic input, the deviations from the neuron with current-based synapses are much stronger: the output rate is significantly reduced in the presence of inhibitory synaptic input, especially for large input spike rates. Figure 6 shows the average current flowing into the membrane in the above experiments. For constant inhibitory bias current, the current increases almost linearly with the excitatory spike rate, whereas inhibitory spikes cause a saturation of the input current. This non-linearity is likely caused by inhibitory spikes injecting a larger negative current in the presence of excitatory input due to the increased average membrane potential.  5 Average membrane potential estimation There are at least two possible approaches regarding the integration of conductance-based synapses into the NEF. A “natural” approach would be to measure the actual neuron response curves A as required for the calculation of decoders in eq. (3). However, the neuron response is no longer defined in terms of a current J but as a two-dimensional function of g E and g I , which slightly complicates matters, and is not the focus of this report. Alternatively, we can try to transform a network of neurons with current-based synapses into networks of neurons with conductance-based synapses. Again, this assumes that the switch to conductance-based synapses does not have a strong effect on the neuronal dynamics. For this approach, we calculate weights W as if the network was still using current-based synapses, but rescale the decomposed W + , W − linearly to account for αE (t ) and αI (t ). Instead of treating these factors as functions time, we estimate expected values 〈αE (t )〉t and 〈αI (t )〉t . This can be achieved by replacing v(t ) with 〈v(t )〉t . Clearly, a “one size fits all” average membrane potential does not exist. However, in the NEF neurons are often in either a mode of (semi) regular spiking or a do not spike at all for longer periods of time. A naïve estimate for 〈v(t )〉t in the spiking mode is to assume a linear transition be-  tween v reset and v th . In this case, the average membrane potential is 〈v(t )〉t =  v reset + v th . 2  (Linear transition)  (11)  However, the membrane potential transition for a neuron is not linear. The force driving the membrane potential towards E L gets larger with higher v(t ), whereas the force driving towards E E gets smaller (for conductance-based neurons). Correspondingly, and as illustrated in fig. 7, v(t ) progresses more slowly through high voltage regimes, causing the actual 〈v(t )〉t to be larger than the prediction made by the linear model. 13  Membrane potential v(t ) [mV]  Conductance based  Current based  Linear transition  −50 −52 −54 −56 −58 −60 −62 −64 −66  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  0  Time to spike t [ms]  5  10  15  20  25  Time to spike t [ms]  Figure 7: Idealized membrane potential traces. Comparison of the membrane potential transition from v reset = −65 mV to v th = −50 mV for a LIF neuron with conductance-based synapses, a LIF neuron with current-based synapses, and a simple linear model. The left and right graphs show different transition times (9 ms and 27 ms). Conductances/currents were assumed to be constant. Dotted lines show the average for each of the three models.  Under the assumption of fast enough regular input spikes we can derive a better approximation for the expected value. For high input rates g E (t ) and g I (t ) are approximately constant. Specifically, for an infinite input spike train a(t ) with constant inter-spike interval ∆t and a normalized exponential low pass filter h(t 0 ) with time constant τ, it holds (see appendix A for the derivation) 〈g (t )〉t = 〈(a ∗ h)(t )〉t =  1 . ∆t  For constant conductance, eq. (6) can be written as Cm  dv(t ) = g L · (e L − v(t )) + g E · (e E − v(t )) + g I · (e I − v(t )) + J bias dt = −v(t ) · (g L + g E + g I ) + g L e L + g E e E + g I e I + J bias ,  which is brought into a fairly general form by substituting λ=  gL + gE + gI , Cm  µ=  e L g L + e E g E + e I g I + J bias . Cm  14  The closed-form solution for an initial value of v(0) = v 0 is dv(t ) = −λv(t ) + µ , dt  ³ µ ´ −λt µ v(t ) = v 0 − ·e + . λ λ  If the synaptic current suffices to generate output spikes, the time-to-spike t th after which the threshold potential v th is reached is given as Ã µ! v th − λ 1 t th = − log µ . λ v0 − λ  (12)  The average membrane potential in the period between two spikes can now be calculated by setting v 0 = v reset , integrating over the above equation, and dividing by t th : 1 〈v(t )〉t = t th  t th  Z 0  v(t ) dt =  µ v0 − λ ³  λt th  ´ µ 1 − e −λtth + λ  For g E → ∞ the expected value 〈v(t )〉t is 〈v(t )〉t =  log  ³  E E −v th E E −E L  log  ´ ³  · E E − E L + v th ´ .  E E −v th E E −E L  (Conductance-based)  (13)  Explicitly, these calculations do not include the refractory period τref . The LIF neuron model assumes all currents flowing into the cell membrane to be zero during the refractory state. As a consequence, conductance-based synapses do not change the behavior of the model during the refractory period, so the average membrane potential calculation should be independent of τref . To give a sense for the difference between the two estimates discussed so far: for the neuron parameters listed in table 1 the linear transition model eq. (11) estimates an average value of −57.5 mV, whereas the conductance-based transition model estimates a slightly higher value of −57.17 mV for an infinitely strong excitatory input.  Figure 8 shows numerical measurements of the average membrane potential for the  experimental setup presented in the previous section. For a constant bias current J bias and no inhibitory spikes, the membrane potential converges to the estimate from eq. (13) as λE increases. In the presence of inhibitory input spikes, 〈v(t )〉t is consistently larger than in the J bias experiment and reaches values clearly above the estimate. Unintuitively, and  despite output-rate deviations being higher (figs. 4 and 5), the mean error between the estimated average membrane potential and the numerically measured value is consistently smaller when using inhibitory spikes instead of a bias current J bias . This is especially true for high λI in comparison to high J bias (i.e. 5.5 mV RMSE for λI = 1000 s−1 , 6.5 mV RMSE  for J bias = −30 nA). Consequently, it might be worthwhile to investigate the effect of not 15  J bias = −30.0 nA  J bias = −12.0 nA  Numerical  J bias = −18.0 nA  J bias = 0.0 nA  Linear estimate  J bias = −6.0 nA  Estimate  Average membrane potential 〈v(t )〉 [mV]  J bias = −24.0 nA  −54 −56 −58 −60 −62 −64 0  200  400 600 Excitatory rate λE [s−1 ]  800  1000  (a) Inhibitory J bias λI = 1000 s−1 λI = 800 s−1 λI = 600 s−1  λI = 400 s−1  Numerical  λI = 0 s−1  Linear estimate  λI = 200 s−1  Estimate  Average membrane potential 〈v(t )〉 [mV]  −52 −54 −56 −58 −60 −62 −64 0  200  400 600 Excitatory rate λE [s−1 ]  800  1000  (b) Inhibitory input spikes Figure 8: Estimate and measured average membrane potentials for varying excitatory spike rates λE and either a constant bias current J bias or an inhibitory spike train with rate λI . Lines represent the mean over a thousand trials, shaded areas the standard deviation.  16  using an external current source J bias in the NEF altogether without negatively affecting the variety of tuning curves. The next section contains a simple technique achieving exactly this by decoding J bias from the pre-population.  6 Elimination of the bias current As pointed out in eq. (2), the NEF generally defines the current injected into the membrane J (t ) of a neuron j as J (t ) = J bias + J syn (t ). For a population of n neurons, this can be written  in matrix notation  ~ J (t ) = ~ J bias + diag(~ α) · E D · (~ a ∗ h)(t ) = ~ J bias + W · (~ a ∗ h)(t ) , where ~ α are n-dimensional vectors, E is the n × d encoding matrix (d being the J bias and ~  dimensionality of the vector represented by the population), D is d × m decoding matrix  a ∗h)(t ) is the (m being the size of the pre-population), W is the n ×m weight matrix, and (~  filtered, m dimensional activity of the pre-population. We can approximate this equation as ¡ ¢ ~ J (t ) ≈ D 0 + diag(~ α) · E D · (~ a ∗ h)(t ) = W 0 · (~ a ∗ h)(t ) ,  where D 0 is a n ×m matrix decoding the vector ~ J bias from the pre-population. Analogously to the L 2 approximation in eq. (3), we can approximate D 0 as  ¡ bias ¢ ¡ ¢−1 , Y0= ~ J , . . . ,~ J bias = D 0 A ⇒ D 0 = Y 0 A T A A T + I σ2 {z } | m times  where Y 0 is the n × N dimensional target matrix (with N being the number of evaluation  points), and A the n × N neuron response matrix. Using the adapted weight matrix  W 0 = D 0 + W instead of J bias should not significantly alter the behaviour of the system. As discussed in section 4, we can split W 0 into excitatory weights W 0+ and inhibitory weights  W 0− for use with conductance-based synapses.  7 Benchmark experiments In this section we present two benchmark networks: a feed-forward communication channel, and an integrator. The first network tests how well one can decode a function from a conductance-based synapse population with respect to pure feed-forward processing and a constant stream of input. The second network assess how well dynamical systems are realized. We then analyze a potential cause of unexpected behaviour in the recurrent 17  network by empirically measuring neuron tuning curves. Communication channel experiments The communication channel experiment consists of a chain of ` neuron ensembles with one hundred neurons each. All connections compute the identity function. The input to the system is a bandwidth limited white noise signal. As a benchmark measure, we compare the decoded output of the last ensemble in the chain to the input value. The experiment is executed for standard LIF neurons, LIF neurons with conductance-based synapses and eliminated J bias (see section 6), as well as LIF neurons with conductance-based synapses and active J bias . Results are shown in fig. 9. As is clearly visible, there is no significant difference in error for the three neuron types for short communication channels. Notably however, across all experiments, currentbased synapses are always best for inputs with low bandwidth, and using J bias in conjunction with conductance-based synapses increases the error. Apart from this, conductancebased synapses are rather competitive compared to current-based synapses, and as the bandwidth increases, the error is mostly dominated by the baseline error obtained when filtering the input signal with the synaptic filter. Interestingly, current-based synapses are only better in high bandwidth scenarios when increasing the communication channel length to eight. At least the error caused by J bias can be explained with the observations laid out in section 5. Specifically, the average membrane potential deviates from the estimated values for a large input spike rate range. Integrator experiments In the integrator experiment, a standard NEF integrator with 100 ms synaptic time constant for the recurrent connection is tested. A value x ∈ [0, 1] is  fed into the integrator for one second, theoretically causing the integrator to converge to x. The simulation is continued for nine seconds and the difference between x and the actual value is recorded. Figure 10 shows the results over varying integrator neuron counts. For standard current-based synapses, the error is relatively small and converges to zero with increasing neuron count. The integrator with conductance-based synapses exhibits much larger errors. The error does not significantly decrease with increasing neuron count and is significantly higher when not eliminating J bias . When recording the integrator value trace over time, the integrator often converges to significantly larger than desired values. This is shown in fig. 10b, which depicts the average final integrator  value. While the integrator with current-based synapses on average converges to the value 0.5, as expected when sampling uniformly from the interval [0, 1], the integrator with conductance-based synapses converges to significantly larger values.  18  Cur.  Cond. (with J bias )  Cond.  Ref.  0.4  RMSE  0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 10  20 30 Input bandwidth [Hz]  40  50  40  50  40  50  (a) n = 2 0.4  RMSE  0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 10  20 30 Input bandwidth [Hz]  (b) n = 4 0.4  RMSE  0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 10  20 30 Input bandwidth [Hz]  (c) n = 8 Figure 9: Communication channel benchmark. A bandwidth limited white noise signal is fed into a series of neuron ensembles (where the number of ensembles n is the “communication channel length”), with a synaptic time constant of 5 ms for all connections. The graphs show the RMSE between input and output signal averaged over 16 runs. The dashed line depicts the baseline error obtained when filtering the input n times with the synaptic filter.  19  Cur.  Cond.  Cond. (with J bias )  0.5  RMSE  0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 102  103 Number of neurons  (a) Integration error  (b) Average integrator value Figure 10: Results for the integrator benchmark. (a) Shows the average integrator representation error over 24 runs in which the integrator is driven to values in the interval [0, 1]. Error bars correspond to the standard deviation. (b) Shows the average value that the integrator converges to over all 24 runs. The dashed line depicts the expected value of 0.5.  Empirical tuning curve measurment Figure 11a shows empirically measured tuning curves for a LIF population with either current or conductance-based synapses. Tuning curves are measured by feeding a bandwidth limited (5 Hz) white noise signal x(t ) into a standard current-based LIF ensemble with 1000 neurons connected to the target population with 100 neurons. The neural activities a(x(t )) are recorded, and the inverse mapping x(a) is calculated. The measured tuning curves are similar, however, as shown in fig. 11b, they mainly differ for low output rates—the output rates of conductance-based neurons systematically are too small. When simulating dynamical systems such as an  20  Current based  400  Conductance based  350  Output rate s−1  300 250 200 150 100 50 0 −1.0  −0.5  0.0  0.5  1.0  Input value x  −1.0  0.0  −0.5  0.5  1.0  Input value x  (a) Tuning curves  10  1  Cond. vs. ground truth  Cond. vs. cur.  Cur. vs. ground truth  RMSE  100  10−1  10−2  0  50  100  150  200  Output rate s  250  300  350  −1  (b) Error over output rate Figure 11: Tuning curve experiment results. (a) Empirically measured tuning curves for both current and conductance-based synapses. (b) RMSE between the tuning curves for varying output rate regimes. Ground truth refers to the non-spiking LIF firing rate model. In the “cond. vs. cur.” graph, the empirical measurements for the current-based model are used as a reference.  integrator, the imbalance caused be the later spike onset (which prevents both excitation and inhibition) may be a reason for the systematic tendency to over-estimate the integral of the signal.  21  Summary In the feed-forward case, the simplistic transformation presented in section 4 allows neuron ensembles with conductance-based synapses to function as well as their current-based counterparts, given that J bias is eliminated from the neuron model (as outlined in section 6). For mostly unknown reasons, the performance of the conductancebased synapses breaks down once recurrent networks are implemented. This may be caused by delayed spike onset in the tuning curves not accounted for when computing decoders.  8 Conclusion In this report, we described both the NEF and LIF neurons with conductance-based synapses. We presented a simple transformation translating existing current-based NEF networks into their conductance-based counterparts. A sequence of benchmark experiments shows that this transformation yields relatively little error for feed-forward networks. However, when implementing dynamics such as integrators there are systematic deviations from the desired behaviour. Experiments show that the neuron tuning curves differ significantly between neurons with current-based synapses and the transformed conductance-based version. They exhibit a delayed spike onset, which is a potential explanation for the observed deviations in recurrent networks. Unfortunately, this problem can likely not be solved with a simple transformation of pre-computed weight matrices. Instead, the two-dimensional neuron response curve of a neuron with excitatory and inhibitory conductance-based synapses must be taken into account. While the neuron response curve can be described analytically for constant, noiseless input, the non-negativity of weight matrices W + and W − mandates an iterative optimization scheme. Preliminary research indicates that these methods are feasible, yet computationally more expensive than standard NEF solvers, especially because the entire weight matrix W is optimized and not the significantly smaller and reusable decoder D.  References [1]  Chris Eliasmith and Charles H. Anderson. Neural Engineering: Computation, Representation, and Dynamics in Neurobiological Systems. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT press, 2003. 380 pp.  [2]  Christof Koch. Biophysics of Computation: Information Processing in Single Neurons. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press, 1999. 562 pp.  [3]  Wulfram Gerstner and Werner M. Kistler. Spiking Neuron Models: Single Neurons, Populations, Plasticity. LCCB: 2002067657. Cambridge University Press, 2002. 22  [4]  Alan L. Hodgkin and Andrew F. Huxley. “A Quantitative Description of Membrane Current and Its Application to Conduction and Excitation in Nerve”. In: The Journal of Physiology 117.4 (1952), pp. 500–544.  [5]  J. Schemmel et al. “A Wafer-Scale Neuromorphic Hardware System for Large-Scale Neural Modeling”. In: Proceedings of 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems. May 2010, pp. 1947–1950.  [6]  Thomas Pfeil et al. “Six Networks on a Universal Neuromorphic Computing Substrate”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 7 (2013), p. 11.  [7]  Arnd Roth and Mark C. W. van Rossum. “Modeling Synapses”. In: Computational Modeling Methods for Neuroscientists. Ed. by Erik De Schutter. The MIT Press, 2009, pp. 139–159.  [8]  Heinrich Reichert. Neurobiologie. 2., neubearb. und erw. Aufl. Stuttgart [u.a.]: Thieme, 2000. VII, 250 S. : Ill., graph. Darst.  [9]  E. Kandel et al. Principles of Neural Science. 5th ed. McGraw-Hill Education, 2012.  [10]  Wulfram Gerstner et al. Neuronal Dynamics: From Single Neurons to Networks and Models of Cognition. Cambridge University Press, 2014.  [11]  Christopher Parisien, Charles H. Anderson, and Chris Eliasmith. “Solving the Problem of Negative Synaptic Weights in Cortical Models”. In: Neural Computation 20 (2008), pp. 1473–1494.  23  Filtered value  12  13  10  12  8  11  6  10  4  9  2  8  0  7 0  1  2  3  4  5  4.70 4.75 4.80 4.85 4.90 4.95 5.00  Time [s]  Time [s]  Figure 12: Example of a low-pass filtered regular spike train. In this example, individual input spikes are ∆t = 0.1 apart. The filter time constant is τ = 0.3. The right graph is a magnification of the left one. Dotted lines correspond to ĥ and ĥ − τ−1 , the dashed line to the final average ∆t −1 = 10.  A Expected value of a filtered, regularly spaced spike train Claim Given an infinite spike train with regular spacing a(t ) = 1 τ  normalized exponential low-pass filter h(t ) = · e 〈h ∗ a〉 = lim  Z  t  t →∞ 0  −t /τ  it holds  P∞  i =0 δ(t  − ∆t · i ) and a  (h ∗ a)(t 0 ) 0 1 dt = . t ∆t  Proof This directly follows from linear systems theory and the unit-gain of the exponential low-pass. Alternatively, the supremum ĥ of h ∗ a can be expressed in terms of a geometric series  ∆t  ∞ ∆t·` 1 1 X eτ ĥ = sup(h ∗ a) = · e − τ = · ∆t . τ `=0 τ e τ −1  Correspondingly, and as illustrated in fig. 12, after a finite amount of time the filtered spike train approximately oscillates between ĥ and ĥ−τ−1 every ∆t. The function between these two points is an infinite sum of exponentials, which itself is an exponential g (t ) = a · e −bt , !  !  with g (0) = ĥ and g (∆t) = ĥ − τ−1 . Solving for a, b yields a = ĥ and b = τ−1 . The average of g (t ) over [0, ∆t) is  ∆t Z ∆t t 1 eτ · ∆t · e − τ dt ∆t · τ e τ − 1 0 0 ∆t ∆t ∆t ³ ´ 1 1 eτ eτ e τ −1 1 − ∆t τ = · ∆t · 1−e = · ∆t · = .  ∆t ∆t e τ − 1 ∆t e τ − 1 ∆t eτ  〈h ∗ a〉 = 〈g (t )〉 =  1 · ∆t  Z  ∆t  g (t ) dt =  24

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
