Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_1306

Abstract:
Distributed Computing Made Secure: A New Cycle Cover Theorem∗  arXiv:1712.01139v2 [cs.DS] 23 Feb 2018  Merav Parter  Eylon Yogev†  Abstract In the area of distributed graph algorithms a number of network’s entities with local views solve some computational task by exchanging messages with their neighbors. Quite unfortunately, an inherent property of most existing distributed algorithms is that throughout the course of their execution, the nodes get to learn not only their own output but rather learn quite a lot on the inputs or outputs of many other entities. This leakage of information might be a major obstacle in settings where the output (or input) of network’s individual is a private information (e.g., distributed networks of selfish agents, decentralized digital currency such as Bitcoin, voting systems). While being quite an unfamiliar notion in the classical distributed setting, the notion of secure multi-party computation (MPC) is one of the main themes in the Cryptographic community. Yet despite all extensive work in the area, no existing algorithm fits the framework of classical distributed models in which there are no assumptions on the graph topologies and only messages of bounded size are sent on the edges in each round. In this paper, we introduce a new framework for secure distributed graph algorithms and provide the first general compiler that takes any “natural” non-secure distributed algorithm e · D · poly(∆)) rounds that runs in r rounds, and turns it into a secure algorithm that runs in O(r where ∆ is the maximum degree in the graph and D is its diameter. We also show that this is nearly (existentially) optimal for any round-by-round compiler for bounded degree graphs. The main technical part of our compiler is based on a new cycle cover theorem: We show that the edges of every bridgeless graph G of diameter D can be covered by a collection of cycles e e such that each cycle is of length O(D) and each edge of the graph G appears in O(1) many cycles.  ∗ Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. Emails: {merav.parter,eylon.yogev}@weizmann.ac.il. † Supported in part by grants from the Israel Science Foundation grant no. 950/16.  Contents 1 Introduction 1.1 Our Approach and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.1.1 From Security Requirements to Graph Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.1.2 Secure Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 2 2 4  2 Our Techniques 2.1 Low Congestion Cycle Covers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2 From Low Congestion Covers to Secure Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5 5 8  3 Preliminaries and Model 10 3.1 Distributed Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3.2 Cryptography with Perfect Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4 Low-Congestion Covers 4.1 Cycle Cover . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.1 Covering Non-Tree Edges 4.1.2 Covering Tree Edges . . . 4.2 Private Neighborhood Trees . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  5 Secure Simulation via Low-Congestion 5.1 Our Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.2 Secure Simulation of a Single Round . 5.3 The Final Secure Algorithm . . . . . .  . . . .  13 13 13 19 27  Covers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29 30 31 33  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  6 Distributed Computation of Low Congestion Covers 6.1 Cycle Cover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.1.1 Distributed Algorithm for Covering Non-Tree Edges 6.1.2 Analysis of Algorithm DistNonTreeCover . . . . . . . 6.1.3 Distributed Algorithm for Covering Tree Edges . . . 6.2 Additional Low Congestion Covers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.3 Pre-processing for Improved Cover Structures . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . . .  35 35 36 41 45 47 48  7 Discussion and Future Work  48  A Balanced Partitioning of a Tree  53  B Missing Details for Algorithm DistCycleCover  53  2  1  Introduction  In distributed graph algorithms (or network algorithms) a number of individual entities are connected via a potentially large network. Starting with the breakthrough by Awerbuch et al. [AGLP89], and the seminal work of Linial [Lin92], Peleg [Pel00] and Naor and Stockmeyer [NS95], the area of distributed graph algorithm is growing rapidly. Recently, it receives considerably more theoretical and practical attention motivated by the spread of multi-core computers, cloud computing, and distributed databases. We consider the standard synchronous message passing model where in each round O(log n) bits can be transmitted over every edge where n is the number of entities (the CONGEST model). The common principle underlying all distributed algorithms (regardless of the model specification) is that the input of the algorithm is given in a distributed format, and consequently the goal of each vertex is to compute its own part of the output, e.g., whether it is a member of a computed maximal independent set, its own color in a valid coloring of the graph, its incident edges in the minimum spanning tree, or its chosen edge for a maximal matching solution. In most distributed algorithms, throughout execution, vertices learn much more than merely their own output but rather collect additional information on the input or output of (potentially) many other vertices in the network. This seems inherent in many distributed algorithms, as the output of one node is used in the computation of another. For instance, most randomized coloring (or MIS) algorithms [Lub86, BE13, BEPS16, HSS16, Gha16, CPS17] are based on the vertices exchanging their current color with their neighbors in order to decide whether they are legally colored. In cases where the data is sensitive or private, these algorithms may raise security concerns. To exemplify this point, consider a voting task for a distributed network, where the goal is to elect the candidate with most votes in the network. This is a rather simple distributed task: construct a BFS tree and let the nodes send the votes from the leaves to the root where each intermediate node sends to its parent in the tree, the sum of all votes for each candidate. While the output goal has been achieved, privacy has been compromised as intermediate nodes learn more information regarding the votes of their subtrees. As privacy in election processes is a fundamental property of any “democratic system”, it is desirable to design a secure distributed voting algorithm, in which information of other nodes’ votes do not get revealed throughout the course of execution. Additional motivation for secure distributed computation are settings that involve private medical data, networks of selfish agents with private utility functions or even decentralized digital currency such as the Bitcoin. Whereas much effort in recent years has been devoted to improving the round complexities of various distributed algorithms, e.g., coloring, MIS, Lovász Local lemma [Suo13, BEK14, FHK16, BEPS16, Gha16, CPS17, CHL+ 17] and many more, the challenge of making these algorithms secure – was left behind. To this point, we have no distributed algorithms for general graphs in the standard CONGEST model that are secure and efficient compared to their non-secure counterparts. While being a rather virgin objective in the distributed graph algorithm setting, the notion of secure multi-party computation (MPC) is one of the main themes in the Cryptographic community. The goal of an MPC protocol is to allow parties to jointly compute a function of their inputs without revealing any about their input except the output of the function. There has been tremendous work on MPC protocols, from general feasibility results [Yao82, GMW87, BGW88, CCD88] to efficient protocols for specific functionalities [BNP08, BLO16]. Despite the large progress, almost all prior protocols require a private channel between every two nodes in the network in order to secure  1  compute the desired function. This, of course, defeats the whole purpose of distributed computing. Only a handful of works have considered a general graph interaction patterns [HLP11, HIJ+ 16, GGG+ 14, BGI+ 14], or locality of MPC protocols [BGT13, CCG+ 14, BIPW17]. Unfortunately, they all have many major drawbacks: they rely on heavy computational assumptions (e.g., obfuscation), they assume a trusted setup phase (which is often not reusable), they require many rounds of interaction, they do not obey bandwidth limitations and they assume specific interaction patterns (e.g., star topology). Despite some common interests, up to this point, both areas of distributed graph algorithms and secure multi-party computation have been developed in almost total isolation, each in its own community with different requirements and goals in mind. The distributed area puts most emphasis on locality, while the study of MPC focuses mostly on security. In this paper, we aim towards bridging this gap and combine the goods from both worlds, by tackling the following question: How to design distributed algorithms that are both efficient (in terms of round and bandwidth complexity) and secure (where nothing is learned but the desired output)? One tedious way to attack this challenge is to go through the most popular distributed problems (e.g., coloring, MIS, matching) and design a secure distributed algorithm for each of them one by one. Much more desirable, however, is to have a general recipe for adding security to existing algorithms, while incurring a small overhead in the round complexity. Towards this end, we introduce the first general compiler that can take any (possibly insecure) distributed algorithm to one that has perfect security (a notion that will be explained next). The compiled algorithm respects the same bandwidth limitations, relies on no setup phase nor on any computational assumption and works for (almost) any graph, while paying an overhead in the number of rounds, to the extent that it is almost existentially needed. This quite general and powerful framework is made possible due to fascinating connections between “secure cryptographic definitions” and natural combinatorial graph properties. Most notably is the cycle cover of a graph. While cycle covers have been studied in the literature, e.g., the wellknown double cycle cover conjecture by Szekeresand and Seymour [JT92]; the Chinese postman problem by Edmond [EJ73], none of the known results satisfy our requires. Instead, we prove a new theorem regarding cycle covers with low congestion which we foresee being of independent interest and exploited in future work.  1.1  Our Approach and Results  1.1.1  From Security Requirements to Graph Structures  We demonstrate our approach with a simple example. Let G be an n-vertex graph. Suppose that each vertex u has an input xu and that each pair of neighbors u, v in the graph (with inputs xu , xv ) wishes to compute a function f (xu , xv ) securely, i.e., each party should learn the output f (xu , xv ) but “nothing more” (the precise notion of security will be later elaborated). Kushilevitz [Kus89] showed that almost all (non-trivial) functions cannot be computed between u and v with this notion of privacy, and this was generalized for weaker notions of (information theoretic) privacy as well [FJS14]. To circumvent these barriers, Feige, Kilian and Naor [FKN94] (later generalized by [IK97]) suggested a “minimal model” called PSM1 where a third party, s, aids 1  The term PSM stands for Private Simultaneous Messages.  2  the computation. In the model, u and v share private randomness (not known to s) and each sends a single message to s which depends on its own input and the shared randomness. This allows s to compute the output f (x, y) while learning nothing more. In this paper we introduce Distributed PSM protocols which generalize the standard two party PSM protocols to general graphs. To provide secure communication between neighboring nodes u, v, we need to find a third node s in the graph so that both u and v can communicate with s without seeing each other’s messages. This requirement translates into covering the edge (u, v) with a cycle containing the edge. The number of rounds of the protocol (e.g., sending messages on the cycle to w) is proportional to the length of the cycle. Furthermore, as we wish to run such a protocol for all edges of the graph simultaneously, we need to cover all edges in the graph while having each individual edge participating in a small number of cycles (this is desirable since the bandwidth is limited). Low Congestion Covers. These requirements motivate the genuine definition of (d, c)-cover C which is a collection of cycles of length at most d such that each edge appears at least once and at most c many times on each of the cycles (the congestion of the cover). Given a (d, c)-cycle cover, we can have all vertices of the graph compute a function f (xu , xv ) for every edge in the e + c) rounds2 (in the CONGEST models). A-priori, it is not clear that graph simultaneously in O(d cycle covers that enjoy both low congestion and short lengths even exist, nor if it is possible to efficiently find them. Perhaps quite surprisingly, we prove the following theorem regarding cycle e is the “Big O” cover. Throughout, we will have an n-vertex graph G and use the notation O notation that hides polylog(n) factors. Theorem 1 (Low Congestion Cycle Cover). Every 2-edge connected graph with diameter D has a e e (d, c)-cycle cover where d = O(D) and c = O(1). That is, the edges of G can be covered by cycles such that each cycle is of length at most d and each edge participates in at most c cycles. We note that this theorem is existentially tight, in the sense that the Θ(D) factor is necessary (consider a cycle graph). Although several variants of cycle cover problems have been considered in the literature, none of them fit our objective of having both short cycles and small congestion. For instance the k-cycle cover problem aims to minimize only the congestion, i.e., restricting each edge to appear on at most k cycles while allowing arbitrary long cycles. On the other hand, in the minimum cycle cover problem that objective is minimize the total length of all cycles in the cover (i.e., instead of minimizing the length of the longest cycle as in our setting) [Fan97]. In order to use these covers in our compiler, we build them once, in a prepossessing step, e + D · ∆) rounds and show that the covers of Theorem 1 can be constructed distributively in O(n (see Lemma 7 and corollary 3). Alternatively, in Section 6 we also provide a much more efficient distributed construction on the expense of having somewhat worse bounds in the quality of the output covers. Theorem 2 (Distributed Low Congestion Cycle Cover). For every 2-edge connected graph G with e 1/ ·D), O(n e  )) diameter D and every  ∈ [0, 1], there is a distributed algorithm that constructs a (O(4 e 1/ · D + n ) rounds. cycle cover in O(4 Our low congestion cycle cover turns out to be a building block for constructing another, more complex, covers which we need in our final secure compiler. We call this building block a private 2  e notation hides polylog(n) factors where n is the number of vertices in the graph. The O(·)  3  neighborhood trees. Roughly speaking, the private neighborhood tree collection of a biconnected graph G = (V, E) is a collection of n trees, one per node ui , where each tree T (ui ) ⊆ G \ {ui } contains all the neighbors of ui but do not contain ui . Intuitively, the private neighborhood trees allow all neighbors Γ(ui ) of all nodes ui to exchange a secret without ui . Note that these covers exists if and only if the graph is 2-vertex connected3 . Similarly to low-congestion cycle covers, we define (d, c)-private neighborhood trees in which each tree T (ui ) has depth at most d and each edge e + c) rounds. belongs to at most c many trees. This allows us to use all trees simultaneously in O(d Theorem 3 (Private Neighborhood Trees). Every biconnected graph with diameter D and maxie e mum degree ∆, has a (d, c)-private neighborhood trees for d = O(D · ∆) and c = O(D). Finally, this covering structures can be constructed also distributively by extending the constructions of low-congestion cycle covers (see Lemma 6 in Section 6). 1.1.2  Secure Simulation  The Security Notion. With this graph framework in mind, we return to our original goal of constructing secure distributed algorithms. We want to design an algorithm in which every node u learns its desired output but does not learn anything else about the inputs and outputs of the rest of the nodes in the graph. In our framework, the topology of the graph is not considered private and is not protected by our security notion. While there are many possible ways to define this kind of privacy, we use the strongest possible notion of perfect privacy which is information theoretic and relies and no computation assumptions. This notion uses the existence of an (unbounded) simulator, with the following intuition: a node learns nothing, except its own output y, from the messages it receives throughout the execution of the algorithm, if a simulator can produce the same output while receiving only y and the graph G. We achieve security in what is known as the “semi-honest” model, where the adversary, acting as one of the nodes in the graph, is not allowed to deviate from the prescribed protocol, but can run arbitrary computation given all the messages it received. Moreover, we assume that the adversary does no collude with other nodes in the graph. It is possible to extend the security notion to include these notions, more on this is discussed at Section 7. The General Compiler. In a distributed algorithm, every node has a state and in each round, it updates its state by applying a local function f that depends on the messages it has received from its immediate neighbors. Theorems 1 and 3 provide the required graph framework for computing this function f in a secure and efficient manner (using a distributed PSM) for all nodes in the graph simultaneously. The communication complexity of the secure protocol depends on the computational complexity of the function f . In almost all distributed algorithms, the local update function f can be computed in polynomial time and as a result the communication overhead of the secure protocol is negligible. We call this family of functions natural and for simplicity of presentation we state our results for natural distributed algorithms. Finally, we can state our main result: any natural distributed algorithm can be compiled to an equivalent one (that is one that has the same output for each node) that is secure. Theorem 4 (Secure Simulation). Let G be a 2-vertex connected n-vertex graph with diameter D and maximal degree ∆. Let A be a natural distributed algorithm that runs on G in r rounds. Then, A 3  A graph G = (V, E) is 2-vertex connected if for all u ∈ V the graph G0 = (V \ {u}, E) is connected.  4  e can be transformed to an equivalent algorithm A0 with perfect privacy which runs in O(rD ·poly(∆)) e rounds, using O(n + D · ∆) rounds of pre-processing. We note that our compiler works for any distributed algorithm rather than only on natural ones. The number of rounds will be proportional to the space complexity of the algorithm (an explicit statement for any algorithm can be√ found in Remark 1). Moreover, to avoid the preprocessing step, √ e · 2 log n · D · poly(∆)) one can use Theorem 2 with  = 1/ log n, to get a secure simulation with O(r rounds (with no preprocessing). We observe that the barrier of [Kus89] can be extended to a cycle graph, which shows that the linear dependency in D in the round complexity of our compiler is existentially unavoidable. Our results are summarized in Figure 1. Applications for Known Distributed Algorithms. Theorem 4 enables us to compile almost all of the known distributed algorithms to a secure version of them, examples include computing majority of votes as well as many other examples which we briefly mention next. It is worth noting that deterministic algorithms for problems in which the nodes do not have any input cannot be made secure by our approach since these algorithms only depend on the graph topology which we do not try to hide. Our compiler is meaningful for algorithms where the nodes have input or for randomized algorithms which define a distribution over the output of the nodes. For instance, whereas the deterministic coloring algorithms cannot be made secure, the randomized coloring algorithms (see e.g., [BE13]) which sample a random legal coloring of the graph can be made secure. Specifically, we get a distributed algorithm that (legally) colors a graph (or computes a legal configuration, in general), while the information that each node learns at the end is as if a centralized entity ran the algorithm for the entire network, and revealed each node’s output privately (i.e., revealing v the final color of v). MIS, Coloring, Matching and More. Our approach captures global (e.g., MST) as well as many local problems [NS95]. The MIS algorithm of Luby [Lub86] along with our compiler yields e O(D · poly(∆)) secure algorithm according to the notion described above. Slight variations of this algorithm also gives the O(log n)-round (∆ + 1)-coloring algorithm (e.g., Algorithm 19 of [BE13]). Combining it with our compiler we get a secure (∆ + 1)-coloring4 algorithm with round complexity e · poly(∆)). Using the Matching algorithm of Israeli and Itai [II86] we get an O(D e · poly(∆)) of O(D secure maximal matching algorithm. Finally, another example comes from distributed algorithms for the Lovász local lemma (LLL) which receives a lot of attention recently [BFH+ 16, FG17, CP17] for the class of bounded degree graphs. Using [CPS17], most of these (non-secure) algorithms for e defective coloring, frugal coloring, and list vertex-coloring can be made secure within O(D) rounds.  2  Our Techniques  2.1  Low Congestion Cycle Covers  We give an overview of our low congestion cycle cover of Theorem 1. Let G = (V, E) be a 2-edge connected n-vertex graph with diameter D. We begin by observing that all but 2n of the edges in the graph can be covered by edge-disjoint cycles of length at most log n. Since the girth of any graph with at least 2n edges is log n, we can repeatedly add a short cycle (up to length log n) to the collection and remove it from the graph. The main challenge is in covering these last 2n edges, 4  We observe that Algorithm 19 of [BE13] can implemented with O(log ∆) memory.  5  Cycle Cover (Theorem 1)  Private-Neighborhood-Trees (Theorem 3)  Secure Distributed Algorithm (Theorem 4) Figure 1: An illustrated summary of our results. as these edges might be arbitrary with potentially a large diameter. The remaining 2n are covered as follows. We construct a BFS tree T in the graph G. All the remaining uncovered edges in the graph are either tree edges or non-tree edges. Our cover consists of two procedures, where the first constructs a low congestion cycle cover for the non-tree edges and the second covers the tree edges. Covering the Non-Tree Edges. Let E 0 be the set of uncovered non-tree edges. The main difficulty in covering E 0 stems from the fact that the diameter5 of G \ T might be large (e.g., Ω(n)). Hence, to cover the edges of E 0 by short cycles, one must use the edges of T . A naı̈ve approach is to cover every edge e = (u, v) in E 0 by taking its fundamental cycle in T (i.e., using the u-v path in T ). Although this yields short cycles, the congestion on the tree edges might become Ω(n). The key challenge is to use the edges of T (as we indeed have to) in a way that cycles enjoy the small e diameter of the graph while not overloading any tree edge more than O(1) times. Our approach is based on using the tree T edges only for the purpose of connecting nodes that are somewhat close to each other, and thus the path between them should not occupy too many edges of the tree. To realize this approach, we define a specific way of partitioning the nodes of the tree T to blocks according to E 0 . In a very rough manner, a block would consist of a set of nodes that have few incident edges in E 0 . To define these blocks, we number the nodes based on postorder traversal in T and partition them into blocks containing nodes with consecutive numbering. The density of a block B is the number of edge in E 0 with one endpoint in B. The blocks are partitioned such that no block has large density (at most some constant), and moreover, the number of blocks is not too large (say, at most n/8). The only exception is a block containing a single node, in such a case its density can be unbounded (i.e., even Ω(n)). The end goal is to connect nodes by their tree path only if they reside in the same block. We then consider the contracted graph obtained by contracting all nodes in a given block into 5  The graph G \ T might be disconnected, when referring to its diameter, we refer to the maximum diameter in each connected component of G \ T .  6  one supernode and connecting two supernodes B1 and B2 , if there is an edge in E 0 whose one endpoint is in B1 , and the other endpoint is in B2 . This graph is in fact a multigraph, that might contain self-loops or multi-edges. The key idea is that the contracted graph contains only n0 = n/8 nodes, and hence we can reuse the girth approach from before, and repeatedly find short cycles (length log n0 ) in it until we are left with at most 2n0 = n/4 edges. These cycles are translated to cycles in the origin graph G by using the tree paths π(u, v, T ) between nodes u, v belonging to the same supernode (block). Our key insight is that eventhough paths between two nodes in a block might be long, we show that every tree edge is “used” by at most two blocks. That is, for each edge e of the tree, there are at most 2 blocks such that the tree path π(u, v) of nodes u, v in the block passes through e. (If a block has only a single node, then it will use no tree edges.) Since the blocks have constant density, we are able to bound the congestion on the edge e. The translation of cycles in the contracted graph to cycles in the original graph yields O(D log n)-length cycles in the original graph where every edge belongs to O(1) cycles. The above step already covered all but 2n0 = n/4 edges. We continue this process log n times until all edges of E 0 are covered, and thus get a log n factor in the congestion. We note that while producing short cycles of small congestion that cover all the non-tree edges with low congestion, these cycles might be non-simple. To handle that, we add an additional “cleanup” step (procedure SimplifyCycles) which takes the output collection of non-simple cycles and produces a collection of simple ones. In this process, some of the edges in the non-simple cycles might be omitted, however, we prove that only tree edges might get omitted and all non-tree edges remain covered by the simple cycles. This concludes the high level idea of covering the non-tree edges. We note the our blocking definition is quite useful also for distributed implementations. The reason is that although the blocks are not independent, in the sense that the tree path connecting two nodes in a given block pass through other blocks, this independence is very limited. The fact that each tree edge is used in the tree paths for only two blocks allows us also the work distributively on many blocks simultaneously (see Section 6). Covering the Tree Edges. Covering the tree edges turns out to be the harder case where new ideas are required. Specifically, whereas in the non-tree edge our goal is to find cycles that use the tree edge as rarely as possible, here we aim to find cycles that cover all edges in the tree, but still avoiding a particular tree edge from participating in too many cycles. The algorithm for covering the tree edges is recursive, where in each step we split the tree into two edge disjoint subtrees T1 , T2 that are balanced in terms of number of edges. To perform a recursive step, we would like to break the problem into two independent subproblems, one that covers the edges of T1 and the other that covers the edges of T2 . However, observe that there might be edges (u, v) ∈ T1 where the only cycle that covers them6 passes through T2 (and vice versa). For every such node u ∈ T1 , let s(u) be the first node in T2 that appears on the fundamental cycle of the edge (u, v). To cover these tree edges, we employ two procedures, one on T1 and the other on T2 that together form the desired cycles (for an illustration, see Figures 9 and 11). First, we mark all nodes u ∈ T1 such that their s(u) is in T2 . Then, we use an Algorithm called TreeEdgeDisjointPath (see Lemma 4.3.2 [Pel00]) which solves the following problem: given a rooted tree T and a set of 2k marked nodes M ⊆ V (T ) for k ≤ n/2, find a matching of these vertices hui , uj i into pairs such that the tree paths π(ui , uj , T ) connecting the matched pairs are edge-disjoint. 6  Recall that the graph G is two edge connected.  7  We employ Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath on T1 with the marked nodes as described above. Then for every pair ui , uj ∈ T1 that got matched by Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath, we add a virtual edge between s(ui ) and s(uj ) in T2 . Since this virtual edge is a non-tree edge with both endpoints in T2 , we have translated the dependency between T1 and T2 to covering a non-tree edge. At that point, we can simply use Algorithm NonTreeCover on the tree T2 and the non-virtual edges. This computes a cycle collection which covers all virtual edges (s(ui ), s(uj )). In the final step, we replace each virtual edge (s(ui ), s(uj )) with the edge disjoint tree path hui , uj i and the paths between ui and s(ui ) (as well as the path connecting uj and s(uj )). This above description is simplified and avoids many details and complications that we had to address in the full algorithm. For instance, in our algorithm, a given tree edge might be responsible for the covering of up to Θ(D) many tree edges. This prevents us from using the edge disjoint paths of Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath in a naı̈ve manner. In particular, our algorithm has to avoid the multiple appearance of a given tree edge on the same cycle as in such a case, when making the cycle simple that tree edge might get omitted and will no longer be covered. See Section 4.1 for the precise details of the proof, and see Figure 2 for a summary of our algorithm. Algorithm CycleCover(G = (V, E)) 1. While there is a cycle of uncovered edges of length at most log n, add it to C. 2. Construct a BFS tree T of G. e ⊆ E be the subset of all uncovered non-tree edges. 3. Let E 4. Repeat log n times: e (a) Partition the nodes of T with block density b with respect to E. e for t ≤ log n such that for all i ∈ [t−1], (b) While there are t edges (u1 , v1 ), . . . , (ut , vt ) ∈ E vi and ui+1 are in the same block and vt and u1 are in the same block (with respect to the partitioning B): Add the cycle u1 → v1 → π(v1 , u2 ) → v2 → π(v2 , u3 ) → v3 → . . . → vt → u1 to C. 5. C ← C ∪ TreeEdgeCover(T ) (see Figure 12). 6. Output SimplifyCycles(C). Figure 2: Procedure for covering non-tree edges.  2.2  From Low Congestion Covers to Secure Simulation  Consider an r-round distributed algorithm A. In a broad view, A can be considered as a collection of r functions f1 , . . . , fr . At round i, a node u holds a state σi and needs to update its state according to a function fi that depends on σi and the state of its immediate neighbors. We assume that the final state σr is the final output of the algorithm for node u. Our goal is to simulate this process of computing σ1 , σ2 , . . . , σr , however, in an oblivious way without knowing any σi except the last one σr which contains the final output. Thus, we will have 8  the node u hold an “encrypted” state, σ bi , instead of the actual state σi . This encryption uses a a random mask R such that σ bi ⊕ R = σi . The key R will be chosen by an arbitrary neighbor v. The neighbors of u, in turn, hold an encrypted version of messages they would send u in order for him to compute the next state. The key for this encryption is chosen by u itself. Thus, the information required in order to compute the function fi is now spread out among u and its neighbors. Define a related function fi0 to be a function that gets an encrypted state of u and its neighbors and the corresponding keys. Then the function decrypts the states, computes fi and finally re-encrypts the new state using a new encryption key. Our goal is to enable u to compute the function fi0 that depends on its neighbors while learning but the output. Actually, we need all nodes u ∈ V to be able to compute fi0 simultaneously. To achieve this, we use a PSM protocol where u is the server and its neighbors are the parties. The first step of a PSM protocol, is for all parties to share private common randomness (not known to u). This is exactly the reason for introducing the notion of private neighborhood trees. Using these trees, each neighborhood can communicate privately, and moreover, this can be done for all nodes simultaneously (with independent randomness for each neighborhood), with low congestion on the edges. The number of rounds is proportional to the depth of the private trees. Our secure compiler works round by round, where all nodes in the graph apply the PSM protocol for every round of the original algorithm A. After securely simulating all the rounds of A, each node holds an encrypted version of the last state, which contains nothing but the desired output. The neighbors of each node u send it the encryption key (keys used solely for the last encryption), this allows u to decrypt and obtain the final output of the algorithm. As a result, each node u sees only perfectly encrypted states along the whole duration of the algorithm, where it proceeds from one state to the other using the PSM protocol. The security of the PSM protocol ensures that it learns nothing but the next encrypted state. A summary of the algorithm for a single node u is given in Figure 3. The description of the simulation of algorithm A with respect to u. 1. For each round i = 1 . . . r do: (a) u holds the encrypted state σbi . (b) A neighbor v of u samples new encryption keys. (c) Run a distributed PSM protocol for with server u to compute the next state of u: i. u sends its state σbi to a neighbor v 0 6= v. ii. Neighbors use the private neighborhood trees to exchange a private random string. iii. u learns its new encrypted state σ bi+1 . 2. v sends sends the final encryption key to u. 3. Using this key, u computes its final output σr . Figure 3: A schematic overview of the simulated algorithm.  9  3  Preliminaries and Model  Unless stated otherwise, the logarithms in this paper are base 2. For a distribution D we denote by x ← D an element chosen from D uniformly at random. For an integer n ∈ N we denote by [n] the set {1, . . . , n}. We denote by Un the uniform distribution over n-bit strings. For two distributions (or random variables) X, Y we write X ≡ Y if they are identical distributions. That is, for any x it holds that Pr[X = x] = Pr[Y = x]. Graph Notations. For a tree T ⊆ G, let T (z) be the subtree of T rooted at z, and let π(u, v, T ) be the tree path between u and v, when T is clear from the context, we may omit it and simply write π(u, v). The fundamental cycle Ce,T of an edge e = (u, v) ∈ / T is the cycle formed by taking e and the tree path between u and v in T0 , i.e., Ce,T = e ◦ π(u, v, T ). For u, v ∈ G, let dist(u, v, G) be the length (in edges) of the shortest u − v path in G. For every integer i ≥ 1, let Γi (u, G) = {v | distG (u, v) ≤ i}. When i = 1, we simply write Γ(u, G). Let deg(u, G) = |Γ(u, G)| be the degree of u in G. For a subset of edges E 0 ⊆ E(G), let deg(u, E 0 ) = |{v : (u,P v) ∈ E 0 }| be the 0 0 number of edges incident to u in E . For a subset of nodes U , let deg(U, E ) = u∈U deg(u, E 0 ). For a u1 -u2 path P1 and an u2 -u3 path, the path P1 ◦ P2 is the concatenation of the two paths. For a subset of vertices Si ⊆ V (G), let G[Si ] be the induced subgraph on Si . Fact 1. [Moore Bound, [Bol04]] Every n-vertex graph G = (V, E) with at least 2n1+1/k edges has a cycle of length at most 2k.  3.1  Distributed Algorithms  The Communication Model. We use a standard message passing model, the CONGEST model [Pel00], where the execution proceeds in synchronous rounds and in each round, each node can send a message of size O(log n) to each of its neighbors. In this model, local computation is done for free at each node and the primary complexity measure is the number of communication rounds. Each node holds a processor with a unique and arbitrary ID of O(log n) bits. Throughout, we make an extensive use of the following useful tool, which is based on the random delay approach of [LMR94]. Theorem 5 ([Gha15, Theorem 1.3]). Let G be a graph and let A1 , . . . , Am be m distributed algorithms in the CONGESTmodel, where each algorithm takes at most d rounds, and where for each edge of G, at most c messages need to go through it, in total over all these algorithms. Then, there is a randomized distributed algorithm (using only private randomness) that, with high probability, produces a schedule that runs all the algorithms in O(c + d · log n) rounds, after O(d log2 n) rounds of pre-computation. A Distributed Algorithm. Consider an n-vertex graph G with maximal degree ∆. We model a distributed algorithm A that works in r rounds as describing r functions f1 , . . . , fr as follows. Let u be a node in the graph with input xu and neighbors v1 , . . . , v∆ . At any round i, the memory of a node u consists of a state, denoted by σi and ∆ messages mv1 →u . . . , mv∆ →u that were received in the previous round. Initially, we set σ0 to contained only the input xu of u and its ID and initialize all messages to ⊥. At round i the node u updates its state to σi+1 according to its previous state σi and the message from the previous round, and prepares ∆ messages to send mu→v1 , . . . , mu→v∆ . To ease notation (and without loss of generality) we assume that each state contains the ID of the node u, 10  thus, we can focus on a single update function fi for every round that works for all nodes. The function fi gets the state σi and messages mv1 →u . . . , mv∆ →u , and randomness si and outputs the next state and outgoing message: (σi , mu→v1 , . . . , mu→v∆ ) ← f (σi−1 , mv1 →u , . . . , mv∆ →u , si ). At the end of the r rounds, each node u has a state σr and a final output of the algorithm. Without loss of generality, we assume that σr is the final output of the algorithm (we can always modify fr accordingly). Natural Distributed Algorithms. We define a family of distributed algorithms which we call natural, which captures almost all known distributed algorithms. A natural distributed algorithm has two restrictions for any round i: (1) the size the state is bounded by |σi | ≤ ∆ · polylog(n), and (2) the function fi is computable in polynomial time. The input for fi is the state σi and at most ∆ message each of length log n. Thus, the input length m for fi is bounded by m ≤ ∆ · polylog(n), and the running time should be polynomial in this input length. We introduce this family of algorithms mainly for simplifying the presentation of our main result. For these algorithms, our main statement can be described with minimal overhead. However, our results are general and work for any algorithm, with appropriate dependency on the size of the state and the running time the function fi (i.e., the internal computation time at each node u in round i). Notations. We introduce some notations: For an algorithm A, graph G, input X = {xv }v∈G we denote by Au (G, X) the random variable of the output of node u while performing algorithm A on the graph G with inputs X (recall that A might be randomized and thus the output is a random variable and not a value). Denote by A(G, X) = {Au (G, X)}u∈G the collection of outputs (in some canonical ordering). Let ViewA u (G, X) be a random variable of the viewpoint of u in the running of the algorithm A. This includes messages sent to u, its memory and random coins during all rounds of the algorithm. Secure Distributed Computation. Let A be a distributed algorithm. Informally, we say that A0 computes A (or simulates A) in a secure manner of A if when running the algorithm A0 every node u learns the final output σr of A but “nothing more”. This notion is captured by the existence of a simulator and is defined below. Definition 1 (Perfect Privacy). Let A be a distributed (possibly randomized) algorithm, that works in r rounds. We say that an algorithm A0 computes A with perfect privacy if for every graph G, every u ∈ G and it holds that: 1. Correctness: For every input X = {xv }v∈V : A(G, X) ≡ A0 (G, X). 2. Perfect Privacy: There exists a randomized algorithm (simulator) Sim such that for every input X = {xv }v∈V it holds that 0  ViewuA (G, X) ≡ Sim(G, xu , Au (G, X)). This security definition is known as the “semi-honest” model, where the adversary, acting a one of the nodes in the graph, is not allowed to deviate from the prescribed protocol, but can run arbitrary computation given all the messages it received. Moreover, we assume that the adversary does no collude with other nodes in the graph. It is possible to extend the security notion to include these notions, more on this is discussed at Section 7. 11  3.2  Cryptography with Perfect Privacy  One of the main cryptographic tools we use is a specific protocol for secure multiparty computation that has perfect privacy. Feige Kilian and Naor [FKN94] suggested a model where two players having inputs x and y wish to compute a function f (x, y) in a secure manner. They achieve this by each sending a single message to a third party that is able to compute the output of the function f from these messages, but learn nothing else about the inputs x and y. For the protocol to work, the two parties need to share private randomness that is not known to the third party. This model was later generalized to multi-players and is called the Private Simultaneous Messages Model [IK97], which we formally describe next. Definition 2 (The PSM model). Let f : ({0, 1}m )k → {0, 1}m be a k variant function. A PSM protocol for f consists of a pair of algorithms (PSM.Enc, PSM.Dec) where PSM.Enc : {0, 1}m × {0, 1}r → {0, 1}t and PSM.Dec : ({0, 1}t )k → {0, 1}m such that • For any X = (x1 , . . . , xk ) it holds that: Pr  R∈{0,1}r  [PSM.Dec(PSM.Enc(x1 , R), . . . , PSM.Enc(xk , R)) = f (x1 , . . . , xk )] = 1.  • There exists a randomized algorithm (simulator) Sim such that for X = x1 , . . . , xk and for R sampled from {0, 1}r , it holds that {PSM.Enc(xi , R)}i∈[k] ≡ Sim(f (x1 , . . . , xk )). The communication complexity of the PSM protocol is the encoding length t and the randomness complexity of the protocol is defined to be |R| = r. Theorem 6 (Follows from [IK97]). For every function f : ({0, 1}m )k → {0, 1}` that is computable by an s = s(m, k)-space TM there is an efficient perfectly secure PSM protocol whose communication complexity and randomness complexity are O(km` · 22s ). We describe two additional tools that we will use, secret sharing and one-time-pad encryption. Definition 3 (Secret Sharing). Let x ∈ {0, 1}n be a message. We say L x is secret shared to k shares by choosing k random strings x1 , . . . , xk ∈ {0, 1}n conditioned on x = kj=1 xj . Each xj is called a share, and notice that the joint distribution of any k − 1 shares is uniform over ({0, 1}n )k−1 . Definition 4 (One-Time-Pad Encryption). Let x ∈ {0, 1}n be a message. A one-time pad is an extremely simple encryption scheme that has information theoretic security. For a random key K ∈ {0, 1}n the “encryption” of x according to K is x b = x ⊕ K. It is easy to see that the encrypted message x b (without the key) is distributed as a uniform random string. To decrypt x b using the key K we simply compute x = x b ⊕ K. The key K might be references as the encryption key or decryption key. Paper Organization. In Section 4 we describe the centralized constructions of our low-congestion covers. We start by showing the construction of cycle covers (in Section 4.1). We then use the cycle cover construction to compute private neighborhood trees in Section 4.2. Section 5 describes the secure simulation which generalizes PSM to general graphs. Finally, Section 6 considers the distributed construction of our low congestion covers. 12  4 4.1  Low-Congestion Covers Cycle Cover  We give the formal definition of a cycle cover and prove our main theorem regarding low-congestion cycle covers. Intuitively, a cycle cover is a collection is cycles in the graph such that each edge is covered by at least one cycle from the collection. We care about two main parameters regarding the cycle cover that we wish to minimize: (1) cycle length: the maximal length of a cycle and (2) edge congestion: the maximal number of cycles an edge participates in. Definition 5 (Low-Congestion Cycle Cover). For a given graph G = (V, E), a (d, c) low-congestion cycle cover C of G is a collection of cycles that cover all edges of G such that each cycle C ∈ C is of length at most O(d) and each edge appears in at most O(c) cycles in C. That is, for every e ∈ E it holds that 1 ≤ |{C ∈ C : e ∈ C}| ≤ O(c). We also consider partial covers, that cover only a subset of edges E 0 . We say that a cycle cover C is a (d, c) cycle cover for E 0 ⊆ E, if all cycles are of length at most D, each edge of E 0 appears in at least one of the cycles of C, and no edge in E(G) appears in more than c cycles in C. That is, in this restricted definition, the covering is with respect to the subset of edges E 0 , however, the congestion limitation is with respect to all graph edges. The main contribution of this section is an existential result regarding cycle covers with low congestion. Namely, we show that any graph that is 2-edge connected has a cycle cover where each cycle is at most the diameter of the graph (up to log n factors) and each edge is covered by O(log n) cycles. Moreover, the proof is actually constructive, and yields a polynomial time algorithm that computes such a cycle cover. Theorem 1. For every n-vertex graph G with diameter D that is 2-edge connected, there exists a (d, c)-cycle cover with d = O(D log n) and c = O(log3 n). The construction of a (d, c)-cycle cover C starts by constructing a BFS tree T . The algorithm has two sub-procedures: the first computes a cycle collection C1 for covering the non-tree edges E1 = E(G)\E(T ), the second computes a cycle collection C2 for covering the tree edges E2 = E(T ). We describe each cover separately. The pseudo-code for the algorithm is given in Figure 4. The algorithm uses two procedures, NonTreeCover and TreeCover which are given in Section 4.1.1 and Section 4.1.2 respectively. 4.1.1  Covering Non-Tree Edges  Covering the non-tree edge mainly uses the fact that while the graph many edges, then the girth is small. Specifically, using Fact 1, with k = log n we get that the girth of a graph with at least 2n edges is at most 2 log n. Hence, as long as that the graph has at least 2n edges, a cycle of length 2 log n can be found. We get that all but 2n edges in G are covered by edge-disjoint cycles of length 2 log n. In this subsection, we show that the set of edges E1 , i.e., the set of non-tree edges can be covered by a (D log n, O(1))-cycle cover denoted C1 . Actually, what we show is slightly more general: if the tree is of depth D(T ) the length of the cycles is at most O(D(T ) log n). Lemma 1 will be useful for covering the tree-edges as well and is used again in see next subsection (Section 4.1.2). 13  Algorithm CycleCover(G = (V, E)) 1. Construct a BFS tree T of G (with respect to edge set E). 2. Let E1 = E(G) \ E(T ) be all non-tree edges, and let E2 = E(T ) be all tree edges. 3. C1 ← NonTreeCover(T, E1 ). 4. C2 ← TreeCover(T, E2 ) 5. Output C1 ∪ C2 . Figure 4: Centralized algorithm for finding a cycle cover of a graph G. Lemma 1. Let G = (V, E) be a n-vertex graph, let T ⊆ G be a tree of depth D(T ). Then, there exists a (D(T ) log n, log n)-cycle cover C1 for the edges of E(G) \ E(T ). An additional useful property of the cover C1 is that despite the fact that the length of the cycles in C1 is O(D log n), each cycle is used to cover O(log n) edges. Lemma 2. Each cycle in C1 is used to cover O(log n) edges in E(G) \ E(T ). The rest of this subsection is devoted to the proof of Lemma 1. A key component in the proof is a partitioning of the nodes of the tree T into blocks. The partitioning is based on a numbering of the nodes from 1 to n and grouping nodes with consecutive numbers into blocks under certain restrictions. We define a numbering of the nodes N : V (T ) → [|V (T )|] by traversing the nodes of the tree in post order. That is, we let N (u) = i if u is the ith node traversed. Using this mapping, we proceed to defining a partitioning of the nodes into blocks and show some of their useful properties. For a block B of nodes and a subset of non-tree edges E 0 ⊆ E1 , the notation deg(B, E 0 ) is the number of edges in E 0 that have an endpoint in the set B. We call this the density of block B with respect to E 0 . For a subset of edges E 0 , and a density bound b (which will be set to a constant), an (E 0 , b)-partitioning B is a partitioning of the nodes of the graph into blocks that satisfies the following properties: 1. Every block consists of a consecutive subset of nodes (w.r.t. their N (·) numbering). 2. If a block B has density deg(B, E 0 ) > b then B consists of a single node. 3. The total number of blocks is at most 4|E 0 |/b. Claim 1. For any b and E 0 , there exists an (E 0 , b)-partitioning partitioning of the nodes of T satisfying the above properties. Proof. This partitioning can be constructed by a greedy algorithm that traverses nodes of T in increasing order of their numbering N (·) and groups them into blocks while the density of the 14  Algorithm Partition(T, E 0 ) 1. Let B be an empty partition, and let B be an empty block. 2. Traverse the nodes of T in post-order, and for each node u do: (a) If deg(B ∪ {u}, E 0 ) ≤ b add u to B. (b) Otherwise, add the block B to B and initialize a new block B = {u}. 3. Output B. Figure 5: Partitioning procedure. block does not exceed b (see Figure 5 for the precise procedure). Indeed, properties 1 and 2 are satisfied directly by the construction. For property 3, let t be the number of blocks B with deg(B, E 0 ) ≤ b/2. By the construction, we know that for any such block B the block B 0 that comes after B satisfies deg(B, E 0 ) + deg(B 0 , E 0 ) > b. Let B1 , . . . , B` be the final partitioning. Then, we have t pairs of blocks that have density at least b and the rest of the (` − t/2) blocks that have density at least b/2. Formally, we have ` X  deg(Bi , E 0 ) > tb + (` − t/2)b/2 = `b/2.  i=1  On the other hand, since it is a partitioning of E 0 we have that we get that `b/2 ≤ 2|E 0 | and therefore ` ≤ 4|E 0 |/b as required.  P`  i=1 deg(Bi , E  0)  = 2|E 0 |. Thus,  Our algorithm for covering the edges of E1 = E(G) \ E(T ) makes use of this block partitioning with b = 16. For any two nodes u, v ∈ V (T ), we use the notation π(u, v, T ) (or simply π(u, v)) to denote the unique simple path in the tree T from u to v. The algorithm begins with an empty collection C and then performs log n iterations where each iteration works as follows: Let E 0 ⊆ E1 be the set of uncovered edges (initially E 0 = E1 ). Then, we partition the nodes of T with respect to E 0 and density parameter b. Finally, we search for cycles of length at most log n between the blocks. If such a cycle exists, we map it to a cycle in G by connecting nodes u, v within a block by the path π(u, v) in the tree T . This way a cycle of length log n between the blocks translates to a cycle of length D(T ) log n in the original graph G. Denote the resulting collection by C. We note that the cycles C might not be simple. This might happen if and only if the tree paths π(vi , ui+1 ) and π(vj , uj+1 ) intersect for some j ∈ [t]. Notice that the if an edge appears more than once in a cycle, then it must be a tree edge. Thus, we can transform any non-simple cycle C into a collection of simple cycles that cover all edges that appeared only once in C (the formal procedure is given at Figure 7). Since these cycle are constructed to cover only non-tree edges, we get that this transformation did not hurt the cover of E1 . The formal description of the algorithm is given in Figure 6. We move to the analysis of the algorithm, and show that it yields the desired cycle cover. That is, we show three things: that every cycle has length at most O(D(T ) log n), that each edge is covered by at most O(log n) cycles, and that each edge has at least one cycle covering it.  15  Algorithm NonTreeEdgeCover(T, E1 ) 1. Initialize a cover C as an empty set. 2. Repeat log |E1 | times: (a) Let E 0 ⊆ E1 be the subset of all uncovered edges. (b) Construct an (E 0 , b)-partitioning B of the nodes of T . (c) While there are t edges (u1 , v1 ), . . . , (ut , vt ) ∈ E 0 for t ≤ log n such that for all i ∈ [t−1], vi and ui+1 are in the same block and vt and u1 are in the same block (with respect to the partitioning B): Add the cycle u1 → v1 → π(v1 , u2 ) → v2 → π(v2 , u3 ) → v3 → . . . → vt → u1 to C. 3. Compute C 0 ← SimplifyCycles(C) and output C 0 . Figure 6: Procedure for covering non-tree edges. Algorithm SimplifyCycles(C) 1. While there is a cycle C ∈ C with a vertex w ∈ C that appears more than once: (a) Remove C from C. (b) Let C = v1 → · · · → vk and define vk+i = vi . (c) Let i1 , . . . , i` be such that vij = w for all j ∈ [`], and let i`+1 = i1 . (d) For all j ∈ [`] let Cj = vij → vij +1 · · · → vij+1 , and if |Cj | ≥ 3, add Cj to C. 2. Output C. Figure 7: Procedure making all cycles in C simple. Cycle Length. The bound of the cycle length follows directly from the construction. The cycles added to the collection are of the form u1 → v1 → π(v1 , u2 ) → v2 → π(v2 , u3 ) → v3 → . . . → vt → u1 , where each π(vi , ui+1 ) are paths in the tree T and thus are of length at most 2D(T ). Notice that the simplification process of the cycles can only make the cycles shorter. Since t ≤ log n we get that the cycle lengths are bounded by O(D(T ) log n). Congestion. To bound the congestion of the cycle cover we exploit the structure of the partitioning, and the fact that each block in the partition has a low density. We begin by showing that by the post-order numbering, all nodes in a given subtree have a continuous range of numbers. For every z ∈ V (T ), let minN (z) be the minimal number of a node in the subtree of T rooted by z. That is, minN (z) = minu∈Tz N (u) and similarly let maxN (z) = maxu∈Tz N (u). Claim 2. For every z ∈ V (T ) and for every u ∈ G it holds that (1) maxN (z) = N (z) and (2) N (u) ∈ [minN (z), maxN (z)] iff u ∈ Tz . Proof. The proof is by induction on the depth of Tz . For the base case, we consider the leaf nodes 16  z, and hence Tz with 0-depth, the claim holds vacuously. Assume that the claim holds for nodes in level i + 1 and consider now a node z in level i. Let vi,1 , . . . , vi,` be the children of z ordered from left to right. By the post-order traversal, the root vi,j is the last vertex visited in Tvi,j and hence N (vi,j ) = maxN (vi,j ). Since the traversal of Tvi,j starts right after finishing the traversal of Tvi,j−1 for every j ≥ 2, it holds that minN (vi,j ) = N (vi,j−1 ) + 1. Using the induction assumption for vi,j , we get that all the nodes in Tz \ {z} have numbering in the range [minN (vi,1 ), maxN (vi,` ] and any other node not in Tz is not in this range. Finally, N (z) = N (vi,` ) + 1 and so the claim holds. The cycles in the cover we compute are composed of paths π(u, v) for two nodes u and v in the same block. Thus, to bound the congestion on an edge e ∈ T we need to bound the number of blocks such that there contains u, v in that block such that π(u, v) passes through e. The next claim shows that every edge in the tree is effected by at most 2 blocks. Claim 3. Let e ∈ T be a tree edge and define B(e) = {B ∈ B | ∃u, v ∈ B s.t. e ∈ π(u, v)}. Then, |B(e)| ≤ 2 for every e ∈ T . Proof. Let e = (w, z) where w is closer to the root in T , and let u, v be two nodes in the same block B such that e ∈ π(u, v). Let ` be the LCA of u and v in T (it might be that ` ∈ {u, v}), then the tree path between u and v can be written as π(u, v) = π(u, `) ◦ π(`, v). Without loss of generality, assume that e ∈ π(`, v). This implies that v ∈ Tz but u ∈ / Tz . Hence, the block of u and v intersects the nodes of Tz . Each block consists of a consecutive set of nodes, and by Claim 2 also Tz consists of a consecutive set of nodes with numbering in the range [minN (z), maxN (z)], thus there are at most two such blocks that intersect e = (w, z), i.e., blocks B that contains both a vertex y with N (y) ∈ [minN (z), maxN (z)] and a vertex y 0 with N (y 0 ) ∈ / [minN (z), maxN (z)], and the claim follows. Finally, we use the above claims to bound the congestion. Consider any tree edge e = (w, z) where w is closer to the root than z. Let Tz be the subtree of T rooted at z. Fix an iteration i of the algorithm. We characterize all cycles in C that go through this edge. For any cycle that passes through e there must be a block B and two nodes u, v ∈ B such that e ∈ π(u, v). By Claim 3, we know that there are that at each iteration of the algorithm, there are at most two such blocks B that can affect the congestion of e. Moreover, we claim that each such block has density at most b. Otherwise it would be a block containing a single node, say u, and thus the path π(u, u) = u is empty and cannot contain the edge e. For each edge in E 0 we construct a single cycle in C, and thus for each one of the two blocks that affect e the number of pairs u, v such that e ∈ π(u, v) is bounded by b/2 (each pair u, v has two edges in the block B and we know that the total number of edges is bounded by b). To summarize the above, we get that for each iteration, that are at most 2 blocks that can contribute to the congestion of an edge e: one block that intersects Tz but has also nodes smaller than minN (z) and one block that intersects Tz but has also nodes larger than maxN (z). Each of these two blocks can increase the congestion of e by at most b/2. Since there are at most log n iterations, we can bound the total congestion by b log n. Notice that if an edge appears k times in a cycle, then this congestion bound counts all k appearances. Thus, after the simplification of the cycles, the congestion remains unchanged. Cover. We show that each edge in E1 was covered by some cycle and that each cycle is used to cover O(log n) edges in E1 . We begin by showing cover for the cycles before the simplification procedure, and then show that the cover remains after this procedure. The idea is that at each iteration of the 17  algorithm, the number of uncovered edges is reduced by half. Therefore, the log |E1 | = O(log n) iterations should suffice for covering all edges of E1 . In each iteration we partition the nodes into blocks, and we search for cycles between the blocks. The point is that if the number of edges is large, then we considering the blocks as nodes in a new virtual graph, this graph has a large number of edges and thus must have a short cycle. At each iteration, the blocks become larger which make the virtual have less nodes and the number of edges is larger relative to the small number of nodes. In what follows, we formalize the intuition given above. Let Ei0 be the set E 0 at the ith iteration of the algorithm. Consider the iteration i with the set of uncovered edge set Ei0 . Our goal is to 0 show that Ei+1 ≤ 1/2Ei0 . By having log |E1 | iterations, last set will be empty. Let Bi be the partitioning performed at iteration i with respect to the edge set Ei0 . Define a e in which each block Bj ∈ Bi is represented by a node vej , and there is an edge (e super-graph G vj , vej 0 ) 0 0 e in G if there is an edge in Ei between some node u in Bj and a node u in Bj 0 , i.e., e ⇐⇒ Ei0 ∩ (Bj × Bj 0 ) 6= ∅. (e vj , vej 0 ) ∈ E(G) e which we denote by ni , is the number of See Figure 8 for an illustration. The number of nodes in G,  𝐵2  𝐵3  𝐵3 𝐵2  𝐵1 𝐵1  𝐵4  𝐵4  Figure 8: Left: Schematic illustration of the block partitioning in the tree T . Dashed edges are those that remain to be covered after employing Alg. LocalCover, where each two blocks are connected e Right: A triangle in the by exactly one edge. Each dashed edge corresponds to super-edges in G. e super-graph G. blocks in the partition and is bounded by ni ≤ 4|Ei0 |/b. Let B(u) be the block of the node u. The algorithm finds cycles of the form u1 → v1 → π(v1 , u2 ) → v2 → π(v2 , u3 ) → v3 → . . . → vt → u1 , e In general, any cycle of which is equivalent to finding the cycle B(u1 ), . . . , B(ut ) in the graph G. e length t in G is mapped to a cycle in G of length at most t · D(T ). Then, the algorithm adds the e At the end of cycle to C and removes the edges of the cycle (thus removing them also from G). e has no cycles of length at most log n. At this point, the next set of edges iteration i the graph G 0 e By Fact 1 (and recalling that b = 16) we get that if G e does not Ei+1 is exactly the edges left in G. have any cycles of length at most log n then we get the following bound on the number of edges: 0 Ei+1 ≤ 2ni = 8|Ei0 |/b = |Ei0 |/2.  18  Thus, all will be covered by a cycle C before the simplification process. We show that the simplification procedure of the cycle maintains the cover requirement. This stems from the fact that any edge that appears more than once in a cycle, might be dropped but is not the edge for which this cycle was constructed to cover. That is, for each non-tree edge, we construct a cycle that covers it. By the construction of the cycles, if a cycle is not simple it must be because of a tree edge. It is left to show that this process only drops edges that appear more than once: Claim 4. Let C be a cycle and let C 0 ← SimplifyCycles(C). Then, for every edge e ∈ C that appears at most once in C there is a cycle C 0 ∈ C 0 such that e ∈ C 0 . Proof. The procedure SimplifyCycles works in iterations where in each iteration it chooses a vertex w that appears more than once in C and partitions the cycle C to consecutive parts, C1 , . . . , C` . All edges in C appear in some Cj . However, Cj might not be a proper cycle since it might be the case that |Cj | ≤ 2. Thus, we show that in an edge e ∈ C appeared at most once in a cycle C then it will appear in Cj for some j where |Cj | ≥ 3. We show that this holds for any iteration and thus will hold at the end of the process. We assume without loss of generality that no vertex has two consecutive appearances. Denote e = (v2 , v3 ) and let C = v1 → v2 → v3 → . . . vk for k ≥ 3. Since e does not appear again in C we know that v1 , v2 , v3 are distinct. Thus, if k = 3 then C will not be split again and the claim follows. Therefore, assume that k ≥ 4. Since e does not appear again in C we know that v2 , v3 , v4 are distinct (it might be the case that v1 = v4 ). Thus, we know that |{v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 }| ≥ 3. Any subsequence begins and ends at the same vertex and thus the subsequence Cj that contains e must contains all of v1 , v2 , v3 , v3 and thus |Cj | ≥ 3, and the claim follows. Finally, we turn to prove Lemma 2. The lemma follows by noting that each cycle in C1 contains at most O(log n) non-tree edges. To see this, observe that each cycle computed in the contracted block graph has length O(log n). Translating these cycles into cycles in G introduces only tree edges. We therefore have that each cycle is used to cover O(log n) non-tree edges. 4.1.2  Covering Tree Edges  Finally, we present Algorithm TreeCover that computes a cycle cover for the tree edges. The algorithm is recursive and uses Algorithm NonTreeCover as a black-box. Formally, we show: Lemma 3. For every n-vertex graph G and a tree T ⊆ G of depth D, there exists a (D log n, log3 n) cycle cover C3 for the edges of T . We begin with some notation. Throughout, when referring to a tree edge (u, v) ∈ T , the node u is closer to the root of T than v. Let E(T ) = {e1 , . . . , en−1 } be an ordering of the edges of T in non-decreasing distance from the root. For every tree edge e ∈ T , define the swap edge of e by e0 = Swap(e) to be an arbitrary edge in G that restores the connectivity of T \ {e}. Since the graph G is 2-edge connected such an edge Swap(e) is guaranteed to exist for every e ∈ T . Let e = (u, v) and (u0 , v 0 ) = Swap(e), we denote u by p(v) (since u is the parent of v in the tree) and v 0 by s(v), where s(v) is the endpoint of Swap(e) that do not belong to T (u0 ) (i.e., the subtree T rooted at u). Define the v-s(v) path Pe = π(v, u0 ) ◦ Swap(e). For an illustration see Figure 9. 19  For the tree T , we construct a subset of tree edges denoted by I(T ) that we are able to cover. These edges are independent in the sense that their Pe paths are “almost” edge disjoint (as will be shown next). The subset I(T ) is constructed by going through the edges of T in non-decreasing distance from the root. At any point, we add e to I(T ) only if it is not covered by the Pe0 paths of the e0 edges already added. Claim 5. The subset I(T ) satisfies the following properties: • For every e ∈ E(T ), there exists e0 ∈ I(T ) such that e ∈ e0 ◦ Pe0 . • For every e, e0 ∈ I(T ) such that e 6= e0 it holds that Pe and Pe0 have no tree edge in common (no edge of T is in both paths). • For every swap edge (z, w), there exists at most two paths Pe , Pe0 for e, e0 ∈ I(T ) such that one passes through (z, w) and the other through (w, z). That is, each swap edge appears at most twice on the Pe paths, once in each direction. Proof. The first property follows directly from the construction. Next, we show that they share no tree edge in common. Assume that there is a common edge (z, w) ∈ Pe ∩ Pe0 ∩ E(T ). Then, both e, e0 must be on the path from root to z on the tree and hence e0 ∈ Pe , leading to contradiction. For the third property, assume towards constriction that both Pe and Pe0 use the same swap edge in the same direction. Again it implies that both e, e0 are on the path from the root to z on T . Our cycle cover for the I(T ) edges will be shown to cover all the edges of the tree T . This is because the cycle that we construct to cover an edge e ∈ I(T ) necessarily contains Pe . Algorithm TreeCover uses the following procedure TreeEdgeDisjointPath, usually used in the context of distributed routing. Key Tool: Route Disjoint Matching. Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath solves the following problem defined by Peleg (see Lemma 4.3.2 [Pel00]): given a rooted tree T and a set of 2k marked nodes M ⊆ V (T ) for k ≤ n/2, the goal is to find (by a distributed algorithm) a matching of these vertices hwi , wj i into pairs such that the tree paths π(wi , wj , T ) connecting the matched pairs are edge-disjoint. This matching can be computed distributively in O(Diam(T )) rounds by working from the leaf nodes towards the root. In each round a node u that received information on more ` ≥ 2 unmarked nodes in its subtree, match all but at most one into pairs and upcast to its parent the ID of at most one unmarked node in its subtree. It is easy to see that all tree paths between matched nodes are indeed edge disjoint. We are now ready to explain the cycle cover construction of the tree edges E(T ). Description of Algorithm TreeCover. We restrict attention for covering the edges of I(T ). The tree edges I(T ) will be covered in a specific manner that covers also the edges of E(T ) \ I(T ). The e = {(v, s(v)) : (p(v), v) ∈ I(T )} and key idea is to define a collection of (virtual) non-tree edges E covering these non-tree edges by enforcing the cycle that covers the non-tree edge (v, s(v)) to covers the edges e = (p(v), v) as well as the path Pe . Since every edge e0 ∈ T appears on one of the e ◦ Pe paths, this will guarantee that all tree edges are covered. Algorithm TreeCover is recursive and has O(log n) levels of recursion. In each independent level of the recursion we need to solve the following sub-problem: Given a tree T 0 , cover by cycles the edges of I(T 0 ) along with their Pe paths. The key idea is to subdivide this problem into two  20  independent and balanced subproblems. To do that, the tree T 0 gets partitioned7 into two balanced edge disjoint subtrees T10 and T20 , where |T10 |, |T20 | ≤ 2/3 · |T 0 | and E(T10 ) ∪ E(T20 ) = E(T 0 ). Some of the tree edges in T 0 are covered by applying a procedure that computes cycles using the edges of T 0 , and the remaining ones will be covered recursively in either T10 or T20 . Specifically, the edges of I(T 0 ) are partitioned into 4 types depending on the position of their swap edges. Let 0 Ex,y = {(u, v) ∈ E(Tx0 ) ∩ I(T 0 ) | v ∈ V (Tx0 ) and s(v) ∈ V (Ty0 ) \ V (Tx0 )}, for every x, y ∈ {1, 2}. 0 , E0 The algorithm computes a cycle cover C1,2 (resp., C2,1 ) for covering the edges of E1,2 2,1 respec0 0 tively. The remaining edges E11 and E22 are covered recursively by applying the algorithm on T10 and T20 respectively. See Fig. 9 for an illustration. 0 . The edges E 0 We now describe how to compute the cycle cover C1,2 for the edges of E1,2 2,1 are 0 0 0 covered analogously (i.e., by switching the roles of T1 and T2 ). Recall that the tree edges E1,2 are 0 0 those edges (p(v), v) such v ∈ T1 and s(v) ∈ T2 . The procedure works in O(log n) phases, each 0 , C 0 and C 0 which together covers at least half of the phase i computes three cycle collections Ci,1 i,2 i,3 0 yet uncovered edges of E1,2 (as will be shown in analysis). 0 . We Consider the ith phase where we are given the set of yet uncovered edges Xi ⊆ E1,2 first mark all the vertices v with (p(v), v) ∈ Xi . Let Mi be this set of marked nodes. For ease of description, assume that Mi is even, otherwise, we omit one of the marked vertices w (from Mi ) and take care of its edge (p(w), w) in later phases. We apply Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath(T10 , Mi ) (see Lemma 4.3.2 [Pel00]) which matches the marked vertices Mi into pairs Σ = {hv1 , v2 i | v1 , v2 ∈ Mi } such that for each pair σ = hv1 , v2 i there is a tree path π(σ) = π(v1 , v2 , T10 ) and all the tree paths π(σ), π(σ 0 ) are edge disjoint for every σ, σ 0 ∈ Σ. Let Xi00 = {e = (p(v), v) ∈ Xi : ∃v 0 and hv, v 0 i ∈ Σ, s.t. e ∈ π(v, v 0 , T10 )} be the set of edges in Xi that appear on the collection of edge disjoint paths {π(σ), σ ∈ Σ}. Our goal is to cover all edges in Ei00 = Xi00 ∪ {Pe | e ∈ Xi00 } by cycles Ci . To make sure that all edges Ei00 are covered, we have to be careful that each such edge appears on a given cycle exactly once. Towards this end, we define a directed conflict graph GΣ whose vertex set are the pairs of Σ, and there is an arc (σ 0 , σ) ∈ A(GΣ ) where σ = hv1 , v2 i, σ = hv10 , v20 i, if at least one of the following cases holds: Case (I) e = (p(v1 ), v1 ) on π(v1 , v2 , T10 ) and the path π 0 = π(v10 , v20 , T10 ) intersects the edges of Pe ; Case (II) e0 = (p(v2 ), v2 ) on π(v1 , v2 , T10 ) and the path π 0 intersects the edges of Pe0 . Intuitively, a cycle that contains both π 0 and Pe is not simple and in particular might not cover all edges on Pe . Since the goal of the pair σ = hv1 , v2 i is to cover all edges on Pe (for e ∈ π(v1 , v2 , T10 )), the pair σ 0 “interferes” with σ. In the analysis section (Claim 6), we show that the outdegree in the graph GΣ is bounded by 1 and hence we can color GΣ with 3 colors. This allows us to partition Σ into three color classes Σ1 , Σ2 and Σ3 . Each color class Σj is an independent set in GΣ and thus it is “safe” to cover all these pairs by cycles together. We then compute a cycle cover Ci,j , for each j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. The collection of all these cycles will be shown to cover the edges Ei00 . To compute Ci,j for j = {1, 2, 3}, for each matched pair hv1 , v2 i ∈ Σj , we add to T20 a virtual edge eb between s(v1 ) and s(v2 ). Let  bi,j = {(s(v1 ), s(v2 )) | hv1 , v2 i ∈ Σj }. E We cover these virtual non-tree edges by cycles using Algorithm NonTreeCover on the tree T20 bi,j . Let C 00 be the output O(D log n, log n) cycle cover of Algorithm with the non-tree edges E i,j 7  This partitioning procedure is described in Appendix A. We note that this partitioning maintains the layering structure of T 0 .  21  0 ). The output cycles of C 00 are not yet cycles in G as they consists of two NonTreeCover(T20 , Ei,j i,j bi,j and the edges E e = {(v, s(v)) | (p(v), v) ∈ I(T )}. First, types of virtual edges: the edges in E 00 00 0 e by replacing each of the virtual edges we translate each cycle C ∈ Ci,j into a cycle C in G ∪ E bi,j in C 00 with the path P (b eb = (s(v1 ), s(v2 )) ∈ E e) = (s(v1 ), v1 ) ◦ π(v1 , v2 , T10 ) ◦ (v2 , s(v2 )). Then, we e in C 0 by the v-s(v) path Pe for e = (p(v), v). This results in replace each virtual edge (v, s(v)) ∈ E cycles Ci,j in G. Finally, let Ci = Ci,1 ∪ Ci,2 ∪ Ci,3 and define Xi+1 = Xi \ Xi00 to be the set of edges e ∈ Xi that are not covered by the paths of Σ. If in the last phase ` = O(log n), the set of marked nodes M` is odd, we omit one of the marked nodes w ∈ M` , and cover its tree edge e = (p(w), w) by taking the fundamental cycle of the S swap edge Swap(e) into the cycle collection. The final cycle 0 0 . This completes collection for E1,2 is given by C1,2 = `i=1 Ci . The same is done for the edges E2,1 the description of the algorithm. The final collection of cycles is denoted by C3 . See Figure 12 for the full description of the algorithm. See Figures 9 to 11 and for illustration.  𝑝(𝑣) 𝑣 𝑣′  𝑒 𝑃𝑒 𝑒′  𝑠(𝑣)  𝑇1′  𝑇2′ 𝑠(𝑣2 ) 𝑠(𝑣′2 ) 𝑠(𝑣′1 ) 𝑣4  𝑝(𝑣1 ) 𝑠(𝑣1 ) 𝑣5  𝑠(𝑣4 )  𝑣1 𝑠(𝑣5 )  𝑣2 𝑣′1  𝑣3 𝑣′2  𝑠(𝑣3 )  Figure 9: Left: Illustration the swap edge e0 = Swap(e) and the path Pe for an edge e ∈ T . For each tree edge e = (u, v) ∈ T , we add the auxiliary edge (v, s(v)). Right: The tree T 0 is partitioned into e two balanced trees T10 and T20 . The root vertex in this example belongs to both trees. The edges E 0 0 0 are partitioned into four sets: E1,1 (e.g., the edge (p(v3 ), v3 )), E2,2 (e.g., the edge (p(v4 ), v4 )), E1,2 0 0 (e.g., the edge (p(v1 ), v1 )), E2,1 (e.g., the edge (p(v5 ), v5 )). The algorithm covers the edges of E1,2 0 by using Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath to compute a matching and edge disjoint paths in T1 . See the tree paths between v1 and v2 and v10 and v20 . Based on this matching, we add virtual edges between vertices of T20 , for example the edges (s(v1 ), s(v2 )) and (s(v10 ), s(v20 )) shown in dashed. The algorithm then applies Algorithm NonTreeCover to cover these non-tree edges in T20 . We analyze the TreeCover algorithm and show that it finds short cycles, with low congestion and that every edge of T is covered. Short Cycles. By construction, each cycle that we compute using Algorithm NonTreeCover con22  𝑇2′  𝑇1′ 𝑠(𝑣2 )  𝑠(𝑣1 )  𝑝(𝑣1 )  𝑠(𝑣2 ) 𝑣2  𝑣1  𝑠(𝑣1 )  𝑃𝑒1  𝑃𝑒1  𝑠(𝑣1 )  𝑒1  𝑃𝑒2  𝑒2  𝑠(𝑣2 )  00 by an Figure 10: Illustration of replacing a single virtual edge (s(v1 ), s(v2 )) in a cycle C 00 ∈ Ci,j s(v1 )-s(v2 ) path in G.  𝑣5 𝑒5 𝑠(𝑣3 )  𝑃𝑒5 𝑠(𝑣4 )  𝑠(𝑣2 )  𝑠(𝑣1 )  𝑠(𝑣5 )  𝑠(𝑣5 ) 𝑠(𝑣6 )  𝜋(𝑣1 , 𝑣2 )  𝑣1 𝑃𝑒 1  𝑒1  𝑒2  𝑣2  𝑃𝑒2  𝑠(𝑣1 ) 𝑠(𝑣2 )  𝑣6  𝑃𝑒6 𝑠(𝑣6 )  𝑠(𝑣4 )  𝑠(𝑣3 )  𝑃𝑒3 𝑃𝑒4  𝑣3  𝑣4  Figure 11: Translating virtual cycles into cycles in G. Each cycle contains O(log n) virtual edges which are are replaced by (almost) edge disjoint paths in G. Note that each edge on ei ◦ Pei appears exactly once since the Pe paths are tree-edge disjoint and the pairs σ = huj , vj i in Σi,j do not interfere with each other.  bi,j . The algorithm replaces each non-tree edge eb = (v1 , v2 ) sists of at most O(log n) non-tree edges E by an v1 -v2 path in G of length O(D). This is done in two steps. First, eb = (v1 , v2 ) is replaced by 23  Algorithm TreeCover(T 0 ) 1. If |T 0 | = 1 then output empty collection. 2. Let C be an empty collection. 3. Partition T 0 into balanced T10 ∪ T20 . 4. Let E 0 be an empty set. 5. For every (u, v) ∈ T let (u0 , v 0 ) = Swap((u, v)) and add a virtual edge (v, v 0 ) to E 0 . 6. For i = 1, ..., O(log n): (a) Let Mi be all active nodes v ∈ V (T10 ) s.t. Swap(v) ∈ V (T2 )}. (b) Apply TreeEdgeDisjointPath(T10 , Mi ) and let Σ = {hv1 , v2 i} be the collection of matched pairs. (c) Partition Σ into 3 independent sets Σ1 , Σ2 and Σ3 . (d) For every j ∈ {1, 2, 3} compute a cycle cover Ci,j as follows: bi,j . i. For every pair hv1 , v2 i in Σj add a virtual edge (s(v1 ), s(v2 )) to E 00 00 bi,j ). ii. C ← C ∪ NonTreeCover(T2 , E i,j  i,j  00 to cycles C iii. Translate Ci,j i,j in G.  (e) Let Ci = Ci,1 ∪ Ci,2 ∪ Ci,3 . S 7. C1 = i Ci . 8. Repeat where T10 and T20 are switched. 9. Add to C the output of TreeCover(T10 ) ∪ TreeCover(T20 ). 10. Output SimplifyCycles(C ∪ C1 ). Figure 12: Procedure for covering tree edges. e Then, each (v, s(v)) edge is replaced by a path Peb = (v1 , s(v1 )) ◦ π(v1 , v2 , T ) ◦ (v2 , s(v2 )) in G ∪ E. the path P(p(v),v) in G, which is also of length O(D). Hence, overall the translated path v1 -v2 path in G has length O(D). Since there are O(log n) virtual edges that are replaced on a given cycle, the cycles of G has length O(D log n). Cover. We start with some auxiliary property used in our algorithm. 0 . The outdegree Claim 6. Consider the graph GΣ constructed when considering the edges in E1,2 of each pair σ 0 = hv10 , v20 i ∈ Σ in GΣ is at most 1. Therefore, GΣ can be colored in 3 colors.  Proof. Let σ = hv1 , v2 i be such that σ 0 interferes with σ (i.e., (σ 0 , σ) ∈ A(GΣ )). Without loss of generality, let e = (p(v1 ), v1 ) be such that e ∈ π(v1 , v2 , T10 ) and π(v10 , v20 , T10 ) intersects the edges of Pe . 24  We first claim that this implies that e appears above the LCA of v10 and v20 in T10 , and hence by the properties of our partitioning, also in T . Assume towards contradiction otherwise, since e ◦ Pe is a path on T (where e is closer to the root) and since Pe intersects π(v10 , v20 , T10 ), it implies that e ∈ π(v10 , v20 , T10 ). Since the vertex v1 is marked, we get a contradiction that v10 got matched with v20 as the algorithm would have matched v1 with one of them. In particular, we would get that the paths π(σ) and π(σ 0 ) are not edge disjoint, as both contain e. Hence, we prove that e is above the LCA of v10 and v20 . Next, assume towards contradiction that there is another pair σ 00 = hv100 , v200 i ∈ Σ such that σ 0 interferes with σ 00 . Without loss of generality, let v100 be such that e00 = (p(v100 ), v100 ) in on π(v100 , v200 , T10 ) and Pe00 intersects with π(v10 , v20 , T10 ). This implies that e00 is also above the LCA of v10 and v20 in T10 . Since one of the edges of Pe00 is on π(v10 , v20 , T10 ) it must be that either e00 on Pe or vice verca, in contradiction that e, e00 ∈ I(T ). We now claim that each edge e ∈ T is covered. By the definition of I(T ) ⊆ E(T ), it is sufficient to show that: Claim 7. For every edge e ∈ I(T ), there exists a cycle C ∈ C3 such that e ◦ Pe ⊆ C. We now consider a specific tree edge e = (p(v), v). First, note that since (v, s(v)) is a non-tree edge, there must be some recursive call with the tree T 0 such that v ∈ T10 and s(v) ∈ T20 where T10 0 . We show and T20 are the balanced partitioning of T 0 . At that point, (v, s(v)) is an edge in E1,2 0 that in the ` = O(log n) phases of the algorithm for covering the E1,2 , there is a phase in which e = (p(v), v) is covered. 0 Claim 8. (I) For every e = (p(v), v) ∈ E1,2 except at most one edge e∗ , there is a phase ie where Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath matched v with some v 0 such that e ∈ π(v, v 0 ). (II) Each edge e 6= e∗ is covered by the cycles computed in phase ie .  Proof. Consider phase i where we need to cover the edges of Xi . Recall, that the algorithm marks the set of nodes v with (p(v), v) ∈ Xi , resulting in the set Mi . Let Σ be the output pairs of Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath(T10 , Mi ). We first show that at least half of the edges in Xi are covered by the paths of Σ. If Mi is odd, we omit one of the marked nodes and then apply Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath to match the pairs in the even-sized set Mi . The key observation is that for every matched pair hv1 , v2 i, it holds that either (p(v1 ), v1 ) or (p(v2 ), v2 ) is on π(v1 , v2 , T10 ) (or both). Hence, at least half of the edges of Xi are on the edge disjoint paths π(v1 , v2 , T10 ). We therefore get that after ` = c log n phases, we are left with |M` | = O(1) at that point if |M` | is odd, we omit one vertex v ∗ such that e∗ = (p(v ∗ ), v ∗ ). Claim (I) follows. We now consider (II) , let e = (p(v), v) and consider phase i = ie in which e ∈ π(v, v 0 , T10 ) where v 0 is the matched pair of v. We show that all the edges of e ◦ Pe are covered by the cycles Ci computed in that phase. By definition, hv, v 0 i belongs to Σ. By Claim 6, GΣ can be colored by 3 colors, let Σj ⊆ Σ be the color class that contains hv, v 0 i. We will show that there exists a cycle C in Ci,j that covers each edge e00 ∈ e ◦ Pe exactly once. 00 to Recall that the algorithm applies Algorithm NonTreeCover which computes a cycle cover Ci,j bi,j in T 0 . Also, (s(v), s(v 0 )) ∈ E bi,j . cover all the virtual edges E 2 00 00 Let C be the (simple) cycle in Ci,j that covers the virtual edge (s(v), s(v 0 )). In this cycle 00 C we have two types of edges: edges in T20 and virtual edges (s(v1 ), s(v2 )). First, we transform 25  C 00 into a cycle C 0 in which each virtual edge eb = (s(v1 ), s(v2 )) is replaced by a path P (b e) = 0 0 (s(v1 ), v1 ) ◦ π(v1 , v2 , T1 ) ◦ (v2 , s(v2 )). Next, we transform C into C ⊆ G by replacing each edge e in C 00 by the v1 -s(v1 ) path Pe for e1 = (p(v1 ), v1 ). (v1 , s(v1 )) ∈ E 1 We now claim that the final cycle C ⊆ G, contains each of the edges e ◦ Pe exactly once, hence even if C is not simple, making it simple still guarantees that e ◦ Pe remain covered. Since T10 and T20 are edge disjoint, we need to restrict attention only two types of T10 paths that got inserted to C: (I) the edge disjoint paths Πi,j = {π(v1 , v2 , T10 ) | hv1 , v2 i ∈ Σj } and (II) the v 0 -s(v 0 ) paths Pe0 for every edge e0 = (p(v 0 ), v 0 ) (appears on C 0 ). We first claim that there is exactly one path π(v1 , v2 , T10 ) ∈ Πi,j that contains the edge e = (p(v), v). By the selection of phase i, e ∈ π(v, v 0 , T10 ) where v 0 is the pair of v. Since all paths Πi,j are edge disjoint, no other path contains e. Next, we claim that there is no path π ∈ Πi,j that passes through an edge e0 ∈ Pe . Since e = (p(v), v) ∈ π(v, v 0 , T10 ) and all edges on Pe are below e on T 8 , the path π(v, v 0 , T10 ) does not contain any e0 ∈ Pe . In addition, since all pairs in Σj are independent in GΣ , there is no path in π(σ 0 ) ∈ Πi,j that intersects Pe (as in such a case, σ interferes with hv, v 0 i). We get that e appears exactly once on Πi,j and no edge from Pe appears on Πi,j . Finally, we consider the second type of paths in T10 , namely, the Pe0 paths. By construction, every e0 ∈ Xi is in I(T ) and hence that Pe0 and Pe share no tree edge. We get that when replacing the edge (v, s(v)) with Pe all edges e0 ∈ Pe appears and non of the tree edges on Pe co-appear on some other Pe00 . All together, each edge on e ◦ Pe appears on the cycle C exactly once. This completes the cover property. Since the edge e∗ is covered by taking the fundamental cycle of its swap edge, we get that all 0 0 edges of E1,2 are covered. Since each edge (v, s(v)) belongs to one of these E1,2 sets, the cover property is satisfied. Congestion. A very convenient property of our partitioning of T 0 into two trees T10 and T20 is that this partitioning is closed for LCAs. In particular, for j ∈ {1, 2} then if u, v ∈ Tj0 , the LCA of u, v in T 0 is also in Tj0 . Note that this is in contrast to blocks of Section 4.1.1 that are not closed to LCAs. We begin by proving by induction on i = {1, . . . , O(log n)} that all the trees T 0 , T 00 ... considered in the same recursion level i are edge disjoint. In the first level, the claim holds vacuously as there is only the initial tree T . Assume it holds up to level i and consider level i + 1. As each tree Tj in level i − 1 is partitioned into two edge disjoint trees in level i + 1, the claim holds. Note that each edge e = (v, s(v)) is considered exactly once, i.e., in one recursion call on T 0 = T10 ∪ T20 where without loss of generality, v ∈ T10 and s(v) ∈ T20 \ T10 . By Claim 8, there is at 0 , which we cover by taking the fundamental cycle of Swap(e∗ ) in T . most one edge e∗ ∈ E1,2 We first show that the congestion in the collection of all the cycles added in this way is bounded by O(log n). To see this, we consider one level i of the recursion and show that each edge appears on at most 2 of the fundamental cycles Fi added in that level. Consider an edge e∗ that is covered in this way in level i of the recursion. That is the fundamental cycle of Swap(e∗ ) given by π(v ∗ , s(v ∗ )) ∪ Pe∗ was added to Fi . Let T 0 be such that T 0 = T10 ∪ T20 and e∗ = (p(v ∗ ), v ∗ ) is such that v ∗ ∈ T10 and s(v ∗ ) ∈ T20 . Since both v and s(v) are in T 0 , the tree path π(v ∗ , s(v ∗ )) ⊆ T 0 . As all other trees T 00 6= T 0 in level i of the recursion are edge disjoint, they do not have any edge in common with π(v ∗ , s(v ∗ )). For the tree T 0 , there are at most two fundamental cycles that we add. 0 0 . Since e∗ ∈ I(T ), and each One for covering an edge in E1,2 and one for covering an edge in E2,1 8  Since our partitioning into T10 , T20 maintains the layering structure of T , it also holds that Pe is below e on T10 .  26  edge appears on at most two paths Pe , Pe0 for e, e0 ∈ I(T ), overall each edge appears at most twice on each of the cycles in Fi (once in each direction of the edge) and over all the O(log n) of the recursion, the congestion due to these cycles is O(log n). It remains to bound the congestion of all cycles obtained by translating the cycles computed using Algorithm TreeCover. We do that by showing that the cycle collection Ci computed in phase i 0 is an O(D log n, log n) cover. Since there are O(log n) phases and O(log n) to cover the edges of E1,2 levels of recursion, overall it gives an O(D log n, log3 n) cover. Since all trees considered in a given recursion level are edge disjoint, we consider one of them: 0 T . We now focus on phase i of Algorithm TreeCover(T 0 ). In particular, we consider the output 00 for j ∈ {1, 2, 3} computed by Algorithm NonTreeCover for the edges E b1,2 and T 0 . Each cycles Ci,j 2 0 00 edge e ∈ T2 appears on O(log n) cycles of Ci,j . Each virtual edge eb = (s(v1 ), s(v2 )) is replaced by an e Let C 0 be the cycles in G∪ E e s(v1 )-s(v2 ) path P (b e) = (s(v1 ), v1 )◦π(v1 , v2 , T10 )◦(s(v1 ), v1 ) in G∪ E. i,j 00 by replacing the edges of e b1,2 with the paths P (b e Note that every obtained from Ci,j b∈ E e) in G ∪ E. b1,2 . The edges (s(v1 ), v1 ) of E e gets two paths P (b e) and P (b e0 ) are edge disjoint for every eb, eb0 ∈ E 0 used only in tree T in that recursion level. Hence, each edge (v1 , s(v1 )) appears on O(log n) cycles e Since the paths π(v1 , v2 , T 0 ) are edge disjoint, each edge e0 ∈ π(v1 , v2 , T 0 ) appears on C 0 in G ∪ E. 1 1 e (i.e., on the cycles translated from C 00 ∈ C 00 that contains the at most O(log n) cycles C 0 in G ∪ E i,j e appears on edge eb = (s(v1 ), s(v2 ))). Up to this point we get that each virtual edge (v, s(v)) ∈ E 0 . Finally, when replacing (v, s(v)) with the paths P O(log n) cycles of Ci,j (p(v),v) , the congestion in G is increased by factor of at most 2 as every two path Pe and Pe0 for e, e0 ∈ I(T ), are nearly edge disjoint (each edge (z, w) appears on at most twice of these paths, one time in each direction). We get that the cycle collection Ci is an O(D log n, log n) cover, as desired.  4.2  Private Neighborhood Trees  We introduce the notion of Private Neighborhood Trees in which the graph G is decomposed into overlapping trees T (u1 ), . . . , T (un ) such that each tree T (ui ) contains the neighbors of ui in G but does not contain ui . Hence, T (ui ) provides the neighbors of ui a way to communicate privately without their root ui . The goal is to compute a collection of trees (or clusters) with small overlap and small diameter. Thus, we are interested in the existence of a low-congestion private neighborhood trees. Definition 6 (Private Neighborhood Trees). Let G = (V = {u1 , . . . , un }, E) be an biconnected graph. The private neighborhood trees N of G is a collection of n subtrees T (u1 ), . . . , T (un ) in G such that for every i ∈ {1, . . . , n} it holds that Γ(ui ) \ {ui } ⊆ T (ui ), but ui ∈ / T (ui ). An (d, c) private neighborhood trees N satisfies: 1. Diam(T (ui )) = O(d) for every i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, 2. Every edge e ∈ E appears in at most O(c) trees. Note that since the graph is biconnected, all nodes of Γ(u) are indeed connected in G \ {u} for every node u. The main challenge is in showing that all n trees can be both of small diameter and with small overlap. Theorem 3 (Private Trees). For every biconnected graph G with maximum degree ∆ and diameter D, there exists a (d, c) private trees with d = O(D · ∆ · log n) and c = O(D · log ∆ · log3 n). 27  In fact we show that given a construction of (d, c) cycle cover C, we can construct an (d · ∆, c · D · log ∆) private neighborhood trees N . In particular, using our construction of (D log n, log3 n) cycle cover C yields the desired bound. The construction of the private neighborhood trees N consists of ` = O(log ∆) phases. In each phase, we compute an (D log n, log3 n) cycle cover in some auxiliary graph using Theorem 1. We start by having for each node u an empty forest F0 (u) = (Γ(u, G), ∅) consisting only of u’s neighbors. Then in each phase, we add edges to these forests so that the number of connected components (containing the neighbors Γ(u, G)) is reduced by factor 2. After O(log ∆) phases, we will have for every u ∈ V , a tree T (u) in G \ {u} that spans all neighbors Γ(u, G). We need some notation. Let C0 be a cycle cover of G. For every i ∈ {0, . . . , `}, let CCi (u) be the number of connected components in the forest Fi (u). In particular, CC0 (u) = deg(u). In each phase i ≥ 1, we are given a collection of forests Ni−1 = {Fi−1 (u1 ), . . . , Fi−1 (un )} such that (I) Fi−1 (uj ) ⊆ G \ {uj }, (II) Γ(uj ) ⊆ V (Fi−1 (uj )) and (III) Fi−1 (uj ) has CCi−1 (uj ) ≤ deg(uj )/2i−1 connected components. The goal of phase i is to add edges to each Fi−1 (uj ) in order to reduce the number of connected components by factor 2. The algorithm uses the current e i which contains the edges of G and some collection of forests Ni−1 to define an auxiliary graph G e i a set of k = CCi−1 (u) virtual additional virtual nodes and edges. For every u ∈ V , we add to G nodes u e1 , . . . , u ek . We connect u to each of its virtual copies u ej and in addition connect the j th virtual copy u ej is connected to all the neighbors of u (in Γ(u, G)) that belong to the j th connected component in the forest Fi−1 (u) ∈ Ni−1 . This is done for every u ∈ G. The final auxiliary graph e i has O(m) nodes, O(m) edges and diameter at most 2D. Note that each edge of G e i has one real G endpoint (i.e., node of G) and one virtual endpoint. Next, the algorithm uses Algorithm CycleCover e i . To map these virtual cycles to real to compute an (D log n, log3 n) cycle cover Cei for the edges of G cycles Ci in G, we simply replace a virtual node u ej with the real node u. As the virtual neighbors of u, namely, u ej , are connected to the neighbors of u, this indeed defines legal cycles in G. Define Gi (u) = Fi−1 (u) ∪ {C | C ∈ Ci and (u, v) ∈ C} \ {u} and let Fi (u) ⊆ Gi (u) be a forest that spans all the neighbors of u. This forest can be computed, for instance, by running a BFS from a neighbor u in each connected component of Gi (u). This completes the description of phase i. The final private tree collection is given by N = {F` (u1 ), . . . , F` (un )}. We now turn to analyze this construction and prove Theorem 3. Small Diameter Trees. We begin by showing that the diameter of each tree T (ui ) is bounded by O(∆D · log n). Note that this bound is existentially tight (up to logarithmic factors) as there are graphs G with diameter D and there is a node u with degree ∆ such that the diameter of G \ {u} is O(∆D). Claim 9. For every i ∈ {0, . . . , log ∆} and for every u ∈ V the number of connected components satisfies CCi (u) ≤ ∆/2i . Proof. The lemma is shown by induction on i. The case of i = 0 holds vacuously. Assume that the ei claim holds up to i − 1 and consider phase i. By construction, for each u, the auxiliary graph G contains CCi−1 (u) virtual nodes u ej that are connected to u. e i covers all these virtual (u, u The cycle cover Cei for G ej ) by virtual cycles, each such cycle e i are connected to neighbors of connects two virtual nodes. Since every two virtual nodes of u in G u that belong to different components in Gi−1 (u), every cycle that connects two virtual neighbors is mapped into a cycle that connects two of u’s neighbors that belong to a different connected  28  component in phase Gi−1 (u). Hence, the number of connected components in the forest Fi (u) has been decreased by factor at least 2 compared to that of Fi−1 (u). Claim 10. The diameter of each tree T (ui ) ∈ N is O(∆ · D · log n). Proof. We first claim that the diameter of each component in the forest Fi (u) is bounded by O(∆ · D · log n) for every u ∈ V and every i ∈ {1, . . . , `}. To see this, note that the forest Fi (u) is formed by collection of O(D log n)-length cycles that connect u’s neighbors. Hence, when removing u, we get paths of length O(D log n). Consider the process where in each phase i, every two u’sneighbors that are connected by a cycle in Ci are connected by a single “edge”. By the Proof of Claim 9, after ` = O(log ∆) phases, we get a connected tree with deg(u) nodes, and hence of “diameter” deg(u). Since each edge corresponds to a path of length O(D log n) in G, we get that the final diameter of F` (u) is O(deg(u) · D · log n). Congestion. Claim 11. Each edge e appears on O(D log3 n) different subgraphs T (ui ) ∈ N . We first show that the cycles Ci computed in G have congestion O(log3 n) for every i ∈ {1, . . . , `}. e i have congestion of O(log3 n). Consider the mapping of cycles Clearly, the cycles Cei computed in G e i to a cycles Ci in G. Edges of the type (u, u Cei in G ej ) are replaced by (u, u) and hence there is no real edge in the cycle. Edges of the type (e uj , w) are replaced by (u, w). Since there is only one virtual node of u that connects to w, and since (e uj , w) appears in O(log3 n) many cycles, also (u, w) 3 appears in O(log n) many cycles (i.e., this conversion does not increase the congestion). Note that the cycle C of each edge (u, v) joins the Gi subgraphs of at most D nodes since in our construction a cycle C might cover up to D edges. (Recall that in Algorithm TreeCover a cycle that covers an a tree edge e, also covers up to D edges on the path Pe ). In addition, each edge e0 appears on different cycles in Ci . We now claim that each edge e appears on O(i log3 n · D) graphs Gi (u). For i = 1, this holds as the cycle C of an edge (u, v) joins the subgraphs G1 (x) and G1 (y) for every edge (x, y) that is covered by C. Assume it holds up to i − 1 and consider phase i. In phase i, we add to the Gi (u) graphs the edges of Ci . Again, each cycle C 0 of an edge (u, v) joins D graphs Gi (x), Gi (y) for every (x, y) that is covered by C 0 . Hence each edge e appears on O(D · log3 n) of the subgraphs Gi (uj ) \ Gi−1 (uj ). By induction assumption, each e appears on (i − 1) log3 n · D graphs Gi−1 (uj ) and hence overall each edge e appears on O(i log3 n) graphs Gi (uj ). Therefore we get that each edge appears on O(log ∆ · log3 n · D) trees in N .  5  Secure Simulation via Low-Congestion Covers  In this section we describe how to transform any distributed algorithm A to a new algorithm A0 which has the same functionality as A (i.e., the output for every node u in A is the same as in A0 ) but has perfect privacy (as is defined in Definition 1). Towards this end, we assume that the combinatorial structures required are already computed (in a preprocessing stage), namely, a private neighborhood tree in the graph. The output of the preprocessing stage is given in a distributed manner. The (distributed) output of the private neighborhood trees for each node u, is such that each vertex v knows its parent in the private neighborhood tree of u (if such exists).  29  Theorem 4. Let G be an n-vertex graph with diameter D and maximal degree ∆. Let A be a natural distributed algorithm that works on G in r rounds. Then, A can be transformed to an equivalent e algorithm A0 with perfect privacy which runs in O(rD·poly(∆)) rounds (after a preprocessing stage). As a preparation for our secure simulation, we provide the following convenient view of distributed algorithm.  5.1  Our Framework  We treat the distributed r-round algorithm A from the view point of some fixed node u, as a collection of r functions f1 , . . . , fr as follows. Let Γ(u) = {v1 , . . . , vk }. At any round i, the memory of u consists of a state, denoted by σi and ∆ messages mv1 →u . . . , mv∆ →u that were received in the previous round (in the degree of the node is less than ∆ the rest of the messages are empty). Initially, we set σ0 to be a fixed string and initialize all messages to NULL. At round i the node u updates its state to σi+1 according to its previous state σi and the messages that it got in the previous round. It then prepares k messages to send mu→v1 , . . . , mu→v∆ . To ease notation (and without loss of generality) we assume that each state contains the ID of the node u. Thus, we can focus on a single update function fi for every round that works for all nodes. The function fi gets the state σi , the messages mv1 →u . . . , mv∆ →u , and the randomness s. The output of fi is the next state σi+1 , and at most k outgoing messages: (σi , mu→v1 , . . . , mu→v∆ ) ← fi (σi−1 , mv1 →u , . . . , mv∆ →u , s). Our compiler works round-by-round where each round i is replaced by a collection of rounds that “securely” compute fi , in a manner that will be explained next. The complexity of our algorithm depends exponentially on the space complexity of the functions fi . Thus, we proceed by transforming the original algorithm A to one in which each fi can be computed in logarithmic space, while slightly increasing the number of rounds. Claim 12. Any natural distributed algorithm A the runs in r rounds can be transformed to a new algorithm Ab with the same output such that Ab is computable in logarithmic space using r0 = r · poly(∆ + log n) rounds. Proof. Let t be the running time of the function fi . Then, fi can be computed with a circuit of at most t gates. Note that since A is natural, it holds that t ≤ poly(∆, log n). Instead of letting u computing fi in round i, we replace the ith round by t rounds where each round computes only a single gate of the function fi . These new rounds will have no communication at all, but are used merely for computing fi with a small amount of memory. Let g1 , . . . , gt be the gates of the function fi in a computable order where gt is the output of the function. We define a new state σi0 of the form σ 0 = (σi , g1 , . . . , gt ), where σi is the original state, and gj is the value of the jth gate. Initially, g1 , . . . , gt are set to ⊥. Then, for all j ∈ [t] we define the function fij (σi , g1 , . . . , gj−1 , ⊥, . . . , ⊥) = (σi , g1 , . . . , gj−1 , gj , ⊥, . . . , ⊥). In the jth round we compute fij , until the final gt is computed. Note that fij can be computed with logarithmic space, and since t ≤ poly(∆, log n) we can compute fij with space O(log ∆ + b where log log n). As a result, the r-round algorithm A is replaced by an rt-round algorithm A, 0 t ≤ poly(∆, log n). That is, we have that r ≤ poly(∆, log n). 30  As we will see, our compiler will have an overhead of poly(∆, log n) in the round complexity and hence the overhead of Claim 12 is insignificant. Thus, we will assume that the distributed algorithm A satisfies that all its functions fi are computable in logarithmic space (i.e., we assume that the algorithm is already after the above transformation).  5.2  Secure Simulation of a Single Round  In the algorithm A each node u computes the function fi in each round i. In our secure algorithm A0 we want to simulate this computation, however, on encrypted data, such that u does not get to learn the true output of fi in any of the rounds except for the last one. When we say “encrypted” data, we mean a “one-time-pad” (see Definition 4). That is, we merely refer to a process where we the data is masked by XORing it with a random string R. Then, R is called the encryption (and also decryption) key. Using this notion, we define a related function fi0 that, intuitively, simulates fi on encrypted data, by getting encrypted state and messages as input, decrypting them, then computing fi and finally encrypting the output with a new key. We simulate every round of the original algorithm A by a PSM protocol for the function fi0 . The Secure Function fi0 . The function fi0 gets the following inputs (encrypted elements will be denoted by the b· notation): 1. An encrypted state σ bi−1 and encrypted messages {m b vj →u }∆ j=1 . 2. The decryption key Rσi−1 of the state σ bi−1 and the decryption keys {Rvj →u }∆ j for the messages ∆ {m b vj →u }j=1 . 3. Shares for randomness {Rsj }∆ j=1 for the function fi . 4. Encryption keys for encrypting the new state Rσi and messages {Ru→vj }∆ j=1 . The function fi0 decrypts the state and messages and runs the function fi (using randomness L j s = Rs ) to get the new state σi and the outgoing messages mu→v1 , . . . , mu→v∆ . Then, it encrypts the new state and messages using the encryption keys. In total, the function fi0 has O(∆) input bits. The precise description of fi0 is given in Figure 13. Recall that in the PSM model, we have k parties p1 , . . . , pk and a server s, where it was assumed that (PI) all parties have private shared randomness (not known to s) and (PII) that each of party has a private communication channel to the server. Our goal is to compute fi0 securely by implementing a PSM protocol for all nodes in the graph simultaneously. We call this implementation a distributed PSM algorithm. The distributed PSM algorithm securely computes fi0 by simulating the PSM protocol for fi0 , treating u as the server and its immediate neighborhood as the parties. Since each party is an immediate neighbor of the server, (PII) is provided easily. Our main efforts is in providing (PI). Towards that goal, we define the notion of private neighborhood trees which provides us the communication backbone for implementing this distributed PSM protocol in general graph topologies for all nodes simultaneously. The private neighborhood tree collection consists of n trees, a tree Tu for every u, that spans all the neighbors of u (i.e., the parties) without going through u, i.e., Tu ⊆ G \ {u}. Using this tree, all the parties can compute shared private random bits R which are not known to u. For  31  The description of the function fi0 .  ∆ Input: An encrypted state σ bi−1 , encrypted messages m b vj →u j=1 , keys for decrypting the input n o∆   ∆ ∆ Rσi−1 , Rvj →u j , randomness Rsj and keys for encrypting the output Rσi , Ru→vj j=1 . j=1  Run: 1. Compute σi−1 ← σ bi−1 ⊕ Rσi−1 and s ←  L  j ∆ j=1 Rs    .  2. For j = 1 . . . ∆: compute mvj →u ← m b vj →u ⊕ Rvj →u . 3. Run σi , mu→v1 , . . . , mu→v∆ ← f (σi−1 , mv1 →u , . . . , mv∆ →u , s). 4. Compute σbi ← σi ⊕ Rσi . 5. For j = 1 . . . ∆: compute m b u→vj ← mu→vj ⊕ Ru→vj . 6. Output σbi , m b u→v1 , . . . , m b u→v∆ . Figure 13: The function fi0 . a single node u, this can be done in O(Diam(Tu ) + |R|) rounds, where Diam(Tu ) is the diameter of the tree and R is the number of random bits. Clearly, our objective is to have trees Tu with small diameter. Furthermore, as we wish to implement this kind of communication in all n trees, Tu1 , . . . , Tun simultaneously, a second objective is to have small overlap between the trees. That is, we would like each edge e to appear only on a small number of trees Tu (as on each of these trees, the edge is required to pass through different random bits). These two objectives are encapsulated in our notion of private-neighborhood-trees. The final algorithm A0i (u) for securely computing fi0 is described in Figure 14. The algorithm A0i (u) for securely computing fi0 . Input: Each node v ∈ Γ(u) has input xv ∈ {0, 1}m . 1. Let Tu be the tree spanning Γ(u) in G \ {u} and let w be the root. 2. w chooses a random string R and sends it to Γ(u) using the tree Tu . 3. Each node v ∈ Γ(u) computes Mv = PSM.Enc(fi0 , xv , R) and sends it to u.  4. u computes y = PSM.Dec fi0 , {Mv }v∈Γ(u) . Figure 14: The description of the distributed PSM algorithm of node u for securely computing the function fi0 . In what follows analyze the security and round complexity of Algorithm A0i . Round Complexity. Let f : {0, 1}m·|Γ(u)| → {0, 1}` be a function with |Γ(u)| ≤ ∆ inputs, where each input is of length m bits. The communication complexity of the PSM protocol depends on the input and output length of the function and also on the memory required to compute f . Suppose 32  that f is computable by an s-space TM. Then, by Theorem 6 the communication complexity (and randomness complexity) of the protocol is at most O(∆m` · 22s ). In the first phase of the protocol, the root w sends a collection of random bits R to Γ(u) using the private neighborhood trees, where |R| = O(∆ · m · ` · 22s ). By Theorem 3, the diameter of e e the tree is at most O(D∆) and each edge belongs to O(D) different trees. Therefore, there are e total of O(D · |R|) many bits that need to go through a single edge when sending the information on all trees simultaneously. Using the random delay approach of Theorem 5, this can be done in e e · D · m · ` · 22s ) rounds. This is summarized by the following Lemma: O(D∆ + D · |R|) = O(∆ Lemma 4. Let f : ({0, 1}m )∆ → {0, 1}` be a function over ∆ inputs where each is of length at most m and that is computable by a s-space TM. Then, there is a distributed algorithm A0i (u) (in the CONGEST model) with perfect privacy where each node u outputs f evaluated on Γ(u). The e · D · m · ` · 22s ). round complexity of A0i (u) is O(∆  5.3  The Final Secure Algorithm  Using the function fi0 , we define the algorithm A0u for computing the next state and messages of the node u. We describe the algorithm for any u in the graph and at the end we show that all the algorithms {A0u }u∈G can be run simultaneously with low congestion. The algorithm A0u involves running the distributed algorithm A0i (u) for each round i ∈ {1, . . . , r}. The secure simulation of round i starts by letting the root of each tree Tu (i.e., the tree connecting the neighbors of u in G \ {u}) sample a key Rσi for encrypting the new state of u. Moreover, each neighbor vj of u samples a share of the randomness Rsj used to evaluate the function fi , and a key Ru→vj for encrypting the message sent from u to vj . Then they run A0i (u) algorithm with u as the server and Γ(u) as the parties for computing the function fi0 (see Figure 14). The node u has the encrypted state and message, the neighbors of u have the (encryption and decryption) keys for the current state, the next state and the sent messages, and moreover the randomness for evaluating fi0 . At the end of the protocol, u computes the output of fi0 which is the encrypted output of the function fi . After the final round, u holds an encryption of the final state σbr which contains only the output of the original algorithm A. At this point, the neighbors of u send it the decryption key for this last state, u decrypts its state and outputs the decrypted state. Initially, the state σ0 is a fixed string which is not encrypted, and the all encryption keys for this round are assumed to be 0. This description is summarized in Figure 15. Finally, we show that the protocol is correct and secure. Correctness. The correctness follows directly from the construction. Consider a node u in the graph. Originally, u computes the sequence of states σ0 , . . . , σr where σr contained the final output of the algorithm. In the compiled algorithm A0 , for each round i of A and every node u the subalgorithm A0i (u) computes σbi , where σbi = σi ⊕ Rσi where v1 holds Rσi . Thus, after the last round, u has σbr and v1 has Rσr . Finally, u computes σ br ⊕ Rσr = σr and outputs σr as required. Round Complexity. We compute the number of rounds of the algorithm for any natural algorithm A. The algorithm consists of r0 = r · poly(∆ + log n) iterations. In each iteration, every vertex u implements algorithm A0i for the function fi0 (there are other operations in the iteration but they are negligible). We know that fi can be computed in s-space where s = O(log ∆ + log log n), and thus we can bound the size of each input to fi0 by poly(∆) · polylog(n). Indeed, the state has this bound by the definition of a natural algorithm, and thus also the encrypted state (which has the 33  The description of the algorithm A0u . 1. Let v1 , v2 , . . . , v∆ be some arbitrary ordering on Γ(u). 2. For each round i = 1 . . . r do: (a) u sends σ bi−1 to neighbor v2 . (b) Each neighbor vj of u samples Rsj at random (and stores it). (c) v1 chooses Rσi at random (and stores it). (d) Run the Ai (u) algorithm for fi0 with server u and parties Γ(u) where: i. v1 has an inputs Rσi−1 and Rσi and v2 has input σ bi−1 .  ii. In addition, each neighbor vj of u has input Ru→vj , Rsj . b u→v∆ ). iii. u learns the final output of the algorithm (σbi , m b u→v1 , . . . , m 3. v1 sends Rσr to u. 4. u computes σr = σ br ⊕ Rσr and outputs σr . Figure 15: The description of the Algorithm A0u . We assume that in “round 0” all keys are initialized to 0. That is, we let Rσ0 = 0, and initially set Rvj →u = 0 for all j ∈ [∆]. exact same size), the messages and encryption keys for the messages have length at most log n, and the randomness shares are of size at most the running time of fi which is at most 2s where s is the space of fi and thus the bound holds. The output length shares the same bound as well. Since fi can be computed in s-space where s = O(log ∆ + log log n), we observe that fi0 can be computed in s-space as well. This includes running fi is a “lazy” manner. That is, whenever the TM for computing fi asks to read a the ith bit of the input, we generate the this bit by performing the appropriate XOR operations for the ith bit of the input elements. The memory required for this is only storing indexes of the input which is log(∆ · poly(log n)) bits and thus s bits suffice. e Then, by Lemma 4 we get that algorithm A0i (u) for fi0 runs in O(D · poly(∆)) rounds, and e the total number of rounds of our algorithm is O(rD · poly(∆)). In particular, if the degree ∆ is e bounded by polylog(n) then we get O(rD) number of rounds. Remark 1 (Round complexity for non-natural algorithms). If A is not a “natural” algorithm then we can bound the number of rounds with dependency on the time complexity of the algorithm. If each function fi (the local computation of the nodes) can be computed by a circuit of size t then the e number of rounds of the compiled algorithm is bounded by O(rDt · poly(∆)). Security. We begin by describing the security of a single sub-protocol A0u for any node u in the graph. The algorithm A0u has many nodes involved, and we begin by showing how to simulate the messages of u. Fix an iteration i, and consider the all the messages sent to u by the PSM protocol in A0i (u) denoted by {Mv }v∈G , and let σbi , m b u→v1 , . . . , m b u→v∆ be the output of the protocol. By the security of the PSM protocol, there is a simulator Sim such that the following two distributions are equal: {Mv }v∈G ≡ Sim(σbi , m b u→v1 , . . . , m b u→v∆ ). 34  b u→v∆ are encrypted by keys that are never sent to u we have that from Since σbi and m b u→v1 , . . . , m b u→v∆ are uniformly random. Thus, the viewpoint of u the distribution of σbi and of m b u→v1 , . . . , m we can run the simulator with a random string R of the same length and have b u→v∆ ) ≡ Sim(R). Sim(σbi , m b u→v1 , . . . , m While this concludes the simulator for u, we need to show a simulator for other nodes that participate in the protocol. Consider the neighbors of u. The neighbor v1 has the encryption key for the state, and v2 has the encrypted state. Since they never exchange this information, each of them gets a uniformly random string. In addition to their own input, the neighbors have the shared randomness for the PSM protocol. All these elements are uniform random strings which can be simulated by a simulator Sim by sampling a random string of the same length. To conclude, the privacy of A0i (u) follows from the perfect privacy of PSM protocol we use. The PSM security guarantees a perfect simulator for the server’s viewpoint, and it is easy to construct a simulator for all other parties in the protocol as they only receive random messages. While the PSM was proven secure in a stand alone setting, in our protocol we have a composition of many instances of the protocol. Fortunately, it was shown in [KLR10] that any protocol that is perfectly secure and has a black-box non-rewinding simulator, is also secure under universal composability, that is, security is guaranteed to hold when many arbitrary protocols are performed concurrently with the secure protocol. We observe that the PSM has a simple simulator that is black-box and non-rewinding, and thus we can apply the result of [KLR10]. This is since the simulator of the PSM protocol is an algorithm that runs the protocol on an arbitrary message that agrees with the output of the function.  6  Distributed Computation of Low Congestion Covers  In this section, we describe the distributed algorithms for constructing the low-congestion covering structures. We start by describing the construction of low-congestion cycle cover.  6.1  Cycle Cover  We describe Algorithm DistCycleCover which constructs a low congestion cycle cover in the distributed setting. The output of the algorithm is defined as follows: the endpoints of every edge e = (u, v) know all the identifiers of all the edges that are covered by the cycles that go through e. Theorem 2. For every 2-edge connected n-node graph G = (V, E) with diameter D and maximum e 1/ · degree ∆, Algorithm DistCycleCover computes a (41/ · D · log ∆, n log2 n) cycle cover C in O(4 D + n ) rounds for every  ∈ (0, 1). We start by claiming that up to logarithmic factors in the round complexity and in the quality of our cycle cover, it is sufficient to restrict attention to graphs with maximum degree 5. Lemma 5. Let A0 be an algorithm that computes a (d, c) cycle cover for every N -node graph G0 with maximum degree 5 within f (N, d, c, Diam(G)) rounds. Then, there exists an algorithm A that computes a (d log ∆, c) cycle cover for every n-node graph G = (V, E) with maximum degree ∆, within f (|E|, d log ∆, c, Diam(G) · log ∆) rounds.  35  Proof. The 2-edge connected graph G can be transformed to a graph G0 with bounded degree 5 in the following manner: For every node u with degree ` = deg(u), we add in G0 , 2` − 1 many copies u b1 , . . . , u b2`−1 that are connected as follows. The node u is the root of a binary tree Tbu of depth log(deg(u)) and with the leaf nodes u b1 , . . . , u b` which correspond to the Γ(u, G) nodes. That is, each th leaf node u bj corresponds to the j neighbor of u. In addition, all these leaf nodes are connected via a path. The leaf nodes of different trees are connected as follows: the leaf node u bj in Tbu that th corresponds to the j neighbor v ∈ Γ(u, G) is connected to the corresponding copy of u in Tbv , namely, vbi . Overall we get a 2-edge connected graph with Θ(|E(G)|) nodes and Θ(|E(G)|) edges, has maximum degree 5 and is of diameter Θ(log ∆ · Diam(G)). Any round of an algorithm for G0 can be simulated by a single round in the graph G. In addition, any cycle computed in G0 can be easily translated into a cycle in G without increasing the congestion by replacing each virtual copy u bj with the node u. Given Lemma 5, we can assume without loss of generality, that G has maximum degree O(1). As in the centralized construction, we start by constructing a BFS tree T . We first cover all the non-tree edges E 0 using Algorithm DistNonTreeCover, and then cover the tree edges E(T ), using Algorithm DistTreeCover. Since we already assume that we work on bounded degree graphs (by paying an extra factor of log ∆ in the length of the cycles), there is no need for the preliminary step that computes short edge disjoint cycles of length O(log n). 6.1.1  Distributed Algorithm for Covering Non-Tree Edges  In this subsection we describe Algorithm DistNonTreeCover that constructs an (21/ · D, n2 ) cycle cover C1 for the non tree edges. We next describe two basic procedures used by algorithm and then describe how to used them to compute the cover. Tool (I): Computing an Hierarchy of Block Partitioning. We are given a BFS tree T , a subset of non-tree edges E 0 and an input parameter  ∈ [0, 1]. Computing the cycle cover is based upon constructing a hierarchy of (E 0 , bi ) block partitioning where bi = m/ni· for every i ∈ {0, . . . , `} where ` = c · d1/e. As in Section 4.1, every block consists of a subset of nodes with consecutive postorder traversal numbering. To see how we can compute the postorder numbering distributively, see Appendix B. We now define the hierarchical block partitioning and then explain how to compute it in a distributed manner. The 0-level of the hierarchy consists of one block containing all nodes. In the ith -level of the hierarchy, each (i − 1)-level block is subdivided into n sub-blocks, each with bounded density of bi = m/ni· . This subdivision is done greedily, going through the nodes in the block from the lowest numbered node to the highest and grouping them into blocks of capacity bi . Just like in the centralized setting, each block either consists of a single node with at least bi edges in E 0 or with a block of bounded density O(bi ). Turning to the distributed implementation, we consider the i-phase for i ≥ 1, where we are given the (i − 1)-level of the partitioning Bi−1,1 , . . . , Bi−1,` such that each node know the ID of the (i − 1)level block Bi,j to which it belongs and the LCA of its block in T (knowing the LCA is important for communicating in the tree TBi−1,j ). Equipped with that knowledge, we now describe how to compute the ith -level of the partitioning. We will work on each block separately but simultaneously. That is, in phase i, we run (simultaneously) a collection of ` algorithms, one per (i − 1)-level block Bi−1,j . From this point on, we focus on one such (i − 1)-block B = Bi−1,j and describe Algorithm PartitionSingleBlock which partitions B into O(n ) blocks, each with bounded density bi .  36  The output of this algorithm is that each node u knows the block IDs and the LCAs of all its blocks in each of O(1/) levels of the hierarchy. Throughout, the density of a subset S ⊆ V is the number of edges in E 0 that have at least one endpoint in S. We say that a block in level i is full if its density is at least bi . We need some notation. Almost all our computation forSa block B are restricted to the subtree in T that connects all B nodes, namely, the subtree TB = u∈B π(u, `, T ) where ` is the LCA of B in T . Note that V (TB ) is not necessarily B, that is, TB might contain nodes that belong to different blocks than B. For u ∈ B, bi (u) is the ID of the i-level block of u. For u ∈ TB (which might not necessarily be in B), let maxB (u) be the node of maximum ID in TB (u) ∩ B (if u ∈ B, then maxB (u) = u). Finally, let b∗i (u) be the i-level block ID of maxB (u). We work from the leaf nodes of TB up the root (i.e., the LCA of B-nodes). Letting DB be the diameter of the tree TB , at step j ≥ 0, we assume that all nodes u in layers DB − j of TB hold the following information: • the block ID b∗i (u), • the LCA of the block b∗i (u), • the density of the block b∗i (u), • the number of i-level blocks in TB (u) ∩ B 9 . These values are trivially computed for all leaf nodes in level DB of TB . We now show how to compute this information in level DB −(j +1). All nodes in layer D −j send their block information to their parents in TB . Consider now a parent u (in layer DB − (j + 1)) and its children in TB ∩ B: v1 , . . . , vk , ordered from left to right. The node u looks for a maximal sequence of children (from left to right) each with only one i-level block in their subtree TB (vp ) ∩ B. For any such maximal sequence, it merges these i-level blocks greedily, by filling up blocks as long as the density of the block is below bi . Once all mergings of i-level blocks of u’s children is done, u can obtain all desired information. If u ∈ B, and the last i-level block of its rightmost child is not completely full (i.e., its density is below bi ), then u joins that block, and otherwise, it opens a new block and the ID of the block is simply the ID of u. Hence, it is easy to see that u has all the required information as it can easily get the density of the block to which it belongs and compute the number of block in TB (u) ∩ B. This completes the description of phase i. After DB rounds of working bottom up on TB , we start working top-down. Here, there is no need to work layer by layer, but rather each node u that just merged the blocks of its children into a full block (with density at least bi ), sends all the information about that block (ID, LCA which is node u) to all its relevant children (whose block got merged) and this information propagates down their tree TB (vp ). Since we only merge subtrees that contain a single i-level block, there is no congestion in propagating the information of the full block down the tree. This completes the description of Algorithm PartitionSingleBlock. We analyze the partitioning algorithm and show: Claim 13. Algorithm PartitionSingleBlock partitions an (i−1)-block Bi−1,j into O(n ) i-level blocks. Proof. Let B 0 = Bi−1,j and T 0 = TB 0 be the subtree of T connecting all nodes of B 0 . Let D0 be the P depth of T 0 . For node u ∈ T 0 , let d(u, B 0 ) = v∈(T 0 (u)∩B 0 ) deg(v, E 0 ). 9  In fact it is sufficient to know if there is exactly one block in TB (u) or more.  37  The blocks are defined bottom up on T 0 . We will claim by induction on the number of round r ≥ 0, that for each node u ∈ V (T 0 ) in layer D0 − r (in T 0 ) the following holds: If T 0 (u) ∩ B 0 (the subtree of u in T 0 ) has more than one block of level i , then for any i-level block in T 0 (u) with density less than bi , either the i-level block before it or after it in T 0 (u) ∩ B 0 has density at least bi . As a result, we will get that that the number of i-level blocks in T (u) ∩ B 0 is at most d(u, B 0 )/bi . Applying this to the root of T 0 (the LCA of the nodes of B 0 ), we get that there are at most deg(B 0 , E 0 )/bi . Since B 0 is a block in level i − 1, we get that deg(B 0 , E 0 ) ≤ m/n·(i−1) and hence, there are at most n i-level blocks. For r = 0, the claim holds vacuously. Assume that it holds up to round r and consider round r + 1. Let u be a node in layer D0 − r + 1 and let v1 , . . . , v` be its children that belongs to B 0 in layer D − r. First, consider all vj with at least two i-level blocks and such that their last block has density less than bi . By induction, we know that each such low-density block has a block of density at least bi before it. All vj with a single i-level block in T 0 (vj ) ∩ B 0 are merged until there is at most one low-density block. We note that if in T 0 (vj ), there are at least two i-level blocks, it implies that either the block right before the block of vj has density of at least b, or that vj ∈ B 0 and deg(vj , E 0 ) ≥ b). Finally, if the i-level block of v` has low-density, u ∈ B 0 and deg(u, E 0 ) ≤ bi , then the number of low-density blocks is not increased and hence the claim holds by induction assumption. We turn to bound the round complexity of the hierarchical partitioning. Claim 14. The hierarchical block partitioning can be computed in O(D) rounds. The algorithm for computing the hierarchical block partitioning has O(1/) steps, where in each step i, we run Algorithm PartitionSingleBlock for each (i − 1)-level block Bi−1,j simultaneously. It is easy to a single application of Algorithm PartitionSingleBlock for one block Bi−1,j in level i − 1 takes O(D) rounds. The next lemma proves Claim 14 by showing that since Algorithm PartitionSingleBlock only communicates on the tree edges TBi−1,j , we can run this algorithm for all the blocks in level i − 1 simultaneously (at the cost of increasing the number of rounds by factor 2). The next lemma is quite general and will be useful later, since most of the computation that we do for blocks B uses only the tree edges TB . Claim 15. Consider the collection of blocks in the i level of the partitioning: B1 , . . . , Bk and A1 , . . . , Ak be a set of algorithms, each takes at most R rounds, and sends messages only on the edges of TBj respectively. Then, all algorithms A1 , . . . , Ak for each of the blocks can run simultaneously in 2R rounds, in the CONGEST model. Proof. By Claim 3, each edge e = (x, y) can appear in at most 2 different blocks Bi , Bj . Hence, the congestion when working on all blocks simultaneously is increased by factor of at most 2 when compared to working on a single block. Tool (II): Edge Disjoint Matching inside a Block. Our next tool uses again Algorithm S TreeEdgeDisjointPath from [Pel00] (see Lemma 4.3.2 within). Recall that TBi = u∈Bi π(`i , u) is the subtree of T that connects all nodes of Bi where ` is the LCA of the nodes in Bi . In the Block Matching Problem we are given a block Bi in the partitioning, a subset of marked nodes Mi ⊆ Bi and a spanning tree T . The goal is to match nodes in Mi (but at most one) into pairs, such that the (unique) tree path in TBi between each pair are all edge disjoint. The distributed output of the 38  problem is that each edge on the path Px,y between a matching pair hx, yi for x, y ∈ Mi knows the endpoints of the path, namely, x and y, and in addition, each node on the path knows the next hops towards x and y respectively. Algorithm DistBlockMatching works in O(Depth(T )) rounds. In the first phase which works from the leafs up, it computes the matching and in the second phase, the edges of the paths between the matched nodes are getting marked. We start by explaining the first phase. We keep the invariant that in round Depth(T ) − i, every node u at layer i in TBi , keeps at most one ID of a node in Mi which is not yet matched. In every round i ≥ 0, each node v sends the ID of at most one unmatched node in TBi (v) to its parent u. A node u in layer Depth(T ) − i + 1 that received more than one ID of marked nodes in Mi , arbitrary match all but at most one of the received nodes into pairs. In D rounds, all (but at most one) nodes of Mi get matched. In the second phase, for every matched pair hx, yi, we mark the edges on its path Px,y . Let v be the node that matched x and y in the first phase. We now let v send this matching outcome back to its children from which it got these IDs (i.e., it sends the pair hx, yi to its children that send it x or y). A node receiving this pair continues to send it to its children who sent it x or y. This message backtracks until it gets to x and y. It is easy to see that all this informed edges (that got an hx, yi message) are precisely the edges on the x − y path in T . Moreover, all these computed paths are edge disjoint and the messages containing the matching result traverses only the edges belonging to the path between the matched pair. If the number of nodes in Mi is not even, then the last unmatched node is matched to an arbitrary (already matched) node. This increases the congestion on the path edges by at most 1. By using Claim 15 we have: Claim 16. (I) The Block Matching problem can be solved in O(Depth(T )) rounds. (II) The Block Matching problem can be solved for all blocks simultaneously in O(Depth(T )) rounds. (III) On each edge e ∈ G, O(1) messages are sent on e in total (throughout the entire execution). Algorithm DistNonTreeCover. As in our centralized construction, we first consider the non-tree edges E 0 = E(G) \ E(T ) and construct a cycle cover C1 for these edges. We begin with an high level description. The algorithm has ` = c · d1/e phases. During each e are added to the set of edges E 0 that we wish to cover. For clarity, in phase, some virtual edges E our description we treat the virtual edges as standard edges in G. Informally speaking, whenever the algorithm adds a virtual edge between two nodes u and v, it implies that the algorithm has already computed an u-v path, and the virtual edge (u, v) indicates the need for computing another u-v path so that we will endup with a cycle. In other words, adding a virtual edge means that we deffer the closure of the cycle to the future iterations. These cycles get completed only at a point where the congestion (or overlap) between cycles can be bounded. ei of virtual edges that In phase i, we are given the set of non-tree edges E 0 in G and a subset E ei should be covered by cycles. The algorithm assumes at that phase that all the edges in E 0 ∪ E between nodes belonging to different j-level blocks for some j ≤ i − 1 are already taken care of ei (in a way that becomes clear later). It then restricts attention to cover the edges (u, v) in E 0 ∪ E between nodes u and v that belong to the same block in all first (i − 1)-levels of the hierarchy, but belong to different blocks in level i. To handle these edges we will have n2 applications of Algorithm DistBlockMatching for each pair of i level blocks Bx and By which belong to the same block in level i−1. The subset of marked nodes in each application of Algorithm DistBlockMatching ei that connect these pair of blocks. Based on the output matching depends on the edges in E 0 ∪ E of Algorithm DistBlockMatching, the algorithm defines a new set of virtual edges which are internal 39  e` are between nodes to the i-level blocks. After ` = c · d1/e phases, the remaining edges in E 0 ∪ E that belong to the same `-level block. As will be shown in the analysis section, at that point the e` that have both endpoint in the same `-level block is O(1). Hence, total number of edges E 0 ∪ E the algorithm covers these remaining edges by taking their fundamental cycles in T . We explain the procedure in more details. The algorithm starts by computing ` = c·d1/e levels of block hierarchies (with respect to the input E 0 of non-tree edges). By letting all nodes exchange their information on their ` blocks with their neighbors, all nodes know which of the E 0 -edges should be considered in a given phase i. (The knowledge about the virtual edges is acquired at the e1 = ∅ be the (empty) set of virtual edges of phase 1. point of their creation). Initially, let E We now focus on phase i ≥ 1 and on one particular (i − 1)-level block B that is partitioned (in level i of the hierarchy) into k = dn e blocks B = {B1 , . . . , Bk }. We assume that we have in addition ei and that each of the endpoints of a virtual edge in E ei knows to E 0 a collection of virtual edges E 0 e about its second endpoint. Let Ei = E ∪ Ei . The goal of each block Bx ∈ B at that phase is to take ei whose second endpoint is in By for every By ∈ B \ Bx . To take care care of all its edges in E 0 ∪ E of these k different types of edges, we run (in Bx ) k applications of Algorithm DistBlockMatching simultaneously. Consider a pair of blocks Bx , By ∈ B, and let Ex,y be the edges in Ei with one endpoint in Bx and one endpoint in By . We divide Ex,y into two subsets. Let Vx,y ⊆ Bx be the nodes in Bx that 1 be the subset of edges in E have at least two incident edges in Ex,y and let Ex,y x,y incident to the 1 nodes of Vx,y . The set of these Ex,y edges are handled locally with a single round of communication. We let each node u ∈ Vx,y , compute an arbitrary matching between its Ex,y -neighbors in By . We ei+1 . To do that, we then connect each of the matched pairs by a virtual edge to be added to E simply let each u ∈ Vx,y send to each of its Ex,y -neighbors in By the ID of their matched node (indicating to them their new virtual edge to this node). 2 = E 1 From now on, we restrict attention to the set of Ex,y x,y \ Ex,y edges, in which each node in Bx has exactly one incident edge in Ex,y . Here we cannot decide locally which virtual edges (between By nodes) should be added. Alternatively, we define a subset of marked nodes Mx,y ⊆ Bx as the nodes in Bx that have exactly one incident edge in Ex,y . Case (I): |Mx,y | = 1. The algorithm covers the single edge between Bx and By in Ex,y by taking its fundamental cycle in T and add it to C1 . Case (II): |Mx,y | ≥ 2. First, if |Mx,y | is odd, the root of TBx picks one edge (u, v) in Ex,y incident to node in Mx,y , add the fundamental cycle of that edge to the cycle cover C1 (i.e., by marking the cycle edges) and omit u from Mx,y . From now on, assume that |Mx,y | is even. The algorithm then applies Algorithm DistBlockMatching on Bx with the marked nodes Mx,y . This algorithm matches the nodes of Mx,y into pairs and mark the edge disjoint paths between these paired nodes on TBx . This pairing of nodes in Mx,y is now used to define the set of virtual edges between nodes of By . In particular, let ha, bi be a matched pair in Mx,y and let (a, a0 ), (b, b0 ) ∈ Ex,y where a0 , b0 ∈ By . The algorithm will connect a0 and b0 in By by a virtual edge to be added to ei+1 . Recall that Algorithm DistBlockMatching computes an edge disjoint path π(a, b, TBx ). If E (a, a0 ), (b, b0 ) are true edges in G it is easy to see how to inform a0 about its virtual endpoint b0 and vice versa. In such a case, we also send the information of the edges (a, a0 ) and (b, b0 ) on the path Wa0 ,b0 = (a0 , a) ◦ π(a, b, TBx ) ◦ π(b, b0 ). This way the edges on the path Pa0 ,b0 of every virtual edge (a0 , b0 ) added know the G-edges that this path (which will become later a cycle) covers. In case where one of the edges (a, a0 ), (b, b0 ) is virtual, say the edge (a, a0 ), the algorithm sends this information using the a-a0 walk Wa,a0 computed in previous phases. These walks are shown to have  40  length at most O(21/ · D) and overlap of O(n ) and hence this information passing on these walks can be done efficiently of all virtual edges simultaneously using the random delay approach. These details are further explained in Appendix B. For an illustration see Figure 17. Overall, for each Bx ∈ B, we run simultaneously10 k applications of Algorithm DistBlockMatching with different subsets of marked nodes Mx,y for every By ∈ B. At the end of all these applications, there are new virtual edges connecting nodes that belong to the same block By . For each such virtual edge, we have computed a path in G between its endpoints. This completes the description of phase i ≤ `. e` such that u and v belong to the In the last phase `, we consider all edges e = (u, v) in E 0 ∪ E same `-level block. We connect these virtual edge endpoints by taking their paths in T . Since each e` already has a walk Wu,v which is shown to be of length O(21/ D), we virtual edge (a, b) ∈ E 0 ∪ E get a cycle Pu,v ◦ π(u, v, T ) which is added to the cycle collection. This cycle is not yet simple but by letting all edges on the cycle learn all the edges of the cycle (using the random delay approach), the cycle can be made simple locally (by internal computation at each node of the cycle) using the centralized algorithm of Section 4.1. In Claim 21 we show that making the cycle simple does not violate the covering property. Further implementation Details are provided in Appendix B. This completes the description of the main algorithm for covering non-tree edges. Let C1 be the output cycle collection.  𝐵𝑥  𝐵𝑦 𝑣′  𝑢  Figure 16: Dealing with nodes with more than one endpoint in a different block. The node u locally matched its neighbors in By which defines a new set of virtual edges to be covered.  6.1.2  Analysis of Algorithm DistNonTreeCover  Congestion and Dilation Analysis. We start by showing that each edge appears on O(1/ · n2 ) cycles. Recall that bi (u) is the i-level block of u and that ` = c · d1/e. For every i = {1, . . . , `} and u ∈ V , let Ei (u) = {(u, v) ∈ Ei | bi−1 (u) = bi−1 (v)} be the set of all u edges in Ei that are internal to its (i − 1)-level block. Note that Algorithm DistNonTreeCover, in phase i, considers only edges S belonging to u Ei (u). Claim 17. The number of edges in E` that have both endpoints in a given `-level block B is O(1). 10  When saying simultaneously we mean using the random delay approach.  41  𝑢′  𝑣′  𝑢  𝑣  𝑥′  𝑦′  𝑥  𝑦  Figure 17: Illustration of the hierarchical block partitioning and the addition of virtual edges. Top: In phase 1, we have n blocks. Zoom into two blocks B1 and B2 . The pair hu, vi got matched in B1 and hence the virtual edge is added in B2 . Bottom: In phase 2, we consider only internal edges in 2-level blocks. Zoom into B10 and B20 which were part of the same block in level 1. The matched pair hx, yi has two virtual edges to x0 and y 0 respectively and define a new virtual edge between x0 and y 0 . This define a path Px0 ,y0 obtained by concatenating the path Px,x0 , Py,y0 and π(x, y, TB10 ) computed in the tree of B10 .  Proof. For every i = {1, . . . , `} and u ∈ V , let degi (u) = |Ei (u)|. We now claim that degi (u) ≥ degi+1 (u) for every i = {1, . . . , `}. To see this, observe that each edge (u, v) ∈ Ei (u) \ Ei+1 (u) (i.e., in this case, bi−1 (u) = bi−1 (v) but bi (u) 6= bi (v)) leads to the introduction of at most one virtual edge (u, v 0 ) ∈ Ei+1 (u) \ Ei (u) where bi (u) = bi (v 0 ). In addition, all the virtual edges added to Ei+1 (u) \ Ei (u) are due to edges in Ei (u) \ Ei+1 (u). Combining these two observations, we get that degi+1 (u) ≤ degi (u). We therefore have that for every u ∈ V , deg1 (u) ≥ deg` (u). By definition E1 (u) = {(u, v) | (u, v) ∈ E 0 } and hence deg1 (u) = deg(u, E 0 ). Let B 0 be an (` −P 1) level block such that B ⊆ B 0 . By the 0 construction of the (` − 1) level P block B , we get that u∈B 0 deg` (u) ≤ b`−1 = O(1). In particular, 0 since B ⊆ B , it also holds that u∈B deg` (u) = O(1), since deg` (u) is the number of u edges in E` whose second endpoint is in the same (` − 1)-level block, it also holds that number of u edges that have both endpoints in its `-level block is bounded by O(1). Let Ci0 be the collection of fundamental cycles added at phase i. Recall that we cover an edge e ∈ Ei by its fundamental cycle in T if the edge e is the only edge in that set the connects two brother blocks Bx and By . Claim 18. Every edge appears on at most O(n2 ) cycles in Ci0 . Proof. Let B1 , . . . , Bk be the collection of all (i − 1)-level blocks. We now consider a particular block Bj which is partitioned into Bj,1 , . . . , Bj,` blocks in level i where ` = O(n ). For such Bj we 42  add at most O(`2 ) fundamental cycles to Ci0 (one per pair of blocks in Bj,1 , . . . , Bj,` ). Note that all these cycles are edges in TBj . By Claim 3, every edge e appears on at the trees of at most two (i − 1)-blocks, hence overall each edge appears in O(n2 ) cycles. We now turn to consider cycles that are computed using the addition of the virtual edges. Claim 19. For each virtual edge (u, v) added in phase i, the algorithm computes a u-v walk Wu,v of length at most 2i · D. In addition, this walk “covers” O(2i ) edges in E 0 . Proof. Both claims are shown by induction on i. For i = 1, when adding a virtual edge (u, v), we have two edges (u, u0 ) and (v, v 0 ) in E 0 such that u, v (resp., u0 , v 0 ) are in the same 1-level block. Using Algorithm DistBlockMatching, we have marked the tree path between u0 and v 0 and hence we have a path Wu,v = (u, u0 ) ◦ π(u0 , v 0 , T ) ◦ (v 0 , v). Clearly, |Wu,v | ≤ 2D + 2. This path covers exactly two edges (u, u0 ) and (v, v 0 ) which proves the claims for the induction base. Assume that the claims hold up to phase i−1 and consider phase i. Here, when adding a virtual edge (u, v) in phase i, same story holds as in the induction phase only that the two edges (u, u0 ) and (v, v 0 ) might be virtual edges that were added in previous phases. The u-v walk is given by Wu,v = Wu,u0 ◦ π(u0 , v 0 , T ) ◦ Wv0 ,v where Wu,u0 , Wv0 ,v is either an edge in G or a walk computed in previous phases. Using the induction assumption, we get that the length of the walk Wu,v at most 2 · 2i−1 · D + 2D ≤ 2i · D. In addition, if (u, u0 ) is a virtual edge, then by induction assumption, Wu,u0 covers at most 2i−1 edges in E 0 and same goes to Wv,v0 . If (u, u0 ) is an edge in E 0 than it covers only itself (same for (v, v 0 )). Overall the walk Wu,v covers 2i edges. The claim follows. Let Wi = {Wu,v | (u, v) ∈ Ei+1 \ Ei } be the collection of all u-v walks between all virtual edges S (u, v) added in phase i. Let W = `i=1 Wi be the collection of all these walks. Claim 20. For every i, each edge e ∈ G appears at most O(i · n ) in total on all walks of Wi (this takes into account the multiple appearance of the edge on the same walk). Hence, overall, each edge e appears O((1/)2 · n ) time on all walks of W. Proof. Recall that we add a virtual edge (u, v) in phase i ≥ 1 for u, v ∈ By , in case where there are edges (u, u0 ), (v, v 0 ) in Ei such that u0 , v 0 are in Bx and Bx and By are brothers (i.e., belong to the same block in level i − 1). Note that for i ≥ 2, the edges (u, u0 ), (v, v 0 ) might be virtual. In any case, we have have u-v walk Wu,v = Wu,u0 ◦ π(u0 , v 0 , T ) ◦ Wv0 ,v where in phase 1, Wu,u0 , Wv,v0 are simply the edges (u, u0 ) and (v, v 0 ). We prove the claim by induction on i. For the base of the induction, consider i = 1. In this case, all walks Wu,v for the virtual edges added at phase 1 are in fact paths. Thus, we only need to bound the number of an edge e on different such paths. Since we have n applications of Algorithm PartitionSingleBlock in each 1-level block, and using Claim 15, we get that each edge e appears on O(n ) different paths in W1 . Assume that the claim holds up to phase i − 1 and consider phase i. Here, we can apply the induction assumption for Wu,u0 and Wv0 ,v (it is sufficient to consider the case where (u, u0 ), (v, v 0 ) are virtual edges added in previous phases, as this is the interesting case). The walk Wu,v has two types of segments: (I) walks connecting virtual edges that were added in phase j ≤ i − 1, namely, Wu,u0 , Wv,v0 and (II) tree segment π(u, v). By the same reasoning as in the base of the induction, each edge e can appear on at most O(n ) tree paths π(u, v) for every virtual edge (u, v) added in phase i. By the induction assumption, each edge e appears at most (i − 1)n times on the collection of walks in Wj for j ≤ i − 1. Hence, overall an edge e appears i · n many time on the walks of Wi . The claim holds. 43  We therefore have: Corollary 1. Every edge appears on O(n2 ) cycles in the final cycle collection. Each cycle has length O(21/ · D) and covers O(21/ ) many non-tree edges. Covering Analysis of Algorithm DistNonTreeCover. Note that the cycles computed are not necessarily simple. We next claim that they can be made simple without loosing the covering property. Recall that in each phase i, for every virtual edge (u, v) added in phase i we compute a walk Wu,v in G. Claim 21. For every virtual edge (u, v), any edge that appears more than once on the walk Wu,v is a T -edge. Proof. The proof is shown by induction on the phase number i. For i = 1, there exists two edges (u, u0 ) and (v, v 0 ) in E 0 such that u, v (resp., u0 , v 0 ) are in the same 1-level block and u0 , v 0 have been paired in their block by Algorithm DistBlockMatching. In this case, Wu,v = (u, u0 ) ◦ π(u0 , v 0 , T ) ◦ (v 0 , v) which is in fact a path!. Assume that the claim holds up to phase i − 1 and consider phase i. For any virtual edge (u, v) added in phase i, there exists two edges (u, u0 ) and (v, v 0 ) in Ei such that u, v (resp., u0 , v 0 ) are in the same i-level block and u0 , v 0 have been paired in their block by Algorithm DistBlockMatching. The only difference to the induction base is that now the edges (u, u0 ) and (v, v 0 ) might be virtual edges added in some phase j ≤ i − 1. In either case Wu,u0 is either an edge (u, u0 ) are of walk for which the induction assumption can be applied. The walk Wu,v = Wu,u0 ◦ π(u0 , v 0 , T ) ◦ Wv0 ,v adds a tree segment π(u0 , v 0 , T ) to the existing walks Wu,u0 , Wv0 ,v . Hence, it can only increase the appearance of the tree edges. Combining with the induction assumption, the claim holds. Claim 22. Every edge e0 ∈ E 0 is covered by the cycles of Algorithm DistNonTreeCover. Proof. By Claim 21, it remains to show that for every edge e0 ∈ E 0 , there is a walk Wu,v such that e0 appears on it. Let e0 = (x, y) and define i to be the first index such that x and y belong to different i-level block. The edge e0 is then considered in phase i of the algorithm. If the algorithm did not cover e0 by taking its fundamental cycle, it implies that i is not the last phase and necessarily some virtual edge was added due to e0 = (w, z). By construction, e0 connects two nodes in the same i-level block and hence will be handled in phase j ≥ i + 1 and in addition, (x, y) appears on the walk Ww,z . We can continue with the argument with the virtual edge (w, z) which is handled only at later phase j, claiming that the edge (x, y) appears when another virtual edge (w0 , z 0 ) is added when considering (w, z) and hence (x, y) appears on the walk Ww0 ,z 0 . This continues until we get to a point where the fundamental cycle of some virtual edge (a, b) such that (x, y) ∈ Wa,b is added and at that point, Claim 21 guarantees that when making the cycle Wa,b ◦ π(a, b, T ) simple the edge (x, y) is covered. Recall that indeed in the last phase ` we handle all remaining edges (also the virtual onces) by taking their fundamental cycles. The claim follows. Round Complexity of Algorithm DistNonTreeCover. e Claim 23. Algorithm DistTreeCover has round complexity O(1/ · (21/ D + n2 ))  44  Proof. By Claim 14, the hierarchical block partitioning can be computed in O(d) rounds. The algorithm has O(1/) phases. We show that each phase can be implemented can in O(21/ D + n ) rounds. We have O(n ) applications of Algorithm DistBlockMatching in each block Bx . Using the random delay approach and Claim 16 all the O(n ) applications in a given block Bx can be done e  + D) rounds. Using Claim 15, this can be done for all blocks in O(n e  + D) rounds as in O(n well. We next bound the number of rounds required to form the virtual edges (a0 , b0 ) and exchange information about the G edges that are covered by the Wa0 ,b0 path. By Claims 19 and 20, using e 2 + 21/ D) rounds. Finally, once the cycles are the random delay approach it can be done in O(n computed, using the random delay approach again, all edges can learn all the cycles that go through e 2 + 21/ D) round and locally make them simple. it in O(n 6.1.3  Distributed Algorithm for Covering Tree Edges  We turn to consider the remaining tree edges E(T ). Algorithm DistTreeCover essentially mimics the centralized construction of Section 4.1. Recall that p(v) is the parent of v in the BFS tree T . A non-tree edge e0 = (u0 , v 0 ) is a swap edge for the tree edge e = (p(v), v) if e ∈ π(u0 , v 0 ), let s(v) = v 0 by the endpoint of e0 that is not in T (v). By using the algorithm of Section 4.1 in [GP16], we can make every node v know s(v) in O(D) rounds. A key part in the algorithm of Section 4.1 is the definition of the path Pe = π(v, u0 ) ◦ (u0 , s(v)) for every tree edge e = (p(v), v). By computing swap edges using Section 4.1 in [GP16] all the edges of each Pe get marked. Computing the set I(T ) ⊆ E(T ). We next describe how to compute a maximal collection of tree edges I = {ei } whose paths Pei are edge disjoint and in addition for each edge ej ∈ E(T ) \ I there exists an edge ei ∈ T 0 such that ej ∈ Pei . To achieve this, we start working on the root towards the leaf. In every round i ∈ {1, . . . , D}, we consider only active edges in layer i in T . Initially, all edges are active. An edge becomes inactive in a given round if it receives an inactivation message in any previous round. Each active edge in layer i, say ej , initiates an inactivation message on its path Pej . An inactivation message of an edge ej propagates on the path Pej round by round, making all the corresponding edges on it to become inactive. Note that the paths Pej and Pej 0 for two edges ej and ej 0 in the same layer of the BFS tree, are edge disjoint and hence inactivation messages from different edges on the same layer do not interfere each other. We get that an edge in layer i active in round i only if it did not receive any prior inactivation message from any of its BFS ancestors. In addition, any edge that receives an inactivation message necessarily appears on a path of an active edge. It is easy to see that within D rounds, all active edges I on T satisfy the desired properties (i.e., their Pei paths cover the remaining T edges and these paths are edge disjoint). Distributed Implementation of Algorithm TreeCover. First, we mark all the edges on the Pe paths for every e ∈ I(T ). As every node v with e = (p(v), v) know its swap edge, it can send information along Pe and mark the edges on the path. Since each edge appears on the most two Pe paths, this can be done simultaneously for all e ∈ I(T ). From this point on we follow the steps of Algorithm TreeCover. The partitioning of Appendix A can be done in O(D) rounds as it only required nodes to count the number of nodes in their subtree. We define the ID of each tree T10 , T20 to be the maximum edge ID in the tree (as the trees are edge disjoint, this is indeed an identifier for the tree). By passing information on the Pe paths, each node v can learn the tree ID of its swap endpoint s(v). This allows to partition the edges of T 0 45  0 into Ex,y for x, y ∈ {1, 2}. Consider now the ith phase in the computation of cycle cover C1,2 for 0 . the edges E1,2 Applying Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath can be done in O(D) round. At the end, each node vj knows its matched pair vj0 and the edges on the tree path π(vj , vj0 , T10 ) are marked. Let Σ be the matched pairs. We now the virtual conflict graph GΣ . Each pair hvj , vj0 i ∈ Σ is simulated by the node of higher ID, say, vj . We say that vj is the leader of the pair hvj , vj0 i ∈ Σ. Next, each node v that got matched with v 0 activates the edges on its path Pe ∩ E(T10 ) for e = (p(v), v). Since the π edges of the matched pairs are marked as well, every edge e0 ∈ π(vk , vk0 , T10 ) that belongs to an active path Pe sends the ID of the edge e to the leader of the pair hvk , vk0 i. By Claim 6, every pair σ 0 interferes with at most one other pair and hence there is no congestion and a single message is sent along the edge-disjoint paths π(vj , vj0 , T10 ) for every hvj , vj0 i ∈ Σ. Overall, we get the the construction of the virtual graph can be done in O(D) rounds. We next claim that all leaders of two neighboring pairs σ, σ 0 ∈ GΣ can exchange O(log n) bits of information using O(D) rounds. Hence, any r-round algorithm for the graph GΣ can be simulated in T10 in O(r · D) rounds. To see this, consider two neighbors σ = hx, yi, σ 0 = hx0 , y 0 i where σ 0 interferes σ. Without loss of generality, assume that the leader x0 of σ 0 wants to send a message to the leader x of σ. First, x0 sends the message on the path π(x0 , y 0 , T10 ). The edge e0 ∈ π(x0 , y 0 , T10 )∩Pe for e = (p(x), x) that receives this message sends it to the leader x along the path Pe . Since we only send messages along edge disjoint paths, there is no congestion and can be done in O(D) rounds. Since the graph GΣ has arboricity O(1), it can be colored with O(1) colors and O(log n) rounds using the algorithm of [BE10]. By the above, simulating this algorithm in G takes O(D log n) rounds. We then consider each color class at a time where at step j we consider Σi,j . For every σ = hx, yi, x sends the ID of s(y) to s(x) along the Pe path for e = (p(x), x). In the same manner, y sends the ID of s(x) to s(y). This allows each node in T20 know its virtual edge. At that point we run Algorithm DistNonTreeCover to cover the virtual edges. Each virtual edge is later replaced with a true path in G in a straightforward manner.  Analysis of Algorithm DistTreeCover. Claim 24. Algorithm DistTreeCover computes a (21/ D, n log2 n) cycle cover C2 for the tree edges E(T ) and has round complexity of O(21/ D · n · log2 n). Proof. The correctness follows the same line of arguments as in the centralized construction (see the Analysis of Section 4.1.2), only the here we use Algorithm DistNonTreeCover. Each cycle computed by Algorithm DistNonTreeCover has length O(21/ D) and the cycle covers O(21/ ) non-tree edges. In our case, each non-tree edge is virtual and replaced by a path of length O(D) hence the final cycle has still length O(21/ D). With respect to congestion, we have O(log n) levels of recursion and in each level when working on the subtree T 0 we have O(log n) applications of Algorithm DistNonTreeCover which computes cycles with congestion O(n ). The total congestion is then bounded by O(n · log2 n). We proceed with round complexity. The algorithm has O(log n) levels of recursion. In each level we work on edge disjoint trees simultaneously. Consider a tree T 0 . The partitioning into T10 , T20 takes O(D) rounds. We now have O(log n) phases. We show that each phase takes O(21/ D · n ) rounds, which is the round complexity of Algorithm DistNonTreeCover. In particular, In phase i we have the following procedures. Applying Algorithm TreeEdgeDisjointPath in T10 , T20 takes O(D) rounds. The computation of the conflict graph GΣ takes O(D) rounds as well and coloring it using the coloring algorithm for low-arboricity graphs of [BE10] takes O(D log n) rounds. Then we apply 46  e 1/ ·D +n2 ) rounds. Translating the cycles into cycles Algorithm DistNonTreeCover which takes O(2 e 1/ · D + n2 ) rounds. e 1/ · D + n2 ) rounds. Overall, we have O(2 in G takes O(2 Theorem 2 follows by combining Lemma 5 and Claims 23 and 24.  6.2  Additional Low Congestion Covers  Private Neighborhood Trees. We now show how to use the distributed construction of cycle covers to construct private neighborhood trees. The distribute output format of private neighborhood trees N is that each node u knows its parent in the spanning tree T (v) ∈ N for every v ∈V. e 1/ · ∆ · D + n · D)-round algorithm that computes an (41/ · D · ∆ · Lemma 6. There exists an O(4 2  log ∆, n · D · log n · log ∆) private neighborhood trees. Proof. We start by running Algorithm DistCycleCover which computes a (d, c) cycle cover C for e + c) rounds, we can make each edge (u, v) d = O(41/ · D) and c = O(n · log2 n). By using O(d know the edges of all the cycles it belongs to in C. We mimic the centralized reduction to cycle cover. In this reduction, we have O(log ∆) applications of Algorithm DistCycleCover on some virtual graph. Since a node v knows the cycles of its edges, it knows which virtual edges it should add in phase i. Simulating the virtual graph can be done with no extra congestion in G. In each phase i, we compute (d, c) cycle cover Ci in G obtained by computing the cycle cover in a virtual graph. By the same argument as in Claim 11, translating these cycles to cycles in G does not increase e + c) rounds, each edge e can learn all the edges on the cycles that pass the congestion. Using O(d through it appears in Ci . At the last phase ` = O(log ∆), the graph G` (uj ) consists of O(log ∆ · ∆) cycles. In particular, G` (uj ) =  ` [  {C ∈ Ci | (uj , v) ∈ C, v ∈ Γ(uj , v)}.  i=1  By the same argument of Claim 11, each edge e appears on O(log ∆ · log2 n · n · D) different subgraphs G` (uj ) for uj ∈ V . The diameter of each subgraph can G` (uj ) can be clearly bounded by the number of nodes it contained which is O(41/ · log ∆ · ∆ · D). Since each edge e knows all cycles it appears on11 , it also knows all the graphs G` (uj ) to which it belongs. Computing a e 1/ ∆·D) rounds. Using the standard random delay spanning tree in G` (ui )\{ui } can be done in O(4 approach, and using the fact that each edge appears on O(log ∆ · log2 n · n · D), all the spanning e 1/ · ∆ · D + n · D) rounds. trees in G` (uj ) \ {uj } can be construct simultaneously in O(4 By combining our general compiler Theorem 4 with our distributed low-congestion cover of Lemma 6, we get: Corollary 2 (Distributed PSM with no pre-processing). Let G be a 2-vertex connected n-vertex graph with diameter D and maximal degree ∆. Let A be a natural distributed algorithm that runs on G in r rounds. Then, A can be transformed to an equivalent algorithm A0 with perfect privacy √ e · 2 log n · D · poly(∆)) which runs in O(r 11  We say that an edge (u, v) knows a piece of information, if at least one of the edge endpoints know that.  47  6.3  Pre-processing for Improved Cover Structures  We next show how the covers of Theorems 1 and 3 with existentially optimal bounds can be e + D · ∆) rounds in the distributed setting. This pre-processing step should constructed using O(n be done only once and any general compiler that will run in the network in the future will be able to use it (i.e., these structures should be computed once for a given network). Lemma 7. For every 2-edge connected n-vertex graph a (D log n, log3 n) cycle cover can be come puted distributively in O(n) rounds of pre-processing. Proof. Compute a BFS tree T and consider the set of non-tree edges E 0 . Let E0 = E 0 . As long that number of edges Ei to be covered in E 0 is at least O(logc n · n), we do as follows in phase i. Let ∆i = |Ei |/n. We partition the edges of Ei into `i = ∆i /(c · log n) edge-disjoint subgraphs by letting each edge in Ei pick a number in [1, `i ] uniformly at random. We have that w.h.p. each subgraph Ei,j contains Θ(n log n) edges of Ei . At the point, we work on each subgraph Ei,j independently. We compute a BFS tree Ti,j in each Ei,j (using only communication on Ei,j edges). We then collect all edges of Ei,j to the root by pipelining these edges on Ti,j . At that point, each root of Ti,j can partition all but 2n edges of Ei,j into edge disjoint cycles of length O(log n). The root also pass these cycle information to the relevant edges using the communication on Ti,j . Note that since the Ei,j subgraphs are disjoint, this can be done simultaneously for all subgraphs Ei,j . At the end of that phase, we are left with 2n · `i = O(|Ei |/ log n) uncovered edges Ei+1 to be handled in the next phase. Overall, after O(log n/ log log n) phases, we are left with O(n log n) uncovered edges. At the point, we can pipeline these edges to the root of the BFS tree, along with the n − 1 edges of the BFS tree and let the root compute it locally as explained in Section 4.1. The lemma follows. Combining this with Lemma 6 we get: Corollary 3. For every biconnected n-vertex graph G = (V, E) with diameter D and maximum degree ∆, an O(D·∆·log n, D·log3 n·log ∆) private neighborhood tree collection N can be constructed e + D · ∆) rounds. using O(n  7  Discussion and Future Work  In this paper we introduce a new framework for secure distributed graph algorithms. We present the construction of a general compiler that can turn any natural non-secure distributed algorithm to e · ∆). There are many remaining a secure one, while increasing the round complexity by factor O(D interesting research directions. First, we note that our protocols are secure against an adversary that controls a single node in the graph. To see this, consider an adversary that gets both σ bi and Rσi , decrypts the state and learn additional information. e e An additional research direction involves the distribution computation of (O(D), O(1)) cycle e 1/ · covers in sublinear number of rounds. Our current efficient distributed algorithm obtains (O(4 e  )) cycle covers in O(41/ · D + n ) rounds. We note that computing (O(D), e e D), O(n O(1)) cycle covers boils into the following problem: Given a graph G = (V, E) compute (in the CONGEST model) a maximal collection of edge disjoint O(log n)-length cycles. 48  Note that in the LOCAL model, this problem is easy, and the main challenges comes from the bandwidth limitations of the CONGEST model.  Acknowledgments We thank Benny Applebaum, Uri Feige, Moni Naor and David Peleg for fruitful discussions concerning the nature of distributed algorithms, cycle covers and secure protocols.  References [ABCP96] Baruch Awerbuch, Bonnie Berger, Lenore Cowen, and David Peleg. Fast distributed network decompositions and covers. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 39(2):105–114, 1996. [ABCP98] Baruch Awerbuch, Bonnie Berger, Lenore Cowen, and David Peleg. Near-linear time construction of sparse neighborhood covers. SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(1):263– 277, 1998. [AGLP89] Baruch Awerbuch, Andrew V. Goldberg, Michael Luby, and Serge A. Plotkin. Network decomposition and locality in distributed computation. In 30th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA, 30 October - 1 November 1989, pages 364–369, 1989. [BE10]  Leonid Barenboim and Michael Elkin. Sublogarithmic distributed mis algorithm for sparse graphs using nash-williams decomposition. Distributed Computing, 22(5-6):363– 379, 2010.  [BE13]  Leonid Barenboim and Michael Elkin. Distributed graph coloring: Fundamentals and recent developments. Synthesis Lectures on Distributed Computing Theory, 4(1):1–171, 2013.  [BEK14]  Leonid Barenboim, Michael Elkin, and Fabian Kuhn. Distributed (δ+1)-coloring in linear (in δ) time. SIAM Journal on Computing, 43(1):72–95, 2014.  [BEPS16] Leonid Barenboim, Michael Elkin, Seth Pettie, and Johannes Schneider. The locality of distributed symmetry breaking. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 63(3):20, 2016. [BFH+ 16] Sebastian Brandt, Orr Fischer, Juho Hirvonen, Barbara Keller, Tuomo Lempiäinen, Joel Rybicki, Jukka Suomela, and Jara Uitto. A lower bound for the distributed lovász local lemma. In Proceedings of the forty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 479–488. ACM, 2016. [BGI+ 14]  Amos Beimel, Ariel Gabizon, Yuval Ishai, Eyal Kushilevitz, Sigurd Meldgaard, and Anat Paskin-Cherniavsky. Non-interactive secure multiparty computation. In Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2014 - 34th Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 17-21, 2014, Proceedings, Part II, pages 387–404, 2014.  49  [BGT13]  Elette Boyle, Shafi Goldwasser, and Stefano Tessaro. Communication locality in secure multi-party computation - how to run sublinear algorithms in a distributed setting. In Theory of Cryptography - 10th Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC 2013, Tokyo, Japan, March 3-6, 2013. Proceedings, pages 356–376, 2013.  [BGW88] Michael Ben-Or, Shafi Goldwasser, and Avi Wigderson. Completeness theorems for non-cryptographic fault-tolerant distributed computation (extended abstract). In Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, May 2-4, 1988, Chicago, Illinois, USA, pages 1–10, 1988. [BIPW17] Elette Boyle, Yuval Ishai, Rafael Pass, and Mary Wootters. Can we access a database both locally and privately? In Theory of Cryptography - 15th International Conference, TCC 2017, Baltimore, MD, USA, November 12-15, 2017, Proceedings, Part II, pages 662–693, 2017. [BLO16]  Aner Ben-Efraim, Yehuda Lindell, and Eran Omri. Optimizing semi-honest secure multiparty computation for the internet. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Vienna, Austria, October 2428, 2016, pages 578–590, 2016.  [BNP08]  Assaf Ben-David, Noam Nisan, and Benny Pinkas. FairplayMP: a system for secure multi-party computation. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS 2008, Alexandria, Virginia, USA, October 27-31, 2008, pages 257–266, 2008.  [Bol04]  Béla Bollobás. Extremal graph theory. Courier Corporation, 2004.  [CCD88]  David Chaum, Claude Crépeau, and Ivan Damgård. Multiparty unconditionally secure protocols (extended abstract). In Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, May 2-4, 1988, Chicago, Illinois, USA, pages 11–19, 1988.  [CCG+ 14] Nishanth Chandran, Wutichai Chongchitmate, Juan A. Garay, Shafi Goldwasser, Rafail Ostrovsky, and Vassilis Zikas. Optimally resilient and adaptively secure multi-party computation with low communication locality. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2014:615, 2014. [CHL+ 17] Yi-Jun Chang, Qizheng He, Wenzheng Li, Seth Pettie, and Jara Uitto. The complexity of distributed edge coloring with small palettes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04290, 2017. [CP17]  Yi-Jun Chang and Seth Pettie. A time hierarchy theorem for the local model. FOCS, 2017.  [CPS17]  Kai-Min Chung, Seth Pettie, and Hsin-Hao Su. Distributed algorithms for the lovász local lemma and graph coloring. Distributed Computing, 30(4):261–280, 2017.  [EJ73]  Jack Edmonds and Ellis L Johnson. Matching, euler tours and the chinese postman. Mathematical programming, 5(1):88–124, 1973.  50  [EN17]  Michael Elkin and Ofer Neiman. Efficient algorithms for constructing very sparse spanners and emulators. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 652–669. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2017.  [Fan97]  Genghua Fan. Minimum cycle covers of graphs. Journal of Graph Theory, 25(3):229– 242, 1997.  [FG17]  Manuela Fischer and Mohsen Ghaffari. Sublogarithmic distributed algorithms for lovász local lemma, and the complexity hierarchy. In 31st International Symposium on Distributed Computing, DISC 2017, October 16-20, 2017, Vienna, Austria, pages 18:1– 18:16, 2017.  [FHK16]  Pierre Fraigniaud, Marc Heinrich, and Adrian Kosowski. Local conflict coloring. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2016 IEEE 57th Annual Symposium on, pages 625–634. IEEE, 2016.  [FJS14]  Joan Feigenbaum, Aaron D. Jaggard, and Michael Schapira. Approximate privacy: Foundations and quantification. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 10(3):11:1–11:38, 2014.  [FKN94]  Uriel Feige, Joe Kilian, and Moni Naor. A minimal model for secure computation (extended abstract). In STOC, 1994.  [GGG+ 14] Shafi Goldwasser, S. Dov Gordon, Vipul Goyal, Abhishek Jain, Jonathan Katz, FengHao Liu, Amit Sahai, Elaine Shi, and Hong-Sheng Zhou. Multi-input functional encryption. In Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT, pages 578–602, 2014. [Gha15]  Mohsen Ghaffari. Near-optimal scheduling of distributed algorithms. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC, pages 3–12, 2015.  [Gha16]  Mohsen Ghaffari. An improved distributed algorithm for maximal independent set. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 270–277. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2016.  [GMW87] Oded Goldreich, Silvio Micali, and Avi Wigderson. How to play any mental game or A completeness theorem for protocols with honest majority. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 1987, New York, New York, USA, pages 218–229, 1987. [GP16]  Mohsen Ghaffari and Merav Parter. Near-optimal distributed algorithms for faulttolerant tree structures. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, pages 387–396. ACM, 2016.  [HIJ+ 16]  Shai Halevi, Yuval Ishai, Abhishek Jain, Eyal Kushilevitz, and Tal Rabin. Secure multiparty computation with general interaction patterns. In ITCS, pages 157–168, 2016.  51  [HLP11]  Shai Halevi, Yehuda Lindell, and Benny Pinkas. Secure computation on the web: Computing without simultaneous interaction. In Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2011 - 31st Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 14-18, 2011. Proceedings, pages 132–150, 2011.  [HSS16]  David G Harris, Johannes Schneider, and Hsin-Hao Su. Distributed (+ 1)-coloring in sublogarithmic rounds. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 465–478. ACM, 2016.  [II86]  Amos Israeli and Alon Itai. A fast and simple randomized parallel algorithm for maximal matching. Information Processing Letters, 22(2):77–80, 1986.  [IK97]  Yuval Ishai and Eyal Kushilevitz. Private simultaneous messages protocols with applications. In Fifth Israel Symposium on Theory of Computing and Systems, ISTCS 1997, Ramat-Gan, Israel, June 17-19, 1997, Proceedings, pages 174–184, 1997.  [JT92]  Ury Jamshy and Michael Tarsi. Short cycle covers and the cycle double cover conjecture. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 56(2):197–204, 1992.  [KLR10]  Eyal Kushilevitz, Yehuda Lindell, and Tal Rabin. Information-theoretically secure protocols and security under composition. SIAM J. Comput., 39(5):2090–2112, 2010.  [Kus89]  Eyal Kushilevitz. Privacy and communication complexity. In 30th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA, 30 October - 1 November 1989, pages 416–421. IEEE Computer Society, 1989.  [Lin92]  Nathan Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing, 21(1):193–201, 1992.  [LMR94]  Frank Thomson Leighton, Bruce M Maggs, and Satish B Rao. Packet routing and job-shop scheduling ino (congestion+ dilation) steps. Combinatorica, 14(2):167–186, 1994.  [Lub86]  Michael Luby. A simple parallel algorithm for the maximal independent set problem. SIAM journal on computing, 15(4):1036–1053, 1986.  [NS95]  Moni Naor and Larry Stockmeyer. What can be computed locally? SIAM Journal on Computing, 24(6):1259–1277, 1995.  [Pel00]  David Peleg. Distributed Computing: A Locality-sensitive Approach. SIAM, 2000.  [Suo13]  Jukka Suomela. Survey of local algorithms. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 45(2):24, 2013.  [Yao82]  Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Protocols for secure computations (extended abstract). In 23rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Chicago, Illinois, USA, 3-5 November 1982, pages 160–164, 1982.  52  A  Balanced Partitioning of a Tree  We show that every rooted tree T can be partitioned into two edge-disjoint rooted trees T1 and T2 such that (I) E(T1 ) ∪ E(T2 ) = E(T ) and (II) V (T1 ), V (T2 ) ≤ 2/3 · N where N = |T |. In addition, this partitioning maintains the layering structure of T as will be described later. To compute this partitioning, define the weight w(v) of each vertex v in T to be the number of vertices in its subtree T (v). First, consider the case, where there is a vertex v ∗ with weight w(v ∗ ) ∈ [1/3N, 2/3N ]. In such a case, define T1 = Tv∗ and T2 = T \ E(T (v ∗ )). By definition, both T1 and T2 are trees, all edges of T are covered and |T1 |, |T2 | ∈ [1/3N, 2/3N ]. Else, if no such balanced vertex exists, there must be a vertex v ∗ such that w(v ∗ ) ≥ 2/3N but for each of its children in T , ui , it holds that w(ui ) ≤ 1/3N . In such a case, we consider the children of v ∗ from left to right u1 , . . . , uk and sum up their weights until we get to a value in P`the range [1/3N, 2/3N ]. Formally, let ` ∈ {1, . . . , k} be the minimal index satisfying that w(ui ) ∈ [1/3N, 2/3N ]. Since each w(ui ) ≤ 1/3N , such an index ` exists. We then set T1 = S S`i=1 (T (ui ) ∪ {(ui , v ∗ )}) and T2 = T \ `i=1 V (T (ui )). By construction, all edges of T are covered i=1 by T1 and T2 . In addition, by definition, |T1 | ∈ [1/3N, 2/3N ] and hence also T2 ∈ [1/3N, 2/3N ]. Finally, we pick the roots r1 , r2 of T1 , T2 (respectively) to be the vertices the are close-most to the root r in T . We then get for u, v ∈ T1 , that if u is closer to the root than v in T , then also u is closer to the root r1 than v in T1 .  B  Missing Details for Algorithm DistCycleCover  Postorder Numbering on a Tree. Given a BFS tree T , We now show a procedure which assigns the vertices numbers N : V → [1, n] according to a postorder traversal on T in O(D) rounds. Each node u first computes the number of vertices in T (u). This can be done in O(D) rounds by working from the leafs up. At the end, each node also knows the number of nodes in the subtree of each of its children. For a range of integers R = [i, j], let max(R) = j and min(R) = i. By working from root to leaf nodes, each vertex u computes a range R(u), indicating the bucket of post-order numbers given to its vertices in T (u). Let R(s) = [1, n]. Given that a vertex v has received its range R(v), it sends to its children their ranges in the following manner. Let u1 , . . . , u` be the children of v ordered from left to right. Then R(u1 ) = [min(R(v)), min(R(v)) + |T (u1 )| − 1] and for every i ≥ 1, R(ui ) = [max(R(ui−1 )) + 1, max(R(ui−1 )) + |T (ui )|]. This proceeds for O(D) rounds, at the end every u knows R(u). Now, each node u, sets its own number N (u) = max(R(ui )). Since by this numbering, each vertex has the maximum number in its subtree, it is indeed a postorder numbering. Sending Information on Virtual Edges. For every virtual edge (a, a0 ) added in phase i ≥ 1, we show in the analysis section, that there is a precomputed a-a0 walk Wa,a0 in G of length O(2i · D). We assume that in phase i, all the edges on the walk of virtual edge added in phase j ≤ i − 1, are already marked and that each such edge on the walk knows the endpoint of the virtual edges and the edges in G that this walk should cover. The analysis shows that in the virtual edges added in phase i − 1 are important of O(2i−1 ) edges in G. Assume that it is given for all virtual edges added in phase j ≤ i − 1, we now show how the algorithm provides these properties for the virtual edges added in phase i. Assume that both edges (a, a0 ) and (b, b0 ) incident to the matched pair ha, bi are virtual. Then, we send the information on  53  the walks π(a, b, TBx ), Wa,a0 and Wb,b0 . This allows the endpoints of virtual edge a0 , b0 to learn about each other. In addition, by passing the identifiers of the 2i−1 edges that are supposed to be covered by the walks Wa,a0 and Wb,b0 , all the nodes on the new walk Wa0 ,b0 = Wa0 ,a ◦ π(a, b, TBx ) ◦ Wb,b0 can get this information. This is done on for all the virtual edges added in phase i simultaneously using the random delay approach. In the analysis section we show that the length of the walks Wa,a0 is bounded by O(21/ D) and each edge appears on O(n2 ) many paths. Thus using the random delay approach, this can be done in O(21/ · D + n2 ) rounds. Marking Edges on Cycles and Making Them Simple. We first make every edge e (i.e., the endpoints of the edge) know the set of edges that are covered by the cycles that go through e. To do that, the endpoints of the virtual edges keep information of the covered edge endpoints. In phase 1, this is easily obtained since the endpoint of the virtual edges are also the vertices whose two edges should be covered by the cycle. Assuming that this information is kept up to phase i − 1, in phase i, when adding the virtual edge u − v, the combined information traverses through the edge disjoint path π(u, v) computed on the tree of the block. We next make every edge e know all the edges of the cycles that go through e. Since each edge appears on n cycles and the length of the cycles is O(21/ · D), using standard random delay e 2 + 21/ · D) rounds. Once each edge e sees the entire cycle, it techniques, it can be done in O(n can locally correct it to be simple as described in Section 4.1.  54

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
