Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_1478

Abstract:
arXiv:1803.03737v2 [cs.NE] 26 Mar 2018  Enhancing Evolutionary Optimization in Uncertain Environments by Allocating Evaluations via Multi-armed Bandit Algorithms Xin Qiu  Risto Miikkulainen  Sentient Technologies, Inc San Francisco, California xin.qiu@sentient.ai  Sentient Technologies, Inc San Francisco, California The University of Texas at Austin Austin, Texas risto.miikkulainen@sentient.ai  ABSTRACT Optimization problems with uncertain fitness functions are common in the real world, and present unique challenges for evolutionary optimization approaches. Existing issues include excessively expensive evaluation, lack of solution reliability, and incapability in maintaining high overall fitness during optimization. Using conversion rate optimization as an example, this paper proposes a series of new techniques for addressing these issues. The main innovation is to augment evolutionary algorithms by allocating evaluation budget through multi-armed bandit algorithms. Experimental results demonstrate that multi-armed bandit algorithms can be used to allocate evaluations efficiently, select the winning solution reliably and increase overall fitness during exploration. The proposed methods can be generalized to any optimization problems with noisy fitness functions.  KEYWORDS Evolutionary computation, multi-armed bandit algorithm, uncertain environment  1  INTRODUCTION  In many real-world problems, fitness evaluations are noisy, and such uncertainty makes evolutionary optimization difficult [14]. The true fitness of a solution can only be approximated by a large number of samples [22], slowing down evaluations and making results unreliable. As a concrete example, consider the conversion rate optimization (CRO) problem. CRO is an emerging field where web designs are optimized to increase the percentage of converted visitors [25]. Conversion refers to any desired actions of website users, e.g., making purchase, registering new account, or clicking on any desired links. The true conversion rate of a web design can only be estimated via a certain number of user interactions/visits. Recently, a new technology for CRO was developed by applying evolutionary algorithm (EA) [20, 21]. Each website design is represented as a genome, and will be evolved into better ones in terms of conversion rate. Evolutionary CRO provides considerable advantages over traditional A/B or multivariant testing: the exploration in evolutionary algorithm covers a large design space; evolution discovers and utilizes effective interactions among variables; the optimization of website design is fully automated. Although impressive improvements over human design have been reported [20, 21], there are still several open issues in evolutionary CRO. First, the evaluations for candidate designs are expensive, and a fair amount of traffic may be wasted on bad designs. Second, only weak statistical evidence  is necessary for winner selection among candidate designs, reducing reliability of the optimization outcome. Third, in some cases, the target is to maintain a high overall conversion rate during the optimization process instead of identifying a single best website design after optimization; the current evolutionary CRO technique can not accommodate to this demand. To overcome these issues, a series of new mechanisms are proposed in this paper by augmenting evolutionary optimization with multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithms [2–4]. First, a new framework called MAB-EA is developed by utilizing MAB algorithms for traffic allocation during fitness evaluation. The proposed framework aims at reducing the evaluation cost while maintaining the optimization performance. Second, an enhanced variant of MAB-EA is designed to select the winner reliably. The main idea is to include an addtional verification phase, based on MAB algorithms, to the end of the evolution process. Third, another variant of MAB-EA is developed by introducing a new concept called asynchronous statistics into MAB algorithms. The new variant is particularly well suited for problems where overall fitness (average fitness over all evaluations) during optimization needs to be maximized. Empirical studies demonstrate that these techniques are effective in a simulated CRO domain. Although the studies in this work are based on CRO domain, the principle ideas can be easily generalized to other optimization problems with uncertain environments. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic concepts of evolutionary CRO and MAB algorithms. Section 3 explains the technical details of the new approaches and discusses the underlying rationales. Section 4 evaluates the proposed mechanisms via experiments. Section 5 provides high-level discussions and suggests some future research diections.  2  BACKGROUND  This section provides a brief description of the basic concepts and existing MAB algorithms that will be utilized in the proposed techniques.  2.1  Evolutionary Conversion Rate Optimization  EA is a population-based metaheuristic inspired by natural evolution process. Each individual (genome) in the population represents a single solution to the optimization problem, and these individuals will evolve through crossover, mutation and survival selection iteratively. The most significant advantage of EAs is that they do not make any assumption about the underlying landscape of the optimization problems, thereby leading to exceptional ability in finding good solutions to mathematically intractable problems [9].  Algorithm 1 UCB1 Algorithm  In evolutionary CRO [20, 21], each genome represents a web interface design. The search space is pre-defined by the web designer. For each such space, the designer specifies the elements of the interface and values that they can take. For instance in a landing page, logo size, header image, button color, content order are such elements, and they can each take on 2-4 values. Evolutionary CRO searches for good designs in the space of possible combinations of these values, which often number in millions. In each generation, all the genomes will be evaluated with a fixed number of user interactions, and the conversion rates during evalution will be used as the fitnesses for each genome. Fitness-proportionate selection is then used to select parent genomes, and traditional genetic operations such as crossover (recombination of the elements in two parent genomes) and mutation (randomly changing one element in the offspring genome) are performed to generate offspring candidates. The same process will be repeated generation by generation until the termination criterion is met, which usually means reaching a fixed number of user interactions. In a typical winner-selection application, the winning design is then selected among the best candidates, with an estimate of its future performance. In campaignmode application, there is no winner but performance is measured by the overall convergence rate throughout the entire experiment.  2.2  Require: K: Total number of arms 1: for i = 1 to K do 2: Pull arm i, and observe reward X i,0 3: x̂ i = X i,0 4: ni = 1 5: end for 6: for t = K + 1, K + 2, . . . do p 7: Pull arm i max := argmaxi x̂ i + 2 log (t)/ni , and observe reward X i max,t 8: 9: 10:  x̂  ×n  +X i max , t  x̂ i max = imax niimax+1 max ni max = ni max + 1 end for  MAB problems due to its good theoretical guarantees [2]. The principle behind UCB is optimism in the face of uncertainty [15]. Generally, UCB constructs an optimistic guess on the potential reward of each arm, and pulls the arm with the highest guess. Among the UCB family of algorithms [11, 16, 18, 19], UCB1 [4] is a simple yet efficient variant that can be directly applied to Bernoulli Bandits. The optimistic guess in UCB1 is in the form of an upper confidence bound derived from the Chernoff-Hoeffding inequality [7, 13]. Suppose X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X n are independent random variables on Í [0, 1] with expected values as µ 1 , µ 2 , . . . , µ n . For X = n1 ni=1 X i and Í µ = E(X ) = n1 ni=1 µ i , the Chernoff-Hoeffding inequality gives an exponential upper bound on the probability that the value of X deviates from its expectation for more than a:  Multi-armed Bandit Algorithms  This subsection explains the definition of multi-armed bandit problem, and introduces three representative multi-armed bandit algorithms used in this paper.  2  P(X > µ + a) ≤ e −2na .  2.2.1 Multi-armed Bandit Problem. In MAB problem, a slot machine with multiple arms is given, and the gambler has to decide which arms to pull, how many times to pull each arm, and in which order to pull them [28]. The most common is the stochastic MAB problem, which is parameterized by the number of arms K, the number of rounds n, and K fixed but unknown reward distributions ν 1 , ν 2 , . . . , ν K associated with arm 1, arm 2, . . . , arm K, respectively. For t = 1, 2, . . . , n, at round t, the agent (gambler) chooses an arm It from the set of arms {1, 2, . . . , K } to pull, and observes a reward sampled from ν It . Each reward sample is independent from the past actions and observations. The CRO problem is a special case (called Bernoulli bandit) of the general stochastic MAB problem: the reward for each pull is either 1 or 0 (converted or not in CRO), and for arm i the probability of success (reward = 1) is µ i . An algorithm for the stochastic MAB problem must decide which arm to pull at each round t, based on the outcomes of the previous t − 1 pulls. In the classical MAB problem, the goal is to maximize the cumulative sum of rewards over the n rounds [4, 24]. Since the agent has no prior knowledge about the reward distributions, it needs to explore the different arms, and at the same time, exploit the seemingly most rewarding arms [3]. This goal aligns with the campaign-mode application in CRO. For clarity of statement, we call this type of problem the classical stochastic MAB problem. Another target for stochastic MAB problem is to output a recommended arm after a given number of pulls. The performance of the MAB algorithm is only evaluated by the average payoff of that recommended arm. This goal aligns with the winner-selection application in CRO. This is called pure exploration problem [5].  (1)  For the stochastic MAB problem, X i will be the reward of each pull for a single arm and X will be the p empirical average reward for that arm after n pulls. Using a = 2 log (t)/n, where t represents the total number of pulls so far for all the arms, P(X > µ + a) ≤ t −4 , which converges to zero very quickly as the total number of pulls increases. This upper bound will then be used in UCB1 to balance between exploration and exploitation. Algorithm 1 shows the basic steps of UCB1 algorithm. Two effects of the UCB1 algorithm needs to bepmentioned: first, if one arm is never pulled, its corresponding x̂ i + 2 log (t)/ni will grow at a rate that is faster than all the other pulled arms. This means that an arm will never be permanently ruled out no matter how poorly it performs. This effect encourages exploration. Second, if one arm has been pulled as many times as the other arms but has a significantly higher empirical mean reward x̂ i , it will be pulled more subsequently. This effect encourages exploitation. A delicate tradeoff between exploration and exploitation is therefore the hallmark of UCB1. 2.2.3 Thompson Sampling. Except for UCB, Thompson Sampling (TS) [27] is another good alternative MAB algorithm for the classical stochastic MAB problem. The idea is to assume a simple prior distribution on the parameters of the reward distribution of every arm, and at each round, play an arm according to its posterior probability of being the best arm [2]. The effectiveness of TS has been empirically demonstrated by several studies [6, 12, 26], and the asymptotic optimality of TS has been theoretically proved for Bernoulli bandits [2, 17]. TS for Bernoulli bandits utilizes beta distribution as priors, i.e., a family of continuous probability distributions on the interval [0, 1] parameterized by two  2.2.2 UCB Algorithm. Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) algorithm is arguably the most popular approach for solving classical 2  Algorithm 2 Thompson Sampling for Bernoulli Bandits  Algorithm 3 Successive Rejects Algorithm  Require: K: Total number of arms 1: for i = 1 to K do 2: Si = 0, Fi = 0 3: end for 4: for t = 1, 2, . . . do 5: for i = 1 to K do 6: Sample θ i,t from Beta(Si + 1, Fi + 1) 7: end for 8: Pull arm i max := argmaxi θ i,t , and observe reward X i max,t 9: if X i max,t = 1 then 10: Si = Si + 1 11: else 12: Fi = Fi + 1 13: end if 14: end for  Require: K: Total number of arms n: Total number of pulls Ensure: Best arm Jn 1 ÍK 1 , n = 0 1: A1 = {1, . . . , K }, log(K) = 2 + i=2 0 i 2: for k = 1 to K − 1 do 3: nk = ⌈ 1 Kn−K +1−k ⌉ log(K )  4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9:  3  positive shape parameters, denoted by α and β. The probability density function (PDF) of the beta distribution Beta(α, β) is given Γ(α +β ) by f (x; α, β) = Γ(α )Γ(β ) x α −1 (1 − x)β −1 , where Γ() is the gamma function, and 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. The mean of Beta(α, β) is α α+β , and higher α, β lead to tighter concentration of Beta(α, β) around the mean. TS initially assumes each arm i to have prior reward distribution Beta(1, 1), which is equivalent to uniform distribution on [0, 1]. At round t, after having observed Si successes (reward = 1) and Fi failures (reward = 0) in Si + Fi pulls for arm i, the reward distribution of arm i will be updated as Beta(Si + 1, Fi + 1). The algorithm then samples from these updated reward distributions, and selects the next arm to pull according to the sampled reward. Algorithm 2 describes the detailed procedure of TS.  1 n−K ⌉ log(K ) K −1  3.1  MAB-EA  In the original Evolutionary CRO framework [20, 21], the evaluation of each candidate is performed in a static fashion: a fixed amount of traffic will be allocated to each website design, and the fitness of each candidate is measured by the conversion rate. In the case of CRO, the evaluation is very expensive because it is consuming traffic on a real website. Thus, the overall conversion rate during evolution determines the real cost of the optimization process. One main drawback of the original static evaluation is that a large amount of traffic may be consumed by bad candidates. Thus, the goal is to develop of a new framework that allocates traffic dynamically in a more efficient way. MAB algorithms are well suited for this role. More specifically, each candidate web design is regarded as an arm, and each visit to the website is equal to a pull. The reward of each visit to a single web design is assumed to follow an unknown but fixed Bernoulli distribution. The probability of getting reward 1 (the visited user is successfully converted) is p and the probability of getting reward 0 (the visited user is not converted) is 1 − p, where p is the true conversion rate of that web design. Given a fixed budget of traffic (number of visits) for each generation, a Bernoulli MAB algorithm will then be invoked to allocate traffic to the current candidates. The fitness of each candidate is equivalent to its number of successful conversions divided by its total visits (both numbers are counted within the current generation). Based on these fitnesses, standard EA operations such as parent selection, crossover, mutation and survival selection will be conducted to generate the population for next generation. Algorithm 4 depicts the procedure of the proposed framework, namely MAB-EA. Note that the goals of the MAB algorithm and the evaluation phase in EA are inherently different: MAB algorithm only cares about identifying the good arms efficiently, whereas EA aims at estimating the fitnesses of all arms. In spite of this fact, MAB algorithm should not impair the optimization performance significantly, and may even improve it. As shown in Algorithm 4, elite candidates  log(K )  times, and so on, except for the last two arms, which  are both pulled n K −1 = ⌈ 1 n−K ⌉ times, where log(K) = 21 + log(K ) 2 ÍK 1 i=2 i . Therefore, the total number of pulls does not exceed the budget n: K −1  n 1 + n 2 + · · · + n K −1 + n K −1 ≤ K +  METHODOLOGY  This section describes the algorithmic details of the proposed approaches and mechanisms. A basic framework combining Evolutionary CRO technique with MAB algorithm is presented first, then two enhanced variants are developed for tackling different use cases, namely, Best Arm Identification and Campaign mode.  2.2.4 Successive Rejects Algorithm. Among many existing algorithms for solving the pure exploration problem [8, 10, 23], Successive Rejects (SR) algorithm stands out in that it is parameter-free and independent of the scaling of the rewards [3]. The main task for SR algorithm is to identify the best arm (the arm with truly best mean reward) after a fixed number of pulls. Suppose we are given K arms and n pulls. First the SR algorithm divides the n pulls into K − 1 phases. At the end of each phase, the arm with the lowest empirical mean reward will be discarded. During each phase, each arm that has not been discarded yet will be pulled for equal number of times. The only surviving arm after K − 1 phases, Jn , will be recommended as the best arm. The details of SR are described in Algorithm 3. As a result, one arm is pulled n 1 = ⌈ 1 n−K K ⌉ times, one arm is pulled n 2 = ⌈  for i ∈ Ak do Pull arm i for nk − nk−1 rounds end for Ak +1 = Ak \argmini ∈Ak X̂ i,nk , where X̂ i,nk is the average reward for arm i after nk pulls end for Let Jn be the unique element of AK  n−K 1 Õ 1 ( + ) = n. 2 K + 1−k log(K) k =1  (2) The SR algorithm is essentially optimal because the regret (difference between the mean rewards of identified best arm and true best arm) decreases exponentially at a rate which is, up to a logarithmic factor, the best possible [3]. 3  Algorithm 4 MAB-EA  Algorithm 5 Best Arm Identification Mode  Require: K: Population size, G max : Maximum number of generations T : Number of website visits for each generation Ce : Percentage for elites, Cp : Percentage for parents P1 : Initial population, Cm : Mutation probability 1: D = P 1 , D is the archive for storing evaluated candidates 2: for д = 1 to G max do 3: Perform MAB algorithm on Pд with a traffic budget of T , record the number of conversions si and number of visits ni within current generation for each candidate 4: for i = 1 to K do 5: Set fitness for candidate i as fi = si /ni 6: end for Create elite pool Eд as the best Ce percentile candidates in 7: current generation 8: Create parent pool Aд as the best Cp percentile candidates in current generation 9: Initialize offspring pool Oд as empty 10: while Size of Eд + Oд is less than K do 11: Perform fitness-proportionate selection on Aд to pick 2 parent candidates Perform uniform crossover between the two parents to 12: generate an offspring 13: Perform mutation operation on the offspring, each element of the offspring will have Cm probability to be randomly altered 14: if the offspring is not in D then 15: Add the offspring to Oд 16: Add the offspring to D 17: end if 18: end while 19: Pд+1 = Eд + Oд 20: end for  Require: Same control parameters as in Algorithm 4 Ke : Size for the elite pool Te : Additional traffic for Best Arm Identification phase 1: D = P 1 , D is the archive for storing evaluated candidates 2: Initialize elite pool E as empty 3: for д = 1 to G max do 4: Same as lines 3-6 in Algorithm 4 5: Add the best Ce percentile candidates of current generation to elite pool E 6: while Size of E is larger than Ke do 7: Remove the worst candidate from E 8: end while Create parent pool Aд as the best Cp percentile candidates 9: in current generation 10: Initialize offspring pool Oд as empty 11: while Size of Oд is less than K do 12: Same as lines 11-17 in Algorithm 4 13: end while 14: Pд+1 = Oд 15: end for 16: Perform pure exploration MAB algorithm on E with a traffic budget of Te , return the identified best candidate tests in Section 4.2 show that BAI mode can significantly improve the reliability of identified best candidate without incurring any additional cost. One additional modification in BAI mode is the removal of elite survival mechanism. No candidate is allowed to survive for more than one generation, and all the candidates for next generation will be totally new. The purpose for this modification is to further improve the explorative ability of the framework, considering the fact that the evaluations are very expensive and only limited number of generations (less than 10) are acceptable in real CRO cases. Since the elite pool in BAI mode has already stored the outstanding candidates for every generation, the evolution can focus on exploring more regions in search space.  play an important role in both parent selection and survival selection. Since MAB algorithms allocate more traffic to those promising candidates, their fitnesses are actually more reliably estimated than those of the least promising candidates. Selection mechanisms relying on good candidates are therefore further enhanced. Thus, the proposed framework is expected to significantly increase the overall conversion rate during evolution without sacrificing the overall optimization performance.  3.2  3.3  Campaign Mode with Asynchronous Multi-armed Bandit Algorithm  The current evolutionary CRO technique is designed to identify a good candidate at the end of optimization. However, in some scenaria, the goal for CRO is to make the overall conversion rate during optimization as high as possible. To fill this need, a Campaign mode based on MAB-EA is developed by introducing a new concept to existing MAB algorithms: asynchronous statistics. The original MAB algorithms initialize the statistics (total reward, average reward, number of pulls, etc.) of all the arms as 0. In contrast, the MAB algorithms in Campaign mode run in an asynchronous manner: All the candidates surviving from previous generation preserve their statistics and use them to initialize the MAB algorithm, which then updates them further, as usual. Taking asynchronous TS as an example, each candidate has an Si and Fi , and these two numbers are updated over generations until the candidate fails to survive. The underlying rationale is that preservation of statistics increases the survival probability of good candidates, therefore Campaign mode focuses more on exploitation than exploration. Asynchronous MAB algorithms allocate more traffic to  Best Arm Identification Mode  One important goal for CRO is to identify a single best design that can be delivered to website owner for long-term use. However, during the normal evolutionary process, only weak statistical evidence is obtained. Although this evidence is enough to rank the candidate designs for reproduction, it is not enough to identify the true best candidate. To solve this problem, Best Arm Identification (BAI) Mode (Algorithm 5) is developed based on the new MAB-EA framework. The BAI mode is applied after the evolution process has concluded. A MAB algorithm for pure exploration (e.g., SR algorithm) will be performed on an elite pool, i.e., the collection of top candidates over all generations. A single winner will be returned after the BAI phase. Although additional traffic is needed for running the BAI phase, this cost can be compensated by extracting a small portion of traffic from each previous generation (e.g., 10%). Empirical 4  Algorithm 6 Campaign Mode with Asynchronous MAB Algorithm  a total of 8 elements in the website that needs to be optimized. The elements have 5, 4, 2, 3, 4, 3, 3 and 4 choices, respectively. The basic conversion rate for the website is 0.05, and the effect of each element choice is within [−0.01, 0.01]. The mean conversion rate for all possible designs is 0.04997, and the conversion rate for the best possible design is 0.08494. This parametric setup is similar to real world situations. For each simulated visit, a Bernoulli test with success probability equal to the conversion rate of the web design will be conducted. A successful trail corresponds to a successful conversion, and givies a reward of 1. A failed trial returns a reward of 0.  Require: Same control parameters as in Algorithm 4 excluding Ce 1: Initialize the total number of conversions si and total number of visits ni for each candidate as 0 2: for д = 1 to G max do 3: Perform asynchronous MAB algorithm on Pд with a traffic budget of T , update the total number of conversions si and total number of visits ni for each candidate 4: Same as lines 4-6 in Algorithm 4 Create parent pool Aд as the best Cp percentile candidates 5: in current generation 6: Remove the worst Cp percentile candidates from Pд 7: Initialize offspring pool Oд as empty 8: while Size of Pд + Oд is less than K do 9: Same as lines 11-13 in Algorithm 4 10: if the offspring is not in Pд + Oд then 11: Initialize the total number of conversions si and total number of visits ni for the offspring as 0 12: Add the offspring to Oд 13: end if 14: end while 15: Pд+1 = Pд + Oд 16: end for  4.2  the existing elites without reevaluating them from scratch, thus improving overall conversion rate. Algorithm 6 summarizes the structure of Campaign mode. Except for asynchronous statistics in MAB algorithms, the Campaign mode differs from the original MAB-EA in two other aspects. First, the duplication avoidance mechanism is weakened. Since exploration is not the first priority in Campaign mode, duplications between different generations are allowed to encourage the revival of underestimated candidates. Second, only the worst Cp percentile candidates are replaced by the new offspring, which are generated from the top Cp percentile candidates. By setting Cp as 20 or even less, the portion of newly generated offspring is limited, and the overall conversion rate is more stable. Moreover, because all the offspring are generated based on the top candidates, the overall quality of offspring tends to be better than purely random sampling. Under these mechanisms, the crossover and mutation operations can continue the exploration at a steady pace.  4  EMPIRICAL STUDY  This section evaluates the effectiveness of the proposed framework and mechanisms via simulated experiments in the conversion rate optimization domain. All the conclusions in this section are supported by t-test at a 5% significance level.  4.1  Overall Performance Evaluation  In order to evaluate the performance of the new framework, three representative MAB algorithms (SR, TS and UCB1) are incorporated into it, and an empirical comparison between these three variants and the original evolutionary CRO algorithm is conducted. The original algorithm is the same as Algorithm 4 except for traffic allocation: instead of varying it based on a MAB algorithm, all candidates evenly share the traffic budget. For convenience, the original evolutionary CRO algorithm is named "Standard Method" in the rest of the paper. The traffic budget for each generation is fixed at 10,000, and the maximun number of generations is set at 10 , conforming to cost limitations in real-world CRO. The population size K is 20, and the mutation probability Cm is 0.01. Different values of elite and parent percentages, Ce and Cp , are tested to investigate the robustness of the proposed framework. Two performance metrics are utilized: one is the best conversion rate, i.e., the true conversion rate of the best-performing candidate in each generation; the other is the overall conversion rate for each generation, i.e., the total number of conversions in one generation divided by the total number of visits in that generation. Note that the overall conversion rate is different from simply averaging the conversion rates of all the candidates, because the traffic allocated to each candidate may be different. Figure 1 shows the results based on 500 independent runs. From Figure 1, it is clear that the proposed framework with TS and SR significantly increases the overall conversion rate during evolution without deteriorating the optimization performance. In fact, the incorporation of MAB algorithms even improves the optimization performance in terms of best conversion rate. Regarding the influence of Ce and Cp , larger values of these two parameters lead to more explorative behaviors at a cost of overall conversion rate at early stage. In real-world cases, the largest acceptable generation number is usually 5, so a reasonable choice for Ce and Cp would be 20 or even less. Under these circumstances, the TS and SR variants perform best both in terms of overall conversion rate and best conversion rate. There are three explanations: first, the MAB algorithm allocates more traffic to the promising candidates, thereby increasing the overall conversion rate during evaluation; second, since the top candidates receive more traffic from MAB algorithm, the reliability of best performing candidate is enhanced; third, under small Ce and Cp , the quality of offspring relies heavily on the top candidates, and more reliable top candidates tend to generate more reliable offspring. The overall quality of candidates is therefore improved, and the overall conversion rate is further increased in this way. Regarding UCB1, since the average reward in p the simulated CRO case is very low (e.g., 0.05), the second term 2 log (t)/ni in line 7 of Algorithm 1 plays a more important role  Experimental Setup  A CRO simulator was built to simulate the interactions between users and website designs. There are multiple possible choices for each element of a website, and each choice will increase or decrease the basic conversion rate of the website independently (that is, interactions between elements are not modeled in these experiments: although they are important in real-world CRO, they do not play a large role in traffic allocation). The effect of each choice is predefined and kept fixed during the CRO process. For all the experiments in this section, the following setup is used: There are 5  Figure 1: This figure shows the best conversion rate and overall conversion rate in each generation. The results are averaged over 500 independent runs for different Ce and Cp settings. TS and SR perform significantly better than Standard Method in terms of both measures. The differences in best conversion rate are statistically significant after generation 1, and the differences in overall conversion rate are statistically significant over all the generations.  Best Conversion Rate over Generations  in arm selection. This encourages evenly allocation of the traffic, thereby leading to similar behaviors as in Standard Method.  Effectiveness of Best Arm Identification Mode  0.070 Best Conversion Rate  4.3  0.075  This subsection demonstrates the effectiveness of BAI mode through an experimental comparison with the Standard Method, MAB-EA, and a state-of-the-art approach [22] where the average fitness within a predefined neighborhood (in solution space) is used to evaluate candidates. In the experiments, the neighborhood approach was further improved by considering all the previous candidates when calculating neighbood fitnesses. For a fair comparison, MAB-EA and neighborhood approach have 11,000 visits per generation; BAI mode has 10,000 visits for each generation and 10,000 additional visits in the BAI phase. The other parameters are identical for all algorithms: Ce = 20, Cp = 20, K = 20, G max = 15, Cm = 0.01. For BAI mode, Ke = 20, and SR algorithm is used in BAI phase. For neighborhood approach, neighborhood size is fixed at 5. Figure 2 compares the best conversion rates of all the algorithms over 500 independent runs. BAI mode consistently improves over the Standard Method, MAB-EA, and neighborhood approach. It both converges faster early on, and explores more efficiently later. After generation 10, BAI mode significantly outperforms MAB-EA even with less total traffic. The neighborhood approach’s performance gradually improves with the collection of more candidates. However, BAI mode is still more reliable than the neighborhood approach even in later stages. Based on the experimental results, BAI mode allows selecting a better winner, and estimates its future/true performance  0.065  UCB1 Successive Rejects Thompson Sampling Standard Method UCB1+BAI Successive Rejects+BAI Thompson Sampling+BAI Standard Method+BAI Neighborhood Approach  0.060 0.055 0  2  4  6  8 10 Generation  12  14  16  Figure 2: Best conversion rate over generations. The methods with a BAI phase perform significantly better, i.e. they allow identifying a candidate where true performance is significantly better than methods without a BAI phase. The neighborhood approach is also better than non-BAI methods, but not as good as BAI. The results are averaged over 500 independent runs, and the performance differences between BAI variants and non-BAI variants are statistically significant . more accurately. It therefore provides important improvements in practical applications.  6  Overall Conversion Rate over Generations  of them can be generalized to other optimization problems with noisy fitness functions. The main idea of MAB-EA is to utilize MAB algorithms to allocate the evaluation budget. Although poorly performing candidates cannot receive sufficient traffic to accurate estimate of their true fitnesses, the optimization performance does not deteriorate. This is because the evolution pressure in EAs comes from the parent selection and survival selection, and these two steps rely primarily on those good candidates. That is, efficient detection of good candidates is more important than accurate evaluation of bad candidates. Thus, MAB algorithms reduce evaluation cost without sacrificing optimization performance. The BAI mode is a significant improvement in settings where result reliability is critical. The EA maintains an elite archive that collects good candidates throughout the optimization process. After evolution is finished, a pure exploration MAB algorithm (e.g., SR) is performed on the elite archive to select the final winner. This process amounts to a two-level winner selection, and reliability of the optimization outcome is enhanced. The additional traffic for the BAI phase is extracted from previous generations, thus no extra cost is incurred. For problems in which overall fitness during optimization matters, the new concepts in Campaign mode can be applied. Asynchronous MAB algorithms together with a high survival probability and greedy offspring generation lead to a high yet stable overall fitness during evolution. It is notable that only MAB algorithms without sharing parameters among candidates are suitable for asynchronization, such as TS and SR but not UCB1. From the experimental results in Section 4.3, neighborhood-based fitness works better than original fitness if the candidate pool is big enough. Therefore, one promising future direction is to combine neighborhood-based fitness with MAB algorithms in later optimization stages. The reliability of winner candidate should be further improved in this way. Another interesting future direction is to introduce contextual bandit algorithms [1], in which the interrelations among variables are explicitly modeled. The model will then be used by the MAB algorithms to allocate evaluation budget more efficiently. Moreover, the model can be used in the crossover or mutation operations to propagate promising variable combinations more often, thus increasing overall performance and efficiency further. Third direction is the incorporation of asynchronous statistics into BAI mode. Initializing elites in BAI phase with their statistics in the main optimization phase may further increase the reliability of best candidate.  Overall Conversion Rate  0.075 0.070 0.065 0.060  UCB1 Successive Rejects Thompson Sampling Standard Method Asynchronous UCB1 Asynchronous Successive Rejects Asynchronous Thompson Sampling  0.055 0.050 0  10  20  30 Generation  40  50  Figure 3: The overall conversion rate for entire optimization process in Campaign Mode. The data point at generation д shows the overall conversion rate until generation д. The asynchronous versions of TS and SR perform significantly better than other versions, leading to better conversion rate over the entire campaign. The results are averaged over 500 independent runs, and the performance differences between asynchronous versions and original versions are statistically significant.  4.4  Effectiveness of Asynchronous MAB Algorithm in Campaign Mode  The main difference between Campaign mode and MAB-EA is the new asynchronous MAB algorithm. This section verifies the effectiveness of asynchronous statistics in MAB algorithms via an empirical comparison. In the experiments, SR, TS and UCB1 are modified to run asynchronously and compared with their original versions, as well as with the Standard Method. The same parameters are used for all algorithms: Cp = 20, K = 20, Cm = 0.01, T = 10, 000. Since Campaign mode generally run for longer period of time, G max is set at 50. Figure 3 compares the results over 500 independent runs. Asynchronous SR and asynchronous TS perform significantly better than their original versions. For UCB1, the asynchronous version is better only in the early stages. This is because all the candidates in UCB1 algorithm share the parameter t (total number of visits for all the candidates). A candidate that has survived for a long period in the asynchronous variant will lead to a very large t. A significant bias towards less visited candidates will then be introduced during the traffic allocation (line 7 of Algorithm 1), thereby wasting more traffic in those unreliable candidates. The candidates in SR and TS do not share any parameters, so the Campaign mode works properly with their asynchronous versions, improving overall conversion rate during optimization significantly.  5  6  CONCLUSION  This paper demonstrates how MAB algorithms can be used to make EAs more effective in uncertain environments. First, the proposed MAB-EA framework makes it possible to allocate the evaluation budget more efficiently. Second, a more reliable two-level winner selection mechanism is employed in BAI mode based on pure exploration MAB algorithms. Third, a Campaign mode with asynchronous MAB algorithms is designed to achieve high and stable overall fitness during the entire campaign. All proposed mechanisms are shown to be effective through experimental comparisons in the simulated CRO domain. The ideas and conclusions in this work can be generalized to other uncertain optimization problems as well.  DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK  The proposed mechanisms in this work solves three general issues in uncertain optimization problems: how to allocate the evaluation budget efficiently, how to make the optimization outcome reliable, and how to maintain high overall fitness during evolution. Although the new approaches are only demonstrated in the CRO domain, all 7  REFERENCES  [23] Volodymyr Mnih, Csaba Szepesvári, and Jean-Yves Audibert. 2008. Empirical Bernstein Stopping. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 672–679. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 1390156.1390241 [24] Herbert Robbins. 1952. Some aspects of the sequential design of experiments. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 58, 5 (09 1952), 527–535. https://projecteuclid.org:443/ euclid.bams/1183517370 [25] Khalid Salehd and Ayat Shukairy. 2011. Conversion Optimization: The Art and Science of Converting Prospects to Customers. O’Reilly Media, Inc., Sebastopol, CA. [26] Steven L. Scott. 2010. A Modern Bayesian Look at the Multi-armed Bandit. Appl. Stoch. Model. Bus. Ind. 26, 6 (Nov. 2010), 639–658. https://doi.org/10.1002/asmb.874 [27] William R. Thompson. 1933. On the Likelihood that One Unknown Probability Exceeds Another in View of the Evidence of Two Samples. Biometrika 25, 3/4 (1933), 285–294. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2332286 [28] Richard Weber. 1992. On the Gittins Index for Multiarmed Bandits. The Annals of Applied Probability 2, 4 (1992), 1024–1033. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2959678  [1] Alekh Agarwal, Daniel J. Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert E. Schapire. 2014. Taming the Monster: A Fast and Simple Algorithm for Contextual Bandits. CoRR abs/1402.0555 (2014). arXiv:1402.0555 [2] Shipra Agrawal and Navin Goyal. 2012. Analysis of Thompson Sampling for the Multi-armed Bandit Problem. In COLT 2012 - The 25th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, June 25-27, 2012, Edinburgh, Scotland. 39.1–39.26. http://www. jmlr.org/proceedings/papers/v23/agrawal12/agrawal12.pdf [3] Jean-Yves Audibert and Sébastien Bubeck. 2010. Best Arm Identification in Multi-Armed Bandits. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/ best-arm-identification-multi-armed-bandits/ [4] Peter Auer, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. 2002. Finite-time Analysis of the Multiarmed Bandit Problem. Machine Learning 47, 2 (01 May 2002), 235–256. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1013689704352 [5] Sébastien Bubeck, Rémi Munos, and Gilles Stoltz. 2009. Pure Exploration in Multiarmed Bandits Problems. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 23–37. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-04414-4_7 [6] Olivier Chapelle and Lihong Li. 2011. An Empirical Evaluation of Thompson Sampling. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS’11). Curran Associates Inc., USA, 2249–2257. http://dl. acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2986459.2986710 [7] Herman Chernoff. 1952. A Measure of Asymptotic Efficiency for Tests of a Hypothesis Based on the sum of Observations. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 23, 4 (1952), 493–507. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2236576 [8] Carlos Domingo, Ricard Gavaldà, and Osamu Watanabe. 2002. Adaptive Sampling Methods for Scaling Up Knowledge Discovery Algorithms. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 6, 2 (01 Apr 2002), 131–152. https://doi.org/10.1023/A: 1014091514039 [9] Agoston E. Eiben and Jim Smith. 2015. From evolutionary computation to the evolution of things. Nature 521 (27 05 2015), 476 EP –. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ nature14544 [10] Eyal Even-Dar, Shie Mannor, and Yishay Mansour. 2006. Action Elimination and Stopping Conditions for the Multi-Armed Bandit and Reinforcement Learning Problems. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 7 (Dec. 2006), 1079–1105. http://dl.acm.org/citation. cfm?id=1248547.1248586 [11] Aurélien Garivier and Olivier Cappé. 2011. The KL-UCB Algorithm for Bounded Stochastic Bandits and Beyond. (02 2011). [12] OleâĂŘChristoffer Granmo. 2010. Solving twoâĂŘarmed Bernoulli bandit problems using a Bayesian learning automaton. International Journal of Intelligent Computing and Cybernetics 3, 2 (2010), 207–234. https://doi.org/10.1108/ 17563781011049179 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1108/17563781011049179 [13] Wassily Hoeffding. 1963. Probability Inequalities for Sums of Bounded Random Variables. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 58, 301 (1963), 13–30. http://www.jstor.org/ stable/2282952 [14] Yaochu Jin and J. Branke. 2005. Evolutionary optimization in uncertain environments-a survey. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 9, 3 (June 2005), 303–317. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2005.846356 [15] Moto Kamiura and Kohei Sano. 2017. Optimism in the face of uncertainty supported by a statistically-designed multi-armed bandit algorithm. Biosystems 160, Supplement C (2017), 25 – 32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2017.08.004 [16] Emilie Kaufmann, Olivier Cappe, and Aurelien Garivier. 2012. On Bayesian Upper Confidence Bounds for Bandit Problems. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research), Neil D. Lawrence and Mark Girolami (Eds.), Vol. 22. PMLR, La Palma, Canary Islands, 592–600. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v22/ kaufmann12.html [17] Emilie Kaufmann, Nathaniel Korda, and Rémi Munos. 2012. Thompson Sampling: An Asymptotically Optimal Finite-time Analysis. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT’12). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 199–213. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-34106-9_18 [18] T.L Lai and Herbert Robbins. 1985. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances in Applied Mathematics 6, 1 (1985), 4 – 22. https://doi.org/10. 1016/0196-8858(85)90002-8 [19] Odalric-Ambrym Maillard, Remi Munos, and Gilles Stoltz. 2011. A Finite-Time Analysis of Multi-armed Bandits Problems with Kullback-Leibler Divergences. 19 (05 2011). [20] Risto Miikkulainen, Neil Iscoe, Aaron Shagrin, Ron Cordell, Sam Nazari, Cory Schoolland, Myles Brundage, Jonathan Epstein, Randy Dean, and Gurmeet Lamba. 2017. Conversion Rate Optimization Through Evolutionary Computation. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1193–1199. https://doi.org/10.1145/3071178.3071312 [21] Risto Miikkulainen, Neil Iscoe, Aaron Shagrin, Ryan Rapp, Sam Nazari, Patrick McGrath, Cory Schoolland, Elyas Achkar, Myles Brundage, Jeremy Miller, Jonathan Epstein, and Gurmeet Lamba. 2018. Sentient Ascend: AI-Based Massively Multivariate Conversion Rate Optimization. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference. AAAI. http://nn.cs.utexas.edu/ ?miikkulainen:iaai18 [22] Risto Miikkulainen, Hormoz Shahrzad, Nigel Duffy, and Phil Long. 2017. How to Select a Winner in Evolutionary Optimization?. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium Series in Computational Intelligence. IEEE. http://nn.cs.utexas.edu/ ?miikkulainen:ssci17 8

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
