Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_1819

Abstract:
How to be correct, lazy and efficient ? C. Recanati Université Paris 13, av. JB. Clément,  1. Lambdix and the semantic problems  93430, Villetaneuse, France  of Lisp  This paper is an introduction to Lambdix, a lazy Lisp interpreter implemented at the Research Laboratory of the University of Paris XI (Laboratoire de Recherche en Informatique, Orsay). Lambdix was devised in the course of an investigation into the relationship between the semantics of programming languages and their implementation; it was used to demonstrate that in the Lisp domain, semantic correctness is consistent with efficiency, contrary to what has often been claimed. The first part of the paper is an overview of well-known semantic difficulties encountered by Lisp as well as an informal presentation of Lambdix; it is shown that the difficulties which Lisp encouters do not arise in Lambdix. The second part is about efficiency in implementation models. It explains why Lambdix is better suited for lazy evaluation than previous models. The section ends by giving comparative execution time tables.  In this section the semantical defects of lisp1 are reviewed and shown not to exist in Lambdix. These defects are characteristic of early versions of lisp, but they are still present in current versions (although, of course, not all defects are present in all versions); this is why we think this little overview is not out of date even if some of points we make are now well-known.  1.1. The functional argument problem Lisp was first thought of as being an implementation of the lambda calculus. Its syntax allows the definition of functions by means of lambda expressions, as for instance (lambda (x y) (+ x y))  1  By 'lisp' here we mean a family of  languages rather than a particular language belonging to this family.  page 1  for addition. This is a fundamental feature  when the function returns the lambda  of Lisp. Now serious problems arise when  expression; consequently, when the  these lambda expressions are used as  anonymous lambda function is applied, x  functional arguments - when a function  recovers its previous value - which is 456  takes another function as argument, and  or not defined.  also when a function returns such a function as value.  Example 2 $ (define apply (f x) (f x) )  Example 1  $ ( define Identity ( x )  $ ( define BuildConstFunc (x)  ( apply (lambda (y) x) 2))  ( lambda(y) x )) The Identity function defined here The function BuildConstFunc is  is constructed by applying a function  supposed to return a function lambda of y,  returning x. In Lambdix, a call to (  which returns x. This lambda function  Identity 45) returns 45 but in lisp:  ought to be a constant function since its argument y is not used. Then a call to (  $ ( Identity 45)  (BuildConstFunc 0) 1)  => 2  ought to return 0, as well as ( (BuildConsFunc 0) 2). This is of course the case in Lambdix, but not in Lisp  seems bound to 2. The source of the trouble is the use of the name x in the  where:  definition of apply. Had apply been  $ ((BuildConsFunc 0) 1)  defined as  => ** error - x not defined ** or  This is even more surprising since only y  $ (setq x 456)  $ ( define apply (f z)  $ ((BuildConsFunc 0) 1)  (f z) )  => 456 the problem would have disappeared. Here The reason for this surprising  it is not because the stack has been popped  answer is the following. In most lisps  too early that the binding fails, but  environments (bindings between names  because an intermediate binding has been  and values) are represented in a stack  inserted: x is first bound to 45; then the  which is popped when the execution of the evaluation of apply inserts the binding of function terminates. The binding of x to 0 x to 2. The lambda is evaluated with y in the application of BuildConsFunc is lost  page 2  bound to 2 and it returns x - which is now  part of the benefits of functional  bound to 2.  programming is lost.  Because of these functional argument problems, Lisp is not a true  1.2. Lexical scope vs dynamic scope  second order functional language1, and  The foregoing examples show that the 1  Some lisps proposed a function to solve  the functional argument problem. This function, sometimes called closure, takes two arguments - a list of formal parameters and an expression - and returns the application of a lambda expression. For instance, the value returned by the  importance in Lisp. This feature is due to the type of variable binding used in Lisp, called 'most recent binding' (MRB, for short). MRB was perhaps, as Gowan has wittily said, the 'most recent error' ([GOW72]). Originally motivated by the technical advantages of the  closure function applied to the list '(x)  implementation, dynamic scoping of the  and an expression Expr - in an  type illustrated by MRB has disastrous  environment where x is bound to 2 - is  consequences for the safety of the  given by :  language. How can you trust a language  $ ( closure '(x) 'Expr ) when x =2 => ((lambda (x) Expr)  names of formal parameters are of major  in which the names of formal parameters  '2 )  must be taken into account? The use of dynamic scoping in  Although this can punctually solve the problem, many critics can be made to this solution. First, it is not very efficient because it adds function calls and requires the evaluation of all the parameters to be saved. Moreover, it is an ad hoc solution. It requires the programmer to know when the closure function is necessary since  Lisp conflicts with the original model introduced by Church, which was at the source of Lisp. In lambda calculus, a rule known as the ß-rule allows the reduction of terms along the following pattern: ( ( λ x . expr ) val ) →  the call to the closure function must be  expr [ x ← val ]  explicit. Furthermore, lisp distinguishing between an f-value and a c-value, some particular attention must be given on the way the interpreter pass the arguments.  value interpretation and this additional call  This requires the use of a special function  must also be explicit.  (called funcall ) to force the functional  page 3  The ß-rule takes as input the application to  allows the use of functional arguments and  a value val of a lambda expression with  is therefore a true second order language.  formal parameter x and yields as output the same expression in which all tokens of  1.3. Evaluation order  x have been replaced by val. The substitution is supposed to be determined  1.3.1. Call by need and call by value  by the inner lambda binding in the (program) text, i.e. lexically.  In lambda calculus, a term t defined by  In most cases, dynamic scope and (λ x y . x) A ((λ u . u u) (λ u . u u))  lexical scope yield the same result, but it is very easy to construct cases with  reduces to A because the first reduction (the substitution of A to x) yields a term, λ  diverging answers1 . This is why - like many functional languages today  y . A, which always reduces to A because  (Common Lisp, Scheme, ML, etc.) -  y does not occur in the core of this lambda  Lambdix consistently uses lexical scope  expression. But in Lisp the interpreter  for formal parameters. Lambdix also  computes the values of the arguments before the core of the function. This strategy of parameter evaluation is known  For instance the term t defined by t ≡ ( λ x . ( λ y . ( λ x . y) B ) x) A  as call by value. Since in the evaluation of  would reduced to A by ß-reduction t → ( λ y . ( λ x . y) B ) A)  calculation of the second argument - the term (( λ u . u u) ( λ u . u u)) - generates  1  →  ( λ x . A) B )  →  A  t all arguments are calculated first, the  an infinite loop: y ≡ (( λ u . u u) ( λ u . u u))  while it would reduced to B in the  → (( λ u . u u) ( λ u . u u))  dynamic model: ( λ x . ( λ y . ( λ x . y) B ) x) A:  → (( λ u . u u) ( λ u . u u))  ( λ y . ( λ x . y) B ) x) ( λ x . y) B ) y  →  Stack [x–A]  ...  In the framework of the lambda  [ x – A ][ y – x ]  calculus, call by value can be understood  [ x – A ][ y – x ][ x – B ]  as a strategy governing the order in which  B  the ß-reductions are performed. This  A formal demonstration of the non  strategy guarantees that if there is a unique  equivalence of the two models can be  solution, the calculus will converge on it.  found in A. Eick and E. Fehr [EIC85].  Unfortunately it also guarantees that the  page 4  calculus will never return if there is also  arguments and if the latter were calculated  an infinite derivation. Thus for terms  only when necessary. Such a strategy of  having both a finite and an infinite  evaluation is known as call by need. For  derivation, this strategy guarantees that the instance, the function f defined by finite derivation will not be found. Hence ( de f (x y)  it is not a winning strategy. The winning  (if  strategy of the lambda-calculus requires  (< x 0)  that the leftmost inner term be reduced  1  first. If there is a finite solution, the  (f (- x 1) (f x y))))  calculus will converge on it (the confluence property guarantees the unicity of the finite solution). This strategy  will never terminate from a call to (f 1 2) if the interpreter conforms to the call by value strategy, but it returns 1 if the  corresponds to call by need.  interpreter conforms go the other strategy  Functions in Lisp are strict1,  (call by need ).  because of the strategy of the interpreter  The strategic choice made by Lisp  (call by value). But there is a Lisp  is not necessarily objectionable on  function which is not strict: the  semantic grounds, because strictness can  conditional test. By definition, the if  be seen as a positive feature; moreover, it  function does not calculate all its arguments: the computation of the second and the third argument is determined by  has the advantage of clarity. But it entails a loss of expressive power, because the set of defined functions is smaller than the set  the result of the computation of the first. Consequently, nonstrict functions could be constructed if the core of the functions  of convergent terms of lambda calculus. The reason why Lisp has made this choice is again efficiency: more often than not,  was evaluated before the values of the  implementations of call by need are utterly inefficient.  1  A function is strict if, when applied to an  undetermined value, the result is undetermined. This property is usually written by the equation F (⊥) = ⊥ where ⊥ denotes an undetermined value. In case of several arguments, a function is strict when: F ( ... , ⊥ , ... ) = ⊥  page 5  functions we are talking about. Laziness certainly decreases efficiency in  1.3.2. Lazy evaluation  connection with some functions, but it yields fascinating results in connection  An interpreter conforming to the call by need strategy is called a lazy interpreter.  with other functions. Well exploited, lazy evaluation becomes very efficient in data  There are various degrees of laziness, however. Pure laziness corresponds to the situation in which the only arguments that  oriented algorithms, for instance in expert systems or prolog interpreters. A lazy cons allows the  are evaluated are the arguments of the printing functions. Such a form of laziness  manipulation of potentially infinite lists called streams. In Lambdix, we can  is very inefficient and "lazy evaluation"  define1 an infinite sequence of 1 by:  generally denotes the following pattern:  $ ( de x (cons 1 x)) and nevertheless have  ◊ call by need for user defined  $ (cadr x)  functions  =1  ◊ delayed evaluation for the function cons  An infinite list of integers can be also  ◊ strict primitive functions  defined as a function from:  (+, -, etc.) stand strict It is the second point which makes the real  $ ( de (from x) (cons x (from (+ x 1))))  difference between simple call by need for user defined functions and lazy  The Lambdix interpreter will have no  evaluation. The introduction of a lazy  problem with  constructor on lists sometimes greatly improves efficiency. Lists are the most  $ (print (cadr (from 2)))  important structures in Lisp and lazy evaluation offers new ways of handling  =3  them. Though laziness is a richer model,  1  This is a recursive definition - which is  distinct from the traditional setq of lisp:  it has always been considered less efficient than the other evaluation patterns.  $ (setq x 2)  But is it really less efficient? This question  $ (setq x (cons 1 x))  cannot be answered in a straighforward  $ (cadr x)  manner, for it all depends on which  =2  page 6  Another difference between Lisp and while Lisp gets trapped into an infinite  Lambdix is that Lambdix distinguishes  loop:  between program and text. Nevertheless, Lambdix provides two operators for an  = 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ....  explicit conversion between text and  Infinite structures can be very pleasant and program. This makes it possible for programs to 'modify their own text' during efficient in many programs. For instance in numeric application, lazy evaluation is  execution. Primitive objects of Lambdix are  well suited for computing with formal series. The use of infinite structures can  typed (numbers, strings, characters, lists,  also simplify algorithms. It can suppress  booleans, primitive arithmetic operations,  tests and makes algorithms shorter.  primitive boolean operations, etc.). But  For instance, it suppresses the need for iterators in unification programs.  there are two levels of language: the level of the program text and that of its semantic interpretation (i.e. its value). In  Stream processing is essential in some simulation programs. It provides an  Lambdix quote does not indicate the  alternative to programming with  absence of evaluation, as it does in Lisp.  assignments. The FlipFlop RS gives an  Quote performs an operation which  interesting example of this feature:  converts any piece of an already computed part of the program into a list. Lists in Lambdix are constant values; they are not  $ (de (FlipFlop R S)  interpreted as forms. A list is a piece of  (let ( (de Q (NAnd S QBAR))  text which remains constant until the  (de QBAR (NAnd R Q)))  operation excla is applied. Excla is the  (cons Q QBAR)))  dual of quote. When applied to a list, the Note that the definitions of Q and QBAR  list is interpreted in the program text as if  are mutually recursive and that the NAnd introduced here will be an operator on  the corresponding piece of text had been written there. For instance, the function  streams.  mapfun which constructs the list of the applications of a function f to all the elements of a list l can be written as1:  1.4. Reflexivity in Lisp 1  An obvious advantage of this definition  is that it is perfectly general; there is no need for a distinction between f-subr, f-  page 7  be defined. Top level names in Lisp are mutually defined2.  $ (de (mapfun f l) (if (nullist l) ()  Nevertheless Lisp provides mutual  (cons ( ! (cons f (car l)))  definitions only at top level. In Lisp the  (mapfun f (cdr l))))))  expression  $ (mapfun + '((1 2) (2 3) (3 4))) =(357)  (let ( (var1 expr1) ... (varN exprN) )  Here the characters ! and ' stand for the  body )  operators excla and quote respectively. is equivalent to the application 1.5. Naming variables ( (lambda (var1 ... varN) body ) A fundamental difference between Lisp  expr1 ... exprN )  and the lambda calculus is that in Lambdix function call is not the only way  ExprN are calculated in the calling  of binding names to values1. Most lisps  environment. Thus cross references cannot  have at least three other binding  be made without additional functional  mechanisms: affectation (setq ), function  arguments. Since Lisp has problems with  definition (introduced by  second order functions, proper recursive  de ) and local definitions (introduced by  definitions cannot be really introduced at  let ).  this particular level. In Lambdix a recursive let has been introduced in order to make local  1.5.1. Naming functions Names introduced by de allow a term to refer to itself in its own definition in such  2  a way that self applicative functions can  operator allows self reference and then,  This is not a special property of lisp. In  the lambda calculus, the fixed point since function can be pass as arguments, is is possible to write cross referenced terms.  expr, or macro functions as possible  In fact, it is lisp which offers restricted  argument values.  possibilities, since functions cannot be  1  passed as arguments (then cross references  Without this alternative, the choice of  dynamic scoping would really be  cannot be done outside the top level  meaningless  definitions).  page 8  function definitions mutual like top-level  the terms Q and QBAR must be mutually  definitions. The distinction between  defined.  function value and cell value has also been removed from Lambdix. In Lambdix a  1.5.2. Naming stores: the assignment  term has a unique value. Thus thede  problem  function can be used for setting any value: Names in Lisp are not used merely as $ (de x 3)  tools for referencing argument values or  =3  functions. The basic concept in Lisp is not  $ (de (f x) (+ x 1))  that of function but that of location. A  =f  variable is viewed as a name for a location at which a value can be stored. The set of  Terms introduced by de have mutual  all bindings at some point in a program is  references within their own lexical level of known as the environment at this point. definition. The top-level is a special case  Definitions, lambda expressions and let  because top level definitions can be added  expressions are viewed as mechanisms  at any time whereas at other levels  which create new locations and bind  definitions come first. Levels can be  variables to those locations. Thus formal  imbricated. A reference to a name is first  parameters are not only viewed as  looked up at the same level. Parameter  potential values but also as stores. In this  names have priority over local definitions  section we shall consider the problems  when they conflict at the same lexical  related to the setq instruction.  level1.  First note that setq is a sequential A recursive let is very useful in a  instruction which must be put inside an  functional language because even if it is  enclosing control instruction as progn,  possible to handle mutual recursion by  while, etc. This means that function call is  means of second order functions, this is quite inefficient and not very clear. Some  not the only way of controlling data flow. This new control level has nothing to do  problems cannot be dealt with without  with the lambda calculus - which was our  mutual recursion. For instance in the  guide up to now.  preceding definition of the FlipFlop RS,  The benefit of assignment is efficiency. What is lost is, once again, semantic clarity. The introduction of  1  If not found as parameter or local  stores in the semantic model decreases the  definition, the reference is searched in the  level of abstraction. For instance, if you  ancestors.  page 9  compare the recursive Fibonacci function  arguments of functions are evaluated does  definition and the iterative one - based on  not count. For instance, in the  assignments - it is obvious that the  interpretation of:  functional definition is very close to the mathematical specification while the other  $ (f (setq x 5) (setq x 6))  requires a proof. In Lisp, the top level is an implicit  the order of evaluation must be taken into  progn in which definitions occur.  account. Note that if a setq instruction is  Definitions are very similar to affectations  performed within the body of g, we would  since they change the values of variables.  have the same problem with  Is it possible to introduce a setq instruction without radically changing the  $ (f (g 5) (g 7))  language? One way of doing so would be to accept the use of setq in the body of a  In traditional lisps, the problem is solved  let while adding an implicit progn in the  because the order of evaluation is  core of the let. We could then perform  perfectly determined. In parallel lisps the  setq instructions on local variables  evaluation order is arbitrary (depending on  introduced by let . This move would not  processors allocation). Thus we must  significally change the language since the  ascertain that in such languages  let in question would only mimic the top-  assignments on globals are used only to  level.  guide the calculation (for instance to To perform assignments on formal  synchronize processes) rather than to contribute to it1.  parameters, we might add sequentiality through an explicit (or implicit) control  In a lazy language, the situation is  instruction in the body of functions. This  intermediate. Shared variables are used by  would obscure the formal specification in  only one function at a time and the order  embedding a new control level. Nevertheless, if parameters are passed by  of evaluation is determined at run time. Then no special problem of concurrent  value, the meaning of the function being defined could not be too much alterated. This is not so, however, if assignments on  1  Global variables are effectively shared  and their content can be override by any  free variables are concerned. If we accept assignment on global  processes at any time. Hence some more  variables, we will loose an interesting  global convention on the way processes  property: the fact that the order in which  may affect these shared variables must be specified.  page 10  access arises as with parallelism but the  The original model of Lisp 1.5  used of global stores must also be  implementation used an access variable  carefully specified since the order of  mechanism called deep binding. This  evaluation may vary from one execution  model was very efficient with respect to  to another.  the switching of environments created by  Another annoying effect of global  function calls, but also fundamentally  assignments is that we could obscure the  inadequate to solve the funarg problem  meaning of the function being defined by  and totally inappropriate for lazy  setting a new value to the name introduced evaluation. In this model, the cost of a within the body of its own definition1. For variable access is proportional to the all these reasons, setq on global variables  distance (in the tree of dynamic  has not been allowed in standard  environments) between the current  Lambdix.  environment and the one where the variable has been bound. Then the cost of a variable access is not bound: the access to a global variable from a recursive call  2. Implementation  requires a time proportional to the recursion depth.  The main originality of Lambdix is its  The MacLisp interpreter has solved  implementation model. This section shows that this model can bear comparison with other models on call by value, and that it is far better suited for lazy evaluation.  this problem by means of a new model called shallow binding. This new model was used in most Lisp implementations thereafter. In this model, each variable has a corresponding cell containing its value  2.1. Previous implementation models  in any environment. Therefore in any environment the access to a value is direct and constant. Thus variable accesses are very efficient.  1  For instance  Nevertheless on function call, the  (de (f x)  old values of the argument list must be  ....  saved into a stack and the new values  (f (setq f ...)) ... )  stored in the cells so as to reflect the  To forbid setq on the term being defined  bindings introduced by the function call.  would be illusory since the meaning of  Similarly when coming back to the  term relies anyway on the meaning of all  previous environment, the content of the  other variables defined at the same level.  page 11  cells corresponding to the argument list  What makes an implementation  must be exchanged with the corresponding efficient is the cost of variable access and stacked values. This makes the  the cost of environment switching. In  binding/unbinding process much more  traditional lisp, the cost of environment  expensive than in the deep binding model. switching was not too important because it So an unexpected consequence of this  only concerned neighbour environments  binding model is that context switching is  and could be handled by a stack  very expensive.  mechanism.  The original shallow binding  Conversely, in second order  model was not designed to solve the  languages (allowing functional arguments)  funarg problem. However Interlisp-10 has  as well as in lazy languages the cost of  implemented a solution maintaining a tree  environment switching is very important.  of environments instead of a stack.  In both cases, context switching can  Context switching is done by repeating the  frequently arise between two distant  binding/unbinding process along the path  environments.  from the current environment to the future  In a lazy language, context  one. A common ancestor must be first  switches are numerous. This is so because  determined on the two paths from these  the request for the calculation of an  environments to the root and then half of  argument occurs within the body of the  the path must be gone through while unbinding the variables, and the second part while rebinding them up to the target  way from the root to this environment and  environment. Here the cost of context  on each node, proceed to the reversal of  switching is proportional to the bindings  the pointer and to the exchange of binding  between the source environment and the  values of the environment with the content  target one. This means that both the  of their cells. At the end of this process,  number of function calls and the number of arguments are to be taken into account1.  all identifiers have the correct values in the cells. This model is known as rerooting and an inductive proof of its algorithm is given in [BAC78]. Although  1  Baker proposed an alternate solution also  this method does not require the search of  maintaining a tree of environment. In its  a common ancestor in the dynamic tree of  solution, the tree is an inverted tree, where  environments, context switching is still  the root is always the current environment. proportional to the bindings from the To switch from the current environment to  current environment to the target one and  another one, one must follow the unique  consequently, still very expensive.  page 12  function, whose environment is by  substitution1 corresponds to a partial  definition different from that of the  compilation of lexical references as  function call. Therefore, each time a  illustrated by figure 1.  parameter must be evaluated, a context f  switching must be performed. If (revised) shallow binding is the most efficient of the classical  x y  (+ x y)  implementation models, it is not very good with respect to laziness. This is so because the cost of a switch between two  fig. 1  environments is not limited by a constant but is proportional to the bindings between Furthermore, any internal lambda the environments in the dynamic tree. structure contains a pointer to its lexical parent structure, and this substitution is  2.2. Lambdix implementation model  performed at an arbitrary level of definition. For instance, the function  2.2.1. Variable access  double-incr defined by the following topAs in the shallow binding schema, each  level definitions  parameter has a cell. But a cell is not attributed to a name, but rather to a formal  $ ( de (double-incr x) (twice (incr x))))  parameter. The binding of lexical parameter is known in advance by lexical  $ ( de (twice f)  analysis. A reference to a parameter in the core of a function is a direct reference to the corresponding parameter cell. The implementation uses internal structures containing formal parameter cells and the body of the lambda expression. A textual substitution is performed by the function read of the interpreter on the body of the function. All names are replaced by the corresponding parameter cells. This  1  This implementation of the ß-reduction  puts Lambdix near the implementation prompted by the De Bruinj notation (like Automath) - where the occurrences of variables were replaced by the level of their binding. But contrary to the De Bruinj model, Lambdix takes care of the names of the variables. This information stands accessible for meta computation. (this allows a certain degree of dynamicity as shown by use of the QUOTE and EXCLA operators).  page 13  (lambda (x) (f (f x)))))  by changing only dynamic pointers  $ ( de (incr x)  corresponding to function calls. In  (lambda (y) (+ y x)))  particular this makes the cost of environment switching independent of the  will be represented by the internal  number of parameters introduced by  structures of figure 2: double-incr  function calls.  x  (  (  x  ! x  ))  ( (  BLOCK 5 6  incr  twice f  dynamic pointer f  x y  (+ x y)  ! ))  y  (+  )  fig. 2  fig. 3  2.2.2. Representation of environments  In the same way, local definitions are parsed and lexical references to them are replaced by direct pointers to analogous  The dynamic pointers to the blocks are used to access values and to represent environments1. Environments are  internal structures. We shall not detail these cases here. In fact, the cell parameters do not directly contain the values. A pointer to a block is attributed to each function call  1  The concept of environment generally  varies from one implementation to the  and the called values are kept into it. Then  other. Traditionally environments have the cells give access to their corresponding been represented as association list - i.e. as values by means of pointers to the block functions mapping Identificators to (called the dynamic pointers of the  Values:  internal lambda structures) and offsets (into the block). This scheme is not as fast  What we call environment in this paper  as pure shallow binding but in this frame  corresponds to the same notion, while in  variable access is also constant and very  [REC86], Lambdix environments were  efficient. This indirection is interesting  introduced by a recursive equation:  sigma: (Id -> Val)  because it induces environment switching  page 14  ENV = Id -> ( ENV -> Val)  transformed by function calls and function  occurs (G2). From this point G calls H  returns. This provides an order on the  (H2) which calls G again (G3).  environments - an order that is usually  P1  called 'dynamic'. Athough it is distinct from the lexical ordering of the definitions, they are related. Suppose the  H1  H2  functions P, H and G to be lexically organized with P at the top, H local to P  G1  and G local to H. The lambda-structures will reflect this lexical organization by  G2  G3  fig. 5  something like fig.4: From this last call to G, one must access P  H  G  the parameters of the call (G3) and those of its lexical ancestors (H2 and P1). This  x y body  y z body t  body  block list (G3,H2,P1) combined with the lambda structures G, H, P suffices for  fig. 4  representing the variable bindings required Now a call to H always appears within a  during the execution of G3. To install or  call to P. The same thing holds for G and  reinstall this particular environment later,  H. The dynamic environment  one has only to make the dynamic pointers  corresponding to a call to G will be  of the lambda structures G, H and P point  defined by the arguments values of this  to the value blocks G3, H2 and P1  call and those corresponding to its  respectively. This is illustrated by figure 6.  ancestors. In figure 6, the dynamic  P1  ordering of the first three calls was: P calling H calling G . Then this first call to  H1  G (G1) terminates and a new call to G  G1  These two views are not really opposed; the second one fit better one of the aspects  P  of the implementation model: in a given  H2  G2  G3  H  G  environment, names give access to function from environments to values and  x y body  y z body t fig. 6  a certain calculation must be performed before accessing a value.  page 15  body  closures given as functional argument) 2.2.3. Cost of environment switching  will also be limited because it will stop as soon as an ancestor pointer is correctly set  In Lambdix implementation, a functional  - which means that in the worst case, it  value is represented by a lambda structure  requires the comparison of all dynamic  and a block corresponding to its  pointers to the top-level. But here, the  environment of definition. This  number of tests and assignments involved  environment corresponds to an  is limited by the lexical level of the  environment of call of its direct ancestor.  definition. It is not a dynamic depth that is  The tree of dynamic environment blocks is involved in this process. It is a lexical maintained by associating each block with  depth, which corresponds to the number of  its dynamic (lexical) father block. One can  levels introduced by let - which usually  then find all dynamic ancestors pointers  reduces to 1.  from one block.  What is important is that the cost  To install an environment of  of the installation of an environment does  definition on the lambda structures, all  not depend on the current environment  ancestor dynamic pointers must be set in  since it is limited by a value that is  the lambda structures to their  independent. It does not matter from  corresponding blocks in the dynamic tree.  which environment the interpreter comes,  To do this, one must simply compare the  but how deep this environment is in the  present values of these dynamic pointers  lexical sense. Furthermore, if the  with those given by the tree of calling  environment of definition is the same as  environments. This calculation can be  the previous environment (as for instance  shortened by the convention that if a  in recursive call) environment switching is  pointer is correctly set, all the ancestors  reduced to a test.  will also be. This property can be easily implemented: it only requires that the previous environment be restored when a  In the general case, the cost of  function returns. In this way the cost of  environment switching does not depend  environment switching is limited to one  on the number of formal parameters, as in  assignment and one test when a function  theshallow binding schema. Thus,  call occurs within the same branch of the  functions of multiple arguments are not  lexical tree.  disadvantaged.  Now the switching from one  The combination of these two  environment to an arbitrary other (case of  characteristics — constant variable access  page 16  and environment switching independent of  implementation language, to the  the current environment — makes our  programmer's ability, or to the model  model well suited to lazy evaluation  itself.  because the computation can be postponed without too drastic a supplementary cost.  To test our implementation model, we have built two Lambdix interpreters: the first supporting only call by value and the second performing only call by need.  2.3. Execution timetables  Both interpreters are built on the same implementation schema.  In this section we give some execution timetables, although everyone knows that  2.3.1. Performances on call by value  such results cannot not be taken too seriously.  We compare Lambdix with lisps that are  This is the case, first of all,  the most used at the L.R.I.: last Lisp  because languages have different  (called lal ), Frantz Lisp and Lelisp.  semantics. This means that some functions defined in one language may be not  These lisps all suffer from the semantical defects listed in the first section2.  defined in another. This situation arises for Lambdix both with second order functions and lazy functions manipulating infinite lists1. It is nevertheless possible to  2  compare execution times of those  software in Frantz Lisp because it was  functions that can be defined in both  used in the industry and because it was the  languages.  only one to have a compiler.  Secondly, if we want to compare  Originally, a team has developed  Unfortunately, the interpreter was very  two models for the implementation of  slow because its implementation was  environments, we should compare interpreters written in the same  based on the deep binding model. Thus  implementation language and as far as  efficient interpreter compatible with  possible by the same programmer;  Frantz Lisp. Lelisp has been chosen by  otherwise, we will not know if the results  another team for the efficiency of its  are due to the efficiency of the  interpreter and its good library (which by  Last lisp has been designed to be an  the way contains a closure function). 1  We only have compared the very same  programs. We did not take advantage of  implementation is based on the shallow binding schema.  possible simplification of lazy program.  page 17  Last Lisp was written in C at the  Even if it is never the best (on call  L.R.I. in 1986 by a very good  by value ), our interpreter can bear  programmer, Patrick Amar, and the  comparison with its two rivals. It gives  interpreter is optimized by assembly code  better results than last Lisp on functions  insertions. The LeLisp interpreter was  using lists and is close to LeLisp on  directly written in Assembler. Given that  recursive functions manipulating numbers.  our implementation is presumably less  What is shown by these results is clearly  optimized than those of its two  that the Lambdix implementation model  competitors, the results1 shown in the  can compete with the shallow binding  following table look very good for the  model.  Lambdix environment model:  Comparison with the Frantz Lisp interpreter and compiler (fig. 8) illustrates  lal  Tak  38.5  42.5  40  Fib  8.8  13.8  13.8  LComp 15.5  11.1  9.1  ◊ good interpreters can compete with  8.1  6.5  compilers:  Sieve  9.1  Lambdix  two other points:  Prog  lelisp  ◊ deep binding is not an efficient model  fig. 7 The Fibonacci test (Fib) is executed with a  Prog  best  call to (Fib 20). The well known Tak  Frantz Lisp interp.  comp.  function is tested with a call to (Tak 18 12  Tak  38.5  overfl.  37  6). The last two tests are small programs  Fib  8.8  108  6  containing recursive calls to functions  LComp  9.1  overfl.  10  which manipulate lists. LComp is a  Sieve  6.5  overfl.  program which compares trees leaf by leaf (same fringe problem). Sieve constructs  5.5  fig. 8  the list of the first 400 prime numbers with the traditional algorithm of Eratosthenes.  2.3.2. Efficiency vs laziness  1  We have built two Lambdix interpreters:  The experimentation has been done on a  VAX 750, and time is expressed in  the first one supporting only call by value  second. To have the equivalent order on a  and the second one performing only call  Sun3.5 you must divided these numbers  by need. The comparison of these two  by a factor 2.  interpreters is surely very instructive  page 18  because the two implementations both  Lazy evaluation gives better results  share the same implementation language,  because the sum is computed only on the  the same model (adapted for lazy  first elements.  evaluation) and the same programmer.  As shown by this table, the bad  Figure 9 gives a comparison between  cases of lazy evaluation are between 10%  Lambdix with call by need and Lambdix  and 25% slower than traditional call by  with call by value. We have not shown the  need while the good cases are 95% better.  performances of other lisps because they  The worst case is that of the Tak function  can be found in the previous tables and are  which has three arguments and calculates  in any case of the same order as Lambdix  them separately - each time from another  with call by value.  environment. But such cases are not very frequent and the price of laziness can be  Lambdix Prog  % of  evaluated in our model as a 15% loss in  diff.  efficiency with strict functions. Such a  by val  by need  Fib  13.8  15.7  - 12  result is very important and could not have  Fib2  19.5  21.7  - 10  been obtained with other models because  Tak  42.5  57  - 25  of the cost of environment switching.  Comp  11.1  0.7  + 94  Sieve  8.1  9.5  - 15  LSum  16.1  0.03  + 99  fig. 9 The programs tested in this table are the same as the previous ones except for Fib2 and LSum. Fib2 is a modified Fibonacci function which takes three arguments1. LSum calculates the sum of the terms of  BIBLIOGRAPHY  two lists generated by the Sieve program.  [1] J. ALLEN, Anatomy of Lisp, McGraw-Hill Computer Science series, 1978.  1  Other lisps were very sensible to these  [2] H.G. BAKER, "Shallow binding in  additional arguments and gave all a result  Lisp 1.5", CACM, vol 21, Nb 7, July  around 20. Note that this is not the case  1978.  with the Lambdix model which is less sensible to parameter addition.  page 19  [3] H.G. BAKER, "List processing in real  Symposia in applied mathematics, vol 19,  time on a serial computer", CACM, vol  1967.  21, Nb 4, April 1978.  [14] M.P. GEORGEFF & S.F. BODNAR,  [4] BARENDREGT, The Lambda  "A simple and efficient implementation of  Calculus, North Holland Publ. Comp.,  higher-order functions in LISP", Report  1981.  N° CSLI-84-19, Dec. 1984.  [5] D.G. BOBROW & B. WEGBREIT,  [15] Mc GOWAN, "The 'most recent'  "A model and stack implementation of  error: its causes and correction",  multiple environments", CACM, vol 16,  SIGPLAN Notices, vol 7, Nb 1, 1972.  Nb 10, Oct. 1973.  [16] P. GREUSSAY, Contribution à la  [6] N.G. de BRUIJN, "Lambda-calculus  définition interprétative et à  with nameless dummies, a tool for  l'implémentation des lambda-langages,  automatic formula manipulation", Indag  Thèse de Doctorat d'Etat, N° 78-2, Nov.  Math. 34, 1972.  1977.  [7] G. BURN, C. HANKIN & S.  [17] R. MILNER, "Logic for computable  ABRAMSKY, "The theory of Strictness  functions, Description of a machine  Ananlysis for Higher order functions",  implementation", Standford A.I. Lab.  Dept. of computer Science, Imperial  Memo 169, 1972.  college, London, June 1985.  [18] J. MOSES, "The function of  [8] J. CHAILLOUX, Le modèle VLISP:  FUNCTION in LISP", SIGSAM bulletin,  description, implémentation et évaluation  July 1970.  Thèse de l'Université de Pierre et Marie  [19] G. PLOTKIN, "The Category of  Curie, Paris 1980.  complete partial orders: a tool for making  [9] J. CHAILLOUX, Le_Lisp de l'INRIA,  meanings", Summer School on foundation  Manuel de Réference, Février 1984.  of Artificial Intelligence and Computer  [10] P. COINTE, Fermetures dans les  Science, Pisa 19-30 June 1978.  lambda-interprètes: application aux langages LISP, PLASMA et SMALLTALK,  [20] T.W. PRATT, Programming Languages: design and implementation.  Thèse de 3ème cycle, 82-11, Mars 1982.  Printice-Hall, 1975.  [11] H. CURRY & R. FEYS,  [21] C. RECANATI, Lambdix: un  Combinatory Logic, North-Holland, 1958.  interprète LISP à liaison lexicale et  [12] EICK & E. FEHR, "Inconsistencies  évaluation paresseuse, Thèse de 3ème  of pure LISP", Springer LNCS N° 145.  cycle de l'Université de Paris-Sud, N°  [13] R.W. FLOYD, "Assigning meanings  4072, Dec. 1986.  to programs", Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.  page 20  [22] R. SETHI, "Semantics of computer programs: Overview of language definition methods", Sept. 1977. [23] D. SCOTT & C. STRACHEY, "Towards a formal semantics", Formal language description languages for computer programming, Steel. et al. eds, North-Holland, Amsterdam 1966. [24] B.C. SMITH, "Reflection and semantics in LISP", Report N° CSLI 84 8, Dec. 1984. [26] G.L. STEELE Jr, "Macaroni is better than spaghetti", SIGPLAN Notices, vol 12, Nb 8, Aug. 1977. [27] G.L. STEELE Jr & G.J. SUSMAN, The Art of the Interpreter, AI Memo Nb 453, 1978. [28] J. STOY, "Some mathematical aspects of functional programming", Functional Programming and its applications, ed Darlington et al., CUP 1982. [29] J. STOY, Denotational Semantics The Scott-Strachey Approach to Programming Language Theory, MIT Press, 1977. [30] R.D. TENNENT, "The denotational semantics of programming languages", CACM vol. 19, N°8, Aug. 1976.  page 21

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
