Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_167

Abstract:
Robust Estimation via Robust Gradient Estimation  arXiv:1802.06485v1 [stat.ML] 19 Feb 2018  Adarsh Prasad‡  Arun Sai Suggala‡  Sivaraman Balakrishnan†  Pradeep Ravikumar‡  Machine Learning Department‡ Department of Statistics† Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. Abstract We provide a new computationally-efficient class of estimators for risk minimization. We show that these estimators are robust for general statistical models: in the classical Huber ǫ-contamination model and in heavy-tailed settings. Our workhorse is a novel robust variant of gradient descent, and we provide conditions under which our gradient descent variant provides accurate estimators in a general convex risk minimization problem. We provide specific consequences of our theory for linear regression, logistic regression and for estimation of the canonical parameters in an exponential family. These results provide some of the first computationally tractable and provably robust estimators for these canonical statistical models. Finally, we study the empirical performance of our proposed methods on synthetic and real datasets, and find that our methods convincingly outperform a variety of baselines.  1  Introduction  Robust estimation has a rich history in statistics with seminal contributions due to Box [4], Tukey [42], Huber [24], Hampel [21] and several others. In the classical analysis of statistical estimators, statistical guarantees are derived under strong model assumptions and in most cases these guarantees hold only in the absence of arbitrary outliers, and other deviations from the model assumptions. Strong model assumptions are rarely met in practice, and this has led to the development of robust inferential procedures and various associated statistical concepts such as the influence function, the breakdown point and the Huber ǫ-contamination model to assess the robustness of estimators. Despite this progress however, the statistical methods with the strongest robustness guarantees, for instance those based on non-convex M -estimators [24], ℓ1 tournaments [13, 15, 45] and notions of depth [10, 20, 38], are computationally intractable. In this paper, we present a class of estimators that are computationally tractable and have strong robustness guarantees. The estimators we propose are obtained by robustifying classical algorithms for risk minimization and are applicable to a wide-range of parametric statistical models for which parameter estimation can be cast within this framework. In contrast to classical work, for instance on M-estimation, we do not attempt to replace the risk minimization objective with a robust counterpart but instead focus on making canonical gradient-based optimization for the usual risk minimization objective robust. We find that this shift in perspective enables a unified treatment of different statistical models, leads to computationally tractable estimators and leads to estimators with strong robustness guarantees. In the risk minimization framework, the target parameter θ ∗ is defined as the solution to an optimization problem:   (1) θ ∗ = argmin R(θ) ≡ argmin Ez∼P L(θ; z) , θ∈Θ  θ∈Θ  1  where L is an appropriate loss-function, R is the population risk and Θ is the set of feasible parameters. The goal of empirical risk minimization procedures is then to compute an approximate minimizer to the above program when given access to samples Dn = {z1 , . . . , zn }. In this classical setting, a standard assumption that is imposed on Dn is that the data has no outliers, and has no arbitrary deviations from model assumptions; i.e., it is typically assumed that each of the zi ’s are independent and identically distributed according to the distribution P . Many analyses of risk minimization further assume that P follows a sub-gaussian distribution, or has otherwise well-controlled tails in order to appropriately control the deviation between the population risk and its empirical counterpart. While our general results can be specialized to obtain results for a variety of models and notions of robustness, we focus on developing estimators which are robust to two canonical classes of deviations from the model assumptions: 1. Robustness to arbitrary outliers: In this setting, we focus on Huber’s ǫ-contamination model, where rather than observe samples directly from P in (1) we instead observe samples drawn from Pǫ which for an arbitrary distribution Q is defined as: Pǫ = (1 − ǫ)P + ǫQ. The distribution Q allows for arbitrary outliers, which may correspond to gross corruptions or more subtle deviations from the assumed model. This model can be equivalently viewed as model mis-specfication in the Total Variation (TV) metric. 2. Robustness to heavy-tails: In this setting, we are interested in developing estimators under weak moment assumptions. We assume that the distribution P from which we obtain samples only has finite low-order moments (see Section 5.4 for a precise characterization). Such heavy tailed distributions arise frequently in the analysis of financial data and large-scale biological datasets (see for instance examples in [18, 47]). In contrast to classical analyses of empirical risk minimization [43], in this setting the empirical risk is not uniformly close to the population risk, and methods that directly minimize the empirical risk perform poorly (see Section 4). The goal of our work is to develop estimators which are computationally tractable and robust in these models. Below, we provide an outline of our results and contributions. 1. Our first contribution is to introduce a new class of robust estimators for risk minimization (1). These estimators are based on robustly estimating gradients of the population risk, and are computationally tractable by design. Building on prior work for robust mean estimation in the Huber model [29], and in the heavy-tailed model [37], we design robust gradient estimators for the population risk in (1). Our main insight is that in this general risk minimization setting, the gradient of the population risk is simply a multivariate mean vector, and we can leverage prior work on mean estimation to design robust gradient estimators. Through this we are able to significantly generalize the applicability of mean estimation methods to general parametric models. 2. Our estimators are practical and our second contribution is to conduct extensive numerical experiments on real and simulated data with our proposed estimators. We provide guidelines for tuning parameter selection and we compare the proposed estimators with several competitive baselines [3, 19, 24]. Across different settings and according to various metrics we find that our estimators consistently perform well. 2  3. Finally, we provide rigorous robustness guarantees for the estimators we propose for a variety of canonical statistical models including for linear regression, for logistic regression and for estimation of the canonical parameters in an exponential family. Our contributions in this direction are two-fold: building on prior work [2] we provide a general result on the stability of gradient descent for risk minimization, showing that in favorable cases gradient descent can be quite tolerant to inaccurate gradient estimates. Subsequently, in concrete settings we provide a careful analysis of the quality of gradient estimation afforded by our proposed gradient estimators and combine these results to obtain guarantees on our final estimates. Broadly, as we discuss in the sequel, our work suggests that estimators which are based on robust gradient estimation offer a variety of practical, conceptual, statistical and computational advantages for robust estimation.  1.1  Related Work  There is extensive work broadly in the area of robust statistics (see for instance [21] and references therein), and we focus this section on some lines of work that are most related to this paper. Classical work has already developed several estimators which are known to be optimally robust for a variety of inferential tasks, including hypothesis testing [26], mean estimation [38], general parametric estimation [11, 15, 45], and non-parametric estimation [13]. However, a major drawback of this classical line of work has been that most of the estimators with strong robustness guarantees are computationally intractable [42], while the remaining ones are heuristics which are not optimal [22]. Recently, there has been a flurry of research in theoretical computer science [9, 14, 16, 29, 32] designing provably robust estimators which are computationally tractable while achieving near-optimal contamination dependence for special classes of problems. Some of the proposed algorithms, are not practical as they rely on the ellipsoid algorithm or require solving semidefinite programs [9, 14, 16, 32] which can be slow for modern problem sizes. We build on the work of Lai et al. [29], who study practical robust mean and covariance estimators for distributions with appropriately controlled moments. A complementary line of recent research [10, 20] has focused on providing minimax upper and lower bounds on the performance of estimators under ǫ-contamination model, without the constraint of computational tractability. In the ǫ-contaminated model, Q can be arbitrary, but there has been a lot of work in settings where the contamination distribution is restricted in various ways. For example, recent work in high-dimensional statistics (for instance [7, 12, 33, 34, 46]) have studied problems like principal component analysis and linear regression under the assumption that the corruptions are evenly spread throughout the dataset. Another line of research has focused on designing robust estimators under the heavy tailed distribution setting. These approaches relax the sub-gaussian or sub-exponential distributional assumptions that are typically imposed on the target distribution P and allow it to be a heavy tailed distribution. Most of the approaches in this category use robust mean estimators [8, 31] that exhibit sub-gaussian type concentration around the true mean for distributions satisfying mild moment assumptions. The median-of-means estimator [31] and Catoni’s mean estimator [8] are two popular examples of such robust mean estimators. Hsu and Sabato [23] use the median-of-means estimator to develop an alternative to ERM under heavy tails. Although this estimator has strong theoretical guarantees and is computationally tractable, as noted by the authors in [23] it performs poorly in practice. In recent 3  work Brownlees et al. [5] replace empirical mean in the empirical risk minimization framework (ERM) with Catoni’s mean estimator and perform risk minimization. The authors provide risk bounds similar to the bounds one can achieve under sub-gaussian distributional assumptions. However, their estimator is not easily computable and the authors do not provide a practical algorithm to compute the estimator. Other recent works by Lerasle and Oliveira [31], Lugosi and Mendelson [35] use similar ideas to derive estimators that perform well theoretically, in heavy-tailed situations. However, these approaches involve optimization of complex objectives for which no computationally tractable algorithms exist. We emphasize that in contrast to our work, these works focus on robustly estimating the population risk which does not directly lead to a computable estimator. We instead consider robustly estimating the gradient of the population risk. When complemented with the gradient descent algorithm this leads naturally to a computable estimator.  1.2  Outline  We conclude this section with a brief outline of the remainder of the paper. In Section 2, we provide some background on risk minimization and the Huber and heavy-tailed noise models. In Section 3, we introduce our class of estimators and provide concrete algorithms for the ǫ-contaminated and heavy-tailed setting. In Section 4 we study the empirical performance of our estimator on a variety of tasks and datasets. We complement our empirical results with theoretical guarantees in Sections 5, 6 and 7. We defer technical details to the Appendix. Finally, we conclude in Section 8 with a discussion of some open problems.  2  Background and Problem Setup  In this section we provide the necessary background on risk minimization, gradient descent and introduce two notions of robustness that we consider in this work.  2.1  Risk Minimization and Parametric Estimation  In the setting of risk minimization, we assume that we have access to a differentiable  loss  function L : Θ × Z 7→ R, where Θ is a convex subset of Rp . Let R(θ) = Ez∼P L(θ; z) be the population loss (risk), and let θ ∗ be the minimizer of the population risk R(θ), over the set Θ θ ∗ = argmin R(θ).  (2)  θ∈Θ  The goal of risk minimization is to minimize the population risk R(θ), given only n samples Dn = {zi }ni=1 . Whereas in parameter estimation we are interested in estimating the unknown parameter θ ∗ from samples Dn . In this work we assume that the population risk is convex to ensure tractable minimization. Moreover, in order to ensure identifiability of the parameter θ ∗ , we impose two standard regularity conditions [6] on the population risk. These properties are defined in terms of the error of the first-order Taylor approximation of the population risk, i.e. defining, τ (θ1 , θ2 ) := R(θ1 ) − R(θ2 ) − h∇R(θ2 ), θ1 − θ2 i, we assume that τℓ τu kθ1 − θ2 k22 ≤ τ (θ1 , θ2 ) ≤ kθ1 − θ2 k22 , 2 2  (3)  where the parameters τℓ , τu > 0 denote the strong-convexity and smoothness parameters respectively. 4  2.2  Gradient Descent and Empirical Risk Minimization  A starting point for the techniques we develop in this paper is the classical projected gradient descent method for empirical risk minimization. Given data Dn = {zi }ni=1 , empirical risk minimization (ERM) estimates the unknown parameter θ ∗ as the minimizer of the empirical risk, i.e. n  1X L(θ; zi ). θbn = argmin Rn (θ) := n θ∈Θ i=1  A popular method for solving this optimization problem is projected gradient descent. Projected gradient descent generates a sequence of iterates {θ t }∞ t=0 , by refining an initial parameter θ0 ∈ Θ via the update:  θ t+1 = PΘ θ t − η∇Rn (θ t ) ,  where η > 0 is the step size and Pθ is the projection operator onto Θ. Despite its simplicity, the gradient descent method is not robust for general convex losses. Furthermore, the empirical risk minimizer is a poor estimator of θ ∗ in the presence of outliers in the data: since ERM depends on the sample mean, outliers in the data can effect the sample mean and lead ERM to sub-optimal estimates. This observation has led to a large body of research that focuses on developing robust M-estimators which have favorable statistical properties, but are often computationally intractable. In this work we take a different approach. Our work relies on an important observation that the gradient of the population risk (Ez∼P ∇L(θ; z) ) is simply a mean vector: one that can be estimated robustly by leveraging recent advances in robust mean estimation [29, 37]. This leads to a general method for risk minimization based on robust gradient estimation (see Algorithm 1).  2.3  Robust Estimation  One of the goals of this work is to develop general statistical estimation methods that are robust in one of the following two models: Huber’s ǫ-contamination model or the heavy-tailed model. We now briefly review these two notions of robustness. 1. Huber’s ǫ-contamination model: Huber [25, 26] proposed the ǫ-contamination model where we observe samples that are obtained from a mixture of the form Pǫ = (1 − ǫ)P + ǫQ,  (4)  where P is the true distribution, ǫ is the expected fraction of outliers and Q is an arbitrary outlier distribution. Given i.i.d. observations drawn from Pǫ , our objective is to estimate θ ∗ , the minimizer of the population risk R(θ) = Ez∼P L(θ; z) , robust to the contamination from Q. 2. Heavy-tailed model: In the heavy-tailed model it is assumed that the data follows a heavy-tailed distribution (i.e, P is heavy-tailed). While heavy-tailed distributions have various possible characterizations: in this paper we consider a characterization via gradients. For a fixed θ ∈ Θ we let Pgθ denote the multivariate distribution of the gradient of population loss, i.e. ∇L(θ; z). We refer to a heavy-tailed distribution as one for which 5  Pgθ has finite second moments for any θ ∈ Θ. As we illustrate in Section 7, in various concrete examples this translates to relatively weak low-order moment assumptions on the data distribution P . Given n i.i.d observations from P , our objective is to estimate the minimizer of the population risk. From a conceptual standpoint, the classical analysis of risk-minimization which relies on uniform concentration of the empirical risk around the true risk, fails in the heavy-tailed setting necessitating new estimators and analyses [5, 23, 35, 36].  3  Gradient Estimation  Gradient descent and its variants are at the heart of modern optimization and are well-studied in the literature. Suppose we have access to the true distribution Pθ∗ . Then to minimize the population risk R(θ), we can use projected gradient descent, where starting at some initial θ 0 and for an appropriately chosen step-size η, we update our estimate according to: θ t+1 ← PΘ (θ t − η∇R(θ t )).  (5)  However, we only have access to n samples Dn = {zi }ni=1 . The key technical challenges are then to estimate the gradient of R(θ) from samples Dn , and to ensure that an appropriate modification of gradient descent is stable to the resulting estimation error. To address the first challenge we observe that the gradient of the population  risk at any point θ is the mean of a multivariate distribution, i.e. ∇R(θ) = Ez∼P ∇L(θ; z) . Accordingly, the problem of gradient estimation can be reduced to a multivariate mean estimation problem, where our goal is to robustly estimate the true mean ∇R(θ) from n samples {∇L(θ; zi )}ni=1 . For a given sample-size n and confidence parameter δ ∈ (0, 1) we define a gradient estimator: Definition 1. A function g(θ; Dn , δ) is a gradient estimator, if for functions α and β, with probability at least 1 − δ, at any fixed θ ∈ Θ, the estimator satisfies the following inequality: kg(θ; Dn , δ) − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ α(n, δ)kθ − θ ∗ k2 + β(n, δ).  (6)  In subsequent sections, we will develop conditions under which we can obtain gradient estimators with strong control on the functions α(n, δ) and β(n, δ) in the Huber and heavy-tailed models. Furthermore, by investigating the stability of gradient descent we will develop sufficient conditions on these functions such that gradient descent with an inaccurate gradient estimator still returns an accurate estimate. To minimize R(θ), we replace ∇R(θ) in equation (5) with the gradient estimator g(θ; Dn , δ) and perform projected gradient descent. In order to avoid complex statistical dependency issues that can arise in the analysis of gradient descent, for our theoretical results we consider a sample-splitting variant of the algorithm where each iteration is performed on a fresh batch of samples (see Algorithm 1). We further assume that the number of gradient iterations T is specified a-priori, and accordingly we define: jnk δ and δe = , (7) n e= T T  We discuss methods for selecting T , and the impact of sample-splitting in later sections. As confirmed in our experiments (see Section 4), sample-splitting should be viewed as a device introduced for theoretical convenience which can likely be eliminated via more complex uniform arguments (see for instance the work [2]). 6  Algorithm 1 Projected Gradient Descent function PGD({z1 , . . . , zn }, Step Size η, Number of Iterations T , δ) e. Split samples into T subsets {Zt }Tt=1 of size n for t = 0 to T − 1 do   e k2 . θ t+1 = argminθ∈Θ kθ − θ t − ηg(θ t ; Zt , δ) 2 end for end function  Next, we consider the two notions of robustness described in Section 2, and derive specific gradient estimators for each of the models using the framework described above. Although the major focus of this work is on Huber contamination and heavy-tailed models, our class of estimators are more general and are not restricted to these two notions of robustness.  3.1  Gradient Estimation in Huber’s ǫ-contamination model  There has been a flurry of recent interest [9, 14, 16, 29, 32] in designing mean estimators which, under the Huber contamination model, can robustly estimate the mean of a random vector. While some of these results are focused on the case where the uncorrupted distribution is Gaussian, or isotropic, we are more interested in robust mean oracles for more general distributions. Lai et al. [29] proposed a robust mean estimator for general distributions, satisfying weak moment assumptions, and we leverage the existence of such an estimator to design a Huber gradient estimator g(θ; Dn , δ) which works in the Huber contamination model (see Algorithm 2). Now, we briefly describe the main idea behind Algorithm 2 and the mean estimator of Lai et al. [29]. The algorithm builds upon the fact that in one-dimension, it is relatively easy to estimate the gradient robustly. In higher-dimension, the crucial insight of Lai et al. [29] is that the effect of the contamination Q on the mean of uncontaminated distribution P is effectively one-dimensional provided we can accurately estimate the direction along which the mean is shifted. In our context, if we can compute the gradient shift direction, i.e. the direction of the difference between the sample (corrupted) mean gradient and the true (population) gradient, then the true gradient can be estimated by using a robust 1D-mean algorithm along the gradient-shift direction and a non-robust sample-gradient in the orthogonal direction since the contamination has no effect on the gradient in this orthogonal direction. In order to identify the gradient shift direction, we use a recursive Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) based algorithm. In each stage of the recursion, we first remove gross-outliers via a truncation algorithm (described in more detail in the Appendix) and subsequently identify two subspaces using an SVD – a clean subspace where the contamination has a small effect on the mean and another subspace where the contamination has a potentially larger effect. We use a simple sample-mean estimator in the clean subspace and recurse our computation on the other subspace. Building on the work of Lai et al. [29], in Lemma 1 and Appendix J we provide a careful analysis of this gradient estimator. 7  Algorithm 2 Huber Gradient Estimator function HuberGradientEstimator(Sample Gradients S = {∇L(θ; zi )}ni=1 , Corruption Level ǫ, Dimension p, δ) Se = HuberOutlierGradientTruncation(S, ǫ, p, δ). if p=1 then e return mean(S) else e Let ΣSe be the covariance matrix of S. Let V be the span of the top p/2 principal components of ΣSe and W be its complement. e where PV is the projection operation on to V . Set S1 := PV (S) Let µ bV := HuberGradientEstimator(S1 , ǫ, p/2, δ). e Let µ bW := mean(PW S). p Let µ b ∈ R be such that PV (b µ) = µ bV , and PW (b µ) = µ bW . return µ b. end if end function  3.2  Gradient Estimation in the Heavy-Tailed model  To design gradient estimators for the heavy-tailed model, we leverage recent work on designing robust mean estimators in this setting. These robust mean estimators build on the classical work of Alon et al. [1], Nemirovski and Yudin [39] and Jerrum et al. [27] on the so-called median-of-means estimator. For the problem of one-dimensional mean estimation, Catoni [8], Lerasle and Oliveira [31] propose robust mean estimators that achieve exponential concentration around the true mean for any distribution with bounded second moment. In this work we require mean estimators for multivariate distributions. Several recent works ([23, 36, 37]) extend the median-of-means estimator of to general metric spaces. In this paper we use the geometric median-of-means estimator (Gmom), which was originally proposed and analyzed by Minsker [37], to design the gradient estimator g(θ; Dn , δ). The basic idea behind the Gmom estimator is to first split the samples into non-overlapping subsamples and estimate the sample mean of each of the subsamples. Then the Gmom estimator is given by the median-of-means of the subsamples. Formally, let {xi . . . xn } ∈ R be n i.i.d random variables sampled from a distribution P . Then the Gmom estimator for estimating the mean of P can be described as follows. Partition the n samples into b blocks B1 , P . . . Bb each 1 of size ⌊n/b⌋. Let {b µ1 , . . . , µ bb } be the sample means in each block, where µ bi = |Bi | xj ∈Bi xj . Then the Gmom estimator is given by median{b µ1 , . . . µ bb }. In high dimensions where different notions of the median have been considered Minsker [37] uses geometric median: µ b = argmin µ  b X i=1  kµ − µ bi k2 .  Algorithm 3 presents the gradient estimator g(θ; Dn , δ) obtained using Gmom as the mean estimator. 8  Algorithm 3 Heavy Tailed Gradient Estimator function HeavyTailedGradientEstimator(Sample Gradients S = {∇L(θ; zi )}ni=1 , δ) Define number of buckets b = 1 + ⌊3.5 log 1/δ⌋. Partition S into b blocks B1 , . . . Bb each of size ⌊n/b⌋. for i = 1 . . . nX do s. µ bi = |B1i | s∈Bi  end for  Let µ b = argmin µ  return µ b. end function  4  b X i=1  kµ − µ bi k2 .  Experiments  In this section we demonstrate our proposed methods for Huber contamination and heavytailed models, on a variety of simulated and real data examples.  4.1  Huber Contamination  We first consider the Huber contamination model and demonstrate the practical utility of gradient-descent based robust estimator described in Algorithms 1 and 2. 4.1.1  Synthetic Experiments: Linear Regression  In linear regression we observe paired samples {(x1 , y1 ), . . . (xn , yn )}, where each (xi , yi ) ∈ Rp × R. We assume that the (x, y) pairs sampled from the true distribution P are linked via a linear model: y = hx, θ ∗ i + w,  (8)  where w is drawn from a zero-mean normal distribution with variance σ 2 (w ∼ N (0, σ 2 )). We use the squared loss as our loss function 1 L(θ; (x, y)) = (y − hx, θi)2 . 2 Note that the true parameter θ ∗ is the minimizer of the resulting population risk R(θ). We now describe the experiment setup, the data model and present the results. Setup We fix the contamination level ǫ = 0.1 and σ 2 = 0.1. Next, we generate (1 − ǫ)n clean covariates from x ∼ N (0, Ip ), the corresponding clean responses using y = hx, θ ∗ i + w where θ ∗ = [1, . . . , 1]T and w ∼ N (0, σ 2 ). We simulate an outlier distribution by drawing the covariates from N (0, p2 Ip ), and setting the responses to 0. The total number of samples are set to be(10 ǫp2 ) i.e. the sample size increases with the dimension. This scaling is used to ensure that the statistical (minimax) error, in the absence of any contamination, is roughly 0.001. An optimally robust method should have error close to 0.1 (roughly equal to corruption level), which ours does (see Figure 1). 9  25  1.7 OLS RobustGD TORRENT Huber Plugin RANSAC  1.6 1.5  Parameter Error  ||θb − θ∗ ||2  20  ×10-3  15  10  1.4 1.3 1.2 1.1  5  1 0 100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  0.9 0.1  500  0.15  0.2  p  0.25  0.3  ǫ  (a) Parameter error vs p for ǫ = 0.1  (b) Parameter error vs ǫ  3 epsilon=0.1 epsilon=0.2 epsilon=0.3 epsilon=0.4  log(Parameter Error)  2  1  0  -1  -2  -3 0  10  20  30  40  50  60  Iterations  (c) log(kθt − θ∗ k2 ) vs t for different ǫ.  Figure 1: Robust Linear Regression. Metric We measure the parameter error in ℓ2 -norm. We also study the convergence properties of our proposed method, for different contamination levels ǫ. We use code provided by Lai et al. [29] to implement our gradient estimator. Baselines We use OLS, TORRENT [3], Huber-loss, RANSAC and plugin estimator as our baselines. TORRENT is an iterative hard-thresholding based alternating minimization algorithm, where in one step, it calculates an active set of examples by keeping only (1−ǫ)n samples which have the smallest absolute values of residual r = y − x, θ t , and in the other step it updates the current estimates by solving OLS on the active set. Bhatia et al. [3] had shown the superiority of TORRENT over other convex-penalty based outlier techniques, hence, we do not compare against those methods.P The plugin estimator is implemented using P Algorithm 2 to estimate both the mean vector n1 ni=1 yi xi and the covariance matrix n1 ni=1 xi xTi . Results We summarize our main findings here. 1. All estimators except our proposed algorithm perform poorly (Figure 1(a)). Note that the TORRENT algorithm has strong guarantees when only the response y is corrupted but 10  performs poorly in the Huber contamination model where both x and y may be contaminated. The error for the robust plugin estimator increases with dimension. We investigate this theoretically in Section 6.1, where we find that the error of the plugin estimator grows √ with the norm of θ ∗ . In our experiment, we choose kθ ∗ k2 = p, and thus Figure 1(a) corroborates Corollary 3 in Section 6.1. 2. In Figure 1(b) we find that the parameter error kθb − θ ∗ k2 increases linearly with the contamination rate ǫ and we study this further in Section 6.1.  3. Finally, Figure 1(c) shows that the convergence rate decreases with increasing contamination ǫ and after ǫ is high enough, the algorithm remains stuck at θ0 , corroborating Lemma 8 (in the Appendix). Next, we study the performance of our proposed method in the context of classification. 4.1.2  Synthetic Experiments: Logistic Regression  In logistic regression we observe paired samples, {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )} where each (xi , yi ) ∈ Rp × R. We assume that the (x, y) pairs sampled from the true distribution P are linked via a linear model: ( 1 1 with probability 1+exp(−hx, θ ∗ i) , (9) y= 0 otherwise. In this case, we use the negative conditional log-likelihood as our loss function, i.e. L(θ; (x, y)) = −yhx, θi + log(1 + exp(hx, θi)).  Setup We simulate a linearly separable classification problem, where the clean covariates are sampled from N (0, Ip ), the corresponding clean responses are computed as y = sign(hx, θ ∗ i) √ √ where θ ∗ = [1/ p, . . . , 1/ p]T . We simulate the outlier distribution by adding asymmetric noise, i.e. we flip the labels of one class, and increase the variance of the corresponding covariates by multiplying them by p2 . The total number of samples are set to be (10 pǫ ). Metric We measure the 0-1 classification error on a separate (clean) test set. We study how the 0-1 error changes with p and ǫ and the convergence properties(parameter error) of our proposed method for different contamination levels ǫ. Baselines We use the logistic regression MLE and the linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) as our baselines. Results Figures 2(b) and 2(c) show qualitatively similar results to the linear regression setting, i.e. that the error of our proposed estimator degrades gracefully (and grows linearly) with the contamination level ǫ and that the gradient descent iterates converge linearly. In Figure 2(a) we observe that both the SVM and logistic regression MLE perform poorly. The logistic regression MLE completely flips the labels and has a 0-1 error close to 1, whereas the linear SVM outputs a random hyperplane classifier that flips the label for roughly half of the dataset. 11  1  1  RobustGD logisticRegression SVM  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6  0-1 error  0-1 error  0.8  0.5 0.4  0.5 0.4  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1  0 100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  RobustGD  0.9  0 0.1  500  0.15  0.2  0.25  p  0.3  0.35  0.4  0.45  epsilon  (a) 0-1 Error vs p at ǫ = 0.1  (b) 0-1 error vs ǫ  0.5 eta=0.1 eta=0.2 eta=0.3 eta=0.4  log(Parameter Error)  0  -0.5  -1  -1.5  -2  -2.5 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  Iterations  (c) log(kθt − θ∗ k2 ) vs t for different ǫ  Figure 2: Robust Logistic Regression. 4.1.3  Robust Face Reconstruction  Setup In this experiment, we show the efficacy of our algorithm by attempting to reconstruct face images that have been corrupted with heavy occlusion, where the occluding pixels play the role the outliers. We use the data from the Cropped Yale Dataset [30] . The dataset contains 38 subjects, and each image has 192×168 pixels. Following the methodology of Wang et al. [44], we choose 8 face images per subject, taken under mild illumination conditions and computed an eigenface set with 20 eigenfaces. Then given a new corrupted face image of a subject, the goal is to get the best reconstruction/approximation of the true face. To remove the scaling effects, we normalized all images to [0, 1] range. One image per person was used to test reconstruction. Occlusions were simulated by randomly placing 10 blocks of size 30 × 30. We repeated this 10 times for each test image. Note that in this example, we use a linear regression model as the uncontaminated statistical model, which is almost certainly not an  Table 1: Fitting to original image error. Mean RMSE  Best Possible  Proposed  TORRENT  OLS  SCRRR  0.05  0.09  0.175  0.21  0.13  12  exact match for the unknown ground truth distribution. Despite this model misspecification, as our results show, that robust mean based gradient algorithms do well. Metric We use Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) between the original and reconstructed image to evaluate the performance of the algorithms. We also compute the best possible reconstruction of the original face image by using the 20 eigenfaces. Methods We use TORRENT, OLS as baselines. Wang et al. [44] implemented popular robust estimators such as RANSAC, Huber Loss etc. and showed their poor performance. Wang et al. [44] then proposed an alternate robust regression algorithm called Self Scaled Regularized Robust Regression(SCRRR), and showed its equivalence to and ℓ1 -penalized method. We also compare against the best possible RMSE obtained by reconstructing the un-occluded image using the eigenfaces. Results Table 1 shows that the mean RMSE is best for our proposed gradient descent based method and that the recovered images are in most cases closer to the un-occluded original image. (Figure 4.1.3). Figure 3(c) shows a case when none of the methods succeed in reconstruction.  (a) Successful Reconstruction  (b) Successful Reconstruction  (c) Failed Reconstruction  Figure 3: Robust Face recovery results: Top; in order from L to R: original image, occluded image, best possible recovery with given basis. Bottom; in order from L to R: Reconstructions using our proposed algorithm, TORRENT and ordinary least squares (OLS).  4.2  Heavy-tailed Estimation  We now consider the heavy-tailed model and present experimental results on synthetic and real world datasets comparing the gradient descent based robust estimator described in Algo13  rithms 1 and 3 (which we call GMOM) with ERM and several other recent proposals. In these experiments we focus on the problem of linear regression which is described in Section 4.1 and work with heavy-tailed noise distributions. 4.2.1  Synthetic Experiments: Simple Linear Regression  Setup. The covariate x ∈ Rp is sampled from a zero-mean isotropic gaussian distribution. √ We set each entry of θ ∗ to 1/ p. The noise w is sampled from a Pareto distribution, with mean zero, variance σ 2 and tail parameter β. The tail parameter β determines the moments of the Pareto random variable. More specifically, the moment of order k exists only if k < β, hence, smaller the β the more heavy-tailed the distribution. In this setup, we keep the dimension p fixed to 128 and vary n, σ and β. We always maintain the sample-size n to be at least 2p. Methods. We use ERM as our baseline and compare it with GMOM. Since we are always in the low-dimensional (n ≥ p) setting, the solution to ERM has a closed form expression and is simply the OLS solution. We also study ERM-GD, which performs a gradient descent on ERM and is equivalent to using empirical mean as the gradient oracle in our framework. We also compare against the robust estimation techniques of Hsu and Sabato [23] and Duchi and Namkoong [17]. In our experiments, all the iterative techniques are run until convergence. Hyper Parameter Selection. The GMOM estimator depends on the confidence parameter δ ∈ (0, 1), which needs to be tuned. In our experiments, we noticed that the performance of GMOM varies very little when δ is selected from a reasonable range that is not too close to 0 (see Figure 5 and the discussion below). So we set δ = 0.1 in all our simulations. Metrics. In our experiments, we vary σ and β, the parameters of Pareto distribution, which can change the minimal risk R(θ ∗ ). So to compare various approaches across parameter values, ∗ ) − 1.0, where θ b b is we use a scaled version of the Excess Risk, which we define as R(θ)/R(θ the estimator. To compare the performance of two estimators θb1 , θb2 , we define the notion of relative efficiency: (R(θb2 ) − R(θ ∗ )) − (R(θb1 ) − R(θ ∗ )) . RelEff(θb1 , θb2 ) = R(θb1 ) − R(θ ∗ )  Roughly, this corresponds to the percentage improvement in the excess risk obtained using θb1 over θb2 . Whenever RelEff(θb1 , θb2 ) > 0, θb1 has a lower risk, and higher the value, the more the fractional improvement.  Results. To reduce the variance in the plots presented here and in the next section, we averaged results over 25 repetitions. Figure 4 shows the benefits of using GMOM over ERM. In Figure 4(a) we plot the excess risk of ERM, ERM-GD and GMOM against the number of Iterations. We see that upon convergence GMOM has a much lower population risk than ERM. As expected, ERM-GD converges to ERM. However, the population risk of ERM-GD in the first few iterations is much lower than the risk of ERM, suggesting early stopping. Next, in Figure 4(b) we plot the scaled excess risk for ERM and GMOM as n/p increases. We see that GMOM is always better than ERM, even when the number of samples is 12 times the dimension p. In Figure 4(c), we plot the relative efficiency of GMOM and ERM against σ. This shows that the percentage improvement in the excess risk by GMOM decreases as 14  the noise level σ decreases. This behavior is expected because in the noiseless setting both methods would have a similar behavior. We do a similar study to see the relative efficiency against the heavy-tailedness of the noise distribution. As noted before, as β is increased more moments exist for the underlying distribution. Figure 4(d) shows that as the noise distribution becomes more heavy-tailed, there is more benefit in using GMOM over ERM. 2  1  ERM ERM (GD) GMOM (GD)  1.9  Excess Risk / True Risk  1.8 1.7  Population Risk  ERM GMOM (GD)  0.9  1.6 1.5 1.4 1.3  0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3  1.2  0.2  1.1  0.1 0  1 50  100  150  2  200  4  6  (a) Population Risk vs Iterations  10  12  (b) ExcessRisk/TrueRisk vs n/p 0.6  RelEff(GMOM,ERM)  1.2  8  n/p  Iterations  RelEff(GMOM,ERM)  0.5  Relative Efficiency  Relative Efficiency  1 0.8 0.6 0.4  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.1  0.2  0  0 1  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  2  4  6  8  10  12  β+1  σ  (c) Relative Efficiency vs σ  (d) Relative Efficiency vs β + 1  Figure 4: Linear Regression: Performance comparison of GMOM and ERM.  Dependence on Confidence Level. Figure 5(a) shows the performance of GMOM estimator for various values of δ. It can be seen that the choice of δ have very little effect on the performance of the estimator. However, we notice that for small values of δ the performance of the GMOM degrades. In practice, one can use either cross validation or a validation set for choosing δ.  5  Theoretical Preliminaries  In this section we develop some theoretical preliminaries. We begin with a description of some canonical examples of risk minimization in Section 5.1. Next we develop a general 15  2 ERM δ=0.01 δ=0.05 δ=0.1 δ=0.2  1.9 1.8  Population Risk  1.7 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.1 1 50  100  150  200  Iterations  (a) Population Risk vs δ  Figure 5: Linear Regression: Dependence on Confidence Level δ. theory on convergence of projected gradient descent in Section 5.2. We analyze the gradient estimators defined in Algorithms 2 and 3 in Sections 5.3 and 5.4 respectively. Finally in Sections 6,7 we present consequences of our general theory for the canonical examples, under Huber contamination and heavy-tailed models. For some of our examples, we will assume certain mild moment conditions. Concretely, for a random vector x ∈ Rp , let µ = E[x] and Σ be the covariance matrix. Then x has bounded 2kth moments if there exists a constant C2k such that for every unit vector v we have that i h  k . (10) E hx − µ, vi2k ≤ C2k E hx − µ, vi2  5.1  Illustrative Examples  The framework of risk minimization is a central paradigm of statistical estimation and is widely applicable. In this section, we provide illustrative examples that fall under this framework. 5.1.1  Linear Regression  Here we observe paired samples {(x1 , y1 ), . . . (xn , yn )}, where each (xi , yi ) ∈ Rp ×R. We assume that the (x, y) pairs sampled from the true distribution P are linked via a linear model: y = hx, θ ∗ i + w,  (11)  where w is drawn from a zero-mean distribution such as normal distribution with variance σ 2 (N (0, σ 2 )) or a more heavy-tailed distribution such as student-t or Pareto distribution. We suppose that under P the covariates x ∈ Rp , have mean 0, and covariance Σ. For this setting we use the squared loss as our loss function, which induces the following population risk: 1 1 (y − hx, θi)2 , and R(θ) = (θ − θ ∗ )T Σ(θ − θ ∗ ). 2 2 ∗ Note that the true parameter θ is the minimizer of the population risk R(θ). The strongconvexity and smoothness assumptions from (3) in this setting require that τℓ ≤ λmin (Σ) ≤ λmax (Σ) ≤ τu . L(θ; (x, y)) =  16  5.1.2  Generalized Linear Models  Here we observe paired samples {(x1 , y1 ), . . . (xn , yn )}, where each (xi , yi ) ∈ Rp × Y. We suppose that the (x, y) pairs sampled from the true distribution P are linked via a linear model such that when conditioned on the covariates x, the response variable has the distribution:   yhx, θ ∗ i − Φ(hx, θ ∗ i) (12) P (y|x) ∝ exp c(σ) Here c(σ) is a fixed and known scale parameter and Φ : R 7→ R is the link function. We focus on the random design setting where the covariates x ∈ Rp , have mean 0, and covariance Σ. We use the negative conditional log-likelihood as our loss function, i.e. L(θ; (x, y)) = −yhx, θi + Φ(hx, θi).  (13)  Once again, the true parameter θ ∗ is the minimizer of the resulting population risk R(θ). It is easy to see that Linear Regression with Gaussian Noise lies in the family of generalized linear models. We now instantiate GLMs for logistic regression. Logistic Regression In this case the (x, y) pairs are linked as: ( 1 1 with probability 1+exp(−hx, θ ∗ i) , y= 0 otherwise.  (14)  This corresponds to setting Φ(t) = log(1 + exp(t)) and c(γ) = 1 in (12). The hessian of the population risk is given by   exp hx, θi T 2 xx . ∇ R(θ) = E (1 + exp hx, θi)2 Note that as θ diverges, the minimum eigenvalue of the hessian approaches 0 and the loss is no longer strongly convex. To prevent this, in this case we take the parameter space Θ to be bounded. 5.1.3  Exponential Families and Canonical Parameters  Finally we consider the case where the true distribution P is in exponential family with canonical parameters θ ∗ ∈ Rp , and a vector of sufficient statistics obtained from the map φ : Z 7→ Rp . Note that while the linear and logistic regression models are indeed in an exponential family, our interest in those cases was not in the canonical parameters. In more details, we can write the true distribution P in this case as P (z) = h(z) exp (hφ(z), θ ∗ i − A(θ ∗ )) , where h(z) is an arbitrary nuisance function. The negative log-likelihood gives us the following loss function: L(θ; z) = −hφ(z), θi + A(θ).  (15)  The strong-convexity and smoothness assumptions require that there are constants τℓ , τu such that τℓ ≤ ∇2 A(θ) ≤ τu , for θ ∈ Θ. 17  5.2  Stability of Gradient Descent  In this section we develop a general theory for the convergence of the projected gradient descent described in Algorithm 1. Note that our gradient estimators could be biased and are not guaranteed to be consistent estimators of the true gradient ∇R(θ). This is especially true in the Huber contamination model where it is impossible to obtain consistent estimators of the gradient of the risk because of the non-vanishing bias caused by the contaminated samples. Hence, we turn our attention to understanding the behavior of projected gradient descent with a biased, inexact, gradient estimator of the form in (6). Before we present our main result, we define the notion of stability of a gradient estimator, which plays a key role in the convergence of gradient descent. Definition 2 (Stability). A gradient estimator is stable for a given risk function R : Θ 7→ R if for some φ ∈ [0, τℓ ), α(e n, δ̃) < τℓ − φ. We denote by κ the following contraction parameter: r 2ητℓ τu e κ := 1 − + ηα(e n, δ), τℓ + τu  and note that κ < 1. With these definitions in place we state our main result on the stability of gradient descent:  Theorem 1. Suppose that the gradient estimator satisfies the condition in (6) and is stable for the risk function R : Θ 7→ R. Then Algorithm 1 initialized at θ 0 with step-size η ≤ 2/(τℓ + τu ), returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 such that with probability at least 1 − δ for the contraction parameter κ above we have that, kθbt − θ ∗ k2 ≤ κt kθ 0 − θ ∗ k2 +  1 e β(e n, δ). 1−κ  (16)  We defer a proof of this result to the Appendix. Theorem 1 provides a general result for risk minimization and parameter estimation. In any concrete instantiation for a given gradient estimator, risk pair, we first study the distribution of the gradient of the risk to estimate the e β(e e and then apply Theorem 1. error suffered by the gradient estimator (α(e n, δ), n, δ)) For the bound (16), the first term is decreasing in T , while the second term is increasing in T . This suggests that for a given n and δ, we need to run just enough iterations for the first term to be bounded by the second. Hence, we can fix the number of iterations T ∗ as the smallest positive integer such that: T ≥ log1/κ  (1 − κ)kθ 0 − θ ∗ k2 . e β(e n, δ)  Since we obtain linear convergence, i.e. κ < 1, typically a logarithmic number of iterations suffice to obtain an accurate estimate.  5.3  General Analysis of Algorithm 2  We now analyze the gradient estimator described in Algorithm 2 for Huber contamination model and study the error suffered by it. As stated before, Algorithm 2 uses the robust mean 18  estimator of Lai et al. [29]. Hence, while our proof strategy mimics that of Lai et al. [29], we present a different result which is obtained by a more careful non-asymptotic analysis of the algorithm. We define:  p log p log n/(pδ) 3/8  ǫp2 log p log + γ(n, p, δ, ǫ) := n n  p log(p)   1/4 δ  ,  (17)  and with this definition in place we have the following result: Lemma 1. Let P be the true probability distribution of z and let Pθ be the true distribution of the gradients ∇L(θ; z) on Rp with mean µθ = ∇R(θ), covariance Σθ , and bounded fourth moments. There exists a positive constant C1 > 0, such that given n samples from the distribution in (4), the Huber Gradient Estimator described in Algorithm 2 when instantiated with the contamination level ǫ, with probability at least 1 − δ, returns an estimate µ b of µθ such that, kb µ − µθ k2 ≤ C1  √   1p ǫ + γ(n, p, δ, ǫ) kΣθ k22 log p.  We note in particular, if n → ∞ (with other parameters held fixed) then γ(n, p, δ, ǫ) → 0 and the error of our gradient estimator satisfies kb µ − µθ k2 ≤ C  p kΣθ k2 ǫ log p,  and has only a weak dependence on the dimension p.  5.4  General Analysis of Algorithm 3  In this section we analyze the gradient estimator for heavy-tailed setting, described in Algorithm 3. The following result shows that the gradient estimate has exponential concentration around the true gradient, under the mild assumption that the gradient distribution has bounded second moment. Its proof follows from the analysis of geometric median-of-means estimator of Minsker [37]. We use tr (Σθ ) to denote the trace of the matrix Σθ . Lemma 2. Let P be the probability distribution of z and Pθ be the distribution of the gradients ∇L(θ; z) on Rp with mean µθ = ∇R(θ), covariance Σθ . Then the heavy tailed gradient estib that satisfies the following exponential mator described in Algorithm 3 returns an estimate µ concentration inequality, with probability at least 1 − δ: r  kb µ − µθ k2 ≤ 11  6  tr (Σθ ) log 1.4/δ . n  Consequences for Estimation under ǫ-Contaminated Model  We now turn our attention to the examples introduced earlier, and present specific applications of Theorem 1, for parametric estimation under Huber contamination model. As shown in Lemma 1, we need the added assumption that the true gradient distribution has bounded fourth moments, which suggests the need for additional assumptions. We make our assumptions explicit and defer the technical details to the Appendix. 19  6.1  Linear Regression  We assume that the covariates x ∈ Rp have bounded 8th -moments and the noise w has bounded 4th moments. Theorem 2 (Robust Linear Regression). Consider the statistical model in equation (11), and C1√τℓ e < suppose that the number of samples n is large enough such that γ(e n, p, δ) and the kΣk2 log p 2  ℓ e contamination level is such that ǫ < kΣkC2√τlog − γ(e n, p, δ) for some constants C1 and C2 . p 2  Then, there are universal constants C3 , C4 , such that if Algorithm 1 is initialized at θ 0 with stepsize η ≤ 2/(τu + τℓ ) and Algorithm 2 as gradient estimator, then it returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 such that with probability at least 1 − δ p  C σ kΣk2 log p  1 3 t ∗ t 0 ∗ e , kθb − θ k2 ≤ κ kθ − θ k2 + n, p, δ) (18) ǫ 2 + γ(e 1−κ for some contraction parameter κ < 1.  In the asymptotic setting when the number of samples n → ∞ (and other parameters are held fixed), we see that for the Huber Gradient Estimator, the corresponding maximum allowed C τ2  contamination level is ǫ < τ 2 1logℓ p . This says that the more well-conditioned the covariance u matrix Σ, the higher the contamination level we can tolerate. Plugin Estimation For linear regression, the true parameter can be written in closed form as θ ∗ = E[xxT ]−1 E[xy]. A non-iterative way to estimate θ ∗ is to separately estimate E[xxT ] and E[xy] using robust covariance and mean oracles respectively. Under the assumption that x ∼ N (0, Ip ), one can reduce the problem to robustly estimating E[xy]. Under this setting, we now present a result using Lai et al. [29] as the mean estimator for estimation of E[xy]. Recall, the definition of γ in (17). We have the following result: Corollary 3. Consider the model in equation(11) with the covariates drawn from N (0, Ip ) and w ∈ N (0, 1), then there are universal constants C1 , C2 such that if ǫ < C1 , then [29] returns an estimate θb of E[xy], such that with probability at least 1 − δ q   1 (19) kθb − θ ∗ k2 ≤ C2 (1 + 2kθ ∗ k22 ) log p ǫ 2 + γ(n, p, δ, ǫ) .  Comparing bounds (18) and (19), we see that the error of the plugin estimator depends on kθ ∗ k2 , which would make the estimator vacuous if kθ ∗ k2 scales with the dimension p. On the other hand, the asymptotic rate of our robust gradient estimator is independent of the kθ ∗ k2 . This disadvantage of plugin estimation is inescapable, due to known minimax results for robust mean estimation [10] that show that the dependence on kθ ∗ k2 is unavoidable for any oracle which estimates the mean of xy in the ǫ-contaminated setting. Next, we apply our estimator to generalized linear models.  6.2  Generalized Linear Models  Here we assume that the covariates have bounded 8th moments. Additionally, we assume smoothness of Φ′ (·) around θ ∗ . To be more precise, we assume that there exist universal constants LΦ,2k , B2k such that h i 2k ≤ LΦ,2k kθ ∗ − θk2k Ex Φ′ (hx, θi) − Φ′ (hx, θ ∗ i) 2 + BΦ,2k , for k = 1, 2, 4 20  k  We also assume that Ex [ Φ(t) (hx, θ ∗ i) ] ≤ MΦ,t,k where Φ(t) (·) is the tth -derivative of Φ(·). Theorem 4 (Robust Generalized Linear Models). Consider the statistical model in equation (12), and suppose that the number of samples n is large enough such that e < γ(e n, p, δ) √  C1 τ ℓ 1  1  1  ,  4 2 + LΦ,2 ] log pkΣk22 [LΦ,4  and the contamination level is such that,  2 C τ 2 ℓ e , ǫ < √ − γ(e n, p, δ) 1 1 1 2 4 2 log pkΣk2 [LΦ,4 + LΦ,2 ]  for some constants C1 and C2 . Then, there are universal constants C3 , C4 , such that if Algorithm 1 is initialized at θ 0 with stepsize η ≤ 2/(τu + τℓ ) and Algorithm 2 as gradient estimator, then it returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 such that with probability at least 1 − δ kθbt − θ ∗ k2 ≤κt kθ 0 − θ ∗ k2 1 1 1 1 1 √ 1 3 4 2 4 4  + BΦ,2 + c(σ) 2 MΦ,2,2 + c(σ) 4 MΦ,4,1 ] 1 C3 log pkΣk22 [BΦ,4 e 2 + γ(e n , p, δ) , ǫ + 1−κ (20)  for some contraction parameter κ < 1. Note that for the case of linear regression with gaussian noise, it is relatively straightforward to see that LΦ,2k = C2k kΣkk2 , BΦ,2k = 0, MΦ,t,k = 1 ∀(t ≥ 2, k ∈ N ) and MΦ,t,k = 0 ∀(t ≥ 3, k ∈ N ) under the assumption of bounded 8th moments of the covariates; which essentially leads to an equivalence between Theorem 2 and Theorem 4 for this setting. In the following section, we instantiate the above Theorem for logistic regression and compare and contrast our results to other existing methods. 6.2.1  Logistic Regression  By observing that Φ(t) (·) is bounded for logistic regression for all t ≥ 1, we can see that LΦ,2k = 0, and that there exists a universal constant C > 0 such that BΦ,2k < C and MΦ,t,k < C ∀(t ≥ 1, k ∈ N ). Corollary 5 (Robust Logistic Regression). Consider the model in equation(14), then there are universal constants C1 , C2 , such that if ǫ < C1 , then Algorithm 1 initialized at θ 0 with stepsize η ≤ 2/(τu + τℓ ) and Algorithm 2 as gradient estimator, returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 , such that with probability at least 1 − δ p  C2 kΣk2 log p  1 t ∗ t 0 ∗ e , b n, p, δ) (21) ǫ 2 + γ(e kθ − θ k2 ≤ κ kθ − θ k2 + 1−κ for some contraction parameter κ < 1.  Under the restrictive assumption that x ∼ N (0, Ip ), Du et al. [16] exploited Stein’s trick to derive a plugin estimator for logistic regression. However, similar to the linear regression, the error of the plugin estimator scales with kθ ∗ k2 , which is avoided in our robust gradient descent algorithm. We also note that our algorithm extends to general covariate distributions. 21  6.3  Exponential Family  Here we assume that the random vector φ(z), z ∼ P has bounded 4th moments. Theorem 6 (Robust Exponential Family). Consider the model in equation(15), then there are universal constants C1 , C2 , such that if ǫ < C1 , then Algorithm 1 initialized at θ 0 with stepsize η ≤ 2/(τu + τℓ ) and Algorithm 2 as gradient oracle, returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 , such that with probability at least 1 − δ √  C2 τu log p  1 t ∗ t 0 ∗ e , b ǫ 2 + γ(e n, p, δ) (22) kθ − θ k2 ≤ κ kθ − θ k2 + 1−κ for some contraction parameter κ < 1.  Plugin Estimation Since the true parameter θ ∗ is the minimizer of the negative loglikelihood, we know that E[∇L(θ ∗ )] = 0, which implies that ∇A(θ ∗ ) = Eθ∗ [φ(Z)]. This shows that the true parameter θ ∗ can be obtained by inverting the ∇A operator, whenever possible. In the robust estimation framework, we can use a robust mean of the sufficient statistics to estimate Eθ∗ [φ(Z)]. We instantiate this estimator using the mean estimator of [29] to estimate Eθ∗ [φ(Z)]: Corollary 7. Consider the model in equation(15), then there are universal constants C1 , C2 b of E[φ(z)], such that with probability at such that if ǫ < C1 , then [29] returns an estimate µ least 1 − δ √    τu log p  1 −1 ∗ ǫ 2 + γ(n, p, δ, ǫ) , (23) b − θ k2 ≤ C2 kPΘ (∇A) µ τℓ where PΘ [θ] = argminy∈Θ ky − θk22 is the projection operator onto the feasible set Θ.  6.4  Discussion and Limitations  In the asymptotic setting of n → ∞, Algorithm 1 √ with Algorithm 2 as gradient estimator converges to a point θb such that kθb − θ ∗ k2 = O( ǫ log p). Hence, our error scales only logarithmically with the dimension p. This dependency on the dimension p is a facet of using the estimator from Lai et al. [29] for gradient estimation. Using better oracles will only improve our performance. Next, we would like to point to the difference in the maximum allowed contamination ǫ∗ between the three models. For logistic regression and exponential C τ2 family, ǫ∗ < C1 , while for linear regression, ǫ∗ < τ 2 1logℓ p . These differences are in large part u due to differing variances of the gradients, which naturally depend on the underlying risk function. This scaling of the variance of gradients for linear regression also provides insights into the limitations of Algorithm 1 for gradient estimators. In the Appendix, we provide an upper bound for the contamination level ǫ based on the initialization point θ 0 , above which, Algorithm 1 would not work for any gradient estimator.  7  Consequences for Heavy-Tailed Estimation  In this section we present specific applications of Theorem 1 for parametric estimation, under heavy tailed setting. The proofs of the results can be found in the Appendix. 22  7.1  Linear Regression  We first consider the linear regression model described in Equation (11). We assume that the covariates x ∈ Rp have bounded 4th -moments and the noise w has bounded 2th moments. This assumption is needed to bound the error in the gradient estimator (see Lemma 2). Theorem 8 (Heavy Tailed Linear Regression). Consider the statistical model in equation (11). There are universal constants C1 , C2 > 0 such that if n e>  C1 τu2 e p log(1/δ) τl2  and if Algorithm 1 is initialized at θ 0 with stepsize η ≤ 2/(τu + τℓ ) and Algorithm 3 as gradient estimator, then it returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 such that with probability at least 1 − δ s  p e C2 σ kΣk2  p log(1/δ)  , (24) kθbt − θ ∗ k2 ≤ κt kθ 0 − θ ∗ k2 + 1−κ n e  for some contraction parameter κ < 1.  7.2  Generalized Linear Models  In this section we consider generalized linear models described in Equation (12), where the covariate x is allowed to have a heavy tailed distribution. Here we assume that the covariates have bounded 4th moment. Additionally, we assume smoothness of Φ′ (·) around θ ∗ . Specifically, we assume that there exist universal constants LΦ,2k , B2k such that h i 2k ≤ LΦ,2k kθ ∗ − θk2k Ex Φ′ (hx, θi) − Φ′ (hx, θ ∗ i) 2 + BΦ,2k , for k = 1, 2 k  We also assume that Ex [ Φ(t) (hx, θ ∗ i) ] ≤ MΦ,t,k for t ∈ {1, 2, 4}, where Φ(t) (·) is the tth derivative of Φ(·). Theorem 9 (Heavy Tailed Generalized Linear Models). Consider the statistical model in equation (12). There are universal constants C1 , C2 > 0 such that if  p LΦ,4 + LΦ,2 C1 kΣk2 e n e> p log 1/δ, τl2 and if Algorithm 1 is initialized at θ 0 with stepsize η ≤ 2/(τu + τℓ ) and Algorithm 3 as gradient estimator, it returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 such that with probability at least 1 − δ  kθbt − θ ∗ k2 ≤κt kθ 0 − θ ∗ k2  1  1 1 1 1 1 3 s  2 4 2 4 4 C2 kΣk2 BΦ,4 + BΦ,2 + c(σ) 2 MΦ,2,2 + c(σ) 4 MΦ,4,1 e  p log(1/δ)  , (25) + 1−κ n e  for some contraction parameter κ < 1.  We now instantiate the above Theorem for logistic regression model. 23  Corollary 10 (Heavy Tailed Logistic Regression). Consider the model in equation(14). There are universal constants C1 , C2 > 0 such that if n e>  C12 kΣk2 e p log 1/δ. τl2  and if Algorithm 1 initialized at θ 0 with stepsize η ≤ 2/(τu + τℓ ) and Algorithm 3 as gradient estimator, it returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 such that with probability at least 1 − δ s  p e C kΣk p log(1/ δ) 2 2  , kθbt − θ ∗ k2 ≤ κt kθ 0 − θ ∗ k2 + 1−κ n e  (26)  for some contraction parameter κ < 1.  7.3  Exponential Family  We now instantiate Theorem 1 for parameter estimation in heavy-tailed exponential family distributions. Here we assume that the random vector φ(z), z ∼ P has bounded 2nd moments, and we obtain the following result: Theorem 11 (Heavy Tailed Exponential Family). Consider the model in equation(15). If Algorithm 1 is initialized at θ 0 with stepsize η ≤ 2/(τu + τℓ ) and Algorithm 3 as gradient estimator, it returns iterates {θbt }Tt=1 , such that with probability at least 1 − δ kθbt − θ ∗ k2 ≤ κt kθ 0 − θ ∗ k2 +  1 C 1−κ  s  k∇2 A(θ ∗ )k2 p log 1/δe , n e  (27)  for some contraction parameter κ < 1 and universal constant C.  8  Discussion  In this paper we introduced a broad class of estimators and showed that these estimators can have strong robustness guarantees in Huber’s ǫ-contamination model and for heavy-tailed distributions. These estimators leverage the robustness of gradient descent, together with the observation that for risk minimization in most statistical models the gradient of the risk takes the form of a simple multivariate mean which can be robustly estimated by using recent work of robust mean estimation. These estimators based on robust gradient descent work well in practice and in many cases outperform other robust (and non-robust) estimators. There are several avenues for future work, including developing a better understanding of robust mean estimation. Any improvement for robust mean estimation would immediately translate to improved guarantees for the estimators we propose for general parametric models. Finally, it would also be of interest to understand the extent to which we could replace gradient descent with other optimization methods such as accelerated gradient descent or Newton’s method. We note however, that although these methods may have faster rates of convergence in the classical risk minimization setting: in our setup their stability (to using inexact gradients) is far more crucial and warrants further investigation. 24  9  Acknowledgements  The research of SB was supported in part by the grant NSF-DMS-1713003. We thank Larry Wasserman for helpful comments on the paper.  References [1] Noga Alon, Yossi Matias, and Mario Szegedy. The space complexity of approximating the frequency moments. In Proceedings of the Twenty-eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’96, pages 20–29, New York, NY, USA, 1996. ACM. [2] Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Martin J Wainwright, and Bin Yu. Statistical guarantees for the em algorithm: From population to sample-based analysis. The Annals of Statistics, 45(1):77–120, 2017. [3] Kush Bhatia, Prateek Jain, and Purushottam Kar. Robust regression via hard thresholding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 721–729, 2015. [4] G. E. P. Box. Non-normality and tests on variances. Biometrika, 40(3-4):318–335, 1953. [5] Christian Brownlees, Emilien Joly, and Gábor Lugosi. Empirical risk minimization for heavytailed losses. The Annals of Statistics, 43(6):2507–2536, 2015. [6] Sébastien Bubeck. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Foundations and Trends R in Machine Learning, 8(3-4):231–357, 2015. [7] Emmanuel J Candès, Xiaodong Li, Yi Ma, and John Wright. Robust principal component analysis. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 58(3):11, 2011. [8] Olivier Catoni. Challenging the empirical mean and empirical variance: a deviation study. In Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré, Probabilités et Statistiques, volume 48, pages 1148–1185. Institut Henri Poincaré, 2012. [9] Moses Charikar, Jacob Steinhardt, and Gregory Valiant. Learning from untrusted data. In STOC, 2017. [10] Mengjie Chen, Chao Gao, and Zhao Ren. Robust covariance matrix estimation via matrix depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.00691, 2015. [11] Mengjie Chen, Chao Gao, Zhao Ren, et al. A general decision theory for huber’s epsiloncontamination model. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 10(2):3752–3774, 2016. [12] Yudong Chen, Constantine Caramanis, and Shie Mannor. Robust sparse regression under adversarial corruption. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2013, Atlanta, GA, USA, 16-21 June 2013, pages 774–782, 2013. [13] L. Devroye and L. Györfi. Nonparametric density estimation: the L1 view. Wiley series in probability and mathematical statistics. Wiley, 1985. [14] Ilias Diakonikolas, Gautam Kamath, Daniel M Kane, Jerry Li, Ankur Moitra, and Alistair Stewart. Robust estimators in high dimensions without the computational intractability. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2016 IEEE 57th Annual Symposium on, pages 655–664. IEEE, 2016. [15] David L Donoho and Richard C Liu. The" automatic" robustness of minimum distance functionals. The Annals of Statistics, pages 552–586, 1988.  25  [16] Simon S Du, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Aarti Singh. Computationally efficient robust estimation of sparse functionals. Conference on Learning Theory, 2017. [17] John Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Variance-based regularization with convex objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02581, 2016. [18] Jianqing Fan, Weichen Wang, and Ziwei Zhu. A shrinkage principle for heavy-tailed data: Highdimensional robust low-rank matrix recovery, 2016. [19] Martin A. Fischler and Robert C. Bolles. Random sample consensus: A paradigm for model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography. Commun. ACM, 24(6): 381–395, 1981. [20] Chao Gao. Robust regression via mutivariate regression depth. 2017. [21] Frank R Hampel, Elvezio M Ronchetti, Peter J Rousseeuw, and Werner A Stahel. Robust statistics: the approach based on influence functions, volume 114. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. [22] Cecil Hastings Jr, Frederick Mosteller, John W Tukey, and Charles P Winsor. Low moments for small samples: a comparative study of order statistics. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pages 413–426, 1947. [23] Daniel Hsu and Sivan Sabato. Loss minimization and parameter estimation with heavy tails. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(18):1–40, 2016. [24] P. J. Huber. Robust Statistics. John Wiley & Sons, 1981. [25] Peter J Huber. Robust estimation of a location parameter. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35(1):73–101, 1964. [26] Peter J Huber. A robust version of the probability ratio test. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 36(6):1753–1758, 1965. [27] Mark R. Jerrum, Leslie G. Valiant, and Vijay V. Vazirani. Random generation of combinatorial structures from a uniform distribution. Theoretical Computer Science, 43:169 – 188, 1986. [28] S Kakade, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Ambuj Tewari. Applications of strong convexity–strong smoothness duality to learning with matrices. CoRR, abs/0910.0610, 2009. [29] Kevin A Lai, Anup B Rao, and Santosh Vempala. Agnostic estimation of mean and covariance. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2016 IEEE 57th Annual Symposium on, pages 665–674. IEEE, 2016. [30] Kuang-Chih Lee, Jeffrey Ho, and David J Kriegman. Acquiring linear subspaces for face recognition under variable lighting. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 27 (5):684–698, 2005. [31] Matthieu Lerasle and Roberto I Oliveira. Robust empirical mean estimators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.3914, 2011. [32] Jerry Li. Robust sparse estimation tasks in high dimensions. Conference on Learning Theory, 2017. [33] Po-Ling Loh. Statistical consistency and asymptotic normality for high-dimensional robust mestimators. Ann. Statist., 45(2):866–896, 04 2017. [34] Po-Ling Loh and Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional regression with noisy and missing data: Provable guarantees with non-convexity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2726–2734, 2011.  26  [35] Gabor Lugosi and Shahar Mendelson. Risk minimization by median-of-means tournaments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.00757, 2016. [36] Gábor Lugosi and Shahar Mendelson. Sub-gaussian estimators of the mean of a random vector. The Annals of Statistics, 2017. [37] Stanislav Minsker. Geometric median and robust estimation in banach spaces. Bernoulli, 21(4): 2308–2335, 2015. [38] Ivan Mizera. On depth and deep points: a calculus. Annals of Statistics, pages 1681–1736, 2002. [39] A.S. Nemirovski and D.B. Yudin. Problem Complexity and Method Efficiency in Optimization. A Wiley-Interscience publication. Wiley, 1983. [40] Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course, volume 87. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. [41] Joel A Tropp. User-friendly tail bounds for sums of random matrices. Foundations of computational mathematics, 12(4):389–434, 2012. [42] John W Tukey. Mathematics and the picturing of data. In Proceedings of the international congress of mathematicians, volume 2, pages 523–531, 1975. [43] S. van de Geer. Empirical Processes in M-Estimation. Cambridge University Press, 2000. [44] Yin Wang, Caglayan Dicle, Mario Sznaier, and Octavia Camps. Self scaled regularized robust regression. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3261–3269, 2015. [45] Yannis G. Yatracos. Rates of convergence of minimum distance estimators and kolmogorov’s entropy. Ann. Statist., 13(2):768–774, 06 1985. [46] Xinyang Yi, Dohyung Park, Yudong Chen, and Constantine Caramanis. Fast algorithms for robust PCA via gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, pages 4152–4160, 2016. [47] Wen-Xin Zhou, Koushiki Bose, Jianqing Fan, and Han Liu. A new perspective on robust mestimation: Finite sample theory and applications to dependence-adjusted multiple testing. 2017.  A  Proof of Theorem 1  In this section, we present the proof of our main result on projected gradient descent with an inexact gradient estimator. To ease the notation we will often omit {Dn , δ} from g(θ; Dn , δ). Proof. At any iteration step t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }, by assumption we have that with probability at least 1 − Tδ , kg(θ t ; Dn , δ/T ) − ∇R(θ t )k2 ≤ α(n/T, δ/T )kθ − θ ∗ k2 + β(n/T, δ/T ).  (28)  Taking union bound, (28) holds over all iteration steps t ∈ {1 . . . T }, with probability at least 1 − δ. For the remainder of the analysis, we assume this event to be true. 27  Notation. Let g(θ k ) = ∇R(θ k ) + ek be the noisy gradient. Let α = α(n/T, δ/T ) and β = β(n/T, δ/T ) for brevity. We have the following Lemma from Bubeck [6]. Lemma 3. [Lemma 3.11 [6]] Let f be M -smooth and m-strongly convex, then for all x, y ∈ Rp , we have: h∇f (x) − ∇f (y), x − yi ≥  mM 1 kx − yk22 + k∇f (y) − ∇f (x)k22 . m+M m+M  By assumptions we have that: k∇R(θ k ) − g(θ k )k2 = kek k2 ≤ αkθ k − θ ∗ k2 + β. Our update   rule is θ k+1 = PΘ θ k − ηg(θ k ) . Then we have that: kθ k+1 − θ ∗ k22 = kPΘ [θ k − ηg(θ k )] − θ ∗ k22 = kPΘ [θ k − ηg(θ k )] − PΘ [θ ∗ − η∇R(θ ∗ )]k22 ≤ kθ k − ηg(θ k ) − (θ ∗ − η∇R(θ ∗ ))k22  = ≤  k  ∗  k  kθ − θ − η(∇R(θ ) − ∇R(θ )) − ηek k22 kθ k − θ ∗ − η(∇R(θ k ) − ∇R(θ ∗ ))k22 + η 2 kek k22 + 2kek k2 kθ k − θ ∗ − η(∇R(θ k ) − ∇R(θ ∗ ))k2 ,  (29)  ∗  (30)  where Equation (29) follows from contraction property of projections. Now, we can write kθ k − θ ∗ − η(∇R(θ k ) − ∇R(θ ∗ ))k2 as  kθk − θ∗ − η(∇R(θk ) − ∇R(θ∗ ))k22 = kθk − θ∗ k22 + η 2 k∇R(θk ) − ∇R(θ∗ )k22 − 2η ∇R(θk ) − ∇R(θ∗ ), θk − θ∗   1 τℓ τu k ∗ 2 2 k ∗ 2 k ∗ 2 k ∗ 2 ≤ kθ − θ k2 + η k∇R(θ ) − ∇R(θ )k2 − 2η kθ − θ k2 + k∇R(θ ) − ∇R(θ )k2 τℓ + τu τℓ + τu (31) = kθk − θ∗ k22 (1 − 2ητℓ τu /(τℓ + τu )) + ηk∇R(θk ) − ∇R(θ∗ )k22 (η − 2/(τu + τℓ )) ≤ kθk − θ∗ k22 (1 − 2ητℓ τu /(τℓ + τu )),  (32) (33)  where the second step follows from Lemma 3 and the last step follows from the step size η ≤ 2/(τℓ + τu ). Now, combining Equations (30) and (33), and using our assumption that kek k2 ≤ αkθ k − θ ∗ k2 + β, we get:  2 p kθ k+1 − θ ∗ k22 ≤ kθ k − θ ∗ k2 (1 − 2ητℓ τu /(τℓ + τu )) + ηkek k2 p  kθ k+1 − θ ∗ k2 ≤  hp  i 1 − 2ητℓ τu /(τℓ + τu ) + ηα kθ k − θ ∗ k2 + ηβ.  1 − 2ητℓ τu /(τℓ + τu ) + ηα. By assumption, we choose ǫ < ǫ∗ such that α < τℓ . p κ = 1 − 2ητℓ τu /(τℓ + τu ) + ηα (34) p < 1 − 2ητℓ τu /(τℓ + τu ) + ητℓ . (35) p p Since 0 ≤ η ≤ 2/(τℓ + τu ), we get that 1 − 2ητℓ τu /(τℓ + τu ) ≤ 1 − η 2 τℓ τu . We have: p (36) κ < 1 − η 2 τℓ τu + ητℓ q (∵ τℓ ≤ τu ) (37) < 1 − η 2 τℓ2 + ητℓ  Let κ =  (38)  < 1.  28  Therefore, we have that, kθ k+1 − θ ∗ k2 ≤ κkθ k − θ ∗ k2 + ηβ.  for some κ < 1. Solving the induction,we get:  kθ k − θ ∗ k2 ≤ κk kθ 0 − θ ∗ k2 +  B  1 ηβ. 1−κ  Proof of Theorem 4  To prove our result on Robust Generalized Linear Models, we first study the distribution of gradients of the corresponding risk function. Lemma 4. Consider the model in Equation (12), then there exist universal constants C1 , C2 > 0 such that p p  C4 LΦ,4 + LΦ,2 kCov(∇L(θ)k2 ≤C1 k∆k22 kΣk2   q p p 3 + C2 kΣk2 BΦ,2 + BΦ,4 + c(σ) 3MΦ,2,2 + c(σ) MΦ,4,1 Bounded fourth moments E  h  (∇L(θ) − E[∇L(θ)])T v  4 i  ≤ C2 (Var[∇L(θ)T v])2 .  Proof. The gradient ∇L(θ) and it’s expectation can be written as: ∇L(θ) = −y.x + u(hx, θi).x   E[∇L(θ)] = E[x u(xT θ) − u(xT θ ∗ ) ],  where u(t) = Φ′ (t).  kE[∇L(θ)]k2 = sup y T E[∇L(θ)] y∈Sp−1   ≤ sup E[(y T x) u(xT θ) − u(xT θ ∗ ) ] y∈Sp−1  ≤ sup  y∈Sp−1  q 1 2  ≤ C1 kΣk2  E[(y T x)2 ]  q  q  2  E[(u(xT θ) − u(xT θ ∗ )) ]  LΦ,2 k∆k22 + BΦ,2  where the last line follows from our assumption of smoothness. Now, to bound the maximum eigenvalue of the Cov(∇L(θ)),    kCov(∇L(θ))k2 = sup z T E ∇L(θ)∇L(θ)T − E[∇L(θ)]E[∇L(θ)]T z z∈Sp−1     ≤ sup z T E ∇L(θ)∇L(θ)T z + sup z T E[∇L(θ)]E[∇L(θ)]T z z∈Sp−1 z∈Sp−1 i  h  2 z + kE[∇L(θ)]k22 ≤ sup z T E xxT u(xT θ) − y) p−1 z∈S h  2  i z + kE[∇L(θ)]k22 ≤ sup E z T xxT u(xT θ) − y z∈Sp−1  ≤ sup  z∈Sp−1  q  r h i E (u(xT θ) − y)4 ] + kE[∇L(θ)]k22  E [(z T x)4 ]  29  To bound E  h  u(xT θ) − y  4 i  , we make use of the Cr inequality.  Cr inequality. If X and Y are random variables such that E|X|r < ∞ and E|Y |4 < ∞ where r ≥ 1 then: E|X + Y |r ≤ 2r−1 (E|X|r + E|Y |r ) Using the Cr inequality, we have that h  h h 4 i 4 i 4 i + E u(xT θ ∗ ) − y ≤ 8 E u(xT θ) − u(xT θ ∗ ) E u(xT θ) − y  ≤ C LΦ,4 k∆k42 + BΦ,4 + c(σ)3 MΦ,4,1 + 3c(σ)2 MΦ,2,2  where the last line follows from our assumption that Pθ∗ (y|x) is in the exponential family, hence, the cumulants are higher order derivatives of the log-normalization function.   q √ p p p p 2 3 LΦ,4 k∆k2 + BΦ,4 + c(σ) 3MΦ,2,2 + c(σ) MΦ,4,1 + kE[∇L(θ)]k22 kCov(∇L(θ))k2 ≤ C C4 kΣk2   q √ p p p p  2 3 ≤ C C4 kΣk2 LΦ,4 k∆k2 + BΦ,4 + c(σ) 3MΦ,2,2 + c(σ) MΦ,4,1 + C12 kΣk2 LΦ,2 k∆k22 + BΦ,2   q p p  p p ≤ Ck∆k22 kΣk2 C4 LΦ,4 + LΦ,2 + C6 kΣk2 BΦ,2 + BΦ,4 + c(σ) 3MΦ,2,2 + c(σ)3 MΦ,4,1 Bounded Fourth Moment. To show that the fourth moment of the gradient distribution is bounded, we have h h 4 i 4 i ≤ E (∇L(θ) − E[∇L(θ)])T v E (∇L(θ) − E[∇L(θ])T v   ≤ 8 E[|∇L(θ])T v|4 ] + E[|E[∇L(θ)]T v|4 ] . {z } | {z } | A  Control of A.  B  E[|∇L(θ])T v|4 ] = E[(xT v)4 (u(xT θ) − y)4 ] q q T 8 ≤ E[(x v) ] E[(u(xT θ) − y)8 ] q p 2 ≤ C8 kΣk2 E[(u(xT θ) − u(xT θ ∗ ))8 ] + E[(u(xT θ ∗ ) − y)8 ] v u 8 X p u 2t 8 gt,k MΦ,t,k ≤ C8 kΣk2 LΦ,8 k∆k2 + BΦ,8 + t,k=2  ≤  √  v u 8 uX p p 2 4 CkΣk2 LΦ,8 k∆k2 + BΦ,8 + t gt,k MΦ,t,k t,k=2  where the last step follows from the fact that the 8th central moment can be written as a polynomial involving the lower cumulants, which in turn are the derivatives of the lognormalization function. Control of B.  2 E[|E[∇L(θ)]T v|4 ] ≤ kE[∇L(θ)k42 ≤ C1 kΣk22 L2Φ,2 k∆k22 + BΦ,2 30  By assumption LΦ,k , BΦ,k , MΦ,t,k are all bounded for k, t ≤ 8, which implies that there exist constants c1 , c2 > 0 such that h 4 i ≤ c1 kΣk22 k∆k42 + c2 (39) E (∇L(θ) − E[∇L(θ])T v  Previously, we say that kCov∇L(θ)k2 ≤ c3 kΣk2 k∆k22 +c4 , for some universal constants c3 , c4 > 0, hence the gradient ∇L(θ) has bounded fourth moments. Having studied the distribution of the gradients, we use Lemma 1 to characterize the stability of Huber Gradient estimator. Using Lemma 1, we know that at any point θ, the Huber Gradient Estimator g(θ, δ/T ) satisfies that with probability 1 − δ/T ,   1 1p e kCov(∇L(θ))k 2 log p. n, p, δ) kg(θ, δ/T ) − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C2 ǫ 2 + γ(e 2  Substituting the upper bound on kCov(∇L(θ))k2 from Lemma 4, we get that there are universal constants C1 , C2 such that with probability at least 1 - δ/T  1 p 1 1 1 4 2 e log pkΣk22 [LΦ,4 (40) kg(θ) − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C1 ǫ 2 + γ(e + LΦ,2 ] k∆k2 n, p, δ) {z } | e α(e n,δ)    p 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 4 2 4 4 e + C2 ǫ 2 + γ(e n, p, δ) + BΦ,2 + c(σ) 2 MΦ,2,2 + c(σ) 4 MΦ,4,1 ] log pkΣk22 [BΦ,4 | {z } e β(e n,δ)  (41)  e < τℓ . Using Equation (40), we To ensure stability of gradient descent, we need that α(e n, δ) get that gradient descent is stable as long as the number of samples n is large enough such C1 τℓ e < that γ(e n, p, δ) , and the contamination level is such that 1 1 1 √ 4 +L 2 ] log pkΣk22 [LΦ,4 Φ,2  ǫ<  C2 τℓ 1 1 1 √ 4 +L 2 ] log pkΣk22 [LΦ,4 Φ,2  !2  e − γ(e n, p, δ)  for some constants C1 and C2 . Plugging the corre-  e into Theorem 1, we get back the result of Theorem 4. sponding ǫ and β(e n, δ)  C  Proof of Corollary 3  We begin by studying the distribution of the random variable xy = xxT θ ∗ + x.w. Lemma 5. Consider the model in Equation (11), with x ∼ N (0, Ip ) and w ∼ N (0, 1) then there exist universal constants C1 , C2 such that E[xy] = θ ∗ kCov(xy)k2 = 1 + 2kθ ∗ k22 h 4 i ≤ C2 (Var[(xy)T v])2 . Bounded fourth moments E (xy − E[xy])T v  Proof. Mean.  xy = xxT θ ∗ + x.w T ∗  E[xy] = E[xx θ + x.w] ∗  (42) (43) (44)  E[xy] = θ . 31  Covariance. Cov(xy) = E[(xxT − I)θ ∗ + x.w)((xxT − I)θ ∗ + x.w)T )] ∗ ∗T  Cov(xy) = E[(xxT − I)θ θ  (45)  (xxT − I)] + Ip .  (46)  Now, Z = (xxT − I)θ ∗ can be written as:    ∗  ∗ 2  2 θ1 (x1 − 1) + x1 x2 θ2∗ + . . . + x1 xp θp∗ θ1 (x1 − 1) x1 x2 ... x1 xp ∗ ∗ 2 ∗  ∗   x1 x2 x2 xp  (x22 − 1) . . .  θ2  x1 x2 θ1 + (x2 − 1)θ2 + . . . + x2 xp θp   T ∗ (xx −I)θ =  .   ..  =  .. .. .. .. ..   .    . . . . . ∗ 2 2 ∗ ∗ ∗ θp x1 xp x2 xp . . . (xp − 1) x1 xp θ1 + x2 xp θ2 + . . . + (xp − 1)θp  Then,   ... θ1∗ θp∗ 2θ1∗ 2 + θ2∗ 2 + . . . + θp∗ 2 θ1∗ θ2∗  θ1∗ 2 + 2θ2∗ 2 + . . . + θp∗ 2 . . . θ2∗ θp∗ θ1∗ θ2∗      T E ZZ =  . .. .. .. ..   . . . . 2 2 2 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ . . . θ1 + θ2 + . . . + 2θp θ2 θp θp θ1   Hence the covariance matrix can be written as:  Cov(xy) = Ip (1 + kθ ∗ k22 ) + θ ∗ θ ∗ T . Therefore kCov(xy)k2 = 1 + 2kθ ∗ k22 . Bounded Fourth Moment. E  h  (xy − E[xy])T v  4 i  ≤E  We start from the LHS h    (xy − E[xy])T v  4 i  (47) 4  = E ((xxT − I)θ ∗ + wx)T v i4 h = E (θ ∗T x)(xT v) − θ ∗T v + wv T x     4   T ∗T ∗T  ≤ 8 8 E (θ x)(x v) + E θ v | {z } | {z A  B  (48) (49)     + E w(xT v) 4 .  | {z }  } 4  (50)  C  The last line follows from two applications of the following inequality:  Cr inequality. If X and Y are random variables such that E|X|r < ∞ and E|Y |4 < ∞ where r ≥ 1 then: E|X + Y |r ≤ 2r−1 (E|X|r + E|Y |r ) . Now to control each term on: • Control of A. Using Cauchy Schwartz, and normality of 1D projections of normal distribution q q T 8 ∗ A ≤ E[|θ x| ] E[|xT v|8 ] (51) - kθ ∗ k42 .  32  (52)  • Control of B, B ≤ kθ ∗ k42 . • Control of C, C = O(1), using independence of w and normality of 1D projections of normal distribution. h 4 i Therefore the E (xy − E[xy])T v - c + kθ ∗ k42 . For the RHS:  Var((xy)T v)2 = (v T Cov(xy)v)2 ≤ kCov(xy)k22 .  We saw that the kCov(xy)k2 - c + kθ ∗ k22 , so both the LHS and RHS scale with kθ ∗ k42 . Hence, xy has bounded fourth moments. Now that we’ve established that xy has bounded fourth moments implies that we can use [29] as a mean estimation oracle. Using Theorem 1.3 [29], we know that the oracle of [29] outputs an estimate θb of E[xy] such that with probability at least 1 − 1/pC1 , we have:   1 p kθb − θ ∗ k2 ≤ C2 kCov(xy)k2 log p ǫ 2 + γ(n, p, δ, ǫ) Using Lemma 5 to subsitute kCov(xy)k2 ≤ 1+2kθ ∗ k22 ), we recover the statement of Corollary 3.  D  Proof of Theorem 6  To prove our result on Robust Exponential Family, we first study the distribution of gradients of the corresponding risk function. Lemma 6. Consider the model in Equation (15), then there exists a universal constant C1 such that E[∇L(θ)] = ∇A(θ) − ∇A(θ ∗ ) 2  ∗  kCov[∇L(θ)]k2 = k∇ A(θ )k2 h 4 i ≤ C1 (Var[∇L(θ)T v])2 . Bounded fourth moments E (∇L(θ) − E[∇L(θ)])T v  (53) (54) (55)  Proof. By Fisher Consistency of the negative log-likelihood, we know that Eθ∗ [∇L(θ ∗ )] = 0  (56)  =⇒ ∇A(θ ) − Eθ∗ [φ(z)] = 0  (57)  ∗  ∗  =⇒ ∇A(θ ) = Eθ∗ [φ(z)].  (58)  For the mean, ∇L(θ) = ∇A(θ) − φ(z)  (59)  E[∇L(θ)] = ∇A(θ) − Eθ∗ [φ(z)] ∗  E[∇L(θ)] = ∇A(θ) − ∇A(θ ).  Now, for the covariance:  T i ∇L(θ) − Eθ∗ [∇L(θ)] ∇L(θ) − Eθ∗ [∇(L(θ)] i h T ∗ ∗ ∗ = Eθ (∇A(θ ) − φ(z)) (∇A(θ ) − φ(z))   = Covθ∗ ∇L(θ ∗ ) = ∇2 A(θ ∗ ).  Covθ∗ [∇L(θ)] = Eθ∗  h  33  (60) (61)  Bounded moments follows from our assumption that the sufficient statistics have bounded 4th moments. Having studied the distribution of the gradients, we use Lemma 1 to characterize the stability of Huber Gradient estimator. Using Lemma 1, we know that at any point θ, the Huber Gradient Estimator g(θ, δ/T ) satisfies that with probability 1 − δ/T ,   1 1p e kCov(∇L(θ))k 2 log p. n, p, δ) kg(θ, δ/T ) − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C2 ǫ 2 + γ(e 2  Substituting the upper bound on kCov(∇L(θ))k2 from Lemma 6, we get that there are universal constants C1 , C2 such that  1 p √ e kg(θ) − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C1 ǫ 2 + γ(e n, p, δ) log p τu . | {z } e β(e n,δ)  e = 0 < τℓ by assumption. Therefore we just have that ǫ < In this case we have that α(e n, δ) e into Theorem 1, C1 for some universal constant C1 . Plugging the corresponding ǫ and β(e n, δ) we get back the result of Corollary 6.  E  Proof of Corollary 7  Using the contraction property of projections, we know that     kPΘ (∇A)−1 µ b − θ ∗ k2 = kPΘ (∇A)−1 µ b − PΘ [θ ∗ ] k2 ≤ k(∇A)−1 µ b − θ ∗ k2 . By Fisher Consistency of the negative log-likelihood, we know that ∇A(θ ∗ ) = Eθ∗ [φ(z)]. The true parameter θ ∗ can be obtained by inverting the ∇A operator whenever possible. k(∇A)−1 µ b − θ ∗ k2 = k(∇A)−1 µ b − (∇A)−1 Eθ∗ [φ(z)]k2 ∗  ∗  = k∇A µ b − ∇A Eθ∗ [φ(z)]k2 .  (62) (63)  where A∗ is the convex conjugate of A. We can use the following result to control the Lipschitz smoothness A∗ . Theorem 12. (Strong/Smooth Duality) Assume f (·) is closed and convex. Then f (·) is smooth with parameter M if and only if its convex conjugate f (·) is strongly convex with parameter 1 . m= M A proof of the above theorem can be found in [28]. Hence, we have that:   1 µ − Eθ∗ [φ(z)]k2 b − θ ∗ k2 ≤ kb kPΘ (∇A)−1 µ τℓ  (64)  By assumption, we have that the fourth moments of the sufficient statistics are bounded. We also know that Cov(φ(z) = ∇2 A(θ ∗ ) which implies that we can use [29] as our oracle. Using Lemma 1, we get that, there exists universal constants C1 , C2 such that with probability at least 1 − 1/pC1 ,  1  p kb µ − Eθ∗ [φ(z)]k2 ≤ C2 τu log p ǫ 2 + γ(n, p, δ, ǫ) .  Combining the above with Equation (64) recovers the result of Corollary 7. 34  F  Proof of Theorem 8  Before we present the proof of Theorem 8, we first study the distribution of gradients of the loss function. This will help us bound the error in the gradient estimator. Lemma 7. Consider the model in Equation (11). Suppose the covariates x ∈ Rp have bounded 4th -moments and the noise w has bounded 2th moments.. Then there exist universal constants C1 , C2 such that E[∇L(θ)] = Σ∆ kCov(∇L(θ)k2 ≤ σ 2 kΣk2 + C1 k∆k22 kΣk22 , where ∆ = θ − θ ∗ and E[xxT ] = Σ. Proof. We start by deriving the results for E[∇L(θ)]. 1 1 L(θ) = (y − xT θ)2 = (xT (∆) − w)2 2 2 ∇L(θ) = xxT ∆ − x.w  (65) (66) (67)  E[∇L(θ)] = Σ∆.  Next, we bound the operator norm of the covariance of the gradients ∇L(θ) at any point θ. Covariance. Cov(∇L(θ)) = E[(xxT − Σ)∆ − x.w)((xxT − Σ)∆ − x.w)T )] T  T  T  (68)  2  Cov(∇L(θ)) = E[(xx − Σ)∆∆ (xx − Σ)] + σ Σ.  (69)  Now, we want to bound kCov(∇L(θ))k2 = λmax (Cov(∇L(θ))).   λmax (Cov(∇L(θ))) ≤ σ 2 λmax (Σ) + λmax E[(xxT − Σ)∆∆T (xxT − Σ)] 2  ≤ σ λmax (Σ) + sup y y∈Sp−1  T  (70)   E[(xx − Σ)∆∆ (xx − Σ)] y T  T  T  (71)   ≤ σ 2 λmax (Σ) + sup y T E[(xxT − Σ)∆∆T (xxT − Σ)] y y∈Sp−1  ≤ σ 2 λmax (Σ) + k∆k22  ≤ σ 2 λmax (Σ) + k∆k22  sup  y,z∈Sp−1  sup  ≤ σ 2 λmax (Σ) + 2k∆k22 2  ≤ σ λmax (Σ) + ≤ σ 2 kΣk2 +    E (y T (xxT − Σ)z)2  y,z∈Sp−1  ≤ σ 2 λmax (Σ) + 2k∆k22  2k∆k22  sup y,z∈Sp−1  sup y,z∈Sp−1  sup  (72) (73)    E 2(y T x)2 (xT z)2 + 2(y T Σz)2  (74)     E (y T x)2 (xT z)2 + kΣk22     E (y T x)2 (xT z)2 + kΣk22  q  E [(y T x)4 ]  y,z∈Sp−1 2 2k∆k2 (kΣk22 + C4 kΣk22 ),  q  E [(z T x)4 ]  + kΣk22  (75) (76)   (77) (78)  where the second last step follows from Cauchy-Schwartz and the last step follows from our assumption of bounded 4th moments (see Equation (10)). 35  We now proceed to the proof of Theorem 8. From Lemma 2, we know that at any point e satisfies the following with θ, the gradient estimator described in Algorithm 3, g(θ; Dne , δ), probability at least 1 − δ, e − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C kg(θ; Dne , δ)  q  tr(Cov(∇L(θ))) log 1/δe . n e  We substitute the upper bound for kCov(∇L(θ))k2 from Lemma 7 in the above equation e − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C kg(θ; Dne , δ)  ≤ C  q  q  ≤ C1 |  tr(Cov(∇L(θ))) log 1/δe n e p(σ2 kΣk2 +2k∆k22 (kΣk22 +C4 kΣk22 )) log 1/δe n e  s  kΣk22 p log 1/δe kθ − θ ∗ k2 n e {z } e  α(e n,δ) s kΣk2 p log 1/δe . + C2 σ n e {z } | e β(e n,δ)  To complete the proof of this theorem, we use the results from Theorem 1. Note that the e < τl . This holds when gradient estimator satisfies the stability condition if α(e n, δ) n e>  C12 τu2 e p log 1/δ. τl2  e into Theorem 1 gives us Now suppose n e satisfies the above condition, then plugging β(e n, δ) the required result.  G  Proof of Theorem 9  To prove the Theorem we use the result from Lemma 4, where we derived the following expression for covariance of ∇L(θ) p p  kCov(∇L(θ)k2 ≤C1 k∆k22 kΣk2 C4 LΦ,4 + LΦ,2   q p p 3 + C2 kΣk2 BΦ,2 + BΦ,4 + c(σ) 3MΦ,2,2 + c(σ) MΦ,4,1 From Lemma 2, we know that at any point θ, the gradient estimator described in Algorithm 3, e satisfies the following with probability at least 1 − δ, g(θ; Dne , δ), e − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C kg(θ; Dne , δ) 36  q  tr(Cov(∇L(θ))) log 1/δe . n e  Substitute the upper bound for kCov(∇L(θ))k2 in the above equation, we get q log 1/δe e kg(θ; Dne , δ) − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C tr(Cov(∇L(θ))) n e s  √ p kΣk2 C4 LΦ,4 + LΦ,2 p log 1/δe kθ − θ ∗ k2 ≤ C1 n e {z } | e  + C2 |  α(e n,δ) v   u p u kΣk B + pB + c(σ)p3M 3 c(σ) MΦ,4,1 p log 1/δe Φ,2 2 Φ,4 Φ,2,2 + t  {z  n e  e β(e n,δ)  We now use the results from Theorem 1. The gradient estimator satisfies the stability condition e < τl . This holds when if α(e n, δ)  √ p C12 kΣk2 C4 LΦ,4 + LΦ,2 e n e> p log 1/δ. τl2  e into Theorem 1 gives us Now suppose n e satisfies the above condition, then plugging β(e n, δ) the required result.  H  Proof of Theorem 11  The proof proceeds along similar lines as the proof of Theorem 9. To prove the Theorem we utilize the result of Lemma 6, where we showed that kCov[∇L(θ)]k2 = k∇2 A(θ ∗ )k2 . Combining this result with Lemma 2 we get that with probability at least 1 − δ q log 1/δe e kg(θ; Dne , δ) − ∇R(θ)k2 ≤ C tr(Cov(∇L(θ))) n e s k∇2 A(θ ∗ )k2 p log 1/δe ≤ C . n e | {z } e β(e n,δ)  e = 0, the stability condition is always satisfied, as long as τl > 0. Substituting Since α(e n, δ) e into Theorem 1 gives us the required result. β(e n, δ)  I  Upper bound on Contamination Level  We provide a complementary result, which gives an upper bound for the contamination level ǫ based on the initialization point θ 0 , above which, Algorithm 1 would not work. The key idea is that the error incurred by any mean estimation oracle is lower bounded by the variance of the distribution, and that if the zero vector lies within that error ball, then any mean oracle can be forced to output 0 as the mean. For Algorithm 1, this implies that, in estimating the mean of the gradient, if the error is high, then one can force the mean to be 0 which forces the algorithm to converge. For the remainder of the section we consider the case of linear regression with x ∼ N (0, Ip ) in the asymptotic regime of n → ∞. 37  }  .  Lemma 8. Consider the model in equation(11) with x ∼ N (0, Ip ) and w ∼ N (0, 1), then 0 ∗ there exists a universal constant C1 such that if ǫ > C1 √ kθ −θ0 k2∗ 2 , then for every gradient 1+2kθ −θ k2  oracle, there exists a contamination distribution Q such that, Algorithm 1 will converge to θ 0 even when the number of samples n → ∞. Proof. Using Lemma 5, we know that for any point θ, ∇L(θ) = xxT ∆ − x.w  Eθ∗ [∇L(θ)] = (θ − θ ∗ ) = ∆  kCov(∇L(θ)k2 = 1 + 2k∆k22 ,  where ∆ = θ − θ ∗ . Let P∇L(θ) represent the distribution ∇Lθ. Similarly, let Pǫ,∇L(θ),Q represent the corresponding ǫ-contaminated distribution. Then, using Theorem 2.1 [10], we know that the minimax rate for estimating the mean of the distribution of gradients is given by:  µ − Eθ∗ [∇L(θ)]k22 ≥ Cǫ2 (1 + 2k∆k22 ) ≥ c. inf sup Pǫ,∇L(θ),Q kb µ b θ∈Rp ,Q  The above p statement says that at any point θ, any mean oracle Ψ will always incur an error of Ω( Cǫ2 (1 + 2k∆k22 )) in estimating the gradient Eθ∗ [∇L(θ)]. kΨ(θ) − Eθ∗ [∇L(θ)]k2 ≥ Cǫ  q  (1 + 2k∆k22 ) ∀ Ψ  Forp any oracle Ψ, there exists some adversarial contamination Q, such that whenever kEθ∗ [∇L(θ)]k2 < Cǫ (1 + 2k∆k22 ), then kΨ(θ)k2 = 0. Suppose that the contamination level ǫ is such that, ǫ>  1 kEθ∗ [∇L(θ 0 )]k2 p , C (1 + 2kθ 0 − θ ∗ k22 )  then for every oracle there exists a corresponding Q such that Algorithm 1 will remain stuck at θ 0 . Plugging Eθ∗ [∇L(θ 0 )] = θ 0 − θ ∗ , we recover the statement of the lemma. Chen et al. [10] provide a general minimax lower bound of Ω(ǫ) for ǫ-contamination√models in this setting. In contrast, using Algorithm 1 with [29] as oracle, we can only O( ǫ log p) close to the true parameter even when the contamination is small, which implies that our procedure is not minimax optimal. Our approach is nonetheless the only practical algorithm for robust estimation of general statistical models.  J  Details and Analysis of Algorithm 2  In this section we present a refined, non-asymptotic analysis of the algorithm from [29]. We begin by introducing some preliminaries. We subsequently analyze the algorithm in 1-dimension and finally turn our attention to the general algorithm. 38  J.1  Preliminaries  Unless otherwise stated, we assume throughout that the random variable X has bounded fourth moments, i.e. for every unit vector v,     2 E hX − µ, vi4 ≤ C4 E hX − µ, vi2 .  We summarize some useful results from [29], which bound the deviation of the conditional mean/covariance from the true mean/covariance.  Lemma 9. [Lemma 3.11 [29]] Let X be a univariate random variable with bounded fourth moments, and let A be any with event with probability P(A) = 1 − γ ≥ 21 . Then, p |E(X|A) − E(X)| ≤ σ 4 8C4 γ 3 .  Lemma 10. [Lemma 3.12 [29]] Let X be a univariate random variable with E[X] = µ, E (X − µ)2 = σ 2 and let E((X − µ)4 ) ≤ C4 σ 4 . Let A be any with event with probability P(A) = 1 − γ ≥ 12 . Then, p (1 − C4 γ)σ 2 ≤ E((X − µ)2 |A) ≤ (1 + 2γ)σ 2 .  Corollary 13. [Corollary 3.13 [29]] Let A be any event with probability P(A) = 1 − γ ≥ 21 , and let X be a random variable with bounded fourth moments. We denote Σ|A = E(XX T |A) − (E(X|A))(E(X|A))T to be the conditional covariance matrix. We have that, p p (1 − C4 γ − 8C4 γ 3 )Σ  Σ|A  (1 + 2γ)Σ.  For random variables with bounded fourth moments we can use Chebyshev’s inequality to obtain tail bounds.  Lemma 11. [Lemma 3.14 [29]] Let X have bounded fourth moments, then for every unit vector v we have that, P(|hX, vi − E[hX, vi]| ≥ t  p  [E [hX − µ, vi2 ]]) ≤  C4 . t4  Our proofs also use the matrix Bernstein inequality for rectangular matrices. As a preliminary, we consider a finite sequence {Zk } of independent, random matrices of size d1 ×d2 . We assume that each random matrix satisfies E(Zk ) = 0, and kZk kop ≤ R almost surely. We define: ( ) X X σ 2 := max k E(Zk ZkT )kop , k E(Zk ZkT )kop . k  k  With these preliminaries in place we use the following result from [41]. Lemma 12. For all t ≥ 0, P   X k  Zk op    ≥ t ≤ (d1 + d2 ) exp    −t2 /2 σ 2 + Rt/3    .  Equivalently, with probability at least 1 − δ, s     X d1 + d2 d1 + d2 2R log + . ≤ 2σ 2 log Zk δ 3 δ op k  39  We let I denote the set of all intervals in R. The following is a standard uniform convergence result. Lemma 13. Suppose X1 , . . . , Xn ∼ P, then with probability at least 1 − δ, r n 4 log(en) + 2 log(2/δ) 1X I(Xi ∈ I) ≤ 2 . sup P(I) − n n I∈I i=1  Algorithm 4 Huber Outlier Gradients Truncation function HuberOutlierGradientTruncation(Sample Gradients S, Corruption Level ǫ, Dimension p,δ) if p=1 then  r   |S| 1 Let [a, b] be smallest interval containing 1 − ǫ − C5 (1 − ǫ) fracδ |S| log  tion of points. Se ← S ∩ [a, b]. return Se else Let [S]i be the samples with the ith co-ordinates only, [S]i = {hx, ei i |x ∈ S} for i = 1 to p do a[i] = HuberGradientEstimator([S]i , ǫ, 1, δ/p). end for r Let B(r, a) be the ball of smallest radius centered at a containing (1 − ǫ −  Cp  p |S|  log    |S| pδ    (1 − ǫ) fraction of points in S.  Se ← S ∩ B(r, a). return Se end if end function  We now turn our attention to an analysis of Algorithm 2 for the 1-dimensional case.  J.2  The case when p = 1  Firstly, we analyze Algorithm 2 when p = 1. Lemma 14. Suppose that, Pθ∗ is a distribution on R1 with mean µ, variance σ 2 , and bounded fourth moments. There exist positive universal constants C1 , C2 , C8 > 0, such that given n samples from the distribution in (4), the algorithm with probability at least 1 − δ, returns an estimate µ b such that, !3 !1 r r r 4 2 1 log 3/δ log 3/δ log(3/δ) +t +t + C2 σ ǫ + kb µ − µk2 ≤ C1 C44 σ ǫ + 2n 2n n where t = C8  q  1 n  n δ  log 1 4    . which can be further simplified to,  kb µ − µk2 ≤ C1 C4 σ ǫ + C8  r  !3 !1 r r n 4  n  2 log(1/δ) 1 1 + C2 σ ǫ + C8 log log n δ n δ n 40  Proof. By an application of Hoeffding’s inequality we obtain that with probability at least 1 − δ/3, q the fraction of corrupted samples (i.e. samples from the distribution Q) is less than  ǫ + log(3/δ) 2n . We condition on this event through the remainder of this proof. We let η denote the fraction of corrupted samples. Further, we let SP be the samples from the true distribution. Let nP be the cardinality of this set, i.e. nP := |SP |. Let I1−η be the interval around µ containing 1 − η mass of Pθ∗ . Then, using Lemma 11, we have that: 1  length (I1−η ) ≤  C44 σ 1  η4  .  Using Lemma 13 we obtain that with probability at least 1 − δ/3 the number of samples from the distribution P that fall in the interval I1−η is at least 1 − η − t where t is upper bounded as: r 4 log(en) + 2 log(6/δ) . t≤2 n Now we let Se be the set of points in the smallest interval containing (1 − η − t)(1 − η) fraction of all the points. • Using VC theory, we know that for every interval I ⊂ R, there exists some universal constant C3 such that P (|(P (x ∈ I|x ∼ D) − P (x ∈ I|x ∈u SD ))| > t/2) ≤ n2D exp(−nD t2 /8)  (79)  This can be re-written as, that with probability at least (1−δ/3), there exists a universal constant C0 such that, r r n  n 1 1 D ≤ C5 log log sup |(P (x ∈ I|x ∼ D) − P (x ∈ I|x ∈u SD ))| ≤ C0 nD δ n δ I | {z } t  • Using Equation (79), we know that (1 − η − t) fraction of SD lie in I1−η . Let Se be the set of points in the smallest interval containing (1 − η − t)(1 − η) fraction of the points.  • We know that the length of minimum interval containing (1 − η − t)(1 − η) fraction of the points of S is less than length of smallest interval containing (1 − η − t) fraction of points of SD , which in turn is less than length of I1−η .  • Now, I1−η and minimum interval containing (1 − η − t) fraction of points of SD need to overlap. This is because, n is large enough such that t < 12 − η hence, the extreme points for such an interval can be atmost 2length (I1−η ) away. • Hence, the distance of all chosen noise-points from µ will be within the length (I1−η ). • Moreover, the interval of minimum length with (1−η −t)(1−η) fraction of S will contain at least 1 − 3η − t fraction of SD . e by controlling the sources of error. • Hence, we can bound the error of mean(S) 41  – All chosen noise points are within length (I1−η ), and there are atmost η of them, hence the maximum error can be ηlength (I1−η ). – Next, the mean of chosen good points will converge to the mean of the conditional distribution. i.e. points sampled from D but conditioned to lie in the minimum length interval. The variance of these random variables is upper bounded using Lemma 10. – To control the distance between the mean(E(X) and the conditional mean(E(X|A)), where A is the event that a sample x is in the chosen interval. We know that P (A) ≥ 1 − 3η − t, hence, using Lemma 3.11[29], we get that there exists a constant C13 such that, 1  3  |E[X] − E[X|A]| ≤ C13 C44 σ(η + t) 4 • Hence, with probability at least 1 − δ/3, the mean of Se will be within r 1 3 1 log(3/δ) 4 η × length (I1−η ) + C13 C4 σ(η + t) 4 + C6 σ(1 + 2η) 2 n • q Taking union-bound over all conditioning statements, and upper bounding, η with ǫ + log(3/δ) 2n , we recover the statement of the lemma.  J.3  The case when p > 1  To prove the case for p > 1, we use a series of lemmas. Lemma 15 proves that the outlier filtering constrains the points in a ball around the true mean. Lemma 17 controls the error in e Lemma 18 controls the mean and covariance the true distribution after outlier filtering (D). e the error for the mean of S when projected onto the bottom span of the covariance matrix ΣSe.  Lemma 15. Suppose that, Pθ∗ is a distribution on Rp with mean µ, covariance Σ, and bounded fourth moments. There exist positive universal constants C1 , C2 , C8 > 0, such that given n samples from the distribution in Equation (4), we can find a vector a ∈ Rp such that with probability at least 1 − δ, 1 4  ka − µk2 ≤C1 C4  + C2  !3  np  4 1 tr (Σ) ǫ + C8 log n δ !1 r r  np  2 p 1 log(p/δ) tr (Σ) log ǫ + C8 n δ n r  p  Proof. Pick n orthogonal directions v1 , v2 , . . . , vn , and use method for one-dimensions, and using union bound, we can recover the result. Next, we prove the case when p > 1. Firstly, we prove that after the outlier step, Lemma 16. After the outlier removal step, there exists universal constants C11 > 0 such that with probability at least 1 − δ, every remaining point x satisfies, kx − µk2 ≤ r1∗ + 2r2∗ 42  √  q 1p p 3 1 and r2∗ = C1 C44 pkΣk2 (η + t) 4 + C2 pkΣk2 (η + t) 2 log(1/δ) and n q q  log(1/δ) is the fraction of samples corrupted. t = C8 n1 log np δ . Here η ≤ ǫ + 2n 1  where  r1∗  = C10  C44  pkΣk2  1 η4  Proof. • Let Se be the set of points chosen after the outlier filtering. Let SeD be set of good points chosen after the outlier filtering. Let SeN be the set of bad points chosen after the outlier filtering. • Using VC theory we know that for every closed ball B(µ, r) = {x|kx − µk2 ≤ r}, there exists a constant C9 such that with probability at least 1 − δ s   n p log sup |P (x ∈ B|x ∼ D) − P (x ∈ B|x ∈u SD )| ≤ C9 n pδ B | {z } t2  1  • Let B ∗ = B(µ, r ∗ ) for r1∗ = C10  C44  1 (η) 4  p  pkΣk2 . Then, we claim that  P (x ∈ B ∗ |x ∼ D) ≥ 1 − η – To see this, suppose we have some x ∈ D. LetPz = x − µ. Let zi = z T vi for some orthogonal directions v1 , v2 , . . . , vp . Let Z 2 = zi2 = kzk22 . –    1 2    C pkΣk2 P Z 2 ≥ 4 1  = P (η) 2    Z4 ≥  C4 p2 kΣk22 (η)    ≤  (η)E(Z 4 ) C4 p2 kΣk22  – Now, E(Z 4 ) ≤ p2 maxi E(zi4 ) ≤ C4 p2 kΣk22 . Plugging this in the above, we have that P (x ∈ B ∗ |x ∼ D) ≥ 1 − η. • Hence, we have that P (x ∈ B ∗ |x ∈u SD ) ≥ 1 − η − t2 . • Using Lemma 15, we have that at least (1 − η − t2 ) fraction of good points are r1∗ + r2∗ away from a. Hence, we have that the minimum radius of the ball containing all the (1 − η − t2 )(1 − η) has a radius of atmost r1∗ + r2∗ , which when combined with the triangle inequality recovers the statement of lemma. e µe = As before, let Se be the set of points after outlier filtering. Let µSe = mean(S), SD mean(SeD ), µ e = mean(SeN ). SN  Lemma 17. Let SeD be the set of clean points remaining after the outlier filtering. Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have that r   1 p p 3p log(p/δ) 1 4 kµSeD − µk2 ≤ C1 C4 (η + t2 ) 4 kΣk2 1 + log(p/δ) + kΣk2 (1 + 2(η + t2 ) n n (r ∗ + 2r2∗ ) log(p/δ) + C15 1 n 43  and kΣSeD k2 ≤ β(n, δ)kΣk2 , where β(n, δ) =  !! √  r 3 3 p C4 p log(p/δ log(p/δ) + 1 + 2C(η + t2 ) + 1 + √ + C4 p(η + t) 2 + (η + t2 ) 2 η n n   Proof. We first prove the bounds on the mean shift. kµSeD − µk2 ≤ kµSeD − µDe k2 + kµDe − µk2 {z } | {z } | B  A  µ −µ  • Control of B. We use Lemma 9 on X = xT kµ De−µk2 for x ∼ D, and A be the event e D that x is not removed by the outlier filtering. 1  3  kµDe − µk2 ≤ C1 C44 (η + t2 ) 4  p  kΣk2  (80)  • Control of A. Using Lemma 10,we have that kΣDe k2 ≤ (1 + 2(η + t2 ))kΣk2 . Now, we use Bernstein’s inequality . Lemma 12 with R = C(r1∗ + 2r2∗ + B), we get that, with probability at least 1 − δ, r p p (r ∗ + 2r2∗ + B) 1 log(p/δ) + C15 1 log(p/δ) kµSeD − µDe k2 ≤ C14 kΣk2 (1 + 2(η + t2 ) n n (81) Next, we prove the bound for covariance matrix. kΣDe − Σk2 | {z }  kΣSeD k2 ≤ kΣSeD − ΣDe k2 +  +kΣk2  (82)  ≤2C(η+t2 )kΣk2 (By Corollary 13)) (x −µ )(x −µ )T −Σ  e D . From, To control kΣSeD −ΣDe k2 , we use Bernstein’s inequality, with Zk = k De kn De Lemma 16, we know that the points are constrained in a ball. Plugging this into Lemma 12, ! r log(p/δ log(p/δ) 2 kΣSeD − ΣDe k2 ≤ C(kΣk2 + R ) + n n    2 2 where R2 = C r1∗ + r2∗ + B 2 .  Plugging in the values, we get that,  kΣSeD − ΣDe k2 ≤ CkΣk2    ! √  r 3 3 p C4 p log(p/δ log(p/δ) 1 + √ + C4 p(η + t) 2 + (η + t2 ) 2 + η n n  Finally, we have that, !! √  r 3 3 log(p/δ log(p/δ) p C4 p + kΣSeD k2 ≤ kΣk2 1 + 2C(η + t2 ) + 1 + √ + C4 p(η + t) 2 + (η + t2 ) 2 η n n | {z }   β(n,δ)  44  Lemma 18. Let W be the bottom p/2 principal components of the covariance matrix after filtering ΣSe. Then there exists a universal constant C > 0 such that with probability at least 1 − δ, we have that   1 2 2 kηPW δµ k2 ≤ Cη β(n, δ) + γ(n, δ)C4 )kΣk2 , where δµ = µSeN − µSeD , PW is the projection matrix on the bottom p/2-span of ΣSe, β(n, δ)  1  is as defined in Lemma 17 and γ(n, δ) = η 2 + (η + t)5/2 + η(η + t) log(1/δ) n  Proof. We have  ΣSe = (1 − η)ΣSeD + ηΣSeN + (η − η 2 )δµ δµT {z } | {z } | E  (83)  F  (84)  By Weyl’s inequality we have that, λp/2 (ΣSe) ≤ λ1 (E) + λp/2 (F ) • Control of λp/2 (F ). tr (F ) p/2 ((r ∗ )2 + (r2∗ )2 ) + B 2 ≤ C15 η 1 p/2   1 1 log(1/δ) 5/2 2 ≤ C16 C4 kΣk2 η 2 + (η + t) + η(η + t) n | {z }  λp/2 (F ) ≤  γ(n,δ)  where t = C8  q  1 n  log  • Control of λ1 (E).  np  δ .  λ1 (E) ≤ (1 − η)βkΣk2 Hence, we have that: λp/2 (ΣSe) ≤ (1 − η)βkΣk2 + C16 γ  p  C4 kΣk2  Using that W is the space spanned by the bottom p/2 eigenvectors of ΣSe and PW is corresponding projection operator, we have that: h p i T PW ΣSePW  (1 − η)β + C16 γ C4 kΣk2 Ip Following some algebraic manipulation in [29], we get that,   1 2 2 kηPW δµ k2 ≤ η (β(n, δ) + γC4 )kΣk2  45  Having established all required results, we are now ready to prove Lemma 1. We restate the result for the sake of completeness. Theorem 14. Suppose that, Pθ∗ is a distribution on Rp with mean µ, covariance Σ and bounded fourth moments. There exist positive universal constant C > 0, such that given n samples from the distribution in Equation (4), the algorithm with probability at least 1 − δ, returns an estimate µ b such that,  !1  r 1 1 1 p 3 log p log(p log(p/δ)) 2  √ √ 2 4 2  4 kb µ − µk2 ≤ CkΣk2 (1 + log p) η + C4 (η + t2 ) + ηpC4 n where η = ǫ +  q  log(p) log(log p/δ) 2n  and t2 =  q  p log(p) log(n/(pδ)) . n  Proof. We divide n samples into ⌊log(p)⌋ different sets. We choose the first set and keep that as our active set of samples. We run our outlier filtering on this set, and let the remaining samples after the outlier filtering be SeD . By orthogonality of subspaces spanned by eigenvectors, coupled with triangle inequality and contraction of projection operators, we have that µV − PV µk22 kb µ − µk22 ≤ 2kPW (b µ − µSeD )k22 + 2kPW (µSeD − µ)k22 + kb µV − PV µk22 kb µ − µk22 ≤ 2kPW (b µ − µSeD )k22 + 2k(µSeD − µ)k22 + kb bV is the mean vector where V is the span of the top p/2 principal components of ΣSe and where µ of returned by the running the algorithm on the reduced dimensions dim(V ) = p/2. From Lemma 18, both β(n, δ) and γ(n, δ) are monotonically increasing in the dimension; moreover the upper bound in Lemma 17 is also monotonically increasing in the dimension p, hence, the error at each step of the algorithm can be upper bounded by error incurred when running on dimension p, with n/ log(p) samples, and probability of δ/ log p. Hence, the overall error for the recursive algorithm can be upper bounded as,   kb µ − µk22 ≤ 2kPW (b µ − µSeD )k22 + 2kµSeD − µk22 (1 + log p) Combining Lemma 17 and Lemma 18 which are instantiated for n/ log p samples and probability δ/ log p, we get,  !1  r 2 1p 1 1 3 log p log(p log(p/δ)) √ √  kb µ − µk2 ≤ CkΣk22 log p  η + C44 (η + t2 ) 4 + ηpC42 n  46

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
