Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_1654

Abstract:
First-spike based visual categorization using reward-modulated STDP Milad Mozafari1,2 , Saeed Reza Kheradpisheh1,2 , Timothée Masquelier3 , Abbas Nowzari-Dalini1 , and Mohammad Ganjtabesh1,2,∗  arXiv:1705.09132v2 [q-bio.NC] 2 Jan 2018  1  Department of Computer Science, School of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran 2  School of Biological Sciences, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM) , Tehran, Iran 3  CerCo UMR 5549, CNRS Université Toulouse 3, France  Abstract  80, and NORB), this reward modulated STDP (RSTDP) approach extracted particularly discriminative visual features, whereas classic unsupervised STDP extracts any feature that consistently repeats. As a result, R-STDP outperformed STDP on these datasets. Furthermore, R-STDP is suitable for online learning, and can adapt to drastic changes such as label permutations. Finally, it is worth mentioning that both feature extraction and classification were done with spikes, using at most one spike per neuron. Thus the network is hardware friendly and energy efficient.  Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently regained popularity, with major achievements such as beating the European game of Go champion. Here, for the first time, we show that RL can be used efficiently to train a spiking neural network (SNN) to perform object recognition in natural images without using an external classifier. We used a feedforward convolutional SNN and a temporal coding scheme where the most strongly activated neurons fire first, while less activated ones fire later, or not at all. In the highest layers, each neuron was assigned to an object category, and it was assumed that the stimulus category was the category of the first neuron to fire. If this assumption was correct, the neuron was rewarded, i.e. spiketiming-dependent plasticity (STDP) was applied, which reinforced the neuron’s selectivity. Otherwise, anti-STDP was applied, which encouraged the neuron to learn something else. As demonstrated on various image datasets (Caltech, ETH∗  Keywords: Spiking Neural Networks, Reinforcement Learning, Reward-Modulated STDP, Visual Object Recognition, Temporal Coding, FirstSpike Based Categorization.  1  Introduction  Neurons in the brain are connected by synapses that can be strengthened or weakened over time. The neural mechanisms behind long-term synaptic plasticity, which is crucial for learning, have been under investigation for many years. Spiketiming-dependent plasticity (STDP) is an unsupervised form of synaptic plasticity, observed in different brain areas [1, 2, 3, 4], in particular in the visual cortex [5, 6, 7]. STDP works by consid-  Corresponding author. Email addresses: milad.mozafari@ut.ac.ir (MM), kheradpisheh@ut.ac.ir (SRK), timothee.masquelier@cnrs.fr (TM), nowzari@ut.ac.ir (AND), mgtabesh@ut.ac.ir (MG).  1  ering the time difference between pre- and postsynaptic spikes. According to this rule, if the presynaptic neuron fires earlier (later) than the postsynaptic one, the synapse is strengthened (weakened). Studies have shown that STDP results in coincidence detectors, by which a neuron gets selective to a frequent input spike pattern leading to an action potential whenever the pattern is presented [8, 9, 10, 11]. STDP works well in finding statistically frequent features, however, as any unsupervised learning algorithm, it faces with difficulties in detecting rare but diagnostic features for important functionalities such as decision-making.  pute the value of the reward. Also, Florian [33] showed that R-STDP is able to solve the XOR task by either rate or temporal input coding and learning a target firing rate. A year later, Legenstein et al. [34] investigated conditions, under which R-STDP achieves a desired learning effect. They demonstrated the advantages of R-STDP by theoretical analysis, as well as practical applications to biofeedbacks and a two-class isolated spoken digit recognition task. Vasilaki et al. [35] examined the idea of R-STDP on problems with continuous space. They showed that their model is able to solve the Morris water maze quite fast, while the standard policy gradient rule failed. Investigating capabilities of R-STDP continued by research from Frémaux et al. [36], in which conditions for a successful learning is theoretically discussed. They showed that a prediction of the expected reward is necessary for R-STDP to learn multiple tasks simultaneously. Studying the RL mechanism in the brain has gathered attentions in recent years, and researchers try to solve more practical tasks by reward-modulated synaptic plasticity [37, 38, 39].  Several studies suggest that the brain’s reward system plays a vital role in decision-making and forming behaviors. This is also known as reinforcement learning (RL), by which the learner is encouraged to repeat rewarding behaviors and avoid those leading to punishments [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. It is found that dopamine, as a neuromodulator, is one of the important chemical substances involved in the reward system [19], where its release is proportional to the expected future reward [17, 20, 21]. It is also shown that dopamine, as well as some Visual object recognition is a sophisticated task, other neuromodulators influences the synaptic plasat which humans are expert. This task requires ticity, such as changing the polarity [22] or adjustboth feature extraction, that is done by the brain’s ing the time window of STDP [23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. visual cortex, and decision-making on the cateOne of the well-studied ideas to model the role gory of the object, for which higher brain areas of the reward system is to modulate or even reverse are involved. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) the weight change determined by STDP, which is have been widely used in computational object called reward-modulated STDP (R-STDP) [28]. R- recognition models. In terms of network arSTDP stores the trace of synapses that are eligi- chitecture, there are several models with shalble for STDP and applies the modulated weight low [40, 41, 42, 43], deep [44, 45, 46], recurchanges at the time of receiving a modulatory sig- rent [47], fully connected [48], and convolutional nal; a reward or punishment (negative reward). structures [40, 46, 49, 50]. Some use rate-based In 2007, Izhikevich [29] proposed a R-STDP rule coding [51, 52, 53], while others use the tempoto solve the distal reward problem, where the re- ral coding [40, 43, 46, 48, 54]. Various kinds of ward is not immediately received. He solved the learning techniques are also applied to SNNs, from problem using a decaying eligibility trace, by which backpropagation [49, 55], tempotron [43, 56], and the recent activities are considered to be more im- other supervised techniques [52, 53, 57, 58], to unportant. He showed that his model can solve both supervised STDP and STDP-variants [42, 48, 59]. classical and instrumental conditionings [30, 31]. In Although STDP-enabled networks provide a more the same year, Farries and Fairhall [32] employed biological plausible means of visual feature extracR-STDP to train neurons for generating particu- tion, they need an external readout, e.g. support lar spike patterns. They measured the difference vector machines [46, 60], to classify input stimuli. between the output and target spike trains to com- Additionally, STDP tends to extract frequent fea2  tures which are not necessarily suitable for the desired task. In this research, we present a hierarchical SNN equipped with R-STDP to solve the visual object recognition in natural images, without using any external classifier. Instead, we put classspecific neurons that are reinforced to fire as early as possible if their target stimulus is presented to the network. Thus, the input stimuli are classified solely based on the first-spike latencies in a fast and biologically plausible way. R-STDP enables our network to find task-specific diagnostic features, therefore, decreases the computational cost of the final recognition system.  aging it to unlearn what it has learned before. Thus, reusing a computational resource that is no longer useful. Moreover, we evaluated the proposed network on object recognition in natural images, using three different benchmarks, that are Caltech face/motorbike (two classes), ETH-80 (eight classes), and NORB (five classes). The results of the experiments demonstrate the advantage of employing R-STDP over STDP in finding task-specific discriminative features. Our network reached the performances (recognition accuracies) of 98.9% on Caltech face/motorbike, 89.5% on ETH-80, and 88.4% on NORB datasets. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: A precise description of the proposed network is provided in Section 2. Then, in Section 3, the results of the experiments are presented. Finally, in Section 4, the proposed network is discussed from different points of view and the possible future works are highlighted.  Our network is based on Masquelier and Thorpes model [40] with four layers. The first layer of the network converts the input image into spike latencies based on the saliency of its oriented edges. This spike train goes under a local pooling operation in the second layer. The third layer of the network includes several grids of integrate-and-fire neurons that combine the received information of oriented edges and extract complex features. This is the only trainable layer in our network which employs R-STDP for synaptic plasticity. The signal (reward/punishment) for modulation of synaptic plasticity is provided by the fourth layer, in which the decision of the network is made. Our network only uses the earliest spike emitted by the neurons in the third layer to make a decision, without using any external classifier. If its decision is correct (incorrect) a global reward (punishment) signal is generated. Besides, in order to increase the computational efficiency, each cell in the network is allowed to spike only once per image. The motivation for at most one spike per neuron is not only computational efficiency, it is also biological realism [61, 62]. Decision-making without any classifiers with at most one spike per neuron, turns the proposed method into a well-suited candidate for the hardware implementation.  2  Materials and Methods  In this section, we first describe the structure of the proposed network and the functionality of each layer. We then explain R-STDP, by which the neurons achieve reinforced selectivity to a specific group of input stimuli. Finally, we give a detailed description on the classification strategy that is used to evaluate the network’s performance.  2.1  Overall Structure  Similar to Masquelier and Thorpes model [40], our network consists of two simple and two complex layers, that are alternately arranged in a feedforward manner (see Fig. 1). The first layer of the network (S1) is a simple layer whose cells detect oriented edges in the input image. These cells emit a spike with a latency that is inversely proportional to the saliency of the edge. After S1, there is a complex layer (C1), which introduces some degrees of position invariance by applying local pooling operation. A C1 neuron propagates the earliest spike in its input window.  We performed two toy experiments to illustrate the abilities of R-STDP. We showed that the network employing R-STDP finds informative features using fewer computational resources than STDP. We also showed that R-STDP can change the behavior of a neuron, if needed, by encour3  S1  The second simple layer (S2) is made of integrate-and-fire (IF) neurons. A neuron in this layer, that detects a complex feature, receives its inputs from C1 neurons and generates a spike once its membrane potential reaches the threshold. For synaptic plasticity, we use a learning rule based on three factors: (1) pre-synaptic spike time, (2) postsynaptic spike time, and (3) a reward/punishment signal. This kind of synaptic plasticity provides the ability to control the behavior of the neurons in terms of their selectivity to input patterns. The second complex layer (C2) of our network is the decision-making layer. Each neuron in this layer is assigned to a category and performs a global pooling operation over S2 neurons in a particular grid. Using a rank-order decoding scheme, the neuron which fires first, indicates the network’s decision about the input image. According to the decision made by the network, a reward/punishment signal is then generated, which drives in the synaptic plasticity of S2 neurons. Implementation of the network is mainly done with C# and the code is available upon request.  2.2  C1  S2  C2  Input Window  Figure 1: Overall structure of the proposed network with four retinotopically organized layers. The first layer (S1) extracts oriented edges from the input image by applying Gabor filters. A local max-pooling operation is applied by the cells in the subsequent layer (C1) to gain some degrees of position invariance. From here, spikes are propagated by the latencies that are inversely proportional to the maximum values. These spikes are the inputs for the IF neurons in the layer S2 that are equipped with the R-STDP learning rule. These neurons are encouraged/punished to learn/unlearn complex features. The activity of S2 neurons are used by C2 neurons for decision-making. These neurons are associated with class labels and the decision is made based on the neuron with the earliest spike.  Layer S1  The goal of this layer is to extract oriented edges from the gray scaled input image and turn them into spike latencies. To this end, the input image is convolved with Gabor filters of four different orientations. Thus, this layer includes four feature maps, each representing the saliency of edges in a particular preferred orientation. Let I be the grayscaled input image and G(θ) represent a Gabor filter (convolution kernel) with window size 5 × 5, wavelength 2.5, effective width 2, and orientation θ. Then, the lth feature map of layer S1 is generated using the following equations: S1l = |I ⊗ G(θl )|, (l − 1) × π π + , θl = 4 8  zontal edges are very common in natural images, a π offset is applied to relax this bias [40]. 8 For each of the feature maps (orientations), we put a 2D grid of the same size containing dummy neurons to propagate spikes. Using an intensityto-latency encoding scheme, the obtained feature maps are converted to the spike latencies that are inversely proportional to the saliency of edges. In other words, the more salient the edge, the earlier the corresponding spike is propagated.  (1) We implemented the proposed network in an event-based manner, where the spikes are sorted by their latencies in ascending order and propagated sequentially (i.e. the first spike is propagated in time step t = 1, the second one in t = 2, and so on).  where ⊗ is the convolution operator and l ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. In order to introduce invariance to image negative operation, the absolute value of the convolution is used. Also, since vertical and hori4  2.3  Layer C1  belonging to the same grid. This mechanism provides the ability of detecting a particular feature over the entire spatial positions. To be precise, let Ps2 (i) be the set of all pre-synaptic neurons corresponding to the ith neuron. Then, the membrane potential of this neuron at time step t is updated by the following equation:   X f vi (t) = vi (t − 1) + Wij × δ t − tc1 (j) , (3)  Our first complex layer is a local pooling layer over the spikes coming from layer S1. Here, there are four 2D neuronal grids corresponding to each of the orientations. Each C1 neuron performs a local pooling operation over a window of size ωc1 × ωc1 and stride rc1 (here we set rc1 = ωc1 − 1) on S1 neurons in a particular grid, after which, it emits a spike immediately after receiving its earliest input spike. This pooling operation decreases the redundancy of layer S1, and shrinks the number of required neurons, which consequently increases the computational efficiency. It also adds a local invariance to the position of oriented edges. let Pc1 (i) be the set of all pre-synaptic neurons of the ith neuron in layer C1. Then, the firing time of this neuron is computed as follows: tfc1 (i) = min {tfs1 (j)}, j∈Pc1 (i)  j∈Ps2 (i)  where Wij denotes the synaptic weight, δ is the Kronecker delta function, and tfc1 (j) is the firing time of the jth cell in layer C1. For each input image, a neuron in S2 fires if its membrane potential reaches the threshold T . Also, these neurons have no leakage and are allowed to fire at most once while an image is being presented. As the neurons fire, their synaptic weights the feature they are detecting - are being updated based on the order of pre- and post-synaptic spikes, as well as a reward/punishment signal (see section reward-modulated STDP). This signal is derived from the activity of the next layer, that indicates the network’s decision. Besides, initial weights of the synapses are randomly generated, with mean 0.8 and standard deviation 0.05. Note that choosing small or midrange values for mean results in inactive, thus untrained, neurons. Moreover, large values for variance increase the impact of network’s initial state. Accordingly, high mean value with small variance is a suitable choice [46].  (2)  where tfs1 (j) denote the firing time of the jth neuron in Pc1 (i). Additionally, two kinds of lateral inhibition mechanisms are employed, which help the network to propagate more salient information. If a neuron located at position (x, y) of the ith grid (orientation) fires, (1) the other neurons at the same position, but in other grids are prevented from firing, and (2) the latencies of the nearby neurons in the same grid are increased by a factor relative to their mutual Euclidean distance. In our experiments, inhibition is done for distances from 1 to 5 pixel(s) 2.5 Layer C2 (floating-point distances are truncated to integer This layer contains exactly n neurons, each is asvalues) with inhibition factors 15%, 12%, 10%, 7%, signed to one of the S2 neuronal grids. A C2 neuand 5%, respectively. ron only propagates the first spike that is received from its corresponding neuronal grid. To put it differently, let Pc2 (i) define the set of S2 neurons in 2.4 Layer S2 the ith neuronal grid (for i ∈ {1, 2, ..., n}). Then, This layer combines the incoming information the firing time of the ith C2 neuron is computed as about oriented edges and turns them into mean- follows: ingful complex features. Here, there are n 2D grids of IF neurons with the threshold T . Each neuron tfc2 (i) = min {tfs2 (j)}, (4) j∈Pc2 (i) receives its inputs from a ωs2 × ωs2 × 4 window of C1 neurons through plastic synapses. A weight where tfs2 (j) denote the firing time of the jth neuron sharing mechanism is also applied to the neurons in layer S2. 5  As mentioned before, the activity of C2 neurons indicates the decision of the network. To this end, we divide C2 neurons into several groups and assign each group to a particular category of input stimuli. Then, the network’s decision on the category of the input stimulus is assumed to be the one whose group propagates the earliest spike among other C2 groups. Assume that there are m distinct categories for the input stimuli, labeled from 1 to m, and n neuronal grids in layer S2. Accordingly, there are exactly n neurons in layer C2, that are divided into m groups. Let g : {1, 2, ..., n} 7→ {1, 2, ..., m} denote a function that returns the group’s index of a C2 neuron, and let tfc2 (i) denote the firing time of the ith neuron in layer C2. Then, the network’s decision D is made by F = arg min{tfc2 (i)|1 ≤ i ≤ n}, i  D = g (F) ,  To formulate our R-STDP learning rule, if a reward signal is received, then  ∆Wij =   −   ar ×Wij ×(1−Wij )  if tfc1 (j) − tfs2 (i) ≤ 0, if tfc1 (j) − tfs2 (i) > 0,  (6)  or the jth cell is silent,  and in case of receiving a punishment signal, we have  ∆Wij =     +  ap ×Wij ×(1−Wij )     a− ×W ×(1−W ) ij ij p  if tfc1 (j)−tfs2 (i) > 0, or the jth cell is silent, (7) if tfc1 (j) − tfs2 (i) ≤ 0,  where i and j refer to the post- and pre-synaptic cells, respectively, ∆Wij is the amount of weight change for the synapse connecting the two neu− + − rons, and a+ r , ar , ap , and ap scale the magnitude of weight change. Furthermore, to specify + the direction of weight change, we set a+ r , ap > 0 − Here, our learning rule does and a− r , ap < 0. not take into account the exact spike time difference and uses an infinite time window. According to this learning rule, the punishment signal reverses the polarity of STDP (a.k.a anti-STDP). In other words, it swaps long-term-depression (LTD) with long-term-potentiation (LTP), which is done to conduct the effect of aversion (avoid repeating a bad behavior), and a+ p is there to encourage the neuron to learn something else.  (5)  where F is the index of a C2 neuron which fires first. The network receives reward (punishment) if its decision matches (does not match) the correct category of the input stimulus. If none of the C2 neurons fire, no reward/punishment signal is generated, thus, no weight-change is applied. Moreover, if more than one neuron fire early (with the minimum spike time), the one with the minimum index (i) is selected.  2.7 2.6    a+  r ×Wij ×(1−Wij )    Overfitting Avoidance  Reward-Modulated STDP (R- In reinforcement learning problems, there is a chance of being trapped into local optima or overSTDP)  fitting to acquiring the maximum possible reward over the training examples. In order to help the network, exploring other possible solutions that are more general to cover both seen and unseen examples, we apply two additional mechanisms during the training phase. These techniques are only used for object recognition tasks.  We propose a reinforcement learning mechanism to update the pre-synaptic weights of S2 neurons. Here, the magnitude of weight change is modulated by a reward/punishment signal, which is received according to the correctness/incorrectness of the network’s decision. We also applied a one-winnertakes-all learning competition among the S2 neurons, by which the one with the earliest spike is the 2.7.1 Adaptive learning rate winner and the only one which updates its synaptic weights. Note that this neuron is the one determin- Since the initial weights of the neurons are randomly set, the number of misclassified samples ing the network’s decision. 6  Here, we employ the dropout technique [63], which causes a C2 neuron to be temporary turned off with the probability of pdrop . This technique gives rise to the overall involvement rate of the neurons, which in turn, not only increases the chance of finding more discriminative features, but also decreases the rate of blind firings (see Supplementary Materials: Dropout).  is relatively high at the beginning of the training phase (i.e. the performance is at the chance level). As training trials go on, the ratio of correctly classified samples to the misclassified ones increases. In the case of high rate of misclassification, the network receives more punishment signals, which rapidly weakens synaptic weights and generates dead or highly selective neurons that cover a small number of inputs. Similarly, when the rate of correct classification gets higher, the rate of reward acquisition increases as well. In this case, the network prefers to exclude misclassified samples by getting more and more selective to correct ones and remain silent for the others. In either cases, the overfitting happens due to the unbalanced impact of reward and punishment. To tackle this problem, we multiply an adjustment factor to the amount of weight modification, by which the impact of correct and incorrect training samples is balanced over the trials. Assume that the network sees all of the training samples on each training iteration and let Nhit and Nmiss denote the number of samples that are classified correctly and incorrectly in the last training iteration, respectively. If N is the number of all training samples, then, the weight changes for the current training trial are modified as follows:     Nmiss  ∆Wij  2.8  Classification  As mentioned before, the activity of the last layer, particularly the earliest spike in layer C2, is the only information that our network uses to make its final decision on the input stimuli. This way, we do not need external classifiers and increase the biological plausibility of the network at the same time. To setup the network for a classification task with m categories, we put n = k × m neuronal grids in layer S2, where k is the number of features associated to each category. Then, we assign each C2 neurons to a category by the association function g : {1, 2, ..., n} 7→ {1, 2, ..., m} defined as follows: g(i) = b(i − 1)/kc + 1.  if a reward is received,  (9)  Then, the network uses equation (5) to classify the input stimuli. During the training phase, each net∆Wij otherwise. work’s decision is compared to the label of stimulus Note that Nhit + Nmiss ≤ N , since there may be and a reward (punishment) signal is generated, if some samples for which none of the S2 neurons is the decision matches (mismatches) the label. active. Wij = Wij +  2.7.2    N  Nhit N    (8)  2.9  Dropout  In a reinforcement learning scenario, the goal of the learner is to maximize the expected value of reward acquisition. In our case, since the network only sees the training samples, it may find a few number of features that are sufficient to correctly classify almost all of the training samples. This issue appears to cause severe overfitting in face of complex problems and the network prefers to leave some of the neurons untrained. These neurons decrease the hit rate of the network over the testing samples, as they blindly fire for almost all of the stimuli.  Comparison of R-STDP and STDP  In object recognition tasks, we make a comparison between our model, SNN with R-STDP, and the one that uses STDP. To this end, we first train the network using STDP and let the network extract features in an unsupervised manner. Next, we compute three kinds of feature vectors of length n from layer S2: • The first-spike vector. This is a binary vector, in which all the values are zeros, except the one corresponding to the neuronal grid with earliest spike. 7  Stimulus 1 Stimulus 2  • The spike-count vector. This vector saves the total number of spikes emitted by neurons in each grid. • The potential vector. This vector contains the maximum membrane potential among the neurons in each grid, by ignoring the threshold.  (a) Feature 2 Synaptic Weights  Feature 2  (b)  (c)  Figure 2: Temporal discrimination task. (a) Two input stimuli including a temporally different sub-pattern. Spikes are propagated from the white squares with the order written on them. (b) Synaptic weights (features) that are learned by the neurons with STDP (left column) and R-STDP (right column). The higher the weight the lighter is the gray level. (c) Synaptic weights when we used STDP-enabled neurons with large receptive fields and high thresholds.  Results  the other neurons. Since the early parts are spatiotemporally the same among all of the input stimuli, there is no chance for the other neurons to fire and win the synaptic plasticity. Consequently, the overall activity of the neuronal group is the same for all of the input stimuli and classifies them into a single category. As we will see below (Fig. 2c), there are also some STDP-based solutions for this problem, however they are inefficient in using computational resources. For example, if we increase the size of receptive fields along with the thresholds, neurons gain the opportunity to receive the last spikes as well as the early ones. Another possible solution is to use many neurons that locally inhibit each other and drop the one-winner-takes-all constraint. This way, regarding the initial random weights, there is a chance for the neurons to learn other parts of the input stimuli. Here, we show that the R-STDP learning rule solves this issue in a more efficient way than STDP. For this purpose, we designed an experiment containing two 3 × 11 input stimuli. The inputs are spatially similar, which means that spikes are propagated from similar locations of both inputs. As illustrated in Fig. 2a, each input is a 2D grid of white and gray squares. By white (gray) squares we denote locations, from which a spike is (is not)  To evaluate the proposed network and learning strategy, we performed two types of experiments. First, we used a series of hand-made problems to show the superiority of R-STDP over STDP. Second, we assessed the proposed network on several object recognition benchmarks.  3.1  Feature 1 Synaptic Weights  After extracting feature vectors for both training and testing sets, K-nearest neighbors (KNN) and support vector machine (SVM) classifiers are used to evaluate the performance of the network. Moreover, the learning strategy and the STDP formula is the same as [40], and to make a fair comparison, we use the same values for parameters in both models. The only parameters that are explored for the STDP are the magnitudes of LTP and LTD.  3  R-STDP  Feature 1  STDP  R-STDP Increases Computational Efficiency  Using STDP, when a neuron is exposed to input spike patterns, it tends to find the earliest repetitive sub-pattern by which the neuron reaches its threshold and fires [64, 65, 8, 11]. This tendency to favor early input spikes can be troublesome in case of distinguishing spike patterns that have temporal differences in their late sections. Assume that there are several categories of input stimuli that possess the same spatial configuration (Fig. 2a). They also have identical early spikes. These patterns are repetitively presented to a group of IF neurons, for which the synaptic plasticity is governed by STDP and the onewinner-takes-all mechanism. If the neurons have low thresholds, one of them gets selective to the early common part of the input stimuli and inhibits 8  propagated. At the time of presenting any of these patterns to the network, spikes are propagated with a temporal order that is defined by the numbers written on the squares. According to this ordering, spikes with lower numbers are propagated earlier. Since the input stimuli are artificial spike patterns, there was no need to apply Gabor filters, thus, they were fed directly into the layer S2. There, we put two neuronal grids with parameters ωs2 = 3 and T = 3. Therefore, each grid contained 1 × 9 neurons to cover the entire input stim− + uli. We also set a+ r = 0.05, ar = −0.05, ap = 0.1, − and ap = −0.1. The goal of the task was that the first (second) C2 neuron fires earlier for the first (second) pattern. We examined both STDP and R-STDP learning rules to see if the network finds discriminative features or not. As shown in Fig. 2b, using STDP, the network extracted a non-discriminative feature, the shared one between both input stimuli. On the other side, the proposed reinforcement learning mechanism guided the neurons to extract features whose temporal order of appearance is the only thing leading to a successful pattern discrimination. We repeated this experiment for 100 times using different random initial weights. Results showed that our network succeeded in 98% of the times, while there were no chance for STDP to find the discriminative features. When we increased the threshold to 4 (requiring at least two sub-patterns) and the size of the receptive fields to 11 × 11 (covering the entire pattern), the network employing the STDP could also find discriminative features (see Fig. 2c) in 80% of the times.  3.2  with similar input stimuli and parameter values, except that we swapped the target input stimuli during the training iterations (see Task 1 and Task 2 in Fig. 3a). As shown in Fig. 3b, at the beginning of the simulation, the desired behavior was that the neurons belonging to the first grid respond to the first stimulus earlier than those in the second grid, and vice versa. After 200 iterations, when the convergence is fulfilled, we swapped the target stimuli. At this stage, since the neurons were exclusively sensitive to the previous target stimuli, they began to generate false alarms. Consequently, the network was receiving high rates of punishments for around 80 iterations (see iterations 200 to 280 in Fig 3b), which in turn swapped LTD and LTP (see Materials and Methods: Reward-modulated STDP). As the network received punishments, the previously weakened (strengthened) synapses got stronger (weaker). Therefore, the sensitivity diminished for a while, and the neurons regained the possibility of learning something new. After iteration 300, neurons found their new target stimulus and, once again, converged to the discriminative features (see the plots of synaptic weights in the top two rows in Fig. 3b). In summary, R-STDP enables the neurons to unlearn what they have learned so far. This ability results in neurons with flexible behavior (plastic neurons), that are able to learn rewarding behavior in changing environments. This ability also helps the neurons to forget and escape from the local optima in order to learn something that earns more reward. Applying STDP in such a scenario does not work at all, since there is no difference between Task 1 and Task 2 from an unsupervised point of view.  Plastic Neurons 3.3  As mentioned earlier, the brain reward system plays an important role in the emergence of a particular behavior. In this part of the paper, we demonstrate the R-STDP’s capability of readjusting neurons’ behavior in an online manner. We designed an experiment, in which the predefined desired behavior of the neurons is changed during the simulation. The experimental setup is very similar to the “Temporal Discrimination” task  Object Recognition  In this section, the performance of our network on categorization of natural images is evaluated. We begin with a description of the datasets that are used in our experiments. Then, we show how the network benefits from the reinforcement learning mechanism to extract features from natural images, followed by comparing R-STDP and STDP in object recognition tasks. Finally, we illustrate how 9  Task 1  Task 2  Target for the first neuronal grid  Target for the second neuronal grid  Swapping target stimuli  (a)  Feature 2 0  Synaptic weights  1  Feature 1  1  Reward Punishment  0.5  Convergence  0 Task switch  Task  Task 1  0  50  100  Task 2  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  500  Iterations  (b) Figure 3: Neurons with flexible behavior. (a) Target stimuli for each neuronal grid. In Task 2, the target stimuli of Task 1 are swapped. (b) Flexibility of the network in a changing environment. Plots on the top two rows represent changes of the synaptic weights. The plot on the bottom illustrates changes in the rate of receiving reward (green solid line), punishment (red dotted line), and the convergence of the synaptic P Wij (1−Wij ) weights (blue dashed line) over 500 iterations. Convergence is measured by 1 − , where the summation is over the 18 (3 × 3 + 3 × 3) 18 synaptic weights that are shared between S2 neurons. As this value gets closer to one, the synaptic weights have more binary-like values.  the dropout and adaptive learning techniques re- criminative features, both spatially and temporally. duce the chance of overfitting to the training sam- Here, we show that R-STDP encourages the neuples. rons to become selective to a particular category of natural images. To this end, we trained and examined the network on images from two categories of 3.3.1 Datasets face and motorbike from the Caltech dataset. We used three well-known object recognition In this experiment, we put 10 neuronal grids for benchmarks to evaluate the performance of the proeach category that were reinforced to win the firstposed network. The first and easiest one is Caltech spike competition in response to the images from face/motorbike which is mainly used for demontheir target categories. Therefore, the desired bestration purposes. The next two that are used havior of the network was that the neurons of the to evaluate the proposed network are ETH-80 and first 10 grids get selective to the face category, while small NORB. These datasets contain images of obthose in the other grids get selective to the motorjects from different view points which make the task bikes. harder (see supplementary Fig. S1). Fig. 4 illustrates the behavior of the network over the training iterations. Since the early it3.3.2 Reinforced Selectivity erations contained rapid changes, they are plotThe previous experiments showed that R-STDP ted wider. During early iterations, strong synapenables the network to find informative and dis- tic weights (see Materials and Methods: Layer S2) 10  0  50  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  (a)  (b) 0.005 0.004  | |  0.003 0.002  | |  0.001 0 1  50  100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  500  550  600  650  700  Iteration  (c) Figure 4: Training the network on Caltech face/motorbike dataset. (a) Evolution of four different features (out of 20) extracted by the network. The black and red plots correspond to the face and motorbike neurons, respectively. (b) Hit rate for neurons of each category. The gray (pink) filled curves depict the percentage of the times that the face (motorbike) neurons emit the earliest spike in response to their target stimulus. Notice that curves for motorbike neurons are mirrored vertically for the sake of better illustration, and hit rates over testing set are indicated by dot-patterns. (c) Trajectory of changes in learning rate with respect to the number of correct (Nhit ) and incorrect (Nmiss ) categorizations.  and 50% dropout probability resulted in an unstable network whose neurons responded to random input stimuli. This chaotic behavior can be easily spotted on early iterations in the middle plot (see Fig. 4b). As the network continues training iterations, reward/punishment signals made neurons more and more selective to their target categories. As shown in Fig. 4b, after 200 iterations, a quite robust selectivity appeared for the training sam-  ples, while on the testing samples, it is elongated for 300 more iterations. This quick convergence on training samples is due to the fact that the network is relatively fast in finding features that successfully discriminate seen samples (see Fig. 4a). These primary features need to converge more to be applicable on testing samples, which requires even more iterations because of the adaptive learning rates. Moreover, we do not let the learning rate  11  drops below 20% of the values of parameters a+ r , − + . This allows the network to con, and a , a a− p p r tinue convergence with a constant rate even if all of the training samples are correctly categorized (see Fig. 4c). We repeated the experiment 30 times with random initial weights and different training and testing samples and the performance achieved by the proposed network is 98.9 ± 0.4% (mean ± std). When we tried a same network structure with STDP, 97.2% was its best achievement (see Table 1). 3.3.3  Performance  We have shown how the proposed network successfully classified faces from motorbikes with high accuracy. Here, we examined the performance of the proposed network on the ETH-80 and NORB datasets that are more challenging (see Supplementary Materials: Datasets). The performance of the network is tested over the entire testing set after each training iteration, in which the network receives all of the training samples in random order. For ETH-80 dataset, we configured the network to extract 10 features per category, which resulted in 8 × 10 = 80 features in total. The receptive field of each neuron in layer S2 was set in a way that it covered the whole input image. Here, nine instances of each category were presented to the network as the training samples, and the remaining were employed in the test phase. After performing 250 training and testing iterations, the best testing performance of the network was reported. Again, we repeated this experiment 30 times, each time using a different training and testing set. As before, the network successfully extracted discriminative features (see Supplementary Fig. 2) and reached the performance of 89.5 ± 1.9% (mean ± std). We also applied STDP to a network with the same structure. To examine the STDP performance, we used support vector machines with linear kernel and KNNs (K was changed from 1 to 10). According to the results, the accuracy achieved by this network is 84.5%, when the maximum potentials were used as the feature vectors and the classifier was KNN. Considering that the proposed net-  work classifies input patterns solely based on the first-spike information, R-STDP definitely outperforms STDP. Table 1 provides the details of the comparison made between R-STDP and STDP. By looking at confusion matrices (see Supplementary Fig. 3a), we found that both R-STDP and STDP agree on the most confusing categories, that are cow, dog, and horse. However, thanks to the reinforcement learning, R-STDP not only decreased the confusion error, but also provided a more balanced error distribution. The same experiment was also performed on the NORB dataset. Again, we put 10 neuronal grids for each of the five categories, whose neurons are able to see the entire incoming stimuli. The proposed network with R-STDP reached the performance of 88.4 ± 0.5% (mean ± std) on testing samples, whereas STDP achieved 66% at most. By reviewing confusion matrices of both methods, we found that both networks encountered difficulties mostly in distinguishing four-leg animals from humans, as well as cars from trucks (see Supplementary Fig. 3b). As before, R-STDP resulted in a more balanced error distribution. Additionally, we compared the proposed network to convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Although the proposed network is not able to beat pre-trained deep CNNs such as VGG16 [66] (see Supplementary Materials: Comparison with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks), comparing it to a shallow CNN, with a similar network structure and same input would be a fair point. We repeated all of the object categorization experiments using a shallow CNN implemented with Keras neural networks API and Tensorflow as its backend. As shown in Table 1, the proposed network successfully outperformed the supervised CNN in both of the ETH-80 and NORB datasets. 3.3.4  Overfitting Problem  Overfitting is one of the most common issues in supervised or reinforcement learning scenarios. This problem got even worse by the emergence of deep learning algorithms. There are many studies focused on developing techniques that increase the generalization power of the learning algorithms.  12  Table 1: Comparison of the network’s performance when using R-STDP and STDP.  Dataset  R-STDP  Caltech (Face/Motorbike) ETH-80 NORB  First-Spike SVM KNN 96.4 96.4 72.9 69.8 62.7 58.6  98.9 89.5 88.4  One of the mechanism that has shown promising empirical results on deep neural networks is the dropout technique [63]. This technique temporary reduces the complexity of the network by suppressing the activity of a specific number of neurons. This reduction in neuronal resources forces the network to generalize more in order to reduce the prediction error. ETH-80  NORB  1  Adaptive learning rate Non-adaptive learning rate  0.95  Performance  0.9  0.85  0.8  0.75  0.7  0.65  STDP Spike-Count SVM KNN 96.9 93.4 74 70.4 61.7 55.3  Max-Potential SVM KNN 96.6 97.2 79.9 84.5 66 65.9  Shallow CNN 99.3 87.1 85.5  the impact of both mentioned mechanisms on categorization of test samples. It is clear that when the adaptive learning rate mechanism is applied, the network achieved higher performances (solid lines). It is also shown that the dropout probability must be chosen according to the complexity of the dataset as well as the network. Since the NORB dataset contains more complex samples than the ETH-80, it tends more to overfitting on training samples. As a consequence, it needs more dropout rate to overcome this issue. The magnitude of this tendency is even clearer when the steady learning rates are used. To put it differently, faster convergence rate along with the complexity of the samples induce more overfitting, which in turn needs more dropout rate.  0.6 0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  Dropout probability  0.8  0.9  0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  Dropout probability  Figure 5: Impact of the dropout and the adaptive learning rate techniques. The plot on the left (right) demonstrates the result for ETH-80 (NORB) dataset. In these plots the solid (dashed) lines illustrate the performance of the network with different dropout probabilities when the adaptive learning rate is on (off).  The proposed network is not an exception and has shown tendencies to overfit on the training samples through our examinations. Therefore, we adopted the dropout technique in our experiments. We also found that an steady learning rate does increase the chance of overfitting. Thus, we made use of dynamic learning rates with respect to the performance of the network (see Material and Methods: Overfitting Avoidance). To show the impact of the aforementioned mechanisms, we repeated the object recognition experiments with different dropout probabilities and steady learning rates. Fig. 5 simultaneously shows  4  Discussion  Mammals are fast and accurate at visual object recognition. Their visual cortex processes the incoming data in a hierarchical manner, through which the complexity of neuronal preference is gradually increased. This hierarchical processing provides a robust and invariant object recognition [67, 68, 69, 70, 71]. Computational modeling of the mammalian visual cortex has been under investigation for many years. Developing a biologically plausible model not only enables scientists to examine their hypotheses with low cost, but also provides a human-like vision for artificially intelligent machines [40, 72, 73, 74, 75]. Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) are the most successful works in this area [63, 76, 66, 77, 78]. The idea behind these networks is inspired by the hierarchical structure of the visual  13  cortex. Despite the promising results obtain by DCNNs, they are not biologically plausible because of using supervised learning rules. In addition, they employ rate-based encoding scheme, which is both energy and resource consuming. There is another group of studies trying to use spiking neurons along with the unsupervised STDP learning rule [40, 42, 46, 48, 59]. These models are more biologically plausible, but they cannot beat DCNNs in terms of accuracy. In theory, spiking neural networks (SNNs) have more computational power than DCNNs, however, they are harder to control because of the complex dynamics and high dimensional space of effective parameter. Furthermore, since most of them are trained in an unsupervised manner, the classification step is done by an external classifier or statistical methods. Here, we solved the object recognition task using a hierarchical SNN equipped with a reinforcement learning rule called R-STDP [28]. There are several studies showing that the brain uses RL to solve the problem of decision-making [15, 16, 17, 18]. Therefore, it is a suitable choice for training classspecific neurons that are able to decide on the class of the input image. Therefore, we put one step further developing a more biologically plausible model which is able to perform the visual categorization totally on its own. The proposed network functions in the temporal domain, where the information is encoded by spike times. The input image is first convolved with oriented Gabor filters and a spike train is generated based on a latency-to-intensity coding scheme. The resulting spikes are then propagated toward the feature extraction layer. Using R-STDP, the proposed network successfully found task-specific diagnostic features using neurons that were pre-assigned to the class labels. In other words, each neuron was assigned to a class a priori, where its desired behavior was to respond early for the instances belonging to the specified class. To decrease the computational cost even more, neurons were forced to fire at most once for an input image and the latency of their spike is considered as the measure of stimulus preference. Therefore, if a neuron fired earlier than the others, it would have received its preferred stimulus. This measure of  preference served as an indicator for the network’s decision. That is to say, when a neuron belonging to a particular class fired earlier, the network’s decision was considered to be that class. Through our experiments, we compared R-STDP to STDP from different aspects. We showed that RSTDP can save computational resources. This was clarified by a hand-designed discrimination task, in which the order of spikes was the only discriminative feature. R-STDP solved the problem using minimal number of neurons, synapses, and threshold, whereas STDP needed more neurons, more synapses, and higher thresholds. This drawback for STDP is due to the fact that it tends to find statistically frequent features [8, 9, 10, 11], which are not necessarily the diagnostic ones. As a consequence, one needs to use either more neurons or more synapses to ensure that the diagnostic features will be eventually found. On the other hand, since R-STDP informs the neurons about their outcomes, they can function better using minimal resources. After having demonstrated the advantages of RSTDP in finding diagnostic features, we investigated how well it can be combined with a hierarchical SNN for solving both visual feature extraction and object categorization in a biologically plausible manner. We evaluated the proposed network and a similar network which uses STDP, as well as a CNN with the same structure, on three datasets of natural images Caltech Face/Motorbike, ETH-80 and NORB. The last two contain images of objects from different viewpoints, which made the task harder. When we compared the performances obtained by the networks, we found that R-STDP strongly outperforms STDP and the CNN with same structure. An even more interesting point is that the proposed network achieved this superiority decisions solely based on the first-spikes, while in the case of the others, even the powerful classifiers like SVMs and error back-propagation were not of any help. To compare R-STDP with STDP, both networks used the same values for parameters except the learning rate (see Materials and Methods: Comparison of the R-STDP and STDP). However, one can use STDP with higher number of neurons and  14  tuned thresholds to compensate the blind unsupervised feature extraction and achieve better performances [60]. Again, we conclude that R-STDP helps the network to act more efficiently in consuming computational resources. Putting everything together, the proposed network has the following prominent features: • Robust object recognition in natural images. • Each neuron is allowed to spike only once per image. This results in a huge reduction of energy consumption. • Decision-making (classification) is performed using the first-spike latencies instead of powerful classifiers. Therefore, the biological plausibility of the model is increased. • Synaptic plasticity is governed by RL (the RSTDP rule), for which supporting biological evidence can be found [28], and which allows to extract highly diagnostic features. To date, we could not find any other works possessing the aforementioned features. To mention one of the closest attempts, Gardner et al. [79] tried to classify Poisson-distributed spike trains by a readout neuron equipped with R-STDP. Although their method is working, it cannot be applied on natural images as it is, because of their time-based encoding and target labeling. There is another related work by Huerta and Nowotny [80]. In this work, the authors designed a model of the RL mechanism which occurs in the mushroom body. They applied their RL mechanism on a pool of randomly connected neurons with 10 readout neurons to classify handwritten digits. Our work is different from theirs in several aspects. First, we used a hierarchical structure based on the mammalian visual cortex, while they used randomly connected neurons. Second, we used the R-STDP learning rule, whereas they employed a probabilistic approach for the synaptic plasticity. Third, the input of our network were natural images using intensity-to-latency encoding, while they used binary encoding with a threshold on artificial images.  Although the results of the proposed network were significantly better than the network employing STDP with external classifiers, they are still not competitive to the state-of-the-art deep learning approaches. One of the limitations to the current method is using only one trainable layer. Besides, the receptive field of the neurons in the last layer are set to be large enough to cover an informative portion of the image. As a result, the network cannot resist high rates of variations in the object, unless using more and more number of neurons. Extending the number of layers in the current network is one of the directions for future research. Going deeper seems to improve the performance by providing a gradual simple to complex feature extraction. However, deeper structure needs more parameter tuning, and a suitable multi-layer synaptic plasticity rule. Recent studies have also shown that combining deep networks and RL can lead to outstanding results [81, 82]. Another direction for the future research is to use the RL for learning semantic associations. For example, STDP is able to extract features for different kinds of animals in different viewpoints, but it is not able of relating all of them into the category of “animal”, because different animals have no reason to co-occur. Or, it can extract features for the frontal and profile face, but it cannot generate an association putting both in the general category of “face”. On the other hand, by a reinforcement signal and using learning rules like R-STDP, neurons are not only able to extract diagnostic features, but also learn relative connections between categories and create super-categories.  Acknowledgment The authors would like to thank Dr. Jean-Pierre Jaffrézou for proofreading this manuscript. This research received funding from the European Research Council under the European Union’s 7th Framework Program (FP/20072013)/ERC Grant Agreement no. 323711 (M4 project) and Iran National Science Foundation: INSF (No. 96005286).  15  References  [13] P. Dayan and B. W. Balleine, “Reward, motivation, and reinforcement learning,” Neuron, vol. 36, no. 2, [1] W. Gerstner, R. Kempter, J. L. van Hemmen, pp. 285–298, 2002. and H. Wagner, “A neuronal learning rule for submillisecond temporal coding,” Nature, vol. 383, no. [14] N. D. Daw and K. Doya, “The computational neurobiology of learning and reward,” Current Opinion in 6595, p. 76, 1996. Neurobiology, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 199–204, 2006. [2] H. Markram, J. Lübke, M. Frotscher, and B. Sakmann, “Regulation of synaptic efficacy by coincidence of post- [15] Y. Niv, “Reinforcement learning in the brain,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 139–154, synaptic APs and EPSPs,” Science, vol. 275, no. 5297, 2009. pp. 213–215, 1997. [3] G.-q. Bi and M.-m. Poo, “Synaptic modifications in [16] D. Lee, H. Seo, and M. W. Jung, “Neural basis of reinforcement learning and decision making,” Annual Recultured hippocampal neurons: dependence on spike view of Neuroscience, vol. 35, pp. 287–308, 2012. timing, synaptic strength, and postsynaptic cell type,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 18, no. 24, pp. 10 464– [17] E. E. Steinberg, R. Keiflin, J. R. Boivin, I. B. Witten, 10 472, 1998. K. Deisseroth, and P. H. Janak, “A causal link between prediction errors, dopamine neurons and learning,” Na[4] P. J. Sjöström, G. G. Turrigiano, and S. B. Nelson, ture Neuroscience, vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 966–973, 2013. “Rate, timing, and cooperativity jointly determine cor-  tical synaptic plasticity,” Neuron, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. [18] W. Schultz, “Neuronal reward and decision signals: 1149–1164, 2001. from theories to data,” Physiological Reviews, vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 853–951, 2015. [5] C. D. Meliza and Y. Dan, “Receptive-field modification in rat visual cortex induced by paired visual stimulation [19] ——, “Getting formal with dopamine and reward,” and single-cell spiking,” Neuron, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 183– Neuron, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 241–263, 2002. 189, 2006. [20] ——, “Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons,” [6] S. Huang, C. Rozas, M. Treviño, J. Contreras, S. Yang, Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 1–27, L. Song, T. Yoshioka, H.-K. Lee, and A. Kirkwood, 1998. “Associative Hebbian synaptic plasticity in primate visual cortex,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 34, no. 22, [21] P. W. Glimcher, “Understanding dopamine and reinforcement learning: the dopamine reward prediction erpp. 7575–7579, 2014. ror hypothesis,” Proceedings of the National Academy [7] Y. Guo, W. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Fu, W. Cheng, D. Song, of Sciences, vol. 108, no. Supplement 3, pp. 15 647– X. Qu, Z. Yang, and K. Zhao, “Timing-dependent LTP 15 654, 2011. and LTD in mouse primary visual cortex following different visual deprivation models,” PLoS One, vol. 12, [22] G. H. Seol, J. Ziburkus, S. Huang, L. Song, I. T. Kim, K. Takamiya, R. L. Huganir, H.-K. Lee, and A. Kirkno. 5, p. e0176603, 2017. wood, “Neuromodulators control the polarity of spike[8] T. Masquelier, R. Guyonneau, and S. J. Thorpe, “Spike timing-dependent synaptic plasticity,” Neuron, vol. 55, timing dependent plasticity finds the start of repeating no. 6, pp. 919–929, 2007. patterns in continuous spike trains,” PLoS one, vol. 3, [23] Q. Gu, “Neuromodulatory transmitter systems in the no. 1, p. e1377, 2008. cortex and their role in cortical plasticity,” Neuro[9] M. Gilson, T. Masquelier, and E. Hugues, “STDP alscience, vol. 111, no. 4, pp. 815–835, 2002. lows fast rate-modulated coding with poisson-like spike trains,” PLoS Computational Biology, vol. 7, no. 10, p. [24] J. N. Reynolds and J. R. Wickens, “Dopaminedependent plasticity of corticostriatal synapses,” Neue1002231, 2011. ral Networks, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 507–521, 2002. [10] R. Brette, “Computing with neural synchrony,” PLoS Computational Biology, vol. 8, no. 6, p. e1002561, 2012. [25] J.-C. Zhang, P.-M. Lau, and G.-Q. Bi, “Gain in sensitivity and loss in temporal contrast of STDP by [11] T. Masquelier, “Stdp allows close-to-optimal spadopaminergic modulation at hippocampal synapses,” tiotemporal spike pattern detection by single coinciProceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. dence detector neurons,” Neuroscience, 2017. 106, no. 31, pp. 13 028–13 033, 2009. [12] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Introduction to rein- [26] E. Marder, “Neuromodulation of neuronal circuits: forcement learning. MIT Press Cambridge, 1998, vol. back to the future,” Neuron, vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 135. 2012.  16  [27] F. Nadim and D. Bucher, “Neuromodulation of neu- [40] T. Masquelier and S. J. Thorpe, “Unsupervised learnrons and synapses,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology, ing of visual features through spike timing dependent vol. 29, pp. 48–56, 2014. plasticity,” PLoS Computational Biology, vol. 3, no. 2, p. e31, 2007. [28] N. Frémaux and W. Gerstner, “Neuromodulated spiketiming-dependent plasticity, and theory of three-factor [41] J. M. Brader, W. Senn, and S. Fusi, “Learning reallearning rules,” Frontiers in neural circuits, vol. 9, world stimuli in a neural network with spike-driven p. 85, 2016. synaptic dynamics,” Neural Computation, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 2881–2912, 2007. [29] E. M. Izhikevich, “Solving the distal reward problem through linkage of STDP and dopamine signaling,” [42] D. Querlioz, O. Bichler, P. Dollfus, and C. Gamrat, Cerebral Cortex, vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 2443–2452, 2007. “Immunity to device variations in a spiking neural network with memristive nanodevices,” IEEE Transac[30] I. P. Pavlov and G. V. Anrep, Conditioned reflexes. tions on Nanotechnology, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 288–295, Courier Corporation, 2003. 2013. [31] E. L. Thorndike, “Review of animal intelligence: An [43] Q. Yu, H. Tang, K. C. Tan, and H. Li, “Rapid feedexperimental study of the associative processes in aniforward computation by temporal encoding and learnmals.” Psychological Review, 1898. ing with spiking neurons,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, vol. 24, no. 10, pp. [32] M. A. Farries and A. L. Fairhall, “Reinforcement learn1539–1552, 2013. ing with modulated spike timing–dependent synaptic plasticity,” Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 98, no. 6, [44] J. H. Lee, T. Delbruck, and M. Pfeiffer, “Training deep pp. 3648–3665, 2007. spiking neural networks using backpropagation,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 10, 2016. [33] R. V. Florian, “Reinforcement learning through modulation of spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity,” [45] P. O’Connor and M. Welling, “Deep spiking networks,” Neural Computation, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1468–1502, arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.08323, 2016. 2007. [46] S. R. Kheradpisheh, M. Ganjtabesh, S. J. Thorpe, [34] R. Legenstein, D. Pecevski, and W. Maass, “A learning and T. Masquelier, “STDP-based spiking deep neutheory for reward-modulated spike-timing-dependent ral networks for object recognition,” arXiv preprint plasticity with application to biofeedback,” PLoS ComarXiv:1611.01421, 2016. putational Biology, vol. 4, no. 10, p. e1000180, 2008. [47] J. Thiele, P. U. Diehl, and M. Cook, “A wake-sleep al[35] E. Vasilaki, N. Frémaux, R. Urbanczik, W. Senn, and gorithm for recurrent, spiking neural networks,” arXiv W. Gerstner, “Spike-based reinforcement learning in preprint arXiv:1703.06290, 2017. continuous state and action space: when policy gradient methods fail,” PLoS Computational Biology, vol. 5, [48] P. U. Diehl and M. Cook, “Unsupervised learning of no. 12, p. e1000586, 2009. digit recognition using spike-timing-dependent plasticity,” Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, vol. 9, [36] N. Frémaux, H. Sprekeler, and W. Gerstner, p. 99, 2015. “Functional requirements for reward-modulated spiketiming-dependent plasticity,” Journal of Neuroscience, [49] Y. Cao, Y. Chen, and D. Khosla, “Spiking deep convol. 30, no. 40, pp. 13 326–13 337, 2010. volutional neural networks for energy-efficient object recognition,” International Journal of Computer Vi[37] J. Friedrich, R. Urbanczik, and W. Senn, “Spatiosion, vol. 113, no. 1, pp. 54–66, 2015. temporal credit assignment in neuronal population learning,” PLoS Computational Biology, vol. 7, no. 6, [50] A. Tavanaei and A. S. Maida, “Bio-inspired spikp. e1002092, 2011. ing convolutional neural network using layer-wise sparse coding and STDP learning,” arXiv preprint [38] N. Frémaux, H. Sprekeler, and W. Gerstner, “ReinarXiv:1611.03000, 2016. forcement learning using a continuous time actor-critic framework with spiking neurons,” PLoS Computational [51] P. Merolla, J. Arthur, F. Akopyan, N. Imam, Biology, vol. 9, no. 4, p. e1003024, 2013. R. Manohar, and D. S. Modha, “A digital neurosynaptic core using embedded crossbar memory with 45pJ [39] G. M. Hoerzer, R. Legenstein, and W. Maass, per spike in 45nm,” in Custom Integrated Circuits Con“Emergence of complex computational structures from ference (CICC), 2011 IEEE. IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–4. chaotic neural networks through reward-modulated Hebbian learning,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. [52] S. Hussain, S.-C. Liu, and A. Basu, “Improved margin 677–690, 2014. multi-class classification using dendritic neurons with  17  morphological learning,” in Circuits and Systems (IS- [64] S. Song, K. D. Miller, and L. F. Abbott, “CompetiCAS), 2014 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, tive Hebbian learning through spike-timing-dependent 2014, pp. 2640–2643. synaptic plasticity,” Nature Neuroscience, vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 919–926, 2000. [53] P. O’Connor, D. Neil, S.-C. Liu, T. Delbruck, and M. Pfeiffer, “Real-time classification and sensor fusion [65] R. Guyonneau, R. VanRullen, and S. J. Thorpe, “Neurons tune to the earliest spikes through STDP,” Neural with a spiking deep belief network,” Frontiers in NeuComputation, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 859–879, 2005. roscience, vol. 7, p. 178, 2013. [54] M. Beyeler, N. D. Dutt, and J. L. Krichmar, “Cate- [66] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition,” gorization and decision-making in a neurobiologically arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014. plausible spiking network using a STDP-like learning rule,” Neural Networks, vol. 48, pp. 109–124, 2013. [67] S. Thorpe J, D. Fize, and C. Marlot, “Speed of processing in the human visual system,” Nature, vol. 381, [55] P. U. Diehl, D. Neil, J. Binas, M. Cook, S.-C. Liu, no. 6582, p. 520, 1996. and M. Pfeiffer, “Fast-classifying, high-accuracy spiking deep networks through weight and threshold bal[68] C. P. Hung, G. Kreiman, T. Poggio, and J. J. DiCarlo, ancing,” in Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2015 Interna“Fast readout of object identity from macaque inferior tional Joint Conference on. IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–8. temporal cortex,” Science, vol. 310, no. 5749, pp. 863– 866, 2005. [56] B. Zhao, R. Ding, S. Chen, B. Linares-Barranco, and  [57]  [58]  [59]  [60]  [61]  [62]  H. Tang, “Feedforward categorization on AER motion [69] J. J. DiCarlo and D. D. Cox, “Untangling invariant obevents using cortex-like features in a spiking neural ject recognition,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 11, network,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and no. 8, pp. 333–341, 2007. Learning Systems, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1963–1978, 2015. [70] H. Liu, Y. Agam, J. R. Madsen, and G. Kreiman, F. Ponulak and A. Kasiński, “Supervised learning in “Timing, timing, timing: fast decoding of object inforspiking neural networks with ReSuMe: sequence learnmation from intracranial field potentials in human viing, classification, and spike shifting,” Neural Compusual cortex,” Neuron, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 281–290, 2009. tation, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 467–510, 2010. [71] J. J. DiCarlo, D. Zoccolan, and N. C. Rust, “How does E. Neftci, S. Das, B. Pedroni, K. Kreutz-Delgado, the brain solve visual object recognition?” Neuron, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Event-driven contrastive divol. 73, no. 3, pp. 415–434, 2012. vergence for spiking neuromorphic systems.” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 7, pp. 272–272, 2012. [72] K. Fukushima and S. Miyake, “Neocognitron: A selforganizing neural network model for a mechanism of A. Tavanaei, T. Masquelier, and A. S. Maida, “Acvisual pattern recognition,” in Competition and Coopquisition of visual features through probabilistic spikeeration in Neural Nets. Springer, 1982, pp. 267–285. timing-dependent plasticity,” in International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2016, [73] Y. LeCun and Y. Bengio, “Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time series,” The Handbook of pp. 307–314. Brain Theory and Neural Networks, vol. 3361, no. 10, S. R. Kheradpisheh, M. Ganjtabesh, and T. Masquep. 1995, 1995. lier, “Bio-inspired unsupervised learning of visual features leads to robust invariant object recognition,” [74] T. Serre, L. Wolf, S. Bileschi, M. Riesenhuber, and T. Poggio, “Robust object recognition with cortex-like Neurocomputing, vol. 205, pp. 382–392, 2016. mechanisms,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis S. J. Thorpe and M. Imbert, “Biological constraints on and Machine Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 3, 2007. connectionist modelling,” Connectionism in Perspec[75] H. Lee, R. Grosse, R. Ranganath, and A. Y. Ng, “Contive, pp. 63–92, 1989. volutional deep belief networks for scalable unsuperR. VanRullen and S. J. Thorpe, “Surfing a spike wave vised learning of hierarchical representations,” in Prodown the ventral stream,” Vision Research, vol. 42, ceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference no. 23, pp. 2593–2615, 2002. on Machine Learning. ACM, 2009, pp. 609–616.  [63] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Ima- [76] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and undergenet classification with deep convolutional neural netstanding convolutional networks,” in European Conferworks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing ence on Computer Vision. Springer, 2014, pp. 818– Systems, 2012, pp. 1097–1105. 833.  18  [77] S. R. Kheradpisheh, M. Ghodrati, M. Ganjtabesh, and T. Masquelier, “Humans and deep networks largely agree on which kinds of variation make object recognition harder,” Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, vol. 10, no. 74, p. 92, 2016. [78] ——, “Deep networks can resemble human feedforward vision in invariant object recognition,” Scientific Reports, vol. 6, p. 32672, 2016. [79] B. Gardner, I. Sporea, and A. Grüning, “Classifying spike patterns by reward-modulated STDP,” in International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks. Springer, 2014, pp. 749–756. [80] R. Huerta and T. Nowotny, “Fast and robust learning by reinforcement signals: explorations in the insect brain,” Neural Computation, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 2123– 2151, 2009. [81] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015. [82] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van Den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam, M. Lanctot et al., “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search,” Nature, vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, 2016.  19  “Supplementary Materials” First-spike based visual categorization using reward-modulated STDP Milad Mozafari1,2 , Saeed Reza Kheradpisheh1,2 , Timothée Masquelier3 , Abbas Nowzari-Dalini1 , and Mohammad Ganjtabesh1,2,∗ 1  Department of Computer Science, School of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran 2  School of Biological Sciences, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM) , Tehran, Iran 3  1  CerCo UMR 5549, CNRS Université Toulouse 3, France  Datasets  summarizes the parameters for each dataset. Caltech face/motorbike was chosen as the first benchmark to monitor the behavior of our network in a two-class object recognition task. Images in this task fall into two categories: faces and motorbikes (see Fig. S1a), that are provided by the California Institute of Technology1 . For each task, 435 images were randomly selected from each category, among which 200 images were chosen for training while the remaining were used for testing. For computational efficiency, images are scaled by the factor 0.5. The second benchmark that we chose for object recognition is ETH-80, provided by Max Planck Institute for Informatics2 . This dataset contains eight categories of objects, that are apple, car, cow, cup, dog, horse, pear, and tomato (see Fig. S1b). In each category, there are 10 different instances, for each, 41 images are captured from different view points. Hence, this benchmark is a good assessment of view-invariant object recognition ability. Here, we applied the leave-one-out cross-validation technique to evaluate the network’s performance. In each evaluation trial, nine instances of each ob-  In this section, a detailed description of the datasets that are used in our experiments is provided. In all of the benchmarks, images in the training set were used to train the network and extract discriminative features, while those in the testing set were used to evaluate the network. In other words, in each training iteration, the network receives all of the images in the training set and does per-image synaptic plasticity, after which it goes under evaluation by receiving images from the testing set. This way, we assessed the ability of the network to extract general features, that work for categorization of either the training (seen) or the testing (unseen) samples. For each dataset, an exhaustive search was performed to find suitable values for all of the parameters. We should add that the size of the input windows were chosen according to the average size of the target objects in each dataset. Table SI ∗  Corresponding author. Email addresses: milad.mozafari@ut.ac.ir (MM), kheradpisheh@ut.ac.ir (SRK), timothee.masquelier@cnrs.fr (TM), nowzari@ut.ac.ir (AND), mgtabesh@ut.ac.ir (MG).  1  http://www.vision.caltech.edu https://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/departments/ computer-vision-and-multimodal-computing 2  1  following sub-sampling procedure on both training and testing sets. This sub-sampling results in images of only one camera (left), one lighting condition (level 4), four elevations (odd values), and all of the 18 azimuths. Therefore, there are 3600 (50 × 4 × 18) images that are equally divided into two 1800-image sets: training and testing samples. (a)  2  Results  In this part of the supplementary materials, we present some complementary explanations and demonstrations on the results of the experiments.  2.1 (b)  2.1.1  Object Recognition Feature Extraction  Using R-STDP, the proposed network is able to extract discriminative features. This is of great importance for similar objects like apples and tomatoes. Fig. S2 clearly shows how the network distinguishes apples from tomatoes by including tomato’s head in the corresponding feature. (c) Figure S1: Sample images from the three datasets that are used in this work. (a) Caltech face/motorbike, (b) ETH-80, and (c) NORB dataset.  ject were put in the training set (8 × 9 × 41 = 2952 in total) and the remaining ones constituted the testing set (8 × 41 = 328). The third object recognition benchmark is called NORB, provided by Courant Institute at New York University3 . This dataset contains five classes of objects, that are four-legged animals, human figures, airplanes, trucks, and cars (see Fig. S1c). The object instances (50 different object in total) are imaged in different view-points, coupled with different lighting conditions. In this task, we used the training and testing sets provided by the authors of this dataset. Since there are large number of images in this dataset, we also performed the 3  Figure S2: Some of the features extracted for each category of the ETH-80 dataset.  2.1.2  Confusion Matrix  As STDP tends to find frequent features, it encounters problems in distinguishing similar objects. The reason is that neurons learn common features and start to fire for images in two or more categories. Regarding this tendency, the external classifier has  http://www.cs.nyu.edu/~ylclab/data/norb-v1.0/  2  Table SI: Values for parameters used in each of the object recognition tasks.  Dataset Caltech ETH-80 NORB  ωc1 7 5 5  ωs2 17 31 23  n 20 80 50  T 42 160 150  a+ p 0.0005 0.0006 0.0005  a− p −0.005 −0.01 −0.05  pdrop 0.5 0.4 0.5  Predicted category  no other means than getting biased towards one of the similar categories. On the other hand, R-STDP helps the network to extract features that provide more balanced (not biased) discrimination. Comparing the confusion matrices of R-STDP and STDP, you can see that the former has a more symmetric structure than the latter. To provide a quantified comparison, for each matrix A, we computed the following equation: P P i j |Aij − Aji | , (1) asym(A) = 2 where Aij denotes the value of row i and column j. asym can be considered as a measure of being asymmetry, where as the matrix A is more symmetry, the value of asym(A) is closer to 0 (see Fig. S3).  2.2  a− r −0.0025 −0.0035 −0.003  a+ r 0.005 0.01 0.05  1  Actual category  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2  0  R-STDP  STDP  asym = 0.16  asym = 0.85  (a) Predicted category 1  Actual category  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2  Dropout R-STDP  One of the techniques we used to avoid overfitting is dropout. In each training iteration, dropout turns some neurons off by chance. This procedure temporarily decreases the network’s complexity and forces smaller portion of neurons to cover the whole training set as much as possible. This way, the probability that a neuron only learns few samples decreases, and the total involvement rate of neurons in solving the task increases. Fig. S4 illustrates the involvement rate of neurons for one of the trials with each of the ETH-80 and NORB datasets. Green bars denote the number of times that a neuron generates earliest spike for testing images belonging to its pre-assigned category, while red bars denote the number of false alarms. By comparing this measure with and without dropout, we found that dropout improves performance by increasing the chance of finding more discriminative features, as well as decreasing the rate of blind firings.  STDP  asym = 0.12  0  asym = 0.98  (b) Figure S3: Comparing confusion matrices of the network over the (a) ETH-80, and (b) NORB datasets, while employing R-STDP and STDP.  2.3  Shallow CNN  In object recognition tasks, we compared the proposed model to a shallow CNN with a similar structure. Here you can find the detailed structure of this CNN. Input images to this CNN are grayscale. The first convolutional layer has four feature maps with the same input window size as our Gabor filters in layer S1. This layer is followed by a max-pooling layer with the same pooling window size and stride as the neurons in layer C1. Next, we put a convolutional layer with n feature maps and neurons 3  ETH-80 Apple  Car  Cow  Cup  Dog  Horse  Pear  Number of correctly involved neurons  Tomato  15  15  With Dropout  12 7  6 3  2  3  7  5  4  3 3  4 4  5  5 5  4  2  0  1  0  8 8 8  7 4  2 2  0  0 0 0 0  8  7 1 1  1  2  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  3 3  2  1 1  2  4  4 4  4 1  0  8 4  5  0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  5  1  0  1  0 0 0  Without Dropout  5  9 4 0  2  6  0  5  1  3  4  2  6 3 3  6  4  6 6  0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0  4 4  0  1 1 1 1  6 0 0 0  1  0  0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0  0 0 0  1  3  63  6  8 1  0  4  3  2  0 0  8  6  8  4 5 4 3 4  4 0  4 5 3 4  0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5  8  7 6 1  3  11  13 8 8  8 2 3  2 1 0 0  0 0  4 3 2 4 3 1 1 0 0 1  0 0  6 1 1  3  5 5  16 17  16 10  1 2 1  0 0 1  0 0 0 0  0 0  4  2 1  0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 2 3 3 3  57  23  NORB 4-legged Animals  Human figures  Airplanes  Trucks  Cars  81 76  72  70  65  With Dropout  57 51 43 37  36  30  42  46  45  41  47  44 35  34 29  23  27  28  26  17  47  35  34  30  27  1  2 8  2  49  30 22  14  2  6  11  4  2 9  5  4  0 0  1  3  6 3  2  8  4  0 0  2  0 0  0 0  0 0 8  14  4  0 4 10  0  2 7  7  0  1 6  5  0  0  1 2  1  2  3 8  7  5 0  6  3  4  44  Without Dropout  4  52  32  23  6  4  49  45  11  Number of spikes for the pre-assigned category Number of spikes for the other categories  Figure S4: Involvement rate of neurons in solving different object recognition tasks with and without applying dropout.  Table SII: Performance of VGG16 over the ETH-80 and NORB datasets.  Dataset ETH-80 NORB  Fine-tuned 97.8 94.7  tivation function for the hidden and output layer are set to ReLU and Softmax, respectively. For overfitting avoidance, we explore using dropout on dense layers and kernel regularizers with different parameter values to achieve the best performance.  Trained from Scratch 96.8 80.1  with input window that covers the whole incoming data from previous layer. Activation functions of convolutional neurons are set to ReLU. After convolutional layers, we put two dense layers: a hidden and an output layer. Number of neurons in the hidden layer is tuned for each task. Ac-  2.4  Comparison with Deep Convolutional Neural Network  Deep convultional neural networks (DCNNs) has achieved outstanding results in various complex visual object recognition tasks. Spiking neural net4  works, despite of being theoretically more powerful, cannot beat them in practice by the time of writing this manuscript. One problem with DCNNs is that they are data-hungry and they need lots of training samples to generalize well. This problem can be tackled by applying fine-tuning strategies over pre-trained DCNNs (initialized with pre-trained weights), instead of training them from scratch (initialized with random weights). Here, we repeated our object recognition tasks, this time using a DCNN called VGG16, which is known as one of the state-of-the-art networks for object categorization. We used Keras network API4 with Tensorflow5 as its backend to examine VGG16 network, while doing fine-tuning or training from scratch. Table SII summarizes the best performances of VGG16 over the ETH-80 and NORB (after doing the aforementioned subsampling) datasets. Since the performance depends on the fine-tuning strategy and values of parameters, we do not guaranty that the obtained results are the best possible ones. However, we did our best to achieve high performances. According to the results, VGG16 always beats us when it is fine-tuned, whereas it has encountered serious overfitting problem, as well as the proposed network, while being trained on the NORB dataset from scratch.  4 5  https://keras.io/ https://www.tensorflow.org/  5

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
