Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_1807

Abstract:
Crowdsourced correlation clustering with relative distance comparisons Antti Ukkonen  arXiv:1709.08459v1 [cs.DS] 25 Sep 2017  Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki Helsinki, Finland Email: antti.ukkonen@helsinki.fi  Abstract—Crowdsourced, or human computation based clustering algorithms usually rely on relative distance comparisons, as these are easier to elicit from human workers than absolute distance information. A relative distance comparison is a statement of the form “item A is closer to item B than to item C”. However, many existing clustering algorithms that use relative distances are rather complex. They are often based on a twostep approach, where the relative distances are first used to learn either a distance matrix, or an embedding of the items, and then some standard clustering method is applied in a second step. In this paper we argue that it should be possible to compute a clustering directly from relative distance comparisons. Our ideas are built upon existing work on correlation clustering, a well-known non-parametric approach to clustering. The technical contribution of this work is twofold. We first define a novel variant of correlation clustering that is based on relative distance comparisons, and hence suitable for human computation. We go on to show that our new problem is closely related to basic correlation clustering, and use this property to design an approximation algorithm for our problem. As a second contribution, we propose a more practical algorithm, which we empirically compare against existing methods from literature. Experiments with synthetic data suggest that our approach can outperform more complex methods. Also, our method efficiently finds good and intuitive clusterings from real relative distance comparison data.  I. I NTRODUCTION Clustering is a classical unsupervised learning problem. The task, in colloquial terms, is to divide a given set of items to groups such that similar items are placed in the same group, while dissimilar items end up in different groups. Clustering has numerous practical applications, ranging from customer segmentation to bioinformatics, and has attracted a lot of attention from the research community for decades [1]. In this paper we study a novel approach to data clustering that is suitable for human computation [2], [3], i.e., an algorithmic process where humans carry out parts of the computation, often using a crowdsourcing platform such as Amazon Mechanical Turk. Human computation algorithms are implemented via so called human intelligence tasks (HITs, see also [4]). A HIT is defined as a piece of input data together with instructions of what to do with the input. Human computation algorithms operate by sending a large number of HITs to a crowd that processes the tasks in parallel. Once all tasks are completed, the algorithm collects the results and possibly carries out some post-processing to obtain the final result.  To motivate human computation approaches to clustering, consider a scenario where we are given a collection of some items, e.g. photographs or pieces of text, and ask human labellers to assign each item to some category. Despite recent advances in computer vision (e.g. [5]), the need for this type of crowdsourced data analysis remains in scenarios where human performance still exceeds that of machine learning. In simple cases the categories (or labels) of interest are known e.g., they can correspond to images different types of galaxies [6], or to texts having positive / negative sentiment [7]. But in some other situations, there may not be any predefined categories, and the first task is to determine what kind of structure there is in the data to begin with. This is a data exploration problem to which clustering is a standard solution. To design an efficient human computation algorithm we should make sure that the required HITs a) are easy for humans to solve, and b) can all be solved in parallel. Next we discuss the technical motivation of our approach on the basis of these two requirements. At the core of most clustering algorithms is the notion of distance. Indeed, similarity between two items is usually defined in terms of a distance function that yields a small numeric value when the items are similar, and increases as the items become more dissimilar. A lot of the actual computation carried out by a clustering algorithm involves calculating, comparing or otherwise using these distances. Any human computation algorithm for clustering must thus deal with distances as well, and it must do this in a manner that satisfies both requirements a) and b) above. The main problem is that absolute (numeric) distances between e.g. images can be difficult for humans to specify in a consistent manner. Even a very simple distance function that can take only two possible values, “similar” and “notsimilar”, can be problematic for human annotators [8]. Relative distance comparisons, on the other hand, are often easier to elicit. Rather than specifying distances on some absolute (and arbitrary) scale, they represent the distance function in terms of statements such as “item A is closer to item B than to item C”, or “of items A, B, and C, item C is an outlier”. Relative distance comparisons of this kind have been used previously e.g. to compute the mean of a set of items [9], density estimation [10], [11], distance/kernel learning [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], and to compute embeddings [17], [18], [19]. To satisfy requirement a) above, the clustering algorithm  must thus use relative distance comparisons only. Requirement b) is satisfied as long as the distance comparisons can be collected in one batch, i.e., there are no interdependencies between the HITs. Most existing human computation algorithms for clustering that satisfy requirements a) and b) first use the relative distance comparisons to either learn a distance/kernel matrix [13], [14], or to compute an embedding of the items to Rn [17], and as a second step apply some “regular” clustering algorithm that uses distance matrices or embeddings. Such approaches indeed can work well, and have the sometimes useful property of learning features for the items (the embedding). But we argue that clustering is a relatively simple combinatorial problem. If the ultimate task is to only compute a clustering, and there is no other use for e.g. an embedding of the items, it seems more desirable to compute the clustering directly from the distance comparisons. The aim of this paper is to devise an efficient method for doing this. We argue that our approach is 1) conceptually simpler than competing approaches, and 2) easier to implement and understand. Our approach is based on C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING, a problem originally proposed by Bansal et al [20]1 . It is a parameter-free approach to clustering, where the distance function and item features have been replaced with “qualitative” information about how pairs of items should relate to each other in a good clustering. A lot of its theoretical properties are known [22], [23], and unlike many other clustering methods, it does not require setting the number of clusters in advance, which is a nice practical advantage. Our main result is a novel variant of correlation clustering that uses relative distance comparisons only, and is thus particularly well suited for human computation. The relative distance comparisons we consider are expressed in terms of triplets: out of a set of three items, one is designated as an “outlier”, meaning that it’s distance from the two other items is the largest. We make the following contributions in this paper: 1) We define a variant of the C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING problem that takes a set of relative distance comparisons as input (Section II-B). 2) We analyse the problem, show it to be NP-hard (Section II-C), discuss its connections to the standard C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING problem (Section II-D), and propose an O(log |U |) approximation algorithm (Section III), where U is the number of items being clustered. This establishes that our problem is not harder than C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING on general weighted graphs from the point of view of approximation. 3) We also present a practical, simple, and very efficient local search algorithm for solving our problem (Section IV), and carry out a number of experiments where we compare our approach against two alternative methods from literature (Section V). 1 Note that Böhm et al [21] use the term “correlation clustering” to describe a different problem that is not to be confused with the one considered in this paper.  II. P ROBLEM DEFINITIONS AND ANALYSIS Let U denote a set of items, and let d denote a distance function d : U × U → R+ 0 between items in U . The triplet (a, b, c), with a, b, c ∈ U , captures the following relative distance comparison based on d: d(a, b) ≤ min{d(a, c), d(b, c)}. That is, of the items a, b, and c, item c is an outlier. (In our notation, the outlier is always the third item of the triplet.) Let T denote a set of such triplets over U . Our task is to cluster the items in U given only T . In informal terms, we want to partition U to disjoint subsets so that items in the same subset are similar to each other, and items in different subsets are different from one another in terms of the distance function d. Let [1:n] denote the integers from 1 to n. A clustering function f : U → [1:k] assigns to every item in U a cluster label, i.e., an integer between 1 and k. Let I{·} denote the indicator function. A. Background about correlation clustering The problem we define in this paper is closely related to the C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING problem, as originally defined in [20]. An instance of C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING is a graph G where every edge (u, v) is associated some positive weight w(u, v), as well as either the label + or the label −. The objective is to find a clustering of the vertices so that vertices connected by a + edge belong to the same cluster, while vertices connected by a − edge are assigned to different clusters. More formally: Problem 1. (C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING) Given the graph G = (U, {E + ∪ E − }, w), where U is a set of items, E + and E − denote sets of edges that are labeled with a + and −, respectively, and the edge weights are given by the function w : E + ∪ E − → R+ . Find a clustering function f that minimizes the cost X c(f, G) = w(u, v) I{f (u) 6= f (v)} + (u,v)∈E +  X  w(u, v) I{f (u) = f (v)}.  (u,v)∈E −  The variant of C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING given in Problem 1 is commonly known as the one that concerns “minimising disagreements in general weighted graphs”. Problem 1 is NP-hard [20], as well as APX-hard [22]. B. Correlation clustering with relative distances We proceed to define a novel variant of C ORRELATION C LUSTERING that is based on relative distance comparisons in the form of a set T of triplets as defined above. Given T , the task is to compute a clustering function f . We first discuss how relative distance comparisons and an underlying ground truth clustering can interact. Simply put (and somewhat exaggerated), a triplet (a, b, c) can be understood as saying that “a and b are next to each other, but c is further away”. From the point of view of  e  f  a b  c  d  Fig. 1. A two-dimensional example with a ground truth clustering of size 3 (the gray circles), items a, b, c, d, e, and f at the locations shown, as well as the triplets (a, b, c), (b, d, c), (a, b, e), and (a, f, c).  a clustering task, we argue that (a, b, c) thus provides three (uncertain) pieces of information:  E + and E − will always yield a clustering function f such that c(f, G) = 0, i.e. the hardness of Problem 1 is caused by noisy constraints. (Indeed, without noise we can simply remove all edges in E − and are left with cliques of E + edges that correspond to the clusters.) With triplets no such easy solutions exist even in a noise-free scenario, as the triplets do not explicitly specify what items belong to the same cluster. Moving on, we say that the triplet (a, b, c) is satisfied by the clustering function f , if and only if I{f (a) = f (b) 6= f (c)} is true. Otherwise (a, b, c) is unsatisfied. In Figure 1 all triplets except (a, b, c) are unsatisfied by the clustering shown. We consider the following problem: Problem 2. Given a set of triplets T over items in the set U , find a clustering function f OPT that minimizes the cost X s(f, T ) = I{ f (a) 6= f (b)∨ (a,b,c)∈T  f (a) = f (c) ∨ f (b) = f (c) },  1. items a and b might be in the same cluster,  i.e., f OPT = arg minf s(f, T ).  2. items a and c might be in different clusters, and  We have defined the objective function in Problem 2 to minimize the number of unsatisfied triplets. Observe that the number of clusters is not specified as part of the problem input. As with traditional C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING, f OPT may use any number of clusters that minimizes s(f OPT , T ).  3. items b and c might be in different clusters. In practice this will not always be true, of course. Figure 1 illustrates this with a toy example with three clusters, six items (letters a to f ), and four triplets. All four triplets reflect the basic Euclidean distance between the items. Of the triplets, (a, b, c) “correctly” reflects the cluster structure according to the claim above: a and b indeed are in the same cluster, while c is in a different cluster. The remaining three triplets show how conflicts arise between the ground truth clustering and relative distance comparisons. First, distances between all items in the triplet may be “long”, as is the case with b, c, and d, and intuition says that the items should be put in different clusters. In Figure 1 this is also the case. But if we interpret the triplet (b, d, c) as above, we would put b and d in the same cluster. Second, all pairwise distances may be “short”, as is the case with a, b and e, and again intuitively it would make sense to put a, b and e in the same cluster. In Figure 1 these items indeed do belong to the same cluster, but our interpretation of (a, b, e) suggests that e is in a different cluster. Third, it is possible that in an optimal clustering, items that are closer to each other in fact belong to different clusters, while the outlier belongs to the same cluster as one of the other items. This is the case with items a, c and f . Item c is an outlier, but nonetheless belongs to the same cluster as f in the ground truth solution of Figure 1, while the above interpretation of (a, f, c) would put a and f in the same cluster, and c in a different cluster. We leave a more fine-grained analysis of the effects of these observations for future work, and in this paper simply assume that the three pieces of information provided by the triplet (a, b, c) (points 1–3 listed above) can be used to identify useful clusterings. However, triplets inherently seem to make the clustering task more challenging than the E + and E − constraints of Problem 1. Because, in the absence of noise,  C. Problem complexity Theorem 1. Problem 2 is NP-hard. Proof. The proof is a simple reduction from the unweighted variant of Problem 1. (This problem is also NP-hard.) Given an instance of C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING determined by the edge sets E + and E − , we create an instance of Problem 2, i.e., a set of triplets T as follows: for every (u, v) ∈ E + , insert the triplet (u, v, xuv ), and for every (u, v) ∈ E − insert the triplet (u, u0v , v). Here xuv and u0 are dummy items that each occur in a single triplet only, and can hence be satisfied trivially. The only real constraints to f OPT are thus determined by items that appear in E+ and E−. Observe that an optimal solution f OPT to Problem 2 immediately gives an optimal solution to the C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING instance. Moreover, the costs of the solutions are identical. The reduction employed in the proof above has the implication that Problem 2 is at least as hard as Problem 1 (with unit weights) also from the point of view of approximation. Indeed, any approximation bound for Problem 2 also holds for the unweighted variant of Problem 1. D. Mapping Problem 2 to Problem 1 We continue by discussing further properties of Problem 2. These will be useful when we design algorithms for the problem. In short, we show how to “clean up” the set of triplets T so that it is possible to construct a reguler C ORRELATION C LUSTERING instance from the triplets. First, observe that if T contains both triplets t = (u, v, x1 ) and t0 = (u, x2 , v) for any u, v, x1 , x2 ∈ U , only one of  these can be satisfied by any clustering function f (including f OPT ), because to satisfy t we must have f (u) = f (v), while satisfying t0 requires f (u) 6= f (v). Some of the triplets in T can (and in most cases will) thus be inconsistent with each other. This is a natural consequence of how relative distance information is encoded in the triplets: items u and v may be “close” to each other in relation to item x1 , but “far apart” when compared with item x2 . Indeed, inconsistencies occur also in sets of triplets T that are fully noiseless, as also discussed above. These inconsistencies are naturally represented in terms of a constraint graph. Definition 1. Two triplets are inconsistent when for some items u and v and any clustering function f , one of the triplets is satisfied when f (u) = f (v), while the other is satisfied when f (u) 6= f (v). Let CT = (T , E) denote the constraint graph associated with the set T . The vertices of CT are the triplets, and the edge set E contains those pairs of triplets that are inconsistent with each other. A vertex cover of a graph is a subset of its vertices such that for every edge, at least one endpoint belongs to the vertex cover. Consider a vertex cover of CT , denoted vc(CT ). (Notice that any vertex cover will do, it does not have to be one of minimum size.) Let T 0 = T \ vc(CT ), i.e., T 0 contains those triplets that are not part of the vertex cover vc(CT ). We can show that in T 0 there are no triplets that would provide conflicting information about any two items u and v: Lemma 1. There are no inconsistent triplets in T vc(CT ).  0  = T \  Algorithm 1 An approximation algorithm 1: Input: triplets T . 2: Construct the constraint graph CT according to Definition 1. 3: Find an approximate minimum vertex cover vcALG (CT ) by using the algorithm of Assumption 2. 4: Let T 0 ← T \ vcALG (CT ). 5: Construct GT 0 according to Definition 2. 6: Find an approximate solution f ALG to GT 0 by using the algorithm of Assumption 1. 7: Return f ALG .  III. A N APPROXIMATION ALGORITHM Above we showed that by finding a vertex cover of the constraint graph CT , we can turn a given instance of Problem 2 into a regular C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING instance. We make use of this to design an approximation algorithm for Problem 2. First, we assume that an approximation algorithm exists for C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING in general weighted graphs. OPT denote the optimal solution to Assumption 1. Let fCC the C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING instance GT 0 . We assume there exists a polynomial time algorithm for C ORRELATION C LUSTERING that finds the solution f ALG that satisfies OPT c(f ALG , GT 0 ) ≤ α c(fCC , GT 0 ),  where α is some function of the input T . Second, we assume that a constant factor approximation algorithm exists for finding minimum vertex covers:  Proof. See Appendix A. In practice this implies that all triplets in T 0 are guaranteed to consistently suggest that items u and v either belong to the same cluster, or that items u and v belong to different clusters. Importantly, there are no two triplets in T 0 such that one would prefer u and v in the same cluster, while the other would prefer u and v in different clusters. We can thus map T 0 to an instance of C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING (Problem 1). 0  Definition 2. Given the set of triplets T = T \ vc(CT ), we define the instance GT 0 = (U, {E + ∪ E − }, w) of C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING as follows: • The set of items U is the union of all items in the triplets in T 0 . 0 • For every pair u, v ∈ U , let Tu,v denote those triplets in 0 T that contain both items u and v. 0 • If for given u and v, all triplets in Tu,v agree that neither u or v is the outlier, we include {u, v} into E + . 0 • If for given u and v, all triplets in Tu,v agree that either u or v must be the outlier, we include {u, v} into E − . 0 • The weight w(u, v) is the size of Tu,v .  Because there are no inconsistent triplets in T 0 , every pair {u, v} will be assigned to either E + or E − .  Assumption 2. Let CT denote the constraint graph of Definition 1, and let vcmin (CT ) denote its vertex cover of minimum size. We assume there exists a polynomial time algorithm that finds the solution vcALG (CT ) that satisfies | vcALG (CT )| ≤ β | vcmin (CT )|, where β > 1 is some constant. Our approximation algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. In short, we first solve minimum vertex cover on CT , discard triplets that belong to the found cover, and then solve the remaining C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING instance. The algorithm runs in polynomial time as long as the algorithms of assumptions 1 and 2 run in polynomial time. The intermediary steps are trivially polynomial in the size of T . We give the following theorem: Theorem 2. Let f OPT denote the optimal solution to Problem 2, and denote by f ALG the solution found by Algorithm 1. We have s(f ALG , T ) ≤ (2α + β) s(f OPT , T ), where α and β are the approximation factors in assumptions 1 and 2, respectively.  Algorithm 2 A local search heuristic 1: Input: a set of triplets T 2: f ← initialise (can be done in different ways) 3: knew ← maxu∈U f (u) + 1 4: f 0 ← ∅ 5: while f 0 6= f do 6: f0 ← f 7: for u ∈ U do 8: f (u) ← arg minf (u)∈[1:knew ] s(f, T ) 9: if f (u) = knew then 10: knew ← knew + 1 11: end if 12: end for 13: “clean up” f so that it maps U to the range [1:h], where h = |{f (u)}u∈U |. 14: knew ← maxu∈U f (u) + 1 15: end while 16: return f  Proof. See Appendix B. The actual bound thus depends on both α and β. Currently best known approximation algorithms for solving C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING in general weighted graphs and finding minimum vertex covers have bounds of α = O(log n) log n [22] and β = 2 − log 2 log n [24], respectively. The graph associated with the C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING instance GT 0 has |U | vertices, and hence we have α = O(log |U |) and obtain: Corollary 1. Algorithm 1 is an O(log |U |) approximation algorithm for Problem 2. From the point of view of approximation, Problem 2 is thus not asymptotically harder than Problem 1 (after omitting constants). Indeed, Algorithm 1 is mainly of theoretical interest, as it shows that Problem 2, like regular C ORRELATION C LUSTERING, admits an approximation bound. IV. A LOCAL SEARCH ALGORITHM Next, we describe a more practical method, at the core of which is a local search heuristic. It is, however, to a certain extent inspired by Algorithm 1, as will become apparent below. A. Outline of the algorithm In short, we minimize the cost function s(f, T ) using a simple greedy local search algorithm. The algorithm updates the cluster assignment of a single item u ∈ U at a time, while keeping the cluster assignment of all other items fixed. The algorithm makes passes over all items until it reaches a fixed point where the value of f (u) no longer changes for any u ∈ U . Details are shown in Algorithm 2. We can initialise f in different ways on line 2 of Alg. 2. In this paper we consider two approaches: 1) All equal: We set f (u) = 1 for every u ∈ U . 2) All different: We initialise f to be a bijection from U to the integers [1:|U |], that is, every i ∈ [1:|U |] is the initial cluster assignment one and only one u ∈ U .  When updating f (u) on line 8, the algorithm considers all possible values in the range [1:knew ]. Here knew is the index of a new cluster that does not yet exist in f . The update step can thus introduce new clusters to f . On line 13 the algorithm re-assigns (“cleans up”) f so that there are no gaps in the cluster indices, meaning that the cluster indices must range from 1 to the number of clusters. B. Practical considerations As discussed above in Section II-D, the set T of triplets may (and in practice will) contain inconsistencies. These inconsistencies are a fundamental property of relative distance comparisons. Above we also showed that by finding a vertex cover of the constraint graph CT , we can remove such inconsistencies. While the local search heuristic described here should in theory be unaffected by these inconsistencies, it is conceivable that we will in practice obtain better results after making T consistent. That is, in the experiments we will consider an approach where the input to Algorithm 2 is in fact T 0 = T \ vc(CT ). This requires computing a vertex cover of CT . We will employ the simple and well-known 2-approximation algorithm2 that selects edges from the input graph one by one, while at every step removing all other edges adjacent to the selected edge (including the selected edge) and adding the endpoints of the selected edge to the cover. The algorithm, called ApproxVC, terminates when the set of edges becomes empty. (For details, see e.g. page 1025 of [26].) Despite the constant factor approximation guarantee, this algorithm can produce a fairly large cover. In theory this does not really matter, since in our use-case any cover of CT will result in a set of triplets T 0 that is free of inconsistencies. However, in practice we would like there to be a sufficient amount of information about the relative distances, and hence T 0 should remain as large as possible. (Indeed, an empty set of triplets is free of inconsistencies, but it is also rather useless.) We will thus use a simple heuristic to further reduce the size of the cover produced by Approx-VC. The idea is to remove all such vertices from the cover that are redundant. A vertex is redundant in a vertex cover if all of its neighbour vertices also belong to the cover. We thus consider every vertex in vc(CT ) one-by-one, and remove it from the cover if (and only if) all of its neighbours belong to the cover. This leaves us with a proper vertex cover of CT , but the size of the cover will in practice be substantially reduced. V. E XPERIMENTS We conduct experiments with the following variants of our local search heuristic: • Ls-EQ: Algorithm 2 with the All equal initialisation of f. • Ls-AD: Algorithm 2 with the All different initialisation of f . 2 This algorithm was independently proposed by F. Gavril and M. Yannakakis, according to [25].  •  •  Ls-EQ-VC: Algorithm 2 with the All equal initialisation of f . The input triplets are first cleaned up by running the vertex cover heuristic on CT . Ls-AD-VC: Algorithm 2 with the All different initialisation of f . The input triplets are first cleaned up by running the vertex cover heuristic on CT .  Of these Ls-AD-VC is the one that we mainly promote and study, others are shown for comparison. We implemented both the local search as well as the vertex cover heuristic in JavaScript. All experiments were run with Node.js. We also consider two alternative approaches. Both first compute an embedding of the items, and then run a “standard” clustering algorithm with this as the input. The first method, called CrowdClust below, is the method described in [13]. The second, called t-STE, is a well-known stochastic neighbourhood embedding method adapted to relative distance judgements in [17]. The clustering algorithm is the same in both methods: a Dirichlet Process mixture model (MBVDP) [27]. We chose this, because like our algorithms, it does not require setting the number of clusters in advance. Of CrowdClust and MB-VDP we use the implementations provided by Ryan Gomes3 , while of t-STE we use Michael Wilber’s implementation4 . Finally, we emphasise that the experiments have been carried out to illustrate the experience of a naive user, without any extensive parameter tuning for the CrowdClust nor t-SNE methods. The number of optimisation iterations in CrowdClust was capped at 20, and both methods compute a 4dimensional embedding. Otherwise we use default parameters suggested by the authors. This is because we want to highlight the simplicity of our algorithms that require no parameter tuning of any kind, and thus competing approaches should also work pretty much “out of the box”. A. Experiment 1: Artificial data with known ground truth Setup: We generate a set T of triplets from a known ground truth clustering f ∗ over 160 items, and measure how well the algorithms can recover f ∗ given the triplets. The triplets are generated by first  constructing all possible triplets (of which there are 160 = 669, 920 in this case), then 3 selecting a random subset of these to include in T , and finally by introducing noise to some randomly chosen triplets by swapping the outlying item with one of the two other items (chosen at random). The process is thus parametrised by three quantities: k : the number of clusters in f ∗ , a : the fraction of triplets (out of all possible triplets) to include in T , and b : the fraction of “noisy” triplets in T . We let k ∈ {2, 4, 8, 16}, a ∈ {0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0}, and b ∈ {0, 0.1, 0.2}. When a = 1 and b = 0 the process outputs all possible triplets without any noise. 3 http://www.vision.caltech.edu/  gomes/software.html  4 https://github.com/gcr/tste-theano  With other choices of a and b the triplet generator is nondeterministic. For each of such combination of a and b we generate 10 independent sets of triplets. This results in 924 test cases (including repeated trials) in total. We run the algorithms for all of these, and report averages over the 10 trials for given values of a, b and k. We evaluate the algorithms by comparing the found clusterings to a ground truth in terms of the adjusted Rand index (RI, larger values better) [28]. Results: We find that in 894 out of the 924 test cases (≈ 97%), Ls-AD-VC has at least the same RI value as CrowdClust. When compared against t-STE, Ls-AD-VC performs at least as well in 751 out of 924 cases (≈ 81%) in terms of RI. That is, in most cases our approach seems to do a better job at reconstructing the true clustering f ∗ . When comparing LsAD-VC against Ls-AD (the pure local search heuristic without vertex cover based pre-processing), we find that in 813 out of the 924 test cases (≈ 88 percent) Ls-AD-VC has better (or the same) performance in terms of RI. This suggests that preprocessing T so that there are no inconsistencies is useful. Finally, when comparing the two initialisation strategies (all equal, all different), we find that in 871 out of the 924 test cases (≈ 94 percent) Ls-AD-VC outperforms Ls-EQ-VC. The local search heuristic is thus more successful in reconstructing f ∗ when it starts from a configuration where all points are in different clusters. A more fine-grained analysis of how different parameters of the triplet generator affect performance is shown in Figure 2. The left, middle, and right columns in Figure 2 show RI as a function of a, k and b, respectively. From the left column we observe that when only a small fraction of triplets are available, and there is a fair amount of erroneous triplets included in the input (b = 0.2), all algorithms have difficulties reconstructing the original f ∗ . This is especially true as the number of clusters in f ∗ increases, as one might expect. With k = 4 (topmost panel) both Ls-ADVC and CrowdClust can recover f ∗ (almost) perfectly when a ≥ 0.05, while t-STE does not do bad either. When k ≥ 8 (middle and bottom panel in left column) both Ls-AD-VC and t-STE seem to produce reasonable results (for a ≥ 0.1), with Ls-AD-VC finding a near-perfect clustering as long as a is large enough. However, in practical human computation applications small values of a may be more relevant, as this corresponds to fewer triplets, and hence less work by the human annotators. This situation is highlighted in the middle column, where we consider RI as a function of k with fixed a = 0.01, and different values of b. In the absence of noise (b = 0, top panel), t-STE is a clear winner. However, as noise is introduced, Ls-AD-VC, as well as the other correlation clustering based methods, outperform the two embedding approaches. For a large number of clusters (say, k ≥ 8), the problem is very hard for all methods, but when the ground truth clustering only contains a few clusters, it seems that Ls-AD-VC can give substantially better results than other methods. Finally, the rightmost column of Figure 2 shows how the fraction of erroneous triplets b affects the algorithms with fixed  0.100  0.500  0.8 0.0 2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  0.00  0.10  0.15  k vs RI, a = 0.01, b=0.1  b vs RI, k = 8, a=0.10  0.100  0.500  0.0  0.4  RI  0.0  0.4  RI  0.4  0.020  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  0.00  0.05  0.10  0.15  k  b  a vs RI, k = 16, b=0.2  k vs RI, a = 0.01, b=0.2  b vs RI, k = 8, a=0.01  0.100  0.500  0.4 0.0  RI  0.4 0.0  0.4  RI  0.8  Ls-AD-VC CrowdClust t-STE Ls-EQ-VC Ls-AD Ls-EQ  0.20  0.8  a  0.020  0.20  0.8  a vs RI, k = 8, b=0.2  0.8  b  0.8  k  0.0 0.005  0.05  a  0.8  0.005  0.4  RI  0.0 0.020  0.0  RI  0.4  RI  0.4 0.0  RI  0.005  RI  b vs RI, k = 8, a=1.00  0.8  k vs RI, a = 0.01, b=0.0  0.8  a vs RI, k = 4, b=0.2  2  4  6  a  8  10 k  12  14  16  0.00  0.05  0.10  0.15  0.20  b  Fig. 2. Results of Experiment 1. The panels show the adjusted Rand index as a function of different triplet generator parameters (a left, k middle and a right). See Section V-A for details. Legend for all panels is shown in the center bottom panel.  k = 8 and different values of a. We observe that when there are a lot of triplets (a ≥ 0.1), Ls-AD-VC is more or less unaffected by the presence of noise, and t-STE is a close second. When there are only few triplets (a = 0.01), t-STE works very well when there is no noise, but its performance rapidly decreases as b increases. What kind of errors do the algorithms make, then? A simple way to address this question is to consider the size of the resulting clustering. Indeed, all algorithms should in theory be able to find the correct number of clusters in ideal  settings. Table I shows the number of clusters (averages over 10 instances) in the solution returned by the algorithms for different values of a, b and k. (Here we only consider Ls-ADVC, Ls-EQ-VC, CrowdClust, and t-STE.) We find that in most cases, the algorithms tend to underestimate the number of clusters. As suggested by the results in Fig. 2, Ls-AD-VC performs very well when the number of triplets is large (a is large), irrespectively of the amount of noise in the input. Also, it tends to outperform t-STE for small values of a when there is a lot of noise (b increases) and k is small.  TABLE I E XPERIMENT 1: AVERAGE NUMBER OF CLUSTERS FOUND BY THE ALGORITHMS FOR DIFFERENT PARAMETERS OF THE TRIPLET GENERATOR .  b=0  b = 0.1  b = 0.2  Ls-AD-VC Ls-EQ-VC CrowdClust t-STE Ls-AD-VC Ls-EQ-VC CrowdClust t-STE Ls-AD-VC Ls-EQ-VC CrowdClust t-STE  2 2 2 6 4 2 2 3.7 1.4 2 2 2.8 1  a=1 k 4 8 4 8 3 4 4 6 7 7 4 8 3 4 4 5.2 7.4 7 4 8 3 4.3 4 3.3 8.2 6.8  c1  16 16 6 6 14 16 5.3 5.6 11.6 16 4.6 5.3 10  2 2 2 3.5 4 2 2 2.8 1 2 2 2.5 1  a = 0.1 k 4 8 4 8 2.8 2.8 4 4.8 4.9 7 4 7.9 2.6 2.9 3.6 5.2 5.3 7 4 7.7 2.6 2.5 3.8 3.9 5.1 6.7  c7  c2  c3  16 14.3 2.4 3.8 13.4 12.7 2.2 1.8 12.4 12.4 2.4 1.3 5.4  2 2 2 3.1 4.2 2 2 2.4 1 2 2 1.8 1  a = 0.05 k 4 8 4 8 2.7 2.5 4 4 4 7.1 4 7.9 2.2 2.4 3.7 2.6 4 7.3 4 6.9 2.5 2.1 3.9 3.4 3.3 6.3  16 10.4 2.4 2 13.7 6.5 2.3 1.7 10.2 3.5 2.4 1 3.4  2 2 2 2.1 2.5 2 2 2.6 2 2 2 1.7 1  a = 0.01 k 4 8 3.7 4.1 2.5 2.2 3.4 3 4.3 7.5 3.8 3.5 2.4 2.3 2.5 1.2 4 5.9 3.4 2.8 2.4 2.4 2.1 1.2 1.9 1.2  16 3 2.2 1.4 11.9 2.8 2.3 1.2 3.9 2.4 2.3 1 1.1  c1  c2 c6  c3 c4  c4 c5  Fig. 3. Clustering of the Nature dataset found by Ls-AD-VC. The figure shows a random sample of five items from clusters 1–5, and clusters 6 and 7 in full. Cluster 1 contains images of snowy mountains, cluster 2 of wooden flat areas or forest, cluster 3 of drylands and deserts. Cluster 4 contains a mixture of tropical trees and open water with a clearly visible horizon, cluster 5 contains images of rocky mountains. Clusters 6 and 7 seem like extra clusters / outliers that could also be merged with some of the larger clusters.  B. Experiment 2: Example clusterings with real triplet data Setup: In our second experiment we present two case studies that highlight how the Ls-AD-VC algorithm works on real, crowdsourced data. We obtained two sets of relative distance comparison triplets from the authors of [9] and [29]. The first one (Nature), originally used in [9] to run a crowd-powered k-means algorithm, contains a set of 3357 triplets over 120 images of natural scenes of four categories (coast, open country, forest, mountain), from the Scene image collection5 [30]. The second one (Food), collected by the authors of [29] from Yummly.com, contains 190,376 triplets over 100 images of various dishes of food. Note that the two datasets are of different “densities” (recall the parameter a from above): Nature contains only about 1 5 http://cvcl.mit.edu/database.htm  Fig. 4. Clustering of the Food dataset found by Ls-AD-VC. The figure shows a random sample of five items from clusters 1–3, cluster 4 only contains a single item. Cluster 1 contains images of savoury main courses, cluster 2 contains images of salads and other kinds of vegetables, cluster 3 corresponds to desserts and sweet dishes, and cluster 4 is a single outlier with an image of a cup of rice.   percent of all possible 120 triplets, while Food contains in 3 fact more than 100 percent of all possible triplets, i.e., Food contains several instances of duplicated triplets. We did not perform any kind of pre-processing or cleanup of the data in either case. The triplets may thus be noisy, conflicting (i.e., for the same set of three items, two triplets may indicate different items as the outlier), etc. This decision was deliberate, because we want to illustrate the experience of a naive user, who wants results quickly, and as simply as possible, e.g. without first running a complex consensus model [31] to clean up erroneous inputs. Certainly there are situations in which using those methods is really necessary, but here we want to show how Ls-AD-VC fares with “raw” human computation data. (One can always argue that results should only improve with more complex pre-processing.) We thus run the experiment simply by running Ls-AD-VC on all available triplets. Results: The found clusterings are shown in figures 3 and  4 for Nature and Food, respectively. Of clusters with more than five items, we show only five randomly selected items. From Nature the method finds 7 clusters, two of which are very small, while from Food we find four clusters, one of which contains only a single(!) item. As can be seen from the figures, the found clusterings are very intuitive in both cases. In particular, thanks to the large number of triplets, the result with Food is extremely good, and really provides strong evidence for the correlation clustering based method to be both simple and very efficient. Also, it is rather remarkable that the method can find a very good clustering from Nature, despite there being very few triplets. However, this is in accordance with the results from synthetic clusterings in Experiment 1, where we show that Ls-AD-VC can find reasonable clusterings even in this situation (a = 0.01) as long as the underlying clustering is not too fine grained. Finally, we want to point out that Ls-AD-VC is extremely fast: the runtimes with Nature and Food are < 1 second and ≈ 11 seconds, respectively. VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK We defined, analysed, and provided both an approximation algorithm, as well as a practical local search algorithm for a novel C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING variant based on relative distance comparisons. We also showed empirically that the approach has certain advantages over existing methods for clustering with relative distance comparisons. Our method is motivated by human computation approaches to clustering. However, an interesting property of our approach is that it does not require guessing the number of clusters in advance. Given that an arbitrary distance matrix can always be used to generate relative distance comparisons in a parameterfree manner, it seems interesting to investigate if and how the approach could be used as a generic non-parametric clustering algorithm. Moreover, it seems relevant to understand what kind of clusterings our method can find when used in such ways. For instance, does the distance between two clusters and cluster diameter affect the outcome? Finally, implementing agglomerative clustering approaches using relative distances also seems of interest. First steps towards this have been taken in [32]. R EFERENCES [1] R. Xu and D. C. W. II, “Survey of clustering algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 645–678, 2005. [2] E. Law and L. v. Ahn, “Human computation,” Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1–121, 2011. [3] A. J. Quinn and B. B. Bederson, “Human computation: a survey and taxonomy of a growing field,” in Proceedings of CHI, 2011, pp. 1403– 1412. [4] P. G. Ipeirotis, “Analyzing the amazon mechanical turk marketplace,” ACM Crossroads, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 16–21, 2010. [5] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. S. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and F. Li, “Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, 2015.  [6] C. J. Lintott, K. Schawinski, A. Slosar, K. Land, S. Bamford, D. Thomas, M. J. Raddick, R. C. Nichol, A. Szalay, D. Andreescu et al., “Galaxy zoo: morphologies derived from visual inspection of galaxies from the sloan digital sky survey,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, vol. 389, no. 3, pp. 1179–1189, 2008. [7] S. M. Mohammad and P. D. Turney, “Crowdsourcing a word–emotion association lexicon,” Computational Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 436– 465, 2013. [8] Y. Pei, X. Z. Fern, T. V. Tjahja, and R. Rosales, “Comparing clustering with pairwise and relative constraints: A unified framework,” TKDD, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 22:1–22:26, 2016. [9] H. Heikinheimo and A. Ukkonen, “The crowd-median algorithm,” in Proceedings of HCOMP, 2013. [10] A. Ukkonen, B. Derakhshan, and H. Heikinheimo, “Crowdsourced nonparametric density estimation using relative distances,” in Proceedings of HCOMP, 2015, pp. 188–197. [11] M. Kleindessner and U. von Luxburg, “Lens depth function and krelative neighborhood graph: versatile tools for ordinal data analysis,” CoRR, vol. abs/1602.07194, 2016. [12] M. Schultz and T. Joachims, “Learning a distance metric from relative comparisons,” in Proceedings of NIPS, 2003, pp. 41–48. [13] R. Gomes, P. Welinder, A. Krause, and P. Perona, “Crowdclustering,” in Proceedings of NIPS, 2011, pp. 558–566. [14] O. Tamuz, C. Liu, S. J. Belongie, O. Shamir, and A. Kalai, “Adaptively learning the crowd kernel,” in Proceedings of ICML, 2011, pp. 673–680. [15] E. Amid, A. Gionis, and A. Ukkonen, “A kernel-learning approach to semi-supervised clustering with relative distance comparisons,” in Proceedings of ECML PKDD, 2015, pp. 219–234. [16] M. Kleindessner and U. von Luxburg, “Kernel functions based on triplet similarity comparisons,” CoRR, vol. abs/1607.08456, 2016. [17] L. van der Maaten and K. Q. Weinberger, “Stochastic triplet embedding,” in Proceedings of IEEE MLSP, 2012, pp. 1–6. [18] E. Amid and A. Ukkonen, “Multiview triplet embedding: Learning attributes in multiple maps,” in Proceedings of ICML, 2015, pp. 1472– 1480. [19] E. Amid, N. Vlassis, and M. K. Warmuth, “t-exponential triplet embedding,” CoRR, vol. abs/1611.09957, 2016. [20] N. Bansal, A. Blum, and S. Chawla, “Correlation clustering,” Machine Learning, vol. 56, no. 1-3, pp. 89–113, 2004. [21] C. Böhm, K. Kailing, P. Kröger, and A. Zimek, “Computing clusters of correlation connected objects,” in Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD, 2004, pp. 455–466. [22] E. D. Demaine, D. Emanuel, A. Fiat, and N. Immorlica, “Correlation clustering in general weighted graphs,” Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 361, no. 2-3, pp. 172–187, 2006. [23] N. Ailon, M. Charikar, and A. Newman, “Aggregating inconsistent information: Ranking and clustering,” J. ACM, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 23:1– 23:27, 2008. [24] B. Monien and E. Speckenmeyer, “Ramsey numbers and an approximation algorithm for the vertex cover problem,” Acta Inf., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 115–123, 1985. [25] C. H. Papadimitriou and K. Steiglitz, Combinatorial Optimization: Algorithms and Complexity. Prentice-Hall, 1982. [26] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms, Second Edition. The MIT Press and McGraw-Hill Book Company, 2001. [27] R. Gomes, M. Welling, and P. Perona, “Incremental learning of nonparametric bayesian mixture models,” in Proceedings of IEEE CVPR, 2008. [28] L. Hubert and P. Arabie, “Comparing partitions,” Journal of classification, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 193–218, 1985. [29] M. J. Wilber, I. S. Kwak, and S. J. Belongie, “Cost-effective hits for relative similarity comparisons,” in Proceedings of HCOMP, 2014. [30] A. Oliva and A. Torralba, “Modeling the shape of the scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 145–175, 2001. [31] A. Sheshadri and M. Lease, “SQUARE: A benchmark for research on computing crowd consensus,” in Proceedings of HCOMP, 2013. [32] S. Haghiri, D. Ghoshdastidar, and U. von Luxburg, “Comparison based nearest neighbor search,” CoRR, vol. abs/1704.01460, 2017.  A PPENDIX A. Proof of Lemma 1 Proof. For two triplets t1 and t2 to be inconsistent, there must exist the items a and b such that t1 is satisfied only when f (a) = f (b), and t2 is satisfied only when f (a) 6= f (b). Consider only those edges in CT that exist due to inconsistencies induced by the items a and b. These edges must form a bipartite clique. Since vc(CT ) is a vertex cover of CT , it must contain a vertex cover of every bipartite clique in C. A proper vertex cover of any bipartite clique must contain at least all vertices from “one side” of the clique, otherwise it cannot cover all edges in the clique. By the above reasoning, in every bipartitie clique of C at least one of the “sides” must be completely contained in vc(C). Since all triplets that belong to the same “side” of a bipartite clique agree about the items a and b, the triplets that remain in T \ vc(C) can not be inconsistent.  Finally, because in every triplet t = (a, b, c) there is precisely one pair, (a, b), that belongs to E + , while the other two pairs, (a, c) and (b, c), belong to E − , we obtain: X c(f, GT 0 ) = (I{f (a) 6= f (b)} + (a,b,c)∈T 0  I{f (a) = f (c)} + I{f (b) = f (c)}).  B. Proof of Theorem 2  This has the same form as the cost s of Problem 2, with the difference that in c(f, GT 0 ) the cost of every triplet (a, b, c) ∈ T 0 is the sum of three indicator variables, instead of a single indicator with a disjunction of three conditions, as is the case in s(f, T 0 ). The conditions, however, are the same in both cases. First, this implies that s(f, T 0 ) ≤ c(f, GT 0 ) for every f . Second, it is easy to see that for a given triplet (a, b, c), at most two of these conditions can be satisfied simultaneously. Whenever the triplet (a, b, c) incurs a cost of 1 in s(f, T 0 ), it therefore incurs at most a cost of 2 in c(f, GT 0 ) for every f . And if none of the conditions is satisfied, the triplet (a, b, c) incurs a cost of zero in both cases. This implies the 2nd inequality of the Lemma.  Before giving the proof, we present three technical lemmas that are needed to establish the result.  Lemma 3. We have s(f, T ) ≤ | vc(CT )| + s(f, T 0 ) for any vertex cover vc(CT ) and clustering function f .  Lemma 2. Let T 0 = T \ vc(CT ), and denote by GT 0 the associated C ORRELATION -C LUSTERING instance. We have s(f, T 0 ) ≤ c(f, GT 0 ) ≤ 2 s(f, T 0 ) for any clustering function f , where c and s are the cost functions of Problems 1 and 2, respectively. Proof. We rewrite the cost function c of Problem 1 as a sum over T 0 . By definition of GT 0 , the weight w(u, v) is equal to 0 the size of Tu,v , i.e., the number of triplets that contain both items u and v. We can write X X c(f, GT 0 ) = I{f (u) 6= f (v)}+ 0 (u,v)∈E + t∈Tu,v  X  X  I{f (u) = f (v)}.  0 (u,v)∈E − t∈Tu,v  Instead of summing over E + and E − separately, we simply sum over all (u, v) and use an indicator function to select the appropriate case. Note that any pair (u, v) can only belong to either E + or E − but not both. This yields X X c(f, GT 0 ) = (I{(u, v) ∈ E + } I{f (u) 6= f (v)}+ 0 (u,v) t∈Tu,v  −  I{(u, v) ∈ E } I{f (u) = f (v)}). We then change the order of summation to run first over T 0 , and then over the pairs in every triplet: X X c(f, GT 0 ) = (I{(u, v) ∈ E + } I{f (u) 6= f (v)}+ t∈T 0 (u,v)∈t  I{(u, v) ∈ E − } I{f (u) = f (v)}).  Proof. By definition, vc(CT ) and T 0 constitute a disjoint partition of T . Since the cost function s is simply a sum over triplets in T , we have s(f, T ) = s(f, vc(CT )) + s(f, T 0 ) for any f . Also, clearly s(f, vc(CT )) can be at most | vc(CT )| (all triplets in vc(CT ) are violated), which leads to the inequality of the Lemma. Lemma 4. Let T be a set of triplets, CT denote the associated constraint graph, vcmin (CT ) the minimum vertex cover of CT , and let f OPT denote the optimal solution to Problem 2. We have | vcmin (CT )| ≤ s(f OPT , T ). Proof. Every edge in CT consists of a pair of triplets, of which at least one must be unsatisfied for any clustering f , including f OPT . The minimum vertex cover vcmin (CT ) corresponds to the smallest possible subset of triplets that must be unsatisfied, resulting in a lower bound of s(f OPT , T ). We conclude with the proof of Theorem 2: Proof. The proof is a mechanical exercise with the lemmas presented above. We start from Lemma 3 that holds for any f and vc(CT ): s(f ALG , T ) ≤ | vcALG (CT )| + s(f ALG , T 0 ) ≤  | vcALG (CT )| + c(f ALG , GT 0 )  ≤ β| vc  min  (CT )| +  ≤ β| vc  min  (CT )| +  OPT αc(fCC , GT 0 ) OPT αc(f , GT 0 ) OPT 0  ≤ β| vcmin (CT )| + 2αs(f  (Lemma 2) (Assum. 1 and 2) OPT (fCC is optimal)  , T ) (Lemma 2)  ≤ β| vcmin (CT )| + 2αs(f OPT , T )  (T 0 ⊆ T )  ≤ βs(f OPT , T ) + 2αs(f OPT , T )  (Lemma 4)  =  (2α + β) s(f  OPT  , T ).

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
