Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1168

Abstract:
X-TORSION AND UNIVERSAL GROUPS  arXiv:1610.00313v1 [math.GR] 2 Oct 2016  MAURICE CHIODO, ZACHIRI MCKENZIE Abstract. For a set X ⊆ N, we deﬁne the X-torsion of a group G to be all elements g ∈ G with g n = e for some n ∈ X. With X recursively enumerable, we give two independent proofs (group-theoretic, and model-theoretic) that there exists a universal ﬁnitely presented X-torsion-free group; one which contains all ﬁnitely presented X-torsion-free groups. We also show that, if X is recursively enumerable, then the set of ﬁnite presentations of Xtorsion-free groups is Π02 -complete in Kleene’s arithmetic hierarchy.  1. Introduction Torsion is a well-studied object in group theory. We let o(g) denote the order of a group element g. Recalling that g ∈ G is torsion if 1 ≤ o(g) < ω, we write Tor(G) ∶= {g ∈ G ∣ g is torsion}. So, what if we were to ‘restrict’ the type of torsion we are looking at? Perhaps we are only concerned with 2-torsion, or torsion elements of prime order. So, for any set X ⊆ N, we define the X-torsion of a group G, written TorX (G), as TorX (G) ∶= {g ∈ G ∣ ∃n ∈ X with g n = e} It is clear that, for the case X = N, we have TorN (G) = Tor(G) in the usual sense. For any set X ⊆ N, we define the factor completion of X to be X fc ∶= {n ∈ N ∣ ∃m ≥ 1, nm ∈ X}, and we say X is factor complete if X fc = X. We say that a group G is X-torsion-free if TorX (G) = {e}; equivalently, if Tord(G) ∩ X fc = ∅. We use the following notation for the set of orders of torsion elements in a group: Tord(G) ∶= {n ∈ N ∣ ∃g ∈ Tor(G) with o(g) = n ≥ 2} One famous consequence of the Higman Embedding Theorem [6] is the fact that there is a universal finitely presented (f.p.) group; that is, a finitely presented group into which all finitely presented groups embed. Recently, Belegradek in [1] and Chiodo in [4] independently showed that there exists a universal f.p. torsion-free group; that is, an f.p. torsion-free group into which all f.p. torsion-free groups embed. In this paper we generalise this result further, in the context of X-torsion-freeness, as follows: 2010 AMS Classification: 20F05, 03D55, 03C98. Keywords: Groups, torsion, torsion quotients, embeddings, universal Horn theory. This work is part of a project that has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 659102. Date: March 13, 2018. 1  2  MAURICE CHIODO, ZACHIRI MCKENZIE  Theorem 2.12. Let X be a recursively enumerable set of integers. Then there is a universal finitely presented X-torsion-free group G. That is, G is Xtorsion-free, and for any finitely presented group H we have that H ↪ G if (and only if ) H is X-torsion-free. There are two key steps in proving this theorem. The first is to construct a free product of all such groups, in an algorithmic way: Theorem 2.9. Let A be an r.e. set of integers. Then there is a countably generated recursive presentation Q of a group Q which is A-torsion-free, and contains an embedded copy of every countably generated recursively presentable A-torsion-free group. From this, we can construct a finitely presented example, using the following theorem of Higman: Theorem 2.10. There is a uniform algorithm that, on input of a countably generated recursive presentation P = ⟨X∣R⟩, constructs a finite presentation T(P ) such that P ↪ T(P ) and Tord(P ) = Tord(T(P )), along with an explicit embedding φ ∶ P ↪ T(P ). We prove Theorem 2.9 in the following two independent ways, for reasons which we outline shortly. Firstly, in Section 2, we generalise the construction in [4, Theorem 3.10] of a universal f.p. torsion-free group, using arguments in group theory. Then, in Section 3, we generalise the construction in [1, Theorem A.1] of a universal f.p. torsion-free group, using arguments in model theory. The results in Section 3 provide the framework for proving that there might be other group properties for which there exist universal f.p. examples. Our main result in Section 3, which we apply directly to the theory of X-torsion-free groups to prove Theorem 2.9, is the following: Theorem 3.8. If T ⊇ TGrp is an r.e. universal Horn LGrp -theory then there exists a recursively presented group G ⊧ T such that every recursively presented group H ⊧ T embeds into G. The reason for providing both proofs of Theorem 2.9 is twofold. On the one hand, the group-theoretic proof in Section 2 is more direct, and gives a clear picture of why Theorem 2.9 holds. It is explicit, and algorithmic. On the other hand, the model-theoretic proof in Section 3 is more general, and might lead to showing that other group properties possess universal f.p. examples. Indeed, it was only by looking at the model-theoretic arguments in [1, Theorem A.1] that we realised we could consider X-torsion as an object, and that the results of [4] could be generalised to this; we would never have made the connection otherwise.  X-TORSION AND UNIVERSAL GROUPS  3  On this, it would be interesting further work to see what other grouptheoretic properties ρ possess universal f.p. examples. A potential proof technique would be as follows: (1) Show that the property ρ satisfies the conditions of Theorem 3.7 (that is, closed under free products, identity, and subgroups). (2) Show that ρ has an r.e. universal Horn LGrp -theory, thus allowing us to apply Theorem 3.8. (3) Show that ρ is possessed by finitely generated free groups, and preserved by free products and HNN extensions (which is what is needed to show that it is preserved under the Higman embedding of Theorem 2.10). Of course, satisfying all of the above is quite difficult. One can easily find many group properties that satisfy (1), and some of these also satisfy (2) quite trivially. But there are very few properties of groups that satisfy (3), and therein lies the problem. We finish our paper with a generalisation a result from [4] on the complexity of recognising torsion-freeness, and show the following: Theorem 2.13. Let X ⊆ N≥2 be a non-empty r.e. set of integers. Then the set of finite presentations of X-torsion-free groups is Π02 -complete. This is remarkable; even if X is a finite set, or stronger still, a single prime (say X = {2}), the set of finite presentations of groups with no X-torsion will still form a Π02 -complete set. 2. X-torsion and universality This section is a generalisation of the definitions and results in [4, Section 3] on universal torsion-free quotients and universal finitely presented torsion-free groups. 2.1. Notation. If P is a group presentation, we denote by P the group presented by P , and w by the group element represented by the word w. A presentation P = ⟨X∣R⟩ is said to be a recursive presentation if X is a finite set and R is a recursive enumeration of relations; P is said to be a countably generated recursive presentation if instead X is a recursive enumeration of generators. A group G is said to be finitely (respectively, recursively) presentable if G ≅ P for some finite (respectively, recursive) presentation P . If P, Q are group presentations then we denote their free product presentation by P ∗ Q: this is given by taking the disjoint union of their generators and relations. If g1 , . . . , gn are elements of a group G, we write ⟨g1 , . . . , gn ⟩ for the subgroup in G generated by these elements and ⟪g1 , . . . , gn ⟫G for the normal closure of these elements in G. Let ω denote the smallest infinite ordinal. Let ∣X∣ denote the cardinality of a set X. If X is a set, let X −1 be a set of the same cardinality as and disjoint from X along with a fixed bijection ∗−1 ∶ X → X −1 . Write X ∗ for the set of finite words on X ∪ X −1 . We will make use of Σ0n sets and Π0n sets; see [8] for an introduction to these.  4  MAURICE CHIODO, ZACHIRI MCKENZIE  2.2. X-torsion. If G, H are groups, and X a set of integers with H X-torsion-free, a surjective homomorphism h ∶ G ↠ H is universal if, for any X-torsion-free K and any homomorphism f ∶ G → K, there is a homomorphism φ ∶ H → K such that f = φ ○ h ∶ G → K, i.e., the following diagram commutes: h / H ❆❆ ❆❆ ❆ φ f ❆   G❆  K Note that if φ exists then it will be unique. Indeed, if φ′ also satisfies f = φ′ ○ h, then φ ○ h = φ′ ○ h, and hence φ = φ′ as h is a surjection and thus is rightcancellative. Moreover, any such H is unique, up to isomorphism. Such an H is called the universal X-torsion-free quotient for G, denoted GX−tf . Observe that if G is itself X-torsion-free, then GX−tf exists and GX−tf ≅ G, as the identity map idG ∶ G → G has the universal property above. A standard construction, showing that GX−tf exists for every group G, is done via taking the quotient of G by its X-torsion-free radical ρX (G), where ρX (G) is the intersection of all normal subgroups N ⊲ G with G/N X-torsion-free (a generalisation of the torsion-free radical, ρ(G), in [2]). It follows immediately that G/ρX (G) has all the properties of an X-torsion-free universal quotient for G. We present here an alternative construction for GX−tf which, though isomorphic to G/ρX (G), lends itself more easily to an effective procedure for finitely (or recursively) presented groups Definition 2.1. Given a group G, and a set of integers X ⊆ N, we inductively define TorX n (G) as follows: TorX 0 (G) ∶= {e}, X X X G TorX n+1 (G) ∶= ⟪ {g ∈ G ∣ g Torn (G) ∈ Tor (G/ Torn (G))} ⟫ , X TorX ω (G) ∶= ⋃ Torn (G). n∈N  TorX i (G)  Thus, is the set of elements of G which are annihilated upon taking i successive quotients of G by the normal closure of all X-torsion elements, and TorX ω (G) is the union of all these. Lemma 2.2. If G is a group, then G/ TorX ω (G) is X-torsion-free. X X X n Proof. Suppose g TorX ω (G) ∈ Tor (G/ Torω (G)). Then g Torω (G) = e in X n G/ TorX ω (G) for some 1 ≤ n ∈ X, so g ∈ Torω (G). Thus there is some i ∈ N X X X such that g n ∈ TorX i (G), and hence g Tori (G) ∈ Tor (G/ Tori (G)). Thus X X X X g ∈ Tori+1 (G) ⊆ Torω (G), and so g Torω (G) = e in G/ Torω (G).   Proposition 2.3. If G is a group, then ρX (G) = TorX ω (G). X Proof. Clearly ρX (G) ⊆ TorX ω (G), by definition of ρ (G) and the fact that X G/ Torω (G) is torsion-free (Lemma 2.2). It remains to show that TorX ω (G) ⊆ X ρX (G). We proceed by contradiction, so assume TorX (G) ⊈ ρ (G). Then ω  X-TORSION AND UNIVERSAL GROUPS  5  there is some N ⊲ G with G/N X-torsion-free, along with some minimal i such X that TorX i (G) ⊈ N (clearly, i > 0, as Tor0 (G) = {e}). Then, by definition of X Tori (G) and the fact that N is normal, there exists e ≠ g ∈ TorX i (G) such X X X X that g Tori−1 (G) ∈ Tor (G/ Tori−1 (G)) and g ∉ N (or else Tori (G) ⊆ N ). But then gn ∈ Tori−1 (G) for some 1 < n ∈ X. Since TorX i−1 (G) ⊆ N by minimality of i, we have that gN is a (non-trivial) X-torsion element of G/N , contradicting X X-torsion-freeness of G/N . Hence TorX  ω (G) ⊆ ρ (G). X−tf Corollary 2.4. If G is a group, then G/ TorX . ω (G) ≅ G  What follows is a standard result, which we state without proof. Lemma 2.5. Let P = ⟨X∣R⟩ be a countably generated recursive presentation. Then the set of words {w ∈ X ∗ ∣ w = e in P } is r.e. Lemma 2.6. Let P = ⟨X∣R⟩ be a countably generated recursive presentation, and A an r.e. set of integers. Then the set of words {w ∈ X ∗ ∣ w ∈ TorA (P )} is r.e. Proof. Take any recursive enumeration {w1 , w2 , . . .} of X ∗ . Using Lemma 2.5, start checking if w ni = e in P for each wi ∈ X ∗ and each n ∈ A (by proceeding along finite diagonals). For each wi we come across which is A-torsion, add it to our enumeration. This procedure will enumerate all words in TorA (P ), and only words in TorA (P ). Thus the set of words in X ∗ representing elements in TorA (P ) is r.e.  We use this to show the following: Lemma 2.7. Given a countably generated recursive presentation P = ⟨X∣R⟩, and r.e. set of integers A, the set TiA ∶= {w ∈ X ∗ ∣ w ∈ TorA i (P )} is r.e., uniformly over all i and all such presentations P . Moreover, the union TωA ∶= ⋃ TiA is r.e., and is precisely the set {w ∈ X ∗ ∣ w ∈ TorA ω (P )}. Proof. We proceed by induction. Clearly TorA 1 (P ) is r.e., as it is the normal closure of TorA (P ), which is r.e. by Lemma 2.6. So assume that TorA i (P ) is A A r.e. for all i ≤ n. Then Torn+1 (P ) is the normal closure of Tor (P / TorA n (P )), which again is r.e. by the induction hypothesis and Lemma 2.6. The rest of the lemma then follows immediately.  Proposition 2.8. There is a uniform algorithm that, on input of a countably generated recursive presentation P = ⟨X∣R⟩ of a group P , and an r.e. set of integers A, outputs a countably generated recursive presentation P A−tf = ⟨X∣R′ ⟩ A−tf (on the same generating set X, and with R ⊆ R′ as sets) such that P A−tf ≅ P , with associated surjection given by extending idX ∶ X → X. A−tf  Proof. By Corollary 2.4, P is the group P / TorA ω (P ). Then, with the notation of Lemma 2.7, it can be seen that P A−tf ∶= ⟨X∣R ∪ Tω ⟩ is a countably A−tf , uniformly constructed from P .  generated recursive presentation for P  6  MAURICE CHIODO, ZACHIRI MCKENZIE  2.3. Universality and complexity of X-torsion. With the above machinery, we can now prove the main technical result of this section; Theorem 2.9. We will re-prove this result again in Section 3, using tools from model theory. Theorem 2.9. Let A be an r.e. set of integers. Then there is a countably generated recursive presentation Q of a group Q which is A-torsion-free, and contains an embedded copy of every countably generated recursively presentable A-torsion-free group. Proof. Take an enumeration P1 , P2 , . . . of all countably generated recursive presentations of groups, and construct the countably generated recursive presentation Q ∶= P1A−tf ∗P2A−tf ∗. . .; this is the countably infinite free product of the universal A-torsion-free quotient of all countably generated recursively presentable groups (with some repetition). As each PiA−tf is uniformly constructible from Pi (by Proposition 2.8), we have that our construction of Q is indeed effective, and hence Q is a countably generated recursive presentation. Also, Proposition 2.8 shows that Q is an A-torsion-free group, as we have successfully annihilated all the A-torsion in the free product factors, and the free product of A-torsionfree groups is again A-torsion-free. Moreover, Q contains an embedded copy of every A-torsion-free countably generated recursively presentable group, as the universal A-torsion-free quotient of an A-torsion-free group is itself.  As detailed in [3, Lemma 6.9 and Theorem 6.10], the following is implicit in Rotman’s proof [9, Theorem 12.18] of the Higman Embedding Theorem. Theorem 2.10. There is a uniform algorithm that, on input of a countably generated recursive presentation P = ⟨X∣R⟩, constructs a finite presentation T(P ) such that P ↪ T(P ) and Tord(P ) = Tord(T(P )), along with an explicit embedding φ ∶ P ↪ T(P ). We can now prove our main result: Theorem 2.11. Let A be an r.e. set of integers. Then there is a finitely presentable group G which is A-torsion-free, and contains an embedded copy of every countably generated recursively presentable A-torsion-free group. Proof. We construct Q as in Theorem 2.9, and then use Theorem 2.10 to embed Q into a finitely presentable group T(Q). By construction, Tord(Q) = Tord(T(Q)), so T(Q) is A-torsion-free. Finally, T(Q) has an embedded copy of every countably generated recursively presentable A-torsion-free group, since Q did. Taking G to be T(Q) completes the proof.  As all f.p. groups are recursively presentable, we have the following corollary: Theorem 2.12. Let A be an r.e. set of integers. Then there is a universal finitely presented A-torsion-free group G. That is, G is A-torsion-free, and for any finitely presented group H we have that H ↪ G if (and only if ) H is A-torsion-free. The following is an unexpected and very strong generalisation of [4, Theorem 4.2], classifying the computational complexity of recognising f.p. A-torsion-free groups.  X-TORSION AND UNIVERSAL GROUPS  7  Theorem 2.13. Let A ⊆ N≥2 be a non-empty set of integers. Then the set of finite presentations of A-torsion-free groups is Π02 -hard. Moreover, if A is r.e., then this set of presentations is Π02 -complete. Proof. This follows the proofs of [3, Lemma 6.11] and [4, Theorem 4.2]. First, there must be some element 1 < a ∈ A. Now, given n ∈ N, form the recursive presentation Pn ∶= ⟨x1 , x2 , . . . ∣ xai = e ∀i ∈ N, xj = e ∀j ∈ Wn ⟩. Then form the finite presentation Qn using Higman’s Embedding Theorem (Theorem 2.10) so that Tord(Qn ) = Tord P n . Now note that Qn is A-torsion-free ⇔ P n is Atorsion free ⇔ xi = e for all i ∈ N ⇔ Wn = N; the latter being a Π02 -complete set ([4, Lemma 4.1]). So the set of finite presentations of A-torsion-free groups is Π02 -hard, for any non-empty A ⊆ N≥2 . Moreover, when A is also r.e., this set has the following Π02 description: G is A-torsion-free ⇔ (∀w ∈ G)(∀n ∈ A)(wn ≠G e or w =G e) and is thus Π02 -complete.    Note that the recursive presentation Pn can be constructed uniformly from n whenever A is r.e. and non-empty, as to find our 1 < a ∈ A we simply begin an enumeration of A and take the first output. 2.4. X-torsion-length. We finish this section by generalising the notion of torsion length, which was first introduced in [5, Definition 2.5]. Definition 2.14. Given X ⊆ N, we define the X-Torsion Length of G, TorLenX (G), X by the smallest ordinal n such that TorX n (G) = Torω (G). Rather than go and re-work all the theory developed in [5], we simply state here the main results [5, Theorem 3.3 and Theorem 3.10], generalised to Xtorsion. Going through the work in [5], it is straightforward to see that all results there generalise to X-torsion, and thus we refrain from doing so here. Theorem 2.15. Given any ∅ ≠ X ⊆ N≥2 , there is a family of finite presentations {Pn }n∈N of groups satisfying TorLenX (P n ) = n and P n / TorX 1 (P n ) ≅ P n−1 . Theorem 2.16. Given any ∅ ≠ X ⊆ N≥2 , there exists a 2-generator recursive presentation Q for which TorLenX (Q) = ω. If X is r.e., then we can algorithmically construct such a finite presentation Q from X. 3. Presentations The purpose of this section is to re-prove Theorem 2.9 using model-theoretic arguments. We follow the idea in [1, Theorem A.1]. 3.1. Notation. Throughout this section LGrp will be used to denote the language of group theory, that is the language of first-order logic supplemented with a binary function symbol ⋅ whose intended interpretation is the group operation, a constant symbol e whose intended interpretation is the identity element, and a unary function symbol ✷−1 whose intended interpretation is the function that sends  8  MAURICE CHIODO, ZACHIRI MCKENZIE  elements to their inverses. We use the standard abbreviation of writing xn instead of x ⋅ ⋯ ⋅ x. If X is a set of constant symbols that are not in L endowed ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶ n  with a well-ordering of its elements then we write LX for the language obtained by adding the constant symbols in X to L. If L is a language, X is a set of new constant symbols that are not in L endowed with an implicit well-ordering, M is an L-structure, and A ⊆ M with a canonical bijection witnessing that ∣A∣ = ∣X∣, then we write ⟨M, A⟩ for the LX -structure obtained by interpreting the constant symbols in X with the elements of A. If M is an L-structure and A ⊆ M, then we say that M is generated by A if all of M is obtained by closing A and the constants of M under applications of the interpretation of functions from L in M. 3.2. Model theory preliminaries. We begin by recalling some definitions and results from Chapter 9 of [7]. Definition 3.1. Let L be a language. We say that an L∞∞ -formula φ is basic Horn if φ is in the form ⋀ Φ ⇒ ψ, where Φ is a, possibly infinite, set of atomic L-formulae, and ψ is either an atomic L-formula or . We say that an L∞∞ -formula φ is universal Horn, and write ∀1 Horn, if φ is in the form ∀⃗ xθ(⃗ x) where θ is basic Horn. We say that an L-theory T is universal Horn if T has an axiomatisation that only consists of ∀1 Horn sentences. Let TGrp be the obvious LGrp -theory that axiomatises the class of groups. It is clear that that TGrp can be written as a finite set of finitary ∀1 Horn sentences. Definition 3.2. Let X ⊆ N. We write TX−tf for the LGrp -theory with axioms: TGrp ∪ {∀x(xn = e ⇒ x = e) ∣ n ∈ X}. It is clear that for all X ⊆ N, TX−tf is a finitary universal Horn theory that axiomatises the class of X-torsion-free groups. Definition 3.3. Let L be a language and let K be a class of L-structures. A K-presentation is a tuple ⟨X, Φ⟩K such that X is a set of new constant symbols endowed with an implicit well-ordering, called generators, that are not in L, and Φ is a set of atomic LX -sentences. We will write ⟨X, Φ⟩ instead of ⟨X, Φ⟩K when K is clear from the context. If both Φ and X are finite then we say that ⟨X, Φ⟩K is a finitely presented K-presentation. If both Φ and X are r.e. then we say that ⟨X, Φ⟩K is a recursively presented K-presentation. Definition 3.4. Let L be a language and let K be a class of L-structures. Let ⟨X, Φ⟩K be a K-presentation. We say that an LX -structure ⟨M, A⟩ is a model of ⟨X, Φ⟩K if M ∈ K and ⟨M, A⟩ ⊧ ⋀ Φ. Definition 3.5. Let L be a language and let K be a class of L-structures. Let ⟨X, Φ⟩K be a K-presentation. We say that ⟨X, Φ⟩K presents an LX -structure ⟨M, A⟩ if  X-TORSION AND UNIVERSAL GROUPS  9  (i) ⟨M, A⟩ is a model of ⟨X, Φ⟩K , (ii) M is generated by A, (iii) for every model ⟨N , B⟩ of ⟨X, Φ⟩K , there exists a homomorphism f ∶ M Ð→ N such that f (cM ) = cN for all c ∈ X. We say that K admits presentations if every K-presentation presents a structure ⟨M, A⟩ with M ∈ K. Note that if ⟨X, Φ⟩ presents ⟨M, A⟩ and ⟨N , B⟩ is a model of ⟨X, Φ⟩, then, since M is generated by A, the homomorphism whose existence is guaranteed by Definition 3.5(iii) is unique. The following is Lemma 9.2.1 of [7]: Lemma 3.6. Let Φ be a set of atomic LX -sentences where X is a set of constants not in L. Let ⟨X, Φ⟩ be a K-presentation and let ⟨M, A⟩ be an LX structure with M ∈ K. The following are equivalent: (i) ⟨X, Φ⟩ presents ⟨M, A⟩, (ii) A generates M; and for every atomic formula ψ(⃗ x) of L and for every a ⃗ ∈ A, M ⊧ ψ(⃗ a) if and only if every structure in K is a model of ∀⃗ x (⋀ Φ ⇒ ψ) . And this is Lemma 9.2.2 of [7]: Lemma 3.7. Let L be a language and let K be a class of L-structures which is closed under isomorphic copies. The following are equivalent: (i) K is closed under products, 1 and substructures, (ii) K admits presentations, (iii) K is axiomatised by a universal Horn theory in the language L∞∞ . 3.3. A proof of Theorem 2.9 using model theory. The following is an adaptation of the proof of Theorem A.1 in [1]. Theorem 3.8. If T ⊇ TGrp is an r.e. universal Horn LGrp -theory then there exists a recursively presented group G ⊧ T such that every recursively presented group H ⊧ T embeds into G. Remark 3.9. A group property ρ having an r.e. universal Horn theory does not imply that the finite presentations of groups with ρ are r.e. Indeed, for X a non-empty r.e. set, TX−tf is an r.e. universal Horn theory (Definition 3.2), but by Theorem 2.13 the set of finite presentations of such groups is Π02 -complete. Proof. Let T ⊇ TGrp be a r.e. universal Horn LGrp -theory. Let K be the class of LGrp -structures that satisfy T . Let K′ be the class of LGrp -structures that satisfy TGrp . By Lemma 3.7, both K and K′ admit presentations. If τ is a presentation, then we will write Gτ for the element of K presented by τ , and Gτ for the element of K′ presented by τ . Let ⟨πn ∣ n ∈ N⟩ be effective enumeration of recursive presentations. Let π be the disjoint union of all the πn ’s; π ∶= π1 ∗ π2 ∗ ⋯. Therefore, π is a recursive presentation. We claim that Gπ is the desired universal group satisfying T . It is immediate that Gπ ⊧ T . If τ is a recursive presentation such that Gτ ⊧ T then Gτ = Gτ , and so Gτ embeds into Gπ . This shows that Gπ is universal. It remains to show that Gπ  10  MAURICE CHIODO, ZACHIRI MCKENZIE  is recursively presented in K′ . Let π = ⟨Y, Φ⟩ and let Y G be the interpretations of the constant symbols Y in Gπ . Let Φ′ be the set of atomic LGrp,Y -sentences (the language obtained by adding new constants for the generators in Y ) that π π hold in ⟨Gπ , Y G ⟩. Lemma 3.6 implies that ⟨Y, Φ′ ⟩K′ presents ⟨Gπ , Y G ⟩. We need to show is that Φ′ is r.e. Let S = T ∪ Φ. We claim that for all atomic LGrp,Y -sentences σ, π  (1)  S ⊢ σ if and only if σ ∈ Φ′ .  Since Gπ ⊧ S, it follows that for all atomic LGrp,Y -sentences σ, if S ⊢ σ then σ ∈ Φ′ . We need to show the converse. Let σ ∈ Φ′ , and suppose that S ⊬ σ. Note that, since σ is atomic, it is of the form w1 = w2 where w1 and w2 are words in the generators Y . Let H be a group such that Y H is the interpretation of the constant symbols Y in H, ⟨H, Y H ⟩ ⊧ S, and H ⊧ (w1 ≠ w2 ). Therefore ⟨H, Y H ⟩ is a model of ⟨Y, Φ⟩K . It follows from (iii) of Definition 3.5 that the π map g ∶ Y G Ð→ Y H defined by the implicit ordering on Y must lift to a homomorphism f ∶ Gπ Ð→ H. But this map is not well-defined since w1 = w2 in Gπ and f (w1 ) ≠ f (w2 ) in H, which is a contradiction. Therefore (1) holds. Since S is r.e., (1) yields a recursive enumeration of the elements of Φ′ .  If X ⊆ N is r.e. then Definition 3.2 shows that TX−tf is an r.e. universal Horn theory that extends TGrp . This immediately re-proves Theorem 2.9. It is then an application of Theorem 2.10 again, to re-prove Theorem 2.12. This time, we have done most of the work using model-theoretic techniques and in a way which could be applied to other group properties (not just X-torsion-freeness), as discussed in the introduction. References [1] I. Belegradek, A. Szczepański, Endomorphisms of relatively hyperbolic groups with an appendix by O. Belegradek, Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 18, No. 1, 97–110 (2008). [2] S. D. Brodsky, J. Howie, The universal torsion-free image of a group, Israel J. Math. 98, 209–228 (1997). [3] M. Chiodo, Finding non-trivial elements and splittings in groups, J. Algebra. 331, 271– 284 (2011). [4] M. Chiodo, On torsion in finitely presented groups, Groups Complex. Cryptol. (2) 6, 1–8 (2014). [5] M. Chiodo, R. Vyas, A note on torsion length, Comm. Algebra, 43, No. 11, 4825–4835 (2015). [6] G. Higman, Subgroups of finitely presented groups, Proc. Roy. Soc. Ser. A 262, 455–475 (1961). [7] W. Hodges, Model Theory. Encyclopedia of mathematics and its applications. No. 42. Cambridge University Press, 1993. [8] H. Rogers Jr, Theory of recursive functions and effective computability, MIT Press, (1987). [9] J. Rotman, An introduction to the theory of groups, Springer-Verlag, New York, (1995). Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, University of Cambridge, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge, CB3 0WB, UK. mcc56@cam.ac.uk Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science, Gothenburg University, Olof Wijksgatan 6, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. zachiri.mckenzie@gu.se

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
