Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_1250

Abstract:
Optimal Inference After Model Selection William Fithian∗1 , Dennis L. Sun2 , and Jonathan Taylor3  arXiv:1410.2597v4 [math.ST] 18 Apr 2017  1  2  Department of Statistics, University of California Berkeley Department of Statistics, California Polytechnic State University 3 Department of Statistics, Stanford University April 19, 2017  Abstract To perform inference after model selection, we propose controlling the selective type I error; i.e., the error rate of a test given that it was performed. By doing so, we recover long-run frequency properties among selected hypotheses analogous to those that apply in the classical (non-adaptive) context. Our proposal is closely related to data splitting and has a similar intuitive justification, but is more powerful. Exploiting the classical theory of Lehmann and Scheffé (1955), we derive most powerful unbiased selective tests and confidence intervals for inference in exponential family models after arbitrary selection procedures. For linear regression, we derive new selective z-tests that generalize recent proposals for inference after model selection and improve on their power, and new selective t-tests that do not require knowledge of the error variance.  1  Introduction  A typical statistical investigation can be thought of as consisting of two stages: 1. Selection: The analyst chooses a statistical model for the data at hand, and formulates testing, estimation, or other problems in terms of unknown aspects of that model. 2. Inference: The analyst investigates the chosen problems using the data and the selected model. Informally, the selection stage determines what questions to ask, and the inference stage answers those questions. Most statistical methods carry an implicit assumption that selection is nonadaptive — that is, choices about which model to use, hypothesis to test, or parameter to estimate, are made before seeing the data. Adaptive selection (also known colloquially as “data snooping”) violates this assumption, formally invalidating any subsequent inference. In some cases, it is possible to specify the question prior to collecting the data—for instance, if the data are governed by some known physical law. However, in most applications, the choice of question is at least partially guided by the data. For example, we often perform exploratory analyses to decide which predictors or interactions to include in a regression model or to check whether the assumptions of a test are satisfied. The goal of this paper is to codify what it means for inference to be valid in the presence of adaptive selection and to propose methods that achieve this “selective validity.” If we do not account properly for adaptive model selection, the resulting inferences can have troubling frequency properties, as we now illustrate with an example. ∗ To  whom correspondence should be addressed  1  Example 1 (File Drawer Effect). Suppose one or more scientific research groups make n independent measurements of n quantities, Yi ∼ N (µi , 1). They focus only on the apparently large effects, selecting (say) only the indices i for which |Yi | > 1, i.e. Ib = {i : |Yi | > 1}. Each scientist wishes to test H0,i : µi = 0 for his own i ∈ Ib at significance level α = 0.05. Most practitioners intuitively recognize that the nominal test that rejects H0,i when |Yi | > 1.96 is invalidated by the selection. What exactly is “invalid” about this test? After all, the probability of falsely rejecting a given H0,i is still P(|Yi | > 1.96) = 0.05, since H0,i is simply not tested at all most of the time. Rather, the troubling feature is that the error rate among the hypotheses selected for testing is possibly much higher than α. To be precise, let n0 be the number of true null effects and suppose n0 → ∞ as n → ∞. Then, in the long run, the fraction of errors among the true nulls we test is X 1 b reject H0,i } 1{i ∈ I, n0 i: H0,i true # false rejections = X # true nulls selected 1 b 1{i ∈ I} n0 i: H0,i true →  b reject H0,i ) PH0,i (i ∈ I, b PH (i ∈ I) 0,i  b = PH0,i (reject H0,i | i ∈ I),  (1)  which for the nominal test is Φ(−1.96)/Φ(−1) ≈ .16. Thus, we see that (1), the probability of a false rejection conditional on selection, is a natural error criterion to control in the presence of selection. In this example, we can directly control (1) at level α = 0.05 simply by finding the critical value c solving  PH0,i |Yi | > c |Yi | > 1 = 0.05. In this case c = 2.41, which is more stringent than the nominal 1.96 cutoff. This paper will develop a theory for inference after selection based on controlling the selective type I error rate (1). Our guiding principle is: The answer must be valid, given that the question was asked. For all its simplicity, Example 1 can be regarded as a stylized model of science. Imagine that each Yi represents an estimated effect size from a scientific study. However, only the large estimates are ever published—a caricature which may not be too far from the truth, as recently demonstrated by Franco et al. (2014). To compound the problem, there may be many reasonable methodologies to choose from, even once the analyst has decided roughly what scientific question to address (Gelman and Loken, 2013). Because of the resulting selection bias, the error rate among published claims may be very high, leading even to speculation that “most published research findings are false” (Ioannidis, 2005). Thus, selection effects may be a partial explanation for the replicability crisis reported in the scientific community (Yong, 2012) and the popular media (Johnson, 2014). The setting of Example 1 has been studied extensively in the literature of simultaneous and selective inference, and several authors have proposed adjusting for selection by means of conditional inference. Zöllner and Pritchard (2007) and Zhong and Prentice (2008) construct selectionadjusted estimators and intervals for genome-wide association studies for genes that pass a fixed 2  initial significance threshold, based on a conditional Gaussian likelihood. Cohen and Sackrowitz (1989) obtain unbiased estimates for the mean of the population whose sample mean is largest by conditioning on the ordering of the observed sample means, and Sampson and Sill (2005) and Sill and Sampson (2009) apply the same idea to obtain estimates for the best-performing drug in an adaptive clinical trial design. Hedges (1984) and Hedges (1992) propose methods to adjust for the file drawer effect in meta-analysis when scientists only publish significant results. Another framework for selection adjustment is proposed by Benjamini and Yekutieli (2005), who consider the problem of constructing intervals for a number R of parameters selected after viewing the data. Letting V denote the number of non-covering intervals among those constructed, they define the false coverage-statement rate (FCR) as the expected fraction V / max(R, 1) of noncovering intervals. Controlling the FCR at level α thus amounts to “coverage on the average, among selected intervals.” As we will see further in Section 8, FCR control is closely related to the selective error control criterion we propose. In fact, Weinstein et al. (2013) employ conditional inference to construct FCR-controlling intervals in the context of Example 1. Rosenblatt and Benjamini (2014) propose a similar method for finding correlated regions of the brain, also with a view toward FCR control.  1.1  Conditioning on Selection  In classical statistical inference, the notion of “inference after selection” does not exist. The analyst must specify the model, as well as the hypothesis to be tested, in advance of looking at the data. A classical level-α test for a hypothesis H0 under model M must control the usual or nominal type I error rate: PM,H0 (reject H0 ) ≤ α. (2) The subscript in (2) reminds us that the probability is computed under the assumption that the data Y are generated from model M , and H0 is true; if M is misspecified, there are no guarantees on the rejection probability. In most statistical practice, it is unrealistic to rule out model selection altogether: statisticians are trained to check their models and to tweak them if they diagnose a problem (to a purist, even model checking is suspect, since it leaves open the possibility that the model will change after we see the data). We will argue that if the model and hypothesis are selected adaptively, we should instead control the selective type I error rate PM,H0 (reject H0 | (M, H0 ) selected) ≤ α.  (3)  One can argue that models and hypotheses are practically never truly fixed but are chosen randomly, since they are based on the outcomes of previous experiments in the (random) scientific process. Typically, we ignore the random selection and use classical tests that control (2), implicitly assuming that the randomness in selecting M and H0 is independent of the data used for inference. In that case, PM,H0 (reject H0 | (M, H0 ) selected) = PM,H0 (reject H0 ). (4) While it may seem pedantic to point out that model selection is random if based on previous experiments, this viewpoint justifies a common prescription for what to do when previous experiments do not dictate a model. If it is possible to split the data Y = (Y1 , Y2 ) with Y1 independent of Y2 , then we can imitate the scientific process by setting aside Y1 for selection and Y2 for inference. If selection depends on Y1 only, then any nominal level-α test based on the value of Y2 will satisfy (4), so the nominal test based on Y2 also controls the selective error (3). This meta-algorithm for generating selective procedures from nominal ones is called data splitting or sample splitting. The idea dates back at least as far as Cox (1975), and, despite the paucity of literature on the topic, is common wisdom among practitioners. For example, it is customary in 3  genetics to use one cohort to identify loci of interest and a separate cohort to confirm them (Sladek et al., 2007). Wasserman and Roeder (2009) and Meinshausen et al. (2009) discuss data-splitting approaches to high-dimensional inference. Data splitting owes much of its popularity to its transparent justification, which even a nonexpert can appreciate: if we imagine that Y1 is observed “first,” then we can proceed to analyze Y2 as though model selection took place “ahead of time.” Equation (4) guarantees that this temporal metaphor will not lead us astray even if it does not describe how Y1 and Y2 were actually collected. Data splitting elegantly solves the problem of controlling selective error, but at a cost. It not only reduces the amount of data available for inference, but also reduces the amount of data available for selection. Furthermore, it is not always possible to split the data into independent parts, as in the case of autocorrelated spatial and time series data. In this article, we propose directly controlling the selective error rate (3) by conditioning on the event that (M, H0 ) is selected. As with data splitting, we treat the data as though it were revealed in stages: in the first stage, we “observe” just enough data to resolve the decision of whether to test (M, H0 ), after which we can treat the data (Y | (M, H0 ) selected) as “not yet observed” when the second stage commences. The intuition of the above paragraph can be expressed formally in terms of the filtration F0  ⊆  F (1A (Y ))  used for selection  ⊆  F (Y ),  (5)  used for inference  where F (Z) denotes the σ-algebra generated by a random variable Z (informally, everything we know about the data after observing Z), F0 is the trivial σ-algebra (representing complete ignorance), and A is the selection event {(M, H0 ) selected}. We can think of “time” as progressing from left to right in (5). In stage one, we learn just enough to decide whether to test (M, H0 ), and no more, advancing our state of knowledge from F0 to F (1A (Y )). We then begin stage two, in which we discover the actual value of Y , advancing our knowledge to F (Y ). Because our selection decision is made at the end of stage one, everything revealed during stage two is fair game for inference. In effect, controlling the type I error conditional on A prevents us from appealing to the fact that Y ∈ A as evidence against H0 . Even if Y ∈ A is extremely surprising under H0 , we still will not reject unless we are surprised anew in the second stage. In this sense, conditioning on a random variable discards the information it carries about any parameter or hypothesis of interest. In contrast to data splitting, which can be viewed as conditioning on Y1 instead of 1A (Y1 ), we advocate discarding as little information as possible and reserving the rest for stage two. This frugality results in a more efficient division of the information carried by Y , which we call data carving.  1.2  Outline  In Section 2 we formalize the problem of selective inference, discuss general properties of selective error control, and address key conceptual questions. Conditioning on the selection event effectively discards the information used for selection, but some information is left over for second-stage inference. We will also see that a major advantage of selective error control is that it allows us to consider only one model at a time when designing tests and intervals, even if a priori there are many models under consideration. If L(Y ), the law of random variable Y , follows an exponential family model, then for any event A, L(Y | A) follows a closely related exponential family model. As a result, selective inference dovetails naturally with the classical optimality theory of Lehmann and Scheffé (1955); Section 3 briefly reviews this theory and derives most powerful unbiased selective tests in arbitrary exponential family models after arbitrary model selection procedures. Because conditioning on more data 4  than is necessary saps the power of second-stage tests, data splitting yields inadmissible selective tests under general conditions. Section 5 gives some general strategies for computing rejection cutoffs for the tests prescribed in Section 3, while Sections 4–6 derive selective tests in specific examples. Section 4 focuses on the case of linear regression, generalizing the recent proposals of Tibshirani et al. (2014), Lee et al. (2016), and others. We derive new, more powerful selective z-tests, as well as selective t-tests that do not require knowledge of the error variance σ 2 . Several simulations in Section 7 compare the post-lasso selective z-test with data splitting, and illustrate a selection–inference tradeoff, between using more data in the initial stage and reserving more information for the second stage. Section 8 compares and contrasts selective inference with multiple inference, and Section 9 concludes.  2 2.1  The Problem of Selective Inference Example: Regression and the Lasso  In the previous section, we motivated the idea of conditioning on selection. Arguably, the most familiar example of this “selection” is variable selection in linear regression. In regression, the observed data Y ∈ Rn is assumed to be generated from a multivariate normal distribution Y ∼ Nn (µ, σ 2 In ).  (6)  The goal is to model the mean µ as a linear function of predictors Xj , j = 1, . . . , p. To obtain a more parsimonious model (or simply an identifiable model when p > n), researchers will often use only a subset M ⊆ {1, . . . , p} of the predictors. Each subset M leads to a different statistical model corresponding to the assumption µ = XM β M , where XM denotes the matrix consisting of M columns Xj for j ∈ M . Then, it is customary to report tests of H0,j : βjM = 0 for each coefficient in the model. If M was chosen in a data-dependent way, then to control selective error we must M condition on having selected (M, H0,j ), which in this case is the same as conditioning on having selected model M . There are many data-driven methods for variable selection in linear regression, ranging from AIC minimization to forward stepwise selection, cf. Hastie et al. (2009). We will consider one procedure in particular, based on the lasso, mostly because selective inference in the context of the lasso (Lee et al., 2016) was a main motivation for the present work. The lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) provides an estimate of β ∈ Rp that solves β̂ = argmin ||Y − Xβ||22 + λ||β||1 ,  (7)  β  where X is the “full” matrix consisting of all p predictors. The first term is the usual least-squares objective, while the second term encourages many of the coefficients to be exactly zero. Because of this property, it makes sense to define the model “selected” by the lasso to be the set of variables with non-zero coefficients, i.e., c(Y ) = {j : β̂j 6= 0}. M c(Y ) can take on up to 2p possible values, one for each subset of {1, ..., p}. The Notice that M c(y) = M } form a partition of Rn into regions that correspond to each model. regions AM = {y : M To control the selective error after selecting a particular M , we must condition on the event that Y landed in AM . The partition for a lasso problem with p = 3 variables in n = 2 dimensions is shown in Figure 1. An explicit characterization of the lasso partition can be found in Lee et al. (2016); see also Harris (2014) for an interactive visualization of the way the lasso partitions the sample space. A different selection procedure would partition the sample space differently; characterizations of 5  Figure 1: An example of the lasso with n = 2 observations and p = 3 variables.Tests are based on the distribution of Y , conditional on its landing in the highlighted region. the partitions in forward stepwise selection and marginal screening can be found in Loftus and Taylor (2014) and Lee and Taylor (2014), respectively. c(Y ), but Imagine that in stage one, we loaded the data into a software package and computed M we remain otherwise ignorant of the value Y — that is, we have observed which of the regions Y falls into but not where Y is in that region. Now that we have chosen the model, we will construct M tests of H0,j : βjM = 0 for each of the selected variables. In the example shown in Figure 1, we selected variables 1 and 3 and thus test the two hypotheses {1,3}  H0,1  {1,3} H0,3  {1,3}  : β1 :  {1,3} β3  =0 = 0.  Notice that we have to be careful to always specify the model along with the coefficient, since the coefficient for variable j does not necessarily have a consistent interpretation across different models. Each regression coefficient summarizes the effect of that variable, adjusting for the other variables in the model. For example, “What is the effect of IQ on salary?” is a genuinely different question from “What is the effect of IQ on salary, after adjusting for years of education?” Both questions are meaningful, but they are fundamentally different.1 Having chosen the model M and conditioned on the selection, we will base our tests on the precise location of Y , which we do not know yet. Conditionally, Y is not Gaussian, but it does follow an exponential family. As a result, we can appeal to the classical theory of Lehmann and Scheffé (1955) to construct tests or confidence intervals for its natural parameters, which are β M if σ 2 is known, and otherwise are (β M /σ 2 , 1/σ 2 ). With this concrete example in mind, we will now develop a general framework of selective inference that is much more broadly applicable. Because we are explicitly allowing models and hypotheses to be random, it is necessary to carefully define our inferential goals. We first discuss selective inference in the context of hypothesis testing. The closely related developments for confidence intervals will follow in Section 2.4. 1 We use the word “effect” here informally to refer to a regression coefficient, recognizing that regression cannot establish causal claims on its own.  6  2.2  Selective Hypothesis Tests  We now introduce notation that we will use for the remainder of the article. Assume that our data Y lies in some measurable space (Y, F ), with unknown sampling distribution Y ∼ F . The analyst’s task is to pose a reasonable probability model M — i.e., a family of distributions which she believes contains F — and then carry out inference based on the observation Y . Let Q denote the question space of inference problems q we might tackle. A hypothesis testing problem is a pair q = (M, H0 ) of a model M and null hypothesis H0 , by which we mean a submodel H0 ⊆ M .2 We write M (q) and H0 (q) for the model and hypothesis corresponding to q. Without loss of generality, we assume H0 (q) is tested against the alternative hypothesis H1 (q) = M (q) \ H0 (q). To avoid measurability issues, we will assume throughout that Q is countable, although our framework can be extended to uncountable Q with additional care. In Section 2.1 where we test each variable in a selected regression model, the question space is M Q = {(M, H0,j ) : M ⊆ {1, . . . , p}, j ∈ M }.  Note our slight abuse of notation in using M interchangeably to refer both to a subset of variable  indices and to the corresponding probability model Nn (XM βM , σ 2 In ) : β ∈ R|M | . We model selective inference as a process with two distinct stages: b )⊆Q 1. Selection: From the collection Q of possible questions, the analyst selects a subset Q(Y to test, based on the data. 2. Inference: The analyst performs a hypothesis test of H0 (q) against M (q) \ H0 (q) for each b ). q ∈ Q(Y In the case of the simple regression example shown in Figure 1, where we selected variables 1 b would consist of the hypotheses for each of the two variables in the model: and 3, Q n   o {1,3} {1,3} b )= Q(Y {1, 3}, H0,1 , {1, 3}, H0,3 . A correctly specified model M is one that contains the true sampling distribution F . Importantly, we expressly do not assume that all — or any — of the candidate models are correctly specified. Because the analyst must choose M without knowing F , she could choose poorly, in which case there may be no formal guarantees on the behavior of the test she performs in stage two. Some degree of misspecification is the rule rather than the exception in most real statistical applications, whether models are specified adaptively or non-adaptively. Our analyst would be in the same position if she were to select a (probably wrong) model using Y , then use that model to perform a test on new data Y ∗ collected in a confirmatory experiment. See Section 2.6.2 for further discussion of this issue. For our purposes, a hypothesis test is a function φ(y) taking values in [0, 1], representing the probability of rejecting H0 if Y = y. In most cases, the value of the function will be either 0 or 1, but with discrete variables, randomization may be necessary to achieve exact level α. To adjust for selection in testing q, we condition on the event that the question was asked, which we describe by the selection event b )}, Aq = {q ∈ Q(Y  (8)  i.e., the event that q is among the questions asked. In general, the selection events for different M questions are not disjoint. In the regression example, where we test H0,j if and only if model M 2 We identify a “null hypothesis” like H 0 : µ(F ) = 0 with the corresponding subfamily or “null model” {F ∈ M : µ(F ) = 0}. This should remind us that the error guarantees of a test do not necessarily extend beyond the model it was designed for.  7  c. By convention we take is selected, conditioning on Aq is equivalent to simply conditioning on M φq (Y ) = 0 for Y ∈ / Aq to reflect the idea that if a hypothesis is not tested then it is not rejected; note this convention does not affect the selective properties of φq . In selective inference, we are mainly interested in the properties of a test φq for a question q, conditional on Aq . We say that φq controls selective type I error at level α if EF [φq (Y ) | Aq ] ≤ α,  for all F ∈ H0 (q).  (9)  and define its selective power function as Powφq (F | Aq ) = EF [φq (Y ) | Aq ].  (10)  Because Q is countable, the only relevant q are those for which P(Aq ) > 0. Notice that only the model M (q) and hypothesis H0 (q) are relevant for defining the selective level and power of a test φq . This means that in designing valid φq , we can concentrate on one q at a time, even if there are many mutually incompatible candidate models in Q. As long as each φq controls the selective error at level α given its selection event Aq , then a global error is also controlled: E [# false rejections] ≤ α, (11) E [# true nulls selected] provided that the denominator is finite. Equation (11) holds for countable Q regardless of the dependence structure across different q. The fact that we can design tests one q at a time makes it much easier to devise selective tests in concrete examples, which we take up in Sections 3–6.  2.3  Comparison to Familywise Error Rate  Selective error control is neither weaker nor stronger than control of the familywise error rate (FWER), which is the probability of rejecting any true null hypothesis: FWER = PF (φq (Y ) = 1 for any q with H0 (q) 3 F ).  (12)  Although the FWER is usually considered the most conservative control guarantee, it does not scale easily across different researchers: suppose that in Example 1, each observation Yi is collected by a different scientific research team at a different university, with each team then publishing the nominal level-α test if |Yi | > 1 and otherwise moving on to another project. At the level of a single research group and experiment, FWER is controlled, but there is a major unaccounted-for multiplicity problem if we consider the discipline as a whole. By contrast, selective error control scales naturally across multiple research groups and requires no coordination among groups. If each research team in a discipline controls the selective error rate for each of its own experiments, then the discipline as a whole will achieve long-run control of the type I error rate among true selected null hypotheses, just as they would if there were no selection. Proposition 1 (Discipline-Wide Error Control). Suppose there are n independently operating research groups in a scientific discipline with a shared, countable question space Q. Research group bi (Yi ) ⊆ Q, and carries out selective level-α tests i collects data Yi ∼ Fi , applies selection rule Q b (φq,i (yi ), q ∈ Qi ). Assume each research group has probability at least δ > 0 of carrying out at least one test of a true null, and for some common B < ∞, h i bi (Yi )|2 ≤ B, EFi |Q for all i. Then as n grows, the discipline as a whole achieves long-run control over the frequentist error rate lim sup n→∞  # false rejections a.s. ≤ α. # true nulls selected 8  (13)  {Sq = s} Y  Aq Figure 2: Instead of conditioning on the selection event Aq that question q is asked, we can condition on a finer event, the value of the random variable Sq . We call Sq the selection variable. The proof is deferred to Appendix A. There is no counterpart to Proposition 1 for other popular error rates such as the false discovery rate (FDR) (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) or familywise error rate (FWER). Section 8 discusses further the relationship between selective error control and other common error rates in multiple inference.  2.4  Selective Confidence Intervals  If the goal is instead to form confidence intervals for a parameter θ(F ), it is more convenient to think of Q as containing pairs q = (M, θ(·)) of a model and a parameter. By analogy to (9), we will call a set C(Y ) a (1 − α) selective confidence set if PF (θ(F ) ∈ C(Y ) | Aq ) ≥ 1 − α,  for all F ∈ M.  (14)  The next result establishes that selective confidence sets can be obtained by inverting selective tests, as one would expect by analogy to the classical case. Proposition 2 (Duality of Selective Tests and Confidence Sets). Suppose we form a confidence interval for θ(F ) on the event Aq . Suppose also that on this event, we form a test φt of H0,t = {F : θ(F ) = t} for all t. Let C(Y ) be the set of t for which φt does not (always) reject: C(Y ) = {t : φt (Y ) < 1} .  (15)  If each φt is a selective level-α test, then C(Y ) is a selective (1 − α) confidence set. Proof. The selective non-coverage probability is   PF (θ(F ) ∈ / C(Y ) | Aq ) = PF (φθ(F ) (Y ) = 1 | Aq ) ≤ EF φθ(F ) (Y ) | Aq ≤ α.  2.5  Conditioning Discards Information  Because performing inference conditional on a random variable effectively disqualifies that variable as evidence against a hypothesis, we will typically want to condition on as little data as possible in stage two. Even so, some selective inference procedures condition on more than Aq . For example, data splitting can be viewed as inference conditional on Y1 , the part of the data used for selection. More generally, we say a selection variable is any variable Sq (Y ) whose level sets partition the sample space more finely than Aq does; i.e., Aq ∈ F (Sq ). Informally, we can think of conditioning on a finer partition of Aq , as shown in Figure 2. 9  We say φ controls the selective type I error with respect to Sq at level α if the error rate is less than α given Sq = s for {Sq = s} ⊆ Aq . More formally,   a.s. EF φ(Y )1Aq (Y ) | Sq ≤ α,  for all F ∈ H0 (q)  (16)  Taking Sq (y) = 1Aq (y), the coarsest possible selection variable, recovers the baseline selective type I error in (9). The definition of a selective confidence set may be generalized in the same way. Generalizing (5) to finer selection variables gives F0  ⊆  F (S(Y ))  used for selection  F (Y ),  ⊆  (17)  used for inference  suggesting that the more we refine S(Y ), the less data we have left for second-stage inference. Indeed, the finer S is, the more stringent is the requirement (16): Proposition 3 (Monotonicity of Selective Error). Suppose F (S1 ) ⊆ F (S2 ). If φ controls the type I error rate at level α for q = (M, H0 ) w.r.t. the finer selection variable S2 , then it also controls the type I error rate at level α w.r.t. the coarser S1 . Proof. If F ∈ H0 , then EF [φ(Y )1A (Y ) | S1 ] = EF       EF φ(Y )1A (Y ) | S2 | S1  a.s.  ≤  α.  Because S(y) = 1A (y) is the coarsest possible choice, a test controlling the type I error w.r.t. any other selection variable also controls the selective error in (9). At the other extreme, if S(y) = y, then we cannot improve on the trivial “coin-flip” test φ(y) ≡ α. Proposition 3 suggests that we will typically sacrifice power as we move from coarser to finer selection variables. Even so, refining the selection variable can be useful for computational reasons. For example, in the case of the lasso, by conditioning additionally on the signs of the nonzero β̂j , the selection event becomes a c convex region instead of the union of up to 2|M | disjoint convex regions (Lee et al., 2016). Another valid reason to refine Sq beyond 1Aq is to strengthen our inferential guarantees in a meaningful way; for example, we can achieve achieve false coverage-statement rate (FCR) control by choosing b )|) (see Section 8, Proposition 11). Sq = (1Aq (Y ), |Q(Y Data splitting corresponds to setting every selection variable equal to S = Y1 . As a result, data splitting does not use all the information that remains after conditioning on A, as we see informally in the three-stage filtration F0  F (1A (Y1 ))  ⊆ used for selection  ⊆ wasted  F (Y1 )  ⊆  F (Y1 , Y2 ).  (18)  used for inference  As we will see in Section 3.2, this waste of information means that data splitting is inadmissible under fairly general conditions. We can quantify the amount of leftover information in terms of the Fisher information that remains in the conditional law of Y given S. In a smooth parametric model, we can decompose the Hessian of the log-likelihood as ∇2 `(θ; Y ) = ∇2 `(θ; S) + ∇2 `(θ; Y | S)  (19)  The conditional expectation IY  | S (θ; S)    = −E ∇2 `(θ; Y | S) | S 10  (20)  Selective Confidence Interval 10 5 0  µ  0.5  Selective CI Nominal CI  −5  0.0  Information  1.0  Leftover Fisher Information  −2  0  2  4  6  8  0  µ  5  10  15  Observed Y  (a) Leftover Fisher information as a function of µ. For µ  3, then there is very little information in the conditional distribution, since Y is conditionally highly concentrated on 3. For µ  3, then Pµ (A) ≈ 1 and virtually no information is lost.  (b) Confidence intervals from inverting the UMPU tests of Section 3. For Y  3, the interval essentially coincides with the nominal interval Y ± 1.96. For Y close to 3, the wide interval reflects potentially severe selection bias.  Figure 3: Univariate Gaussian. Y ∼ N (µ, 1) with selection event A = {Y > 3}. is the leftover Fisher information after selection at S(Y ) (the leftover information is essentially the same as the missing information of Orchard et al. (1972), but we find “leftover” to be a more intuitive descriptor than missing in this context since the information is at our disposal). Taking expectations in (19), we obtain   E IY | S (θ; S) = IY (θ) − IS (θ)  IY (θ). (21) Thus, on average, the price of conditioning on S — the price of selection — is the information S carries about θ.3 In some cases this loss may be quite small, which a simple example elucidates. Example 2. Consider selective inference under the univariate Gaussian model Y ∼ N (µ, 1),  (22)  after conditioning on the selection event A = {Y > 3}. Figure 3a plots the leftover information as a function of µ. If µ  3, there is very little information in the conditional distribution: whether µ = −10 or µ = −11, Y is conditionally highly concentrated on 3. By contrast, if µ  3, then Pµ (A) ≈ 1, the conditional law is practically no different from the marginal law, and virtually no information is lost in the conditioning. Figure 3b shows the confidence intervals that result from inverting the tests described in Section 3. When Y  3, the interval essentially coincides with the nominal interval Y ± 1.96 because there is hardly any selection bias and no real adjustment is necessary. By contrast, when Y is close to 3 it is potentially subject to severe selection bias. This fact is reflected by the confidence interval, which is both longer than the nominal interval and centered at a value significantly less than Y . 3 Note  that we do not necessarily have IY | S (θ; S)  IY (θ) for every S. In fact there are interesting counterexamples where IY | A (θ)  IY (θ) for certain θ, but we will not take them up here.  11  2.6  Conceptual Questions  We now pause to address conceptual objections we have encountered when explaining our work. These objections can be most easily expressed, and answered, in the setting where there is a single b selected model and a single selected hypothesis to test or confidence interval to construct (i.e., Q is always a singleton). There is a common theme in every one of the conceptual objections to follow: they are all equally good grounds for objecting to data splitting, or for that matter, to selecting a model and hypothesis based on a prior experiment whose outcome was random. Thus, a good exercise is to ask ourselves how we would answer the same question if it were asked about data splitting; most likely, the same answer applies equally well to data carving. 2.6.1  How can the model be random?  In our framework, inference is based on a statistical model M that is allowed to be chosen randomly, based on the data Y . A common first reaction is that if the data are generated according to the model, and the model is selected based on the data, then the whole business is circular and nonsensical. To resolve this conundrum, note that in our framework the true sampling distribution F is not selected in any sense; it is entirely outside the analyst’s control. The only thing selected is the working model, a tool the analyst uses to carry out inference, which may or may not include the true F . Thus, the sampling distribution F comes first, then the data Y , then the model M . Random selection of models is not new and should not trouble or confuse us: M would be just as random if it were selected via data splitting, or for that matter if it were based on a prior experiment. Thoughtful skeptics may find reasons for concern about all of these approaches, believing that statistical testing is only appropriate when a model can be based purely on convincing theoretical considerations. We answer only that this point of view would rule out most scientific inquiries for which statistics is ever used. However, for those who are comfortable with choosing a random model using data splitting or a previous experiment, we see no special reason to be any more concerned about choosing a random model using data carving. In any case, M is by no means required to be random, and our conditional-inference framework applies in many interesting settings where M is always the same pre-specified parametric or nonparametric model, but we adaptively choose which hypotheses to test or which parameters to estimate. For example, in our clinical trial example of Section 6.1, the statistical model is always the same but we choose which null hypotheses to test after inspecting the data. The same is true of the conditional confidence intervals of Weinstein et al. (2013), the saturated-model selective z-test proposed by Lee et al. (2016) and discussed in 4.2, and the rank verification methods proposed in Hung and Fithian (2016). 2.6.2  What if the selected model is wrong?  If we were writing about a topic other than selective inference, we might have begun by stating a formal mathematical assumption that the sampling distribution F belongs to a known model M , and then devised a test φ that behaves well when F ∈ M . The same φ might not work well at all for F ∈ / M : for example, if we choose to apply the one-sample t-test of µ = 0 to a sample Y1 , . . . , Yn whose observations are highly correlated, then the probability of rejection may be a great deal larger than the nominal α, even if E[Yi ] = 0. This is not a mistake in the formal theory, nor does it make the t-test an inherently invalid test; rather, the validity or invalidity of a test is defined with respect to its behavior when F ∈ H0 ⊆ M . In any given application, the analyst must choose from among many statistical methods knowing that each one is designed to work under a particular set of parametric or nonparametric  12  assumptions about F — i.e., under a particular model M . Because our theory encompasses both the choice and the subsequent analysis, it would not be sensible to assume that the analyst is infallible and always selects a correct model. Typically some candidate models M are correctly specified, others are not, and the analyst can never know for sure which are which. Any model selection procedure using data splitting, data carving, or a prior experiment always carries a risk of selecting the wrong model, and in all cases the second-stage type I error guarantees are only in force when the model is correct. Of course, the possibility of misspecification is not restricted to adaptive procedures like data carving and data splitting: selecting an inappropriate model after seeing the data leaves us no better or worse off than if we had chosen the same inappropriate model before seeing the data. The alternative to adaptive model selection is not infallible model selection, it is non-adaptive model selection. There is a separate question of robustness: if F ∈ / M but is “close” in some sense, we may still want our procedure to behave predictably. However, even if some model gives a reasonable approximation to L(Y ), there is no guarantee that the induced model for L(Y | A) is reasonable, since conditioning can introduce new robustness problems. For example, suppose that a test statistic Zn (Y ) tends in distribution to N (0, 1) under H0 as n → ∞. In a non-selective setting, we might be comfortable modeling it as Gaussian as a basis for hypothesis testing. In this case it is also true that L(Zn | Zn > c) converges to a truncated Gaussian law for any fixed c ∈ R, but the approximation may be much poorer for intermediate values of n. Worse, if we use increasing thresholds cn → ∞ with n, the truncated Gaussian approximation may never become reasonable. Understanding the interaction between selective inference and asymptotic approximations is an area of active ongoing study; see Tian and Taylor (2017); Tibshirani et al. (2015); Tian and Taylor (2015); Taylor and Tibshirani (2016) for subsequent works discussing asymptotics without Gaussian assumptions. 2.6.3  Does the result have a marginal interpretation?  Consider an adaptive clinical trial in which we select the most promising subgroup of patients based on some preliminary analysis, and then report a confidence interval for the average treatment effect on that subgroup. For some realizations of the data, we might decide to return an interval for the effect on men over the age of 45, and for other realizations we might decide to return an interval for the effect on Hispanic women with high blood pressure. Let S(Y ) denote the selected subpopulation, a random region of covariate space, let θ(s) denote the true average treatment effect on a given subpopulation s, and let Cs (Y ) denote the confidence interval we construct for θ(s) when S(Y ) = s. We find that confusion often occurs when people attempt to interpret C(Y ) = CS(Y ) (Y ) as a marginal confidence interval for θ(S(Y )), the treatment effect on a random subpopulation. If we ran the experiment again with the same selection procedure, we might choose a completely different S(Y ), giving C(Y ) a completely different meaning, and 100 realizations of the data might produce 100 disjoint realizations of C(Y ), meant to cover 100 very different true parameter values. While technically correct, the above interpretation is usually best avoided. Rather, we recommend thinking of each Cs as a different confidence interval for a different fixed parameter θ(s), having nothing to do with Cs0 for s0 6= s. During the selection stage, we choose one Cs to construct and leave the other intervals undefined. In other words, the interval has no useful interpretation until the first stage is complete, after which S(Y ) is fixed: it is pointless to try to interpret an answer before we even decide what question to ask. It is true that we might have asked about a different parameter if the data had looked different. By the same token, we might have performed an entirely different experiment if our most recent grant application had been funded. Neither of these contingencies should be a  13  source of confusion because experiments not performed, or parameters not selected, are irrelevant to the situation at hand.  2.7  Prior Work on Selective Inference  This article takes its main inspiration from a recent ferment of work on the problem of inference in linear regression models after model selection. Lockhart et al. (2014) derive an asymptotic test for whether the nonzero fitted coefficients at a given knot in the lasso path contain all of the true nonzero coefficients. Tibshirani et al. (2014) provided an exact (finite-sample) version of this result and extended it to the LARS path, while Lee et al. (2016), Loftus and Taylor (2014), and Lee and Taylor (2014) used similar approaches to derive exact tests for the lasso with a fixed value of regularization parameter λ, forward stepwise regression, and regression after marginal screening, respectively. All of the above approaches are derived assuming that the error variance σ 2 is known or an independent estimate is available. The present work attempts to unify the above approaches under a common theoretical framework generalizing the classical optimality theory of Lehmann and Scheffé (1955), and elucidate previously unexplored questions of power. It also lets us generalize the results to the case of unknown σ 2 , and to arbitrary exponential families after arbitrary selection events. Since the initial appearance of this work, it has been applied in many other settings; see Taylor and Tibshirani (2015) for a recent review. Other works have viewed selective inference as a multiple inference problem. Recent work in this vein can be found in Berk et al. (2013) and Barber and Candès (2015). Section 8 argues that inference after model selection and multiple inference are distinct problems with different scientific goals; see Benjamini (2010) for more discussion of this distinction. An empirical Bayes approach for selection-adjusted estimation can be found in Efron (2011). There has also recently been work on inference in high-dimensional linear regression models, notably Belloni et al. (2011), Belloni et al. (2014), Zhang and Zhang (2014), Javanmard and Montanari (2014), and Van de Geer et al. (2014); see Dezeure et al. (2015) for a review. These works focus on approximate asymptotic inference for a fixed model with many variables, while we consider finite-sample inference after selecting a smaller submodel to focus our inferential goals. Leeb and Pötscher (2005, 2006, 2008) prove certain impossibility results regarding estimating the distribution of post-selection estimators. These results do not apply to our framework; under the statistical models we use, the post-selection distributions of our test statistics are known and thus do not require estimation. The foregoing works are frequentist, as is this work. Because Bayesian inference conditions on the entire data set, conditioning first on a selection event typically has no operative effect on the posterior: if p and π are respectively the marginal likelihood and prior, then p(Y | A, θ) · π(θ | A) ∝ p(Y | θ) · π(θ) for Y ∈ A (Dawid, 1994). Yekutieli (2012) argues that in certain cases it is more appropriate to condition the likelihood on selection without changing the prior to reflect that conditioning, resulting in a posterior proportional to p(Y | A, θ) · π(θ). The credible intervals discussed in Yekutieli (2012) resemble the confidence intervals proposed in this article, and the discussion therein presents a somewhat different perspective on how and why conditioning can adjust for selection. Though our goals are very different, our theoretical framework is in some respects similar to the conditional confidence framework of Kiefer (1976), in which inference is made conditional on some estimate of the confidence with which a decision can be made. See also Kiefer (1977); Brownie and Kiefer (1977); Brown (1978); Berger et al. (1994). Olshen (1973) discussed error control given selection in a two-stage multiple comparison procedure, in which an F -test is first performed, then Scheffé’s S-method applied if the F -test rejects. For large enough rejection thresholds, simultaneous coverage in the second stage is less than 1 − α  14  conditional on rejection in stage one.  3  Selective Inference in Exponential Families  As discussed in Section 2.2, we can construct selective tests “one at a time” for each model– hypothesis pair (M, H0 ), conditional on the corresponding selection event Aq and ignoring any other models that were previously under consideration. This is because the other candidate models and hypotheses are irrelevant to satisfying (9). For that reason, we suppress the explicit dependence on q = (M, H0 ) except where it is necessary to resolve ambiguity. Our framework for selective inference is especially convenient when M corresponds to a multiparameter exponential family Y ∼ fθ (y) = exp{θ0 T (y) − ψ(θ)} f0 (y)  (23)  with respect to some dominating measure. Then, the conditional distribution given Y ∈ A for any measurable A is another exponential family with the same natural parameters and sufficient statistics but different carrier measure and normalizing constant: (Y | Y ∈ A) ∼ exp{θ0 T (y) − ψA (θ)} f0 (y) 1A (y)  (24)  This fact lets us draw upon the rich theory of inference in multiparameter exponential families.  3.1  Conditional Inference and Nuisance Parameters  Classically, conditional inference in exponential families arises as a means for inference in the presence of nuisance parameters, as in Model 4 below. Model 4 (Exponential Family with Nuisance Parameters). Y follows a p-parameter exponential family with sufficient statistics T (y) and U (y), of dimension k and p − k respectively: Y ∼ fθ,ζ (y) = exp{θ0 T (y) + ζ 0 U (y) − ψ(θ, ζ)} f0 (y),  (25)  with (θ, ζ) ∈ Θ ⊆ Rp open. Assume θ corresponds to a parameter of interest and ζ to an unknown nuisance parameter. The conditional law L(T (Y ) | U (Y )) depends only on θ: (T | U = u) ∼ gθ (t | u) = exp{θ0 t − ψg (θ | u)} g0 (t | u),  (26)  letting us eliminate ζ from the problem by conditioning on U . For k = 1 (i.e., for θ ∈ R), we obtain a single-parameter family for T . Consider testing the null hypothesis H0 : θ ∈ Θ0 ⊆ Θ against the alternative H1 : θ ∈ Θ1 = Θ \ Θ0 . We say a level-α selective test φ(y) is selectively unbiased if Powφ (θ | A) = Eθ [φ(Y ) | A] ≥ α,  for all θ ∈ Θ1 .  (27)  The condition (27) specializes to the usual definition of an unbiased test when there is no selection (when A = Y). Unbiasedness rules out tests that privilege some alternatives to the detriment of others, such as one-sided tests when the alternative is two-sided. A uniformly most powerful unbiased (UMPU) selective level-α test is one whose selective power is uniformly highest among all level-α tests satisfying (27). A selectively unbiased confidence region is one that inverts a selectively unbiased test, and confidence regions inverting UMPU selective  15  tests are called uniformly most accurate unbiased (UMAU). All of the above specialize to the usual definitions when A = Y. See Lehmann and Romano (2005) or Brown (1986) for thorough reviews of the rich literature on testing in exponential family models. In particular, the following classic result of Lehmann and Scheffé (1955) gives a simple construction of UMPU tests in exponential family models. Theorem 5 (Lehmann and Scheffé (1955)). Under Model 4 with k = 1, consider testing the hypothesis H0 : θ = θ0 against H1 : θ 6= θ0 (28) at level α. There is a UMPU test of the form φ(Y ) = f (T (Y ), U (Y )) with   1 t < c1 (u) or t > c2 (u) f (t, u) = γi t = ci (u)   0 c1 (u) < t < c2 (u)  (29)  where ci and γi are chosen to satisfy Eθ0 [f (T, U ) | U = u] = α  (30)  Eθ0 [T f (T, U ) | U = u] = α Eθ0 [T | U = u] .  (31)  The condition (30) constrains the power to be α at θ = θ0 , and (31) is obtained by differentiating the power function and setting its derivative to 0 at θ = θ0 . Because L(Y | A) is an exponential family, we can simply apply Theorem 5 to the conditional law L(Y | A) to obtain an analogous construction in the selective setting. Corollary 6 (UMPU Selective Tests). Under Model 4 with k = 1, consider testing the hypothesis H0 : θ = θ0  against  H1 : θ 6= θ0  (32)  at selective level α on selection event A. There is a UMPU selective test of the form φ(Y ) = f (T (Y ), U (Y )) with   1 t < c1 (u) or t > c2 (u) t = ci (u) (33) f (t, u) = γi  0 c1 (u) < t < c2 (u) for which ci and γi solve Eθ0 [f (T, U ) | U = u, Y ∈ A] = α Eθ0 [T f (T, U ) | U = u, Y ∈ A] = α Eθ0 [T | U = u, Y ∈ A] .  (34) (35)  We emphasize here that the test φ as defined above is not merely UMPU among selective tests that condition on U , but rather it is UMPU among all selective level-α tests; see Lehmann and Romano (2005) for more details. In some cases, it may be useful to interpret φ conditionally on U = u, for example if the observed u leads to a more or less powerful test. It is worth keeping in mind that unbiasedness is only one way to choose a test when there is no completely UMP one. For example, another simple choice is to use the equal-tailed test from the same conditional law (26). The equal-tailed level-α rejection region is simply the union of the one-sided level-α/2 rejection regions. While the equal-tailed and UMPU tests choose ci and γi in different ways, both tests take the form (29). In fact, as we will see next, all admissible tests are of this form, which implies that data splitting tests are usually inadmissible.  16  3.2  Conditioning, Admissibility, and Data Splitting  A selective level-α test φ is inadmissible on selection event A if there exists another selective level-α test φ∗ for which Eθ,ζ [φ∗ (Y )|A] ≥ Eθ,ζ [φ(Y )|A], for all (θ, ζ) ∈ Θ1 , (36) with the inequality strict for at least one (θ, ζ). In the main result of this section, we will show that tests based on data splitting are nearly always inadmissible. Let Y be an observation from Model 4, and suppose we wish to test H0 : θ = θ0  against  H1 : θ 6= θ0 .  (37)  We will assume all tests are functions of the sufficient statistic and write (with some abuse of notation) φ(T, U ) for φ(Y ). We can do this without loss of generality because any test φ(Y ) can be Rao-Blackwellized, i.e., φ(T, U ) ≡ E[φ(Y )|T, U ], to obtain a new test that is a function of (T, U ), with the same power function as the original. Therefore, if φ(T, U ) is inadmissible, then so is the original test φ(Y ). Now we can apply the following result of Matthes and Truax (1967). Theorem 7 (Matthes and Truax, Theorem 3.1). Let Y be an observation from Model 4, and suppose we wish to test H0 : θ = θ0 against H1 : θ = 6 θ0 . (38) Let C denote the class of all level-α tests φ(T, U ) of the form   t ∈ int C(u) 0 φ(t, u) = γ(t, u) t ∈ ∂C(u) ,   1 t∈ / C(u)  (39)  and C(u) is a convex set for every u. Then, for any φ ∈ / C , there exists φ∗ ∈ C such that Eθ,ζ [φ∗ (T, U )] ≥ Eθ,ζ [φ(T, U )],  for all (θ, ζ) ∈ Θ1 .  (40)  Notice that, if (40) holds with equality for all (θ, ζ), then by the completeness of (T, U ) we a.s. have φ = φ∗ . Hence, every admissible test is in C or almost surely equal to a test in C . In order to apply this result to data splitting, we first introduce a generic exponential family composed of two independent data sets governed by the same parameters: Model 8 (Exponential Family with Data Splitting). Model independent random variables (Y1 , Y2 ) ∈ Y1 × Y2 as Yi ∼ exp {θTi (y) + ζ 0 Ui (y) − ψi (θ, ζ)} f0,i (y), i = 1, 2, (41) with θ ∈ R and with the models for Yi both satisfying Model 4. Model 8 would, for example, cover the case where Y1 and Y2 are the responses for two linear regressions with different design matrices but the same regression coefficients. For a selection event A = A1 × Y2 , we say φ is a data-splitting test if φ(Y ) = φ2 (Y2 ); that is, the selection stage uses only Y1 and the inference stage uses only Y2 . Again, by Rao-Blackwellization, we can assume without loss of generality that the test is of the form φ(T2 , U2 ).  17  Next, define the cutoff gap g ∗ (φ) as the largest g ≥ 0 for which the acceptance and rejection regions are separated by a “cushion” of width g. If T2∗ is a conditionally independent copy of T2 given U2 , then g ∗ (φ) = sup {g : Pθ,ζ (|T2 − T2∗ | < g, φ(T2 , U2 ) > 0, φ(T2∗ , U2 ) < 1) = 0}.  (42)  Note that the support of (T2 , T2∗ , U2 ) does not depend on θ or ζ; thus, neither does g ∗ . For most tests, g ∗ (φ) = 0. For example, g ∗ = 0 if either cutoff is in the interior of supp(T2 | U2 ) with positive probability, or if φ is a randomized test for discrete (T2 , U2 ). Next we prove the main technical result of this section: φ is inadmissible unless T1 is determined by U1 on A1 , within an amount g ∗ of variability. Theorem 9. Let T1∗ denote a copy of T1 that is conditionally independent given U1 and Y1 ∈ A, and let φ be a data-splitting test of (38) in Model 8. If Pθ,ζ (|T1 − T1∗ | > g ∗ (φ) | Y1 ∈ A) > 0 then φ is inadmissible. Proof. Construct conditionally independent copies Ti∗ with (T1 , T1∗ , U1 ) ⊥⊥ (T2 , T2∗ , U2 ), and assume that φ is of the form φ(T, U ) with T = T1 + T2 and U = U1 + U2 (otherwise we could Rao-Blackwellize it). If φ is admissible, then by Matthes and Truax (1967), it must be a.s. equivalent to a test of the form (39). That is, there exist ci (U ) for which Pθ,ζ (φ(T, U ) < 1, T ∈ / [c1 (U ), c2 (U )] | A) = Pθ,ζ (φ(T, U ) > 0, c1 (U ) < T < c2 (U ) | A) = 0. (43) Now, by assumption, there exists δ > g ∗ (φ) for which B1 , {|T1 − T1∗ | > δ} occurs with positive probability. By the definition of g ∗ (φ) in (42), the event B2 , {|T2 − T2∗ | > δ, φ(T2 , U2 ) > 0, φ(T2∗ , U2 ) < 1} also occurs with positive probability. Since the two events are independent, B = B1 ∩ B2 occurs with positive probability. Next, assume w.l.o.g. that the event in (42) can occur with T2∗ > T2 (otherwise we could reparameterize with natural parameter ξ = −θ, for which −Ti would be the sufficient statistics for Yi ). Then for some δ > g ∗ (φ), the event B = {T1 + δ < T1∗ , T2 < T2∗ < T2 + δ, φ(T2 , U2 ) > 0, and φ(T2∗ , U2 ) < 1} occurs with positive probability for all θ, ζ. On B, T1 + T2 < T1 + T2∗ < T1∗ + T2 < T1 + T2∗ , but φ(T, U ) > 0 for T = T1 + T2 and T = T1∗ + T2 and φ(T, U ) < 1 for the other two, ruling out the possibility of (43). In the typical case g ∗ = 0 and we have Corollary 10. Suppose φ is a data-splitting test of (38) in Model 8 with g ∗ (φ) = 0. Then φ is inadmissible unless T1 is a function of U1 on A.  18  Expected CI Length  3 1  2  Interval Length  1  Information  4  2  Leftover Fisher Information  −2  0  2  Data Splitting Data Carving  0  0  Data Splitting Data Carving 4  6  8  −2  0  µ  2  4  6  8  µ  (a) Fisher information available for second-stage inference.  (b) Expected confidence interval length.  Figure 4: Contrast between data splitting and data carving in Example 3, in which Yi ∼ N (µ, 1) independently for i = 1, 2. Data splitting discards Y1 entirely, while data carving uses the leftover information in Y1 for the second-stage inference. When µ  3, data carving also uses about one data point for inference since there is no information left over in Y1 . But when µ  3, conditioning barely effects the law of Y1 and data carving has nearly two data points left over. Example 3. To illustrate Theorem 9, consider a bivariate version of Example 2: Yi ∼ N (µ, 1), i = 1, 2,  with Y1 ⊥⊥ Y2 ,  (44)  in which we condition on the selection event A = {Y1 > 3}. With data splitting, we could construct a 95% confidence interval using only Y2 ; namely, Y2 ± 1.96. This interval is valid but does not use all the information available. A more powerful alternative is to construct an interval based on the law  Lµ Y1 + Y2 Y1 > 3 , (45) which uses the leftover information in Y1 . Figure 4a shows the Fisher information that is available to each test as a function of µ. The Fisher information of data splitting is exactly 1 no matter what µ is, whereas the optimal selective test has information approaching 2 as µ increases. Figure 4b shows the expected confidence interval length of the equal tailed interval as a function of µ. For µ  √ 3, the data splitting interval is roughly 41% longer than it needs to be (in the limit, the factor is 2 − 1). Together, the plots tell a consistent story: when the selection event is not too unlikely, discarding the first data set exacts an unnecessary toll on the power of our second-stage procedure.  4  Selective Inference for Linear Regression  For a concrete example of the exponential family framework discussed in Section 3, we now turn to linear regression, which is one of the most important applications of selective inference. In linear regression, the data arise from a multivariate normal distribution Y ∼ Nn (µ, σ 2 In ), 19  (46)  where µ is modeled as µ = XM β M .  (47)  To avoid trivialities, we will assume that XM has full column rank for all M under consideration, so that β M is well-defined. Depending on whether σ 2 is assumed known or unknown, hypothesis tests for coordinates βjM generalize either the z-test or the t-test. In the non-selective case, z- and t-tests are based on † † coordinates of the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator β̂ = XM Y , where XM is the Moore0 Penrose pseudoinverse. For a particular j and M , it will be convenient to write β̂jM = ηjM Y with Xj·M ⊥ Xj (48) , where Xj·M = PX ηjM = M \j kXj·M k2 is the remainder after adjusting Xj for the other columns of XM , and PXM \j denotes projection ⊥ onto the column space of XM \j . Letting σ̂ 2 = kPX Y k2 /(n − |M |), the test statistics M 0  Z=  ηjM Y σkηjM k  0  and  Te =  ηjM Y σ̂kηjM k  (49)  are respectively distributed as N (0, 1) and tn−|M | under H0 : βjM = 0. Henceforth, we will suppress the subscript and superscript for ηjM , simply writing η when there is no ambiguity. The optimal selective t- and z-tests are based on the same test statistics, but compared against different null distributions. We consider two distinct modeling frameworks: Section 4.1 concerns inference under the more restrictive selected linear model, the family of distributions for which (47) and (46) both hold, while Section 4.2 concerns inference under the more general saturated model which assumes only (46) 0 and performs inference on ηjM µ. As we will see, selected-model tests can be more powerful than saturated-model tests, but the extra power comes at a price since the inferences are only valid under more restrictive modeling assumptions. Section 4.3 compares and contrasts the two approaches.  4.1  Inference Under the Selected Model  Suppressing the superscript M in β M , the selected model has the form   1 0 1 0 2 2 Y ∼ exp β X kyk − ψ(X β, σ ) y − M M σ2 2σ 2  (50)  If σ 2 is known, the sufficient statistics are Xk0 Y for k ∈ M , and inference for βj is based on  Lβj Xj0 Y XM \j 0 Y, A . (51) Otherwise, kY k2 represents another sufficient statistic and inference is based on  Lβj /σ2 Xj0 Y XM \j 0 Y, kY k, A .  (52)  Decomposing ⊥ Xj0 Y = Xj0 PXM \j Y + Xj0 PX Y M \j  =  Xj0 PXM \j Y  2 0  + kXj.M k η Y,  (53) (54)  0 we see that Z = η 0 Y /σkηk is a fixed affine transformation of Xj0 Y once we condition on XM \j Y . 2 If σ is known, then, we can equivalently base our selective test on  Lβj Z XM \j 0 Y, A . (55)  20  0 While Z is marginally independent of XM \j Y , it is generically not conditionally independent given 0 A, so that the null distribution of Z generically depends on XM \j Y . 2 If σ is unknown, we may observe further that  σ̂ 2 =  ⊥ kY k2 − kPXM \j Y k2 − (η 0 Y )2 /kηk2 kPX Y k2 M = . n − |M | n − |M |  (56)  Writing Z0 (Y ) = η 0 Y /kηk, we have Te(Y ) = (n − |M |) Z0 /(kY k2 − kPXM \j Y k2 − Z02 ), which is a 0 monotone function of η 0 Y after fixing kY k2 and XM \j Y . Thus, our test is based on the appropriate conditional law of   Lβ /σ2 Te XM \j 0 Y, kY k, A . (57) j  Note that, given A, σ̂ 2 in (56) is neither unbiased for σ 2 nor χ2 -distributed. We recommend against viewing it as a serious estimate of σ 2 in the selective setting. Constructing a selective t-interval is not as straightforward as the general case described in Section 5.2 because βj is not a natural parameter of the selected model; rather, βj /σ 2 is. Testing βj = 0 is equivalent to testing βj /σ 2 = 0, but testing βj = b for b 6= 0 does not correspond to any point null hypothesis about βj /σ 2 . However, we can define Ye = Y − bXj ∼ N (Xβ − bXj , σ 2 I).  (58)  Because (βj − b)/σ 2 is a natural parameter for Ye , we can carry out a UMPU selective t-test for H0 : βj = b ⇐⇒ (βj − b)/σ 2 = 0 based on the law of Ye .  4.2  Inference Under the Saturated Model  Even if we do not take the linear model (47) seriously, there is still a well-defined best linear predictor in the population for design matrix XM :   † θM = arg min Eµ kY − XM θk2 = XM µ, (59) θ  We call θM the least squares coefficients for M . According to this point of view, each θjM corre0 sponds to the linear functional ηjM µ. This point of view is convenient because the least-squares parameters are well-defined under the more general saturated model (6), leading to meaningful inference even if we do a poor job of selecting predictors. In particular, Berk et al. (2013) adopt this perspective as a way of avoiding the need to consider multiple candidate statistical models. Several recent articles have tackled the problem of exact selective inference in linear regression after specific selection procedures (Lee et al., 2016; Loftus and Taylor, 2014; Lee and Taylor, 2014). These works, as well as Berk et al. (2013), assume the error variance is known, or that an estimate may be obtained from independent data, and target least-squares parameters in the saturated model. Under the selected model, βjM = θjM = η 0 µ, whereas under the saturated model β M may not exist (i.e., there is no β M such that µ = XM β M ). Compared to the selected model, the saturated ⊥ model has n − |M | additional nuisance parameters corresponding to PX µ. M We can write the saturated model in exponential family form as   1 1 0 2 2 µ y − 2 kyk − ψ(µ, σ ) , (60) Y ∼ exp σ2 2σ  21  which has n + 1 natural paramaters if σ 2 is unknown and n otherwise. To perform inference on some least-squares coefficient θjM = η 0 µ, we can rewrite (60) as  Y ∼ exp   1 1 1 0 0 ⊥ 0 ⊥ 2 2 µ η η y + 2 (Pη µ) (Pη y) − 2 kyk − ψ(µ, σ ) . σ 2 kηk2 σ 2σ  (61)  If σ 2 is known, inference for θjM after selection event A is based on the conditional law   LθjM η 0 Y Pη⊥ Y, A , or equivalently LθjM Z Pη⊥ Y, A . If σ 2 is unknown, we must instead base inference on  Pη⊥ Y, kY k, A . (62) LθjM /σ2 η 0 Y Unfortunately, the conditioning in (62) is too restrictive. The set  y : Pη⊥ y = Pη⊥ Y, kyk = kY k  (63)  is a line intersected with the sphere kY kS n−1 , and consists only of the two points {Y, Y − 2η 0 Y }, which are equally likely under the hypothesis θjM = 0. Thus, under the saturated model, conditioning on kY k leaves insufficient information about θjM to carry out a meaningful test.  4.3  Saturated Model or Selected Model?  When σ 2 is known, we have a choice whether to carry out the z-test with test statistic Z = η 0 Y /σkηk in the saturated or the selected model. In other words, we must choose either to assume ⊥ that PX µ = 0 or to treat it as an unknown nuisance parameter. Writing M U = XM \j 0 Y,  and  ⊥ V = PX Y, M  (64)  we must choose whether to condition on U and V (saturated model) or only U (selected model). Conditioning on both U and V can never increase our power relative to conditioning only on U , and (unless the tests coincide) will lead to an inadmissible test per Theorem 9. In the non-selective case, this choice makes no difference at all since T, U, and V are mutually independent. In the selective case, however, the choice may be of major consequence as it can lead to very different tests. In general, T, U, and V are not conditionally independent given A, ⊥ and PX µ may play an important role in determining the conditional distribution of T . If we M needlessly condition on V , we may lose a great deal of power, whereas failing to condition on V ⊥ could lead us astray if PX µ is large. A simple example can elucidate this contrast. M Example 4. Suppose that y ∼ N2 (µ, I2 ), with design matrix X = I2 , and we choose the bestfitting one-sparse model. That is, we choose M = {1} if |Y1 | > |Y2 |, and M = {2} otherwise. Figure 5 shows one realization of this process with Y = (2.9, 2.5). |Y1 | is a little larger than |Y2 |, so we choose M = {1}. The yellow highlighted region A = {|Y1 | > |Y2 |} is the chosen selection event, and the selected model is Y ∼ N2 ((µ1 , 0), I2 ) . (65) In this case, T = Y1 , V = Y2 , and there is no U since XM has only one column. The selectedmodel test is based on L(Y1 | A), whereas the saturated-model test is based on L(Y1 | Y2 , A). The second conditioning set, a union of two rays, is plotted in brown. Under the hypothesis µ = 0, the realized |Y1 | is quite large given A, giving p-value 0.007. By contrast, |Y1 | is not terribly large given {Y2 = 2.5} ∩ A = {Y2 = 2.5, |Y1 | > 2.5}, leading to p-value 0.30.  22  Conditional Null Distributions 1.4  Conditioning Sets  1.2 0.0  −4  0.2  0.4  −2  0  A  0.6  Density  2  Y  0.8  1.0  4  ●  Y2  Saturated Model Selected Model Observed Value  −4  −2  0  2  4  −6  Y1  −4  −2  0  2  4  6  Y1  (a) For Y = (2.9, 2.5), the selected-model conditioning set is A = {y : |y1 | > |y2 |}, a union of quadrants, plotted in yellow. The saturatedmodel conditioning set is {y : y2 = 2.5} ∩ A = {y : y2 = 2.5, |y1 | > 2.5}, a union of rays, plotted in brown.  (b) Conditional distributions of Y1 under H0 : µ1 = 0. Under the hypothesis µ = 0, the realized |Y1 | is quite large given A, giving p-value 0.007. By contrast, |Y1 | is not too large given A ∩ {y : y2 = Y2 }, giving p-value 0.3.  Figure 5: Contrast between the saturated-model and selected-model tests in Example 4, in which we fit a one-sparse model with design matrix X = I2 . The selected-model test is based on L0 (Y1 | A), whereas the saturated-model test is based on L0 (Y1 | Y2 , A). The selected-model approach is especially well-suited for testing goodness of fit of a selected linear model — in that case, we prefer the test not to have level α, but rather to reject with high probability, when important variables are not selected. Fithian et al. (2015) consider sequential goodness-of-fit testing in a “path” of increasingly complex models selected by a method like the lasso or forward stepwise regression. As Example 4 illustrates, the saturated-model p-value is especially large for “near ties” when |Y1 | is not much larger than |Y2 |. As a result, the selectedmodel test can be much more powerful in early steps of the path where multiple strong variables compete to enter the model first. For more details see Fithian et al. (2015).  5  Computations  We saw in Section 3 that inference in the one-parameter exponential family requires knowing the conditional law Lθ (T | U, A). In a few cases, such as in the saturated model viewpoint, this conditional law can be determined fairly explicitly. In other cases, we will need to resort to Monte Carlo sampling. In this section, we suggest some general strategies.  5.1  Gaussians Under the Saturated Model  As we discussed in Section 4.2, the previous papers by Lee et al. (2016); Loftus and Taylor (2014); 2 Lee and Taylor (2014) adopted the  saturated model viewpoint with known σ . In this case, Lθ (T | U, A) = Lθ η 0 Y Pη⊥ Y, A is a truncated univariate Gaussian, since η 0 Y is a Gaussian random variable and Pη⊥ Y is independent of η 0 Y . If A is convex, then the truncation is to an interval [V − (Y ), V + (Y )], where the endpoints represent the maximal extent one can move in the  23  Figure 6: Saturated-model inference for a generic convex selection set for Y ∼ N (µ, In ). After conditioning on the yellow set A, V + is the largest η 0 Y can get while V − is the smallest it can get. Under H0 : η 0 µ = 0, the test statistic η 0 Y takes on the distribution of a standard Gaussian 0 Y )−Φ(V − ) random variable truncated to the interval [V − , V + ]. As a result, W (Y ) = Φ(η Φ(V + )−Φ(V − ) is uniformly distributed. η direction at a “height” of Pη⊥ Y , while still remaining inside A, i.e., V + (Y ) =  sup  η 0 (Y + tη)  (66)  η 0 (Y + tη).  (67)  {t: Y +tη ∈ A}  V − (Y ) =  inf  {t: Y +tη ∈ A}  The geometric intuition is illustrated in Figure 6. When A is specifically a polytope, we can obtain closed-form expressions for V − and V + . The generalization to regions A that are non-convex is straightforward (i.e., instead of truncating to a single interval, we truncate to a union of intervals). For further discussion of these points, see Lee et al. (2016).  5.2  Monte Carlo Tests and Intervals  In a more generic setting, we may not have an easy formula for conditional law of T . In that case, there are several options for inference using Monte Carlo methods. If we can obtain a stream of samples from Lθ (T | U, A) for any value of θ, then we can carry out hypothesis tests and construct intervals. This can be done efficiently via rejection sampling if, for example, we can sample efficiently from Lθ (Y | U ) and Pθ (Y ∈ A | U ) is not too small. Otherwise, more specialized sampling approaches may be required. A little more abstractly, we now consider constructing a test based on the statistic Z, which is distributed according to a one-parameter exponential family Z ∼ gθ (z) = eθz−ψ(θ) g0 (z). (68) Exact Monte Carlo Tests Suppose that, in addition to Z, we are given an independent sequence from the reference distribution i.i.d.  Z1 , . . . , Zn ∼ g0 (z). 24  (69)  Then an exact Monte Carlo one-sided test of H0 : θ ≤ 0 rejects if the observed value Z is among the (n + 1) α largest of Z, Z1 , . . . , Zn (Barnard, 1963). Even if i.i.d. samples are not available, the same procedure has level α provided the law of (Z, Z1 , . . . , Zn ) is exchangeable under H0 . Besag and Clifford (1989) propose an ingenious procedure for obtaining such an exchangeable sequence when we only know how to run a Markov chain with stationary distribution g0 : Beginning at Z, take k ≥ 1 steps backward in the chain to e Then, run n independent chains k steps forward, beginning each chain at Z, e and letting Zi Z. denote the end state of the ith chain. If Z ∼ g0 , the sequence is exchangeable. Note that, while this test has level α for any k, n ≥ 0, using small values of k, n makes the test more random, reducing its power. If the chain is irreducible, then as k, n → ∞, the test converges to the deterministic right-tailed level-α test of H0 . Approximate Monte Carlo Intervals By reweighting the samples, we can use (Z1 , . . . , Zn ) to test H0 : θ ≤ θ0 for any other θ0 . Denote the importance-weighted empirical expectation as Pn h(Z )eθZi b Pn iθZ (70) Eθ h(Z) = i=1 i i=1 e a.s.  −−→ Eθ h(Z)  as n → ∞ for integrable h.  (71)  In effect, we have put an exponential family “through” the empirical distribution of the Zi in the manner of Efron et al. (1996); see also Besag (2001). The Monte Carlo one-sided cutoff for a test bθ (Z > c2 ) ≤ α. The test rejects for Z > c2 and of H0 : θ ≤ θ0 is the smallest c2 for which P 0 randomizes appropriately at Z = c2 . The two-sided test of H0 : θ = θ0 is a bit more involved, but similar in principle. We can solve for c1 , γ1 , c2 , γ2 for which b θ φ(Z) = α E 0 b θ [Zφ(Z)] = α E b θ Z. E 0 0  (72) (73)  In Appendix B we discuss how (72–73) can be solved efficiently for fixed θ0 and inverted to obtain a confidence interval. Monte Carlo inference as described above is computationally straightforward once Z1 , . . . , Zn are obtained. More generally, the Zi could represent importance samples with weights Wi , or steps in a Markov chain with stationary distribution g0 (z). The same methods apply as long as we still have Pn W h(Zi ) eθZi b Pn i (74) Eθ h(Z) = i=1 θZi i=1 Wi e a.s.  −−→ Eθ h(Z),  for integrable h.  (75)  Numerical problems may arise in solving (72–73) for θ0 far away from the reference parameter used for sampling. Combining appropriately weighted samples from several different reference values can help to keep the effective sample size from getting too small for any θ0 . For further references on Monte Carlo inference see Jockel (1986); Forster et al. (1996); Mehta et al. (2000).  5.3  Sampling Gaussians with Affine and Quadratic Constraints  In the case where Y is Gaussian, several simplifications are possible. For one, there are many ways to sample from a truncated multivariate Gaussian distribution. In this paper, we use hit-and-run Gibbs sampling algorithms, while Pakman and Paninski (2014) suggest another approach based on Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. 25  Efficient sampling from multivariate Gaussian distributions under such constraints is the main algorithmic challenge for most of the Gaussian selective tests proposed in this paper. The works cited above use the saturated model exclusively which means they do not require any sampling. In many cases, the sampling problem may be greatly facilitated by refining the selection variable that we use. For example, Lee et al. (2016) propose conditioning on the variables selected by the lasso as well as the signs of the fitted β̂j , leading to a selection event consisting of a single polytope in Rn . If we condition only on the selected variables and not on the signs, the selection event is a union of up to 2s polytopes, where s is the number of variables in the selected model (though most of the polytopes might be excluded after conditioning on U ). Refining the selection variable never impairs the selective validity of the procedure, but it typically leads to a loss in power. However, this loss of power may be quite small if, for example, the conditional law puts nearly all of its mass on the realized polytope. This price in power is acceptable if it is the only way to obtain a tractable test. Quantifying the tradeoff between computation and power is an interesting topic for further work. When carrying out selective t-tests, it is necessary to condition further on the realized vector length kY k, adding a quadratic equality constraint to the support. To deal with this, we sample instead from a ball and project the samples onto the sphere using an importance sampling scheme. Appendix C gives details.  6  Selective Inference in Non-Gaussian Settings  In this section we describe tests in two simple non-Gaussian settings, selective inference in a binomial problem, and tests involving a scan statistic in Poisson process models. More generally, we address the question of selective inference in generalized linear models.  6.1  Selective Clinical Trial  To illustrate the application of our approach in a simple non-Gaussian setting we discuss a selective clinical trial with binomial data. The experiment discussed here is similar to an adaptive design proposed by Sill and Sampson (2009). Consider a clinical trial with m candidate treatments for heart disease. We give treatment j to nj patients for 0 ≤ j ≤ m, with j = 0 corresponding to the placebo. The number of patients on treatment j to suffer a heart attack during the trial is  pj θ j=0 ind. = , (76) Yj ∼ Binom(pj , nj ), with log θ − βj j > 0 1 − pj so βj measures the efficacy of treatment j. The likelihood for Y is   m m m    X  Y X Yj Y ∼ exp θ yj − βj yj − ψ(θ, β) ,   nj j=0 j=1 j=0  (77)  an exponential family with m + 1 sufficient statistics. Define p̂j = Yj /nj , and let p̂(j) denote the jth smallest order statistic. After observing the data, we select the best k < m treatments in-sample, then construct a confidence interval for each one’s odds ratio relative to placebo. If there are ties, we select all treatments for which p̂j ≤ p̂(k) (so that we could possibly select more than k treatments).  26  For simplicity, assume that treatments 1, . . . , k are the ones selected. Inference for β1 is then based on the conditional law   m X Lβ1 Y1 Yj , Y2 , . . . , YJ , {j = 1 selected} (78) j=0  Under this law, Y2 , . . . , Ym are fixed, as is Y0 + Y1 , with Y0 and Y1 the only remaining unknowns. Before conditioning on selection, we have the two-by-two multinomial table Control  Treatment  Y0  Y1  n0 − Y0  n1 − Y1  Heart attack No heart attack  The margins are fixed, and conditioning on selection gives an additional constraint that Y1 ≤ n1 p̂(k) , where the right-hand side is known after conditioning on the other Yj . Rejecting for conditionally extreme Y1 amounts to a selective Fisher’s exact test. Aside from the constraint on its support, the distribution of Y1 is hypergeometric if β1 = 0 and otherwise noncentral hypergeometric with noncentrality parameter β1 . We can use this family to construct an interval for β1 .  6.2  Poisson Scan Statistic  As a second simple example, consider observing a Poisson process Y = {Y1 , . . . , YN (Y ) } on the interval [0, 1] with piecewise-constant intensity, possibly elevated in some unknown window [a, b]. That is, Y ∼ Poisson(λ(t)) with ( eα+β t ∈ [a, b] λ(t) = (79) eα otherwise. Our goal is to locate [a, b] by maximizing some scan statistic, then test whether β > 0 or construct a confidence interval for it. Assume we always have [â, b̂] = [Yi , Yj ] for some i, j; this is true, for example, if we use the multi-scale-adjusted likelihood ratio statistic proposed in Rivera and Walther (2013). The density of Y can be written in exponential family form as   Z 1 (y) NX  Y ∼ exp log λ(yi ) − λ(s) ds (80)   0 i=1    = exp α N (Y ) + β T (y) − ψ(α, β) ,  (81)  where N (y)  T (y) =  X  1{yi ∈ [a, b]}  and  ψ(α, β) = eα (1 − b + a) + eα+β (b − a).  (82)  i=1  If A is the event that [a, b] is chosen, we carry out inference with respect to Lβ (T | N, A). Note that under β = 0 and conditional on N , Y is an i.i.d. uniform random sample on [0, 1]. Once we condition on the event {a, b ∈ Y }, the other N − 2 values are uniform. Thus, we can sample from Lβ (T | N, A) with β = 0 by taking Y to include a, b, and N − 2 uniformly random points, then rejecting samples for which [a, b] is not the selected window. 27  6.3  Generalized Linear Models  Our framework extends to logistic regression, Poisson regression, or other generalized linear model (GLM) with response Y and design matrix X, since the GLM model may be represented as an exponential family of the form Y ∼ exp {β 0 X 0 y − ψ(Xβ)} f0 (y).  (83)  As a result, we can proceed just as we did in the case of linear regression in the reduced model, conditioning on U = XM \j 0 Y and basing inference on LβjM (Xj0 Y | U, A). A difficulty may arise for logistic or Poisson regression due to the discreteness of the response distribution Y . If some control variable X1 is continuous, then for almost every realization of X, all configurations of Y yield unique values of U = X10 Y . In that case, conditioning on X10 Y means conditioning on Y itself. No information is left over for inference, so that the best (and only) exact level-α selective test is the trivial one φ(Y ) ≡ α. By contrast, if all of the control variables are discrete variables like gender or ethnicity, then conditioning on U may not constrain Y too much. Because X 0 Y is approximately a multivariate Gaussian random variable, a more promising approach may be to base inference on the asymptotic Gaussian approximation as in Taylor and Tibshirani (2016).  7  Simulation: High-Dimensional Regression  As a simple illustration, we compare selective inference in linear regression after the lasso for n = 100, p = 200. Here, the rows of the design matrix X are drawn from an equicorrelated multivariate Gaussian distribution with pairwise correlation ρ = 0.3 between the variables. The columns are normalized to have length 1. We simulate from the model Y ∼ N (Xβ, In ), (84) with β 7-sparse and its non-zero entries set to 7. The magnitude of β was chosen so that data splitting with half the data yielded a superset of the true variables on roughly 20% of instances. For data splitting and carving, Y is partitioned into selection and inference data sets Y1 and Y2 , containing n1 and n2 = n − n1 data points respectively. We assume the error variance is known and carry out the Lasso on Y1 with Lagrange parameter λ = 2E(kX T k∞ ),   ∼ N (0, In )  as described in (Negahban et al., 2012). We then compare two post-selection inference procedures: Data Splitting after Lasso on Y1 (Splitn1 ): Use the lasso on Y1 to select the model, and use Y2 for inference. Data Carving after Lasso on Y1 (Carven1 ): Use the lasso on Y1 to select the model, and use Y2 and whatever is left over of Y1 for inference. For the data carving procedures, we use the selected-model z-test of Section 4.1. In addition, we condition on the signs of the active lasso coefficients, so procedure Carve100 is the inference-afterlasso test proposed in Lee et al. (2016).4 We know from Theorem 9 that procedure Carven1 strictly dominates procedure Splitn1 for any n1 , but there is a selection–inference tradeoff between data-carving procedures Carven and 4 Because of the form of the selection event when we use the lasso after n data points, the test statistic is ⊥ Y . Thus, there is no distinction between the saturated- and selected-model conditionally independent of PX M z-tests after the lasso on all n data points.  28  pscreen  E[V ]  E[R − V ]  FDR  Power  Level  Carve100  0.99  8.13  6.99  0.54  0.80  0.05  Split50  0.09  9.13  4.74  0.66  0.93  0.06  Carve50  0.09  9.13  4.74  0.66  0.99  0.06  Split75  0.68  9.24  6.59  0.58  0.47  0.05  Carve75  0.68  9.24  6.59  0.58  0.97  0.06  Algorithm  Table 1: Simulation results. pscreen is the probability of successfully selecting all 7 true variables, and Power is the power, conditional on successful screening, of tests on the true variables. The more data we use for selection, the better the selected model’s quality is, but there is a cost in second-stage power. Carve75 appears to be finding a good tradeoff between these competing goals. Carven1 always outperforms Splitn1 , as predicted by Theorem 9. pscreen  E[V ]  E[R − V ]  FDR  Power  Level  Carve100  0.97  8.11  6.97  0.54  0.80  0.04  Split50  0.09  9.20  4.77  0.66  0.93  0.05  Carve50  0.09  9.20  4.77  0.66  0.99  0.06  Algorithm  Table 2: Simulation results under misspecification. Here, errors  are drawn independently from Student’s t5 . Our conclusions are identical to Table 1. Carven1 for n1 < n. Carven uses all of the data for selection, and is therefore likely to select a superior model, whereas procedure Carven1 reserves more power for the second stage. Let R be the size of the model selected and V the number of noise variables included. We compare the procedures with respect to aspects of their selection performance: • chance of screening, i.e. obtaining a correct model (P(R − V = 7) or pscreen ). • expected number of noise variables selected (E[V ]), • expected number of true variables selected (E[R − V ]), • false discovery rate of true variables selected (E[V / max(R, 1)] or FDR), Conditional on having obtained a correct model, we also compare them on aspects of their second stage performance: • probability of correctly rejecting the null for one of the true variables (Power), • probability of incorrectly rejecting the null for a noise variable (Level). The results, shown in Table 1, bear out the intuition of Section 3.2. Because procedure Carve100 uses the most information in the first stage, it performs best in terms of model selection, but pays 29  1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4  Screening x Power  0.0  0.2  1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.0  0.2  Probability  Screening Power, Carving Power, Splitting  Data Carving Data Splitting  0  20  40  60  80  100  0  # data points used for selection  20  40  60  80  100  # data points used for selection  (a) Probability of successful screening, and power conditional on screening, for Splitn1 and Carven1 .  (b) Probability of successful screening times power conditional on screening, for Splitn1 and Carven1 .  Figure 7: Tradeoff between power and model selection. As n1 increases and more data is used in the first stage, we have a better chance of successful screening (picking all the true nonzero variables). However, increasing n1 also leads to reduced power in the second stage. Data splitting suffers much more than data carving, though both are affected. a price in lower second-stage power relative to Split50 or Carve50 . The procedure Carve50 clearly dominates Split50 , as expected. Increasing n1 from 50 to 75 improves pscreen for Split75 , but Split75 suffers a drop in power. Procedure Carve75 seems to strike a better compromise. Figure 7 shows the tradeoff curve of model selection success (as measured by the probability of successful screening) against second-stage power conditional on successful screening. As n1 increases, stage-one performance improves while stage-two performance declines, but the decline is much slower for data carving. Surprisingly, Carve98 and Carve99 have much higher power than Carve100 : 91%, 86%, and 80% respectively. We cannot explain why holding out just one or two data points in the first stage improves power so dramatically. Better understanding this tradeoff is an interesting topic of further work. Finally, to check the robustness of data carving, we replace the Gaussian errors with independent errors drawn from Student’s t distribution with five degrees of freedom. The numbers barely change at all; see Table 2. Tian and Taylor (2017) rigorously analyze the case of non-Gaussian errors.  8  Conditioning as a Device for Multiple Inference  To this point we have argued for controlling selective type I error as a goal in its own right, but it can also serve as a device for controlling more traditional multiple inference goals. In this section we discuss two examples: confidence intervals for selected parameters that control the false coverage-statement rate (FCR) and familywise error rate (FWER). Suppose that θq , q = 1, . . . , m correspond to parameters of a common (fixed) model M . We b )| of them as interesting and construct a confidence adaptively designate a number R(Y ) = |Q(Y b Benjamini and Yekutieli (2005) propose controlling the false interval Cq (Y ) for each q ∈ Q.  30  coverage-statement rate (FCR)   V , E max(R, 1)  where  V (Y ) =  n o b θq (F ) ∈ q : q ∈ Q, / Cq (Y )  (85)  is the number of non-covering intervals constructed. Other authors have addressed inference after selection by proposing to control the FWER, the chance that any selected test incorrectly rejects the null or any constructed confidence interval fails to cover its parameter. For example, the “post-selection inference” (PoSI) method of Berk et al. (2013) constructs simultaneous (1 − α) confidence intervals for the least-squares parameters of all linear regression models that were ever under consideration. As a result, no matter how we choose the model, the overall probability of constructing any non-covering interval is controlled at α. By choosing appropriate selection variables Sq , we can control the FCR or FWER as desired using intervals with selective coverage. Our proof generalizes and extends a result in Weinstein et al. (2013), who also use conditional control to achieve FCR control in a specialized setting. Using a similar proof, we also show that using an adaptive Bonferroni rule, which adjusts the test’s level based on the (random) number of intervals actually constructed, can achieve FWER control. Proposition 11 (FCR and FWER Control via Selective Error Control). Assume Q is countable with each q ∈ Q corresponding to a different parameter θq for the same model M . Let R(Y ) = b )| with R(Y ) < ∞ a.s., and define V (Y ) as in (85). |Q(Y  If each Cq enjoys coverage at level 1 − α given Sq = 1Aq (Y ), R(Y ) , then the collection of b controls the FCR at level α: intervals (Cq , q ∈ Q)     V V R ≥ 1 ≤ α. (86) E ≤ E max(R, 1) R b controls the FWER at If each Cq enjoys coverage at level 1 − α/R(Y ) given Sq , then (Cq , q ∈ Q) level α: P [V ≥ 1] ≤ α. (87) n o P b ), θq (F ) ∈ Proof. Let Vq (Y ) = 1 q ∈ Q(Y / Cq (Y ) , so that V = q∈Q Vq . If Cq has level-α selective coverage, then for R ≥ 1, and for any F ∈ M , X X   EF [V | R] = EF [Vq | R] ≤ α EF 1Aq (Y ) | R = αR, (88) q∈Q  q∈Q  hence E [V /R | R] = α for each R ≥ 1. We can repeat the argument when Cq has level-α/R selective coverage, we obtain EF [V | R] ≤ α. Marginalizing each bound over R(Y ) gives the result. However, the converse of Proposition 11 is not true: FWER control does not in general guarantee control of relevant selective error rates. For example, suppose that we construct an interval for the effect of red meat consumption on heart disease (Q(Y ) = 1) with probability 0.9 and for the effect of statins on heart disease (Q(Y ) = 2) otherwise. If C1 and C2 have selective error rates α1 = 0.02 and α2 = 0.3 respectively, the overall FWER is still controlled at α = 0.05. Does our conservatism when asking about smoking compensate for our anti-conservatism when asking about coffee? Perhaps not; those readers who are primarily interested in statins will be consistently misled, and readers who are primarily interested in red meat consumption will be see unnecessarily conservative intervals. As such, averaging our error rates across the two questions, with two different interpretations, seems inappropriate.  31  More problematically, if the different questions correspond to different and non-overlapping models — for example, if we examine residuals to decide between a Poisson log-linear model and a negative-binomial model — then it is especially unintuitive to focus on error rates averaged across the different choices of model. By contrast, if the different questions represent a bag of relatively anonymous, a priori undifferentiated hypotheses which we are prioritizing for follow-up research, such as in a genome-wise association study, then an error rate like the FDR is likely a better proxy for our scientific goals.  9  Discussion  Selective inference concerns the properties of inference carried out after using a data-dependent procedure to select which questions to ask. We can recover the same long-run frequency properties among answers to selected questions that we would obtain in the classical non-adaptive setting, if we follow the guiding principle of selective error control: The answer must be valid, given that the question was asked. Happily, living up to this principle can be a simple matter in exponential family models including linear regression, due to the rich classical theory of optimal testing in exponential family models. Even if we are possibly selecting from a large menu of diverse and incompatible models, we can still design tests one model at a time and control the selective error using the test designed for the selected model. We generally pay a price for conditioning, so it is desirable to condition on as little as possible. Data carving can dramatically improve on data splitting by using the leftover information in Y1 , the data set initially designated for selection. Many challenges remain. Deriving the cutoffs for sample carving tests can be computationally difficult in general. In addition, the entire development of this article takes the model selection b as given, when in reality we can choose Q. b More work is needed to learn what model procedure Q selection procedures lead to favorable second-stage properties. As data sets and research questions become more and more complex, we have less and less hope of specifying adequate statistical models ahead of time. As such, a key challenge of complex research is to balance the goal of choosing a realistic model against the goal of inference once we have chosen it. We hope that the ideas in this article represent a step in the right direction.  Reproducibility A git repository with code to generate the figures for this file is available at the first author’s website.  Acknowledgements William Fithian was supported by National Science Foundation VIGRE grant DMS-0502385 and the Gerald J. Lieberman Fellowship. Dennis Sun was supported in part by the Stanford Genome Training Program (NIH/NHGRI T32 HG000044) and the Ric Weiland Graduate Fellowship. Jonathan Taylor was supported in part by National Science Foundation grant DMS-1208857 and Air Force Office of Sponsored Research grant 113039. We would like to thank Stefan Wager, Trevor Hastie, Rob Tibshirani, Brad Efron, Yoav Benjamini, Larry Brown, Maxwell Grazier G’sell, Subhabrata Sen, and Yuval Benjamini for helpful discussions.  32  References Rina Foygel Barber and Emmanuel J Candès. Controlling the false discovery rate via knockoffs. The Annals of Statistics, 43(5):2055–2085, 2015. GA Barnard. Discussion of professor bartlett’s paper. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 1963. Alexandre Belloni, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. Inference for high-dimensional sparse econometric models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1201.0220, 2011. Alexandre Belloni, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. Inference on treatment effects after selection among high-dimensional controls. The Review of Economic Studies, 81(2):608– 650, 2014. Yoav Benjamini. Simultaneous and selective inference: current successes and future challenges. Biometrical Journal, 52(6):708–721, 2010. Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 289–300, 1995. Yoav Benjamini and Daniel Yekutieli. False discovery rate–adjusted multiple confidence intervals for selected parameters. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100(469):71–81, 2005. James O Berger, Lawrence D Brown, and Robert L Wolpert. A unified conditional frequentist and bayesian test for fixed and sequential simple hypothesis testing. The Annals of Statistics, pages 1787–1807, 1994. Richard Berk, Lawrence Brown, Andreas Buja, Kai Zhang, and Linda Zhao. Valid post-selection inference. The Annals of Statistics, 41(2):802–837, 2013. Julian Besag. Markov chain monte carlo for statistical inference. Center for Statistics and the Social Sciences, 2001. Julian Besag and Peter Clifford. Generalized monte carlo significance tests. Biometrika, 76(4): 633–642, 1989. Lawrence D Brown. A contribution to kiefer’s theory of conditional confidence procedures. The Annals of Statistics, pages 59–71, 1978. Lawrence D Brown. Fundamentals of statistical exponential families with applications in statistical decision theory. Lecture Notes-monograph series, pages i–279, 1986. C Brownie and J Kiefer. The ideas of conditional confidence in the simplest setting. Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods, 6(8):691–751, 1977. Arthur Cohen and Harold B Sackrowitz. Two stage conditionally unbiased estimators of the selected mean. Statistics & Probability Letters, 8(3):273–278, 1989. DR Cox. A note on data-splitting for the evaluation of significance levels. Biometrika, 62(2): 441–444, 1975. AP Dawid. Selection paradoxes of bayesian inference. Lecture Notes-Monograph Series, pages 211–220, 1994.  33  Ruben Dezeure, Peter Bühlmann, Lukas Meier, Nicolai Meinshausen, et al. High-dimensional inference: Confidence intervals, p-values and r-software hdi. Statistical Science, 30(4):533–558, 2015. Bradley Efron. Tweedies formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 106(496):1602–1614, 2011. Bradley Efron, Robert Tibshirani, et al. Using specially designed exponential families for density estimation. The Annals of Statistics, 24(6):2431–2461, 1996. William Fithian, Jonathan Taylor, Robert Tibshirani, and Ryan Tibshirani. Adaptive sequential model selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.02565, 2015. Jonathan J Forster, John W McDonald, and Peter WF Smith. Monte carlo exact conditional tests for log-linear and logistic models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 445–453, 1996. Annie Franco, Neil Malhotra, and Gabor Simonovits. Publication bias in the social sciences: unlocking the file drawer. Science, 2014. Andrew Gelman and Eric Loken. The garden of forking paths: Why multiple comparisons can be a problem, even when there is no “fishing expedition” or “p-hacking” and the research hypothesis was posited ahead of time. Downloaded January, 30:2014, 2013. Naftali Harris. Visualizing lasso polytope geometry, June 2014. URL http://www.naftaliharris. com/blog/lasso-polytope-geometry/. Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome Friedman, T Hastie, J Friedman, and R Tibshirani. The elements of statistical learning, volume 2. Springer, 2009. Larry V Hedges. Estimation of effect size under nonrandom sampling: The effects of censoring studies yielding statistically insignificant mean differences. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 9(1):61–85, 1984. Larry V Hedges. Modeling publication selection effects in meta-analysis. Statistical Science, pages 246–255, 1992. Kenneth Hung and William Fithian. Rank verification for exponential families. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03944, 2016. John PA Ioannidis. Why most published research findings are false. PLoS medicine, 2(8):e124, 2005. Adel Javanmard and Andrea Montanari. Hypothesis testing in high-dimensional regression under the gaussian random design model: Asymptotic theory. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 60(10):6522–6554, 2014. Karl-Heinz Jockel. Finite sample properties and asymptotic efficiency of monte carlo tests. The annals of Statistics, pages 336–347, 1986. George Johnson. New truths that only one can see. The New York Times, 2014. Jack Kiefer. Admissibility of conditional confidence procedures. The Annals of Statistics, pages 836–865, 1976. Jack Kiefer. Conditional confidence statements and confidence estimators. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 72(360a):789–808, 1977. 34  Jason D Lee and Jonathan E Taylor. Exact post model selection inference for marginal screening. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 136–144, 2014. Jason D Lee, Dennis L Sun, Yuekai Sun, and Jonathan E Taylor. Exact post-selection inference, with application to the lasso. The Annals of Statistics, 44(3):907–927, 2016. Hannes Leeb and Benedikt M Pötscher. Model selection and inference: Facts and fiction. Econometric Theory, 21(01):21–59, 2005. Hannes Leeb and Benedikt M Pötscher. Can one estimate the conditional distribution of postmodel-selection estimators? The Annals of Statistics, pages 2554–2591, 2006. Hannes Leeb and Benedikt M Pötscher. Can one estimate the unconditional distribution of postmodel-selection estimators? Econometric Theory, 24(02):338–376, 2008. EL Lehmann and Joseph P Romano. Testing statistical hypotheses. New York:. Springer, 2005. EL Lehmann and Henry Scheffé. Completeness, similar regions, and unbiased estimation: Part ii. Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics (1933-1960), 15(3):219–236, 1955. Richard Lockhart, Jonathan Taylor, Ryan J Tibshirani, and Robert Tibshirani. A significance test for the lasso (with discussion). The Annals of Statistics, 42(2):413–468, 2014. Joshua R Loftus and Jonathan E Taylor. A significance test for forward stepwise model selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.3920, 2014. Ted K Matthes and Donald R Truax. Tests of composite hypotheses for the multivariate exponential family. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pages 681–697, 1967. Cyrus R Mehta, Nitin R Patel, and Pralay Senchaudhuri. Efficient monte carlo methods for conditional logistic regression. Journal of The American Statistical Association, 95(449):99–108, 2000. Nicolai Meinshausen, Lukas Meier, and Peter Bühlmann. P-values for high-dimensional regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 104(488), 2009. Sahand N. Negahban, Pradeep Ravikumar, Martin J. Wainwright, and Bin Yu. A unified framework for high-dimensional analysis of MM-estimators with decomposable regularizers. Statistical Science, 27(4):538–557, November 2012. ISSN 0883-4237. doi: 10.1214/12-STS400. URL http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.ss/1356098555. Richard A Olshen. The conditional level of the ftest. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 68(343):692–698, 1973. Terence Orchard, Max A Woodbury, et al. A missing information principle: theory and applications. In Proceedings of the 6th Berkeley Symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, volume 1, pages 697–715. University of California Press Berkeley, CA, 1972. Ari Pakman and Liam Paninski. Exact hamiltonian monte carlo for truncated multivariate gaussians. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 23(2):518–542, 2014. Camilo Rivera and Guenther Walther. Optimal detection of a jump in the intensity of a poisson process or in a density with likelihood ratio statistics. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 40(4): 752–769, 2013. JD Rosenblatt and Yoav Benjamini. Selective correlations; not voodoo. NeuroImage, 103:401–410, 2014. 35  Allan R Sampson and Michael W Sill. Drop-the-losers design: Normal case. Biometrical Journal, 47(3):257–268, 2005. Michael W Sill and Allan R Sampson. Drop-the-losers design: Binomial case. Computational statistics & data analysis, 53(3):586–595, 2009. Robert Sladek, Ghislain Rocheleau, Johan Rung, Christian Dina, Lishuang Shen, David Serre, Philippe Boutin, Daniel Vincent, Alexandre Belisle, Samy Hadjadj, et al. A genome-wide association study identifies novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes. Nature, 445(7130):881–885, 2007. Jonathan Taylor and Robert Tibshirani. Post-selection inference for l1-penalized likelihood models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07358, 2016. Jonathan Taylor and Robert J Tibshirani. Statistical learning and selective inference. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(25):7629–7634, 2015. Xiaoying Tian and Jonathan Taylor. Asymptotics of selective inference. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 2017. Xiaoying Tian and Jonathan E Taylor. Selective inference with a randomized response. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.06739, 2015. Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 267–288, 1996. Ryan J Tibshirani, Jonathan Taylor, Richard Lockhart, and Robert Tibshirani. Exact postselection inference for sequential regression procedures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.3889, 2014. Ryan J Tibshirani, Alessandro Rinaldo, Robert Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Uniform asymptotic inference and the bootstrap after model selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06266, 2015. Sara Van de Geer, Peter Bühlmann, Yaacov Ritov, Ruben Dezeure, et al. On asymptotically optimal confidence regions and tests for high-dimensional models. The Annals of Statistics, 42 (3):1166–1202, 2014. Larry Wasserman and Kathryn Roeder. High dimensional variable selection. Annals of statistics, 37(5A):2178, 2009. Asaf Weinstein, William Fithian, and Yoav Benjamini. Selection adjusted confidence intervals with more power to determine the sign. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 108(501): 165–176, 2013. Daniel Yekutieli. Adjusted bayesian inference for selected parameters. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 74(3):515–541, 2012. Ed Yong. Replication studies: Bad copy. Nature, 485(7398):298–300, 2012. Cun-Hui Zhang and Stephanie S Zhang. Confidence intervals for low dimensional parameters in high dimensional linear models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 76(1):217–242, 2014. Hua Zhong and Ross L Prentice. Bias-reduced estimators and confidence intervals for odds ratios in genome-wide association studies. Biostatistics, 9(4):621–634, 2008. Sebastian Zöllner and Jonathan K Pritchard. Overcoming the winners curse: estimating penetrance parameters from case-control data. The American Journal of Human Genetics, 80(4):605–615, 2007.  36  A  Proof of Proposition 1  Proof. For group i, let Ri be the number of true nulls selected, i.e., n o bi (Yi ), Fi ∈ H0 ⊆ M , Ri = (M, H0 ) : (M, H0 ) ∈ Q Pn Pn and let Vi denote the number of false rejections. If ZnV = i=1 Vi and ZnR = i=1 Ri , then we need to show lim supn→∞ ZnV /ZnR ≤ α. By design, 0 ≤ Vi ≤ Ri and E(Vi ) ≤ α E(Ri ). As a result, E[ZnV ]/E[ZnR ] ≤ α for every n, so we just need to show that the two sums are not far from their expectations. Because ∞ X Var(Ri ) i=1  i2  ≤B  ∞ X 1 < ∞, 2 i i=1  we can apply Kolmogorov’s strong law of large numbers to the independent but non-identical sequence R1 , R2 , . . . to obtain 1 R a.s. (Z − EZnR ) −−→ 0, n n  so  δ ZnR a.s. − 1 ≤ (ZnR − EZnR ) −−→ 0. EZnR n  As for ZnV , we have 1 V a.s. (Z − EZnV ) −−→ 0, n n  so  ZnV δ a.s. − α ≤ (ZnV − EZnV ) −−→ 0; EZnR n a.s.  a.s.  in other words, ZnR /EZnR −−→ 1 and lim supn ZnV /EZnR ≤ α.  B  Monte Carlo Tests and Confidence Intervals: Details  Assume Z arises from a one-parameter exponential family Z ∼ gθ (z) = eθz−ψ(θ) g0 (z).  (89)  We wish to compute (by Monte Carlo) the UMPU two-sided rejection region for the hypothesis H0 : θ = θ0 . Let U ∼ Unif[0, 1] be an auxiliary randomization variable. Define the dictionary ordering on [0, 1]: (z1 , u1 ) ≺ (z2 , u2 ) ⇐⇒ z1 < z2 or (z1 = z2 and u1 < u2 ).  (90)  If Γ1 = (c1 , γ1 ) and Γ2 = (c2 , 1 − γ2 ), then the region RΓ1 ,Γ2 = {(z, u) : (z, u) ≺ Γ1 or (z, u)  Γ2 }  (91)  implements the rejection region for the test with cutoffs c1 , c2 and boundary randomization parameters γ1 , γ2 . For Γ1 ≺ Γ2 , write K1 (Γ1 , Γ2 ; θ) = Pθ (RΓ1 ,Γ2 ) − α K2 (Γ1 , Γ2 ; θ) = Eθ (Z | (Z, U ) ∈  (92) RΓC1 ,Γ2 )  − Eθ (Z),  (93)  so that the correct cutoffs Γi are those for which K1 (Γ1 , Γ2 ; θ) = K2 (Γ1 , Γ2 ; θ) = 0. For fixed θ, K1 is decreasing in Γ1 and increasing in Γ2 , while K2 is increasing in both Γ1 and Γ2 . 37  Let (Z1 , W1 ), (Z2 , W2 ), . . . be a sequence of random variables for which Pn W h(Zi )eθZi n b Pn i Eθ h(Z) = i=1 θZi i=1 Wi e a.s.  −−→ Eθ h(Z).  (94) (95)  for all integrable h. This would be true if (Zi , Wi ) are a valid i.i.d. sample or i.i.d. importance sample from g0 , or if they come from a valid Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm. b n are defined analogously to Ki for i = 1, 2, with Eθ and Pθ replaced with their importanceIf K i a.s. b n and P bn , then K bn − b n satisfy weighted empirical versions E −→ K pointwise as n → ∞, and K i i θ θ the same monotonicity properties almost surely for each n. As a result, we have almost sure b n, K b n ): convergence on compacta for (K 1 2 sup (Γ1 ,Γ2 )∈G  b n (Γ1 , Γ2 ; θ) − Ki (Γ1 , Γ2 ; θ) max K i i  (96)  2  for each θ, for compact G ∈ (R × [0, 1]) . b n and K b n , in effect defining the We carry out our tests by solving for Γ1 and Γ2 which solve K 1 2 UMPU tests for a one-parameter exponential family through the approximating empirical measure. Specifically, we can define n o b 2 (Γ1 ; θ) = inf Γ2 : K b n (Γ1 , Γ2 ; θ) = 0 , Γ (97) 1 b 2 = ∞ if the set is empty. That is, for a given lower cutoff we define the upper cutoff to with Γ   b n Γ1 , Γ b 2 (Γ1 ; θ); θ is an increasing obtain a level-α acceptance region if that is possible. Then, K 2 b function and we can solve it using binary search. Let Rθ denote  the rejection region  so obtained. bθ if and only if K b n (z, u), Γ b 2 ((z, u)); θ < 0. This fact, Note that (z, u) is in the left-tail of R 2  paired with an analogous test for whether (z, u) is in the right tail, gives us a quick way to carry out the test. It also allows us to quickly find the upper and lower confidence bounds for the approximating empirical family, via binary search.  C  Sampling for the Selective t-Test: Details  Let C ⊆ Rk denote a set with nonempty interior and consider the problem of integrating some integrable function h(y) against the uniform probability measure on C ∩ S k−1 , where S k−1 is the unit sphere of dimension k − 1, assuming the intersection is non-empty. Assume we are given an i.i.d. sequence of uniform samples Y1 , Y2 , . . . from C ∩ B k , where B k is the unit ball. k−1 Let R ∼ r k , so that if Z ∼ Unif(S k−1 ), then Y = RZ ∼ Unif(B k ). Let Z W (Z) = 0  1  rk−1 1{rZ ∈ C} dr k  −1 (98)  We can use the Yi for which Zi = Yi /kYi k ∈ C as a sequence of importance samples with  38  weights W (Zi ), since E(h (Z)1 {Y, Z ∈ C} W (Z)) Z Z 1 rk−1 = h(z)1 {z, rz ∈ C} W (z) dr dz k S k−1 0 Z = h(z)1 {z ∈ C} dz  (99) (100) (101)  S k−1  = E (h(Z)1 {Z ∈ C}) . To carry out the selective t-test of H0 : βj = 0, we need to sample from  L η0 Y PXM \j Y, kY k, A .  (102)  (103)  ⊥ Let U = PXM \j Y , and let Q ∈ Rn×(n−|M |−1) be such that QQ0 = PX . Then L2 , kQ0 Y k2 = M \j 2 2 kY k − kU k is fixed under the selection event. Let  C = {v : U + Qv ∈ A},  (104)  so that AU = U + QC, an (n − |M | − 1)-dimensional hyperplane intersected with A, is the event we would sample from for the selective z-test. Under H0 , Y is uniformly distributed on   (U + QC) ∩ kY kS n−1 = U + Q C ∩ LS n−|M |−2 . (105) Assume we can resample Y ∗ uniformly from AU ∩ (U + LB n−|M |−1 ), which is just sampling from AU with an additional quadratic constraint. Then V ∗ = Q0 (Y ∗ − U ) is a sample from the ball of radius L, intersected with C. We can turn V ∗ into an importance-weighted sample from the sphere via the scheme outlined above; then, the same importance weight suffices to turn Y ∗ into a sample from the selective t-test conditioning set.  39

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
