Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_1381

Abstract:
Modeling and simulation of non-linear and hysteresis behavior of magneto-rheological dampers in the example of quarter-car model  Sulaymon Eshkabilov Dynamics & Control Lab Tashkent Automotive Road Institute Amir Temur Str. 20, Tashkent -100060, Uzbekistan Email: sulaymon@d-c-lab.com Abstract. This paper presents reviews of several models and numerical simulation models of non-linear and hysteresis behaviors of magneto-rheological liquid dampers in MATLAB®/Simulink® in the example of quarter-car model of vehicle suspension simulation, such as, Bingham, Dahl, LuGre and Bouc-Wen models. In addition, it demonstrates numerical simulation models built in MATLAB®/Simulink® and discusses results from numerical simulation models for three different input excitations from terrain. Keywords: Bingham model, Dahl model, LuGre model, Bouc-Wen model, passive and semi-active suspension, magneto-rheological damper, quarter car model, numerical simulation, Simulink model.  1.  Introduction  In general, most of the natural phenomena, operational machine processes and dynamic system behaviors are of non-linear nature that is very often linearized for the sake of simplicity in formulations and analyses. In fact, nonlinear behaviors or phenomena of processes may create difficulties in studies and engineering design processes but considering some of those non-linear characteristics of processes or behaviors of dynamic systems carefully could be also very beneficial and of great importance for efficient and accurate control, and used for operational efficiency and energy preservation or dissipation depending on their application areas. For example, nonlinear parameters and characteristics of some materials and interactions of different parts made of different materials have a great potential to apply for dampers and shock absorbers [1]. One of the good examples for such processes is a hysteresis loop observed in magnetic or magnetized materials and magneto-rheological (MR) liquids. In studies [2, 3, 4, 5], the MR liquids are found to be one of the most suitable and promising in designing vibration dampers and shock absorbers, and there are some combinatorial designs [6] of MR fluid dampers. In studies [7], feasibility of MR liquid damper modeling by employing Bouc-Wen model in association with an intelligent self-tuning PID controller for semi-active suspension modeling is studied numerically via computer modeling in MATLAB/Simulink. Nevertheless, identification of the hysteresis loop parameters is rather complex and may require considerable laboratory and numerical studies in order to apply them and get a best use of MR damper properties. In this paper, we put some emphases on different mathematical models and formulations of the MR liquids, and their hysteresis loop parameters and numerical simulation models designed for a semi-actively controlled feedback damper for a vehicle suspension systems developed in MATLAB/Simulink. In addition, we shall try to analyze and compare efficiency and accuracy of these models in the example of the quarter-car model to design a semi-active suspension system. 2.  Mathematical formulation of a quarter-car model  To derive an equation of (vertical) motion of a vehicle while driving on uneven roads, we take quarter of a vehicle by assuming that terrain roughness is evenly distributed under all wheels of a vehicle and loading from the whole vehicle body is equally distributed across all of its axles. In addition, we consider that a tire has some damping effect. With these preconditions, we draw the next physical model (Figure 1) of the system for passively and semi-actively controlled systems of a quarter-car model.  a)  Paassive suspensio on design;  b) Semi-acttive suspension design. Figure 1. Vehicle V suspensi on models.  From the passive and semii-active suspension design show wn in Figure 1, we can derive equations of m motion of the two mass bodies whicch as un-sprung mass (half of axle a mass and one o wheel) aand sprung mass (quarter car body mass) . So, the equations off motion of the systems s are a)  Fo or passive suspension system: 0  b)  (1)  Fo or semi-active su uspension system m: (2)  Where , and are diisplacement, vellocity and accelleration of the sprung mass (qquarter car boddy mass), respecctively; , and are displacem ment, velocity an nd acceleration of o the un-sprung mass (half of axxle mass and onne wheel), respecctively; and daamping coefficieents of suspensio on and tire; an nd stiffness oof suspension annd tire; and are terrain rouughness (disturbancee) displacement and velocity with w respect to longitudinal l speeed of the vehiccle; is the fforce generated by the controller th hat takes into account terrain rou ughness , an nd vertical displ acement and velocity of the vehhicle. In the moddel, for - the control force exerrted by the contrroller, we apply y several differeent hysteresis efffect models, succh as, Bingham m, Dahl, LuGre and Bouc-Wen B modeels and design nu umerical simulattion models in M MATLAB/Simullink. 3. Matheematical formullations of the MR M dampers 3.1. Bingha am model To simulatee and identify paarameters of the MR liquids, Bin ngham plastic m model [8] was prooposed in 1985. It is formulatedd by the following: (3) Where is a piston’s relatiive displacementt and is its derrivative that is veelocity of a pistoon; is frictionnal force; is daamping is offset force (constant force value). The sig gnum function will takee care of the dirrection of the friictional constant;  force dep pending on the relative r velocity of the hysteresis (internal) vvariable . Note that in our simuulation model, correspond to the displacem ment and veloccity of the spru ung mass.  and  The responsse of Bingham model m correspon nds to the follow wing graph show wn in Figure 3 annd it can be assuumed that the shhape of Bingham model m force will w be equal to Coulomb force plus friction forrce ( ). The dam mping coefficiennt (constant) will be equal to the linear relationsh hip between the force ∆ and thee velocity ∆ diffferences- Figuree 3.  Figuree 2. Bingham meechanical model proposed by [6]].  ∆ ∆  Figure 3. The reesponse of Binghham model. Now we build a Simulink model m – Figure 4 using the form mulation from thee equation (3) annd link it with thhe model expresssed for the semi-acttively controlled d suspension mod del from the exp pression of (2) ass shown in Figurre 1.b.  Figure 4. Bing gham model emb bedded in semi-aactive suspensionn control. Note that th he Coulomb frictional force ( ) is directly relatted to the yield stress. In Binghham model theree are two input ssignals, which are and make up u relative velocity in order to diirect the Coulom mb frictional forrce with the ssignum function, i.ee., . 3.2. Dahl model m This model considers quasi--static bonds in the t origin of fricction [9]. Dahl m model of the MR damper [8] is foormulated by: (4) | | is exerted forcee from the MR damper, d is thee control voltagee, Where, and are paarameters that co ontrol the hystereesis loop shape.  (5) is the dynaamic hysteresis ccoefficient, ,  ,  Using the ex xpressions (4) and (5), we build d a simulation model m of Dahl moodel in Simulinkk as shown in Fiigure 5. In Dahll model (Figure 5), there t is one feed dback coming fro om the un-spring g mass that is veelocity annd there is one ouutput signal thatt is going to thee un-sprung masss and sprung maass.  Fig gure 5. Dahl mod del implemented d for semi-active control of suspeension system. In Dahl model, there are on ne input signal and output sig gnal . The innput signal is cooming from the velocity of the sprung nction of fo force, and summ ming junction off dynamic hyssteresis mass that iss a car body vellocity and feeding summing jun coefficient. The output sign nal is the controll force feeding a summing juncction of input forrces for sprung mass with (-) siign and for un-sprun ng mass with (+)) sign. 3.3. LuGree model In modeling g the hysteresis loops, the LuGrre model is deveeloped within stuudies [10] and aapplied in workss [11] in modeliing and simulation of o dampers. This model [10] tak kes into accountt three types of frictions observved in dry frictioon and fluid flow ws, viz. Coulomb, sttick-slip and striibeck effects thatt are formulated by the followinng: (6) Where , , are stiffnesss, damping and viscous friction coefficients, resspectively; is the friction sttate (average defflection of the bristlees), is the velocity v of the frriction state, is the relative vvelocity of the spprung mass. |  In the abovee expression,  |  (7)  is defineed by [12 and 13] that has been eexpressed with thhe following (8)  Where  is the Coulomb friction force,  is i the sticktion fo orce, and  is thhe Stribeck veloccity.  The simulattion model of th he LuGre modell, as shown in Figure F 6, is buillt in Simulink w with one input ssignal that is a rrelative velocity from m sprung mass and a one output signal s that is con ntrol force ffor the suspensioon system conneected with a sum mmation junction of the t sprung and un-sprung u massees with (-) and (+ +) signs respectiively alike Binghham and Dahl m models shown in Figure 4 and 5.  Fiigure 6. Simulink k model of the L LuGre model. In the Simulink model, a fun nction block witth three input sig gnals, viz. , mployed to comppute a control forrce that , , is em f . The tw wo input signalss, which are and , aree internal variables computed from the expressions (7) is the MR force and (8). 3.4. Bouc-W Wen model The MR dam mper with Bouc-Wen model is composed c of stifffness (spring) ellement, passive damper and Bouuc-Wen hysteressis loop elements. Th he schematic rep presentation of Bouc-Wen B modeel of an MR dam mper is depicted bby the next scheematic view – Fiigure 7. The hysteresis loop has an internal i variablee that represen nts hysteretic behhavior and satisffies the next exppression (9). Thee model equation of Bouc-Wen mod del [8] is expressed by the follow wing. | |  | |  | |  (9)  Where is the evolutionary y variable that caan vary from a sinusoidal s to a quuasi-rectangularr function of the time dependingg on the parameters , and .  Figure F 7. Schem matic representatiion of Bouc-Wen en model of an M MR damper.  The force ex xerted by the MR R damper is the function of the relative displaceement the control voltage v , and iss given by  and veloocity  and the pparameter  defiined by  (10) In the modeel computing daamping force of the MR damperr, is the stiffn fness of the sprinng element of thhe MR damper aand the values of th he parameters (co oefficients) and hav ve a linearly relaationship with thhe control voltagge and determ mine the influence off the model on the final force . The force takes into accoount pre-yield sttress of the dam mper. The valuess of the parameters (coefficients) ( and arre determined from the followinng expressions: ,  (11)  The best fitt parameter valu ues of these parrameters are deetermined by fitt tting to the expeerimentally meaasured response of the system. The simulattion model of the system from m Bouc-Wen mo odel shown in F Figure 8 is buillt in Simulink bby using the equuations expressed in n (9), (10) and (11). ( The simulation model hass two input sourrces, viz. diisplacement andd velocityy of the sprung masss ( ) of the system, and two output signals forr control force going to thee sprung mass ( ) with (-) minnus sign and to the un-sprung u ( ) mass with (+) plus p sign. Note th hat is equual to and is equal to in the equatiion (2). Note that in n the MR model, there are two input i signals and d one output siggnal. The input ssignals are and displacement and velocity y of the sprung mass m and the outp put signal is the control force generated by the MR damperr.  Figure 8. Bouc-Wen mo del.  In Bouc-Ween model alike Bingham, Dahl and LuGre mo odels, the controol force feeds thhe summing junnction of forces for the sprung masss with (-) sign an nd for the un-sprrung mass with (+) ( sign. Also, all off the four simulaation models aree summed up ass sub-systems (F Figure 9) to com mpare their perfformances againnst each olled system for four different ex xcitation signals from the terrainn. The system response is displacement other and a passively contro ody from the roaad excitations. in the car bo  Semi_Active (Bouc--Wen)  Fig gure 9. Passively controlled systeem model vs. fouur MR models aas sub-systems. 4.  Simula ation results and discussions  The above depicted d mathem matical formulattions as implemented in Simulinnk models are ssimulated to com mpare performannces of each model with respect to o its exerted dam mping force, and d vibration and shock dampingg efficiency as a semi-active viibration controller fo ormulated in thee system equatio ons (2) of motion n against passiveely controlled/daamped vibrationn damper formullated in (1) in the ex xample of quarteer car model sho own in Figure 1. In all of our sim mulations, the coontrol force in (22) is set to be equal to and vibration damp ping is evaluated in the sprung g mass. Displaceement values off the sprung maass with a semii-active controller off the MR dampeer models are com mpared with thee displacement vvalues of a passivvely controlled ssuspension systeem. The values of su uspension param meters (quarter car) c are taken fro om the data givven in Table 1 aand all numericaal values for hyssteresis model (Bing gham, Dahl, LuGre and Bouc-W Wen) parameterss are chosen froom the data giveen in Table 2, 3, 4 and 5. The rrational parameter values v of the hyssteresis models are found by traails and errors. F For numerical ssimulations threee different signaals, viz.  random white noise, Heaviside step function and sine waves with 2.1 Hz and 20.8 Hz of oscillations, and also, a combinatorial excitation signal, a sum of sine waves and random (Gaussian white) noises, are taken. Road excitation signals are set to have maximum (absolute) magnitude of 0.075 m and oscillation frequencies of sine waves are taken by considering natural frequencies of the quarter car model. Table 1. Data for suspension system (quarter car model). Parameter name Parameter notation Parameter value Sprung Mass 2500 Un-sprung mass 320 Stiffness of suspension 80000 [ / ] Stiffness of un-spring mass (tire) 500000 [ / ] Damping coefficient of sprung mass 320 [ ∙ / ] Damping coefficient of un-sprung mass 15020 [ ∙ / ] Table 2. Data for Bingham model simulation. Parameter name Parameter notation Parameter value Damping coefficient in Bingham model 320 [ ∙ / ] Offset force 10 Frictional force 100 Parameter name Control voltage Hysteresis parameters Parameter name Coulomb friction force Sticktion force Stribeck velocity Stiffness coefficient Damping coefficient Viscous friction coefficient  Table 3. Data for Dahl model simulation. Parameter notation Parameter value 5[ ] 350, 800, 250, 25 , , , Table 4. Data for the LuGre model simulation. Parameter notation Parameter value 10 [ ] 25 [ ] 0.04 [ / ] 500 [ / ] 10 [ ∙ / ] 0.6 [ ∙ / ]  Table 5. Data for Bouc-Wen model simulation. Parameter name Parameter notation Parameter value Parameters of the Hysteresis shape 1, 0, 1.5, 2 , , ,n Stiffness of the spring element 300 [ / ] Input voltage 5[ ] Other parameters 4400, 442, 10872, 49616 , , , Pre-yield stress 0[ ] From the numerical simulations of hysteresis loop models with Bingham, Dahl, LuGre and Bouc-Wen models for the semi-active suspension system it is clear that all of the semi-active system models outperform passively controlled system model for four different excitation signals from road. Figure 10 and 11 demonstrate system responses (displacement of the car body) of the passively and semi-actively controlled models from random (Gaussian white) noise with the magnitude of 0.075 m (in the range of -0.0375 m … +0.0375 m) and from the simulation results it is clearly seen that all hysteresis models outperform passively damped system model in damping undersigned excitations from the terrain. Out of these four semi-active models, Bingham and Bouc-Wen models demonstrate much higher damping than the other two models, viz. Dahl and LuGre models.  x 10  Passive vs. S emi-active hyste eresis models  Input signall (road): Gussia an noise  8 Car body displacement, [m]  -3  6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 0  2  4  6 time, [sec]  8  10  Passive P B Bingham D Dahl L LuGre B Bouc-Wen 12  Figurre 10. Model ressponses on rando om (Gaussian whhite noise) excitaation from road..  Figurre 11. Model ressponses on rando om (Gaussian whhite noise) excitaation from road.. In another excitation e with Step S (Heaviside) function – Figu ure 12 and 13, thhe hysteresis moodels outperform m in damping undesired excitation in n the car body in n comparison with w passively co ontrolled model. In this case, L LuGre and Bouc--Wen models peerforms considerably y better than thee other two models and dissipaate the step exciitation with the magnitude of 00.075 m in less than 2 seconds. Wh hereas Bingham m model damps th he excitation in about a 8 seconds and Dahl modell in about 13 secconds.  Passive vs. Semi-active S hysterresis models 0 0.14  Input signa al (road): Heavisid de Step function  Car body displacement, [m]  0 0.12 0.1 0 0.08 0 0.06 Passive Bingham Dahl LuGre Bouc-Wen  0 0.04 0 0.02 0  0  2  4  6 time, [sec]  8  10  12  Fiigure 12. Passivee vs. semi-activee suspension moddels on Step inpput excitation.  Fiigure 13. Passivee vs. semi-activee suspension moddels on Step inpput excitation.  In sine wave excitations with 2.1 Hz of freq quency shown in n Figure 14 andd 15, semi-activeely controlled m models except forr BoucWen modell have demonstrrated slightly better in damping magnitude of eexcitation oscillaations in compaarison with a paassively controlled system s model an nd frequency of excitation from the road is presserved clearly aas a periodic signnal with all moddels. In this case, Bouc-Wen B modeel has outperformed all other models in term ms of damped oscillation maggnitudes. In sinee wave excitations with 20.8 Hz off frequency show wn in Figure 16 6 and 17, all hyysteresis models have dissipatedd magnitude of excited n car body moree than passively controlled model by preservingg periodic oscillaations with respect to road excittations. vibrations in Performances of all modelss after about tw wo seconds of sim mulation time hhave reached to very similar steeady state valuee in the range of 5 of displaccement in car bo ody. In this case, Bouc-Wen moodel has perform med slightly poorrer than the otheer three MR damperr models in terms of damped exccitation.  Passive vs. Semi-active S hysteressis models 0.0 05  Input siignal (road): 0.75sin n(2π*f*t); f=2.1 Hz  Car body displacement, [m]  0.0 04 0.0 03 0.0 02 0.0 01 0 -0.0 01 Passsive Bingham Dah hl LuG Gre Bou uc-Wen  -0.0 02 -0.0 03 -0.0 04 -0.0 05 0  2  4  6 time, [sec]  8  10  12  Figure F 14. Passiv ve vs. semi-activ ve suspension on n sinusoidal wavve: 0.075 sin 2  ,  2.1  excitation.  Figure F 15. Passiv ve vs. semi-activ ve suspension on n sinusoidal wavve: 0.075 sin 2  ,  2.1  excitation.  Passive vs. Semi-active hysteresis models Passive Bingham Dahl LuGre Bouc-Wen  Car body displacement, [m]  0.01  0.0 005  0  -0.0 005  Input signal (road): ( 0.75sin(2π*f*t); * f=20.8 Hz  -0.01 0  2  4  6 time, [sec]  8  10  12  Figure F 16. Passiv ve vs. semi-activ ve suspension on n sinusoidal wavee: 0.075 sin 2  ,  20.8  excitation  Figure F 17. Passiv ve vs. semi-activ ve suspension on n sinusoidal wavee: 0.075 sin 2  ,  20.8  excitation  A fourth ex xcitation signal from f road used to t simulate the models m is sine w wave with 20.8 H Hz of frequencyy plus white noisse. The performancees of the semi-aactive models for this excitation n – Figure 18 annd 19 have been similar to the pprevious case wiith sine wave excitaation with 20.8 Hz H frequency fo or some extent and a in this case, the two MR moodels, viz. Binghham and Dahl m models, have not reaached to a stable steady-state vallue.  Passive vs. Se emi-active hysterresis models  Car body displacement, [m]  015 0.0  Input sig gnal (road): 0.75s sin(2π*f*t)+Gussia an noise  0.01 0.0 005 0 -0.0 005 -0 0.01  0  5.  2  4  6 time, [sec]  8  10  Passive P B Bingham D Dahl L LuGre B Bouc-Wen 12  Figure 18 8. The system responses of passiive and semi-acttive on sinusoidaal wave ( white noise excitationn.  20 0.8  ): 0.075 sin n 2  + Gausssian  Figure 19 9. The system responses of passiive and semi-acttive on sinusoidaal wave ( white noise excitationn.  20 0.8  ): 0.075 sin n 2  + Gausssian  Summ mary  The develop ped simulation models m of the hy ysteresis or non--linear system bbehaviors of the MR liquids useed in dampers byy using mathematical formulations of o Bingham, Dahl, LuGre and Bouc-Wen B modells in MATLAB//Simulink in the example of quaarter car model havee showed adequaacy of these MR R dampers for designing d vibratiion and shock ddampers. The sim mulation resultss of the semi-activelly controlled dam mper models wiith Bingham, Daahl, LuGre and B Bouc-Wen modeels have demonsstrated superiority over passively co ontrolled damperr model in the ex xample of four different d excitatiion signals mimiicking terrain rouughness for the quarter car suspension system mod del. Amongst th hese semi-activeely controlled m models, Bouc-W Wen has outperfoormed other moodels in terms of thee damped vibrations and steady-sstate response tim me in three excittation signals, viiz. step, white nooise and low frequency sine wave. In case of high her (>20.8 Hz) frequency (puree periodic) excittation from roadd, Bingham, Daahl and LuGre m models perform better than Bouc-W Wen model.  Further stud dies will be aimeed to develop maathematical (emp pirical) formulattions and experiimental validatioons to compute ooptimal parameters of MR hysteresis based damp pers with Dahl, LuGre and Boouc-Wen modelss with respect tto suspension aand tire with these MR daamper models. parameters. In addition, it iss planned to deveelop an adaptivee PID controller in association w dgements. This research study is supported by y the state grannt # A-3-54 from m the State Science and Techhnology Acknowled Committee of Uzbekistan. References 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.  Mitu M A.M., Popeescu I., Siretean nu T., (2012) “Mathematical “ m modeling of sem mi-active controol with applicaation to bu uilding seismic protection”, p BSG G Proceedings, Vol. V 19, 2012, ppp. 88-99. Saapinski B., (2009 9) “Magneto-rheeological damperrs in vibrational control of mechhanical structurees”, Mechanics V Vol. 28, No 1. 18-25 pp. Brraz Cesar M., R. Carneiro dee Barros R., 20 012, “Propertiees and Numericcal Modeling oof MR damperss”, 15th in nternational confference on experimental mechanics, Porto, Portuugal. Zh hang H., et al. (2004), ( “Study on the design, test t and simulattion of a MR daamper with twoo-stage electromagnetic co oil”, www.paperr.edu.cn – viewed d on March 13, 2016. 2 Esshkabilov S., Grrimheden M., 2015, “Car seat daamper controller design with maggneto-rheologicaal fluids“, Int. C Conf., Nov., 2015, Navo oi, Uzbekistan. Leee T.Y., Kawash hima K., Chen P.C. P (2008) "Exp perimental and A Analytical Studyy on a Nonlinearr Isolated Bridgee under Seemiactive Contro ol", 14th World Conference on Earthquake E Engiineering, Octobeer 12-17, 2008, B Beijing, China. Mat M Hussin Ab Taalib, Intan Z. Maat Darus, 2013, "Self-tuning " PID D Controller withh MR damper A And Hydraulic Acctuator Fo or Suspension Sy ystem", Fifth Intternational Confference on Compputational Intelliigence, Modellinng and Simulatioon, IE EEE-Computer Society, S DOI 10..1109/CIMSim.2 2013.27, pp. 1199-124. Gugliemino, et al.. 2008, Semi-acttive Suspension Control, Springeer, pp. 192-196. Laampaert V., Al-B Bender F., 2003 3 “A generalized d Maxwell slip fr friction model apppropriate for coontrol purposes,”” IEEE – Physics Confereence, St. Petersburg, Russia, pp. 1170-1177. Canudas de Wit C, Olsson H.J.,, Astrom K.J., Lischinsky L P (11993), Dynamiccs friction modeels and control design. American A Controll Conference, Saan Francisco, US SA, pp. 1920-19226. Nguyen B. D., Aldo A. F., Olivierr A. B., 2007, Efficient Simulatiion of a Dynamiic System with L LuGre Friction, JJournal off Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics, D Vol. 2, pp. 281-289. B. Armstrong-H´eelouvry, Controll of Machines wiith Friction. Bosston, MA: Kluweer, 1991. Canudas de Wit C., Olsson H., Astrom A K. J., and a Lischinsky P P., 1995, “A neew model for coontrol of system ms with friction,” IEEE Trrans. Autom. Co ontr., vol. 40, no.. 3, pp. 419–425.  Su ulaymon L. ES SHKABILOV. He got ME from m Tashkent Auttomotive Road IInstitute (TARI)) in n 1994, earned MSc M from Rocheester Institute of Technology in 22001 and PhD frrom Cyberneticss reesearch Institute of Academy Scciences of Uzbeekistan in 2005. He was a visiting professor inn 20 010-2011 at Mecchanical Engineeering departmennt of Ohio Univeersity, OH, USA A. He is currentlyy an n associate proffessor at TARI and holds a ppart-time professsor position at Tashkent-Turinn Po olytechnic Univ versity. His reseaarch areas are m mechanical vibraations and appliccations of modall an nalysis, system identification, co ontrol and modelling of dynamic systems.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
