Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_1810

Abstract:
Causal Discovery in the Presence of Measurement Error: Identifiability Conditions  Kun Zhang† , Mingming Gong?† , Joseph Ramsey† , Kayhan Batmanghelich? , Peter Spirtes† , Clark Glymour† †  arXiv:1706.03768v1 [stat.ME] 10 Jun 2017  ?  Department of philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh  Abstract Measurement error in the observed values of the variables can greatly change the output of various causal discovery methods. This problem has received much attention in multiple fields, but it is not clear to what extent the causal model for the measurement-error-free variables can be identified in the presence of measurement error with unknown variance. In this paper, we study precise sufficient identifiability conditions for the measurement-errorfree causal model and show what information of the causal model can be recovered from observed data. In particular, we present two different sets of identifiability conditions, based on the second-order statistics and higher-order statistics of the data, respectively. The former was inspired by the relationship between the generating model of the measurement-errorcontaminated data and the factor analysis model, and the latter makes use of the identifiability result of the over-complete independent component analysis problem.  1  Introduction  Understanding and using causal relations among variables of interest has been a fundamental problem in various fields, including biology, neuroscience, and social sciences. Since interventions or controlled randomized experiments are usually expensive or even impossible to conduct, discovering causal information from observational data, known as causal discovery (Spirtes et al., 2001; Pearl, 2000), has been an important task and received much attention in computer science, statistics, and philosophy. Roughly speaking, methods for causal discovery are categorized into constraint-based ones, such as the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2001), and score-based ones, such as Greedy Equivalence Search  (GES) (Chickering, 2002). Causal discovery algorithms aim to find the causal relations among the observed variables. However, in many cases the measured variables are not identical to the variables we intend to measure. For instance, the measured brain signals may contain error introduced by the instruments, and in social sciences many variables are not directly measurable and one usually resorts to proxies (e.g., for “regional security" in a particular area). In this paper, we assume that the observed variables Xi , i = 1, ..., n, are generated from the underlying measurement-noise-free variables X̃i with additional random measurement errors Ei : Xi = X̃i + Ei .  (1)  Here we assume that the measurement errors Ei are independent from X̃i and have non-zero variances. We call this model the CAusal Model with Measurement Error (CAMME). Generally speaking, because of the presence of measurement errors, the d-separation patterns among Xi are different from those among the underlying variables X̃i . This generating process has been called the random measurement error model in (Scheines & Ramsey, 2017). According to the causal Markov condition (Spirtes et al., 2001; Pearl, 2000), observed variables Xi and the underlying variables X̃i may have different conditional independence/dependence relations and, as a consequence, the output of constraint-based approaches to causal discovery is sensitive to such error, as demonstrated in (Scheines & Ramsey, 2017). Furthermore, because of the measurement error, the structural equation models according to which the measurement-error-free variables X̃i are generated usually do not hold for the observed variables Xi . (In fact, Xi follow error-invariables models, for which the identifiability of the underlying causal relation is not clear.) Hence, approaches based on structural equation models, such as the linear, non-Gaussian, acyclic model (LiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2006)), will generally fail to find the correct causal direction and causal model.  In this paper, we aim to estimate the causal model underlying the measurement-error-free variables X̃i from their observed values Xi contaminated by random measurement error. We assume linearity of the causal model and causal sufficiency relative to {X̃i }ni=1 . We particularly focus on the case where the causal structure for X̃i is represented by a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), although this condition can be weakened. In order to develop principled causal discovery methods to recover the causal model for {X̃i }ni=1 from observed values of {Xi }ni=1 , we have to address theoretical issues include • whether the causal model of interest is completely or partially identifiable from the contaminated observations, • what are the precise identifiability conditions, and • what information in the measured data is essential for estimating the identifiable causal knowledge. We make an attempt to answer the above questions on both theoretical and methodological sides. One of the main difficulties in dealing with causal discovery in the presence of measurement error is because the variances of the measurement errors are unknown. Otherwise, if they are known, one can readily calculate the covariance matrix of the measurement-error-free variables X̃i and apply traditional causal discovery methods such as the PC (Spirtes et al., 2001) or GES (Chickering, 2002)) algorithm. It is worth noting that there exist causal discovery methods to deal with confounders, i.e., hidden direct common causes, such as the Fast Causal Inference (FCI) algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2001). However, they cannot estimate the causal structure over the latent variables, which is what we aim to recover in this paper. (Silva et al., 2006) and (Kummerfeld et al.) have provided algorithms for recovering latent variables and their causal relations when each latent variable has multiple measured effects. Their problem is different from the measurement error setting we consider, where clustering for latent common causes is not required and each measured variable is the direct effect of a single "true" variable. Furthermore, as shown in next section, their models can be seen as special cases of our setting.  2  Effect of Measurement Error on Conditional Independence / Dependence  We use an example to demonstrate how measurement error changes the (conditional) independence and dependence relationships in the data. More precisely,  we will see how the (conditional) independence and independence relations between the observed variables Xi are different from those between the measurementerror-free variables X̃i . Suppose we observe X1 , X2 , and X3 , which are generated from measurement-errorfree variables according to the structure given in Figure 1. Clearly X̃1 is dependent on X̃2 , while X̃1 and X̃3 are conditionally independent given X̃2 . One may consider general settings for the variances of the measurement errors. For simplicity, here let us assume that there is only measurement error in X2 , i.e., X1 = X̃1 , X2 = X̃2 + E2 , and X3 = X̃3 . X̃1  X̃2  X̃3  X1  X2  X3  Figure 1: A linear CAMME to demonstrate the effect of measurement error on conditional independence and dependence relationships. For simplicity, we consider the special case where there is measurement error only in X2 , i.e., X2 = X̃2 + E2 , but X1 = X̃1 and X3 = X̃3 . Let ρ̃12 be the correlation coefficient between X̃1 and X̃2 and ρ̃13,2 be the partial correlation coefficient between X̃1 and X̃3 given X̃2 , which is zero. Let ρ12 and ρ13,2 be the corresponding correlation coefficient and partial correlation coefficient in the presence of measurement error. We also let ρ̃12 = ρ̃23 = ρ̃ to make the result simpler. So we have ρ13 = ρ̃13 = ρ̃12 ρ̃23 = ρ̃2 . Std(E2 ) Let γ = Std( . For the data with measurement error, X̃ ) 2  ρ12 =  Cov(X1 , X2 ) 1/2 Var (X1 )Var1/2 (X2 )  Cov(X̃1 , X̃2 ) Var1/2 (X̃1 )(Var(X̃2 ) + Var(E2 ))1/2 ρ̃ = ; (1 + γ 2 )1/2 ρ13 − ρ12 ρ23 = (1 − ρ212 )1/2 (1 − ρ223 )1/2 =  ρ13,2  = =  12 ρ̃23 ρ̃13 − ρ̃1+γ 2  1/2 1/2 ρ̃2 ρ̃2 1 − (1+γ 2 ) 1 − (1+γ 2)  r2 ρ̃2 . 1 + γ 2 − ρ̃2  As the variance of the measurement error in X2 increases, γ become larger, and ρ12 decreases and finally goes to zero; in contrast, ρ13,2 , which is zero for the measurement-error-free variables, is increasing and finally converges to ρ̃2 . See Figure 2 for an illustration. In other words, in this example as the variance of the measurement error in X2 increases, X1 and X2 become more and more independent, while X1 and X3 are conditionally more and more dependent given X2 . However, for the measurement-error-free variables, X̃1  One might apply other types of methods instead of the constraint-based ones for causal discovery from data with measurement error. In fact, as the measurementerror-free variables are not observable, X̃2 in Figure 1 is actually a confounder for observed variables. As a consequence, generally speaking, due to the effect of the confounders, the independence noise assumption underlying functional causal model-based approaches, such as the method based on the linear, non-Gaussian, acyclic model (Shimizu et al., 2006), will not hold for the observed variables any more. Figure 3 gives an illustration on this. Figure 3(a) shows the scatter plot of X1 vs. X2 and the regression line from X2 to X1 , where X̃2 , the noise in X̃1 , and the measurement error E2 , are all uniformly distributed (ρ = 0.4, and γ = 1.4). As seen from Figure 3(b), the residual of regressing X1 on X2 is not independent from X2 , although the residual of regressing X̃1 on X̃2 is independent from X̃2 . As a result, the functional causal model-based approaches to causal discovery may also fail to find the causal structure of the measurement-error-free variables from their contaminated observations.  ρ  ρ̃  12  ρ ρ ρ̃  ρ̃  2  2  X1  −2.5 −5  0 X2  5  (a) 2  0  −2 −4  −2  0 X2  2  4  (b) Figure 3: Illustration on how measurement error leads to dependence between regression residual and contaminated cause. (a) Scatter plot of X2 and X1 with measurement error in X2 together with the regression line. (b) Scatter plot of the regression residual and X2 . Note that if we regress X̃1 on X̃2 , the residual is independent from X̃2 . the corresponding causal adjacency matrix for X̃i , in which Bij is the coefficient of the direct causal influence from X̃j to X̃i and Bii = 0. We have, X̃ = BX̃ + Ẽ,  13, 2  4 6 8 γ = S td(E 2)/S td( X̃ 2)  10  Figure 2: The correlation coefficient ρ12 between X1 and X2 and partial correlation coefficient ρ13,2 between X1 and X3 given X2 as functions of γ, the ratio of the standard deviation of measurement error to the that of X̃2 . We have assumed that the correlation coefficient between X̃1 and X̃2 and that between X̃2 and X̃3 are the same (denoted by ρ̃), and that there is measurement error only in X2 .  3  0  13, 2  2  ρ 0  12  Data points 2.5Linear regression line  Residual of regressing X1 on X2  and X̃2 are dependent and X̃1 and X̃3 and conditionally independent given X̃2 . Hence, the structure given by constraint-based approaches to causal discovery on the observed variables can be very different from the causal structure over measurement-error-free variables.  Canonical Representation of Causal Models with Measurement Error  Let G̃ be the acyclic causal model over X̃i . Here we call it measurement-error-free causal model. Let B be  (2)  where the components of Ẽ, Ẽi , have non-zero, finite variances. Then X̃ is actually a linear transformation of the error terms in Ẽ because (2) implies X̃ = (I − B)−1 Ẽ. | {z }  (3)  ,A  Now let us consider two types of nodes of G̃, namely, leaf nodes (i.e., those that do not influence any other node) and non-leaf nodes. Accordingly, the noise term in their structural equation models also has distinct behaviors: If X̃i is a leaf node, then Ẽi influences only X̃i , not any other; otherwise Ẽi influences X̃i and at least one other variable, X̃j , j 6= i. Consequently, we can decompose the noise vector into two groups: ẼL consists of the l noise terms that influence only leaf nodes, and ẼNL contains the remaining noise terms.  Therefore,  Equation (3) can be rewritten as X̃ = ANL ẼNL + AL ẼL = X̃∗ + AL ẼL ,  (4)  where X̃∗ , ANL ẼNL , ANL and AL are n × (n − l) and n × l matrices, respectively. Here both AL and ANL have specific structures. All entries of AL are 0 or 1; for each column of AL , there is only one non-zero entry. In contrast, each column of ANL has at least two non-zero entries, representing the influences from the corresponding non-leaf noise term. Further consider the generating process of observed variables Xi . Combining (1) and (4) gives X = X̃∗ + AL ẼL + E = ANL ẼNL + (AL ẼL + E) = ANL ẼNL + E∗ " #  NL  ẼNL I · = A , E∗  (5) (6)  where E∗ = AL ẼL + E and I denotes the identity matrix. To make it more explicit, we give how Xi∗ and Ei∗ are related to the original CAMME process: ( X̃i , if X̃i is not a leaf node in G̃; ∗ X̃i = , and X̃i − Ẽi , otherwise; (7) ( Ei , if X̃i is not a leaf node in G̃; Ei∗ = Ei + Ẽi , otherwise. Clearly Ei∗ s are independent across i, and as we shall see in Section 4, the information shared by difference Xi is still captured by X̃∗ . Proposition 1. For each CAMME specified by (2) and (1), there always exists an observationally equivalent representation in the form of (5) or (6), The proof was actually given in the construction procedure of the representation (5) or (6) from the original CAMME. We call the representation (5) or (6) the canonical representation of the underlying CAMME (CR-CAMME). Example Set 1 Consider the following example with three observed variables Xi , i = 1, 2, 3, for which X̃1 → X̃2 ← X̃3 , with causal relations X̃2 = aX̃1 + bX̃3 + Ẽ2 . That is,   0 0 0 B = a 0 b  , 0 0 0 and according to (3),    1 0 0 A = a 1 b  . 0 0 1  X = X̃ + E = X̃∗ + E∗     E1 1 0   Ẽ = a b  · 1 + Ẽ2 + E2  Ẽ3 0 1 E3   Ẽ1    1 0 1 0 0   Ẽ3     0 1 0 ·  E1  = a b . 0 0 1 Ẽ2 + E2  0 1 E3 In causal discovery from observations in the presence of measurement error, we aim to recover information of the measurement-error-free causal model G̃. Let us define a new graphical model, G̃∗ . It is obtained by replacing variables X̃i in G̃ with variables X̃i∗ . In other words, it has the same causal structure and causal parameters (given by the B matrix) as G̃, but its nodes correspond to variables X̃i∗ . If we manage to estimate the structure of and involved causal parameters in G̃∗ , then G̃, the causal model of interest, is recovered. Comparing with G̃, G̃∗ involves some deterministic causal relations because each leaf node is a deterministic function of its parents (the noise in leaf nodes has been removed; see (7)). We defined the graphical model G̃∗ because we cannot fully estimate the distribution of measurement-error-free variables X̃, but might be able to estimate that of X̃∗ , under proper assumptions. In what follows, most of the time we assume A0. The causal Markov condition holds for G̃ and the distribution of X̃i∗ is non-deterministically faithful w.r.t. G̃∗ , in the sense that if there exists S, a subset of {X̃k∗ : k 6= i, k 6= j}, such that neither of X̃i∗ and X̃j∗ is a deterministic function of S and X̃i∗ ⊥ ⊥ X̃j∗ | S holds, then X̃i∗ and X̃j∗ (or X̃i and X̃j ) are d-separated by S in G̃∗ . This non-deterministically faithfulness assumption excludes a particular type of parameter coupling in the causal model for X̃i . in Figure 4 we give a causal model in which the causal coefficients are carefully chosen so that this assumption is violated: because X̃3∗ = aX̃1∗ + bX̃2∗ and X̃4∗ = 2aX̃1∗ + 2bX̃2∗ + E4∗ , we have X̃4∗ = 2X̃3∗ + E4∗ , implying X̃4∗ ⊥ ⊥ X̃1∗ | X̃3∗ and ∗ ∗ ∗ X̃4 ⊥ ⊥ X̃2 | X̃3 , which are not given by the causal Markov condition on G̃. We note that this nondeterministic faithfulness is defined for the distribution of the constructed variables X̃i∗ , not the measurementerror-free variables X̃i . (Bear in mind their relationship given in (7).) This assumption is generally stronger than the faithfulness assumption for the distribution of X̃i . In particular, in the causal model given in Figure 4,  the distribution of X̃i is still faithful w.r.t. G̃. Below we call the conditional independence relationship between X̃i∗ and X̃j∗ given S where neither of X̃i∗ and X̃j∗ is a deterministic function of S non-deterministic conditional independence. 2a X̃1  c a  b  X̃2  2b  X̃4  d  X̃5  X̃3  Figure 4: A causal model in which X̃i∗ are not nondeterministically faithful w.r.t. G̃ because of parameter coupling. Now we have two concerns. One is whether essential information of the CR-CAMME is identifiable from observed values of X. We are interested in finding the causal model for (or a particular type of dependence structures in) X̃. The CR-CAMME of X, given by (5) or (6), has two terms, X̃∗ and Ẽ∗ . The latter is independent across all variables, and the former preserves major information of the dependence structure in X̃. Such essential information of the CR-CAMME may be the covariance matrix of X̃∗ or the matrix ANL , as discussed in next sections. In the extreme case, suppose such information is not identifiable at all, then it is hopeless to find the underlying causal structure of G̃. The other is what information of the original CAMME, in particular, the causal model over the measurementerror-free variables, can be estimated from the above identifiable information of the CR-CAMME. Although the transformation from the original CAMME to a CR-CAMME is straightforward, without further knowledge there does not necessarily exist a unique CAMME corresponding to a given CR-CAMME: first, the CRCAMME does not tell us which nodes X̃i are leaf nodes in G̃; second, even if X̃i is known to be a leaf node, it is impossible to separate the measurement error Ei from the noise Ẽi in Ei∗ . Fortunately, we are not interested in everything of the original CAMME, but only the causal graph G̃ and the corresponding causal influences B. Accordingly, in the next sections we will explore what information of the CR-CAMME is identifiable from the observations of X and how to further reconstruct necessary information of the original CAMME. In the measurement error model (1) we assumed that each observed variable Xi is generated from its own latent variable X̃i . We note that in case multiple observed variables are generated from a single latent variable or a single observed variable is generated by multiple latent variables (see, e.g., (Silva et al., 2006)), we can still use the CR-CAMME to represent the process. In  the former case, certain rows of ANL are identical. For instance, if X1 and X2 are generated as noisy observations of the same latent variable, then in (5) the first two rows of ANL are identical. (More generally, if one allows different coefficients to generate them from the latent variable, the two rows are proportional to each other.) Then let us consider an example in the latter case. Suppose X3 is generated by latent variables X̃1 and X̃2 , for each of which there is also an observable counterpart. Write the causal model as X3 = f (X̃1 , X̃2 ) + E3 and introduce the latent variable X̃3 = f (X̃1 , X̃2 ), and then we have X3 = X̃3 + E3 . The CR-CAMME formulation then follows.  4  Identifiability with Second Order Statistics  The CR-CAMME (5) has a form of the factor analysis model (FA) (Everitt, 1984), which has been a fundamental tool in data analysis. In its general form, FA assumes the observable random vector X = (X1 , X2 , ..., Xn )| was generated by X = Lf + N,  (8)  where the factors f = (f1 , ..., fr )| satisfies Cov(f ) = I, and noise terms, as components of N, are mutually independent and also independent from f . Denote by ΨN the covariance matrix of N, which is diagonal. The unknowns in (8) are the loading matrix L and the covariance matrix ΨN . Factor analysis only exploits the second-order statistics, i.e., it assumes that all variables are jointly Gaussian. Clearly in FA L is not identifiable; it suffers from at least the right orthogonal transformation indeterminacy. However, under suitable conditions, some essential information of FA is generically identifiable, as given in the following lemma. Lemma 2. For the factor analysis model, when the 1/2 number of factors r < φ(n) = 2n+1−(8n+1) , the 2 model is generically globally identifiable, in the sense that for randomly generated (L, ΨN ) in (8), it is with only measure 0 that there exists another representation (L0 , Ψ0N ) such that (L0 , Ψ0N ) and (L, ΨN ) generate the same covariance matrix for X and Ψ0N 6= ΨN . This was formulated as a conjecture by (Shapiro, 1985), and was later proven by (Bekker & ten Berge, 1997). This lemma immediately gives rise to the following generic identifiability of the variances of measurement errors.1 1  We note that this “generic identifiability" is sightly weaker than what we want: we want to show that for certain (L, ΨN ) the model is necessarily identifiable. To give this proof is non-trivial and is a line of our future research.  Proposition 3. The variances of error terms Ei∗ and the covariance matrix of X̃∗ in the CR-CAMME (5) are generically identifiable when the sample size N → ∞ and the following assumption on the number of leaf nodes l holds: A1. The number of leaf variables l satisfies l (8n + 1)1/2 − 1 > c(n) , . n 2n  (9)  Clearly c(n) is decreasing in n and c(n) → 0 as n → ∞. To give a sense how restrictive the above condition is, Fig. 5 shows how c(n) changes with n. In particular, when n = 4, c(n) = 59.3%, condition (9) implies the number of leaf nodes is l > 2.4; when n = 100, c(n) = 13.6%, condition (9) implies l > 13.6. Roughly speaking, as n increases, it is more likely for condition (9) to hold. Note that the condition given in Proposition 3 is sufficient but not necessary for the identifiability of the noise variances and the covariance matrix of the non-leaf hidden variables (Bekker & ten Berge, 1997). 80%  c(n)  40%  20%  1  2  3  10 10 10 Number of variables n  4  10  Figure 5: c(n) as a function of n. Now we know that under certain conditions, the covariance matrices of E∗ and X̃∗ in the CR-CAMME (5) are (asymptotically) identifiable from observed data with measurement error. Can we recover the measurementerror-free causal model G̃ from them? 4.1  Proposition 4. Suppose assumptions A0, A1, and A2 hold. Then as N → ∞, G̃ can be estimated up to the equivalence class and, moreover, the leaf nodes of G̃ are identifiable. Proofs are given in Appendix. The proof of this corollary inspires a procedure to estimate the information of G̃ from contaminated observations in this case, which is denoted by FA+EquVar. It consists of four steps. (1) Apply FA on the data with a given number of leaf nodes and estimate the variances of Ei∗ as well as the covariance matrix of X̃∗ .2 (2) The (n − l) smallest values of the variances of Ei∗ correspond to non-leaf nodes, and the remaining l nodes correspond to leaf nodes. (3) Apply a causal discovery method, such as the PC algorithm, to the sub-matrix of the estimated covariance matrix of X̃∗ corresponding to non-leaf nodes and find the causal structure over non-leaf nodes. (4) For each leaf node Xi∗ , find the subset of non-leaf nodes that determines Xi∗ , and draw directed edges from those nodes to Xi∗ , and further perform orientation propagation. 4.2  60%  0 0 10  A2. The measurement errors in all observed variables have the same variance.  Gaussian CAMME with the Same Variance For Measurement Errors  In many problems the variances of the measurement errors in different variables are roughly the same because the same instrument is used and the variables are measured in similar ways. For instance, this might approximately be the case for Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) recordings. In fact, if we made the following assumption on the measurement error, the underlying causal graph G̃ can be estimated at least up to the equivalence class, as shown in the following corollary.  Gaussian CAMME: General Case  Now let us consider the general case where we do not have the constraint A2 on the measurement error. Generally speaking, after performing FA on the data, the task is to discover causal relations among X̃i∗ by analyzing their estimated covariance matrix, which is, unfortunately, singular, with the rank (n − l). Then there must exist deterministic relations among X̃i∗ , and we have to deal with such relations in causal discovery. Here suppose we simply apply the Deterministic PC (DPC) algorithm (Glymour, 2007; Luo, 2006) to tackle this problem. DPC is almost identical to PC, and the only difference is that when testing for conditional independence relationship U ⊥ ⊥ V | W, if U or V is a deterministic function of W, one then ignores this test (or equivalently we do not remove the edge between U and V ). We denote by FA+DPC this procedure for causal discovery from data with measurement error. Under some conditions on the underlying causal model G̃, it can be estimated up to its equivalence class, as given in the following proposition. Here we use PA(X̃j ) to denote the set of parents (direct causes) of X̃j in G̃. Proposition 5. Suppose Assumptions A0 and A1 hold. As N → ∞, compared to G̃, the graph produced by the above DPC procedure does not contain any missing edge. In particular, the edges between all non-leaf nodes are 2  Here we suppose the number of leaf nodes is given. In practice one may use model selection methods, such as BIC, to find this number.  corrected identified. Furthermore, the whole graph of G̃ is identifiable up to its equivalence class if the following assumption further holds: A3. For each pair of leaf nodes X̃j and X̃k , there exists X̃p ∈ PA(X̃j ) and X̃q ∈ PA(X̃k ) that are d-separated in G̃ by a variable set S1 , which may be the empty set. Moreover, for each leaf node X̃j and each non-leaf node X̃i which are not adjacent, there exists X̃r ∈ PA(X̃j ) which is d-separated from X̃i in G̃ by a variable set S2 , which may be the empty set. Example Set 2 and Discussion Suppose assumption A0 holds. • G̃A , given in Figure 6(a), follows assumptions A1 and A3. According to Proposition 5, the equivalence class of this causal DAG can be asymptotically estimated from observations with measurement error. • Assumptions A0, A1, and A3 are sufficient conditions for G̃ to be recovered up to its equivalence class and, they, especially A3, may not be necessary. For instance, consider the causal graph G̃B given in Figure 6(b), for which assumption A3 does not hold. If assumption A2 holds, G̃B can be uniquely estimated from contaminated data. Other constraints may also guarantee the identifiability of the underlying graph. For example, suppose all coefficients in the causal model are smaller than one in absolute value, then G̃B can also be uniquely estimated from noisy data. Relaxation of assumption A3 which still guarantees that G̃ is identifiable up to its equivalence class is a future line of research. • The causal graphs G̃C and G̃D , shown in Figure 6(c), do not follow A1, so generally speaking, they are not identifiable from contaminated observations with second-order statistics. This is also the case for G̃E , shown in Figure 6(d).  5  Identifiability with Higher Order Statistics  The method based on second-order statistics exploits FA and deterministic causal discovery, both of which are computationally relatively efficient. However, if the number of leaf-nodes is so small that the condition in Proposition 3 is violated (roughly speaking, usually this does not happen when n is big, say, bigger than 50, but is likely to be the case when n is very small,  G̃A :  G̃B :  X̃8  X̃1  X̃2 X̃5  X̃3 X̃6  X̃4  X̃2  X̃7  (b) G̃E :  X̃4  G̃C (solid lines as its edges): G̃D (all lines as its edges): X̃2 X̃3  X̃4  X̃3  X̃4  (a)  X̃1  X̃1  X̃5 X̃6  (c)  X̃1  X̃2  X̃3  X̃5  X̃6  X̃8  X̃7 (d)  Figure 6: (a) G̃A : a causal DAG G̃ which follows assumptions A1 and A3. (b) G̃B : a DAG which follows assumption A1, but not A3; however, the structure is still identifiable if either assumption A2 holds or we know that all causal coefficients are smaller than one in absolute value. (c) Two DAGs that do not follow assumption A1; G̃C has only the solid lines as its edges, and G̃D also includes the dashed line. (d) G̃E : another DAG that does not follow assumption A1.  say, smaller than 10), the underlying causal model is not guaranteed to be identifiable from contaminated observations. Another issue is that with second-order statistics, the causal model for X̃ is usually not uniquely identifiable; in the best case it can be recovered up to its equivalence class (and leaf nodes). To tackle these issues, below we show that we can benefit from higherorder statistics of the noise terms. In this section we further make the following assumption on the distribution of Ẽi : A4. All Ẽi are non-Gaussian. We note that under the above assumption, ANL in (6) can be estimated up to the permutation and scaling indeterminacies (including the sign indeterminacy) of the columns, as given in the following lemma. Lemma 6. Suppose assumption A4 holds. Given X which is generated according to (6), ANL is identifiable up to permutation and scaling of columns as the sample size N → ∞.  Proof. This lemma is implied by Theorem 10.3.1 in (Kagan et al., 1973) or Theorem 1 in (Eriksson & Koivunen, 2004).  5.1  Non-Gaussian CAMME with the Same Variance For Measurement Errors  We first note that under certain assumptions the underlying graph G̃ is fully identifiable, as shown in the following proposition. Proposition 7. Suppose the assumptions in Corollary 4 hold, and further suppose assumption A4 holds. Then as N → ∞, the underlying causal graph G̃ is fully identifiable from observed values of Xi . 5.2  Non-Gaussian CAMME: More General Cases  In the general case, what information of the causal structure G̃ can we recover? Can we apply existing methods for causal discovery based on LiNGAM, such as ICA-LiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2006) and Direct-LiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2011), to recover it? LiNGAM assumes that the system is non-deterministic: each variable is generated as a linear combination of its direct causes plus a non-degenerate noise term. As a consequence, the linear transformation from the vector of observed variables to the vector of independent noise terms is a square matrix; ICA-LiNGAM applies certain operations to this matrix to find the causal model, and Direct-LiNGAM estimates the causal ordering by enforcing the property that the residual of regressing the effect on the root cause is always independent from the root cause. In our case, ANL , the essential part of the mixing matrix in (6), is n × r, where r < n. In other words, for some of the variables X̃i∗ , the causal relations are deterministic. (In fact, if X̃k is a leaf node in G̃, X̃k∗ is a deterministic function of X̃k ’s direct causes.) As a consequence, unfortunately, the above causal analysis methods based on LiNGAM, including ICA-LiNGAM and Direct-LiNGAM, do not apply. We will see how to recover information of G̃ by analyzing the estimated ANL . We will show that some group structure and the groupwise causal ordering in G̃ can always be recovered. Before presenting the results, let us define the following recursive group decomposition according to causal structure G̃. Definition 8 (Recursive group decomposition). Consider the causal model G̃∗ . Put all leaf nodes which share the same direct-and-only-direct node in the same group; further incorporate the corresponding direct-andonly-direct node in the same group. Here we say a node X̃i∗ is the “direct-and-only-direct" node of X̃j∗ if and only if X̃i∗ is a direct cause of X̃j∗ and there is no other directed path from X̃i∗ to X̃j∗ . For those nodes which are not a direct-and-only-direct node of any leaf  node, each of them forms a separate group. We call the set of all such groups ordered according to the causal ordering of the non-leaf nodes in DAG G̃∗ a recursive group decomposition of G̃∗ , denoted by GG̃∗ . Example Set 3 As seen from the process of recursive group decomposition, each non-leaf node is in one and only one recursive group, and it is possible for multiple leaf nodes to be in the same group. Therefore, in total there are (n − l) recursive groups. For example, for G̃A given in Figure 6(a), a corresponding group structure for the corresponding G̃∗ is GG̃∗ = A  ({X̃1∗ } → {X̃2∗ , X̃5∗ } → {X̃3∗ , X̃6 v} → {X̃4∗ , X̃7∗ , X̃8∗ }), and for G̃B in Figure 6(b), there is only one group: GG̃∗ = ({X̃1∗ , X̃2∗ , X̃3∗ , X̃4∗ }). For both G̃C and G̃D , B given in Figure 6(c), a recursive group decomposition is ({X̃1∗ } → {X̃2∗ , X̃3∗ } → {X̃4∗ } → {X̃5∗ , X̃6∗ }). Note that the causal ordering and the recursive group decomposition of given variables according to the graphical model G̃∗ may not be unique. For instance, if G̃∗ has only two variables X̃1∗ and X̃2∗ which are not adjacent, both decompositions (X̃1∗ → X̃2∗ ) and (X̃2∗ → X̃1∗ ) are correct. Consider G̃∗ over three variables, X̃1∗ , X̃2∗ , X̃3∗ , where X̃1∗ and X̃2∗ are not adjacent and are both causes of X̃3∗ ; then both (X̃1∗ → {X̃2∗ , X̃3∗ }) and (X̃2∗ → {X̃1∗ , X̃3∗ }) are valid recursive group decompositions. We first present a procedure to construct the recursive group decomposition and the causal ordering among the groups from the estimated ANL . We will further show that the recovered recursive group decomposition is always asymptotically correct under assumption A4. 5.2.1  Construction and Identifiability of Recursive Group Decomposition  First of all, Lemma 7 tells us that ÂNL in (6) is identifiable up to permutation and scaling columns. Let us start with the asymptotic case, where the columns of the estimated ANL from values of Xi are a permuted and rescaled version of the columns of ANL . In what follows the permutation and rescaling of the columns of ANL does not change the result, so below we just work with the true ANL , instead of its estimate. X̃i∗ and X̃i follow the same causal DAG, G̃, and X̃i∗ are causally sufficient, although some variables among them (corresponding to leaf nodes in G̃∗ ) are determined by their direct causes. Let us find the causal ordering of X̃i∗ . If there are no deterministic relations and the values of X̃i∗ are given, the causal ordering can be estimated by recursively performing regression and checking independence between the regression residual and the predictor (Shimizu et al., 2011). Specifically, if one regresses all the remaining variables on the root  cause, the residuals are always independent from the predictor (the root cause). After detecting a root cause, the residuals of regressing all the other variables on the discovered root cause are still causally sufficient and follow a DAG. One can repeat the above procedure to find a new root cause over such regression residuals, until no variable is left.  the above procedure on this new set of variance will give the second root cause and its recursive group. Applying this procedure repeatedly until no variable is left finally discovers all recursive groups following the causal ordering. The constructed recurse group decomposition is asymptotically correct, as stated in the following proposition.  However, in our case we have access to ANL but not the values of X̃i∗ . Fortunately, the independence between regression residuals and the predictor can still be checked by analyzing ANL . Recall that X̃∗ = ANL ẼNL , where the components of ẼNL are independent. Without loss of generality, here we assume that all components of ẼNL are standardized, i.e., they have a zero mean and unit variance. Denote by ANL the i· NL ∗ ∗ NL N L| ith row of A . We have E[X̃j X̃i ] = Aj· Ai· and N L| NL 2 E[X̃i∗2 ] = ANL A = ||A || . The regression model i· i· i· for X̃j∗ on X̃i∗ is  Proposition 10. (Identifiable recursive group decomposition) Let Xi be generated by the CAMME with the corresponding measurement-error-free variables generated by the causal DAG G̃ and suppose assumptions A0 and A4 hold. The recursive group decomposition constructed by the above procedure is asymptotically correct, in the sense that as the sample size N → ∞, if non-leaf node X̃i is a cause of non-leaf node X̃j , then the recursive group which X̃i is in precedes the group which X̃j belongs to. However, the causal ordering among the nodes within the same recursive group may not be identifiable.  X̃j∗ =  E[X̃j∗ X̃i∗ ] E[X̃i∗2 ]  X̃i∗ + Rj←i =  N L| ANL j· Ai· X̃i∗ + Rj←i . 2 ||ANL || i·  Here the residual can be written as Rj←i = X̃j∗ − ANL j·  = |  N L| ANL j· Ai· X̃i∗ 2 ||ANL || i· N L| NL ANL Ai·  NL j· Ai· Ẽ . − NL ||A ||2 {z i· }  (10)  ,αj←i  If for all j, Rj←i is either zero or independent from X̃i∗ , we consider X̃i∗ as the current root cause and put it and all the other variables which are deterministically related to it in the first group, which is a root cause group. Now the problem is whether we can check for independence between nonzero residuals Rj←i and the predictor X̃i∗ . Interestingly, the answer is yes, as stated in the following proposition. Proposition 9. Suppose assumption A4 holds. For variables X̃∗ generated by (5), regression residual Rj←i given in (10) is independent from variable X̃i∗ if and only if |αj←i ◦ ANL (11) i· |1 = 0, where ◦ denotes entrywise product. So we can check for independence as if the values of X̃∗ were given. Consequently, we can find the root cause group. We then consider the residuals of regressing all the remaining variables X̃k∗ on the discovered root cause as a new set of variables. Note that like the variables X̃j∗ , these variables are also linear mixtures of Ẽi . Repeating  The result of Proposition 10 applies to any DAG structure in G̃. Clearly, the indentifiability can be naturally improved if additional assumptions on the causal structure G̃ hold. In particular, to recover information of G̃, it is essential to answer the following questions. • Can we determine which nodes in a recursive group are leaf nodes? • Can we find the causal edges into a particular node as well as their causal coefficients? Below we will show that under rather mild assumptions, the answers to both questions are yes. 5.2.2  Identifying Leaf Nodes and Individual Causal Edges  If for each recursive group we can determine which variable is the non-leaf node, the causal ordering among the variables X̃i∗ is then fully known. The causal structure in G̃∗ as well as the causal model can then be readily estimated by regression: for a leaf node, its direct causes are those non-leaf nodes that determine it; for a non-leaf node, we can regress it on all non-leaf nodes that precede it according to the causal ordering, and those predictors with non-zero linear coefficients are its parents. (Equivalently, its parents are the nodes that causal precede it and in its Markov blanket.) Now the problem is whether it is possible to find out which variable in a given recursive group is a leaf node; if all leaf nodes are found, then the remaining one is the (only) non-leaf node. We may find leaf nodes by “looking backward" and “looking forward"; the former makes use of the parents of the variables in the consid-  ered group, and the latter exploits the fact that leaf nodes do not have any child. Proposition 11. (Leaf node determination by “looking backward") Suppose the observed data were generated by the CAMME where assumptions A0 and A4 hold.3 Let the sample size N → ∞. Then if assumption A5 holds, leaf node O is correctly identified from values of X (more specifically, from the estimated ANL or the distribution of X̃∗ ); alternatively, if assumption A6 holds, leaf nodes O and Q are correctly identified from values of X. A5. According to G̃∗ , leaf node O in the considered recursive group, g (k) , has a parent which is not a parent of the non-leaf node in g (k) . ∗  A6. According to G̃ , leaf nodes O and Q in the considered recursive group, g (k) , are nondeterministically conditionally independent given some subset of the nodes in g (1) , g (2) , ..., g (k) .  Example Set 4 hold.  Suppose assumptions A0 and A4  • For G̃A in Figure 6(a), assumption A6 holds for X̃7∗ and X̃8∗ in the recursive group {X̃4∗ , X̃7∗ , X̃8∗ }: they are non-deterministically conditionally independent given {X̃2∗ , X̃4∗ }; so both of them are identified to be leaf nodes from the estimated ANL or the distribution of X̃∗ , and X̃4∗ can be determined as a non-leaf node. (In addition, assumption A5 holds for X̃8∗ , allowing us to identify this leaf node even if X̃7∗ is absent in the graph.) • For both G̃C and G̃D in Figure 6(c), X̃6∗ , in the recursive group {X̃5∗ , X̃6∗ }, follows assumption A5 and can be found to be a leaf node from the distribution of X̃i∗ ; accordingly, X̃5∗ has to be a non-leaf node. • For G̃E in Figure 6(d), assumption A5 holds for X̃5∗ and X̃8∗ , which can then be found to be leaf nodes.  Proposition 12. (Leaf node determination by “looking forward") Suppose the observed data were generated by the CAMME where assumptions A0 and A4 hold. Then as the sample size N → ∞, we can correctly identify the leaf node U in the considered recursive group g (k) from values of X if assumption A7 holds for it: A7. For leaf node U in g (k) , there exists at least one node causally following g (k) that 1) is dseparated from U by a subset of variables in g (1) , ..., g (k−1) , g (k) which does not include all parents of U and 2) is a child of the non-leaf node in g (k) . Example Set 5 hold.  Suppose assumptions A0 and A4  • For data generated by G̃A in Figure 6(a), we already found X̃4∗ in recursive group {X̃4∗ , X̃7∗ , X̃8∗ } to be a non-leaf node because of Proposition 11. Proposition 12 further indicates that X̃2∗ (in group {X̃2∗ , X̃5∗ }) and X̃3∗ (in group {X̃3∗ , X̃6∗ }) are nonleaf nodes, and all leaf nodes are identified. • For G̃B in Figure 6(b), there is only one recursive group, and it does not provide further information by looking “backward" or “forward", and it is impossible to find the non-leaf node with Proposition 11 or 12. • For both G̃C and G̃D in Figure 6(c), X̃6∗ was found to be a leaf node due to Proposition 11; thanks to Proposition 12, the other leaf node, X̃3∗ , was also detected. In particular, in G̃C , for leaf node X̃3∗ both X̃4∗ and X̃6∗ satisfy the two conditions in assumption 12; however, in G̃D , for leaf node X̃3∗ only X̃4∗ satisfies them. All leaf nodes were successfully found. • For G̃E in Figure 6(d), Proposition 11 already allows us to identify leaf nodes X̃5∗ and X̃8∗ . Because assumption A7 holds for X̃4∗ (for it X̃7∗ satisfies the two conditions), we can further identify this leaf node.  We can also determine leaf nodes by looking at the relationships between the considered variables and the variables causally following them, as stated in the following proposition.  For contaminated data generated by any of G̃A , G̃C , G̃D , and G̃E , now we can find all leaf nodes in the measurement-error-free causal model. One can then immediately estimate the whole measurement-errorfree model, as seen next.  3 In this non-Gaussian case (implied by assumption A4), the result reported in this proposition may still hold if one avoids the non-deterministic faithfulness assumption and assumes a weaker condition; however, for simplicity of the proof we currently still assume non-deterministic faithfulness.  The above two propositions are about the identifiably of leaf nodes in the measurement-error-free causal model. By applying them to all leaf nodes, we have the (sufficient) conditions under which the causal graph of G̃ is fully identifiable.  Proposition 13. (Full identifiability) Suppose the observed data were generated by the CAMME where assumptions A0 and A4 hold. Assume that for each leaf node in G̃∗ , at least one of the three assumptions, A5, A6, and A7, holds. Then as the sample size N → ∞, the causal structure in G̃ is fully identifiable from the contaminated observations. In the general case, the causal structure in G̃ might not be fully identifiable, and the above propositions may allow partial identifiability of the underlying causal structure. Roughly speaking, the recursive group decomposition is identifiable in the non-Gaussian case; with Propositions 11 and 12 one can further identify some leaf nodes as well as their parents.  6  Conclusion and Discussions  For variables of interest in various fields, including social sciences, neuroscience, and biology, the measured values are often contaminated by additional measurement error. Unfortunately, the outcome of existing causal discovery methods is sensitive to the existence of measurement error, and it is desirable to develop causal discovery methods that can estimate the causal model for the measurement-error-free variables without using much prior knowledge about the measurement error. To this end, this paper is concerned with the identifiability conditions for the underlying measurement-error-free causal model given contaminated observations. We have shown that under various conditions, the causal model is partially or even fully identifiable. Table 6 summarizes the identifiability results presented in this paper. Propositions 4 and 5 make use of secondorder statistics of the data, and Propositions 7 to 13 further exploit non-Gaussianity of the data. The identifiability conditions reported in this paper are sufficient and might not be necessary. Below are some high-level interpretations of the conditions. • Roughly speaking, in the Gaussian case (Propositions 4 and 5) the identifiability conditions are mainly about the number of leaf nodes in the measurement-error-free causal model and the sparsity of the underlying causal structure. The measurement-error-free causal model may be identifiable up to its equivalence class. • In the non-Gaussian case, the conditions for full identifiability are mainly about the sparsity of the measurement-error-free causal structure. • In the non-Gaussian case, the identifiability conditions of the recursive group decomposition (including causal ordering between groups) are rather general (Proposition 7).  • The identifiability of the measurement-error-free causal model may greatly benefit from additional knowledge about the measurement error (e.g, that all measurement errors have the same variance, as discussed in Propositions 4 and 7). • Suppose assumptions A0 and A4 hold (the nonGaussian case is considered); without additional knowledge about the measurement error, we conjecture that the necessary and sufficient condition for the non-leaf node to be identifiable is that at least one of the three assumptions, A5, A6, and A7, holds. To falsify or prove this conjecture is part of our future work. We note that in principle, all assumptions except A0 (regarding the causal Markov condition and nondeterministic faithfulness assumption related to causal model G̃∗ ) are testable from the observed data. This suggests that it is possible to develop practical causal discovery methods to deal with measurement error that are able to produce reliable information at least in the asymptotic case. We have verified the validity of the algorithms briefly given in the paper on large samples, including FA+EquVar and FA+DPC outlined in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, respectively, and the procedure to find recursive group decomposition given in Section 5.2. All of them are two-step methods: in the first step, the first two methods apply factor analysis on the data, and the last procedure applies over-complete independent component analysis; in the second step all the methods do causal discovery with subsequent analysis on the estimated information of the canonical representation of the CAMMA. These methods might not be statistically efficient for the purpose of causal discovery because of estimation errors in the first step. We are currently studying their behavior on finite samples and aim at developing statistically more efficient algorithms. Such methods are also expected to be able to learn the optimal number of leaf nodes in the causal graph (in this paper we assume this number is given). It is worth noting that various kinds of background knowledge of the causal model may further help improve the identifiability of the measurement-error-free causal model. For instance, if one knows that all causal coefficients are smaller than one in absolute value, then the measurement-error-free causal model in Figure 6(b) is immediately identifiable from contaminated data. Our future research also includes establishing identifiability conditions that allow cycles in the measurement-error-free causal model and developing efficient methods for particular cases where each measurement-error-free variable has multiple measured effects or multiplied measurement-error-free variables  Proposition # Proposition 4 Proposition 5 Proposition 7 Proposition 10 Proposition 11 Proposition 12 Proposition 13  Table 1: Summary of the identifiability results. Assumptions What information of G̃ is identifiable? up to the equivalence class; leaf nodes identifiA0, A1, and A2 able A0, A1, and A3 up to the equivalence class A0, A4, A1, and A2 Fully identifiable Recursive group decomposition (including A0 and A4 causal ordering between the groups) A0, A4, and A5 or A6 for Recursive group decomposition; the leaf nodes some leaf nodes in G̃∗ A0, A4, and A7 for some Recursive group decomposition; the leaf nodes leaf nodes in G̃∗ A0, A4, and A5 or A6 or Fully identifiable A7 for each leaf node  generate a single measured effect.  References Bekker, P. A. and ten Berge, J. M. F. Generic global indentification in factor analysis. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 264:255–263, 1997. Chickering, D. M. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of machine learning research, 3(Nov):507–554, 2002. Eriksson, J. and Koivunen, V. Identifiability, separability, and uniqueness of linear ICA models. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 11(7):601–604, 2004. Everitt, B. S. An introduction to latent variable models. London: Chapman and Hall, 1984. Glymour, C. Learning the structure of deterministic systems. In Gopnik, A. and Schulz, L. (eds.), Causal learning: psychology, philosophy and computation. Oxford University Press, 2007. Kagan, A. M., Linnik, Y. V., and Rao, C. R. Characterization Problems in Mathematical Statistics. Wiley, New York, 1973. Kummerfeld, E., Ramsey, J., Yang, R., Spirtes, P., and Scheines, R. Causal clustering for 2-factor measurement models. In Calders, T., Esposito, F., Hüllermeier, R., and Meo, R. (eds.), Proc. ECML PKDD. Luo, W. Learning bayesian networks in semideterministic systems. In Proc. Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 230–241, 2006. Pearl, J. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000. Scheines, R. and Ramsey, J. Measurement error and causal discovery. In Proc. CEUR Workshop 2016, pp. 1–7, 2017. Shapiro, A. Identifiability of factor analysis: Some results and open problems. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 70:1–7, 1985. Shimizu, S., Hoyer, P.O., Hyvärinen, A., and Kerminen,  A.J. A linear non-Gaussian acyclic model for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7: 2003–2030, 2006. Shimizu, S., Inazumi, T., Sogawa, Y., Hyvärinen, A., Kawahara, Y., Washio, T., Hoyer, P. O., and Bollen, K. Directlingam: Adirect method for learning a linear non-gaussian structural equation model. Journal of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1225–1248, 2011. Silva, R., Scheines, R., Glymour, C., and Spirtes, P. Learning the structure of linear latent variable models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7:191– 246, 2006. Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. Causation, Prediction, and Search. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2nd edition, 2001.  Appendix: Proofs A.1: Proof of Proposition 4 Proof. According to Proposition 3, the variances of Ei∗ are identifiable. If they are not identical, then their smallest value is the variance of measurement errors Ei . If the estimated variance of Ej∗ is greater than the smallest value, according to the definition of Ei∗ in (7), X̃j must be a leaf node in G̃. There are in total three types of edges in G̃. 1. First consider the edges between leaf nodes. According to the definition of leaf nodes, there is no edge between them. Since we know which nodes are leaf nodes, it is guaranteed that there is no edge between them. 2. Then consider the edges between non-leaf nodes. Remove all the leaf nodes, and we have the set of non-leaf nodes, which is causally sufficient. The subgraph of G̃ over this set of variables satisfies the causal Markov condition and the faithfulness assumption. Then by applying any consistent constraint-based causal discovery method, such as the PC algorithm, this subgraph is corrected identified up to its equivalence class as N → ∞. That is, the edges between non-leaf nodes are correctly identified. 3. Finally consider the edges between leaf nodes and non-leaf nodes. Each leaf node X̃i∗ is a deterministic, linear function of its direct causes, which are among non-leaf nodes. Denote by the set of the direct causes of X̃i∗ by Si . Recall that the covariance matrix of non-leaf nodes is non-singular. As a consequence, X̃i∗ , as a linear combination of elements of Si , cannot be represented as a deterministic, linear combination of other non-leaf nodes; otherwise some leaf node can be written as a deterministic, linear function of other non-leaf nodes, leading to a contradiction. As a result, Si is identifiable and, as a consequence, the edges between each leaf node and non-leaf nodes are identifiable. Therefore, G̃ is identifiable at least up to its equivalence class. Furthermore, we know that for all edges between leaf nodes and non-leaf nodes, the direction points to the leaf nodes. A.2: Proof of Proposition 5 Proof. The deterministic relations among X̃i∗ and their conditional independence/dependence relations can be seen from the covariance matrix of X̃i∗ . First, notice that the conditional independence relations detected  by DPC are correct but may not be complete. Hence, asymptotically speaking, the edges removed by DPC do not exist in the true graph, i.e., DPC does not produce any missing edge. We then note that there is no deterministic relation among non-leaf nodes and that two non-leaf nodes in G̃ which are not adjacent are d-separated by a proper subset of other non-leaf nodes; as a consequence, DPC will successfully detect the conditional independence relationships as well as the edges between non-leaf nodes. Therefore, the edges between all non-leaf nodes are identifiable. Next, we shall consider whether DPC is able to correctly identify the edges between leaf nodes (which are actually not adjacent in G̃) and those between leaf nodes and non-leaf nodes. First consider the relationships between leaf nodes. According to the former part of assumption A3, all paths between leaf nodes X̃j and X̃k that go through at most one of X̃p and X̃q are blocked by (PA(X̃j ) \ X̃p ) ∪ (PA(X̃k ) \ X̃q ); the paths that go through both of X̃p and X̃q are blocked by S1 . Therefore, all paths between X̃j and X̃k are blocked by (PA(X̃j ) \ X̃p ) ∪ (PA(X̃k ) \ X̃q ) ∪ S1 , which does not deterministically determine X̃j or X̃k , so such an conditional independence relationship is detected by DPC. Hence each pair of leaf nodes in G̃, X̃j and X̃k , are not adjacent in the output of DPC. Finally, we consider the d-separation relationships between each leaf node X̃j and its non-adjacent non-leaf node X̃i . According to the latter part of assumption A3, all paths between X̃j and X̃i that do not go through X̃r are blocked by PA(X̃j ) \ X̃r , and the paths between them that go through X̃r are blocked by S2 . Therefore, all paths between X̃j and X̃i are blocked by (PA(X̃j ) \ X̃r ) ∪ S2 . That is, the outcome of DPC does not contain any extra edge between leaf nodes and non-leaf nodes. Hence, the skeleton given by DPC is the same as the skeleton of G̃ under assumptions A0, A1, and A3. Furthermore, according to Lemma 4 in (Luo, 2006), DPC correctly identifies all colliders in G̃. Therefore, under such assumptions G̃ is recovered up to its equivalence class. A.3: Proof of Proposition 7 Proof. Denoted by ÂNL the estimate of ANL . First note that according to Corollary 4, leaf nodes in G̃ are identifiable. Then for each leaf node X̃l , find the combination of the non-leaf nodes which determines X̃l in terms of ÂNL , which is achieved by finding the combination of the rows of ÂNL corresponding to nonleaf nodes to determine the l-th row of ÂNL . All nodes  involved in this combination are direct causes of X̃l . The solution in this step is unique because the rows of ÂNL corresponding to non-leaf nodes are linearly independent, as implied by the non-deterministic relations among X̃i (or non-zero variances of Ẽi ). We have found all edges between leaf nodes and nonleaf nodes, and the remaining edges are those between non-leaf nodes. If we remove all leaf nodes and edges into them from G̃, we have the causal graph over nonleaf nodes and the graph is still acyclic, and the set of non-leaf nodes is causally sufficient. Denote by ÂNL s the matrix consisting of the rows of ÂNL corresponding to non-leaf nodes. According to the identifiability of LiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2006), the causal relations among non-leaf nodes are uniquely determined by ÂNL s or its inverse. A.4: Proof of Proposition 9 Proof. Both Rj←i and X̃i∗ are linear mixtures of independent, non-Gaussian variables Ẽi . According to the Darmois-Skitovich theorem (Kagan et al., 1973), Rj←i and X̃i∗ are statistically independent if and only if the for any k, at most one of the kth entries of their coefficient vectors, αj←i and ANL i· , is non-zero, which is equivalent to the condition (11). A.5: Proof of Proposition 10 Proof. In the constructed recursive group decomposition, each group has one and only one non-leaf node. Just consider the non-leaf nodes in the recursive decomposition. Combining Lemma 1 in (Shimizu et al., 2011) and Proposition 9, one can see that the discovered causal ordering among them must be correct. A.6: Proof of Proposition 11 Proof. In each recursive group, there is a single nonleaf node, and all the others are leaf-nodes. Denote by ∗(k) X̃q the qth node in the recursive group g (k) . Denoted ∗(k) by X̃NL the only non-leaf node in the recursive group ∗(k) g (k) . Denote by PA(X̃NL ) the set of direct causes of ∗(k) X̃NL in G̃∗ . First consider assumption A5. Let us regress each vari∗(k) able X̃q in this group on all variables X̃i∗ in the first (k − 1) recursive groups; in this regression task, all pre∗(k) dictors are causally earlier than X̃q because of the identifiable causal ordering among the recursive groups. Although the realizations of variables X̃i∗ are unknown, such regression models can be estimated from the estimated matrix ÂNL , as done in Section 5.2.1, or by analyzing the estimated covariance matrix of X̃∗ , which is ÂNL ÂN L| (we have assumed that Var(ẼiNL ) = 1  without loss of generality). There are two possible cases to consider. ∗(k)  i) For the non-leaf node X̃NL in the kth group, all predictors with non-zero coefficients are its direct ∗N L causes, and their set is PA(X̃(k) ). ∗(k)  ii) Then consider a leaf node in this group, X̃q0 , ∗(k)  ∗(k)  ∗(k)  X̃q0 6= X̃NL . Recall that when regressing X̃q0 on the variables in causally earlier recursive groups, ∗(k) X̃NL is not among the predictors because it is also in the kth group. First note that each node ∗(k) ∗(k) in X̃NL is always d-connected to X̃q0 given any ∗(k)  variable set that does not include X̃NL . As a ∗(k) consequence, in the regression model for X̃q0 , all ∗(k)  predictors in PA(X̃NL ) have non-zero coefficients, so all predictors with non-zero coefficients form ∗(k) a superset of PA(X̃NL ). Furthermore, under assumption A5, O has at least a direct cause that ∗(k) is not in PA(X̃NL ). Therefore, in the regression model for O, the set of predictors with non-zero ∗N L coefficients is a proper superset of PA(X̃(k) ) (the former has more elements). ∗(k)  That is, when regressing variables X̃q in the considered group on variables in earlier groups, the non-leaf node, as well as possibly some of the leaf nodes, always has a smaller number of predictors with non-zero coefficients, compared to the model for leaf node O. Hence we can determine O as a leaf node. Then consider assumption A6. According to assumption A0, A6 implies that O and Q are d-separated by a proper subset of the variables. Consequently, they are not adjacent in G̃∗ . Bear in mind that the nonleaf node in g (k) is adjacent to all leaf nodes in the same group in G̃∗ . Therefore both O and Q are leaf nodes. A.7: Proof of Proposition 12 Proof. We note that the recursive group decomposition can be correctly identified from the values of X as N → ∞, as implied by Proposition 10. Denote by W the nonleaf node in g (k) . Let us first find a subset of the nodes causally following g (k) in which each node, denoted by S, is always non-deterministically dependent on at least one of the nodes in g (k) relative to g (1) ∪g (2) ∪...∪g (k) ∪S. Denoted by S this set of nodes. If assumption A7 holds, S is non-empty. We then see that the non-leaf node W is always nondeterministically dependent on every node in S. Suppose this is not the case, i.e., there is S ∈ S which is non-deterministically independent from W given a  subset of g (1) ∪ g (2) ∪ ... ∪ g (k) . Denote by R1 this subset. If R1 contains any leaf nodes in G̃∗ , let us remove those leaf nodes from R1 and denote by R01 the resulting variable set. Further note that S and W are still de-separated by R01 . Then U 0 , a leaf node in g (k) , is always d-separated from S given R01 ∪ (PA(U 0 ) \ W ). Since all nodes in R01 ∪(PA(U 0 )\W ) are non-leaf nodes, W can not be represented as their linear combination; thus U 0 is not their deterministic function. Furthermore, S is not a deterministic function of nodes in R01 ∪ (PA(U 0 ) \ W ) either; otherwise, according to the construction procedure of the recursive group decomposition, S will belong to g (1) ∪ g (2) ∪ ... ∪ g (k) because all elements of R01 ∪ (PA(U 0 ) \ W ) belong to it. Hence any leaf node U 0 in g (k) will be non-deterministically independent from S relative to g (1) ∪ g (2) ∪ ... ∪ g (k) ∪ S, so S is non-deterministically independent from every node in g (k) given a subset of g (1) ∪ g (2) ∪ ... ∪ g (k) . That is, S ∈ / S, leading to a contradiction. Next, we show that for leaf node U in g (k) , there exists at least one element of S which is non-deterministically conditionally independent from U given a subset of g (1) ∪ g (2) ∪ ... ∪ g (k) . Denote by V one of the nodes that causally follow g (k) and satisfy the two conditions in assumption A7. Because of condition 2), V ∈ S. Condition 1) states that V and leaf node U are dseparated by a subset of variables in g (1) , ..., g (k−1) , g (k) that does not include all parents of U . Denote by R2 this variable set. If R2 contains any leaf nodes in G̃∗ , remove them from R2 and denote by R02 the resulting variable set. V and U are still de-separated by R02 , but all elements of R02 are non-leaf nodes. Because all non-leaf nodes in G̃∗ are linearly independent, the parents of U that are not in R02 can not be written as linear combinations of the elements of R02 . Therefore, U is not a deterministic function of R02 . Moreover, V is not a deterministic function of R02 either, because otherwise V will not in groups causally following g (k) . This means that leaf node U is non-deterministically independent from V , as an element of S, given R02 . That is, we can distinguish between leaf node U and the non-leaf node in the same recursive group by checking non-deterministic conditional independence relationships in X̃i∗ .  A.8: Proof of Proposition 13 Proof. First note that under the assumptions in the proposition, the recursive group decomposition is identifiable, and all leaf nodes are asymptotically identifiable. The causal ordering among the variables X̃i∗ is then fully known. The causal graph G̃ as well as the causal model can then be readily estimated by regression: for  a leaf node, its direct causes are those non-leaf nodes that determine it; for a non-leaf node, we can regress it on all non-leaf nodes that causally precede it according to the causal ordering, and those predictors with non-zero linear coefficients are its parents.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
