Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_116

Abstract:
Dynamic Loop Parallelisation Adrian Jackson∗ and Orestis Agathokleous∗ ∗ EPCC,  arXiv:1205.2367v1 [cs.PL] 10 May 2012  The University of Edinburgh, Kings Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3JZ, UK  Abstract—Regions of nested loops are a common feature of High Performance Computing (HPC) codes. In shared memory programming models, such as OpenMP, these structure are the most common source of parallelism. Parallelising these structures requires the programmers to make a static decision on how parallelism should be applied. However, depending on the parameters of the problem and the nature of the code, static decisions on which loop to parallelise may not be optimal, especially as they do not enable the exploitation of any runtime characteristics of the execution. Changes to the iterations of the loop which is chosen to be parallelised might limit the amount of processors that can be utilised. We have developed a system that allows a code to make a dynamic choice, at runtime, of what parallelism is applied to nested loops. The system works using a source to source compiler, which we have created, to perform transformations to user’s code automatically, through a directive based approach (similar to OpenMP). This approach requires the programmer to specify how the loops of the region can be parallelised and our runtime library is then responsible for making the decisions dynamically during the execution of the code. Our method for providing dynamic decisions on which loop to parallelise significantly outperforms the standard methods for achieving this through OpenMP (using if clauses) and further optimisations were possible with our system when addressing simulations where the number of iterations of the loops change during the runtime of the program or loops are not perfectly nested.  I. I NTRODUCTION High Performance Computing (HPC) codes, and in particular scientific codes, require parallel execution in order to achieve a large amount of performance increase. Depending on the underlying parallel platform which is used, programmers use different programming models in order to achieve parallel execution. In distributed memory systems, the message passing programming model is the most commonly used approach for applying parallelism in the codes. In shared memory systems however, an attractive choice for parallel programming is through OpenMP[16]. The parallelisation of codes with OpenMP is often achieved with loop parallelisation. As long as the iterations of a loop are independent, they can be distributed to the available processors of the system in order to execute them in parallel. A programmer is required to specify a loop that can be parallelised by placing compiler directives before the loop, resolving any dependency issues between the iterations beforehand. HPC codes often consist of regions with nested loops of multiple levels. In order to parallelise these regions, a choice must be  made on how parallelism should be applied on the loops. Even though OpenMP supports a variety of strategies for parallelising nested loops, only a single one can be used to parallelise the code. A static choice however, cannot exploit any runtime characteristics during the execution of the program. Changes in the input parameters of the executable which affect the iterations of the loops may render the parallelisation decision suboptimal. In addition to this, the iterations of a loop can change at runtime due to the nature of the code. A common feature of HPC codes is to organise the data into hierarchies, for example blocks of multi-dimensional arrays. Depending on the problem, the blocks can have different shapes and sizes. These parameters affect the loops that are responsible for accessing this data. In some situations, a static decision has the potential to impose a limitation on the amount of processors that can be used for the parallel execution of the loops. With the current trend of chip manufactures to increase the number of cores in the processors in each generation leading to larger and larger shared memory system being readily available to computational scientists on the desktop and beyond, a more dynamic approach must be considered for taking such decisions. This report outlines our investigations into various strategies that can be applied at runtime in order to make a dynamic decision on how to parallelise a region with nested loops. Our approach is to try to automatically perform modifications to users code before compilation in order to enable the code to make these decisions dynamically at runtime. Specifically, we investigated the possibility of having multiple versions of a loop within a region of nested loops in order to make a dynamic choice on whether a loop should be execute sequentially or in parallel. II. O PEN MP OpenMP [1] is, arguably, the dominant parallel programming model currently used for writing parallel programs for used on shared memory parallel systems. Now at version 3.1, and supported by C and FORTRAN, OpenMP operates using compiler directives. The programmer annotates their code specifying how it should be parallelised. The compiler then transforms the original code into a parallel version when the code is compiled. By providing this higher level of abstraction, OpenMP codes tend to be easier to develop, debug and maintain. Moreover, with OpenMP it is very easy  TABLE I S TRATEGIES FOR PARALLELISING NESTED LOOP REGIONS Name  Description  Outermost Inner Loop Nested  Loop Parallelisation of the outermost loop Parallelisation of one of the inner loops Parallelisation of multiple loops with nested parallel regions Collapsing the loops into a single big loop  Loop Collapsing Loop Selection  Runtime loop selection using if clauses  to develop the parallel version of a serial code without any major modifications. Whilst there are a number of different mechanisms that OpenMP provides for adding parallel functionality to programs, the one that is generally used most often is loop parallelisation. This involves taking independent iterations of loops and distributing them to a group of threads that perform these sets of independent operations in parallel. Since each of the threads can access shared data, it is generally straightforward to parallelise any loop with no structural changes to the program. III. N ESTED L OOPS HPC codes, and particularly scientific codes, deal with numerical computations based on mathematical formulas. These formulas are often expressed in the form of nested loops, where a set of computations is applied to a large amount of data (generally stored in arrays) and parallelisation can be applied to each loop individually. The arrays often consist of multiple dimensions and the access on the data is achieved with the presence of nested loops. Furthermore it is not uncommon that the arrangement of the data is done in multiple hierarchies, most commonly in blocks with multidimensional arrays, where additional loops are require in order to traverse all the data. When such code is presented, a choice must be made on which loop level to parallelise (where the parallelisation should occur) [2]. A summary of the available strategies is presented in Table I A. Outermost loop The most commonly used approach is to parallelise the outermost loop of a nested loop region, as shown in Listing 1. Using this strategy, the iterations of the loop are distributed to the members of the thread team. The threads operate in parallel by executing the portion of iterations they are assigned to them individually. The nested loops of the parallel region are executed in a sequential manner. 1 2 3 4 5 6  #pragma omp parallel for private (j) for(i = 0; i < I; i++){ for(j = 0; j < J; j++){ work(); } } Listing 1.  Outer loop parallelisation of a nested loop region  Parallelising the outermost loop is often a good choice, as it minimises the parallel overheads of the OpenMP implementation (such as the initialisation of the parallel region, the scheduling of loop iterations to threads and the synchronisation which takes place at the end of the Parallel loops). More extensive work on the overheads of various OpenMP directives can be found in [3]. Despite the advantages of the Outermost Loop parallelisation strategy in this context, there are drawbacks of this choice. The maximum amount of available parallelism is limited by the number of iterations of the outerloop loop. Considering the example code in Listing 1, it is only possible to have I tasks being executed in parallel. This restricts the number of threads the code can utilise upon execution, and therefore the number of processors or cores that can be exploited. B. Inner loop This is a variant on the outermost loop strategy, with the difference that one of the inner loops of the region is chosen to be parallelised. This approach will only be required or beneficial if the outer loop does not have enough iterations to parallelise efficiently as this variant on the parallelisation strategy introduces parallelisation overheads by requiring the parallelisation to be performed for each loop of the outerloop rather than once for all the loops (as shown in Listing 2). Further nesting of the parallelisation (at deeper loop levels) will further increase the performance problems; the parallel overheads appear a lot more times, whereas the amount of work of each iteration becomes finer. 1 2 3 4 5 6  for(i = 0; i < I; i++){ #pragma omp parallel for shared (i) for(j = 0; j < J; j++){ work(); } } Listing 2.  Inner loop parallelisation of a nested loop region  Another issue with this strategy is the scenario where loops are not perfectly nested. In this situation, when there are computations in-between the loops, as shown in Listing 3, parallelising a loop of a deeper level will result in sequential execution of that work. Depending on the amount of the execution time which is now serialised, this approach has the potential to increase the execution time of the code. 1 2 3 4 5 6  for(i = 0; i < I; i++){ somework(); for(j = 0; j < J; j++){ otherwork(); } } Listing 3.  Poorly nested loop region example  C. Nested The Nested parallelisation strategy exploits the fact that more than one loop can be executed in parallel. By opening  multiple nested parallel regions at different levels of loops, as presented in Listing 4, more threads can be utilised during the parallel execution of the code. Unlike the Outermost Loop and the Inner Loop approaches, which can only utilise as many threads as the iterations of the loop with the biggest number of iterations, this strategy can exploit further parallelisation opportunities. Other studies have shown that nested parallelism can give good results on systems with a large number of processors [4] [5]. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  #pragma omp parallel for private (j) for(i = 0; i < I; i++){ #pragma omp parallel for shared (i) for(j = 0; j < J; j++){ work(); } } Listing 4.  Nested loop parallelisation of a nested loop region  D. Loop Collapsing The loop collapsing strategy takes a different approach for exposing additional parallelism within nested loop regions. By performing code transformations, multiple nested loops are combined, or collapsed, into a single loop. The newly created loop has a larger amount of iterations, which can be distributed to the threads. As of version 3.0, OpenMP supports loop collapsing by using the COLLAPSE clause in the Loop Construct, requiring the programmer to provide the number of loop levels to collapse. To be able to use the COLLAPSE clause the loops have to be perfectly nested (i.e. no code between the loops) and the number of loop iterations (when multiplied together) need to be able to be regularly divided. Loop collapsing can produce better results than both the inner loop and nested loop strategies, since the parallel overheads are minimal, however it is not always available, either because not all compilers support OpenMP version 3.0, or because the conditions outlined above cannot be met. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  #pragma omp parallel for collapse (3) for(i = 0; i < I; i++){ for(j = 0; j < J; j++){ for(k = 0; k < K; k++){ work(); } } }  parallel region is always created in either case. The presence of the if clause only affects the number of threads that get assigned to the parallel region. When sequential execution is triggered, the code is only executed by the master thread, for parallel execution all threads execute the code. Furthermore, with the if clause, programmers are still required to manually write code which makes the decision, construct sensible scalar-expressions to be evaluated, and manually parallelise each loop that is a potential target for parallelisation. IV. DYNAMIC LOOP  One of the motivators for this work was a parallelisation that was undertaken of a finite-volume cell-centred structured Navier-Stokes code for undertaking Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulation. It is a structured mesh, multigrid, code which works with multiblock grids, and includes a range of CFD solvers including; steady state, time-domain dual time-stepping, frequency-domain harmonic balance, and timedomain Runge-Kutta. The general pattern for the computations within the code is shown in Listing 6. Whilst this type of computational pattern is not uncommon for scientific codes one of the challenges in the parallelisation is that as the code can use a range of different methods, as previously outlined, the range of these loops can vary. For instance when performing a time domain simulation the harmonic loop has a single iteration. However, when performing a harmonic balance simulation it can have a range of values, generally between 2 and 16. Furthermore, it is not uncommon to run large simulations with a single block, or a small number of blocks, meaning that the block loop has a very small number of iterations. Finally, each block in the simulation can have different values for its dimensions. In theory, the loop collapsing strategy would be ideal for this type of simulation code as this would enable parallelisation without having to deal with the varying sizes of the nested loops. However, it cannot be guaranteed that for all input datasets the loop iterations can be regularly divided, and there are also particular areas of the code where the loops are not perfectly nested. 1 2 3 4 5  Listing 5.  Parallelisation of a nested loop region with loop collapsing  6 7 8  E. Loop Selection OpenMP already provides a way of forcing a parallel region to execute sequentially with the use of the if clause on OpenMP directives. The if clause, of the following form, if (scalar − expression), is used to determine at runtime whether the code enclosed in the parallel region should execute sequentially or in parallel. When the scalar expression of the clause evaluates to 0, the region is executed sequentially. Any other value will result in parallel execution. However, a new  PARALLELISATION  9 10 11  for(iter = 0; iter < n_iters; iter++){ for(block = 0; block < n_blocks; block++){ for(harmonics = 0; harmonics < n_harmonics; harmonics++){ for(j_cell = 0; j_cell < n_cells_j; j_cell++){ for(i_cell = 0; i_cell < n_cells_i; i_cell++){ perform computations; } } } } }  Listing 6.  Example scientific code loops  Given the different techniques that can be used to parallelise nested loops, the occurrence of nested loops in many scientific simulation codes, and the fact that the loop iterations of nested loops can change for different input datasets of a code or when performing different functions with a code, we wanted  a system that enabled the selection of different parallelisation choices to be available to code at runtime when the specific ranges of the nested loops are known. Our strategy for providing this functionality is to create code, based on the provided user code, that can perform a parallelisation of any of the nested loops and add decision making algorithms to dynamically choose, at runtime, which parallelisation is used. Specifically, we have created tools that create multiple versions of a loop within a region of nested loops in order to make a dynamic choice on whether a loop should execute sequentially or in parallel In general, code duplication is considered bad programming practice as it can, amongst other issues, lead to update anomalies (where not all instances of the functionality are modified when modifications occur) and thus damage the maintainability of the code. However, if the duplicate code (in our instance the serial and parallel versions of each loop in the nested loop structure) can be generated automatically for standard user code then it will not adversely affect the maintainability of the user program. We created a source-to-source compiler that recognises compiler directives within user’s source code and uses them to pre-process the source code and generate a program that has the alternative parallelisation strategies encapsulated within it. By exposing a simple interface to the programmers through compiler directives, which are similar to the already familiar OpenMP compiler directives, we can automatically provide the dynamic parallelisation functionality for users without requiring significant changes to the original source code. Furthermore, this approach provides the users the choice of enabling or disabling our functionality with minimum effort. To complement the code duplication we have also implemented functionality (in a small runtime library) that produces the code which is responsible for deciding what parallelisation to perform automatically. The decision functionality considers the number of iterations of a loop in order to chose a parallelisation strategy that makes best use of the processors or cores available. Our implementation is currently limited to parallelising a single loop of a nested loop region, taking advantage only the Outermost and Inner loop strategies. Other authors [2] have already taken a similar approach by modifying the OpenMP runtime library in order to make these decisions dynamically. However, applying this logic in the OpenMP runtime library would have limited the implementation to a specific compiler. Using our source-to-source compile approach we are aiming to transfer the logic in user code in order to maintain the portability of our solution. In addition to simple heuristics, we also explored the idea of a profile-based approach at runtime in order to detect the best possible parallelisation strategy with time measurements. A heuristics based approach alone cannot capture any information on the amount of the actual computations when making a decision on parallelising a loop. Whilst this is generally irrelevant for perfectly nested loops (as all the work is in the lowest loop), it may have more of an impact where there is work between the different loops as well. There may also  Fig. 1.  Compilation process using the source-to-source compiler  be situations where a different inner loop has slightly more iterations than an outer loop so could be chosen by a simple heuristic as the place where the parallelisation occurs but the overheads associated with parallelising that inner loop actually make this a suboptimal choice. Providing a profiling based decision mechanism may help with both these scenarios, and enable us to identify situations where, for instance, using less threads to parallelise an outer loop might provide a better execution time. The idea of an auto tuning code has already been proposed by other compiler-related researches [6] [7] for producing optimised code, we apply similar logic. V. S OURCE - TO - SOURCE  COMPILER  Our source-to-source compiler acts as a preprocessor to C code which can contain OpenMP directives, as well as our own directives. The compiler parses the code, and creates an internal representation of the code in the form of an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST). The regions of the input code that contain our directives are translated into the semantics of the C programming language and OpenMP directives during the parse phase, and appropriate nodes for these regions are placed in the AST. The created AST is then translated back to C code with OpenMP directives. This generated code is then compiled using a standard, OpenMP enabled, C compiler to produce a parallel executable (this process is illustrated in Figure 1. Our compiler, implemented using the Lua [8] programming language along with the Lpeg [9] parsing library, recognises a number of our own bespoke compiler directives of the form #pragma preomp. A loop that is preceded by a #pragma preomp f or directive is considered by our compiler as a suitable candidate for applying parallelisation. When such a loop is found, our compiler performs the necessary code transformations so that a decision can be made at runtime whether the loop should run sequentially or in parallel (and to ensure that both the sequential and parallel versions of the loop are available in the executable at runtime). In addition to this,  a simple analysis of the loop is performed in order to facilitate the computation of a loops iterations during the making of the decision. An example of such a code is presented in Listing 7. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  #pragma preomp parallel for private(j) for(i=0; i<I; i++){ #pragma preomp parallel for shared(i) for(j=0; j<J; j++){ work(); } } Listing 7.  A nested loop region with preomp  Furthermore we also extend the grammar to support an additional clause, the parallel threshold(expression) clause. This is optional, and when it is not present the compiler will assume a default value of 1.0. This clause is used to allow control over when a loop is parallelised, and will be discussed further in Section VI. A. Code Duplication The main function of the source-to-source compiler is to take the original user code and duplicate the loops to be parallelised so that there are both serial and parallel versions of those loops that can be selected at runtime. As previously mentioned our system only allows one loop to be parallelised at any given time (although which loop is parallelised can change over the runtime of a program as the parameters of the loop change), but both the serial and parallel versions of all the loops to be parallelised must appear in the executable to enable a selection at runtime to take place. When a loop is preceded by a #pragma preomp f or directive, the loop is duplicated and wrapped in a normal if − else statement which evaluates a decision function from our runtime library and selects the if or else branch based on the outcome of the evaluation. B. OpenMP if As a comparison to our code duplication approach we also implemented the same functionality uses the existing if clause of the OpenMP Parallel Construct. Our custom directive is translated into an OpenMP Parallel For directive, with an attached if clause in order to decide whether to execute the loop in parallel or not (rather than a serial and parallel version of the loop). The expression of the if clause consists of a call to a decision function of our runtime library, which takes the evaluated expressions of the loops information in order to make a decision. This functionality was included to allow a comparison of our approach to the standard method that developers could currently use to provide dynamic selection of parallelism with OpenMP. However, a major drawback of this approach (and the reason we do not uses it for our functionality) is that a parallel region will be created regardless of whether a loop is parallelised or not. Considering the example in Figure 2, parallelising the outer loop of two nested loops with two threads will result in three parallel regions. Each thread of the outer region will  Fig. 2. An example of using the if clause to parallelise (a) the outer and (b) the inner loop of two nested loops with two threads  create a new parallel region and become its master. In the case of the inner loop being parallelised, two parallel regions are created. For nested regions with a larger number of loops this method has the potential to produce excessive parallel overheads. VI. D ECISION  FUNCTIONS AND THE RUNTIME LIBRARY  The runtime library implements the logic for deciding which version of a loop is chosen during execution. Once a code has been processed by the source-to-source compiler it must then be linked with our runtime library to enable this functionality to be used. A. Decision Based On Heuristics Here we use heuristics, based on information collected at runtime, to decide whether a loop should execute sequentially or in parallel. The idea of this approach is to look for the first loop that has enough iterations to utilise all of the available threads, based on the assumption that parallelising outer loops is more efficient than parallelising inner loops as the amount of parallel overheads should be lower (as the OpenMP parallel regions are encountered less frequently). Before the execution of a loop, the decider checks whether a loop of an outer level is already running in parallel. If this condition is met, then the loop is serialised. In the case that no outer loop is running in parallel the number of iterations of the loop is calculated and it is divided with the available number of threads. If this results in a value that is greater than or equal to a specified threshold, then the parallel version of a loop is chosen, otherwise the loop is serialised. As discussed in Section V, the default value of the threshold is 1 (there must be no idle threads) although this can be controlled by the user. The calculations of the iterations is based on the parameters of the loop which are extracted by the source to source compiler and are provided as arguments to the decision function. In the case that the original code of the loop uses variables for its boundaries, any change in their value will also be captured by the decision function during the calculation. This design allows constant monitoring of any changes in the iterations of the loops which also results in dynamic adaptation of the parallelisation strategy during the execution of the program. The algorithm is very simple and with minimum overheads. Moreover, there is no need to maintain any state for the loops. However, the logic which is used by the function is  of a program the profiling overhead will only be imposed in the first few iterations of the program. Figure 3 outlines this with an example of three nested loops. VII. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION  Fig. 3.  An example of the Heuristics With Profiling Decider on three loops  based on optimism. It only considers the amount of parallelism exposed by the loop regardless of whether the amount of work of the loop is big enough to justify any overheads of the parallelisation or whether there is any work between loops.  To evaluate the performance of our new functionality we aimed to benchmark it against standard, static, OpenMP parallelisations with a range of different configurations. In particular, we focussed on varying the number of loop iterations, the amount of work between and within loops, and the number of changes that occur to loop bounds during execution to evaluate whether and when our approach is beneficial compared to a static parallelisation. To undertake these benchmarks we used two different codes. The first is a synthetic, configurable, benchmark C code, shown in Listing 8, which we constructed for this evaluation. The number of iterations of each loop can be configured, as can the amount of work that is simulated (by calling the delay function) between the second and third loops, and within the third loop. 1  B. Decision Based On Heuristics With Profiling  2  To address the potential issue with the basic decision based on heuristics previously discussed we also implemented a more complex decision function based on both the size of loops and some evaluation of the work in the loops. In the same manner as the heuristics decider, it uses the same information extracted by the source to source compiler in order to determine whether the loop should be parallelised or not. However, if a loop does not meet the conditions, then the function reverts to a profiling mode in order to decide which version of the loop, serial or parallel, to choose from based on timings. The first time a loop is executed, the heuristics decider determines if the loop should be parallelised. If the conditions are not met, the sequential version of the loop is chosen and profiling is enabled for this loop. At the next execution of the loop, the evaluation of the heuristics is still performed. If the conditions are still not met (for example there where no changes in the iterations of the loop), the loop is now parallelised since at this point we only have timing information for the serial version. Consecutive executions of the loop will first check the heuristics conditions, falling back to profiling mode if the condition is not satisfied. However, the function will detect that timings for both versions are available and utilise the information gathered from profiling to decide what loop to parallelise (providing the number of iterations of the loop have not changed), with the fastest version chosen as the final decision. In contrast to this, if the amount of work is not the same (i.e. the number of loop iterations has changed) the timings get invalidated, and profiling is re-initiated. To implement this functionality requires additional code, when compared to the basic heuristic decision function. This will impose an extra overhead to the produced program, although if the loop iterations are static throughout the run  4  3  5 6 7 8  for(i=0; i<num_iters; i++){ for(j=0; j<outer_iters; j++){ delay(outer_delayreps); for(k=0; k<inner_iters; k++){ delay(inner_delayreps); } } } Listing 8.  Synthetic benchmark code  The second benchmark code was an extract from the CFD code outlined in Listing 6. This code is more complex than the synthetic benchmark and more representative of realistic scientific simulation codes. This code is used to explore the performance of our solution when the loop iterations vary and when the bounds of loops are dynamic during the course of the execution of the benchmark (i.e. one or more loops change their loop bound as the outer loops are progressed). A. Benchmark Environment The platform used to evaluate the dynamic loop parallelisation functionality was Ness [10], at EPCC. The system is composed by two parts, a front-end for development and job submission and a back-end for job execution. The management of the two parts is handled by the Sun Grid Engine which allows submission of jobs from the front-end that must be executed on the back-end nodes in isolation. The back-end part of the system is composed by two SUN X4600 Shared Memory nodes. The central processing unit (CPU) of each node is an AMD Opteron processor of 16 2.6GHz processing cores and 32 GB or main memory. Each core has 64K of L1 cache for data and 64K L1 cache for instructions. In addition there is also 1 MB of L2 available to each core (combined for data and instructions). We used the Portland Group (PGI) C compiler for the majority of the benchmarks, with the following compiler flags: -O4,-c99,-mp. For the benchmarking involving the OpenMP  if functionality we used the GNC C compiler instead as the version of the PGI compiler we used does not support a thread team of a nested parallel region to have more than one threads when an outer region is serialised with the if clause (this seems contrary to the OpenMP specification where the if clause only affects the number of threads that get assigned to a particular parallel region, not the thread teams of its nested regions). When using the GNU C compiler we used the following compiler flags: -O3,-stf=c99,-fopenmp. Timing information was collected using the omp get wtime() function, with each benchmark executed three times and the worst time taken (since this is the limiting factor for the execution time).  (a) Outer Loop Work : 0s  (b) Outer Loop Work : 0.022s  (c) Outer Loop Work : 0.079s  (d) Outer Loop Work : 0.15s  B. Synthetic benchmark results If we consider the example code in Listing 8, the execution time of the code of the two internal nested loops when only the outer loop is parallelised with a certain amount of threads (outer threads) can be calculated as shown in Equation 1. TpOuter is the execution time when parallelising the outer loop, Touter work is the time needed for the work in-between the loops and Tinner work is the time needed for the amount of work within the innermost loop. basicstyle= Tp  Outer  =  outer_iters ∗ (Touter_work + (inner_iters ∗ Tinner_work ))  (1)  outer_threads  In a similar fashion, when parallelising the inner loop using inner threads, the execution time of the loops is shown in Equation 2. basicstyle= Tp  Inner  = outer_iters ∗ (Touter_work +  inner_iters ∗ Tinner_work  )  (2)  inner_threads  If we want to have a reduction in the overall execution time by parallelising the inner loop, the constraint TpInner < TpOuter must be satisfied. Solving this constraint in terms of Touter work we can get the maximum allowed threshold of the execution time for the work of the outer loop as shown in Equation 3. It is worth mentioning that this model is an ideal performance model, where the work is evenly distributed to the threads. In reality, the time of Touter work might be affected by the presence of parallel overheads. basicstyle= Touter_work < 1 1 inner_iters ∗ Tinner_work ∗ ( − ) outer_threads inner_threads 1 1− outer_threads  (3)  In order to test our hypothesis, we measured the amount of time which is required by the delay function for various values, with the results shown in Figure 4. The graphs in Figure 4 show the performance of four different parallelisation strategies. OpenM P Outer(1) and OpenM P Inner(2) are the results from manual, static, parallelisations of the individual loops in the benchmark. Heuristics are the results from our basic decision function using a value of one (i.e. only parallelise the loop if there are more iterations than threads available), and Heuristic P rof iler are the results from our system using the profiling functionality where appropriate.  Fig. 4. Synthetic Benchmark results with varying levels of work between the loops  From the results it is evident that when the loops are perfectly nested, and regular (i.e. the loop bounds are not changing), then there is no benefit from using the profiling functionality. The basic heuristics will choose the optimal loop to parallelise apart from when we are using 6 threads. The variation in outcomes for 6 threads is is a consequence of the number of loop iterations chosen for the benchmark (8 iterations of the outer loop and 16 iterations of the inner loop). The distribution of 8 iterations to 6 threads results in all of the threads to get assigned 1 iteration of the outer loop each, and 2 of the threads get and extra iteration. The total execution time in this case is limited by the slowest threads, which is the time of 32 iterations; 2 iterations of the outer loop multiplied by 16 iterations of the inner one. Parallelising the inner loop with 6 threads however, 2 of the thread get from 2 iterations whereas the rest the threads get 3 iterations each. In this case, the total execution time of the parallel loops is the amount of time required for 24 iterations; 3 iterations of the inner loop multiplied by 8 iterations of the outer loop. Since both decision functions only utilise the heuristics decision (when the number of threads is less than the number of iterations) they cannot exploit this opportunity as no profiling is actually performed in this case. This could be altered by setting the decision heuristic to a value other than 1 (i.e setting the heuristic to 1.5). From the graphs we can observe that our threshold value calculations hold. For the parameters we used for this benchmark the calculated threshold value is approximately Touter work < 0.0468 seconds. When the work of the outer work is less than the calculated threshold (Figures 4a 4b) parallelising the inner loop with 16 threads is still faster than parallelising the outer loop with 8 threads. As the amount of work increases, the impact on the execution time when parallelising the inner loop  TABLE II L OOP PARAMETERS USED FOR THE CFD CODE BENCHMARKING Parameter  Value  iters n cell j n cell i  500 2496 or 8 8 or 2496  is increased, since more work is now being serialised. In these cases, the heuristics decider makes the wrong choice (Figures 4c and 4d) since its decision only concerns the amount of iterations of the loops and the available threads. In contrast to this, when profiling is used in the decision function, it correctly detected that the fastest execution time is achieved by not parallelising the inner loop. In the case, where the amount of work of the outer loop exceeds the calculated threshold, parallelising the inner loop, even with 16 threads, increases the total execution time. The benefit from using 16 threads to parallelise the inner loop is not enough to justify the work that is serialised. C. CFD benchmarking results The first benchmark that we performed using the extract from the CFD code was to compare the OpenMP if clause with our basic heuristic functionality. We used, as a reference, the timings of the manually parallelised the n blocks, n harmonics and n cell j loops and compare the execution time of the heuristics decision function for the two code generation modes of our compiler. In order to avoid cases of the iterations not being evenly distributed to the threads, we only consider cases of 2, 4, 8, 12 and 16 threads. The parameters used for the loop iterations are shown in Table II, with varying amount of work in the inner loop. We also consider cases where blocks do not have the same shape by altering the values of the n cell j and n cell i loops. No alterations indicate that all of the blocks have a grid shape of 2496x8(j cell x i cell). An alteration of 2 means that the first and third blocks have a grid shape of 8x2496 whereas the second and fourth blocks have a shape of 2496x8. The performance results shown in Figure 5 highlight the fact that there is a significant difference between our implemented functionality and that provided by OpenMP (the if clause). Not only is the if clause slower than the basic OpenMP parallelisation, but it also increases the overall execution time of the code. For Figure 5a, where 2 and 4 threads are available, only the loop of the outer level is parallelised in both code generation modes. However, the if clause mode produces a slower execution time than the code duplication mode. When more than 4 threads are used, the parallelisation is applied on the n cell j loop. In contrast to the code duplication mode which produces an execution time similar to the case of statically parallelising the loop, the if clause mode is still slower. A similar performance pattern is seen at 16 threads. Moreover, in the presence of alterations in the shape of the blocks, as shown in Figures 5b and 5d, the if clause mode produces an even slower execution time. On the other hand,  (a) Small work, no alterations  (b) Small work, 2 alterations  (c) Large work, no alterations  (d) Large work, 2 alterations  Fig. 5. CFD benchmark with n blocks = 4 and n harmonics = 4 with varied alterations in the i and j cell loops and varied amount of work in the inner loop  the code duplication mode can exploit this opportunity in order to utilise all of the available threads by applying parallelism on the n cell i loop. Increasing the amount of work in the core calculation has a positive effect on the if clause code generation mode. We can observe from Figure 5c that compared to Figure 5a the difference between using the if clause and the static parallelisation is not as large for small numbers of threads. This is likely to be because the performance cost of executing the if clause is proportionally smaller compared to the overall execution time. However, the same performance degradation is still observed when increasing the number of threads. The execution times of the code using the OpenMP if clause raised some concerns over whether the code was operating correctly. After extensive testing and verification we ascertained that both versions of the code (the if clause and code duplication) were correct and producing the same behaviour. Therefore, we investigated the parallel overheads of the OpenMP runtime library of the GCC compiler. Other authors [11] have already studied the overheads of nested parallelism on various compilers, including a more recent version of the GCC compiler than the one used in this work. Their findings suggest that the implementation of nested parallel regions of the GCC compiler has significant overheads. What is not presented in their work is whether or not the use of the if clause on nested parallel regions produces the same overheads. In order to ensure that the behaviour we observed in our results is the cause of nested parallel regions and not the presence of the if clause, we have constructed a simple micro benchmark.  TABLE III M ICRO BENCHMARK RESULTS OF GNU’ S C COMPILER ’ S IMPLEMENTATION OF NESTED PARALLELISM  Parallel loop  Execution time (seconds)  Outer Inner Nested (with if clause) Nested (with num threads clause)  38.845619 153.06809 163.05681 162.85479 (a) n blocks = 4, n harmonic = 8,(b) n blocks = 4, n harmonic = 8, no alterations 2 alterations  D. Nested parallel micro benchmark We created four versions of a benchmark code with three nested loops and the delay function of the EPCC Microbenchmark Suite in the block of the innermost loop. The first version of the benchmark creates a parallel region on the loop of the second level. The second version performs the same operation on the innermost loop. The third version uses the if clause on both loops by serialising the outer loop with a value of 0 and parallelising the inner loop with a value of 1. Finally, the last version creates a parallel region on both of these loops, however we force the number of threads on the thread team of the outer loop to 1 using the num threads clause. Through this we manage to reproduce the same behaviour as with the if clause code case when the inner loop is parallelised. The number of iterations of the parallel loops are the same as the number of available threads. Table III presents the execution times of each case. We can see that parallelising the inner loop with nested parallel regions takes 10 seconds longer than parallelising the inner loop manually, even for this small and simple benchmark. Moreover, the two versions that contain nested parallel regions achieve very similar execution times. From this test we can concluded that it is likely that the behaviour we observed from the if clause code generation mode is affected by the overheads of the implementation of the GCC compiler for nested parallel regions. E. Decision function benchmarking Finally, we investigated the performance of our profiling decision functionality for the CFD extract code. This code is perfectly nested, so the basic heuristic decision function should be optimal here as it should chose the best loop to parallelise with very little overheads, whereas the profiling function has extra functionality and therefore imposes extra overheads on the performance of the code. The results from our experiments are shown in Figure 6. We can observe from Figures 6a that both the decision functions make the correct choice of parallelisation strategy up to 12 threads. However, the overheads of the profiling functionality have a negative impact on the overall execution time. Even when profiling is not actually being performed, the functions which are inserted before and after the execution of each loop to count the amount of work performed at each loop level increase the overall time. Moreover, we can observe that at 16 threads the profiler actually chooses to parallelise the harmonics loop, whereas the heuristics decider produces  (c) n blocks = 8, n harmonic = 4,(d) n blocks = 8, n harmonic = 4, no alterations 4 alterations Fig. 6. CFD benchmark with varied alterations in the i and j cell loops and a large amount of work in the inner loop  the correct behaviour of profiling the n cell loop. The timings which are performed for each loop version during the profiling mode are sensitive to the presence of any overheads which ultimately affect the decision of the function (such as the overhead of taking the timings). When alterations are present in the shape of the loops, as shown in Figures 6b and 6d, the heuristics decider manages to adapt its behaviour, parallelising the innermost loop in order to utilise more threads, and can significantly out perform the static parallelisation. In all of the test cases, the decision function which is based on profiling provides slower execution times than the decision function which is based on heuristics. Moreover, the additional logic which is included in the decision function with profiling caused a suboptimal decision to be made in some situations. VIII. I MPROVED  PROFILING DECISIONS  The results from the previous benchmarks lead to considerations of the reasons behind the poor execution of the decision function which performs profiling. Comparing the functionality of this function with the simple case of the heuristics decision function there are two sources of additional overheads. The first one is the logic of profiling each version of a loop. In order to make a choice between the two versions of a loop, the slow version must also be executed. However, if an actual simulation code runs for a significant amount of time this overhead should be negligible (providing the loop bounds do not alter and trigger the profiling functionality too many times) as it should only be incurred infrequently.  (a) Small work, n blocks = n harmonic = 4, 2 alterations  4,(b) Large work, n blocks = n harmonic = 4, 4 alterations  8,  Fig. 7. CFD benchmark with varied alterations in the i and j cell loops and a large amount of work in the inner loop  The second source of overheads is the inclusion of additional function calls before and after each loop in order to measure the time of the execution and count the amount of work performed. The elimination of the functionality for taking the slow path is not possible since this is the essence of profiling. Both versions of a loop must be executed in order to make a comparison between their execution time. However, we can relax the conditions on the validity of the timings. If we only consider the number of the iterations of the specific loop which is being profiled, then we can eliminate all the logic that performs the counting of the work for the internal loops. When the decision function decides that a version of a loop should be profiled (after the failure of the heuristics conditions) the number of the iterations of the version of the loop that is going to be executed is saved in the state of the loop at that point. This way, the code of the function calls which are placed before and after each loop remains simple, only adjusting the loop level counter of each thread as well as marking the starting and ending times of the execution of a loop which is being profiled, rather than counting the iterations of internal loops as the initial profiling functionality does. In order to test our theory we have created a new version of the runtime library which includes the above modifications, called the relaxed profiler. From the graphs in Figure 7 we can see that the removal of the additional logic which performs the counting benefits the decision function with profiling. When no profiling is performed (2 and 4 threads), the relaxed version of the decision function is faster than the accurate version, and the same performance pattern holds when the profiling is performed (8 threads and more for Figure 7a and 12 threads and more for Figure 7b). Comparing the execution time of the new version of the decision function with profiling to the execution time of the heuristics decision function, the latter still produces a faster execution time, however the difference is not large. This behaviour is expected, since the presence of profiling introduces additional computations within the code itself from the functions which are placed before and after each loop. Moreover, in the cases where the parallelisation is applied on  a nested loop, the decision function must execute both versions of a loop, one of them being the slow version, in order to make a decision. Finally, we can see that the relaxed decision function rectifies the problem with the original profiling decision function of it choosing the wrong option in some cases. For Figure 7a we can see that at 12 and 16 threads the relaxed profiler makes the correct choice, and the same for Figure 7b at 16 threads (where the performance of the relaxed profile decision function is comparable to the heuristics decision function). IX. C ONCLUSION The main focus of this work was to investigate the possibility of dynamically choosing at runtime the best loop of a nested loop region which best utilises the available threads. We have successfully created a source-to-source compiler and a runtime library in order to automatically allow a dynamic choice to be made at runtime. As our solution uses a directives based approach, similar to OpenMP, we requires minimum effort and code change from the users point of view. We have discovered that the current mechanism users can exploit to perform this, the OpenMP if clause, does not perform efficiently (at least for the implementation we tested). Despite the fact that this behaviour is the result of the inefficient implementation of the GCC compiler which was used in this work, the same compiler with the code duplication mode was able to provide additional speedup in the execution time of the code. From this we conclude that by relying on the OpenMP runtime library to perform loop nesting, the execution time is limited by the compilers implementation of nested parallel regions. Although code duplication is considered to be a bad programming practice, when it is done automatically, it can eliminate unnecessary parallel overheads. We have also shown that some level of auto-tuning (using profiling to select which loop to parallelise) can provide performance benefits in certain circumstances, for instance when loops are not perfectly nested. OpenMP is currently generally used for small scale parallelisation of code, primarily because there are very few large scale shared-memory HPC resources. However, the current trend in multi-core processors suggests that in the near future large scale shared-memory resources (of order 100-1000s of cores) are likely to be commonly available. Therefore, sharedmemory parallelisations are likely to become more utilised and interesting for large scale scientific simulations. R EFERENCES [1] “Openmp: Openmp application programming interface version 3.1,” 2011. [2] R. Duran, R. Silvera, J. Corbaln, and J. Labarta, “Runtime adjustment of parallel nested loops,” in In Proc. of the International Workshop on OpenMP Applications and Tools (WOMPAT 04, 2004. [3] D.-K. Chen, H.-M. Su, and P.-C. Yew, “The impact of synchronization and granularity on parallel systems,” in Proceedings of the 17th annual international symposium on Computer Architecture, ser. ISCA ’90. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1990, pp. 239–248. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/325164.325150 [4] Y. Tanaka, K. Taura, M. Sato, and A. Yonezawa, “Performance evaluation of openmp applications with nested parallelism,” 2000.  [5] E. Ayguade, M. Gonzalez, X. Martorell, and G. Jost, “Employing nested openmp for the parallelization of multi-zone computational fluid dynamics applications,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 686–697, May 2006. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2005.06.019 [6] M. Hall, J. Chame, C. Chen, J. Shin, G. Rudy, and M. M. Khan, “Loop transformation recipes for code generation and auto-tuning.” [7] “Pluto - an automatic parallelizer and locality optimizer for multicores.” [Online]. Available: http://pluto-compiler.sourceforge.net [8] “The lua programming language.” [Online]. Available: http://www.lua.org  [9] “The lpeg pattern-matching library.” [Online]. Available: http://www.inf.puc-rio.br/roberto/lpeg [10] “Ness hpc machine.” [Online]. Available: http://www.epcc.ed.ac.uk/facilities/ness [11] V. V. Dimakopoulos, P. E. Hadjidoukas, and G. C. Philos, “A microbenchmark study of openmp overheads under nested parallelism,” in Proceedings of the 4th international conference on OpenMP in a new era of parallelism, ser. IWOMP’08. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1789826.1789828

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
