Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_1876

Abstract:
Prophet Inequalities Made Easy: Stochastic Optimization by Pricing Non-Stochastic Inputs  arXiv:1612.03161v2 [cs.GT] 9 Jul 2017  Paul Dütting∗  Michal Feldman†  Thomas Kesselheim‡  Brendan Lucier§  July 11, 2017  Abstract We present a general framework for stochastic online maximization problems with combinatorial feasibility constraints. The framework establishes prophet inequalities by constructing price-based online approximation algorithms, a natural extension of threshold algorithms for settings beyond binary selection. Our analysis takes the form of an extension theorem: we derive sufficient conditions on prices when all weights are known in advance, then prove that the resulting approximation guarantees extend directly to stochastic settings. Our framework unifies and simplifies much of the existing literature on prophet inequalities and posted price mechanisms, and is used to derive new and improved results for combinatorial markets (with and without complements), multi-dimensional matroids, and sparse packing problems. Finally, we highlight a surprising connection between the smoothness framework for bounding the price of anarchy of mechanisms and our framework, and show that many smooth mechanisms can be recast as posted price mechanisms with comparable performance guarantees.  1  Introduction  A concert is being held in a local theatre, and potential audience members begin calling to reserve seats. The organizer doesn’t know individuals’ values for seats in advance, but has distributional knowledge about their preferences. Some need only a single seat, others require a block of seats. Some think seats are very valuable, others are only willing to attend if tickets are very cheap. Some prefer front-row seats, some prefer to sit a few rows back, and some prefer the balcony. The organizer needs to decide which seats, if any, to allocate to each individual as they call. The goal is to maximize the total value (i.e., social welfare) of the seating arrangement. Such stochastic online optimization problems have been studied for decades. A common goal is to attain “prophet inequalities” that compare the performance of an online algorithm to that of an omniscient offline planner. A classic result is that if the goal is to choose exactly one element (i.e., there is only a single seat to allocate), then a simple threshold strategy—choosing the first value higher than a certain pre-computed threshold—yields at least half of the expected maximium ∗  Department of Mathematics, London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK, Email: p.d.duetting@lse.ac.uk. † Blavatnic School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, P.O.B. 39040, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. Email: mfeldman@tau.ac.il ‡ TU Dortmund, Otto-Hahn-Str. 14, 44221 Dortmund, Germany. Email: thomas.kesselheim@cs.tu-dortmund.de. This work was done while the author was at Max Planck Institute for Informatics and Saarland University, supported in part by the DFG through Cluster of Excellence MMCI, and while he was visiting Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing. § Microsoft Research, 1 Memorial Drive #1, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Email: brlucier@microsoft.com  1  value [34, 35, 44]. This solution has the appealing property that it corresponds to posting a takeit-or-leave-it price and allocating to the first interested buyer. A natural question is whether more complex allocation problems (like the concert example above) can be approximated by posting prices and allowing buyers to select their preferred outcomes in sequence. Driven in part by this connection to posted prices, prophet inequalities have seen a resurgence in theoretical computer science. Recent work has established new prophet inequalities for a variety of allocation problems, including matroids [13, 33], unit-demand bidders [13, 3], and combinatorial auctions [23]. In this paper we develop a framework for proving prophet inequalities and constructing posted-price mechanisms. Our framework, which is based on insights from economic theory, unifies and simplifies many existing results and gives rise to new and improved prophet inequalities in a host of online settings.  1.1  Example: Combinatorial Auctions  To introduce our framework we will consider a combinatorial auction problem. There is a set M of m items for sale and n buyers. Each buyer i has a valuation function vi : 2M → R≥0 that assigns nonnegative value to every subset of at most d items.1 Valuations are non-decreasing and normalized so that vi (∅) = 0, butP otherwise arbitrary. The goal is to assign items to buyers to maximize total value. Write v(x) = ni=1 vi (xi ) for the total value of allocation x = (x1 , . . . , xn ), where xi ⊆ M for all i. There is a simple O(d)-approximate greedy algorithm for this problem and a lower bound of Ω(d/ log d) assuming P 6= N P [46]. Our goal is to match this O(d) approximation as a prophet inequality with posted item prices. That is, given distributions over the valuations, compute prices for the items so that, when buyers arrive in an arbitrary order and each chooses his most-desired bundle from among the unsold items, the expected total value is an O(d) approximation to the expected optimum.2 Let’s first consider the simpler full information case where all valuations are known in advance. This problem is still non-trivial, and in fact there may not exist prices that lead to the optimal allocation.3 Intuitively, what we need for an approximation result are prices that balance between two forces. They should be small enough that high-valued buyers are willing to purchase their optimal bundles if available, but also large enough that those items will not first be scooped up by bidders with much lower values. Such “balanced” prices can be obtained as follows: Given valuation profile v, consider the welfare-maximizing allocation x∗ (which we can assume allocates all items). Then for each item j, say j ∈ x∗i , set the price of j to pj = vi (x∗i )/2|x∗i |. These prices are low enough that the total price of all items is at most 1/2 · v(x∗ ), which is significantly less than the total value of x∗ . At the same time, prices are high enough that, for any set of goods S, the total price of S is at least 1/2d of the value of allocations in the optimal allocation x∗ that intersect S. So, in particular, a bidder that purchases S must have value at least that high. 1  Alternatively, we can suppose that there is a cardinality constraint that no buyer can receive more than d items. There is a straightforward lower bound of Ω(d) on the approximation of any posted item prices. Suppose there are d items and two agents. The first agent is unit-demand and has value 1 for any single item. The second agent values the set of all d items for value d, and has value 0 for any subset. If all items have price greater than 1, then neither agent purchases anything. If any item has price less than 1, then the unit-demand agent (who chooses first) will purchase the cheapest single item and the other agent will purchase nothing, generating a total value of 1 whereas the optimum is d. One can avoid issues of tie-breaking by perturbing the values by an arbitrarily small amount. 3 For example, suppose there are three items and four single-minded bidders. The first three bidders each have value 2 for a different pair of items, and the last bidder has value 3 for the set of all three items, so at most one bidder can get positive value, and it is optimal to allocate all items to the last bidder. However, at any item prices where the last bidder is willing to purchase, one of the other bidders will purchase first if arriving before the last bidder. This leads to a 3/2 approximation in the worst arrival order. 2  2  To see why these prices yield an O(d) approximation, let x denote the purchase decisions of the players and let I ⊆ N be the set of players i such that x∗i intersects with x. The welfare achieved by x is equal to the revenue generated plus the sum of buyer utilities. The revenue P is the sum of prices of the items sold, and since prices are “balanced” this is at least (1/2d) · i∈I vi (x∗i ). Also, each buyer i 6∈ I could have chosen to purchase x∗i , and therefore must get at least as much utility ∗ as they would by purchasing x∗i , which is vi (x∗i ) minus the prices are Pprice of∗ xi . Again, since ∗ balanced, this means the sum of buyer utilities is at least i6∈I vi (xi ) − 1/2 · v(x ). Multiplying this by 1/2d and adding the revenue gives an O(d) approximation.4 . The argument above was for the full information case. Perhaps surprisingly, the existence of sufficiently “balanced” prices for full information instances also establishes an O(d)-approximate prophet inequality for the general stochastic problem, where one has only distributional knowledge about valuations. Our main result is this reduction from the stochastic setting to the full information setting, which holds for a broad class of allocation problems.  1.2  A Framework for Prophet Inequalities  Consider a more general combinatorial allocation problem, where the cardinality constraint d is replaced with an arbitrary downward-closed feasibility constraint F and each vi is drawn independently from an arbitrary distribution Di . While our framework applies for more general outcome spaces (see Sections 2 and 3), combinatorial allocation problems provide a sweet spot between expressiveness and clarity. Our key definition is the following notion of balanced prices for fullinformation instances. For P each x ∈ F we write OPT(v | x) for the optimal residual allocation: the allocation that maximizes i vi (x′i ) over x′ ∈ F with x, x′ disjoint and x ∪ x′ ∈ F. Given a fixed to buyer valuation profile v, a pricing rule defines a price pvi (xi ) for every bundle that we can assignP v i. For example, the item prices described in Section 1.1 define a pricing rule pi (xi ) = j∈xi pj . Below we also extend the definition to dynamic prices, i.e., prices that depend on which allocations have already been made. Key Definition (special case) ((α, β)-balanced prices). Let α, β > 0. A pricing rule pv = (pv1 , . . . , pvn ) defined by functions pvi : 2M → R≥0 is (α, β)-balanced with respect to valuation profile v if for all x ∈ F and all x′ ∈ F with x, x′ disjoint and x ∪ x′ ∈ F, P v 1 (a) i pi (xi ) ≥ α (v(OPT(v)) − v(OPT(v | x))) , P v ′ (b) i pi (xi ) ≤ β v(OPT(v | x)) .  The first condition formalizes what it means that prices are high enough: the sum of prices for x should partially cover the welfare lost due to allocating x. The second condition formalizes “low enough:” the sum of prices for any x′ that is still feasible “after” allocating x should not be much higher than the optimal residual welfare. Our main result is that the existence of balanced prices for full information instances directly implies a price-based prophet inequality for the stochastic setting. The idea to choose balanced prices is a natural one and has appeared in the prophet inequality literature before, most explicitly in the notion of balanced thresholds of Kleinberg and Weinberg [33]. Previous definitions, however, applied to the stochastic setting directly, which made the construction and analysis of balanced thresholds inherently probabilistic. A main advantage of our framework is that it suffices to reason about the simpler full-information setting.  P ∗ ∗ For simplicity we assumed here that i ) − 1/2 · v(x ) ≥ 0. More generally, since utilities are noni6∈I vi (x P ∗ ∗ negative, P the sum of buyer utilities is at least max{ i6∈I vi (xi ) − 1/2 · v(x ), 0}. If the maximum is attained at 0, then i∈I vi (x∗i ) > 1/2 · v(x∗ ) and the revenue alone exceeds (1/4d) · v(x∗ ), as desired. 4  3  Main Theorem (informal). Consider the setting where valuations are drawn from product distribution D. Suppose that the pricing rule pv is (α, β)-balanced with respect to valuation profile v. Then posting prices   α Eṽ∼D pṽi (xi ) pi (xi ) = 1 + αβ  achieves welfare at least  1 1+αβ E[v (OPT(v))].  In other words, to construct appropriate prices for a stochastic problem instance, it suffices to construct balanced prices for the full-information instances in its support and then post the expected values of those prices, scaled by an appropriate factor. The proof of our main theorem is similar in spirit to proofs in the Price of Anarchy literature [41, 45] or for establishing algorithmic stability [29], in that it uses “ghost samples.” It is, however, considerably more involved because of the sequential, online aspect of our problem. Remark 1.1 (Weakly Balanced Prices). We also define a notion of weakly balanced prices, in which it suffices to upper bound the prices by βv(OPT(v)). In this case, we can show that posting an appropriately scaled version of the expected prices yields a 1/4αβ-approximate prophet inequality. Remark 1.2 (Computation). It is sometimes easier to compute prices that are balanced with respect to an approximation algorithm ALG rather than OPT. Our result still applies in this case, with OPT replaced by ALG in the welfare guarantee. We also note that if the price rule p in the main theorem is perturbed to some p̂ with ||p − p̂||∞ < ǫ, then the welfare guarantee degrades by at most an additive O(nǫ) term. This robustness is desirable in itself, and also implies that appropriate prices can be computed for bounded values with poly(n, m, 1/ǫ) samples using standard concentration bounds, as has been observed for various posted price settings [12, 23]. Remark 1.3 (Static vs. Dynamic, Anonymous vs. Discriminatory, Bundle vs. Item Pricing). We have described our framework for static, discriminatory, bundle prices. In general, our construction has the property that if the full-information balanced prices pv are dynamic, anonymous, and/or take the form of item prices, then the derived prices for the stochastic setting will have these properties as well. For example, our result holds also for dynamic prices, replacing pi (xi ) and pi (x′i ) with pi (xi | x[i−1] ) and pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) where the conditioning on x[i−1] indicates that the price to player i may depend on the purchase decisions of players that precede him. See Sections 2 and 3 for details. Remark 1.4 (Arrival Order). Balancedness can depend on player arrival order. In the applications we consider, our results hold even if the arrival order is chosen by an adaptive adversary that observes previous realized values and purchase decisions before selecting the next player to arrive. Let’s return to our example from Section 1.1. We established the existence of weakly (d, 1)balanced prices (simply undo the scaling by 1/2), so our main result implies a O(d)-approximate prophet inequality. What about computation? We can compute prices in polynomial time by basing them on the O(d)-approximate greedy algorithm (rather than the optimal allocation), but then we only get a O(d2 )-approximate solution. It turns out that we can further improve this to O(d) in polynomial time, as we hoped for in Section 1.1, by applying our main theorem to a fractional relaxation of the auction problem. See Section 4 for more details. Composition We also show that balanced prices “compose”, as was shown for mechanism smoothness in [45]. This means that to derive a prophet inequality for a complex setting it often suffices to show balancedness for a simpler problem. See Appendix C. 4  Feasibility Constraint  Valuation Class  Pricing Model  Upper Bound  Query Model  Combinatorial Auction  XOS  Static, anonymous item prices  2e e−1  [23] 2 [this work]  XOS, Demand  Combinatorial Auction  MPH-k  Static, anonymous item prices  O(k2 ) [23] 4k − 2 [this work]  MPH, Demand  Matroid  Submodular Dynamic prices  2 (existential) 4 (computational)  Value  Knapsack  Additive  Static, anonymous prices  3  Explicit  d-Sparse PIPs  Additive  Static, anonymous prices  8d  Explicit  Table 1: Overview of applications. Results are computational unless otherwise stated. The query model refers to the valuation access needed for the computational upper bounds, where “explicit” indicates that valuations can be described explicitly. All results are order oblivious (see Section 2).  1.3  Unification of Existing Prophet Inequality Proofs  Our framework unifies and simplifies many of the existing prophet inequality proofs. We list some representative examples below. We discuss the first example in more detail in Appendix A. The other two examples are covered in Appendices D and F. Example 1.1 (Classic Prophet Inequality, [34, 35]). The goal is to pick the single highest-value element vi . The pricing rule pv defined by pvi (xi ) = maxi vi for all i is (1, 1)-balanced. Example 1.2 (Matroids, [33]). The goal is to pick a maximum weight independent set in a matroid. Encode sets S by n-dimensional vectors x over {0, 1} such that xi = 1 if i ∈ S. Then one can define a dynamic pricing rule pv by pi (xi | y) = v(OPT(v | y)) − v(OPT(v | y ∪ xi )) for all i, where y is the set of previously-selected elements. This pricing rule is (1, 1)-balanced. Example 1.3 (XOS Combinatorial Auctions, [23]). The goal is to assign m goods to n buyers with XOS valuations5 . Let x∗ = OPT(v) and let a1 , . . . , an be the corresponding additive supporting functions. Set item prices pj = ai (j) for j ∈ x∗i . This pricing rule is (1, 1)-balanced. The final example illustrates the power of our composition results (see Appendix C): the existence of (1, 1)-balanced prices for XOS combinatorial auctions, and hence a 2-approximate prophet inequality, follows directly from the existence of (1, 1)-balanced prices for a single item, despite being significantly more complex. It also yields a O(log m)-approximate prophet inequality for subadditive valuations by approximating subadditive valuations with XOS valuations [17, 9].  1.4  New and Improved Prophet Inequalities  We also establish new prophet inequalities using our framework; see Table 1. Our first result is a poly-time (4k − 2)-approximate prophet inequality for MPH-k combinatorial auctions6 . 5 A valuation v is XOS if there is a collection of additive functions a1 (·), . . . , ak (·), such that for every set S, v(S) = max1≤i≤k ai (S). This is a generalization of submodular valuations [37]. 6 The maximum over positive hypergraphs-k (MPH-k) hierarchy of valuations [21] is an inclusive hierarchy, where k measures the degree of complementarity.  5  Theorem 1.1 (Combinatorial auctions with MPH-k valuations). For combinatorial auctions with MPH-k valuations, a (4k − 2 + ǫ)-approximate posted-price mechanism, with static item prices, can be computed in poly(n, m, 1/ǫ) demand and MPH-k queries. Theorem 1.1 improves the poly-time result of [23] from O(k 2 ) to O(k). We note two interesting special cases. First, combinatorial auctions with bundle size d (from Section 1.1) belong to MPH-d, so Theorem 1.1 captures the polytime O(d) approximation discussed above. Second, XOS valuations coincide with MPH-1, so Theorem 1.1 improves the previously best known poly-time result of [23] from 2e/(e − 1) to 2, matching the existential lower bound. See Section 4 and Appendix D. The second set of new results includes Knapsack feasibility constraints and d-sparse Packing Integer Programs (PIPs), for which we obtain a constant- and a O(d)-approximation, respectively. These settings are presented in Sections 4 and E, respectively. Theorem 1.2 (Knapsack). For Knapsack constraints, a factor (5 + ǫ)-approximate posted-price mechanism, with static prices, can be computed in poly(n, 1/ǫ). This improves to a (3 + ǫ) approximation if no individual demands more than half of the total capacity. Theorem 1.3 (Sparse PIPs). For d-sparse Packing Integer Programs (PIPs) with constraint matrix A ∈ Rm×n ≥0 where aj,i ≤ 1/2 for all i, j and unit capacities, a factor (8d+ǫ)-approximate posted-price mechanism, with static prices, can be computed in time poly(n, m, 1/ǫ). To the best of our knowledge, Theorems 1.2 and 1.3 are the first prophet inequalities for these settings. We note that [24] derived a prophet inequality for closely-related fractional knapsack constraints, with approximation factor ≈ 11.657. We obtain an improved prophet inequality for this fractional setting: a corollary of Theorem 1.1 (with k = 1) is that one can obtain a 2-approximation for a fractional knapsack constraint using a static per-unit price, even when knapsack weights are private and arbitrarily correlated with buyer values. See Section 4 for more details. Finally, in Appendix F we generalize the matroid prophet inequalities of Kleinberg and Weinberg [33] to settings where players make choices regarding multiple elements of a matroid, and have submodular preferences over subsets of elements. Theorem 1.4 (Multi-Dimensional Matroids). For matroid feasibility constraints and submodular valuations, there is a (4 + ǫ)-approximate posted-price mechanism, with dynamic prices, that can be computed in poly(n, 1/ǫ) value queries.  1.5  From Price of Anarchy to Prophet Inequalities  In the proof sketch in Section 1.1, we derived a lower bound on buyer utility by considering a deviation to a certain purchasing decision. This deviation argument, which appears in the proof of our main result, is also useful for establishing Price of Anarchy bounds [41, 45]. There is a subtle but important difference, however. In smoothness proofs one considers deviations against a fixed strategy profile, while the prophet inequality problem is inherently temporal and agents deviate at different points in time. As it turns out, many smoothness proofs have a built-in charging scheme (which we refer to as outcome smoothness) that, under the assumption that critical payments are monotonically increasing, implies prophet inequalities with the same (asymptotic) approximation guarantee. We provide examples showing that both outcome smoothness and monotonicity are necessary for this result to hold. We also provide two “black-box reductions” for binary singleparameter settings, where PoA guarantees of O(γ) established by (normal) smoothness imply O(γ 2 )approximate prophet inequalities. See Section 5.  6  Theorem 1.5 (informal). For general multi-parameter problems, if the first-price (i.e., pay-yourbid) mechanism based on declared welfare maximization has a Price of Anarchy of O(γ) provable via outcome smoothness, and critical payments are monotonically increasing, then posting a scaled version of the critical payments yields a O(γ)-approximate price-based prophet inequality. Using these results we can, for example, rederive the classic prophet inequality [34, 35] from the smoothness of the first-price single-item auction [45] or the matroid prophet inequality [33] from the smoothness of the pay-your-bid, declared welfare maximizing mechanism for selecting a maximum-weight basis [39].  1.6  Further Related Work  Prophet inequalities and their applicability as posted-price mechanisms were (re-)discovered in theoretical computer science by [28]. Subsequently, threshold-based prophet inequalities and postedprice mechanisms were developed for matroids and matroid intersection [13, 33, 7], polymatroids [20], unit-demand bidders [13, 3], and combinatorial auctions [3, 23]. Not all prophet inequalities in the literature are based on explicit thresholds. Examples include prophet inequalities for the generalized assignment problem [4, 5], matroids and matroid intersection [26], and for general binary feasibility constraints [42]. On the other hand, many posted-price mechanisms from the literature are constructed either without explicit reference to prophet inequalities or via different techniques. Chawla et al. [12] developed approximately-optimal (revenue-wise) posted-price mechanisms for unit-demand buyers. Posted-price mechanisms have subsequently been developed for a variety of other auction settings [18, 8, 11, 6]. Dynamic posted prices that give optimal welfare for unit-demand buyers were established in [15]. Recently, dynamic posted prices for various online settings have been considered, including k-server on the line and metrical task systems [14], and makespan minimization for scheduling problems [27]. Most recently, and in parallel to this work combinatorial prophet inequalities were developed in [43] and [10]. The former, amongst others, proves prophet inequalities for subadditive CAs, but considers a different allocation model and is therefore imcomparable. The latter, in turn, focuses on revenue and not welfare as we do here. Finally, [1] re-considers the classic prophet inequality setting, but in a large market setting and assuming random or best order. The notion of smooth games was introduced by Roughgarden [41] as a tool for bounding the price of anarchy, which measures the inefficiency that can be incurred in equilibrium. This notion has been extended to mechanisms by Syrgkanis and Tardos [45]. Notions of outcome smoothness were considered in [16, 40].  2  General Model and Notation  Problem Formulation There is a set N of n agents. For each agent i ∈ N there is an outcome space Xi containing a null outcome ∅. We write X = X1 × . . . × Xn for the joint outcome space. Given outcome profile x ∈ X and a subset of agents S ⊆ N , we will write xS for the outcome in which each i ∈ S receives xi and each i 6∈ S receives ∅. Specifically, we will write x[i−1] for allocation x with the outcomes of agents i, . . . , n set to ∅. There is a subset F ⊆ X of feasible outcomes. We will assume that F is downward-closed, so that if x ∈ F then also xS ∈ F for all S ⊆ N . A valuation function for agent i is a function vi : Xi → R≥0 . We will assume values are bounded, and without loss of generality scaled to lie in [0, 1]. Each agent i’s valuation vi is drawn independently from a publicly known distribution Di . We write D = D1 × · · · × Dn for the product distribution over the set V = V1 × · · · × Vn of valuation profiles. We often suppress dependence on 7  D from our notation when clear from context. Agent utilities are quasilinear: if agent i receives outcome xi and makes a payment πi , his utility is ui = vi (xi ) − πi . P The welfare of outcome x is v(x) = v (x i i ). An outcome rule ALG maps each valuation i profile to a feasible outcome. ALGi (v) denotes the outcome of agent i on input v. We will write OPT(v, F) = arg maxx∈F {v(x)} for the welfare-maximizing outcome rule for F, omitting the dependence on F when it is clear from context. Pricing Rules and Mechanisms A pricing rule is a profile of functions p = (p1 , . . . , pn ) that assign prices to outcomes. We write pi (xi | y) for the (non-negative) price assigned to outcome xi ∈ Xi , offered to agent i, given partial allocation y ∈ F. Define pi (xi ) = pi (xi | ∅) for convenience. We require that pi (xi | y) = ∞ for any xi such that (xi , y−i ) 6∈ F. A pricing rule is said to be monotone non-decreasing if pi (xi | y) ≥ pi (xi | yS ) for all i, xi ∈ Xi , y ∈ X, (xi , y−i ) ∈ F, and S ⊆ N . In general, we allow prices to be dynamic and discriminatory. We refer to prices that do not depend on the partial allocation (apart from feasibility) as static and to prices that do not depend on the identity of the agent as anonymous. A posted-price mechanism is defined by a pricing rule p and an ordering over the agents. This pricing rule can, in general, depend on the distributions D. The agents are approached sequentially. Each agent i is presented the menu of prices determined by pi , given all previous allocations, and selects a utility-maximizing outcome. A posted-price mechanism is order-oblivious if it does not require the agents to be processed in a specific order. In all of the applications we consider, the mechanisms we construct are order-oblivious. It is well-known that every posted-price mechanism is truthful [13]. Online Allocations and Prophet Inequalities We consider stochastic allocation algorithms that can depend on the value distributions D. That is, an allocation algorithm A maps a value profile and distribution to a feasible outcome. We say A is an online allocation algorithm if Ai (v, D) does not depend on the entries of v that occur after i in some ordering over the indices. Extending the notion of competitive ratio from the worst-case analysis of online algorithms, we’ll say the (stochastic) competitive ratio of online allocation algorithm A is max D  Ev∼D [v(OPT(v))] . Ev∼D [v(A(v, D))]  We somtimes refer to a competitive ratio using its inverse, when convenient. A prophet inequality for constraint F is an upper bound on the stochastic competitive ratio of an online allocation algorithm for F. We note that a posted-price mechanism describes a particular form of an online allocation algorithm.  3  A Framework for Prophet Inequalities  In this section we state and prove our main result, which reduces prophet inequalities to finding balanced prices for the simpler full information setting. We say that a set of outcome profiles H ⊆ X is exchange compatible with x ∈ F if for all y ∈ H and all i ∈ N , (yi , x−i ) ∈ F. We call a family of sets (Fx )x∈X exchange compatible if Fx is exchange compatible with x for all x ∈ X. Definition 3.1. Let α > 0, β ≥ 0. Given a set of feasible outcomes F and a valuation profile v, a pricing rule p is (α, β)-balanced with respect to an allocation rule ALG, an exchange-compatible family of sets (Fx )x∈X , and an indexing of the players i = 1, . . . , n if for all x ∈ F 8   pi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ α1 · v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx ) , and P ′ (b) for all x′ ∈ Fx : i∈N pi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≤ β · v(OPT(v, Fx )). (a)  P  i∈N  The definition provides flexibility in the precise choice of Fx . As Fx becomes larger (more permissive), both inequalities become easier to satisfy since v(OPT(v, Fx )) increases. On the other hand, a larger set Fx means that the second condition must be satisfied for more outcomes x′ ∈ Fx . We say that a collection of pricing rules (pv )v∈V is (α, β)-balanced if there exists a choice of (Fx )x∈X such that, for each v, the pricing rule pv is balanced with respect to (Fx )x∈X . The definition of (α, β)-balancedness captures sufficient conditions for a posted-price mechanism to guarantee high welfare when agents have a known valuation profile v. Our interest in (α, β)balanced pricing rules comes from the fact that this result extends to Bayesian settings.  Theorem 3.1. Suppose that the collection of pricing rules (pv )v∈V for feasible outcomes F and valuation profiles v ∈ V is (α, β)-balanced with respect to allocation rule ALG and indexing of the α players i = 1, . . . , n. Then for δ = 1+αβ the posted-price mechanism with pricing rule δp, where 1 ṽ · Ev [v(ALG(v))] when approaching pi (xi | y) = Eṽ [pi (xi | y)], generates welfare at least 1+αβ players in the order they are indexed. Proof. We denote the exchange-compatible family of sets with respect to which the collection of pricing rules (pv )v∈V is balanced by (Fx )x∈X . We will first use Property (b) to show a lower bound on the utilities of the players, and Property (a) to show a lower bound on the revenue of the posted-price mechanism. We will then add these together to obtain a bound on the social welfare. We will write x(v) for the allocation returned by the posted-price mechanism on input valuation profile v and x′ (v, v′ ) = OPT(v′ , Fx(v) ) for the welfare-maximizing allocation with respect to valuation profile v′ under feasibility constraint Fx(v) . Utility bound: We obtain a lower bound on the expected utility of a player as follows. We ′ ), F sample valuations v′ ∼ D. Player i now considers buying OPTi ((vi , v−i x(vi′ ,v−i ) ) at price ′ δ·pi (OPTi ((vi , v−i ), Fx(vi′ ,v−i ) ) | x[i−1] (v)). Taking expectations and exploiting that x[i−1] (v) does not depend on vi we obtain i   h  ′ ′ ), Fx(vi′ ,v−i ) ) x[i−1] (v) ), Fx(vi′ ,v−i ) ) − δ · pi OPTi ((vi , v−i E[ui (v)] ≥ E ′ vi OPTi ((vi , v−i v v,v  i  h  = E ′ vi′ x′i (v, v′ ) − δ · pi x′i (v, v′ ) x[i−1] (v) . v,v  Summing the previous inequality over all agents we get " # " # "  #  X X  X δ · pi x′i (v, v′ ) x[i−1] (v) vi′ x′i (v, v′ ) − E ′ ui (v) ≥ E ′ E v  v,v  i∈N  v,v  i∈N  i∈N  "  # i h  X ′ ′ ′ ′ δ · pi xi (v, v ) x[i−1] (v) . = E ′ v OPT(v , Fx(v) ) − E ′ v,v  v,v  (1)  i∈N  We can upper bound the last term in the previous inequality by using Property (b). This gives   h  i X δ · pi x′i (v, v′ ) x[i−1] (v) ≤ δβ · E ṽ OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) ṽ  i∈N  pointwise for any v and v′ , and therefore also # "   h  i X δ · pi x′i (v, v′ ) x[i−1] (v) ≤ δβ · E ṽ OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) . E′ v,v  v,ṽ  i∈N  9  (2)  Replacing v′ with ṽ in Inequality (1) and combining it with Inequality (2) we obtain # " h  i X ui (v) ≥ (1 − δβ) · E ṽ OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) . E v  v,ṽ  i∈N  (3)  Revenue bound: The second step is a lower bound on the revenue achieved by the posted-price mechanism. Applying Property (a) we obtain i X X h δ · pi (xi (v) | x[i−1] (v)) = δ · E piṽ (xi (v) | x[i−1] (v)) i∈N  i∈N  ṽ  h i δ ≥ · E ṽ(ALG(ṽ)) − ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) )) . α ṽ  Taking expectation over v this shows # " X   δ δ δ · pi (xi (v) | x[i−1] (v)) ≥ · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ))] − · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) )) . E v α ṽ α ṽ,v  (4)  i∈N  Combination: It remains to show how the two bounds can be combined so that they imply the approximation guarantee. By quasi-linearity we can rewrite the expected social welfare that is achieved by the posted-price mechanism as the sum of the expected utilities plus the expected revenue. Using δ = α/(1 + αβ) and Inequalities (3) and (4), this gives # " " # # " X X X  δ · pi xi (v) | x[i−1] (v) ui (v) + E vi (xi (v)) ≥ E E v  i∈N  v  v  i∈N  i∈N   δ   δ ≥ (1 − δβ) E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) )) + E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ))] − E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) )) v,ṽ α ṽ α ṽ,v 1 E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ)] . = 1 + αβ ṽ   In what follows, we provide an alternative definition of balancedness, in which Property (b) is refined. This definition will be useful for some applications, as exemplified in Section 4. Definition 3.2. Let α > 0, β1 , β2 ≥ 0. Given a set of feasible outcomes F and a valuation profile v, a pricing rule p is weakly (α, β1 , β2 )-balanced with respect to allocation rule ALG, an exchangecompatible family of sets (Fx )x∈X , and an indexing of the players i = 1, . . . , n if, for all x ∈ F,  P 1 (a) i∈N pi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ α · v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx ) , and P ′ (b) for all x′ ∈ Fx : i∈N pi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≤ β1 · v(OPT(v, Fx )) + β2 · v(ALG(v)). The following theorem specifies the refined bound on the welfare that is obtained by weakly (α, β1 , β2 )-balanced pricing rules. Its proof appears in Appendix B.  Theorem 3.2. Suppose that the collection of pricing rules (pv )v∈V for feasible outcomes F and valuation profiles v ∈ V is weakly (α, β1 , β2 )-balanced with respect to allocation ALG and indexing 1 the posted-price of the players i = 1, . . . , n with β1 + β2 ≥ α1 . Then for δ = β1 +max{2β 2 ,1/α} mechanism with pricing rule δp, where pi (xi | y) = Eṽ [pṽi (xi | y)], generates welfare at least 1 α(2β1 +4β2 ) · Ev [v(ALG(v))] when approaching players in the order they are indexed. 10  4  New and Improved Prophet Inequalities  We have already argued that our framework unifies and simplifies many of the existing prophet inequality proofs. In this section we show how it can be used to derive new and improved bounds on the approximation ratio that can be obtained via price-based prophet inequalities. We highlight two results: the new poly-time O(d)-approximation for combinatorial auctions with bundle size at most d, and the new poly-time constant-approximation for knapsack problems. Additional results include combinatorial auctions with MPH-k valuations (see Appendix D), d-sparse packing integer programs (see Appendix E) and multi-dimensional matroids (where the result follows from the Rota exchange theorem [36, Lemma 2.7] and our composition results, see Appendix F). Combinatorial Auctions with Bounded Bundle Size An existential O(d)-approximate pricebased prophet inequality is presented in Section 1.1. Combined with the O(d)-approximation greedy algorithm for this setting, it gives a poly-time O(d2 )-approximate price-based prophet inequality (as shown in [23]). In what follows we use the flexibility of our framework to work directly with a relaxation of the allocation problem, thereby improving the approximation of the prophet inequality from O(d2 ) to O(d). This is a special case of Theorem 1.1, which is proved in Appendix D. Theorem 4.1. For combinatorial auctions where every agent can get at most d items, there exist weakly (1, 1, d − 1)-balanced item prices that are static, anonymous, and order oblivious. Moreover, a (4d − 2 − ǫ)-approximate posted-price mechanism can be computed in poly(n, m, 1/ǫ) demand queries, where ǫ is an additive error due to sampling. Proof. Consider the canonical fractional relaxation of the combinatorial auction problem: a feasible P allocationPis described by values xi,S ∈ [0, 1] for all i ∈ N and S ⊆ M such that S xi,S ≤ 1 for all i and i,S∋j xi,S ≤ 1 for all j ∈ M . TakePF to be all such fractional allocations, and P Fx to be the set of fractional allocations y such that i,S∋j (xi,S + yi,S ) ≤ 1 for all j ∈ M , and S yi,S ≤ 1 for all i. As usual, we think of Fx as the set of allocations that remain feasible given a partial allocation x. Consider the following pricing rule for fractional allocations. Given valuation v, let x∗ P profile P be the welfare-maximizing fractional allocation. Then for each item j, set pj = i S∋j x∗i,S vi (S). We claim that these prices are (1, 1, d − 1)-balanced P with respect to the optimal allocation rule. For Property (a), fix some x ∈ F. Write xj = i,S∋j xi,S . Consider the following allocation y ∈ Fx : for each S, choose jS ∈ arg maxj∈S {xj }. Set yi,S = (1 − xjS ) · x∗i,S . We think of y as the optimal allocation x∗ adjusted downward to lie in Fx . We then have that X X XX X X pi (xi ). v(x∗ ) − v(y) = xjS · x∗i,S · vi (S) = xj x∗i,S · vi (S) ≤ xj · p j = i  j  S  j  i,S : j=jS  i  Property (a) follows since v(y) ≤ v(OPT(v, Fx )). For Property (b), fix x ∈ F and x′ ∈ Fx . Then X X X X X X pi (x′i ) ≤ (1 − xj )pj = (1 − xj ) x∗i,S · vi (S) = x∗i,S · vi (S) (1 − xj ) i  j  =  j  i,S∋j  i,S    j∈S    X X X xj  . (|S| − 1)x∗i,S · vi (S) + x∗i,S · vi (S) · 1 − i,S  i,S  j∈S  The first expression on the RHS is at most (d − 1)v(OPT(v)), since |S| ≤ d whenever x∗i,S > 0. For the second expression, note that it is at most the welfare of the allocation y defined by yi,S = 11  P x∗i,S · (1 − j∈S xj )+ . Moreover, this allocation y is in Fx . So the second expression is at most v(OPT(v, Fx )), giving Property (b). Theorem 3.2 therefore yields prices that guarantee a (4d − 2) approximation for the fractional allocation problem, and an ǫ-approximation to those prices can be computed via sampling. To complete the proof, note that for every agent i, if all previous agents have selected integral outcomes, then agent i also has a utility-maximizing outcome that is integral. This is because any fractional allocation can be interpreted as a convex combination of integral allocations. These same prices therefore guarantee a (4d − 2 − ǫ) approximation even if the mechanism prohibits non-integral allocations from being purchased. The more general Theorem 1.1 also improves the best-known polytime prophet inequality for XOS valuations from 2e/(e − 1) to 2 (which is tight [23]) and for MPH-k valuations it improves the best known polytime bounds from O(k2 ) to O(k). Knapsack In the knapsack allocation problem, there is a single divisible unit of resource and each agent has a private value vi ≥ 0 for receiving at least si ≥ 0 units. Assume for now that si ≤ 1/2 for all i. We allow both vi and si to P be private information, drawn from a joint distribution. In our notation: Xi = [0, 12 ], F = {x | i xi ≤ 1}, and vi (xi ) = vi if xi ≥ si and vi (xi ) = 0 otherwise. Based on an arbitrary allocation algorithm ALG, we design anonymous, static prices by setting pi (xi | y) = xi · v(ALG(v)) if xi can feasibly be added and ∞ otherwise. The following restates the second half of Theorem 1.2. Theorem 4.2. For the knapsack allocation problem in which no single agent can request more than half of the total capacity, the prices above are (1, 2)-balanced with respect to ALG. This implies a (3 + ǫ)-approximate polytime posted-price mechanism with a single static anonymous per-unit price. Proof. The polytime claim follows from Theorem 3.1 with ALG set to the classic for knapP FPTAS 1 sack [31], so it suffices to prove balancedness. For any x ∈ F, let Fx = F if i xi < 2 , and Fx = ∅ otherwise. Note that Fx is exchange compatible with x since, for any x′ ∈ Fx and any agent k, P ′ xk + i xi ≤P1. To establish balancedness with respect to (Fx )x , we consider two cases based on the value of i xi . P 1 Case 1: Property (a) is trivially fulfilled because v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx )) ≤ i xi < 2 . v(OPT(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx )) = 0. For Property b, note that for any x′ ∈ Fx , we have X X pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) = x′i · v(ALG(v)) ≤ v(ALG(v)) ≤ v(OPT(v)) = v(OPT(v, Fx )). i  Case 2: X i  i  P  i xi  ≥ 21 . Property (b) is vacuous since Fx = ∅. For Property (a), we have  pi (xi | x[i−1] ) =  X i  1 1 xi · v(ALG(v)) ≥ v(ALG(v)) = (v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx ))). 2 2  We can remove the restriction that si ≤ 1/2 as follows, completing the proof of Theorem 1.2. Consider the contribution to the expected optimal welfare separated into welfare from agents with si ≤ 1/2, and agents with si > 1/2. The posted-price mechanism described above obtains a 3-approximation to the former. For the latter, a mechanism that treats the unit of resource as indivisible, and posts the best take-it-or-leave-it price for the entire unit, is a 2-approximation. This is because at most one agent with si > 1/2 can win in any realization. Thus, for any distribution profile, one of these two mechanisms must be a 5-approximation to the unrestricted 12  knapsack problem.7 One can therefore obtain a (5 + ǫ)-approximate price-based prophet inequality by estimating the expected welfare of each pricing scheme (via sampling) and selecting the better of the two. In Appendix E we show how to generalize the result for the knapsack problem to d-sparse packing integer programs. Finally, consider the fractional version of the knapsack problem, where agents obtain partial value for receiving a portion of their desired allocation: vi (xi ) = vi · min{xi /si , 1}. If we restrict allocations xi to be multiples of some δ > 0, this is a special case of a submodular combinatorial auction with ⌈1/δ⌉ identical items. Since Theorem 1.1 implies that a fixed per-item price yields a 2-approximation for any δ, we can infer by taking the limit as δ → 0 that for any ǫ > 0 there is a (2 + ǫ)-approximate polytime posted-price mechanism for the fractional knapsack problem, with a single static anonymous per-unit price, even if each agent’s size si is private and arbitrarily correlated with their value. As mentioned in Section 1.4, this improves the previously best-known prophet inequality of ≈ 11.657 due to [24].  5  From Price of Anarchy to Prophet Inequalities  In this section we explore the connection between balanced prices and mechanism smoothness. While generally smoothness does not suffice to conclude the existence of a posted-price mechanism with comparable welfare guarantee (see Appendix G), we will show that this is the case for typical smoothness proofs and present pretty general reductions from the problem of proving prophet inequalities to mechanism smoothness. We first recall the definition of a smooth mechanism. A (possibly indirect) mechanism Mπ for an allocation problem π is defined by a bid space B = B1 × · · · × Bn , an allocation rule f : B → F, and a payment rule P : B → Rn≥0 . We focus on first-price mechanisms, where Pi (b) = bi (f (b)). Typically, mechanisms are defined for a collection of problems Π, in which case we will simply refer to the mechanism as M. Definition 5.1 (Syrgkanis and Tardos [45]). Mechanism Mπ is (λ, µ)-smooth for λ, µ ≥ 0 if for any valuation profile v ∈ V and any bid profile b ∈ B there exists a bid b′i (v, bi ) ∈ Bi for each player i ∈ N such that X X ui (b′i , b-i ) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)) − µ · Pi (b). i∈N  i∈N  A mechanism M that is (λ, µ)-smooth has a Price of Anarchy (with respect to correlated and Bayes-Nash equilibria) of at most max{µ, 1}/λ [45]. The following formal notion of a residual market will be useful for our further analysis. For any x ∈ F we define the contraction of F by x, F/x, as follows. Let N + (x) = {i ∈ N | xi 6= ∅}. Then F/x = {z = (zj )j∈N \N + (x) | (z, xN + (x) ) ∈ F}. That is, F/x contains allocations to players who were allocated nothing in x, that remain feasible when combined with the allocations in x. We think of the contraction by x as a subinstance on players N \ N + (x) with feasibility constraint F/x, and refer to it as the subinstance induced by x. We say that a collection of problems Π is subinstance closed if for every π ∈ Π with feasible allocations F and every x ∈ F the subinstance induced by x is contained in Π. The contraction by x also naturally leads to an exchange feasible set Fx by padding the allocations z ∈ F/x with null outcomes. We refer to this Fx as the canonical exchange-feasible set. 7  The worst case is when both mechanisms achieve the same expected welfare, which occurs if 3/5 of the expected welfare is due to agents with si ≤ 1/2. The expected welfare of each mechanism is then 13 · 35 = 51 of the optimum.  13  5.1  Warm-up: Binary, Single-Parameter Problems with Monotone Prices  We begin with a simple result that serves to illustrate the connection between balancedness and smoothness. We will show that if a binary, single-parameter problem has the property that the welfare-maximizing mechanism is (λ, µ)-smooth and its critical prices τi ( · | y) are non-decreasing in y,8 then there exists a pricing rule that is (α, β)-balanced, where αβ = O(max{µ, 1}/λ). In particular, this implies that the welfare guarantee due to Theorem 3.1 is within a constant factor of the Price of Anarchy of the mechanism implied by smoothness. Theorem 5.1. Consider a subinstance-closed collection of binary, single-parameter problems such that the first-price mechanism based on the welfare maximizing allocation rule OPT is (λ, µ)-smooth. If the critical prices τi ( · | y) are non-decreasing in y then setting pi (1 | y) = max{vi , τi (v-i | y)} )-balanced with respect to OPT and the canonical exchange-feasible and pi (0 | y) = 0 is (1, µ+1+λ λ sets (Fx )x∈X . Proof. Fix any y and x ∈ Fy . Observe that by definition of the prices, it holds that pi (xi | y) ≥ v(OPT(v, F(∅,y−i ) )) − v(OPT(v, F(xi ,y−i ) )).  (5)  To see this, first note that both sides of the inequality are equal to 0 if xi = 0. If xi = 1 and vi ≥ τi (v-i | y), then agent i is allocated in OPT(v, F(∅,y−i ) ) and hence both sides of the inequality are equal to vi . If xi = 1 and vi < τi (v-i | y), then agent i is not allocated in OPT(v, F(∅,y−i ) ), and hence the right-hand side of the inequality is at most the externality imposed by forcing an allocation to agent i, which is at most τi (v-i | y) = pi (xi | y). We are now ready to prove balancedness. To verify Condition (a), choose x ∈ F and note that n X i=1  n   X v(OPT(v, Fx[i−1] )) − v(OPT(v, Fx[i] )) = v(OPT(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx )) pi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ i=1  as required, where the inequality follows from Equation (5), and the equality follows by a telescoping sum. For Condition (b), we get X  τi (v-i | x[i−1] ) ≤  i∈x′  X  τi (v-i | x) ≤  i∈x′  µ+1 v(OPT(v, Fx )), λ  (6)  where the first inequality follows by the monotonicity of critical prices, and the second inequality follows by a known implication of smoothness [19] (see Appendix I.1). Therefore, for any x′ ∈ Fx , X X X pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≤ vi + τi (v-i | x[i−1] ) i  i∈x′  i∈x′  µ+1 v(OPT(v, Fx )) λ µ+1+λ ≤ v(OPT(v, Fx )), λ  ≤ v(x′ ) +  where the first inequality follows by replacing the maximum in the definition of the prices by a sum, the second inequality follows by Equation (6), and the last inequality follows by v(x′ ) ≤ v(OPT(v, Fx )), since x′ ∈ Fx . 8  The critical price τi (v-i | y) is the infimum of values vi such that the mechanism allocates 1 to agent i on input (vi , v-i ), in the problem subinstance induced by y.  14  5.2  General Problems and Outcome Smoothness  We proceed to show an implication from smoothness to prices that works in more general settings. It is based on the observation that many smoothness proofs proceed by showing that agent i could bid b′i to get some target outcome x∗i . We capture proofs that proceed in this manner through the following notion of outcome smoothness. Similar but different notions were considered in [16, 40]. Definition 5.2. A mechanism is (λ, µ)-outcome smooth for λ, µ ≥ 0 if for all valuation profiles v ∈ V there exists an outcome x′ (v) ∈ F such that for all bid profiles b ∈ B,  X X ′ ′ Pi (b). Pi (bi , b-i ) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)) − µ · vi (xi ) − ′ inf ′ ′ i∈N  bi : fi (bi ,b-i )xi  i∈N  We show that if a first-price, declared welfare maximizing mechanism (i.e., a mechanism with allocation rule f (b) = OPT(b)) is (λ, µ)-outcome smooth and has non-decreasing critical prices, then the critical prices for that mechanism (from the definition of outcome smoothness) can be used as posted prices that yield an O(λ/µ) approximation to the optimal welfare. Recall that these critical prices are different from the first-price payments that make up the mechanism’s payment rule. This result has a mild technical caveat: we require that the mechanism continues to be smooth in a modified problem with multiple copies of each bidders. An allocation is feasible in the modified feasibility space F ′ if it corresponds to a feasible allocation x ∈ F, with each xi being partitioned between the copies of agent i. Theorem 5.2. Fix valuation space V and feasibility space F, and suppose F ′ is an extension of F as defined above. Suppose that the first-price mechanism based on the declared welfare maximizing allocation rule for valuation space V and feasibility space F ′ has non-decreasing critical prices, and is (λ, µ)-outcome smooth for every F ′ /z. Then there is a collection of exchange-feasible sets (Fx )x∈X , and an allocation rule ALG that returns the welfare-maximization allocation with probability λ, such that for every v ∈ V there exists a pricing rule that is (λ, µ/λ)-balanced with respect to ALG and (Fx )x∈X . Theorem 5.2 implies that posting (an appropriately scaled version of) the critical prices from the outcome smooth mechanism yields a welfare approximation of O(λ/µ), matching the Price of Anarchy guarantee of the original mechanism. The proof of Theorem 5.2 appears in Appendix H.  5.3  Binary, Single-Parameter Problems  We conclude with two general “black-box reductions” for binary single-parameter settings, in which agents can either win or lose, which show how to translate PoA guarantees of O(γ) provable via (regular) smoothness into O(γ 2 )-approximate posted-price mechanisms. Proofs appear in Appendix I. The key to both these results is a novel, purely combinatorial implication of smoothness for the greedy allocation rule proved in Lemma I.2. Theorem 5.3. Suppose that the first-price mechanism based on the greedy allocation rule GRD has a Price of Anarchy of O(γ) provable via smoothness, then there exists a O(γ 2 )-approximate price-based prophet inequality. Theorem 5.4. Suppose that the first-price mechanism based on the declared welfare maximizing allocation rule OPT has a Price of Anarchy of O(γ) provable via smoothness, then there exists a O(γ 2 )-approximate price-based prophet inequality.  15  We note that Theorem 5.1 applied to matroids (using known smoothness results for pay-yourbid greedy mechanisms over matroids [39]) implies the existence of (1, 3)-balanced prices and hence a 4-approximate prophet inequality. A strengthening of Theorem 5.4 for monotonically increasing critical prices (discussed in Remark I.2) leads to an improved factor of 2, matching the prophet inequality for matroids shown in Kleinberg and Weinberg [33]. This also captures the classic singleitem prophet inequality, as a special case.  6  Conclusions and Open Problems  We introduced a general framework for establishing prophet inequalities and posted price mechanisms for multi-dimensional settings. This work leaves many questions open. A general class of questions is to determine the best approximation guarantee that a prophet inequality can achieve for a particular setting. For example, even for the intersection of two matroids there is a gap between the trivial lower bound of 2 and the upper bound of 4k − 2 = 6. Similarly, in subadditive combinatorial auctions, the best-known upper bound is logarithmic in the number of items m [23], but again the best-known lower bound is 2, inherited from the case of a single item. Notably, the price of anarchy for simultaneous single-item auctions is known to be constant for subadditive valuations [22], but the proof does not use the smoothness framework and hence our results relating posted prices to smooth mechanisms do not directly apply. A related question is whether there exist prophet inequalities that cannot be implemented using posted prices. Interestingly, we are not aware of any separation between the two so far. More generally, one could ask about the power of anonymous versus personalized prices, item versus bundle prices, static versus dynamic prices, and so on. For example, to what extent can static prices approximate the welfare under a matroid constraint, an intersection of matroids, or an arbitrary downward-closed feasibility constraint? Regarding the pricing framework itself, it would be interesting to extend the notion of (α, β)balancedness to allow randomization in a dynamic pricing rule, and to understand the additional power of randomization. One could also generalize beyond feasibility constraints to more general seller-side costs for allocations. For the connection between smoothness and balancedness, we leave open the question of removing the price-monotonicity condition from Theorem 5.2, or whether the approximation factors can be improved for our single-parameter reductions (Theorems 5.3 and 5.4). Finally, recent work has shown that smoothness guarantees often improve as markets grow large [25]; is there a corresponding result for balancedness?  References [1] M. Abolhassani, S. Ehsani, H. Esfandiari, M. T. Hajiaghayi, R. Kleinberg, and B. Lucier. Beating 1-1/e for ordered prophets. In Proceedings of the 49th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 61–71, 2017. [2] I. Abraham, M. Babaioff, S. Dughmi, and T. Roughgarden. Combinatorial auctions with restricted complements. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages 3–16, 2012. [3] S. Alaei. Bayesian combinatorial auctions: Expanding single buyer mechanisms to many buyers. SIAM Journal on Computing, 43(2):930–972, 2014.  16  [4] S. Alaei, M. Hajiaghayi, and V. Liaghat. Online prophet-inequality matching with applications to ad allocation. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages 18–35, 2012. [5] S. Alaei, M. Hajiaghayi, and V. Liaghat. The online stochastic generalized assignment problem. In Proceedings of the 16th/17th APPROX-RANDOM Workshop, pages 11–25, 2013. [6] S. Alaei, J. D. Hartline, R. Niazadeh, E. Pountourakis, and Y. Yuan. Optimal auctions vs. anonymous pricing. In Proceedings of 56th IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 1446–1463, 2015. [7] P. D. Azar, R. Kleinberg, and S. M. Weinberg. Prophet inequalities with limited information. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1358–1377, 2014. [8] M. Balcan, A. Blum, and Y. Mansour. Item pricing for revenue maximization. In Proceedings 9th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages 50–59, 2008. [9] K. Bhawalkar and T. Roughgarden. Welfare guarantees for combinatorial auctions with item bidding. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 700–709, 2011. [10] Y. Cai and M. Zhao. Simple mechanisms for subadditive buyers via duality. In Proceedings of the 49th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 170–183, 2017. [11] T. Chakraborty, Z. Huang, and S. Khanna. Dynamic and non-uniform pricing strategies for revenue maximization. In Proceedings of the 50th IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 495–504, 2009. [12] S. Chawla, J. D. Hartline, and R. D. Kleinberg. Algorithmic pricing via virtual valuations. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages 243–251, 2007. [13] S. Chawla, J. D. Hartline, D. L. Malec, and B. Sivan. Multi-parameter mechanism design and sequential posted pricing. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 311–320, 2010. [14] I. R. Cohen, A. Eden, A. Fiat, and L. Jez. Pricing online decisions: Beyond auctions. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 73–91, 2015. [15] V. Cohen-Addad, A. Eden, M. Feldman, and A. Fiat. The invisible hand of dynamic market pricing. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 383–400, 2016. [16] C. Daskalakis and V. Syrgkanis. Learning in auctions: Regret is hard, envy is easy. In Proceedings of the 57th IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 219– 228, 2016. [17] S. Dobzinski. Two randomized mechanisms for combinatorial auctions. In Proceedings of the 10th/11th APPROX-RANDOM Workshop, pages 89–103, 2007. [18] S. Dobzinski, N. Nisan, and M. Schapira. Truthful randomized mechanisms for combinatorial auctions. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 644–652, 2006. 17  [19] P. Dütting and T. Kesselheim. Algorithms against anarchy: Understanding non-truthful mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 239–255, 2015. [20] P. Dütting and R. Kleinberg. Polymatroid prophet inequalities. In Proceedings of the 23rd European Symposium on Algorithms, pages 437–449, 2015. [21] U. Feige, M. Feldman, N. Immorlica, R. Izsak, B. Lucier, and V. Syrgkanis. A unifying hierarchy of valuations with complements and substitutes. In Proceedings of the 29th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 872–878, 2015. [22] M. Feldman, H. Fu, N. Gravin, and B. Lucier. Simultaneous auctions are (almost) efficient. In Proceedings of the 45th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 201–210, 2013. [23] M. Feldman, N. Gravin, and B. Lucier. Combinatorial auctions via posted prices. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 123–135, 2015. [24] M. Feldman, O. Svensson, and R. Zenklusen. A simple o(log log(rank))-competitive algorithm for the matroid secretary problem. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1189–1201, 2015. [25] M. Feldman, N. Immorlica, B. Lucier, T. Roughgarden, and V. Syrgkanis. The price of anarchy in large games. In Proceedings of the 48th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 963–976, 2016. [26] M. Feldman, O. Svensson, and R. Zenklusen. Online contention resolution schemes. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1014–1033, 2016. [27] M. Feldman, A. Fiat, and A. Roytman. Makespan minimization via posted prices. In Working paper, 2017. [28] M. Hajiaghayi, R. Kleinberg, and T. W. Sandholm. Automated mechanism design and prophet inequalities. In Proceedings of the 22nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 58– 65, 2007. [29] M. Hardt, B. Recht, and Y. Singer. Train faster, generalize better: Stability of stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1225–1234, 2016. [30] J. D. Hartline, D. Hoy, and S. Taggart. Price of anarchy for auction revenue. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 693–710, 2014. [31] O. H. Ibarra and C. E. Kim. Fast approximation algorithms for the knapsack and sum of subset problems. Journal of the ACM, 22:463–468, 1975. [32] R. Kleinberg and S. M. Weinberg. Matroid prophet inequalities. In Proceedings of the 44th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference, pages 123–136, 2012. [33] R. Kleinberg and S. M. Weinberg. Matroid prophet inequalities. In Proceedings of the 44th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 123–136, 2012. [34] U. Krengel and L. Sucheston. Semiamarts and finite values. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 83:745–747, 1977. 18  [35] U. Krengel and L. Sucheston. On semiamarts, amarts, and processes with finite value. Advances in Probability and Related Topics, 4:197–266, 1978. [36] J. Lee, M. Sviridenko, and J. Vondrak. Submodular maximization over multiple matroids via generalized exchange properties. Mathematics of Operations Research, 35(4):795–806, 2010. [37] B. Lehmann, D. Lehmann, and N. Nisan. Combinatorial auctions with decreasing marginal utilities. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages 18–28, 2001. [38] B. Lucier and A. Borodin. Price of anarchy for greedy auctions. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 537–553, 2010. [39] B. Lucier and V. Syrgkanis. Greedy algorithms make efficient mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 221–238, 2015. [40] T. Lykouris, V. Syrgkanis, and É. Tardos. Learning and efficiency in games with dynamic population. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 120–129, 2016. [41] T. Roughgarden. Intrinsic robustness of the price of anarchy. Journal of the ACM, 62(5):32, 2015. [42] A. Rubinstein. Beyond matroids: Secretary problem and prophet inequality with general constraints. In Proceedings of the 48th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2016. 324– 332. [43] A. Rubinstein and S. Singla. Combinatorial prophet inequalities. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1671–1687, 2017. [44] E. Samuel-Cahn. Comparison of threshold stop rules and maximum for independent nonnegative random variables. Annals of Probability, 12:1213–1216, 1984. [45] V. Syrgkanis and É. Tardos. Composable and efficient mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 45th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 211–220, 2013. [46] L. Trevisan. Non-approximability results for optimization problems on bounded degree instances. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 453–461, 2001.  19  A  Classic Prophet Inequality via Balanced Prices  In this appendix we show how to re-derive the classic prophet inequality via our framework in Section 3. Specifically, we show the existence of a (1, 1)-balanced pricing rule as defined in Definition 3.1. Theorem 3.1 then shows the factor 2-approximation. P In the classic setting we have Xi = {0, 1} for all i and F = {x | i xi ≤ 1}. We set pi (1 | x) = maxℓ vℓ if x does not allocate the item, ∞ otherwise; pi (0 | x) = 0 for all x. This corresponds to a fixed posted price of maxℓ vℓ on the item. Claim A.1. These prices are (1, 1)-balanced with respect to OPT and Fx defined by Fx = F if x does not allocate the item and Fx = ∅ otherwise. Proof. Let x be an arbitrary allocation profile. If x allocates the item, then Fx = ∅ and thus Condition (b) is trivially P fulfilled. For Condition (a), we observe that v(OPT(v, Fx )) = 0 and that v(OPT(v)) = maxℓ vℓ = i pi (xi | x[i−1] ), because exactly one buyer pays maxℓ vℓ . If x does not allocate the item, then v(OPT(v, Fx )) = v(OPT(v)), making Condition (a) trivial. For Condition P ′ (b), we use that in x′ at most one buyer is allocated the item. Therefore, p (x i i i | x[i−1] ) ≤ maxℓ vℓ = v(OPT(v)) = v(OPT(v, Fx )).  B  Proof of Theorem 3.2  Our proof will follow the same steps as the one for Theorem 3.1. As in that poof, denote the exchange-compatible family of sets with respect to which the collection of pricing rules (pv )v∈V is balanced by (Fx )x∈X , and let x(v) be the allocation returned by the posted-price mechanism on input valuation profile v. Let x′ (v, v′ ) = OPT(v′ , Fx(v) ) be the allocation that maximizes welfare with respect to valuation profile v′ over feasibility constraint Fx(v) . Utility bound: Again sample valuations v′ ∼ D. By the same reasoning as in the proof of Theorem 3.1, we obtain " # "  # X X  ′ ′  . (7) δ · pi x′i (v, v′ ) x[i−1] (v) ui (v) = E ′ v (x (v, v′ )) − E ′ E v  i∈N  v,v  v,v  i∈N  We upper bound the last term in the previous inequality by using Property (b). This gives pointwise for any v and v′   X   ′ ′ δ · pi xi (v, v ) x[i−1] (v) ≤ δβ1 · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) )) + δβ2 · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ))] , ṽ  i∈N  and therefore also "  X δ · pi x′i (v, v′ ) E′ v,v  i∈N  ṽ  #   ≤ δβ1 · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) + δβ2 · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ)] . x[i−1] (v) v,ṽ  v,ṽ  Replacing v′ with ṽ in Inequality (7) and combining it with Inequality (8) we obtain # " X   ui (v) ≥ (1 − δβ1 ) · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) − δβ2 · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ)] . E v  i∈N  v,ṽ  v,ṽ  20  (8)  (9)  Revenue bound: Again, applying Property (a) we obtain # " X   δ δ δ · pi (xi (v) | x[i−1] (v)) ≥ · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ))] − · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) . E v α ṽ α ṽ,v  (10)  i∈N  Combination: To combine our bounds, we distinguish whether β2 ≥  1 2α .  1 We use that point-wise for every i ∈ N we have ui (v) ≥ 0. Therefore, ui (v) ≥ Case 1: β2 ≥ 2α 1 1 ρui (v) for all 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1. Using δ = β1 +2β , ρ = 2αβ , and Inequalities (9) and (10), we get 2 2  E v  "  X  i∈N  #  vi (xi (v)) ≥ ρ · E v  "  X  #  ui (v) + E  i∈N  v  "  X  i∈N   δ · pi xi (v) | x[i−1] (v)    ≥ ρ(1 − δβ1 ) · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) − ρδβ2 · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ)] v,ṽ  = Case 2: β2 < E v  1 2α  "  i∈N  #  v,ṽ    δ δ + · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ))] − · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) α ṽ α ṽ,v  1 · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ)] . α(2β1 + 4β2 ) ṽ  Now, we use δ =  X  #  vi (xi (v)) ≥ E v  "  1 β1 +1/α .  X  i∈N  Inequalities (9) and (10) yield #  ui (v) + E v  "  X  i∈N   δ · pi xi (v) | x[i−1] (v)  #    ≥ (1 − δβ1 ) · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) − δβ2 · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ)] v,ṽ  +  v,ṽ    δ δ · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ))] − · E ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx(v) ) α ṽ α ṽ,v  1 − αβ2 · E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ)] 1 + αβ1 ṽ 1 E [ṽ(ALG(ṽ)] , ≥ α(2β1 + 4β2 ) ṽ  =  where the last step uses that β1 + β2 ≥  C  1 α  and β2 <  1 2α .  Composition Results  In this section we show that balanced prices are composable, in the sense that balanced prices for separate markets remain balanced when the markets are combined. We consider two forms of composition. The first is a composition of preferences: it shows how to extend from a class of valuations V to any maximum over valuations from V . The second shows how to compose allocations across different markets, where agents have additive preferences across markets. Together these two composition results capture XOS composition, in the sense of [45]. Our theorems apply to balancedness with respect to OPT, and they extend to general approximation algorithms ALG under mild conditions.  21  Closure under Maximum Given an arbitrary valuation space Vi for player i, we consider its extension Vimax , which contains all functions vimax : Xi → R for which there is a finite set {vi1 , . . . , vim } ∈ Vi such that vimax (xi ) = maxℓ viℓ (xi ) for all xi ∈ Xi . We say that a valuation profile ṽ ∈ V is a supporting valuation profile for allocation x and valuation profile v ∈ V max if ṽi ≤ vi and ṽi (xi ) = vi (xi ) for all i. Definition C.1. Allocation rule ALG is consistent if for every v ∈ V max and corresponding supporting valuation profile ṽ ∈ V for ALG(v), we have ṽ(ALG(ṽ)) ≥ ṽ(ALG(v)). Lemma C.1. The optimal allocation rule OPT is consistent. Proof. Since OPT(v) is a feasible outcome under ṽ, it holds that ṽ(OPT(ṽ)) ≥ ṽ(OPT(v)) by optimality. Theorem C.1. Suppose that for each v ∈ V there exists a pricing rule pv that is (α, β)-balanced with respect to v, consistent allocation rule ALG, and the exchange-compatible family of sets (Fx )x∈X . For each v ∈ V max let ṽ ∈ V be a supporting valuation profile for ALG(v). Then the pricing rule pṽ is (α, β)-balanced with respect to v, ALG, and (Fx )x∈X . Proof. We first establish Property (a). We use Property (a) of the original pricing rules, plus the definition of a supporting valuation profile to conclude that X  pṽi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥  i∈N  1 · (ṽ(ALG(ṽ)) − ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx )) α   1 · ṽ(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(ṽ, Fx ) α  1 ≥ · v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx ) . α  ≥  Next we establish Property (b). By Property (b) of the original pricing rule and the definition of a supporting valuation profile, X pṽi (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≤ β · ṽ(OPT(ṽ, Fx )) i∈N  ≤ β · v(OPT(ṽ, Fx ))  ≤ β · v(OPT(v, Fx )). Closure under Addition Suppose there are m separate allocation problems, each with feasibility constraint F ℓ over allocation space X ℓ = X1ℓ × . . . × Xnℓ . The joint problem is then defined over the product allocation space X = X 1 × . . . × X m , with feasibility constraint F = F 1 × . . . × F m . We say that a valuation vi : X → R is additive if it is defined by a (not necessarily additive) valuation function viℓ for each P outcome xℓi ∈ Xiℓ , and for an outcome xi = (x1i , . . . , xm i ) ∈ Xi , the value of xi ℓ (xℓ ). is given by vi (xi ) = m v ℓ=1 i i  Theorem C.2. Suppose that v is additive over a set of allocation problems F 1 , . . . , F m , and ℓ for each individual allocation problem there exists a pricing rule pv that is (α, β)-balanced with respect to vℓ , allocation rule ALGℓ on F ℓ , and the exchange-compatible family of sets (Fxℓ ℓ )xℓ ∈X ℓ . Pm v ℓ is (α, β)-balanced with respect to v and ALG on F, where Then the pricing rule p = ℓ=1 p ALG(v) = (ALG1 (v1 ), . . . , ALGm (vm )). 22  Q ℓ Proof. Set Fx = ( m i=1 Fxℓ )x∈X . We first verify Condition (a). We use the definition of the joint pricing rule, Condition (a) of the component pricing rules together with additivity across subproblems to conclude that X  pi (xi | x[i−1] ) =  i∈N  ≥  m XX  ℓ  pvi (xℓi | xℓ[i−1] )  i∈N ℓ=1 m  X ℓ=1  =   1 · vℓ (ALGℓ (vℓ )) − vℓ (OPT(vℓ , Fxℓ ) α  1 · (v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx ))) . α  Next we verify Condition (b). We use the definition of the joint pricing rule, Condition (b) of the component pricing rules together with additivity across subproblems to conclude that X  pi (x′i  | x[i−1] ) =  i∈N  ≤  m X X  ℓ  pvi ((x′ )ℓi | xℓ[i−1] )  ℓ=1 i∈N m X  β · vℓ (OPT(vℓ , Fxℓ ))  ℓ=1  = β · v(OPT(v, Fx )). We note that both Theorem C.1 and Theorem C.2 can be generalized so that they apply to weakly balanced pricing rules.  D  Proof of Theorem 1.1  In this appendix we establish our new prophet inequality results for combinatorial auctions with MPH-k valuations. In particular, we establish the existence of (1, 1)-balanced prices for XOS combinatorial auctions. Combinatorial Auctions with MPH-k Valuations The maximum over positive hypergraphs (MPH) hierarchy of valuations [21] is an inclusive hierarchy (i.e., it is expressive enough to include all valuations), which subsumes many interesting classes of valuations as special cases. To formalize this valuation class, we first need a few preliminaries. A hypergraph P representation M w of valuation function v : 2 → R≥0 is a set function that satisfies v(S) = T ⊆S w(T ). Any valuation function v admits a unique hypergraph representation and vice versa. A set S such that w(S) 6= 0 is said to be a hyperedge of w. Pictorially, the hypergraph representation can be thought as a weighted hypergraph, where every vertex is associated with an item in M , and the weight of each hyperedge e ⊆ M is w(e). Then the value of the function for any set S ⊆ M , is the total value of all hyperedges that are contained in S. The rank of a hypergraph representation w is the cardinality k of the largest hyperedge. The rank of v is the rank of its corresponding w and we refer to a valuation function v with rank k as a hypergraph-k valuation. If the hypergraph representation of v is non-negative, i.e. for any S ⊆ M , w(S) ≥ 0, then we refer to function v as a positive hypergraph-k function (PH-k) [2]. Definition D.1 (Maximum Over Positive Hypergraph-k (MPH-k) class [21]). A monotone valuation function v : 2M → R≥0 is Maximum over Positive Hypergraph-k (MPH-k) if it can be expressed 23  as a maximum over a set of PH-k functions. That is, there exist PH-k functions {vℓ }ℓ∈L such that for every set S ⊆ M , v(S) = maxℓ∈L vℓ (S), (11) where L is an arbitrary index set. An important special case of MPH-k are XOS valuations, which are defined as the maximum over additive functions, and therefore coincide with MPH-1. Existential O(k) Result Given an arbitrary allocation algorithm ALG and valuation profile v, write ṽ for the supporting Hypergraph-k valuations Pfor allocation ALG(v). Write wi for the hypergraph representation of ṽi , so that ṽi (ALG(v)) = T ⊆ALGi (v) wi (T ). Then, for each item j, we define X pv ({j}) = wi (T ). (12) T ∋j T ⊆ALGi (v)  That is, item prices are determined by adding up the weights of each supporting hyperedges an item of goods x, set pv (x) = P isvcontained in. These prices then extend linearly: For each set v v j∈x p ({j}). Finally, for each agent i and allocation xi , we will have pi (xi | z) = p (xi ) whenever xi is disjoint from the sets in z and ∞ otherwise. Theorem D.1. The pricing rule defined in Equation 12, extended linearly to sets of items, is weakly (1, 1, k − 1)-balanced with respect to an arbitrary allocation rule ALG and MPH-k valuation profile v. S S Proof. We will show balancedness with respect to Fx = {y ∈ F : ( i yi ) ∩ ( i xi ) = ∅}. Observe that we can lower-bound the value of OPT(v, Fx ) by removing all items that are allocated by x from the allocation ALG(v). This gives us X X X [ v(OPT(v, Fx )) ≥ vℓ (ALGℓ (v) \ ( xi )) ≥ wℓ (T ). (13) i  ℓ∈N  ℓ T ⊆ALGℓ (v) ∀i : T ∩xi =∅  Furthermore, note first that pv is a fixed pricing scheme, meaning that the price of an outcome does not change unless it becomes infeasible. Therefore, for every allocation y ∈ Fx , we have X X pi (yi | x) pi (yi | x[i−1] ) = i  i  =  XX i  =  j∈yi  XX i  =  pv ({j})  pv ({j})  ℓ j∈ALGℓ (v)∩yi  XX ℓ  X  i  X  j∈ALGℓ (v)∩yi  24  X  T ∋j T ⊆ALGℓ (v)  wℓ (T ).  (14)  For condition (a), by Equation (14), X X pvi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ i  ℓ  =  X  wℓ (T )  T ⊆ALGℓ (v) ∃i : T ∩xi 6=∅  X  X  wℓ (T ) −  ℓ T ⊆ALGℓ (v)  X ℓ  X  T ⊆ALGℓ (v) ∀i : T ∩xi =∅   wℓ (T )  ≥ (v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx ))), where the first inequality follows by changing the order of summation over j and T , and the second inequality is given in Equation 13. For condition (b), note that for all x and all x′ ∈ Fx , by Equation (14), after splitting the sum depending on whether the respective set T intersects with any of the bundles in x or not X XX X X X XX X wℓ (T ). wℓ (T ) + pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) = i  ℓ  i  j∈ALGℓ (v)∩x′i  T ∋j T ⊆ALG S ℓ (v) T ∩( i′ xi′ )=∅  i  ℓ  j∈ALGℓ (v)∩x′i  T ∋j T ⊆ALG S ℓ (v) T ∩( i′ xi′ )6=∅  Observe that in the first sum for a fixed set T , the term wℓ (T ) occurs at most |T | times. In the second sum, it can even occur only |T | − 1 times because the intersection of x and x′ is empty but x intersects with T . By applying that |T | ≤ k whenever wℓ (T ) > 0, this gives us X X X X X (|T | − 1)wℓ (T ) |T |wℓ (T ) + pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≤ i  ℓ  ≤k  X ℓ  =  X ℓ  ℓ  T ⊆ALG S ℓ (v) T ∩( i′ xi′ )=∅  X  T ⊆ALG S ℓ (v) T ∩( i′ xi′ )6=∅  wℓ (T ) + (k − 1)  ℓ  T ⊆ALG S ℓ (v) T ∩( i′ xi′ )=∅  X  X  wℓ (T ) + (k − 1)  X  X  wℓ (T )  T ⊆ALG S ℓ (v) T ∩( i′ xi′ )6=∅  X  wℓ (T )  ℓ T ⊆ALGℓ (v)  T ⊆ALG S ℓ (v) T ∩( i′ xi′ )=∅  ≥ v(OPT(v, Fx )) + (k − 1)v(ALG(v)). Note that Theorem D.1 when specialized to XOS valuations shows the existence of weakly (1, 1, 0)-balanced prices, or equivalently, (1, 1)-balanced prices. Computational O(k) Result We now show how to obtain a polytime (4k − 2)-approximate price-based prophet inequality for MPH-k valuations. For this result we will assume access to the following kind of MPH-k oracle. Suppose that valuation function v is MPH-k, with supporting PH-k functions {vℓ }ℓ∈L . The query for v takes as input a set of items S, and returns a value oracle to access the PH-k function vℓ for which v(S) = vℓ (S). That is, for every T ⊆ M , we can query the value of vℓ (T ) in a second step. The following linear problem, known as the configuration LP for combinatorial auctions, computes a fractional allocation that maximizes the social welfare among all fractional allocations.  25  max  X  vi (S) · xi,S  i,S  s.t.  X  xi,S ≤ 1 for every i ∈ N  S  X  xi,S ≤ 1 for every j ∈ M  i,S:j∈S  xi,S ∈ [0, 1] for every i ∈ N, S ⊆ M We extend the definition of F to include all fractional allocations that fulfill the above P LP; Fx is extended to all fractional allocations that use at most a fractional equivalent of 1 − i,S:j∈S xi,S of every item j ∈ M . Our first observation will be that Theorem D.1 holds even for the fractional version of the MPH-k combinatorial auction problem. That is, if the set of feasible outcomes is extended to include all fractional allocations, then an appropriate extension of the prices described above remain weakly (1, 1, k − 1)-balanced. In particular, given a fixed valuation profile v, we define prices based on the optimal LP solution x∗ . For every agent i and every bundle S, let wi,S be the agent of S, which is P PH-k representation in the support that maximizes P P i’s∗valuation P vP = w (T ). Then, price item j as follows: p({j}) = x i (S) i,S i S i,S T :j∈T,T ⊆S wi,S (T ) = P ∗ T ⊆S x (w (S) − w (S \ {j})). This sum can be computed in polynomial time given oracle i,S i,S i S i,S ∗ access as described above because xi,S 6= 0 only for polynomially many S. Then, extend this pricing linearly to prices over sets of items, and to prices allocations by simple scaling, i.e., Pover fractional P for every x ∈ F and x′ ∈ Fx , we let p(x′i | x) = S x′i,S j∈S p({j}). It is well known that an optimal fractional solution to the configuration LP can be computed in polynomial time given access to demand queries (using demand queries to implement a separation oracle, as is standard). Therefore, for the space of fractional allocations, prices that are weakly (1, 1, k − 1)-balanced with respect to the optimal fractional solution can be computed in polynomial time, given access to demand and MPH-k oracles. We can therefore compute prices that give a (4k − 2)-approximation to the optimal fractional allocation, in a posted price mechanism, where agents are free to purchase any fractional allocation at the posted prices. This, however, seems unsatisfactory. After all, we do not wish to allow agents to purchase infeasible sets, and the analysis only applies if every agent can purchase a set in her demand correspondence. The following observation comes to our help: for every agent i, if all previous agents have selected integral outcomes from the posted price mechanism, then agent i has a utility-maximizing outcome in their demand correspondence that is integral. This is because any fractional allocation can be interpreted as a convex combination of integral allocations. Since our approximation guarantee holds regardless of the demanded set chosen by each agent, it will hold even if we restrict agents to only select integral outcomes in the posted price mechanism. This means that we only need to price integral allocations and the analysis follows. We conclude that the prices computed using the configuration LP, as described above, actually generate a (4k − 2) approximation for the (non-fractional) MPH-k combinatorial auction problem.  E  Proof of Theorem 1.3  In this appendix we prove our polytime price-based prophet inequalities for sparse linear packing programs. We consider programs with and without integrality constraints. That is, the possible outcomes for agent i are either [0, 1] (fractional solutions) or {0, 1} (integral solutions). We assume 26  that valuations are linear, i.e., vi (xi ) = vi · xi . In both cases, the feasibility constraints F are given such that x ∈ F if and only if A · x ≤ c. Without loss of by a constraint matrix A ∈ Rm×n ≥0 generality, let cj = 1 for all j ∈ [m]. We assume that aj,i ≤ 12 for all i, j and that the column sparsity is bounded by d, meaning that for each i there are at most d choices of j such that aj,i > 0. such that Theorem E.1. For d-sparse linear packing programs with constraint matrix A ∈ Rm×n ≥0 1 aj,i ≤ 2 for all i, j and unit capacities, there exist weakly (1, 0, d)- and (2, 0, d)-balanced prices, for fractional and integral solutions, respectively, with respect to arbitrary allocation algorithms ALG. The prices can be computed by running ALG once. We will define static prices pi (xi | y) P as follows. Let x∗ = ALG(v). For each constraint P j, we define a per-unit price ρj by setting ρj = i∈N :aj,i >0 vi x∗i . Now, we define pi (xi | y) = j aj,i xi ρj for every quantity xi that can feasibly be added to y. The claim will now follow by the two lemmas below. Lemma E.1. For F being all fractional solutions, the devised pricing scheme is weakly (1, 0, d)balanced with respect to ALG. Proof. Let Fx = {z | A(x + z) ≤ 1}. To verify Condition (a), we derive a lowerPbound on v(OPT(v, Fx )) as follows. Given x, let z be defined by setting zi = x∗i (1 − maxj:aj,i >0 i′ aj,i′ xi′ ). We have z ∈ Fx because for every constraint j we have X X X X X aj,i xi + aj,i zi ≤ aj,i xi + aj,i x∗i (1 − aj,i′ xi′ ) ≤ 1. i  i  i  i′  i  P Note that furthermore, by this definition, x∗i′ ( i aj,i xi ) ≥ x∗i′ − zi′ for all i′ and all j. Now, it follows that XX X pi (xi | x[i−1] ) = aj,i xi ρj i  i  j  =  XX  =  X  i  aj,i xi  X  vi′ x∗i′  i′ :aj,i′ >0  j  j  X  i′ :aj,i′ >0  X aj,i xi ) vi′ x∗i′ (  ≥  X  X  vi′ (x∗i′ − zi′ )  ≥  X  j  i  i′ :aj,i′ >0  vi′ (x∗i′ − zi′ )  i′  ≥ v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx )). For Condition (b), we simply observe that X XX pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) = aj,i x′i ρj i  i  =  j  X  ρj  j  j  ≤  X  X  ρj  j  27  aj,i x′i  =  X j  =  X  vi x∗i  i∈N :aj,i >0  X X i  ≤d  vi x∗i  j:aj,i >0  X  vi x∗i = d · v(ALG(v)).  i  Lemma E.2. For F being all integral solutions, the devised pricing scheme is weakly (2, 0, d)balanced with respect to ALG. P Proof. To define Fx , let c be the vector such that cj = 1 if i aj,i xi ≤ 21 and cj = 0 otherwise. That is, cj = 1 if and only if constraint j still has capacity at least 21 after adding x. Let Fx be the set of integral solutions y that fulfill Ay ≤ P c. with aj,i > 0 and let zi = 0 Let z be defined such that zi = x∗i if i′ aj,i′ xi′ ≤ 12 for all j P ∗ otherwise. By this definition, we have zi ≥ xi (1 − 2 maxj:aj,i >0 i′ aj,i′ xi′ ). For this reason, P x∗i′ ( i aj,i xi ) ≥ 12 (x∗i′ − zi′ ) for all i′ and all j. From here on, we can follow the exact same calculations as above. For Condition (a), we have X XX pi (xi | x[i−1] ) = aj,i xi ρj i  i  j  =  XX  =  X j  i′ :aj,i′ >0  ≥  X  X  i  j  ≥  X  aj,i xi  vi′ x∗i′  i′ :aj,i′ >0  j  X  i′ :aj,i′ >0  X aj,i xi ) vi′ x∗i′ ( i  1 vi′ (x∗i′ − zi′ ) 2  1X vi′ (x∗i′ − zi′ ) 2 ′ i   1 ≥ v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx )) . 2  For Condition (b), we observe that again X XX pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) = aj,i x′i ρj i  i  =  j  X  ρj  X j  =  X  ≤d  X  ρj  j  vi x∗i  i∈N :aj,i >0  X X i  aj,i x′i ≤  j  j  =  X  vi x∗i  j:aj,i >0  X  vi x∗i = d · v(ALG(v)).  i  Pricing Integral Problems based on Fractional Solutions The way we described the pricing schemes above was to use an offline allocation algorithm ALG for the respective problem. This 28  algorithm has to solve an NP-hard problem and as we show any approximation guarantee is preserved in the process. However, it is also possible to use the respective optimal fractional solution instead of ALG. The pricing schemes defined this way then achieve the described approximation guarantees with respect to the fractional optimum. To show this result, we have to slightly extend our framework and allow Fx to contain distributions over outcome profiles that are exchange compatible. Specifically, for the integral part of Theorem E.1 we would define Fx as the Pset of distributions 1 such that the expected consumption in the jth constraint is at most 1 if i aj,i xi ≤ 2 and 0 otherwise. Note that this extends the definition of Fx in the proof of Lemma E.2 to distributions. Following the steps above, z is now based on the optimal fractional solution x∗ . We P randomized 1 ∗ let zi = 1 with probability xi if i′ aj,i′ xi′ ≤ 2 for all j with aj,i > 0 and let zi = 0 otherwise. In the remainder, zi′ is replaced by its expectation.  F  Proof of Theorem 1.4  We consider a matroid feasibility constraint M = (E, I), where E is a ground set of elements and I ⊆ 2E is a family of feasible subsets. Set E is partitioned into subsets E1 , . . . , En , corresponding to agents, and for each i, the outcome space Xi contains all subsets of Ei . One can think of Ei as S the set of elements from which agent i can choose. An allocation9 x is feasible if and only if Given a valuation profile i xi ∈ I; that is, if the chosen elements form an independent set. v, let OPT(v) ∈ I denote a social-welfare maximizing allocation. Furthermore, given S ∈ I, let OPT(v | S) denote the set T ∈ I maximizing v(T ) such that S ∩ T = ∅ and S ∪ T ∈ I. Theorem F.1 asserts the existence of balanced prices for matroid settings with additive, submodular, and XOS valuations. Theorem F.1. There exist prices for multi-dimensional matroid settings in which agents have additive, submodular, or XOS valuations that are (1, 1)-balanced with respect to OPT. As a special case, we obtain (1, 1)-balanced prices for the single-dimensional matroid setting of [33], where each agent controls exactly one element of the ground set. We prove the P theorem for additive valuations. That is, there are non-negative numbers vi,j such that vi (xi ) = j∈xi vi,j . The proof for submodular and XOS Valuations then follows directly from Theorem C.1 (composition theorem: closure under maximum). Additive Valuations Given S ∈ I, i ∈ N , and a valuation profile v, define ( S S S v(OPT(v | j yj )) − v(OPT(v | ( j yj ∪ xi ))) , if ( j yj ∪ xi ) ∈ I v pi (xi | y) = ∞ , otherwise.  (15)  The following lemma shows that the prices in Equation 15 are monotonically increasing. We then prove in Theorem F.2 that these prices are (1, 1)-balanced. Lemma F.1. Consider the pricing rule pv . For an arbitrary profile v, feasible outcome profiles y, y′ ∈ F such that yj ⊆ yj′ for all j, agent i, and allocation xi , pvi (xi | y) ≤ pvi (xi | y′ ). 9  Kleinberg and Weinberg [33] also provide bounds for a multi-dimensional matroid setting. Their result, which has implications for revenue and welfare, applies when buyers have unit-demand preferences with independent values across elements. Our approach is different, and provides a welfare bound for a broader class of valuations.  29  Proof. Let S = Otherwise,  S  j  yj , T =  S  j  yj′ . If S ∪xi 6∈ I, then T ∪xi 6∈ I, and so pvi (xi | y) = pvi (xi | y′ ) = ∞.  pvi (xi | y) = v(OPT(v | S)) − v(OPT(v | (S ∪ xi ))) ≤ v(OPT(v | T )) − v(OPT(v | (T ∪ xi ))) ≤ pvi (xi | y′ ), where the equation follows by the definition of pvi (xi | y), and the inequality follows from the submodularity of the function f (U ) = v(OPT(v | U )) (cf. [32, Lemma 3]). Theorem F.2. The pricing rule defined in Equation 15 is (1, 1)-balanced with respect to the optimal allocation rule OPT. S S Proof.SWe define F as the set of all outcome profiles y ∈ E × . . . × E such ( y ) ∩ ( x 1 n i i S Si xi ) = ∅ and ( i yi ) ∪ ( i xi ) ∈ I. In other words, we consider the matroid contracted by the set i xi . We first show that Condition (a) holds for α = 1. For every agent i ∈ N and every x ∈ F by a telescoping-sum argument,   i i−1 [ X X [ v(OPT(v | xj )) pvi (xi | x[i−1] ) = xj )) − v(OPT(v | i  i  j=1  j=1  = v(OPT(v)) − v(OPT(v |  [  xj ))  j  = v(OPT(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx )). We next showSthat the second condition holds for β = 1. Consider some arbitrary x ∈ F, x′ ∈ Fx . Let S = i xi . Note that OPT(v | S) is precisely a maximum-weight basis of the matroid contracted with S. By the generalized Rota exchange theorem [36, Lemma 2.7], for each i there exists some set Ri ⊆ OPT(v | S) (which may not be contained in Ei ) such that each element of OPT(v | S) appears in exactly one Ri , and (OPT(v | S) \ Ri ) ∪ x′i is an independent set in the matroid after contracting S. We therefore have X X pvi (x′i | x) pvi (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≤ i∈N  i∈N  =  X  v(OPT(v | S)) − v(OPT(v | S ∪  i∈N  ≤  X  i∈N  =  X    x′i ))   v(OPT(v | S)) − v(OPT(v | S) \ Ri )  v(Ri )  i∈N  = v(OPT(v | x)), where the first inequality follows from the monotonicity of the prices (Lemma F.1), and the second inequality follows by observing that (OPT(v) \ Ri ) ∪ x′i is feasible in the contracted matroid (see the Rota exchange argument above), and thus v(OPT(v) \ Ri ) ≤ v(OPT(v | S ∪ x′i )). The final equality follows by additivity. We conclude that the suggested prices are (1, 1)-balanced.  30  Computational Aspects Theorem F.1 establishes the existence of a price-based 2-approximate prophet inequality for additive, submodular, and XOS preferences. For additive valuations the construction is polytime, as the greedy algorithm is optimal. For submodular and XOS valuations computing the optimal allocation is NP-hard. We claim that the result for submodular valuations can turn into a computational one, by basing the prices on an approximately optimal allocation. Namely, let GRD be the algorithm that allocates items greedily by value, always choosing the item that locally increases v(x) the most subject to the matroid constraint. We show that GRD is consistent (see Definition C.1) in this setting. Lemma F.2. The greedy algorithm GRD is consistent for XOS valuations over matroid feasibility constraints. Proof. Fix an XOS valuation profile v, and let ṽ be a supporting valuation profile for the allocation GRD(v). Note that as the supporting valuation profile is additive, GRD returns the optimal solution. As GRD(v) is another feasible solution, we have ṽ(GRD(ṽ)) ≥ ṽ(GRD(v)). Theorem C.1 (closure under maximum) now implies that the prices given in (15) for an additive valuation supporting GRD(v) are (1, 1)-balanced with respect to the greedy allocation. We can compute these prices in polynomial time by simulating GRD and then determining the supporting additive valuation. Since GRD is a 2-approximation to OPT for submodular valuations, Theorem 3.1 then implies that we can compute prices that yield a 4-approximation to the optimal expected welfare, less an additive sampling error.  G  A Smooth Mechanism Without Good Posted Prices  In this appendix we show that there are allocation problems that admit constant-factor smooth mechanisms, but for which no posted-price mechanism can guarantee more than a linear fraction of the optimal social welfare. Proposition G.1. There exists a downward-closed welfare maximization problem that admits a (1, 0)-smooth mechanism, but for which any posted price mechanism has approximation factor Ω(n). Proof. Let k be a positive integer to be fixed later. In the allocation problem we consider, Xi = [k]n ∪ {∅} for each i ∈ [n]. That is, each agent is allocated either ∅ or a sequence of n integers between 1 and k. For xi ∈ Xi \{∅}, write xi = (xi1 , . . . , xin ), where each xij ∈ [k]. The set of feasible allocations is F = {x : (xi 6= xj ) =⇒ ((xi = ∅) ∨ (xj = ∅))}. That is, all agents who receive a non-empty allocation must receive the same allocation. Agents have the following valuations. Each agent i has some desired value zi ∈ [k]. The value of an allocation is vi (xi ) = 1 if xii = zi , and vi (xi ) = 0 otherwise. Let Di be the distribution over such valuations in which zi is chosen uniformly from [k]. For this feasibility constraint and space of valuations, consider the mechanism that returns the welfare-optimal allocation and charges payments of 0. This mechanism simultaneously satisfies all desires by allocating (z1 , . . . , zn ) to every agent, where zi is the desired value reported by agent i. This mechanism is (1, 0)-smooth, with truth-telling being the required deviation. On the other hand, consider any posted-price mechanism. Whichever is the first agent to obtain a non-∅ outcome, say agent i purchasing allocation xi , each subsequent agent j can obtain positive value only if zj = xij , which occurs with probability 1/k. We therefore have that the expected welfare of any posted price mechanism is at most 1 + n−1 k . Taking k = n and noting that the 31  optimal welfare is n, we conclude that no posted price mechanism can obtain more than an Ω(n) approximation to the optimal welfare.  H  Proof of Theorem 5.2  To prove Theorem 5.2, we will first introduce the notion of weak outcome smoothness, then show how to construct the prices, and finally establish the two conditions necessary for (α, β)balancedness separately.  H.1  Weak Outcome Smoothness and Its Properties  We begin by defining a more general notion of outcome smoothness, corresponding to the notion of weak smoothness. Definition H.1. A mechanism is weakly (λ, µ1 , µ2 )-outcome smooth for λ, µ1 , µ2 ≥ 0 if for all valuation profiles v ∈ V there exists an outcome x′ (v) ∈ F such that for all bid profiles b ∈ B,  X X ′ ′ , b ) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)) − µ · P (b Pi (b) − µ2 · b(f (b)). vi (xi ) − ′ inf i -i 1 i ′ ′ bi : fi (bi ,b-i )xi  i∈N  i∈N  The following observation will facilitate our discussion in what follows. Under a mild scale invariance assumption, we can without loss of generality consider (λ, 0, µ)-outcome smooth mechanisms. Proposition H.1. Consider a (λ, µ1 , µ2 )-outcome smooth mechanism with allocation rule f and payment rule P such that for every δ > 0, we have x′ (v/δ) = x′ (v). For every player i ∈ N and all bid profiles b ∈ B define   b(f (b)) , 1 · Pi (b). P̃i (b) = min P i∈N Pi (b)  Then the mechanism with allocation rule f and payment rule P̃ is (λ, 0, µ1 + µ2 )-outcome smooth.  Proof. Given a valuation profile v, we claim that the re-defined mechanism is (λ, 0, µ1 +µ2 )-outcome smooth with respect to the same outcome x′ (v). n o Fix a bid profile b ∈ B and let δ = min Pb(f (b)) , 1 . Note that δ ≤ 1. Using outi∈N Pi (b) come smoothness of the original mechanism for valuation profile v/δ and corresponding outcome x′ (v/δ) = x′ (v) we obtain  X X 1 1 ′ ′ P (b , b ) ≥ λ · · vi (xi ) − ′ inf · v(OPT(v)) − µ · Pi (b) − µ2 · b(f (b)). i -i 1 i δ δ bi : f (b′i ,b-i )x′i i∈N  i∈N  Multiplying by δ, we have X inf vi (x′i ) − δ · ′ ′   X ′ P (b , b ) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)) − µ · δ · Pi (b) − µ2 · δ · b(f (b)). i -i 1 i ′  bi : f (bi ,b-i )xi  i∈N  i∈N  P From the definition of P̃ and δ we know that δ · Pi (b′i , b-i ) = P̃i (b′i , b-i ), δ · i∈N Pi (b) ≤ b(f (b)), and δ · b(f (b)) ≤ b(f (b)). This yields  X ′ ′ P̃i (bi , b-i ) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)) − (µ1 + µ2 ) · b(f (b)). vi (xi ) − ′ inf ′ i∈N  bi : f (bi ,b-i )xi ′  32  Another observation is that the function x′ of a weakly (λ, µ1 , µ2 )-outcome smooth mechanism is indeed a λ-approximation of social welfare, which also implies that its range λ-approximates the space of all outcome profiles. Lemma H.1. Suppose Y is the range of x′ . Then X X max vi (yi ) ≥ vi (x′ (v)) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)). y∈Y  i∈N  i∈N  Proof. We use outcome smoothness setting the valuation profile to v and the bid profile to 0. Then for y = x′ (v),  X ′ Pi (bi , 0) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)) . vi (yi ) − ′ inf ′ bi : f (bi ,0)yi  i∈N  As we assume that payments are never negative, this implies X vi (yi ) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)) . i∈N  H.2  Constructing the Prices  We first have to define pi (xi | z) for all i ∈ N , z ∈ F, xi ∈ Xi . To this end, we create two additional copies of each agent, implying that we have 3n agents overall. The different incarnations of agent i, denoted by i, i + n, and i + 2n correspond to different roles when setting the prices. They particularly ensure that agent i competes against itself. In more detail, for i ∈ [n], the roles will be as follows in defining pi (xi | z). Agent i is used to represent vi , agent i + n is used to represent zi and agent i + 2n tries to buy outcome xi in the outcome-smooth mechanism. We will frequently map outcome profiles z ∈ F from the original space of n agents to the agents n + 1, . . . , 2n. This operation we denote by z. That is z i = zi−n for i ∈ {n + 1, . . . , 2n} and z i = ∅ otherwise. We will adopt the more general notion of weak outcome smoothness, from Appendix H.1. We assume that outcome smoothness holds in every subinstance F ′ /z of the extended outcome space F ′ . To avoid any possible confusion of the numbering of the agents, we denote by Gz , the outcome space F ′ /z padded with ∅ wherever zi 6= ∅. That is, Gz is isomorphic to F ′ /z but uses the exact same indices as F ′ . We will denote the allocation rule of the outcome smooth mechanism in this space by f ( · | z) and its payment rule by P ( · | z). Outcome smoothness now ensures that for all z ∈ F ′ and valuation profiles v ∈ V there exists an outcome x′ (v | z) ∈ Gz such that for all bid profiles b ∈ B, 3n  X i=1  vi (x′i )  −  inf  b′i : fi ((b′i ,b-i )|z)x′i  Pi ((b′i , b-i )   | z) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v, Gz )) − µ · b(f (b | z)).  Given these definitions, we define prices based on the payments in the outcome-smooth mechanism by  Pi (b′i+2n , v−(i+2n) ) z . pvi (xi | z) = inf ′ ′ bi+2n : fi ((bi+2n ,v−(i+2n) )|z)xi  The meaning is as follows: Agents n + 1, . . . , 2n incorporate the allocation z and agents 1, . . . , n represent the part of v(OPT(v)) that is not yet taken away by z. Now, another copy of agent i is added to the system and competes with agents 1, . . . , n for the outcome.  33  H.3  Showing Balancedness  Let ALG denote the algorithm that returns OPT(v) with probability λ. We will show that the constructed prices are (λ, µ/λ)-balanced with respect to ALG if they are monotone. To this end, we define Fx as the range of x′ ( · | z) on agents 2n + 1, . . . , 3n. Formally, Fx = {y ∈ X1 × . . . × Xn | ∃v : x′ (v | x) = y}, where y is the outcome profile on 3n agents that sets y2n+i = yi for i ∈ [n] and yi = ∅ for i ≤ 2n. Lemma H.2. Suppose (f ( · | z), P ( · | z)) is (λ, 0, µ)-outcome smooth on every Gz such that x′ (v | z) = x′ (ǫ · v | z) for every ǫ > 0, pvi is monotonically increasing, then pvi satisfies Condition (b) of (α, β)-balancedness with β = µ/λ, for the choice of (Fx )x∈X described above. Proof. Consider x and y ∈ Fx . By definition of Fx , we can find some v′ such that x′ (v′ ) = y. Recall that, in allocation y, agents 1 through 2n obtain the empty allocation, and agents 2n + 1 through 3n receive allocation profile y. By assumption for all ǫ > 0 we have x′ (ǫ · v′ ) = y . Outcome smoothness for problem subinstances, with valuation profile ǫ · v′ and bid profile v implies ! 3n X Pi ((b′i , v-i ) | x) ≥ λ · ǫ · v′ (OPT(ǫ · v′ , Gx )) − µ · v(f (v | x)) . ǫ · vi′ (y i ) − inf b′i : fi ((b′i ,v-i )|x)y i  i=1  As payments Pi are never negative, this implies ! 3n 3n X X ′ ′ ′ ǫ·vi′ (y i ) . − inf Pi ((bi , v-i ) | x) ≥ λ·ǫ·v (OPT(ǫ·v , Gx ))−µ·v(f (v | x))−  i=2n+1  b′i : fi ((b′i ,v-i )|x)y i  i=1  This implies n X i=1  pvi (yi | x) =  3n X  i=2n+1  b′i :  inf  fi ((b′i ,v-i )|x)y i  ≤ µ · v(f (v | x)) − ǫ  Pi ((b′i , v-i ) | x)  3n X  vi′ (y i ) −  ′  ′  !  λ · v (OPT(ǫ · v , Gx )) .  i=1  As this holds for all ǫ > 0, we also have n X  pvi (yi | x) ≤ µ · v(f (v | x)) ≤ µ · v(OPT((v1 , . . . , vn , 0, . . . , 0), Gx )) ≤  i=1  µ v(OPT(v, Fx )) , λ  where the last step uses Lemma H.1. Lemma H.3. Suppose (f ( · | z), P ( · | z)) is (λ, 0, µ)-outcome smooth on every Gz such that x′ (v | z) = x′ (ǫ · v | z) for every ǫ > 0, f is the declared welfare maximizer, and P is the first-price payment rule. Then pvi satisfies Condition (a) of (α, β)-balancedness with α = λ, for the choice of ALG and (Fx )x∈X described above. Proof. Consider an arbitrary player i and arbitrary outcomes x ∈ F. To bound pi (xi | x[i−1] ), we consider player 2n + i in the outcome-smooth mechanism. Let b2n+i be a bid such that f2n+i (b2n+i , v−(2n+i) | x[n+i−1] )  xi . We show that for any such b2n+i , we have Pi (b2n+i , v−(2n+i) | x[n+i−1] ) ≥ v(OPT(v, Gx[n+i−1] )) − v(OPT(v, Gx[n+i] )) . 34  As this holds for all b2n+i , this gives also a lower bound on the infimum. In the following, we keep the allocation x[n+i−1] = (∅, . . . , ∅, x1 , . . . , xi−1 , ∅, . . . ∅) fixed and com(i−1)  pare the two possible feasible solutions a := f (b2n+i , v−(2n+i) | x[n+i−1] ) and q := OPT(v, Gx[n+i−1] ). As a maximizes (b2n+i , v−(2n+i) ) when keeping x[n+i−1] fixed, we have b2n+i (a2n+i ) +  3n X  vj (aj ) ≥ b2n+i (q2n+i ) +  j=1 j6=2n+i  3n X  vj (qj ) .  j=1 j6=n+i  As vj = 0 for all j > n, this is equivalent to b2n+i (a2n+i ) ≥ b2n+i (q2n+i ) +  n X  vj (qj ) −  j=1  n X  vj (aj ) .  j=1  Now, observe that if we replace a2n+i by xi in allocation a, then the modified vector a′ is still of players 2n + i and n + i, this also feasible in the space that keeps x[n+i−1] fixed. By symmetry P means that (a1 , . . . , an , ∅, . . . , ∅) ∈ Gx[n+i] . This implies nj=1 vj (aj ) ≤ v(OPT(v, Gx[n+i] )). Overall, we get pvi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ v(OPT(v, Gx[n+i−1] )) − v(OPT(v, Gx[n+i] )) .  Summing up the prices for all players i and using a telescoping sum, this implies a lower bound of n X  pvi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ v(OPT(v, Gx∅ )) − v(OPT(v, Gx[n] ))  i=1  = v(OPT(v)) − v(OPT(v, Gx )) .  Finally, we have v(OPT(v)) = λ1 v(ALG(v)) and v(OPT(v, Gx )) ≤ λ1 v(OPT(v, Fx )) by Lemma H.1. So, in combination n X  pvi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥  i=1  I  1 (v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx ))) . λ  Proofs of Theorem 5.3 and Theorem 5.4  In this appendix we describe how to obtain balanced prices from smooth mechanisms in binary, single-parameter settings. In these settings players can either “win” or ”lose”, and have a value vi ∈ R≥0 for winning. Feasible solutions x ∈ F ⊆ {0, 1}n are subsets of players that can win simultaneously. For ease of notation we identify the vectors x ∈ F with the subset of players i ∈ N for which xi = 1. This lets us write i ∈ x if xi = 1 and i 6∈ x otherwise.  I.1  Permeable Allocation Rules  We begin by defining the permeability of an allocation rule f , and by showing that (λ, µ)-smoothness implies a bound on permeability. An algorithm f for a binary, single-parameter problem is monotone if for every player i ∈ N , any two bids b′i ≥ bi , and any bid vector b-i , fi (bi , b-i ) = 1  ⇒  fi (b′i , b-i ) = 1.  For monotone allocation rules the critical value for player i is the smallest bid that ensures that player i wins against bids b-i . That is, τif (b-i ) = inf{bi | fi (bi , b-i ) = 1}. 35  Definition I.1 (Dütting and Kesselheim [19], see also [38, 45, 30]). A monotone allocation algorithm f for a binary, single parameter problem F is γ-permeable if γ ≥ 1 is the smallest multiplier such that for all bid vectors b and all feasible allocations x ∈ F it holds that X τif (b-i ) ≤ γ · b(f (b)). (16) i∈N : xi =1  Theorem I.1 (Dütting and Kesselheim [19]). Suppose that the first-price mechanism M based on allocation f is (λ, µ)-smooth, then f is γ-permeable with γ ≤ (µ + 1)/λ. P Proof. Given a bid vector b, we have to show that i: xi =1 τif (b-i ) ≤ µ+1 λ · b(f (b)). To this end, consider fixed x ∈ F and b. Let ǫ > 0 and let v be defined by vi = max{bi , τif (b-i )}. By smoothness of M, there are b′i such that X X ui (b′i , b-i ) ≥ λ · v(OPT(v)) − µ · Pi (b). i∈N  i∈N  τif (b-i )  ui (b′i , b-i )  Observe that if i 6∈ f (b), then ≤ 0 because > bi and this means that i 6∈ f (b′i , b-i ) results in positive utility. Furthermore, for i ∈ f (b), we have unless b′i > vi . None of these choices P ui (b′i , b-i ) ≤ vi = bi . Therefore i∈N ui (b′i , b-i ) ≤ b(f (b)). Next, we can lower-bound v(OPT(v)) by the value of the feasible solution x, which gives us P P P v(OPT(v)) ≥ i: xi =1 vi ≥ i: xi =1 (τif (b-i ) −Pǫ) ≥ i: xi =1 τif (b-i ) − nǫ. Finally, as M is first-price, we also have i∈N Pi (b) = b(f (b)). In combination this yields ! X f τi (b-i ) − nǫ − µ · b(f (b)), b(f (b)) ≥ λ · i: xi =1  which implies  X  i: xi =1  τif (b-i ) ≤  µ+1 · b(f (b)) + nǫ. λ  As this holds for all ǫ > 0, this shows the claim. Applying Theorem I.1 to each problem in a collection of problems Π, we see that if a mechanism M is (λ, µ)-smooth for Π then it is (µ + 1)/λ-permeable for Π. Remark I.1. While the definition of permeability requires γ to be the smallest multiplier for which inequality (16) is satisfied, all our results can be derived from any upper bound on this multiplier at the cost of slightly worse guarantees.  I.2  Proof of Theorem 5.3  In this subsection we prove Theorem 5.3, which shows that (λ, µ)-smoothness of the greedy allocation rule for a subinstance-closed closed collection of binary, single-parameter problems Π implies the existence of a weakly ((µ + 1)/λ, 0, (µ + 1)/λ)-balanced pricing rule. By Theorem I.1, in order to show this result, it suffices to show the following theorem. Theorem I.2. Let ALG be any allocation rule. Suppose that the greedy allocation rule GRD is γ-permeable for a subinstance-closed collection of binary, single-parameter feasibility problems Π. Then for every v ∈ V there exists a pricing rule that is weakly (γ, 0, γ)-balanced with respect to ALG and the canonical exchange-feasible sets (Fx )x∈X . We first describe the pricing rule that achieves this result. Afterwards, we show that this pricing rule has the desirable properties. 36  I.2.1  Construction of the Prices  We set the price pi (zi | x) for player i ∈ N and outcome zi ∈ {0, 1} for arbitrary but fixed valuations v and allocation x ∈ F through Algorithm 1. For this let GRD(v | x) ∈ Fx denote the allocation that results if we go through the players in order of non-increasing value but only add a player if he is not in x and feasible together with x and the previously accepted players. We generally set pi (0 | x) = 0. That is, the price for losing is always zero. To determine the price pi (1 | x) for winning we first compute a sequence of reference allocations r(0) ≥ · · · ≥ r(n) and a sequence of reference valuations v(0) ≥ · · · ≥ v(n) . We then set pi (1 | x) = vi if i ∈ r(n) , i.e., the price of player i is that player’s valuation if he is part of the final reference allocation. Otherwise, (n) we set pi (1 | x) = inf{vi′ : i ∈ GRD(vi′ , v−i | x)}, i.e., we set the price to the player’s critical value against the players in the final reference allocation. While we need to define prices pi (zi | x) for any possible allocation x ∈ F, the prices that player i will actually see are the ones where x is set to the purchase decisions of the players j = 1, . . . , i − 1 that precede player i in the ordering. Note that in this case xi = xi+1 = xn = 0 and therefore (i−1) r(n) = · · · = r(i−1) and v(n) = · · · = v(i−1) . We use the shorthand τiGRD (v−i | x[i−1] ) := inf{vi′ : (i−1)  i ∈ GRD(vi′ , v−i  | x[i−1] )}.  Algorithm 1: Pricing Rule Derived from GRD (Parametrized by ALG) Input: zi ∈ {0, 1}, v, x ∈ F Output: pi (zi | x) if zi = 0 then // In this case the price is simply zero pi (zi | x) = 0 else // First determine reference allocation and valuations (0)  (0)  r(0) ← ALG(v), vk ← vk if k ∈ r(0) and vk ← 0 otherwise for j ← 1 to n do (j) (j−1) (j) = vk if k ∈ r(j) and vk ← 0 else r(j) ← GRD(v(j−1) | x[j] ), vk ← vk // Now determine the price if i ∈ r(n) then // If player i is part of the reference allocation he pays his valuation pi (zi | x) ← vi else // Otherwise he pays the critical value against the players in the reference allocation (n)  pi (zi | x) ← inf{vi′ : i ∈ GRD(vi′ , v−i | x)} return pi (zi | x)  I.2.2  Proof of Theorem I.2  We prove the theorem in two steps. We first use permeability of the greedy allocation rule to establish Condition (a) (in Lemma I.1). We then show Condition (b). For this we first prove a novel combinatorial implication of permeability of the greedy allocation rule (in Lemma I.2) by considering valuations that are either zero or one. We then use this property in a careful layering 37  argument to establish Condition (b) (in Lemma I.3). Lemma I.1. Let ALG be any allocation rule. Suppose that the greedy allocation rule GRD is γpermeable for a subinstance-closed collection of binary, single-parameter problems Π. Then the pricing rule described in Algorithm 1 fulfills Condition (a) of Definition 3.2 with α = γ with respect to allocation rule ALG and the canonical exchange-feasible sets (Fx )x∈X . Proof. Let x ∈ F. We will show that pi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ γ1 · (v(r(i−1) ) − v(r(i) )). By a telescoping-sum argument, this then implies  X X1  (i−1) (i) pi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ · v(r ) − v(r ) γ i∈N i∈N     1 1 (0) (n) = · v(r ) − v(r ) ≥ · v(ALG(v)) − v(OPT(v, Fx )) , γ γ where the last step follows from the fact that r(0) = ALG(v) and r(n) ∈ Fx . So, it only remains to show pi (xi | x[i−1] ) ≥ γ1 · (v(r(i−1) ) − v(r(i) )). Observe that if xi = 0, we have r(i−1) = r(i) and this claim follows trivially. So, consider an arbitrary player i for which xi = 1. If i ∈ r(i−1) then r(i−1) \ r(i) = {i}. So pi (1 | x[i−1] ) = vi , while v(r(i−1) ) − v(r(i) ) = vi and the claim is true. Otherwise, i 6∈ r(i−1) , and we will first use smoothness with respect to subinstances to bound (i−1) the size of the set r(i−1) \ r(i) . For a fixed ǫ > 0, define v′ by setting vi′ = τiGRD (v−i | x[i−1] ) + ǫ, vj′ = vj for j ∈ r(i−1) \ r(i) , and vj′ = 0 for all other j. Now player i ∈ GRD(v′ | x[i−1] ∪r(i) ) by definition of v′ and vi′ in particular, while for each player j ∈ r(i−1) \ r(i) we have j 6∈ GRD(v′ | x[i−1] ∪ r(i) ) because it cannot be added to x[i−1] ∪ r(i) ∪ {i} = x[i] ∪ r(i) by definition of r(i) . Hence, the greedy critical values of each player j ∈ r(i−1) \ r(i) must be at least τjGRD (v′ | x[i−1] ∪ r(i) ) ≥ vi′ . Since both player i and the set of players r(i−1) \ r(i) are feasible extensions to x[i−1] ∪ r(i) , we can use γ-permeability of the greedy allocation rule in the subinstance in which we hold x[i−1] ∪ r(i) fixed to obtain,   X |r(i−1) \ r(i) | · vi′ ≤ τjGRD (v′ | x[i−1] ∪ r(i) ) ≤ γ · v′ GRD(v′ | x[i−1] ∪ r(i) ) = γ · vi′ . j∈r(i−1) \r(i)  Cancelling vi′ shows that |r(i−1) \ r(i) | ≤ γ. To show the claim it now suffices to observe that the greedy critical value of player i in the subinstance where we hold x[i−1] fixed under the original valuations is the highest value of a player j ∈ r(i−1) \ r(i) . Namely, pi (1 | x[i−1] ) =  max  j∈r(i−1) \r(i)  vj ≥  1 · γ  X  vj = v(r(i−1) ) − v(r(i) ),  j∈r(i−1) \r(i)  which concludes the proof. Lemma I.2. Suppose that the greedy allocation rule GRD is γ-permeable for a subinstance-closed collection of problems of binary, single-parameter problems Π. Consider any problem π ∈ Π with feasibility structure F. Furthermore, let B0 ⊇ B1 ⊇ . . . ⊇ Bn and A0 ⊆ A1 ⊆ . . . ⊆ An with Bt ∪ At ∈ F for all t. Consider a set C that fulfills C ∪ An ∈ F and for every i ∈ C there is a t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n} with i ∈ Bt or {i} ∪ Bt ∪ At 6∈ F. Then we have |C| ≤ γ · |B0 |. 38  Proof. Set Bn+1 = ∅ and define Cn+1 = C. Furthermore, define Ct for 0 ≤ t ≤ n recursively as a maximal subset of the players in Ct+1 \ Bt such that Ct ∪ At ∪ Bt ∈ F. We will show that for all t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}, |Ct+1 \ Ct | ≤ γ · |Bt \ Bt+1 |. Consider some fixed t and define D := Bt ∩ Ct+1 . Now a crucial observation is that the set Ct+1 \(Ct ∪D) is feasible holding E := Bt+1 ∪At ∪Ct ∪D fixed. This is because  Ct+1 \ (Ct ∪ D) ∪ Bt+1 ∪ At ∪ Ct ∪ D = Bt+1 ∪ At ∪ Ct+1 ⊆ Bt+1 ∪ At+1 ∪ Ct+1 ∈ F.  Further note that by the way we have chosen Ct we know that Bt \ (Bt+1 ∪ D) is another feasible extension to E because (Bt \ (Bt+1 ∪ D)) ∪ Bt+1 ∪ At ∪ Ct ∪ D = Bt ∪ At ∪ Ct ∈ F. To apply γ-permeability in the subinstance where we hold E fixed, define a valuation profile v̄ by setting v̄i = 1 for i ∈ Bt \ (Bt+1 ∪ D) and 0 otherwise. Now, for every i ∈ Ct+1 \ (Ct ∪ D), we have τiGRD (v̄ | E) = 1. This is due to the maximality of Ct : If for some i ∈ Ct+1 \ (Ct ∪ D) this value is 0, then also {i} ∪ (Bt \ (Bt+1 ∪ D)) ∪ Bt+1 ∪ At ∪ Ct ∪ D ∈ F. So by permeability, X |Ct+1 \ (Ct ∪ D)| = τiGRD (v̄ | E) ≤ γ · v̄(GRD(v̄ | E)) = γ · |Bt \ (Bt+1 ∪ D)|, i∈Ct+1 \(Ct ∪D)  and therefore |Ct+1 \ Ct | = |D| + |Ct+1 \ (Ct ∪ D)| ≤ |D| + γ · |Bt \ (Bt+1 ∪ D)| ≤ γ · |Bt \ Bt+1 |. We now obtain the desired bound on the size of the set C by summing the previous inequality over all t and using that it becomes a telescoping sum |C| + |C0 | = |Cn+1 | + |C0 | =  n X  |Ct+1 \ Ct | ≤ γ ·  n X  |Bt \ Bt+1 | = γ · (|B0 | − |Bn+1 |) = γ · |B0 |.  t=0  t=0  It remains to show that all players in C will be covered (i.e., that C0 = ∅). This follows from the fact that for each player i ∈ C by the definition of C there exists a t such that i ∈ Bt or i does not fit into Bt ∪ At and, thus, in either case i 6∈ Ct . Lemma I.3. Let ALG be any allocation rule. Suppose that the greedy allocation rule GRD is γ-permeable for a subinstance-closed collection of binary, single-parameter problems Π. Then the pricing rule described in Algorithm 1 fulfills Condition (b) of Definition 3.2 with β1 = 0 and β2 = γ with respect to allocation rule ALG and the canonical exchange-feasible sets (Fx )x∈X .  39  v(5) v(4) v(3) v(2) v(1)  Figure 1: Our proof that the pricing rule derived from the greedy allocation rule satisfies Condition (b), relies on the fact that we can chop the valuation and price space into discrete layers, which reduces the problem to 0/1-valuations. Proof. Consider an arbitrary feasible x ∈ F and an arbitrary feasible extension x′ ∈ Fx . We want to show that X pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≤ γ · v(ALG(v)). i∈N  We will prove this claim through a layering argument; as depicted in Figure 1. To this end, let v(j) be the j-th highest value of v1 , . . . , vn ; furthermore v(n+1) = 0. For each j ∈ [n], let S j denote the set of players with value at least v(j) and let T j denote the set of players with x′i = 1 that see a price pi (1 | x[i−1] ) of at least v(j) . We now apply Lemma I.2 for each j ∈ [n] by setting At = x[t] , Bt = r(t) ∩S j , C = T j . Note that C ∪ An ∈ F and for every i ∈ C there is a t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n} such that i ∈ Bt or {i} ∪ Bt ∪ At 6∈ F. We obtain |T j | ≤ γ · |r(0) ∩ S j |. We conclude that X  pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) =  i∈N  = ≤  n XX  1i∈T j · (v(j) − v(j+1) )  i∈N j=1 n X j  |T | · (v(j) − v(j+1) )  j=1 n X  γ · |r(0) ∩ S j | · (v(j) − v(j+1) )  j=1  = γ · v(ALG(v)) , where the first equality holds by definition of the sets T j , the second equality is basic calculus, the inequality follows from Lemma I.2 as argued above, and the final equality holds by definition of r(0) = ALG(v) and the sets S j .  I.3  Proof of Theorem 5.4  In this subsection we prove Theorem 5.4, which claims that (λ, µ)-smoothness of the pay-yourbid mechanism based on the welfare-maximizing allocation rule for subinstance-closed collection of binary, single-parameter problems Π implies the existence of a weakly (1, (µ + 1)/λ)-balanced pricing rule. By Theorem I.1 it suffices to show the following theorem. Theorem I.3. Let ALG be any allocation rule. Suppose that the welfare-maximizing allocation rule OPT is γ-permeable for a subinstance-closed collection of binary, single-parameter feasibility 40  problems Π. Then there exists a pricing rule that is weakly (1, 0, γ 2 )-balanced with respect to ALG and the canonical exchange-feasible sets (Fx )x∈X . As in the case of greedy we first describe the construction of the prices, and then we show that these prices are balanced. I.3.1  Construction of the Prices  We define the price pi (zi | x) for player i ∈ N and outcome zi ∈ {0, 1} and arbitrary but fixed valuation profile v and allocation x ∈ F through Algorithm 2. For this section, define OPT(v | x) as the allocation that results by padding the welfare-maximizing allocation for valuation profile v over F/x with empty allocations. As in the the case of the greedy allocation rule, we again set pi (0 | x) = 0 and we compute pi (1 | x) via reference allocations and reference valuations. We again define the initial reference (0) allocation as r(0) = ALG(v) and the initial reference valuations by setting vj = vj for j ∈ r(0) and (0)  vj  = 0 otherwise. The subsequent reference allocations and valuations are defined recursively as (i)  r (i) = OPT(v (i−1) | x[i] ) and vj  (i−1)  = vj  (i)  = vj for j ∈ r(0) and vj  inf{vi′  r(n)  = 0 otherwise. We then set  (n) i ∈ OPT(vi′ , v-i | x)} (i−1) = v(r ) − v(r(i) ).  pi (1 | x) = vi if i ∈ and pi (1 | x) = | otherwise. Note that this definition immediately implies that pi (xi | x[i−1] ) By substituting all occurrences of n with i − 1 we obtain the formula for the price pi (1 | x[i−1] ). (i−1)  We use the shorthand τ OPT (v-i  (i−1)  | x[i−1] ) := inf{vi′ | i ∈ OPT(vi′ , v-i  ) | x[i−1] )}.  Algorithm 2: Pricing Rule Derived from OPT (Parametrized by ALG) Input: zi ∈ {0, 1}, v, x ∈ F Output: pi (zi | x) if zi = 0 then // In this case the price is simply zero pi (zi | x) = 0 else // First determine reference allocation and valuations (0)  (0)  r(0) ← ALG(v), vk ← vk if k ∈ r(0) and vk ← 0 otherwise for j ← 1 to n do (j) (j−1) (j) r(j) ← OPT(v(j−1) | x[j]), vk ← vk = vk if k ∈ r(j) and vk ← 0 else // Now determine the price if i ∈ r(n) then // If player i is part of the reference allocation he pays his valuation pi (zi | x) ← vi else // Otherwise he pays the critical value against the players in the reference allocation (n)  pi (zi | x) ← inf{vi′ : i ∈ OPT(vi′ , v−i | x)} return pi (zi | x)  41  I.3.2  Proof of Theorem I.3  We again proceed in two steps. We first show Condition (a) (in Lemma I.4 below). Afterwards we show that the permeability of OPT provides an upper bound on the permeability of GRD and that the critical prices with respect to OPT are not much higher than those with respect to GRD (in Lemmas I.5 and I.6). This allows us to bound Condition (b) using the same machinery that we used in the previous section (in Lemma I.7) Lemma I.4. Let ALG be any allocation rule. Suppose that the welfare-maximizing allocation rule OPT is γ-permeable for a subinstance-closed collection of problems of binary, single-parameter problems Π. Then the pricing rule described in Algorithm 2 fulfills Condition (a) of Definition 3.2 with α = 1 with respect to allocation rule ALG and the canonical exchange-feasible sets (Fx )x∈X . Proof. Consider x ∈ F. We defined prices exactly so that pi (xi | x[i−1] ) = v(r(i−1) ) − v(r(i) ). Therefore, using a telescoping-sum argument, we get X pi (xi | x[i−1] ) = v(r(0) ) − v(r(n) ). i∈N  The claim now follows from the fact that r(0) = ALG(v) and r(n) ∈ Fx . Lemma I.5. If the greedy allocation rule GRD is γ GRD -permeable and the welfare-maximizing allocation rule OPT is γ OPT -permeable for a subinstance-closed collection of of binary, single-parameter problems Π, then γ OPT ≥ γ GRD . Proof. We only have to show that for all x ∈ F, x′ ∈ Fx and all v, we have X τiGRD (v-i | x) ≤ γ OPT · v(GRD(v | x)). i∈x′  Let y = x′ ∩ GRD(v | x). Observe that because y ⊆ GRD(v | x), we have GRD(v | x ∪ y) = GRD(v | x). Define a valuation profile v′ by setting vi′ = vi for all i ∈ x′ \ Q and vi′ = 0 otherwise. By loser independence of greedy, GRD(v | x ∪ y) = GRD(v′ | x ∪ y). Furthermore, OPT(v′ | x ∪ y) = GRD(v′ | x ∪ y). We claim that for i ∈ x′ \ y we have ′ ′ τiGRD (v-i | x) ≤ τiGRD (v-i | x ∪ y) ≤ τiOPT (v-i | x ∪ y) .  For the first inequality we use that τiGRD (v-i | x) is the value vj of some j that has to be outbid by player i. By fixing another set y, this value can only go up because the options are limited further. Also, when fixing x ∪ y, replacing the valuations by v′ has no influence because the set of players that are selected remains unchanged. The second inequality holds because under v′ player i in order to win when we hold x ∪ y fixed ′ | x ∪ y) = OPT(v′ | x ∪ y) out of the solution. Under has to force some subset z ⊆ GRD(v-i -i OPT his payment is the sum of the respective players’ valuations, under GRD it is just the highest valuation of any such player. On the other hand, for players i ∈ y, because y ⊆ GRD(v | x), the greedy critical value GRD τi (v-i | x) is at most vi .  42  Using these two bounds on τiGRD (v-i | x) we obtain, X X X τiGRD (v-i | x) ≤ vi + τiGRD (v-i | x) i∈x′  i∈x′ \y  i∈y  ≤  X  vi +  ≤  ′ τiOPT (v-i | x ∪ y)  i∈x′ \y  i∈y  X  X  vi + γ OPT · v′ (OPT(v′ | x ∪ y))  i∈y  =  X  vi + γ OPT · v′ (GRD(v′ | x ∪ y))  i∈y  ≤ γ OPT ·  X  vi + γ OPT · v′ (GRD(v′ | x ∪ y))  i∈y  =γ  OPT  · v(OPT(v | x) ,  where the third inequality use γ OPT -permeability of the welfare-maximizing allocation rule OPT in the subinstance in which we hold x ∪ y fixed, the subsequent equality holds by the definition of v′ , the fourth inequality uses that γ OPT ≥ 1, and the final equality holds by the definition of y and v′ . Lemma I.6. If the greedy allocation rule GRD is γ GRD -permeable for a subinstance-closed collection of of binary, single-parameter problems Π, then τiOPT (v(i−1) | x[i−1] ) ≤ γ GRD · τiGRD (v(i−1) | x[i−1] ) Proof. Note that for valuations v(i−1) both GRD and OPT over F/x return the same set of players. The same is true if we drop any player j from v(i−1) . Dropping player i we can define y = (i−1) (i−1) GRD(v-i | x[i−1] ) = OPT(v-i | x[i−1] ). (i−1)  (i−1)  Now consider player i bidding b′i = τiGRD (v-i | x[i−1] ) + ǫ. Then i ∈ GRD(b′i , v-i | x[i−1] ). The addition of player i causes the removal of a (possibly empty) subset of players z ⊆ y. That is, (i−1) GRD(b′i , v-i | x[i−1] ) = (y \ z) ∪ {i}. (i−1)  Define valuations v′ by setting vi′ = b′i , vj′ = vj for j ∈ z, and vj′ = 0 for every other player j. Consider the subinstance in which we hold y \ z fixed. Since both player i and the set of players z are feasible extensions we can apply γ GRD -permeability of the greedy allocation rule to obtain X |z| · b′i = τjGRD (v′ | y \ z) ≤ γ GRD · v′ (GRD(v′ | y \ z)) = γ GRD · b′i , j∈z  and therefore |z| ≤ γ GRD . The final step is now to observe that the critical value τiOPT (v(i−1) | x[i−1] ) of player i under the welfare-maximizing allocation rule is at most |T | times the critical value pGRD (v(i−1) | x[i−1] ) of i player i under the greedy allocation rule. To see this let z′ ⊆ y be the set with the smallest value such that (y \ z′ ) ∪ {i} ∈ F. Then, X X τiOPT (v(i−1) | x[i−1] ) = vj ≤ vj ≤ |T | · max vj = |z| · τiGRD (v(i−1) | x[i−1] ), j∈z′  j∈z  j∈z  where we used that z is some subset of y such that (y \ z) ∪ {i} ∈ F and so its combined value can only be larger than that of z′ . 43  Lemma I.7. Let ALG be any allocation rule. Suppose that the welfare-maximizing allocation rule OPT is γ-permeable for a subinstance-closed collection of binary, single-parameter problems Π. Then the pricing rule described in Algorithm 2 fulfills Condition (b) of Definition 3.2 with β1 = 0 and β2 = γ 2 with respect to allocation rule ALG and the canonical exchange-feasible sets (Fx )x∈X . Proof. Consider an arbitrary allocation x ∈ F and feasible extension x′ ∈ Fx . We want to show that X pi (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≤ (γ OPT )2 · v(ALG(v)). i∈N  We will again show this claim through layering. This time, however, we need the layering to arbitrarily fine-grained. We will specify the granularity by ǫ > 0. For each j ∈ N, let S j denote the set of players with value at least j · ǫ. Let T j denote the set of players with x′i = 1 that see a price pOPT (x′i | x[i−1] ) of at least γ GRD · j · ǫ. i For any fixed j ∈ N we now bound |T j | using Lemma I.2. We set At = x[t] , Bt = r(t) ∩ S j , C = T j . Note that C ∪ An ∈ F. We claim that for every i ∈ C we have i ∈ Bt or {i} ∪ Bt ∪ At 6∈ F for t = i−1. To see this, consider the two options how pOPT (x′i | x[i−1] ) can be set. If i ∈ r(i−1) , then i pOPT (x′i | x[i−1] ) = vi . As by definition pOPT (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≥ γ GRD · j · ǫ ≥ j · ǫ, this implies vi ≥ j · ǫ i i (i−1)  and so i ∈ Bi−1 = r(i−1) ∩ S j . Otherwise, if i 6∈ r(i−1) , then pOPT (x′i | x[i−1] ) = τiOPT (v-i i In this case, we can apply Lemma I.6 to get (i−1)  pOPT (x′i | x[i−1] ) = τiOPT (v-i i  (i−1)  | x[i−1] ) ≤ γ GRD · τiGRD (v-i  | x[i−1] ).  | x[i−1] ).  (i−1)  So, we know that τiGRD (v-i | x[i−1] ) ≥ j · ǫ and therefore {i} ∪ x[i−1] ∪ (r(i−1) ∩ Y j ) 6∈ F. So, by Lemma I.2, we get |T j | ≤ γ GRD · |r(0) ∩ Y j |. We conclude that X  pOPT (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≤ nǫ + i  i∈x′  ∞ XX  1i∈T j · γ GRD · ǫ  i∈x′ j=1  = nǫ + γ GRD · ≤ nǫ + γ GRD ·  ∞ X  j=1 ∞ X  |T j | · ǫ γ GRD · |r(0) ∩ Y j | · ǫ  j=1  ≤ (γ  GRD 2  ) · v(ALG(v)) + 2nǫ.  As this argument holds for any ǫ > 0, we also have By Lemma I.5, γ GRD ≤ γ OPT and the claim follows.  P  i∈x′  pOPT (x′i | x[i−1] ) ≤ (γ GRD )2 · v(ALG(v)). i  Remark I.2. When the prices defined by Algorithm 2 are non-decreasing then γ-permeability (i−1) (i−1) of OPT immediately implies that τiGRD (v−i | x[i−1] ) ≤ τiGRD (v−i | x) ≤ γ · v(OPT(v, Fx )) implying that the pricing rule is (α, β)-balanced with β = γ. In this case Theorem I.3 can be strengthened to show the existence of a (1, γ)-balanced pricing rule.  44

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
