Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_1165

Abstract:
arXiv:1802.04986v1 [cs.SE] 14 Feb 2018  Convolutional Neural Networks over Control Flow Graphs for Software Defect Prediction Anh Viet Phan, Minh Le Nguyen  Lam Thu Bui  Japan Advanced Institute of Information Technology Nomi, Japan 923-1211 Email: {anhphanviet,nguyenml}@jaist.ac.jp  Le Quy Don Technical University Ha Noi, Vietnam Email: lambt@lqdtu.edu.vn  Abstract—Existing defects in software components is unavoidable and leads to not only a waste of time and money but also many serious consequences. To build predictive models, previous studies focus on manually extracting features or using tree representations of programs, and exploiting different machine learning algorithms. However, the performance of the models is not high since the existing features and tree structures often fail to capture the semantics of programs. To explore deeply programs’ semantics, this paper proposes to leverage precise graphs representing program execution flows, and deep neural networks for automatically learning defect features. Firstly, control flow graphs are constructed from the assembly instructions obtained by compiling source code; we thereafter apply multi-view multi-layer directed graph-based convolutional neural networks (DGCNNs) to learn semantic features. The experiments on four real-world datasets show that our method significantly outperforms the baselines including several other deep learning approaches. Index Terms—Software Defect Prediction, Control Flow Graphs, Convolutional Neural Networks  (a) File 1.c (b) File 2.c  Fig. 1: A motivating example  Recently, several software engineering problems have been successfully solved by exploiting tree representations of Software defect prediction has been one of the most attractive programs - the Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) [12]. In the research topics in the field of software engineering. According field of machine learning, the quality of input data directly to regular reports, semantic bugs result in an increase of affects the performance of learners. Regarding this, due to application costs, trouble to users, and even serious conse- containing rich information of programs, tree-based approaches quences during deployment. Thus, localizing and fixing defects have shown significant improvements in comparison with in early stages of software development are urgent requirements. previous research, especially software metrics-based. Mou Various approaches have been proposed to construct models et al. proposed a tree-based convolutional neural network to which are able to predict whether a source code contains extract structural information of ASTs for classifying programs defects. These studies can be divided into two directions: one by functionalities [15]. Wang et al. employed a deep belief is applying machine learning techniques on data of software network to automatically learn semantic features from AST metrics that are manually designed to extract features from tokens for defect prediction [23]. Kikuchi et. al measured the source code; the other is using programs’ tree representations similarities between tree structures for source code plagiarism detection [10]. and deep learning to automatically learn defect features. The traditional methods focus on designing and combining However, defect characteristics are deeply hidden in profeatures of programs. For product metrics, most of them are grams’ semantics and they only cause unexpected output in based on statistics on source code. For example, Halstead met- specific conditions [24]. Meanwhile, ASTs do not show the rics are computed from numbers of operators and operands [8]; execution process of programs; instead, they simply represent CK metrics are measured by function and inheritance counts the abstract syntactic structure of source code. Therefore, [6]; McCabe’s metric estimates the complexity of a program both software metrics and AST features may not reveal many by analyzing its control flow graph [13]. However, according types of defects in programs. For example, we consider the to many studies and surveys, the existing metrics often fail in procedures with the same name sumtoN in two C files File capturing the semantics of programs [9], [14]. As a result, 1.c and File 2.c (Fig. 1). Two procedures have a tiny although many efforts have been made such as adopting difference at line 7 File 1.c and line 15 in File 2.c. As robust learning algorithms and refining the data, the classifier can be seen a bug from File 2.c, the statement i=1 causes performance is not so high [4]. an infinite loop of the for statement in case N>=1. Whereas I. I NTRODUCTION  using RSM tool1 to extract the traditional metrics, their feature vectors are exactly matching, since two procedures have the same lines of code, programming tokens, etc. Similarly, parsing the procedures into ASTs using Pycparser2 , their ASTs are identical. In other words, both metrics-based and tree-based approaches are not able to distinguish these programs. To explore more deeply programs’ semantics, this paper proposes combining precise graphs which represent execution flows of programs called Control Flow Graphs (CFGs), and a powerful graphical neural work. Regarding this, each source code is converted into an execution flow graph by two stages: 1) compiling the source file to the assembly code, 2) generating the CFG from the compiled code. Applying CFGs of assembly code is more beneficial than those of ASTs. Firstly, assembly code contains atomic instructions and their CFGs indicate step-by-step execution process of programs. After compiling two source files (Fig. 1) we observed that i+=1 and i=1 are translated into different instructions. Secondly, assembly code is refined because they are the products after AST processing of the compiler. The compiler applies many techniques to analyze and optimize the ASTs. For example, two statements int n; n=4; in the main procedure of File 2.c are treated in a similar way with the statement int n = 4; and, the if statement can be removed since the value of n is identified. Meanwhile, ASTs just describe the syntactic structures of programs, and they may contain many redundant branches. Assume that if the statement i=1 in procedure sumtoN of File 2.c is changed to i+=1 then both programs are the same. However, their AST structures have many differences including the positions of subtrees of two functions main and sumtoN, the separation of declaration and assignment of the variable n, and the function prototype of sumtoN in File 2.c. We thereafter leverage a directed graph-based convolutional neural network (DGCNN) on CFGs to automatically learn defect features. The advantage of the DGCNN is that it can treat large-scale graphs and process the complex information of vertices like CFGs. The experimental results on four real-world datasets show that applying DGCNN on CFGs significantly outperforms baselines in terms of the different measures3 . The main contributions of the paper can be summarized as follows: • Proposing an application of a graphical data structure namely Control Flow Graph (CFG) to software defect prediction and experimentally proving that leveraging CFGs is successful in building high-performance classifiers. • Presenting an algorithm for constructing Control Flow Graphs of assembly code. • Formulating an end-to-end model for software defect prediction, in which a multi-view multi-layer convolutional neural networks is adopted to automatically learn the defect features from CFGs. 1 http://msquaredtechnologies.com/m2rsm/ 2 https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pycparser 3 The source code and collected datasets are publicly available at https: //github.com/nguyenlab/DGCNN  The model implementation is released to motivate related studies. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II explains step-by-step our approach for solving software defect prediction problem from processing data to adapting the learning algorithm. The settings for conducting the experiments such as the datasets, the algorithm hyper-parameters, and evaluation measures are indicated in Section III. We analyze experimental results in Section IV, and conclude in Section VI. •  II. T HE P ROPOSED A PPROACH This section formulates a new approach to software defect prediction by applying graph-based convolutional neural networks over control flow graphs of binary codes. Our proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 3 includes two steps: 1) generating CFGs which reveal the behavior of programs, and 2) applying a graphical model on CFG datasets. In the first step, to obtain the graph representation of a program, the source code is compiled into an assembly code using g++ on Linux. The CFG thereafter is constructed to describe the execution flows of the assembly instructions. In the second step, we leverage a powerful deep neural network for directed labeled graphs, called the multiview multi-layer convolutional neural network, to automatically build predictive models based on CFG data. A. Control Flow Graphs A control flow graph (CFG) is a directed graph, G = (V,E) where V is the set of vertices {v1 , v2 , ..., vn } and E is the set of directed edges {(vi , vj ), (vk , vl ), ...} [1]. In CFGs, each vertex represents a basic block that is a linear sequence of program instructions having one entry point (the first instruction executed) and one exit point (the last instruction executed); and the directed edges show control flow paths. This paper aims to formulate a method for detecting faulty source code written in C language. Regarding this, CFGs of assembly code, the final products after compiling the source code, server as the input to learn faulty features using machine algorithms. Based on recent research, it has been proved that CFGs are successfully applied to various problems including malware analysis [2], [3], software plagiarism [5], [22]. Since semantic errors are revealed while programs are running, analyzing the execution flows of the assembly instructions may be helpful for distinguishing faulty patterns from nonfaulty ones. Fig. 2 illustrates an example of the control flow graph constructed from an assembly code snippet, in which each vertex corresponds to an instruction and a directed edge shows the execution path from an instruction to the other. The pseudocode to generate CFGs is shown in Algorithm 1. The algorithm takes an assembly file as the input, and outputs the CFG. Building the CFG from an assembly code includes two major steps. In the first step, the code is partitioned into blocks of instructions based on the labels (e.g. L1, L2, L3 in Fig. 2). The second step is creating the edges to represent the control flow transfers in the program. Specifically, the first line invokes procedure initialize_Blocks to read the file contents  (a)  (b)  Fig. 2: An example of a Control Flow Graph (CFG).( 2a) a fragment of assembly code;( 2b) the CFG of the code fragment (each node is viewed by the line number and the name of the instruction).  and return all the blocks. In line 2, the set of edges is initially set to empty. From line 3 to 24, the graph edges are created by traversing all instructions of each block and considering possible execution paths from the current instruction to others. For a block, because the instructions are executed in sequence, every node has an outgoing edge to the next one (line 5-9). Additionally, we consider two types of instructions which may have several targets. For jump instructions, an edge is added from the current instruction to the first one of the target block. We use two edges to model function calls, in which one is from the current node to the first instruction of the function and the other is from the final instruction of the function to the next instruction of the current node (line 10-24). Finally, the graphs are formed from the instruction and edge sets (line 25-26). B. Multi-view Multi-layer Graph-based Convolutional Neural Networks  Algorithm 1: The algorithm for constructing Control Flow Graphs from assembly code Input : asm f ile - A file of assembly code Output : The graph representation of the code 1 blocks ← initialize Blocks(asm f ile); 2 edges ← {}; 3 for i ← 0 to |blocks| do 4 for j ← 0 to |blocks[i].instructions| do 5 if j > 0 then 6 inst 1 ← blocks[i].instructions[j − 1]; 7 inst 2 ← blocks[i].instructions[j]; 8 edges.add(new Edge(inst 1, inst 2)); 9 end 10 if inst 1.type=“jump” or inst 1.type=“call” then 11 label ← inst 1.params[0]; 12 to block ←find Block by Label(label); 13 if to block 6= NULL then 14 inst 2 ← to block.f irst instruction; 15 edges.add(new Edge(inst 1, inst 2)); 16 if inst 1.type=“call” then 17 inst 2 ← to block.last instruction; 18 inst 1 ← inst 1.next; 19 edges.add(new Edge(inst 2, inst 1)); 20 21 22 23 24 25 26  end end end end end instructions ← get All Instructions(blocks); return construct Graph(instructions, edges);  into a vector. Finally, the feature vector is fed into a fullyconnected layer and an output layer to compute the categorical distributions for possible outcomes. Specifically, during the forward pass of convolutional layers, each filter slides through all vertices of the graph and computes dot products between entries of the filter and the input. Suppose that the subgraph in the sliding window includes d + 1 vertices (the current vertex and its neighbors) with vector representations of x0 , x1 , ..., xd ∈ Rvf ×nf , then the output of the filters is computed as follows:  The directed graph-based convolutional neural network (DGCNN) is a dynamic graphical model that is designed to treat large-scale graphs with complex information of vertex labels. For instance, a CFG vertex is not simply a token but represents an instruction, which may contain many components including the instruction name and several operands. In addition, each instruction can be viewed in other perspectives (multiple vf d X X views), e.g. instruction types or functions. y = tanh( Wconv,i,j · xi,j + bconv ) (1) Fig. 3 depicts the overview architecture of DGCNN. In the i=0 j=1 DGCNN model, the first layer is called vector representations or the embedding layer, whereby a vertex is represented as a set where y, bconv ∈ Rvc ×nc , Wconv,i ∈ Rvc ×nc ×vf ×nf . tanh is of real-valued vectors corresponding with the number of views. the activation function. nf and vf are the vector size and the Next, we design a set of fixed-size circular windows sliding number of views of the input layer. nc and vc are the numbers over the entire graphs to extract local features of substructures. of filters and views of the convolutional layer. The input graphs are explored at different levels by stacking Due to arbitrary structures of graphs, the numbers of vertices several convolutional layers on the embedding layer. In our in subgraphs are different. As can be seen in Fig.3, the current work, we apply DGCNN with two layers in the convolution receptive field at the red node includes 5 vertices while only stage. After convolution, a dynamic pooling layer is applied 3 vertices are considered if the window moves right down. to gather extracted features from all the parts of the graphs Consequently, determining the number of weight matrices for  Fig. 3: The overview of our approaches for software defect prediction using convolutional neural networks on Control Flow Graphs of assembly code.  filters is unfeasible. To deal with this obstacle, we divide vertices into groups and treat items in each group in a similar way. Regarding the way, the parameters for convolution have only three weight matrices including W cur , W in , and W out for current, outgoing, and incoming nodes, respectively. In the pooling layer, we face the similar problem of dynamic graphs. The numbers of nodes are varying between programs’ CFGs. Meanwhile, convolutions preserve the structures of input graphs during feature extraction. This means that it is impossible to determine the number of items which will be pooled into the final feature vector. An efficient solution to this problem is applying dynamic pooling [18] to normalize the features such that they have the same dimension. Regarding this, one-way max pooling is adopted to gather the information from all parts of the graph to one fixed size vector regardless of graph shape and size. III. E XPERIMENTS A. Datasets The datasets for conducting experiments are obtained from a popular programming contest site CodeChef 4 . We created four benchmark datasets which each one involves source code submissions (written in C, C++, Python, etc.) for solving one of the problems as follows: • SUMTRIAN (Sums in a Triangle): Given a lower triangular matrix of n rows, find the longest path among all paths starting from the top towards the base, in which each movement on a part is either directly below or diagonally below to the right. The length of a path is the sums of numbers that appear on that path. • FLOW016 (GCD and LCM): Find the greatest common divisor (GCD) and the least common multiple (LCM) of each pair of input integers A and B. • MNMX (Minimum Maximum): Given an array A consisting of N distinct integers, find the minimum sum of cost to convert the array into a single element by following 4 https://www.codechef.com/problems/hproblem-namei  TABLE I: Statistics on the datasets Dataset FLOW016 MNMX SUBINC SUMTRIAN  Total Class 0 Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Class 4 10648 3472 4165 231 2368 412 8745 5157 3073 189 113 213 6484 3263 2685 206 98 232 21187 9132 6948 419 2701 1987  operations: select a pair of adjacent integers and remove the larger one of these two. For each operation, the size of the array is decreased by 1. The cost of this operation will be equal to their smaller. • SUBINC (Count Subarrays): Given an array A of N elements, count the number of non-decreasing subarrays of array A. The target label of an instance is one of the possibilities of source code assessment. Regarding this, a program can be assigned to one of the groups as follows: 0) accepted - the program ran successfully and gave a correct answer; 1) time limit exceeded - the program was compiled successfully, but it did not stop before the time limit; 2) wrong answer: the program compiled and ran successfully but the output did not match the expected output; 3) runtime error: the code compiled and ran but encountered an error due to reasons such as using too much memory or dividing by zero; 4) syntax error - the code was unable to compile. We collected all submissions written in C or C++ until March 14th, 2017 of four problems. The data are preprocessed by removing source files which are empty code, and unable to compile. Table I presents statistical figures of instances in each class of the datasets. All of the datasets are imbalanced. Taking MNMX dataset as an example, the ratios of classes 2, 3, 4 to class 0 are 1 to 27, 46, and 24. To conduct experiments, each dataset is randomly split into three folds for training, validation, and testing by ratio 3:1:1. B. Experimental Setup We compare our model with tree-based approaches which have been successfully applied to programming language  TABLE II: Structures and numbers of hyperparameters of the neural networks. Each layer is presented in form of the name followed by the number of neurons. Emb is a embedding layer. Rv, TC, GC, and FC stand for recursive, tree-based convolutional, graph-based convolutional, and fully-connected, respectively.  C. Evaluation Measures  The approaches are evaluated based on two widely used measures including accuracy and the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, known as the AUC. Predictive accuracy has been considered the most important criterion to evaluate the effectiveness of classification algoNetwork Architecture weights biases rithms. For multi-class classification, the accuracy is estimated RvNN Coding30-Emb30-Rv600-FC600-Soft5 1104600 1235 by the average hit rate. TBCNN Coding30-Emb30-TC600-FC600-Soft5 1140600 1235 SibStCNN Coding30-Emb30-TC600-FC600-Soft5 1140600 1235 In machine learning, the AUC that estimates the discriminaDGCNN-1V GC100-GC600-FC600-Soft5 552000 1305 tion ability between classes is an important measure to judge DGCNN-2V GC100-GC600-FC600-Soft5 561000 1305 the effectiveness of algorithms. It is equivalent to the nonparametric Wilcoxon test in ranking classifiers [7]. According processing tasks. For the tree-based methods, a source code is to previous research, AUC has been proved as a better and represented as an abstract syntax trees (AST) using a parser, more statistically consistent criterion than the accuracy [11], and then different machine learning techniques are employed to especially for imbalanced data. In the cases of imbalanced build predictive models. The settings for baselines are presented datasets that some classes have much more samples than others, most of the standard algorithms are biased towards as follows: The neural networks For neural networks includ- the major classes and ignore the minor classes. Consequently, ing DGCNN, tree based convolutional neural networks the hit rates on minor classes are very low, although the overall (TBCNN) [15], Sibling-subtree convolutional neural networks accuracy may be high. Meanwhile, in practical applications, (SibStCNN - an extension of TBCNN in which feature accurately predicting minority samples may be more important. detectors are redesigned to cover subtrees including a node, Taking account of software defect prediction, the essential task its descendants and siblings), and recursive neural networks is detecting faulty modules. However, many software defect (RvNN), we use some common hyper-parameters: initial datasets are highly imbalanced and the faulty instances belong learning rate is 0.1, vector size of tokens is 30. The structures to minority classes [17]. Because all experimental datasets are imbalanced, we adopt both measures to evaluate the classifiers. of the networks are shown in Table II. ROC curves which depict the tradeoffs between hit rates When adapting DGCNN for CFGs, we use two views of CFG nodes including instructions and their type. For instance, jne, and false alarm rates are commonly used for analyzing binary jle, and jge are assigned into the same group because they classifiers. To extend the use of ROC curves to multi-class are conditional jump instructions. For instructions, it should problems, the average results are computed based on two be noted that they may have many operands. In this case, we ways: 1) macro-averaging gives equal weight to each class, replace all operands such as block names, processor register and 2) micro-averaging gives equal weight to the decision of names, and literal values with symbols “name”, “reg”, and each sample [21]. The AUC measure for ranking classifiers is “val”, respectively. Following this replacement, the instruction estimated by the area under the macro-averaged ROC curves. addq $32, %rsp is converted into addq value, reg. IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION To generate inputs for DGCNN, firstly the symbol vectors are randomly initialized and then the corresponding vector of Table III shows the accuracies of classifiers on the four each view is computed based on the component vectors as datasets. As can be seen, CFG-based approaches significantly follows: outperform others. Specifically, in comparison with the second C 1 X best, they improve the accuracies by 12.39% on FLOW016, xj (2) x vi = 1.2% on MNMX, 7.71% on SUBINC, and 1.98% on SUMC j=1 TRIAN. As mentioned before (Section I), software defect where C is the number of symbols in the view, and xj is the prediction is a complicated task because semantic errors are vector representation of the j th symbol. Taking instruction hidden deeply in source code. Even if a defect exists in a proaddq $32, %rsp as an example, its vector is the linear gram, it is only revealed during running the application under combination of vectors of symbols addq, value, and reg specific conditions. Therefore, it is impractical to manually k-nearest neighbors (kNN) We apply kNN algorithm with design a set of good features which are able to distinguish tree edit distance (TED) and Levenshtein distance (LD) [16]. faulty and non-faulty samples. Similarly, ASTs just represent The number of neighbors k is set to 3. the structures of source code. Although tree-based approaches Support Vector Machines (SVMs) The SVM classifiers (SibStCNN, TBCNN, and RvNN) are successfully applied to are built based on hand-crafted features, namely bag-of-words other software engineering tasks like classifying programs by (BoW). By this way, the feature vector of each program is functionalities, they have not shown good performance on determined by counting the numbers of times symbols appear the software defect prediction. In contrast, CFGs of assembly in the AST. The SVM with RBF kernel has two parameters C code is precise graphical structures which show behaviors of and γ; their values are 1 and 0, respectively. programs. As a result, applying DGCNN on CFGs achieves the  TABLE III: Comparison of classifiers according to accuracy. 1V and 2V following DGCNN means that CFG nodes are viewed by one and two perspectives. Op and NoOp are using instruction with or without operands.  NoOp NoOp Op Op  FLOW016 60.00 60.75 61.69 61.03 63.10∗ 62.25 73.80 74.32 75.49 75.12  MNMX 77.53 79.13 80.73 82.56 82.45 82.85∗ 83.19 83.82 84.05 83.71  SUBINC 67.23 66.62 68.31∗ 64.53 63.99 67.69 70.93 74.02 72.40 76.02  SUMTRIAN 64.87 65.81 66.97∗ 58.82 65.05 65.10 68.83 68.12 68.19 68.95  0.8 True Positive Rate  Approach SVM-BoW LD TED RvNN TBCNN SibStCNN DGCNN 1V DGCNN 2V DGCNN 1V DGCNN 2V  1.0  0.6  0.2 0.0 0.0  TABLE IV: The performance of classifiers in terms of AUC.  NoOp NoOp Op Op  FLOW016 0.74 0.75 0.76 0.76 0.82 0.80 0.81 0.82  MNMX 0.76 0.79 0.77 0.79 0.82 0.81 0.80 0.79  SUBINC 0.73 0.69 0.72 0.71 0.74 0.72 0.75 0.74  SUMTRIAN 0.79 0.73 0.78 0.80 0.82 0.81 0.81 0.81  0.2  0.4 0.6 False Positive Rate  0.8  1.0  (a)  1.0 0.8 True Positive Rate  Approach SVM-BoW RvNN TBCNN SibStCNN DGCNN 1V DGCNN 2V DGCNN 1V DGCNN 2V  micro-average ROC curve (area = 0.89) macro-average ROC curve (area = 0.76) ROC curve of class 0 (area = 0.80) ROC curve of class 1 (area = 0.77) ROC curve of class 2 (area = 0.52) ROC curve of class 3 (area = 0.94) ROC curve of class 4 (area = 0.78)  0.4  0.6  micro-average ROC curve (area = 0.92) 0.4 macro-average ROC curve (area = 0.82) highest accuracies on the experimental datasets about software ROC curve of class 0 (area = 0.89) defects. ROC curve of class 1 (area = 0.87) 0.2 From the last four rows of Table III, the more the information ROC curve of class 2 (area = 0.59) ROC curve of class 3 (area = 0.96) is provided, the more efficient the learner is. In general, viewing ROC curve of class 4 (area = 0.78) graph nodes by two perspectives including instructions and 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 instruction groups helps boost DGCNN classifiers in both cases: False Positive Rate with and without the use of operands. Similarly, taking into (b) account of all components in instructions (Eq. 2) is beneficial. In this case, the DGCNN models achieve highest accuracies on Fig. 4: The illustration of the discrimination ability between the experimental datasets. Specifically, DGCNN with one view classes of classifiers on imbalanced datasets. Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b reaches the accuracies of 75.49% on FLOW016, and 84.05% are the ROC curves of TBCNN and DGCNN 1V NoOp on on MNMX; DGCNN with two views obtains the accuracies MNMX dataset, respectively. of 76.02% on SUBINC, and 68.95% on SUMTRIAN. We also assess the effectiveness of the models in terms of the discrimination measure (AUC) which is equivalent to belonging degrees of an instance to classes. There are two Wilcoxon test in ranking classifiers. For imbalanced datasets, groups including graph-based and tree-based approaches, in many learning algorithms have a trend to bias the majority which the approaches in each group has the similar AUC class due to the objective of error minimization. As a result, scores; and graph-based approaches show better performance the models mostly predict an unseen sample as an instance of than those of tree-based. It is worth noticing that, along with the majority classes, and ignore the minority classes. Fig. 4 the efforts of accuracy maximization, the approach based on plots the ROC curves of TBCNN and DGCNN 1V NoOp DGCNN and CFGs also enhance the distinguishing ability classifiers on MNMX dataset, an imbalanced data with the between categories even on imbalanced data. The DGCNN minority classes of 2 and 4. Both two classifiers have a notable classifier improves the second best an average of 0.03 on AUC lower ability in detecting minority instances from the others. scores. From above analysis, we can conclude that leveraging For predicting class 4, the TBCNN is even equivalent to a precise control flow graphs of binary codes is suitable for random classifier. After observing the other ROC curves we software defect prediction, one of the most difficult tasks in found the similar problem for all of the approaches on the the field of software engineering. experimental datasets. Thus, AUC is an essential measure for V. E RROR A NALYSIS evaluating classification algorithms, especially in the case of imbalanced data. We analyze cases of source code variations which methods Table IV presents the AUCs of probabilistic classifiers, are able to handle or not based on observations on classifiers’ which produce the probabilities or the scores to indicate the outputs, training and test data. We found that RvNN’s per-  (a) File 3.c (a training sample) (b) File 4.c (G+, T-)  (d) File 6.c (G-, T-) (c) File 5.c (G-, T+)  Fig. 5: Some source code examples in FLOW016 dataset which may cause mistakes of tree-based (T) and CFG-based (G) approaches. Fig. 5a is a sample in the training set. Figs. 5b, 5c, and 5d are samples in the test set. Symbols “+” and “-” denote the sample is correctly and incorrectly classified by the approaches.  formance is degraded when tree sizes increase. This problem new branches of ASTs (File 3.c and File 4.c). Because is also pointed out from other research on tasks of natural of the weight matrices for each node being determined based language processing [19], [20] and programming language on the position, SibStCNN and TBCNN are easily affected by processing [15]. From Tables I, III, and IV the larger trees, changes regarding tree shape and size. the lower accuracies and AUCs, RvNN obtains in comparison Meanwhile, graph-based approaches are able to handle these with other approaches, especially on SUMTRIAN dataset. changes. We observed that although loop statements like For, SibStCNN and TBCNN obtain higher performance than other While, and DoWhile have different tree representations, their baselines due to learning features from subtrees. For analyzing assembly instructions are similar by using a jump instruction tree-based methods in this section, we only take into account to control the loop. Similarly, moving a statement to possible SibStCNN and TBCNN. positions may not result in notable changes in assembly code. Effect of code structures: the tree-based approaches suffer Moreover, grouping a set of statements to form a procedure is from varying structures of ASTs. For example, given a also captured in CFGs by using edges to simulate the procedure program, we have many ways to reorganize the source code invocation (Section II-A). such as changing positions of some statements, constructing Effect of changing statements: CFG-based approaches may procedures and replacing statements by equivalent ones. These be affected by replacements of statements. Considering source modifications lead to reordering the branches and producing code in File 3.c, File 5.c, they have similar ASTs, but  the assembly codes are different. In C language, statements are translated into different sets of assembly instructions. For example, with the same operator, the sets of instructions for manipulating data types of int and long int are dissimilar. Moreover, statements are possible replaced by others without any changes of program outcomes. Indeed, to show values, we can select either printf or cout. Since contents of CFG nodes are changed significantly, DGCNN may fail in predicting these types of variations. Effect of using library procedures: when writing a source code, the programmer can use procedures from other libraries. In Fig. 5, File 6.c applies the procedure __gcd in the library algorithm, while the others use ordinary C statements for computing the greatest common divisor of each integer pair. Both ASTs and CFGs do not contain the contents of external procedures because they are not embedded to generate assembly code from source code. As a result, tree-based and graph-based approaches are not successful in capturing program semantics in these cases. VI. C ONCLUSION This paper presents an end-to-end model for solving software defect prediction, one of the most difficult tasks in the field of software engineering. By applying precise representations (CFGs) and a graphical deep neural network, the model explores deeply the behavior of programs to detect faulty source code from others. Specifically, the CFG of a program is constructed from the assembly code after compiling its source code. Then DGCNN is leveraged to learn from various information of CFGs data to build predictive models. Our evaluation of four real-world datasets indicates learning on graphs could significantly improve the performance of feature-based and tree-based approaches according to both accuracy and discrimination measures. Our method improves the accuracies from 4.08% to 15.49% in comparison with the feature-based approach, and from 1.2% to 12.39% in comparison with the tree-based approaches. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported partly by JSPS KAKENHI Grant number 15K16048 and the first author would like to thank the scholarship from Ministry of Training and Education (MOET), Vietnam under the project 911. R EFERENCES [1] Frances E Allen. Control flow analysis. In ACM Sigplan Notices, volume 5, pages 1–19. ACM, 1970. [2] Blake Anderson, Daniel Quist, Joshua Neil, Curtis Storlie, and Terran Lane. Graph-based malware detection using dynamic analysis. Journal in computer virology, 7(4):247–258, 2011. [3] Danilo Bruschi, Lorenzo Martignoni, and Mattia Monga. Detecting selfmutating malware using control-flow graph matching. In International Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment, pages 129–143. Springer, 2006. [4] Cagatay Catal. Software fault prediction: A literature review and current trends. Expert systems with applications, 38(4):4626–4636, 2011. [5] Dong-Kyu Chae, Jiwoon Ha, Sang-Wook Kim, BooJoong Kang, and Eul Gyu Im. Software plagiarism detection: a graph-based approach. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Conference on information & knowledge management, pages 1577–1580. ACM, 2013.  [6] Shyam R Chidamber and Chris F Kemerer. A metrics suite for object oriented design. IEEE Transactions on software engineering, 20(6):476– 493, 1994. [7] Tom Fawcett. An introduction to roc analysis. Pattern recognition letters, 27(8):861–874, 2006. [8] Maurice Howard Halstead. Elements of software science, volume 7. Elsevier New York, 1977. [9] C Jones. Strengths and weaknesses of software metrics. AMERICAN PROGRAMMER, 10:44–49, 1997. [10] Hiroshi Kikuchi, Takaaki Goto, Mitsuo Wakatsuki, and Tetsuro Nishino. A source code plagiarism detecting method using alignment with abstract syntax tree elements. In Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing (SNPD), 2014 15th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2014. [11] Charles X Ling, Jin Huang, and Harry Zhang. Auc: a statistically consistent and more discriminating measure than accuracy. In IJCAI, volume 3, pages 519–524, 2003. [12] Kenneth C Louden et al. Programming languages: principles and practices. Cengage Learning, 2011. [13] Thomas J McCabe. A complexity measure. IEEE Transactions on software Engineering, (4):308–320, 1976. [14] Tim Menzies, Jeremy Greenwald, and Art Frank. Data mining static code attributes to learn defect predictors. IEEE transactions on software engineering, 33(1), 2007. [15] Lili Mou, Ge Li, Lu Zhang, Tao Wang, and Zhi Jin. Convolutional neural networks over tree structures for programming language processing. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2016. [16] Viet Anh Phan, Ngoc Phuong Chau, and Minh Le Nguyen. Exploiting tree structures for classifying programs by functionalities. In Knowledge and Systems Engineering (KSE), 2016 Eighth International Conference on, pages 85–90. IEEE, 2016. [17] Daniel Rodriguez, Israel Herraiz, Rachel Harrison, Javier Dolado, and José C Riquelme. Preliminary comparison of techniques for dealing with imbalance in software defect prediction. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering, page 43. ACM, 2014. [18] Richard Socher, Eric H Huang, Jeffrey Pennington, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher D Manning. Dynamic pooling and unfolding recursive autoencoders for paraphrase detection. In NIPS, volume 24, pages 801– 809, 2011. [19] Richard Socher, Jeffrey Pennington, Eric H Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher D Manning. Semi-supervised recursive autoencoders for predicting sentiment distributions. In Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 151–161. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011. [20] Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng, Christopher Potts, et al. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), volume 1631, page 1642, 2013. [21] Marina Sokolova and Guy Lapalme. A systematic analysis of performance measures for classification tasks. Information Processing & Management, 45(4):427–437, 2009. [22] Xin Sun, Yibing Zhongyang, Zhi Xin, Bing Mao, and Li Xie. Detecting code reuse in android applications using component-based control flow graph. In IFIP International Information Security Conference, pages 142–155. Springer, 2014. [23] Song Wang, Taiyue Liu, and Lin Tan. Automatically learning semantic features for defect prediction. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering, pages 297–308. ACM, 2016. [24] Martin White, Christopher Vendome, Mario Linares-Vásquez, and Denys Poshyvanyk. Toward deep learning software repositories. In Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference on, pages 334–345. IEEE, 2015.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
