Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_1843

Abstract:
The DFS Fused Lasso: Linear-Time Denoising over General Graphs Oscar Hernan Madrid Padilla1 oscar.madrid@utexas.edu  James Sharpnack2 jsharpna@gmail.com  arXiv:1608.03384v3 [math.ST] 1 Mar 2017  James Scott1,3 james.scott@mccombs.utexas.edu  Ryan J. Tibshirani4,5 ryantibs@stat.cmu.edu  1  Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 2 Department of Statistics, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616 3 McCombs School of Business, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712 4 Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 5 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213  Abstract The fused lasso, also known as (anisotropic) total variation denoising, is widely used for piecewise constant signal estimation with respect to a given undirected graph. The fused lasso estimate is highly nontrivial to compute when the underlying graph is large and has an arbitrary structure. But for a special graph structure, namely, the chain graph, the fused lasso—or simply, 1d fused lasso—can be computed in linear time. In this paper, we establish a surprising connection between the total variation of a generic signal defined over an arbitrary graph, and the total variation of this signal over a chain graph induced by running depth-first search (DFS) over the nodes of the graph. Specifically, we prove that for any signal, its total variation over the induced chain graph is no more than twice its total variation over the original graph. This connection leads to several interesting theoretical and computational conclusions. Denoting by m and n the number of edges and nodes, respectively, of the graph in question, our result implies that for an underlying signal with total variation t over the graph, the fused lasso achieves a mean squared error rate of t2/3 n−2/3 . Moreover, precisely the same mean squared error rate is achieved by running the 1d fused lasso on the induced chain graph from running DFS. Importantly, the latter estimator is simple and computationally cheap, requiring only O(m) operations for constructing the DFS-induced chain and O(n) operations for computing the 1d fused lasso solution over this chain. Further, for trees that have bounded max degree, the error rate of t2/3 n−2/3 cannot be improved, in the sense that it is the minimax rate for signals that have total variation t over the tree. Finally, we establish several related results—for example, a similar result for a roughness measure defined by the `0 norm of differences across edges in place of the the total variation metric. Keywords: fused lasso, total variation denoising, graph denoising, depth-first search  1  Introduction  We study the graph denoising problem, i.e., estimation of a signal θ0 ∈ Rn from noisy data yi = θ0,i + i ,  i = 1, . . . , n,  (1)  when the components of θ0 are associated with the vertices of an undirected, connected graph G = (V, E). Without a loss of generality, we denote V = {1, . . . , n}. Versions of this problem arise in diverse areas of science and engineering, such as gene expression analysis, protein mass spectrometry, and image denoising. 1  The problem is also archetypal of numerous internet-scale machine learning tasks that involve propagating labels or information across edges in a network (e.g., a network of users, web pages, or YouTube videos). Methods for graph denoising have been studied extensively in machine learning and signal processing. In machine learning, graph kernels have been proposed for classification and regression, in both supervised and semi-supervised data settings (e.g., Belkin and Niyogi [2002], Smola and Kondor [2003], Zhu et al. [2003], Zhou et al. [2005]). In signal processing, a considerable focus has been placed on the construction of wavelets over graphs (e.g., Crovella and Kolaczyk [2003], Coifman and Maggioni [2006], Gavish et al. [2010], Hammond et al. [2011], Sharpnack et al. [2013], Shuman et al. [2013]). We will focus our study on the fused lasso over graphs, also known as (anisotropic) total variation denoising over graphs. Proposed by Rudin et al. [1992] in the signal processing literature, and Tibshirani et al. [2005] in the statistics literature, the fused lasso estimate is defined by the solution of a convex optimization problem, θ̂G = argmin θ∈Rn  1 ky − θk22 + λk∇G θk1 , 2  (2)  where y = (y1 , . . . , yn ) ∈ Rn the vector of observed data, λ ≥ 0 is a tuning parameter, and ∇G ∈ Rm×n is the edge incidence matrix of the graph G. Note that the subscript on the incidence matrix ∇G and the fused lasso solution θ̂G in (2) emphasize that these quantities are defined with respect to the graph G. The edge incidence matrix ∇G can be defined as follows, using some notation and terminology from algebraic graph theory (e.g., Godsil and Royle [2001]). First, we assign an arbitrary orientation to edges in the graph, i.e., for each edge e ∈ E, we arbitrarily select one of the two joined vertices to be the head, denoted e+ , and the other to be the tail, denoted e− . Then, we define a row (∇G )e of ∇G , corresponding to the edge e, by (∇G )e,e+ = 1, (∇G )e,e− = −1, (∇G )e,v = 0 for all v 6= e+ , e− , for each e ∈ E. Hence, for an arbitrary θ ∈ Rn , we have X k∇G θk1 = |θe+ − θe− |. e∈E  We can see that the particular choice of orientation does not affect the value k∇G θk1 , which we refer to as the total variation of θ over the graph G.  1.1  Summary of results  We will wait until Section 1.3 to give a detailed review of literature, both computational and theoretical, on the fused lasso. Here we simply highlight a key computational aspect of the fused lasso to motivate the main results in our paper. The fused lasso solution in (2), for a graph G of arbitrary structure, is highly nontrivial to compute. For a chain graph, however, the fused lasso solution can be computed in linear time (e.g., using dynamic programming or specialized taut-string methods). The question we answer is: how can we use this fact to our advantage, when seeking to solve (2) over an arbitrary graph? Given a generic graph structure G that has m edges and n nodes, it is obvious that we can define a chain graph by running depth-first search (DFS) over the nodes. Far less obvious is that, for any signal, its total variation over the DFS-induced chain graph never exceeds twice its total variation over the original graph. This fact, which we prove, has the following three notable consequences (the first being computational, and next two statistical). 1. No matter the structure of G, we can denoise any signal defined over this graph in O(m + n) operations: O(m) operations for DFS and O(n) operations for the 1d fused lasso on the induced chain. We call the corresponding estimator—the 1d fused lasso run on the DFS-induced chain—the DFS fused lasso. 2  2. For an underlying signal θ0 that generates the data, as in (1), such that θ0 ∈ BVG (t), where BVG (t) is the class of signals with total variation at most t, defined in (4), the DFS fused lasso estimator has mean squared error (MSE) on the order of t2/3 n−2/3 . 3. For an underlying signal θ0 ∈ BVG (t), the fused lasso estimator over the original graph, in (2), also has MSE on the order of t2/3 n−2/3 . The fact that such a fast rate, t2/3 n−2/3 , applies for the fused lasso estimator over any connected graph structure is somewhat surprising. It implies that the chain graph represents the hardest graph structure for denoising signals of bounded variation—at least, hardest for the fused lasso, since as we have shown, error rates on general connected graphs can be no worse than the chain rate of t2/3 n−2/3 . We also complement these MSE upper bounds with the following minimax lower bound over trees. 4. When G is a tree of bounded max degree, the minimax MSE over the class BVG (t) scales at the rate t2/3 n−2/3 . Hence, in this setting, the DFS fused lasso estimator attains the optimal rate, as does the fused lasso estimator over G. Lastly, we prove the following for signals with a bounded number of nonzero edge differences. 5. For an underlying signal θ0 ∈ BDG (s), where BDG (s) is the class of signals with at most s nonzero edge differences, defined in (5), the DFS fused lasso (under a condition on the spacing of nonzero differences over the DFS-induced chain) has MSE on the order of s(log s + log log n) log n/n + s3/2 /n. When G is a tree, the minimax MSE over the class BDG (s) scales as s log(n/s)/n. Thus, in this setting, the DFS fused lasso estimator is only off by a log log n factor provided that s is small. This DFS fused lasso gives us an O(n) time algorithm for nearly minimax rate-optimal denoising over trees. On paper, this only saves a factor of O(log n) operations, as recent work (to be described in Section 1.3) has produced an O(n log n) time algorithm for the fused lasso over trees, by extending earlier dynamic programming ideas over chains. However, dynamic programming on a tree is (a) much more complex than dynamic programming on a chain (since it relies on sophisticated data structures), and (b) noticeably slower in practice than dynamic programming over a chain, especially for large problem sizes. Hence there is still a meaningful difference—both in terms of simplicity and practical computational efficiency—between the DFS fused lasso estimator and the fused lasso over a generic tree. For a general graph structure, we cannot claim that the statistical rates attained by the DFS fused lasso estimator are optimal, nor can we claim that they match those of fused lasso over the original graph. As an example, recent work (to be discussed in Section 1.3) studying the fused lasso over grid graphs shows that estimation error rates for this problem can be much faster than those attained by the DFS fused lasso (and thus the minimax rates over trees). What should be emphasized, however, is that the DFS fused lasso can still be a practically useful method for any graph, running in linear time (in the number of edges) no matter the graph structure, a scaling that is beneficial for truly large problem sizes.  1.2  Assumptions and notation  Our theory will be primarily phrased in terms of the mean squared error (MSE) an estimator θ̂ of the mean parameter θ0 in (1), assuming that  = (1 , . . . , n ) has i.i.d. mean zero sub-Gaussian components, i.e.,  E(i ) = 0, and P(|i | > t) ≤ M exp − t2 /(2σ 2 ) , all t ≥ 0, for i = 1, . . . , n, (3) for constants M, σ > 0. The MSE of θ̂ will be denoted, with a slight abuse of notation, by kθ̂ − θ0 k2n = 3  1 kθ̂ − θ0 k22 . n  √ (In general, for a vector x ∈ Rn , we denote its scaled `2 norm by kxkn = kxk2 / n.) Of course, the MSE will depend not only on the estimator θ̂ in question but also on the assumptions that we make about θ0 . We will focus our study on two classes of signals. The first is the bounded variation class, defined with respect to the graph G, and a radius parameter t > 0, as BVG (t) = {θ ∈ Rn : k∇G θk1 ≤ t}.  (4)  The second is the bounded differences class, defined again with respect to the graph G, and a now a sparsity parameter s > 0, as BDG (s) = {θ ∈ Rn : k∇G θk0 ≤ s}. (5) We call measure of roughness used in the bounded differences class the cut metric, given by replacing the `1 norm used to define the total variation metric by the `0 norm, i.e., X k∇G θk0 = 1{θe+ 6= θe− }, e∈E  which counts the number of nonzero edge differences that appear in θ. Hence, we may think of the former class in (4) as representing a type of weak sparsity across these edge differences, and the latter class in (5) as representing a type of strong sparsity in edge differences. When dealing with the chain graph, on n vertices, we will use the following modifications to our notation. We write ∇1d ∈ R(n−1)×n for the edge incidence matrix of the chain, i.e.,   −1 1 0 ... 0  0 −1 1 ... 0    (6) ∇1d =  . . .. ..   .. . . 0  0 . . . −1 1  We also write θ̂1d for the solution of the fused lasso problem in (2) over the chain, also called the 1d fused lasso solution, i.e., to be explicit, n−1  θ̂1d  X 1 = argmin ky − θk22 + λ |θi+1 − θi |. 2 θ∈Rn  (7)  i=1  We write BV1d (t) and BD1d (s) for the bounded variation and bounded differences classes with respect to the chain, i.e., to be explicit, BV1d (t) = {θ ∈ Rn : k∇1d θk1 ≤ t}, BD1d (s) = {θ ∈ Rn : k∇1d θk0 ≤ s}. Lastly, in addition to the standard notation an = O(bn ), for sequences an , bn such that an /bn is upper −1 bounded for n large enough, we use an  bn to denote that both an = O(bn ) and a−1 n = O(bn ). Also, for random sequences An , Bn , we use An = OP (Bn ) to denote that An /Bn is bounded in probability.  1.3  Related work  Since its inception in the signal processing and statistics communities in Rudin et al. [1992] and Tibshirani et al. [2005], respectively, there has been an impressive amount of work on total variation penalization and the fused lasso. We do not attempt to give a complete coverage, but point out some relevant computational and theoretical advances, covering the two categories separately. 4  Computational. On the computational side, it is first worth pointing out that there are multiple efficient algorithms for solving the fused lasso problem over a chain graph, i.e., the 1d fused lasso problem. Davies and Kovac [2001] derived an algorithm based on a “taut string” perspective that solves the 1d fused lasso problem in O(n) time (but, the fact that their taut string method solves the 1d fused lasso problem was not explicitly stated in the work). This was later extended by Condat [2012], Barbero and Sra [2014] to allow for arbitrary weights in both of the individual penalty and loss terms. Johnson [2013] proposed an entirely different O(n) time algorithm for the fused lasso based on dynamic programming. The taut string and dynamic programming algorithms are extremely fast in practice (e.g., they can solve a 1d fused lasso problem with n in the tens of millions in just a few seconds on a standard laptop). Kolmogorov et al. [2016] extended the dynamic programming approach of Johnson [2013] to solve the fused lasso problem on a tree. Their algorithm in theoretically very efficient, with O(n log n) running time, but the implementation that achieves this running time (we have found) can be practically slow for large problem sizes, compared to dynamic programming on a chain graph. Alternative implementations are possible, and may well improve practical efficiency, but as far as we see it, they will all involve somewhat sophisticated data structures in the “merge” steps in the forward pass of dynamic programming. Barbero and Sra [2014] extended (though not in the same direct manner) fast 1d fused lasso optimizers to work over grid graphs, using operator splitting techniques like Douglas-Rachford splitting. Their techniques appear to be quite efficient in practice, and the authors provide thorough comparisons and a thorough literature review of related methods. Over general graphs structures, many algorithms have been proposed, e.g., to highlight a few: Chambolle and Darbon [2009] described a direct algorithm based on a reduction to parametric max flow programming; Hoefling [2010], Tibshirani and Taylor [2011] gave solution path algorithms (tracing out the solution in (2) over all λ ∈ [0, ∞]); Chambolle and Pock [2011] described what can be seen as a kind of preconditioned ADMM-style algorithm; Kovac and Smith [2011] described an active set approach; Tansey and Scott [2015] leveraged fast 1d fused lasso solvers in an ADMM decomposition over trails of the graph; most recently, Landrieu and Obozinski [2015] derived a new method based on graph cuts. We emphasize that, even with the advent of these numerous clever computational techniques for the fused lasso over general graphs, it is still far slower to solve the fused lasso over an arbitrary graph than it is to solve the fused lasso over a chain. Theoretical. On the theoretical side, it seems that the majority of statistical theory on the fused lasso can be placed into two categories: analysis of changepoint recovery, and analysis of MSE. Some examples of works focusing on changepoint recovery are Rinaldo [2009], Harchaoui and Levy-Leduc [2010], Qian and Jia [2012], Rojas and Wahlberg [2014]. The statistical theory will concern MSE rates, and hence we give a more detailed review of related literature for this topic. We begin with results for chain graphs. Mammen and van de Geer [1997] proved, when θ0 ∈ BV1d (t), that the 1d fused lasso estimator estimator θ̂1d with λ  t−1/3 n1/3 satisfies kθ̂1d − θ0 k2n = OP (t2/3 n−2/3 ).  (8)  This is indeed the minimax MSE rate for the class BV1d (t), as implied by the minimax results in Donoho and Johnstone [1998]. (For descriptions of the above upper bound and this minimax rate in a language more in line with that of the current paper, see Tibshirani [2014].) Recently, Lin et al. [2016] improved on earlier results for the bounded differences class in Dalalyan et al. [2014], and proved that when θ0 ∈ BD1d (s), the 1d fused lasso estimator θ̂1d with λ  (nWn )1/4 satisfies    p s kθ̂1d − θ0 k2n = OP (9) (log s + log log n) log n + n/Wn , n where Wn denotes the minimum distance between positions at which nonzero differences occur in θ0 , more precisely, Wn = min{|i − j| : (∇1d θ0 )i 6= 0, (∇1d θ0 )j 6= 0}. When these nonzero differences or “jumps” 5  in θ0 are evenly spaced apart, we have Wn  n/s, and the above becomes, for λ    s(log s + log log n) log n s3/2 2 . + kθ̂1d − θ0 kn = OP n n  √  ns−1/4 , (10)  This is quite close to the minimax lower bound, whose rate is s log(n/s)/n, that we establish for the class BD1d (s), in Theorem 7. (The minimax lower bound that we prove this theorem actually holds beyond the chain graph, and applies to tree graphs). We can see that the 1d fused lasso rate in (10) is only off by a factor of log log n, provided that s does not grow too fast (specifically, s = O((log n log log n)2 )). Beyond chain graphs, the story is in general much less clear, however, interesting results are known in special cases. For a d-dimensional grid graph, with d ≥ 2, Hutter and Rigollet [2016] recently improved on results of Wang et al. [2016], showing that for θ0 ∈ BVG (t) ∩ BDG (s), the fused lasso estimator θ̂G over G satisfies   loga n 2 kθ̂G − θ0 kn = OP min{t, s} . (11) n when λ  loga/2 n, where a = 2 if d = 2, and a = 1 if d ≥ 3. A minimax lower p bound on the MSE rate for the BVG (t) class over a grid G of dimension d ≥ 2 was established to be t log(n/t)/n, by Sadhanala et al. [2016]. This makes the rate achieved by the fused lasso in (11) nearly optimal for bounded variation signals, off by at most a log3/2 n factor when d = 2, and a log n factor when d ≥ 3. Wang et al. [2016], Hutter and Rigollet [2016] also derived MSE rates for the fused lasso over several other graph structures, such as Erdos-Renyi random graphs, Ramanujan d-regular graphs, star graphs, and complete graphs. As it is perhaps the most relevant to our goals in this paper, we highlight the MSE bound from Wang et al. [2016] that applies to arbitrary connected graphs. Their Theorem 3 √ implies, for a generic connected graph G, θ0 ∈ BVG (t), that the fused lasso estimator θ̂G over G with λ  n log n satisfies r  log n 2 kθ̂G − θ0 kn = OP t . (12) n (See Appendix A.1 for details.) In Theorem 3, we show that the universal tn−1/2 rate (ignoring log terms) in (12) for the fused lasso over an arbitrary connected graph can be improved to t2/3 n−2/3 . In Theorem 2, we show that the same rate can indeed be achieved by a simple, linear-time algorithm: the DFS fused lasso.  1.4  Outline  In Section 2, we prove a simple but key lemma relating the `1 norm (and `0 ) norm of differences on a tree and a chain induced by running DFS. We then define the DFS fused lasso estimator. In Section 3, we derive MSE rates for the DFS fused lasso, and the fused lasso over the original graph G in question, for signals of bounded variation. We also derive lower bounds for the minimax MSE rate over trees. In Section 4, we proceed similarly, but for signals with bounded differences. In Section 5, we cover numerical experiments, and in Section 6, we summarize our work and also describe some potential extensions.  2  The DFS fused lasso  In this section, we define the DFS-induced chain graph and the DFS fused lasso.  2.1  Tree and chain embeddings  We start by studying some of the fundamental properties associated with total variation on general graphs, and embedded trees and chains. Given a graph G = (V, E), let T = (V, ET ) be an arbitrary spanning tree 6  of G. It is clear that for any signal, its total variation of over T is no larger than its total variation over G, X X k∇T θk1 = |θe+ − θe− | ≤ |θe+ − θe− | = k∇G θk1 , for all θ ∈ Rn . (13) e∈ET  e∈E  The above inequality, albeit very simple, reveals to us the following important fact: if the underlying mean θ0 in (1) is assumed to be smooth with respect to the graph G, inasmuch as k∇G θ0 k1 ≤ t, then it must also be smooth with respect to any spanning tree T of G, since k∇T θ0 k1 ≤ t. Roughly speaking, computing the fused lasso solution in (2) over a spanning tree T , instead of G, would therefore still be reasonable for the denoising purposes, as the mean θ0 would still be smooth over T according to the total variation metric. The same property as in (14) also holds if we replace total variation by the cut metric: X X k∇T θk0 = 1{θe+ 6= θe− } ≤ 1{θe+ 6= θe− } = k∇G θk0 , for all θ ∈ Rn . (14) e∈ET  e∈E  Thus for the mean θ0 , the property k∇G θ0 k0 ≤ s again implies k∇T θ0 k0 ≤ s for any spanning tree T of G, and this would again justify solving the fused lasso over T , in place of G, assuming smoothness of θ0 with respect to the cut metric in the first place. Here we go one step further than (13), (14), and assert that analogous properties actually hold for specially embedded chain graphs. The next lemma gives the key result. Lemma 1. Let G = (V, E) be a connected graph, where recall we write V = {1, . . . , n}. Consider depthfirst search (DFS) run on G, and denote by v1 , . . . , vn the nodes in the order in which they are reached by DFS. Hence, DFS first visits v1 , then v2 , then v3 , etc. This induces a bijection τ : {1, . . . , n} → {1, . . . , n}, such that τ (i) = vi , for all i = 1, . . . , n. Let P ∈ Rn×n denote the permutation associated with τ . Then it holds that k∇1d P θk1 ≤ 2k∇G θk1 ,  for all θ ∈ Rn ,  (15)  k∇1d P θk0 ≤ 2k∇G θk0 ,  for all θ ∈ Rn .  (16)  as well as Proof. The proof is simple. Observe that k∇1d P θk1 =  X  |θτ (i+1) − θτ (i) |,  (17)  i=1,...,n−1  and consider an arbitrary summand |θτ (i+1) − θτ (i) |. There are now two cases to examine. First, suppose τ (i) is not a leaf node, and τ (i + 1) has not yet been visited by DFS; then there is an edge e ∈ E such that {e− , e+ } = {τ (i), τ (i + 1)}, and |θτ (i+1) − θτ (i) | = |θe+ − θe− |. Second, suppose that either τ (i) is a leaf node, or all of its neighbors have already been visited by DFS; then there is a path p = {p1 , . . . , pr } in the graph such that p1 = τ (i), pr = τ (i + 1), and each {pj , pj+1 } ∈ E, j = 1, . . . , r − 1, so that by the triangle inequality r−1 X |θτ (i+1) − θτ (i) | ≤ |θpj−1 − θpj |. j=1  Applying this logic over all terms in the sum in (17), and invoking the fundamental property that DFS visits each edge exactly twice (e.g., Chapter 22 of Cormen et al. [2001]), we have established (15). The proof for (16) follows from precisely the same arguments. 7  Example 1. The proof behind Lemma 1 can also be clearly demonstrated through an example. We consider G to be a binary tree graph with n = 7 nodes, shown below, where we have labeled the nodes according to the order in which they are visited by DFS (i.e., so that here P is the identity). 1  5  2  3  7  6  4  In this case, k∆1d θk1 =  6 X  |θi+1 − θi |  i=1    ≤ |θ2 − θ1 | + |θ3 − θ2 | + |θ3 − θ2 | + |θ4 − θ2 | + |θ4 − θ2 | + |θ2 − θ1 | + |θ5 − θ1 |  + |θ6 − θ5 | + |θ6 − θ5 | + |θ7 − θ5 | X ≤2 |θe+ − θe− | = 2k∇G θk1 , e∈G  where in the inequality above, we have used triangle inequality for each term in parentheses individually.  2.2  The DFS fused lasso  We define the DFS fused lasso estimator, θ̂DFS , to be the fused lasso estimator over the chain graph induced by running DFS on G. Formally, if τ denotes the bijection associated with the DFS ordering (as described in Lemma 1), then the DFS-induced chain graph can be expressed as C = (V, EC ) where V = {1, . . . , n} and EC = {{τ (1), τ (2)}, . . . , {τ (n − 1), τ (n)}}. Denoting by P the permutation matrix associated with τ , the edge incidence matrix of C is simply ∇C = ∇1d P , and the DFS fused lasso estimator is given by θ̂DFS = argmin θ∈Rn  = P  >  1 ky − θk22 + λk∇1d P θk1 2  ! n−1 X 1 2 |θi+1 − θi | . argmin kP y − θk2 + λ 2 θ∈Rn  (18)  i=1  Therefore, we only need to compute the 1d fused lasso estimator on a permuted data vector P y, and apply the inverse permutation operator P > , in order to compute θ̂DFS . Given the permutation matrix P , the computational cost of (18) is O(n), since, to recall the discussion in Section 1.3, the 1d fused lasso problem (7) can be solved in O(n) operations with dynamic programming or taut string algorithms. The permutation P is obtained by running DFS, which requires O(m) operations, and makes the total computation cost of the DFS fused lasso estimator O(m + n). It should be noted that, when multiple estimates are desired over the same graph G, we must only run DFS once, and all subsequent estimates on the induced chain require just O(n) operations. The bounds in (15), (16) for the DFS chain are like those in (13), (14) for spanning trees, and carry the same motivation as that discussed above for spanning trees, beneath (13), (14): if the mean θ0 is assumed to be smooth with respect to t, insofar as its total variation satisfies k∇G θ0 k1 ≤ t, then denoising with respect 8  to C would also be reasonable, in that k∇1d P θ0 k1 ≤ 2t; the same can be said for the cut metric. However, it is the rapid O(m + n) computational cost of the DFS fused lasso, and also the simplicity of the dynamic programming and taut string algorithms for the 1d fused lasso problem (7), that makes (15), (16) particularly appealing compared to (13), (14). To recall the discussion in Section 1.3, the fused lasso can in principle be computed efficiently over a tree, in O(n log n) operations using dynamic programming, but this requires a much more cumbersome implementation and in practice we have found it to be noticeably slower.  2.3  Running DFS on a spanning tree  We can think of the induced chain graph, as described in the last section, as being computed in two steps: (i) run DFS to compute a spanning tree T of G; (ii) run DFS on the spanning tree T to define the chain C. Clearly, this is the same as running DFS on G to define the induced chain C, so decomposing this process into two steps as we have done above may seem odd. But this decomposition provides a useful perspective because it leads to the idea that we could compute the spanning tree T in Step (i) in any fashion, and then proceed with DFS on T in Step 2 in order to define the chain C. Indeed, any spanning tree in Step (i) will lead to a chain C that has the properties (15), (16) as guaranteed by Lemma 1. This may be of interest if we could compute a spanning tree T that better represents the topology of the original graph G, so that the differences over the eventual chain C better mimicks those over G. An example of a spanning tree whose topology is designed to reflect that of the original graph is a lowstretch spanning tree. Current interest on low-stretch spanning trees began with the breakthrough results in Elkin et al. [2008]; most recently, Abraham and Neiman [2012] showed that a spanning tree with average stretch O(log n log log n) can be computed in O(m log n log log n) operations. In Section 5, we investigate low-stretch spanning trees experimentally. In Section 6.4, we discuss a setting in which the fused lasso problem (2) has arbitrary penalty weights, which gives rise to a weighted graph G. In this setting, an example of a spanning tree that can be crafted so that its edges represent important differences in the original graph is a maximum spanning tree. Prim’s and Kruskal’s minimum spanning tree algorithms, each of which take O(m log n) time [Cormen et al., 2001], can be used to compute a maximum spanning tree after we negate all edge weights.  2.4  Averaging multiple DFS estimators  Notice that several DFS-induced chains can be formed from a single seed graph G, by running DFS itself on G with different random starts (or random decisions about which edge to follow at each step in DFS), or by computing different spanning trees T of G (possibly themselves randomized) on which we run DFS, or by (1) (2) (K) some combination, etc. Denoting by θ̂DFS , θ̂DFS , . . . , θ̂DFS the DFS fused estimators fit to K different P lasso (k) induced chains, we might believe that the average estimator, (1/K) K θ̂ k=1 DFS , will have good denoising performance, as it incorporates fusion at each node in multiple directions. In Section 5, we demonstrate that this intuition holds true (at least, across the set of experiments we consider).  3  Analysis for signals of bounded variation  Throughout this section, we assume that the underlying mean θ0 in (1) satisfies θ0 ∈ BVG (t) for a generic connected graph G. We derive upper bounds on the MSE rates of the DFS fused lasso and the fused lasso over G. We also derive a tight lower bound on the minimax MSE when G is a tree that of bounded degree.  9  3.1  The DFS fused lasso  The analysis for the DFS fused lasso estimator is rather straightforward. By assumption, k∇G θ0 k1 ≤ t, and thus k∇1d P θ0 k1 ≤ 2t by (15) in Lemma 1. Hence, we may think of our model (1) as giving us i.i.d. data P y around P θ0 ∈ BV1d (2t), and we may apply existing results from Mammen and van de Geer [1997] on the 1d fused lasso for bounded variation signals, as described in (8) in Section 1.3. This establishes the following. Theorem 2. Consider a data model (1), with i.i.d. sub-Gaussian errors as in (3), and θ0 ∈ BVG (t), where G is a generic connected graph. Then for any DFS ordering of G yielding a permutation matrix P , the DFS fused lasso estimator θ̂DFS in (18), with a choice of tuning parameter λ  t−1/3 n1/3 , has MSE converging in probability at the rate kθ̂DFS − θ0 k2n = OP (t2/3 n−2/3 ). (19) (1)  (2)  (K)  We note that, if multiple DFS fused lasso estimators θ̂DFS , θ̂DFS , . . . , θ̂DFS are computed across multiple different DFS-induced chains on G, then the average estimator clearly satisfies the same bound as in (19), K 1 X (k) θ̂DFS − θ0 K k=1  2  = OP (t2/3 n−2/3 ), n  provided that K is held constant, by the triangle inequality.  3.2  The graph fused lasso  Interestingly, the chain embedding result (15) in Lemma 1 is not only helpful for establishing the MSE rate for the DFS fused lasso estimator in Theorem 2, but it can also be used to improve the best known rate for the original fused lasso estimator over the graph G. In Section 1.3, we described a result (12) that follows from Wang et al. [2016], establishing an MSE rate of tn−1/2 rate (ignoring log terms) for the fused lasso estimator over a connected graph G, when k∇G θ0 k1 ≤ t. In fact, as we will now show, this can be improved to a rate of t2/3 n−2/3 , just as in (19) for the DFS fused lasso. Wang et al. [2016] present a framework for deriving fast MSE rates for fused lasso estimators based on entropy. They show in their Lemma 9 that a bound in probability on the sub-Gaussian complexity > x  max x∈SG (1)  1−w/2  ,  (20)  kxk2  for some 0 < w < 2, where SG (1) = {x ∈ row(∇G ) : k∇G xk1 ≤ 1}, leads to a bound in probability on the MSE of the fused lasso estimator θ̂G over G. (Wang et al. [2016] actually assume Gaussian errors, but their Lemma 9, Theorem 10, Lemma 11, and Corollary 12 still hold for sub-Gaussian errors as in (3)). The sub-Gaussian complexity in (20) is typically controlled via an entropy bound on the class SG (1). Typically, one thinks of controlling entropy by focusing on specific classes of graph structures G. Perhaps surprisingly, Lemma 1 shows we can uniformly control the sub-Gaussian complexity (20) over all connected graphs. For any DFS-induced chain C constructed from G, note first that row(∇G ) = span{1}⊥ = row(∇C ), where 1 = (1, . . . , 1) ∈ Rn is the vector of all 1s. This, and (15) in Lemma 1, imply that > x  max x∈SG (1)  1−w/2  > x  ≤ max x∈SC (2)  kxk2  1−w/2  .  kxk2  Now, taking w = 1, max x∈SC (2)  > x 1/2  kxk2  =  max  x : 1> x=0, k∇1d P xk1 ≤2  > x 1/2  =  kxk2  10  max  x : 1> x=0, k∇1d xk1 ≤1  2−1/2 (P )> x 1/2  kxk2  = OP (n1/4 ).  The last step (asserting that the penultimate term is OP (n1/4 )) holds by first noting that P  is equal in law to  (as we have assumed i.i.d. components of the error vector), and then applying results on the chain graph in Theorem 10, Lemma 11, and Corollary 12 of Wang et al. [2016]. Applying Lemma 9 of Wang et al. [2016], we have now established the following result. Theorem 3. Consider a data model (1), with i.i.d. sub-Gaussian errors as in (3), and θ0 ∈ BVG (t), where G is a generic connected graph. Then the fused lasso estimator θ̂G over G, in (2), under a choice of tuning parameter λ  t−1/3 n1/3 , has MSE converging in probability at the rate kθ̂G − θ0 k2n = OP (t2/3 n−2/3 ).  (21)  In a sense, the above theorem suggests that the chain graph is among the hardest graphs for denoising bounded variation signals, since the fused lasso estimator on any connected graph G will achieve an MSE rate in that is at least as good as in the chain rate, if not better. In this vein, it is worth emphasizing that the MSE bound in (21) is not tight for certain graph structures; a good example is the 2d grid, where we must compare (21) from the theorem to the known MSE bound in (11) from Hutter and Rigollet [2016], the latter being only log factors from optimal, as shown in Sadhanala et al. [2016]. It is natural for the 2d grid graph √ to consider the scaling t  n (as argued in Sadhanala et al. [2016]), in which case the rates for the fused lasso estimator are n−1/3 from Theorem 3 versus (log2 n)n−1/2 from Hutter and Rigollet [2016].  3.3  Minimax lower bound over trees  We derive a lower bound for the MSE over the class BVG (t) when G is a tree graph. The proof applies Assouad’s Lemma [Yu, 1997], over a discrete set of probability measures constructed by a careful partitioning of the vertices of G, that balances both the sizes of each partition element and the number of edges crossing in between partition elements. It is deferred until Appendx A.2. Theorem 4. Consider a data model (1), with i.i.d. Gaussian errors i ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), i = 1, . . . , n, and with θ0 ∈ BVG (t), where G is a tree graph, having maximum degree dmax . Then there exists absolute constants N, C > 0, such that for n/(tdmax ) > N , inf  sup  θ̂  θ0 ∈BVG (t)  Ekθ̂ −  θ0 k2n   ≥C  t σd2max n  2/3 .  (22)  The theorem demonstrates that, for trees of bounded degree, such as the chain and balanced d-ary trees, the fused lasso estimator over the tree achieves achieves the minimax rate, as does the DFS fused lasso.  4  Analysis for signals with bounded differences  We assume that the underlying mean θ0 in (1) satisfies θ0 ∈ BDG (s) for a generic connected graph G. We analyze the MSE of the DFS fused lasso, as well as (a particular formulation of) wavelet denoising over G. We again establish a lower bound on the minimax MSE when G is a tree.  4.1  The DFS fused lasso  As it was for the bounded variation case, the analysis for the DFS fused lasso estimator is straightforward. By assumption, k∇G θ0 k0 ≤ s, thus k∇1d P θ0 k0 ≤ 2s by (16) in Lemma 1, and we may think of our model (1) as having i.i.d. data P y around P θ0 ∈ BD1d (2s). Applying an existing result on the 1d fused lasso for bounded differences signals, as described in (9), from Lin et al. [2016], gives the following result. 11  Theorem 5. Consider a data model (1), with i.i.d. sub-Gaussian errors as in (3), and θ0 ∈ BDG (s), for a connected graph G. Consider an arbitrary DFS ordering of G, that defines a permutation matrix P and the DFS fused lasso estimator θ̂DFS in (18). Denote by Wn = min{|i − j| : (∇1d P θ0 )i 6= 0, (∇1d P θ0 )j 6= 0} the minimum distance between positions, measured along the DFS-induced chain, at which nonzero differences or jumps occur in θ0 . Then, under a choice of tuning parameter λ  (nWn )1/4 , the DFS fused lasso estimator has MSE converging in probability at the rate    p s 2 kθ̂DFS − θ0 kn = OP (23) (log s + log log n) log n + n/Wn . n √ Hence, if the s jumps along the DFS chain are evenly spaced apart, i.e., Wn  n/s, then for λ  ns−1/4 , kθ̂DFSr −  θ0 k2n   = OP   s(log s + log log n) log n s3/2 . + n n  (24)  An undesirable feature of applying existing 1d fused lasso results for signals with bounded differences, in the above result, is the dependence on Wn in the DFS fused lasso error bound (23) (we applied the result (9) from Lin et al. [2016], but the bounds from Dalalyan et al. [2014] also depend on Wn , and as far as we can tell, so should any analysis of the 1d fused lasso for signals with bounded differences). In the 1d setting, assuming that Wn  n/s, which says that jumps in θ0 occur at roughly equally spaced positions, is fairly reasonable; but to assume the same when the jumps are measured with respect to the DFS-induced chain, as we must in order to establish (24), is perhaps not. Even if the differences apparent in θ0 over edges in G are somehow (loosely speaking) spaced far apart, running DFS could well produce an ordering such that jumps in P θ0 occur at positions very close together. We reiterate that the MSE bounds for the DFS fused lasso for bounded variation signals, in Theorem 2, do not suffer from any such complications.  4.2  Graph wavelet denoising  We compare the performances of the DFS fused lasso and wavelet denoising using spanning tree wavelets, for signals with bounded differences. For spanning tree wavelets, the construction starts with a spanning tree and carefully defines a hierarchical decomposition by recursively finding and splitting around a balancing vertex, which is a vertex whose adjacent subtrees are of size at most half of the original tree; this decomposition is used to construct an unbalanced Haar wavelet basis, as in Singh et al. [2010]. In Sharpnack et al. [2013], it was shown that for any connected graph G, the constructed wavelet basis W ∈ Rn×n satisfies kW θk0 ≤ dlog dmax edlog nek∇G θk0 ,  for all θ ∈ Rn ,  (25)  where dmax is the maximum degree of G, and the above holds regardless of choice of spanning tree in the wavelet construction. Now consider the wavelet denoising estimator θ̂W = argmin θ∈Rn  1 ky − θk22 + λkW θk1 . 2  (26)  The following is an immediate consequence of (25), the fact that the wavelet basis W is orthonormal, and standard results about soft-thresholding (e.g., Lemma 2.8 in [Johnstone, 2011]). Theorem 6. Consider a data model (1), with i.i.d. Gaussian errors i ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), i = 1, . . . , n, and with θ0 ∈ BVG (t), where G is a connected graph, √ having maximum degree dmax . Then the spanning tree wavelet estimator θ̂W in (26), with a choice λ  log n, has MSE converging in expectation at the rate   s log dmax log2 n 2 Ekθ̂W − θ0 kn = O . (27) n 12  The result in (27) has the advantage over the DFS fused lasso result in (23) that it does not depend on a hard-to-interpret quantity like Wn , the minimum spacing between jumps along the DFS-induced chain. But when (say) dmax  1, s  1, and we are willing to assume that Wn  n (meaning the jumps of θ0 occur at positions evenly spaced apart on the DFS chain), we can see that the spanning tree wavelet rate in (27) is just slightly slower than the DFS fused lasso rate in (24), by a factor of log n/ log log n. While the comparison between the DFS fused lasso and wavelet rates, (23) and (27), show an advantage to spanning tree wavelet denoising, as it does not require assumptions about the spacings between nonzero differences in θ0 , we have found nonetheless that the DFS fused lasso to performs well in practice compared to spanning tree wavelets, and indeed often outperforms the latter in terms of MSE. Experiments comparing the two methods are presented Section 5.  4.3  Minimax lower bound for trees  We now derive a lower bound for the MSE over the class BDG (s) when G is a tree graph. The proof relates the current denoising problem to one of estimating sparse normal means, with a careful construction of the sparsity set using degree properties of trees. It is deferred until Appendix A.3. Theorem 7. Consider a data model (1), with i.i.d. Gaussian errors i ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), i = 1, . . . , n, and with θ0 ∈ BDG (s), where G is a tree. Then there are absolute constants N, C > 0, such that for n/s > N , n s inf sup Ekθ̂ − θ0 k2n ≥ Cσ 2 log . (28) n s θ̂ θ0 ∈BDG (s) The MSE lower bound in (28) shows that, when we are willing to assume that Wn  n/s in the DFSinduced chain, the DFS fused lasso estimator is a log log n factor away from the optimal rate, provided that s is not too large, namely s = O((log n log log n)2 ). The spanning tree wavelet estimator, on the other hand, is a log n factor from optimal, without any real restrictions on s, i.e., it suffices to have s = O(na ) for some a > 0. It is worth remarking that, for large enough s, the lower bound in (28) is perhaps not very interesting, as in such a case, we may as well consider the bounded variation lower bound in (22), which will likely be tighter (faster).  5  Experiments  In this section we compare experimentally the speed and accuracy of two approaches for denoising signals on graphs: the graph fused lasso, and the fused lasso along the chain graph induced by a DFS ordering. In our experiments, we see that the DFS-based denoiser sacrifices a modest amount in terms of mean squared error, while providing gains (sometimes considerable) in computational speed. This shows that our main theorem, in addition to providing new insights on MSE rates for the graph fused lasso, also has important practice consequences. For truly massive problems, where the full graph denoising problem is impractical to solve, we may use the linear-time DFS fused lasso denoiser, and obtain a favorable tradeoff of accuracy for speed.  5.1  Generic graphs  We begin by considering three examples of large graphs of (more or less) generic structure, derived from road networks in three states: California, Pennsylvania, and Texas. Data on these road networks are freely available at https://snap.stanford.edu. In these networks, intersections and endpoints are represented by nodes, and roads connecting these intersections or endpoints are represented by undirected edges; see Leskovec et al. [2009] for more details. For each network, we use the biggest connected component as 13  our graph structure to run comparisons. The graph corresponding to California has n = 1957027 nodes and m = 2760388 edges, the one for Pennsylvania has n = 1088092 nodes and m = 1541898 edges, and the graph for Texas has n = 1351137 nodes and m = 1879201 edges. We compare Laplacian smoothing versus the fused lasso over a DFS-induced chain, on the graphs from the three states. We do not compare with the fused lasso over the original graphs, due to its prohibitive computational cost at such large scales. We used the following procedure to construct a synthetic signal θ0 ∈ Rn on each of the road network graphs, of piecewise constant nature: • an initial seed node v1 is selected uniformly at random from the nodes V = {1, . . . , n} in the graph; • a component C1 is formed based on the bn/10c nodes closest to v1 (where the distance between two nodes in the graph is given by the length of the shortest path between them); • a second seed node v2 is selected uniformly at random from G \ C1 ; • a component C2 is formed based on the bn/10c nodes closest to v2 (again in shortest path distance); • this process is repeated until we have a partition C1 , . . . , C10 of the node set V into components of (roughly) equal size, and θ0 ∈ Rn is defined to take constant values on each of these components. In our experiments, we considered 20 values of the total variation for the underlying signal. For each, the signal θ0 was scaled appropriately to achieve the given total variation value, and data y ∈ Rn was generated by adding i.i.d. N (0, 0.22 ) noise to the components of θ0 . For each data instance y, the DFS fused lasso and Laplacian smoothing estimators, the former defined by (18) and the latter by θ̂Lap = argmin θ∈Rn  1 ky − θk22 + λθ> LG θ, 2  (29)  where LG = ∇> G ∇G is the Laplacian matrix of the given graph G, and each estimator is computed over 20 values of its own tuning parameter. Then, the value of the tuning parameter minimizing the average MSE, over 50 draws of data y around θ0 , was selected for each method. Finally, this optimized MSE, averaged over the 50 draws of data y, and further, over 10 repetitions of the procedure for constructing the signal θ0 explained above, was recorded. Figure 1 displays the optimized MSE for the DFS fused lasso and Laplacian smoothing, as the total variation of the underlying signal varies, for the three road network graphs. As we can see from the figure, for low values of the underlying total variation, i.e., low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) levels, Laplacian smoothing and the DFS fused lasso, each tuned to optimality, perform about the same. This is because at low enough SNR levels, each will be approximating θ0 by something like ȳ1, with ȳ being the sample average of the data vector y. But as the SNR increases, we see that the DFS fused lasso outpeforms Laplacian smoothing by a considerable amount. This might seem surprising, as Laplacian smoothing uses information from the entire graph, whereas the DFS fused lasso reduces the rich structure of the road network graph in each case to that of an embedded chain. However, Laplacian smoothing is a linear smoother (meaning that θ̂Lap in (29) is a linear function of the data y), and therefore it comes with certain limitations when estimating signals of bounded variation (e.g., see the seminal work of Donoho and Johnstone [1998], and the more recent graph-based work of Sadhanala et al. [2016]). In contrast, the DFS fused lasso is a nonlinear estimator, and while it discards some information in the original graph structure, it retains enough of the strong adaptivity properties of the fused lasso over the original graph to statistically dominate a linear estimator like Laplacian smoothing. Lastly, in terms of computational time, it took an average of 82.67 seconds, 44.02 seconds, and 54.49 seconds to compute the 20 DFS fused lasso solutions (i.e., over the 20 tuning parameter values) for the road network graphs from California, Pennsylvania, and Texas, respectively (the averages are taken over the 50 draws of data y around each signal θ0 , and the 10 repetitions in constructing θ0 ). By comparison, it took an 14  Pennsylvania ●  DFS fused lasso Laplacian smoothing  Texas ●  DFS fused lasso Laplacian smoothing  ●  ●  0.015  ● ●  ●  ●  0.015  ●  ● ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  0.002  ● ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ● ●  ● ●  ● ●  ● ● ● ●  10000  15000  Total variation  20000  ●  ●  ●  0.000  ●  0.000  0.000  ● ●  ●  ●  ● ● ●  5000  ● ●  ● ●  ●  ● ● ●  ●  ●  0.010  0.010  ● ●  0.005  ●  ●  ●  ●  0.005  ●  Optimized MSE  ●  Optimized MSE  0.006  ● ●  0.004  Optimized MSE  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  DFS fused lasso Laplacian smoothing  ●  ● ●  0.008  0.020  0.010  California  ●  5000  10000  15000  Total variation  20000  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  5000  10000  15000  20000  Total variation  Figure 1: The optimized MSE for the DFS fused lasso and Laplacian smoothing (i.e., MSE achieved by these methods under optimal tuning) is plotted as a function of the total variation of the underlying signal, for each of the three road network graphs. This has been averaged over 50 draws of data y for each construction of the underlying signal θ0 , and 10 repetitions in constructing θ0 itself. For low values of the underlying total variation, i.e., low SNR levels, the two methods perform about the same, but as the SNR increases, the DFS fused lasso outperforms Laplacian smoothing by a considerable margin.  average of 2748.26 seconds, 1891.97 seconds, and 1487.36 seconds to compute the 20 Laplacian smoothing solutions for the same graphs. The computations and timings were performed on a standard laptop computer (with a 2.80GHz Intel Core i7-2640M processor). For the DFS fused lasso, in each problem instance, we first computed a DFS ordering using the dfs function from the R package igraph, which is an R wrapper for a C++ implementation of DFS, and initialized the algorithm at a random node for the root. We then computed the appropriate 1d fused lasso solutions using the trendfilter function from the R package glmgen, which is an R wrapper for a C++ implementation of the fast (linear-time) dynamic programming algorithm in Johnson [2013]. For Laplacian smoothing, we used the solve function from the R package Matrix, which is an R wrapper for a C++ implementation of the sparse Cholesky-based solver in Davis and Hager [2009]. For such large graphs, alternative algorithms, such as (preconditioned) conjugate gradient methods, could certainly be more efficient in computing Laplacian smoothing solutions; our reported timings are only meant to indicate that the DFS fused lasso is efficiently computable at problem sizes that are large enough that even a simple linear method like Laplacian smoothing becomes nontrivial.  5.2  2d grid graphs  Next we consider a denoising example on a 2d grid graph of dimension 1000 × 1000, so that the number of nodes is n = 1000000 and the number of edges is m = 1998000. We generated a synthetic piecewise constant signal θ0 ∈ R1000×1000 over the 2d grid, shown in the top left corner of Figure 2, where a color scale (displayed in the accompanying color legend) is used, with red denoting the smallest possible value and yellow the largest possible value. Data y ∈ R1000×1000 was generated by adding i.i.d. N (0, 1) noise to the components of θ0 , displayed in the top middle panel of Figure 2. We then computed the 2d fused lasso solution (i.e., the fused lasso solution over the full 2d grid graph), as well as three DFS-based variations: the DFS fused lasso solution using a random DFS ordering (given by running DFS beginning at a random node), labeled as “1 random DFS” in the figure; the average of DFS fused lasso solutions over 5 random 15  DFS orderings, labeled “5 random DFS” in the figure; and the average of DFS fused lasso solutions over 2 “snake” DFS orderings (one given by collecting and joining all horizontal edges and the other all vertical edges) labeled “2 snake DFS” in the figure. The tuning parameter for each method displayed in the figure was chosen to minimize the average MSE over 100 draws of the data y from the specified model. Visually, we can see that the full 2d fused lasso solution is the most accurate, however, the 1 random DFS, 5 random DFS, and 2 snake DFS solutions all still clearly capture the structure inherent in the underlying signal. Of the three DFS variations, the 5 random DFS estimator is visually most accurate; the 1 random DFS estimator is comparably “blotchy”, and the 2 snake DFS estimator is comparably “stripey”. The left panel of 3 shows the optimized MSE for each method, i.e., the minimum of the average MSE over 100 draws of the data y, when we consider 20 choices for the tuning parameter. This optimized MSE is plotted as a function of the sample size, which runs from n = 2500 (a 50 × 50 grid) to n = 1000000 (a 1000 × 1000 grid), and in each case the underlying signal is formed by taking an appropriate (sub)resolution of the image in the top left panel of Figure 2. The 2d fused lasso provides the fastest decrease in MSE as n grows, followed by the 5 random DFS estimator, then the 1 random DFS estimator, and the 2 snake DFS estimator. This is not a surprise, since the 2d fused lasso uses the information from the full 2d grid. Indeed, comparing (11) and (19), we recall that the 2d fused lasso enjoys an MSE rate of t log2 n/n when θ0 has 2d total variation t, whereas the DFS fused lasso has an MSE rate of only (t/n)2/3 in this setting. When √ t  n, which is a natural scaling for the underlying total variation in 2d and also the scaling considered in the experimental setup for the figure, these rates are (log2 n)n−1/2 for the 2d fused lasso, and n−1/3 for the DFS fused lasso. The figure uses a log-log plot, so the MSE curves all appear to have linear trends, and the fitted slopes roughly match these theoretical MSE rates (-0.58 for the 2d fused lasso, and -0.39, -0.40, and -0.36 for the three DFS variations). The right panel of Figure 3 shows the runtimes for each method (averaged over 100 draws of the data y), as a function of the sample size n. The runtime for each method counts the total time taken to compute solutions across 20 tuning parameter values. The computations and timings were carried out on a standard desktop computer (with a 3.40GHz Intel Core i7-4770 processor). To compute 2d fused lasso solutions, we used the TVgen function in the Matlab package proxTV, which is a Matlab wrapper for a C++ implementation of the proximal stacking technique described in Barbero and Sra [2014]. For the DFS fused lasso, we computed initial DFS orderings using the dfs function from the Matlab package MathBGL, and then, as before, used the C++ implementation available through glmgen to compute the appropriate 1d fused lasso solutions. The figure uses a log-log plot, and hence we can see that all DFS-based estimators are quite a bit more efficient than the 2d fused lasso estimator.  5.3  Tree graphs  We finish with denoising comparisons on tree graphs, for sample sizes varying from n = 100 to n = 5300. For each sample size n, a random tree is constructed via a sequential process in which each node is assigned a number of children between 2 and 10 (uniformly at random). Given a tree, an underlying signal θ0 ∈ Rn √ is constructed to be piecewise constant with total variation 5 n (the piecewise constant construction here is made easy because the oriented incidence matrix of a tree is invertible). Data y ∈ Rn was generated by adding i.i.d. N (0, 1) noise to θ0 . We compared the fused lasso estimator over the full tree, 1 random DFS and 5 random DFS estimators (using the terminology from the last subsection), and the wavelet smoothing estimator defined in (26). For each estimator, we computed the entire solution path using the path algorithm of Tibshirani and Taylor [2011] implemented in the R package genlasso, and selected the step along the path to minimize the average MSE over 50 draws of data y around θ0 , and 10 repetitions in constructing θ0 . (The full solution path can be computed here because each estimator can be cast as a generalized lasso problem, and because the problem sizes considered here are not enormous.) The left panel of Figure 4 plots this optimized MSE as a function of the sample size n. We see that the 16  Figure 2: Underlying signal, data, and solutions from the 2d fused lasso and different variations on the DFS fused  50.00  lasso fit over a 1000 × 1000 grid.  ●  ●  ●  ● ● ●  ● ●  ● ●  ●  ● ●  0.005  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ● ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ● ●  ● ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  0.002  ● ●  ●  ●  ●●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  5e+04  2e+05  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  1e+06  n  1e+04  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  2d fused lasso 1 random DFS 5 random DFS 2 snake DFS  ●  ● ●  2e+03  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  0.01  ●  ● ●  ●  0.05  ●  ● ● ● ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  2d fused lasso (slope: −0.58) 1 random DFS (slope: −0.39) 5 random DFS (slope: −0.40) 2 snake DFS (slope: −0.36)  ●  ● ●  ●  ●● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  1e+04  ●  ●  ●  ●  5.00  0.010  ●  ●  ●  ●  0.001  ●  ●  ●  ●  2e+03  ●  ●  ●  ●  Optimized MSE  ●  0.50  ●  ● ●  Runtime in seconds  0.020  ●  5e+04  2e+05  1e+06  n  Figure 3: Optimized MSE and runtime for the 2d fused lasso and DFS fused lasso estimators over a 2d grid, as the grid size n (total number of nodes) varies.  17  ●  ●  ● ● ●  ●●  0.035  ●  0.020  ●  ● ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●●  ● ● ● ● ● ● ●  ● ● ● ● ●  0.002  200  500  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●●● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ●●●  1000  2000  5000  ●  ●●●  ● ● ●●●● ● ● ● ●●● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ●●●● ●● ●●●●● ●●●●  0  n  ●  ● ●  50  100  ● ●●●  150  ●  ●  ●● ●  ●  ●  ●●  ●  ●  ●  ●●  ●  ●  0.025  ●  ●●  0.020  0.010  ● ●  100  ●  ● ●  MSE  ●  ●  ●  ● ● ●  ●  0.005  Optimized MSE  ● ● ●  Tree fused lasso 1 random DFS Wavelet smoothing  0.040  Tree fused lasso 1 random DFS 5 random DFS Wavelet smoothing  0.030  0.050  0.100  fused lasso estimator over the full tree and the 5 random DFS estimator perform more or less equivalently over all sample sizes. The 1 random DFS estimator is slightly worse, and the wavelet smoothing estimator is considerably worse. The right panel shows the the MSE as a function of the effective degrees of freedom of each estimator, for a particular data instance with n = 5300. We see that both the tree fused lasso and 1 random DFS estimators achieve their optimum MSEs at solutions of low complexity (degrees of freedom), whereas wavelet smoothing does not come close to achieving this MSE across its entire path of solutions.  ●●  ● ●●  ●  ●●  ●  ●  ● ● ●●  ●  200  250  Degrees of freedom  Figure 4: The left panel shows the optimized MSE as a function of the sample size for the fused lasso over a tree graph, as well as the 1 random DFS and 5 random DFS estimators, and wavelet smoothing. The right panel  6  Discussion  Recently, there has been a significant amount on interest on graph-structured denoising. Much of this work has focused on the construction of graph kernels or wavelet bases. We have proposed and studied a simple method, defined by computing the 1d fused lasso over a particular DFS-induced ordering of the nodes of a general graph. This linear-time algorithm comes with strong theoretical guarantees for signals of bounded variation (achieving optimal MSE rates for trees of bounded degree), as well as guarantees for signals with a bounded number of nonzero differences (achieving nearly optimal rates under a condition on the spacings of jumps along the DFS-induced chain). We summarize our theoretical results in Table 1. Practically, we have seen that the DFS fused lasso can often represent a useful tradeoff between computational efficiency and statistical accuracy, versus competing methods that offer better statistical denoising power but are more computationally expensive, especially for large problems. A simple trick like averaging multiple DFS fused lasso fits, over multiple random DFS-induced chains, often improves statistical accuracy at little increased computational cost. Several extensions along these lines, and other lines, are possible. To study any of them in detail is beyond the scope of this paper. We discuss them briefly below, leaving detailed follow-up to future work.  18  BVG (t), t  1  BDG (s), s  1  Fused lasso, θ̂G  n−2/3  unknown  Spanning tree wavelets, θ̂W  unknown  (log2 n log dmax )/n  DFS fused lasso, θ̂DFS  n−2/3  (log n log log n)/n∗  Tree lower bound  n−2/3 dmax  −4/3  log n/n  Table 1: A summary of the theoretical results derived in this paper. All rates are on the mean squared error (MSE) scale (Ekθ̂ − θ0 k2n for an estimator θ̂), and for simplicity, are presented under a constant scaling for t, s, the radii in the BVG (t), BDG (s) classes, respectively. The superscript “∗ ” in the BDG (s) rate for the DFS fused lasso is used to emphasize that this rate only holds under the assumption that Wn  n. Also, we write dmax to denote the max degree of the graph in question.  6.1  Beyond simple averaging (1)  (K)  Given multiple DFS fused lasso estimators, θ̂DFS , . . . , θ̂DFS , obtained using multiple DFS-induced chains computed on the same graph G, there are several possibilities intelligently combining these estimators P for(k) (K) θ̂ beyond the simple average, denoted (say) θ̄DFS = (1/K) K k=1 DFS . To better preserve edges in the com(1) (K) bined estimator, we could run a simple nonlinear filter—for example, a median filter, over θ̂DFS , . . . , θ̂DFS (meaning that the combined estimator is defined by taking medians over local neighborhoods of all of the individual estimators). A more sophisticated approach would be to compute the DFS fused lasso estimators sequentially, using the (k − 1)st estimator to modify the response in some way in the 1d fused lasso problem that defines the kth DFS fused lasso estimator. We are intentionally vague here with the specifics, because such a modification could be implemented in various ways; for example, it could be useful to borrow ideas from the boosting literature, which would have us treat each DFS fused lasso estimator as a weak learner.  6.2  Distributed algorithm  For large graphs, we should be able to both compute a DFS ordering over G, and solve the DFS fused lasso problem in (18), in a distributed fashion. There are many algorithms for distributed DFS, offering a variety of communication and time complexities; see, e.g., Tsin [2002] for a survey. Distributed algorithms for the 1d fused lasso are not as common, though we can appeal to the now well-studied framework for distributed optimization via the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) from Boyd et al. [2011]. Different formulations for the auxiliary variables present us with different options for communication costs. We have found that, for a formulation that requires O(1)-length messages to be communicated between processors, the algorithm typically converges in a reasonably small number of iterations.  6.3  Theory for piecewise constant signals  The bounded differences class BDG (s) in (5) is defined in terms of the cut metric k∇G θk0 of a parameter θ, which recall, counts the number of nonzero differences occurring in θ over edges in the graph G. The cut metric measures a notion of strong sparsity (compared to the weaker notion measured by the total variation metric) in a signal θ, over edge differences; but, it may not be measuring sparsity on the “right” scale for certain graphs G. Specifically, the cut metric k∇G θk0 can actually be quite large for a parameter θ that is piecewise constant over G, with a small number of pieces—these are groups of connected nodes that are assigned the same constant value in θ. Over the 2d grid graph, e.g., one can easily define a parameter θ that 19  √ has only (say) two constant pieces but on the order of n nonzero edge differences. Therefore, for such a “simple” configuration of the parameter θ, the cut metric k∇G θk0 is deceivingly large. To formally define a metric that measures the number of constant pieces in a parameter θ, with respect to a graph G = (V, E), we introduce a bit of notation. Denote by Z(θ) ⊆ E the subset of edges over which θ exhibits differences of zero, i.e., Z(θ) = {e ∈ E : θe+ = θe− }. Also write (∇G )Z(θ) for the submatrix of the edge incidence matrix ∇G with rows indexed by Z(θ). We define the piece metric by  ρG (θ) = nullity (∇G )Z(θ) , where nullity(·) denotes the dimension of the null space of its argument. An equivalent definition is ρG (θ) = the number of connected components in (V, E \ Z(θ)). We may now define the piecewise constant class, with respect to G, and a parameter s > 0, PCG (s) = {θ ∈ Rn : ρG (θ) ≤ s}. It is not hard to to see that BVG (s) ⊆ PCG (s) (assuming only that G is connected), but for certain graph topologies, the latter class PCG (s) will be much larger. Indeed, to repeat what we have conveyed above, for √ the 2d grid one can naturally define a parameter θ such that θ ∈ BDG ( n) and θ ∈ PCG (2). We conjecture that the fused lasso estimator over G can achieve a fast MSE rate when the mean θ0 in (1) exhibits a small number of constant pieces, i.e., θ0 ∈ PCG (s), provided that these pieces are of roughly equal size. Specifically, assuming ρG (θ0 ) ≤ s, let Wn denote the smallest size of a connected component in the graph (V, E \ Z(θ0 )). Then, for a suitable choice of λ, we conjecture that the fused lasso estimator θ̂G in (2) satisfies    s 2 kθ̂G − θ0 kn = OP polylog n + n/Wn , (conjecture) n where polylog n is a shorthand for a polynomial of log n. This would substantially improve upon existing strong sparsity denoising results, such as (11), (23), (27), since the latter results are all proven for the class BDG (s), which, as we have argued, can be much smaller than PCG (s), depending on the structure of G.  6.4  Weighted graphs  The key result in Lemma 1 can be extended to the setting of a weighted graph G = (V, E, w), with we ≥ 0 denoting the edge weight associated an edge e ∈ E. We state the following without proof, since its proof follows in nearly the exact same way as that of Lemma 1. Lemma 8. Let G = (V, E, w) be a connected weighted graph, where recall we write V = {1, . . . , n}, and we assume all edge weights are nonnegative. Consider running DFS on G, and denote by τ : {1, . . . , n} → {1, . . . , n} the induced permutation, so that if v1 , . . . , vn are the nodes in the order that they are traversed by DFS, then τ (i) = vi , for all i = 1, . . . , n. Denote wmin = mine∈E we , the minimum edge weight present in the graph, and define ( we if e = {i, j} ∈ E, w̃ij = for all i, j = 1, . . . , n. wmin otherwise,  (30)  It holds that n−1 X i=1  w̃τ (i),τ (i+1) θτ (i+1) − θτ (i) ≤ 2  X e∈E  20  we |θe+ − θe− |,  for all θ ∈ Rn ,  (31)  as well as n−1 X  X  w̃τ (i),τ (i+1) 1 θτ (i+1) 6= θτ (i) ≤ 2 we 1{θe+ 6= θe− },  i=1  for all θ ∈ Rn .  (32)  e∈E  The bounds in (31), (32) are the analogies of (15), (16) but for a weighted graph G; indeed we see that we can still embed a DFS chain into G, but this chain itself comes with edge weights, as in (30). These new edge weights in the chain do not cause any computational issues; the 1d fused lasso problem with arbitrary penalty weights can still be solved in O(n) time using the taut string algorithm in Barbero and Sra [2014]. Thus, in principle, all of the results in this paper should carry over in some form to weighted graphs.  6.5  Potts and energy minimization  Replacing the total variation metric by the cut metric in the fused lasso problem (2) gives us θ̃G = argmin θ∈Rn  1 ky − θk22 + λk∇G θk0 , 2  (33)  often called the Potts minimization problem. Because the 1d Potts minimization problem θ̃1d = argmin θ∈Rn  1 ky − θk22 + λk∇1d θk0 2  (34)  can be solved efficiently, e.g., in worst-case O(n2 ) time with dynamic programming Bellman [1961], Johnson [2013], the same strategy that we have proposed in this paper can be applied to reduce the graph Potts problem (33) to a 1d Potts problem (34), via a DFS ordering of the nodes. This may be especially interesting as the original Potts problem (33) is non–convex and generally intractable (i.e., intractable to solve to global optimality) for an arbitrary graph structure, so a reduction to a worst-case quadratic-time denoiser is perhaps very valuable. When the optimization domain in (33) is a discrete set, the problem is often called an energy minimization problem, as in Boykov et al. [2001]. It has not escaped our notice that our technique of denoising over DFS-induced chains could be useful for this setting, as well.  A A.1  Proofs Derivation of (12) from Theorem 3 in Wang et al. [2016]  We first establish a result on the exact form for the inverse of (an augmented version of) the edge incidence matrix of a generic tree T = (V, ET ), where, recall V = {1, . . . , n}. Without a loss of generality, we may assume that the root of T is at node 1. For m ≤ n, we define a path in T , of length m, to be a sequence p1 , . . . , pm such that {pr , pr+1 } ∈ ET for each r = 1, . . . , m − 1. We allow for the possibility that m = 1, in which case the path has just one node. For any j, k, ` = 1, . . . , n, we say that j is on the path from k to ` if there exists a path p1 , . . . , pm such that p1 = k, pm = ` and pr = j for some r = 1, . . . , m. For each node i = 2, . . . , n (each node other than the root), we define its parent p(i) to be the node connected to i which is on the path from the root to i. We can also assume without a loss of generality that for each i = 2, . . . , n, the (i − 1)st row of ∇T corresponds to the edge {p(i), i}, and thus we can write   −1 if j = p(i), (∇T )i−1,j = 1 if j = i,   0 if j ∈ {1, . . . , n} \ {i, p(i)}. 21  for each j = 1, . . . , n. The next lemma describes the inverse of ∇T , in the appropriate sense. Lemma 9. Let e1 = (1, 0, . . . , 0) ∈ Rn , and define the matrix AT ∈ Rn×n by ( 1 if j is on the path from the root to i, (AT )i,j = 0 otherwise,  (35)  for each i, j = 1, . . . , n. Then  AT =  e> 1 ∇T  −1  e> 1 ∇T    .  Proof. We will prove that the product  B=  AT  is the identity. As the root of T corresponds to node 1, we have that by definition of AT that its first column is (AT )·,1 = (1, . . . , 1), which implies that the first column of B is B·,1 = e1 . Moreover, by definition of AT , its first row is (AT )1,· = e> 1, which implies that the first row of B is B1,· = e> 1. Let us now assume that i, j are each not the root. We proceed to consider three cases. Case 1. Let j 6= i, and j be on the path from the root to i. Then j is also on the path from the root to p(i). This implies that  >  e1 Bij = (A ) = (∇T )i−1,· (AT )·,j = 1 − 1 = 0. ∇T i,· T ·,j Case 2. Let j 6= i, and j not be on the path from the root to i. Then j is not on the path from the root to p(i), which implies that  >  e1 Bij = (A ) = (∇T )i−1,· (AT )·,j = 0 − 0 = 0. ∇T i,· T ·,j Case 3. Let j = i. Then j is on the path from the root to i, and j is not on the path from the root to p(i). Hence,  >  e1 Bij = (A ) = (∇T )i−1,· (AT )·,j = −1 · 0 + 1 · 1 = 1. ∇T i,· T ·,j Assembling these three cases, we have shown that B = I, completing the proof. We now establish (12).  22  Proof of (12). The proof of Theorem 3 in Wang et al. [2016] proceeds as in standard basic inequality arguments for the lasso, and arrives at the step kΠ⊥ (θ̂G − θ0 )k22 ≤ 2> Π⊥ (θ̂G − θ0 ) + 2λk∇G θ0 k1 − 2λk∇G θ̂G k1 , where Π⊥ is the projection matrix onto the space span{1}⊥ , i.e., the linear space of all vectors orthogonal to the vector 1 = (1, . . . , 1) ∈ Rn of all 1s. The proof in Wang et al. [2016] uses the identity Π⊥ = ∇†G ∇G , where ∇†G denotes the pseudoinverse of ∇G . However, notice that we may also write Π⊥ = ∇†T ∇T for any spanning tree T of G. Then, exactly the same arguments as in Wang et al. [2016] produce the MSE bound √   M (∇T ) log n 2 kθ̂G − θ0 kn = OP k∇G θ0 k1 , n where M (∇T ) is the maximum `2 norm among the columns of ∇†T . We show below, using Lemma 9, that √ M (∇T ) ≤ n, and this gives the desired MSE rate. For any b ∈ Rn−1 , we may characterize ∇†T b as the unique solution x ∈ Rn to the linear system ∇T x = b, such that 1> x = 0, i.e., the unique solution to the linear system  >    a e1 , x= b ∇T for a value of a ∈ R such that 1> x = 0. By Lemma 9, we may write   a , x = AT b so that the constraint 0 = 1> x = na + 1> (AT )·,2:n b gives a = −(1/n)> (AT )·,2:n b, and x = (I − 11> /n)(AT )·,2:n b. Evaluating this across b = e1 , . . . , en , we find that the maximum `2 norm of columns of ∇†T is bounded by √ the maximum `2 norm of columns of (AT )·,2:n , which, from the definition in (35), is at most n.  A.2  Proof of Theorem 4  We first present two preliminary lemmas. Lemma 10. Let S1 , . . . , Sm be a partition of the nodes of G such that the total number of edges with ends in distinct elements of the partition is at most s. Let k ≤ mini=1,...,m |Si |. Then   kt2 kmt2 2 inf sup Ekθ̂ − θ0 k2 ≥ 2 2 exp − 2 2 . 4σ s σ s θ̂ θ0 ∈BVG (t) Proof. For each η ∈ {−1, 1}m , define m  θη =  δX 1S ηi p i , 2 |Si | i=1  m }. Note that where δ > 0 will√be specified shortly. Also define the class P = {N (θη , σ 2 I) : η ∈ {−1, 1} √ k∇G θη k1 ≤ δs/ k, so to embed P into the class {N (θ, σ 2 I) : θ ∈ BVG (t)}, we set δ = t k/s.  23  Let η, η 0 ∈ {−1, 1}m differ in only one coordinate. Then the KL divergence between the corresponding induced measures in P is kθη − θη0 k22 /σ 2 ≤ δ 2 /σ 2 . Hence by Assouad’s Lemma [Yu, 1997], and a wellknown lower bound on the affinity between probability measures in terms of KL divergence,   δ2m δ2 2 inf sup Ekθ̂ − θ0 k2 ≥ exp − 2 . 4σ 2 σ θ̂ θ0 ∈BVG (t) The result follows by plugging in the specified value for δ. Lemma 11. Let G be a tree with maximum degree dmax , and k ∈ {1, . . . , n} be arbitrary. Then there exists a partition as in Lemma 10, s = m − 1, and k ≤ min  i=1,...,m  |Si | ≤ k(dmax + 1).  Proof. Our proof proceeds inductively. We begin by constructing S10 , the smallest subtree among all those having size at least k, and generated by a cut of size 1 (i.e., separated from the graph by the removal of 1 edge). Note that |S10 | ≤ kdmax , because if not then S10 has at least k internal nodes, and we can remove its root to produce another subtree whose size is smaller but still at least k. For the inductive step, assume S10 , . . . , S`0 have been constructed. We consider two cases. (For a subgraph G0 of G, we denote by G − G0 the complement subgraph, given by removing all nodes in G0 , and all edges incident to a node in G0 .) 0 , the smallest subtree of G − ∪l S 0 among all those Case 1. If |G − ∪`i=1 Si0 | > k, then we construct S`+1 i=1 i 0 | ≤ kd having size at least k, and generated by a cut of size 1. As before, we obtain that |S`+1 max .  Case 2. If |G − ∪`i=1 Si0 | ≤ k, then the process is stopped. We define Si = Si0 , i = 1, . . . , ` − 1, as well as S` = S`0 ∪ (G − ∪`i=1 Si0 ). With m = `, the result follows. We now demonstrate a more precise characterization of the lower bound in Theorem 4, from which the result in the theorem can be derived. Theorem 12. Let G be a tree with maximum degree dmax . Then !2  2/3 2 t σn inf sup Ekθ̂ − θ0 k22 ≥ −1 . 4eσ 2 n 2t(dmax + 1) θ̂ θ0 ∈BVG (t) Proof. Set s = m − 1 and $ k=  σn 2t(dmax + 1)  2/3 % .  By Lemmas 10 and 11, inf  sup  θ̂  θ0 ∈BVG (t)  Ekθ̂ −  θ0 k22  kmt2 ≥ 2 2 exp 4σ s ≥ ≥ ≥ ≥    kt2 − 2 2 σ s      kt2 kt2 exp − 2 4σ 2 m σ (m − 1)2   2 kt t2 k 3 (dmax + 1)2 m2 exp − 4σ 2 m σ 2 n2 (m − 1)2   kt2 4t2 k 3 (dmax + 1)2 exp − 4σ 2 n σ 2 n2 k 2 t2 exp(−1). 4σ 2 n 24  In the above, the third line uses n/m ≤ kdmax as given by Lemma 11, the fourth line simply uses m ≤ n and m2 /(m − 1)2 ≤ 4 (as m ≥ 2), and the last line uses the definition of k. Thus, because 2/3  σn − 1, k≥ 2t(dmax + 1) we have established the desired result.  A.3  Proof of Theorem 7  First we establish that, as G is a tree, the number of nodes of degree at most 2 is at least n/2. Denote by di be the degree of the node i, for each i = 1, . . . , n. Then 2(n − 1) =  n X i=1  di =  X  di +  i : di ≤2  X  di ≥ |{i : di ≤ 2}| + 3|{i : di ≥ 3}| = 3n − 2|{i : di ≤ 2}|.  i : di ≥3  Hence, rearranging, we find that |{i : di ≤ 2}| ≥ n/2 + 1. Let I = {i : di ≤ 2} so that |I| ≥ dn/2e and stipulate that |I| is even without loss of generality. Let k be the largest even number such that k ≤ s/2. Define B = {z ∈ Rn : zI ∈ {−1, 0, +1}|I| , zI c = 0, kzk0 = k}. Note that by construction B ⊆ BDG (s). Assume s ≤ n/6. Then this implies k/2 ≤ n/6 ≤ |I|/3. By Lemma 4 in Raskutti et al. [2011], there exists B̃ ⊆ B such that   |I| − k k , log |B̃| ≥ log 2 k/2 and kz − z 0 k22 ≥ k/2 for all z, z 0 ∈ B̃. Defining B0 = 2δ B̃, for δ > 0 to be specified shortly, we now have kz − z 0 k22 ≥ 2δ 2 k for all z, z 0 ∈ B0 . For θ ∈ B0 , let us consider comparing the measure Pθ = N (θ, σ 2 I) against P0 =pN (0, σ 2 I): the KL divergence between these two satisfies K(Pθ ||P0 ) = kθk22 /σ 2 = 2δ 2 k/σ 2 . Let δ = ασ 2 /(2k) log |B0 |, for a parameter α < 1/8 that we will specify later. We have 1 X K(Pθ ||P0 ) ≤ α log |B0 |. |B0 | θ∈B0  Hence by Theorem 2.5 in Tsybakov [2009], inf  sup  θ̂  θ0 ∈BDG (s)  It holds that δ2k =  s ! p |B | 2α 0 2 2 p 1 − 2α − . P(kθ̂ − θ0 k2 ≥ δ k) ≥ log |B0 | 1 + |B0 | ασ 2 ασ 2 k |I| − k log |B0 | ≥ log ≥ Cσ 2 s log 2 4 k/2  (36)    n , s  for some constant C > 0 depending on α alone. Moreover, the right-hand side in (36) can be lower bounded by (say) 1/4 by taking α to be small enough and assuming n/s is large enough. Thus we have established  ! n 1 inf sup P kθ̂ − θ0 k22 ≥ Cσ 2 s log ≥ , s 4 θ̂ θ0 ∈BDG (s) and the result follows by Markov’s inequality. 25  References I. Abraham and O. Neiman. Using petal-decompositions to build a low stretch spanning tree. ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 44:395–406, 2012. Á. Barbero and S. Sra. Modular proximal optimization for multidimensional total-variation regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.0589, 2014. M. Belkin and P. Niyogi. Using manifold structure for partially labelled classification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 15, 2002. R. Bellman. On the approximation of curves by line segments using dynamic programming. Communications of the ACM, 4(6):284, 1961. S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein. Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 3(1): 1–122, 2011. Y. Boykov, O. Veksler, and R. Zabih. Fast approximate energy minimization via graph cuts. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 23(11):1–18, 2001. A. Chambolle and J. Darbon. On total variation minimization and surface evolution using parametric maximum flows. International Journal of Computer Vision, 84(3):288–307, 2009. A. Chambolle and T. Pock. A first-order primal-dual algorithm for convex problems with applications to imaging. Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision, 40:120–145, 2011. R. Coifman and M. Maggioni. Diffusion wavelets. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 21(2): 53–94, 2006. L. Condat. A direct algorithm for 1d total variation denoising. HAL preprint hal-00675043, 2012. T. Cormen, C. Stein, R. Rivest, and C. Leiserson. Introduction to Algorithms. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2nd edition, 2001. M. Crovella and E. Kolaczyk. Graph wavelets for spatial traffic analysis. Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications IEEE Societies, 3:1848–1857, 2003. A. Dalalyan, M. Hebiri, and J. Lederer. On the prediction performance of the lasso. To appear, Bernoulli, 2014. P. L. Davies and A. Kovac. Local extremes, runs, strings and multiresolution. Annals of Statistics, 29(1): 1–65, 2001. T. Davis and W. Hager. Dynamic supernodes in sparse Cholesky update/downdate and triangular solves. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, 35(4):1–23, 2009. D. L. Donoho and I. M. Johnstone. Minimax estimation via wavelet shrinkage. Annals of Statistics, 26(8): 879–921, 1998. M. Elkin, Y. Emek, D. Spielman, and S.-H. Teng. Lower-stretch spanning trees. SIAM Journal on Computing, 38(2):608–628, 2008. M. Gavish, B. Nadler, and R. Coifman. Multiscale wavelets on trees, graphs and high dimensional data: Theory and applications to semi supervised learning. International Conference on Machine Learning, 27, 2010. C. Godsil and G. Royle. Algebraic Graph Theory. Springer, 2001. D. Hammond, P. Vandergheynst, and R. Gribonval. Wavelets on graphs via spectral graph theory. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 30(2):129–150, 2011. Z. Harchaoui and C. Levy-Leduc. Multiple change-point estimation with a total variation penalty. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(492):1480–1493, 2010. H. Hoefling. A path algorithm for the fused lasso signal approximator. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 19(4):984–1006, 2010. J.-C. Hutter and P. Rigollet. Optimal rates for total variation denoising. Annual Conference on Learning Theory, 29:1115–1146, 2016. 26  N. Johnson. A dynamic programming algorithm for the fused lasso and l0 -segmentation. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 22(2):246–260, 2013. I. Johnstone. Gaussian estimation: sequence and wavelet models. Unpublished manuscript, 2011. V. Kolmogorov, T. Pock, and M. Rolinek. Total variation on a tree. SIAM Journal of Imaging Sciences, 9 (2):605–636, 2016. A. Kovac and A. Smith. Nonparametric regression on a graph. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 20(2):432–447, 2011. L. Landrieu and G. Obozinski. Cut pursuit: fast algorithms to learn piecewise constant functions on general weighted graphs. HAL preprint hal-01306779, 2015. J. Leskovec, K. J. Lang, A. Dasgupta, and M. W. Mahoney. Community structure in large networks: Natural cluster sizes and the absence of large well-defined clusters. Internet Mathematics, 6(1):29–123, 2009. K. Lin, J. Sharpnack, A. Rinaldo, and R. J. Tibshirani. Approximate recovery in changepoint problems, from `2 estimation error rates. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06746, 2016. E. Mammen and S. van de Geer. Locally apadtive regression splines. Annals of Statistics, 25(1):387–413, 1997. J. Qian and J. Jia. On pattern recovery of the fused lasso. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.5194, 2012. G. Raskutti, M. Wainwright, and B. Yu. Minimax rates of estimation for high-dimensional linear regression over `q -balls. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 57(10):6976–6994, 2011. A. Rinaldo. Properties and refinements of the fused lasso. The Annals of Statistics, 37(5):2922–2952, 2009. C. R. Rojas and B. Wahlberg. On change point detection using the fused lasso method. arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.5408, 2014. L. Rudin, S. Osher, and E. Faterni. Nonlinear total variation based noise removal algorithms. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 60(1):259–268, 1992. V. Sadhanala, Y.-X. Wang, and R. J. Tibshirani. Total variation classes beyond 1d: Minimax rates, and the limitations of linear smoothers. To appear, Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016. J. Sharpnack, A. Krishnamurthy, and A. Singh. Detecting activations over graphs using spanning tree wavelet bases. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 16:536–544, 2013. D. Shuman, S. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Vandergheynst. The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Extending high-dimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular domains. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 30(3):83–98, 2013. A. Singh, R. Nowak, and R. Calderbank. Detecting weak but hierarchically-structured patterns in networks. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 13:749–756, 2010. A. Smola and R. Kondor. Kernels and regularization on graphs. Annual Conference on Learning Theory, 16, 2003. W. Tansey and J. Scott. A fast and flexible algorithm for the graph-fused lasso. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.06475, 2015. R. Tibshirani, M. Saunders, S. Rosset, J. Zhu, and K. Knight. Sparsity and smoothness via the fused lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 67(1):91–108, 2005. R. J. Tibshirani. Adaptive piecewise polynomial estimation via trend filtering. The Annals of Statistics, 42 (1):285–323, 2014. R. J. Tibshirani and J. Taylor. The solution path of the generalized lasso. Annals of Statistics, 39(3):1335– 1371, 2011. Y. H. Tsin. Some remarks on distributed depth-first search. Information Processing Letters, 82:173–178, 2002. A. Tsybakov. Introduction to Nonparametric Estimation. Springer, 2009. Y.-X. Wang, J. Sharpnack, A. Smola, and R. J. Tibshirani. Trend filtering on graphs. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(105):1–41, 2016. B. Yu. Assouad, Fano, and Le Cam. In Festschrift for Lucien Le Cam, pages 423–435. Springer, 1997. 27  D. Zhou, J. Huang, and B. Scholkopf. Learning from labeled and unlabeled data on a directed graph. International Conference on Machine Learning, 22:1036–1043, 2005. X. Zhu, Z. Ghahramani, and J. Lafferty. Semi-supervised learning using Gaussian fields and harmonic functions. International Conference on Machine Learning, 20:912–919, 2003.  28

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
