Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_1529

Abstract:
On using Tra er Driver for External Dynami Pro ess Observation ⋆ (extended abstra t)  arXiv:cs/0701106v1 [cs.PL] 17 Jan 2007  Pierre Deransart  Inria  Ro quen ourt, BP 105, 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex, Fran e Pierre.Deransartinria.fr  Abstra t One is interested here in the observation of dynami  pro esses starting from the  tra es whi h they leave or those that one makes them produ e. It is  onsidered  here that it should be possible to make several observations simultaneously, using a large variety of independently developed analyzers. For this purpose, we introdu e the original notion of full tra e to  apture  the idea that a pro ess  an be instrumented in su h a way that it may broad ast  all information whi h  ould ever be requested by any kind of observer. Ea h  analyzer  an then nd in the full tra e the data elements whi h it needs. This  approa h uses what has been  alled a "tra er driver" whi h  ompletes the tra er  and drives it to answer the requests of the analyzers. A tra er driver allows to restri t the ow of information and makes this approa h tra table. On the other side, the potential size of a full tra e seems to make the idea of full tra e unrealisti . In this work we explore the  onsequen es of this notion in term of potential  e ien y, by analyzing the respe tive workloads between the (full) tra er and many dierent analyzers, all being likely run in true parallel environments. To illustrate this study, we use the example of the observation of the resolution of  onstraints systems (proof-tree, sear h-tree and propagation) using so-  phisti ated visualization tools, as developed in the proje t OADymPPaC (20012004). The pro esses approa h  1  onsidered here are  omputer programs, but we believe the  an be extended to many other kinds of pro esses.  Introdu tion  One is interested here in the observation of dynami  pro esses starting from the  tra es whi h they leave or those that one makes them produ e. It is  onsidered  here that it should be possible to make several observations simultaneously, using a large variety of independently developed analyzers. When one wants to observe a pro ess, the pra ti e is to instrument it for ea h type of observation whi h one wants to make on it. One thus implements a ⋆  This work has been partly supported by OADymPPaC [1℄, a Fren h RNTL proje t.  new "ad ho " tra er for ea h analyzer, or one adapts and one. Su h a work approa h whi h  ompletes an existing  an be largely avoided if one adopts from the start a general onsists to instrument it su h that it produ es what we  all a  "full tra e". This unique tra e will be useful then for all the later observations whi h one  an plan to make. Ea h analyzer  an then nd in the full tra e the  data elements whi h it needs. This approa h uses what was driver" whi h  alled a "tra er  ompletes the tra er and drives it to answer the requests of the  analyzers. This approa h is parti ularly tempting in pra ti e as the full tra e never needs to be  ompletely expressed (the ex hanges of information remain limited) and  the work of the tra er implementation and of its driver is made on e for all. The evaluation in terms of feasibility and performan e remains however problemati . In fa t, this approa h allows to redu e the size of the tra e emitted to a useful bare minimum and thus to speed up the whole pro ess. In it allows to  onsider very large full tra es. This has also a  the size of the tra e. Beyond a  ompensation,  ost whi h grows with  ertain size, the produ tion  ost of the tra e is  likely to be ome prohibitory. It is pre isely the question in whi h one is interested here. Until where  an one go in this approa h on a pra ti al level without slowing  down a pro ess ex essively and how? To get a more pre ise idea, one must take into a  ount not only the time of tra e produ tion, but also how the tra e will  be used. In [2℄ and [3℄ the notion of tra er driver is presented and experimented is the ontext of nite domain  onstraint resolution [4℄. But the question of the nature  of the tra e whose emission is  ontrolled by the tra er driver is not dire tly ta k-  led. In this work we explore the  onsequen es of this notion in term of potential  e ien y, by analyzing the respe tive workloads between the (full) tra er and many dierent analyzers, all being likely run in a true parallel environment. In this work, we introdu e the notion of full tra e to pro ess whi h  apture the idea that a  an be instrumented in su h a way that it may broad ast all information ould ever be requested by any kind of observer. We then analyze the  nature of the work of the tra er and the driver, and the distribution of the fun tions between the tra er and its driver on the one hand, and the analyzers on the other hand. This allows us to better estimate how powerful, useful and e ient the  on ept of full tra e  ar hite ture of all involved  an be, provided it is a  ompanied by the right  omponents.  To illustrate this study, one will take the example of the observation of the resolution of  onstraints systems (proof-tree, sear h-tree and propagation) us-  ing sophisti ated tools for visualization, a  ording to the method developed in  the proje ts DiSCiPl (1997-2000) [5℄ then OADymPPaC (2001-2004) [1℄. This eld is of parti ular interest be ause the tra es in lude the representations of ompli ated and potentially bulky obje ts, and the  omputations (evolution of  the domain of the variables) are at the same time logi al and sto hasti . The onstraints systems, be ause of the to true  omplex systems.  omplexity of their resolution, are very  lose  In this extended abstra t we present su  essively the  on epts of full tra e  and its in remental  ompressed version, then the question of their semanti s. We analyze nally the problem of the distribution of work between a driven tra er and external analyzers whi h work only with the useful tra e ow whi h is provided to them by their requests.  2  Full Tra e  We introdu e here the pro ess  on ept of  full tra e.  By denition the full tra e of a  ontains all one may like to know about it during its exe ution (this  in ludes likely a des ription of the pro ess itself ) . A pro ess is at a given moment  t  by a state  St .  hara terized  It does not enter in the framework of this  arti le to dene what is exa tly su h a state. It will be supposed only that it an be des ribed by a nite set of parameters for its value at moment A  t.  The  pn  for the  nth  parameter, and  pn,t  on ept of "moment" will be spe ied hereafter.  urrent state will be denoted by the list of the values of its parameters. It is  also assumed that the transformation of a state into another is made by "steps" hara terized by an a tion  a. The set of a  tions performed at moment  t is labelled  at . So dened, the  on ept of full tra e seems not to have any appli ation. In  pra ti e, there are only approximations; but the important thing here, is to admit that, whatever is the level of details with whi h one wishes to observe a pro ess, there is always a threshold whi h makes it possible to dene su h a tra e. One an  onsider that in the  ase of a program, it a ts of a more or less thorough  instrumentation whi h produ es a tra e, in other words a program augmented with a tra er.  Denition 1 (Virtual Full Tra e). sequen e of tra e events of the form  . An virtual full tra e is an unbounded  et : (t, at , St+1 )  omprising the following  elements:   et : unique identier of the event.  t: hrono. Time of the tra e. It only  varies by unit values and is always  in reasing. To distinguish from the time of the observed pro esses or of the analyzers whi h may not be monotonous  ompared to the  hrono.   St = p1,t ..., pn,t : parameters at hrono t. In a tra e event the parameters are alled attributes and St the full urrent state. The parameters may St is the last urs. The parameters (or attributes)  des ribe obje ts or a tions performed to rea h the new state. observed state before the event  et  orrespond to the new rea hed state  o  St+1 .   at : a tion an identier of the set of a state  St  to the state  tions  hara terizing the step from the  St+1 .  Any tra e ee tively produ ed by a pro ess  an be regarded as a partial full  tra e. In pra ti e, one "sees" only partial tra es whi h start after the moment 0 where the pro ess observed is in a presumably initial state  S0 .  We will limit  ourselves in this summary to only a single example of tra e: the tra e of the proof-trees in Prolog systems based on standard Prolog [6℄. This tra e is far from being a full tra e (many useful information, even easily available at any moment are not represented there). Here is an extra t:  1 2 3 3 4 4 5 ....  1 2 3 3 3 3 3  Call: Call: Call: Exit: Call: Exit: Call:  '$ all$'(ben h(2)) ben h(2) 2>0 2>0 _182 is 2-1 1 is 2-1 ben h(1)  This is a Byrd's tra e [7℄, adopted in the majority of the Prolog systems. The moment "0" event  orresponds to the laun hing of the resolution of a goal. Ea h tra e  orresponds to a stage in its resolution. An event  ontains the following  information: two attributes whi h are indi ation of depths (the rst, the depth in the sear h-tree and the se ond in the proof-tree), a "port" whi h  orresponds  to the a tion whi h made it possible to rea h this stage. Thus the port orresponds to a goals to solve, and total of 5 in the  all  all to the indi ated subgoal and the installation of the sub-  exit  to the su  ess of the subgoal. There are other ports (a  ase of GNU-Prolog) not detailed here. The rst " all" denes  the laun hing of the rst goals (if there is only one of them). If the resolution terminates, the tra e is nite, unbounded otherwise. The last attribute gives the subgoal to solve. This tra e does not hrono  omprise identiers nor  hrono; the  orresponds to the sequential order of emission of the tra e events and  the resulting  hrono plays the role of an identier.  It is interesting to note that the obje tive of su h a tra e is to display all the steps of evolution of a proof-tree until obtaining all the possible proofs (the port  fail  orresponds to a failure and  redo  to a nondeterministi  goal where a new  resolution will be tried), and to some extend to des ribe also the sear h-tree. However, the (partial) proof-tree is never expli itly des ribed (not more than the sear h-tree). This tra e thus does not provide the parameters of interest dire tly (the partial proof-tree). This brings us to the following observation. The parameters of the full state are not given expli itly in this tra e, but only some attributes (port and goal) whi h possibly make it possible to nd it. We will re onsider this point later. These attributes thus give only an in remental information whi h makes it possible to obtain the new proof-tree after a resolution step. We will say that the tra e is "in remental". This leads us to dene the following parti ular tra es whi h we dene here without more details.  Denition 2 (Dis ontinuous, Ee tive, In remental Full Tra e). A tra e is dis ontinuous if it is a (full) tra e whi h ontains su events whose variation of the  . essive  hrono may be higher than a unit. There are "holes"  in it, either be ause the emission is dis ontinuous, or be ause the observing proess "listens" only o  asionally to it. Noti e that the dis ontinuity  on erns only  the tra e emission and not its extra tion; in other words moment 0  orresponds  to the a tivation of the tra er. A tra e is  ee tive if it is a (full) tra  starting from the knowledge of  (St , At )  e of the form  one  an dedu e  et : (t, At ) and (at , St+1 ). At  su h that, denotes a  set of attributes. The ee tive tra e is the tra e emitted by a tra er, that whi h is a tually visible. The virtual full tra e is a parti ular where the attributes parti ular  At  are the a tion label  at  ase of ee tive tra e  and the parameters  St .  Another  ase is the full in remental tra e.  A tra e is  in remental if the attributes are su  h that only the  urrent state are noted. It has the form  et : (t, Deltat +)  hanges ae t-  Deltat + ontains the des ription of the a tions whi h modify the values of the parameters  ing the  where  of the moment t. To remain a full tra e, this tra e must satisfy the following dition: starting from the knowledge of  (St , Deltat +)  one  an dedu e  on-  (at , St+1 ).  In this extended summary, when the distin tion is not absolutely ne essary, one will not distinguish between virtual and ee tive tra es, and one will speak indierently about parameters or attributes. Pra ti ally all the tra es are in remental (thus it uses attributes), as the pre eding example illustrates it well, be ause the emission of a full state in ea h tra e event would be obviously prohibitive. In fa t the size whi h would take the events would be mu h too high and the tra e would be extremely redundant. The  ondition imposes simply that one  an retrieve the full tra e starting from  the transmitted attributes and from the pre eding full state. In pra ti e the observed pro esses will produ e partial tra es only. In this  ase the retrieval of  the full state is impossible. If one wants to nd a full tra e, or at least a more omplete one, it will be ne essary "to ask" the tra er to provide at least one full state. If the observing pro ess needs to take into a that  an be su ient to enable it to maintain a  ount only a partial state,  onsistent partial state. On the  other hand if it needs, at a given moment, to know a full state, or at least a more full  omplete state, it will have to ask the tra er to provide him at least a urrent state or a part of it.  Pra ti ally all the tra es are dis ontinuous, even if often ea h part of them (ne essarily nite)  an be regarded as a nite single tra e. This also raises the  problem of the knowledge of the initial state  S0  in whi h the observed pro ess  was at the moment of the initial tra e event ( hrono equals to 0) and thus of the ommuni ation to the analyzers of the full initial state  S0 ,  before any event of  tra e. These two reasons justify that one is interested in the manner of obtaining su h a state. The urrent value of a parameter may exist just as it is in the pro ess and requires only a small  omputation to extra t it. On the other hand it may  not exist and should require a partial re-exe ution of the pro ess (this is used in the analyzers of the CHIP environment of Cosyte  apa ity  [5℄ or CLPGUI  [1℄). This obliges to stop the exe ution of the observed pro ess (at least when that is possible), and to give the ability to the observing pro ess to stop and resume the observed pro ess. This leads to the idea sket hed in the introdu tion of syn hronization primitives between pro esses, a kind "image freezing" whi h  makes it possible to  omplete the information at any moment, a  need. This also results in the need for a fun tion "a  ess to the  ording to the urrent state".  It is important to note that with an ee tive or in remental tra e, keeping a full  urrent state is then in  harge of the observing pro ess and not of the  observed pro ess. This assumes however that the observed pro ess least re overy points in whi h full  ontains at  urrent state will be maintained and a  essible,  so as to allow the observing pro ess to resume the tra e and to be able to restart from a full  urrent state. It is important to note that with a full ee tive tra e,  dierent from the full virtual tra e, to keep a full pro ess will be an additional  urrent state in the observing  harge of this pro ess itself, be ause the tra er of  the observed pro ess then does not have any more obligation to  al ulate the  requested parameters expli itly (only the requested attributes are This supposes however that the observed pro ess points in whi h a full  omputed).  ontains at least re overy  urrent state will be preserved and a  essible. This may  allow the observing pro ess to resume the tra e and to be able to restart from a full  urrent state. This aspe t is not treated here.  3  Observational Semanti s  One is interested in this se tion in the semanti s of the full tra e,  alled here  "observational semanti s". The tra e does not explain anything. It is only a  olle tion of fa ts. The  question arises however to understand the tra e. For that one needs two levels of semanti s. The rst level  orresponds to the des ription of the a tions and ob-  je ts appearing in the parameters and attributes of the tra es, i.e. a semanti s of the observed data. The se ond level  orresponds to a kind of tra e explanation,  i.e. a semanti s des ribing how the values of the parameters at the moment are derived from the values of the parameters of the moment a tions whi h a  at  t−1  t  and how the  are sele ted. Clearly this means that one has a model of the pro ess urately des ribes the evolution of the tra e between two events. The  form of this semanti s is the subje t of another work in progress. To read a tra e, one needs only the rst level of semanti s. Only the relations between the parameters in the same state or attributes in the emitted tra e events must be known. In the example of the Prolog tra e, the properties of the obje t "proof-tree" must be known to understand the relation between the depth of the tree and the tree itself. The semanti s of the tra e (full and/or in remental) thus  ontains the des ription of the relations between the parameters whi h  relates the semanti s and the produ ed attributes. But to understand the tra e omprehensively, it is ne essary to go further in the knowledge of the pro ess itself. What we  all here "observational semanti s" (OS) is the semanti s of the  tra er (the rst semanti s, although being part of the OS,  an be seen like a  semanti s of the tra e). It uses the semanti s of the obje ts and a tions of the full tra e and  an be seen as an abstra t semanti s in the sense of Cousot [8℄. It  l ∈ dom(Σ) ∧ choice-point(Σ(l)) N ← l, S ← Σ(l)  ba k to  Fig. 1. A rule of the abstra  t model of Prolog Proof-Tree displayed in [13℄  is a kind of natural semanti s [9℄ whi h  an be expressed by a nite set of rules  of the form  a : Condition(S) → S ′ = a(S) su h that any event of tra e et : (t, at , St+1 ) an be obtained starting from the state St and the a tion at by appli ation of the rule a of the OS. The (set of ) a tions a performed at hrono t is denoted at . This semanti s an take the form of a stru tural operational semanti s [10℄ or of an evolving algebra [11℄ and being more or less rened, "big-step" or "small-step" [12℄. It is in fa t very tempting to have a  omplete semanti s for the tra er in order to allow a  lear  implementation of it. Coming ba k to the example of Prolog, a tra er augmented with the tra e of  onstraints resolution (proof-tree, sear h-tree, labeling-tree and propagation),  alled Codeine, has been implemented in this manner on GNU-Prolog [13℄. An abstra t model has been dened [14℄, whi h has been then implemented on several solvers [1℄. This made it possible to meet two prin ipal obje tives: portability of the analyzers whose input data are based on the full tra e, and robustness of the tra ers whose implementation is guided and improved by a good methodologi al approa h [15℄ based on a pre-spe ied rigorous semanti s. It is useful however to note that a would be a  omplete semanti s of the tra e, whi h  omplete formalization of the observed pro ess, is almost impossible  in pra ti e, be ause of the degree of renement that would imply. For example, an attribute in luded in many tra es is the CPU time  onsumed by the pro ess  sin e the "beginning" of the tra e emission. To formalize its variations, in fa t issued from the host system, would amount introdu ing into the observational semanti s a model of the system in whi h the pro ess is exe uted. Finally an OS should not be  onfused with a  whi h would make it possible to re all the the sole initial state and its rules. The  omplete operational semanti s  ourse of the pro ess starting from  urrent full state is not su ient to  know whi h rule may apply. For example, the model developed for nite domain onstraints resolution des ribed in [13℄ as at least one rule  ontains a set of operational rules su h  an be applied at ea h state, but whose  always pre ise enough to de ide how it  onditions are not  an be applied. So is the  ba k to  rule,  depi ted in the Figure 1. It  ontains a  the new  ondition  l ∈ dom(Σ)  whi h must be satised, meaning that  urrent node belongs to the sear h-tree, but nothing says whi h node  must be sele ted. The sole knowledge of the full  urrent state (whi h in ludes the  urrent sear h-tree) is not su ient. The knowledge of the  urrent tra e event  is ne essary to know whi h is this new node and thus to know how this rule is in fa t instantiated.  4  Tra er Driver and Evaluation  The idea to use a tra er driver was proposed by M. Du assé and J. Noyé sin e the origin of Prolog [16℄ in the  ontext of logi  programming, then regularly de-  veloped and tested in various environments [17℄. The originality of this approa h onsists in proposing that the full tra e should not be  ommuni ated in its in-  tegrity to an analyzer, but that this one re eives only the part of the tra e whi h relates to it. Instead of broad asting "urbi et orbi" a full tra e that any analyzer would have the task to lter, ltering is performed at the sour e level, i.e. by the observed pro ess whi h behaves then like a server of tra es. The analyzer is a  lient whi h restri ts himself to indi ate to the observed pro ess the tra e  whi h it needs indeed. The pro esses then brings to information: the  omplete separation of the observed and observing  onsider an ar hite ture server/ lient with ex hanges of  lient indi ates to the server the tra e it needs and the server  provides him only what it requires. The ltering of the tra e is no longer  arried  out by the analyzer, but by the observed pro ess. It is the task of the tra er driver to perform all requested ltering and to dispat h the tra es requested by the  lients. This ar hite ture as well as the ex hanges between the pro esses have  been des ribed in parti ular in [1℄ and [2℄. We will not go more into the details in this extended abstra t. In addition, only the aspe ts related to the possibilities of modulating the tra es emitted a be  ording to the needs of the analyzers will  onsidered; the possibility previously mentioned to syn hronize the pro esses  will not be  onsidered here.  This approa h allows to redu e the size of the tra e emitted to a useful bare minimum and thus to speed up the whole pro ess. In to  onsider very large full tra es. This has also a  of the tra e. Beyond a  ompensation, it allows  ost whi h grows with the size  ertain size, the produ tion  ost of the tra e is likely to  be ome prohibitory. It is pre isely the question in whi h one is interested. Until where  an one go into this approa h on a pra ti al level without slowing down  a pro ess ex essively and how? To get a more pre ise idea, one must take into a  ount not only the time of tra e produ tion, but also how the tra e will be  used. One ould think at rst sight that the fa t, for the observed pro ess, to have to produ e a full tra e makes this approa h unrealisti . The server is indeed slowed down by the simple fa t of having to  ompute a great number of parameters  whi h will perhaps never be used. This approa h would be thus very penalizing for the pro ess instrumented with an expensive tra er whenever only a weak portion of the full tra e would be used. On another side, and pre isely in this ase, a  onsiderable e onomy is realized be ause of ltering at the sour e, and  the transmission of a limited tra e whose  osts of  oding and diusion are then  extremely redu ed. The idea is that in pra ti e the fa t of emitting only one small part of the tra e, ltered at the sour e,  ompensates for the over  ost of  work mainly related to the updates of all the parameters of the full tra e in the analyzed pro ess.  On the other hand, if many analyzers are a tivated simultaneously and use at a given moment a tra e equivalent to a full tra e, the problem to produ e or not the full tra e does not arise any more (it must in any  ase be produ ed), and  the question about the interest of using a tra er driver is worth to be posed. We show that even in this  ase the driver  an save time.  Additionally another type of e onomy must be  onsidered whi h is  omple-  mentary to the previous one: the use of an in remental tra e as an ee tive tra e instead of the virtual full tra e. In this  ase there is no loss of information (the  equivalent of the full tra e is still transmitted), but there is a redu tion of the amount of data transmitted (a kind of data  ompression is used in order to  limit the size of the emitted data ow). In this later  ase the tra er performs a  kind of  ompression and the analyzer a kind of de ompression and both task must be taken into a  ount in the analysis of the workloads. It will be shown  that the performan es of the tra er and the analyzers  an be inuen ed more by  this kind of load rather than by the size of the full tra e. In order to be more pre ise, it is ne essary to analyze the repartition of work within the various pro esses. The times to take into a  ount for a detailed performan es analysis are times  on erning the pro ess itself, its tra er and its pilot on the one hand, and times on erning one analyzer on the other hand (one must suppose here that, if there are several analyzers, they are running with true parallelism):  Pro ess Tra er and Driver --------------- ------------------------------------| | | | T_prog + T_ ore + T_ ond + T_extra t + T_en ode-and- om Analyser -----------------------------------------| | T_filter + T_de ode + T_rebuild + T_exe From the side of the pro ess, tra er and driver:   Tprog :  time devoted to the exe ution of the not instrumented program (or  instrumented but with dea tivated tra er).   Tcore: additional exe  ution time of the pro ess on e instrumented to produ e  the full tra e and with a tivated tra er. It is a time devoted to the  onstru -  tion of the elements ne essary to a likely later extra tion of the parameters of the  urrent state. This time is largely inuen ed by the size of the full tra e.  At this stage all approa h, one  omputations must be performed be ause, in the presented  onsiders that it must be possible to produ e the full  state at any moment (in  urrent  ase in parti ular of dis ontinuous tra e). This time  is related to the form of the full tra e only and does not depend on what will be emitted. If all the parameters of the full tra e are already part of the pro ess, this time is just null.   Tcond :  time of  he king of the  onditions dening the tra es to be emitted  for ea h analyzer (ltering). This time is null if there is no ltering (emission of the full tra e).   Textract : omputing time of the parameters requested during or after ltering.  Tencode−and−com : time for formatting the tra e (en oding), possible ompression and emission. Time spe i  Textract  and  to the driver  Tencode−and−com  Tcond .  orresponds to  Other times, namely,  Tcore ,  an be regarded as times related to the tra er.  It should be noti ed here that, in this approa h, the driver a ts only on the  hoi e of the parameters and the attributes to be  tra e, i.e. on the  ontained in the ee tive  ommuni ated information. It does not have the possibility of  inuen ing the form of the attributes, for example the degree of  ompression of the information. In fa t, this  ompression is  oded here in the form of the  attributes. The nature of the attributes (in remental information or not) is part of the tra er and it  annot be modied or adapted through the tra er driver.  On the other side any additional  ompression algorithm used to redu e the size  of the information ow belongs to the stage of en oding. Generalizing this idea, one  ould also  onsider the possibility to put into the tra e more abstra t  attributes, adapted to some more spe i a redu ed size. The  use, su h that the whole tra e has  orresponding attribute  omputation time would thus be  related to the extra tion stage. This generalization is not studied here. From the side of the analyzer:   Tf ilter :  time of ltering by an analyzer. This time is null if ltering is per-  formed at the sour e (the tra e events sent to a parti ular analyzer  an  indeed be tagged at the sour e). In fa t by pre aution but mainly be ause of la k of implemented tra er driver, many external analyzers will lter again the tra e. However it is not ne essary to   Tdecode:  ir umvent, as the time of well. It must be not be  onsider this  ase here.  time of de oding of the re eived tra e. This time is impossible to oding and  ompared with the  ompletely eliminated. If  used, it is be ause it is  Tencode−and−com as Tencode−and−com. It an-  ommuni ation  encode  part of  ompression/de ompression algorithms are  onsidered that, even if both times are  umulated,  one will save a substantial amount of time over the transmission.   Trebuild :  time of rebuilding the full tra e starting from the ee tive tra e  ( omputation of the urrent parameters starting from the emitted attributes). This time must be tributes. It is  ompared with  Textract ,  equilibrates most favorably with the   Texec :  the  omputation time of the at-  onsidered that su h a time, even if  umulated with  Textract ,  ost of tra e emission.  exe ution time of the proper fun tions of the analyzer. With very  sophisti ated analyzers (as those used for data analysis for example), this time  an be ome so important that it makes negligible the one  orresponding  to the tra e produ tion. Example: Codeine, des ribed in [13℄, implements the generation of a full tra e for the analysis of  onstraints resolution, as an extension of GNU-Prolog. The  urrent state  St  ontains (among other attributes): proof-tree, sear h-tree,  straints state and variables with their domains. For a the full tra e see [1℄ ( alled in this proje t "generi not generate a full tra e (as full as it  on-  omplete des ription of  tra e"). Even if Codeine does  ould be possible), the Codeine tra e is  onsiderably ri her than the simple Byrd's tra e of GNU-Prolog whi h is stri tly ontained. Only an in remental tra e is generated, and only the proof-tree and the  onstraints and variables states  urrent state of the pro ess (the  an be rebuilt later starting just from the  ost of extra tion is redu ed to the  proper data management realized by the tra er). To obtain the  ost of the  urrent sear h-  tree the pro ess would have to be re-exe uted partially, therefore it would be ne essary to freeze its nently a  urrent exe ution. The  ost of management of a perma-  essible sear h-tree at any moment would be  of its size. On the other hand an analyzer  learly intra table be ause  an, using the produ ed in remental  tra e, maintain all these obje ts permanently (obtaining useful for it). Codeine also  St  or those parameters  ontains a tra er driver su h that the denitions of  the tra es to be emitted (spe i ation of the emitted tra e) are stored in a data le whi h must be provided before the pro ess starts. Times are distributed as follows: From the side of the pro ess, tra er and driver:   Tprog : exe part of   Tcore:  ution time of GNU-Prolog with "swit hes" of the tra er (a small  Tcore  of negligible duration in general).  time of  onstru tion of the parameters of the full Codeine tra e ( ol-  le ting of all data useful to extra t the full tra e); a kind of GNU-Prolog plug-in.   Tcond : time of ltering the full tra e to sele  Textract : omputing time of the attributes  t all the requested tra es. orresponding to the parameters  requested during ltering.   Tencode−and−com :  omputing time of the attributes  orresponding to the re-  quested parameters, en oding (XML format or Prolog term) of the emitted tra e, and emission time of the in remental tra e. From the side of the analyzers: experiments in the framework of the OADymPPaC proje t with sophisti ated analyzers (intensive visualization of graphs, visual data analyses) revealed the following   Tf ilter  and  Tdecode :  osts.  both times are intri ate in a synta ti  (XML) of the full tra e. Re-ltering, a part of whi h But the driven tra er approa h  analysis module  ould have been avoided.  ould not be taken into a  ount in the  analyzers built during this proje t.   Trebuild :  time of  onstru tion of the parameters of the full tra e (variables  domains, a tive  onstraints set, sear h-tree ...). This time grows (non esti-  mated fa tor) a  ording to the size of the data, sometimes related to the size  of the tra e, with a  onsiderable slow down of the analyzer during the read-  ing of the tra e . The low speed of an analyzer may  ause, in the  ase of  analysis of the tra e on the y, a strong slow down of the observed pro ess.   Texec :  time of  onstru tion of the obje ts to be visualized (graphs, data  tables). These times  an grow exponentially a  The e ien y of the used algorithms is  ording to the size of the data.  ru ial here. This  an also  ause a  slow down of the pro ess, and pleads in favor of a preliminary treatment of information before transmission (for example, sele tion of distinguished nodes to put in the tra e to redu e the size of a drawn graphs, or to  olle t  groups of variables as a unique attribute to redu e the number of lines in a matrix). It was been shown experimentally in [3℄ that the behavior of the Codeine tra er with the full tra e above  ompares favorably with the behavior of GNU-  Prolog with the Byrd's tra e only. Furthermore, the ltering realized by the tra er driver does not prejudi es the performan es. We give here a theoreti al justi ation to this result, showing that this approa h, already justied experimentally,  an also be justied theoreti ally.  In [2℄ L. Langevine observes that ltering the tra es all together is more ee tive than to lter them one after the other. This  omes from the fa t that  running several automata together may be more e ient than running one only. Indeed the essen e of ltering relates to simplied sele t rst the tra e events  ner additional ltering will be thus of events mu h more redu ed. One a tra e whose language to  onditions whose role is to  ontaining the ports requested by an analyzer. A arried out thereafter but on a number  an admit that this rst ltering relates to  orresponds to a regular language. It is then possible  onsider that ea h lter is itself a regular expression whose re ognition on  the full tra e Filtering  an be done using a non deterministi  nite-state automaton.  orresponds then to the re ognition task by a union of as many nite-  state automata than there are a tive analyzers requesting a tra e. However the resulting automaton, on e optimized,  an be mu h more e ient than the most  e ient of the automata asso iated with a single analyzer (the union of the automata  an be more e ient in terms of  omputation steps than only one of  them [18℄). As these operations of ltering are extremely frequent, be ause they apply to all the tra e events, the speed up  an be  onsiderable.  We are now in position to analyze the respe tive workloads. First observe that respe tive times of both sides may be  onsidered as  u-  mulative or not, depending whether the respe tive pro ess are run sequentially or with true parallelism. In the later essors (a situation whi h  an be  ase, if all pro ess are run on dierent pro-  onsidered with su h an approa h), only the  slowest pro ess must be taken into a  ount to evaluate the exe ution time of the  whole system.   Tprog  and  Tcore  These times  on one side,  Texec  on the other side.  orrespond to times spe i  to the tra er and the analyzers (the  slowest analyzer has the main inuen e on the exe ution time). These times  Tcore Tf ilter  are in ompressible and   Tcond  on one side and  depends only on the size of the virtual tra e. on the other side.  At least one of these times must be null, and, if the ltering is at the sour e, the performan e  an be improved. In any  whatever is the size of the full tra e,   Textract  on one side and  These times  Trebuild  ases this time appears negligible,  ompared with the other times.  on the other side.  orrespond respe tively to the  omputation of the attributes  from the parameters and re ipro ally. If one  an redu e the extra tion time  thanks to the ltering ( onsidering the low number of sele ted tra e events and attributes, and the fa t that the most of the parameters work is already in luded in  Tcore ),  the time of rebuilding  omputation  an be very im-  portant and will probably be signi antly greater than the extra tion time.   Tencodea ndc om  on one side and  These times  Tdecode  on the other side.  an be important, but the interest lies in the fa t that the  prots realized on the ompensates the  ommuni ation time (redu ed emitted volume) largely  oding/de oding times.  To summarize, the tra er and the slowest analyzer are the main fa tors inuen ing the whole performan e and they sides  an in rease the workload of both  onsiderably. However the use of a tra er driver and of te hniques of tra e  ompression make it possible to  ompensate partially, but sometimes in very  ee tive manner, the over- osts related to the use of a full tra e.  5  Con lusion  We introdu ed the  on ept of full tra e in order to take into a  possibilities of analysis of a dynami  ount the multiple  pro ess. The analyzed pro ess is instru-  mented with, in addition to its tra er, a tra e driver, and the analyzers have the possibility of addressing orders to the driver. An ar hite ture then  lient/server is  onsidered to des ribe the intera tions between the pro esses analyzers and  the analyzed pro ess. This enabled us to ta kle the problem of the evaluation of this approa h in terms of e ien y. We tried to appre iate how the introdu tion of a tra er driver the global e ien y of the analysis of a dynami  ould improve  pro ess using several analyzers  observing the pro ess in a simultaneous way. We initially observed that a full tra e  ould be parti ularly expensive to produ e, but that part of this  ould be transferred, without loss of  apa ity of analysis (the full tra e  retrieved by the analyzers), on the analyzers. The most unfavorable of e ien y  ost  an be  ase in term  orresponds to the situation where the equivalent of a full tra e must  be built, extra ted and emitted. In this  ase, the full tra e is in fa t a union of  all the redu ed tra es requested by several analyzers. We showed that, even in this  ase, a ltering realized by a tra er driver was able to bring an important  bene e. Our observations, during the proje ts DiSCiPl [5℄ and OADymPPaC [1℄, using very sophisti ated analyzers as powerful tools for visualizations as well ([19℄ [20℄), also showed that the limits of performan e analyzers that tra er, even with a full tra e. This study opens nally on a series of questions:  ame often more of the   How deep is it possible to implement a very broad full tra e? ourse the limits of the approa h are obvious: the  Of  on ept of full tra e is  meaningful only with regards to a family of possible analyses, well known and sele ted in advan e. Nothing guarantees a priori that an additional instrumentation of the observed pro ess will never be ne essary. But beyond this aspe t, the interesting question relates to the feasibility of the implementation of a very ne grained full tra e. On one side indeed, one will be able to  ompensate for  ertain produ tion  osts of su h large tra e, by emit-  ting an ee tive tra e of limited size; but on the other side, the analyzers (whose use  an be temporary or ex eptional) will be loaded with most of  time of development/re-building of the full tra e (ne essary, even if it uses only a part of it) and will o  asionally slow down the observed pro ess.   Whi h intera tion language to use and whi h dialogue between the driver and the analyzers? This question has been little ta kled here and mainly remains out of the s ope of this arti le. The tenden y however is with the use of a language like XML. It is the way  hosen by the  OADymPPaC proje t, and the possibility of redu ing the ow of tra e to its bare minimum en ourages this. Nevertheless our experiments showed that the data  ommuni ation needed to be optimized by ompression with spe i  tra e  ombining usual methods of  ompression like using in remental at-  tributes, but also by introdu ing more abstra t attributes in the tra e. This leads to the idea that the dialogue between the involved pro esses, limited here to the  hoi e of the tra e events and the attributes in the tra e, and  apa ities of syn hronization, must be extended su h that it allows also to    inuen e the design of the attributes themselves. Finally a  ru ial question related to the  omprehension of the tra e.  to understand a tra e, or how to des ribe its semanti s ?  How If the  semanti s of the tra e (and of the tra er), or at least a large part of it, is given a priori (be ause one has a model for the observed pro ess), then the omprehension of the tra e as well as the implementation of the tra er are largely fa ilitated. In the opposite or arti ial  ase - and it is the  ase for many natural  omplex pro esses - one has only vast tra es to study. Even in  the elds of programming languages where semanti s seems better  ontrolled  a priori, one tries to analyze a program behavior by trying to understand its tra es. Thus one sees stinging the usefulness of general te hniques based on data mining [21℄ or on Web mining [22℄ for su h purposes. However one must re ognize that any full tra e will probably always in lude portions es aping any kind of des ription based on formal semanti s.  Referen es 1. Deransart, P., & al: Outils d'Analyse Dynamique Pour la Programmation par Contraintes (OADymPPaC). Te hni al report, Inria Ro quen ourt and É ole des Mines de Nantes and Insa de Rennes and Université d'Orléans and Cosyte and ILOG (2004) Projet RNTL. http:// ontraintes.inria.fr/OADymPPaC .  2. Langevine, L., Du assé, M.: A Tra er Driver for Hybrid Exe ution Analyses. In Press, A., ed.: Pro eedings of the 6th Automated Debugging Symposium. (2005) 3. Langevine, L., Du assé, M.: A Tra er Driver for Versatile Dynami Analyses of Constraint Logi Programs. In Serebrenik, A., Muñoz-Hernandez, S., eds.: Pro eedings of the 15th Workshop on Logi -based Methods in Programming Environments (WLPE'05), a pre- onferen e workshop of ICLP'05, Sitges, Spain (2005) Computer Resear h Repository s.SE/0508105. 4. Langevine, L., Du assé, M.: A Tra er Driver for CLP: Debugging, Monitoring and Visualization of an Exe ution from a Single Tra er. In Demoen, B., Lifs hitz, V., eds.: Pro . of the 20th Int. Conf. on Logi Programming, (ICLP'04). Number 3132 in LNCS, Saint-Malo, Fran e (2004) 462463 5. Deransart, P., Hermenegildo, M., Maªuszy«ski, J., eds.: Analysis and Visualisation Tools for Constraint Programming. Number 1870 in LNCS. Springer Verlag (2000) 6. GNU-Prolog: A CLP(FD) System Based on Standard Prolog (ISO) developed by D. Diaz (2003) http://gprolog.sour eforge.net/ Distributed under the GNU li ense. 7. Byrd, L.: Understanding the ontrol ow of Prolog programs. Logi Programming Workshop (1980) 8. Cousot, P.: Abstra t Interpretation. Te hnique et S ien e Informatiques 19 (1994) 19 9. Kahn, G.: Natural Semanti s. In Brandenburg, F.J., Vidal-Naquet, G., Wirsing, M., eds.: Pro eedings of STACS, Springer (1987) also INRIA, RR 416, Natural Semanti s on the Computer. 10. Plotkin, G.: A Stru tural Approa h to Operational Semanti s. TR DAIMI FN 19, Computer S ien e Department, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark (1981) 11. Gurevit h, Y.: Evolving algebras, a tutorial introdu tion. Bulletin of the European Asso iation for Theoreti al Computer S ien e 43 (1991) 264284 12. Lu as, S.: Observational Semanti s and Dynami Analysis of Computational Proess. RR 00/02, E ole Polyte hnique, Laboratoire d'Informatique, LIX, Palaiseau (Fran e) (2000) 13. Langevine, L., Du assé, M., Deransart, P.: A Propagation Tra er for GNU-Prolog: from Formal Denition to E ient Implementation. In Palamidessi, C., ed.: Proeedings of the 19th International Conferen e on Logi Programming, ICLP'03, Mumbai, India (2003) 14. Langevine, L., Deransart, P., Du assé, M.: A Generi Tra e S hema for the Portability of CP(FD) Debugging Tools. In Apt, K., Fages, F., Rossi, F., P., S., Van za, J., eds.: Re ent Advan es in Constraints. Number 3010 in Le ture Notes in Arti ial Intelligen e. Springer Verlag (2004) Sele ted papers of the Joint ERCIM/CoLogNET International Workshop on Constraint Solving and Constraint Logi Programming. 15. Du assé, M., Langevine, L., Deransart, P.: Rigorous design of tra ers: an experiment for onstraint logi programming. In Ronsse, M., Boss here, K.D., eds.: Pro eedings of the 5th International Workshop on Automated and Algorithmi Debugging, AADEBUG'03, Ghent, Belgium (2003) Computer Resear h Repository s.SE/0310042. 16. Du assé, M., Noyé, J.: Logi Programming Environments: Dynami Program Analysis and Debugging. The Journal of Logi Programming 19/20 (1994) 351384 17. Du assé, M.: Tra e S hemata for (Multi-language) Dynami Analysis. In Choi, J.D., Ryder, B., Zeller, A., eds.: Dagstuhl Seminar 03491, "Understanding Program Dynami s", Saint-Malo, Fran e, Dagstuhl, Germany (2003) 18. Hop roft, J.E., Ullman, J.D., eds.: Introdu tion to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation. Computer S ien e. Addison-Wesley (1979)  19. Baudel, T., & al: Visual CP, Referen e Manual (2004) Manufa tured and distributed by Ilog, http://www2.ilog. om/preview/Dis overy/ . 20. Ghoniem, M., Jussien, N., Fekete, J.D.: VISEXP: Visualizing Constraint Solver Dynami s Using Explanations. In Barr, V., Markov, Z., eds.: Pro . of the 17th Int. of the Florida Arti ial Intelligen e Resear h So iety Conferen e (FLAIRS'04), AAAI Press (2004) 21. Denmat, T., Du assé, M., Ridoux, O.: Data Mining and Cross-Che king of Exe ution Tra es. A reinterpretation of Jones, Harrold and Satsko test Information Visualization. RI 1743, IRISA, Rennes (Fran e) (2005) 22. Zaidman, A., Calders, T., Demeyer, S., Paredaens, J.: Applying Webmining Te hniques to Exe ution Tra es to Support the Program Comprehension Pro ess. In So iety, I.C., ed.: Pro eedings of the 9th European Conferen e on Software Maintenan e and Rengineering (CSMR 2005), Man hester, UK (2005) 134142

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
