Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_1235

Abstract:
Efficient and Robust Pedestrian Detection using Deep Learning for Human-Aware Navigation André Mateus, David Ribeiro, Pedro Miraldo, and Jacinto C. Nascimento  arXiv:1607.04441v2 [cs.RO] 28 Sep 2017  Instituto de Sistemas e Robótica (LARSyS), Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa, Torre Norte - 6 Piso Av.Rovisco Pais, 1 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal. Corresponding author: andre.mateus@tecnico.ulisboa.pt  Abstract This paper addresses the problem of Human-Aware Navigation (HAN), using multi camera sensors to implement a vision-based person tracking system. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: a novel and efficient Deep Learning person detection and a standardization of human-aware constraints. In the first stage of the approach, we propose to cascade the Aggregate Channel Features (ACF) detector with a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to achieve fast and accurate Pedestrian Detection (PD). Regarding the human awareness (that can be defined as constraints associated with the robot’s motion), we use a mixture of asymmetric Gaussian functions, to define the cost functions associated to each constraint. Both methods proposed herein are evaluated individually to measure the impact of each of the components. The final solution (including both the proposed pedestrian detection and the human-aware constraints) is tested in a typical domestic indoor scenario, in four distinct experiments. The results show that the robot is able to cope with human-aware constraints, defined after common proxemics and social rules. Keywords: Pedestrian Detection, Convolutional Neural Network, Human-Aware Navigation  1. Introduction For robots to interact naturally with humans in their social environments, they must have the ability to plan their motion accounting for typical social norms. In this paper, we address the robot navigation in the presence of humans, resorting to multi cameras (static outside and/or onboard cameras) for the vision-based person tracking system. One of the research focus in robotics is Human-Robot Interaction and its role in social environments. When people think of a robot interacting with a person, what comes to mind is a robot that can speak with her or hand over some object. However, the motion itself is of great importance in a social context (e.g., when a robot is requested to fetch an item), or simply when a normal navigation behavior needs to be adjusted according to proxemics rules, so it does not disturb people. The study of robot navigation in the presence of people is called HumanAware Navigation (HAN). Most approaches to HAN in the literature use only sensors onboard the robot. Even though those sensors bring the advantage of context-independence, it is useful to have other external sensors, which can add more information about the environment, not only in terms of coverage space, but also in terms of precision on the estimation of the person’s position. Hence, in this paper, in addition to the onboard camera, external cameras were mounted on the ceiling and used for the pedestrian detection (PD) task. This setup ensures a broader perception of the environment, capable of seeing/detecting both humans and robots at the same time. Preprint submitted to Elsevier Robotics and Autonomous Systems  Furthermore, in this paper we address the importance of incorporating deep learning (DL) in an HAN based architecture. The integration of DL provides both: (i) efficiency and (ii) robustness to the pedestrian detection task, as detailed next. Traditionally, the detection task is usually accomplished through the sliding window paradigm, based on a exhaustive search over the image to find the object positions (e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4]). During this search, features for each window location are extracted and computed (possibly at multiple scales), and later evaluated by a classifier. However, such procedure can easily become intractable due to the substantial number of windows and the complexity of the features processing. Thus, for the use of richer and more expensive features, it is necessary to constrain the computations to a restricted number of locations, considering only certain regions of interest. Accordingly, we propose a cascade of the ACF detector [5] with a CNN for PD. The ACF allows to obtain a selective search that identifies promising image regions for the presence of pedestrians (i.e. proposals). This alleviates the CNN task, since the number of windows (i.e. proposals) to classify is now substantially reduced. The advantages of this cascade are twofold. Firstly, we only use the more expensive computations (i.e. the CNN classification) in the promising ACF proposals. Consequently, operating under this regions of interest paradigm [6, 7], allows to speed up the detection procedure and perform pedestrian detection at real time requirements. The methodology previously described, contributes to the efficiency goal. Secondly, the first stage of the cascade (i.e. the ACF) provides October 24, 2017  a large number of false positives (FP). This number of FPs is drastically reduced by the application of the CNN, while maintaining most of the true positives (TP). This means that the errors corresponding to these FPs provided by the ACF are solved within the CNN processing. This approach allows to achieve the robustness goal. The CNN model results from first, pre-training with a large object dataset [8], and then fine-tuning (i.e. re-training) with a PD dataset [1]. This transfer learning procedure [9] is adopted because it improves the final model. In order to guanratee independence from the particular application in the HAN context, no further fine-tuning is performed (although the CNN could be fine-tuned again with a specific HAN dataset). Finally, we also propose a novel solution for HAN resorting to multiple cameras (onboard and offboard), for people state estimation, coupled with the aforementioned DL strategy. A costmap is computed by combining several constraints associated with HAN. Each time the robot receives a new goal, it computes a path on that costmap. When compared with state-ofthe-art approaches, the main contributions presented in this paper are: (i) a novel and efficient technique for people detection; and (ii) a standardization of human-aware constraints. Moreover, since all the computations are performed using CPU, this methodology is an economically viable solution, that reaches the intended runtime figures and accuracy requirements. Therefore, the mentioned approach can be integrated in robots that only have onboard CPUs (no GPUs). The solution is tested in simulated and in realistic scenarios. The results show that the proposed solution fulfils the aforementioned goals. This paper proposes novel extensions of the authors’ previous works, namely [10, 11]. More specifically, in [10] HAN constraints are introduced, and in [11] a real-time PD algorithm is proposed. Comparing the present paper with [11], additional outside cameras are used, more HAN constraints are introduced and tested, and additional details are included (e.g. in the method’s evaluation and the related work).  classifier. The Locally Decorrelated Channel Features (LDCF) [14] is a more accurate variant of ACF (but also slower), which decorrelates the previously mentioned image channels resorting to linear filters. This idea of adding a filtering step for the features, was further studied in the work of [15]. Nevertheless, the application of deep compositional architectures, namely, Convolutional Neural Networks, to the tasks of image classification, localization and detection [8], have significantly boosted the state-of-the-art. As such, the application of deep learning to PD arises as a natural forthcoming step. Indeed, deep learning based architectures learn hierarchical features [16] that make it possible to reach a better classification performance than using the handcrafted ones. To avoid overfitting during the training of CNN models, the dataset must be of substantial size and contain the corresponding annotations. This is, however, an apparent limitation since this problem can be addressed by transferring parameters from an already trained CNN model (with datasets belonging to other tasks, for example, generic object classification) to the model of interest. This CNN concerning the model of interest, is then retrained (i.e. fine-tuned) with the dataset corresponding to the specific problem. The computations associated with the CNN are expensive when compared to the ones required by methods using handcrafted features. Therefore, to improve the detector’s speed, an hybrid solution can be adopted by cascading a faster and shallower method, based on handcrafted features, with a deep CNN. The handcrafted approach generates proposals (i.e., promising regions for the pedestrians locations), whose classification is refined by the CNN (i.e., the accuracy is enhanced by removing false positives). Currently, various PD deep learning approaches have been developed in the literature, mainly by extending the main pipeline of successful object detectors, such as: R-CNN [6], Fast R-CNN [17] and Faster R-CNN [18]. This pipeline comprises a combination of: (i) proposal extraction and (ii) CNN evaluation (being identical to the hybrid scheme, but more generic). For example, in [19], the ACF is used in conjunction with the Fast R-CNN architecture, which has two CNN branches for small and large scales. The work of [20] is able to improve the proposal extraction module of the Faster R-CNN scheme, resorting to diverse network outputs in order to detect objects of different scales. The work presented in [21] uses the region proposal network (CNN based) from Faster R-CNN and refines the detections resorting to CNN features and boosted decision trees. In our approach, we adopt a similar architecture to [22, 23], which follows the R-CNN pipeline. However, we do not apply any bounding box regression, contrasting to [22]. Besides, and since we are concerned with speed, we introduce an ACF score rejection threshold. Below this value, the proposals are eliminated and are not processed by the CNN, allowing to achieve faster running time figures. Our main focus is devoted to the integration of the Computer Vision module (PD method) with the HAN module, in order to achieve an accurate and fast enough system.  1.1. State-of-the-Art To give a better comprehensive understanding of the contributions presented herein, we next review the related work on both PD and HAN, respectively. 1.1.1. Pedestrian Detection: One of the main goals in our framework is to achieve an accurate and fast Pedestrian Detection algorithm. This has been one of the major topics addressed in the computer vision community, surveys are available in [12, 13]. Classically, the PD problem has been addressed by using conventional handcrafted features (e.g., image gradient, HOG, wavelets, etc) that have plateaued in recent years. Some of the popular handcrafted methods for PD include: the Aggregate Channel Features (ACF) [5], where individual pixel lookups are extracted from the concatenation of the LUV, histogram of oriented gradients and gradient magnitude image channels. These pixels serve as features to be applied in a boosted decision trees 2  1.1.2. Human-Aware Navigation: Regarding the HAN, a planner approach can be found in [24]. This work focuses on human comfort, which is addressed by three criteria: preventing personal space invasions; navigating in the humans’ field of view (FOV); and preventing sudden appearances in the FOV of humans. Those criteria are modeled as cost functions in a 2D costmap and path planning is performed with A? algorithm. Even though the HAN planner accounts for replanning if people move, it does not adapt their personal space during the motion. With that in mind, two extensions to HAN are proposed: • A prediction cost function which, by increasing the cost in front of a moving human, decreases the probability of the robot entering that area [25]; and • The concept of compatible paths, which means that two paths are compatible if both agents can follow their paths (reaching the goal position), without any deadlocks [26].  Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed methodology, cascading the ACF (nondeep) detector and the deep CNN. First, the ACF detector performs selective search identifying promising image regions that might contain pedestrians, i.e. generates pedestrian proposals (see the green rectangles in the third image of the figure). The candidate proposals, in the RGB feature map, are forwarded through the CNN to be more accurately classified (see text).  An alternative approach was proposed by [27], which differs from HAN planner on the considered constraints and their formulation. Instead of focusing simply on human comfort, constraints concerning social rules (e.g., navigate on the right side of narrow passages) and low-level human navigation behavior (e.g., face direction of movement) are also taken into account. Another important issue related with human comfort, in a social context, is the interference with humans interacting with other humans and/or objects. This issue is tackled by [28] where, besides considering proxemics and the back space of a person, a constraint is included to model the space between interacting entities. Other important work was presented in [29]. The authors presented a framework for planning a smooth path through a set of milestones. Those are added, deleted, and/or modified, based on the static and dynamic components of the environment. More recently, [30] defined the three goals for HumanAware Navigation: human comfort (e.g., space that people keep from each other in different contexts, known as the theory of proxemics [31], and velocity that robots navigate close to humans [32]); respect social rules; and mimic low-level human behavior.  present the results with the complete framework (PD + HAN). Section 8 concludes the paper. 2. Vision-Based People Detection through Deep Learning For PD, this paper follows the strategy mentioned in the previous section, providing the following contributions. First, we adopt a very deep learning based approach, by using pretrained models. Second, we are able to drastically decrease the computational effort associated with the exhaustive search performed during the sliding window process. To accomplish this, we cascade the ACF (non-deep) detector [5] with a CNN1 . This cascade strategy is twofold: first, it provides a selective search approach that significantly improves the computational efficiency, since only the output proposals of the ACF are taken into account; then, by cascading with the CNN, we are able to boost the performance of the ACF detector (i.e., improve the classification accuracy of the ACF proposals by reducing the number of false positives). Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed approach for the PD task.  1.2. Outline of the Paper This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the main stages of the proposed vision-based framework. Section 2.1 describes the PD methodology. Section 2.1.1 details the CNN model and operations used for PD. Section 3 is related with how the deep learning methodology is integrated in the navigation setup. To accomplish this, the CNN training must be performed (Section 3.1), as well as the adaptation of the CNN (Section 3.2). Experimental evaluation is conducted in Section 4, in which, we evaluate the performance of the proposed PD methodology in the INRIA dataset (Section 4.1) and in two real scenarios comprising the “corridor” and “MBOT” sequences (Section 4.2). Section 5 presents the HAN constraints that will be used in the proposed framework. In Section 6, we evaluate the HAN constraints, and in Section 7, we  2.1. Methodology for PD In this section we formalize the adopted methodology for PD. First, let us consider that we have available the following |D| training set D = {(x, y)i }i=1 , where x denotes the input image 3 with x : Ω → R with Ω denoting the image lattice2 of size w × h × d, with d = 3; the class label is defined in y ∈ Y = {0, 1}C that denotes the (absence) presence of the pedestrian in the ith image xi (i.e., C = 2). The training dataset D is the input for the ACF detector. For each input image xi , a detector (e.g., 1 Recall  that there exist several non-deep detectors, such as Regionlets [33] or LDCF [14]. We choose the ACF detector since it is fast. 2 In this paper, the RGB feature map is considered for the image x.  3  and bias βout ∈ RC (C is the number of classes under consideration). The output of the CNN mentioned in (1), can be seen as an approximation of the input data (represented by v? in equation (1)). The convolution mentioned above is formally defined as:  ACF or LDCF) is used to provide the candidate windows, or the proposals, along with the scores (confidences). This can be |O| formalized as the following output set O = {(x(B), S )i }i=1 . |B| In this set, B = {bk }k=1 represents the set of bounding boxes coordinates, with bk = [xk , yk , wk , hk ] ∈ R4 denoting the top-left point and width and height enclosing (or not) the pedestrian; we denote as x(B), the content (i.e., the proposals) of the image |S | delimited by the bounding boxes B; S = {sk }k=1 are the ACF detector confidence scores assigned to the proposals x(B). As mentioned in [9], the generalization ability of the CNN can be boosted resorting to pre-trained models, instead of using random initialization. Therefore, we use the proposed VGG CNN model [34]3 , pre-trained with Imagenet [8]. Formally, e |D| e = {(e we have a dataset to pre-train the CNN, i.e. D x,e y)n }n=1 , f = {0, 1}Ce, where Ce is the number with e x : Ω → R3 and e y∈Y of classes in the pre-trained model (in the Imagenet case, the number of classes is Ce = 1000). In Section 3.2.2 we detail how transfer learning is accomplished in our classification problem.  cl (v(l−1) ( j)) =  ∑  v(l−1) (i) ? Wl (i, j) + β l ( j),  (2)  i∈Ω( j)  where ? stands for the convolution, Ω( j) is the input region addresses and where the convolutional filters are represented by the weight matrix Wl and the bias vector β l . Notice that the input v(l−1) ( j) in (2), is obtained following the structure in (1), i.e. convolution, activation and sub-sampling operations 4 , from the preceding layer, that is:   v(l−1) ( j) = sl−1 al−1 (cl−1 (v(l−2) ( j))) , (3) where v(0) ( j) represents the input image. The L convolutional layers are followed by a sequence of fully connected layers, that perform a particular instance of L the convolution in (2) to the entire vectorised input vL ∈ R|v | , where |vL | denotes the length-vector vL . In the final stage, the above fully connected layers are followed by a classification layer that is defined by a soft-max function as follows (see [35]): fout ( f fc ) = softmax(Wout f fc + βout ), (4)  2.1.1. CNN model: We now formalize the main ingredients of the CNN architecture. Basically, this type of deep networks comprises several processing stages. Each stage is characterized by having two types of layers, namely: a convolutional layer containing a nonlinear activation function, and a non-linear subsampling layer. In the former, a convolutional filter is applied to the input. In the latter, the size reduction of the input is achieved. These two stages are typically followed by several fully connected layers, and a multinomial logistic regression layer (see details in [35]). Formally, the convolutional neural network can be analytically represented by the following mapping f : X → Y , where X represents the image space and Y represents the classification space:  with the soft-max function defined as y(q)i =  exp(q(i)) ∑ j exp(q( j))  and  [0, 1]C  fout ∈ represents the output from the inference process that takes the input v, with C representing the number of classes. In our case, the input are the proposals of the ACF non-deep detector, i.e. x(B), and C represents the two output classes (absence/presence of the pedestrian). Thus, (1) is written as (similarly for (2)):  f (v; θ ) = v? = fout ◦ ffc ◦ sL ◦ aL ◦ cL ◦ ... ◦ s1 ◦ a1 ◦ c1 (v(0) ), (1)  f (x(B); θ ) = x(B)?  where ◦ denotes the composition operator, {ci (.)}Li=1  represents a convolutional layer, θ represents the model parameters comprising the input weight matrices Wl ∈ Rkl ×kl ×nl ×nl−1 and bias vector βl ∈ Rnl for each layer l ∈ {1, ..., L}, and with kl × kl representing the size of the nl filters in the l-th layer, having nl−1 input channels ; al (.) represents a non-linear activation layer (e.g. the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), for more details see [35]) ; sl (.) is a sub-sampling layer, that is, a function that allows to obtain vl =↓ v(l−1) , where ↓ denotes a subsampling function that pools (using the mean or max functions) the values from a region of the input data ; ffc is a fully-connected layer containing the weights {W fc ,k }Kk=1 (with W fc ,k ∈ Rn fc ,k−1 ×n fc ,k representing the connections between the k − 1-th and k-th fully connected layers), and biases {β fc ,k }Kk=1 (with β ∈ Rn fc ,k ), that also belong to the model parameters θ ; fout is a multinomial logistic regression layer containing the weights Wout ∈ Rn fc ,K ×C  = fout ◦ ffc ◦ sL ◦ aL ◦ cL ◦ ... ◦ s1 ◦ a1 ◦ c1 (x(B (0) )),  (5)  where the inputs are the proposals (i.e., the image content, in the RGB feature map, delimited by the bounding boxes), here denoted as x(B (0) ) (see Fig. 1). The main idea is to take the proposals x(B), that will be processed by the CNN, and produce a classification probability that a given proposal contains a pedestrian. The proposals classified as non pedestrians are discarded, allowing to eliminate false positives. The ones regarded as pedestrians are kept, including the original ACF detector score. In the PD case, the CNN prediction output can be formally represented by: (6) f (x(B), θ ) = y? , 4 These are the basic operations of the CNN, but the subsampling layer does not necessarily need to be present in every case.  3 Details are also available at: http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/ ˜vgg/research/very_deep/.  4  which is trained using the binary cross-entropy loss over the training set indexed by i, as follows:  training images, from which 1218 are negative images (i.e., not containing pedestrians) and 614 are positive images (i.e., containing pedestrians). There are 288 test images. In our experimental setup, we have to build not only the training set but also the validation set to fine-tune the pre-trained CNN model. To obtain the positive set, we use the ground truth positive training bounding boxes (i.e., proposals corresponding to the image content delimited by them) Bpos = 1237. Data augmentation is then performed for the positive samples using the following two steps:  1 |D| ∑ −y(i) × log(y? (i)) − (1 − y(i)) × log(1 − y? (i)) |D| i=1 (7) Let the pre-trained CNN be represented by the model e y= f (e x, θe), with θe = [θecn , θefc , θelr ]. The process of pre-training a CNN is defined by the following three steps: L =  1. Training M1 stages (see cyan/blue block in the CNN illustrated in Fig. 1) of convolutional and non-linear subsampling layers, that are represented by the parameters θecn ; then  1. Horizontal flipping over the set Bpos , resulting in a new (1) set, Bpos = 2474 (including also Bpos ); and 2. Random deformations (including translation and scale), in the range R = [0, 5] pixels (for the beginning and end) (1) applied on the previous set, Bpos . This allows us to ob(2) tain a new set, Bpos = 4948.  2. Training M2 fully connected layers (see green block in the CNN illustrated in Fig. 1), represented by the parameters θefc ; and 3. Training one multinomial logistic regression layer with parameters (see red block in the CNN illustrated in Fig. 1) θelr , by minimizing the cross-entropy loss function [35] e over the dataset D.  To build the negative set Bneg , we extract negative windows (i.e., proposals) from the negative images using the strategy mentioned in [23] (i.e., employing a non-fully trained version of LDCF). As a result, a set of 12552 negative windows is obtained, by defining an upper-bound of 18 negative proposals per image. This strategy allows to acquire a total of 17500 proposals, from which 15751 are used for training (90%) and 1749 for validation (10%).  It is worth to mention that, transferring a large number of pre-trained layers and fine-tuning the CNN is the key to achieve the best classification results in transfer learning problems [9]. Following this strategy, we first take the M1 layers to initialize a new model (see [9]). Since we have changed the CNN input size to reduce the computational expense, the M2 layers were randomly initialized from a Gaussian distribution, so that the dimensions are compatible and inference is possible. Finally, we introduce a new binomial logistic regression layer, with parameters θlr (randomly initialized from a Gaussian distribution) adapted for two classes (pedestrian and non-pedestrian). Afterwards, we fine-tune the CNN model by minimizing the crossentropy loss function in (7), using the pedestrian training set D.  3.2. Adaptation of the pre-trained CNN model As mentioned in Sec. 2.1, we use a pre-trained CNN model. As such, some modifications/adaptations are necessary. In the following, we describe the required steps, by first detailing the model used and, then, describing the modifications needed. 3.2.1. Pre-trained model used: For the pre-trained network, we select the VGG Very Deep 16 architecture (VGG-VD16), more specifically, the “D” configuration in [34]6 . This CNN architecture receives 224 × 224 × 3 input images. The network comprises 13 convolutional layers, three fully connected layers and a multinomial logistic regression layer (see Sec. 2.1.1). There are five max-pooling operations (i.e., nonlinear subsampling), which operate on a 2x2 region, reducing the input by a factor of two. These operations appear after layers: 2, 4, 7, 10 and 13. The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) is selected to be the non-linearity, applied to the convolutional and fully connected layers. Furthermore, the size of the receptive field is the same for all convolutional layers (i.e., 3x3). However, the number of filters is different as described below:  3. Materials and methods This section addresses the implementation details of the adopted deep learning methodology, to be integrated in the navigation setup. First, in Sec. 3.1 we describe the experimental setup used to train the deep CNN. Then, Sec. 3.2 addresses the adaptation of the pre-trained model to the PD task. The outcome of these sections, i.e. the final CNN architecture finetuned for PD, is subsequently used for testing purposes, as described in Sec. 4. 3.1. CNN training in the INRIA dataset To train the CNN model we use the INRIA dataset, which is a common benchmark used for research work in the detection of pedestrians in images5 . This dataset comprises 1832  • There are 64 filters in each of the layers 1 and 2; • There are 128 filters in each of the layers 3 and 4; 6 See additional details at: http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/ vgg/ ˜ research/very_deep/.  5 More  details can be found at: http://pascal.inrialpes.fr/ data/human/.  5  • There are 256 filters in each of the layers 5, 6 and 7;  Table 1: Logarithmic average miss rate (MR), frames per second (FPS), number of true positives (TP), false positives (FP), and false negatives (FN) on the INRIA dataset, for the ACF detector and the ACF+CNN.  • There are 512 filters in each of the layers from 8 to 13; • There are 4096 filters in each of the layers 14 and 15;  Dataset  • There are 1000 filters in layer 16. Each of these filters is associated with a different ILSVRC [8] class. After this layer, there is a soft-max function.  INRIA Baseline  The pre-training of the mentioned model was performed with Imagenet [8], having 1000 classes, 1.2 million training, 50 thousand validation and 100 thousand test images.  INRIA Threshold  3.2.2. Adaptation of the deep network: In order to decrease the computational effort required by the VGG-VD16 model, the expected input size for the CNN was reduced from 224 × 224 × 3 (i.e., the original) to 64 × 64 × 3. Nevertheless, due to this change in the input size, inference is not possible after the first fully connected layer. Moreover, the PD task requires the use of only two classes (i.e. C = 2) in order to represent the presence or absence of a pedestrian. Therefore, the layer 16 and the soft-max must be adjusted accordingly. In order to solve the aforementioned issues, we choose to randomly initialize the parameters of the three fully connected layers. More specifically, they are obtained from a Gaussian distribution, with zero mean and variance σ 2 = 0.01. The changed network is fine-tuned using the previously mentioned (in Sec. 3.1) positive and negative sets, obtained from the INRIA pedestrian dataset. The process of pre-training the network acts as a regularization procedure, similar to data augmentation. Regarding the fine-tuning hyperparameters, we use ε = 10 epochs, a minibatch of ξ = 100 samples, a learning rate of β = 0.001, and a momentum of µ = 0.9. No special effort was dedicated to fine-tune the mentioned hyperparameters. During test, we run the ACF detector in the 288 INRIA test images in order to obtain the proposals (i.e., regions potentially containing pedestrians). Then, we run the proposals through the CNN in order to classify them as pedestrians or non-pedestrians. All the experiments will be detailed next (see Sec. 4 and Tabs. 1 and 2) and were obtained with Matlab, running on CPU mode on 2.50 GHz Intel Core i7-4710 HQ with 12 GB of RAM and 64 bit architecture. The Piotr’s Computer Vision Matlab Toolbox [36] (2014, version 3.40) was employed to execute the ACF method, and to perform the performance evaluation. Regarding the implementation of the CNN framework, the MatConvNet toolbox [37] was utilized.  Metrics TP FP FN MR% FPS TP FP FN MR% FPS  ACF Proposals 551 1284 38 16.83 15.18 531 112 58 17.48 14.81  ACF+CNN 546 249 43 15.13 3.38 528 54 61 16.48 6.62  • In Sec. 4.2, we evaluate the performance of the PD method in real scenarios comprising two sequences (termed herein as “corridor” and “MBOT”). Special attention is given to the details of how we achieve real-time requirements in the detection. 4.1. Performance evaluation on the INRIA dataset To test the accuracy of the PD module, to be integrated in the navigation setup, we first assess its performance in the INRIA dataset. The adopted evaluation metric is the log average miss rate (MR), as proposed in [12]. This metric is obtained from nine values in the False Positives Per Image (FPPI) interval [10−2 , 100 ]. Since it is a miss rate, lower MR values correspond to superior performances (i.e. improved accuracies). To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed cascade of a non-deep detector (ACF) with the CNN architecture, we also present in Tab. 1 (field ”INRIA Baseline”) the results of the ACF alone and the results of the cascade, in order to notice the improvement achieved. From the experiments conducted, we achieve a log average miss rate of 16.83% for the ACF detector alone. Cascading the ACF with the CNN we are able to reach 15.13%.7 Tab. 1 shows the number of true positives (TP), false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN), before and after the use of the CNN. Notice that, the number of FP is significantly reduced, while maintaining most of the TP. This indicates that the CNN is successfully discarding FP, allowing to reach performance improvements (and justifying the observed gain). An important concern when building the PD algorithm, is to verify and ensure that the runtime figures satisfy the realtime requirements. Tab. 1 shows the ACF and ACF+CNN running times in frames per second (FPS) obtained for the INRIA dataset. From the results, we conclude that the ACF+CNN system is able to perform PD at 3.38 FPS, which should be improved. The introduction of the CNN in the pipeline after the  4. Evaluation of the People Detection This section provides the testing results for the evaluation of the proposed PD method. The section is divided into two parts: • In Sec. 4.1, we describe the performance evaluation, concerning both accuracy and runtime figures of the PD method, when the INRIA dataset is used; and  7 The approach proposed herein, as shown in Fig. 1, is general and can be applied to any other non-deep detector (e.g. Regionlets [33], LDCF [14] or Spatial Pooling [38] detectors).  6  ACF method, resulted in a significant runtime decrease from 15.18 FPS to 3.38 FPS. To improve the mentioned runtime figures, while achieving as much accuracy as possible, two strategies can be used: (a) reduce the original images size, or (b) discard ACF proposals with confidence score below a certain threshold. In this work, the latter option (b) is adopted. Notice that, reducing the size of the images may jeopardize the quality of the detections. Furthermore, the confidence scores outputted by the ACF detector constitute a relevant indicator to filter the proposals. This can be achieved by applying a threshold over the proposals, where only the ones above a certain score are kept and are further processed by the CNN. For our experiments, a threshold value of 40 was set for the confidence score. This threshold is in accordance with the value suggested in [39], in which it is proposed a thresholding technique based on upper and lower bounds on the confidence scores of the ACF. Another important remark is that, the gain in speed results from the fact that the CNN only has to classify a smaller portion of the ACF proposals, instead of all of them. Therefore, the easier false positives should be discarded by the threshold operation, while the harder false positives should be discarded by the CNN. The threshold value controls the trade-off between potential accuracy loss and speed gain. By selecting the later case (i.e. the threshold operation), we are able to improve the runtime of the overall detector (i.e. ACF+CNN), when compared with the results obtained for the baseline. These results are shown in Tab. 1 (field ”INRIA Threshold”), where it can be seen that the ACF+CNN frame rate increases from 3.38 FPS (baseline) to 6.62 FPS (threshold). In order to assess if this speed metrics are suited for realtime applications, we perform further experiments in real HAN scenarios in Sec. 4.2.  Table 2: Runtime figures before (top, ”Baseline”) and after (bottom, ”Threshold”) the threshold operation applied to the ACF proposals, when using the overall PD method (i.e., ACF+CNN).  Dataset  Baseline  Threshold  Data seq. 1 (corridor)  Data seq. 2 (Mbot)  Total time = 0.1273 sec.  Total time = 0.2066 sec.  avg. no. det. ACF = 2.70  avg. no. det. ACF = 4.83  avg. no. det. ACF+CNN = 2.36  avg. no. det. ACF+CNN = 2.45  ACF time = 0.0326 sec.  ACF time = 0.0367 sec.  CNN time = 0.0947 sec.  CNN time = 0.17 sec.  Frame rate = 7.85 FPS  Frame rate = 4.84 FPS  Total time = 0.0961 sec.  Total time = 0.1026 sec.  avg. no. det. ACF = 1.82  avg. no. det. ACF = 1.78  avg. no. det. ACF+CNN = 1.81  avg. no. det. ACF+CNN = 1.73  ACF time = 0.0333 sec.  ACF time = 0.0381 sec.  CNN time = 0.0628 sec.  CNN time = 0.0645 sec.  Frame rate = 10.41 FPS  Frame rate = 9.74 FPS  number of detections (”avg. no. det.”) before (ACF only) and after (ACF+CNN) the application of the CNN, and also the CNN time for each data sequence (top, the two columns in the field named ”Baseline”). By applying the threshold operation (as described in Sec. 4.1), it possible to obtain approximately 10 FPS for each of the datasets (as shown in Tab. 2, field ”Threshold”)), which is suited for real-time applications. 5. Human-Aware Navigation From the method described in the previous section, we get bounding boxes on the images, representing pedestrians. Multiple instances of the proposed PD can be applied in images of several cameras at the same time. Assuming that we have a set of images (a single image can also be used), the goal of this section is to: firstly, project the position of the pedestrians from the image into the world environment; fuse the information given from different imaging sensors; and, then, define the HAN constraints to be included in any conventional path planer. After computing the position of the pedestrian in the world coordinate systems, including the estimation of the pedestrian’s velocity (the methods used in this paper for this module are shown in Sec. 5.1), the main goal of this section is to define the robot’s path in an environment with humans that may interact with it. To be as Human-Aware as possible, three goals are considered, namely: human comfort; respect social rules; and naturalness. To fulfill these requirements, the following constraints are taken into account:  4.2. Performance evaluation on real scenarios To perform experiments in real scenarios, we acquired two indoor datasets to evaluate the PD task. Two datasets are considered in these experiments: • The “corridor” dataset, containing 5556 images; and • The “MBOT” dataset, containing 3966 images. The size of the frame (i.e., the image) is 480 × 640 for both of the sequences. Some of the results obtained in the two datasets are shown in Fig. 2, where each bounding box has a score, showing the confidence of containing a pedestrian. The total time to perform PD in the dataset “corridor” (5556 frames) and “MBOT” (3966 frames), is roughly 707.27 seconds and 839 seconds, respectively. The running time figures per frame are shown in Tab. 2. In this table, the field “Baseline” refers to the metrics of the final PD detector as detailed in Sec. 3.2. The algorithm reaches 7.85 FPS and 4.84 FPS, for the ”corridor” and the ”MBOT” sequences, respectively. The runtime is longer for the ”Mbot” dataset, because the number of ACF detections that have to be processed by the CNN is larger, in comparison with the ”corridor” dataset. This observation is depicted in Tab. 2, by comparing the average  1. Take least effort path (naturalness) – Sec. 5.2; 2. Keep a distance from static obstacles (naturalness) – Sec. 5.2; 3. Respect personal spaces (human comfort) – Sec. 5.3.1;  7  (a) Pedestrian detection in the “corridor” sequence.  (b) Pedestrian detection in the “MBOT” sequence. Figure 2: In real scenarios, there are cameras mounted on the ceiling and on the robot. To test our PD, we used two sequences of images acquired from both possible real scenario camera locations. In Figs. (a) and (b) are shown three images of the “corridor” and “MBOT‘” sequences, respectively.  4. Avoid navigating behind sitting humans (human comfort) – Sec. 5.3.2;  5. Create and/or remove signaled tracks. The people tracking is performed in the world coordinate system, instead of the image plane. For this purpose, two assumptions are considered: i) people are standing or walking upright8 ; ii) given i), a person’s feet will always be on the ground plane and, thus, the point, which represents a person feet, is on the line between the bottom left and right corners of the respective bounding box. Since the person is, most of the times, in the center of the bounding box, a good estimate for the position of the feet is in the middle point of the considered line segment. The projection is performed by transforming the selected point with an homography computed a priori (transformation from the image plane into the floor plane). These positions will be associated with the targets and be used as measurements in Kalman Filters (one for each person), which will perform the tracking. A constant velocity motion model was considered for the prediction step of the filter. The association between measurements and targets is performed with the NNJPDA method [40]. This is a hard assignment method, in which only one measurement is assigned to the target, using a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) approach. When the association is complete, there is a condition that checks if the assignment distance is higher than a threshold. When that is the case, the track and measurement are unassigned. After the assignment, there are three cases to be considered:  5. Do not interfere with human-object interactions (human comfort) – Sec. 5.3.3; and 6. Overtake people by the left (social rule) – Sec. 5.3.4; The first two constraints are related to navigation problems (the method used in this paper is described in Sec. 5.2), whereas the remaining four constraints are about the HAN (more details about each of these constraints are shown in Sec. 5.3). 5.1. People Tracking in the World As explained in the previous sections, the PD module returns bounding boxes representing people in the scene. Those are sent to this module which uses the Nearest Neighbour Joint Probabilistic Data Association (NNJPDA), [40], and an array of Kalman Filters to track people (one for each person). It performs the following steps: 1. Project the middle point, between the bottom left and right corners of each bounding box, to the ground plane, in world coordinates; 2. Predict the new state of each track; 3. Associate the measurements to existing tracks and determine if tracks need to be created or removed; 4. Update the prediction with the respective measurement; and  8 In our experiments we also considered a seated person. Even though our method was not designed for this type of cases, the results were satisfactory.  8  • ex and ey – are the variables that define the space around the person; and  1. The assignment exists; 2. The track is not assigned; and/or  • px and py – represent the person position.  3. The measurement is not assigned.  A graphical representation of these parameters is shown in Fig. 3(a). Then, the personal space of a walking person was modelled as:  If there is a successful assignment, it proceeds to the correction step of the filter, with the assigned measurement. When a track is not assigned, there are two possibilities: the track increases the inactivity flag and, if the inactivity threshold was reached, the track is deleted. If a measurement is not assigned, after some iterations, a new Kalman Filter is created for this measurement. Velocity estimates (required for the HAN constraints) are given from the Kalman filter state estimates. We are considering a person state to be her position and velocity.  2 1 g1 = asymGauss(ex , ey , px , py , α p , βe, βe, βe), 3 2 where βe = max (ν, 0.8) , (9) α p is the person’s orientation and ν her speed. A graphical representation of the person walking along y–axis direction with a velocity of 1 [m/s] is presented in Fig. 3(a). Regarding a walking person, it makes sense for the personal space in front to be larger than in the back (to ensure that the robot does not pass in front of the person, decreasing the risk of collision). On the other hand, if a person is standing and we consider the personal space defined using the previous formulation, the robot may pass behind too close to the person, causing discomfort. Thus, for this case we propose that the personal space to be modelled as a circular Gaussian: ! (ex − px )2 (ey − py )2 − , (10) g2 = exp − 2βx2 2βy2  5.2. Path planner and obstacle avoidance The first HAN constraint is addressed by the path planner (see the list in the beginning of Sec. 5). In this work the A∗ algorithm [41] was used, ensuring a minimum cost path as long as the heuristic is admissible. The total cost of a node is given by the sum of the cost of reaching that node, with the heuristic cost. The latter was considered to be the Euclidean distance from the initial to the goal position. Since the environment is dynamic (people may appear walking in the scene), the planner computes a path periodically. The goal of the second constraint is to prevent the robot from passing too close to obstacles. This is solved by attributing a high cost to the area surrounding the obstacles, [42]. In the next subsection, we define the remaining constraints, that will be included in the path planner, for the navigation to be human-aware.  where βx and βy are the standard deviation in the x and y direction respectively. This formulation was also considered for a seated person. If an object hand over is required, the robot should be able to enter the personal space, to be at “arm’s length”. However, the robot cannot be allowed to enter from a random direction, instead it should only be allowed to approach a person from the front [43]. Thus, our solution is to open the region in front of the person 45 degrees, to a distance of 0.6[m]. Personal space, in a hand over scenario, is depicted in Figure 3(b).  5.3. Human-Aware Navigation Cost Functions The Human-Aware Cost Functions used in this work are based on previous state-of-the-art approaches. However, some of them are reformulated (namely the cost functions associated with constraints 4 and 5) in order to be better integrated in our approach, and to standardize their formulation.  5.3.2. Visibility Constraint: Constraint 4 concerns preventing discomfort from passing behind a seated person. We reformulated this problem with an asymmetric Gaussian:  5.3.1. Personal Space Cost Functions: The third constraint in the list accounts for personal space, which models will be presented next. We consider three different situations: when a person is standing; walking; or seated. For the case of a walking person, we used the formulation proposed in [27], which the authors call asymmetric Gaussian: g = asymGauss(ex , ey , px , py , α, βh , βs , βr ),  g3 = asymGauss(ex , ey , px , py , α p − π, 1.2, 0.8, 0.006). (11) 5.3.3. Interaction Constraint: The fifth constraint prevents the robot from interfering with a person interacting with an object. It is represented by an interaction set modelled as a circle:  γ if (ex − pex )2 + (ey − pey )2 ≤ r g4 = , (12) 0 otherwise  (8)  where • α – orientation of the function; • βh – variance in the α direction;  where the middle position between the interacting entities is denoted as ( pex , pey ), and the radius r is half the distance between the entities (only one-on-one interactions are considered). γ is an importance factor, which varies from 0 to 1.  • βr – variance in the α − π direction; • βs – variance in the α ± π2 direction; 9  βh  α βs  βs  βr  (a) Personal space  (b) Object hand over  (c) Seated person  (d) Walking person  Figure 3: Representation of cost functions associated with different people postures: Fig. (a) represents the cost function for the personal space of a person walking in the y direction at 1 [m/s]; Fig. (b) shows the cost function of a person standing, oriented in the x direction, during an object hand over; Fig. (c) represents the cost function for the case where a person is seated; and Fig. (d) shows the total cost function of a walking person, including the social rule of overtaking her by the left and her personal space.  (a) The robot was placed behind a person and a goal position was defined. Then the person starts walking, the robot should replan a path through the person’s left.  (b) The robot is requested to hand over an object to a person, who is across the room. However it needs to pass between a seated person and a TV. As it starts moving, the TV is turned on. To prevent interference, the robot replans around that area. However, there is yet another person, walking behind the couch, who must be taken into account. Figure 4: Evaluation of the proposed navigation system using simulated environments. The environment was created using Gazebo and the results are shown in Rviz (ROS package). Figs. (a) and (b) show sequences of images representing experiments 1 and 2 respectively (more details regarding each of the experiments are given in the text). In all cases, it can be seen: the costmap, current and goal position, path, and the trajectory.  10  (a) Image of the robot platform used for the experimental results in realistic scenarios.  (b) Image of Camera 1, mounted on the ceiling.  (c) Image of Camera 2, mounted on the ceiling.  (d) Image of Camera 3, mounted on the ceiling.  (e) On-board robot camera’s image.  (f) Depiction of the environment in Rviz, showing: the robot’s position, a pedestrian, and the positions of the cameras. Figure 5: Representation of the setup used in the experiments in a realistic scenario. Fig. (a) shows the robot platform and Figs. (b), (c), (d), and (e) show the images of the cameras that will be used to detect the pedestrians (as it can be seen, in these images we already show the bounding boxes identifying a person in the environment). To conclude, Fig. (f) shows the environment (ROS Rviz package), with the position of all the cameras, the position of the robot and the pedestrian, with the respective HAN constraint (in this case the pedestrian was standing).  The proposed system was implemented as an extension of the ROS navigation stack, [42], and the cost functions, described in the previous section, were implemented as plug-ins to the costmap layered structure, [44]. The simulation environment was Gazebo running on a machine with an Intel Core i7-3770T, and 8GB of RAM. The experiments performed were:  5.3.4. Overtake Constraint: Constraint 6 represents the social rule of overtaking people by the left (considered only for walking persons). This constraint is also represented using an asymmetric Gaussian: g5 = asymGauss(ex , ey , px , py , α p −  π , 1.5, 0.3, 0.0075), (13) 2  5.3.5. Cost Function Fusion: For the three possible postures of a person (standing, seated and walking), there are two where more than one cost function is applied and they must be combined. Since the main goal of the framework is to maximize the comfort of the humans, the cost functions are combined by taking the maximum cost value attributed to each point in space. The first case of multiple cost functions affecting the same space, is a seated person, whose personal space is given by: g6 = max (g2 , g3 ) ,  Experiment 1: The robot is navigating when encounters a slow walking person, which it must overtake. The goal is to verify if it respects constraints 3 and 6, Sec. 5. Experiment 2: The robot is requested to hand over some object to a person across the room. As it starts moving, the TV is turned on, and the robot replans its path. However, another person is going across the room behind the seated person, who must be overtaken for it to reach its goal. This experiment was designed to evaluate the navigation module regarding constraints 3, 4, 5, and 6, Sec. 5.  (14)  The results for these experiments are shown in Fig. 4. Next, we present experimental results using both simulated and realistic environments.  this cost function is depicted in Fig. 3(c). The second case concerns a walking person, where the personal space must be combined with the respective social rule (a person should be overtaken by the left): g7 = max (g1 , g5 ) .  7. Results of the Complete Framework  (15)  In this section, we evaluate the proposed framework (using both the proposed PD and HAN). For that purpose, we use a MBOT mobile platform [45] (see Fig. 5(a)), in a typical indoor work scenario, as shown in Fig. 5(f). For the PD, we are using five distinct cameras: one onboard and four cameras fixed on the ceiling. Figures showing the images captured by the onboard camera and three of the ceiling cameras are shown in Figs. 5(b)-(e).  A graphical representation of this cost function is shown in Fig. 3(d). 6. Evaluation of the Human-Aware Navigation Constraint To evaluate the proposed constraints for HAN, two experiments were defined and tested in simulated environments. 11  For the validation, we consider the following experiments:  starts moving, the person turns on the TV and, thus, the robot needs to replan its path, so it does not interfere with the interaction that just started. As can be seen on the second image of Fig. 8(a) the pedestrian was partially occluded by the couch on the onboard sensor. Thus the PD running on this sensor was not able to detect the person in the environment. However, since we were using another sensor (external to the robot), which was detecting the person, the robot knew that there was a person there and, when the TV was turned on, the robot replaned the path according with the respective human-aware constraint. In the last experiment, we show a case where the robot is asked to receive some object from a person. In this case, the robot should identify the person’s position, which is given by the proposed PD algorithm. Then, the robot should navigate towards his position and enter in his personal space to be able to receive the object. As it can be seen from Fig. 9, both the proposed PD and the HAN work as expected, even in the case where the pedestrian is not seen by the onboard sensor. A video with these experiments is sent as supplementary material and ROS packages for both the PD and the HAN will be available to the community.  Experiment 1: In the first experiments, the robot must avoid three standing people that are distributed along the main corridor of the environment, performing a slalom path to avoid entering in their personal space; Experiment 2: The robot is navigating when encounters a slow walking person, which it must overtake. The goal is to verify if it respects constraints 3 and 6, Sec. 5. Experiment 3: A person is seated on a couch, watching TV, and the robot wants to go across the room. The goal is to test if the robot respects constraints 4 and 5, Sec. 5. Experiment 4: The robot navigates towards a person, to hand over some object. The goal is to verify the modification of the personal space, constraint 3, Sec. 5. Regarding the HAN throughout the experiments, the robot displayed a similar behaviour to the simulation in terms of trajectory execution. However, the parameters of the cost functions (9), (10), (11), and (13) needed to be adjusted. The values presented previously were derived empirically, taking into account: the values in the literature; the space restrictions of the real scenario, and our intuition of comfort distances. In the next subsection we discuss the results obtained for each of the experiments.  8. Conclusions This work addresses the problem of Human-Aware Navigation for a robot in a social context. For that purpose, in this paper we derive a robust and efficient solution for the PD, using deep learning. In addition, regarding HAN, we reformulate some of the respective constraints in order to have a standardization of human-aware constraints. To validate our contributions, we first use the INRIA dataset to evaluate both the accuracy and runtime figures of the PD method. Then, to evaluate the performance using real data, we use two sequences of images (one was acquired using the robot’s onboard camera and the second sequence was acquired using an external camera). The results show that the method is both robust and fast enough (up to 10 frames per second) for robot navigation applications. To evaluate the standardization of HAN constraints, we use a simulated environment. In a realistic scenario, we test both modules in four distinct scenarios. The results show that the robot has the correct behavior, which means that both PD and HAN are working properly.  7.1. Discussion of the experimental results Let us start by the Experiment 1. From the results shown in Fig. 6, firstly, one can see that the proposed PD correctly detected the pedestrians, including on the onboard sensor, which was able to detect people that were in front of the robot. Using this information, the robot planned and executed the correct path towards the given goal, performing a slalom path to avoid entering in their personal space. Regarding the second experiment, a different setup was considered. Now there is only a person in the environment but, when the robot starts to move, that person will start moving, blocking the robot’s path. As it can be seen from Fig. 7, firstly, the robot plans the path taking into account a person standing in the environment. Then, when the person starts walking the robot replan its path to overtake the pedestrian by the left. The proposed PD was able to detect people from different sensors including the onboard sensor. Since we are using multiple sensors for the detections, even when the onboard camera doesn’t see the pedestrian, the robot continues with the right path towards the goal. From these results, one can conclude that the robot was able to correctly detect the pedestrian in real-time and was able to plan its path according with the defined HumanAware Navigation constraints. When considering the third experiment, the goal was to avoid passing in front of a person that was watching TV (a person interacting with an object). These results are shown in Fig. 8. Firstly, the robot plans its motion according with the less cost path towards the given goal position, which would include passing between the person and the TV. When the robot  References References [1] N. Dalal, B. Triggs, Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection, IEEE Proc. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). [2] P. F. Felzenszwalb, R. B. Girshick, D. McAllester, D. Ramanan, Object detection with discriminatively trained part based models, IEEE Proc. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. [3] P. Viola, M. J. Jones, Robust real-time face detection, Int’l J. Computer Vision. [4] L. Zhu, Y. Chen, A. Yuille, W. Freeman, Latent hierarchical structural learning for object detection, IEEE Proc. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). [5] P. Dollar, R. Appel, S. Belongie, P. Perona, Fast feature pyramids for object detection, IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence.  12  (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f)  Figure 6: In this experiment, people are standing during the robot’s movement. From top to bottom, we show: 1) the Rviz representation of the environment, people & robot positions, and the path planned at each instant; 2) detection from the onboard camera sensor; and 3) three detections from three different cameras mounted on the ceiling. From Figs. (a)-(f) one can see the robot navigation going towards a goal position and avoiding people, while respecting the personal space constraint.  13  (a)  (b)  (d)  (c)  (e)  (f)  Figure 7: Contrarily to the previous experiment, in this case only a person is in the environment and, instead of standing, he starts moving, blocking the robot’s path. In this figure we show the environment and images taken from the cameras, similar to Fig. 6. From Figs. (a)-(f) we can see that firstly the person is identified as standing, but when the robot starts moving, he also starts moving, thus the robot replans its path, in order to overtake the pedestrian by the left. Notice that, since we are using multiple sensors for the PD, even when the person is outside the onboard camera’s FOV, the robot performs well because the pedestrian is identified by the external sensors.  14  (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  Figure 8: This figure shows the results for the third experiment. From top to bottom, we show: the representation of the environment (including people & robot positions and the path planned); the detections from the onboard camera; and the detections from an external camera. Through the results shown in Figs. (a)-(e), it is possible to observe the two paths planned and followed by the robot when the TV is on and off. Firstly, the robot plans its path passing between the couch and the pedestrian. When the TV is turned on, the robot replans its path to go around the couch.  (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  Figure 9: Similar to the scheme shown in Fig. 8, from the top to the bottom, we show: the environment representation (with the location of the pedestrian and the robot, as well as the robot’s path); detections from the onboard camera; and the detections from an external camera. From Figs: (a)-(e), it is possible to observe that the robot follows the path planned to the hand over position, and that the costmap of the personal space is changed so the robot can reach that position.  15  [6] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, J. Malik, Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). [7] J. Hosang, M. Omran, R. Benenson, B. Schiele, Taking a deeper look at pedestrians, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). [8] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, L. Fei-Fei, ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge, Int’l J. Computer Vision. [9] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, H. Lipson, How transferable are features in deep neural networks?, Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS). [10] A. Mateus, P. Miraldo, P. U. Lima, J. Sequeira, Human-Aware Navigation using External Omnidirectional Cameras, Iberian Robotics Conference. [11] D. Ribeiro, A. Mateus, P. Miraldo, J. C. Nascimento, A real-time deep learning pedestrian detector for robot navigation, in: Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions (ICARSC), 2017 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2017, pp. 165–171. [12] P. Dollar, C. Wojec, B. Schiele, P. Perona, Pedestrian detection: An evaluation of the state of the art, IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. [13] R. Benenson, M. Omran, J. Hosang, B. Schiele, Computer Vision - ECCV 2014 Workshops: Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-7 and 12, 2014, Proceedings, Part II, Springer International Publishing, 2014, Ch. Ten Years of Pedestrian Detection, What Have We Learned? [14] W. Nam, P. Dollar, J. H. Han, Local decorrelation for improved pedestrian detection, Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS). [15] S. Zhang, R. Benenson, B. Schiele, Filtered channel features for pedestrian detection. [16] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, Deep learning, book in preparation for MIT Press (2016). [17] R. Girshick, Fast R-CNN. [18] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, J. Sun, Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. [19] J. Li, X. Liang, S. Shen, T. Xu, S. Yan, Scale-aware fast R-CNN for pedestrian detection, CoRR abs/1510.08160. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1510.08160 [20] Z. Cai, Q. Fan, R. S. Feris, N. Vasconcelos, A unified multi-scale deep convolutional neural network for fast object detection (2016) 354–370. [21] L. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Liang, K. He, Is Faster R-CNN Doing Well for Pedestrian Detection? [22] J. Hosang, M. Omran, R. Benenson, B. Schiele, Taking a deeper look at pedestrians, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015, pp. 4073–4082. [23] D. Ribeiro, J. C. Nascimento, A. Bernardino, G. Carneiro, Improving the performance of pedestrian detectors using convolutional learning, Pattern Recognition. [24] E. A. Sisbot, F. M.-U. Luis, R. Alami, T. Simeon, A Human Aware Mobile Robot Motion Planner, IEEE Trans. Robotics. [25] T. Kruse, A. Kirsch, E. A. Sisbot, R. Alami, Exploiting Human Cooperation in Human-Centered Robot Navigation, IEEE Int’l Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN). [26] T. Kruse, P. Basili, S. Glasauer, A. Kirsch, Legible Robot Navigation in the Proximity of Moving Humans, IEEE Workshop on Advanced Robotics and its Social Impacts (ARSO). [27] R. Kirby, Social Robot Navigation, Ph.D. thesis, Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University (2010). [28] L. Scandolo, T. Fraichard, An Anthropomorphic Navigation Scheme for Dynamic Scenarios, IEEE Proc. Int’l Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). [29] A. Pandey, R. Alami, A Framework towards a Socially Aware Mobile Robot Motion in Human-Centered Dynamic Environment, IEEE/RSJ Proc. Int’l Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). [30] T. Kruse, A. K. Pandey, R. Alami, A. Kirsch, Human-aware robot navigation: A survey, Robotics and Autonomous Systems. [31] E. Hall, The Hidden Dimension: Man’s Use of Space in Public and Private, Bodley Head, 1969. [32] D. Shi, E. G. Collins Jr., B. Goldiez, A. Donate, X. Liu, D. Dunlap, Human-Aware Robot Motion Planning with Velocity Constraints, Int’l Symposium Collaborative Technologies and Systems (CTS). [33] X. Wang, M. Yang, S. Zhu, Y. Lin, Regionlets for generic object detection,  IEEE Proc. Int’l Conf. Computer Vision (ICCV). [34] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for largescale image recognition, Int’l Conf. Learning Representations (ICLR). [35] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks, Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS). [36] P. Dollár, Piotr’s Computer Vision Matlab Toolbox (PMT), http:// vision.ucsd.edu/˜pdollar/toolbox/doc/index.html (2012). [37] A. Vedaldi, K. Lenc, MatConvNet – Convolutional Neural Networks for MATLAB, ACM Proc. Int’l Conf. on Multimedia. [38] S. Paisitkriangkrai, C. Shen, A. van den Hengel, Strengthening the effectiveness of pedestrian detection with spatially pooled features, Proc. European Conf. Computer Vision (ECCV). [39] A. Verma, R. Hebbalaguppe, L. Vig, S. Kumar, E. Hassan, Pedestrian detection via mixture of cnn experts and thresholded aggregated channel features, ICCV Workshop. [40] Y. Bar-Shalon, F. Daum, J. Huang, The probabilistic data association filter: Estimation in the presence of measurement origin uncertainty, IEEE Control Systems Magazine. [41] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, B. Raphael, A Formal Basis for the Heuristic Determination of Minimum Cost Paths, IEEE Trans. Systems Science and Cybernetics 4 (2). [42] E. Marder Eppstein, E. Berger, T. Foote, B. Gerkey, K. Konolige, The Office Marathon: Robust Navigation in an Indoor Office Environment, IEEE Proc. Int’l Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA). [43] K. L. Koay, E. A. Sisbot, D. S. Syrdal, M. L. Walters, K. Dautenhahn, R. Alami, Exploratory Study of a Robot Approaching a Person in the Context of Handing Over an Object., AAAI spring symposium: multidisciplinary collaboration for socially assistive robotics. [44] D. V. Lu, D. Hershberger, W. D. Smart, Layered Costmaps for ContextSensitive Navigation, IEEE/RSJ Proc. Int’l Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). [45] J. Messias, R. Ventura, P. Lima, J. Sequeira, P. Alvito, C. Marques, P. Carriço, A Robotic Platform for Edutainment Activities in a Pediatric Hospital, IEEE Int’l Conf. Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions (ICARSC).  16

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
