Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1638

Abstract:
Hyperbolic HHS II: Graphs of hierarchically hyperbolic groups Davide Spriano  arXiv:1801.01850v1 [math.GR] 5 Jan 2018  January 5, 2018 Abstract In this paper we consider a large family of graphs of hierarchically hyperbolic groups (HHG) and show that their fundamental groups admit HHG structures. To do that, we will investigate the notion of hierarchical quasi convexity and show that for a hyperbolic HHS it coincides with the notion of quasi-convexity. The main technical result, for which we expect further applications, is that it is possible to incorporate the HHG structure of a hierarchically hyperbolically embedded subgroup into the HHG structure of the ambient group. This generalizes and provides some additional details to a procedure described in [DHS17].  Contents 1 Introduction  1  2 Background 2.1 Cone-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2 Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 3 4  3 Hierarchical quasi-convexity  6  4 Graphs of Hierarchically Hyperbolic Groups 4.1 Definitions and notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1.1 Morphism of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces . . . . . . . . 4.2 Changing the hierarchically hyperbolic structure I: plan . . . . . . 4.3 Changing the hierarchically hyperbolic structure II: technical part  1  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  7 . 7 . 7 . 9 . 10  Introduction  The study of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups (respectively HHS and HHG) was introduced by Behrstock, Hagen and Sisto in [BHS17c]. HHS and HHG form a very large class of spaces which contains several examples of interest including mapping class groups, right-angled Artin groups, many CAT(0) cube complexes, most 3-manifold groups, Teichmüller space (in any of the standard metrics), etc. A lot is known about HHS, see [BHS15, BHS17b, BHS17a, DHS17]. For instance a remarkable result about hierarchically hyperbolic space is that, under very mild conditions, every top-dimensional quasi-flat in an HHS lies within finite Hausdorff distance of a finite union of standard orthants. This proves open conjectures of Farb in the case of Mapping Class Group, and Brock in the case of Teichmüller space. For an introductory survey on HHS and HHG, we refer to [Sis17].  1  Given a class of objects of interest, in this case the class of HHG, it is natural to ask if it is possible to obtain new examples by combining objects in the class. In the case of groups, one of the most natural ways to combine them is to take the fundamental group of an ”admissible” graph of groups. In the context of hyperbolic groups, the most comprehensive answer in this sense is provided by the celebrated Bestvina-Feighn Combination Theorem ([BF92, BF96]) that provides sufficient conditions which ensure that the fundamental group of a finite graph of hyperbolic groups is word-hyperbolic. In [BHS15], Behrstock, Hagen and Sisto introduced the definition of graph of HHG and proved what we will refer to as the Combination Theorem for HHG ([BHS15, Corollary 8.22], see Theorem 4.15) which provides strong answers in this sense. Indeed, under some hypotheses on the edge maps, they showed that the fundamental group of a graph of HHG is indeed an HHG. The idea of the Combination Theorem is that, given a graph of HHG G, some Cayley graphs of the various edge and vertex groups can be arranged in a ”Bass-Serre tree” fashion, giving a space T on which π1 (G) acts. The hypotheses basically guarantee that the HHS structures of the various groups glue together to get an HHS structure on T that is π1 (G) equivariant. The main goal of this paper is to show that a large class of graphs of HHG satisfies the hypotheses of the Combination Theorem. One of the key tools that will be used is the concept of hierarchically hyperbolically embedded subgroups. Hierarchically hyperbolically embedded subgroups (introduced in [BHS17b]) are the natural generalization of hyperbolically embedded subgroups to the hierarchical setting. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups were introduced and extensively studied in [DGO17] and can be thought of as a generalization of the peripheral structure of a relatively hyperbolic group. The existence of a (non degenerate) hyperbolically embedded subgroup has far reaching consequence, such as acylindrical hyperbolicity of the ambient group ([Osi16]). Conversely, given an acylidrically hyperbolic group, there are constructions that provides several hyperbolically embedded subgroups [DGO17]. Moreover, hyperbolically embedded subgroups are ”generic” as showed by Maher and Sisto in [MS17]. For these reasons, considering hierarchically hyperbolically embedded subgroups should not be thought of as an exceedingly restrictive hypothesis. Intuitively, the main result of this paper consists in showing that the hypotheses of the Combination Theorem are stable under adding new vertices with hyperbolic vertex groups and whose edge groups are hierarchically hyperbolically embedded in the vertex groups. Before giving a more precise formulation of the main result, let’s consider a motivating example. It is easy to see that a graph of HHG G consisting of a single vertex v satisfies the hypotheses of the Combination Theorem (Remark 4.16). Let Q be the vertex HHG associated to v. Then we can transform the graph G adding a vertex w and an edge e between v and w such that G = Gw is hyperbolic and H = He is a quasi-convex subgroup of G. We require moreover that H is hierarchically hyperbolically embedded in Q. Since the starting graph satisfy the Combination Theorem, so does the modified graph of groups. Thus the amalgamated product Q ∗H G admits an HHG structure. It is worth underlining that the only hierarchical-like requirement concerns the embedding H ֒→ Q. Since there are no requirements on the HHG structure of Q, an hypothesis of this type is clearly needed. We consider now the construction above in full generality. F Definition. Let G ′ = Gi be a finite union of finite graphs of HHG. A graph of groups G is star-obtainable from G ′ if G can be obtained from G ′ by a finite number of the following moves. 1. Joining two vertices of G ′ by an edge e such that Ge is hyperbolic. 2. Adding a new vertex v and joining it with a finite set of vertices of G ′ such that · the vertex group Gv is hyperbolic; · the edge groups are quasi-convex subgroups of Gv ;  2  We say that G is hyperbolic-obtainable from G ′ if it is star-obtainable and the following holds. For each vertex v of G ′ the set of edge groups adjacent to v that correspond to edges of G − G ′ is hierarchically hyperbolically embedded in Gv . The main result of the paper is the following.  F Theorem 1 (4.17). Let G be a graph of groups that is hyperbolic-obtainable from G ′ = Gi , where each Gi is a finite graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups that satisfies the hypotheses of the Combination Theorem for HHG. Then there are HHG structures on the vertices and edges groups of G such that G satisfies the hypotheses of the Combination Theorem. In particular, π1 (G) admits a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure. There are two key ingredients in the proof of Theorem 1: the flexibility in the HHG structures on hyperbolic groups provided by [Spr17, Corollary 5.23] and a construction that allows to incorporate the HHG structure of a hierarchically hyperbolically embedded subgroup H into an HHG Q (Proposition 4.22). The latter is greatly inspired, and in fact is a generalization of [BHS17b, Section 6]. It also provides a more detailed proof of the Large Link Lemma condition of [BHS17b, Proposition 6.14].  Outline Section 2 recalls the definition of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and the some results related to cone-offs and factor systems. Section 3 shows the equivalence of quasi-convexity and hierarchical quasi-convexity in hyperbolic spaces. It also recalls some fundamental theorems of the theory of HHS such as the existence of hierarchy paths and the distance formula. Section 4 contains the main result of the paper. In Subsection 4.1 we recall the definitions and some results connected to HHG and (hierarchically) hyperbolically embedded subgroups. In Subsection 4.2 we state the main result and applications, and structure the ideas of the proof. The bulk of the proofs and technicalities is moved to Subsection 4.3.  Acknowledgments The author would like to thank Alessandro Sisto for suggesting the topic and for very helpful comments and suggestions.  2 2.1  Background Cone-offs  We recall the following results. Definition 2.1 (Coning-off). Let Γ be a graph, H a connected subgraph of Γ. We define b as the graph obtained from Γ adding the cone-off of Γ with respect to H, and denote it by Γ, an edge connecting each pair of vertices in (H × H) − ∆H×H , where ∆H×H denotes the diagonal. We call the edges added in such a way H-components. Similarly, the cone-off with respect to a family of connected subgraphs H = {Hi } is obtained adding the Hi -components for each Hi ∈ H. An edge is an H-component if it is a Hi -component for some Hi ∈ H. Proposition 2.2 (Kapovich-Rafi, Bowditch). Let Γ be a connected graph with simplicial metric dΓ such that (X, dX ) is δ-hyperbolic. Let K > 0 and H be a family of K-quasib be the cone-off of Γ with respect to the family H. Then Γ b is convex subgraphs of Γ. Let Γ δ ′ -hyperbolic (with respect to the path metric) for some constant δ ′ > 0 depending only on K and δ. Moreover there exists H = H(K, δ) > 0 such that whenever x, y ∈ V (Γ), [x, y]Γ is b then [x, y]Γ and a dΓ -geodesic from x to y in Γ and [x, y]Γb is a dΓb -geodesic from x to y in Γ b [x, y]Γb are H-Hausdorff close in (Γ, dΓb ).  3  b be the cone-off of a graph Γ with respect to a family of quasiDefinition 2.3. Let Γ b where isometrically embedded subgraphs H. Let γ = u1 ∗ e1 ∗ · · · ∗ en ∗ un+1 be a path of Γ, each ei is an Hi -component for some Hi ∈ H, and the ui are (possibly trivial) segments of Γ. The embedded-de-electrification e γ e of γ is the concatenation u1 ∗ η1 ∗ · · · ∗ ηn ∗ un+1 where each ηi is a geodesic segment of Hi connecting the endpoints of ei . If ei was an H-component, we say that ηi is an H-piece. A piece of γ e is an H-piece if it is an H-piece for some H ∈ H. Proposition 2.4 ([Spr17] Corollary 2.30). Let Γ be a δ-hyperbolic graph, H a family of b the cone-off of Γ with respect to uniformly quasi-isometrically embedded subgraphs and Γ H. Then there exist τ1 = τ1 (δ, K) and τ2 = τ2 (δ, K) such that for each pair of points b with the property that for each embedded-dex, y ∈ Γ there exists a τ1 -quasi-geodesic γ ′ of Γ electrification γ e′ of γ ′ , γ e′ is a τ2 -quasi-geodesic of Γ.  2.2  Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces  The goal of this section is to recall the definition of hierarcahically hyperbolic spaces and some important properties. For additional details, the main reference is [BHS15]. Definition 2.5 (Hierarchically hyperbolic space, [BHS15]). The q-quasigeodesic space (X , dX ) is a hierarchically hyperbolic space if there exists δ ≥ 0, an index set S, and a set {CW : W ∈ S} of δ–hyperbolic spaces (CU, dU ), such that the following conditions are satisfied: 1. (Projections.) There is a set {πW : X → 2CW | W ∈ S} of projections sending points in X to sets of diameter bounded by some ξ ≥ 0 in the various CW ∈ S. Moreover, there exists K so that each πW is (K, K)–coarsely Lipschitz. 2. (Nesting.) S is equipped with a partial order ⊑, and either S = ∅ or S contains a unique ⊑–maximal element; when V ⊑ W , we say V is nested in W . We require that W ⊑ W for all W ∈ S. For each W ∈ S, we denote by SW the set of V ∈ S such that V ⊑ W . Moreover, for all V, W ∈ S with V properly nested in W there is a specified subset ρVW ⊂ CW with diamCW (ρVW ) ≤ ξ. There is also a projection CV ρW . (The similarity in notation is justified by viewing ρVW as a coarsely V : CW → 2 constant map CV → 2CW .) 3. (Orthogonality.) S has a symmetric and anti-reflexive relation called orthogonality: we write V ⊥W when V, W are orthogonal. Also, whenever V ⊑ W and W ⊥U , we require that V ⊥U . Finally, we require that for each T ∈ S and each U ∈ ST for which {V ∈ ST | V ⊥U } = 6 ∅, there exists W ∈ ST − {T }, so that whenever V ⊥U and V ⊑ T , we have V ⊑ W . Finally, if V ⊥W , then V, W are not ⊑–comparable. 4. (Transversality and consistency.) If V, W ∈ S are not orthogonal and neither is nested in the other, then we say V, W are transverse, denoted V ⋔ W . There exists κ0 ≥ 0 such that if V ⋔ W , then there are sets ρVW ⊆ CW and ρW V ⊆ CV each of diameter at most ξ and satisfying: n o min dW (πW (x), ρVW ), dV (πV (x), ρW V ) ≤ κ0 for all x ∈ X . For V, W ∈ S satisfying V ⊑ W and for all x ∈ X , we have: n o min dW (πW (x), ρVW ), diamCV (πV (x) ∪ ρW V (πW (x))) ≤ κ0 . The preceding two inequalities are the consistency inequalities for points in X . V Finally, if U ⊑ V , then dW (ρU W , ρW ) ≤ κ0 whenever W ∈ S satisfies either V ⊑ W and V 6= W or V ⋔ W and W 6 ⊥U .  4  5. (Finite complexity.) There exists n ≥ 0, the complexity of X (with respect to S), so that any set of pairwise–⊑–comparable elements has cardinality at most n. 6. (Large links.) There exist λ ≥ 1 and E ≥ max{ξ, κ0 } such that the following holds. Let W ∈ S and let x, x′ ∈ X . Let N = λdW (πW (x), πW (x′ )) + λ. Then there exists {Ti }i=1,...,⌊N⌋ ⊆ SW − {W } such that for all T ∈ SW − {W }, either T ∈ STi for some i, or dT (πT (x), πT (x′ )) < E. Also, dW (πW (x), ρTWi ) ≤ N for each i. 7. (Bounded geodesic image.) For all W ∈ S, all V ∈ SW − {W }, and all geodesics V γ of CW , either diamCV (ρW V (γ)) ≤ E or γ ∩ NE (ρW ) 6= ∅. 8. (Partial Realization.) There exists a constant α with the following property. Let {Vj } be a family of pairwise orthogonal elements of S, and let pj ∈ πVj (X ) ⊆ CVj . Then there exists x ∈ X so that: • dVj (x, pj ) ≤ α for all j, V  • for each j and each V ∈ S with Vj ⊑ V , we have dV (x, ρVj ) ≤ α, and V  • if W ⋔ Vj for some j, then dW (x, ρWj ) ≤ α. 9. (Uniqueness.) For each κ ≥ 0, there exists θu = θu (κ) such that if x, y ∈ X and d(x, y) ≥ θu , then there exists V ∈ S such that dV (x, y) ≥ κ. We often refer to S, together with the nesting and orthogonality relations, the projections, and the hierarchy paths, as a hierarchically hyperbolic structure for the space X . Definition 2.6 (Factor System). Let Γ be a connected graph. We say that a family H of connected subgraphs of Γ is a factor system for Γ if there are constants K, c, ξ, B such that the following are satisfied. 1. Each H ∈ H is K-quasi-isometrically embedded in Γ. 2. Given H1 , H2 ∈ H, either diam(pH1 (H2 )) ≤ ξ, or there is U ∈ H with such that U ⊆ H1 and dHaus (pH1 (H2 ), U ) ≤ B. 3. Given H1 , H2 ∈ H, if dHaus (pH1 (H2 ), H1 ) ≤ B, then H1 ⊆ H2 . 4. Every ascending chain of inclusions H1 ( H2 ( · · · ( Hn has length bounded above by c. 5. Given H1 , H2 ∈ H, if dHaus (H1 , H2 ) < ∞, then H1 = H2 . Theorem 2.7 ([Spr17], Theorem 3.14). Let Γ be a hyperbolic graph, H be a factor system b be the cone off of H with respect to all elements of for Γ and, for each H ∈ H ∪ {Γ}, let H H that are strictly contained in H. Then Γ admits a hierarchically hyperbolic structure, with b | H ∈ H ∪ {Γ}}. indexing set H ∪ {Γ}, and with associated hyperbolic spaces the family {H The projections are realized as closest point projections in Γ. There is a particular instance of factor system that we will use in Section 4. Corollary 2.8. Let Γ be a hyperbolic graph and let H be a family of uniformly quasiisometrically embedded subgraphs of Γ. Suppose that all the elements of H have infinite diameter. Suppose, moreover, that for each ε exists R = R(ε) such that for any pair of distinct elements H1 , H2 of H, the intersection Nε (H1 ) ∩ H2 has diameter at most R. Then H is a factor system for Γ and (Γ, H ∪ {Γ}) is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Proof. The axioms 1,4 and 5 are immediate from the hypotheses. Axiom 3 follows easily from hyperbolicity of Γ. Consider Axiom 2. We claim that there is ξ such that for each pair of elements H1 and H2 of H, we have diam(pH2 (H1 )) ≤ ξ. Suppose this is not the case. Since Γ is hyperbolic, the spaces Hi are uniformly quasi-convex. In particular, there is are constants K and T such that diam(pH2 (H1 )) − T ≤ diam(NK (H1 ) ∩ H2 ). But the latter is uniformly bounded by R(K). A consequence of a generalized version of Theorem 2.7 is the following.  5  Theorem 2.9 ([Spr17], Corollary 5.23). Let G be a hyperbolic group and let F = {F1 , . . . , FN } be a finite family of infinite quasi-convex subgroups. Let ∼ be the equivalence relation between subset of G given by having finite distance in Cay(G) (note that does not depend on the choice of generators). Then there exists a finite family of quasi-convex subgroups F (M ) that contains F such that if Fcos is the set of cosets of F (M ) , then (G, Fcos /∼ ) is a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure on G. Corollary 2.10 ([Spr17], Section 5). Let G be a hyperbolic group, and let F = {F1 , . . . , FN } be a finite family of quasi-convex subgroups. Let (G, S) be the HHG structure on G provided by Theorem 2.9. Then for each F ∈ F, we have that (F, S[F ] ) is an HHG structure on F . Moreover the inclusion map i : F ֒→ G induces an injective hieromorphism between F and G, such that for each [H] ∈ S[F ] , we have i ([H]) = [H].  3  Hierarchical quasi-convexity  We conclude this section providing a result that will be useful in Section 4, namely that for a hyperbolic graph Γ equipped with the HHS structure coming from a factor system, quasi-convex subgraphs of Γ are hierarchically quasi-convex. The notion of hierarchical quasi-convexity was introduced by Behrstock, Hagen and Sisto and has deep consequences (see Sections 5,6,7 of [BHS15]). Definition 3.1 (Hierarchical quasi-convexity, [BHS15] Definition 5.1). Let (X , S) be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. We say that a subset Y ⊂ Q is k-hierarchically quasiconvex, for some k : [0, ∞) → [0, ∞), if the following holds: 1. For each U ∈ S, one has that πU (Y ) is k(0)-quasi-convex in CU . 2. For every r ≥ 0 and every x ∈ X such that dCU (πU (x), πU (Y )) ≤ r for all U ∈ S, one has that dX (x, Y ) ≤ k(r). We recall the Distance Formula for hierarchically hyperbolic spaces Theorem 3.2 (Distance formula, [BHS15] Theorem 4.5). Let (X , S) be hierarchically hyperbolic. Then there exists s0 such that for all s ≤ s0 there exists constants K, C such that for all x, y ∈ X , X {{dCW (πW (x), πW (y))}}s , dX (x, y) ≍(K,C) W ∈S  where {{A}}s is equal to 0 if A < s, and equal to A otherwise. Definition 3.3 (Hierarchy path, [BHS15] Definition 4.2). Let (X , S) be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. A path γ of X is a D-hierarchy path if 1. γ is a (D, D)-quasi-geodesic of X ; 2. for each U ∈ S the projection πU (γ) is a (D, D)-quasi-geodesic. Theorem 3.4 (Existence of hierarchy paths, [BHS15] Theorem 4.4). Let X be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then there exists D0 so that any x, y ∈ X are joined by a D0 -hierarchy path. We can now state the main result of this section. Proposition 3.5 (Equivalence of quasi-convexity and hierarchical quasi-convexity). Let (X , S) be a hyperbolic hierarchically hyperbolic space, and let Y be a subspace of X . Then there are functions Q and K such that the following holds. If Y is q-quasi-convex in X , then Y is K(q)-hierarchically quasi convex in (X , S). Conversely, if Y is k-hierarchically quasi-convex in (X , S), then Y is Q(k)-quasi-convex in X . Proof. The fact that hierarchical quasi-convexity implies quasi-convexity is an easy consequence of Theorems 3.4 and 3.2. Suppose that Y is hierarchically k-quasi-convex for some k : [0, ∞) → [0, ∞), let a, b be two points of Y, and let [a, b] be a geodesic of X connecting  6  them. Let γ be a hierarchy path connecting a and b, whose existence is guaranteed by Theorem 3.4. Then, using the fact that the spaces CU are hyperbolic, we have that for each s ∈ γ and U ∈ S, we can uniformly bound the distance d(πU (s), πU (Y)). By the distance formula (Theorem 3.2), we can uniformly bound the distance between s and Y. Since γ is a quasi-geodesic, it has uniformly bounded Hausdorff distance from [a, b], thus the result follows. For the other implication, recall that hierarchically quasi-convexity consists of two parts. For each U ∈ S, the spaces πU (Y) are uniformly quasi-convex. Let x′ , y ′ be two points in πU (Y) and let x, y ∈ Y be such that x′ ∈ πU (x) and y ′ ∈ πU (y). Let γ be a hierarchy path between x and y, whose existence is guaranteed by Theorem 3.4. Since X is hyperbolic and Y is quasi-convex, each point of γ has uniformly bounded distance from Y. Since projections are uniformly quasi-Lipschitz, this is still true for πU (γ) and πU (Y). Since every CU is uniformly hyperbolic, the claim follows. There is a function k such that if dCU (x, Y) ≤ r for each U ∈ S, then dX (x, y) ≤ k(r). Let x ∈ X be such that for each U ∈ S, one has dCU (x, Y) ≤ r, and let y ∈ Y such that dX (x, y) is minimal. If there is ψ(r) such that for all U ∈ S one has dCU (x, y) ≤ ψ(r), then the result will follow form the distance formula (Theorem 3.2). Choose U and let z be a point of Y such that dCU (x, z) = dCU (x, Y). We want to uniformly bound dCU (y, z), which will imply the claim. Let [x, y] be a geodesic of X between x and y. Since [x, y] is a projection geodesic and Y is quasi-convex in X there is a point s′ ∈ [x, z] that has uniformly bounded distance from y. Let γ be a hierarchy path of X between x and y. Since X is hyperbolic, the Hausdorff distance between [x, z] and the hierarchy path γ is uniformly bounded. Thus there is a point s ∈ γ that has uniformly bounded distance from y in X . We remark that the uniform bound does not depend on x or U ∈ S. Since the projection πU is quasi-Lipschitz, we can uniformly bound dCU (s, y)by some uniform c. Since γ is a hierarchy path, s lies at uniformly bounded distance Λ from a geodesic [x, z] of CU . Since [x, z] is a projection geodesic, we get dCU (y, z) ≤ 2(Λ + c).  4  Graphs of Hierarchically Hyperbolic Groups  The goal of this section is to apply the constructions of the previous sections in order to get an HHG structure on certain fundamental groups of graphs of groups. Indeed, the Combination Theorem for HHG (see [BHS15]) yields sufficient conditions for the fundamental group of a graph of groups to be an HHG. We will check that these conditions are verified for a class of graphs of groups. The key step will be to show that given a finite family of hyperbolic HHGs {(Hi , Hi )}i∈I that is hierarchically hyperbolic embedded into an HHG (Q, S), then it is possible to modify the HHG structure on Q in such a way that the various inclusions φi : Hi ֒→ Q become homomorphisms of HHG.F We will need some definitions introduced in [BHS15]. We refer to [BHS15] for additional details.  4.1 4.1.1  Definitions and notations Morphism of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces  Definition 4.1 (Hieromorphism, [BHS15] Definition 1.19). Let (X , S) and (X ′ , S′ ) be hierarchically hyperbolic structures on the spaces X , X ′ respectively. A hieromorphism, consists of a map f : X → X ′ , an injective map f : S → S′ preserving nesting, transversality, and orthogonality, and maps f ∗ (U ) : CU → C(f (U )), for each U ∈ S, which are uniformly quasi-isometric embeddings. The three maps should preserve the structure of the hierarchically hyperbolic space, that is, they coarsely commute with the maps πU and ρU V , for U, V in either S or S ′ , associated to the hierarchical structures.  7  Definition 4.2 (Automorphism, hierarchically hyperbolic group, [BHS15] Definition 1.20). An automorphism of the hierarchically hyperbolic space (X, S) is a hieromorphism f : (X , S) → (X , S) such that f is bijective and each f ∗ (U ) is an isometry. The finitely generated group Q is hierarchically hyperbolic if there exists a hierarchically hyperbolic space (X , S) on which Q acts by automorphisms of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, so that the uniform quasi-action of G on X is metrically proper and cobounded and S contains finitely many Q–orbits. Note that if Q is hierarchically hyperbolic by virtue of its action on the hierarchically hyperbolic space (X , S), then (Q, S) is a hierarchically hyperbolic structure with respect to any word-metric on Q; for any U ∈ S the projection is the composition of the projection X → CU with a Q–equivariant quasi-isometry Q → X . In this case, (Q, S) (with the implicit hyperbolic spaces and projections) is a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure. Definition 4.3 (Full hieromorphim, [BHS15] ). We say that a hieromorphism is full if · there exists ξ ≥ 0 such that each f ∗ (U ) : CU → C(f (U )) is a (ξ, ξ)–quasi-isometry, and · for each U ∈ S, if V ′ ∈ S′ satisfies V ′ ⊑ f (U ), then there exists V ∈ S such that V ⊑ U and f (V ) = V ′ . As the functions f, f ∗ (U ), and f S all have distinct domains, it is often clear from the context which is the relevant map; in that case we periodically abuse notation slightly by dropping the superscripts and just calling all of the maps f . Remark 4.4. Observe that the second item of the definition of full hieromorphism holds automatically unless V ′ is bounded. Definition 4.5 (Homomorphism of hierarchically hyperbolic groups, [BHS15] Def 1.21). Let (Q, S) and (Q′ , S′ ) be hierarchically hyperbolic groups. A homomorphism of hierarchically hyperbolic groups consists of a hieromorphims φ : Q → Q′ such that φ is a homomorphism of group and the hieromorphism maps φ∗ , φ are uniformly coarsely-equivariant with respect to the homomorphism φ.  Hyperbolically embedded subgroups We recall the definition of hyperbolically embedded subgroups that was originally introduced by Dahmani, Guirardel and Osin in [DGO17]. Let G be a group and {Hi }i∈I be a F family of subgroups of G. Let T be a (possibly infinite) set of elements of G and let F = i∈I (Hi − 1). Suppose that T is symmetric (that is for each t ∈ T , we have that t−1 ∈ T ) and that hT ∪ F i = G. For each i ∈ I, the Cayley graph Cay(Hi , Hi − {1}) is a complete subgraph of Cay(G, T ∪ F ). Let E(Hi ) denote the set of edges of the Cayley graph of Hi . Definition 4.6 ([DGO17] Definition 4.2). For each i ∈ I, we define the relative metric dbi : Hi × Hi → [0, +∞] as the length of the shortest path in Cay(G, T ∪ F ) − E(Hi ). If such a path does not exist, then we set the length to be +∞. Definition 4.7 (Hyperbolically embedded subgroups, [DGO17] Definition 4.25). The family {Hi }i∈I is hyperbolically embedded in G with respect to the set T , and denoted by {Hi } ֒→h (G, T ) if: · the graph Cay(G, T ⊔ H) is hyperbolic; · for each i ∈ I, the metric space (Hi , dbi ) is proper.  We say that the family {Hi } is hyperbolically embedded in G if there is a set X such that {Hi } ֒→h (G, X). Definition 4.8 (Hierarchically hyperbolically embedded subgroups, [BHS17b]). Let (Q, S) be an HHG, let S be the ⊑-maximal element of S and let ({Hi }i∈I ) be a finite family of subgroups of Q. We say that the family {Hi } is hierarchically hyperbolically embedded into Q, and denote this by H ֒→hh Q, if the following hold:  8  · There is a (possibly infinite) generating set T of Q such that CS = Cay(Q, T ) and πS is the inclusion. · T ∩ Hi generates Hi . · Hi is hyperbolically embedded in (Q, T ). We remark that, by the definition of hierarchically hyperbolic group, it is always possible to find a set T such that the first two conditions are satisfied. The focus of the definition is that the family {Hi } is hyperbolically embedded with respect to that particular set T . We recall some properties of hyperbolically embedded subgroups. Lemma 4.9 ([AMS16], Lemma 3.1). If {Hi }֒→h (G, T ) is a hyperbolically embedded family of subgroups, then for each i there is a finite set of generators Qi of Hi such that (Hi , dQi ) is quasi-isometrically embedded in (G, dT ). Lemma 4.10 ([AMS16], Lemma 3.2). Let {Hi }֒→h (G, T ) be a hyperbolically embedded family of subgroups. Then for every ε there exists R = R(ε) such that for every g ∈ G and i, j ∈ I, if diam(Hi ∩ Nε (gHj )) ≥ R, then i = j and g ∈ Hi .  4.2  Changing the hierarchically hyperbolic structure I: plan  The goal of this subsection is to state the main result and streamline the strategy adopted. We will postpone the bulk of the proofs to the next paragraph. Consider the following class of graphs of groups. F Definition 4.11. Let G ′ = Gi be a finite union of finite graphs of HHG. A graph of groups G is star-obtainable from G ′ if G can be obtained from G ′ by a finite number of the following moves. 1. Joining two vertices of G ′ by an edge e such that Ge is hyperbolic. 2. Adding a new vertex v and joining it with a finite set of vertices of G ′ such that · the vertex group Gv is hyperbolic; · the edge groups are quasi-convex subgroups of Gv ; We say that G is hyperbolic-obtainable from G ′ if it is star-obtainable and the following holds. For each vertex v of G ′ the set of edge groups adjacent to v that correspond to edges of G − G ′ is hierarchically hyperbolically embedded in Gv . We remark that the construction (1) is a special case of the second one. Indeed, adding an edge with edge group He is the same (on the level of the fundamental group) as adding a vertex v adjacent to edges e1 , e2 such that He1 ∼ = Gv ∼ = He2 . However, we listed them separately for simplicity. We will now recall enough terminology to be able to state the Combination Theorem for HHG. Definition 4.12 (Graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups, [BHS15]). Let G = (Γ, {Ge }, {Gv }, φ± e ) be a graph of groups, where Γ represent the underlying graph, {GV } are the vertex groups, {Ge } are the edges groups and {φ± e } are the edge maps. We say that G is a graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups if for each v ∈ V, e ∈ E, we have sets Sv , Se so that (Gv , Sv ) and (Ge , Se ) are hierarchically hyperbolic group structures for which φ± e : Ge → Ge± is a homomorphism of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Another concept that we want to recall is the one of bounded supports. However, since the definition is long and beyond the scope of this paper, we will refer to [BHS15, Definition 8.5] and consider instead the following two Lemmas. The intuitive idea is that given two graphs of HHG that are known to have bounded supports (for instance a graph consisting of a single vertex), we can connect them in a way that the supports do not propagate from one another, yielding that the new graph still has bounded supports. The proofs are a straightforward consequence of the definition of bounded supports ([BHS15, Definition 8.5]).  9  Lemma 4.13. Every graph of HHG that has only one vertex and no edges has bounded supports. Lemma 4.14. Let G1 and G2 be two finite graphs of hierarchically hyperbolic groups that have the bounded supports. Let G be a graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups obtained adding edges to G1 and G2 in such a way that the result is a (connected) finite graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Suppose that for each new edge e, with edge group (He , He ), the following holds. For each vertex v on e, edge f 6= e incident to v and g1 , g2 ∈ Gv we have that g1 φf (Hf ) ∩ g2 φe (He ) = ∅, where φf : Hf → Gv is the edge map. Then G has bounded supports. We recall the Combination Theorem for HHG. Theorem 4.15 (Combination Theorem for HHG, [BHS15] Corollary 8.22). Let G = (Γ, {Gv }, {Ge }, {φ± e }) be a finite graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups and suppose that the following are satisfied. − · For each edge e, the images φ+ e (Ge ) and φe (Ge ) have hierarchically quasi-convex image (Definition 3.1). · The maps φ± e , as hieromorphisms, are full (Definition 4.3). · For each edge e, the image of the maximal element Se ∈ Se is not orthogonal to any element V ∈ Se± . · G has bounded supports.  Then the fundamental group of G admits a hierarchically hyperbolical group structure. Remark 4.16. We remark that a graph with a single vertex of valence 0 satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 4.15. Indeed, there are no edge maps and the bounded supports follows from Lemma 4.13. The main result of this section is the following. F Theorem 4.17. Let G be a graph of groups that is hyperbolic-obtainable from G ′ = Gi , where each Gi is a finite graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups that satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 4.15. Then there are HHG structures on the vertices and edges of G (as in Construction 4.21) such that G satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 4.15. In particular, π1 (G) admits a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure. Proof. We postpone the full proof of the Theorem to the end of this section. This will allow to ”inductively apply” the construction of Definition 4.11 and Theorem 4.15 to obtain an HHG structure on interesting groups. Since every hierarchically hyperbolic group can be realized as the fundamental group of a graph of HHG with one vertex and no edges, Remark 4.16 provides an interesting class of examples. For instance, if H is a quasiconvex subgroup of a hyperbolic group G and H ֒→hh MCG, where MCG is the Mapping Class Group of a given (non sporadic) surface, we get that MCG ∗H G admits an HHG structure.  4.3 Changing the hierarchically hyperbolic structure II: technical part In this subsection we will prove Theorem 4.17. The proof will follow three steps. Firstly we will show that it is possible to equip the new added edge and vertex groups with an HHG structure. This is an easy consequence of Theorem 2.9. Then we will need to show that the whole graph of groups is a graph of HHG. To achieve this, we will change the HHG structure on (some) of the original vertices. This will require some amount of work. Finally we will verify that the new graph of HHG satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 4.15, mainly the one concerning hierarchical quasi-convexity.  10  Definition 4.18 (Normalized HHS). The HHS (X , S) is normalized if there exists C such that for each U ∈ S one has CU = NC (πU (X )). Proposition 4.19 ([DHS17] Proposition 1.16). Let X , S be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then X admits a normalized hierarchically hyperbolic structure (X , S′ ) with a hieromorphism f : (X , S) → (X , S′ ) where f : X → X is the identity and f : S → S′ is a bijection. Moreover, if G ≤ Aut(X , S), then there is a homomorphism G → Aut(S′ ) making f equivariant. Remark 4.20. Let (Q, S) be a normalized hierarchically hyperbolic group and let S ∈ S be the ⊑-maximal element. Then the action of Q on CS is cobounded. In particular, there is a (possibly infinite) set of generators X for Q such that CS is quasi-isometric to Cay(Q, X). Convention. From now on, we will use Proposition 4.19 to assume that all the hierarchically hyperbolic spaces are normalized. Moreover, by Remark 4.20, we can assume that for each hierarchically hyperbolic group (Q, S), the maximal hyperbolic space CS associated it is a Cayley graph of Q. Notation. In what follows we will deal with different hierarchically hyperbolic structures on the same space. In order to avoid confusion, if (Q, S) and (Q, S′ ) are two different hierarchically hyperbolic structure on Q, we will denote by CS U , the hyperbolic spaces associated to U in S, and by CS′ U the one associated to the second structure. Similarly, S S we decorate the projections πU and the maps ρU πU and ρU V with left superscripts V. We want to describe how to incorporate the HHG structure of hierarchically hyperbolically embedded subgroups into an ambient HHG. First, consider the following construction, which is analogous to the one described in [BHS17b, Proposition 6.14] Construction 4.21 (Cf. [BHS17b]). Let {(Hi , Hi )}i∈I be a finite family of hyperbolic hierarchically hyperbolic groups, and let (Q, S) be a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Suppose that the family {Hi }i∈I is hierarchically hyperbolically embedded in Q. We construct a new HHS structure on Q. For each i ∈ I, let φi : Hi ֒→ Q be the inclusion maps. By Remark 4.20, there is a set T ⊆ Q so that CS S = Cay(Q, T ). Let Cos({Hi }) be the set of all the cosets of the various Hi in Q, and let d CS be the cone-off of CS with respect to Cos({Hi }). By Lemma 4.9, the maps φi : Hi ֒→ CS provide (uniform) quasi-isometric embeddings for all the elements of Cos({Hi }). Since each coset gφi (Hi ) is isometric to φi (Hi ), since HHS structures are preserved by quasi-isometry, and since, by assumption, (Hi , Hi ) is a hierarchically hyperbolic group, we can push forward the HHS structure of Hi to all the cosets gφi (Hi ). The new HHS on the group Q will be obtained ”adding” all the above HHS structures to (Q, S). Since all the HHS structures on the various cosets (of the same Hi ) are identical, we will describe a precise indexing set for all the HHS structures of the elements of Cos({Hi }). For each i ∈ L let Q(i) be a maximal set of elements of Q such that for each pair g1 , g2 ∈ Q(i), we have that g1 g2−1 6∈ Hi (that is, choose once and for all a representative F for the cosets of Hi ). Then for each i ∈ I define Fi to be the set Hi × Q(i), and let F = i∈I Fi . We claim (Proposition 4.22) that the following defines a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure on Q: • The index set is L = S ⊔ F • The relations ⊑ and ⊥ restricted to S are unchanged. Between the elements of a level set Hi × {g} ⊆ F, the relations are defined as on Hi , and we set all the elements of F to be nested into S. In all the other cases, we declare two elements to be transverse (that is, neither orthogonal nor nested). • The spaces CL W are defined as: d if W = S; · CS · CS W if W ∈ S − {S};  11  · CHi U if W = (U, g), where U ∈ Hi and g ∈ Q(i). • The projections L πW : Q → 2CL W are unchanged on S. Given an element W ∈ F, there is i ∈ I, U ∈ Hi and g ∈ Q(i) such that W = (U, g). Then we define L πW as the composition Hi πU ◦ pgHi , where pHi denotes the closest point projection in CS on the coset gHi , and we identify gHi with Hi . L  • The maps and spaces ρU V are: · unchanged if U and V are elements of S; · unchanged if U and V are elements of Hi × {g} for some i ∈ I and g ∈ Q(i); · defined as follow if we are not in the above cases. Let W ∈ {U, V } and define SW as S if W ∈ S, or as gHi if W ∈ Zi . We have that SU and SV can be uniquely seen as subgraphs of CS, so it is well defined the closest point projection pSV , where we remark that we consider the metric in CS. Then we set ρU V as the composition U πV ◦ p S V ◦ ρ U SU , where ρSU is defined as in the lines above and πV is well defined, since by hypotheses CS is a Cayley graph for Q. Proposition 4.22. The structure described in Construction 4.21 is a hierarchically hyperbolic structure on Q such that: · (Q, L) is a hierarchically hyperbolic group; · S ⊆ L; · for each i ∈ I, the map φi : Hi → Q is a homomorphism of hierarchically hyperbolic groups, with respect to the above structures. · for each i ∈ I we have that φi (Hi ) ∩ S = ∅, where φi : Hi → L is the map on the index set level induced by φ. Proof. The second and last point are clear by construction. The hard part of the proof consists in showing that (Q, L) is an HHS, and we will do by verifying the axioms of hierarchically hyperbolic space. The fact that (Q, L) is an HHG and that the maps φi are homomorphisms of hierarchically hyperbolic groups follow from the fact the HHS structures are clearly compatible with the Q and Hi actions. • There is a set of projections {πW | W ∈ L} that are uniformly quasi-Lipschitz. This follows because the maps F πW are defined as composition of uniformly quasi-Lipschitz maps. • There is a relation ⊑ and sets ρU V such that for each pair U, V with U properly nested in V , the set ρU V has uniformly bounded diameter. Lemma 4.10 and the fact that (Hi , Hi ) is a hierarchically hyperbolic group gives the statement on F. Since the map CS → d CS is distance-non-increasing, it holds also on S. Since, by construction, if two elements are nested, then they both belong to either S or F or one is in F and the other is S. But since each element of F is coned-off in d CS, we get the claim. • Orthogonality. This clearly holds because if U ⊥V , then U, V ∈ S. • Behrstock’s inequalities. We start with an useful lemma. Lemma 4.23. Let (Q, S) be a hierarchically hyperbolic group, S ∈ S be the maximal element and X be a set of generators for Q such that CS = Cay(Q, X) (as in Remark 4.20). Let H be a finitely generated group and Y a finite set of generators for H. Finally let φ : H → Q be a group homomorphism that is a quasi-isometric embedding with respect to the word metrics in Y and X. Then there is C such that for each g ∈ Q, and U ∈ S − S, one has diamCU (πU (gφ(H))) ≤ C. Proof. We recall that CS = Cay(Q, X). Since, for each U ∈ S − {S}, the space ρU S has uniformly bounded diameter in CS, and since H is quasi-isometrically embedded in CS, the following holds. There is a uniform radius ∆ = ∆(H) and for each U ∈ S − {S} a point xU ∈ CS such that · NE (ρU S ) ⊆ B∆ (xU ), where E is the constant for the bounded geodesic image property for S,  12  · For each g ∈ Q and y ∈ gH − B∆ (xU ), the projection of y on B∆ (xU ) ∩ gH is not contained in NE (ρU S ) (see figure 1).  B∆ (xU )  y p(y) ρU S  E  U Figure 1: The projection of the point x on the set B∆ lies outside the E-neighborhood of ρU S.  Firstly, we want to uniformly bound the diameter of the various projections πU (gH ∩ B∆ (xU )). Note that the projections πU : Q → 2CU are uniformly quasi-Lipschitz, but with respect to the metric on Q which is, in general, not quasi-isometric to CS. We will show that is nevertheless possible to uniformly bound the diameter in Q of the sets gH ∩ B∆ (xU ), which gives the desired estimate. Let F = B2∆ (1) ∩ H. Since H is finitely generated and quasi-isometrically embedded in CS, F is a finite set. Moreover, for each g ∈ Q and U ∈ S − {S}, there exists h ∈ gH such that gH ∩ B∆ (xU ) ⊆ hF . For instance, choosing h to be the closest point projection of xU on gH works. Since the set F is finite, it has finite diameter in Q. Moreover, left multiplication by h is an isometry. Thus we can uniformly bound the diameter in Q of of the sets hF , and thus of the sets gH ∩ B∆ (xU ). Now, consider a point z ∈ gH − B∆ (xU ). We claim that the projection πU (z) lies in a uniform neighborhood of πU (gF ). In fact, since z 6∈ B∆ (xU ), z lies outside the ball B∆ (xU ) in CS. Let γ be a geodesic of CS between z and its closest point projection on B∆ (xU ). By construction γ ∩ NE (ρU S ) = ∅, and thus, by the bounded geodesic image property, there is a uniform B such that diamCU (πU (γ)) ≤ B. In particular, πU (z) lies in the B-neighborhood of πU (B∆ (xU )), which concludes the proof. We will now proceed to prove Behrstock’s inequalities. 1 We have to show that there exists a uniform κ such that for all U, V ∈ L not nested into each other, it holds: min{dU (πU (x), ρVU ), dV (πV (x), ρU V )} ≤ κ. It is easily seen that there are only two cases we should worry about: when U ∈ Fi and V ∈ Fj with i 6= j, or when U ∈ S − {S} and V ∈ F − {S}. Consider the first one. Unraveling the definitions, it is clear that it suffices to show the case when U = g1 Hi and V = g2 Hj , with i 6= j. However, Lemma 4.10 and Corollary 2.8 give that the set of the various laterals of the Hi in Q is a factor system for CS. Then the result follows. So, consider the second case. Let i ∈ I, g ∈ Q(i) and J ∈ Hi such that V = (J, g). Unraveling the definitions, we get that we need to show that there exists a uniform κ such that: min{dU (πU (x), πU (ρVS )), dCHi J (πJ ◦ pgHi (x), πJ ◦ pgHi (ρU S ))} ≤ κ, were we remark that all the projections are considered with the metric of CS. We will show that if the second term is sufficiently large, then we can uniformly bound  13  the first one. Note that, since the maps πJ are uniformly quasi-Lipschitz and since gHi is quasi-isometrically embedded in CS, we can substitute the second term with dCS (pgHi (x), pgHi (ρU S )). Let E, κ0 be the constants coming from the bounded geodesic image and Behrstock’s inequality conditions of the HHG (Q, S). Let ∆ = E + κ0 . Let y = pgHi (x) and z = pgHi (ρU S ). Let γ be a geodesic of CS between x and y. Since the closest point projection on gHi is a quasi-Lipschitz map, say with constant L, if dCS (y, z) > L∆ + L, we obtain that γ ∩ NE (ρU S ) = ∅. The bounded geodesic image condition applied to γ, gives that diamCU (ρS U (γ)) is uniformly bounded. In particular, S since y ∈ gHi , we get that dU (ρS U (x), ρU (gHi )) is uniformly bounded. Since U, S ∈ S, the Behrstock’s inequality condition gives that, for every x ∈ Q, we have S min{dCS (x, ρU S ), diamCU (πU (x) ∪ ρU (x))} ≤ κ0 .  But we have that dCS ({x, y}, ρU S ) > L∆+L ≥ κ0 . Thus, we must have dCU (πU (x), πU (gHi )) is uniformly bounded. Since, by Lemma 4.23, the projection πU (gHi ) is uniformly bounded, we get the claim. 2 We have to show that for each V ⊑ W properly nested into each other, there is an uniform κ such that min{dW (x, ρVW ), diamCV (πV (x) ∪ ρW V (x))} ≤ κ0 . The only case that we need to check is when W = S. So, suppose that V = (J, g) ∈ F, where J ∈ Hi , and g ∈ Q(i). Then, unraveling the definitions, the second term becomes diamCJ (πJ ◦ pgHi (x) ∪ πJ ◦ pgHi (x)), which has uniformly bounded diameter since πJ ◦ pgHi is uniformly quasi-Lipschitz. Suppose, instead, that V ∈ S−{S}. Since distance in d CS are smaller or equal distances in CS, and since the above statement holds in CS, we get the claim. 3 We need to show that whenever U ⊑ V and there is W which is not orthogonal or nested into V , it holds V dW (ρU W , ρW ) ≤ κ. Unraveling the definitions, it is easily to see that if U, V, W ∈ F, then the claim holds, and since distances in d CS are smaller or equal distances in CS, it also holds if U, V, W ∈ S. So, there are only two cases of interest: U, V ∈ S−{S} and W ∈ F−{S}, or U, V ∈ F − {S} and W ∈ S − {S}. The second case is clear because, unraveling the V definitions, one has ρU W ⊆ ρW . The first one follows from the fact that the statement S holds in CS and the projections ρS U and ρV are uniformly quasi-Lipschitz. • Finite complexity. This is clear by construction. • Large link lemma: there exists λ ≥ 1 and E such that the following holds. Let W ∈ L and x, y ∈ Q. Let N = λdW (πW (x), πW (y)) + λ. Then there exists {T1 , . . . , T⌈N⌉ } ⊆ HW such that for each V ∈ HW , either V ∈ HTi ∪ {Ti } for some i ∈ {1, . . . , ⌈N ⌉}, or dV (πV (x), πV (y)) < E. Also, dW (πW (x), ρTWi ) ≤ N for each i. Note that if W ∈ F or W ∈ S − S, then the claim holds because of the HHS structure of (Q, S) or (Hi , Hi ), for the various i. So, we are only interested in the case W = S. We need to show that given x, y ∈ Q, it is possible to linearly bound in terms of the distance in d CS the number of (⊑-maximal) elements U of L with the property that dCU (πU (x), πU (y)) ≤ E. We will consider separately the elements in F and in S. Consider the set A consisting of all Q-translates of the various Hi . We will use the following two important facts. By Corollary 2.8 and Lemma 4.10, we can easily see that A d is the cone-off of CS with respect to A, is a factor system for CS. Since, by definition, CS the Large Link Lemma holds for the set A. Secondly, since each gHi is uniformly quasi-isometrically embedded in CS, and since the projections πU , for U ⊑ gHi , are uniformly quasi-Lipschitz, we get that there exists a  14  non-decreasing map L : R → R such that the following holds. For each i ∈ I, g ∈ Q(i) and U ⊑ gHi we have that dCU (πCU (x), πCU (y)) ≤ L (dgHi (πgHi (x), πgHi (y))), for each x, y ∈ Q. Let E1 be the constant of the Large Link Lemma applied to the set A and let E2 > L(E1 ). The Large Link Lemma on the set A give us a constant λA and a set T A , with A |T A | ≤ λA dCS if and only if dgHi (pgHi (x), pgHi (y)) ≤ E1 . d (x, y) + λA , such that gHi ∈ T But then, for each U ∈ F, we have that dCU (πU (x), πU (y)) ≤ E2 if and only if U ⊑ gHi with dgHi (πgHi (x), πgHi (y)) > E1 . Thus, for each E2 > L(E1 ) the Large Link Lemma holds on the set F. Note that the key ingredient in the above proof is that we already have a version of the Large Link Lemma that holds with the distances in d CS. If such a result was available also for S, then, since each element of L is contained in either F or S, we would get the result. CS, it is, in general, impossible to estimate dCS (x, y) in However, given two points x, y ∈ d terms of dCS d (x, y). We will show that, for a large enough E, it is however possible to estimate the number of (maximal) elements W ∈ S with dW (πW (x), πW (y)) > E in terms of dCS d (x, y), which is enough for our purposes. This will require some amount of work. Lemma 4.24. For each C > 0 there exist T = T (CS, C) and Θ = Θ(CS) such that the following holds. Let γ = γ0 ∗ β1 ∗ γ1 ∗ · · · ∗ βM ∗ γM be a C-quasi-geodesic of CS such that for each i there is gi and j ∈ I such that βi ⊆ gi Hj and L(βi ) > Θ.Then for each U ∈ S − {S}, there exists 0 ≤ i ≤ M such that diam(πU (γ)) − T ≤ diam(πU (γi )). Proof. Let E be the constant of the bounded geodesic image property for S and H be such that all C-quasi-geodesics of CS with the same endpoints have Hausdorff distance at most H. Choose U ∈ S − {S} and consider B = NE+H (ρU S ). If γ does not intersect B the result trivially follows from the bounded geodesic image for S. So suppose that γ intersects B. Roughly speaking, if Θ is large enough, all the segments γi of γ becomes ”far away”. In particular, we will get that there is at most one segment γi that is near B. More precisely, setting Θ = C(3H + E) + C we obtain that there is i ∈ {0, . . . , M } such that (γ−(βi ∗γi ∗βi+1 ))∩B = ∅. Let χ1 , χ2 be the connected components of γ−(βi ∗γi ∗βi+1 ). The bounded geodesic image for S gives that diam(πU (χj )) is uniformly bounded, for j ∈ {1, 2}. Since each of the segments βi , βi+1 is contained in some element of Cos({Hi }), by Lemma 4.23 we get the claim. d Since d So, consider points x, y ∈ CS. CS is obtained from CS coning-off a family of uniformly quasi-isometrically embedded subgraphs, we can apply Proposition 2.4 and get a quasi-geodesic γ b of d CS with the property that each embedded-de-electrification γ ee of γ b is e uniformly a quasi-geodesic of CS. Fix such a de-electrification γ e . We want to apply Lemma 4.24 to e γ e . In order to do that, we will subdivide γ ee in a way that satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma 4.24. Recall that the quasi-geodesic γ b decomposes as γ b=b γ0 ∗ e1 ∗ · · · ∗ eM ∗ γ bM ,  where each ei is a Cos({Hi })-component and all the γ bi are quasi-geodesics of CS (in particular, they do not contain Cos({Hi })-components). Thus, e γ e has the form γ ee = b γ0 ∗ β1 ∗ · · · ∗ βM ∗ γ bM ,  where each βi is obtained substituting each ei ∈ gi Hj with a geodesic of gi Hj connecting the endpoints of ei . Let Θ be the constant coming from Lemma 4.24. We will choose a coarser subdivision of γ b and γ ee such that all the subsegments βj have length greater or equal to Θ. More formally, we obtain a new subdivision as follows: let j ∈ {1, . . . , M } be the first index such that L(βj ) < Θ. Then for each i < j − 1, set γi′ = γ bi and βi′ = βi . Set  15  ′ γi−1 =γ bi−1 ∗ βi ∗ b γi and for each i ≥ j set γi′ = γ bi+1 and βi′ = βi+1 . Proceeding in this way, we obtain a new subdivision:  ee = γ0 ∗ β1 ∗ · · · ∗ βn ∗ γn , γ  where each of the βi is contained in one element of Cos({Hi }) and has length greater or equal Θ, and each of the γi may contain some Cos({Hi })-piece of length strictly less than Θ. For each segment γi , let γi be the subsegment of b γ with the same endpoints of γi (that is, the segment obtained substituting back the Cos({Hi })-components in γi ). It is clear that γi is an embedded-de-electrification of γi , but with the remarkable property that each Cos({Hi })-components e of γi de-electrify to a CS segment of length at most Θ. Thus, for each i the following holds: LCS (γi ) ≤ ΘLCS d (γi ). Let τ be such that γ b is a τ -quasi-geodesic of d CS. We have: n X 0  LCS (γi ) ≤  n X  ΘLCS γ ) ≤ τ ΘdCS d (γi ) ≤ ΘLCS d (b d (x, y) + τ.  0  That is, we can estimate the length of the portion of γ ee that is coarsely not contained in Cos({Hi }) in terms of dCS d (x, y). Since γ ee is uniformly a quasi-geodesic of CS, 4.24 gives that there is a uniform F such that for each U ∈ S − {S}, if diamCU (πU ({x, y})) > F , then there is i such that diamCU (γi ) > ES , where ES is the large link lemma constant for S. The large link lemma property for S furnish a series of subsets Ti ⊆ S − {S} such that if there exists U ∈ S − {S} with diamCU (γi ) > ES , then U is nested in one element P contained in Ti . Let T = ∪i Ti . We have that there is a uniform λ such that |T | ≤ λ( n i=0 LCS (γi )) + λ. Since the latter can be uniformly linearly estimated in terms of dCS d (x, y), we get the result. • Bounded geodesic image: there exists EL such that for all W ∈ L, V ∈ LW − {W } and V geodesics γ of CW , either diamCV (ρW V (γ)) ≤ EL , or NEL (ρW ) ∩ γ = ∅. The statements clearly holds in the case W 6= S or W = S and V ∈ F. So, we only have to check the statement for W = S and V ∈ S. But since, by Proposition 2.2, geodesic of CS and geodesics of d CS have uniformly bounded Hausdorff distance (with respect to the d the conclusion follows from the bounded geodesic image property for CS. metric in CS), • Partial Realization Note that a family of pairwise orthogonal elements is either contained in S or F. Since F is a factor system, it holds in F, and ii holds on S − {S}. Thus we get that the property holds on the whole L. • Uniqueness This holds in F, and that is enough, since for each W ∈ F, CL W = CF W and L πW = F πW . We are now ready to prove Theorem 4.17. Proof of Theorem 4.17. The proof will follow three steps. Firstly we will show that it is possible to equip the new added edge and vertex groups with an HHG structure. Then we will need to show that the whole graph of groups is a graph of HHG. To achieve this, we will change the HHG structure on (some) of the original vertices. Finally we will verify that the new graph of HHG satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 4.15. For each vertex v ∈ G − G ′ , we have that Gv is hyperbolic and that the adjacent edge groups {Hi } are a finite family of quasi convex subgroups of Gv . Then Theorem 2.9 applied to (G, {Hi }) yields a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure (G, F) on G. This induces a hierarchically hyperbolic structure (Hi , Hi ) for each i, such that the inclusion maps ji : Hi ֒→ Gv are homomorphisms of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Indeed, this follows because [Hi ] ∈ F, (CF Hi , FHi ) admits an HHS structure (see Corollary 2.10) and Hi is  16  quasi-isometric to CF Hi . It is straightforward that all the maps ji are full and, since there are no orthogonality relations in F, the images of the maximal elements are not orthogonal to any other element. For each vertex v ∈ G ′ , let {Hiv } be the set of edge groups adjacent to v that correspond to edges of G − G ′ . By hypothesis, we have that {Hiv } ֒→hh Gv . Note that, by the process above, all elements of {Hiv } are equipped with an HHG structure. Applying Proposition 4.22 to the pair (Gv , Sv ); {(Hiv , Hvi )}, we get new HHG structures (Gv , Lv ) on the Gv that turn G into a graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. The bounded supports condition follows from Lemma 4.14, the fullness of the maps and the orthogonality condition are clear by construction. We need to show that the images of the edge maps are hierarchically quasi-convex. To simplify notation, we will denote dVb (πV (x), πV (y)) as dVb (x, y). Consider an edge e and a vertex v adjacent to it. Let Y ⊆ X be the image of the edge map. We want to show that Y is hierarchically quasi-convex. There are several cases that needs to be considered. The case where e is an edge of G ′ . If the hierarchical structure on the vertex group Qv is unchanged, then Y is hierarchically quasi-convex by hypothesis. Otherwise, let (Qv , Sv ) be the old hierarchical structure, (Qv , Lv ) be the new one and S be the maximal element of both Sv and Lv . Finally, let CS denote the space CSv S and let d CS denote the space CLv S. Since Y is hierarchically quasi-convex in (Qv , Sv ) (and in particular quasi-convex), we get that for each element gHi ∈ Cos({Hi }), the projection pgHi (Y) is uniformly quasiconvex. Let x ∈ Qv be such that dCU (x, Y) ≤ r for all U ∈ Lv . We want to show that it is possible to uniformly bound dQ (Y, x). If we can bound dCS (x, Y), then the result would follows from the fact that Y is hierarchically quasi-convex in (Qv , Sv ). In order to obtain this bound we will consider two additional different sets of HHS structures on the various spaces involved. Firstly, let A be the set of cosets of the various Hi seen as subspaces of CS. By Corollary 2.8 and Lemma 4.10, we have that A is a factor system for CS. By Proposition 3.5, we have CS is quasi-isometric that Y is hierarchically quasi-convex in (CS, A ∪ {CS}). Note that d to the cone-off of CS with respect to A, and, by hypothesis, we have dCS d (Y, x) ≤ r. If for each element gHi ∈ A, we could uniformly bound dCgHi (Y, z), then hierarchically quasiconvexity of Y in (CS, A ∪ {CS}) would produce a bound on dCS (Y, x) and thus, a bound on dQ (Y, x). Thus, consider a coset gHi . If W = (Hi , g) ∈ F, one has that (gHi , FW ) is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, with hyperbolic total spaces. Thus we can apply Proposition 3.5 to obtain that Y is hierarchically quasi-convex in (gHi , FW ). Since, by hypothesis, for each U ∈ FW (⊆ Lv ) we have dCU (Y, x) ≤ r, there is a function k depending on i but not on g such that dgHi (x, Y) ≤ k(r). Since there are only finitely many choices for i, the result follows. The case where e is an edge of G − G ′ and v is a vertex of G ′ . The image of the edge map Y coincide with one of the subgroups Hi . Then we have that πU (Y) is uniformly bounded when U ∈ L−F, because of Lemma 4.23, or when U ⊑ (g, Hj ), with j 6= i, because of Lemma 4.10. In the other case, πU (Y) coarsely coincide with CU by normalness (Proposition 4.19). This clearly implies that for each U , the space πU (Y) is uniformly quasi-convex. Now let x be a point such that dCU (x, Y) ≤ r for all U ∈ S. Let y be a point witnessing the closest point projection of x on Hi = Y. It easily follows from the above discussion that for each U ∈ S, |dCU (x, y) − dCU (x, Y)| is uniformly bounded. Then the result follows from the distance formula applied to x and y. The case where e is an edge of G − G ′ and v is a vertex of G. This is a straightforward consequence of Proposition 3.5.  17  References [AMS16] Yago Antolı́n, Ashot Minasyan, and Alessandro Sisto. Commensurating endomorphisms of acylindrically hyperbolic groups and applications. Groups Geom. Dyn., 10(4):1149–1210, 2016. [BF92]  M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. A combination theorem for negatively curved groups. J. Differential Geom., 35(1):85–101, 1992.  [BF96]  Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Addendum and correction to: “A combination theorem for negatively curved groups” [J. Differential Geom. 35 (1992), no. 1, 85–101; MR1152226 (93d:53053)]. J. Differential Geom., 43(4):783–788, 1996.  [BHS15]  Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces II: Combination theorems and the distance formula. ArXiv e-prints, February 2015.  [BHS17a] J. Behrstock, M. F Hagen, and A. Sisto. Quasiflats in hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. ArXiv e-prints, April 2017. [BHS17b] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Asymptotic dimension and small-cancellation for hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3), 114(5):890–926, 2017. [BHS17c] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, I: Curve complexes for cubical groups. Geom. Topol., 21(3):1731–1804, 2017. [DGO17] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, and D. Osin. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and rotating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 245(1156):v+152, 2017. [DHS17]  Matthew Gentry Durham, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Boundaries and automorphisms of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Geom. Topol., 21(6):3659– 3758, 2017.  [MS17]  J. Maher and A. Sisto. Random subgroups of acylindrically hyperbolic groups and hyperbolic embeddings. Accepted in IMRN, January 2017.  [Osi16]  D. Osin. Acylindrically hyperbolic groups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 368(2):851– 888, 2016.  [Sis17]  A. Sisto. What is a hierarchically hyperbolic space? Accepted in Proccedings of the ”Beyond hyperbolicity” conference, June 2017.  [Spr17]  Davide Spriano. Hyperbolic HHS I: Factor systems and quasi-convex subgroups. ArXiv e-prints, November 2017.  18

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
