Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1599

Abstract:
Permutation monoids and MB-homogeneous structures  arXiv:1802.04166v1 [math.GR] 12 Feb 2018  Thomas D. H. Coleman1, David M. Evans2, Robert D. Gray3,4 February 13, 2018  Abstract In this paper, we investigate the connection between infinite permutation monoids and bimorphism monoids of first-order structures. Taking our lead from the study of automorphism groups of structures as infinite permutation groups and the more recent developments in the field of homomorphism-homogeneous structures, we establish a series of results that underline this connection. Of particular interest is the idea of MB-homogeneity; a relational structure M is MB-homogeneous if every monomorphism between finite substructures of M extends to a bimorphism of M. The results in question include a characterisation of closed permutation monoids, a Fraı̈ssé-like theorem for MB-homogeneous structures, and the construction of 2ℵ0 pairwise non-isomorphic countable MB-homogeneous graphs. We prove that any finite group arises as the automorphism group of some MB-homogeneous graph and use this to construct oligomorphic permutation monoids with any given finite group of units. We also consider MB-homogeneity for various well-known examples of homogeneous structures and in particular give a complete classification of countable homogeneous undirected graphs that are also MB-homogeneous. Keywords: bimorphisms, MB-homogeneous, cancellative monoids, permutation monoids, oligomorphic transformation monoids, homomorphism-homogeneous structures, infinite graph theory. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification: 20M99, 03C15, 05C63  Let M be a first-order structure with automorphism group Aut(M). As “structure is whatever is preserved by automorphisms” [17], the automorphism group is a key concept in understanding the model theory of M. Every automorphism of M is a permutation of the domain M of M; hence we can view Aut(M) as an infinite permutation group. Much of the existing literature in this field explores connections between infinite permutation group theory and model theory; see [2] and [7] for instance. More recent work has studied the endomorphism monoid End(M) of a first-order structure M; analogously, these are examples of infinite transformation monoids. By imposing additional conditions on the type of endomorphism of M, we can obtain various 1  School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9SS, United Kingdom. Email: tdhc@st-andrews.ac.uk. 2 Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. Email: david.evans@imperial.ac.uk. 3 School of Mathematics, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, United Kingdom. Email: robert.d.gray@uea.ac.uk. 4 This work was supported by the EPSRC grant EP/N033353/1 ‘Special inverse monoids: subgroups, structure, geometry, rewriting systems and the word problem’.  1  submonoids of End(M). These various natural monoids of transformations associated with a first-order structure M have been studied by Lockett and Truss [20, 21]. The principal aim of papers by Cameron and Nešetřil [9], Mašulović [23], [24], Mašulović and Pech [25], Lockett and Truss [20, 21], and Hartman, Hubička and Mašulović [16] focus on generalising the current theory on infinite permutation groups to the case of infinite transformation monoids; particularly in the case of End(M). Research on End(M) is not restricted to finding analogues of results about Aut(M); understanding End(M) is key to the study of the polymorphism clone Pol(M) of M and hence complexity of constraint satisfaction problems [5]. This connection provides motivation for studying endomorphism monoids of first-order structures, and has been extensively studied by Bodirsky [3, 4], Bodirsky and Nešetřil [5] and Bodirsky and Pinsker [6]. The collection of all bijective endomorphisms of a first-order structure M with domain M forms a monoid under the composition operation; we call this the bimorphism monoid of the structure M and denote it by Bi(M). Of course, every automorphism of M is a bijective homomorphism; but in general, the converse does not hold. Hence Bi(M) contains the automorphism group Aut(M) (as its group of units), but is also contained in the symmetric group Sym(M ) since every element of Bi(M) is a bijection from M to itself. Therefore, the bimorphism monoid Bi(M) gives a natural example of a permutation monoid; a monoid where each element is a permutation. In fact, as we shall see for any countable set M , the closed submonoids of the symmetric group Sym(M ) under the pointwise convergence topology are precisely the bimorphism monoids of first-order structures M on the domain M (Theorem 2.1). Although it is a natural concept, permutation monoids have not received much attention in the literature. By definition, every permutation monoid is a group-embeddable monoid. The study of group-embeddable monoids was a principal interest of early semigroup theorists; a well known result (Ore’s Theorem, see [27]) says that a monoid T is embeddable in a group if it is cancellative and satisfies Ore’s condition (for a, b ∈ T , then aT ∩ bT 6= ∅). Furthermore, a monoid T is group-embeddable if and only if M has a faithful representation as a monoid of permutations. Equivalently, M is groupembeddable if and only if M is isomorphic to a submonoid of some symmetric group; that is, a permutation monoid. A result of Reyes [30] (see [7]) states that a subgroup of the infinite symmetric group is closed if and only if it is the automorphism group of some first-order structure. Examples of highly symmetric infinite permutation groups are abundant in the literature, often arising as automorphism groups of structures with “nice” structural conditions; specifically, ℵ0 -categoricity and homogeneity. A structure M is ℵ0 -categorical if and only if M is the unique (up to isomorphism) countable model of the theory Th(M) of M, and it is homogeneous if every isomorphism between finite substructures of M extends to an automorphism of M. The two are related; every homogeneous structure M over a finite relational language is ℵ0 -categorical, and an ℵ0 -categorical structure M is homogeneous if and only if Th(M) has quantifier elimination [22]. Finding examples of ℵ0 -categorical structures provides corresponding examples of interesting permutation groups. It is a famous theorem of Engeler, Ryll-Nardzewski and Svenonius (see [17]) that a structure M is ℵ0 -categorical if and only if Aut(M) has finitely many orbits on M n for every n ∈ N; such groups are called oligomorphic permutation groups. It follows that a potential source of oligomorphic permutation groups are automorphism groups of homogeneous structures over a finite relational language. The celebrated theorem of 2  Fraı̈ssé [14] gives a characterisation of homogeneous structures, which can then be used to construct many examples of structures with an oligomorphic automorphism group. Such structures include the countable dense linear order without endpoints (Q, <), the random graph R, and the generic poset P . This was followed in time by complete classification results for countable homogeneous structures; for posets by Schmerl [32], undirected graphs by Lachlan and Woodrow [19] and directed graphs by Cherlin [10]. In the study of infinite permutation monoids and bimorphism monoids of first-order structures, the natural analogue of homogeneity is MB-homogeneity. A structure M is MB-homogeneous if every finite partial monomorphism of M extends to a bimorphism of M. This notion of homogeneity was first introduced by Lockett and Truss in [20], in which they determined conditions using MB-homogeneity for the existence of generic bimorphisms of a structure. Further results were shown by the same authors [21]; where they classified homomorphism-homogeneous (and hence MB-homogeneous) posets in a wide-ranging result. MB-homogeneity is a natural extension of MM-homogeneity – where every finite partial monomorphism of M extends to a monomorphism of M – which has been more widely considered; for instance, Cameron and Nešetřil [9] demonstrated a Fraı̈ssé-theoretic result about construction and uniqueness of MMhomogeneous structures. The aim of this paper is to develop the theory of infinite permutation monoids, with a particular focus on bimorphism monoids and MB-homogeneous structures. We begin in Section 1 by recalling the definition of an oligomorphic transformation monoid from [25], and extend results of the same paper by considering other self-map monoids as introduced by Lockett and Truss [21]. Section 2 investigates permutation monoids and MB-homogeneity in more detail, including a characterisation of closed permutation monoids (Theorem 2.1) and a Fraı̈ssé-like theorem for MB-homogeneity (Propositions 2.6, 2.7, and 2.8). Section 3 is devoted to MB-homogeneous graphs; including establishing some useful properties of MB-homogeneous graphs, introducing the notion of bimorphism equivalence (Definition 3.7) and demonstrating that there exist 2ℵ0 nonisomorphic MB-homogeneous graphs, each of which is bimorphism equivalent to the random graph R (Theorem 3.20). Furthermore, we show that for any finite group H, there exists a MB-homogeneous graph Γ such that Aut(Γ) ∼ = H (Theorem 3.21); consequently there exists an oligomorphic permutation monoid with H as its group of units. Finally, Section 4 assesses a selection of previously known homogeneous structures to determine whether or not they are MB-homogeneous, culminating in a complete classification of countably infinite graphs that are both homogeneous and MB-homogeneous (Theorem 4.11). Throughout the article, maps act on the right of their arguments, and we compose maps from left to right. A relational first-order signature σ consists of a collection of relations {R̄i : i ∈ I} where each Ri has an arity ni ∈ N for all i ∈ I. A σ-structure with equality M consists of a domain M and subsets Ri ⊆ M ni interpreting R̄i in σ for each i ∈ I. We follow usual convention for notation regarding relations; for a σ-structure M, we write RiM (x̄) if x̄ ∈ Ri ⊆ M ni . All structures M will be countably infinite unless stated otherwise.  3  1  Oligomorphic transformation monoids  Let X be a countably infinite set and let T be an infinite submonoid of End(X). Then T is a transformation monoid acting on the set X via (x, α) 7→ xα for all x ∈ X and α ∈ T . We can extend this to an action of T on tuples x̄ ∈ X n , with T acting componentwise on x̄. We begin by outlining some important definitions regarding the notion of orbits on tuples for a transformation monoid; versions of these appear in [33]. Definition 1.1. Let T ⊆ End(X) be a transformation monoid acting on tuples X n as above, and let U be the group of units of T . • Define the forward orbit of a tuple x̄ to be the set F (x̄) = {ȳ ∈ X n : (∃s ∈ T )(x̄s = ȳ)}. • Define the strong orbit of x̄ to be the set S(x̄) = {ȳ ∈ X n : (∃s, t ∈ T )(x̄s = ȳ and ȳt = x̄)}. • Define the group orbit of x̄ to be the set U (x̄) = {ȳ ∈ X n : (∃s ∈ U )(x̄s = ȳ)}. We note immediately that U (x̄) ⊆ S(x̄) ⊆ F (x̄) for any tuple x̄ and that if ȳ ∈ F (x̄) then F (ȳ) ⊆ F (x̄). Furthermore, the relation x̄ ∼ ȳ if and only if x̄ and ȳ are in the same strong orbit is an equivalence relation [33]. In comparison, the forward orbit is reflexive and transitive (and thus a preorder), but it may not be symmetric. This notion therefore differs slightly from Steinberg’s weak orbits, obtained by taking the symmetric-transitive closure of the forward orbit preorder [33]. We outline a basic lemma regarding these orbits which will be useful throughout the section; the proof of this is omitted. Lemma 1.2. Let T be a transformation monoid acting on a set of tuples X n . For any tuple x̄ ∈ X n , we have the following: S (1) F (x̄) = ȳ∈F (x̄) S(ȳ); S  (2) S(x̄) = ȳ∈S(x̄) U (ȳ).  Recall that a permutation group G ⊆ Sym(X) acts oligomorphically on X if and only if there are finitely many orbits on X n for every n ∈ N [7]. If the action of G componentwise on tuples of X is oligomorphic, we say that G is an oligomorphic permutation group. The next definition, originally of [25], places these concepts in the context of transformation monoids. Definition 1.3. We say that a transformation monoid T ⊆ End(X) acts oligomorphically on X if and only if there are finitely many strong orbits on X n for every n ∈ N. If the componentwise action of T on tuples of X is oligomorphic, then call T an oligomorphic transformation monoid. We note that if T is itself a group, then the strong orbits are the group orbits and the definitions coincide; so any oligomorphic permutation group is an oligomorphic transformation monoid. Our next result provides more connections between oligomorphic permutation groups and oligomorphic transformation monoids, generalising [25, Lemma 2.10]. 4  Proposition 1.4. Let T ⊆ End(X) be a transformation monoid with group of units U . If U is an oligomorphic permutation group then T is an oligomorphic transformation monoid. Proof. As U is an oligomorphic permutation group, there are finitely many group orbits U (ȳ) with y ∈ X n for every n ∈ N. As every strong orbit S(x̄) arises as the union of group orbits U (ȳ), we conclude that there are at most finitely many strong orbits of T acting on X n for every natural number n by Lemma 1.2. Remark. By the Ryll-Nardzewski theorem (see [17]), U is an oligomorphic permutation group if and only if it is the automorphism group of some ℵ0 -categorical structure M. By this proposition and the fact that Aut(M) acts as the group of units for any endomorphism monoid of M, we conclude that if M is ℵ0 -categorical then T ∈ {End(M), Epi(M), Mon(M), Bi(M), Emb(M)} is an oligomorphic transformation monoid. (See [21] for the definitions of these various transformation monoids.) This result provides us with numerous examples of oligomorphic transformation monoids, with the caveat that they are closely related to ℵ0 -categorical structures via their group of units. The main result of this section distances the notion of oligomorphicity in monoids from ℵ0 -categoricity by providing a different source of suitable examples; but first we detail some preliminary conditions. In the same way that homogeneous structures over a finite language provide examples of ℵ0 -categorical structures (and hence oligomorphic permutation groups), we turn to homomorphism-homogeneity to provide examples of oligomorphic transformation monoids. In the table below, we recall the eighteen different notions of homomorphism-homogeneity as presented in the two papers of Lockett and Truss [20, 21]. isomorphism (I)  monomorphism (M)  homomorphism (H)  End(M) (H)  IH  MH  HH  Epi(M) (E)  IE  ME  HE  Mon(M) (M)  IM  MM  HM  Bi(M) (B)  IB  MB  HB  Emb(M) (I)  II  MI  HI  Aut(M) (A)  IA  MA  HA  Table 1: Table of XY-homogeneity: a first-order structure M is XY-homogeneous if a finite partial map of type X (column) extends to a map of type Y (row) in the associated monoid. We note that if a structure M is XY-homogeneous then it is also IY-homogeneous. For shorthand in our next result, denote the monoid of maps of type Y by Y(M) for some structure M. For example, H(M) is the endomorphism monoid of M, and A(M) is the automorphism group. A previous observation of Lockett and Truss in [21] says that an endomorphism of a finite relational structure is an automorphism if and only if it is a bijection. Lemma 1.5. If A and B are finite σ-structures and f : A − → B and g : B − → A are ∼ bijective homomorphisms, then A = B and f, g are isomorphisms. 5  Proof. The composition map f g : A − → A is a bijective endomorphism of A; by the observation above, f g must be an automorphism of A. For some ā ∈ Ani , if ¬RiA (ā) and RiB (āf ), then RiA (āf g) as g is a homomorphism. Since f g is an automorphism this is a contradiction; so f must preserve non-relations and is therefore an isomorphism. A similar argument applies to show that g is an isomorphism. Proposition 1.6. Let M be an XY-homogeneous structure with domain M . Then two tuples ā = (a1 , . . . , an ) and b̄ = (b1 , . . . , bn ) are in the same strong orbit of Y(M) if and only if there exists a partial isomorphism f of M such that āf = b̄. Proof. Suppose that α, β ∈ Y(M) are maps such that āα = b̄ and b̄β = ā respectively; so ai α = bi and bi β = ai for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. If α sends elements ai 6= aj of ā to elements ai α = aj α of b̄, then we have that ai αβ = aj αβ and so ai = aj ; a contradiction. Hence the restrictions α|ā and β|b̄ are injective maps and so they are also bijections. Now, we → A, where A, B are the structures induced consider the maps α|ā : A − → B and β|b̄ : B − by M on ā, b̄ respectively. By Lemma 1.5, we see that A ∼ = B and so we can define f = α|ā . Conversely, we see that if f is an isomorphism between the structures A and B; by XY-homogeneity (and hence IY-homogeneity) of M, we extend f to a map α ∈ Y(M) such that āα = b̄. Similarly, we extend the map f −1 : B − → A to a map β ∈ Y(M) such that b̄β = ā and so ā and b̄ are in the same strong orbit. We now move on to proving the final result of this section. A result of [7, ch2] states that, for Aut(M) acting on M n , the number of group orbits on n-tuples is finite if the number of group orbits on k-tuples of distinct elements is finite for every k ≤ n. Using the fact from Proposition 1.6 that maps between two tuples in the same strong orbit are bijections, it is not hard to show that a similar result holds for the number of strong orbits of n-tuples when Y(M) is acting on M n . This, together with Proposition 1.6, proves the following theorem. Theorem 1.7. If M is an XY-homogeneous structure over a finite relational language, then Y(M) is an oligomorphic transformation monoid. Proof. As M is over a finite relational language, it has finitely many isomorphism types on k-tuples of distinct elements for any k ∈ N; by Proposition 1.6, there are finitely many strong orbits on k-tuples of distinct elements for every k ∈ N. The result then follows from the observation above. Using this theorem, we can find examples of structures with oligomorphic transformation monoids that are not ℵ0 -categorical; for instance, any homomorphism-homogeneous poset not in Schmerl’s classification (see [23] or [21]) has an oligomorphic endomorphism monoid. A notable instance is Corollary 2.2(a) in [9]; there exists a countably infinite graph Γ with oligomorphic endomorphism (and monomorphism) monoid but a trivial automorphism group. Of particular interest to this paper is the idea of an oligomorphic permutation monoid. This follows as a special case of Definition 1.3, where the transformation monoid T is also a permutation monoid. It is a corollary of Theorem 1.7 that if M is an MB-homogeneous structure over a finite relational language, then Bi(M) is an oligomorphic permutation monoid. It follows that finding MB-homogeneous structures give interesting examples of permutation monoids; this motivates the study of MBhomogeneous structures in Section 2. 6  2  Permutation monoids and MB-homogeneity  Among the endomorphism monoids of a first-order structure M mentioned in the introduction was the collection of bimorphisms Bi(M). As a set of endomorphisms it is a submonoid of End(M); however as a collection of bijective maps it is a submonoid of Sym(M ), the symmetric group on the domain of M . It follows that Bi(M) is a group-embeddable monoid and so it acts on M by permutations as opposed to transformations. Thus Bi(M) (for a countably infinite M) expressed in this fashion is an infinite permutation monoid. This section is devoted to the study of infinite permutation monoids, outlining some general properties and presenting a method for constructing interesting infinite permutation monoids via MB-homogeneous structures. To start, recall that the symmetric group Sym(M ) on a countably infinite set M has a natural topology given by pointwise convergence, with a basis for open sets given by the cosets of stabilizers of tuples. It is well-known ([30], see 4.1.4 in [17]) that G ≤ Sym(M ) is closed under the pointwise convergence topology if and only if it is the automorphism group of some first-order structure M on domain M . This was generalised by Cameron and Nešetřil [9] to closed submonoids T ≤ End(M ) under the product topology; this occurs if and only if T is the endomorphism monoid of some first-order structure M on domain M . Our first proposition provides an analogous result for closed permutation monoids; the proof of which is similar to other results along these lines. To do this, we recall the following standard result from point-set topology [29, Theorem 17.2]; if Y is a subspace of some topological space X, then a set A is closed in Y under the subspace topology inherited from X if and only if A = Y ∩B, where B is some closed set in X. Furthermore, the pointwise convergence topology on Sym(M ) is the same as the topology induced on the set by End(M ) via the inclusion map: so Sym(M ) is a subspace of End(M ). Theorem 2.1. Let M be a countable set. A submonoid T of Sym(M ) is closed under the pointwise convergence topology if and only if it is the bimorphism monoid of some structure M on domain M . Proof. We begin with the converse direction. Suppose that T = Bi(M) is the bimorphism monoid of a structure M on domain M . As Sym(M ) is a subspace of End(M ), and Bi(M) is the intersection of Sym(M ) and the closed set End(M) of End(M ), it follows from the result above that Bi(M) is closed in Sym(M ). For the forward direction, assume that T is a closed submonoid of Sym(M ). Define an n-ary relation Rx̄ by Rx̄ (ȳ) ⇔ (∃s ∈ T )(x̄s = ȳ) for each n ∈ N and x̄ ∈ M n . Let M be the relational structure on M with relations Rx̄ for all tuples x̄ ∈ M n and all n ∈ N. The proof that T = Bi(M) is by containment both ways. As every element of T is already a permutation of the domain M of M, proving that T acts as endomorphisms on M is enough to show that T ⊆ Bi(M). Assume then that s ∈ T and ȳ ∈ M n such that Rx̄ (ȳ) holds; as this happens, there exists an s′ ∈ T such that x̄s′ = ȳ. Therefore x̄s′ s = ȳs and so Rx̄ (ȳs) holds; so T ⊆ End(M) and hence T ⊆ Bi(M). It remains to show that Bi(M) ⊆ T ; so suppose that α ∈ Bi(M). Our aim is to show that α is a limit point of T ; as T is closed, it must contain all its limit points. 7  Note that each n-tuple x̄ defines a neighbourhood of α, consisting of all functions β such that x̄α = x̄β. As T is a monoid, it follows that Rx̄ (x̄) holds and so Rx̄ (x̄α) holds. By definition of Rx̄ , there exists s ∈ T such that x̄α = x̄s; hence α is a limit point of T . Therefore α ∈ T and so Bi(M) ⊆ T , completing the proof. Remark. It is a well-known result from descriptive set theory that any closed subset A of a Polish space X is itself a Polish space with the induced topology from X (see [18]). As Sym(M ) is a Polish space, it follows that Bi(M) is also a Polish space; so bimorphisms of first-order structures provide natural examples of Polish monoids. We leave this area of investigation open. Our aim now is to determine a cardinality result for closed submonoids of Sym(X). For any x̄ ∈ X n , define the pointwise stabilizer of x̄ to be the set St(x̄) = {α ∈ Bi(M) : x̄α = x̄} Note also that as Bi(M) is a group-embeddable monoid, it is therefore cancellative. Proposition 2.2. For any countably infinite first-order structure M, either |Bi(M)| ≤ ℵ0 or |Bi(M)| = 2ℵ0 , the first alternative holding if and only if the pointwise stabilizer of some tuple is the identity e ∈ Bi(M). Proof. Assume that St(x̄) = {e} for some x̄ ∈ M n . Let γ1 , γ2 ∈ Bi(M) where x̄γ1 = x̄γ2 = ȳ. As Bi(M) is a collection of permutations, it embeds in Sym(M ) = G, and the action of Bi(M) on M extends to an action of G on M. As a consequence, there exists a unique γ1−1 ∈ G such that γ1 γ1−1 = e. As ȳγ1−1 = x̄, we have that x̄γ2 γ1−1 = x̄γ1 γ1−1 = x̄. But St(x̄) = {e} and so γ2 γ1−1 = e; hence γ1 = γ2 . By the fact there are only countably many tuples in F (x̄), we are forced to conclude that Bi(M) is countable in this case. On the other hand, suppose that St(x̄) 6= {e} for all tuples x̄ ∈ M n . As M is countably infinite, we can enumerate elements of M = {x1 , x2 , . . .}. Using this enumeration, we define a sequence of tuples (x̄k )k∈N where x̄k = (x1 , . . . , xk ) for all k ∈ N. Since St(x̄) 6= {e} for all tuples x̄ of M, for each element x̄k of (x̄k )k∈N there exists tk ∈ Bi(M) such that tk 6= e and x̄k tk = x̄k . This means that the sequence (tk )k∈N of elements of Bi(M) is an infinite sequence where each bimorphism tk is not the identity element of Bi(M). As the sequence of tuples (x̄k )k∈N will eventually encapsulate every element of M , the sequence of bimorphisms (tk )k∈N approaches the pointwise stabilizer of M. This is the identity element and so e is a limit point of Bi(M). Now, for some α ∈ Bi(M), consider the sequence (tk α)k∈N . Here, tk α 6= α for any k ∈ N; for if tk α = α for some k, then cancellativity of Bi(M) implies that tk = e, contradicting our earlier assumption. Then α is a limit point for the sequence (tk α)k∈N , and so every element of Bi(M) is a limit point. This means that Bi(M) is a perfect set and thus has cardinality of the continuum (ch 6, [18]).  2.1  MB-homogeneity  As mentioned in the introduction, automorphism groups of homogeneous structures are examples of infinite permutation groups whose orbits on n-tuples of distinct elements are determined by isomorphism types of substructures (see Proposition 1.6). It 8  is a consequence of Theorem 1.7 that bimorphism monoids of MB-homogeneous structures provide examples of infinite permutation monoids whose orbits on n-tuples are defined in the same way. Motivated by this, we aim to find a way of constructing MBhomogeneous structures; our inspiration for this task is Fraı̈ssé’s theorem for finding homogeneous structures (see [2]). Building on a similar result of Cameron and Nešetřil [9] for MM-homogeneous structures, the rest of this section is devoted to providing a Fraı̈ssé-like theorem for constructing MB-homogeneous structures. Throughout this section σ is a relational signature, C is a class of finite σ-structures and, following convention, we write A, B to mean the σ-structures on domains A, B. We refer the reader to [17] for further background on model theory. There are two main properties that a class of finite structures C has that guarantee the existence of a countable homogeneous structure with age C . The first is the joint embedding property (JEP); this property ensures that we can construct a countable structure M with age C . The second is the amalgamation property (AP); this ensures our constructed structure M is homogeneous by showing that it has the equivalent extension property (EP). When building a countable MB-homogeneous structure M with age C , we still need the JEP to ensure that M has the age we want but we need a different amalgamation property to ensure MB-homogeneity rather than standard homogeneity. As we are aiming to extend to bijective endomorphisms, we require a “back and forth” style argument to ensure that the extended map is indeed bijective. Due to the fact that bimorphisms are not automorphisms in general, we require two amalgamation conditions, and hence two extension conditions, to ensure that M is MBhomogeneous. We begin this section by examining the required extension properties. If M is MB-homogeneous then M is MM-homogeneous; it follows (by Proposition 4.1(b) of [9]) that M must have the mono-extension property (MEP), which takes care of the forward extension: (MEP) For all A, B ∈ Age(M) with A ⊆ B and monomorphism f : A − → M, there exists a monomorphism g : B − → M extending f . Any suitable “back” condition should express in its statement the key difference between a monomorphism of M and a bimorphism. This difference is the existence of a preimage; for any α ∈ Bi(M) and substructure A ⊆ M there exists a substructure B ⊆ M such that Bα = A. Note that this is not true for an arbitrary monomorphism β of M as Mβ is not required to equal M. The existence of a preimage for every extended map is the condition we wish to ensure in our “back” extension property, and this motivates our next definition. Definition 2.3. Let A, B be two σ-structures. We say that an injective map f : A − →B is an antimonomorphism if and only if ¬RA (a1 , . . . , an ) implies ¬RB (a1 f, . . . , an f ) for all n-ary relations R of σ. Remarks. Note that any map that is both a monomorphism and an antimonomorphism is an embedding. It is an easy exercise to show that the function composition of two antimonomorphisms is again an antimonomorphism; in particular, it is important to note that the composition of an antimonomorphism and an embedding is an antimonomorphism. We now state and prove a lemma stating that a preimage of a monomorphism is an antimonomorphism. For any bijective function f : A → B, we write f¯ : B → A to be the unique bijection such that f f¯ = 1A and f¯f = 1B . Notice here that f¯ = f . 9  Lemma 2.4. Let A, B be two σ-structures, and suppose that f : A − → B is a bijection. ¯ Then f is a monomorphism if and only if f is an antimonomorphism. Proof. Suppose f is a monomorphism and that ¬RB (b1 , . . . , bn ) = ¬RB (a1 f, . . . , an f ) holds in B. Since f preserves relations, it follows that ¬RA (a1 , . . . , an ) holds in A; as ¯ . . . , an f f¯) = ¬RA (b1 f¯, . . . , bn f¯). f f¯ = 1A we have that ¬RA (a1 , . . . , an ) = ¬RA (a1 f f, In the converse direction, suppose that f¯ is an antimonomorphism and that RA (a1 , . . . , an ) is a relation with ai = bi f¯ for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. As f¯ preserves non-relations, it follows that RB (b1 , . . . , bn ) holds. Finally, as f¯f = 1B , we have that RB (b1 , . . . , bn ) = RB (b1 f¯f, . . . , bn f¯f ) = RB (a1 f, . . . , an f ) and therefore f is an monomorphism. Remarks. By restricting the codomain of a monomorphism f : A − → B to the image, we see that f ′ : A − → Af is a bijective homomorphism and therefore f¯′ : Af − → A is an antimonomorphism by the above lemma. Similarly, by restricting the codomain of an antimonomorphism f¯ : B − → A to the image, we see that f¯′ : B − → B f¯ and so we obtain a bijective homomorphism f ′ : B f¯ − → B. It is an immediate corollary of this result that if A, B, C are σ-structures, and f : A → B, g : B → C are bijective homomorphisms, then (f g) = ḡ f¯ : C → A is a bijective antimonomorphism. We use antimonomorphisms to express the backward extension in the bi-extension property (BEP): (BEP) For all A, B ∈ Age(M) with A ⊆ B and antimonomorphism f¯ : A − → M, there exists a antimonomorphism ḡ : B − → M extending f¯. These properties prove to be necessary and sufficient for MB-homogeneity. Proposition 2.5. Let M be a countable structure with age C . Then M is MBhomogeneous if and only if M has the BEP and the MEP. Proof. Suppose that M is MB-homogeneous; then M is also MM-homogeneous and has the MEP from Proposition 4.1(a) of [9]. Let A ⊆ B ∈ C and f¯ : A → M be an antimonomorphism. As Age(M) = C , there exist copies A′ ⊆ B ′ ⊆ M of A and B and isomorphisms θ : B − → B ′ and θ −1 : B ′ → B. Restrict the codomain of f¯ to its image to find an antimonomorphism f¯′ : A → Af¯; so θ −1 f¯′ = h̄ : A′ → Af¯ is a ¯ = h : Af¯ → A′ is a monomorphism; as bijective antimonomorphism. By Lemma 2.4, h̄ M is MB-homogeneous, extend h to a bimorphism α of M. So α|B ′ θ −1 : B ′ → B is a bijective homomorphism; by Lemma 2.4, define θ ᾱ = ḡ : B → B ′ . It remains to show that θ ᾱ extends f¯; indeed, for a ∈ A we have that af¯ = af¯αᾱ = af¯f θ ᾱ = aθ ᾱ as α extends f θ. Therefore M has the BEP. Conversely, suppose that M has the BEP and the MEP, and let f : A − → B be a monomorphism between finite substructures of M. We shall extend f : A → B to a bimorphism α of M in stages using a back and forth argument. Set A0 = A, B0 = B and f0 = f . At a typical stage, we have a bijective monomorphism fk : Ak − → Bk extending f , where Ai ⊆ Ai+1 and Bi ⊆ Bi+1 for all i ≤ k. As M is countable, we can enumerate the points M = {m0 , m1 , . . .}. When k is even, pick a point mi , where i is the smallest number such that mi ∈ / dom f . So, Ak ∪ {mi } is a substructure of M 10  ′ : Ak ∪ {mi } − → M. containing Ak . Using the MEP, extend fk to a monomorphism fk+1 ′ ′ → Bk ∪{mi fk+1 } is a By restricting the codomain of fk+1 we have that fk+1 : Ak ∪{mi } − bijective homomorphism extending fk . If k is odd, note that f¯k : Bk − → Ak is a bijective antimonomorphism by Lemma 2.4. Select a point mi , where i is the least number such that mi ∈ / dom f¯k ; so Bk ∪ {mi } is a substructure of M. Using the BEP, extend f¯k ′ : Bk ∪ {mi } − → M. Again, by restricting the codomain to an antimonomorphism f¯k+1 ′ ¯ we obtain a bijective antimonomorphism fk+1 : Bk ∪ {mi } − → Ak ∪ {mi f¯k+1 } extending ′ ¯ ¯ fk ; so fk+1 : Ak ∪ {mi fk+1 } − → Bk ∪ {mi } is a bijective homomorphism extending fk . By ensuring that every mi appears at both an odd and even stage, countably many applications of this procedure yield a bimorphism α of M extending f .  Remark. We note here that this process of extending one point at a time eventually creates a bimorphism. In a similar fashion to Dolinka [12, Section 3] we can present equivalent conditions to Proposition 2.5 using one point extensions. (1PBEP/1PMEP) Suppose that A ⊆ B ∈ C and there is a (anti)monomorphism f : A − → M. If |B r A| = 1 then there exists a (anti)monomorphism g:B− → M extending f . A straightforward proof by induction shows that a structure M has both these conditions, if and only if it also has the BEP and MEP. These easier-to-handle properties are useful in determining whether or not a structure is MB-homogeneous. We now turn our attention to the actual process of construction. As we also need to ensure MM-homogeneity, it would make sense to take our “forth” amalgamation condition to be the mono-amalgamation property introduced in [9]. (MAP) Let C be a class of finite structures. For any A, B1 , B2 ∈ C and any maps fi : A − → Bi (for i = 1, 2) such that f1 is a monomorphism and f2 is an embedding, there exists C ∈ C and monomorphisms gi : Bi − →C (for i = 1, 2) such that f1 g1 = f2 g2 and g1 is an embedding. Similar to the BEP, we use antimonomorphisms to set out the “back” amalgamation condition, known as the bi-amalgamation property (BAP). (BAP) Let C be a class of finite structures. For any elements A, B1 , B2 ∈ C , antimonomorphism f¯1 : A − → B1 and embedding f2 : A − → B2 , there exists D ∈ C , embedding g1 : B1 − → D and antimonomorphism ḡ2 : B2 − →D such that f¯1 g1 = f2 ḡ2 . (see Figure 1.) We have enough now to prove the first of our propositions that detail our Fraı̈ssé-like construction. Proposition 2.6. Let M be an MB-homogeneous structure. Then Age(M) has the MAP and the BAP. Proof. As M is MB-homogeneous it is necessarily MM-homogeneous; by Proposition 4.1(b) of [9], Age(M) has the MAP. Suppose then that A, B1 , B2 are structures in Age(M), and assume we have an antimonomorphism f¯1 : A − → B1 and an embedding f2 : A − → B2 . Without loss of generality, further assume that A, B1 , B2 ⊆ M and that f2 is the inclusion map. 11  g1  ∃D  ḡ2  B1  B2 f¯1  f2 A  Figure 1: The bi-amalgamation property (BAP) From Lemma 2.4, f¯1 induces a bijective monomorphism f1 : Af¯1 − → A. As M is MBhomogeneous we extend f1 to some α ∈ Bi(M). Restricting α to B1 yields a bijective monomorphism α|B1 : B1 − → B1 α, where B1 α ⊇ A. Let D be the structure induced by M on B1 α∪B2 ; it follows that A ⊆ D. As α is surjective, we define C to be the structure such that Cα = D; set g1 : B1 − → C to be the inclusion map. As α : M − → M is a bijective homomorphism, then ᾱ : M − → M is an antimonomorphism by Lemma 2.4. Hence, ᾱ|B2 : B2 − → B2 ᾱ ⊆ C and define ḡ2 : B2 − → C to be this antimonomorphism. It is easy to check that f¯1 g1 = f2 ḡ2 and so Age(M) has the BAP. For our next result, recall that a class of finite structure C has the JEP if for all A, B ∈ C there exists a D ∈ C such that A, B ⊆ D. Proposition 2.7. If C is a class of finite relational structures that is closed under isomorphisms and substructures, has countably many isomorphism types and has the JEP, MAP and BAP, then there exists an MB-homogeneous structure M such that Age(M) = C . Proof. We build M over countably many stages, assuming that Mk has been constructed at some stage k ∈ N. Note that as C has countably many isomorphism types, we can enumerate them by C = {A0 , A1 , . . .}. If k ≡ 0 mod 3, select a structure Ai ∈ C , where k = 3i. Use the JEP to find a structure D that embeds both Mk and Ai ; define Mk+1 to be this structure D. If k ≡ 1 mod 3, select a triple (A, B, f ) such that A ⊆ B ∈ C and f : A − → Mk is a monomorphism. Using the MAP, we find a structure Mk+1 ∈ C such that there is an embedding e : Mk → Mk+1 and f extends to some monomorphism g : B − → Mk+1 . If ¯ ¯ k ≡ 2 mod 3 select a triple (X, Y, f ) such that X ⊆ Y ∈ C and f : X − → Mk is an antimonomorphism. Using the BAP we find a structure Mk+1 such that there is an embedding e′ : Mk → Mk+1 and f¯ is extended to an antimonomorphism ḡ : Y − → Mk+1 . We can arrange the steps such that: • every structure A ∈ C appears at some 0 mod 3 stage; • every triple (A, B, f ) appears at some 1 mod 3 stage, where for every such k, for every A ⊆ B ∈ C and every monomorphism f : A → Mk , there exists ℓ ≥ k and embedding ek,ℓ : Mk → Mℓ such that f extends to a monomorphism g : B → Mℓ . • every triple (X, Y, f¯) appears at some 2 mod 3 stage, where for every such k, for every X ⊆ Y ∈ C and every antimonomorphism f¯ : X → Mk , there exists ℓ ≥ k and embedding ek,ℓ : Mk → Mℓ such that f¯ extends to a antimonomorphism ḡ : Y → Mℓ . 12  S Following this, define M = k∈N Mk . All that remains to show is that M has age C and that M is MB-homogeneous. Our construction ensures that every Ai ∈ C appears at a 0 mod 3 stage, so it follows that C ⊆ Age(M). Conversely, we have that Mk ∈ C for all k ∈ N; as C is closed under substructures, Age(M) ⊆ C and so they are equal. Now suppose that A ⊆ B ∈ C and f : A − → M is a monomorphism. From the arrangement of steps above, there exists a k such that Af ⊆ Mk . From the construction, there exists an ℓ ∈ N such that Mℓ ⊃ Mk and the monomorphism g : B → Mℓ extends f ; so M has the MEP. We can use a similar argument to show that M has the BEP in a similar fashion and so M is MB-homogeneous by Proposition 2.5. A major consequence of Fraı̈ssé’s original theorem is the fact that any two Fraı̈ssé limits with the same age are isomorphic. While we cannot guarantee that any two structures with the same age constructed in the manner of Proposition 2.7 are isomorphic (see Section 3 for some examples) we can provide a uniqueness condition for this method of construction using a weaker notion of equivalence. Once again, we extend an idea of [9] to achieve this goal. Let M, N be two countable structures with the same signature σ. We say that M, N are bi-equivalent if: • Age(M) = Age(N ), and; • every embedding from a finite structure of M into N extends to a bijective monomorphism α : M − → N , and vice versa. Note that bi-equivalence is an equivalence relation on structures with the same signature. Two σ-structures M and N can be bi-equivalent without being isomorphic; see Example 3.11 for more details. We now show this is the relevant equivalence relation for MB-homogeneity. Proposition 2.8. 1) Let M, N be two bi-equivalent structures. If M is MB-homogeneous, so is N . 2) If M, N are MB-homogeneous and Age(M) = Age(N ), then M and N are bi-equivalent. Proof. 1) By Proposition 2.5 it suffices to show that N has the MEP and BEP. If M and N are bi-equivalent, they are certainly mono-equivalent in the sense of Proposition 4.2 of [9]; as M is MM-homogeneous, so is N (by the same result of [9]) and thus N has the MEP. Suppose then that A ⊆ B ∈ Age(N ) and there exists an antimonomorphism f¯ : A − → A′ ⊆ N . Note that A need not be isomorphic to A′ . As Age(M) = Age(N ) there exists a copy A′′ of A′ in M; fix an isomorphism e : A′ → A′′ between the two. Therefore, e is a isomorphism from a finite structure of N into M; as the two are bi-equivalent, we extend this to a bijective homomorphism α : N → M. This in turn induces a bijective antimonomorphism ᾱ : M − → N by Lemma 2.4. Now, define an antimonomorphism h̄ = f¯e : A → A′′ ; this is an antimonomorphism from A into M. Since M is MB-homogeneous, it has the BEP by Proposition 2.5 and so we extend h̄ to an antimonomorphism h̄′ : B → M. Now, the map h̄′ ᾱ : B − → N is a antimonomorphism; we need to show it extends f¯. So, for all a ∈ A, and using the facts that α extends e and h̄′ extends h̄ = f¯e, we have that af¯ = af¯αᾱ = af¯eᾱ = ah̄′ ᾱ. 13  Therefore N has the BEP. 2) Let f : A − → B be a bijective embedding from a finite structure of M into N . We utilise a back and forth argument constructing the bijection over countably many steps; so set A0 = A, B0 = B and f0 = f . At some stage, we have a bijective monomorphism fk : Ak − → Bk extending f , where Ai ⊆ Ai+1 and Bi ⊆ Bi+1 for all i ≤ k. As both M and N are countable, we can enumerate the points M = {m0 , m1 , . . .} and N = {n0 , n1 , . . .}. If k is even, select a point mi ∈ Mr dom fk , where i is the smallest natural number such that mi ∈ / dom fk . We have that Ak ∪ {mi } ⊆ M and so is an element of Age(N ) by assumption. As N is MB-homogeneous it has the MEP and so fk can be extended ′ : Ak ∪ {mi } − → N . Restricting the codomain to the image of to a monomorphism fk+1 ′ ′ } extending fk . gives a bijective monomorphism fk+1 : Ak ∪ {mi } − → Bk ∪ {mi fk+1 fk+1 ¯ If k is odd, note that fk : Bk − → Ak is a bijective antimonomorphism. Select a point nj ∈ N r dom f¯k , where j is the least natural number such that nj ∈ / im fk . Therefore Bk ∪ {nj } ⊆ N and is an element of Age(M). As M is MB-homogeneous, use the ′ : Bk ∪ {nj } − → M. Restricting the BEP to extend f¯k to an antimonomorphism f¯k+1 codomain to the image once more delivers the required bijective antimonomorphism ′ f¯k+1 : Bk ∪ {nj } − → Ak ∪ {nj f¯k+1 } extending f¯k ; taking the inverse shows that fk+1 is a bijective homomorphism extending fk as required. Repeating this process countably many times, ensuring that each mi is in the domain and each nj in the image, provides a bijective homomorphism α : M − → N extending f . The converse direction is entirely analogous. We conclude the section by observing that due to Proposition 2.7 and Proposition 2.8, a MB-homogeneous structure is determined by its age up to bi-equivalence.  3  MB-homogeneous graphs  In this section, we focus on MB-homogeneous graphs in more detail. In this article, a graph Γ is a set of vertices V Γ together with a set of edges EΓ, where this edge set interprets a irreflexive and symmetric binary relation E. If {u, v} ∈ EΓ, we say that u and v are adjacent and write u ∼ v ∈ Γ. If {u, v} ∈ / EΓ, we say that {u, v} is a non-edge, that they are non-adjacent, and write u ≁ v. For a graph Γ, define the complement Γ̄ of Γ to be the graph with vertex set V Γ̄ = V Γ and edges given by u ∼ v ∈ Γ̄ if and only if u ≁ v ∈ Γ. For n ∈ N ∪ {ℵ0 }, recall that a complete graph K n on n vertices is a graph on vertex set V K n (with |V K n | = n) with edges given by u ∼ v ∈ K n if and only if u 6= v ∈ V K n . The complement of the graph K n is called the null graph on n vertices, and is denoted by K̄ n . Say that ∆ is an induced subgraph of a graph Γ if V ∆ ⊆ V Γ and u ∼ v ∈ ∆ if and only if u ∼ v ∈ ∆. In this paper, whenever we say ∆ is a subgraph of Γ, we mean that ∆ is an induced subgraph of Γ. The only exception is the case of a spanning subgraph; say that ∆ is a spanning subgraph of Γ if V ∆ = V Γ and u ∼ v ∈ ∆ implies that u ∼ v ∈ Γ. A logical place to start our investigation is by demonstrating some properties of MB-homogeneous graphs. Proposition 3.1. Let Γ be an MB-homogeneous graph. Then its complement Γ̄ is also MB-homogeneous.  14  Proof. We note that A ∈ Age(Γ) if and only if Ā ∈ Age(Γ̄). Since Γ is MB-homogeneous, it has the MEP and BEP by Proposition 2.5. Now suppose that A ⊆ B ∈ Age(Γ) and that f¯ : A − → Γ is an antimonomorphism. Any such f¯ preserves non-edges and may change edges to non-edges; so f¯ : Ā − → Γ̄ is a monomorphism. As Γ has the BEP, f¯ can be extended to an antimonomorphism ḡ : B − → Γ; this in turn induces a monomorphism ḡ : B̄ − → Γ̄ and hence Γ̄ has the MEP. The proof that Γ̄ has the BEP is similar. Following this, we can guarantee that certain subgraphs appear in an MB-homogeneous graph. Cameron and Nešetřil [9, Proposition 2.5] prove that every MM-homogeneous graph must contain an infinite complete subgraph; we expand this proposition. Corollary 3.2. Any infinite non-complete, non-null MB-homogeneous graph Γ contains both an infinite complete and an infinite null subgraph. Proof. Any MB-homogeneous graph is necessarily MM-homogeneous and hence it contains an infinite complete subgraph from the aforementioned result of [9]. By Proposition 3.1 we have that Γ̄ is also MB-homogeneous and so contains an infinite complete subgraph; the result follows from this. A consequence of this argument is that an MB-homogeneous graph Γ is neither a locally finite graph (where for all v ∈ V Γ, there are only finitely many edges involving v) nor the complement of a locally finite graph. In fact, we can say more than this. Recall that the diameter of a graph Γ is the greatest length of the shortest path between any two points u, v ∈ V Γ. The next result is a restatement of [9, Proposition 1.1(c)]; the proof follows as every MB-homogeneous graph is also an MH-homogeneous graph. Corollary 3.3 (Proposition 1.1(c), [9]). Suppose that Γ is a connected MB-homogeneous graph. Then Γ has diameter at most 2 and every edge is contained in a triangle.  We now examine cases where the graph is disconnected (and non-null to avoid triviality). It is shown in [9] that any disconnected MH-homogeneous graph is a disjoint union of complete graphs of all the same size. We use this result in conjunction with Corollary 3.2 to see that the only candidates for a disconnected MB-homogeneous graph must be disjoint unions of infinite complete graphs. Building on an observation of [31] that any disconnected MM-homogeneous graph is a disjoint union of infinite complete graphs, we classify disconnected MB-homogeneous graphs in our next result. F Proposition 3.4. Let Γ = i∈I Ki , where Ki ∼ = K ℵ0 for all i in some index set I. 1) If I is finite with size n > 1, then Γ is MM-homogeneous but not MB-homogeneous. 2) If I is countably infinite, then Γ is MB-homogeneous. Proof. In both cases, we note that every A ∈ Age(Γ) can be decomposed as finite F disjoint union of finite complete graphs; so we can write that A = kj=1 Cj , where Cj is a complete graph of some finite size. F 1) As |I| = n we note that k ≤ n for all A = kj=1 Cj in the age of Γ. Suppose that A ⊆ B ∈ Age(Γ) with B r A = {b}. We have two choices for b; either b is completely independent of A or b is related to exactly one Cj for some 1 ≤ j ≤ k. If it is the former, we can extend any monomorphism f : A − → Γ to a monomorphism g : B − →Γ by sending b to any vertex v ∈ V Γ r Af . If it is the latter, then we can extend any monomorphism f : A − → Γ to a monomorphism g : B − → Γ by sending b to a vertex 15  v ∈ Ki r Cj f , where j is defined as above. Hence Γ has the MEP. However, note that Γ does not embed an independent n + 1 set and so Γ is not MB-homogeneous by Corollary 3.2. 2) The proof that Γ is MM-homogeneous when I is infinite is as above. Assume then that A ⊆ B ∈ Age(Γ) with B r A = {b}, and let f¯ : A − → Γ be an antimonomorphism. We note that as A is finite then Af¯ is finite; since I is infinite, there will always exist i ∈ I such that Ki ∩ Af¯ = ∅. Therefore, regardless of how b is related to A, we can extend f¯ to an antimonomorphism ḡ : B − → Γ by mapping b to some v ∈ Ki , where i is as stated above. Hence Γ is MB-homogeneous by Proposition 2.5. Remark. We note that from Proposition 3.4 and Proposition 3.1 that the complement F of i∈N Kiℵ0 , which is the complete multipartite graph with infinitely many partitions each of infinite size, is also MB-homogeneous. F The proof that Γ = i∈N Kiℵ0 is MB-homogeneous relied on the existence of an independent element to every image of a finite antimonomorphism. Our aim now is to obtain some sufficient conditions for MB-homogeneity along these lines in order to construct some new examples. Definition 3.5. Let Γ be an infinite graph. • Say that Γ has property (△) if for every finite set U ⊆ V Γ there exists u ∈ V Γ such that u is adjacent to every member of U . • Say that Γ has property (∴) if for every finite set V ⊆ V Γ there exists v ∈ V Γ such that v is non-adjacent to every member of V . (See Figure 2 for a diagram.) property (△)  property (∴)  U  V  u  Γ  v  Figure 2: A diagram of Definition 3.5 We note here that if a graph Γ has property (△) then it is algebraically closed (see [13]); due to the self-complementary nature of these properties, if Γ has property (∴) then its complement Γ is algebraically closed. These properties prove to be sufficient for MB-homogeneity. Proposition 3.6. Let Γ be an infinite graph. If Γ has both properties (△) and (∴) then Γ is MB-homogeneous. Proof. Suppose once more that A ⊆ B ∈ Age(Γ) with B r A = {b}, and that f : A − →Γ is a monomorphism. As A is finite, Af is a finite set of vertices in Γ and so by property 16  (△) there exists a vertex v of Γ such that v is adjacent to every element of Af . We have then that v is a potential image point of b, and the map g : B − → Γ extending f and sending b to v is a monomorphism; so Γ has the MEP. Using property (∴) in a similar fashion shows that Γ has the BEP and so is MB-homogeneous by Proposition 2.5. Remark. The converse of this result is not true. Proposition 3.4 2) is an example of an MB-homogeneous graph with property (∴) but not property (△). Its complement is an example of an MB-homogeneous graph with property (△) but not property (∴). This shows that any algebraically closed graph Γ whose complement is also algebraically closed is MB-homogeneous. We now present a notion of equivalence that extends an idea of [13]. Definition 3.7. Let Γ, ∆ be two graphs. We say that Γ is bimorphism equivalent to ∆ if there exist bijective homomorphisms α : Γ − → ∆ and β : ∆ − → Γ. Remark. Informally, this definition says that you can start with Γ, and draw some number (possibly infinite) of extra edges onto Γ to get ∆; from there, you can draw some number (possibly infinite) of extra edges onto ∆, to get a graph isomorphic to Γ. This is a weaker version of bi-equivalence introduced in Proposition 2.8. Every pair of bi-equivalent graphs are bimorphism equivalent by definition, but the converse is not true; specifically, bimorphism equivalent graphs need not have the same age (see Corollary 3.10 and Example 3.11). Note that this definition is equivalent to saying that Γ, ∆ contain each other as spanning subgraphs. Justifying the name, this is an equivalence relation of graphs (up to isomorphism); we denote this relation by ∼b . The product αβ : Γ − → Γ of the two bijective homomorphisms induces a bimorphism on Γ, and so if Bi(Γ) = Aut(Γ) we have that α and β are necessarily isomorphisms. If this occurs, then [Γ]∼b is a singleton equivalence class. We show that bimorphism equivalence preserves properties (△) and (∴). Proposition 3.8. Let Γ, ∆ be bimorphism equivalent graphs via bijective homomorphisms α : Γ − → ∆ and β : ∆ − → Γ. Then Γ has properties (△) and (∴) if and only if ∆ does. Proof. Suppose that Γ has property (△) and X ⊆ V Γ. From this, there exists a vertex v ∈ V Γ adjacent to every element of X. As α is a homomorphism, Xα is a finite subset of V ∆ and vα is adjacent to every element of Xα; since α is bijective, every finite subset Y of V ∆ can be written as Xα for some X ⊆ V Γ. These observations show that ∆ has property (△). Using the fact that α is a bijective monomorphism, by Lemma 2.4 there exists an antimonomorphism ᾱ : ∆ − → Γ. Since Γ has property (∴), for any finite X ⊆ V Γ there exists a vertex w ∈ Γ independent of every element in X. Due to the fact that ᾱ preserves non-edges, any Y ⊆ V ∆ has a vertex x ∈ V ∆ independent of every element of Y ; and as α is bijective this happens for every finite set X ⊆ V Γ and so ∆ has property (∴). The converse direction is symmetric. In fact, we can say more about the connection between bimorphism equivalence and properties (△) and (∴). Proposition 3.9. If Γ, ∆ are two graphs with properties (△) and (∴), then Γ and ∆ are bimorphism equivalent.  17  Proof. Assume that Γ, ∆ are two graphs with properties (△) and (∴). We use a back and forth argument to construct a bijective homomorphism α : Γ → ∆ and a bijective antimonomorphism β̄ : Γ → ∆, which by Lemma 2.4 will be the converse of a bijective homomorphism β : ∆ → Γ. Suppose that f : {c} → {d} is a function sending a vertex c of Γ to a vertex d of ∆; this is a bijective homomorphism. Now set {c} = C0 , {d} = D0 , f = f0 , and assume that we have extended f to a bijective homomorphism fk : Ck → Dk , where Ci and Di are finite and Ci ⊆ Ci+1 and D ⊆ Di+1 for all 0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1. Furthermore, as both Γ and ∆ are countable, we can enumerate their vertices as V Γ = {c0 , c1 , . . .} and V ∆ = {d0 , d1 , . . .}. If k is even, select a vertex cj ∈ Γ where j is the smallest number such that cj ∈ / Ck . As ∆ has property (△), there exists a vertex u ∈ ∆ such that u is adjacent to every element of Dk . Define a map fk+1 : Ck ∪{cj } → Dk ∪{u} sending cj to u and extending f ; this map is a bijective homomorphism as any edge from cj to some element of Ck is preserved (see Figure 3 for a diagram of an example).  Ck  Dk cj  fk+1  u  Γ  ∆ Figure 3: k even in proof of Proposition 3.9  Now, if k is odd, choose a vertex dj ∈ ∆ where j is the smallest number such that dj ∈ / Dk . As Γ has property (∴), there exists a vertex v ∈ Γ such that v is independent of every element of Ck . Define a map fk+1 : Ck ∪ {v} → Dk ∪ {dj } sending c to dj and extending fk . Then fk+1 is a bijective homomorphism as fk is and every edge between c and Ck is preserved; because there are none. See Figure 4 for a diagram of an example of this stage.  Ck  Dk v  fk+1  dj  Γ  ∆ Figure 4: k odd in proof of Proposition 3.9  18  Repeating this process infinitely many times, ensuring that each vertex of Γ appears at an even stage and each vertex of ∆ appears at an odd stage, defines a bijective homomorphism α : Γ → ∆. We can construct a bijective antimonomorphism β̄ : Γ → ∆ in a similar fashion; replacing homomorphism with antimonomorphism and using property (∴) of ∆ at even steps and property (△) of Γ at odd steps. So the converse map β : ∆ → Γ is a bijective homomorphism and so Γ and ∆ are bimorphism equivalent. Recall that the random graph R is the countable universal homogeneous graph. It is well known (see [8]) that R is characterised up to isomorphism by the following extension property (EP): (EP) For any two finite disjoint sets of vertices U, V of R there exists x ∈ V R such that x is adjacent to every vertex in U and non-adjacent to any vertex in V . (see Figure 5.)  U  R  V  x Figure 5: (EP) in the random graph R  The next result extends [9, Proposition 2.1(i)] and establishes a complementary condition to the graph case of [13, Corollary 2.2]. Corollary 3.10. Suppose that Γ is a countable graph. Then Γ has properties (△) and (∴) if and only if it is bimorphism equivalent to R. Proof. As R has both properties (△) and (∴), the converse direction follows from Proposition 3.8, and the forward direction follows from Proposition 3.9. Remarks. These three results together show that the equivalence class [R]∼b is precisely the set of all countable graphs Γ with properties (△) and (∴). In particular, if Γ ∈ [R]∼b and Γ ≇ R (such a Γ exists: see Example 3.11), then Γ is bimorphism equivalent to R. This means that you can draw infinitely many extra edges on R (a necessity, see Proposition 2 of [8]) to get an MB-homogeneous graph Γ ≇ R, and then draw infinitely many more edges on Γ to get a graph isomorphic to R.  19  3.1  Constructing uncountably many examples  The aim of this subsection is to use these properties of MB-homogeneous graphs in order to construct uncountably many examples. To begin with, we construct an initial example of an MB-homogeneous graph that is not homogeneous. This is important; if we wish to describe 2ℵ0 many examples of MB-homogeneous graphs, then they cannot also be homogeneous; as there are only countably many non-isomorphic homogeneous graphs [19]. Example 3.11. Let P = (pn )n∈N0 be an infinite binary sequence with infinitely many 0’s and 1’s. Define the graph Γ(P ) on the infinite vertex set V Γ(P ) = {v0 , v1 , . . .} with edge relation vi ∼ vj if and only if pmax(i,j) = 0. From this, we can observe that: • if pi = 0 then vi ∼ vj for all natural numbers j < i; • if pi = 1 then vi ≁ vj for all j < i; where < is the natural ordering on N. Say that Γ(P ) is the graph determined by the binary sequence P . An example (where P = (0, 1, 0, 1, . . .)) is given in Figure 6.  v0  v1  v2  v3  v4  v5  v6  v7  v8  Figure 6: Γ(P ), with P = (0, 1, 0, 1, . . .) As P has infinitely many of each term, we have that for every finite subsequence A = {ai1 , . . . , aik } of P there exist natural numbers c, d > ik such that pc = 0 and pd = 1. This together with the manner of the construction ensures that Γ(P ) has both properties (△) and (∴) and is therefore MB-homogeneous. We check that for any sequence P satisfying the above conditions the graph Γ(P ) is not isomorphic to a homogeneous graph by using the classification of countable homogeneous graphs by Lachlan and Woodrow [19]. As Γ(P ) has both an edge and a non-edge it is neither K ℵ0 nor its complement K̄ ℵ0 . Since Γ(P ) is connected, it is not a disjoint union of complete graphs; as it has property (∴), it is not the complement of a disjoint union of complete graphs. From Corollary 3.2, as Γ(P ) is neither complete nor null it contains both an infinite complete subgraph and an infinite null subgraph; so it is not isomorphic to the Kn -free graph Hn or its complement H̄n for any n. Finally, we note that as no term p of P can be both 0 and 1 simultaneously, there is no vertex vp that is adjacent to {v0 } and non-adjacent to {v1 }. Hence Γ(P ) does not satisfy the extension property characteristic of the random graph. This accounts for all countable graphs in the classification; so Γ is not a homogeneous graph. 20  Remarks. Let P, Q be two infinite binary sequences with infinitely many 0’s and 1’s. Any such infinite binary sequence contains every finite binary sequence X as a subsequence. The finite induced subgraphs Γ(X) of Γ(P ) are those induced on V Γ(X) by the edge relation of P . As this is true for all such binary sequences P and Q, we conclude that Γ(P ) and Γ(Q) have the same age. It can be shown from here that for any two such sequences P and Q, then Γ(P ) and Γ(Q) are bi-equivalent (see Proposition 2.8). Throughout the rest of this section, any binary sequences P, Q have infinitely many 0’s and 1’s. This guarantees that any graph Γ(P ) determined by P has properties (△) and (∴). Many natural questions arise from this construction. Perhaps the most pertinent of these is: to what extent does Γ(P ) depend on the binary sequence P ? Answering this question will tell us exactly how many new MB-homogeneous graphs there are of this kind. We achieve a solution by investigating the automorphism group as an invariant of Γ(P ). Our first lemma establishes a convention for the zeroth place of such a sequence. We denote the neighbourhood set of a vertex v ∈ V Γ by N (v). Lemma 3.12. Suppose that Γ(P ) and Γ(Q) are the graphs on the vertex sets V = {v0 , v1 , . . .} and W = {w0 , w1 , . . .}, with edges determined by the binary sequences P = (pn )n∈N0 and Q = (qn )n∈N0 respectively, and assume that pi = qi for all i > 0. Then Γ(P ) ∼  = Γ(Q). Following this, we can take p0 = p1 for any binary sequence P without loss of generality; we adopt this as convention for the rest of the section. Now, if P is a binary sequence, denote the kth consecutive string of 0’s and 1’s by Ok and Ik respectively, and denote the vertex sets corresponding to these subsequences by V Ok and V Ik (see Figure 7). Furthermore, denote the graph induced by Γ(P ) on any subset V X of V Γ by Γ(X). 1  1  0  I1  v0  1  O1  v1  V I1  0  v2  1  0  I2  v3  V O1  1  v4  0 O2  v5  v6  V I2  v7  v8  V O2  1  0  I3  O3  v9  v10  V I3  V O3  Figure 7: Γ(P ), with P = (1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, . . .)  21  ...  Lemma 3.13. Let P = (pn )n∈N0 be a binary sequence, and let Γ(P ) be the graph determined by this binary sequence. Suppose that vj is a vertex in V In for some n ∈ N. Then Γ(N (vj )) ∼ = K ℵ0 . Proof. From the assumption that pj = 1, the observation of Example 3.11, and the definition of an edge in Γ(P ), we have that vj ∼ vk if and only if j < k and pk = 0; so N (vj ) = {vk : k > j, pk = 0}. As there are infinitely many 0’s in P , this set is infinite as j is finite. Now, take va , vb ∈ N (vj ). Here, va ∼ vb ∈ Γ(N (vj )) if and only if pmax(a,b) = 0; but pa = pb = 0 and so any two vertices of N (vj ) are adjacent. Lemma 3.14. Let P = (pn )n∈N0 be a binary sequence. Suppose that v, w are vertices in some V Ok = {vk1 , . . . , vkn } corresponding to some Ok = {pk1 , . . . , pkn }. Then N (v) ∪ {v} = N (w) ∪ {w} and Γ(N (v)) ∼ = Γ(N (w)). Proof. Define the sets X = {vj : j < i1 } and Y = {vk : k ≥ i1 , ak = 0}. Due to the construction of Γ in Example 3.11, we have that N (v) ∪ {v} = X ∪ Y = N (w) ∪ {w}. For all u ∈ V Γ(V Ok ), it is easy to see that N (u) = X ∪ (Y r {u}). Using a similar argument to the proof of Lemma 3.13, we have that Γ(Y r {u}) is an infinite complete graph for any u ∈ Γ(V Ok ), and every element in Y is adjacent to every element of X. For any v, w ∈ V Ok define a map f : X ∪ (Y r {v}) − → X ∪ (Y r {w}) fixing X pointwise and sending (Y r {v}) to (Y r {w}) in any fashion; this is an isomorphism between Γ(N (v)) and Γ(N (w)). Before our next proposition, recall that if there exists γ ∈ Aut(Γ) such that vγ = w, then the graphs induced on N (v) and N (w) are isomorphic. Furthermore, recall that an independent set U of a graph Γ is a maximum independent set if there does not exist a subset W of Γ such that W is a independent set with |W | > |U |. Proposition 3.15. Let P = (pn )n∈N0 be a binary sequence. Then Y Aut(Γ(P )) = (Aut(Γ(Ok )) × Aut(Γ(Ik ))) i∈N  the infinite direct product of automorphism groups on each Γ(Ok ) and Γ(Ik ). Proof. Using Lemma 3.12, we set the convention that p0 = p1 throughout; hence either O1 or I1 (depending on whether P starts with a 0 or 1) has size at least 2. For some i, write Oi = {pi1 , . . . , pin } and Ii = {qi1 , . . . , qim }, and we write V Oi = {vi1 , . . . , vin } and V Ii = {wi1 , . . . , wim }. We first show that any automorphism of Γ(P ) fixes both V Ok and V Ik setwise for all k ∈ N, using a series of claims. Then, we prove that any bijective map from Γ(P ) to itself fixing every point except those in a single V Ok (or V Ik ) and acting as an automorphism on that V Ok (or V Ik ) is an automorphism of Γ(P ). We begin with our first claim. Claim 1. If v ∈ V Oi and w ∈ V Oj with i 6= j, then Γ(N (v)) ≇ Γ(N (w)). Proof of Claim 1. Without loss of generality, suppose that i < j and so i1 < i2 < . . . < in < j1 < j2 < . . . < jm . We define the following sets: Xi = {vk : k < i1 } Xj  = {vk : k < j1 }  Yi = {vk : k ≥ i1 , pk = 0} Yj = {vk : k ≥ j1 , pk = 0}. 22  Lemma 3.14 asserts that N (v) = Xi ∪ (Yi r {v}) and N (w) = Xj ∪ (Yj r {w}). By reasoning outlined in Lemma 3.14, if va ≁ vb ∈ Γ(N (v)) then va , vb ∈ Xi . Note also that both Xi and Xj are both finite sets, and so any maximum independent set of Xi , Xj (and hence of N (v), N (w)) must be finite. Consider the sets A = {va : a < i1 , pa = 1} ∪ {v0 } and B = {vb : b < j1 , pb = 1} ∪ {v0 }, contained in Xi and Xj respectively. So if va , vd ∈ A, then pmax(a,d) = 1 and so va ≁ vd . Now, if vc ∈ Xi r A then pc = 0, and as vc 6= v0 it follows that pmax(c,0) = 0 and so vc ∼ v0 . Hence A is the maximum independent set in Xi ; using a similar argument, we can show that B is the maximum independent set in Xj . Since i < j there exists an Ik between Oi and Oj ; so there is a e ∈ N where in < e < j1 and pe = 1. Hence ve ∈ B r A and so |B| > |A|. Therefore, as Γ(N (v)) and Γ(N (w)) have different sizes of maximum independent sets, they are not isomorphic and this concludes the proof of Claim 1. This shows that there is no automorphism α of Γ(P ) sending a vertex v ∈ V Oi to a vertex w ∈ V Oj where i 6= j, as they have non-isomorphic neighbourhoods. We move on to our next claim. Claim 2. Suppose that v ∈ V Oi (with i ≥ 2) and w ∈ V Ij . Then there is no automorphism of Γ(P ) sending v to w. Proof of Claim 2. Define the set A = {va : a < i1 , pa = 1} ∪ {v0 } as in the previous claim. As i ≥ 2, there exists a c such that 0 < c < i1 with pc = 1. Hence we have that |A| ≥ 2 and so Γ(N (v)) has at least one non-edge. However, Γ(N (w)) ∼ = K ℵ0 by Lemma 3.13 and so there cannot possibly be an automorphism sending v to w. This proves the second claim. From these claims, we see that any automorphism α of Γ(P ) fixes V Oi setwise for i ≥ 2. Now, for k ≥ 2, any V Ik (or V Ik+1 ) sandwiched between V Ok and V Ok+1 , as V Ik (or V Ik+1 ) are the only vertices not adjacent to every vertex in V Ok and adjacent to every vertex in V Ok+1 . As V Ok and V Ok+1 are fixed setwise, we conclude that V Ik (or V Ik+1 ) is fixed setwise for k ≥ 2. Claim 3. V O1 and V I1 are fixed setwise by any automorphism of Γ(P ). Proof of Claim 3: There are two cases to consider; where P either begins with a 0 or a 1. Case 1 (p0 = 0). Suppose for a contradiction that there exists an α ∈ Aut(Γ) sending a v ∈ V O1 to a w ∈ V I1 . Due to our case we have |V O1 | ≥ 2 and so Γ(V O1 ) has an edge from v to some u ∈ V O1 . But w ∈ V I1 and thus is independent of everything in V O1 ∪ V I1 ; so the edge between v and u is not preserved by α and so V O1 is fixed setwise. From this, we can use a similar argument to above to show that V I1 is fixed setwise. Case 2 (p0 = 1). From this assumption, we have that |V I1 | ≥ 2 and so Γ(V I1 ) contains a non-edge. Hence for some v ∈ V O1 , the graph Γ(N (v)) contains a nonedge. Therefore, from Lemma 3.13 and Claim 1, Γ(N (v)) ≇ Γ(N (w)) for some w ∈ V Γ(P ) r V O1 and so V O1 is fixed setwise. As this happens, both V I1 and V I2 are fixed setwise. This concludes the proof of Claim 3.  23  So for any k ∈ N, we have that V Ok and V Ik are fixed setwise by any automorphism of Γ(P ). It remains to prove that any automorphism of Γ(V Ok ) or Γ(V Ik ) whilst fixing every other point in Γ(P ) is an automorphism of Γ(P ). Here, as Γ(V Ok ) is a complete graph and Γ(V Ik ) is a null graph, it follows that Aut(Γ(V Ok )) ∼ = Sym(|V Ok |) and ∼ Aut(Γ(V Ik )) = Sym(|V Ik |) for all k ∈ N. So suppose that f : Γ(P ) − → Γ(P ) is a bijective map that acts as an automorphism on some Γ(V Ok ) and fixes V Γ r V Ok . By Lemma 3.14 any two elements v, w ∈ V Ok have the same extended neighbourhood N (v) ∪ {v} = N (w) ∪ {w} (and Γ(N (v)) ∼ = Γ(N (w))). It follows that f preserves all edges and non-edges between V Ok and V Γ(P ) r V Ok and so it is an automorphism of Γ(P ). The proof that the bijective map g : Γ(P ) − → Γ(P ) that acts as an automorphism of some Γ(V Ik ) and fixes every other point is similar. This proposition guarantees the existence of countably many MB-homogeneous graphs. For instance, define a binary sequence P n = (pi )i∈N by the following: ( 1 if i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 1, n + 1, n + 3, . . . pi = 0 if i = n, n + 2, . . . Here, P n is a sequence of n many 1’s followed by alternating 0’s and 1’s. It follows that Aut(Γ(P n )) is the infinite direct product of one copy of Sym(n) together with infinitely many trivial groups; so Aut(Γ(P n )) ∼ = Sym(n). This is true for all n ≥ 2. So if m 6= n, then Aut(Γ(P m )) ≇ Aut(Γ(P n )) and so Γ(P m ) ≇ Γ(P n ). Furthermore, it is straightforward to see that if two monoids T, T ′ have nonisomorphic groups of units U, U ′ respectively, then T ≇ T ′ . Hence we have constructed several examples of non-isomorphic oligomorphic permutation monoids on bi-equivalent structures. By Proposition 1.6, this means that each of these oligomorphic permutation monoids have the same strong orbits. We now aim to use the basic framework established here to construct 2ℵ0 nonisomorphic examples of MB-homogeneous graphs. To achieve this, the idea is to add in pairwise non-embeddable finite structures into the age of some Γ(P ) to ensure uniqueness up to isomorphism. To this end, let A = (an )n∈N0 be a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers. We use A to recursively define a binary sequence P A = (pi )i∈N as follows; Base: 0 followed by a1 many 1’s. Inductive: Assuming that the nth stage of the sequence has been constructed, add a 0 followed by an+1 many 1’s to the right hand side of the sequence. For instance, if A = (2, 3, 5, . . .) then P A = (0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, . . .). Using such a binary sequence P A, we construct Γ(P A) in the fashion of Example 3.11. As P A has infinitely many 0’s and 1’s then Γ(P A), the graph determined by P A, is MBhomogeneous. The eventual plan is to induce finite graphs onto the independent sets induced on Γ(P A) by strings of consecutive 1’s in P A. By selecting a suitable countable family of pairwise non-embeddable graphs that do not appear in the age of Γ(P A), we ensure graphs of different ages. We prove two lemmas which form the basis for our construction of 2ℵ0 non-isomorphic examples of MB-homogeneous graphs. The second lemma is folklore; and the proof is omitted. 24  Lemma 3.16. Let P be any binary sequence. Then Γ(P ) does not embed any cycle graph of size m ≥ 4. Proof. Let V X = {vi1 , . . . , vim } ⊆ V Γ(P ), with m ≥ 4. Let X be the graph on V X with edges induced by Γ(P ), and suppose X is an m-cycle. As each vertex in a cycle graph has degree 2, we see that pij 6= 0 for ij > i3 . But this means that pi4 = . . . = pim = 1 and so vi4 has degree 0 in X. This is a contradiction and so X is not an m-cycle. Lemma 3.17. Let Cm and Cn be two cycle graphs with m, n ≥ 3. Then Cm embeds in Cn (and vice versa) if and only if m = n; in which case they are isomorphic.  Hence C = {Cn : n ≥ 4} is a countable family of pairwise non-embeddable graphs such that Age(Γ(P A)) ∩ C = ∅. Now suppose that A = (an )n∈N is a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers with ai ≥ 4; construct Γ(P A) in the usual fashion. We have that the size of each Ik in P A is ak . For each independent set Γ(IK ) ⊆ Γ(P A), draw an ak -cycle on its vertices, thus creating a new graph Γ(P A)′ (see Figure 8).  Figure 8: Γ(P A)′ corresponding to the sequence A = (4, 5, 6, . . .), with added cycles highlighted in red In particular, note that even with these additional structures, Γ(P A) is still MBhomogeneous as it has properties (△) and (∴). Since we have added so many structures to the age, we must be careful that we have not added extra cycles of sizes not expressed in the sequence A. The next proposition alleviates this concern. Proposition 3.18. Suppose that A = (an )n∈N is a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers with a1 ≥ 4 and suppose that m ≥ 4 is a natural number such that m 6= an for all n ∈ N. Then the graph Γ(P A)′ outlined above does not contain an m-cycle. Proof. Suppose that M ⊆ Γ(P A)′ is an m-cycle. Then the edge set of M is a combination of the edges of the graph induced by the finite subsequence Q = (qi1 , . . . , qim ) of P A (where i1 < i2 < . . . < im ) on V M = {vi1 , . . . , vim } and the edges from cycles added onto Γ(P A). We aim to show that M = Γ(In ) for some n ∈ N; that is, the only cycles of size ≥ 4 in Γ(P A)′ are precisely those we added in the construction. So assume here that Q contains a 0. As M is an m-cycle, dM (v) = 2 for all v ∈ M and so the only elements of Q that can be 0 are qi1 , qi2 and qi3 . We split our consideration into cases. 25  Case 1 (qi3 = 0). As we assume this, vi3 is adjacent to both vi1 and vi2 . If qi2 = 0, then vi2 ∼ vi1 creating a 3-cycle; this is a contradiction as M does not embed a 3-cycle. Therefore, qi2 = 1 and so vi1 is adjacent to some vij where 3 < j ≤ m. Since qij = 1 for all ij > i3 , it follows that the edge between vi1 and vij was induced by an added cycle. This implies that vi1 , vij ∈ V Γ(Ik ) for some k. Therefore, (bi1 , . . . , bij ) is a sequence of 1’s where i1 < i2 < . . . < ij are consecutive natural numbers; a contradiction as i1 < i3 < ij and so 1 = qi3 = 0. Hence, qi3 6= 0. Case 2 (qi2 = 0). Since this happens, vi2 is adjacent to vi1 and some vertex vij 6= vi1 ; so ij > i2 . If qij is 1, then vij is non-adjacent to any vertex vik with ik < ij and qik = 0, as the construction of Γ(P A)′ ensures that no edges are drawn in this case. But this is a contradiction as qi2 = 0 and vij ∼ vi2 . So qij must be 0 in this case; but ij > i2 and so qij = 1 by Case 1 and the argument preceding Case 1. This is a contradiction and so qi2 = 1. A similar argument to that of Case 2 holds for when qi1 = 0 and so no element of Q is 0. Hence, Q is made up of 1’s; however, it is still a possibility that these originate from from different Ik ’s. We now show however that every vertex of M comes from a single V Ik for some k. As no element of Q is 0, we conclude that two vertices in M have an edge between them only if they are contained in the same V Ik and have an edge between them in Γ(Ik ). As M is connected, we have that M ⊆ Γ(Ik ) for some k. Finally, as Γ(Ik ) is an ak -cycle embedding an m-cycle, we are forced to conclude that m = ak by Lemma 3.17 and so we are done. Corollary 3.19. Suppose that A = (an )n∈N and B = (bn )n∈N are two different strictly increasing sequences of natural numbers with a1 , b1 ≥ 4. Then Γ(P A)′ ≇ Γ(P B)′ . Proof. As A and B are different sequences there exists a j ∈ N such that aj 6= bj ; without loss of generality assume that aj < bj . Hence Γ(P A)′ embeds an aj -cycle; but as aj ∈ / B, by Proposition 3.18 Γ(P B)′ does not embed an aj -cycle. Hence Age(Γ(P A)′ ) 6= Age(Γ(P B)′ ) and so they are not isomorphic. These results prove the following: Theorem 3.20. There are 2ℵ0 many non-isomorphic, non-bi-equivalent MB-homogeneous graphs, each of which is bimorphism equivalent to the random graph R. Proof. As there are 2ℵ0 strictly increasing sequences of natural numbers we have continuum many examples of Γ(P A)′ by Corollary 3.19. As these graphs have different ages, this means we have constructed 2ℵ0 many non-isomorphic, non-bi-equivalent MBhomogeneous graphs. Furthermore, as each these examples has property (△) and (∴), they are bimorphism equivalent to R by Corollary 3.10. Remark. As a consequence of this, |[R]∼b | = 2ℵ0 . This means that there are 2ℵ0 pairwise non-isomorphic graphs Γ with the property stated in the remark after Corollary 3.10. Finally in this section, we utilise this technique of overlaying finite graphs in order to prove the second main theorem of the section. Recall that a graph Γ is n-regular if every v ∈ V Γ has degree n for some n ∈ N. Theorem 3.21. Any finite group H arises as the automorphism group of an MBhomogeneous graph Γ. 26  Proof. By a version of Frucht’s theorem [15] there exists countably many 3-regular graphs Γ such that Aut(Γ) ∼ = H; and so, as there are only finitely many graphs of size less than or equal to 5, there exists a 3-regular graph ∆ of size n ≥ 6 such that Aut(∆) ∼ = H. By the handshake lemma (see p5 [11]), such a graph must have a total of 3n/2 edges out of a total of (n2 − n)/2 possible edges; as n ≥ 6, this means that ∆ must induce at least 6 non-edges. Define a binary sequence P = (pi )i∈N by the following: ( 1 if i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 1, n + 1, n + 3, . . . pi = 0 if i = n, n + 2, . . . So P is a sequence of n many 1’s followed by alternating 0’s and 1’s. Using the notation established above for Lemma 3.12, it follows that |I1 | = n and |Ok | = |Im | = 1 for k ≥ 1 and m ≥ 2. Construct Γ(P ) on V Γ(P ) = {v0 , v1 , . . .} as illustrated in Example 3.11, and draw in edges on V I1 such that Γ(V I1 ) ∼ = ∆ to obtain a graph Γ(P )′ (see Figure 9).  v0  v1  v2  vn−2  vn−1  vn  vn+1  vn+2  vn+3  vn+4  Figure 9: Γ(P )′ , with ∆ highlighted in red In a similar fashion to Proposition 3.15, we aim to show that V Oi and V Ii are fixed setwise for any automorphism α of Γ(P )′ through a series of claims. Claim 1. If va ∈ V Oi and vb ∈ V Oj with i 6= j, then Γ(N (v)) ≇ Γ(N (w)). Proof of Claim 1. As |V Ok | = 1 for all k ∈ N, we have that V Oi = {va } and V Oj = {vb }. Assume without loss of generality that a < b. We define the following sets: Xa = {vk : k < a} Xb = {vk : k < b} Ya = {vk : k ≥ a, pk = 0} Yb = {vk : k ≥ b, pk = 0}. Lemma 3.14 applies in this situation; so N (va ) = Xa ∪ Ya and N (vb ) = Xb ∪ Yb . As in the proof of Proposition 3.15, any maximum independent set of N (va ), N (vb ) is contained in Xa , Xb respectively. Now, as Γ(V I1 ) ∼ = ∆ is a 3-regular graph on more than six vertices, there exists some maximal independent set M ⊆ V I1 of Γ(V I1 ) with size greater than or equal to 2.  27  Now we consider the sets A = {vc ∈ V Γ(P )′ : n − 1 < c < a, pc = 1} ∪ M and B = {vc ∈ V Γ(P )′ : n − 1 < c < b, pc = 1} ∪ M, the maximum independent sets of Xa and Xb respectively. As i < j, there exists d such that a < d < b with pd = 1. Hence vd ∈ B r A and so |B| > |A|. Since A, B are maximum independent sets of Γ(N (va )) and Γ(N (vb )) respectively with different sizes, we conclude that Γ(N (va )) ≇ Γ(N (vb )). This ends the proof of Claim 1. This shows that there exists no automorphism γ of Γ(P )′ sending any v ∈ V Oi to w ∈ V Oj with i 6= j. Claim 2. There exists no automorphism sending v ∈ V Ok to w ∈ V Im for all k, m ∈ N. Proof of Claim 2. We split the proof into two cases; where m = 1 and where m ≥ 2. For the latter, Γ(N (w)) ∼ = K ℵ0 for any w ∈ V Im with m ≥ 2 by Lemma 3.13. But as Γ(V I1 ) is not a complete graph, we have that Γ(V Ok ) contains a non-edge for all k ∈ N and so Γ(N (v)) ≇ Γ(N (w)) in this case. It remains to show that there is no automorphism sending v ∈ V Ok to w ∈ V I1 . In this case Γ(N (w)) is the union of an infinite complete graph K and G = Γ(NΓ(V I1 ) (w)), with every vertex of K connected to every vertex of G. This means any non-edge of Γ(N (w)) must be induced by G; as |NΓ(V I1 ) (w)| = 3, there are at most 3 of them for any w ∈ V I1 . However, as Xa contains V I1 , we have that Γ(N (v)) contains ∆ as an induced subgraph. By the reasoning above, ∆ has at least 6 non-edges and therefore so does Γ(N (v)). This means that Γ(N (v)) ≇ Γ(N (w)) for any v ∈ V Ok and any w ∈ V I1 and so we are done. Here, V Ok is fixed setwise for all k ∈ N; as |V Ok | = 1 for all such k we have that they are also fixed pointwise. As in the proof of Proposition 3.15, we have that any V Ik sandwiched between V Ok−1 and V Ok are the only vertices not adjacent to every vertex in V Ok and adjacent to every vertex in V Ok+1 . As V Ok and V Ok+1 are fixed setwise, we deduce that V Ik is fixed setwise (and hence pointwise) for k ≥ 2. We conclude that V I1 is fixed setwise under automorphisms of Γ(P )′ . Finally, we show that any bijective map γ : Γ(P )′ → Γ(P )′ acting as an automorphism on V I1 and fixing everything else is an automorphism of Γ(P )′ . As every v ∈ V Ok for all k is connected to each u ∈ V I1 and every w ∈ V Im for all m is independent of each u ∈ V I1 , we have that this map preserves all edges and non-edges of Γ(P )′ and so is an automorphism of Γ(P )′ . Using this together with Theorem 1.7, it follows that for any finite group U there exists an oligomorphic permutation monoid that has U as a group of units.  4  Worked examples  This section is devoted to determining MB-homogeneity of examples of homogeneous structures. This investigation concludes in a complete classification of countable homogeneous graphs that are also MB-homogeneous.  28  There are a variety of ways to demonstrate that a structure M is MB-homogeneous. Firstly, if M is a homogeneous structure where each finite partial monomorphism h is also a finite partial isomorphism, then M is MB-homogeneous as we can extend h to an automorphism. If M is a graph, then it suffices to show that M has properties (△) and (∴) by Proposition 3.6. Finally, recall the remarks of Proposition 2.5; to prove that M is MB-homogeneous it suffices to show that M has both the 1PBEP and the 1PMEP. All of these techniques are used at points in demonstrating the following positive examples. Example 4.1. Let Γ = K ℵ0 , the complete graph on countably many vertices; this graph is homogeneous [19]. Suppose that h : A − → B is a monomorphism between two finite substructures of Γ. As there are no non-edges to preserve, it must preserve non-edges and so h is a finite partial isomorphism. Using homogeneity of Γ, we extend h to an automorphism (and hence a bimorphism) of Γ and so Γ is MB-homogeneous. Its complement Γ̄, the infinite null graph, is also MB-homogeneous by Proposition 3.1. Example 4.2. A tournament is defined to be an oriented, loopless complete graph. By a similar argument to the complete graph in Example 4.1, every finite partial monomorphism of a tournament is a finite partial isomorphism. So the three homogeneous tournaments (Q, <), the random tournament T and the local order S(2) (see Cherlin [10]) are all MB-homogeneous. Example 4.3. Let R be the countable universal homogeneous undirected graph, also known as the random graph. It follows from the extension property characteristic to the random graph (see Figure 5) that R has properties (△) and (∴) (see Definition 3.5) and so is an MB-homogeneous graph by Proposition 3.6. Example 4.4. Let D be the Fraı̈ssé limit of the class of directed graphs without loops or 2-cycles, otherwise known as the generic digraph. It is well known that D satisfies the following extension property (see [1]). (DEP) For any finite and pairwise disjoint sets of vertices U, V, W of D, there exists a vertex x of D such that there is an arc from x to every element of U , an arc to x from every element of V , and x is independent of every vertex in W . (see Figure 10 for a diagram of an example.) Using this, we show that D is MB-homogeneous by demonstrating that it has the 1PMEP and 1PBEP in turn. Suppose that A ⊆ B ∈ Age(D) with B r A = {b} and that f : A − → D is a → − monomorphism. Decompose A into three disjoint sets b = {a ∈ A : b − → a}, − = {a ∈ A : b ← b← − a} and bk = {a ∈ A : b k a}. The fact that f is injective means → f, b← − f and bk f are pairwise disjoint subsets of V D. Using the DEP, that the sets b− → f , an arc from all select a vertex x ∈ V D such that x has an arc to all elements of b− ← − elements of b f and is independent of all elements of b k f . Define g : B − → D to be the map such that bg = x and g|A = f ; due to our choice of x, this is a monomorphism. So D has the 1PMEP. Now suppose that X ⊆ Y ∈ Age(D) with Y r X = {y} and that f¯ : X → D is an antimonomorphism. The fact that X is finite implies that im f¯ is finite, and so there exists a vertex w ∈ V D such that w is independent of all elements in X f¯ by the DEP. 29  U  V  x  W D Figure 10: Example of directed extension property in D Define ḡ : Y → D to be the function such that yḡ = w and ḡ|X = f¯; thanks to our choice of w, this is an antimonomorphism as all non-arcs are preserved. So D has the 1PBEP and hence D is MB-homogeneous by Proposition 2.5. Remark. It can be shown that the class of loopless digraphs with 2-cycles is a Fraı̈ssé class and hence there exists a unique homogeneous generic digraph with 2-cycles D ∗ , with a slightly different extension property (see Ch. 4 of [26]). With this, we can use a similar proof to above to show that D ∗ is MB-homogeneous. We continue our investigation by focusing on a class of structures known as cores; a structure M is a core if every endomorphism of M is an embedding. Every ℵ0 categorical structure has a core, and is homomorphically equivalent to a model-complete core [3]. Cores play an important role in the theory of constraint satisfaction problems; see Bodirsky’s habilitation thesis [4] for an introduction to the topic. Widely studied examples of cores include the countable dense linear order without endpoints (Q, <), the complete graph on countably many vertices K ℵ0 , and its complement K̄ ℵ0 . Proving that a structure M is a core is a useful way to show that a structure is not MBhomogeneous, as this next result shows. Lemma 4.5. Let M be a core such that there exists a finite partial monomorphism of M that is not an isomorphism. Then M is not MH-homogeneous (and hence, not MB-homogeneous). Proof. Let h be a finite partial monomorphism of a core M that is not an isomorphism. As any endomorphism of M is an embedding, we cannot extend h. We can use this result to detail some homogeneous structures that are not MBhomogeneous. Example 4.6. Let G be the countable homogeneous Kn -free graph for n ≥ 3. By results of Mudrinski in [28], it is shown that G is a core for all such n. As there are finite partial monomorphisms of G that are not isomorphisms (send any non-edge to an edge, for instance) we have that G is not MB-homogeneous by Lemma 4.5.  30  Example 4.7. The oriented graph analogues of the homogeneous Kn -free graphs are the Henson digraphs MT . These are the Fraı̈ssé limits of the class of all digraphs not embedding elements of some set T of finite tournaments. We show that MT is a core for any non-empty T containing tournaments of three or more vertices. Suppose for a contradiction there exists a γ ∈ End(MT ) such that for some independent pair of vertices v, w we have that vγ = wγ. Select a tournament Y ∈ T with the least number of vertices, and choose x, y ∈ Y such that x − → y. Create a oriented graph Y ′ by removing the arc between x and y, adding an extra vertex x′ and drawing an arc x′ − → y; see Figure 11 for an example. Y′  Y  x  y  x  y x′  Figure 11: Construction of Y ′ from Y in Example 4.7 Note that there is no tournament on any |Y |-set of vertices of Y ′ ; so Y ′ ∈ Age(MT ). By homogeneity of MT , we find a copy Y ′′ of Y ′ with v, w in place of x, x′ respectively, and a vertex u in place of y. The image of Y ′′ under γ is a oriented graph on |Y | vertices with vγ → uγ, that preserves all arcs involving v and u. It follows that Y ′′ γ ∼ = Y ; this is a contradiction as Y does not belong to the age of MT . So γ must be injective. Now assume that there exists an independent pair of vertices v, w ∈ MT such that vγ − → wγ. Select a Y ∈ T in the same fashion as before, choose two vertices x − → y of Y and remove this arc to obtain a oriented graph Z that embeds in MT . Via homogeneity of MT , we find an isomorphic copy of Z with v, w in place of x, y respectively. Hence the image of Z under γ induces a copy of Y in MT ; a contradiction as Y does not belong to the age of MT . So MT is a core for any such set of tournaments T ; therefore MT is not MB-homogeneous by Lemma 4.5. Example 4.8. Let S(3) be the myopic local order, defined as follows. Distribute ℵ0 many points densely around the unit circle such that for every point a there are no → b if and points b, c such that arg(a, b) = arg(b, c) = arg(c, a) = 2π 3 . Draw an arc a − only if arg(a, b) < 2π/3; note that this means that S(3) embeds no directed 3-cycles. We show that this structure is a core. Assume that there is an endomorphism γ of S(3) with aγ − → bγ for some independent pair of points a, b ∈ S(3). As this occurs, we have that both arg(a, b) and arg(b, a) > 2π/3. As arg(a, b) = 2π − arg(b, a), it follows that arg(b, a) < 4π/3. From this, there exists a point c such that arg(b, c) = arg(c, a) < 2π/3 and so b − → c and c − → a. The endomorphism γ then creates a directed 3-cycle (or a loop) and this is a contradiction. Now suppose that for some non-related pair a, b ∈ S(3), there is an endomorphism γ such that aγ = bγ. As before, we can find a point c ∈ S(3) such that b − → c and c − → a. As γ is an endomorphism it must preserve these relations and so bγ − → cγ and cγ − → aγ = bγ. Hence we have a directed 2-cycle and this is 31  obviously false; so S(3) is a core. Applying Lemma 4.5 again implies that S(3) is not MB-homogeneous. Finally, we note that as Proposition 2.5 is an if and only if statement, it is enough to prove that a structure M does not have the MEP or the BEP to show that M is not MB-homogeneous. Example 4.9. Let Dn be the generic In -free digraph for n ≥ 3; this is a homogeneous digraph [10]. We show here that Dn does not have the BEP, and hence is not MBhomogeneous by Proposition 2.5 So let T be some tournament on n − 1 vertices, and let U be the disjoint union of T with a vertex u. We note that T ⊆ U ∈ Age(Dn ). Let f¯ : T − → Dn be an antimonomorphism sending T to an independent set of n − 1 vertices in Dn ; such a substructure exists by construction. Then as antimonomorphisms preserve non-arcs, a potential image point for u in Dn must be independent of T f¯; this cannot happen as then Dn would induce an independent n-set. So Dn does not have the BEP and hence is not MB-homogeneous by Proposition 2.5. Example 4.10. Let H be the complement of the homogeneous Kn -free graph for n ≥ 3. We note that H contains R as a spanning subgraph (as it is algebraically closed) and so it is MM-homogeneous as it satisfies the MEP [9]. However, as H does not embed an independent n-set, it does not contain an infinite null graph. As H is not complete (as it has a non-edge), it follows that H is not MB-homogeneous by Corollary 3.2. Following this final example, we are able to present a complete classification of those homogeneous graphs that are also MB-homogeneous. Theorem 4.11. The only countably infinite homogeneous and MB-homogeneous graphs are the following: ℵ  • K ℵ0 and its complement K 0 ; F F • i∈N Kiℵ0 and its complement i∈N Kiℵ0 ;  • the random graph R.  Proof. We check every item in the classification of countably infinite, undirected homogeneous graphs given in [19]. We showed that those graphs on the list are MBhomogeneous in Example 4.1, Proposition 3.4 and Example 4.3. Any other disconnected homogeneous graph must be the a countable union of complete graphs or a finite union of infinite complete graphs; these are not MB-homogeneous by Proposition 3.4. The only other countable homogeneous graphs are the Kn -free graphs and their complements; these are not MB-homogeneous by Example 4.6 and Example 4.10. We end on some open questions concerning MB-homogeneous graphs in general. As we have seen, it would be an arduous task to classify MB-homogeneous graphs up to isomorphism; the idea of bimorphism equivalence represents the best hope to identify all MB-homogeneous graphs. A positive answer to the following question would constitute the best classification result possible for MB-homogeneous graphs, given the amount and range of examples above. Question 4.12. Is every countable MB-homogeneous graph bimorphism equivalent to one of the five graphs in Theorem 4.11? 32  Related to this question is the following: Question 4.13. Are there only countably many MB-homogeneous graphs up to bimorphism equivalence? Finally, we notice that every example of an MB-homogeneous graph in this article is also HE-homogeneous. This motivates our final question: Question 4.14. Is there a countably infinite MB-homogeneous graph that is not HEhomogeneous? Conversely, is there a HE-homogeneous graph that is not MB-homogeneous?  References [1] L. Agarwal. Reducts of the generic digraph. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 167(3):370–391, 2016. [2] M. Bhattacharjee, H. D. Macpherson, R. G. Möller, and P. M. Neumann. Notes on Infinite Permutation Groups. Number 1698 in Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer, 1998. [3] M. Bodirsky. The core of a countably categorical structure. In STACS 2005, pages 110–120. Springer, 2005. [4] M. Bodirsky. Complexity classification in infinite-domain constraint satisfaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1201.0856, 2012. [5] M. Bodirsky and J. Nešetřil. Constraint satisfaction with countable homogeneous templates. Journal of Logic and Computation, 16(3):359–373, 2006. [6] M. Bodirsky and M. Pinsker. Schaefer’s theorem for graphs. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 62(3):19, 2015. [7] P. J. Cameron. Oligomorphic permutation groups, volume 152. Cambridge University Press, 1990. [8] P. J. Cameron. The random graph. In The Mathematics of Paul Erdös II, pages 333–351. Springer, 1997. [9] P. J. Cameron and J. Nešetřil. Homomorphism-homogeneous relational structures. Combinatorics, Probability & Computing, 15(1-2):91–103, 2006. [10] G. L. Cherlin. The classification of countable homogeneous directed graphs and countable homogeneous n-tournaments, volume 621. American Mathematical Soc., 1998. [11] R. Diestel. Graph theory. Springer-Verlag, 2000. [12] I. Dolinka. The Bergman property for endomorphism monoids of some Fraı̈ssé limits. In Forum Mathematicum, volume 26, pages 357–376, 2014. [13] I. Dolinka, R. D. Gray, J. D. McPhee, J. D. Mitchell, and M. Quick. Automorphism groups of countable algebraically closed graphs and endomorphisms of the random graph. Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 160(3):437–462, 2016. 33  [14] R. Fraı̈ssé. Sur certaines relations qui généralisent l’ordre des nombres rationnels. Comptes Rendus de l’Acádemie des Sciences de Paris, 237(11):540–542, 1953. [15] R. Frucht. Graphs of degree three with a given abstract group. Canadian J. Math, 1:365–378, 1949. [16] D. Hartman, J. Hubička, and D. Mašulović. Homomorphism-homogeneous Lcolored graphs. European J. Combin., 35:313–323, 2014. [17] W. Hodges. Model Theory, volume 42. Cambridge University Press, 1993. [18] A. Kechris. Classical descriptive set theory, volume 156. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. [19] A. H. Lachlan and R. E. Woodrow. Countable ultrahomogeneous undirected graphs. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, pages 51–94, 1980. [20] D. Lockett and J. K. Truss. Generic endomorphisms of homogeneous structures. Groups and Model Theory, Contemporary Mathematics, page 217, 2012. [21] D. C. Lockett and J. K. Truss. Some more notions of homomorphism–homogeneity. Discrete Mathematics, 336:69–79, 2014. [22] H. D. Macpherson. A survey of homogeneous structures. Discrete Mathematics, 311(15):1599–1634, 2011. [23] D. Mašulović. Homomorphism-homogeneous partially ordered sets. 24(4):215–226, 2007.  Order,  [24] D. Mašulović. Some classes of finite homomorphism-homogeneous point-line geometries. Combinatorica, 33(5):573–590, 2013. [25] D. Mašulović and M. Pech. Oligomorphic transformation monoids and homomorphism-homogeneous structures. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 212(1):17– 34, 2011. [26] J. D. McPhee. Endomorphisms of Fraı̈ssé limits and automorphism groups of algebraically closed relational structures. PhD thesis, University of St Andrews, 2012. [27] J. Meakin. Groups and semigroups: connections and contrasts. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, 340:357, 2007. [28] N. Mudrinski. Notes on endomorphisms of Henson graphs and their complements. Ars Combinatoria, 96:173–183, 2010. [29] J. R. Munkres. Topology, volume 2. Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, 2000. [30] G. E. Reyes. Local definability theory. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 1(1):95–137, 1970. [31] M. Rusinov and P. Schweitzer. Homomorphism–homogeneous graphs. Journal of Graph Theory, 65(3):253–262, 2010.  34  [32] J. H. Schmerl. Countable homogeneous partially ordered sets. Algebra Universalis, 9(1):317–321, 1979. [33] B. Steinberg. A theory of transformation monoids: combinatorics and representation theory. The Electronic Journal of Combinatorics, 17(1):R164, 2010.  35

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
