Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_1803

Abstract:
A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration Antoine Amarilli1 , Pierre Bourhis2 , Louis Jachiet3 , and Stefan Mengel4 1 2 3  arXiv:1702.05589v2 [cs.DS] 5 May 2017  4  LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay; France antoine.amarilli@telecom-paristech.fr CRIStAL, CNRS UMR 9189 & Inria Lille; France pierre.bourhis@univ-lille1.fr Université Grenoble Alpes; France louis.jachiet@inria.fr CNRS, CRIL UMR 8188; France mengel@cril.fr  Abstract We study the problem of enumerating the satisfying valuations of a circuit while bounding the delay, i.e., the time needed to compute each successive valuation. We focus on the class of structured d-DNNF circuits originally introduced in knowledge compilation, a sub-area of artificial intelligence. We propose an algorithm for these circuits that enumerates valuations with linear preprocessing and delay linear in the Hamming weight of each valuation. Moreover, valuations of constant Hamming weight can be enumerated with linear preprocessing and constant delay. Our results yield a framework for efficient enumeration that applies to all problems whose solutions can be compiled to structured d-DNNFs. In particular, we use it to recapture classical results in database theory, for factorized database representations and for MSO evaluation. This gives an independent proof of constant-delay enumeration for MSO formulae with first-order free variables on bounded-treewidth structures. 1998 ACM Subject Classification F.2.2 Nonnumerical Algorithms and Problems Keywords and phrases circuits; constant-delay; enumeration; d-DNNFs; MSO Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs...  1  Introduction  When a computational problem has a large number of solutions, computing all of them at once can take an unreasonable amount of time. Enumeration algorithms are an answer to this challenge, and have been studied in many contexts (see [35] for an overview). They generally consist of two phases. First, in a preprocessing phase, the input is read and indexed. Second, in an enumeration phase that uses the result of the preprocessing, the solutions are computed one after the other. The goal is to limit the amount of time between each pair of successive solutions, which is called delay. We focus on a well-studied class of efficient enumeration algorithms with very strict requirements: the preprocessing must be linear in the input size, and the delay between successive solutions must be constant. Such algorithms have been studied in particular for database applications, to enumerate query answers (see [18, 5, 19, 6, 7, 23, 24] and the recent survey [32]), or to enumerate the tuples of factorized database representations [28]. One shortcoming of these existing enumeration algorithms is that they are typically shown by building a custom index structure tailored to the problem, and designing ad hoc © Antoine Amarilli; Pierre Bourhis; Louis Jachiet; Stefan Mengel; licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany  XX:2  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  Linear-time preprocessing phase (Sec. 3–5)  Enumeration phase (Sec. 6)  d-DNNF Prp. augmented Prp. normal Thm. normal Prp. compressed Prp. satisfying traces 3.9 d-DNNF 4.3 d-DNNF 5.4 d-DNNF 6.3 6.5 valuations (Def. 3.6) (Def. 4.2) (Def. 6.1) +OR-index v-tree Figure 1 Overview of the proof of Theorem 2.1  preprocessing and enumeration algorithms. This makes it hard to generalize them to other problems, or to implement them efficiently. In our opinion, it would be far better if enumeration for multiple problems could be done via one generic representation of the results to enumerate, reusing general algorithms for the preprocessing and enumeration phases. This paper accordingly proposes a new framework for constant-delay enumeration algorithms, inspired by the field of knowledge compilation in artificial intelligence. Knowledge compilation studies how the solutions to computational problems can be compiled to generic representations, in particular classes of Boolean circuits, on which reasoning tasks can then be solved using general-purpose algorithms. In this paper, we show how this knowledge compilation approach can be implemented for constant-delay enumeration, by compiling to a prominent class of circuits from knowledge compilation called deterministic decomposable negation normal form (in short, d-DNNF) [16]. These circuits generalize several forms of branching programs such as OBDDs [17] and were recently shown to be more expressive than Boolean circuits of bounded treewidth [12]. Further, there are many efficient algorithms to compute d-DNNF representations of small width CNF formulae for a wide range of width notions [11], and even software implementations to compute such representations for given Boolean functions [29, 13]. d-DNNFs are also intimately related to state-of-the-art propositional model counters based on exhaustive DPLL [20], to syntactically multi-linear arithmetic circuits [31], and to probabilistic query evaluation in database theory [21]. Our main technical contribution is an efficient algorithm to enumerate the satisfying valuations of a d-DNNF under a standard structuredness assumption, namely, assuming that a so-called v-tree is given [30]: this assumption holds in all works cited above. Our first main result (Theorem 2.1) shows that we can enumerate the satisfying valuations of such a circuit with linear preprocessing and delay linear in the Hamming weight of each valuation. Further, our second main result (Theorem 2.2) shows that, if we impose a constant bound on the Hamming weight, we can enumerate the valuations with constant delay. In these results we express valuations succinctly as the set of the variables that they set to true. To show our results, we consider d-DNNFs under a semantics where negation is implicit, i.e., variables that are not tested must be set to zero. In analogy to zero-suppressed OBDDs [36], we call this semantics zero-suppressed. The preprocessing phase of our algorithm rewrites such circuits to a normal form (Section 4) and pre-computes a multitree reachability index on them (Section 5), which allows us to enumerate efficiently the traces of the circuit, and obtain the desired valuations (Section 6). To enumerate for d-DNNFs in standard semantics, we show how to rewrite the input circuit to zero-suppressed semantics, using the structuredness assumption, and using a new notion of range gates to make the process efficient (Section 3). The overall proof is very modular; for an outline see Figure 1. Our second contribution is to illustrate how our circuit-based framework and enumeration results can be useful in database theory. As a proof of concept, we present two known results that we can extend, or recapture with an independent proof. First, we re-prove with our framework that the answers to MSO queries on trees and bounded-treewidth structures can be enumerated with linear preprocessing and delay linear in each assignment, i.e., constant-  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  delay if the free variables are first-order. This was previously shown by Bagan [5] with a custom construction, by Kazana and Segoufin [23] using a powerful result of Colcombet [14], and by Courcelle [15] in a more general setting (but with O(n log n) preprocessing) using AND/OR-DAGs (that share some similarities with DNNFs). Our proof follows our proposed approach: we compute a circuit representation of the output following the provenance constructions in [3], and simply apply our enumeration result to this circuit. Second, we show how d-DNNFs generalize the deterministic factorized representations of relational instances studied in database theory [28]. This allows us to give enumeration algorithms with linear preprocessing and constant delay for arbitrary deterministic d-representations, extending the enumeration result of [28]. The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives the main definitions and results. We then describe the preprocessing phase of our algorithm: we reduce the input circuit to zero-suppressed semantics in Section 3, rewrite it to a normal form in Section 4, and compute the multitree index in Section 5. We then describe the enumeration algorithm in Section 6. We present our two applications in Section 7 and conclude in Section 8. Due to space restrictions, many details and the proofs are found in the appendix.  2  Preliminaries and Problem Statement  Circuits. A circuit C = (G, W, g0 , µ) is a directed acyclic graph (G, W ) whose vertices G are called gates, whose edges W are called wires, which has an output gate g0 ∈ G, and where each gate g ∈ G has a type µ(g) among ∧ (AND-gate), ∨ (OR-gate), ¬ (NOT-gate), or var (variable). We represent the circuit with adjacency lists that indicate, for each gate g ∈ G, the gates having a wire to g (called the inputs of g), and the gates of which g is an input; the number of such gates is called respectively the fan-in and fan-out of g. The size |C| of this representation is then |G| + |W |. We require that variables have fan-in zero, that NOT-gates have fan-in one, and we will always work on negation normal form (NNF) circuits where the input of NOT-gates is always a variable. A circuit without NOT-gates is called monotone. We write Cvar for the set of variables of C. A valuation of Cvar is a function ν : Cvar → {0, 1}. A circuit defines a Boolean function on Cvar , that is, a function φ that maps each valuation of Cvar to {0, 1}. For any valuation ν, the image of ν by φ is defined by substituting each gate in Cvar by its value according to ν, evaluating the circuit using the standard semantics of Boolean operations, and returning the value of the output gate g0 . Note that AND-gates (resp., OR-gates) with no inputs always evaluate to 1 (resp., to 0) in this process. We call a gate unsatisfiable if it evaluates to 0 under all valuations (and satisfiable otherwise); we call it 0-valid if it evaluates to 1 under the valuation which sets all variable gates to 0. We say that ν satisfies C if φ maps ν to 1 (i.e., g0 evaluates to 1 under ν), and call ν a satisfying valuation. For enumeration, we represent a valuation ν of C as the set Sν of variables of Cvar that it sets to 1, i.e., {g ∈ Cvar | ν(g) = 1}. We call Sν an assignment, and a satisfying assignment if ν is a satisfying valuation. The Hamming weight |ν| of ν is the cardinality of Sν . Unlike valuations, assignments of constant Hamming weight are of constant size, no matter the size of Cvar . We write {} for the empty assignment, and write ∅ for an empty set of assignments. The main class of circuits that we will study are d-DNNFs [16], of which we now recall the definition. We say that an AND-gate g of a circuit C is decomposable if there is no pair g1 6= g2 of input gates to g such that some variable g 0 ∈ Cvar has a directed path both to g1 and to g2 : intuitively, a decomposable AND-gate is a conjunction of inputs on disjoint sets of variables. We say that an OR-gate g of C is deterministic if there is no pair g1 6= g2 of input  XX:3  XX:4  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  gates of g and valuation ν of C such that g1 and g2 both evaluate to 1 under ν: intuitively, a deterministic OR-gate is a disjunction of mutually exclusive inputs. A circuit C is a d-DNNF if all its AND-gates are decomposable, and all its OR-gates are deterministic. We will further study the subclass of d-DNNFs called structured d-DNNFs, consisting of the d-DNNFs having a v-tree [30]. A v-tree on a set S of variables is a rooted unranked ordered tree T whose set of leaves is exactly S. We write <T for the order on T in which the nodes are visited in a pre-order traversal. For a circuit C, we say that a v-tree T on the set Cvar is a v-tree of C if there is a mapping λ from the gates of C to the nodes of T such that: (i) λ maps the variables of C to themselves; (ii) for each wire (g, g 0 ) of C, the node λ(g) is a descendant of λ(g 0 ) in T ; and (iii) for each AND-gate g of C with inputs g1 , . . . , gn (in this order), the nodes λ(g1 ), . . . , λ(gn ) are descendants of λ(g), none of them is a descendant of another, and we have λ(g1 ) <T · · · <T λ(gn ). Note that having a v-tree implies (by point iii) that all AND-gates are decomposable. A structured d-DNNF is a d-DNNF C given with a v-tree T of C. Enumeration. As usual for efficient enumeration algorithms [32], we work in the RAM model with uniform cost measure (see, e.g., [2]), where pointers, numbers, labels for vertices and edges, etc., have constant size; thus an assignment has size linear in its Hamming weight. An enumeration algorithm with linear-time preprocessing computes a set of results S(I) from an input instance I. It consists of two parts. First, the preprocessing phase takes as input an instance I and produces in linear time an indexed instance I 0 and an initial state. Second, the enumeration phase repeatedly calls an algorithm A. Each call to A takes as input the indexed instance I 0 and the current state, and returns a result and a new state: a special state value indicates that the enumeration is over so A should not be called again. The results produced by the calls to A must be exactly the elements of S(I), with no duplicates. We say that the enumeration algorithm has linear delay if the time to produce each new output element E is linear in the size of E (and independent of the input instance I). In particular, when the output elements have constant size, each element must be produced with constant delay, which we call constant-delay enumeration. The memory usage of an enumeration algorithm is the maximum number of memory cells used during the enumeration phase (not counting the indexed instance I 0 , which resides in read-only memory), expressed as a function of the input instance size |I| and of the size |O| of the largest output (as in [5]). Note that constant delay does not imply a bound on memory usage, because the state can become large even if we only add a constant quantity of information at each step. Main results. Our main theorem on circuit enumeration is the following: I Theorem 2.1. Given a structured d-DNNF C with a v-tree T , we can enumerate its satisfying assignments with linear-time preprocessing, linear delay, and memory usage O(|O| · log |C|), where |O| is the Hamming weight of the largest assignment. If we fix a maximal Hamming weight k ∈ N, we can show constant-delay enumeration: I Theorem 2.2. For any k ∈ N, given a structured d-DNNF C with a v-tree T , we can enumerate its satisfying assignments of Hamming weight ≤ k with preprocessing in time O(|T | + k 2 · |C|), delay in O(k), and memory in O(k · log |C|), i.e., linear-time preprocessing and constant delay for fixed k. In both results, remember that |C| is the number of gates and wires of C. We prove our two results in Sections 3–6: the first three sections present the three steps of the linear-time  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  preprocessing algorithm, and the last one presents the enumeration algorithm. We then use the results for database applications in Section 7, in particular re-proving constant-delay enumeration for MSO queries with free first-order variables on bounded-treewidth structures. The memory bound in our results is not constant and depends logarithmically on the input. While we think that this is reasonable, we also show constant-memory enumeration for some restricted circuit classes: the details are deferred to Appendix F for lack of space.  3  Reducing to Zero-Suppressed Semantics  We start our linear preprocessing by rewriting the input circuit to an alternative zerosuppressed semantics where negation is coded implicitly. For this rewriting, we will use the structuredness assumption on the circuit, in a weaker form called having a compatible order: this is the first thing that we present. We will also extend slightly our circuit formalism, to concisely represent sets of inputs with range gates that use this order: we present this second. Last, we present the alternative semantics, and give our translation result (Proposition 3.9). Compatible orders.  Our structuredness requirement is to have a compatible order:  I Definition 3.1. An order for a circuit C is a total order < on Cvar . For two variables g1 , g2 ∈ Cvar , the interval [g1 , g2 ] consists of the variables g which are between g1 and g2 for <, i.e., g1 ≤ g ≤ g2 or g2 ≤ g ≤ g1 . The interval of a gate g is then [min(g), max(g)], where min(g) denotes the smallest gate according to < that has a directed path to g, and max(g) is defined analogously. In particular, the interval of any g ∈ Cvar is [g, g] = {g}. We say that the order < is compatible with C if, for every AND-gate g with inputs g1 , . . . , gn (in this order), for all 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n, we have max(gi ) < min(gj ); in particular, the intervals of g1 , . . . , gn are pairwise disjoint. Note that, if a circuit C has compatible order <, every AND-gate g is decomposable: if some g 0 ∈ Cvar had a directed path to two inputs of g then their intervals would intersect. Observe further that, given a structured d-DNNF C with a v-tree T , we can easily compute a compatible order < for C in linear time in T . Indeed, let < be the restriction to Cvar of the order <T on T given by pre-order traversal. Considering any suitable mapping λ from C to T , for any gate g, we know that min(g) is no less than the first leaf of T in < reachable from λ(g), and that max(g) is no greater than the last leaf reachable from λ(g). The intervals of the inputs g1 , . . . , gn to an AND-gate are then pairwise disjoint, because they are included in the sets of reachable leaves from the nodes λ(g1 ), . . . , λ(gn ) in the v-tree, and none of these nodes is a descendant of another, so they cannot share any descendant leaf. Hence, if we know a v-tree T for C then we know an order < for C. Augmented circuits.  We use compatible orders to define circuits with a new type of gates:  I Definition 3.2. For k ∈ N, we define a k-augmented circuit C as a circuit with a compatible order < and with k additional types of gates, called range gates: there are the = i-range gates for 0 ≤ i < k, and the ≥ k-range gates. These gates must have exactly two inputs, which must be variables of C (they are not necessarily different, so we allow multi-edges in circuits for this purpose). We talk of augmented circuits when the value of k does not matter. When evaluating a k-augmented circuit under a valuation ν, each = i-range gate g (resp., ≥ k-range gate g) with inputs g1 and g2 evaluates to 1 if there are exactly i gates (resp., at least k gates) in [g1 , g2 ] set to 1 by ν; note that g may be unsatisfiable if |[g1 , g2 ]| is too small.  XX:5  XX:6  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  Range gates are related to the threshold gates studied in circuit complexity (see e.g. [10]), but we only apply them directly to variables. We can of course emulate range gates with standard gates, e.g., ≥ 0-gates always evaluate to 1, and a ≥ 1-range gate on g1 and g2 can be expressed as an OR-gate g having the interval [g1 , g2 ] as its set of inputs. However, the point of range gates is that we can now write this in constant space, thanks to <. This will be important to rewrite circuits in linear time to our alternative semantics. Zero-suppressed semantics. We are now ready to introduce our alternative semantics for augmented circuits. We will do so only on monotone augmented circuits, i.e., without NOT-gates, because negation will be coded implicitly. We use the notion of traces: I Definition 3.3. An upward tree T of a monotone augmented circuit C = (G, W, µ, g0 ) is a subgraph (G0 , W 0 ) of C, with G0 ⊆ G and W 0 ⊆ W , which is a rooted tree up to reversing the direction of the wires. For all (g 0 , g) ∈ W 0 , we call g 0 ∈ G0 a child of g ∈ G0 in T , and call g the parent of g 0 in T ; note that g 0 is an input of g in C. A gate g ∈ G0 in T is an internal gate of T if it has a child in T , and a leaf otherwise. T is a partial trace if its internal gates are AND-gates and OR-gates and if its gates satisfy the following: for every AND-gate g in T , all its inputs in C are children of g in T ; for every OR-gate g in T , exactly one of its inputs in C is a child of g in T . Note that T cannot contain OR-gates with no inputs, and that its leaves consist of range gates, variable gates, and AND-gates with no inputs. We call T a trace of C if its root is g0 . We define traces as trees, not general DAGs, because we cannot reach the same gate in a trace by two different paths (remember that AND-gates in augmented circuits are decomposable). We can see each trace (G0 , W 0 ) of C = (G, W, µ, g0 ) as an augmented circuit (G0 , W 0 , µ, g0 ), up to adding to range gates in the trace their inputs in C, and we then have: I Observation 3.4. A valuation ν of a monotone augmented circuit C satisfies C if and only if ν satisfies a trace of C. Observe that we can check if a valuation ν of C satisfies a trace T simply by looking at the value of ν on the leaves of T ; the definition of ν outside the intervals of the leaves does not matter. We will change this point to define zero-suppressed semantics, where ν can only satisfy T if it maps to 0 all the other variables. We then call ν a minimal valuation of T : I Definition 3.5. Let C be a monotone augmented circuit, ν be a valuation of C, and T be a trace or partial trace of C. We call ν a minimal valuation of T if: For every variable g in T , we have ν(g) = 1; For every ./ i-range gate g in T with inputs g1 and g2 in C (where ./ ∈ {=, ≥} and i ∈ N), the number n of variables in [g1 , g2 ] that are set to 1 by ν satisfies the constraint n ./ i; All other variables of Cvar are set to 0 by ν. Note that this implies that ν satisfies T . We call ν a minimal valuation for a gate g of C (resp., for C) if it is a minimal valuation of a partial trace rooted at g (resp., at the output g0 ). Note that C may have two minimal valuations ν1 and ν2 whose assignments S1 and S2 are such that S1 ( S2 (see, e.g., Example 3.7 below). Minimality only imposes that, relatively to a trace T , the valuation sets to 0 all variables that are not tested in T . Minimal valuations allow us to define the zero-suppressed semantics of a monotone augmented circuit C: the satisfying valuations of C in this semantics are those that are minimal for some trace.  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel I Definition 3.6. A monotone augmented circuit C in zero-suppressed semantics captures the (generally non-monotone) Boolean function Φ mapping a valuation ν to 1 iff ν is a minimal valuation for C. We call S(C) the set of satisfying assignments of C in this semantics. We call C a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics if it satisfies the analogue of determinism: there is no OR-gate g with two inputs g1 6= g2 and valuation ν of C that is a minimal valuation for both g1 and g2 . (Decomposability again follows from the compatible order.) I Example 3.7. Consider the monotone circuit C whose output gate is an OR-gate with three inputs: x, y, and an AND-gate of y and z. The circuit C captures x ∨ y in standard semantics, and it is not a d-DNNF. C has three traces, having one minimal valuation each. In the zero-suppressed semantics, we have S(C) = {{x}, {y}, {y, z}}, and C captures the Boolean function (x ∧ ¬y ∧ ¬z) ∨ (¬x ∧ y). Further, C is a d-DNNF in that semantics. Zero-suppressed semantics makes enumeration easier, because it expresses negation implicitly in a very concise way. The name is inspired by zero-suppressed OBDDs [36, Chapter 8]: variables that are not tested when following a trace are implicitly set to 0. We can equivalently define the assignments S(C) of C inductively as follows: I Lemma 3.8. Let C be a monotone augmented circuit. Let us define inductively a set of assignments S(g) for each gate g in the following way: for all g ∈ Cvar , we set S(g) := {g}; for all ./ i-range gates g with inputs g1 and g2 , we set S(g) := {t ⊆ [g1 , g2 ] | |t| ./ i}; S for all OR-gates g with inputs g1 , . . . , gn , we set S(g) := 1≤i≤n S(gi ) (with S(g) = ∅ if g has no inputs); for all AND-gates g with inputs g1 , . . . , gn , we set S(g) := {S1 ∪ · · · ∪ Sn | (S1 , . . . , Sn ) ∈ Q 1≤i≤n S(gi )} (with S(g) = {{}} if g has no inputs); observe that the unions are always disjoint because C has a compatible order. Then, for any gate g, the set S(g) contains exactly the assignments that describe a minimal valuation for g. In particular, for g0 the output gate of C, the set S(g0 ) is exactly S(C). We can now state our main reduction result for this section: we can rewrite any d-DNNF to an equivalent d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics, by introducing ≥ 0-range gates to write explicitly that the variables not tested in a trace are unconstrained: I Proposition 3.9. Given a d-DNNF circuit C and a compatible order <, we can compute in linear time a monotone 0-augmented circuit C ∗ having < as a compatible order, such that C ∗ is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics and such that S(C ∗ ) is exactly the set of satisfying assignments of C.  4  Reducing to Normal Form Circuits  In this section, given Proposition 3.9, we work on a monotone 0-augmented d-DNNF circuit C in zero-suppressed semantics, with a compatible order < to define the semantics of range gates. We present our next two preprocessing steps for the enumeration of the assignments S(C) of C: restricting our attention to valuations of the right Hamming weight (for Theorem 2.2 only), and bringing C to a normal form that makes enumeration easier. Homogenization. Our input augmented circuit C in zero-suppressed semantics may have satisfying assignments of arbitrary Hamming weight. When proving Theorem 2.1, this is intended, and the construction that we are about to describe is not necessary. However, when proving Theorem 2.2 about enumerating valuations of constant weight, we need to restrict  XX:7  XX:8  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  our attention to such valuations, to ensure constant delay. We do so using the following homogenization result, adapted from the technique of Strassen [33]: I Proposition 4.1. Given k ∈ N and a monotone augmented d-DNNF circuit C in zerosuppressed semantics with compatible order <, we can construct in time O(k 2 ·|C|) a monotone augmented d-DNNF circuit C 0 in zero-suppressed semantics with compatible order < such that S(C 0 ) = {t ∈ S(C) | |t| ≤ k}. Proof sketch. We create k +2 copies of each gate g, with each copy capturing the assignments of a specific weight from 0 to k inclusive (or, for the k + 2-th copy, the assignments with weight > k). In particular, for ≥ 0-gates g, for 0 ≤ i ≤ k, we use an = i-gate for the copy of g capturing weight i. We then re-wire the circuit so that weights are correctly preserved. J Note that this is the only place where our preprocessing depends on k: in particular, for constant k, the construction is linear-time. This result allows us to assume in the sequel that the set of assignments of the circuit in zero-suppressed semantics contains precisely the valuations that we are interested in, i.e., those that have suitable Hamming weight. Normal form. Now that we have focused on the interesting valuations of our circuit C, we can bring it to our desired normal form: I Definition 4.2. A normal circuit C is a monotone augmented circuit such that: C is arity-two, i.e., each gate has fan-in at most two. C is ∅-pruned, i.e., no gate g is unsatisfiable (i.e., each gate has some minimal valuation). C is {}-pruned, i.e., no gate g is 0-valid (i.e., the valuation that sets all variables to 0 is not a minimal valuation for any gate). C is collapsed, i.e., it has no AND-gate with fan-in 1. C is discriminative, i.e., for every OR-gate g with an input that is not an OR-gate (we call g an exit), g has fan-in 1, fan-out 1, and the one gate with g as input is an OR-gate. C is a normal d-DNNF if it is additionally a d-DNNF in the zero-suppressed semantics. The pruned requirements slightly weaken the expressiveness of normal circuits C, because they forbid that S(C) = ∅ or that {} ∈ S(C). These cases will be easy to handle separately. The main result of this section is then the following: I Proposition 4.3. Given a monotone augmented d-DNNF circuit C in zero-suppressed semantics with compatible order < and with S(C) 6= ∅ and S(C) 6= {{}}, we can build in O(|C|) a normal d-DNNF C 0 , with < as a compatible order, such that S(C 0 ) = S(C)\{{}}. Proof sketch. We reuse the construction of Proposition 4.1 with k = 1 to split the gates so that they are not 0-valid, we eliminate bottom-up the unsatisfiable gates, we make C arity-two in a straightforward way, we collapse all AND-gates with fan-in 1, and we make C discriminative by inserting new OR-gates (i.e., the exits) on all wires from non-OR-gates to OR-gates. J This result allows us to assume in the sequel that we are working with normal d-DNNFs.  5  Indexing OR-Components  This section presents the last step of our preprocessing. Remember that we now work with a normal d-DNNF, and we want to enumerate its set of assignments. Intuitively, this last preprocessing will help us to enumerate the choices that can be made at OR-gates. Formally, we will work on the OR-components of our circuit:  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel I Definition 5.1. The OR-component K of an OR-gate g in a normal circuit C is the set of OR-gates that can be reached from g by going only through OR-gates, following wires in either direction. We abuse notation and also see K as a DAG, whose vertices are the gates of K, and whose edges are the wires between them. Recall from Definition 4.2 that, as C is discriminative, all gates of an OR-component K with no inputs in K must be exits; we call them the exits of K. For a gate g in K, the exits of g are the gates of K that have a directed path to g in K; intuitively, they are the “possible choices” for a partial trace rooted at g. Our goal is to preprocess each OR-component of C to be able to enumerate efficiently the exits of all OR-gates of C. This enumeration task is tricky, however: exploring K naively when enumerating would take time dependent of C, but materializing a reachability index would take quadratic preprocessing time. Thus, we design an efficient indexing scheme, using the fact that OR-components are multitrees: I Definition 5.2. A DAG G is a multitree if it has no pair n = 6 n0 of vertices such that there 0 are two different directed paths from n to n . In particular, forests are multitrees, and so are polytrees (DAGs with no undirected cycles). I Lemma 5.3. For any normal d-DNNF C, each OR-component of C is a multitree. We can then prepare the enumeration of exits of gates in OR-components, by designing an efficient and generic indexing scheme on multitrees (see Appendix C). We deduce: I Theorem 5.4. Given a normal d-DNNF C, we can compute in O(|C|) a structure called OR-index allowing us to do the following: given an OR-gate g of C, enumerate the exits of g in its OR-component K, with constant delay and memory usage O(log |K|).  6  Enumerating Assignments  We have described in the previous sections our linear-time preprocessing on the input circuit: this produces a normal d-DNNF C together with an OR-index, and we wish to enumerate its assignments S(C) in zero-suppressed semantics. In this section, we show that we can enumerate the elements of S(C), producing each assignment t with delay O(|t|). To prove this, we will go back to our definition of zero-suppressed semantics in Section 3, namely, the minimal valuations of the traces of C (recall Definition 3.3). We will proceed in two steps. First, we use our preprocessing and the OR-index to show an efficient enumeration scheme for the traces of C, in a compact representation called compressed traces. Second, we show how to enumerate efficiently the minimal valuations of a compressed trace. Compressed traces. We cannot enumerate traces directly because they can be arbitrarily large (e.g., contain long paths of OR-gates) even for assignments of small weight. We accordingly define compressed traces as a variant of traces that collapse such paths: I Definition 6.1. An OR-path of a monotone augmented circuit C = (G, W, µ, g0 ) is a path from g ∈ G to g 0 ∈ G where all intermediate gates are OR-gates; in particular if (g, g 0 ) ∈ W then there is an OR-path from g to g 0 . A compressed upward tree of C is a pair (G0 , W 0 ) where G0 ⊆ G and where W 0 ⊆ G0 × G0 is such that for each (g, g 0 ) ∈ W 0 there is an OR-path from g to g 0 : we require that T is a rooted tree up to reversing the direction of the edges. T is a compressed partial trace if its internal gates are AND-gates and OR-gates such that: for every AND-gate g in T , all its inputs in C are children of g in T ; for every exit g in T (it is an OR-gate), its one input in C is a child of g in T ;  XX:9  XX:10  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration for every non-exit OR-gate g in T , exactly one of its exits g 0 in C is a child of g in T . We write |T | := |G0 |. We call T a compressed trace of C if its root is g0 . The minimal valuations of a compressed trace are defined like for non-compressed traces (Definition 3.5). The use of compressed traces is that their size is linear in that of their minimal valuations: I Lemma 6.2. For any compressed trace T of a normal circuit C and minimal valuation ν for T and C, we have |T | ≤ 6 · |ν|. From a trace T in a normal d-DNNF C, we can clearly define a compressed trace T 0 with the same leaves, as follows. Whenever T contains an OR-gate g whose parent gate g 0 in T is not an OR-gate (or when g is the root of T ), as g cannot be an exit, we know that there is a OR-path in T from g to an exit g 00 of g in its OR-component. We “compress” this OR-path in T 0 as an edge from g to g 00 . Conversely, given a compressed trace T 0 , we can fill it to a trace T with the same leaves, by replacing each edge from g to g 0 by a witnessing OR-path; and there is only one way to do so because OR-components in C are multitrees (Lemma 5.3). Hence, there is a bijection between traces and compressed traces that preserves the set of leaves. As the minimal valuations of traces and compressed traces are defined in the same way from their set of leaves, we can simply enumerate compressed traces instead of traces. The following shows that we can perform enumeration of the compressed traces efficiently: I Proposition 6.3. Given a normal d-DNNF C with its OR-index, we can enumerate its compressed traces, with the delay to produce each compressed trace T being in O(|T |). In particular, if all compressed traces have constant size, then the delay is constant. Proof sketch. At each AND-gate, we enumerate the lexicographic product of the partial traces of its two children; at each OR-gate, we enumerate its exits using the OR-index. J Enumerating valuations of a compressed trace. We now show how, given a compressed trace T , we can enumerate its minimal valuations (recall Definition 3.5). Restricting our attention to the leaves of T , we can rephrase our problem in the following way: I Definition 6.4. The assignment enumeration problem for a total order < on gates Cvar is as follows: given pairwise disjoint intervals [g1− , g1+ ], . . . , [gn− , gn+ ], and cardinality constraints ./1 ii , . . . , ./n in , where 0 < ij ≤ [gj− , gj+ ] and ./j ∈ {=, ≥}, enumerate the values of the products t1 × · · · × tn for all the assignments of the tj ⊆ [gj− , gj+ ] such that |tj | ./j ij for all j. Indeed, remember that, as C is {}-pruned, the leaves of T consist of variables and range gates, and their intervals are pairwise disjoint thanks to decomposability. A ./ i-gate with inputs g − , g + codes the interval [g − , g + ] with cardinality constraint ./ i, and a variable g simply codes [g, g] with constraint = 1. Further, thanks to {}-pruning, we know that no range gate is labeled with = 0 or ≥ 0, and thanks to ∅-pruning, we know that no range gate is labeled with an infeasible cardinality constraint. We claim: I Proposition 6.5. We can enumerate the solutions to the assignment enumeration problem for < on Cvar , with each solution t being produced with delay linear in its size |t|. Again, this is constant-delay when all solutions have size bounded by a constant. Proof sketch. We enumerate the possible assignments of weights to intervals with constantdelay, to reduce to the case where all cardinality constraints are equalities. We then enumerate the assignments in lexicographic order, using an existing scheme [25, Section 7.2.1.3] to enumerate the assignments in each interval. J  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  We have now concluded the proof of Theorem 2.1 and 2.2: refer back to Figure 1 for an overview of the proof of Theorem 2.1. Given our input d-DNNF C and v-tree T rewritten to a compatible order, we rewrite C to an equivalent normal d-DNNF and compute the OR-index. We then enumerate compressed traces, and enumerate the valuations for each trace. The proof of Theorem 2.2 is the same except that we additionally use Proposition 4.1 before Proposition 4.3 to restrict to valuations of Hamming weight ≤ k.  7  Applications  We now present two applications of our main results. Our first application recaptures the well-known enumeration results for MSO queries on trees [5, 22]. The second application describes links to factorized databases and strengthens the enumeration result of [28]. MSO enumeration. Recall that the class of monadic second-order formulae (MSO) consists of first-order logical formulae extended with quantification over sets, see e.g. [26]. The enumeration problem for a fixed MSO formula φ(X1 , . . . , Xk ) with free second-order variables, given a structure I, is to enumerate the answers of φ on I, i.e., the k-tuples (B1 , . . . , Bk ) of subsets of the domain of I such that I satisfies φ(B1 , . . . , Bk ). We measure the data complexity of this task, i.e., its complexity in the input structure, with the query being fixed. It was shown by Bagan [5] that MSO query enumeration on trees and bounded treewidth structures can be performed with linear-time preprocessing and delay linear in each MSO assignment; in particular, if the free variables of the formula are first-order, then the delay is constant. This latter result was later re-proven by Kazana and Segoufin [23]. We show how to recapture this theorem from our main results. From the results of Courcelle and standard techniques (see, e.g., [22], Theorem 6.3.1 and Section 6.3.2), we restrict to binary trees. I Definition 7.1. Let Γ be a finite alphabet. A Γ-tree T is a rooted unordered binary tree where each node n ∈ T carries a label in Γ. We abuse notation and identify T to its node set. MSO formulae on Γ-trees are written on the signature consisting of one binary predicate for the edge relation and unary predicates for each label of Γ. Let φ(X1 , . . . , Xk ) be an MSO formula on Γ-trees, and let T be a Γ-tree. We will show our enumeration result by building a structured circuit capturing the assignments of φ on T : I Definition 7.2. A singleton on X1 , . . . , Xk and T is an expression of the form hXi : ni with n ∈ T . An assignment on X1 , . . . , Xk and T is a set S of singletons: it defines a k-tuple (B1S , . . . , BkS ) of subsets of T by setting BiS := {n ∈ T | hXi : ni ∈ S} for each i. The assignments of φ on T are the assignments S such that T satisfies φ(B1S , . . . , BkS ). We will enumerate assignments instead of answers: this makes no difference because we can always rewrite each assignment in linear time to the corresponding answer. We now state the key result: we can efficiently build circuits (with singletons as variable gates) that capture the assignments to MSO queries. (While these circuits are not augmented circuits, they are decomposable, so the definition of zero-suppressed semantics clearly extends.) I Theorem 7.3. For any fixed MSO formula φ(X1 , . . . , Xk ) on Γ-trees, given a Γ-tree T , we can build in time O(|T |) a monotone d-DNNF circuit C in zero-suppressed semantics whose set S(C) of assignments (as in Definition 3.6) is exactly the set of assignments of φ on T . Proof sketch. We simplify φ to have a single free variable and limit to assignments on leaves as in [5], and rewrite φ to a deterministic tree automaton A using the result of Thatcher and  XX:11  XX:12  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  Wright [34], in time independent of T (though the runtime is generally nonelementary in φ). We then compute our circuit as a variant of the provenance circuits in our earlier work [3], observing that it is a d-DNNF thanks to the determinism of the automaton as in [4]. This second step is in O(|A| · |T |), so linear in T . Appendix E.1 gives a self-contained proof. J Note that the resulting circuit is already in zero-suppressed semantics, and has no range gates. By continuing as in the proof of Theorem 2.1 (for free second-order variables) or of Theorem 2.2 (for free first-order variables), we deduce the MSO enumeration results of [5, 23]. Note that, once we have computed the tree automaton for the query and the circuit representation, our proof of the enumeration result is completely query-agnostic: we simply apply our enumeration construction on the circuit. Our proof also does not depend on the factorization forest decomposition theorem of [14] used by [23]; it consists only of the simple circuit manipulation and indexing that we presented in Sections 4–6. Note that the delay is in O(k · |T |), with no large hidden constants, and O(k) for first-order variables. A limitation of our approach is that our memory usage bound includes a logarithmic factor in T , whereas [5, 23] show constant-memory enumeration. However, we can show that the circuit computed in Theorem 7.3 satisfies an upwards-determinism condition that allow us to replace the indexing scheme of Theorem 5.4 (our memory bottleneck) by a more efficient index. We can thus reprove the constant-memory enumeration of [5, 23] (see Appendix F). Factorized representations. Our second application is the factorized representations of [28], a concise way to represent database relations [1] by “factoring out” common parts. The atomic factorized relations are the empty relation ∅, the relation hi containing only the empty tuple, and singletons hA : ai where A is an attribute and a is an element. Larger relations are built using the relational union and Cartesian product operators on sub-relations with compatible schemas. For example, hA1 : a1 i × (hA2 : a2 i ∪ hA2 : a02 i) is a factorized representation of the relation on attributes A1 , A2 containing the tuples (a1 , a2 ) and (a1 , a02 ). A d-representation is a factorized representation given as a DAG, to reuse common sub-expressions. We show that d-representations can be seen as circuits in zero-suppressed semantics: I Lemma 7.4. For any d-representation D, let C be the monotone circuit obtained by replacing × and ∪ by AND and OR, replacing ∅ and hi by AND-gates and OR-gates with no inputs, and keeping singletons as variables. Then all AND-gates of C are decomposable, and S(C) (defined as in Section 3) is exactly the database relation represented by D. Hence, our results in Theorem 2.2 can be rephrased in terms of factorized representations: I Theorem 7.5. The tuples of a deterministic d-representation D over a schema S can be enumerated with linear-time preprocessing, delay O(|S|), and memory O(|S| log |D|). Note that the existing enumeration result on factorized representations (Theorem 4.11 of [28]) achieves a constant memory bound, unlike ours. However, this existing result applies only to deterministic d-representations that are normal (Definition 4.6 of [28]), whereas ours does not assume this. Normal d-representations are intuitively pruned and collapsed circuits where no OR-gate is an input to an OR-gate, which avoids, e.g., the need for the constructions of Section 5. Observe that the circuits that we build for MSO queries are not normal in this sense, so we cannot prove Theorem 7.3 directly from Theorem 4.11 of [28].  8  Conclusion  We have studied how to enumerate satisfying valuations of circuits, under the structuredness, decomposability, and determinism conditions introduced in AI: we have shown that  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  enumeration can be performed with linear preprocessing and delay linear in each valuation (so constant delay for valuations of constant Hamming weight). We have given two example applications of this result: factorized databases, and an independent proof of the MSO query enumeration results of [5, 22]. Beyond these applications, however, our method implies efficient enumeration results for all problems studied in knowledge compilation, when they can be compiled to structured d-DNNFs (refer back to the Introduction for examples). A natural question is whether our constructions can be extended for other tasks, e.g., computing the i-th valuation [5, 8]; managing updates on the structure [27]; or enumerating valuations in order of weight, or in lexicographic order: this latter problem is open for MSO [32, Section 6.1] though results are known for factorized representations following an f-tree [9]. Another direction is to strengthen our result to constant-memory enumeration on all d-DNNF circuits, or lift some hypotheses on the input circuits. We also intend to study a practical implementation, which we believe to be realistic since our construction only performs simple and modular transformations on the input circuits, and has no hidden large constants. Acknowledgements. This work was partly funded by the French ANR Aggreg project, by the CPER Nord-Pas de Calais/FEDER DATA Advanced data science and technologies 2015-2020, by the PEPS JCJC INS2I 2017 CODA, and by the Télécom ParisTech Research Chair on Big Data and Market Insights.  XX:13  XX:14  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  References 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26  Serge Abiteboul, Richard Hull, and Victor Vianu. Foundations of databases. AddisonWesley, 1995. Alfred V. Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. The Design and Analysis of Computer Algorithms. Addison-Wesley, 1974. Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, and Pierre Senellart. Provenance circuits for trees and treelike instances. In ICALP, 2015. Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, and Pierre Senellart. Tractable lineages on treelike instances: Limits and extensions. In PODS, 2016. Guillaume Bagan. MSO queries on tree decomposable structures are computable with linear delay. In CSL, 2006. Guillaume Bagan, Arnaud Durand, Emmanuel Filiot, and Olivier Gauwin. Efficient enumeration for conjunctive queries over X-underbar structures. In CSL, 2010. Guillaume Bagan, Arnaud Durand, and Etienne Grandjean. On acyclic conjunctive queries and constant delay enumeration. In CSL, 2007. Guillaume Bagan, Arnaud Durand, Etienne Grandjean, and Frédéric Olive. Computing the jth solution of a first-order query. ITA, 42(1), 2008. Nurzhan Bakibayev, Tomáš Kočiskỳ, Dan Olteanu, and Jakub Závodnỳ. Aggregation and ordering in factorised databases. PVLDB, 2013. David A. Mix Barrington, Neil Immerman, and Howard Straubing. On uniformity within NC1 . JCSS, 41(3), 1990. Simone Bova, Florent Capelli, Stefan Mengel, and Friedrich Slivovsky. On compiling CNFs into structured deterministic DNNFs. In SAT, 2015. Simone Bova and Stefan Szeider. Circuit treewidth, sentential decision, and query compilation. In PODS, 2017. Arthur Choi and Adnan Darwiche. Dynamic minimization of sentential decision diagrams. In AAAI, 2013. Thomas Colcombet. A combinatorial theorem for trees. In ICALP, 2007. Bruno Courcelle. Linear delay enumeration and monadic second-order logic. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 157(12), 2009. Adnan Darwiche. On the tractable counting of theory models and its application to truth maintenance and belief revision. J. Applied Non-Classical Logics, 11(1-2), 2001. Adnan Darwiche and Pierre Marquis. A knowledge compilation map. JAIR, 17, 2002. Arnaud Durand and Etienne Grandjean. First-order queries on structures of bounded degree are computable with constant delay. TOCL, 8(4), 2007. Arnaud Durand, Nicole Schweikardt, and Luc Segoufin. Enumerating answers to first-order queries over databases of low degree. In PODS, 2014. Jinbo Huang and Adnan Darwiche. DPLL with a trace: From SAT to knowledge compilation. In IJCAI, 2005. Abhay Kumar Jha and Dan Suciu. Knowledge compilation meets database theory: Compiling queries to decision diagrams. TCS, 52(3), 2013. Wojciech Kazana. Query evaluation with constant delay. PhD thesis, École normale supérieure de Cachan, 2013. Wojciech Kazana and Luc Segoufin. Enumeration of monadic second-order queries on trees. TOCL, 14(4), 2013. Wojciech Kazana and Luc Segoufin. Enumeration of first-order queries on classes of structures with bounded expansion. In PODS. ACM, 2013. Donald E. Knuth. Art of Computer Programming. Volume 4a: Combinatorial Algorithms, Part 1, 2005. Leonid Libkin. Elements of Finite Model Theory. Springer, 2004.  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36  Katja Losemann and Wim Martens. MSO queries on trees: enumerating answers under updates. In CSL-LICS, 2014. Dan Olteanu and Jakub Závodnỳ. Size bounds for factorised representations of query results. TODS, 40(1), 2015. Umut Oztok and Adnan Darwiche. A top-down compiler for sentential decision diagrams. In IJCAI, 2015. Knot Pipatsrisawat and Adnan Darwiche. New compilation languages based on structured decomposability. In AAAI, 2008. Ran Raz, Amir Shpilka, and Amir Yehudayoff. A lower bound for the size of syntactically multilinear arithmetic circuits. SIAM J. Comput., 38(4), 2008. Luc Segoufin. A glimpse on constant delay enumeration (Invited talk). In STACS, 2014. Volker Strassen. Vermeidung von Divisionen. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 264, 1973. James W. Thatcher and Jesse B. Wright. Generalized finite automata theory with an application to a decision problem of second-order logic. Math. Systems Theory, 2(1), 1968. Kunihiro Wasa. Enumeration of enumeration algorithms. CoRR, abs/1605.05102, 2016. Ingo Wegener. Branching programs and binary decision diagrams. SIAM, 2000.  XX:15  XX:16  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  A  Proofs for Section 3 (Reducing to Zero-Suppressed Semantics)  We now introduce some additional notation to be used throughout the appendix. We will call a decomposable circuit or DNNF a circuit where all AND-gates are decomposable, and a deterministic circuit a circuit where all OR-gates are deterministic. We introduce an additional notation related to zero-suppressed semantics: I Definition A.1. For a gate g in a monotone augmented circuit C, we will call its captured set S(g) the set of the minimal valuations of g (written as assignments) in the sense of Definition 3.5 (and for which an alternative characterization is given as Lemma 3.8). The captured set S(g0 ) of the output gate g0 of C is then equal to its set of assignments S(C); so we may also call S(C) the captured set of C. We also introduce an additional definition related to partial traces (in particular, traces): I Definition A.2. The variables tested by a partial trace T of C are the variables that occur in T or occur in the interval of a range gate of T . Note that these are a subset of the interval of the root of T . We then show the auxiliary characterization of the set of assignments, which we will use heavily in the proofs: I Lemma 3.8. Let C be a monotone augmented circuit. Let us define inductively a set of assignments S(g) for each gate g in the following way: for all g ∈ Cvar , we set S(g) := {g}; for all ./ i-range gates g with inputs g1 and g2 , we set S(g) := {t ⊆ [g1 , g2 ] | |t| ./ i}; S for all OR-gates g with inputs g1 , . . . , gn , we set S(g) := 1≤i≤n S(gi ) (with S(g) = ∅ if g has no inputs); for all AND-gates g with inputs g1 , . . . , gn , we set S(g) := {S1 ∪ · · · ∪ Sn | (S1 , . . . , Sn ) ∈ Q 1≤i≤n S(gi )} (with S(g) = {{}} if g has no inputs); observe that the unions are always disjoint because C has a compatible order. Then, for any gate g, the set S(g) contains exactly the assignments that describe a minimal valuation for g. In particular, for g0 the output gate of C, the set S(g0 ) is exactly S(C). Proof. We show the claim by induction. For the base cases: For a variable g, the only partial trace rooted at g is {g}, and indeed its only minimal valuation is {g}. For a range gate g with inputs g1 and g2 , the only partial trace rooted at g is {g}, and its minimal valuations are as defined. For the induction cases: For an OR-gate g, if g has no inputs, then there is no partial trace rooted at g, so S(g) = ∅ is correct. If g has inputs, then we can partition the partial traces rooted at g depending on which input is retained. In particular, the set of leaves of the partial traces rooted at g are exactly the union of the set of leaves of the partial traces rooted at the inputs of g. Hence, the assignments describing the minimal valuations of g are exactly the union of the corresponding assignments for the inputs of g, so we conclude by induction. For an AND-gate g, if g has no inputs, then the only partial trace rooted at g is the partial trace {g}, whose one minimal assignment is {}, which sets all variables to 0, and S(g) = {{}} is correct. Otherwise, the partial traces rooted at g are obtained by taking g and taking one partial trace rooted at each input of g. In particular, if there is an input g 0 such that there is no partial trace rooted at g 0 , then there is no partial trace rooted  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel at g: now as by induction we have S(g 0 ) = ∅, so we have indeed set S(g) = ∅ which is correct. Otherwise, remembering that an augmented circuit is decomposable (because it has a compatible order), as g is an AND-gate, we know that the intervals for its inputs must be pairwise disjoint. In particular, the partial traces for each input of g must be on leaves having pairwise disjoint intervals. Hence, the minimal valuations of a partial trace of g must be minimal valuations of some partial trace rooted at g 0 , and conversely any choice of minimal valuation for partial traces rooted at the inputs of g can be combined to a minimal valuation of a partial trace rooted at g thanks to the fact that the intervals are disjoint. This allows us to conclude using the induction hypothesis. J Observe that Lemma 3.8 allows us to give an equivalent rephrasing of the determinism condition in zero-suppressed semantics: a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics is a decomposable circuit where, for each OR-gate g, the captured set S(g) is the disjoint union of the captured sets of the inputs of g. We now show the main result of this section: I Proposition 3.9. Given a d-DNNF circuit C and a compatible order <, we can compute in linear time a monotone 0-augmented circuit C ∗ having < as a compatible order, such that C ∗ is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics and such that S(C ∗ ) is exactly the set of satisfying assignments of C. To prove the result, we will define complete circuits, where, intuitively, all variables are tested so the semantics makes no difference: I Definition A.3. Given an augmented circuit or decomposable circuit C with a compatible order <, we call reach(g) the subset of Cvar of the gates g 0 that have a directed path to g, or that are in the interval of a range gate that has a directed path to g. An AND-gate g of C is complete if we have reach(g) = [min(g), max(g)]. An OR-gate g of C is complete if, for any input g 0 to g, we have min(g 0 ) = min(g) and max(g 0 ) = max(g). The circuit C is complete if every gate of C is complete, and if the interval of the output g0 of C is the complete set of variables Cvar . To prove Proposition 3.9, the first step is to rewrite the input d-DNNF to an equivalent complete augmented d-DNNF (in the standard semantics). This will be done using ≥ 0-gates, which are important to make this possible in linear time, and always evaluate to 1 so can be added without changing the completed function. The second step is to rewrite the complete augmented circuit to a monotone augmented circuit in the zero-suppressed semantics, whose captured set is the set of satisfying assignments of the original circuit. Let us first take care of the first step: I Lemma A.4. Given a d-DNNF circuit C and a compatible order <, we can compute in linear time a complete 0-augmented circuit C 0 that has < as a compatible order, computes the same function as C, and is a d-DNNF (i.e., all its OR-gates are deterministic, with decomposability being implied by the compatibility of <). The completion procedure of Lemma A.4 is a standard routine for many forms of read once branching programs, see e.g. [Weg00, Lemma 6.2.2]. Note that this lemma is actually the only place where we use the compatible order < directly; in all later results, it will only be used implicitly, to define the semantics of range gates (if any). Proof of Lemma A.4. In a first step, it is convenient to make sure that every gate in C has fan-in at most two. To this end, replace each gate of higher fan-in with a binary tree in the  XX:17  XX:18  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  obvious way. Note that this can easily be done in linear time and in a way that preserves compatibility with <. In a second step we compute for every gate g in C the values min(g) and max(g). Again, this can be done in linear time in a straightforward bottom-up fashion. Note that the completeness requirement is trivial on gates g with no inputs, and it is immediately satisfied on gates g with exactly one input if we assume that their one input satisfies the requirement. Hence, it suffices to consider gates of fan-in exactly 2 in the following. Also note that one direction of the completeness requirement is immediate: for any AND- or OR-gate g, we have reach(g) ⊆ [min(g), max(g)], so only the converse implication needs to be proven. We will write ≺ for the covering relation of <, i.e., we have g ≺ g 0 if g < g 0 and there is no g 00 such that g < g 00 < g 0 . We will process the gates bottom-up to ensure the completeness requirement, assuming by induction that it is satisfied on all input gates. As the requirement is immediate for variables, NOT-gates and range gates, we first explain the construction for AND-gates and second for OR-gates. First, let g be an AND-gate with inputs g1 and g2 . Remember that the interval of g is [min(g), max(g)] which is [min(g1 ), max(g2 )], and we know by compatibility of < that max(g1 ) < min(g2 )]. If max(g1 ) ≺ min(g2 ), i.e., max(g1 ) is the predecessor of min(g2 ), then there is nothing to do for g, as every gate in the interval of g is in that of g1 or in that of g2 , in which case we conclude that it is in reach(g1 ) or in reach(g2 ) by induction hypothesis, and conclude. If max(g1 ) 6≺ min(g2 ), let g10 and g20 be such that max(g1 ) ≺ g10 and g20 ≺ min(g2 ). Add a fresh child g 0 to g, between g1 and g2 , which is a ≥ 0-range gate with inputs g10 and g20 . It is clear that this does not violate compatibility of < with C, because the interval of g 0 is [g10 , g20 ] and we have max(g1 ) < g10 and g20 < min(g2 ). Further, it does not change the computed function, because g 0 always evaluate to 1 which is neutral for AND. Last, it is now clear that g satisfies the condition of Definition A.3, because any gate g 00 in the interval of g is now either a gate of the interval of g1 , of the interval of g2 , or of the interval of g 0 : we conclude by induction as above in the first two cases, and in the third case we conclude because g 00 is in the interval of the range gate g 0 which has a directed path to g. Second, let g be an OR-gate with inputs g1 and g2 . We replace g1 with an AND-gate g10 computing the AND of the following: if min(g) < min(g1 ), letting g1− be such that min(g) ≤ g1− ≺ min(g1 ), a ≥ 0-range gate (g10 )− whose inputs are min(g) and g1− ; g1 itself; if max(g1 ) < max(g), letting g1+ be such that max(g1 ) ≺ g1+ ≤ max(g), a ≥ 0-range gate (g10 )+ whose inputs are g1+ and max(g). We do the analogous construction for g2 . It is clear that this does not violate the compatibility of < with C, because the interval of the new AND-gates g10 and g20 are exactly the interval of g by construction, and the interval of g is unchanged. It is also clear that these transformations do not change the computed function because the ≥ 0-range gates evaluate to 1; further, the transformations do not affect determinism at the OR-gate g for the same reason. Last, it is now clear that g10 , g20 and g satisfy the conditions of Definition A.3. Indeed, the interval of these three gates is [min(g), max(g)]. Now, to show the condition on g10 any gate of this interval is either in the interval of g1 , of (g10 )− , or of (g10 )+ , we conclude using the induction hypothesis in the first case and immediately in the two other cases. To show the condition of g, we use the same proof. To show the condition on g20 , we use the analogous proof with g2 , (g20 )− , and (g20 )+ . We perform the above constructions for all gates. Last, if the interval of the output  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  gate g0 does not contain all variables of Cvar , we replace it by an AND-gate of g0 and of ≥ 0-range gates that capture the missing variables. The resulting circuit C 0 then computes the same function as C and is complete. Moreover, C 0 has a compatible order < and all OR-gates are deterministic, so it is a d-DNNF. Finally, for every gate g that we manipulated, we only performed a construction that can be done in constant time, so the overall time of the construction is linear in the size of C. J We now take care of the second step: given an augmented d-DNNF circuit C 0 which is complete, rewrite it to a monotone augmented circuit C ∗ which is a d-DNNF in zerosuppressed semantics and captures the satisfying assignments of C 0 . We will do so simply by substituting all NOT-gates with gates that always evaluate to 1: I Definition A.5. Given an (augmented) circuit C, its monotonization is the monotone (augmented) circuit C ∗ obtained by removing the input wire to each NOT-gate of C and changing the type of these gates to AND-gates (which have no children, so they always evaluate to 1). This transformation can clearly be performed in linear time. We now claim that it preserves some properties. First, we must make the following trivial observation: I Observation A.6. For any augmented circuit C with compatible order <, its monotonization C ∗ still admits < as a compatible order. Second, the key observation is the following: I Lemma A.7. For any complete augmented circuit C 0 capturing Boolean function Φ, its monotonization C ∗ captures Φ under zero-suppressed semantics. To prove this lemma, it will be useful to extend the definitions of upward trees and traces (Definition 3.3) to augmented circuits which are not necessarily monotone; the only difference is that the leaves of a trace can now also include NOT-gates. We define minimal valuations like in Definition 3.5, except that we enforce that negated variables must be set to 0; the variables tested by a trace also include the negated variables. We can now show the important property of complete circuits: I Observation A.8. Every trace T of a complete circuit C tests all variables of Cvar . Proof. We simply prove by bottom-up induction that any trace rooted at a gate g of C tests all variables of the interval of g. This is true of variable gates, NOT-gates, and range gates; it is true of OR-gates because it is true of all their inputs and they have the same interval as their inputs; it is true of AND-gates because the sub-traces on all inputs satisfy the property. We conclude thanks to the fact that the interval of the output gate consists of all variables of Cvar . J We can now show: Proof of Lemma A.7. We observe the existence of a bijection between the traces of C ∗ and of C 0 . Specifically, consider the mapping f from the traces of C 0 to traces of C ∗ obtained by replacing each leaf which is a NOT-gate of C 0 by the corresponding AND-gate with no inputs in C ∗ . It is clear that any upward tree in the image of this transformation is a trace of C ∗ . Conversely, we can map the traces of C ∗ to traces of C 0 by replacing the fresh AND-gates with no inputs by the corresponding NOT-gate, and again the upward trees in the image of this transformation are indeed traces of C 0 . As this defines an inverse function for f , it is  XX:19  XX:20  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration clear that f is a bijection. Further, as C 0 is complete, it is clear that the variables which are not tested by f (T 0 ) are precisely the variables whose negation is a leaf of 0 T For the forward direction, consider a satisfying valuation ν 0 of C 0 . By Observation 3.4, there is a trace T 0 of C 0 of which ν 0 is a satisfying valuation. As C 0 is complete, by 0 Observation A.8, T 0 tests all variables of Cvar . Hence, the satisfying valuation ν 0 of T 0 is actually a minimal satisfying valuation of T (there are no variables implicitly set to 0). Now, clearly ν 0 is also a satisfying valuation of f (T 0 ). The converse is shown in the same way by considering a satisfying valuation ν ∗ of C ∗ , a witnessing trace T ∗ of C ∗ of which it is a minimal valuation, and observing that ν ∗ is a satisfying valuation of the trace f −1 (T ∗ ) of C 0 . J The last claim to show is the preservation of d-DNNF through monotonization: I Lemma A.9. For any complete augmented circuit C 0 which is a d-DNNF in the standard semantics, its monotonization C ∗ is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics (in the sense of Definition 3.6). Proof. As in the proof of Lemma A.7, we know that the captured set of each gate g of C ∗ describes the satisfying assignments of g in C 0 in the standard semantics. Hence, any violation of determinism in zero-suppressed semantics on C ∗ witnesses a violation of determinism in the standard semantics in C 0 . J We are now ready to prove our main result for this section: Proof of Proposition 3.9. We first apply to C the construction of Lemma A.4 to get in linear time a complete 0-augmented circuit C 0 which is a d-DNNF in the standard sense, has compatible order <, and computes the same function Φ as C. Now, we construct in linear time the monotonization C ∗ of C 0 , which is a monotone 0-augmented circuit. By Observation A.6, C ∗ still admits < as compatible order. By Lemma A.9, C ∗ is a d-DNNF in the zero-suppressed semantics. By Lemma A.7, C ∗ captures Φ under zero-suppressed semantics, which concludes the proof. J We conclude the section by a remark on zero-suppressed semantics: this semantics, as well as the relevant definitions, can be defined not only for augmented circuits, but more generally for decomposable (non-augmented) circuits: I Remark A.10. The definition of upwards trees and traces (Definition 3.3) extend to monotone (non-augmented) circuits which are decomposable, even if they do not have a compatible order. Observation 3.4 extends to them, and the definition of minimal valuations (Definition 3.5) also does. Further, the definition of zero-suppressed semantics extends (Definition 3.6), as does the definition of captured sets in Definition A.1. Last, the alternative characterization of the captured sets in Lemma 3.8 also extends. Thanks to this remark, we will be able to talk about zero-suppressed semantics and captured sets in decomposable monotone circuits with no range gates, even if they do not have a compatible order. This will be especially useful in Section 7, where we directly produce decomposable circuits in zero-suppressed semantics.  B  Proofs for Section 4 (Reducing to Normal Form Circuits)  Throughout this appendix, two monotone circuits C and C 0 are called equivalent (in zerosuppressed semantics) if S(C) = S(C 0 ).  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  B.1  Reduction to Arity-Two  We show that following easy general-purpose result which will be useful in several proofs. I Lemma B.1. For any (augmented) monotone circuit C, we can compute in linear time an equivalent arity-two (augmented) monotone circuit C 0 . Further, if C is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics (resp., if it is ∅-pruned, if it is {}-pruned, if it has some order < as a compatible order, if it is monotone), then the same is true of C 0 . Proof. We use the standard construction of adding intermediate AND- and OR-gates, leveraging the associativity of the Boolean ∧ and ∨ operations. It is clear that none of the existing or additional gates is unsatisfiable or 0-valid if none of the original gates are, so the process preserves being ∅-pruned and {}-pruned. The process adds no NOT-gates so it clearly preserves monotonicity. Any violation of the d-DNNF condition on the rewritten circuit witnesses a violation on the original circuit. Last, it is clear that any compatible order is still compatible with the result of the rewriting, as any violation of compatibility would witness a violation in the original circuit. J  B.2  Homogenization  The proof will use the following definition: I Definition B.2. For k ∈ N, a monotone augmented circuit C is k-homogenized if its gate set G is partitioned as G = G=0 ∪ G=1 ∪ · · · ∪ G=k ∪ G>k , all these unions being disjoint, such that for i ∈ [0, k] the G=i and G>k satisfy the following properties: For every g ∈ G=i , for every t ∈ S(g), we have |t| = i, and For every g ∈ G>k , for every t ∈ S(g), we have |t| > k. Note that S(g) = ∅ is allowed in both cases. Note that in particular variable gates are all in G=1 if k ≥ 1, and they are all in G>0 if k = 0. C is a called a k-homogenization of an augmented circuit C 0 , if for every gate g of C 0 For every i ∈ [0, k], C contains a gate g =i such that S(g =i ) = {t ∈ S(C 0 ) | |t| = i}, and C contains a gate g >k such that S(g >k ) = {t ∈ S(C 0 ) | |t| > k}. We will now prove the following strengthening of Proposition 4.1: I Proposition B.3. For every l ∈ N, given a monotone l-augmented C with compatible order < and k ∈ N, we can construct in time O((k + 1)2 · |C|) a monotone max(l, k + 1)augmented circuit C 0 with compatible order < such that C 0 is a k-homogenization of C. Further, if C is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics then C 0 also is. It is clear that this result implies Proposition 4.1. Indeed, to impose the desired semantics on the resulting circuit C 0 , one can simply add a fresh OR-gate as the output gate of the k-homogenization C 0 as the OR of the G=i for 0 ≤ i ≤ k. It is then clear that the circuit satisfies the required properties, and we easily check determinism on the fresh output gate in the sense of Definition 3.6 thanks to the fact that the valuations are disjoint (they have different weights). We now prove Proposition B.3: Proof of Proposition B.3. The construction essentially follows the classical homogenization technique introduced by Strassen [Str73], and will not use the input compatible order except for the definition of range gates. We first rewrite the input circuit C in linear time using Lemma B.1 to ensure that it is arity-two. We will write in(g) to denote the inputs of a gate g.  XX:21  XX:22  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  Now, for every gate g of C, for every i ∈ N, we define the sets S =i (g) := {t ∈ S(G) | |t| = i} and S >i (g) := {t ∈ S(G) | |t| > i}. We create the k-homogenized circuit C 0 by associating, to each gate g of C, k + 2 gates g =0 , . . . , g =k and one gate g >k in C 0 such that for i ∈ [0, k] we have S(g =i ) = S =i (g) and S(g >k ) = S >k (g). To ensure this, we proceed iteratively as follows: If g is a variable, for all i ∈ [0, k] \ {1}, the gate g =i is an OR-gate with no inputs (so S(g =0 ) = ∅). If k > 0, g =1 is a variable identified to g and g >k is an OR-gate with no inputs. Otherwise, g >0 is a variable identified to g. 0 If g is a = k 0 -range gate, then if k 0 ≤ k we set g =k to be an = k 0 -range gate with the same inputs as g, otherwise we have k < k 0 and set g >k to be an = k 0 -range gate with the same inputs as g. All other gates are OR-gates with no inputs. If g is a ≥ k 0 -range gate, for all i ∈ [0, k 0 − 1], the gate g =i is an OR-gate with no inputs. For all i ∈ [k 0 , k], the gate g =i is a = i-range gate with the same inputs as g. Finally, g >k is a ≥ (k + 1)-range gate identified with the same inputs as g. If g is an OR-gate, for every i ∈ [0, k], the gate g =i is an OR-gate whose inputs are {(g 0 )=i | g 0 ∈ in(g)}, and g >k is an OR-gate whose inputs are {(g 0 )>k | g 0 ∈ in(g)}; If g is an AND-gate, for every i ∈ [0, k], the gates g =i and g >k are defined as follows: (remember that C is arity-two so the following cases are exhaustive): if |in(g)| = 0, then g =i and g >k are AND-gates with in(g =i ) := ∅ and in(g >k ) := ∅; if |in(g)| = 1, writing in(g) = {g 0 }, then g =i and g >k are AND-gates with in(g =i ) := {(g 0 )=i } and in(g =i ) := {(g 0 )>i }; if |in(g)| = 2, writing in(g) = {g10 , g20 }, then for i ∈ [0, k], the gate g =i is an ORgate with inputs g0=i , . . . , gi=i where each gj=i is an AND-gate with inputs (g10 )=j and >k (g20 )=(i−j) . Moreover, g >k is an OR-gate with inputs gi,j for i, j ∈ [0, k] and gi>k,1 and gi>k,2 for i ∈ [0, k] which are defined as follows: >k ∗ if i + j > k, then gi,j is an AND-gate with inputs (g10 )=i and (g20 )=j , >k ∗ if i + j ≤ k, then gi,j is an OR-gate with no inputs, ∗ gi>k,1 is an AND-gate with inputs (g10 )>k and (g20 )=i ∗ gi>k,2 is an AND-gate with inputs (g10 )=i and (g20 )>k By straightforward but somewhat cumbersome induction, it is easy to see that the gates g =0 , . . . , g =k and g >k indeed compute the sets S =0 (g), . . . , S =k (g) and S >k (g), respectively. Thus, C 0 is a k-homogenization of C as claimed. Moreover, the construction for every gate g in C can be performed in time O(k 2 ), so the overall runtime of the algorithm is O(k 2 · |C|). It is clear that the resulting circuit C 0 is monotone. If C has a compatible order <, we first show that < is a compatible order for C 0 , so that C 0 is l-augmented. Indeed, all AND-gates g ∧ with more than one input in C 0 derive from the construction for an AND-gate g with inputs g10 and g20 in C. But then in g ∧ always has inputs (g10 )./1 i1 and (g20 )./2 i2 for ./1 , ./2 ∈ {=, >} and i1 , i2 ∈ [0, k]. Note that, by construction of C 0 , the variables having a directed path to (g10 )./1 i1 and (g20 )./2 i2 in C 0 are subsets of those having a directed path to g10 and g20 respectively in C. Hence, as < is compatible with C, from the condition on g with inputs g10 and g20 in C, we deduce that the condition is satisfied for g ∧ in C 0 . Hence, < is a compatible order for C 0 . We last observe that the range gates that we create are not labeled with integer values that are larger than those of the original circuit or than k + 1, so C 0 is indeed a monotone max(l, k + 1)-augmented circuit. We last show that if C is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics then so is C 0 . To do so, we show that the OR-gates of C 0 are deterministic in the sense of Definition 3.6. To this end, consider an OR-gate g ∨ in C 0 with at least two inputs. Only two cases can occur:  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel g ∨ was introduced in the construction for an OR-gate g in C. In this case, the inputs of g ∨ are {(g 0 )./i | g 0 ∈ in(g)} for ./ ∈ {=, >} and i ∈ [0, k]. As before S((g 0 )./i ) ⊆ S(g 0 ) for every input g 0 of g in C. Since g is deterministic, we know that, for all gates g 0 , g 00 ∈ in(g) with g 0 = 6 g 00 , the sets S(g 0 ) and S(g 00 ) are disjoint. It follows that for every (g 0 )./i , (g 00 )./i ∈ in(g ∨ ) with g 0 6= g 00 , the sets S((g 0 )./i ) and S((g 00 )./i ) are disjoint. Thus g ∨ is deterministic. g ∨ was introduced in the construction for an AND-gate g in C. In this case, the inputs of g ∨ are OR-gates with no inputs (which can never cause a violation of determinism because they capture the empty set), and AND-gates with inputs of the form (g10 )./1 i1 and (g20 )./2 i2 where ./1 , ./2 ∈ {=, >} and i1 , i2 ∈ [0, k]. Let now g and g 0 be two inputs 0 0 of g ∨ where g has the inputs (g10 )./1 i1 and (g20 )./2 i2 and g 0 has the inputs (g10 )./1 i1 and 0 0 (g20 )./2 i2 . By inspection of the construction, we see that we cannot have ./1 = ./01 and ./2 = ./02 and i1 = i01 and i2 = i02 at the same time, that is, one of these equalities must be false. But then, depending on whether the false equality is on ./1 or i1 , or on ./2 or i2 , 0 0 0 0 we have S((g10 )./1 i1 ) ∩ S((g10 )./1 i1 ) = ∅ or S((g20 )./2 i2 ) ∩ S((g20 )./2 i2 ) = ∅. Thus, in both cases S(g) ∩ S(g 0 ) = ∅ by Lemma 3.8 and thus g ∨ is deterministic. Since in both cases g ∨ is deterministic, it follows, as claimed, that C 0 is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics. J  B.3  Reduction to Normal Form  I Proposition 4.3. Given a monotone augmented d-DNNF circuit C in zero-suppressed semantics with compatible order < and with S(C) 6= ∅ and S(C) 6= {{}}, we can build in O(|C|) a normal d-DNNF C 0 , with < as a compatible order, such that S(C 0 ) = S(C)\{{}}. In the rest of this section, we prove Proposition 4.3 in multiple steps to ensure each condition. The first step is to make the circuit ∅-pruned and {}-pruned. To do so, it will be convenient to reuse our homogenization process (Proposition B.3 of Appendix B.2) and our notion of homogenization of circuits (Definition B.2). We first show how to make circuits ∅-pruned while preserving being a d-DNNF and being homogenized: I Lemma B.4. For any l ∈ N and monotone l-augmented circuit C with compatible order < such that S(C) 6= ∅, we can compute in linear time an equivalent ∅-pruned monotone laugmented circuit C 0 with compatible order <. Further, if C is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics, then so is C 0 , and if C is a k-homogenized for some k ∈ N then so is C 0 . Proof. We first compute which gates g of C are unsatisfiable. It is easily seen that these gates are the following, which can be computed in linear time by processing C bottom-up: range gates labeled with ./ i whose interval contains less than i variables (which we call unsatisfiable range gates); AND-gates with no inputs gates; AND-gates where one input gate is unsatisfiable; OR-gates where all input gates is unsatisfiable. We define the circuit C 0 as C where we remove all unsatisfiable gates and all wires leading out of these gates. This can clearly be computed in linear-time. Further, C 0 has a output gate (namely, the same as C), because as S(C) 6= ∅, we know that we have not removed the output gate of C. We will show that, for every gate g of C 0 , the set S(g) in C 0 is the same as S(g) in C. This claim implies in particular that C 0 is equivalent to C (when applying it to the output gate), and it shows that C 0 is ∅-pruned: if some gate g is unsatisfiable in C 0 , then g is also  XX:23  XX:24  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration unsatisfiable in C, so g should have been removed in C 0 . To see why the claim is true, observe that the only wires from a removed gate to a non-removed gate, i.e., from an unsatisfiable gate g to a satisfiable gate g 0 , must be such that g 0 is an OR-gate (otherwise it would be unsatisfiable too), and clearly removing the wire from g to g 0 does not change the set captured by g 0 . Assuming now that C is k-homogenized for some k ∈ N, we can see from the previous claim that the same is true of C 0 . Indeed, we can suitably partition the gates of C 0 using the same partition as the one used for C. Last, to see that C 0 admits < as a compatible order, and that C 0 is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics if C is, observe that we construct C 0 from C by removing gates and removing input wires to the remaining gates, so this cannot introduce violations of the compatibility of < or the determinism of OR-gates. J We now show how to make the circuit ∅-pruned and {}-pruned, using the previous process and the homogenization process (Proposition B.3 of Appendix B.2). I Lemma B.5. For any l ∈ N, for any monotone l-augmented circuit C with compatible order < such that S(C) 6= ∅ and S(C) 6= {{}}, we can compute in linear time a monotone max(l, 1)-augmented circuit C 0 with compatible order < such that S(C 0 ) = S(C)\{{}} and C 0 is ∅-pruned and {}-pruned. Further, if C is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics, then so is C. Proof. We use Proposition B.3 for k = 1 to compute in linear time in C a monotone max(l, 1)augmented circuit Chomog which is a 0-homogenization of C, which admits < as a compatible order, and which is a d-DNNF according to zero-suppressed semantics iff C is. Recalling now Definition B.2, we know that Chomog has a gate g >0 such that S(g >0 ) = {t ∈ S(C) | |t| > 0, so choosing g >0 as the output gate of Chomog we have indeed that S(Chomog ) = S(C)\{{}}; in particular S(Chomog ) 6= ∅. We now apply Lemma B.4 to Chomog , to obtain an equivalent ∅-pruned monotone max(l, 1)-augmented circuit C∅ which is ∅-pruned, which is is still 0-homogenized, and which is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics if C is. We last rewrite C∅ to an equivalent circuit C 0 . Recall that, as C 0 is 0-homogenized, its gate set is partitioned in G=0 and G>0 , such that all gates of G=0 capture {{}} (they cannot capture ∅ as C∅ is ∅-pruned), and no gates of the latter capture a set containing {} (and G>0 contains in particular the output gate). We define our final circuit C 0 from C∅ by removing all gates of G=0 and all wires leading out of them. Note that, by definition of homogenized circuits, we do not remove variable gates or the output gate. The construction of C 0 is clearly in linear-time, and C 0 is compatible with < and is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics if C 0 is, because C 0 is constructed from C∅ by removing gates and input to remaining gates, which cannot introduce violations of these requirements. We now show that for every gate g of C 0 , its captured set S(g) in C 0 is the same as S(g) in C∅ . This claim implies in particular that C 0 is equivalent to C∅ (when applying it to the output gate), that C 0 is ∅-pruned (any violation of this in C 0 implies a violation of the fact that C∅ is ∅-pruned), and it shows that C 0 is {}-pruned: if {} ∈ S(g) in C 0 for some gate g, then the same holds of g in C∅ , so g ∈ G=0 and g should have been removed in C 0 . To see why the claim is true, observe that when there is a wire from a gate g in C 0 to a gate g 0 in C 0 , and g is removed and g 0 is not, i.e., g ∈ G=0 and g 0 ∈ G>0 , then we have S(g) ⊆ {{}}, and then as C 0 is ∅-pruned we must have S(g) = {{}}. Hence, we know that g 0 is an AND-gate, because if it were an OR-gate we would have {} ∈ S(g 0 ) contradicting g 0 ∈ G>0 . Now as {} is neutral for ×, we do not change the semantics by removing the wire.  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel Hence, C 0 is a monotone max(l, 1)-augmented circuit with compatible order < that is ∅-pruned and {}-pruned, we have S(C 0 ) = S(C∅ ) = Chomog = S(C)\{{}}, and if C is a d-DNNF in the zero-suppressed semantics then Chomog , C∅ , and thus C 0 , also are. This concludes the proof. J The third step is to ensure that the circuit is collapsed and discriminative, but this is completely straightforward: I Lemma B.6. For any l ∈ N and l-augmented circuit C with compatible order <, we can compute in linear time an l-augmented circuit C 0 with compatible order < which is collapsed and discriminative. Further, if C is arity-two (resp., is ∅-pruned, is {}-pruned, is a d-DNNF in the zero-suppressed semantics, is monotone), then so is C 0 . Proof. Simply merge all AND-gates with one input with their one input to make the circuit collapsed. This is clearly linear-time, and does not affect compatibility with <, OR-determinism, being arity-two, being ∅-pruned, or being {}-pruned. Then, for every wire (g, g 0 ) where the input gate g is not an OR-gate but the output gate g 0 is an OR-gate, rewrite the wire by inserting an intermediate OR-gate, i.e., we create a fresh OR-gate g 00 (the exit), and replace the wire (g, g 0 ) by (g, g 00 ) and (g 00 , g 0 ). This is clearly linear-time, ensures that the output is discriminative, and it does not affect any of the requirements. J Using these results, we can conclude the proof of Proposition 4.3: Proof of Proposition 4.3. We first apply Lemma B.5 to make the circuit ∅-pruned and {}-pruned. We then apply Lemma B.1 to make it arity-two. We last apply Lemma B.6 to make it collapsed and discriminative. J As in Appendix A, we will need in Section 7 to apply the process described in this section to non-augmented circuits that have no compatible order but are decomposable. The claim is as follows, and it is straightforward to verify, because all transformations described in this section do not introduce range gates if their input does not contain range gates, and do not depend on the compatible order except to define the semantics of range gates and to ensure decomposability. I Remark B.7. If the input circuit C to Propositions 4.1 or B.3 has no range gates and no compatible order, but is decomposable, then the construction still works, and the output still does not have range gates and is still decomposable. The same is true of Proposition 4.3.  C  Proofs for Section 5 (Indexing OR-Components)  I Lemma 5.3. For any normal d-DNNF C, each OR-component of C is a multitree. Proof. Assume by contradiction that an OR-component is not a multitree, so it has two gates g and g 0 such that there are two different directed paths π1 and π2 from g to g 0 . As π1 and π2 are two different paths to the same gate g 0 , there must be a gate g 00 with inputs g100 6= g200 such that π1 goes through g100 and g 00 , and π2 goes through g200 and g 00 . As C is ∅-pruned, S(g 0 ) is non-empty, so let t ∈ S(g 0 ). As C is {}-pruned, t is non-empty. The directed paths π1 and π2 witness that t ∈ S(g100 ) and t ∈ S(g200 ), and this violates the determinism condition on the OR-gate g 00 . J  XX:25  XX:26  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration I Theorem 5.4. Given a normal d-DNNF C, we can compute in O(|C|) a structure called OR-index allowing us to do the following: given an OR-gate g of C, enumerate the exits of g in its OR-component K, with constant delay and memory usage O(log |K|). In order to prove Theorem 5.4, thanks to Lemma 5.3, it suffices to show the following general result on multitrees, where a leaf of a multitree T is a vertex n with no edge to a vertex of T : I Theorem C.1. Given a multitree T , we can compute in linear time a data structure allowing us to perform the following: given n ∈ T , enumerate the leaves of T that are reachable from n with constant-delay and memory usage in O(log |T |). This theorem allows us to compute the required OR-index. Indeed, we can compute the OR-components of C in linear time, go over each OR-component K, and apply the theorem to the reverse of K (in which exits are leaves), which is still a multitree. The result over all OR-components is an index that allows us, given any OR-gate g in C, to enumerate the exits of g with constant delay and with the claimed memory usage. This computation is linear-time overall, and concludes the preprocessing of our input circuit. All that remains is to prove Theorem C.1, which we do in the rest of this appendix. Given a multitree T , we will show how to compute in linear time a multitree Q(T ) labeled with leaves of T and a mapping q from T to Q(T ) such that the leaves reachable from a node n ∈ T correspond (in a one-to-one correspondence) to the labels of the nodes reachable from q(n) ∈ Q(T ). This ensures that, by enumerating the labels of the nodes reachable from q(n) in Q(T ), we enumerate the leaves reachable from n in T . We then show that this second task is easy, as the nodes of a multitree T reachable from a node n ∈ T can be enumerated in constant delay with a simple tree traversal. Finally, we improve on the tree traversal so that the memory usage is logarithmic in the size of the multitree. Transformation of T into Q(T ). Let T be a multitree, and let us explain how to construct Q(T ). We may assume without loss of generality that T is binary. Indeed, if this is not the case, we simply consider all nodes of T with more than two children and replace them by binary trees in the obvious way. This transformation does not change the leaves that are reachable from the original nodes, so it suffices to solve our enumeration problem on the new binary tree. We create Q(T ) by a bottom-up traversal of T , and consider every node n of T from the leaves to the root: If n is a leaf, we introduce a leaf node q(n) in Q(T ). If n is an internal node with a single child n0 , we introduce a node q(n) in Q(T ) and connect it as a parent of the children of q(n0 ) in Q(T ) if they exist (note that they must already have been constructed). If n is an internal node with two children n1 and n2 , we introduce two nodes q(n) and c(n) in Q(T ). We connect q(n) as a parent of c(n), and connect c(n) as a parent of the children of q(n1 ) and q(n2 ) in Q(T ) if they exist (again, they have already been constructed). This completes the construction of Q(T ). Note that multiple internal nodes of Q(T ) may share the same children, so it is not generally a tree. We show that Q(T ) is a binary multitree. Indeed, it is immediate to see that whenever there is an edge in Q(T ) from a node c(n) or q(n) to a node c(n0 ) or q(n0 ), then either n = n0  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel or n0 is a descendant of n in T . Hence, Q(T ) is acyclic, and if there is a path from c(n) or q(n) to c(n0 ) or q(n0 ) in Q(T ), then there is a path from n to n0 in T , so any violation of the fact that Q(T ) is a multitree would imply a violation in T . This shows that Q(T ) is a multitree (but note that it is generally not a tree). Further, it is immediate to show by induction that all nodes of the form q(n) have at most one child, and then the nodes of the form c(n) have at most two children, so indeed Q(T ) is binary. We now describe how to label each node n0 of Q(T ) with a leaf of T , which we write λ(n0 ). Our construction will ensure the following property: for any node n ∈ T , the leaves reachable from n in T are in a one-to-one correspondence with the labels of nodes reachable from q(n) in T 0 . More precisely, for each leaf ` of T reachable from n, there is exactly one node reachable from q(n) in T 0 such that λ(q(n)) = `, and, conversely, for every node n0 reachable from q(n) in T 0 , the leaf λ(n0 ) is reachable from n in T . We describe the construction in a bottom-up fashion on nodes n of T , and show that the property is verified for n: If n is a leaf, we set λ(q(n)) := n. This clearly satisfies the property. If n is an internal node with a single child n0 , we set λ(q(n)) := λ(q(n0 )), which was defined before. Since we reach the same leaves from n and n0 in T , the property is satisfied by induction. If n is an internal node with two children n1 and n2 , we set λ(q(n)) := λ(q(n1 )), and λ(c(n)) := λ(q(n2 )), which were both defined before. We now explain why this is correct. The set of leaves reachable from n in T is the union of the leaves reachable from n1 and n2 , and this union is disjoint because T is a multitree. Now, the set of nodes reachable from q(n) in T 0 contains q(n), c(n), and the nodes reachable from q(n1 ) or q(n2 ) except q(n1 ) and q(n2 ) themselves. So our choice of labels clearly guarantees the desired property by induction. Enumeration phase. Given a node n ∈ T , thanks to the property of Q(T ) that we just showed, we can enumerate the leaves reachable from n in T simply by traversing the tree rooted in q(n). Our enumeration state is a stack S of nodes in the multitree Q(T ) that have yet to be processed. At the beginning of the enumeration, S = {q(n)}. At each step of the enumeration, we pop a node n0 of T 0 from S, push the children of n0 (if any) back into S, and then output λ(n0 ). The stack S can be implemented with a linked list, so that we can push and pop elements in constant time. It is immediate that this algorithm can indeed enumerate in constant delay the labels of the nodes reachable from an node q(n) of Q(T ). So we have solved our initial enumeration problem on T : given a node n ∈ T , we enumerate the nodes reachable from q(n) in Q(T ) as we explained, and by the property that we showed, the process enumerates exactly the leaves of T reachable from n. Memory usage. We now explain how to refine the preprocessing and enumeration process to satisfy the logarithmic memory bound. We define the weight w(n) of a node n in a multitree to be the number of nodes reachable from a node n, including n itself. The memory usage of our enumeration algorithm is the maximum size of the state maintained during the enumeration, i.e., the maximum size reached by S. Given a node n ∈ T , if the tree rooted in q(n) is unbalanced then S may contain as many as w(q(n))/2 nodes. We now show how to get a tighter, logarithmic bound on memory usage by choosing the order in which we traverse Q(T ). We first pre-compute the weight of all nodes of Q(T ) in linear time in a bottom-up fashion, as part of our preprocessing. Now, at each step of the enumeration, we pop a node  XX:27  XX:28  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  from S (which is the last inserted still in S) and then push its children onto S. When there are two children, we make sure that the child with greater weight is pushed first. We claim that at every step of the enumeration for a node q(n) of T 0 corresponding to n ∈ T , the weight of a node in S is greater or equal to the sum of the weights of nodes in S that were inserted afterwards, i.e., that precede the node in S. We show the claim by induction along the enumeration process: At the beginning of the enumeration S contains only q(n) and the claim is vacuous. At each step of the enumeration, we pop the first node and we push back its children, of which there are at most two. The property holds for all the nodes of the new stack that already existed in the old stack, since the total weight of the nodes we push back (i.e. the children) is the weight of the popped node minus one. The property also holds for the newly added nodes, because we add the node with bigger weight first. Hence, we have shown our claim by induction. Thus, let us consider any point of the enumeration algorithm, write the stack S = (s1 , . . . , sp ), and show that p = O(log |T |). We assume in particular that p ≥ 2, otherwise there is nothing to show. Let us define a sequence P (Ti ) by T1 := 1 and Ti+1 := j≤i Tj : it is clear by induction from our previous claim that, for all 1 ≤ q ≤ p, we have w(sq ) ≥ Tq . Now, it is easy to see that Ti = 2i−2 for i ≥ 2, so we have w(sp ) ≥ 2p−2 . Remember now that the weight of a node in S cannot exceed w(q(n)), because all nodes in S are reachable from q(n). So we must have w(sp ) ≤ w(q(n)), and w(q(n)) ≥ 2p−2 . This clearly implies that p = O(log(w(q(n))), in particular p = O(log |T |). Hence, the stack is always of size logarithmic in |T |, which proves the memory usage claim.  D D.1  Proofs for Section 6 (Enumerating Assignments) Compressed Traces  I Lemma 6.2. For any compressed trace T of a normal circuit C and minimal valuation ν for T and C, we have |T | ≤ 6 · |ν|. Proof. First observe that, as C is {}-pruned, C (hence T ) cannot contain AND-gates with no children, or range gates labeled = 0 or ≥ 0. Hence, each leaf of T is either a variable gate or a range gate capturing a non-empty set. Remember further that, as C has a compatible order, no two leaves can share a common variable. Hence, each leaf of T contributes at least one to the Hamming weight of a minimal valuation ν, so that, letting n be the number of leaves of T , we have |ν| ≥ n. As C is arity-two and collapsed, each AND-gate of T has exactly two children, and by definition of a compressed trace each OR-gate of T has exactly one child. Letting n0 be the number of AND-gates in T , it is then clear that n0 = n − 1. Call AND-gates, variable gates, and range gates useful: their number is n + n0 . It suffices to show that the number n00 of OR-gates of T is at most 2(n0 + n). This follows if we can show that, for each useful gate, one of its parent, grandparent, and great-grandparent in T is also useful (or is undefined, in the case of the root). Indeed, this implies that n00 ≤ 2(n0 + n) because, if each useful gate covers its parent and grandparent, this guarantees that all non-useful gates (namely, all OR-gates) are covered. The reason why a parent, grandparent, or great-grandparent of a useful gate must be useful is that, whenever T contains an OR-gate, it is either an exit and then its one child is not an OR-gate so it is useful, or it is not an exit, in which case its one child is an exit. So we have shown the desired inequality, which concludes the proof. J  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel I Proposition 6.3. Given a normal d-DNNF C with its OR-index, we can enumerate its compressed traces, with the delay to produce each compressed trace T being in O(|T |). Proof. We define inductively an algorithm to enumerate the sequence of partial compressed traces in C rooted at a gate g as follows: If g is a variable, produce the one element of its singleton sequence of compressed traces and halt immediately. If g is an OR-gate, enumerate with constant delay its sequence of reachable exits, using the precomputed OR-index: as the circuit is normal, this sequence is non-empty. For each reachable exit g 0 , letting g 00 be its one input gate, enumerate the sequence T (g 00 ) of partial compressed traces rooted at g 00 . For each such compressed trace C, produce C ∪ {g, g 0 } (the union is disjoint). Halt when the enumeration of reachable exits has halted with the last such gate g 0 , and the enumeration of partial compressed traces rooted at g 0 has halted. If g is an AND-gate, as the circuit is normal it has exactly two inputs. Enumerate the sequence of partial compressed traces T (g1 ) rooted at its first input g1 . For each trace C1 ∈ T (g1 ), enumerate the sequence T (g2 ) of partial compressed traces rooted at its second input g2 . For each such trace C2 , produce {g} ∪ C1 ∪ C2 (the unions are disjoint). Halt when the enumeration of compressed traces of T (g1 ) has halted with the last such trace C1 and the enumeration of T (g2 ) has also halted. Running the algorithm on C is simply running it on the output gate g0 . We claim that the delay of this algorithm when producing a compressed trace T is in O(|T |). To see why, observe that the state when we start to enumerate the next valuation consists of gates of C where the enumeration has not yet halted, or (in the case of left children of AND-gates) where enumeration has halted but where the previous compressed trace will be reused in full. At each node that we consider in the algorithm, we perform a constant amount of computation (in particular, for OR-gates, we use the OR-index), and then we output that gate as part of the compressed trace. Hence, the algorithm performs a constant number of steps at a set of gates which is a subset of the gates of the compressed trace which is output, so the claim holds. (In particular, when the enumeration at one gate halts, the end of the computation at that gate is accounted as part of the last compressed trace using a recursive call at that gate, but it is not considered when producing the next compressed trace (which may not include that gate).) J  D.2  Enumerating Valuations of a Compressed Trace  I Proposition 6.5. We can enumerate the solutions to the assignment enumeration problem for < on Cvar , with each solution t being produced with delay linear in its size |t|. To prove this result, it will be convenient to enumerate assignments following the lexicographic product of the individual orders: I Definition D.1. Given two sets S1 , S2 with orders ≤1 , ≤2 , the lexicographic product ≤1 × ≤2 on S1 × S2 is defined by (a1 , a2 )(≤1 × ≤2 )(b1 , b2 ) if and only if (a1 <1 b1 ), or a1 = b1 and (a2 ≤2 b2 ). The lexicographic product of two totally ordered sets is clearly a total order, and the lexicographic product operation is clearly associative, so this definition extends to an arbitrary number of sets and yields a total order.  XX:29  XX:30  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  We show the following general lemma about enumeration in the lexicographic order: I Lemma D.2. Let S1 , . . . , Sn be non-empty sets that do not contain the empty assignment, such that the elements of each Si can be enumerated in some total order ≤i , each element being produced with delay linear in its size. Then the elements of the product S1 × · · · × Sn can be enumerated in the lexicographic order ≤1 × · · · × ≤n , each element being produced with delay linear in its total size. Proof. We run the enumeration algorithm for each Sj . To produce the first enumeration result, we enumerate the first element of each Sj with its algorithm, and we find the largest 1 ≤ j ≤ n such that the element of Sj that we enumerated is not the last one: this obeys the delay bound, because, as the Sj do not contain the empty assignment, the time required to iterate over all the Sj is linear in the total size of the enumerated solution. Now, at each stage of the global enumeration algorithm, we remember the last element of the product that we enumerated, the corresponding enumeration state in each Sj , and the largest 1 ≤ j ≤ n such that the element of Sj that we enumerated is not the last one. To produce the next element, enumerate the next element e of this Sj , and then compute first element ej → for Sj → for j < j → ≤ n as when producing the first enumeration result (this may be empty if j = n). Finally, we go over all Sj to update our value for j. We then produce our enumeration result: it is composed of the element of the product of the Sj ← for 1 ≤ j ← < j that we had enumerated in the round before, of the element e ∈ Sj that we just enumerated, and the ej → for j < j → ≤ n. The delay of this is the delay of writing the solution, which is linear in its total size, plus the delay of going over the Sj , which is linear in the total size as above, and the delay of enumerating e ∈ Sj and the ej → , which is less than the total size again, so we obey the bound. J We will use Lemma D.2 to enumerate the solutions to the assignment enumeration problem (recall Definition 6.4), and we will do so in two steps. We will first reduce to the case where all constraints ./j are equalities. Then we will enumerate valuations in this case. To reduce to equalities, we will define the range Rj of the interval [gj− , gj+ ] for 1 ≤ j ≤ n as the singleton {ij } if ./j is =, and the range {ij , ij + 1, . . . , [gj− , gj+ ] } if ./j is ≥; note that this set is non-empty. The range R of the product is simply R1 × · · · × Rn . We can talk of an element t1 × · · · × tn of the product of the intervals as realizing the vector (|t1 | , . . . , |tn |) of R, which we call a histogram: clearly all such elements realize a histogram of R (so the values of R partition the assignments), and conversely every value of R is the histogram of some element (i.e., the classes of the partition are non-empty). Thus, to prove Proposition 6.5, we can enumerate the histograms of the range R, and then enumerate the assignments corresponding to this histogram. It is clear that, for each range Rj , we can enumerate the integers that it contains with constant delay since we are working in a RAM model. Hence, by Lemma D.2, we can enumerate the histograms of R with delay linear in n, i.e., the number of entries in the histograms. Note now that n is always less than the size of any assignment that realizes it because the ij and thus the number of inputs chosen from each interval [gj− , gj+ ] is strictly positive, so the delay when enumerating a histogram is within the allowed delay to enumerate an assignment. Note that, as each histogram is realized by at least one assignment, the delay when enumerating a histogram is paid at most once when enumerating an assignment. Hence, it suffices to study the enumeration of assignments that satisfy a fixed histogram, i.e., where ./j is = for each 1 ≤ j ≤ n. Let Sq for a set S and a non-negative integer q denote the set of all subsets of size q of S. We make the following observation.  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel I Observation D.3. Let [g1− , g1+ ], . . . , [gn− , gn+ ] and = ii , . . . , = in be an instance of the assignment enumeration problem where all cardinality constraints are equalities. Then the − +  − +  1 ] × . . . × [gn ,gn ] . assignments to be enumerated on the given instance are exactly [g1 i,g in 1 Proof. By definition of the assignment enumeration problem, when choosing for each j ∈ [n] an assignment tj of size ij from [g1− , g1+ ], we have that t1 × . . . × tn has to be enumerated. Conversely, every assignment a that has to be enumerated decomposes as a1 × . . . × an with − +  − +  1 ] × . . . × [gn ,gn ] . |aj | = ij and thus t ∈ [g1 i,g J in 1 Hence, applying Lemma D.2 again, it suffices to argue that we can enumerate the elements [g − ,g +  of the ji j in delay linear in the size of the produced elements, i.e., linear in ij . We j  will see the elements of [gj− , gj+ ] as ordered according to <, which allows us to define a [g − ,g +  lexicographic order on ji j . It is then known that we can enumerate such elements with j delay linear in ij ; we refer the reader to e.g. [Knu05, Section 7.2.1.3] where implicitly the following is shown. I Proposition D.4. Given a set S of p ordered elements and q ∈ N, the following tasks can be performed in time O(q): compute the lexicographically minimal combination of q elements from S, and given a combination of q elements from S, compute the lexicographically next such combination if it exists. Hence, by Lemma D.2 we can enumerate the assignments satisfying a histogram, producing each assignment with delay linear in its total size. This concludes the proof of Proposition 6.5.  D.3  Putting Things Together  We are now ready to put things together to prove our main results. We first show: I Proposition D.5. Given a normal d-DNNF C with its OR-index, we can enumerate the elements of S(C), producing each assignment t with delay O(|t|). Proof. The enumeration algorithm consists of two nested loops: In the outer loop, we enumerate the compressed traces T of C with the help of Proposition 6.3. In the inner loop, we enumerate for each T the satisfying assignments with Proposition 6.5. Since C is deterministic, each satisfying assignments of C is captured by exactly once compressed trace. Consequently, we enumerate every satisfying assignments of C exactly once, so the algorithm is correct. To analyze the delay of the algorithm, note that, to enumerate a valuation ν, in the worst case we have to first enumerate the next compressed trace T of C and then compute the valuation ν as a valuation of T . The first part takes time O(|T |) by Proposition 6.3 which by Lemma 6.2 is O(|ν|). The second part takes time O(|ν|) by Proposition 6.5. So the overall delay to produce ν is O(|ν|) as claimed. J We are now ready to prove our first main result: Proof of Theorem 2.1. Given C, we first deal with two special cases. We first check if C has any satisfying assignments. If not, we are done at this point and stop. Note that this consistency check can be done in linear time [Dar01]. The second special case is that we check if C is satisfied exactly by {{}}. If so, we print out {} and are done. This test can also be done in linear time as follows: First check if  XX:31  XX:32  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  {} satisfies C. This can be done in linear time by substituting all inputs by 0 and then evaluating C. Afterwards, we check if C is satisfied by exactly one valuation. Since satisfying assignments of a d-DNNF can be counted in linear time [DM02], this is also a linear time test. In the remainder of the proof, we may now assume that the set S of valuations satisfying C is such that S 6= ∅ and S 6= {{}}. We now infer a compatible order < for C. As discussed in Section 3, this is easy to do in linear time, assuming we are given a v-tree. Next, we proceed with Proposition 3.9 to compute a monotone 0-augmented d-DNNF C 0 in zero-suppressed semantics having < as a compatible order such that S(C 0 ) = S. We then use Proposition 4.3 to compute a 1-normal d-DNNF C 00 which has < as a compatible order and is such that S(C 00 ) = S(C 0 ) \ {{}}. Finally, we compute the OR-index of C 00 with Theorem C.1. Before we start the enumeration phase, we check if {} satisfies C. If so, we enumerate {} as the first valuation. Afterwards, we use Proposition D.5 to enumerate the valuations in S \ {{}}. By inspection of the individual results used in this algorithm, it is obvious that the satisfying assignments of C are correctly enumerated. Moreover, the linear runtime bound on the preprocessing follows by the fact that all individual steps can be performed in time linear in their input size. The bound on the enumeration delay follows directly from Proposition D.5. J The proof of Theorem 2.2 is identical to that of Theorem 2.1 except for the fact that we make an additional preprocessing step. After using Proposition 3.9, we compute a circuit C k that is satisfied exactly by the satisfying assignments of C with Hamming weight at most k with Proposition 4.1. We then proceed as in the proof of Theorem 2.1. Note that this slightly increases the runtime of the preprocessing from O(|C|) to O(k 2 · |C|).  E E.1  Proofs for Section 7 (Applications) Computing Circuit Representations of MSO Answers  I Theorem 7.3. For any fixed MSO formula φ(X1 , . . . , Xk ) on Γ-trees, given a Γ-tree T , we can build in time O(|T |) a monotone d-DNNF circuit C in zero-suppressed semantics whose set S(C) of assignments (as in Definition 3.6) is exactly the set of assignments of φ on T . This appendix section proves Theorem 7.3; we later explain in Appendix E.2 how we can use this result to deduce MSO enumeration results using our main results. The key ingredient of the proof of Theorem 7.3 is our existing construction for provenance of MSO queries on treelike instances [ABS15], using automaton determinism to obtain a d-DNNF [ABS16]. However, for readability, we give a self-contained proof of this result, which focuses on the case of trees. The rewritten proof presented here is also useful to show upwards-determinism and deduce constant memory bounds for enumeration (see Appendix F). We introduce some additional notation. Given a Γ-tree T , we will write λ(n) to denote the label in Γ of a node n of T ; in other words, the labeling function λ is part of the Γ-tree, but we do not write it explicitly for brevity. We will write Leaf(T ) for the set of leaves of a Γ-tree T . Remember that we often identify T with its set of nodes when no confusion can ensue. Further, we will write Assign(φ, T ) to denote the set of assignments of an MSO formula φ(X1 , . . . , Xk ) on Γ-trees with free second-order variables on a Γ-tree T , i.e., the set of  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  assignments A on schema X = X1 , . . . , Xk and domain T such that T satisfies φ(A1 , . . . , Ak ) with the Ai defined as in Definition 7.2. To prove Theorem 7.3, somewhat similarly to Sections 3.3.2 and Sections 3.3.3 of [Bag13], it will be useful to assume that assignments are only considered on leaves, and that the MSO formula only has one free second-order variable. We will explain how to do this, up to extending the size of the alphabet. I Definition E.1. Let Γ be a finite alphabet of labels, let X = X1 , . . . , Xk be a tuple of second-order variables which we see as labels disjoint from Γ, and let ⊥ be a fresh node label. Let ΓX := Γ ∪ {⊥, X1 , . . . , Xk }. A ΓX -assignment tree (T, µ) is a ΓX -tree T and a mapping µ from Leaf(T ) to a domain D called the domain of the assignment tree. We impose the following requirements: The labels X1 , . . . , Xk are used only on leaf nodes, and conversely every leaf node carries a label of this set. Formally, we require Leaf(T ) = {n ∈ T | λ(n) ∈ {X1 , . . . , Xk }}. The mapping µ is computable in constant time, i.e., we can read the image by µ of a leaf node of T directly from that node. If µ(n) 6= µ(n0 ) for two leaves n 6= n0 of T , we require that λ(n) 6= λ(n0 ). For any ΓX -assignment tree T and subset U ⊆ Leaf(T ), the X-assignment α(U ) of U is defined as {hλ(n) : µ(n)i | n ∈ U }. Note that this set is without duplicates thanks to our requirement on µ above, and it is an assignment on schema X and domain T . We now claim that, up to increase the size of the formula, we can rewrite an MSO formula so that it has only one free variable and only answers that include leaves need to be considered: I Lemma E.2. For any MSO formula φ(X1 , . . . , Xk ) on Γ-trees, we can compute an MSO formula ψ(Y ) on ΓX -trees with one free second-order variable that has the following property: given any Γ-tree T , we can compute in linear time a ΓX -assignment tree (T 0 , µ), whose domain is the nodes of T , such that the assignments of φ on T are exactly the ΓX -assignments of the answers of ψ on T 0 ; formally: Assign(φ, T ) = {α(U ) | U ⊆ Leaf(T 0 ), T 0 |= ψ(U )}. Proof. We rewrite φ(X1 , . . . , Xk ) to an MSO formula ψ(Y ) on ΓX -trees, by creating the free second-order variable Y and replacing each atom of the form Xi (x) for a first-order variable x and free second-order variable Xi by ∃y Y (y) ∧ Xi (y) ∧ Φ(x, y), where Φ is a constant-sized MSO subformula asserting that y is a descendant of x and the path from x to y in the tree passes only through nodes labeled ⊥. We now describe the linear-time rewriting of input trees. We rewrite an input Γ-tree T to a ΓX -assignment tree (T 0 , µ) consisting of a ΓX -tree T 0 and function µ from Leaf(T 0 ) to T (written directly on the leaves to ensure constant-time computability). We do so by adding, for every node n of T , k fresh descendants n1 , . . . , nk that we connect to n by a binary tree of fresh nodes labeled ⊥. Each ni is labeled with Xi and mapped by µ to n. It is clear that this process runs in linear time, remembering that k is a constant. Further, it is clear that (T 0 , µ) uses Xi only on leaf nodes, and exactly on such nodes; and that µ satisfies the requirement that it does not map to the same element of T two leaves of T 0 carrying the same label. Last, it is immediate that the answers of ψ on T 0 map to the assignments of φ on T in the prescribed way. Indeed, the rewriting of φ to ψ clearly ensures that U ⊆ Leaf(T 0 ) is an answer to ψ iff (U1 , . . . , Un ) is an answer to φ, where Ui contains the nodes of T whose fresh descendant labeled Xi and connected by a ⊥-path in T 0 is in U . This is the case iff the X-assignment of U on X and T is an assignment to φ. J  XX:33  XX:34  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  Thanks to this result, we can restrict our study to MSO formulae ψ(Y ) with only one free variable, and to answers of ψ that only contain leaves of the tree. We will now state a simple lemma that asserts that the interpretation of a free second-order variable in an MSO formula can always be read off directly from the labels of the tree. We first introduce some definitions: I Definition E.3. A leaf valuation ν of a Γ-tree T is a function mapping the nodes of Leaf(T ) to {0, 1}; we will abuse notation and see them as valuations of T by extending them to map every internal node to 0. We write LVal(T ) for the set of leaf valuations of T . We write Γ to mean Γ × {0, 1}. For ν ∈ LVal(T ), we denote by ν(T ) the Γ-tree obtained from T by relabeling each node n from λ(n) to (λ(n), ν(n)). I Lemma E.4. Given an MSO formula ψ(Y ) on Γ-trees with one free variable, we can compute an MSO formula χ on Γ-trees with no free variables (i.e., a Boolean formula) that has the following property: for any Γ-tree T , for any leaf valuation ν ∈ LVal(T ), the Γ-tree ν(T ) satisfies χ iff {hY : ni | ν(n) = 1} is an assignment of ψ(Y ). Proof. We simply rewrite each atom L(x) for a node predicate L of Γ by ((L, 0))(x) ∨ ((L, 1))(x), and we replace atoms Y (x) that use the free second-order variable Y with W L ((L, 1))(x) for all node predicates L in Γ. It is then clear that the additional label of a Γ-tree indicates how the free second variable should be interpreted. J Remembering that we are only considering answers to the input MSO formula ψ(Y ) that consist of leaf nodes, this lemma allows us to assume a Boolean formula χ on Γ-trees and to study the leaf valuations ν of an input Γ-tree T such that the χ accepts ν(T ). Our goal is to obtain a circuit which captures these leaf valuations (represented as assignments) under zero-suppressed semantics. In other words, the circuit will have variable gates that correspond to the nodes of T , and its captured set should be exactly the assignments corresponding to leaf valuations of T that make it satisfy χ. To compute this circuit, we will be going through tree automata. To this end, it will be simpler to think of automata that read ordered trees, i.e., there is an order on the children of each internal node; we will define automata accordingly but will ensure that this order is inessential. It will also be simpler to assume that input trees are full, i.e., every node has either 0 or 2 children. To do this, we can always add a fresh symbol ⊥0 to the alphabet, with its two labeled versions (⊥0 , 0) and (⊥0 , 1), and add fresh leaves to Γ-trees labeled ⊥0 to make them full. One would then rewrite the MSO formula to relativize quantification to nodes that are not labeled ⊥0 (i.e., do not quantify over them), and add a constant-sized formula asserting that these nodes are all labeled 0 so that they never occur in assignments. We thus define deterministic bottom-up tree automata in the standard way: I Definition E.5. A bottom-up deterministic tree automaton on Γ-trees that are full and ordered (and binary), called a Γ-bDTA for brevity, is a tuple A = (Q, F, ι, δ) where: 1. Q is a finite set of states; 2. F is a subset of Q called the accepting states; 3. ι : Γ → Q is an initialization function which determines the state of the automaton on a leaf node from the label of that node; 4. ∆ : Γ × Q2 → Q is a transition function which determines the state of the automaton on an internal node from its label and the state of the automaton on its two children. As our trees are unordered, we require that the order in which the automaton reads the children of a node never matters, i.e., for every l ∈ Γ and q1 , q2 ∈ Q, we have δ(l, q1 , q2 ) = δ(l, q2 , q1 ). Given a Γ-tree T , we define the run of A on T as the function f : T → Q defined by:  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel 1. For each leaf l of T , set f (l) := ι(λ(l)); 2. For each internal node n of T with children n1 and n2 , set f (l) := δ(λ(n), f (n1 ), f (n2 )). We say that the bDTA A accepts a Γ-tree T if, letting nr be the root of T , the run f of A on T is such that f (nr ) ∈ F . We now use the well-known fact that Boolean MSO formulae on Γ-trees can be rewritten to equivalent Γ-bDTAs, using the standard translation of Thatcher and Wright [TW68] and standard techniques to determinize the automaton [CDG+ 07]: I Theorem E.6 [TW68]. For any tree alphabet Γ and Boolean MSO formula χ on Γ-trees, we can compute a Γ-bDTA A such that, for any Γ-tree T , we have that T satisfies χ iff T is accepted by A. Having fixed our Boolean formula χ on Γ-trees, let us compute accordingly such a Γ-bDTA A. Remember that, given a Γ-tree T , we want to compute a circuit whose captured set under zero-suppressed semantics is the set of assignments representing leaf valuations ν of T such that A accepts ν(T ). We call this the assignment set of the automaton A on the tree T . The following definition is inspired by the provenance notions in [ABS15], but changed to work only on leaves. I Definition E.7. Let A be a Γ-bDTA, and T be a Γ-tree. The assignment set α(A, T ) of A on T is the set {α(ν) | ν ∈ LVal(T ), A accepts ν(T )}. We then give a construction inspired to Proposition 3.1 of [ABS15], but rephrased in the terminology of factorized representations, and simplified by limiting the uncertain labels to leaves. We also observe that the result is deterministic thanks to the determinism of the automaton, as in Theorem 6.11 of [ABS16]. I Proposition E.8. For any tree alphabet Γ, given a Γ-bDTA A = (Q, F, ι, δ) and a full (binary) Γ-tree T , we can compute in time O(|A| · |T |) a monotone circuit C which is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics, such that S(C) = α(A, T ). Note that C is not an augmented circuit, but as it is decomposable, the set S(C) of assignments of C in zero-suppressed semantics (in the sense of Definition 3.6, or Lemma 3.8) is well-defined (recall Remark A.10). Proof of Proposition E.8. We compute the circuit C in a bottom-up fashion on T . We consider each node n of T with label λ(n) ∈ Γ. If n is a leaf node, for b ∈ {0, 1} we let qb := ι((λ(n), b)), and we create the following gates in C: One OR-gate gnq for each q ∈ Q with the following inputs: If q = q0 , one AND-gate with no inputs. If q = q1 , one variable gate corresponding to the node n If n is an internal node with children n1 and n2 , we create the following gates in C: One AND-gate gnq1 ,q2 for each q1 , q2 ∈ Q whose inputs are gnq11 and gnq22 ; One OR-gate gnq for each q ∈ Q with inputs the gnq1 ,q2 for each q1 , q2 ∈ Q such that δ((λ(n), 0), q1 , q2 ) = q.  XX:35  XX:36  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  The output gate g0 is a ∨-gate of the gnq r for q ∈ F , where nr is the root of T . It is clear that the construction of C runs in the prescribed time bound, because the processing that we perform at each node of T is linear in |A|, specifically, in the table of the transition function δ of A. It is clear that C is decomposable, because AND-gates that have inputs are of the form gnq1 ,q2 for internal nodes n of T , in which case the inputs are gnq11 and gnq22 . Now, it is immediate S that, for i ∈ {1, 2}, only descendant leaves of ni can appear in S(gnqii ). As these sets of descendant leaves for the two sibling nodes n1 and n2 are disjoint, the decomposability condition is indeed satisfied. It is now easy to show the following inductive correctness claim on C: for each q ∈ Q and n ∈ T the assignment set S(gnq ) captured by the gate gnq precisely describes the leaf valuations ν of the subtree Tn of T rooted at n such that the run of A on ν(Tn ) reaches q on the root node n of ν(Tn ). Indeed, for a leaf node n of T and for q ∈ Q, the assignments corresponding to the possible leaf valuations are {} and {n}, and we have {} ∈ S(gnq ) iff q = ι((λ(n), 0) and {n} ∈ S(gnq ) iff q = ι((λ(n), 1)). For an internal node n of T with children n1 and n2 and q ∈ Q, an assignment a corresponding to a leaf valuation ν belongs to S(gnq ) iff there is a pair q1 , q2 ∈ Q of states such that δ((λ(n), 0), q1 , q2 ) = q and, for each i ∈ {1, 2}, the assignment ai of the restriction νi of ν to the subtree Tni rooted at ni belongs to S(gnqii ). By induction hypothesis, for any q1 , q2 ∈ Q, for each i ∈ {1, 2}, this happens iff the run of A on ν(Tni ) reaches qi on the root node ni of ν(Tni ). Hence, the condition is equivalent to requiring that there is q1 , q2 ∈ Q such that δ((λ(n), 0), q1 , q2 ) = q and, for all i ∈ {1, 2}, the run of A on ν(Tni ) reaches qi on the root node ni . By definition of δ, this is the case iff the run of A on the subtree Tn of T rooted at n reaches q on the root node n. This concludes the inductive proof of the correctness claim. This clearly implies that the set captured by the decomposable circuit C is the union of the assignment sets ν such that the run of A on ν(T ) reaches a final state at the root, i.e., the assignments ν(T ) for which A accepts ν(T ), so the construction is correct. It remains to show that C is deterministic. The only OR-gates that we introduce are the gnq , and the output gate g0 . For a leaf node n ∈ T , it is clear from their definition that the gnq are deterministic. For an internal node n ∈ T with children n1 and n2 , the fact that the gnq are deterministic is thanks to the determinism of the automaton: for every valuation ν ∈ LVal(T ), by the inductive invariant, for each i ∈ {1, 2}, there is exactly one qi ∈ Q such that ν ∈ gnqii . Hence, there is exactly one q1 , q2 ∈ Q such that ν ∈ S(gnq1 ,q2 ). This implies that there could not be a gate gnq for some q ∈ Q such that ν is in the captured set of two of its inputs. For the output gate g0 , determinism follows again from the determinism of the automaton, as for every leaf valuation ν of T the automaton A reaches exactly one state on the root of ν(T ). Thus, C is deterministic. This concludes the proof. J This allows us to recap the proof of Theorem 7.3: Proof of Theorem 7.3. Fix the MSO formula φ(X1 , . . . , Xk ) on Γ-trees, compute the MSO formula ψ(Y ) on ΓX -trees by Lemma E.2, and the Boolean MSO formula χ on ΓX -trees by Lemma E.4. Rewrite χ to χ0 by adding one fresh symbol ⊥0 that can be used to make input trees full, relativizing quantification to exclude ⊥0 -nodes from consideration but asserting that they never carry the label (⊥0 , 1), and let Γ0 be the resulting alphabet, where Γ0 = ΓX ∪ {⊥0 }, the union being disjoint as ⊥0 is fresh. Now, use Theorem E.6 to compute a Γ0 -bDTA for χ0 . Given the input Γ-tree T , rewrite it in linear time following the process of Lemma E.2 to a ΓX -tree T 0 , and complete it with ⊥0 -nodes to a Γ0 -tree T 00 which is binary and full. Now, use Proposition E.8 to compute a deterministic circuit C that captures the assignments of A  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel on T 00 and is a d-DNNF in the zero-suppressed semantics. Finally, rewrite C in linear time to C 0 by considering each variable gate n and doing the following: If n is a leaf of T 00 which is not in T 0 (i.e., it was added just to make the tree full), replace n with an OR-gate with no inputs. Recalling that χ0 enforces that such nodes are never annotated with 1 in a valuation, this does not change the captured set of the circuit. Further, it clearly cannot alter decomposability, nor can it alter determinism because the captured set S(g) of each gate g after this transformation are a subset of the set previously captured by gate g. If n is a leaf of T 00 which is in T 0 , recalling that its label λ(n) is necessarily in X1 , . . . , Xk , replace the singleton n by hλ(n) : µ(n)i. By the condition on µ, this cannot break decomposability or determinism, because it is a bijective renaming of the variable gates. Hence, the result C 0 is a monotone d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics. We now show that it captures the assignments of φ on T . For the forward direction, consider an assignment A of φ on T . By Lemma E.2, there is a subset U of leaves of T 0 such that α({hY : ni | n ∈ U }) = A and T 0 satisfies φ(U ). By Lemma E.4, the leaf valuation νU obtained from U is such that νU (T 0 ) satisfies χ, and clearly if we expand νU to a valuation of T 00 that sets to 0 the additional leaves of T 0 we know that νU (T 00 ) satisfies χ0 . Hence, by Theorem E.6, we know that A accepts νU (T 00 ), so by Proposition E.8 the assignment U corresponding to νU is captured by C. Now, our rewriting ensures that, as A = α({hY : ni | n ∈ U }), the circuit C 0 captures A. For the backward direction, consider an assignment A captured by the monotone d-DNNF C 0 . Considering its preimage in C, this means that C captures an assignment U , i.e., a set of leaves of T 00 , that are all in T 0 and such that α({hY : ni | n ∈ U }) = A. Now, by Proposition E.8 we know that, letting νU be the leaf valuation of T 00 defined by setting the nodes of U to 1 and setting all other nodes to 0, the automaton A accepts νU (T 00 ). By Theorem E.6, this implies that νU (T 00 ) satisfies χ0 , hence νU (T 0 ) satisfies χ, hence, by Lemma E.4, T 0 satisfies ψ(U ), and by Lemma E.2 we know that T satisfies φ(A). This concludes the correctness proof. J  E.2  Proof of MSO Enumeration Results  We now explain formally how our results can be used to re-prove the existing result of [Bag06, KS13], once we have restricted to Γ-trees. Note that, unlike what we defined in the main text, this result does not only focus on data complexity: the goal is to justify the O(k · |T |) claim for the delay given in the main text. I Theorem E.9. For any fixed tree alphabet Γ, given an MSO formula φ with k free variables and a Γ-tree T , we can enumerate the answers to φ on T with the following complexities: the preprocessing has linear data complexity, i.e., it is in O(f (|φ|) · |T |) for some fixed function f ; the delay is linear in each produced valuation and independent from the query except for k, in particular, it is in O(k · |T |); the memory usage is linear in the size of the largest valuation and again independent from the query except for k, so again in particular in O(k · |T |). If all free variables of φ are first-order, the delay and memory usage are in O(k). Proof. For the preprocessing phase, we use Theorem 7.3 to compute in linear-time a monotone circuit C which is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics and captures the assignments of φ on T . Note that we have not shown a compatible order for C, but it has no range gates, so  XX:37  XX:38  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  we know by Remark B.7 that we can apply the results of Section 4 to the circuit, and the same is immediately true for Sections 5 and 6. We further know that this circuit is upwards-deterministic by Claim F.3 (see Appendix F), so we can apply the linear-time preprocessing scheme of Theorem F.2 as well as its enumeration scheme. This runs in delay linear in each assignment, which is always in O(k · |T |), i.e., constant delay (O(k)) if the size of assignments is constant, which is in particular the case if the free variables of φ are second-order translations of free first-order variables. We then rewrite each assignment (set of singletons) to the answer that it represents, in time linear in each assignment. The memory usage is linear in each assignment thanks to Theorem F.2. J  E.3  Factorized Representations  I Lemma 7.4. For any d-representation D, let C be the monotone circuit obtained by replacing × and ∪ by AND and OR, replacing ∅ and hi by AND-gates and OR-gates with no inputs, and keeping singletons as variables. Then all AND-gates of C are decomposable, and S(C) (defined as in Section 3) is exactly the database relation represented by D. Proof. The fact that C is decomposable, i.e., a DNNF, is thanks to the requirement on d-representations which imposes that gates have a schema, with union always having input gates of the same schema, and product always having input gates of disjoint schemas. This requirement clearly disallows in particular that some singleton has a path to two different inputs to a product gates. Note that C is not an augmented circuit, but as it is decomposable, its set of assignments S(C) in zero-suppressed semantics (in the sense of Definition 3.6, or Lemma 3.8) is well-defined (recall Remark A.10). The claimed result on S(C) then follows immediately from Lemma 3.8. J I Theorem 7.5. The tuples of a deterministic d-representation D over a schema S can be enumerated with linear-time preprocessing, delay O(|S|), and memory O(|S| log |D|). Proof. Let D be a deterministic d-representation, and let C be the corresponding monotone circuit as in the statement of Lemma 7.4, such that the set S(C) captured by C is the relation represented by D: we know that C is decomposable. The circuit C is not exactly deterministic because the determinism requirement of [OZ15] only requires that they are no duplicate tuples in the captured set of the output gate g0 . However, it is easy to see that this requirement implies that, for every OR-gate g, there are no duplicates when computing S(g), unless g has no directed path to g0 or it is “absorbed” later in the circuit (i.e., we only use its value conjoined with gates capturing ∅). Hence, we rewrite C to C 0 by removing gates with no directed path to g0 , and by computing bottom-up in linear time which gates capture exactly ∅ (as in Lemma B.4), and replace them by OR-gates with no inputs: this does not change the set captured by C (indeed, the sets captured by all remaining gates), and C 0 is still decomposable. Now, it is clear that the determinism requirement of [OZ15] on S(g0 ) in C, hence on S(g0 ) in C 0 , imposes that all OR-gates are deterministic, because any violation of determinism on a gate g would imply a duplicate in S(g), hence in S(g0 ), following a directed path from g to g0 , and observing that the duplicate can never be lost at an OR-gate along the path, or at an AND-gate (this uses the fact that no gate captures ∅). Hence, C 0 is a d-DNNF in zero-suppressed semantics such that S(C 0 ) is the relation represented by D. We note that C 0 does not have a compatible order, but again it is decomposable and does not have range gates, so the process in Sections 4–6 still applies to it (see in particular Remark B.7), because the process does not introduce range gates, and does not use the order  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  except to define the semantics of range gates and to guarantee decomposability. So we can simply use Proposition 4.3 to compute a normal monotone circuit C 00 capturing the same set as C 0 (it is not necessary to apply homogenization because C 0 already captures tuples of the correct weight), we apply Theorem C.1, and last we enumerate following Proposition D.5. We handle the special cases of {{}} and of circuits capturing ∅ like in the proof of Theorem 2.1 in Appendix D.3. Thus, we can enumerate the tuples of C 0 , hence of D, with linear-time preprocessing, delay in O(|S|), and memory O(|S| log |D|) as in Theorem 2.1. J  F  Constant-Memory Enumeration for Upwards-Deterministic Circuits  Remember that our enumeration results of Theorem 2.1 and Theorem 2.2 use memory in O(|O| log |I|), where |I| is the size of the input circuit and |O| is the size of each output. The factor in |O|, which is constant for constant-sized outputs, is obviously difficult to avoid. However, the same is not true of the logarithmic factor in the input, which comes from the indexing construction on multitrees of Theorem 5.4 in Section 5. In this appendix, we explain how the memory usage of the enumeration phase of Theorem 2.1 and Theorem 2.2 can be improved to O(|O|), under an additional hypothesis on the input circuit which allows us to bypass Theorem 5.4. We first present this condition, called upwards-determinism, and claim that enumeration for such circuits can be performed using memory linear in the size of each valuation (Theorem F.2). Second, we show that the circuits produced for MSO enumeration in Theorem 7.3 are upwards-deterministic. Third, we prove Theorem F.2.  F.1  Upwards-Deterministic Circuits  We define upwards-deterministic circuits in the following way: I Definition F.1. A wire (g, g 0 ) of C is pure if g 0 is an OR-gate, or if g 0 is an AND-gate and all its other inputs are 0-valid. A gate g is upwards-deterministic if g is unsatisfiable or there is at most one gate g 0 such that (g, g 0 ) is a pure wire of C. We call C upwards-deterministic if every AND-gate and OR-gate in C is upwards-deterministic. In particular, when a wire (g, g 0 ) of a monotone circuit is pure, it intuitively means that g 0 evaluates to 1 whenever g does, and S(g) ⊆ S(g 0 ) in zero-suppressed semantics. Upwards-determinism imposes that g is an input to at most one such g 0 . If we assume upwards-determinism, we can show the analogue of our main results of Theorem 2.1 and Theorem 2.2, but with memory usage linear in each output. Namely: I Theorem F.2. Given a structured upwards-deterministic d-DNNF C with its v-tree T , we can enumerate its satisfying assignments with linear-time preprocessing and delay and memory usage linear in each valuation. Further, for any k ∈ N, we can enumerate the satisfying assignments of Hamming weight ≤ k with preprocessing O(k 2 |C|) and with delay and memory usage in O(k), i.e., constant delay and constant memory. Proof sketch. We show that upwards-determinism can be preserved in our preprocessing in Sections 3–4. Once the circuit is normal, upwards-determinism ensures that each OR-gate is the input to at most one OR-gate, so OR-components in Section 5 are actually reversed trees, and we can replace Theorem C.1 with a much simpler constant-memory indexing scheme. J The complete proof of Theorem F.2 is technical, and presented in Appendix F.3.  XX:39  XX:40  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  F.2  Upwards-Deterministic Circuits for MSO Enumeration  We now show the claim that Theorem 7.3 produces circuits whose underlying circuit is upwards-deterministic. This implies the constant memory bound for MSO enumeration in Theorem E.9, using Theorem F.2. I Claim F.3. Theorem 7.3 produces upwards-deterministic circuits. Proof. The input rewriting that we perform in the proof of Theorem 7.3 clearly cannot influence the fact that the circuit is upwards-deterministic. Indeed, first, the bijective renaming of inputs clearly has no effect. Second replacing some inputs by gates capturing ∅ ensures that the captured set of each gate is a subset of what it was before the rewriting: so the set of unsatisfiable gates is a superset of what it was initially, and the set of 0-valid gates is a subset of what it was initially, thus any violation of upwards-determinism in the initial circuit implies the existence of a violation in the original circuit. From this, to show the claim for Theorem 7.3, it suffices to show that the circuits produced in Proposition E.8 are upwards-deterministic. To show this, consider its application to an automaton with state set A and to a Γ-tree T , and let C be the resulting circuit. In the construction, the only gates that are used as input to multiple gates are the gnq for q ∈ Q and n ∈ T when n is not the root of T . Let n0 be the parent of n in T , and assume that n is the first child of n0 in T : the proof if n is the second child is symmetric. Let n2 be 2 the second child of n0 . The gates of C that have gnq as an input are then the gnq,q for q2 ∈ Q, 0 q2 and the other input to each of them is gn2 . Now, by determinism of the automaton, using the inductive invariant in the proof of Proposition E.8, we know that there is exactly one q2 such that {} ∈ gnq22 , i.e., gnq22 . Hence, the only outgoing wire of gnq which is pure is the one 2 to gnq,q , so gnq does not violate upwards-determinism. This concludes the proof. J 2  F.3  Proof of Theorem F.2  To show Theorem F.2, we revisit the proofs of Sections 3–6. Specifically: 1. We must show that the preprocessing steps of Sections 3–4 preserve upwards-determinism. We must specifically show this for the reduction to zero-suppressed semantics (Proposition 3.9), the homogenization (Proposition 4.1), and the normalization (Proposition 4.3). 2. We must show that we can replace the use of Theorem C.1 in Section 5 by a constantmemory indexing result. To do this, we can use the assumption that OR-components are reversed trees (i.e., rooted trees, where edges are reversed and go from the leaves to the root), because this is guaranteed by upwards-determinism on normal circuits. Indeed, a gate g with two different children in an OR-component would necessarily be satisfiable (because a normal circuit is ∅-pruned), and its two outgoing wires in the OR-component would be pure. 3. We must show that enumeration in Section 6 with the indexes of Proposition F.4 uses linear memory. We first show the second point: I Proposition F.4. Given a reversed tree T , we can compute in linear time a data structure allowing us to perform the following: given n ∈ T , enumerate in constant delay and constant memory the leaves of T that have a directed path to n. Proof. We traverse the tree in prefix order in linear time and store at each leaf a pointer to the next leaf. We then traverse the tree bottom-up and store, for each internal node n of  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  the tree, a pointer to its first leaf in the prefix order (i.e., the first leaf that has a directed path to n), and a pointer to its last leaf in the prefix order. This can clearly be performed in linear time. To perform the enumeration, given a node n, we jump to its first leaf n0 , remember its last leaf n00 , and we enumerate the leaves in prefix order from n0 to n00 . This process is clearly correct, constant delay, and uses only a constant amount of memory. J We next argue for the third point: the process of Section 6 takes memory linear in each produced valuation (and in particular constant when valuations have bounded size). Indeed, the only place in this section where memory usage did not satisfy this property was when using the OR-indexes, but the indexes of Proposition F.4 only require constant memory, so the overall memory usage is linear in the produced valuations. We last take care of the first point. We first show that rewriting circuits to arity-two can be performed in linear-time without breaking upwards-determinism, extending Lemma B.1: I Claim F.5. Every upwards-deterministic Boolean circuit C can be rewritten in linear time to an arity-two circuit C 0 that is equivalent to C in standard semantics (i.e., captures the same function) and that is upwards-deterministic. We can further do so while preserving a compatible order <. For every k ∈ N, every upwards-deterministic monotone k-augmented Boolean circuit C can be rewritten it in linear time to an arity-two monotone k-augmented Boolean circuit C 0 that is equivalent to C in zero-suppressed semantics and is upwards-deterministic. Further, all properties preserved in Lemma B.1 are still preserved. Proof. We will use the same construction to show the two claims, and it will essentially be the same general construction that we used to show Lemma B.1: we rewrite each gate with fan-in greater than 2 to a tree of gates of the same type with fan-in two. For this reason, we will not argue that the same properties as before are preserved, because this will still be true for the same reasons as before. To preserve upwards-determinism, we will simply be more specific about the way in which we construct each tree. We first preprocess the circuit once to compute which gates are 0-valid. This can clearly be performed in linear time, as in Lemma B.5. Whenever we wish to rewrite a gate g with input gates g1 , . . . , gn , with n > 2, the tree of gates of the same type that we introduce will be linear (i.e., as unbalanced as possible). Specifically, we remove the wires from gi to g for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, we introduce gates gi0 of the same type as g for 1 < i < n − 1, we set the inputs of g to be g1 and g10 , the inputs of each 0 0 gi0 for 1 < i < n − 2 to be gi+1 and gi+1 , and the inputs of gn−2 to be gn−1 and gn . This ensures that all gates have arity-two, and that the circuit is equivalent. We now impose a constraint on the order in which the input gates g1 , . . . , gn should be considered: we require that all gates that are 0-valid are enumerated first, so they are attached as high in the tree as possible. The only thing to show is that upwards-determinism is preserved. The new gates, i.e., the gi0 introduced for each gate g, cannot introduce a violation of upwards-determinism, because 0 they have only one outgoing wire (to gi−1 , or to g). Hence, it suffices to consider outgoing 0 wires for gates of the rewritten circuit C that stand for gates of the input circuit C, i.e., using our terminology above, it suffices to consider the wires from the gi to the gj0 , or to g. It clearly suffices to show that, whenever such a wire is pure, then the corresponding wire (gi , g) is pure in C. Indeed, this implies that any violation of upwards-determinism in C 0 on a gate g 0 (which also exists in C) would imply a violation of upwards-determinism on g 0 in C.  XX:41  XX:42  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration Hence, let us consider a wire (g 0 , g 00 ) in C 0 where g 0 exists in C, let g be the gate for which g 00 was introduced: observe that the wire (g 0 , g) exists in C, and that g and g 00 have the same type, in fact possibly we have g 00 = g 0 . Let us assume that (g 0 , g 00 ) is pure in C 0 , and show that it is pure in C. There are four possibilities: The gate g is an OR-gate. In this case, the wire is pure in C, and there is nothing to show. The gate g is an AND-gate and all its inputs are 0-valid in C. In this case, the wire is pure in C, and there is nothing to show. The gate g is an AND-gate and only one of its inputs g ∗ is not 0-valid in C. In this case, the only incoming pure wire of g in C is (g ∗ , g), and under our assumption that (g 0 , g 00 ) is pure in C 0 we must show that g 0 = g ∗ . From the construction we know that g ∗ is still 0-valid in C 0 , so we know that g ∗ was enumerated last in the inputs of g, so it is attached to the lowest node in the tree of C 0 introduced for g. As g ∗ is still not 0-valid in C 0 , we then know that g is not 0-valid in C 0 and none of the gi0 is 0-valid (because there is a path from the gate g ∗ , which is not 0-valid, to all these gates that goes only via AND-gates). So if the wire (g 0 , g 00 ) is pure, it must be the case that g 00 is the lowest node in the tree of C 0 , and the other input to g 00 must be 0-valid so we must have g 0 = g ∗ which is what we wanted to show. The gate g is an AND-gate and at least two of its inputs are not 0-valid in C. In this case, similarly to the above reasoning, g is not 0-valid in C and none of the gi0 are 0-valid in C, Further, as two inputs that are not 0-valid were enumerated last, the lowest node in the tree has two inputs that are not 0-valid. Hence, in fact, this case cannot occur under our assumption that the wire (g 0 , g 00 ) is pure in C 0 . This concludes the proof.  J  We then show: I Claim F.6. The construction of Proposition 3.9 preserves upwards-determinism. Proof. The construction first completes the input circuit using Lemma A.4, and then computes its monotonization. We argue that monotonization on a decomposable circuit cannot break upwards-determinism. Indeed, it does not change which gates are 0-valid, it does not change the type of AND-gates or OR-gates except to introduce AND-gates with no inputs, so it does not change which wires are pure; and further it cannot make any gate unsatisfiable which wasn’t unsatisfiable. We thus focus on completion. The completion construction in the proof of Lemma A.4 first rewrites the circuit to an arity-two circuit C, which does not break upwards-determinism by Claim F.5. Then it adds range gates as children to some AND-gates and rewrites inputs to OR-gates by AND-gates of the original gates and some fresh range gates. We explain why this does not break upwards-determinism. It is clear that, in the new circuit C 0 , the wires going out of a new range gate or out of a new AND-gate cannot violate upwards-determinism, because these gates are used as input to only one gate. So it suffices to consider the wires (g 0 , g) going out of gates g 0 in C 0 that correspond to gates that already existed in C. There are two cases: either g is an AND-gate of C 0 that already existed in C, or g is an AND-gate introduced when rewriting an OR-gate g 00 of C. In the first case, we show that if the wire (g 0 , g) is pure in C 0 , then it was already pure in C. But this is immediate: if the wire is pure, then all other inputs to g in C 0 are 0-valid,  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel  and then from our rewriting it is clear that all inputs of g in C (which are a subset of those in C 0 ) were already 0-valid. In the second case, as g 00 was an OR-gate of C, the wire (g, g 00 ) was necessarily pure in C. This allows us to conclude the proof. Indeed, assume by way of contradiction that there is a gate g of C 0 that violates upwards-determinism. By our initial reasoning, g is necessarily a gate that already exists in C. Further, g captures a non-empty set in C 0 , and by our construction we know that the same is true of g in C. Now, let g1 6= g2 be the gates of C 0 such that the wires (g, g1 ) and (g, g2 ) are pure in C 0 . Let g10 , g20 be the gates that correspond to g1 and g2 in C, i.e., gi0 = gi if gi0 exists in C, and otherwise gi0 is the OR-gate of C for which the AND-gate gi was introduced. Our construction clearly ensures that g10 6= g20 : indeed, our construction ensures that the gate g cannot have a wire both to a fresh AND-gate of C 0 and to the original OR-gate (indeed no gates at all have wires to the original OR-gates), and g cannot have a wire to two new AND-gates introduced for the same OR-gate (as we create one AND-gate for each input). Now, our previous claim ensures that the wires (g, g10 ) and (g, g20 ) are pure in C, so g witnesses that C is not upwards-deterministic, contradicting our assumption and concluding the proof. J We then show the claim for Proposition 4.3. The construction of Lemma B.1 extends thanks to Claim F.5. It is straightforward that Lemma B.6 does not break upwardsdeterminism. Indeed, wires to AND-gates that are collapsed are necessarily pure because they have only one input, so collapsing the gates cannot cause a gate to have more than one outgoing pure wire. Further, adding exits is not problematic, because wires to exits were already to OR-nodes, so already pure, and each exit has exactly one outgoing wire. The ∅-pruning process of Lemma B.4 preserves upwards-determinism. Indeed, any gate in the output existed with the same type in the input, it is 0-valid in the output iff it is 0-valid in the input, all gates in the output are satisfiable but were already satisfiable in the input, every wire in the output existed in the input, and it is not hard to see that if a wire in the output is pure then is also pure in the input: indeed, the inputs to AND-gates are unchanged, and changing the inputs to OR-gates is unproblematic because all their incoming wires are always pure. What must be shown is that upwards-determinism is preserved by the pruning construction of Lemma B.5. In this lemma, the actual process of {}-pruning is unproblematic for similar reasons as for ∅-pruning: note that removing input gates to AND-gates that are 0-valid cannot cause any of the other input wires to become pure. The crux of the matter is to show that Proposition B.3 preserves upwards-determinism. This also takes care of proving the extension of Proposition 4.1. Hence, we claim: I Claim F.7. If the input C to Proposition B.3 is upwards-deterministic, then its output C 0 also is. Proof. Remember that the construction in the proof of Proposition B.3 first rewrites the circuit to arity-two with Lemma B.1, which does not break upwards-determinism thanks to Claim F.5; so we let C be the arity-two version of the input circuit, which is upwardsdeterministic. The construction then produces C 0 by introducing, for each gate g of the original circuit C, >k,1 >k gates of the form g =i for 0 ≤ i ≤ k and g >k , as well as gates of the form gj=i and gi,j , gi,j , >k,2 gi,j , which we call fresh gates of C 0 . We will define the original gate ω(g) of a gate g of C as follows: if g is of the form g0=i or g0>k , then ω(g) := g0  XX:43  XX:44  A Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration  if g is a fresh gate created for a AND-gate g0 with two inputs in C, then ω(g) := g0 . It is clear that fresh gates g in C 0 cannot violate upwards-determinism, because in the construction any such gate g is used as input to only one gate in C 0 , specifically, a gate whose original gate is the same as that of g. So it suffices to check upwards-determinism for gates of C 0 which are not fresh gates, i.e., wires (g 0 , g) of C 0 where g 0 is not fresh, so that in particular ω(g 0 ) 6= ω(g), and by construction (ω(g 0 ), ω(g)) is a wire of C. We will show the following claim (*): for every wire (g00 , g0 ) of C such that g00 is an AND-gate or an OR-gate, when considering every wire (g 0 , g) of C 0 such that ω(g) = g0 and ω(g 0 ) = g00 , then (i) for each choice of g 0 , at most one g is such that the wire is pure, and (ii) if one such wire is pure then (g00 , g0 ) is also pure in C. This claim implies that C 0 is upwards-deterministic. Indeed, assume to the contrary that C 0 is not upwards-deterministic, then it has an AND- or OR-gate g 0 which is not fresh, is satisfiable, and has two pure wires (g 0 , g1 ) and (g, g2 ) with g1 6= g2 . The construction then ensures that ω(g 0 ) is an AND-gate or an OR-gate and that (ω(g 0 ), ω(g1 )) and (ω(g 0 ), ω(g2 )) are wires of C. Further, by the properties of C 0 , the set S(g 0 ) captured by g 0 in C 0 is a subset of the set S(ω(g 0 )) of ω(g 0 ) in C, so ω(g 0 ) is satisfiable. By (i), we know that we must have ω(g1 ) 6= ω(g2 ), and by (ii) these two wires are pure in C, so ω(g 0 ) is not upwards-deterministic in C, a contradiction. Hence, it suffices to show claim (*). Let us show claim (*) by considering all possible wires (g00 , g0 ) of C: If g0 is an OR-gate, then the wire (g00 , g0 ) is always pure so (ii) is vacuous. Further, for each gate g 0 of C 0 with ω(g 0 ) = g00 , there is exactly one gate g of C 0 with ω(g) = g0 such that the wire (g 0 , g) is in C 0 , so (i) holds. If g0 is an AND-gate, then: If g0 has no inputs, then there are no wires to consider so (i) and (ii) are vacuous. If g0 has one input then the wire (g00 , g0 ) is always pure so (ii) is vacuous, and (i) holds for the same reasons as for OR-gates. If g0 has two inputs, let g000 be the input of g0 in C which is different from g00 , i.e., the inputs of g0 in C are g00 and g000 . Observe that in the construction, for any wire (g 0 , g) of C with ω(g) = g0 and ω(g 0 ) = g00 , the gate g is always a fresh AND-gate with two inputs, and its other input is a non-fresh gate g 00 such that ω(g 00 ) = g000 . Hence, the wire (g 0 , g) of C 0 is pure only if g 00 is 0-valid in C 0 . Recalling the properties of C 0 , remember that this can only happen if g 00 is the gate (g000 )=0 and if g000 is 0-valid in C, so we have shown point (ii). Further, observe from the construction that the only such wires (g 0 , g) in C 0 are: 00 =0 ∗ For i ∈ {0, . . . , k}, the wire from (g00 )=i to (g0 )=i . i , whose other input is (g0 ) ∗ The wire from (g00 )>k to (g0 )>k,1 , whose other input is (g000 )=0 . So indeed, for each choice of g, there is at most one pure wire, so (i) holds too. We have thus established claim (*), which concludes the proof.  J  With the above, we have finished the proof of Theorem F.2. References for the Appendix ABS15 ABS16  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, and Pierre Senellart. Provenance circuits for trees and treelike instances. In ICALP, 2015. Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, and Pierre Senellart. Tractable lineages on treelike instances: Limits and extensions. In PODS, 2016.  Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet, and Stefan Mengel Bag06  Guillaume Bagan. MSO queries on tree decomposable structures are computable with linear delay. In CSL, 2006. Bag13 Guillaume Bagan. Algorithmes et complexité des problèmes d’énumération pour l’évaluation de requêtes logiques. PhD thesis, Université de Caen, 2013. CDG+ 07 H. Comon, M. Dauchet, R. Gilleron, C. Löding, F. Jacquemard, D. Lugiez, S. Tison, and M. Tommasi. Tree automata: Techniques and applications, 2007. Available from http://tata.gforge.inria.fr/. Dar01 Adnan Darwiche. Decomposable negation normal form. J. ACM, 48(4), 2001. DM02 Adnan Darwiche and Pierre Marquis. A knowledge compilation map. JAIR, 17, 2002. Knu05 Donald E. Knuth. Art of Computer Programming. Volume 4a: Combinatorial Algorithms, Part 1, 2005. KS13 Wojciech Kazana and Luc Segoufin. Enumeration of monadic second-order queries on trees. TOCL, 14(4), 2013. OZ15 Dan Olteanu and Jakub Závodnỳ. Size bounds for factorised representations of query results. TODS, 40(1), 2015. Str73 Volker Strassen. Vermeidung von Divisionen. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 264, 1973. TW68 James W. Thatcher and Jesse B. Wright. Generalized finite automata theory with an application to a decision problem of second-order logic. Math. Systems Theory, 2(1), 1968. Weg00 Ingo Wegener. Branching programs and binary decision diagrams. SIAM, 2000.  XX:45

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
