Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_184

Abstract:
AMENABLE UNIFORMLY RECURRENT SUBGROUPS AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  arXiv:1802.04736v2 [math.GR] 29 Mar 2018  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  Abstract. We study lattice embeddings for the class of countable groups Γ defined by the property that the largest amenable uniformly recurrent subgroup AΓ is continuous. When AΓ comes from an extremely proximal action and the envelope of AΓ is co-amenable in Γ, we obtain restrictions on the locally compact groups G that contain a copy of Γ as a lattice, notably regarding normal subgroups of G, product decompositions of G, and more generally dense mappings from G to a product of locally compact groups. We then focus on a family of finitely generated groups acting on trees within this class, and show that these embed as cocompact irreducible lattices in some locally compact wreath products. This provides examples of finitely generated simple groups quasi-isometric to a wreath product C ≀ F , where C is a finite group and F a non-abelian free group. Keywords. Lattices, locally compact groups, strongly proximal actions, Chabauty space, groups acting on trees, irreducible lattices in wreath products.  1. Introduction The questions considered in this article fall into the setting of the following general problem: given a (class of) countable group Γ, study the locally compact groups G such that Γ embeds as a lattice in G, i.e. such that Γ sits as a discrete subgroup of G and G/Γ carries a G-invariant probability measure. Malcev showed that every finitely generated torsion free nilpotent group embeds as a cocompact lattice in a unique simply connected nilpotent Lie group [Rag72, Ch. II]. Conversely if G is a locally compact group with a finitely generated nilpotent lattice, then after modding out by a compact normal subgroup, the identity component G0 is a Lie group of polynomial growth (these have been characterized in [Gui73, Jen73]) and G/G0 is finitely generated and virtually nilpotent. This statement is a combination of several works. First if G has a finitely generated nilpotent lattice Γ, then Γ is necessarily cocompact in G. Since Γ is virtually torsion free this is a classical fact when G is totally disconnected, and the general case can be deduced from [BQ14, Prop. 3.7] (which uses notably the solution of Hilbert’s fifth problem [MZ55]). In particular G is compactly generated with polynomial growth, and the statement then follows from the generalization of Gromov’s polynomial growth theorem for locally compact groups [Los87]. Beyond the nilpotent case, examples of classifications of embeddings of Γ as a cocompact lattice have been obtained by Dymarz in [Dym15] for several families Date: March 29, 2018. This work was carried out when the author was F.R.S.-FNRS Postdoctoral Researcher. Current affiliation: CNRS, UMPA - ENS Lyon. 1  2  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  of examples of solvable groups Γ. Although not directly related to our concerns, we also mention that a certain dual problem was considered by Bader–Caprace– Gelander–Mozes in [BCGM16] for the class of amenable groups. Outside the setting of amenable groups, Furman addressed the above problem for the class of lattices Γ in semi-simple Lie groups in [Fur01], improving rigidity results of Mostow, Prasad, Margulis (see the references in [Fur01]; see also Furstenberg [Fur67b]). In [BFS15], Bader–Furman–Sauer considered a large class of countable groups Γ defined by certain group theoretic conditions, and established, given a lattice embedding of Γ in G, a general arithmeticity result in the setting where the connected component of G is non-compact. In this article we consider the class of groups whose Furstenberg uniformly recurrent subgroup is continuous (see below for definitions). In the first part of the article we address the question to what extent the properties of the Furstenberg uniformly recurrent subgroup of a countable group Γ influence the locally compact groups into which Γ embeds as a lattice. In the second part we focus on a family of finitely generated groups within this class which embed as cocompact irreducible lattices in some locally compact wreath products. The groups under consideration. For a countable group Γ, the Chabauty space Sub(Γ) of all subgroups of Γ is a compact space, on which Γ acts by conjugation. A uniformly recurrent subgroup (URS) of Γ is a closed minimal Γ-invariant subset of Sub(Γ) [GW15]. Glasner and Weiss showed that every minimal action of Γ on a compact space X gives rise to a URS (see Proposition 3.2), called the stabilizer URS associated to the action. Conversely every URS arises as the stabilizer URS of a minimal action (see Matte Bon–Tsankov [MBT17], and Elek [Ele17] in the case of finitely generated groups). URS’s have been shown to be related to the study of ideals in reduced group C ∗ algebras [KK17, Ken15] and reduced crossed products [Kaw17]. URS’s of several classes of groups have been studied in [LBMB16]. For certain examples of groups Γ, rigidity results about minimal actions on compact spaces have been obtained in [LBMB16] from a complete description of the space URS(Γ). Various results about homomorphisms between topological full groups of étale groupoids, notably obstructions involving invariants of the groupoids, have been obtained in [MB18] via URS’s considerations (more precisely via a complete description of the points in the Chabauty space of these groups whose orbit does not approach the trivial subgroup). In the present article we will make use of URS’s as a tool in order to study lattice embeddings for a class of countable groups that we now define. A URS is amenable if it consists of amenable subgroups. Every countable group Γ admits a largest amenable URS AΓ (with respect to a natural partial order on URS(Γ), see §3.1), which is the stabilizer URS associated to the action of Γ on its Furstenberg boundary (see §2.2 for definitions). The URS AΓ is called the Furstenberg URS of Γ. AΓ is either a point, in which case we have AΓ = {Rad(Γ)}, where Rad(Γ) is the amenable radical of Γ, or homeomorphic to a Cantor space. In this last case we say that AΓ is continuous. We refer to [LBMB16] for a more detailed discussion. Let (C) denote the class of groups Γ for which the Furstenberg URS AΓ is continuous. Equivalently, a group Γ belongs to (C) if and only if Γ admits an amenable URS whose envelope is not amenable (see below for the definition of the  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  3  envelope). The class (C) is disjoint from all classes of groups previously mentioned in the introduction. More precisely, the class (C) is disjoint from the class of amenable groups, the class of linear groups [BKKO14], and also from other classes of groups specifically considered in [BFS15], such as groups with non-vanishing ℓ2 -Betti numbers [BKKO14] or acylindrically hyperbolic groups (see [DGO11, Th. 7.19] and [BKKO14, Th. 1.4]). The class (C) is stable under taking quotient by an amenable normal subgroup and extension by an amenable group [LBMB16, Prop. 2.20]. Also if Γ has a normal subgroup that is in (C), then Γ belongs to (C) [LBMB16, Prop. 2.24]. By a result of Breuillard–Kalantar–Kennedy–Ozawa, the complement of the class (C) is also stable under extensions (see [LBMB16, Prop. 2.24]). The study of this class of groups is also motivated by the work of Kalantar– Kennedy [KK17], who showed the following characterization: a countable group Γ belongs to (C) if and only if the group Γ/Rad(Γ) has a reduced C ∗ -algebra that is not simple. For an introduction and the historical developments of the problem of C ∗ -simplicity, we refer to the survey of de la Harpe [Har07]. Topological boundaries. We will make use of the notion of topological boundary in the sense of Furstenberg. These are compact spaces with a minimal and strongly proximal group action (see §2.2 for definitions). Many different notions of boundaries appear in the study of groups and group actions. What is now sometimes called “boundary theory” is particularly well described in the introduction of [BF14]. We insist that in the present article the term boundary will always refer to a topological boundary in the above sense. This notion should not be confused with any of the measured notions of boundaries. In particular, despite the possibly confusing terminology, the maximal topological boundary, called the Furstenberg boundary, is not the same notion as the measured notion of Poisson–Furstenberg boundary. Lattices and direct products. Special attention will be given to products of locally compact groups. The study of lattices in product groups is motivated (among other things) by its connections with the theory of lattices in semi-simple Lie groups, its rich geometric aspects, as well as the instances of groups with rare properties appearing in this setting. We refer to the literature (see [Mar91, Wis96, BM97, BM00b, Rém99, Sha00, BM02, Rat04, MS04, BS06, CR09, CM12, Rad17]) for developments over the last years on the study of lattices in products of locally compact groups. Given a countable group Γ with a continuous Furstenberg URS and a group G containing Γ as a lattice, we are interested in understanding how close the group G can be from a direct product of two groups, or which properties the group G can share with a direct product. Of course various notions of closeness can be considered. The most basic one is to ask whether the group G admits non-trivial decompositions as a direct product. One step further, one might consider quotient morphisms from G onto direct products of groups. In Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 below we more generally consider continuous morphisms with dense image from G to a direct product of groups G → G1 × G2 . We make no assumption about injectivity of these maps or injectivity of the composition with the projection to one factor  4  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  Gi . In particular this setting allows maps of the form G → G/N1 × G/N2 for closed normal subgroups N1 , N2 such that N1 N2 is dense in G. First results. A central notion in this article is the one of extremely proximal action. Minimal and extremely proximal actions naturally arise in geometric group theory, and are boundaries in the sense of Furstenberg. We refer to §2.3 for definitions and examples. We say that the Furstenberg URS AΓ of a countable group Γ comes from an extremely proximal action if there exists a compact space Z and a Γ-action on Z that is minimal and extremely proximal, whose associated stabilizer URS is equal to AΓ . Note that typically Z will not be the Furstenberg boundary of Γ. If H is a URS of Γ, the envelope Env(H) of H is by definition the subgroup of Γ generated by all the subgroups H ∈ H. Theorem 1.1. Let Γ be a countable group whose Furstenberg URS comes from a faithful and extremely proximal action, and let G be a locally compact group containing Γ as a lattice. The following hold: (a) Assume that Env(AΓ ) is finitely generated and co-amenable in Γ. Then G cannot be a direct product G = G1 × G2 of two non-compact groups. (b) Assume that Env(AΓ ) has finite index in Γ and finite abelianization. Then any continuous morphism with dense image from G to a product of locally compact groups G → G1 × G2 is such that one factor Gi is compact. The same conclusions hold for any group commensurable to G up to compact kernels. This result has applications to the setting of groups acting on trees, see Corollary 1.3. We make several comments about the theorem: 1) We do not assume that Γ is finitely generated, nor that G is compactly generated. For statement (a), The assumption that Env(AΓ ) if finitely generated admits variations, see Theorem 5.14. 2) Making an assumption on the “size” of the envelope of AΓ with respect to Γ is natural, in the sense that in general there is no hope to derive any conclusion on the entire group Γ if this envelope is too small. An extreme illustration of this is that there are groups Γ whose Furstenberg URS comes from a faithful and extremely proximal action but is trivial, and these can be lattices in products, e.g. PSL(2, Z[1/p]) inside PSL(2, R) × PSL(2, Qp ) (see also the discussion right after Corollary 1.3). 3) Under the assumption that Env(AΓ ) is co-amenable in Γ, the fact that the Furstenberg URS AΓ comes from a faithful and extremely proximal action is equivalent to asking that the action of Γ on AΓ is faithful and extremely proximal; see Remark 3.27. This provides an intrinsic reformulation of the assumption not appealing to any auxiliary space. 4) For Γ as in the theorem, the assumption in statement (b) that Env(AΓ ) has finite index in Γ and Env(AΓ ) has finite abelianization is equivalent to Γ being virtually simple (see Proposition 4.6). The URS approach to study lattice embeddings allows to consider more generally subgroups of finite covolume. Recall that a closed subgroup H of a locally  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  5  compact group G has finite covolume in G if G/H carries a G-invariant probability measure. Thus a lattice is a discrete subgroup of finite covolume. Before stating the following result we need some terminology. Recall the notion of disjointness introduced by Furstenberg in [Fur67a]. If X, Y are compact G-spaces, X and Y are disjoint if whenever Ω is a compact G-space and Ω → X and Ω → Y are continuous equivariant surjective maps, the map Ω → X × Y that makes the natural diagram commute remains surjective (see §3.3). When X, Y are minimal G-spaces, this is equivalent to asking that the diagonal G-action on the product X × Y is minimal. Consider the following property: two non-trivial G-boundaries are never disjoint. A group with this property will be called boundary indivisible. Glasner characterized minimal compact G-spaces which are disjoint from all G-boundaries as those carrying a fully supported measure whose orbit closure in the space of probability measures is minimal [Gla75, Th. 6.2]. The relation between disjointness and boundaries that we consider here is of different spirit, as it deals with disjointness within the class of G-boundaries, rather than disjointness from this class. Locally compact groups with a cocompact amenable maximal subgroup are examples of boundary indivisible groups [Fur73, Prop. 4.4]. On the contrary, many discrete groups are not boundary indivisible. The relevance of this property in our setting comes from the fact that, as we will show in Proposition 3.24, a discrete group Γ as in Theorem 1.1 is boundary indivisible. Actually the only examples of (non-amenable) boundary indivisible discrete groups that we are aware of fall into the setting of Proposition 3.24. Recall that a convex compact G-space is irreducible if it does not contain any proper closed convex G-invariant subspace. We say that a subgroup L of a topological group G is weakly co-amenable in G if whenever Q is a non-trivial convex compact G-space in which L fixes a point, Q is not irreducible. This is indeed a weakening of the notion of co-amenability †, which asks that every convex compact G-space Q with L-fixed points has G-fixed points [Eym72] (and hence Q is not irreducible, unless trivial). If G has a subgroup that is both amenable and weakly co-amenable, then G is amenable; and a normal weakly co-amenable subgroup is coamenable. However in general weak co-amenability does not imply co-amenability, even for discrete groups. In §6.3 we exhibit examples of finitely generated groups such that every subgroup is either amenable or weakly co-amenable, but having non-amenable subgroups that are not co-amenable. Finally we say that a subgroup L ≤ G is boundary-minimal if there exists a non-trivial G-boundary on which L acts minimally. We refer to §5.1 for context and examples. Theorem 1.2. Let H be a locally compact group with an amenable URS that comes from an extremely proximal action, and whose envelope is co-amenable in H. Let G be a locally compact group containing H as a closed subgroup of finite covolume. Then G is boundary indivisible, and the following hold: (a) Whenever G → G1 × G2 is a continuous morphism with dense image, one factor Gi is amenable. †and not a relative version of a notion of weak amenability.  6  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  (b) If L is a boundary-minimal subgroup of G, and L is uniformly recurrent, then L is weakly co-amenable in G. In particular every boundary-minimal normal subgroup of G is co-amenable in G. Again we make several comments: 1) The group H is allowed to be discrete, so the theorem applies for all groups Γ as in Theorem 1.1. While (a) will be an intermediate step in the proof of Theorem 1.1, (b) provides additional information that is rather independent of the conclusion of Theorem 1.1. 2) Statement (a) implies that whenever N1 , N2 are closed normal subgroups of G such that N1 N2 is dense in G, at least one Ni must be co-amenable in G. 3) The last sentence in (b) implies that if N is a closed normal subgroup of G such that N CN is open in G (where CN is the centralizer of N ), then N is either amenable or co-amenable in G (see Proposition 5.3). We do not know whether the condition that N CN is open can be removed. 4) Theorem 1.2 does not say anything about amenable normal subgroups of G. It is worst pointing out that, as illustrated by the examples discussed in Section 6, it happens that a discrete group Γ satisfying the assumptions of Theorem 1.2 and with trivial amenable radical, sits as a lattice in a group G with noncompact amenable radical. 5) Remark 5.13 below provides counter-examples showing that in statement (b) the conclusion cannot be strengthened by saying that L is co-amenable in G. 6) For H, G as in the theorem, it happens that G splits as a direct product of two non-compact groups, even under the additional assumption that the amenable URS of H comes from a faithful extremely proximal action (see Example 6.3), so that “amenable” cannot be replaced by “compact” in statement (a). We view the above remarks 4)-5)-6) as illustrations of the limitations of the use of topological boundaries and URS’s to the problem addressed here in the rather abstract setting of Theorem 1.2. Group actions on trees is a natural source of extremely proximal actions, and Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 find applications in this setting. In the following statement T is a locally finite simplicial tree. Corollary 1.3. Let Γ ≤ Aut(T ) be a countable group having no proper invariant subtree and no finite orbit in T ∪ ∂T . Assume that Γξ is non-trivial and amenable for all ξ ∈ ∂T ; and Γ is virtually simple. If G is a locally compact group containing Γ as a lattice, then: (a) any continuous morphism with dense image G → G1 × G2 is such that one factor Gi is compact. In particular G itself cannot be a direct product of two non-compact groups. (b) The conclusion (b) of Theorem 1.2 holds for G. A group Γ as in Corollary 1.3 is never discrete in Aut(T ). Recall that Burger and Mozes constructed simple groups Γ acting on two locally finite regular trees T, T ′ such that the image of Γ in Aut(T ) and Aut(T ′ ) are non-discrete, but Γ acts  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  7  freely and cocompactly on T × T ′ , so that Γ is a cocompact lattice in the product Aut(T ) × Aut(T ′ ) [BM00b]. These examples illustrate the fact that the assumption in Corollary 1.3 that end-stabilizers are all non-trivial is essential. Examples of groups to which Corollary 1.3 applies can be found among the family of groups denoted G(F, F ′ ) in [LB16] (see Corollary 6.22). These are examples of groups with a continuous Furstenberg URS. Here F ′ ≤ Sym(d) is a finite permutation group and F is a simply transitive (or regular) subgroup of F ′ . The group G(F, F ′ ) is then a finitely generated group acting on a d-regular tree, transitively on vertices and edges, and with local action at every vertex isomorphic to F ′ . We refer to §6.2 for a definition. The normal subgroup structure of these groups is highly sensible to the permutation groups: there are permutation groups F, F ′ such that G(F, F ′ ) virtually admits a non-abelian free quotient (Proposition 6.11), and there are permutation groups F, F ′ such that G(F, F ′ )∗ (the subgroup of index two in G(F, F ′ ) preserving the bipartition of Td ) is simple [LB16, Cor. 4.14]. This family of groups and the family of Burger–Mozes lattices in the product of two trees both contain instances of finitely generated simple groups which embed densely in some universal group U (F )+ [BM00a, §3.2]. Despite these similarities, Corollary 6.22 shows that any group containing a virtually simple G(F, F ′ ) as a lattice is rather allergic to any direct product behavior. Compare with Theorem 1.4. We also mention that other examples of groups to which Corollary 1.3 can be applied may be found among the family of piecewise prescribed tree automorphism groups considered in [LB17, Sec. 4]. Irreducible lattices in wreath products. Leaving aside the previous abstract situation, we then focus on the family of groups G(F, F ′ ) (see §6.2 for definitions). The above mentioned common properties between the discrete groups G(F, F ′ ) and certain lattices in the product of two trees provide motivation for studying which locally compact groups can contain a group G(F, F ′ ) as a lattice. The contribution of this article to this problem is on the one hand the conclusions given by Corollary 1.3 (see Corollary 6.22), and on the other hand to describe embeddings of these groups as irreducible lattices in some locally compact wreath products. If H is a group acting on a set Ω, and A is a subgroup of a group B, the semirestricted permutational wreath product B ≀A Ω H, introduced by Cornulier in Ω,A [Cor17], is the semi-direct product B ⋊ H, where B Ω,A is the set of functions f : Ω → B such that f (x) ∈ A for all but finitely many x ∈ Ω, and H acts on B Ω,A in the usual way. This definition somehow interpolates between the restricted and the unrestricted permutational wreath products, which correspond respectively to A = 1 (in which case we will write B ≀Ω H) and A = B. When B, H are locally compact and A is compact open in B, there is a natural locally compact group topology on B ≀A Ω H (see §6.5.1). We call a lattice Γ in B ≀A Ω H irreducible if Γ has a non-discrete projection to H. The terminology is motivated by the fact that this definition prevents Γ, and more generally any subgroup commensurable with Γ, from being of the form Γ1 ⋊ Γ2 , where Γ1 and Γ2 are lattices in B Ω,A and H. In the following statement Ck is the cyclic group of order k, Sk the symmetric group on k elements, Vd the vertex set of a d-regular tree Td , and G(F, F ′ )∗ the subgroup of index two in G(F, F ′ ) preserving the bipartition of Td .  8  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  Theorem 1.4. Let d ≥ 3, F F ′ ≤ Sym(d) permutation groups such that F acts freely, and n the index of F in F ′ . Then the following hold: (a) The group G(F, F ′ ) embeds as an irreducible cocompact lattice in the semiS restricted permutational wreath product Gn,d = Sn ≀Vdn−1 Aut(Td ). (b) When F is a transitive permutation group, the finitely generated group Γn,d = Cn ≀Vd (Cd ∗ Cd ) = (Cn2 ≀ Fd−1 ) ⋊ Cd and G(F, F ′ )∗ have isometric Cayley graphs. We note that no finite index subgroup of Gn,d can split non-trivially as a product, but the stabilizer of an edge of Td in Gn,d (for the projection action on Td ) is an open subgroup which does split as a direct product of two non-compact groups. V ,S The embedding of G(F, F ′ ) in Gn,d = Snd n−1 ⋊ Aut(Td ) is not the inclusion in the subgroup 1 ⋊ Aut(Td ), but a twisted embedding associated to the cocycle given by the local action on Td . See Section 6 for details. We also note that the image V ,S of G(F, F ′ ) in Gn,d does not intersect the amenable radical Snd n−1 ⋊ 1, but does intersect the subgroup 1 ⋊ Aut(Td ) (along a cocompact lattice of Aut(Td )). The case n = 2 is particular as the group G2,d is actually a restricted wreath product, and in this situation the group G(F, F ′ ) is an irreducible cocompact lattice in C2 ≀Vd Aut(Td ) = (⊕Vd C2 ) ⋊ Aut(Td ). Applications. Recall that the property of being virtually simple is not invariant by quasi-isometry. Indeed the lattices constructed by Burger and Mozes in [BM00b] show that a virtually simple finitely generated group may have the same Cayley graph as a product of two finitely generated free groups. Theorem 1.4 together with simplicity results from [LB16] provide another illustration of this fact, namely finitely generated simple groups having the same Cayley graph as a wreath product. The wreath product construction is already known to be a source of examples of finitely generated groups whose algebraic properties are not reflected in their Cayley graphs. Two wreath products B1 ≀ Γ and B2 ≀ Γ may have isometric or bi-Lipschitz Cayley-graphs, one being solvable or torsion free, while no finite index subgroup of the second has these properties [Dyu00]. The phenomenon exhibited in Theorem 1.4 is nonetheless very different, in the sense that it provides finitely generated groups with isometric Cayley graphs such that one is a wreath product, but the other is simple (and hence not commensurable with a wreath product). Recall that for finitely generated groups, being amenable is a quasi-isometry invariant. By contrast, Theorem 1.4 implies: Corollary 1.5. Among finitely generated groups, the property of having infinite amenable radical is not invariant by quasi-isometry. The examples from Theorem 1.4 simultaneously show that having an infinite elliptic radical is also not invariant by quasi-isometry. Recall that the elliptic radical of a discrete group is the largest locally finite normal subgroup. Recall that by a theorem of Eskin–Fisher–Whyte, any finitely generated group Γ that is quasi-isometric to a wreath product C ≀Z, where C is a finite group, must act properly and cocompactly on a Diestel-Leader graph DL(m, m) [EFW07, EFW12, EFW13]. By the algebraic description of the isometry groups of these graphs given in [BNW08] (see also [CFK12]), this implies in particular that Γ has a subgroup  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  9  of index at most two that is (locally finite)-by-Z. By contrast, Theorem 1.4 shows that this rigidity fails in the case of C ≀ Fk when k ≥ 2. Questions. We end this introduction with two questions. Extreme proximality is used in a crucial way at different stages of the proofs of Theorems 1.1 and 1.2. These results both fail without the extreme proximality assumption, simply because then the group itself may very well be a direct product. Putting aside these trivial counter-examples, we do not know whether serious algebraic restrictions on a locally compact group may be derived from the existence of a lattice with a continuous Furstenberg URS. In this direction, we find the following question natural: Question 1.6. Does there exist Γ with a continuous Furstenberg URS which is a lattice in a group G = G1 × G2 such both factors are non-discrete, and Γ has an injective and dense projection to each factor ? What if we impose moreover that Γ has trivial amenable radical ? Theorem 1.4 presents a situation of a locally compact group G with two cocompact lattices Γ1 , Γ2 ≤ G such that the stabilizer URS associated to the Γ1 -action on ∂sp G is {Rad(Γ1 )}, while the stabilizer URS associated to the Γ2 -action on ∂sp G is continuous. Here ∂sp G stands for the Furstenberg boundary of G; see §2.2. In these examples the group G splits as G = N ⋊ Q, where N is the amenable radical of G. The lattice Γ1 preserves this splitting, meaning that we have Γ1 = (N ∩Γ1 )⋊(Q∩Γ1 ) (and hence Γ1 does not act faithfully on ∂sp G), while Γ2 has an injective projection to Q. This naturally raises the following: Question 1.7. Let G be a locally compact group with two lattices Γ1 and Γ2 both acting faithfully on X = ∂sp G. Is it possible that the Γ1 -action on X is topologically free, but the Γ2 -action on X is not topologically free ? Can this happen with ∂sp G = G/H being a homogeneous G-space ? Note that by [Fur03, Prop. 7], the condition that Γ1 and Γ2 act faithfully on ∂sp G is equivalent to saying that Γ1 and Γ2 have trivial amenable radical. Recall that topologically free means that there is a dense subset of points having trivial stabilizer (equivalently, the stabilizer URS is trivial). Outline of proofs and organization. The article is organized as follows. In the next section we introduce terminology and preliminary results about topological boundaries and extremely proximal actions. In Section 3 we establish the results about uniformly recurrent subgroups that are used in later sections. In particular we prove a certain gap property for URS’s coming from extremely proximal actions (Proposition 3.17). Combined with an observation about compact spaces with comparable stabilizer URS’s (Proposition 3.9), we deduce that a locally compact group H with an amenable URS that comes from an extremely proximal action, and whose envelope is co-amenable in H, is boundary indivisible (Proposition 3.24). The setting of Section 4 is that of a group admitting a non-topologically free extremely proximal action. We establish intermediate results, notably concerning normal subgroups (Proposition 4.6) and commensurated subgroups (Proposition 4.12), and deduce non-embedding results for this class of groups (see Proposition 4.10 and Corollary 4.13). In Section 5 we use results from Section 3 together with Proposition 5.9 of Furstenberg and prove Theorem 1.2. We then specify to discrete groups and give  10  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  the proof of Theorem 1.1. The proof essentially splits in two steps: the first one is the application of Theorem 1.2 to obtain amenability of one factor, and the second consists in proving that under appropriate assumptions the amenable factor is compact, using results from Section 4. In Section 6 we consider groups acting on trees, and apply previous results of the article to this setting. After giving the proof of Corollary 1.3, we focus on the family of groups with prescribed local action G(F, F ′ ). We study boundaries of these groups, and use results from Section 3 in order to characterize the discrete groups within this family which are boundary indivisible (see Theorem 6.9). This includes those which are virtually simple, but this also contain non-virtually simple instances. Finally we study lattice embeddings of these groups and give the proof of Theorem 1.4. Acknowledgements. I am grateful to Alex Furman for pointing out Proposition 5.9 to my attention, and to Uri Bader for enlightening discussion about the proof. I am also grateful to Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace, Yves Cornulier, Bruno Duchesne, Nicolás Matte Bon, Nicolas Monod and Pierre Pansu for interesting discussions and comments related to this work. Finally I am indebted to Alain Valette for a decisive remark made in Neuchâtel in May 2015, which eventually led to Theorem 1.4. 2. Preliminaries 2.1. Conventions and terminology. The letter G will usually refer to a topological group, while Γ will denote a discrete group. The group of homeomorphic automorphisms of G will be denoted Aut(G). Whenever G is a locally compact group, we will always assume that G is second countable. The notation X will refer to a topological space. The letters X, Y will be reserved for compact spaces, and Z for a compact space equipped with an extremely proximal group action. All compact spaces are assumed to be Hausdorff. A space X is a G-space if G admits a continuous action G × X → X . The action of G on X (or the G-space X ) is minimal if all orbits are dense. The G-space X is said to be trivial if X is a one-point space. If X is locally compact, we denote by Prob(X ) the set of all regular Borel probability measures on X . The space of continuous compactly supported functions on X is denoted CK (X ). Each µ ∈ Prob(X ) defines a linear functional on CK (X ), and we endow Prob(X ) with the weak*-topology: a net (µi ) converges to µ if µi (f ) → µ(f ) for all f ∈ CK (X ). By Banach-Alaoglu theorem, Prob(X ) is relatively compact in CK (X )∗ . We denote by 2X the set of all closed subsets of X . The sets n  o  O(K; U1 , . . . , Un ) = C ∈ 2X : C ∩ K = ∅; C ∩ Ui 6= ∅ for all i , where K ⊂ X is compact and U1 , . . . , Un ⊂ X are open, form a basis for the Chabauty topology on 2X . Endowed with the Chabauty topology, the space 2X is compact. We will freely identify X with its image in 2X by the natural inclusion x 7→ {x}. Note that when X is a G-space, so is 2X . In the particular case where X = G is a locally compact group, the space Sub(G) of closed subgroups of G is closed in 2G . In particular Sub(G) is a compact space, on which G acts by conjugation. A uniformly recurrent subgroup (URS) of  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  11  G is a closed, G-invariant, minimal subset of Sub(G). The set of URS’s of G is denoted URS(G). By extension we also say that a subgroup H ≤ G is uniformly recurrent if the closure of the conjugacy class of H in Sub(G) is minimal. 2.2. Topological boundaries. If X is a compact G-space, the action of G on X is strongly proximal if the closure of any G-orbit in Prob(X) contains a Dirac measure. Strong proximality is stable under taking products (with diagonal action) and continuous equivariant images (see e.g. [Gla76]). We say that X is a boundary if X is both minimal and strongly proximal. For every topological group G, there exists a unique boundary ∂sp G with the universal property that for any boundary X, there exists a continuous G-equivariant surjection ∂sp G → X [Fur73, Prop. 4.6]. This universal space ∂sp G is referred to as the Furstenberg boundary of G. It is easy to verify that any amenable normal subgroup N of G acts trivially on any G-boundary, so that ∂sp G = ∂sp (G/N ). If G admits a cocompact amenable subgroup, then the Furstenberg boundary is a homogeneous space ∂sp G = G/H, and the G-spaces of the form G/L with L containing H are precisely the G-boundaries [Fur73, Prop. 4.4]. The situation for discrete groups is quite different: as shown in [KK17] and [BKKO14], Furstenberg boundaries of discrete groups are always non-metrizable (unless trivial). The following is a fundamental property of boundaries (see [Gla76, III.2.3]): Theorem 2.1. Any convex compact G-space contains a boundary. In fact if Q is an irreducible convex compact G-space, then the action of G on Q is strongly proximal, and the closure of extreme points of Q is a G-boundary. Irreducible means that Q has no proper closed convex G-invariant subspace. In particular Theorem 2.1 has the following consequence ([Gla76, III.3.1]): Theorem 2.2. A group G is amenable if and only if all G-boundaries are trivial, or equivalently ∂sp G is trivial. 2.3. Extremely proximal actions. Let X be a compact G-space. A closed subset C of X is compressible if the closure of the G-orbit of C in the space 2X contains a singleton {x}. Equivalently, for every neighbourhood U of x, there exists g ∈ G such that g(C) ⊂ U . The action of G on X is extremely proximal if every closed subset C ( X is compressible. References where extremely proximal actions were considered include [Gla74, LS96, JR00, FST15, LBMB16]. We will make use of the following result, which is Theorem 2.3 from [Gla74]: Theorem 2.3. Let X be a compact G-space, and assume X has at least three points. If the G-action on X is extremely proximal, then it is strongly proximal. Examples of extremely proximal actions are provided by group actions on trees or hyperbolic spaces. If G ≤ Aut(T ) acts on T with no proper invariant subtree and no finite orbit in T ∪ ∂T , then the action of G on ∂T is minimal and extremely proximal; and if G acts coboundedly on a proper geodesic hyperbolic space X with no fixed point or fixed pair at infinity, then the G-action on the Gromov boundary ∂X is minimal and extremely proximal. These two situations are particular cases of the following more general result, that we believe is well-known. A homeomorphism g of a space X is hyperbolic if there exist ξ− , ξ+ ∈ X, called the endpoints of g, such that for all neighbourhoods  12  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  U− , U+ of ξ− , ξ+ , for n large enough we have gn (X \ U− ) ⊂ U+ and g−n (X \ U+ ) ⊂ U− . Proposition 2.4. If G acts on a compact space X with hyperbolic elements having no common endpoints, and such that the set of endpoints of hyperbolic elements of G is dense in X, then the action is minimal and extremely proximal. Proof. Let U ⊂ X be a non-empty open invariant subset. By our density assumption, there is g ∈ G hyperbolic whose attracting endpoint ξ+ belongs to U . So for every x 6= ξ− , there is n > 0 such that gn (x) ∈ U since U is open, so we deduce that U contains X \ {ξ− }. But the existence of hyperbolic elements with no common endpoints ensures that G fixes no point of X, so finally U = X, i.e. the action is minimal. Now if C ( X is a closed subset then again there is g ∈ G whose attracting endpoint is outside C, and C is compressible to the repealing endpoint of g.  Recent work of Duchesne and Monod shows that group actions on dendrites is also a source of extremely proximal actions. Recall that a dendrite X is a compact metrizable space such that any two points are the extremities of a unique arc. Duchesne and Monod show that if Γ acts on X with no invariant proper subdendrite, then there is a unique minimal closed invariant subset M ⊆ X and the Γ-action on M is extremely proximal. See the proof of Theorem 10.1 in [DM16]. Extremely proximal actions also play a prominent role in the context of group actions on the circle. For any minimal action α : Γ → Homeo+ (S1 ), either α(Γ) is conjugated to a group of rotations, or α(Γ) has a finite centralizer CΓ in Homeo+ (S1 ) and the action of Γ on the quotient circle CΓ \S1 is extremely proximal: see Ghys [Ghy01] and Margulis [Mar00]. We mention however that in all the examples of countable groups Γ with an action on S1 that is minimal and not topologically free that we are aware of, the stabilizer URS is either non-amenable, or not known to be amenable. In particular we do not know any application of Theorem 1.1 to groups acting on the circle. In the sequel we will make use of the following easy lemma. Lemma 2.5. Let G be a topological group, and H a subgroup of G such that there is some compact subset K of G such that G = KH. Let X be a compact G-space, and C a closed subset of X that is compressible by G. Then C is compressible by H. In particular if the G-action on X is extremely proximal, then the H-action is extremely proximal. Proof. By assumption there exists x ∈ X and (gi ) such that gi (C) converges to x in 2X . If gi = ki hi , by compactness of K we assume that (ki ) converges to some k, and it follows that hi (C) converges to k−1 x by continuity of G × 2X → 2X .  3. Uniformly recurrent subgroups 3.1. Generalities on uniformly recurrent subgroups. Let G be a locally compact group. For H, K ∈ URS(G), we write H 4 K when there exist H ∈ H and K ∈ K such that H ≤ K. This is equivalent to the fact that every H ∈ H is contained in an element of K, and every K ∈ K contains an element of H, and the relation 4 is an order on URS(G). See e.g. §2.4 in [LBMB16].  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  13  For simplicity the URS {N } associated to a closed normal subgroup N of G will still be denoted N . In particular N 4 H (resp. H 4 N ) means that N is contained in (resp. contains) all the elements of H. By the trivial URS we mean the URS corresponding to the trivial subgroup {1}. We warn the reader that in this terminology the URS corresponding to a non-trivial normal subgroup N is trivial as a G-space (it is a one-point space), but is not trivial as a URS. Let X, Y be compact G-spaces. We say that X is a factor of Y , and Y is an extension of X, if there exists a continuous equivariant map Y → X that is onto. If π : Y → X is a continuous equivariant map, we say that π is almost 1-1 if the set of y ∈ Y such that π −1 (π(y)) = {y} is dense in Y . When moreover π is onto we say that Y is an almost 1-1 extension of X. We now recall the definition of the stabilizer URS associated to a minimal action on a compact space. If X is a compact G-space and x ∈ X, we denote by Gx the stabilizer of x in G. Definition 3.1. If X is a compact G-space, we denote by X0 ⊂ X the set of points at which Stab : X → Sub(G), x 7→ Gx , is continuous. Upper semi-continuity of the map Stab and second countability of G imply that X0 is a dense subset of X (indeed if (Un ) is a basis of the topology on Sub(G) and Xn is the set of x ∈ X such that Gx ∩ Un 6= ∅, which is closed, one verifies that Stab is continuous on ∩n (∂Xn )c ). Following [GW15], we denote X̃ = cls {(x, Gx ) : x ∈ X0 } ⊂ X × Sub(G), and SG (X) = cls {Gx : x ∈ X0 } ⊂ Sub(G), where cls stands for the closure in the ambient space. We have the obvious inclusions X̃ ⊆ X ∗ := cls {(x, Gx ) : x ∈ X} and ∗ SG (X) ⊆ SG (X) := cls {Gx : x ∈ X} . We denote by ηX and πX the projections from X × Sub(G) to X and Sub(G) respectively. Proposition 3.2 (Prop. 1.2 in [GW15]). If X is a minimal compact G-space, then ηX : X̃ → X is an almost 1-1 extension, and X̃ and SG (X) are the unique minimal ∗ (X). closed G-invariant subsets of respectively X ∗ and SG Definition 3.3. SG (X) is the stabilizer URS associated to the G-action on X. The action of G on X is topologically free if SG (X) is trivial, i.e. SG (X) = {{1}}. Remark 3.4. When G is not assumed second countable, in general X0 is no longer dense in X. However it is still possible to define the stabilizer URS associated to a minimal action on a compact space; see the discussion in [MBT17, p1]. In the sequel we will sometimes use the following version of Proposition 3.2. Proposition 3.5. Let X be compact G-space, and let H ≤ G be a subgroup acting minimally on X. Then H acts minimally on X̃ and SG (X), and X̃ and SG (X) ∗ (X). are the unique minimal closed H-invariant subsets of X ∗ and SG  14  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  Proof. Let Y ⊆ X ∗ closed and H-invariant. Since X is a factor of X ∗ and H acts minimally on X, for every x ∈ X0 there exists L ∈ Sub(G) such that (x, L) ∈ Y . But for x ∈ X0 , the fact that (x, L) belongs to X ∗ forces L to be equal to Gx by definition of X0 , and it follows that X̃ ⊆ Y . Moreover H acts minimally on X̃ since ηX : X̃ → X is an almost 1-1 extension and minimality is preserved by taking almost 1-1 extensions (if π : X1 → X2 is almost 1-1 and if C ⊆ X1 is a closed subset such that π(C) = X2 , then C = X1 ). So the statements for X̃ and ∗ (X) since these are factors X ∗ are established, and the same hold for SG (X) and SG of X̃ and X ∗ .  3.2. Envelopes. Let G be a locally compact group and H ∈ URS(G). Definition 3.6. The envelope Env(H) of H is the closed subgroup of G generated by all the subgroups H ∈ H. By definition Env(H) is the smallest closed subgroup of G such that H ⊂ Sub(Env(H)). Note that Env(H) is a normal subgroup of G, and is actually the smallest normal subgroup such that H 4 Env(H). Let Γ be a discrete group, X a compact Γ-space and X0 the domain of continuity of the map Stab. It is a classical fact that X0 consists of those x ∈ X such that for every γ ∈ Γx , there exists U neighbourhood of x that is fixed by γ (see e.g. [Vor12, Lem. 5.4] for a proof). For x ∈ X, we will denote by Γ0x ≤ Γx the set of elements fixing a neighbourhood of x, so that x ∈ X0 if and only if Γx = Γ0x . Lemma 3.7. Let Γ be a countable discrete group, X a compact minimal Γ-space, n ≥ 1 and γ1 , . . . , γn ∈ Γ. The following are equivalent: (i) (ii) (iii) (iv)  ∩Fix(γi ) has non-empty interior; there is x ∈ X such that γi ∈ Γ0x for all i; same as in (ii) but with x ∈ X0 ; there is H ∈ SΓ (X) such that γi ∈ Hfor all i.  In particular Env(SΓ (X)) is generated by the elements γ ∈ Γ such that Fix(γ) has non-empty interior. Proof. It is clear that (i) and (ii) are equivalent. Also (iii) clearly implies (ii), and (ii) also implies (iii) by density of X0 in X. Finally (iii) implies (iv) since Γ0x ∈ SΓ (X) for x ∈ X0 , and (iv) implies (iii) by density of the set of Γ0x , x ∈ X0 , in SΓ (X).  3.3. G-spaces with comparable stabilizer URS’s. We recall the notion of disjointness from [Fur67a]. Two compact G-spaces X, Y are disjoint if whenever X, Y are factors of a compact G-space Ω via ϕX : Ω → X and ϕY : Ω → Y , then the map (ϕX , ϕY ) : Ω → X × Y is surjective. When X, Y are minimal G-spaces, this is equivalent to saying that the product X × Y remains minimal [Fur67a, Lem. II.1]. The following lemma presents a situation which easily implies disjointness: Lemma 3.8. Let X, Y be minimal compact G-spaces such that there exists y0 ∈ Y such that Gy0 acts minimally on X. Then X and Y are disjoint.  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  15  Proof. This is clear: if W is a closed invariant subset of X × Y , then by minimality of Y there exists x0 ∈ X such that (x0 , y0 ) ∈ W . Since Gy0 acts minimally on X we deduce that W contains X × {y0 }, and by minimality of Y it follows that W is equal to X × Y .  The following proposition will be used notably in Proposition 3.24. Proposition 3.9. Let X, Y be compact minimal G-spaces, and write H = SG (X) and K = SG (Y ). Suppose that H 4 K. Then X and Y can be disjoint only if Env(H) 4 K. In particular if SG (X) = SG (Y ) and this URS is not a point, then X and Y are not disjoint. Proof. Using notation from Proposition 3.2, we have almost 1-1 extensions ηX : X̃ → X and ηY : Ỹ → Y , and we write η = ηX × ηY : X̃ × Ỹ → X × Y , and π = πX × πY : X̃ × Ỹ → H × K. The set W ⊆ H × K of pairs (H, K) such that H ≤ K is non-empty by assumption, is clearly G-invariant, and is easily seen to be closed. If W is a proper subset of H × K then π −1 (W ) is a proper subset of X̃ × Ỹ since π is a factor, and it follows that η π −1 (W ) is a closed G-invariant subset of X × Y that is proper since η is almost 1-1. This contradicts disjointness of X and Y . Therefore we have W = H × K. This means that for a fixed K ∈ K we have H ≤ K for every H ∈ H, and hence Env(H) 4 K.  3.4. Action of a URS on a G-space. In this paragraph G still denote a locally compact group, and X is a compact G-space. Given H ∈ URS(G), we study the properties of the action of elements on H on the space X. The proof of the following lemma is an easy verification, and we leave it to the reader. Lemma 3.10. If X is a compact G-space, {H ∈ Sub(G) | H fixes a point in X} is a closed G-invariant subset of Sub(G). In particular the following definition makes sense. Definition 3.11. Let X be a compact G-space, and H ∈ URS(G). We say that H fixes a point in X if for some (all) H ∈ H, there is x ∈ X such that h(x) = x for all h ∈ H. Lemma 3.12. Let X be a compact G-space, Y ⊆ X a closed invariant subset of X, and H ∈ URS(G). If there exists H ∈ H fixing x ∈ X such that Gx ∩ Y 6= ∅, then H fixes a point in Y . Proof. By assumption there exist (gi ) and y ∈ Y such that gi (x) converges to y. If K ∈ H is a limit point of (H gi ) (which exists by compactness), then K fixes y by upper semi-continuity of the stabilizer map.  Lemma 3.12 implies the following: Lemma 3.13. If X is a compact G-space containing a unique minimal closed Ginvariant subset Xmin ⊂ X (e.g. X is proximal), and if H ∈ URS(G) fixes a point in X, then H fixes a point in Xmin . Proposition 3.14. Let Z be a compact G-space that is extremely proximal, and H ∈ URS(G). Then either H fixes a point in Z, or all H ∈ H act minimally on Z.  16  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  Proof. If there exist H ∈ H and a non-empty closed subset C ( Z that is invariant by H, then we may apply Lemma 3.12 to the space X = 2Z , the subspace Y = Z and the point x = C, and we deduce that H fixes a point in Z.  ∗ (X) stands for the closure in Sub(G) Recall that given a compact G-space X, SG of the set of subgroups Gx , x ∈ X.  Lemma 3.15. Let X be a compact G-space. Assume that K ≤ G is a closed ∗ (X) subgroup of G which acts minimally on X and such that there exists H ∈ SG with H ≤ K. Then Env(SG (X)) ≤ K. ∗ (X) Proof. Since K acts minimally on X, the closure of the K-orbit of H in SG contains SG (X) according to Proposition 3.5. Since H ∈ Sub(K) and Sub(K) is a closed subset of Sub(G), we deduce that SG (X) ⊂ Sub(K), and in particular Env(SG (X)) ≤ K.   Definition 3.16. Let H ∈ URS(G). We say that H comes from an extremely proximal action if there exists a compact G-space Z that is minimal and extremely proximal, and such that SG (Z) = H. It was shown in [LBMB16] that for a discrete group Γ with a non-trivial URS H coming from an extremely proximal action, any non-trivial K ∈ URS(Γ) must be “relatively large” with respect to H (see [LBMB16, Th. 3.10] for a precise statement). Appropriate assumptions on Γ and H further imply that H 4 K for every non-trivial K ∈ URS(Γ) [LBMB16, Cor. 3.12]. The following proposition goes in the opposite direction by considering URS’s larger than H. Proposition 3.17. Let H ∈ URS(G) that comes from an extremely proximal action. Let K ∈ URS(G) such that H 4 K and H = 6 K. Then Env(H) 4 K. Proof. Let Z be a compact G-space that is minimal and extremely proximal and such that SG (Z) = H. Fix K ∈ K, and assume that K does not act minimally on Z. According to Proposition 3.14 this implies that the URS K fixes a point in Z, i.e. K 4 H. Since moreover H, K satisfy H 4 K by assumption, we deduce that H = K, which is a contradiction. Therefore K acts minimally on Z. Since moreover there exists H ∈ H such that H ≤ K, we are in position to apply Lemma 3.15, from which the conclusion follows.  It should be noted that Proposition 3.17 is false without the extreme proximality assumption, as in general there are plenty of URS’s between H and Env(H). Lemma 3.18. Let H ∈ URS(G) that comes from an extremely proximal action. Then Env(H) acts minimally on H. Proof. Let Z be a compact G-space that is minimal and extremely proximal and such that SG (Z) = H, and let N = Env(H). Without loss of generality we may assume that H is not a point, since otherwise there is nothing to prove. This ensures that N acts non-trivially on Z. By extreme proximality N must act minimally on Z (see Lemma 4.2), and therefore also on H by Proposition 3.5.  Remark 3.19. The extreme proximality assumption cannot be removed in Lemma 3.18. Indeed it is not true in general that, given H ∈ URS(G), H remains a URS of Env(H). Indeed, as explained in [GW15], any minimal subshift on two letters  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  17  gives rise to a URS H of the lamplighter group G = C2 ≀Z, such that H is contained in the Chabauty space Sub(L) of the base group L = ⊕C2 . In particular Env(H) lies inside the abelian group L, and it follows that Env(H) acts trivially on H. Proposition 3.20. Let H ∈ URS(G) that comes from an extremely proximal action, and assume H is not a point. Then: (a) The action of G on H gives rise to the same URS, i.e. SG (H) = H. (b) If moreover H comes from a faithful extremely proximal action, then the action of G on H is faithful. Proof. Write K = SG (H). By definition we have H 4 K. Argue by contradiction and suppose H = 6 K. Then applying Proposition 3.17, we deduce that Env(H) acts trivially on H. But Env(H) also acts minimally on H by Lemma 3.18, so we deduce that H must be a point, a contradiction. This shows (a). For (b), arguing as in the proof of Lemma 3.18 we see that any non-trivial normal subgroup N of G acts minimally on H. Since H is not a point, we have in particular that N acts non-trivially on H.  Remark 3.21. Proposition 3.20 implies that, as far as our interest lies inside the URS associated to a minimal and extremely proximal action (and not the space Z itself), there is no loss of generality in assuming that (G, Z) is a sub-system of (G, Sub(G)). See also Remark 3.27. 3.5. Amenable URS’s. Recall that we say that H ∈ URS(G) is amenable if every H ∈ H is amenable. The following lemma already appeared in [LBMB16, Prop. 2.21]. Lemma 3.22. If H ∈ URS(G) is amenable and X is a G-boundary, then H 4 SG (X). Proof. Since H is amenable, H must fix a point in the compact G-space Prob(X). Now X is the unique minimal G-invariant subspace of Prob(X) since X is a Gboundary, so by Lemma 3.13 we have that H fixes a point in X, i.e. H 4 SG (X).  Proposition 3.23. Let X be a compact minimal G-space such that H = SG (X) is amenable, and let Y be a G-boundary such that X and Y are disjoint. Then Env(H) acts trivially on Y . In particular if Env(H) is co-amenable in G, a non-trivial G-boundary is never disjoint with X. Proof. The fact that Env(H) must act trivially on Y follows by applying Lemma 3.22 and Proposition 3.9. Since an amenable group has no non-trivial boundary, the second statement follows.  Proposition 3.23 says that when G admits an amenable URS whose envelope is co-amenable, a non-trivial G-boundary is never disjoint with X. This conclusion is not satisfactory for our concerns as it depends on the choice of a space X and not only on G. Although there is no hope to get a better conclusion in full generality, the next result, which will play an important role in Section 5, will remove this dependence under an extreme proximality assumption. We recall from the introduction that we say that G is boundary indivisible if two non-trivial G-boundaries are never disjoint.  18  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  Proposition 3.24. Assume that G admits an amenable H ∈ URS(G) that comes from an extremely proximal action, and let X be a non-trivial G-boundary. (a) Either SG (X) = H, or Env(H) acts trivially on X. (b) Assume that Env(H) is co-amenable in G. Then SG (X) = H, and G is boundary indivisible. Proof. (a). Since H is amenable, we have H 4 SG (X) by Lemma 3.22. Now if we assume H = 6 SG (X), then according to Proposition 3.17 we have Env(H) 4 SG (X), which exactly means that Env(H) acts trivially on X. (b). If SG (X) 6= H then the action of G on X factors through an action of G/Env(H) by (a). But by assumption the latter is amenable, so has no non-trivial boundaries. So it follows that X is trivial, a contradiction. Therefore all non-trivial G-boundaries have the same stabilizer URS H. Since moreover H cannot be a point (because otherwise G would be amenable), the fact that G is boundary indivisible follows from Proposition 3.9.  For a countable group Γ, the Furstenberg URS of Γ is the stabilizer URS associated to the action of Γ on its Furstenberg boundary. We refer to [LBMB16] for the proof of the following properties. Proposition 3.25. Let Γ be a countable group, and AΓ its Furstenberg URS. Then the following hold: (a) AΓ is amenable, and H 4 AΓ for every amenable H ∈ URS(Γ). (b) If X is a Γ-boundary, then AΓ 4 SΓ (X). If moreover there is x ∈ X such that Γx is amenable, then AΓ = SΓ (X). (c) AΓ is invariant under Aut(Γ). Proposition 3.26. Let Γ be a countable group, and let Λ = Env(AΓ ) be the envelope of the Furstenberg URS of Γ. Then Λ acts minimally on AΓ , and AΓ = AΛ . Proof. The conjugation action of Γ on the normal subgroup Λ = Env(AΓ ) induces a map Γ → Aut(Λ). Since AΛ is invariant under Aut(Λ) by Proposition 3.25, it is in particular Γ-invariant. Moreover the action of Γ on AΛ is clearly minimal since it is already the case for Λ. Therefore AΛ is an amenable URS of Γ, so it follows that AΛ 4 AΓ since AΓ is larger than any amenable URS of Γ. On the other hand AΓ is a closed and Λ-invariant subset of Sub(Λ) consisting of amenable subgroups, so by the domination property applied to AΛ we must have AΓ 4 AΛ . Equality follows.  Remark 3.27. When Env(AΓ ) is co-amenable in Γ, the fact that AΓ comes from a faithful and extremely proximal action is equivalent to saying that the Γ-action on AΓ is faithful and extremely proximal. The direct implication is consequence of Proposition 3.20, and the converse follows from Proposition 3.24. This gives us an intrinsic reformulation of the assumption of Theorem 1.1 inside the Chabauty space of Γ. 4. Extremely proximal actions If X is a Hausdorff Γ-space and U ⊂ X , we denote by ΓU the set of elements of Γ acting trivially on X \ U . We say that the action of Γ on X is micro-supported if ΓU is non-trivial for every non-empty open set U . We will need the following easy lemma.  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  19  Lemma 4.1. Assume that the action of Γ on X is micro-supported, and let U be a non-empty open set. Then ΓU is not solvable. Proof. Assume that Λ is a subgroup of ΓU whose action on U is micro-supported, and let V be a non-empty open subset of U . By assumption there exists a nontrivial λ1 ∈ ΛV , so that we may find an open set W ⊂ V such that W and λ1 (W ) are disjoint. For λ2 ∈ ΛW , the commutator [λ1 , λ2 ] coincides with λ−1 2 on W , and is therefore non-trivial provided that λ2 is non-trivial. It follows by induction that if ΓU,n is the n-th term of the derived series of ΓU , then the action of ΓU,n on U is micro-supported. In particular ΓU,n is never trivial, and ΓU is not solvable.  In this section we will consider the following setting: (EP) Γ is a discrete group, Z is a compact Γ-space, and the action of Γ on Z is faithful, minimal and extremely proximal. In order to avoid trivialities, we assume that Z has at least three points. Unless specified otherwise, in the remaining of this section Γ and Z will be assumed to satisfy (EP). Our goal is to derive various properties on the group Γ that will be used in later sections. Lemma 4.2. Let N ≤ Homeo(Z) be a non-trivial subgroup that is normalized by Γ. Then N acts minimally and does not fix any probability measure on Z. Proof. Assume there exists C ( Z that is closed and N -invariant. Since C is compressible and N is normalized by Γ, wee see that N has a fixed point in Z. Now the set of N -fixed points is Γ-invariant, so it has to be the entire Z by minimality, and N is trivial. The same argument shows the absence of N -invariant probability measure on Z, since an extremely proximal action is also strongly proximal by Theorem 2.3.  In all this section the terminology topologically free (see Definition 3.3) has to be understood with Γ viewed as a discrete group. Therefore that the action is not topologically free means that there exists γ 6= 1 which acts trivially on a non-empty open subset of Z. Lemma 4.3. If the action of Γ on Z is not topologically free, then it is microsupported. Proof. Let U be a non-empty open subset of Z. Let γ be a non-trivial element such that there is a non-empty open set V on which γ acts trivially, and let g ∈ Γ such that g(X \ V ) ⊂ U . Then the non-trivial element gγg−1 acts trivially outside U , so ΓU is non-trivial.  Definition 4.4. Let Γ0 be the subgroup of Γ generated by the elements γ ∈ Γ such that Fix(γ) has non-empty interior. Remark 4.5. When Γ is a countable group, Γ0 is also equal to the envelope of the URS SΓ (Z) by Lemma 3.7. Recall that the monolith Mon(Γ) is the intersection of all non-trivial normal subgroups of Γ. We say Γ is monolithic if Mon(Γ) is non-trivial. Proposition 4.6. Assume that the action of Γ on Z is not topologically free. Then the following hold:  20  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  (a) The commutators [γ1 , γ2 ], where Fix(γ1 ) ∩ Fix(γ2 ) has non-empty interior, generate [Γ0 , Γ0 ]. (b) Γ is monolithic, and one has Mon(Γ) = [Γ0 , Γ0 ]. (c) Any non-trivial normal subgroup of Γ has trivial centralizer. (d) If the action of [Γ0 , Γ0 ] on Z is extremely proximal, then [Γ0 , Γ0 ] is a simple group. (e) Γ is virtually simple if and only if Γ0 has finite index in Γ and finite abelianization. Proof. (a) Denote by N the subgroup generated by the set of [γ1 , γ2 ], where γ1 , γ2 act trivially on a common open set. We show that for every g, h fixing non-empty open sets U, V , the commutator [g, h] belongs to N . Since Γ0 is generated by all these elements g, h, this will show that Γ0 /N is abelian. Hence [Γ0 , Γ0 ] ≤ N , and the other inclusion is clear. First note that N is not trivial by Lemmas 4.1 and 4.3. Therefore N acts minimally on Z according to Lemma 4.2, and we may find s ∈ N such that the open set W = U ∩ s(V ) is non-empty. Since g and hs fix W by construction, we have [g, hs ] ∈ N . But since s ∈ N , we deduce that [g, h] = [h, s]g [g, hs ][s, h] is a product of three elements of N , and hence belongs to N , as desired. (b) We shall show that any non-trivial normal subgroup N contains [Γ0 , Γ0 ]. Since [Γ0 , Γ0 ] is itself a non-trivial normal subgroup, this will prove that it is the monolith of Γ. By a classical commutator manipulation (see e.g. Lemma 4.1 from [Nek13]), there exists an open set U such that N contains the derived subgroup of ΓU . Now let γ1 , γ2 fixing an open set V . If γ is such that γ(Z \ V ) ⊂ U , then γ1γ , γ2γ are supported inside U , so that [γ1γ , γ2γ ] = [γ1 , γ2 ]γ is contained in N . Since N is normal, [γ1 , γ2 ] ∈ N . Now all these elements generate [Γ0 , Γ0 ] by (a), hence the conclusion. (c) If N is a normal subgroup of Γ, then so is CΓ (N ). Therefore they cannot be both non-trivial, because otherwise the intersection would be abelian and would contain [Γ0 , Γ0 ] by the previous paragraph, a contradiction. (d) If the action of [Γ0 , Γ0 ] on Z is extremely proximal, then according to (b) the monolith N of [Γ0 , Γ0 ] is non-trivial. Since N is characteristic in [Γ0 , Γ0 ], N is normal in Γ, and hence contains [Γ0 , Γ0 ] by (b). So N = [Γ0 , Γ0 ] and [Γ0 , Γ0 ] is simple. (e) For Γ to be virtually simple it is clearly necessary that the normal subgroup [Γ0 , Γ0 ] has finite index in Γ. Conversely, if this condition holds then the action of [Γ0 , Γ0 ] on Z is extremely proximal (Lemma 2.5), and [Γ0 , Γ0 ] is simple by (d).  Definition 4.7. Let X be a topological space, and let Γ be a group acting on X . A non-empty open set Ω ⊂ X is wandering for Γ if the translates γ(Ω), γ ∈ Γ, are pairwise disjoint. We say that Ω is wandering for γ if it is wandering for hγi. Proposition 4.8. Let Γ and Z as in (EP). Then there exist an open set Ω and a non-abelian free subgroup F2 = ∆ ≤ Γ such that Ω is wandering for ∆. Proof. Following Glasner [Gla74], we consider pairwise disjoint non-empty open sets U− , U+ , V− , V+ , and elements a, b ∈ Γ such that a(Z\U− ) ⊂ U+ and b(Z\V− ) ⊂ V+ . Let W = U− ∪ U+ ∪ V− ∪ V+ . It follows from a ping-pong argument than any non-trivial reduced word in the letters a, b sends the complement of W inside W , so that the subgroup ∆ generated by a, b is free [Gla74, Th. 3.4].  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  21  Upon reducing W if necessary, we may find an open set Ω such that Ω ∩ W = ∅ and a(Ω) ⊂ U+ , a−1 (Ω) ⊂ U− , b(Ω) ⊂ V+ and b−1 (Ω) ⊂ V− . Induction on the word length shows that if the left-most letter of γ ∈ ∆ is respectively a, a−1 , b, b−1 , then γ(Ω) lies respectively inside U+ , U− , V+ , V− . In particular Ω ∩ γ(Ω) is empty since Ω is disjoint from W , so Ω is wandering for ∆.  Proposition 4.9. Retain notations (EP). Then the wreath product ΓU ≀ F2 embeds into Γ for every open subset U ( Z that is not dense. Proof. Let Ω and ∆ as in Proposition 4.8, and let Λ be the subgroup of Γ generated by ΓΩ and ∆. Since Ω is wandering for ∆, all the conjugates γΓΩ γ −1 pairwise commute, and it follows that Λ is isomorphic to ΓΩ ≀ F2 . Now if U is an in the statement, by extreme proximality the group ΓU is isomorphic to a subgroup of ΓΩ , hence the conclusion.  The argument in the following proof is borrowed from [Cap16]. Proposition 4.10. In the setting (EP), if the action of Γ on Z is not topologically free, then Γ cannot have any faithful linear representation. Proof. Let U be an open subset of Z. By Lemmas 4.1 and 4.3, we may find a non-abelian finitely generated subgroup B inside ΓU . Now if we choose U small enough, it follows from Proposition 4.9 that the finitely generated group Λ = B ≀ F2 is isomorphic to a subgroup of Γ. Since Λ is not residually finite [Gru57], it admits no faithful linear representation by Malcev’s theorem [Mal40], and a fortiori the same is true for Γ.  Recall that a subgroup Λ of a group Γ is commensurated if all conjugates of Λ are commensurable, where two subgroups are commensurable if the intersection has finite index in both. The beginning of the argument in the proof of the following proposition already appeared in [LBW16]. The idea is to extend classical techniques for normal subgroups to certain commensurated subgroups. Proposition 4.11. Retain notation from (EP), and assume that the action of Γ on Z is not topologically free. If Λ is a commensurated subgroup of Γ such that there exists an element of Λ admitting a wandering open set, then Λ contains the monolith Mon(Γ). Proof. Let λ ∈ Λ admitting a wandering open set Ω. We shall first prove that [ΓΩ , ΓΩ ] is contained in Λ. Let g, h ∈ ΓΩ , and let also n ≥ 1. Since Ω is wandering we have Ω ∩ λn (Ω) = ∅. It follows that the commutator [g, λn ] is trivial outside Ω ∪ λn (Ω), and coincides with g on Ω and with λn g−1 λ−n on λn (Ω). Therefore its commutator with h is trivial outside Ω, and is coincides with [g, h] on Ω. But since g, h ∈ ΓΩ , the elements [[g, λn ], h] and [g, h] actually coincide everywhere, i.e. [[g, λn ], h] = [g, h]. Now since Λ is commensurated in Γ, there exists n0 ≥ 1 such that [[g, λn0 ], h] belongs to Λ. Applying the previous argument with n = n0 , we deduce that [g, h] belongs to Λ. In order to prove the statement, it is enough to prove that [ΓC , ΓC ] is contained in Λ for every closed subset C ( Z according to Proposition 4.6. So let C a proper closed subset of Z. By minimality and extreme proximality, there is γ ∈ Γ such  22  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  that γ(C) ⊂ Ω. Fix such a γ, and choose some integer n1 ≥ 1 such that γ −1 λn1 γ belongs to Λ. Set λ′ = γ −1 λn1 γ and Ω′ = γ −1 (Ω). This Ω′ is wandering for λ′ and λ′ ∈ Λ, so [ΓΩ′ , ΓΩ′ ] is contained in Λ by the first paragraph. Since C ⊂ Ω′ , we  have ΓC ≤ ΓΩ′ , and the proof is complete. Proposition 4.12. Assume that Z is a compact Γ-space and the action of Γ on Z is faithful, minimal, extremely proximal and not topologically free. Then there exists a free subgroup F2 ≤ Γ such that for every commensurated subgroup Λ ≤ Γ not containing the monolith Mon(Γ), we have F2 ∩ Λ = 1. Proof. Let F2 be a free subgroup of Γ as in the conclusion of Proposition 4.8. If Λ ≤ Γ is a commensurated subgroup such that F2 ∩ Λ 6= 1, then in particular Λ contains an element admitting a wandering open set. So by Proposition 4.11 we have Mon(Γ) ≤ Λ. This shows that every commensurated subgroup not containing Mon(Γ) intersects F2 trivially.  Corollary 4.13. Assume that Z is a compact Γ-space and the action of Γ on Z is faithful, minimal, extremely proximal and not topologically free. If G is a locally compact amenable group whose connected component G0 is a Lie group, then there exists no injective homomorphism Γ → G. Proof. Argue by contradiction and assume Γ embeds in G. Let U be an open subgroup of G containing G0 as a cocompact subgroup. Such a U is commensurated in G, so the subgroup Γ ∩ U is commensurated in Γ. If there exists U such that Γ ∩ U does not contain Mon(Γ), then according to Proposition 4.12 we may find a non-abelian free subgroup F2 ≤ Γ such that F2 ∩ U = 1. In particular G contains the non-amenable group F2 as a discrete subgroup, which contradicts amenability of G. Therefore Mon(Γ) is contained in U for every choice of U . Since compact open subgroups form a basis at 1 in G/G0 by van Dantzig’s theorem, it follows that Mon(Γ) actually lies inside G0 . Now since G0 is a connected Lie group, the group Aut(G0 ) is linear, so the map G → Aut(G0 ) induced by the conjugation action of G on G0 is not injective in restriction to Γ by Proposition 4.10. Therefore this map must vanish on Mon(Γ), which means that Mon(Γ) actually lies inside the center of G0 . In particular Mon(Γ) is abelian, which contradicts Proposition 4.6.  5. The proofs of Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 5.1. Boundary-minimal subgroups. In this paragraph we consider the following property: Definition 5.1. Let G be a topological group, and L a closed subgroup of G. We say that L is boundary-minimal if there exists a non-trivial G-boundary on which L acts minimally. It should be noted that being boundary-minimal does not prevent L from being amenable. For instance the action of Thompson’s group T on the circle S1 is a boundary action, and the abelian subgroup of T consisting of rotations acts minimally on S1 . Other examples may be found among the groups acting on trees considered in §6.2, where the stabilizer of a vertex is an amenable subgroup acting minimally on the ends of the tree. In the sequel we will mainly focus on the case when L is normal in G, or more generally when L belongs to a URS (see Proposition 5.8). By contrast with the  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  23  previous examples, a normal boundary-minimal subgroup is never amenable, as a normal amenable subgroup of G acts trivially on any G-boundary. Recall that Furman showed [Fur03, Prop. 7] (see also Caprace–Monod [CM14, Prop. 3]) that if N is non-amenable normal subgroup of a locally compact group G, there always exists a G-boundary on which N acts non-trivially. This naturally raises the question whether any non-amenable normal subgroup of G is boundary-minimal. We do not know the answer to this question. While the case of discrete groups is easily settled (see below), the situation for non-discrete groups seems to be more delicate. We recall the following result of Furstenberg (see [Gla76, II.4.3]): Theorem 5.2. Let G be a topological group, and denote by ϕ : G → Homeo(∂sp G) the action of G on ∂sp G. Then there exists a homomorphism ψ : Aut(G) → Homeo(∂sp G) such that ψ ◦ Inn = ϕ, where Inn(G) ≤ Aut(G) is the group of inner automorphisms of G. In particular when N is a normal subgroup of a group G, the map G → Aut(N ) coming from the conjugation action of G on N induces an action of G on ∂sp N , which factors through G/CG (N ). Note that this result readily answers the above question for discrete groups, by showing that the boundary-minimal normal subgroups of G are exactly the non-amenable normal subgroups of G. Indeed if N is non-amenable then ∂sp N is a non-trivial space, N acts minimally on ∂sp N , and ∂sp N is a G-boundary by Theorem 5.2. However the argument does not carry over for arbitrary groups, as in general the G-action on ∂sp N is not continuous. Proposition 5.3. Let G be a locally compact group, and N a closed normal nonamenable subgroup. Assume that at least one of the following holds true: (a) N · CG (N ) is open in G (e.g. when N is a direct factor of G); (b) N is cocompact in G; (c) there exists H ∈ URS(N ) that is not a point, invariant by Aut(N ), and that is an N -boundary (e.g. if N has a closed cocompact amenable subgroup). Then N is boundary-minimal in G. Proof. Condition (a) ensures that the image of N in G/CG (N ) is open. Therefore the G-action on ∂sp N given by Theorem 5.2 is continuous because the N -action is, and we deduce that ∂sp N is a non-tivial G-boundary. If (b) holds, then N acts minimally on any G-boundary [Gla76, II.3.2]. Finally the verification of case (c) is straightforward since G → Aut(N ) is continuous [HR79, Th. 26.7] and Aut(N ) acts continuously on Sub(N ).  5.2. Weakly co-amenable subgroups. In this paragraph we consider the following weakening of the notion of co-amenability. Definition 5.4. Let G be a topological group, and H a subgroup of G. We say that H is weakly co-amenable in G if whenever Q is a non-trivial convex compact G-space in which H fixes a point, Q is not irreducible. The following properties readily follow from the definition. Proposition 5.5. Let K ≤ H ≤ G be subgroups of G. (i) If H ≤ G is co-amenable then H is weakly co-amenable.  24  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  (ii) For a normal subgroup N ⊳ G, weakly co-amenable is equivalent to coamenable. (iii) If H ≤ G is amenable and weakly co-amenable in G, then G is amenable. (iv) If ϕ : G → G′ is continuous with dense image and H ≤ G is weakly coamenable, then ϕ(H) is weakly co-amenable in G′ . (v) If K is weakly co-amenable in G, then H is weakly co-amenable in G. (vi) If K is co-amenable in H and H is weakly co-amenable in G, then K is weakly co-amenable in G. Proof. (i) If Q is non-trivial convex compact G-space with H-fixed points, then there is a G-fixed point by co-amenability of H in G, so Q is not irreducible. (ii) If N ⊳ G is not co-amenable, there is a convex Q such that Fix(N ) is nonempty but Fix(G) is empty. Since N is normal Fix(N ) is G-invariant, so that by Zorn’s lemma Fix(N ) contains an irreducible convex G-space, which is non-trivial since Fix(G) is empty. This shows N is not weakly co-amenable. The proofs of (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) are similar verifications, and we leave them to the reader.  Remark 5.6. As for co-amenability, it is natural to wonder whether weak coamenability of K in G implies weak co-amenability of K in H. In view of (ii), the same counter-examples given in [MP03] show that the answer is negative in general. By the correspondence between irreducible convex compact G-spaces and Gboundaries, weak co-amenability admits the following characterization: Proposition 5.7. A subgroup H ≤ G is weakly co-amenable in G if and only if for every non-trivial G-boundary X, there is no probability measure on X that is fixed by H. Proof. Follows from Theorem 2.1.    The following shows how weak co-amenability naturally appears for boundary indivisible groups (see also Proposition 6.17). Proposition 5.8. Let G be a boundary indivisible locally compact group, and L a closed subgroup of G that is boundary-minimal and uniformly recurrent. Then L is weakly co-amenable in G. Proof. Write H for the closure of LG in Sub(G), which is a URS by assumption. Let X be a non-trivial G-boundary on which L acts minimally, and let Y be a G-boundary on which L fixes a probability measure. We have to show that Y is trivial. Since H fixes a point in Prob(Y ) and the G-action on Prob(Y ) is strongly proximal by Theorem 2.1, H fixes a point in Y by Lemma 3.13. So there exists y ∈ Y such that L ≤ Gy , and it follows that Gy acts minimally on X. Therefore by Lemma 3.8 X and Y are disjoint, and since X is non-trivial and G is boundary indivisible, this is possible only if Y is trivial.  5.3. The proof of Theorem 1.2. In this paragraph we shall give the proof of Theorem 1.2 from the introduction. We will make use of the following result. Proposition 5.9 (Furstenberg). Let G be a locally compact group, H ≤ G a closed subgroup of finite covolume, and X a G-boundary. Then X is a H-boundary.  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  25  For completeness we repeat the argument from [Fur81, Prop. 4.4]. Proof. Write Q = Prob(X), and consider a closed H-invariant subspace Q′ ⊆ Q. We have to show that X ⊆ Q′ . The set X = (gH, µ) : µ ∈ g(Q′ ) ⊆ G/H × Q   is a well-defined, closed, G-invariant subspace of G/H × Q. Fix a G-invariant probability measure mG/H on G/H, and consider n  o  Y = ν ∈ Prob(X ) : p∗G/H (ν) = mG/H , where pG/H is the projection from G/H ×Q onto the first factor, and p∗G/H is the induced push-forward operator. Then Y is a closed (and hence compact) G-invariant subspace of Prob(X ), and p∗Q : Y → Prob(Q) is continuous. So p∗Q (Y ) is closed in Prob(Q), and by strong proximality of the G-action on Q (Theorem 2.1), p∗Q (Y ) must intersect Q. Now X being the unique minimal closed G-invariant subspace of Q, one has X ⊆ p∗Q (Y ). For every x ∈ X, we therefore have νx ∈ Prob(X ) such that p∗G/H (νx ) = mG/H and p∗Q (νx ) = δx . This implies mG/H {gH : x ∈ g(Q′ )} = 1 for every x, and it easily follows that X ⊆ Q′ .  Remark 5.10. In the case when H is cocompact in G, strong proximality of the action of H on X also follows from [Gla76, II.3.1] applied to the action on Prob(X); and minimality follows [Gla76, IV.5.1] from disjointness of the G-spaces G/H and X [Gla76, III.6.1]. Theorem 5.11. Assume that H admits an amenable URS H that comes from an extremely proximal action, and such that Env(H) is co-amenable in H. Let G be a locally compact group containing H as a closed subgroup of finite covolume. Then: (a) G is boundary indivisible. (b) More generally if L is a locally compact group such that there is a sequence a topological group homomorphisms G = G0 → G1 → . . . → Gn = L such that either Gi → Gi+1 has dense image, or Gi → Gi+1 is an embedding of Gi as a closed subgroup of finite covolume in Gi+1 ; then L is boundary indivisible. In particular whenever G maps continuously and with dense image to a product G1 × G2 , one factor Gi must be amenable. Proof. Since H is amenable, H comes from an extremely proximal action, and Env(H) is co-amenable in H, the group H is boundary indivisible by Proposition 3.24. Now by Proposition 5.9, the property of being boundary indivisible is inherited from closed subgroups of finite covolume. Indeed if X, Y are disjoint Gboundaries, i.e. X × Y is a G-boundary, then X × Y is also a boundary for H by Proposition 5.9, hence of X or Y must be trivial since H is boundary indivisible. This shows (a). Since boundary indivisibility passes to dense continuous images, and is inherited from closed subgroups of finite covolume, (b) follows from (a). Finally if G1 , G2 are as in the last statement and Xi = ∂sp Gi , then X1 × X2 is a boundary for G1 × G2 , which is boundary indivisible by the previous paragraph. So one factor Xi must be trivial, which exactly means that Gi is amenable by Theorem 2.2.   26  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  Remark 5.12. In the proof of Theorem 5.11 we obtain that G is boundary indivisible from the same property for H, which is itself deduced from Proposition 3.24 (which in turn relies notably on Proposition 3.9). We note that the order in which the argument is developed seems to matter, in the sense that the arguments applied to H do not seem to be applicable directly to the group G. Indeed we do not know whether a group G as in Theorem 5.11 falls into the setting of Proposition 3.9, i.e. we do not know whether all non-trivial G-boundaries have the same stabilizer URS. We actually believe this might be false in general. We note at this point that the proof of Theorem 1.2 from the introduction is now complete. Indeed the fact that a group G as in Theorem 1.2 is boundary indivisible, as well as statement (a), is Theorem 5.11; and statement (b) follows from Proposition 5.8. The following remark explains a comment from the introduction. Remark 5.13. Theorem 1.4 provides instances of countable groups Γ being lattices in a group G of the form G = N ⋊ Aut(Td ), such that all the assumptions of Theorem 1.2 are satisfied (see Section 6). If M is a cocompact subgroup of Aut(Td ) acting minimally on ∂Td , then L = N ⋊ M is a cocompact (hence uniformly recurrent) subgroup of G, and L is boundary-minimal in G since ∂Td is a G-boundary. However when M is non-unimodular, then M is not co-amenable in Aut(Td ), and L is not co-amenable in G. This shows that the conclusion of statement (b) in Theorem 1.2 that L is weakly co-amenable in G cannot be strengthen by saying that L is co-amenable in G. 5.4. The proof of Theorem 1.1. Recall that if G is a topological group, the quasi-center QZ(G) of G is the subgroup of G containing the elements g ∈ G having an open centralizer. Note that QZ(G) contains the elements having a discrete conjugacy class, so in particular it contains all discrete normal subgroups. Recall also that the elliptic radical of G is the largest normal subgroup of G in which every compact subset generates a relatively compact subgroup. It is a closed characteristic subgroup of G. We say that two groups G1 , G2 are commensurable up to compact kernels if there exist Ki ≤ Hi ≤ Gi such that Hi is open and of finite index in Gi , Ki is a compact normal subgroup of Hi , and H1 /K1 and H2 /K2 are isomorphic. The following is slightly more complete than Theorem 1.1 from the introduction. Theorem 5.14. Let Γ be a countable group whose Furstenberg URS AΓ comes from a faithful and extremely proximal action, and assume that Env(AΓ ) is co-amenable in Γ. Let G be a locally compact group containing Γ as a lattice, and H a group commenurable with G up to compact kernels. Consider the following properties: (a) Env(AΓ ) is finitely generated; (b) Env(AΓ ) has finite index in Γ, and Γ admits a finitely generated subgroup with finite centralizer; (c) Env(AΓ ) has finite index in Γ and Env(AΓ ) has finite abelianization. Then: • (a), (b) both imply that H cannot be a product of two non-compact groups.  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  27  • (c) implies that any continuous morphism with dense image from H to a product of locally compact groups H → G1 × G2 is such that one factor Gi is compact. Proof. For simplicity we give the proof for H = G. The general case follows the same lines. Of course we may assume that Env(AΓ ) is non-trivial, since otherwise there is nothing to prove. According to Proposition 4.6 we have in particular that Γ is monolithic, and Mon(Γ) = [Env(AΓ ), Env(AΓ )]. For simplicity in all the proof we write E = Env(AΓ ) and M = Mon(Γ) = [E, E]. Assume that ϕ : G → G1 × G2 is continuous with dense image, and denote by pi the projection G1 × G2 → Gi , i = 1, 2. We will show that one factor must be compact. Upon modding out by the maximal compact normal subgroup of the identity component G0 , which intersects Γ trivially since Γ has no non-trivial finite normal subgroup (Proposition 4.6), we may also assume that G0 has no non-trivial compact normal subgroup. This implies in particular that G0 is a connected Lie group [MZ55]. By the assumption that E is co-amenable in Γ, we can apply Theorem 5.11, which says that one factor, say G2 , must be amenable. We then apply Corollary 4.13, which tells us that the map p2 ◦ ϕ is not injective in restriction to Γ. By definition of M we deduce that M ≤ ϕ−1 (G1 × 1). Assume now that (c) holds. Then M , being of finite index in Γ, is a lattice in G, and is contained in the closed normal subgroup ϕ−1 (G1 × 1). Therefore we deduce that ϕ−1 (G1 × 1) is cocompact in G, and that p2 ◦ ϕ(G) is a compact subgroup of G2 . Since p2 ◦ ϕ(G) is also dense in G2 , we have that G2 is compact. We now have to deal with (a), (b), in which case ϕ is the identity and G = G1 × G2 . Without loss of generality, we may assume that the projections pi (Γ) are dense. The proofs of the two cases will share a common mechanism, given by the following easy fact: Lemma 5.15. If there exists a subgroup L ≤ G whose centralizer CG (L) contains G2 , CG (L) is open in G, and CG (L) ∩ Γ is finite, then G2 is compact. Indeed, since Γ must intersect an open subgroup O ≤ G along a lattice of O, it follows that CG (L) is compact, and a fortiori so is G2 . We start with case (a). Consider H1 = p1 (E), which is normal in G1 by density of p1 (Γ). Note that H1 is compactly generated in view of the assumption that E is finitely generated. Since M = [E, E], the group H1 /M is abelian, and therefore of the form Zn × Rm × C for some compact group C. It follows that the group Q1 = H1 /H10 admits a discrete cocompact normal subgroup ∆, which is an extension of M by a free abelian group. Being characteristically simple and non-amenable, the group M has trivial elliptic radical, so the group ∆ also has trivial elliptic radical. Now since Q1 is compactly generated, there is a compact open normal subgroup K of Q1 such that K ⋊ ∆ has finite index in Q1 (see e.g. [BCGM16, Lem. 4.4]), so we deduce that Q1 has a compact open elliptic radical. Since any connected group has compact elliptic radical [MZ55], we deduce that H1 has a compact elliptic radical R, and H1 /R is discrete-by-connected. The compact group R is also normal in G, and therefore we can mod out by R and assume that R is trivial, so that H10 is open in H1 . Since H10 centralizes M , any γ ∈ E such that p1 (γ) belongs to H10  28  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  centralizes M , and therefore is trivial by Proposition 4.6. Therefore H10 is open in H1 and intersects the dense subgroup p1 (E) trivially, so it follows that H10 is trivial, and p1 (E) is a discrete subgroup of G. Observe that p1 (E) is centralized by G2 and normalized by G1 , and hence is normal in G. Being a discrete normal subgroup of G, p1 (E) therefore lies in the quasi-center QZ(G). Since p1 (E) is finitely generated, the centralizer of p1 (E) in G is actually open in G. Moreover the subgroup Γ ∩ CG (p1 (E)) is normal in Γ since CG (p1 (E)) is normal in G, but clearly does not contain M , and hence is trivial by Proposition 4.6. Therefore we can apply Lemma 5.15 with L = p1 (E), and we obtain the conclusion. We now deal with (b). Let Z be a minimal compact Γ-space on which the Γ-action is faithful and extremely proximal and such that SΓ (Z) = AΓ . By Proposition 5.9 (actually an easy case of it) the action of E on Z is also minimal, and it is extremely proximal by Lemma 2.5. Moreover the associated stabilizer URS remains equal to AΓ , and is also the Furstenberg URS of E by Proposition 3.26. So E satisfies all the assumptions of case (b) of the theorem, so it is enough to prove the result under the additional assumption Γ = E. In this case we have M = [Γ, Γ] thanks to Proposition 4.6, so it follows that p2 (Γ) is abelian. By density of the projection the group G2 is also abelian, and hence G2 lies in the center of G. Therefore Γ is normalized by the dense subgroup ΓG2 , and it follows that Γ is normal in G. In particular Γ ≤ QZ(G), and the conclusion follows by applying Lemma 5.15 with L a f.g. subgroup of Γ such that CΓ (L) is finite.  6. Groups acting on trees 6.1. Amenable URS’s and groups acting on trees. In this paragraph T is a locally finite tree, and H acts continuously on T by isometries. The assumption that T is locally finite is not essential here, and the results admit appropriate generalizations for non-locally finite trees (using the compactification from [MS04, Prop. 4.2]). Recall that the H-action on T is minimal if there is no proper invariant subtree, and of general type if H has no finite orbit in T ∪ ∂T . The following is wellknown, and essentially goes back to Tits [Tit70] (see also [PV91] and Proposition 2.4 for details). Proposition 6.1. If the action of H ≤ Aut(T ) is minimal and of general type, then the action of H on ∂T is minimal and extremely proximal. Theorem 5.11 therefore implies the following result: Corollary 6.2. Let H ≤ Aut(T ) be a locally compact group whose action on T is continuous, minimal and of general type. Assume that end stabilizers are amenable, and the envelope of SH (∂T ) is co-amenable in H. Assume H embeds as a subgroup of finite covolume in G. Then whenever G maps continuously and with dense image to a product G1 × G2 , one factor Gi must be amenable. The conclusion of Corollary 6.2 implies in particular that whenever H embeds in G with finite covolume, then G cannot be a product of two non-amenable groups. The following example, which is largely inspired from [CM11, Ex. II.8], shows that the group G can nonetheless be a product of two non-compact groups.  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  29  Example 6.3. Let k = Fp ((t)) be the field of Laurent series over the finite field Fp , and let α ∈ Aut(k) be a non-trivial automorphism of k. The group L = SL(2, k) acts on a (p + 1)-regular tree, 2-transitively and with amenable stabilizers on the boundary. This action extends to a continuous action of H = L ⋊α Z, so that H satisfies all the assumptions of Corollary 6.2. Nevertheless H embeds diagonally in the product G = (L ⋊ Aut(k)) × Z as a closed subgroup of finite covolume since G/H is compact and H and G are unimodular. We will need the following fact. If A is a subtree of T , by the fixator of A we mean the subgroup fixing pointwise A. Proposition 6.4. Let Γ ≤ Aut(T ) be a countable group whose action on T is minimal and of general type, and such that end-stabilizers in Γ are amenable. Then AΓ = SΓ (∂T ), and Env(AΓ ) is the subgroup generated by fixators of half-trees. Proof. Since the Γ-action on ∂T is extremely proximal, it is also strongly proximal by Theorem 2.3. So ∂T is a Γ-boundary with amenable stabilizers, and we deduce that AΓ = SΓ (∂T ) by Proposition 3.25. Now according to Lemma 3.7, the subgroup Env(SΓ (∂T )) = Env(AΓ ) is generated by the elements γ ∈ Γ whose fixed point set in ∂T has non-empty interior. Since half-trees form a basis of the topology in ∂T , the statement follows.  Before going to the proof of Corollary 1.3, we make the following observation: Remark 6.5. For Γ acting on T (action minimal and general type) such that the action on ∂T is not topologically free, virtual simplicity of Γ is equivalent to Γ0 being of finite index in Γ and Γ0 having finite abelianization, where Γ0 is the subgroup generated by fixators of half-trees. See statement (e) of Proposition 4.6. Proof of Corollary 1.3. In view of Proposition 6.4, the assumptions on Γ imply that the Furstenberg URS of Γ comes from a faithful extremely proximal action. The fact that end-stabilizers are all non-trivial means that the action of Γ on ∂T is not topologically free, and by the above observation virtual simplicity of Γ is equivalent to Env(AΓ ) being of finite index in Γ and with finite abelianization. The first statement of the corollary therefore follows from Theorem 5.14, case (c), and the second statement from Theorem 1.2.  6.2. Groups with prescribed local action. In the next paragraphs we will illustrate the results of the previous sections on a family of groups acting on trees, which contains instances of discrete and non-discrete groups. The purpose of this paragraph is to recall the definition and give a brief description of known properties of these groups. We will denote by Ω a set of cardinality d ≥ 3 and by Td a d-regular tree. The vertex set and edge set of Td will be denoted respectively Vd and Ed . We fix a coloring c : Ed → Ω such that neighbouring edges have different colors. For every g ∈ Aut(Td ) and every v ∈ Vd , the action of g on the star around v gives rise to a permutation of Ω, denoted σ(g, v), and called the local permutation of g at v. These permutations satisfy the identity (1)  σ(gh, v) = σ(g, hv)σ(h, v)  for every g, h ∈ Aut(Td ) and v ∈ Vd .  30  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  Given a permutation group F ≤ Sym(Ω), the group U (F ) introduced by Burger and Mozes in [BM00a] is the group of automorphisms g ∈ Aut(Td ) such that σ(g, v) ∈ F for all v. It is a closed cocompact subgroup of Aut(Td ). Definition 6.6. Given F ≤ F ′ ≤ Sym(Ω), we denote by G(F, F ′ ) the group of automorphisms g ∈ Aut(Td ) such that σ(g, v) ∈ F ′ for all v and σ(g, v) ∈ F for all but finitely many v. That G(F, F ′ ) is indeed a subgroup of Aut(Td ) follows from (1), and we note that we have U (F ) ≤ G(F, F ′ ) ≤ U (F ′ ). We make the following observation for future reference. Remark 6.7. As it follows from the definition, any element γ ∈ G(F, F ′ ) fixing an edge e can be (uniquely) written as γ = γ1 γ2 , where each γi belongs to G(F, F ′ ) and fixes one of the two half-trees defined by e. In the sequel we always assume that F ′ preserves the F -orbits in Ω (see [LB16, Lem. 3.3] for the relevance of this property in this context). These groups satisfy the following properties (see [LB16]): (1) The group G(F, F ′ ) is dense in the locally compact group U (F ′ ). In particular G(F, Sym(Ω)) is a dense subgroup of Aut(Td ). (2) G(F, F ′ ) admits a locally compact group topology (defined by requiring that the inclusion of U (F ) is continuous and open), and the action of G(F, F ′ ) on Td is continuous but not proper as soon as F 6= F ′ . Endowed with this topology, the group G(F, F ′ ) is compactly generated. (3) stabilizers of vertices and stabilizers of ends in G(F, F ′ ) are respectively locally elliptic and (locally elliptic)-by-cyclic. In particular they are amenable. (4) G(F, F ′ ) is a discrete group if and only if F acts freely on Ω. When this is so, the group G(F, F ′ ) is therefore a finitely generated group, and stabilizers of vertices and stabilizers of ends in G(F, F ′ ) are respectively locally finite and (locally finite)-by-cyclic. When F acts freely on Ω and F 6= F ′ , the groups G(F, F ′ ) are instances of groups obtained from a more general construction described in [LB17, Sec. 4] (more precisely, a variation of it), which provides discrete groups with a continuous Furstenberg URS (the later being the stabilizer URS associated to the action on the boundary of the tree on which these groups act). In the particular case of the groups G(F, F ′ ), the Furstenberg URS can be explicitly described, see Proposition 4.28 and Corollary 4.29 in [LBMB16]. In the sequel whenever we use letters F and F ′ , we will always mean that F, F ′ are permutation groups on a set Ω, that F ′ contains F and preserves the F -orbits in Ω. Following [Tit70], we will denote by G(F, F ′ )+ the subgroup of G(F, F ′ ) generated by fixators of edges, and by G(F, F ′ )∗ the subgroup of index two in G(F, F ′ ) preserving the bipartition of Td . The following result, also obtained in [CRW17, Prop. 9.16], supplements simplicity results obtained in [LB16], where the index of the simple subgroup was found explicitly under appropriate assumptions on the permutation groups. Proposition 6.8. The group G(F, F ′ ) has a simple subgroup of finite index if and only if F is transitive and F ′ is generated by its point stabilizers.  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  31  Proof. These conditions are necessary by [LB16, Prop. 4.7]. Conversely, assume F transitive and F ′ generated by its point stabilizers. By [LB16, Prop. 4.7] again, G(F, F ′ )+ has index two in G(F, F ′ ), so in particular it is compactly generated. If M is the monolith of G(F, F ′ ), which is simple and open in G(F, F ′ ) by [LB16, Cor. 4.9], we have to show M has finite index. According to Remark 6.7, G(F, F ′ )+ is also the subgroup generated by fixators of half-trees, and therefore by Proposition 4.6 M is the commutator subgroup of G(F, F ′ )+ . The abelianization of G(F, F ′ )+ is therefore a finitely generated abelian group, which is generated by torsion elements since G(F, F ′ )+ is generated by locally elliptic subgroups (fixators of edges). Therefore this abelianization is finite, and it follows that M has finite index in G(F, F ′ ).  6.3. Boundaries of G(F, F ′ ). In this paragraph we use results from the previous sections in order to study the boundaries of the discrete groups G(F, F ′ ). The following result shows that several properties of the set of boundaries are governed by the permutation groups, and that rigidity phenomena occur under mild conditions of the permutation groups. Theorem 6.9. Assume F acts freely on Ω, F 6= F ′ , and write Γ = G(F, F ′ ). The following are equivalent: (i) The subgroup of F ′ generated by its point stabilizers has at most two orbits in Ω. (ii) Γ/Env(AΓ ) is isomorphic to one of C2 , D∞ or D∞ ⋊ C2 . (iii) Env(AΓ ) is co-amenable in Γ. (iv) SΓ (X) = AΓ for every non-trivial Γ-boundary X. (v) Γ is boundary indivisible. We will need preliminary results before proving Theorem 6.9. Lemma 6.10. Assume that F acts freely on Ω. The envelope of the Furstenberg URS of G(F, F ′ ) is equal to G(F, F ′ )+ . Proof. Write Γ = G(F, F ′ ) and Γ+ = G(F, F ′ )+ . According to Proposition 6.4, Env(AΓ ) is the subgroup generated by fixators of half-trees in Γ. Therefore the inclusion Env(AΓ ) ≤ Γ+ is clear. The converse inclusion also holds true by Remark 6.7, so equality follows.  In view of Lemma 6.10 and Proposition 3.24, we are led to consider the quotient G(F, F ′ )/G(F, F ′ )+ , and in particular study when it is amenable. To this end, we will denote by F ′+ the subgroup of F ′ generated by its point stabilizers, and write D = F ′ /F ′+ . Since F ′+ is normal in F ′ , we have an action of F ′ on the set of orbits of F ′+ , which factors through a free action of D. Proposition 6.11. The group Q = G(F, F ′ )∗ /G(F, F ′ )+ is isomorphic to the group U (D)∗ , where D = F ′ /F ′+ is viewed as a permutation group acting freely on the set of orbits of F ′+ in Ω. If moreover F is transitive, one has Q = D ∗ D. Proof. We let O1 , . . . , Or ⊆ Ω be the orbits of F ′+ , and we will freely identify the set of orbits with the integers {1, . . . , r}. For every a ∈ Ω, there is a unique i ∈ {1, . . . , r} such that a ∈ Oi , and we denote i = ia . We view the tree Td as the Cayley graph of the free Coxeter group of rank d, namely the group defined by generators x1 , . . . , xd and relators x2j = 1 for all j.  32  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  When adding relations of the form xa = xb whenever ia = ib (i.e. a and b are in the same F ′+ -orbit), we obtain a free Coxeter group of rank r. It has a Cayley graph that is a regular tree of degree r, and we have a surjective map p : Td → Tr . Two elements v, w ∈ ∗d C2 = hx1 , . . . , xd i have the same image in ∗r C2 if and Q only if one can write w = v wj xaj xbj wj−1 for some words wj and colors aj , bj such that iaj = ibj . Since the inverse of wj is equal to the word obtained from wj by reversing the order, we have: Lemma 6.12. Two vertices v, w of Td have the same projection in Tr if and only if the distance between v and w is even, say d(v, w) = 2m, and if (a1 , . . . , a2m ) is the sequence of colors from v to w, then the word (ia1 , . . . , ia2m ) is a concatenation of palindromes of even length. Lemma 6.13. For every g ∈ G(F, F ′ ) and every vertex v on Td , the image of σ(g, v) in D = F ′ /F ′+ does not depend on v. We denote by σg ∈ D the corresponding element, which is trivial when g ∈ G(F, F ′ )+ . Proof. If v, w are adjacent vertices and a is the color of the edge between them, then σ(g, v)(a) = σ(g, w)(a). So σ(g, v)σ(g, w)−1 ∈ F ′+ . The first statement follows by connectedness. The fact that σg is trivial on G(F, F ′ )+ is then clear because g 7→ σg is a morphism according to the first statement, which vanishes on fixators of edges.  Note that the set of edges of Tr inherits a natural coloring by the integers 1, . . . , r. Lemma 6.14. There is a natural morphism ϕ : G(F, F ′ ) → Aut(Tr ) such that ker(ϕ) = G(F, F ′ )+ and Im(ϕ) = U (D). Proof. We shall first define an action of G(F, F ′ ) on the set of vertices of Tr . Let g ∈ G(F, F ′ ). Let v, w be two vertices of Td , and (a1 , . . . , an ) be the sequence of colors from v to w. If v = v1 , . . . , vn+1 = w are the vertices between v and w, then the sequence of colors from g(v) to g(w) is (σ(g, v1 )(a1 ), . . . , σ(g, vn )(an )). If σg is the element defined in Lemma 6.13, then one has iσ(g,vj )(aj ) = σg (iaj ) for all j = 1, . . . , n. This shows in particular that if v, w satisfy the condition of Lemma 6.12, then the same holds for g(v) and g(w). This means that for every vertex x of Tr , the formula (2)  ϕ(g)(x) := p(gx̃),  where x̃ is any vertex of Td such that p(x̃) = x, is a well-defined action of G(F, F ′ ) on Tr . The fact that the tree structure is preserved is clear. Note that for every g ∈ G(F, F ′ ), all the local permutations of ϕ(g) are equal to σg : for every vertex x of Tr , one has σ(ϕ(g), x) = σg . In particular the image of ϕ lies inside U (D). We shall prove that ker(ϕ) = G(F, F ′ )+ . Let g ∈ G(F, F ′ ) fixing an edge in Td . Then ϕ(g) also fixes an edge of Tr by (2). Moreover one has σg = 1 (Lemma 6.13), and it follows from the previous paragraph that all local permutations of ϕ(g) are trivial. This implies g ∈ ker(ϕ). Conversely, we let g be an element of ker(ϕ), and we prove that g ∈ G(F, F ′ )+ . Note that since ϕ(g) is trivial, one has σg = 1, i.e. all local permutations of g are in F ′+ . Now let v be any vertex. By Lemma 6.12, the sequence of colors (a1 , . . . , a2n ) from v to g(v) gives rise to a sequence (ia1 , . . . , ia2n ) that is a concatenation of palindromes. For simplicity we treat the case where (ia1 , . . . , ia2n ) is a palindrome; the general case consists in repeating the  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  33  argument for this case. Let v = v1 , . . . , v2n+1 = g(v) be the vertices between v and g(v) (note that vn is the midpoint between v and g(v)). Since (ia1 , . . . , ia2n ) is a palindrome, one easily checks that there are elements g1 , . . . , gn such that gj belongs to the stabilizer of vj in G(F, F ′+ ) and g′ = g1 . . . gn g fixes the vertex v (this is obtained by successively folding the geodesic [v, g(v)] onto itself starting from its midpoint in order to bring back g(v) to v with g1 . . . gn ). We now invoke the following easy fact, whose verification is left to the reader. Lemma 6.15. Let γ ∈ G(F, F ′ ) fixing a vertex w, and such that σ(γ, w) ∈ F ′+ . Then γ ∈ G(F, F ′ )+ . We apply Lemma 6.15 to g′ and all gj ’s, and deduce that g = gn−1 . . . g1−1 g′ belongs to G(F, F ′ )+ as desired. The last thing that remains to be proved in the statement of Lemma 6.14 is that the image of ϕ is equal to U (D). The fact that ϕ(g) always belongs to U (D) has already been observed. For the converse inclusion, observe that since G(F, F ′ ) acts transitively on the vertices of Tr (as it is already the case on Td ), it is enough to check that the image of ϕ contains U (D)x for some vertex x of Tr . Now since D acts freely on {1, . . . , r}, the map U (D)x → D, γ 7→ σ(γ, x), is an isomorphism. Therefore it is enough to see that any action on the star around x on Tr can realized by an element of G(F, F ′ ), and this is indeed the case (see e.g. Lemma 3.4 in [LB16]).  To finish the proof of the proposition, remark that the image of G(F, F ′ )∗ by ϕ is precisely U (D)∗ . When F is transitive then D is also transitive, so that U (D)∗ has two orbits of vertices and one orbit of edges, and therefore splits as the free product D ∗ D.  Remark 6.16. The case F = F ′ is allowed in Proposition 6.11, so that the conclusion also holds for the groups U (F ) from [BM00a]. Proposition 6.11 naturally leads us to isolate the following three situations. We keep the previous notation, so that r is the number of orbits of F ′+ in Ω, D = F ′ /F ′+ and Q = G(F, F ′ )∗ /G(F, F ′ )+ : (1) r = 1. In this case Tr is a segment of length one, and D and Q are trivial. (2) r = 2. Tr is a bi-infinite line, and this case splits into two disjoint sub-cases: (a) If F ′ is intransitive then D is trivial, and Q = U (1)∗ = Z (generated by a translation of Tr of length 2). (b) If F ′ is transitive then we have D = Sym(2) and Q = D ∗ D = D∞ . (3) r ≥ 3. Then Q = U (D)∗ is a virtually free group (since it acts vertex transitively and with trivial edge stabilizers of Tr ). Theorem 6.9 says that all properties stated there hold true if and only if r ∈ {1, 2}. A sufficient condition for having r = 1 is for instance that F acts transitively on Ω, F 6= F ′ and F ′ acts primitively, or quasi-primitively on Ω. Recall that a permutation group is quasi-primitive if every non-trivial normal subgroup acts transitively. But Theorem 6.9 also applies beyond the case of quasi-primitive permutation groups. For example a situation giving rise to case (2) (a) is when F ′ has a fixed point and acts transitively on the complement. Examples giving rise to case (2) (b) are for instance obtained by taking F ′ = Sym(n)≀C2 = Sym(n)≀hτ i acting naturally  34  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  on 2n letters, and F the subgroup generated by ((cn , cn ), 1) and ((1, 1), τ ), where cn is a cycle of order n. Proof of Theorem 6.9. (i) ⇒ (ii) follows from Lemma 6.10 and Proposition 6.11 (and the discussion following its proof). (ii) ⇒ (iii) is clear. (iii) ⇒ (iv) is Proposition 3.24. (iv) ⇒ (v) is guaranteed by Proposition 3.9 and the fact that AΓ is not a point. Finally assume that (i) does not hold, i.e. F ′+ has at least three orbits in Ω, and write Γ+ = G(F, F ′ )+ . By Proposition 6.11, the group Q = Γ/Γ+ has a subgroup of finite index that is free of rank at least 2. So there exist non-trivial Q-boundaries, and a fortiori these are non-trivial Γ-boundaries. If X is such a boundary, then Γ+ acts trivially on X. Since Γ+ also acts minimally on ∂Td , it follows that X and ∂Td are disjoint Γ-boundaries, contradicting (v). Therefore property (v) implies property (i), and the proof is complete.  6.4. Weakly co-amenable subgroups. In this paragraph we show that subgroups of the groups G(F, F ′ ) satisfy the following dichotomy: Proposition 6.17. Assume that F acts freely transitively and F ′ acts primitively on Ω. Then any subgroup of G(F, F ′ ) is either (locally finite)-by-cyclic (and hence amenable) or weakly co-amenable. We will need the following lemma. Lemma 6.18. Assume that F ′ acts primitively on Ω, and take two subgroups H1 6= H2 in the Furstenberg URS of G(F, F ′ ). Then hH1 , H2 i = G(F, F ′ )∗ . Proof. Write Γ = G(F, F ′ ). Recall from [LBMB16, Prop. 4.28] that the Furstenberg URS of Γ consists of subgroups Γ0ξ , ξ ∈ ∂Td , where Γ0ξ is the set of elements acting trivially on a neighbourhood of ξ. Given ξ 6= η ∈ ∂Td , we show that the subgroup Λ generated by Γ0ξ and Γ0η must be equal to G(F, F ′ )∗ . Take a vertex v on the geodesic from ξ to η, let e1 , e2 be the edges containing v and pointing towards ξ and η, and a, b the colors of e1 , e2 . Denote by K(v) the subgroup of Γ consisting of elements γ fixing v and such that σ(γ, w) ∈ F for every w 6= v. Since F ′ is primitive, F ′ is generated by the point stabilizers Fa′ and Fb′ . This implies that every element of K(v) may be written as a product of elements fixing either the half-tree defined by e1 containing ξ, or the half-tree defined by e2 containing η, so that K(v) ≤ Λ. Since v was arbitrary, we also have K(v ′ ) ≤ Λ for v ′ a neighbour of v on the geodesic [ξ, η]. The conclusion now follows since for two neighbouring vertices v, v ′ , the subgroups K(v), K(v ′ ) always generate G(F, F ′ )∗ [LB16, Cor. 3.10].  Proof of Proposition 6.17. Write Γ = G(F, F ′ ), and let Λ be a subgroup of Γ that is non-amenable, equivalently whose action of Td is of general type. By Proposition 5.7 we have to show that Λ fixes no probability measure on any non-trivial Γboundary. Argue by contradiction and assume that X is a non-trivial Γ-boundary on which Λ fixes a probability measure µ. According to Theorem 6.9, we have SΓ (X) = AΓ . Therefore by Proposition 3.2 there exist an almost 1-1 extension η : X̃ → X and a factor map π : X̃ → AΓ . Let Q ⊂ Prob(X̃) be the set of ν such that η ∗ ν = µ, and write R = π ∗ (Q), which is a closed Λ-invariant subset of Prob(AΓ ). Since the action of Λ on ∂Td is strongly proximal and since AΓ is a factor of ∂Td [LBMB16, Prop. 2.10-4.28],  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  35  we deduce that R contains some Dirac measures. Let H ∈ AΓ such that there is ν ∈ Prob(X̃) with η ∗ ν = µ and π ∗ ν = δH . Such a measure ν must be supported in the set of (x, H) ∈ X̃, and it follows that µ is supported in the set of H-fixed points in X (because (x, H) ∈ X̃ implies that H ≤ Gx by upper semi-continuity of the stabilizer map). But since Λ does not fix any point in AΓ , we may find another H ′ ∈ AΓ such that δH ′ ∈ R, so that the same argument shows that H ′ also acts trivially on the support of µ. By Lemma 6.18 the subgroups H, H ′ generate G(F, F ′ )∗ , which is of index two in Γ. Therefore any point in the support of µ has a Γ-orbit of cardinality at most two, which is absurd since Γ acts minimally on X and X is non-trivial by assumption.  Remark 6.19. Assume F acts freely transitively and F ′ acts primitively, and write Γ = G(F, F ′ ). Let Λ ≤ Γ such that the Λ-action on Td is of general type but with a proper Λ-invariant subtree. For instance one could take for Λ the subgroup generated by two hyperbolic elements with sufficiently far apart axis. Then Λ is not co-amenable in Γ (see the argument in the proof of Theorem 2.4 in [CM09]), but Λ is weakly co-amenable in Γ by Proposition 6.17. Remark 6.20. We mention that when F ′ is primitive, following the proof of Corollary 4.14 from [LBMB16] (with minor modifications), one could prove that every non-trivial G(F, F ′ )-boundary factors onto ∂Td . This would provide an alternative proof of Proposition 6.17. 6.5. Lattice embeddings of the groups G(F, F ′ ). In this section we study how the discrete groups G(F, F ′ ) can embed as lattices in some locally compact groups. The purpose of this paragraph is twofold: (1) First we apply previous results of the article to the family of groups G(F, F ′ ) and deduce some properties of general locally compact groups containing a group G(F, F ′ ) as a lattice (Corollary 6.22). (2) Second we explain how the groups G(F, F ′ ) embed as lattices in some locally compact wreath products. This will be the content of §6.5.2 below. Remark 6.21. Maybe it is worth pointing out that instances of lattice embeddings of the groups G(F, F ′ ) already appeared in [LB16]. Indeed under appropriate assumptions on permutation groups F ≤ F ′ , H ≤ H ′ , the inclusion of G(F, F ′ ) in G(H, H ′ ) has discrete and cocompact image [LB16, Cor. 7.4]. Corollary 6.22. Assume that F acts freely transitively on Ω, and that F ′ is generated by its point stabilizers. Let G be a locally compact group containing G(F, F ′ ) as a lattice. Then the conclusions of Corollary 1.3 hold. Proof. The assumptions on F, F ′ imply that G(F, F ′ ) is virtually simple by Proposition 6.8, so Corollary 1.3 applies.  Remark 6.23. In the setting of Corollary 6.22, although G(F, F ′ ) cannot be a lattice in a product, it happens that there exist non-discrete groups G1 , G2 such that G(F, F ′ ) embeds as a discrete subgroup of G1 × G2 with injective and dense projection to each factor. For instance if F1 , F2 are permutation groups such that F Fi ≤ F ′ and we set Gi = G(Fi , F ′ ), then the diagonal embedding of G(F, F ′ ) in G1 × G2 has this property as soon as F1 ∩ F2 = F . See [LB16, Lem. 3.4 and §7.1].  36  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  6.5.1. Locally compact wreath products. In this paragraph we introduce some terminology that will be used in the sequel. Let Ω be a set, B a group and A a subgroup of B. We will denote by B Ω,A the set of functions f : Ω → B such that f (x) ∈ A for all but finitely many x ∈ Ω. Note that B Ω,A is a group. Definition 6.24 ([Cor17]). If H is a group acting on Ω, the semi-restricted Ω,A ⋊ H, permutational wreath product B ≀A Ω H is the semi-direct product B X,A −1 where h ∈ H acts on f ∈ B by (hf )(x) = f (h x). The extreme situations when A = 1 and when A = B correspond respectively to the restricted and the unrestricted wreath product. When A = 1, we shall write B ≀Ω H for the restricted wreath product. Also for simplicity we will sometimes say “wreath product” B ≀A Ω H instead of “semi-restricted permutational wreath product”. When A is a compact group and H a locally compact group acting continuously on Ω, the group AΩ ⋊ H is a locally compact group for the product topology. If moreover B is locally compact and A is compact open in B, there is a natural locally compact group topology on B ≀A Ω H, defined by requiring that the inclusion Ω A of A ⋊ H in B ≀Ω H is continuous and open. See [Cor17, Sec. 2]. In the remaining of the article we shall be interested in the study of certain lattices in some locally compact groups B ≀A Ω H. A few remarks are in order: Lemma 6.25. Let A, B, Ω and H as above. (a) Assume Γ1 is a lattice in B Ω,A and Γ2 is a lattice in H that normalizes Γ1 . Then Γ1 ⋊ Γ2 is a lattice in B ≀A Ω H. A (b) For B ≀Ω H to contain a lattice, it is necessary that H contains a lattice. Proof. For the first statement, see [Rag72, Lem. I.1.6-7]. For the second statement, Ω observe that if Γ ≤ B ≀A Ω H is a lattice, the intersection ΓA = Γ ∩ (A ⋊ H) is a Ω lattice in AΩ ⋊H since AΩ ⋊H is open in B ≀A Ω H. The subgroup A being compact, the projection of ΓA to H is discrete, and hence is a lattice in H.  Recall that there are various notions of irreducibility for a lattice in a direct product of groups. In general whether all these notions coincide depends on the context. We refer to [CM12, 2.B] and [CM09, 4.A] for detailed discussions. In the setting of wreath products, we will use the following terminology: Definition 6.26. A lattice Γ in B ≀A Ω H is an irreducible lattice if Γ has a non-discrete projection to the group H. This definition implies that neither Γ nor its finite index subgroups can be of the form Γ1 ⋊ Γ2 as in Lemma 6.25. Lemma 6.27. If the group B Ω,A does not contain any lattice, then any lattice in B ≀A Ω H is irreducible. Proof. If Γ ≤ B≀A Ω H is a lattice with a discrete projection Λ to H, then the subgroup Λ contains Γ as a lattice, and it follows that Γ intersects the subgroup B Ω,A , B ≀A Ω Ω,A . which is open in B ≀A  Ω Λ, along a lattice of B  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  37  Remark 6.28. Of course if B admits no lattice then the same holds for B Ω,A . More interestingly, there are finite groups A, B for which B Ω,A fails to admit any lattice (provided Ω is infinite). This is for instance the case when A 6= B and any non-trivial element of B has a non-trivial power in A. Consequently all lattices in B ≀A Ω H are irreducible by Lemma 6.27 (for arbitrary H). Proof of Remark 6.28. We claim that the above condition on A, B actually implies that B Ω,A has no infinite discrete subgroup. For every finite Σ ⊂ Ω, we write OΣ ≤ B Ω,A for the subgroup vanishing on Σ, and UΣ = OΣ ∩ AΩ . Assume Γ is a discrete subgroup of B Ω,A , so that there is a finite Σ ⊂ Ω such that Γ ∩ UΣ = 1. The assumption on A, B is easily seen to imply that any non-trivial subgroup of OΣ intersects UΣ non-trivially. Therefore Γ ∩ OΣ = 1, and OΣ being of finite index in B Ω,A , Γ is finite.  It should be noted that the existence of an irreducible lattice in B ≀A Ω H forces H to be non-discrete and B to be non-trivial. However this does not force B Ω,A to be non-discrete, and as we will see below, interesting examples already arise when B is finite and A is trivial. 6.5.2. The proof of Theorem 1.4. Let n ≥ 2 and d ≥ 3. We denote by Σn the (V ) set of integers {0, . . . , n − 1}, and by Σn d the set of functions f : Vd → Σn with finite support, where the support of f is the set of v such that f (v) 6= 0. We will also write fv for the image of v by f , and sometimes use the notation (fv ) for the function f . We consider the graph Xn,d whose set of vertices is the set of pairs (f, e), where (V ) f belongs to Σn d and e ∈ Ed , and edges emanating from a vertex (f, e) are of two types: • type 1: (f, e′ ) is connected to (f, e) if e′ ∈ Ed is a neighbour of e (i.e. if e and e′ share exactly one vertex); • type 2: (f ′ , e) is connected to (f, e) if the function f ′ is obtained from f by changing the value at exactly one vertex of e. Note that since any e ∈ Ed has 2(d − 1) neighbours and Σn has cardinality n, every vertex of Xn,d has 2(d − 1) neighbours of type 1 and 2(n − 1) neighbours of type 2. The graph Xn,d is almost the wreath product of the complete graph on n vertices with the tree Td , see below. Let Sn be the group of permutations of Σn . For σ ∈ Sn and i ∈ Σn , we will write σ · i the action of σ on i. The stabilizer of 0 ∈ Σn in Sn is obviously isomorphic to Sn−1 , and by abuse of notation we will denote it Sn−1 . In particular when viewing Sn−1 as a subgroup of Sn , we will always implicitly mean that Sn−1 is the subgroup of Sn acting only on {1, . . . , n − 1}. S  Definition 6.29. We will denote by Gn,d the wreath product Sn ≀Vdn−1 Aut(Td ). Groups of the form Gn,d were considered in [Cor17, Ex. 2.6]. We will denote V ,S Un,d = Snd n−1 , so that Gn,d = Un,d ⋊ Aut(Td ). We endow Gn,d with the topology such that sets of the form ((σv )U1 , γU2 ) form a basis of neighbourhoods of ((σv ), γ), d and in where U1 and U2 belong to a basis of the identity respectively in SVn−1 Aut(Td ). This defines a totally disconnected locally compact group topology on Gn,d (see [Cor17, Prop. 2.3]). We note that the case n = 2 is somehow particular,  38  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  as U2,d is a discrete subgroup of G2,d , and G2,d is just the restricted wreath product G2,d = C2 ≀Vd Aut(Td ) = (⊕Vd C2 ) ⋊ Aut(Td ). Proposition 6.30. The group Gn,d acts by automorphisms on the graph Xn,d by preserving the types of edges. Moreover the action is faithful, continuous, proper and transitive on the set of vertices. Proof. The group Gn,d is a subgroup of the unrestricted permutational wreath product of Sn and Aut(Td ). The latter group has a faithful action on the set of functions Vd → Σn , given by ((σv ), γ) · (fv ) = (σv · fγ −1 v ). (V )  The group Gn,d preserves Σn d because σv fixes 0 almost surely if (σv ) belongs to Un,d . Now the projection from Gn,d onto Aut(Td ) induces an action of Gn,d on the (V ) set Ed , and we will consider the diagonal action of Gn,d on Σn d × Ed . In other words, if g = ((σv ), γ) ∈ Gn,d , and ((fv ), e) ∈ Xn,d , (3)      g · ((fv ), e) = (σv · fγ −1 v ), γe .  Fix x = ((fv ), e) ∈ Xn,d and g = ((σv ), γ) ∈ Gn,d , and let x′ be a neighbour of x. If x′ is of type 1, then we have x′ = ((fv ), e′ ), where e and e′ share a vertex w in Td . Then γe and γe′ have the vertex γw in common, so that by the formula (3), g · x′ is a neighbour of type 1 of g · x in Xn,d . Now if x′ is of type 2, then we may write x′ = ((fv′ ), e) with fv′ = fv if and only if v 6= w, where w is one of the two vertices of e. It follows that σv · fγ −1 v = σv · fγ′ −1 v if and only if v 6= γw, so that by (3) g · x′ is a neighbour of type 2 of g · x. This shows that the action is by graph automorphisms and preserves the types of edges. Lemma 6.31. Let e ∈ Ed , and let K be the stabilizer of e in Aut(TQ d ). Then the stabilizer of the vertex ((0), e) in Gn,d is the compact open subgroup Sn−1 ⋊ K. Proof. That g = ((σv ), γ) fixes ((0), e) exactly means by (3) that σv fixes 0 for all v and that γ fixes e.  So the fact that the action is continuous and proper follows from the lemma, and the transitivity on the set of vertices is an easy verification.  Consider now the free product Cd ∗ Cd of two cyclic groups of order d, acting on its Bass-Serre tree Td with one orbit of edges and two orbits of vertices. Denote by Cn the cyclic subgroup of Sn generated by the cycle (0, . . . , n − 1), and set Γn,d := Cn ≀Vd (Cd ∗ Cd ) ≤ Gn,d . Remark that Cd ∗ Cd has a split morphism onto Cd , whose kernel acts on Td with two orbits of vertices and is free of rank d − 1. Therefore Γn,d splits as Γn,d = (Cn2 ≀ Fd−1 ) ⋊ Cd . Lemma 6.32. Γn,d ≤ Gn,d acts freely transitively on the vertices of Xn,d . Proof. This is clear: the image of the vertex ((0), e) by an element ((σv ), γ) is ((σv · 0), γe), so both transitivity and freeness follow from the fact that the actions of Cn on Σn and of Cd ∗ Cd on Ed have these properties.   AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  39  We now explain how the groups G(F, F ′ ) act on the graphs Xn,d . In the sequel F, F ′ denote two permutation groups on Ω such that F ≤ F ′ and F ′ preserves the orbits of F , and we denote by n the index of F in F ′ . Fix a bijection between Σn = {0, . . . , n − 1} and F ′ /F , such that 0 is sent to the class F . The action of F ′ on the coset space F ′ /F induces a group homomorphism α : F ′ → Sn , such that α(F ) lies inside Sn−1 . For γ ∈ G(F, F ′ ) and v ∈ Vd , write ργ,v = α(σ(γ, γ −1 v)) ∈ Sn . Note that ργ,v ∈ Sn−1 if and only if σ(γ, γ −1 v) ∈ F . We also denote by ργ = (ργ,v ). Proposition 6.33. Let F ≤ F ′ ≤ Sym(Ω), and n the index of F in F ′ . The map ϕ : G(F, F ′ ) → Gn,d , γ 7→ ϕ(γ) = (ργ , γ), is a well-defined group morphism that is injective, continuous, and with a closed and cocompact image. Proof. The map ϕ is well-defined because ργ,v ∈ Sn−1 for all but finitely many V ,S v, so that we indeed have ργ ∈ Snd n−1 . The fact that ϕ is a group morphism follows from the cocycle identity (1) satisfied by local permutations. Indeed for γ, γ ′ ∈ G(F, F ′ ) we have ϕ(γ)ϕ(γ ′ ) = (ψ, γγ ′ ) with ψv = ργ,v ργ ′ ,γ −1 v = α(σ(γ, γ −1 v))α(σ(γ ′ , γ ′−1 γ −1 v)) = α(σ(γγ ′ , (γγ ′ )−1 v)) = ργγ ′ ,v , so ψ = ργγ ′ and ϕ(γ)ϕ(γ ′ ) = ϕ(γγ ′ ). Injectivity of ϕ is clear since the composition with the projection to Aut(Td ) d ⋊ Aut(Td ) is is injective. The preimage in G(F, F ′ ) of the open subgroup SVn−1 ′ the subgroup U (F ), which is open in G(F, F ) by definition of the topology, so it follows that the map ϕ is continuous. Also the intersection between Im(ϕ) and the d ⋊ Aut(Td ) is ϕ(U (F )), and it is easy to check that the latter open subgroup SVn−1 is indeed a closed subgroup of Gn,d , so it follows that Im(ϕ) is closed in Gn,d . The fact that Im(ϕ) is cocompact will follow from Proposition 6.30 and Proposition 6.34 below.  In the sequel for simplicity we will also write G(F, F ′ ) for the image of ϕ : G(F, F ′ ) → Gn,d , γ 7→ ϕ(γ) = (ργ , γ) . In particular when speaking about an action of G(F, F ′ ) on the graph Xn,d , we will always refer to the action defined in Proposition 6.30, restricted to G(F, F ′ ). This means that γ ∈ G(F, F ′ ) acts on (f, e) ∈ Xn,d by γ · (f, e) = (f γ , γe), where (4)  (f γ )v = ργ,v · fγ −1 v = α(σ(γ, γ −1 v)) · fγ −1 v .  This action should not be confused with the standard action ((fv ), e) 7→ ((fγ −1 v ), γe) coming from the inclusion of G(F, F ′ ) in Aut(Td ). Proposition 6.34. Let F ≤ F ′ ≤ Sym(Ω), and n the index of F in F ′ .  40  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  (a) The group G(F, F ′ )∗ acts cocompactly on Xn,d . When F is transitive on Ω, the group G(F, F ′ )∗ acts transitively on vertices of Xn,d . (b) The stabilizer of a vertex ((0), e) ∈ Xn,d in G(F, F ′ ) is the stabilizer of e in U (F ). In particular the action of G(F, F ′ ) on Xn,d is proper. Therefore when F acts freely transitively on Ω, the group G(F, F ′ )∗ acts freely transitively on the vertices of Xn,d . Proof. We show that for every vertex x = ((fv ), e) of Xn,d , there is g ∈ G(F, F ′ )∗ such that g · x = ((0), e). Since U (F ) preserves the vertices of this form, and since the number of orbits of U (F )∗ ≤ G(F, F ′ )∗ on Ed is finite and is equal to one when F is transitive [BM00a], statement (a) will follow. We argue by induction on the cardinality N of the support of (fv ). There is nothing to show if N = 0. Assume N ≥ 1, and let v0 ∈ Vd with fv0 6= 0 and such that v0 maximizes the distance from e among vertices v such that fv 6= 0. Let e0 be the edge emanating from v0 toward e (if v0 belongs to e then e0 = e), and let a ∈ Ω be the color of e0 . We also denote by T 1 and T 2 the two half-trees defined by e0 , where T 1 contains v0 . For every b ∈ Ω, b 6= a, we denote by e0,b the edge containing v0 and having color c(e0,b ) = b, and by T 1,b the half-tree defined by e0,b not containing v0 . By assumption the permutation group F ′ preserves the F -orbits in Ω, so we have ′ F = F Fa′ . The subgroup α(F ′ ) ≤ Sn being transitive, it follows from the previous decomposition that there exists σ ∈ Fa′ such that α(σ) · fv0 = 0. For every b 6= a, we choose σb ∈ F such that σb (b) = σ(b), and we consider the unique element h ∈ Aut(Td ) whose local permutations are σ(h, v) = 1 if v ∈ T 2 ; σ(h, v0 ) = σ; and σ(h, v) = σb for every v ∈ T 1,b and every b 6= a. It is an easy verification to check that h is a well-defined automorphism of Td , and h ∈ G(F, F ′ ) because all but possibly one local permutations of h are in F . Note that h fixes e by construction. Write h(x) = ((φv ), e). We claim that the support of (φv ) has cardinality N − 1. Since h fixes v0 , by (4) we have φv0 = α(σ(h, v0 )) · fv0 = α(σ) · fv0 = 0. Moreover we also have φv = fv for every v in T 2 because h acts trivially on T 2 . Finally by the choice of v0 we had fv = 0 for every v 6= v0 in T 1 , and since σ(h, v) ∈ F for all these v and α(F ) fixes 0, we still have φv = 0 for every v in T 1 , v 6= v0 . This proves the claim, and the conclusion follows by induction. Statement (b) follows from Lemma 6.31, and the last statement follows from (a) and (b) and the fact that U (F ) acts freely on Ed when F acts freely on Ω.  Propositions 6.33-6.34 and Lemma 6.32 imply Theorem 1.4 from the introduction. Note that when F acts freely transitively on Ω, we have an explicit description of a generating subset of the group G(F, F ′ )∗ whose associated Cayley graph is Xn,d . For, fix an edge e0 ∈ Ed , whose color is a ∈ Ω and whose vertices are v0 , v1 , and denote x0 = ((0), e0 ) ∈ Xn,d . For i = 0, 1, let Si be the set of γ ∈ G(F, F ′ ) fixing vi and such that σ(γ, v) ∈ F for every v 6= vi , and σ(γ, vi ) is non-trivial and belongs to F ∪ Fa′ . Then S = S0 ∪ S1 generates G(F, F ′ )∗ , and Cay(G(F, F ′ )∗ , S) → Xn,d , γ 7→ γx0 , is a graph isomorphism. Moreover neighbours of type 1 (resp. type 2) of a vertex of Xn,d are labeled by elements s ∈ Si such that σ(γ, vi ) ∈ F (resp. σ(γ, vi ) ∈ Fa′ ).  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  41  We end the article by observing that there are possible variations in the definition of the graph Xn,d . If Kn is the complete graph on n vertices, let Kn ≀ Td be the wreath product of the graphs Kn and Td (sometimes also called the lamplighter (V ) graph over Td ): the vertex set is Σn d × Vd , and there is an edge between (f, v) and (f ′ , v ′ ) if and only if either f = f ′ and v, v ′ are adjacent in Td , or v = v ′ and f (w) = f ′ (w) if and only if w 6= v. Again if n is the index of F in F ′ , the group G(F, F ′ ) acts on Kn ≀ Td by γ · (f, v) = (f γ , γv), where f γ is given by (4). The previous arguments for the graph Xn,d carry over to this graph, so that we have: Proposition 6.35. Let F ≤ F ′ ≤ Sym(Ω), and n the index of F in F ′ . Then G(F, F ′ ) acts properly and cocompactly on the graph Kn ≀ Td . The reason why we considered the graph Xn,d instead of Kn ≀ Td is to obtain, under the assumption that F acts freely on Ω, a free action of G(F, F ′ )∗ on the set of vertices. In the case of Kn ≀ Td , the stabilizer of a vertex in G(F, F ′ )∗ is finite, but non-trivial. We note that it might be interesting to investigate whether the generalized wreath products of graphs from [Ers06] could provide other kind of interesting groups of automorphisms. Yet another possibility is to take the same vertex set as Xn,d , but declaring that there is an edge between (f, e) and (f ′ , e′ ) if e 6= e′ share a vertex w and fv = fv′ for every v 6= w. This graph Zn,d has larger degree, namely 2(d − 1)n. Again all the results proved above for Xn,d remain true. In the case d = 2, one may check that Zn,2 is the Diestel-Leader graph DL(n, n), so that Zn,d may be thought of as “higher dimensional” versions of these graphs. References [BCGM16] U. Bader, P.E. Caprace, T. Gelander, and S. Mozes, Lattices in amenable groups, arXiv:1612.06220 (2016). [BF14] U. Bader and A. Furman, Boundaries, rigidity of representations, and Lyapunov exponents, Proceedings of ICM (2014). [BFS15] U. Bader, A. Furman, and R. Sauer, On the structure and arithmeticity of lattice envelopes, C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris 353 (2015), no. 5, 409–413. [BKKO14] E. Breuillard, M. Kalantar, M. Kennedy, and N. Ozawa, C ∗ -simplicity and the unique trace property for discrete groups, arXiv:1410.2518v2 (2014). [BM97] M. Burger and Sh. Mozes, Finitely presented simple groups and products of trees, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math. 324 (1997), no. 7, 747–752. , Groups acting on trees: from local to global structure, Inst. Hautes Études [BM00a] Sci. Publ. Math. (2000), no. 92, 113–150 (2001). , Lattices in product of trees, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (2000), [BM00b] no. 92, 151–194. [BM02] M. Burger and N. Monod, Continuous bounded cohomology and applications to rigidity theory, Geom. Funct. Anal. 12 (2002), no. 2, 219–280. [BNW08] L. Bartholdi, M. Neuhauser, and W. Woess, Horocyclic products of trees, J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 10 (2008), no. 3, 771–816. [BQ14] Y. Benoist and J-F. Quint, Lattices in S-adic Lie groups, J. Lie Theory 24 (2014), no. 1, 179–197. [BS06] U. Bader and Y. Shalom, Factor and normal subgroup theorems for lattices in products of groups, Invent. Math. 163 (2006), no. 2, 415–454. [Cap16] P-E. Caprace, Non-discrete simple locally compact groups, to appear in the Proceedings of the 7th European Congress of Mathematics (2016). [CFK12] Y. Cornulier, D. Fisher, and N. Kashyap, Cross-wired lamplighter groups, New York J. Math. 18 (2012), 667–677.  42  [CM09] [CM11] [CM12] [CM14] [Cor17] [CR09] [CRW17] [DGO11] [DM16] [Dym15] [Dyu00]  [EFW07]  [EFW12] [EFW13] [Ele17] [Ers06] [Eym72] [FST15] [Fur67a] [Fur67b] [Fur73]  [Fur81]  [Fur01] [Fur03] [Ghy01] [Gla74] [Gla75]  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  P-E. Caprace and N. Monod, Isometry groups of non-positively curved spaces: discrete subgroups, J. Topol. 2 (2009), no. 4, 701–746. , Decomposing locally compact groups into simple pieces, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 150 (2011), no. 1, 97–128. , A lattice in more than two Kac-Moody groups is arithmetic, Israel J. Math. 190 (2012), 413–444. , Relative amenability, Groups Geom. Dyn. 8 (2014), no. 3, 747–774. Y. Cornulier, Locally compact wreath products, arXiv:1703.08880 (2017). P-E. Caprace and B. Rémy, Simplicity and superrigidity of twin building lattices, Invent. Math. 176 (2009), no. 1, 169–221. P-E. Caprace, C. Reid, and Ph. Wesolek, Approximating simple locally compact groups by their dense locally compact subgroups, arXiv:1706.07317v1 (2017). F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, and D. Osin, Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and rotating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces, arXiv:1111.7048 (2011). B. Duchesne and N. Monod, Group actions on dendrites and curves, arXiv:1609.00303v3 (2016). T. Dymarz, Envelopes of certain solvable groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 90 (2015), no. 1, 195–224. A. Dyubina, Instability of the virtual solvability and the property of being virtually torsion-free for quasi-isometric groups, Internat. Math. Res. Notices (2000), no. 21, 1097–1101. A. Eskin, D. Fisher, and K. Whyte, Quasi-isometries and rigidity of solvable groups, Pure Appl. Math. Q. 3 (2007), no. 4, Special Issue: In honor of Grigory Margulis. Part 1, 927–947. , Coarse differentiation of quasi-isometries I: Spaces not quasi-isometric to Cayley graphs, Ann. of Math. (2) 176 (2012), no. 1, 221–260. , Coarse differentiation of quasi-isometries II: Rigidity for Sol and lamplighter groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 177 (2013), no. 3, 869–910. G. Elek, On uniformly recurrent subgroups of finitely generated groups, arXiv:1702.01631 (2017). A. Erschler, Generalized wreath products, Int. Math. Res. Not. (2006), Art. ID 57835, 14. P. Eymard, Moyennes invariantes et représentations unitaires, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 300, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1972. J. Frisch, T. Schlank, and O. Tamuz, Normal amenable subgroups of the automorphism group of the full shift, arXiv:1512.00587 (2015). H. Furstenberg, Disjointness in ergodic theory, minimal sets, and a problem in Diophantine approximation, Math. Systems Theory 1 (1967), 1–49. , Poisson boundaries and envelopes of discrete groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 73 (1967), 350–356. , Boundary theory and stochastic processes on homogeneous spaces, Harmonic analysis on homogeneous spaces (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XXVI, Williams Coll., Williamstown, Mass., 1972), Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1973, pp. 193– 229. , Rigidity and cocycles for ergodic actions of semisimple Lie groups (after G. A. Margulis and R. Zimmer), Bourbaki Seminar, Vol. 1979/80, Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 842, Springer, Berlin-New York, 1981, pp. 273–292. A. Furman, Mostow-Margulis rigidity with locally compact targets, Geom. Funct. Anal. 11 (2001), no. 1, 30–59. , On minimal strongly proximal actions of locally compact groups, Israel J. Math. 136 (2003), 173–187. É. Ghys, Groups acting on the circle, Enseign. Math. (2) 47 (2001), no. 3-4, 329–407. S. Glasner, Topological dynamics and group theory, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 187 (1974), 327–334. , Compressibility properties in topological dynamics, Amer. J. Math. 97 (1975), 148–171.  AMENABLE URS’S AND LATTICE EMBEDDINGS  43  , Proximal flows, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 517, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1976. [Gru57] K. W. Gruenberg, Residual properties of infinite soluble groups, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 7 (1957), 29–62. [Gui73] Y. Guivarc’h, Croissance polynomiale et périodes des fonctions harmoniques, Bull. Soc. Math. France 101 (1973), 333–379. [GW15] E. Glasner and B. Weiss, Uniformly recurrent subgroups, Recent trends in ergodic theory and dynamical systems, Contemp. Math., vol. 631, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2015, pp. 63–75. [Har07] P. de la Harpe, On simplicity of reduced C ∗ -algebras of groups, Bull. Lond. Math. Soc. 39 (2007), no. 1, 1–26. [HR79] E. Hewitt and K. Ross, Abstract harmonic analysis. Vol. I, second ed., Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences], vol. 115, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1979, Structure of topological groups, integration theory, group representations. [Jen73] J. W. Jenkins, Growth of connected locally compact groups, J. Functional Analysis 12 (1973), 113–127. [JR00] P. Jolissaint and G. Robertson, Simple purely infinite C ∗ -algebras and n-filling actions, J. Funct. Anal. 175 (2000), no. 1, 197–213. [Kaw17] T. Kawabe, Uniformly recurrent subgroups and the ideal structure of reduced crossed products, arXiv:1701.03413 (2017). [Ken15] M. Kennedy, Characterizations of C ∗ -simplicity, arXiv:1509.01870v3 (2015). [KK17] M. Kalantar and M. Kennedy, Boundaries of reduced C ∗ -algebras of discrete groups, J. Reine Angew. Math. 727 (2017), 247–267. [LB16] A. Le Boudec, Groups acting on trees with almost prescribed local action, Comment. Math. Helv. 91 (2016), no. 2, 253–293. [LB17] , C ∗ -simplicity and the amenable radical, Invent. Math. 209 (2017), no. 1, 159–174. [LBMB16] A. Le Boudec and N. Matte Bon, Subgroup dynamics and C∗ -simplicity of groups of homeomorphisms, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. (to appear) (2016). [LBW16] A. Le Boudec and Ph. Wesolek, Commensurated subgroups in tree almost automorphism groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. (to appear) (2016). [Los87] V. Losert, On the structure of groups with polynomial growth, Math. Z. 195 (1987), no. 1, 109–117. [LS96] M. Laca and J. Spielberg, Purely infinite C ∗ -algebras from boundary actions of discrete groups, J. Reine Angew. Math. 480 (1996), 125–139. [Mal40] A. Malcev, On isomorphic matrix representations of infinite groups, Rec. Math. [Mat. Sbornik] N.S. 8 (50) (1940), 405–422. [Mar91] G. A. Margulis, Discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3), vol. 17, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991. [Mar00] G. Margulis, Free subgroups of the homeomorphism group of the circle, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math. 331 (2000), no. 9, 669–674. [MB18] N. Matte Bon, Rigidity of graphs of germs and homomorphisms between full groups, arXiv:1801.10133 (2018). [MBT17] N. Matte Bon and T. Tsankov, Realizing uniformly recurrent subgroups, arXiv:1702.07101 (2017). [MP03] N. Monod and S. Popa, On co-amenability for groups and von Neumann algebras, C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Soc. R. Can. 25 (2003), no. 3, 82–87. [MS04] N. Monod and Y. Shalom, Cocycle superrigidity and bounded cohomology for negatively curved spaces, J. Differential Geom. 67 (2004), no. 3, 395–455. [MZ55] D. Montgomery and L. Zippin, Topological transformation groups, Interscience Publishers, New York-London, 1955. [Nek13] V. Nekrashevych, Finitely presented groups associated with expanding maps, arXiv:1312.5654v1 (2013). [PV91] I. Pays and A. Valette, Sous-groupes libres dans les groupes d’automorphismes d’arbres, Enseign. Math. (2) 37 (1991), no. 1-2, 151–174. [Gla76]  44  ADRIEN LE BOUDEC  [Rad17] [Rag72] [Rat04]  [Rém99] [Sha00] [Tit70] [Vor12]  [Wis96]  N. Radu, New simple lattices in products of trees and their projections, arXiv:1712.01091 (2017), With an appendix by P-E. Caprace. M. S. Raghunathan, Discrete subgroups of Lie groups, Springer-Verlag, New YorkHeidelberg, 1972, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Band 68. D. Rattaggi, Computations in groups acting on a product of trees: Normal subgroup structures and quaternion lattices, ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 2004, Thesis (Dr.sc.math.)–Eidgenoessische Technische Hochschule Zuerich (Switzerland). B. Rémy, Construction de réseaux en théorie de Kac-Moody, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math. 329 (1999), no. 6, 475–478. Y. Shalom, Rigidity of commensurators and irreducible lattices, Invent. Math. 141 (2000), no. 1, 1–54. J. Tits, Sur le groupe des automorphismes d’un arbre, Essays on topology and related topics (Mémoires dédiés à Georges de Rham), Springer, New York, 1970, pp. 188–211. Y. Vorobets, Notes on the Schreier graphs of the Grigorchuk group, Dynamical systems and group actions, Contemp. Math., vol. 567, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2012, pp. 221–248. D. Wise, Non-positively curved squared complexes: Aperiodic tilings and non-residually finite groups, ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 1996, Thesis (Ph.D.)–Princeton University.  UCLouvain, IRMP, Chemin du Cyclotron 2, 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium CNRS, Unité de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées, ENS-Lyon, France E-mail address: adrien.le-boudec@ens-lyon.fr

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
