Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1263

Abstract:
THE CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY, GROTHENDIECK DUALITY AND THIN GROUPS  arXiv:1709.06179v1 [math.GR] 18 Sep 2017  ALEXANDER LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  Abstract. This paper answers a question raised by Grothendieck in 1970 on the “Grothendieck closure” of an integral linear group and proves a conjecture of the first author made in 1980. This is done by a detailed study of the congruence topology of arithmetic groups, obtaining along the way, an arithmetic analogue of a classical result of Chevalley for complex algebraic groups. As an application we also deduce a group theoretic characterization of thin subgroups of arithmetic groups.  0. Introduction If ϕ : G1 → G2 is a polynomial map between two complex varieties, then in general the image of a Zariski closed subset of G1 is not necessarily closed in G2 . But here is a classical result: Theorem (Chevalley). If ϕ is a polynomial homomorphism between two complex algebraic groups then ϕ(H) is closed in G2 for every closed subgroup H of G1 . There is an arithmetic analogue of this issue: Let G be a Q-algebraic group, let Af = Π∗p prime Qp be the ring of finite ádeles over Q. The topology of G(Af ) induces the congruence topology on G(Q). If K is compact open subgroup of G(Af ) then Γ = K ∩ G(Q) is called a congruence subgroup of G(Q). This defines the congruence topology on G(Q) and on all its subgroups. A subgroup of G(Q) which is closed in this topology is called congruence closed. A subgroup ∆ of G commensurable to Γ is called an arithmetic group. Now, if ϕ : G1 → G2 is a Q-morphism between two Q-groups, which is a surjective homomorphism (as C-algebraic groups) then the image of an arithmetic subgroup ∆ of G1 is an arithmetic subgroup of G2 ([Pl-Ra, Theorem 4.1 p. 174]), but the image of a congruence subgroup is not necessarily a congruence subgroup. It is well known that SLn (Z) has congruence subgroups whose images under the adjoint map SLn (Z) → PSLn (Z) ֒→ Aut(Mn (Z)) are not congruence subgroups (see [Ser] and Proposition 2.1 below for an exposition and explanation). So, 1  2  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  the direct analogue of Chevalley theorem does not hold. Still, in this case, if Γ is a congruence subgroup of SLn (Z), then ϕ(Γ) is a normal subgroup of ϕ(Γ), the (congruence) closure of ϕ(Γ) in PSLn (Z), and the quotient is a finite abelian group. Our first technical result says that the general case is similar. It is especially important for us that when G2 is simply connected, the image of a congruence subgroup of G1 is a congruence subgroup in G2 (see Proposition 0.1 (ii) below). Before stating the result, we give the following definition and set some notations for the rest of the paper: Let G be a linear algebraic group over C, G0 - its connected component, and R = R(G) - its solvable radical, i.e. the largest connected normal solvable subgroup of G. We say that G is essentially simply connected if Gss := G0 /R is simply connected. Given a subgroup Γ of GLn , we will throughout the paper denote by 0 Γ the intersection of Γ with G0 , where G0 is the connected component of G - the Zariski closure of Γ. Therefore, Γ0 is always a finite index normal subgroup of Γ. The notion “essentially simply connected” will play an important role in this paper due to the following proposition, which can be considered as the arithmetic analogue of Chevalley’s result above: Proposition 0.1. (i) If ϕ : G1 → G2 is a surjective (over C) algebraic homomorphism between two Q-defined algebraic groups, then for every congruence closed subgroup Γ of G1 (Q), the image ϕ(Γ0 ) is normal in its congruence closure ϕ(Γ0 ) and ϕ(Γ0 )/ϕ(Γ0 ) is a finite abelian group. (ii) If G2 is essentially simply connected, and Γ a congruence subgroup of G1 then ϕ(Γ) = ϕ(Γ), i.e., the image of a congruence subgroup is congruence closed. This analogue of Chevalley’s theorem, and a result of [Nori], [Weis] enable us to prove: Proposition 0.2. If Γ1 ≤ GLn (Z) is a congruence closed subgroup (i.e. closed in the congruence topology) with Zariski closure G, then there exists a congruence subgroup Γ of G, such that [Γ, Γ] ≤ Γ01 ≤ Γ. If G is essentially simply connected then the image of Γ1 in G/R(G) is actually a congruence subgroup. We apply Proposition 0.1 (ii) in two directions: (A) Grothendieck-Tannaka duality for discrete groups, and  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  3  (B) A group theoretic characterization of thin subgroups of arithmetic groups. Grothendieck closure. In [Gro], Grothendieck was interested in the following question: Question 0.3. Assume ϕ : Γ1 → Γ2 is a homomorphism between two finitely generated residually finite groups inducing an isomorphism ϕ̂ : Γ̂1 → Γ̂2 between their profinite completions. Is ϕ already an isomorphism? To tackle Question 0.3, he introduced the following notion. Given a finitely generated group Γ and a commutative ring A with identity, let ClA (Γ) be the group of all automorphisms of the forgetful functor from the category ModA (Γ) of all finitely generated A-modules with Γ action to ModA ({1}), preserving tensor product. Grothendieck’s strategy was the following: he showed that, under the conditions of Question 0.3, ϕ induces an isomorphism from ModA (Γ2 ) to ModA (Γ1 ), and hence also between ClA (Γ1 ) and ClA (Γ2 ). He then asked: Question 0.4. Is the natural map Γ ֒→ ClZ (Γ) an isomorphism for a finitely generated residually finite group? An affirmative answer to Question 0.4 would imply an affirmative answer to Question 0.3. Grothendieck then showed that arithmetic groups with the (strict) congruence subgroup property do indeed satisfy ClZ (Γ) ≃ Γ. Question 0.4 basically asks whether Γ can be recovered from its category of representations. In [Lub], the first author phrased this question in the framework of Tannaka duality, which asks a similar question for compact Lie groups. He also gave a more concrete description of ClZ (Γ): (0.1)  ClZ (Γ) = {g ∈ Γ̂|ρ̂(g)(V ) = V,  ∀ (ρ, V ) ∈ ModZ (Γ)}.  Here ρ̂ is the continuous extension ρ̂ : Γ̂ → Aut(V̂ ) of the original representation ρ : Γ → Aut(V ). However, it is also shown in [Lub], that the answer to Question 0.4 is negative. The counterexamples provided there are the arithmetic groups for which the weak congruence subgroup property holds but not the strict one, i.e. the congruence kernel is finite but non-trivial. It was conjectured in [Lub, Conj A, p. 184], that for an arithmetic group  4  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  Γ, ClZ (Γ) = Γ if and only if Γ has the (strict) congruence subgroup property. The conjecture was left open even for Γ = SL2 (Z). In the almost 40 years since [Lub] was written various counterexamples were given to question 0.3 ([Pl-Ta1], [Ba-Lu], [Br-Gr], [Py]) which also give counterexamples to question 0.4, but it was not even settled whether ClZ (F ) = F for finitely generated non-abelian free groups F . We can now answer this and, in fact, prove the following surprising result, which gives an essentially complete answer to Question 0.4. Theorem 0.5. Let Γ be a finitely generated subgroup of GLn (Z). Then Γ satisfies Grothendieck-Tannaka duality, i.e. ClZ (Γ) = Γ if and only if Γ has the congruence subgroup property i.e., for some (and consequently for every) faithful representation Γ → GLm (Z) such that the Zariski closure G of Γ is essentially simply connected, every finite index subgroup of Γ is closed in the congruence topology of GLn (Z). In such a case, the image of the group Γ in the semi-simple (simply connected) quotient G/R is a congruence arithmetic group. The Theorem is surprising as it shows that the cases proved by Grothendieck himself (which motivated him to suggest that the duality holds in general) are essentially the only cases where this duality holds. Let us note that the assumption on G is not really restrictive. In Lemma 3.6, we show that for every Γ ≤ GLn (Z) we can find an “over” representation of Γ into GLm (Z) (for some m) whose Zariski closure is essentially simply connected. Theorem 0.5 implies Conjecture A of [Lub]. Corollary 0.6. If G is a simply connected semisimple Q-algebraic group, and Γ a congruence subgroup of G(Q), then ClZ (Γ) = Γ if and only if Γ satisfies the (strict) congruence subgroup property. In particular: Corollary 0.7. ClZ (F ) 6= F for every finitely generated free group on at least two generators; furthermore, ClZ (SL2 (Z)) 6= SL2 (Z). In fact, it will follow from our results that ClZ (F ) is uncountable. Before moving on to the last application, let us say a few words about how Proposition 0.1 helps to prove a result like Theorem 0.5.  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  5  The description of ClZ (Γ) as in Equation 0.1 implies that (0.2)  ClZ (Γ) = lim ρ(Γ) ← ρ  when the limit is over all (ρ, V ) when V is a finitely generated abelian group, ρ a representation ρ : Γ → Aut(V ) and ρ(Γ) = ρ̂(Γ̂) ∩ Aut(V ) ⊆ Aut(V̂ ). This is an inverse limit of countable discrete groups, so one can not say much about it unless the connecting homomorphisms are surjective, which is, in general, not the case. Now, ρ(Γ) is the congruence closure of ρ(Γ) in Aut(V ) and Proposition 0.1 shows that the corresponding maps are “almost” onto, and are even surjective if the modules V are what we call here “simply connected representations”, namely those cases when V is torsion free (and hence isomorphic to Zn for some n) and the Zariski closure of ρ(Γ) in Aut(C ⊗ V ) = GLn (C) Z  is essentially simply connected. We show further that the category ModZ (Γ) is “saturated” with such modules (see Lemma 3.6) and we deduce that one can compute ClZ (Γ) as in Equation 0.1 by considering only simply connected representations. We can then use Proposition 0.1(b), and get a fairly good understanding of ClZ (Γ). This enables us to prove Theorem 0.5. In addition, we also deduce: Corollary 0.8. If (ρ, V ) is a simply connected representation, then the induced map ClZ (Γ) → Aut(V ) is onto Clρ (Γ) := ρ(Γ) - the congruence closure of Γ. From Corollary 0.8 we can deduce our last application. Thin groups. In recent years, following [Sar], there has been a lot of interest in the distinction between thin subgroups and arithmetic subgroups of algebraic groups. Let us recall: Definition 0.9. A subgroup Γ ≤ GLn (Z) is called thin if it is of infinite index in G ∩ GLn (Z), when G is its Zariski closure in GLn . For a general group Γ, we will say that it is a thin group (or it has a thin representation) if for some n there exists a representation ρ : Γ → GLn (Z) for which ρ(Γ) is thin. During the last five decades a lot of attention was given to the study of arithmetic groups, with many remarkable results, especially for those of higher rank (cf. [Mar], [Pl-Ra] and the references therein). Much less is known about thin groups. For example, it is not known if there exists a thin group with property (T ). Also, given a subgroup of an arithmetic group (say, given by a set of generators) it is difficult to  6  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  decide whether it is thin or arithmetic (i.e., of finite or infinite index in its integral Zariski closure). It is therefore of interest and perhaps even surprising that our results enable us to give a purely group theoretical characterization of thin groups Γ ⊂ GLn (Z). Before stating the precise result, we make the topology on ClZ (Γ) explicit. If we take the class of simply connected representations (ρ, V ) for computing the group ClZ (Γ), one can then Q show that ClZ (Γ)/Γ is a closed subspace of the product ρ (Clρ (Γ)/Γ), where each Clρ (Γ)/Γ is given the discrete topology. This is the topology on the quotient space ClZ (Γ)/Γ in the following theorem. We can now state: Theorem 0.10. Let Γ be finitely generated Z-linear group. Then Γ is a thin group if and only if it satisfies (at least) one of the following conditions: (1) Γ is not F Ab (namely, it does have a finite index subgroup with an infinite abelianization), or (2) ClZ (Γ)/Γ is not compact.  Warning There are groups Γ which can be realized both as arithmetic groups as well as thin groups. For example, the free group is an arithmetic subgroup of SL2 (Z), but at the same time a thin subgroup of every semisimple group, by a well known result of Tits [Ti]. In our terminology this is a thin group. T.N.V. thanks the Math Department of the Hebrew University for great hospitality while a major part of this work was done. He would also like to thank the JC Bose fellowship (SR/S2/JCB-22/2017) for support during the period 2013-2018. The authors thank the Math Department of the University of Marseilles, and the conference at Oberwolfach, where the work was completed. We would especially like to thank Bertrand Remy for many interesting discussions and for his warm hospitality. A.L. is indebted to ERC, NSF and BSF for support.  1. Preliminaries on Algebraic Groups over Q We recall the definition of an essentially simply connected group:  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  7  Definition 1.1. Let G be a linear algebraic group over C with maximal connected normal solvable subgroup R (i.e. the radical of G) and identity component G0 . We say that G is essentially simply connected if the semi-simple part G0 /R = H is a simply connected. Note that G is essentially simply connected if and only if, the quotient G0 /U of the group G0 by its unipotent radical U is a product Hss × S with Hss simply connected and semi-simple, and S is a torus. For example, a semi-simple connected group is essentially simply connected if and only if it is simply connected. The group Gm × SLn is essentially simply connected; however, the radical of the group GLn is the group R of scalars and GLn /R = SLn /centre, so GLn is not essentially simply connected. We will show later (Lemma 1.3(iii)) that every group has a finite cover which is essentially simply connected. Lemma 1.2. Suppose G ⊂ G1 × G2 is a subgroup of a product of two essentially simply connected linear algebraic groups G1 , G2 over C; suppose that the projection πi of G to Gi is surjective for i = 1, 2. Then G is also essentially simply connected. Proof. Assume, as we may, that G is connected. Let R be the radical of G. The projection of R to Gi is normal in Gi since πi : G → Gi is surjective. Moreover, Gi /πi (R) is the image of the semi-simple group G/R; the latter has a Zariski dense compact subgroup, hence so does Gi /πi (R); therefore, Gi /πi (R) is reductive and is its own commutator. Hence Gi /πi (R) is semi-simple and hence πi (R) = Ri where Ri is the radical of Gi . Let R∗ = G ∩ (R1 × R2 ). Since R1 × R2 is the radical of G1 × G2 , it follows that R∗ is a solvable normal subgroup of G and hence its connected component is contained in R. Since R ⊆ R1 × R2 , it follows that R is precisely the connected component of the identity of R∗ . We then have the inclusion G/R∗ ⊂ G1 /R1 × G2 /R2 with projections again being surjective. By assumption, each Gi /Ri = Hi is semi-simple, simply connected. Moreover G/R∗ = H where H is connected, semi-simple. Thus we have the inclusion H ⊂ H1 × H2 . Now, H ⊂ H1 × H2 is such that the projections of H to Hi are surjective, and each Hi is simply connected. Let K be the kernel of the map H → H1 and K 0 its identity component. Then H/K 0 → H1 is a surjective map of connected algebraic groups with finite kernel. The simple connectedness of H1 then implies that H/K 0 = H1 and hence that K = K 0 ⊂ {1} × H2 is normal in H2 .  8  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  Write H2 = F1 × · · · × Ft where each Fi is simple and simply connected. Now, K being a closed normal subgroup of H2 must be equal Q to i∈X Fi for some subset X of {1, · · · , t}, and is simply connected. Therefore, K = K 0 is simply connected. From the preceding two paragraphs, we have that both H/K and K are simply connected, and hence so is H = G/R∗ . Since R is the connected component of R∗ and G/R∗ is simply connected, it follows that G/R = G/R∗ and hence G/R is simply connected. This completes the proof of the lemma.  1.1. Arithmetic Groups and Congruence Subgroups. In the introduction, we defined the notion of arithmetic and congruence subgroup of G(Q) using the adelic language. One can define the notion of arithmetic (res. congruence) group in more concrete terms as follows. Given a linear algebraic group G ⊂ SLn defined over Q, we will say that a subgroup Γ ⊂ G(Q) is an arithmetic group if is commensurable to G ∩ SLn (Z) = G(Z); that is, the intersection Γ ∩ G(Z) has finite index both in Γ and in G(Z). It is well known that the notion of an arithmetic group does not depend on the specific linear embedding G ⊂ SLn . As b of G(Q) as the in [Ser], we may define the arithmetic completion G completion of the group G(Q) with respect to the topology on G(Q) as a topological group, obtained by designating arithmetic groups as a fundamental systems of neighbourhoods of identity in G(Q). Given G ⊂ SLn as in the preceding paragraph, we will say that an arithmetic group Γ ⊂ G(Q) is a congruence subgroup if there exists an integer m ≥ 2 such that Γ contains the “principal congruence subgroup” G(mZ) = SLn (mZ) ∩ G where SLn (mZ) is the kernel to the residue class map SLn (Z) → SLn (Z/mZ). We then get the structure of a topological group on the group G(Q) by designating congruence subgroups of G(Q) as a fundamental system of neighbourhoods of identity. The completion of G(Q) with respect to this topology, is denoted G. Again, the notion of a congruence subgroup does not depend on the specific linear embedding G → SLn . Since every congruence subgroup is an arithmetic group, there exists b → G which is easily seen to be surjective, and a map from π : G b This is the kernel C(G) of π is a compact profinite subgroup of G. called the congruence subgroup kernel. One says that G(Q) has the congruence subgroup property if C(G) is trivial. This is easily seen to be equivalent to the statement that every arithmetic subgroup of G(Q) is a congruence subgroup.  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  9  It is known (see p. 108, last but one paragraph of [Ra2] or [Ch]) that solvable groups G have the congruence subgroup property. Moreover, every solvable subgroup of GLn (Z) is polycyclic. In such a group, every subgroup is intersection of finite index subgroups. So every solvable subgroup of an arithmetic group is congruence closed. We will use these facts frequently in the sequel. Another (equivalent) way of viewing the congruence completion is (see [Ser], p. 276, Remarque) as follows: let Af be the ring of finite adeles over Q, equipped with the standard adelic topology and let Zf ⊂ Af be the closure of Z. Then the group G(Af ) is also a locally compact group and contains the group G(Q). The congruence completion G of G(Q) may be viewed as the closure of G(Q) in G(Af ). Lemma 1.3. Let H, H ∗ be linear algebraic groups defined over Q. (i) Suppose H ∗ → H is a surjective Q-morphism. Let (ρ, WQ ) be a representation of H defined over Q. Then there exists a faithful Q-representation (τ, VQ ) of H ∗ such that (ρ, W ) is a subrepresentation of (τ, V ). (ii) If H ∗ → H is a surjective map defined over Q , then the image of an arithmetic subgroup of H ∗ under the map H ∗ → H is an arithmetic subgroup of H. (iii) If H is connected, then there exists a connected essentially simply connected algebraic group H ∗ with a surjective Q-defined homomorphism H ∗ → H with finite kernel. (iv) If H ∗ → H is a surjective homomorphism of algebraic Q-groups which are essentially simply connected, then the image of a congruence subgroup of H ∗ (Q) is a congruence subgroup of H(Q). Proof. Let θ : H ∗ → GL(E) be a faithful representation of the linear algebraic group H ∗ defined over Q and τ = ρ ⊕ θ as H ∗ -representation. Clearly τ is faithful for H ∗ and contains ρ. This proves (i). Part (ii) is the statement of Theorem (4.1) of [Pl-Ra]. We now prove (iii). Write H = RG as a product of its radical R and ∗ a semi-simple group G. Let Hss → G be the simply connected cover ∗ of G. Hence Hss acts on R through G, via this covering map. Define ∗ H ∗ = R ⋊ Hss as a semi-direct product. Clearly, the map H ∗ → H has finite kernel and satisfies the properties of (iii). To prove (iv), we may assume that H and H ∗ are connected. If U ∗ , U are the unipotent radicals of H ∗ and H, the assumptions of (iv) do not change for the quotient groups H ∗ /U ∗ and H/U. Moreover, since H ∗ is the semi-direct product of U ∗ and H ∗ /U ∗ (and similarly  10  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  for H, U) and the unipotent Q-algebraic group U has the congruence subgroup property, it suffices to prove (iv) when both H ∗ and H are reductive. By assumption, H ∗ and H are essentially simply connected; ∗ ∗ i.e. H ∗ = Hss × S ∗ and H = Hss × S where S, S ∗ are tori and Hss , Hss are simply connected semi-simple groups. Thus we have connected reductive Q-groups H ∗ , H with a surjective map such that their derived groups are simply connected (and semi-simple), and the abelianization (H ∗ )ab is a torus (similarly for H). ∗ Now, [H ∗ , H ∗] = Hss is a simply connected semi-simple group and hence it is a product F1 ×· · ·×Fs of simply connected Q-simple algebraic ∗ groups Fi . Being a factor of [H ∗ , H ∗ ] = Hss , the group [H, H] = Hss is a product of a (smaller) number of these Fi ’s. After a renumbering of the indices, we may assume that Hss is a product F1 ×· · ·×Fr for some r ≤ s ∗ and the map π on Hss is the projection to the first r factors. Hence ∗ the image of a congruence subgroup of Hss is a congruence subgroup of Hss . The tori S ∗ , S have the congruence subgroup property by a result of Chevalley (as already stated at the beginning of this section, this is true for all solvable algebraic groups). Hence the image of a congruence subgroup of S ∗ is a congruence subgroup of S. We thus need only prove that every subgroup of the reductive group H of the form Γ1 Γ2 , where Γ1 ⊂ Hss and Γ2 ⊂ S are congruence subgroups, is itself a congruence subgroup of H. We use the adelic form of the congruence topology. Suppose K is a compact open subgroup of the H(Af ) where Af is the ring of finite adeles. The image of H(Q) ∩ K under the quotient map H → H ab = S is a congruence subgroup in the torus S and hence H(Q) ∩ K ′ ⊂ (Hss (Q) ∩ K)(S(Q) ∩ K) for some possibly smaller open subgroup K ′ ⊂ H(Af ). This proves (iv).  Note that part (iii) and (iv) prove Proposition 0.1(ii). 2. The Arithmetic Chevalley Theorem In this section, we prove Proposition 0.1(i). Assume that ϕ : G1 → G2 is a surjective morphism of Q-algebraic groups. We are to prove that ϕ(Γ0 ) contains the commutator subgroup of a congruence subgroup of G2 (Q) containing it. Before starting on the proof, let us note that in general, the image of a congruence subgroup of G1 (Z) under ϕ need not be a congruence subgroup of G2 (Z). The following proposition gives a fairly general situation when this happens.  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  11  Proposition 2.1. Let π : G1 → G2 be a finite covering of semi-simple algebraic groups defined over Q with G1 simply connected and G2 not. Assume G1 (Q) is dense in G1 (Af ). Write K for the kernel of π and Kf for the kernel of the map G1 (Af ) → G2 (Af ). Let Γ be a congruence subgroup of G1 (Q) and H its closure in G1 (Af ). Then the image π(Γ) ⊂ G2 (Q) is a congruence subgroup if and only if KH ⊃ Kf . Before proving the proposition, let us note that while K is finite, the group Kf is a product of infinitely many finite abelian groups and that Kf is central in G1 . This implies Corollary 2.2. (i) There are infinitely many congruence subgroups Γi with π(Γi ) non-congruence subgroups of unbounded finite index in their congruence closures Γi . (ii) For each of these Γ = Γi , the image π(Γ) contains the commutator subgroup [Γ, Γ], and is normal in Γ (with abelian quotient). We now prove Proposition 2.1. Proof. Let G3 be the image of the rational points of G1 (Q): G3 = π(G1 (Q)) ⊂ G2 (Q). Define a subgroup ∆ of G3 to be a quasi-congruence subgroup if the inverse image π −1 (∆) is a congruence subgroup of G1 (Q). Note that the quasi-congruence subgroups of G3 are exactly the images of congruence subgroups of G1 (Q) by π. It is routine to check that by declaring quasi-congruence subgroups to be open, we get the structure of a topological group on G3 . This topology is weaker or equal to the arithmetic topology on G3 . However, it is strictly stronger than the congruence topology on G3 . The last assertion follows from the fact that the completion of G3 = G1 (Q)/K(Q) is the quotient G1 /K where G1 is the congruence completion of G1 (Q), whereas the completion of G3 with respect to the congruence topology is G1 /Kf . Now let Γ ⊂ G1 (Q) be a congruence subgroup and ∆1 = π(Γ); let ∆2 be its congruence closure in G3 . Then both ∆1 and ∆2 are open in the quasi-congruence topology on G3 . Denote by G∗3 the completion of G3 with respect to the quasi-congruence topology, so G∗3 = G1 /K and denote by ∆∗1 , ∆∗2 the closures of ∆1 , ∆2 in G∗3 . We then have the equalities ∆2 /∆1 = ∆∗2 /∆∗1 , ∆∗2 = ∆∗1 Kf /K. Hence ∆∗1 = ∆∗2 if and only if K∆∗1 ⊃ Kf . This proves Proposition 2.1.  12  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  The proof shows that ∆∗1 is normal in ∆∗2 (since Kf is central) with abelian quotient. The same is true for ∆1 in ∆2 and the corollary is also proved.  To continue with the proof of Proposition 0.1, assume, as we may (by replacing G1 with the Zariski closure of Γ), that G1 has no characters defined over Q. For, suppose that G1 is the Zariski closure of Γ ⊂ G1 (Z). Let χ : G1 → Gm be a non-trivial (and therefore surjective) homomorphism defined over Q; then the image of the arithmetic group G1 (Z) in Gm (Q) is a Zariski dense arithmetic group. However, the only arithmetic groups in Gm (Q) are finite and cannot be Zariski dense in Gm . Therefore, χ cannot be non-trivial. We can also assume that G1 is connected. We start by proving Proposition 0.1 for the case that Γ is a congruence subgroup. If we write G1 = R1 H1 where H1 is semi-simple and R1 is the radical, we may assume that G1 is essentially simply connected (Lemma 1.3(iii)), without affecting the hypotheses or the conclusion of Proposition 0.1. Hence G1 = R1 ⋊ H1 is a semi direct product. Then clearly, every congruence subgroup of G1 contains a congruence subgroup of the form ∆⋊Φ where ∆ ⊂ R1 and Φ ⊂ H1 are congruence subgroups. Similarly, write G2 = R2 H2 . Since ϕ is easily seen to map R1 onto R2 and H1 onto H2 , it is enough to prove the proposition for R1 and H1 separately. We first recall that if G is a solvable linear algebraic group defined over Q then the congruence subgroup property holds for G, i.e., every arithmetic subgroup of G is a congruence subgroup (for a reference see p. 108, last but one paragraph of [Ra2] or [Ch]). Consequently, by Lemma 1.3 (ii), the image of a congruence subgroup in R1 is an arithmetic group in R2 and hence a congruence subgroup. Thus we dispose of the solvable case. In the case of semi-simple groups, denote by H2∗ by the simply connected cover of H2 . The map ϕ : H1 → H2 lifts to a map from H1 to H2∗ . For simply connected semi-simple groups, a surjective map from H1 to H2∗ sends a congruence subgroup to a congruence subgroup by Lemma 1.3 (iv). We are thus reduced to the situation H1 = H2∗ and ϕ : H1 → H2 is the simply connected cover of H2 . By our assumptions, H1 is now connected, simply connected and semisimple. We claim that for any non-trivial Q-simple factor L of H1 ,  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  13  L(R) is not compact. Otherwise, the image of Γ, the arithmetic group, there is finite and as Γ is Zariski dense, so H1 is not connected. The strong approximation theorem ([Pl-Ra, Theorem 7.12]) gives now that H1 (Q) is dense in H1 (Af ). So Proposition 2.1 can be applied to finish the proof of Proposition 0.1 in the case Γ is a congruence subgroup. We need to show that it is true also for the more general case when Γ is only congruence closed. To this end let us formulate the following Proposition which is of independent interest. Proposition 2.3. Let Γ ⊆ GLn (Z), G its Zariski closure and Der = [G0 , G0 ]. Then Γ is congruence closed if and only if Γ ∩ Der is a congruence subgroup of Der. Proof. If G0 has no toral factors, this is proved in [Ve], in fact, in this case a congruence closed Zariski dense subgroup is a congruence subgroup. (Note that this is stated there for general G, but the assumption that there is no toral factor was mistakenly omitted as the proof there shows.) Now, if there is a toral factor, we can assume G is connected, so ab G = V × S where V is unipotent and S a torus. Now Γ ∩ [G, G] is Zariski dense and congruence closed, so it is a congruence subgroup by [Ve] as before. For the other direction, note that the image of Γ is U × S, being solvable, is always congruence closed, so the Proposition follows.  Now, we can end the proof of Proposition 0.1 for congruence closed subgroups by looking at ϕ on G3 = Γ the Zariski closure of Γ and apply the proof above to Der(G03 ). It also proves Proposition 0.2. Of course, Proposition 2.3 is the general form of the following result from [Ve] (based on [Nori] and [Weis]), which is, in fact, the core of Proposition 2.3. Proposition 2.4. Suppose Γ ⊂ G(Z) is Zariski dense, G simply connected and Γ a subgroup of G(Z) which is closed in the congruence topology. Then Γ is itself a congruence subgroup. 3. The Grothendieck closure 3.1. The Grothendieck Closure of a group Γ. Definition 3.1. Let ρ : Γ → GL(V ) be a representation of Γ on a lattice V in a Q-vector space V ⊗ Q. Then we get a continuous hob → GL(Vb ) (where, for a group ∆, ∆ b denotes its momorphism ρb : Γ  14  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  profinite completion) which extends ρ . Denote by Clρ (Γ) the subgroup of the profinite completion of Γ, b : ρb(g)(V ) ⊂ V }. In which preserves the lattice V : Clρ (Γ) = {g ∈ Γ fact, since det(ρ̂(g)) = ±1 for every g ∈ Γ and hence also for every g ∈ Γ̂, for g ∈ Clg (Γ), ρ̂(g)(V ) = V , and hence Clρ (Γ) is a subgroup of Γ̂. We denote by Cl(Γ) the subgroup (3.1)  b : ρb(g)(V ) ⊂ V Cl(Γ) = {g ∈ Γ  ∀ lattices V }.  Therefore, Cl(Γ) = ∩ρ Clρ (Γ) where ρ runs through all integral representations of the group Γ. Suppose now that V is any finitely generated abelian group (not necessarily a lattice i.e. not necessarily torsion-free) which is also a Γ-module. Then the torsion in V is a (finite) subgroup with finite exponent n say. Then nV is torsion free. Since Γ acts on the finite b also acts on group V /nV by a finite group via, say, ρ, it follows that Γ b we have ρb(g)(V /nV ) = the finite group V /nV via ρb. Thus, for g ∈ Γ V /nV . Suppose now that g ∈ Cl(Γ). Then g(nV ) = nV by the definition of Cl(Γ). Hence g(V )/nV = V /nV for g ∈ Cl(Γ). This is an equality in the quotient group Vb /nV . This shows that g(V ) ⊂ V + nV = V which shows that Cl(Γ) preserves all finitely generated abelian groups V which are Γ -modules. By ClZ (Γ) we mean the Grothendieck closure of the (finitely generated) group Γ. It is essentially a result of [Lub] that the Grothendieck closure ClZ (Γ) is the same as the group Cl(Γ) defined above (in [Lub], the group considered was the closure with respect to all finitely generated Z modules which are also Γ modules, whereas we consider only those finitely generated Z modules which are Γ modules and which are torsion-free; the argument of the preceding paragraph shows that these closures are the same). From now on, we identify the Grothendieck closure ClZ (Γ) with the foregoing group Cl(Γ). Notation 3.2. Let Γ be a group, V a finitely generated torsion-free abelian group which is a Γ-module and ρ : Γ → GL(V ) the corresponding Γ-action. Denote by Gρ the Zariski closure of the image ρ(Γ) in GL(V ⊗ Q), and G0ρ its connected component of identity. Then both Gρ , G0ρ are linear algebraic groups defined over Q, and so is Derρ = [G0ρ , G0ρ ].  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  15  b ∩ GL(V ). Since the profiLet B = Bρ (Γ) denote the subgroup ρb(Γ) nite topology of GL(V̂ ) induces the congruence topology on GL(V ), Bρ (Γ) is the congruence closure of ρ(Γ) in GL(V ). We denote by D = Dρ (Γ) the intersection of B with the derived subgroup Derρ = [G0 , G0 ]. We thus have an exact sequence 1 → D → B → A → 1, where A = Aρ (Γ) is an extension of a finite group G/G0 by an abelian group (the image of B∩G0 in the abelianization (G0 )ab of the connected component G0 ). 3.2. Simply Connected Representations. Definition 3.3. We will say that ρ is simply connected if the group G = Gρ is essentially simply connected. That is, if U is the unipotent radical of G, the quotient G0 /U is a product H × S where H is semisimple and simply connected and S is a torus. An easy consequence of Lemma 1.2 is that simply connected representations are closed under direct sums. Lemma 3.4. Let ρ1 , ρ2 be two simply connected representations of an abstract group Γ. Then the direct sum ρ1 ⊕ρ2 is also simply connected. We also have: Lemma 3.5. Let ρ : Γ → GL(W ) be a sub-representation of a representation τ : Γ → GL(V ) such that both ρ, τ are simply connected. Then the map r : Bτ (Γ) → Bρ (Γ) is surjective. Proof. The image of Bτ (Γ) in Bρ (Γ) contains the image of Dτ . By Proposition 2.3, Dτ is a congruence subgroup of the algebraic group Derτ . The map Derτ → Derρ is a surjective map between simply connected groups. Therefore, by part (iv) of Lemma 1.3, the image of Dτ is a congruence subgroup F of Dρ . Now, by Proposition 2.3, Dρ ·ρ(Γ) is congruence closed, hence equal to Bρ which is the congruence closure of ρ(Γ) and Bτ → Bρ is surjective.  3.3. Simply-Connected to General. Lemma 3.6. Every (integral) representation ρ : Γ → GL(W ) is a subrepresentation of a faithful representation τ : Γ → GL(V ) where τ is simply connected.  16  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  Proof. Let ρ : Γ → GL(W ) be a representation. Let Der be the derived subgroup of the identity component of the Zariski closure H = Gρ of ρ(Γ). Then, by Lemma 1.3(iii), there exists a map H ∗ → H 0 with finite ∗ kernel such that H ∗ is connected and H ∗ /U ∗ = (H ∗ )ss × S ∗ where Hss is a simply connected semi-simple group. Denote by WQ the Q-vector space W ⊗ Q. By Lemma 1.3(i), ρ : H 0 → GL(WQ ) may be considered as a sub-representation of a faithful representation (θ, EQ ) of the covering group H ∗ . By (ii) of Lemma 1.3, the image of an arithmetic subgroup of H ∗ is an arithmetic group of H. Moreover, as H(Z) is virtually torsion free, one may choose a normal, torsion-free arithmetic subgroup ∆ ⊂ H(Z) such that the map H ∗ → H 0 splits over ∆. In particular, the map H ∗ → H 0 splits over a normal subgroup N of Γ of finite index. Thus, θ may be considered as a representation of the group N. Consider the induced representation IndΓN (WQ ). Since WQ is a representation of Γ, it follows that IndΓN (WQ ) = WQ ⊗IndΓN (trivN ) ⊃ WQ . Since, by the first paragraph of this proof, WQ ⊂ EQ as H ∗ modules, it follows that WQ |N ⊂ EQ and hence WQ ⊂ IndΓN (EQ ) =: VQ . Write τ = IndΓN (EQ ) for the representation of Γ on VQ . The normality of N in Γ implies that the restriction representation τ |N is contained in a direct sum of the N-representations n → θ(γnγ −1 ) as γ varies over the finite set Γ/N. Write Gθ|N for the Zariski closure of the image θ(N). Since Gθ|N has ∗ ∗ H as its Zariski closure and the group Hss is simply connected, each θ composed with conjugation by γ is a simply connected representation of N. It follows from Lemma 3.4 that τ |N is simply connected. Since simple connectedness of a representation is the same for subgroups of finite index, it follows that τ , as a representation of Γ, is simply connected. We have now proved that there exists Γ-equivariant embedding of the module (ρ, WQ ) into (τ, VQ ) where W, V are lattices in the Q-vector spaces WQ , VQ . A basis of the lattice W is then a Q-linear combination of a basis of V ; the finite generation of W then implies that there exists an integer m such that mW ⊂ V , and this inclusion is an embedding of Γ-modules. Clearly, the module (ρ, W ) is isomorphic to (ρ, mW ) the isomorphism given by multiplication by m. Hence the lemma follows.   CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  17  The following is the main technical result of this section, from which the main results of this paper are derived: Proposition 3.7. The group Cl(Γ) is the inverse limit of the groups Bρ (Γ) where ρ runs through simply connected representations and Bρ (Γ) is the congruence closure of ρ(Γ). Moreover, if ρ : Γ → GL(W ) is simply connected, then the map Cl(Γ) → Bρ (Γ) is surjective. b Proof. Denote temporarily by Cl(Γ)sc the subgroup of elements of Γ which stabilize the lattice V for all simply connected representations (τ, V ). Let W be an arbitrary finitely generated torsion-free lattice which is also a Γ-module; denote by ρ the action of Γ on W . By Lemma 3.6, there exists a simply connected representation (τ, V ) which contains (ρ, W ). If g ∈ Cl(Γ)sc , then τb(g)(V ) ⊂ V ; since Γ is b and stabilizes W , it follows that for all x ∈ Γ, b τb(x)(W c) ⊂ W c; dense in G c ∩ V = W. in particular, for g ∈ Cl(Γ)sc , ρb(g)(W ) = τb(g)(W ) ⊂ W Thus, Cl(Γ)sc ⊂ Cl(Γ). The group Cl(Γ) is, by definition, the set of all elements g of the b which stabilize all Γ stable torsion free latprofinite completion Γ tices. It follows in particular, that these elements g stabilize all Γstable lattices V associated to simply connected representations (τ, V ); hence Cl(Γ) ⊂ Cl(Γ)sc . The preceding paragraph now implies that Cl(Γ) = Cl(Γ)sc . This proves the first part of the proposition (see Equation 0.2). We can enumerate all the simply connected integral representations ρ, since Γ is finitely generated. Write ρ1 , ρ2 , · · · , ρn · · · , for the sequence of simply connected representations of Γ. Write τn for the direct sum ρ1 ⊕ ρ2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ρn . Then τn ⊂ τn+1 and by Lemma 3.4 each τ is simply connected; moreover, the simply connected representation ρn is contained in τn . By Lemma 3.5, it follows that Cl(Γ) is the inverse limit of the totally ordered family Bτn (Γ); moreover, Bτn+1 (Γ) maps onto Bτn (Γ). By taking inverse limits, it follows that Cl(Γ) maps onto the group Bτn (Γ) for every n. It follows, again from Lemma 3.5, that every Bρn (Γ) is a homomorphic image of Bτn (Γ) and hence of Cl(Γ). This proves the second part of the proposition.   18  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  Definition 3.8. Let Γ be a finitely generated group. We say that Γ is F Ab if the abelianization ∆ab is finite for every finite index subgroup ∆ ⊂ Γ. Corollary 3.9. If Γ is F Ab then for every simply connected representation ρ, the congruence closure Bρ (Γ) of ρ(Γ) is a congruence subgroup and Cl(Γ) is an inverse limit over a totally ordered set τn of simply connected representations of Γ, of congruence groups Bn in groups Gn = Gτn with G0n simply connected. Moreover, the maps Bn+1 → Bn are surjective. Hence the maps Cl(Γ) → Bn are all surjective. Proof. If ρ : Γ → GL(V ) is a simply connected representation, then for a finite index subgroup Γ0 the image ρ(Γ0 ) has connected Zariski closure, and by assumption, G0 /U = H × S where S is a torus and H is simply connected semi-simple. Since the group Γ is FAb it follows that S = 1 and hence G0 = Der(G0 ). Now Proposition 2.4 implies that Bρ (Γ) is a congruence subgroup of Gρ (V ). The Corollary is now immediate from the Proposition 3.7. We take Bn = Bτn in the proof of the proposition.  We can now prove Theorem 0.5. Let us first prove the direction claiming that the congruence subgroup property implies Cl(Γ) = Γ. This was proved for arithmetic groups Γ by Grothendieck, and we follow here the proof in [Lub] which works for general Γ. Indeed, if ρ : Γ → GLn (Z) is a faithful simply connected representation such that ρ(Γ) satisfies the congruence subgroup property, then it means that the map ρ̂ : Γ̂ → GLn (Ẑ) is injective. Now ρ (Cl(Γ)) ⊆ GLn (Z) ∩ ρ̂(Γ̂), but the last is exactly the congruence closure of ρ(Γ). By our assumption, ρ(Γ) is congruence closed, so it is equal to ρ(Γ). So in summary ρ̂(Γ) ⊂ ρ̂ (Cl(Γ)) ⊆ ρ(Γ) = ρ̂(Γ). As ρ̂ is injective, Γ = Cl(Γ). In the opposite direction: Assuming Cl(Γ) = Γ. By the description of Cl(Γ) in (0.1) or in (3.1), it follows that for every finite index subgroup Γ′ of Γ, Cl(Γ′ ) = Γ′ (see [Lub, Proposition 4.4]). Now, if ρ is a faithful simply connected representation of Γ, it is also such for Γ′ and by Proposition 3.6, ρ (Cl(Γ′ )) is congruence closed. In our case it means that for every finite index subgroup Γ′ , ρ(Γ′ ) is congruence closed, i.e. ρ(Γ) has the congruence subgroup property. 4. Thin Groups Let Γ be a finitely generated Z-linear group, i.e. Γ ⊂ GLn (Z), for some n. Let G be its Zariski closure in GLn (C) and ∆ = G ∩ GLn (Z).  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  19  We say that Γ is a thin subgroup of G if [∆ : Γ] = ∞, otherwise Γ is an arithmetic subgroup of G. In general, given Γ, (say, given by a set of generators) it is a difficult question to determine if Γ is thin or arithmetic. Our next result gives, still, a group theoretic characterization for the abstract group Γ to be thin. But first a warning: an abstract group can sometimes appear as an arithmetic subgroup and sometimes as a thin subgroup. For example, the free group on two generators F = F2 is a finite index subgroup of SL2 (Z), and so, arithmetic. But at the same time, by a well known result of Tits asserting that SLn (Z) contains a copy of F which is Zariski dense in SLn [Ti]; it is also thin. To be precise, let us define: Definition 4.1. A finitely generated Z-linear group Γ is called a thin group if it has a faithful representation ρ : Γ → GLn (Z) for some Z n ∈ Z, such that ρ(Γ) is of infinite index in ρ(Γ) ∩ GLn (Z) where Z ρ(Γ) is the Zariski closure of Γ in GLn . Such a ρ will be called a thin representation of Γ. We have assumed that i : Γ ⊂ GLn (Z). Assume also, as we may (see Lemma 3.6) that the representation i is simply connected. By b which preserves Proposition 3.7, the group Cl(Γ) is the subgroup of Γ the lattices Vn for a totally ordered set (with respect to the relation of being a sub representation) of faithful simply connected integral representations (ρn , Vn ) of Γ with the maps Cl(Γ) → Bn being surjective, where Bn is the congruence closure of ρn (Γ) in GL(Vn ). Hence, Cl(Γ) is the inverse limit (as n varies) of the congruence closed subgroups Bn and Γ is the inverse limit of the images ρn (Γ). Equip Bn /ρn (Γ) with the discrete topology. Consequently, Cl(Γ)/Γ is a closed subspace of Q the Tychonov product n (Bn /ρn (Γ)). This is the topology on Cl(Γ)/Γ considered in the following theorem. Theorem 4.2. Let Γ be a finitely generated Z-linear group, i.e. Γ ⊂ GLm (Z) for some n. Then Γ is not a thin group if and only if Γ satisfies both of the following two properties: (a) Γ is an F Ab group (i.e. for every finite index subgroup Λ of Γ, Λ/[Λ, Λ] is finite), and (b) The group Cl(Γ)/Γ is compact Proof. Assume first that Γ is a thin group. If Γ is not F Ab we are done. So, assume Γ is F Ab. We must now prove that Cl(Γ)/Γ is not compact. We know that Γ has a faithful thin representation ρ :  20  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  Γ → GLn (Z) which in addition, is simply connected. This induces a surjective map (see Proposition 3.7) Cl(Γ) → Bρ (Γ) where Bρ (Γ) is the congruence closure of ρ(Γ) in GLn (Z). As Γ is F Ab, Bρ (Γ) is a congruence subgroup, by Corollary 3.9. But as ρ is thin, ρ(Γ) has infinite index in Bρ (Γ). Thus, Cl(Γ)/Γ is mapped onto the discrete infinite quotient space Bρ (Γ)/ρ(Γ). Hence Cl(Γ)/Γ is not compact. Assume now Γ is not a thin group. This implies that for every faithful integral representation ρ(Γ) is of finite index in its integral Zariski closure. We claim that Γ/[Γ, Γ] is finite. Otherwise, as Γ is finitely generated, Γ is mapped on Z. The group Z has a Zariski dense integral representation τ into Ga ×S where S is a torus; take any integral matrix g ∈ SLn (Z) which is neither semi-simple nor unipotent, whose semisimple part has infinite order. Then both the unipotent and semisimple part of the Zariski closure H of τ (Z) are non trivial and H(Z) cannot contain τ (Z) as a subgroup of finite index since H(Z) is commensurable to Ga (Z) × S(Z) and both factors are non trivial and infinite. The representation ρ × τ (where ρ is any faithful integral representation of Γ) will give a thin representation of Γ. This proves that Γ/[Γ, Γ] is finite. A similar argument (using an induced representation) works for every finite index subgroup, hence Γ satisfies F Ab. We now prove that Cl(Γ)/Γ is compact. We already know that Γ is F Ab, so by Corollary 3.9, Cl(Γ) = limBρn (Γ) when Bn = Bρn (Γ) are ← congruence groups with surjective homomorphisms Bn+1 → Bn . Note that as Γ has a faithful integral representation, we can assume that all the representations ρn in the sequence are faithful and (4.1)  Γ = lim ρn (Γ). ←− n  This implies that Cl(Γ)/Γ = lim Bn /ρn (Γ). Now, by our assumption, ←− n  each ρn (Γ) is of finite index in Bn = Bρn (Γ). So Cl(Γ)/Γ is an inverse limit of finite sets and hence compact.  5. Grothendieck closure and super-rigidity Let Γ be a finitely generated group. We say that Γ is integral superrigid if there exists an algebraic group G ⊆ GLm (C) and an embedding i : Γ0 7→ G of a finite index subgroup Γ0 of Γ, such that for every integral representation ρ : Γ → GLn (Z), there exists an algebraic representation ρ̃ : G → GLn (C) such that ρ and ρ̃ agree on some finite index subgroup of Γ0 . Note: Γ is integral super-rigid if and only if a finite index subgroup of Γ is integral super-rigid.  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  21  Example of such super-rigid groups are, first of all, the irreducible (arithmetic) lattices in high rank semisimple Lie groups, but also the (arithmetic) lattices in the rank one simple Lie groups Sp(n, 1) and F−20 (see [Mar], [Cor], [Gr-Sc]). But [Ba-Lu] shows that there are such 4 groups which are thin groups. Now, let Γ be a subgroup of GLm (Z), whose Zariski closure is essentially simply connected. We say that Γ satisfies the congruence subgroup property (CSP) if the natural extension of i : Γ → GLm (Z) to Γ̂, i.e. ĩ : Γ̂ → GLm (Ẑ) has finite kernel. Theorem 5.1. Let Γ ⊆ GLm (Z) be a finitely generated subgroup satisfying (F Ab). Then (a) Cl(Γ)/Γ is compact if and only if Γ is an arithmetic group which is integral super-rigid. (b) Cl(Γ)/Γ is finite if and only if Γ is an arithmetic group satisfying the congruence subgroup property. Remarks. (a) The finiteness of Cl(Γ)/Γ implies, in particular, its compactness , so Theorem 5.1 recovers the well known fact (see [BMS], [Ra2]) that the congruence subgroup property implies super-rigidity. (b) As explained in §2 (based on [Ser]) the simple connectedness is a necessary condition for the CSP to hold. But by Lemma 3.6, if Γ has any embedding into GLn (Z) for some n, it also has a simply connected one. We now prove Theorem 5.1. Proof. : Assume first Cl(Γ)/Γ is compact in which case, by Theorem 4.2, Γ must be an arithmetic subgroup of some algebraic group G. Without loss of generality (using Lemma 3.6) we can assume that G is connected and simply connected, call this representation ρ : Γ → G. Let θ be any other representation of Γ. Let τ = ρ ⊕ θ be the direct sum. The group Gτ is a subgroup of Gρ × Gθ with surjective projections. Since both τ and ρ are embeddings of the group Γ, and Γ does not have thin representations, it follows (from Corollary 3.9) that the projection π : Gτ → Gρ yields an isomorphism of the arithmetic groups τ (Γ) ⊂ Gτ (Z) and ρ(Γ) ⊂ Gρ (Z). Assume, as we may, that Γ is torsion-free and Γ is an arithmetic group. Every arithmetic group in Gτ (Z) is virtually a product of the form Uτ (Z) ⋊ Hτ (Z) where Uτ and Hτ are the unipotent and semisimple parts of Gτ respectively (note that G0τ cannot have torus as quotient since Γ is F Ab). Hence Γ ∩ Uτ (Z) may also be described as  22  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  the virtually maximal normal nilpotent subgroup of Γ. Similarly for Γ ∩ Uρ (Z). This proves that the groups Uτ and Uρ have isomorphic arithmetic groups which proves that π : Uτ → Uρ is an isomorphism. Otherwise Ker(π), which is a Q-defined normal subgroup of Uτ , would have an infinite intersection with the arithmetic group Γ ∩ Uτ . Therefore, the arithmetic groups in Hτ and Hρ are isomorphic and the isomorphism is induced by the projection Hτ → Hρ . Since Hρ is simply connected by assumption, and is a factor of Hτ , it follows that Hτ is a product Hρ H where H is a semi-simple group defined over Q with H(Z) Zariski dense in H. But the isomorphism of the arithmetic groups in Hτ and Hρ then shows that the group H(Z) is finite which means that H is finite. Therefore, π : Hτ0 → Hρ is an isomorphism and so the map G0τ → Gρ is also an isomorphism since it is a surjective morphism between groups of the same dimension, and since Gρ is simply connected. This proves that Γ is a super-rigid group. In [Lub], it was proved that if Γ satisfies super rigidity in some simply connected group G, then (up to finite index) Cl(Γ)/Γ is in 1-1 correspondence with C(Γ) = Ker(Γ̂ → G(Ẑ)). This finishes the proof of both parts (a) and (b).  Remark. In the situation of Theorem 5.1, Γ is an arithmetic group, satisfying super-rigidity. The difference between parts (a) and (b), is whether Γ also satisfies CSP. As of now, there is no known arithmetic group (in a simply connected group) which satisfies super-rigidity without satisfying CSP. The conjecture of Serre about the congruence subgroup problem predicts that arithmetic lattices in rank one Lie groups (−20) fail to have CSP. These include Lie groups like Sp(n, 1) and F4 for which super-rigidity was shown (after Serre had made his conjecture). Potentially, the arithmetic subgroups of these groups can have Cl(Γ)/Γ compact and not finite. But (some) experts seem to believe now that these groups do satisfy CSP. Anyway as of now, we do not know any subgroup Γ of GLn (Z) with Cl(Γ)/Γ compact and not finite. References [BMS] H. Bass, J. Milnor and J.-P. Serre, Solution of the congruence subgroup problem for SLn (n ≥ 3) and Sp2n (n ≥ 2). Publ. Math. I.H.E.S. 33 (1967), 59–137. [Ba-Lu] H. Bass and A. Lubotzky, Nonarithmetic superrigid groups: counterexamples to Platonov’s conjecture. Ann. of Math. 151 (2000), 1151–1173.  CONGRUENCE TOPOLOGY  [Bo]  23  A. Borel, Introduction Aux Groupes Arithmetiques. Actualite Scientifiques et Industrielles 1341, Hermann, Paris, 1969. [Br-Gr] M.R. Bridson and F.J. Grunewald, Grothendieck’s problems concerning profinite completions and representations of groups. Ann. of Math. 160 (2004), 359–373. [Ch] J.S. Chahal, Solution of the congruence subgroup problem for solvable algebraic groups. Nagoya Math. J. 79 (1980), 141–144. [Cor] K. Corlette, Archimedean superrigidity and hyperbolic geometry. Ann. of Math. 135 (1992), 165–182. [Go] E.S. Golod, On nil-algebras and finitely approximable p-groups. (Russian) Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 28 (1964), 273–276. [Gri] R.I. Grigorchuk, On Burnside’s problem on periodic groups. (Russian) Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 14 (1980), 53–54. [Gro] A. Grothendieck, Representations lineaires et compactification profinie des groupes discrets. Manuscripta Math. 2 (1970), 375–396. [Gr-Sc] M. Gromov and R. Schoen, Harmonic maps into singular spaces and p-adic superrigidity for lattices in groups of rank one. Publ. Math. I.H.E.S. 76 (1992), 165–246. [Lub] A. Lubotzky, Tannaka Duality for Discrete Groups. American J. of Math. 102 (1980), 663–689. [Mar] G.A. Margulis, Discrete Subgroups of Semi-simple Lie Groups. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) 17. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991. [Nori] M.V. Nori, On Subgroups of GLn (Fp ). Invent Math 88 (1987), 257–275. [Pl-Ra] V. Platonov and A. Rapinchuk, Algebraic Groups and Number Theory. In series: Pure and Applied Mathematics, V. 139, Academic Press, 1994, 625 pps. [Pl-Ta1] V. Platonov and O.I. Tavgan, Grothenkieck’s problem on profinite completions of groups. Soviet Math. Dokl. 33 (1986), 822–825. [Pl-Ta2] V. Platonov and O.I. Tavgan, Grothendieck’s problem on profinite completions and representations of groups. K-Theory 4 (1990), 89–101. [Py] L. Pyber, Groups of intermediate subgroup growth and a problem of Grothendieck. Duke Math. J. 121 (2004), 169–188. [Ra1] M.S. Raghunathan, Discrete Subgroups of Lie Groups. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Band 68. Springer-Verlag, New YorkHeidelberg, 1972. ix+227 pp. [Ra2] M.S. Raghunathan, On the Congruence Subgroup Problem. Publ. Math. I.H.E.S. 46 (1976), 107–161. [Sar] P. Sarnak, Notes on Thin Matrix Groups, Thin Groups and Superstrong Approximation. Math. Sci. Res. Publ. 61 (2014), 343–362, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. [Ser] J-P. Serre, Groupes de Congruence, (d’après H. Bass, H. Matsumoto, J. Mennicke, J. Milnor, C. Moore). Séminaire Bourbaki, Vol. 10, Exp. No. 330, 275–291, Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1995. [Ti] J. Tits, Free subgroups in linear groups. J. Algebra 20 (1972), 250–270. [Ve] T.N. Venkataramana, A remark on Extended Congruence Subgroups. IMRN (1999), no 15, 835–838.  24  A. LUBOTZKY AND T.N. VENKATARAMANA  [Weis] B. Weisfeiler, Strong Approximation for Zariski dense subgroups. Ann of Math. 120 (1984), 271–315. Institute of Mathematics, Hebrew University, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel, alex.lubotzky@mail.huji.ac.il Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhabha Road, Colaba, Mumbai 400005, India, venky@math.tifr.res.in

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
