Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_1203

Abstract:
A Two-Stage Method for Text Line Detection in Historical Documents Tobias Grüninga,∗, Gundram Leiferta , Tobias Straußa , Roger Labahna a Computational  Intelligence Technology Lab, Institute of Mathematics, University of Rostock, 18057 Rostock, Germany  arXiv:1802.03345v1 [cs.CV] 9 Feb 2018  Abstract This work presents a two-stage text line detection method for historical documents. In a first stage, a deep neural network called ARU-Net labels pixels to belong to one of the three classes: baseline, separator or other. The separator class marks beginning and end of each text line. The ARU-Net is trainable from scratch with manageably few manually annotated example images (less than 50). This is achieved by utilizing data augmentation strategies. The network predictions are used as input for the second stage which performs a bottom-up clustering to build baselines. The developed method is capable of handling complex layouts as well as curved and arbitrarily oriented text lines. It substantially outperforms current state-of-the-art approaches. For example, for the complex track of the cBAD: ICDAR2017 Competiton on Baseline Detection the F-value is increased from 0.859 to 0.922. The framework to train and run the ARU-Net is open source. Keywords: baseline detection, text line detection, layout analysis, historical documents, U-Net, pixel labeling, semantic segmentation, state estimation  1. Introduction Accessibility of the valuable cultural heritage of historical documents is an important concern of archives, libraries as well as certain companies, e.g., those specialized in genealogy. After years of digitization at an industrial scale to protect and preserve these valuable goods, millions over millions of scanned pages are stored at servers all over the world [1]. The generic next step is to make the enormous amount of content of these document images accessible and enable humanists, historians, genealogists as well as ordinary people to efficiently work with these documents. Besides the cost- and time-consuming process of manually annotating volumes [2], it is subject to current research and scientific discussion how to automate this process [3]. Since 2009, tremendous progress in the field of Automated Text Recognition1 (ATR) [4, 5] as well as Keyword Spotting (KWS) [6, 7, 8] was achieved. The performance of state-of-the-art systems reaches ∗ Corresponding  author Email addresses: tobias.gruening@uni-rostock.de (Tobias Grüning), gundram.leifert@uni-rostock.de (Gundram Leifert), tobias.strauss@uni-rostock.de (Tobias Strauß), roger.labahn@uni-rostock.de (Roger Labahn) 1 Optical Character Recognition + Handwritten Text Recognition  Preprint submitted to Elsevier  February 12, 2018  character error rates below 10% for ATR [9] and mean average precisions above 0.9 for KWS [10] for complex handwritten documents. Although efforts are made to develop systems working solely on the rough input image without any a-priori segmentation [11, 12, 13], the best performing recognition systems – with reference to recently hosted competitions – rely on segmented words or text lines as input. Entirely segmentation-free approaches suffer either from an enormous training/inference time and/or, up to now, did not demonstrate its applicability with competitive quality on challenging datasets [10]. Hence, a workflow which involves a text line extraction followed by the transformation of pixel information into textual information (ATR/KWS) is the widely used standard. This work deals with the first step of the information retrieval pipeline, namely the text line extraction. This is a mandatory step since errors directly effect the performance of the overall information retrieval process. The text line extraction is still unsolved to a certain extent for historical documents due to difficulties such as physical degradations (e.g., bleed-through, faded away characters, heterogeneous stroke intensity), image capture conditions (e.g., scan curve, illumination issues), complex layouts (e.g., structured documents, marginalia, multicolumn layouts, varying font sizes), arbitrary orientations and curved text lines. The results achieved by state-of-the-art approaches are not satisfying [14], especially if dealing with heterogeneous data. Therefore, this work focuses on the extraction of text lines in arbitrary historical documents. Since different ATR/KWS systems necessitate different text line representations, e.g., bounding boxes [15], x-height areas [16] or more precise polygonal representations following all ascenders and descenders [7], there is not the one correct text line representation. Therefore we limit ourselves towards the text line detection task by representing each text line by its baseline. The detected baselines allow for an extraction of the text lines in an appropriate – with respect to the following method – way. The problem of extracting a text line given its baseline can be tackled by applying, e.g., histogram approaches to estimate the x-height [16] or by utilizing Dynamic Programming to calculate separating seams [17]. Besides the classical image processing based approaches, deep learning based methods became omnipresent in the document analysis community within the last years. Such techniques were recently used to solve several different problems such as binarization [18], page boundary extraction [19], page segmentation [20] or text line detection [16]. The presented work to our knowledge is the first which uses a two-stage method, combining deep learning strategies and state-of-the-art image processing based techniques. We propose an extension of the U-Net [21], the so-called ARU-Net. The fully convolutional U-Net is extended by incorporating residual blocks [22] to increase its representative power. Furthermore, a spatial attention mechanism is developed which allows the ARU-Net to focus on image content at different positions and scales. The network is designed to processes the entire, arbitrarily-sized image at once to take account of all spatial context. The ARU-Net is universal in a way, that it could be used to tackle any pixel labeling task. In this work, it is trained in a fully supervised fashion to classify each pixel to belong to one of the following classes: baseline, separator or other. The separator class is introduced to explicitly  2  predict beginning and end of each text line and not just rely on the information implicitly given by the baseline class. This is advantageous for text lines which are close together but have to be separated, e.g., those belonging to different columns. The network output serves as input for an image processing based bottom-up clustering approach. This approach utilizes so-called states of superpixels [23], which encode local text orientation and interline distances. This second stage allows for an error correction of the network output by incorporating domain knowledge based on assumptions, which hold for text lines in general, see Sec. 3.3.3. Additionally, it is easily possible to incorporate the separator information, which allows for an handling of documents with complex layouts, e.g., images containing tables or marginalia. Each method relying on supervised deep learning and therefore relying on training data can suffer from the need of an enormous amount of labeled training data. We demonstrate that the presented approach achieves high quality results on the Bozen dataset [24] with less than 50 full-page training samples by using data augmentation strategies. Along with an annotating effort of just a few minutes per page the adaptation of the proposed method is easy and cheap. We demonstrate the applicability of the proposed method for images with arbitrarily oriented as well as curved text lines by achieving nearly as good results as for straight 0° oriented text lines. Finally, we show that the presented approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods on three different datasets. A relative F-value [25] error (the gap to 1.0) reduction of at least 24% is achieved for the cBAD dataset [26]. This dataset is composed of images of nine different archives and libraries from all over Europe and is therefore – in the opinion of the authors – the most representative and heterogeneous freely available dataset. Especially, for the complex track, which contains mostly documents with complex layouts, the average F-value is increased from 0.859 to 0.922. The main contributions of this work are: • introduction of a newly designed deep neural network (ARU-Net) for pixel labeling along with a meaningful parametrization – the ARU-Net and its training framework are open source2 , • introduction of the new concept of learned separators to handle complex layouts instead of an a-priori page segmentation or white-/blackrun calculation • introduction of a state-of-the-art two-stage workflow which combines state-of-the-art deep learning and image processing techniques – the entire workflow is freely usable via the Transkribus platform3 .  2. Related Work A comprehensive survey of approaches for text line extraction in historical documents is given in [27] and [28]. In this section, we will focus on approaches relevant for this work. 2 https://github.com/TobiasGruening/ARU-Net 3 https://transkribus.eu  3  In [17, 29, 30], the principle of Dynamic Programming is utilized to calculate cost optimal paths passing the image from left to right to separate different text lines from each other. These methods basically differ in the way the images are pre-processed and in the definition of the cost function. Garz et al. [31] propose a method based on clustering of interest points (this is just another name for what we call superpixel). Using a standard clustering technique, interest points in an area which exceeds a certain density are clustered to form word clusters. Word clusters are separated to sub-word segments and these are finally grouped to build text lines. Ryu et al. [23] propose an algorithm which uses certain characteristics (so-called states) of extracted connected components to assign costs to certain clustering results. These states encode local text orientation and interline distances and are introduced in Def. 3.3.4. Subsequently using four different operations (merge, split, merge-split, merge-merge-split) on an initial coarse clustering, the costs are minimized to obtain an optimal clustering, which leads to the final text line segmentation. Ahn et al. [32] improve this approach by the introduction of a newly developed binarization method and an improved clustering process. Grüning et al. [33] extended the approach of Ryu et al. so that it is applicable for more general superpixels with a newly introduced clustering procedure which does not rely on a coarse initial clustering. Besides these “classical” approaches, which are based on image processing techniques, methods based on machine learning gained importance within the last two years. Moysset et al. [34] propose a method based on a recurrent neural network. The network is trained given only the number of lines in the image utilizing Connectionist Temporal Classification which was introduced to train networks for handwriting text recognition and allows for ground truth data without any alignment. The trained neural network predicts confidences for the vertical coordinates of the image to belong either to the classes line or interline. Further post-processing of the neural network output is performed to detect the text lines. In follow-up works, they formulated the problem as a regression problem [35, 36]. The recurrent neural network directly predicts bounding boxes as well as the start of each text line, respectively. Besides this regression based approach, classification based approaches were proposed most recently. In contrast to the approach of Moysset et al., these methods perform a pixel labeling to classify each image pixel (instead of classifying rows of pixels, only). For instance, Renton et al. [16] propose a fully convolutional network (FCN) based on dilated (or atrous) convolutions to classify pixels as text line main body or not. The classification results are utilized to extract the text line information. These techniques are currently very popular, e.g., four of the five participants of the cBAD: ICDAR2017 Competition on Baseline Detection [37] use methods relying on FCNs.  3. Methodology In this section, we introduce the two-stage method for baseline detection, see Fig. 3.1. The first stage relies on a deep neural network – the ARU-Net – and performs a pixel labeling. The pixel labeling can be seen as some kind of goal-oriented binarization. Instead of detecting all foreground elements, it  4  Stage II  Superpixel Clustering  Superpixel Calculation  Stage I  State Estimation  ARU-Net Input  Output  Figure 3.1: Two-stage workflow to detect baselines – The first stage utilizes a deep hierarchical neural network to perform a pixel labeling. The result of Stage I is the input for an image processing based method in Stage II. This method clusters superpixel to build baselines. The image is sampled from the cBad complex test set [25].  restricts itself to those elements which are of interest for the specific task. The second stage performs a superpixel (SP) extraction on the first stage’s output. These SPs are further clustered to build baselines. In the following, the problem of baseline detection is formulated. Afterwards, a detailed description of the proposed ARU-Net is given. Finally, the SP extraction and clustering approach is described. 3.1. Problem Statement We will introduce the problem of baseline detection in a formal way by defining all necessary termini and notation. Within this work we follow the definition of a baseline given in [26]: Definition 3.1.1 (baseline). A baseline is defined in the typographical sense as the virtual line where most characters rest upon and descenders extend below. h×w  Definition 3.1.2 (image, pixel, intensity). A matrix I ∈ [0, 1]  is called (gray-scale) image of  height h and width w. A pair p = (y, x) ∈ {1, ..., h} × {1, ..., w} is called pixel of I. The matrix value I(p) = I(y, x) = Iy,x in row y and column x is called intensity of pixel p. Image means gray-scale image for the rest of this work. Ih denotes the height of image I, Iw denotes the width, analogously. For visualization purposes a pixel intensity value of 1 means white and 0 means black. If the colored image is available, we usually use this one for visualization even though it is converted to its gray-scale version for calculations. Definition 3.1.3 (coordinate). Let p = (y, x) be a pixel. py = y and px = x denote the elements of the first and second dimension of p and are called coordinates (y−coordinate and x−coordinate).  5  Definition 3.1.4 (image space). The set of all possible images I=  [  [0, 1]  h×w  (3.1)  h,w∈N  is called image space. Definition 3.1.5 (polygonal chain, closed). A polygonal chain of length n ∈ N is an n-tuple of pixels P = (p1 , p2 , ..., pn ) .  (3.2)  A polygonal chain is called closed iff p1 = pn holds. Taking into account Def. 3.1.1, each baseline can be represented by a polygonal chain. Definition 3.1.6 (polygonal chain space). The infinite set P of all possible polygonal chains is called polygonal chain space. Definition 3.1.7 (baseline detector, baseline hypothesis). We call a function b : I → P(P) which maps each image to a subset of P a baseline detector. The set of all baseline detectors is denoted by B. The output of b for a certain image I is called baseline hypothesis. Definition 3.1.8 (baseline ground truth). The set GI ⊂ P of polygonal chains representing the baselines of an image I (possibly annotated by a human operator) is called baseline ground truth (for image I). Def. 3.1.1 allows for some baseline variety. Hence, there is not the one unique and correct ground truth for an image. Therefore, ground truth information is always biased by its creator. This has to be taken into account for the evaluation process as well as for the baseline detector design. Definition 3.1.9 (similarity score). A function h·, ·iµ : P × P → [0, 1] assigning a scalar value to each pair of baseline ground truth and baseline hypothesis polygonal chain sets is called similarity score. A value of 1.0 indicates that two polygonal chains are regarded as equal. Within this work we follow the similarity score introduced in [25]: We measure the accuracy of a baseline detector in terms of the F-value, see [25] for a detailed introduction. The problem tackled in this work can now be formulated as follows: Suppose there are two sets of images along with their baseline ground truth information Ttrain = {(I, GI )i | i = 1, ..., n},  Ttest = {(I, GI )i | i = 1, ..., m}.  6  (3.3)  We aim for a design of a baseline detector b∗ given Ttrain which solves b∗ = arg max b∈B  X  hGI , b(I)iµ .  (3.4)  (I,GI )∈Ttest  In the design phase of b∗ the set Ttest is unknown and one is allowed to use solely Ttrain . Hence, one has to ensure that b∗ generalizes well from Ttrain to Ttest . Since the proposed design consists of two stages and the first stage relies on deep learning techniques, an adaptation to a differently biased ground truth (produced by a different annotator) can be done easily by retraining the first stage without any fine tuning done by experts. 3.2. Stage I: ARU-Net Typically, layout analysis algorithms directly work on the input image I or on a binarized version of it [17, 23, 29, 30, 31, 33]. Instead, we employ a more goal-oriented transformation of the input image utilizing a neural network, which is trained in a supervised manner to assign a certain class to each pixel like in [21, 38, 39]. This is often referred to as pixel labeling or semantic segmentation. We will introduce the problem of pixel labeling utilizing hierarchical neural networks, followed by a description of the proposed ARU-Net architecture. 3.2.1. Pixel Labeling – Problem Formulation Definition 3.2.1 (neural pixel labeler). A neural pixel labeler (NPL) for the classes C = {c1 , ..., cn } is a hierarchical neural network Φ( · ; w) : I → I |C| . The NPL is parametrized by w ∈ RN . For I ∈ I it performs a prediction over all pixels and all possible classes  Φ(I; w) = C ∈ [0, 1]  Ih ×Iw ×|C|  subject to  |C| X  C(y, x, c) = 1  ∀y, x.  (3.5)  c=1  C(:, :, c) = C:,:,c ∈ I denotes the image which encodes the pixel-wise prediction (probability) for the c−th class. Definition 3.2.2 (pixel ground truth). A cartesian product GI ∈ I |C| is called pixel ground truth (for image I) if it assigns exactly one class (one-hot-encoding) to each pixel such that ∀y, x ∃!c ∈ {1, ..., |C|} :  GI (y, x, c) = 1 ∧ GI (y, x, c̃) = 0 (∀c̃ 6= c).  (3.6)  Following the problem formulation of Section 3.1, we aim for an NPL, which was tuned on a training set and optimally performs on a test set. Assume there are training and test sets in the style of Eq. (3.3) –  7  with pixel ground truth information instead of baseline ground truth information Tetrain = {(I, GI )i | i = 1, ..., n},  Tetest = {(I, GI )i | i = 1, ..., m}.  (3.7)  The performance of an NPL is evaluated in terms of the cross-entropy between the predicted and the ground truth distribution. The cross-entropy can also be motivated by a maximum likelihood estimation. This results in the cross-entropy loss function. Definition 3.2.3 (loss function). Let Te be a set of images along with their pixel ground truth and Φ( · ; w) is an NPL. The performance of Φ on Te is evaluated in terms of the (cross-entropy) loss function  L(Φ, Te ) = −  X  |C| Ih X Iw X X  GI (y, x, c) ln Φ(I; w)y,x,c .  (3.8)  (I,GI )∈Te y=1 x=1 c=1  To improve the performance of the NPL on the training set, one can calculate the loss function’s gradient with respect to the model parameters using the well-known technique of backpropagation [40]. The gradient is used to adapt the model parameters by gradient descent w ←w−τ ·  ∂L (Φ, Tetrain ) ∂w  (3.9)  with a learning rate τ . This is repeated to successively adapt the NPL. The process of adapting the model by minimizing its loss is called training. Since one does not aim for a minimization of the loss on the training set, the system has to generalize to achieve high quality results on the test set as well. To stabilize training, avoid over-fitting, improve generalization, ... dozens of techniques to improve the simple rule in Eq. (3.9) were introduced within the last years. Since the introduction of these is beyond the scope of this work, we refer to [41]. Details on techniques used within this work are given in Sec. 4. 3.2.2. ARU-Net – Architecture The ARU-Net is a special form of an NPL and is described in this section. We omit a formal introduction of the used neural network components and concepts and refer to the above mentioned literature. Within the last few years, different architectures were proposed for the pixel labeling task. Most of them are based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [42]. A direct application of CNNs for semantic segmentation is presented in [38]. The presented Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) combines local features to produce more meaningful high level features using pooling layers. Pooling reduces the spatial dimension. Thus, the result suffers from a coarse resolution. Noh et al. [39] tackle this problem by applying a deconvolutional network on the subsampled output of the FCN. The U-Net proposed in [21] furthermore introduces shortcuts between layers of the same spatial dimension. This allows for an easier combination of local low level features and global higher-level features. Additionally, error propagation 8  for deep structures is facilitated and the so-called vanishing gradient problems [43] are reduced. The U-Net is the basis for the proposed ARU-Net. We extend the U-Net by two more key concepts – spatial attention (A) and depth (residual structure (R)) to be described below. Remarkably, in contrast to the U-Net proposed in [21], we perform border padding. Hence, the spatial dimensions in each scale space of the U-Net are all the same, see Fig. 3.2 for a schematic representation of an U-Net. The output of the U-Net thus is a feature map (Z features in Fig. 3.2) of the same spatial dimension as the input. Hence, the U-Net becomes an NPL as defined in Def. 3.2.1 by adding a convolutional (to get pixel-wise predictions) softmax classifier on top which distinguishes between the different classes of C. Remark 3.2.1. If the presented architectures are used for the pixel labeling task, it is implicitly assumed that such a classifier is always added to generate per class probabilities at pixel level. Z  2Z  Identity  2Z  Z  Z  Output  I  Z  Input  1  2Z  4Z  2Z  Identity  II 4Z  4Z  8Z  4Z  Identity  III  8Z  IV Conv+Act  Max Pool  Deconv+Act  2 Layer CNN Block  Figure 3.2: U-Net – The input is an image of arbitrary spatial dimension. ”Act” is the activation function thus the rectangles represent sets of activation maps. Each rectangle represents a 3-dim array (∈ Rh×w×z ). Within each scale space (roman numbers) the feature map widths and heights are constant (encoded by the height of the rectangles). The number of feature maps Z is pictured by the width of the rectangles. Between adjacent scale spaces the spatial dimension decreases by a certain factor (2 in the figure) and the representative depth (number of feature maps) increases by the same factor.  He et al. [22] introduce very deep neural networks which are still trainable and yield state-of-the-art results. This is achieved using so-called residual blocks. Residual blocks introduce shortcuts, which enable the error backpropagation and identity propagation even for very deep structures. Hence, the vanishing gradient problems are reduced [22]. There are various different forms of residual blocks. The one used within this work is depicted in Fig. 3.3. Definition 3.2.4 (RU-Net). An RU-Net is an U-Net with residual blocks. That means, each of the 2 layer CNN blocks in Fig. 3.2 is replaced by a residual block as in Fig. 3.3. To explicitly incorporate the potential to handle various font sizes, especially mixed font sizes on a single page, we introduce a pixel-wise (spatial) attention mechanism. For this purpose, we introduce an 9  Z  Z  Z  +  Conv+Act  Conv  Identity  Act  Output  Z  Input  Z  Logits  Figure 3.3: Residual Block – The input is convolved and the resulting 3-dim array (the maps before passed through an acitvation function are referred to as logits) is used twice. At the first branch it is passed through the activation function and further processed by several convolution layers. At the second branch it is directly fed into a summation node. After a point-wise summation of the two logit maps an activation function is applied. The shortcut enables for an easy identity propagation and error backpropagation. Arbitrarily many inner layers are possible.  attention network (A-Net). The A-Net is a multi-layer CNN which generates a single output feature map. The A-Net will be applied along with the RU-Net at different scales, the same network weights are used on all scales (weight sharing). Specially, a scale pyramid is built by downscaling the input image I = I1 several times. The resulting (scaled) images I1 , I2 , I4 , I8 , ..., Is (subscripts denote the scaling factors) are fed into the RU-Net and the A-Net. Trainable deconvolutional layers (of corresponding scales) are applied on the outputs of the RU- and the A-Net to obtain feature maps of spatial dimensions equal to the inputs. A1 , ..., As denote the up-sampled feature maps of the A-Net, RU1 , ..., RUs of the RU-Net, respectively. After applying a pixel-wise softmax normalization for the attention maps bi (y, x) = P A  exp(Ai (y, x)) j∈{1,2,...,s} exp(Aj (y, x))  (3.10)  bi sum to one (pixel-wise). The feature maps RUi are combined following the normalized attention maps A ARU =  X  RUi  bi , A  (3.11)  i∈{1,2,...,s}  where  is the Hadamard product (element-wise multiplication). ARU is the input for the classifier to  build a NPL, see Rem. 3.2.1. Definition 3.2.5 (ARU-Net). An RU-Net incorporating the described spatial attention mechanism is called ARU-Net, see Fig. 3.4. The point-wise multiplication combined with the pixel-wise attention maps allow the ARU-Net to pay attention in different scales at different positions of the image. In Fig. 3.4 one can see that this behavior was indeed learned by the network. It seems like the RU-Net is specialized on a certain font size and the A-Net distinguishes between areas of different font sizes (bright and dark areas). The ARU-Net as introduced can be used for any pixel labeling task, e.g., binarization, page detection  10  A-Net  A-Net  RU-Net  Classification  Softmax  RU-Net  +  Deconv (4)  A-Net  Deconv (2)  RU-Net  Figure 3.4: ARU-Net – The input image and its downscaled versions are fed into the A-Net and R-U-Net accross different scales). The results for the lower resolutions are deconvolved. The attention maps are a softmax normalization. The brighter the map at a certain position the more attention is paid to that corresponding scale. The attention maps are point-wise muliplied with the feature maps of the RU-Net. summed and a classification is performed.  (weight sharing passed through position at the The results are  and page segmentation. The purpose of the ARU-Net is defined and fixed by the number of classes and the ground truth data provided for training. In this work, we limit ourselves to the baseline detection problem introduced in Sec. 3.1. For this purpose, we introduce three different classes: baseline (bl), separator (sep) and other (∅). The separators mark beginning and end of each text line. Although, the separator information is implicitly encoded by the baselines, it is advantageous to explicitly introduce it as possible classification result. Especially, for baselines which are close together, e.g., such belonging to two adjacent columns, this approach helps to avoid segmentation errors. Pixel ground truth for the classes C = {bl, sep, ∅} is automatically generated by Alg. 1 given the baseline ground truth of Eq. (3.3). A sample image with baseline ground truth along with its generated pixel ground truth is depicted in Fig. 3.5. The prediction of a trained ARU-Net for this sample image is shown in Fig. 3.6a. 3.3. Stage II: Baseline Estimation This subsection describes the second stage of the proposed approach. Baselines are estimated given the output of the ARU-Net. This task consists of three steps: superpixel calculation, state estimation and superpixel clustering, which are described in the following. Ih ×Iw ×3  The trained ARU-Net generates an output C ∈ [0, 1]  for each image I ∈ I. In the following  B = C:,:,1 denotes the image encoding the confidence of each pixel belonging to a baseline and S = C:,:,2 is the separator image, see Fig.3.6a 3.3.1. Superpixel Calculation The number of all pixels in an image often exceeds several millions. To reduce the dimensionality of the problem (the number of pixels to be regarded for the baseline estimation), we limit ourselves to a 11  Algorithm 1: Pixel Ground Truth Generation  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12  input : image I, corresponding baseline ground truth GI output: pixel ground truth GI B, S, N ← 0 B of dimension Ih × Iw for P = (p1 , ..., pn ) ∈ GI do θ ← local text orientation of P B see Def. 3.3.2 d ← interline distance of P B see Def. 3.3.3 P b ← polygonal chain of length d and orient. θ + 90° centered at p1 P e ← polygonal chain of length d and orient. θ + 90° centered at pn draw P b and P e in S B draw: follow the chain and set pixel values to 1.0 draw P in B E ← 3 × 3 matrix of ones S ←S⊕E B ← B ⊕ E ∧ ¬S N ← ¬S ∧ ¬B return : GI ← [B, S, N ]  B ⊕ morphological dilation  subset of all pixels. Definition 3.3.1 (superpixel). Let S = {p1 , ..., pN } be a subset of the image pixels of I (typically, N  Ih · Iw holds). An element of S is called superpixel (SP). Basically, the definition of a superpixel does not introduce any new concept. A SP is just a normal pixel which is somehow regarded to be of certain importance. Since it is frequently used term, we decided to introduce it via a definition. It is easy to see that the choice of the set of SPs is crucial for the overall performance. If there are no SPs for a baseline at all, this baseline will be missed. To calculate a suitable set of SPs, we utilize the baseline map B generated by the ARU-Net. In a first step B is binarized Bb = B > b by an element-wise comparison of B with a confidence threshold b. The morphological skeleton Bs = SKE(Bb ) is calculated for Bb following Lantuéjoul’s formula [44]. All foreground pixels (pixels with an intensity of 1) of Bs build an initial set of pixels {p1 , ..., pM }. Its elements are sorted (π : N → N) in descending order w.r.t. their baseline confidences    pπ(1) , ..., pπ(M ) : B(pπ(i) ) ≥ B(pπ(j) ) ⇔ i ≤ j.  (3.12)  Finally, S is set up by iteratively adding pixels of the sorted list of Eq. (3.12) (beginning with the first pixel). To keep the number of SPs small, a new pixel p is added to S only if kp − qk2 > d ∀q ∈ S  (3.13)  holds, otherwise it is skipped. In Fig. 3.6b the set of resulting SPs is shown. These SPs build the basis for the further clustering. Remark 3.3.1. For all experiments, we have chosen fixed values of b = 0.2 (binarization threshold) and 12  (a) Baseline ground truth – The baselines are described by the red dots. For better clarity dots of the same baseline were connected.  (b) Pixel ground truth produced by Alg. 1 – Green encodes the separator class, red the baseline class and black the ”other” class. Figure 3.5: Baseline and pixel ground truth – These are shown for the top snippet of the image of Fig. 3.1.  d = 10 (Eq. (3.13)). These demonstrated to be well suited for a wide range of different scenarios. Hence, they are not regarded as free parameters of the system which have to be further tuned. This also holds for the parameters which are fixed in Rem. 3.3.4 & 3.3.8.  3.3.2. Superpixel State Estimation Assume we can assign each SP to a certain text line. The state of an SP should encode meaningful characteristics of its text line. These characteristics will be defined and combined to build the state. This work is based on previous work of [23, 33], but adapted to the characteristics of SPs extracted given the ARU-Net output, e.g., easier calculation of the local text orientation as well as a different smoothing cost formulation. Definition 3.3.2 (local text orientation). The local text orientation θ of an SP p is the slope of its text line’s baseline at the coordinates closest (w.r.t. the euclidean distance) to p. Definition 3.3.3 (interline distance). The interline distance s of an SP p is the distance of its text line’s baseline to the nearest other baseline. Distance means the distance which is orthogonal to the local text direction of p. Definition 3.3.4 (state). The state of an SP is the pair (θ, s) of its local text orientation and its interline distance. In the following, we will describe a method to estimate the states of all SPs. The local text orientation will be calculated in a straightforward way utilizing solely the baseline image B and local information. 13  (a) ARU-Net output – The estimated baselines B (blue) and separators S (cyan) are shown.  (b) Superpixel and neighborhood system – The calculated SPs (blue) are shown along with the resulting Delaunay neighborhood system N (yellow). Figure 3.6: Baseline detection process – Two intermediate steps are shown for the top snippet of the image of Fig. 3.1.  On the other hand, the estimation of the interline distances combines local information of the text line’s periodicity with the more global assumption that nearby SPs tend to have similar interline distances. For these approaches the concepts of neighborhood and connectivity are mandatory and will be introduced. Definition 3.3.5 (neighborhood system, edge, adjacent). We call a subset N ⊂ S×S neighborhood system. An element of N is called edge and denoted by ep,q . N is not directed (ep,q = eq,p ). Two SPs p, q are adjacent if ep,q ∈ N . ep,q \ p ∈ S denotes the SP q. Remark 3.3.2. In the following the neighborhood system N for a set of SPs is always calculated by Delaunay’s triangulation [45]. Definition 3.3.6 (connectivity function). The line segment g( · ; ep,q ) : [0, 1] → R2 defined by g(τ ; ep,q ) := p + τ (q − p) connects the two pixels p, q of the edge ep,q . The function Γ : N × I → [0, 1] defined by R1 Γ(ep,q , I) =  0  I(g(τ ; ep,q ))dτ kp − qk2  (3.14)  is called connectivity function. I(g(τ ; ep,q )) denotes the intensity of the pixel in I closest (w.r.t the euclidean distance) to the real-valued coordinates g(τ ; ep,q ). The connectivity function calculates the average intensity for a given image along the shortest path connecting two pixels. The local text orientation of each SP is estimated by θp = LTO(p; N , B) utilizing N and the baseline image B, see Alg. 2. The LTO algorithm picks the two neighbors of a SP p with the largest baseline connectivity to p and determines the slope of the line passing through these neighbors. 14  Algorithm 2: Local Text Orientation of p  1 2 3 4 5 6  input : SP p, neighborhood system N , baseline image B output: local text orientation θ of p M ← {eq,r ∈ N | q = p ∨ r = p} L ← sorted list of M B sorted by means of Γ(eq,r , B) if |L| == 1 then eq,r ← L1 B Lk denotes the k-th element of L else eq,r ← (L1 \ p, L2 \ p)   r −q return : θ ← arctan rxy −qy x  The periodicity of text lines in document images is utilized to calculate the interline distances. We determine the interline distance of a SP p by evaluating the regional text-line periodicity around p as follows. For an SP p, a circular region of diameter d ∈ N around p, and a projection direction determined by the local text orientation θp , let p,d d hp,d = (hp,d 1 , ..., hd ) ∈ N  (3.15)  be the projection profile with respect to S, see Fig. 3.7. For the calculation of hp,d , only SPs with a distance to p of less than  d 2  are taken into account.  Remark 3.3.3. The projection profile hp,d can be calculated very efficiently by utilizing the cross product T # » for q ∈ S with kp − qk ≤ d . of the orientation vector o = (cos(θ ), sin(θ )) and the vectors pq p  p  2  2  To extract the regional periodicity inherent in the projection profile hp,d , a Discrete Fourier Transformation (DFT) is applied to hp,d with resulting coefficients   H p,d = H1p,d , ..., Hdp,d ∈ Cd .  (3.16)  A coefficient Hkp,d , k ∈ {1, ..., d} corresponds to the portion of the signal with a period of p,d  signal h  0  . In the simplest case, the index k of the dominant coefficient of H  distance s of p as s =  d k0 .  p,d  d k  to the entire  determines the interline  However, we may be forced to assign a different value to s due to additional  constraints to be discussed in a moment. Therefore, we introduce a data energy value for each possible value  d k  of the interline distance s of p. From energy, we then derive a data cost to be used within a cost  minimization framework for finding the optimal interline distance. Definition 3.3.7 (data energy, data cost). The data energy of SP p and interline distance  15  d k  is given  Figure 3.7: Interline distance estimation – Illustration of several projection profiles for a certain SP (red point). The profiles for different diameters d ∈ {64, 128, 256, 512} and an orientation of 0° are shown in green. The winning period (interline distance) is drawn as yellow curve. In blue a histogram for a wrong orientation (45°) is shown.  by    d = Ep k  Hkp,d H p,d  2 2.  (3.17)  2  The corresponding data cost is calculated by Dp       d d = − log Ep . k k  (3.18)  Remarkably, the data energy is normalized such that it sums (over k) up to 1.0 for arbitrary d ∈ N. To cover a suitable range of different interline distances as well as to be robust against disturbances due to close-by text regions of a different style, the projection profiles and DFTs are calculated for different diameters d ∈ {64, 128, 256, 512} and k ∈ {3, 4, 5}. The choice of the values for d and k is application driven and results in reasonable interline distances (sorted list) of S := (170.7, 128.0, 102.4, 85.3, 64.0, 51.2, 42.7, 32.0, 25.6, 21.3, 16.0, 12.8) .  In the following, we write sp for the assigned interline distance s =  d k  (3.19)  ∈ S of SP p and say p is labeled  with sp . A labeling {sp }p∈S of S assigns an interline distance to each SP of S. Following a greedy labeling strategy by assigning the interline distance with the highest energy defined by Eq. (3.17) to each SP leads to a noisy result, see Fig. 3.8a. To reduce the noise effects, the influence of close-by SPs is taken into account. It is reasonable to expect that neighboring SPs tend to have similar interline distances. This expectation is encoded via a smoothing cost defined for adjacent SPs. Definition 3.3.8 (smoothing cost). For each ep,q ∈ N (and assigned interline distances sp , sq ) the 16  (a) Greedy states – The SP states for a greedy labeling using the highest energy of Eq. (3.17) are shown.  (b) Smoothed states – The SP states for the final labeling after minimizing Eq. (3.21) are shown. Figure 3.8: SPs with their assinged states – The local text orientation of each SP is visualized by the orientation of the green lines (rotated by 90°). The length of the lines encode the interline distance of the corresponding SP.  smoothing cost is defined by  Vp,q (sp , sq ) =    σ  , hsp , sq is ≥ 4,   hsp , sq is  , else.  (3.20)  hsp , sq is is the index difference of sp and sq in the sorted list S of Eq. (3.19), e.g., h16.0, 42.7is = 4. Thus, the smoothing cost Vp,q (sp , sq ) becomes large if interline distances of different size are assigned to adjacent SPs. A maximum cost value of σ is used for huge differences in the interline distances. Setting σ to a large value prevents neighboring SPs to differ to much in their interline distances. Definition 3.3.9 (labeling cost). The labeling cost is given by   X X C {sp }p∈S = αd Dp (sp ) + αs Vp,q (sp , sq ).  (3.21)  ep,q ∈N  p∈S  The data cost and the smoothing costs are weighted by αd and αs , respectively, to form the labeling cost. The graphcut algorithm [46] is utilized to minimize Eq. (3.21). The final labeling is shown in Fig. 3.8b. Remark 3.3.4. For all experiments, we have chosen fixed values of σ = 25, αd = 1 and αs = 1.  3.3.3. Superpixel Clustering In the previous subsections the calculation of SPs and their enrichment with state information was described. In a final step, this state information is utilized to cluster the SPs to build baselines. There  17  will be a one-to-one assignment between clusters and baselines. In the following, we call a set of SPs cluster. In this subsection we formulate the clustering problem and introduce a greedy clustering procedure to solve the problem. Two assumptions which hold for baselines in general constitute the conditions for the clustering problem: (I) Baselines should not exceed a certain curvilinearity value. (II) Within the interline distance of a baseline there are no other baselines. Basically, assumption (I) claims that a baseline can be approximated by a polynomial function of a certain degree, see [23]. Assumption (II) is self-explanatory. Remark 3.3.5. In the following, θ({p1 , ..., pn }) denotes the average orientation and s({p1 , ..., pn }) the average interline distance of all SPs in {p1 , ..., pn }. Definition 3.3.10 (curvilinearity value). Let deg ∈ N and S be a set of SPs. Assume pS,deg (t) ∈ P [t] is the polynomial which solves the linear regression problem in the monomials t0 , t1 , ..., tdeg for the rotated pixels   cos(−θ(S)) S0 =   sin(−θ(S))  − sin(−θ(S)) cos(−θ(S))   ·p  p∈S     ⊂ R2 .  (3.22)    The root-mean-square regression error normalized by s(S) is called curvilinearity value of S and is denoted by cur(S, deg). Remark 3.3.6. We fix deg = 3 and omit it in the following. Def. 3.3.10 allows for an easy evaluation of (I). To test for (II) we will introduce the distance of two clusters. Remarkably, only distances orthogonal to the text orientation should be taken into account. First, the orthogonal component of the distance between two SPs is introduced. Afterwards, this is generalized for two clusters of SPs. Definition 3.3.11 (off-text distance). Given two SPs p, q and an orientation θ, the off-text distance of p and q is the length of the component of p − q ∈ R2 which is orthogonal to θ. It is denoted by kp − qkθ . Remark 3.3.7. The off-text distance can be efficiently calculated by  kp − qkθ = (px − q x ) sin(θ) − py − q y cos(θ) .  18  (3.23)  Calculating the minimal pairwise off-text distance off all SPs of two clusters could result in a cluster distance distorted by SP outliers. Therefore, SPs in each cluster will be projected onto the corresponding regression curve obtained by the regression problem in Def. 3.3.10, before taking pairwise distances. Definition 3.3.12 (regression curve). Let S, S 0 and pS (t) be of Def. 3.3.10. The spatial t-range of S 0 is given by tmin = min{px | p ∈ S 0 } and tmax = max{px | p ∈ S 0 }. A curve cS : [0, 1] → R2 which results from rotating the graph of pS (t) for t ∈ [tmin , tmax ] by θ(S) is called regression curve of S. The SPs in S are projected onto cS (in direction θ(S) + π2 ). The resulting projected SPs are denoted by S c . To achieve robust distance estimates even for curved and differently slanted text lines we focus on SPs of the different clusters which are quite close to each other and furthermore take into account the slope of the regression curve at the specific SP positions instead of averaging over the entire text line. Definition 3.3.13 (cluster distance). Assume two clusters S1 , S2 with regression curves cS1 (t), cS2 (t) and projected SPs S1c , S2c . The cluster distance is defined as d(S1 , S2 ) =  min  p∈S1c ,q∈S2c : kp−qk2 <4·s(S1 ∪S2 )  kp − qkθc (p,q) ,  (3.24)  where θc (p, q) is the average slope of the corresponding regression curves at p and q, respectively. Since, it is now possible to evaluate conditions (I) & (II), we will use this to introduce feasible sets of clusters. For this purpose, we will limit ourselves to partitions (a special kind of cluster sets) and require the baseline clusters to be N -linked. Definition 3.3.14 (partition). Let M be a set. We call a set of subsets {M1 , ..., MN } of M a partition of M iff M = M1 ∪ · · · ∪ MN ∧ Mi 6= ∅ ∀i ∧ Mi ∩ Mj = ∅, i 6= j. The set of all partitions of M is denoted by par(M). Definition 3.3.15 (N -linked). Let S be a cluster and N be a neighborhood system. S is N -linked iff ∀p, q ∈ S ∃p0 , ..., pN ∈ S : p0 = p ∧ pN = q ∧ epi ,pi+1 ∈ N (0 ≤ i ≤ N − 1)  (3.25)  holds. Definition 3.3.16 (feasible). For γ, δ ∈ R+ , L ∈ N, a set of SPs S and a neighborhood system N , we call a set of clusters P = {S0 , ..., SL } feasible iff 1. P ∈ par(S) 2. ∀i > 0 : Si is N -linked 3. conditions (I) and (II) hold: 19  • cur(Si ) < γ  ∀i > 0  • d(Si , Sj ) > δ · max{s(Si ), s(Sj )}  ∀i, j > 0, i 6= j.  The set of feasible sets of clusters is denoted by f easN (S). The clusters Si , i > 0 identify the baselines, S0 constitutes the clutter cluster containing SPs not belonging to any baseline. We identify the baseline corresponding to Si with the polygonal chain of the projected SPs Sic which follow the regression curve cSi (t), see Fig. 3.9. The number L ∈ N of baselines is (a-priori) unknown. In the following, we will incorporate domain knowledge to promote SPs belonging to different baselines not to be N -linked. Hence, clusterings with erroneously connected baselines are not feasible anymore. This is done by a modification of the neighborhood system N . Since baselines of different text orientations should not contribute to the same cluster, we adjust the initial neighborhood system N by removing edges ep,q of SPs with substantially different local orientations: |θp − θq | mod π >  π 4.  In addition, it is an ease to incorporate layout information by further adjusting  N . The layout information encoded by the separator image S (Fig. 3.6a) can be incorporated by taking into account the connectivity of SPs in S. All edges ep,q ∈ N for which a separator is crossed, i.e., Γ(ep,q , S) > η or maxτ S(g(τ ; ep,q )) > 2 · η (g of Def. 3.3.6) holds, are removed, see Fig. 3.9b. Finally, a common scenario is the baseline detection with given text regions. We assume that the text regions are represented by closed polygonal chains R1 , ..., RN . This additional layout information (if available) is easy to integrate. All edges for which @Ri : Ri contains p, q.  (3.26)  holds are removed. Roughly speaking, a closed polygonal chain contains a SP if for all ”ways” from the SP to the image border one have to cross the polygonal chain. Hence, SPs which are part of different nonoverlapping text regions are not N -linked any more. Thus, each baseline Si , i > 0 is entirely contained in one text region for all feasible sets. The resulting neighborhood system is still denoted by N . Remark 3.3.8. For all experiments, we have chosen fixed values of γ = 0.3, δ = 0.5 (Def. 3.3.16) and η = 0.125. After reducing the neighborhood system, we now introduce the total baseline energy. We will assign an energy to all feasible sets and aim for an optimal one. This allows for the formulation of the clustering problem to be solved. Definition 3.3.17 (total baseline energy). Let B be a baseline image, N a neighborhood system and P = {S0 , ..., SL } a set of clusters over S. With N (Si ) = {ep,q ∈ N | p, q ∈ Si } ⊂ N the total baseline  20  (a) Without separator information – The entire neighborhood system (yellow) is shown.  (b) With separator information – The neighborhood system was reduced by removing edges (cyan) with high separator connectivity. The corresponding separator information is illustrated in Fig. 3.6a. Figure 3.9: Influence of the separator information – The resulting baselines (blue lines) with and without taking into account the separator information are shown.  energy is defined by  b(P) =  L X  X  Γ(ep,q , B).  (3.27)  i=1 ep,q ∈N (Si )  Finally, the clustering problem can be formulated as P∗ =  arg max b(P).  (3.28)  P∈f easN (S)  Because there could be a huge number of feasible sets of clusters for large S, we introduce a greedy clustering algorithm to solve Eq. (3.28). The proposed algorithm clusters edges of N instead of clustering SPs. If an edge is assigned to a cluster (set) of edges, we assign both corresponding SPs to the corresponding cluster of SPs. In a first step, the set of edges in N is sorted in decreasing order w.r.t.  1−  kp − qkθ({p,q}) kp − qk2  ! · Γ(ep,q , B).  (3.29)  The sorted list is denoted by N . Eq. (3.29) takes into account the B-connectivity value of an edge and discounts it if ep,q is rather orthogonal to θ({p, q}). Discounted edges are less likely part of a baseline and are therefore sorted to the end of the list. This avoids that these edges are falsely assigned to baseline clusters which are composed of just a few correct edges (statistics of the cluster are not reliable, yet). Given S and N , the proposed clustering process is shown in Alg. 3.  21  Algorithm 3: SP Clustering  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18  input : Set of SPs S and sorted list of edges N output: optimized partition P ∗ S0 ← S, P ∗ ← {S0 }, n ← 0 while |N | = 6 n do n ← |N | for ep,q ∈ N do B Four possible cases dependent on the SPs if ∃i > 0 : p, q ∈ Si then B Case 1: add edge to existing cluster! N ← N \ {ep,q } else if p, q ∈ S0 then B Case 2: create new cluster? if kp − qkθ({p,q}) < δ · s({p, q}) then B γ, δ of Rem. 3.3.8 N ← N \ {ep,q }, S|P ∗ | ← {p, q}, S0 ← S0 \ S|P ∗ | P ∗ ← P ∗ ∪ {S|P ∗ | } else if w.l.o.g. p ∈ S0 ∧ ∃i > 0 : q ∈ Si then B Case 3: if cur(Si ∪ {p}) < γ ∧ d(Si , {p}) < δ · s(Si ) then if d(Si ∪ {p}, Sj ) > δ · s(Sj ) ∀j 6= i, j > 0 then N ← N \ {ep,q }, Si ← Si ∪ {p}, S0 ← S0 \ {p}  extend cluster Si ?  else if ∃i, j > 0 (i 6= j) : p ∈ Si ∧ q ∈ Sj then B Case 4: merge clusters Si , Sj ? if cur(Si ∪ Sj ) < γ ∧ d(Si , Sj ) < δ · min (s(Si ), s(Sj )) then N ← N \ {ep,q }, Si ← Si ∪ Sj P ∗ ← P ∗ \ {Sj } return : P ∗  4. Experiments The experiment section is divided into 4 subsections. First, we investigate the influence of the training set size as well as the influence of different data augmentation strategies. This is followed by an investigation of the performance of the proposed method if it is applied to images with curved or arbitrarily oriented text lines. The third subsection presents and compares results of different versions of our proposed NPL architectures on the very heterogeneous and challenging cBAD dataset [25, 26]. We perform statistical tests to show the statistical significance of the stated conclusion – the superiority of the proposed ARU-Net in a two-stage workflow over other architectures and a single-stage workflow. Finally, we compare the proposed method against other state-of-the-art methods on the datasets of 3 recently hosted competitions. As mentioned in Sec. 3 we will follow the similarity score of [25] (F-value) to measure the quality of the baseline detection. The configuration for all experiments including the hyperparameters of the network architecture as well as the training are summarized in Tab. 4.1. This configuration is the result of an extensive search in the hyperparameter space and results in impressive results for various scenarios/datasets. Since no early stopping based on the loss for any validation set is used, we train on the entire training set. The ARU-Net workflow for training and inference (Tensorflow code) as well as a trained network  22  Table 4.1: Hyperparameters – The architecture and training configuration which were used in this work are described.  Image pre-processing: input image I is downscaled by a factor of 2 for max{Ih , Iw } < 2000, 3 for 2000 ≤ max{Ih , Iw } < 4800 or 4 followed by a normalization to mean 0 and variance 1 (on pixel intensity level) RU-Net architecture, see Fig. 3.2 & 3.3: number of scale spaces: 6, initial feature depth: 8, residual depth (activated layers in a residual block): 3, feature increasing and spatial decreasing factor: 2, activation function: ReLu, kernel size: 3 × 3, stride: 1 A-Net architecture: 4 layer CNN, activation function: ReLu, kernel size: 4×4, stride: 1, maxpooling of size 2 × 2 after each convolution, feature number: 12, 16, 32, 1 ARU-Net architecture, see Fig. 3.4: number of image scales: 5, classifier: 4 × 4 convolution layer with softmax activation Training: weight initialization: Xavier, optimizer: RMSprop, learning rate: 0.001, learning rate decay per epoch: 0.985, weight decay on the L2 norm: 0.0005, exponential moving average on the model weights: 0.9995, mini batch size: 1 (due to memory limitations of the GPU), early stopping: none (trained for a fixed number of epochs) are freely available4 . The ARU-Net training takes 3 h to 24 h from scratch (dependent on the number of epochs and samples per epoch) on a Titan X GPU. The inference time per image ranges from 2 s to 12 s per image on a dual core laptop (Intel Core i7-6600U with 16GiB RAM), this reduces to 0.5 s to 2 s running the ARU-Net on the Titan X. 4.1. Influence of Training Sample Number and Data Augmentation A major drawback of state-of-the-art approaches (Sec. 2) is the need for an extensive expert tuning if confronted with scenarios which are not already covered. But the eligibility for an usage at industrial scale depends on the possibility to easily adapt at reasonable cost. For approaches relying on machine learning, this reduces to two questions: • What about the amount of ground truth needed? • What about the effort of ground truth production? Concerning the second question, we refer to Alg. 1. The annotation of baselines for a document image is quite easy and does not need remarkable expert knowledge compared to, e.g., ground truth production for ATR systems for historical handwritings or even the text line annotation at surrounding polygon level. The effort is reduced to several minutes per page by using platforms such as Transkribus5 . In the following, we want to examine the first question. The influence of training dataset size along with different data augmentation strategies is investigated for the freely available Bozen dataset6 [24], see Fig. A.1. This dataset is a subset of documents from the 4 https://github.com/TobiasGruening/ARU-Net 5 https://transkribus.eu 6 https://zenodo.org/record/218236  23  Ratsprotokolle collection of Bozen composed of minutes of the council meetings held from 1470 to 1805 and consists of 400 pages. It is written in Early Modern German. Baseline ground truth information is available in form of PAGE7 XML. The dataset is quite challenging concerning layout analysis issues. Most of the pages consist of a single main text region with many difficulties for line detection and extraction, e.g., bleed through, touching text lines and marginalia. For the following experiments, we have randomly divided the Bozen set in a set of training samples T of size 350 and a test set of size 50. In a first step, we randomly set up a chain of subsets of T T1 ⊂ T3 ⊂ T5 ⊂ T10 ⊂ T30 ⊂ T50 ⊂ T100 ⊂ T200 ⊂ T350 ,  (4.1)  where Ti contains i training samples (pages and pixel ground truth). Since we expect an influence of the choice of training samples (= sorting of T ), we repeat the mentioned procedure 4 times. Notably, the test set remains untouched. Finally, we got 45 training sets – five of each quantity. For each set, we trained the RU-Net for 100 epochs with 256 images per epoch. Therefore, we randomly choose samples of the training set and remove them from the set. If each element of the training set was used for training once, we start again with the initial training set. Hence, it does not matter whether the number of training samples per epoch exceeds the size of the training set or not. This procedure guarantees the same amount of training samples shown to the networks in training independent of the size of the training set. The RU-Net was chosen instead of the ARU-Net, because of the homogeneity of the Bozen dataset concerning font size and resolution. We trained the RU-Net from scratch on all 45 sets in 4 different scenarios. For training purposes the image pre-processing mentioned in Tab. 4.1 is disabled. Instead, the training samples (I, GI )i are pre-processed following one of the four strategies: 1. subsampled by a constant factor of 3 (no further data augmentation - one training sample per element of the training set) – B 2. randomly subsampled by a factor s ∈ [2, 5] – S 3. S + random affine transformation (three corner points of the image are randomly shifted within a circle of diameter 0.025 · max(Ih , Iw ) around there original position) – S + A 4. S + A + elastic transformation [47] – S + A + E For the test set the images were sub-sampled by the constant factor of 3 in all scenarios. The results of these 180 experiments are shown in Fig. 4.1. One can see that all 3 data augmentation strategies significantly improve the performance compared to the base (B) strategy. Notably, for small numbers of training samples the min-max difference is much larger than for higher number of training samples. Hence, 7 http://www.primaresearch.org/tools  24  B  S  S+A  S+A+E  F-Value on Test Set  1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 1  3  5  10 30 50 Number of Training Samples  100  200  350  Figure 4.1: Influence of the number of training samples and of different data augmentation strategies – The bar height represents the mean F-value. The error bars encode min-max values of the 5 experiments (not the standard deviation). The dashed green line marks the maximum mean value of 0.975 achieved for 350 trainings samples. For a description of the different augemantation strategies: B, S, S+A and S+A+E, see main text.  if just a few training samples are available, the choice of these is of importance. The best mean F-value (0.975) is achieved for all 350 training samples with the S + A + E strategy. Nevertheless, there only is a negligible loss in performance for 200 or 100 training samples. Even for 30 training samples, a F-value of 0.963 is achieved for the S+A strategy, which is sufficient for most applications, see Fig. A.1. This results in a quite acceptable effort for ground truth production making the presented approach interesting even for industrial production. The S + A data augmentation strategy will be the default for the rest of this work. Of course, the presented numbers are not directly transferable to collections with pages of entirely different scenarios, e.g., census tables mixed with postal cards mixed with ... . One would expect that more than 30 training samples are necessary for this kind of scenario. Nevertheless, the presented experiment reflects a common situation: One has a robust baseline detector which was trained on very heterogeneous data (see Sec. 4.4.3), but this detector does not work satisfyingly well for a certain (in most cases quite homogeneous) collection. The numbers presented here give a hint concerning the effort of ground truth production necessary in this scenario. 4.2. Curved and Oriented Text Lines In this subsection, we demonstrate the ability of the introduced approach to handle curved or arbitrarily oriented text lines. In a first experiment, the test set of the Bozen dataset was deformed to contain arbitrarily curved text lines. For this purpose, we utilized trigonometric functions with random period to simulate curved text lines in the test phase, see Fig. A.2. The RU-Net was trained (5 times) for 100 epochs with 256 samples per epoch on the Bozen training set using the S + A + E augmentation strategy with  25  strong elastic deformations. We choose elastic transformations in training, because they simulate curves of different amplitudes and frequencies in the same image. Furthermore, we increased the polynomial degree (Def. 3.3.10) to 5 to enable the system to handle the curvatures present in the test set. Remark 4.2.1. Different methods were used to deform the images during training and test phases. Hence, the system had to learn the concept of curved text lines instead of an inversion of the image degradation method used in the training phase. In a second experiment, we have trained an RU-Net (5 times) on arbitrarily oriented samples of the Bozen training set and evaluated the resulting networks on oriented pages of the test set. The results are shown in Tab. 4.2 and a few sample images are shown in Fig. A.2. For the curved scenario the results are as good as for the base scenario. In case of the oriented scenario the results are slightly worse, but still excellent. This demonstrates the applicability for images with curved or oriented text lines without remarkable adaptation of the workflow. Finally, we have trained five models with all degradations (affine, elastic, rotation) and evaluated this model on the three different scenarios. The corresponding F-values are depicted in Tab. 4.2. The system is worse than the experts for the base and curved scenarios, but for the oriented scenario it even benefits from the additional elastic transformations. Table 4.2: Results for the Bozen test set – The results in the Base, Curved and Oriented scenario are depicted. The Pand R-values are strongly related to the well known precision and recall measures, see [25]. Finally, the results for a single system trained with all degradations are shown.  Scenario  ∅ P-Val  ∅ R-Val  ∅ F-val [min,max]  Base  0.9765  0.9734  0.9750 [0.9693, 0.9770]  Curved  0.9802  0.9690  0.9745 [0.9725, 0.9760]  Oriented  0.9625  0.9655  0.9640 [0.9582, 0.9674]  ∅ F-val (Base)  ∅ F-val (Curved)  ∅ F-val (Oriented)  0.9531  0.9573  0.9676  Combined  4.3. U-Net vs. ARU-Net vs. Single-Stage Workflow In Sec. 3, we have introduced the ARU-Net in a two-stage workflow. In this section, we will investigate its superiority over the classical U-Net as well as over a ”single-stage” workflow. For this purpose we have trained the U-, RU-, ARU- and LARU-Net (each 5 times – random weight initialization and random training sample order) on the recently introduced cBAD dataset8 [26]. The LARU-Net is an ARU-Net with a separable MDLSTM9 layer at the lowest resolution to incorporate full spatial context. The details of the dataset are described in [25]. In our opinion, this is the most challenging freely available dataset at 8 https://zenodo.org/record/257972 9A  separable MDLSTM layer is a concatenation of two (x- and y-direction) BLSTM layers  26  Table 4.3: Results for the cBAD test set – The results for different neural network architectures and the workflow without Stage II (for the ARU-Net) are shown. Each architecture is trained 5 times on the cBAD train set. The results are sorted with respect to computational effort. The last two columns indicate whether an architecture is superior to all before mentioned ones in terms of disjunct confidence intervals and the Tukey-Duckworth test.  Method  ∅ F-val [95% CI] Simple Track  Complex Track  ARU I†  0.9627 [0.9615, 0.9636]  0.9081 [0.9071, 0.9095]  CI  T-D  U  0.9714 [0.9701, 0.9721]  0.9114 [0.9107, 0.9122]  3  3  RU  0.9756 [0.9744, 0.9766]  0.9182 [0.9165, 0.9203]  3  3  ARU  0.9781 [0.9772, 0.9789]  0.9223 [0.9214, 0.9230]  3  3  LARU  0.9772 [0.9765, 0.9780]  0.9233 [0.9217, 0.9249]  7  7  †  single-stage workflow – baseline estimation by basic image processing methods (binarization of B followed by a CC analysis, no usage of S)  the moment. We have trained each network for 250 epochs, 1024 training samples each epoch using the S + A data augmentation strategy. To assure the statistical significance of the posed superiority of the newly introduced architecture, we follow [48] and provide the results of a statistical analysis. The choice of appropriate statistical tests is quite limited since we can’t make any assumptions regarding the underlying distribution. We utilize 95% confidence intervals (CI) provided by non-parametric bootstrapping [49] as well as the Tukey-Duckworth test (level of significance: 5%) [50]. The results obtained are summarized in Tab. 4.3. The ARU-Net performs significantly (last two columns) better than all architectures with less computational effort. The LARU-Net could not prove its superiority and is therefore dismissed. Furthermore, the results show that the introduction of the second stage is beneficial for the overall performance. Hence, the ARU-Net together with the two-stage workflow has shown its superiority (which is statistically significant) over the other systems and is used in the following. It has to be mentioned that the above comparison is not fair concerning the number of trainable parameters – U - 2.16, RU 4.13, ARU - 4.14, LARU - 6.25 (in millions) – nor concerning the training or even inference time. The comparison is about different architectures which, theoretically, have different capabilities, and whether they make good use of them or not. For instance, the LARU-Net should be capable of incorporating a more detailed spatial context, but in fact it does not benefit (in our settings) from this capability. 4.4. Comparison against the State of the Art In this subsection, we compare the proposed framework against the state of the art. We have chosen the 3 most recent competitions on text line detection for historical documents, namely: ICDAR 2015 competition on text line detection in historical documents [14], ICDAR2017 Competition on Layout Analysis for Challenging Medieval Manuscripts (Task 2) [51] and cBAD: ICDAR2017 Competition on Baseline Detection [37]. We will not further introduce the datasets or metrics used and refer to the competition papers.  27  4.4.1. ICDAR 2015 Competition on Text Line Detection in Historical Documents (ANDAR-TL) The ARU-Net was trained on the cBAD training set10 . This competition aims at the origin point (OP) detection. An OP is roughly spoken the lower left ”corner” of a text line. Hence, we calculate the left most point of each detected baseline. This is the output of our system for this competition. The achieved results are shown in Tab. 4.4. Since the ARU-Net was not trained on the original training data, it is hard to compare its results to the other ones. Nevertheless, we would like to stress the fact, that trained systems usually perform better if training set and test set are sampled from the same distribution. E.g., the ARU-Net trained on the cBAD training set achieves an average F-value of 0.9605 for the Bozen test set, which is worse than the F-vlaue of 0.9750 of the system trained solely on the Bozen training set, see Tab. 4.2. This indicates (but does not prove) the superiority of the presented method over the other methods in Tab. 4.4. Table 4.4: Origing Point (OP) detection results for the ANDAR-TL test set – Results for the dataset of [14] are shown. #DF means the number of detection failures (no OP detected by the system), #DM means the number of detection misses (detected OP far away from the ground truth OP) and #FP means the number of false positives  Method  #HYP  #COR  #DF  #DM  #FP  avg. cost  UNIFR  9301  2578  3022  6456  267  19.00  IA-2  11789  5655  407  6032  102  14.51  A2iA-3†  8967  6523  2490  2263  181  13.20  SNU[32]  10466  7741  948  2700  25  9.77  [33]  10896  8015  517  2860  21  8.19  proposed  11635  9610  358  1942  83  5.39  †  According to [28] this is an extension of [34].  4.4.2. ICDAR2017 Competition on Layout Analysis for Challenging Medieval Manuscripts (Task 2) The ARU-Net was trained for 250 epochs 1024 samples per epoch on the competition training data11 provided by the competition organizers. This allows an entirely fair comparison to the participant’s results, see Tab. 4.5. The proposed method substantially outperforms the winning one and reduces the error (the gap to 1.0) by 43.26% (relatively). The specialty of this competition was, that the methods should focus on a special kind of text, e.g., comments were not annotated as text. Hence, the ARU-Net had to learn to distinguish between different types of text. The output of the ARU-Net and the detected baselines for a sample image of the CSG18 subset of the test set are shown in Fig. 4.2. One can see, that the ARU-Net entirely ignores all text entities not regarded (in this competition) as main text. Remarkably, no further information besides the input image is provided to the ARU-Net. 10 The  competition training data was not available to the authors.  11 http://diuf.unifr.ch/main/hisdoc/diva-hisdb  28  Table 4.5: Results for the ICDAR2017 Competition on Layout Analysis for Challenging Medieval Manuscripts – The F-values for Task 2 of all participants and the proposed method are shown for the different subsets of the test set.  Method  CB55  CSG18  CSG863  overall  CVML  0.9534  0.8734  0.9751  0.9340  BYU  0.9597  0.9879  0.9830  0.9768  CITlab  0.9896  0.9853  0.9716  0.9822  proposed  0.9980  0.9828  0.9889  0.9899  Figure 4.2: Results for an image of the CSG18 subset of the test set – The original image (only the main text lines were ground truthed), the baseline image generated by the trained ARU-Net and the baselines detected by the proposed method are shown (from left to right).  4.4.3. cBAD: ICDAR2017 Competition on Baseline Detection We compare our average result for the ARU-Net (see Tab. 4.3) to the results presented in [37], see Tab. 4.6. Our method performs considerably better in both tracks compared to all submissions. Especially, the increase in performance for the complex track is massive. Remarkably, the winning team uses an UNet based system with task specific pre- and postprocessing. This indicates that the newly introduced concepts and parametrization, which are presented in this work, significantly improve the capability of the classical U-Net. Some results on chosen images of the cBAD test set are shown in Fig. A.3-A.5. Notably, no further information besides the input image (and the text region information in the simple track) is provided to the ARU-Net nor to the second stage of the workflow during inference.  5. Conclusion In this work we presented a machine learning based method for text line detection in historical documents. The text lines are represented by their baselines. The problem and the proposed method were 29  Table 4.6: Results for the cBAD test set – The P-, R- and F-values of all participants and of the proposed method for the simple and complex track of the cBAD: ICDAR2017 Competition on Baseline Detection are shown.  Method  Simple Track  Complex Track  P-Val  R-Val  F-val  P-Val  R-Val  F-val  LITIS  0.780  0.836  0.807  –  –  –  IRISA†  0.883  0.877  0.880  0.692  0.772  0.730  UPVLC  0.937  0.855  0.894  0.833  0.606  0.702  BYU  0.878  0.907  0.892  0.773  0.820  0.796  DMRZ  0.973  0.970  0.971  0.854  0.863  0.859  proposed  0.977  0.980  0.978  0.926  0.918  0.922  †  This method is based on the work presented in [16].  introduced thoroughly. The proposed ARU-Net, which is a universal pixel labeling approach, was trained to predict the baseline position and the beginning and end of each text line. This enables the system to handle documents with complex layouts, e.g., tables, marginalia, multi columns layouts. We have shown that the system can be trained from scratch with manageably few training samples for a complex but homogeneous collection. Remarkably, ground truth production is quite cheap. A ground truth sample is just a page with annotated baselines, which can be done in a few minutes per page. Therefore, one can expect that an adaptation on collections, which are not covered by the neural network, is possible with quite reasonable ground truthing effort. The applicability of the proposed method was shown for straight, curved and oriented text lines as well as for a combined scenario. The superiority of the proposed ARU-Net in the two-stage workflow over the classical U-Net and over a simplified workflow was shown and statistically verified. Finally, we showed that the proposed method substantially outperforms the previous state of the art. Nevertheless, as one can see in Fig. A.3-A.5 there are still errors made by the system, e.g., missed baselines (see Fig. A.4 – bottom right), segmentation errors (see Fig. A.5 – bottom left), false positives (see Fig. A.3 – top left) or problems with strongly degraded documents (see Fig. A.4 – top left). But these errors do not seem to follow a certain deterministic principle, which is not surprising for a method based on machine learning. However, we plan to test newly introduced concepts like capsules, memory augmentation and deeply supervised networks to further improve the system’s performance.  Acknowledgement NVIDIA Corporation kindly donated a Titan X GPU used for this research. This work was partially funded by the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 674943 (READ Recognition and Enrichment of Archival Documents). Finally, we would like to thank Udo Siewert for his valuable comments and suggestions.  30  References References [1] A. Isaac, R. Clayphan, B. Haslhofer, Europeana: Moving to linked open data, Information Standards Quarterly 24 (2/3). [2] T. Causer, V. Wallace, Building a volunteer community: Results and findings from transcribe bentham, Digital Humanities Quarterley 6 (2) (2012) 1–28. [3] J. A. Sánchez, G. Mühlberger, B. Gatos, P. Schofield, K. Depuydt, R. M. Davis, E. Vidal, J. de Does, tranScriptorium: a european project on handwritten text recognition, in: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM symposium on Document engineering, ACM, 2013, pp. 227–228. [4] A. Graves, J. Schmidhuber, Offline handwriting recognition with multidimensional recurrent neural networks, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21, NIPS’21 (2008) 545–552. [5] G. Leifert, T. Strauß, T. Grüning, W. Wustlich, R. Labahn, Cells in multidimensional recurrent neural networks, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 17 (1) (2016) 3313–3349. [6] J. Puigcerver, A. H. Toselli, E. Vidal, Word-graph and character-lattice combination for kws in handwritten documents, in: 2014 14th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, IEEE, 2014, pp. 181–186. [7] T. Strauß, T. Grüning, G. Leifert, R. Labahn, CITlab ARGUS for Keyword Search in Historical Handwritten Documents: Description of CITlab’s System for the ImageCLEF 2016 Handwritten Scanned Document Retrieval Task, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, Évora, Portugal, 2016. [8] T. Strauß, G. Leifert, T. Grüning, R. Labahn, Regular expressions for decoding of neural network outputs, Neural Networks 79 (2016) 1–11. [9] J. A. Sanchez, V. Romero, A. H. Toselli, E. Vidal, ICFHR2014 Competition on Handwritten Text Recognition on Transcriptorium Datasets (HTRtS), in: Proceedings of International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, ICFHR, Vol. 2014-Decem, IEEE, 2014, pp. 785–790. [10] I. Pratikakis, K. Zagoris, J. Puigcerver, A. H. Toselli, E. Vidal, ICFHR2016 Handwritten Keyword Spotting Competition ( H-KWS 2016 ), in: Proceedings of International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, ICFHR, IEEE, 2016, pp. 613–618. [11] M. Rusiñol, D. Aldavert, R. Toledo, J. Lladós, Efficient segmentation-free keyword spotting in historical document collections, Pattern Recognition 48 (2) (2015) 545–555. [12] T. Bluche, Joint line segmentation and transcription for end-to-end handwritten paragraph recognition, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2016) 838–846. [13] T. Konidaris, A. L. Kesidis, B. Gatos, A segmentation-free word spotting method for historical printed documents, Pattern Analysis and Applications 19 (4) (2016) 963–976. [14] M. Murdock, S. Reid, B. Hamilton, J. Reese, ICDAR 2015 competition on text line detection in historical documents, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, Vol. 2015-Novem, IEEE, 2015, pp. 1171–1175. [15] S. Sudholt, G. A. Fink, Phocnet : A deep convolutional neural network for word spotting in handwritten documents, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, ICFHR, 2016, pp. 1–6. [16] G. Renton, C. Chatelain, S. Adam, C. Kermorvant, T. Paquet, Handwritten text line segmentation using Fully Convolutional Network, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, 2017, pp. 5–9. 31  [17] N. Arvanitopoulos, S. Süsstrunk, Seam Carving for Text Line Extraction on Color and Grayscale Historical Manuscripts, International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR) (2014) 726 – 731. [18] Q. N. Vo, S. H. Kim, H. J. Yang, G. Lee, Binarization of degraded document images based on hierarchical deep supervised network, Pattern Recogn. 74 (2018) 568–586. [19] C. Tensmeyer, B. Davis, C. Wigington, I. Lee, B. Barrett, PageNet: Page Boundary Extraction in Historical Handwritten Documents, in: Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Historical Document Imaging and Processing, HIP ’1, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 59–64. [20] K. Chen, M. Seuret, J. Hennebert, R. Ingold, Convolutional Neural Networks for Page Segmentation of Historical Document Images, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, 2017, pp. 965–970. [21] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation, Miccai (2015) 234–241. [22] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778. [23] J. Ryu, H. I. Koo, N. I. Cho, Language-independent text-line extraction algorithm for handwritten documents, IEEE Signal Processing Letters 21 (9) (2014) 1115–1119. [24] J. A. Sánchez, V. Romero, A. H. Toselli, E. Vidal, READ dataset Bozen (2016). doi:10.5281/ zenodo.218236. [25] T. Grüning, R. Labahn, M. Diem, F. Kleber, S. Fiel, READ-BAD: A New Dataset and Evaluation Scheme for Baseline Detection in Archival Documents, arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03311. [26] M. Diem, F. Kleber, S. Fiel, T. Grüning, B. Gatos, ScriptNet: ICDAR 2017 Competition on Baseline Detection in Archival Documents (cBAD) (2017). doi:10.5281/zenodo.257972. [27] A. Zahour, L. Likforman-Sulem, W. Boussalaa, B. Taconet, Text Line segmentation of historical Arabic documents, Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR 1 (2-4) (2007) 138–142. [28] S. Eskenazi, P. Gomez-Krämer, J.-M. Ogier, A comprehensive survey of mostly textual document segmentation algorithms since 2008, Pattern Recognition 64 (2017) 1–14. [29] A. Nicolaou, B. Gatos, Handwritten text line segmentation by shredding text into its lines, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, 2009, pp. 626–630. [30] R. Saabni, A. Asi, J. El-Sana, Text line extraction for historical document images, Pattern Recognition Letters 35 (1) (2014) 23–33. [31] A. Garz, A. Fischer, R. Sablatnig, H. Bunke, Binarization-free text line segmentation for historical documents based on interest point clustering, in: Proceedings - 10th IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems, DAS 2012, IEEE, 2012, pp. 95–99. [32] B. Ahn, J. Ryu, H. I. Koo, N. I. Cho, Textline detection in degraded historical document images, EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing 2017 (1) (2017) 82. [33] T. Grüning, G. Leifert, T. Strauß, R. Labahn, A Robust and Binarization-Free Approach for Text Line Detection in Historical Documents, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, 2017, pp. 236–241.  32  [34] B. Moysset, C. Kermorvant, C. Wolf, J. Louradour, Paragraph text segmentation into lines with Recurrent Neural Networks, Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR 2015-Novem (2015) 456–460. [35] B. Moysset, J. Louradour, C. Kermorvant, C. Wolf, Learning text-line localization with shared and local regression neural networks, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, ICFHR, 2017, pp. 1–6. [36] B. Moysset, C. Kermorvant, C. Wolf, Full-Page Text Recognition: Learning Where to Start and When to Stop, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, 2017, pp. 871–876. [37] M. Diem, F. Kleber, S. Fiel, B. Gatos, T. Grüning, cBAD: ICDAR2017 Competition on Baseline Detection, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, 2017, pp. 1355–1360. [38] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, T. Darrell, Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Vol. 07-12-June, 2015, pp. 3431–3440. [39] H. Noh, S. Hong, B. Han, Learning deconvolution network for semantic segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, Vol. 2015 Inter, 2015, pp. 1520–1528. [40] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, R. J. Williams, Learning representations by back-propagating errors, Nature 323 (6088) (1986) 533–536. [41] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, Deep Learning, MIT Press, 2016. [42] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, P. Haffner, Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition, Proceedings of the IEEE 86 (11) (1998) 2278–2323. [43] X. Glorot, Y. Bengio, Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks, in: Y. W. Teh, M. Titterington (Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Vol. 9 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2010, pp. 249–256. [44] J. Serra, Image Analysis and Mathematical Morphology, Vol. 1, 1982. [45] B. Delaunay, Sur la sphere vide, Bulletin de l’Académie des Sciences de l’URSS 6 (1934) 793–800. [46] Y. Boykov, O. Veksler, R. Zabih, Fast approximate energy minimization via graph cuts, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 23 (11) (2001) 1222–1239. [47] P. Simard, D. Steinkraus, J. C. Platt, Best Practices for Convolutional Neural Networks Applied to Visual Document Analysis, Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (2003) 958–963. [48] J. Puigcerver, Are Multidimensional Recurrent Layers Really Necessary for Handwritten Text Recognition?, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, 2017, pp. 67–72. [49] B. Efron, Better bootstrap confidence intervals, Journal of the American Statistical Association 82 (397) (1987) 171–185. [50] J. W. Tukey, A Quick Compact Two Sample Test To Duckworth’s Specifications, Technometrics 1 (1) (1959) 31–48. [51] F. Simistira, M. Bouillon, M. Seuret, M. Würsch, M. Alberti, R. Ingold, M. Liwicki, ICDAR2017 Competition on Layout Analysis for Challenging Medieval Manuscripts, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, 2017, pp. 1361–1370. 33  Figure A.1: Results for an image of the Bozen test set – Results for RU-Nets trained on 5, 30 and 350 training samples (left to right) with different data augmentation strategies B, S+A and S+A+E (top to bottom) are shown.  34  Figure A.2: Results for an image of the Bozen test set – Results for two “degraded” images are shown. The images were arbitrarily curved and rotated.  35  Figure A.3: Results for images of the cBAD test set – Only the images without any layout information were used.  36  Figure A.4: Results for images of the cBAD test set – Only the images without any layout information were used.  37  Figure A.5: Results for images of the cBAD test set – Only the images without any layout information were used.  38

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
