Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_1374

Abstract:
Faster gaze prediction with dense networks and Fisher pruning Iryna Korshunova Alykhan Tejani Ferenc Huszár Twitter {ltheis,ikorshunova,atejani,fshuzar}@twitter.com  arXiv:1801.05787v1 [cs.CV] 17 Jan 2018  Lucas Theis  Abstract  knowledge distillation [10] and pruning, we show that stateof-the-art performance can be achieved with a much faster architecture, achieving a 10x speedup for the same AUC performance. Secondly, we provide a principled derivation for the pruning method of Molchanov et al. [24], extend it, and show that our extension works well when applied to gaze prediction.  Predicting human fixations from images has recently seen large improvements by leveraging deep representations which were pretrained for object recognition. However, as we show in this paper, these networks are highly overparameterized for the task of fixation prediction. We first present a simple yet principled greedy pruning method which we call Fisher pruning. Through a combination of knowledge distillation and Fisher pruning, we obtain much more runtime-efficient architectures for saliency prediction, achieving a 10x speedup for the same AUC performance as a state of the art network on the CAT2000 dataset. Speeding up single-image gaze prediction is important for many real-world applications, but it is also a crucial step in the development of video saliency models, where the amount of data to be processed is substantially larger.  2. Fast gaze prediction models Our models build on the recent state-of-the-art model DeepGaze II [20], which we first review before discussing our approach to speeding it up. The backbone of DeepGaze II is formed by VGG-19 [28], a deep neural network pre-trained for object recognition. Feature maps are extracted from several of the top layers, upsampled, and concatenated. A readout network with 1 × 1 convolutions and ReLU nonlinearities [25] takes in these feature maps and produces a single output channel, implementing a point-wise nonlinearity. This output is then blurred with a Gaussian filter, Gσ , followed by the addition of a center bias to take into account the tendencies of observers to fixate on pixels near the image center. This center bias is computed as the marginal log-probability of a fixation landing on a given pixel, log Q(x, y), and is dataset dependent. Finally, a softmax operation is applied to produce a normalized probability distribution over fixation locations, or saliency map:  1. Introduction The ability to predict the gaze of humans has many applications in computer vision and related fields. It has been used for image cropping [1], improving video compression [6], and as a tool to optimize user interfaces [31], for instance. In psychology, gaze prediction models are used to shed light on how the brain might process sensory information [17]. Recently, due to advances in deep learning, human gaze prediction has received large performance gains. In particular, reusing image representations trained for the task of object recognition have proven to be very useful [19, 20]. However, these networks are relatively slow to evaluate while many real-world applications require highly efficient predictions. For example, popular websites often deal with large amounts of images which need to be processed in a short amount of time using only CPUs. Similarly, improving video encoding with gaze prediction maps requires the processing of large volumes of data in near realtime. In this paper we explore the trade-off between computational complexity and gaze prediction performance. Our contributions are two-fold: First, using a combination of  Q(x, y | I) ∝ exp (R(U (F (I))) ∗ Gσ + log Q(x, y)) (1) Here, I is the input image, F extracts feature maps, U bilinearly upsamples the feature maps and R is the readout network. To improve efficiency, we made some minor modifications in our reimplementation of DeepGaze II. We first applied the readout network and then bilinearly upsampled the one-dimensional output of the readout network, instead of upsampling the high-dimensional feature maps. We also used separable filters for the Gaussian blur. To make sure the size of the saliency map matches the size of the input image, we upsample and crop the output before applying the softmax operation. 1  We use two basic alternative architectures providing different trade-offs between computational efficiency and performance. First, instead of VGG-19, we use the faster VGG-11 architecture [28]. As we will see, the performance lost by using a smaller network can for the most part be compensated by fine-tuning the feature map representations instead of using fixed pre-trained representations. Second, we try DenseNet-121 [11] as a feature extractor. DenseNets have been shown to be more efficient, both computationally and in terms of parameter efficiency, when compared to state-of-the-art networks in the object recognition task [11]. Even when starting from these more parameter efficient pre-trained models, the resulting gaze prediction networks remain highly over-parametrized for the task at hand. To further decrease the number of parameters we turn to pruning: greedy removal of redundant parameters or feature maps. In the following section we derive a simple, yet principled, method for greedy network pruning which we call Fisher pruning.  the approximation " Hkk ≈ EP  ∆k =  (2)  where I are inputs, z are outputs, and the expectation is taken with respect to some data distribution P . We first consider pruning single parameters θk . For any change in parameters d, we can approximate the corresponding change in loss with a 2nd order approximation around the current parameter value θ: H = ∇2 L(θ), 1 L(θ + d) − L(θ) ≈ g> d + d> Hd 2  N 1 2X 2 θk g , 2N n=1 nk  ãnkij = mk ankij .  (6)  (7)  (8)  The gradient of the loss for the nth datapoint with respect to mk is X ∂ gnk = − ankij log Q(zn | In ) (9) ∂ankij ij  (3)  P 2 1 and the pruning signal is therefore ∆k = 2N n gnk , since m2k = 1 before pruning. The gradient with respect to the activations is available during the backward pass of computing the network’s gradient and the pruning signal can therefore be computed at little extra computational cost. We note that this pruning signal is very similar to the one used by Molchanov et al. [24] – which uses absolute gradients instead of squared gradients and a certain normalization of the pruning signal – but our derivation provides a more principled motivation. An alternative derivation which does not require P and Q to be close is provided in Supplementary Section 2.  (4)  Following this approximation, dropping the kth parameter (setting θk = 0) would lead to the following increase in loss: 1 L(θ − θk ek ) − L(θ) ≈ −gk θk + Hkk θk2 , 2  ,  where gn is the gradient of the parameters with respect to the nth data point. In what follows, we are going to use this as a pruning signal to greedily remove parameters one-byone where this estimated increase in loss is smallest. For convolutional architectures, it makes sense to prune entire feature maps rather than pruning individual parameters. Let ankij be the activation of the kth feature map at spatial location i, j for the nth datapoint. Let us also introduce a binary mask m ∈ {0, 1}K into the network which modifies the activations ankij of each feature map k as follows:  Our goal is to remove feature maps or parameters which contribute little to the overall performance of the model. In this section, we consider the general case of a network with parameters θ trained to minimize a cross-entropy loss,  g = ∇L(θ),  2 #  which assumes that Qθ (z | I) is close to P (z | I) (see Supplementary Section 1 for a derivation). Eqn. (6) can be viewed as an empirical estimate of the Fisher information of θk , where an expectation over the model is replaced with real data samples. If Q and P are in fact equal and the model is twice differentiable with respect to parameters θ, the Hessian reduces to the Fisher information matrix and the approximation becomes exact. If we use N data points to estimate the Fisher information, our approximation of the increase in loss becomes  2.1. Fisher pruning  L(θ) = EP [− log Qθ (z | I)] ,  ∂ log Qθ (z | I) ∂θk  (5)  where ek is the unit vector which is zero everywhere except at its kth entry, where it is 1. Following related methods which also start from a 2nd order approximation [21, 8], we assume that the current set of parameters is at a local optimum and that the 1st term vanishes as we average over a dataset of input images. In practice, we found that including the first term actually reduced the performance of the pruning method. For the diagonal of the Hessian, we use  2.2. Regularizing computational complexity In the previous section, we have discussed how to reduce the number of parameters or feature maps of a neural network. However, we are often more interested in reducing a 2  network’s computational complexity. That is, we are trying to solve an optimization problem of the form minimize L(θ) subject to C(θ) < K θ  The ensemble of DeepGaze II models was used to generate an average saliency map for each image in the SALICON dataset. These saliency maps were then used for knowledge distillation [10]. This additional data allows us to not only train the readout network of our own models, but also fine-tune the underlying feature representation. We used a weighted combination of the cross-entropy for MIT1003 and the cross-entropy with respect to the DeepGaze II saliency maps, using weights of 0.1 and 0.9, respectively. After training our models to convergence, we start pruning the network. We accumulated pruning signals (Equation 7) for 10 training steps while continuing to update the parameters before pruning a single feature map. The feature map was selected to maximize the reduction in the combined cost (Equation 13). We tried using the combined cost (Equation 12) for early stopping to automatically determine an appropriate number of feature maps to prune, however, we found that early stopping terminated too early and we therefore opted to treat the number of pruned features as a hyperparameter which we optimized via random search. During the pruning phase we used SGD with a fixed learning rate of 0.0025 and momentum of 0.9, as we found that this led to slightly better results than using Adam. This may be explained by a regularizing effect of SGD [32].  (10)  where θ here may contain the weights of a neural network but may also contain a binary mask describing its architecture. C measures the computational complexity of the network. During optimization, we quantify the computational complexity in terms of floating point operations. For example, the number of floating point operations of a convolution with a bias term, K × K filters, Cin input channels, Cout output channels, and producing a feature map with spatial extent H × W is given by H · W · Cout · (2 · Cin · K 2 + 1).  (11)  Since H and W represent the size of the output, this formula automatically takes into account any padding as well as the stride of a convolution. The total cost of a network is the sum of the cost of each of its layers. To solve the above optimization problem, we try to minimize the Lagrangian L(θ) + β · C(θ),  (12)  where β controls the trade-off between computational complexity and a model’s performance. We compute the cost of removing a parameter or feature map as  2.4. Related work Many recent papers have used pretrained neural networks as feature extractors for the prediction of fixations [19, 18, 20, 29, 23]. Most closely related to our work is the DeepGaze approach [19, 20]. In contrast to DeepGaze, here we also optimize the feature representations, which despite the limited amount of available fixation training data is possible because we use a combination of knowledge distillation and pruning to regularize our networks. Kruthiventi et al. [18] also tried to finetune a pretrained network by using a smaller learning rate for pretrained parameters than for other parameters. Vig et al. [30] trained a smaller network end-to-end but did not start from a pretrained representation and therefore did not achieve the performance of current state-of-the-art architectures. Similarly, Pan et al. [26] trained networks end-to-end while initializing only a few layers with parameters obtained from pretrained networks but have since been outperformed by DeepGaze II and other recent approaches. To our knowledge, none of this prior work has addressed the question of how much computation is actually needed to achieve good performance. Many heuristics have been developed for pruning [22, 7, 24]. More closely related to ours are methods which try to directly estimate the effect on the loss. Optimal brain damage [21], for example, starts from a 2nd order approximation of a squared error loss and computes second  L(θ − θk ei ) − L(θ) + β · (C(θ − θk ei ) − C(θ)) , (13) where the reduction in loss is estimated as in the previous section. During training, we periodically estimate the cost of all feature maps and greedily prune feature maps which minimize the combined cost. By pruning a feature map, we expect the loss to go up but the computational cost to go down. For different β, different architectures will become optimal solutions of the optimization problem.  2.3. Training Our models were trained in several steps. First, we trained a DeepGaze II model using Adam [16] with a batch size of 8 and a learning rate of 0.001 which was slowly decreased over the course of training. As in [20], the model was first pre-trained using the SALICON dataset [13] while using the MIT1003 dataset [15] for validation. The validation data was evaluated every 100 steps and training was stopped when the cross-entropy on the validation data did not decrease 20 times in a row. The parameters with the best validation score observed until then were saved. Afterwards, the MIT1003 dataset was split into 10 training and validation sets and used to train 10 DeepGaze II models again with early stopping. 3  0.880  13.44  0.875 0.870  13.48  AUC  Log-likelihood [nat]  13.40  13.52 13.56 13.60  0.860  DenseGaze121 DenseGaze121 (regularized) FastGaze11 FastGaze11 (regularized) DeepGaze II 62  125  250  500  Milliseconds  0.865  0.855 1000  2000  0.850  4000  DenseGaze121 DenseGaze121 (regularized) FastGaze11 FastGaze11 (regularized) DeepGaze II 62  125  250  500  Milliseconds  1000  2000  4000  Figure 1. Speed and performance of various models trained on MIT1003 and evaluated on the CAT2000 training set. Each point corresponds to a different architecture with a different number of pruned features and a different β. Solid lines mark Pareto optimal models. Regularized models were explicitly optimized to reduce the amount of floating point operations instead of optimizing the number of feature maps (β > 0). The x-axis shows speed measured on a CPU for a single image as input. Except for the log-likelihood of DenseGaze, explicitly regularizing computational performance made a big difference in terms of speed. We also find that pruned DenseGaze models generalize better to CAT2000 than DeepGaze II.  3. Experiments  derivatives analytically by performing an additional backward pass. Optimal brain surgeon [8] extends this method and automatically tries to correct parameters after pruning by computing the full Hessian. In contrast, our pruning signal only requires gradient information which is already computed during the backward pass. This makes the proposed Fisher pruning not only more efficient but also easier to implement.  We explored two basic architectures. First, we tried using the smaller VGG-11 variant of Simonyan et al. [28] for feature extraction. In contrast to the readout network of Kümmerer et al. [20], which took as input feature maps from 5 different layers, we only used the output of the last convolutional layer (“conv5 2”) as input. Extracting information from multiple layers is less important in our case, since we are also optimizing the parameters of the feature extraction network. As an alternative to VGG, we tried DenseNet-121 as a feature extractor [11], using the output of “dense block 3” as input to the readout network. In both cases, the readout network consisted of convolutions with parametric rectified linear units [9] and 32, 16, and 2 feature maps in the hidden layers. In the following, we will call the first network FastGaze and the second network DenseGaze. To find the optimal pruning parameters, we ran multiple experiments with a randomly sampled number of pruned features and a randomly chosen trade-off parameter β. The total number of feature maps is 2803 for FastGaze and 7219 for DenseGaze. β was chosen between 3e-5 and 3e-2. We evaluated each model in terms of log-likelihood and the commonly used metric of area under the curve (AUC). We used the publicly available CAT2000 [2] dataset for evaluation, which was not used during training of any of the models. While there are many ways to measure computational cost, we here were mostly interested in single-image performance on CPUs. We used a single core of an Intel Xeon E5-2620 (2.4GHz) and averaged the speed over 6 images of 384 x 512 pixels. Our implementation was written in PyTorch [27]. Figure 1 shows the performance of various models. In  Most closely related to our pruning method is the approach of Molchanov et al. [24]. By applying heuristics to a 1st order approximation, they arrive at a very similar estimate of the change in loss due to pruning (we found that in practice, both estimates performed similarly). The main contribution in Section 2.1 is a new derivation which provides a more principled motivation for the pruning signal.  Unlike most papers on pruning, Molchanov et al. [24] also explicitly regularized the computational complexity of the network. However, their approach used a fixed weight while pruning a different number of feature maps. In contrast, here we treat each setting of β as creating a separate optimization problem with its own optimal architecture. In practice, we find that the speed and architecture of a network is heavily influenced by the choice of β even when pruning the same number of feature maps, suggesting that using different weights is important. Molchanov et al. [24] further only estimated the computational cost of each feature map once before starting to prune. This leads to suboptimal pruning, as the computational cost of a feature map changes when neighboring layers are pruned. 4  Figure 2. The top graph visualizes the feature maps of the unpruned FastGaze model, while the remaining graphs visualize models pruned to different degrees. Labels indicate the number of feature maps. From top to bottom, the measured runtime for these models was 1.39s, 356ms, 258ms, and 91ms. For strongly regularized models, we observed a tendency to alternate between convolutions with many feature maps and convolutions with very few feature maps. The top left corner shows an example input image and ground truth fixations, while the right column shows saliency models generated by the different models. Despite a 15x difference in speed, the saliency maps are visually very similar.  5  Model Center Bias eDN [30] SalNet [26] DeepGaze I [19] SAM-ResNet [5] DSCLRCN DeepFix [18] SALICON [12] DeepGaze II [20] FastGaze DenseGaze  terms of log-likelihood, we find that both FastGaze and DenseGaze generalize better to CAT2000 than our reimplementation of DeepGaze II, despite the fact that both models were regularized to imitate DeepGaze II. In terms of AUC, DeepGaze II performs slightly better than FastGaze but is outperformed by DenseGaze. Pruning only seems to have a small effect on performance, as even heavily pruned models still perform well. For the same AUC, we achieve a speedup of roughly 10x with DenseGaze, while in terms of loglikelihood even our most heavily pruned model yielded better performance (which corresponds to a speedup of more than 75x). Comparing DenseGaze and FastGaze, we find that while DenseGaze achieves better AUC performance, FastGaze is able to achieve faster runtimes due to its less complex architecture. We find that explicitly regularizing computational complexity is important. For the same AUC and depending on the amount of pruning, we observe speedups of over 2x for FastGaze when comparing regularized and non-regularized models. In Figure 2 we visualize some of the pruned FastGaze models. We find that at lower computational complexity, optimal architectures have a tendency to alternate between convolutions with large and small numbers of feature maps. This makes sense when only considering the computational cost of a convolutional layer (Equation 11), but it is interesting to see that such an architecture can still perform well in terms of fixation prediction, which requires the detection of various types of objects. Qualitative results are provided in Figure 3. Even at large reductions in computational complexity, the fixation predictions appear very similar. At a speedup of 39x compared to DeepGaze II, the saliency maps start to become a bit blurrier, but generally detect the same structures. In particular, the model still responds to faces, people, objects, signs, and text. To verify that our models indeed perform close to the state of the art, we submitted saliency maps to the MIT Saliency Benchmark [3, 14, 4]. We computed saliency maps for the MIT300 test set, which contains 300 more images of the same type as MIT1003. We evaluated a FastGaze model which took 356ms to evaluate in PyTorch, (2250 pruned features, β = 0.0001) and a DenseGaze model which took 577ms (2701 pruned features, β = 3 · 10−5 ). We find that both models perform only slightly below the state of the art when evaluated on MIT300 (Table 1).  AUC 78% 82% 83% 84% 87% 87% 87% 87% 88% 85% 86%  Table 1. Comparison of deep models evaluated on the MIT300 benchmark dataset. For reference, we also include the performance of a Gaussian center bias. Results of competing methods were obtained from the benchmark’s website [3].  trade-off between performance and computational complexity. With this we were able to show that the computational complexity of state-of-the-art saliency models can be drastically reduced while maintaining a similar level of performance. Together with a knowledge distillation approach, the reduced complexity allowed us to train the models endto-end and achieve good generalization performance. Less resource intensive models are of particular importance in applications where a lot of data is processed, as well as in applications running on resource constrained devices such as mobile phones. Faster gaze prediction models also have the potential to speed up the development of video models. The larger number of images to be processed in videos impacts training times, making it more difficult to iterate models. Another issue is that the amount of fixation training data in existence is fairly limited for videos. Smaller models will allow for faster training times and a more efficient use of the available training data.  References [1] E. Ardizzone, A. Bruno, and G. Mazzola. Saliency Based Image Cropping, pages 773–782. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. 1 [2] A. Borji and L. Itti. CAT2000: A Large Scale Fixation Dataset for Boosting Saliency Research. CVPR 2015 workshop on ”Future of Datasets”, 2015. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.03581. 4 [3] Z. Bylinskii, T. Judd, A. Borji, L. Itti, F. Durand, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba. MIT Saliency Benchmark. 6 [4] Z. Bylinskii, T. Judd, A. Oliva, A. Torralba, and F. Durand. What do different evaluation metrics tell us about saliency models? CoRR, abs/1604.03605, 2016. 6 [5] M. Cornia, L. Baraldi, G. Serra, and R. Cucchiara. Predicting human eye fixations via an lstm-based saliency attentive model. CoRR, abs/1611.09571, 2016. 6  4. Conclusion We have described a principled pruning method which only requires gradients as input, and which is efficient and easy to implement. Unlike most pruning methods, we explicitly penalized computational complexity and tried to find the architecture which optimally optimizes a given 6  Data  DeepGaze II (3.59s)  DenseGaze (577ms)  FastGaze (356ms)  FastGaze (91ms)  Figure 3. Example saliency maps generated for images of the CAT2000 dataset. (The original images contained gray borders which were cropped in this visualization.) Intensities correspond to gamma-corrected fixation probabilities, where black and white correspond to the 1% and 99% percentile of saliency values for a given image, respectively. Saliency maps in the second column were generated by an ensemble of DeepGaze II models, but we report the time for a single model. Columns 3 and 4 show saliency maps of only slightly pruned DenseGaze and FastGaze models, while the last column shows saliency maps of a heavily pruned model. We find all models produce similar saliency maps. In particular, even the heavily pruned model (39x speedup compared to DeepGaze II) still responds to faces, people, other objects, and text.  [6] Y. Feng, G. Cheung, W.-T. Tan, and Y. Ji. Gaze-driven video streaming with saliency-based dual-stream switching. In IEEE Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP), 2012. 1 [7] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, and W. J. Dally. Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015. 3 [8] B. Hassibi and D. G. Stork. Second order derivatives for network pruning: Optimal brain surgeon. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 164–171, 1993. 2, 4 [9] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, , and J. Sun. Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on Ima-  [10] [11]  [12]  [13]  7  geNet Classification. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015. 4 G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network. ArXiv e-prints, 2015. 1, 3 G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. van der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger. Densely connected convolutional networks. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017. 2, 4 X. Huang, C. Shen, X. Boix, and Q. Zhao. SALICON: Reducing the semantic gap in saliency prediction by adapting deep neural networks. In The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015. 6 M. Jiang, S. Huang, J. Duan, and Q. Zhao. SALICON:  [14]  [15]  [16]  [17]  [18]  [19]  [20]  [21]  [22]  [23]  [24]  [25]  [26]  [27] [28]  [29]  [30]  [31] P. Xu, Y. Sugano, and A. Bulling. Spatio-temporal modeling and prediction of visual attention in graphical user interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2016. 1 [32] C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals. Understanding deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017. 3  Saliency in Context. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2015. 3 T. Judd, F. Durand, and A. Torralba. A benchmark of computational models of saliency to predict human fixations. Technical report, MIT technical report, 2012. 6 T. Judd, K. Ehinger, F. Durand, and A. Torralba. Learning to predict where humans look. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2009. 3 D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015. 3 C. Koch and S. Ullman. Shifts in selective visual attention: towards the underlying neural circuitry. Human Neurobiology, 4:219–227, 1985. 1 S. S. S. Kruthiventi, K. Ayush, and R. V. Babu. DeepFix: A Fully Convolutional Neural Network for Predicting Human Eye Fixations. In IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, volume 26, 2017. 3, 6 M. Kümmerer, L. Theis, and M. Bethge. Deep Gaze I: Boosting Saliency Prediction with Feature Maps Trained on ImageNet. In ICLR Workshop, May 2015. 1, 3, 6 M. Kümmerer, T. S. A. Wallis, and M. Bethge. DeepGaze II: Reading fixations from deep features trained on object recognition. ArXiv e-prints, Oct. 2016. 1, 3, 4, 6 Y. LeCun, J. S. Denker, and S. A. Solla. Optimal Brain Damage. In D. S. Touretzky, editor, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2, pages 598–605. MorganKaufmann, 1990. 2, 3 H. Li, A. Kadav, I. Durdanovic, H. Samet, and H. P. Graf. Pruning filters for efficient convnets. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017. 3 N. Liu and J. Han. A deep spatial contextual long-term recurrent convolutional network for saliency detection. CoRR, abs/1610.01708, 2016. 3 P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras, T. Aila, and J. Kautz. Pruning convolutional neural networks for resource efficient inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017. 1, 2, 3, 4 V. Nair and G. Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2010. 1 J. Pan, E. Sayrol, X. Giro-i Nieto, K. McGuinness, and N. E. O’Connor. Shallow and deep convolutional networks for saliency prediction. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2016. 3, 6 PyTorch. https://github.com/pytorch. 4 K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. ArXiv eprints, Sept. 2014. 1, 2, 4 H. R. Tavakoli, A. Borji, J. Laaksonen, and E. Rahtu. Exploiting inter-image similarity and ensemble of extreme learners for fixation prediction using deep features. Neurocomputing, 244(Supplement C):10 – 18, 2017. 3 E. Vig, M. Dorr, and D. Cox. Large-Scale Optimization of Hierarchical Features for Saliency Prediction in Natural Images. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2014. 3, 6  8  S1 Details of Fisher pruning Under mild regularity conditions, the diagonal of the Hessian of the cross-entropy loss is given by ∂2 EP [− log Qθ (z | I)] ∂θk2   ∂ 1 ∂ = EP − Qθ (z | I) ∂θk Qθ (z | I) ∂θk   2 " 2 # ∂ Q (z | I) 2 θ ∂ ∂θ , log Qθ (z | I) − EP  k = EP ∂θk Qθ (z | I)  Hkk =  (14) (15)  (16)  where the last step follows from the quotient rule. For the second term we have " EP  ∂2 ∂ 2 θk Qθ (z  | I)  Qθ (z | I)  #  P (I)  P (z | I) ∂ 2 Qθ (z | I) d(I, z) Qθ (z | I) ∂θk2  (17)  P (I)  ∂2 Qθ (z | I) d(I, z) ∂θk2  (18)  P (I)Qθ (z | I) d(I, z)  (19)  Z = Z ≈ =  ∂2 ∂θk2  Z  =0  (20)  where we have assumed that Qθ (z | I) has been trained to convergence and is close to P (z | I).  S2 Alternative derivation of Fisher pruning Let Qθ be our original model and Q̃θ,m be the pruned model, where we multiply the activations ankij by binary mask parameters mk ∈ {0, 1} as in Eqn. 8 of the main text. Pruning is achieved by setting mk = 0 for pruned features, and mk = 1 for features we wish to keep. We can define the cost of pruning as the extent to which it changes the model’s output, which can be measured by the KL divergence L(m) =  N 1 X KL[Qθ (z | In ) || Q̃θ,m (z | In )]. N n=1  (21)  This KL divergence can be approximated locally by a quadratic distance (the Fisher-Rao distance) as we will show below. First, note that when m = 1, Q̃θ,m ≡ Qθ , so the value of the KL divergence is 0, and its gradients with respect to both θ and m are exactly 0 as well. Thus, we can approximate L by its second-order Taylor-approximation around the unpruned model m = 1 as follows: L(m) ≈  1 (m − 1)> H(m − 1), 2  (22)  where H = ∇2 L(1) is the Hessian of L at m = 1. Pruning a single feature k amounts to setting mk = 1 − ek , where ek is the unit vector which is zero everywhere except at its ith entry, where it is 1. The cost of pruning a single feature k is then approximated as: `k = L(1 − ek ) ≈  1 Hkk 2  (23)  Under some mild conditions, the Hessian of L at m = 1 is the Fisher information matrix, which can be approximated by 9  the empirical Fisher information. In particular for the diagonal terms Hkk we have that: N h i ∂2 1 X 1 Hkk = − E log Q̃ (z | I ) Q θ,1 n θ,1 2 ∂m2k 2N n=1 " 2 # N 1 X ∂ = E log Q̃θ,1 (z | In ) 2N n=1 Q̃θ,1 ∂mk " 2 # N 1 X ∂ = EQ log Q̃θ,1 (z | In ) an,i,j,k 2N n=1 θ ∂ãn,i,j,k " 2 # N 1 X 2 ∂ a EQ log Qθ (z | In ) = 2N n=1 n,i,j,k θ ∂an,i,j,k  2 N 1 X 2 ∂ ≈ a log Qθ (zn | In ) 2N n=1 n,i,j,k ∂an,i,j,k  =  N 1 X 2 g , 2N n=1 nk  (24)  (25)  (26)  (27)  (28)  (29)  where gnk is defined as in Eqn. 9 of the main text.  10

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
