Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1697

Abstract:
Representation stability and finite linear groups Andrew Putman∗  Steven V Sam†  arXiv:1408.3694v3 [math.AT] 15 Feb 2017  January 13, 2017 Abstract We study analogues of FI-modules where the role of the symmetric group is played by the general linear groups and the symplectic groups over finite rings and prove basic structural properties such as local Noetherianity. Applications include a proof of the Lannes–Schwartz Artinian conjecture in the generic representation theory of finite fields, very general homological stability theorems with twisted coefficients for the general linear and symplectic groups over finite rings, and representation-theoretic versions of homological stability for congruence subgroups of the general linear group, the automorphism group of a free group, the symplectic group, and the mapping class group.  Contents 1 2 3 4 5 6  Introduction Noetherian results Partial resolutions and representation stability Twisted homological stability A machine for finite generation Finite generation theorems  1  1 14 28 35 36 41  Introduction  The language of representation stability was introduced by Church–Farb [ChFa] to describe representation-theoretic patterns they observed in many parts of mathematics. In later work with Ellenberg [ChEFa], they introduced FI-modules, which gave a clearer framework for these patterns for the representation theory of the symmetric group. The key technical innovation of their work was a certain Noetherian property of FI-modules, which they later established in great generality with Nagpal [ChEFaNag]. This Noetherian property allowed them to prove an asymptotic structure theorem for finitely generated FI-modules, giving an elegant mechanism behind the patterns observed earlier in [ChFa]. The theory of FI-modules fits into the larger picture of functor categories, which play an important role in algebraic topology and algebraic K-theory; see [FraFriPiSch, FraTo] for surveys. In this paper, we study functor categories that can be viewed as analogues of FI-modules where the role of the symmetric group is played by the classical finite groups of matrices, namely the general linear groups and the symplectic groups over finite rings. We establish analogues of the aforementioned Noetherian and asymptotic structure results. A byproduct of our work here is a proof of the Lannes–Schwartz Artinian conjecture (see Theorem B). We ∗ †  Supported in part by NSF grant DMS-1255350 and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Supported by a Miller research fellowship  1  have two families of applications. The first are very general homological stability theorems with twisted coefficients for the general linear groups and symplectic groups over finite rings. The second are representation-theoretic analogues of homological stability for congruence subgroups of the general linear group, the automorphism group of a free group, the symplectic group, and the mapping class group.  1.1  Review of FI-modules  Since our theorems parallel results about FI-modules, we begin by reviewing the theory of FI-modules. Unless otherwise specified, all rings in this paper are commutative and contain 1. Fix a Noetherian ring k. Configuration spaces. We start with an example. Let X be a compact oriented manifold with ∂X 6= ∅. Let PConf n (X) = {(x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ X n | xi 6= xj for i 6= j} be the configuration space of n ordered points in X. The symmetric group Sn acts freely on PConf n (X) by permuting points. Let Conf n (X) = PConf n (X)/Sn be the configuration space of n unordered points in X. McDuff [Mc] proved that Conf n (X) satisfies cohomological stability: for k ≥ 1, we have Hk (Conf n (X); k) ∼ = Hk (Conf n+1 (X); k) for n ≫ 0. For PConf n (X), easy examples show that cohomological stability does not hold. Observe that Hk (PConf n (X); k) is a representation of Sn . Building on work of Church [Ch1], Church–Ellenberg–Farb–Nagpal [ChEFaNag] proved that Hk (PConf n (X); k) stabilizes as a representation of Sn in a natural sense. The key to this is the theory of FI-modules. Basic definitions. Let FI be the category of finite sets and injections. An FI-module over a ring k is a functor M : FI → Modk . More concretely, M consists of the following. • For each finite set I, a k-module MI . • For each injection f : I ֒→ J between finite sets I, J, a homomorphism Mf : MI → MJ . These homomorphisms must satisfy the obvious compatibility conditions. For I ∈ FI, the FI-endomorphisms of I are exactly the symmetric group SI , so SI acts on MI . In particular, setting [n] = {1, . . . , n} and Mn = M[n] , the group Sn acts on Mn . Example 1.1. Given a finite set I (with the discrete topology), let Emb(I, X) be the space of injective functions I → X. There is an FI-module M with MI = Hk (Emb(I, X); k) for I ∈ FI. Observe that Mn = Hk (PConf n (X); k). General situation. More generally, let C be any category. A C-module over a ring k is a functor M from C to Modk (see [FraFriPiSch, FraTo] for surveys). For each C ∈ C, we thus have a k-module MC , and for each C-morphism f : C → C ′ we have a k-module morphism Mf : MC → MC ′ . These morphisms satisfy compatibility conditions coming from the composition law in C. The class of C-modules over k forms a category whose morphisms are natural transformations. A morphism φ : M → N of C-modules thus consists of k-module morphisms φC : MC → NC for each C ∈ C such that the diagram φ  MC −−−C−→ NC    Mf y  φ  ′   N y f  MC ′ −−−C−→ NC ′ 2  commutes for all C-morphisms f : C → C ′ . We will often omit the k and simply speak of C-modules. Notions such as C-submodules, surjective/injective morphisms, etc. are defined pointwise. For example, a C-module morphism φ : M → N is surjective/injective if for all objects C, the linear map φC : MC → NC is surjective/injective. A C-submodule is the image of an injective morphism of C-modules. A C-module M is finitely generated if there exist C1 , . . . , Cn ∈ C and elements xi ∈ MCi such that the smallest C-submodule of M containing the xi is M itself. We will say that the category of C-modules over k is locally Noetherian if all submodules of finitely generated C-modules over k are finitely generated. We will say that the category of C-modules is locally Noetherian if the category of C-modules over k is locally Noetherian for all Noetherian rings k. Asymptotic structure. Let M be a finitely generated FI-module over a Noetherian ring. Church–Ellenberg–Farb–Nagpal [ChEFaNag] proved that the category of FI-modules is locally Noetherian, and used this to prove three things about M . For N ≥ 0, let FIN be the full subcategory of FI spanned by I ∈ FI with |I| ≤ N . • (Injective representation stability) If f : I → J is an FI-morphism, then the homomorphism Mf : MI → MJ is injective when |I| ≫ 0. • (Surjective representation stability) If f : I → J is an FI-morphism, then the SJ -orbit of the image of Mf : MI → MJ spans MJ when |I| ≫ 0. • (Central stability) For N ≫ 0, the functor M is the left Kan extension to FI of the restriction of M to FIN . Informally, central stability says that for I ∈ FI with |I| > N , the k-module MI can be constructed from MI ′ for |I ′ | ≤ N using the “obvious” generators and the “obvious” relations. It should be viewed as a sort of finite presentability condition. Remark 1.2. The statement of central stability in [ChEFaNag] does not refer to Kan extensions, but is easily seen to be equivalent to the above. The original definition of central stability in the first author’s paper [Pu2] appears to be very different: it gives a presentation for MI in terms of those MI ′ with |I ′ | ∈ {|I| − 1, |I| − 2}. One can show that this is equivalent to the above statement. We will prove a more general result during the proof of Theorem F below. Conclusion. The upshot is that the locally Noetherian property implies that to describe how Hk (PConf n (X); k) changes as n → ∞, it was enough for Church–Ellenberg–Farb–Nagpal to prove that the FI-module in Example 1.1 is finitely generated. Our goal is to generalize this kind of result to other settings. Remark 1.3. In a different direction, Wilson [Wi] has generalized the theory of FI-modules to the other classical families of Weyl groups.  1.2  Introduction to the rest of the introduction  It will take some time to state our results, so to help orient the reader we give a brief outline of the rest of the introduction and provide a summary of our four main families of results. We begin in §1.3 by introducing the four main categories we study in this paper. They take as input a commutative ring R and are called VI(R), V(R), V′ (R), VIC(R, U), and SI(R). This section states our first main family of theorems. • Theorems A/B/C/D/E: When R is a finite commutative ring, the categories of VI(R)-, V(R)-, V′ (R)-, VIC(R, U)-, and SI(R)-modules are locally Noetherian.  3  Remark 1.4. Our proofs of Theorems A–E use analogues of the theory of Gröbner bases. Such techniques are developed systematically by Sam–Snowden in [SamSn4]; however, the results of this paper can not be proved using the main result of [SamSn4]. See Remark 2.16 for more on this. Remark 1.5. The condition that R is finite is necessary; indeed, in Theorem N we prove that none of the above categories of modules are locally Noetherian when R is infinite. In §1.4, we introduce the language of complemented categories, which provides a common framework for stating and proving our results. Examples include FI and VIC(R, U) and SI(R) (though not VI(R) or V(R) or V′ (R); we will explain how to handle these in Remark 1.18 below). This section states our second main theorem: • Theorem F: If C is a complemented category such that the category of C-modules is locally Noetherian, then finitely generated C-modules have a simple asymptotic structure analogous to Church–Farb’s theorem from the previous section. The next section (§1.5) provides large numbers of examples of finitely generated C-modules to which we can apply the previous result and obtain interesting asymptotic structure theorems. Letting OK be the ring of integers in an algebraic number field, the main theorems of this section are as follows: • Theorems G/H/I/J/K: The homology groups of congruence subgroups in GLn (OK ), SLn (OK ), the automorphism group of a free group, Sp2n (OK ), and the mapping class group form finitely generated modules over appropriate categories. Combining these theorems with Theorem F, we obtain a version of representation stability for these homology groups. Remark 1.6. The proofs of Theorems G–K all use a machine we develop later in this paper. The key input to this machine is an appropriate local Noetherianity theorem (like Theorems A–E above). See Theorem 5.13 for a statement of how this machine works. The final section (§1.6) of our introduction concerns twisted homological stability. Its main theorems can be summarized as follows: • Theorems L/M: If R is a finite commutative ring, then the twisted homology groups of GLn (R), SLn (R), and Sp2n (R) with coefficients in a finitely generated module over an appropriate category stabilize. Remark 1.7. The proofs of Theorems L and M both use another machine we develop later in this paper to prove twisted homological stability theorems from appropriate local Noetherianity theorems. See Theorem 4.2 for a statement of how this machine works. Remark 1.8. Some readers may notice a parallel between Theorems 5.13 and 4.2 and a program outlined independently by Church (in lectures and personal communication, but never published). Church’s program had similar inputs and would have obtained these same conclusions (finite generation for homology of congruence subgroups, and stability for twisted homology), but with one key difference: if successful, it would have yielded effective quantitative bounds (on the degree of generators in the former case, and on the stable range in the latter). However, Church informs us that technical difficulties arose that mean his proposed program cannot be carried out, and so it will not appear. He points out that, although the results in this paper were obtained independently, they can be viewed after the fact as a demonstration that the framework of his approach can be salvaged by using our local Noetherianity theorems to avoid these technical difficulties, at the cost of giving up effective bounds. 4  The introduction closes with some comments and questions together with an outline of the remainder of the paper. This last section also contains Theorem N, which is the nonNoetherian result discussed in Remark 1.5.  1.3  Categories of free modules: VI, V, V′ , VIC, and SI  We now introduce the categories we will consider in this paper. Fix a ring R (assumed as always to be commutative). The category VI. A linear map between free R-modules is splittable if it has a left inverse. Let VI(R) be the category whose objects are finite-rank free R-modules and whose morphisms are splittable injections. For V ∈ VI(R), the monoid of VI(R)-endomorphisms of V is GL(V ). Thus if M is a VI(R)-module, then MV is a representation of GL(V ) for all V ∈ VI(R). The category VI(R) was introduced by Scorichenko in his thesis ([Sco]; see [FraFriPiSch] for a published account). Our main theorem about VI(R) is as follows. Theorem A. Let R be a finite ring. Then the category of VI(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. Remark 1.9. In contrast, VI(Z) is not locally Noetherian, and in fact VI(R) is not locally Noetherian whenever R is an infinite ring; see Theorem N below. Remark 1.10. While preparing this article, we learned that Gan and Li [GanLi] have recently independently shown that the category of functors VI(R) → Modk is locally Noetherian when R is a finite field and k is a field of characteristic 0. For our applications, it is important that both R and especially k be more general. A variant: the Artinian conjecture. Define V(R) to be the category whose objects are finite-rank free R-modules and whose morphisms are all splittable linear maps (not necessarily injective). We then have the following. Theorem B (Artinian conjecture). Let R be a finite ring. Then the category of V(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. Theorem B generalizes an old conjecture of Jean Lannes and Lionel Schwartz which asserts that the category of V(Fq )-modules over Fq is locally Noetherian. This is often stated in a dual form and is thus known as the Artinian conjecture. It first appeared in print in [Ku1, Conjecture 3.12] and now has a large literature containing many partial results (mostly focused on the case q = 2, though even there nothing close to the full conjecture was previously known). See, e.g., [Ku2, Po1, Po2, Po3, Dj1, Dj2]. See also [Sch, Chapter 5] for connections to the Steenrod algebra. A proof of this conjecture also appears in [SamSn4], see Remark 2.17. A variant of V(R) is the category V′ (R) whose objects are finite-rank free R-modules and whose morphisms are all linear maps (not just the splittable ones). Of course, V(R) = V′ (R) if R is a field, but they differ in general. For V′ (R), we have the following theorem. Theorem C. Let R be a finite ring. Then the category of V′ (R)-modules is locally Noetherian. Problems with VI. The category VI(R) is not rich enough to allow many natural constructions. For instance, the map V 7→ GL(V ) does not extend to a functor from VI(R) to the category of groups. The problem is that if V is a submodule of W , then there is no canonical way to extend an automorphism of V to an automorphism of W . We overcome this problem by introducing a richer category. 5  The category VIC, take I. Define VIC(R) to be the following category. The objects of VIC(R) are finite-rank free R-modules V . If V, W ∈ VIC(R), then a VIC(R)-morphism from V to W consists of a pair (f, C) as follows. • f : V → W is an R-linear injection. • C ⊂ W is a free R-submodule such that W = f (V ) ⊕ C. If (f, C) : V → W and (g, D) : W → X are two VIC(R)-morphisms, then the composition (g, D) ◦ (f, C) equals (g ◦ f, g(C) ⊕ D). The monoid of VIC(R)-endomorphisms of V ∈ VIC(R) is GL(V ). Observe that in contrast to VI(R), the assignment V 7→ GL(V ) extends to a functor from VIC(R) to the category of groups: if (f, C) : V → W is a morphism, then there is an induced map GL(V ) → GL(W ) which extends automorphisms over C by the identity, and this assignment is functorial. The category VIC(R) was first introduced by Djament [Dj3]. Remark 1.11. We will sometimes use an alternative description of the morphisms in VIC(R) which works whenever all stably free R-modules are free (for instance, when R is a finite commutative ring). Namely, the data (f, C) which defines a morphism V → W is equivalent to a pair of R-linear maps V → W → V whose composition is the identity. Here the first map is f and the second map is the projection W → V away from C. The category VIC, take II (cheap). Let U ⊂ R× be a subgroup of the group of multiplicative units of R and let SLU (V ) = {f ∈ GL(V ) | det(f ) ∈ U}. For our applications, we will need a variant of VIC(R) whose automorphism groups are SLU (V ) rather than GL(V ). The category VIC(R) is equivalent to the full subcategory generated by {Rn | n ≥ 0}. Define VIC(R, U) to be the category whose objects are {Rn | n ≥ 0} and whose morphisms from Rn ′ ′ to Rn are VIC(R)-morphisms (f, C) : Rn → Rn such that det(f ) ∈ U if n = n′ . Thus the U n monoid of VIC(R, U)-endomorphisms of Rn is SLU n (R) := SL (R ). Orientations. For many of our constructions, it will be useful to extend VIC(R, U) to a category whose objects are all finite-rank free R-modules rather than just the Rn . An orientation of a rank n free R-module V is a generator for the rank 1 free R-module ∧n V . The group of units of R acts transitively on the set of orientations on V , and a U-orientation on V consists of an orbit under the action of U. A U-oriented free R-module is a finiterank free R module V equipped with a U-orientation. If W1 and W2 are U-oriented free R-modules, then W1 ⊕ W2 is in a natural way a U-oriented free R-module. A U-oriented free R-submodule of V is an R-submodule V ′ of V which is a free R-module equipped with a U-orientation; if V ′ = V , then the U-orientations on V ′ and V must be the same, and if V ′ $ V then there is no condition on the U-orientation of V ′ . The category VIC, take II (better). The category VIC(R, U) can now be defined as follows (this yields a category equivalent to the previous one). The objects of VIC(R, U) are U-oriented free R-modules V . If V, W ∈ VIC(R, U), then a morphism of VIC(R, U) from V to W consists of a pair (f, C) as follows. • f : V → W is an R-linear injection. • C ⊂ W is a U-oriented free R-submodule such that W = f (V ) ⊕ C. In the second bullet point, f (V ) is equipped with the U-orientation f∗ (ω), where ω is the U-orientation on V , and the direct sum decomposition f (V ) ⊕ C is as U-oriented free Rmodules. Note that when C is nonzero, there is a unique U-orientation on C such that the U-orientations on f (V ) ⊕ C and W are the same, so the morphisms in VIC(R, U) and VIC(R) are only different when dim(V ) = dim(W ). The monoid of VIC(R, U)-endomorphisms of V ∈ VIC(R, U) is SLU (V ). Observe that VIC(R, U) ⊆ VIC(R) with equality when U is the  6  entire group of units. Our main theorem about VIC(R, U) is as follows. For VIC(F) with F a finite field, this theorem was conjectured by Church [Ch2]. Theorem D. Let R be a finite ring and let U ⊂ R be a subgroup of the group of units. Then the category of VIC(R, U)-modules is locally Noetherian. Remark 1.12. Just like for VI(R), it is necessary for R to be finite; see Theorem N. Symplectic forms. We now turn to the symplectic analogue of VI(R)-modules. A symplectic form on a finite-rank free R-module V is a bilinear form ı̂ : V × V → R which is alternating (i.e., ı̂(v, v) = 0 for all v ∈ V ) and which induces an isomorphism from V to its dual V ∗ = HomR (V, R). A symplectic R-module is a finite-rank free R-module equipped with a symplectic form. A symplectic R-submodule of a symplectic R-module V is an R-submodule W such that the symplectic form on V restricts to a symplectic form on W . A symplectic map between symplectic R-modules is an R-linear map that preserves the symplectic form. Observe that symplectic maps must be injective. The category SI. Define SI(R) to be the category whose objects are symplectic R-modules and whose morphisms are symplectic maps. The monoid of SI(R)-endomorphisms of V ∈ SI(R) is Sp(V ), i.e., the group of R-linear isomorphisms of V that preserve the symplectic form. Just like for VIC(R), the map V 7→ Sp(V ) extends to a functor from SI(R) to the category of groups: a symplectic map f : V → W induces a map Sp(V ) → Sp(W ) which extends automorphisms over f (V )⊥ by the identity. We then have the following. Theorem E. Let R be a finite ring. Then the category of SI(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. Remark 1.13. Just like for VI(R), it is necessary for R to be finite; see Theorem N.  1.4  Complemented categories and their asymptotic structure  Our next result says that finitely generated modules over the above categories have a simple asymptotic structure (like the one for FI-modules we discussed earlier). To avoid having to give separate proofs for all our categories, we introduce an abstract framework. Complemented categories. A weak complemented category is a monoidal category (A, ⊛) satisfying: • Every morphism in A is a monomorphism. Thus for all morphisms f : V → V ′ , it makes sense to talk about the subobject f (V ) of V ′ . • The identity object 1 of (A, ⊛) is initial. Thus for V, V ′ ∈ A there exist natural morphisms V → V ⊛ V ′ and V ′ → V ⊛ V ′ , namely the compositions ∼ =  V − → V ⊛ 1 −→ V ⊛ V ′  and  ∼ =  V′ − → 1 ⊛ V ′ −→ V ⊛ V ′ .  We will call these the canonical morphisms. • For V, V ′ , W ∈ A, the map HomA (V ⊛ V ′ , W ) → HomA (V, W ) × HomA (V ′ , W ) obtained by composing morphisms with the canonical morphisms is an injection. • Every subobject C of an object V has a unique complement, that is, a unique sub∼ = → V where the compositions object D of V such that there is an isomorphism C ⊛ D − ∼ ∼ = = → V of the isomorphism with the canonical → V and D → C ⊛ D − C → C⊛D − morphisms are the inclusion morphisms. • The canonical map Sp ≀ Aut(X) → Aut(X p ) is injective. (Here ≀ denotes wreath product.) 7  A complemented category is a weak complemented category (A, ⊛) whose monoidal structure is symmetric (more precisely, which is equipped with a symmetry). Remark 1.14. Things like complemented categories go back to work of Quillen; see [Gr, p. 3]. After a version of this paper was distributed, Nathalie Wahl (and later with Oscar RandalWilliams) posted her paper [WahRW], which uses an axiomatization similar to complemented categories to prove homological stability results of a more classical flavor than ours. A related axiomatization also appears in work of Djament–Vespa [DjVe1]. Generators for a category. If (A, ⊛) is a monoidal category, then a generator for A is an object X of A such that all objects V of A are isomorphic to X i for some unique i ≥ 0. We will call i the X-rank of V . Example 1.15. The category FI of finite sets and injections is a complemented category whose monoidal structure is the disjoint union. A generator is the set {1}. Example 1.16. The category VIC(R) is a complemented category whose monoidal structure is the direct sum. The subobject attached to a morphism V → V ′ can be interpreted as the pair (W, W ′ ) where W is the image of the linear injection V → V ′ and W ′ is the chosen complement. The complement to this subobject is the pair (W ′ , W ). A generator is R1 . Example 1.17. The category SI(R) is a complemented category whose monoidal structure is the orthogonal direct sum. The complement of a symplectic submodule W of a symplectic R-module (V, ı̂) is W ⊥ = {v ∈ V | ı̂(v, w) = 0 for all w ∈ W }. A generator is R2 equipped with the standard symplectic form. Remark 1.18. The category VI(R) is not a complemented category. However, there is a forgetful functor Ψ : VIC(R) → VI(R). If R is a finite ring and M is a finitely generated VI(R)-module, then the pullback Ψ∗ (M ) is a finitely generated VIC(R)-module (see the proof of Theorem A in §2.4) which can be analyzed using the technology we will discuss below. A similar remark applies to V(R) and V′ (R). Asymptotic structure theorem. The following theorem generalizes the aforementioned asymptotic structure theorem for FI-modules. Theorem F. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X. Assume that the category of A-modules is locally Noetherian, and let M be a finitely generated A-module. Then the following hold. For N ≥ 0, let AN denote the full subcategory of A spanned by elements whose X-ranks are at most N . • (Injective representation stability) If f : V → W is an A-morphism, then the homomorphism Mf : MV → MW is injective when the X-rank of V is sufficiently large. • (Surjective representation stability) If f : V → W is an A-morphism, then the orbit under AutA (W ) of the image of Mf : MV → MW spans MW when the X-rank of V is sufficiently large. • (Central stability) For N ≫ 0, the functor M is the left Kan extension to A of the restriction of M to AN . Remark 1.19. See Theorem 3.7 below for a concrete description of the presentation for M implied by central stability; the proof of Theorem F immediately follows the proof of Theorem 3.7.  8  1.5  Representation stability for congruence subgroups  Our next theorems apply the above technology to prove representation-theoretic analogues of homological stability for certain kinds of congruence subgroups. GL over number rings. Let OK be the ring of integers in an algebraic number field K. Charney [Cha1] proved that GLn (OK ) satisfies homological stability. Rationally, these stable values were computed by Borel [Bo]. Let α ⊂ OK be a proper nonzero ideal. The level α congruence subgroup of GLn (OK ), denoted GLn (OK , α), is the kernel of the map GLn (OK ) → GLn (OK /α). It follows from Borel’s work [Bo] that Hk (GLn (OK , α); k) stabilizes when k = Q; however, Lee–Szczarba [LeSz] proved that it does not stabilize integrally, even for k = 1. Few of these homology groups are known, and the existing computations do not seem to fit into any pattern. However, they have an important additional piece of structure: for each n ≥ 1, the conjugation action of GLn (OK ) on GLn (OK , α) descends to an action of SLU n (OK /α) on Hk (GLn (OK , α); k), where U ⊂ OK /α is the image of the group of units of OK . Our goal is to describe how this representation changes as n increases. Congruence subgroups of GL as VIC-modules. As we discussed above, there is a functor from VIC(OK ) to the category of groups that takes V to GL(V ). Similarly, there is a functor GL(OK , α) from VIC(OK ) to the category of groups defined by the formula GL(OK , α)V = ker(GL(V ) → GL(V ⊗OK (OK /α))). Passing to homology, we get a VIC(OK )-module Hk (GL(OK , α); k) with Hk (GL(OK , α); k)V = Hk (GL(OK , α)V ; k)  (V ∈ VIC(OK )).  Since OK is infinite, the category of VIC(OK )-modules is poorly behaved. However, we will prove in §6.1 that Hk (GL(OK , α); k) actually descends to a VIC(OK /α, U)-module, where U ⊂ OK /α is the image of the group of units of OK . Since OK /α is finite, our theorems apply to VIC(OK /α, U). All that is necessary is to prove that the VIC(OK /α, U)-module Hk (GL(OK , α); k) is finitely generated. Relation to FI-modules. It turns out that the needed finite generation follows from known results. The conjugation action of the set of permutation matrices on GLn (OK , α) turns Hk (GLn (OK , α); k) into a representation of Sn . In [Pu2], the first author proved that if k is a field whose characteristic is sufficiently large, then the Sn -representations Hk (GLn (OK , α); k) satisfy a version of central stability. This was generalized to arbitrary Noetherian rings k by Church–Ellenberg–Farb–Nagpal [ChEFaNag], who actually proved that the groups Hk (GLn (OK , α); k) form a finitely generated FI-module. More precisely, the following defines an embedding of categories Φ : FI → VIC(OK /α, U). • For I ∈ FI, set Φ(I) = (OK /α)I . • For an FI-morphism σ : I ֒→ J, set Φ(σ) = (fσ , Cσ ), where fσ : (OK /α)I → (OK /α)J is defined by fσ (bi ) = bσ(i) for i ∈ I and Cσ = hbj | j ∈ / σ(I)i. Here {bi | i ∈ I} and I {bj | j ∈ J} are the standard bases for (OK /α) and (OK /α)J , respectively. Then [ChEFaNag] proves that the restriction of VIC(OK /α, U) to Φ(FI) ⊂ VIC(OK /α, U) is finitely generated, so the VIC(OK /α, U)-module Hk (GL(OK , α); k) is finitely generated: Theorem G. Let OK be the ring of integers in an algebraic number field K, let α ⊂ OK be a proper nonzero ideal, let U ⊂ OK /α be the image of the group of units of OK , and let k be a Noetherian ring. Then the VIC(OK /α, U)-module Hk (GL(OK , α); k) is finitely generated for all k ≥ 0. 9  We can therefore apply Theorem F to Hk (GL(OK , α); k). The result is an asymptotic structure theorem for Hk (GLn (OK , α); k). This partially verifies a conjecture of Church–Farb [ChFa, Conjecture 8.2.1]. As a simple illustration of our machinery, we will give a direct proof of Theorem G in this paper. Remark 1.20. Church–Ellenberg–Farb–Nagpal’s theorem gives a central stability description of Hk (GLn (OK , α); k) as an FI-module; however, the central stability conclusion from Theorem F gives more information than this since it deals with Hk (GLn (OK , α); k) as a representation of SLU n (OK /α) and not merely as a representation of Sn . Remark 1.21. The other examples that we discuss also form FI-modules, but it seems very hard to prove that they are finitely generated as FI-modules. Remark 1.22. One could also consider congruence subgroups of SLn (R) for other rings R. In fact, the first author’s results in [Pu2] work in this level of generality; however, we have to restrict ourselves to rings of integers so we can cite a theorem of Borel–Serre [BoSe] which asserts that the homology groups in question are all finitely generated k-modules. This is the only property of rings of integers we use, and our methods give a similar result whenever this holds (another example would be R a finite commutative ring). Variant: SL. We can define SLn (OK , α) ⊂ SLn (OK ) in the obvious way. The homology groups Hk (SLn (OK , α); k) are now representations of SLn (OK /α) = SL1n (OK /α). Similarly to GLn (OK , α), we will construct a VIC(OK /α, 1)-module Hk (SL(OK , α); k) with n = Hk (SLn (OK , α); k) Hk (SL(OK , α); k)OK  (n ≥ 0)  and prove the following variant of Theorem G. Theorem H. Let OK be the ring of integers in an algebraic number field K, let α ⊂ OK be a proper nonzero ideal, and let k be a Noetherian ring. Then the VIC(OK /α, 1)-module Hk (SL(OK , α); k) is finitely generated for all k ≥ 0. Remark 1.23. Just like for Theorem G, this could be deduced from work of Church– Ellenberg–Farb–Nagpal [ChEFaNag], though we will give a proof using our machinery. Automorphism groups of free groups. Our second example of a VIC(R, U)-module comes from the automorphism group Aut(Fn ) of the free group Fn of rank n. Just like for GLn (OK ), work of Hatcher [Hat] and Hatcher–Vogtmann [HatVo1] shows that Aut(Fn ) satisfies homological stability. These stable values were computed by Galatius [Ga], who proved in particular that they rationally vanish. For ℓ ≥ 2, the level ℓ congruence subgroup of Aut(Fn ), denoted Aut(Fn , ℓ), is the kernel of the map Aut(Fn ) → SL±1 n (Z/ℓ) arising from the action of Aut(Fn ) on H1 (Fn ; Z/ℓ). Satoh [Sat] proved that H1 (Aut(Fn , ℓ); Z) does not stabilize. Similarly to SLn (OK , α), few concrete computations are known. Remark 1.24. Unlike for SLn (OK , α) it is not known in general if Hk (Aut(Fn , ℓ); Q) stabilizes, though this does hold for k ≤ 2 (see [DPu]). The conjugation action of Aut(Fn ) on Aut(Fn , ℓ) descends to an action of SL±1 n (Z/ℓ) on Hk (Aut(Fn , ℓ); k). In §6.2, we will construct a VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1)-module Hk (Aut(ℓ); k) with Hk (Aut(ℓ); k)(Z/ℓ)n = Hk (Aut(Fn , ℓ); k) Our main theorem about this module is as follows. 10  (n ≥ 0).  Theorem I. Fix some ℓ ≥ 2, and let k be a Noetherian ring. Then the VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1)-module Hk (Aut(ℓ); k) is finitely generated for all k ≥ 0. Applying Theorem F, we get an asymptotic structure theorem for Hk (Aut(Fn , ℓ); k), partially verifying a conjecture of Church–Farb (see the sentence after [ChFa, Conjecture 8.5]). Remark 1.25. The kernel of Aut(Fn ) → GLn (Z) is denoted IAn and its homology forms a module over VIC(Z). It would be interesting to understand this module; however, this seems to be a very difficult problem. Our techniques cannot handle this example because Z is an infinite ring (c.f. Theorem N). Symplectic groups over number rings. Let OK and K and α ⊂ OK be as above. The level α congruence subgroup of Sp2n (OK ), denoted Sp2n (OK , α), is the kernel of the map Sp2n (OK ) → Sp2n (OK /α). The groups Sp2n (OK ) and Sp2n (OK , α) are similar to GLn (OK ) and GLn (OK , α). In particular, the following hold. • Charney [Cha3] proved that Sp2n (OK ) satisfies homological stability. • Borel [Bo] calculated the stable rational homology of Sp2n (OK ). He also proved that Hk (Sp2n (OK , α); k) stabilizes when k = Q. • For general k, an argument similar to the one that Lee–Szczarba [LeSz] used for SLn (OK , α) shows that Hk (Sp2n (OK , α); k) does not stabilize, even for k = 1. • The conjugation action of Sp2n (OK ) on Sp2n (OK , α) induces an action of Sp2n (OK /α) on Hk (Sp2n (OK , α); k). In §6.3, we will construct an SI(OK /α)-module Hk (Sp(OK , α); k) such that Hk (Sp(OK , α); k)(OK /α)2n = Hk (Sp2n (OK , α); k)  (n ≥ 0).  Our main result concerning this functor is as follows. Theorem J. Let OK be the ring of integers in an algebraic number field K, let α ⊂ OK be a proper nonzero ideal, and let k be a Noetherian ring. Then the SI(OK /α)-module Hk (Sp(OK , α); k) is finitely generated for all k ≥ 0. Applying Theorem F, we obtain an asymptotic structure theorem for Hk (Sp2n (OK , α); k). This partially verifies a conjecture of Church–Farb [ChFa, Conjecture 8.2.2]. The mapping class group. Let Sgb be a compact oriented genus g surface with b boundary components. The mapping class group of Sgb , denoted MCGbg , is the group of homotopy classes of orientation-preserving homeomorphisms of Sgb that restrict to the identity on ∂Sgb . This is one of the basic objects in low–dimensional topology; see [FaMar] for a survey. Harer [Har] proved that the mapping class group satisfies a form of homological stability. If ′ ′ i : Sgb ֒→ Sgb′ is a subsurface inclusion, then there is a map i∗ : MCGbg → MCGbg′ that extends mapping classes by the identity. Harer’s theorem says that for all k ≥ 1, the induced map ′ Hk (MCGbg ; k) → Hk (MCGbg′ ; k) is an isomorphism for g ≫ 0. For k = Q, the stable homology of the mapping class group was calculated by Madsen–Weiss [MadWe]. Congruence subgroups of MCG. Fix some ℓ ≥ 2. The group MCGbg acts on H1 (Sgb ; Z/ℓ). This action preserves the algebraic intersection pairing ı̂(·, ·). If b = 0, then Poincaré duality implies that ı̂(·, ·) is symplectic. If instead b = 1, then gluing a disc to the boundary component does not change H1 (Sgb ; Z/ℓ), so ı̂(·, ·) is still symplectic. For g ≥ 0 and 0 ≤ b ≤ 1, the action of MCGbg on H1 (Sgb ; Z/ℓ) ∼ = (Z/ℓ)2g thus induces a representation MCGbg → Sp2g (Z/ℓ). It is classical [FaMar, §6.3.2] that this is surjective. Its kernel is the level ℓ congruence subgroup Modbg (ℓ) of MCGbg . It is known that Hk (MCGbg (ℓ); k) does not stabilize, even for 11  k = 1 (see [Pu1, Theorem H]). Also, the conjugation action of MCGbg on MCGbg (ℓ) induces an action of Sp2g (Z/ℓ) on Hk (MCGbg (ℓ); k). Remark 1.26. For b > 1, the algebraic intersection pairing is not symplectic, so we do not get a symplectic representation. We will not discuss this case. Stability. We will restrict ourselves to the case where b = 1; the problem with closed surfaces is that they cannot be embedded into larger surfaces, so one cannot “stabilize” them. In §6.5, we will construct an SI(Z/ℓ)-module Hk (MCG(ℓ); k) such that Hk (MCG(ℓ); k)(Z/ℓ)2g = Hk (MCG1g (ℓ); k)  (g ≥ 0).  Our main theorem concerning this module is as follows. Theorem K. Fix some ℓ ≥ 2, and let k be a Noetherian ring. Then the SI(Z/ℓ)-module Hk (MCG(ℓ); k) is finitely generated for all k ≥ 0. Applying Theorem F, we get an asymptotic structure theorem for Hk (MCG1g (ℓ); k). This partially verifies a conjecture of Church–Farb [ChFa, Conjecture 8.5]. Remark 1.27. The kernel of MCG1g → Sp2g (Z) is the Torelli group, denoted Ig1 , and its homology forms a module over SI(Z). Just like for IAn , we would like to understand this module but cannot do so with our techniques since Z is an infinite ring.  1.6  Twisted homological stability  We now discuss twisted homological stability. We wish to thank Aurélien Djament for his help with this section. Motivation: the symmetric group. A classical theorem of Nakaoka [Nak] says that Sn satisfies classical homological stability. Church [Ch2] proved a very general version of this with twisted coefficients. Namely, he proved that if M is a finitely generated FI-module and Mn = M[n] , then for all k ≥ 0 the map Hk (Sn ; Mn ) → Hk (Sn+1 ; Mn+1 ) is an isomorphism for n ≫ 0 (in fact, he obtained linear bounds for when stability occurs). We remark that this applies to much more general coefficient systems than earlier work of Betley [Be]. The key to Church’s theorem is the fact that the category of FI-modules is locally Noetherian. We will abstract Church’s argument to other categories (though our results will be weaker in that we will not give bounds for when stability occurs); the possibility of doing so was one of Church’s motivations for conjecturing Theorem D. General linear group. In [Va], van der Kallen proved that for rings R satisfying a mild condition (for instance, R can be a finite ring), GLn (R) satisfies homological stability. The paper [Va] also shows that this holds for certain twisted coefficient systems (those satisfying a “polynomial” condition introduced by Dwyer [Dw]; see [WahRW] for a general framework for arguments like Dwyer’s using the language of functor categories). The arguments in [Va] also work for SLU n (R) for subgroups U ⊂ R of the group of units. We will prove the following generalization of van der Kallen’s result (at least for finite commutative rings). If M is a VIC(R, U)-module, then denote by Mn the value MRn . Theorem L. Let R be a finite ring, let U ⊂ R be a subgroup of the group of units, and let M be a finitely generated VIC(R, U)-module over a Noetherian ring. Then for all k ≥ 0, the U map Hk (SLU n (R); Mn ) → Hk (SLn+1 (R); Mn+1 ) is an isomorphism for n ≫ 0. 12  Remark 1.28. This is more general than van der Kallen’s result: if k is a field, then his hypotheses on the coefficient systems Mn imply that dimk (Mn ) grows like a polynomial in n, which need not hold for finitely generated VIC(R, U)-modules. For instance, one can define a finitely generated VIC(R, U)-module whose dimensions grow exponentially via Mn = k[HomVIC(R,U) (R1 , Rn )]. The symplectic group. Building on work of Charney [Cha3], Mirzaii–van der Kallen [MirVa] proved that for many rings R (including all finite rings), the groups Sp2n (R) satisfy homological stability. In fact, though Mirzaii–van der Kallen do not explicitly say this, Charney’s paper shows that the results of [MirVa] also apply to twisted coefficients satisfying an appropriate analogue of Dwyer’s polynomial condition. We will prove the following generalization of this. If M is an SI(R)-module, then denote by Mn the value MR2n . Theorem M. Let R be a finite ring and let M be a finitely generated SI(R)-module over a Noetherian ring. Then for all k ≥ 0, the map Hk (Sp2n (R); Mn ) → Hk (Sp2n+2 (R); Mn+1 ) is an isomorphism for n ≫ 0. Remark 1.29. Examples similar to the one we gave after Theorem L show that this is more general than Mirzaii–van der Kallen’s result.  1.7  Comments and future directions  We now discuss some related results and open questions. Remark 1.30 (Homological stability). The examples in Theorems G, H, I, J, K can be interpreted when ℓ = 1 or when α is the unit ideal. In this case, we interpret the categories VIC(0) = SI(0) as follows: there is one object for each nonnegative integer n ≥ 0 and there is a unique morphism n → n′ whenever n′ ≥ n. Then representation stability of the relevant homology groups is the usual homological stability statements: for example, for each i ≥ 0, and n ≫ 0 the map Hi (SLn (Z); k) → Hi (SLn+1 (Z); k) is an isomorphism. Infinite rings. We have repeatedly emphasized that it is necessary for our rings R to be finite. Our final theorem explains why this is necessary. Theorem N. Let R be an infinite ring. For C ∈ {VI(R), VIC(R), SI(R)}, the category of C-modules is not locally Noetherian. This naturally leads to the question of how to develop representation stability results for categories such as VIC(R), etc. when R is an infinite ring. Bounds. Our asymptotic structure theorem does not provide bounds for when it begins. This is an unavoidable artifact of our proof, which make essential use of local Noetherianity. The results of the first author in [Pu2] concerning central stability for the homology groups of congruence subgroups (as representations of Sn ) are different and do give explicit bounds. It would be interesting to prove versions of our theorems with explicit bounds. Orthogonal and unitary categories. It is also possible to include orthogonal versions of our categories, i.e., finite rank free R-modules equipped with a nondegenerate orthogonal form. This is a richer category than the previous ones because the rank of an orthogonal module no longer determines its isomorphism type. While many of the ideas and constructions of this paper should be relevant, it will be necessary to generalize them further to include the 13  example of categories of orthogonal modules. Similarly, one can consider unitary versions. We have omitted discussion of these variations for reasons of space. Twisted commutative algebras. The category of FI-modules fits into the more general framework of modules over twisted commutative algebras (these are commutative algebras in the category of functors from the groupoid of finite sets) and this perspective is used in [SamSn1, SamSn2, SamSn3] to develop the basic properties of these categories. Similarly, the categories in this paper fit into a more general framework of modules over algebras which generalize twisted commutative algebras where the groupoid of finite sets is replaced by another groupoid (see Remark 3.5). When k is a field of characteristic 0, twisted commutative algebras have alternative concrete descriptions in terms of GL∞ (k)-equivariant commutative algebras (in the usual sense) thanks to Schur–Weyl duality. For the other cases in our paper, no such alternative description seems to be available, so it would be interesting to understand these more exotic algebraic structures.  1.8  Outline and strategy of proof  We now give an outline of the paper and comment on our proofs. Let C be one of the categories we discussed above, i.e., VI(R), V(R), V′ (R), VIC(R, U), or SI(R). The first step is to establish that the category of C-modules is locally Noetherian, i.e., that the finite generation property is inherited by submodules. This is done in §2, where we prove Theorems A, B, C, D, E, and N. We then prove our asymptotic structure result (Theorem F) in §3. The brief §4 shows how to use our locally Noetherian results to prove our twisted homological stability theorems (Theorems L and M). We then give, in §5, a framework (adapted from the standard proof of homological stability due to Quillen) for proving that C-modules arising from congruence subgroups are finitely generated. Finally, §6 applies the above framework to prove our results that assert that modules arising from the homology groups of various congruence subgroups are finitely generated, namely Theorems G, H, I, J, and K. Acknowledgments. We wish to thank Tom Church, Yves Cornulier, Aurélien Djament, Jordan Ellenberg, Nicholas Kuhn, Amritanshu Prasad, Andrew Snowden, and Nathalie Wahl for helpful conversations and correspondence. We also thank some anonymous referees for their careful reading of the paper and numerous suggestions and improvements.  2  Noetherian results  The goal of this section is to prove Theorems A, B, C, D, E, and N, which assert that modules over the various categories discussed in the introduction are locally Noetherian. We begin in §2.1 with some preliminary results. Next, in §2.2 we introduce the category OVIC(R) and in §2.3 we prove that the category of OVIC(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. We will use this in §2.4 to prove Theorems A, B, C, and D. These cover all of our categories except SI(R), which we deal with in §2.5. We close in §2.6 by proving Theorem N, which asserts that our categories are not locally Noetherian when R is an infinite ring. Since it presents no additional difficulties, in this section we allow k to be an arbitrary ring (unital, but not necessarily commutative). By a k-module, we mean a left k-module, and Noetherian means left Noetherian. However, we emphasize that R will always be a (unital) commutative ring. Also, in this section we will denote the effects of functors by parentheses rather than subscripts, so for instance if M : C → D is a functor and x ∈ C, then we will write M (x) ∈ D for the image of x under M .  14  2.1  Preliminary results  We first discuss some preliminary results. Let k be a fixed Noetherian ring. Functor categories. Let C be a category. A C-module (over k) is a functor C → Modk where Modk is the category of left k-modules. A morphism of C-modules is a natural transformation. For x ∈ C, let PC,x denote the representable C-module generated at x, i.e., PC,x (y) = k[HomC (x, y)]. If M is a C-module, then a morphism PC,x → M is equivalent to a choice of element in M (x). The category of C-modules is an Abelian category, with kernels, cokernels, exact sequences, etc. calculated pointwise. A C-module is finitely generated if it is a quotient of a finite direct sum of PC,x (allowing different choices of x). This agrees with the definition given in the introduction. Lemma 2.1. Let C be a category. The category of C-modules is locally Noetherian if and only if for all x ∈ C, every submodule of PC,x is finitely generated. Proof. Immediate since Noetherianity is preserved by quotients and finite direct sums. Functors between functor categories. Let Φ : C → D a functor. Given a D-module M : D → Modk , we get a C-module Φ∗ (M ) = M ◦ Φ. Note that Φ∗ is an exact functor from D-modules to C-modules. We say that Φ is finite if Φ∗ (PD,y ) is finitely generated for all y ∈ D. Recall that Φ is essentially surjective if every object of D is isomorphic to an object of the form Φ(x) for x ∈ C. Lemma 2.2. Let Φ : C → D be an essentially surjective and finite functor. Assume that the category of C-modules is locally Noetherian. Then the category of D-modules is locally Noetherian. Proof. Pick y ∈ D and let M1 ⊆ M2 ⊆ · · · be a chain of submodules of PD,y . By Lemma 2.1, it is enough to show that the Mn stabilize. Since Φ∗ is exact, we get a chain of submodules Φ∗ (M1 ) ⊆ Φ∗ (M2 ) ⊆ · · · of Φ∗ (PD,y ). Since Φ is finite, Φ∗ (PD,y ) is finitely generated, so since C is locally Noetherian there is some N such that Φ∗ (Mn ) = Φ∗ (Mn+1 ) for n ≥ N . Since Φ is essentially surjective, it preserves strict inclusions of submodules: if Mn $ Mn+1 , then there is some z ∈ D such that Mn (z) $ Mn+1 (z) and we can find x ∈ C such that Φ(x) ∼ = z, which ∗ ∗ means that Φ (Mn )(x) $ Φ (Mn+1 )(x). Thus Mn = Mn+1 for n ≥ N , as desired. Remark 2.3. In all of our applications of Lemma 2.2 in this paper, essential surjectivity will be obvious, as the objects of our categories are indexed by natural numbers. Well partial orderings. A poset P is well partially ordered if for any sequence x1 , x2 , . . . in P, there exists i < j such that xi ≤ xj . See [Kr] for a survey. The direct product P1 × P2 of posets is in a natural way a poset with (x, y) ≤ (x′ , y ′ ) if and only if x ≤ x′ and y ≤ y ′ . The following lemma is well-known, see for example [SamSn4, §2] for a proof. Lemma 2.4. (a) A subposet of a well partially ordered poset is well partially ordered. (b) If P is well partially ordered and x1 , x2 , . . . is a sequence, then there is an infinite increasing sequence i1 < i2 < · · · such that xi1 ≤ xi2 ≤ · · · . (c) A finite direct product of well partially ordered posets is well partially ordered. Posets of words. Let Σ be a finite set. Let Σ⋆ be the set of words s1 · · · sn whose letters come from Σ. Define a poset structure on Σ⋆ by saying that s1 · · · sn ≤ s′1 · · · s′m if there is an increasing function f : [n] → [m] such that si = s′f (i) for all i. The following is a special case of Higman’s lemma. 15  Lemma 2.5 (Higman, [Hi]). Σ⋆ is a well partially ordered poset. e ⋆ whose We will also need a variant of Higman’s lemma. Define a partially ordered set Σ ′ ⋆ ′ objects are the same as Σ by saying that s1 · · · sn ≤ s1 · · · sm if there is an increasing function f : [n] → [m] such that s′f (i) = si for i = 1, . . . , n and for each j = 1, . . . , m, there exists i such that f (i) ≤ j and s′j = s′f (i) . e ⋆ is a well partially ordered poset. Lemma 2.6. Σ  See [SamSn4, Prop. 8.2.1]; a different proof of this is in [DrKu, Proof of Prop. 7.5].  2.2  The category OVIC  Fix a finite commutative ring R. Motivation. Let U ⊂ R× be a subgroup of the group of multiplicative units. For the purpose of proving that the category of VIC(R, U)-modules is locally Noetherian, we will use the “cheap” definition of VIC(R, U) from the introduction and use the alternate description of its morphisms from Remark 1.11. Thus VIC(R, U) is the category whose objects are {Rn | n ≥ 0} ′ ′ ′ and whose morphisms from Rn to Rn are pairs (f, f ′ ), where f : Rn → Rn and f ′ : Rn → Rn satisfy f ′ f = 1Rn and det(f ) ∈ U if n = n′ . We will introduce yet another category OVIC(R) that satisfies OVIC(R) ⊂ VIC(R, U) (the “O” stands for “Ordered”; see Lemma 2.13 below). We emphasize that OVIC(R) does not depend on U. The objects of OVIC(R) are {Rn | n ≥ 0}, and the OVIC(R)-morphisms from Rn ′ to Rn are VIC(R, U)-morphisms (f, f ′ ) such that f ′ is what we will call a column-adapted map (see below for the definition). The key property of OVIC(R) is that every VIC(R)-morphism ′ (f, f ′ ) : Rn → Rn (notice that we are using VIC(R) and not VIC(R, U)) can be uniquely ′ factored as (f, f ′ ) = (f1 , f1′ )(f2 , f2′ ), where (f1 , f1′ ) : Rn → Rn is an OVIC(R)-morphism and ′ ′ (f2 , f2′ ) : Rn → Rn is an isomorphism; see Lemma 2.11 below. This implies in particular that the category OVIC(R) has no non-identity automorphisms. We will prove that the category of OVIC(R)-modules is locally Noetherian and that the inclusion functor OVIC(R) ֒→ VIC(R, U) is finite. The key point here is the above factorization and the fact that AutVIC(R) (Rn ) is finite. By Lemma 2.2, this will imply that the category of VIC(R, U)-modules is locally Noetherian. Column-adapted maps, local case. In this paragraph, assume that R is a commutative local ring. Recall that the set of non-invertible elements of R forms the unique maximal ideal ′ of R. An R-linear map f : Rn → Rn is column-adapted if there is a subset S = {s1 < · · · < sn } ⊆ {1, . . . , n′ } with the following two properties. Regard f as an n × n′ matrix and let b1 , . . . , bn be the standard basis for Rn . • For 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the sth i column of f is bi . • For 1 ≤ i ≤ n and 1 ≤ j < si , the entry in position (i, j) of f is non-invertible. The set S is unique and will be written Sc (f ). Example 2.7. An example of a column-adapted map f : R6 → R3 is the linear map represented by the matrix   ⋆ 1 0 ∗ 0 ∗   ⋆ 0 1 ∗ 0 ∗  . ⋆ 0 0 ⋆ 1 ∗  Here ∗ can be any element of R, while ⋆ can be any non-invertible element of R.  The following observation might clarify the nature of column-adapted maps. It follows immediately from our definitions. 16  Observation 2.8. All column-adapted maps are surjective, and the only column-adapted map f : Rn → Rn is the identity. Column-adapted maps, general case. Now assume that R is an arbitrary finite commutative ring. This implies that R is Artinian, so there exists an isomorphism R ∼ = R1 × · · · × Rq where the Ri are finite commutative local rings [AtMac, Theorem 8.7]. For the remainder of this section, we fix one such isomorphism. Observe that ′  ′  ′  HomR (Rn , Rn ) = HomR1 (R1n , R1n ) × · · · × HomRq (Rqn , Rqn ), ′  ′  so given f ∈ HomR (Rn , Rn ) we can write f = (f1 , . . . , fq ) with fi ∈ HomRi (Rin , Rin ). We will say that f is column-adapted if each fi is column-adapted. Lemma 2.9. Let R be a finite commutative ring and let f : Ra → Rb and g : Rb → Rc be column-adapted maps. Then gf : Ra → Rc is column-adapted. Proof. It is enough to deal with the case where R is a local ring. Write Sc (f ) = {s1 < · · · < sb } and Sc (g) = {t1 < · · · < tc }. For 1 ≤ i ≤ c, let ui = sti . We claim that gf is a columnadapted map with Sc (gf ) = {u1 < · · · < uc }. The first condition is clear, so we must verify the second condition. Consider 1 ≤ i ≤ n and 1 ≤ j < ui . We then have (gf )ij = gi1 f1j + gi2 f2j + · · · + gib fbj . By definition, gik is non-invertible for 1 ≤ k < ti . Also, for ti ≤ k ≤ b the element fkj is non-invertible since j < ui = sti ≤ sk . It follows that all the terms in our expression for (gf )ij are non-invertible, so since the non-invertible elements of R form an ideal we conclude that (gf )ij is non-invertible, as desired. ′  Lemma 2.10. Let R be a finite commutative ring and let f : Rn → Rn be a surjection. ′ Then we can uniquely factor f as f = f2 f1 , where f1 : Rn → Rn is column-adapted and f2 : Rn → Rn is an isomorphism. Proof. It is enough to deal with the case where R is a local ring. Since Rn is projective, ′ we can find g : Rn → Rn such that f g = 1Rn . We can view f and g as matrices, and the Cauchy–Binet formula says that 1 = det(f g) =  X  det(f[n],I ) det(gI,[n] )  I  where I ranges over all n-element subsets of [n′ ] = {1, . . . , n′ } and fI,J means the minor of f with rows I and columns J. Since R is local, the non-units form an ideal, so there exists at least one I such that det(f[n],I ) is a unit. Let I be the lexicographically minimal subset such that this holds. There is a unique h ∈ GL(Rn ) with (hf )[n],I = 1Rn . This implies that hf is column-adapted with Sc (hf ) = I, and the desired factorization is f1 = hf , f2 = h−1 . The category OVIC. Continue to let R be a general finite commutative ring. Define ′ OVIC(R) to be the category whose objects are {Rn | n ≥ 0} and where HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ) consists of pairs (f, f ′ ) as follows. ′ ′ • f ∈ HomR (Rn , Rn ) and f ′ ∈ HomR (Rn , Rn ). • f ′ f = 1Rn , so f is an injection and f ′ is a surjection. • f ′ is column-adapted.  17  ′′  ′  ′  For (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ) and (g, g′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ), we define (g, g′ )(f, f ′ ) ′′ to be (gf, f ′ g′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ). Lemma 2.9 implies that this makes sense. The key property of OVIC(R) is as follows. ′  Lemma 2.11. Let R be a finite commutative ring and let (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ). Then we can uniquely write (f, f ′ ) = (f1 , f1′ )(f2 , f2′ ), where (f2 , f2′ ) ∈ AutVIC(R) (Rn ) and ′ (f1 , f1′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ). Proof. Letting f ′ = f2′ f1′ be the factorization from Lemma 2.10, the desired factorization is ′ (f, f ′ ) = (f f2′ , f1′ )((f2′ )−1 , f2′ ). To see that this first factor is in HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ), observe that f1′ f f2′ = (f2′ )−1 f ′ f f2′ = (f2′ )−1 f2′ = 1Rn . Free and dependent rows. Assume that R is local. The condition f ′ f = 1Rn in the definition of an OVIC(R)-morphism implies that the rows of f indexed by Sc (f ′ ) are determined by the other rows, which can be chosen freely. So we will call the rows of f indexed by Sc (f ′ ) the dependent rows and the other rows the free rows. Example 2.12. Assume that R is a local ring, that f ′ : R6 → R3 is a column-adapted map with Sc (f ′ ) = {2, 3, 5}, and that f : R3 → R6 satisfies f ′ f = 1R3 . The possible matrices representing f ′ and f are of the form     ⋆ 1 0 ∗ 0 ∗   f ′ = ⋆ 0 1 ∗ 0 ∗  ⋆ 0 0 ⋆ 1 ∗    ∗ ⋄  ⋄  and f =  ∗  ⋄ ∗  ∗ ⋄ ⋄ ∗ ⋄ ∗    ∗ ⋄  ⋄  . ∗  ⋄ ∗  Here ∗ can be any element of R, while ⋆ can be any non-invertible element of R and each ⋄ is completely determined by the choices of ∗ and ⋆ plus the fact that f ′ f = 1R3 .  2.3  The category of OVIC-modules is locally Noetherian  The main result of this section is Theorem 2.14 below, which says that the category of OVIC(R)-modules is locally Noetherian when R is a finite commutative ring. A partial order. We first need the existence of a certain partial ordering. For d ≥ 0, define PR (d) =  ∞ G  HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ).  n=0  To apply the results of Sam–Snowden in [SamSn4], we would need to find a total ordering of the set PR (d) which is invariant under left composition. However, constructing such an ordering seems difficult. Our solution is to construct a total ordering which is invariant under left composition with “enough” morphisms to make an argument in the style of [SamSn4] go through (see Remark 2.16 for some discussion of this). The following lemma gives this ordering and is the key to the proof of Theorem 2.14, which asserts that the category of OVIC(R)-modules is locally Noetherian when R is a finite commutative ring. Lemma 2.13. Let R be a finite commutative ring, and fix d ≥ 0. There exists a well partial ordering  on PR (d) together with an extension ≤ of  to a total ordering such that the ′ following holds. Consider (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) and (g, g′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) ′ with (f, f ′ )  (g, g′ ). Then there is some (φ, φ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ) with the following two properties. 18  1. We have (g, g′ ) = (φ, φ′ )(f, f ′ ). ′′ 2. If (f1 , f1′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) satisfies (f1 , f1′ ) < (f, f ′ ), then (φ, φ′ )(f1 , f1′ ) < (g, g′ ). Since the proof of Lemma 2.13 is lengthy, we postpone it until the end of this section and instead show how it can be used to prove local Noetherianity. Noetherianity. We now come to our main result. Theorem 2.14. Let R be a finite commutative ring. Then the category of OVIC(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. Proof. Fix a Noetherian ring k. For d ≥ 0, define Pd to be the OVIC(R)-module POVIC(R),Rd , where the notation is as in §2.1, so Pd (Rn ) = k[HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn )]. By Lemma 2.1, it is enough to show that every submodule of Pd is finitely generated. Let  and ≤ be the orderings on PR (d) given by Lemma 2.13. For an element (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ), denote by ef,f ′ the associated basis element of Pd (Rn ). Given nonzero x ∈ Pd (Rn ), define its initial term init(x) as follows. First, set init(0) = 0. For x 6= 0, write P x = αf,f ′ ef,f ′ with αf,f ′ ∈ k, and let (f0 , f0′ ) be the ≤-largest element such that αf0 ,f0′ 6= 0. We then define init(x) = αf0 ,f0′ ef0 ,f0′ . Next, given a submodule M ⊂ Pd , define its initial module init(M ) to be the function that takes n ≥ 0 to the k-module k{init(x) | x ∈ M (Rn )}. Warning: init(M ) need not be an OVIC(R)-submodule of Pd , see Remark 2.16. Claim. If N, M ⊂ Pd are submodules with N ⊂ M and init(N ) = init(M ), then N = M . Proof of Claim. Assume that M 6= N . Let n ≥ 0 be such that M (Rn ) 6= N (Rn ). Pick y ∈ M (Rn ) \ N (Rn ) such that init(y) = αet where t is ≤-minimal. By assumption, there exists z ∈ N (Rn ) with init(z) = init(y). But then y−z ∈ M (Rn )\N (Rn ) and init(y−z) = βet′ where t′ < t, a contradiction. We now turn to the proof that every submodule of Pd is finitely generated. Assume otherwise, so there is a strictly increasing sequence M0 $ M1 $ · · · of submodules. By the claim, we must have init(Mi ) 6= init(Mi−1 ) for all i ≥ 1, so we can find some ni ≥ 0 and some / init(Mi−1 )(Rni ). Since  is a well partial ordering, λi efi ,fi′ ∈ init(Mi )(Rni ) with λi efi ,fi′ ∈ we can apply Lemma 2.4(b) and find i0 < i1 < · · · such that (fi0 , fi′0 )  (fi1 , fi′1 )  (fi2 , fi′2 )  · · · Since k is Noetherian, there exists some m ≥ 0 such that λim+1 is in the left k-ideal generated P by λi0 , . . . , λim , i.e., we can write λim+1 = m j=0 cj λij with cj ∈ k. Consider some 0 ≤ nij j ≤ m. Let xj ∈ Mij (R ) be such that init(xj ) = λij efij ,fi′ . By Lemma 2.13, there j  exists some (φj , φ′j ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rnij , Rnim+1 ) such that (fim+1 , fi′m+1 ) = (φj , φ′j )(fij , fi′j ). P nim+1 ′ ), Lemma 2.13 implies that Setting y = m j=0 cj (φj , φj )xj , an element of Mim+1 −1 (R , a contradiction. init(y) = λim+1 efim+1 ,fi′ m+1  Insertion maps. For the proof of Lemma 2.13, we will need the following lemma. Lemma 2.15. Let R be a commutative local ring. Fix some 1 ≤ k ≤ ℓ ≤ n and some S = {s1 < s2 < · · · < sd } ⊂ {1, . . . , n}. Set ℓb = max({i | si < ℓ} ∪ {0}). Let v = (v1 , . . . , vd ) ∈ Rd b Define be such that vi is non-invertible for all i > ℓ. T = {s1 < · · · < sbℓ < sbℓ + 1 < · · · < sd + 1} ⊂ {1, . . . , n + 1}.  There exists (φ, φ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn+1 ) with the following properties. 19  • Consider (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) with Sc (f ′ ) = S. – The matrix f ′ φ′ is obtained from f ′ by inserting the column vector v between the (ℓ − 1)st and ℓth columns. Observe that Sc (f ′ φ′ ) = T . – Let w ∈ Rd be the kth row of f . Then φf is obtained from f by inserting w between the (ℓ − 1)st and ℓth rows (observe that this new row is a free row!) and then modifying the dependent rows so that (φf, f ′ φ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn+1 ). More th precisely, the sbth i row of φf is the si row of f minus vi w. ′ d n • Consider (g, g ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (R , R ) with Sc (g′ ) < S in the lexicographic order. Then Sc (g′ φ′ ) < T in the lexicographic order. Proof. Define vb ∈ Rn to be the column vector with vi in position si for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and zeros elsewhere. Next, define φ′ : Rn+1 → Rn to be the matrix obtained from the n × n identity matrix IdRn by inserting vb between the (ℓ − 1)st and ℓth columns. The condition on the vi ensures that φ′ is a column-adapted map. The possible choices of φ : Rn → Rn+1 such that (φ, φ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn+1 ) have a single free row, namely the ℓth . Let that row have a 1 in position k and zeros elsewhere. The other dependent rows are determined by this. For a formula for this matrix, letting e be the kth standard basis row vector, the matrix φ is the result of inserting e between the ℓth and (ℓ + 1)st rows of IdRn − vbe. We have thus constructed an element (φ, φ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn+1 ); that it satisfies the conclusions of the lemma is an easy calculation. Constructing the orders, local case. We now prove Lemma 2.13 in the special case where R is a local ring. Proof of Lemma 2.13, local case. Let R be a finite commutative local ring. The first step ′ is to construct . Consider (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) and (g, g′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ). We will say that (f, f ′ )  (g, g′ ) if there exists a sequence (f, f ′ ) = (f0 , f0′ ), (f1 , f1′ ), . . . , (fn′ −n , fn′ ′ −n ) = (g, g′ ) with the following properties: • For 0 ≤ i ≤ n′ − n, we have (fi , fi′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn+i ). ′ ) is obtained from (f , f ′ ) as follows. Choose • For 0 ≤ i < n′ −n, the morphism (fi+1 , fi+1 i i ′ some 1 ≤ k ≤ ℓ ≤ n + i such that k ∈ / Sc (fi′ ). Then fi+1 is obtained from fi′ by inserting a copy of the kth column of fi′ between the (ℓ − 1)st and ℓth columns of fi′ . Also, fi+1 is obtained from fi′ by first inserting a copy of the kth row of fi (observe that this is a free row!) between the (ℓ − 1)st and ℓth rows of fi (this new row is also a free row!) and then d n+i+1 ). ′ ) ∈ Hom modifying the dependent rows to ensure that (fi+1 , fi+1 OVIC(R) (R , R This clearly defines a partial order on PR (d). Claim. The partially ordered set (PR (d), ) is well partially ordered. Proof of Claim. Define          Σ = Rd ∐ {♣} × Rd ∐ {♠} , where ♣ and ♠ are formal symbols. We will prove that (PR (d), ) is isomorphic to a subposet e ⋆ from Lemma 2.6, so by Lemma 2.4(a) is itself well of the well partially ordered poset Σ ′ partially ordered. Consider (f, f ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ). For 1 ≤ i ≤ n, let (ri , ci ) ∈ Σ be as follows. • If i ∈ Sc (f ′ ), then (ri , ci ) = (♣, ♠). Observe that in this case the ith row of f is a dependent row. 20  • If i ∈ / Sc (f ′ ), then ri is the ith row of f and ci is the ith column of f ′ . Observe that in this case the ith row of f is a free row. e ⋆ . We claim that the map taking the pair (f, f ′ ) We get an element (r1 , c1 ) · · · (rn , cn ) ∈ Σ e ⋆ . To see this, consider an element to (r1 , c1 ) · · · (rn , cn ) is an injection from PR (d) to Σ ⋆ e (r1 , c1 ) · · · (rn , cn ) ∈ Σ in its image. Our goal is to reconstruct (f, f ′ ). First, we can read off all the free rows of f . Second, if the ith row of f is free, then we can also read off the ith column of f ′ . The other columns of f ′ are determined by the fact that they are precisely the standard basis vectors in Rd , appearing in their natural order. But now that we have all of f ′ and the free rows of f , the dependent rows of f are determined since f ′ f = 1Rd . The claim follows. That this injection is order-preserving is immediate from the definitions. The only subtle point is the reason we required that k ∈ / Sc (fi′ ) in the second case of the definition of the ordering on PR (d). This is needed to ensure that no dependent rows of f are copied when producing a larger element. We now extend  to a total order ≤. Fix some arbitrary total order on Rd , and con′ sider (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) and (g, g′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ). We then determine if (f, f ′ ) ≤ (g, g′ ) via the following procedure. • If n < n′ , then (f, f ′ ) < (g, g′ ). • Otherwise, n = n′ . If Sc (f ′ ) < Sc (g′ ) in lexicographic ordering, set (f, f ′ ) < (g, g′ ). • Otherwise, Sc (f ′ ) = Sc (g′ ). If f ′ 6= g′ , then compare the sequences of elements of Rd which form the columns of f ′ and g′ using the lexicographic ordering and the fixed total ordering on Rd . • Finally, if f ′ = g′ , then compare the sequences of elements of Rd which form the free rows of f and g using the lexicographic ordering and the fixed total ordering on Rd . It is clear that this determines a total order ≤ on PR (d) that extends . It remains to check that these orders have the property claimed by the lemma. Consider ′ (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) and (g, g′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) with (f, f ′ )  (g, g′ ). By ′ repeated applications of Lemma 2.15, there exists (φ, φ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rn , Rn ) such that (g, g′ ) = (φ, φ′ )(f, f ′ ). Now pick (f1 , f1′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rn ) such that (f1 , f1′ ) < (f, f ′ ). We want to show that (φ, φ′ )(f1 , f1′ ) < (φ, φ′ )(f, f ′ ). If Sc (f1′ ) < Sc (f ′ ) in the lexicographic order, then this is an immediate consequence of Lemma 2.15, so we can assume that Sc (f1′ ) = Sc (f ′ ). In this case, it follows from Lemma 2.15 that f1′ φ′ and f ′ φ′ are obtained by inserting the same columns into f1′ and f ′ , respectively. If f1′ 6= f ′ , then it follows immediately that (φ, φ′ )(f1 , f1′ ) < (φ, φ′ )(f, f ′ ). Otherwise, it follows from Lemma 2.15 that φf1 and φf are obtained by duplicating the same rows in f1 and f , respectively, and it follows that (φ, φ′ )(f1 , f1′ ) < (φ, φ′ )(f, f ′ ), as desired. Remark 2.16. The total ordering that we define for the proof of Lemma 2.13 need not be compatible with all compositions in the sense that f ′ < f implies that gf ′ < gf for all g. This assumption is in place in [SamSn4] which is why we cannot use the machinery from that paper. To see this, consider the example R = Z/16 and define f=  !  0 , 1        f1′ = 2 1 ,   0 0   g = 1 0  , 0 1  g1′  =  !  2 1 0 , 0 0 1  21      f2′ = 6 1 , g2′  =  !  6 1 0 . 0 0 1  Then (f, fi′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (R1 , R2 ) and (g, gi′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (R2 , R3 ) for i = 1, 2. Also,         g1′ f1′ = 4 2 1 ,  g1′ f2′ = 12 6 1 ,  g2′ f1′ = 12 2 1 ,  g2′ f2′ = 4 6 1 .          Using our ordering, we need to fix a total ordering on Z/16. If we choose 2 < 6, then we would have f1′ < f2′ . This forces 4 < 12 by considering g1′ f1′ < g1′ f2′ , but it also forces 12 < 4 by considering g2′ f1′ < g2′ f2′ . Hence our ordering is not compatible with all compositions. In particular, we cannot guarantee that init(M ) is an OVIC(R)-submodule of Pd . It is possible that there exist total orderings that are compatible with all compositions. Constructing the orders, general case. We finally come to the general case. Proof of Lemma 2.13, general case. Let R be an arbitrary finite commutative ring. As we mentioned above, R is Artinian, so we can write R ∼ = R1 × · · · × Rq with Ri a finite local ring [AtMac, Theorem 8.7]. Indeed, we have fixed one such isomorphism. For all n, n′ ≥ 0, we then have ′  ′  ′  HomR (Rn , Rn ) = HomR1 (R1n , R1n ) × · · · × HomRq (Rqn , Rqn ). The set PR (d) can thus be identified with the set of tuples ((f1 , f1′ ), . . . , (fq , fq′ )) ∈ PR1 (d) × · · · × PRq (d) such that there exists some single n ≥ 0 with (fi , fi′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(Ri ) (Rid , Rin ) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ q. Above we constructed the desired orders  and ≤ on each PRi (d). Define a partial order  on their product using the product partial order and define a total order ≤ on their product using the lexicographic order. This restricts to orders  and ≤ on PR (d). Lemma 2.4 implies that  is well partially ordered, and the remaining conclusions are immediate.  2.4  The categories of VI-, V-, V′ -, and VIC-modules are locally Noetherian  We now prove several of our main theorems. Proof of Theorem D. We wish to prove that the category of VIC(R, U)-modules is locally Noetherian. By the discussion at the beginning of §2.2 (and Theorem 2.14), it is enough to show that the inclusion functor Φ : OVIC(R) → VIC(R, U) is finite. Fix d ≥ 0 and set M = PVIC(R,U),Rd , so M (Rn ) = k[HomVIC(R,U) (Rd , Rn )]. Our goal is to prove that the OVIC(R)-module Φ∗ (M ) is finitely generated. For every ϕ ∈ SLU d (R), we get an element ∗ −1 ∗ d (ϕ, ϕ ) of Φ (M )(R ), and thus a morphism POVIC(R),Rd → Φ (M ). For ϕ ∈ GLd (R) and (f, f ′ ) ∈ HomOVIC(R) (Rd , Rd+1 ), the element (f, f ′ )(ϕ, ϕ−1 ) is in Φ∗ (M )(Rd+1 ), and thus determines a morphism POVIC(R),Rd+1 → Φ∗ (M ). Lemma 2.11 implies that the resulting map     M    POVIC(R),Rd  ⊕   SLU d (R)  M  GLd (R)×Hom OVIC(R) (Rd ,Rd+1 )     POVIC(R),Rd+1  −→ Φ∗ (M )  is a surjection. Since R is finite, this proves that Φ∗ (M ) is finitely generated.  22  Proof of Theorem A. We wish to prove that the category of VI(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. The forgetful functor VIC(R) → VI(R) is essentially surjective since it is the identity map on the objects. To see that it is finite, consider the pullback of PVI(R),Rn to VIC(R). Since it is generated as a VI(R)-module by the identity map idRn ∈ PVI(R),Rn (Rn ) = k[homVI(R) (Rn , Rn )], the same is true as a VIC(R)-module since the forgetful map is surjective on morphism sets. This surjectivity uses the fact that R is finite. Indeed, this implies that every stably free R-module is free, so the cokernel of a splittable R-linear map Rm → Rn is free. The desired statement now follows from Lemma 2.2 and Theorem D. Proof of Theorem B. We wish to prove that the category of V(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. By Lemma 2.2 and Theorem A, it is enough to prove that the inclusion functor ι : VI(R) → V(R) is essentially surjective and finite. Essential surjectivity is clear, so we must only prove finiteness. Let V be a free R-module. By considering its image, every splittable R-linear map canonically factors as a composition of a surjective map followed by a splittable injective map. So we have the decomposition of VI(R)-modules ι∗ (PV(R),V ) =  M  PVI(R),W  V →W →0  where the sum is over all free quotients W of V . Proof of Theorem C. We wish to prove that the category of V′ (R)-modules is locally Noetherian. By Lemma 2.2 and Theorem A, it is enough to prove that the inclusion functor ι : VI(R) → V′ (R) is essentially surjective and finite. Essential surjectivity is clear, so we must only prove finiteness. Consider some d ≥ 0. We must prove that ι∗ (PV′ (R),Rd ) is a finitely generated VI(R)-module. Let N be the number of elements of Rd . Consider some n ≥ N and some V′ (R)-morphism f : Rd → Rn . Viewing f as an n × d matrix, there are at most N distinct rows occurring in f . This implies that there exists some g ∈ GLd (R) such that the last (n − N ) rows of f ◦ g are identically 0. From this, we see that f can be factored as f ′′ f′ Rd −→ RN −→ Rn , where f ′′ is splittable and f ′ is arbitrary. This implies that we have the decomposition of VI(R)-modules M ι∗ (PV′ (R),Rd ) = PVI(R),RN ′ , Rd →RN ′ ′  where the sum is over all R-linear maps Rd → RN with N ′ ≤ N . Remark 2.17. A shorter proof of Theorem A (and hence of Theorems B and C) is given in [SamSn4, §8.3] that deduces it from the locally Noetherian property of the opposite of the category of finite sets and surjective functions. We include the proof above since it follows easily from Theorem D which is the result that we actually need for our applications, and because the ideas for the proof were only made possible by work from both projects.  2.5  The category of SI-modules is locally Noetherian  Fix a finite commutative ring R. Our goal in this section is to adapt the proof that the category of VIC(R)-modules is locally Noetherian to prove that the category of SI(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. The proof of this is immediately after Theorem 2.20 below. Row-adapted maps. An R-linear map f : Rn → Rm is row-adapted if the transpose f t of the matrix representing f is column-adapted in the sense of §2.2, in which case we 23  define Sr (f ) = Sc (f t ). Lemma 2.9 implies that the composition of two row-adapted maps is row-adapted. The category OSI. Define OSI′ (R) to be the category whose objects are pairs (R2n , ω), ′ where ω is a symplectic form on R2n , and whose morphisms from (R2n , ω) to (R2n , ω ′ ) are ′ R-linear maps f : R2n → R2n which are symplectic and row-adapted. Also, define OSI(R) to be the full subcategory of OSI′ (R) spanned by the (R2n , ω) such that ω is the standard symplectic form on R2n , i.e., if {b1 , . . . , b2n } is the standard basis for R2n , then ω(b2i−1 , b2j−1 ) = ω(b2i , b2j ) = 0  and ω(b2i−1 , b2j ) = δij  (1 ≤ i, j ≤ n),  where δij is the Kronecker delta. We will frequently omit the ω from objects of OSI(R). Factorization of SI-morphisms. The following is the analogue for SI(R) of Lemma 2.11. ′  Lemma 2.18. Let R be a finite commutative ring and f ∈ HomSI(R) ((R2n , ω), (R2n , ω ′ )). Then we can uniquely write f = f1 f2 , where f2 ∈ IsoSI(R) ((R2n , ω), (R2n , λ)) for some sym′ plectic form λ on R2n and f1 ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2n , λ), (R2n , ω ′ )). Proof. Applying Lemma 2.10 to the transpose of f and then transposing the result, we can ′ uniquely write f = f1 f2 , where f2 : R2n → R2n is an isomorphism and f1 : R2n → R2n is a row-adapted map. There exists a unique symplectic form λ on R2n such that f2 : (R2n , ω) → ′ (R2n , λ) is a symplectic map. Since f : (R2n , ω) → (R2n , ω ′ ) is a symplectic map and f1 = ′ f f2−1 , it follows that f1 : (R2n , λ) → (R2n , ω ′ ) is a symplectic map, as desired. A partial order. Our goal now is to prove Theorem 2.20 below, which says that the category of OSI(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. This requires the existence of a certain partial ordering. For d ≥ 0 and ω a symplectic form on R2d , define PR (d, ω) =  ∞ G  HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n );  n=0  here we are using our convention that R2n is given the standard symplectic form. Lemma 2.19. Let R be a finite commutative ring. Fix d ≥ 0 and a symplectic form ω on R2d . There exists a well partial ordering  on PR (d, ω) together with an extension ≤ of  to a total ordering such that the following holds. Consider f ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) and ′ ′ g ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) with f  g. Then there is some φ ∈ HomOSI(R) (R2n , R2n ) with the following two properties. 1. We have g = φf . ′′ 2. If f1 ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) satisfies f1 < f , then φf1 < g. We postpone the proof of Lemma 2.19 until the end of this section. Noetherian theorems. For d ≥ 0 and ω a symplectic form on R2d , define Qd,ω to be the OSI(R)-module obtained by pulling back the OSI′ (R)-module POSI′ (R),(R2d ,ω) , so Qd,ω (R2n ) = k[HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n )]. The main consequence of Lemma 2.19 is as follows. Theorem 2.20. Let R be a finite commutative ring. Then the category of OSI(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. Moreover, for d ≥ 0 and ω a symplectic form on R2d , the OSI(R)-module Qd,ω is finitely generated. 24  Proof. The proof of Theorem 2.14 can easily be adapted to prove that in fact every submodule of Qd,ω is finitely generated (replace Lemma 2.13 with Lemma 2.19). If ω is the standard symplectic form on R2d , then Qd,ω = POSI(R),R2d . We can thus use Lemma 2.1 to deduce that the category of OSI(R)-modules is locally Noetherian. We now use Theorem 2.20 to deduce Theorem E, which asserts that the category of SI(R)modules is locally Noetherian when R is a finite commutative ring. Proof of Theorem E. By Lemma 2.2 and Theorem 2.20, it is enough to show that the inclusion functor Φ : OSI(R) → SI(R) is finite. Fix d ≥ 0 and ω a symplectic form on R2d . Set M = PSI(R),(R2d ,ω) , so M (R2n ) = k[HomSI(R) ((R2d , ω), R2n )]; here we remind the reader of our convention that R2n is endowed with its standard symplectic form. Our goal is to prove that the OSI(R)-module Φ∗ (M ) is finitely generated. For every symplectic form λ on R2d and every element of IsoSI(R) ((R2d , ω), (R2d , λ)), we get a morphism Qd,λ → Φ∗ (M ) in the obvious way. Lemma 2.18 implies that the resulting map M  λ a symplectic form on R2d      M  IsoSI(R) ((R2d ,ω),(R2d ,λ))     Qd,λ  −→ Φ∗ (M )  is a surjection. Theorem 2.20 implies that each Qd,λ is a finitely generated OSI(R)-module. Since R is finite, this proves that Φ∗ (M ) is finitely generated. Insertion maps. For the proof of Lemma 2.19, we will need the following analogue of Lemma 2.15. Lemma 2.21. Let R be a commutative local ring. Fix d ≥ 0, a symplectic form ω on R2d , ′ and some f ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) and g ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ). Assume that there exists some I ⊂ {1, . . . , n′ } \ {i | either 2i − 1 ∈ Sr (g) or 2i ∈ Sr (g)} such that f can be obtained from g by deleting the rows J := {2i − 1, 2i | i ∈ I} (observe that this implies that Sr (f ) is equal to Sr (g) after removing J from {1, . . . , 2n′ } and renumbering the rows in ′ order). Let the rows of g be r1 , . . . , r2n′ . Then there exists φ ∈ HomOSI(R) (R2n , R2n ) with the following properties. • We have g = φf . • Let h ∈ HomOSI(R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) be such that Sr (h) = Sr (f ). Then φh is obtained from h by inserting the row rj in position j of h for all j ∈ J. • Let h ∈ HomOSI(R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) be such that Sr (h) < Sr (f ) in the lexicographic order. Then Sr (φh) < Sr (g) in the lexicographic order. Proof. Set J ′ = {1, . . . , 2n′ } \ J, and write J = {j1 < · · · < j2(n′ −n) } and J ′ = {j1′ < ′ }. Next, write S (f ) = {s < · · · < s } ⊂ {1, . . . , 2n}, and for 1 ≤ i ≤ 2n′ , let · · · < j2n r 1 2d 1 ri = (ri , . . . , ri2d ). Define rbi ∈ R2n to be the element that has rij in position sj for 1 ≤ j ≤ 2d ′ and zeros elsewhere. Finally, define φ : R2n → R2n to be the map given by the matrix defined as follows. • For 1 ≤ k ≤ 2(n′ − n), the jkth row of φ is rbk . • For 1 ≤ k ≤ 2n, the (jk′ )th row of φ has a 1 in position k and zeros elsewhere. The fact that g is row-adapted implies that φ is row-adapted, and the three listed conclusions of the lemma are easy calculations. The only non-trivial fact that must be proved is that ′ φ : R2n → R2n is symplectic with respect to the standard symplectic forms ωn and ωn′ on ′ R2n and R2n , respectively. 25  ′  Let x1 , . . . , x2n ∈ R2n be the columns of φ. To prove that φ is symplectic with respect to ωn and ωn′ is equivalent to proving that (1 ≤ i, j ≤ n).  ωn′ (x2i−1 , x2j−1 ) = ωn′ (x2i , x2j ) = 0 and ωn′ (x2i−1 , x2j ) = δij  (2.1)  ′  For 1 ≤ i ≤ 2n, let x′i ∈ R2n be the element obtained by replacing the jkth entry of xi with a 0 for 1 ≤ k ≤ 2(n′ − n) and let x′′i = xi − x′i . By construction, x′1 , . . . , x′2n is the standard ′ basis for R2n with the basis vectors indexed by J removed, so ωn′ (x′2i−1 , x′2j−1 ) = ωn′ (x′2i , x′2j ) = 0  and ωn′ (x′2i−1 , x′2j ) = δij  (1 ≤ i, j ≤ n).  Also, by construction we have ωn′ (x′i , x′′j ) = 0 for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2n. It follows that (2.1) is equivalent to showing that ωn′ (x′′i , x′′j ) = 0 for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2n. The only x′′i that are nonzero are x′′si for 1 ≤ i ≤ 2d, so it is enough to show that ′ that ωn′ (x′′si , x′′sj ) = 0 for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2d. Let y1 , . . . , y2d ∈ R2n be the columns of g. For ′ 1 ≤ i ≤ 2d, let yi′ ∈ R2n be the element obtained by replacing the jkth entry of yi with a 0 for 1 ≤ k ≤ 2(n′ − n) and let yi′′ = yi − yi′ . By construction, we have x′′si = yi′′ for 1 ≤ i ≤ 2d, so we must show that ωn′ (yi′′ , yj′′ ) = 0 for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2d. Let z1 , . . . , z2d ∈ R2n be the columns of f and let b1 , . . . , b2d be the standard basis for ′ 2d R . Since f : (R2d , ω) → R2n and g : (R2d , ω) → R2n are symplectic maps, it follows that ωn (zi , zj ) = ω(bi , bj ) and ωn′ (yi , yj ) = ω(bi , bj )  (1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2d).  (2.2)  Using the fact that f is obtained by deleting appropriate pairs of rows of g, we see that ωn (zi , zj ) = ωn′ (yi′ , yj′ )  (1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2d).  (2.3)  Combining (2.2) and (2.3), we see that ωn′ (yi , yj ) = ωn′ (yi′ , yj′ ) for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2d. By construction, we have ωn′ (yi , yj′ ) = ωn′ (yi′ , yj ) = ωn′ (yi′ , yj′ )  (1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2d).  We conclude that for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 2d we have ω2n′ (yi′′ , yj′′ ) equal to ωn′ (yi − yi′ , yj − yj′ ) = ωn′ (yi , yj ) − ωn′ (yi′ , yj ) − ωn′ (yi , yj′ ) + ωn′ (yi′ , yj′ ) = 2ωn′ (yi′ , yj′ ) − 2ωn′ (yi′ , yj′ ) = 0, as desired. Constructing the orders. We now prove Lemma 2.19. Proof of Lemma 2.19. The general case of Lemma 2.19 can easily be deduced from the case where R is a local ring (the argument is identical to that for Lemma 2.13), so we can assume that R is a local ring. The first step is to construct . Consider f ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) ′ and g ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ). We will say that f  g if f can be obtained from g by deleting the rows {2i − 1, 2i | i ∈ I} for some set I ⊂ {1, . . . , n′ } \ {i | either 2i − 1 ∈ Sr (f ) or 2i ∈ Sr (f )}. This clearly defines a partial order on PR (d, ω). Claim. The partially ordered set (PR (d, ω), ) is well partially ordered. 26  Proof of Claim. Define          Σ = Rd ∐ {♠} × Rd ∐ {♠} , where ♠ is a formal symbol. We will prove that (PR (d, ω), ) is isomorphic to a subposet of the well partially ordered poset Σ⋆ from Lemma 2.5, so by Lemma 2.4(a) is itself well partially ordered. Consider f ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ). For 1 ≤ i ≤ 2n, let ri =  (  the ith row of f ♠  if i ∈ / Sr (f ), if i ∈ Sr (f ).  Thus ri ∈ R2d ∐ {♠}. For 1 ≤ i ≤ n, let θi = (r2i−1 , r2i ) ∈ Σ. We thus get an element θ1 · · · θn ∈ Σ∗ . We claim that the map taking f to θ1 · · · θn is an injection from PR (d, ω) to Σ⋆ . To see this, consider an element θ1 · · · θn ∈ Σ⋆ in its image. Our goal is to reconstruct f . Write θi = (r2i−1 , r2i ), and set S = {1 ≤ i ≤ 2n | ri = ♠}. We can read off all the rows of f except for those whose index lies in S. But we know that S = Sr (f ), so rows whose index lies in S are precisely the standard basis vectors in Rd , appearing in their natural order. We have thus reconstructed all of f , as claimed. That this injection is order-preserving is immediate from the definitions. The only subtle point is the reason we used the ♠ rather than just using the basis vectors in Rd . The point here is that in the definition of the partial order on PR (d, ω), we were not allowed to delete rows in Sr (f ), so we have to distinguish them in Σ. We now extend  to a total order ≤. Fix some arbitrary total order on R2d , and consider ′ f ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) and g ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ). We then determine if f ≤ g via the following procedure. Assume without loss of generality that f 6= g. • If n < n′ , then f < g. • Otherwise, n = n′ . If Sr (f ) < Sr (g) in the lexicographic ordering, then f < g. • Otherwise, Sr (f ) = Sr (g). Compare the sequences of elements of R2d which form the rows of f and g using the lexicographic ordering and the fixed total ordering on R2d . It is clear that this determines a total order ≤ on PR (d, ω) that extends . It remains to check that these orders have the property claimed by the lemma. Consider ′ f ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) and g ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) with f  g. By Lemma ′ 2.21, there exists some φ ∈ HomOSI(R) (R2n , R2n ) such that g = φf . Now consider f1 ∈ HomOSI′ (R) ((R2d , ω), R2n ) such that f1 < f . We want to show that φf1 < φf . If Sr (f1 ) < Sr (f ) in the lexicographic order, then this is an immediate consequence of Lemma 2.21, so we can assume that Sr (f1 ) = Sr (f ). In this case, it follows from Lemma 2.21 that φf1 and φf are obtained by inserting the same rows into the same places in f1 and f , respectively. It follows immediately that φf1 < φf , as desired.  2.6  Counterexamples  In this section, we prove Theorem N, which asserts that the category of C-modules is not locally Noetherian for C ∈ {VI(R), VIC(R), SI(R)} when R is an infinite ring. This requires the following lemma. Lemma 2.22. Let k be a nonzero ring and Γ be a group that contains a non-finitely generated subgroup. Then the group ring k[Γ] is not Noetherian. Proof. Given a subgroup H ⊆ Γ, the kernel of the surjection k[Γ] → k[Γ/H] is a left ideal IH ⊂ k[Γ]. Clearly H $ H ′ implies IH $ IH ′ , so the existence of an infinite ascending chain 27  of left ideals in k[Γ] follows from the existence of an infinite ascending chain of subgroups of Γ. The existence of this is an immediate consequence of the existence of a non-finitely generated subgroup of Γ. Proof of Theorem N. For all of our choices of C, the group Γ := AutC (R2 ) contains SL2 (R). We claim that SL2 (R) contains a non-finitely generated subgroup. There are two cases. If Z ⊆ R, then SL2 (R) contains a rank 2 free subgroup. For instance, one can take the subgroup generated by ! ! 1 2 1 0 and . 0 1 2 1 This free subgroup contains a non-finitely generated subgroup. If Z * R, then the additive group of R is annihilated by some positive integer ℓ. Since R is infinite, this implies that the additive group of R is not finitely generated. The claim now follows from the fact that the additive group of R is a subgroup of SL2 (R) via the embedding r 7→  !  1 r . 0 1  By Lemma 2.22, the claim implies that k[Γ] is not Noetherian. Define a C-module M via the formula ( k[AutC (V )] if V ∼ = Z2 , MV = 0 otherwise. The morphisms are the obvious ones. It is then clear that M is finitely generated but contains non-finitely generated submodules.  3  Partial resolutions and representation stability  This section contains the machinery that we will use to prove our asymptotic structure theorem. It contains three sections. Recall the definition of a (weak) complemented category from §1.4. In §3.1, we will discuss automorphisms of complemented categories. Next, in §3.2 we will state Theorem 3.7, which gives a certain partial resolution for finitely generated modules over a complemented category. Theorem 3.7 is proven in §3.3. At the end of §3.3, we will derive our asymptotic structure theorem (Theorem F) from Theorem 3.7. The arguments in this section are inspired by [ChEFaNag]. The formal manipulations in §3.1 are also reminiscent of some of those appearing in [WahRW].  3.1  Automorphism groups of complemented categories  Objects in complemented categories equipped with a generator have rich automorphism groups. For instance, we have the following. Lemma 3.1. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X. For V, V ′ ∈ A, the group AutA (V ′ ) acts transitively on the set HomA (V, V ′ ). Proof. Without loss of generality, V ′ = X k for some k ≥ 0. Consider morphisms f, g : V → X k . Let C and D be the complements to f (V ) and g(V ), respectively, and let φ : V ⊛C → X k and φ′ : V ⊛ D → X k be the associated isomorphisms. Writing V ∼ = X ℓ , we then have C, D ∼ = X k−ℓ ; in particular, there is an isomorphism η : C → D. The composition φ−1  id⊛η  φ′  X k −−→ V ⊛ C −−−→ V ⊛ D −→ X k 28  is then an isomorphism Ψ : X k → X k such that Ψ ◦ φ : V ⊛ C → X k is an isomorphism that restricts to g : V → X k , so Ψ ◦ f = g. Lemma 3.2. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category, let V, V ′ ∈ A, and define ϕ : AutA (V ) × AutA (V ′ ) → AutA (V ⊛ V ′ ) by the formula ϕ(f, g) = f ⊛ g. Then the following hold. (a) The homomorphism ϕ is injective. (b) Let i : V → V ⊛ V ′ and i′ : V ′ → V ⊛ V ′ be the canonical maps. Then {η ∈ AutA (V ⊛ V ′ ) | η ◦ i′ = i′ } = ϕ(AutA (V ) × idV ′ ) ∼ = AutA (V ), ′ ′ {η ∈ AutA (V ⊛ V ) | η ◦ i = i} = ϕ(idV × AutA (V )) ∼ = AutA (V ′ ). Proof. (a) Consider f0 ∈ AutA (V ) and g0 ∈ AutA (V ′ ) such that ϕ(f0 , g0 ) = idV ⊛V ′ . The proofs that f0 = idV and g0 = idV ′ are similar, so we will only give the details for f0 . Let 1 be the identity of (A, ⊛) and let u : 1 → V ′ be the unique map (by assumption, 1 is initial). Since g0 ◦ u = u, we have a commutative diagram V ⊛ 1 −−V−−→ V ⊛ V ′ id ⊛u   f ⊛id y 0 1   f ⊛g y 0 0  (3.1)  V ⊛ 1 −−V−−→ V ⊛ V ′ . id ⊛u  Since f0 ⊛ g0 = idV ⊛V ′ , we deduce that (idV ⊛ u) ◦ (f0 ⊛ id1 ) = idV ⊛ u. Like all A-morphisms, idV ⊛ u is a monomorphism, so f0 ⊛ id1 = idV ⊛1 , and hence f0 = idV , as desired. (b) The isomorphisms are a consequence of (a). We next show that ϕ(AutA (V ) × idV ′ ) ⊂ {η ∈ AutA (V ⊛ V ′ ) | η ◦ i′ = i′ }, ϕ(idV × AutA (V ′ )) ⊂ {η ∈ AutA (V ⊛ V ′ ) | η ◦ i = i}. The proofs are similar, so we will only give the details for ϕ(idV × AutA (V ′ )). Consider g1 ∈ AutA (V ′ ). The map ϕ(idV , g1 ) ◦ i is the composition of the canonical isomorphism V ∼ = V ⊛ 1 with the composition id ⊛g1  V V V ⊛ 1 −→ V ⊛ V ′. V ⊛ V ′ −→  id ⊛u  The uniqueness of u implies that this composition equals idV ⊛(g1 ◦u) = idV ⊛u, so ϕ(idV , g1 )◦ i = i, as desired. We next show that ϕ(AutA (V ) × idV ′ ) ⊃ {η ∈ AutA (V ⊛ V ′ ) | η ◦ i′ = i′ }, ϕ(idV × AutA (V ′ )) ⊃ {η ∈ AutA (V ⊛ V ′ ) | η ◦ i = i}. The proofs are similar, so we will only give the details for ϕ(idV × AutA (V ′ )). Consider h2 ∈ AutA (V ⊛ V ′ ) such that h2 ◦ i = i. We wish to find some g2 ∈ AutA (V ′ ) such that ϕ(idV , g2 ) = h2 . Observe that i′ (V ′ ) is a complement to i(V ) and h2 ◦ i′ (V ′ ) is a complement to h2 ◦ i(V ) = i(V ). By the uniqueness of complements, there must exist g2 ∈ AutA (V ′ ) such that h2 ◦ i′ = i′ ◦ g2 . Under the injection HomA (V ⊛ V ′ , V ⊛ V ′ ) ֒→ HomA (V, V ⊛ V ′ ) × HomA (V ′ , V ⊛ V ′ ), both h2 and idV ⊛ g2 map to the same thing, namely (i, i′ ◦ g2 ). We conclude that h2 = idV ⊛ g2 = ϕ(idV , g2 ), as desired. 29  3.2  Recursive presentations and partial resolutions  Fix a complemented category (A, ⊛) with a generator X and fix an A-module M . We wish to study several chain complexes associated to M . Shift functor. Consider some p ≥ 0 and some V ∈ A. Define IV,p = HomA (X p , V ). This might be the empty set. The groups Aut(X)p and Sp and the wreath product Sp ≀ Aut(X) = Sp ⋉ Aut(X)p all act on X p and induce free actions on IV,p . Set I′V,p = IV,p / Aut(X)p ,  I′′V,p = IV,p /Sp ,  I′′′ V,p = IV,p /(Sp ≀ Aut(X)).  For h ∈ IV,p , let Wh ⊂ V be the complement of h(X p ). We then define an A-module Σp M via the formula M MWh (V ∈ A). (Σp M )V = h∈IV,p  As far as morphisms go, consider a morphism f : V → V ′ and some h ∈ IV,p . We then have f ◦ h ∈ IV ′ ,p . Moreover, letting C ⊂ V ′ be the complement of f (V ), there is a natural isomorphism V ⊛ C ∼ = V ′ . Under this isomorphism, we can identify Wf ◦h with Wh ⊛ C. The canonical morphism Wh → Wh ⊛ C thus induces a map MWh → MWf ◦h . This allows us to define (component by component) a morphism (Σp M )f : (Σp M )V → (Σp M )V ′ . We will identify Σ0 M with M in the obvious way. As notation, we will write (Σp M )V,h for the term of (Σp M )V associated to h ∈ IV,p . ′ ′′ ′′′ Define Σ′p M and Σ′′p M and Σ′′′ p M by summing over IV,p and IV,p and IV,p , rather than IV,p . These are quotients of IV,p as A-modules by the submodules spanned by (x, (−1)g x) where x ∈ MW,h and (−1)g x ∈ MW,h◦g for g ∈ Aut(X)p or g ∈ Sp or g ∈ Sp ≀ Aut(X), respectively, and (−1)g refers to the sign of the Sp -component of g in the second and third case (and is defined to be 1 in the first case). Lemma 3.3. If (A, ⊛) is a complemented category with generator X and if M is a finitely generated A-module, then Σp M and Σ′p M and Σ′′p M and Σ′′′ p M are finitely generated Amodules for all p ≥ 0. Proof. It is enough to prove this for Σp M since this surjects onto the others. There exist V1 , . . . , Vm ∈ A and xi ∈ MVi for 1 ≤ i ≤ m such that M is generated by {x1 , . . . , xm }. For all V ∈ A, let hV : X p → V ⊛ X p be the canonical morphism, so (Σp M )V ⊛X p ,hV = MV . For 1 ≤ i ≤ m, define xi ∈ (Σp M )Vi ⊛X p to be the element xi ∈ (Σp M )Vi ⊛X p ,hVi ⊂ (Σp M )Vi ⊛X p . We claim that Σp M is generated by x1 , . . . , xm . Indeed, generated by the indicated elements. Consider V ∈ A. (Σp M )V . If (Σp M )V 6= 0, then V ∼ = X q for some q ≥ NX q = (Σp M )X q . It is clear that (Σp M )X q−p ⊛X p ,hX q−p AutA (X q ) acts transitively on IX q ,p . We conclude that h ∈ IX q ,p , so NX q = MX q .  let N be the submodule of Σp M Our goal is to show that NV = p, and it is enough to show that ⊂ NX q . Lemma 3.1 implies that NX q contains (Σp M )X q ,h for all  Remark 3.4. The operation Σp is an exact functor on the category of A-modules: given a morphism f : M → N , there is a morphism Σp f : Σp M → Σp N defined in the obvious way, th and the same is true for Σ′p and Σ′′p and Σ′′′ p . Note that Σp can be identified with the p ′ ′′ ′′′ iterate of Σ1 , and a similar statement holds for Σp , but not for Σp or Σp . 30  Chain complex. For p ≥ 1, we now define a morphism d : Σp M → Σp−1 M of A-modules as follows. Consider V ∈ A. For 1 ≤ i ≤ p, let ti : X → X p be the canonical morphism of the ith term and let si : X p−1 → X p be the morphism that corresponds to the (p − 1)-tuple (t1 , . . . , tbi , . . . , tp ) under the isomorphism HomA (X p−1 , X p ) ∼ = HomA (X, X p ) × · · · × HomA (X, X p )  from the definition of a complemented category. For h ∈ IV,p , we have h ◦ si ∈ IV,p−1 . Moreover, we can identify Wh◦si with Wh ⊛ (h ◦ ti (X)). Define di : Σp M → Σp−1 M to be the morphism that takes (Σp M )V,h = MWh to (Σp−1 M )V,h◦si = MWh ⊛(h◦ti (X)) via the map induced by the canonical morphism Wh → Wh ⊛ (h ◦ ti (X)). We then define d = Pp i−1 d . The usual argument shows that d ◦ d = 0, so we have defined a chain i i=1 (−1) complex of A-modules: Σ∗ M : · · · −→ Σ3 M −→ Σ2 M −→ Σ1 M −→ M. The differentials factor through the quotients Σ′p M and Σ′′p M and Σ′′′ p M , so we get complexes Σ′∗ M : · · · −→ Σ′3 M −→ Σ′2 M −→ Σ′1 M −→M, Σ′′∗ M : · · · −→ Σ′′3 M −→ Σ′′2 M −→ Σ′′1 M −→M, ′′′ ′′′ ′′′ Σ′′′ ∗ M : · · · −→ Σ3 M −→ Σ2 M −→ Σ1 M −→M.  Remark 3.5. Let A◦ be the underlying groupoid of A, i.e., the subcategory where we take all objects of A and only keep the isomorphisms. Using the complemented structure of A, there is a natural symmetric monoidal structure on A◦ -modules defined by M  (F ⊗ G)(V ) =  V =V  F (V ′ ) ⊗k G(V ′′ ).  ′ ⊛V ′′  So we can define commutative algebras and their modules. Define an A◦ -module A1 by V 7→ k if V is isomorphic to the generator of A and V 7→ 0 otherwise and set Ae = Sym(A1 ) where Sym denotes the free symmetric algebra. Then e )= A(V  M  k  {L1 ,...,Ln } V =L1 ⊛···⊛Ln  where the sum is over all unordered decompositions of V into rank 1 subspaces. There is a quotient A of Ae given by V 7→ k for all V (identify all summands above), and the category of A-modules is equivalent to the category of A-modules: a map A ⊗ M → M is equivalent to giving a map M (V ′ ) → M (V ) for each decomposition V = V ′ ⊛ V ′′ , and the associativity of multiplication is equivalent to these maps being compatible with composition. Under this interpretation, Σ′∗ M becomes ⊗2 · · · → A⊗3 1 ⊗ M → A1 ⊗ M → A1 ⊗ M → M,  e while Σ′′′ ∗ M is the Koszul complex of M thought of as an A-module:  ··· →  ^3  A1 ⊗ M →  ^2  A1 ⊗ M → A1 ⊗ M → M.  Relation to finite generation. We pause now to make the following observation. 31  Lemma 3.6. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X and let M be an A-module over a ring k. Assume that MV is a finitely generated k-module for all V ∈ A. Then M is finitely generated if and only if there exists some N ≥ 0 such that the map d : (Σ1 M )V → MV is surjective for all V ∈ A whose X-rank is at least N . Proof. If M is generated by elements x1 , . . . , xk with xi ∈ MVi , then we can take N to be the maximal X-rank of V1 , . . . , Vk plus 1. Indeed, if V ∈ A has X-rank at least N , then every morphism Vi → V factors through W for some W ⊂ V whose X-rank is one less than that of V , which implies that the map d : (Σ1 M )V → MV is surjective. Conversely, if such an N exists, then for a generating set we can combine generating sets for MX i for 0 ≤ i ≤ N − 1 to get a generating set for M . Partial resolutions and representation stability. We finally come to our main theorem which will be used in the proof of Theorem F. Theorem 3.7. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X. Assume that the category of A-modules is locally Noetherian, and let M be a finitely generated A-module. Fix some q ≥ 1. If the X-rank of V ∈ A is sufficiently large, then the chain complex (Σq M )V −→ (Σq−1 M )V −→ · · · −→ (Σ1 M )V −→ MV −→ 0 is exact. The same holds if we replace Σp by Σ′p or Σ′′p or Σ′′′ p. The proof of Theorem 3.7 is in §3.3 after some preliminaries. Remark 3.8. The different resolutions given by Theorem 3.7 are useful in different contexts. The resolution Σ∗ will be used in our finite generation machine in §5 (though the other resolutions could also be used at the cost of complicating the necessary spaces). For A = FI, the resolution Σ′′∗ is a version of the “central stability chain complex” from [Pu2]; this also played an important role in [ChEFaNag]. Finally, the resolution Σ′′′ ∗ is the “most efficient” of our resolutions in the sense that the terms are smallest.  3.3  Proof of Theorem 3.7  We begin with some preliminary results needed for the proof of Theorem 3.7. Torsion submodule. If M is an A-module, then define the torsion submodule of M , denoted T (M ), to be the submodule defined via the formula T (M )V = {x ∈ MV | there exists a morphism f : V → W with Mf (x) = 0}. Lemma 3.9. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X and let M be an A-module. Then T (M ) is an A-submodule of M . Proof. Fix V ∈ A. It suffices to show that T (M )V is closed under addition. Given x, x′ ∈ T (M )V , pick morphisms f : V → W and f ′ : V → W ′ such that Mf (x) = 0 and Mf ′ (x′ ) = 0. Let g : W → W ⊛ W ′ and g′ : W ′ → W ⊛ W ′ be the canonical morphisms. Lemma 3.1 implies that there exists some h ∈ AutA (W ⊛ W ′ ) such that h ◦ g ◦ f = g′ ◦ f ′ . This morphism kills both x and x′ , and hence also x + x′ . Lemma 3.10. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X. Assume that the category of A-modules is locally Noetherian and let M be a finitely generated A-module. Then there exists some N ≥ 0 such that if V ∈ A has X-rank at least N , then T (M )V = 0. 32  Proof. Combining Lemma 3.9 with our locally Noetherian assumption, we get that T (M ) is finitely generated, say by elements x1 , . . . , xp with xi ∈ T (M )Vi for 1 ≤ i ≤ p. Let fi : Vi → Wi be a morphism such that Mfi (xi ) = 0. Define W = W1 ⊛ · · · ⊛ Wp , and consider some 1 ≤ i ≤ p. Define fei : Vi → W to be the composition of fi with the canonical morphism Wi ֒→ W . It is then clear that Mfe (xi ) = 0. If N is the X-rank of W , we claim that i T (M )V = 0 whenever V ∈ A has X-rank at least N . Indeed, every morphism g : Vi → V can be factored as fe  i Vi − → W −→ V,  and thus Mg (xi ) = 0. Since the xi generate T (M ), it follows that T (M )V = 0. Torsion homology. Since Σ∗ M is a chain complex of A-modules, we can take its homology and obtain an A-module Hq (Σ∗ M ) for each q ≥ 0. We then have the following. Lemma 3.11. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X. Fix some q ≥ 0, and consider V ∈ A. Let ι : V → V ⊛X be the canonical morphism. Then for all x ∈ (Hq (Σ∗ M ))V , we have (Hq (Σ∗ M ))ι (x) = 0. In particular, the same is true for any morphism f that maps V to W with larger X-rank. The same holds if we replace Σ∗ by Σ′∗ or Σ′′∗ or Σ′′′ ∗ . Proof. For Σ∗ , the relevant map on homology is induced by a map · · · −−−−→ (Σ2 M )V ⊛X −−−−→ (Σ1 M )V ⊛X −−−−→ MV ⊛X −−−−→ 0  · · · −−−−→  x  I  (Σ2 M )V  −−−−→  x  I  (Σ1 M )V  x  I  −−−−→  MV  −−−−→ 0  of chain complexes. We will prove that I is chain homotopic to the zero map. The chain homotopy will descend to a similar chain homotopy on Σ′∗ and Σ′′∗ and Σ′′′ ∗ , so this will imply the lemma. Let ι : V → V ⊛ X be the canonical morphism. Recall that (Σp M )V =  M  MWh  and (Σp M )V ⊛X =  h∈IV,p  M  MWh .  h∈IV ⊛X,p  The map I : (Σp M )V → (Σp M )V ⊛X takes (Σp M )V,h = MWh to (Σp M )V ⊛X,ι◦h = MWh ⊛X via the map induced by the canonical morphism W → W ⊛ X. We now define a chain homotopy map G : (Σp M )V → (Σp+1 M )V ⊛X as follows. Given h ∈ IV,p = HomA (X p , V ), define h : X p+1 → V ⊛ X to be the composition h⊛id  X p+1 = X ⊛ X p −→ X p ⊛ X −−−→ V ⊛ X, where the first arrow flips the two factors using the symmetric monoidal structure on A. We then have h ∈ IV ⊛X,p+1 . Since (Σp M )V,h = (Σp+1 M )V ⊛X,h = MWh , we can define G on (Σp M )V,h to be the identity map (Σp M )V,h = (Σp+1 M )V ⊛X,h . We now claim that dG + Gd = I. Indeed, on (Σp M )V the map dG + Gd takes the form p X i=1  (−1)i−1 Gdi  !    +  p+1 X j=1    (−1)j−1 dj G .  Straightforward calculations show that d1 G = I and that Gdi = di+1 G for 1 ≤ i ≤ p. 33  Endgame. All the ingredients are now in place for the proof of Theorem 3.7. Proof of Theorem 3.7. For all i ≥ 0, Lemma 3.3 implies that the A-module Σi M is finitely generated. Our assumption that the category of A-modules is locally Noetherian then implies that Hi (Σ∗ M ) is finitely generated. Lemma 3.11 implies that for all i ≥ 0, we have T (Hi (Σ∗ M )) = Hi (Σ∗ M ). The upshot of all of this is that we can apply Lemma 3.10 to obtain some Nq ≥ 0 such that if V ∈ A has X-rank at least Nq and 0 ≤ i ≤ q, then Hi (Σ∗ M )V = 0. In other words, the chain complex (Σq M )V −→ (Σq−1 M )V −→ · · · −→ (Σ1 M )V −→ MV −→ 0 is exact, as desired. For Σ′∗ and Σ′′∗ and Σ′′′ ∗ , the proof is the same. Asymptotic structure theorem. We conclude by proving Theorem F (the main argument here is very similar to that of [ChPu, Lemma 2.23]). Proof of Theorem F. Injective representation stability follows from Lemma 3.10, and surjective representation stability is immediate from finite generation. All that remains to prove is central stability. Using Theorem 3.7, choose N large enough so that the chain complex (Σ2 M )V −→ (Σ1 M )V −→ MV −→ 0 is exact whenever the X-rank of V ∈ A is at least N . Define M ′ to be the left Kan extension to A of the restriction of M to AN . The universal property of the left Kan extension gives a natural transformation θ : M ′ → M such that θV : (M ′ )V → MV is the identity for all V ∈ A whose X-rank is at most N . We must prove that θV is an isomorphism for all V ∈ A. Letting r be the X-rank of V , the proof is by induction on r. The base cases are when 0 ≤ r ≤ N , where the claim is trivial. Assume now that r > N and that the claim is true for all smaller r. The natural transformation θ induces natural transformations θi : Σi M ′ → Σi M for all i ≥ 0, and our inductive hypothesis implies that the maps (θi )V : (Σi M ′ )V → (Σi M )V are isomorphisms for all i ≥ 1. We have a commutative diagram (Σ2 M ′ )V −−−−→ (Σ1 M ′ )V −−−−→ (M ′ )V −−−−→ 0    (θ2 )V y∼ =     (θ1 )V y∼ =  (Σ2 M )V −−−−→ (Σ1 M )V −−−−→     θV y  MV  −−−−→ 0  We warn the reader that while the bottom row is exact, the top row is as yet only a chain complex. If W ∈ A has X-rank at most N , then every A-morphism W → V factors through an object whose X-rank is r − 1 (for instance, this is an easy consequence of Lemma 3.1). Combining this with the usual formula for a left Kan extension as a colimit, we deduce that the map (Σ1 M ′ )V → (M ′ )V is surjective. The fact that θV is an isomorphism now follows from an easy chase of the above diagram.  34  4  Twisted homological stability  In this section, we prove a general theorem which allows us to deduce twisted homological stability from untwisted homological stability and local Noetherianity (see Theorem 4.2 below; this abstracts an argument of Church [Ch2]). Using this, we will prove Theorems L and M, which give very general twisted homological stability theorems for SLU n (R) and Sp2n (R). We remark that Wahl–Randal-Williams [WahRW] have also recently and independently proved twisted homological stability theorems. They require their coefficients to be either “polynomial” or “abelian”, but they allow much more general rings R. Their proofs are very different from ours. Lemma 4.1. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with a generator X. Then for all n ≥ r, we have an isomorphism of AutA (X n )-representations Aut (X n )  k[HomA (X r , X n )] ∼ = k[AutA (X n )/ AutA (X n−r )] ∼ = IndAutAA (X n−r ) k. Consequently, Hk (AutA (X n ); k[HomA (X r , X n )]) ∼ = Hk (AutA (X n−r ); k). Proof. Let i ∈ HomA (X r , X n ) be the canonical morphism X r → X r ⊛ X n−r . By Lemma 3.1, AutA (X n ) acts transitively on the set HomA (X r , X n ). By Lemma 3.2(b), the stabilizer of i in AutA (X n ) is identified with AutA (X n−r ), which establishes the first isomorphism. The second follows from Shapiro’s lemma [Br, Proposition III.6.2]. Our main theorem is then as follows. If (A, ⊛) is a complemented category with a generator X and M is an A-module, then denote MX n by Mn . Theorem 4.2. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with a generator X and let M be a finitely generated A-module over a ring k. Assume that the following hold. 1. The category of A-modules over k is locally Noetherian. 2. For all k ≥ 0, the map Hk (AutA (X n ); k) → Hk (AutA (X n+1 ); k) induced by the map AutA (X n ) → AutA (X n+1 ) that takes f ∈ AutA (X n ) to f ⊛ idX ∈ AutA (X n+1 ) is an isomorphism for n ≫ 0. Then for k ≥ 0, the map Hk (AutA (X n ); Mn ) → Hk (AutA (X n+1 ); Mn+1 ) is an isomorphism for n ≫ 0. Proof. Combining Lemma 4.1 with our second assumption, we see that the theorem is true if M is a finite direct sum of representable A-modules PA,x with x ∈ A (see §2.1). Our local Noetherian assumption implies that there exists an A-module resolution · · · −→ P2 −→ P1 −→ P0 −→ M −→ 0, where Pi is a finite direct sum of representable A-modules for all i ≥ 0. For all n ≥ 0, we can combine [Br, Proposition VII.5.2] and [Br, Eqn. VII.5.3] to obtain a spectral sequence E1pq (n) = Hp (AutA (X n ); (Pq )n ) =⇒ Hp+q (AutA (X n ); Mn ). This spectral sequence is natural, so there is a map E1∗∗ (n) → E1∗∗ (n + 1) which converges to the map H∗ (AutA (X n ); Mn ) → H∗ (AutA (X n+1 ); Mn+1 ). By the above, for each pair (p, q), the map E1pq (n) → E1pq (n + 1) is an isomorphism for n ≫ 0. This implies that for each k ≥ 0, the map Hk (AutA (X n ); Mn ) → Hk (AutA (X n+1 ); Mn+1 ) is an isomorphism for n ≫ 0, as desired. 35  Proof of Theorems L and M. Theorems L and M are obtained by applying Theorem 4.2 to the categories VIC(R, U) and SI(R), respectively. The necessary locally Noetherian theorems are Theorem D, and Theorem E. The necessary untwisted homological stability theorems are due to van der Kallen [Va] and Mirzaii–van der Kallen [MirVa].  5  A machine for finite generation  This section contains the machine we will use to prove our finite generation results. We begin with two sections of preliminaries: §5.1 is devoted to systems of coefficients, and §5.2 is devoted to the basics of equivariant homology. Finally, §5.3 contains our machine. Our machine is based on an unpublished argument of Quillen for proving homological stability (see, e.g., [HatWah]). The insight that that argument interacts well with central stability is due to the first author [Pu2]. This was later reinterpreted in the language of FI-modules in [ChEFaNag]. The arguments in this section abstract and generalize the arguments in [Pu2] and [ChEFaNag]. Throughout this section, k is a fixed commutative ring.  5.1  Systems of coefficients  b be the category whose objects are the finite sets [n] = {0, . . . , n} and whose Letting ∆ + morphisms are strictly increasing maps, recall that a semisimplicial set X is a contravariant b to the category of sets. The image of [n] is called the set of n-simplices and functor from ∆ + n is denoted X . A simplex σ ′ ∈ X m is a face of a simplex σ ∈ X n if σ ′ is the image of σ under the map X n → X m induced by some map [m]+ → [n]+ . The geometric realization of X is denoted |X|. For more on semisimplicial sets, see [Fri] (where they are called ∆-sets). n Fix a semisimplicial set X. Observe that the set ⊔∞ n=0 X forms the objects of a category ′ ′ with a unique morphism σ → σ whenever σ is a face of σ. We will call this the simplex category of X.  Definition 5.1. A coefficient system on X is a contravariant functor from the simplex category of X to the category of k-modules. Remark 5.2. In other words, a coefficient system F on X consists of k-modules F(σ) for simplices σ of X and homomorphisms F(σ ′ → σ) : F(σ) → F(σ ′ ) whenever σ ′ is a face of σ. These homomorphisms must satisfy the obvious compatibility condition. Definition 5.3. Let F be a coefficient system on X. The simplicial chain complex of X with coefficients in F is as follows. Define M  Ck (X; F) =  F(σ).  σ∈X k  Next, define a differential ∂ : Ck (C; F) → Ck−1 (C; F) in the following way. Consider σ ∈ X k . We will denote an element of F(σ) ⊂ Ck (X; F) by c · σ for c ∈ F(σ). For 0 ≤ i ≤ k, let σi be b whose image does not the face of σ associated to the unique morphism [k − 1]+ → [k]+ of ∆ contain i. For c ∈ F(σ), we then define ∂(c · σ) =  k X  (−1)i ci · σi ,  i=0  where ci is the image of c under the homomorphism F(σi → σ) : F(σ) −→ F(σi ). Taking the homology of C∗ (X; F) yields the homology groups of X with coefficients in F, which we will denote by H∗ (X; F). 36  Remark 5.4. If F is the coefficient system that assigns k to every simplex and the identity map to every inclusion of a face, then H∗ (X; F) ∼ = H∗ (X; k).  5.2  Equivariant homology  A good reference that contains proofs of everything we state in this section is [Br, §VII]. Semisimplicial sets form a category SS whose morphisms are natural transformations. Given a semisimplicial set X and a group G, an action of G on X consists of a homomorphism G → AutSS (X). Unpacking this, an action of G on X consists of actions of G on X n for all n ≥ 0 which satisfy the obvious compatibility condition. Observe that this induces an action of G on X. Also, there is a natural quotient semisimplicial set X/G with (X/G)n = X n /G. Remark 5.5. If G is a group acting on a semisimplicial set X, then there is a natural continuous map |X| → |X/G| that factors through |X|/G. In fact, it is easy to see that |X|/G = |X/G|. Definition 5.6. Consider a group G acting on a semisimplicial set X. Let EG be a contractible CW complex on which G acts properly discontinuously and freely, so EG/G is a classifying space for G. Define EG ×G X to be the quotient of EG × |X| by the diagonal action of G. The G-equivariant homology groups of X, denoted HG ∗ (X; k), are defined to be H∗ (EG ×G X; k). This definition does not depend on the choice of EG. The construction of EG ×G X is known as the Borel construction. The following lemma summarizes two key properties of these homology groups. Lemma 5.7. Consider a group G acting on a semisimplicial set X. There is a canonical G map HG ∗ (X; k) → H∗ (G; k) such that if X is k-acyclic, then the map Hi (X; k) → Hi (G; k) is an isomorphism for i ≤ k. Proof. The map HG ∗ (X; k) → H∗ (G; k) comes from the map EG ×G X → EG/G induced by the projection of EG × X onto its first factor. The second claim is an immediate consequence of the spectral sequence whose E2 page is [Br, (7.2), §VII.7]. To calculate equivariant homology, we use a certain spectral sequence. First, a definition. Definition 5.8. Consider a group G acting on a semisimplicial set X. Define a coefficient e be any lift of σ system Hq (G, X; k) on X/G as follows. Consider a simplex σ of X/G. Let σ to X. Set Hq (G, X; k)(σ) = Hq (Geσ ; k),  e . This does not depend on the choice of σ e since conjugation where Geσ is the stabilizer of σ induces the identity on group homology, so it defines a coefficient system on X/G.  Our spectral sequence is then as follows. It can be easily extracted from [Br, §VII.8].  Theorem 5.9. Let G be a group acting on a semisimplicial set X. There is a spectral sequence E1p,q = Cp (X/G; Hq (G, X; k)) =⇒ HG p+q (X; k) with d1 : E1p,q → E1p−1,q equal to the differential of C∗ (X/G; Hq (G, X; k)).  37  5.3  A machine for finite generation  We now discuss a machine for proving that the homology groups of certain congruence subgroups form finitely generated modules over a complemented category. Congruence subgroups. Let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with a generator Y . The assignment V 7→ AutB (Ve ) for V ∈ B is functorial. Indeed, given a B-morphism e we can then fe: Ve1 → Ve2 , let Ce be the complement to fe(Ve1 ) ⊂ Ve2 and write Ve2 ∼ = Ve1 ⊛ C; e e e extend automorphisms of V1 to V2 by letting them act as the identity on C. It is clear that this is well-defined. Next, let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category and let Ψ : B → A be a strong monoidal functor (recall that this is a monoidal functor whose coherence maps are invertible). An argument similar to the above shows that the assignment Ve 7→ ker(AutB (Ve ) → AutA (Ψ(Ve )))  (Ve ∈ B)  is functorial. We will call this functor the level Ψ congruence subgroup of AutB and denote its value on Ve by ΓVe (Ψ).  Highly surjective functors. The above construction is particularly well-behaved on certain kinds of functors that we now define. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with a generator X and let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with a generator Y . A highly surjective functor from B to A is a strong monoidal functor Ψ : B → A satisfying: • Ψ(Y ) = X. • For Ve ∈ B, the map Ψ∗ : AutB (Ve ) → AutA (Ψ(Ve )) is surjective.  Remark 5.10. We only assume that Ψ is a strong monoidal functor (as opposed to a strict monoidal functor), so for all q ≥ 0 we only know that Ψ(Y q ) and X q are naturally isomorphic rather than identical. To simplify notation, we will simply identify Ψ(Y q ) and X q henceforth. The careful reader can insert appropriate natural isomorphisms as needed. Lemma 5.11. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with a generator X, let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with a generator Y , and let Ψ : B → A be a highly surjective functor. Then the following hold. (a) For all V ∈ A, there exists some Ve ∈ B such that Ψ(Ve ) ∼ =V. e e e e (b) For all V1 , V2 ∈ B, the map Ψ∗ : HomB (V1 , V2 ) → HomA (Ψ(Ve1 ), Ψ(Ve2 )) is surjective.  Proof. For the first claim, we have V ∼ =V. = X q for some q ≥ 0, so Ψ(Y q ) = X q ∼ q r q e ∼ e ∼ e ∼ For the second claim, write V1 = Y and V2 = Y , so Ψ(V1 ) = X and Ψ(Ve2 ) ∼ = Xr. q r If q > r, then HomA (X , X ) = ∅ and the claim is trivial, so we can assume that q ≤ r. Consider some f ∈ HomA (X q , X r ). Let fe1 ∈ HomB (Y q , Y r ) be arbitrary (this set is nonempty; for instance, it contains the composition of the canonical map Y q → Y q ⊛ Y r−q with an isomorphism Y q ⊛ Y r−q ∼ = Y r ). Lemma 3.1 implies that there exists some f2 ∈ AutA (X r ) such that f = f2 ◦ Ψ(fe1 ). Since Ψ is highly surjective, we can find fe2 ∈ AutB (Y r ) such that Ψ(fe2 ) = f2 . Setting fe = fe2 ◦ fe1 , we then have Ψ(fe) = f , as desired.  Lemma 5.12. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X, let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with generator Y , and let Ψ : B → A be a highly surjective functor. Consider fe, fe′ ∈ HomB (Y q , Y r ) such that Ψ(fe) = Ψ(fe′ ). Then there exists some ge ∈ ΓY r (Ψ) such that fe′ = ge ◦ fe. e: Yr → Yq ⊛ C e be the isomorphism Proof. Let Ce be the complement to fe(Y q ) ⊂ Y r and h q q e e e and e e h = Ψ(h), such that h ◦ f : Y → Y ⊛ C is the canonical map. Define C = Ψ(C), q q e f = Ψ(f ), so h ◦ f : X → X ⊛ C is the canonical map. Lemma 3.1 implies that there exists  38  e such that e some ge1 ∈ AutB (Y q ⊛ C) h ◦ fe′ = ge1 ◦ e h ◦ fe. Define g1 = Ψ(ge1 ), so h ◦ f = g1 ◦ h ◦ f . Lemma 3.2(b) implies that there exists some g2 ∈ AutA (C) such that g1 = id ⊛ g2 . Since Ψ e such that Ψ(ge2 ) = g2 . is highly surjective, we can find some ge2 ∈ AutB (C) −1 Define ge ∈ AutB (Y r ) to equal e h−1 ◦ ge1 ◦ (id ⊛ ge2 ) ◦ e h. Then Ψ(ge) = h−1 ◦ g1 ◦ (id ⊛ g2−1 ) ◦ h, e ◦ fe is the canonical which is the identity since g1 = id ⊛ g2 . Thus ge ∈ ΓY r (Ψ). Finally, since h −1 map, it follows that e h ◦ fe ◦ (id ⊛ ge2 ) = e h ◦ fe. Thus e ◦ fe = h e −1 ◦ ge1 ◦ h e ◦ fe = h e −1 ◦ h e ◦ fe′ = fe′ . ge ◦ fe = e h−1 ◦ ge1 ◦ (id ⊛ ge2−1 ) ◦ h  Homology of congruence subgroups. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with generator X, let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with generator Y , and let Ψ : B → A be a highly surjective functor. Fixing a ring k and some k ≥ 0, we define an A-module Hk (Ψ; k) as follows. Since A is equivalent to the full subcategory spanned by the X q , it is enough to define Hk (Ψ; k) on these. Set Hk (Ψ; k)X q = Hk (ΓY q (Ψ); k). To define Hk (Ψ; k) on morphisms, consider f ∈ HomA (X q , X r ). By Lemma 5.11, there exists some fe ∈ HomB (Y q , Y r ) such that Ψ(fe) = f , and we define Hk (Ψ; k)f : Hk (ΓY q (Ψ); k) → Hk (ΓY r (Ψ); k)  to be the map on homology induced by the map ΓY q (Ψ) → ΓY r (Ψ) induced by fe. To see that this is well-defined, observe that if fe′ ∈ HomB (Y q , Y r ) also satisfies Ψ(fe′ ) = f , then Lemma 5.12 implies that there exists some ge ∈ ΓY r (Ψ) such that fe′ = ge ◦ fe. Since inner automorphisms act trivially on group homology, we conclude that fe and fe′ induce the same map Hk (ΓY q (Ψ); k) → Hk (ΓY r (Ψ); k).  Space of Y -embeddings. We wish to give a sufficient condition for the A-module Hk (Ψ; k) to be finitely generated. This requires the following definition. Consider Ve ∈ B. Recall that for all k ≥ 0, we defined IVe ,k = HomB (Y k , Ve ).  The space of Y -embeddings is the semisimplicial set IVe defined as follows. First, define (IVe )k = IVe ,k+1 . For f ∈ IVe ,k+1 , we will denote the associated k-simplex of IVe by [f ]. Next, b (i.e., a strictly increasing map from if [f ] ∈ (IVe )k and φ : [ℓ]+ → [k]+ is a morphism of ∆ [ℓ]+ = {0, . . . , ℓ} to [k]+ = {0, . . . , k}), then there is a natural induced map φ∗ : Y ℓ+1 → Y k+1 (here we are indexing the Y -factors starting at 0). We define the face of [f ] associated to φ to be [f ◦ φ∗ ].  Finite generation, statement. We can now state our main theorem. Theorem 5.13. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with a generator X, let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with a generator Y , and let Ψ : B → A be a highly surjective functor. Fix a Noetherian ring k, and assume that the following hold. 1. The category of A-modules is locally Noetherian. 2. For all V ∈ A and k ≥ 0, the k-module Hk (Ψ; k)V is finitely generated. 3. For all p ≥ 0, there exists some Np ≥ 0 such that for all Ve ∈ B whose Y -rank is at least Np , the space IVe is p-acyclic. Then Hk (Ψ; k) is a finitely generated A-module for all k ≥ 0. 39  We prove Theorem 5.13 at the end of this section after some preliminary results. Identifying the spectral sequence. Let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with generator Y . For all Ve ∈ B, the group AutB (Ve ) acts on IVe . The following lemma describes the restriction of this action to a congruence subgroup.  Lemma 5.14. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with a generator X, let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with a generator Y , and let Ψ : B → A be a highly surjective functor. Fix some Ve ∈ B, and set V = Ψ(Ve ) ∈ A. Then the group ΓVe (Ψ) acts on IVe and we have an isomorphism IVe /ΓVe (Ψ) ∼ = IV of semisimplicial sets.  Proof. The claimed action of ΓVe (Ψ) is the restriction of the obvious action of AutB (Ve ). We have a ΓVe (Ψ)-invariant map IVe → IV of semisimplicial sets. This induces a map ρ : IVe /ΓVe (Ψ) → IV . For all k ≥ 0, Lemma 5.11 implies that ρ is surjective on k-simplices and Lemma 5.12 implies that ρ is injective on k-simplices. We conclude that ρ is an isomorphism of semisimplicial sets, as desired. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with a generator X and let Ψ : B → A be a highly surjective functor. Fix some Ve ∈ B. Our next goal is to understand the spectral sequence given by Theorem 5.9 for the action of ΓVe (Ψ) on IVe . Set V = Ψ(Ve ) ∈ A. Using Lemma 5.14, this spectral sequence is of the form Γ (Ψ)  V e (I ; k). E1p,q = Cp (IV ; Hq (ΓVe (Ψ), IVe ; k)) =⇒ Hp+q e V  Recall the definition of Σp from §3.2.  Lemma 5.15. Let (A, ⊛) be a complemented category with a generator X, let (B, ⊛) be a weak complemented category with a generator Y , and let Ψ : B → A be a highly surjective functor. Fix Ve ∈ B, and set V = Ψ(Ve ). Finally, fix a ring k. Then for p, q ≥ 0 we have Cp−1 (IV ; Hq (ΓVe (Ψ), IVe ; k)) ∼ = (Σp Hq (Ψ; k))V .  Proof. Recall that the (p − 1)-simplices of IV are in bijection with the set IV,p and that the simplex associated to h ∈ IV,p is denoted [h]. It follows that M  Cp−1 (IV ; Hq (ΓVe (Ψ), IVe ; k)) =  h∈IV,p  Hq (ΓVe (Ψ), IVe ; k)([h]).  e∈I e Fix some h ∈ IV,p , and let h e ,p be a lift of h. By definition, we have V  We have  Hq (ΓVe (Ψ), IVe ; k)([h]) = Hq ((ΓVe (Ψ))[eh] ; k).  e e=e (AutB (Ve ))[eh] = {ge ∈ AutB (Ve ) | ge ◦ e h = h} and (ΓVe (Ψ))[eh] = {ge ∈ ΓVe (Ψ) | ge ◦ h h}.  e p ), Lemma 3.2(b) implies that (AutB (Ve )) ∼ f ⊂ Ve be a complement to h(Y Letting W = eh [e h]  f ). Under this isomorphism, (Γ (Ψ)) goes to Γ (Ψ). Letting Wh = Ψ(W f ) ⊂ V, AutB (W eh e e eh V [e h] W eh  we have that Wh is a complement to h(X p ). By definition, we have  Hq ((ΓVe (Ψ))[eh] ; k) = Hq (ΓW e (Ψ); k) = (Hq (Ψ; k))Wh .  The upshot of all of this is that  Cp−1 (IV ; Hq (ΓVe (Ψ), IVe ; k)) =  M  eh  h∈IV,p  40  (Hq (Ψ; k))Wh = (Σp Hq (Ψ; k))V .  Finite generation, proof. We finally prove Theorem 5.13. Proof of Theorem 5.13. The proof is by induction on k. The base case k = 0 is trivial, so assume that k > 0 and that Hk′ (Ψ; k) is a finitely generated A-module for all 0 ≤ k′ < k. Since we are assuming that the k-module Hk (Ψ; k)V is finitely generated for all V ∈ A and all k ≥ 0, we can apply Lemma 3.6 and deduce that it is enough to prove that if V ∈ A has X-rank sufficiently large, then the map (Σ1 Hk (Ψ; k))V → Hk (Ψ; k)V  (5.1)  is surjective. Letting Ve ∈ B satisfy Ψ(Ve ) = V , we have Hk (Ψ; k)V = Hk (ΓVe (Ψ); k). To prove that (5.1) is surjective, we will use the action of ΓVe (Ψ) on IVe . By Lemma 5.7 and our assumption about the acyclicity of IVe , the map Γ (Ψ)  Hk Ve  (IVe ; k) → Hk (ΓVe ; k)  is an isomorphism if the Y -rank of Ve (which equals the X-rank of V ) is sufficiently large. Combining Theorem 5.9 with Lemma 5.15, we get a spectral sequence Γ (Ψ) V e (I ; k). E1p,q ∼ = (Σp+1 Hq (Ψ; k))V =⇒ Hp+q e V  Moreover, examining the isomorphism in Lemma 5.15, we see that the differential d : E1p,q → E1p−1,q is identified with the differential d : (Σp+1 Hq (Ψ; k))V → (Σp Hq (Ψ; k))V . Our inductive hypothesis says that Hq (Ψ; k) is a finitely generated A-module for 0 ≤ q < k. Theorem 3.7 therefore implies that if the X-rank of V is sufficiently large, we have E2p,q = 0 for 0 ≤ q < k and 1 ≤ p ≤ k + 1. This implies that the map Γ (Ψ)  (Σ1 Hk (Ψ; k))V = E10,k → Hk Ve  is a surjection, as desired.  6  (IVe ; k) ∼ = Hk (ΓVe ; k)  Finite generation theorems  In this section, we construct the modules claimed in the introduction and prove Theorems G, H, I, J, and K; they are proved in §6.1, §6.1, §6.2, §6.3, and §6.5, respectively. These theorems assert that the homology groups of various congruence subgroups form finitely generated modules over the appropriate categories. They will all be deduced from Theorem 5.13. We also introduce the weak complemented category Surf in §6.4. There is an interesting parallel between the complexes that appear in this section and those that appear in the paper [WahRW] of Wahl–Randal-Williams, which proves a variety of more traditional homological stability theorems. Our paper and theirs were written independently (though in later revisions to save space we removed some proofs that duplicated work of theirs).  41  6.1  The general and special linear groups: Theorems G and H  Let OK be the ring of integers in an algebraic number field K, let α ⊂ OK be a proper b ⊂ OK , and let k be a nonzero ideal, let U ⊂ OK /α be the image of the group of units U Noetherian ring. In this section, we construct VIC(OK /α, U)-modules Hk (GL(OK , α); k) as in Theorem G for all k ≥ 0; see Corollary 6.2. We then prove Theorem G, which says that Hk (GL(OK , α); k) is a finitely generated VIC(OK /α, U)-module for all k ≥ 0. Theorem H is a similar result for the special linear group. Its proof is similar to that of the general linear group, and we leave it as an exercise to the reader. Categories and functors. As was noted in Example 1.16, for any ring R the category VIC(R) is a complemented category whose monoidal structure is direct sum. We have AutVIC(R) (Rn ) = GLn (R)  (n ≥ 0).  (6.1)  Define a strong monoidal functor Ψ : VIC(OK ) → VIC(OK /α, U) by Ψ(V ) = (OK /α) ⊗OK V . The reason for the presence of U in the target of Ψ is that objects V of VIC(OK ) are equipped b b acts transitively on the set of orientations!), with U-orientations (a vacuous condition since U 1 and these induce U-orientations on (OK /α) ⊗OK V . The functor Ψ takes the generator OK of VIC(OK ) to the generator (OK /α)1 of VIC(OK /α, U). Define GL(OK , α) = Γ(Ψ). Using n = GLn (OK , α). the identification in (6.1), we have GL(OK , α)OK Lemma 6.1. The functor Ψ is highly surjective. Proof. This is equivalent to the fact that the map GLn (OK ) → SLU n (OK /α) is surjective for all n ≥ 0. This follows from the fact that the map SLn (OK ) → SLn (OK /α) is surjective, which follows from strong approximation (see, e.g., [PlRa, Chapter 7]; this is a special feature of rings of integers). As we discussed in §5.3, Lemma 6.1 has the following corollary. Corollary 6.2. For all k ≥ 0, there exists a VIC(OK /α, U)-module Hk (GL(OK , α); k) such that Hk (GL(OK , α); k)(OK /α)n = Hk (GLn (OK , α); k). Identifying the space of embeddings. We now wish to give a concrete description of 1 -embeddings of O n (recall the definition of the space of Y -embeddings from the space of OK K n consists of elements ((v , w ), . . . , (v , w )) as follows. §5.3). A split partial basis for OK 0 0 p p n that form part of a free basis for the free O -module O n . • The vi are elements of OK K K n , O ). • The wi are elements of HomOK (OK K • For all 0 ≤ i, j ≤ p, we have wi (vj ) = δi,j (Kronecker delta). These conditions imply that the wi also form part of a free basis for the free OK -module n , O ). The space of split partial bases for O n , denoted PB (O ), is the HomOK (OK K n K K n. semisimplicial set whose p-simplices are split partial bases ((v0 , w0 ), . . . , (vp , wp )) for OK 1 -embeddings of O n is isomorphic to PB (O ). Lemma 6.3. The space of OK n K K 1 -embeddings of O n are in bijection Proof. Fix some p ≥ 0. The p-simplices of the space of OK K p+1 n with elements of HomVIC(OK ) (OK , OK ). We will define set maps p+1 n η1 : HomVIC(OK ) (OK , OK ) → (PBn (OK ))p ,  p+1 n η2 : (PBn (OK ))p → HomVIC(OK ) (OK , OK )  that are compatible with the semisimplicial structure and satisfy η1 ◦ η2 = id and η2 ◦ η1 = id. The constructions are as follows. 42  p+1 n ), so by definition f : O p+1 → O n is an O , OK • Consider (f, C) ∈ HomVIC(OK ) (OK K K K n is a complement to f (O p+1 ). For 0 ≤ i ≤ p, define linear injection and C ⊂ OK K n to be the image under f of the (i − 1)st basis element of O p+1 and define vi ∈ OK K n , O ) via the formulas wi ∈ HomOK (OK K  wi (vj ) = δij  and wi |C = 0  (0 ≤ j ≤ p).  Then η1 (f, C) := ((v0 , w0 ), . . . , (vp , wp )) is a split partial basis. p+1 n to be • Consider a split partial basis ((v0 , w0 ), . . . , (vp+1 , wp+1 )). Define f : OK → OK Tp th the map that takes the i basis element to vi−1 . Also, define C = i=0 ker(wi ). Then p+1 n ). η2 (((v0 , w0 ), . . . , (vp , wp ))) := (f, C) is an element of HomVIC(OK ) (OK , OK The space PBn (OK ) was introduced by Charney [Cha2], who proved the following theorem. Theorem 6.4 ([Cha2, Theorem 3.5]). The space PBn (OK ) is  n−4 2 -acyclic.  Remark 6.5. Charney actually worked over rings that satisfy Bass’s stable range condition SRr ; the above follows from her work since OK satisfies SR3 . Also, [Cha2, Theorem 3.5] contains the data of an ideal α ⊂ OK (not the same as the ideal we are working with!); the reference reduces to Theorem 6.4 when α = 0. Finally, Charney’s definition of PBn (R) is different from ours, but for Dedekind domains the definitions are equivalent; see [Re]. Putting it all together. We now prove Theorem G, which asserts that the VIC(O/α, U)module Hk (GL(OK , α); k) is finitely generated. Proof of Theorem G. We apply Theorem 5.13 to the highly surjective functor Ψ. This theorem has three hypotheses. The first is that the category of VIC(OK /α, U)-modules is locally Noetherian, which is Theorem D. The second is that Hk (GLn (OK , α); k) is a finitely generated k-module for all k ≥ 0, which is a theorem of Borel–Serre [BoSe]. The third is that the 1 -embeddings is highly acyclic, which follows from Lemma 6.3 and Theorem 6.4. space of OK We conclude that we can apply Theorem 5.13 and deduce that Hk (GL(OK , α); k) is a finitely generated VIC(OK /α, U)-module for all k ≥ 0, as desired.  6.2  The automorphism group of a free group: Theorem I  Fix ℓ ≥ 2, and let k be a Noetherian ring. In this section, we construct VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1)-modules Hk (Aut(ℓ); k) as in Theorem I for all k ≥ 0; see Corollary 6.7. We then prove Theorem I, which says that Hk (Aut(ℓ); k) is a finitely generated VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1)-module for all k ≥ 0. The category of free groups. Define Fr to be a category whose objects are the finite-rank free groups and whose monoidal structure is the free product ∗. The Fr-morphisms from F to F ′ are pairs (f, C) : F → F ′ , where f : F → F ′ is an injective homomorphism and C ⊆ F ′ is a subgroup such that F ′ = f (F ) ∗ C. The category Fr is a complemented category. The subobject attached to a morphism (f, C) : F → F ′ can be thought of as the pair (f (F ), C) and its complement is the subobject (C, f (F )). A generator is the rank 1 free group F1 ∼ = Z, and AutFr (Fn ) = Aut(Fn ) (n ≥ 0). (6.2) The category Fr was first introduced by Djament–Vespa [DjVe2] to study the twisted homology of Aut(Fn ). Functor. The category VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1) is a complemented category whose monoidal structure is given by the direct sum. There is a strong monoidal functor Ψ : Fr → VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1) defined 43  via the formula Ψ(F ) = H1 (F ; Z/ℓ). The reason for the ±1 here is that Ψ factors through the functor Fr → VIC(Z) that takes F to H1 (F ; Z), and elements of VIC(Z) are equipped with ±1-orientations (a vacuous condition since the group of units of Z is ±1). The functor Ψ takes the generator F1 ∼ = Z of Fr to the generator (Z/ℓ)1 of VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1). Define Aut(ℓ) = Γ(Ψ). Using the identification in (6.2), we have Aut(ℓ)Fn = Aut(Fn , ℓ). Lemma 6.6. The functor Ψ is highly surjective. Proof. This is equivalent to the fact that the map Aut(Fn ) → GLn (Z) is surjective for all n ≥ 0, which is classical (see, e.g., [LySc, Chapter I, Proposition 4.4]). As we discussed in §5.3, Lemma 6.6 has the following corollary. Corollary 6.7. For all k ≥ 0, there exists a VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1)-module Hk (Aut(ℓ); k) such that Hk (Aut(ℓ); k)(Z/ℓ)n = Hk (Aut(Fn , ℓ); k). Identifying the space of embeddings. We now wish to give a concrete description of the space of F1 -embeddings of Fn . A split partial basis for Fn consists of elements ((v0 , C0 ), . . . , (vp , Cp )) as follows. • The vi are elements of Fn . • The Ci are subgroups of Fn such that Fn = hvi i ∗ Ci . • For all 0 ≤ i, j ≤ p with i 6= j, we have vj ∈ Ci . We remark that the condition Fn = hvi i ∗ Ci implies that Ci ∼ = Fn−1 . Also, the conditions Tp ∼ together imply that i=0 Ci = Fn−p−1 and that the vi can be extended to a free basis for Fn . The space of split partial bases for Fn , denoted PB(Fn ), is the semisimplicial set whose p-simplices are split partial bases ((v0 , C0 ), . . . , (vp , Cp )) for Fn . We remark that the Ci in this space play the same role as the kernels of the wi in PBn (OK ). Lemma 6.8. The space of F1 -embeddings of Fn is isomorphic to PB(Fn ). Proof. Fix some p ≥ 0. The p-simplices of the space of F1 -embeddings of Fn are in bijection with elements of HomFr (Fp+1 , Fn ). We will define set maps η1 : HomFr (Fp+1 , Fn ) → (PB(Fn ))p ,  η2 : (PB(Fn ))p → HomFr (Fp+1 , Fn )  that are compatible with the semisimplicial structure and satisfy η1 ◦ η2 = id and η2 ◦ η1 = id. The constructions are as follows. • Consider (f, C) ∈ HomFr (Fp+1 , Fn ), so by definition f : Fp+1 → Fn is an injective homomorphism and C ⊂ Fn is a subgroup satisfying Fn = f (Fp+1 ) ∗ C. For 0 ≤ i ≤ p, define vi ∈ Fn to be the image under f of the (i − 1)st basis element of Fp+1 and define Ci ⊂ Fn to be the subgroup generated by {vj | i 6= j} ∪ C. Then η1 (f, C) := ((v0 , C0 ), . . . , (vp , Cp )) is a split partial basis. • Consider a split partial basis ((v0 , C0 ), . . . , (vp+1 , Cp+1 )). Define f : Fp+1 → Fn to be T the map that takes the ith basis element to vi−1 . Also, define C = pi=0 Ci . Then η2 (((v0 , C0 ), . . . , (vp , Cp ))) := (f, C) is an element of HomFr (Fp+1 , Fn ). The space PB(Fn ) appears in work of Wahl–Randal-Williams, where they prove the following theorem (making essential use of work of Hatcher–Vogtmann [HatVo2]). Theorem 6.9 ([WahRW, Proposition 5.3]). The space PB(Fn ) is  n−3 2 -connected.  Putting it all together. We now prove Theorem I, which asserts that the VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1)module Hk (Aut(ℓ); k) is finitely generated. 44  Proof of Theorem I. We apply Theorem 5.13 to the highly surjective functor Ψ. This theorem has three hypotheses. The first is that the category of VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1)-modules is locally Noetherian, which is Theorem D. The second is that Hk (Aut(Fn ); k) is a finitely generated kmodule for all k ≥ 0, which is a theorem of Culler–Vogtmann [CuVo, Corollary on p. 93]. The third is that the space of F1 -embeddings is highly acyclic, which follows from Lemma 6.8 and Theorem 6.9. We conclude that we can apply Theorem 5.13 and deduce that Hk (Aut(ℓ); k) is a finitely generated VIC(Z/ℓ, ±1)-module for all k ≥ 0, as desired.  6.3  The symplectic group: Theorem J  Let OK be the ring of integers in an algebraic number field K, let α ⊂ OK be a proper nonzero ideal, and let k be a Noetherian ring. In this section, we construct SI(OK /α)modules Hk (Sp(OK , α); k) as in Theorem J for all k ≥ 0; see Corollary 6.11. We then prove Theorem J, which says that these are finitely generated modules. Categories and functors. As was noted in Example 1.17, for any ring R the category SI(R) is a complemented category whose monoidal structure is given by the orthogonal direct sum. We have AutSI(R) (Rn ) = Sp2n (R) (n ≥ 0). (6.3) Define a strong monoidal functor Ψ : SI(OK ) → SI(OK /α) by Ψ(V ) = (OK /α) ⊗OK V . This 2 of SI(O ) to the generator (O /α)2 of SI(O /α) (both functor takes the generator OK K K K are equipped with the standard symplectic form). Define Sp(OK , α) = Γ(Ψ). Using the identification in (6.3), we have Sp(OK , α)O2n = Sp2n (OK , α). K  Lemma 6.10. The functor Ψ is highly surjective. Proof. This is equivalent to the fact that the map Sp2n (OK ) → Sp2n (OK /α) is surjective for all n ≥ 0, which follows from strong approximation (see, e.g., [PlRa, Chapter 7]). As we discussed in §5.3, Lemma 6.10 has the following corollary. Corollary 6.11. For all k ≥ 0, there exists an SI(OK /α)-module Hk (Sp(OK , α); k) such that Hk (Sp(OK , α); k)(OK /α)2n = Hk (Sp2n (OK , α); k). Identifying the space of embeddings. We now wish to give a concrete description of the 2 -embeddings of O 2n . Letting ı̂ be the symplectic form on O 2n , a symplectic space of OK K K basis for Ok2n is an ordered basis (a1 , b1 , . . . , an , bn ) such that ı̂(ai , aj ) = ı̂(bi , bj ) = 0 and ı̂(ai , bj ) = δij for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, where δij is the Kronecker delta. A partial symplectic 2n is a sequence (a , b , . . . , a , b ) of elements of O 2n that can be extended to basis for OK 1 1 p p K 2n , a symplectic basis (a1 , b1 , . . . , an , bn ). The space of partial symplectic bases for OK denoted PSBn (OK ), is the semisimplicial set whose (p − 1)-cells are partial symplectic bases (a1 , b1 , . . . , ap , bp ). 2 -embeddings of O 2n is isomorphic to PSB (O ). Lemma 6.12. The space of OK n K K 2 -embeddings of O 2n are in bijection Proof. Fix some p ≥ 0. The p-simplices of the space of OK K p+1 2n ). We can define a set map with elements of HomSI(OK ) (OK , OK p+1 2n η : HomSI(OK ) (OK , OK ) → (PSBn (OK ))p p+1 2n ) of the standard symplectic by letting η(f ) be the image under f ∈ HomSI(OK ) (OK , OK p+1 basis for OK . Clearly η is a bijection compatible with the semisimplicial structure.  45  f ′ (S ′ )  τ′  f ′ (τ )  f ′ (f (S))  τ0  S  f0 (S)  Figure 1: The LHS shows how to compose morphisms (f, τ ) : S → S ′ and (f ′ , τ ′ ) : S ′ → S ′′ . The picture depicts S ′′ . The RHS shows the identity morphism (f0 , τ0 ) : S → S, which pushes ∂S across a collar neighborhood.  The space PSBn (OK ) was introduced by Charney [Cha3], who proved the following theorem. Theorem 6.13 ([Cha3, Corollary 3.3]). The space PSBn (OK ) is  n−6 2 -connected.  Remark 6.14. Just like for PBn (OK ) in §6.1, the definition of PSBn (R) is different from Charney’s, but can be proved equivalent for Dedekind domains using the ideas from [Re]. Putting it all together. We now prove Theorem J, which asserts that the SI(O/α)-module Hk (Sp(OK , α); k) is finitely generated. Proof of Theorem J. We apply Theorem 5.13 to the highly surjective functor Ψ. This theorem has three hypotheses. The first is that the category of SI(OK /α)-modules is locally Noetherian, which is Theorem E. The second is that Hk (Sp2n (OK , α); k) is a finitely generated k-module for all k ≥ 0, which is a theorem of Borel–Serre [BoSe]. The third is that the 2 -embeddings is highly acyclic, which follows from Lemma 6.12 and Theorem 6.13. space of OK We conclude that we can apply Theorem 5.13 and deduce that Hk (Sp(OK , α); k) is a finitely generated SI(OK /α)-module for all k ≥ 0, as desired.  6.4  The category of surfaces  In preparation for proving Theorem K (which concerns congruence subgroups of the mapping class group), this section is devoted to a weak complemented category Surf of surfaces. This category was introduced by Ivanov [I, §2.5]; our contribution is to endow it with a monoidal structure. It is different from previous monoidal categories of surfaces (for instance, in [Mil]), which do not include morphisms between non-isomorphic surfaces. A related monoidal category of surfaces was constructed independently by Wahl–Randal-Williams [WahRW, §5.6], though their morphisms are different from ours. The category Surf. The objects of the category Surf are pairs (S, η) as follows. • S is a compact oriented surface with one boundary component. • η : [0, 1] → ∂S is an embedding such that S lies to the left of Im(η). We will call η the boundary arc of S. This endows S with a natural basepoint, namely η(1/2) ∈ ∂S. To keep our notation from getting out of hand, we will usually refer to (S, η) simply as S, leaving η implicit. For S, S ′ ∈ Surf, the set HomSurf (S, S ′ ) consists of homotopy classes of pairs (f, τ ) as follows. • f : S → Int(S ′ ) is an orientation-preserving embedding. • τ is a properly embedded arc in S ′ \ Int(f (S)) which goes from the basepoint of S ′ to the image under f of the basepoint of S. If (f, τ ) : S → S ′ and (f ′ , τ ′ ) : S ′ → S ′′ are morphisms, then (f ′ , τ ′ ) ◦ (f, τ ) = (f ′ ◦ f, τ ′ · f ′ (τ )) : S → S ′′ ,  46  S1  S2  R  τ1  R′  λ  τ2  Figure 2: The upper left figure is S1 ⊛ S2 , divided into the three subsurfaces S1 and S2 and R (R is shaded). The bottom left figure is S1′ ⊛ S2′ ; here the rectangle is labeled R′ . For i = 1, 2, the morphism (fi , τi ) : Si → Si′ is depicted. The right hand figure shows how S1 ⊛ S2 is embedded in S1′ ⊛ S2′ .  where arcs are composed as in the fundamental groupoid (this goes from left to right rather than right to left as in function composition; see Figure 1). The identity morphism of S is the morphism (f0 , τ0 ) depicted in Figure 1; the embedding f0 “pushes” ∂S across a collar neighborhood. Remark 6.15. The boundary arc of an object of Surf is necessary to define the monoidal structure on Surf. However, aside from providing a basepoint it plays little role in the structure of Surf. Indeed, if S, S ′ ∈ Surf are objects with the same underlying surface, then ∼ = it is easy to see that there exists an isomorphism (f, τ ) : S → S ′ . Automorphisms. Ivanov proved the following theorem. Theorem 6.16 ([I, §2.6]). Let S ∈ Surf. Then AutSurf (S) is isomorphic to the mapping class group of S. Remark 6.17. One potentially confusing point here is that Ivanov allows his surfaces to have multiple boundary components. The theorem in [I, §2.6] is more complicated than Theorem 6.16, but it reduces to Theorem 6.16 when S has one boundary component. A bifunctor. Let R = [0, 3] × [0, 1] ⊂ R2 . Consider objects S1 and S2 of Surf. Define S1 ⊛ S2 to be the following object of Surf. For i = 1, 2, let ηi : [0, 1] → Si be the boundary arc of Si . Then S1 ⊛ S2 is the result of gluing S1 and S2 to R as follows. • For t ∈ [0, 1], identify η1 (t) ∈ S1 and (0, t) ∈ R. • For t ∈ [0, 1], identify η2 (t) ∈ S2 and (3, 1 − t) ∈ R. We have 1 − t in the above to ensure that the resulting surface is oriented. The boundary arc of S1 ⊛ S2 is t 7→ (1 + t, 0) ∈ R. Lemma 6.18. The operation ⊛ is a bifunctor on Surf. Proof. For i = 1, 2, let (fi , τi ) : Si → Si′ be a Surf-morphism. We must construct a canonical morphism (g, λ) : S1 ⊛ S2 −→ S1′ ⊛ S2′ . The based surface S1 ⊛ S2 consists of three pieces, namely S1 and S2 and R. Identify all three of these pieces with their images in S1 ⊛ S2 . Similarly, S1′ ⊛ S2′ consists of three pieces, namely S1′ and S2′ and a rectangle which we will call R′ to distinguish it from R ⊂ S1 ⊛ S2 , and we will identify these three pieces with their images in S1′ ⊛ S2′ . Let g : S1 ⊛ S2 → S1′ ⊛ S2′ be the embedding depicted in Figure 2, so g(R) is a regular neighborhood in S1′ ⊛ S2′ \ Int(f1 (S1 ) ∪ f2 (S2 )) of the union of τ1 and τ2 and the arc t 7→ (3t, 1/2) in R′ = [0, 3] × [0, 1] ⊂ R2 . Also, let λ be the arc shown in Figure 2. It is clear that (g, λ) is well-defined up to homotopy. 47  S1  S1  S2  S2  S3  S3  Figure 3: The LHS is (S1 ⊛ S2 ) ⊛ S3 and the RHS is S1 ⊛ (S2 ⊛ S3 ). T  λ τ  f (S1 )  Figure 4: The LHS shows f (S1 ) and T together with the arcs τ and λ. The RHS shows the desired morphism T ⊛ S1 → S2 .  Monoidal structure. We now come to the following result. Lemma 6.19. The category Surf is a monoidal category (not symmetric!) with respect to the bifunctor ⊛. Proof. Clearly a disc (with some boundary arc; any two such boundary arcs determine isomorphic objects of Surf) is a two-sided identity for ⊛. Associativity is clear from Figure 3. The various diagrams that need to commute are all easy exercises. Weak complemented category. We finally come to the main result of this section. Proposition 6.20. The monoidal category (Surf, ⊛) is a weak complemented category with generator a one-holed torus. Proof. If S11 is a one-holed torus with a fixed boundary arc and S is an arbitrary object g of Surf, then letting g be the genus of S we clearly have S ∼ = ⊛i=1 S11 . It follows that S11 is a generator of (Surf, ⊛). Now let (f, τ ) : S1 → S2 be a Surf-morphism. We must construct a complement to (f, τ ) which is unique up to precomposing the inclusion map by an isomorphism. Define T to be the complement of an open regular neighborhood in S2 of ∂S2 ∪ τ ∪ f (S1 ). Thus T is a compact oriented surface with one boundary component. Fix a boundary arc of T . As is shown in Figure 4, there exists a Surf-morphism (g, λ) : T → S2 such that T is a complement to (f, τ ). Uniqueness of this complement is an easy exercise.  6.5  The mapping class group: Theorem K  Fix ℓ ≥ 2, and let k be a Noetherian ring. In this section, we construct SI(Z/ℓ)-modules Hk (MCG(ℓ); k) as in Theorem K for all k ≥ 0; see Corollary 6.22. We then prove Theorem K, which says that Hk (MCG(ℓ); k) is a finitely generated SI(Z/ℓ)-module for all k ≥ 0. Categories and functors. Let (Surf, ⊛) be the weak complemented category of surfaces discussed in §6.4 (see Proposition 6.20). For all g ≥ 0, fix a boundary arc of Sg1 . This allows us to regard each Sg1 as an object of Surf. By Theorem 6.16, we have AutSurf (Sg1 ) = MCG1g 48  (g ≥ 0).  (6.4)  Figure 5: The LHS shows a morphism (g, λ) : ⊛2i=0 S11 → S51 . The canonical morphisms (hj , δj ) : S11 → ⊛2i=0 S11 are shown, and the union of the rectangles involved in forming ⊛2i=0 S11 is shaded. The RHS shows the associated tethered torus system.  In Example 1.17 we noted that the category SI(Z/ℓ) is a complemented category whose monoidal structure is given by the orthogonal direct sum. There is a strong monoidal functor Ψ : Surf → SI(Z/ℓ) defined via the formula Ψ(S) = H1 (S; Z/ℓ); here H1 (S; Z/ℓ) is equipped with the symplectic algebraic intersection pairing. This functor takes the generator S11 of Surf to the generator H1 (S11 ; Z/ℓ) ∼ = (Z/ℓ)2 for SI(Z/ℓ). Define MCG(ℓ) = Γ(Ψ). Using the identification in (6.4), we have MCG(ℓ)(Z/ℓ)2g = MCG1g (ℓ). Lemma 6.21. The functor Ψ is highly surjective. Proof. This is equivalent to the fact that the map MCG1g → Sp2g (Z/ℓ) arising from the action of MCG1g on H1 (Sg1 ; Z/ℓ) is surjective for all g ≥ 0. This is classical. For instance, it can be factored as MCG1g → Sp2g (Z) → Sp2g (Z/ℓ); the map MCG1g → Sp2g (Z) is surjective by [FaMar, §6.3.2], and the map Sp2g (Z) → Sp2g (Z/ℓ) is surjective by strong approximation (see, e.g., [PlRa, Chapter 7]). As we discussed in §5.3, Lemma 6.21 has the following corollary. Corollary 6.22. For all k ≥ 0, there exists an SI(Z/ℓ)-module Hk (MCG(ℓ); k) such that Hk (MCG(ℓ); k)(Z/ℓ)2g = Hk (MCG1g (ℓ); k). Identifying the space of embeddings. We now wish to give a concrete description of the space of S11 -embeddings of Sg1 . A tethered torus system on Sg1 is a sequence ((f0 , τ0 ), . . . , (fp , τp )) as follows (see the right hand side of Figure 5). • Each (fi , τi ) is a morphism from S11 to Sg1 . • After homotoping the (fi , τi ), the following hold. Let ∗ ∈ ∂Sg1 be the basepoint. – (fi (S11 ) ∪ τi ) ∩ (fj (S11 ) ∪ τj ) = {∗} for all distinct 0 ≤ i, j ≤ p. – Going clockwise, the τi leave the basepoint ∗ in their natural order (i.e., τi leaves before τj when i < j); see Remark 6.23 below for more on this. The space of tethered tori on Sg1 , denoted TTg , is the semisimplicial set whose p-simplices are tethered torus systems ((f0 , τ0 ), . . . , (fp , τp )). Remark 6.23. The condition on the order in which the τi leave the basepoint is needed because of the fact that the monoidal structure on (Surf, ⊛) is not symmetric; in our proof below, a p-simplex of TTg corresponds to a morphism ⊛pi=0 S11 → Sg1 , and the ordering on the τi reflects the ordering on the ⊛-factors. Lemma 6.24. The space of S11 -embeddings of Sg1 is isomorphic to TTg . Proof. Consider a morphism (g, λ) : ⊛pi=0 S11 → Sg1 . For 0 ≤ j ≤ p, let (hj , δj ) : S11 → ⊛pi=0 S11 be the canonical map coming from the j th term. Then ((g ◦ h0 , λ · g(δ0 )), . . . , (g ◦ hp , λ · g(δp ))) is a tethered torus system (see Figure 5). This gives an isomorphism between the space of S11 -embeddings of Sg1 and the space of tethered tori. 49  Using results of Hatcher–Vogtmann [HatVo3], we will prove the following in §6.6. Theorem 6.25. The space TTg is  g−3 2 -connected.  Putting it all together. We now prove Theorem K, which asserts that the SI(Z/ℓ)-module Hk (MCG(ℓ); k) is finitely generated. Proof of Theorem K. We apply Theorem 5.13 to the highly surjective functor Ψ. This theorem has three hypotheses. The first is that the category of SI(Z/ℓ)-modules is locally Noetherian, which is Theorem E. The second is that Hk (MCG1g (ℓ); k) is a finitely generated k-module for all k ≥ 0. This follows easily from the fact that the moduli space of curves is a quasi-projective variety; see [FaMar, p. 127] for a discussion. The third is that the space of S11 -embeddings is highly acyclic, which follows from Lemma 6.24 and Theorem 6.25. We conclude that we can apply Theorem 5.13 and deduce that Hk (MCG(ℓ); k) is a finitely generated SI(Z/ℓ)-module for all k ≥ 0, as desired.  6.6  The space of tethered tori  Our goal is to prove Theorem 6.25, which asserts that TTg is g−3 2 -connected. We will deduce this from work of Hatcher–Vogtmann. Recall that we have endowed each Sg1 with a basepoint ∗ ∈ ∂Sg1 . A tethered chain on Sg1 is a triple (α, β, τ ) as follows. • α and β are oriented properly embedded simple closed curves on Sg1 that intersect once transversely with a positive orientation. • τ is a properly embedded arc that starts at ∗, ends at a point of β \ α, and is otherwise disjoint from α ∪ β. We will identify homotopic tethered chains. The space of tethered chains, denoted TCg , is the semisimplicial set whose p-simplices are sequences ((α0 , β0 , τ0 ), . . . , (αp , βp , τp )) of tethered chains with the following properties. • They can be homotoped such that they only intersect at ∗. • Going clockwise, the τi leave the basepoint ∗ in their natural order (i.e., τi leaves before τj when i < j). We remark that any unordered sequence of tethered chains that satisfies the first condition can be uniquely ordered such that it satisfies the second. The complex TCg was introduced by Hatcher–Vogtmann [HatVo3], who proved the following theorem. Theorem 6.26 (Hatcher–Vogtmann, [HatVo3]). The space TCg is  g−3 2 -connected.  Proof of Theorem 6.25. We begin by defining a map π 0 : TC0g → TT0g . Fix once and for all a tethered chain (A, B, Γ) in S11 . Consider a tethered chain (α, β, τ ) ∈ TC0g . Let T be a closed regular neighborhood of α ∪ β. Choosing T small enough, we can assume that τ only intersects ∂T once. Write τ = τ ′ · τ ′′ , where τ ′ is the segment of τ from the basepoint of Sg1 to ∂T and τ ′′ is the segment of τ from ∂T to β. Using the change of coordinates principle of [FaMar, §1.3], there exists an orientation-preserving homeomorphism f : S11 → T such that f (A) = α and f (B) = β and f (Γ) = τ ′′ . By [FaMar, Proposition 2.8] (the “Alexander method”), these conditions determine f up to homotopy. The pair (f, τ ′ ) is a tethered torus, and we define π 0 ((α, β, τ )) = (f, τ ′ ) ∈ TT0g . It is clear that this is well-defined and surjective (but not injective). The map π 0 extends over the higher-dimensional simplices of TCg in an obvious way to define a map π : TCg → TTg . Arbitrarily pick a set map φ0 : TT0g → TC0g such that π 0 ◦ φ0 = id. If ((f0 , τ0 ), . . . , (fp , τp )) is a simplex of TTg and (αi , βi , τi′ ) = φ0 ((fi , τi )) for 0 ≤ i ≤ p, then by construction we have αi , βi ⊂ Im(fi ). Since the images of the fi are 50  disjoint, we conclude that ((α0 , β0 , τ0′ ), . . . , (αp , βp , τp′ )) is a simplex of TCg . Thus φ0 extends over the higher-dimensional simplices of TTg to define a map φ : TTg → TCg satisfying π ◦ φ = id. This implies that π induces a surjective map on all homotopy groups, so by Theorem 6.26 we deduce that TTg is g−3 2 -connected.  References [AtMac] [Be] [Bo] [BoSe] [Br] [Cha1] [Cha2] [Cha3] [Ch1] [Ch2] [ChEFa] [ChEFaNag] [ChFa] [ChPu] [CuVo] [DPu] [Dj1] [Dj2] [Dj3] [DjVe1]  [DjVe2] [DrKu] [Dw] [Fa]  M. F. Atiyah and I. G. Macdonald, Introduction to commutative algebra, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, MA, 1969. S. Betley, Twisted homology of symmetric groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 130 (2002), no. 12, 3439–3445. A. Borel, Stable real cohomology of arithmetic groups, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 7 (1974), 235–272 (1975). A. Borel and J.-P. Serre, Corners and arithmetic groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 48 (1973), 436–491. K. S. Brown, Cohomology of Groups, corrected reprint of the 1982 original, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 87, Springer, New York, 1994. R. M. Charney, Homology stability for GLn of a Dedekind domain, Invent. Math. 56 (1980), no. 1, 1–17. R. Charney, On the problem of homology stability for congruence subgroups, Comm. Algebra 12 (1984), no. 17-18, 2081–2123. R. Charney, A generalization of a theorem of Vogtmann, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 44 (1987), no. 1-3, 107–125. T. Church, Homological stability for configuration spaces of manifolds, Invent. Math. 188 (2012), no. 2, 465–504, arXiv:1103.2441v3. T. Church, personal communication. T. Church, J. S. Ellenberg and B. Farb, FI-modules and stability for representations of symmetric groups, Duke Math. J. 164 (2015), no. 9, 1833–1910, arXiv:1204.4533v4. T. Church, J. S. Ellenberg, B. Farb and R. Nagpal, FI-modules over Noetherian rings, Geom. Topol. 18 (2014), no. 5, 2951–2984, arXiv:1210.1854v2. T. Church and B. Farb, Representation theory and homological stability, Adv. Math. 245 (2013), 250–314, arXiv:1008.1368v3. T. Church and A. Putman, Generating the Johnson filtration, Geom. Topol. 19 (2015), no. 4, 2217–2255, arXiv:1311.7150v2. M. Culler and K. Vogtmann, Moduli of graphs and automorphisms of free groups, Invent. Math. 84 (1986), no. 1, 91–119. M. Day and A. Putman, On the second homology group of the Torelli subgroup of Aut(Fn ), preprint 2014, arXiv:1408.6242v2. A. Djament, Foncteurs en grassmanniennes, filtration de Krull et cohomologie des foncteurs, Mém. Soc. Math. Fr. (N.S.) No. 111 (2007), xxii+213 pp. A. Djament, Le foncteur V 7→ F2 [V ]⊗3 entre F2 -espaces vectoriels est noethérien, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 59 (2009), no. 2, 459–490, arXiv:math/0702667v4. A. Djament, Sur l’homologie des groupes unitaires à coefficients polynomiaux, J. K-Theory 10 (2012), no. 1, 87–139. A. Djament and C. Vespa, Sur l’homologie des groupes orthogonaux et symplectiques à coefficients tordus, Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. (4) 43 (2010), no. 3, 395–459, arXiv:0808.4035v4. A. Djament and C. Vespa, Sur l’homologie des groupes d’automorphismes des groupes libres à coefficients polynomiaux, Comment. Math. Helv. 90 (2015), no. 1, 33–58. J. Draisma and J. Kuttler, Bounded-rank tensors are defined in bounded degree, Duke Math. J. 163 (2014), no. 1, 35–63, arXiv:1103.5336v2. W. G. Dwyer, Twisted homological stability for general linear groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 111 (1980), no. 2, 239–251. B. Farb, Representation stability, Proceedings of the 2014 International Congress of Mathematicians. Volume II, 1173–1196, arXiv:1404.4065v1.  51  [FaMar] [FraFriPiSch]  [FraTo] [Fri] [Ga] [GanLi] [Gr]  [Har] [Hat] [HatVo1] [HatVo2] [HatVo3] [HatWah] [Hi] [I]  [Kr] [Ku1] [Ku2] [LeSz] [LySc] [MadWe] [Mc] [Mil] [MirVa] [Nak] [PlRa]  B. Farb and D. Margalit, A primer on mapping class groups, Princeton Mathematical Series, 49, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 2012. V. Franjou, E. Friedlander, T. Pirashvilli, and L. Schwartz, Rational representations, the Steenrod algebra and functor homology, Panoramas et Synthèses, 16, Soc. Math. France, Paris, 2003. V. Franjou and A. Touzé (eds.), Lectures on functor homology, Progress in Mathematics, 311, Birkhäuser/Springer, Cham, 2015. G. Friedman, Survey article: an elementary illustrated introduction to simplicial sets, Rocky Mountain J. Math. 42 (2012), no. 2, 353–423. S. Galatius, Stable homology of automorphism groups of free groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 173 (2011), no. 2, 705–768, arXiv:math/0610216v3. W. L. Gan, L. Li, Noetherian property of infinite EI categories, New York J. Math. 21 (2015), 369–382, arXiv:1407.8235v3. D. Grayson, Higher algebraic K-theory. II (after Daniel Quillen), in Algebraic K-theory (Proc. Conf., Northwestern Univ., Evanston, Ill., 1976), 217–240. Lecture Notes in Math., 551, Springer, Berlin. J. L. Harer, Stability of the homology of the mapping class groups of orientable surfaces, Ann. of Math. (2) 121 (1985), no. 2, 215–249. A. Hatcher, Homological stability for automorphism groups of free groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 70 (1995), no. 1, 39–62. A. Hatcher and K. Vogtmann, Cerf theory for graphs, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 58 (1998), no. 3, 633–655. A. Hatcher and K. Vogtmann, Homology stability for outer automorphism groups of free groups, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 4 (2004), 1253–1272, arXiv:math/0406377v2. A. Hatcher and K. Vogtmann, Tethers and homology stability for surfaces, preprint 2015, arXiv:1508.04334v2. A. Hatcher and N. Wahl, Stabilization for mapping class groups of 3-manifolds, Duke Math. J. 155 (2010), no. 2, 205–269, arXiv:0709.2173v4. G. Higman, Ordering by divisibility in abstract algebras, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 2 (1952), 326–336. N. V. Ivanov, On the homology stability for Teichmüller modular groups: closed surfaces and twisted coefficients, in Mapping class groups and moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces (Göttingen, 1991/Seattle, WA, 1991), 149–194, Contemp. Math., 150, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI. J. B. Kruskal, The theory of well-quasi-ordering: A frequently discovered concept, J. Combinatorial Theory Ser. A 13 (1972), 297–305. N. J. Kuhn, Generic representations of the finite general linear groups and the Steenrod algebra. II, K-Theory 8 (1994), no. 4, 395–428. N. J. Kuhn, Invariant subspaces of the ring of functions on a vector space over a finite field, J. Algebra 191 (1997), no. 1, 212–227. R. Lee and R. H. Szczarba, On the homology and cohomology of congruence subgroups, Invent. Math. 33 (1976), no. 1, 15–53. R. C. Lyndon and P. E. Schupp, Combinatorial group theory, Springer, Berlin, 1977. I. Madsen and M. Weiss, The stable moduli space of Riemann surfaces: Mumford’s conjecture, Ann. of Math. (2) 165 (2007), no. 3, 843–941, arXiv:math/0212321v3. D. McDuff, Configuration spaces of positive and negative particles, Topology 14 (1975), 91–107. E. Y. Miller, The homology of the mapping class group, J. Differential Geom. 24 (1986), no. 1, 1–14. B. Mirzaii and W. van der Kallen, Homology stability for unitary groups, Doc. Math. 7 (2002), 143–166, arXiv:math/0111117v1. M. Nakaoka, Decomposition theorem for homology groups of symmetric groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 71 (1960), 16–42. V. Platonov and A. Rapinchuk, Algebraic groups and number theory, translated from the 1991 Russian original by Rachel Rowen, Pure and Applied Mathematics, 139, Academic Press, Boston, MA, 1994.  52  [Po1] [Po2] [Po3] [Pu1] [Pu2] [Re] [SamSn1] [SamSn2] [SamSn3] [SamSn4] [Sat] [Sch] [Sco] [Va] [WahRW] [Wi]  G. M. L. Powell, The Artinian conjecture for I ⊗2 , J. Pure Appl. Algebra 128 (1998), no. 3, 291–310. G. M. L. Powell, The structure of indecomposable injectives in generic representation theory, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 350 (1998), no. 10, 4167–4193. G. M. L. Powell, On Artinian objects in the category of functors between F2 -vector spaces, in Infinite length modules (Bielefeld, 1998), 213–228, Trends Math, Birkhäuser, Basel. A. Putman, The Picard group of the moduli space of curves with level structures, Duke Math. J. 161 (2012), no. 4, 623–674, arXiv:0908.0555v3. A. Putman, Stability in the homology of congruence subgroups, Invent. Math. 202 (2015), no. 3, 987–1027, arXiv:1201.4876v5. I. Reiner, Unimodular complements, Amer. Math. Monthly 63 (1956), 246–247. S. V Sam and A. Snowden, GL-equivariant modules over polynomial rings in infinitely many variables, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 368 (2016), 1097–1158, arXiv:1206.2233v3. S. V Sam and A. Snowden, Introduction to twisted commutative algebras, preprint 2012, arXiv:1209.5122v1. S. V Sam and A. Snowden, Stability patterns in representation theory, Forum Math. Sigma 3 (2015), e11, 108 pp., arXiv:1302.5859v2. S. V Sam and A. Snowden, Gröbner methods for representations of combinatorial categories, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 30 (2017), 159–203, arXiv:1409.1670v3. T. Satoh, The abelianization of the congruence IA-automorphism group of a free group, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 142 (2007), no. 2, 239–248. L. Schwartz, Unstable modules over the Steenrod algebra and Sullivan’s fixed point set conjecture, Chicago Lectures in Mathematics, Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1994. A. Scorichenko, Stable K-theory and functor homology over a ring, thesis 2000. W. van der Kallen, Homology stability for linear groups, Invent. Math. 60 (1980), no. 3, 269–295. N. Wahl and O. Randal-Williams, Homological stability for automorphism groups, preprint 2015, arXiv:1409.3541v3. J. Wilson, FIW -modules and stability criteria for representations of the classical Weyl groups, J. Algebra 420 (2014), 269–332, arXiv:1309.3817v2.  Andrew Putman Department of Mathematics Rice University, MS 136 6100 Main St. Houston, TX 77005  Steven V Sam Department of Mathematics University of California, Berkeley 933 Evans Hall Berkeley, CA 94720  Current address: Department of Mathematics University of Notre Dame 279 Hurley Hall South Bend, IN 46556 andyp@nd.edu  Current address: Department of Mathematics University of Wisconsin, Madison 480 Lincoln Drive Madison, WI 53706 svs@math.wisc.edu  53

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
