Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1926

Abstract:
arXiv:1507.07778v3 [math.GT] 6 Nov 2017  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  A BSTRACT. We define a new class of irreducible groups, called groups not infinite-index presentable by products or not IIPP. We prove that certain aspherical manifolds with fundamental groups not IIPP do not admit maps of non-zero degree from direct products. This extends previous results of Kotschick and Löh, providing new classes of aspherical manifolds – beyond those non-positively curved ones which were predicted by Gromov – that do not admit maps of non-zero degree from direct products. A sample application is that an aspherical geometric 4-manifold admits a map of non-zero degree from a direct product if and only if it is a virtual product itself. This completes a characterization of the product geometries due to Hillman. Along the way we prove that for certain groups the property IIPP is a criterion for reducibility. This especially implies the vanishing of the simplicial volume of the corresponding aspherical manifolds. It is shown that aspherical manifolds with reducible fundamental groups do always admit maps of non-zero degree from direct products.  1. I NTRODUCTION A fundamental topic in topology is the study of maps of non-zero degree between manifolds of the same dimension. The existence of a map of non-zero degree defines a transitive relation, called domination relation, on the homotopy types of closed oriented manifolds. Whenever such a map M −→ N exists we say that M dominates N and denote this by M ≥ N. Gromov suggested investigating the domination relation as defining a partial order of manifolds and formulated several conjectures for candidate classes that might (not) be comparable under ≥ [14, 13, 15, 4, 38, 20]. A particular case of the domination question is when the domain is a non-trivial direct product. That case was raised in Gromov’s theory of functorial semi-norms (such as the simplicial volume, see also [25]) and of topological rigidity, where Gromov predicted that the fundamental classes of certain aspherical manifolds with large universal covers are not dominated by products. Furthermore, the domination-by-products question has its own independent interest, being a special case of Steenrod’s classical problem on the realization of homology classes by manifolds [7]. The homotopy types of aspherical manifolds are determined by their fundamental groups. Longstanding rigidity conjectures state that their homeomorphism types are determined by their fundamental groups as well. Several related questions concern the decomposition of the fundamental group of an aspherical manifold as a direct product and the realization of finitely presented Poincaré duality groups as fundamental groups of aspherical manifolds. An open question in this context is Date: November 7, 2017; c C. Neofytidis 2015–2017. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 57M05, 57M10, 57M50, 55M25, 22E25, 57N65, 53C23, 20F34. 1  2  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  whether every closed aspherical manifold M with fundamental group Γ1 × Γ2 can be decomposed as a product of closed manifolds with fundamental groups Γ1 and Γ2 respectively. In particular, it is an open question whether aspherical manifolds with reducible fundamental groups (that is, virtual products of two infinite groups) are finitely covered – and therefore dominated – by products. Lück showed how to obtain an affirmative answer in dimensions higher than four, relying on very strong assumptions concerning the Farrell-Jones conjecture and the cohomological dimensions of the involved groups [24]. For non-positively curved manifolds an affirmative answer is given by Gromoll-Wolf’s isometric splitting theorem [12]. 1.1. Summary of results. Before stating the main results in detail, we give a general overview of the content of this paper. First, applying Thom’s emphatic answer (in rational homology) [33] of Steenrod’s realization problem, we will show that every closed aspherical manifold with reducible fundamental group is indeed dominated by products (Theorem A). Therefore, in this paper we are interested to investigate whether aspherical closed manifolds with irreducible (i.e. not reducible) fundamental group admit arbitrary maps of non-zero degree by non-trivial direct products (clearly such maps cannot be homotopic to coverings). Our goal is to introduce a new algebraic obstruction to domination by products for aspherical manifolds whose fundamental groups have non-trivial center. This property will be termed “groups not infinite-index presentable by products” or “not IIPP” for short (cf. Definition 1.1). We will obtain new classes of aspherical manifolds that are not dominated by direct products, extending a previous obstruction of Kotschick and Löh [20] (called “groups not presentable by products”), and expanding Gromov’s predictions (about irreducible, non-positively curved manifolds [14]) to aspherical manifolds with non-trivial center. In particular, we will show that large classes of circle bundles with fundamental groups not IIPP are not dominated by products (Theorem B). In many cases, we will prove that the existence of a map of non-zero degree from a direct product is equivalent to the existence of a finite covering of the same product type (Theorem C). By definition, a group not presentable by products is not IIPP and a group not IIPP is irreducible, but none of those implications can be reversed (cf. Remark 1.2). Nevertheless, the characterization of Theorem C contains a special case of equivalence between “irreducible” and “not IIPP” for arbitrary (i.e. not necessarily finitely generated or torsion-free) groups: If the quotient of a group Γ by its center C(Γ) is not presentable by products, then Γ is reducible if and only Γ is IPPP (Theorem D). This result fails when Γ/C(Γ) is presentable by products. For example, the 5-dimensional Heisenberg group H5 – whose quotient by its center is Z4 and thus presentable by products – is IIPP but irreducible (cf. Example 1.7). Dimension five is the sharp dimension in which this phenomenon occurs, since “IIPP” and “reducible” are equivalent for fundamental groups of aspherical geometric manifolds (in the sense of Thurston) in dimensions ≤ 4; cf. Section 6.2, in particular Theorem 6.7. As a sample application of this study we deduce (combining Theorems A and D) the vanishing of the simplicial volume of certain aspherical manifolds (Corollary 1.5). Moreover, our results combined with Hillman’s work [17] show that a 4-dimensional geometric manifold is dominated by a product if and only if it is covered by a product (Theorem F). Further applications about ordering  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  3  manifolds using maps of non-zero degree [4, 38] and the monotonicity of Kodaira dimensions with respect to the existence of maps of non-zero degree [39] will be presented in a subsequent paper [28]. 1.2. Main theorems. In the development of the theory of bounded cohomology, Gromov [13] conjectured that the fundamental classes of irreducible, locally symmetric spaces of non-compact type cannot be represented by non-trivial products (of surfaces). Kotschick and Löh [20] verified Gromov’s conjecture, by finding an algebraic obstruction to domination by products for rationally essential manifolds. A closed oriented connected n-dimensional manifold M is called rationally essential if the classifying map of the universal covering cM : M −→ Bπ1 (M) sends the fundamental class of M to a non-trivial element in Hn (Bπ1 (M); Q); see [14, 13]. The non-domination criterion of [20], given in Theorem 2.4 below, reads as follows: An infinite group Γ is called not presentable by products if, for every homomorphism ϕ : Γ1 ×Γ2 −→ Γ onto a finite index subgroup of Γ one of the factors Γi has finite image ϕ(Γi ) ⊂ Γ. As we shall see in Section 2.2, the proof of Theorem 2.4 was obtained by showing that the existence of a map of non-zero degree f : X1 × X2 −→ M, with M rationally essential, implies a presentation by products Γ1 × Γ2 −→ π1 (M), where Γi := im(π1 (f Xi )). However, the proof of that statement does not give any insight on the index of the presenting factors Γ1 , Γ2 in π1 (M). In fact, all the possibilities for the indices [π1 (M) : Γi ] may occur, as we will see in Example 4.1. The targets of that example are however direct products of (aspherical) manifolds. Hence, a main question is to understand how close to “reducible” must the fundamental group of an aspherical manifold be, in order this manifold to be dominated by products. Indeed, the case of reducible fundamental groups has a complete affirmative answer: Theorem A. A closed aspherical manifold with reducible fundamental group is dominated by a non-trivial direct product of closed oriented manifolds. Thus our purpose in this article is to examine aspherical manifolds with irreducible fundamental groups. We extend the notion “group not presentable by products”, including groups with (virtually) infinite center: Definition 1.1. An infinite group Γ is called not infinite-index presentable by products or not IIPP if, for every homomorphism ϕ : Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ onto a finite index subgroup of Γ at least one of the images ϕ(Γi ) has finite index in Γ. Otherwise, if such homomorphism ϕ exists with [Γ : ϕ(Γi )] = ∞ for both i, then Γ is called infinite-index presentable by products or IIPP. Remark 1.2. The following inclusions hold immediately by definition: {groups not presentable by products} ⊂ {groups not IIPP} ⊂ {irreducible groups}. However, none of the inverse inclusions hold: For the first inclusion, the infinite cyclic group is a trivial example of a group presentable by products, but not IIPP. For the second inclusion, the 5-dimensional Heisenberg group is an example of an IIPP irreducible group; cf. Example 1.7.  4  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  The strong feature of the property “not IIPP” is that it detects at once all the possible dimensions of the factors of a product that dominates (with a π1 -surjective map) a rationally essential manifold with torsion-free fundamental group. For aspherical manifolds one of the factors can be taken as simple as possible: Up to finite covers, if an aspherical manifold M with fundamental group not IIPP is dominated by a product X1 × X2 , then X1 × T dim X2 ≥ M, where dim X2 ≤ rankC(π1 (M)). Our first main non-domination result deals with circle bundles: Theorem B. Let M be a circle bundle over a closed oriented aspherical manifold B, so that π1 (M) is not IIPP and its center remains infinite cyclic in finite covers. Then M is not dominated by any non-trivial direct product of closed oriented manifolds. Example 1.3. Closed Nil4 -manifolds fulfill the conditions of Theorem B and therefore are never dominated by products; cf. Propositions 6.10 and 6.22. Examples of such manifolds can easily be constructed as mapping tori of suitable self-homeomorphisms of T 3 ; see Remark 6.12. The fundamental group of M in Theorem B is presentable by products having infinite (cyclic) center. By Eberlein’s works [5, 6] or, more generally, by the stirring work of Farb and Weinberger [9], irreducible manifolds of dimension higher than one with fundamental groups with center do not admit metrics of non-positive sectional curvature. The non-domination results of Kotschick and Löh [20] deal mostly with non-positively curved manifolds. More precisely, they show that non-positively curved manifolds are dominated by products if and only if they are virtually diffeomorphic to products. Equivalently, the fundamental groups of those manifolds are reducible if and only if they are presentable by products. In the case of fiber bundles (which includes manifolds that do not admit metrics of non-positive sectional curvature [18]), the results of [20] deal with targets whose fiber and base have fundamental groups not presentable by products and with targets with positive simplicial volume. A circle bundle M over an aspherical manifold has vanishing simplicial volume [13, 23]. Moreover, the infinite cyclic fundamental group of the S 1 -fiber is presentable by products and, as mentioned above, central in π1 (M), which means that π1 (M) is presentable by products. However, as noted in Remark 1.2, the property “presentable by products” is not generally equivalent to “reducible”, and this applies as well to fundamental groups of many circle bundles; e.g. the fundamental group of any circle bundle over a closed surface with non-zero rational Euler class is irreducible and presentable by products (but it is not IIPP; see Proposition 6.3). In fact, when the base of the circle bundle has fundamental group not presentable by products, then π1 (M) is reducible if and only if it is IIPP. The following result characterizes circle bundles with the latter property, and is a partial converse to Theorem B: π  Theorem C. Let M −→ B be a circle bundle over a closed aspherical manifold B whose fundamental group π1 (B) is not presentable by products. Then the following are equivalent: (1) M is dominated by a non-trivial product of closed oriented manifolds;  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  5  (2) M is finitely covered by a product S 1 × B ′ , for some finite cover B ′ −→ B; (3) π1 (M) is reducible; (4) π1 (M) is IIPP. Example 1.4. A closed 4-manifold M carrying the geometry Sol14 is virtually a circle bundle over a closed oriented Sol3 -manifold, and π1 (M) is not IIPP (see Propositions 6.15 and 6.24 respectively). Since Sol3 -manifold groups are not presentable by products (cf. Proposition 6.2), Theorem C implies that M is not dominated by products. Actually, a circle bundle over a closed oriented Sol3 -manifold is dominated by a product if and only if it possesses the geometry Sol3 × R (see also Theorem 6.1). The idea of Theorem C is that the center of π1 (B) remains trivial in finite covers, being not presentable by products and torsion-free. In fact, the equivalence between (3) and (4) holds in its greatest generality with no assumptions on finite generation, torsion freeness or the virtual rank of the center: Theorem D. Let Γ be a group with center C(Γ) such that the quotient Γ/C(Γ) is not presentable by products. Then, Γ is reducible if and only if it is IIPP. In the light of Theorem A we obtain the following consequence of Theorem D: Corollary 1.5. Let M be a closed oriented aspherical manifold such that π1 (M) is IIPP and π1 (M)/C(π1 (M)) is not presentable by products. Then there exists a closed oriented manifold N such that T k × N ≥ M, where T k is the k-dimensional torus with k < rankC(π1 (M)). In particular, M has zero simplicial volume. Remark 1.6. It is a long-standing conjecture that the simplicial volume of a closed aspherical manifold whose fundamental group contains a non-trivial amenable normal subgroup vanishes [23]. The vanishing result in Corollary 1.5 is a straightforward consequence of the domination T k × N ≥ M (applying Theorems D and A). Alternatively, after showing that π1 (M) is a virtual product with an Abelian factor (by Theorem D), the vanishing of the simplicial volume of M follows as well by Gromov’s isometry theorem with respect to the simplicial ℓ1 -norm [13]. The property IIPP truly recognizes reducibility of a group Γ whenever the quotient Γ/C(Γ) is not presentable by products. Indeed, IIPP is not anymore a criterion for a group Γ to be reducible when the quotient Γ/C(Γ) is presentable by products: Example 1.7. The 5-dimensional Heisenberg group H5 is irreducible and IIPP, with H5 /C(H5 ) isomorphic to Z4 ; cf. Lemma 8.1. Also, H5 is realizable by a non-trivial circle bundle over T 4 . In Theorem 8.2, we will prove that this manifold is not dominated by products. This seems to be the first example of an aspherical manifold whose fundamental group admits a presentation by a product of two non-trivial subgroups of infinite index, but this manifold is still not dominated by products. Previously, examples of rationally essential, but not aspherical, manifolds with reducible fundamental groups that are not dominated by products were given in [20].  6  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  Also, this example shows that the converse of Theorem B does not hold in general. In particular, the assumptions of Theorem C (which is a partial converse of Theorem B) cannot be removed. The Heisenberg group H5 has cohomological dimension five which allows enough space for the existence of two infinite commuting subgroups Γi ⊂ H5 such that H5 is presented by Γ1 × Γ2 and [H5 : Γi ] = ∞. This is not true in lower dimensions as we shall see in Theorem E below. 1.3. Examples and applications. We now characterize the fundamental groups of certain aspherical manifolds, giving non-trivial examples of groups presentable by products, but not IIPP. Then, we apply our main results to show that an aspherical 4-manifold possessing a Thurston geometry is dominated by a direct product if and only if it is virtually a direct product. 1.3.1. Non-trivial examples of groups not IIPP. The condition “not IIPP” is the crucial property for the non-existence results of this paper. The following result gathers together some nonelementary examples of groups not IIPP. Theorem E. Irreducible fundamental groups of aspherical manifolds that possess a Thurston solvable geometry in dimensions ≤ 4 are not IIPP. The above statement contains solvable groups that are not presentable by products as well, 4 namely Sol3 -, Sol04 - and Solm6 =n -manifold groups. Theorem E says, roughly, that in low dimensions the properties “reducible” and “IIPP” are actually equivalent. The requirement on the cohomological dimension being at most four is crucial in the above theorem, because as we have seen in Example 1.7 the 5-dimensional Heisenberg group H5 is irreducible and IIPP. 1.3.2. Domination by products for geometric 4-manifolds. After [20], it is natural to ask to what extent the condition “presentable by products” on the fundamental group of a rationally essential manifold M would be sufficient for X1 × X2 ≥ M. Theorem A says that reducibility suffices for aspherical manifolds. A complete answer is known in dimension three [22], where Kotschick and the author proved that a closed 3-manifold is dominated by products if and only if it is either a virtual product or a virtual connected sum of copies of S 2 × S 1 . Thus, in particular, non-trivial circle bundles over closed oriented aspherical surfaces are never dominated by products, although their fundamental groups are presentable by products, having infinite center. It is well known [34, g2 if and only if it is 30] that a closed 3-manifold possesses one of the geometries Nil3 or SL virtually a non-trivial circle bundle over a closed aspherical surface (torus or a hyperbolic surface respectively). A main application of Theorems B and C, together with the examples of groups not IIPP given in Theorem E, is the following characterization in dimension four: Theorem F. A closed oriented aspherical geometric 4-manifold M is dominated by a non-trivial product if and only if it is finitely covered by a product. Equivalently, M carries one of the product geometries X3 × R or the reducible H2 × H2 geometry. The existence of finite coverings of (diffeomorphism) type N × S 1 for manifolds modeled on product geometries X3 × R is due to Hillman [17] (note that domination by products alone follows  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  7  by Theorem A as well). The above theorem says that only geometric aspherical 4-manifolds that are virtual products admit maps of non-zero degree from direct products. Remark 1.8. We note that we could have included non-aspherical geometries as well in the above statement, however those geometries are not interesting for the domination-by-products question, either because they are products themselves or because their representatives are simply connected. The latter geometries were contained as trivial examples in [26], where we constructed maps from products to every simply connected 4-manifold. Acknowledgements. Most of the content of this paper stems by a large part of author’s thesis, which was defended in Munich. The author is grateful to his advisor, Dieter Kotschick, for his wise guidance and support. Among several other people, the author is particularly grateful to Clara Löh and to Shicheng Wang for useful discussions and many suggestions; Shicheng Wang’s previous numerous works on maps of non-zero degree have been a great source of inspiration and have strongly influenced this research project. The financial support of the Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst (DAAD) is also gratefully acknowledged. 2. BACKGROUND  AND  P RELIMINARIES  In this section, we give a short description of the background of the topic of this paper, explain the notation, and give some elementary properties of groups presentable by products. 2.1. The domination relation. In the early 1940s, Steenrod raised the question of whether every n-dimensional integral homology class can be realized as the image of the fundamental class of a closed oriented n-dimensional manifold under a continuous map [7, Problem 25]. About a decade later, Thom answered affirmatively Steenrod’s question in degrees up to six, and found a 7-dimensional integral homology class which is not realizable by a closed manifold. (Since then, other non-realizability results have been obtained.) Nevertheless, Thom proved that, in all degrees, some multiple of each integral homology class can be realized by a closed smooth manifold [33]. In this paper, we are interested in the realization of fundamental classes of closed oriented manifolds (especially by direct products of manifolds), and therefore we deal with the notion of the degree of a continuous map. Namely, suppose that f : M −→ N is a continuous map between two closed oriented n-dimensional manifolds. The degree of f is defined to be the integer d so that Hn (f ; Z)([M]) = d · [N], where [M] ∈ Hn (M; Z) and [N] ∈ Hn (N; Z) denote the fundamental classes of M and N respectively. Whenever d is not zero, we say that M dominates N (or that M d-dominates N), and write M ≥ N (or M ≥d N). The degree of f is denoted by deg(f ). Unless otherwise stated, in this paper we consider continuous maps between the homotopy types of closed oriented connected manifolds. Gromov suggested to investigate the domination relation as defining an ordering of manifolds and as a tool to understand the values of functorial semi-norms on homology, most notably the simplicial volume [14, 13, 4]. The simplicial volume of a closed manifold M is completely determined by the classifying space of the fundamental group, Bπ1 (M), because the classifying map  8  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  of the universal covering, cM : M −→ Bπ1 (M), induces an isometry H∗ (cM ; Q) : H∗ (M; Q) −→ H∗ (Bπ1 (M); Q) with respect to the simplicial ℓ1 -norm [13]. This gives rise to the following definition: Definition 2.1 ([13]). A closed oriented connected n-dimensional manifold M is called rationally essential if Hn (cM ; Q)([M]) 6= 0 ∈ Hn (Bπ1 (M); Q), where cM : M −→ Bπ1 (M) classifies the universal covering of M. Otherwise, M is called rationally inessential. Clearly, every closed aspherical manifold is rationally essential. In fact, the notion of essentialness expands widely the class of aspherical manifolds, because for example every connected sum containing a rationally essential summand is rationally essential itself, and every manifold with non-zero simplicial volume is rationally essential [13]. 2.2. Kotschick-Löh’s non-domination criterion. Gromov conjectured that there might exist certain classes of (rationally essential) manifolds which are not dominated by products, pointing out irreducible locally symmetric spaces of non-compact type as potential candidates; cf. [14, Chapter 5G+ ]. Kotschick and Löh [20] verified Gromov’s suggestion, by finding a condition on the fundamental groups of rationally essential manifolds that are dominated by products: Definition 2.2 ([20]). An infinite group Γ is called presentable by products if there is a homomorphism ϕ : Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ onto a finite index subgroup of Γ so that the restriction of ϕ to each factor Γi has infinite image ϕ(Γi ). The property of being (not) presentable by products is clearly preserved under passing to finite index subgroups. Example 2.3. (1) A reducible group is obviously presentable by products, being a virtual product of two infinite groups. (2) Let Γ be a group which contains a finite index subgroup Γ with infinite center. Then Γ is presentable by products through the multiplication homomorphism C(Γ) × Γ −→ Γ. These two examples include every torsion-free group presentable by products [20, Prop. 3.2]. Suppose now that M is a rationally essential n-dimensional manifold and let f : X1 ×X2 −→ M be a map of non-zero degree, where the Xi are closed oriented manifolds of positive dimensions. Consider the induced map π1 (f ) : π1 (X1 ) × π1 (X2 ) −→ π1 (M) and set Γ := im(π1 (f )) ⊂ π1 (M) and Γi := im(π1 (f |Xi )) ⊂ Γ for the image of π1 (f ) and the images under π1 (f ) of the restrictions of f to the two factors Xi respectively. The multiplication map ϕ : Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ is then a well-defined surjective homomorphism, because the Γi commute element-wise and Γ1 ∪ Γ2 generates Γ. Moreover, the outer commutative diagram in Figure 1 implies that X1 × X2 is rationally essential [20]. Let cXi : Xi −→ Bπ1 (Xi ) be the classifying maps of the universal coverings of the Xi and Bπ1 (f |Xi ) : Bπ1 (Xi ) −→ BΓi be the maps induced by π1 (f |Xi ) on the level of classifying spaces.  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  f  X1 × X2 cX1 ×X2    Bϕ  ❤❤❤❤ ❤❤❤❤ ❤ ❤ ❤ ❤ ❤❤❤❤ ❤❤❤❤   M  (Bπ1 (f |X1 )◦cX1 )×(Bπ1 (f |X2 )◦cX2 )  BΓ1 × BΓ2 33  Bπ1 (X1 × X2 )  //  9  cM   // 66  Bπ1 (M)  Bπ1 (f )  F IGURE 1. Domination by products on the level of classifying spaces. Also, let Bϕ : BΓ1 × BΓ2 −→ BΓ be the map induced by ϕ; here we apply the homotopy equivalence BΓ1 ×BΓ2 ≃ B(Γ1 ×Γ2 ). We then have for i = 1, 2 the maps Bπ1 (f |Xi )◦cXi : Xi −→ BΓi , and the corresponding rational homology classes (1)  αi := Hdim Xi (Bπ1 (f |Xi ) ◦ cXi )([Xi ]) ∈ Hdim Xi (BΓi ; Q),  where [Xi ] denote the fundamental classes of the factors Xi . According to this notation, the key observation of Kotschick and Löh [20], shown in the commutative rectangle of Figure 1, is 0 6= deg(f ) · Hn (cM )([M]) = Hn (Bϕ)(α1 × α2 ). This means that the αi are not trivial and therefore the Γi are both infinite. In particular, Γ is presented by the product ϕ : Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ. This proves the following: Theorem 2.4 (Kotschick-Löh [20]). If M is a rationally essential manifold and π1 (M) is not presentable by products, then M is not dominated by products. Remark 2.5. A consequence of Theorem 2.4 is that Gromov’s prediction was indeed correct. Namely, a locally symmetric space of non-compact type is dominated by a product if and only if it is virtually (isometric to) a product; cf. [20, Cor. 4.2]. 2.3. Groups presentable by products. We end this preliminary section with some elementary properties of groups presentable by products, mainly as introduced in [20, Section 3]. If a group Γ is presentable by a product through a homomorphism ϕ : Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ, then the images ϕ(Γi ) commute with each other and ϕ(Γ1 ) ∪ ϕ(Γ2 ) generates im(ϕ). This means that, whenever a group Γ is presented by a product ϕ : Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ, we can replace each Γi by its image ϕ(Γi ), Γ by its finite index subgroup im(ϕ) and ϕ by the multiplication map. Therefore we may always assume that Γ can be presented by two element-wise commuting subgroups Γi through the multiplication map. The following properties can be easily verified:  10  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  Lemma 2.6 ([20, Lemma 3.3]). Suppose Γ1 , Γ2 are element-wise commuting subgroups of Γ so that Γ1 ∪Γ2 generates Γ. Then the multiplication map ϕ : Γ1 ×Γ2 −→ Γ is a well-defined surjective homomorphism and the following statements hold: (1) the intersection Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is a subgroup of the center C(Γ); (2) the kernel of ϕ is isomorphic to the Abelian group Γ1 ∩ Γ2 . In particular, there exists a short exact sequence ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ −→ 1,  (2)  where the isomorphism between Γ1 ∩ Γ2 and the kernel of ϕ is given by the antidiagonal. For groups with finitely generated center we moreover observe the following: Lemma 2.7. Let Γ be a finitely generated group with finitely generated center. Assume that Γ is presented by a product Γ1 × Γ2 as in Lemma 2.6. Then each of the factors Γi is finitely generated. Proof. For i, j ∈ {1, 2}, i 6= j, there exist (two) short exact sequences 1 −→ Γi −→ Γ −→ Γj /(Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ) −→ 1,  (3)  where Γ −→ Γj /(Γ1 ∩Γ2 ) is obtained by composing the isomorphism Γ ∼ = (Γ1 ×Γ2 )/(Γ1 ∩Γ2 ) (cf. sequence (2)) with the homomorphism induced by the projection from Γ1 ×Γ2 to Γj (see also [21]). Since Γ is finitely generated, the short exact sequence (3) implies that the group Γj /(Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ) is also finitely generated. Moreover, the center C(Γ) is finitely generated Abelian and thus the intersection Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is also finitely generated Abelian by Lemma 2.6. This shows that Γj is also finitely generated.  3. T HE  CASE OF REDUCIBLE GROUPS ( PROOF OF  T HEOREM A)  If M is a closed aspherical n-dimensional manifold whose fundamental group π1 (M) is reducible, then there exists a finite cover of M with fundamental group isomorphic to a direct product Γ1 × Γ2 . Thus, up to finite covers, we may identify π1 (M) with Γ1 × Γ2 . Then BΓ1 × BΓ2 is homotopy equivalent to M. In particular, there exists a non-trivial class α ∈ Hn (BΓ1 × BΓ2 ) mapping to the fundamental class [M] ∈ Hn (M). Since each of the Γi has infinite index in π1 (M) and M is aspherical manifold of dimension n, a theorem of Strebel [32] implies that the cohomological dimensions of each of the Γi is less than n. Thus, the Künneth formula (with rational coefficients) in degree n for the product BΓ1 × BΓ2 implies that there exist non-trivial homology classes a1 ∈ Hk (BΓ1 ) and a2 ∈ Hn−k (BΓ2 ), where 0 < k < n, such that α = a1 ⊗ a2 . By Thom’s theorem [33], there exist two closed smooth manifolds X1 and X2 of dimensions k and n − k respectively, together with continuous maps gi : Xi −→ BΓi , i = 1, 2, such that H∗ (gi )([Xi ]) = di · ai , for some non-zero integers di . Finally, the product map g1 ×g2  X1 × X2 −→ BΓ1 × BΓ2 ≃ M  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  11  is continuous and in homology of degree n maps the fundamental class [X1 × X2 ] to a non-zero multiple of [M]. This finishes the proof of Theorem A. 4. C IRCLE  BUNDLES WITH FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS NOT  ( PROOFS  OF  T HEOREMS B  AND  IIPP  C)  The purpose of this section is to introduce (in more detail) the property IIPP and prove Theorems B and C. 4.1. Motivation and definition of the property IIPP. Two basic examples of groups presentable by products are given by the reducible ones and by groups containing a finite index subgroup with infinite center; cf. Example 2.3. If follows by Lemma 2.6 that these two - not generally distinct classes contain all torsion-free groups presentable by products [20, Prop. 3.2]. A reducible group Γ can always be presented (being a virtual product) by a product Γ1 × Γ2 so that both subgroups Γi have infinite index in Γ, whereas a group with infinite center does not generally have this property; a trivial example is given by the infinite cyclic group. On the topological level, Theorem 2.4 states that whenever a rationally essential manifold M is dominated by a product, its fundamental group is presentable by products. However, (the proof of) that result does not give any additional information on the index of the factors of a product presenting π1 (M). The following example shows that all the possibilities can actually occur: Example 4.1. (1) Let M be a closed oriented manifold of positive dimension and infinite fundamental group. The identity map idM ×M of the product M × M is obviously π1 -surjective of degree one and both subgroups im(π1 (idM )) = π1 (M) have infinite index in π1 (M × M). (2) For g ≥ 1, let Σg+1 = Σg #(Sa1 × Sb1 ) be a closed oriented surface of genus g + 1. Let the composition (4)  q  id∨p  Σg #(Sa1 × Sb1 ) −→ Σg ∨ (Sa1 × Sb1 ) −→ Σg ∨ Sb1 , where q is the quotient map pinching to a point the essential circle defining the connected sum Σg #(Sa1 × Sb1 ), id is the identity map of Σg and the map p pinches to a point the meridian of the torus Sa1 × Sb1 ; cf. Figure 2. Denote by h the composition (id ∨ p) ◦ q. Now, let the composite map h×id  g  Σg+1 × Sc1 −→c (Σg ∨ Sb1 ) × Sc1 −→ Σg × Sc1 , where idc is the identity map of Sc1 and g is the identity on Σg and Sc1 , and sends the generator b of Sb1 to the generator c of Sc1 . Let f := g ◦ (h × idc ) : Σg+1 × Sc1 −→ Σg × Sc1 . Then H3 (f )([Σg+1 × S 1 ]) = [Σg × S 1 ], i.e. deg(f ) = 1. By the definition of f , we obtain an index-one subgroup of π1 (Σg × S 1 ), namely im(π1 (f |Σg+1 )) = π1 (Σg × S 1 ), and the infinite-index subgroup im(π1 (f |S 1 )) = π1 (S 1 ) ⊂ π1 (Σg × S 1 ).  12  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  q  id∨p  −→  −→  F IGURE 2. The map (id ∨ p) ◦ q : Σg+1 −→ Σg ∨ Sb1 (3) Let two copies of a closed oriented surface of genus three, Σ3 = (Sg11 × Sg12 )#(Sa11 × Sa12 )#(Sb11 × Sb12 ) Σ′3 = (Sg11′ × Sg12′ )#(Sa1′1 × Sa1′2 )#(Sb1′1 × Sb1′2 ). As in the previous example (cf. Figure 2), define h : Σ3 −→ (Sg11 × Sg12 ) ∨ Sa12 ∨ Sb12 as the composition q  id∨p∨p  Σ3 −→ (Sg11 × Sg12 ) ∨ (Sa11 × Sa12 ) ∨ (Sb11 × Sb12 ) −→ (Sg11 × Sg12 ) ∨ Sa12 ∨ Sb12 (see above for the notation). Now, let the composition g  h×h′  Σ3 × Σ′3 −→ ((Sg11 × Sg12 ) ∨ Sa12 ∨ Sb12 ) × ((Sg11′ × Sg12′ ) ∨ Sa1′2 ∨ Sb1′2 ) −→ Sg11 × Sg12 × Sg11′ × Sg12′ , where h, h′ are defined above, and g restricts to the identity map on each Sg1j and Sg1′ , and j is given as follows on the rest of the circles: a2 7→ g1′ , b2 7→ g2′ , a′2 7→ g1 , b′2 7→ g2 . We define f : Σ3 × Σ′3 −→ T 4 to be the composition g ◦ (h × h′ ). Again, f is a degree one map. However, both im(π1 (f |Σ3 )) and im(π1 (f |Σ′3 )) are now of index one in π1 (T 4 ). We note that this construction cannot be generalized when the target is not a product of two tori, T 2 × T 2 , because the generators of higher genus surfaces do not commute with each other. Actually, it will be transparent by the discussion in the upcoming subsection (cf. Lemma 4.3), that, if an n-dimensional aspherical manifold M admits a map f : X1 × X2 −→ M so that both subgroups im(π1 (f |Xi )) ⊂ π1 (M) are of finite index, then M is a virtual n-dimensional torus T n . In this paper, we analyze groups presentable by products by adding a constraint on the index of the presenting factors. More precisely, we introduce the following class of groups: Definition 4.2. An infinite group Γ is called infinite-index presentable by products (IIPP) if there is a homomorphism ϕ : Γ1 ×Γ2 −→ Γ onto a finite index subgroup of Γ so that for both factors Γi the images ϕ(Γi ) ⊂ Γ are of infinite index in Γ. Otherwise, Γ is called not infinite-index presentable by products (not IIPP). In the upcoming subsection, we will show that an aspherical manifold with fundamental group not IIPP can be dominated by a product only if it is dominated by a product containing a torus factor. This will imply that large classes of aspherical manifolds with fundamental groups not IIPP cannot be dominated by products. In the case of circle bundles, we will prove that, under a certain assumption on the fundamental group of the base, the condition “IIPP” characterizes aspherical  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  13  circle bundles that are dominated by products. Without that additional assumption on the base, this characterization does not generally hold (as we have already mentioned in Example 1.7). 4.2. Not IIPP as a non-domination criterion (proof of Theorem B). We first extend the nonexistence results of [20] to certain rationally essential manifolds with fundamental groups presentable by products, but not IIPP. The strong feature of such torsion-free groups is that one of the presenting subgroups must be Abelian: Lemma 4.3. Let Γ be a finitely generated torsion-free group with finitely generated center. Suppose that there exist element-wise commuting subgroups Γ1 , Γ2 ⊂ Γ so that Γ1 ∪ Γ2 generates Γ. If Γ is not IIPP, then one of the Γi is isomorphic to Zk for some k ≤ rankC(Γ). Proof. By Lemma 2.6, there is a short exact sequence ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ −→ 1, where ϕ is the multiplication map and the intersection Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is contained in the finitely generated center C(Γ). Since Γ is torsion-free, we have that Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is isomorphic to Zk for some k ≤ rankC(Γ). Moreover, each Γi is finitely generated by Lemma 2.7. Because Γ is not IIPP, one of the Γi , say Γ1 , must have finite index in Γ. This means that Γ2 is virtually Γ1 ∩ Γ2 , and so it is virtually Abelian. Moreover, the intersection Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is central in Γ2 , which implies that Γ2 /C(Γ2 ) is finite (because Γ2 is virtually Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ). By Schur’s theorem [29], we conclude that the commutator [Γ2 , Γ2 ] is also finite and so trivial, because Γ2 is torsion-free. This shows that Γ2 is Abelian itself and thus isomorphic to Zk .  As a warm-up, we observe that, in the torsion-free case, Lemma 4.3 yields the following dimension restrictions on the factors of a product that dominates a rationally essential manifold: Proposition 4.4. Let M be a rationally essential manifold so that π1 (M) is torsion-free and rankC(π1 (M)) = r. If π1 (M) is not IIPP, then there is no π1 -surjective non-zero degree map X1 × X2 −→ M, whenever min{dim X1 , dim X2 } > r. Proof. Suppose that there exist X1 , X2 closed oriented manifolds of positive dimensions and a π1 -surjective non-zero degree map f : X1 × X2 −→ M. Then there is a short exact sequence (5)  ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ π1 (M) −→ 1,  where ϕ is the multiplication map, Γi := π1 (f |Xi )(π1 (Xi )) and Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ⊂ C(π1 (M)); see Section 2.2. In particular, Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is isomorphic to Zk , for some k ≤ r = rankC(π1 (M)), because it is torsion-free. We moreover observe that k ≥ 1, otherwise π1 (M) would be isomorphic to the product Γ1 × Γ2 by (5) and so IIPP. We now apply Lemma 4.3 to π1 (M) to conclude that one of the Γi , say Γ2 , is isomorphic to Zk . This means that BΓ2 ≃ T k and by the non-vanishing (cf. Section 2.2) of α2 := Hdim X2 (Bπ1 (f |X2 ) ◦ cX2 )([X2 ]) ∈ Hdim X2 (T k ; Q), we deduce that dim X2 ≤ k. This is possible only if min{dim X1 , dim X2 } ≤ r.    14  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  In the case where M is aspherical, then the above proposition says that, if f : X1 × X2 −→ M is a π1 -surjective map of non-zero degree, then there is a finite cover M of M such that f factors through the map Bϕ : M × T k −→ M which is induced by the multiplication homomorphism ϕ : Γ1 × Γ2 −→ π1 (M), for some k ≤ rankC(π1 (M)); cf. Figure 1. In particular, there exist two non-trivial homology classes α1 ∈ Hdim X1 (M; Q) and α2 ∈ Hdim X2 (T k ; Q) such that Hn (Bϕ)(α1 × α2 ) = deg(f ) · [M]. Thus X1 × T m ≥ M, where m = dim X2 ≤ k. Example 4.5 (1-domination). Let M be a closed aspherical manifold. If π1 (M) has infinite cyclic center and it is not IIPP, then M can admit a degree one map by a product X1 × X2 only if one of the Xi is a circle. (Recall that a map of degree one is π1 -surjective.) Aspherical manifolds whose fundamental groups have infinite cyclic center are of special interest, in particular with respect to the study of circle bundles and circle actions; see [3] and the references there. We begin with two general facts about finite coverings of circle bundles: π  Lemma 4.6. Let M −→ B be a circle bundle over a closed oriented manifold B. p′  p  (1) Every finite cover M −→ M is a circle bundle over a finite cover B ′ −→ B. If moreover B is aspherical and π1 (B) is not presentable by products, then π1 (M ) and π1 (M) have infinite cyclic center. (2) ([2]) If the Euler class of M is torsion, then M is a virtually trivial circle bundle over a finite cover of B. Proof. (1) Since π1 (p)(π1 (M )) has finite index in π1 (M) and π1 (π)(π1 (M)) = π1 (B), the imp′  age H := π1 (π ◦ p)(π1 (M )) has finite index in π1 (B). Let B ′ −→ B be the finite covering π′  corresponding to H. Then π ◦ p lifts to M −→ B ′ , which is the desired circle bundle. If B is aspherical, then the S 1 fiber is central in the fundamental group of M. If, in addition, π1 (B) is not presentable by products, then it has trivial center (because it is torsion-free), and so the center of π1 (M) is infinite cyclic. Now π1 (B ′ ) has finite index in π1 (B), and so it is not presentable by products as well and therefore the center of π1 (M ) is also infinite cyclic. (2) Consider the Abelianization H1 (B) = π1 (B)/[π1 (B), π1 (B)]. Since the Euler class of M is torsion, the Universal Coefficient Theorem implies that the torsion part of H1 (B) is not trivial. Let now the composition π1 (B) −→ H1 (B) −→ TorH1 (B), where the first map is the quotient map and the second is the projection to the torsion of H1 (B). p′  If B ′ −→ B is the finite covering corresponding to the kernel of the above composition, then the pullback bundle (p′ )∗ (M) is the product S 1 × B ′ ; see [2, Prop. 3] for more details.  p  Remark 4.7. Conversely to part (2) of the above lemma, let M = S 1 × B ′ −→ M be a finite p′  cover, where B ′ −→ B is a finite covering between the bases (the map p′ is covered by p). The Euler class of M is trivial, that is eM = H 2 (p′ ; Z)(eM ) = 0 ∈ H 2 (B ′ , Z), where eM ∈ H 2 (B; Z) is the Euler class of M. By the fact that H 2 (p′ ; Q) is injective (since deg(p′ ) 6= 0), we conclude that eM is torsion.  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  15  A basic ingredient of our proof is the following lemma which generalizes [22, Lemma 1]: π  Lemma 4.8 (Factorization Lemma). Let M −→ B be a non-trivial n-dimensional circle bundle over a closed oriented aspherical manifold B. Suppose that the Euler class of M is not torsion and that the center of π1 (M) remains infinite cyclic in finite covers. Then X × S 1  M for any closed oriented manifold X. Proof. Since M is a non-trivial circle bundle whose integer Euler class eM ∈ H 2 (B; Z) is not torsion, the rational Euler class of M is not trivial as well. The same property holds for every (fiber preserving) finite cover of M, by Lemma 4.6 and Remark 4.7. By Poincaré duality, there exists a non-trivial class α ∈ H n−3(B; Q) so that eM ⌣ α is a non-zero multiple of the cohomology fundamental class ωB of B. Since H n−1 (B; Q) = Q, the Gysin sequence H n−1 (π)  ⌣e  M · · · −→ H n−3(B; Q) −→ H n−1(B; Q) −→ H n−1(M; Q) −→ · · ·  implies that ker(H n−1(π)) = im(⌣ eM ) = H n−1 (B; Q). Therefore H n−1 (π) = 0. Suppose now that there exists a non-zero degree map f : X × S 1 −→ M. After passing to a finite cover, if necessary, we may assume that f is π1 -surjective and that the center of π1 (M) is infinite cyclic. The latter means that the circle fiber of M represents (up to multiples) the only central factor in π1 (M). By the surjectivity of π1 (f ), we deduce that the composite map π ◦ f kills the homotopy class of the S 1 factor of the product X × S 1 , because this factor is central in π1 (X × S 1 ). Since B is aspherical, we conclude that π ◦ f factors up to homotopy through the projection p1 : X × S 1 −→ X. In particular, there is a continuous map g : X −→ B, so that π ◦ f = g ◦ p1 up to homotopy. (We note that X is not necessarily aspherical. It is, however, rationally essential, because f has non-zero degree and M is aspherical.) Let ωX be the cohomology fundamental class of X. Since H n−1 (p1 ; Q)(ωX ) = ωX ∈ H n−1(X× S 1 ; Q) and H n−1 (π; Q)(ωB ) = 0 ∈ H n−1(M; Q), the homotopy equation π ◦ f = g ◦ p1 implies that g must be of zero degree. Let now the pullback of M under g: g ∗M = {(x, y) ∈ X × M | g(x) = π(y)} . The map f : X × S 1 −→ M factors through g ∗M as follows: X × S 1 −→  g ∗M  π  2 −→ M  (x, t) 7→ (x, f (x, t)) 7→ f (x, t) . However, the degree of the pullback map π2 : g ∗ M −→ M is zero, being equal to the degree of g, which contradicts our assumption on deg(f ). This completes the proof.  We now finish the proof of Theorem B: Proof of Theorem B. Since π1 (M) is not IIPP, M is a non-trivial circle bundle and, moreover, its Euler class is not torsion by Lemma 4.6 (2). After passing to a finite cover, if necessary, suppose  16  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  that there is a π1 -surjective non-zero degree map f : X1 × X2 −→ M, where dim Xi > 0 and C(π1 (M)) = Z; cf. Lemma 4.6 (1). As before, there is a short exact sequence ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ π1 (M) −→ 1, where Γi := im(π1 (f |Xi )) ⊂ π1 (M), ϕ is the multiplication map and Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ⊂ C(π1 (M)) = Z, see Section 2.2. Lemma 4.3 implies that one of the Γi , say Γ2 , must be infinite cyclic, because π1 (M) is not IIPP and torsion-free. Therefore, BΓ2 ≃ S 1 and because the rational class α2 := Hdim X2 (Bπ1 (f |X2 ) ◦ cX2 )([X2 ]) ∈ Hdim X2 (S 1 ; Q) is not trivial we conclude that dim X2 = 1, i.e. X2 = S 1 . Now, we have a π1 -surjective dominant map X1 × S 1 −→ M, where C(π1 (M)) = Z. The proof follows by Lemma 4.8.  4.3. A characterization for circle bundles (proof of Theorem C). A main motivation for Theorem 2.4 was to show that non-positively curved manifolds which are not virtual products are not dominated by products. Actually, the property “fundamental group presentable by products” suffices for domination by products for non-positively curved manifolds (of dimension higher than one) and it is equivalent to “reducible”; cf. [20, Theorem 4.1]. Another consequence of the results of [20], which moreover deals with manifolds that do not admit any metric of non-positive sectional curvature (cf. [18]), concerns fibrations whose fiber and base have fundamental groups not presentable by products: π  Theorem 4.9 ([20, Theorem 5.1]). Let F −→ M −→ B be a fiber bundle whose fiber F and base B are closed oriented aspherical manifolds with fundamental groups not presentable by products. Then M is dominated by products if and only if it is a virtual product F ′ × B ′ , where F ′ and B ′ are finite covers of F and B respectively. Corollary 4.10 ([20, Cor. 5.3]). Let M be a closed oriented 4-manifold which is the total space of a surface bundle whose fiber F and base B are both hyperbolic surfaces. Then the following are equivalent: (1) (2) (3) (4)  M is dominated by a non-trivial product of closed oriented manifolds; M is virtually diffeomorphic to a trivial surface bundle; π1 (M) is reducible; π1 (M) is presentable by products.  Remark 4.11. The fact that hyperbolic groups are not presentable by products is proved in [20]. Moreover, we note that 4-manifolds satisfying one (and therefore every) property in the above corollary constitute the class of closed reducible H2 × H2 -manifolds; cf. Section 6.1. Now, if we replace the fiber F by S 1 in Theorem 4.9, then π1 (M) is presentable by products having infinite cyclic center. Theorem C, which is a partial converse of Theorem B, says that the conclusion of Theorem 4.9 still holds when the fiber is S 1 . However, domination by products is  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  17  now equivalent to the conditions “π1 (M) IIPP” and “π1 (M) reducible”; compare with the equivalence between (3) and (4) of Corollary 4.10. Proof of Theorem C. Since B is aspherical, M is also aspherical and its fundamental group fits into a short exact sequence (6)  π1 (π)  1 −→ π1 (S 1 ) −→ π1 (M) −→ π1 (B) −→ 1,  where π1 (S 1 ) is in the center of π1 (M). Moreover, π1 (B) has trivial center, because it is torsionfree and not presentable by products. Thus C(π1 (M)) = π1 (S 1 ) = Z. Suppose that there is a non-zero degree map f : X1 × X2 −→ M. After passing to a finite cover, if necessary, we may assume that f is π1 -surjective. (The finite cover of M is a circle bundle with infinite cyclic center, by Lemma 4.6 (1).) As before, we have a short exact sequence ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ π1 (M) −→ 1, where Γi := im(π1 (f |Xi )) ⊂ π1 (M) and Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ⊂ C(π1 (M)) = Z. Moreover, we obtain two non-trivial rational homology classes αi := Hdim Xi (Bπ1 (f |Xi ) ◦ cXi )([Xi ]) 6= 0 ∈ Hdim Xi (BΓi ; Q), see Sections 2.2 and 2.3 for the details. The composite homomorphism π1 (π) ϕ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ π1 (M) −→ π1 (B) ∼ = π1 (M)/π1 (S 1 )  maps one of the Γi , say Γ1 , to the neutral element of π1 (B), because π1 (B) is not presentable by products and torsion-free. This means that Γ1 is contained in C(π1 (M)) = π1 (S 1 ) = Z and it is therefore isomorphic to C(π1 (M)) = Z. In particular, BΓ1 ≃ BZ = S 1 and so the non-vanishing of α1 ∈ Hdim X1 (S 1 ; Q) implies that dim X1 ≤ 1. Since dim X1 > 0, we have that X1 = S 1 , i.e. S 1 × X2 ≥ M. It follows by Lemma 4.8 that M is a virtual product and, more precisely, that it is finitely covered by a product S 1 × B ′ for some finite cover B ′ −→ B. Thus (1) implies (2). The converse is trivially true and so (1) is equivalent to (2). Next, we show that the properties (2) and (3) are equivalent. Obviously (2) implies (3). Assume now that π1 (M) is reducible. Then there exists a finite cover M ′ −→ M so that π1 (M ′ ) is isomorphic to a direct product ∆1 × ∆2 , where ∆i are non-trivial (and therefore infinite) subgroups of π1 (M ′ ). The cover M ′ is a circle bundle over a finite cover B ′ of B, where π1 (B ′ ) is not presentable by products being a finite index subgroup of π1 (B); cf. Lemma 4.6 (1). We therefore obtain a short exact sequence (7)  1 −→ π1 (S 1 ) −→ ∆1 × ∆2 −→ π1 (B ′ ) −→ 1,  where π1 (S 1 ) = C(π1 (M ′ )) ∼ = C(∆1 ) × C(∆2 ). Since π1 (B ′ ) is not presentable by products and torsion-free, one of the ∆i , say ∆1 , maps trivially to π1 (B ′ ) ∼ = π1 (M ′ )/π1 (S 1 ) in (7). Thus ∆1 ⊂ π1 (S 1 ) (and so ∆1 is isomorphic to Z) and ∆2 surjects onto π1 (B ′ ). Moreover, π1 (S 1 ) maps trivially to ∆2 , otherwise ∆2 would have finite index in π1 (M ′ ), which is impossible, because  18  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  π1 (M ′ ) ∼ = ∆1 × ∆2 and both ∆i are infinite. Therefore ∆2 maps isomorphically onto π1 (B ′ ). We have now proved that π1 (M ′ ) ∼ = π1 (S 1 × B ′ ) and so M ′ is homotopy equivalent to S 1 × B ′ . Thus (3) implies (2). Finally, the equivalence between (3) and (4) follows from the more general group-theoretic Theorem D, whose proof is given in the upcoming section.  Remark 4.12. An alternative argument for the last step in the proof of the implication (3) ⇒ (2) is the following: Having that ∆1 maps trivially to π1 (B ′ ) ∼ = π1 (M ′ )/π1 (S 1 ), we conclude that π1 (S 1 ) maps trivially to ∆2 because the center of π1 (M ′ ) ∼ = ∆1 × ∆2 is infinite cyclic, isomorphic 1 to π1 (S ). Actually, taking for granted that the circle fiber of M ′ is the only central factor in π1 (M ′ ), we can relax the condition “not presentable by products” for the fundamental group of the base B ′ to “irreducible”. Also, note that after showing the implication (1) ⇒ (2) and since the implication (2) ⇒ (3) is trivial, we can deduce the equivalence of (1), (2) and (3) by Theorem A (which gives the implication (3) ⇒ (1)). This discussion yields a topological example of groups not IIPP in any dimension: Corollary 4.13. If M is a circle bundle with non-trivial rational Euler class over a closed aspherical manifold B so that π1 (B) is not presentable by products, then π1 (M) is not IIPP. Proof. Since π1 (B) is not presentable by products, π1 (M) is IIPP if and only if it is reducible, by the equivalence between (3) and (4) in Theorem C (or by Theorem D below). However, π1 (M) is not reducible, otherwise M would be covered by S 1 × B ′ , for some finite cover B ′ −→ B (by the equivalence between (2) and (3) of Theorem C), which is impossible because the Euler class of M is not torsion; cf. Remark 4.7.  5. T HE IIPP  PROPERTY AS A CRITERION FOR REDUCIBILITY ( PROOF OF  T HEOREM D)  In this section we show that the properties “IIPP” and “reducible” are equivalent for a group Γ, whenever Γ/C(Γ) is not presentable by products. Proof of Theorem D. Since every reducible group is IIPP, we only need to show that the converse is also true when the quotient of our group by its center is not presentable by products. Let Γ be an IIPP group such that Γ/C(Γ) is not presentable by products. Since Γ is IIPP, there exists a finite index subgroup Γ ⊂ Γ and two element-wise commuting subgroups Γ1 , Γ2 ⊂ Γ of infinite index such that Γ = Γ1 Γ2 . Thus we obtain the following composite surjective homomorphism Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ −→ Γ/Γ ∩ C(Γ), whose image Γ/Γ ∩ C(Γ) is of finite index in Γ/C(Γ). In particular, Γ/Γ ∩ C(Γ) is not presentable by products. Thus, for one of the Γi , say for Γ2 , the quotient Γ2 /Γ2 ∩C(Γ) is finite. Since Γ2 ∩C(Γ) is central in Γ2 , we deduce that Γ2 is virtually C(Γ2 ), in particular it is virtually Abelian.  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  19  We claim that [Γ : Γ1 C(Γ2 )] < ∞. First, we have that Γ = Γ1 Γ2 = Γ1 C(Γ2 )Γ2 .  (8) Next, we observe that (9)  Γ1 C(Γ2 ) ∩ Γ2 = C(Γ2 ).  Indeed, on the one hand it is clear that C(Γ2 ) ⊂ Γ1 C(Γ2 ) ∩ Γ2 . On the other hand, every element in Γ1 C(Γ2 ) ∩ Γ2 is central in Γ2 , because it belongs to Γ2 and the Γi commute element-wise. By (8), (9) and since Γ2 /C(Γ2 ) is finite, we obtain [Γ : Γ1 C(Γ2 )] = [Γ2 : Γ1 C(Γ2 ) ∩ Γ2 ] = [Γ2 : C(Γ2 )] < ∞, as claimed. Let now the presentation of Γ1 C(Γ2 ) by (10)  Γ1 ∩ C(Γ2 ) −→ Γ1 × C(Γ2 ) −→ Γ1 C(Γ2 ).  Since [Γ : Γ1 ] = ∞ and [Γ : Γ1 C(Γ2 )] < ∞, we conclude that [C(Γ2 ) : Γ1 ∩ C(Γ2 )] = [Γ1 C(Γ2 ) : Γ1 ] = ∞. Thus Γ1 C(Γ2 ) is isomorphic to the product Γ1 × (C(Γ2 )/Γ1 ∩ C(Γ2 )), where the quotient group C(Γ2 )/Γ1 ∩ C(Γ2 ) is Abelian of positive rank.  Theorem D proves in particular the equivalence between (3) and (4) in Theorem C, for circle bundles over aspherical manifolds with fundamental groups not presentable by products. As pointed out in the introduction, the property IIPP on a group Γ is not anymore a criterion for reducibility of Γ if the quotient Γ/C(Γ) is presentable by products. More precisely, we have seen in Example 1.7 that the 5-dimensional Heisenberg group H5 – whose quotient H5 /C(H5 ) is Z4 – is irreducible and not IIPP. This nilpotent group is realized as the fundamental group of a circle bundle over T 4 . As we shall see in the next section (cf. Theorem E), dimension four is the sharp dimension in which irreducible fundamental groups of solvable manifolds are not IIPP. We note that the center of Γ in Theorem D can be assumed to be infinite, otherwise Γ is trivially not presentable by products. At the other end, for groups whose every finite index subgroup has finite center, the notions “presentable by products” and “IIPP” are equivalent: Proposition 5.1. If every subgroup of finite index in Γ has finite center, then Γ is presentable by products if and only if it is IIPP. Proof. It suffices to show that presentability by products implies IIPP. Suppose that Γ1 , Γ2 are commuting infinite subgroups of Γ and that there is a short exact sequence ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ Γ −→ 1, where ϕ is the multiplication homomorphism and Γ1 ∩ Γ2 lies in the center of Γ; cf. Lemma 2.6. Since C(Γ) is finite, we deduce that Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is also finite and so it has infinite index in both Γi . The proof now follows by the short exact sequence (3) in the proof of Lemma 2.7.   20  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  6. F UNDAMENTAL  GROUPS OF GEOMETRIC MANIFOLDS IN LOW DIMENSIONS  ( PROOF  OF  T HEOREM E)  After the characterization of groups (not) IIPP in the preceding section (whose topology fits in the concept of Theorem C), we now give further non-trivial examples of groups presentable by products but not IIPP, which fit in the concept of Theorem B as well. These examples include irreducible fundamental groups of low-dimensional solvable manifolds with infinite center. To this end, we characterize in terms of the IIPP property the fundamental groups of all aspherical geometric manifolds in dimensions ≤ 4. After Theorem D, the most prominent examples in the present section (that are not covered by Theorem D) will be irreducible fundamental groups of nilpotent manifolds, because the quotients of these groups by their center are still presentable by products (being again nilpotent and torsion-free). We begin this section with a brief review of Thurston’s geometries. 6.1. Enumeration of the low-dimensional geometries. Let Xn be a complete simply connected n-dimensional Riemannian manifold. We say that a closed manifold M is an Xn -manifold, or that M possesses the Xn geometry in the sense of Thurston, if it is diffeomorphic to a quotient of Xn by a lattice Γ in the group of isometries of Xn (acting effectively and transitively). The group Γ denotes the fundamental group of M. We say that Xn and Yn are the same geometries if there exists a diffeomorphism ψ : Xn −→ Yn and an isomorphism Isom(Xn ) −→ Isom(Yn ) mapping each g ∈ Isom(Xn ) to ψ ◦ g ◦ ψ −1 ∈ Isom(Yn ). In dimension 1, the circle is the only closed manifold being a quotient of the real line R. In dimension 2, a closed surface possesses one of the geometries S 2 , R2 or H2 . In dimension 3, Thurston [34] proved that there exist eight (homotopically unique) geometries, namely the geomeg2 , H2 × R, Nil3 , R3 , S 2 × R and S 3 (see also [30]). tries H3 , Sol3 , SL The classification of the 4-dimensional geometries is due to Filipkiewicz [10]. According to that, there exist eighteen geometries in dimension four with compact representatives. There is an additional geometry which, however, cannot be realized by any compact 4-manifold. Here, we deal only with the aspherical geometries, because the non-aspherical ones are not interesting for domination by products. Namely, the non-aspherical geometries are either products of a sphere with a non-compact factor (H2 × S 2 , R2 × S 2 , S 3 × R), or compact themselves (S 2 × S 2 , CP2 , S 4 ), and all of their representatives are dominated by products [17, 20, 26]. Enumeration of the aspherical geometries in dimension four. We enumerate the aspherical 4dimensional geometries, following Wall’s papers [36] and [37]. Our list is adapted to the dominationby-products question, and this list will be used as an organizing principle; see Table 1. Hyperbolic geometries. There exist two aspherical irreducible symmetric geometries, namely the real and the complex hyperbolic, denoted by H4 and H2 (C) respectively. Product geometries. Seven of the aspherical geometries are products of lower dimensional geg2 × R, Nil3 × R, H2 × R2 , R4 and H2 × H2 . Closed manifolds ometries: H3 × R, Sol3 × R, SL possessing a geometry of type X3 × R satisfy the following property:  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  Type  Geometry X4  Hyperbolic  H4 , H2 (C)  Product  Solvable non-product  21  H3 × R, Sol3 × R, g2 × R, N il3 × R, SL H2 × R2 , R4 , H2 × H2 N il4 , 4 4 Solm6 =n , Sol0 Sol14  TABLE 1. The 4-dimensional aspherical Thurston geometries with compact representatives.  Theorem 6.1 ([17, Sections 8.5 and 9.2]). Let X3 be a 3-dimensional aspherical geometry. A closed 4-manifold possessing the geometry X3 × R is finitely covered by a product N × S 1 , where N is a closed oriented 3-manifold carrying the geometry X3 . The geometry H2 × H2 can be realized both by manifolds that are virtual products of two closed hyperbolic surfaces and by manifolds that are not even (virtual) surface bundles. These two types are known as the reducible and the irreducible H2 × H2 geometry respectively; see [17, Section 9.5] for further details and characterizations.  Solvable non-product geometries. Finally, there exist four aspherical non-product geometries of solvable type. Below, we describe their model Lie groups. 4 3 The nilpotent Lie  group Nil  is defined as the semi-direct product R ⋊ R, where R acts on 0 t 0   3 R by t 7→ exp  0 0 t  . The model spaces for the three non-product solvable – but not 0 0 0 nilpotent – geometries are defined as follows: Let m and n be positive integers and a > b > c reals such that a + b + c = 0 and ea , eb , ec are 4 roots of the equation Pm,n (λ) = λ3 − mλ2 + nλ − 1 = 0. If m 6= n, the Lie group Solm6 =n is   at e 0 0   defined as R3 ⋊R, where R acts on R3 by t 7→  0 ebt 0  . We remark that the case m = n 0 0 ect gives b = 0 and corresponds to the product geometry Sol3 × R.  22  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  If we require two equal roots of the polynomial Pm,n , then we obtain the model space of the 4 Sol again defined as R3 ⋊ R, where now the action of R on R3 is given by t 7→  0 geometry,  et 0 0   t 0 .  0 e 0 0 e−2t The last solvable model space is an extension of R by the 3-dimensional Heisenberg group Nil3 . 4 3 3 Namely,the Lie group Sol 1 is defined as the semi-direct product Nil ⋊ R, where R acts on Nil 1 e−t x z   by t 7→  0 1 et y  . 0 0 1  4 3 Every closed Sol04 - or Solm6 =n -manifold is a mapping torus of a self-homeomorphism of T and every closed oriented Nil4 - or Sol14 -manifold is a mapping torus of a self-homeomorphism of a Nil3 -manifold [17, Sections 8.6 and 8.7]. We note that non-orientable closed Nil4 - or Sol14 -manifolds are not mapping tori of Nil3 -manifolds [17, Theorem 8.9]. Further details about manifolds possessing a solvable non-product geometry, in particular concerning their fundamental groups, will be provided while examining each geometry individually.  A crucial property for our study is that the 4-dimensional geometries are homotopically unique by a result of Wall; cf. [37, Theorem 10.1] and [19, Prop. 1]. In particular, a closed aspherical geometric 4-manifold M is finitely covered by a closed X4 -manifold if and only if it possesses the geometry X4 . 6.2. Proof of Theorem E in dimensions ≤ 3. Dimension 1 gives already the first (trivial) example of a solvable group presentable by products but not IIPP, namely the infinite cyclic group, which is the fundamental group of S 1 . In dimension 2, the only non-trivial solvable fundamental group of an oriented manifold is the fundamental group of T 2 which is the product Z × Z. The fundamental groups of higher genus surfaces are (non-elementary) hyperbolic and therefore not presentable by products as shown in [20]. We now deal with infinite fundamental groups of closed 3-manifolds. First, using Epstein’s factorization theorem for 3-manifold groups [8] and the fact that not virtually cyclic free products are not presentable by products [21], we obtain that the fundamental group of a closed 3-manifold is presentable by products if and only if it has virtually infinite center [22, Theorem 8]. These two properties are moreover equivalent to M being Seifert fibered (with infinite fundamental group), by the Seifert fiber space conjecture, which was independently proven by Gabai and by CassonJungreis. Recall that a closed 3-manifold M (possibly with finite fundamental group) is Seifert fibered if and only if it is virtually a circle bundle over a closed oriented surface, by the works g2 , of Seifert, Thurston and Scott; cf. [34, 30]. Equivalently, M carries one of the geometries SL H2 × R, Nil3 , R3 , S 2 × R or S 3 . Thus, we have the following consequence of [22, Theorem 8]:  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  23  Proposition 6.2 ([22]). Suppose M is a closed 3-manifold with infinite fundamental group. Then π1 (M) is presentable by products if and only if M is a virtual circle bundle over a closed oriented g2 , H2 × R, Nil3 or R3 . surface. Equivalently, M possesses one of the geometries SL  However, if the circle fiber of M is not (virtually) a direct factor, i.e. if M is not modeled on H × R or R3 , then π1 (M) cannot be IIPP: 2  Proposition 6.3. The fundamental group of a non-trivial circle bundle M over a closed oriented aspherical surface Σ is not IIPP. Proof. If Σ is hyperbolic, then π1 (M) fits into a non-split central extension 1 −→ Z −→ π1 (M) −→ π1 (Σ) −→ 1. In particular, π1 (M) fulfills the conditions of Theorems C and D, because non-virtually cyclic hyperbolic groups are not presentable by products [20]. By Epstein’s factorization theorem [8] and Stallings fibering criterion [31], the fundamental group of a non-trivial circle bundle over a closed oriented surface is never reducible, and so Theorem D implies that π1 (M) is not IIPP. The remaining case is when Σ has genus one, i.e. when M is a non-trivial circle bundle over T 2 (and therefore a Nil3 -manifold). In that case, π1 (M) fits into a non-split central extension 1 −→ Z −→ π1 (M) −→ Z2 −→ 1, where C(π1 (M)) = Z. Suppose that π1 (M) is IIPP. Then we may assume that there exist nontrivial infinite-index commuting subgroups Γ1 , Γ2 ⊂ π1 (M) and a short exact sequence ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ π1 (M) −→ 1, where ϕ is the multiplication map and Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ⊂ C(π1 (M)). (Note that both Γi are torsionfree, because π1 (M) is torsion-free.) We observe that Γ1 ∩ Γ2 cannot be trivial, otherwise π1 (M) would be Abelian (equivalently, M would be T 3 ). This means that Γ1 ∩ Γ2 must be isomorphic to C(π1 (M)) = Z. Moreover, since [π1 (M) : Γi ] = ∞ and π1 (M) has cohomological dimension three, we conclude that each of the Γi is of cohomological dimension at most two [32]. Now, Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is central in both Γi which means that the quotients Γi /(Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ) are finitely generated and virtually free groups Fki , by a result of Bieri [1, Cor. 8.7]. Passing to finite coverings, we may assume that these quotient groups are free and therefore the central extensions 1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γi −→ Fki −→ 1 split. We have finally reached the absurd conclusion that π1 (M) is virtually isomorphic to a direct  product Z × Fk1 × Fk2 . Remark 6.4. The case of nilpotent groups in the above proposition could be treated in a different way, using the Hirsch length, however, the dimensions here were suitable to appeal to Bieri’s [1] result on central extensions. In fact, the cohomological dimension of a finitely generated torsionfree nilpotent group coincides to its Hirsch length [16]. We will return and use the Hirsch length of nilpotent groups in Section 6.3.3.  24  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  Because the fundamental group of S 2 × S 1 is infinite cyclic and therefore not IIPP, we have now determined all fundamental groups of closed 3-manifolds that are (not) IIPP: Corollary 6.5. Suppose that the fundamental group of a closed oriented 3-manifold M is infinite. Then π1 (M) is IIPP if and only if it is reducible. Equivalently, π1 (M) is a virtual product π1 (Σ) × Z, where Σ is a closed oriented aspherical surface. In particular, we have proved Theorem E in dimension three. 6.3. Proof of Theorem E in dimension four. We will prove Theorem E in dimension four in two steps. First, we will determine which closed aspherical geometric 4-manifolds have fundamental groups (not) presentable by products: Theorem 6.6. The fundamental group of a closed aspherical geometric 4-manifold M is presentable by products if and only if M possesses one of the geometries X3 × R, Nil4 , Sol14 or the reducible H2 × H2 geometry. Then, Theorem E will follow as a consequence of the next characterization: Theorem 6.7. The fundamental group of a closed aspherical geometric 4-manifold M is reducible if and only if it is IIPP. Equivalently, M carries one of the product geometries X3 × R or the reducible H2 × H2 geometry. Groups presentable by products: Proof of Theorem 6.6. We proceed by examining case by case all aspherical geometries, following the enumeration given at the beginning of this section (cf. Table 1). 6.3.1. Hyperbolic geometries. As we have already seen (and used in the proof of Proposition 6.3), non-virtually cyclic hyperbolic groups are not presentable by products; we refer to [20, Prop. 3.6] for the details. Since the fundamental groups of closed 4-manifolds with hyperbolic geometries H4 or H2 (C) are obviously not (virtually) infinite cyclic, we deduce that they are not presentable by products. 6.3.2. Product geometries. An equivalent formulation of Theorem 6.1 is the following: Corollary 6.8. The fundamental group of a closed aspherical 4-manifold M carrying a product geometry X3 × R is a virtual product π1 (N) × Z, where N is a closed aspherical X3 -manifold. In particular, π1 (M) is presentable by products and C(π1 (M)) is virtually infinite. As mentioned previously, the geometry H2 × H2 is an exceptional type among the product geometries, because not every closed H2 × H2 -manifold has a finite cover which is a product of two closed hyperbolic surfaces. This property distinguishes closed H2 × H2 -manifolds into two classes, the reducible and the irreducible ones. Since H2 × H2 -manifolds admit metrics of nonpositive sectional curvature, Theorem 4.1 of [20] implies that irreducible lattices in the group of isometries of H2 × H2 are not presentable by products:  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  25  Proposition 6.9. The fundamental group of a closed H2 × H2 -manifold M is presentable by products if and only if it is a virtual product of two closed hyperbolic surface groups. Equivalently, M carries the reducible H2 × H2 geometry. 6.3.3. Solvable non-product geometries. We finally deal with solvable non-product geometries, 4 4 4 i.e. the geometries Nil4 , Solm6 =n , Sol0 and Sol1 . As we shall see, only the fundamental groups of closed manifolds modeled on the geometries Nil4 or Sol14 are presentable by products. The geometry Nil4 . Proposition 6.10. A closed Nil4 -manifold M is a virtual circle bundle over a closed oriented Nil3 -manifold and the center of π1 (M) remains infinite cyclic in finite covers. Proof. Let M be a closed Nil4 -manifold. After possibly passing to a double cover, we may assume that M is oriented and so π1 (M) fits into a short exact sequence 1 −→ π1 (N) −→ π1 (M) −→ Z −→ 1, where N is a closed oriented Nil3 -manifold and a generator t ∈ Z acts by conjugation on π1 (N); cf. [17, Sections 8.6 and 8.7]. Passing to another finite cover, if necessary, we may assume that N is a non-trivial circle bundle over T 2 with fundamental group π1 (N) = hx, y, z | [x, y] = z, xz = zx, yz = zyi, where C(π1 (N)) = hzi; cf. [30]. Since M is a Nil4 -manifold, the automorphism of π1 (N)/hzi ∼ = Z2 , induced by the action of t ∈ Z on π1 (N), ! is given (after possibly passing to another finite cover) by a matrix (conjugate to) 1 k A= ∈ GL2 (Z), for some k 6= 0; cf. [17, Theorem 8.7]. The relation xm y n = z mn y n xm 0 1 in π1 (N) gives the following presentation of π1 (M) (see also [11] and [35, pg. 522] for further details): π1 (M) = hx, y, z, t | txt−1 = x, tyt−1 = xk yz l , tzt−1 = z det A = z, [x, y] = z, xz = zx, yz = zyi, where C(π1 (M)) = hzi. Thus we have a short exact sequence (11)  1 −→ hzi −→ π1 (M) −→ Q −→ 1,  where Q = π1 (M)/hzi = hx, y, t | [t, y] = xk , xt = tx, xy = yxi. In particular, the classifying space BQ is a non-trivial circle bundle over T 2 and thus a Nil3 -manifold. Now, the induced sequence of the classifying spaces corresponding to (11) implies that M is homotopically a circle bundle over BQ. Finally, the center of π1 (M) remains infinite cyclic in finite covers, generated by multiples of z, because k 6= 0.  Remark 6.11. Since every non-trivial nilpotent group has non-trivial center and because the property of being “nilpotent” is closed under subgroups and quotient groups, the proof of the above  26  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  proposition could be obtained using the fact that every nilpotent group of cohomological dimension three is either Abelian or isomorphic to Q (as in the above proof); see Proposition 6.19, Lemma 6.20 and Remark 6.21. Remark 6.12. Note that π1 (M) is (virtually) an extension of Z2 = hy, ti by Z2 = hz, xi, and so M is (virtually) a T 2 -bundle over T 2 , whose T 2 -fiber contains the S 1 -fiber of the circle bundle S 1 −→ M −→ BQ of the above proposition. It is a result of Ue [35, Theorem B] that every closed Nil4 -manifold is a virtual T 2 -bundle over T 2 . We refer to a work of Fukuhara and Sakamoto [11] for a classification of T 2 -bundles over T 2 . We furthermore observe that π1 (M) is  (virtually) an extension of Z = hyi by Z3 = hz, x, ti,  1 −1 −l   3 where the automorphism of Z is given by  0 1 −k  and it has infinite order. In particular, 0 0 1 3 M is a (virtual) mapping torus of T ; see also [17, Section 8.6]. 4 4 The geometries Solm6 =n and Sol0 .  Proposition 6.13. The fundamental group of a closed 4-manifold possessing one of the geometries 4 4 Solm6 =n or Sol0 is not presentable by products. In order to prove Proposition 6.13, we will use the concept of “acentral” subgroups which was introduced in [21]: A subgroup A of a group Γ is called acentral if for every non-trivial element g ∈ A the centralizer CΓ (g) is contained in A. An acentral extension is an extension of groups 1 −→ N −→ Γ −→ Q −→ 1 such that the normal subgroup N is acentral. Proposition 6.14 ([21, Prop. 3.2]). If a group contains an infinite acentral subgroup of infinite index, then it is not presentable by products. Proposition 6.14 implies that if an extension 1 −→ N −→ Γ −→ Q −→ 1 is acentral, with N and Q infinite, then Γ is not presentable by products [21, Cor. 3.3]. Also, if Γ is a semi-direct product N ⋊θ Q, where N is non-trivial Abelian and Q is infinite acting freely outside 0 ∈ N, then the extension 0 −→ N −→ Γ −→ Q −→ 1 is acentral and N is infinite. In particular, Γ is not presentable by products [21, Cor. 3.5]. This gives an alternative proof that Sol3 -manifold groups are not presentable by products [21, Section 3]. 4 4 Proof of Proposition 6.13. We will show that the fundamental groups of closed Solm6 =n - or Sol0 manifolds contain acentral subgroups of infinite index. 4 4 Every manifold M with geometry modeled on Solm6 =n or Sol0 is a mapping torus of a selfhomeomorphism of T 3 [17, Section 8.6] (see also [36, 37]) and its fundamental group is a semidirect product Z3 ⋊θ Z, where the automorphism θ of Z3 is induced by the action by conjugation of a generator t ∈ Z. 4 Now, if M is a Solm6 =n -manifold, then θ has three real distinct eigenvalues and none of them is equal to ±1, because M is neither nilpotent nor carries the Sol3 × R geometry (which is the case m = n); cf. [36] and [17, pg. 164/165] (or Section 6.1).  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  27  If M is a Sol04 -manifold, then θ has two complex eigenvalues that are not roots of unity and a real eigenvalue not equal to ±1; cf. [36] and [17, pg. 164/165] (or Section 6.1). In both cases we derive that the centralizer Cπ1 (M ) (g) of each g ∈ Z3 \ {0} is contained in Z3 (it is actually equal to Z3 ). This means that the infinite-index normal subgroup Z3 is acentral and so π1 (M) is not presentable by products by Proposition 6.14 or [21, Cor 3.3 or Cor 3.5].  The geometry Sol14 . Proposition 6.15. A closed Sol14 -manifold M is a virtual circle bundle over a mapping torus of T 2 with hyperbolic monodromy. In particular, π1 (M) is presentable by products. Proof. Let M be a closed Sol14 -manifold. After passing to a double cover, we may assume that M is oriented, and so its fundamental group fits into a short exact sequence 1 −→ π1 (N) −→ π1 (M) −→ Z −→ 1, where N is a closed oriented Nil3 -manifold and a generator t ∈ Z acts by conjugation on π1 (N); cf. [17, Sections 8.6 and 8.7]. If necessary, we pass to another finite cover of M and so we can assume that the fiber N is a non-trivial circle bundle over T 2 and that its fundamental group has a presentation π1 (N) = hx, y, z | [x, y] = z, xz = zx, yz = zyi with center C(π1 (N)) ! = hzi; cf. [30]. a b Let A = ∈ GL2 (Z) be the automorphism of π1 (N)/hzi ∼ = Z2 induced by the action c d of t ∈ Z on π1 (N). The eigenvalues λ1 , λ2 of A satisfy det(A) = λ1 λ2 = ±1. Actually, det A = 1, because M is oriented. Moreover, λi 6= ±1, because π1 (M) is not nilpotent; see also [17, Theorem 8.7]. We conclude that A is a hyperbolic automorphism. Now the relation xm y n = z mn y n xm in π1 (N) implies that a presentation of the fundamental group of M is given by π1 (M) = hx, y, z, t | txt−1 = xa y c z k , tyt−1 = xb y d z l , tzt−1 = z det A = z, [x, y] = z, xz = zx, yz = zyi, k, l ∈ Z, where the infinite cyclic group generated by z is central in π1 (M). Thus we obtain a short exact sequence (12)  1 −→ hzi −→ π1 (M) −→ Q −→ 1,  where Q = π1 (M)/hzi = hx, y, t | txt−1 = xa y c, tyt−1 = xb y d , xy = yxi. Clearly, the group Q fits into an extension 1 −→ Z2 −→ Q −→ Z −→ 1, ! a b where t ∈ Z acts on Z2 by the hyperbolic automorphism A = . We have now shown c d that Q is the fundamental group of a mapping torus of T 2 with hyperbolic monodromy, i.e. BQ is  28  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  a closed oriented Sol3 -manifold. Therefore, M is homotopically a circle bundle over BQ, by the induced sequence in homotopy corresponding to the short exact sequence (12).  The proof of Theorem 6.6 is now complete. Groups not IIPP: Proof of Theorem 6.7. Since reducible groups are IIPP, in order to complete the proof of Theorem 6.7 we need to show that the fundamental groups of manifolds modeled on Nil4 or Sol14 are not IIPP. Closed Nil4 -manifolds. Since torsion-free nilpotent groups have infinite center, an immediate consequence of Proposition 6.10 (see also Proposition 6.19) is the following: Lemma 6.16. The fundamental group of a closed Nil4 -manifold is not a virtual product. In the preceding section (Proposition 6.3), we showed that closed Nil3 -manifolds have fundamental groups not IIPP using Bieri’s results [1], since the cohomological dimensions of those groups (and of their subgroups) were suitable for that purpose. Passing now one dimension higher, we cannot appeal anymore to those results. However, instead of the cohomological dimension, we may use the Hirsch length (which is in fact equal to the cohomological dimension for finitely generated torsion-free nilpotent groups by a theorem of Gruenberg, cf. [16, §8.8]). The Hirsch length generalizes the notion of the rank of free Abelian groups: Definition 6.17 ([16]). Let Γ be a (virtually) polycyclic group with a series Γ = Γ0 ⊃ Γ1 ⊃ · · · ⊃ Γn = 1, so that the quotients Γi /Γi+1 are cyclic. The sum of the ranks of these quotients is independent of the choice of the series of groups and is called the Hirsch length of Γ. We denote the Hirsch length of Γ by h(Γ). Example 6.18. A finitely generated torsion-free nilpotent group Γ is polycyclic, admitting a central series Γ = Γ0 ⊃ Γ1 ⊃ · · · ⊃ Γn = 1, so that the quotients Γi /Γi+1 are infinite cyclic for all i = 0, 1, ..., n − 1. Therefore Γ has a well-defined Hirsch length (equal to n). The following proposition gives some basic properties of nilpotent groups and their Hirsch length. For a proof see [27, pg. 75–77]. Proposition 6.19. Let Γ be a finitely generated nilpotent group. (1) If Γ is torsion-free, then C(Γ) has positive rank and Γ/C(Γ) is torsion-free. (2) If K is a normal subgroup of Γ, then K and Γ/K are finitely generated nilpotent and (a) h(Γ) = h(K) + h(Γ/K); (b) h(K) = h(Γ) if and only if [Γ : K] < ∞. Using Proposition 6.19, we determine all torsion-free nilpotent groups of Hirsch length three. Lemma 6.20. A torsion-free nilpotent group Γ of Hirsch length three is isomorphic to Gn := hx, y, z | zy = yz, zx = xz, [x, y] = z n i, for some n ≥ 0. In particular, Γ is the fundamental group of a circle bundle over T 2 .  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  29  Proof. First, we observe that Γ is finitely generated, because it is nilpotent of finite Hirsch length. Moreover, since Γ is torsion-free, we have that its center C(Γ) is free Abelian of positive rank, the quotient group Q := Γ/C(Γ) is again nilpotent and torsion-free and the short exact sequence (13)  1 −→ C(Γ) −→ Γ −→ Q −→ 1,  yields that 0 ≤ h(Q) ≤ 2, because h(C(Γ)) ≥ 1; cf Proposition 6.19. If h(Q) = 0 or 1, then it is easy to see that Γ is free Abelian of rank three. Indeed, this is obvious if h(Q) = 0. If h(Q) = 1, then Q is infinite cyclic, and therefore the central extension (13) splits. Suppose, finally, that h(Q) = 2. Since Q is torsion-free nilpotent, it has non-trivial center C(Q). Therefore, it fits into a short exact sequence 1 −→ C(Q) −→ Q −→ Q/C(Q) −→ 1, where the quotient Q/C(Q) is again a torsion-free nilpotent group. By the additivity of the Hirsch length for the above exact sequence, we deduce that h(Q/C(Q) ≤ 1. This finally implies that Q is free Abelian of rank two. Therefore, the central extension (13) takes the form 1 −→ Z −→ Γ −→ Z2 −→ 1. Choosing presentations Z = hzi and Z2 = hx, y | [x, y] = 1i, we deduce that Γ is isomorphic to Gn for some n ≥ 0.  Remark 6.21. In the light of Gruenberg’s theorem [16, §8.8], Lemma 6.20 determines all finitely generated nilpotent groups of cohomological dimension three. Moreover, it yields another proof of the fact that closed Nil4 -manifolds are virtual circle bundles over closed oriented Nil3 -manifolds; compare Proposition 6.10. We now finish the proof that Nil4 -manifold groups are not IIPP: Proposition 6.22. The fundamental group of a closed Nil4 -manifold M is not IIPP. Proof. We know that π1 (M) is presentable by products and that M is virtually a non-trivial circle bundle over a closed oriented Nil3 -manifold (cf. Proposition 6.10). We need to prove that π1 (M) cannot be presented by a product of subgroups Γ1 and Γ2 so that both Γi have infinite index in π1 (M). We proceed again by contradiction. After passing to suitable finite index subgroups, suppose that there exist two infinite-index commuting subgroups Γi ⊂ π1 (M) and a short exact sequence (14)  ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ π1 (M) −→ 1,  where ϕ is the multiplication map and Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ⊂ C(π1 (M)); cf. Section 2.3. Also we have that C(π1 (M)) = Z (by Proposition 6.10) and that the Γi are finitely generated, torsion-free and nilpotent. Since π1 (M) is not reducible (Lemma 6.16), we conclude that the intersection Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is not trivial and so it must be infinite cyclic, as a subgroup of C(π1 (M)) = Z. Also, Proposition 6.19 and Lemma 6.20 imply that the Hirsch length of π1 (M) is h(π1 (M)) = 4. Applying again the  30  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  additivity of the Hirsch length to the short exact sequence (14), we have that h(Γ1 ×Γ2 ) = 5. Since both Γi have infinite index in π1 (M), we deduce that h(Γi ) ≤ 3 by Proposition 6.19. Therefore, one of the Γi must be of Hirsch length three and the other of Hirsch length two (again by Proposition 6.19). Let us assume that h(Γ1 ) = 3 and h(Γ2 ) = 2. Since Γ1 is a torsion-free nilpotent group of Hirsch length three, Lemma 6.20 implies that Γ1 isomorphic to Gn for some n ≥ 0. Moreover, Γ2 is isomorphic to Z2 , because it is torsion-free nilpotent of Hirsch length two (see the proof of Lemma 6.20). We have now reached the conclusion that the rank of the center of Γ1 × Γ2 is at least three. This is however not possible, according to the next lemma, because Γ1 × Γ2 is an extension of π1 (M) by Z and C(π1 (M)) = Z.  Lemma 6.23. If a group Γ with finitely generated center C(Γ) fits into a central extension 1 −→ π Zk −→ Γ −→ Q −→ 1, where Q is torsion-free, then rankC(Γ) ≤ rankC(Q) + k. Proof. It follows by the fact that if x ∈ C(Γ), then π(x) ∈ C(Q).    Closed Sol14 -manifolds. We finally deal with the Sol14 geometry. Proposition 6.24. The fundamental group of a closed Sol14 -manifold is not IIPP. Proof. By Proposition 6.15, a closed Sol14 -manifold M is a virtual circle bundle over a closed oriented Sol3 -manifold N. In particular, its fundamental group π1 (M) satisfies all the assumptions of Theorem D (recall that π1 (N) is not presentable by products; see Proposition 6.2). Thus, π1 (M) is IIPP if and only if it is a virtual product π1 (N)×Z. The latter is impossible by Wall’s uniqueness theorem [37, Theorem 10.1].  This finishes the proof of Theorem 6.7 and therefore the proof of Theorem E. 7. D OMINATION  BY PRODUCTS IN DIMENSION FOUR ( PROOF OF  T HEOREM F)  In this section we determine which geometric 4-manifolds are (not) dominated by products. To this end, we combine the algebraic results of the previous section with the topological statements of Theorem 2.4 and Theorems B and C to prove Theorem F, which completes Hillman’s characterization of product geometries given in Theorem 6.1. Proof of theorem F. Theorem 6.1 says that closed manifolds possessing one of the product geometries X3 × R are finitely covered by products of type N × S 1 . Moreover, closed manifolds carrying the reducible H2 × H2 geometry are virtually products of closed hyperbolic surfaces. In particular, all those manifolds are dominated by products. (Note that domination by products alone follows by Theorem A as well.) By Wall’s uniqueness theorem of the 4-dimensional geometries, it suffices to show that closed 4-manifolds possessing either a hyperbolic geometry, the irreducible H2 × H2 geometry, or a nonproduct solvable geometry cannot be dominated by products. For the hyperbolic geometries H4 and H2 (C), the irreducible H2 ×H2 geometry, and the solvable 4 4 geometries Solm6 =n and Sol0 our claim can be deduced by Theorem 2.4, because the fundamental  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  31  groups of closed 4-manifolds carrying one of those geometries are not presentable by products; see Section 6.3 for the details. If now M is a closed Nil4 -manifold, then it is a virtual circle bundle over a closed oriented Nil3 -manifold and the center of its fundamental group remains infinite cyclic in finite covers; cf. Proposition 6.10. Moreover, π1 (M) is not IIPP, by Proposition 6.22, and so Theorem B implies that M cannot be dominated by products. Finally, if M is a closed Sol14 -manifold, then it is a virtual circle bundle over a closed oriented Sol3 -manifold and π1 (M) is not IIPP; cf. Propositions 6.15 and 6.24 respectively. Therefore, M is not dominated by products by Theorem C, because closed Sol3 -manifolds have fundamental groups not presentable by products. (Equivalently, M is not dominated by products because of the equivalence between (1) and (2) in Theorem C and by Wall’s uniqueness theorem.) The proof is now complete.  Combining Theorem E with the characterizations of groups (infinite-index) presentable by products in Section 6, we obtain the following purely algebraic characterization: Corollary 7.1. A closed oriented aspherical geometric 4-manifold M is dominated by a product if and only if (1) either π1 (M) is a virtual product π1 (N) × Z, for some closed aspherical geometric 3manifold N, or (2) π1 (M) is a virtual product of two closed hyperbolic surface groups. 8. T HE 5- DIMENSIONAL H EISENBERG  MANIFOLD  In this section we give the first example of an aspherical manifold whose fundamental group is IIPP and irreducible, and show that this manifold is not dominated by products. Lemma 8.1. The 5-dimensional Heisenberg group H5 = hx, y, u, v, z | [x, y] = [u, v] = z, all other commutei is IIPP and irreducible. Proof. We observe that the groups Γ1 = hx, y, z | [x, y] = z, xz = zx, yz = zyi and Γ2 = hu, v, z | [u, v] = z, uz = zu, vz = zvi are infinite index subgroups of H5 that commute element-wise, and Γ1 Γ2 = H5 . In particular, H5 is presented by the product Γ1 × Γ2 through the multiplication homomorphism Γ1 × Γ2 −→ H5 . Thus H5 is IIPP. Now we show that H5 is irreducible. First of all, H5 is not a product itself, otherwise its center would have been of rank greater than 1, because subgroups of nilpotent groups are nilpotent themselves and torsion-free nilpotent groups have infinite center. Second, every finite index subgroup H5 ⊂ H5 fits into a short exact sequence 1 −→ hz k i −→ H5 −→ Q −→ 1,  32  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  where Q is a finite index subgroup of Z4 = H5 /hzi. In particular, Q is isomorphic to Z4 , generated by some powers of x, y, u and v. If H5 were a direct product, then the relations [xm , y n ] = z mn and [um , v n ] = z mn in H5 would imply that z is a torsion element. However, H5 is torsion-free and the lemma follows.  The classifying space of H5 is a non-trivial circle bundle over T 4 , called the 5-dimensional Heisenberg manifold. Theorem 8.2. The Heisenberg manifold BH5 is not dominated by products. Proof. Suppose, for contrast, that there exists a map of non-zero degree f : X1 × X2 −→ BH5 which is π1 -surjective, after possibly replacing BH5 by a finite cover; this cover will remain a non-trivial circle bundle over T 4 with center C(H5 ) ∼ = Z, by Lemma 8.1. We have a short exact sequence (15)  ϕ  1 −→ Γ1 ∩ Γ2 −→ Γ1 × Γ2 −→ H5 −→ 1,  where Γi := im(π1 (f |Xi )) ⊂ H5 , Γ1 ∩ Γ2 ⊂ C(H5 ) = Z and ϕ is the multiplication homomorphism; see Sections 2.2 and 2.3 for the details. In particular, Γ1 ∩ Γ2 is isomorphic to Z, because H5 is irreducible. Since the Γi are finitely generated torsion-free nilpotent groups, the above exact sequence implies that it suffices (up to order) to examine what happens when the Hirsch length of Γ1 takes the values one, two and three. Case I. Suppose first that h(Γ1 ) = 1. Then X1 = S 1 (see the proof of Theorem C), and so S 1 × X2 ≥ BH5 . The latter is not possible by the Factorization Lemma 4.8. Case II. Next, suppose that h(Γ1 ) = 2. Then Γ1 is isomorphic to Z2 (see the proof of Lemma 6.20). Since Γ2 is nilpotent and torsion-free, its center has positive rank. Thus rankC(Γ1 ×Γ2 ) ≥ 3, which contradicts Lemma 6.23 because Γ1 × Γ2 fits into the short exact sequence (15), where Γ1 ∩ Γ2 and C(H5 ) are both infinite cyclic. Case III. The only remaining case is when h(Γ1 ) = 3. In that case, h(Γ2 ) = 3. By Lemma 6.20, each of the groups Γi is isomorphic to some Gni = hx, y, z | [x, y] = z ni , xz = zx, yz = zyi, for ni ≥ 0. As in Case II, none of the Γi can be Abelian of rank greater than 1, by Lemma 6.23. We conclude that ni ≥ 1. According to the proof of Theorem 2.4 (cf. Section 2.2) and because BH5 is aspherical, there exist two non-trivial homology classes αi ∈ Hdim Xi (BΓi ; Q) such that H5 (Bϕ)(α1 × α2 ) = deg(f ) · [BH5 ]. Moreover, we know by Case I that one of the Xi must have dimension two and the other dimension three. Without loss of generality, suppose that dim X1 = 3 and dim X2 = 2. Recall that, for n ≥ 1, every Gn is realizable by a non-trivial circle bundle over T 2 . Therefore the cycle α1 ∈ H3 (BΓ2 ; Q) is realized by such a nilpotent 3-manifold N and the cycle α2 ∈ H2 (BΓ2 ; Q) is realized by T 2 . This means that there exists a continuous composite map T 2 × N −→ BΓ1 × BΓ2 −→ BH5 ,  FUNDAMENTAL GROUPS OF ASPHERICAL MANIFOLDS AND MAPS OF NON-ZERO DEGREE  33  which in degree 5 homology maps the fundamental class [T 2 × N] to a non-trivial multiple of [BH5 ]. In particular, the product S 1 × (S 1 × N) dominates BH5 which is impossible as we have seen in Case I. After having examined all the possibilities for the groups Γ1 and Γ2 , we conclude that BH5 cannot be dominated by products.  R EFERENCES 1. R. Bieri, Homological dimension of discrete groups, Second edition. Queen Mary College Mathematical Notes, Queen Mary College, Department of Pure Mathematics, London, 1981. 2. J. Bowden, The topology of symplectic circle bundles, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 361 (2009), no. 10, 5457–5468. 3. S. Cappell, S. Weinberger and M. Yan, Closed aspherical manifolds with center, J. Topol., 6 (2013), no. 4, 1009– 1018. 4. J. A. Carlson and D. Toledo, Harmonic mappings of Kähler manifolds to locally symmetric spaces, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., 69 (1989), 173–201. 5. P. Eberlein, Lattices in spaces of nonpositive curvature, Ann. of Math. (2), 111 (1980), no. 3, 435–476. 6. P. Eberlein, Isometry groups of simply connected manifolds of nonpositive curvature II, Acta Math., 149 (1982), no. 1-2, 41–69. 7. S. Eilenberg, On the problems of topology, Ann. of Math. (2), 50 (1949), 247–260. 8. D. B. A. Epstein, Factorization of 3-manifolds, Comment. Math. Helv., 36 (1961), 91–102. 9. B. Farb and S. Weinberger, Isometries, rigidity and universal covers, Ann. of Math., 186 (2008), no. 3, 915–940. 10. R. Filipkiewicz, Four-dimensional geometries, PhD thesis, University of Warwick, 1983. 11. S. Fukuhara and K. Sakamoto, Classification of T 2 -bundles over T 2 , Tokyo J. Math., 6 (1983), no. 2, 310–327. 12. D. Gromoll and J. A. Wolf, Some relations between the metric structure and the algebraic structure of the fundamental group in manifolds of nonpositive curvature, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 77 (1971), 545–552. 13. M. Gromov, Volume and bounded cohomology, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., 56 (1982), 5–99. 14. M. Gromov, Metric Structures for Riemannian and Non-Riemannian Spaces, With appendices by M. Katz, P. Pansu and S. Semmes, translated from the French by S. M. Bates, Progress in Mathematics 152, Birkhäuser Verlag, 1999. 15. M. Gromov, Singularities, expanders and topology of maps. I. Homology versus volume in the spaces of cycles, Geom. Funct. Anal., 19 (2009), no. 3, 743–841. 16. K. W. Gruenberg, Cohomological topics in group theory, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 143, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1970. 17. J. A. Hillman, Four-manifolds, geometries and knots, Geometry and Topology Monographs 5, Coventry, 2002. 18. M. Kapovich and B. Leeb, Actions of discrete groups on nonpositively curved spaces, Math. Ann., 306 (1996), no. 2, 341–352. 19. D. Kotschick, Remarks on geometric structures on compact complex surfaces, Topology, 31 (1992), no. 2, 317– 321. 20. D. Kotschick and C. Löh, Fundamental classes not representable by products, J. London Math. Soc., 79 (2009), 545–561. 21. D. Kotschick and C. Löh, Groups not representable by products, Groups Geom. Dyn., 7 (2013), 181–204. 22. D. Kotschick and C. Neofytidis, On three-manifolds dominated by circle bundles, Math. Z., 274 (2013), 21–32. 23. W. Lück, L2 -invariants: theory and applications to geometry and K-theory, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002. 24. W. Lück, Survey on aspherical manifolds, European Congress of Mathematics, Eur. Math. Soc., 53–82, 2010. 25. J. Milnor and W. Thurston Characteristic numbers of 3-manifolds Enseignement Math. (2), 23 (1977), no. 3-4, 249–254.  34  CHRISTOFOROS NEOFYTIDIS  26. C. Neofytidis, Branched coverings of simply connected manifolds, Topol. Appl., 178 (2014), 360–371. 27. C. Neofytidis, Non-zero degree maps between manifolds and groups presentable by products, Munich thesis, 2014, available online at http://edoc.ub.uni-muenchen.de/17204/. 28. C. Neofytidis, Ordering Thurston’s geometries by maps of non-zero degree, J. Topol. Anal. (to appear). 29. I. Schur, Über die Darstellung der endlichen Gruppen durch gebrochene lineare Substitutionen, Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 127 (1904), 20–50. 30. P. Scott, The geometries of 3-manifolds, Bull. London Math. Soc., 15 (1983), 401–487. 31. J. Stallings, On fibering certain 3-manifolds, In Topology of 3-manifolds and related topics (Proc. The Univ. of Georgia Institute, 1961), 95–100, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1962. 32. R. Strebel, A remark on subgroups of infinite index in Poincaré duality groups, Comment. Math. Helv., 52 (1977), no. 3, 310–314. 33. R. Thom, Quelques propriétés globales des variétés différentiables, Comment. Math. Helv., 28 (1954), 17–86. 34. W. P. Thurston, Three-Dimensional Geometry and Topology, Princeton University Press, 1997. 35. M. Ue, Geometric 4-manifolds in the sense of Thurston and Seifert 4-manifolds I, J. Math. Soc. Japan, 42 (1990), 511–540. 36. C. T. C. Wall, Geometries and geometric structures in real dimension 4 and complex dimension 2, In Geometry and Topology (College Park, Md., 1983/84), Lecture Notes in Math., 1167, Springer, Berlin, (1985), 268–292. 37. C. T. C. Wall, Geometric structures on compact complex analytic surfaces, Topology, 25 (1986), no. 2, 119–153. 38. S. Wang, The existence of maps of non-zero degree between aspherical 3-manifolds, Math. Z., 208 (1991), 147– 160. 39. W. Zhang, Geometric structures, Gromov norm and Kodaira dimensions, Adv. Math. 308 (2017), 1–35. D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICAL S CIENCES , SUNY B INGHAMTON , B INGHAMTON , NY 13902-6000, USA E-mail address: chrisneo@math.binghamton.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
