Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_1436

Abstract:
arXiv:0711.4444v2 [cs.MS] 29 Nov 2007  INSTITUT NATIONAL DE RECHERCHE EN INFORMATIQUE ET EN AUTOMATIQUE  Building the Tangent and Adjoint codes of the Ocean General Circulation Model OPA with the Automatic Differentiation tool TAPENADE M.H. Tber — L. Hascoët — A. Vidard — B. Dauvergne  N° 6372 Novembre 2007 Thème NUM  apport de recherche  Building the Tangent and Adjoint odes of the O ean General Cir ulation Model OPA with the Automati Dierentiation tool TAPENADE ∗  M.H. Tber  , L. Has oët  ∗  †  , A. Vidard  , B. Dauvergne  ∗  Thème NUM  Systèmes numériques Projet Tropi s Rapport de re her he  Abstra t:  n° 6372  Novembre 2007  28 pages  The o ean general  ir ulation model OPA is developed by the  LODYC team at Paris VI university.  OPA has re ently undergone a major  rewriting, migrating to FORTRAN95, and its adjoint  ode needs to be re-  built. For earlier versions, the adjoint of OPA was written by hand at a high development  ost.  We use the Automati  Dierentiation tool TAPENADE  to build me hani aly the tangent and adjoint dierentiated  odes by  odes of OPA. We validate the  omparison with divided dieren es, and also with an  identi al twin experiment. We apply state-of-the-art methods to improve the performan e of the adjoint and Walther's binomial  ode.  In parti ular we implement the Griewank  he kpointing algorithm whi h gives us an optimal  trade-o between time and memory  onsumption. We apply a spe i  egy to dierentiate the iterative linear solver that  strat-  omes from the impli it time  stepping s heme.  Key-words:  OPA, general  ir ulation model, TAPENADE, Automati  ferentiation, reverse mode, Adjoint Code, Che kpointing  ∗ †  INRIA Sophia Antipolis, Fran e INRIA Grenoble, Fran e  Unité de recherche INRIA Sophia Antipolis  Dif-  Constru tion des odes Tangent et Adjoint du modèle de ir ulation générale o éanique OPA par l'outil de Diérentiation Automatique TAPENADE Résumé : Le modèle de  ir ulation générale o éanique OPA est développé  par l'équipe LODYC de l'université Paris VI. La nouvelle version 9 d'OPA onstitue une évolution majeure, ave TRAN95.  Les  en parti ulier une migration vers FOR-  odes Linéaire Tangent et Adjoint d'OPA, qui auparavant  étaient é rits à la main, doivent don  être redéveloppés. Nous utilisons l'outil  de Diérentiation Automatique TAPENADE pour gent et Adjoint d'OPA 9. raison ave  onstruire les  odes Tan-  Nous validons les dérivées obtenues par  ompa-  les Diéren es Divisées et sur deux appli ations test in luant des  expérien es jumelles. Nous utilisons le s héma de  he kpointing ré ursif bino-  mial de Griewank et Walther pour améliorer les performan es du  ode adjoint.  Nous utilisons une stratégie spé ique pour diérentier le solveur linéaire itératif provenant du s héma impli ite d'avan ement en temps. montrent un  oût raisonnable, tant en  Nos résultats  onsommation mémoire que pour le  temps d'exé ution de l'adjoint.  Mots- lés :  OPA, Cir ulation O éanique, TAPENADE, Diérentiation Au-  tomatique, mode inverse, Code Adjoint, Che kpointing  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA  3  1 Introdu tion The development of tangent and adjoint models is an important step in addressing sensitivity analysis and variational data assimilation problems in O eanography. Sensitivity analysis is the study of how model output varies with hanges in model inputs.  The sensitivity information given by the adjoint  model is used dire tly to gain an understanding of the physi al pro esses. In data assimilation, one  onsiders a  ost fun tion whi h is a measure of the  model-data mist. The adjoint sensitivities are used to build the gradient for des ent algorithms. Similarly the tangent model is used in the in remental algorithms [3℄ to linearize the  ontext of the  ost fun tion around a ba kground  ontrol. For the previous version 8 of the O ean General Cir ulation Model OPA [17℄, Weaver et al [22℄ developed the numeri al tangent and adjoint by hand using  odes  lassi al te hniques [5, 19℄. Sin e then, the OPA model has un-  dergone a major update. Parti ularly the new versions are fully rewritten in FORTRAN95. adjoint  In this paper, we report on the development of tangent and  odes of OPA using the Automati  Dierentiation (AD) tool TAPE-  NADE [12℄. A brief des ription of the OPA model and the  onguration used  in this work is given in the next se tion. In se tion 3 we present the prin iples of AD and how they are ree ted into the fun tionalities of the AD tool TAPENADE. In se tion 4 we fo us on the most interesting di ulties that we en ountered in the appli ation of AD to su h a large  ode. Se tion 5 shows  some experiments that validate our derivatives and presents two illustrative appli ations, fo using on  omputational aspe ts rather than impli ations for  o eanography. An outlook of further work is given in the  on lusion.  2 The O ean General Cir ulation Model OPA Developed by the LODYC team at Paris VI university, OPA is a exible o ean ir ulation model that onguration.  an be used either in a regional or in a global o ean  OPA is the o ean model  omponent of NEMO (Nu leus For  European Modelling of the O ean) and is widely used in the s ienti  om-  munity. Moreover it is be oming a major a tor in operational o eanography (Mer ator, ECMWF, UK-Met o e) Its formulation is based on the so- alled primitive equations for the temporal evolution of o ean velo ity  RR n° 6372  urrents, tem-  Tber et al.  4  perature and salinity in its three horizontal and verti al dimensions. equations are derived from Navier-Stokes equations  These  oupled with a state equa-  tion for water density and heat equation, under Boussinesq and hydrostati approximations.  U  Let us introdu e the following variables:  Uh + wk  (the subs ript  tial temperature,  S  h  the velo ity ve tor,  denotes the lo al horizontal ve tor),  the salinity,  p  the pressure and  ρ  T  U =  the poten-  the in-situ density. The  ve tor invariant form of the primitive equations in an orthogonal set of unit ve tors linked to the earth are written as follows                                  ∂Uh ∂t ∂p ∂z ∇·U ∂T ∂t ∂S ∂t ρ    1 = − (∇ × U) × U + ∇ (U) 2 2    h  − f k × Uh −  1 ∇h p + D U ρ0  = −ρg = 0 = −∇ · (T U) + D T = −∇ · (SU) + D S = ρ (T, S, p)  ∇ is the generalized derivative ve tor operator, t the time, z the verti al oordinate, ρ0 a referen e density, f the Coriolis a eleration, and g the gravity U T S a eleration. D , D and D are the parametrization of small s ale physi s for  where  momentum, temperature and salinity, in luding surfa e for ing terms. A full des ription of the model basi s, dis retization, physi al and numeri al details an be found in [17℄. Through this paper, OPA is used in its global free surfa e ORCA-2. In this  onguration  onguration the model uses a rotated grid with poles on  North Ameri a and Asia in order to avoid the singularity problem on the North Pole. The spa e resolution is roughly equivalent to a geographi al mesh of 2°  by 1.3° with a meridional resolution of 0.5° near the Equator (see gure 1). The  Verti al domain, spreading from the surfa e to a depth of 5000m, is meshed using 31 levels with levels 1 to 10 in the top 100 meters. The time step is 96 minutes so that there are 15 time steps per day. The model is for ed by heat, freshwater, and momentum uxes from the atmosphere and/or the sea-i e.  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA  5  Figure 1: ORCA 2 Mesh  The solar radiation penetrates the upper layers of the o ean. Zero uxes of heat and salt are applied through the bottom. On the lateral solid boundaries a no-slip  ondition is also applied. Initialization of the model for temperature  and salinity is based on the Levitus et al. (1998)  limatology with a null initial  velo ity eld. For more details about the spa e time-domain and the o ean physi s of ORCA-2, we refer to the page dedi ated to this  1  onguration in the  o ial website of NEMO-OPA . The to  onguration ORCA-2 is routinely used by MERCATOR/Meteo-Fran e  ompute the o eani  omponent of their seasonal fore asting system. The  size of OPA-9, 200 modules dening 800 pro edures with over 100 000 lines of FORTRAN95, makes it the largest appli ation dierentiated by TAPENADE to date.  The  omputational kernel whi h is a tually dierentiated a  for 330 pro edures.  1 http://www.lody  RR n° 6372  .jussieu.fr/NEMO/general/des ription/ORCA_ ong.html  ounts  Tber et al.  6  3 Prin iples of AD and the tool TAPENADE 2  TAPENADE [12℄ is an AD tool developed by the Tropi s  team at INRIA.  Given the sour e of an original program that evaluates a mathemati al fun tion, and given a sele tion of input and output variables to be dierentiated, TAPENADE produ es a new sour e program that  omputes the partial deriva-  tives of the sele ted outputs with respe t to the sele ted inputs. Basi ally, TAPENADE does that by inserting additional statements into a opy of the original program. Like other AD tools, TAPENADE is based on the fundamental observation that the original program P, whatever its size and m n run time, omputes a fun tion F, X∈IR 7→ Y ∈IR whi h is the omposition of the elementary fun tions words if  P  omputed by ea h run-time instru tion. In other  exe utes a sequen e of elementary statements  Ik , k ∈ [1..p],  then  P  a tually evaluates  F = fp ◦ fp−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 , where ea h  fk  is the fun tion implemented by  hain rule of derivative derivatives of ea h Calling  X0 = X  Y Xk = fk (Xk−1 )  omponent of  and  variables, i.e. the su  Ik .  Therefore one an apply the F ′ , i.e. the partial  al ulus to get the Ja obian matrix  essive  with respe t to ea h the su  omponent of  X.  essive values of all intermediate  states of the memory throughout exe  ution of  P,  we get  ′ F ′ (X) = fp′ (Xp−1 ) × fp−1 (Xp−2 ) × · · · × f1′ (X0 ) . The derivatives  fk′  (1)  of ea h elementary instru tion are easily built, and must  be inserted in the dierentiated program so that ea h of them has the values  Xk−1  dire tly available for use. This pro ess yields analyti  are exa t up to numeri al a  derivatives, that  ura y.  In pra ti e, two sorts of derivatives are of parti ular importan e in s ienti  omputing: the tangent (or dire tional) derivatives, and the adjoint (or  reverse) derivatives.  In parti ular, tangent and adjoint are the two sorts of  derivative programs required for OPA, and TAPENADE provides both. The ′ tangent derivative is the produ t Ẏ = F (X) × Ẋ of the full Ja obian times a dire tion  Ẋ  in the input spa e. From equation (1), we nd  ′ Ẏ = F ′ (X) × Ẋ = fp′ (Xp−1) × fp−1 (Xp−2 ) × · · · × f1′ (X0 ) × Ẋ 2  (2)  http://www-sop.inria.fr/tropi s/  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA whi h is most u ts are mu h  7  heaply exe uted from right to left be ause matrix×ve tor prodheaper than matrix×matrix produ ts. This is also the most  onvenient exe ution order be ause it uses the intermediate values  P builds them. X = F ′∗ (X) × Y of  Xk  in the  same order as the program  On the other hand the adjoint  derivative is the produ t  the  transposed Ja  Y in the output spa e. The resulting X (Y · Y ). From equation (1), we nd  weight ve tor dot produ t  obian times a  is the gradient of the  ′∗ X = F ′∗ (X) × Y = f1′∗ (X0 ) × · · · × fp−1 (Xp−2 ) × fp′∗ (Xp−1 ) × Y  (3)  whi h is also most  heaply exe uted from right to left. However, this uses the  intermediate values  Xk  in the inverse of their building order in  Regarding the runtime  Ẏ  and adjoint  X  ost only a small multiple of the original program  slowdown fa tor is less than 4 in theory. In pra ti e it the tangent, whereas it  below. Despite its higher  m runs  m  The  an be less than 2 for  ost, the adjoint  ode is still by large the  heapest  To get the gradient with the tangent mode would  of the tangent  is independent from  P.  an rea h up to 10 for the adjoint for a reason dis ussed  way to obtain gradients. require  P.  ost for obtaining the derivatives, both tangent  ode, one per dimension of  X,  whereas this  ost  with the adjoint mode.  The di ulty of the adjoint mode lies in the fa t that it needs the intermediate values  Xk  in reverse order. To this end, TAPENADE basi ally uses a  two-sweeps strategy, a  alled Store-All. In the rst sweep (the forward sweep),  opy of the original program  P  is run, together with Push statements that  store intermediate values on a sta k just before they get overwritten. In the se ond sweep (the ba kward sweep), the derivative statements ompute the ′∗ elementary derivatives fk (Xk−1 ) for k = p down to 1, using Pop statements to restore the intermediate values as they are required. This in urs a ost in memory spa e as the maximum sta k size needed is attained at the end of the forward sweep, and is thus proportional to the length of the program  P.  There is also a runtime penalty for these sta k manipulations. TAPENADE implements a number of strategies [11℄ to mitigate this data-ow analysis of the program's values  Xk that need to be stored.  ontrol ow graph, redu ing the number of  However for very long programs su h as OPA,  involving unsteady simulations, Store-All  an not work alone.  ombines it with a storage/re omputation trade-o  RR n° 6372  ost, based on stati  TAPENADE  alled  he kpointing.  Tber et al.  8  Che kpointing redu es the maximum sta k size at the exe utions. Consider a pie e  C  of the original program  P.  ost of dupli ated  Che kpointing  illustrated on gure 2 means that during the main forward sweep,  C  C  as  pushes  no value on the sta k. When the ba kward sweep rea hes ba k to the pla e where intermediate values are now missing on the sta k, it runs  C  a se ond  time, this time with the Store-All strategy i.e. pushing values on the sta k. The ba kward sweep  an then resume safely.  To run  C  twi e requires that  enough of its input values, a snapshot, are stored but the size of a snapshot is generally mu h less than the sta k size used by down the adjoint program. When  C  is well  C.  hosen,  Obviously, this also slows he kpointing  the peak size of the sta k by a fa tor of two. Che kpoints whi h  an divide  an be nested, in  ase both the sta k's peak size and the adjoint runtime slowdown  grow as little as the logarithm of the size of applies  he kpointing to ea h pro edure  an  P. In its default mode, TAPENADE  all.  {  C  successive sweeps  Figure 2: Che kpointing applied to the program pie e  C.  Rightwards arrows  represent forward sweeps, thi k when they store intermediate values on the sta k, thin otherwise.  Leftwards arrows represent ba kward sweeps.  Bla k  dots are stores, white dots are retrieves. Small dots are Push and Pops, big dots are snapshots.  TAPENADE  apa ity to generate robust and e ient tangent and adjoint  odes has been demonstrated on several real-world test appli ations [15, 7, 1, 13, 16℄. Regarding the appli ation language, it in FORTRAN. Taking into a  an handle programs written  ount the new programming  onstru ts provided  by FORTRAN95 has required an important programming eort in the past few years, mostly to handle modules, stru tured data types, array notation, pointers, and dynami  memory allo ation. Sin e the new OPA 9 is now written  in FORTRAN95, dierentiation of OPA is a very realisti  test for the new  TAPENADE 2.2.  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA There exist several other AD tools.  9  Restri ting to the tools whi h, like  TAPENADE, operate by sour e transformation, provide tangent and adjoint modes, use global program analysis to optimize the dierentiated have demonstrated their appli ability on large industrial  odes, we  ode, and an men-  tion TAF [4℄ a pioneer of AD for meteorology, now the standard AD tool for the popular MIT Global Cir ulation Model. Unlike TAPENADE's, the adjoint mode of TAF regenerates the intermediate values an given initial point. This is  Xk  with Store-All strategy is getting blurred by nested joint su  by re omputation from  alled a Re ompute-All strategy. Comparison  odes grow more alike as more  he kpointing, as the ad-  he kpoints are inserted. OpenAD [20℄,  essor of ADIFOR and ADIC, uses the Store-All strategy. There are ex-  periments to also apply OpenAD to the MIT GCM. The tool Adol-C [10℄, although using operator overloading instead of sour e transformation, is very popular and has been applied su adjoint mode  essfully to many industrial appli ations. Its  an be seen as an extension of the Store-All strategy: not only  the intermediate values are stored on the sta k, but also the  omputation graph  to be dierentiated. This allows the AD tool to perform further optimizations on this graph, at the  ost of a higher memory  onsumption.  4 Applying TAPENADE to OPA We generated working tangent and adjoint  odes for the  omputational kernel  of OPA, using TAPENADE. Depending on the nal appli ation (  f  se tion  5), the a tual fun tion to dierentiate as well as the input and output variables may be dierent, but the te hni al di ulties that we en ountered are essentially the same. This se tion des ribes these points.  4.1  FORTRAN95  onstru ts  The new OPA 9 uses extensively the modular had to extend the  all-graph internal representation of TAPENADE to handle  the nesting of modules and pro edures. into the dierentiated Be ause a module  Essentially this nesting is mirrored  ode. an dene private  ferentiated modules do not have a  RR n° 6372  onstru ts of FORTRAN95. We  omponents, subroutines in the dif-  ess to all variables of the original module.  Tber et al.  10  Therefore the dierentiated module must ontain its own opy of all the original module's variables, types, and pro edures. This is a dierentiation model: the dierentiated the original  ode; it must  dierentiated  ode  ontain its own  hange in TAPENADE's  annot just  all or use parts of  opies of those. In other words, the  ode need not be linked with the original.  The interfa e me hanism of FORTRAN95 is a way to implement overloaded pro edures.  This is stati  overloading, whi h is resolved at  ompile  time. Therefore we had to extend TAPENADE type- he king phase to pletely solve the  alls to interfa ed pro edures.  om-  Conversely, TAPENADE is  now able to generate interfa es on the dierentiated pro edures, so that the general stru ture of the  ode is preserved.  The array notation of FORTRAN95 is used systemati ally in OPA. At the same time, dierentiation requires that many  alls to intrinsi  fun tions be  split to propagate the derivatives. When these fun tions are used on arrays ("elemental" intrinsi s) TAPENADE must generate a  ode whi h is far from  trivial. For instan e the single statement from OPA:  zws(:,:,:) = SQRT(ABS(psal(:,:,:))) generates in the adjoint mode  abs1 = ABS(psal(:,:,:)) mask = (psal(:,:,:) .GT. 0.0) ... WHERE (abs1 .EQ. 0.0) abs1b = 0.0 ELSEWHERE abs1b = zwsb(:, :, :)/(2.0*SQRT(abs1)) END WHERE WHERE (.NOT.mask(:, :, :)) psalb(:, :, :) = psalb(:, :, :) - abs1b ELSEWHERE psalb(:, :, :) = psalb(:, :, :) + abs1b END WHERE Without going in too mu h detail into the adjoint dierentiation model, we observe that the test that is needed to prote t the dierentiated  ode against  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA the non-dierentiability of dierentiation of  ABS,  SQRT  11  at 0, as well as the test that  have been turned into  WHERE  ontrols the  onstru ts to keep the  runtime benets of array notation. Some temporary variables are introdu ed automati ally to store  ontrol-ow de isions (e.g.  abs1  and  mask),  although  TAPENADE still doesn't do this in an optimal way on the example. OPA uses pointers and dynami  DEALLOCATE).  memory allo ation ( alls to  ALLOCATE  and  This is an appli ation for the pointer analysis now available  in TAPENADE, nding whether a variable has a derivative, even when this variable is a  essed through a pointer. Unfortunately, dynami  allo ation is  handled partly, i.e. only in the tangent mode of TAPENADE. In the adjoint mode, we have no general strategy for memory allo ation and TAPENADE sometimes  annot produ e a working  an allo ate should be a  ode. We understand that the adjoint of  DEALLOCATE,  and vi e-versa, but some  be made by hand on the dierentiated  4.2  hanges must  ode to make it work.  Che kpointing and hidden variables  OPA reads and writes several data les, not only during the pre- and postpro essing stages, but also during the  omputational kernel itself. Sour e terms  su h as the wind stress are being read at intermediate time steps. Also, some modules and pro edures dene private but  annot be a  SAVE variables, whose value is preserved  essed from outside.  are just examples of a  Although unrelated, these two points  ommon problem: they  reentrant". If a  alled pro edure modies an internal  sible from the outside  alling  ontext to  an identi al result. Similarly if the  SAVE  an make a pro edure non variable, it be omes impos-  all the pro edure a se ond time with  alled pro edure reads from a previously  opened le, and just moves the read pointer further in the le, then it be omes impossible to  all the pro edure twi e and obtain the same values read.  Non reentrant pro edures are a problem for the the adjoint mode. We saw in se tion 3 that  he kpointing strategy of  he kpointing relies on  alling the  he kpointed pie e twi e, in su h a way that the se ond  all is equivalent to the  rst. To this end, a su ient subset of the exe ution  ontext, the snapshot,  must be saved and restored. Hidden variables like an internal the read pointer inside an opened le  RR n° 6372  SAVE variable or  annot be saved nor restored in general.  Tber et al.  12  When then  he kpointing would require hidden variables to be put in the snapshot, he kpointing should be forbidden.  Similarly, when a pro edure only allo ates some memory, the allo ation must not be done twi e.  If this pro edure is  he kpointed, then one must  deallo ate the memory when restoring the snapshot before the dupli ate  all.  TAPENADE is not yet able to do this automati ally. TAPENADE has some fun tionalities to problem, but in all  ope with this hidden variables  ases intera tion with the user is ne essary. First, TAPE-  NADE issues a warning message when a subroutine be ause of a private  SAVE  annot be  he kpointed  variable. The message is issued only when this vari-  able would be part of the snapshot for this pro edure. When this happened for OPA, we just turned by hand the variables in question into publi variables in the original  ode. In prin iple this  global  ould also be done automati-  ally. However there are only a handful su h variables, thus developing this is not our priority. When a subroutine is not reentrant be ause of I/O le pointers or be ause of isolated memory allo ation or deallo ation, then TAPENADE lets the user label the subroutine so that it must not be  he kpointed. For OPA, we took  another strategy: we modied the main I/O subroutines so that they always rst make sure that the le is opened and then only use dire t read into the le without using a read I/O pointer. Thus all I/O subroutines are reentrant.  4.3  Binomial Che kpointing  Automati  Dierentiation of OPA is one of the most ambitious appli ations  of TAPENADE so far. It means building the adjoint of a pie e of  ode that  performs an unsteady nonlinear simulation over a very large number of time steps. Ea h time step  omputes a new state whose size ranges in the hundreds  of megabytes. In adjoint mode if no  he kpointing was applied, whi h means  that all intermediate values were to be stored on a sta k, we  ould exe ute  only a handful of time steps before we run out of memory even on our largest workstation. Che kpointing is  ompulsory to  ompute the adjoint over several  thousands of time steps, whi h is our goal. We saw in se tion 3 that TAPENADE applies of subroutine  alls, i.e. ea h  all is  he kpointing at the level  he kpointed. This easy strategy is often  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA far from optimal. On one hand several  13  alls are better not  TAPENADE now oers the option to mark sele ted On the other hand,  he kpointed, and  alls for  not  he kpointing.  he kpointing should be applied at other lo ations. For  example at the top level of the simulation program is a loop over many time steps.  We denitely need an e ient  he kpointing s heme applied at this  level of time iterations. One  lassi al solution used by TAF on the MIT GCM  multi level re ursive  he kpointing. Basi ally, it splits the  ode [14℄, is  alled  omplete time inter-  val into a small number of equidistant intervals, then apply the same strategy to ea h of the sub-intervals.  For instan e 64 time steps  an be split into 4  large intervals of 4 small intervals of 4 time steps, as sket hed on gure 3. This onsumes a maximum of 9 simultaneous snapshots, and the average number of dupli ate exe utions for a time step is 1000 time steps  2.25.  In a more realisti  situation,  an be split into 10 large intervals of 10 small intervals of  10 time steps, and one  an gure out that this  onsumes a maximum of 27  simultaneous snapshots, and the average number of dupli ate exe utions for a time step is  2.7.  0  16  32  48  52  56  60 61 62 57 58  53 54 49 50 36  40  44 45 46 41 42  37 38 33 34 20  24  28 29 30 25 26  21 22 17 18 4  8  12 13 14 9 10  5 1  6  2  Figure 3: Three-levels ward  he kpointing with 64 time steps and 9 snapshots. For-  omputations go right, adjoint  omputations go left. Bla k  resent writing/taking a snapshot, white snapshot.  RR n° 6372  ir les rep-  ir les represent reading an available  Tber et al.  14  However, it was shown in [21℄ that this strategy is not optimal. Under the reasonable assumptions that all time steps  ost the same run time, and that  the snapshot needed to run again from time step from step  n  to any later step  n + x,  the optimal distribution of nested  n to n+1 is the same as to run  Griewank and Walther have  hara terized  he kpoints, whi h follows a binomial law.  With this optimal strategy, both spatial and temporal omplexity of the adjoint ode grow logarithmi ally with respe t to the number of time steps of the original simulation.  In other words, both the slowdown fa tor whi h grows  like the number of times ea h time step is exe uted, and the memory whi h grows like the number of simultaneous snapshots, grow logarithmi ally with the total number of time steps. In real appli ations, run-time and memory spa e do not behave symmetrially. One  an always wait a little longer for the result, whereas the memory  spa e is bounded. Therefore the maximum number of snapshots  d  that  an  be stored simultaneously is xed.  Then [8℄ shows that the optimal strategy th gives a slowdown fa tor that grows only like the d root of the total number of  time steps, whi h is still very good. Figure 4 shows the optimal  he kpointing  strategy for the same problem as gure 3 i.e. 64 time steps with memory for 9 snapshots. only  2.  The average number of dupli ate exe utions for a time step is  For the more realisti  situation (1000 time steps and memory for 27  2.57.  snapshots) the average number of dupli ate exe utions is only We implemented this optimal strategy in the adjoint  ode of OPA. We  made our rst experiments by hand modi ation of the adjoint  ode produ ed  by TAPENADE. Still, TAPENADE produ ed automati ally the pro edures that store and retrieve the snapshot, and therefore the hand modi ation was benign: given the number of time steps, a general pro edure  3  s hedules the  optimal sequen e of a tions (store snapshot, retrieve snapshot, run time step, run adjoint time step) to dierentiate the  omplete simulation. Further ver-  sions of TAPENADE will fully automate this pro ess.  Figure 5 shows the  performan es on OPA. They are in good agreement with the theory. Noti e in parti ular the two small ine tion points on the and 800 iterations.  urve around 150 iterations  Going ba k to the optimality proof in [8℄, we see that  the optimal strategy is parti ularly e ient when the number of time steps is 3A  FORTRAN95 implementation of this s heduling pro edure an be found in www.inriasop/tropi s/ftp/Hi ham_Tber/  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA  0  16  30  15  38  45  51  56  60  62  57 58 52 53 54 46 47 48 49  39 40 41 42 43  31 32 33 34 35 36  19  22  24 25 26 27 28  20 17 3  6  9  10 11 12 13 14  7 4 1  Figure 4: Optimal binomial  he kpointing with 64 time steps and 9 snapshots  7.5  Slowdown factor  7 6.5 6 5.5 5 4.5  200  400  600  800  1000  1200  Total number of time steps Figure 5: Optimal binomial he kpointing with 15 snapshots: slowdown fa tor as a fun tion of the total length of the initial simulation. The slowdown fa tor is the run-time ratio of the adjoint  RR n° 6372  ode  ompared to the original  ode.  Tber et al.  16  exa tly  (d + t)! d!t! where d is the number of snapshots and t is the number of dupli ate exe utions allowed per time step. For our target ma hine d = 15 and we nd η(15, 2) = 136 and η(15, 3) = 816, whi h orresponds to the ine tion points of gure 5. η(d, t) =  For the previous version OPA 8, the adjoint was written by hand. Nevertheless, even a hand-written adjoint must implement strategies to retrieve intermediate states in reverse order that is, something very  lose to  Looking at this hand-written adjoint, we rst observe that the  he kpointing. he kpointing  strategy is neither multi level nor optimal binomial. It is more like a single level strategy, with one snapshot stored every xed number of time steps. During the reverse sweep, states between two stored snapshots are rebuilt approximately using linear interpolation. The advantage is that few time steps are evaluated twi e, and therefore the slowdown fa tor remains well below 4. We  an see at  least two drawba ks. First, this hand manipulation requires deep knowledge of the original program and of the underlying equations. This method does not blend easily with Automati  Dierentiation. It is not yet automated in any  AD tool and therefore tedious and error-prone  ode manipulations would still  be ne essary. Se ond, this introdu es approximation errors into the  omputed  derivatives, whose mathemati al behavior is un lear. The gradient obtained in the end is used in  omplex optimizations or data-assimilation loops, and small  errors may result in poor  onvergen e. In any  ase, for very large numbers of  time steps, we believe a trade-o between exa t binomial  he kpointing and  approximate interpolation is worth experimenting. Interpolation is probably good enough for many variables that vary very slowly, and whi h  ould be  designated by the end-user, and only the other variables would need to be stored.  4.4  Iterative linear solver  The OPA model solves an ellipti  equation at the end of ea h time step, using  an iterative method that generates a sequen e of approximations of the exa t solution. The me hani al appli ation of AD on this kind of methods gives a sequen e of derivatives of the approximate solutions with the same number  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA  17  of iterations as the original solver. The reason is that AD keeps the ow of ontrol of the original program in the dierentiated program. In parti ular the onvergen e tests are still based only on the non-dierentiated variables. Naturally, one may ask whether and how AD-produ ed derivatives are reasonable approximations to the desired derivative of the exa t solution. The issues of derivative  onvergen e for iterative solvers in relation to AD are dis ussed in  [6, 9, 2℄. OPA provides two alternative algorithms to solve the ellipti PCG for Pre onditioned Conjugate Gradient, and SOR for Su Relaxation method. Both algorithms give  equation:  essive Over-  orre t results for the original  ode,  but PCG is generally preferred thanks to its e ien y and ve torization properties. However, the AD-dierentiated algorithms. Figure 6  tives obtained by divided dieren es. with the SOR algorithm remain reases. be ome  On the  ode gives dierent results using the two  ompares the AD-derivatives with approximate derivaWe see that the derivatives obtained  orre t when the number of time steps in-  ontrary, the derivatives obtained with the PCG algorithm  ompletely wrong after 80 time steps. Noti e that this o  urs in tan-  gent mode as well as in adjoint mode: the derivatives obtained with PCG, although wrong, remain identi al in tangent and adjoint. Our explanation is that ea h iteration of PCG involves the  omputation of s alar produ ts of vari-  ables that depend on the state ve tor, thus making the numeri al algorithm nonlinear even though the ellipti  equation is linear. In [6℄, Gilbert has shown  that the appli ation of AD to a xed point iteration gives a derivative xed point iteration that in the  onverges R-linearly to the desired derivative in parti ular  ase of a large  this is not the  ontra tive iterate or se ant updating.  Unfortunately  ase for quasi-Newton iterative solvers su h as PCG, for whi h  there is no similar  onvergen e result to our knowledge.  To solve this problem for the tangent-dierentiated OPA we exploit the linearity of the ellipti  system, and for the adjoint-dierentiated OPA we ex-  ploit the self adjointness property of the ellipti  operator [22℄. We  an thus  use the original PCG routine itself to solve for the dierentiated linear systems. Pra ti ally, we do this using the so- alled bla k-box feature provided in TAPENADE. Figure 6 shows that (here for the tangent mode) the PCG gives the same a  RR n° 6372  ura y as the SOR solver.  18  Tber et al.  Figure 6: evolution of the relative error between tangent derivative and divided dieren es, for the three strategies: SOR and straightforward AD, PCG and straightforward AD, PCG with the bla k box strategy  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA  19  In another experiment, we tried to use straightforward AD with the PCG solver, but this time xing the number of PCG iterations to some very high value. We observed that the derivatives be ome dieren es. This expensive and the  oherent again with divided  ould be another way to solve our problem, but it is  ertainly  hoi e of the high iteration number is deli ate. This prob-  lem denitely deserves further study, and  onrms the general re ommendation  not to dierentiate solvers of a nonlinear kind, and use a bla k-box strategy instead.  5 Validation Experiments 5.1 The  Corre tness test lassi al way to  gent and adjoint  he k for  orre tness of the automati ally generated tan-  odes is as follows:  1. Choose an arbitrary input  X  and and arbitrary dire tion  Ẋ .  Compute  the Divided Dieren e  DD = for a good enough small  F (X + εẊ) − F (X) ε  ε.  2. Using the tangent dierentiated program, 3. Using the adjoint dierentiated program, and nally test for the derivative  he k that  Ẏ = F ′ (X) × Ẋ .  ompute ompute  X = F ′∗ (X) × Ẏ  (DD · DD) = (Ẏ · Ẏ ) = (X · Ẋ).  We performed this  omplete global ORCA-2 simulation on 1000 time steps and its odes.  The results are shown in table 1.  The values mat h, and  Table 1: Dot produ t test for 1000 time steps  (DD · DD) (ε = 10−7 ) (Ẏ · Ẏ ) (X · Ẋ)  RR n° 6372  4.405352760987440e+08 4.405346876439977e+08 4.405346876439867e+08  Tber et al.  20  (Ẏ · Ẏ )  and  (X · Ẋ)  mat h very well, up to the last few digits, whi h shows  that the tangent and adjoint in a dierent of  odes really  ompute the same derivatives, only  omputation order as shown by equations (2) and (3). The values  (DD · DD)  and  (Ẏ · Ẏ )  don't mat h so well, be ause of the weakness of the  Divided Dieren es approximation. Figure 7 shows this weakness: For a small 0  10  −2  10  −4  10  −6  10 −12 10  −10  −8  10  10  −6  ε  10  −4  −2  10  10  Figure 7: Relative error of Divided Dieren es with respe t to AD-generated derivatives,  value of of  ε,  ε,  omputed for various values of of the step size  the dominant error is due to ma hine a  ura y. For a large value  the dominant error is due to the se ond derivatives of  minimizes both errors, but  5.2  ε  annot eliminate them  F.  The best  ε  ompletely.  Sensitivity analysis on a long simulation  One of the main appli ation of adjoint models is the sensitivity analysis i.e. the study of how model output varies with  hanges in model inputs. Using dire t  or statisti al methods would require many integration of the non linear model while one adjoint model integration is enough to ompute this sensitivity. As an example, gure 8 shows the output map of the sensitivity of the North Atlanti meridional heat ux at 29°N to  hanges in the initial sea surfa e temperature  (SSTt0 ) over one year integration period, starting January 1, 1998.  This is  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA done by  omputing the gradient respe t to  J=  Z  tN  t0  where  Ω  v  SSTt0  of  T.v dxdzdt  Ω  ross se tion at 29°N in the North Atlanti ,  is the zonal  temperature and  ZZ  21  is the meridional  T  is the  urrent velo ity.  Contours in gure 8 show where variation of initial SST would ee t the most upon heat transport at 29°N. It shows large s ale patterns mainly lo ated  north of the 29°N parallel and in the Caribbean sea with a strong spot o Moro  o. These results are  onsistent with those obtained by Marotzke et al.  ([18℄) This map was  omputed by the TAPENADE-generated adjoint of OPA on  the global ORCA2 grid, over 5475 time steps (1 year). This experiment was done with the SOR algorithm as the iterative linear solver. The TAPENADEgenerated adjoint  omputed this sensitivity map in a time that is only 8.03  times that of the original simulation.  5.3  Data Assimilation  For further validation of the automati ally generated derivatives, we out a data assimilation experiment.  arried  This was done in a so- alled twin ex-  periment framework whereby the dire t model traje tory is used to generate syntheti  observations.  The initial sea surfa e temperature is perturbed by  a white noise and it has to be re overed using variational data assimilation te hniques. Syntheti  observation are given by the sea surfa e height (SSH)  and the sea surfa e salinity (SSS) generated from the model's original outputs starting from the unperturbed SST. The  ost fun tion to be minimised is  J(SST (t0 )) =  Z  tN  k SSH(t) − SSH o(t) k2 + k SSS(t) − SSS o (t) k2 dt  (4)  t0  Where the supers ript  SSS(t) For  o  stands for syntheti  observation and  SSH(t)  and  are model output. omputing  ost issues, only the Antar ti  zoom of ORCA2 is  onsid-  ered, the minimisation is done an iterative gradient sear h algorithm where  RR n° 6372  Tber et al.  22  Figure 8: Sensitivity map of the North Atlanti line), with respe t to  heat transport at 29°N (dotted  hanges in the initial surfa e temperature  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA the gradient of  J  is  23  umputed using adjoint te hniques. Figure 9 illustrates  the performan e of the optimization loop for an integration period of 1 month i.e. 450 time steps. The  ost fun tion de reases by two orders of magnitude.  Figure 10 indi ates that the true solution (top panel) is re overed with a good approximation (bottom panel) from the randomly perturbed one(middle panel), showing the quality of the derivatives obtained.  6  Cost function  10  5  10  4  10 0 10  1  2  10  10  Iterations  Figure 9: Twin experiment: Convergen e of the  ost fun tion  6 Con lusion and Outlook The eort to build the tangent and adjoint  odes for the previous version 8  of the OPA o ean General Cir ulation Model has  ost several months devel-  opment from an experien ed resear her. For the new version OPA 9 written in FORTRAN95, the use of the AD tool TAPENADE signi antly redu es this eort. Our rst numeri al appli ations show the quality of the derivatives obtained. This works validates the  hoi e of AD as the strategy to obtain the  tangent and adjoint for OPA 9, and for the versions to  ome.  At the same time, OPA is the largest FORTRAN95 appli ation dierentiated with TAPENADE. This work has pointed at a number of limitations of  RR n° 6372  24  Tber et al.  Figure 10: Twin experiment: True eld (top), Initial perturbed eld (middle) and identied optimal sea surfa e temperatures (bottom)  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA  25  TAPENADE that have been lifted. Other limitations remain, su h as the nonreentrant pro edures, whi h need to be addressed in future work. Su dierentiation of OPA denitely in reases our  essful  onden e in TAPENADE.  This works is also an additional illustration of the superiority of the binomial  he kpointing strategy,  ompared to multi level  he kpointing. By the  standards of other appli ation elds, e.g. CFD, a slowdown of the adjoint of only 7 for a nonsteady simulation on 1000 time steps would be  ode  onsidered  very good. By the standards of weather simulation or o ean modeling however, s ientists expe t yet faster adjoints, at the tion. Even if we  ost of a radi al approxima-  onsider that these approximations  hange the mathemati al  nature of the optimization pro ess, we understand they are ne essary and we shall study how they  an be proposed as an option by the AD tool.  This work has underlined several dire tions for further resear h in AD and AD tools. Some of them are already being studied by resear hers in our groups. Considering the appli ation language, two  onstru ts need to be dierentiated  better:    The next experiment to be made very soon is to apply TAPENADE to the parallelized version of OPA. This is ne essary before the generated tangent and adjoint    odes  an be used in produ tion  ontext.  The OPA sour e makes extensive use of the prepro essor dire tives su h as  #IFDEF. TAPENADE does not deal with these dire  tives be ause they  do not respe t the synta ti stru ture of a ode. Handling these dire tives in the AD tool is in our opinion hopeless. What might be done though, is to generate dierentiated  odes for ea h possible prepro essed  and devise a tool to put the dire tives ba k into the dierentiated This is made easier if the dierentiated of the original, as is the  ode  ode, odes.  losely follows the stru ture  ase with TAPENADE.  Considering spe i ally adjoint dierentiation, we hope to obtain more e ient ode through a more systemati ellipti  operator.  exploitation of self-adjointness, e.g.  We also hope to optimize the  its present version, TAPENADE applies Using proling information, we believe we whi h  he kpointing is useless or  he kpointing strategy.  he kpointing to ea h pro edure an dete t several pro edure  In all.  alls for  ounter-produ tive. TAPENADE is already  able to use this information to produ e a better adjoint.  RR n° 6372  of the  Tber et al.  26  Referen es [1℄ W. Castaings, D. Dartus, M. Honnorat, F.-X. Le Dimet, Y. Loukili, and J. Monnier. Automati  dierentiation: A tool for variational data assimi-  lation and adjoint sensitivity analysis for ood modeling. In Bü ker et al, editor,  Automati Dierentiation: Appli ations, Theory, and Implemen-  tations, LNCSE, pages 249262. Springer, 2005. [2℄ B. Christianson. Reverse a  Opti-  umulation and attra tive xed points.  mization Methods and Software, 3:311326, 1994.  [3℄ P. Courtier, J.-N. Thépaut, and A. Hollingsworth. A strategy for operational implementation of 4d-var, using an in remental approa h.  Meteorol. So ., 120:13671387, 1994.  [4℄ R. Giering.  Q. J. R.  Tangent linear and Adjoint Model Compiler, Users manual,  1997. http://www.autodi. om/tam . [5℄ R. Giering and T. Kaminski. Re ipes for adjoint  ode  ACM  onstru tion.  Transa tions on Mathemati al Software, 24(4):437474, 1998.  [6℄ J.C. Gilbert. Automati  dierentiation and iterative pro esses.  tion Methods and Software, 1:1321, 1992.  [7℄ M.B. Giles, D. Ghate, and M.C. Duta. Using automati adjoint CFD  ode development. In Uthup et al, editor,  Aerospa e Design and Optimization,  Optimiza-  dierentiation for  Re ent Trends in  pages 363373. Tata-M Graw Hill,  New Delhi, 2005. Post-SAROD-2005, Bangalore, India. [8℄ A. Griewank. A hieving logarithmi plexity in reverse automati  Software, 1:3554, 1992.  growth of temporal and spatial  dierentiation.  om-  Optimization Methods and  [9℄ A. Griewank, C. Bis hof, G. Corliss, A. Carle, and K. Williamson. Derivative  onvergen e for iterative equation solvers.  Software, 2:321355, 1993.  Optimization Methods and  INRIA  Tangent and Adjoint dierentiation of OPA  27  [10℄ A. Griewank, D. Juedes, J. Srinivasan, and C. Tyner. ADOL-C, a pa kage for the automati  dierentiation of algorithms written in C/C++.  Trans. Math. Software, 22(2):131167, 1996. [11℄ L. Has oët and M. Araya-Polo.  The adjoint data-ow analyses:  malization, properties, and appli ations.  Appli ations, Theory, and Tools, Le  In  ACM For-  Automati Dierentiation:  ture Notes in Computational S ien e  and Engineering. Springer, 2005. Sele ted papers from AD2004 Chi ago. [12℄ L. Has oët and V. Pas ual. Tapenade 2.1 user's guide. Te hni al Report 0300, INRIA, 2004. [13℄ L. Has oët, M. Vázquez, and A. Dervieux. Automati optimum design, applied to soni  dierentiation for  boom redu tion. In Kumar et al., editor,  Pro eedings of ICCSA'03, Montreal, Canada,  pages 8594. LNCS 2668,  Springer, 2003. [14℄ Heimba h, P. and Hill, C. and Giering, R. of the parallel MIT general dierentiation.  An e ient exa t adjoint  ir ulation model, generated via automati  Future Generation Computer Systems,  21(8):13561371,  2005. [15℄ J. Kim, E. Hunke, and W. Lips omb. Sensitivity analysis and parameter tuning s heme for global sea-i e modeling.  O ean Modeling Journal, 14(1  2):6180, 2006. [16℄ C. Lauvernet, F. Baret, L. Has oët, and F.-X. LeDimet. Improved estimates of vegetation biophysi al variables from meris toa images by using spatial and temporal  Beijing, China, 2005.  onstraints.  In  pro eedings of the 9th ISPMSRS,  [17℄ G. Made , P. Dele luse, M. Imbard, and C. Levy. Opa8.1 o ean general ir ulation model referen e manual. Te hni al report, Pole de Modelisation, IPSL, 1998. [18℄ J. Marotzke, R. Giering, K.Q. Zhang, D. Stammer, C. Hill, and T. Lee. Constru tion of the adjoint MIT o ean General Cir ulation Model and  RR n° 6372  Tber et al.  28  appli ation to atlanti  heat transport sensitivity.  J. Geophys. Res.,  (104(C12)):29,52929,548, 1999. [19℄ O. Talagrand. The use of adjoint equations in numeri al modeling of the  Automati Dierentiation of Algorithms: Theory, Implementation and Appliation, pages 169180, 1991. Philadelphia, Penn: SIAM. atmospheri  ir ulation. In A. Griewank and G. Corliss, editors,  [20℄ J. Utke, U. Naumann, M. Fagan, N. Tallent, Strout M., P. Heimba h, C. Hill, and C. Wuns h. Automati  OpenAD/F: A modular, open-sour e tool for  Dierentiation of Fortran  odes. Te hni al report ANL/MCS-  P1230-0205, Argonne National Laboratory, 2006.  Submitted to ACM  TOMS. [21℄ A. Walther and A. Griewank. Advantages of binomial  he kpointing for  Numeri al Mathemati s and Advan ed Appli ations, pages 834843. Springer, Berlin,  memory-redu ed adjoint al ulations. In Feistauer et al, editor, 2003. Pro eeding of ENUMATH 2003. [22℄ A. Weaver, J. Vialard, and D. Anderson.  Three- and four-dimensional  variational assimilation with an o ean general tropi al pa i he ks.  ir ulation model of the  o ean: I. formulation, internal diagnosti s and  Monthly Weather Review, 131(7):13601378, 2003.  onsisten y  INRIA  Unité de recherche INRIA Sophia Antipolis 2004, route des Lucioles - BP 93 - 06902 Sophia Antipolis Cedex (France) Unité de recherche INRIA Futurs : Parc Club Orsay Université - ZAC des Vignes 4, rue Jacques Monod - 91893 ORSAY Cedex (France) Unité de recherche INRIA Lorraine : LORIA, Technopôle de Nancy-Brabois - Campus scientifique 615, rue du Jardin Botanique - BP 101 - 54602 Villers-lès-Nancy Cedex (France) Unité de recherche INRIA Rennes : IRISA, Campus universitaire de Beaulieu - 35042 Rennes Cedex (France) Unité de recherche INRIA Rhône-Alpes : 655, avenue de l’Europe - 38334 Montbonnot Saint-Ismier (France) Unité de recherche INRIA Rocquencourt : Domaine de Voluceau - Rocquencourt - BP 105 - 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex (France)  Éditeur INRIA - Domaine de Voluceau - Rocquencourt, BP 105 - 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex (France) http://www.inria.fr  ISSN 0249-6399

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
