Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1828

Abstract:
arXiv:1612.06117v2 [math.GR] 24 Jun 2017  CELLULAR AUTOMATA, DUALITY AND SOFIC GROUPS LAURENT BARTHOLDI Abstract. We produce for arbitrary non-amenable group G and field K a non-pre-injective, surjective linear cellular automaton. This answers positively Open Problem (OP-14) in Ceccherini-Silberstein and Coornaert’s monograph “Cellular Automata and Groups”. We also reprove in a direct manner, for linear cellular automata, the result by Capobianco, Kari and Taati that cellular automata over sofic groups are injective if and only if they are post-surjective. These results come from considerations related to matrices over group rings: we prove that a matrix’s kernel and the image of its adjoint are mutual orthogonals of each other. This gives rise to a notion of “dual cellular automaton”, which is pre-injective if and only if the original cellular automaton is surjective, and is injective if and only if the original cellular automaton is post-surjective.  1. Introduction 1.1. Cellular automata. Let G be a group and let K be a field. A linear cellular automaton on G is — no more, no less — a square matrix with entries in the group ring KG. The interpretation of a linear cellular automaton Θ P Mn pKGq is as follows. Let S be a finite subset of G such that all entries of Θ are in the K-span of S. Construct the graph G with vertex set G, and with an edge from g to gs for all g P G, s P S. Put a copy of the vector space V :“ Kn at each vertex of G . Elements of the vector space V G “ tc : G Ñ V u are called configurations. Then Θ, defines a one-step evolution rule still written Θ on the space of configurations, in which each vertex of G inherits write ř a value in V depending on the values at its neighbours: one may G c P V evolves Θ “ sPS Θs s for K-matrices Θs , and then every configuration ř under Θ to the configuration taking at every g P G the value sPS Θs pcps´1 gqq. More concisely, c evolves to Θ ¨ c. For more information on linear cellular automata, we defer to [6, Chapter 8]. Linear cellular automata are natural linear analogues of classical cellular automata, in which each vertex of G takes a value in a finite set A, which evolves according to the values at its neighbours. The cellular automaton is thus a locallydefined evolution rule on the compact space AG . In particular, if K is a finite field, then every linear cellular automaton is also a classical cellular automaton. The converse, however, is far from true: linear cellular automata are extremely restricted computational models, and there is no clear way of converting a classical cellular automaton into a linear one. Every self-map of a finite set A induces a selfmap of the finite-dimensional vector space V :“ KA, so cellular automata acting on AG induce linear self-maps on KpAG q, but this space is much larger than V G : Date: June 25, 2017. This work is supported by the “@raction” grant ANR-14-ACHN-0018-01. 1  2  LAURENT BARTHOLDI  Â coalgebra” the former is a completion of the tensor power G V (the “measuring À KG á V ), while the latter is a completion of the direct sum G V . 1.2. Sofic groups and surjunctivity. How are algebraic properties of the group G reflected in the cellular automata carried by G ? We single out some properties of cellular automata which have received particular attention: let us write x „ y for x, y P AG when tg P G | xpgq ‰ ypgqu is finite. A cellular automaton Θ : AG ý is injective: if Θpxq “ Θpyq implies x “ y; pre-injective: if Θpxq “ Θpyq ^ x „ y implies x “ y; otherwise one calls such x, y Mutually Eraseable Patterns; surjective: if Θpxq “ AG ; one then says that Θ has no Garden of Eden; post-surjective: if y „ Θpxq implies Dz „ x : Θpzq “ y. Moore and Myhill’s celebrated “Garden of Eden” theorem asserts that, if G “ Zd , then cellular automata are pre-injective if and only if they are surjective [9, 10]. This has been extended to amenable groups G by Ceccherini-Silberstein, Machı̀ and Scarabotti [4], and I proved in [1, 2] that both results may fail as soon as G is not amenable. We shall not need the precise definition of amenable groups; suffice it to say that one of the equivalent definitions states that G contains finite subsets that are arbitrarily close to invariant under translation, in the sense that for every finite S Ď G and every ǫ ą 0 there exists a finite subset F Ď G with #pF SzF q ă ǫ#F . We recall: Theorem 1.1 ([2]). For a group G, the following are equivalent: (1) G is non-amenable; (2) for some integer n and every (or equivalently some) field K, there is an injective G-module map pKGqn Ñ pKGqn´1 . We shall also not need the precise definition of sofic groups, a common generalization of amenable and residually finite groups; we refer to the original article [13]. Suffice it to say that it is at present unknown whether non-sofic groups exist, and that if G is sofic then it satisfies Gottschalk’s “Surjunctivity Conjecture” from [8], namely every injective cellular automaton is surjective [13, §3]. Capobianco, Kaari and Taati show in [3] that, when G is sofic, every post-surjective cellular automaton is pre-injective. Thus injective  pre-injective if G sofic  post-surjective  iff G amenable surjective  We remark that if a cellular automaton is injective and surjective, then its inverse is also a cellular automaton. Similarly, if a cellular automaton is pre-injective and post-surjective, then it is bijective and its inverse is also a cellular automaton. The notions of (pre-)injectivity and (post-)surjectivity become substantially simpler in the context of linear cellular automata, and exhibit more clearly the duality:  CELLULAR AUTOMATA, DUALITY AND SOFIC GROUPS  3  Lemma 1.2. A linear cellular automaton Θ : À V G ý is pre-injective, respectively post-surjective if and only if its restriction to G V is injective, respectively surjective.  Note that non-surjective linear cellular automata Θ : V G ý avoid a non-empty open subset of V G , namely there exists a finite subset F Ď G and x P V F such that Θpyq never restricts to x on F , see Proposition 2.2. 1.3. A problem by Ceccherini-Silberstein and Coornaert. Ceccherini-Silberstein and Coornaert prove in [5] that if G is an amenable group then a linear cellular automaton on G is pre-injective if and only if it is surjective, and ask if this is also a characterization of amenability in the restricted context of linear cellular automata. The construction I gave in [2] actually produces, for every non-amenable group G, a pre-injective, non-surjective linear cellular automaton. Ceccherini-Silberstein and Coornaert ask in [6, Open Problem 14]: Problem 1.3. Let G be a non-amenable group and let K be a field. Does there exist a finite-dimensional K-vector space V and a linear cellular automaton Θ : V G ý which is surjective but not pre-injective? The group ring KG admits an anti-involution ˚, defined on basis elements g P G by g ˚ :“ g ´1 and extended by linearity. It induces an anti-involution on Mn pKGq as follows: for Θ P Mn pKGq, set pΘ˚ qij “ Θ˚ji for all i, j P t1, . . . , nu; namely, Θ˚ is computed from Θ by transposing the matrix and applying ˚ to all its entries. Clearly Θ˚˚ “ Θ. There is a natural bilinear pairing pKGqn ˆ pKn qG Ñ K, given by ÿÿ xv|ξy :“ pgq ¨ ξpgq. gPG v  In this article, I shall prove: Theorem 1.4. Let G be a group, let K be a field, and let Θ P Mn pKGq be a linear cellular automaton. Then (1.1) (1.2) (1.3) (1.4)  kerpΘ|Kn GqK “ impΘ˚ |pKn qG q, kerpΘ|pKn qG qK “ impΘ˚ |Kn Gq, impΘ|Kn GqK “ kerpΘ˚ |pKn qG q, impΘ|pKn qG qK “ kerpΘ˚ |Kn Gq.  In particular, Θ is pre-injective if and only if Θ˚ is surjective, and Θ is injective if and only if Θ˚ is post-surjective. This answers positively Problem 1.3: Corollary 1.5. Let G be a non-amenable group and let K be an arbitrary (possibly finite) field. Then there exist surjective, non-pre-injective linear cellular automata on G. Proof. Let Θ P Mn pKGq be a pre-injective, non-surjective linear cellular automaton, obtained e.g. by adding a full row of 0’s to the matrix given by Theorem 1.1. Then Θ˚ is the required example.   4  LAURENT BARTHOLDI  1.4. Capobianco, Kari and Taati’s result. From this duality of linear cellular automata, one also deduces an immediate proof of Capobianco, Kari and Taati’s main result, when restricted to linear cellular automata: Theorem 1.6 (see [3, Theorem 2]). Let G be a sofic group. Then every postsurjective linear cellular automaton is pre-injective. Proof. Let Θ be a post-surjective linear cellular automaton. By Theorem 1.4, Θ˚ is injective, so Θ˚ is surjective by [13, §3], so Θ is pre-injective again by Theorem 1.4.  1.5. Reddite ergo quæ Cæsaris sunt. The notion of dual linear cellular automata is quite natural, but its first appearance seems only to be a passing remark in [11]. The last line of Theorem 1.4 has been proven, in the setting of locally finite graphs, by Matthew Tointon in [12]. I am indebted to Professor Coornaert for having pointed out that reference to me when I shared this note with him. In a recent article [7], Gaboriau and Seward study the sofic entropy of algebraic actions, and note the following consequence of Corollary 1.5: if G is sofic but not amenable, then the Yuzvinsky addition formula for entropy hpG # Aq “ hpG # Bq ` hpG # A{Bq fails for some G-modules B ď A. Indeed take A “ pKn qG and B “ kerpΘq for a surjective, non-pre-injective cellular automaton Θ. I am grateful to Messrs. Gaboriau and Seward for having communicated their remark to me ahead of its publication. 2. Linear cellular automata We start with a field K and an integer n. We write V :“ Kn , and identify V with V ˚ . There is a natural bilinear, non-degenerate pairing V ˚ ˆ V Ñ K given by xφ|vy “ φpvq “  n ÿ  φi vi .  i“1  Let G be a group. We denote by V G the vector space of functions G Ñ V , and declare its closed subsets to be tc P V G | c|S P W u for all finite S Ď G and all W ď V S . In particular, the restriction maps πS : V G Ñ V S are continuous for all finite S Ď G, and V G is compact (but not Hausdorff). We denote by V ˚ G the vector subspace of finitely-supported functions in V G . There is a left action of G on V G by translation: for g P G, c P V G we define gc P V G by pgcqphq “ cpg ´1 hq. This action preserves V ˚ G. There is also a bilinear pairing ÿ x´|´y : V ˚ G ˆ V G Ñ K, xω|cy “ xωpgq|cpgqy. gPG  Lemma 2.1. x´|´y is non-degenerate in both arguments.    In the notation introduced above, a linear cellular automaton is both an element of V b V ˚ G and a G-equivariant, continuous self-map Θ : V G ý. Note that Θ restricts to a self-map V ˚ G ý. Proposition 2.2. Let Θ : V G ý be a linear cellular automaton. Then ΘpV G q is a closed subspace of V G .  CELLULAR AUTOMATA, DUALITY AND SOFIC GROUPS  5  Proof. Verbatim the proof of [6, Theorem 8.8.1]. Note that they claim in fact the weaker statement that ΘpV G q is closed in the prodiscrete topology. Note also that the proposition does not follow trivially from the fact that V G is compact, because V G is not Hausdorff.  ř Consider a linear cellular automaton Θ P V bV ˚ G, written as Θ “ i vi bφi gi for finitely many vi P V, φi P V ˚ , gi P G. ř Then, tracing back to our original definition, its adjoint Θ˚ P V ˚ b V G is Θ˚ “ i φi b vi gi´1 . Lemma 2.3. Let Θ P V b V ˚ G be a cellular automaton, with adjoint Θ˚ . Then  xΘ˚ pωq|cy “ xω|Θpcqy for all ω P V ˚ G, c P V G . ř Proof. Write Θ as a finite sum i vi b φi gi . Then the sides of the above equation are respectively ) ˇ E ÿ A! ÿ ÿ ˇ φi b vi pgi´1 ωq pgqˇcpgq “ xφi |cpgqy xωpgi gq|vi y gPG  i  gPG,i  and ÿA  gPG  ˇ! ÿ ) E ÿ ˇ vi b φi pgi cq pgq “ xωpgq|vi y xφi |cpgi´1 gqy, ωpgqˇ i  gPG,i  which are just permutations of each other.    3. Proof of Theorem 1.4 Let Θ P Mn pKGq be a linear cellular automaton, and as in §2 set V “ V ˚ “ Kn , with the usual scalar product. We begin by the inclusion kerpΘ|V ˚ GqK Ě impΘ˚ |V G q from (1.1). Given c P impΘ˚ |V G q, say c “ Θ˚ pdq, for all ω P kerpΘ|V ˚ Gq we have xω|cy “ xω|Θ˚ pdqy “ xΘpωq|dy “ x0|dy “ 0, so c K kerpΘ|V ˚ Gq. The exact same computation gives all ‘Ě’ inclusions from (1.2), (1.3) and (1.4). We continue with the inclusion kerpΘ|V ˚ Gq KĎ impΘ˚ |V G q from (1.1). Given c R impΘ˚ |V G q, there exists an open neighbourhood of c in V G zimpΘ˚ |V G q by Proposition 2.2; so there exists a finite subset S Ď G and a proper subspace W ă V S such that the projection πS pV G q belongs to W . Since V S is finite-dimensional, there exists a linear form ω on V S that vanishes on W but does not vanish on c. Note that ω, qua element of pV S q˚ , is canonically identified with an element of pV ˚ qS , and therefore with an element of V ˚ G. From ω K impΘ˚ |V G q we get Θpωq K V G so Θpωq “ 0 because the scalar product x´|´y is non-degenerate. Therefore c M kerpΘ|V ˚ Gq as desired. We continue with the inclusion kerpΘ|V G q KĎ impΘ˚ |V ˚ Gq from (1.2). Given ω R impΘ˚ |V ˚ Gq, there exists a linear form c P pV ˚ Gq˚ that vanishes on impΘ˚ |V ˚ Gq but does not vanish on ω. Note that pV ˚ Gq˚ canonically identifies with V G . From c K impΘ˚ |V ˚ Gq we get Θpcq K V ˚ G, so Θpcq “ 0 because the scalar product x´|´y is non-degenerate. Therefore ω M kerpΘ|V G q as desired. We finally consider the inclusion impΘ|V ˚ GqK Ď kerpΘ˚ |V G q from (1.3). Given c K impΘ|V ˚ Gq, we have c K Θpωq for all ω P V ˚ G, so Θ˚ pcq K ω for all ω P V ˚ G, so Θ˚ pcq K V ˚ G and therefore Θ˚ pcq “ 0 because the scalar product x´|´y is non-degenerate. The exact same computation gives the ‘Ď’ inclusion from (1.4).  6  LAURENT BARTHOLDI  Recalling that Θ is pre-injective if and only if kerpΘ|V ˚ Gq “ 0 and Θ is injective if and only if kerpΘ|V G q “ 0 and Θ is post-surjective if and only if impΘ|V ˚ Gq “ V ˚ G and Θ is surjective if and only if impΘ|V G q “ V G , the last conclusions follow. References [1] Laurent Bartholdi, Gardens of Eden and amenability on cellular automata, J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 12 (2010), no. 1, 241–248, DOI 10.4171/JEMS/196, available at arXiv:math/0709.4280. MR2578610 (2011e:05282) [2] Laurent Bartholdi and Dawid Kielak, Amenability of groups is characterized by Myhill’s Theorem, Journal Europ. Math. Soc. (2016), to appear, available at arXiv:cs/1605.09133. [3] Silvio Capobianco, Jarkko Kari, and Siamak Taati, Post-surjectivity and balancedness of cellular automata over groups (2015), available at arXiv:1507.02472. [4] Tullio G. Ceccherini-Silberstein, Antonio Machı̀, and Fabio Scarabotti, Amenable groups and cellular automata, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 49 (1999), no. 2, 673–685 (English, with English and French summaries). MR1697376 (2000k:43001) [5] Tullio G. Ceccherini-Silberstein and Michel Coornaert, The Garden of Eden theorem for linear cellular automata, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 26 (2006), no. 1, 53–68. MR2201937 (2007a:37017) , Cellular automata and groups, Springer Monographs in Mathematics, Springer[6] Verlag, Berlin, 2010. MR2683112 (2011j:37002) [7] Damien Gaboriau and Brandon Seward, Cost, ℓ2 -Betti numbers and the sofic entropy of some algebraic actions (2017), available at arXiv:1509.02482. to appear. [8] Walter Gottschalk, Some general dynamical notions, Recent advances in topological dynamics (Proc. Conf. Topological Dynamics, Yale Univ., New Haven, Conn., 1972; in honor of Gustav Arnold Hedlund), Springer, Berlin, 1973, pp. 120–125. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 318. MR0407821 [9] Edward F. Moore, Machine models of self-reproduction, Mathematical problems in the biological sciences. Proc. Sympos. Appl. Math. XIV, 1962, pp. 17–33. MR0299409 (45 #8457) [10] John Myhill, The converse of Moore’s Garden-of-Eden theorem, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 14 (1963), 685–686. MR0155764 (27 #5698) [11] Adriana Popovici and Dan Popovici, Dilatability of Linear Cellular Automata, Proceedings of the 19th International Symposium on Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems — MTNS 2010, 2010. [12] Matthew C. H. Tointon, Characterizations of algebraic properties of groups in terms of harmonic functions, Groups Geom. Dyn. 10 (2016), no. 3, 1007–1049, DOI 10.4171/GGD/375. MR3551188 [13] Benjamin Weiss, Sofic groups and dynamical systems, Sankhyā Ser. A 62 (2000), no. 3, 350–359. Ergodic theory and harmonic analysis (Mumbai, 1999). MR1803462 Département de Mathématiques et Applications, École Normale Supérieure, Paris and Mathematisches Institut, Georg-August Universität zu Göttingen E-mail address: laurent.bartholdi@gmail.com

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
