Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_1446

Abstract:
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming  1  arXiv:cs/0505085v1 [cs.PL] 31 May 2005  Improving PARMA trailing TOM SCHRIJVERS∗ and BART DEMOEN Dept. of Computer Science, K.U.Leuven, Belgium (e-mail: {toms,bmd}@cs.kuleuven.ac.be)  MARIA GARCIA DE LA BANDA School of Computer Science and S.E, Monash University, Australia (e-mail: mbanda@csse.monash.edu.au)  PETER J. STUCKEY NICTA Victoria Laboratory Department of Computer Science and S.E. University of Melbourne, Australia (e-mail: pjs@cs.mu.oz.au) submitted 20 November 2003; revised 22 October 2004; accepted 30 May 2005  Abstract Taylor introduced a variable binding scheme for logic variables in his PARMA system, that uses cycles of bindings rather than the linear chains of bindings used in the standard WAM representation. Both the HAL and dProlog languages make use of the PARMA representation in their Herbrand constraint solvers. Unfortunately, PARMA’s trailing scheme is considerably more expensive in both time and space consumption. The aim of this paper is to present several techniques that lower the cost. First, we introduce a trailing analysis for HAL using the classic PARMA trailing scheme that detects and eliminates unnecessary trailings. The analysis, whose accuracy comes from HAL’s determinism and mode declarations, has been integrated in the HAL compiler and is shown to produce space improvements as well as speed improvements. Second, we explain how to modify the classic PARMA trailing scheme to halve its trailing cost. This technique is illustrated and evaluated both in the context of dProlog and HAL. Finally, we explain the modifications needed by the trailing analysis in order to be combined with our modified PARMA trailing scheme. Empirical evidence shows that the combination is more effective than any of the techniques when used in isolation. To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming. KEYWORDS: constraint logic programming, program analysis, trailing  1 Introduction The logic programming language Mercury (Somogyi et al. 1996) is considerably faster than traditional implementations of Prolog due to two main reasons. First, ∗ Research Assistant of the fund for Scientific Research - Flanders (Belgium)(F.W.O. - Vlaanderen)  Mercury requires the programmer to provide type, mode and determinism declarations whose information is used to generate efficient target code. And second, variables can only be ground (i.e., bound to a ground term) or new (i.e., first time seen by the compiler and hence unconstrained). Since neither aliased variables nor partially instantiated structures are allowed, Mercury does not need to support full unification; only assignment, construction, deconstruction and equality testing for ground terms are required. Furthermore, it does not need to perform trailing, a technique that allows an execution to resume computation from a previous program state: information about the old state is logged during forward computation and used to restore it during backtracking. This usually means recording the state of unbound variables right before they become aliased or bound. Since Mercury’s new variables have no run-time representation they do not need to be trailed. HAL (Demoen et al. 1999; de la Banda et al. 2002) is a constraint logic language designed to support the construction, extension and use of constraint solvers. HAL also requires type, mode and determinism declarations and compiles to Mercury so as to leverage from its sophisticated compilation techniques. However, unlike Mercury, HAL includes a Herbrand constraint solver which provides full unification. This solver uses Taylor’s PARMA scheme (Taylor 1991; Taylor 1996) rather than the standard WAM representation (Aı̈t-Kaci 1991). This is because, unlike the WAM, the PARMA representation of ground terms does not contain reference chains and, hence, it is equivalent to that of Mercury. Thus, calls to the Herbrand constraint solver can be replaced by calls to Mercury’s more efficient routines whenever ground terms are being manipulated. Unfortunately, the increased expressive power of full unification comes at a cost, which includes the need to perform trailing. Furthermore, trailing in the PARMA scheme is more expensive than in the WAM, both in terms of time and space. We present here two techniques to counter the trailing penalty of the PARMA scheme. The first is a trailing analysis that detects and eliminates at compile-time unnecessary trailings and is suitable for any system based on the classic PARMA trailing scheme. Without other supporting information such analysis is rather inaccurate, since little is known at compile-time about the way predicates are used. However, when mode and determinism information is available at compile-time, as in HAL, significant accuracy improvements can be obtained. The second technique is a modified PARMA trailing scheme which considerably reduces the required trail stack size. This technique can be applied to any PARMA-based system and has been implemented by us in both dProlog (Demoen and Nguyen 2000) and the Mercury back-end of the HAL system. Finally, we detail the modifications required by our trailing analysis in order to be combined with our modified trailing scheme. The empirical evaluation of each technique indicates that the combination of the modified trailing scheme with the trailing analysis results in a significant reduction of trail size at a negligible time cost. The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides a quick background on trailing, the classic PARMA scheme, and when trailing can be avoided. Section 3 summarizes the information used by our analyzer to improve its accuracy. Section 4 presents the notrail analysis domain. Section 5 shows how to analyze 2  HAL’s body constructs. Section 6 shows how to use the analysis information to avoid trailing. Section 7 presents the modified trailing scheme. Section 8 shows the changes required by the analysis to deal with this modified scheme. Section 9 presents the results from the experimental evaluation of each technique. Finally, future work is discussed in Section 10. 2 Background We begin by setting some terminology. A bound variable is a variable that is bound to some nonvariable term. An aliased variable is unbound and equated with some other variable. A free variable is unbound and unaliased. We will also refer to a new variable, which is a variable in HAL (and Mercury) which has no run-time representation, since it is yet to be constrained. In the WAM, an unbound variable is represented by a linear chain. If the variable is free the chain has length one (a cell containing a self-reference). When two free variables are unified, the younger cell is made to point to the older cell (see Section 2.2 for a discussion of relative cell age). These two variables are now aliased. A series of unifications of free variables thus results in a linear chain of references of which the last one is a self-reference or, in case the variable becomes instantiated, a bound term. This representation implies that testing whether a (source level) variable is bound or unbound, requires dereferencing. Such dereferencing is necessary during each unification and it is thus performed quite often. Example 1 Consider the execution of the goal X = Y, Z = W, X = Z, X = a when each variable is initially represented by a self-reference. Using the WAM representation, the first unification points X at Y. The second unification points Z at W. In the third unification we must first dereference X to get Y, dereference Z to give W, and then point Y at W. In the last unification we dereference X and set W to a. The changes in heap states are shown in Figure 1.  X  Y  X  Y  X  Y  X  Y  X  Z  W  Z  W  Z  W  Z  W  Z  (a) Initially  (b) X = Y  (c) Z = W  (d) X = Z  Y a  W  (e) X = a  Fig. 1. Example of binding chains using the WAM representation. In his PARMA-system (Taylor 1996), Taylor introduced a different variable representation scheme that does not suffer from this dereferencing need. In this scheme an unbound variable is represented by a circular chain. If the variable is free the 3  chain has length one (a self-reference as in the WAM). Unifying two variables in this scheme consists of cutting their circular chains and combining them into one big circular chain. When the variable is bound, each cell in the circular chain is replaced by the value to which it is bound. No dereferencing is required to verify whether a cell is bound, because the tag in a cell immediately identifies the cell as being bound or not. However, as we will see later, other costs are incurred by the scheme. Example 2 Consider the execution of the same goal X = Y, Z = W, X = Z, X = a when again each variable is initially represented by a self-reference. Using the PARMA representation, the first unification points X at Y and Y at X. The second unification points Z at W and W at Z. In the third unification we must point X at W and Z at Y. In the final unification each variable in the chain of X is set to a. The changes in heap states are shown in Figure 2. Notice how no references remain in the final state, as opposed to Figure 1(e).  X  Y  X  Y  X  Y  X  Y  X  Z  W  Z  W  Z  W  Z  W  Z  (a) Initially  (b) X = Y  (c) Z = W  (d) X = Z  a  a  a  a  Y W  (e) X = a  Fig. 2. Example of binding chains using the PARMA representation. Another difference between the WAM and PARMA binding schemes becomes apparent when constructing a new term containing an unbound variable X. Effectively, we are aliasing a new variable with X and, hence, this new variable must be added into the variable chain of X. Example 3 Consider the execution of the goal X = Y, Z = f(X) when each variable is initially represented by a self-reference. Using the WAM representation, the first unification points X at Y. The second unification constructs a heap term f(X) with the content of X, namely Y, and points Z at this. Using the PARMA representation, the first unification chains X and Y together. The second unification has to add the copy of X in f(X), to the chain for X. The resulting heap states are shown in Figure 3. As mentioned before, trailing is a technique that stores enough information regarding the representation state of a variable before each choice-point, to be able to reconstruct such state upon backtracking. For both WAM and PARMA chains the 4  X  Y  X Z  Z  (a) X = Y  Y  X  f  Y  Z  (b) Z=f(X)  X Z  (c) X = Y  Y f  (d) Z=f(X)  Fig. 3. Example of constructing a term containing an unbound variable using both WAM (a)(b) and PARMA (c)(d) representations. change of representation state occurs at the cell level: from being a self-reference (when the variable represented by the cell – the associated variable – is unbound and unaliased), to pointing to another cell in the chain (when the associated variable gets aliased), to pointing to the final bound structure (when the variable is bound directly or indirectly). Thus, what needs to be trailed are the cells. In the rest of the section we will discuss the PARMA trailing scheme in greater detail, the orthogonal issue of conditional/unconditional trailing, and a possible improvement based on compile-time detection of unnecessary trailings. 2.1 The classic PARMA Scheme: Value trailing The classic PARMA trailing scheme uses value trailing, described by the following C-like code:1 valuetrail(p) { *(tr++) = *p; /* store the contents of the cell p */ *(tr++) = p; /* store the address of the cell p */ } which takes the address p of a cell in a PARMA chain and stores in the trail stack first the (old) contents of the cell and then its address. Here, tr is a global pointer to the top of the trail stack. The untrail operation for value trailing is straightforwardly defined by: untrail_valuetrail() { address = *(--tr); /* retrieve the cell address */ *address = *(--tr); /* recover the cell contents */ } which first pops the address of a cell and then its contents. In contrast, trailing in the WAM stores only the address of the cell. The reasons are twofold. First, a cell is updated at most once, from a self-reference to a pointer to 1  All code in this paper is pseudo-C code. Implementation details that obfuscate rather than clarify the concepts at hand, have been omitted.  5  either another cell in a linear chain or a structure. And second, for a self-referencing cell the address and the content of the cell are the same. Therefore, when a cell is updated the old content of the cell (which is the one stored during trailing) is always the same as its address. This allows the WAM value trailing to be optimized by only storing the address of the cell, reducing by half the space cost of a single cell trailing. Let us now discuss when cells need to be trailed in the classic PARMA scheme. We have seen before that trailing is only needed when the representation state of a variable changes, and that this can only happen when the variable is unbound and, due to a unification, it becomes either aliased or bound. Therefore, we only need to trail cells when their associated variables are involved in a unification or when creating a new term which contains an unbound variable. The following discussion distinguishes three cases: cells associated to variables involved in a variable–variable unification, in a variable–nonvariable unification, and in new term construction. Trailing during variable–variable unification: The result of aliasing two unbound variables belonging to separate chains is the merging of the two chains into a single one. This can be done by changing the state of only two cells: those associated to each of the variables. Since each associated cell appears in a different chain, the final chain can be formed by simply interchanging their respective successors. One can then reconstruct the previous situation by remembering which two cells have been changed and what their initial value was. This is achieved for unification X = Y by the following (simplified) code: valuetrail(X); valuetrail(Y); tmp = *X; *X = *Y; *Y = tmp; Notice that X and Y are trailed independently. As only their associated cells need to be trailed, we will refer to this kind of trailing as shallow trailing. In contrast, for this kind of unification the WAM will update and trail the last cell in just one of the two linear chains. Hence, the space cost is four times lower (one value as opposed to four). Example 4 Consider the PARMA trailing that occurs during the first three unifications of the goal X = Y, Z = W, X = Z, X = a from Example 2, when each variable is initially represented by a self-reference. From the first unification we trail X together with its initial value (which, since X is a self-reference, is also) X, and Y together with its initial value Y. Similarly, for the second unification we trail Z together with its value Z, and W together with its value W. For the third unification, we trail X together with its value Y, and Z together with its value W. The resulting trail is X  X  Y  Y  Z  Z  W 6  W  Y  X  W  Z  The WAM trail for the same goal illustrated in Figure 1 trails first X, then Z and finally Y. The resulting trail is X Z Y . Trailing during variable–nonvariable unification: When an unbound variable becomes bound, every single cell in its chain is set to point to the nonvariable term. Thus, we can only reconstruct the chain if all cells in the chain are trailed. The combined unification-trailing (simplified) code for unification X = Term is as follows: start = X; do { next = *X; valuetrail(X); *X = Term; X = next; } while (X != start); Since all cells in the chain of the unbound variable are trailed, we will refer to this kind of trailing as deep trailing. In contrast, for this kind of unification, the WAM will trail again just one cell in the linear chain. Hence, the space complexity for WAM is just O(1) compared to O(n) for PARMA, where n is the number of cells in the chain. However, the time complexity is O(n) for both, due to the dereferencing in the WAM. Example 5 Consider the PARMA trailing that happens in the last unification X = a of the goal from Example 2. The binding of all variables in the chain adds the trail elements W  X  X  Y  Y  Z  Z  W  In contrast the WAM trailing adds a single trail element Y . Trailing during new term construction: As mentioned before, when a new term is constructed on the heap with a copy of an unbound variable X, the cell containing this copy must be added into the chain for X. This means we must trail X since its value (i.e., its successor in the chain) is going to change. We do not need to trail the new cell since it clearly has no previous value we need to recover. The combined construction-trailing (simplified) code for constructing f(X) where X is an unbound variable and th is the current top of heap pointer, is: *(++th) = *X; valuetrail(X); *X = th; In contrast, for this construction the WAM need not trail at all since it simply points the new cell at the old unbound variable. If X is either a bound or a new variable, this complexity does not arise: X will be placed in the new structure pointing to either the nonvariable term or to itself, with no trailing required in any case. 7  Summary: The major advantage of the PARMA binding scheme is that it requires no dereferencing, while its major disadvantages are (for a detailed account see (Lindgren et al. 1995)): 1. PARMA trails more cells per unification: two in variable-variable unifications and all in variable-nonvariable, versus one. 2. Trailing of an individual cell is more expensive: two slots used versus one. 3. Unlike in the WAM, cells can be trailed more than once: every time a cell is updated which can happen more than once. 4. Copying an unbound variable into a structure involves trailing a cell. As a result, the trail stack usage is expected to be much higher in the PARMA scheme than in the WAM. Demoen and Nguyen (Demoen and Nguyen 2000) have indeed observed in the dProlog system maximal trail sizes for the PARMA scheme that are on average twice as large as with the WAM scheme. The techniques we present in this paper attempt to counter the disadvantages. The trailing analysis reduces the number of trailings and thereby counters disadvantages 1, 3 and 4, while the modified trailing scheme counters disadvantage 2. 2.2 Conditional versus unconditional trailing A cell that is changed only requires trailing if the cell did exist before the most recent choice point since, otherwise, there is no previous state that has to be restored during backtracking. This property applies equally to the WAM and PARMA schemes. In some systems a simple run-time test can be used to verify whether a cell is older than the most recent choice point. Younger cells require no trailing. If all cells on the heap are kept in order of allocation, the test simply checks whether the address of the cell is smaller than that of bh, the address of the top of the heap at the beginning of the most recent choice point. Systems, such as dProlog, which take advantage of this property use what is known as conditional trailing. Let us assume the existence of function is older(p,bh) which succeeds if p < bh. Conditional trailing is then described by the following code: cond_valuetrail(p, bh) { if (is_older(p,bh)) valuetrail(p); } thus avoiding the trailing of cells which are newer than the most recent choice point. The code for variable–variable and variable–nonvariable unification described in the previous sections using the unconditional valuetrail operation can be rewritten to use conditional trailing by simply substituting each call to valuetrail by a call to cond valuetrail. The untrail operation remains unchanged. In systems where the order of cells on the heap is not guaranteed, unconditional trailing is required. The Mercury back-end of the HAL system, for example, is such a system since Mercury uses the Boehm garbage collector which does not 8  preserve the order of the cells on the heap between garbage collections. Other systems use unconditional trailing at least during some unifications (see for instance (Van Roy and Despain 1992)). In (Demoen and Nguyen 2000) it is shown that global performance is hardly affected by the choice between conditional or unconditional trailing, since the savings made on avoided trailings are balanced by the overhead of the run-time tests. The differences between conditional and unconditional trailing do not affect the proposed analysis. Thus, the same analysis can still be used if at some point conditional trailing becomes available in Mercury. 2.3 Unnecessary trailing in the classic PARMA scheme: When considering the trailing of an unbound variable appearing in a unification, there are at least two cases in which its trailing can be avoided: • If the variable is new there is no previous value to remember and, therefore, trailing is not required. This is in fact a subset of the cases exploited by conditional trailing. • The cells that need to be trailed (the associated cell in the case of variable– variable, all cells in the case of variable–nonvariable) have already been trailed since the most recent choice-point. Upon backtracking only the earliest trailing after the choice-point is important, since that is the one which enables the reconstruction of the state of the variable before the choice-point. In the following sections we will see how compile-time analysis information can be obtained to detect the above two cases and can therefore be used to (a) eliminate unnecessary trailing in the classical PARMA trailing scheme, and (b) eliminate runtime tests performed by conditional trailing on variables known at compile-time to have no representation and thus be younger than the most recent choice point. 3 Language Requirements The analysis presented in this paper was designed for the HAL language. However, it can be useful for any language that uses PARMA representation and that provides accurate information regarding the following properties: • Instantiation state: trailing analysis can gain accuracy by taking into account the instantiation state of a program variable, i.e. whether the variable is new, ground or old. State new corresponds to program variables with no internal representation (equivalent to Mercury’s free instantiation). State ground corresponds to program variables known to be bound to ground terms. In any other case the state is old, corresponding to program variables which might be unbound but do have a representation (a chain of length one or more) or bound to a term not known to be ground. Program variables with instantiation state new, ground or old will be called new, ground or old variables, respectively. Note that once a new variable becomes old or ground, it can never 9  become new again. And once it is known to be ground, it remains ground. Thus, the three states can be considered mutually exclusive. The information should be available at each program point p as a table associating with each variable in scope of p its instantiation state. We will represent the instantiation table information at program point p as follows. Let V arp denote the set of all program variables in scope at program point p. The function instp : V arp → {new, ground, old} defines the instantiation state of program variable X at point p. This function allows us to partition V arp into three disjoint sets: N ewp , Groundp and Oldp containing the set of new, ground and old variables, respectively. • Determinism: trailing analysis can also gain accuracy from the knowledge that particular predicates have at most one solution. This information should be available as a table associating with each predicate (procedure to be more precise) its determinism. Herein we will refer to six main kinds of determinism: semidet (minimum-maximum set of solutions: 0-1), det (1-1), multi (1-∞), nondet (0-∞), erroneous (1,0), and failure (0-0). For our purposes we will only be interested in whether a predicate can return more than one answer. We will represent the determinism table by a function det : P red → {0, 1, ∞} which maps each predicate q to its maximum number of solutions. • Sharing: trailing analysis can exploit sharing information to increase accuracy. This information should be available at each program point p as a table associating with each variable in scope of p the set of variables which possibly share with it. Clearly, any variables that may be aliased together must possibly share. We will represent the sharing table at program point p by the function sharep : Oldp → P(Oldp ) which assigns to each program variable in Oldp the set of program variables in Oldp that share with it. Note that program variables in N ewp and Groundp cannot share by definition.  4 The notrail Analysis Domain The aim of the notrail domain is to keep enough information to be able to decide whether the run-time variables in a unification need to be trailed or not, so that if possible, optimized versions which do not perform the trailing can be used instead. In order to do this, we must remember that only run-time variables which are unbound and have a representation (i.e., are not new) need to be trailed. This suggests making use of the instantiation information mentioned in the previous section. Note that, since the analysis works on the level of program variables, some indirection will be required. We have already established that program variables in N ewp and Groundp represent run-time variables which do not need to be trailed. Thus, only variables in Oldp need to be represented in the notrail domain. the set of new, ground and old program variables, respectively. Assuming that V arp contains n variables and 10  the tree we have used to implement the underlying table is sufficiently balanced, then, the size of the Oldp is O(n) and the complexity of instp is O(log n). Recall that Oldp contains all program variables representing not only run-time variables which are unbound and have a representation, but also run-time variables bound to terms which the analysis cannot ensure to be ground. This is necessary to ensure correctness: even though run-time variables which are bound do not need to be trailed, the nonvariable terms to which they are bound might contain one or more unbound run-time variables. It is the trailing state of these unbound runtime variables that is represented through the domain representation of the bound program variable. Now that we have decided which program variables need to be represented by our domain, we have to decide how to represent them. We saw before that it is unnecessary to trail a run-time variable in a variable–variable unification if its associated cell has already been trailed, i.e., if the run-time variable has already been shallow trailed since the most recent choice-point. For the case of variable– nonvariable unification this is not enough, we need to ensure all cells in the chain have already been trailed, i.e, the run-time variable has already been deep trailed. This suggests a domain which distinguishes between shallow and deep trailed runtime variables. This can be easily done by partitioning Oldp into three disjoint sets of program variables with a different trailing state: those representing runtime variables which might not have been trailed yet, those representing run-time variables which have at least been shallow trailed, and those representing run-time variables which have been deep trailed. It is sufficient to keep track of only two sets to be able to reconstruct the third. Hence, the type of the elements of our notrail domain Lnotrail will be P(Oldp ) × P(Oldp ), where the first component contains the set of program variables representing run-time variables which have already been shallow trailed, and the second component contains the set of program variables representing run-time variables which have already been deep trailed. In the following we will use l1 , l2 , . . . to denote elements of Lnotrail at program points 1, 2, . . ., and s1 , s2 , . . . and d1 , d2 , . . . for the already shallow and deep trailed components of the corresponding elements. Also, the elements of the domain will be referred to as descriptions, with descriptions before and after a goal being referred to as the pre- and post-descriptions, respectively. Note that, by definition, we can state that if a run-time variable has already been deep trailed, then it has also been shallow trailed (i.e., if all cells in the chain have already been trailed, then the cell associated to the variable has also been trailed). The partial ordering relation ⊑ on Lnotrail is thus defined as follows: ∀(s1p , d1p ), (s2p , d2p )  ∈ Lnotrail :  (s1p , d1p )  ⊑  (s2p , d2p )  ⇔    s2p d2p  ⊆ ⊆  d1p d1p  ∪  s1p  This implies that deep trailing is stronger information than shallow trailing, and shallow trailing is stronger than no trailing at all. Also note that descriptions are compared at the same program point only (so that the instantiation and sharing information is identical). An example of a trailing lattice is shown in Fig. 4. Clearly 11  (∅, ∅) SS SSSS kk kkkk ({Y }, ∅) ({X}, ∅) SSSS RRRR kkkk llll (∅, {Y }) ({X, Y }, ∅) (∅, {X}) RRRR SSSS kkkk llll ({Y }, {X})  ({X}, {Y })  SSSS  kkkk  (∅, {X, Y })  Fig. 4. Notrail lattice Hasse diagram for variables {X, Y } where if l1 ⊑ l2 then l1 is below l2 in the diagram (Lnotrail , ⊑) is a complete lattice with top description ⊤p = (∅, ∅) and bottom description ⊥p = (∅, Oldp ). There are two important points that need to be taken into account when considering the above domain. The first point is that the dp component of a description will be used not only to represent already deep trailed variables but any variable in Oldp which, for whatever reason (e.g., it has been initialized since the last choicepoint), does not need to have any part of it trailed The second point is that as soon as a deeply trailed program variable X is made to share with a shallow trailed program variable Y , X also must become shallow trailed since some cell in some newly merged chain might come from Y and thus might not have been trailed. The sharing information at each program point is used to define the following function which makes trailing information consistent with its associated sharing information: consistp ((s, d)) = (s ∪ x, d \ x) where x = {X ∈ d|(sharep (X) \ d) 6= ∅} Intuitively, the function eliminates from d every program variable X which shares with other variables not in d, and adds them to s. From now on we will assume that ∀(s, d) ∈ Lnotrail : consistp ((s, d)) = (s, d) and use the consist function to preserve this property.2 Given HAL’s implementation of the sharing analysis domain ASub (Søndergaard 1986) the time complexity of determining sharep (X) for a variable X is O(n2 ). Furthermore, since ASub explicitly carries the set of ground variables at each program point (gp ), we will use this set rather than computing a new one (Groundp ) from the instantiation information, thus increasing efficiency. The major cost of consistp is the computation of x: for each of the O(n) variables the sharep set has to be computed. All other set operations are negligible in comparison. Hence, the overall time complexity is O(n3 ). We will see that the complexity of this function determines the 2  Note that the notrail domain can be seen as a “product domain” that also includes the mode and sharing information. However, for simplicity, we will consider the different elements separately, relating them only via their associated program point.  12  complexity of all the operations that use it. Thus, we will use it only when strictly necessary. In summary, each element lp = (sp , dp ) in our domain can be interpreted as follows. Consider a program variable X. If X ∈ dp , this means that all cells in all chains represented by X have already been trailed (if needed). Therefore, X does not need to be trailed in any unification for which lp is a pre-description. Note that X could be a bound variable which includes many different variable chains. If X ∈ sp we have two possibilities. If X is known to be unbound, then its associated cell has been shallow trailed. Therefore, it does not need to be trailed in any unification for which lp is a pre-description (although, in practice, we will only consider optimizing variable-variable unifications). If X might be bound, then a cell of one of its chains might not be trailed. As a result, no optimization can be performed in this case. We could, of course, represent bound variables more accurately, by requiring the domain to keep track of the different chains contained in the structures to which the program variables are bound, their individual trailing state and how these are affected by the different program constructs. Known techniques (see for instance (Janssens and Bruynooghe 1993; Van Hentenryck et al. 1995; Mulkers et al. 1994; Lagoon and Stuckey 2001)) based on type information could be used to keep track of the constructor that a variable is bound to and of the trailing state of the different arguments, thereby making this approach possible. 5 Analyzing HAL Body Constructs with Lnotrail This section defines the notrail operations required by HAL’s analysis framework (Bueno et al. 2001; Nethercote 2001) to analyze the different body constructs. This framework is quite similar to the well known framework of (Bruynooghe 1991) when analyzing a single module. While the analysis framework handles analysis of multiple module programs, it makes no extra demands on the analysis domain. Thus, for this paper we will simply treat the program to be analyzed as a single module. For each body construct in HAL, we will show how to obtain the postdescription from the information contained in the pre-description. Variable initialization init(X) In HAL a variable X transits from its initial instantiation new to instantiation old by being initialized. Since a new variable does not need to be trailed, we can simply add X to the d component of the pre-description (recall that d not only represents already deep trailed variables, but also any other old variable which does not need to be trailed). Formally, let l1 = (s1 , d1 ) be the pre-description, the post-description l2 can be obtained as: l2 = (s1 , d1 ∪ {X}) Variable–variable unification: X = Y . There are several cases to consider: • If one of the variables (say X) is new, it will simply be assigned a copy of 13  • •  •  •  the pointer of Y . After the unification is performed, the trailing state of X becomes that of Y . Thus, the trailing state of X in the post-description should be that of Y in the pre-description. Note that this will never require a call to consist since a new variable cannot introduce any sharing. If one of the variables is ground, the other one will be ground after the unification. Hence, neither of them will appear in the post-description. If both variables are deep trailed, all cells in their associated chains are trailed and will remain trailed after unification (which is obtained by simply merging the chains). Hence, all variables retain their current trailing state and the pre-description will remain unchanged. If both variables are already aliased (they belong to the same chain) nothing is done by unification. Hence, they will retain the current trailing state. Hence, all variables retain their current trailing state and the pre-description will remain unchanged. Otherwise, at least one of the variables is not deep trailed and two unaliased variables are being considered. If both variables are unbound, unification will merge both chains while at the same time performing shallow trailing if necessary. Thus, after the unification both variables will be shallow trailed. If at least one variable is bound, the other one will become bound after the unification. As stated earlier, bound variables can be treated in the same way. Note that if either variable was deep trailed before the unification, all shared variables must become shallow trailed as well after the unification. This requires applying the consist function.  Formally, let l1 = (s1 , d1 ) be the pre-description and g2 be the set of ground variables at program point 2 after the unification. Its post-description l2 can be obtained as:  same(X, Y, l1 ) X is new    remove ground(l1 , g2 ) X is ground l2 = unify(X, Y ) =  min(X, Y, l1 ) X and Y are old   unify(Y, X) otherwise with    (s1 ∪ {X}, d1 ) Y ∈ s1 same(X, Y, (s1 , d1 )) = (s , d ∪ {X}) Y ∈ d1  1 1 (s1 , d1 ) otherwise remove ground(li , vi ) = (si \ vi , di \ vi )  {X, Y } ⊆ d1  (s1 , d1 ) min(X, Y, (s1 , d1 )) = consist2 ((s1 ∪ {X, Y }, d1 \ {X, Y })) X 6∈ share1 (Y )  (s1 , d1 ) otherwise  Here same(X, Y, li ) gives X the same trailing state as Y , remove ground(li , vi ) removes all variables in vi from li , and min(X, Y, li ) distinguished between three cases. If X and Y are both deep trailed, nothing has to be changed. If X and Y are definitely not aliased (they do not share) it ensures that they move to a shallow 14  X f/1  X f/1  (a) Before.  (b) After.  Fig. 5. Term construction example: f (X). The dashed line represents a choicepoint. trailed state. Otherwise, the description must remain unchanged since unification might have done nothing (and thus they might still be untrailed, so adding them to s1 would be a mistake). Note that there is no need to apply consist here since X and Y already share in the pre-description and, although sharing information might have changed, it can only create sharing among variables already connected (through X and Y ) by the closure under union performed by consist. The worst case time complexity, O(n3 ), is again due to consist. Variable–term unification: Y = f (X1 , . . . , Xn ). There are two cases to consider: If Y is new, the unification simply constructs the term in Y . Otherwise, we can treat this for the purpose of the analysis as two unifications, Y ′ = f (X1 , . . . , Xn ), Y = Y ′ where Y ′ is a new variable. Since unifications of the form Y ′ = Y have been discussed above, here we only focus on the construction into a new variable. In the following we assume that the Y in the variable-term unification is new. When a term, e.g. f (X), is constructed with X being represented by a PARMA chain, the argument cell in the structure representation of f /1 is inserted in the chain of X (see Fig.5). While X requires shallow trailing, the cell of the term requires no trailing at all as it is newly created. The generalization of this to an n-ary variable term unification is as follows. If all arguments are deep trailed, then Y becomes deep trailed and the arguments remain deep trailed. Otherwise, Y and all its arguments become shallow trailed (since each argument is at least shallow trailed by the operation). Note that if at least one argument was deep trailed, and since each argument shares with Y after the unification, we must apply consist to maintain the information consistent. Formally, let l1 = (s1 , d1 ) be the pre-description of the unification, x be the set of variables {X1 , . . . , Xn } and g2 the set of ground variables after the unification. Its post-description l2 can be obtained as:  (s1 , d1 ∪ {Y }) x ⊆ d1 l2 = consist2 (remove ground((s1 ∪ x ∪ {Y }, d1 \ x), g2 )) otherwise The worst case time complexity is O(n3 ). This definition can be combined with the previous one for the overall definition of variable–term unification. The implementation can be more efficient, but the complexity will still be O(n3 ). 15  Predicate call: q(X1 . . . Xn ). Let l1 be the pre-description of the predicate call and x the set of variables {X1 , . . . , Xn }. The first step will be to project l1 onto x resulting in description lproj . Note that onto-projection is trivially defined as: onto proj(l, v) = (s ∩ v, d ∩ v) The second step consists in extending lproj onto the set of variables local to the predicate call. Since these variables are known to be new (and thus they do not appear in Old1 ), the extension operation in our domain is trivially defined as the identity. Thus, from now on we will simply disregard the extension steps required by HAL’s framework. Let lanswer be the answer description resulting from analyzing the predicate’s definition for calling description lproj . We will assume that the set v of variables local to q/n has already been projected out from lanswer , where out-projection is identical to remove ground, which has time complexity O(n). In order to obtain the post-description, we will make use of the determinism information. Thus, the post-description l2 can be derived by combining the lanswer and l1 , using the determinism of the predicate call as follows: • If the predicate has determinism multi or nondet (which can have more than one answer), then all variables not in x become not trailed by the (possible) introduction of a new choice point. Hence, l2 is equal to lanswer except for the fact that we have to apply the consist function in order to take into account the changes in sharing involving variables not in x. • Otherwise, we know the trailing state of variables in l1 is unchanged except by possibly new introduced sharing. Thus, l2 is the result of combining lanswer and l1 as follows: the trailing state of variables in x is taken from lanswer , while that of other variables is taken from l1 . Any deep trailed variables that share with non-deep trailed variables must, of course, become shallow trailed. Formalized, the combination3 function is defined as: l2  = =  comb(l1 , lanswer )  consist2 (((s1 \ x) ∪ sanswer , (d1 \ x) ∪ danswer )) consist2 (lanswer )  det(q) ≤ 1 otherwise  Obviously, the complexity is O(n3 ) because of consist. Example 6 Assume that the call q(X) has pre-description ({X, Y }, ∅) and the predicate q/1 has answer description ({X}, ∅). The post-description of the call depends on the determinism of the predicate. If the predicate q/1 has at most one solution, the postdescription will be (({X, Y } \ {X}) ∪ {X}, (∅ \ {X}) ∪ ∅) = ({X, Y }, ∅). Otherwise the post-description will be equal to the answer description, ({X}, ∅). 3  Note that the combination is not the meet of the two descriptions. It is the “specialized combination” introduced in (de la Banda et al. 1998) which assumes that lanswer contains the most accurate information about the variables in x, the role of the combination being just to propagate this information to the rest of variables in the clause.  16  Disjunction: (G1 ; G2 ; . . . ; Gn ). Disjunction is the reason why trailing becomes necessary. As mentioned before, trailing might be needed for all variables which were already old before the disjunction. Thus, let l0 be the pre-description of the entire disjunction. Then, ⊤ will be the pre-description of each Gi except for Gn whose pre-description is simply l0 (since the disjunction implies no backtracking over the last branch). Let li = (si , di ), 1 ≤ i ≤ n be the post-description of goal Gi . We will again assume that the set vi of variables local to each Gi has already been projected out from li . The end result ln+1 of the disjunction is the least upper bound (lub) of all branches,4 which is defined as: l1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ ln = consistn+1 (remove ground((s, d), gn+1 )) where s d s′i d′i  = = = =  (s′1 ∩ . . . ∩ s′n ) \ d (d′1 ∩ . . . ∩ d′n ) si ∪ d′i di ∪ gi  Intuitively, all variables which are deep trailed in all descriptions are ensured to remain deep trailed; all variables which are trailed in all descriptions but have not always been deep trailed (i.e., are not in d) are ensured to have already been (at least) shallow trailed. Note that variables which are known to be ground in all descriptions (those in gn+1 ) are eliminated. This is consistent with the view that only old variables are represented by the descriptions and avoids adding overhead to the abstract operations. HAL also includes switches, which are disjunctions where the compiler has detected that only one branch needs to be executed. Switches are treated identically to disjunctions except for the fact that the pre-description for each Gi is l0 rather than ⊤. Example 7 Let l0 = (∅, {X, Y, Z}) be the pre-description of the code fragment: ( A = a, X = Y ; A = b, X = f(Y, Z) ) Let us assume there is no sharing at that program point. Assuming that A is old, then this is simply a disjunction. Then, the pre-descriptions of the first branch is (∅, ∅), the ⊤ element of our domain. The pre-description of the second branch is (∅, {X, Y, Z}), i.e., since this is the last branch in the disjunction, its pre-description is identical to the pre-description of the entire disjunction. Their post-descriptions are ({X, Y }, ∅) and (∅, {X, Y, Z}), respectively. Finally, the lub of the two postdescriptions results in ({X, Y }, ∅). Now assume A is ground. Then this code fragment is a switch on A. The predescription for the first branch becomes (∅, {X, Y, Z}) and the post description 4  Note that this is not the lub of the notrail domain alone, but that of the product domain which includes sharing (and groundness) information.  17  is the same. Finally the lub of the two post-descriptions for the two branches is (∅, {X, Y, Z}). The time complexity of the joining of the branches is simply that of the lub operator (O(n3 )) for a fixed maximum number of branches, and it is completely dominated by the consistn+1 function. If-then-else: I → T ; E . Although the if-then-else could be treated as (I, T ; E), this is rather inaccurate since (as in the case of switches) only one branch will ever be executed and, thus, there is no backtracking between the two branches. Hence, we can do better if no old variable that exists before the if-then-else is bound or aliased, i.e. possibly requiring trailing and backtracking if the condition fails. This is not a harsh restriction, since it is ensured whenever the if-condition is used in a logical way, i.e., it simply inspects existing variables and does not change any non-local variable. However, in general it is not possible to statically determine this property. Instead a safe approximation is used: the if-then-else is treated as (I, T ; E) if the condition contains any pre-existing old variables, otherwise the following stronger treatment is used. Let l1 be the pre-description to the if-then-else. Then l1 will also be the predescription to both I and E. Let lI be the post-description obtained for I. Then lI will also be the pre-description of T . Finally, let lT and lE be the post-descriptions obtained for T and E, respectively. Then, the post-description for the if-then-else can be obtained as the lub lT ⊔ lE . The time complexity of the joining of the branches is again O(n3 ), just like the operation over the disjunction. Example 8 Let l0 = (∅, ∅) be the pre-description of the following if-then-else where N is known to be ground: ( N = 1 -> X = Y  ; X = f(Y, Z) )  Assume no variables share before the if-then-else. Then, l0 is equal to the predescription of both the thenand else-branch. The post-description of the then-branch is ({X, Y }, ∅) and that of the else-branch is ({X, Y, Z}, ∅). The post-description finally is obtained as their lub: ({X, Y }, ∅). If the pre-description was l0 = (∅, {X, Y, Z}) as in Example 7, then the postdescription would be (∅, {X, Y, Z}), since no additional trailing will be required. Higher-order term construction: Y = p(X1 , . . . , Xn ). This involves the creation of a partially evaluated predicate, i.e., we are assuming there is a predicate with name p and arity equal or higher than n for which the higher-order construct Y is being created. In HAL, Y is required to be new. Also, it is often too difficult or even impossible to know whether Y will be actually called or not and, if so, where. Thus, HAL follows a conservative approach and requires that the instantiation of the “captured” arguments (i.e., X1 , . . . , Xn ) remain unchanged after calling Y . It 18  also guarantees (through type and mode checking) that no higher-order terms are ever unified. The above requirements allow us to follow a simple (although conservative) approach: Only after a call to Y will the trailing of the captured variables be affected. If the call to Y might have more than one solution and thus may involve backtracking, then the involved variables will be treated safely in the analysis at the call location if they are still statically live there. If the call to Y does not involve backtracking but does involve unifications, then trailing information might not be inferred correctly at the call location. This is because the captured variables are generally not known at the call location. To keep the trailing information safe, any potential unifications have to be accounted for in the higher-order unification. Since the construction of the higher-order term involves no backtracking and all unifications leave the variables they involve at least shallow trailed, it is sufficient to demote all captured deep trailed variables to shallow trailed status, together with all sharing deep trailed variables. Formally, let l1 = (s1 , d1 ) be the pre-description of the higher-order term construction and x be the set of variables {X1 , . . . , Xn }. Then its post-description l2 can be obtained with a time complexity of O(n3 ) as:  consist2 ((s1 ∪ (x ∩ d1 ), d1 \ x)) x ∩ d1 6= ∅ l2 = l1 otherwise Higher-order call: call(P, X1 , . . . , Xn ). The exact impact of a higher-order call is difficult to determine in general. Fortunately, even if the exact predicate associated to variable P is unknown, the HAL compiler still knows its determinism. This can help us improve accuracy. If the predicate might have more than one solution, all variables must become not trailed. Since the called predicate is typically unknown, no answer description is available to improve accuracy. Otherwise, the worst that can happen is that the deep trailed arguments of the call become shallow trailed. So in the post-description we move all deep trailed arguments to the set of shallow trailed variables, together with all variables they share with. Recall that for this case the captured variables have already been taken care of when constructing the higher-order term. The sequence of steps is much the same as that for the predicate call. First, we project the pre-description l1 onto the set x of variables {X1 , . . . , Xn }, resulting in lproj . Next, the answer description lanswer of the higher-order call is computed as indicated above:  (s ∪ d, ∅) det(P ) ≤ 1 lanswer = (∅, ∅) otherwise The combination of lanswer and l1 is computed to obtain the post-description l2 .  6 Trailing Optimization The optimization phase consists of deciding for each unification in the body of a clause which variables need to be trailed. This decision is based on the pre19  description of the unification, inferred by the trailing analysis. If some variables do not need to be trailed, the general unification predicate is replaced with a variant that does not trail those particular variables. Thus, we will need a different variant for each possible combination of variables that do and do not need to be trailed. • For the unification of two unbound variables, trailing is omitted for either variable if it is shallow trailed or deep trailed in the pre-description. • For the binding of an unbound variable X, trailing of X is omitted if it is deep trailed in the pre-description. • In the construction of a term containing an old unbound variable X, trailing of X is omitted if X is either shallow or deep trailed in the pre-description. • For the unification of two bound variables, the trailing for chains in the structure of either is omitted if it is deep trailed in the pre-description. Often it is not known at compile time whether a variable is bound or not, so a general variable-variable unification predicate is required that performs run-time boundness tests before selecting the appropriate kind of unification. Various optimized variants of this general predicate are needed as well. Experimental results for the analysis are presented in Section 9. 7 The improved trailing scheme Let us now present a trailing scheme which is more sophisticated than the classic PARMA value trailing discussed in Section 2. We will start by considering the improvements that apply to each kind of unification (variable–variable and variable– nonvariable) and finish by showing how to combine them. Our modified scheme must be able to apply different untrail operations depending on the kinds of trailing that was performed. A simple tagging scheme (explained in detail in Section 7.3) is used to indicate the kind of untrailing required in each case. 7.1 Variable–variable unification: swap trailing In the classic scheme the value trailing of both cells takes up four trail stack slots (two for the addresses of each variable plus another two for their contents) when trailing is unconditional. Undoing such variable–variable unification consists of simply restoring the old values of the cells separately. However, there is a more economic inverse operation that undoes the swapping that happened during unification: simply swapping back. This swapping only requires the addresses of the involved cells and not their respective old contents. We introduce a new kind of trailing named swap trailing which exploits this and also the corresponding untrailing operation. Swap trailing is defined by the following code: swaptrail(p, q) { *(tr++) = p; *(tr++) = set_tag(q,SWAP_TRAIL); } 20  where p and q are the addresses of the two cells, tr is a pointer to the top of the trailing stack, SWAP TRAIL is a tag, and the function set tag(c,t) tags cell c with tag t. Note that swap trailing only consumes two slots in the trail stack, as opposed to the four used by (unconditional) value trailing in the classical scheme. The untrail operation for swap trailing is: untrail_swaptrail() { q = untag(*(--tr)); /* recover address q */ p = *(--tr); /* recover address p */ tmp = *q; *q = *p; /* swap contents of p with q */ *p = tmp; } The above improvement assumes that both cells are unconditionally trailed. If conditional value trailing is available, the classic scheme would either consume zero, two or four slots if respectively none, only one or both variables are older than the most recent choice point. Swap trailing can only be used in conjunction with conditional trailing to replace the four slot case, with value trailing still needed for the two slot case. As a result the code for conditional variable–variable trailing looks like: cond_varvartrail(p, q, bh) { if (is_older(p,bh)) { if (is_older(q,bh)) { swaptrail(p,q); /* trail both using swaptrail */ } else { valuetrail(p); /* only trail p */ } } else if (is_older(q,bh)) { valuetrail(q); /* only trail q */ } } It is important to note that the potential gain in space on the trail obtained by the above operations comes at a cost in execution time (more run-time operations are needed) and that the gain in space is not guaranteed. 7.2 Variable–nonvariable unification: chain trailing As seen before, variable-nonvariable unification pulls the entire chain of the variable apart by setting every cell in the chain to the nonvariable. In the case of classic value trailing, every address of a cell is stored twice: once as the address of a cell and once as the contents of the predecessor cell. This means that there is quite some redundancy. The obvious improvement is to store each address only once. We name this chain trailing. Because the length of the chain is not known, a marker is needed to indicate, for the untrailing operation, where chain trailing ends. The last 21  entry of the chain encountered during untrailing, is the first one actually trailed. We use the CHAIN END tag to mark this entry. The last address put on the trail is tagged with CHAIN BEGIN to indicate the kind of trailing. For chains of length one, the last and first cell coincide. The CHAIN END tag is used to mark this single address. Chain trailing is defined by the code: chaintrail(p) { start = p; *(tr++) = set_tag(p,CHAIN_END); p = *p; only_one = TRUE; while (p != start) { /*trail each cell address*/ only_one = FALSE; *(tr++) = p; p = *p; } if (!only_one) { /* if more than one cell */ last = tr - 1; /* tag last one as CHAIN_BEGIN*/ *last = set_tag(*last,CHAIN_BEGIN); } } The untrail operation for reconstructing the chain is straightforward: it dispatches to the appropriate untrailing action depending on the tag of the first cell encountered during untrailing. If this is CHAIN BEGIN, meaning n ≥ 1, the corresponding code is: untrail_chaintrail() { head = untag(*(--tr)); previous = head; current = *(--tr); while (get_tag(current) != CHAIN_END) { *current = previous; previous = current; current = *(--tr); } current = untag(current); *current = previous; *head = current; } If the first tag is CHAIN END, then n = 1 and the code for untrailing is: untrail_shortchain() { cell = untag(*(--tr)); *cell = cell; } 22  Example 9 Consider the trailing that occurs using the improved scheme for the goal X = Y, Z = W, X = Z, X = a from Example 4. The first unification is a swaptrail, trailing X and Y, similarly the second unification swaptrails Z and W and the third unification swap trails X and Z. Finally the last unification chain trails X. The resulting trail looks like: X  Y  sw  Z  W  sw  X  Z  sw  X  ce  W  Z  Y  cb  where we use superscripts sw, cb and ce to represent the SWAP TRAIL, CHAIN BEGIN and CHAIN END tags respectively. This uses 10 trail entries compared to the 24 entries in Examples 4 and 5 The above improvement assumes that all cells are unconditionally trailed. Let us assume that the chain consists of n cells, k of which are older than the most recent choice point. If conditional trailing is available and 2 ∗ k < n, our unconditional chain trailing will consume more space than the classic conditional value trailing. Fortunately, a conditional variant of chain trailing is also possible: cond_chaintrail(p, bh) { start = p; first = TRUE; only_one = TRUE; do { if (is_older(p,bh)) /* trail each older cell in chain*/ if (first) { *(tr++) = set_tag(p,CHAIN_END); /*tag if first*/ first = FALSE; } else { only_one = FALSE; *(tr++) = p; } p = *p; } while (p != start); if (!only_one) { /* if more than one older cell */ last = tr - 1; /* tag last one as CHAIN_BEGIN*/ *last = set_tag(*last,CHAIN_BEGIN); } } This conditional variant uses only k slots of the stack trail, so it is clearly an improvement over conditional value trailing whenever k > 0. Note that the untrail operation used is the same as for the unconditional chain trailing. This might look wrong at first since the cond chaintrail might not trail all cells in the chain. However, this is simply exploiting the fact that the objective of trailing is to be able to reconstruct the bindings that existed at the creation time of a choice point. Thus, the final state of younger cells and the state of any cell 23  during the intermediate steps of untrailing are irrelevant. In fact, the more general – and better with respect to stack trail consumption – principle behind this is that only the old cells (older than the most recent choice point) in the chain pointing to other old cells have to be trailed (an old cell must have been made to point to a new cell after the last choice-point). The kind of trailing suitable for this insight is a special kind of value trailing, where the successive equal slots on the trail stack are overlapped. The above cond chaintrail operation only approximates this, since an implementation would incur an undue time overhead because of the extra runtime tests needed to test the age of the successors. Thus, we store the addresses of old cells even if they neither point to nor are pointed to by old cells. Example 10 Figure 6 illustrates with a small example how the above specified conditional chain trailing, together with previous trailings, safely restores the state of all variables older than the most recent choice point. Consider the following goal X = Z, Z = Y, X = a, fail and let us assume that both X and Y are older than the most recent choice point, Z is newer, and all three are chains of length 1 as depicted in Figure 6(a). The successive forward steps are shown in the Figures 6(b), 6(c) and 6(d). X is value trailed during X = Z, as is Y during Z = Y. The addresses of X and Y are stored on the trail stack with conditional chain trailing during X = a5 . The cb and ce to the side of the stack trail entries represent the CHAIN BEGIN and CHAIN END tags respectively. The execution fails immediately after X = a, and backtracks to the initial state in three steps. First (Figure 6(e)), the conditional chain trailing is untrailed, creating a chain of X and Y. Next (Figure 6(f)), the value trailing of Y is undone and finally (Figure 6(g)), the value trailing of X is reversed too. The final state corresponds to the initial state, except for Z, which is still bound to a. However, as Z did not exist before the most recent choice point, its content is irrelevant at that point because it is inaccessible and will be reclaimed from the heap anyway when forward execution resumes. Note the illegal intermediate state illustrated in Figure 6(f) is not important since it only occurs in the middle of untrailing, and never during execution.  7.3 Combining the improvements Let us first consider the combination in the context of the modified unconditional trailing scheme of the Mercury back-end of HAL. In this context, in addition to swap and unconditional chain trailing, function trailing is used to allow custom trailings for constraint solvers. Function trailing stores a pointer to an untrailing function and to untrailing data. Thus, we need four different tags to distinguish the different trailing information that can appear on the trail. Fortunately, there are two tag bits available (because of the aligned addressing for 32 bit machines). There is one constraint on the allocation of the four different tags to the kinds of 5  This could be avoided if X is known to have been trailed already.  24  X  Y  X  Z  Y  X X X  Z  (a) Initially  X Z  a  Y Y X X  (e) Untrail X = a  Y Z  (b) X = Z  Y  X  Y a  (f) Untrail Z = Y  a  Y  a  Y X Y Y X X  cb ce  (d) X = a  X X X  a Z  (c) Z = Y  X Z  Y Y X X  Y Z  a  (g) Untrail X = Z  Fig. 6. Conditional chain trailing example. trailing: the CHAIN END tag should not look the same as the tag of the intermediate addresses in a chain trail. The general untrail operation then simply looks like: untrail(tr_cp) { while (tr > tr_cp) { switch (get_tag(*tr)) { case FUNCTION_TRAIL: untrail_functiontrail(); break; case SWAP_TRAIL: untrail_swaptrail(); break; case CHAIN_BEGIN: untrail_chaintrail(); break; case CHAIN_END: untrail_shortchain(); } } } Note that, since we are assuming we are in a modified unconditional trailing scheme, value trailing is never used. This is because value trailing is only needed in the modified scheme whenever only one of the two variables involved in a variablevariable unification is newer than the most recent choice point, and thus only that 25  one was trailed. Otherwise swap trailing will be used. Since no conditional trailing is allowed, swap trailing is always used for variable-variable unifications. Let us now consider the combination in the context of the modified conditional trailing scheme of dProlog. In this context only value, swap and conditional chain trailing are used. The remarks on the application and allocation of tags is the same as for the unconditional case and the general conditional untrail operation looks identical except for the fact that the FUNCTION TRAIL case is substituted by a VALUE TRAIL case, and the call to untrail functiontrail() is substituted by a call to untrail valuetrail(). When looking at the value trailings of chains of length one in the example in the previous section (see Figure 6), there is an obvious trailing alternative in the conditional system that stores no redundant information: chain trailing. Indeed, if such a variable would be chain trailed instead of value trailed, only one instead of two slots would be used on the stack. However, this would require more run-time tests and we have not implemented this. value_trail(p) { if (*p == p) /* self pointer */ *(tr++) = set_tag(p,CHAIN_END); else *(tr++) = *p; *(tr++) = p; } Experimental results for both the conditional and unconditional trailing scheme are presented in Section 9. 8 Analysis for the improved trailing scheme Trailing analyses heavily depend on the details of the trailing scheme. The analysis presented in Section 4 was defined for the classic PARMA trailing scheme. In this section we present the modifications needed by that analysis in order to be applied to our improved trailing scheme. As we will see, the improved scheme gives rise to fewer opportunities for trail savings. 8.1 Unnecessary trailing in the improved trailing scheme The main difference between the two schemes in terms of unnecessary trailing appears when considering cells that have been trailed since the most recent choicepoint. In the case of value- and chain-trailing, these cells do not need to be trailed again since the information stored the first time allows us to reconstruct the state right before the choice-point.6 As we will see later in the experimental evaluation, this allows our previous analysis to detect many spurious trailings. 6  This is assuming that the semantics of function trailing is such that it does not rely on the intermediate state of any Herbrand variable during untrailing.  26  In the case of swap trailing, however, cells need to be trailed even if they have already been trailed since the most recent choice-point. This is because swap trailing is an incremental kind of trailing (the content of the cells is not stored during the trailing, but only the incremental change) and thus relies on future trailings for proper untrailing of cells. As a result, during the untrailing process in our improved scheme, all later chain and swap trailings have to be undone before the swap trailing can be untrailed correctly. Thus, there is no opportunity here to avoid future trailings between two choice points, after the first trailing has been performed. Let us illustrate this with a counterexample. Counterexample. Let us not trail variables a second time between two choice points. Consider then the following code: X = Y, Z = W, X = Z, fail where all variables are older than the most recent choice point and, initially, they are represented as chains of length one, as depicted in Figure 7(a). In the first two steps the four variables are aliased and swap trailed pairwise, creating two chains of length two (see Figure 7(b)). The s’s represent SWAP TRAIL tags.  X Z  Y W  (a) Initially  W Z Y W X  X  Y  Z  (b) Z = W  s  X  s  Z  W Z Y W X  Y  s  (c) X = Z  X = Y,  X  Y  Z  W  s  (d) Untrail  Fig. 7. Counterexample of incremental behavior of swap trailing: it does not eliminate the need for further trailing of the same cells. Next X and Z are aliased, creating one large chain (see Figure 7(c)). During this step X and Z are not (swap) trailed since they have already been swap trailed after the most recent choice point (and we are assuming this means trailing is not needed). Finally, the execution fails and untrailing tries to restore the situation at the most recent choice point. However, Figure 7(d) shows that the omission of the last swap trailing was invalid, as untrailing fails to restore the correct situation. Thus, a cell involved in swap trailing still needs trailing later in the same segment of the execution.  8.2 The Ltrail analysis domain The implications for the Ltrail analysis domain are simple: it only needs to distinguish between variables that do not have to be trailed again (deep trailed) and those which have to (rest). In other words, variables can only have one of two possible 27  states at a particular program point: deep trailed or not trailed at all. Hence, the type of elements of our Ltrail domain will be P(Oldp ). The ordering ⊑ is simply ⊇. All the operations we have defined for the Lnotrail domain have to be adapted to this simplification. This adaptation is rather straightforward: every description l in Ltrail is treated as if it were the description (∅, l) in Lnotrail , and new descriptions l′ in Ltrail are obtained by first calculating the (s′ , d′ ) descriptions using the Lnotrail operations and then setting l′ = d′ . 8.3 Optimization based on the analysis Again, the pre-description of every unification is used to improve that unification. The possible optimizations based on the Ltrail domain are more limited than those for the Lnotrail domain, as only deep trailed variables are represented in the descriptions: • For the unification of two variables, a variant without (swap) trailing can be used if both variables are in the pre-description (i.e. deep-trailed). • For the binding of an unbound variable Y to a term f (X1 , ..., Xn ), a variant of the unification without (chain) trailing can be used if Y is in the predescription. In addition, no (swap) trailing is required for any of the Xi that appear in the pre-description. • For the unification of two bound variables, if both variables are in the predescription, or if one is in the pre-description and the other is known to be ground, then no trailing is needed at runtime. This means that if during the recursive unification process of the bound variables, unbound variables are unified or bound, nothing will need to be trailed for these unbound variables.  9 Experimental Results We first examine the effect of the trailing analysis Lnotrail and its associated optimizations on the classic PARMA trailing scheme for HAL. We then look at the effect of the improved PARMA trailing scheme, and at the effect of the use of the trailing analysis Ltrail on the improved PARMA trailing scheme. Finally, we examine the improved PARMA trailing scheme in the context of dProlog. All timing results were obtained on an Intel Pentium 4 2.00 GHz 512 MB. 9.1 Effect of trailing analysis using Lnotrail in HAL The Lnotrail analyzer has been implemented in the analysis framework of HAL and applied to six HAL benchmarks that use the Herbrand solver: icomp, hanoi, qsort, serialize, warplan and zebra. Table 1 gives a summary of these benchmarks. All benchmarks make use of the Herbrand solver and cannot be executed as Mercury programs (without significantly modifying the algorithm and representation). The pre-descriptions inferred for the unifications of these benchmarks have been 28  Table 1. HAL Benchmark descriptions and lines of code Benchmark icomp hanoi qsort serialize warplan zebra  Description a cut down version of the interactive BIM compiler the Hanoi puzzle using difference lists the quick sort algorithm using difference lists the classic Prolog palindrome benchmark war planner for robot control the classic five houses puzzle  Lines 294 31 43 74 316 82  Table 2. Compilation statistics for notrail analysis Benchmark icomp hanoi qsort serialize warplan zebra  Compilation Time Analysis Total Relative 1.170 2.110 55.5 % 0.030 0.350 8.6 % 0.020 0.810 2.5 % 0.040 0.430 9.3 % 1.080 2.590 41.7 % 0.090 0.560 16.1 %  Old unifications Improved Total Relative 314 1,542 20.4 % 13 13 100.0 % 7 7 100.0 % 1 20 5.0 % 93 1,347 6.9 % 40 177 22.6 %  Size Relative 120.5 % 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.2 % 156.2 % 108.6 %  used to optimize the generated Mercury code by avoiding unnecessary trailing, as explained in Section 6. Table 2 shows, for each benchmark, the analysis time in seconds compared to the total compilation time, the number of improved unifications compared to the total number of unifications involving old variables, and the size of generated binary executable. The binary size of the optimized program is expressed as the number of bytes relative to the unoptimized program. The high compilation times obtained for some benchmarks are due to the existence of predicates with many different pre-descriptions, something the analysis has not been optimized for yet. The deterministic nature of both hanoi and qsort benchmarks, allows the analysis to infer that all unifications should be replaced by a non-trailing alternative. In the other benchmarks a much smaller fraction of unifications can be improved due to the heavy use of non-deterministic predicates. The last table shows that due to the multi-variant specialization, there may be a considerable size blow-up. In particular, for icomp and warplan the size is substantially increased. Various approaches to limit the number generated variants, explored in other work, apply to this work as well. For example, one approach is to use profiling information to only retain the most performance-critical variants (see (Ferreira and Damas 2003)). Another approach, taken in (Mazur 2001), is to only generate the most and least optimized variants. The latter would reproduce the optimal result for hanoi and qsort. Table 3 presents the execution times in seconds obtained by executing each benchmark a number of times in a loop; the iteration number in the table gives that loop 29  Table 3. Benchmark timings for classic PARMA: unoptimized (cparma) and optimized with trailing analysis (caparma) Benchmark icomp hanoi qsort serialize warplan zebra  Iterations 10,000 10 10,000 10,000 10 200  cparma 0.834 0.990 0.363 0.901 1.293 1.239  Time caparma 0.790 0.707 0.303 0.884 1.407 1.254  relative 94.7 % 71.4 % 83.5 % 98.1 % 108.8 % 101.2 %  Table 4. Benchmark trail sizes for classic PARMA: unoptimized (cparma) and optimized with trailing analysis (caparma) Benchmark icomp hanoi qsort serialize warplan zebra  Maximum trail cparma caparma relative 5,545 4,217 76.1 % 61,441 0 0.0 % 11,801 0 0.0 % 16,569 12,657 76.4 % 17 9 52.9 % 209 185 88.5 %  Trailing operations cparma caparma relative 1,110 860 77.5 % 7,864,300 0 0.0 % 1,510 0 0.0 % 2,120 1,620 76.4 % 102,290 101,820 99.5 % 5,153,800 4,920,600 95.5 %  count. This execution process (and the iteration number) is also used to obtain all other results shown for these HAL benchmarks. The significant speed-up obtained for both the hanoi and qsort benchmarks is explained by the effects of replacing all unifications with a non-trailing version on the maximum size of the trail stack (in kilobytes), and on the total number of trailing operations, as shown in Table 4. In the non-deterministic benchmarks, a much smaller fraction of the trailing operations is removed. This results in a smaller speed-up or even a slight slow-down. The slow-down shows that the optimization does not come without a cost. The larger active code size due to the multi-variant specialization has an impact on the instruction cache behavior. Table 5 shows the impact on instruction references and instruction cache misses, obtained with the cachegrind skin of the valgrind memory debugger (see (Nethercote and Seward 2003)). The number of instruction references is the number of times an instruction is retrieved from memory and the instruction cache miss rate is the percentage of instruction references in main memory instead of cache. The table clearly shows that the elimination of all trailing operations results in a considerable reduction of executed instructions. On the other side of the spectrum, the multi-variant specialization has a negative effect on the instruction cache miss rate, which explains the slow-down of the warplan benchmark. 30  Table 5. Benchmark instruction cache misses for classic PARMA: unoptimized (cparma) vs. optimized with trailing analysis (caparma) Benchmark icomp hanoi qsort serialize warplan zebra  I1 instruction cache miss rate cparma caparma relative 0.85 % 1.79 % 210.6 % 0.00 % 0.00 % -% 0.00 % 0.00 % -% 0.00 % 0.70 % ∞% 1.55 % 4.44 % 286.5 % 0.40 % 0.10 % 25.0 %  Instruction references cparma caparma relative 716 ×106 709 ×106 99.0 % 991 ×106 839 ×106 84.7 % 427 ×106 397 ×106 93.0 % 6 912 ×10 899 ×106 98.6 % 1,559 ×106 1,560 ×106 100.1 % 1,300 ×106 1,291 ×106 99.3 %  9.2 Effect of the improved trailing scheme in the Mercury back-end of HAL The improved unconditional PARMA trailing scheme has also been implemented in the Mercury back-end of HAL. Since Mercury already has a tagged trail, this was not too difficult. Aside from the discussed trailings for unification, this system also requires trailing when a term is constructed with an old variable as an argument. In this term construction, the argument cell in the term structure is inserted in the variable chain. This modifies one cell in the old variable chain. In the classic scheme this cell is trailed with value trailing. To avoid value trailing altogether this has been replaced with swap trailing in the improved trailing scheme. Table 6 presents the timing and maximal trail for both the classic and improved trailing scheme for the six HAL benchmarks used before. Table 6. Timing and maximal trail for the classic (cparma) and improved (iparma) unconditional PARMA trailing scheme for the Mercury back-end of HAL. Benchmark icomp hanoi qsort serialize warplan zebra  cparma 0.834 0.990 0.363 0.901 1.293 1.239  Time iparma 0.809 0.944 0.350 0.836 1.284 1.171  relative 97.0 % 95.4 % 96.4 % 92.8 % 99.3 % 94.5 %  Maximal trail cparma iparma relative 5,545 3,049 55.0 % 61,441 40,961 66.7 % 11,801 7,857 66.6 % 16,569 10,233 61.8 % 17 9 52.9 % 209 105 50.2 %  In all benchmarks the improved trailing scheme is faster than the classic scheme. The differences are a few percentages though, with a maximum difference of slightly more than 7% for the serialize benchmark. Much more important are the effects of the improved trailing scheme on the maximal trail size. The maximal trail is at least 30% and up to 50% smaller for the improved scheme than for the classic scheme. 31  9.3 Effect of the improved trailing scheme combined with trailing analysis Ltrail in the Mercury back-end of HAL The trailing analysis presented in Section 4 and implemented in HAL, was modified, as proposed in Section 8, to deal with the improved trailing scheme. Table 7 presents the timing and maximal trail for the HAL benchmarks obtained under the improved scheme with the information inferred by the modified analysis, and compares the results obtained under the same scheme without any analysis information. Table 7. Timing and maximal trail for the improved unconditional PARMA scheme without (iparma) and with (iaparma) Ltrail trailing analysis, relative to the classic scheme without trailing. Benchmark icomp hanoi qsort serialize warplan zebra  iparma 97.0 % 95.4 % 96.4 % 92.8 % 99.3 % 94.5 %  Time iaparma 93.3 % 71.6 % 83.5 % 92.8 % 99.7 % 91.9 %  relative 96.2 % 75.1 % 86.6 % 100.0 % 100.4 % 97.3 %  iparma 55.0 % 66.7 % 66.6 % 61.8 % 52.9 % 50.2 %  Maximal trail iaparma relative 47.9 % 87.1 % 0.0 % 0.0 % 0.0 % 0.0 % 61.8 % 100.0 % 52.9 % 100.0 % 46.4 % 92.4 %  For the serialize and warplan benchmarks the analysis was not able to reduce the number of actual trailing operations. For the other four benchmarks the combination of the improved scheme with analysis yields better results, both for time and maximal trail. For the hanoi and qsort benchmarks there is again a drastic improvement: all trailings have been avoided, with a distinctive time improvement of 25% and 15 % respectively. For the other two benchmarks, icomp and zebra, there is a maximal trail improvement of about 10% together with a slightly reduced time, 4% and 3% better respectively. Overall, the combination of the improved scheme with the trailing analysis never makes the results worse. Since it drastically improves some benchmarks and shows a modest improvement of others, it is fair to conclude that the combination is superior to the improved system without analysis.  9.4 Effect of the improved trailing scheme in dProlog Let us now present the experimental results of the improved conditional PARMA trailing scheme in dProlog for several small benchmarks and one bigger program, comp. Table 8 shows the timing and maximal trail use for each benchmark. Time is given in seconds and applies to the number of runs (iterations) given. The maximal trail size is given in kilobytes and applies to a single run. The time difference between the classic and the improved scheme is negligible. The improved scheme is at most 8.8% slower, for the zebra benchmark, but on 32  Table 8. PARMA in dProlog: classic (cparma) vs. improved trailing (iparma) Benchmark  Iterations  boyer 10 browse 10 cal 100 chat 50 crypt 2,000 ham 20 meta qsort 1,250 nrev 50,000 100 poly 10 queens 16 20 queens 100 reducer 200 sdda 12,000 send 100 tak 100 zebra 300 relative average comp 1 comp relative  Time cparma iparma .950 .920 1.010 1.010 1.800 1.800 1.020 1.040 1.160 1.170 1.160 1.130 1.070 1.090 .900 .860 .630 .650 1.810 1.790 3.310 3.300 .440 .430 1.000 1.010 .800 .800 1.620 1.520 2.510 2.730 100% 99.9% 1.930 1.890 100% 97.9%  Maximal trail cparma iparma 450.6 225.3 5.2 4.5 0.4 0.2 3.6 1.9 0.5 0.2 0.8 0.4 12.6 7.4 0.4 0.2 52.6 26.3 0.7 0.3 0.7 0.3 18.9 10.0 1.3 0.8 0.5 0.2 373.1 186.6 1.6 0.8 100% 51.7% 2516.3 1319.8 100% 52.4%  average both are about equally fast. The price for the lower trail usage is an increase in instructions executed and that is why there is no net speedup. The differences in maximal trail use however are substantial. While swap trail and chain trail halve the trail stack consumption, value trailing is still used for some cases of variable–variable trailing. Yet experimental results show that that kind of variable–variable trailing does not occur very often in most benchmarks, as the maximal trail stack is effectively halved in eleven benchmarks and on average the maximal trail use is 51.7% of the classical scheme. The results for the smaller benchmarks are confirmed by the larger comp program. Execution time is nearly the same for the classic and improved trailing scheme and the maximal trail shows a similar improvement of almost 50%.  10 Related and future work As far as we know, the modifications suggested to the classic PARMA trailing scheme are new. A somewhat similar analysis for detecting variables that do not have to be trailed is presented by Debray in (Debray 1992) together with corresponding optimizations. Debray’s analysis however is for the WAM variable representation and in a traditional Prolog setting, i.e., without type, mode and determinism declarations. Also 33  in (Van Roy and Despain 1992) trailing is avoided, but only for variables that are new in our terminology and, again, the setting is basically the WAM representation. Taylor too keeps track of a trailing state of variables in the global analysis of his PARMA system with the classic PARMA trailing scheme (see (Taylor 1991; Taylor 1989)). As opposed to the Lnotrail analysis we have presented here, Taylor’s analysis is less precise and closer to the Ltrail analysis presented here: the trailing state of a variable can only be that it has to be trailed or not, i.e. there is no intermediary shallow trailing state. There exist also two run-time technique for preventing the multiple value trailing between two choice points. The first, described in (Noyé 1994), only works in the WAM scheme, because it introduces linear reference chains that PARMA does not allow. The second, described in (Aggoun and Beldiceanu 1990), maintains a timestamp for every cell that corresponds to the choicepoint before the last update. However, such a timestamp requires additional space, even in the case that the cell is never updated. In the context of PARMA, timestamps would likely consume more space than is actually saved by avoiding trailing. Finally, there are other approaches to the reconstruction of state on backtracking other than trailing, using either copying (Schulte 1999) or recomputation (Van Hentenryck and Ramachandran 1995 While PARMA (and for that matter WAM) bindings do not keep enough information to allow recomputation on backtracking, a copying approach to backtracking in PARMA is quite feasible. This remains as an interesting question for future work. There is little room left for optimization of the trailing analysis for the improved unconditional trailing scheme. Of course, the analysis itself can be improved by adopting a more refined representation for bound variables. Currently, all PARMA chains in the structure of a bound variable are represented by the same trailing state. Bound variables could be represented more accurately, by requiring the domain to keep track of the different chains contained in the structures to which the program variables are bound, their individual trailing state and how these are affected by the different program constructs. Known techniques (see for instance (Janssens and Bruynooghe 1993; Van Hentenryck et al. 1995; Mulkers et al. 1994; Lagoon and Stuckey 2001; Lagoon et al. 2003)) based on type information could be used to keep track of the constructor that a variable is bound to and the trailing state of the different arguments, thereby making this approach possible. This applies equally to the analysis of the classical scheme. Additionally, it would be interesting to see how much extra gain analysis can add to the improved conditional trailing scheme as implemented in dProlog or in the Mercury back-end of HAL that supports conditional trailing. Such analysis would certainly not improve the maximal trail, but it would remove the overhead of the run-time test. This will most likely also result in a small speed-up. Though experimental results show that the improved scheme with analysis is better than the classic scheme with analysis, this need not be true for all programs. Recall that between two choice points all value trailings of a cell but the first can be eliminated in the classic scheme, while no swap trailings could be eliminated in the improved scheme. A hybrid scheme would be possible using analysis to decide on a single unification basis if either swap trailing or value trailing is better at minimizing 34  the amount of trailing and the cost of untrailing. This analysis would require a more global view of all the trailings in between two choice points. Moreover, some trailings could be common to different pairs of choice points and optimality would depend on where execution spends most of its time. Also the untrailing operation can be improved: when analysis is able to determine for instance that the only trailing that happened was a swap trailing, no tags need to be set and tested. Acknowledgements We would like to thank the referees for their detailed and insightful reports which have significantly improved the paper. References Aggoun, A. and Beldiceanu, N. 1990. Time Stamps Techniques for the Trailed Data in Constraint Logic Programming Systems. In SPLT’90: 8ème Séminaire Programmation en Logique, S. Bourgault and M. Dincbas, Eds. CNET, Trégastel, France, 487–510. Aı̈t-Kaci, H. 1991. Warren’s Abstract Machine: A Tutorial Reconstruction. MIT Press. Bruynooghe, M. 1991. A Practical Framework for the Abstract Interpretation of Logic Programs. Journal of Logic Programming 10, 1/2/3&4, 91–124. Bueno, F., de la Banda, M. J. G., Hermenegildo, M. V., Marriott, K., Puebla, G., and Stuckey, P. J. 2001. A Model for Inter-module Analysis and Optimizing Compilation. In LOPSTR ’00: Selected Papers form the 10th International Workshop on Logic Based Program Synthesis and Transformation, K.-K. Lau, Ed. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2042. Springer Verlag, London, UK, 86–102. de la Banda, M. J. G., Demoen, B., Marriott, K., and Stuckey, P. J. 2002. To the Gates of HAL: A HAL Tutorial. In FLOPS 2002: Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Functional and Logic Programming, Z. Hu and M. Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2441. Springer Verlag, Aizu, Japan, 47–66. de la Banda, M. J. G., Marriott, K., Stuckey, P. J., and Søndergaard, H. 1998. Differential Methods in Logic Program Analysis. Journal of Logic Programming 35, 1, 1–37. Debray, S. 1992. A Simple Code Improvement Scheme for Prolog. Journal of Logic Programming 13, 1 (May), 57–88. Demoen, B., de la Banda, M. J. G., Harvey, W., Marriott, K., and Stuckey, P. J. 1999. An Overview of HAL. In CP’99: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming, J. Jaffar, Ed. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1713. Springer Verlag, Alexandria, Virginia, USA, 174–188. Demoen, B. and Nguyen, P.-L. 2000. So Many WAM Variations, so Little Time. In CL2000: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Computational Logic, J. Lloyd, V. Dahl, U. Furbach, M. Kerber, K.-K. Lau, C. Palamidessi, L. Moniz Pereira, Y. Sagiv, and P. J. Stuckey, Eds. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 1861. ALP, Springer Verlag, London, UK, 1240–1254. Ferreira, M. and Damas, L. 2003. Controlling Code Expansion in a Multiple Specialization Prolog Compiler. In Proceedings of CICLOPS 2003: Colloquium on Implementation of Constraint and LOgic Programming Systems, R. Lopes and M. Ferreira, Eds. University of Porto, Mumbai, India, 75–87. Technical Report DCC-2003-05, DCC - FC & LIACC, Univeristy of Porto, December 2003.  35  Janssens, G. and Bruynooghe, M. 1993. Deriving Descriptions of Possible Value of Program Variables by means of Abstract Interpretation. Journal of Logic Programming 13, 205–258. Lagoon, V., Mesnard, F., and Stuckey, P. J. 2003. Termination Analysis with Types Is More Accurate. In ICLP 2003: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Logic Programming, C. Palamidessi, Ed. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2916. Springer Verlag, Mumbai, India, 254–268. Lagoon, V. and Stuckey, P. 2001. A Framework for Analysis of Typed Logic Programs. In FLOPS 2001: Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Functional and Logic Programming, H. Kuchen and K. Ueda, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2024. Springer Verlag, Tokyo, Japan, 296–310. Lindgren, T., Mildner, P., and Bevemyr, J. 1995. On Taylor’s Scheme for Unbound Variables. Tech. rep., Computer Science Department, Uppsala University. Oct. Mazur, N. 2001. Compile-time Garbage Collection for the Declarative Language Mercury. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer Science, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Mulkers, A., Winsborough, W. H., and Bruynooghe, M. 1994. Live-Structure Dataflow Analysis for Prolog. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 16, 2, 205–258. Nethercote, N. 2001. The Analysis Framework of HAL. M.S. thesis, University of Melbourne. Nethercote, N. and Seward, J. 2003. Valgrind: A Program Supervision Framework. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 89, 2, 1–23. Noyé, J. 1994. Elagage de contexte, retour arrière superficiel, modifications réversibles et autres: une étude approfondie de la WAM. Ph.D. thesis, Université de Rennes I. Schulte, C. 1999. Comparing Trailing and Copying for Constraint Programming. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Logic Programming, D. De Schreye, Ed. MIT Press, Las Cruces, NM, USA, 275–289. Somogyi, Z., Henderson, F., and Conway, T. 1996. The Execution Algorithm of Mercury, an Efficient Purely Declarative Logic Programming Language. Journal of Logic Programming 29, 1–3, 17–64. Søndergaard, H. 1986. An Application of Abstract Interpretation of Logic Programs: Occur Check Reduction. In ESOP 86: Proceedings of the European Symposium on Programming, B. Robinet and R. Wilhelm, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 213. Springer Verlag, Saarbrücken, Germany, 327–338. Taylor, A. 1989. Removal of Dereferencing and Trailing in Prolog Compilation. In Proceedings of the 6th Internation Conference on Logic Programming, G. Levi and M. Martelli, Eds. MIT Press, Lisbon, Portugal, 48–60. Taylor, A. 1991. High Performace Prolog Implementation. Ph.D. thesis, Basser Department of Computer Science. Taylor, A. 1996. Parma - Bridging the Performance GAP Between Imperative and Logic Programming. Journal of Logic Programming 29, 1-3, 5–16. Van Hentenryck, P., Cortesi, A., and Charlier, B. L. 1995. Type analysis of Prolog using Type Graphs. Journal of Logic Programming 22, 3, 179–209. Van Hentenryck, P. and Ramachandran, V. 1995. Backtracking without Trailing in CLP(Rlin). ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 17, 4 (July), 635–671. Van Roy, P. and Despain, A. 1992. High-Performance Logic Programming with the Aquarius Prolog Compiler. IEEE Computer 25, 1, 54–68.  36

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
