Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_1420

Abstract:
An Adaptive Algorithm for Precise Pupil Boundary Detection using Entropy of Contour GradientsI Cihan Topala , Halil Ibrahim Cakirb , Cuneyt Akinlarb a Department  of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Anadolu University, 26470 Eskisehir, Turkey of Computer Engineering, Anadolu University, 26470 Eskisehir, Turkey,II  arXiv:1709.06366v1 [cs.CV] 19 Sep 2017  b Department  Abstract Eye tracking spreads through a vast area of applications from ophthalmology, assistive technologies to gaming and virtual reality. Detection of pupil is the most critical step in many of these tasks hence needs to be performed accurately. Although detection of pupil is a smooth task in clear sight, possible occlusions and odd viewpoints complicate the problem. We present an adaptive pupil boundary detection method that is able to infer whether entire pupil is in clearly visible by a modal heuristic. Thus, a faster detection is performed with the assumption of no occlusions. If the heuristic fails, a deeper search among extracted image features is executed to maintain accuracy. Furthermore, the algorithm can find out if there is no pupil as an aidful information for many applications. We prepare a dataset containing 1509 high resolution eye images collected from five subjects and perform an extensive set of experiments to obtain quantitative results in terms of accuracy, localization and timing. The proposed method outperforms three other state of the art algorithms and can run up to 140 Hz in single-thread on a standard laptop computer. Keywords: Pupil detection, eye tracking, elliptical arc detection, ellipse detection, gaze estimation, shape recognition.  1. Introduction Eye tracking (ET) has emerged as an important research area with a diverse set of applications including human computer interaction, diagnosis of psychological, neurological and ophthalmologic individuals, assistive systems for drivers and disabled people, marketing research, and biometrics. In addition, there are efforts to integrate ET technology in virtual reality (VR) studies to increase the feeling of immersion via rendering virtual environment with a depth of field effect similar to human vision. Pupil boundary detection and center estimation is an essential step in all eye tracking systems and I This work is supported by The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) and Anadolu University Commission of Scientific Research Projects (BAP) under the grant numbers 111E053 and 1207F113, respectively. II Cuneyt Akinlar was with Department of Computer Engineering, Anadolu University during the time of this study. Email addresses: cihant@anadolu.edu.tr (Cihan Topal), halilibrahimcakir@gmail.com (Halil Ibrahim Cakir), cuneytakinlar@gmail.com (Cuneyt Akinlar)  Preprint submitted to Elsevier  has to be performed precisely. In point-of -gaze (PoG) detection, the extraction of pupil center is required to estimate the location of gaze. In such applications, even loss of a single pixel precision in pupil center may cause an error of a few degrees in the gaze direction vector, which would result in a significant drift in the estimated gaze point. Pupil boundary detection is a more difficult problem which has to be performed accurately for biometric applications and medical studies. Another emerging application area of eye tracking is virtual reality (VR) technologies which recently have a significant leap in popularity. VR technology renders a 3D scene from two different point of views, ie. from the views of left and right eyes of a user. To prevent problems like motions sickness, these rendering 3D locations should match the interpupillary distance of the user. Moreover, developers integrate eye tracking into VR systems to better simulate the human visual system. They render locations where the user focuses sharper and blur other regions to boost immersion effect and enhance the VR experience. September 20, 2017  In this study, we propose a novel adaptive pupil boundary detection method from eye images, which works by extracting arcs from the edge segments of the image and joining them to find the pupil boundary, hence the center. Organization of the paper is as follows; we give a comprehensive related work on pupil boundary and center detection in section 2, we explain our method with fine detail in section 3, analysis of the method in terms of accuracy (F-measure), localization and running time are presented in section 4, and we finalize the paper with concluding remarks.  boundaries aiming to maximize the contour integral value on the smoothed image derivative (Eq. 1). max(r,x0 ,y0 ) Gσ (r) ∗  ∂ ∂r  I (r,x0 ,y0 )  I(x, y) ds 2πr  (1)  Arvacheh and Tizhoosh [16] developed an iterative algorithm based on an active counter model which is also capable of detecting near-circular shapes. These methods work fine; however, they require a full search of the image plane in order to find r, x0 , y0 parameters that maximize the response to the given model. Model-based search approach is computationally expensive and therefore, cannot be employed in real-time eye tracking applications. In [17] authors use curvature of pupil contour to sort out boundary pixels which belong to prospective occlusions. They detect blobs in the binarized image and extract contour of the biggest blob. Finally, edge pixels of the pupil boundary are selected by employing a set of heuristics (e.g. eyelids have positive curvature, etc.) and ellipse fit applied to chosen pixels. Another interesting approach on pupil detection is proposed and utilized in EyeSeeCam project [18]. The algorithm extracts edge segments, then removes glints and other unfavourable artefacts by a sequence of morphological operations based on several assumptions. Finally, Delaunay Triangulation is applied to remaining pixels and pupil boundary is detected assuming it is a convex hull. Starburst algorithm [19] estimates the pupil center by an iterative radial feature detection technique instead of finding all edges. It starts by locating and removing glints if any exists. Then, rays are cast from an initial point within a 20◦ of radial step. Each ray stops where image derivative is greater than a threshold value, i.e., when a sharp intensity change occurs. This operation is iterated with an updated starting point and a set of feature points are collected at each step. Finally, ellipse fit is applied to the collected points with RANSAC [11]. In another study, authors aim to adapt the Starburst algorithm to elliptical iris segmentation problem [20]. In [21], Świrski et al. approximately detects pupil region by a Haar-like feature [23, 11]. Secondly, they apply a k -means segmentation to determine a proper pupil threshold. Then a modified RANSAC-based ellipse fitting method is employed which utilizes gradient information as well as the  2. Related Work The literature on pupil detection is very rich, and many different techniques have been proposed. In this section, our goal is to give a high-level picture of the proposed solutions for pupil boundary detection and/or pupil center estimation. Many early methods in the literature utilize discriminative visual structure of human eye to detect the pupil. Dark intensity of pupil region and its high contrast between bright sclera region offers a relatively easy way to solve the problem. In this manner, many algorithms extracts pupil (or iris in some studies) center with combinations of several methods like thresholding, morphological operations, connected component analysis and center of mass algorithms with various additional steps [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. In addition, there are methods which also benefit model fitting approaches to find pupil or iris boundary as a circle or ellipse [6, 7, 8, 9]. In these studies, edge and contour extraction is employed and followed by Hough transform or RANSAC algorithm to accurately estimate the boundary [10, 11]. Dark/bright pupil differencing is another approach to roughly detect eye locations in a remotely taken image [12, 13, 14]. It works by differencing two successive frames that captured with on-axis and off-axis illumination, respectively. Due to the physical structure of human eye, on-axis illumination causes a significant brightness inside the pupil. Therefore, pupil regions become more salient in the difference image. Along with the feature-based methods, there are also purely model-based approaches which are mostly utilized in iris recognition studies in the literature. Daugman [15] proposes an integrodifferential operator for detecting the pupil and iris 2  Lin et al. [5]  •  Wang and Sun [6] Ma et al. [7] Dey and Samanta [8]  •  •  4 , ∅  •  •  •  •  •  •  vertical  ellipse  •  Hough  •  for edges  •  1  ellipse  •  •  •  Hiley et al. [13]  •  •  iterative  •  Morimoto et al. [14]  •  • • •  •  Fuhl et al [22]  •  ∅ ∅ 2  ellipse  ,3  for edges  radial  ellipse  4  •  •  iterative  ,5  •  •  ellipse  6  Li et al. [19] k-means  ∅  •  •  Świrski et al. [21]  , ∅  circle  •  Kumar et al. [18]  1  4  Ebisawa [12]  Zhu et al. [17]  , ∅,  parallelogram  •  ∅  symmetric  for glint  adaptive  Agustin et al. [9]  modified  Other / Comments  •  Use of Temporal Information  Keil et al. [4]  •  Center of Mass Algorithm  •  •  Circle / Ellipse Fitting  •  Long et al. [3]  Blob Detection/ Connected Comp. Analysis  Mäenpää [2]  Gõni et al. [1]  Edge Detection  Morphological Operations •  Bright/Dark Pupil Differencing  adaptive  Algorithms  Downsampling  Image Thresholding / Binarization  Table 1: A brief taxonomy for pupil boundary detection / center estimation algorithms.  ∅ does not detect the pupil boundary, only estimates its center.  4 performs iris detection.   performs ROI detection.  1  applies histogram back-projection or non-linear power transform on the image to make the pupil more salient.  2  before ellipse fitting, tries to determine the false pupil contour pixels w.r.t. their curvature values by a set of heuristics.  4  requires removal of glints. Assumes that the initial point for ray casting is inside the pupil. Iterative algorithm.  3  performs Fast Radial Symmetry detection and Delaunay Triangulation. Removes glints and artefacts by a set of morphological assumptions. tries to find an ellipse that matches the edge image points and is orthogonal to the gradients of the image.  5 6  detects and filter edges. Uses two different approaches, i.e. algorithmic and morphological. Rescales image if it fails in the first attempt.  spatial coordinates to find the pupil boundary. In a more recent study Fuhl et al. detect edges on the eye image and filter them with respect to several morphological criteria [22]. Later, edge segments are constructed from the remaining edge pixels and some of the edge segments (i.e. straight lines) are eliminated by various heuristics. Finally remaining contours evaluated by ellipse fitting and the best ellipse is selected by a cost function which utilize inner gray value and the roundest shape. Table 1 gives a brief taxonomy of the abovementioned pupil detection algorithms. As seen in the table, thresholding is a common technique in the literature. Despite thresholding can quickly discriminate image regions having different intensity values, it is highly vulnerable to lighting conditions and parameter configuration. Consequently, it fails on finding the exact location where intensity change occurs and can easily causes a decrease on the ac-  curacy. Another frequently employed technique is morphological operations which are applied on the thresholded binary image to suppress remaining undesired pixel sets and improve modal structure of the image. However, morphological operations may also degrade the actual information on the image and cause significant errors on the result. Similarly, algorithms that utilize thresholding and blob detection to find a center point for pupil are obviously not capable of detecting the boundary. Hence, they cannot be applied on most biometrics or medical studies which requires precise detection of the boundaries of pupil and iris. Downsampling the image to save computational time has an obvious cost as it decreases the accuracy by wasting spatial resolution. Bright/dark pupil differencing requires a little amount of computation and eases roughly locating the pupil, however it has important drawbacks. First, it needs addi3  Near-circular segment YES  Input Frame  ROI Detection  Edge Segment Detection  Near-circular Segment Search  Corner Detection  ? Near-Circular Segment  NO  Ellipse Fitting  Pupil Candidate Generation  Pupil Detection  Elliptical Arc All segments Extraction  Figure 1: Processing pipeline of the proposed algorithm.  in the image as a very aidful information for many applications. The proposed method has a simple flow and consists of the processing pipeline shown in Fig. 1. The processing starts by detection of region of interest (ROI) by convolving eye image with a Haar-like feature. Then, we extract edge segments each of which is a contiguous array of pixels. The next step is to determine whether a near-circular segment exists that traces the entire boundary of the pupil. Such an edge segment would be found if the pupil is clearly visible with no or very little occlusion. To find whether an edge segment has a circular geometry, we devise a fast heuristic method which utilizes gradient distribution of an edge segments. On the condition that a near-circular segment is found, we extract elliptical arcs from only that segment. If no near-circular segment is found, which would be the case if the pupil is severely occluded by the eyelids or eyelashes, then arcs from all edge segments in the ROI are extracted. Following the extraction of the elliptical arcs, we join them in every possible combination to generate a set of ellipse candidates that at least one of them traces the pupil boundary. Candidates are finally evaluated for their relevance to be the actual pupil contour and the best one, if it exists, is chosen among the candidate ellipses. In the following subsections we elaborate each step of the proposed algorithm in fine detail to make the discussion clear.  tional hardware to obtain bright and dark pupil images consecutively in a synchronous manner. Furthermore, it reduces temporal resolution since it needs two frames to perform a single detection. Due to the same reason it is very sensitive to motion and it fails if a large pupil displacement occurs between two consecutive images. Ebisawa specifically addresses this problem in [24], and proposes various methods for positional compensation. In this section we presented an overview of related studies covering both biometrics and eye tracking areas from the viewpoint of pupil detection problem. For interested readers, there are also comprehensive surveys that review the gaze estimation literature; in particular [25, 26]. 3. Proposed Method In this study, we propose an adaptive method for pupil boundary detection which is able to save computation by inferring whether an occlusion is the case or not. In this manner, the computation takes very little time if the pupil is in clear sight by the camera. On the contrary, algorithm infers if the pupil is severely occluded, and spends more effort to detect the pupil without compromising real-time applicability. The main strategy which improves the algorithm against occlusions is extracting the elliptical arcs from input image and finding one arc or a group of arcs representing the pupil contour. In this way, relevant features from a partially visible pupil can be extracted and detection can be performed by fusion of separate features. Besides detecting the pupil boundary and center precisely, the algorithm can also identify if there is no pupil  3.1. ROI Estimation In the first step of the proposed method we roughly estimate the pupil area in the entire eye image. For this purpose, we utilize pupil’s geomet4  3R  factor: 3x  =  *  5R  (a)  external r = 4x internal r = 3x  Figure 3: Sample eye image in which detected ROI is indicated (left), edge segments obtained by EDPF algorithm within the ROI are indicated in different colors (right). (b)  edge localization. ED outputs not only a binary edge map similar to those output by conventional edge detectors, but it also outputs the result as a set of edge segments each of which is a contiguous and connected pixel chain [29]. This property of ED extremely eases the application of the algorithm to further detection and recognition problems. Similar to other edge detectors, ED has several parameters that must be tuned by the user for different tasks. Ideally, one would want to have an edge detector which runs with a fixed set of parameters for any type of image. To achieve this goal, we have incorporated ED with the a contrario edge validation mechanism due to the Helmholtz principle [30, 31], and obtained a fast parameter-free edge segment detector, i.e. EDPF2 [32]. EDPF works by running ED with all ED’s parameters at their extremes, which detects all possible edge segments in a given image with many false positives. It then validates the extracted edge segments by the Helmholtz principle, which eliminates false detections leaving only perceptually meaningful segments with respect to the a contrario approach with very little overhead of computation. Fig. 3 illustrates detected edge segments for an example eye image. In the figure, each color represents a different edge segment, which is one-pixel width, contiguous array of pixels.  Figure 2: (a) ROI detection by means of a convolution operation with a Haar-like feature. (b) Detected ROIs of two eye images having different size of pupils.  ric and intensity attributes in a similar vein as the method [21]. A pupil can be described as a dark and compact blob since it consists of darker intensity levels than its surrounding iris, and it has usually a low-eccentric elliptical shape. To locate pupil region we convolve input image with a Haar-like feature and find the maximum response on the image as shown in Fig. 2(a) [23]. Pupil size can vary in real life due to the reasons like physiological differences and pupil dilation in light changes. For this reason, the Haar-like feature kernel is applied in various aperture sizes and the maximum response per unit is picked at the end. In Fig. 2(b) results of ROI estimation process for two eye images from two individuals having different pupil sizes are presented. 3.2. Edge Segment Detection To detect all edge segments inside the ROI, we employ Edge Drawing (ED) edge segment detector1 [27, 28]. Unlike traditional edge detectors which work by identifying a set of potential edge pixels in an image and eliminating non-edge pixels through operations such as morphological operations, non-maximal suppression, hysteresis thresholding etc., ED follows a proactive approach. The ED algorithm works by first identifying a set of points in the image, called the anchors, and then joins these anchors in a way which maximizes the gradient response of edge paths, hence ensures good 1 Online:  3.3. Near-Circular Segment Search The main goal of this step is detecting the pupil in an easy and computation efficient way when its circumference is entirely visible in case of no occlusion. Once we have the edge segments detected, we need to find the one that traverses the pupil 2 Demo  http://c-viz.anadolu.edu.tr/EdgeDrawing  5  page: http://c-viz.anadolu.edu.tr/EDPF  |G|  Gy  a few values dominate. Thus, we can distinguish edge segments in circular shapes by picking the ones which result in plain gradient distribution. To achieve this, we use the entropy function (Eq. 2) on the quantized gradient distributions of the segments. n X E=− pi . log(pi ) (2)  y 67.5°  α  45°  Gx  22.5° 0°  Gradient operator  x  -22.5°  G α = tan −1  y  Gx  (a)      -90°  i  -45° -67.5°  Since entropy function maximizes for flat distributions where the frequency of each symbol is equal, we compute the entropy of gradient distribution for each separate edge segments as follows:  (b)  Figure 4: (a) Gradient computation with image derivatives, (b) Quantization of computed gradient directions.  arg max  8 X  fGi . log(fGi )  (3)  i  boundary. The most intuitive solution is to apply a brute force search as follows: fit an ellipse to each edge segment, compute the fitting error, and pick the edge segment that has the smallest fitting error. This method might work only when the pupil is clearly visible, i.e., when it is not occluded by IR-LED glints or eyelashes, however, fitting an ellipse and calculating fitting error for each segment requires too much computation. To reduce this computational burden, we devise a faster method based on the analysis of gradient directions to find the near-circular segment, if one exists. Gradients of the segments contain substantial information about the geometrical structure and is used in shape matching, retrieval and recognition problems [33, 34]. Since we already have the vertical and horizontal derivatives of eye image computed during the edge detection scheme, we can find the gradient directions by very little amount of computation (see Fig. 4.a). The arctan function obviously results angle values in an interval [−π/2, π/2], providing an angle range of 180◦ . Before examining the distribution of gradients, we quantize the angles with 22.5◦ to obtain discrete symbols, thus we divide the unit circle into 16 regions into 8 different directions (see Fig. 4.b). Once we get quantized gradient directions for all pixels in a segment, we infer the modal characteristics of that segment by analyzing their gradient distributions. It is easy to observe that any segment in near-circular form would have an even gradient distribution if the tangential gradients on its perimeter is sampled with a fixed angular step. Intuitively, circular edge segments would have relatively uniform gradient distribution; whereas, straight edge segments have an unbalanced distribution where  where fGi is the frequency of the ith gradient direction. The entropy values for edge segments are maximized for a perfect circle and gets lower as the segment shape differs from being a circle (elliptic, etc.), and finally entropy becomes zero for straight lines since a straight line has only one gradient direction along its trajectory. Since we quantize the unit circle into 8 direction (see Fig. 4.b), the number of different symbols is 8 and the maximum entropy value is log2 8 = 3 in our case. Fig. 5 shows edge segments of an input eye image and gradient distributions, lengths and entropy values for 10 sample segments. It is easy to observe that circular edge segments have higher gradient entropy values regardless their size, whereas straight edge segments have lower values as expected. With this heuristic, we can discard the segments producing small entropy values than a certain threshold in an extremely fast manner. When examining speed of this method, we measure that computing the gradient entropy of an edge segment with available image derivatives is faster than ellipse fitting and error computation up to 200 times. In this way, we avoid spending computation time on the segments which have irrelevant geometries than ellipticals. Following the computation of gradient entropies of edge segments, one segment is chosen to be the near-circular segment to extract elliptical arcs if it satisfies the following three criteria: i) must have a high gradient entropy. The theoretical entropy upper-bound for 8 different gradient directions is log2 8 = 3. Accordingly, we choose the segments which have 2.9 or more gradient entropy. 6  due to the small occlusions such as glints, we consider a 15 pixels threshold for the distance between the start and end points of the segment.  Edge Segment  Gradient Distr.  Length  Entropy  512  2.96  348  0.95  186  1.35  246  2.89  314  2.86  88  2.03  63  2.82  71  2.61  73  1.38  86  1.04  Along with the second criterion, ellipse fitting is an essential tool employed in various steps of the proposed method. Through a crowd literature, there are two renowned ellipse fitting methods which are known to be fast and robust [35], [36]. Among these two algorithms, Taubin’s method [35] results a better ellipse contour with slightly lower error, however, it does not guarantee that the resulted conic is an ellipse, rather it can return a hyperbola as well. In addition, Fitzgibbon’s method [36] always ensures that the resulted conic is an ellipse, but it tends to extract more eccentric ellipses with higher fitting errors. To benefit advantages of both methods, we follow a simple Taubin-prior procedure as the following. First, we use Taubin’s method and examine the coefficients of resulted conic to understand whether its an ellipse or hyperbola. If it turns out that we get a hyperbola, then we use Fitzgibbon’s method and get an ellipse. Due to the fact that we apply ellipse fit to consecutive edge elements rather than scattered pixel data, we usually end up with a valid ellipse with Taubin’s method. In both ellipse fitting methods, we need to compute a fitting error to quantitatively evaluate the success. For this purpose, there is no straightforward method in the literature except numerical approximations [37]. Since inaccurate approximations easily cause misjudgements of elliptical features, we developed a more quantitative fitting error computation method based on [38]. We estimate the distance between the ellipse and each point by solving the equations described in [38] with NewtonRaphson method in a couple of iterations. Once we estimate all distance values between each point and the ellipse, we calculate the normalized rms distance to obtain a single scalar to represent the fitting error. For ellipse perimeter calculation, which also does not have an exact solution, hence we employ Ramanujan’s second approximation [39]. In the event that more than one edge segment satisfies all three conditions given above, the one having the minimum ellipse fitting error is chosen to be the near-circular segment. While existence of a near-circular segment speeds up the computation, its not compulsory for the detection of pupil. It is important to note that shape of a segment  Figure 5: Two sample eye ROI with and without occlusion and detected edge segments (top), List of gradient distributions, lengths ans entropy value of several edge segments selected from above sample images (bottom).  ii) must have a small ellipse fitting error, e.g., 2 pixels, when an ellipse is fit to the pixels which form the segment. iii) must be a closed segment. To avoid problems 7  Figure 6: ROI detection, arc extraction, pupil candidate generation and pupil detection steps. The first two rows consist of examples where the pupil is completely in clear sight; there are examples with occlusions in the rows 2-to-5, and there is no pupil in the last one. (a) Input image with detected ROI, (b) Detected edge segments within the ROI. Near-circular segment is indicated in red, if exists. High entropy segments which are subjected to arc extraction if a near-circular segment could be found indicated in green. Short and low gradient entropy segments which are not omitted indicated in blue. (c) Detected corners (green boxes) and ellipses which are fit to pixels lying in between two consecutive corners. Only successful (i.e. having low fitting error) ellipses are indicated. (d) Extracted elliptical arcs. (e) 2n − 1 pupil candidates are generated by joining all possible arc combinations, (f) the selected ellipse representing the pupil contour using the argument in Eq. 5 (Best viewed in color)  does not necessarily have to be near-circular to give high entropy values. In addition to segments with near-circular geometry, gradient distributions of segments which have concave shapes or follow complex trajectories can also end up with high entropy values. Therefore, we use entropy test as a prerequisite to accelerate the algorithm and make final decision about a segment by ellipse fitting.  then all segments which have high gradient entropy (i.e., > 2) are subjected to arc extraction process. In this manner, the algorithm adapts itself and requires less computation when there is no occlusions and pupil contour is entirely visible. Due to the fact that their straight geometry rarely contains elliptical arcs, we omit segments having low gradient entropy and short segments (i.e., < 25 pixels) to save further computation time. In a previous work, we extract circular arcs by combining consecutive line segments to detect circles in an image3 [27]. However, pupil’s projection onto the camera plane can be more elliptic, hence we need to detect the elliptical arcs in this study.  3.4. Elliptical Arc Extraction The next step of the algorithm is extracting the elliptical arcs (which will be referred to as arc hereafter) from edge segments obtained in the previous step. If a near-circular segment could be found at the previous step, arcs are extracted only from that segment. If no near-circular segment is found,  3 Demo  8  page: http://c-viz.anadolu.edu.tr/EDCircles  Cost Function vs. Frames 1000  Cost Function Threshold 100  10  1  0.1  0.01  Figure 8: Images of apparatus that we collect database video sequences. Figure 7: Output of our cost function for a set of example frames. It is seen that the result of cost function increases proportional to the pupil occlusion. If the occlusion is dramatic or there is no pupil in the image, the value of the function overshoots. (Note that the plot is in logarithmic scale.)  we try to fit ellipse to each subset of all extracted arcs. Excluding the empty set, there are 2n − 1 different arc combinations for n arcs. Fig. 6.e shows all generated pupil candidates generated from extracted arcs in Fig. 6.d. Since the pupil candidate generation process considers all subsets of selected arcs, groups of unrelated arcs which do not form a valid elliptic structure are also subjected to be eliminated after ellipse fit. Therefore, we eliminate those candidates which result in high fitting error due to the fact hat they cannot belong to the pupil boundary. After we eliminate candidates which result high fitting error, one of the remaining candidates is going to be selected as the final pupil by utilization of a cost function in the final step. Or, the algorithm ends up with the decision that there is no pupil in the image, if the output of the cost function diverges.  To solve this problem, we devise another strategy that finds the start and end points of a potential elliptical arc within an edge segment by locating the corners along the segment [40]. We detect corners on the segments with a fast curvature scale-space (CSS) method which utilize image gradient information to compute turning angle curvature [41]. Afterwards, we apply ellipse fit to the points lying in between two consecutive corners along each segment and obtain elliptical arcs. In Fig. 6.b-d we present the results of arc extraction process for several test images. In the first two rows, the pupil is completely visible; hence, the near-circular segment (indicated in red) is detected. Therefore, arc extraction is applied to only this segment. When no near-circular segment is found due to occlusions, arcs are extracted from all segments having high gradient entropy to avoid missing any critical information (see 3rd , 4th and 5th rows of Fig. 6). We should note that even if the pupil is in clear sight, it may appear highly elliptical because of the view angle. In such cases, pupil’s segment may result a low gradient entropy and near-circular segment would not be detected. As a consequence, elliptical arc extraction would be applied to all segments even though there is no occlusion.  3.6. Detection of The Pupil In the previous step, we get a number of pupil candidates each of which is a subset of elliptical arcs consisting several arcs. Accordingly, we still need to select one candidate ellipse to be the final pupil contour. To make the decision, we define a cost function Jc which considers the following properties of a candidate ellipse: i. the ellipse fitting error (ε), ii. the eccentricity (e), iii. the ratio of the arc pixels to the perimeter of resulting ellipse (φ).  3.5. Generation of the Pupil Candidates In this step, we generate candidate ellipses by grouping the extracted arcs. Thus we aim to detect the pupil boundary completely even if its boundary is partially visible. To generate pupil candidates,  Each of the pupil candidates is formed by one or more arcs. If the pupil boundary is detected from multiple arcs, the fitting error should be reasonable because we expect the arcs to be parts of the same 9  elliptic contour. Thus we need to minimize the fitting error ε. The eccentricity (e) indicates the compactness of an ellipse, or in other words, diversity of an ellipse from a circle and it is computed as r b2 0<e<1 (4) e= 1− 2 , a where a and b are semi-major and semi-minor axes, respectively. The eccentricity is 0 for a circle and 1 for a parabola. Among the pupil candidates each of which is a subset of elliptical arcs, there are also diverse ellipses whose eccentricities can get close to 1. However, pupil’s projection onto the image plane is usually closer to a circle rather than a skewed ellipse in majority of the applications. Therefore, we tend to select a candidate having an eccentricity close to 0. The parameter φ is the ratio of the number of pixels involved in ellipse fitting to the perimeter of the resulting ellipse. In some circumstances, one single and short arc may result in a large pupil candidate ellipse that may lead to inconsistency. Therefore, we look for the pupil candidates which are formed by consensus of more arc pixels and have a greater φ. During our experiments, we observed that the effect of the eccentricity (e) is less than the effect of ε and φ due to the possibility of true pupil not being the most compact ellipse among the candidates. Accordingly, we take squares of ε and φ to increase their effect on the cost function. Finally, we need to minimize ε and e and maximize φ in our formulation, and select the candidate that minimizes the following argument: Jc (pi ) = arg min(ε,e,φ)  ε2i . πie φ2i  Figure 9: A snapshot of our pupil annotation tool. Two different ellipse fitting algorithms are utilized to find the best conic to represent the pupil GT. After clicking a location inside the pupil, a guide is displayed in order to help user to equally sample contour points.  gorithm, it is still possible to obtain arcs and pupil candidates although there is actually no pupil. We observe that the cost function overshoots in these circumstances due to large ε and small φ values. Therefore, we can easily find if there is no pupil by quantifying output of Jc . In Fig. 7 we present a plot of the cost function versus a number of frames sampled from an eye blink operation. It is clearly seen that the Jc ’s output rapidly increases as the visible part of the pupil periphery gets smaller due to occlusions. Similarly, the algorithm ends up that there is no pupil in the image because the cost function overshoots for all of pupil candidates in the last row of Fig. 6. By examining several frames, we find out that a stable threshold value can provide promising results on deciding whether there is no pupil. We provide more detail on this topic in the next section with quantitative experimental results.  (5) 4. Experimental Results  where pi is the ith pupil candidate and π is constant. Fig. 6.f shows the pupil detection results for sample images. Among the pupil candidates shown in Fig. 6.e, the one that minimizes the Jc in Eq. 5 is selected as the pupil.  In this section, we present results of a comprehensive set of experiments in both quantitative and qualitative manner. We compare the proposed algorithm to three state of the art pupil detection algorithms, i.e. Starburst [19], Świrski et al. [21] and ElSe [22]. We quantitatively assess algorithms in terms of pupil detection accuracy (by means of Fmeasure), pupil localization and running time. We also provide qualitative results which provide useful insight to readers about the performance of algorithms. In addition to the content that we present in the paper, we also provide more supplementary  3.7. Detection of True Negatives In many applications, having the information that there is no pupil in the image is important as much as detecting it. This information can provide very useful extensions to eye tracking applications such as blink detection. In the proposed al10  (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  Figure 10: Illustration of localization test. (a) Input image, (b) Pupil ground truth pupil (GT), (c) Detected pupil (Det), (d) Subject4_0022.png (Swirski) Overlapping (indicated in blue) and non-overlapping (indicated in red and green) pixels.  material (e.g. codes, videos, etc.) on our webEven though having 5 points is sufficient to fit Other Candidates an ellipse hence its degree of freedom, we picked 10 site [42]. points in average from each pupil’s boundary to better reduce the effect of perspective distortion. Note 4.1. Pupil Detection Dataset that a circle’s projection onto image may not be a perfect ellipse due to the perspective distortion and In order to perform experiments, we first prelens distortion. Once all points are set along the pare a dataset containing 1509 high resolution pupil’s boundary, then we fit ellipse to them with (1280×720) eye frames collected from 5 Subject1_0074.png subjects. (Starburst) two different algorithms [36, 35] and select the paWe used a simple head-mounted eye tracking apparameters which provides lower fitting error. Thereratus (see Fig. 8) consisting of two HD cameras (for fore, we obtain the best possible conic to represent scene & eye) that we built for 3D gaze estimation the pupil GT in each eye image. study. To our knowledge, this is the only available pupil detection dataset in resolution higher than VGA (640×480) in the literature. 4.2. Localization Assessment During collection of the frames, we ask all subThe first quantitative test we perform is localiza(Starburst) jects to move their eyes different directionsSubject1_0075.png in a certion assessment of pupil detection algorithms. In tain order. In this way, we obtain eye images as this evaluation, we quantify success of algorithms pupil is viewed in diverse angles with and without for how precisely they detect pupils with respect occlusions by camera. Furthermore, we also want to ground truth data. We apply this test only the users to blink several times to obtain negative imframes in which the pupil is truly detected by each age samples that pupil does not exist. Eventually, algorithm in the dataset. Source codes of all algoin 57% of the frames pupil is in clear sight, in 16% rithms were downloaded from websites that authors of them there are severe occlusions and in 27% of provided in corresponding papers [43, 44, 45]. We them there is no pupil in the dataset. We count a set all parameters of all algorithms according to corpupil positive sample if more than half of its peresponding publications, or use the best performing riphery is visible, otherwise it is considered as a values if it is not explicitly indicated in the paper or negative sample. code. For each algorithm, we used a single parameAfter we collect the test frames, we implement an ter set for all images in the dataset which provides efficient annotation tool which eases rigorous annothe best overall result. tation procedure (see Fig. 9). Our annotation tool In order to quantify the localization performance, overlays a grid in polar form to ease the selection we compute overlap ratio OR between the detected of pixels from pupil boundary in an equal angular pupil and ground truth by counting number of corresolution. In addition, to ensure localization of responding pixels as follows: ground truth (GT) conics, it does not collect the exact pixel coordinates that users click. Instead, it Area(EDet ) ∩ Area(EGT ) (6) OR(EDet , EGT ) = searches a local pixel neighborhood of clicked locaArea(EDet ) ∪ Area(EGT ) tion to find the maximum image gradient response where EDet and EGT are ellipse of detected pupil and picks that location. In this way, we guarantee the selection of exact edge pixels in between pupil and ground truth ellipse, respectively [46]. In this manner we calculate the ratio of the number of overand iris in high resolution images precisely. 11  1.00  0.98  0.97 0.95  0.98  0.97  0.96  0.96  0.94  0.92  0.97  0.95  0.95  0.92 0.93  0.92  0.90 0.90 0.86  0.85  Localization  0.83 0.80  0.77  0.76  0.75  0.70  0.70  0.67  0.60  Subject 1  Subject 2  Starburst  Subject 5  Subject 4  Subject 3 Swirski  ElSe  Overall  Proposed  Figure 11: Localization test results of each algorithm for each subject.  lapping pixels to total number of overlapping and non-overlapping pixels as seen in Fig. 10. Once the number of overlapping and nonoverlapping pixels are determined, we calculate OR and take the average for all images for each algorithm. Higher OR indicates better localization, hence provides higher accuracy in the application which pupil detection is utilized, obviously. In Fig. 11 we present average localization results for individual subjects and overall for each algorithm. Although ElSe and Świrski also give prospering results, the proposed algorithm performs the best with a 4% improvement over the runner up in overall results.  we count TP, FP, TN ve FN samples, we calculate Precision (Eq. 8) and Recall (Eq. 9) values in order to compute F-Measure (Eq. 10). We present F-Measure results in Fig. 12 with respect to a range of εO in between 0.0 to 0.2 which corresponds to OR varying from a perfectly aligned ellipses at 80% overlap. We do not evaluate pupils as TP if they are detected with a OR lower than 80%. From the sketches in Fig. 12 it is clearly seen that accuracy tests are less contentious than localization experiments where the competition among the algorithms are tighter. In this experiment, proposed method outperforms others as its accuracy rapidly increases even in very small εO errors and follows a very stable path regardless the subject. We also see that Świrski and ElSe algorithms performs very closely with a significant success over Starburst algorithm.  4.3. Accuracy Assessment In the previous experiment we assess the localization performance of algorithms by considering only the images that they detect pupil correctly. In this step, we evaluate the accuracy of algorithms by counting the number of images that the pupil is correctly detected in the entire frame sequences. To consider a pupil image as a correct detection (TP), we calculate overlap error (εO ) as in Eq. 7 and compare the result with a threshold value [47]. εO (EDet , EGT ) = 1 − OR  Precision =  Recall =  count(TP Pupils) cellipsest(TP Pupils + FP Pupils) (8)  count(TP Pupils) count(TP Pupils + FN Pupils)  (7) F-Measure =  The range of εO is in between 0 and 1, and its value obviously increases as the intersection area between detected ellipse and GT decreases. We compare εO with a threshold value to make a decision on the detected pupil on whether it is a true positive (TP) or a false positive (FP). Likewise, we also evaluate images in which algorithms do not detect a pupil as true negative (TN) if there is no actual pupil in the image; or false negative (FN) vice versa. After  2 × Precision × Recall Precision + Recall  (9)  (10)  4.4. Qualitative Results Along with quantitative accuracy and localization results, we also present qualitative results in Fig. 13. In the figure, we provide two results from each of five subjects from top to bottom. It is also clearly shown that the algorithm can successfully 12  Subject 2  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6 0.5 0.4  F-Measure  1.0  0.6 0.5 0.4  0.6 0.5 0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.0  0.0 0.00  0.02  0.04  0.06  0.08  0.10  0.12  0.14  0.16  0.18  0.0 0.00  0.20  0.02  0.04  0.06 0.08  0.10  0.12  0.14  0.16 0.18  0.20  0.00  Subject 4  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6 0.5 0.4  0.6 0.5 0.4  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1  0.0 0.08  0.10  0.12  0.14  0.16  0.18  0.20  F-Measure  0.9  0.8  F-Measure  0.9  0.06  0.08  0.12  0.14  0.16  0.18  0.20  0.14  0.16  0.18  0.20  0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0  0.0  Overlap Error  0.10  Overall 1.0  0.9  0.04  0.06  Subject 5 1.0  0.02  0.04  Overlap Error  1.0  0.00  0.02  Overlap Error  Overlap Error  F-Measure  Subject 3  1.0  F-Measure  F-Measure  Subject 1 1.0  0.00  0.02  0.04  0.06  0.08  0.10  0.12  0.14  0.16  0.18  0.20  0.00  0.02  Overlap Error  Starburst  Swirski  ElSe  0.04  0.06  0.08  0.10  0.12  Overlap Error  Proposed  Figure 12: F-Measure results of each algorithm for each subject.  determine true negatives, i.e. in 2nd and 9th rows. In Fig. 14 we present several examples where the proposed algorithm fails. The most common reason for fail cases is motion blur where the algorithm cannot extract edges from the pupil contour. Therefore, elliptical arcs, hence the pupil contour cannot be detected. Besides the images presented here, we also provide video sequences of all algorithms in [42] for interested readers.  into consideration. All algorithm implementations are in C++ except Starburst which is in MATLAB. According to a study [48], a typical execution in MATLAB is 50 times slower than a C++ based application, therefore we divide timing results of Starburst by 50. Świrski’s implementation was implemented in order to benefit from parallel computing libraries in order to utilize multi-core CPUs. To able to make a fair comparison, we assign the application to a specific core and measure running times. The running times of all algorithms in average for all images are summarized in Table 2. According to average running times in Table 2, proposed method is the fastest one among all algorithms. It can be seen that the proposed algorithm can run up to 140 Hz in single thread for HD images in 1280×720 resolution. In per subject analysis we see that the proposed method is slightly slower than the ElSe algorithm for subject 4. When we investigate the reason behind the longer execution of subject 4, we see that there are too many occlusions which cause algorithm to fail on detecting a near-circular segment and extract arcs from all edge segments. Table 3 gives a dissection of running times of the proposed algorithm for separate steps. ROI detection is obviously the most computation demanding  4.5. Running Time Assessment We run all experiments on a laptop computer with Intel i7 2.40 GHz CPU. To be able to make a fair comparison, we take implementation platforms  Table 2: Average running times of algorithms for each subject in milliseconds. Best timings are indicated in bold.  Algorithm Subject Subject 1 Subject 2 Subject 3 Subject 4 Subject 5 Average  Starburst  Świrski  ElSe  Proposed  113.36 56.36 55.89 66.89 183.71 93.79  81.34 79.63 74.62 70.34 92.35 79.48  9.79 9.51 9.72 10.14 9.88 9.81  5.58 6.39 5.04 10.77 6.51 7.25  13  Figure 13: Qualitative results from all algorithms and all subjects (images in every two-rows from the beginning belong to a different subject).  step of the algorithm which takes roughly half of the entire execution due to the computation of in-  tegral images and convolution of Haar-like features at several scales. Another time-consuming step 14  (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  Figure 14: Several examples in which the proposed algorithm fails. The algorithm could detect no pupil in the last two images.  especially when a near-circular segment could not be detected- is the last step, i.e. pupil detection, which is the main reason behind the algorithm’s fall back at subject 4. Since this step contains too many computationally expensive ellipse fitting and error calculation routines, it significantly stretchs out the execution time if absence of a near-circular segment is the case.  analysis, we boost the execution of algorithm and pave the way for real-time applications for high resolution images. We performed a comprehensive set of experiments by comparing the proposed method with three state of the art algorithms and provided both quantitative and qualitative results. Experimental evaluations show that the proposed algorithm can detect the pupil even in tough occlusive cases without compromising the real-time applicability constraints.  5. Conclusions Pupil detection is an indispensable step in many eye tracking applications and have to be performed precisely. In most studies, pupil detection is handled with straightforward methods which lack accuracy and fail in occlusive cases. In this study we focused on developing an efficient feature-based algorithm for pupil boundary detection by using the entropy of edge segments. We basically find elliptical arcs in an input image and try to obtain a final ellipse encircling the pupil with the consensus of all obtained features. Because the edge segment detection method we employed provide optimum localization, elliptical arcs we extract from edge segments accurately encircle pupil boundary and estimates its center. Moreover, by means of the gradient distribution  References References [1] S. Goni, J. Echeto, A. Villanueva, R. Cabeza, Robust algorithm for pupil-glint vector detection in a videooculography eyetracking system, in: Int’l Conf. Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2004, pp. 941–944. [2] T. Mäenpää, An iterative algorithm for fast iris detection, in: Advances in Biometric Person Authentication, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 127–134. [3] X. Long, O. K. Tonguz, A. Kiderman, A high speed eye tracking system with robust pupil center estimation algorithm, in: IEEE Int’l Conf. Engineering in Medicine and Biology, 2007, pp. 3331–3334. [4] A. Keil, G. Albuquerque, K. Berger, M. A. Magnor, Real-time gaze tracking with a consumer-grade video camera, Václav Skala-UNION Agency, 2010. [5] L. Lin, L. Pan, L. Wei, L. Yu, A robust and accurate detection of pupil images, in: Int’l Conf. Biomedical Engineering and Informatics, Vol. 1, 2010, pp. 70–74. [6] J.-G. Wang, E. Sung, Study on eye gaze estimation, IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics) 32 (3) (2002) 332–350. [7] L. Ma, T. Tan, Y. Wang, D. Zhang, Efficient iris recognition by characterizing key local variations, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13 (6) (2004) 739– 750. [8] S. Dey, D. Samanta, An efficient approach for pupil detection in iris images, in: Int’l Conf. Advanced Computing and Communications, 2007, pp. 382–389. [9] J. San Agustin, H. Skovsgaard, E. Mollenbach, M. Barret, M. Tall, D. W. Hansen, J. P. Hansen, Evaluation of a low-cost open-source gaze tracker, in: ACM Int’l Symposium on Eye-Tracking Research & Applications (ETRA), New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 77–80. [10] D. Ballard, Generalizing the hough transform to detect arbitrary shapes, Pattern Recognition 13 (2) (1981) 111 – 122.  Table 3: Detailed average timing results of proposed algorithm for different subjects  Dataset  ROI Detection  Edge Segment Detection  Gradient Entropy Comp.  Corner Detection  Arc Extraction  Pupil Detection  TOTAL (ms)  Step  Subject 1 Subject 2 Subject 3 Subject 4 Subject 5 Overall  3.47 3.31 2.81 3.91 3.52 3.49  1.46 1.51 1.28 1.96 1.71 1.68  0.07 0.21 0.20 0.17 0.27 0.23  0.06 0.09 0.06 0.14 0.08 0.09  0.25 0.43 0.29 0.62 0.41 0.46  0.27 0.83 0.39 3.97 0.52 1.30  5.58 6.39 5.04 10.77 6.51 7.25  15  [11] M. A. Fischler, R. C. Bolles, Random sample consensus: A paradigm for model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography, Communications of the ACM 24 (6) (1981) 381–395. [12] Y. Ebisawa, Improved video-based eye-gaze detection method, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 47 (4) (1998) 948–955. [13] J. B. Hiley, A. H. Redekopp, R. Fazel-Rezai, A low cost human computer interface based on eye tracking, in: Int’l Conf. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS), 2006, pp. 3226–3229. [14] C. Morimoto, D. Koons, A. Amir, M. Flickner, Pupil detection and tracking using multiple light sources, Image and Vision Computing 18 (4) (2000) 331 – 335. [15] J. Daugman, How iris recognition works, in: IEEE Int’l Conf. Image Processing (ICIP), Vol. 1, 2002, pp. I–33– I–36. [16] E. M. Arvacheh, H. R. Tizhoosh, Iris segmentation: Detecting pupil, limbus and eyelids, in: IEEE Int’ Conf. Image Processing (ICIP), 2006, pp. 2453–2456. [17] D. Zhu, S. T. Moore, T. Raphan, Robust pupil center detection using a curvature algorithm, Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 59 (3) (1999) 145 – 157. [18] N. Kumar, S. Kohlbecher, E. Schneider, A novel approach to video-based pupil tracking, in: IEEE Int’l Conf. Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC 2009), 2009, pp. 1255–1262. [19] D. Li, D. Winfield, D. J. Parkhurst, Starburst: A hybrid algorithm for video-based eye tracking combining feature-based and model-based approaches, in: IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, 2005, pp. 79–79. [20] W. J. Ryan, D. L. Woodard, A. T. Duchowski, S. T. Birchfield, Adapting starburst for elliptical iris segmentation, in: IEEE Int’l Conf. Biometrics: Theory, Applications and Systems,, 2008, pp. 1–7. [21] L. Świrski, A. Bulling, N. Dodgson, Robust real-time pupil tracking in highly off-axis images, in: ACM Int’l Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications (ETRA), 2012, pp. 173–176. [22] W. Fuhl, T. C. Santini, T. Kuebler, E. Kasneci, Else: Ellipse selection for robust pupil detection in real-world environments, ACM Int’l Symp. Eye Tracking Research and Applications (ETRA). [23] P. Viola, M. Jones, Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of simple features, in: IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Vol. 1, 2001, pp. 511–518. [24] Y. Ebisawa, Robust pupil detection by image difference with positional compensation, in: IEEE Int’l Conf. Virtual Environments, Human-Computer Interfaces and Measurements Systems, 2009, pp. 143–148. [25] D. W. Hansen, Q. Ji, In the eye of the beholder: A survey of models for eyes and gaze, IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI) 32 (3) (2010) 478–500. [26] C. H. Morimoto, M. R. Mimica, Eye gaze tracking techniques for interactive applications, Computer Vision and Image Understanding 98 (1) (2005) 4 – 24. [27] C. Akinlar, C. Topal, EDCircles: A real-time circle detector with a false detection control, Pattern Recognition 46 (3) (2013) 725 – 740. [28] C. Topal, C. Akinlar, Edge Drawing: A combined realtime edge and segment detector, Journal of Visual Com-  [29]  [30]  [31]  [32]  [33]  [34]  [35]  [36]  [37]  [38]  [39] [40]  [41]  [42]  [43]  [44]  [45] [46]  [47]  16  munication and Image Representation 23 (6) (2012) 862 – 872. C. Topal, O. Ozsen, C. Akinlar, Real-time edge segment detection with edge drawing algorithm, in: Int’l Symp. Image and Signal Processing and Analysis (ISPA), 2011, pp. 313–318. A. Desolneux, L. Moisan, J.-M. Morel, Edge detection by helmholtz principle, Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision 14 (3) (2001) 271–284. A. Desolneux, L. Moisan, J. M. Morel, From Gestalt Theory to Image Analysis: A Probabilistic Approach, Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2007. C. Akinlar, C. Topal, EDPF: A Real-time Parameterfree Edge Segment Detector with a False Detection Control, Int’l Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence 26 (1). L. Jia, L. Kitchen, Object-based image similarity computation using inductive learning of contour-segment relations, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 9 (1) (2000) 80–87. C. Martinez-Ortiz, J. Žunić, Curvature weighted gradient based shape orientation, Pattern Recognition 43 (9) (2010) 3035 – 3041. G. Taubin, Estimation of planar curves, surfaces, and nonplanar space curves defined by implicit equations with applications to edge and range image segmentation, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 13 (11) (1991) 1115–1138. A. Fitzgibbon, M. Pilu, R. B. Fisher, Direct least square fitting of ellipses, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. (PAMI) 21 (5) (1999) 476–480. P. L. Rosin, Assessing error of fit functions for ellipses, Graphical models and image processing 58 (5) (1996) 494–502. R. Nürnberg, Distance from a point to an ellipse, wwwf.imperial.ac.uk/~rn/distance2ellipse.pdf, accessed September 15, 2017 (2006). S. Ramanujan, Collected papers of srinivasa ramanujan, Chelsea Publishing, New York. H. I. Cakir, C. Topal, C. Akinlar, An occlusion-resistant ellipse detection method by joining coelliptic arcs, in: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2016, pp. 492–507. C. Topal, K. Özkan, B. Benligiray, C. Akinlar, A robust CSS corner detector based on the turning angle curvature of image gradients, in: ICASSP, 2013, pp. 1444–1448. Pupil detector supplementary webpage, http://c-viz. anadolu.edu.tr/PupilDetector, accessed on September 15, 2017. Starburst source codes page., https://github.com/ thirtysixthspan/Starburst, accessed on September 15, 2017. Swirski’s source codes page., https://github.com/ LeszekSwirski/pupiltracker/, accessed on September 15, 2017. ElSe source codes page., ftp://messor.informatik. uni-tuebingen.de/, accessed on September 15, 2017. D. K. Prasad, M. K. H. Leung, S. Y. Cho, Edge curvature and convexity based ellipse detection method, Pattern Recognition 45 (9) (2012) 3204–3221. A. Y. S. Chia, S. Rahardja, D. Rajan, M. K. Leung, A split and merge based ellipse detector with selfcorrecting capability, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 20 (7) (2011) 1991–2006.  [48] M. Fornaciari, A. Prati, R. Cucchiara, A fast and effective ellipse detector for embedded vision applications, Pattern Recognition 47 (2014) 3693–3708.  17

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
