Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_1129

Abstract:
Simultaneous Orthogonal Planarity? Patrizio Angelini1 , Steven Chaplick2 , Sabine Cornelsen3 , Giordano Da Lozzo4 , Giuseppe Di Battista4 , Peter Eades5 , Philipp Kindermann6 , Jan Kratochvı́l7 , Fabian Lipp2 , and Ignaz Rutter8  arXiv:1608.08427v1 [cs.CG] 30 Aug 2016  1  6  Universität Tübingen, Germany – angelini@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de 2 Universität Würzburg, Germany – {steven.chaplick,fabian.lipp}@uni-wuerzburg.de 3 Konstanz University, Germany – sabine.cornelsen@uni-konstanz.de 4 Roma Tre University, Italy – {dalozzo,gdb}@dia.uniroma3.it 5 The University of Sydney, Australia – peter@it.usyd.edu.au FernUniversität in Hagen, Germany – philipp.kindermann@fernuni-hagen.de 7 Charles University, Czech Republic – honza@kam.mff.cuni.cz 8 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany – rutter@kit.edu  Abstract. We introduce and study the OrthoSEFE-k problem: Given k planar graphs each with maximum degree 4 and the same vertex set, do they admit an OrthoSEFE, that is, is there an assignment of the vertices to grid points and of the edges to paths on the grid such that the same edges in distinct graphs are assigned the same path and such that the assignment induces a planar orthogonal drawing of each of the k graphs? We show that the problem is NP-complete for k ≥ 3 even if the shared graph is a Hamiltonian cycle and has sunflower intersection and for k ≥ 2 even if the shared graph consists of a cycle and of isolated vertices. Whereas the problem is polynomial-time solvable for k = 2 when the union graph has maximum degree five and the shared graph is biconnected. Further, when the shared graph is biconnected and has sunflower intersection, we show that every positive instance has an OrthoSEFE with at most three bends per edge.  1  Introduction  The input of a simultaneous embedding problem consists of several graphs G1 = (V, E1 ), . . . , Gk = (V, Ek ) on the same vertex set. For a fixed drawing style S, the simultaneous embedding problem asks whether there exist drawings Γ1 , . . . , Γk of G1 , . . . , Gk , respectively, in drawing style S such that for any i and j the restrictions of Γi and Γj to Gi ∩ Gj = (V, Ei ∩ Ej ) coincide. The problem has been most widely studied in the setting of topological planar drawings, where vertices are represented as points and edges are represented as ?  This research was initiated at the Bertinoro Workshop on Graph Drawing 2016. Research was partially supported by DFG grant Ka812/17-1, by MIUR project AMANDA, prot. 2012C4E3KT 001, by the grant no. 14-14179S of the Czech Science Foundation GACR, and by DFG grant WA 654/21-1.  pairwise interior-disjoint Jordan arcs between their endpoints. This problem is called Simultaneous Embedding with Fixed Edges or SEFE-k for short, where k is the number of input graphs. It is known that SEFE-k is NP-complete for k ≥ 3, even in the restricted case of sunflower instances [26], where every pair of graphs shares the same set of edges, and even if such a set induces a star [3]. On the other hand, the complexity for k = 2 is still open. Recently, efficient algorithms for restricted instances have been presented, namely when (i) the shared graph G∩ = G1 ∩ G2 is biconnected [19,1] or a star-graph [1], (ii) G∩ is a collection of disjoint cycles [13], (iii) every connected component of G∩ is either subcubic or biconnected [26,11], (iv) G1 and G2 are biconnected and G∩ is connected [14], and (v) G∩ is connected and the input graphs have maximum degree 5 [14]; see the survey by Bläsius et al. [12] for an overview. For planar straight-line drawings, the simultaneous embedding problem is called Simultaneous Geometric Embedding and it is known to be NP-hard even for two graphs [17]. Besides simultaneous intersection representation for, e.g., interval graphs [20,14] and permutation and chordal graphs [21], it is only recently that the simultaneous embedding paradigm has been applied to other fundamental planarity-related drawing styles, namely simultaneous level planar drawings [2] and RAC drawings [4,8]. We continue this line of research by studying simultaneous embeddings in the planar orthogonal drawing style, where vertices are assigned to grid points and edges to paths on the grid connecting their endpoints [29]. In accordance with the existing naming scheme, we define OrthoSEFE-k to be the problem of testing whether k input graphs hG1 , . . . , Gk i admit a simultaneous planar orthogonal drawing. If such a drawing exists, we call it an OrthoSEFE of hG1 , . . . , Gk i. Note that it is a necessary condition that each Gi has maximum degree 4 in order to obtain planar orthogonal drawings. Hence, in the remainder of the paper we assume that all instances have this property. For instances with this property, at least when the shared graph is connected, the problem SEFE-2 can be solved efficiently [14]. However, there are instances of OrthoSEFE-2 that admit a SEFE but not an OrthoSEFE; see Fig. 1(a). Unless mentioned otherwise, all instances of OrthoSEFE-k and SEFE-k we consider are sunflower. Notice that instances with k = 2 are always sunflower. Let hG1 = (V, E1 ), G2 = (V, E2 )i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2. We define the shared graph (resp. the union graph) to be the graph G∩ = (V, E1 ∩ E2 ) (resp. G∪ = (V, E1 ∪ E2 )) with the same vertex set as G1 and G2 , whose edge set is the intersection (resp. the union) of the ones of G1 and G2 . Also, we call the edges in E1 ∩ E2 the shared edges and we call the edges in E1 \ E2 and in E2 \ E1 the exclusive edges. The definitions of shared graph, shared edges, and exclusive edges naturally extend to sunflower instances for any value of k. One main issue is to decide how degree-2 vertices of the shared graph are represented. Note that, in planar topological drawings, degree-2 vertices do not require any decisions as there exists only a single cyclic order of their incident edges. In the case of orthogonal drawings there are, however, two choices for a degree-2 vertex: It can either be drawn straight, i.e., it is incident to two angles 2  C v3  v  v4  v5  u (a)  (b)  Fig. 1. (a) A negative instance of OrthoSEFE-2. Shared edges are black, while exclusive edges are red and blue. The red edges require 270◦ angles on different sides of C. Thus, the blue edge (u, v) cannot be drawn. Note that the given drawing is a SEFE-2. (b) Examples of side assignments for the exclusive edges incident to degree-2 vertices of G∩ : orthogonality constraints are satisfied at v4 and v5 , while they are violated at v3 .  of 180◦ , or bent, i.e., it is incident to one angle of 90◦ and to one angle of 270◦ . If v is a degree-2 vertex of the shared graph with neighbors u and w, and two exclusive edges e, e0 , say of G1 , are incident to v and are embedded on the same side of the path uvw, then v must be bent, which in turn implies that also every exclusive edge of G2 incident to v has to be embedded on the same side of uvw as e and e0 . In this way, the two input graphs of OrthoSEFE-2 interact via the degree-2 vertices. It is the difficulty of controlling this interaction that marks the main difference between SEFE-k and OrthoSEFE-k. To study this interaction in isolation, we focus on instances of OrthoSEFE-2 where the shared graph is a cycle for most of the paper. Note that such instances are trivial yes-instances of SEFE-k (provided the input graphs are all planar). Contributions and Outline. In Section 2 we provide our notation and we show that the existence of an OrthoSEFE of an instance of OrthoSEFE-k can be described as a combinatorial embedding problem. In Section 3, we show that OrthoSEFE-3 is NP-complete even if the shared graph is a cycle, and that OrthoSEFE-2 is NP-complete even if the shared graph consists of a cycle plus some isolated vertices. This contrasts the situation of SEFE-k where these cases are polynomially solvable [1,10,19,26]. In Section 4, we show that OrthoSEFE2 is efficiently solvable if the shared graph is a cycle and the union graph has maximum degree 5. Finally, in Section 5, we extend this result to the case where the shared graph is biconnected (and the union graph still has maximum degree 5). Moreover, we show that any positive instance of OrthoSEFE-k whose shared graph is biconnected admits an OrthoSEFE with at most three bends per edge. We close with some concluding remarks and open questions in Section 6. Full proofs can be found in the Appendix.  2  Preliminaries  We will extensively make use of the Not-All-Equal 3-Sat (Nae3Sat) problem [25, p.187]. An instance of Nae3Sat consists of a 3-CNF formula φ with variables x1 , . . . , xn and clauses c1 , . . . , cm . The task is to find a Nae truth as3  signment, i.e., a truth assignment such that each clause contains both a true and a false literal. Nae3Sat is known to be NP-complete [27]. The variable–clause graph is the bipartite graph whose vertices are the variables and the clauses, and whose edges represent the membership of a variable in a clause. The problem Planar Nae3Sat is the restriction of Nae3Sat to instances whose variable– clause graph is planar. Planar Nae3Sat can be solved efficiently [23,28]. Embedding Constraints. Let hG1 , . . . , Gk i be an OrthoSEFE-k instance. A SEFE is a collection of embeddings Ei for the Gi such that their restrictions on G∩ are the same. Note that in the literature, a SEFE is often defined as a collection of drawings rather than a collection of embeddings. However, the two definitions are equivalent [22]. For a SEFE to be realizable as an OrthoSEFE it needs to satisfy two additional conditions. First, let v be a vertex of degree 2 in G∩ with neighbors u and w. If in any embedding Ei there exist two exclusive edges incident to v that are embedded on the same side of the path uvw, then any exclusive edge incident to v in any of the Ej 6= Ei must be embedded on the same side of the path uvw. Second, let v be a vertex of degree 3 in G∩ . All exclusive edges incident to v must appear between the same two edges of G∩ around v. We call these the orthogonality constraints. See Fig. 1(b). Theorem 1. An instance hG1 , . . . , Gk i of OrthoSEFE-k has an OrthoSEFE if and only if it admits a SEFE satisfying the orthogonality constraints. For the case in which the shared graph is a cycle C, we give a simpler version of the constraints in Theorem 1, which will prove useful in the remainder of the paper. By the Jordan curve Theorem, a planar drawing of cycle C divides the plane into a bounded and an unbounded region – the inside and the outside of C, which we call the sides of C. Now the problem is to assign the exclusive edges to either of the two sides of C so that the following two conditions are fulfilled. Planarity Constraints. Two exclusive edges of the same graph must be drawn on different sides of C if their endvertices alternate along C. Orthogonality Constraints. Let v ∈ V be a vertex that is adjacent to two exclusive edges ei and e0i of the same graph Gi , i ∈ {1, . . . , k}. If ei and e0i are on the same side of C, then all exclusive edges incident to v of all graphs G1 , . . . , Gk must be on the same side as ei and e0i . Note that this is a reformulation of the general orthogonality constraints. Further, the orthogonality constraints also imply that if ei and e0i are on different sides of C, then for each graph Gj that contains two exclusive edges ej and e0j incident to v, with j ∈ {1, . . . , k}, ej and e0j must be on different sides of C. The next theorem follows from Theorem 1 and from the following two observations. First, for a sunflower instance hG1 , . . . , Gk i whose shared graph is a cycle, any collection of embeddings is a SEFE [22]. Second, the planarity constraints are necessary and sufficient for the existence of an embedding of Gi [5]. Theorem 2. An instance of OrthoSEFE-k whose shared graph is a cycle C has an OrthoSEFE if and only if there exists an assignment of the exclusive edges to the two sides of C satisfying the planarity and orthogonality constraints. 4  Cj sj α j  c4 = (x1, x3, x4)  j δj t  γj  βj yaj ybj  ycj  j V54  sji  uji  vij  wij  zij  rij  C4  V44  Vi  V34 V24 V14  V15  V25  V35  V45 V55  tji  (a)  (b)  Fig. 2. (a) A clause gadget Cj (top) and a variable-clause gadget Vij (bottom); solid edges belong to the gadgets, dotted edges are optional, and dashed edges are transmission edges. (b) Illustration of instance hG1 , G2 , G3 i, focused on a clause c4 . Black edges belong to the shared graph G∩ . The red, blue, and green edges are the exclusive edges of G1 , G2 , and G3 , respectively.  3  Hardness Results  We show that OrthoSEFE-k is NP-complete for k ≥ 3 for instances with sunflower intersection even if the shared graph is a cycle, and for k = 2 even if the shared graph consists of a cycle and isolated vertices. Theorem 3. OrthoSEFE-k with k ≥ 3 is NP-complete, even for instances with sunflower intersection in which (i) the shared graph is a cycle and (ii) k − 1 of the input graphs are outerplanar and have maximum degree 3. Proof sketch. The membership in NP directly follows from Theorem 2. To prove the NP-hardness, we show a polynomial-time reduction from the NP-complete problem Positive Exactly-Three Nae3Sat [24], which is the variant of Nae3Sat in which each clause consists of exactly three unnegated literals. Let x1 , x2 , . . . , xn be the variables and let c1 , c2 , . . . , cm be the clauses of a 3-CNF formula φ of Positive Exactly-Three Nae3Sat. We show how to construct an equivalent instance hG1 , G2 , G3 i of OrthoSEFE-3 such that G1 and G2 are outerplanar graphs of maximum degree 3. We refer to the exclusive edges in G1 , G2 , and G3 as red, blue, and green, respectively; refer to Fig. 2. For each clause cj , j = 1, . . . , m, we create a clause gadget C j as in Fig. 2(a) (top). For each variable xi , i = 1, . . . , n, and each clause cj , j = 1, . . . , m, we create a variable-clause gadget Vij as in Fig. 2(a) (bottom). Observe that the (dotted) green edge {wij , rij } in a variable-clause gadget is only part of Vij if xi does not occur in cj . Otherwise, there is a green edge {wij , yxj } connecting wij to one of the three vertices yaj , ybj , or ycj (dashed stubs) in the clause gadget. Observe that these three variable-clause edges per clause can be realized in such a way that there exist no planarity constraints between pairs of them. In Fig. 2(b), the variable-clause gadgets V14 , V34 , V44 are incident to variable-clause edges, while V24 and V54 contain edges {w24 , r24 } and {w54 , r54 }, respectively. 5  The gadgets are ordered as indicated in Fig. 2(b). The variable-clause gadgets Vij , with i = 1, . . . , n, always precede the clause gadget V j , for any j = 1, . . . , m. Further, if j is odd, then the gadgets V1j , . . . , Vnj appear in this order, otherwise they appear in reversed order Vnj , . . . , V1j . Finally, Vij and Vij+1 , for i = 1, . . . , n and j = 1, . . . , m − 1, are connected by an edge {wij , wij+1 }, which is blue if j is odd and red if j is even. We call these edges transmission edges. Assume hG1 , G2 , G3 i admits an OrthoSEFE. Planarity constraints and orthogonality constraints guarantee three properties: (i) If the edge {uji , vij } is , vij+1 }, i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , m − 1. This is due to inside C, then so is {uj+1 i the fact that, by the planarity constraints, the two green edges incident to wij lie on the same side of C and hence, by the orthogonality constraints, the two transmission edges incident to wij also lie in this side. We call {u1i , vi1 } the truth edge of variable xi . (ii) Not all the three green edges a = {αj , β j }, b = {β j , γ j }, and c = {γ j , δ j } lie on the same side of C. Namely, the two red edges of the clause gadget C j must lie on opposite sides of C because of the interplay between the planarity and the orthogonality constraints in the subgraph of C j induced by the vertices between β j and γ j . Hence, if edges a, b, and c lie in the same side of C, then the orthogonality constraints at either β j or γ j are not satisfied. (iii) For each clause cj = (xa , xb , xc ), edge a = {αj , β j } lies in the same side of C as the truth edge of xa . This is due to the planarity constraints between each of these two edges and the variable-clause edge {waj , yaj }. Analogously, edge b (edge c) lies on the same side as the truth edge of xb (of xc ). Hence, setting xi = true (xi = false) if the truth edge of xi is inside C (outside C) yields a Nae3Sat truth assignment that satisfies φ. The proof for the other direction is based on the fact that assigning the truth edges to either of the two sides of C according to the Nae3Sat assignment of φ also implies a unique side assignment for the remaining exclusive edges that satisfies all the orthogonality and the planarity constraints. It is easy to see that G1 and G2 are outerplanar graphs with maximum degree 3, and that the reduction can be extended to any k > 3.  In the following we describe how to modify the construction in Theorem 3 to show hardness of OrthoSEFE-2. We keep only the edges of G1 and G3 . Variable-clause gadgets and clause gadgets remain the same, as they are composed only of edges belonging to these two graphs. We replace each transmission edge in G2 by a transmission path composed of alternating green and red edges, starting and ending with a red edge. This transformation allows these paths to traverse the transmission edges of G1 and the variable-clause edges of G3 without introducing crossings between edges of the same color. It is easy to see that the properties described in the proof of Theorem 3 on the assignments of the exclusive edges to the two sides of C also hold in the constructed instance, where transmission paths take the role of the transmission edges. Theorem 4. OrthoSEFE-2 is NP-complete, even for instances hG1 , G2 i in which the shared graph consists of a cycle and a set of isolated vertices. 6  e  e  δ  Pδ β  Pβ P γ  γ  α f  f (a)  e e G xδ  Pα  f  (b)  Gφ c0e xβ x γ  xα  (c)  xe xδ  c00e  xβ x γ c0f xα 00 cf xf (d)  Fig. 3. (a) Instance hG1 , G2 i satisfying the properties of Lemma 1, where the edges in E2 belonging to the components α, β, γ, and δ of H have different line styles. (b) e (d) Variable–clause graph Gφ . Polygons for the components of H. (c) Graph G.  4  Shared Graph is a Cycle  In this section we give a polynomial-time algorithm for instances of OrthoSEFE2 whose shared graph is a cycle and whose union graph has maximum degree 5 (Theorem 5). In order to obtain this result, we present an efficient algorithm for more restricted instances (Lemma 1) and give a series of transformations (Lemma 2–3) to reduce any instance with the above properties to one that can be solved by the algorithm in Lemma 1. Lemma 1. OrthoSEFE-2 is in P for instances hG1 , G2 i such that the shared graph C is a cycle and G1 is an outerplanar graph with maximum degree 3. Proof. The algorithm is based on a reduction to Planar Nae3Sat, which is in P [23,28]. First note that since G1 is outerplanar there exist no two edges in E1 alternating along C. Hence, there are no planarity constraints for G1 . We now define an auxiliary graph H with vertex set E2 \ E1 and edges corresponding to pairs of edges alternating along C; see Fig 3(a). W.l.o.g. we may assume that H is bipartite, since G2 would not meet the planarity constraints otherwise [5]. Let B be the set of connected components of H, and for each component B ∈ B, fix a partition B1 , B2 of B into independent sets (possibly B2 = ∅ in case of a singleton B). Note that in any inside/outside assignment of the exclusive edges of G2 that meets the planarity constraints, for every B ∈ B, all edges of B1 lie in one side of C and all edges of B2 lie in the other side. Draw the cycle C as a circle in the plane. For a component B ∈ B, let PB be the polygon inscribed into C whose corners are the endvertices in V of the edges in E2 corresponding to the vertices of B; refer to Fig. 3(b). If B only contains one vertex (i.e., one edge of G2 ), we consider the digon PB as the straight-line segment connecting the vertices of this edge. If B has at least two vertices, we let PB be open along its sides, i.e. it will contain the corners and all inner points (in Fig. 3(b) we depict this by making the sides of PB slightly concave). One can easily show that for any two components B, D ∈ B, their polygons PB , PD e may share only some of their corners, but no inner points. Hence the graph G 7  obtained by placing a vertex xB inside the polygon PB , for B ∈ B, making xB adjacent to each corner of PB and adding the edges E1 , is planar; see Fig. 3(c). We construct a formula φ with variables xB , B ∈ B, such that φ is Naesatisfiable if and only if hG1 , G2 i admits an inside/outside assignment meeting all planarity and orthogonality constraints. The encoding of the truth assignment will be such that xB is true when the edges of B1 are inside C and the edges of B2 are outside, and xB is false if the reverse holds. Every assignment satisfying the planarity constraints for G2 defines a truth-assignment in the above sense. Let e = (v, w) be an exclusive edge of E1 and let e1v , e2v (e1w , e2w ) be the exclusive edges of E2 incident to v (to w, respectively); we assume that all such four edges of E2 exist, the other cases being simpler. Let B(u, i) be the component containing the edge eiu , for u ∈ {v, w} and i ∈ {1, 2}. Define the literal `iu to be xB(u,i) if eiu ∈ B1 (u, i) and ¬xB(u,i) if eiu ∈ B2 (u, i). With our interpretation of the truth assignment, an edge eiu is inside C if and only if `iu is true. Now, for the assignment to meet the orthogonality constraints, if `1v = `2v , say both are true, then e must be assigned inside C as well, which would cause a problem if and only if `1w = `2w = false. Hence the orthogonality constraints are described by Nae-satisfiability of the clauses ce = (`1v , `2v , ¬`1w , ¬`2w ), for each e ∈ E1 . To reduce to Nae3Sat, we introduce a new variable xe for each edge e ∈ E1 \ E2 and replace the clause ce by two clauses c0e = (`1v , `2v , xe ) and c00e = (¬xe , ¬`1w , ¬`2w ). A planar drawing of the variable–clause graph Gφ of the e (see Figs. 3(c) resulting formula φ is obtained from the planar drawing Γe of G and 3(d)) by (i) placing each variable xB , with B ∈ B, on the point where vertex xB lies in Γe, (ii) placing each variable xe , with e ∈ E1 , on any point of edge e in Γe, (iii) placing clauses c0e and c00e , for each edge e = (v, w) ∈ E1 , on the points where vertices v and w lie in Γe, respectively, and (iv) drawing the edges of Gφ as the corresponding edges in Γe. This implies that Gφ is planar and hence we can test the Nae-satisfiability of φ in polynomial time [23,28]. t u The next two lemmas show that we can use Lemma 1 to test in polynomial time any instance of OrthoSEFE-2 such that G∩ is a cycle and each vertex v ∈ V has degree at most 3 in either G1 or G2 .  Lemma 2. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph is a cycle and such that G1 has maximum degree 3. It is possible to construct in polynomial time an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph is a cycle and such that G∗1 is outerplanar and has maximum degree 3. Proof sketch. We construct an equivalent instance hG01 , G02 i of OrthoSEFE-2 such that G0∩ is a cycle, G01 has maximum degree 3, and the number of pairs of edges in G01 that alternate along G0∩ is smaller than the number of pairs of edges in G1 that alternate along G∩ . Repeatedly applying this transformation yields an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i satisfying the requirements of the lemma. Consider two edges e = (u, v) and f = (w, z) of G1 such that u, w, v, z appear in this order along cycle G∩ and such that the path Pu,z in G∩ between u and z that contains v and w has minimal length. If G1 is not outerplanar, then the edges e and f always exist. Fig. 4 illustrates the construction of hG01 , G02 i. 8  e u  H1  eav  eaw w  H2  ebw  v  e  eaw  ebv z  H3  H1  u  f  w0  eav z0  H2  w  v  u0  f0  ebw  ebv  e0 v0  H3  z  f  Fig. 4. Instances (left) hG1 , G2 i and (right) hG01 , G02 i for the proof of Lemma 2. Edges of G∩ (G0∩ ) are black. Exclusive edges of G1 (G01 ) are red and those of G2 (G02 ) are blue. h  f  e ue  H1  v  H2  uf  e H3  uh  ue  f 00  e0  00  h  f0  H1  ve  vf  h00  0  v0  H2  vh  uf  H3  uh  Fig. 5. Illustration of the transformation for the proof of Lemma 3 to reduce the number of vertices incident to two exclusive edges in G1 . Edges e0 , f 0 of G2 and h0 of G1 (right) take the role of edges e, f of G1 and h of G2 (left), respectively. Thus, the orthogonality constraints at v 0 are equivalent to those at v.  By the choice of e and f , and by the fact that G1 has maximum degree 3, there is no exclusive edge in G1 with one endpoint in the set H2 of vertices between w and v, and the other one not in H2 . Further, observe that in an OrthoSEFE of hG01 , G02 i edges f and f 0 (edges e and e0 ) must be on the same side. Further, e and f must be in different sides of G0∩ . It can be concluded that hG01 , G02 i has an OrthoSEFE if and only if hG1 , G2 i has an OrthoSEFE.  The proof of the next lemma is based on the replacement illustrated in Fig. 5. Afterwards, we combine these results to present the main result of the section. Lemma 3. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph is a cycle and whose union graph has maximum degree 5. It is possible to construct in polynomial time an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph is a cycle and such that graph G∗1 has maximum degree 3. Theorem 5. OrthoSEFE-2 can be solved in polynomial time for instances whose shared graph is a cycle and whose union graph has maximum degree 5.  5  Shared Graph is Biconnected  We now study OrthoSEFE-k for instances whose shared graph is biconnected. In Theorem 6, we give a polynomial-time Turing reduction from instances of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph is biconnected to instances whose shared graph is a cycle. In Theorem 7, we give an algorithm that, given a positive instance of OrthoSEFE-k such that the shared graph is biconnected together 9  with a SEFE satisfying the orthogonality constraints, constructs an OrthoSEFE with at most three bends per edge. We start with the Turing reduction, i.e., we develop an algorithm that takes as input an instance hG1 , G2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph G∩ = G1 ∩G2 is biconnected and produces a set of O(n) instances hG11 , G12 i,. . . ,hGh1 , Gh2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graphs are cycles. The output is such that hG1 , G2 i is a positive instance if and only if all instances hGi1 , Gi2 i, i = 1, . . . , h, are positive. The reduction is based on the SEFE testing algorithm for instances whose shared graph is biconnected by Bläsius et al. [10,11], which can be seen as a generalized and unrooted version of the one by Angelini et al. [1]. We first describe a preprocessing step. Afterwards, we give an outline of the approach of Bläsius et al. [11] and present the Turing reduction in two steps. We assume familiarity with SPQR-trees [7,6]; for formal definitions see Appendix A. Lemma 4. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph is biconnected. It is possible to construct in polynomial time an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i whose shared graph is biconnected and such that each endpoint of an exclusive edge has degree 2 in the shared graph. We continue with a brief outline of the algorithm by Bläsius et al. [11]. First, the algorithm computes the SPQR-tree T of the shared graph. To avoid special cases, T is augmented by adding S-nodes with only two virtual edges such that each P-node and each R-node is adjacent only to S-nodes and Q-nodes. Then, necessary conditions on the embeddings of P-nodes and R-nodes are fixed up to a flip following some necessary conditions. Afterwards, by traversing all S-nodes, a global 2SAT formula is produced whose satisfying assignments correspond to choices of the flips that result in a SEFE. We refine this approach and show that we can choose the flips independently for each S-node, which allows us to reduce each of them to a separate instance, whose shared graph is a cycle. We now describe the algorithm of Bläsius et al. [11] in more detail. Consider a node µ of T . A part of skel(µ) is either a vertex of skel(µ) or a virtual edge of skel(µ), which represents a subgraph of G. An exclusive edge e has an attachment in a part x of skel(µ) if x is a vertex that is an endpoint of e or if x is a virtual edge whose corresponding subgraph contains an endpoint of e. An exclusive edge e of G1 or of G2 is important for µ if its endpoints are in different parts of skel(µ). It is not hard to see that, to obtain a SEFE, the embedding of the skeleton skel(µ) of each node µ has to be chosen such that for each exclusive edge e the parts containing the attachments of e share a face. It can be shown that any embedding choice for P-nodes and R-nodes that satisfies these conditions can, after possibly flipping it, be used to obtain a SEFE [1, Theorem 1]. The proof does not modify the order of exclusive edges around degree-2 vertices of G∩ , and therefore applies to OrthoSEFE-2 as well. Now let µ be an S-node. Let ε be a virtual edge of skel(µ), Gε be the subgraph represented by ε, and ν be the corresponding neighbor of µ in the SPQR-tree of G. An attachment of ν with respect to µ is an interior vertex of Gε that is incident to an important edge e for µ. If ν has such an attachment, then it is 10  u  u  u Pε  skel(ν) Cε v (a)  v (b)  v (c)  Fig. 6. (a) Skeleton of an S-node µ in which the R-node ν corresponding to the virtual edge ε = (u, v) is expanded to show its skeleton. (b) Replacing ε with cycle Cε . (c) Replacing Cε with path Pε ; vertices a1 , a2 , x1 , . . . , x4 , b1 , b2 are green boxes.  a P- or R-node. It is a necessary condition on the embedding of Gε that each attachment x with respect to µ must be incident to a face incident to the virtual edge twin(ε) of skel(ν) representing µ, and that their clockwise circular order together with the poles of ε is fixed up to reversal [11, Lemma 8]. For the purpose of avoiding crossings in skel(µ), we can thus replace each virtual edge ε that does not represent a Q-node by a cycle Cε containing the attachments of ε with respect to µ and the poles of ε in the order Oε . We keep only the important edges of µ. Altogether this results in an instance hGµ1 , Gµ2 i of SEFE modeling the requirements for skel(µ); see Figs. 6(a) and 6(b). Lemma 5. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph is biconnected. Then hG1 , G2 i admits an OrthoSEFE if and only if all instances hGµ1 , Gµ2 i admit an OrthoSEFE.  Next, we transform a given instance hGµ1 , Gµ2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 as above into an equivalent instance hGµ1 , Gµ2 i whose shared graph is a cycle. Let Cεi be the cycles corresponding to the neighbor νi , i = 1, . . . , k of µ in hGµ1 , Gµ2 i. To obtain the instance hGµ1 , Gµ2 i, we replace each cycle Cεi with poles u and v by a path Pεi from u to v that first contains two special vertices a1 , a2 followed by the clockwise path from u to v (excluding the endpoints), then four special vertices x1 , . . . , x4 , then the counterclockwise path from u to v (excluding the endpoints), and finally two special vertices b1 , b2 followed by v. In addition to the existing exclusive edges (note that we do not remove any vertices), we add to G1 the exclusive edges (a2 , x3 ), (x1 , x3 ), (x2 , x4 ), (x2 , b1 ), and to G2 the exclusive edges (a1 , x3 ) and (x2 , b2 ) to G2 ; see Fig. 6(c). The above reduction together with the next lemma implies the main result. Lemma 6. hGµ1 , Gµ2 i admits an OrthoSEFE if and only if hGµ1 , Gµ2 i does. Theorem 6. OrthoSEFE-2 when the shared graph is biconnected is polynomialtime Turing reducible to OrthoSEFE-2 when the shared graph is a cycle. Also, the reduction does not increase the maximum degree of the union graph. Corollary 1. OrthoSEFE-2 can be solved in polynomial time for instances whose shared graph is biconnected and whose union graph has maximum degree 5. 11  to vn  vi  or  (a) around v1  vn  vi  v1  to v1  (b) around v2 , . . . , vn−1  (c) around vn  Fig. 7. Constructing a drawing with at most three bends per edge  Observe that, from the previous results it is not hard to also obtain a SEFE satisfying the orthogonality constraints, if it exists. We show how to construct an orthogonal geometric realizations of such a SEFE. Theorem 7. Let hG1 , . . . , Gk i be a positive instance of OrthoSEFE-k whose shared graph is biconnected. Then, there exists an OrthoSEFE hΓ1 , Γ2 , . . . , Γk i of hG1 , . . . , Gk i in which every edge has at most three bends. Proof sketch. We assume that a SEFE satisfying the orthogonality constraints is given. We adopt the method of Biedl and Kant [9]. We draw the vertices with increasing y-coordinates with respect to an s-t-ordering [15] v1 , . . . , vn on the shared graph. We choose the face to the left of (v1 , vn ) as the outer face of the union graph. The edges will bend at most on y-coordinates near their incident vertices and are drawn vertically otherwise. Fig. 11 indicates, how the ports are assigned. We make sure that an edge may only leave a vertex to the bottom if it is incident to vn or to a neighbor with a lower index. Thus, there are exactly three bends on {v1 , vn }. Any other edge {vi , vj }, 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n has at most one bend around vi and at most two bends around vj .   6  Conclusions and Future Work  In this work we introduced and studied the problem OrthoSEFE-k of realizing a SEFE in the orthogonal drawing style. While the problem is already NP-hard even for instances that can be efficiently tested for a SEFE, we presented a polynomial-time testing algorithm for instances consisting of two graphs whose shared graph is biconnected and whose union graph has maximum degree 5. We have also shown that any positive instance whose shared graph is biconnected can be realized with at most three bends per edge. We conclude the paper by presenting a lemma that, together with Theorem 6, shows that it suffices to only focus on a restricted family of instances to solve the problem for all instances whose shared graph is biconnected. Lemma 7. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph G∩ is a cycle. An equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 such that (i) the shared graph G∗∩ is a cycle, (ii) graph G∗1 is outerplanar, and (iii) no two degree-4 vertices in G∗1 are adjacent, can be constructed in polynomial time.  12  References 1. P. Angelini, G. D. Battista, F. Frati, M. Patrignani, and I. Rutter. Testing the simultaneous embeddability of two graphs whose intersection is a biconnected or a connected graph. J. Discrete Algorithms, 14:150–172, 2012. 2. P. Angelini, G. Da Lozzo, G. Di Battista, F. Frati, M. Patrignani, and I. Rutter. Beyond level planarity. In M. Nöllenburg and Y. Hu, editors, GD ’16, LNCS. Springer, 2017. To appear. 3. P. Angelini, G. D. Lozzo, and D. Neuwirth. Advancements on SEFE and partitioned book embedding problems. Theor. Comput. Sci., 575:71–89, 2015. 4. E. N. Argyriou, M. A. Bekos, M. Kaufmann, and A. Symvonis. Geometric RAC simultaneous drawings of graphs. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 17(1):11–34, 2013. 5. L. Auslander and S. V. Parter. On embedding graphs in the sphere. J. Math. Mech., 10(3):517–523, 1961. 6. G. D. Battista and R. Tamassia. On-line maintenance of triconnected components with SPQR-trees. Algorithmica, 15(4):302–318, 1996. 7. G. D. Battista and R. Tamassia. On-line planarity testing. SIAM J. Comput., 25(5):956–997, 1996. 8. M. A. Bekos, T. C. van Dijk, P. Kindermann, and A. Wolff. Simultaneous drawing of planar graphs with right-angle crossings and few bends. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 20(1):133–158, 2016. 9. T. Biedl and G. Kant. A better heuristic for orthogonal graph drawings. Comput. Geom., 9(3):159–180, 1998. 10. T. Bläsius, A. Karrer, and I. Rutter. Simultaneous embedding: Edge orderings, relative positions, cutvertices. In S. K. Wismath and A. Wolff, editors, GD’13, volume 8242 of LNCS, pages 220–231. Springer, 2013. 11. T. Bläsius, A. Karrer, and I. Rutter. Simultaneous embedding: Edge orderings, relative positions, cutvertices. ArXiv e-prints, abs/1506.05715, 2015. 12. T. Bläsius, S. G. Kobourov, and I. Rutter. Simultaneous embedding of planar graphs. In R. Tamassia, editor, Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization. CRC Press, 2013. 13. T. Bläsius and I. Rutter. Disconnectivity and relative positions in simultaneous embeddings. Comput. Geom., 48(6):459–478, 2015. 14. T. Bläsius and I. Rutter. Simultaneous PQ-ordering with applications to constrained embedding problems. ACM Trans. Alg., 12(2):16, 2016. 15. U. Brandes. Eager st-ordering. In R. H. Möhring and R. Raman, editors, ESA’02, volume 2461 of LNCS, pages 247–256. Springer, 2002. 16. G. Di Battista and R. Tamassia. On-line graph algorithms with SPQR-trees. In M. S. Paterson, editor, ICALP’90, volume 443 of LNCS, pages 598–611. Springer, 1990. 17. A. Estrella-Balderrama, E. Gassner, M. Jünger, M. Percan, M. Schaefer, and M. Schulz. Simultaneous geometric graph embeddings. In S. Hong, T. Nishizeki, and W. Quan, editors, GD’07, volume 4875 of LNCS, pages 280–290. Springer, 2007. 18. C. Gutwenger and P. Mutzel. A linear time implementation of SPQR-trees. In J. Marks, editor, GD’00, volume 1984 of LNCS, pages 77–90. Springer, 2000. 19. B. Haeupler, K. R. Jampani, and A. Lubiw. Testing simultaneous planarity when the common graph is 2-connected. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 17(3):147–171, 2013. 20. K. R. Jampani and A. Lubiw. Simultaneous interval graphs. In O. Cheong, K. Chwa, and K. Park, editors, ISAAC’10, volume 6506 of LNCS, pages 206–217, 2010.  13  21. K. R. Jampani and A. Lubiw. The simultaneous representation problem for chordal, comparability and permutation graphs. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 16(2):283–315, 2012. 22. M. Jünger and M. Schulz. Intersection graphs in simultaneous embedding with fixed edges. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 13(2):205–218, 2009. 23. B. M. E. Moret. Planar NAE3SAT is in P. ACM SIGACT News, 19(2):51–54, 1988. 24. B. M. E. Moret. Theory of Computation. Addison-Wesley-Longman, 1998. 25. C. H. Papadimitriou. Computational complexity. Academic Internet Publ., 2007. 26. M. Schaefer. Toward a theory of planarity: Hanani–Tutte and planarity variants. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 17(4):367–440, 2013. 27. T. J. Schaefer. The complexity of satisfiability problems. In R. J. Lipton, W. A. Burkhard, W. J. Savitch, E. P. Friedman, and A. V. Aho, editors, Proceedings of the 10th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC’78), pages 216–226. ACM, 1978. 28. W. Shih, S. Wu, and Y. Kuo. Unifying maximum cut and minimum cut of a planar graph. IEEE Trans. Computers, 39(5):694–697, 1990. 29. R. Tamassia. On embedding a graph in the grid with the minimum number of bends. SIAM J. Comput., 16(3):421–444, 1987.  14  Appendix A  Definitions for the appendix  In Section 2 we already discussed how to assign the exclusive edges to either of the Sk two sides of C. We formalise this assignment by means of a function A : i=1 Ei \ E(G∩ ) → {l, r}, where A(e) = l (resp. A(e) = r) if edge e lies to the left (resp. to the right) of C, according to an arbitrary orientation of C. Connectivity and SPQR-trees. A graph G = (V, E) is connected if there is a path between any two vertices. A cutvertex is a vertex whose removal disconnects the graph. A separating pair {u, v} is a pair of vertices whose removal disconnects the graph. A connected graph is biconnected if it does not have a cutvertex and a biconnected graph is 3-connected if it does not have a separating pair. We consider st-graphs with two special pole vertices s and t. The family of st-graphs can be constructed in a fashion very similar to series-parallel graphs. Namely, an edge st is an st-graph with poles s and t. Now let Gi be an stgraph with poles si , ti for i = 1, . . . , k and let H be a planar graph with two designated adjacent vertices s and t and k + 1 edges st, e1 , . . . , ek . We call H the skeleton of the composition and its edges are called virtual edges; the edge st is the parent edge and s and t are the poles of the skeleton H. To compose the Gi ’s into an st-graph with poles s and t, we remove the edge st from H and replace each ei by Gi for i = 1, . . . , k by removing ei and identifying the poles of Gi with the endpoints of ei . In fact, we only allow three types of compositions: in a series composition the skeleton H is a cycle of length k + 1, in a parallel composition H consists of two vertices connected by k + 1 parallel edges, and in a rigid composition H is 3-connected. For every biconnected planar graph G with an edge st, the graph G − st is an st-graph with poles s and t [16]. Much in the same way as series-parallel graphs, the st-graph G − st gives rise to a (de-)composition tree T describing how it can be obtained from single edges. The nodes of T corresponding to edges, series, parallel, and rigid compositions of the graph are Q-, S-, P-, and R-nodes, respectively. To obtain a composition tree for G, we add an additional root Qnode representing the edge st. We associate with each node µ the skeleton of the composition and denote it by skel(µ). For a Q-node µ, the skeleton consists of the two endpoints of the edge represented by µ and one real and one virtual edge between them representing the rest of the graph. For a node µ of T , the pertinent graph pert(µ) is the subgraph represented by the subtree with root µ. For a virtual edge ε of a skeleton skel(µ), the expansion graph of ε is the pertinent graph pert(µ0 ) of the neighbor µ0 corresponding to ε when considering T rooted at µ. The SPQR-tree of G with respect to the edge st, originally introduced by Di Battista and Tamassia [16], is the (unique) smallest decomposition tree T for G. Using a different edge s0 t0 of G and a composition of G − s0 t0 corresponds to rerooting T at the node representing s0 t0 . It thus makes sense to say that 15  T is the SPQR-tree of G. The SPQR-tree of G has size linear in G and can be computed in linear time [18]. Planar embeddings of G correspond bijectively to planar embeddings of all skeletons of T ; the choices are the orderings of the parallel edges in P-nodes and the embeddings of the R-node skeletons, which are unique up to a flip. When considering rooted SPQR-trees, we assume that the embedding of G is such that the root edge is incident to the outer face, which is equivalent to the parent edge being incident to the outer face in each skeleton. We remark that in a planar embedding of G, the poles of any node µ of T are incident to the outer face of pert(µ). Hence, in the following we only consider embeddings of the pertinent graphs with their poles lying on the same face.  B  Omitted or Sketched Proofs from Section 2  Theorem 1. An instance hG1 , . . . , Gk i of OrthoSEFE-k has an OrthoSEFE if and only if it admits a SEFE satisfying the orthogonality constraints. Proof. For the if part, let E be the embedding of G∩ determined by the SEFE hE1 , . . . Ek i of hG1 , . . . , Gk i. Observe that the orthogonality constraints at each vertex define (i) whether a degree 2 vertex of G∩ has to be drawn straight or bent, and (ii) which face incident to a degree 3 vertex of G∩ has to be assigned the 180◦ angle. It is not hard to see that a planar orthogonal drawing Γ of G∩ in which the embedding of G∩ is E satisfying such requirements can be constructed. We draw the exclusive edges in each Ei as orthogonal polylines in Γ inside the face of E determined by the SEFE. The fact that the exclusive edges of each Ei can be drawn in Γ without introducing any crossings descends from the fact that Ei is a planar embedding of Gi . For the only if part, let v be a vertex in G∩ such that the orthogonality constraints are not satisfied at v. If v has exactly two neighbors u and w in G∩ , then we need to assign a port to two exclusive edges of the same graph (one for each of these edges) on one side of the path uvw and a port to at least one exclusive edge on the other side of the path uvw. If v has degree 3 in G∩ , then we need to assign a port to an exclusive edge between a pair of edges of G∩ and a port to an exclusive edge between a different pair of edges of G∩ . Hence, in both cases we need at least five ports, which is not possible on the grid. t u  C  Omitted or Sketched Proofs from Section 3  Theorem 3. OrthoSEFE-3 is NP-complete, even for instances hG1 = (V, E1 ), G2 = (V, E2 ), G3 = (V, E3 )i with sunflower intersection in which (i) the shared graph G∩ = (V, E1 ∩ E2 ∩ E3 ) is a cycle and (ii) G1 and G2 are outerplanar graphs with maximum degree 3. Proof. The membership in NP directly follows from Theorem 2, since an assignment A, which is a certificate for our problem, can be easily verified in polynomial time to satisfy all the planarity and the orthogonality constraints. 16  To prove that the problem is NP-hard, we show a reduction from the NPcomplete problem Positive Exactly-Three Nae3Sat [24], which is the variant of Nae3Sat in which each clause consists of exactly three unnegated literals. See Fig. 2. Let x1 , x2 , . . . , xn be the variables and let c1 , c2 , . . . , cm be the clauses of a 3-CNF formula φ of Positive Exactly-Three Nae3Sat. We show how to construct an equivalent instance hG1 = (V, E1 ), G2 = (V, E2 ), G3 = (V, E3 )i of OrthoSEFE-3; refer to Fig. 2(b). Assume, without loss of generality, that the literals in each clause cj = (xja , xjb , xjc ) are such that a > b > c, if j is odd, and a < b < c, otherwise. A variable-clause gadget Vij for a variable xi belonging to a clause cj is a subgraph of G∪ defined as follows. Gadget Vji contains a path (sji , uji , wij , vij , zij , rij , tji ) belonging to G∩ , and edges {uji , vij } and {wij , zij } belonging to E3 ; see Fig. 2(a). The clause gadget C j for a clause cj is a subgraph of G∪ defined as follows. Gadget C j contains a path (sj , αj , yaj , β j , ybj , dj1 , . . . , dj6 , γ j , ycj , δ j , tj ) belonging to G∩ , and edges {αj , β j }, {β j , γ j }, {γ j , δ j }, {dj1 , dj3 }, {dj2 , dj4 }, {dj3 , dj5 }, {dj4 , dj6 } belonging to E3 , and edges {β j , dj3 } and {dj4 , γ j } belonging to E1 ; see Fig. 2(a). Initialize G∪ to the union of Vij , for i = 1, . . . , n and j = 1, . . . , m, and of C j , for j = 1, . . . , m. Then, for j = 1, . . . , m and for i = 1, . . . , n − 1 identify vertex tji with vertex sji+1 , if j is odd, or identify vertex tji+1 with vertex sji , otherwise. Further, for j = 1, . . . , m (where m + 1 = 1), identify vertex tjn with vertex sj j j and vertex tj with vertex sj+1 n , if j is odd, or identify vertex t1 with vertex s j+1 and vertex tj with vertex s1 , otherwise. To complete the construction of hG1 , G2 , G3 i we add to G∪ exclusive edges as follows. For i = 1, . . . , n and for j = 1, . . . , m − 1, we add an edge {wij , wij+1 } to E2 , if j is odd, or to E1 , otherwise. We call these edges transmission edges. Further, for i = 1, . . . , n and for j = 1, . . . , m, we add an edge {wij , yij }, if xi ∈ cj , or an edge {wij , rij }, otherwise. Clearly, the construction of instance hG1 , G2 , G3 i can be completed in polynomial time. Graph G∩ is a cycle, as we already observed. Also, the transmission edges in E1 (in E2 ) do not alternate along G∩ , since the variable-clause gadgets appear along G∩ in the order V1j , . . . , Vnj , if j is odd, or in the order Vnj , . . . , V1j , otherwise. Also, no transmission edge in E1 alternates with edges (β j , d3 ) and (d4 , γ j ), for any j, and such edges do not alternate with each other by construction. Hence, G1 and G2 are outerplanar. The fact that G1 and G2 have maximum degree 3 also directly follows from the construction. Given a positive instance φ of Positive Exactly-Three Nae3Sat, we show that hG1 , G2 , G3 i is a positive instance of OrthoSEFE-3. Given a satisfying truth assignment T : X → {true, false} where X denotes the set of variables in φ, we construct an assignment A of the exclusive edges of E1 ∪ E2 ∪ E3 to the two sides of G∩ satisfying all the planarity and the orthogonality constraints. For i = 1, . . . , n and for j = 1, . . . , m, we set A(e) = l, for each exclusive edge e ∈ E1 ∪ E2 ∪ E3 incident to wij , if T (xi ) = true, or A(e) = r, otherwise. For i = 17  1, . . . , n and for j = 1, . . . , m, we set A(uji , vij ) = r, if T (xi ) = true, or A(uji , vij ) = l, otherwise. For each clause cj = (xja , xjb , xjc ), we set A(αj , β j ) = l, if T (xa ) = false, or A(αj , β j ) = r, otherwise; we set A(β j , γ j ) = l, if T (xb ) = false, or A(β j , γ j ) = r, otherwise; and we set A(γ j , δ j ) = l, if T (xc ) = false, or A(γ j , δ j ) = r, otherwise. Finally, for each clause cj = (xja , xjb , xjc ), consider the literal x◦ with ◦ ∈ {a, c} such that T (x◦ ) = T (xb ), if any, otherwise let x◦ = xa . Suppose that x◦ = xa ; set A(dj1 , dj3 ) = A(dj3 , dj5 ) = A(β j , dj3 ) = r and set A(dj2 , dj4 ) = A(dj4 , dj6 ) = A(dj4 , γ j ) = l, if T (x◦ ) = false, or set A(dj1 , dj3 ) = A(dj3 , dj5 ) = A(β j , dj3 ) = l and set A(dj2 , dj4 ) = A(dj4 , dj6 ) = A(dj4 , γ j ) = r, otherwise. Suppose that x◦ = xc ; set A(dj1 , dj3 ) = A(dj3 , dj5 ) = A(β j , dj3 ) = l and set A(dj2 , dj4 ) = A(dj4 , dj6 ) = A(dj4 , γ j ) = r, if T (x◦ ) = false, or set A(dj1 , dj3 ) = A(dj3 , dj5 ) = A(β j , dj3 ) = l and set A(dj2 , dj4 ) = A(dj4 , dj6 ) = A(dj4 , γ j ) = r, otherwise. We show that A satisfies the planarity constraints. First observe that the planarity constraints for the edges in E1 and E2 are trivially satisfied by A since G1 and G2 are outerplanar. As for the edges in E3 , we have that the only pairs of edges that alternate along G∩ are h(uji , vij ), (wij , zij )i, for i = 1, . . . , n and for j = 1, . . . , m, pairs h(waj , yaj ), (αj , β j )i, h(wbj , ybj ), (β j , γ j )i, and h(wcj , ycj ), (γ j , δ j )i, for j = 1, . . . , m, and the edges incident to the dummy vertices dj1 , . . . , dj6 , for j = 1, . . . , m. However, it is easy to verify that A assigns alternating edges to different sides of G∩ .  We show that A satisfies the orthogonality constraints at every vertex. For all the vertices except for wij , β j , dj3 , dj4 , and γ j , for i = 1, . . . , n and for j = 1, . . . , m, this is true since they have only one incident exclusive edge. For vertices wij , dj3 , and dj4 , with i = 1, . . . , n and for j = 1, . . . , m, this is true since all the edges incident to wij are assigned to the same side of G∩ by A, by construction. For vertex βj and γj , we distinguish two cases based on whether there exists a ◦ ∈ {a, c} with T (xb ) = T (x◦ ): (i) If this is case, let ◦ = c without loss of generality; the case ◦ = a can be shown analogously. Then, A(β j , γ j ) = A(γ j , δ j ) = A(dj4 , γ j ), by construction, and hence the orthogonality constraints are satisfied at γ j . To prove that they are also satisfied at β j , it suffices to show that the two edges of E3 incident to β j are assigned to different sides of G∩ , given that β j has degree 3 in G1 and degree 2 in G2 . Namely, due to the fact that T is a Nae3Sat truth assignment we have that T (xa ) 6= T (xb ), and hence A(αj , β j ) 6= A(β j , γ j ). (ii) In the second case, T (xa ) 6= T (xb ) 6= T (xc ), hence we have that A(αj , β j ) 6= A(β j , γ j ) 6= A(γ j , δ j ). Since vertices β j and γ j have degree 4 in G3 , degree 3 in G1 , and degree 2 in G2 , this implies that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied at β j and at γ j . Suppose that hG1 = (V, E1 ), G2 = (V, E2 ), G3 = (V, E3 )i is a positive instance of OrthoSEFE-3 and let A be the corresponding assignment of the exclusive edges to the sides of G∩ . We show how to construct a Nae3Sat truth assignment T that satisfies φ. For i = 1, . . . , n, we set T (xi ) = true if and only if A(wi1 , zi1 ) = l. We start by proving that, for each i = 1, . . . , n, all the edges incident to wij , with 1 ≤ j ≤ m, are assigned to the same side of G∩ . Observe that, for each i = 1, . . . , n and for each for each j = 1, . . . , m, the 18  two edges in G3 incident to wij both alternate with edge (uji , vij ) along G∩ and hence are assigned to the same side of G∩ by the planarity constraints. Hence, by the orthogonality constraints at wij , all the exclusive edges in E1 ∪ E2 incident to wij lie on the same side of G∩ as (wij , zij ). Further, since any two vertices wij and wij+1 , are connected by a transmission edge in either E1 or in E2 , the statement follows. This property allows us to focus on each clause separately. Let cj = (xja , xjb , xjc ) be a clause in φ, with 1 ≤ j ≤ m. We show that T (xja ) = T (xjb ) = T (xjc ) does not hold. First, we show that A(β j , dj3 ) 6= A(dj4 , γ j ). Namely, by the planarity constraints, A(dj1 , dj3 ) = A(dj3 , dj5 ) 6= A(dj2 , dj4 ) = A(dj4 , dj6 ); then, by the orthogonality constraints at dj3 and at dj4 , we have that A(β j , dj3 ) = A(dj1 , dj3 ) = A(dj3 , dj5 ) and that A(dj4 , γ j ) = A(dj2 , dj4 ) = A(dj4 , dj6 ), and the statement follows. Second, A(αj , β j ) = A(β j , γ j ) = A(γ j , δ j ) does not hold, since A(β j , dj3 ) 6= A(dj4 , γ j ) and by the orthogonality constraints at β j and at γ j . This implies that A(waj , yaj ) = A(wbj , ybj ) = A(wcj , ycj ) does not hold, and hence A(waj , zaj ) = A(wbj , zbj ) = A(wcj , zcj ) does not hold, since all the edges incident to wij , with 1 ≤ j ≤ m, are assigned to the same side of G∩ . This concludes the proof that T (xja ) = T (xjb ) = T (xjc ) does not hold. It is easy to see that the reduction can be performed in polynomial time and that it can be extended to any k > 3 by subdividing two edges of G∩ for each additional graph Gi and by introducing an exclusive edge between these vertices only belonging to Gi . t u  D  Omitted or Sketched Proofs from Section 4  Lemma 2. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 such that G∩ = (V, E1 ∩ E2 ) is a cycle and G1 has maximum degree 3. It is possible to construct in polynomial time an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 such that G∗∩ = (V ∗ , E1∗ ∩ E2∗ ) is a cycle and G∗1 is an outerplanar graph with maximum degree 3. Proof. We describe how to construct an equivalent instance hG01 , G02 i of OrthoSEFE2 such that G0∩ is a cycle, G01 has maximum degree 3 and the number of pairs of edges in G01 that alternate along G0∩ is smaller than the number of pairs of edges in G1 that alternate along G∩ . Note that repeatedly performing this transformation eventually yields an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i satisfying the requirements of the lemma. Consider two edges e = (u, v) and f = (w, z) of G1 such that u, w, v, z appear in this order along cycle G∩ and such that the path Pu,z in G∩ between u and z that contains v and w has minimal length. If G1 is not outerplanar, edges e and f always exist. 0 Initialize G0∩ = G∩ . Replace path Pu,z in G0∩ by a path Pu,z , as follows; refer to Fig. 8. Let H1 , H2 , and H3 be the sets of vertices between u and w, between 0 w and v, and between v and z in G∩ . Path Pu,z contains u, then the vertices 0 in H1 , then a dummy vertex w , then the vertices in H2 , then a dummy vertex 19  e u  H1  eav  eaw w  H2  ebw  v f  H3  e  eaw  ebv z  u  H1  w0  eav  H2  z0  w  v  u0  f0  ebw  (a)  ebv  e0 v0  H3  z  f  (b)  Fig. 8. Instances (a) hG1 , G2 i and (b) hG01 , G02 i for the proof of Lemma 2. Edges of the shared graph G∩ are black. Exclusive edges of G1 are red and those of G2 are blue.  z 0 , then three dummy vertices x1 , x2 , x3 , then v, then four dummy vertices x4 , x5 , x6 , x7 , then w, then three dummy vertices x8 , x9 , x10 , then three dummy vertices u0 , x11 , and v 0 , then the vertices in H3 , and finally z. Note that G0∩ contains all the vertices of G∩ , plus a set of dummy vertices. We now describe the exclusive edges in E10 and E20 . Initialize E10 = E1 and E20 = E2 . Add edges e0 = (u0 , v 0 ) and f 0 = (w0 , z 0 ) to E10 . Also, add edges (z 0 , x2 ), (z 0 , x3 ), (x1 , v), (x3 , x4 ), (v, x6 ), (x5 , w), (x7 , x8 ), (w, x10 ), (x8 , u0 ), and (x9 , u0 ) to E20 . Finally, replace in E20 each edge (x, w) incident to w by an edge (x, w0 ) and each edge (x, v) incident to v with an edge (x, v 0 ). Before proving the statement, we observe an important property that will be used in the following, namely that there exists no exclusive edge in E1 , and hence in E10 , with an endpoint in H2 and the other one not in H2 . In fact, there exists no edge connecting a vertex of H2 to any of u, v, w, z, since these vertices are already incident to edges e and f , respectively, and since G1 has maximum degree 3. Also, there exists no exclusive edge g connecting a vertex of H2 to a vertex of H1 (of H3 ), since in this case g would alternate with f (with e), hence contradicting the minimality of path Pu,z . Finally, the existence of an exclusive edge connecting a vertex of H2 to any other vertex in V would immediately make the instance negative, since G1 would not be planar. We now prove that hG01 , G02 i satisfies the required properties. First, graph G0∩ is a cycle by construction. Second, G01 has maximum degree 3, since (i) every vertex in V ∩ V 0 is incident to the same edges in E10 as in E1 , (ii) dummy vertices xi , with i = 1, . . . , 11, have degree 2, and (iii) dummy vertices w0 , z 0 , u0 , and v 0 have degree 3. Third, the number of pairs of alternating edges in hG01 , G02 i is smaller than in hG1 , G2 i. In fact, (i) edge e0 does not alternate with any edge of E10 , since x11 is not incident to any exclusive edge in E10 , (ii) edge f 0 does not alternate with any edge in E10 , since there exists no exclusive edge in E10 with an endpoint in H2 and the other one not in H2 , and (iii) all pairs of edges in E1 ∩ E10 that alternate along G0∩ also alternate along G∩ , except for edges e and f , which alternate along G∩ but not along G0∩ . We now prove that hG01 , G02 i is equivalent to hG1 , G2 i. Suppose that hG1 , G2 i admits an OrthoSEFE hΓ1 , Γ2 i. By Theorem 2, hΓ1 , Γ2 i determines an assignment A of the exclusive edges of E1 and of E2 to the two sides of G∩ satisfying all the planarity and the orthogonality constraints. We 20  show how to construct an assignment A0 of the exclusive edges of E10 and of E20 to the two sides of G0∩ satisfying all the constraints.  For each exclusive edge g ∈ E1 ∩ E10 , set A0 (g) = A(g). Also, set A0 (e0 ) = A(e) and A0 (f 0 ) = A(f ). For each exclusive edge g ∈ E2 ∩ E20 , set A0 (g) = A(g). Also, for each edge (x, w0 ) (resp. (x, v 0 )) incident to w0 (resp. to v 0 ), set A0 (x, w0 ) = A(x, w) (resp. A0 (x, v 0 ) = A(x, v)). Further, set A0 (x1 , v) = A0 (v, x6 ) = A0 (x7 , x8 ) = A0 (x8 , u0 ) = A0 (x9 , u0 ) = A(e) and set A0 (z 0 , x2 ) = A0 (z 0 , x3 ) = A0 (x3 , x4 ) = A0 (x5 , w) = A0 (w, x10 ) = A(f ). The planarity constraints for the edges of G01 are satisfied since any pair of edges that alternate along G0∩ also alternate in G∩ and since their assignment in A0 and in A are the same, by construction. We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G02 are satisfied by A . For the edges that are not incident to any dummy vertex, this is true for the same reason as for the edges of G01 . For each edge (x, w0 ) incident to w0 , this is true since A0 (x, w0 ) = A(x, w), and since (x, w0 ) alternates with an edge g ∈ E20 along G0∩ if and only if edge (x, w) alternates with an edge g ∗ along G∩ , where g ∗ = g if g is not incident to v 0 , while g ∗ = (y, v) if g = (y, v 0 ). Analogous arguments hold for each edge (x, v 0 ) incident to v 0 . Finally, the fact that the planarity constraints for each edge incident to two dummy vertices are satisfied by A0 can be easily verified; recall that A(e) 6= A(f ). 0  We now prove that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied by A0 at every vertex of V 0 . For the vertices in V 0 ∩V \{w, v}, this is true since they are satisfied by A and since for every exclusive edge g ∈ E10 ∪ E20 incident to these vertices, we have that g ∈ E1 ∪ E2 , by construction, and A0 (g) = A(g). For vertex w, this is true since A0 (x5 , w) = A0 (w, x10 ) = A(f ) = A0 (f ). For vertex v, this is true since A0 (x1 , v) = A0 (v, x6 ) = A(e) = A0 (e). For vertex u0 , this is true since A0 (x8 , u0 ) = A0 (x9 , u0 ) = A0 (e0 ) = A(e). For vertex z 0 , this is true since A0 (z 0 , x2 ) = A0 (z 0 , x3 ) = A0 (f 0 ) = A(f ). For vertex w0 , assume there exist two exclusive edges eaw , ebw ∈ E20 that are incident to w0 , the case in which there exists only one or none of them being trivial. Since A0 (eaw ) = A(eaw ), A0 (ebw ) = A(ebw ), and A0 (f 0 ) = A(f ), and since the orthogonality constraints at w are satisfied by A, the orthogonality constraints at w0 are satisfied by A0 . Analogously, the orthogonality constraints at v 0 between edges eav , ebv ∈ E20 , if any, and edge e0 ∈ E10 are satisfied by A0 since the same constraints at v between edges eav , ebv ∈ E2 and e ∈ E1 are satisfied by A. Since vertices xi , with i = 1, . . . , 11, have degree 2 in G01 , this concludes the proof that A0 satisfies the orthogonality constraints. Suppose that hG01 , G02 i admits OrthoSEFE hΓ10 , Γ20 i, and let A0 be the corresponding assignment of the exclusive edges of E10 and of E20 to the two sides of G0∩ . We show how to construct an assignment A of the exclusive edges of E1 and of E2 to the two sides of G∩ satisfying all the planarity and the orthogonality constraints. For each exclusive edge g ∈ E1 , set A(g) = A0 (g). For each exclusive edge g ∈ E2 ∩ E20 , set A(g) = A0 (g). Also, for each edge (x, w) (resp. (x, v)) incident to w (resp. to v), set A(x, w) = A0 (x, w0 ) (resp. A(x, v) = A0 (x, v 0 )). 21  We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G1 are satisfied by A. For each pair (e1 , e2 ) of exclusive edges in E1 such that {e1 , e2 } = 6 {e, f }, this is true since e1 and e2 alternate along G∩ if and only if they alternate along G0∩ , by construction. For pair (e, f ), this is true for the following reason. By planarity constraints, we have A0 (x1 , v) = A0 (v, x6 ) 6= A0 (x3 , x4 ); hence, by orthogonality constraints at vertex v, we have A0 (e) = A0 (x1 , v) = A0 (v, x6 ). Analogously, we have A0 (f ) = A0 (x5 , w) = A0 (w, x10 ) 6= A0 (x7 , x8 ). Since, by planarity constraints, A0 (v, x6 ) 6= A0 (x5 , w), we have A0 (e) 6= A0 (f ) and hence A(e) 6= A(f ). We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G2 are satisfied by A. For each pair (e1 , e2 ) of exclusive edges in E2 such that neither e1 nor e2 is incident to either of w and v, this is true since e1 and e2 alternate along G∩ if and only if they alternate along G0∩ , by construction. For each edge (x, w) incident to w, this is true since A(x, w) = A0 (x, w0 ), and since (x, w) alternates with an edge g ∈ E2 along G∩ if and only if edge (x, w) alternates with an edge g ∗ along G0∩ , where g ∗ = g if g is not incident to v, while g ∗ = (y, v 0 ) if g = (y, v). Analogous arguments hold for each edge (x, v) incident to v. We now prove that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied by A at every vertex of V . For vertices in V \{w, v}, this is true since they are satisfied by A0 and since for every exclusive edge g ∈ E1 ∪ E2 incident to these vertices, g ∈ E10 ∪ E20 , by construction, and A(g) = A0 (g). In order to prove that the constraints are satisfied also at w and v, we first argue that A(f ) = A0 (f 0 ) and A(e) = A0 (e0 ): Namely, by planarity constraints, A0 (z 0 , x2 ) 6= A0 (x1 , v) 6= A0 (z 0 , x3 ), and hence A0 (z 0 , x2 ) = A0 (z 0 , x3 ). Similarly, A0 (x5 , w) 6= A0 (x7 , x8 ) 6= A0 (w, x10 ), and hence A0 (x5 , w) = A0 (w, x10 ). Then, by using the longer chain of alternating edges we get A0 (z 0 , x3 ) 6= A0 (x1 , v) 6= A0 (x3 , x4 ) 6= A0 (v, x6 ) 6= A0 (x5 , w) and thus A0 (z 0 , x3 ) = A0 (x5 , w). Finally, by orthogonality constraints at z 0 and w, we get A0 (f 0 ) = A0 (z 0 , x3 ) and A0 (f ) = A0 (x5 , w). Since A(f ) = A0 (f ) we conclude A(f ) = A0 (f 0 ). The equality A(e) = A0 (e0 ) follows symmetrically. We now prove that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied at w and v. For vertex w, assume there exist two exclusive edges eaw , ebw ∈ E2 incident to w, the case in which there exists only one or none of them being trivial. Since A(eaw ) = A0 (eaw ), A(ebw ) = A0 (ebw ), and A(f ) = A0 (f 0 ), and since the orthogonality constraints at w0 between eaw , ebw and f 0 are satisfied by A0 , the orthogonality constraints at w between eaw , ebw and f are satisfied by A. Analogously, the orthogonality constraints at v between edges eav , ebv ∈ E2 , if any, and edge e ∈ E1 are satisfied by A since the same constraints at v 0 between eav , ebv ∈ E20 and e0 ∈ E10 are satisfied by A0 . This concludes the proof of the lemma. t u Lemma 3. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 such that G∩ = (V, E1 ∩ E2 ) is a cycle and each vertex v ∈ V has degree at most 3 in either G1 or G2 . It is possible to construct in polynomial time an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 such that G∗∩ = (V ∗ , E1∗ ∩ E2∗ ) is a cycle and graph G∗1 has maximum degree 3. Proof. We describe how to construct an equivalent instance hG01 , G02 i of OrthoSEFE2 such that G0∩ is a cycle, each vertex v ∈ V 0 has degree at most 3 in either G01 22  h  f  e ue  H1  v  H2  uf  e H3  uh  ue  f 00  e0  00  ve  (a)  h  f0  H1  vf  h00  0  v0  H2  vh  uf  H3  uh  (b)  Fig. 9. Instances (a) hG1 , G2 i and (b) hG01 , G02 i for the proof of Lemma 3. Edges of the shared graph G∩ are black. Exclusive edges of G1 are red and those of G2 are blue.  or G02 , and the number of degree-4 vertices in G01 is smaller than the number of degree-4 vertices in G1 . Note that repeatedly performing this transformation eventually yields an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i satisfying the requirements of the lemma. Consider a vertex v ∈ V such that there exists two edges e = (v, ue ), f = (v, uf ) ∈ E1 incident to v. Assume without loss of generality that ue , v, and uf appear in this order along G∩ . Suppose that there exists an edge h = (v, uh ) ∈ E2 incident to v, the other case being simpler. We describe the construction for the case in which vertices ue , v, uf , uh appear in this order along G∩ ; the other cases are analogous. Initialize G0∩ = G∩ ; refer to Fig. 9. Replace v in G0∩ by a path Pv = x1 , x2 , ve , x3 , y1 , y2 , vf , y3 , v 0 , z1 , z2 , vh , z3 composed of dummy vertices. We now describe the exclusive edges in E10 and E20 . Set Ei0 , with i = 1, 2, contains all the exclusive edges in Ei that are not incident to v. Also, E10 contains edges e00 = (ve , ue ), f 00 = (vf , uf ), and h0 = (vh , v 0 ). Finally, E20 contains edges (x1 , ve ), (x2 , x3 ), (y1 , vf ), (y2 , y3 ), (z1 , vh ), (z2 , z3 ), and edges e0 = (ve , v 0 ), f 0 = (vf , v 0 ), and h00 = (vh , uh ). We prove that hG01 , G02 i satisfies the required properties. First, graph G0∩ is a cycle by construction. Second, the degree of the vertices in V \ V 0 is the same in G01 (resp. G02 ) as in G1 (resp. as in G2 ), while all the dummy vertices have degree at most 3 in G01 . Hence, every vertex in V 0 has degree at most 3 in either G01 or G02 ; also, the number of degree-4 vertices in G01 is smaller than the number of degree-4 vertices in G1 , since v ∈ / G01 . 0 0 We now prove that hG1 , G2 i is equivalent to hG1 , G2 i. Suppose that hG1 , G2 i admits an OrthoSEFE hΓ1 , Γ2 i, and let A be the corresponding assignment of the exclusive edges of E1 and of E2 to the two sides of G∩ , which exists by Theorem 2. We show how to construct an assignment A0 of the exclusive edges of E10 and of E20 to the two sides of G0∩ satisfying all the constraints. For each exclusive edge g ∈ E1 ∪ E2 incident to v, set A0 (g) = A(g). Also, set 0 00 A (e ) = A(e), A0 (f 00 ) = A(f ), and A0 (h0 ) = A(h). Finally, set A0 (x1 , ve ) = A0 (e0 ) = A(e) and A0 (x2 , x3 ) 6= A(e); set A0 (y1 , vf ) = A0 (f 0 ) = A(f ) and A0 (y2 , y3 ) 6= A(f ); and set A0 (z1 , vh ) = A0 (h00 ) = A(h) and A0 (z2 , z3 ) 6= A(h). 23  We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G01 are satisfied by A . Note that, by construction, edge h0 does not alternate with any edge of G01 along G0∩ . Also, edges e00 and f 00 do not alternate with each other along G0∩ . Further, if edge e00 (edge f 00 ) alternates with an edge g ∈ G01 along G0∩ , then edge e (edge f ) alternates with g along G∩ . Finally, any two edges not incident to any dummy vertex that alternate along G0∩ also alternate along G∩ . In all the described cases, the planarity constraints are satisfied by A0 since they are satisfied by A. 0  We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G02 are satisfied by A . Note that, by construction, edges e0 , f 0 , (x1 , ve ), (x2 , x3 ), (y1 , vf ), (y2 , y3 ), (z1 , vh ), and (z2 , z3 ) do not alternate with any edge of G02 that is not incident to a dummy vertex along G0∩ ; it easy to verify that A0 satisfies the planarity constraints among these edges. Also, edge h00 alternates with (z2 , z3 ), but A0 (h00 ) 6= A0 (z2 , z3 ) by construction. Further, if edge h00 alternates with an edge g 6= (z2 , z3 ) ∈ G02 along G0∩ , then edge h alternates with g along G∩ . Finally, any two edges not incident to any dummy vertex that alternate along G0∩ also alternate along G∩ . In all these cases, the planarity constraints are satisfied by A0 since they are satisfied by A. 0  We now prove that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied by A0 at every vertex in V 0 . For non-dummy vertices, this is true since they are satisfied by A and since all the edges incident to them have the same assignment in A as in A0 . For vertices xi , yi , and zi , with i = 1, 2, 3, this is true since they have degree 2 in G01 . For vertex ve , this is true since A0 (e00 ) = A0 (x1 , ve ) = A0 (e0 ) = A(e); similar arguments apply for vertices vf and vh . Finally, for vertex v 0 , this is true since (i) A0 (e0 ) = A(e), A0 (f 0 ) = A(f ), and A0 (h0 ) = A(h), (ii) e, f , and h are incident to v in G2 , and (iii) A satisfies the orthogonality constraints. This concludes the proof that A0 satisfies the orthogonality constraints. Suppose that hG01 , G02 i admits an OrthoSEFE hΓ10 , Γ20 i, and let A0 be the corresponding assignment of the exclusive edges of E10 and of E20 to the two sides of G0∩ . We show how to construct an assignment A of the exclusive edges of E1 and of E2 to the two sides of G∩ satisfying all the planarity and the orthogonality constraints. For each exclusive edge g ∈ E1 ∪ E2 not incident to v, set A(g) = A0 (g). Also, set A(e) = A0 (e00 ), A(f ) = A0 (f 00 ), and A(h) = A0 (h00 ). We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G1 and of G2 are satisfied by A. Consider any pair of edges hg1 , g2 i of the same graph Gi , with i = 1, 2, that alternate along G∩ . If none of g1 and g2 is incident to v, then they also alternate along G0∩ . Hence, the planarity constraints are satisfied by A since they are satisfied by A0 . Otherwise, assume g1 is incident to v; note that g2 is not incident to v, since g1 and g2 alternate along G∩ . If g1 = e (if g1 = f ; if g1 = h), then edge e00 (edge f 00 ; edge h00 ) alternates with g2 along G0∩ . Further, A(e) = A0 (e00 ), A(f ) = A0 (f 00 ), A(h) = A0 (h00 ), and A(g2 ) = A0 (g2 ). Hence, the planarity constraints for these edges are satisfied by A since they are satisfied by A0 . 24  We finally prove that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied by A. For the vertices in V \ {v, ue , uf , uh }, this is true since they are satisfied by A0 and since for every exclusive edge g ∈ E1 ∪E2 incident to these vertices, we have that g ∈ E10 ∪ E20 , by construction, and A(g) = A0 (g). For vertex ue , this is true since for each edge g incident to ue different from e, it holds that A(g) = A0 (g), since A(e) = A0 (e00 ), and since the orthogonality constraints at ue are satisfied by A0 . Analogous arguments hold for vertices uf and uh . To prove that this is true for v, we first argue that A(e) = A0 (e0 ), that A(f ) = A0 (f 0 ), and that A(h) = A0 (h0 ): Namely, by planarity constraints, we get A0 (e0 ) = A0 (x1 , ve ) since they both alternate with (x2 , x3 ); hence, by orthogonality constraints at ve , we get A0 (e00 ) = A0 (e0 ). Since A(e) = A0 (e00 ), by construction, we conclude A(e) = A0 (e0 ). The equalities A(f ) = A0 (f 0 ) and A(h) = A0 (h0 ) follow symmetrically. Hence, the orthogonality constraints at v are satisfied by A since they are satisfied at v 0 by A0 . This concludes the proof. t u Theorem 5. OrthoSEFE-2 can be solved in polynomial time for instances whose shared graph is a cycle and whose union graph has maximum degree 5. Proof. First apply Lemma 3 to obtain an equivalent instance hG01 , G02 i such that G0∩ is a cycle and graph G01 has maximum degree 3. Then, apply Lemma 2 to obtain an equivalent instance hG001 , G002 i such that G00∩ is a cycle and G001 is an outerplanar graph with maximum degree 3. Finally, apply Lemma 1 to test in polynomial time whether hG001 , G002 i, and hence hG1 , G2 i, is a positive instance. t u  E  Omitted or Sketched Proofs from Section 5  Lemma 4. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph is biconnected. It is possible to construct in polynomial time an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i whose shared graph is biconnected and such that each endpoint of an exclusive edge has degree 2 in the shared graph. Proof. We start with a simplification step that removes certain edges. An exclusive edge e = uv of G1 or of G2 is an intra-pole edge if its endpoints are adjacent in some skeleton of the SPQR-tree of the shared graph G∩ . If neither u nor v is incident to other exclusive edges, then uv is isolated. Let E10 and E20 be the isolated intra-pole edges of G1 and G2 , respectively. We claim that the instance hG1 − E10 , G2 − E20 i admits an OrthoSEFE if and only if hG1 , G2 i does. The if part is clear since we can simply remove the isolated intra-pole edges from an OrthoSEFE of hG1 , G2 i to obtain an OrthoSEFE. Conversely, Angelini et al. [1] show that the intra-pole edges can be reinserted into any SEFE, and thus also into an OrthoSEFE of hG1 − E10 , G2 − E20 i without crossings, i.e., the planarity constraints are satisfied for hG1 , G2 i. Since the edges in E10 ∪ E20 are isolated also the orthogonal constraints are trivially satisfied, and we obtain an OrthoSEFE of hG1 , G2 i. This finishes the proof of the claim. 25  v0  v  v0 w3  x  x  u  v  w2  w1 u  Fig. 10. Moving exclusive edges from a vertex with degree 3 in the shared graph to a new vertex with degree 2 in the shared graph.  In the following, we assume that hG1 , G2 i has been preprocessed in this way, and it hence does not contain isolated intra-pole edges. Consider an exclusive edge e = uv in G1 or G2 , say in G1 , such that u has degree 3 in the shared graph. Assume that ux is an edge of G incident to u such that, in every OrthoSEFE of hG1 , G2 i the edge uv is embedded in a face of G incident to ux (we describe how to determine such an edge later). We perform the following transformation. We subdivide ux by three vertices w1 , w2 , w3 and add the edge w1 w3 . We further replace uv by w2 v and also, if it exists, the (unique) exclusive edge e0 = uv 0 (from G2 ) by w2 v 0 ; see Fig. 10. Call the resulting in0 0 stance hG1 , G2 i. It is not difficult to see that hG1 , G2 i admits an OrthoSEFE if 0 0 0 0 and only if hG1 , G2 i does. If hG1 , G2 i admits an OrthoSEFE, we can contract the vertices w1 , w2 , w3 onto u to obtain an OrthoSEFE of hG1 , G2 i. Note that the orthogonal constraint at u is satisfied since the triangle w1 , w2 , w3 ensures that the exclusive edges incident to u are embedded in the same face of G0∩ and hence in G∩ . Conversely, given an OrthoSEFE of hG1 , G2 i, due to the orthogonality constraints at u all exclusive edges incident to u are embedded in the same face of G∩ , and hence the replacement can be carried out locally without creating crossings. Note that, after the transformation, there are fewer endpoints of exclusive edges that have degree 3 in the shared graph. We iteratively apply this transformation to obtain the instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i. It remains to show that there always exists a suitable edge ux. Let T denote the SPQR-tree of the shared graph G∩ . Since u has degree 3, there is exactly one node µ of T whose skeleton contains u and where the degree of u in skel(µ) is 3. Note that µ is either a P-node or an R-node. First assume µ is an R-node and consider the position of v inside skel(µ), where it is either a vertex of skel(µ) or it is contained in a virtual edge εv of skel(µ). Since µ is an R-node, u and v (u and εv ) share at most two faces, both of which are incident to a virtual edge ε incident to u. We choose ux as the (unique) edge incident to u that is contained in the subgraph represented by ε. Second, assume µ is a P-node. If the other endpoint v of e is not a pole of µ, then v is contained in a virtual edge εv of skel(µ), and we can proceed as in the previous case; see Fig. 10. Now assume that v is the other vertex of skel(µ), i.e., e is an intra-pole edge. Since e cannot be isolated (due to the simplification step at the beginning), there exists an exclusive edge e0 in G2 incident to u or v. Since e 6= e0 , the edge e0 has an endpoint v 0 that is contained in a subgraph represented by a virtual edge ε of skel(µ). It follows that in every planar embedding of G2 , the edge e0 is embedded in a face incident to ε. By the orthogonality constraints 26  at the vertex shared by e and e0 , e also has to be embedded in a face incident to ε in any OrthoSEFE. We thus choose ux as the (unique) edge incident to u contained in the subgraph represented by ε. t u Lemma 5. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 such that the shared graph G∩ is biconnected. Then hG1 , G2 i admits an OrthoSEFE if and only if all instances hGµ1 , Gµ2 i admit an OrthoSEFE. Proof. It is not hard to see that each hGµ1 , Gµ2 i can be obtained from hG1 , G2 i by removing some vertices and edges and suppressing subdivision vertices. Thus, if hG1 , G2 i admits an OrthoSEFE, so does each hGµ1 , Gµ2 i. Conversely, assume that each hGµ1 , Gµ2 i admits an OrthoSEFE. Recall that we have fixed a reference embedding for each skeleton of the SPQR-tree of the shared graph G∩ up to a flip. We fix the flips of all reference embeddings as follows. For each S-node µ and each neighbor ν, represented by a virtual edge ε in skel(µ), we consider the flips of the cycle Cε in the OrthoSEFE of hGµ1 , Gµ2 i with respect to the ordering Oε of the attachments of the subgraph represented by ε. If the reference embedding is used, we label the edge µν with label 1, otherwise we label it −1. Finally, we choose an arbitrary root µ0 of the augmented SPQR-tree for which we fix the reference embedding. For each skeleton skel(µ), µ 6= µ0 , we choose the reference embedding if and only if the product of the labels on the (unique) path from µ0 to µ is 1, and its flip otherwise. We denote the planar embedding of G∩ obtained in this way by E. It remains to determine the embeddings of G1 and G2 . After suitably flipping the given OrthoSEFEs, we can assume that their embeddings can be obtained from E by removing vertices and edges, and by contracting edges. We now determine the embeddings of G1 and G2 as follows. Recall that every vertex that is incident to exclusive edges has degree 2 in the shared graph. For each vertex v that is incident to exclusive edges of G1 (of G2 ), we consider the unique S-node µ whose skeleton contains v, and we choose the edge ordering as in the given OrthoSEFE of hGµ1 , Gµ2 i. We claim that this results in an OrthoSEFE hE1 , E2 i of hG1 , G2 i. Refer to Figs. 6(a) and 6(b). First observe that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied, since the edge ordering of each vertex is chosen according to one of the given OrthoSEFEs. It remains to show that the embeddings also satisfy the planarity constraints. Due to the construction of the embeddings, all the exclusive edges are embedded in faces of E; otherwise we would observe crossings in the skeletons of the (augmented) SPQR-tree. Consider two exclusive edges uv and u0 v 0 from the same graph that cross. Since uv and u0 v 0 cross, there exists a node µ of the (augmented) SPQR-tree such that for each of the two edges the endpoints are in different parts of skel(µ). If µ is a P-node or an R-node and all four parts containing these endpoints are distinct, then the parts containing the endpoints of these edges alternate around a face of skel(µ). This contradicts the planarity of the corresponding input graph G1 or G2 . Thus, in this case at least two attachments are contained in the same virtual edge ε of skel(µ). Let ν be the S-node of the augmented SPQR-tree corresponding to ε. Clearly, in skel(ν), the endpoints 27  of each of the two edges are distinct parts of skel(ν). It follows that the endpoints of the two edges alternate around the two faces of hGν1 , Gν2 i corresponding to the two faces of skel(µ). By construction of hE1 , E2 i this contradicts the assumption that the given drawing of hGν1 , Gν2 i is an OrthoSEFE. t u Lemma 6. hGµ1 , Gµ2 i admits an OrthoSEFE if and only if hGµ1 , Gµ2 i does. Proof. We simply show that, in terms of embeddings, the path Pε replacing Cε behaves the same as Cε . First, observe that the edge (a2 , x3 ) ensures that all exclusive edges of G1 incident to the clockwise uv-path of Ci are embedded on the same side of the path Pε . Similarly, (x2 , b1 ) ensures that all exclusive edges of G1 incident to the counterclockwise uv-path of Cε are embedded on the same side of the path Pε . Moreover, since the endpoints of the edges (a2 , x3 ) and (x2 , b1 ) alternate along Pε , they are embedded on different sides of Pε . Thus, the exclusive edges of G1 incident to the clockwise and counterclockwise uvpath of Cε cannot be embedded on the same side of Pε . Similarly, the exclusive edges (a1 , x4 ) and (x2 , b2 ) ensure that the exclusive edges of G2 incident to the clockwise uv-path are all on one side of Pε and the exclusive edges of G2 incident to the counterclockwise uv-path are on the other side of Pε . Finally, due to the alternation with (a2 , x3 ), the edges (x2 , x4 ) and (x2 , b1 ) must be embedded on the same side of Pε . By the orthogonality constraint at x2 , the edge (x2 , b2 ) must be also embedded on the same side as (x2 , x4 ). Thus, (a2 , x3 ) and (a1 , x3 ) are on the same side of Pε and likewise for (x2 , b1 ) and (x2 , b2 ). This ensures that the exclusive edges of G1 and G2 incident to the clockwise uv-path of Cε are embedded on the same side of Cε and likewise for those incident to the counterclockwise uv-path. t u Theorem 7. Let hG1 , . . . , Gk i be a positive instance of OrthoSEFE-k whose shared graph is biconnected. Then, there exists an OrthoSEFE hΓ1 , Γ2 , . . . , Γk i of hG1 , . . . , Gk i in which every edge has at most three bends. Proof. We assume that a cyclic order of the edges of the union graph around each vertex is given such that (a) it induces a planar embedding on each Gi , i = 1, . . . , k, and (b) we can assign the incident edges around a vertex to at most four ports such that at most one edge of each Gi is assigned to the same port. We adopt the method of Biedl and Kant [9]. First, we compute in linear time [15] an s-t-ordering on the shared graph, i.e., we label the vertices v1 , . . . , vn such that {v1 , vn } is an edge of the shared graph and, for each i = 2, . . . , n − 1, there are j < i < k such that {vj , vi } and {vi , vk } are edges of the shared graph. We choose the face to the left of (v1 , vn ) as the outer face of the union graph. We now draw the union graph by adding the vertices in the order in which they appear in the s-t-ordering while respecting the given order of the edges around each vertex. The edges will bend at most on y-coordinates near their incident vertices and are drawn vertically otherwise. We draw the edges around v1 as indicated in Fig. 11(a) where some of the incident edges might actually indicate several exclusive edges – at most one from each graph. 28  to vn  or  vi  (a) around v1  vn  vi  v1  to v1 (b) around v2 , . . . , vn−1  (c) around vn  Fig. 11. Constructing a drawing with at most three bends per edge  For i = 2, . . . , n − 1, an edge may only leave vi to the bottom if it is incident to a neighbor with a lower index. Again, some of the ports might host several exclusive edges, even one to a vertex with a lower index and one to a vertex with a higher index. Special cases occur when the ordering around vi is such that four exclusive edges of two distinct graphs must be assigned to two consecutive ports. In particular, an edge leaving vi to a vertex with a lower index might bend twice around vi (see, e.g., the two small circles in Fig. 11(b)). Finally, the edges around vn are placed such that the edge {v1 , vn } enters it from the left. Thus, there are exactly three bends on {v1 , vn }; see Fig. 11(c). For any other edge, there is at most one bend around the endvertex with lower index and at most two bends around the endvertex with higher index. t u  F  Omitted or Sketched Proofs from Section 6  Lemma 7. Let hG1 , G2 i be an instance of OrthoSEFE-2 whose shared graph G∩ is a cycle. It is possible to construct in polynomial time an equivalent instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i of OrthoSEFE-2 such that (i) the shared graph G∗∩ is a cycle, (ii) graph G∗1 is outerplanar, and (iii) no two degree-4 vertices in G∗1 are adjacent to each other. Proof. The reduction works in two steps. In the first step, we construct an in+ stance hG+ 1 , G2 i satisfying properties (i) and (iii) that is equivalent to hG1 , G2 i; then, in the second step we construct the final instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i equivalent to + hG+ 1 , G2 i, which also satisfies property (ii). For the first step, we show how to construct an instance hG01 , G02 i of OrthoSEFE2 equivalent to hG1 , G2 i such that G0∩ is a cycle and the number of vertices with degree 4 in G01 not satisfying the condition of property (iii) is smaller than the number of vertices with degree 4 in G1 not satisfying this condition. Repeatedly + performing this transformation eventually yields the required instance hG+ 1 , G2 i. Consider a vertex v with degree 4 in G1 not satisfying the condition of property (iii). Let e = (u, v) and f = (v, w) be the two exclusive edges of G1 incident to v. Assume that u, v, and w appear in this order along G∩ , the other cases being analogous. Initialize G0∩ = G∩ ; refer to Fig. 12. Replace v in G0∩ by a path Pv composed of dummy vertices x1 , x2 , va , x3 , . . . , x8 , u0 , x9 , x10 , of vertex v, and of dummy vertices y1 , y2 , w0 , y3 , . . . , y8 , vb , y9 , y10 . Note that G0∩ contains all the vertices of 29  e0  e f u  H1  v  H2  w  H1  u  (a)  e00 va  f 00 v  u0  w0 vb  f0 H2 w  (b) Fig. 12. Illustrations for the proof of Lemma 7  G∩ , plus a set of dummy vertices. We now describe the exclusive edges in E10 and E20 . Set Ei0 , with i = 1, 2, contains all the exclusive edges in Ei , except for e and f . Also, E10 contains edges e0 = (u, va ), e00 = (u0 , v), f 00 = (v, w0 ), and f 0 = (vb , w). Finally, E20 contains edges (x1 , va ), (x2 , x3 ), (va , x5 ), (x4 , x7 ), (x6 , u0 ), (x8 , x9 ), (u0 , x10 ), (y1 , w0 ), (y2 , y3 ), (w0 , y5 ), (y4 , y7 ), (y6 , vb ), (y8 , y9 ), and (vb , y10 ). We prove that hG01 , G02 i satisfies the required properties. First, graph G0∩ is a cycle by construction. Second, the number of vertices of degree 4 in G01 not satisfying the condition of property (iii) is smaller than the number of such vertices in G1 . In fact, any vertex x 6= v with degree 4 in G01 satisfies the required condition if and only if it satisfies the same condition in G1 . On the other hand, vertex v does not satisfy the condition in G1 , by hypothesis, but it satisfies the condition in G01 , since u0 and w0 have degree 3 in G01 and the path between them along G0∩ containing v only contains dummy vertices x9 , x10 , y1 , and y2 , which are not incident to any exclusive edge of G01 , by construction. We now prove that hG01 , G02 i is equivalent to hG1 , G2 i. Suppose that hG1 , G2 i admits an OrthoSEFE hΓ1 , Γ2 i, and let A be the corresponding assignment of the exclusive edges of E1 and of E2 to the two sides of G∩ , which exists by Theorem 2. We show how to construct an assignment A0 of the exclusive edges of E10 and of E20 to the two sides of G0∩ satisfying all the constraints. For each exclusive edge g ∈ E1 ∩ E10 , set A0 (g) = A(g). Also, set A0 (e0 ) = 0 00 A (e ) = A(e) and A0 (f 0 ) = A0 (f 00 ) = A(f ). For each exclusive edge g ∈ E2 ∩E20 , set A0 (g) = A(g). Also, set A0 (x1 , va ) = A0 (va , x5 ) = A0 (x6 , u0 ) = A0 (u0 , x10 ) = A0 (y1 , w0 ) = A0 (w0 , y5 ) = A0 (y6 , vb ) = A0 (vb , y10 ) = A(e) and set A0 (x2 , x3 ) = A0 (x4 , x7 ) = A0 (x8 , x9 ) = A0 (y2 , y3 ) = A0 (y4 , y7 ) = A0 (y8 , y9 ) = A(f ). We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G01 are satisfied by 0 A . Note that, by construction, edges e00 and f 00 do not alternate with any edge of G01 along G0∩ . Also, edges e0 and f 0 do not alternate with each other. Further, if edge e0 (edge f 0 ) alternates with an edge g ∈ G01 along G0∩ , then edge e (edge f ) alternates with g along G∩ . Finally, any two edges different from e0 , e00 , f 0 , f 00 that alternate along G0∩ also alternate along G∩ . In all the described cases, the planarity constraints are satisfied by A0 since they are satisfied by A. We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G02 are satisfied by 0 A . Note that, by construction, edges in E20 ∩ E2 do not alternate with any edge 30  incident to a dummy vertex along G0∩ , and alternate with each other along G0∩ if only if they alternate with each other along G∩ . Hence, the planarity constraints for these edges are satisfied by A0 since they are satisfied by A. On the other hand, it is easily verified that the planarity constraints are satisfied by A0 also for the edges incident to dummy vertices. We now prove that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied by A0 at every vertex in V 0 . For the non-dummy vertices in V 0 \ {u, v, w}, this is true since they are satisfied by A and since the edges incident to these vertices have the same assignment in A as in A0 . For vertex u, this is true since they are satisfied by A, since A0 (e0 ) = A(e), and since the other edges incident to u have the same assignment in A and in A0 . Analogously, for w this is true since they are satisfied by A, since A0 (f 0 ) = A(f ), and since the other edges have the same assignment in A and in A0 . For v, this is true since they are satisfied by A, since A0 (e00 ) = A(e), since A0 (f 00 ) = A(f ), and since the other edges have the same assignment in A and in A0 . For va , this is true since A0 (x1 , va ) = A0 (va , x5 ) = A0 (e0 ) = A(e). For u0 , this is true since A0 (x6 , u0 ) = A0 (u0 , x10 ) = A0 (e00 ) = A(e). For w0 , this is true since A0 (y1 , w0 ) = A0 (w0 , y5 ) = A0 (f 00 ) = A(f ). For vb , this is true since A0 (y6 , vb ) = A0 (vb , y10 ) = A0 (f 0 ) = A(f ). Since all the other dummy vertices have degree 2 in G01 , this concludes the proof that A0 satisfies the orthogonality constraints. Suppose that hG01 , G02 i admits OrthoSEFE hΓ10 , Γ20 i, and let A0 be the corresponding assignment of the exclusive edges of E10 and of E20 to the two sides of G0∩ . We show how to construct an assignment A of the exclusive edges of E1 and of E2 to the two sides of G∩ satisfying all the planarity and the orthogonality constraints. For each exclusive edge g ∈ E1 , set A(g) = A0 (g). Also, set A(e) = A0 (e0 ) and A(f ) = A0 (f 0 ). Finally, for each exclusive edge g ∈ E2 ∩ E20 , set A(g) = A0 (g). We prove that the planarity constraints for the edges of G1 are satisfied by A. Note that e and f do not alternate with each other since they are incident to the same vertex v. Also, if edge e (edge f ) alternates with an edge g ∈ G1 along G∩ , then edge e0 (edge f 0 ) alternates with g along G0∩ . Finally, any two edges different from e and f that alternate along G∩ also alternate along G0∩ . In all these cases, the planarity constraints are satisfied by A since they are satisfied by A0 . The planarity constraints for the edges of G2 are satisfied by A since any two of these edges alternate along G∩ if and only if they alternate along G0∩ , and since the planarity constraints are satisfied by A0 . We finally prove that the orthogonality constraints are satisfied by A at every vertex in V . For the vertices in V \ {v}, this is true since they are satisfied by A0 and since for every exclusive edge g ∈ E1 ∪ E2 incident to these vertices, we have g ∈ E10 ∪ E20 , by construction, and A(g) = A0 (g). To prove that this is true also for v, we first argue that A(e) = A0 (e00 ) and A(f ) = A0 (f 00 ): By planarity constraints, we get A0 (x1 , va ) = A0 (va , x5 ) = A0 (x6 , u0 ) = A0 (u0 , x10 ), since they belong to a sequence of alternating edges; hence, by orthogonality constraints at va and u0 , we get A0 (e0 ) = A0 (x1 , va ) = A0 (va , x5 ) = A0 (x6 , u0 ) = A0 (u0 , x10 ) = 31  A0 (e00 ); since A(e) = A0 (e0 ), by construction, we conclude A(e) = A0 (e00 ). The equality A(f ) = A0 (f 00 ) follows symmetrically. Hence, the orthogonality constraints at v are satisfied by A since they are satisfied at v by A0 . This concludes + the proof that hG+ 1 , G2 i, which satisfies properties (i) and (iii), is equivalent to hG1 , G2 i. + In order to construct an instance hG∗1 , G∗2 i equivalent to hG+ 1 , G2 i that also satisfies property (ii), we observe that the proof of Lemma 2 can be easily ex+ tended so that it can be applied to hG+ 1 , G2 i. This lemma, in fact, holds for instances hG1 , G2 i satisfying property (i) and a property that is stronger than (iii), namely that G1 has degree at most 3. This stronger condition, however, is only used to ensure that there exists no exclusive edge in E1 with an endpoint in H2 and the other one not in H2 ; refer to Fig. 8. In particular, it is used to ensure that there exists no edge connecting a vertex of H2 to any of u, v, w, z. However, it is possible to prove that property (iii) is already sufficient to ensure the absence of these edges. Namely, suppose that there exists an edge in E1 connecting a vertex x of H2 to vertex v, the other cases being analogous. This implies that v has degree 4 in G1 , since it is also adjacent to u. However, any path in cycle G∩ containing u, x, and v also contains either w or z, since e and f alternate along G∩ ; this is a contradiction to property (iii), since each of w and z is incident to an exclusive edge of G1 , namely f . This concludes the proof of the lemma. t u  32

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
