Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_1996

Abstract:
arXiv:1607.02482v1 [math.AC] 8 Jul 2016  POLYNOMIALS INDUCING THE ZERO FUNCTION ON LOCAL RINGS MARK W. ROGERS AND CAMERON WICKHAM Abstract. For a Noetherian local ring pR, mq having a finite residue field of cardinality q, we study the connections between the ideal Z pRq of Rrxs, which is the set of polynomials that vanish on R, and the ideal Z pmq, the polynomials ś that vanish on m, using what we call π-polynomials: polynomials of the form πpxq “ qi“1 px ´ ci q, where c1 , . . . , cq is a set of representatives of the residue classes of m. When R is Henselian we prove that πpRq “ m and show that a generating set for Z pRq may be obtained from a generating set for Z pmq by composing with πpxq. When m is principal and has index of nilpotency e, we prove that if e ď q then Z pmq “ px, mqe , and if Ş e “ q ` 1 then Z pmq “ px, mqe ` pxq ´ mq´1 xq. When R is finite, we prove that Z pRq “ qi“1 Z pci ` mq is a minimal primary decomposition. We determine when Z pRq is nonzero, regular, or principal, respectively, and do the same for Z pmq. We prove that when R is complete, repeated application of πpxq ` x to elements of R will produce a sequence converging to the roots of πpxq. We show that Z pRq is the intersection of the principal ideals generated by the π-polynomials.  1. Introduction One of the surprising facts about finite rings is that a polynomial can be nonzero and yet induce the zero function. An interesting first example is provided by Fermat’s Little Theorem: If p is prime, then the nonzero polynomial xp ´ x induces the zero function on Zp . Using this we can build obvious examples, such as ppxp ´ xq and pxp ´ xq2 on Zp2 , and more surprising examples, such as pxp ´ xqp ´ pp´1 pxp ´ xq on Zpp`1 ; see Corollary 4.5 for more information on these examples. For a ring R, it’s easy to see that the set of polynomials in Rrxs that induce the zero function on R is an ideal of Rrxs; we call this the zero-function ideal of R, denoted Z pRq. The zero-function ideal has been studied, often with particular focus on the rings R “ Zpn , for its connection with integer-valued polynomials and functions induced by polynomials [F, J, P, Z] and coding theory [LRS]. For most of our paper, pR, mq is a Noetherian local ring; we will see that Z pRq is only nonzero when theˇ residue field R “ R{m is finite, so we focus most of our attention on this ˇ case and let q “ ˇRˇ. Many authors have studied the problem of finding a generating set for Z pRq, most often in the case R “ Zpn [D, B, F, L, NW, P, W]. In this paper, we argue that in many cases, focus should be shifted from Z pRq to the simpler ideal Z pmq, which is the set of polynomials that induce the zero function on m. The connection between the two is the ideal Z pR, mq, the set of polynomials that take elements of R into m; it’s easy to show that Z pR, mq “ pxq ´ x, mq. Certainly polynomials in Z pR, mq can be composed with those in Z pmq to obtain polynomials in Z pRq; visually, Z pmq ˝ Z pR, mq Ď Z pRq. One of the main themes of this paper is to show that in some sense the opposite is true: A generating Date: July 11, 2016. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 13M10, 13B25; Secondary 11C08, 13J15, 13E10, 13F20. Key words and phrases. finite ring, polynomial functions, vanishing polynomials, Artinian rings. 1  2  MARK W. ROGERS AND CAMERON WICKHAM  set for Z pRq can be obtained by composing generators of Z pR, mq with generators of Z pmq (see Theorem 4.2). Example 1.1. Let R “ Z9 , so that m “ p3q and R – Z3 . By direct computation or by Theorem 4.4, Z pmq “ px, mq2 . In Lemma 2.5 we easily find that with πpxq “ x3 ´ x, Z pR, mq “ pπpxq, mq “ px3 ´ x, 3q; from this, according to Theorem 4.2, we deduce Z pRq “ Z pmq ˝ Z pR, mq “ px3 ´ x, 3q2 . This makes it clear that the simpler ideal Z pmq controls the structure of the generating set of the more complicated ideal Z pRq. The polynomial xq ´ x has played an important role in the `research on zero-functions, ˘ q due primarily to the fact that the image of x ´ x generates Z R and, to a lesser extent, the fact that when R is finite, xq ´x maps R surjectively onto m. See A. Bandini’s paper [B] for applications of surjectivity; we generalize the surjectivity result in Corollary 2.11 and apply it in Theorem 3.2 and Proposition 4.1. A secondary theme of this paper is that there is actually a class of polynomials with these properties that can play the of xq ´ x; we śrole q call these π-polynomials, defined to be polynomials of the form πpxq “ i“1 px ´ ci q where c1 , . . . , cq is any set of representatives of the residue classes of m. As we will see, xq ´ x is a π-polynomial when R is Henselian (which holds true in the common case where R is finite). If R is complete, we also provide a computational way of obtaining the factorization of any π-polynomial, such as xq ´ x itself. In the case of xq ´ x, this method is as simple as choosing any element of R and repeatedly taking the qth power; the results converge to a root of xq ´ x. (See Theorems 2.10, 5.2.) The ideal Z pRq for R “ Zpn was studied as early as 1929 by L. E. Dickson [D, Theorem 27]; in that work, the polynomials in Z pRq were referred to as residual polynomials. Dickson found a generating set for Z pZpn q when n ď p. In our notation, he found Z pRq “ pπpxq, mqn , where πpxq “ xp ´ x and m “ pR. We generalize and recover this work as another application of our Theorem 4.2: We show in Theorem 4.4 and its corollary that if pR, mq is an Artinian local ring with a principal maximal ideal having index of nilpotency e ď q, then Z pmq “ px, mqe , and thus Z pRq “ pπpxq, mqe for any π-polynomial. When e ą q, the situation is more complicated, but we take care of the case e “ q ` 1; the result is related to results on Z pRq for specific rings R ([B, Theorem 2.1] and [L, Theorem II]). As further indication of the importance of π-polynomials and Z pmq, we provide two additional results. Under suitable conditions, we prove in Proposition 2.7 that Z pRq is the intersection of the principal ideals generated by the π-polynomials, and in Proposition 2.9 we provide a minimal primary decomposition of Z pRq as the intersection of the ideals Z pci ` mq, where c1 , . . . , cq is a set of represetatives of the residue classes of m. Since generators for Z pci ` mq may be obtained from generators for Z pmq by composition with x ´ ci , this shows that a primary decomposition for Z pRq may be obtained from knowing only a generating set for Z pmq. This result on primary decomposition is a generalization of results from the paper [P] of G. Peruginelli, which was concerned with the ring R “ Zpn . The remaining theme of our paper is provided in Theorem 3.2, Theorem 3.3, and Corollary 3.4, where we identify conditions under which Z pRq is nonzero, principal, and regular, and the same for Z pmq; these results explain why we often focus our attention on finite rings. The results generalize, have some overlap with, and were inspired by R. Gilmer’s paper [G].  POLYNOMIALS INDUCING THE ZERO FUNCTION ON LOCAL RINGS  3  2. Zero-Function Ideals and π-polynomials We begin with a precise definition of the zero-function ideal of a ring, and we define a class of polynomials that plays an important role the study of zero-function ideals. Definition 2.1. Let R be a commutative ring with identity, let S be a subset of R, and let J be an ideal of R. The set Z pS, Jq of polynomials in Rrxs which map S into J is easily seen to be an ideal of Rrxs. When the ideal J is omitted, it is assumed to be zero. The focus of this paper is on Z pRq, which we call the zero-function ideal of R. Definition 2.2. Suppose the local ring pR, mq has a finite residue field. If c1 , . . . ,ś cq is any set of representatives of the residue classes of m, then we call the polynomial πpxq “ qi“1 px´ci q a π-polynomial for R. Example 2.3. We mentioned in the introduction that for R “ Z9 , Z pmq “ px, 3q2 . However, for R “ Z8 , Z pmq Ľ px, 2q3 . In fact, according to Theorem 4.4 and a few brief calculations, Z pmq “ px, 2q3 ` px2 ´ 2xq “ px2 ´ 2x, 4xq. We may then use Theorem 4.2 to compose with the π-polynomial πpxq “ x2 ´ x and conclude that Z pRq “ ppx2 ´ xq2 ´ 2px2 ´ xq, 4px2 ´ xqq. The following basic result is a generalized factor theorem that will be useful in a few proofs. The part related to units appears in Gilmer’s proof of Theorem 4 in [G]. Lemma 2.4. Let R be a commutative ring with identity. If f pxq P Rrxs is a polynomial with roots c1 , c2 , . . . , cn such that each difference ci ´ cj (i ‰ j) is either a regular element or a unit, then px ´ c1 qpx ´ c2 q . . . px ´ cn q divides f pxq in Rrxs. Proof. By the Factor Theorem, f pxq “ px ´ c1 qf1 pxq for some f1 pxq P Rrxs. Substituting c2 in for x, we obtain 0 “ f pc2 q “ pc2 ´ c1 qf1 pc2 q. Since c2 ´ c1 is either a regular element or a unit, c2 is a root of f1 pxq; we obtain some f2 pxq P Rrxs with f1 pxq “ px ´ c2 qf2 pxq. So f pxq “ px ´ c1 qpx ´ c2 qf2 pxq. By continuing to evaluate at the c’s in this manner, we arrive at f pxq “ px´ c1 qpx´ c2 q ¨ ¨ ¨ px´ cn qfn pxq for some polynomial fn pxq P Rrxs, as desired.  Convention. Throughout this paper, let R be a Noetherian local ring with maximal ideal m. Unless otherwise specified, the residue field R{m will be denoted by R. The image in R of an element r P R will be denoted by r. If the residue field is finite, c1 , . . . , cq will denote a set ofś representatives of the residue classes of m and πpxq will denote the π-polynomial πpxq “ qi“1 px ´ ci q.  The following lemma may be viewed as a generalization of Fermat’s Little Theorem; it is well-known, at least in special cases, as remarked by D. J. Lewis in [L]. A simple but important consequence of this lemma is that πpRq Ď m. Later in Corollary 2.11 we will show that if R is Henselian, then πpRq “ m.  Lemma 2.5. If pR, mq is a Noetherian local ring with finite residue field of cardinality q, then Z pR, mq “ pπpxq, mq for any π-polynomial πpxq. ` ˘ Proof. Let f pxq P Z pR, mq; then f pxq P Z R . By Lemma 2.4, f pxq is in the ideal generated by πpxq in Rrxs; pull this back to Rrxs to get f pxq P pπpxq, mq. For the opposite containment, certainly the constant polynomials in m are in Z pR, mq. śq Now suppose πpxq “ i“1 px ´ ci q. Since any element in R is congruent modulo m to one of the ci , the polynomial πpxq is in Z pR, mq, as desired.   4  MARK W. ROGERS AND CAMERON WICKHAM  Example 2.6. Let R “ Zp5q (Z localized at the prime ideal p5q), so that m “ p5q, R “ Z5 , and q “ 5. The polynomial xq ´ x is not a π-polynomial since it doesn’t factor completely over R Ď Q: x5 ´ x “ xpx ´ 1qpx ` 1qpx2 ` 1q. However, by Lagrange’s Theorem applied to the group of units of R, it is still true that x5 ´ x P Z pR, mq. According to the lemma, we expect x5 ´ x P pπpxq, mq for any π-polynomial. In fact, if for example we let πpxq “ px ´ 2qpx ` 1qxpx ´ 1qpx ` 2q, then x5 ´ x “ πpxq ` 5px3 ´ 1q P pπpxq, mq. In the next result we show that the zero-functions are precisely those polynomials that are multiples of each π-polynomial. Proposition 2.7. Let pR, mq be a Noetherian ring with finite residue field R of cardinality q. The zero-function ideal Ş of R is the intersection of the principal ideals generated by the π-polynomials: Z pRq “ pπpxqq.  Proof. The fact that any zero-function f pxq P Z pRq is a multiple of any π-polynomial πpxq Ş follows immediately from Lemma 2.4. This shows Z pRq Ď pπpxqq. Ş Let f pxq P pπpxqq and let r P R; we show f prq “ 0. We may extend r to a set r, c2 , . . . , cq of representatives of the residue classes of m, and thus πpxq “ px ´ rqpx ´ c2 q ¨ ¨ ¨ px ´ cq q is a π-polynomial having r as a root. Since f pxq is a multiple of πpxq, f prq “ 0. Thus f pxq P Z pRq.  In the following result we give a minimal primary decomposition of Z pRq if R is finite. First, we give a simple example: Example 2.8. For R “ Z9 , as mentioned in the introduction, we have Z pmq “ px, 3q2 “ px2 , 3xq, so the proposition below gives the following minimal primary decomposition of Z pRq: ppx3 ´ xq2 , 3px3 ´ xqq “ px2 , 3xq X ppx ´ 1q2 , 3px ´ 1qq X ppx ´ 2q2 , 3px ´ 2qq, where the ideals on the right are primary for the maximal ideals px, 3q, px ´ 1, 3q, and px ´ 2, 3q, respectively. Proposition 2.9. Let pR, mq be a finite local ring with residue field R of cardinality q. Let c1 , . . . , cq be a set of representatives of the residue classes of m. Then Z pRq “ Ş q i“1 Z pci ` mq is a minimal primary decomposition of Z pRq. For each i, the associated prime of Z pci ` mq is the maximal ideal px ´ ci , mq. Proof. Certainly any zero-function on R is also zero on each ci ` m. For the other inclusion, Ť use the fact that R “ qi“1 pci ` mq. For the statement about associated primes, let e be the index of nilpotency of m, so that me “ 0 but me´1 ‰ 0, and use the fact that px ´ ci , mqe Ď Z pci ` mq. As for the minimality of the decomposition, Ş ś let j be an integer between Ş 1 and q; we show that Z pRq Ĺ i‰j Z pci ` mq. Let hpxq “ i‰j px ´ ci qe ; then hpxq P i‰j Z pci ` mq since ś me “ 0. To see that hpxq is not a zero-function, note that hpcj q “ i‰j pcj ´ ci qe is a product of units, and is thus nonzero.  Next we provide an equivalent way to view π-polynomials, provided the ring is Henselian; of course, this holds for the finite local rings in which we are mainly interested. For an example where the two conditions below are not equivalent, see Example 2.6. This theorem is also needed in our proof that π-polynomials map R surjectively onto m.  POLYNOMIALS INDUCING THE ZERO FUNCTION ON LOCAL RINGS  5  Theorem 2.10. Let R be a Henselian local ring with finite residue field R of cardinality q. For any polynomial πpxq P Rrxs, the following statements are equivalent: (i) The polynomial πpxq is a π-polynomial. (ii) The polynomial πpxq is monic and maps to xq ´ x in Rrxs. Proof. Let πpxq be any π-polynomial. Since R is a field with q elements, by Lagrange’s theorem on the group of units of R, xq ´ x is a zero-function on R. By Lemma 2.4, πpxq divides xq ´ x in Rrxs. Since these are monic polynomials of the same degree, they are equal. For the converse, suppose πpxq is any monic polynomial withśπpxq “ xq ´ x. Let R “ td1 , . . . , dq u; as discussed in the previous paragraph, xq ´ x “ qi“1 px ´ di q in Rrxs. By Hensel’s Lemma, this factorization of πpxq can be pulled śqback to a factorization in Rrxs: There exist ci in R with ci “ di such that πpxq “ i“1 px ´ ci q. Thus πpxq is a πpolynomial.  In the following corollary, we improve upon part of Lemma 2.5 by showing that the induced function π : R Ñ m is actually surjective when R is Henselian. This generalizes Lemma 1.3 of [B], where A. Bandini proved that, for any prime p, πpRq “ m in case R “ Zpn and πpxq “ xp ´ x. We use this corollary in our Theorem 3.2, where we characterize finite rings with principal zero-function ideals, expanding upon Gilmer [G]. It is used again in Proposition 4.1, which is fundamental for our Theorem 4.2, which shows that generators for Z pRq may be obtained by composing generators for Z pmq with a π-polynomial. Corollary 2.11. If pR, mq is a Henselian local ring with finite residue field R of cardinality q, then πpRq “ πpcq “ m for any π-polynomial πpxq and any coset c of m. Proof. We show that πpcq Ď πpRq Ď m Ď πpcq. The first containment is clear since c Ď R, and we saw the second containment in Lemma 2.5. For the final containment, let m P m. By Theorem 2.10, the polynomial πpxq ´ m is still a π-polynomial, and thus it factors over R: πpxq ´ m “ px ´ c1 qpx ´ c2 q ¨ ¨ ¨ px ´ cq q. This shows that for each i, πpci q “ m. Since c1 , c2 , . . . , cq is a set of representatives of the residue classes of m, one of them, say cj , is in c. Thus m “ πpcj q P πpcq, as desired.  3. When Z pRq and Z pmq are Nonzero, Regular, or Principal In the upcoming Theorems 3.2 and 3.3 we will use the following result from B. R. McDonald. McDonald states and proves the theorem for any finite local ring pR, mq, but the theorem and proof still hold when R is just Artinian. The notation McDonald uses is different from ours but the part we will use is that over an Artinian local ring, any regular polynomial is an associate of a monic polynomial. McDonald writes µf where we would write f , the image of f in Rrxs. Theorem 3.1. [M, Theorem XIII.6, p. 259] Let f be a regular polynomial in Rrxs. Then there is a monic polynomial f ˚ with µf “ µf ˚ and, for an element a in R, f paq “ 0 if and only if f ˚ paq “ 0. Furthermore, there is a unit v in Rrxs with vf “ f ˚ . One of the motivations for the current paper is Theorem 4 from [G], which states that if pR, mq is a zero-dimensional local ring, then Z pRq is principal if and only if either R is infinite (when Z pRq “ 0) or R is a finite field (when Z pRq is generated by xq ´ x.) The following result recovers half of Gilmer’s result, using some of the same ideas but a few different ones as well. For example, Gilmer used a result of E. Snapper; instead we use the  6  MARK W. ROGERS AND CAMERON WICKHAM  result of McDonald mentioned above. Also, we make the connection with π-polynomials and Z pmq. The other half of Gilmer’s result is recovered in Theorem 3.3. Theorem 3.2. Let pR, mq be a finite local ring and let πpxq be any π-polynomial for R. The following statements are equivalent: (1) R is a field. (2) Z pRq is principal. (3) Z pRq “ pπpxqq. (4) Z pmq is principal. (5) Z pmq “ pxq. Proof. If R is a field then Rrxs is a principal ideal domain, so Z pRq is principal. Assume Z pRq is principal. Since πpRq Ď m and me “ 0 for some e ě 1, Z pRq contains regular polynomials, such as πpxqe ; thus, the generator of Z pRq must be regular. According to Theorem 3.1, we may assume the generator is monic: Z pRq “ pf pxqq for some monic polynomial in Rrxs. Let r be a nonzero element in the annihilator of m, so that, by Lemma 2.5, rπpxq is a polynomial of degree q in Z pRq “ pf pxqq. This forces f pxq to have degree at most q, and since we know that all polynomials in Z pRq are multiples of πpxq (Proposition 2.7), the degree of f pxq is exactly q. Since f pxq is a monic multiple of πpxq with the same degree, f pxq “ πpxq. If Z pRq “ pπpxqq, then according to Corollary 2.11, 0 “ πpRq “ m. From this we easily conclude that Z pmq “ pxq, and thus Z pmq is principal. If Z pmq is principal, we use an argument similar to the part where we assumed Z pRq is principal. Since Z pmq contains xe for some e ě 1, Z pmq contains regular elements, so the generator of Z pmq is regular, and we may assume it is monic: Z pmq “ pf pxqq for some monic f pxq P Rrxs. Let r be a nonzero element in the annihilator of m, so that rx P Z pmq. This forces f pxq to have degree at most 1. Since f pxq is monic and f p0q “ 0, f pxq “ x, as desired. If Z pmq “ x, then m “ 0, so R is a field.  In the next proposition it becomes clear how the conditions of being Artinian or having a finite residue field affect Z pRq and Z pmq. We will use the concept of the embedding dimension of R, denoted edim R; this is the minimal number of generators of the maximal ideal. Recall that depth R ď dim R ď edim R. Theorem 3.3. Let pR, mq be a Noetherian local ring. (1) Z pmq contains nonzero polynomials if and only if depth R “ 0. (2) Z pRq contains nonzero polynomials if and only if depth R “ 0 and R is finite. (3) Z pmq contains regular polynomials if and only if dim R “ 0. (4) Z pRq contains regular polynomials if and only if dim R “ 0 and R is finite. (5) Z pmq is generated by a regular polynomial if and only if edim R “ 0. (6) Z pRq is generated by a regular polynomial if and only if edim R “ 0 and R is finite. In order to make the similarity with the other parts more clear, parts (4), (5), and (6) of the previous proposition were not stated as concisely as possible. Before we present the proof, we state and prove a corollary to clarify those three parts. In the development of this paper, we were particularly interested in the monic polynomials in Z pRq, so this corollary explains why we were mainly focused on finite rings. Corollary 3.4. Let pR, mq be a Noetherian local ring.  POLYNOMIALS INDUCING THE ZERO FUNCTION ON LOCAL RINGS  (3) (4) (5) (6)  Z pmq Z pRq Z pmq Z pRq  7  contains regular polynomials if and only if R is Artinian. contains regular polynomials if and only if R is a finite ring. is generated by a regular polynomial if and only if R is a field. is generated by a regular polynomial if and only if R is a finite field.  Proof of Corollary 3.4. Part (3) is clear since a Noetherian local ring is Artinian if and only if it has dimension 0. Part (4) follows from the proposition since a zero dimensional Noetherian local ring has a finite residue field if and only if the ring is finite. Parts (5) and (6) follow since edim R “ 0 if and only if R is a field.  Proof of Theorem 3.3. (1): If R has depth 0 then since R is Noetherian, there is a nonzero element m that annihilates m; thus mx P Z pmq. If R does not have depth 0, then R contains a regular element t. Let gpxq “ g0 ` g1 x ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` gn xn P Z pmq. Since gptq “ gpt2 q “ gpt3 q “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ gptn`1 q “ 0, there is a matrix equation ﬁ» ﬁ » ﬁ » 1 t1 t2 ¨¨¨ tn g0 0 4 2n ﬃ — ﬃ —1 t2 —0ﬃ t ¨ ¨ ¨ t g 1 ﬃ— ﬃ — ﬃ — — .. .. .. .. ﬃ — .. ﬃ “ — .. ﬃ .. –. . . . . ﬂ – . ﬂ –.ﬂ 1 tn`1 tpn`1q2 ¨ ¨ ¨  tpn`1qn  The determinant of this Vandermonde matrix is ź ź ptj ´ ti q “ 1ďiăjďn`1  gn  0  ti ptj´i ´ 1q.  1ďiăjďn`1  Since each tj´i ´ 1 is a unit, this determinant is an associate of a power of t; namely tk where k “ npn ` 1qpn ` 2q{6. After multiplying both sides of the matrix equation by the adjugate and dividing by the unit, we find that tk gi “ 0 for each i. Since tk is regular, the polynomial gpxq is zero, as desired. (2): Assume R “ tc1 , . . . , cq u and R has depth 0. Since R is Noetherian with depth 0, there śq is a nonzero element m that annihilates m. By Lemma 2.5, the polynomial πpxq “ i“1 px ´ ci q is in Z pR, mq, so the polynomial mπpxq is a nonzero element of Z pRq. For the converse, if R is not finite, then there is an infinite sequence of elements tcn uně1 such that no two come from the same residue class of m; thus each difference cj ´ ci (j ‰ i) is a unit. On the other hand, if R does not have depth 0, then there is a regular element t P m. Consider the sequence ttn uně1 ; for i ą j we have ti ´ tj “ tj pti´j ´ 1q. Since tj is regular and ti´j ´ 1 is a unit, each difference ti ´ tj (i ‰ j) is regular. In either case, we may apply Lemma 2.4 to conclude that any nonzero polynomial in the zero-function ideal has arbitrarily high degree. This is a contradiction, so the zero-function ideal contains only the zero polynomial, as desired. (3): If R has dimension 0 then me “ 0 for some e ě 1. Thus xe P Z pmq. Conversely, if R has positive dimension, then for any minimal prime ideal p of R, R{p is an integral domain of positive dimension; in particular, it has positive depth. According to Part (1), Z pm{pq is the zero ideal of of R{p. The image of any f pxq P Z pmq in pR{pqrxs is in Z pm{pq, and thus f pxq P prxs. Since the coefficients of f pxq are in every minimal prime, they are all nilpotent, so f pxq is not regular. 0. Let e be such that me “ 0 and let R “ tc1 , . . . , cq u. (4): Suppose R is finite and dim R “ ś By Lemma 2.5, the polynomial πpxq “ qi“1 px´ci q is in Z pR, mq, so the regular polynomial πpxqe is in Z pRq.  8  MARK W. ROGERS AND CAMERON WICKHAM  Conversely, suppose either R is infinite or dim R ě 1. If R is infinite, then Z pRq does not contain regular polynomials since it is the zero ideal, by Part (2). If dim R ě 1, then for every minimal prime ideal p of R, R{p is an integral domain of positive dimension; in particular, it has positive depth. According to Part (2), Z pR{pq is the zero ideal of of R{p. The image of any f pxq P Z pRq in pR{pqrxs is in Z pR{pq, and thus f pxq P prxs. This shows that f pxq cannot be regular. (5): If edim R “ 0 then R is a field, so m “ 0 and Z pmq “ pxq. Conversely, assume Z pmq “ pf pxqq for some regular polynomial f pxq P Rrxs. By Part (3), dim R “ 0, so me “ 0 for some e ě 1. Due to this and the result from McDonald (our Theorem 3.1), we may assume f pxq is monic. By Part (1), depth R “ 0, so there is an element m P m with mx P Z pmq. This shows that the monic polynomial f pxq must have degree 1; the only choice is f pxq “ x. From this we see that m “ 0 so R is a field. (6): If edim R “ 0 and R is finite, then R is a finite field, so Z pRq “ pπpxqq for any π-polynomial, by Lemma 2.5. Conversely, assume Z pRq “ pf pxqq for some regular polynomial f pxq. From Part (4) we know that dim R “ 0 and R is finite; this implies that R is finite. By Theorem 3.2, R is a finite field, so edim R “ 0.  In the following example we illustrate the use of this theorem and contrast the behavior of the zero-function ideals over rings with finite and infinite residue fields. Example 3.5. The ring R “ Z2 JS, T K{pS 2 , ST q is a complete Noetherian local ring with depth zero, dimension one, and a finite residue field with q “ 2 elements; let s and t be the images of S and T in R. According to Theorem 3.3, Z pmq is nonzero but does not contain regular polynomials, and the same goes for Z pRq. We argue that Z pmq “ psxq and conclude that Z pRq “ pspx2 ´ xqq by applying Theorem 4.2. Certainly Z pmq Ě psxq, since the annihilator of the maximal ideal of R is sR. For the opposite containment, let R̃ “ R{sR – Z2 JT K, a local Noetherian ring of positive depth. If f pxq P Z pmq, then f˜ P Z pm̃q, where m̃ and f˜ are the images of m and f in R̃ and R̃rxs. By Theorem 3.3 (1), Z pm̃q “ 0, so we conclude that f P psq. Since f p0q “ 0, f P psq X pxq “ psxq, as desired. If we switch to an infinite coefficient ring and residue field, say, Q instead of Z2 , we still have Z pmq “ psxq (nonzero but containing no regular polynomials). However, Theorem 4.2 does not apply (for one thing, π-polynomials don’t exist). In fact, Theorem 3.3 (2) guarantees Z pRq “ 0 instead of Z pRq “ pspx2 ´ xqq. 4. Obtaining Z pRq from Z pmq; Applications The following proposition is the key to our main result, Theorem 4.2. Proposition 4.1. Let pR, mq be a Henselian local ring with finite residue field R and let πpxq be an arbitrary π-polynomial. Any f pxq P Z pRq may be written in the form f pxq “ p0 pπpxqq ` xp1 pπpxqq ` x2 p2 pπpxqq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` xq´1 pq´1 pπpxqq with each pi pxq P Z pmq. Proof. Let f pxq P Z pRq. In the polynomial ring Rrx, ys “ Rrysrxs, f may be divided by the monic polynomial πpxq ´ y, so that f pxq “ Qpx, yqpπpxq ´ yq ` Rpx, yq for some Qpx, yq, Rpx, yq P Rrx, ys with Rpx, yq “ 0 or the degree of Rpx, yq with respect to x is less than q. Now set y “ ppxq to obtain f pxq “ p0 pπpxqq ` xp1 pπpxqq ` x2 p2 pπpxqq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ `  POLYNOMIALS INDUCING THE ZERO FUNCTION ON LOCAL RINGS  9  xq´1 pq´1 pπpxqq where the polynomials pi pyq P Rrys are the coefficients of the powers of x in Rpx, yq. It remains to see that each pi pxq P Z pmq. Let m P m. Since (according to Corollary 2.11) π maps each coset of m onto m, there exists a set c1 , c2 , . . . , cq of representatives of the residue classes of m, with πpci q “ m for each ci ; each difference ci ´ cj (i ‰ j) is a unit. Since f pxq P Z pRq, we may evaluate f pxq at ci for each i from 1 to q to obtain 0 “ p0 pmq ` ci p1 pmq ` c2i p2 pmq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` ciq´1 pq´1 pmq. In matrix form, this system becomes » ﬁ » 1 c1 c21 ¨ ¨ ¨ 0 —0ﬃ —1 c2 c2 ¨ ¨ ¨ 2 — ﬃ — — .. ﬃ “ — .. .. .. . . –.ﬂ –. . . . 2 0 1 cq cq ¨ ¨ ¨  ﬁ ﬁ» c1q´1 p0 pmq ﬃ — c2q´1 ﬃ ﬃ — p1 pmq ﬃ ﬃ .. .. ﬃ — ﬂ . . ﬂ– q´1 pq´1 pmq cq ś The matrix is a Vandermonde matrix, and its determinant is 1ďiăjďq pcj ´ ci q, which is a unit since it is a product of units. Thus, the matrix is invertible, so each pi pmq “ 0, as desired.  An application of the previous result, we come to our main theorem, which states that generators for Z pRq can be obtained by composing generators for Z pmq with any π-polynomial, which we could roughly describe by writing Z pRq “ Z pmq ˝ Z pR, mq, if one keeps in mind Lemma 2.5 which states that Z pR, mq “ pπpxq, mq. An obvious consequence of the next theorem is that the minimal number of generators of Z pRq is less than or equal to the minimal number of generators of Z pmq. Theorem 4.2. Suppose pR, mq is a Henselian local ring with finite residue field R of cardinality q and let πpxq be an arbitrary π-polynomial. If Z pmq “ pF1 pxq, . . . , Fn pxqq then Z pRq “ pF1 pπpxqq, . . . , Fn pπpxqqq. Proof. Since πpRq Ď m, certainly Z pRq Ě pF1 pπpxqq, . . . , Fn pπpxqqq. Now let f pxq P Z pRq. Use Proposition 4.1 to write f pxq “ p0 pπpxqq ` xp1 pπpxqq ` x2 p2 pπpxqq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` xq´1 pq´1 pπpxqq with each pi pxq P Z pmq. Since each pi pxq is an Rrxs-linear combination of F1 pxq, . . . , Fn pxq, each pi pπpxqq is an Rrxs-linear (actually Rrπpxqs-linear) combination of F1 pπpxqq, . . . , Fn pπpxqq. Since f pxq is an Rrxs-linear combination of the pi pπpxqq, the proof is complete.  Remark 4.3. The equality Z pRq “ Z pmq ˝ Z pR, mq should not be taken too literally. Certainly polynomials in Z pmq composed with polynomials in Z pR, mq are in Z pRq, but it’s not true that every polynomial in Z pRq can be obtained in that way. For example, xpx2 ´ xq P Z pZ2 q, but since it’s degree is not even, it does not equal f px2 ´ xq for any polynomial f pxq. As mentioned in the introduction, the theorem below is a version of results of Dickson [D, p. 22, Theorem 27], Bandini [B, Theorem 2.1], and Lewis [L, Theorem II], adapted for Z pmq rather than Z pRq, and for finite local rings rather than specific rings. We then recover the results for Z pRq in Corollary 4.5 as an application of our main theorem, Theorem 4.2. Theorem 4.4. Let pR, mq be a finite local ring with principal maximal ideal m “ pmq; set q “ |R{m|. Suppose e is the index of nilpotency of m. If e ď q then Z pmq “ px, mqe ; if e “ q ` 1, then Z pmq “ px, mqe ` pxq ´ mq´1 xq.  10  MARK W. ROGERS AND CAMERON WICKHAM  Proof. We prove the first result using induction on e. The base case e “ 1 is clear, since then R is a field, m “ 0, and Z pmq “ pxq. Assume the result is true for rings whose maximal ideal has index of nilpotency e ´ 1 ď q; we prove the result for a ring whose maximal ideal has index `of nilpotency e ď q. The containment Ě is clear. Let f pxq P Z pmq; ˘ then f pxq P Z R{me´1 . By induction, f pxq P px, mqe´1 , and thus f pxq P px, mqe´1 . ře´1 k e´1´k We have f pxq “ k“0 x m fk pxq for some fk pxq P Rrxs; it remains to see that each fk pxq P px, mq, i.e. that fk p0q P m. For each r P R, 0 “ f prmq “  e´1 ÿ  prmqk me´1´k fk prmq “ me´1  k“0  e´1 ÿ  r k fk prmq.  k“0  ře´1  ře´1 k Since the annihilator of me´1 is m, k“0 r k fk prmq P m, and thus k“0 r fk p0q P m. This ` ˘ ` ˘ ře´1 k q shows that k“0 fk p0qx P Z R . Since by Lemma 2.5 Z R “ px ´ xq, this polynomial with degree less than q must be the zero polynomial. Therefore each fk p0q P m, as desired. For the second result, the only part of the containment Z pmq Ě px, mqe ` pxq ´ mq´1 xq that is not clear is xq ´ mq´1 x P Z pmq; for this, take any rm P m and compute prmqq ´ mq´1 prmq “ mq pr q ´rq P mq`1 “ 0. For the opposite containment, assume f pxq P Z pmq and reduce module me´1 to obtain a similar expression for f pxq, and again deduce that ` as ˘ above ře´1 ře´1 k q k q k“0 fk p0qx “ upx ´ xq k“0 fk p0qx P Z R “ px ´ xq. Since e ´ 1 “ q, we must have for some unit u P R; thus each fk p0q “ 0 except for fq p0q “ u and f1 p0q “ ´u . Define polynomials gk pxq identical to fk pxq except for gq pxq “ fq pxq ´ u and g1 pxq “ f1 pxq ` u. Now the constant term of each gk pxq is in m and we have f pxq “  e´1 ÿ  xk me´1´k fk pxq “ upxq ´ mq´1 xq `  k“0  e´1 ÿ  xk me´1´k gk pxq  k“0  so that f pxq P px, mqe ` pxq ´ mq´1 xq, as desired.    The following corollary follows immediately from the theorem and Theorem 4.2. Corollary 4.5. Let pR, mq be a finite local ring with principal maximal ideal m “ pmq; set q “ |R{m|. Suppose e is the index of nilpotency of m, and let πpxq be any π-polynomial. If e ď q then Z pRq “ pπpxq, mqe ; if e “ q ` 1 then Z pRq “ pπpxq, mqe ` pπpxqq ´ mq´1 πpxqq. 5. Factoring π-Polynomials The following lemma is the heart of a more constructive approach (Theorem 5.2) to the converse part of the proof of Theorem 2.10, which gave two equivalent conditions for π-polynomials. Note that according to this lemma, if me “ 0, then for any r P R, the sequence tpn prqu stabilizes at n “ e ´ 1. Lemma 5.1. Let pR, mq be a Noetherian local ring with finite residue field R of cardinality q, and let πpxq be any polynomial mapping to xq ´ x in Rrxs. Let p0 pxq “ x and pn pxq “ πppn´1 pxqq ` pn´1 pxq, so that pn pxq denotes the function obtained by successively applying the function πpxq ` x, n times. For every n ě 1, pn pxq ´ pn´1 pxq P Z pR, mn q .  POLYNOMIALS INDUCING THE ZERO FUNCTION ON LOCAL RINGS  11  Proof. We use induction on ` n. For ˘ the base case (n “ 1) just note that p1 pxq ´ p0 pxq “ pπpxq ` xq ´ x “ πpxq P Z R, m1 by Lemma 2.5. n Now assume the induction hypothesis: ` ˘For some n ě 1, pn pxq ´ pn´1 pxq P Z pR, m q.q We n`1 show that pn`1 pxq ´ pn pxq P Z R, m . Since πpxq is a polynomial mapping to x ´ x modulo mrxs, there is some mpxq P mrxs such that πpxq “ xq ´ x ´ mpxq; thus pn pxq may also be viewed as applying xq ´ mpxq, n times. For simplicity of notation, set c “ pn pxq, a “ pn´1 pxq, and b “ c ´ a, so that c “ πpaq ` a “ aq ´ mpaq. We have pn`1 pxq ´ pn pxq “ πppn pxqq ` pn pxq ´ pn pxq “ πpcq “ cq ´ c ´ mpcq “ pa ` bqq ´ c ´ mpcq ˆ ˙ q q´2 2 q q´1 “ a ` qa b ` a b ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` bq ´ c ´ mpcq 2 ˆ ˙ q q´2 2 q´1 “ qa b ` a b ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` bq ` mpaq ´ mpcq 2 since aq ´ c `“ mpaq. ˘By induction, b P Z pR, mn q, and since `q P m, we˘ see that the first term is in Z R, mn`1 . Since b P Z pR, mn q and n ě 1, b2 P Z R, mn`1 , which takes care of all but the last two terms: mpaq ´ mpcq. řdeg mpxq Now mpaq ´ mpcq “ i“1 mi pai ´ ci q, where mi is the coefficient of xi in mpxq, and is thus in m. Since ´b “ a´c is a factor of a˘i ´ci for all positive integers i and ´b P Z pR, mn q, ` it follows that mpaq ´ mpcq P Z R, mn`1 , as desired.   The following theorem provides, in particular, a more constructive approach to the proof of the result in Theorem 2.10 which states that any monic polynomial πpxq mapping to xq ´ x is actually a π-polynomial. In a ring with me “ 0, it allows discovery of the roots by successively applying the function πpxq ` x (e ´ 1 times) to representatives of the residue classes of m. When πpxq “ xq ´ x, this amounts to successively taking qth powers. In the case of a finite ring, the resulting roots of xq ´ x are called Teichmüller elements in Jian Jun Jiang’s paper [J]. Theorem 5.2. Let pR, mq be a complete Noetherian local ring with finite residue field R “ tc1 , . . . , cq u. Let πpxq be any polynomial mapping to xq ´ x in Rrxs and let pn pxq be the function obtained by applying πpxq`x successively, n times. The limit limnÑ8 pn pci q exists. Set di “ limnÑ8 pn pci q; then di is a root of πpxq and di “ ci . If πpxq is monic, then there is a factorization πpxq “ px ´ d1 qpx ´ d2 q ¨ ¨ ¨ px ´ dq q, and thus πpxq is a π-polynomial. Proof. The limit exists since, by Lemma 5.1, the sequence tpn pci quně1 is a Cauchy sequence. For any r P R, πprq ` r and r are in the same coset of m, since πprq “ r q ´ r ´ mprq P m. We may apply this fact successively, beginning with r “ ci , to see that each pn pci q is congruent to ci modulo m. Since m is closed under the m-adic topology, we conclude that di “ ci . To see that πpdi q “ 0, use the Cauchy sequence mentioned above and the fact that polynomials are continuous under the m-adic topology: πpdi q “ πplim pn pci qq “ lim πppn pci qq “ limppn`1 pci q ´ pn pci qq “ 0.  12  MARK W. ROGERS AND CAMERON WICKHAM  If πpxq is monic then it must have degree q; an application of Lemma 2.4 completes the proof.  Example 5.3. With R “ Z125 , we have q “ 5 and e “ 3. We can choose elements 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 to be representatives of the elements of R{m “ Z5 . We factor the polynomial πpxq “ x5 ` 5x4 ` 40x3 ` 85x2 ` 24x ` 50 “ x5 ´ x ´ mpxq where mpxq “ ´p5x4 ` 40x3 ` 85x2 ` 25x ` 50q. Applying p2 pxq to 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 yields 50, 31, 72, 18, 74. According to the theorem, πpxq factors in Rrxs as πpxq “ px ´ 50qpx ´ 31qpx ´ 72qpx ´ 18qpx ´ 74q. Acknowledgment: The authors thank Richard Belshoff, Jung-Chen Liu and Les Reid for helpful discussions and suggestions. References Bandini, A., Functions f : Z{p Z ÝÑ Z{pn Z induced by polynomials of Zrxs, Annali di Matematica 181 (2002), 95–104. doi:10.1007/s102310100031 []D Dickson, L. E., Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, The University of Chicago Press, 1929. []F Frisch, S., Polynomial Functions on Finite Commutative Rings, Lecture Notes in Pure and Appl. Mathematics 205, Dekker 1999, 323–336. []G Gilmer, R., The Ideal of Polynomials Vanishing on a Commutative Ring, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 127 (1999), no. 5, 1265–1267. doi:10.1090/S0002-9939-99-04634-1 []J Jiang, Jian Jun, On the Number Counting of Polynomial Functions, J. Math. Research & Exp. 30 (2010), no. 2, 241–248. doi:10.3770/j.issn:1000-341X.2010.02.006 []L Lewis, D. J., Ideals and Polynomial Functions, Amer. J. Math. 78 (1956), no. 1, 71–77. doi:10.2307/2372485 []LRS Lahtonen, J., Ryu, J., and Suvitie, E., On the Degree of the Inverse of Quadratic Permutation Polynomial Interleavers, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 58 (2012), no. 6, 3925–3932. doi:10.1109/TIT.2012.2190492 []M McDonald, B. R., Finite Rings with Identity, Pure and Applied Mathematics, New York, Marcel Dekker Inc, 1974. []NW Niven, I. and Warren, L. J., A Generalization of Fermat’s Theorem, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 8 (1957), no. 2, 306–313. doi:10.1090/S0002-9939-1957-0086804-0 []P Peruginelli, G., Primary decomposition of the ideal of polynomials whose fixed divisor is divisible by a prime power, J. Alg. 398 (2014), 227–242. doi:10.1016/j.jalgebra.2013.09.016 []W Werner, N. J., Polynomials that kill each element of a finite ring, J. Alg. and Its Appl. 13 (2014), no. 3, 1350111-1–12. doi:10.1142/S0219498813501119 []Z Zhang, Q., Polynomial functions and permutation polynomials over some finite commutative rings, J. Number Theory 105 (2004), 192–202. doi:10.1016/j.jnt.2003.09.009 []B  n  Department of Mathematics, Missouri State University, Springfield, MO 65897, USA E-mail address: markrogers@missouristate.edu Department of Mathematics, Missouri State University, Springfield, MO 65897, USA E-mail address: cwickham@missouristate.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
