Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1617

Abstract:
arXiv:1612.00432v1 [math.GR] 1 Dec 2016  Magnus pairs in, and free conjugacy separability of, limit groups Larsen Louder & Nicholas W.M. Touikan December 2, 2016 Abstract There are limit groups having non-conjugate elements whose images are conjugate in every free quotient. Towers over free groups are freely conjugacy separable.  1  Introduction  This paper is concerned with the problem of finding free quotients of finitely generated groups in which non-conjugate elements have non-conjugate images. Given a finitely generated group G which is not a limit group, there is a finite collection of limit group quotients G ։ L1 , . . . , G ։ Ln of G such that every homomorphism G → F, where F is a free group, factors through one of the factor groups G ։ Li , hence it suffices to consider the problem only for limit groups. We are reduced then to the problem of finding free quotients of limit groups in which non-conjugate elements have non-conjugate images. A group is freely conjugacy separable, or F-conjugacy separable, if for any pair u, v ∈ G of nonconjugate elements there is a homomorphism to some free group G → F such that the images of u and v in F are non-conjugate. We will give two different types of examples of limit groups which are not F-conjugacy separable for entirely different reasons. In Section 2 we produce a limit group L with elements u, v such that the cyclic groups hui, hvi are nonconjugate, but whose normal closures hhuii and hhvii coincide. We call such a pair of elements a Magnus pair (see Definition 2.1.) Such elements must have conjugate images in any free quotient by a theorem of Magnus [Mag31]. In Section 3 we construct a limit group which is a double of a free group over a cyclic group generated by a C-test word (see Definition 3.1). These limit groups, called C-doubles, are low rank and we are able to construct their Makanin-Razborov diagrams encoding all homomorphisms into any free group and directly observe the failure of free conjugacy separability. This limit group was independently discovered and studied by Simon Heil [Hei16], who published a preprint while this paper was in preparation. He uses this limit group to show that limit groups are not freely subgroup separable. 1  Definition 1.1. A sequence of homomorphisms {φi : G → H} is discriminating if for every finite subset P ⊂ G\ {1} there is some N such that for all j ≥ N, 1 6∈ φj (P ). Definition 1.2. A finitely generated group L is a limit group if there is a discriminating sequence of homomorphisms {φi : L → F}, where F is a free group. Theorem A. The class of limit groups is not freely conjugacy separable. This should be seen in contrast to the fact that limit groups are conjugacy separable [CZ07]. Furthermore Lioutikova in [Lio03] proves that iterated centralizer extensions (see Definition 4.3) of a free group F are F-conjugacy separable. It is a result of of Kharlampovich and Miasnikov [KM98b] that all limit groups embed in to iterated centralizer extensions. Moreover by [GLS09, Theorem 5.3] almost locally free groups [GLS09, Definition 4.2] cannot have Magus pairs. This class includes the class of limit groups which are ∀∃-equivalent to free groups. The class of iterated centralizer extensions and the class of limit groups ∀∃-equivalent to free groups are contained in the class of towers, also known as NTQ groups. We generalize these previous results to the class of towers with the following strong F-conjugacy separability result: Theorem B. Let F be a non-abelian free group and let G be a tower over F (see Definition 4.3). There is a discriminating sequence of retractions {φi : G ։ F}, such that for any finite subset S ⊂ G of pairwise non-conjugate elements, there is some positive integer N such that for all j ≥ N the elements of φj (S) are pairwise non-conjugate in F. Similarly for any indivisible γ ∈ L with cyclic centralizer there is some positive integer M such that for all k ≥ M , rk (γ) is indivisible. This theorem also settles [GLS09, Question 7.1], which asks if arbitrarily large collections of pairwise nonconjugate elements can have pairwise nonconjugate images via a homomorphism to a free group. The proof of Theorem B is in Section 4 and follows from results of Sela [Sel03] and Kharlampovich and Myasnikov [KM05], which form the first step in their (respective) systematic studies of the ∀∃-theory of free groups. Finally, in Section 5 we analyze the failure of free conjugacy separability of our limit group with a Magnus pair and show that this is very different from C-double constructed in Section 3. We then show that the free conjugacy separability does not isolate the class of towers within the class of limit groups. Throughout this paper, unless mentioned otherwise, F will denote a nonabelian free group, Fn will denote a non-abelian free group of rank n, and F(X) will denote the free group on the basis X.  2  A limit group with a Magnus pair  Consider the of the fundamental group of the graph of spaces U given in Figure 1. We pick elements u, v ∈ π1 (U) corresponding to the similarly labelled loops 2  Σu ◭  ◭  u◭ ◮  ◭  ◭  ◮  v ◭ ◭  ◭  Σv  Figure 1: The graph of spaces U. The attaching maps are of degree 1 and the black arrows show the orientations. given in Figure 1 and we also consider groups π1 (Σu ), π1 (Σv ) to be embedded into π1 (U). Definition 2.1. Let G be a group, and let ∼± be the equivalence relation g ∼± h if and only if g is conjugate to h or h−1 , and denote by [g]± the ∼± equivalence class of g. A Magnus pair is a pair of ∼± classes [g]± 6= [h]± such that hhgii = hhhii. Note that if h ∈ [g]± then hhgii = hhhii, and that the relation “have the same normal closure” is coarser than ∼± , and if a group has a Magnus pair then it is strictly coarser than ∼± . To save notation we will say that g and h are a Magnus pair if their corresponding equivalence classes are. Lemma 2.2. The elements u and v in π1 (U) are a Magnus pair. Proof. The graph of spaces given in Figure 1 gives rise to a cyclic graph of groups splitting D of π1 (U). The underlying graph X has 4 vertices and 8 edges where the vertex groups are hui, hvi, π1 (Σu ), and π1 (Σv ). Now note that π1 (Σu ) can be given the presentation π1 (Σu ) = ha, b, c, d | abcd = 1i = ha, b, ci and that the incident edge groups have images hai, hbi, hci, habci = hdi. Without loss of generality v ±1 is conjugate to a,b, and c in π1 (U) and u±1 is conjugate to d = abc in π1 (U) which means that u ∈ hhvii and, symmetrically considering Σv , v ∈ hhuii. On the other hand, the elements hai, hbi, hci, habci are pairwise non-conjugate in ha, b, ci and we now easily see that u and v are non-conjugate by considering the action on the Bass-Serre tree. u and v therefore form a Magnus pair.  3  2.1  Strict homomorphisms to limit groups  Definition 2.3. Let G be a finitely generated group and let D be a 2-acylindrical cyclic splitting of G. We say that a vertex group Q of D is quadratically hanging (QH) if it satisfies the following: • Q = π1 (Σ) where Σ is a compact surface such that χ(Σ) ≤ −1, with equality only if Σ is orientable or ∂(Σ) 6= ∅. • The images of the edge groups incident to Q correspond to the π1 -images of ∂(Σ) in π1 (Σ). Definition 2.4. Let G be torsion-free group. A homomorphism ρ : G → H is strict if there some 2-acylindrical abelian splitting D of G such that the following hold: • ρ is injective on the subgroup AD generated by the incident edge groups of each each abelian vertex group A of D. • ρ is injective on each edge group of D. • ρ is injective on the “envelope” R̂ of each non-QH, non-abelian vertex group R of D, where R̂ is constructed by first replacing each abelian vertex group A of D by AD and then taking R̂ to be the subgroup generated by R and the centralizers of the edge groups incident to R. • the ρ-images of QH subgroups are non-abelian. This next Proposition is a restatement of Proposition 4.21 of [CG05] in our terminology. It is also given as Exercise 8 in [BF09, Wil09]. Proposition 2.5. If L is a limit group, G is some finitely generated group such that there is a strict homomorphism ρ : G → L, then G is also limit group.  2.2  π1 (U) is a limit group but it is not freely conjugacy separable.  Consider the sequence of continuous maps given in Figure 2. The space on the top left obtained by taking three disjoint tori, identifying them along the longitudinal curves as shown, and then surgering on handles H1 , H2 is homeomorphic to the space U. A continuous map from U to the wedge of three circles is then constructed by filling in and collapsing the handles to arcs h1 , h2 , identifying the tori, and then mapping the resulting torus to a circle so that the image of the longitudinal curve u (or v, as they are now freely homotopic inside a torus) maps with degree 1 onto a circle in the wedge of three circles. Lemma 2.6. The homomorphism π1 (U) → F3 given by the continuous map in Figure 2 is onto, the vertex groups π1 (Σv ), π1 (Σu ) have non-abelian image and the edge groups hui, hvi are mapped injectively.  4  H1  Σv  u ◭  v ◭  Σu h1  H2 u ◭  v ◭  h1 h2 u ◭  h1  h2  u  h2  Figure 2: A continuous map from U to the wedge of three circles. The space on the top left is homeomorphic to U. This can be seen by cutting along the curves labelled u, v. Proof. The surjectivity of the map π1 (U) → F3 as well as the injectivity of the restrictions to hui, hvi are obvious. Note moreover that the image of π1 (Σu ) contains (some conjugate of) hu, h1 uh−1 1 i and is therefore non-abelian, the same is obviously true for the image of π1 (Σv ). The final ingredient is a classical result of Magnus. Theorem 2.7 ([Mag31]). The free group F has no Magnus pairs. Proposition 2.8. π1 (U) is a limit group. For every homomorphism ρ : π1 (U) → F the images ρ(u), ρ(v) of the elements u, v given in Lemma 2.2 are conjugate in F even though the pair u, v are not conjugate in π1 (U). Proof. Lemma 2.6 and Proposition 2.5 imply that π1 (U) is a Limit group. Lemma 2.2 and Theorem 2.7 imply that, for every homomorphism π1 (U) → F to a free group F, the image of u must be conjugate to the image of v ±1 even though u 6∼± v.  5  3  A different failure of free conjugacy separability  We now construct another limit group L that is not freely conjugacy separable, but for a completely different reason. Definition 3.1 (C-test words [Iva98]). A non-trivial word w(x1 , . . . , xn ) is a C-test word in n letters for Fm if for any two n-tuples (A1 , . . . , An ), (B1 , . . . , Bn ) of elements of Fm the equality w(A1 , . . . , An ) = w(B1 , . . . , Bn ) 6= 1 implies the existence of an element S ∈ Fm such that Bi = SAi S −1 for all i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Theorem 3.2 ([Iva98, Main Theorem]). For arbitrary n ≥ 2 there exists a non-trivial indivisible word wn (x1 , . . . , xn ) which is a C-test word in n letters for any free group Fm of rank m ≥ 2. Definition 3.3 (Doubles and retractions). Let F(x, y) denote the free group on two generators, let w = w(x, y) denote some word in {x, y}±1 . The amalgamated free product D(x, y; w) = hF(x, y), F(r, s) | w(x, y) = w(r, s)i is the double of F(x, y) along w. The homomorphism ρ : D(x, y; w) ։ F(x, y) given by r 7→ x, s 7→ y is the standard retraction. Definition 3.4. Let u ∈ F(x, y) ≤ D(x, y; w), but with u 6∼± wn for any n, be given by a specific word u(x, y). Its mirror image is the distinct element u(r, s) ∈ F(r, s) ≤ D(x, y; w). u(x, y) and u(r, s) form a mirror pair. It is obvious that mirror pairs are not ∼± -equivalent. Let w be a C-test word and let L = D(x, y; w). It is well known that any such double is a limit group. We will call L a C-double. Lemma 3.5. The C-double L cannot map onto a free group of rank more than 2. Proof. w is not primitive in F(x, y) therefore by [She55] L = D(x, y; w) is not free. Theorem 3.2 specifically states that w is not a proper power. It now follows from [Lou13, Theorem 1.5] that D(w) cannot map onto F3 . The proof of the next theorem amounts to analyzing a Makanin-Razborov diagram. We refer the reader to [Hei16] for an explicit description of this diagram. Theorem 3.6. For any map φ : L → F from a C-double to some free group, if u(x, y) ∈ F(x, y) lies in the commutator subgroup [F(x, y), F(x, y)], but is not conjugate to wn for any n, then the images φ (u(x, y)) and φ (u(r, s)) of mirror pairs are conjugate. In particular the limit group L is not freely conjugacy separable. Furthermore mirror pairs u(x, y), u(r, s) do not form Magnus pairs.  6  Proof. To answer this question we must analyze all maps for L to a free group. By Lemma 3.5, any such map factors through a surjection onto F2 , or factors through Z. Case 1: φ(w) = 1. In this case the factor F(x, y) does not map injectively, it follows that its image is abelian. It follows that φ factors through the free product πab : D(x, y; w) → F(x, y)ab ∗ F(r, s)ab . In this case all elements of the commutator subgroups of F(x, y) and F(r, s) are mapped to the identity and therefore have conjugate images. Case 2: φ(w) 6= 1. In this case the factors F(x, y), F(r, s) ≤ D(x, y; w) map injectively. By Theorem 3.2, since w is a C-test word and φ(w(x, y)) = φ(w(r, s), there is some S ∈ F2 such that Sφ(x)S −1 = φ(r) and Sφ(y)S −1 = φ(s). Suppose now that w(x, y) mapped to a proper power, then by [Bau65, Main Theorem] w(x, y) ∈ F(x, y) is part of a basis, which is impossible. It follows that the centralizer of φ (w) is hφ(w)i so that S = φ(w)n . Therefore φ(r) = wn φ(x)w−n and φ(s) = wn φ(y)w−n and the result follows in this case as well. We now show that a mirror pair u(x, y) and u(r, s) is not a Magnus pair. Consider the quotient D(x, y; w)/hhu(x, y)ii. By using a presentation with generators and relations, the group canonically splits as the amalgamated free product (F(x, y)/hhu(x, y)ii) ∗hwi (F(r, s)/hhwn ii) where hwn i = hwi∩hhuii and w is the image of w in hwi/hwn i. Now if hhu(x, y)ii = hhu(r, s)ii then we must have D(x, y; w)/hhu(r, s)ii = D(x, y; w)/hhu(x, y)ii. This implies F(r, s)/hh(u(r, s))ii = F(r, s)/hhwn ii, which implies by Theorem 2.7 that u(r, s) ∼± wn , which is a contradiction. It seems likely that failure of free conjugacy separability should typically follow from C-test word like behaviour, rather than from existence of Magnus pairs.  4  Towers are freely conjugacy separable.  Definition 4.1. Let G be a group. A regular quadratic extension of G is an extension G ≤ H such that • H splits as a fundamental group of a graph of groups with two vertex groups: Hv1 = G and Hv2 = π1 (Σ) where Hv2 is a QH vertex group (See Definition 2.3.) • There is a retraction H ։ G such that the image of π1 (Σ) in G is non abelian. We say that Σ is the surface associated to the quadratic extension. And note that if ∂Σ = ∅ then H = G ∗ π1 (Σ). 7  Definition 4.2. Let G be a group. An abelian extension by the free abelian group A is an extension G ≤ G∗hui (hui⊕A) = H where u ∈ G is such that either its centralizer ZG (u) = hui, or u = 1. In the case where u = 1 the extension is G ≤ G ∗ A and it is called a singular abelian extension. Definition 4.3. Let F be a (possibly trivial) free group. A tower of height n over F is a group G obtained from a sequence of extensions F = G0 ≤ G1 ≤ . . . ≤ Gn = G where Gi ≤ Gi+1 is either a regular quadratic extension or an abelian extension. The G′i s are the levels of the tower G and the sequence of levels is a tower decomposition. A tower consisting entirely of abelian extensions is an iterated centralizer extension. Definition 4.4. Let F = G0 ≤ . . . ≤ Gn = G be a tower decomposition of G. We call the graphs of groups decomposition of Gi with one vertex group Gi−1 and the other vertex group a surface group or a free abelian group as given in Definitions 4.1 and 4.2 the ith level decomposition. Towers appear as NTQ groups in the work of Kharlampovich and Miasnikov, and as ω-residually free towers, as well as completions of strict resolutions in the the work of Sela. It is a well known fact that towers are limit groups [KM98a]. This also follows easily from Proposition 2.5 and the definitions. Proposition 4.5. Let G be a tower of height n over F. Then G is discriminated by retractions G → Gn−1 . G is also discriminated by retractions onto F. Following Definition 1.15 of [Sel03] we have: Definition 4.6. Let G be a tower. A closure of G is another tower G⋆ with an embedding θ : G ֒→ G⋆ such that there is a commutative diagram G0  G1  ≤  ...  ≤  Gn  =  G  ≤  G⋆1  ≤  ...  ≤  G⋆n  =  G⋆  =  ≤  G0  where the injections Gi ֒→ G⋆i are restrictions of θ and the horizontal lines are tower decompositions. Moreover the following must hold: 1. If Gi ≤ Gi+1 is a regular quadratic extension with associated surface Σ such that ∂Σ is “attached” to hu1 i, . . . , hun i ≤ Gi then G⋆i ≤ G⋆i+1 is a regular quadratic extension with associated surface Σ such that ∂Σ is “attached” to hθ(u1 )i, . . . , hθ(un )i ≤ G⋆i , in such a way that θ : Gi ֒→ G⋆i extends to a monomorphism θ : Gi+1 ֒→ G⋆i+1 which maps the vertex group π1 (Σ) surjectively onto the vertex group π1 (Σ) ≤ G⋆i+1 .  8  2. If Gi ≤ Gi+1 is an abelian extension then G⋆i ≤ G⋆i+1 is also an abelian extension. Specifically (allowing ui = 1) if Gi+1 = Gi ∗hui i (hui i ⊕ Ai ), then G⋆i+1 = G⋆i ∗hθ(ui )i (hθ(ui )i⊕A′i ). Moreover we require the embedding θ : Gi+1 → G⋆i+1 to map hui i⊕Ai to a finite index subgroup of hθ(ui )i⊕A′i . We will now state one of the main results of [KM05] and [Sel03] but first some explanations of terminology are in order. Towers are groups that arise as completed limit groups corresponding to a strict resolution and the definition of closure corresponds to the one given in [Sel03]. We also note that our requirement on the Euler characteristic of the surface pieces given in Definitions 2.3 and 4.1 ensures that our towers are coordinate groups of normalized NTQ systems as described in the discussion preceding [KM05, Lemma 76], we also point out that a correcting embedding as described right before [KM05, Theorem 12] is in fact a closure in the terminology we are using. We now give an obvious corollary (in fact a weakening) of [Sel03, Theorem1.22], or [KM05, Theorem 12]; they are the same result. Let X, Y denote fixed tuples of variables. Lemma 4.7 (∀∃-lifting Lemma). Let F be a fixed non-abelian free group and let G = hF, X | R(F, X)i be a standard finite presentation of a tower over F. Let Wi (X, Y, F) = 1 and Vi (X, Y, F) 6= 1 be (possibly empty) finite systems of equations and inequations (resp.) If the following holds: m  _  Wi (X, Y, F) = 1 ∧ Vi (X, Y, F) 6= 1 F |= ∀X∃Y R(F, X) = 1 → i=1  then there is an embedding θ : G ֒→ G⋆ into some closure such that G⋆ |= ∃Y  m   _ Wi (θ(X), Y, F) = 1 ∧ Vi (θ(X), Y, F) 6= 1  i=1  where X and F are interpreted as the corresponding subsets of G = hF, X | R(F, X)i In the terminology of [Sel03] we have G = hF, Xi and G⋆ = hF, X, Zi for some collection of elements Z. Let Y = (y1 , . . . , yk ) be a tuple of elements in G⋆ that witness the existential sentence above. A collection of words yi (F, X, Z) =G∗ yi is called a set of formal solution in G⋆ . According to [KM05, Definition 24] the tuple Y ⊂ G⋆ is an R-lift. Proposition 4.8. Let G be a tower over a non abelian free group Fand let S ⊂ G be a finite family of pairwise non-conjugate elements of G. There exists a discriminating family of retractions ψi : G ։ F such that for each ψi the elements of ψi (S) are pairwise non-conjugate.  9  Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that this was not the case. Then either there exists a finite subset P ⊂ G \ {1} such that for every retraction r : G ։ F, 1 ∈ r(P ) or the elements of r(S) are not pairwise non-conjugate. If we write elements of P and S as fixed words {pi (F, X)} and {sj (F, X)} (resp.) then we can express this as a sentence. Indeed, consider first the formula:     _ _ ΦP,S (F, X, t) =  pi (F, X) = 1 ∨  t−1 si (F, X)t = sj (F, X) pi ∈P  (si ,sj )∈∆(S)  where ∆(S) = {(x, y) ∈ S × S | x 6= y)}. In English this says that either some element of P vanishes or two distinct elements of S are conjugated by some element t. We therefore have: F |= ∀X [(R(F, X)) = 1) → ∃tΦP,S (F, X, t)] .  (1)  It now follows by Lemma 4.7 that there is some closure θ : G ֒→ G⋆ such that G⋆ |= ∃tΦP,S (F, θ(X), t). Since 1 6∈ P and θ is a monomorphisms none of the pi (F, X) are trivial so   _  G⋆ |= ∃t  t−1 si (F, X)t = sj (F, X)  . (si ,sj )∈∆(S)  In particular there are elements u, v ∈ G which are not conjugate in G but are conjugate in G⋆ . We will derive a contradiction by showing that this is impossible. We proceed by induction on the height of the tower. If the tower has height 0 then G = F and the result obviously holds. Suppose now that the claim held for all towers of height m ≤ n. Let G have height n and let u, v be nonconjugate elements of G let G ≤ G⋆ be any closure and suppose that there is some t ∈ G⋆ \ G such that tut−1 = v. Let D be the nth level decomposition of G⋆ and let T be the corresponding Bass-Serre tree. Let T (G) be the minimal G-invariant subtree and let DG be the splitting induced by the action of G on T (G). By Definition 4.6 DG is exactly the nth level decomposition of G and two edges of T (G) are in the same G-orbit if and only if they are in the same G⋆ -orbit. We now consider separate cases: Case 1: Without loss of generality u is hyperbolic in the nth level decomposition of G. If v is elliptic in the nth level decomposition of G then it is elliptic in the nth -level decomposition of G⋆ and therefore cannot be conjugate to u which acts hyperbolically on T . It follows that both u, v must be hyperbolic elements with respect to the nth level decomposition of G. Let lu , lv denote the axes of u, v (resp.) in T (G) ⊂ T . Since tut−1 = v, we must have t · lu = lv . Let e be some edge in lu then by the previous paragraph t·e ⊂ lv must be in the same G-orbit as e, which means that 10  there is some g ∈ G such that gt·e = e, but again by Definition 4.6 the inclusion G ≤ G⋆ induces a surjection of the edge groups of the nth level decomposition of G to the edge groups of the nth level decomposition of G⋆ , it follows that gt ∈ G which implies that t ∈ G contradicting the fact that u, v were not conjugate in G. Case 2: The elements u, v are elliptic in the nth level decomposition of G. Suppose first that u, v were conjugate into Gn−1 , then the result follows from the fact that there is a retraction G ։ Gn−1 and by the induction hypothesis. Similarly by examining the induced splitting of G ≤ G⋆ , we see that u cannot be conjugate into Gn−1 and v into the other vertex group of the nth -level decomposition. We finally distinguish two sub-cases. Case 2.1: Gn−1 ≤ G is an abelian extension by the free abelian group A and u, v are conjugate in G into some free abelian group hwi ⊕ A. Any homomorphic image of hwi ⊕ A in F must lie in a cyclic group, since u 6= v in G⋆ and G⋆ is discriminated by retractions onto F, there must be some retraction r : G⋆ → F such that r(u) 6= r(v) which means that u, v are sent to distinct powers of a generator of the cyclic subgroup r(hwi ⊕ A). It follows that their images are not conjugate in F so u, v cannot be conjugate in G⋆ . Case 2.2: Gn−1 ≤ G is a quadratic extension and u and v are conjugate in G into the vertex group π1 (Σ). Arguing as in Case 1 we find that if there is some t ∈ G⋆ such that tut−1 = v then there is some g ∈ G such that gt fixes a vertex of T (G) ⊂ T whose stabilizer is conjugate to π1 (Σ). Again by the surjectively criterion in item 1. of Definition 4.6, gt ∈ G contradicting the fact that u, v were not conjugate in G. All the possibilities have been exhausted so the result follows. proof of Theorem B. Let S1 ⊂ S2 ⊂ S3 ⊂ . . . be an exhaustion of representatives of distinct conjugacy classes of G by finite sets. For each Sj let {ψij } be the discriminating sequence given by Proposition 4.8. We take {φi } to be the diagonal sequence {ψii }. This sequence is necessarily discriminating and the result follows. It is worthwhile to point out that test sequences given in the proof of [Sel03, Theorem 1.18] or the generic sequence given in [KM05, Definition 44], because of their properties, must satisfy the conclusions of Theorem B. As an immediate consequence of the Sela’s completion construction ([Sel03, Definition 1.12]) or canonical embeddings into NTQ groups ([KM06, §7]) Theorem B implies the following: Corollary 4.9. Let L be a limit group and suppose that for some finite set S ⊂ L there is a homomorphism f : L → F such that: • The elements of f (S) are pairwise non-conjugate. • There is a factorization f = fm ◦ fm−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 11  such that each fi is a strict homomorphisms between limit groups (see Definition 2.4). Then there is a discriminating sequence ψi : L → F such that for all i the elements ψi (S) are pairwise non-conjugate.  5 5.1  Refinements π1 (U) is almost freely conjugacy separable.  The limit group L constructed in Section 3 had an abundance of pairs of nonconjugate elements whose images had to have conjugate images in every free quotient. The situation is completely different for our Magnus pair group. Proposition 5.1. hui, hvi ≤ π1 (U) are the only maximal cyclic subgroups of π1 (U) whose conjugacy classes cannot be separated via a homomorphism to a free group π1 (U) → F. Proof. We begin by embedding π1 (U) into a hyperbolic tower. Let ρ : π1 (U) ։ F3 be the strict homomorphism given in Figure 2. Consider the group L = hπ1 (U), F3 , s | u = ρ(u), svs−1 = ρ(v)i. This presentation naturally gives a splitting D of L given in Figure 3. We have  Σu ◭  ◭  u◭ ◮  ◭  F3 ◭  ◭  ◮  ◭ v ◭  Σv  Figure 3: The splitting D of L. a retraction ρ∗ : L ։ F3 given by   g 7→ ρ(g); g ∈ π1 (U) f 7→ f ; f ∈ F3 ρ∗ :  s 7→ 1 It therefore follows that L is a hyperbolic tower over F3 . 12  Claim: if α, β ∈ π1 (U) ≤ L are non-conjugate in π1 (U) and α, β are not both conjugate to hui or hvi in π1 (U) then they are not conjugate in L. If both α and β are elliptic, then this follows easily from the fact that the vertex groups are malnormal in L. Also α cannot be elliptic while β is hyperbolic. Suppose now that α, β are hyperbolic. Let T be the Bass-Serre tree corresponding to D and let T ′ = T (π1 (U)) be the minimal π1 (U) invariant subtree. Suppose that there is some s ∈ L such that sαs−1 = β, then as in the proof of Proposition 4.8 and Proposition we find that for some g ∈ π1 (U) either gs permutes two edges in T ′ that are in distinct π1 (U)-orbits or it fixes some edge in T ′ . The former case is impossible and it is easy to see that the latter case implies that gs ∈ π1 (U). Therefore we have a contradiction to the assumption that α, β are not conjugate in π1 (U). The claim is now proved. It therefore follows that if α, β ∈ π1 (U) ≤ L are as above, then by Theorem B there exists some retraction r : L ։ F3 such that r(α), r(β) are non-conjugate. This construction gives an alternative proof to the fact that π1 (U) is a limit group. The group L constructed is a triangular quasiquadratic group and the retraction ρ∗ makes it non-degenerate, and therefore an NTQ group. L and therefore π1 (U) ≤ L are therefore limit groups by [KM98a].  5.2  C-doubles do not contain Magnus pairs.  Theorem B enables us to examine a C-double L more closely. Proposition 5.2. The C-double L constructed in Section 3 does not contain a Magnus pair. Proof. We need to show that if two elements u, v of L have the same normal closure in L then they must be conjugate. Suppose that u, v are both elliptic with respect to the splitting (as a double) of L but not conjugate. By Theorem 3.2 if they are conjugate to a mirror pair (ug , v h ) for some g, h ∈ L then they do not form a Magnus pair, i.e. they have separate normal closures. Otherwise there are homomorphisms L → F in which u, v have non-conjugate images, therefore by Theorem 2.7 the normal closures of their images are distinct; so hhuii 6= hhvii as well. Suppose now that u or v is hyperbolic in L. Recall the generating set x, y, r, s for L given in Definition 3.3. Let F = F(x, y) and consider the embedding into a centralizer extension, represented as an HNN extension L ֒→ hF, t|tw(x, y) = w(x, y)ti = F∗thwi x 7→ x, r 7→ t  −1  y 7→ y xt,  s 7→ t−1 yt  The stable letter t makes mirror pairs conjugate in this bigger group. A hyperbolic element of L can be written as a product of syllables u = a1 (x, y)a2 (r, s) · · · al (r, s) 13  with a1 or al possibly trivial. The image of u in F∗thwi is   u = a1 (x, y) t−1 a2 (x, y)t · · · t−1 al (x, y)t . Consider the set of words of the form   w1 (x, y) t−1 w2 (x, y)t · · · wN −1 (x, y) t−1 wN (x, y)t , with w1 or wN possibly trivial. This set is clearly closed under multiplication, inverses and passing to Fthwi -normal form. It follows that we can identify the image of L with this set of words, which we call t−1 ∗ t-syllabic words. Each factor wi (x, t) or t−1 wj (x, y)t is called a t−1 ∗ t-syllable. It is an easy consequence of Britton’s Lemma that if u is a hyperbolic, i.e. with cyclically reduced syllable length more than 1, t−1 ∗ t-syllabic word and g −1 ug is again t−1 ∗ t-syllabic for some g in F∗thwi then g must itself be t−1 ∗ tsyllabic. Indeed this can be seen by cyclically permuting the F∗thwi -syllables of a cyclically reduced word u. We refer the reader to [LS01, §IV.2] for further details about normal forms and conjugation in HNN extensions. Suppose now that u, v are non conjugate in L, but have the same normal closure in L. Since at least one of them is hyperbolic in L, it is clear from the embedding that its image must also be hyperbolic with respect to the HNN splitting F∗thwi. Now, since hhuiiL = hhviiL , in the bigger group F∗thwi we have: hhuiiF∗t  hwi  = hhhhuiiL iiF∗t  hwi  = hhhhviiL iiF∗t  hwi  = hhviiF∗t  hwi  By Theorem B or [Lio03] centralizer extensions are freely conjugacy separable, therefore they cannot contain Magnus pairs. It follows that u, v must be conjugate in the bigger F∗thwi . Let g −1 ug =F∗thwi v. Now both u and v must be hyperbolic so it follows that g must also be a t−1 ∗ t-syllabic word; thus g is in the image of L of F∗thwi . Furthermore since the map L ֒→ F∗thwi is an embedding g −1 ug =F∗thwi v ⇒ g −1 ug =L v, contradicting the fact that u, v are non conjugate in L.  5.3  A non-tower limit group that is freely conjugacy separable  In this section we construct a limit group that is freely conjugacy separable but which does not admit a tower structure. Let H ≤ [F, F] be some f.g. malnormal subgroup of F, e.g. H = haba−1 b−1 , b−2 a−1 b2 ai ≤ F(a, b). And pick h ∈ H \ [H, H] such that H is rigid relative to h, i.e. H has no non-trivial cyclic or free splittings relative to hhi. Because h ∈ [F, F] there is is a quadratic extension F < F ∗hhi π1 (Σ) where Σ has one boundary component and has genus g = genus(h), in particular there is a retraction onto F. Consider now the subgroup L = H ∗hhi π1 (Σ). 14  Proposition 5.3. L as above is freely conjugacy separable. Proof. Because H ≤ F was chosen to be malnormal, an easy Bass-Serre theory argument (e.g. apply [LS01, Theorem IV.2.8]) tells us that α, β ∈ L are conjugate if and only if they are conjugate in F ∗hhi π1 (Σ). On the other hand by Theorem B, F ∗hhi π1 (Σ), and hence L, are freely conjugacy separable. Definition 5.4. A splitting X is elliptic in a splitting Y if every edge group in X is conjugate to a vertex group of Y. Otherwise we say X is hyperbolic in Y. Theorem 5.5 ([RS97, Theorem 7.1]). Let G be an f.p. group with a single end. There exists a reduced, unfolded Z-splitting of G called a JSJ decomposition of G with the following properties: 1. Every canonical maximal QH (recall definition 2.3) subgroup (CMQ) of G is conjugate to a vertex group in the JSJ decomposition. Every QH subgroup of G can be conjugated into one of the CMQ subgroups of G. Every non-CMQ vertex groups in the JSJ decomposition is elliptic in every Z-splitting of G. 2. An elementary Z-splitting G = A ∗C B or G = A∗C which is hyperbolic in another elementary Z-splitting is obtained from the JSJ decomposition of G by cutting a 2-orbifold corresponding to a CMQ subgroup of G along a weakly essential simple closed curve (s.c.c.). 3. Let Θ be an elementary Z-splitting G = A ∗C B or G = A∗C which is elliptic with respect to any other elementary Z splitting of G. There exists a G-equivariant simplicial map between a subdivision of TJSJ , the BassSerre tree corresponding to the JSJ decomposition, and TΘ , the Bass-Serre tree corresponding to Θ. 4. Let Λ be a general Z-splitting of G. There exists a Z-splitting Λ1 obtained from the JSJ decomposition by splitting the CMQ subgroups along weakly essential s.c.c. on their corresponding 2-orbifolds, so that there exists a G-equivariant simplicial map between a subdivision of the Bass-Serre tree TΛ1 and TΛ . 5. If JSJ1 is another JSJ decomposition of G, then there exists a G-equivariant simplicial map h1 from a subdivision of TJSJ to TJSJ1 , and a G-equivariant simplicial map h2 from a subdivision of TJSJ1 to TJSJ , so that h1 ◦ h2 and h2 ◦ h1 are G-homotopic to the corresponding identity maps. We note that item 5. of the above theorem describes the canonicity of a JSJ decomposition. Lemma 5.6. The splitting L = H ∗hhi π1 (Σ) is a cyclic JSJ splitting. Proof. This is an elementary Z splitting of L, let’s see how it can be obtained from the JSJ decomposition given in Theorem 5.5. The first case is if h is elliptic in every other splitting. Then by 3. of Theorem 5.5 there exists an L- equivariant 15  map ρ from TJSJ to the Bass-Serre tree T corresponding to H ∗hhi π1 (Σ) in which H stabilizes a vertex v. It follows that H acts on φ−1 ({v}) = TH ⊂ TJSJ . Since H is rigid relative to h and h acts elliptically on TJSJ , TH cannot be infinite, since that would imply that H admits an essential cyclic splitting relative to h. TH must in fact be a point. Otherwise TH is a finite tree tree and there must be a “boundary” vertex u ∈ TH such that H 6≥ Lu . Since φ(u) = v, L-equivariance implies that Lu fixes v so that Lu ≤ H, which is a contradiction. It follows that in this case H is actually a vertex group of the JSJ decomposition and π1 (Σ) must be a CMQ vertex group. The second case is that h is hyperbolic in some other Z-splitting D of L. Since H is rigid relative to h, H must be hyperbolic with respect to D. Now by 2. of Theorem 5.5 the splitting L = H ∗hhi π1 (Σ) can be obtained from the JSJ splitting of L by cutting along a simple closed curve on some CMQ vertex group, and this curve is conjugate to h. But this means that H admits a cyclic splitting as a graph of groups with a QH vertex group π1 (Σ′ ) such that the π1 -image of some connected component of ∂Σ′ is conjugate to hhi, in particular H must have a cyclic splitting relative to h, which contradicts the fact that H is rigid relative to h. Proposition 5.7. The limit group L = H ∗hhi π1 (Σ) does not admit a tower structure. Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that L was a tower, consider the last level: Ln−1 < Ln = L. Since L has no non-cyclic abelian subgroups Ln−1 < L must be a hyperbolic extension. This means that L admits a cyclic splitting D with a vertex group Ln−1 and a QH vertex group Q. Since L = H ∗hhi π1 (Σ) is a JSJ decomposition and π1 (Σ) is a CMQ vertex group. By 1. and 4. of Theorem 5.5, the QH vertex group Q must be represented as π1 (Σ1 ), where Σ1 is a connected subsurface Σ1 ⊂ Σ. It follows from 4. of Theorem 5.5 that the other vertex group must be Ln−1 = H ∗hhi π1 (Σ′ ) where Σ′ = Σ \ Σ1 . Since Ln−1 < L is a quadratic extension there is a retraction L ։ Ln−1 . Note however that because Σ′ has at least two boundary components H ∗hhi π1 (Σ′ ) = H ∗ Fm where m = −χ(Σ′ ). Now since we have a retraction L ։ Ln−1 there is are xi , yi ∈ Ln−1 such that g Y [xi , yi ] h= i=1  But this would imply that h ∈ [Ln−1 , Ln−1 ] which is clearly seen to be false by abelianizing H ∗ Fm and remembering that h 6∈ [H, H].  16  References [Bau65] Gilbert Baumslag. Residual nilpotence and relations in free groups. J. Algebra, 2:271–282, 1965. [BF09]  Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Notes on Sela’s work: limit groups and Makanin-Razborov diagrams. In Geometric and cohomological methods in group theory, volume 358 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 1–29. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2009.  [CG05]  Christophe Champetier and Vincent Guirardel. Limit groups as limits of free groups. Israel J. Math., 146:1–75, 2005.  [CZ07]  S. C. Chagas and P. A. Zalesskii. Limit groups are conjugacy separable. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 17(4):851–857, 2007.  [GLS09] Anthony M Gaglione, Seymour Lipschutz, and Dennis Spellman. Almost locally free groups and a theorem of magnus: Some questions. Groups–Complexity–Cryptology, 1(2):181–198, 2009. [Hei16]  Simon Heil. Jsj decompositions of doubles of free groups. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01424, 2016.  [Iva98]  SV Ivanov. On certain elements of free groups. Journal of Algebra, 204(2):394–405, 1998.  [KM98a] O. Kharlampovich and A. Myasnikov. Irreducible affine varieties over a free group. I. Irreducibility of quadratic equations and Nullstellensatz. J. Algebra, 200(2):472–516, 1998. [KM98b] O. Kharlampovich and A. Myasnikov. Irreducible affine varieties over a free group. II. Systems in triangular quasi-quadratic form and description of residually free groups. J. Algebra, 200(2):517–570, 1998. [KM05]  Olga Kharlampovich and Alexei Myasnikov. Implicit function theorem over free groups. J. Algebra, 290(1):1–203, 2005.  [KM06]  Olga Kharlampovich and Alexei Myasnikov. Elementary theory of free non-abelian groups. J. Algebra, 302(2):451–552, 2006.  [Lio03]  Ekaterina Lioutikova. Lyndon’s group is conjugately residually free. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 13(3):255–275, 2003.  [Lou13]  Larsen Louder. Scott complexity and adjoining roots to finitely generated groups. Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics, 7(2):451–474, 2013.  [LS01]  Roger C. Lyndon and Paul E. Schupp. Combinatorial group theory. Classics in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2001. Reprint of the 1977 edition.  17  [Mag31] Wilhelm Magnus. Untersuchungen über einige unendliche diskontinuierliche Gruppen. Math. Ann., 105(1):52–74, 1931. [RS97]  E. Rips and Z. Sela. Cyclic splittings of finitely presented groups and the canonical JSJ decomposition. Ann. of Math. (2), 146(1):53–109, 1997.  [Sel03]  Z. Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups. II. Completions, closures and formal solutions. Israel J. Math., 134:173–254, 2003.  [She55]  Abe Shenitzer. Decomposition of a group with a single defining relation into a free product. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 6(2):273–279, 1955.  [Wil09]  Henry Wilton. Solutions to Bestvina & Feighn’s exercises on limit groups. In Geometric and cohomological methods in group theory, volume 358 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 30–62. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2009.  18

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
