Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_1993

Abstract:
Sensitivity to the Neutrino Mass Hierarchy Emilio Ciuffoli, Jarah Evslin and Xinmin Zhang  arXiv:1305.5150v4 [hep-ph] 20 Apr 2016  Theoretical Physics Division, IHEP, CAS, YuQuanLu 19B, Beijing 100049, China In the next decade, a number of experiments will attempt to determine the neutrino mass hierarchy. Feasibility studies for such experiments generally determine the statistic ∆χ2 . As the hierarchy is a discrete choice, ∆χ2 does not obey a one degree of freedom χ2 distribution and so the number of σ’s of confidence of the hierarchy determination is not the square root of ∆χ2 . We present a simple Bayesian formula for the sensitivity to the hierarchy that can be expected from the median experiment as a function of ∆χ2 .  In the next two decades a number of reactor, accelerator and atmospheric neutrino experiments will attempt to determine the neutrino mass hierarchy, which is the sign of the mass difference 2 ∆M31 = M32 − M12 where Mi is the ith eigenvalue of the neutrino mass matrix. If the sign is positive (negative), one says that the hierarchy is normal (inverted). Most of these experiments are still in the planning stages, where the key role is played by studies of the sensitivity of a given design to the hierarchy. Such studies determine, either analytically or via Monte Carlo simulations, ∆χ2 = χ2I − χ2N  (1)  where χ2N (χ2I ) is the χ2 statistic equal to a weighted sum of the squares of the differences between the data and predictions given the normal (inverted) hierarchy, choosing all of the nuisance parameters so as to minimize χ2N (χ2I ). The goal of these experiments is not to determine whether each of the hierarchies is consistent with the data, as would be usual in a frequentist approach. Rather, as it is already well accepted that precisely one of the hierarchies is manifested in nature, the goal of these experiments is to determine which of the hierarchies provides the best fit to the data. In this paper we will use the test statistic ∆χ2 to answer this question as follows. We will define the best fit hierarchy to be that which yields the lowest value of χ2 , and so the hierarchy determined by the experiment simply corresponds to the sign of ∆χ2 . The critical question is then, given ∆χ2 , what is the sensitivity of a typical experiment to the hierarchy? In Ref. [1] the authors showed that the most naive answer, the p value that would be obtained if ∆χ2 satisfied a one degree of freedom χ2 distri-  bution, gives the incorrect answer. Indeed ∆χ2 is not necessarily positive and so such a prescription would not even always be defined. In this note we will provide an analytic answer (13) to this question and will compare our answer to the results of simulations of Daya Bay II and disappearance data at NOνA. Nested hypotheses To begin, we will describe just why the p value is not the answer to the question stated above. Consider N data points {yi } generated by an experiment trying to determine an unknown quantity x. We will use the approximation in which these data points yi (0) follow a Gaussian distribution peaked at yi (x) with (0) variance σi2 (x). Both yi (x) and σi (x) are known functions of x. An experimenter is interested in two hypotheses. Hypothesis (A) states that x is a real number. Hypothesis (B) states that x = x0 , for a particular real number x0 . Clearly hypothesis (B) is a special case of hypothesis (A), so these hypotheses are said to be nested. In particular, (B) is obtained from (A) by fixing one, otherwise unconstrained, real number, the number x. For any given value of x, the experimenter can define a statistic χ2 (x) by simulating the experiment with that value of x and calculating the weighted sum of the squares of differences between his measured and simulated results χ2 (x) =  X (yi − y (0) (x))2 i  i  σi (x)2  .  (2)  The experimenter then determines a best fit x, for which χ2 (x) is minimized. He then asks how compatible his results are with the hypothesis (B). To determine this, he calculates δχ2 = χ2 (x0 ) − χ2 (x).  (3)  2  Unlike ∆χ2 defined in Eq. (1), δχ2 is manifestly nonnegative, because x is defined so as to give the lowest value of χ2 . Just what value of δχ2 should the experimenter expect? 75 years ago Wilks proved [2] that if hypothesis (B) is true then δχ2 will obey a χ2 distribution with a single degree of freedom. The experimenter can then determine a conditional probability that given (B), the experiment would have gone as badly as it did !! r 1 δχ2 2 pW (δχ ) = 1 − erf . (4) 2 2 For example, if he found δχ2 = 9, then pW would only be about 0.13%, and so a frequentist experimenter might conclude that he has ruled out (B) with 3σ of confidence. Non-nested Hypotheses As described in Ref. [1], the determination of the hierarchy is qualitatively different. The two hypotheses are the normal hierarchy (NH) and the inverted hierarchy (IH). These hypotheses are not nested, and they correspond to a discrete choice, not the fixing of a degree of freedom. So the conditions for Wilks’ theorem are strongly violated. As was observed in general in Ref. [3] and in this context in Ref. [1], this means that the statistic ∆χ2 defined in Eq. (1) does not follow a χ2 distribution. Just what distribution does ∆χ2 follow? Let us begin with the simple case in which there are no nuisance parameters, which was applied to a toy model of the hierarchy determination in Ref. [1]. An experiment will produce a set of numbers {yi }, which we assemble into a vector y. The normal and inverted hierarchies yield two theoretical estimates of this vector which we will denote yN and yI respectively. Again let us assume that the measured numbers yi are normally distributed about their mean with a variance σi2 , which for simplicity we take to be independent of the hierarchy. Without loss of generality, let us assume for the moment that the true hierarchy is normal. Then the measured numbers will be yi = yiN + σi gi  (5)  where gi is a standard Gaussian random variable.  The statistic ∆χ2 is then easily determined to be ∆χ2 = χ2I − χ2N X (yi − y I )2 X (yi − y N )2 i i − = 2 2 σ σ i i i i =  X (y N + σi gi − y I )2 − (y N + σi gi − y N )2 i  i  i  i  σi2  i  =  (6)  X (y N − y I )2 i  i  σi2  i  +  X 2(y N − y I ) i  i  i  σi  gi .  This identifies ∆χ2 as a Gaussian distributed random variable with mean given by the first term on the right hand side ∆χ2 =  X (y N − y I )2 i  i  i  σi2  (7)  and standard deviation given by the second term [1] s q X 4(y N − y I )2 i i σ∆χ2 = (8) = 2 ∆χ2 . 2 σ i i Note that ∆χ2 is the ∆χ2 statistic without statistical fluctuations, for example it may be given by the theoretical spectra of ν e observed at a reactor experiment, of νµ and ν µ at an iron calorimeter atmospheric neutrino experiment, or of νe (ν e ) appearance at an accelerator experiment running in the neutrino (antineutrino) mode. In an atmospheric neutrino experiment one may use the spectra as a function of energy, zenith angle and even the inelasticity of the events [4]. ∆χ2 is the statistic most often reported in the literature. We will now use Eq. (8) to relate ∆χ2 to three quantities of interest. What is the probability that the hierarchy which yields the lowest χ2 is indeed the true hierarchy? Let us first consider the case in which the normal hierarchy is manifested in nature. The correct hierarchy will be determined by the experiment if ∆χ2 > 0. The statistic ∆χ2 is centered on theqposi-  tive value ∆χ2 with a standard deviation of 2 ∆χ2 q and so the closest negative value is ∆χ2 /2 σ’s from the mean, on one side of the distribution. For example, if ∆χ2 = 9 then a negative value will be excluded at 1.5σ’s on one side, yielding a probability of successfully determining the hierarchy of 93.3%, considerably less than the 99.7% that one may naively suspect just by taking the square root of ∆χ2 . More  3  generally, the probability of correctly determining the hierarchy is  pc (∆χ2 ) =    s  1 1 + erf  2    ∆χ2  . 8  (9)  In a more standard terminology, pc is the sensitivity to the hierarchy of the binary classification test whose classification function is the sign of ∆χ2 . We will refer to it simply as the “probability of success” in what follows. In Ref. [5] the authors obtained a similar result which differs as a result of their formula (5.11) for the probability of success for a given ∆χ2 . If instead the inverted hierarchy is correct, the calculation proceeds identically. As we have approximated σi to be hierarchy independent, the probability of success is identical for both hierarchies. This is the quantity quoted in a number of studies such as Refs. [6–8]. Second, what is the sensitivity of a typical experiment to the hierarchy? A “typical experiment” is one in which |∆χ2 | obtains its average value |∆χ2 |. As the probability of successfully determining the hierarchy is a monotonic function of ∆χ2 , the average value of ∆χ2 corresponds to the median value of the probability of success and so we will refer to such experiments as median experiments. The sensitivity of the sign(∆χ2 ) test to the hierarchy is the probability that a fit to the correct hierarchy yields a lower value of χ2 than one to the wrong hierarchy. Since |∆χ2 | is fixed, this is simply the probability that ∆χ2 has the correct sign. Again the calculation will proceed identically for both hierarchies, so we may restrict our attention to the case in which the normal hierarchy is correct. Therefore the question is, given that ∆χ2 is positive and ∆χ2 is equal to either ∆χ2 or −∆χ2 , what is the probability pv that ∆χ2 = ∆χ2 . Let L± be the likelihood, given the normal hierarchy, that ∆χ2 = ±∆χ2 , which is easily found using the fact that ∆χ2 obeys a normal distribution p centered at ∆χ2 with standard deviation 2 ∆χ2 . Using the fact that the distribution of ∆χ2 is odd with respect to a change in the hierarchy, the Bayes  factor for the normal hierarchy is L+ 2 = e∆χ /2 . L−  (10)  In particular, symmetric Bayesian priors assigning a 50% chance to each hierarchy yield a probability of success of pv =  1 L+ = L+ + L− 1 + e−∆χ2 /2  (11)  for median experiments, those in which |∆χ2 | = |∆χ2 |. For example, if ∆χ2 = 9 then the probability that a median experiment correctly determines the hierarchy will be 98.9%. While this is better than the mean probability of success 93.3%, it still falls noticeably short of the 99.7% which one might expect from Wilks’ theorem. In Ref. [9] it was noted that the sensitivity (11) is equal to the posterior probability of determining the correct hierarchy. Given ∆χ2 determined either from Monte Carlo simulations or from Asimov data, one may express the sensitivity to the hierarchy expected at a median experiment in terms of a number s of standard deviations σ. We will convert probabilities into standard deviations using the one-sided Gaussian distribution    s 1 . (12) 1 + erf √ pv (∆χ2 ) = 2 2 While the double-sided Gaussian is also often used in the literature, we have checked that this choice of convention has a small effect on our results. Using Eq. (11) one now finds that the number of σ’s of sensitivity is ! 2 √ 1 − e−∆χ /2 −1 2 s(∆χ ) = 2 erf . (13) 1 + e−∆χ2 /2 This function is plotted in Fig. 1. For example, if ∆χ2 = 9 then a median experiment determines the hierarchy with a sensitivity of 2.3σ instead of the 3σ which might be expected. Had we insteaded opted for the double-sided Gaussian convention for s, we would have instead found 2.5σ. A general Bayesian prior of b and 1 − b for the normal and inverted hierarchies leads to a sensitivity  −∆χ2 /2 ! 1 √ 1 + 1 − −1 b e . (14) s(∆χ2 ) = 2 erf  1 1 + b − 1 e−∆χ2 /2  4  s  7 6 5 4 3 2 1 10  20  30  40  50  DΧ2  FIG. 1: For a given ∆χ2 statistic determined from theoretical spectra, the black curve is the number s of σ’s of sensitivity of the determination of the mass hierarchy by a median experiment. A median experiment is one in which |∆χ2 | obtains its median value. For comparison, the dashed curve uses the two-sided definition of s and the red curve is the square root of ∆χ2 .  Third, what is the probability p(s) that the hierarchy will be determined with a sensitivity of at least sσ? Note first that for a general experimental outcome ∆χ2 , the probability of success pv = =  L+ L+ + L−  2 −∆χ2 )2 /8∆χ2  e−(∆χ  e−(∆χ2 −∆χ2 )2 /8∆χ2 + e−(∆χ2 +∆χ2 )2 /8∆χ2 1 = (15) 1 + e−∆χ2 /2  FIG. 2: The black, red, blue, purple and green curves are the probability of a hierarchy determination with 1σ, 2σ, 3σ, 4σ and 5σ of sensitivity as a function of ∆χ2 . The dashed line represents a median experiment, and its intersections with the curves yield the same information as Fig. 1.  responds not to a point but to a K-dimensional subset of the N -dimensional vector space in which y is valued. The nuisance parameters xi are coordinates on these subsets. If the standard deviations σi vary sufficiently slowly, then the inverse covariance matrix defines a metric on this space. Recall that, in the case of the normal (inverted) hierarchy, the nuisance parameters x are chosen to minimize χ2N (χ2I ). Geometrically, this minimization corresponds to choosing the point in each subset which is closest to y, the coordinates of the point are the nuisance parameters which minimize the corresponding χ2 statistic.  is independent of ∆χ2 . Using this fact, an argument similar to those above leads to In this framework, it is easy to combine data from       multiple experiments. They can simply be added to s 2 ∆χ − 4arctanh erf √2 1    y as new components. For example, one can combine q 1 + erf . p(s) = 2 2 a forecast spectrum of Daya Bay II with a value of 8∆χ the nuisance parameter θ13 determined at Daya Bay (16) and RENO by letting the first N − 2 components of y correspond to the νe spectrum at Daya Bay II and This function is plotted in Fig. 2. the next two to the relative survival probabilities obParallel nuisance parameters served at Daya Bay and RENO. The single nuisance In reality there is no single experimental result parameter θ13 yields a curve in the N -dimensional yN or yI which is predicted by a given hierarchy. space of observations for each hierarchy. The curve The results also depend on a number of nuisance is parameterized by θ13 . The last two coordinates of parameters, such as the neutrino mass matrix pathis curve are simply the relative survival probabilirameters and the flux normalization of the source. ties expected at Daya Bay and RENO as a function We will assemble these nuisance parameters into a of the parameter θ13 . The χ2 to be minimized is the vector x = {xi }. distance in the full N dimensional space, so it automatically combines determinations of θ13 at RENO, If the final data consists of N numbers, such as Daya Bay and Daya Bay II without the need for any the number of events in N energy bins, and if there penalty terms. are K nuisance parameters, then each hierarchy cor-  5  Now let us make two approximations. First, we approximate yN and yI to be linear (or affine) functions of the nuisance parameters x, so that the subspaces corresponding to theoretical predictions are hyperplanes. The resulting models are called linear regression models. Model selection in one dimensional non-nested linear regression models was first studied in Ref. [10]. Ref. [3] presented a statistic, generalizing ∆χ2 , which is Gaussian distributed and distinguishes the models. The properties of this statistic, in the case of linear regression models, were determined in Ref. [11]. One may object that the spectra are not indeed linear functions of the neutrino mass matrix. However the essential point is that they be approximately linear in a regime whose size is the precision to which an experiment can determine the nuisance parameters. This is a much easier criterion. Later we will compare our analytical results to simulations in which no such approximation is made, and we will see that the resulting error is small. For now we will make the further approximation that one obtains the same value of ∆χ2 for any value of the nuisance parameters chosen for the normal hierarchy if the nuisance parameters for the inverse hierarchy are chosen so as to minimize ∆χ2I . In other words, ∆χ2 , is independent of the choice of the nuisance parameters so long as each χ2 is properly minimized. Geometrically this means that the hyperplanes corresponding to the theoretical values yN and yI are parallel. Again assume that the normal hierarchy is correct. If xT is the true value of the nuisance parameters, then the theoretical values of the observables yN will be linear functions yiN of xT . χ2N (χ2I ) is just the minimum distance squared from the observations yi = yiN + σi gi to the hyperplane corresponding to the normal (inverted) hierarchy. The statistical fluctuation vector g = σi gi can be decomposed into a two vectors, g⊥ and gk such that g⊥ is perpendicular to the hyperplanes and gk is parallel. To determine χ2N or χ2I , one must choose the nuisance parameters x at which it is minimized. χ2 will be minimized for the choice of nuisance parameters xT + gk . In other words, the parallel part of g yields the statistical error in the determination of the nuisance parameters. We have assumed that this error is the same for both hierarchies. For this choice of  FIG. 3: In this figure the hierarchy is normal and ∆χ2 is independent of the nuisance parameters. The two parallel lines are the expected measurements corresponding to various values of the nuisance parameters for the two hierarchies. As a result of statistical fluctuations yiN + σi gi is measured instead of the theoretical value yiN . The parallel part of g determines the effect of this fluctuation on the best fit nuisance parameters and the perpendicular part its effect on ∆χ2 .  nuisance parameters, the theoretical predictions for k k yi are yiN + σi gi and yiI + σi gi in the cases of the two hierarchies. Now we are ready to calculate ∆χ2 = χ2I − χ2N (17) k X (yi − y I − σi g )2 X (yi − y N − σi g k )2 i i i i = − 2 2 σ σ i i i i =  X (y N + σi g ⊥ − y I )2 − (y N + σi g ⊥ − y N )2 i  i  i  i  =  X (y N − y I )2 i  i  σi2  i  =  i  i  i  σi2  X (y N − y I )2 i  i  σi2  i  +  X 2(y N − y I ) i  i  +  i  σi  X 2(y N − y I ) i  i  i  σi  gi⊥ . gi .  In the last step we used the identity X 2(y N − y I ) i  i  i  σi  k  gi = 0  (18)  which follows from the fact that, using the metric 1/σi2 , the vector (yiN − yiI ) is perpendicular to the k hyperplanes and so to σi gi . Just as in Eq. (6), Eq. (17) describes a normal 2 distribution q centered at ∆χ and with standard deviation 2 ∆χ2 . As a result, Eqs. (9) and (13) for  6  the probability of success and number of σ’s of sensitivity in the median experiment remain correct. General nuisance parameters Of course, ∆χ2 does depend on the nuisance parameters, and so the hyperplanes corresponding to the theoretical data are not parallel and the above results are only approximate. This fact was first noted in Ref. [3], where it was concluded that as a result ∆χ2 is not normally distributed. Its distribution leptokurtic. This observation can be intuitively understood as follows. Imagine that ∆χ2 depends so strongly upon the nuisance parameters that a 1σ change in the nuisance parameters can reduce the sensitivity to the hierarchy by several σ’s. As a result, most of the experiments in which the hierarchy determination is incorrect will be those in which the nuisance parameter is such that ∆χ2 is much smaller. Thus the tails of the distribution of ∆χ2 will grow as a result of those simulations in which the nuisance parameters take a nonstandard value. Clearly, this effect is only present in simulations in which the nuisance parameters are allowed to vary, and so simulations that fix the nuisance parameters will yield values of ∆χ2 which, upon using Eq. (13), overestimate the sensitivity to the hierarchy. In Ref. [3] the author proposed a new statistic which does follow a Gaussian distribution even in this more general setting. However, in the case of the hierarchy determinations planned in the near future, the angle between the hypersurfaces is actually quite small. This is reflected in the observation [13] that even a 1σ variation in θ13 only leads to about a one third of a σ variation in the confidence. Therefore the approximate treatment of the ∆χ2 statistic above is quite precise. To illustrate this point, in Fig. 4 we present the distribution of the ∆χ2 statistic in simulations which combine the ν e spectrum measured at Daya Bay II with MINOS’ 4% determination of the atmospheric mass difference [12] and also with an optimistic 1% forecast determination at an upgraded NOνA . All of 2 the nuisance parameters are fixed except for |∆M32 |, 2 2 which is chosen to minimize χI and χN as described above. Following [14] we have considered 6 years of exposure at a 20 kton detector for Daya Bay II which detects ν e via inverse β decay on the 10% of  FIG. 4: The distribution of ∆χ2 in 50,000 experiments with each hierarchy is shown, combining the data with MINOS’ 4% determination of the atmospheric mass splitting (red curve) and with an optimistic 1% determination at NOνA (black curve). The dashed curves are the corresponding q Gaussian distributions centered at ∆χ2 with width 2  ∆χ2 .  its mass consisting of free protons. The baselines and reactor fluxes are identical to Ref. [14]. The leptonic CP-violating angle δ is set to π/2. We find that the distribution of ∆χ2 is indeed well approximated by a Gaussian distribution centered q  at ∆χ2 with standard deviation 2 ∆χ2 . ∆χ2 ∼ 11 (20) for Daya Bay II with MINOS (NOνA) yielding 2.6σ (3.9σ) of sensitivity at the median experiment, with a rate of successfully determining the hierarchy of 94.6% (98.5%) in good agreement with Eq. (9). In Fig. 5 we present the distribution of ∆χ2 in simulations in which δ = 0 and π, although we always fit to a δ = π/2 theoretical mode as the appearance mode at T2K and NOνA cannot distinguish 0 and π [13, 15]. At δ = 0 (π) we find ∆χ2 = 17 (22) yielding 3.5σ (4.2σ) of sensitivity, confirming the expectations of Ref. [16]. Despite the fact that the model used for fitting differs from that used to generate the data, the distribution of ∆χ2 described in this paper approximates the simulated data well. Frequentist confidence A frequentist notion of confidence can be made well defined even in this context [17, 18]. Imagine that an experiment measures ∆χ2 . This differs from the expected ∆χ2 for the normal (inverted) hierarchy by |∆χ2 ∓ ∆χ2 | which corresponds to a frequentist incompatibility of |∆χ2 ∓ ∆χ2 | q 2 ∆χ2  (19)  7  FIG. 5: As in Fig. 4, but using only a 1% determination of the atmospheric mass splitting. The simulations reported in the red and black curves use δ = 0 and π respectively, although the fitting is always performed assuming δ = π/2. As can be seen, if δ = π, the hierarchy determination will be more reliable [13, 14].  σ’s. In particular, in the case of the median experiment with the true hierarchy, ∆χ2 = ∆χ2 . Therefore thepinverted hierarchy is excluded at a confidence of ∆χ2 σ’s. In this sense it might be tempting to ignore the results of this paper p and to identify the frequentist incompatibility ∆χ2 with the confidence in the hierarchy determination expected in a median experiment. While such a definition of confidence is welldefined, it has a very unattractive feature. Consider an experiment with an expected ∆χ2 = 16. The general arguments in this note imply that if the hierarchy is normal (inverted) then ∆χ2 will follow a Gaussian distribution centered on 16 (−16) with a width of σ = 8. In the frequentist sense, the median experiment will yield |∆χ2 | = 16 and so is incompatible with the false hierarchy with 4σ of confidence while the 98th percentile experiment will yield ∆χ2 = 0 and so is incompatible with the false hierarchy with 2σ of confidence. An identification of the sensitivity to the hierarchy with the frequentist incompatibility would therefore imply that even the 98th percentile of experimental outcomes will yield a 2σ sensitivity to the hierarchy. Now consider the somewhat unlikely case in which due to statistical fluctuations, the results of this experiment are indeed in the 98th percentile, so that ∆χ2 = 0. Now the experimentalist will be asked to provide the hierarchy with 2σ of confidence. Of course he cannot, the experiment has not yielded any preference for either hierarchy, even at the 2σ level that was promised for a 98th percentile experi-  ment when the funding was requested. In this sense, the identification of the frequentist incompatibility with the confidence in the hierarchy determination is misleading: the confidence can be nonzero even when no information is obtained. The basic problem with the application of the frequentist notion of confidence in this example is that both hierarchies have been ruled out with equal confidence. Ruling out both hierarchies can be useful when searching for new physics, testing assumptions regarding backgrounds, etc. Although in that case one would use a χ2 test and not a ∆χ2 test, as the latter is insensitive to effects that affect both hierarchies similarly. However, for the purpose of determining which hierarchy is manifested in nature it is reasonable to assume that one of the hierarchies is indeed correct. In this case one is led to the Bayesian constructions described in this note.  Acknowledgement  We have benefited beyond measure from correspondence with Xin Qian, Yoshitaro Takaesu and Tyce DeYoung. We thank Amir Nawaz Khan for identifying two typos in an earlier version of this paper. JE is supported by the Chinese Academy of Sciences Fellowship for Young International Scientists grant number 2010Y2JA01. EC and XZ are supported in part by the NSF of China.  [1] X. Qian, A. Tan, W. Wang, J. J. Ling, R. D. McKeown and C. Zhang, “Statistical Evaluation of Experimental Determinations of Neutrino Mass Hierarchy,” Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 113011 [arXiv:1210.3651 [hep-ph]]. [2] S. S. Wilks, “The Large-Sample Distribution of the Likelihood Ratio for Testing Composite Hypotheses” Ann. Math. Stat. 9, No. 1 (1938), 60-62. [3] D. R. Cox, “Tests of Separate Families of Hypotheses,” Proc. Fourth Berkeley Symp. on Math. Statist. and Prob. 1 (1961), 105-123. [4] M. Ribordy and A. Y. Smirnov, “Improving the neutrino mass hierarchy identification with inelasticity measurement in PINGU and ORCA,” arXiv:1303.0758 [hep-ph]. [5] S. -F. Ge, K. Hagiwara, N. Okamura and Y. Takaesu, “Determination of mass hierarchy with  8  [6]  [7]  [8]  [9] [10]  [11] [12]  medium baseline reactor neutrino experiments,” arXiv:1210.8141 [hep-ph]. L. Zhan, Y. Wang, J. Cao and L. Wen, “Experimental Requirements to Determine the Neutrino Mass Hierarchy Using Reactor Neutrinos,” Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 073007 [arXiv:0901.2976 [hep-ex]]. X. Qian, D. A. Dwyer, R. D. McKeown, P. Vogel, W. Wang and C. Zhang, “Mass Hierarchy Resolution in Reactor Anti-neutrino Experiments: Parameter Degeneracies and Detector Energy Response,” PRD, 87, 033005 (2013) [arXiv:1208.1551 [physics.ins-det]]. E. Ciuffoli, J. Evslin and X. Zhang, “Mass Hierarchy Determination Using Neutrinos from Multiple Reactors,” JHEP 1212 (2012) 004 [arXiv:1209.2227 [hep-ph]]. M. Blennow, “On the Bayesian approach to neutrino mass ordering,” arXiv:1311.3183 [hep-ph]. H. Hotelling, “The Selection of Variates for Use in Prediction with Some Comments on the General Problem of Nuisance Parameters,” Ann. Math. Statist. Volume 11, 3 (1940) 271-283 M. H. Pesaran, “On the General Problem of Model Selection,” Rev. of Econ. Stud. 41 (1974) 153-171. H. Nunokawa, S. J. Parke and R. Zukanovich Funchal, “Another possible way to determine the neutrino mass hierarchy,” Phys. Rev. D 72 (2005) 013009 [hep-ph/0503283].  [13] E. Ciuffoli, J. Evslin and X. Zhang, “Optimizing Medium Baseline Reactor Neutrino Experiments,” arXiv:1302.0624 [hep-ph]. [14] Y. -F. Li, J. Cao, Y. Wang and L. Zhan, “Unambiguous Determination of the Neutrino Mass Hierarchy Using Reactor Neutrinos,” arXiv:1303.6733 [hep-ex]. [15] H. Minakata and S. J. Parke, “Correlated, Precision Measurements of θ23 and ∆ using only the Electron Neutrino Appearance Experiments,” arXiv:1303.6178 [hep-ph]. [16] H. Minakata, H. Nunokawa, S. J. Parke and R. Zukanovich Funchal, “Determining neutrino mass hierarchy by precision measurements in electron and muon neutrino disappearance experiments,” Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 053008 [hep-ph/0607284]. [17] Y. Takaesu, “Mass Hierarchy Using Medium Baseline Detector,” presented at the International Workshop on RENO-50. [18] A. U. Abeysekara, R. Alfaro, C. Alvarez, J. D. lvarez, R. Arceo, J. C. Arteaga-Velzquez, H. A. A. Solares and A. S. Barber et al., “Sensitivity of the High Altitude Water Cherenkov Detector to Sources of Multi-TeV Gamma Rays,” arXiv:1306.5800 [astro-ph.HE].

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
