Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_1245

Abstract:
HOROFUNCTIONS ON GRAPHS OF LINEAR GROWTH  arXiv:1608.03727v2 [math.MG] 31 Oct 2016  MATTHEW C. H. TOINTON AND ARIEL YADIN  Abstract. We prove that a linear growth graph has finitely many horofunctions. This provides a short and simple proof that any finitely generated infinite group of linear growth is virtually cyclic.  Résumé. Nous montrons qu’un graphe à croissance linéaire admet un nombre fini d’horofonctions. Celà donne une preuve courte et simple que chaque groupe infini de type fini à croissance linéaire est virtuellement cyclique.  1. Introduction Let Γ be an infinite, connected, locally finite graph, and denote by d(·, ·) the graph metric on Γ. Let o ∈ Γ. Then Γ is said to have linear volume growth if the balls about o for the metric d grow at most linearly in the radius. The graph Γ is said to have polynomial volume growth if these balls grow at most polynomially. Given an element z ∈ Γ we define the Busemann function bz : Γ → Z via bz (y) = d(z, y) − d(z, o). Given a geodesic ray ω = (z1 , z2 , . . .) in Γ we define the horofunction fω : G → Z by fω (y) = limn→∞ bzn (y). It is a well-known and simple fact that this limit exists. Note that fω is not constant, and in fact fω (zn ) = −n, which shows that fω is unbounded. Theorem 1.1. Let Γ be an infinite, connected, locally finite graph of linear volume growth. Then the set of horofunctions on Γ is finite. A finitely generated group G is said to have polynomial (respectively, linear) volume growth if some (and hence every) Cayley graph of G has polynomial (respectively, linear) volume growth. A remarkable theorem of Gromov’s states that a finitely generated group of polynomial volume growth contains a nilpotent subgroup of finite index [2]. As an application of Theorem 1.1 we give a short argument to prove the linear-growth case of Gromov’s theorem, as follows. Theorem 1.2. Let G be a finitely generated infinite group of linear volume growth. Then G contains a cyclic subgroup of finite index. In fact, Gromov’s theorem implies that a group of subquadratic growth is virtually cyclic, and this has also been proved by elementary methods by Justin [5], van den Dries & Wilkie [1] and Imrich & Seifter [4], the last two of these giving bounds on the index of the cyclic subgroup in terms of the volume growth. Nonetheless, the present proof is completely different to all of those and rather short, so we record it here. We prove Theorem 1.1 in Section 2. The proof of Theorem 1.2 is in Section 3. Let us mention a related (probably much more difficult) question. Conjecture 1.3. Let G be a Cayley graph of polynomial volume growth. Then the set of horofunctions on G is countable. 1  2  MATTHEW C. H. TOINTON AND ARIEL YADIN  Proving this conjecture would provide an alternative proof to Gromov’s theorem (by using a variant of Lemma 3.1 below). This has been suggested by Karlsson [6]. One method to prove this conjecture could be using the structure of finitely generated nilpotent groups, and relying on Gromov’s theorem, but that would somehow miss the point. (For example, in [7] Walsh shows that nilpotent groups always have a finite orbit in the space of horofunctions. It seems that this can be extended to virtually nilpotent groups as well.) It would be interesting to prove this conjecture even in the quadratic growth case without using Gromov’s theorem, since that would imply a new proof of the characterization of recurrent groups (which are finite extensions of Z or Z2 ). 2. Horofunctions on a graph of linear growth For S a graph Γ, we say that Γ is N-partite on a sequence (Γn )n∈N of disjoint sets Γn if Γ has vertex set n∈N Γn and the neighbours of every x ∈ Γn lie in Γn−1 ∪ Γn+1 . We call the sets Γn the partite sets of Γ. We call a path in Γ monotone if it has at most one vertex in each Γn . The proof of Theorem 1.1 essentially rests on the following graph-theoretic result. Proposition 2.1. Let Γ be an N-partite graph whose partite sets all have cardinality k ≥ 1. Then there exist monotone paths γ1 , . . . , γk in Γ such that every infinite monotone path in Γ has infinite intersection with some γj . Recall that in a bipartite graph on two finite sets X1 , X2 of equal cardinality, a matching is a subgraph in which each element of X1 is connected to precisely one element of X2 , and vice versa. Hall’s Marriage Theorem [3] states that if there is no matching then there exists some subset Y ⊂ X1 such that the neighbourhood of Y in X2 has strictly smaller cardinality than Y itself. Lemma 2.2. If for each n ∈ N there is a matching in Γ between Γn and Γn+1 then Γ satisfies Proposition 2.1. Proof. It is easy to see that the existence of such matchings implies that the vertices of Γ may be partitioned into k monotone paths, and that this is sufficient to satisfy the proposition.  GivenSan N-partite graph Γ and a sequence N = (nj )j ⊂ N, we may define a new graph on ΓN := j Γnj by placing an edge between x ∈ Γnj and x′ ∈ Γnj+1 if and only if there exists a monotone path between x and x′ in Γ. (Note that ΓN is an N-partite graph with partite sets Γnj .) The following is then immediate. Lemma 2.3. If there exists a sequence N = (nj )j such that ΓN satisfies Proposition 2.1, then the conclusion of Proposition 2.1 holds for Γ as well. Proof of Proposition 2.1. We proceed by induction on k. The base case k = 1 is easy, so we assume that k > 1. We may also delete every element of Γ that does not lie in any infinite monotone path; the only potential problem with this is that the Γn may no longer all have the same cardinality, but, using Lemma 2.3, we may fix this by passing to a subsequence. Let N = (nj )j be a sequence and consider the N-partite graph ΓN . If for every j there exists a matching (in the graph ΓN ) between Γnj and Γnj+1 , then we are done by combining Lemmas 2.2 and 2.3. Thus, we assume that a sequence as above does not exist. Specifically, by Hall’s Marriage Theorem, there exists n such that for any m > n, there exist Um ⊂ Γn and Vm ⊂ Γm such that 1 ≤ |Vm | < |Um | ≤ k, and such that every monotone path from Um to Γm ends in Vm . Without loss of generality we assume that the sets Vm are minimal with respect to these properties, and hence  HOROFUNCTIONS ON GRAPHS OF LINEAR GROWTH  3  that every element v ∈ Vm lies in some monotone path from Um to Γm . By passing to a subsequence of m > n, we have an infinite sequence n < m1 < m2 < · · · such that |Vmj | = |Vm1 | all have the same size and Umj = Um1 = U are all the same fixed subset. Let M = (mj )j and consider the graph ΓM . We claim that ΓM satisfies Proposition 2.1, which will suffice by Lemma 2.3. We move to proving this claim. Every monotone path in Γ starting in U and ending in Γmj must end in Vmj . Thus, by minimality of Vmj , any monotone path in Γ starting in Vmj and ending in Γmj+1 must end in Vmj+1 . In particular, in the graph ΓM , any infinite monotone path γ must satisfy the following dichotomy: either γ ∩ Vmj = ∅ for all j, or there exists j0 such that for all S j > j0 we have γ ∩ Vmj 6= ∅. Let ΓA be the induced subgraph of ΓM on the vertex set j Vmj , and ΓB the induced subgraph S on the vertex set j (Γmj \ Vmj ). Note that ΓA is N-partite with partite sets (ΓA )j = Vmj , all of size v = |Vm1 | < k. Also, ΓB is N-partite with partite sets (ΓB )j = Γmj \ Vmj , which all have size w = k − v < k. Thus, any infinite monotone path in ΓM induces an infinite monotone path in either ΓA or in ΓB . By induction, there exist infinite monotone paths α1 , . . . , αv in ΓA such that any infinite monotone path in ΓA must intersect one of these infinitely many times. Similarly, there are such paths β1 , . . . , βw in ΓB . Thus, any infinite monotone path in ΓM must intersect one of α1 , . . . , αv , β1 , . . . , βw infinitely many times. This completes the proof.  Proof of Theorem 1.1. Note that if Γ has linear growth then, writing Br for the ball of radius r about o, there is some k ∈ N and an infinite increasing sequence m1 , m2 , . . . such that |Bmn \Bmn −1 | = k for every n. Define Γn = Bmn \Bmn −1 , and define an N-partite graph Γ̂ on Γ1 , Γ2 , . . . by joining x ∈ Γn to x′ ∈ Γn+1 if and only if there is a path in Γ from x to x′ of length mn+1 − mn . Define a map α from the set of geodesic rays in Γ starting at o to the set of monotone paths in Γ̂ (in the sense of Proposition 2.1) in the natural way. Specifically, if ω is a geodesic ray in Γ starting S at o then α(ω) is the unique monotone path in Γ̂ passing through the same elements of n Γn as ω. Note that α is surjective onto the set of monotone paths in Γ̂, and also that if α(ω) and α(ω ′ ) have infinite intersection then so do ω and ω ′ . Let γ1 , . . . , γk be as given by Proposition 2.1, and pick, using the surjectivity of α, geodesic rays ω1 , . . . , ωk in Γ starting at o such that α(ωi ) = γi . If β is a geodesic ray in Γ, the tail of β coincides with the tail of some geodesic ray β ′ in Γ starting at o (see Lemma 2.4 below). However, α(β ′ ) has infinite intersection with some γi by Proposition 2.1, and so β has infinite intersection with ωi . This implies in particular that fβ = fωi , and so fω1 , . . . , fωk is a complete set of horofunctions.  For completeness we include a short argument for the following standard lemma. Lemma 2.4. If γ = (x0 , x1 , x2 , . . .) is a geodesic ray starting at x0 then there exists some N such that (xN , xN +1 , . . .) coincides with the tail of a geodesic ray ω starting at o. Proof. The sequence d(xn , o) − d(xn , x0 ) is non-increasing in n, since (2.1)  d(xn+1 , x0 ) = d(xn , x0 ) + 1  and |d(xn+1 , o) − d(xn , o)| ≤ 1 for every n. The triangle inequality also implies that d(xn , o) − d(xn , x0 ) is bounded below by −d(o, x0 ). The sequence (d(xn , o) − d(xn , x0 ))∞ n=1 is therefore eventually constant, say for n ≥ N . Combined with (2.1), this implies that d(xn+1 , o) = d(xn , o) + 1 for n ≥ N . The infinite path ω having initial segment some geodesic path from o to xN , followed by xN +1 , xN +2 , . . ., is therefore a geodesic ray starting at o.   4  MATTHEW C. H. TOINTON AND ARIEL YADIN  3. The linear-growth case of Gromov’s theorem A group G acts on the space {f : G → R | f (1) = 0} by x·f (y) = f (x−1 y)− f (x−1 ). Note that for a Busemann function bz we have x · bz = bxz , and hence for a horofunction fω we have x · fω = fxω . The following observation we learned from Anders Karlsson. Lemma 3.1. If the set of horofunctions on a group G contains a finite orbit then G has a finiteindex subgroup admitting a surjective homomorphism onto Z. Proof. Letting G act on the finite orbit, G contains a finite-index subgroup H that fixes some element fω of the orbit. Thus for h ∈ H, g ∈ G we have fω (g) = h−1 · fω (g) = fω (hg) − fω (h), which implies that fω is a homomorphism H → Z and that fω (Hg) = fω (H) + fω (g) for every g ∈ G. In particular, if fω (H) = {0} then fω is constant on the finitely many cosets of H, contradicting the fact that horofunctions are unbounded. We conclude that the image fω (H) is a non-trivial subgroup of Z, and thus admits a surjective homomorphism onto Z.  Remark 3.2. Essentially the same argument shows more generally that if Γ is a graph of linear growth and G < Aut (Γ) acts transitively on the vertices of Γ then G has a finite-index subgroup admitting a surjective homomorphism onto Z. Proof of Theorem 1.2. Theorem 1.1 implies that G has a finite set of horofunctions. The set of horofunctions is invariant, so in this case it contains a finite orbit. Lemma 3.1 therefore implies that there exists N ⊳ G of finite index such that N admits a surjective homomorphism onto Z. Let K ⊳ N be the kernel of this homomorphism. Since N is finite index in G it is finitely generated of linear growth. Since N/K ∼ = Z, it must be that K is finite. Hence, N is finite-by-Z, which by standard methods implies that N is also Z-by-finite. Thus, G contains a finite-index infinite cyclic subgroup.  Acknowledgements We are grateful to Emmanuel Breuillard, Anders Karlsson, Sébastien Martineau, Tom Meyerovitch, Ville Salo and an anonymous referee for helpful comments and discussions. MT is supported by ERC grant GA617129 ‘GeTeMo’. AY is supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant no. 1346/15). References [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6]  L. van den Dries and A. J. Wilkie. An effective bound for groups of linear growth, Arch. Math. 42 (1984), 391–396. M. Gromov. Groups of polynomial growth and expanding maps, Publ. Math. IHES 53 (1981), 53–73. P. Hall. On Representatives of Subsets, J. London Math. Soc. 10 (1935), 26–30 W. Imrich and N. Seifter. A bound for groups of linear growth, Arch. Math. 48 (1987), 100–104. J. Justin. Groupes et semi-groupes à croissance linéaire, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 273 (1971), 212–214. A. Karlsson. Ergodic theorems for noncommuting random products (lecture notes) http://www.unige.ch/math/folks/karlsson/wroclawtotal.pdf [7] C. Walsh. The action of a nilpotent group on its horofunction boundary has finite orbits, Groups Geom. Dyn. 5 (2011), 189–206.  MT: Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, Univ. Paris-Sud, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France E-mail address: matthew.tointon@math.u-psud.fr AY: Department of Mathematics, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel E-mail address: yadina@bgu.ac.il

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
