Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_2119

Abstract:
1  Discrete Power control stochastic game on the Multiple access channel.  arXiv:1710.08800v1 [cs.SY] 24 Oct 2017  Prashant N, Lakshmi Narasimhan Theagarajan∗ Indian Institute of Information Technology Sri City, India ∗ Indian Institute of Technology Palakkad, India Email:prashant.n@iiits.in,∗ lnt@iitpkd.ac.in  Abstract—We consider the scenario where multiple users send information to a single receiver over a common channel. Each user is aware of only his channel fading state and has statistical knowledge of the fading process of the other users. The fading process of each user is modeled as ergodic finite state Markov chains. We consider two problems. The first problem is the noncooperative game where the receiver decodes the the message of each transmitter by considering the signals of the other users as noise. In the second problem, the receiver employs a successive interference decoder to decode the messages of the users. The two problems are posed as stochastic games, the first one as a non-cooperative game where the aim is to maximize the expected time average throughput of each user in a selfish manner. In the second problem, the aim is maximize the expected time average sum throughput of the system. We show the existence of Nash equilibrium policies for both the games and give a best response algorithm to find them for both the games. Our analysis begins first by showing that the second game is the potential game of the first one, hence the equilibria policies for both the games are same. We then analyze the first game at large but finite number of users. We show there exist a natural number such that when the number of users exceed this number, then the equilibrium policies are unique. Furthermore the equilibrium policies of the users are invariant as long as the number of users remain above the latter threshold. These policies are then shown to achieve the global maximum of the expected time average sum throughput of the second game. We give a algorithm which is linear in number of users to compute these threshold equilibrium policies. Index Terms—Multiple Access Channel, Stochastic Games, Nash equilibrium, Markov Decision process, Potential Games, Dominating strategies, Best response sets, Best response algorithm.  I. I NTRODUCTION The Multiple access channel (MAC) is a abstract model of the scenario where more than one transmitter simultaneously sends information to a single receiver. In the wireless setup, the time varying fading process and knowledge of channel state information affects the throughput of the users. Resources such as power, time and rate have to be dynamically allocated to improve the throughput of the users. In general, this problem can be approached in two ways, a centralized scheme or a distributed scheme. The centralized scheme provides the best possible throughputs for each transmitter while requiring a huge overhead. On the other hand a distributed implementation provides the flexibility required for a practical system, but gives less throughput in comparison to the former. In this work we adopt a game theoretic approach to analyze the above problem. This approach is a distributed scheme and here the  users are modeled as rational and selfish players interested in maximizing their utilities. Another problem considered in the distributed approach is the availability of each users channel statistics across other users. A centralized approach assumes that all such information is available to every user at each time instant. On the other hand, a distributed scheme may or may not include such assumptions and hence vary from users having complete channel state information of other users to knowing only channel statistics of other users. These assumptions significantly affect system modeling as well as the throughputs achieved by various users in the system. We now provide a brief survey on the related works. The centralized problem where each user’s transmitter and receiver knows every other users channel state was considered in [1], here the authors considered the problem of finding resource allocation schemes which are information theoretically optimal. The authors of [1] considered the problem finding all possible achievable rates of all users under fixed average power constraints. This set of achievable rates was shown to be a polymatroid and using results in [2], the authors showed that the solution of any rate and power allocation schemes over this set can be computed in polynomial time by using a greedy algorithm. In particular they showed the scheme of assigning the channel to the user with the highest channel gain maximizes the ergodic sum capacity. [4] considered the same problem in a game theoretic setup. They assumed full channel state information of each user is available to every user and showed that when each user maximizes his own rate in a selfish manner, while treating the other user signal as interference, assigning the channel to the user with the highest channel gain is a Nash equilibrium. The work in [5], [6] considered the problem where each user maximized his/her mutual information in a selfish manner and provided sufficient conditions for the existence of unique Nash equilibrium. Here also the authors assumed that each user had access of channel gain of every other user. The work in [7] formulated the above problem in a Bayesian scenario, that is each user is only aware of his/her channel gain and has statistical knowledge of the channel gains of the other user. They showed there exist a unique Nash equilibrium. In this model, the power policies was modeled as a continuous variable while the channel could only take values from a finite set. A similar setup in which the power was considered discrete was considered in [9], [22]. In fact our model is similar to  2  these papers. In [9] the authors showed the existence of Nash equilibria for the game where each user maximizes his/her own Shannon capacity while treating the other users as noise. An algorithm was provided for computing the equilibrium policies for two users while a best response algorithm is provided to compute any such equilibrium policy for any number of users. A proof was provided for the correctness of the two user algorithm while the best response algorithm was shown to converge only numerically. We note that a method of proving that the algorithm in [9] converges was provided in [22]. We provide the whole proof for convergence of the algorithm in our work. We note that in all of these models the number of users was fixed and algorithms were provided to compute or converge to point of interest. However as the number of users increases, the algorithms provided above become computationally infeasible. To overcome this problem new models where the number of users can be very large have become quite popular in literature [12], [13]. In these models the numbers of agents are significantly large, such that, each user can be modeled as a rational agent playing against a continuum of agents. The infinite interaction between the users is now captured by means of a parameter called the mean field. Each user is now modeled to interact with other users only through the mean field. This modeling assumption significantly reduces the complexity by converting the large user problem into a simpler optimization problem. However in many cases the equilibria policies arising from this type of modeling becomes solution to difficult forward - backward partial differential equations. In general, only solutions from numerical algorithms can be given for such problems. It is to be noted, that in all mean field models an assumption of symmetric agents is assumed, that is the players in these type of games are interchangeable.[12], [13]. In the wireless context such modeling has been considered in [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19]. However we focus specifically on [19], as this model is similar to the one we consider. In this model, each user maximizes his/her own signal to interference and noise ratio where the signal from the other users is treated as noise. The authors show that as number of users tend towards infinity, the problem can be analyzed via a mean field setup. Interestingly they show via numerical simulations that the optimal equilibria policy at large number of users outperforms any well known equilibrium policy. We prove a similar result in our work. In this paper, we study the model where the receiver knows the channel states of all the users, while each transmitter only knows her/his channel state information. We assume that the each user is aware of channel statistics of the other users. We consider two scenarios, one where the receiver uses a standard matched filter decoder and in the other one, the receiver employs a successive interference decoder. In the first scenario while decoding the signal of a user, the receiver treats the message of other users as noise. Here each user selfishly maximizes his/her own Shannon capacity. In the second scenario a prespecified ordering of the users is made available to each transmitter and here each user maximizes the multiple access channel sum rate. We assume that the channel gain as well as the feasible power levels are finite. Our results  are as follows. 1) In both scenarios we show the existence of Nash equilibria and prove the convergence of the best response algorithm given in [9], [11]. We also show that the utility function of the second problem is the potential function[21] corresponding to the utilities of the first one. Hence we need to analyze only one of the problem. Henceforth we analyze the first scenario only. 2) We then consider the case as the numbers of users becomes large under the assumption of finite sets of symmetric users. This assumption implies that all users belonging to a particular set are interchangeable and there are only finite number of such sets. We prove that there exist a finite threshold number of users beyond which the Nash equilibrium of each user in each set is unique and invariant. We refer to this policy as a infinitely invariant policy. Hence as long as the number of users remains greater than this threshold, the Nash equilibrium policy of each user in the system does not change. This implies we need to compute the equilibria policies only for a finite number of users using the best response algorithm. We also show that under this assumption the best response algorithm has linear complexity in number of users. 3) We then show at sufficiently large number of users, the equilibrium policy is a strictly dominating policy among the set of all rational policies of each user. from this result, we derive as a corollary that at sufficiently large number of users, in the scenario where each user knows only his, her channel gain , the infinitely invariant policy is the optimal policy which maximizes the ergodic sum rate capacity of the MAC channel. 4) We then provide a sequence of optimization problems which computes the infinitely invariant policy. We show that this policy maximizes time average snr of the user and then minimizes the variance of the time average snr. By using structural results from Markov decision theory, we show that this policy arises from a greedy algorithm which has linear complexity in number of channel states as well as number of power levels. Our paper is structured as follows. The system model and problem formulation along with the various required definitions are provided in section II and section III respectively. We then provide the existence of Nash equilibria and best response algorithm used to compute them in section IV. Section V considers the case when interference is very large. This is an intermediate step in the analysis of the games at large number of users. Here we provide the algorithm used in the computation of the infinitely invariant policy. In section VI we consider the scenario where the numbers of users is very large and show the existence of a infinitely invariant policy in section VII. In section VIII we provide numerical results verifying the same. II. S YSTEM  MODEL  We consider a discrete time scenario involving the multiaccess fading channel where a set N = {1, 2, 3, · · · , N } of  3  users access a base-station simultaneously over each time-slot. The fading channel observed by user i at time n is modeled as an finite state ergodic Markov chain hi [n] which takes values from a finite set Hi . The results in this work remain the same for any stationary and ergodic fading process. Any element of this set is denoted as Q hi . The set of channel states of all users is denoted as H = i∈N Hi and h := (hi , h2 , · · · , hN ) denotes any element of this set. ′ The transition probability of user i going from channel hi to hi is equal to λh′ ,hi . The Markov chains hi [n] of users are i assumed to be processes independent of each other. We assume that the fading process of user i is known perfectly by both the user as well as the base-station but is unknown to the other users. We denote the row vector πi := (πi (hi ) : hi ∈ Hi ) as the vector of steady state probabilities of user i corresponding to the Markov chain hi [n]. At each time n user i invests power pi [n] from the finite set Pi . Any element of this set is denoted as pi . It is assumed that sometimes the user will not transmit, hence the action pi = 0 belongs to the set of power Pi of user Q i. The set of power action of all users is denoted as P = i∈N Pi and p := (pi , p2 , · · · , pn ) denotes any element of this set. We assume that the base station has complete information about the power level pi [n] utilized by each user i for every time-slot n. On the other hand, users other than user i only know the set of channel states Hi , power levels Pi of user i. We also assume that users other than user i know perfectly the channel statistics of user i. is to be noted that, this allows users other than user i to compute the steady state probabilities πi of user i. We associate with each user i, a real valued function ti which signifies the reward ti (h, p) of user i when the the channel states and power actions of all the users are h and p respectively. It is assumed that this utility/reward function is known to all users as well as the base-station. In this work we consider the following reward functions. 1) The base-station employs a regular matched filter to decode the message of a user by considering the signals from other user as noise. In such a case a upper-bound for the maximum rate, user i can achieve when the the channel states and power actions of all the users are h and p is,   hi p i n . (1) ti (h, p) := log2 1 + PN N0 + j=1,j6=i hj pj 2) The base-station uses a successive interference cancellation filter. Given an ordering scheme on the the set of users N , the received packet of a user i is decoded after canceling out the decoded transmission of other users lying below user i in the predefined order from the received transmission. We assume perfect cancellation of the decoded signal from the received transmission known to all users at each time slot. If the users want to maximize the aggregated throughput in a decentralized manner, then the utility function of each user is, PN   j=1 hj pj s . (2) t (h, p) = log2 1 + N0  It is to be noted that the objective function here is the same for all users. III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION In this section, we formulate the game theoretic problem arising from the system model and the two reward functions. We do so by first considering the class of stationary policies. It is to be noted that, this problem is going to be analyzed a constrained Markov game with independent state information. The interested reader can refer to [11] for motivation about the forthcoming definitions. A. Stationary policies: Let M(G) denote the set of probability measures over a set G. A stationary policy for user i is a function ui : Hi 7−→ M(Pi ), such that ui (·/hi ) ∈ M(Pi ). The value ui (pi /hi ) represents the probability of user i using power pi when her/his channel state is hi . We denote the set of stationary policies for user i as Ui . B. User and Order Notations: Given a set Gi associated with user i we refer to an element of the set as gi . The global set of all such elements of all users is defined as QNthe Cartesian product of these sets and is denoted as G = i=1 Gi . Any element of this set is denoted as g = (gi , · · · , gN ). The set of all elements other than the element of user i is the Cartesian product of these sets other than QN the set Gi associated with user i and is denoted as G−i = j=1,j6=i Gj . Any element of this set is denoted as g−i = (gi , · · · , gi−1 , gi+1 , · · · , gN ). Given any set G we denote |G| as the cardinality of set G. We use capital letters to denote any random variable or matrix occurring in this work. It will be clear from context, whether the occurring notation in capital letter is a matrix or a random variable. We denote R, N and Z as the set of real numbers, natural numbers and integers respectively. The set Z+ denotes the set of strictly positive natural numbers. Let f (·) and g(·) denote two functions on the set of natural numbers. If the function f is asymptotically bounded above (below) the function, we denote it as, f (n) = O(g(n)) (f (n) = Ω(g(n))) C. Expected time-average reward and cost: Let βi represent a initial probability distribution on the set of states Hi of user i and β := (βi , β2 , · · · , βN ) represent the initial joint probability distribution of all users on the global set of states H. Given a multi-policy u for all players, we can define a probability measure λβu which determines the distribution of the stochastic process (h[n], p[n]) of states and actions. The expectation due to this distribution is denoted as Eβu . We define the time-average expected rate Ti (u) of user i as a function of the multi-policy u of all users. It is calculated as Ti (u) := lim inf T →∞  T 1 X β E (ti (h[n], p[n])). T n=1 u  (3)  4  Similarly let λβui denote the probability measure with respect (w.r.t) to the policy ui of user i and Eui denotes the expectation due to this distribution. The time average expected power Pi (ui ) used by user i is now calculated as T 1 X βi Pi (ui ) := lim sup Eui (pi [n]). T →∞ T n=1  (4)  D. Game Theoretic formulation Let P i denote a constraint on the time average expected power of user i. A policy ui is called i−feasible if it satisfies Pi (ui ) ≤ P i . A multi-policy u is called feasible if it is ifeasible for all users i ∈ N. User i chooses a i-feasible policy so as to maximize his reward Ti (ui , u−i ). However Ti (u) depends on the stationary policy of other users also leading to a non-cooperative game. Let [u−i , vi ] denote the multi-policy where, users k 6= i use stationary policy uk while user i uses policy vi . We now define the Constrained Nash Equilibrium (CNE). Definition 1. A multi-policy u ∈ U is called a CNE if for each player i ∈ N and for any vi ∈ Ui such that [u−i , vi ] is feasible, Ti (u) ≥ Ti (u−i , vi ).  (5)  We denote the above formulation as a constrained Markov game (CMG) [11], " # Γ = N , (Hi )i∈N , (Pi )i∈N , (Λi )i∈N , (ti )i∈N , (P i , )i∈N ,  A CMG is called an identical interest CMG if the immediate reward function ti is same for all user. The games Γn and Γs represent the Markov games when the reward function for user i are tni and tsi respectively. In the next two subsections we illustrate how to compute the best response sets associated with this game. E. Calculation of Optimal response Given the stationary policy ui , we define the occupation measure zi (hi , pi ) of user i for each channel-power pair (hi , pi ) as zi (hi , pi ) = π(hi ) · ui (pi |hi ).  (6)  The occupation measure zi (hi , pi ) for user i is the steadystate probability of the user being in state hi and using power pi . Define the immediate reward for user i, when user i has channel hi and employs power pi and other users use multipolicy u−i as, X X Y z Ri −i (hi , pi ) = [ zl (pl , hl )]ti (h, p), (7) h−i ∈Hi p−i ∈P−i l6=i  Then the time-average expected reward of user i under the multi-policy u are: X X z Ti (u) = (8) Ri −i (hi , pi )zi (hi , pi ). hi ∈Hi pi ∈Pi  Similarly the time-average expected power of user i is X X Pi (ui ) = pi zi (xi , ai ).  (9)  hi ∈Hi pi ∈Pi  As we can compute occupation measures from stationary policies and conversely using (6), we restrict ourselves, in this work to finding occupation measures. Hence from now on, without loss of generality, we denote time-average expected reward and time-average expected power of user i as Ti (u) := Ti (z) and Pi (ui ) := Pi (zi ). We also use the term occupation measure and stationary policy interchangeably, even though from now on, we will only be computing the occupation measures zi of each user i. F. Best response of player i Let all users other than user i use the multi-policy u−i . Then user i has an optimal stationary best response policy which is independent of the initial state x0 [11]. Let the set of optimal stationary policies of user i be denoted as Bi (z−i ). We can compute the elements of this set from the following Linear program. Find zi∗ ∈ Zi that satisfies, {Ti (zi∗ , z−i ) − Ti (zi , z−i ) ≥ 0 :, ∀zi ∈ Zi },  (10)  where the polyhedron Zi associated with user i is represented as,  Zi = X  (  zi ∈ R|Hi |×|Pi | : Pi (zi ) ≤ P i ,  zi (pi , hi ) = πi (hi ), ∀ hi ∈ Hi ,  pi ∈Pi  )  zi (pi , hi ) ≥ 0, ∀ (hi , pi ) ∈ Hi × Pi . We note that Zi is the set of all occupation measures of user i corresponding to i-feasible stationary policies. The set of allQoccupation measures of all users is represented as Z := i∈N Zi . We denote E(Zi ) as the set of extreme points/vertices of the polyhedron Zi . It is to noted that, the set of occupation measures Zi of each user i is nonempty as the policy of never transmitting satisfies all the constraints describing the polyhedron Zi . IV. E XISTENCE AND C OMPUTATION E QUILIBRIUM  OF  NASH  In this section we show how to compute a constrained Nash equilibrium for these games. The existence of equilibria for these games was shown in theorem 2.1, [11] under the assumption that the Markov process resulting from policy of each user is irreducible and has a single ergodic class. As in our models the policy does not affect the Markov chain transition probability, under the assumption of ergodicity of the channel state process, the result follows. The existence of equilibria for the game Γc was also shown in theorem 2, [9].  5  We state and prove the convergence of the best response algorithm proposed in [9] used to compute the equilibrium policies for game Γc . To show this result, we first extend the idea of potential games developed in [21] for normal form games to the constrained Markov games in this paper. We first state the definition of potential function and potential games for the games considered in this work. A. Potential games Definition 2. A function T̂ : Z 7−→ R is called a potential function for the constrained Markov game Γ if for all users i ∈ N , for all multi-policy z−i of all users other than user i and for any pair of policies (zi , ẑi ) of user i, Ti (zi , z−i ) − Ti (ẑi , z−i ) = T̂ (zi , z−i ) − T̂ (ẑi , z−i ).  (11)  The Markov game where each user use the expected time average reward T̂ is considered as the Markov potential game corresponding to the Markov game Γ. It is to be noted that the expected time average reward T̂ for a Markov potential game is the same for all users, that is, a Markov potential game is an identical interest game. One can also observe from the above definition that the equilibria for the Markov potential game are the same as the equilibria for the corresponding Markov game. We now give a sufficient condition for for verifying whether there exist a potential function these Markov games. Theorem 1. Suppose for a Markov game Γ there exist a function t̂ : H × P 7−→ R such that for all users i ∈ N , for all channel power (h−i , p−i ) tuples of all users other than user i and any pair of channel power tuples (hi , pi ) and (ĥi , p̂i ) of user i the function ti (h, p) satisfies, ti (hi , pi , h−i , p−i ) − ti (ĥi , p̂i , h−i , p−i ) =  (12)  t̂(hi , pi , h−i , p−i ) − t̂(ĥi , p̂i , h−i , p−i ). Then there exist a potential function for the Markov game Γ. Furthermore, the constrained Markov game where the immediate reward of each user is t̂ is the Markov potential game corresponding to the Markov game Γ. Proof: The proof of this theorem is a consequence of lemma 2.10 in [21]. Let us consider the Markov game Γ̂, where user i has the immediate reward t̂. In this case we the denote the immediate reward of user i, when when user i has channel hi and employs power pi and other users use multi-policy z−i z as R̂i −i . Also denote T̂ (zi , z−i ) as the time-average expected reward of each user for this game. The result (11) follows from expressions (12), (7) and (8). The next result shows that the Markov game Γs is the Markov potential game corresponding to the Markov game Γn . Theorem 2. Γs is the Markov potential game of the Markov game Γn . Proof: The reader can verify the following identity, tni (hi , pi , h−i , p−i ) − tni (ĥi , p̂i , h−i , p−i ) =  (13)  ts (hi , pi , h−i , p−i ) − ts (ĥi , p̂i , h−i , p−i ). The proof then follows from theorem 1. As the equilibria policies of the Markov potential game and the corresponding Markov game are the same, following theorem 2, we can restrict our analysis to the Markov game Γn . We now state the algorithm stated in [9] used to compute the equilibrium policies for a Markov game when it has a potential function. The algorithm is used to compute Epsilon constrained Nash equilibrium(ǫ-CNE) which we define below. Definition 3. A multi-policy u ∈ U is called a ǫ-CNE if for each player i ∈ N and for any vi ∈ Ui such that [u−i , vi ] is feasible, Ti (u) − Ti (u−i , vi ) ≥ −ǫ.  (14)  Algorithm 1 Best Response Algorithm 1: Set k = 0. 2: Find a z(0) ∈ Z. 3: Set ǫ > 0. 4: while z(k + 1) 6= z(k) do 5: for i = 1 : |N |, do 6: ẑ−i (k) ← z1 (k + 1), .., zi−1 (k + 1)  , zi+1 (k), .., z|N | (k) . 7: Set zi ∈ Bi (ẑ−i (k)). 8: if |Ti (zi , ẑ−i (k))− Ti (zi (k), ẑ−i (k))| ≤ ǫ, then 9: Set zi (k + 1) ← zi (k). 10: else 11: zi (k + 1) ← zi . 12: k ←k+1 We analyze the Best response algorithm and prove its convergence in two cases. With the error approximation ǫ = 0, the algorithm is shown to terminate in finite time only if the best response in the algorithm is computed using the simplex algorithm. We assume here that the simplex algorithm computes a vertex solution of a linear program, that is the solution of the linear program is a extreme point of the corresponding polyhedron. In the case the error ǫ is strictly positive we show that in finite number of iterations the best response algorithm computes an ǫ− CNE. Theorem 3. 1) Let the error approximation ǫ = 0. If the best response policy for each user in the best response algorithm is a vertex of the polyhedron Zi , then the algorithm terminates in finite number of iterations in a CNE. 2) Let the error approximation ǫ > 0. Then the Best response algorithm terminates in finite number of iterations in an ǫ− CNE. The proof of this theorem is provided in Appendix A. It is noted that the above theorem shows the existence of a CNE which are the vertices of the set of feasible occupation measures Zi for each user i. In particular, this implies the existence of CNE policies for games Γs and Γn which are vertices of the set of occupation measures. We also note that the ǫ− best response will find a CNE which are close to the vertices of feasible occupation measures.  6  It is to be noted that the best response algorithm only guarantees convergence to a CNE, however depending upon the ordering of users, the initial policy chosen for the algorithm may converge to different CNE if there exist multiple CNE’s. In the next subsection we analyze global maximizers of identical interest games. B. Global Maximizer of Identical Interest Markov games Definition 4. A multi-policy z ∗ ∈ Z is the global maximizer of an identical interest Markov games Γ with time average reward T , if for any multi-policy z ∈ Z T (z ∗ ) ≥ T (z).  (15)  We now state the result which shows there exist a global maximum, whose each single policy is a vertex of the polyhedron formed by the set of feasible occupation measures. Theorem 4. There exist a multi-policy z ∗ ∈ Z which is the global maximizer of the identical interest Markov game Γ. Each policy zi∗ corresponding to the multi-policy z ∗ is a vertex of set of feasible occupation measure Zi for each user i. Proof: As the function T (z) is continuous over a compact set Z, there exist a global maximum point z ∗ ∈ Z. Now we prove there exist a pure policy ẑi ∈ Zi for each user i, such that T (ẑ) = T (z). We give the proof for two users which can be easily extended to N users. Let ẑi denote the best response policy of user i, which is a vertex of the polyhedron Zi , when user 2 plays policy z2∗ . Then we have T (ẑi , z2∗ ) ≥ T( z ∗ ), but as z ∗ is global maximizer we have T (ẑi , z2∗ ) = T (z ∗ ). This implies (ẑi , z2∗ ) is also a global maximizer. Similarly we can find ẑ2 which is a vertex of the polyhedron Z2 such that T (ẑi , ẑ2 ) = T (ẑi , z2∗ ), hence we have T (ẑ) = T (z ∗ ) and each policy zi∗ corresponding to the multipolicy z ∗ is a vertex of set of feasible occupation measure Zi for each user i. We can easily show that the global maximum of an identical interest Markov game is a CNE. The above results shows that the game Γs has a global maximizer and a CNE. In the next subsection, we define dominating policies for Markov games.  V. T IME  AVERAGE E XPECTED REWARD AT LARGE INTERFERENCE  We consider in this section only one user. At each time slot n, the user i gets a one-step reward of ti (hi [n], pi [n], I) = log2 (1 +  hi [n]pi [n] ), N0 + I  (17)  where I is the interference faced by the user and (hi [n], pi [n]) is her/his channel state-power action pair. User i wants to maximize her/his time average expected reward, i.e maximize, ti (I, zi ) = lim inf T →∞  subject to  T 1 X βi E (ti (hi [n], pi [n], I)), T n=1 u  pi (zi ) := lim sup T →∞  T 1 X βi E (pi [n]) ≤ P i . T n=1 u1  where βi is the initial distribution of player i and zi is the occupation measure corresponding to the stationary policy ui computed using (6). The optimal policy zi to the above optimization problem considered by user i is independent of the initial distribution βi and can be computed by the corresponding linear program LP (i, I). Find a policy zi∗ which maximizes o n (18) ti (I, zi ) : zi ∈ Zi , where  ti (zi , I) :=  X  ti (hi , pi , I)zi (hi , pi ).  (hi ,pi )  C. Dominating Policies Definition 5. Let Ẑi ⊆ Zi denote a subset of policies of all users other than user i. A policy zi∗ for user i is called a dominating policy over the set Ẑi if for any multi-policy z−i in the set Ẑi of all users other than user i, we have for all policies zi of user i, Ti (zi∗ , z−i ) ≥ Ti (zi , z−i ).  used to analyze games Γn and Γs at large number of users. To motivate the analysis of the games Γn and Γs at large number of users, we first understand how the expected time average maximizing policy of user i behaves in presence of a very large deterministic interference. This analysis in itself is interesting as well as provides intuition on the behavior of the previously mentioned Markov games at large number of users. The next section addresses this analysis.  (16)  The policy zi∗ is called strictly dominating over the set Ẑi if the above inequalities are strict. If the set Ẑi = Zi in the above definition, the definition becomes the standard definition of a dominating policy. It also follows that if there exist a multi-policy z ∗ of all users such that the policy zi∗ of user i is a dominating policy over the set of all feasible occupation measures Zi , then the multi-policy z ∗ is a CNE. In case the policy zi∗ is a strictly dominating policy, the CNE is unique. This simple observation will be  We denote Si (I) denote the set of solutions to the linear program LP (i, I). is to be noted that the set of solutions Si (I) is equal to the set of best response Bi (z−i ) of user i in the Markov game Γn when users other than user i use the policy where they do not transmit any data and the noise variance N0 in the system is equal to 1 + I. In this section, we characterize the set of solutions Si (I) of the linear program LP (i, 1) at large interference. To do so, we first define the notion of the outer-limit of a sequence of sets. Definition 6. We define the outer limit limI→∞ S i (I) of the sequence of sets Si (I) as the interference I tends towards infinity as, ∞ [ ∞ n \ limI→∞ S i (I) := zi ∈ Zi : zi ∈ Si (Ik ), n=1 k=n  o where Ik → ∞ as k → ∞ for some sequence {Ik } .  7  The outer limit contains all policies of user i which belong to each set Si (Ik ) of solutions for some sequence Ik of interference which tends towards infinity as the index k tends towards infinity. The outer limit can be thought upon as the set of all infinitely often occurring optimal solutions of the linear programs LP (i, I) as the interference I tends toward to infinity. We show the outer limit limI→∞ S i (I) is a nonempty set in the next subsection.  A. Analysis as the interference I tends towards infinity. At very large interference I, the function ti (hi , pi , I) can be approximated as hi pi [25], [26]. By considering this approximation the objective function ti (zi , I) of the linear program can be approximated as, X (hi pi )zi (hi , pi ). li1 (zi ) :=  respectively. Then consider stationary policies zi of user i such that,  P l  if rj=l π(hji )pqi ≤ P i , a = q π(hi ), Pr zi (hli , pai ) := 0, if j=l π(hji )pqi ≤ P i , a 6= q  Pr  j q π(hli )α(pai ), if j=l π(hi )pi > P i ,  where α(·) is a probability distribution on the set Pi which satisfies, π(hli )  r X  pai α(pai )  = pi −  a=1  q r X X  zi (hji , pâi )pâi .  j=l+1 â=1  Let the set Qi denote the above class of policies. To understand, why the policies in this set are structured, we observe the following properties of policies in the set Qi . 1) The function ui (·/hki ) : Hi → Pi defined by  (hi ,pi )  We now consider the linear program (LP (1, 1)) induced by this approximation. Find a policy zi∗ which maximizes, o n (19) li1 (zi ) : zi ∈ Zi . The set of solutions of this linear program is denoted by the set Si1 and any policy in this set is called a 1-sensitive optimal solution. We now show that the outer limit limI→∞ S i (I) of the sequence of solutions Si (I) of the linear program LP (i, I) is a subset of the solutions of the above linear program.  Theorem 5. The outer limit limI→∞ S i (I) of the sequence of sets Si (I) as the interference I tends towards infinity is a non empty subset of the set Si1 of all 1-sensitive optimal solutions. Proof: We note that each value of the interference I, the linear program LP (I, i) always gives a solution which is a vertex of the polyhedron Zi . As the number of vertices of the polyhedron Zi is finite, we can find a subsequence {Im } such that a single vertex zi ∈ Zi is a subset of the set of solutions Si (Im ) for each integer m. Clearly zi lies in the set limI→∞ S i (I). This proves that the set limI→∞ S i (I) is nonempty.Let the policy zi lie in the set limI→∞ S i (I). Hence there exists, a subsequence {Ik } such that the policy zi lies in the set of solutions Si (Ik ) for each integer k and limk→∞ Ik = ∞. Hence we have, Ik · ti (Ik , zi ) ≥ Ik · ti (Ik , ẑi ), ∀ẑi ∈ Zi . Si1 .  Hence, in the limit we have zi ∈ We note that in most cases the outer limit limI→∞ S i (I) is a strict subset of the set Si1 of all 1− sensitive optimal solutions. In the next theorem we describe all the 1− sensitive optimal policies. We do so by first defining the following set of structural policies. Let us represent the set Hi and Pi as sets of strictly increasing positive real numbers, i.e., n o n o Hi = 0, h1i , · · · , hri and Pi = 0, p1i , · · · , pqi  ui (pki /hli ) =  zi (hli , pki ) , πi (hli )  is monotonically increasing function of the channel gain Pr hli for all index l satisfying j=l π(hji )pqi ≤ P i . 2) TheP average power expenditure in each channel state hli , i.e a pai zi (hli , pai ) is increasing in the channel index l.  The next result shows that the all the policies in the above set are optimal solutions of the linear program LP (i, 1).  Theorem 6. The set Si1 of solutions of linear program LP (i, 1) is equal to the set Qi of structured policies. This proof is also provided in appendix B. In general there exist infinite 1− sensitive optimal solutions. Only in the case when the power set Pi = {0, p1i } is the solution unique. In this case the outer limit limI→∞ Si (I) is equal to the set Si1 af all 1− sensitive optimal solutions. We next provide a algorithm which computes one of the policies of the set Si1 . Algorithm 2 Infinitely invariant Optimal Policy forPl = r : 0 do r if j=l π(hji )pqi ≤ P i then Set zi (hli , pqi ) = π(hli ). SetP zi (hli , pki ) = 0, ∀k ∈ {0, P1,r · · · , q − 1}. r else if j=l π(hji )pqi > P i ≥ j=l+1 π(hji )pqi then Find a ∈ {0, P1, · · · , q − 1} with . π(hli )pai ≤ rj=l π(hji )pqi − P i ≤ π(hli )pa+1 i Set zi (hli , pai ) =  Set Set else Set Set  Pr  q j j=l+1 π(hi )pi −P i a+1 a pi −pi  π(hli )pa+1 + i  zi (hli , pa+1 ) = π(hli ) − zi (hli , pai ) i zi (hli , pki ) = 0 ∀k 6= {a, a + 1}  zi (hli , p0i ) = π(hli ). zi (hli , pki ) = 0, ∀k ∈ {1, 2, · · · , q}.  We will show in the next subsection that the policy generated by the algorithm 2 is the unique policy belonging to the outer limit limI→∞ Si (I).  8  B. Infinitely invariant Optimal Solution In the previous subsection, we considered policies that belonged to the set Si (I) of solutions of the linear program LP (i, I) infinitely often as the interference tends to infinity. In this subsection, we consider policies that belong to every set Si (I) always after some finite value of interference I0 . Definition 7. We define the inner-limit of the sets Si (I) as the interference I tends towards infinity as \ Si (I), limI→∞ Si (I) = I≥I0  where I0 is some finite interference. We refer to any point zi belonging to the set limI→∞ Si (I) as a infinitely invariant optimal solution. W The interference I0 is called the threshold interference of user i. If there exist a infinitely invariant optimal solution, then it can be shown that the inner limit limI→∞ Si (I) is a subset of the outer limit limI→∞ Si (I). If both the sets are equal, then we say that the limI→∞ Si (I) exists and define lim Si (I) = limI→∞ Si (I) = limI→∞ Si (I).  I→∞  We show the existence of an infinitely invariant optimal solution for the hypothetical case when the set of feasible solutions Zi has two vertices zi1 and zi2 . This proof motivates the definitions later defined in this subsection. The proof for the existence of an infinitely invariant optimal solution for a general set of feasible solutions Zi is presented later. Theorem 7. Assume that the polyhedron Zi is equal to the convex closure of two policies zi1 and zi2 . Then there exist an infinitely invariant optimal solution. Proof: We define the set Ki (ki ) as the set of channelpower pair (hi , pi ) whose product is equal to the signal to unit noise variance (snr) ki , that is, o n (20) Ki (ki ) = (hi , pi ) ∈ Hi × Pi : hi pi = ki .  Let Ki denote the set of possible distinct snr possible values. Suppose the policies zi1 and zi2 satisfy for each distinct snr ki X X zi2 (hi , pi ). (21) zi1 (hi , pi ) = (hi ,pi )∈Ki (ki )  (hi ,pi )∈Ki (ki )  We can now see in such a case, the expected time average reward ti (zi1 , I) and ti (zi2 , I) under the two policies are the same for any interference I. Therefore, we have the interference I = 0 as the interference threshold and the inner limit limI→∞ Si (I) is equal to the set of feasible policies Zi for all interference I greater than zero. On the other hand suppose condition (20) does not hold true, then we will show by contradiction the existence of an interference threshold. So let us assume there does not exist any finite interference threshold I0 , then the inner limit limI→∞ Si (I) is empty. We know that there exist a vertex solution of the linear program LP (i, I) for each interference I. Hence, either of the vertices zi1 or zi2 belong to the set Si (I) of linear program LP (i, I) for each interference I. As the inner limit limI→∞ Si (I) is empty, we can find a sequence {Ik }k≥1 of distict interference  values, such that the set Si (Ik ) contains only the vertex zi1 for odd values of index k and only the vertex zi2 for even values of index k. Consider the real valued continuous function f (I) defined as f (I) := ti (zi1 , I) − ti (zi2 , I), then the function f (Ik ) is strictly positive at odd values of indices k and strictly negative at even indices. This implies, we can find another sequence {Iˆk } such that f (Iˆk ) = 0 and Ik ≤ Iˆk ≤ Ik+1 . By mean-value theorem, we can find another sequence {Ik∗ } such that the derivative f 1 (I) of the function f (I) evaluates to zero at the values {Ik∗ } and Iˆk ≤ Ik∗ ≤ Iˆk+1 . However, the derivative f 1 (I) = X X −ki zi1 (hi , pi ) − zi2 (hi , pi ), (1 + I + ki )(1 + I) ki  (hi ,pi )∈Ki (ki )  is a rational function of the variable I and can have at most |Ki | real numbers I such that f 1 (I) = 0. Since the derivative f 1 (I) of the function f (I) evaluates to zero more than |Ki | number of times, we have f 1 (I) = 0 for all I, and hence the function f (I) is a constant function for all interference value I. However, it can be easily seen that the function f (I) decreases to 0 as the interference I tends towards infinity, which contradicts our claim that f (I) is a constant function. Hence, there exist an in infinitely invariant optimal solution. In the proof of theorem 7, we differentiated between the policies zi1 and zi2 , only if the condition (21) did not hold true. We generalize this concept now. Given any occupation measure zi of user i, we define a random variable Zi which takes snr value ki with probability zi (ki ) X zi (hi , pi ). zi (ki ) = Pr(Zi = ki ) = (hi ,pi )∈Ki (ki )  We refer to the distribution of this random variable as the snr distribution corresponding to the policy zi . Note that for any policy zi of user i, the time average expected reward of user i when she/he faces an interference I is equal to X ti (ki , I)zi (ki ), ti (zi , I) = ki ∈Ki  where the one step reward ti (ki , I) of user i at snr ki and interference I is,  ki  ti (ki , I) = log2 1 + . 1+I  We restate condition (21) in the next theorem. The second condition of the next theorem gives a sufficient condition for verifying when two policies have the same snr distribution.  Theorem 8. Suppose zi1 and zi2 are two distinct policies of user i. 1) If the snr random variables Zi1 and Zi2 corresponding to distinct policies zi1 and zi2 have the same distribution, then the policies give rise to the same the time average expected reward of user ifor any interference I, i.e. ti (zi1 , I) = ti (zi2 , I), ∀I ≥ 0.  9  2) Suppose time average expected reward of user i evaluated at the two policies zi1 and zi2 are the same at |Ki |−1 distinct interference values {Ik }, 1 ≤ k ≤ |Ki |−1 , then the snr random variables Zi1 and Zi2 corresponding to distinct policies zi1 and zi2 have the same distribution. The proof is provided in Appendix D. The above theorem ensures that we need only to consider the snr distribution corresponding to a policy, as two distinct policies with the same snr distribution give the same time average expected reward. We state the generalization of theorem 7 for a general polyhedron Zi of user i in the next theorem. Theorem 9. There exist an infinitely invariant optimal solution for user i. Further more, if policies zi1 and zi2 are infinitely invariant optimal solutions, then the snr distributions corresponding to these policies are same. The proof is provided in Appendix D. Using theorem 9 and theorem 8, we note that for any interference I larger than the threshold interference I0 , the infinitely invariant policies give the same time average expected reward. In the next theorem, we show that the outer limit is precisely the set of all infinitely invariant optimal policies. Theorem 10. The outer limit limI→∞ Si (I) is equal to the inner limit limI→∞ Si (I) for any user i. Proof: We have already established in theorem 9 that the inner limit limI→∞ Si (I) is nonempty. We shall prove the outer limit limI→∞ Si (I) contains the inner limit limI→∞ Si (I) thus proving theorem 10. Let policy zi1 be an infinitely invariant optimal solution and policy zi2 belong to the outer limit limI→∞ Si (I). Then there exist a sequence {Ik } of interference terms which tends towards to infinity as k tends towards to infinity and the policy zi2 belongs to the set Si (Ik ) of solutions of the linear program LP (i, Ik ) for each index k. Hence we can find at least |Ki | − 1 distinct interference {Il } terms such that the sets Si (Il ) contain both policies zi1 and zi2 . Thus by theorem 8, part 2, we have the snr distributions corresponding to these policies are the same. Hence from theorem 8, part 1 both policies give rise to the same time average expected reward. Thus the policy zi2 also belongs to inner limit limI→∞ Si (I). As a corollary of theorem 5 and theorem 10, the set Si1 of all 1−sensitive optimal solutions contains all the infinitely sensitive solutions of user i. In the case the set Pi of power of user i is of the form {0, p1i }, the set Si1 is unique, thus one can solve the approximate linear program LP (i, 1) to compute the infinitely invariant solution. However, in general the set Si1 contains policies other than the infinitely invariant policies. In the next subsection we shall show that algorithm 2 computes an infinitely invariant optimal solution. C. Computation of an infinitely invariant optimal solution. In the previous subsection, we defined and showed the existence of an infinitely invariant optimal solution and also proved that the outerlimit contains only these policies. In this subsection we shall show how to compute an infinitely invariant optimal solution. We shall also show that there exist  only one such policy. We do so by refining the set Si1 of 1− sensitive optimal solutions by considering the corresponding linear program LP (i, 2). Find a policy zi∗ of user i which minimizes, n o li2 (zi ) : zi ∈ Zi , li1 (zi ) = li,1 , (22) where  li2 (zi ) :=  X  (hi pi )2 zi (hi , pi ),  (hi ,pi )  and li,1 := max{li1 (zi ) : zi ∈ Zi } We denote the set of optimal solutions of the linear program LP (i, 2) as Si2 and any policy belonging to this set is called a 2− sensitive optimal policy. We note that by definition, any 2− sensitive optimal policy is also 1− sensitive optimal policy. The next theorem shows that the previously defined set Si2 contains all the infinitely invariant optimal solutions. Theorem 11. Let zi be an infinitely invariant optimal solution of user i. Then the policy zi is 2− sensitive optimal and belongs to the set Si2 . Furthermore this set only contains one policy and is computed by algorithm 2. The proof is provided in Appendix E. It is to be noted that the above theorem establishes that it is sufficient to solve LP (i, 2) to compute the unique infinitely invariant optimal solution. Theorem 11 also shows that rather than solving the linear program LP (i, 2), we can use algorithm 2 to compute this policy. We note that the objective functions li1 (zi ) and li2 (zi ) can be formulated in terms of snr distribution corresponding to the policy zi as, X ki zi (ki ) = E(Zi ), li1 (zi ) = ki ∈Ki  and  li2 (zi ) =  X  ki2 zi (ki ) = E(Zi2 )  ki ∈Ki  respectively. One now notices that the infinitely sensitive optimal policy minimizes the variance of the snr random variable Zi over all policies which maximizes the mean of the snr random variable Zi . In the next section we shall prove that under simple sufficient conditions an infinitely invariant optimal solution is the unique Nash equilibrium of the Markov game Γn at sufficiently but finite large number of users. VI. M ARKOV  GAMES AT LARGE NUMBER OF USERS  In this section, we shall prove that the infinitely invariant optimal solution is a strictly dominating policy over the set of all rational policies of the other users for any Markov game, once the number of users crosses a particular threshold. As we assume that all the users are rational, at sufficiently large number of users, the infinitely invariant optimal solution for each user is the Nash equilibrium policy of that user. To achieve this result, we shall first characterize the set of all rational polices of each user. We shall show that the set of all  10  policies where each user’s corresponding snr random variables has a strictly positive mean contains his/her rational policies. Then we shall show that at large number of users, when all users employ rational policies, the best response of each user is to employ her/his infinitely invariant optimal solution. Recall the Markov game where each user treats interference as noise was denoted as Γn . We note that the Markov game Γn when the set of users is N is denoted from now on as ΓN . The set of all possible users from now on is the set of strictly positive integers Z+ and any set of users N is a strict finite subset of the set Z+ . Since we shall analyze any game with the i′ th user in perspective, we always consider that user i belongs to the set of users N unless otherwise mentioned. We first define the idea of an Infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policy for each user. Definition 8. A sequence of policies {zi∗ }i≥1 are called the Infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policies of all possible users, if there exists a natural number N ∗ such that for all the finite subsets of users N ⊆ Z+ satisfying |N | ≥ N ∗ , we have for all users i in the set N , the policy zi∗ is a Nash equilibrium policy of each user i for the Markov game ΓN . It is to be noted that the existence of this sequence of policies ensures that we need to use the best response algorithm only if the cardinality of set N of users does not exceed the threshold N ∗ . As we shall show that infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policy of any user is his/her infinitely invariant optimal solution, once the number of users exceed N ∗ , we can simply use algorithm 2 to compute the infinitely invariant optimal policy and find all the Nash equilibrium policies. As algorithm 2computes this policy in O(|Hi ||Pi |) steps, we can compute the Nash equilibrium policies of the Markov game in O(|N ||Hi ||Pi |) steps. Suppose the set N of users is strictly greater than the number N ∗ , then with any addition of a new user, we would no longer need to recompute the equilibria policies using the best response algorithm, but rather just find the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policy of the new user and adjoin this policy to the older set of equilibrium policies. This new set of policies will constitute a Nash equilibrium for the new Markov game obtained by addition of this new user. Similarly if any user leaves the system and yet the residual number of users in the system still remains greater than the threshold, we would not need to recompute the Nash equilibria of this new system, but continue using the previously computed policies. We also recall that the best response algorithm required each user to know the channel statistics of the other users. However, if an infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium exist, then this condition is no longer required and each user only needs to know his/her channel gain and channel statistics. In the next subsection we analyze the set of rational policies of each user. A. Set of all best responses Previously, we defined the best response set Bi (z−i ) of user i as the set of all his/her policies, which maximizes his time average expected reward Ti (zi , z−i ) when users other than user i use multi-policy z−i . We use this set to define the set (Bi ) of all best response of user i.  Definition 9. The set (Bi ) of all best response of user i is the set of all policies zi of user i, such that each policy belonging to this set belongs to the best response set Bi (z−i ) for some multi-policy z−i of users other than user i, for some set N of users containing user i. It can be observed that the all the possible rational policies for any game in which that user is involved is contained in the N set of all his/her best response policies. If we denote Z−i as the set of all feasible multi policies of users other than user i, when the set N containing the number i denotes all the users in the game, then the set Bi of all best responses of user i can be obtained as, [ [ Bi = Bi (z−i ). N N ⊆Z+ z−i ∈Z−i  As all the users are rational, policies not in the set Bi (z−i ) are not used by user i. This implies that rational user need not consider polcies in the set Zi /Bi (z−i ). We summarize the result below. Theorem 12. Let ΓN be a Markov game involving the set N of users. If z−i denotes the policies of users other than user i, then for any policy zi not in the set Bi of all his/her best responses, there exist another policy zi∗ in the set Bi such that, Ti (zi∗ , z−i ) > Ti (zi , z−i ). With the previous theorem in mind, we can restrict our attention to simply the policies belonging to the set Bi of all best responses. Hence, we provide a important property of policies in this set. We denote Mi (γ) as the set of all policies of user i, for which the corresponding snr random variable Zi has a mean which is bounded below by a strictly positive real number γ, i.e, n o X Mi (γ) = zi ∈ Zi : E(Zi ) = ki zi (ki ) ≥ γ . ki ∈Ki  In the next theorem, we show that the set Bi of all best responses of user i is a subset of the set Mi (γ) of all policies of user i for some strictly positive real number γ. Furthermore we provide a lower bound on this real number γ. Recall that, we defined the set Pi of power levels of user i as the ordered set of strictly increasing positive real numbers, o n Pi = 0, p1i , p2i , · · · , pqi . We also represent the stationary probability of user i being in channel state 0 as πi (0).  Theorem 13. The set Bi of all best responses of user i is equal to the set Mi (γ0,i ) of all policies of user i for some strictly positive constant γ0,i . Also there exist a policy zi of user i such that corresponding snr random variable Zi has a mean equal to γ0,i . Furthermore the positive constant γi,0 satisfies, γi,0 > min(h1i p1i (1 − π(0), h1i P i ). The proof of this theorem is provided in Appendix F . We call the constant γ0,i as the interference multiple of user i. One can observe that the interference multiple γ0,i is strictly  11  positive if the stationary probability of user i being in channel state 0 as πi (0) is strictly less than 1. We note that this condition always holds true, as the contrapositive of this condition would imply that user i always has a channel state where he/she cannot get any strictly positive reward. In such a case user i does not need to be considered as one of the user playing the Markov game and can be neglected. Similarly the power constraint P i of user i needs to be positive which we assume is always true. We also note that from theorem 13 the average interference caused by user i when he/she employs any policy belonging to his set of all best responses is at least the interference multiple γ0,i . In the next subsection, we show the existence of infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policies. VII. E XISTENCE  OF THE INFINITELY INVARIANT  NASH  EQUILIBRIUM  In this section at large number of users, we will show that the infinitely invariant optimal policy for each user strictly dominates every other policy whenever the other users play policies from their set of all best responses. We shall then later show that the infinitely invariant optimal solution becomes the unique Nash equilibrium at large number of players. We state the next result. Theorem 14. Suppose the interference multiple γi,0 for each user i satisfies γi,0 ≥ γ0 and for some strict positive constant γ0 . Then there exist a natural number N0,i for each user i such that for all sets |N | ≥ N0,i + 1, the infinitely invariant optimal policy of user i strictly dominates all her/his policies in the game ΓN , when all users other than user i use policies in the set of all best responses. The proof is provided in Appendix G. One can observe in the proof of this theorem that the number Ni,0 is a function of only the set of channel and power Hi and Pi , the interference threshold I0,i of user i and the lower bound γ0 . We note that the above theorem does not guarantee that the infinitely invariant optimal policy strictly dominates all policy when all the other players play arbitrarily. Indeed, if all the users other than users i do not transmit at all, then the best response of user i belongs to the set Si (0) of solutions of the linear program LP (i, 0). In general, the infinitely invariant optimal solution need not belong to the latter set and will give a strictly lower time average reward as compared to any policy in the set Si (0). However all the users being rational always transmit from their best response set and hence the previously mentioned scenario does not occur. We note that if we can ensure that the threshold N0,i is bounded above for all users i by some constant, then there exists an infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium. This result is in general not easy to show. However in some cases as stated next, the result is easily provable. Proposition 1. [Finite sets of symmetric users] Suppose the set Z+ of strictly positive integers can be partitioned into finite sets N1 , N2 , · · · , Nk such that if user i and user j belong to some set Nl , 1 ≤ l ≤ k, then both the users satisfy P i = P j , Hi = Hj , Pi = Pj and πi = πj .  TABLE I PARAMETERS Model 1 2 3 4  N 7 7 7 7  r 2 3 4 4  q 5 4 3 3  Power Constraints 2.1 ×1(6) 1.9 ×1(5) 1.35 ×1(6) (1.35,1.25,1.25,1.35,1.35,1.35,1.35)  N∗ 4 4 5 6  It is to be noted that the above assumptions ensures that the users belonging in the same partition, then they are symmetric and every optimization problem for each of the user in that partition is the same. Under the above assumption we show the uniform boundedness of the interference thresholds. Theorem 15. Suppose the assumption "Finite sets of symmetric users " holds true. Then the numbers Ni,0 defined in the statement of theorem 14 is uniformly bounded, that is for each user i, we have Ni,0 ≤ maxj∈Z+ Nj,0 < ∞. Proof: First we note that under the assumptions of symmetric users, the lower bound γ0 is strictly positive. It can also be verified by that the interference threshold I0,i is upper bounded by maxj∈Z+ Ij,0 . Hence the number N0,i is the same for all users i belonging to the same partition. Hence, we have Ni,0 ≤ maxj∈Z+ Nj,0 < ∞. VIII. N UMERICAL R ESULTS We present the numerical results for models with the following parameters. The largest channel index is represented by the variable r. Hence the cardinality of the set of channel states is r + 1. The total number of power levels is equal to q + 1, where the variable q represents the largest power index. We represent the set of channel states and power levels as {0, r1 , 2r , · · · , 1} and{0, 1, · · · , q} . We consider a Markov fading model [10] with transition probabilities as λ0,0 = 1/2, λ0,1 = 1/2; λq,q−1 = 1/2, λq,q = 1/2; λi,i = 1/3, λi,i+1 = 1/3, λi,i−1 = 1/3 (1≤i≤q−1), where λi,j represents the probability of going from state index i to state index j. N is the number of users in the system and 1(k) is a k length row vector of all ones. Table I shows the various model parameters and the minimum number of users at which the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium becomes the equilibrium policy. Each element of table II contains values of two stationary policies. The first policy is the Nash equilibrium policy of the first user in the models when only two users are in the system (we neglect the last five users in all models). The second policy is the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policy of the first user. We observe that the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policy is different from the NE policy in all the models. Indeed, more number of users are required for the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policies to become a Nash equilibrium. To further illustrate this point, we plot in figure (1) the two norm distance between the NE policy and the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policy of the first user against the total number of users in the system. We can observe from the figure that for models 1 and 2, it requires at least four users for the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policy to become a  12  TABLE II S TATIONARY POLICIES ui (pi , hi )  0 1,1 0,0 0,0 0 1,1 .3333,1 0,0 0,0 0 1,1 1,1 0,.15 0,0 0,0 0 1,1 1,1 0,.15 0,0 0,0  0  3 0,0 .2333,0 0,0 3 0,0 0,0 1,.3333 0,0 3 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 1,1 3 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 1,1  4 0,0 0,0 1,0 4 0,0 0,0 0,.6667 1,1  5 0,0 0,0 0,1  -2  -4  -6  -8  -10  -12 2  2.5  3  3.5  4  4.5  5  5.5  6  6.5  Total No. of users (N)  Figure (2): Plot of the difference of the rewards of the first user, when all users use their Nash equilibrium policies and when all users use their infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policies, against the number of users.  A PPENDIX A P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.  Fig. 1. l2 norm difference 1.8  Model1 Model2 Model3 Model4  1.6  A. Proof of Theorem 3, part (1) Proof: The Markov game Γ is a potential game, then from definition 2 there exist a function T : Z → R, such that for each user i, Ti (zi , z−i )−Ti (ẑi , z−i ) = T (zi , z−i )−T (ẑi , z−i ), for all multi-policy z−i of all users other than user i and for any pair of policies (zi , ẑi ) of user i. It can now be observed in the best response algorithm, for each index k,  1.4  1.2  Two Norm Difference  × 10 -3 Model1 Model3 Model4 Model2  Power −→ 2 0,0 .7667,.5667 0,0 2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 2 0,0 0,0 .85,0 1,0 0,0 2 0,0 0,0 .85,0 1,0 0,0  1 0,0 0,.4333 0,0 1 0,0 .6667,0 0,0 0,0 1 0,0 0,0 .15,.85 0,0 0,0 1 0,0 0,0 .15,.85 0,0 0,0  2  Reward Difference  Channel ↓ Model1 0 1 2 Model2 0 1 2 3 Model3 0 1 2 3 4 Model4 0 1 2 3 4  Fig. 2. Reward Difference  1  0.8  T (z(k)) ≤ T (zi (k + 1), ẑ−1 (k)) ≤ (23) T (z2 (k + 1), ẑ−2 (k)) ≤ · · · ≤ T (z(k + 1)). (24)  0.6  0.4  0.2  0 2  2.5  3  3.5  4  4.5  5  5.5  6  6.5  Total No. of Users(N)  Figure (1) :Plot of two norm distance between the NE policy and the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policy of the first user against the total number of users in the system.  NE, while for models 3 and 4, we need at least 5 and 6 number of users respectively. Note that the model 3 and 4 differ only by user 2 and 3 having lesser power constraint. Due to this, the infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policies become NE policies only once the total number of users crosses 6. In figure (2) we plot the difference of the rewards of the first user, when all users use their Nash equilibrium policies and when all users use their infinitely invariant Nash equilibrium policies, against the number of users. As mentioned in table (I) and seen in figure (1), we see that the rewards of the users have become the same, once the total number of users crosses the integer N ∗ .  7  We first prove that the algorithm terminates. To do so, assume the contrary, then for any index k, we have z(k) 6= z(k + 1). Since by assumption, the best response policy of each user i computed in the algorithm is a vertex of the polyhedron, from finiteness of the vertices of each polyhedron Zi , we have that the sequence {z(k)} can only take values from a finite set. This implies there exist at least two indices k < j such that, z(k) = z(j). Without loss of generality (WLOG), assume that k, j are the smallest indices which satisfy the latter property. Thus we have from (23), T (z(k)) = T (z(k + 1)) = · · · = T (z(j − 1)) = T (z(j)). In particular all inequalities in (23) hold with equality for the index k. As the best response algorithm ensures for all users i, zi (k + 1) = zi (k) if T (zi (k + 1), ẑ−1 (k)) = T (zi (k), ẑ−1 (k)), we have z(k) = z(k + 1). This clearly contradicts our assumption. We have shown there exist a index k such that z(k) = z(k+ 1). Assume it its the smallest such index. Now we have from (23), T (z(k)) = T (z(k + 1)). In particular, all inequalities in (23) hold with equality for index k. Hence, z(k) is a CNE.  7  13  B. Proof of Theorem 3, part (2) Proof: We first show that the sequence {T (z(k))} converges to a finite number. Calculation (23) shows that the sequence {T (z(k))} either converges to a finite real number or infinity. Denote this limit by T ∗ . Let z ∗ be a limit point of the sequence z(k) generated by the best response algorithm and let z(km ) be the subsequence that converges to z ∗ . As the function T is continous, the sequence T (z(km )) converges to T (z ∗ ). As the set Z is compact, by Weierstrass theorem sup{T (z) : z ∈ Z} is finite. Since z ∗ ∈ Z as the set Z is closed, it follows that T (z ∗ ) < ∞. As the sequence {T (z(k))} converges to T ∗ = T (z ∗ ) which is finite. We now prove that the algorithm will terminate. suppose not, then for each index k, we have for some user i, Ti∗ (k) := Ti (zi , ẑ−i (k)) − Ti (zi (k), ẑ−i (k)) ≥ ǫ. As T (z(k + 1)) − T (z(k)) =  X  Ti∗ (k) > ǫ,  i∈N  we have from calculation (23) that the number T ∗ = ∞. This contradicts our previous proof of the statement that number T ∗ < ∞. Hence the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate. Let k be the smallest index such that for all users i, we have Ti∗ (k)  = Ti (zi , ẑ−i (k)) − Ti (zi (k), ẑ−i (k)) ≤ ǫ.  It can now be verified that z(k) is a ǫ− CNE. C. Proof of Theorem 3, part (2) We first show that the sequence {T (z(k))} converges to a finite number. Calculation (23) shows that the sequence {T (z(k))} either converges to a finite real number or infinity. Denote this limit by T ∗ . Let z ∗ be a limit point of the sequence z(k) generated by the best response algorithm and let z(km ) be the subsequence that converges to z ∗ . As the function T is continous, the sequence T (z(km )) converges to T (z ∗ ). As the set Z is compact, by Weierstrass theorem sup{T (z) : z ∈ Z} is finite. Since z ∗ ∈ Z as the set Z is closed, it follows that T (z ∗ ) < ∞. As the sequence {T (z(k))} converges to T ∗ = T (z ∗ ) which is finite. We now prove that the algorithm will terminate. suppose not, then for each index k, we have for some user i, Ti∗ (k) := Ti (zi , ẑ−i (k)) − Ti (zi (k), ẑ−i (k)) ≥ ǫ. As T (z(k + 1)) − T (z(k)) =  X  Ti∗ (k) > ǫ,  i∈N  we have from calculation (23) that the number T ∗ = ∞. This contradicts our previous proof of the statement that number T ∗ < ∞. Hence the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate. Let k be the smallest index such that for all users i, we have  A PPENDIX B P ROOF OF THEOREM 6. We first prove a simple lemma which states that any optimal policy to the linear program LP (i, 1) will either ensure that the user transmits with peak power, or the average power utilized by this policy will be equal to the average power constraint. Lemma 1. Let zi denote a 1−sensitive optimal policy. If Pi ≥ Pr x q x=1 π(hi )pi , then for all index x, ( π(hxi ), if a = q x a zi (hi , pi ) := 0, otherwise. Pr x q However if pi < x=1 π(hi )pi , then the expected average power constraint pi (zi ) under the policy zi is equal to P i .  Proof: We leave the reader to prove P the first condition. We prove the second case. Assume pi < rx=1 π(hxi )pqi , let policy zi∗ be a 1−sensitive optimal policy. Suppose zi∗ does not satisfy P i (zi∗ ) = P i . It follows then that for at least one channel index x∗ we have the occupation measure zi∗ (pqi ) < ∗ ∗ π(hxi ). Let the set of power indices a for which zi∗ (pai , hxi ) 6= 0, a 6= q be A. Choose ǫ such that 0<ǫ<  Consider the policy ẑi such that  ǫ ∗ x a ∗  zi (hi , pi ) − |A| , if a ∈ A, a 6= q, x = x , ẑi (hxi , pai ) := zi∗ (hxi , pqi ) + ǫ, if x = x∗ , a = q,   ∗ x a zi (hi , pi ), otherwise. The reader can now verify the following, q q X X ∗ ∗ ∗ x∗ a zi (hi , pi ) = ẑi (hxi , pai ) = π(hxi ), a=0  a=0    X pi (ẑi ) = pi (zi∗ ) + ǫ pqi − pxi /|A| ≤ P i , x∈A  and  li1 (ẑi ) − li1 (zi∗ ) =  X ∗ ∗ ǫ (pqi · hxi ) − (pai · hxi )/ |A|) > 0. a∈A  Hence by contradiction zi∗ cannot be optimal. We now use the above lemma to complete the proof of theorem 6. The reader is asked to prove 6 using Pr theorem x q π(h )p lemma 1 under the condition pi ≥ i i on the x=1 average power constraint of user i. We consider the case where this condition does not hold true. Proof: Assume that zi∗ be a 1−sensitive optimal policy. Then by lemma 1, we know that pi (zi ) = P i > 0. We first ∗ consider the case thatP for some channel state x∗ , zi∗ (pqi , hxi ) < ∗ π(hxi ), even though rj=x∗ π(hji )pqi ≤ P i . We will show this is not possible. We first observe that, ∗ q xX −1 X  Ti∗ (k) = Ti (zi , ẑ−i (k)) − Ti (zi (k), ẑ−i (k)) ≤ ǫ. It can now be verified that z(k) is a ǫ− CNE.  P i − pi (zi ) P . pqi − a∈A pai / |A|  ≥  zi∗ (pai , hji )pai  j=0 a=0 r X  Pi −  j=x∗  = Pi −  q r X X  j=x∗ a=0  π(hji )pqi ≥ 0.  zi∗ (pai , hji )pai  14  We note that if the above set of inequalities hold with equal∗ ∗ ities, then zi (pqi , hxi ) = π(hxi ), which contradicts our asPx∗ −1 Pq j a a sumption. So we assume that, j=0 a=0 zi (pi , hi )pi > 0. ∗ This implies that there exist a channel index x̂ < x such that x̂ a∗ for some index a∗ , such that pa∗ i > 0 and zi (hi , pi ) > 0. Consider the policy ẑi of user i,  ∗  zi∗ (hx̂i , pai ) − ǫi , if , a = a∗ , x = x̂,    ∗ x̂   if a = 0, x = x̂ zi (hi , 0) + ǫi , ∗ q x a ∗ x ẑi (hi , pi ) := zi (hi , pi ) + ǫ2 , if , a = q, x = x∗ ,  ∗   zi∗ (hxi , 0) − ǫ2 , if , a = 0, x = x∗ ,    z ∗ (hx , pa ), otherwise, i i i ∗  where the constants ǫi > 0 and ǫ2 > 0 satisfies ǫi ·pai = ǫ2 ·pqi . The reader can verify that for each channel index x, q X  ẑi (hxi , pai )  =  q X  zi∗ (hxi , pai )  π(hxi ).  =  It also follows that  ∗  pi (ẑi ) − pi (zi∗ ) = ǫ2 · pqi − ǫi · pai = 0, ∗  li1 (ẑi ) − li1 (zi∗ ) = hxi · ǫ2 · pqi − hx̂i · ǫi · pai > 0, Hence we have exhibited a policy ẑi that strictly performs better than the optimal policy zi∗ . Therefore, by contradiction, we ∗ q x∗ x have for the optimal policy zi∗ , zP i (pi , hi ) = π(hi ), whenever r j q ∗ the channel index x satisfies, j=x∗ π(hi )pi ≤ P i . x∗ denote the maximal channel that Pr index such PLet r j q j q P . Hence we have π(h )p π(h )p > ∗ ∗ i i i ≤ i i j=x +1 j=x ∗ P i If zi is an optimal policy of the linear program LP (i, 1), then it should satisfy zi∗ (hji , pqi ) = π(hji ) for all channel indices j ≥ x∗ +1. We also note that the value of the objective function li1 (zi ) evaluated at the policy zi∗ is equal to li1 (zi∗ ) =  q r X X  ∗  zi∗ (hri , pqi )hji pli  ≤  zi (hji , pli )hji pli  +  ≤  ≤  q X  π(hji )hji pqi  +  ∗ hxi (P i  q X  −  j=x∗ +1  Pi =  =  j=x∗ +1  +  q x X X  l=0  ∗  zi∗ (hxi , pli )pli = P i −  (25)  zi∗ (hji , pli )pli .  j=0 l=0  q X  j=x∗ +1  |Ki |−1  X   log2 1 +  X j=1  π(hji )pqi ),  One can get equalities in the expressions (25) if the optimal policy zi∗ is such that q X  Let us consider the function  f (x) =  ∗  π(hji )pqi  ti (kl , Ij )α(j) = 0.  j=1  |Ki |−1  j=x∗ +1  q X  X  1  where the last inequality follows from, pi (zi∗ )  |Ki |−1  π(hji )hji pqi  j=x∗ +1  j=0 l=0  We prove the result by contradiction. Suppose the matrix Mi is not invertible, then we can find real numbers α(j), 1 ≤ j ≤ |Ki | − 1, not all of them zero, such that for all non zero snr values kl ∈ Ki /{0},  π(hji )pqi ).  kl  α(j). 1 + Ij  Hence the function f (x) is zero at all points x ∈ Ki . By the mean value theorem, we have the derivative f 1 of the function f is zero at |Ki | − 1 distinct real numbers. However the derivative of f (x) is‘  π(hji )hji pqi  q X  ∗  zi (hji , pli )hix pli +  Mi (l, j) = ti (kl , Ij ),  j=1  j=x∗ +1  j=0 l=0  q x∗ X X  q X  Lemma 2. Let Mi denote a (|Ki | − 1) × (|Ki | − 1) matrix with the (l, j) entry as  f (x) =  j=0 l=0  q x X X  We first prove a result which is used to prove theorem 8.  Proof: Recall that, the one step reward  kl  ti (kj , Il ) = log2 1 + 1 + Ij  and ∗  A PPENDIX C P ROOF OF THEOREM 8  where kl are the distinct non zero snr terms in the set Ki and Ij , 1 ≤ j ≤ |Ki | − 1, are distinct interference values. Then the matrix Mi is invertible.  a=0  a=0  In such a case, one can verify that the policy zi∗ belongs to the set Qi . This proves that the set of 1−sensitive optimal solutions Si1 is a subset of the set of structural results Qi . To prove the converse, observe that for any two distinct solutions zi1 and zi2 belonging to the structural results Qi , we have li1 (zi1 ) = li1 (zi2 ), hence, all policies in the set Qi are 1−sensitive optimal policies.  α(j) . (1 + x + Ij )  Clearly the derivative is a rational function and can have at most |Ki | − 2 real numbers x where f 1 (x) evaluates to zero. Hence f 1 (x) = 0 for all real numbers x, therefore f (x) is a constant function. However the function f (x) is zero at x = 0 and nonzero at any x strictly positive if the numbers α(j) are not all zero. Hence by contradiction, the real numbers α(j) are all zero for all 1 ≤ j ≤ |Ki | − 1. Hence the matrix Mi is invertible. We now prove theorem 8. Proof: Let zi1 and zi2 be two policies of user i such that the corresponding snr random variables Zi1 and Zi2 have the distribution. Then the time average expected reward of user  15  i for any interference I evaluated at the first policy zi1 is ti (zi1 , I) = X X ti (ki , I)zi1 (ki ) = ti (ki , I)zi2 (ki ) = ti (zi2 , I).  Lemma 3. Let Pi = {0, p1i , · · · , pqi } denote the set of power of user i. If x is a constant such that 0 ≤ x ≤ pqi , denote ⌊x⌋ to be the index j which satisfies,  This proves the first part of theorem 8. Now suppose the time average expected reward of user i evaluated at the two polices are the same for |Ki |− 1 distinct interference values {Ik }, 1 ≤ k ≤ |Ki |, then the vector {(zi1 (kl ) − z12 (kl )), kl ∈ Ki /{0}} belongs to the null set of the transpose of the matrix Mi . As the matrix Mi is invertible by the previous lemma, we have for all snr terms kl ∈ Ki /{0}, zi1 (kl ) = z12 (kl ). This implies that the two snr distribution are the same proving the second part of theorem 8.  Then the unique probability distribution {α(j) : 0 ≤ j ≤ |Pi |} which minimizes, X j (pi )2 α(j),  ki ∈Ki  ki ∈Ki  A PPENDIX D P ROOF OF THEOREM 9 Proof: Let E(Zi ) = {zi1 , zi2 , · · · , zim } denote the set of vertices of the polyhedron Zi of feasible occupation measures of user i. As the set Zi is the convex closure of its vertices, we have Zi = conv(E(Zi )). We first show that given any distinct two vertices zij and zik of the previously defined set, there exist a finite real number I(zij , zik ) such that for all interference I ≥ I(zij , zik ), either the condition ti (zik , I) ≥ ti (zij , I) or ti (zik , I) ≤ ti (zij , I). To prove this claim, assume the result is not true, then we can find at least |Ki | − 1 distinct values of interference Ik , 1 ≤ k ≤ |Ki | such that ti (zik , Ik ) = ti (zij , Ik ) for all these values of interference. However by theorem 8 part (2), we have that the two snr distributions are equal, i.e zik = zij . Again by theorem 8 part (1), we have for all interference I ≥ 0, ti (zik , Ik ) = ti (zij , Ik ) which contradicts our assumption. Hence, by contradiction, there exist a finite finite real number I(zij , zik ) such that for all interference I ≥ I(zij , zik ), either the condition ti (zik , I) ≥ ti (zij , I) or ti (zik , I) ≤ ti (zij , I). We can now see that for all interference n o I ≥ I0 = max I(zij , zik ) : (zij , zik ) ∈ E(Zi ) ,  there exist a vertex zil such that the condition ti (zil , I) ≥ ti (zik , I) for all vertices zik ∈ E(Zi ) holds true. As the function ti (zi , I) is a linear function in the variable zi and the set Zi of feasible occupation measures is the convex closure of its vertices, we have vertex zil belongs to the set Si (I) of optimal solutions of the linear program LP (i, I) for all interference I ≥ I0 . This shows the existence of an infinitely invariant optimal solution for user i. Suppose there exists two infinitely invariant optimal solutions, then from theorem 8, part (2) and the definition of an infinitely invariant optimal solution, we can show the corresponding snr distribution are the same. A PPENDIX E P ROOF OF THEOREM 11. The following lemma is required for the proof of theorem 11.  ⌊x⌋ = min{j ∈ {0, 1, · · · , q} : pji ≥ x}.  j∈Pi  subject to, X  pji α(j) = α,  (26)  j∈Pi  where 0 ≤ α ≤ pqi , is the probability distribution  ⌊α⌋+1 pi −α   , if j = ⌊α⌋  pi⌊α⌋+1 −p⌊α⌋ i ∗ α (j) = 1 − α∗ (⌊α⌋), if j = ⌊α⌋ + 1    0, otherwise.  Proof: We first note that if X is a real valued random variable such that it lies between two real number a and b, then V ar(X) ≤  (b − a)2 . 4  (27)  To prove this claim observe that V ar(X) ≤ E(X − c)2 for 2 and using the all real numbers c, by choosing c = (b+a) 2 fact that the random variable X lies between a and b almost surely, the result follows. Note that if we denote Xα to be the random variable that takes values in the set Pi with probability distribution α(·), then the linear program in lemma 3 can be restated as, finding a random variable Xα with distribution α(·) which minimizes, V ar(Xα ) : Xα ∈ Sα ,  (28)  where the set Sα denotes the set of random variables Xα that takes values in the set Pi with probability distribution α(·) and has mean α, i.e. E(Xα ) = α. Let us denote aα and bα as the numbers belonging to the set P i such that the random variable Xα with distribution α(·) lies almost surely between aα and bα . Assume aα < aα , then we have from 27, (bα − aα )2 : Xα ∈ Sα }. 4 One can easily show that the right hand side in the above expression is minimized when aα = ⌊α⌋ and bα = ⌊α⌋ + 1. The distribution α(·) which minimizes the left hand side in the above expression can now be evaluated to be the distribution stated in lemma 3. We now provide the of theorem 11. min{V ar(Xα ) : Xα ∈ Sα } ≤ min{  A. Proof of theorem 11 Proof: We have already established from theorem 5 and theorem 10 that any infinitely invariant optimal solution is 1−sensitive optimal. Let zi1 be an infinitely invariant optimal  16  solution and zi2 be any other 1−sensitive optimal policy. Then, for any interference I greater than interference threshold I0 ,   X hi p i 1 zi1 (hi , pi ) log2 1 + ti (zi , I) = 1+I (hi ,pi )   X hi p i 2 log2 1 + ≥ ti (zi , I) = zi2 (hi , pi ). 1+I (hi ,pi )  At sufficiently large interference I, we have  X  k  ∞ (−1)k+1 hi pi hi p i = . log2 1 + 1+I k 1+I k=1  As both policies  zi1  and  zi2  are 1−sensitive optimal, we have  0 ≤ ti (zi1 , I) − ti (zi2 , I) =  k ! ∞ X X (−1)k+1 hi pi  hi pi  k=2  k  1+I  (zi1 (hi , pi ) − zi2 (hi , pi )).  hi pi  Hence the infinitely invariant optimal solution is also 2−sensitive optimal. Define the index k ∗ such that, k ∗ = max{k :  r X  pqi π(hji ) > P i }.  j=k  By theorem 6 we know that for any 1−sensitive optimal policy, we have for channel indices k > k ∗ the policy zi satisfies zi (hki , pqi ) = π(hki ). Hence any policy zi which is 2−sensitive optimal minimizes, ∗  q k X X  (hli pki )2 zi (hli , pki )  r X  +  π(hli )pqi ,  l=k∗ +1  l=0 k=0  over all policies zi in the set Si1 of 1−sensitive optimal policies. Hence any such policy zi minimizes, q X  ∗  ∗  (hki pki )2 zi (hki , pki ),  k=0  subject to q X  r X  π(hji )pqi }.  j=l+1  The uniqueness of this solution follows from lemma 3 and theorem 6. The reader can verifying the correctness of algorithm 2 by checking that it computes the unique 2−sensitive optimal policy. A PPENDIX F P ROOF OF THEOREM 13 We first characterize the set Bi of all best responses of user i. The first lemma shows that set is a compact set.  Proof: Recall that that set Bi of all best responses of user i, was defined as, [ [ Bi (z−i ), Bi = N N ⊆Z+ z−i ∈Z−i  N where Z−i denotes the the set of all feasible multi-policies of users other than user i, when the set N containing the number i denotes the set of all users in the game ΓN . Let C(Zi ) denote the class of all the subsets of the set Zi , which are obtained as convex closure of finitely many vertices of the polyhedron Zi . As the vertices of the polyhedron Zi is finite, we have the class C(Zi ) itself as finite. We note that the set Bi (z−i ) contains all the best response policies of user i, when users other than user i play multi-policy z−i . As this set contains all the set of solutions of a linear program, we have that this set is the convex closure of finitely many points, each point being a vertex of the set Zi of feasible occupation measures of user i. This implies that the best response set Bi (z−i ) belongs to the class C(Zi ) for each multi-policy z−i of users other than user i. As the class C(Zi ) is finite, we have that the set Bi is a finite union of compact sets. Hence Bi is compact. We now define the set M∗i (0) as the set of all policies of user i, for which the corresponding snr random variable Zi has a mean strictly greater than zero, i.e, o n X ki zi (ki ) > 0 . M∗i (0) = zi ∈ Zi : E(Zi ) = ki ∈Ki  ∗  (pki )2 zi (hki , pki ) = P i −  r X  π(hli )pqi ,  l=k∗ +1  k=0  and  a = min{l ∈ {0, 1, · · · , q} : pli ≥ P i −  Lemma 4. The set Bi of all best responses of user i is a compact set.  Multiplying the above expression by I 2 and letting I tend toward infinity, we have X X −(hi pi )2 zi2 (hi , pi ) −(hi pi )2 zi1 (hi , pi ) ≥ hi pi  where the index a itself satisfies,  q X  ∗  ∗  zi (hki , pki ) = π(hki ).  k=0  Using lemma 3, the 2−sensitive optimal policy zi satisfies ∗ zi (hki , pli ) :=  l a+1 Pr π(hi )pi + j=l+1 π(hji )pqi −P i   , if l = a  pa+1 −pa i i k∗ a 1 − zi (hi , pi ), if l = a + 1    0, otherwise,  The next lemma shows that that set Bi of all best responses is a subset of the previously defined set. Lemma 5. The set Bi is a subset of the set M∗i (0) of the set of all policies of user i, for which the corresponding snr random variable Zi has a mean strictly greater than zero.  Proof: Let zi be a policy belonging to the set Bi of all best response policies of user i. Then for some finite subset N ⊆ N and for some multi-policy z−i of users other than user i, the policy zi belongs to the set Bi (z−i ) of best responses of P user i. Suppose ki ∈Ki ki zi (ki ) = 0, we shall then prove that this policy cannot belong to the set Bi (z−i ) by exhibiting a policy zi∗ which provides a strictly better time average reward, i.e, Ti (zi∗ , z−i ) > Ti (zi , z−i ). Since the policy zi satisfies  17  ki zi (ki ) = 0, then we have that zi (hxi , pai ) > 0 if and only if x = 0 or x 6= 0, a = 0. This implies that the average reward Ti (zi , z−i ) at policy zi is equal to 0. Consider the policy zi∗ of user i which satisfies, P i  if x = r, a = q  pqi , ∗ x a x zi (hi , pi ) := π(hi ), if 0 ≤ x ≤ r − 1, a = 0,   0, otherwise. P  ki ∈Ki  Note that the above policy allows user i to only transmit whenever her/his channel gain is the best, i.e., x = q. It can be easily verified that Pi (zi∗ ) = Pi , hence the policy is feasible and that the average reward obtained at this policy Ti (zi∗ , z−i ) > 0. Hence we have shown that Ti (zi , z−i ) = 0 < Ti (zi∗ , z−i ). The next lemma shows that any policy belonging to the set Bi of all best responses of user i will either ensure that the user transmits with peak power whenever her/his channel gain is strictly positive or the expected time average power utilized by this policy is equal to the average power constraint P i .  Lemma 6. Let N ∈ N denote any subset of users containing user i. Let z−i denote any multi-policy of all users other than user i, then any optimal best response zi∗ ∈ Bi (z−i ) has property. If the power constraint Pi ≥ Pr the following x q π(h )p , then for all index x > 0, i i x=1 ( π(hxi ), if a = q ∗ x a zi (hi , pi ) := 0, otherwise. Pr However if Pi < x=1 π(hxi )pqi , then the expected average power constraint pi (zi∗ ) under the policy zi∗ is equal to P i . Also, the optimal policy zi∗ satisfies zi∗ (0, 0) = πi (0). The proof is similar to proof of lemma 1 in Appendix B and hence omitted. We now give proof of theorem 13 Proof: Consider the function f : Zi :→ R defined as, X X f (zi ) = hi pi zi (hi , pi ). hi ∈Hi pi ∈Pi  Note that the function f (zi ) is the expected value of the snr random variable Zi corresponding to the occupation measure zi of user i. As the set Bi of all best responses of user i is a compact set (Lemma 4 ) and the function f (zi ) is continuous, by Weierstrass theorem , there exist a policy zi∗ ∈ Bi such that, f (zi∗ ) ≤ f (zi ), ∀ zi ∈ Bi . As the policy zi∗ ∈ Bi , by lemma 5, we have f (zi∗ ) > 0, hence we choose the interference multiple γi,0 = f (zi∗ ). Then we have the set Bi of all best responses is subset of the set Mi (γi,0 ) of all policies of user i for which the corresponding snr random variable Zi has mean at least γi,0 . We will now complete the proof by providing the lower bound on the interference multiple γi,0 . Consider first the case that the power constraint P i of user i satisfies, Pi ≥  r X  whenever her/his channel gain is strictly positive. In this case we have for all policies zi ∈ Bi , the function f (zi ) satisfies, f (zi ) ≥  r X  π(hxi )hxi pqi > (1 − π(0))h1i p1i .  x=1  On the other hand if the condition 29 does not hold true, then by lemma 6, we have for every policy zi in the set Bi of all best responses satisfies zi (0, 0) = π(0). Also by lemma 6 every policy zi in the set satisfies Pi (zi ) = P i . As the set Bi of all best responses is a subset of the set Zi of all feasible policies, we have, ( ) XX f (zi∗ ) ≥ min hi pi zi (hi , pi ) : zi ∈ Zi∗ , hi  pi  where the set Zi∗ is described as, n Zi∗ = zi ∈ R|Hi |×|Pi | , Pi (zi ) = P i XX hi  pi  zi (0, pli ) = 0, ∀ 1 ≤ l ≤ q, o zi (hi , pi ) = 1, zi (0, p0i ) = π(0) .  It can now be verified that in this case, f (zi∗ ) > h1i P i . Hence we have that the interference multiple γi,0 for user i satisfies, γi,0 > min(h1i p1i (1 − π(0), h1i P i ).  A PPENDIX G P ROOF OF THEOREM 14 In this appendix, for a finite set N of users containing user i, and other users j ∈ N /{i} using policy zj , we denote the expected time average reward of user i and immediate reward of user i at channel state-power action pair (hi , pi ) z as Ti (zi , z−i , N ) and Ri −i (hi , pi , N ). These changes make explicit the dependence of these functions on the set N which will be varying in this appendix. As the proof of the theorem 14 is involved, we first provide a brief outline of the argument. Let policy zj of user j 6= i belong to his/her set Bj of all best responses. Let zi and zi∗ denote any policy and the infinitely sensitive optimal policy of user i. We first show that there exist a natural number N0,i (zi ) depending upon the policy zi of user i, such that for all sets N of users satisfying |N | ≥ N0,i (zi ), the difference between the expected time average rewards when user i employs his/her infinitely sensitive optimal policy zi∗ and policy zi is strictly positive, i.e., for all z−i ∈ B−i , |N | ≥ N0,i (zi ) Ti (zi∗ , z−i , N ) − Ti (zi , z−i , N ) > 0.  To show this result, we first observe the above expression can be expressed as,  π(hxi )pqi .  Ti (zi∗ , z−i , N ) − Ti (zi , z−i , N ) =  x=1  Then by lemma 6, all the policies in the set Bi of all best responses ensure that user i transmits with peak power pqi  (29)  X  hi ,pi  z  Ri −i (hi , pi , N )(zi∗ (hi , pi ) − zi (hi , pi )).  18  We divide the above expression into two terms at sufficiently large P number of users depending on the condition that the sum j6=i Zj of the snr random variables j 6= i corresponding to the policies zj , exceeds the interference threshold I0,i of user i, i.e., Ti (zi∗ , z−i , N ) − Ti (zi , z−i , N ) = A(zi∗ , zi , N ) + B(zi∗ , zi , N ).  (hi ,pi )∈Ki (ki )  where A(zi∗ , zi , N ) = X  hi ,pi     X   ti (h, p)1{Pj6=i Zj ≤I0,i }  h−i ,p−i  Y    zj (hj , pj )  j6=i ∗ (zi (hi , pi ) − zi (hi , pi )) ,  and B(zi∗ , zi , N ) = X  hi ,pi  We state some definitions and lemmas required to prove this theorem. These definitions and theorems convert the tedious calculations involved in this proof in terms of the snr random variables which are more easier to handle. Recall that the snr distribution of the snr random variable Zi of user i corresponding to the policy zi was given as X zi (hi , pi ). zi (ki ) = Pr(Zi = ki ) =     X   ti (h, p)1{Pj6=i Zj >I0,i }  h−i ,p−i  Y j6=i    zj (hj , pj )  (zi∗ (hi , pi ) − zi (hi , pi )) .  The idea behind the above breakup comes from two observations. The first observation is that for all interference I greater than I0,i , the infinitely sensitive optimal policy zi is the optimal solutions of the linear program LP (i, I) and hence the term B(zi∗ , zi , N ) will be strictly positive. The other observation comes from theorem 13, that when all users other than user i use policies from their set of best response policies, they will always transmit, causing interference of at least γj,0 . By ensuring that the interference multiple γj,0 greater than P some strictly positive constant γ0 , we ensure that the sum j6=i Zj will eventually exceed the interference threshold I0,i . By using Hoeffding inequality and this second observation, we will show that the term A(zi∗ , zi , N ) can be made arbitrary small. Eventually at large number of users, the term A(zi∗ , zi , N ) will become much smaller than the term B(zi∗ , zi , N ), and hence their sum will become positive. Rigorously, we will show that, A(zi∗ , zi , N ) = Ω(− exp(−(|N | − 1)),  =Ω  βl+1 (zi , zi∗ ) l+1  (|N | − 1)  −    1 |N | − 1  l+2 !  ,  where l ∈ {0, 1} depending upon the policy zi of user i. If the policy zi is not 1−sensitive optimal, then l = 0 otherwise l = 1. One can now easily observe the existence of the number N0,i (zi ). The functions βl+1 (zi , zi∗ ) of the policies zi and zi∗ will be shown to strictly positive for each l ∈ {0, 1}. Then to complete the proof, we observe that for all sets N of users satisfying |N | ≥ max{N0,i (zi ) : zi ∈ Ei (Zi )} where Ei (Zi ) is the set of all vertices of the polyhedron Zi , we have for all policies zj ∈ Bj , j ∈ N /{i}, for all policies zi ∈ Zi , Ti (zi∗ , z−i , N ) − Ti (zi , z−i , N ) > 0.  (30)  and the snr random variable Zi takes values in the set Ki of possible distinct snr values. Given policies zi of each user i belonging to the finite set N of users, and the corresponding snr random variables Zi , we define, 1) The immediate reward of user i at snr ki when users {j ∈ N , j 6= i} has snr random variables Zj as, !# " ki Z−i P , Ri (ki , N ) = EZ−i log2 1 + N0 + j6=i Zj where the expectation is taken with respect to the snr distributions of the random variables Zj , j 6= i. 2) The expected time average reward of user i, when every user {j ∈ N } has snr random variables Zj as, i h Z Ti (Zi , Z−i , N ) = EZi Ri −i (ki , N ) ,  where the expectation is taken with respect to the snr distribution of the random variables Zi . The next lemma shows that the above definitions are just another way of stating the previously defined immediate reward and The expected time average reward of user i when all users j ∈ N use policy zj .  Lemma 7. Let each user j ∈ N use policy zj and Zj denote the snr random variables corresponding to these policy zj . 1) Let the channel state-power action pair (hi , pi ) satisfy hi pi = ki , then we have z  Z  Ri −i (ki , N ) = Ri −i (hi , pi , N ). 2) For each user i, we have Ti (Zi , Z−i , N ) = Ti (zi , z−i , N ).  and B(zi∗ , zi , N )  The set Ki (ki ) was defined as o n Ki (ki ) = (hi , pi ) ∈ Hi × Pi : hi pi = ki  Proof: Recall that the immediate reward of user i at channel state hi and power action pi , when other users use multi-policy z−i is X X Y z Ri −i (hi , pi , N ) = [ zl (pl , hl )]ti (h, p). (31) h−i ∈Hi p−i ∈P−i l6=i  Here the function ti (h, p) is the immediate reward of user i, when the signals from the other users is treated as noise, i.e., ! hi p i P . ti (h, p) = log2 1 + N0 + j6=i hj pj z  One can represent the immediate reward Ri −i (hi , pi , N ) as i h  hi pi , (32) Ez|N | Ez|N |−1 · · · Ez1 log2 1 + N0 +P hj pj j6=i  19  where each expectation is successively taken with respect to the policy {zj , j 6= i}, from j = 1 to |N |. Recall also that the snr random variable Zj takes value kj = hj pj with probability X zj (hj , kj ), P(Zj = kj ) = (hj ,pj )∈Kj (kj )  and alternates its sign if it is even. From theorem 11, we note that policy zi ∈ Sil /Sil+1 for any l ∈ {0, 1} if and only if βl (zi , zi∗ ) = 0 and βl+1 (zi , zi∗ ) > 0. We also define the following functions and constants,  where the set Kj (kj ) = {(hj , pj ) : hj pj = kj }. One can now show that the expression (32) is equal to i h  EZ|N | EZ|N |−1 · · · EZ1 log2 1 + N0 +hPi pi Zj ,  X  g(Z−i , N ) = N0 +  Zj .  j∈N /{i}  j6=i  k i = max {ki : ki ∈ Ki } , k = max k i .  where each expectation is successively taken with respect to the distribution of the snr random variable {Zj , j 6= i}, from j = 1 to |N |. Hence we have, Z Ri −i (ki , N )  =  i  a = max{k, I0,i }, fi (ki ) = zi∗ (ki ) − zi (ki ).  z Ri −i (hi , pi , N ).  The expected time average reward of user i at policy zi when other users use multipolicy z−i is, X z Ri −i (hi , pi , N )zi (hi , pi ) Ti (zi , z−i , N ) =   c1 (a, N ) = exp 4γ0 a −  hi .pi  c2 = 2  and thus    γ0 k  2  t2 (k)2 (|N | − 1)    .  (  3 ) k , c5 = max 1, N0  Ti (zi , z−i , N ) = Ti (Zi , Z−i , N ). c5 (a) = −c5 (1 + 2 exp(4γ0 a)) . We now provide the proof of theorem 14. Certain tedious calculations in this proof are provided later for ease of the proof. Proof: We denote the set Si0 as the set of all feasible policies Zi of user i. Recall that the infinitely sensitive optimal policy of user i is the 2−sensitive optimal policy and belongs to the set Si2 . As this set is a subset of the set Si1 of all 1−sensitive optimal policies, we have that Si2 ⊆ Si1 ⊆ Si0 and Si2 ∪ Si1 /Si2 ∪ Si0 /Si1 = Si0 . Let Zj be the snr random variable corresponding to the policy zj of user j 6= i. We note that given the assumptions stated in theorem 14, the policy zj belongs to the set Bj of all best responses of user j. Hence by theorem 13 and the stated conditions in theorem 14, the mean E[Zj ] of the snr random variable Zj satisfies E[Zj ] ≥ γ0 . We denote Zi∗ and Zi to be the snr random variable of user i corresponding to the infinitely optimal sensitive policy zi∗ and any arbitrary policy zi ∈ Si0 . Note that, by the uniqueness of the 2−sensitive optimal policy, if the policy zi ∈ Si2 , then the policies zi and zi∗ are the same, hence we consider only policies zi ∈ / Si2 . We also define the following functions of the policies zi and zi∗ for user i. Define for l ∈ {0, 1, 2}, X (ki )l (zi∗ (ki ) − zi (ki )), βl (zi , zi∗ ) = (−1)l+1 ki  where P(Zi = ki ) = zi (ki ) and P(Zi∗ = ki ) = zi∗ (ki ). Note that, the function βl (zi , zi∗ ) computes the difference in the l-th moment between the snr random variables Zi∗ and Zi  l+2  k N0  l+1  k N0    −    c4 (a, N ) = c3 (a, N ) −    c3 (a, N ) = −    k N0  c1 (a, N ).  c1 (a, N ).  Now using lemma 7, the difference between the expected average rewards when user i uses policy zi∗ and policy zi , when other users use policy z−i is, Ti (zi∗ , z−i , N ) − Ti (zi , z−i , N ) = Ti (Zi∗ , Z−i , N ) − Ti (Zi , Z−i , N ) = X ki    EZ−i log2 1 +  ki g(Z−i , N )    (zi∗ (ki ) − zi (ki )).  We divide the above summation into two parts, Ti (Zi∗ , Z−i , N ) − Ti (Zi , Z−i , N ) = A(zi∗ , zi , N ) + B(zi∗ , zi , N ), where A(zi∗ , zi , N ) =    X  ki 1{Pj6=i Zj ≤a} fi (ki ), E log2 1 + g(Z−i , N ) ki  B(zi∗ , zi , N ) =  X  E log2 1 + ki  ki g(Z−i , N )    1{Pj6=i Zj >a}    fi (ki ),  20  We provide lower bounds on the two terms when the set N satisfies a + 1. |N | ≥ γ0 These bounds are obtained from the lemmas provided after the end of this proof. We have, from lemma 9 k c1 (a, N ) exp (−c2 (|N | − 1)) . N0 We also have from lemma 12, that if the policy zi of user i belongs to the set Sil /Sil+1 , then term " l+1 # X βr (zi∗ , zi ) ∗ B(zi , zi , N ) ≥ r(N0 + (|N | − 1)k)r r=1 A(zi∗ , zi , N ) ≥ −  −    2k 2N0 + (|N | − 1)γ0  l+2  + c3 (a, N ) exp(−  c2 (|N | − 1)). 4  the difference − Ti (zi , z−i ) ≥  " l+1 X r=1  −    2k 2N0 + (|N | − 1)γ0  l+2  We now have from lemma 13, " l+1 X ∗ Ti (zi , z−i ) − Ti (zi , z−i ) ≥ r=1  −    2k 2N0 + (|N | − 1)γ0  l+2  βr (zi∗ , zi ) r(N0 + (|N | − 1)k)r  + c4 (a) exp(−  #  c2 (|N | − 1)). 4  βr (zi∗ , zi ) r(N0 + (|N | − 1)k)r  + c5 (a) exp(−  #  c2 (|N | − 1)). 4  We let E(Zi ) = {zi1 , zi2 , · · · , zim } denote the vertices of the polyhedron Zi and define the following numbers, Ni1 = inf {(N − 1)γ0 > a} . N ∈N  Ni2 = inf  N ∈N  (  sup zi ∈E(Zi )  " l(zi )+1 X r=1  j6=i  where  c1 (t, N ) = exp 4γ0 t −  t2 (k)2 (|N | − 1)    and c2 = 2(  γ0 2 ) . k  2) And for all finite sets N ,  c  X E[Zj ] 2 ) ≤ 0) ≤ exp − (|N | − 1) . P( (Zj − 2 4 j6=i  Hence we have for all subsets N satisfying a + 1, |N | ≥ γ0  Ti (zi∗ , z−i )  Lemma 8. Let N denote any finite set of users containing user i. Let user j ∈ N use policy zj ∈ Bj . Let Zj be the snr random variable corresponding to the policy zj . 1) Then for any positive real number t, we have for all sets N satisfying (|N | − 1)γ0 > t , X P( Zj ≤ t) ≤ c1 (t, N ) exp (−c2 (|N | − 1)) ,  βr (zi∗ , zi ) − r(N0 + (|N | − 1)k)r  Proof: Note that the snr random variable Zj takes values between 0 and k j = max{kj ∈ Kj }. Hence the random variable Zj −E(Zj ) takes values between −E(Zj ) and kj −E(Zj ). We then have by Hoeffding inequality for all sets N satisfying (|N | − 1)γ0 > t, P  P (Z −E(Z ))  P t− j6=i E(Zj ) j j j6=i P( j6=i Zj ≤ t) = P ≤ |N |−1 |N |−1   P −2(t− j6=i E(Zj )2 P . ≤ exp (k )2 j6=i  j  By theorem 13 and assumptions stated in theorem 14, we have, X E[Zj ] ≥ (|N | − 1)γ0 and kj ≤ k. j6=i  As a consequence we have from the above expression,  2 ! X −2((|N | − 1) t P( Zj ≤ t) ≤ exp γ0 − . |N | − 1 (k)2 j6=i  It can be observed on expanding the square term, that the above expression is the desired result. The proof of the second part of this lemma is similar to the first one and hence it is omitted.  Lemma 9. We have for all sets N satisfying (|N | − 1)γ0 > a the term A(zi∗ , zi , N ) ≥ −  k c1 (a, N ) exp (−c2 (|N | − 1)) , N0  l(zi )+2 #  ) where c2 , c1 (a) constants as defined in lemma 8 and the c2 ≥ −c5 (a) exp(− (|N | − 1)) constant , a = max{Ii,0 , k}. 4 Proof: We have A(zi∗ , zi , N ) ≥ # ! " where l(zi ) ∈ {0, 1} with l(zi ) = 0 if policy zi is not X k 1 2 i 1−sensitive. Define Ni,0 = max{Ni , Ni }. We then have − P 1{Pj6=i Zj ≤a} zi (ki ). E log2 1 + N0 + j6=i Zj for all sets N ∈ N such that |N | ≥ Ni,0 , Ti (zi∗ , z−i ) − ki Ti (zi , z−i ) > 0, for all policies zi ∈ Zi and all policies Using the facts that the snr random variables Zj are positive zj ∈ Bj of user j ∈ N /{i}. and k = maxj {max{kj : kj ∈ Kj }} we have, The next lemma provides an upper bounds on the proba  bility of sum of independent snr random variables Zj correX k A(zi∗ , zi , N ) ≥ − P  Z j ≤ a sponding to policies zj ∈ Bj of user j. N0   2k 2N0 + (|N | − 1)γ0  j6=i  21  Using lemma 8, we get the desired result. The next lemma provides bounds on partial sums of alternating series. ln(1 + x) in the interval x ∈ (−1, 1). The proof of this lemma is given in theorem 8.16 [29]. Lemma 10. Let {an } be a decreasing sequence of real numbers converging to 0. Then the alternating series P∞ n+1 (−1) an converges. Let s represent the series and n=1 sn is its partial sums, i.e„ s=  ∞ X  (−1)n+1 an ,  n=1 n X  sn =  (−1)k+1 ak .  Then, B(zi , zi∗ , N ) =  Then for each integer n ∈ N, 0 < (−1)n (s − sn ) < an+1  ki  where  fi (ki ) = zi∗ (ki ) − zi (ki ). We define the term Sl (Z−i , ki ) for each snr ki and each l ∈ {0, 1} as, r l+1  X (−1)r+1 ki . Sl (Z−i , ki ) = g(Z−i , N ) r r=1  We use the above lemma to prove a technical result required to prove theorem 14. Lemma 11. Let x be a real number in the interval [0, 1), then we have 2 X (x)k  k=1  k  (−1)k+1 <  x3 , 3  ∞ X (x)k k=1  k  where B1 (zi , zi∗ , N ) = X E[(ln(Z−i , ki ) − Sl (Z−i , ki )) 1{Pj6=i Zj >a} ]fi (ki ), ki  and  X  E[Sl (Z−i , ki )1{Pj6=i Zj >a} ]fi (ki ).  ki  x2 . 2  B1 (zi , zi∗ , N )  We have ≥ X E[(ln(Z−i , ki ) − Sl (Z−i , ki )) 1{Pj6=i Zj >a} ]zi (ki ). −  Proof: At x ∈ [0, 1), we have log(1 + x) =  B(zi , zi∗ , N ) = B1 (zi , zi∗ , N ) + B2 (zi , zi∗ , N ),  B2 (zi , zi∗ , N ) =  and log(1 + x) − x <  E[ln(Z−i , ki )1{Pj6=i Zj >a} ]fi (ki ),  We now write the term B(zi , zi∗ , N ) as sum of two terms and provide lower bounds on each of them. This breakup depends upon whether the policy zi is 1− sensitive optimal or not. If the policy zi is not 1− sensitive optimal, then set l = 0, otherwise l = 1. Now let,  k=1  0 < log(1 + x) −  X  ki  (−1)k+1 .  The results stated in the lemma follow from lemma 10. Lemma 12. Suppose the policy zi is not 1−sensitive optimal, then set l = 0, otherwise set l = 1. We then have for all sets N satisfying |N | > γa0 + 1, the term # " l+1 ∗ X β (z , z ) r i i B(zi , zi∗ , N ) ≥ r(N + (|N | − 1)k)r 0 r=1  Using lemma 11 and the fact that the indicator function is bounded above by 1, we have " l+2 # X ki ∗ E B1 (zi , zi , N ) ≥ − zi (ki ), g(Z−i , N ) ki  =−  X h E ki  ki g(Z−i , N )  2k 2N0 + (|N | − 1)γ0  l+2  P    k N0  {  P  j6=i (Zj −  E(Zj ) )>0} 2  i  zi (ki ). { c2 (|N | − 1)). 4 Using lemma 8 and the properties that ki ≤ k and E[Zj ] ≥ γ0 , we have where  l+2  l+2  l+1 2k k k ∗ B (z , z , N ) ≥ − 1 i i c3 (a, N ) = − − c1 (a, N ). 2N0 + (|N | − 1)γ0 N0 N0  −    +1  l+2  1  + c3 (a, N ) exp(−  Proof: We define  ln(Z−i , ki ) = log2 1 +  ki g(Z−i , N )  where g(Z−i , N ) = N0 +  X j6=i  Zj .    .  −  E(Zj ) )≤0} j6=i (Zj − 2  l+2  exp(−  c2 (|N | − 1)). 4  To get a lower bound on the term B2 (zi , zi∗ , N ), observe that # " l+1 X βr (z ∗ , zi ) i ∗ P 1{ j6=i Zj >a} . B2 (zi , zi , N ) = E r(g(Z−i , N ))r r=1  22  Observing that the random variable Zj ≤ k for all users j, we have from 8, we have # " l+1 X βr (zi∗ , zi ) ∗ B2 (zi , zi , N ) ≥ r(N0 + (|N | − 1)k)r r=1  R EFERENCES  [1] S. Hanly and D. Tse, “Multi access fading channels. II. Delay-limited capacities,” IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory , vol. 44, no. 7, 1998 [2] J. Edmonds, “Submodular functions, matroids and certain polyhedra,” in Proc. Calgary Int. Conf. Combinatorial Structures and Applications . (Calgary, Alta, June 1969), pp. 69–87 [3] Z Han, D Niyato, W Saad, T Basar, A Hjorungnes,“Game Theory in Wireless and Communication Networks" [4] L. Lai and H. El Gamal, “The water-filling game in fading multiple·(1 − c1 (a, N ) exp (−c2 (|N | − 1))). access channels, IEEE Transaction of Information Theory, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 2110?122, May 2008. [5] G. Scutari, D P. Palomar, and S Barbarossa, “Optimal Linear PrecodHence we have that the term B(zi , zi∗ , N ) ≥ ing Strategies for Wideband Noncooperative Systems Based on Game " l+1 # Theory Part I: Nash Equilibria" IEEE Transaction on Signal Processing, ∗ X βr (zi , zi ) 56, no. 3, pp. 1230-1249, March 2008. (1 − c1 (a, N ) exp (−c2 (|N | − 1))) [6] vol. G. Scutari, D P. Palomar, and S Barbarossa, “Optimal Linear Precoding r r(N0 + (|N | − 1)k) r=1 Strategies for Wideband Noncooperative Systems Based on Game Thel+2  l+1  ory Part II: Algorithms" IEEE Transaction on Signal Processing, vol. c2 k 2k 56, no. 3, pp. 1250-1267, March 2008. − exp(− (|N | − 1)). − [7] G. He, M. Debbah, E. Altman , “A Bayesian Game-Theoretic Approach 2N0 + (|N | − 1)γ0 N0 4 for Distributed Resource Allocation in Fading Multiple Access Channels” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking On further manipulation, we have Volume 2010. " l+1 # [8] T. Heikkinen, “A potential game approach to distributed power control X βr (zi∗ , zi ) and scheduling”, Computer Networks, vol. 50, no. 13, pp. 2295 2?311, B(zi , zi∗ , N ) ≥ September 2006. r r(N + (|N | − 1)k) 0 r=1 [9] E. Altman, K. Avrachenkov, G. Miller, and B. Prabhu, “Uplink dynamic discrete power control in cellular networks”,INRIA Technical Report 5818, 2006 l+2  [10] E Altman, K Avrachenkov, N Bonneau, M Debbah, R El-Azouzi, c2 2k D Menasch, “Constrained Stochastic Games in Wireless Networks” + c3 (a, N ) exp(− (|N | − 1)), − Globecomm, 2008 2N0 + (|N | − 1)γ0 4 [11] E. Altman, “Constrained cost coupled stochastic games with independent state information to be published” Operations Research Letters, vol. 36, which is the required result. no. 2, Mar. 2008. [12] Lasry, P.L. Lions, “Mean Field Games” Lemma 13. For all subsets N ⊆ N of users satisfying |N | > [13] J.M. O. Gu’eant, J.M Lasry, P.L. Lions, “Mean field games and applications a ” γ0 + 1, the term [14] Y. Hayel, H. Tembine, E. Altman, and R. El-Azouzi, “A Markov Decision Evolutionary Game for Individual Energy Management.” c4 (a, N ) ≥ c5 (a). [15] H Tembine, P Vilanova, M Assaad, M Debbah, “Mean field stochastic games for SINR-based Medium Access Control.” Proof: Note that we have [16] F.MÃ©riaux, S.Lasaulce, H.Tembine, “Stochastic Differential Games and Energy-Efficient Power Control.” Dynamic Games Applications   (2013) 3:3–23 t2 c1 (a, N ) = exp 4γ0 a − , [17] H.Tembine, “Energy-constrained mean field games in wireless net2 (k) (|N | − 1) works.” [18] H.Tembine, “Risk-Sensitive Mean-Field Games” in IEEE Transactions hence on Automatic Control, Vol. 59, Issue 4. [19] F. Ḿeriaux * , V.Varma, S.Lasaulce, “Mean Field Energy Games in Wireless Networks” c1 (a, N ) ≤ exp (4γ0 a) . [20] E. Altman, K. Avrachenkov, N. Bonneau, M. Debbah, R. El-Azouzi, and D. Menasch, “Constrained stochastic games: Dynamic control in wireAs, less networks” Tech Report, 2007, www-net.cs.umass.edu/sadoc/mdp. [21] D. Monderer and L. S. Shapley, "Potential games", Games and Economic  l+2  l+1 Behavior, vol. 14, no. 1, pp 124-143 May 1996. k k [22] N Prashant and Vinod Sharma, “Stochastic Games on the Multiple − c1 (a, N ), c3 (a, N ) = − N0 N0 Access Channel” in arXiv:1210.7859, October 2008, “unpublished”. [23] M. L. Puterman, “Markov Decision Process, Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming” where the index l ∈ {0, 1}, we have [24] G. B. Dantzig, J. Folkman, N. Shapiro , “On the Continuity of the Minimum Set ofa Continuous Function”, Journal Of Mathematical c3 (a, N ) ≥ −c5 (1 + exp (4γ0 a)) . Analysis and Applications 17, 519-548 (1967) [25] F. Berggren and R. Jantti, “Asymptotically Fair Transmission Scheduling over Fading Channels”, IEEE Transactions on Wireless CommunicaHence we have, tions, Vol. 3, No. 1, January 2004.   [26] A. Fu. E. Modiano and J. Tsitsiklis, “Optimal Transmission Scheduling k over a Fading Channel with Energy and Deadline Constraints”, IEEE c4 (a, N ) = c3 (a, N ) − c1 (a, N ), Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 5, No. 3, March 2006. N0 [27] M. Shaked, J.G. Shanthikumar “Stochastic Orders-Springer(2007)” ≥ c3 (a, N ) − c5 exp (4γ0 a) [28] D.P.Bertsekas, J.N.Tsitsiklis, “Parallel and Distributed Computation: Numerical Methods” ≥ −c5 (1 + 2 exp (4γ0 a)) [29] T.M. Apostol “Mathematical Analysis” = c5 (a). [30] D. Bertsimas, J. N. Tsitsiklis “Introduction to Linear Optimization” [31] D. P. Bertsekas “Convex Optimization Theory”

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
