Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_242

Abstract:
Asymptotics For High Dimensional Regression M -Estimates: Fixed Design Results Lihua Lei∗, Peter J. Bickel†, and Noureddine El Karoui‡  arXiv:1612.06358v1 [math.ST] 19 Dec 2016  Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley December 20, 2016  Abstract We investigate the asymptotic distributions of coordinates of regression M-estimates in the moderate p/n regime, where the number of covariates p grows proportionally with the sample size n. Under appropriate regularity conditions, we establish the coordinate-wise asymptotic normality of regression M-estimates assuming a fixed-design matrix. Our proof is based on the second-order Poincaré inequality (Chatterjee, 2009) and leave-one-out analysis (El Karoui et al., 2011). Some relevant examples are indicated to show that our regularity conditions are satisfied by a broad class of design matrices. We also show a counterexample, namely the ANOVA-type design, to emphasize that the technical assumptions are not just artifacts of the proof. Finally, the numerical experiments confirm and complement our theoretical results.  1  Introduction  High-dimensional statistics has a long history (Huber, 1973; Wachter, 1976, 1978) with considerable renewed interest over the last two decades. In many applications, the researcher collects data which can be represented as a matrix, called a design matrix and denoted by X ∈ Rn×p , as well as a response vector y ∈ Rn and aims to study the connection between X and y. The linear model is among the most popular models as a starting point of data analysis in various fields. A linear model assumes that y = Xβ ∗ + ,  (1)  where β ∗ ∈ Rp is the coefficient vector which measures the marginal contribution of each predictor and  is a random vector which captures the unobserved errors. The aim of this article is to provide valid inferential results for features of β ∗ . For example, a researcher might be interested in testing whether a given predictor has a negligible effect on the response, or equivalently whether βj∗ = 0 for some j. Similarly, linear contrasts of β ∗ such as β1∗ − β2∗ might be of interest in the case of the group comparison problem in which the first two predictors represent the same feature but are collected from two different groups. An M-estimator, defined as n  β̂(ρ) = arg min β∈Rp  1X ρ(yi − xTi β) n i=1  ∗ contact:  (2)  lihua.lei@berkeley.edu. Support from Grant FRG DMS-1160319 is gratefully acknowledged. from Grant FRG DMS-1160319 is gratefully acknowledged. ‡ Support from Grant NSF DMS-1510172 is gratefully acknowledged. AMS 2010 MSC: Primary: 62J99, Secondary: 62E20; Keywords: M-estimation, robust regression, high-dimensional statistics, second order Poincaré inequality, leave-one-out analysis. † Support  1  where ρ denotes a loss function, is among the most popular estimators used in practice (Relles, 1967; Huber, 1973). In particular, if ρ(x) = 21 x2 , β̂(ρ) is the famous Least Square Estimator (LSE). We intend to explore the distribution of β̂(ρ), based on which we can achieve the inferential goals mentioned above. The most well-studied approach is the asymptotic analysis, which assumes that the scale of the problem grows to infinity and use the limiting result as an approximation. In regression problems, the scale parameter of a problem is the sample size n and the number of predictors p. The classical approach is to fix p and let n grow to infinity. It has been shown (Relles, 1967; Yohai, 1972; Huber, 1972, 1973) that β̂(ρ) is consistent in terms of L2 norm and asymptotically normal in this regime. The asymptotic variance can be then approximated by the bootstrap (Bickel & Freedman, 1981). Later on, the studies are extended to the regime in which both n and p grow to infinity but p/n converges to 0 (Yohai & Maronna, 1979; Portnoy, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987; Mammen, 1989). The consistency, in terms of the L2 norm, the asymptotic normality and the validity of the bootstrap still hold in this regime. Based on q these results, we can construct d β̂j (ρ)) where Var( d β̂j (ρ)) is a 95% confidence interval for β0j simply as β̂j (ρ) ± 1.96 Var( calculated by bootstrap. Similarly we can calculate p-values for the hypothesis testing procedure. We ask whether the inferential results developed under the low-dimensional assumptions and the software built on top of them can be relied on for moderate and highdimensional analysis? Concretely, if in a study n = 50 and p = 40, can the software built upon the assumption that p/n ' 0 be relied on when p/n = .8? Results in random matrix theory (Marčenko & Pastur, 1967) already offer an answer in the negative side for many PCA-related questions in multivariate statistics. The case of regression is more subtle: For instance for least-squares, standard degrees of freedom adjustments effectively take care of many dimensionality-related problems. But this nice property does not extend to more general regression M-estimates. Once these questions are raised, it becomes very natural to analyze the behavior and performance of statistical methods in the regime where p/n is fixed. Indeed, it will help us to keep track of the inherent statistical difficulty of the problem when assessing the variability of our estimates. In other words, we assume in the current paper that p/n → κ > 0 while let n grows to infinity. Due to identifiability issues, it is impossible to make inference on β ∗ if p > n without further structural or distributional assumptions. We discuss this point in details in Section 2.3. Thus we consider the regime where p/n → κ ∈ (0, 1). We call it the moderate p/n regime. This regime is also the natural regime in random matrix theory (Marčenko & Pastur, 1967; Wachter, 1978; Johnstone, 2001; Bai & Silverstein, 2010). It has been shown that the asymptotic results derived in this regime sometimes provide an extremely accurate approximations to finite sample distributions of estimators at least in certain cases (Johnstone, 2001) where n and p are both small.  1.1  Qualitatively Different Behavior of Moderate p/n Regime  First, β̂(ρ) is no longer consistent in terms of L2 norm and the risk Ekβ̂(ρ)−β ∗ k2 tends to a non-vanishing quantity determined by κ, the loss function ρ and the error distribution through a complicated system of non-linear equations (El Karoui et al., 2011; El Karoui, 2013, 2015; Bean et al., 2012). This L2 -inconsistency prohibits the use of standard perturbation-analytic techniques to assess the behavior of the estimator. It also leads to qualitatively different behaviors for the residuals in moderate dimensions; in contrast to the low-dimensional case, they cannot be relied on to give accurate information about the distribution of the errors. However, this seemingly negative result does not exclude the possibility of inference since β̂(ρ) is still consistent in terms of L2+ν norms for any ν > 0 and in particular in L∞ norm. Thus, we can at least hope to perform inference on each coordinate. Second, classical optimality results do not hold in this regime. In the regime p/n → 0, the maximum likelihood estimator is shown to be optimal (Huber, 1964, 1972; Bickel &  2  Doksum, 2015). In other words, if the error distribution is known then the M-estimator associated with the loss ρ(·) = − log f (·) is asymptotically efficient, provided the design is of appropriate type, where f (·) is the density of entries of . However, in the moderate p/n regime, it has been shown that the optimal loss is no longer the log-likehood but an other function with a complicated but explicit form (Bean et al., 2013), at least for certain designs. The suboptimality of maximum likelihood estimators suggests that classical techniques fail to provide valid intuition in the moderate p/n regime. Third, the joint asymptotic normality of β̂(ρ), as a p-dimensional random vector, may be violated for a fixed design matrix X. This has been proved for least-squares by Huber (1973) in his pioneering work. For general M-estimators, this negative result is a simple consequence of the results of El Karoui et al. (2011): They exhibit an ANOVA design (see below) where even marginal fluctuations are not Gaussian. By contrast, for random design, they show that β̂(ρ) is jointly asymptotically normal when the design matrix is elliptical with general covariance by using the non-asymptotic stochastic representation for β̂(ρ) as well as elementary properties of vectors uniformly distributed on the uniform sphere in Rp ; See section 2.2.3 of El Karoui et al. (2011) or the supplementary material of Bean et al. (2013) for details. This does not contradict Huber (1973)’s negative result in that it takes the randomness from both X and  into account while Huber (1973)’s result only takes the randomness from  into account. Later, El Karoui (2015) shows that each coordinate of β̂(ρ) is asymptotically normal for a broader class of random designs. This is also an elementary consequence of the analysis in El Karoui (2013). However, to the best of our knowledge, beyond the ANOVA situation mentioned above, there are no distributional results for fixed design matrices. This is the topic of this article. Last but not least, bootstrap inference fails in this moderate-dimensional regime. This has been shown by Bickel and Freedman (1983) for least-squares and residual bootstrap in their influential work. Recently, El Karoui and Purdom (2015) studied the results to general M-estimators and showed that all commonly used bootstrapping schemes, including pairs-bootstrap, residual bootstrap and jackknife, fail to provide a consistent variance estimator and hence valid inferential statements. These latter results even apply to the marginal distributions of the coordinates of β̂(ρ). Moreover, there is no simple, design independent, modification to achieve consistency (El Karoui & Purdom, 2015).  1.2  Our Contributions  In summary, the behavior of the estimators we consider in this paper is completely different in the moderate p/n regime from its counterpart in the low-dimensional regime. As discussed in the next section, moving one step further in the moderate p/n regime is interesting from both the practical and theoretical perspectives. The main contribution of this article is to establish coordinate-wise asymptotic normality of β̂(ρ) for certain fixed design matrices X in this regime under technical assumptions. The following theorem informally states our main result. Theorem (Informal Version of Theorem 3.1 in Section 3). Under appropriate conditions on the design matrix X, the distribution of  and the loss function ρ, as p/n → κ ∈ (0, 1), while n → ∞,     β̂j (ρ) − Eβ̂j (ρ)  , N (0, 1) = o(1) max dTV L  q Var(β̂j (ρ))  1≤j≤p  where dTV (·, ·) is the total variation distance and L(·) denotes the law. It is worth mentioning that the above result can be extended to finite dimensional linear contrasts of β̂. For instance, one might be interested in making inference on β1∗ −β2∗ in the problems involving the group comparison. The above result can be extended to give the asymptotic normality of β̂1 − β̂2 . Besides the main result, we have several other contributions. First, we use a new approach to establish asymptotic normality. Our main technique is based on the secondorder Poincaré inequality (SOPI), developed by Chatterjee (2009) to derive, among many 3  other results, the fluctuation behavior of linear spectral statistics of random matrices. In contrast to classical approaches such as the Lindeberg-Feller central limit theorem, the second-order Poincaré inequality is capable of dealing with nonlinear and potentially implicit functions of independent random variables. Moreover, we use different expansions for β̂(ρ) and residuals based on double leave-one-out ideas introduced in El Karoui et al. (2011), in contrast to the classical perturbation-analytic expansions. See aforementioned paper and follow-ups. An informal interpretation of the results of Chatterjee (2009) is that if the Hessian of the nonlinear function of random variables under consideration is sufficiently small, this function acts almost linearly and hence a standard central limit theorem holds. Second, to the best of our knowledge this is the first inferential result for fixed (non ANOVA-like) design in the moderate p/n regime. Fixed designs arise naturally from an experimental design or a conditional inference perspective. That is, inference is ideally carried out without assuming randomness in predictors; see Section 2.2 for more details. We clarify the regularity conditions for coordinate-wise asymptotic normality of β̂(ρ) explicitly, which are checkable for LSE and also checkable for general M-estimators if the error distribution is known. We also prove that these conditions are satisfied with by a broad class of designs. The ANOVA-like design described in Section 3.3.4 exhibits a situation where the distribution of β̂j (ρ) is not going to be asymptotically normal. As such the results of Theorem 3.1 below are somewhat surprising. For complete inference, we need both the asymptotic normality and the asymptotic bias and variance. Under suitable symmetry conditions on the loss function and the error distribution, it can be shown that β̂(ρ) is unbiased (see Section 3.2.1 for details) and thus it is left to derive the asymptotic variance. As discussed at the end of Section 1.1, classical approaches, e.g. bootstrap, fail in this regime. For least-squares, classical results continue to hold and we discuss it in section 5 for the sake of completeness. However, for M-estimators, there is no closed-form result. We briefly touch upon the variance estimation in Section 3.4.2. The derivation for general situations is beyond the scope of this paper and left to the future research.  1.3  Outline of Paper  The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we clarify details which are mentioned in the current section. In Section 3, we state the main result (Theorem 3.1) formally and explain the technical assumptions. Then we show several examples of random designs which satisfy the assumptions with high probability. In Section 4, we introduce our main technical tool, second-order Poincaré inequality (Chatterjee, 2009), and apply it on M-estimators as the first step to prove Theorem 3.1. Since the rest of the proof of Theorem 3.1 is complicated and lengthy, we illustrate the main ideas in Appendix A. The rigorous proof is left to Appendix B. In Section 5, we provide reminders about the theory of least-squares estimation for the sake of completeness, by taking advantage of its explicit form. In Section 6, we display the numerical results. The proof of other results are stated in Appendix C and more numerical experiments are presented in Appendix D.  2 2.1  More Details on Background Moderate p/n Regime: a more informative type of asymptotics?  In Section 1, we mentioned that the ratio p/n measures the difficulty of statistical inference. The moderate p/n regime provides an approximation of finite sample properties with the difficulties fixed at the same level as the original problem. Intuitively, this regime should capture more variation in finite sample problems and provide a more accurate approximation. We will illustrate this via simulation.  4  Consider a study involving 50 participants and 40 variables; we can either use the asymptotics in which p is fixed to be 40, n grows to infinity or p/n is fixed to be 0.8, and n grows to infinity to perform approximate inference. Current software rely on lowdimensional asymptotics for inferential tasks, but there is no evidence that they yield more accurate inferential statements than the ones we would have obtained using moderate dimensional asymptotics. In fact, numerical evidence (Johnstone, 2001; El Karoui et al., 2013; Bean et al., 2013) show that the reverse is true. We exhibit a further numerical simulation showing that. Consider a case that n = 50,  has i.i.d. entries and X is one realization of a matrix generated with i.i.d. gaussian (mean 0, variance 1) entries. For κ ∈ {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9} and different error distributions, we use the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistics to quantify the distance between the finite sample distribution and two types of asymptotic approximation of the distribution of β̂1 (ρ). Specifically, we use the Huber loss function ρHuber,k with default parameter k = 1.345 (Huber, 2011), i.e.  1 2 |x| ≤ k 2x ρHuber,k (x) = k(|x| − 12 k) |x| > k Specifically, we generate three design matrices X (0) , X (1) and X (2) : X (0) for small sample case with a sample size n = 50 and a dimension p = nκ; X (1) for low-dimensional asymptotics (p fixed) with a sample size n = 1000 and a dimension p = 50κ; and X (2) for moderate-dimensional asymptotics (p/n fixed) with a sample size n = 1000 and a dimension p = nκ. Each of them is generated as one realization of an i.i.d. standard gaussian design and then treated as fixed across K = 100 repetitions. For each design matrix, vectors  of appropriate length are generated with i.i.d. entries. The entry has either a standard normal distribution, or a t3 -distribution, or a standard Cauchy distribution, i.e. t1 . Then we use  as the response, or equivalently assume β ∗ = 0, and obtain the M-estimators β̂ (0) , β̂ (1) , β̂ (2) . Repeating this procedure for K = 100 times results in K replications in three cases. Then we extract the first coordinate of each (0) (1) K (2) K estimator, denoted by {β̂k,1 }K k=1 , {β̂k,1 }k=1 , {β̂k,1 }k=1 . Then the two-sample KolmogorovSmirnov statistics can be obtained by r r n n (0) (1) KS1 = max |F̂n (x) − F̂n (x)|, KS2 = max |F̂n(0) (x) − F̂n(2) (x)|, 2 x 2 x (r)  (r)  where F̂n is the empirical distribution of {β̂k,1 }K k=1 . We can then compare the accuracy of two asymptotic regimes by comparing KS1 and KS2 . The smaller the value of KSi , the better the approximation. Figure 1 displays the results for these error distributions. We see that for gaussian errors and even t3 errors, the p/n-fixed/moderate-dimensional approximation is uniformly more accurate than the widely used p-fixed/low-dimensional approximation. For Cauchy errors, the low-dimensional approximation performs better than the moderatedimensional one when p/n is small but worsens when the ratio is large especially when p/n is close to 1. Moreover, when p/n grows, the two approximations have qualitatively different behaviors: the p-fixed approximation becomes less and less accurate while the p/n-fixed approximation does not suffer much deterioration when p/n grows. The qualitative and quantitative differences of these two approximations reveal the practical importance of exploring the p/n-fixed asymptotic regime. (See also Johnstone (2001).)  2.2  Random vs fixed design?  As discussed in Section 1.1, assuming a fixed design or a random design could lead to qualitatively different inferential results. In the random design setting, X is considered as being generated from a super population. For example, the rows of X can be regarded as an i.i.d. sample from a distribution known, or partially known, to the researcher. In situations where one uses techniques such as cross-validation (Stone, 1974), pairs bootstrap in regression (Efron &  5  Kolmogorov−Smirnov Statistics  Distance between the small sample and large sample distribution normal  t(3) ●  ●  ● ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  0.45  0.40  cauchy ●  0.50  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ● ● ●  0.35  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ● ●  ● ●  0.30  ● ● ●  0.25 0.25  0.50  0.75  0.25  0.50  0.75  0.25  0.50  0.75  kappa Asym. Regime  ●  p fixed  ●  p/n fixed  Figure 1: Axpproximation accuracy of p-fixed asymptotics and p/n-fixed asymptotics: each column represents an error distribution; the x-axis represents the ratio κ of the dimension and the sample size and the y-axis represents the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic; the red solid line corresponds to p-fixed approximation and the blue dashed line corresponds to p/n-fixed approximation. Efron, 1982) or sample splitting (Wasserman & Roeder, 2009), the researcher effectively assumes exchangeability of the data (xTi , yi )ni=1 . Naturally, this is only compatible with an assumption of random design. Given the extremely widespread use of these techniques in contemporary machine learning and statistics, one could argue that the random design setting is the one under which most of modern statistics is carried out, especially for prediction problems. Furthermore, working under a random design assumption forces the researcher to take into account two sources of randomness as opposed to only one in the fixed design case. Hence working under a random design assumption should yield conservative confidence intervals for βj∗ . In other words, in settings where the researcher collects data without control over the values of the predictors, the random design assumption is arguably the more natural one of the two. However, it has now been understood for almost a decade that common random design assumptions in high-dimension (e.g. xi = Σ1/2 zi where zi,j ’s are i.i.d with mean 0 and variance 1 and a few moments and Σ “well behaved”) suffer from considerable geometric limitations, which have substantial impacts on the performance of the estimators considered in this paper (El Karoui et al., 2011). As such, confidence statements derived from that kind of analysis can be relied on only after performing a few graphical tests on the data (see El Karoui (2010)). These geometric limitations are simple consequences of the concentration of measure phenomenon (Ledoux, 2001). On the other hand, in the fixed design setting, X is considered a fixed matrix. In this case, the inference only takes the randomness of  into consideration. This perspective is popular in several situations. The first one is the experimental design. The goal is to study the effect of a set of factors, which can be controlled by the experimenter, on the response. In contrast to the observational study, the experimenter can design the experimental condition ahead of time based on the inference target. For instance, a oneway ANOVA design encodes the covariates into binary variables (see Section 3.3.4 for details) and it is fixed prior to the experiment. Other examples include two-way ANOVA designs, factorial designs, Latin-square designs, etc. (Scheffe, 1999). Another situation which is concerned with fixed design is the survey sampling where the inference is carried out conditioning on the data (Cochran, 1977). Generally, in order to avoid unrealistic assumptions, making inference conditioning on the design matrix X is necessary. Suppose the linear model (1) is true and identifiable (see Section 2.3 for details), then all information of β ∗ is contained in the conditional distribution L(y|X) and hence the information in the marginal distribution L(X) is redundant. The conditional  6  inference framework is more robust to the data generating procedure due to the irrelevance of L(X). Also, results based on fixed design assumptions may be preferable from a theoretical point of view in the sense that they could potentially be used to establish corresponding results for certain classes of random designs. Specifically, given a marginal distribution L(X), one only has to prove that X satisfies the assumptions for fixed design with high probability. In conclusion, fixed and random design assumptions play complementary roles in moderate-dimensional settings. We focus on the least understood of the two, the fixed design case, in this paper.  2.3  Modeling and Identification of Parameters  The problem of identifiability is especially important in the fixed design case. Define β ∗ (ρ) in the population as n  β ∗ (ρ) = arg min β∈Rp  1X Eρ(yi − xTi β). n i=1  (3)  One may ask whether β ∗ (ρ) = β ∗ regardless of ρ in the fixed design case. We provide an affirmative answer in the following proposition by assuming that i has a symmetric distribution around 0 and ρ is even. d  Proposition 2.1. Suppose X has a full column rank and i = −i for all i. Further assume ρ is an even convex function such that for any i = 1, 2, . . . and α 6= 0, 1 (Eρ(i − α) + Eρ(i + α)) > Eρ(i ). (4) 2 Then β ∗ (ρ) = β ∗ regardless of the choice of ρ. The proof is left to Appendix C. It is worth mentioning that Proposition 2.1 only requires the marginals of  to be symmetric but does not impose any constraint on the dependence structure of . Further, if ρ is strongly convex, then for all α 6= 0, 1 (ρ(x − α) + ρ(x + α)) > ρ(x). 2 As a consequence, the condition (4) is satisfied provided that i is non-zero with positive probability. If  is asymmetric, we may still be able to identify β ∗ if i are i.i.d. random variables. In contrast to the last case, we should incorporate an intercept term as a shift towards the centroid of ρ. More precisely, we define α∗ (ρ) and β ∗ (ρ) as n  (α∗ (ρ), β ∗ (ρ)) = arg min α∈R,β∈Rp  1X Eρ(yi − α − xTi β). n i=1  Proposition 2.2. Suppose (1, X) is of full column rank and i are i.i.d. such that Eρ(1 − α) as a function of α has a unique minimizer α(ρ). Then β ∗ (ρ) is uniquely defined with β ∗ (ρ) = β ∗ and α∗ (ρ) = α(ρ). The proof is left to Appendix C. For example, let ρ(z) = |z|. Then the minimizer of Eρ(1 − a) is a median of 1 , and is unique if 1 has a positive density. It is worth pointing out that incorporating an intercept term is essential for identifying β ∗ . For instance, in the least-square case, β ∗ (ρ) no longer equals to β ∗ if Ei 6= 0. Proposition 2.2 entails that the intercept term guarantees β ∗ (ρ) = β ∗ , although the intercept term itself depends on the choice of ρ unless more conditions are imposed. If i ’s are neither symmetric nor i.i.d., then β ∗ cannot be identified by the previous criteria because β ∗ (ρ) depends on ρ. Nonetheless, from a modeling perspective, it is popular and reasonable to assume that i ’s are symmetric or i.i.d. in many situations. Therefore, Proposition 2.1 and Proposition 2.2 justify the use of M-estimators in those cases and M-estimators derived from different loss functions can be compared because they are estimating the same parameter. 7  3 3.1  Main Results Notation and Assumptions  Let xTi ∈ R1×p denote the i-th row of X and Xj ∈ Rn×1 denote the j-th column of X. Throughout the paper we will denote by Xij ∈ R the (i, j)-th entry of X, by X[j] ∈ Rn×(p−1) the design matrix X after removing the j-th column, and by xTi,[j] ∈ R1×(p−1) the vector xTi after removing j-th entry. The M-estimator β̂(ρ) associated with the loss function ρ is defined as β̂(ρ) = arg min β∈Rp  n  n  k=1  k=1  1X 1X ρ(yk − xTk β) = arg min ρ(k − xTk (β − β ∗ )) n β∈Rp n  (5)  We define ψ = ρ0 to be the first derivative of ρ. We will write β̂(ρ) simply β̂ when no confusion can arise. When the original design matrix X does not contain an intercept term, we can simply replace X by (1, X) and augment β into a (p + 1)-dimensional vector (α, β T )T . Although being a special case, we will discuss the question of intercept in Section 3.2.2 due to its important role in practice. Equivariance and reduction to the null case β̂ −Eβ̂j is invariant to the choice of β ∗ , provided that β ∗ Notice that our target quantity √j Var(β̂j )  is identifiable as discussed in Section 2.3, we can assume β ∗ = 0 without loss of generality. In this case, we assume in particular that the design matrix X has full column rank. Then yk = k and n 1X ρ(k − xTk β). β̂ = arg min β∈Rp n k=1  Similarly we define the leave-j-th-predictor-out version as n  β̂[j] = arg min β∈Rp−1  1X ρ(k − xTk,[j] β). n k=1  Based on these notations we define the full residuals Rk as Rk = k − xTk β̂,  k = 1, 2, . . . , n  and the leave-j-th-predictor-out residual as rk,[j] = k − xTk,[j] β̂[j] ,  k = 1, 2, . . . , n,  j = 1, . . . , p.  Three n × n diagonal matrices are defined as D = diag(ψ 0 (Rk ))nk=1 ,  D̃ = diag(ψ 00 (Rk ))nk=1 ,  D[j] = diag(ψ 0 (rk,[j] ))nk=1 .  (6)  We say a random variable Z is σ 2 -sub-gaussian if for any λ ∈ R, EeλZ ≤ e  λ2 σ 2 2  .  In addition, we use Jn ⊂ {1, . . . , p} to represent the indices of parameters which are of interest. Intuitively, more entries in Jn would require more stringent conditions for the asymptotic normality. Finally, we adopt Landau’s notation (O(·), o(·), Op (·), op (·)). In addition, we say an = Ω(bn ) if bn = O(an ) and similarly, we say an = Ωp (bn ) if bn = Op (an ). To simplify the logarithm factors, we use the symbol polyLog(n) to denote any factor that can be upper 1 bounded by (log n)γ for some γ > 0. Similarly, we use polyLog(n) to denote any factor 1 0 that can be lower bounded by (log n)γ 0 for some γ > 0. 8  3.2  Technical Assumptions and main result  Before stating the assumptions, we need to define several quantities of interest. Let  T   T  X X X X λ+ = λmax , λ− = λmin n n be the largest (resp. smallest) eigenvalue of the matrix canonical basis vector and  XT X n .  Let ei ∈ Rn be the i-th  T T D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] )ei . hj,1,i , (I − D[j] X[j] (X[j]  hj,0 , (ψ(r1,[j] ), . . . , ψ(rn,[j] ))T , Finally, let (  |hTj,1,i Xj | |hTj,0 Xj | ∆C = max max , max j∈Jn ||hj,0 ||2 i≤n,j∈Jn ||hj,1,i ||2  ) ,  Qj = Cov(hj,0 ) Based on the quantities defined above, we state our technical assumptions on the design matrix X followed by the main result. A detailed explanation of the assumptions follows.   1 , K1 , K2 = A1 ρ(0) = ψ(0) = 0 and there exists positive numbers K0 = Ω polyLog(n) O (polyLog(n)), such that for any x ∈ R, K0 ≤ ψ 0 (x) ≤ K1 ,  |ψ 00 (x)| d p 0 ( ψ (x)) = p ≤ K2 ; dx ψ 0 (x)  A2 i = ui (Wi ) where (W1 , . . . , Wn ) ∼ N (0, In×n ) and ui are smooth functions with ku0i k∞ ≤ c1 and ku00i k∞ ≤  c2 for some c1 , c2 = O(polyLog(n)). Moreover, assume mini Var(i ) = Ω  1 polyLog(n)  .  A3 λ+ = O(polyLog(n)) and λ− = Ω A4 minj∈Jn  XjT Qj Xj tr(Qj )  =Ω    1 polyLog(n)      1 polyLog(n)    ;  ;  A5 E∆8C = O (polyLog(n)). Theorem 3.1. Under assumptions A1 − A5, as p/n → κ for some κ ∈ (0, 1), while n → ∞,     β̂ − E β̂ j j  , N (0, 1) = o(1), max dTV L  q j∈Jn Var(β̂j ) where dTV (P, Q) = supA |P (A) − Q(A)| is the total variation distance. We provide several examples where our assumptions hold in Section 3.3. We also provide an example where the asymptotic normality does not hold in Section 3.3.4. This shows that our assumptions are not just artifacts of the proof technique we developed, but that there are (probably many) situations where asymptotic normality will not hold, even coordinate-wise. 3.2.1  Discussion of Assumptions  Now we discuss assumptions A1 - A5. Assumption A1 implies the boundedness of the first-order and the second-order derivatives of ψ. The upper bounds are satisfied by most loss functions including the L2 loss, the smoothed L1 loss, the smoothed Huber loss, etc. The non-zero lower bound K0 implies the strong convexity of ρ and is required for technical reasons. It can be removed by considering first a ridge-penalized M-estimator 9  and taking appropriate limits as in El Karoui (2013, 2015). In addition, in this paper we consider the smooth loss functions and the results can be extended to non-smooth case via approximation. Assumption A2 was proposed in Chatterjee (2009) when deriving the second-order Poincaré inequality discussed in Section 4.1. It means that the results apply to nonGaussian distributions, such as the uniform distribution on [0, 1] by taking ui = Φ, the cumulative distribution function of standard normal distribution. Through the gaussian concentration (Ledoux, 2001), we see that A2 implies that i are c21 -sub-gaussian. Thus A2 controls the tail behavior of i . The boundedness of u0i and u00i are required only for the direct application of Chatterjee’s results. In fact, a look at his proof suggests that one can obtain a similar result to his Second-Order Poincaré inequality involving moment bounds on u0i (Wi ) and u00i (Wi ). This would be a way to weaken our assumptions to permit to have the heavy-tailed distributions expected in robustness studies. Since we are considering strongly convex loss-functions, it is not completely unnatural to restrict our attention to light-tailed errors. Furthermore, efficiency - and not only robustness - questions are one of the main reasons to consider these estimators in the moderate-dimensional context. The potential gains in efficiency obtained by considering regression M-estimates (Bean et al., 2013) apply in the light-tailed context, which further justify our interest in this theoretical setup. Assumption A3 is completely checkable since it only depends on X. It controls the singularity of the design matrix. Under A1 and A3, it can be shown that the objective function is strongly convex withcurvature (the smallest eigenvalue of the Hessian matrix)   1 everywhere. lower bounded by Ω polyLog(n) Assumption A4 is controlling the left tail of quadratic forms. It is fundamentally connected to aspects of the concentration of measure phenomenon (Ledoux, 2001). This condition is proposed and emphasized under the random design setting by El Karoui et al. (2013). Essentially, it means that for a matrix Qj ,which does not depend on Xj , the quadratic form XjT Qj Xj should have the same order as tr(Qj ). Assumption A5 is proposed by El Karoui (2013) under the random design settings. It is motivated by leave-one-predictor-out analysis. Note that ∆C is the maximum of linear contrasts of Xj , whose coefficients do not depend on Xj . It is easily checked for design matrix X which is a realization of a random matrix with i.i.d sub-gaussian entries for instance.  Remark 3.2. In certain applications, it is reasonable to make the following additional assumption: A6 ρ is an even function and i ’s have symmetric distributions. Although assumption A6 is not necessary to Theorem 3.1, it can simplify the result. Under d assumption A6, when X is full rank, we have, if = denotes equality in distribution, n  β̂ − β ∗ = arg min η∈Rp  n  1X 1X ρ(i − xTi η) = arg min ρ(−i + xTi η) n i=1 η∈Rp n i=1 n  d  = arg min η∈Rp  1X ρ(i + xTi η) = β ∗ − β̂. n i=1  This implies that β̂ is an unbiased estimator, provided it has a mean, which is the case here. Unbiasedness is useful in practice, since then Theorem 3.1 reads     β̂j − βj∗  , N (0, 1) = o(1) . max dTV L  q j∈Jn Var(β̂j ) For inference, we only need to estimate the asymptotic variance.  10  3.2.2  An important remark concerning Theorem 3.1  When Jn is a subset of {1, . . . , p}, the coefficients in Jnc become nuisance parameters. Heuristically, in order for identifying βJ∗n , one only needs the subspaces span(XJn ) and span(XJnc ) to be distinguished and XJn has a full column rank. Here XJn denotes the sub-matrix of X with columns in Jn . Formally, let Σ̂Jn =  1 T X (I − XJnc (XJTnc XJnc )− XJTnc )XJn n Jn  where A− denotes the generalized inverse of A, and     λ̃+ = λmax Σ̂Jn , λ̃− = λmin Σ̂Jn . Then Σ̂Jn characterizes the behavior of XJn after removing the effect of XJnc . In particular, we can modify the assumption A3 by   1 . A3* λ̃+ = O(polyLog(n)) and λ̃− = Ω polyLog(n) Then we are able to derive a stronger result in the case where |Jn | < p than Theorem 3.1 as follows. Corollary 3.3. Under assumptions A1-2, A4-5 and A3*, as p/n → κ for some κ ∈ (0, 1),     β̂ − E β̂ j j  , N (0, 1) = o(1). max dTV L  q j∈Jn Var(β̂j ) It can be shown that λ̃+ ≤ λ+ and λ̃− ≥ λ− and hence the assumption A3* is weaker than A3. It is worth pointing out that the assumption A3* even holds when XJcn does not have full column rank, in which case βJ∗n is still identifiable and β̂Jn is still well-defined, although βJ∗nc and β̂Jnc are not; see Appendix C-2 for details.  3.3  Examples  Throughout this subsection (except subsubsection 3.3.4), we consider the case where X is a realization of a random matrix, denoted by Z (to be distinguished from X). We will verify that the assumptions A3-A5 are satisfied with high probability under different regularity conditions on the distribution of Z. This is a standard way to justify the conditions for fixed design (Portnoy, 1984, 1985) in the literature on regression Mestimates. 3.3.1  Random Design with Independent Entries  First we consider a random matrix Z with i.i.d. sub-gaussian entries. Proposition 3.4. Suppose Z has i.i.d. mean-zero σ 2-sub-gaussian  entries with Var(Zij ) = 1 2 τ > 0 for some σ = O(polyLog(n)) and τ = Ω polyLog(n) , then, when X is a realization of Z, assumptions A3-A5 for X are satisfied with high probability over Z for Jn = {1, . . . , p}. In practice, the assumption of identical distribution might be invalid. In fact the assumptions A4, A5 and the first part of A3 (λ+ = O (polyLog(n))) are still satisfied with high probability if we only assume the independence between entries and boundedness of certain moments. To control λ− , we rely on Litvak et al. (2005) which assumes symmetry of each entry. We obtain the following result based on it.  11  Proposition 3.5. Suppose Z has independent σ 2 -sub-gaussian entries with d  Zij = −Zij , Var(Zij ) > τ 2   1 for some σ = O (polyLog(n)) and τ = Ω polyLog(n) , then, when X is a realization of Z, assumptions A3-A5 for X are satisfied with high probability over Z for Jn = {1, . . . , p}. Under the conditions of Proposition 3.5, we can add an intercept term into the design matrix. Adding an intercept allows us to remove the mean-zero assumption for Zij ’s. In fact, suppose Zij is symmetric with respect to µj , which is potentially non-zero, for all i, then according to section 3.2.2, we can replace Zij by Zij − µj and Proposition 3.6 can be then applied. Proposition 3.6. Suppose Z = (1, Z̃) and Z̃ ∈ Rn×(p−1) has independent σ 2 -subgaussian entries with d Z̃ij − µj = µj − Z̃ij , Var(Z̃ij ) > τ 2   1 and arbitrary µj . Then, when X is a for some σ = O (polyLog(n)), τ = Ω polyLog(n) realization of Z, assumptions A3*, A4 and A5 for X are satisfied with high probability over Z for Jn = {2, . . . , p}. 3.3.2  Dependent Gaussian Design  To show that our assumptions handle a variety of situations, we now assume that the observations, namely the rows of Z, are i.i.d. random vectors with a covariance matrix i.i.d. Σ. In particular we show that the Gaussian design, i.e. zi ∼ N (0, Σ), satisfies the assumptions with high probability. i.i.d.  Proposition  3.7. Suppose zi ∼ N (0, Σ) with λmax (Σ) = O (polyLog(n)) and λmin (Σ) = 1 Ω polyLog(n) , then, when X is a realization of Z, assumptions A3-A5 for X are satisfied with high probability over Z for Jn = {1, . . . , p}. This result extends to the matrix-normal design (Muirhead, 1982)[Chapter 3], i.e. (Zij )i≤n,j≤p is one realization of a np-dimensional random variable Z with multivariate gaussian distribution vec(Z) , (z1T , z2T , . . . , znT ) ∼ N (0, Λ ⊗ Σ), and ⊗ is the Kronecker product. It turns out that assumptions A3 − A5 are satisfied if both Λ and Σ are well-behaved. Proposition 3.8. Suppose Z is matrix-normal with vec(Z) ∼ N (0, Λ ⊗ Σ) and   1 λmax (Λ), λmax (Σ) = O (polyLog(n)) , λmin (Λ), λmin (Σ) = Ω . polyLog(n) Then, when X is a realization of Z,assumptions A3-A5 for X are satisfied with high probability over Z for Jn = {1, . . . , p}. In order to incorporate an intercept term, we need slightly more stringent condition on Λ. Instead of assumption A3, we prove that assumption A3* - see subsubsection 3.2.2 - holds with high probability. Proposition 3.9. Suppose Z contains an intercept term, i.e. Z = (1, Z̃) and Z̃ satisfies the conditions of Proposition 3.8. Further assume that 1  maxi |(Λ− 2 1)i | 1  mini |(Λ− 2 1)i |  = O (polyLog(n)) .  (7)  Then, when X is a realization of Z, assumptions A3*, A4 and A5 for X are satisfied with high probability over Z for Jn = {2, . . . , p}. 12  When Λ = I, the condition (7) is satisfied. Another non-trivial example is the exchangeable case where Λij are all equal for i 6= j. In this case, 1 is an eigenvector of Λ and 1 1 hence it is also an eigenvector of Λ− 2 . Thus Λ− 2 1 is a multiple of 1 and the condition (7) is satisfied. 3.3.3  Elliptical Design  Furthermore, we can move from Gaussian-like structure to generalized elliptical models where zi = ζi Σ1/2 Zi where {ζi , Zij : i = 1, . . . , n; j = 1, . . . , p} are independent random variables, Zij having for instance mean 0 and variance 1. The elliptical family is quite flexible in modeling data. It represents a type of data formed by a common driven factor and independent individual effects. It is widely used in multivariate statistics (Anderson (1962); Tyler (1987)) and various fields, including finance (Cizek et al., 2005) and biology (Posekany et al., 2011). In the context of high-dimensional statistics, this class of model was used to refute universality claims in random matrix theory (El Karoui, 2009). In robust regression, El Karoui et al. (2011) used elliptical models to show that the limit of kβ̂k22 depends on the distribution of ζi and hence the geometry of the predictors. As such, studies limited to Gaussian-like design were shown to be of very limited statistical interest. See also the deep classical inadmissibility results (Baranchik, 1973; Jurečkovà & Klebanov, 1997). However, as we will show in the next proposition, the common factors ζi do not distort the shape of the asymptotic distribution. A similar phenomenon happens in the random design case - see El Karoui et al. (2013); Bean et al. (2013). Proposition 3.10. Suppose Z is generated from an elliptical model, i.e. Zij = ζi Zij , where ζi are independent random variables taking values in [a, b] for some 0 < a < b < ∞ and Zij are independent random variables satisfying the conditions of Proposition 3.4 or Proposition 3.5. Further assume that {ζi : i = 1, . . . , n} and {Zij : i = 1, . . . , n; j = 1, . . . , p} are independent. Then, when X is a realization of Z, assumptions A3-A5 for X are satisfied with high probability over Z for Jn = {1, . . . , p}. Thanks to the fact that ζi is bounded away from 0 and ∞, the proof of Proposition 3.10 is straightforward, as shown in Appendix C. However, by a more refined argument and assuming identical distributions ζi , we can relax this condition. Proposition 3.11. Under the conditions of Proposition 3.10 (except the boundedness of ζi ) and assume ζi are i.i.d. samples generated from some distribution F , independent of n, with α P (ζ1 ≥ t) ≤ c1 e−c2 t , for some fixed c1 , c2 , α > 0 and F −1 (q) > 0 for any q ∈ (0, 1) where F −1 is the quantile function of F and is continuous. Then, when X is a realization of Z, assumptions A3-A5 for X are satisfied with high probability over Z for Jn = {1, . . . , p}. 3.3.4  A counterexample  Consider a one-way ANOVA situation. In other words, let the design matrix have exactly 1 non-zero entry per row, whose value is 1. Let {ki }ni=1 be integers in {1, . . . , p}. And let Xi,j = 1(j = ki ). Furthermore, let us constrain nj = |{i : ki = j}| to be such that 1 ≤ nj ≤ 2bp/nc. Taking for instance ki = (i mod p) is an easy way to produce such a matrix. The associated statistical model is just yi = i + βk∗i . It is easy to see that X X β̂j = arg min ρ(yi − βj ) = arg min ρ(i − (βj − βj∗ )) . β∈R  β∈R  i:ki =j  i:ki =j  This is of course a standard location problem. In the moderate-dimensional setting we consider, nj remains finite as n → ∞. So β̂j is a non-linear function of finitely many random variables and will in general not be normally distributed. 13  For concreteness, one can take ρ(x) = |x|, in which case β̂j is a median of {yi }{i:ki =j} . The cdf of β̂j is known exactly by elementary order statistics computations (see David and Nagaraja (1981)) and is not that of a Gaussian random variable in general. In fact, the ANOVA design considered here violates the assumption A3 since λ− = minj nj /n = O (1/n). Further, we can show that the assumption A5 is also violated, at least in the least-square case; see Section 5.1 for details.  3.4 3.4.1  Comments and discussions Asymptotic Normality in High Dimensions  In the p-fixed regime, the asymptotic distribution is easily defined as the limit of L(β̂) in terms of weak topology (Van der Vaart, 1998). However, in regimes where the dimension p grows, the notion of asymptotic distribution is more delicate. a conceptual question arises from the fact that the dimension of the estimator β̂ changes with n and thus there is no well-defined distribution which can serve as the limit of L(β̂), where L(·) denotes the law. One remedy is proposed by Mallows (1972). Under this framework, a triangular 2 array {Wn,j , j = 1, 2, . . . , pn }, with EWn,j = 0, EWn,j = 1, is called jointly asymptotically pn normal if for any deterministic sequence an ∈ R with kan k2 = 1,   pn X L an,j Wn,j  → N (0, 1). j=1  When the zero mean and unit variance are not satisfied, it is easy to modify the definition by normalizing random variables. Definition 3.12 (joint asymptotic normality). {Wn : Wn ∈ Rpn } is jointly asymptotically normal if and only if for any sequence {an : an ∈ Rpn }, ! aTn (Wn − EWn ) → N (0, 1). L p aTn Cov(Wn )an The above definition of asymptotic normality is strong and appealing but was shown not to hold for least-squares in the moderate p/n regime (Huber, 1973). In fact, Huber (1973) shows that β̂ LS is jointly asymtotically normal only if max(X(X T X)−1 X T )i,i → 0. i  When p/n → κ ∈ (0, 1), provided X is full rank, max(X(X T X)−1 X T )i,i ≥ i  p 1 tr(X(X T X)−1 X T ) = → κ > 0. n n  In other words, in moderate p/n regime, the asymptotic normality cannot hold for all linear contrasts, even in the case of least-squares. In applications, however, it is usually not necessary to consider all linear contrasts but instead a small subset of them, e.g. all coordinates or low dimensional linear contrasts such as β1∗ − β2∗ . We can naturally modify Definition 3.12 and adapt to our needs by imposing constraints on an . A popular concept, which we use in Section 1 informally, is called coordinate-wise asymptotic normality and defined by restricting an to be the canonical basis vectors, which have only one non-zero element. An equivalent definition is stated as follows. Definition 3.13 (coordinate-wise asymptotic normal).  14  {Wn : Wn ∈ Rpn } is coordinate-wise asymptotically normal if and only if for any sequence {jn : jn ∈ {1, . . . , pn }}, ! Wn,jn − EWn,jn p L → N (0, 1). Var(Wn,jn ) A more convenient way to define the coordinate-wise asymptotic normality is to introduce a metric d(·, ·), e.g. Kolmogorov distance and total variation distance, which induces the weak convergence topology. Then Wn is coordinate-wise asymptotically normal if and only if ! ! Wn,j − EWn,j , N (0, 1) = o(1). max d L p j Var(Wn,j ) 3.4.2  Discussion about inference and technical assumptions  Variance and bias estimation To complete the inference, we need to compute the bias and variance. As discussed in Remark 3.2, the M-estimator is unbiased if the loss function and the error distribution are symmetric. For the variance, it is easy to get a conservative estimate via resampling methods such as Jackknife as a consequence of Efron-Stein’s inequality; see El Karoui (2013) and El Karoui and Purdom (2015) for details. Moreover, by the variance decomposition formula, h i h i h i Var(β̂j ) = E Var(β̂j |X) + Var E(β̂j |X) ≥ E Var(β̂j |X) , the unconditional variance, when X is a random design matrix, is a conservative estimate. The unconditional variance can be calculated by solving a non-linear system; see El Karoui (2013) and Donoho and Montanari (2016). However, estimating the exact variance is known to be hard. El Karoui and Purdom (2015) show that the existing resampling schemes, including jacknife, pairs-bootstrap, residual bootstrap, etc., are either too conservative or too anti-conservative when p/n is large. The challenge, as mentioned in El Karoui (2013); El Karoui and Purdom (2015), is due to the fact that the residuals {Ri } do not mimic the behavior of {i } and that the resampling methods effectively modifies the geometry of the dataset from the point of view of the statistics of interest. We believe that variance estimation in moderate p/n regime should rely on different methodologies from the ones used in low-dimensional estimation. Technical assumptions On the other hand, we assume that ρ is strongly convex. One remedy would be adding a ridge regularized term as in El Karoui (2013) and the new problem is amenable to analysis with the method we used in this article. However, the regularization term introduces a non-vanishing bias, which is as hard to be derived as the variance. For unregularized Mestimators, the strong convexity is also assumed by other works (El Karoui, 2013; Donoho & Montanari, 2016). However, we believe that this assumption is unnecessary and can be removed at least for well-behaved design matrices. Another possibility, for errors that have more than 2 moments is to just add a small quadratic term to the loss function, e.g. λx2 /2 with a small λ. Finally, we recall that in many situations, least-squares is actually more efficient than `1 -regression (see numerical work in Bean et al. (2013)) in moderate dimensions. This is for instance the case for double-exponential errors if p/n is greater than .3 or so. As such working with strongly convex loss functions is as problematic for moderate-dimensional regression M-estimates as it would be in the low-dimensional setting. To explore traditional robustness questions, we will need to weaken the requirements of Assumption A2. This requires substantial work and an extension of the main results  15  of Chatterjee (2009). Because the technical part of the paper is already long, we leave this interesting statistical question to future works.  4  Proof Sketch  Since the proof of Theorem 3.1 is somewhat technical, we illustrate the main idea in this section. First notice that the M-estimator β̂ is an implicit function of independent random variables 1 , . . . , n , which is determined by n  1X xi ψ(i − xi β̂) = 0. n i=1  (8)  The Hessian matrix of the loss function in (5) is n1 X T DX  D0 λ− Ip under the notation introduced in section 3.1. The assumption A3 then implies that the loss function is strongly convex, in which case β̂ is unique. Then β̂ can be seen as a non-linear function of i ’s. A powerful central limit theorem for this type of statistics is the second-order Poincaré inequality (SOPI), developed in Chatterjee (2009) and used there to re-prove central limit theorems for linear spectral statistics of large random matrices. We recall one of the main results for the convenience of the reader. Proposition 4.1 (SOPI; Chatterjee, 2009). Let W = (W1 , . . . , Wn ) = (u1 (W1 ), . . . , un (Wn )) i.i.d.  where Wi ∼ N (0, 1) and ku0i k∞ ≤ c1 , ku00i k∞ ≤ c2 . Take any g ∈ C 2 (Rn ) and let ∇i g, ∇g and ∇2 g denote the i-th partial derivative, gradient and Hessian of g. Let κ0 =  E  n X  ! 21 ∇i g(W )  4  ,  1  1  κ1 = (Ek∇g(W )k42 ) 4 ,  κ2 = (Ek∇2 g(W )k4op ) 4 ,  i=1  and U = g(W ). If U has finite fourth moment, then ! ! √ 2 5(c1 c2 κ0 + c31 κ1 κ2 ) U − EU , N (0, 1) ≤ dTV L p . Var(U ) Var(U ) From (8), it is not hard to compute the gradient and Hessian of β̂j with respect to . Recalling the definitions in Equation (6) on p. 8, we have Lemma 4.2. Suppose ψ ∈ C 2 (Rn ), then ∂ β̂j = eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D ∂T  (9)  ∂ β̂j = GT diag(eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D̃)G ∂∂T where ej is the j-th cononical basis vectors in Rp and  (10)  G = I − X(X T DX)−1 X T D. Recalling the definitions of Ki ’s in Assumption A1 on p. 9, we can bound κ0 , κ1 and κ2 as follows. Lemma 4.3. Let κ0j , κ1j , κ2j defined as in Proposition 4.1 by setting W =  and g(W ) = β̂j . Let 1 (11) Mj = EkeTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 k∞ , then κ20j  ≤  K12 3  (nK0 λ− ) 2  · Mj ,  κ41j  K12 ≤ , (nK0 λ− )2 16  κ42j  ≤  K24   3  (nK0 λ− ) 2  ·  K1 K0  4 · Mj .  As a consequence of the second-order Poincaré inequality , we can bound the total variation distance between β̂j and a normal distribution by Mj and Var(β̂j ). More precisely, we prove the following Lemma. Lemma 4.4. Under assumptions A1-A3,     β̂j − Eβ̂j  , N (0, 1) = Op max dTV L  q j Var(β̂j )  1  maxj (nMj2 ) 8  n · minj Var(β̂j )  ! · polyLog(n) .  Lemma 4.4 is the key to prove Theorem 3.1. To obtain the coordinate-wise asymptotic normality, it is left to establish an upper bound for Mj and a lower bound for Var(β̂j ). In fact, we can prove that Lemma 4.5. Under assumptions A1 - A5,     1 polyLog(n) , min Var(β̂j ) = Ω . max Mj = O j j n n · polyLog(n) Then Lemma 4.4 and Lemma 4.5 together imply that       β̂ − E β̂ polyLog(n) j j     max dTV L q , N (0, 1) = O = o(1). 1 j n8 Var(β̂j ) Appendix A, provides a roadmap of the proof of Lemma 4.5 under a special case where the design matrix X is one realization of a random matrix with i.i.d. sub-gaussian entries. It also serves as an outline of the rigorous proof in Appendix B.  4.1  Comment on the Second-Order Poincaré inequality  Pn Notice that when g is a linear function such that g(z) = i=1 ai zi , then the Berry-Esseen inequality (Esseen, 1945) implies that ! ! Pn |ai |3 W − EW dK L p , N (0, 1)  Pi=1 3 , n Var(W ) ( i=1 a2i ) 2 where dK (F, G) = sup |F (x) − G(x)|. x  On the other hand, the second-order Poincaré inequality implies that ! ! ! ! 1 Pn 4 2 W − EW W − EW i=1 ai , N (0, 1) ≤ dTV L p , N (0, 1)  Pn dK L p . 2 Var(W ) Var(W ) i=1 ai This is slightly worse than the Berry-Esseen bound and requires stronger conditions on the distributions of variates but provides bounds for TV metric instead of Kolmogorov metric. This comparison shows that second-order Poincaré inequality can be regarded as a generalization of the Berry-Esseen bound for non-linear transformations of independent random variables.  5  Least-Squares Estimator  The Least-Squares Estimator is a special case of an M-estimator with ρ(x) = 12 x2 . Because the estimator can then be written explicitly, the analysis of its properties is extremely simple and it has been understood for several decades (see arguments in e.g. Huber (1973)[Lemma 2.1] and Huber (1981)[Proposition 2.2]). In this case, the hat matrix H = X(X T X)−1 X T captures all the problems associated with dimensionality in the problem. In particular, proving the asymptotic normality simply requires an application of the Lindeberg-Feller theorem. It is however somewhat helpful to compare the conditions required for asymptotic normality in this simple case and the ones we required in the more general setup of Theorem 3.1. We do so briefly in this section. 17  5.1  Coordinate-Wise Asymptotic Normality of LSE  Under the linear model (1), when X is full rank, β̂ LS = β ∗ + (X T X)−1 X T , thus each coordinate of β̂ LS is a linear contrast of  with zero mean. Instead of assumption A2, which requires i to be sub-gaussian, we only need to assume maxi E|i |3 < ∞, under which the Berry-Essen bound for non-i.i.d. data (Esseen, 1945) implies that     T −1 T T −1 T 3 β̂j − βj∗  , N (0, 1)  kej (X X) X k3 ≤ kej (X X) X k∞ . dK L  q kej (X T X)−1 X T k2 keTj (X T X)−1 X T k32 Var(β̂ ) j  This motivates us to define a matrix specific quantity Sj (X) such that Sj (X) =  keTj (X T X)−1 X T k∞ keTj (X T X)−1 X T k2  (12)  then the Berry-Esseen bound implies that maxj∈Jn Sj (X) determines the coordinate-wise asymptotic normality of β̂ LS . Theorem 5.1. If E maxi |i |3 < ∞, then   β̂ − β E|i |3 LS,j 0,j max dK  q , N (0, 1) ≤ A · 3 · max Sj (X), j∈Jn (E2i ) 2 j∈Jn Var(β̂LS,j ) where A is an absolute constant and dK (·, ·) is the Kolmogorov distance, defined as dK (F, G) = sup |F (x) − G(x)|. x  It turns out that maxj∈Jn Sj (X) plays in the least-squares setting the role of ∆C in assumption A5. Since it has been known that a condition like Sj (X) → 0 is necessary for asymptotic normality of least-square estimators (Huber (1973)[Proposition 2.2]), this shows in particular that our Assumption A5, or a variant, is also needed in the general case. See Appendix C-4.1 for details.  5.2  Discussion  Naturally, checking the conditions for asymptotic normality is much easier in the leastsquares case than in the general case under consideration in this paper. In particular: 1. Asymptotic normality conditions can be checked for a broader class of random design matrices. See Appendix C-4.2 for details. kX k  . 2. For orthogonal design matrices, i.e X T X = cId for some c > 0, Sj (X) = kXjj k∞ 2 Hence, the condition Sj (X) = o(1) is true if and only if no entry dominates the j − th row of X. 3. The ANOVA-type counterexample we gave in Section 3.3.4 still provides a counterexample. The reason now is different: namely the sum of finitely many independent random variables is evidently in general non-Gaussian. In fact, in this case, Sj (X) = √1 is bounded away from 0. nj Inferential questions are also extremely simple in this context and essentially again dimensionindependent for the reasons highlighted above. Theorem 5.1 naturally reads, β̂j − βj∗ d q → N (0, 1). T T −1 σ ej (X X) ej 18  (13)  Estimating σ is still simple under minimal conditions provided n − p → ∞: see Bickel and Freedman (1983)[Theorem 1.3] or standard computations concerning the normalized residual sum-of-squares (using variance computations for the latter may require up to 4 moments for i ’s). Then we can replace σ in (13) by σ̂ with n  σ̂ 2 =  1 X 2 Rk n−p k=1  where Rk = yk − xTk β̂ and construct confidence intervals for βj∗ based on σ̂. If n − p does not tend to ∞, the normalized residual sum of squares is evidently not consistent even in the case of Gaussian errors, so this requirement may not be dispensed of.  6  Numerical Results  As seen in the previous sections and related papers, there are five important factors that affect the distribution of β̂: the design matrix X, the error distribution L(), the sample size n, the ratio κ, and the loss function ρ. The aim of this section is to assess the quality of the agreement between the asymptotic theoretical results of Theorem 3.1 and the empirical, finite-dimensional properties of β̂(ρ). We also perform a few simulations where some of the assumptions of Theorem 3.1 are violated to get an intuitive sense of whether those assumptions appear necessary or whether they are simply technical artifacts associated with the method of proof we developed. As such, the numerical experiments we report on in this section can be seen as a complement to Theorem 3.1 rather than only a simple check of its practical relevance. The design matrices we consider are one realization of random design matrices of the following three types: i.i.d.  (i.i.d. design) : Xij ∼ F ; i.i.d.  i.i.d.  (elliptical design) : Xij = ζi X̃ij , where X̃ij ∼ N (0, 1) and ζi ∼ F . In addition, {ζi } is independent of {X̃ij }; (partial Hadamard design) : a matrix formed by a random set of p columns of a n×n Hadamard matrix, i.e. a n × n matrix whose columns are orthogonal with entries restricted to ±1. Here we consider two candidates for F in i.i.d. design and elliptical design: standard normal distribution N (0, 1) and t-distribution with two degrees of freedom (denoted t2 ). For the error distribution, we assume that  has i.i.d. entries with one of the above two distributions, namely N (0, 1) and t2 . The t-distribution violates our assumption A2. To evaluate the finite sample performance, we consider the sample sizes n ∈ {100, 200, 400, 800} and κ ∈ {0.5, 0.8}. In this section we will consider a Huber loss with k = 1.345 (Huber, 1981), i.e.  1 2 |x| ≤ k 2x ρ(x) = k2 kx − 2 |x| > k k = 1.345 is the default in R and yields 95% relative efficiency for Gaussian errors in low-dimensional problems. We also carried out the numerical work for L1 -regression, i.e. ρ(x) = |x|. See Appendix D for details.  6.1  Asymptotic Normality of A Single Coordinate  First we simulate the finite sample distribution of β̂1 , the first coordinate of β̂. For each combination of sample size n (100, 200, 400 and 800), type of design (i.i.d, elliptical and Hadamard), entry distribution F (normal and t2 ) and error distribution L() (normal and t2 ), we run 50 simulations with each consisting of the following steps: (Step 1) Generate one design matrix X; 19  (Step 2) Generate the 300 error vectors ; (Step 3) Regress each Y =  on the design matrix X and end up with 300 random samples (1) (300) of β̂1 , denoted by β̂1 , . . . , β̂1 ; b (Step 4) Estimate the standard deviation of β̂1 by the sample standard error sd; h i (k) b β̂ (k) + 1.96 · sd b for each (Step 5) Construct a confidence interval I (k) = β̂1 − 1.96 · sd, 1 k = 1, . . . , 300; (Step 6) Calculate the empirical 95% coverage by the proportion of confidence intervals which cover the true β1 = 0. Finally, we display the boxplots of the empirical 95% coverages of β̂1 for each case in Figure 2. It is worth mentioning that our theories cover two cases: 1) i.i.d design with normal entries and normal errors (orange bars in the first row and the first column), see Proposition 3.4; 2) elliptical design with normal factors ζi and normal errors (orange bars in the second row and the first column), see Proposition 3.10. We first discuss the case κ = 0.5. In this case, there are only two samples per parameter. Nonetheless, we observe that the coverage is quite close to 0.95, even with a sample size as small as 100, in both cases that are covered by our theories. For other cases, it is interesting to see that the coverage is valid and most stable in the partial hadamard design case and is not sensitive to the distribution of multiplicative factor in elliptical design case even when the error has a t2 distribution. For i.i.d. designs, the coverage is still valid and stable when the entry is normal. By contrast, when the entry has a t2 distribution, the coverage has a large variation in small samples. The average coverage is still close to 0.95 in the i.i.d. normal design case but is slightly lower than 0.95 in the i.i.d. t2 design case. In summary, the finite sample distribution of β̂1 is more sensitive to the entry distribution than the error distribution. This indicates that the assumptions on the design matrix are not just artifacts of the proof but are quite essential. The same conclusion can be drawn from the case where κ = 0.8 except that the variation becomes larger in most cases when the sample size is small. However, it is worth pointing out that even in this case where there is 1.25 samples per parameter, the sample distribution of β̂1 is well approximated by a normal distribution with a moderate sample size (n ≥ 400). This is in contrast to the classical rule of thumb which suggests that 5-10 samples are needed per parameter.  6.2  Asymptotic Normality for Multiple Marginals  Since our theory holds for general Jn , it is worth checking the approximation for multiple coordinates in finite samples. For illustration, we consider 10 coordinates, namely β̂1 ∼ β̂10 , simultaneously and calculate the minimum empirical 95% coverage. To avoid the finite sample dependence between coordinates involved in the simulation, we estimate the empirical coverage independently for each coordinate. Specifically, we run 50 simulations with each consisting of the following steps: (Step 1) Generate one design matrix X; (Step 2) Generate the 3000 error vectors ; (Step 3) Regress each Y =  on the design matrix X and end up with 300 random samples of β̂j for each j = 1, . . . , 10 by using the (300(j − 1) + 1)-th to 300j-th response vector Y ; b j for (Step 4) Estimate the standard deviation of β̂j by the sample standard error sd j = 1, . . . , 10; h i (k) (k) b j , β̂ (k) + 1.96 · sd b j for (Step 5) Construct a confidence interval Ij = β̂j − 1.96 · sd j each j = 1, . . . , 10 and k = 1, . . . , 300; 20  ^ Coverage of β1 (κ = 0.5) normal  ^ Coverage of β1 (κ = 0.8)  t(2)  normal  1.00 ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  0.95  ●  1.00  1.00 ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  0.90  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  1.00  0.95  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  100  200  400  800  ellip  ●  Coverage  0.90  0.95  ●  ●  0.90  ellip  Coverage  ●  iid  ●  iid  0.95  t(2)  1.00  0.90  1.00  0.90  100  200  400  800  100  200  400  hadamard  hadamard  0.95  0.95 0.90  800  100  200  400  Sample Size Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  800  Sample Size hadamard  Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  hadamard  Figure 2: Empirical 95% coverage of β̂1 with κ = 0.5 (left) and κ = 0.8 (right) using Huber1.345 loss. The x-axis corresponds to the sample size, ranging from 100 to 800; the y-axis corresponds to the empirical 95% coverage. Each column represents an error distribution and each row represents a type of design. The orange solid bar corresponds to the case F = Normal; the blue dotted bar corresponds to the case F = t2 ; the red dashed bar represents the Hadamard design. (Step 6) Calculate the empirical 95% coverage by the proportion of confidence intervals which cover the true βj = 0, denoted by Cj , for each j = 1, . . . , 10, (Step 7) Report the minimum coverage min1≤j≤10 Cj . If the assumptions A1 - A5 are satisfied, min1≤j≤10 Cj should also be close to 0.95 as a result of Theorem 3.1. Thus, min1≤j≤10 Cj is a measure for the approximation accuracy for multiple marginals. Figure 3 displays the boxplots of this quantity under the same scenarios as the last subsection. In two cases that our theories cover, the minimum coverage is increasingly closer to the true level 0.95. Similar to the last subsection, the approximation is accurate in the partial hadamard design case and is insensitive to the distribution of multiplicative factors in the elliptical design case. However, the approximation is very inaccurate in the i.i.d. t2 design case. Again, this shows the evidence that our technical assumptions are not artifacts of the proof. On the other hand, the figure 3 suggests using a conservative variance estimator, e.g. the Jackknife estimator, or corrections on the confidence level in order to make simultaneous inference on multiple coordinates. Here we investigate the validity of Bonferroni correction by modifying the step 5 and step 6. The confidence interval after Bonferroni correction is obtained by h i (k) (k) b j , β̂ (k) + z1−α/20 · sd bj Ij = β̂j − z1−α/20 · sd (14) j where α = 0.05 and zγ is the γ-th quantile of a standard normal distribution. The (k) proportion of k such that 0 ∈ Ij for all j ≤ 10 should be at least 0.95 if the marginals are all close to a normal distribution. We modify the confidence intervals in step 5 by (k) (14) and calculate the proportion of k such that 0 ∈ Ij for all j in step 6. Figure 4 displays the boxplots of this coverage. It is clear that the Bonferroni correction gives the valid coverage except when n = 100, κ = 0.8 and the error has a t2 distribution. 21  ^ ^ Min. coverage of β1 ~ β10 (κ = 0.5) normal  ^ ^ Min. coverage of β1 ~ β10 (κ = 0.8)  t(2)  normal  0.95 0.90  t(2)  0.95 ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  0.90  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  0.80  0.95  ●  0.90  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ellip  ●  ●  Coverage  0.95 ●  ellip  Coverage  iid  0.80  0.95 0.90  ●  ●  iid  0.80  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  0.80  0.95  0.80 100  200  400  800  100  200  400  hadamard  hadamard  0.90  0.90  0.80  800  100  200  400  Sample Size Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  800  100  200  400  800  Sample Size hadamard  Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  hadamard  Figure 3: Mininum empirical 95% coverage of β̂1 ∼ β̂10 with κ = 0.5 (left) and κ = 0.8 (right) using Huber1.345 loss. The x-axis corresponds to the sample size, ranging from 100 to 800; the y-axis corresponds to the minimum empirical 95% coverage. Each column represents an error distribution and each row represents a type of design. The orange solid bar corresponds to the case F = Normal; the blue dotted bar corresponds to the case F = t2 ; the red dashed bar represents the Hadamard design.  7  Conclusion  We have proved coordinate-wise asymptotic normality for regression M-estimates in the moderate-dimensional asymptotic regime p/n → κ ∈ (0, 1), for fixed design matrices under appropriate technical assumptions. Our design assumptions are satisfied with high probability for a broad class of random designs. The main novel ingredient of the proof is the use of the second-order Poincaré inequality. Numerical experiments confirm and complement our theoretical results.  22  ^ ^ Bonf. coverage of β1 ~ β10 (κ = 0.5) normal  ^ ^ Bonf. coverage of β1 ~ β10 (κ = 0.8)  t(2)  normal  1.00 ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  iid  0.95  iid  0.95  ●  0.90  0.90 1.00 ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  0.95  ●  ●  0.90  0.90  1.00  1.00  hadamard  hadamard  0.95  ●  ellip  ellip  0.95  Coverage  1.00  Coverage  t(2)  1.00  0.95  0.90  0.90 100  200  400  800  100  200  400  800  100  200  400  Sample Size Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  800  100  200  400  800  Sample Size hadamard  Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  hadamard  Figure 4: Empirical 95% coverage of β̂1 ∼ β̂10 after Bonferroni correction with κ = 0.5 (left) and κ = 0.8 (right) using Huber1.345 loss. The x-axis corresponds to the sample size, ranging from 100 to 800; the y-axis corresponds to the empirical uniform 95% coverage after Bonferroni correction. Each column represents an error distribution and each row represents a type of design. The orange solid bar corresponds to the case F = Normal; the blue dotted bar corresponds to the case F = t2 ; the red dashed bar represents the Hadamard design.  References Anderson, T. W. (1962). An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis. Wiley New York. Bai, Z., & Silverstein, J. W. (2010). Spectral analysis of large dimensional random matrices (Vol. 20). Springer. Bai, Z., & Yin, Y. (1993). Limit of the smallest eigenvalue of a large dimensional sample covariance matrix. The annals of Probability, 1275–1294. Baranchik, A. (1973). Inadmissibility of maximum likelihood estimators in some multiple regression problems with three or more independent variables. The Annals of Statistics, 312–321. Bean, D., Bickel, P., El Karoui, N., Lim, C., & Yu, B. (2012). Penalized robust regression in high-dimension. Technical Report 813, Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley. Bean, D., Bickel, P. J., El Karoui, N., & Yu, B. (2013). Optimal M-estimation in highdimensional regression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110 (36), 14563–14568. Bickel, P. J., & Doksum, K. A. (2015). Mathematical statistics: Basic ideas and selected topics, volume i (Vol. 117). CRC Press. Bickel, P. J., & Freedman, D. A. (1981). Some asymptotic theory for the bootstrap. The Annals of Statistics, 1196–1217. Bickel, P. J., & Freedman, D. A. (1983). Bootstrapping regression models with many parameters. Festschrift for Erich L. Lehmann, 28–48. Chatterjee, S. (2009). Fluctuations of eigenvalues and second order poincaré inequalities. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 143 (1-2), 1–40. Chernoff, H. (1981). A note on an inequality involving the normal distribution. The Annals of Probability, 533–535.  23  Cizek, P., Härdle, W. K., & Weron, R. (2005). Statistical tools for finance and insurance. Springer Science & Business Media. Cochran, W. G. (1977). Sampling techniques. John Wiley & Sons. David, H. A., & Nagaraja, H. N. (1981). Order statistics. Wiley Online Library. Donoho, D., & Montanari, A. (2016). High dimensional robust m-estimation: Asymptotic variance via approximate message passing. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 166 , 935-969. Durrett, R. (2010). Probability: theory and examples. Cambridge university press. Efron, B., & Efron, B. (1982). The jackknife, the bootstrap and other resampling plans (Vol. 38). SIAM. El Karoui, N. (2009). Concentration of measure and spectra of random matrices: applications to correlation matrices, elliptical distributions and beyond. The Annals of Applied Probability, 19 (6), 2362–2405. El Karoui, N. (2010). High-dimensionality effects in the markowitz problem and other quadratic programs with linear constraints: Risk underestimation. The Annals of Statistics, 38 (6), 3487–3566. El Karoui, N. (2013). Asymptotic behavior of unregularized and ridge-regularized high-dimensional robust regression estimators: rigorous results. arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.2445 . El Karoui, N. (2015). On the impact of predictor geometry on the performance on highdimensional ridge-regularized generalized robust regression estimators. Technical Report 826, Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley. El Karoui, N., Bean, D., Bickel, P., Lim, C., & Yu, B. (2011). On robust regression with high-dimensional predictors. Technical Report 811, Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley. El Karoui, N., Bean, D., Bickel, P. J., Lim, C., & Yu, B. (2013). On robust regression with high-dimensional predictors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110 (36), 14557–14562. El Karoui, N., & Purdom, E. (2015). Can we trust the bootstrap in high-dimension? Technical Report 824, Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley. Esseen, C.-G. (1945). Fourier analysis of distribution functions. a mathematical study of the laplace-gaussian law. Acta Mathematica, 77 (1), 1–125. Geman, S. (1980). A limit theorem for the norm of random matrices. The Annals of Probability, 252–261. Hanson, D. L., & Wright, F. T. (1971). A bound on tail probabilities for quadratic forms in independent random variables. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 42 (3), 1079–1083. Horn, R. A., & Johnson, C. R. (2012). Matrix analysis. Cambridge university press. Huber, P. J. (1964). Robust estimation of a location parameter. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35 (1), 73–101. Huber, P. J. (1972). The 1972 wald lecture robust statistics: A review. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1041–1067. Huber, P. J. (1973). Robust regression: asymptotics, conjectures and monte carlo. The Annals of Statistics, 799–821. Huber, P. J. (1981). Robust statistics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York. Huber, P. J. (2011). Robust statistics. Springer. Johnstone, I. M. (2001). On the distribution of the largest eigenvalue in principal components analysis. Annals of statistics, 295–327. Jurečkovà, J., & Klebanov, L. (1997). Inadmissibility of robust estimators with respect to l1 norm. Lecture Notes-Monograph Series, 71–78. Latala, R. (2005). Some estimates of norms of random matrices. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 133 (5), 1273–1282. Ledoux, M. (2001). The concentration of measure phenomenon (No. 89). American Mathematical Soc. Litvak, A. E., Pajor, A., Rudelson, M., & Tomczak-Jaegermann, N. (2005). Smallest singular value of random matrices and geometry of random polytopes. Advances in  24  Mathematics, 195 (2), 491–523. Mallows, C. (1972). A note on asymptotic joint normality. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 508–515. Mammen, E. (1989). Asymptotics with increasing dimension for robust regression with applications to the bootstrap. The Annals of Statistics, 382–400. Marčenko, V. A., & Pastur, L. A. (1967). Distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of random matrices. Mathematics of the USSR-Sbornik , 1 (4), 457. Muirhead, R. J. (1982). Aspects of multivariate statistical theory (Vol. 197). John Wiley & Sons. Portnoy, S. (1984). Asymptotic behavior of M-estimators of p regression parameters when p2 /n is large. i. consistency. The Annals of Statistics, 1298–1309. Portnoy, S. (1985). Asymptotic behavior of M estimators of p regression parameters when p2 /n is large; ii. normal approximation. The Annals of Statistics, 1403–1417. Portnoy, S. (1986). On the central limit theorem in Rp when p → ∞. Probability theory and related fields, 73 (4), 571–583. Portnoy, S. (1987). A central limit theorem applicable to robust regression estimators. Journal of multivariate analysis, 22 (1), 24–50. Posekany, A., Felsenstein, K., & Sykacek, P. (2011). Biological assessment of robust noise models in microarray data analysis. Bioinformatics, 27 (6), 807–814. Relles, D. A. (1967). Robust regression by modified least-squares. (Tech. Rep.). DTIC Document. Rosenthal, H. P. (1970). On the subspaces ofl p (p¿ 2) spanned by sequences of independent random variables. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 8 (3), 273–303. Rudelson, M., & Vershynin, R. (2009). Smallest singular value of a random rectangular matrix. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 62 (12), 1707–1739. Rudelson, M., & Vershynin, R. (2010). Non-asymptotic theory of random matrices: extreme singular values. arXiv preprint arXiv:1003.2990 . Rudelson, M., & Vershynin, R. (2013). Hanson-wright inequality and sub-gaussian concentration. Electron. Commun. Probab, 18 (82), 1–9. Scheffe, H. (1999). The analysis of variance (Vol. 72). John Wiley & Sons. Silverstein, J. W. (1985). The smallest eigenvalue of a large dimensional wishart matrix. The Annals of Probability, 1364–1368. Stone, M. (1974). Cross-validatory choice and assessment of statistical predictions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 111–147. Tyler, D. E. (1987). A distribution-free M-estimator of multivariate scatter. The Annals of Statistics, 234–251. Van der Vaart, A. W. (1998). Asymptotic statistics. Cambridge university press. Vershynin, R. (2010). Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices. arXiv preprint arXiv:1011.3027 . Wachter, K. W. (1976). Probability plotting points for principal components. In Ninth interface symposium computer science and statistics (pp. 299–308). Wachter, K. W. (1978). The strong limits of random matrix spectra for sample matrices of independent elements. The Annals of Probability, 1–18. Wasserman, L., & Roeder, K. (2009). High dimensional variable selection. Annals of statistics, 37 (5A), 2178. Yohai, V. J. (1972). Robust M estimates for the general linear model. Universidad Nacional de la Plata. Departamento de Matematica. Yohai, V. J., & Maronna, R. A. (1979). Asymptotic behavior of M-estimators for the linear model. The Annals of Statistics, 258–268.  25  APPENDIX A  Proof Sketch of Lemma 4.5  In this Appendix, we provide a roadmap for proving Lemma 4.5 by considering a special case where X is one realization of a random matrix Z with i.i.d. mean-zero σ 2 -subgaussian entries. Random matrix theory (Geman, 1980; Silverstein, √ 1985; Bai & Yin, √ 1993) implies that λ+ = (1 + κ)2 + op (1) = Op (1) and λ− = (1 − κ)2 + op (1) = Ωp (1). Thus, the assumption A3 is satisfied with high probability. Thus, the Lemma 4.4 in p. 16 holds with high probability. It remains to prove the following lemma to obtain Theorem 3.1. Lemma A.1. Let Z be a random matrix with i.i.d. mean-zero σ 2 -sub-gaussian entries and X be one realization of Z. Then under assumptions A1 and A2,     1 polyLog(n) , min Var(β̂j ) = Ωp , max Mj = Op 1≤j≤p 1≤j≤p n n · polyLog(n) where Mj is defined in (11) in p.16 and the randomness in op (·) and Op (·) comes from Z.  A-1  Upper Bound of Mj  First by Proposition E.3, λ+ = Op (1),  λ− = Ωp (1).  In the rest of the proof, the symbol E and Var denotes the expectation and the variance 1 conditional on Z. Let Z̃ = D 2 Z, then Mj = EkeTj (Z̃ T Z̃)−1 Z̃ T k∞ . Let H̃j = I − T T Z̃[j] (Z̃[j] Z̃[j] )−1 Z̃[j] , then by block matrix inversion formula (see Proposition E.1), which we state as Proposition E.1 in Appendix E. !−1   T Z̃ Z̃ Z̃1 [1] 1 T −1 T (Z̃ Z̃) Z̃ = T Z̃[1] Z̃[1] Z̃[1]    T 1 1 −Z̃1T Z̃[1] (Z̃[1] Z̃[1] )−1 Z̃1 = T Z̃[1] ∗ ∗ Z̃1 (I − H̃1 )Z̃1  T  1 Z̃1 (I − H̃1 ) = T . ∗ Z̃1 (I − H̃1 )Z̃1 Z̃1T Z̃1 T Z̃[1] Z̃1  This implies that M1 = E  kZ̃1T (I − H̃1 )k∞ . Z̃1T (I − H̃1 )Z̃1  (A-1)  Since Z T DZ/n  K0 λ− I, we have 1 1 = eT1 (Z̃ T Z̃)−1 e1 = eT1 (Z T DZ)−1 e1 = eT1 T n Z̃1 (I − H̃1 )Z̃1    Z T DZ n  −1 e1 ≤  1 nK0 λ−  and we obtain a bound for M1 as 1  M1 ≤  EkZ̃1T (I − H̃1 )k∞ EkZ1T D 2 (I − H̃1 )k∞ = . nK0 λ− nK0 λ−  Similarly, 1  1  1  T T EkZjT D 2 (I − D 2 Z[j] (Z[j] DZ[j] )−1 Z[j] D 2 )k∞ EkZjT D 2 (I − H̃j )k∞ Mj ≤ = . nK0 λ− nK0 λ− 1  26  (A-2)  The vector in the numerator is a linear contrast of Zj and Zj has mean-zero i.i.d. subgaussian entries. For any fixed matrix A ∈ Rn×n , denote Ak by its k-th column, then ATk Zj is σ 2 kAk k22 -sub-gaussian (see Section 5.2.3 of Vershynin (2010) for a detailed discussion) and hence by definition of sub-Gaussianity, t2  P (|ATk Zj | ≥ σkAk k2 t) ≤ 2e− 2 . Therefore, by a simple union bound, we conclude that t2  P (kAT Zj k∞ ≥ σ max kAk k2 t) ≤ 2ne− 2 . k  √ Let t = 2 log n, P (kAT Zj k∞ ≥ 2σ max kAk k2 k  p 2 log n) ≤ = o(1). n  This entails that   T  kA Zj k∞ = Op   max kAk k2 · polyLog(n) = Op (kAkop · polyLog(n)) . k  (A-3)  1  with high probability. In Mj , the coefficient matrix (I − Hj )D 2 depends on Zj through D and hence we cannot use (A-3) directly. However, the dependence can be removed by replacing D by D[j] since ri,[j] does not depend on Zj . Since Z has i.i.d. sub-gaussian entries, no column is highly influential. In other words, the estimator will not change drastically after removing j-th column. This would suggest Ri ≈ ri,[j] . It is proved by El Karoui (2013) that   polyLog(n) √ sup |Ri − ri,[j] | = Op . n i,j It can be rigorously proved that kZjT D(I − H̃j )k∞ − kZjT D[j] (I − Hj )k∞ = Op 1    polyLog(n) n   ,  1  T T 2 2 where Hj = I − D[j] Z[j] (Z[j] D[j] Z[j] )−1 Z[j] D[j] ; see Appendix A-1 for details. Since D[j] (I − Hj ) is independent of Zj and  kD[j] (I − Hj )kop ≤ kD[j] kop ≤ K1 = O (polyLog(n)) , it follows from (A-2) and (A-3) that kZjT D[j] (I   − Hj )k∞ = Op  polyLog(n) n   .  In summary,  Mj = Op  A-2 A-2.1  polyLog(n) n   .  (A-4)  Lower Bound of Var(β̂j ) Approximating Var(β̂j ) by Var(bj )  It is shown by El Karoui (2013)1 that 1 Nj β̂j ≈ bj , √ n ξj  (A-5)  1 El Karoui (2013) considers a ridge regularized M estimator, which is different from our setting. However, this argument still holds in our case and proved in Appendix B.  27  where n  1 X Nj = √ Zij ψ(ri,[j] ), n i=1  1 T T T Z (D[j] − D[j] Z[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 Z[j] D[j] )Zj . n j  ξj =  It has been shown by El Karoui (2013) that  max |β̂j − bj | = Op j  polyLog(n) n   .  Thus, Var(β̂j ) ≈ Var(bj ) and a more refined calculation in Appendix A-2.1 shows that   polyLog(n) . | Var(β̂j ) − Var(bj )| = Op 3 n2 It is left to show that   Var(bj ) = Ωp  A-2.2  1 n · polyLog(n)   .  (A-6)  Bounding Var(bj ) via Var(Nj )  By definition of bj ,  Var(bj ) = Ωp  polyLog(n) n     ⇐⇒ Var  Nj ξj   = Ωp (polyLog(n)) .  As will be shown in Appendix B-6.4,  Var(ξj ) = Op  polyLog(n) n   .  As a result, ξj ≈ Eξj and  Var  Nj ξj      Nj Eξj  ≈ Var   =  Var(Nj ) . (Eξj )2  As in the previous paper (El Karoui, 2013), we rewrite ξj as ξj =  1 1 1 1 T 21 T T 2 2 2 Zj D[j] (I − D[j] Z[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 Z[j] D[j] )D[j] Zj . n  The middle matrix is idempotent and hence positive semi-definite. Thus, ξj ≤ Then we obtain that  1 T Z D[j] Zj ≤ K1 λ+ = Op (polyLog(n)) . n j Var(Nj ) = Ωp (Eξj )2    Var(Nj ) polyLog(n)   ,  and it is left to show that  Var(Nj ) = Ωp A-2.3  1 polyLog(n)   .  (A-7)  Bounding Var(Nj ) via tr(Qj )  Recall the definition of Nj (A-5), and that of Qj (see Section 3.1 in p.8), we have Var(Nj ) =  1 T Z Qj Zj n j  Notice that Zj is independent of ri,[j] and hence the conditional distribution of Zj given Qj remains the same as the marginal distribution of Zj . Since Zj has i.i.d. sub-gaussian 28  entries, the Hanson-Wright inequality (Hanson & Wright, 1971; Rudelson & Vershynin, 2013; see Proposition E.2), shown in Proposition E.2, implies that any quadratic form of Zj , denoted by ZjT Qj Zj is concentrated on its mean, i.e. 2 ZjT Qj Zj ≈ EZj , ZjT Qj Zj = (EZ1j ) · tr(Qj ).  As a consequence, it is left to show that  tr(Qj ) = Ωp A-2.4  n polyLog(n)   .  (A-8)  Lower Bound of tr(Qj )  By definition of Qj , tr(Qj ) =  n X  Var(ψ(ri,[j] )).  i=1  To lower bounded the variance of ψ(ri,[j] ), recall that for any random variable W , Var(W ) =  1 E(W − W 0 )2 . 2  (A-9)  where W 0 is an independent copy of W . Suppose g : R → R is a function such that |g 0 (x)| ≥ c for all x, then (A-9) implies that Var(g(W )) =  c2 1 E(g(W ) − g(W 0 ))2 ≥ E(W − W 0 )2 = c2 Var(W ). 2 2  (A-10)  In other words, (A-10) entails that Var(W ) is a lower bound for Var(g(W )) provided that the derivative of g is bounded away from 0. As an application, we see that Var(ψ(ri,[j] )) ≥ K02 Var(ri,[j] ) and hence tr(Qj ) ≥ K02  n X  Var(ri,[j] ).  i=1  By the variance decomposition formula,    Var(ri,[j] ) = E Var ri,[j] (i) + Var E ri,[j] (i) ≥ E Var ri,[j] [i] , where (i) includes all but i-th entry of . Given (i) , ri,[j] is a function of i . Using (A-10), we have Var(ri,[j] |(i) ) ≥ inf i  ∂ri,[j] ∂i  2  · Var(i |(i) ) ≥ inf i  ∂ri,[j] ∂i  2  · Var(i ).  This implies that Var(ri,[j] ) ≥ E Var ri,[j] [i]    ≥ E inf   ∂ri,[j] ∂i  2  2  !  · min Var(i ). i  Summing Var(ri,[j] ) over i = 1, . . . , n, we obtain that tr(Qj ) =  n X  X  Var(ri,[j] ) ≥ E  i=1  i  ∂ri,[j] inf  ∂i  · min Var(i ). i  It will be shown in Appendix B-6.3 that under assumptions A1-A3,   X ∂ri,[j] 2 n E inf = Ωp .  ∂i polyLog(n) i This proves (A-8) and as a result,  min Var(β̂j ) = Ωp j  29  1 n · polyLog(n)   .  (A-11)  B B-1  Proof of Theorem 3.1 Notation  To be self-contained, we summarize our notations in this subsection. The model we considered here is y = Xβ ∗ +  where X ∈ Rn×p be the design matrix and  is a random vector with independent entries. β̂ −Eβ̂j Notice that the target quantity √j is shift invariant, we can assume β ∗ = 0 without Var(β̂j )  loss of generality provided that X has full column rank; see Section 3.1 for details. Let xTi ∈ R1×p denote the i-th row of X and Xj ∈ Rn×1 denote the j-th column of X. Throughout the paper we will denote by Xij ∈ R the (i, j)-th entry of X, by X(i) ∈ R(n−1)×p the design matrix X after removing the i-th row, by X[j] ∈ Rn×(p−1) the design matrix X after removing the j-th column, by X(i),[j] ∈ R(n−1)×(p−1) the design matrix after removing both i-th row and j-th column, and by xi,[j] ∈ R1×(p−1) the vector xi after removing j-th entry. The M-estimator β̂ associated with the loss function ρ is defined as n 1X ρ(k − xTk β). (B-12) β̂ = arg min p n β∈R k=1  Similarly we define the leave-j-th-predictor-out version as n  β̂[j]  1X ρ(k − xTk,[j] β). = arg min p n β∈R  (B-13)  k=1  Based on these notation we define the full residual Rk as Rk = k − xTk β̂,  k = 1, 2, . . . , n  (B-14)  the leave-j-th-predictor-out residual as rk,[j] = k − xTk,[j] β̂[j] ,  k = 1, 2, . . . , n, j ∈ Jn .  (B-15)  D̃ = diag(ψ 00 (Rk )),  (B-16)  D̃[j] = diag(ψ 00 (rk,[j] )).  (B-17)  T T G[j] = I − X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] .  (B-18)  Four diagonal matrices are defined as D = diag(ψ 0 (Rk )), D[j] = diag(ψ 0 (rk,[j] )), Further we define G and G[j] as G = I − X(X T DX)−1 X T D,  Let Jn denote the indices of coefficients of interest. We say a ∈]a1 , a2 [ if and only if a ∈ [min{a1 , a2 }, max{a1 , a2 }]. Regarding the technical assumptions, we need the following quantities  T   T  X X X X λ+ = λmax , λ− = λmin (B-19) n n be the largest (resp. smallest) eigenvalue of the matrix canonical basis vector and hj,0 = (ψ(r1,[j] ), . . . , ψ(rn,[j] ))T ,  XT X n .  Let ei ∈ Rn be the i-th  hj,1,i = GT[j] ei .  (B-20)  Finally, let (  |hTj,0 Xj | |hTj,1,i Xj | , max ∆C = max max j∈Jn ||hj,0 || i≤n,j∈Jn ||hj,1,i || 30  ) ,  (B-21)  Qj = Cov(hj,0 ).  (B-22)  We adopt Landau’s notation (O(·), o(·), Op (·), op (·)). In addition, we say an = Ω(bn ) if bn = O(an ) and similarly, we say an = Ωp (bn ) if bn = Op (an ). To simplify the logarithm factors, we use the symbol polyLog(n) to denote any factor that can be upper bounded 1 to denote any factor that can be by (log n)γ for some γ > 0. Similarly, we use polyLog(n) 1 0 lower bounded by (log n)γ 0 for some γ > 0. Finally we restate all the technical assumptions:   1 A1 ρ(0) = ψ(0) = 0 and there exists K0 = Ω polyLog(n) , K1 , K2 = O (polyLog(n)), such that for any x ∈ R, d p 0 |ψ 00 (x)| ≤ K2 ; ( ψ (x)) = p dx ψ 0 (x)  K0 ≤ ψ 0 (x) ≤ K1 ,  A2 i = ui (Wi ) where (W1 , . . . , Wn ) ∼ N (0, In×n ) and ui are smooth functions with ku0i k∞ ≤ c1 and ku00i k∞ ≤  c2 for some c1 , c2 = O(polyLog(n)). Moreover, assume mini Var(i ) = Ω  1 polyLog(n)  .  A3 λ+ = O(polyLog(n)) and λ− = Ω A4 minj∈Jn  XjT Qj Xj tr(Qj )  =Ω    1 polyLog(n)      1 polyLog(n)    ;  ;  A5 E∆8C = O (polyLog(n)).  B-2  Deterministic Approximation Results  In Appendix A, we use several approximations under random designs, e.g. Ri ≈ ri,[j] . To prove them, we follow the strategy of El Karoui (2013) which establishes the deterministic results and then apply the concentration inequalities to obtain high probability bounds. Note that β̂ is the solution of n  0 = f (β) ,  1X xi ψ(i − xTi β), n i=1  we need the following key lemma to bound kβ1 − β2 k2 by kf (β1 ) − f (β2 )k2 , which can be calculated explicily. Lemma B.1. [El Karoui (2013), Proposition 2.1] For any β1 and β2 , kβ1 − β2 k2 ≤  1 kf (β1 ) − f (β2 )k2 . K0 λ−  Proof. By the mean value theorem, there exists νi ∈]i − xTi β1 , i − xTi β2 [ such that ψ(i − xTi β1 ) − ψ(i − xTi β2 ) = ψ 0 (νi ) · xTi (β2 − β1 ). Then n  1X 0 ψ (νi )xi xTi (β1 − β2 ) n i=1 2 ! n X 1 ≥ λmin ψ 0 (νi )xi xTi · kβ1 − β2 k2 n i=1  kf (β1 ) − f (β2 )k2 =  ≥ K0 λ− kβ1 − β2 k2 .  31  Based on Lemma B.1, we can derive the deterministic results informally stated in Appendix A. Such results are shown by El Karoui (2013) for ridge-penalized M-estimates and here we derive a refined version for unpenalized M-estimates. Throughout this subsection, we only assume assumption A1. This implies the following lemma, Lemma B.2. Under assumption A1, for any x and y, p p p |ψ(x)| ≤ K1 |x|, | ψ 0 (x)− ψ 0 (y)| ≤ K2 |x−y|, |ψ 0 (x)−ψ 0 (y)| ≤ 2 K1 K2 |x−y| , K3 |x−y|. To state the result, we define the following quantities.   n 1 1X T = √ max max kxi k2 , max kXj k2 , E = ρ(i ), i j∈Jn n i=1 n n  U=  1X xi (ψ(i ) − Eψ(i )) n i=1  (B-23)  n  ,  U0 =  2  1X xi Eψ(i ) n i=1  .  (B-24)  2  The following proposition summarizes all deterministic results which we need in the proof. Proposition B.3. Under Assumption A1, (i) The norm of M estimator is bounded by kβ̂k2 ≤  1 (U + U0 ); K0 λ−  (ii) Define bj as 1 Nj bj = √ n ξj where n  1 X Nj = √ Xij ψ(ri,[j] ), n i=1 Then  ξj =  1 T T T X (D[j] − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] )Xj , n j  √ √ 1 2K1 max |bj | ≤ √ · · ∆C · E, j∈Jn n K0 λ−  (iii) The difference between β̂j and bj is bounded by max |β̂j − bj | ≤ j∈Jn  1 2K12 K3 λ+ T · ∆3C · E. · 7 n 2 K04 λ−  (iv) The difference between the full and the leave-one-predictor-out residual is bounded by ! √ √ 1 2K12 K3 λ+ T 2 2K1 3 2 max max |Ri − ri,[j] | ≤ √ · ∆C · E + 3 · ∆C · E . 7 j∈Jn i n 2 K04 λ− K02 λ− Proof.  (i) By Lemma B.1, kβ̂k2 ≤  1 kf (0)k2 kf (β̂) − f (0)k2 = , K0 λ− K0 λ−  since β̂ is a zero of f (β). By definition, n  n  n  1X 1X 1X f (0) = xi ψ(i ) = xi (ψ(i ) − Eψ(i )) + xi Eψ(i ). n i=1 n i=1 n i=1 This implies that kf (0)k2 ≤ U + U0 . 32  (ii) First we prove that ξj ≥ K0 λ− .  (B-25)  Since all diagonal entries of D[j] is lower bounded by K0 , we conclude that ! X T D[j] X ≥ K0 λ− . λmin n Note that ξj is the Schur’s complement (Horn & Johnson, 2012, chapter 0.8) of X T D[j] X , n  we have ξj−1  =  eTj  X T D[j] X n  !−1 ej ≤  1 , K0 λ−  which implies (B-25). As for Nj , we have Nj =  XjT hj,0 khj,0 k XjT hj,0 √ = √ 2· . khj,0 k2 n n  (B-26)  The the second term is bounded by ∆C by definition, see (B-21). For the first term, the assumption A1 that ψ 0 (x) ≤ K1 implies that Z x Z x 0 1 2 ψ (y) · ψ(y)dy = ψ (x). ρ(x) = ρ(x) − ρ(0) = ψ(y)dy ≥ K 2K 1 1 0 0 Here we use the fact that sign(ψ(y)) = sign(y). Recall the definition of hj,0 , we obtain that sP sP n n 2 p ψ(r ) khj,0 k2 i,[j] i=1 i=1 ρ(ri,[j] ) √ = ≤ 2K1 · . n n n Since β̂[j] is the minimizer of the loss function n  Pn  i=1  ρ(i − xTi,[j] β[j] ), it holds that  n  1X 1X ρ(ri,[j] ) ≤ ρ(i ) = E. n i=1 n i=1 Putting together the pieces, we conclude that p √ |Nj | ≤ 2K1 · ∆C E. By definition of bj ,  (B-27)  √ √ 1 2K1 |bj | ≤ √ · ∆C E. n K0 λ−  (iii) The proof of this result is almost the same as El Karoui (2013). We state it here for the sake of completeness. Let b̃j ∈ Rp with (b̃j )j = bj ,  T T (b̃j )[j] = β̂[j] − bj (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj  (B-28)  where the subscript j denotes the j-th entry and the subscript [j] denotes the subvector formed by all but j-th entry. Furthermore, define γj with (γj )j = −1,  T T (γj )[j] = (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj .  Then we can rewrite b̃j as (b̃j )j = −bj (γj )j ,  (b̃j )[j] = β̂[j] − bj (γj )[j] .  33  (B-29)  By definition of β̂[j] , we have [f (β̂[j] )][j] = 0 and hence [f (b̃j )][j] = [f (b̃j )][j] − [f (β̂[j] )][j] =  n i h 1X xi,[j] ψ(i − xTi b̃j ) − ψ(i − xTi,[j] β̂[j] ) . n i=1  (B-30) By mean value theorem, there exists νi,j ∈]i − xTi b̃j , i − xTi,[j] β̂[j] [ such that ψ(i − xTi b̃j ) − ψ(i − xTi,[j] β̂[j] ) = ψ 0 (νi,j )(xTi,[j] β̂[j] − xTi b̃j ) =ψ 0 (νi,j )(xTi,[j] β̂[j] − xTi,[j] (b̃j )[j] − Xij bj ) i h T T =ψ 0 (νi,j ) · bj · xTi,[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − Xij Let di,j = ψ 0 (νi,j ) − ψ 0 (ri,[j] )  (B-31)  and plug the above result into (B-30), we obtain that n i h  1X T T xi,[j] · ψ 0 (ri,[j] ) + di,j · bj · xTi,[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − Xij n i=1  [f (b̃j )][j] =  n  h i 1X 0 T T = bj · ψ (ri,[j] )xi,[j] xTi,[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − Xij n i=1 n  1X T T di,j xi,[j] (xTi,[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − Xij ) n i=1 i 1h T T T T X[j] D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − X[j] D[j] Xj = bj · n n 1X di,j xi,[j] · xTi γj + bj · n i=1 ! n 1 X di,j xi,[j] xTi γj . = bj · n i=1 + bj ·  Now we calculate [f (b̃j )]j , the j-th entry of f (b̃j ). Note that n  [f (b̃j )]j = =  1X Xij ψ(i − xTi b̃j ) n i=1  n  n  n  n  h i 1X 1X T T Xij ψ(ri,[j] ) + bj · Xij (ψ 0 (ri,[j] ) + di,j ) · xTi,[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − Xij n i=1 n i=1  h i 1X 1X 0 T T Xij ψ(ri,[j] ) + bj · ψ (ri,[j] )Xij xTi,[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − Xij n i=1 n i=1 ! n 1X T + bj · di,j Xij xi γj n i=1 ! n X 1 1 T 1 T T 2 = √ Nj + bj · D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − X D[j] X[j] (X[j] ψ 0 (ri,[j] )Xij n j n i=1 n ! n 1X T + bj · di,j Xij xi γj n i=1 ! n 1 1X T = √ Nj − bj · ξj + bj · di,j Xij xi γj n i=1 n ! n 1X T = bj · di,j Xij xi γj n i=1 =  34  where the second last line uses the definition of bj . Putting the results together, we obtain that ! n 1X T f (b̃j ) = bj · di,j xi xi · γj . n i=1 This entails that kf (b̃j )k2 ≤ |bj | · max |di,j | · λ+ · kγj k2 .  (B-32)  i  Now we derive a bound for maxi |di,j |, where di,j is defined in (B-36). By Lemma B.2, |di,j | = |ψ 0 (νi,j ) − ψ 0 (ri,[j] )| ≤ K3 |νi,j − ri,[j] | = K3 |xTi,[j] β̂[j] − xTi b̃j |. By definition of b̃j and hj,1,i , T T |xTi,[j] β̂[j] − xTi b̃j | = |bj | · xTi,[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj − Xij T T =|bj | · |eTi (I − X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] )Xj |  =|bj | · |hTj,1,i Xj | ≤ |bj | · ∆C khj,1,i k2 ,  (B-33)  where the last inequality is derived by definition of ∆C , see (B-21). Since hj,1,i T T is the i-th column of matrix I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] , its L2 norm is upper bounded by the operator norm of this matrix. Notice that   1 1 1 −1 T T T T 2 2 2 I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] D[j]2 . I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] = D[j] The middle matrix in RHS of the displayed atom is an orthogonal projection matrix and hence  1 1 K1 2 −1 T T 2 kop · kD[j]2 kop ≤ kI − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] kop ≤ kD[j] . (B-34) K0 Therefore, max khj,1,i k2 ≤ max kI − i,j  j∈Jn  T T D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] kop  and thus  r max |di,j | ≤ K3 i   ≤  K1 K0   12 ,  K1 · |bj | · ∆C . K0  (B-35)  (B-36)  As for γj , we have K0 λ− kγj k22  ≤  γjT  X T D[j] X n  XjT Dj Xj =(γj )2j · + (γj )T[j] n  ! γj  T X[j] D[j] X[j]  n  ! (γj )[j] + 2γj  XjT D[j] X[j] (γj )[j] n  Recall the definition of γj in (B-37), we have ! T X[j] D[j] X[j] 1 T T T (γj )[j] (γj )[j] = XjT D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj n n and γj  XjT D[j] X[j] 1 T T (γj )[j] = − XjT D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] Xj . n n 35  As a result, K0 λ− kγj k22 1 1 1 1 1 T T 2 2 2 2 D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] ≤ XjT D[j] (I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] )D[j] Xj n 1  ≤  2 Xj k22 kD[j]  n  1  1 2  ≤  1  T T 2 2 · I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j]  kD[j] Xj k22 n  ≤  op  K1 kXj k22 ≤ T 2 K1 , n  where T is defined in (B-23). Therefore we have s K1 T. kγj k2 ≤ K0 λ−  (B-37)  Putting (B-32), (B-36), (B-37) and part (ii) together, we obtain that s r K1 K1 ∆C |bj | · T kf (b̃j )k2 ≤ λ+ · |bj | · K3 K0 K0 λ− s r K1 K1 1 2K1 2 ≤ λ+ · ∆ E · K3 ∆C · T n (K0 λ− )2 C K0 K0 λ− =  1 2K12 K3 λ+ T · ∆3C · E. · 5 n 3 2 K0 λ−  By Lemma B.1, kβ̂ − b̃j k2 ≤  kf (β̂) − f (b̃j )k2 kf (b̃j )k2 1 2K12 K3 λ+ T · ∆3C · E. = ≤ · 7 K0 λ− K0 λ− n 4 2 K0 λ−  Since β̂j − bj is the j-th entry of β̂ − b̃j , we have |β̂j − bj | ≤ kβ̂ − b̃j k2 ≤  1 2K12 K3 λ+ T · · ∆3C · E. 7 n 2 K04 λ−  (iv) Similar to part (iii), this result has been shown by El Karoui (2013). Here we state a refined version for the sake of completeness. Let b̃j be defined as in (B-28), then |Ri − ri,[j] | = |xTi β̂ − xTi,[j] β̂[j] | = |xTi (β̂ − b̃j ) + xTi b̃j − xTi,[j] β̂[j] | ≤ kxi k2 · kβ̂ − b̃j k2 + |xTi b̃j − xTi,[j] β̂[j] |. Note that kxi k2 ≤  √  nT , by part (iii), we have  1 2K12 K3 λ+ T 2 · ∆3C · E. kxi k2 · kβ̂ − b̃j k2 ≤ √ 7 n K 4λ 2 0  (B-38)  −  On the other hand, similar to (B-36), by (B-33), r √ √ K1 1 2K1 T T |xi b̃j − xi,[j] β̂[j] | ≤ · |bj | · ∆C ≤ √ · 3 · ∆2C · E. K0 n K2λ 0 −  (B-39)  Therefore, 1 |Ri − ri,[j] | ≤ √ n  2K12 K3 λ+ T 2 7  2 K04 λ−  36  √ ·  ∆3C  ·E +  2K1 3  K02 λ−  ·  ∆2C  ·  √  ! E  .  B-3  Summary of Approximation Results  Under our technical assumptions, we can derive the rate for approximations via Proposition B.3. This justifies all approximations in Appendix A. Theorem B.4. Under the assumptions A1 - A5, (i) T ≤ λ+ = O (polyLog(n)) ; (ii) max |β̂j | ≤ kβ̂k2 = OL4 (polyLog(n)) ; j∈Jn  (iii)  max |bj | = OL2 j∈Jn  polyLog(n) √ n   ;  (iv)  max |β̂j − bj | = OL2 j∈Jn  polyLog(n) n   ;  (v)  max max |Ri − ri,[j] | = OL2 j∈Jn  i  polyLog(n) √ n   .  Proof. (i) Notice that Xj = Xej , where ej is the j-th canonical basis vector in Rp , we have kXj k2 XT X = eTj ej ≤ λ+ . n n Similarly, consider the X T instead of X, we conclude that   kxi k2 XX T ≤ λmax = λ+ . n n Recall the definition of T in (B-23), we conclude that p T ≤ λ+ = O (polyLog(n)) . (ii) Since i = ui (Wi ) with ku0i k∞ ≤ c1 , the gaussian concentration property (Ledoux, 2001, chapter 1.3) implies that i is c21 -sub-gaussian and hence E|i |k = O(ck1 ) for any finite k > 0. By Lemma B.2, |ψ(i )| ≤ K1 |i | and hence for any finite k, E|ψ(i )|k ≤ K1k E|i |k = O(ck1 ). By part (i) of Proposition B.3, using the convexity of x4 and hence   a+b 4 2  ≤  a4 +b4 2 ,  1 8 E(U + U0 )4 ≤ (EU 4 + U04 ). 4 (K0 λ− ) (K0 λ− )4 Pn Recall (B-24) that U = n1 i=1 xi (ψ(i ) − Eψ(i )) 2 , Ekβ̂k42 ≤   U 4 = (U 2 )2 =  1  n4  n X  2 xTi xi0 (ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))(ψ(i0 ) − Eψ(i0 ))  i,i0 =1  2 n X 1 X = 4 kxi k22 (ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))2 + |xTi xi0 |(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))(ψ(i0 ) − Eψ(i0 )) n 0 i=1   i6=i  37  1 = 4 n +  X n  kxi k42 (ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))4 +  (2|xTi xi0 |2 + kxi k22 kxi0 k22 )(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))2 (ψ(i0 ) − Eψ(i0 ))2  i6=i0  i=1  X  X  |xTi xi0 |  ·  |xTk xk0 |   · (ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))(ψ(i0 ) − Eψ(i0 ))(ψ(k ) − Eψ(k ))(ψ(k0 ) − Eψ(k0 ))  others Since ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ) has a zero mean, we have E(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))(ψ(i0 ) − Eψ(i0 ))(ψ(k ) − Eψ(k ))(ψ(k0 ) − Eψ(k0 )) = 0 for any (i, i0 ) 6= (k, k 0 ) or (k 0 , k) and i 6= i0 . As a consequence,  n 1 X kxi k42 E(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))4 EU = 4 n i=1  X T 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 (2|xi xi |2 + kxi k2 kxi k2 )E(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i )) E(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i )) + 4  i6=i0    n X X 1 kxi k42 E(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))4 + 3 kxi k22 kxi0 k22 E(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))2 E(ψ(i0 ) − Eψ(i0 ))2  . ≤ 4 n 0 i=1 i6=i  4  4  a +b 4 For any i, using the convexity of x4 , hence ( a+b 2 ) ≤ 2 , we have  E(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))4 ≤ 8E ψ(i )4 + (Eψ(i ))4 ≤ 16Eψ(i )4 ≤ 16 max Eψ(i )4 . i  By Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, E(ψ(i ) − Eψ(i ))2 ≤ Eψ(i )2 ≤  q p Eψ(i )4 ≤ max Eψ(i )4 . i  Recall (B-23) that kxi k22 ≤ nT 2 and thus,  1 16n · n2 T 4 + 3n2 · n2 T 4 · max Eψ(i )4 i n4 1 ≤ 4 · (16n3 + 3n4 )T 4 max Eψ(i )4 = O (polyLog(n)) . i n  EU 4 ≤  On the other hand, let µT = (Eψ(1 ), . . . , Eψ(n )), then kµk22 = O(n · polyLog(n)) and hence by definition of U0 in (B-24), r kµk22 kµT Xk2 1p T T = µ XX µ ≤ · λ+ = O (polyLog(n)) . U0 = n n n In summary, Ekβ̂k42 = O (polyLog(n)) . (iii) By mean-value theorem, there exists ax ∈ (0, x) such that ρ(x) = ρ(0) + xψ(0) +  x2 0 ψ (ax ). 2  By assumption A1 and Lemma B.2, we have ρ(x) =  x2 0 x2 0 K3 x2 ψ (ax ) ≤ kψ k∞ ≤ , 2 2 2  where K3 is defined in Lemma B.2. As a result, Eρ(i )8 ≤    K3 2 38  8  16 E16 i = O(c1 ).  Recall the definition of E in (B-23) and the convexity of x8 , we have n  EE 8 ≤  1X Eρ(i )8 = O(c16 1 ) = O (polyLog(n)) . n i=1  (B-40)  Under assumption A5, by Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, q √ √ E(∆C E)2 = E∆2C E ≤ E∆4C · EE 2 = O (polyLog(n)) . Under assumptions A1 and A3, √ 2K1 = O (polyLog(n)) . K0 λ− Putting all the pieces together, we obtain that   polyLog(n) √ max |bj | = OL2 . j∈Jn n (iv) Similarly, by Holder’s inequality, E(∆3C E)2 = E∆6C E 2 ≤ E∆8C   34  · EE 8   41  = O (polyLog(n)) ,  and under assumptions A1 and A3, 2K12 K3 λ+ T 7  = O (polyLog(n)) .  2 K04 λ−  Therefore,  max |β̂j − bj | = OL2 j∈Jn  polyLog(n) n   .  (v) It follows from the previous part that √ E(∆2C · E)2 = O (polyLog(n)) . Under assumptions A1 and A3, the multiplicative factors are also O (polyLog(n)), i.e. √ 2K1 2K12 K3 λ+ T 2 = O (polyLog(n)) , = O (polyLog(n)) . 3 7 4 2 K0 λ− K02 λ− Therefore,  max max |Ri − ri,[j] | = OL2 j∈Jn  B-4  i  polyLog(n) √ n   .  Controlling Gradient and Hessian  Proof of Lemma 4.2. Recall that β̂ is the solution of the following equation n  1X xi ψ(i − xTi β̂) = 0. n i=1 Taking derivative of (B-41), we have ! ∂ β̂ ∂ β̂ T X D I − X T = 0 =⇒ T = (X T DX)−1 X T D. ∂ ∂  39  (B-41)  This establishes (9). To establishes (10), note that (9) can be rewritten as (X T DX)  ∂ β̂ = X T D. ∂T  (B-42)  Fix k ∈ {1, · · · , n}. Note that ∂Ri ∂i ∂ β̂ = − xTi = I(i = k) − xTi (X T DX)−1 X T D. ∂k ∂k ∂k Recall that G = I − X(X T DX)−1 X T D, we have ∂Ri = eTi Gek , ∂k  (B-43)  where ei is the i-th canonical basis of Rn . As a result, ∂D = D̃ diag(Gek ). ∂k  (B-44)  Taking derivative of (B-42), we have XT  ∂ β̂ ∂D ∂D ∂ β̂ X T + (X T DX) = XT T ∂k ∂ ∂k ∂ ∂k  =⇒   ∂ β̂ ∂D = (X T DX)−1 X T I − X(X T DX)−1 X T D T ∂k ∂ ∂k  =⇒  ∂ β̂ = (X T DX)−1 X T D̃ diag(Gek )G, ∂k ∂T  where G = I − X(X T DX)−1 X T D is defined in (B-18) in p.30. Then for each j ∈ {1, · · · , p} and k ∈ {1, . . . , n}, ∂ β̂j = eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D̃ diag(Gek )G = eTk GT diag(eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D̃)G ∂k ∂T where we use the fact that aT diag(b) = bT diag(a) for any vectors a, b. This implies that ∂ β̂j = GT diag(eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D̃)G ∂∂T  Proof of Lemma 4.3. Throughout the proof we are using the simple fact that kak∞ ≤ kak2 . Based on it, we found that 1  1  eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 ≤ eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 ∞ q = eTj (X T DX)−1 X T DX(X T DX)−1 ej q 1 = eTj (X T DX)−1 ej ≤ 1 . (nK0 λ− ) 2 1  Thus for any m > 1, recall that Mj = E eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 1  E eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 ≤E eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D ≤  Mj (nK0 λ− )  m−1 2  ∞  2  (B-45)  ,  m ∞  1 2  1  ∞  · eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2  .  m−1 2  (B-46)  40  We should emphasize that we cannot use the naive bound that 1  E eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2  m ∞ 1  =⇒ eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2  m  1  ≤ E eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2   polyLog(n) m √ = OL n ∞  1 m , (nK0 λ− ) 2  ≤ 2  (B-47)  since it fails to guarantee the convergence of TV distance. We will address this issue after deriving Lemma 4.4. By contrast, as proved below,   1 polyLog(n) 1 eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 = Op (Mj ) = Op << p . (B-48) n ∞ nK0 λ− Thus (B-46) produces a slightly tighter bound   1  eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2  ∞  = OLm  polyLog(n) n   .  m+1 2m  It turns out that the above bound suffices to prove the convergence. Although (B-48) m+1 implies the possibility to sharpen the bound from n− 2m to n−1 using refined analysis, we do not explore this to avoid extra conditions and notation. • Bound for κ0j First we derive a bound for κ0j . By definition,  4 ∂ β̂j ∂ β̂ j ≤ E κ20j = E T ∂ ∂T  2  ∞  4  ∂ β̂j · ∂T  2   .  2  By Lemma 4.2 and (B-46) with m = 2,  E  ∂ β̂j ∂T  2 1  ≤ E eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 ∞  2 ∞  · K1 =  K1 Mj 1  (nK0 λ− ) 2  .  On the other hand, it follows from (B-45) that ∂ β̂j ∂T  2  = eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D  2 2  1  ≤ K1 · eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2  2  2  ≤ 2  K1 . (B-49) nK0 λ−  Putting the above two bounds together we have κ20j ≤  K12 3  (nK0 λ− ) 2  · Mj .  (B-50)  • Bound for κ1j As a by-product of (B-49), we obtain that κ41j  ∂ β̂j =E ∂T  4  ≤ 2  K12 . (nK0 λ− )2  (B-51)  • Bound for κ2j Finally, we derive a bound for κ2j . By Lemma 4.2, κ2j involves the operator norm of a symmetric matrix with form GT M G where M is a diagonal matrix. Then by the triangle inequality, GT M G  op  ≤ kM kop · GT G 41  2  op  = kM kop · kGkop .  Note that  1  1  1  1  D 2 GD− 2 = I − D 2 X(X T DX)−1 X T D 2 is a projection matrix, which is idempotent. This implies that  1  1 1 1 D 2 GD− 2 = λmax D 2 GD− 2 ≤ 1. op  Write G as D  − 12  1 2  (D GD  − 12  1 2  )D , then we have  kGkop ≤ D  1 2  − 12  · D GD  − 21  · D  op  r  1 2  ≤  op  op  K1 . K0  Returning to κ2j , we obtain that 4  κ42j = E GT diag(eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D̃)G op   4 8 · kGkop ≤ E eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D̃ ∞   ≤E  =E    4  eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D̃  ∞ 1  1  K1 K0  eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 D− 2 D̃  4    4 K1 · K0 ∞ 4  Assumption A1 implies that 1 |ψ 00 (Ri )| ∀i, p ≤ K2 & hence kD− 2 D̃kop ≤ K2 . 0 ψ (Ri )  Therefore, 1  1  eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2 D− 2 D̃  4  1  ≤ K24 · eTj (X T DX)−1 X T D 2  ∞  4 ∞  .  By (B-46) with m = 4, κ42j  ≤  K24   3  (nλ− ) 2  ·  K1 K0  4 · Mj .  (B-52)  Proof of Lemma 4.4. By Theorem B.4, for any j, Eβ̂j4 ≤ Ekβ̂k42 < ∞. Then using the second-order Poincaré inequality (Proposition 4.1),     ! 3 β̂ − E β̂ c c κ + c κ κ j j 1 2 0j 1j 2j 1  , N (0, 1) = O max dT V L  q j∈Jn Var( β̂ j) Var(β̂j )   1 1 M2  M4  j j   n 34 + n 87  =O  · polyLog(n) =O Var(β̂j )  1  1  (nMj2 ) 4 + (nMj2 ) 8 n Var(β̂j )  ! · polyLog(n) .  It follows from (B-45) that nMj2 = O (polyLog(n)) and the above bound can be simplified as     ! 1 (nMj2 ) 8 β̂ − E β̂ j j     max dT V L q , N (0, 1) = O · polyLog(n) . j∈Jn n Var(β̂j ) Var(β̂j )  42  Remark B.5. If we use the naive bound (B-47), by repeating the above derivation, we √ ), in which case, obtain a worse bound for κ0,j = O( polyLog(n) ) and κ2 = O( polyLog(n) n n   max dT V j∈Jn    β̂ − E β̂ j j L  q  , N (0, 1) = O Var(β̂j )  polyLog(n) n Var(β̂j )  ! .  1  However, we can only prove that Var(β̂j ) = Ω( n1 ). Without the numerator (nMj2 ) 8 , which 1 will be shown to be O(n− 8 polyLog(n)) in the next subsection, the convergence cannot be proved.  B-5  Upper Bound of Mj  As mentioned in Appendix A, we should approximate D by D[j] to remove the functional (1)  dependence on Xj . To achieve this, we introduce two terms, Mj (1)  Mj  1  (2)  2 k∞ ), = E(keTj (X T DX)−1 X T D[j]  Mj  (1)  (2)  and Mj , defined as 1  2 = E(keTj (X T D[j] X)−1 X T D[j] k∞ ).  (1)  (2)  We will first prove that both |Mj − Mj | and |Mj − Mj | are negligible and then derive (2)  an upper bound for Mj . B-5.1  (1)  Controlling |Mj − Mj |  By Lemma B.2, 1  1  2 kD 2 − D[j] k∞ ≤ K2 max |Ri − ri,[j] | , K2 Rj ,  i  and by Theorem B.4,   q polyLog(n) 2 √ ERj = O . n (1)  Then we can bound |Mj − Mj | via the fact that kak∞ ≤ kak2 and algebra as follows. (1)  1  1  1  1  2 |Mj − Mj | ≤ E(keTj (X T DX)−1 X T (D 2 − D[j] )k∞ ) 2 )k2 ) ≤ E(keTj (X T DX)−1 X T (D 2 − D[j] r  r =  1  1  2 E(keTj (X T DX)−1 X T (D 2 − D[j] )k22 )  ≤  1  1  2 E(eTj (X T DX)−1 X T (D 2 − D[j] )2 X(X T DX)−1 ej ).  By Lemma B.2, q p | ψ 0 (Ri ) − ψ 0 (ri,[j] )| ≤ K2 |Ri − ri,[j] | ≤ K2 Rj , thus 1  1  2 (D 2 − D[j] )2  K22 R2j I   K22 2 R D. K0 j  This entails that (1)  − 21  |Mj − Mj | ≤ K2 K0  q  E(R2j · eTj (X T DX)−1 X T DX(X T DX)−1 ej )  q 1  −2  E(R2j · eTj (X T DX)−1 ej )   q K2 polyLog(n) p . ≤√ E(R2j ) = O n nK0 λ− = K2 K0  43  (1)  Bound of |Mj  B-5.2  (2)  − Mj |  First we prove a useful lemma. Lemma B.6. For any symmetric matrix N with kN kop < 1, (I − (I + N )−1 )2   N2 . (1 − kN kop )2  Proof. First, notice that I − (I + N )−1 = (I + N − I)(I + N )−1 = N (I + N )−1 , and therefore (I − (I + N )−1 )2 = N (I + N )−2 N. Since kN kop < 1, I + N is positive semi-definite and 1 I. (1 − kN kop )2  (I + N )−2  Therefore,  N (I + N )−2 N   (1)  N2 . (1 − kN kop )2  (2)  We now back to bounding |Mj − Mj |. Let Aj = X T D[j] X, Bj = X T (D − D[j] )X. By Lemma B.2, kD − D[j] k∞ ≤ K3 max |Ri − ri,[j] | = K3 Rj i  and hence kBj kop ≤ K3 Rj · nλ+ I , nηj . where ηj = K3 λ+ · Rj . Then by Theorem B.4.(v),   polyLog(n) E(ηj2 ) = O . n Using the fact that kak∞ ≤ kak2 , we obtain that (1)  |Mj  1  (2)  1  T T −1 T 2 2 − Mj | ≤ E(keTj A−1 X D[j] k∞ ) j X D[j] − ej (Aj + Bj ) r 1  ≤  1  2 T T −1 X T D 2 k2 ) E(keTj A−1 j X D[j] − ej (Aj + Bj ) [j] 2  q   −1 )X T D X(A−1 − (A + B )−1 )e E eTj (A−1 j j j [j] j − (Aj + Bj ) j q   −1 )A (A−1 − (A + B )−1 )e = E eTj (A−1 j j j j j − (Aj + Bj ) j  =  The inner matrix can be rewritten as −1 −1 (A−1 )Aj (A−1 ) j − (Aj + Bj ) j − (Aj + Bj ) −1  −1  −1  −1  −1  −1  −1  −1  −1  −1  − 12  =Aj 2 (I − (I + Aj 2 Bj Aj 2 )−1 )Aj 2 Aj Aj 2 (I − (I + Aj 2 Bj Aj 2 )−1 )Aj −1  =Aj 2 (I − (I + Aj 2 Bj Aj 2 )−1 )2 Aj 2 . −1  (B-53)  −1  Let Nj = Aj 2 Bj Aj 2 , then −1  −1  1  1  kNj kop ≤ kAj 2 kop · kBj kop · kAj 2 kop ≤ (nK0 λ− )− 2 · nηj · (nK0 λ− )− 2 =  44  ηj . K0 λ−  On the event {ηj ≤ 21 K0 λ− }, kNj kop ≤ 12 . By Lemma B.6, (I − (I + Nj )−1 )2  4Nj2 . This together with (B-53) entails that −1  −1  −1 eTj (A−1 )Aj (Aj−1 − (Aj + Bj )−1 )ej = eTj Aj 2 (I − (I + Nj )−1 )2 Aj 2 ej j − (Aj + Bj ) −1  −1  −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 ≤4eTj Aj 2 Nj2 Aj 2 ej = eTj A−1 j Bj Aj Bj Aj ej ≤ kAj Bj Aj Bj Aj kop .  Since Aj  nK0 λ− I, and kBj kop ≤ nηj , we have −1 −1 −1 3 2 kA−1 j Bj Aj Bj Aj kop ≤ kAj kop · kBj kop ≤  1 1 · η2 . · n (K0 λ− )3 j  Thus,    K0 λ− −1 −1 −1 E eTj (A−1 − (A + B ) )A (A − (A + B ) )e · I η ≤ j j j j j j j j j 2    T −1  polyLog(n) 1 1 −1 2 · Eη = O . ≤E ej Aj Bj A−1 B A e · ≤ j j j j j n (K0 λ− )3 n2 On the event {ηj > 21 K0 λ− }, since nK0 λ− I  Aj  nK1 λ+ I and Aj + Bj  nK0 λ− I, −1 −1 |eTj (A−1 )Aj (A−1 )ej | j − (Aj + Bj ) j − (Aj + Bj ) −1 2 ≤nK1 λ+ · |eTj (A−1 ) ej | j − (Aj + Bj )   T −2 ≤nK1 λ+ · 2|eTj A−2 ej | j ej | + 2|ej (Aj + Bj ) ≤  4nK1 λ+ 1 4K1 λ+ = · . 2 (nK0 λ− ) n (K0 λ− )2  This together with Markov inequality implies htat    K0 λ− −1 −1 −1 E eTj (A−1 − (A + B ) )A (A − (A + B ) )e · I η > j j j j j j j j j 2   K0 λ− 1 4K1 λ+ · P ηj > ≤ · n (K0 λ− )2 2 1 4K1 λ+ 4 ≤ · · · Eηj2 n (K0 λ− )2 (K0 λ− )2   polyLog(n) =O . n2 Putting pieces together, we conclude that q   (1) (2) −1 )A (A−1 − (A + B )−1 )e |Mj − Mj | ≤ E eTj (A−1 j j j j j − (Aj + Bj ) j s    K0 λ− −1 −1 T −1 −1 ≤ E ej (Aj − (Aj + Bj ) )Aj (Aj − (Aj + Bj ) )ej · I ηj > 2 s    K0 λ− −1 )A (A−1 − (A + B )−1 )e · I η ≤ + E eTj (A−1 − (A + B ) j j j j j j j j j 2   polyLog(n) . =O n B-5.3  (2)  Bound of Mj  Similar to (A-1), by block matrix inversion formula (See Proposition E.1), 1  1 2  eTj (X T D[j] X)−1 X T D[j] =  45  2 XjT D[j] (I − Hj ) 1  1  2 2 XjT D[j] (I − Hj )D[j] Xj  ,  1  1  T T 2 2 where Hj = D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] . Recall that ξj ≥ K0 λ− by (B-25), so we have 1 1 2 2 (I − Hj )D[j] Xj = nξj ≥ nλ− . XjT D[j]  As for the numerator, recalling the definition of hj,1,i , we obtain that 1 1 T T 2 Xj (I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] ) · D[j] n ∞ p 1 T −1 T ≤ K1 · X (I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] ) X[j] ) n j ∞ p p = K1 max hTj,1,i Xj ≤ K1 ∆C max khj,1,i k2 .  1  2 kXjT D[j] (I − Hj )k∞ =  i  i  As proved in (B-35),  max khj,1,i k2 ≤ i  K1 K0   21 .  This entails that 1 K1 2 kXjT D[j] (I − Hj )k∞ ≤ √ · ∆C = OL1 (polyLog(n)) . K0  Putting the pieces together we conclude that 1  (2) Mj  B-5.4  ≤  2 EkXjT D[j] (I − Hj )k∞  nλ−   =O  polyLog(n) n   .  Summary  Based on results from Section B.5.1 - Section B.5.3, we have   polyLog(n) Mj = O . n Note that the bounds we obtained do not depend on j, so we conclude that   polyLog(n) max Mj = O . j∈Jn n  B-6 B-6.1  Lower Bound of Var(β̂j ) Approximating Var(β̂j ) by Var(bj )  By Theorem B.4, max E(β̂j − bj )2 = O j    polyLog(n) n2   ,  max Eb2j = O j    polyLog(n) n   .  Using the fact that β̂j2 − b2j = (β̂j − bj + bj )2 − b2j = (β̂j − bj )2 + 2(β̂j − bj )bj , we can bound the difference between Eβ̂j2 and Eb2j by Eβ̂j2 − Eb2j = E(β̂j − bj )2 + 2|E(β̂j − bj )bj | ≤ E(β̂j − bj )2 + 2    q q polyLog(n) E(β̂j − bj )2 Eb2j = O . 3 n2  Similarly, since |a2 − b2 | = |a − b| · |a + b| ≤ |a − b|(|a − b| + 2|b|),     polyLog(n) |(Eβ̂j )2 − (Ebj )2 | ≤ E|β̂j − bj | · E|β̂j − bj | + 2E|bj | = O . 3 n2 46  Putting the above two results together, we conclude that   polyLog(n) Var(β̂j ) − Var(bj ) = O . 3 n2  (B-54)  Then it is left to show that  Var(bj ) = Ω B-6.2  1 n · polyLog(n)   .  Controlling Var(bj ) by Var(Nj )  Recall that  1 Nj bj = √ n ξj  where n  1 X Nj = √ Xij ψ(ri,[j] ), n i=1  ξj =  1 T T T X (D[j] − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] )Xj . n j  Then  n Var(bj ) = E  Nj Nj −E ξj ξj  2   =E  Nj − ENj ENj Nj + −E ξj ξj ξj  2 .  Using the fact that (a + b)2 − ( 12 a2 − b2 ) = 12 (a + 2b)2 ≥ 0, we have 1 n Var(bj ) ≥ E 2 B-6.3    Nj − ENj ξj  2   −E  ENj Nj −E ξj ξj  2 ,  1 I1 − I2 . 2  (B-55)  Controlling I1  The Assumption A4 implies that   tr(Cov(hj,0 )) 1 T Var(Nj ) = Xj Qj Xj = Ω . n npolyLog(n)   1 It is left to show that tr(Cov(hj,0 ))/n = Ω polyLog(n) . Since this result will also be used later in Appendix C, we state it in the following the lemma. Lemma B.7. Under assumptions A1 - A3,  2   n−p+1 tr(Cov(ψ(hj,0 ))) K4 1 ≥ 02 · · min Var(i ) = Ω . i n K1 n polyLog(n) Proof. The (A-10) implies that Var(ψ(ri,[j] )) ≥ K02 Var(ri,[j] ).  (B-56)  Note that ri,[j] is a function of , we can apply (A-10) again to obtain a lower bound for Var(ri,[j] ). In fact, by variance decomposition formula, using the independence of 0i s,    Var(ri,[j] ) = E Var ri,[j] (i) + Var E ri,[j] (i) ≥ E Var ri,[j] (i) , where (i) includes all but the i-th entry of . Apply A-10 again,  ∂ri,[j] Var ri,[j] (i) ≥ inf i ∂i  2  · Var(i ),  and hence  ∂ri,[j] Var(ri,[j] ) ≥ E Var ri,[j] (i) ≥ E inf  ∂i 47  2  · Var(i ).  (B-57)  ∂ri,[j] ∂i .  Now we compute  Similar to (B-43) in p.40, we have ∂rk,[j] = eTi G[j] ek , ∂i  (B-58)  where G[j] is defined in (B-18) in p.30. When k = i, 1 1 1 ∂ri,[j] −1 −1 −1 2 2 2 = eTi G[j] ei = eTi D[j]2 D[j] G[j] D[j]2 D[j] ei = eTi D[j] G[j] D[j]2 ei . ∂i  (B-59)  By definition of G[j] , −1  1  1  1  T T 2 2 2 D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] G[j] D[j]2 = I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] . D[j] 1  T T 2 Let X̃[j] = D[j] X[j] and Hj = X̃[j] (X̃[j] X̃[j] )−1 X̃[j] . Denote by X̃(i),[j] the matrix X̃[j] after removing i-th row, then by block matrix inversion formula (See Proposition E.1), T X̃(i),[j] + x̃i,[j] x̃Ti,[j] )−1 x̃i,[j] eTi Hj ei = x̃Ti,[j] (X̃(i),[j]  =  =  T (X̃(i),[j] X̃(i),[j] )−1  x̃Ti,[j]  −  T T X̃(i),[j] )−1 x̃i,[j] x̃Ti,[j] (X̃(i),[j] X̃(i),[j] )−1 (X̃(i),[j] T 1 + x̃Ti,[j] (X̃(i),[j] X̃(i),[j] )−1 x̃i,[j]  T x̃Ti,[j] (X̃(i),[j] X̃(i),[j] )−1 x̃i,[j] T 1 + x̃Ti,[j] (X̃(i),[j] X̃(i),[j] )−1 x̃i,[j]  ! x̃i,[j]  .  This implies that 1  −1  2 eTi D[j] G[j] D[j]2 ei = eTi (I − Hj )ei =  1 T 1 + x̃Ti,[j] (X̃(i),[j] X̃(i),[j] )−1 x̃i,[j] 1  =  1 2  1  T T D2 e 1 + eTi D[j] X[j] (X(i),[j] D(i),[j] X(i),[j] )−1 X[j] [j] i  ≥ = ≥ ≥  1 1 2  1  T T D2 e 1 + K0−1 eTi D[j] X[j] (X(i),[j] X(i),[j] )−1 X[j] [j] i  1 T T e 1 + K0−1 (D[j] )i,i · eTi X[j] (X(i),[j] X(i),[j] )−1 X[j] i 1 1+  T T e K0−1 K1 eTi X[j] (X(i),[j] X(i),[j] )−1 X[j] i  1 K0 · . T T e K1 1 + eTi X[j] (X(i),[j] X(i),[j] )−1 X[j] i  T T Apply the above argument to Hj = X[j] (X[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] , we have  1 T T = eTi (I − X[j] (X[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] )ei . T (X T −1 X e 1 + eTi X[j] [j] i (i),[j] X(i),[j] ) Thus, by (B-56) and (B-57), Var(ψ(ri,[j] )) ≥  K04 T T · [eTi (I − X[j] (X[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] )ei ]2 . K12  Summing i over 1, . . . , n, we obtain that n  tr(Cov(hj,0 )) K4 1 X T T T ≥ 02 · [e (I − X[j] (X[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] )ei ]2 · min Var(i ) i n K1 n i=1 i  48  (B-60)  2 1 T −1 T tr(I − X[j] (X[j] X[j] ) X[j] ) · min Var(i ) i n   2 K4 n−p+1 = 02 · · min Var(i ) i K1 n   1 by assumption A2, we conclude that Since mini Var(i ) = Ω polyLog(n) K4 ≥ 02 · K1    tr(Cov(hj,0 )) =Ω n    1 polyLog(n)   .  In summary,  Var(Nj ) = Ω  1 polyLog(n)   .  Recall that ξj =  1 T 1 T T Xj (D[j] − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] )Xj ≤ XjT D[j] Xj ≤ K1 T 2 , n n  we conclude that I1 ≥ B-6.4  Var(Nj ) =Ω (K1 T 2 )2    1 polyLog(n)   .  (B-61)  Controlling I2  By definition,  2 1 1 1 Nj I2 = E ENj −E + ENj E − E ξj ξj ξj ξj    2 ENj Nj 1 = Var + ENj E − E ξj ξj ξj    2 1 1 2 = (ENj ) · Var + Cov Nj , ξj ξj     1 1 2 ≤ (ENj ) · Var + Var(Nj ) Var ξj ξj   1 = ENj2 · Var . ξj     (B-62)  By (B-27) in the proof of Theorem B.4, ENj2 ≤ 2K1 E(E · ∆2C ) ≤ 2K1  q  EE 2 · E∆4C = O (polyLog(n)) ,  where the last equality uses the fact that E = OL2 (polyLog(n)) as proved in (B-40). On the other hand, let ξ˜j be an independent copy of ξj , then  Var  1 ξj    1 = E 2  1 1 − ˜ ξj ξj  !2 =  1 (ξj − ξ˜j )2 E . 2 ξj2 ξ˜j2  Since ξj ≥ K0 λ− as shown in (B-25), we have   1 1 1 Var ≤ E(ξj − ξ˜j )2 = · Var(ξj ). ξj 2(K0 λ− )4 (K0 λ− )4  (B-63)  To bound Var(ξj ), we propose to using the standard Poincaré inequality (Chernoff, 1981), which is stated as follows. 49  Proposition B.8. Let W = (W1 , . . . , Wn ) ∼ N (0, In×n ) and f be a twice differentiable function, then 2 ∂f (W ) . Var(f (W )) ≤ E ∂W 2 In our case, i = ui (Wi ), and hence for any twice differentiable function g, Var(g()) ≤ E  ∂g() ∂W  2  ∂g() ∂ · ∂ ∂W T  =E 2  2 2  ≤ max ku0i k∞ · E i  2  ∂g() ∂  2  . 2  Applying it to ξj , we have Var(ξj ) ≤ c21 · E  ∂ξj ∂  2  .  (B-64)  2  For given k ∈ {1, . . . , n}, using the chain rule and the fact that dB −1 = −B −1 dBB −1 for any square matrix B, we obtain that  ∂  T T D[j] − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] ∂k ∂D[j] ∂D[j] T T T T ∂D[j] = − X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] ∂k ∂k ∂k ∂D [j] T T T T + D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] ∂k ∂D[j] G[j] =GT[j] ∂k T T where G[j] = I − X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] as defined in last subsection. This implies that ∂D[j] ∂ξj 1 = XjT GT[j] G[j] Xj . ∂k n ∂k  Then (B-64) entails that  2 n 1 X T T ∂D[j] E Xj G[j] Var(ξj ) ≤ 2 G[j] Xj n ∂k  (B-65)  k=1  ∂D  . Similar to (B-44) in p.40 and recalling the definition of D[j] in First we compute ∂[j] k (B-17) and that of G[j] in (B-18) in p.30, we have ∂D[j] = D̃[j] diag(G[j] ek ) diag(D̃[j] G[j] ek ), ∂k Let Xj = G[j] Xj and X̃j = Xj ◦ Xj where ◦ denotes Hadamard product. Then XjT GT[j]  ∂D[j] ∂D[j] G[j] Xj = XjT Xj = XjT diag(D̃[j] G[j] ek )Xj = X̃jT D̃[j] G[j] ek . ∂k ∂k  Here we use the fact that for any vectors x, a ∈ Rn , xT diag(a)x =  n X  ai x2i = (x ◦ x)T a.  i=1  This together with (B-65) imply that Var(ξj ) ≤  n 1 X 1 E(X̃jT D̃[j] G[j] ek )2 = 2 E X̃jT D̃[j] G[j] n2 n k=1  50  2  = 2  1 E(X̃jT D̃[j] G[j] GT[j] D̃[j] X̃j ) n2  Note that G[j] GT[j]  kG[j] k2op I, and D̃[j]  K3 I by Lemma B.2 in p.(B.2). Therefore we obtain that  K2   1  2 2 2 X̃j ≤ 23 · E G[j] op · kX̃j k22 Var(ξj ) ≤ 2 E G[j] op · X̃jT D̃[j] n n  K2   K32  2 2 4 4 = 2 E G[j] op · kXj k4 ≤ 3 E G[j] op · kXj k∞ n n As shown in (B-34),  kG[j] kop ≤  K1 K0   12 .  On the other hand, notice that the i-th row of G[j] is hj,1,i (see (B-20) for definition), by definition of ∆C we have kXj k∞ = kG[j] Xj k∞ = max |hTj,1,i Xj | ≤ ∆C · max khj,1,i k2 . i  By (B-35) and assumption A5,  kXj k∞ ≤ ∆C ·  K1 K0   21  This entails that  = OL4 (polyLog(n)) .   Var(ξj ) = O  polyLog(n) n   .  Combining with (B-62) and (B-63), we obtain that   polyLog(n) I2 = O . n B-6.5  Summary  Putting (B-55), (B-61) and (B-62) together, we conclude that         1 1 polyLog(n) 1 −O =Ω =⇒ Var(bj ) = Ω . n Var(bj ) = Ω polyLog(n) n · polyLog(n) polyLog(n) n Combining with (B-54),  Var(β̂j ) = Ω  C  polyLog(n) n   .  Proof of Other Results  C-1  Proofs of Propositions in Section 2.3  Proof of Proposition 2.1. Let Hi (α) = Eρ(i − α). First we prove that the conditions d  imply that 0 is the unique minimizer of Hi (α) for all i. In fact, since i = −i , Hi (α) = Eρ(i − α) =  1 (Eρ(i − α) + ρ(−i − α)) . 2  Using the fact that ρ is even, we have Hi (α) = Eρ(i − α) =  1 (Eρ(i − α) + ρ(i + α)) . 2  By (4), for any α 6= 0, Hi (α) > Hi (0). As a result, 0 is the unique minimizer of Hi . Then for any β ∈ Rp n  n  n  n  1X 1X 1X 1X Eρ(yi − xTi β) = Eρ(i − xTi (β − β ∗ )) = Hi (xTi (β − β ∗ )) ≥ Hi (0). n i=1 n i=1 n i=1 n i=1 51  The equality holds iff xTi (β − β ∗ ) = 0 for all i since 0 is the unique minimizer of Hi . This implies that X(β ∗ (ρ) − β ∗ ) = 0. Since X has full column rank, we conclude that β ∗ (ρ) = β ∗ .  Proof of Proposition 2.2. For any α ∈ R and β ∈ Rp , let n  1X Eρ(yi − α − xTi β). n i=1  G(α; β) =  Since αρ minimizes Eρ(i − α), it holds that n  n  1X 1X G(α; β) = Eρ(i − α − xTi (β − β ∗ )) ≥ Eρ(i − αρ ) = G(αρ , β ∗ ). n i=1 n i=1 Note that αρ is the unique minimizer of Eρ(i − α), the above equality holds if and only if   α − αρ T ∗ α + xi (β − β ) ≡ αρ =⇒ (1 X) = 0. β − β∗ Since (1 X) has full column rank, it must hold that α = αρ and β = β ∗ .  C-2  Proofs of Corollary 3.3  Proposition C.1. Suppose that i are i.i.d. such that Eρ(1 − α) as a function of α has a unique minimizer αρ . Further assume that XJnc contains an intercept term, XJn has full column rank and span({Xj : j ∈ Jn }) ∩ span({Xj : j ∈ Jnc }) = {0} Let  (C-66)  (  ) n 1X T Eρ(yi − xi β) . βJn (ρ) = arg min min c n βJn βJn i=1  Then βJn (ρ) = βJ∗n . Proof. let n  G(β) =  1X Eρ(yi − xTi β). n i=1  For any minimizer β(ρ) of G, which might not be unique, we prove that βJn (ρ) = βJ∗n . It follows by the same argument as in Proposition 2.2 that xTi (β(ρ)−β ∗ ) ≡ α0 =⇒ X(β(ρ)−β ∗ ) = α0 1 =⇒ XJn (βJn (ρ)) = −XJnc (β(ρ)Jnc −βJ∗nc )+α0 1. Since XJnc contains the intercept term, we have XJn (βJn (ρ) − βJ∗n ) ∈ span({Xj : j ∈ Jnc }). It then follows from (C-68) that XJn (βJn (ρ) − βJ∗n ) = 0. Since XJn has full column rank, we conclude that βJn (ρ) = βJ∗n .  52  The Proposition C.1 implies that βJ∗n is identifiable even when X is not of full column rank. A similar conclusion holds for the estimator β̂Jn and the residuals Ri . The following two propositions show that under certain assumptions, β̂Jn and Ri are invariant to the choice of β̂ in the presense of multiple minimizers. Proposition C.2. Suppose that ρ is convex and twice differentiable with ρ00 (x) > c > 0 for all x ∈ R. Let β̂ be any minimizer, which might not be unique, of n  F (β) ,  1X ρ(yi − xTi β) n i=1  Then Ri = yi − xi β̂ is independent of the choice of β̂ for any i. Proof. The conclusion is obvious if F (β) has a unique minimizer. Otherwise, let β̂ (1) and β̂ (2) be two different minimizers of F denote by η their difference, i.e. η = β̂ (2) − β̂ (1) . Since F is convex, β̂ (1) + vη is a minimizer of F for all v ∈ [0, 1]. By Taylor expansion, F (β̂ (1) + vη) = F (β̂ (1) ) + v∇F (β̂ (1) )η +  v2 T 2 η ∇ F (β̂ (1) )η + o(v 2 ). 2  Since both β̂ (1) + vη and β̂ (1) are minimizers of F , we have F (β̂ (1) + vη) = F (β̂ (1) ) and ∇F (β̂ (1) ) = 0. By letting v tend to 0, we conclude that η T ∇2 F (β̂ (1) )η = 0. The hessian of F can be written as ∇2 F (β̂ (1) ) =  1 T cX T X X diag(ρ00 (yi − xTi β̂ (1) ))X  . n n  Thus, η satisfies that ηT  cX T X η = 0 =⇒ Xη = 0. n  (C-67)  This implies that y − X β̂ (1) = y − X β̂ (2) and hence Ri is the same for all i in both cases. Proposition C.3. Suppose that ρ is convex and twice differentiable with ρ00 (x) > c > 0 for all x ∈ R. Further assume that XJn has full column rank and span({Xj : j ∈ Jn }) ∩ span({Xj : j ∈ Jnc }) = {0}  (C-68)  Let β̂ be any minimizer, which might not be unique, of n  F (β) ,  1X ρ(yi − xTi β) n i=1  Then β̂Jn is independent of the choice of β̂. Proof. As in the proof of Proposition C.2, we conclude that for any minimizers β̂ (1) and β̂ (2) , Xη = 0 where η = β̂ (2) − β̂ (1) . Decompose the term into two parts, we have XJn ηJn = −XJcn ηJnc ∈ span({Xj : j ∈ Jnc }). It then follows from (C-68) that XJn ηJn = 0. Since XJn has full column rank, we conclude (1) (2) that ηJn = 0 and hence β̂Jn = β̂Jn .  53  Proof of Corollary 3.3. Under assumption A3*, XJn must have full column rank. Otherwise there exists α ∈ R|Jn | such that XJn α, in which case αT XJTn (I −HJnc )XJn α = 0. This violates the assumption that λ̃− > 0. On the other hand, it also guarantees that span({Xj : j ∈ Jn }) ∩ span({Xj : j ∈ Jnc }) = {0}. This together with assumption A1 and Proposition C.3 implies that β̂Jn is independent of the choice of β̂. c  c  c  Let B1 ∈ R|Jn |×|Jn | , B2 ∈ R|Jn |×|Jn | and assume that B2 is invertible. Let X̃ ∈ Rn×p such that X̃Jn = XJn − XJnc B1 , X̃Jnc = XJnc B2 . Then rank(X) = rank(X̃) and model (1) can be rewritten as y = X̃ β˜∗ +  where β̃J∗n = βJ∗n ,  β̃J∗nc = B2−1 βJ∗nc + B1 βJ∗n .  ˜ Let β̂ be an M-estimator, which might not be unique, based on X̃. Then Proposition C.3 ˜ ˜ shows that β̂Jn is independent of the choice of β̂, and an invariance argument shows that ˜ β̂Jn = β̂Jn . In the rest of proof, we use ˜· to denote the quantity obtained based on X̃. First we show that the assumption A4 is not affected by this transformation. In fact, for any j ∈ Jn , by definition we have span(X̃[j] ) = span(X[j] ) and hence the leave-j-th-predictor-out residuals are not changed by Proposition C.2. This implies that h˜j,0 = hj,0 and Q̃j = Qj . Recall the definition of hj,0 , the first-order condition of β̂ entails that X T hj,0 = 0. In particular, XJTnc hj,0 = 0 and this implies that for any α ∈ Rn , 0 = Cov(XJTnc hj,0 , αT hj,0 ) = XJnc Qj α. Thus, X̃jT Q̃j X̃j tr(Q̃j )  =  XjT Qj Xj (Xj − XJcn (B1 )j )T Qj (Xj − XJnc (B1 )j ) = . tr(Qj ) tr(Qj )  Then we prove that the assumption A5 is also not affected by the transformation. The above argument has shown that h̃Tj,0 X̃j kh̃j,0 k2  =  hTj,0 Xj . khj,0 k2     I|Jn | 0 On the other hand, let B = , then B is non-singular and X̃ = XB. Let −B1 B2 B(j),[j] denote the matrix B after removing j-th row and j-th column. Then B(j),[j] is also non-singular and X̃[j] = X[j] B(j),[j] . Recall the definition of hj,1,i , we have T T h̃j,1,i = (I − D̃[j] X̃[j] (X̃[j] D̃[j] X̃j )−1 X̃[j] )ei T T T = (I − D[j] X[j] B(j),[j] (B(j),[j] X[j] D[j] Xj B(j),[j] )−1 B(j),[j] X[j] )ei T = (I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] Xj )−1 X[j] )ei  = hj,1,i . On the other hand, by definition, T T T T X[j] hj,1,i = X[j] (I − D[j] X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] )ei = 0.  54  Thus, hTj,1,i X̃j = hTj,1,i (Xj − XJcn (B1 )j ) = hTj,1,i Xj . In summary, for any j ∈ Jn and i ≤ n, h̃Tj,1,i X̃j kh̃j,1,i k2  =  hTj,1,i Xj . khj,1,i k2  Putting the pieces together we have ˜ C = ∆C . ∆ By Theorem 3.1,   β̂ − E β̂ j j  , N (0, 1) = o(1). max dTV L  q j∈Jn Var(β̂j )    provided that X̃ satisfies the assumption A3. Now let U ΛV be the singular value decomposition of XJnc , where U ∈ Rn×p , Λ ∈ Rp×p , V ∈ Rp×p with U T U = V T V = Ip and Λ = diag(ν1 , . . . , νp ) being the diagonal matrix formed by singular values of XJnc . First we consider the case where XJnc has full column rank, p then νj > 0 for all j ≤ p. Let B1 = (XJTn XJn )− XJTn XJn and B2 = n/|Jnc |V T Λ−1 . Then X̃ T X̃ 1 = n n    XJTn (I − XJnc (XJTnc XJnc )−1 XJnc )XJn 0  0 nI   .  This implies that λmax  X̃ T X̃ n  !  n o = max λ̃max , 1 ,  The assumption A3* implies that ! X̃ T X̃ λmax = O(polyLog(n)), n  λmin  λmin  X̃ T X̃ n  X̃ T X̃ n  !  n o = min λ̃min , 1 .  !   =Ω  1 polyLog(n)   .  By Theorem 3.1, we conclude that Next we consider the case where XJcn does not have full column rank. We first remove the redundant columns from XJcn , i.e. replace XJnc by the matrix formed by its maximum linear independent subset. Denote by X this matrix. Then span(X) = span(X) and span({Xj : j 6∈ Jn }) = span({Xj : j 6∈ Jn }). As a consequence of Proposition C.1 and C.3, neither βJ∗n nor β̂Jn is affected. Thus, the same reasoning as above applies to this case.  C-3  Proofs of Results in Section 3.3  First we prove two lemmas regarding the behavior of Qj . These lemmas are needed for justifying Assumption A4 in the examples. Lemma C.4. Under assumptions A1 and A2, kQj kop ≤ c21  K32 K1 , K0  kQj kF ≤  where Qj = Cov(hj,0 ) as defined in section B-1.  55  √  nc21  K32 K1 K0  Proof of Lemma C.4. By definition, ||Qj ||op = sup αT Qj α α∈Sn−1  where Sn−1 is the n-dimensional unit sphere. For given α ∈ Sn−1 , αT Qj α = αT Cov(hj,0 )α = Var(αT hj,0 ) It has been shown in (B-59) in Appendix B-6.3 that ∂ri,[j] = eTi G[j] ek , ∂k T T where G[j] = I − X[j] (X[j] D[j] X[j] )−1 X[j] D[j] . This yields that ! n n n X X ∂ri,[j] ∂ X αi ψ(ri,[j] ) = = αi ψ 0 (ri,[j] ) · αi ψ 0 (ri,[j] ) · eTi G[j] = αT D̃[j] G[j] . ∂ i=1 ∂ i=1 i=1  By standard Poincaré inequality (see Proposition B.8), since i = ui (Wi ), ! ! n n 2 X ∂ X 0 2 αi ψ(ri,[j] ) αi ψ(ri,[j] ) ≤ max ||uk ||∞ · E Var k ∂ i=1 i=1   ≤c21 · E αT D̃[j] G[j] GT[j] D̃[j] α ≤ c21 EkD̃[j] G[j] GT[j] D̃[j] k22 ≤ c21 EkD̃j k2op kG[j] k2op . We conclude from Lemma B.2 and (B-34) in Appendix B-2 that kG[j] k2op ≤  kD̃[j] kop ≤ K3 ,  K1 . K0  Therefore, ||Qj ||op = sup Var α∈Sn−1  and hence ||Qj ||F ≤  √  n X  ! αi ψ(Ri )  ≤ c21  i=1  n||Qj ||op ≤  √  n · c21  K32 K1 K0  K32 K1 . K0  Lemma C.5. Under assumptions A1 - A3, tr(Qj ) ≥ K ∗ n = Ω(n · polyLog(n)), where K ∗ =  K04 K12  ·   n−p+1 2 n  · mini Var(i ).  Proof. This is a direct consequence of Lemma B.7 in p.47. Throughout the following proofs, we will use several results from the random matrix theory to bound the largest and smallest singular values of Z. The results are shown in Appendix E. Furthermore, in contrast to other sections, the notation P (·), E(·), Var(·) denotes the probability, the expectation and the variance with respect to both  and Z in this section. Proof of Proposition 3.4. By Proposition E.3, √ √ λ+ = (1 + κ)2 + op (1) = Op (1), λ− = (1 − κ)2 − op (1) = Ωp (1) and thus the assumption A3 holds with high probability. By Hanson-Wright inequality (Hanson & Wright, 1971; Rudelson & Vershynin, 2013; see Proposition E.2), for any given deterministic matrix A,    t2 t P (|ZjT AZj − EZjT AZj | ≥ t) ≤ 2 exp −c min , σ 4 kAk2F σ 2 kAkop 56  for some universal constant c. Let A = Qj and conditioning on Z[j] , then by Lemma C.4, we know that √ K 2 K1 K 2 K1 , kQj kF ≤ nc21 3 kQj kop ≤ c21 3 K0 K0 and hence      t2 t T T P Zj Qj Zj − E(Zj Qj Zj Z[j] ) ≤ −t Z[j] ≤ 2 exp −c min , . σ 4 · nc41 K34 K12 /K02 σ 2 c21 K32 K1 /K0 (C-69) Note that 2 E(ZjT Qj Zj Z[j] ) = tr(E[Zj ZjT |Z[j] ]Qj ) = EZ1j tr(Qj ) = τ 2 tr(Qj ).  By Lemma C.5, we conclude that ! ! T Q Z Z ZjT Qj Zj t t j j j Z[j] ≤ P P Z[j] ≤ τ2 − ≤ τ2 − tr(Qj ) nK ∗ tr(Qj ) tr(Qj )    t2 t ≤2 exp −c min , . (C-70) σ 4 · nc41 K34 K12 /K02 2σ 2 c21 K32 K1 /K0 Let t = 21 τ 2 nK ∗ and take expectation of both sides over Z[j] , we obtain that !    ZjT Qj Zj τ2 K ∗2 τ 4 K ∗τ 2 P ≤ ≤ 2 exp −cn min , tr(Qj ) 2 4σ 4 c41 K34 K12 /K02 2σ 2 c21 K32 K1 /K0 and hence P  ZjT Qj Zj τ2 ≤ min j∈Jn tr(Qj ) 2  !    ≤ 2n exp −cn min  K ∗2 τ 4 K ∗τ 2 , 4σ 4 c41 K34 K12 /K02 2σ 2 c21 K32 K1 /K0   = o(1). (C-71)  This entails that min  j∈Jn  ZjT Qj Zj = Ωp (polyLog(n)). tr(Qj )  Thus, assumption A4 is also satisfied with high probability. On the other hand, since Zj has i.i.d. mean-zero σ 2 -sub-gaussian entries, for any deterministic unit vector α ∈ Rn , αT Zj is σ 2 -sub-gaussian and mean-zero, and hence t2  P (|αT Zj | ≥ t) ≤ 2e− 2σ2 . Let αj,i = hj,1,i /khj,1,i k2 and αj,0 = hj,0 /khj,0 k2 . Since hj,1,i and hj,0 are independent of Zj , a union bound then gives   p t2 +4σ 2 log n t2 2σ 2 P ∆C ≥ t + 2σ log n ≤ 2n2 e− = 2e− 2σ2 . By Fubini’s formula (Durrett, 2010, Lemma 2.2.8.), E∆8C  Z  ∞  Z  7  √ 2σ log n 7  8t P (∆C ≥ t)dt ≤  = 0  8t dt + 0  Z  ∞  √ 2σ log n  8t7 P (∆C ≥ t)dt  Z ∞ p p p log n)8 + 8(t + 2σ log n)7 P (∆C ≥ t + 2σ log n)dt Z0 ∞ p t2 7 ≤ (2σ log n)8 + 64(8t7 + 128σ 7 (log n) 2 ) · 2e− 2σ2 dt = (2σ  0  = O(σ 8 · polyLog(n)) = O (polyLog(n)) .  (C-72)  This, together with Markov inequality, guarantees that assumption A5 is also satisfied with high probability. 57  Proof of Proposition 3.5. It is left to prove that assumption A3 holds with high probability. The proof of assumption A4 and A5 is exactly the same as the proof of Proposition 3.5. By Proposition E.4, λ+ = Op (1). On the other hand, by Proposition E.7 (Litvak et al., 2005),    T  Z Z < c1 ≤ e−c2 n . P λmin n and thus λ− = Ωp (1).  Proof of Proposition 3.6. Since Jn excludes the intercept term, the proof of assumption A4 and A5 is still the same as Proposition 3.5. It is left to prove assumption A3. Let R1 , . . . , Rn be i.i.d. Rademacher random variables, i.e. P (Ri = 1) = P (Ri = −1) = 12 , and Z ∗ = diag(B1 , . . . , Bn )Z. Then (Z ∗ )T Z ∗ = Z T Z. It is left to show that the assumption A3 holds for Z ∗ with high probability. Note that (Zi∗ )T = (Bi , Bi x̃Ti ). For any r ∈ {1, −1} and borel sets B1 , . . . , Bp ⊂ R, P (Bi = r, Bi Z̃i1 ∈ B1 , . . . , Bi Z̃i(p−1) ∈ Bp−1 ) = P (Bi = r, Z̃i1 ∈ rB1 , . . . , Z̃i(p−1) ∈ rBp−1 ) = P (Bi = r)P (Z̃i1 ∈ rB1 ) . . . P (Z̃i(p−1) ∈ rBp−1 ) = P (Bi = r)P (Z̃i1 ∈ B1 ) . . . P (Z̃i(p−1) ∈ Bp−1 ) = P (Bi = r)P (Bi Z̃i1 ∈ B1 ) . . . P (Bi Z̃i(p−1) ∈ Bp−1 ) where the last two lines uses the symmetry of Z̃ij . Then we conclude that Zi∗ has independent entries. Since the rows of Z ∗ are independent, Z ∗ has independent entries. Since Bi d are symmetric and sub-gaussian with unit variance and Bi Z̃ij = Z̃ij , which is also symmetric and sub-gaussian with variance bounded from below, Z ∗ satisfies the conditions of Propsition 3.5 and hence the assumption A3 is satisfied with high probability. Proof of Proposition 3.8 (with Proposition 3.7 being a special case). Let Z∗ = 1 1 Λ− 2 ZΣ− 2 , then Z∗ has i.i.d. standard gaussian entries. By Proposition 3.6, Z∗ satisfies assumption A3 with high probability. Thus, !  T  1 1 Σ 2 Z∗T ΛZ∗ Σ 2 Z∗ Z∗ λ+ = λmax ≤ λmax (Σ) · λmax (Λ) · λmax = Op (polyLog(n)), n n and 1  λ− = λmin  1  Σ 2 Z∗T ΛZ∗ Σ 2 n  !   ≥ λmin (Σ) · λmin (Λ) · λmin  Z∗T Z∗ n     = Ωp  1 polyLog(n)    1  .  As for assumption A4, the first step is to calculate E(ZjT Qj Zj |Z[j] ). Let Z̃ = Λ− 2 Z, then vec(Z̃) ∼ N (0, I ⊗ Σ). As a consequence, Z̃j |Z̃[j] ∼ N (µ̃j , σj2 I) where  1  −2 µ̃j = Z̃[j] Σ−1 Z[j] Σ−1 [j],[j] Σ[j],j = Λ [j],[j] Σ[j],j .  58  Thus, Zj |Z[j] ∼ N (µj , σj2 Λ) where µj = Z[j] Σ−1 [j],[j] Σ[j],j . It is easy to see that λ− ≤ min σj2 ≤ max σj2 ≤ λ+ . j  (C-73)  j  It has been shown that Qj µj = 0 and hence ZjT Qj Zj = (Zj − µj )T Qj (Zj − µj ). 1  1  1  Let Zj = Λ− 2 (Zj − µj ) and Q̃j = Λ 2 Qj Λ 2 , then Zj ∼ N (0, σj2 I) and ZjT Qj Zj = ZjT Q̃j Zj . By Lemma C.4, kQ̃j kop ≤ kΛkop · kQj kop ≤ λmax (Λ) · c21 and hence kQ̃j kF ≤  √  nλmax (Λ) · c21  K32 K1 , K0  K32 K1 . K0  By Hanson-Wright inequality (Hanson & Wright, 1971; Rudelson & Vershynin, 2013; see Proposition E.2), we obtain a similar inequality to (C-69) as follows:   P |ZjT Qj Zj − E(ZjT Qj Zj Z[j] )| ≥ t Z[j] " ( )# t2 t ≤2 exp −c min . , σj4 · nλmax (Λ)2 c41 K34 K12 /K02 σj2 λmax (Λ)c21 K32 K1 /K0 On the other hand, E(ZjT Qj Zj |Z[j] ) = E(ZjT Q̃j Zj |Z[j] ) = σj2 tr(Q̃j ). By definition, 1  1  1  1  tr(Q̃j ) = tr(Λ 2 Qj Λ 2 ) = tr(ΣQj ) = tr(Qj2 ΛQj2 ) ≥ λmin (Λ) tr(Qj ). By Lemma C.5, tr(Q̃j ) ≥ λmin (Λ) · nK ∗ . Similar to (C-70), we obtain that ! ZjT Qj Zj t 2 ≥ σj − Z[j] P tr(Qj ) nK ∗ " ( )# t2 t ≤2 exp −c min , . σj4 · nλmax (Λ)2 c41 K34 K12 /K02 σj2 λmax (Λ)c21 K32 K1 /K0 Let t = 12 σj2 nK ∗ , we have P  ZjT Qj Zj σj2 ≥ tr(Qj ) 2  !    ≤ 2 exp −cn min  K ∗2 K∗ , 4λmax (Λ)2 c41 K34 K12 /K02 2λmax (Λ)c21 K32 K1 /K0  and a union bound together with (C-73) yields that min  j∈Jn      ZjT Qj Zj 1 1 = Ωp min σj2 · = Ωp . j tr(Qj ) polyLog(n) polyLog(n) 59   =o    1 n  As for assumption A5, let 1  αj,0 =  1  Λ 2 hj,0 , khj,0 k2  Λ 2 hj,1,i khj,1,i k2  αj,i =  then for i = 0, 1, . . . , p, p λmax (Λ).  kαj,i k2 ≤ Note that  hTj,0 Zj T = αj,0 Zj , khj,0 k2  hTj,1,i Zj T = αj,i Zj khj,1,i k2  using the same argument as in (C-72), we obtain that   E∆8C = O λmax (Λ)4 · max σj8 · polyLog(n) = O (polyLog(n)) , j  and by Markov inequality and (C-73),  E(∆8C |Z) = Op E∆8C = Op (polyLog(n)).  Proof of Proposition 3.9. The proof that assumptions A4 and A5 hold with high probability is exactly the same as the proof of Proposition 3.8. It is left to prove assump1 tion A3*; see Corollary 3.3. Let c = (mini |(Λ− 2 1)i |)−1 and Z = (c1 Z̃). Recall the the definition of λ̃+ and λ̃− , we have λ̃+ = λmax (Σ{1} ),  λ̃− = λmin (Σ{1} ),  where Σ{1} =  1 T Z̃ n   I−  11T n   Z̃.  Rewrite Σ{1} as Σ{1}  1 = n    11T I− n  It is obvious that  span   T    11T Z̃ I− Z̃ . n  11T I− n    Z̃ ⊂ span(Z).  As a consequence  λ̃+ ≤ λmax  ZT Z n     λ̃− ≥ λmin  ,  It remains to prove that  T  Z Z λmax = Op (polyLog(n)) , n   λmin  ZT Z n  ZT Z n      .   = Ωp  1 polyLog(n)   .  To prove this, we let 1  Z∗ = Λ− 2 Z 1  1    1 0  0 Σ  1  − 21   , (ν Z̃∗ ),  where ν = cΛ− 2 1 and Z̃∗ = Λ− 2 Z̃Σ− 2 . Then !  T   T  1 1 Z Z Σ 2 Z∗T ΛZ∗ Σ 2 Z∗ Z∗ λmax = λmax ≤ λmax (Σ) · λmax (Λ) · λmax , n n n  60  and  λmin  ZT Z n  1  1   = λmin  Σ 2 Z∗T ΛZ∗ Σ 2 n  !   ≥ λmin (Σ) · λmin (Λ) · λmin  It is left to show that  T  Z∗ Z∗ = Op (polyLog(n)), λmax n   λmin  Z∗T Z∗ n     = Ωp  Z∗T Z∗ n  1 polyLog(n)   .   .  By definition, mini |νi | = 1 and maxi |νi | = O (polyLog(n)), then ! !  T  Z∗ Z∗ kνk22 νν T Z̃∗T Z̃∗ Z̃∗T Z̃∗ λmax ≤ λmax + = λmax + . n n n n n Since Z̃∗ has i.i.d. standard gaussian entries, by Proposition E.3, ! Z̃∗T Z̃∗ = Op (1). λmax n Moreover, kνk22 ≤ n maxi |νi |2 = O(n · polyLog(n)) and thus,  T  Z∗ Z∗ = Op (polyLog(n)). λmax n On the other hand, similar to Proposition 3.6, Z∗ = diag(B1 , . . . , Bn )Z∗ where B1 , . . . , Bn are i.i.d. Rademacher random variables. The same argument in the proof of Proposition 3.6 implies that Z∗ has independent entries with sub-gaussian norm bounded by kνk2∞ ∨ 1 and variance lower bounded by 1. By Proposition E.7, Z∗ satisfies assumption A3 with high probability. Therefore, A3* holds with high probability. Proof of Proposition 3.10. Let Λ = (λ1 , . . . , λn ) and Z be the matrix with entries Zij , then by Proposition 3.4 or Proposition 3.5, Zij satisfies assumption A3 with high probability. Notice that  T 2   T  Z Λ Z Z Z 2 λ+ = λmax ≤ λmax (Λ) · λmax = Op (polyLog(n)), n n and  λ− = λmin  Z T Λ2 Z n      2  ≥ λmin (Λ) · λmin  ZT Z n     = Ωp  1 polyLog(n)   .  Thus Z satisfies assumption A3 with high probability. Conditioning on any realization of Λ, the law of Zij does not change due to the independence between Λ and Z. Repeating the arguments in the proof of Proposition 3.4 and Proposition 3.5, we can show that ZjT Q̃j Zj tr(Q̃j )   = Ωp  1 polyLog(n)   ,  and E  max  i=0,...,n;j=1,...,p  T |α̃j,i Zj |8 = Op (polyLog(n)),  (C-74) where Q̃j = ΛQj Λ,  α̃j,0 =  Λhj,0 , kΛhj,0 k2  61  α̃j,1,i =  Λhj,1,i . kΛhj,1,i k2  Then ZjT Qj Zj ZjT Q̃j Zj tr(ΛQj Λ) ZjT Q̃j Zj · = Ωp = ≥ a2 · tr(Qj ) tr(Qj ) tr(Q̃j ) tr(Q̃j )    1 polyLog(n)   ,  (C-75)  and " E∆8C  =E  max  i=0,...,n;j=1,...,p  ≤ b8 E   max    kΛhj,1,i k2 kΛhj,0 k2 , max · max max j khj,0 k2 i,j khj,1,i k2  T |α̃j,i Zj |8  T |α̃j,i Zj |8  i=0,...,n;j=1,...,p  8 # (C-76)  = Op (polyLog(n)). By Markov inequality, the assumption A5 is satisfied with high probability. Proof of Proposition 3.11. The concentration inequality of ζi plus a union bound imply that   2 2 P max ζi > (log n) α ≤ nc1 e−c2 (log n) = o(1). i  Thus, with high probability,  T 2   T  4 Z Λ Z Z Z λmax = λmax ≤ (log n) α · λmax = Op (polyLog(n)). n n Let n0 = b(1 − δ)nc for some δ ∈ (0, 1 − κ). Then for any subset I of {1, . . . , n} with size n0 , by Proposition E.6 (Proposition E.7), under the conditions of Proposition 3.4 (Proposition 3.5), there exists constants c3 and c4 , which only depend on κ, such that    T  ZI ZI < c3 ≤ e−c4 n P λmin n where ZI represents the sub-matrix of Z formed by {Zi : i ∈ I}, where Zi is the i-th row of Z. Then by a union bound,   T     ZI ZI n P min0 λmin < c3 ≤ e−c4 n . n0 n |I|=n By Stirling’s formula, there exists a constant c5 > 0 such that   n o n! n ≤ c exp (− δ̃ log δ̃ − (1 − δ̃) log(1 − δ̃))n = 0 5 0 n n !(n − n0 )! where δ̃ = n0 /n. For sufficiently small δ and sufficiently large n, −δ̃ log δ̃ − (1 − δ̃) log(1 − δ̃) < c4 and hence   P   min0 λmin  |I|=n  ZIT ZI n     < c3  < c5 e−c6 n  for some c6 > 0. By Borel-Cantelli Lemma,  lim inf  min  n→∞ |I|=b(1−δ)nc  λmin  ZIT ZI n   ≥ c3  On the other hand, since F −1 is continuous at δ, then a.s.  ζ(b(1−δ)nc) → F −1 (δ) > 0.  62  a.s..  (C-77)  where ζ(k) is the k-th largest of {ζi : i = 1, . . . , n}. Let I ∗ be the set of indices corresponding to the largest b(1 − δ)nc ζi0 s. Then with probability 1,  T 2   T 2   T  Z Λ Z ZI ∗ Λ I ∗ ZI ∗ Z Z = lim inf λmin ≥ lim inf ζ(b(1−δ)nc) · lim inf λmin lim inf λmin n→∞ n→∞ n→∞ n→∞ n n n  T  ZI ZI ≥ lim inf ζ(b(1−δ)nc) · lim inf min λmin n→∞ n→∞ |I|=b(1−δ)nc n ≥ c3 F −1 (δ)2 > 0. To prove assumption A4, similar to (C-75) in the proof of Proposition 3.10, it is left to show that   tr(ΛQj Λ) 1 = Ωp . min j tr(Qj ) polyLog(n) Furthermore, by Lemma C.5, it remains to prove that   n min tr(ΛQj Λ) = Ωp . j polyLog(n) Recalling the equation (B-60) in the proof of Lemma B.7, we have eTi Qj ei ≥  1 K0 . · T T T K1 1 + ei Z[j] (Z(i),[j] Z(i),[j] )−1 Z[j] ei  (C-78)  By Proposition E.5, v u u  P tλmax  ZjT Zj n    !  > 3C1  ≤ 2e−C2 n .  On the other hand, apply (C-77) to Z(i),[j] , we have P  min  |I|=b(1−δ)nc  (Z(i),[j] )TI (Z(i),[j] )I n  λmin  !  ! < c3  < c5 e−c6 n .  A union bound indicates that with probability (c5 np + 2p)e− min{C2 ,c6 }n = o(1), ! ! T Z[j] Z[j] (Z(i),[j] )TI (Z(i),[j] )I 2 ≤ 9C1 , min min λmin ≥ c3 . max λmax j i,j |I|=b(1−δ)nc n n This implies that for any j, λmax  T Z[j] Z[j]  !  n  T 2 Z[j] Λ Z[j]  = λmax  !  n  2 ≤ ζ(1) · 9C12  and for any i and j, λmin  T Z(i),[j] Z(i),[j]  n  ! = λmin  T 2 ζ(i) Z(i),[j] Z(i),[j]  !  n 2  ≥ min{ζ(b(1−δ)nc) , ζ(b(1−δ)nc) + 1} ·  min  |I|=b(1−δ)nc  λmin  2 (Z(i),[j] )TI ζ(i) (Z(i),[j] )I  n  2  ≥c3 min{ζ(b(1−δ)nc) , ζ(b(1−δ)nc) + 1} > 0. Moreover, as discussed above, 2  ζ(1) ≤ (log n) α , min{ζ(b(1−δ)nc) , ζ(b(1−δ)nc) + 1} → F −1 (δ) 63  !  almost surely. Thus, it follows from (C-78) that with high probability, eTi Qj ei ≥  K0 1 · T (Z T −1 Z e K1 1 + eTi Z[j] [j] i (i),[j] Z(i),[j] )  K0 1 · T Z [j] K1 1 + eT Z[j] ei · c3 (F −1 (δ))2 i n K0 1 . ≥ · K1 1 + (log n) α4 · 9C12 · c3 (F −1 (δ))2  ≥  The above bound holds for all diagonal elements of Qj uniformly with high probability. Therefore,   K0 n 1 2 tr(ΛQj Λ) ≥ ζ(b(1−δ)nc) ·b(1−δ)nc· = Ω · . p K1 1 + (log n) α4 · 9C12 · c3 (F −1 (δ))2 polyLog(n) As a result, the assumption A4 is satisfied with high probability. Finally, by (C-76), we obtain that   T E∆8C ≤ E max |α̃j,i Zj |8 · kΛk8op . i=0,...,n;j=1,...,p  By Cauchy’s inequality, E∆8C ≤  r E  max  i=0,...,n;j=1,...,p  T Z |16 · |α̃j,i j  q E max ζi16 . i  Similar to (C-72), we conclude that E∆8C = O (polyLog(n)) and by Markov inequality, the assumption A5 is satisfied with high probability.  C-4 C-4.1  More Results of Least-Squares (Section 5) The Relation Between Sj (X) and ∆C  In Section 5, we give a sufficient and almost necessary condition for the coordinatewise asymptotic normality of the least-square estimator β̂ LS ; see Theorem 5.1. In this subsubsection, we show that ∆C is a generalization of maxj∈Jn Sj (X) for general Mestimators. Consider the matrix (X T DX)−1 X T , where D is obtain by using general loss functions, then by block matrix inversion formula (see Proposition E.1),  −1   X1T DX1 X1T DX[1] X1T eT1 (X T DX)−1 X T = eT1 T T T X[1] DX1 X[1] DX[1] X[1] = ≈  T T X1T (I − DX[1] (X[1] DX[1] )−1 X[1] ) T DX )−1 X T D)X X1T (D − DX[1] (X[1] 1 [1] [1] T T X1T (I − D[1] X[1] (X[1] D[1] X[1] )−1 X[1] ) T DX )−1 X T D)X X1T (D − DX[1] (X[1] 1 [1] [1]  where we use the approximation D ≈ D[1] . The same result holds for all j ∈ Jn , then T T kX1T (I − D[1] X[1] (X[1] D[1] X[1] )−1 X[1] )k∞ keTj (X T DX)−1 X T k∞ ≈ . T T T T T −1 T −1 kej (X DX) X k2 kX1 (I − D[1] X[1] (X[1] D[1] X[1] ) X[1] )k2 T T Recall that hTj,1,i is i-th row of I − D[1] X[1] (X[1] D[1] X[1] )−1 X[1] , we have  max i  |hTj,1,i X1 | keTj (X T DX)−1 X T k∞ ≈ . khj,1,i k2 keTj (X T DX)−1 X T k2  The right-handed side equals to Sj (X) in the least-square case. Therefore, although of complicated form, assumption A5 is not an artifact of the proof but is essential for the asymptotic normality. 64  C-4.2  Additional Examples  Benefit from the analytical form of the least-square estimator, we can depart from subgaussinity of the entries. The following proposition shows that a random design matrix Z with i.i.d. entries under appropriate moment conditions satisfies maxj∈Jn Sj (Z) = o(1) with high probability. This implies that, when X is one realization of Z, the conditions Theorem 5.1 are satisfied for X with high probability over Z. Proposition C.6. If {Zij : i ≤ n, j ∈ Jn } are independent random variables with 1  1. maxi≤n,j∈Jn (E|Zij |8+δ ) 8+δ ≤ M for some δ, M > 0; 2. mini≤n,j∈Jn Var(Zij ) > τ 2 for some τ > 0 3. P (Z has full column rank) = 1 − o(1); 4. EZj ∈ span{Zj : j ∈ Jnc } almost surely for all j ∈ Jn ; where Zj is the j-th column of Z. Then  max Sj (Z) = Op j∈Jn  1 1  n4   = op (1).  A typical practically interesting example is that Z contains an intercept term, which is not in Jn , and Zj has i.i.d. entries for j ∈ Jn with continuous distribution and sufficiently many moments, in which case the first three conditions are easily checked and EZj is a multiple of (1, . . . , 1), which belongs to span{Zj : j ∈ Jnc }. In fact, the condition 4 allows Proposition C.6 to cover more general cases than the above one. For example, in a census study, a state-specific fix effect might be added into the model, i.e. yi = αsi + ziT β ∗ + i where si represents the state of subject i. In this case, Z contains a sub-block formed by zi and a sub-block with ANOVA forms as mentioned in Example 1. The latter is usually incorporated only for adjusting group bias and not the target of inference. Then condition 4 is satisfied if only Zij has same mean in each group for each j, i.e. EZij = µsi ,j . Proof of Proposition C.6. By Sherman-Morison-Woodbury formula, eTj (Z T Z)−1 Z T =  ZjT (I − Hj ) ZjT (I − Hj )Zj  T T where Hj = Z[j] (Z[j] Z[j] )−1 Z[j] is the projection matrix generated by Z[j] . Then  Sj (Z) =  keTj (Z T Z)−1 Z T k∞ kZjT (I − Hj )k∞ q = . keTj (Z T Z)−1 Z T k2 ZjT (I − Hj )Zj  (C-79)  Similar to the proofs of other examples, the strategy is to show that the numerator, as a linear contrast of Zj , and the denominator, as a quadratic form of Zj , are both concentrated around their means. Specifically, we will show that there exists some constants C1 and C2 such that    n  o 1 1 . (C-80) max sup P kAZj k∞ > C1 n 4 + P ZjT AZj < C2 n = o j∈Jn n n×n 2 A∈R ,A =A, tr(A)=n−p+1  If (C-80) holds, since Hj is independent of Zj by assumptions, we have     T kZ (I − H )k 1 1 C1 C1 j ∞ j P Sj (Z) ≥ √ · n− 4 = P  q ≥√ · n− 4  T C2 C 2 Z (I − Hj )Zj j  65     1 ≤P k(I − Hj )Zj k∞ > C1 n 4 + P ZjT (I − Hj )Zj < C2 n        1 T 4 =E P k(I − Hj )Zj k∞ > C1 n Z[j] + E P Zj (I − Hj )Zj < C2 n Z[j]    1 ≤ sup P kAZj k∞ > C1 n 4 + P ZjT AZj < C2 n  (C-81)  A∈Rn×n ,A2 =A,tr(A)=n−p+1  ( ≤ max j∈Jn    1 4  P kAZj k∞ > C1 n  sup  )    +P  A∈Rn×n ,A2 =A,tr(A)=n−p+1  ZjT AZj  < C2 n    =o    1 . n  (C-82) Thus with probability 1 − o(|Jn |/n) = 1 − o(1), 1 C1 · n− 4 max Sj (Z) ≤ √ j∈Jn C2  and hence   max Sj (Z) = Op j∈Jn    1  .  1  n4  Now we prove (C-80). The proof, although looks messy, is essentially the same as the proof for other examples. Instead of relying on the exponential concentration given by the sub-gaussianity, we show the concentration in terms of higher-order moments. In fact, for any idempotent A, the sum square of each row is bounded by 1 since X A2ij = (A2 )j,j ≤ λmax (A2 ) = 1. i  By Jensen’s inequality, 2  2 EZij ≤ (E|Zij |8+δ ) 8+δ .  For any j, by Rosenthal’s inequality (Rosenthal, 1970), there exists some universal constant C such that  !4+δ/2  8+δ n n n X  X X 2 Aij Zij ≤C |Aij |8+δ E|Zij |8+δ + A2ij EZij E   i=1 i=1 i=1   !4+δ/2 n n X  X 2 8+δ 2 2 ≤C |Aij | E|Zij | + Aij EZij   i=1 i=1   !4+δ/2 n n X  X 8+δ 2 2 ≤ CM Aij + Aij ≤ 2CM 8+δ .   i=1  i=1  1  Let C1 = (2CM 8+δ ) 8+δ , then for given i, by Markov inequality, ! n X 1 1 P Aij Zij > C1 n 4 ≤ 2+δ/4 n i=1 and a union bound implies that   1 P kAZj k∞ > C1 n 4 ≤  1 n1+δ/4    1 =o . n  (C-83)  Now we derive a bound for ZjT AZj . Since p/n → κ ∈ (0, 1), there exists κ̃ ∈ (0, 1 − κ) such that n − p > κ̃n. Then EZjT AZj  =  n X  2 Aii EZij > τ 2 tr(A) = τ 2 (n − p + 1) > κ̃τ 2 n.  i=1  To bound the tail probability, we need the following result: 66  (C-84)  Lemma C.7 (Bai and Silverstein (2010), Lemma 6.2). Let B be an n × n nonrandom matrix and W = (W1 , . . . , Wn )T be a random vector of independent entries. Assume that EWi = 0, EWi2 = 1 and E|Wi |k ≤ νk . Then, for any q ≥ 1,   q q E|W T BW − tr(B)|q ≤ Cq (ν4 tr(BB T )) 2 + ν2q tr(BB T ) 2 , where Cq is a constant depending on q only. It is easy to extend Lemma C.7 to non-isotropic case by rescaling. In fact, denote σi2 by the variance of Wi , and let Σ = diag(σ1 , . . . , σn ), Y = (W1 /σ1 , . . . , Wn /σn ). Then 1  1  W T BW = Y T Σ 2 BΣ 2 Y, 1  1  with Cov(Y ) = I. Let B̃ = Σ 2 BΣ 2 , then 1  1  1  1  B̃ B̃ T = Σ 2 BΣB T Σ 2  ν2 Σ 2 BB T Σ 2 . This entails that 1  1  tr(B̃ B̃ T ) ≤ nu2 tr(Σ 2 BB T Σ 2 ) = ν2 tr(ΣBB T ) ≤ ν22 tr(BB T ). On the other hand,  q2  1 q q q q 1 tr(B̃ B̃ T ) 2 ≤ nλmax (B̃ B̃ T ) 2 = nν22 λmax Σ 2 BB T Σ 2 ≤ nν2q λmax (BB T ) 2 . Thus we obtain the following result Lemma C.8. Let B be an n×n nonrandom matrix and W = (W1 , . . . , Wn )T be a random vector of independent mean-zero entries. Suppose E|Wi |k ≤ νk , then for any q ≥ 1,   q q E|W T BW − EW T BW |q ≤ Cq ν2q (ν4 tr(BB T )) 2 + ν2q tr(BB T ) 2 , where Cq is a constant depending on q only. Apply Lemma C.8 with W = Zj , B = A and q = 4 + δ/2, we obtain that   E|ZjT AZj − EZjT AZj |4+δ/2 ≤ CM 16+2δ (tr(AAT ))2+δ/4 + tr(AAT )2+δ/4 for some constant C. Since A is idempotent, all eigenvalues of A is either 1 or 0 and thus AAT  I. This implies that tr(AAT ) ≤ n,  tr(AAT )2+δ/4 ≤ n  and hence E|ZjT AZj − EZjT AZj |4+δ/2 ≤ 2CM 16+2δ n2+δ/4 for some constant C1 , which only depends on M . By Markov inequality,  P  |ZjT AZj − EZjT AZj | ≥  κ̃τ 2 n 2    ≤ 2CM 16+2δ    2 κ̃τ 2  4+δ/2 ·  1 n2+δ/4  .  Combining with (C-84), we conclude that  P ZjT AZj < C2 n = O 2    1 n2+δ/4   =o    1 n  (C-85)  where C2 = κ̃τ2 . Notice that both (C-83) and (C-85) do not depend on j and A. Therefore, (C-80) is proved and hence the Proposition.  67  D  Additional Numerical Experiments  In this section, we repeat the experiments in section 6 by using L1 loss, i.e. ρ(x) = |x|. L1 -loss is not smooth and does not satisfy our technical conditions. The results are displayed below. It is seen that the performance is quite similar to that with the huber loss. ^ Coverage of β1 (κ = 0.5) normal  ^ Coverage of β1 (κ = 0.8)  t(2)  normal  1.00 ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  0.95 0.90  1.00  1.00 ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  0.90  1.00  0.95  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  100  200  ellip  0.95  Coverage  0.90  ellip  Coverage  ●  iid  ●  iid  0.95  t(2)  1.00  0.90  1.00  0.90  100  200  400  800  100  200  400  hadamard  hadamard  0.95  0.95 0.90  800  100  200  400  Sample Size Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  800  400  800  Sample Size hadamard  Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  hadamard  Figure 5: Empirical 95% coverage of β̂1 with κ = 0.5 (left) and κ = 0.8 (right) using L1 loss. The x-axis corresponds to the sample size, ranging from 100 to 800; the y-axis corresponds to the empirical 95% coverage. Each column represents an error distribution and each row represents a type of design. The orange solid bar corresponds to the case F = Normal; the blue dotted bar corresponds to the case F = t2 ; the red dashed bar represents the Hadamard design.  68  ^ ^ Min. coverage of β1 ~ β10 (κ = 0.5) normal  ^ ^ Min. coverage of β1 ~ β10 (κ = 0.8)  t(2)  normal  0.95 0.90  t(2)  0.95 ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  0.90  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  0.80  0.95  ●  0.90  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ellip  ●  ●  Coverage  0.95 ●  ellip  Coverage  iid  0.80  0.95 0.90  ●  ●  iid  0.80  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  0.80  0.95  0.80 100  200  400  800  100  200  400  hadamard  hadamard  0.90  0.90  0.80  800  100  200  400  Sample Size Entry Dist.  ●  normal  800  100  200  400  800  Sample Size  t(2)  hadamard  Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  hadamard  Figure 6: Mininum empirical 95% coverage of β̂1 ∼ β̂10 with κ = 0.5 (left) and κ = 0.8 (right) using L1 loss. The x-axis corresponds to the sample size, ranging from 100 to 800; the y-axis corresponds to the minimum empirical 95% coverage. Each column represents an error distribution and each row represents a type of design. The orange solid bar corresponds to the case F = Normal; the blue dotted bar corresponds to the case F = t2 ; the red dashed bar represents the Hadamard design. ^ ^ Bonf. coverage of β1 ~ β10 (κ = 0.5) normal  ^ ^ Bonf. coverage of β1 ~ β10 (κ = 0.8)  t(2)  normal  1.00 ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  iid  0.95  iid  0.95  ●  0.90  0.90 1.00 ●  ●  ●  ● ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ●  ● ●  0.95  ●  ●  0.90  0.90  1.00  1.00  hadamard  hadamard  0.95  ●  ellip  ellip  0.95  Coverage  1.00  Coverage  t(2)  1.00 ●  0.95  0.90  0.90 100  200  400  800  100  200  400  800  100  200  400  Sample Size Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  800  100  200  400  800  Sample Size hadamard  Entry Dist.  ●  normal  t(2)  hadamard  Figure 7: Empirical 95% coverage of β̂1 ∼ β̂10 after Bonferroni correction with κ = 0.5 (left) and κ = 0.8 (right) using L1 loss. The x-axis corresponds to the sample size, ranging from 100 to 800; the y-axis corresponds to the empirical uniform 95% coverage after Bonferroni correction. Each column represents an error distribution and each row represents a type of design. The orange solid bar corresponds to the case F = Normal; the blue dotted bar corresponds to the case F = t2 ; the red dashed bar represents the Hadamard design.  69  E  Miscellaneous  In this appendix we state several technical results for the sake of completeness. Proposition E.1 (Horn & Johnson, 2012, formula (0.8.5.6)). Let A ∈ Rp×p be an invertible matrix and write A as a block matrix   A11 A12 A= A21 A22 with A11 ∈ Rp1 ×p1 , A22 ∈ R(p−p1 )×(p−p1 ) being invertible matrices. Then   −1 −1 A11 + A−1 A21 A−1 −A−1 11 A12 S 11 11 A12 S A−1 = −S −1 A21 A−1 S −1 11 where S = A22 − A21 A−1 11 A12 is the Schur’s complement. Proposition E.2 (Rudelson & Vershynin, 2013; improved version of the original form by Hanson & Wright, 1971). Let X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) ∈ Rn be a random vector with independent mean-zero σ 2 -sub-gaussian components Xi . Then, for every t,     t t2 , P |X T AX − EX T AX| > t ≤ 2 exp −c min σ 4 kAk2F σ 2 kAkop Proposition E.3 (Bai & Yin, 1993). If {Zij : i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , p} are i.i.d. random variables with zero mean, unit variance and finite fourth moment and p/n → κ, then  T   T  √ 2 √ Z Z a.s. Z Z a.s. → (1 + κ) , λmin → (1 − κ)2 . λmax n n Proposition E.4 (Latala, 2005). Suppose {Zij : i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , p} are independent mean-zero random variables with finite fourth moment, then   sX sX sX q 2 + max 2 + 4 E λmax (Z T Z) ≤ C max EZij EZij EZij 4 i  j  j  i  i,j  4 for some universal constant C. In particular, if EZij are uniformly bounded, then   λmax  ZT Z n    r   p = Op 1 + . n  Proposition E.5 (Rudelson & Vershynin, 2010). Suppose {Zij : i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , p} are independent mean-zero σ 2 -sub-gaussian random variables. Then there exists a universal constant C1 , C2 > 0 such that s r  T   ! 2 Z Z p P λmax > Cσ 1 + +t ≤ 2e−C2 nt . n n Proposition E.6 (Rudelson & Vershynin, 2009). Suppose {Zij : i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , p} are i.i.d. σ 2 -sub-gaussian random variables with zero mean and unit variance, then for  ≥ 0 s ! r  T  Z Z p−1 ≤ (1 − ) ≤ (C)n−p+1 + e−cn P λmin n n for some universal constants C and c.  70  Proposition E.7 (Litvak et al., 2005). Suppose {Zij : i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , p} are independent σ 2 -sub-gaussian random variables such that d  Zij = −Zij ,  Var(Zij ) > τ 2  for some σ, τ > 0, and p/n → κ ∈ (0, 1), then there exists constants c1 , c2 > 0, which only depends on σ and τ , such that    T  Z Z < c1 ≤ e−c2 n . P λmin n  71

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
