Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_2179

Abstract:
A New Optimal Algorithm for Computing the Visibility Area of a simple Polygon from a Viewpoint Hamid Hoorfar  ∗  Alireza Bagheri∗  arXiv:1803.10184v2 [cs.CG] 29 Mar 2018  Abstract Given a simple polygon P of n vertices in the Plane. We study the problem of computing the visibility polygon from a given viewpoint q inside P where only few working variables can be used. The problem was previously solved in O(nr) time using O(1) variables for working space, where r denotes the cardinality of reflex vertices of P in the output. In this paper, we present an optimal in-place algorithm of O(n) time, and O(1) extra variables (in addition to the being in-place) for computing visibility area. If reporting the parts of P that are not in the visibility area is acceptable as result, our algorithm can be a constant-memory for computing visibility area. We improve timecomplexity such that it just depends on n. Actually, we provide a linear-time and in-place algorithm for computing visibility area of a viewpoint inside a simple polygon. Keywords: Visibility Area, Constant-Memory Mode, Memory-constrained Algorithm, Two-pass Algorithm, In-place Algorithm, Streaming Algorithm, Guarding Polygon.  1  Introduction  The visibility polygon of a simple polygon P from an internal point q is the set of all points of P that can be visible from q, where two points p and q are visible from each other whenever the line-segment pq does not intersects the boundary of P. The visibility area of viewpoint q inside P is the set of all points in P that are visible from q. One of the important problem studies in computational geometry is visibility [8]. Joe and Simpson found the first optimal algorithm for computing visibility area (region) from a point in linear-time and space [9, 11]. In computing, when the input is presented as a sequence of items, it is called data streams, also, if an algorithm is presented for processing data streams is called streaming algorithm. In streaming algorithms, the input is presented as a sequence and is computed in a constant p passes and typically in one pass, so, they are called p-pass algorithm. In most models, this type of constrained-memory algorithms has restricted memory (generally less than logarithmic in the size of input and typically constant). So, a p-pass algorithm is a streaming algorithm which sees its input exactly p times, in order, without unbounded buffering. A p-pass algorithm generally requires less than O(n) and typically constant space. As mentioned, these constant-memory algorithms do not have a long-term memory structure. Deciding and processing of current data must be at the moment. Using constant space, there is not enough memory for storing previously seen data or even for the index of this data. An in-place algorithm is an algorithm which transforms input using no auxiliary data structure. Only a small amount of extra workspace is allowed for auxiliary variables. The input is overwritten by the output as the algorithm executes. In-place algorithm updates input sequence only through replacement or swapping of elements. If extra O(1) bits for workspace is allowed, It is called strict in-place. The strict definition of in-place algorithms includes all algorithms with O(1)-bits space complexity, the class DSPACE(1). This class is very limited; it equals the regular languages [10]. However, in constraint-memory mode, there is O(s) bits workspace during running algorithm, typically s ∈ O(log n). Several researchers worked on constrained memory algorithm in visibility [1, 3, 5, 7]. Some related works are reviewed here. Computing visibility area of a viewpoint q in the simple polygon P with extra O(1) variables has time-complexity of O(nr) where r is the cardinality of the reflex vertices of P in the output [6] while there exists a linear-time algorithm for computing the visibility area without constrained memory [2]. If there is O(s) variables for the computing, the time complexity of computing visibility area decreases to O( nr 2s + n log r) where s ∈ O(log r). It was presented a time-space trade-off algorithm which reports the k-visibility area kn for q ∈ P in O( cn s + n log s + min{ s , n log logs n}) time, the algorithm uses O(s) words with O(log n) bits each of workspace and c ≤ n is the number of vertices of P where the visibility area changes for the viewpoint q [4]. If k = 1 and s = 1, their algorithm time complexity is O(cn), in fact, using O(log n) bits ∗ Department of Computer Engineering and Information Technology, Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), {hoorfar,ar bagheri}@aut.ac.ir  A New Optimal Algorithm for Computing the Visibility Area of a simple Polygon from a Viewpoint  V12  V11  V10 V8  V7  θ20 q  V1  positive X-axis  V20  Figure 1: Illustration of the angle of pi , the angle, θ20 is the angle of qp20 , the ∠V1 V7 V8 is a clockwise turn and the angle ∠V10 V11 V12 is a counterclockwise turn.  space. Our General Result: We provide an optimal algorithm of O(n) time, and O(1) extra variables for computing visibility area of a view point q inside P in the in-place model and we improve time-complexity such that it just depends on n. With the difference that if we change our algorithm to be not-in-place(to be constant-memory), we can just report parts of P that are not in the visibility area of q.  2  Preliminaries  Assume that a simple polygon P is given in a doubly linked list L of n vertices (every vertices in one word with log(ω) bits each) in counterclockwise order along the boundary and there is a read-only variable that is contained a query point q ∈ P (one word with log(ω) bits), where ω is the maximum storage size of vertices, it differs from n. The storage size of variables that are used as working space, also, is log(ω) bits. In this model, the input is provided in a sequential-access with two directions forward and backward. If 2-direction sequential-access is acceptable, our algorithm is streaming. Sequential access is the only way of accessing a random element in L (in our model). Let l0 , l1 , l2 , . . . , ln−1 be the elements of L, in forward traversal, the input is streamed from l0 to ln−1 , and in backward traversal, the input is streamed from ln−1 to l0 , sequentially. There is a few additional variables of memory as working space or workspace. The workspace is both writable and readable during the running of algorithm. The output is presented with modifying input L as the algorithm executes. At the end of processing algorithm, Let ti is the number of reading element li in L where 0 ≤ i < n, and p = maxn−1 i=0 (li ), then the algorithm is called p-pass. The aim is to report a suitable representation of the visibility area of P in the doubly linked list L, using O(1) variables, so, there is no extra space for writing the result. For every vertex pi of P, we → and the positive X-axis as denoted by θ (radian). For every compute the angle between vector (ray) − qp i i θi , where i between 0 and n − 1, 0 ≤ i ≤ 2π. For every 3 vertices v1 ,v2 and v3 , the angle ∠v1 v2 v3 is called → counterclockwise turn, if and only if v3 is placed on the left side of the vector − v− 1 v2 , otherwise, if and only if v3 is placed on the right side, it is called clockwise turn, see Figure 1. Sometimes, for simplicity we denote angle ∠v1 v2 v3 as ∠v2 . For two vertices ν and ν 0 , let Γν is the line which is contained ν and q, let e1 and e2 are two edges which are contained ν 0 , so, the intersection of e1 and Γν , or e2 and Γν , that one touches the polygon from internal of P(from direction of q), is called shadow of ν, we denote it by S(ν) or ν, see Figure 2(A) and 2(B). In boundary traversal of P, if θc−1 < θc > θc+1 or θc−1 > θc < θc+1 , pc is called critical vertex. If θc−1 < θc > θc+1 , then pc is called critical-max vertex and if θc−1 > θc < θc+1 , pc is called critical-min vertex. In the Table 2, There is a list of functions that are useful for our data structure, doubly linked list.  Hamid Hoorfar and Alireza Bagheri, 2018  q e1 e2  ν  ν q  ν0  e2 ν0  ν e1 ν  (A)  (B)  Figure 2: (A)the red box is shadow of ν, in this case, there are two intersections between e1 , e2 and qν, so, the red circle is not the shadow. (B)the red box is shadow of ν, in this case, there is one intersection between e1 , e2 and qν.  Function Name Insert(x) Delete() Update(x) Forward() Backward() Return()  3  Table 1: Functions Time Complexity θ(1) θ(1) θ(1) θ(1) θ(1) θ(1)  List for doubly linked list structure Description Insert a new element before current element(data=x). Delete current element. Replace data of current element with value of x. Go to next element. Go to previous element. Print current element in the output.  A Constant-Memory Algorithm for Computing Visibility area of Simple Polygons  In this section, the aim is presenting an algorithm for computing the visibility area of q inside P and only O(1) extra variables is available(allowed). We assume that vertices of simple polygon P is given in doubly linked list L. Let l0 , l1 , l2 , . . . , ln−1 be the elements of L and p0 , p1 , p2 , . . . , pn−1 be the vertices of P in counterclockwise order along the boundary and assume that θi is the angle of qpi . We use 3 variables as workspace. Our algorithm contains two traverse in L, forward and backward. Note that the aim is to report a suitable representation of the visibility area of P from q. Forward Traversal: Using forward traversal in L, actually, we traverse the vertices of P along the boundary in counterclockwise order. Considering angles, we continue to traverse until finding the first element that is not in the ascending order which is named critical-max element(vertex). When we encounter such element pi , we check whether ∠pi−2 pi−1 pi is clockwise turn or not. If yes, we delete (pi ) and continue deleting until we occur first element pk such that θk > θi , we update and replace value of pk−1 with the shadow of (pi ) (shadow pi on pk ) and continue. Otherwise, if no, we ignore current element and next descending elements until we occur next critical-min vertex and continue. See Figure 3(A). Backward Traversal: After forward traversal, we traverse the vertices of P along the boundary in clockwise order. Considering angles, we continue to traverse until finding the first element that is not in the descending order which is named critical-min element(vertex). When we encounter such element pj , we delete (pj ) and continue deleting until we occur first element pl such that θl < θj , we update and replace value of pl−1 with the shadow of (pj ) (on pl ) and continue. See Figure 3(B). Our algorithm do the above two procedures, respectively. By doing these, no critical vertex will remained in L. Others vertices that are remained in L are the boundary of visibility area of q in P, see Algorithm 1. Since our algorithm is 2-pass (according to our definition), and since processing each vertex takes O(1) time, the running time of the algorithm is O(n), using O(1) workspace(variables). Now, we have the following theorem: Theorem 1 Given a simple polygon P with n vertices in a doubly linked list and a view point q inside P. Using O(1) variables, there is an algorithm which computes visibility area of q in P in O(n) time. See Algorithm 1 and Video 1 to illumination. In our strategy, we modify and delete unused elements from input to obtain the output. Of course, we can save the output in a new write-only linked list or array by a little change in Algorithm 1. If we put the Return function instead of the Insert and Delete functions, then we can report the parts of polygon  A New Optimal Algorithm for Computing the Visibility Area of a simple Polygon from a Viewpoint  Algorithm 1: Computing the visibility area using constant workspace. Input: Vertices of simple polygon P in doubly linked list L, a view point q in P Output: Vertices of visibility area of P from q in L, ordered counterclockwise. 1 set V0 , V1 , V2 three vertices with smallest angle in L, respectively; 2 if V2 = N ull then 3 End of Algorithm. 4 end 5 while V1 is not a critical-max vertex do 6 V0 = V1 ; V1 = V2 ; V2 =Forward(); 7 end 8 if ∠V1 is clockwise turn then 9 while V1 > V2 do 10 Delete(); V2 =Forward(); 11 end 12 Insert(S(V1 )); Goto 2; 13 else 14 while V0 > V1 do 15 V0 = V1 ; V1 = V2 ; V2 =Forward(); 16 end 17 Goto 2; 18 end 19 set V0 , V1 , V2 three vertices with largest angle in L, respectively; 20 while V1 is not critical-min vertex do 21 V0 = V1 ; V1 = V2 ; V2 =Backward(); 22 end 23 while V1 < V2 do 24 Delete(); V2 =Backward(); 25 end 26 Insert(S(V1 )); Goto 2;  (A)  (B)  Figure 3: (A)gray areas are the deleted parts of P using the forward traversal. (B)gray areas are the deleted parts of P using the backward traversal.  that are not in the visibility area. It leads to reporting the visibility area, uniquely. With the difference that if we change our algorithm to be not-in-place, we can just report parts of P that are not in the visibility area. Also, our current algorithm can be used for polygons with holes, polygonal chains, sets of non-crossed line segments and sets of disjointed polygons(obstacles) in the plane. In statically typed languages, a variable also has a type, meaning that only certain kinds of values can be stored in it, so, we are allowed to assume ω is constant without no assumption about n(the number of vertices). Also we can say our algorithm is used O(1) bits space. But, in dynamically typed languages, it is values, not variables, which carry type, so, our algorithm is used extra O(log ω) bits for its workspace, as mentioned ω and n are not same (maybe ω  n).  Hamid Hoorfar and Alireza Bagheri, 2018  4  Conclusion  We studied the problem of computing visibility of a viewpoint inside simple polygon. We used a different data structure for finding visibility area. we presented an in-place algorithm with using O(log n) additional space to compute visibility area of a viewpoint in simple polygon using a different data structure. References [1] Mikkel Abrahamsen. Constant-workspace algorithms for visibility problems in the plane. Master’s thesis, University of Copenhagen, 2013. [2] Takao Asano, Tetsuo Asano, Leonidas Guibas, John Hershberger, and Hiroshi Imai. Visibility of disjoint polygons. Algorithmica, 1(1-4):49–63, 1986. [3] Tetsuo Asano, Kevin Buchin, Maike Buchin, Matias Korman, Wolfgang Mulzer, Günter Rote, and André Schulz. Memory-constrained algorithms for simple polygons. Computational Geometry, 46(8):959–969, 2013. [4] Yeganeh Bahoo, Bahareh Banyassady, Prosenjit Bose, Stephane Durocher, and Wolfgang Mulzer. Time-space trade-off for finding the k-visibility region of a point in a polygon. In International Workshop on Algorithms and Computation, pages 308–319. Springer, 2017. [5] Luis Barba, Matias Korman, Stefan Langerman, and Rodrigo I Silveira. Computing the visibility polygon using few variables. In International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation, pages 70–79. Springer, 2011. [6] Luis Barba, Matias Korman, Stefan Langerman, and Rodrigo I Silveira. Computing a visibility polygon using few variables. Computational geometry, 47(9):918–926, 2014. [7] Minati De, Anil Maheshwari, and Subhas C Nandy. Space-efficient algorithms for visibility problems in simple polygon. arXiv preprint arXiv:1204.2634, 2012. [8] Subir Kumar Ghosh, Thomas Caton Shermer, Binay Kumar Bhattacharya, and Partha Pratim Goswami. Computing the maximum clique in the visibility graph of a simple polygon. Journal of Discrete Algorithms, 5(3):524–532, 2007. [9] Barry Joe and Richard B Simpson. Corrections to lee’s visibility polygon algorithm. BIT Numerical Mathematics, 27(4):458–473, 1987. [10] Maciej Liskiewicz and Rüdiger Reischuk. The complexity world below logarithmic space. In Structure in Complexity Theory Conference, 1994., Proceedings of the Ninth Annual, pages 64–78. IEEE, 1994. [11] Csaba D Toth, Joseph O’Rourke, and Jacob E Goodman. Handbook of discrete and computational geometry. CRC press, 2017. A A.1  Appendices List of Videos  Video 1 The video is available at YouTube and DropBox.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
