Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_2134

Abstract:
Elementary equivalence vs commensurability for hyperbolic groups Vincent Guirardel, Gilbert Levitt, Rizos Sklinos  arXiv:1701.08853v1 [math.GR] 30 Jan 2017  Abstract We study to what extent torsion-free (Gromov)-hyperbolic groups are elementarily equivalent to their finite index subgroups. In particular, we prove that a hyperbolic limit group either is a free product of cyclic groups and surface groups, or admits infinitely many subgroups of finite index which are pairwise non elementarily equivalent.  1  Introduction  There are many ways in which one may try to classify finitely generated (or finitely presented) groups. The most obvious one is up to isomorphism, or to commensurability (having isomorphic subgroups of finite index). More generally, Gromov suggested the looser notions of quasi-isometry and measure equivalence (commensurable groups are quasi-isometric and measure equivalent, though the converse is far from true). First-order logic provides us with a coarser relation than the relation of isomorphism, where one tries to classify groups up to elementary equivalence. Two groups are elementarily equivalent if and only if they satisfy the same first-order sentences. As usual, one must restrict the class of groups under consideration. A representative example is the work of Szmielew [Szm55] that characterised all abelian groups (possibly infinitely generated) up to elementary equivalence. Our concern here is to investigate the relation between elementary equivalence and commensurability for the special class of torsion-free hyperbolic groups, a class of groups almost orthogonal to the class of abelian groups (hyperbolic will always mean Gromovhyperbolic, also called word-hyperbolic or δ-hyperbolic). The solution of the Tarski problem by Kharlampovich-Myasnikov [KM06] and Sela [Sel06] says that all non-abelian free groups are elementarily equivalent. Even more, both works characterised the finitely generated groups that are elementarily free (i.e. elementarily equivalent to a non-abelian free group). Specifically, there exist finitely generated groups which are elementarily free but not free. The simplest examples are fundamental groups of closed surfaces with Euler characteristic at most −2, and more generally nonabelian free products of such surface groups and cyclic groups. This particular family is closed under taking finite index subgroups; in particular, these groups are elementarily equivalent to their finite index subgroups. On the other hand, if G, G0 are two torsion-free hyperbolic groups with no non-trivial cyclic splitting (fundamental groups of closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds, for instance), the situation is rigid: if G and G0 are elementarily equivalent (or just have the same universal theory), then they are isomorphic (see Proposition 7.1 of [Sel09]). In particular, being co-Hopfian [Sel97], the group G is not elementarily equivalent to any of its proper finite index subgroups. All finitely generated elementarily free groups are torsion-free and hyperbolic (see [Sel06, page 713] and [Sel01]). It is therefore natural to ask whether all finitely generated elementarily free groups are elementarily equivalent to their finite index subgroups, and  1  more generally which torsion-free hyperbolic groups are elementarily equivalent to their finite index subgroups. We shall see that the answer to the first question is very much negative. Since it is conceivable that there exist hyperbolic groups with no proper finite index subgroups, we focus on classes of hyperbolic groups which have many finite index subgroups: limit groups and cubulable groups. Limit groups were first introduced as finitely generated ω-residually free groups. They may be viewed as limits of free groups in the space of marked groups [CG05]. In model theoretic terms, they may be characterized as finitely generated groups having the same universal theory as free groups [Rem89]. Some of them, for instance non-abelian free products of cyclic groups and surface groups as above, are elementarily free, but most of them are not. A group is cubulable (or cubulated) if it acts properly discontinuously and cocompactly on a CAT(0) cubical complex. Cubulable hyperbolic groups played a prominent role in the proof by Agol and Wise of the virtually Haken conjecture about 3-dimensional manifolds [Ago13]. Our main results are the following: Theorem 1.1. Let G be a torsion-free hyperbolic group. If G is a limit group or is cubulable, then either G is a free product of surface groups and cyclic groups, or it has infinitely many normal subgroups of finite index which are all different up to elementary equivalence. Corollary 1.2. A finitely generated elementarily free group is elementarily equivalent to all its finite index subgroups if and only if it is a free product of surface groups and cyclic groups. We also prove: Theorem 1.3. There exists a one-ended hyperbolic limit group G which is not elementarily free, but has an elementarily free finite index subgroup. Among torsion-free hyperbolic groups, Sela [Sel09] singled out a special family, which he called elementary prototypes, with the property that two elementary prototypes are elementarily equivalent if and only if they are isomorphic. Our way of proving Theorem 1.1 is to construct non-isomorphic finite index subgroups of G which are elementary prototypes. In Theorem 1.3 we construct G as the fundamental group of a surface with a socket. Let us now describe the contents of the paper in a more detailed way. In order to make our main results as independent as possible of the deep theory needed to solve Tarski’s problem and establish the results of [Sel09], we view one-ended prototypes as groups having no non-injective preretraction (in the sense of [Per11]), and in Section 5 we give a direct argument to show that for such groups elementary equivalence is the same as isomorphism. As the name suggests, a non-injective preretraction yields a retraction and thus a hyperbolic floor [Per11]. A one-ended torsion-free hyperbolic group has a canonical splitting over cyclic groups, its JSJ splitting [Sel97, Bow98, GL]. A special role is played by the quadratically hanging (QH) vertex groups: they are isomorphic to the fundamental groups of compact surfaces, and incident edge groups are boundary subgroups. Using a key technical lemma proved in Section 3, we show (Proposition 4.7) that the existence of a non-injective preretraction is equivalent to that of a surface Σ associated to a QH vertex group of the JSJ decomposition, and a map p : π1 (Σ) → G with the following properties: p is a conjugation on every boundary subgroup, is not an isomorphism of π1 (Σ) onto a conjugate, and has non-abelian image. We also show that p cannot exist if the genus of Σ is too small (Corollary 3.5). 2  The main new results are contained in the last two sections. We first consider fundamental groups of surfaces with sockets, obtained by enlarging the fundamental group of a surface with boundary by adding roots of generators of boundary subgroups. We determine which of these groups are limit groups, which of them are elementarily free, and which of them are elementary prototypes (i.e. do not have non-injective preretractions). In particular, we prove Theorem 1.3 by showing that the fundamental group of an orientable surface of genus 2 with a socket of order 3 is a limit group which is an elementary prototype but has an elementarily free subgroup of index 3. We also study a related family of groups, for which all sockets are identified. In Section 7 we prove Theorem 1.1, using the fact that a one-ended torsion-free hyperbolic group G is an elementary prototype if its cyclic JSJ decomposition satisfies the following conditions: all surfaces are orientable, the girth of the graph of groups is large compared to the complexity of the surfaces which appear, and edge groups map injectively to the abelianization of G. This condition about edge groups is the main reason why we restrict to limit groups and cubulable groups. Acknowledgements This work was mainly conducted during the 2016 Oberwolfach workshop on Model Theory, for which the authors acknowledge support and hospitality. The first author acknowledges support from the Institut universitaire de France. The second author is grateful to the organizers of the 2015 Workshop on Model Theory and Groups in Istanbul for making him think about the topic studied here. The third author was supported by the LABEX MILYON (ANR-10-LABX-0070) of Université de Lyon, within the program ”Investissements d’Avenir” (ANR-11-IDEX-0007) operated by the French National Research Agency (ANR).  2  Preliminaries  Graphs of groups. Graphs of groups are a generalization of free products with amalgamation and HNN-extensions. Recall that a graph of groups G consists of a graph Γ, the assignment of a group Gv or Ge to each vertex v or non-oriented edge e, and injections Ge → Gv whenever v is the origin of an oriented edge (see [Ser77] for precise definitions); the image of Ge is called an incident edge group of Gv . This data yields a group G(G), the fundamental group of G, with an action of G(G) on a simplicial tree T (the Bass-Serre tree of G). We sometimes call the graph of groups Γ rather than G. A graph of groups decomposition (or splitting) of a group G is an isomorphism of G with the fundamental group of a graph of groups. The vertex and edge groups Gv and Ge are then naturally viewed as subgroups of G. We always assume that G is finitely generated and that the graph of groups is minimal (no proper connected subgraph of Γ carries the whole of G); it follows that Γ is a finite graph. We allow the trivial splitting, with Γ a single vertex v with Gv = G. Killing all vertex groups defines an epimorphism from G to the topological fundamental group of the graph Γ (a free group, possibly cyclic or trivial). The (closed) star of a vertex v of Γ is the union of all edges containing v. The open star of v is obtained by removing all vertices w 6= v from the closed star. Grushko decompositions. A finitely generated group has a Grushko decomposition: it is isomorphic to a free product A1 ∗ . . . ∗ An ∗ Fm , where each Ai for i ≤ n is nontrivial, freely indecomposable and not infinite cyclic, and Fm is a free group of rank m. Moreover, the numbers n and m are unique, as well as the Ai ’s up to conjugacy (in G) and permutation. We call the Ai ’s the Grushko factors of G. When G is torsion-free, they are precisely the one-ended free factors of G by a classical theorem of Stallings.  3  Decompositions as free products correspond to graph of groups decompositions with trivial edge groups. A one-ended group does not split over a trivial group, but it may split over Z. We discuss this when G is a torsion-free hyperbolic group. Hyperbolic groups and their cyclic JSJ decompositions. Recall that a finitely generated group is hyperbolic if its Cayley graph (with respect to some, hence any, finite generating set) is a hyperbolic metric space: there exists δ > 0 such that any point on one side of any geodesic triangle is δ-close to one of the other two sides. Small cancellation groups and fundamental groups of negatively curved closed manifolds are hyperbolic. In particular free groups, fundamental groups of closed surfaces with negative Euler characteristic, and free products of such groups, are hyperbolic. A one-ended torsion-free hyperbolic group G is co-Hopfian [Sel97]: it cannot be isomorphic to a proper subgroup. A one-ended torsion-free hyperbolic group G has a canonical JSJ decomposition Γcan over cyclic groups [Sel97, Bow98, GL]. We mention the properties that will be important for this paper. The graph Γcan is bipartite, with every edge joining a vertex carrying a cyclic group to a vertex carrying a non-cyclic group. The action of G on the associated Bass-Serre tree T is invariant under automorphisms of G and acylindrical in the following strong sense: if a non-trivial element g ∈ G fixes a segment of length ≥ 2 in T , then this segment has length exactly 2 and its midpoint has cyclic stabilizer. Surface-type vertices. There are two kinds of vertices of Γcan carrying a non-cyclic group: rigid ones, and quadratically hanging (QH) ones. We will be concerned mostly with QH vertices. If v is a QH vertex of Γcan , the group Gv is isomorphic to the fundamental group of a compact (possibly non-orientable) surface Σ. Incident edge groups Ge are boundary subgroups of π1 (Σ): there exists a component C of ∂Σ such that the image of Ge is equal to π1 (C). We do not specify base points, so we should really say that Ge is conjugate to π1 (C) in π1 (Σ); similarly, any non null-homotopic simple closed curve in Σ determines an infinite cyclic subgroup of π1 (Σ), well-defined up to conjugacy. Moreover, given any component C of ∂Σ, there is a unique incident edge e such that Ge equals π1 (C). These properties are not true for general QH vertices (see [GL]), so as in [Per11] we recall them by calling QH vertices v of Γcan surface-type vertices (see Definition 3.1). Surfaces. The genus g = g(Σ) of a compact surface Σ is the largest number of nonintersecting (possibly one-sided) simple closed curves (other than components of ∂Σ) that can be drawn on the surface without P disconnecting it. If Σ1 , . . . , Σk are disjoint compact subsurfaces of Σ, one clearly has k g(Σi ) ≤ g(Σ). Surfaces of genus 0 are obtained by removing open discs from a sphere, and they are called planar. If Σ has b boundary components, its Euler characteristic is χ(Σ) = 2 − 2g − b if Σ is orientable, χ(Σ) = 2 − g − b otherwise. Surfaces appearing in surface-type vertices will always have non-abelian fundamental group; equivalently, χ(Σ) will be negative. Two surfaces are homeomorphic if and only if they are both orientable or non-orientable, and g and χ are the same. Given a compact surface Σ, there is an upper bound for the cardinality of a family of disjoint non-parallel simple closed curves which are not null-homotopic (a curve is nullhomotopic if it bounds a disc, two curves are parallel if they bound an annulus); for instance, the bound is 3g − 3 if Σ is a closed orientable surface of genus g ≥ 2. There are 5 surfaces with χ(Σ) = −1. The orientable ones are the pair of pants (g = 0, b = 3) and the once-punctured torus (g = 1, b = 1). The non-orientable ones are the twice punctured projective plane (g = 1, b = 2), the once-punctured Klein bottle (g = 2, b = 1), and the closed surface of genus 3. With the exception of the punctured 4  torus, these surfaces do not carry pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphisms and are not allowed to appear in hyperbolic towers (in the sense of [Sel01, Per11]). They should be considered as exceptional (see Definition 4.3). Actions of surface groups on trees. Let Σ be a compact surface. We describe a standard construction associating a finite family C of disjoint simple closed curves on Σ to an action of π1 (Σ) on a tree T such that boundary subgroups are elliptic (they fix a vertex in T ). The group π1 (Σ) acts freely on the universal covering Σ̃. It also acts on T , and we construct an equivariant continuous map f˜ : Σ̃ → T . First suppose that Σ is closed. Fix a triangulation of Σ and lift it to the universal covering Σ̃. We define f˜ on the set of vertices, making sure that vertices Σ̃ are mapped to vertices of T . We then extend it to edges in a linear way, and to triangles (2-simplices). There is a lot of freedom in this construction, but we make sure that f˜ is in general position with respect to midpoints of edges: the preimage C˜ of the set of midpoints of edges of T intersects each triangle in a finite collection of disjoint arcs joining one side of the triangle to another side. The construction is the same if Σ has a boundary, but we require that each line in ∂ Σ̃ be mapped to a single vertex of T (this is possible because boundary subgroups act elliptically on T ). The subset C˜ ⊂ Σ̃ is π1 (Σ)-invariant and its projection to Σ is a finite family C of disjoint simple closed curves. Limit groups. A group G is residually free if, for every nontrivial element g ∈ G, there exists a morphism h : G → F for some free group F such that h(g) is nontrivial. A group G is ω-residually free if, for every finite set {g1 , . . . , gn } ⊂ G \ {1}, there exists a morphism h : G → F for some free group F such that h(gi ) is nontrivial for all i ≤ n. Remeslenikov [Rem89] proved that the class of ω-residually free groups coincides with the class of ∀-free groups, i.e. the class of groups that have the same universal theory as a free group. In his work on the Tarski problem, Sela viewed finitely generated ω-residually free groups in a more geometric way and called them limit groups because they arise from limiting processes (see [Sel01, CG05]). Limit groups have the same universal theory as a free group, but they are not necessarily elementarily free. Free abelian groups and free groups are limit groups. Fundamental groups of orientable closed surfaces, and of non-orientable surfaces with g ≥ 4, are limit groups (they are even elementarily free). A finitely generated subgroup of a limit group, and a free product of limit groups, are limit groups. A limit group is hyperbolic if and only if it does not contain Z2 ([Sel01]).  3  Pinched curves on surfaces  Definition 3.1 (Surface-type vertex). Let Γ be a graph of groups decomposition of a group G. A vertex v of Γ is called a surface-type vertex if the following conditions hold: • the group Gv carried by v is the fundamental group of a compact surface Σ (usually with boundary), with π1 (Σ) non-abelian; • incident edge groups are maximal boundary subgroups of π1 (Σ), and this induces a bijection between the set of boundary components of Σ and the set of incident edges. We say that Gv is a surface-type vertex group. If u is any lift of v to the Bass-Serre tree T of Γ, we say that u is a surface-type vertex, and its stabilizer Gu (which is conjugate to Gv ) is a surface-type vertex stabilizer.  5  Surface-type vertices are QH (quadratically hanging) vertices in the sense of [GL]. Definition 3.2 (Pinching). Let Σ be a compact surface. Given a homomorphism p : π1 (Σ) → G, a family of pinched curves is a collection C of disjoint, non-parallel, two-sided simple closed curves Ci ⊂ Σ, none of which is null-homotopic, such that the fundamental group of each Ci is contained in ker p (the curves may be parallel to a boundary component). The map p is non-pinching if there is no pinched curve: p is injective in restriction to the fundamental group of any simple closed curve which is not null-homotopic. Let S be a component of the surface Σ̂ obtained by cutting Σ along C. Its fundamental group is naturally identified with a subgroup of π1 (Σ), so p restricts to a map from π1 (S) to G, which we also denote by p. Lemma 3.3. Let Γ be a graph of groups decomposition of a group G, with Bass-Serre tree T . Assume that Γ has a single surface-type vertex v with Gv = π1 (Σ), together with vertices v1 , . . . , vn (with n ≥ 1), and every edge of Γ joins v to some vi (in particular, edge groups of Γ are infinite cyclic). Let p : π1 (Σ) → G be a homomorphism such that the image of every boundary subgroup of π1 (Σ) fixes an edge of T , and p is not an isomorphism onto some subgroup of G conjugate to π1 (Σ). Let C be a maximal family of pinched curves on Σ, and let S be a component of the surface obtained by cutting Σ along C. Then the image of π1 (S) by p is contained in a conjugate of some Gvi (i.e. it fixes a vertex of T which is not a lift of v). Proof. The boundary of S consists of components of ∂Σ and curves coming from C. Define S0 by gluing a disc to S along each curve coming from C. There is an induced map π : π1 (S0 ) → G, hence an action of π1 (S0 ) on the Bass-Serre tree T , and we must show that π1 (S0 ) fixes a lift of some vi . We may assume that the image of π is non-trivial. As in the preliminaries, we consider the universal covering S̃0 , and π1 (S0 )-equivariant maps f˜ : S̃0 → T such that every line in ∂ S̃0 is mapped to a vertex (such maps exist because boundary subgroups of π1 (Σ) fix a point in T ). Assuming that f˜ is in general position, we consider preimages of midpoints of edges and we project to S0 . This yields a finite family C0 of simple closed curves on S0 , and we choose f˜ so as to minimize the number of these curves (in particular, no curve in C0 is null-homotopic). The map f˜ induces a map f : S0 → Γ sending each component Y of S0 \ C0 into the open star of some vertex vY of Γ. We shall show that no vY may be equal to v. Assuming this, we deduce that C0 has to be empty, since every curve in C0 separates a component mapped to the star of v from a component mapped to the star of some vi , and the lemma follows. Let therefore Y be a component with vY = v, and Z its closure. The components of ∂Z come from either C0 or ∂Σ. The restriction πZ of π to π1 (Z) has an image contained in a conjugate of π1 (Σ), which we may assume to be π1 (Σ) itself. It is non-pinching (its kernel cannot contain the fundamental group of an essential simple closed curve) by maximality of C, and it sends any boundary subgroup H of π1 (Z) into a boundary subgroup of π1 (Σ) because πZ (H) fixes an edge of T . By Lemma 6.2 of [Per11], there are three possibilities: either ∂Z = ∅, or the image of πZ is contained in a boundary subgroup of π1 (Σ), or it has finite index in π1 (Σ). We show that each possibility contradicts one of our assumptions. If ∂Z is empty (so, in particular, C0 = ∅ and Z = S0 ), we note that π1 (Σ) is a free group because n ≥ 1, and we represent πZ : π1 (Z) → π1 (Σ) by a map from Z to a graph. Maximality of C implies that Z = S0 is a sphere or a projective plane, so the image of π is trivial, a contradiction. Now suppose that the image of πZ is contained in a boundary subgroup H of π1 (Σ). Denote by ṽ the vertex of T fixed by π1 (Σ), and by ṽṽi the unique edge incident on ṽ 6  fixed by H (a lift of some edge vvi of Γ). Consider the component Ỹ of the preimage of Y in S̃0 mapping to the star of ṽ. The union of all regions adjacent to Ỹ is mapped by f˜ into the open star of ṽi , and we may redefine f˜ so as to remove C0 ∩ ∂Z from C0 , thus contradicting the original choice of f˜ (if C0 ∩ ∂Z = ∅, then Z = S0 and we may replace f˜ by the constant map equal to ṽi ). If the image of πZ has finite index d in π1 (Σ), then d has to be 1 because χ(Σ) ≥ χ(S0 ) ≥ χ(Z) = dχ(Σ), and we conclude from Lemma 3.12 of [Per11] that Σ = S0 = Z and p is an isomorphism from π1 (Σ) to itself, contradicting our hypothesis. Remark 3.4. The proof shows the following more general result, which will be useful in [GLS]: Let Γ and Σ be as in Lemma 3.3. Let Σ0 be a compact surface, and let p : π1 (Σ0 ) → G be a homomorphism such that the image of every boundary subgroup of π1 (Σ0 ) is contained in a conjugate of some Gvi . Let C be a maximal family of pinched curves on Σ0 , and let S be a component of the surface obtained by cutting Σ0 along C. Then, up to conjugacy in G, the image of π1 (S) by p is contained in some Gvi , or there is a subsurface Z ⊂ S such that p(π1 (Z)) is a finite index subgroup of π1 (Σ). Corollary 3.5. Let Γ be as in Lemma 3.3. Denote by n the total number of vertices vi of Γ, by n1 the number of vi ’s which have valence 1, and by b the number of boundary components of Σ. If p : π1 (Σ) → G maps every boundary subgroup of π1 (Σ) injectively into a G-conjugate, and p is not an isomorphism onto a G-conjugate of π1 (Σ), then the genus g of Σ satisfies g ≥ n1 and g + b ≥ 2n. Recall that g = 21 (2 − χ(Σ) + b) if Σ is orientable, and g = 2 − χ(Σ) + b otherwise. By a G-conjugate of H, we mean a subgroup of G conjugate to H. Proof. We fix a maximal family of pinched curves C ⊂ Σ, and we let Σ̂ be the (possibly disconnected) surface obtained by cutting Σ along C. Consider a vertex vi of Γ of valence 1. Let C be the boundary component of Σ associated to the edge vvi , and let S be the component of Σ̂ containing C. By Lemma 3.3, the image of π1 (S) by the restriction of p fixes a vertex of T which is not a lift of v. Because of our assumption on p(π1 (C)), this vertex must be in the orbit of vi . It follows that C is the only boundary component of Σ contained in S: since vi has valence 1, the group Gvi cannot intersect non-trivially a conjugate of π1 (C 0 ) if C 0 6= C is another component of ∂Σ. The boundary of S thus consists of C and curves from C. Since π1 (C) is not contained in ker p but curves in C are pinched, S cannot be planar: it cannot be a sphere with holes since a generator of π1 (C) would then be a product of elements representing pinched curves, contradicting injectivity of p on π1 (C). We conclude that Σ̂ has at least n1 non-planar components. This implies g ≥ n1 . The second inequality follows since n1 + b ≥ 2n.  4  Preretractions  Definition 4.1 (JSJ-like decomposition, [Per11, Definition 5.8]). Let Γ be a graph of groups decomposition of a group G. It is JSJ-like if: • edge groups are infinite cyclic; • at most one vertex of any given edge is a surface-type vertex (in the sense of Definition 3.1), and at most one carries a cyclic group; • (Acylindricity) if a non-trivial element of G fixes two distinct edges of T , then they are adjacent and their common vertex has cyclic stabilizer. 7  The basic example of a JSJ-like decomposition is the canonical cyclic JSJ decomposition of a torsion-free one-ended hyperbolic group G. More generally, the tree of cylinders (in the sense of [GL11]) of any splitting of a torsion-free CSA group G over infinite cyclic groups is JSJ-like. Proposition 4.2 ([Per11, Proposition 6.1]). Let Γ be a JSJ-like graph of groups decomposition of a group G. If r : G → G sends each vertex group and each edge group isomorphically to a conjugate of itself, then r is an automorphism. This statement is stronger than Proposition 6.1 of [Per11], but the proof is identical. If G is torsion-free hyperbolic, Γ may be any graph of groups decomposition with infinite cyclic edge groups (one applies the proposition to its tree of cylinders). Definition 4.3 (Exceptional surfaces). Pairs of pants, once-punctured Klein bottles, twicepunctured projective planes, and closed non-orientable surfaces of genus 3, are surfaces with Euler characteristic -1 which do not carry pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphisms. We call them, as well as surface-type vertices associated to them, exceptional. Definition 4.4 (Preretraction, [Per11, Definition 5.9]). Let Γ be a JSJ-like decomposition of a group G. A preretraction associated to Γ is a homomorphism r : G → G such that, for each vertex group Gv : 1. if Gv is not surface-type, the restriction of r to Gv is conjugation by some gv ∈ G; 2. if Gv is an exceptional surface-type vertex group, the restriction of r to Gv is conjugation by some gv ∈ G; 3. if Gv is a non-exceptional surface-type vertex group, then the image of Gv is nonabelian. Note that this implies that the restriction of r to any edge group of Γ is a conjugation. Example 4.5. Let G be the fundamental group of a non-exceptional closed surface. Any map from G onto a non-abelian free subgroup is a non-injective preretraction (with Γ the trivial splitting). Conditions 2 and 3 are important in order to draw conclusions from the existence of a non-injective preretraction (as in [Per11]). In the present paper, however, we often do not need these assumptions. Definition 4.6 (Weak preretraction). A map r : G → G satisfying Condition 1 of Definition 4.4 will be called a weak preretraction. Proposition 4.2 implies that a preretraction r is an isomorphism if there is no nonexceptional surface-type vertex. More generally: Proposition 4.7. Let Γ be a JSJ-like decomposition of a group G. The following are equivalent: • there is a non-injective preretraction r associated to Γ; • Γ has a non-exceptional surface-type vertex group Gv = π1 (Σ), and there is a map p : π1 (Σ) → G which is a conjugation on each boundary subgroup, has non-abelian image, and is not an isomorphism of π1 (Σ) onto a conjugate. Similarly, there exists a non-injective weak preretraction r if and only if there is an arbitrary surface-type Gv with a map p which is a conjugation on each boundary subgroup and is not an isomorphism of π1 (Σ) onto a conjugate. 8  Proof. The existence of r implies that of p by Proposition 4.2. To prove the converse direction, we may collapse the edges of Γ not containing the surface-type vertex v associated to Σ and thus assume that Γ is as in Lemma 3.3 (unless G is a non-exceptional closed surface group, in which case p itself is a preretraction which is non-injective because G is co-Hopfian). As in Lemma 3.3, we denote by n the number of vertices adjacent to v. Given p which is a conjugation on each boundary subgroup, we may extend it “by the identity” to a (weak) preretraction r. We first illustrate this when Σ has two boundary components (so n ≤ 2). If n = 2, we have G = A1 ∗C1 π1 (Σ) ∗C2 A2 , and p equals conjugation by some gi on the cyclic group Ci ; we then define r as being conjugation by gi on Ai . If n = 1, then G has presentation hπ1 (Σ), A, t | c1 = a1 , tc2 t−1 = a2 i, with ai ∈ A and ci generators of boundary subgroups Ci of π1 (Σ). If pi is conjugation by gi on Ci , we define r as being conjugation by g1 on A and mapping t to g1 tg2 −1 . The general case is similar; if Γ is not a tree, one chooses a maximal subtree in order to get a presentation with stable letters as in the case n = 1 above. There remains to check that r is non-injective. We may assume that p is injective. Then there is no pinching, so by Lemma 3.3 the image of p is contained in a conjugate of some Gvi . Let ẽ = ṽṽi ⊂ T be a lift of the edge vvi . We may assume that π1 (Σ) is the stabilizer of ṽ, and p is the identity on the stabilizer of ẽ. The extension r then preserves the stabilizer of ṽi , and up to postcomposing r with the conjugation by some element of Gẽ , we may assume that r is the identity on the stabilizer of ṽi . The image of p fixes a vertex in the orbit of ṽi , and by acylindricity this vertex must be ṽi . It follows that r cannot be injective. Remark 4.8. In particular, if there is a non-injective preretraction associated to an arbitrary non-trivial JSJ-like decomposition, there is one associated with a Γ as in Lemma 3.3.  5  Preretractions and elementary equivalence  Let G be a finitely generated group. It may be written as A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ F , with Ai non-trivial, not isomorphic to Z, freely indecomposable, and F free. We call the Ai ’s the Grushko factors of G. The following is folklore, but we give a proof for completeness. Proposition 5.1. Let G and G0 be torsion-free hyperbolic groups. Assume that G and G0 are elementarily equivalent. If A is a Grushko factor of G, and A has no non-injective preretraction associated to its cyclic JSJ decomposition Γcan , then A embeds into G0 . Such an A is an example of an elementary prototype [Sel09, Definition 7.3]. Proof. We assume that A does not embed into G0 , and we construct a non-injective preretraction. By Sela’s shortening argument (see [Per11, Proposition 4.3]), there exist finitely many non-trivial elements ri ∈ A such that, given any homomorphism f : A → G0 (necessarily non-injective), there is a modular automorphism σ of A such that the kernel of f 0 = f ◦ σ contains one of the ri ’s. Let Γcan be the canonical cyclic JSJ decomposition of A. By definition, modular automorphisms act on non-surface vertex groups Gv of Γcan by conjugation, so f and f 0 differ by an inner automorphism on such vertex groups Gv . If Γ has an exceptional surfacetype vertex group Gu that has a Dehn twist of infinite order (i.e. if Σ is a once-punctured Klein bottle or a closed non-orientable surface of genus 3), this property does not hold for Gu (this detail was overlooked in [Per11, Lemma 5.6]). To remedy this, one considers Γ0can obtained from Γcan by splitting Gu along the fundamental group of a suitable 2-sided simple closed curve which is invariant under the 9  mapping class group (see Remark 9.32 in [GL]); in Γ0can , all exceptional surfaces have finite mapping class group, and modular automorphisms of A act by conjugation on all exceptional surface groups of Γ0can . Thus the following statement, which is expressible in first-order logic, holds (compare Section 5.4 of [Per11]): given any f : A → G0 such that non-exceptional surface-type vertex groups Gv of Γ0can have non-abelian image, there is f 0 : A → G0 such that ker f 0 contains one of the ri ’s, non-exceptional surface-type vertex groups Gv have non-abelian image by f 0 , and for each other vertex group Gv of Γ0can there is g ∈ G0 such that f 0 agrees with ig ◦ f on Gv (with ig denoting conjugation by g). Since G and G0 are elementarily equivalent, this statement holds with f the inclusion from A to G, and yields a non-injective f 0 : A → G. Composing with a projection from G onto A yields a non-injective weak preretraction from A to A associated to Γ0can . In order to get a preretraction (i.e. to ensure that non-exceptional surface-type vertex groups have non-abelian image), we apply Proposition 5.12 of [Per11]. By Proposition 4.7, this preretraction also gives a non-injective preretraction associated to Γcan . Corollary 5.2. If a finitely generated group G is elementarily free, all its Grushko factors have non-injective preretractions associated to their cyclic JSJ decompositions. Recall that every finitely generated elementarily free group is torsion-free and hyperbolic ([Sel01], [Sel06]). Corollary 5.3. Let G and G0 be one-ended torsion-free hyperbolic groups. Suppose that G, G0 do not have non-injective preretractions associated to their cyclic JSJ decompositions. If G and G0 are elementarily equivalent, they are isomorphic. This follows from the proposition and the fact that G and G0 are co-Hopfian [Sel97].  6  Surfaces with sockets  The fundamental group G = π1 (Σ) of a closed hyperbolic surface Σ is a limit group which is elementarily equivalent to a non-abelian free group, with one exception: if Σ is the non-orientable surface of genus 3, then G is not even a limit group. In this section we consider fundamental groups of surfaces with sockets (which we simply call socket groups). They are obtained from π1 (Σ), with Σ a compact hyperbolic surface of genus g with b ≥ 1 boundary components Bi , by adding a root to the element hi representing Bi (see Figure 1). More precisely, G has presentation hh1 , . . . , hb , z1 , . . . , zb , a1 , b1 ), . . . , ag , bg | h1 · · · hb = [a1 , b1 ] · · · [ag , bg ], zini = hi i or hh1 , . . . , hb , z1 , . . . , zb , a1 , . . . , ag | h1 · · · hb = a21 · · · a2g , zini = hi i, depending on whether Σ is orientable or not. The exponent ni , the order of the i-th socket, is a positive integer, and we always assume ni ≥ 3: if ni = 2, we can remove the socket by attaching a Möbius band to Bi . Socket groups are torsion-free one-ended hyperbolic groups. They were introduced in [Sel97] to study splittings over maximal cyclic subgroups. We shall show: Proposition 6.1. The group G is a limit group if and only if one of the following holds: • the surface Σ is orientable with at least four boundary components (i.e. b ≥ 4); • the surface Σ is orientable with two or three boundary components and genus g ≥ 1; 10  Figure 1: A socket group can be seen topologically as the fundamental group of a surface for which every boundary component is glued onto a circle under an n-cover map for some n. • the surface Σ is orientable with one boundary component and genus g ≥ n is the order of the unique socket;  n+1 2 ,  where  • the surface Σ is non-orientable and b + g ≥ 4. Proposition 6.2. The following assertions are equivalent: 1. the group G is elementarily equivalent to a free group; 2. the groups G has a non-injective preretraction associated to its cyclic JSJ decomposition; 3. the surface Σ is non-orientable, b + g ≥ 4, every ni is even, and g ≥ b. The group G is naturally the fundamental group of a graph of groups Γ with a central vertex carrying π1 (Σ), and b terminal vertices carrying hzi i (the edge groups are generated by the hi ’s). It is a torsion-free one-ended hyperbolic group, and the assumption ni ≥ 3 ensures that Γ is its canonical cyclic JSJ decomposition (see Proposition 4.24 in [DG11]). Proof of Proposition 6.1. By Proposition 4.21 of [CG05], G is a limit group if and only if the equation z1n1 · · · zbnb = [a1 , b1 ] · · · [ag , bg ]  or  z1n1 · · · zbnb = a21 · · · a2g ,  with unknowns zi , ai , bi in a free group F (x, y), has a solution which is not contained in a cyclic subgroup, and with every zi non-trivial. k Recall that, given integers ki ≥ 2, a relation xk11 · · · xpp = 1 between elements of F (x, y) implies that hx1 , . . . , xp i is cyclic when p ≤ 3 [LS62]. Thus G is not a limit group if Σ is non-orientable and b + g ≤ 3. On the other hand, if Σ is non-orientable and b + g ≥ 4, it is easy to find a suitable solution of the equation above, by setting all unknowns equal to powers of x or y. Now suppose that Σ is orientable and there is a single socket (b = 1). If g ≥ n+1 2 , it follows from [Cul81] that [x, y]n is a product of g commutators, so G is a limit group. If g < n+1 2 , no non-trivial n-th power is a product of g commutators by [CE95], so G is not a limit group. Finally, assume that Σ is orientable and b ≥ 2. As suggested by Jim Howie, the equation z1n1 z2n2 = [a1 , b1 ] is solved by setting z1 = xn2 , z2 = yx−n1 y −1 , a1 = xn1 n2 , b1 = y. It follows that G is a limit group when g ≥ 1. If g = 0, the fact recalled above implies that G is a limit group if and only if b ≥ 4. Proof of Proposition 6.2. We first prove (2) =⇒ (3). Assuming that there is a preretraction, we apply Lemma 3.3 to the map p provided by Proposition 4.7. Cut Σ open along C, and call Si the component of the surface thus obtained which contains Bi . For each i, up to conjugation, we get a map from π1 (Si ) to hzi i sending hi to itself and killing the fundamental group of every other boundary component of Si . This is possible only if Si is non-orientable and ni is even. 11  The inequality g ≥ b follows from Corollary 3.5. By Proposition 4.2, the existence of a non-injective preretraction forces that of a non-exceptional surface. This rules out the once-punctured Klein bottle (g = 2, b = 1) and thus implies b + g ≥ 4. Conversely, we assume that Σ and the ni ’s are as in (3), and we construct a noninjective preretraction r fixing every zi (hence every hi ). Write ni = 2mi . If b = 1, then g ≥ 3; we choose z ∈ G not commuting with z1 , and we map a1 to z1m1 , a2 to z, a3 to z −1 , and ai to 1 for i > 3. If 2 ≤ b ≤ g, we map ai to zimi for i ≤ b, to 1 for i > b. This proves (3) =⇒ (2). (1) =⇒ (2) follows from Corollary 5.2. Conversely, the map r constructed above expresses G as an extended hyperbolic tower over a free group, showing that G is elementarily free [Sel06]. Remark 6.3. The proof shows that G has a non-injective weak preretraction (in the sense of Definition 4.6) associated to its cyclic JSJ decomposition if and only if Σ is non-orientable, every ni is even, and g ≥ b. Corollary 6.4. Let G be a socket group, with Σ a once-punctured orientable surface of genus 2, and a single socket of order 3 (see Figure 2). Then G is a one-ended hyperbolic limit group G which is not elementarily free but contains an elementarily free subgroup of finite index. Remark 6.5. In fact, G has no non-injective weak preretraction by Remark 6.3. Proof. By Propositions 6.1 and 6.2, G is a limit group that is not elementarily free. It has a subgroup G0 of index 3, obtained as the kernel of a map from G to Z/3Z killing a1 , b1 , a2 , b2 , which is the fundamental group of the space obtained by gluing three oncepunctured surfaces of genus 2 along their boundary. Identifying two of these surfaces yields a retraction from G0 onto the fundamental group of the closed orientable surface of genus 4, so G0 is elementarily free by [Sel06].  Figure 2: A covering of degree 3. We now consider a slightly different family of groups, where all sockets are identified. More precisely, G is the fundamental group of a graph of groups with one surface-type vertex group Gv = π1 (Σ), where Σ has at least two boundary components, and one vertex carrying a cyclic group hzi. It is presented as hh1 , . . . , hb , z, t1 , . . . , tb , a1 , b1 , . . . , ag , bg | h1 · · · hb = [a1 , b1 ] · · · [ag , bg ], ti z ni ti −1 = hi , t1 = 1i or hh1 , . . . , hb , z, t1 , . . . , tb , a1 , . . . , ag | h1 · · · hb = a21 · · · a2g , ti z ni ti −1 = hi , t1 = 1i, 12  Figure 3: A socket group with identified sockets. depending on whether Σ is orientable or not (see Figure 3). When Σ is orientable one may orient the components of ∂Σ in a consistent way, and the sign of the ni ’s matters. In the non-orientable case the components may be oriented separately and only |ni | has a meaning. Proposition 6.6. Let G be a socket group with identified sockets as above. There is a noninjective weak preretraction associated to the cyclic JSJ decomposition of G if and only if b b X X the sum ni is 0 when Σ is orientable, the sum ni is even when Σ is non-orientable. i=1  i=1  Proof. Assume that there is p : π1 (Σ) → G which is a conjugation on each boundary subgroup and is not an isomorphism of π1 (Σ) onto a conjugate (see Proposition 4.7). We apply Lemma 3.3. First suppose there is no pinching. All hi ’s are mapped into the same ni conjugate of hzi, so we may assume that hi is mapped to a power P of z, which must be z p q n (note that z conjugate to z implies p = q). We deduce that z i is a product of squares or commutators in hzi. If there is pinching, apply the argument to each pinched surface. Conversely, we define a non-injective preretraction r as follows: we map z to z, every P n ( n )/2 i i hi to z , every ti , ai , bi to 1, except that we map a1 to z in the non-orientable case. Deciding whether there is a non-injective (true) preretraction r (with Σ non-exceptional and the image of π1 (Σ) non-abelian) is more subtle. First suppose that Σ is orientable. If its genus is ≥ 1, one may make r(π1 (Σ)) nonabelian by sending a1 and b1 to some x ∈ G which does not commute with z. If Σ is a 4-punctured sphere and r exists, Lemma 3.3 implies that there is a pinched curve. It must divide Σ into two pairs of pants, each containing two boundary components of Σ, say B1 and B2 on one side, B3 and B4 on the other. One must then have n1 + n2 = n3 + n4 = 0. Conversely, if this holds, one defines r on the generating set {z, t2 , t3 , t4 } by sending z to itself, t2 to the trivial element, and by sending t3 and t4 to some x ∈ G such that z and xzx−1 do not commute. This argument shows: Proposition 6.7. Let G be a socket group with identified sockets as above, with Σ an orientable surface of genus g. There is a non-injective preretraction (i.e. G is elementarily b X free) if and only if the sum ni is 0 and either: i=1  (i) g ≥ 1, or (ii) g = 0 and there is a proper nonempty subset I ⊂ {1, . . . , b} with  13  P  i∈I  ni = 0.  When Σ is non-orientable, the easy case is when g ≥ 3 since one may use a2 and a3 to make r(π1 (Σ)) non-abelian. When g is 1 or 2, one has to consider the ways in which a maximal family of pinched curves may divide Σ. A case by case analysis yields: Proposition 6.8. Let G be a socket group with identified sockets as above, with Σ a non-orientable surface of genus g. Then there is a non-injective preretraction (i.e. G is b X elementarily free) if and only if the sum ni is even and one of the following holds: i=1  (i) g ≥ 3; (ii) g = 2 and Σ has at least three boundary components (i.e. b ≥ 3); (iii) g = 2, the surface Σ has two boundary components (i.e. Σ is a twice punctured Klein bottle), and |n1 | = |n2 | or both n1 , n2 are even; (iv) g = 1, the surface Σ has at least three boundary componentsP(i.e. b ≥ 3), and there exist a proper subset I ⊂ {1, . . . , b} and signs εi = ±1 with i∈I εi ni = 0.  7  Finite index subgroups  The most obvious examples of limit groups, namely free abelian groups, free groups, surface groups, are elementarily equivalent to their finite index subgroups. The goal of this section is to show that these are basically the only examples of limit groups with this property, at least among hyperbolic limit groups. Theorem 7.1. Let G be a hyperbolic limit group, or a torsion-free cubulable hyperbolic group. If G is not a free product of cyclic groups and of surface groups, it has infinitely many normal finite index subgroups which are all different up to elementary equivalence. Corollary 7.2. Let G be a finitely generated elementarily free group. If G is not a free product of cyclic groups and surface groups, it has infinitely many finite index subgroups which are not elementarily free. On the other hand, if G is a free product of cyclic groups and fundamental groups of closed surfaces with χ(Σ) ≤ −2, it is elementarily free by [Sel06], and so are all its non-cyclic finitely generated subgroups. The corollary is clear, because a finitely generated elementarily free group is a hyperbolic limit group by [Sel01] and [Sel06]. We shall deduce the theorem from a more technical statement, which requires a definition. Definition 7.3. We say that G has enough abelian virtual quotients if, given any infinite cyclic subgroup C, there is a finite index subgroup GC of G such that C ∩ GC has infinite image in the abelianization of GC ; equivalently, C has a finite index subgroup which is a retract of a finite index subgroup of G. Note that having enough virtual abelian quotients is inherited by subgroups. This property is slightly weaker than G being LR over cyclic groups in the sense of [LR08] (they require that C itself be a retract of a finite index subgroup). It implies the existence of infinitely many finite index subgroups. Theorem 7.4. Let G be a one-ended torsion-free hyperbolic group. If G has enough virtual abelian quotients and is not a surface group, then G has infinitely many characteristic subgroups of finite index which have no non-injective weak preretraction associated to their cyclic JSJ decomposition. 14  The theorem readily extends to groups which are only virtually torsion-free and are not virtual surface groups. Having enough virtual abelian quotients is a technical assumption (which holds for limit groups and cubulable hyperbolic groups, as we shall see). It is not optimal, but note that some assumption is needed: if there is a hyperbolic group which is not residually finite, there is one which has no proper subgroup of finite index [KW00], and such a group obviously does not satisfy Theorem 7.4. Also note that groups with property (T) do not have enough virtual abelian quotients, but they cannot have non-injective weak preretractions because they have no splittings. We first explain how to deduce Theorem 7.1 from Theorem 7.4. Lemma 7.5. Residually free groups (in particular limit groups) and cubulable hyperbolic groups have enough abelian virtual quotients. Proof. If G is residually free, there is a map p from G to a free group which is injective on C. By Hall’s theorem, the image of C under p is a free factor of a finite index subgroup, and we let GC be its preimage. If G is hyperbolic and cubulable, then by [Ago13] it is virtually special: there is some finite index subgroup G1 < G acting freely and cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex X such that X/G1 is special. Since quasiconvex subgroups are separable by [HW08, Corollary 7.4], up to passing to a further finite index subgroup, we can assume that the 2neighbourhoods of hyperplanes are embedded in X/G1 so that X/G1 is fully clean. Denote C1 = C ∩ G 1 . By [HW08, Proposition 7.2], there is a convex cube complex Y ⊂ X which is C1 invariant and C1 -cocompact and defines a local isometry f : Y /C1 → X/G1 which is fully special by [HW08, Lemma 6.3]. By [HW08, Proposition 6.5], there is a finite cover X/G2 of X/G1 and an embedding Y /C1 → X/G2 with a retraction X/G2 → Y /C1 . Grouptheoretically, we get a retraction from the finite index subgroup G2 of G to C1 . This proves the lemma. Note that any residually free hyperbolic group is a limit group [Bau67]. Proof of Theorem 7.1. Given G as in the theorem, we write its Grushko decomposition as G = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ Ap ∗ F ∗ S1 ∗ · · · ∗ Sq where F is free, each Si is a closed surface group, and each Ai is a one-ended group which is not a surface group (the Ai ’s are not necessarily distinct up to isomorphism). By assumption, we have p ≥ 1. By Theorem 7.4 and Lemma 7.5, we can find in each Ai a decreasing sequence Ai (1) % Ai (2) % Ai (3) % . . . of characteristic finite index subgroups which have no non-injective preretraction associated to theirQcyclic JSJ decomposition. Let Gn be the kernel of the natural projection from G onto pi=1 Ai /Ai (n). It is a finite index subgroup of G whose non-surface Grushko factors are all isomorphic to some Ai (n). We claim that there are infinitely many distinct Gn ’s up to elementary equivalence. If not, we may assume that they are all equivalent. Applying Proposition 5.1 to G1 and G2 , we find that A1 (1) embeds into G2 , hence into some Grushko factor Aj (2). We cannot have j = 1 because A1 (1) properly contains A1 (2) and torsion-free one-ended hyperbolic groups are co-Hopfian [Sel97]. We may therefore assume j = 2. We then find that A2 (2) embeds in some A3 (k), and k > 2 by co-Hopfianity. Iterating this argument leads to a contradiction. The remainder of this section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 7.4. We consider the canonical cyclic JSJ decomposition Γcan (G), or simply Γcan , and the associated Bass-Serre tree Tcan . Its non-rigid vertices are of surface-type. Recall that the girth of a graph is the smallest length of an embedded circle (∞ if the graph is a tree). We say that Γcan has large girth if its girth N is large compared to the 15  complexity of the surfaces which appear in Γcan ; precisely, (N − 2)/2 should be larger than the maximal cardinality of a family of non-parallel disjoint simple closed curves on a given surface (the curves may be boundary parallel, but should not be null-homotopic). If G0 is a finite index subgroup, its JSJ tree is obtained by restricting the action of G on Tcan to G0 . This is because by [Bow98] one may construct Tcan purely from the topology of the boundary of G, and ∂G0 = ∂G. If v is a surface-type vertex for the action of G on Tcan , it is one also for the action of G0 , but in general the surface is replaced by a finite cover. The proof requires two lemmas. Lemma 7.6. There is a characteristic subgroup of finite index G0 ⊂ G whose JSJ decomposition has the following properties: 1. the surfaces which appear in Γcan (G0 ) are all orientable; 2. each edge group maps injectively to the abelianization of G0 ; 3. the graph Γcan (G0 ) has large girth (as defined above). Note that the first two properties are inherited by finite index subgroups. Lemma 7.7. Let G be a torsion-free one-ended hyperbolic group whose JSJ decomposition satisfies the properties of the previous lemma. If G is not a surface group, then G has no non-injective weak preretraction associated to its cyclic JSJ decomposition. Before proving these lemmas, let us explain how they imply Theorem 7.4. First suppose that there is G0 as in Lemma 7.6 such that Γcan (G0 ) is not a tree. Then choose a decreasing sequence of characteristic finite index subgroups H1 ⊃ H2 ⊃ · · · of the topological fundamental group of the graph Γcan (G0 ), and define Gn as the preimage of Hn under the natural epimorphism from G0 to the fundamental group of the graph Γcan (G0 ). Since Γcan (G0 ) is invariant under automorphisms of G0 , each Gn is characteristic in G. Its JSJ decomposition is the covering of Γcan (G0 ) associated to Hn , with the lifted graph of groups structure. The group Gn satisfies the first two properties of Lemma 7.6, and also the third one because the surfaces appearing in Γcan (Gn ) are the same as in Γcan (G0 ), so Lemma 7.7 applies. If Γcan (G0 ) is a tree for every subgroup of finite index G0 < G as in Lemma 7.6, we fix any such G0 and we let Gn be any sequence of distinct characteristic subgroups of finite index (it exists because there are enough abelian virtual quotients). We cannot control the complexity of surfaces, but Lemma 7.7 applies to Gn because the girth is infinite. We now prove the lemmas. Proof of Lemma 7.6. Since the first two properties are inherited by finite index subgroups, it suffices to construct G0 having one given property. To achieve (1), view the JSJ decomposition Γcan as expressing G as the fundamental group of a graph of spaces X, with a surface Σ for each surface-type vertex. If there is a non-orientable surface, consider a 2-sheeted covering of X which is trivial (a product) above the complement of the non-orientable surfaces, and is the orientation covering Σ̂ over each non-orientable surface (note that a boundary component of Σ lifts to two curves in Σ̂). Though Γcan is canonical, the 2-sheeted covering is not, so we define G0 as the intersection of all subgroups of G of index 2. For (2), let Ci be the edge groups of Γcan , and let G0 be any characteristic subgroup of finite index contained in every group GCi provided by Definition 7.3. Each edge group of Γcan (G0 ) is the image of some Ci ∩ G0 by an automorphism of G0 , so maps injectively to the abelianization. 16  If the girth of Γcan is too small, we choose a characteristic finite index subgroup H0 of the topological fundamental group π1 (Γcan ) such that the associated finite cover of Γcan has large girth, and we define G0 as the preimage of H0 under the epimorphism from G to the topological fundamental group of Γcan . As in the proof of the theorem given above, invariance of Γcan under automorphisms implies that G0 is characteristic, and the complexity of surfaces does not change. Proof of Lemma 7.7. We consider the canonical cyclic JSJ decomposition Γ = Γcan . Recall that it is bipartite: each edge joins a vertex carrying an infinite cyclic group to a vertex carrying a non-cyclic group. We argue by way of contradiction, assuming that there is a non-injective weak preretraction. By Proposition 4.7, there is a surface-type vertex group Gv = π1 (Σ) and a map p : π1 (Σ) → G which is a conjugation on each boundary subgroup and is not an isomorphism of π1 (Σ) onto a conjugate. Let C be a maximal family of pinched curves on Σ (see Definition 3.2), and let S be a component of the compact surface obtained by cutting Σ along C. Since G is not a surface group, we may assume that S contains a boundary component C of Σ. It must contain another boundary component C 0 of Σ: otherwise, since Σ is orientable and curves in C are pinched, the image of a generator of π1 (C) would be a product of commutators, contradicting the second item in Lemma 7.6. We apply Lemma 3.3 to the graph of groups obtained from Γ by collapsing all edges which do not contain v. We find that the image of π1 (S) by p is contained (up to conjugacy) in the fundamental group Ri of a subgraph of groups Γi of Γ, which is a component of the complement of the open star of v. The image of the fundamental groups of C and C 0 are contained in the groups carried by distinct vertices w and w0 of Γi which are adjacent to v in Γ, but far away from each other in Γi because the girth of Γ is large. As in the proof of Lemma 3.3, we construct a surface S0 by attaching discs to boundary curves of S coming from C, and we represent the induced map π : π1 (S0 ) → Ri by an equivariant map from the universal covering S̃0 to the Bass-Serre tree of Γi . We consider preimages of midpoints of edges, and we project to S0 . We obtain a finite family C0 of disjoint simple closed curves on S0 . View Γi as covered by stars of vertices u carrying a cyclic group. If C0 is a curve in C0 , the image of π1 (C0 ) by π is contained (up to conjugacy) in a unique Gu , and curves associated to different vertices cannot be parallel. Since any path joining w to w0 in Γi must go through at least (N −2)/2 stars, with N the girth of Γ, the family C0 must contain at least (N − 2)/2 non-parallel curves. We get a contradiction if N is large enough.  References [Ago13] Ian Agol. The virtual Haken conjecture. Doc. Math., 18:1045–1087, 2013. With an appendix by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning. [Bau67] Benjamin Baumslag. Residually free groups. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 17:402–418, 1967. [Bow98] Brian H. Bowditch. Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic groups. Acta Math., 180(2):145–186, 1998. [CE95]  Leo P. Comerford, Jr. and Charles C. Edmunds. Genus of powers in a free group. In Geometric group theory (Columbus, OH, 1992), volume 3 of Ohio State Univ. Math. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 67–71. de Gruyter, Berlin, 1995.  [CG05]  Christophe Champetier and Vincent Guirardel. Limit groups as limits of free groups. Israel J. Math., 146:1–75, 2005. 17  [Cul81] Marc Culler. Using surfaces to solve equations in free groups. 20(2):133–145, 1981.  Topology,  [DG11] François Dahmani and Vincent Guirardel. The isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic groups. Geom. Funct. Anal., 21(2):223–300, 2011. [GL]  Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. arXiv:1602.05139 [math.GR].  JSJ decompositions of groups.  [GL11]  Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. Trees of cylinders and canonical splittings. Geom. Topol., 15(2):977–1012, 2011.  [GLS]  Vincent Guirardel, Gilbert Levitt, and Rizos Sklinos. in preparation.  [HW08] Frédéric Haglund and Daniel T. Wise. Special cube complexes. Geom. Funct. Anal., 17(5):1551–1620, 2008. [KM06] Olga Kharlampovich and Alexei Myasnikov. Elementary theory of free nonabelian groups. J. Algebra, 302(2):451–552, 2006. [KW00] Ilya Kapovich and Daniel T. Wise. The equivalence of some residual properties of word-hyperbolic groups. J. Algebra, 223(2):562–583, 2000. [LR08]  D. D. Long and A. W. Reid. Subgroup separability and virtual retractions of groups. Topology, 47(3):137–159, 2008.  [LS62]  R. C. Lyndon and M. P. Schützenberger. The equation aM = bN cP in a free group. Michigan Math. J., 9:289–298, 1962.  [Per11]  Chloé Perin. Elementary embeddings in torsion-free hyperbolic groups. Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. (4), 44(4):631–681, 2011.  [Rem89] V. N. Remeslennikov. ∃-free groups. Siberian Math. J., 30(6):998–1001, 1989. translation (1990) from Sibirsk. Mat. Zh. 30 (1989), 193–197. [Sel97]  Z. Sela. Structure and rigidity in (Gromov) hyperbolic groups and discrete groups in rank 1 Lie groups. II. Geom. Funct. Anal., 7(3):561–593, 1997.  [Sel01]  Zlil Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups. I. Makanin-Razborov diagrams. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci., 93:31–105, 2001.  [Sel06]  Z. Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups. VI. The elementary theory of a free group. Geom. Funct. Anal., 16(3):707–730, 2006.  [Sel09]  Z. Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups. VII. The elementary theory of a hyperbolic group. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3), 99(1):217–273, 2009.  [Ser77]  Jean-Pierre Serre. Arbres, amalgames, SL2 . Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 1977. Rédigé avec la collaboration de Hyman Bass, Astérisque, No. 46.  [Szm55] W. Szmielew. Elementary properties of Abelian groups. Fund. Math., 41:203– 271, 1955.  18  Vincent Guirardel Institut de Recherche Mathématique de Rennes Université de Rennes 1 et CNRS (UMR 6625) 263 avenue du Général Leclerc, CS 74205 F-35042 RENNES Cédex e-mail: vincent.guirardel@univ-rennes1.fr Gilbert Levitt Laboratoire de Mathématiques Nicolas Oresme Université de Caen et CNRS (UMR 6139) (Pour Shanghai : Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, CNRS, LMNO, 14000 Caen, France) e-mail: levitt@unicaen.fr Rizos Sklinos Institut Camille Jordan Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 (UMR 5208) 43 boulevard du 11 novembre 1918 69622, Villeurbanne cedex, France e-mail: rizozs@gmail.com  19

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
