Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_2728

Abstract:
A Metamodel of Unit Testing for Object-Oriented Programming Languages  arXiv:0912.3583v1 [cs.PL] 18 Dec 2009  Martin Lévesque Dept. of Computer Science University of Quebec at Montréal Montréal, Québec, Canada Email: levesque.martin@gmail.com ABSTRACT A unit test is a method for verifying the accuracy and the proper functioning of a portion of a program. This work consists to study the relation and the approaches to test Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) programs and to propose a metamodel that enables the programmer to write the tests while writing the source code to be tested.  Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.5 [Software Engineering]: Testing and Debugging  General Terms Verification  Keywords Object-Oriented Programming, Unit Testing, Metamodel  1.  INTRODUCTION  A unit test [10] is a method for verifying the accuracy and the proper functioning of a portion of a program. This work consists to study the relation and the approaches to test OOP programs and to propose metamodel that enables the programmer to write the tests while writing the source code to be tested. By considering the current approaches used in the industry, the integration and the writing of the tests are hard tasks: most likely, the tools available require to write additional components manually and most of the time, the tests are not near of the source code to be tested. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a state of the art about the relation between OOP programs and the tests. Section 3 describes the proposed metamodel of unit testing for OOP languages. Section 4 gives an example of what could looks like an OOP environment which uses the proposed metamodel. finally, Section 5 contains the conclusion and future possible work.  2.  OOP AND UNIT TESTS  This section contains the motivations of testing OOP languages differently compared to testing procedural languages. Then, the levels of abtraction for the tests are defined. Finally, current approaches to test OOP languages are discussed.  2.1 Motivations of testing OOP languages differently compared to testing procedural languages This section describes some reasons why an OOP language must be tested completely differently compared to procedural languages. Intuitively, specialization and aggregation combined to polymorphism increases the difficulty to detect errors during the integration of several components. The primary goal consists of decreasing the maximum effort to test a unit by reusing as much as possible the tests [9, 5].  2.1.1 Test unit In procedural languages such as (C, Pascal, etc.), the principal units are the procedure and the module. However, the principal unit in an OOP language is the class [9, 1, 4]. This difference has a huge impact on the methodology to test the software since several new OOP concepts are nonexistent in the procedural paradigm.  2.1.2 Object and encapsulation Traditional techniques to test procedural languages are not necessary application to the object oriented paradigm since the encapsulation reduces or eliminates the possibility to test a specific state of an attribute of an object [9].  2.1.3 Specialization and inheritance A method is defines by one of the following characteristic [9]: 1. Inherited from the parent class without redefinition. 2. Redefinition without any call to super. 3. Redefinition with a call to super. 4. A new method nonexistent in the parent classes. Existing works consider that the tests for cases 2, 3 and 4 must be retested completely compared to the first case which does not require any redefinition.  2.1.4 Polymorphism Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Copyright 200X ACM X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX ...$10.00.  Let p(z) be a method named p which take a parameter z where z contains a method m. Depending on the dynamic type of z, several different methods m when z.m is called by polymorphism. It has a huge impact on the tests since several permutations of dynamic types must be passed for the parameters in order cover more lines of code.  2.1.5 OOP language entity dimensions OOP language entities can be categorized as follows [1]: • Object: A class instance composed of several attributes and methods. An object represents a specific state. • Class: A model which factorizes the properties of its instances. • Class hierarchy: A class inherits the properties of its parent classes. • Package (or subsystem): A subsystem defines an interface presenting services. A subsystem regroups classes with strong semantic relations. Jin et al. has developed a mechanism which uses a metamodel which allows to test the coupling between units [8]. Figure 1: System of N classes uing JUnit. • System: Composed of a set of subsystems and links them together.  2.2 Levels of abstraction for the tests The principal levels of abstraction for the test are the white box, the black box and the grey box [4]: • White box: White box tests consider the implementation of the classes and the methods. • Black box: Black box tests does not take into account the implementation but only the interface units. • Grey box: Grey box tests take into account the white box and the black box levels.  2.3 Current approaches to test OOP languages The approaches used in practice and in the research community are based on specifications or on programs.  2.3.1 Specification-based The first approach to test an object-oriented program consists to use a certain specification language which describes what the packages and the classes are actually doing. With this specification, it is possible to generate several tests automatically in order to verify the correctness of the implementation. Barbey et al. [2] have used an object oriented specification called Concurrent Object-Oriented Petri Nets (CO-OPN/2). In such a language, an interface describing the attributes in the methods is defined. The axioms enable the programmer to define the comportements of the methods. The main problem in this work is that it does not take into account the characteristics of the OOP paradigm such as polymorphism, specialization, etc. Several researchers [6, 12] have defined that the state of an object is the result of a certain number of method calls. Doong et al. [6] have used a similar approach compared to the work of Barbey and al., however they specified algebraically the behavior of the classes. The verification of the correctness of a method is done by generating a sequence of method calls. Then axioms are used to validate the results. The main problems with the specification-based approach is that the programmer must manipulate an extra language only in order to test the software. Also, the tests are most likely not near the source code to be tested which is not good by considerating that, in practice, the tests are not updated when the software change.  Figure 2: Loss of the semantic relations with a typical system using JUnit.  2.3.2 Program-based The program-based approach consists to get a certain confidence level by writing manually the tests in order to simulate the main possibilities of execution of the software. A standard in the industry is the JUnit Framework [3] well used for the Java programming language. The main components of the JUnit Framework are the tests suites and the tests cases. A test case regroups several tests of a class and the suite is used to contains several tests cases. Let say a system has N classes. Then if there is one test case for each class, then the system will consists of 2∗N +1 classes (Fig. 1). Another problem with JUnit is the loss of the semantic relations between test classes (Fig. 2). In fact, classes TestClass2 and TestClass3 could be defined to be the subclass of TestClass1 and reuse the code from TestClass1. However it would be done manually. We need something more automatic in order to reuse the tests.  3. METAMODEL OF UNIT TESTING FOR OOP The proposed metamodel (Fig. 3) is an extension of the metamodel defined by Ducournau et al. [7]. The main motivation of this extension is to add properties specifically for unit tests in order to write unit tests by taking advantage of the mechanisms and the forces of OOP.  The relations defined in [7] are also used and expressed as follows: • Redefines (redef): Used to redefines a given entity. • Has (has): Used to know which knowledge is known by a certain entity. For example, it can be useful to know which tests are attached to a given local property. • Introduces (intro): Useful to know which entity has introduced a property or a test. • Belongs to (belongs): Useful to know which global entity is associated to a given local entity. • Defines (def): Used to know which entity has defined a certain property. Figure 3: Metamodel of Unit Testing for OOP.  3.1.1 Property tests Global Test Property.  A test property (Test Package, Local Test Class or Local Test Property) represents, in a complete OOP environment using the proposed metalmodel, a block of unit test code associated to a unit (A Package, a class or a property). The idea of incorporating test properties inside a class in the metamodel was inspired by the D Programming Language [11]. However, they do not considered OOP mechanisms such as inheritance and they have not modeled several layers of granularity. Here is a brief list of the main features of the proposed metamodel: • Covered dimensions: The proposed model enables to test packages (and sub-packages), classes and class properties. • Level of abstraction to define tests: Grey box. Testing packages allows to link classes together regardless of the implementation, which corresponds to the black box level. However, testing classes and methods corresponds to the white box level since the tests and the implementation are regrouped within the same entity. • The program-based approach to test the software is used. • Test’s units are the package, the class and the property class. On the other hand, the central unit is the class. • Encapsulation: the white box tests allow to access to all properties compared to the black box tests which allow to access only to public properties. • Inheritance and specialization of tests are built by considering the real world and the type safety. A super class’ test is useful to test a subclass, so it is inherited by default.  Let’s express the global test properties which belongs to a certain global property (gc ) of a class c having super classes. P arentsc represents the set of all super classes of c: ∀p∈P arentsc c ≺ p  Let Gc be the global properties of c, Lgc the local properties of a given global property gc ∈ Gc of a class c and its super classes are defined by: [  Lgc =  {ld |belongs(ld , gc ), ld ∈ Ld }  As said, the proposed metamodel (Fig. 3) is an extension of the metalmodel proposed by Ducournau et al. [7]. However, properties for tests are the following:  where belongs is a relation used to know if a local property belongs to a global property. Then the global test properties (GT Pgc ) of a given global global property is given by: [  GT Pgc =  {gtp|has(lc , gtp), gtp ∈ GT Pc }  • Properties to test packages.  (3)  lc ∈Lgc  where GP Tc represents the global test properties of a class c. The relation has(lc , gtp) states that lc knows gtp. A Global Test Property (GTP) is either inherited from a local property redefinition or introduced by a local property. The introduced global tests (IGT Pgc ) represent a sub set of GT Pgc : [  {gtp|intro(d, gtp),  d∈P arentsc ∪{c}  ∃lc ∈Lgc has(lc , gtp), gtp ∈ GT Pc } ⊆ GT Pgc  (4)  where intro(d, gtp) means that d introduces gtp.  Local Test Property. Let define all local test properties LT Pc for a given class c, the local test properties of a given global property gtc is defined by:  • Properties to test classes. • Properties to test class properties.  (2)  d∈P arentsc ∪{c}  • The specialization is used for the tests class and for the tests property in order to reuse  3.1 Class and properties  (1)  LT P Cgtc =  [  {ltc |belongs(ltc , gtc )}  ltc ∈LT Pc  However, redefined tests must be removed:  (5)  LT Pgtc  = LT P Cgtc − [ {t1 |∃t2 ∈LT P Cgtc redef (t2 , t1 )} t1 ∈LT P Cgtc  (6) where redef (t2 , t1 ) is a relation which expresses that the test t2 redefines the test t1 .  3.1.2 Class tests Global Test Class. A global test class is either inherited from a super class or introduced by a given class. Let GT C be the global tests class of a system, GT Cc the global tests class of a class c are defined by: [  GT Cc =  {t|∃c∈P arentsc ∪{c} intro(c, t)}  Figure 4: Example of name conflict of tests with inheritance: by using two times the same global test property associated to the same local property of a super class.  (7)  t∈GT C  Local Test Class. Let LT C be the local tests of a class. The local tests of a class c is given by: LT CCc =  [  {lt|∃gtc∈GT Cc belongs(lt, gtc)}  (8)  lt∈LT C  However, redefinitions must be removed: LT Cc = S  LT CCc − {t |∃t2 ∈LT CCc redef (t2 , t1 )} 1 t1 ∈LT CCc  (9)  3.2 Type-Safety In static typing languages, the redefinition of the return type must covariant and the redefinition of the parameters must be contravariant in order to have safe types. It does not poses any problem for the proposed metamodel since the metamodel is an extension of the existing properties and the notion of property and class is not altered.  3.3 Property Conflicts 3.3.1 Global Test Property Name conflict of tests with inheritance: by using two times the same global test property associated to the same local property of a super class. The example in Fig. 4 is an example of a name conflict of tests by using two times the same global test property associated to the same local property of a super class. In this example, two tests for the same method operation are defined (Test1Operation and Test2Operation). Both classes B and C define a new test Test2Operation which causes a name conflict since two global test property with the same exists for the method operation. Solutions: 1. Factorize B.Test2Operation and C.Test2Operation in the super class A if the test in class B is the same than the one defined in class C. 2. Redefine operation in B and C.  Figure 5: Example of name conflict of global property test with multiple inheritance. 3. Move Test2Operation in class A and redefine the local test property associated to Test2Operation in class B and C.  Multiple Inheritance. The second type of possible conflict with global test properties is with multiple inheritance. The example with multiple inheritance (Fig. 5) does not cause any conflict for the tests since each new global test property is associated to the redefined add method. However, the method add is redefined in classes B and C and there exist three solutions for this problem. The tests must follow one of these three methods of conflict resolution: 1. Rename method add in B and C (for example B.addB, C.addC). 2. Selection. In class D, the method add is redefined and a method between B.add and C.add is called and the associated tests of that selection are now associated also to D.add. 3. Unification. In class D, all tests from B and C are associated to D.add.  3.3.2 Local Test Property Local Test Property name conflict with inheritance. Let A be a super class of B and C which introduces a method add and a test associated (Fig. 6). The subclasses B and C redefine the local test property Test1Add. Without class D, there  Figure 7: A very simple example: Cow, grass and mouse.  Figure 6: Example of Local Test Property name conflict with inheritance. exists no conflict. However, with a class D which can inherit both B.Test1Add and C.Test1Add there is a name conflict: which test should be chosen by the compiler ? Depending on the test, three strategies exists with multiple inheritance: rename, select and unify.  3.4 Tests execution A compiler of an object oriented programming language can then execute automatically by using the meta information from the metamodel proposed (Algorithm 1). Algorithm 1: Executing the tests by using the metamodel (ExecTests). Data: P , a set of all packages. 1 foreach p ∈ P do 2 // Test all packages 3 foreach Test Package tp such that has(p, tp) do 4 Execute tp 5 end 6 foreach Class c such that has(p, c) do 7 // Test all classes 8 foreach ltc ∈ LT Cc do 9 Execute ltc 10 end 11 // Test all properties: 12 foreach Global Property gp such that has(c, gp) do 13 foreach Global Test Property such that gtp ∈ GT Pgp do 14 foreach Local Test Property such that ltp ∈ LT Pgtp do 15 Execute ltp 16 end 17 end 18 end 19 end 20 end  Figure 8: Metamodel of the example for the classes Animal, Mouse and Cow.  4.1 First example: Cow, grass and mouse The example (Fig. 7) contains a super class Animal and two subclasses Cow and Mouse. The Animal class defines a method lastF oodEaten which returns the last food that the animal has recently eaten. That class also introduces a new test property T estN otN ull associated to the method lastF oodEaten. This test verify that the food exists when the animal has recently eaten something. The class Cow redefines the method lastFoodEaten and adds a new test T estGrassColor in order to verify that the grass has the right color (Green). The following listing presents the pseudocode of the first example:  ✞ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  12 13  EXAMPLE  This section contains a very basic example showing the strengths of the proposed metamodel in a real OOP environment like Java.  p u b l i c Food ( C o l o r c ) { c o l o r s . add ( c ) ; }  10 11  4.  p u b l i c c l a s s Food { p r i v a t e L i s t <Color > c o l o r s = new A r r a y L i s t < C o l o r > ( ) ;  p u b l i c Food ( ) { }  14 15 16 17  / / Returns t r u e i f the food i s c . p u b l i c boolean i s C o l o r ( Color c ) { /∗ . . . ∗/ }  18  }  20 21 22 23 24 25 26  f ()  2  p u b l i c c l a s s G r a s s e x t e n d s Food { public Grass ( ) { c o l o r s . add ( C o l o r . Green ) ; } }  defines a Property Test named T estN ame associated to the method f . Let say that a compiler tests those classes in the order of the declaration. Then, the following output would be printed: • Animal.lastFoodEaten() v1 • Animal.TestNotNull  27 28 29 30  p u b l i c c l a s s Animal { p r i v a t e Food l a s t F o o d E a t e n = n u l l ;  • Mouse.lastFoodEaten() v1  31  Test TestNotNull { C u r r e n t . l a s t F o o d E a t e n = new Food ( C o l o r . Red ) ;  32 33 34 35  37  String output = t h i s . g e t C l a s s ( ) . getName ( ) + " . T e s t N o t N u l l " ; System . o u t . p r i n t l n ( o u t p u t ) ;  40 41  } p u b l i c Food l a s t F o o d E a t e n ( ) { String output = t h i s . g e t C l a s s ( ) . getName ( ) + " . l a s t F o o d E a t e n ( ) v1 " System . o u t . p r i n t l n ( o u t p u t ) ;  42 43 44 45 46 47 48  5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK There exist two approaches in order to test a OOP software: specification-based and program-based. The approach based on a specification enables the programmer to modelize the behavior of the objects, but this technique is not so interesting since it uses an extra language and the mechanisms used does not take into account the advantages of an OOP language. The proposed metamodel offers a new approach combining the advantages of the current approaches. The metamodel makes it possible to write unit tests inside the classes to be tested. It facilitates the programmer to write and maintain a software unit. The proposed metamodel contains test properties for the class properties, for the classes and for the packages. There exists specialization links between the tests properties. The metamodel enables the compiler to execute automatically the tests. The future work is to embed the proposed metamodel in a real OOP environment in order to validate the usability and the reliability. Then, existing systems using for example JUnit will be converted to a system using the proposed metamodel in order to compare the testing approaches.  return lastFoodEaten ; }  51  }  53 54 55 56  p u b l i c c l a s s Mouse e x t e n d s Animal { }  57 58 59 60 61 62 63  p u b l i c c l a s s Cow e x t e n d s Animal { Test TestGrassColor { / / Ok , i t i s g r a s s . C u r r e n t . l a s t F o o d E a t e n = new G r a s s ( ) ;  64  Food f = C u r r e n t . l a s t F o o d E a t e n ( ) ; a s s e r t T r u e ( f . i s C o l o r ( C o l o r . Green ) ) ; System . o u t . p r i n t l n ( t h i s . g e t C l a s s ( ) . getName ( ) + " . TestGrassColor" ) ;  65 66 67 68 69  } public Grass lastFoodEaten ( ) { System . o u t . p r i n t l n ( t h i s . g e t C l a s s ( ) . getName ( ) + " . l a s t F o o d E a t e n ( ) v2 " ) ;  70 71 72 73 74 75  6. REFERENCES  76  i f ( lastFoodEaten instanceof Grass ) return ( Grass ) lastFoodEaten ;  77 78 79  return null ;  80  }  81 82  }  ✆  ✝ Listing 1: Pseudocode of the example. The listing 1 contains a new keyword Current which correspond to a new instance of the current class, allocated only during the test. The following syntax:  ✞ 1  T e s t TestName { . . . }  • Cow.TestGrassColor We can clearly observe the benefit of using the proposed metamodel: the tests defined in a class are also used in the subclasses in order to cover more lines of code automatically.  49 50  • Cow.lastFoodEaten() v2  • Cow.lastFoodEaten() v2  38 39  • Mouse.TestNotNull  • Cow.TestNotNull  Food l a s t = C u r r e n t . l a s t F o o d E a t e n ( ) ; a s s e r t T r u e ( l a s t != n u l l ) ;  36  52  ✆  ✝  19  [1] S. Barbey, M. Ammann, and A. Strohmeier. Open Issues in Testing Object-Oriented Software. In Karol FrÃijhauf, editor, ECSQ’94 (European Conference on Software Quality), Basel, Switzerland, October 17-20 1994, pages 257– 267. vdf Hochschulverlag AG an der ETH ZÃijrich, 1994. Also available as Technical Report EPFL-DI No 94/45. [2] S. Barbey, D. Buchs, and C. Péraire. A Theory of Specification-Based Testing for Object-Oriented Software. In EDCC-2: Proceedings of the Second European Dependable Computing Conference on Dependable Computing, pages 303–320, London, UK, 1996. Springer-Verlag. [3] R. A. Becker and W. S. Cleveland. Java Development With Ant, Chapitre 4 : Testing with JUnit. Manning, 2002. [4] E.V. Berard. Issues in the testing of object-oriented software. In Electro/94 International. IEEE Computer Society, 1994.  [5] C. Bucanac. Object Oriented Testing Report. Technical Report 1998-12-09, IDE, University Of Karlskrona/Ronneby, December 1998. [6] R. Doong and P. G. Frankl. The ASTOOT approach to testing object-oriented programs. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 3(2):101–130, 1994. [7] R. Ducournau, F. Morandat, and J. Privat. Modules and Class Refinement: a Meta-Modeling Approach to Object-Oriented Programming. Technical Report 07-021, LIRMM, 2007. [8] Z. Jin and A. J. Offutt. Coupling-based Integration Testing. In ICECCS ’96: Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International Conference on Engineering of Complex Computer Systems, page 10, Washington, DC, USA, 1996. IEEE Computer Society. [9] T. A. Roger. Testing the Polymorphic Relationships of Object-Oriented Components. Technical Report ISE-TR-99-05, Department of Information and Software Engineering, George Mason University, February 1999. [10] P. Runeson. A Survey of Unit Testing Practices. IEEE Software, 23(4):22–29, 2006. [11] W. Bright. D programming Language, 2005. http://www.digitalmars.com/d/. [12] T. Xie. Automatic identification of common and special object-oriented unit tests. In OOPSLA ’04: Companion to the 19th annual ACM SIGPLAN conference on Object-oriented programming systems, languages, and applications, pages 324–325, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
