Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_2642

Abstract:
Universal Protocols for Information Dissemination Using Emergent Signals Bartłomiej Dudek1 and Adrian Kosowski∗2  arXiv:1705.09798v3 [cs.DS] 29 Nov 2017  1  University of Wrocław, Poland 2 Inria Paris, France  Abstract We consider a population of n agents which communicate with each other in a decentralized manner, through random pairwise interactions. One or more agents in the population may act as authoritative sources of information, and the objective of the remaining agents is to obtain information from or about these source agents. We study two basic tasks: broadcasting, in which the agents are to learn the bit-state of an authoritative source which is present in the population, and source detection, in which the agents are required to decide if at least one source agent is present in the population or not. We focus on designing protocols which meet two natural conditions: (1) universality, i.e., independence of population size, and (2) rapid convergence to a correct global state after a reconfiguration, such as a change in the state of a source agent. Our main positive result is to show that both of these constraints can be met. For both the broadcasting problem and the source detection problem, we obtain solutions with a convergence time of O(log2 n) rounds, w.h.p., from any starting configuration. The solution to broadcasting is exact, which means that all agents reach the state broadcast by the source, while the solution to source detection admits one-sided error on a ε-fraction of the population (which is unavoidable for this problem). Both protocols are easy to implement in practice and have a compact formulation. Our protocols exploit the properties of self-organizing oscillatory dynamics. On the hardness side, our main structural insight is to prove that any protocol which meets the constraints of universality and of rapid convergence after reconfiguration must display a form of non-stationary behavior (of which oscillatory dynamics are an example). We also observe that the periodicity of the oscillatory behavior of the protocol, when present, must necessarily depend on the number #X of source agents present in the population. For instance, our protocols inherently rely on the emergence of a signal passing through the population, whose period is Θ(log #nX ) rounds for most starting configurations. The design of clocks with tunable frequency may be of independent interest, notably in modeling biological networks.  Key words: Gossiping, Epidemic processes, Oscillatory dynamics, Emergent phenomena, Population protocols, Broadcasting, Distributed clock synchronization.  ∗  Corresponding Author. Email: adrian.kosowski@inria.fr  1  Introduction  Information-spreading protocols, and more broadly epidemic processes, appear in nature, social interactions between humans, as well as in man-made technology, such as computer networks. For some protocols we have a reasonable understanding of the extent to which the information has already spread, i.e., we can identify where the information is located at a given step of the process: we can intuitively say which nodes (or agents) are “informed” and which nodes are “uninformed”. This is the case for usual protocols in which uninformed agents become informed upon meeting a previously informed agent, cf. e.g. mechanisms of rumor spreading and opinion spreading models studied in the theory community [26, 29]). Arguably, most man-made networking protocols for information dissemination also belong to this category. By contrast, there exists a broad category of complex systems for which it is impossible to locate which agents have acquired some knowledge, and which are as yet devoid of it. In fact, the question of “where the information learned by the system is located” becomes somewhat fuzzy, as in the case of both biological and synthetic neural networks. In such a perspective, information (or knowledge) becomes a global property of the entire system, whereas the state of an individual agent represents in principle its activation, rather than whether it is informed or not. As such, knowledge has to be treated as an emergent property of the system, i.e., a global property not resulting directly from the local states of its agents. The convergence from an uninformed population to an informed population over time is far from monotonous. Even so, once some form of “signal” representing global knowledge has emerged, agents may try to read and copy this signal into their local state, thus each of them eventually also becomes informed. At a very informal conceptual level, we refer to this category of information-dissemination protocols as protocols with emergent behavior. At a more technical level, emergent protocols essentially need to rely on non-linear dynamical effects, which typically include oscillatory behavior, chaotic effects, or a combination of both. (This can be contrasted with simple epidemic protocols for informationspreading, in which nodes do not become deactivated.) This work exhibits a simple yet fundamental information-spreading scenario which can only be addressed efficiently using emergent protocols. Both the efficient operation of the designed protocols, and the need for non-stationary dynamical effects in any efficient protocol for the considered problems, can be formalized through rigorous theoretical analysis. Our goal in doing this is twofold: to better understand the need for emergent behavior in real-world information spreading, and to display the applicability of such protocols in man-made information spreading designs. For the latter, we describe an interpretation of information as a (quasi-)periodic signal, which can be both decoded from states of individual nodes, and encoded into them.  1.1  Problems and Model  We consider a population of n identical agents, each of which may be in a constant number of possible states. Interactions between agents are pairwise and random. A fair scheduler picks a pair of interacting agents independently and uniformly at random in each step. The protocol definition is provided through a finite sequence of state transition rules, following the precise conventions of the randomized Population Protocol model [6, 8] or (equivalently) of Chemical Reaction Networks [21].1 The input to the problem is given by fixing the state of some subset of agents, to some state of the protocol, which is not available to any of the other agents. Intuitively, the agents whose state has been fixed are to be interpreted as authoritative sources of information, which is to be detected and disseminated through the network (i.e., as the rumor source node, broadcasting station, etc.). For example, the 1  The activation model is thus asynchronous. The same protocols may be deployed in a synchronous setting, with scheduler activations following, e.g., the independent random matching model (with only minor changes to the analysis) or the PULL model [29] (at the cost of significantly complicating details of the protocol formulation).  2  problem of spreading a bit of information through the system is formally defined below. Problem B IT B ROADCAST Input States: X1 , X2 . Promise: The population contains a non-zero number of agents in exactly one of the two input states {X1 , X2 }. Question: Decide if the input state present in the population is X1 or X2 . We can, e.g., consider that the transmitting station (or stations) choose whether to be in state X1 or X2 in a way external to the protocol, and thus transmit the “bit” value 1 or 2, respectively, through the network. Broadcasting a bit is one of the most fundamental networking primitives. The definition of the population protocol includes a partition of the set of states of the protocol into those corresponding to the possible answers to the problem. When the protocol is executed on the population, the output of each agent may be read at every step by checking, for each agent, whether its state belongs to the subset of an output state with a given answer (in this case, the answer of the agent will be the “bit” it has learned, i.e., 1 or 2). We will call a protocol exact if it eventually converges to a configuration, such that starting from this configuration all agents always provide the correct answer. We will say it operates with ε-error, for a given constant ε > 0, if starting from some step, at any given step of the protocol, at most an ε-fraction of the population holds the incorrect answer, with probability 1 − O(1/n). Time is measured in steps of the scheduler, with n time steps called a round, with the expected number of activations of each agent per round being a constant. Our objective is to design protocols which converge to the desired outcome rapidly. Specifically, a protocol is expected to converge in O(poly log n) rounds (i.e., in O(npoly log n) steps), with probability 1 − O(1/n), starting from any possible starting configuration of states in the population, conforming to the promise of the problem.2 Motivated by both applications and also a need for a better understanding of the broadcasting problem, we also consider a variant of the broadcasting problem in which no promise on the presence of the source is given. This problem, called D ETECTION, is formally defined below. Problem D ETECTION Input State: X. Question: Decide if at least one agent in state X is present in the population. Detection of the presence of a source is a task which is not easier than broadcasting a bit. Indeed, any detection protocol is readily converted into a broadcasting protocol for states {X1 , X2 } by identifying X = X1 and treating X2 as a dummy state which does not enter into any interactions (i.e., is effectively not visible in the network). Intuitively, the detection task in the considered setting is much harder: a source X may disappear from the network at any time, forcing other agents to spontaneously “unlearn” the outdated information about the presence of the source. This property is inherently linked to the application of the D ETECTION problem in suppressing false rumors or outdated information in social interactions. Specifically, it may happen that a certain part of a population find themselves in an informed state before the original rumor source is identified as a source of false information, a false rumor may be propagated accidentally because of an agent which previously changed state from “uninformed” to “informed” due to a fault or miscommunication, or the rumor may contain information which is no longer true. Similar challenges with outdated information and/or false-positive activations are faced in Chemical Reaction Networks, e.g. in DNA strand displacement models [5]. In that context, the 2  We adhere to this strong requirement for self-stabilizing (or self-organizing) behavior from any initial configuration in the design of our protocols. The presented impossibility results still hold under significantly weaker assumptions.  3  P ROBLEM :  B IT B ROADCAST  D ETECTION  Non-stationarity property: (Applies to all fast O(1)-state protocols)  no fixed points while source transmits random bits  no fixed points while source is present  New protocols with emergent signal: Convergence time: – No error (exact output) – One-sided ε-error  universal, 74 states  universal, 55 states  O(log2 n)  impossible O(log2 n)  Other protocols with ω(1)-states:  Clock-Sync (in synchronized round model) [11]  Time-to-Live [5]  detection problem has the intuitive interpretation of detecting if a given type of chemical or biological agent (e.g., a contaminant, cancer cell, or hormonal signal) is present in the population, and spreading this information among all agents.  1.2  Our Results  In Section 3, we show that both the B IT B ROADCAST, and the D ETECTION problem can be solved with protocols which converge in O(log2 n) rounds to an outcome, with probability 1 − O(1/n), starting from any configuration of the system. The solution to B IT B ROADCAST guarantees a correct output. The solution to D ETECTION admits one-sided ε-error: in the absence of a source, all agents correctly identify it as absent, whereas when the source is present, at any moment of time after convergence the probability that at least (1 − ε)n agents correctly identify the source as present is at least 1 − O(1/n).3 Here, ε > 0 is a constant influencing the protocol design, which can be made arbitrarily small. The designed protocols rely on the same basic building block, namely, a protocol realizing oscillatory dynamics at a rate controlled by the number of present source states in the population. Thus, these protocols display non-stationary behavior. In Section 4, we show that such behavior is a necessary property in the following sense. We prove that in any protocol which solves D ETECTION in sub-polynomial time in n and which uses a constant number of states, the number of agents occupying some state has to undergo large changes: by a polynomially large factor in n during a time window of length proportional to the convergence time of the protocol. For the B IT B ROADCAST problem, we show that similar volatile behavior must appear in a synthetic setting in which a unique source is transmitting its bit as random noise (i.e., selecting its input state {X1 , X2 } uniformly at random in subsequent activations). We note that, informally speaking, our protocols rely on the emergence of a “signal” passing through the population, whose period is Θ(log #nX ) rounds when the number of source agents in state X is #X. In Section 5, we then discuss how the behavior of any oscillatory-type protocol controlled by the existence of #X has to depend on both n and #X. We prove that for any such protocol with rapid convergence, the cases of subpolynomial #X and #X = Θ(n) can be separated by looking at the portion of the configuration space regularly visited by the protocol. This, in particular, suggests the nature of the dependence of the oscillation period on the precise value of #X, and that the protocols we design with period Θ(log #nX ) are among the most natural solutions to the considered problems. The proofs of all theorems are deferred to the closing sections of the paper. 3  The existence of one-sided error is inherent to the D ETECTION problem in the asynchronous setting: indeed, if no agent of the population has not made any communication with the source over an extended period of time, it is impossible to tell for sure if the source has completely disappeared from the network, or if it is not being selected for interaction by the random scheduler.  4  1.3  Comparison to the State-of-the-Art  Our work fits into lines of research on rumor spreading, opinion spreading, population protocols and other interaction models, and emergent systems. We provide a more comprehensive literature overview of some of these topics in Subsection 1.4. Other work on the problems. The B IT B ROADCAST problem has been previously considered by Boczkowski, Korman, and Natale in [11], in a self-stabilizing but synchronous (round-based) setting. A protocol solving their problem was presented, giving a stabilized solution in Õ(log n) time, using a number of states of agents which depends on population size, but exchanging messages of bit size O(1) (this assumption can be modeled in the population protocol framework as a restriction on the permitted rule set). In this sense, our result can be seen as providing improved results with respect to their approach, since it is applicable in an asynchronous setting and reduces the number of states to constant (the latter question was open [11]). We remark that their protocol has a more general application to the problem of deciding which of the sources X1 or X2 is represented by a larger number of agents, provided these two numbers are separated by a multiplicative constants. (Our approach could also be used in such a setting, but the required separation of agent numbers to ensure a correct output would have to be much larger: we can compare values if their logarithms are separated by a multiplicative constant.) The protocol of [11] involves a routine which allows the population to create a synchronized modulo clock, working in a synchronous setting. The period of this clock is independent of the input states of the protocol, which should be contrasted with the oscillators we work on in this paper, which encode the input into a signal (with a period depending on the number of agents in a given input state). The D ETECT problem was introduced in a work complementary to this paper [5]. Therein we look at applications of the confirmed rumor spreading problem in DNA computing, focusing on performance on protocols based on a time-to-live principle and on issues of fault tolerance in a real-world model with leaks. The protocols designed there require O(log n) states, and while self-stabilizing, do not display emergent behavior (in particular, agents can be categorized as “informed” and “uninformed”, the number of correctly informed agents tends to increase over time, while the corresponding continuous dynamical system stabilizes to a fixed point attractor). Originality of methods. The oscillatory dynamics we apply rely on an input-parameter-controlled oscillator. The uncontrolled version of the oscillator which we consider here is the length-3 cyclic oscillator of the cyclic type, known in population dynamics under the name of rock-paper-scissors (or RPS). This has been studied intensively in the physics and evolutionary dynamics literature (cf.e.g. [46] for a survey), while algorithmic studies are relatively scarce [15]. We remark that the uncontrolled cyclic oscillator with a longer (but O(1) length cycle) has been applied for clock/phase synchronization in self-stabilizing settings and very recently in the population protocol setting when resolving the leader election problem [25]. (The connection to oscillatory dynamics is not made explicit, and the longer cycle provides for a neater analysis, although it does not seem to be applicable to our parameter-controllable setting.) Whereas we are not aware of any studies of parameter-controlled oscillators in a protocol design setting (nor for that matter, of rigorous studies in other fields), we should note that such oscillators have frequently appeared in models of biological systems, most notably in biological networks and neuroendocrinology ( [27] for a survey). Indeed, some hormone release and control mechanisms (e.g., for controlling GnRH surges in vertebrates) appear to be following a similar pattern. To the best of our knowledge, no computational (i.e., interaction-protocol-based) explanation for these mechanisms has yet been proposed, and we hope that our work may provide, specifically on the D ETECT problem, may provide some insights in this direction. In terms of lower bounds, we rely on rather tedious coupling techniques for protocols allowing randomization, and many of the details are significantly different from lower-bound techniques found  5  in the population protocols literature. We remark that a recent line of work in this area [3, 21] provides a powerful set of tools for proving lower bounds on the number of states (typically Ω(log log n) states) for fast (typically polylogarithmic) population protocols for different problems, especially for the case of deterministic protocols. We were unable to leverage these results to prove our lower bound for the randomized scenario studied here, and believe our coupling analysis is complementary to their results.  1.4  Other Related Work  Our work fits into the line of research on rumor spreading, population protocols, and related interaction models. Our work also touches on the issue of how distributed systems may spontaneously achieve some form of coordination with minimum agent capabilities. The basic work in this direction, starting with the seminal paper [32], focuses on synchronizing timers through asynchronous interprocess communication to allow processes to construct a total ordering of events. A separate interesting question concerns local clocks which, on their own, have some drift, and which need to synchronize in a network environment (cf. e.g. [35, 37], or [34] for a survey of open problems). Rumor spreading. Rumor spreading protocols are frequently studied in a synchronous setting. In a synchronous protocol, in each parallel round, each vertex independently at random activates a local rule, which allows it either to spread the rumor (if it is already informed), or possibly also to receive it (if it has not yet been informed, as is the case in the push-pull model). The standard push rumor spreading model assumes that each informed neighbor calls exactly one uninformed neighbor. In the basic scenario, corresponding to the complete interaction network, the number of parallel rounds for a single rumor source to inform all other nodes is given as log2 n + ln n + o(log n), with high probability [24, 42]. More general graph scenarios have been studied in [22] in the context of applications in broadcasting information in a network. Graph classes studied for the graph model include hypercubes [22], expanders [45], and other models of random graphs [23]. The push-pull model of rumor spreading is an important variation: whereas for complete networks the speedup due to the pull process is in the order of a multiplicative constant [29], the speed up turns out to be asymptotic, e.g., on preferential attachment graphs, where the rumor spreading time is reduced from Θ(log n) rounds in the push model to Θ(log n/ log log n) rounds in the push-pull model [18], as well as on other graphs with a non-uniform degree distribution. The push-pull model often also proves more amenable to theoretical analysis. We note that asynchronous rumor spreading on graphs, in models closer to our random scheduler, has also been considered in recent work [26, 40], with [26] pointing out the tight connections between the synchronous (particularly push-pull) and asynchronous models in general networks. Population protocols. Population protocols are a model which captures the way in which the complex behavior of systems (biological, sensor nets, etc.) emerges from the underlying local interactions of agents. The original model of Angluin et al. [6, 7] was motivated by applications in sensor mobility. Despite the limited computational capabilities of individual sensors, such protocols permit at least (depending on available extensions to the model) the computation of two important classes of functions: threshold predicates, which decide if the weighted average of types appearing in the population exceeds a certain value, and modulo remainders of similar weighted averages. The majority function, which belongs to the class of threshold functions, was shown to be stably computable for the complete interaction graph [6]; further results in the area of majority computation can be found in [7, 9, 10, 38]. A survey of applications and models of population protocols is provided in [9, 39]. An interesting line of research is related to studies of the algorithmic properties of dynamics of chemical reaction networks [21]. These are as powerful as population protocols, though some extensions of the chemical reaction model also allow the population size to change in time. Two very recent results in the population protocol model are  6  worthy of special attention. Alistarh, Aspnes, and Gelashvili [4] have resolved the question of the number of states required to solve the Majority problem on a complete network in polylogarithmic time as Θ(log n). For the equally notable task of Leader Election, the papers of Gasieniec and Stachowiak [25] (for the upper bound) together with the work of Alistarh, Aspnes, Eisenstat, Gelashvili, and Rivest [3] (for the lower bound) put the number of states required to resolve this question in polylogarithmic time as Θ(log log n). Both of these results rely on a notion of a self-organizing phase clock. Nonlinearity in interaction protocols. Linear dynamical systems, as well as many nonlinear protocols subjected to rigorous analytical study, have a relatively simple structure of point attractors and repellers in the phase space. The underlying continuous dynamics (in the limit of n → +∞) of many interaction protocols defined for complete graphs would fit into this category: basic models of randomized rumor spreading [42]; models of opinion propagation (e.g. [1, 14]); population protocols for problems such as majority and thresholds [6, 7]; all reducible Markov chain processes, such as random walks and randomized iterative load balancing schemes. Nonlinear dynamics with non-trivial limit orbits are fundamental to many areas of systems science, including the study of physical, chemical and biological systems, and to applications in control science. In general, population dynamics with interactions between pairs of agents are non-linear (representable as a set of quadratic difference equations) and have potentially complicated structure if the number of states is 3 or more. For example, the simple continuous Lotka-Volterra dynamics [36] gives rise to a number of discrete models, for example one representing interactions of the form A + B → A + A, over some pairs A, B of states in a population (cf. [46] for further generalizations of the framework or [15] for a rigorous analysis in the random scheduler model). The model describes transient stability in a setting in which several species are in a cyclic predator-prey relation. Cyclic protocols of the type have been consequently identified as a potential mechanism for describing and maintaining biodiversity, e.g., in bacterial colonies [30, 31]. Cycles of length 3, in which type A2 attacks type A1 , type A3 attacks type A2 , and type A1 attacks type A3 , form the basis of the basic oscillator, also used as the starting point for protocols in this work, which is referred to as the RPS (rock-paper-scissors) oscillator or simply the 3-cycle oscillator, which we discuss further in Section 6.1. This protocol has been given a lot of attention in the statistical physics literature. The original analytical estimation method applied to RPS was based on approximation with the Fokker-Planck equation [44]. A subsequent analysis of cyclic 3- and 4-species models using Khasminskii stochastic averaging can be found in [16], and a mean field approximation-based analysis of RPS is performed in [41]. In [15], we have performed a study of some algorithmic implications of RPS, showing that the protocol may be used to perform randomized choice in a population, promoting minority opinions, in Õ(n2 ) steps. All of these results provide a good qualitative understanding of the behavior of the basic cyclic protocols. We remark that the protocol used in this paper is directly inspired by the properties of RPS, as we discuss further on, but has a more complicated interaction structure (see Fig. 1). For protocols with convergence to a single point in the configuration space in the limit of large population size, a discussion of the limit behavior is provided in [12], who provide examples of protocols converging to limit points at coordinates corresponding to any algebraic numbers. We also remark that local interaction dynamics on arbitrary graphs (as opposed to the complete interaction graph) exhibit a much more complex structure of their limit behavior, even if the graph has periodic structure, e.g., that of a grid. Oscillatory behavior may be overlaid with spatial effects [46], or the system may have an attractor at a critical point, leading to simple dynamic processes displaying self-organized criticality (SOC, [43]).  7  2 2.1  Preliminaries: Building Blocks for Population Protocols Protocol Definition  A randomized population protocol for a population of n agents is defined as a pair P = (Kn , Rn ), where Kn is the set of states and Rn is the set of interaction rules. The interaction graph is complete. We will simply write P = (K, R), when considering a protocol which is universal (i.e., defined in the same way for each value of n) or if the value of n is clear from the context. All the protocols we design are universal; our lower bounds also apply to some non-universal protocols. The set of rules R ⊆ K 4 × [0, 1] is given so that each rule j ∈ R is of the form j = (i1 (j), i2 (j), o1 (j), o2 (j), qj ), describing an interaction read as: “(i1 (j), i2 (j)) → (o1 (j), o2 (j))with probability qj ”. For all i1 , i2 ∈ {j ∈ R : (i1 (j), i2 (j)) = (i1 , i2 )} as the set of rules acting on the pair of states K, we define Ri1 ,i2 = P i1 , i2 , and impose that j∈Ri ,i qj ≤ 1. 1 2  For a state A ∈ K, we denote the number of agents in state AP as #A, and the concentration of state # # A as a = A/n, and likewise for a set of states A, we write A = A∈A #A. In any configuration of the system, each of the n agents from the population is in one of states from Kn . The protocol is executed by an asynchronous scheduler, which runs in steps. In every step the scheduler uniformly at random chooses from the population a pair of distinct agents to interact: the initiator and the receiver. If the initiator and receiver are in states i1 and i2 , respectively, then the protocol executes at most one rule from set protocol Ri1 ,i2 , selecting rule j ∈ Ri1 ,i2 with probability qj . If rule j is executed, the initiator then changes its state to o1 (j) and the receiver to o2 (j). The source has a special state, denoted X in the D ETECT problem, or one of two special states, denoted {X1 , X2 } in the B IT B ROADCAST problem, which is never modified by any rule. All protocols are presented in the randomized framework, however, the universal protocols considered here are amenable to a form of conversion into deterministic rules discussed in [3], which simulates randomness of rules by exploiting the inherent randomness of the scheduler in choosing interacting node pairs to distribute weakly dependent random bits around the system. All protocols designed in this work are initiator-preserving, which means that for any rule j ∈ R, we have o1 (j) = i1 (j) (i.e., have all rules of the form A + B → A + C, also more compactly written as A : B → C), which makes them relevant in a larger number of application. As an illustrative example, we remark that the basic rumor spreading (epidemic) model is initiator-preserving and given simply as 1 : 0 → 1. All protocols can also obviously be rewritten to act on unordered pairs of agents picked by the scheduler, rather than ordered pairs.  2.2  Protocol Composition Technique  Our protocols will be built from simpler elements. Our basic building block is the input-controlled oscillatory protocol Po (see Fig. 1). We then use protocol Po as a component in the construction of other, more complex protocols, without disrupting the operation of the original protocol. Formally, we consider a protocol PB using state set B = {Bi : 1 ≤ i ≤ kb } and rule set RB , and a protocol extension PBC using a state set B × C = B × {Ci : 1 ≤ i ≤ kc }, where C is disjoint from B, and rule extension set RBC . Each rule extension defines for each pair of states from B × C (i.e., to each element of (B × C) × (B × C)) a probability distribution over elements of C × C. The composed protocol PB ◦ PBC is a population protocol with set of states B × C. Its rules are defined so that, for a selected pair of agents in states (Bi , Cj ) and (Bi0 , Cj 0 ), we obtain a pair of agents in states (Bi∗ , Cj ∗ ) and (Bi0∗ , Cj 0∗ ) according to a probability distribution defined so that: • Each pair Bi0∗ , Bi0∗ appears in the output states of the two agents with the same probability as it would in an execution of protocol PB on a pair of agents in states Bi and Bi0 .  8  • Each pair Ci0∗ , Ci0∗ appears in the output states of the two agents with the probability given by the definition of PBC . In the above, the pairs of agents activated by PB and PBC are not independent of each other. This is a crucial property in the composition of protocol Po when composing it with further blocks to solve the D ETECT problem. We denote by 1B the identity protocol which preserves agent states on set of states B. For a protocol P , we denote by P/2 a lazy version of a protocol P in which the rule activation of P occurs with probability 1/2, and with probability 1/2 the corresponding rule of the identity protocol is activated. Note that all asymptotic bounds on expected and w.h.p. convergence time obtained for any protocol P also apply to protocol P/2, in the regime of at least a logarithmic number of time steps. We also sometimes treat a protocol PBC extension as a protocol in itself, applied to the identity protocol 1B . The independently composed protocol PB + PBC is defined as an implementation of the composed protocol (PB ) ◦ (PC /2), realized with the additional constraint that in each step, either the rule of PB is performed with an identity rule extension, or the rule extension of PBC is performed on top of the identity protocol 1B . Such a definition is readily verified to be correct by a simple coupling argument, and allows us to analyze protocols PB and PBC , observing that the pairs (identities) of agents activated by the scheduler in the respective protocols are independent. All the composed protocols (and protocol extensions) we design are also initiator-preserving, i.e., Ci∗ = Ci and Bi∗ = Bi , with probability 1. In notation, rules omitted from the description of protocol extensions are implicit, occurring with probability 0 (where Cj ∗ 6= Cj ) or with the probability necessary for the normalization of the distribution to 1, where the state is preserved (where Cj ∗ = Cj ). As a matter of naming convention, we name the states in the separate state sets of the composed protocols with distinct letters of the alphabet, together with their designated subscripts and superscripts. The rumor source X is treated specially and uses a separate letter (and may be seen as a one state protocol without any rules, on top of which all other protocols are composed; in particular, its state is ? never modified). The six remaining states of protocol Po are named with the letters A? , as usual in its definition. Subsequent protocols will use different letters, e.g., M? and L? .  3 3.1  Overview of Protocol Designs Main Routine: Input-Controlled Oscillator Protocol Po  We first describe the main routine which allows us to convert local input parameters (the existence of source into a form of global periodic signal on the population. This main building block is the construction of a 7-state protocol Po following oscillator dynamics, whose design we believe to be of independent interest. The complete design of protocol Po is shown in Fig. 1. The source state is denoted by X. Addi++ tionally, there are six states, called A+ i and Ai , for i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. The naming of states in the protocol is intended to maintain a direct connection with the RPS oscillator dynamics, which is defined by the ++ simple rule “Ai : Ai−1 7→ Ai , for i = 1, 2, 3”. In fact, we will retain the convention Ai = {A+ i , Ai } ++ + ++ and ai = a+ to be different flavors of the same species i + ai , and consider the two states Ai and Ai + Ai , referring to the respective superscripts as either lazy ( ) or aggressive (++ ). The protocol has the property that in the absence of X, it stops in a corner state of the phase space, in which only one of three possible states appears in the population, and otherwise regularly (every O(log n) steps) moves sufficiently far away from all corner states. An intuitive formalization of the basic properties of the protocol is given by the theorem below. Theorem 1. There exists a universal protocol Po with |K| = 7 states, including a distinguished source state X, which has the following properties. 9  (1) Interaction with an initiator from the same species makes receiver aggressive: ?  Ai :  ?  Ai  7→  A++ i  (2) Interaction with an initiator from a different species makes receiver lazy (case of no attack): ?  Ai :  ?  Ai+1 7→  A+ i+1  (3) A lazy initiator has probability p of performing a successful attack on its prey: A+ i :  ?  Ai−1  ( A+ with probability p, i , 7→ + Ai−1 , otherwise.  (4) An aggressive initiator has probability 2p of performing a successful attack on its prey: A++ i :  ?  Ai−1  ( A+ with probability 2p, i , 7→ + Ai−1 , otherwise.  (5) The source converts any receiver into a lazy state of a uniformly random species:  X:  ?  A?   +  A1 , with probability 1/3, 7→ A+ 2 , with probability 1/3,   + A3 , with probability 1/3.  Figure 1: Rules of the basic oscillator protocol Po . The adopted notation for initiator-preserving rules is of the form A : B 7→ C, corresponding to transitions written as A + B → A + C in the notation of chemical reaction networks or (A, B) → (A, C) in the notation of population dynamics. All rules apply to i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, whereas a question mark ? in a superscript or subscript denotes a wildcard, matching any permitted combination of characters, which may be set independently for each agent. Probability p > 0 is any (sufficiently small) absolute constant. 1. For any starting configuration, in the absence of the source (#X = 0), the protocol always reaches a configuration such that: ++ ++ • all agents are in the same state: either A++ 1 , or A2 , or A3 ;  • no further state transitions occur after this time. Such a configuration is reached in O(log n) rounds, with constant probability (and in O(log2 n) rounds with probability 1 − O(1/n)). 2. For any starting configuration, in the presence of the source (#X ≥ 1), we have with probability 1 − O(1/n): • for each state i ∈ K, there exists a time step in the next O(log #nX ) rounds when at least a constant fraction of all agents are in state i; • during the next O(log #nX ) rounds, at least a constant fraction of all agents change their state at least once. 10  The proof of the Theorem is provided in Section 6. The RPS dynamics provides the basic oscillator mechanism which is still largely retained in our scenario. Most of the difficulty lies in controlling its operation as a function of the presence or absence of the rumor source. We do this by applying two separate mechanisms. The presence of rumor source X shifts the oscillator towards an orbit closer to the central orbit (A1 , A2 , A3 ) = (1/3, 1/3, 1/3) through rule (5), which increases the value of potential φ := ln(a1 a2 a3 ), where ai = #Ai /n. Conversely, independent of the existence of rumor source X, a second mechanism is intended to reduce the value of potential φ. This mechanism exploits the difference between the aggressive and lazy flavors of the species. Following rule (1), an agent belonging to a species becomes more aggressive if it meets another from the same species, and subsequently attacks agents from its prey species with doubled probability following rule (4). This behavior somehow favors larger species, since they are expected to have (proportionally) more aggressive agents than the smaller species (in which pairwise interactions between agents of the same species are less frequent) — the fraction of agents in Ai which are aggressive would, in an idealized static scenario, be proportional to ai . (This is, in fact, often far from true due to the interactions between the different aspects of the dynamics). As a very loose intuition, the destabilizing behavior of the considered rule on the oscillator is resemblant of the effect an eccentrically fitted weight has on a rotating wheel, pulling the oscillator towards more external orbits (with smaller values of φ). The intuition for which the proposed dynamics works, and which we will formalize and prove rigorously in Section 6, can now be stated as follows: in the presence of rumor source X, the dynamics will converge to a form of orbit on which the two effects, the stabilizing and destabilizing one, eventually compensate each other (in a time-averaged sense). The period of a single rotation of the oscillator around such an orbit is between O(1) and O(log n), depending on the concentration of X. In the absence of X, the destabilizing rule will prevail, and the oscillator will quickly crash into a side of the triangle. For small values of #X > 0, the protocol can be very roughly (and non-rigorously) viewed as cyclic composition of three dominant rumor spreading processes over three sets of states A1 , A2 , A3 , one converting states A1 to A3 , the next from A3 to A2 , and the last from A2 to A1 , which spontaneously take over at moments of time separated by O(log n) parallel rounds. For other starting configurations, and especially for the case of #X = 0, the dynamics of the protocol, which has 5 free dimensions, is more involved to describe and analyze (see Section 6.4). We provide some further insights into the operation of the protocol in Section 7.1, notably formalizing the notion that an intuitively understood oscillation (going from a small number of agents in some state Ai , to a large number of agents in state Ai , and back again to a small number of agents in state Ai ) takes Θ(log #nX ) steps, with probability 1 − O(1/n). As such, protocol Po can be seen as converting local input #X into a global periodic signal with period Θ(log #nX ). What remains is allowing nodes to extract information from this periodic signal. Simulation timelines shown in Fig.9 in the Appendix illustrate the idea of operation of protocol Po and its composition with other protocols.  3.2  Protocols for B IT B ROADCAST  A solution to B IT B ROADCAST is obtained starting with an independent composition of two copies of oscillator Po , called Po[1] and Po[2] , with states in one protocol denoted by subscript [1] and in the other by subscript [2]. The respective sources are thus written as X[1] and X[2] . In view of Theorem 1, in this composition Po[1] + Po[2] , under the promise of the B IT B ROADCAST problem, one of the oscillators will be running and the other will stop in a corner of its state space. Which of the oscillators is running can be identified by the presence of states A+ i [z], which will only appear for z ∈ {1, 2} corresponding to the operating oscillator. Moreover, by the same Theorem, every O(log n) rounds a constant number of agents of this oscillator will be in such a state A+ i [z], for any choice of i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. We can thus design the protocol extension Pb to detect this. This is given by the pair of additional output states {Y1 , Y2 } and the rule extension consisting of the two rules shown in Fig. 2.  11  (6a) Interaction with agent state A+ ?[1] sets agent output to Y1 : ++ (A+ ?[1] , A?[2] , Y? ) :  (A??[1] , A??[2] , Y? )7→ Y1  (6a) Interaction with agent state A+ ?[2] sets agent output to Y2 : + (A++ ?[1] , A?[2] , Y? ) :  (A??[1] , A??[2] , Y? )7→ Y2  Figure 2: Protocol extension Pb of protocol (Po[1] + Po[2] ), with additional states {Y1 , Y2 }. (5a-5b) Interaction with source X[1] alters corner configurations different from A1 : X[1] :  A?3 7→ A+ 1  X[1] :  A?2 7→ A+ 3  (5c-5d) Interaction with source X[2] alters corner configurations different from A2 : X[2] :  A?1 7→ A+ 2  X[2] :  A?3 7→ A+ 1  Figure 3: Protocol Po0 is obtained from the basic oscillator protocol Po by removing Rule (5) and replacing it by the two rules shown above. Theorem 2 (Protocol for B IT B ROADCAST). Protocol (Po[1] + Po[2] ) + Pb , having |K| = 74 states, including distinguished source states X[1] , X[2] converges to an exact solution of B IT B ROADCAST. This occurs in O(log2 n) parallel rounds, with probability 1 − O(1/n). In the output encoding, agent states of the form (·, ·, Yz ) represent answer “z”, for z ∈ {1, 2}. The protocol (Po[1] + Po[2] ) + Pb is not “silent”, i.e., it undergoes perpetual transitions of state, even once the output has been decided. As a side remark, we note that for the single-source broadcasting problem, or more generally for the case when the number of sources is small, max{#X[1] , #X[2] } = O(1), we can propose the following simpler silent protocol. We define protocol Po0 , by modifying protocol Po as follows. We remove from it Rule (5), and replace it by to the four rules shown in Fig. 3. The analysis of the modified protocol follows from the same arguments as those used to prove Theorem 1(1). In the regime of max{#X[1] , #X[2] } = O(1), the effect of the source does not influence the convergence of the process and each of the three possible corner configurations, with exclusively species {A1 , A2 , A3 }, is reached in O(log n) steps with constant probability. However, rules (5a)−(5d) enforce that the only stable configuration which will persist is the one in a corner corresponding to the identity of the source, i.e., A1 for source X[1] and A2 for source X[2] ; the source will restart the oscillator in all other cases. We thus obtain the following side result, for which we leave out the details of the proof. Observation 1. Protocol Po0 , having |K| = 6 + 2 = 8 states, including distinguished source states X[1] , X[2] converges to an exact solution of B IT B ROADCAST, eventually stopping with all agents in state 12  (6) Meeting an agent of a different type resets majority setting: ((X or A?j ), M? ) :  ( M+1 , with probability 1/2 (A?i , M? ) 7→ , M−1 , with probability 1/2  for j 6= i.  (7-10) Three-state majority protocol among agents of the same type: (7) :  (A?i , M−1 ) :  (A?i , M+1 )7→M0 ,  with probability r.  (8) :  (A?i , M+1 ) : (A?i , M+1 ) : (A?i , M−1 ) :  (A?i , M−1 )7→M0 , (A?i , M0 ) 7→M+1 , (A?i , M0 ) 7→M−1 ,  with probability r.  (9) : (10) :  with probability r. with probability r.  Figure 4: Protocol extension Pm of protocol Po , with additional states {M−1 , M0 , M+1 }. This protocol extension is applied through the composition (Po ◦ Pm ). Probability r > 0 is given by an absolute constant, depending explicitly on s and p, whose value is sufficiently small. ++ A++ 1 if source X[1] is present and stopping with all agents in state A2 if source X[2] is present, with no subsequent state transition. The stabilization occurs within O(log2 n) parallel rounds, with probability 1 − O(1/n), if max{#X[1] , #X[2] } = O(1), i.e., the broadcast originates from a constant number of sources.  3.3  Protocol for D ETECT  The solution to problem D ETECT is more involved. It relies on two auxiliary extensions added on top of a single oscillator Po . The first, Pm , runs an instance of the 3-state majority protocol of Angluin et al. [7] within each species Ai of the oscillator. For this reason, the composition between Po and Pm has to be of the form Po ◦ Pm (i.e., it cannot be independent). The operation of this extension is shown in Fig. 5 and analyzed in Section 7.2. It relies crucially on an interplay of two parameters: the time Θ(log #nX ) taken by the oscillator to perform an orbit, and the time Ω(log #nX ) it takes for the majority protocol (which is reset by the oscillator in its every oscillation) to converge to a solution. When parameters are tuned so that the second time length is larger a constant number of times than the first, a constant proportion of the agents of the population are involved in the majority computation, i.e., both of the clashing states in the fight for dominance still include Ω(n) agents. In the absence of a source, shortly after the oscillator stops, one of these states takes over, and the other disappears. The above-described difference can be detected by the second, much simpler, extension Pl , designed in Fig. 5 and analyzed in Section 7.3. The number of “lights” switched on during the operation of the protocol will almost always be more than (1 − ε)n, where ε > 0 is a parameter controlled by the probability of lights spontaneously disengaging, and may be set to and arbitrarily small constant. Theorem 3 (Protocol for D ETECT). For any ε > 0, protocol (Po ◦ Pm ) + Pl , having |K| = 6 · 3 · 3 + 1 = 55 states, including a distinguished source state X, which solves the problem of spreading confirmed rumors as follows: 1. For any starting configuration, in the presence of the source (#X ≥ 1), after an initialization period of O(log n) rounds, at an arbitrary time step the number of agents in an output state corresponding to a “yes” answer is (1 − ε)n, with probability 1 − O(1/n). 13  (11) Light switch progresses from L−1 to L+1 in the presence of initiator M−1 : (A?? , M−1 , L? ) :  (A?? , M? , L−1 ) 7→ L+1  (12) Light switch progresses from L+1 to Lon in the presence of initiator M+1 : (A?? , M+1 , L? ) :  (A?? , M? , L+1 ) 7→ Lon  (13) Light spontaneously turns off: (A?? , M? , L? ) :  (A?? , M? , Lon ) 7→ L−1 ,  with probability q(ε).  Figure 5: Protocol extension Pl of protocol (Po ◦ Pm ), with additional states {L−1 , L+1 , Lon }. This protocol extension is applied through the composition (Po ◦ Pm ) + Pl . Probability q(ε) > 0 is given by an absolute constant, depending explicitly on s, p, r, and ε, whose value is sufficiently small. 2. For any starting configuration, in the absence of the source (#X = 0), the system always reaches a configuration such that all agents are in output states corresponding to a “no” answer for all subsequent time steps. Such a configuration is reached in O(log2 n) rounds, with probability 1 − O(1/n).  4  Impossibility Results for Protocols without Non-Stationary Effects  For convenience of notation, we identify a configuration of the population with a vector z = (z (1) , . . . , z (k) ) ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}k = Z, where z (i) , for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, denotes the number of agents in the population having state i, and kzk1 = n. Our main lower bound may now be stated as follows. Theorem 4 (Fixed points preclude fast stabilization). Let ε1 > 0 be arbitrarily chosen, let P be any k-state protocol, and let z0 be a configuration of the system with at most nε0 agents in state X, where ε0 ∈ (0, ε1 ] is a constant depending only on k and ε1 . Let B be a subset of the state space around z0 such that the population of each state within B is within a factor of at most nε0 from that in z0 (for any (i) (i) z ∈ B, for all states i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, we have z0 /nε0 < z (i) ≤ nε0 max{1, z0 }). Suppose that in an execution of P starting from configuration z0 , with probability 1 − o(1), the configurations of the system in the next n2ε1 parallel rounds are confined to B. Then, an execution of P for n2ε0 parallel rounds, starting from a configuration in which state X has been removed from z0 , reaches a configuration in a O(n6ε1 )-neighborhood of B, with probability 1 − o(1). In the statement of the Theorem, for the sake of maintaining the size of the population, we interpret “removing state X from z0 ” as replacing the state of all agents in state X by some other state, chosen adversarially (in fact, this may be any state which has sufficiently many representatives in configuration z0 ). The O(n6ε1 )-neighborhood of B is understood in the sense of the 1-norm or, asymptotically equivalently, the total variation distance, reflecting configurations which can be converted into a configuration from B by flipping the states of O(n6ε1 ) agents. The proof of Theorem 4 is provided in Section 8. It proceeds by a coupling argument between a process starting from z0 and a perturbed process in which state X has been removed. The analysis differently treats rules and states which are seldom encountered during the execution of the protocol 14  from those that are encountered with polynomially higher probability (such a clear separation is only possible when k = O(poly log log n)). Eventually, the probability of success of the coupling reduces to a two-dimensional biased random walk scenario, in which the coordinates represent differences between the number of times particular rules have been executed in the two coupled processes. We have the following direct corollaries for the problems we are considering. For D ETECT, if B represents the set of configurations of the considered protocol, which are understood as the protocol giving the answer “#X > 0”, then our theorem says that, with probability 1 − o(1), the vast majority of agents will not “notice” that #X had been set to 0, even a polynomial number of steps after this has occurred, and thus cannot yield a correct solution. An essential element of the analysis is that it works only when state X is removed in the perturbed process. Thus, there is nothing to prevent the dynamics from stabilizing even to a single point in the case of X = 0, which is indeed the case for our protocol Pr . The argument for B IT B ROADCAST only applies to situations where the source agent is sending out white noise (independently random bits in successive interactions). Such a source can be interpreted as a pair of sources in states X1 and X2 in the population, each disclosing itself with probability 1/2 upon activation and staying silent otherwise. In the cases covered by the lower bound, the scenario in which the source X1 is completely suppressed cannot be distinguished from the scenario in which both X1 and X2 appear; likewise, the scenario in which the source X2 is completely suppressed cannot be distinguished from the scenario in which both X1 and X2 appear. By coupling all three processes, this would imply the indistinguishability of the all these configurations, including those with only source X1 and only source X2 , which would imply incorrect operation of the protocol. Whereas we use the language of discrete dynamics for precise statements, we informally remark that the protocols covered by the lower bound of Theorem 4 include those whose dynamics zt /n, described in the continuous limit (n → +∞), has only point attractors, repellers, and fixed points. In this sense, the use of oscillatory dynamics in our protocol seems inevitable. The impossibility result is stated in reference to protocols with a constant number of states, however, it may be extended to protocols with a non-constant number of states k, showing that such protocols require nexp[−O(poly(k))] time to reach a desirable output. (This time is larger than polylogarithmic up to some threshold value k = O(poly log log n).) The lower bound covers randomized protocols, including those in which rule probabilities depend on n (i.e., non-universal ones).  5  Input-Controlled Behavior of Protocols for D ETECT  In this Section, we consider the periodicity of protocols for self-organizing oscillatory dynamics, in order to understand how the period of a phase clock must depend on the input parameters. We focus on the setting of the D ETECT problem, considering the value #X of the input parameter. In Section 3.1, we noted informally that the designed oscillatory protocol performs a complete rotation around the triangle in Θ(log n/#X) rounds. Here, we provide partial evidence that the periodicity of any oscillatory protocol depends both on the value of #X and n. We do this by bounding the portions of the configuration space in which a protocol solving D ETECT finds itself in most time steps, separating the cases of sub-polynomial #X (i.e., #X < nε0 , where ε > 0 is a constant dependent on the specific protocol), and the case of 0 #X = Θ(n). Any protocol on k states (not necessarily of oscillatory nature) can be viewed as a Markov chain in its k-dimensional configuration space [0, n]k , and as in Section 4 we identify a configuration with a vector z ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}k = Z. The configuration at time step t is denoted z(t). In what follows, we will look at the equivalent space of log-configurations, given by the bijection: Z 3 z = (z (1) , . . . , z (k) ) 7→ (ln◦ z (1) , . . . , ln◦ z (k) ≡ ln◦ z ∈ {ln◦ 0, ln◦ 1, . . . , ln◦ n}k ), where ln◦ a = ln a for a > 0 and ln◦ a = −1 for a = 0. 15  For z0 ∈ Z, we will refer to the d-log-neighborhood of z0 as the set of points {z ∈ Z : | ln◦ z − ln◦ z0 | < d}. Notice first that the notion of a box in the statement of Theorem 4 is closely related to the set of points in the (ε0 ln n)-log-neighborhood of configuration z0 . It follows from the Theorem that any protocol for solving D ETECT within a polylogarithmic number of rounds T with probability 1 − o(1) must, in the case of 0 < #X < nε0 , starting from z0 at some time t0 , leave the (ε0 ln n)-log-neighborhood of z0 within T rounds with probability 1 − o(1). We obtain the following corollary. Proposition 1. Fix a universal protocol P which solves the D ETECT problem with ε-error in T = O(poly log n) rounds with probability 1 − o(1). Set 0 < #X < nε0 , where ε0 > 0 is a constant which depends only on the definition of protocol #X. Let t0 be an arbitrarily chosen moment of time after at least T rounds from the initialization of the protocol in any initial state. Then, within T rounds after time t0 , there is a moment of time t such that z(t) is not in the (ε0 log n)-neighborhood of z(t0 ), with probability 1 − o(1). The above Proposition suggests that oscillatory or quasi-oscillatory behavior at low concentrations of state X must be of length Ω(log n). By contrast, the following Proposition shows that in the case #X = Θ(n), the protocol remains tied to a constant-size log-neighborhood of its configuration space. Proposition 2. Fix a universal protocol P with set of states K which solves the D ETECT problem with ε-error in T = O(poly log n) rounds with probability 1 − o(1). Then, there exists a constant δ0 > 0, depending only on the design of protocol P , with the following property. Fix #X ∈ [cn, n/2], where 0 < c < 1/2 is an arbitrarily chosen constant. Let t be an arbitrarily chosen moment of time, after at least T rounds from the initialization of the protocol at an adversarially chosen initial configuration z(0), such that each coordinate z (i) (0) satisfies z (i) (0) = 0 or z (i) (0) > 1/(2|K|), for all i ∈ {1, . . . , |K|}. Then, Ω(1) with probability 1 − e−n , z(t) is in the δ0 -neighborhood of z(0). The proof of the Proposition is deferred to Section 9. Note that, in the regime of a constant-size log-neighborhood of configuration z(0), the discrete dynamics of the protocol adheres closely to the continuous-time version of its dynamics in the limit n → +∞. (See Section 6, and in particular Lemma 1, for a further discussion of this property). Since the latter is independent of n, any oscillatory behavior “inherited” from the continuous dynamic would have a period of O(1) rounds. We leave as open the question whether some form of behavior of a protocol with polylogarithmic (i.e., or more broadly, non-constant and subpolynomial) periodicity for D ETECT can be designed in the regime of #X = Θ(n) despite this obstacle. In particular, the authors believe that the existence of an input-controlled phase clock with a period of Θ(log n) for any #X > 0, and the absence of operation for #X = 0, is unlikely in the class of discrete dynamical systems given by the rules of population protocols. The remaining sections of the paper provide proofs of the Theorems from Sections 3, 4, and 5.  6  Analysis of Oscillator Dynamics Po  This section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 1.  6.1  Preliminaries: Discrete vs. Continuous Dynamics  Notation. For a configuration of a population protocol, we write z = (z (1) , . . . , z (k) ) to describe the number of agents in the k states of the protocol, and likewise use vector u = (u(1) , . . . , u(k) ) = z/n to describe their concentrations. The concentration of a state called A which is the iA -th state in vector u is equivalently written as a ≡ a(u) ≡ u(iA ) , depending on which notation is the easiest to use in a given transformation. 16  If vector u represents the current configuration of the protocol and u0 := u0 |u is the random variable describing the next configuration of the protocol after the execution of a single rule, we write ∆u := u0 − u. We also use the notation ∆ to functions of state u. Next, we define the continuous dynamics associated with the protocol by the following vector differential equation: du u̇ ≡ := nE(∆u) dt and likewise, for each coordinate, ȧ = nE(∆a) (we use the dot-notation and d/dt interchangeably for time differentials). This continuous description serves for the analysis only, and reflects the behavior of the protocol in the limit n → ∞.4 Warmup: the RPS oscillator. Our oscillatory dynamics may be seen as an extension of the rockpaper-scissors (RPS) protocol (see Related work). This is a protocol with three states A1 , A2 , A3 and three rules: Ai : Ai−1 7→ Ai with probability p, where p > 0 is an arbitrarily fixed constant, and the indices of states Ai are always 1, 2, or 3, and any other values should be treated as mod 3 in the given range. For i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, the change of concentration of agents of state Ai in the population in the given step can be expressed for the RPS protocol as:   +1/n, with probability pai−1 ai , 1 # ∆ai = · ∆ Ai = −1/n, with probability pai ai+1 , (1)  n  0, otherwise, Thus, the corresponding continuous dynamics for RPS is given as: ȧi = nE(∆ai ) = pai−1 ai − pai ai+1 , for i = 1, 2, 3. The orbit of motion for this dynamics in R3 is given by two constants of motion. First, a1 + a2 + a3 = 1 by normalization. Secondly, for any starting configuration with a strictly positive number of agents in each of the three states, the following function φ of the configuration: φ = ln(a1 a2 a3 )  (2)  is easily verified to be constant over time φ̇ = 0, hence φ = ln(a1 a2 a3 ) = const < 0 (or more simply, a1 a2 a3 = const). Thus, for the continuous dynamics, the initial product of concentrations completely determines its perpetual orbit, which is obtained by intersecting the appropriate curve a1 a2 a3 = const with the plane a1 + a2 + a3 = 1. As a matter of convention, the plane a1 + a2 + a3 = 1 with conditions ai ≥ 0 is drawn as an equilateral triangle (we adopt this convention throughout the paper, for subsequent protocols). All of the orbits are concentric around the point (1/3, 1/3, 1/3), which is in itself a point orbit maximizing the value of φ = − ln 27. The discrete dynamics follows a path of motion which typically resembles random-walk-type perturbations around the path of motion, until eventually, after Õ(n2 ) steps it crashes into one of the sides of the triangle. Subsequently, if ai = 0, for some i = 1, 2, 3, then no rule can make ai increase. (If ai−1 > 0, in the next O(log n) steps, all remaining agents of Ai+1 will convert to Ai−1 , and there will be only agents from Ai−1 left.) Thus, the protocol will terminate in a corner of the state space. A further discussion of the RPS dynamics can be found in [15, 28]. 4  We note that some of our results rely on the stochasticity of the random scheduler model, and do not immediately generalize to the continuous case.  17  6.2  Proof Outline of Theorem 1  The rest of the section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 1. We start by noting some basic properties in Subsection 6.3, then prove the properties of the protocol for the case of X = 0 (Subsection 6.4, and finally analyze (the somewhat less involved) case of X > 0 (Subsection 6.5). For the case of X = 0, the proof is based on a repeated application of concentration inequalities for several potential functions (applicable in different portions of the 6-dimensional phase space). In two specific regions, in √ the O(1/ n)-neighborhood of the center of the (A1 , A2 , A3 )-triangle and very close to its sides, we rely on stochastic noise to “push” the trajectory away from the center of the triangle, and also to push it onto one of its sides. Fortunately, each of these stages takes O(log n) parallel rounds, with strictly positive probability. Overall, the O(log n) parallel rounds bound for the case of X = 0 is provided with constant probability; this translates into O(log n) parallel rounds in expectation, since subsequent executions of the process for O(log n) rounds have independently constant success probability, and the process has a geometrically decreasing tail over intervals of length O(log n).  6.3  Properties of the Oscillator  In the following, we define s = a1 + a2 + a3 ∈ [0, 1]. Handling the case of s < 1 allows us not only to take care of the fact that a fraction of the population may be taken up by rumor source X, but also allows for easier composition of Po with other protocols (sharing the same population). We set p as a constant value independent of n, which is sufficiently small (e.g., p = s2 /1012 is a valid choice; we make no efforts in the proofs to optimize constants, but the protocol appears in simulations to work well with much larger values of p). We will occasionally omit an explanation of index i, which will then implicitly mean “for all i = 1, 2, 3”. We define amin := mini=1,2,3 ai and amax := maxi=1,2,3 ai . From the definition of the protocol one obtains the distribution of changes of the sizes of states in a step:  + ++ 1  +1/n, with probability 3 x(s − ai ) + pai ai−1 + 2pai ai−1 , ++ ∆ai = −1/n, with probability 23 xai + pai a+ i+1 + 2pai+1 ai ,   0, otherwise.  ++  +1/n, with probability ai (ai − ai ), ∆a++ = −1/n, with probability xa++ + (s − ai )a++ i i i ,   0, otherwise. ++ Taking the expectations of the above random variables, and recalling that ai = a+ i +ai , we obtain: ++ + ++ ȧi = x(s/3 − ai ) + pa+ i ai−1 + 2pai ai−1 − pai ai+1 − 2pai+1 ai ++ = x(s/3 − ai ) + pai−1 (ai + a++ i ) − pai (ai+1 + ai+1 )  ȧ++ i  =  −xa++ i  + ai (ai −  a++ i )  − (s −  ai )a++ i  =  −xa++ i  +  (3) a2i  −  sa++ i .  Moreover, we have by a simple transformation:   X  X ȧi  x X s ++ ai−1 φ̇ = = −9 +p ai −1 ai 3 ai ai  6.4  (4)  (5)  Stopping in O(n log n) Sequential Steps in the Absence of a Source  Throughout this subsection we assume that x = 0. We consider first the case where ai 6= 0, for i = 1, 2, 3 (noting that as soon as ai = 0, we can easily predict the subsequent behavior of the oscillator, as was the case for the RPS dynamics). 18  The dynamics of Po is defined in such a way that that when x = 0 and in the absence of the rules of a2 the RPS oscillator, the value of a++ would be close to si . Consequently, we define κi , i = 1, 2, 3 as the i appropriate normalized corrective factor: κi = s  a++ i − ai ai  thus  a++ = i  ai (ai + κi ). s  Note that as 0 ≤ a++ ≤ ai ≤ 1, thus −1 ≤ κi ≤ 1. Next, we introduce the following definitions: i δi = ai − ai−1 q δ = δ12 + δ22 + δ32 q κ = κ21 + κ22 + κ23 We also reuse potential φ from the original RPS oscillator. This time, it is no longer a constant of motion. By (5) and the definition of κi , for x = 0 we upper-bound φ̇ as:   p X ai−1 φ̇ = − 1) ai (ai + κi )( s ai   p X (ai + κi )(ai−1 − ai ) = s   X p 1X 2 = − (ai − ai−1 ) + κi (ai−1 − ai ) s 2   1 2 p − δ + κδ (6) ≤ s 2 The above change φ̇ of the potential is indeed negative when κ ≈ 0 (which is in accordance with our intention in designing the destabilizing rules for the oscillator). The functions δ, φ and κ are intricately dependent on each other. In general, we will try to show that δ and φ increase over time, while κ stays close to 0. This requires that we first introduce a number of auxiliary potentials based on these two functions. First, for x = 0, we can rewrite (4) as: ˙ = a2 − sa++ = −a κ . a++ i i i i i Next, introducing the definition of κi to (3), we obtain for x = 0: ++ ++ ++ ȧi = pai−1 (ai + a++ i ) − pai (ai+1 + ai+1 ) = pai (ai−1 − ai+1 ) + p(ai ai−1 − ai+1 ai ) =   1 1 = pai δi−1 + p ai (ai + κi )ai−1 − ai+1 (ai+1 + κi+1 )ai = s s  p = pai δi−1 + ai κi ai−1 − κi+1 ai+1 + (ai−1 ai − a2i+1 ) . s  19  From the above, an upper bound on |ȧi | follows directly using elementary transformations:  p |ȧi | ≤ pai |δi−1 | + ai |κi |ai−1 + |κi+1 |ai+1 + |ai−1 ai − a2i+1 | ≤ s  p ≤ pai δ + ai κ(ai−1 + ai+1 ) + |ai−1 ai − a2i+1 |) = s ai−1 + ai+1 p = pai δ + pai κ + ai |(ai−1 − ai+1 )ai − (ai+1 − ai )ai+1 | ≤ s s p ≤ pai (δ + κ) + ai (|ai−1 − ai+1 |ai + |ai+1 − ai |ai+1 ) ≤ s ai + ai+1 ≤ pai (δ + κ) + pai δ s ≤ pai (2δ + κ).  We are now ready to estimate κ̇i for x = 0, using the definition of κi and the previously obtained formula for ȧ++ i :   ++  ai a++ ȧ++ i i = −sκi − s 2 + 1 ȧi − 2 ȧi − ȧi κ̇i = s ai ai ai  ++  a ȧi ȧi = −sκi − s i − ai − 2ȧi = −sκi − κi − 2ȧi . ai ai ai   Next from the bound on |ȧi |:  ȧi κ˙2i = 2κi κ̇i = 2 − sκ2i − κ2i − 2ȧi κi ai  | ȧ | i 2 κi + 2|ȧi ||κi | ≤ 2 − sκ2i + ai  2 ≤ 2 − sκi + p(2δ + κ)(κ2i + 2ai |κi |)  ≤ 2 − sκ2i + p(2δ + κ)(κ + 2κ) = −2sκ2i + p(12δκ + 6κ2 ).  Next:  X 1 X ˙2 1  κi ≤ −2s κ2i + 3p(12δκ + 6κ2 ) ≤ 2κ 2κ  1 2 ≤ −2sκ + p(36δκ + 18κ2 ) = 2κ = (−s + 9p)κ + 18pδ ≤ s ≤ − κ + 18pδ, 2  κ̇ =  where in the final transformation we took into account that p ≤ s/18. Now, we define the potential η for any configuration with all ai > 0 as:  η=  s3 ln −φ 27  1/2 =  −  3 X i=1  ai ln s/3  !1/2 .  We remark that η is always well-defined when amin > 0, and that η ≥ 0. 20  (7)  A3  t3  t1 t0  δ~O(n -1/2)  t4  A1  t2  δ~s/12  t5 t7  t6  A2  Figure 6: Schematic illustration of order of phases in the proof of stabilization of protocol Po for X = 0. Overview of the proof. The proof for the case of X = 0 proceeds by following the trajectory of the discrete dynamics of Po , divided into a number of stages. We define a series of time steps t0 , t1 , . . . , t7 by conditions on the configuration met at time ti , and show that subject to these conditions holding, we have tj+1 ≤ tj + O(n log n) (we recall that here time is measured in steps), with at least constant probability. Overall, it follows that the configuration at time t7 , which corresponds to having reached a corner state, is reached from t0 , which is any initial configuration with X = 0, in O(n log n) time steps, with constant probability. The intermediate time steps may be schematically described as follows (see Fig. 6). For configurations which start close to the center of the triangle (δ ≤ s/12), we define a pair of potentials ψ (1) , ψ (2) , based on a linear combination of modified versions of η and κ. The dynamics will eventually escape from √ the area δ ≤ s/12; however, first it may potentially reach a very small area of radius O(1/ n) around the center of the triangle with κ ≈ 0 (Lemma 3, time t1 , reached in O(n log n) steps by a multiplicative drift analysis on potential ψ (2) < 0), pass through the vicinity of center of the triangle, escaping it with κ ≈ 0 (Lemma 4, time t2 , reached in O(n log n) steps with constant probability by a protocol-specific analysis of the scheduler noise, which with constant probability increases η without increasing κ too much), and eventually escapes completely to the area of δ > s/12 (Lemma 5, exponentially increasing value of potential ψ (1) > 0). In the area of δ > s/12, we define a new potential ψ based on φ and κ. This increases (Lemma 8, additive drift analysis on ψ with bounded variance) until a configuration at time t4 with a constant number of agents of some species Ai is reached. This configuration then evolves towards a configuration at time t5 at which some species has O(1) agents, and additionally its predator species is a constant part of the population (Lemma 9, direct analysis of the process combined with analysis of potential ψ and a geometric drift argument). Then, the species with O(1) agents is eliminated in O(n) steps with constant probability (t6 , Lemma 10), and finally one more species is eliminated in another O(n log n) steps (at time t7 , Lemma 11, straightforward analysis of the dynamics). At this point, the dynamics has reached a corner. Throughout the proof, we make sure to define boundary conditions on the analyzed cases to make sure that the process does not fall back to a previously considered case with probability 1 − o(1). ai Phase with δ ≤ s/12. We then have ai ∈ [3s/12, 5s/12] and s/3 ∈ [3/4, 5/4], for i = 1, 2, 3. In this range, we have:  2    2 1 ai ai ai 3 ai −1 < − 1 − ln < −1 . 3 s/3 s/3 s/3 4 s/3  21  Summing the above inequalities for i = 1, 2, 3 and noting that 3  1X 3 i=1    P3  ai i=1 ( s/3  − 1) = 0, we obtain:  2 2 3  ai 3 X ai 2 −1 <η < −1 . s/3 4 s/3 i=1  Next, we have: 2  2 X 3  3 X ai 3 3δ 2 −1 = (ai − s/3)2 = 2 . s/3 s s i=1  i=1  Combining the two above expressions gives the sought bound between η and δ as: δ 3δ <η< s 2s and equivalently δ ∈ ( 23 sη, sη). We have directly from (6) and from the relations between η and δ:   p 1 2 p 2 p ps p φ̇ ≥ δ − κδ = δ − κδ ≥ η − κ, η̇ = − 2η 2sη 2 4sη 2sη 9 2  (8)  and from (7):  s s κ̇ ≤ − κ + 18pδ ≤ − κ + 18ps η. (9) 2 2 Moving to the discrete-time model, it is advantageous to eliminate the discontinuity of partial derivatives of η and κ at points with η = 0 and κ = 0 respectively, which is a side-effect of the applied square root transformation in the respective definitions of η and κ. We define the auxiliary functions η ∗ and κ∗ by adding an appropriate corrective factor: r 1 η∗ = η2 + n r 1 κ∗ = κ2 + n  and derive accordingly from (8) and (9):   1 p η ps ps p 2ps η−√ − κ ≥ η ∗ − κ∗ − √ η̇ ∗ = ∗ η̇ ≥ η 9 2 9 2 n 9 n   κ s 1 s s ∗ κ̇ = ∗ κ̇ ≤ − κ− √ + 18ps η ≤ − κ∗ + 18ps η ∗ + √ . κ 2 2 n n  (10) (11)  Let u be the 5-dimensional vector representing the current configuration of the system: u := the last element a++ is determined as a++ = 3 3 folklore application of Taylor’s theorem.  + ++ + (1) (5) (a+ a++ 1 ,P 1 , a2 , a2 , a3 ) ≡ (u , . . . , u ); note that 5 (i) 5 s − i=1 u . The following lemma is obtained by a  Lemma 1. Let f : R5 → R be a C 2 function in a sufficiently large neighborhood of u, with min1≤i≤5 u(i) ≥ ˙  2/n. Then, |E∆f (u) − nf | ≤  2 n2  maxku∗ −uk∞ ≤1/n Df (u∗ ), where Df (u∗ ) := max1≤i,j≤5  ∂f 2 (u∗ ) ∂u(i) ∂u(j)  .  In principle it is also correct to represent u as a vector of dimension 6, i.e., including a++ in u as a free dimension. 3 2 However, such a representation would lead to second-order partial derivatives ∂u(i)∂∂u(j) η ∗ (u) which are too large for our purposes. 5  22  Proof. Let u0 be the random variable representing the configuration of the system after its next transition from configuration u. Observe that in every non-idle step of execution of the protocol, exactly one agent changes its state, so ku0 − uk∞ ≤ 1/n. Applying Taylor approximation we have: X X  E(∆f ) = E(f (u0 )|u) − f (u) = (f (u0 ) − f (u)) Pr(u0 |u) = ∇f (u) · (u0 − u) + R2 (u, u0 ) Pr(u0 |u) = u0  = ∇f (u) ·  u0  X f˙ 1 (u0 − u) Pr(u0 |u) + R2 (u) = ∇f (u) · (u̇(1) , . . . , u̇(5) )T + R2 (u) = + R2 (u), n n 0 u  (12) where ∇f (u) is the gradient of f at u, R2 (u, u0 ) ∈ R denotes the second-order Taylor remainder for function f expanded at point u along the vector towards point u0 , and R2 (u) ∈ R is subsequently an appropriately chosen value, satisfying: |R2 (u)| ≤  1 n2  max  ku∗ −uk∞ ≤1/n  Df (u∗ ).  The following lemma is obtained directly by computing and bounding all second order partial derivatives of functions η ∗ and κ∗ with respect to variables (u(1) , . . . , u(5) ). Lemma 2. There exists a constant c1 > 1 depending only on s, p, such that, for any configuration u with δ(u) ≤ s/12: √ • maxku∗ −uk∞ ≤1/n Dη∗ (u∗ ) < c1 n, √ • maxku∗ −uk∞ ≤1/n Dκ∗ (u∗ ) < c1 n. In view of the above lemmas, we obtain from (8) and (9), for an appropriately chosen constant c2 = 2c1 + s:    E∆η ∗ ≥ 1 ps η ∗ − p κ∗ − √c2 , when δ ≤ s/12, n  18 2 n  E∆κ∗ ≤ 1 − s κ∗ + 18ps η ∗ + √c2 , when δ ≤ s/12. n 3 n For j = 1, 2, we now define two linear combinations of functions η ∗ and κ∗ : ψ (j) = η ∗ −  3jp ∗ κ . s  When δ ≤ s/12, we have:     1 ps ∗ p ∗ c2 3jp c2 1 ps ∗ jp ∗ 2c2 (j) ∗ 2 ∗ √ E∆ψ ≥ η − κ − √ + jpκ − 54jp η − ≥ η + κ −√ ≥ n 18 2 s n 24 2 n n n     ps 3jp ∗ 48c2 ps c3 ≥ η∗ + κ − √ ≥ |ψ (j) | − √ , 24n s 24n ps n n 48c2 ps  s 72·54·2 . (j) We subsequently perform an analysis of ψt = ψ (j) (ut ), j = 1, 2, (2) (1) (1) (2) ∗ processes. We remark that ψt ≤ ψt , since ψt − ψt = 3p s κ ≥ 0.  where we denoted c3 :=  and used the fact that p <  treating them as stochastic  Lemma 3. Let ut0 be an arbitrary starting configuration of the system. Then, with constant probability, (1) (2) 2c3 for some t1 = t0 + O(n log n), a configuration ut1 is reached such that ψt1 ≥ ψt1 ≥ − √ . n 23  (2)  Proof. W.l.o.g. assume t0 = 0. We subsequently only analyze process ψt . Let t1 be the first time step (2) (2) (2) 2c3 . If t1 6= 0, then ψ0 < 0. Note that then ψt < 0 for all t ≤ t1 , from which it such that ψt1 > − √ n s follows by a straightforward calculation from the definition of ψ, κ, and η, that δt < 12 for all t ≤ t1 . ∗(2)  We now define the filtered stochastic process ψt for t ≥ t1 . For all t ≥ 0, we then have: ∗(2)  E(∆ψt ∗(2)  Since 0 ≤ ψt gives:  ∗(2)  |ψt  ∗(2)  as ψt  6= 0) ≤  ∗(2)  (2)  := |ψt | for t < t1 , and put ∆ψt  := 0  ps ∗(2) ψ . 48n t  < 9 for all time steps, a direct application of multiplicative drift analysis (cf. [19]) Et1 ≤  48n ps   √  9 n 1 + ln , 2c3  and the claim follows by Markov’s inequality. (j)  2c3 √ Lemma 4. Let ut1 be an arbitrary starting configuration of the system such that ψt1 ∈ [− √ , 4cn3 ], for n j = 1, 2. Then, with constant probability, for some t2 = t1 + O(n), a configuration ut2 is reached such (1) 4c3 that ψt2 ≥ √ . n (2)  Proof. W.l.o.g. assume that t1 = 0 and suppose that initially ψ0 Then, from the lower and upper bounds on  (1) ψ0  2c3 3p ∗ (1) (2) κ0 = ψ0 − ψ0 ≤ √ + s n 4c (1) (2) 3 η0∗ = 2ψ0 − ψ0 ≤ 2 √ + n  and  (2) ψ0  (1)  ≤ ψ0  <  4c3 √ n  (i.e., that t2 6= t1 ).  we obtain the following bounds on κ0 and δ0 :  4c √ 3 =⇒ κ0 ≤ n 2c3 √ =⇒ η0 ≤ n  2c3 s √ , p n 10c3 10c s √ =⇒ δ0 < √ 3 . n n  √ 3 s , s + 10c √ 3 s ] and a++ = It follows that, for i = 1, 2, 3, ai,0 ∈ [ 3s − 10c i,0 n 3 n  ai,0 s (ai,0 +κi,0 )  √ 3 )( s − ∈ [( 31 − 10c 3 n  √ 3 )( s + 10c √ 3 s + 2c√3 s )]. For the sake of clarity of notation, we will simply write + 10c 3 n n p n √ √ √ ai,0 = s/3 ± O(1/ n) and a++ = s/9 ± O(1/ n), hence also a+ i,0 i,0 = 2s/9 ± O(1/ n). We will consider now the sequence of exactly n transitions of the protocol, between time steps t = 0, 1, . . . , n. Pt−1 (2) c3 ps For all t we have E∆ψt ≥ − 24n 3/2 . Consider the Doob submartingale Yt = τ =0 Xt with increments (Xt ) given as: ( (2) c3 ps ∆ψt + 24n if Yt > − √c3n 3/2 , Xt = 0, otherwise, 10c √ 3s n  −  2c√3 s ), ( 13 p n  Noting that |Xt | ≤ n9 , an application of the Azuma inequality for submartingales to (Yn ) gives: Pr[Yn ≤ − √c3n ] ≤ exp [−c23 /162] (cf. e.g. [13][Thm. 16]). From here it follows directly that:  Pr  ψn(2)   c3 c3 ps (2) > − √ + ψ0 − n ≥ 1 − exp [−c23 /162] > 1/2. n 24n3/2  (2)  2c3 Noting that ψ0 ≥ − √ , we have: n   Pr  ψn(2)   2c3 ≥ −√ > 1/2. n  (13)  We now describe the execution of transitions in the protocol for times t = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1 through the following coupling. First, we select the sequence of pairs of agents chosen by the scheduler. Let V2+ 24  + (respectively, V1+ ) denote the subsets of the set of n agents, having initial states A+ 2 (resp., A1 ) at time 0, respectively, which are involved in exactly one transition in the considered time interval, acting in it as the initiator (resp., receiver). Let S ⊆ {0, 1, . . . , n − 1} denotes the subset of time steps at which the scheduler activates a transition involving an element of V2+ as the initiator and an element of V1+ as the receiver. The execution of the protocol is now given by:  • Phase PA : Selecting the sequence of pairs of elements activated by the scheduler in time steps (0, 1, . . . , n − 1). This also defines set S. Executing the rules of the protocol in their usual order for time steps from set {0, 1, . . . , n − 1} \ S. • Phase PB : Executing the rules of the protocol for time steps from set S. Observe that since elements of pairs activated in time steps from S are activated only once throughout the n steps of the protocol, the above probabilistic coupling does not affect the distribution of outcomes. Directly from (13), we obtain through a standard bound on conditional probabilities that at least a (2) 2c3 constant fraction of choices made in phase PA leads to an outcome “ψn ≥ − √ ” with at least constant n probability during phase PB :     2c3 (2) (14) Pr PA : Pr ψn ≥ − √ PA > 1/4 ≥ 1/3. n + We now remark on the size of set S. The distribution of |S| depends only on a+ 2,0 , a1,0 , and the choices √ made by the random scheduler. We recall that a+ 2,0 = 2s/9 ± O(1/ n). Since the expected number of isolated edges in a random multigraph on n nodes (representing the set of agents) and n edges (representing the set of time steps) is (1 ± o(1))e−4 n, the number of such edges having the first endpoint in an + 4e−4 s2 agent in state A+ 2 and the second endpoint in an agent in state A1 is (1 ± o(1)) 81 n. A straightforward concentration analysis (using, e.g., the asymptotic correspondence between G(n, m) and G(n, p) random graph models and an application of Azuma’s inequality for functions of independent random −4 2 variables) shows that the bound |S| = (1 ± o(1)) 4e 81 s n holds with very high probability. In particular, we have: Pr[|S| > c4 n] = 1 − eΩ(−n) , (15)  for some choice of constant c4 which depends only on s. Relations (14) and (15) provide all the necessary information about phase PA that we need. Subsequently, we will only analyse phase PB , conditioning on a fixed execution of phase PA such that the following event FA holds:   2c3 (2) Pr ψn ≥ − √ PA > 1/4 ∧ |S| > c4 n. (16) n We remark that, by a union bound over (14) and (15), Pr[FA ] ≥ 1/3 − eΩ(−n) > 1/4. In the remainder of our proof, our objective will be to show that:   4c3 Pr ψn(1) ≥ √ PA > c5 , n for some constant c5 > 0 depending only on s, p, for any choice of PA for which event FA holds. When this is shown, the claim of the lemma will follow directly, with a probability value given as at least c5 Pr[FA ] > c5 /4 by the law of total probability. We now proceed to analyze the random choices made during phase PB . Each of the considered |S| + interactions involves a pair of agents of the form (A+ 2 , A1 ), and describes the following transition: ( + (A+ + + 2 , A2 ), with probability p, (A2 , A1 ) → + (A+ 2 , A2 ), with probability 1 − p, 25  independently at random for each transition. The only state changes observed during this phase are from + A+ 1 to A2 , and we denote by B the number of such state changes. The value of random variable B completely describes the outcome of phase PB . We have EB = p|S|, and by a standard additive Chernoff bound:   √ (17) Pr |B − p|S|| ≤ 2 n PA ≥ 1 − 2e−4 > 7/8. √ √ Let B ⊆ [p|S| − 2 n,p|S| + 2 n] be the subset of the considered interval containing values of B such (1) 4c3 that ψn PA , B ∈ B ≥ √ . If Pr[B ∈ B|PA ] ≥ 1/8, then the claim follows directly. n √ √ Otherwise, it follows from (16) and (17) that there must exist a value b ∈ [p|S|−2 n, p|S|+2 n]\ B, such that:   2c3 ψn(2) PA , B = b ≥ − √ . n Given that:   4c 3 ψn(1) PA , B = b ≤ √ . n (2)  (1)  and recalling that ψn ≤ ψn , we obtain the following bound on ηn :    4c3 2c3 10c3 ηn∗ PA , B = b = 2ψn(1) − ψn(2) PA , B = b ≤ 2 √ + √ = √ . n n n  (18)  (2)  We now consider lower bounds on the value of ψn , conditioned on PA , B = b+ (respectively, √ 3 s , b + 21c √ 3s ] PA , B = b− ), where b+ (resp., b− ) is a value arbitrarily fixed in the range b+ ∈ [b + 20c n n (resp., b− ∈ [b −  21c √ 3s , b n  −  20c √ 3 s ]). n  The executions of the protocol with B = b+ and B = b− differ  + with respect to the execution with B = b in the number of executed transitions from a+ 1 to a2 by at least 20c √ 3 s . Recalling that δ2 = a2 − a1 , it follows that for some b0 ∈ {b+ , b− } we have after n steps: n    20c3 s δn PA , B = b0 ≥ |δ2,n | PA , B = b0 ≥ √ . n Subsequently, we will assume that b0 = b+ ; the case of b0 = b− is handled analogously. From the relation η > δ/s and (18) we have:  20c3  10c3 ηn∗ PA , B = b+ ≥ √ ≥ ηn∗ PA , B = b + √ . n n  (19)  When comparing the value of κ∗n in the two cases, B = b+ and B = b, it is convenient to consider √ κ∗ as the length of the vector (κ1 , κ2 , κ3 , 1/ n) in Euclidean space. For each of the coordinates κi , i = 1, 2, 3, we have:   40c3 κi,n PA , B = b+ − κi,n PA , B = b < √ , n hence:   120c3 κ∗n PA , B = b+ < κ∗n PA , B = b + √ . (20) n (1)  Introducing (19) and (20) into the definition of ψn , we obtain directly:     10c 3p 120c3 2c 10c3 3p 120c3 4c 3 √ ≥ −√3 + √ > √3 , − ψn(1) PA , B = b+ > ψn(1) PA , B = b + √ − s n s n n n n n where we again used the fact that p is a sufficiently small constant w.r.t. s. We thus obtain:   4c 3 √ 3 s , b + 21c √ 3s ] > √ , ψn(1) PA , B ∈ [b + 20c n n n 26  where by the definition of random variable B as a sum of i.i.d. binary random variables and the choice √ 3 s , b + 21c √ 3 s ] holds with of value b in the direct vicinity of the expectation of B, the event B ∈ [b + 20c n n constant probability. The case of b0 = b− is handled analogously. (1)  (2)  Lemma 5. Let ut2 be an arbitrary starting configuration of the system such that max{ψt2 , ψt2 } = (1)  4c3 ψt2 ≥ √ . Then, with constant probability, for some t3 = t2 + O(n log n), a configuration ut3 is n reached such that δt3 > s/12. (1)  Proof. We subsequently consider only the process ψt . We start by showing the following claim. (1) 4c3 Claim. Suppose ψ0 = A ≥ √ . Then, with probability at least 1 − exp [−A2 psn/46656], for n some time step t ≤  72n ps  (1)  ≥ 2A, or δt > s/12. P Proof (of claim). Consider the Doob submartingale Yt = t−1 τ =0 Xt with increments (Xt ) given as: ( (1) A ∆ψt − psA 48n , if Yt > 2 or δt > s/12, Xt = 0, otherwise. the process reaches a value ψt  Noting that |Xt | ≤ n9 , an application of the Azuma inequality for submartingales (cf. e.g. [13][Thm. 16]) to (YT ) with T = 72n ps gives: A Pr[YT ≤ − ] ≤ exp [−A2 psn/46656], 2 Moreover, assuming the barrier δt > s/12 was not reached, we have:   A psA psA 72n A (1) (1) ψT YT > − = ψ0 + T + YT > A + − = 2A, 2 48n 48n ps 2 which completes the proof of the claim. We now prove the lemma by iteratively applying the claim over successive intervals of time (τ0 , τ1 , . . .), (1) (1) such that τ0 = t2 and τi+1 is the first time step not before τi such that ψτi+1 ≥ 2ψτi or δτi+1 ≥ s/12. By the claim, we have:   72n Pr τi+1 − τi ≤ ≥ 1 − exp [−(ψτ(1) )2 psn/46656]. i ps Noting that c3 > 48/(ps) by definition, and that before the barrier δ > s/12 is reached, we have (1) 4c3 i √ 2i , we obtain: ψτi ≥ √ 2 ≥ ps192 n n   72n Pr τi+1 − τi ≤ > 1 − exp [−4i+1 ]. ps and further:  Pr τi+1   Y i i X  72n ≤ (i + 1) > 1 − exp [−4j+1 ] > 1 − exp [−4j+1 ] > 0.98. ps j=0  h In particular, putting i = log2 n, Pr τi ≤ δτi ≥ s/12 (since otherwise we would follows.  j=0  i  72n log2 n > 0.98. Since for this value of i, we must have ps (1) have ψτi = ω(1), which is impossible), the claim of the lemma  27  Phase with δ > s/12. The second phase of convergence corresponds to configurations of the system which are sufficiently far from the center point (a1 , a2 , a3 ) = (s/3, s/3, s/3). Formally, we analyze a variant of potential φ (with an additive corrective factor proportional to κ2 ) to show that, starting from a configuration with δ > s/12, we will eliminate one of the three populations a1 , a2 , a3 in O(n log n) sequential steps with constant probability, without approaching the center point too closely (a value of δ = Ω(1) will be maintained throughout). For this part of the analysis, we define the considered potential as: ψ = η2 −  4p 2 s3 4p κ = ln − φ − 2 κ2 , 2 s 27 s  (21)  for any configuration u with amin > 0. We have directly from (6) and (7):   4p p 1 2 p 2 ψ̇ = −φ̇ − 2 2κκ̇ ≥ δ − κδ + 4κ − 144 κδ = s s 2 s   2    δ 1p 2 p 1 2 p δ + − 2κ + 1 − 144 κδ ≥ δ , = s 4 2 s 4s  (22)  where in the last transformation we took into account that p ≤ s/144. For the sake of technical precision in formulating the subsequent lemmas, we also consider the stochastic process ψt∗ , given as ψt∗ = ψ(ut ) for any t < td , where td is defined as the first time in the evolution of the system such that a configuration with amin,td < c6 /n is reached, where c6 = 313600/s ∗ is a constant depending only on s. For all t ≥ td , we define ψt∗ := ψt−1 + n1 . Lemma 6. In any configuration ut with δ ≥ s/20 we have: E∆ψt∗ ≥  1 pδ 2 8 sn  >  ps 3600n .  Proof. We have: 4p E∆(κ2 ) s2 Following the definition of φ in Eq. (2), we have by linearity of expectation:   X  X X ∆ai E∆φ = E ln(ai + ∆ai ) − ln ai = E ln 1 + . ai E∆ψ = −E∆φ −  (23)  Next, using the bound ln(1 + b) ≤ b which holds for b > −1, we have: X  E ln(1 +  X E∆ai X ȧi /n ∆ai )≤ = = φ̇/n ai ai ai  from which it follows that:  1 φ̇ (24) n To analyze E∆(κ2 ), we apply a variant of Lemma 1. A direct application of the lemma is not sufficient due to the singularity related to the a−1 i term in the definition of κi ; however, this effect is compensated when we take into account that any change of the value of κ2i occurs in the considered protocol with probability at most proportional to ai . For the specific case of κ2i , for fixed i = 1, 2, 3, we consider ++ κ2i : R2 → R as a function of the restricted configuration ū = (a+ i , ai ), and we rewrite expression (12) as: X  E(∆κ2i ) = ∇f (u) · (u0 − u) + R2 (u, u0 ) Pr(u0 |u) ≤ E∆φ ≤  0  0  ++ u0 =(a+ )6=u i ,ai  ≤  κ˙2i 1 + 2 n n  max  ku∗ −uk∞ ≤1/n  Dκ2 (u∗ )  X  Pr(u0 |u) ≤  i  0  0  ++ u0 =(a+ )6=u i ,ai  28  κ˙2i 1 + 2 n n  max  ku∗ −uk∞ ≤1/n  Dκ2 (u∗ )ai . i  A straightforward computation from the definition of function κi shows that: max  ku∗ −uk∞ ≤1/n  It follows that E(∆κ2i )  Dκ2 (u∗ ) ≤ i  8s2 . a2i    κ˙2i ai 8s2 1 ˙2 8s2 ≤ κi + , + 2 2 = n n ai n ai n  and so: E(∆κ2 ) ≤  1 n    24s2 κ˙2 + amin n   .  (25)  Introducing (24) and (25) into (23), we obtain: 4p 1 1 4p E∆ψ = −E∆φ − 2 E∆(κ2 ) ≥ − φ̇ − s n n s2   392s p 2 p 2 δ − ≥ ≥ δ , 4sn amin n 8sn    1 24s2 96p = ψ̇ − 2 ≥ κ˙2 + amin n n n amin  where in the second-to-last transformation we used (22), and in the last transformation we used the 2 relation a392s ≤ δ2 which holds when δ ≥ s/20 and amin ≥ c6 /n. min n ∗ The claim thus follows when ψt∗ = ψt and ψt+1 = ψt+1 , i.e., for t < td . For larger values of t, the ∗ claim follows trivially from the definition of ψt . The above Lemma is used to show that, starting from any configuration with δ > s/12, we quickly reach a configuration in which some species has a constant number of agents. Lemma 7. If δt ≥ s/20, we have: (i) |∆ψt∗ | ≤ c7 , (ii) Var(∆ψt∗ ) ≤  c8 n.  where c7 > 0 and c8 > 0 are constants depending only on s. Moreover, in any configuration u with amin ≥ 2/n, we have: (iii) |∆ψ(u)| ≤  c7 namin .  (iv) Var(∆ψ(u)) ≤  c8 . n2 amin  Proof. We first consider the case of a configuration with amin ≥ 2/n. Using the definition of ψ (and within it, of φ and κ). Consider any transition from a configuration u to a subsequent configuration u0 and let S ⊆ {1, 2, 3} be defined as the set of indices of configurations changing between u and u0 + 0 ++ ++ 0 (S = {i : a+ i (u) 6= ai (u ) ∨ ai (u) 6= ai (u )}). We verify that there exists an absolute constant c7 > 0 such that: c7 |ψ(u0 ) − ψ(u)| ≤ ≤ c7 . n mini∈S ai Moreover, by the definition of the protocol a transition from u to u0 occurs with probability Pr(u0 |u) ≤ mini∈S ai . Since there is only a constant number of possible successor configurations ut+1 for ut (loosely bounding, not more than 36 ), it follows that:   ( 36 c7 b < n , for any b > 0 1 Pr |∆ψ(u)| > 7 b = 0, for b > nacmin . 29  The bounds on the variance of Var(∆ψ(u)) and that of ∆ψt∗ = ∆ψ(u) (for t < td ) with amin,t ≥ (c + 6 + 1)/n follow directly. The analysis of ∆ψt∗ when amin,t = c6 /n and t < td is performed analogously, noting that if the succeeding configuration u0 = ut+1 is such that amin (u0 ) < c6 /n, then ∆ψt∗ = n1 . Finally, for t ≥ td , the result holds trivially by the definition of ψt∗ . Lemma 8. Let ut3 be an arbitrary starting configuration of the system such that δt3 > s/12. Then, with probability 1 − O(1/n), for some t4 = t3 + O(n log n), a configuration ut4 is reached such that amin,t4 = c6 . Proof. W.l.o.g. assume that t3 = 0. First we remark that, by the relation between η and δ for δ ≤ s/12, a process starting with δ0 > s/12 satisfies: ψ0 = ψ0 = η02 −  4p 2 (s/12)2 12p 1 κ > − 2 > . s2 0 s2 s 150  Moreover, for any configuration u0 with δ(u0 ) ≤ s/20 we have: ψ(u0 ) = η 2 (u0 ) −  s 2 ) 4p 2 ( 32 20 1 κ ≤ < . 2 2 s s 170  1 1 and as long as for all time steps t we have ψt ≥ 170 , the barrier condition Thus, initially ψ0 > 150 1 1 δt ≥ s/20 has not been violated. Moreover, for ψt ∈ [ 170 , 150 ], we have by Lemma 6 that E∆ψt ≥ 0. 1 Moreover, by Lemma 7 (iii) and the fact that δt < 144 which implies amin,t > s/4, we have that 4c7 |∆ψt | ≤ sn . It follows from a standard application of Azuma’s inequality for martingales (resembling the analysis of the hitting time of the random walk with step size O(1/n), from one endpoint of a path of length Θ(1) to the other) that:   1 Pr ∃t<n2 / ln n ψt < = O(1/n), 170  hence also throughout the first n2 / ln n steps of the process we have δ > s/18, with probability 1 − O(1/n). We Pare now ready to analyze the subsequent stages of the process, designing a Doob submartingale Yt = t−1 τ =0 Xt with time increments (Xt ) defined as: ( ps ∆ψt∗ − 3600 , if ψτ > 1/170 and amin,τ ≥ c6 for all τ ≤ t Xt = 0, otherwise. Using Lemma 7 (i) and (ii) and applying the Azuma-McDiarmid inequality6 in the bounded variance version (cf. e.g. [13][Thm. 18]) to Yt for tc = c3 n ln n, for some sufficiently large constant c > 0 depending only on s, we obtain: # " " # 4 ln2 n c c ln n = exp − = 1 − O(1/n). Pr[Yt ≤ −c2 ln n] ≤ exp − c 2 2c8 + 23 cc7 2t n8 + 2c7 c3 ln n ps If the event Xt = ∆ψt∗ − 3600 were to hold for all t < tc with c = 2·3600 and if Ytc > −c2 ln n, then ps ps we would have ψt∗c = ψ0∗ + Ytc + 3600 tc ≥ 0 − c2 ln n + 3c2 ln n = 2c2 ln n, which would mean that ψt∗c 6= ψtc , since ψ ≤ 3 ln n + O(1) by definition. If ψt∗c 6= ψtc , then t4 < tc , and the proof is complete. 6  If our objective in the proof of the lemma were to show a bound on t4 which holds with constant probability (which would be sufficient for our purposes later on), rather than a w.h.p. bound, then this specific step of the proof can also be performed using Markov’s inequality. In any case, we would need to make use of the bounded variance of ψt∗ in the proof of the next Lemma.  30  (Indeed, to reach a configuration with amin < c6 /n, the protocol has to pass through a configuration with amin = c6 /n, since the size of each population changes by at most 1 in each transition.) Otherwise, we must have that at least one of the following events holds: Ytc ≤ −c2 ln n, or ψτ ≤ 1/170 for some τ < tc , or amin,τ < c6 for some τ < tc . We have established that each of the first two of these events holds with probability O(1/n), whereas if the latter event holds, then t4 < tc . Thus, t4 < tc holds with probability 1 − O(1/n) by a union bound. Lemma 9. Let ut4 be a starting configuration of the system such that amin,t4 = c6 /n. Then, with constant probability, for some t5 = t4 +O(n log n), a configuration ut5 is reached such that aj,t5 ≤ c6 /n and aj+1,t5 > s/40, for some j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Proof. W.l.o.g. assume that arg mini=1,2,3 ai,t4 = 2. If a3,t4 > s/40, then the claim follows immediately, putting t5 = t4 and j = 2. Otherwise, we will show that with constant probability, the system will evolve so that a2 will increase over time until within O(n log n) steps we will have a time step t5 with j = 3 (i.e., a3,t5 ≤ c6 /n and a1,t5 > s/40). In the considered case, w.l.o.g. assume t4 = 0. Next, let T = cn ln n for a sufficiently large constant 1 c; we choose as c := 2 log2 0.005ps for convenience in later analysis. Intuitively, in view of Lemmas 6 ∗ and 7, the potential ψT will be further increased in the next steps: the randompvariable (ψT∗√− ψ0∗ |u0 ) has an expected value of Θ(T /n) = Θ(log n), with a standard deviation of Θ( T /n) = Θ( log n). By an application of the Azuma-McDiarmid inequality for martingales with bounded variance similar to that in the proof of Lemma 8, we obtain the following result:7   pst T ∗ ∗ Pr ∀t≤T ψt ≥ ψ0 + −ε = 1 − n−Ω(1) , for any constant ε > 0. (26) 3600n n Observe that since a2,0 = c6 /n = O(1/n), we have ψ0∗ ≥ ln n − O(1). Taking this into account, for our purposes, a slightly weaker and simpler form of expression (26) will be more convenient:   Pr ∀t∈[0.5n log2 n,T ] ψt∗ ≥ (1 + 10−4 ps) ln n = 1 − o(1). (27) The proof of the lemma is completed by a more fine-grained analysis of the considered protocol. In the initial configuration t4 = 0, we have a2,0 = c6 /n (there are exactly c6 agents in state A2 ), and since t4 6= t5 , we have a3,0 < s/40. Consequently, a1,0 = s − s/40 − O(1/n) > 0.9s. Informally, since the prey of A2 (i.e., A1 ) is more than twice more numerous than its predator (i.e., A3 ), we should ++ observe the increase in the size of population of A2 , regardless of the activities (A+ i or Ai ) of the agents in the population. We consider the evolution of the system, finishing at the earliest time te when a2 (te ) > s/100. The following relations are readily shown (apply e.g. Lemma 14 with i = 2 and u = 0): 0.05ps a2 n 0.05ps < 0.05s, t < te ) ≤ − a3 . n  E(∆a2,t |a3,t < 0.05s, t < te ) ≥  (28)  E(∆a3,t |a3,t  (29)  From (29), taking into account that |∆ai,t | ≤ for martingales shows that:  1 n  and a3,0 < s/40, an application of Azuma’s inequality  Pr[∀t≤min{te ,T } a3,t < 0.05s] = 1 − o(1).  (30)  Taking into account the above, by a straightforward geometric growth analysis (compare e.g. proof of Lemma 5), we obtain from (28): Pr[te < T ] = 1 − o(1). (31) 7  Such an analysis can also be performed using Chebyshev’s inequality, obtaining a slightly weaker expression in the probability bound.  31  Moreover, since the speed of increase of a2 is bounded (even in the absence of predators) by that of a standard push rumor spreading process (formally, E(∆a2,t ) ≤ a2,t ), we have (compare e.g. [20]): Pr[te > 0.5n log2 n] = 1 − o(1).  (32)  Now, we observe that with constant probability, the size of population A2 does not decrease in the time interval [0, te ] below the value a2,0 = c6 /n, attained at the beginning of this interval:   Pr ∀t∈[0,te ] a2,t ≥ c6 /n = Ω(1). (33) Indeed, with constant probability the value a2,t is initially non-decreasing: with constant probability, in the first O(n) rounds each of the c6 = O(1) agents from A2 will be triggered by the scheduler O(1) times in total, and each interaction involving an agent from A2 will have this agent as the initiator, and an agent from the largest of the three populations, A1 , as the receiver (the prey). Thus, with constant probability, the number of agents in population A2 is increased to an arbitrary large constant (e.g., 1000c6 ). After this, we use the geometric growth property (28) to show that a2,t reaches the barrier a2,t > s/100 (at time te ) before the event a2,t < c6 /n occurs (cf. e.g. proof of Lemma 5, or standard analysis of variants of rumor-spreading processes in their initial phase [29]). When the event from bound (33) holds, at least one of the following events must also hold: (A) amin,t ≥ c6 /n, for all t ≤ te , (B) or there exists a time step t < te such that a1,t ≤ c6 /n, (C) or there exists a time step t < te such that a3,t ≤ c6 /n. To complete the proof, we will show that each of the events (A) and (B) holds with probability o(1). Indeed, then in view of (33), event (C) will necessarily hold with probability Ω(1). This means that, with probability Ω(1), there exists a time step t < te such that a3,t < c6 /n and a2,t < s/100 (since t < te ), and so also a1,t > s − s/100 − c6 /n > 0.98s > s/40; thus, the claim of the lemma will hold with t5 = t and j = 3. To show that event (B) holds with probability o(1), notice that a2,t < s/100 by definition of te , and moreover a3,t < 0.05s with probability 1 − o(1), hence the event a1,t < s − s/100 − 0.05s = 0.94s holds with probability o(1). To show that event (A) holds with probability o(1), notice that, substituting in (27) t = te , by a union bound over (27), (31) and (32) we obtain:   Pr ψt∗e ≥ (1 + 10−4 ps) ln n = 1 − o(1). This means that, with probability 1 − o(1), we have ψt∗e 6= ψte or ψte ≥ (1 + 10−4 ps) ln n. In the first case, event (A) cannot hold. In the second case, observe that a2,te = s/100 + O(1/n) by definition of P 1 te , so a1,te > s − s/100 − O(1/n) − c6 /n > 0.98s, and it follows that ψte = 3i=1 ln ai,t + O(1) = e −4 ln n + O(1). Since the condition ψte ≥ (1 + 10 ps) ln n is not fulfilled, event (A) can only hold with probability o(1). Lemma 10. Let ut5 be a starting configuration of the system such that aj,t5 ≤ c6 /n and aj+1,t5 > s/40, for some j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Then, with constant probability, for some t6 = t5 + O(n), a configuration ut6 is reached such that amin,t6 = 0. Proof. We consider the pairs of interacting agents chosen by the scheduler in precisely the next n rounds after time t5 . Given that set Aj,t5 has constant size, and set Aj+1,t5 has linear size in n, it is straightforward to verify that with constant probability, the set of randomly chosen n pairs of agents has all of the following properties: 32  • Each agent from Aj,t5 belongs to exactly one pair picked by the scheduler, and is the receiver in this pair. • Each agent interacting in a pair with an agent from Aj,t5 belongs to exactly one pair. • Each agent interacting in a pair with an agent from Aj,t5 belongs to set Aj+1,t5 . Conditioned on such a choice of interacting pairs by the scheduler, the protocol changes the state of all agents from set Aj,t5 to state j + 1 with probability at least p|Aj,t5 | ≥ pc6 = Ω(1). State j is then effectively eliminated. In the absence of species j, the interaction between species j − 1 and j + 1 collapses to a lazy predator-prey process, with transitions of the form (Aj−1 , Aj+1 ) → (Aj−1 , Aj−1 ) associated with a constant transition probability. A w.h.p. bound on the time of elimination of species j + 1 follows immediately from the analysis of the push rumor spreading model, and we have the following Lemma. Lemma 11. Let ut6 be a starting configuration of the system such that aj,t6 = 0, for some j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Then, with probability 1 − O(1/n), for some t7 = t6 + O(n log n), a configuration ut7 is reached such that for all t ≥ t7 , aj,t = aj+1,t = 0 and aj−1,t = s. After a further O(n log n) steps after time t7 , the final configuration of all agents in the oscillator’s population will be a++ j−1,t = s.  6.5  Operation of the Oscillator in the Presence of a Source  In this section we prove properties of the oscillatory dynamics for the case #X > 0. It is possible to provide a detailed analysis of the limit trajectories of the dynamics in this case, as a function of the concentration of x. Here, for the sake of compactness we only show the minimal number of properties of the oscillator required for the proof of Theorem 1. When the given configuration is such that amin is sufficiently large, say amin > 0.02s, then both the subclaims of Theorem 1(2) hold for the considered configuration. (The first subclaim hold directly; the second subclaim follows by a straightforward concentration analysis of the number of agents changing state in protocol Po over the next 0.01sn steps, since we will always have amin ≥ 0.01s during the considered time interval.) Otherwise, the considered configuration is close to one of the sides of the triangle. We will show that in the next O(n log n) steps, with high probability, the protocol will either reach a configuration with amin > 0.02s, or will visit successive areas around the triangle, as illustrated in Fig. 7. The following Lemmas show that within each area, an exponential growth process occurs, which propagates the agent towards the next area. Lemma 12. If ai−1 < 0.8s and ai+1 < 0.05s, then ȧi−1 ≤ xs/3 − 0.05psai−1 . Proof. From the assumptions we have that ai > 0.15s. Starting from (3) we obtain: ++ ȧi−1 = x(s/3 − ai−1 ) + pai+1 (ai−1 + a++ i−1 ) − pai−1 (ai + ai )  ≤ xs/3 + 2pai−1 ai+1 − pai−1 ai ≤ xs/3 + pai−1 (2ai+1 − ai ) ≤ xs/3 + pai−1 (0.1s − 0.15s) = xs/3 − 0.05psai−1  33  A3 a2 = 0.05s a3 = 0.8s  ta  a1 = 0.25s  A1  tb  A2  ta0  Figure 7: Configurations considered in Lemmas 12 and 13 (descending dashed slope) and Lemmas 14 and 15 (ascending dashed slope) for i = 1 (dark red) and i = 2 (green). Unless the process leaves the shaded area towards the center o the triangle, the shape of the time trajectory is counter-clockwise around the triangle, w.h.p. From the above bound on expectation, the following Lemma follows directly by a standard concentration analysis. In what follows, we consider an execution in which the concentration x is strictly positive and bounded by a sufficiently small absolute constant (i.e., #X is at most a given constant fraction of the entire population), with the required upper bounds on x used in the proofs of lemmas given in their statements. This is a technical assumption, which allows us to simplify the proof structure. In particular, the assumption #X ≤ c12 n can be omitted in the statement of Theorem 1, and the claim of the theorem can even be proved for executions in which #X changes during the execution of the protocol, as long as the invariant #X > 0 is preserved over the considered interval of time. Lemma 13. Let uta be a starting configuration of the system such that ai−1,ta < 0.75s and ai+1,ta < 0.05s. Suppose x < 10−3 ps, starting from time ta . Then, for some tb ∈ [ta , ta + c9 n], where c9 is a Ω(1) constant depending only on p and s, with probability 1 − e−n ) , the system reaches a configuration utb such that exactly one of the following two conditions is fulfilled: • either amin,tb ≥ 0.02s, • or ai+1,tb < 0.05s and ai−1,tb < 0.02s. Proof. In the considered range of values of ai−1 , we have ai−1,ta < 0.75s and ai−1,t ≥ 0.02s, for all t until we leave the considered area at time tb . Taking into account that x < 10−3 ps, it follows from Lemma 12 that: E∆ai−1 ≤  1 1 ps2 (xs/3 − 0.05psai−1 ) ≤ (x < 10−3 ps2 /3 − 10−3 ps2 ) < −0.0005 . n n n  Taking into account that |∆ai−1 ≤ n1 |, it follows from a straightforward concentration analysis (cf. e.g. proof of Lemma 5 for a typical analysis of this type of exponential growth process) that a boundary of the considered area (either ai−1,t < 0.02s or amin,t > 0.02s) must be reached within O(n) steps with very high probability, as stated in the claim of the lemma. A similar analysis is performed for the next area. Lemma 14. If ai+1 < 0.25s and ai−1 < 0.05s then ȧi+1 ≥ xs/12 + 0.6psai+1 and ȧi−1 ≤ xs/3 − 0.2psai−1 .  34  Proof. From assumptions we have that ai > 0.7s. Starting from (3) we obtain: ++ ȧi+1 = x(s/3 − ai+1 ) + pai (ai+1 + a++ i+1 ) − pai+1 (ai−1 + ai−1 )  ≥ x(s/3 − ai+1 ) + pai+1 (ai − 2ai−1 ) ≥ x(s/3 − 0.25s) + pai+1 (0.7s − 2 · 0.05s) = xs/12 + 0.6psai+1 ++ ȧi−1 = x(s/3 − ai−1 ) + pai+1 (ai−1 + a++ i−1 ) − pai−1 (ai+1 + ai+1 )  ≤ xs/3 + pai−1 (2ai+1 − ai ) ≤ xs/3 + pai−1 (2 · 0.25s − 0.7s) = xs/3 − 0.2psai−1 .  Again, a concentration result follows directly. Lemma 15. Let utb be a starting configuration of the system such that ai−1,tb < 0.02s and ai+1,tb < 1 0.02s. Suppose x < 0.02ps, starting from time tb . Then, for some ta0 ∈ [tb , tb +c10 n ln max{1/n,a ]⊆ i+1,t } b  [tb , tb + c10 n ln n], where c10 is a constant depending only on p and s, with probability 1 − O(1/n3 ), the system reaches a configuration uta0 such that exactly one of the following two conditions is fulfilled: • either amin,ta0 ≥ 0.02s, • or ai−1,ta0 < 0.05s, ai+1,ta0 > 0.25s, and (consequently) ai,ta0 < 0.75s. Proof. We first show that, starting from time tb onward, the process ai−1,t satisfies ai−1,t < 0.05s for Ω(1) all t ∈ [tb , t∗ ] with probability 1 − e−n , where t∗ is defined as the minimum of time ta + c10 n ln n and the last time moment such that ai+1,t ≤ 0.25s holds for all t ∈ [tb , t∗ ]. By Lemma 14, we have for all t ∈ [tb , t∗ ] such that ai−1,t > 0.01s: E∆ai−1 =  1 1 1 0.01ps2 ȧi−1 ≤ (xs/3 − 0.2psai−1 ) < (0.02ps2 /3 − 0.02ps2 ) < − , n n n n  where we took into account the assumption x < 0.02ps. The claim on ai−1,t < 0.05s follows from a standard concentration analysis, noting that |∆ai−1,t | ≤ n1 . In order to analyze the process ai+1,t , we apply a filter and consider the process a0i+1,t , starting at time tb , defined as follows. For as long as ai−1,t < 0.05s, we put a0i+1,t := ai+1,t , and starting from the first time t∗∗ when ai−1,t > 0.05s, we compute a0i+1,t+1 as the subsequent value of ai+1 after a simulation of a single step of the process for some state u with concentrations of types: x(u) = x, ai+1 (u) = a0i+1,t , ai−1 (u) = 0.05s, and ai (u) = s − ai−1 (u) − ai+1 (u). For a given time step t, let Rt denote the event that ∆a0i+1,t 6= 0. By the construction of protocol Po , which always requires at least one agent of type X or type Ai+1 to be involved in an interaction which creates or destroys an agent of type Ai+1 , we have: Pr[Rt ] ≤ x + 2a0i+1,t . Moreover, from Lemma 14 it follows that for a0i+1,t < 0.25s: E∆a0i+1,t  ȧ0i+1,t 1 = ≥ (xs/12 + 0.6psa0i+1,t ). n n  35  Since ∆a0i+1,t |¬Rt = 0, we have: E∆a0i+1,t |Rt ≥  + 0.6psa0i+1,t ) ≥ Pr[Rt ]  1 n (xs/12  + 0.6psa0i+1,t ) 0.3ps ≥ , 0 x + 2ai+1,t n  1 n (xs/12  and moreover ∆a0i+1,t |Rt ∈ {− n1 , 0, n1 }. Analysis of this type of process is folklore (in the context of epidemic models with infection and recovery) but somewhat tedious; we sketch the argument for the sake of completeness. When considering only those steps for which event Rt holds, the considered process can be dominated by a lazy random walk on the line {0, n1 , 2,n , . . .}, with a constant bias towards its right endpoint. To facilitate analysis, we define points Qc = cbα ln ncn, for c = 0, 1, . . ., where constant α > 0 is subsequently suitably chosen, and for any point Qc to the right of the starting point of the walk (i.e, c > cmin where cmin is the smallest integer such that Qcmin +1 > ai+1,tb ) define sc as the number of steps of the walk until its first visit to sc . For a suitable choice of constants α and β > 0 sufficiently large, we have that for any c, with probability at least 1 − O(1/n2 ), sc+1 − sc ≤ β ln n, and moreover between its step sc and its step sc+1 , the walk is confined to the subpath (Qc−1 , Qc+1 ) of the considered path. Considering the original time t of our process a0i+1,t (including moments with ¬Rt ), let tc be the moment of time corresponding to the sc -th step of the walk. Conditioning on events which hold with probability 1 − O(1/n2 ), the value tc+1 − tc can be stochastically dominated by the sum of β ln n independent n geometrically distributed random variables, each with expected value O( max{1,(c−1) ln n} ). Let cmax be the largest positive integer such that Qcmax < 0.25s. Applying a union bound on the conditioning of all intervals tc+1 − tc , for c ≥ cmin and a concentration bound on the considered geometric random variables, we eventually obtain that with probability 1 − O(1/n3 ) the condition a0i+1,t is achieved for time: ! cX cX max max n t< (tc+1 − tc ) = O n + ln n = max{1, (c − 1) ln n} c=cmin c=cmin   1 O (n(ln n − ln max{1, ai+1,tb n} + 1)) = O n ln . max{1/n, ai+1,tb } Recalling that a0i+1,t = ai+1,t holds throughout the considered time interval with very high probability, the claim follows. An iterated application of Lemmas 13 and Lemmas 15 moves the process along time moments ta , tb , where time moment t0a is again be fed to Lemma 13, considering the succeeding value of i. After a threefold application of both Lemmas, the process has w.h.p. in O(n log n) steps either performed a complete rotation, passing through three moments of time designated as “ta ”, rotated by one third of a full circle, or has reached at some time t0 a point with amin,t0 ≥ 0.02s. In either case, the claim of Theorem 1(2) follows directly. t0a , . . .,  7 7.1  Analysis of Protocol for D ETECT Further Properties of the Oscillator  We start by stating a slight generalization of Lemma 6, capturing the expected change of potential ψt∗ (given by (21)) for the case #X > 0, for configurations which are sufficiently far from both the center and the sides of the triangle. Lemma 16. In any configuration ut with 10−6 s2 ≤ amin ≤ 0.02s and x < c12 we have: E∆ψt ≥ where c12 > 0 is an absolute constant which depends only on s and p.  36  ps 7200n ,  Proof. We can condition the expectation of E∆ψt on the event Et , which holds if an agent in state X participates in the current interaction. Conditioned on ¬Et , the analysis corresponds directly to the computations performed for the case x = 0, where we remark that the assumptions of Lemma 6 are satisfied due to the assumed upper bound on amin . Thus: ps E∆ψt |¬Et > . 3600n Next, taking into account the lower bound on amin , by exactly the same argument as in Lemma 7(iii), we have |∆ψt | < c012 /n, for some choice of constant c012 > 0 which depends only on s and p. Obviously, E∆ψt |Et > −c012 /n, and since Pr[Et ] < 2x, by the law of total expectation: E∆ψt > (1 − 2x)  ps c0 ps − 2x 12 > , 3600n n 7200n  where the last inequality holds for any x < c12 , where c12 :=  1 . 2(2c012 +1)  Lemma 17. Suppose amin,t0 < 10−6 s4 at some time t0 . Then, there exists an absolute constant c13 > 0, Ω(1) c such that the following event holds with probability 1 − e−n ) : for all t ∈ [t0 , t0 + en 13 ], we have amin,t < 0.01s2 . 3  s Proof. Let ψ̂t ≡ ln 27 − ψt . Consider any t ≥ t0 such that amin,t < 10−6 s4 . Then, φt < ln amin,t < −6 4 ln(10 s ) and consequently:  ψ̂t = φt +  4p 4p 2 κ ≤ ln(10−6 s4 ) + 4 ≤ ln(2 · 10−6 s4 ), s4 t s  where we recall that κ2t ≤ 1 and the last inequality follows for p chosen to be sufficiently small (4p/s4 < ln 2). Further, note that if for some time t we have ψ̂t < ln(8 · 10−6 s4 ), then: φt = ψ̂t −  4p 2 κ < ln(8 · 10−6 s4 ), s4 t  thus a1,t a2,t a3,t < 8 · 10−6 s4 , from which it follows that a2min,t < 16 · 10−6 s4 , and so amin,t < 0.01s2 . Thus, for ψ̂t < ln(8 · 10−6 s4 ), at least one of the following holds: • Either ψ̂t < ln(2 · 10−6 s4 ), • Or ψ̂t ≥ ln(2 · 10−6 s4 ), thus amin,t ≥ 10−6 s4 . Then, taking into account that amin,t < 0.01s2 , ps we have by Lemma 16: E∆ψ̂t < − 7200n . Taking into account the known properties of function ψt (Lemma 7), we have that starting from ψ̂t0 < c ln(2 · 10−6 s4 ), it takes time exponential in a polynomial of n (eΩ(n 13 ) , for some absolute constant c13 > 0) to break the potential barrier for ψ̂, i.e., to reach the first moment of time t1 such that ψ̂t1 ≥ Ω(1) ln(8 · 10−6 s4 ), with probability 1 − e−n ) , for some absolute constant c14 > 0. To complete the proof, recall that for any t < t1 , we have ψ̂t < ln(8 · 10−6 s4 ), and so as previously established, amin,t < 0.01s2 . For any execution of the oscillator protocol Po , we can now divide the axis of time into maximal time intervals of two types, which we call oscillatory and central. A central time interval continues for as long as the condition amin,t ≥ 10−6 s4 is fulfilled, and turns into an oscillatory interval as soon as this condition no longer holds. An oscillatory time interval continues for as long as the condition amin,t < 0.01s2 is fulfilled, and turns into an oscillatory interval as soon as this condition no longer holds. Lemma 17 implies that an oscillatory interval is of exponential length w.v.h.p. 37  Lemma 18. Suppose 0 < x < c12 . Let t0 be an arbitrary moment of time such that amin,t0 > 0. 1 Let T = Cn ln amin,t , for an arbitrarily fixed constant positive integer C = O(1). With probability 0  Ω(1)  1 − e−n  , we have for all subsequent moments of time t ∈ [t0 , t0 + T ]: ln  1 max{ n1 , amin,t }  ≤ 100C ln  1 . amin,t0  Proof. Without loss of generality assume t0 = 0. We can assume in the proof that amin,0 > n−0.01/C , otherwise the claim trivially holds. Thus, initially we have φ0 ≥ 3 ln amin,0 ≥ − 0.03 C ln n ≥ −0.03 ln n. We proceed to show that potential φ does not decrease much during the considered motion. We have at any time φ̇ ≥ −p, which follows directly from (5). Suppose at some time t we have φt ≥ −0.2 ln n. We note that amin,t ≥ eφt ≥ n−0.2 . Applying Lemma 1, we have under these assumptions: ! p 1 1 E∆φt ≥ − − O ≥− 2 2 n n n amin,t and moreover by the properties of the natural logarithm (cf. e.g. [15]): |∆φt k <  4 namin,t  ≤  4e−φt ≤ 4n−0.8 . n  As usual, we apply a Doob martingale, with φ0t := φt until the first moment of time t such that φt < −0.2 ln n, and subsequently φ0t+1 := φ0t for larger t. We have E∆φt ≥ −n−1 and |∆φt k < 4n−0.8 . 1 Considering T = Cn ln amin,0 < Cn ln n steps of the process starting from time 0, by a standard Ω(1)  application of Azuma’s inequality, we obtain that with probability 1−e−n φ0t − φ00 ≥ −  , for all t ∈ [0, T ] we have:  T 1 − n−0.2 ≥ −C ln − 1 ≥ −0.1 ln n. n amin,0  From the last inequality it follows that φ0t ≥ φ00 − 0.1 ln n ≥ −0.2 ln n for all t ∈ T , with probability Ω(1) 1 − e−n , and so φ0t = φt . We now rewrite the same bound for φt , using the relation φ ≥ 3 ln amin : φt ≥ φ0 − C ln  1 amin,0  − 1 ≥ 3 ln amin,0 − C ln  1 amin,0  − 1 ≥ −(C + 4) ln  1 amin,0  ≥ −100C ln  1 amin,0  .  1 Taking into account that − ln amin,t ≥ φt for amin,t 6= 0, we obtain the claim.  Lemma 19. Suppose 0 < x < c12 . Fix type i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Let t0 be any time such that amin,t0 < 10−6 s4 . Let t∗ > t be the first moment after t0 such that i is the most represented type, ai,t∗ = amax,t∗ . Let t∗∗ > t∗ be the first moment after t∗ such that i is the least represented type, ai,t∗∗ = amin,t∗∗ . 1 Then, with probability 1−O(1/n3 ), t∗∗ ≤ t0 +c11 n ln max{1/n,a , where c11 > 0 is an absolute i+1,t0 } constant depending only on s and p. Proof. From Lemma 17, we have that w.v.h.p. the protocol is in an oscillatory interval which will Ω(1) c last super polynomial time, i.e., with probability 1 − e−n ) : for all t ∈ [t0 , t0 + en 13 ], we have amin,t < 0.02s. Acting as in the previous subsection, we iteratively apply Lemma 13 and Lemma 15. After at most 6 applications of both Lemmas, the process has performed two complete rotations around the triangle, w.h.p., passing in particular through time moments t∗ where the designated type i was a maximal type and t∗∗ where type i was a minimal type. It remains to bound the time required to perform these iterations. We consider as an example a single application of Lemma 15 starting at a time tb and 38  1 ending at a time ta0 , where ta0 < tb + c10 n ln max{1/n,a i+1,t 1 Lemma 18 at time tb , we obtain ln amin,t  a0  b  }  with probability 1 − O(1/n3 ). Applying  1 ≤ 100C ln amin,t , w.v.h.p. We use this bound for the next b  application of Lemma 13, and so on. After a total of at most 12 applications, we eventually obtain a 1 bound of the form c11 ln amin,t on the length of the considered time interval, where the value of c11 is 0 computed as a function of C.  7.2  Protocol Extension Pm : Majority (s)  The composition of the extension is specified in Fig. 4. In what follows, we denote Mi (s) (s) and mi := Mi /n, for s ∈ {−1, 0, +1}.  := #(A?i , Ms )  Lemma 20. Suppose 0 < x < c12 . Let t0 be an arbitrarily chosen moment of time and let T > 0. For fixed i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, we have for all t ∈ [t0 , t0 + T ]: (+1)  |mi,t with probability 1 − O(e−n  1/6  (−1)  − mi,t | ≤ 2e4rT /n max{n−0.2 , ai,t0 },  ). (+1)  (−1)  Proof. W.l.o.g. assume t0 = 0 and i = 1. Denote A0 := #A1,0 , Dt := M1,t − M1,t , and Gt := Dt2 . As usual, we denote ∆Dt = Dt+1 − Dt and ∆Gt = Gt+1 − Gt . For the subsequent analysis, we choose to use the “squared potential” Gt to simplify considerations; this would be the usual potential of choice to analyze an unbiased random walk with a fair coin toss. First we remark that |D0 | ≤ A0 , so |G0 | ≤ A20 . Next, observe that since at most one agent changes its state in a single time step, we have |∆Dt | ≤ 2, and so: |∆Gt | ≤ (|Dt | + 2)2 − |Dt |2 ≤ 4(|Dt | + 1) ≤ 4n + 4.  (34)  We now upper bound the expectation E∆Gt . We condition this expectation on the disjoint set of events R6 , R7 , R8 , R9 , R10 , R0 , where Rr , for 6 ≤ r ≤ 10, corresponds to Rule (r) being executed in the current step, and R0 is the event that none of these rules is executed. We have the following: • If event R0 or R6 holds, then at least one of the following three situations occurs: (1) the values (+1) (−1) of M1 and M1 both remain unchanged at time t, (2) an agent changes state from type A1 to another type, or (3) an agent turns from another type into type A1 . In case (1), we have Dt+1 = Dt . In case (2), the probability that |Dt+1 | = |Dt | + 1 is not more than the probability that |Dt+1 | = |Dt | − 1, since by the construction of the protocol, the choice of the agent leaving the population is completely independent of its value Ms . In case (3), we have Pr[|Dt+1 | = |Dt | − 1] = Pr[|Dt+1 | = |Dt | + 1] = 1/2 by construction. In all cases, Pr[|Dt+1 | = |Dt | + 1] ≤ Pr[|Dt+1 | = |Dt | − 1]. We therefore have: E[∆Gt |R0 ∨ R6 ] ≤ ((|Dt | + 1)2 − |Dt |2 ) + ((|Dt | − 1)2 − |Dt |2 ) ≤ 2. • For events R7 and R8 , we have Dt+1 |R7 = Dt − 1 and Dt+1 |R8 = Dt + 1. Since events R7 and R8 hold with equal probability, it follows that: E[∆Gt |R7 ∨ R8 ] ≤ ((|Dt | + 1)2 − |Dt |2 ) + ((|Dt | − 1)2 − |Dt |2 ) ≤ 2.  39  • Finally, for events R9 and R10 , we have Dt+1 |R9 = Dt + 1 and Dt+1 |R10 = Dt − 1. Since (−1) (+1) Pr[R9 ] · M1 = Pr[R10 ] · M1 (+1)  E[∆Gt |R9 ∨ R10 ] ≤  max{M1  (−1)  , M1  }  A1 (+1)  min{M1  (−1)  , M1  A1  }  ((|Dt | + 1)2 − |Dt |2 )+  ((|Dt | − 1)2 − |Dt |2 ) ≤  4|Dt |2 4Gt +2= + 2, A1 A1 where we assume in notation that A1 > 0. Applying the law of total expectation for ∆Gt over the set of events R0 ∨ R6 , R7 ∨ R8 , R9 ∨ R10 and noting that Pr[R9 ∧ A10 ] ≤ r An1 , we eventually obtain: Gt + 2. (35) n Inequalities (34) and (35) are sufficient to lower-bound the evolution of random variable Gt , which undergoes multiplicative drift with rate parameter 1 + 4r/n (up to lower order terms). Since known multiplicative drift lower bounds (cf.e.g. [17, 33]) do not appear to cover this case explicitly, we sketch the corresponding submartingale analysis (with slightly weaker parameters) for the sake of completeness. Consider any moment of time t such that Gt ≥ n1.6 . Define target value Gmax = (1+8r)Gt ≥ n1.6 . Consider the following filter, defining G0τ , τ ≥ 0 as the submartingale with G0τ = Gt+τ until the first moment of time at which Gt+τ < Gmax , and G0τ = G0τ +1 + 5r n Gmax for all subsequent moments of 5r 0 0 time. Note that E∆Gτ ≤ n Gmax by (35) and |∆Gτ | ≤ 4n + 4 ≤ 5n by (34) (where we conduct the entire analysis for n sufficiently large with respect to absolute constants of the algorithm). By Azuma’s inequality, we have for any τ > 0 and z > 0:   5r −z 2 0 0 Pr[Gτ > G0 + Gmax τ + z] ≤ exp . n 2τ (5n)2 E∆Gt ≤ 4r  Next, choosing any τ ≤ n and z = rGmax ≥ rn1.6 and noting that: 5r Gmax τ + z ≤ Gt + 5rGmax + rGmax ≤ Gmax , n we rewrite the concentration equality as:   −(rn1.6 )2 0.19 0 Pr[Gτ > Gmax ] ≤ exp < e−n . 2τ (5n)2 G00 +  Applying to the above a union bound over all τ ∈ [0, n], we obtain by another crude estimate: Pr[∀τ ∈[0,n] G0τ ≤ Gmax ] ≥ 1 − e−n  0.18  ,  from which it follows directly by the definition of G0τ that: 0.18  Pr[∀τ ∈[0,n] Gt+τ ≤ Gmax ] ≥ 1 − e−n  .  Thus, given that Gmax = (1 + 8r)Gt , the value of Gt increases by a factor of at most (1 + 8r) over n steps, with very high probability. Iterating the argument at most a logarithmic number of times and applying a union bound gives for arbitrary t: Gt ≤ (1 + 8r)t/n+1 max{n1.6 , A20 } ≤ 2e8rt/n max{n1.6 , A20 }, 1/6  with probability at least 1 − e−n , from which the claim of the lemma follows directly after taking the square root and normalizing by a factor of n. 40  (−1)  (0)  (+1)  By considering the sizes of populations mi,t , mi,t , and mi,t (whose sum is ai,t ), we obtain the 1 following corollary of the above Lemma, applied for a suitably chosen value T = 0.001n ln ai,t . r 0  Lemma 21. Suppose 0 < x < c12 . Let t0 be an arbitrarily chosen moment of time with ai,t0 ≤ 0.02s2 . For fixed i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, we have for all t ∈ [t0 , t0 + 0.001n ln max{ 11,a } ]: r i,t0  n  (+1)  |mi,t with probability 1 − O(e−n  1/6  (−1)  − mi,t | ≤ 0.1ai,t + 0.05s,  ). (0)  The above Lemma provides a crucial lower bound on the size of population mi . Lemma 22. Suppose 0 < x < c12 . Let t0 be an arbitrarily chosen moment of time with ai,t0 ≤ 0.02s2 . For fixed i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, we have for all t ∈ [t0 , t0 + 0.005n ln max{ 11,a } ] such that ai,t > 0.25s: r i,t0  n  (+1)  (−1)  min{mi,t , mi,t } ≥ 0.001s3 , Ω(1)  with probability 1 − e−n  .  Proof. Note first that by the conditions ai,t0 ≤ 0.02s2 < 0.1s < 0.25s < ai,t . Let t1 > t0 denote the last moment of time before t2 such that ai,t1 −1 < 0.1s and let t2 ≥ t1 + 0.15sn denote the first moment of time after t1 such that ai,t2 > 0.25s. We have t ≥ t2 + 0.05sn. (+1) (−1) We now consider the process mi,τ (exactly the same arguments may be applied for process mi,τ ). (+1)  We have ∆mi,τ  ≤ 1/n. The analysis is divided into two phases: (+1)  • Phase 1: τ ∈ [t1 , t2 ) (thus ai,τ ∈ [0.1s, 0.25s]). Initially, mi,t1 ≥ 0. Suppose for some step (+1)  τ we have mi,τ 0.25s) ≥ most  < 0.02s. Rule (6) is executed with probability (ai,τ )(1 − ai,τ ) ≥ 0.1s(1 −  0.075s2 ,  (+1) 2rmi,τ  (+1)  whereas rule (8) or (9) which reduces mi,τ  < 0.04rs <  0.01s2 .  A computation of the expected value provides:  (+1)  (+1)  E[∆mi,τ |(mi,τ  < 0.02s)] > (+1)  An application of Azuma’s inequality yields that mi,t2 probability 1 − e  −nΩ(1)  is executed with probability at  >  0.06s2 . n 1 0.06s2 2 n (t2  − t1 ) > 0.004s3 , with  . In case of failure, we consider the process no further. (+1)  • Phase 2: τ ∈ [t2 , t) (thus ai,τ ≥ 0.1s). From Phase 1, we have that initially mi,t2 > 0.004s3 . (+1)  Suppose for some step τ we have 0.001s3 < mi,τ  < 0.01s. We consider two cases:  – If ai,τ ≥ 0.25s, then by Lemma 21 we have: (+1)  |mi,t  (−1)  − mi,t | ≤ 0.1ai,t + 0.05s,  Ω(1)  with probability 1−e−n . In case of failure we interrupt the analysis (this is an implicit ap(+1) plication of union bounds over successive steps τ ). Under the assumption mi,τ < 0.01sr, we conclude: (−1) (+1) mi,t ≤ 0.1ai,t + 0.05s + mi,t < 0.3ai,t , and hence: (−1)  mi,t  1 (0) ≤ mi,t − 0.005s. 2 41  (36)  (+1)  Now, to compute the expected value ∆mi,τ , we remark that rule (6) does not decrease this (0)  expected value since mi,τ . Moreover, in view of (36), the probability of executing rule (9) (−1)  (which increases mi,t  by 1/n) exceeds the probability of executing one of the rules (7) (−1)  or (8) (which decrease mi,t  (+1)  by 1/n) by 0.005smi,τ r > 5 · 10− 6s4 r by the assumption  (+1)  0.001s3 < mi,τ . We eventually obtain in this case: (+1)  (+1)  E[∆mi,τ |(0.001s3 < mi,τ (+1)  – If ai,τ ≥ 0.25s, then assuming mi,τ the first phase to obtain:  (+1)  < 0.01s)] >  5 · 10− 6s4 r . n  (37)  < 0.01s, we can perform an analogous analysis as in  (+1)  E[∆mi,τ |(mi,τ  < 0.01s)] >  0.06s2 , n  which, in particular, also implies (37). (+1)  (+1)  We have thus shown that the expected change to mi,τ satisfies (37). Noting that initially mi,t2 > 0.004s3 = 0.001s3 + 0.003s3 , an application of Azuma’s inequality to an appropriate Doob (+1) martingale with (37) shows that the event mi,τ > 0.001s3 will hold for all remaining steps of Ω(1)  the process τ , with probability 1 − e−n  .  Lemma 23. Let t be any moment of time with amin,t > 4r1/2 . For all i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, we have: (+1)  min{mt with probability 1 − O(e−n  Ω(1)  (−1)  , mt  } ≥ r3/2 s  ).  Proof. Denote c = 4r1/2 . To show the claim, observe that necessarily for all τ ∈ [t − cn/2, t] we (+1) (−1) have amin,τ > c/2. We consider the change of value mτ over time (the argument for mτ follows (+1) (+1) symmetrically). Initially, we have mt−cn/2 ≥ 0, and at every step |∆mτ | ≤ 1/n. At any time τ such (+1)  that mτ  < s/4 we have the following cases: (+1)  • Rule (6) is executed, which happens with probability at least a2min,τ > c2 /4. Since mτ conditioned on this event, the expected value of  (+1) ∆mτ  < s/4,  is at least 1/4.  • One of the rules (7)-(10) is executed, which occurs with probability at most r. (+1)  • In all other cases, we have ∆mτ  = 0.  Noting that r = c2 /16, the claim follows from a standard application of Azuma’s inequality. Lemma 24. Suppose 0 < x < c12 . Let t ≥ 2c11 n log n be an arbitrary moment of time. Then, min{m+1,t , m−1,t } > c15 , with probability 1 − O(1/n), for some absolute constant c15 > 0 depending only on s, p, and r.  42  Proof. Assume w.l.o.g. t = 2c11 n ln n. Instead of analyzing the evolution of the real system, we consider an execution of a system which is coupled with it over the first t steps as follows. First, starting from time 0, we perform t steps of protocol Po (i.e., considering only rules (1)−(5) of its definition, and without setting values of the second component M? ). Next, we once again activate the pairs of elements which were activated in the first part of the coupling, in the same order, applying rules (6) − (10) of the protocol with the same outcome which they would have received in the original execution. Clearly, at time t the same configuration u(t) is reached by both the original and coupled execution. Consider first the execution of Po from time 0. If amin,0 < 10−6 s4 , then the execution is in an oscillatory interval at time 0, and will remain in it (amin < 0.02s2 ) until time t = c ln n with probability Ω(1) 1 − e−n . Then, for all τ ∈ [0, t] we assume that the claim of Lemma 19 holds with t0 = τ for all i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. By a crude union bound, this event holds with probability 1 − O(1/n); from now on we assume this is true. (Formally, to allow us to proceed, in the analysis we can say with implicitly couple the system with a different set of random choices to which the system switches in the low-probability event that the claim of Lemma 19 were not to hold for some t0 = τ for the original system.) Given that in the claim of Lemma 19 for t0 = 0 we have t∗∗ < t, and for t0 = t we have t∗ ≥ t, by the properties of the time intervals [t∗ , t∗∗ ] we observe that there must exist a time τ ∈ [0, t] and a type i ∈ {1, 2, 3} such that Ai is the least represented type at time τ and the most represented type at time t (amax,t = ai,t and amin,τ = ai,τ ), and moreover t ∈ [t∗ , t∗∗ ] in the claim of Lemma 19 with choice of t0 = τ . Since amax,t ≥ s/3, we now apply Lemma 22 with t0 = τ to obtain the claim, noting that amin,τ < 0.02s2 1 and moreover that t < τ + 0.005n ln max{ 11,a } , given that we have t < τ + c11 n ln max{1/n,a , r i+1,t } n  i,t0  0  c1 1 where c11 is a constant depending only on s and p, and noting that we can choose r < 0.005 . It remains to consider the cases when the execution starts at time 0 with amin,0 ≥ 10−6 s4 . Then, if amin,t ≥ 10−6 s4 holds, the claim follows from Lemma 23 given that r is chosen so that 10−6 s4 > 4r1/2 . Otherwise, there must exist some last time t0 ≤ t such that amin,t0 ≥ 10−6 s4 . We apply Lemma 19 with t0 = t0 . If the obtained value t∗∗ satisfies t∗∗ < t, then we can apply an analogous analysis as in the case amin,0 < 10−6 s4 to obtain the claim. Otherwise, we have that t ≤ t∗∗ ≤ t + cn, where the value of constant c, depending only on s and p follows from Lemma 19. By an iterated application of Lemma 18, we obtain that amin,t ≥ c0 , where the value of constant c0 > 0, depending only on s and p, follows from the application of Lemma 18. Choosing r sufficiently small so that c0 > 4r1/2 , we complete the proof using Lemma 23.  Finally, for the sake of completeness we state how the majority protocol stops in the case of #X = 0. Lemma 25. Suppose x = 0. Then, there exists a moment of time ts such that either m+1,t = 0 or m−1,t = 0 holds for all t > ts . Moreover, ts < c16 n log2 n with probability 1 − O(1/n), for some absolute constant c16 > 0 depending only on s, p, and r. Proof. By Theorem 1(1), there exists a moment of time t0 = O(n log2 n) such that the system reaches a corner configuration (cf. Lemma 11). W.l.o.g., assume that a1 = s and a2 = a3 = 0. At this point, in the majority protocol Rule (7) will never again be activated, whereas the execution of rules (8)-(11) follows precisely the classical majority scenario of Angluin et al. [7]. By a standard concentration analysis (see also [7]), one of the two species M+1 , M−1 will become extinct in O(n log2 n) steps with probability 1 − O(1/n). As a side remark on Lemma 25 that it is possible to initialize the system entirely with a state (Ai , M0 ) so that m+1,t = m−1,t = 0 holds throughout the process (even if the designed protocol will never enter such a configuration from most initial configurations).  43  7.3  Protocol Extension Pl : Detection with Lights  To complete the proof of Theorem 3, we design a protocol extension Pd , such that D ETECTION is solved by the composition ((Po ◦ Pm ) + Pl ). Extension Pl , uses three states, {L−1 , L+1 , Lon }. We informally refer to states L as lights. The composition is given in Fig. 5. Informally, state L−1 means that the agent is “waiting for meeting M−1 ”, then after meeting M−1 it becomes L+1 , “waiting for M+1 ” and finally it becomes Lon . To analyze the operation of the protocol, consider first the case of x = 0. By Lemma 25, after O(n log2 n) steps, agents in at least one of the states {M+1 , M−1 } are permanently eliminated from the system. Thus, either rule (11) or rule (12) will never again be executed in the future. An agent 1 which is in state Lon will spontaneously move to another state following rule (13) within O( q(ε) n log n) 2 steps, with probability 1 − O(1/n ), and will never reenter such a state, since this would require the activation of both rule (11) and rule (12). By applying a union bound over all agents, we obtain that state Lon never again appears in the population after O(n log n) steps from the termination of the majority protocol, with probability 1 − O(1/n). Overall, all nodes reach a state having a different state than Lon after O(n log2 n) steps from the start of the process, with probability 1 − O(1/n), and all leave such a state eventually with certainty. In the presence of the source X, the analysis of the process can be coupled with a Markov chain on three states L−1 , L+1 , and Lon . In view of Lemma 24, transitions from state L−1 to L+1 and from state L+1 to to L−1 occur with at least constant probability (except for an O(1/n)-fraction of all time steps), this 3-state chain is readily shown to be rapidly mixing. For a choice of q(ε) > 0 depending only on s, p, r, ε sufficiently small, we can lower-bound the number of agents occupying state Lon by (1 − ε)n, with high probability. Under the natural decoding of states as “informed” (having component Lon ) or “uninformed” (having component L−1 or L+1 ), the proof of Theorem 3 is complete. We remark that it is also possible to design a related protocol in which exactly one state is recognized as “informed” and exactly one state is recognized as “uninformed”; we omit the details of the construction.  8  Proof of Impossibility Result  This Section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 4. First, we restate some notation. We recall that the vector z = (z (1) , . . . , z (k) ) ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}k = Z describes the number of agents having particular states, and kzk1 = n. In this section we will identify the set of states with {1, . . . , k} = [1, k]. It is now also more convenient for us to work with a scheduler which selects unordered (rather than ordered) pairs of interacting agents; we note that both models are completely equivalent in terms of computing power under a fair random scheduler, since selecting an ordered pair of agents can be seen as selecting an unordered pair, and then setting their orientation through a coin toss. Indexing with integers {1, 2, . . . , r} the set of all distinct rules of the protocol, where r ≤ k 4 , for a rule j ≡ “{i1 (j), i2 (j)} → {o1 (j), o2 (j)}00 , 1 ≤ j ≤ r, i1 (j), i2 (j), o1 (j), o2 (j) ∈ {1, . . . , k}, we will denote by qj , the probability (selected by the protocol designer) that rule j is executed as the next interaction rule once the scheduler has selected (i1 , i2 ) as the interacting pair, and by pj (z) the probability (i (j)) (i (j)) that j is the next rule chosen in configuration z (we have pj (z) = qj z 1 nz2 2 (1−O(1/n)), where the O(1/n) factor compensates the property of a scheduler which always selects a distinct pair of elements). For any configuration z0 ∈ Z, we define the d-box Bd (z0 ) around z0 as the set of all states z ∈ Z (i) (i) such that z0 /d ≤ z (i) ≤ d max{1, z0 }, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k. We start the proof with the following property of boxes. Lemma 26. Fix k ∈ Z+ and let 0 < ε1 < 0.001 be arbitrarily fixed. There exists ε0 = ε0 (k, ε1 ), 0 < ε0 < ε1 , such that, for any interaction protocol P with k states and any configuration z0 ∈ Z, there 44  exists a value ε = ε(P, z0 ) ∈ [ε0 , ε1 ] such that, for any rule j of the protocol, 1 ≤ j ≤ r, exactly one of the following bounds holds: 1. (i) for all z ∈ Bnε0 (z0 ), pj (z) ≤ nε−1 , 2. (ii) for all z ∈ Bnε0 (z0 ), pj (z) ≥ n24ε−1 . and for any state i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, exactly one of the following bounds holds: 1. (iii) for all z ∈ Bnε0 (z0 ), z (i) ≤ nε , 2. (iv) for all z ∈ Bnε0 (z0 ), z (i) ≥ n24ε . 4  Proof. Let k be fixed and let ε0 = 96−(k+k +f +1) ≤ 96−(k+r+f +1) , where f = log2 (1/ε1 ). Consider (i) the (multi)set M of real values M := {logn max{nε0 , z0 } : i ∈ {1, . . . , r}}∪{logn max{nε0 , npj (z0 )} : j ∈ {1, . . . , r}} ⊆ [0, 1]. Since |M | = k + r, by the pigeonhole principle, there must exist an interval Il = [96−l , 96−l+1 ), for some l ∈ {f, . . . , k + r + f }, such that Il ∩ M = ∅. Now, we set ε = 2 · 96−l > 96ε0 , we also have ε < 2 · 96−f < ε1 . We immediately obtain that for any state (i) (i) i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we either have z0 ≤ nε/2 or z0 ≥ n48ε . Recalling that for any z ∈ Bnε0 (z0 ), (i) (i) z0 /nε0 ≤ z (i) ≤ nε0 max{1, z0 }, claims (iii) and (iv) follow. (i (j)) (i (j)) To show claims (i) and (ii), notice that if rule j, j ∈ {1, . . . , r} is such that min{z0 1 , z0 2 } ≤ nε , then for all z ∈ Bnε0 (z0 ) we have min{z (i1 (j)) , z (i2 (j)) } ≤ nε (by (iii) and (iv)), and so pj (z) ≤ (i (j)) (i (j)) nε−1 by the properties of the random scheduler. Otherwise, we have min{z0 1 , z0 2 } ≥ n24ε , and 1 so 2n2ε0 ≤ pj (z0 )/pj (z) ≤ 2n2ε0 , where we recall that ε > 96ε0 . Since we have pj (z0 ) ≤ nε/2 or pj (z0 ) ≥ n48ε , claims (i) and (ii) follow. Given any k-state protocol P , we will arbitrarily choose a value of ε for which the claim of the above Lemma holds (e.g., the smallest possible such value of ε). Note that a similar analysis is also possible for protocols using a super-constant number of states in n, however, then the value of ε0 is dependent on 4 n; retracing the arguments in the proof, we can choose appropriately ε0 ≥ nexp[−O(k )] . (We make no effort to optimize the polynomial in k in the exponent.) In what follows, let z0 be a fixed configuration of the protocol (admitting a certain property which we will define later). We will then consider a rule j to be a low probability (LP) rule (writing j ∈ LP ) in box Bnε0 (z0 ) if it satisfies condition (i) of the Lemma, and a high probability (HP) rule in this box (writing j ∈ HP ) if it satisfies condition (ii). Note that LP ∪ HP = {1, . . . , r}. Likewise, for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we will classify i as a low-representation (LR) state (writing i ∈ LR) in box Bnε0 (z0 ) if i satisfies condition (iii) of the Lemma, and a high representation (HR) state (writing i ∈ HR) in this box if i satisfies condition (iv). Note that LR ∪ HR = {1, . . . , k}. Moreover, we define a set of very high representation (VHR) states, V HR ⊆ HR, as the set of all i such that for all z 0 ∈ Bnε0 (z0 ), zi0 ≥ n1−8ε . Denoting HR0 = HR \ V HR, we have by the definition of a box that for all i0 ∈ HR0 , for all z 0 ∈ Bnε0 (z0 ): zi0 ≤ n1−8ε /O(n2ε0 ) < n1−6ε . From now on, we assume that configuration z0 admits the following property: for T = n1+2ε , an execution of the protocol starting from configuration z0 passes through a sequence of configurations zt , t = 1, 2, . . . , T , such that the configuration does not leave the box around z0 in any step with sufficiently large probability, lower-bounded by some absolute constant Π ∈ (0, 1]: Pr[∀t<T zt ∈ B ⊆ Bnε0 (z0 )] ≥ Π,  (38)  where B is an arbitrarily fixed subset of Bnε0 (z0 ). We now show that the above property has the following crucial implication: for an interacting pair involving selected high and very high representation states, a rule creating a low representation state can only be triggered with sufficiently small probability. Informally, it seldom happens that in the protocol a low representation state is created out of any high representation state. 45  Lemma 27. For a protocol having the property given by Eq. (38), for i1 ∈ HR and i2 ∈ V HR, let of the form {i1 , i2 } → {o1 , o2 }, taken over all o1 ∈ LR, o2 ∈ [1, r]. Then, R Pi1 ,i2 be the set of rules −14ε ). q = O(n j j∈Ri1 ,i2 P Proof. Suppose, by contradiction, that j∈Ri ,i qj > 3n−14ε . 1 2 Associate with process zt a random variable Jt ∈ {0, 1}, defined as follows. For all t < te , where te is the first moment of time such that zte ∈ / Bnε0 (z0 ), we put Jt = 1 if a rule from Ri1 ,i2 is used for the interaction made by the protocol in process zt at time t, and set Jt = 0 otherwise. For all t ≥ te , we set Jt to 1. We have E(Jt |z1 , . . . , zt ) ≥ 2n2ε−1 ; indeed, for t < te , it holds that: E(Jt |z1 , . . . , zt ) = Pr[Jt = 1|zt ] =  X  X  pj (zt ) =  j∈Ri1 ,i2  ≥ 3n−14ε  j∈Ri1 ,i2  qj  z (i1 (j)) z (i2 (j)) (1 − O(1/n)) ≥ n2  n24ε n1−8ε  (1 − O(1/n)) > 2n2ε−1 . n2 By a simple stochastic domination argument, (Jt ) can be lower-bounded by a sequence of independent binomial trials with success probability n2ε−1 , hence by an application of a multiplicative Chernoff bound for T = n1+2ε : " T # " T # X X 1 Pr Jt > n4ε = Pr Jt > 2n2ε−1 T = 1 − o(1), 2 t=1  t=1  where the o(1) factor is exponentially small in n. We now show the following claim. Claim. With probability Π − o(1), the following event holds: zt ∈ B for all t ∈ [0, T ) and the total number of rule activations in the time interval [0, t) during which an agent changes state from a state in LR to a different state is at most O(kn3ε ). Proof (of claim). Acting similarly as before, we associate with process zt a random variable Lt ∈ {0, 1}, defined as follows. For all t < te , we put Lt = 1 if a rule acting on at least one agent in a state from LR is made by the protocol in process zt at time t, and set Lt = 0 otherwise. For all t ≥ te , we set Lt to a dummy variable set always to 0, i.a.r. We observe that: nε , n since |LR| ≤ k, and for t < te , zi < nε for any i ∈ LR, hence the scheduler selects an agent from a ε LR state into an interacting pair with probability at most 2k nn . Applying an analogous argument as in the case of random variable Lt , this time for the upper tail, we obtain: " T # " T # X X 3ε ε Pr Lt < 4kn = Pr Lt > 2 · 2kn T = 1 − o(1). E(Lt |z1 , . . . , zt ) ≤ 2k  t=1  t=1  The claim follows directly. Now, by a union bound we obtain: " T # T X X Pr Jt > n4ε ∧ Lt < 4kn3ε = 1 − o(1). t=1  t=1  Taking into account that te > T holds with probability Π = Ω(1) by (38), we have by a union bound that with probability at least Π − o(1) = Ω(1), the holds: zt ∈ B for all t ∈ [0, T ], P PTfollowingPevent T T 4ε , and L < 4kn3ε . However then 4ε 3ε > knε , so there J > n J − L t t=1 t t=1 t t=1 t > n − kn (i) must exist at time T a state i ∈ LR such that zT > nε . This is a contradiction with zT ∈ B ⊆ Bnε0 (z0 ) by Lemma 26(iii). 46  In the rest of the proof, we consider the evolution of a protocol starting from configuration z0 and having property (38). We compare this evolution to the evolution of the same protocol, starting from a perturbed configuration z0∗ , such that: (C1) kz0 − z0∗ k1 ≤ nε . ∗(i)  (C2) for all low representation states i ∈ LR, we have z0  (i)  ≤ z0 .  Intuitively, the perturbed state z0∗ may correspond to removing a small number of agents from z0 (and replacing them by high representation states for the sake of normalization), e.g., as in the case of the disappearance of a rumor source from a system which has already performed a rumor-spreading process. Our objective will be to show that, with probability at least Π − o(1), after T = n1+2ε the process ∗ zT is still not far from z0 , being constrained to a box in a similar way as process zt . To achieve this, we define a coupling between processes zt and zt∗ (knowing that process zt is constrained to a box around z0 with probability Π). Informally, the analysis proceeds as follows. We run the processes together for T = n1+2ε steps. In most steps, the 1-norm distance kzt − zt∗ k1 between the two processes remains unchanged, without exceeding O(n3ε ). Otherwise, exactly one of the two processes executes a rule (and the other pauses). With a frequency of roughly nε /n steps (i.e., roughly n3ε times in total during the process), an LP rule is executed which increases the distance between these two states. We think of this type of “error” as unfixable, contributing to the O(n3ε ) distance of the processes; however, such errors are relatively uncommon. With a higher frequency of roughly n3ε /n steps (i.e., roughly once every n1−3ε steps), a less serious “error” occurs, when some HP rule ι increases the distance between the two states. The rate of such errors is too high to leave them unfixed, and we have a time window of about n1−3ε steps to fix such an error (before the next such error occurs). We observe that since ι is an HP rule, which is activated with probability at least n24ε−1 , rule ι will still be activated frequently during this time window. The coupling of transitions of states zt and zt∗ is in this case performed so as to force the two processes to execute rule ι lazily, never at the same time. The number of executions of rule ι in the ensuing time window by each of the two processes follows the standard coupling pattern of a pair of lazy random walks on a line, initially located at distance 1, until their next meeting (cf. e.g. [2]). During this part of the coupling, we allow the distance kzt − zt∗ k1 to increase even up to n6ε (as a result of executions of rule ι), but the entire contribution to the distance related to rule ι is reduced to 0 before the next HP rule “error” occurs, with sufficiently high probability (in this case, with probability 1 − O(n−6ε ). Overall, the coupling is successful with probability Π − O(n−ε ). We remark that we use the bound on the number of states k to enforce a sufficiently large polynomial separation between the frequencies of LR states and HR states, and likewise for LP rules and HP rules. We also implicitly assume that k = no(1) , throughout the process. The analysis also works for a choice of k = O(log log n), with a sufficiently small hidden constant. The separation between LR/HR states and LP/HP rules is used in at least two places in the proof. First, it enforces that rules creating LR states from VHR states may appear in the definition of the protocol only with polynomially small probability ∗(i) (i) (Lemma 27), which helps to maintain over time the invariant zt ≤ zt , for all LR states. Secondly, we use the separation of LP/HP rules in the analysis of the coupling to show that a fixable “error” caused by a HP rule can be sufficiently quickly repaired, before new errors occur. In the formalization of the coupling, we make both processes zt and zt∗ lazy, i.e., add to each process an additional independent coin-toss at each step, and enforce that with probability 1/2 no rule is executed in a given step (i.e., the step is skipped by the protocol). We assume a random scheduler which picks uniformly a random pair of nodes at each step. Thus, if the scheduler picks a pair of agents in states {i1 , i2 }, and j is a rule acting on this pair of states, the probability that the interaction corresponding to rule j will be qj /2. (The laziness of the process here is a purely technical assumption for the analysis, and corresponds to using a measure of time which is scaled by a factor of 2 ± o(1) w.h.p.; this does not affect the asymptotic statement of the theorem.) 47  We will also find it convenient to apply an auxiliary notation for representing the evolution of a state. For process zt (resp., zt∗ , we define ρt (j) (resp. ρ∗t (j)), for all j ∈ [1, r], as the number of times rule j has been executed since time 0. Observe that the pair (z0 , (ρt (j) : j ∈ [1, t]) completely describes the evolution of a state (i.e., the order in which the rules were executed is irrelevant). Moreover, since each execution of a rule changes the states of at most 4 agents, we have: kzt −  zt∗ k1  ≤4  r X  |ρt (j) −  ρ∗t (j)|  + kz0 −  j=1  z0∗ k1  ≤ +4  r X  |ρt (j) − ρ∗t (j)| + nε .  j=1  Definition of the coupling. 1. At each step t, we order the agents of configurations zt and zt∗ , so that al (t) denotes the type of the l-th agent in zt and a∗l (t) is the type of the l-th agent in zt∗ . The orderings are such that |{l : al (t) = a∗l (t)}| is maximized; in particular, for any state i such that z (i) (t) ≤ z ∗(i) (t) (respectively, z ∗(i) (t) ≤ z (i) (t)) we have that if for some l, al (t) = i (resp., a∗l (t) = i), then a∗l (t) = i (resp., al (t) = i). 2. The scheduler then picks a pair of distinct indices l1 , l2 ∈ {1, . . . , n} as the pair of interacting agents. 2.1. If al1 (t) = a∗l1 (t) and al2 (t) = a∗l2 (t), then the same rule j = j ∗ acting on the pair of states (al1 (t), al2 (t)) is chosen as the current interaction rule, with probability qj . 2.2. Otherwise, a pair of (clearly distinct) rules j and j ∗ are picked independently at random for zt and zt∗ from among the rules available for state pairs (al1 (t), al2 (t)) and (a∗l1 (t), a∗l2 (t)), with probabilities qj and qj ∗ , respectively. 3. The processes finally perform their coin tosses to decide which of the selected rules (j for zt and j ∗ for zt∗ ) will be applied in the current step. 3.1. If j = j ∗ and rule j has been executed exactly the same number of times in the history of the two processes (ρt (j) = ρ∗t (j)), then with probability 1/2 both of the processes execute rule j, and with probability 1/2 neither execute their rule. 3.2. If j 6= j ∗ , or if j = j ∗ and rule j has been executed a different number of times in the history of the two processes (ρt (j) 6= ρ∗t (j)), then exactly one of the two processes performs its chosen rule and the other process waits, with the process performing the rule being chosen as zt or zt∗ , with probability 1/2 each. The correctness of the coupling (i.e., that the marginals zt and zt∗ each correspond to a valid execution of the given protocol under a random scheduler) is immediate to verify. Lemma 28. Let zt be a process satisfying property (38), and let z0∗ satisfy conditions (C1) and (C2). Then, for T = n1+2ε , with probability Π − O(n−ε ) we have kzT∗ − zk1 = O(n6ε ), for some z ∈ B. Proof. To prove the claim, it suffices to show that with probability Π − O(n−ε ) the provided coupling succeeds, i.e., it maintains a sufficiently small difference zT (i) − zT∗ (i) for all states i, with zT ∈ B. In the analysis of the provided coupling, we will assume that the box condition zt ∈ B holds always throughout the process (otherwise, we assume the coupling does not succeed). To state this formally, we work with auxiliary processes z̄t and z̄t∗ , given as z̄t = zt and z̄t∗ = zt∗ for all t < te , where te is the first moment of time such that zt ∈ / Bnε0 (z0 ), and set to the dummy value z̄t = z̄t∗ = z0 for all t ≥ te . At the end of the process, we will thus have z̄T = zT and z̄T∗ = zT∗ with probability at least Π. In the following, we silently assume that t < te − 1 (in particular, that zt ∈ B and zt+1 ∈ B), and we will simply show 48  that the coupling of z̄t and z̄t∗ is successful with probability 1 − n−ε . The condition of t ≥ te − 1 is trivially handled. In addition to the box condition (which is now enforced) we try to maintain, with sufficiently high probability, throughout the first T steps of the process several invariants (all at a time), corresponding to the following events holding: ∗(i)  • FD (t): for all states i ∈ LR, z̄t  ∗(i)  • FLR (t): for all states i ∈ LR, z̄t  (i)  ≤ z̄t . (LR domination condition) (i)  ≤ z̄t ≤ nε . (LR state condition)  • FLP (t): for all rules j ∈ LP , max{pj (z̄t ), pj (z̄t∗ )} ≤ 2nε−1 . (LP rule condition) (i)  ∗(i)  • FHR (t): for all states i ∈ HR, min{z̄t , z̄t  } ≥ n24ε /2. (HR state condition)  • FHP (t): for all rules j ∈ HP , min{pj (z̄t ), pj (z̄t∗ )} ≥ n24ε−1 /2. (HP rule condition) (i)  ∗(i)  • FHR0 (t): for all states i ∈ HR0 , max{z̄t , z̄t  } ≤ 2n1−6ε . (HR’ state condition)  • a family of possible events Sw,d (t), for some d ∈ {0, . . . , 4n3ε } and w ∈ {0, . . . , n6ε }, with specific events defined as follows: P – S0,d (t) holds if for all rules j ∈ HP we have ρt (j) = ρ∗t (j), and j∈LP |ρt (j)−ρ∗t (j)| = d. This implies, in particular, kz̄t∗ − z̄t k1 ≤ 4d + nε ≤ 5n3ε . (identical rate of HP execution) – Sw,d (t) for w > 0 holds if there exists a rule ι ∈ HP suchP that for all rules j ∈ HP \ {ι} ∗ ∗ we have ρt (j) = ρt (j), |ρt (ι) − ρt (ι)| = w, and moreover i∈LP |ρt (i) − ρ∗t (i)| = d. This implies, in particular, kz̄t∗ − z̄t k1 ≤ 4d + 4w + nε ≤ 5n6ε . (single HP execution difference) We will call the coupling successful if for all t ≤ T , all events F· (t) and some event Sw,d (t) holds, and we will say it is a failure otherwise. (We remark that condition FD (t) is implied by condition FLR (t), but we retain both for convenience in discussion.) The analysis of the coupled process is now the following. First, we remark that all of the given events F· (t) and event S0,0 (t) hold for t = 0. If the process meets condition S0,d at time t and all conditions F· (t), then we have the following: • With probability at least 1−O(n3ε−1 ), the coupling will follow clauses 2.1 and 3.1 of its definition, and the two processes z̄ and z̄ ∗ will execute the same rule j (or both pause). Hence, we continue to step t + 1 satisfying condition S0,d and all of the conditions F· (t + 1), making use of the box condition for process z̄t . (We note that, to show FLP (t), when considering the special case of a rule involving a state from LR, we can make use of FLR (t) and note that the activation probability of such a rule is bounded by 2nε−1 due to the nε bound on the population of a LR state). • With probability at most O(n3ε−1 ), the coupling will, however, select distinct rules, j for z̄t and j ∗ for z̄t∗ , and will select exactly one of them to execute, say j 0 ∈ {j, j ∗ }. – If j 0 ∈ LP , which happens in the current step of the process with probability at most 2nε−1 by FLP , then the event S0,d+1 (t + 1) will hold in the next step (provided d + 1 ≤ 4n3ε ; otherwise, if d + 1 > 4n3ε , we will say that the coupling has failed). – If j 0 ∈ HP , which happens in the coupling with probability O(n3ε−1 ) (as bounded due to clause 2.2), then the event S1,d (t + 1) will hold in the next step. The condition FD (t + 1) requires more careful consideration. Taking into account that FD (t) holds, we need to consider two cases: either j 0 = j and the rule applied to z̄t changed at least one of the two interacting states {i1 (j), i2 (j)}, say i1 (j) ∈ LR, so that z̄ i1 (j) (t) = z̄ ∗i1 (j) (t) and 49  failure  failure  failure O(n−2.9ε−1 )  S0,0  S1,0  S1,1  S0,4n3ε  S0,d  S0,1  O(n3ε−1 )  1 − O(n3ε−1 )  failure Pr ≤ 1  S1,d failure  S2,d failure  Sw,d  Π0t ≥ Π0t  n24ε−1 4  failure O(n6ε−1 )  Sn6ε ,d failure Pr ≤ 1  Figure 8: Illustration of transitions between states Sw,d for the coupling in the lower bound proof. z̄ i1 (j) (t + 1) ≤ z̄ ∗i1 (j) (t + 1) − 1, or j 0 = j ∗ and the rule applied to z̄t∗ created a pair of states {o1 (j ∗ ), o2 (j ∗ )}, say o1 (j ∗ ) ∈ LR. In the first case, by the description of the ordering given in clause 1 of the definition of the coupling, the problem occurs only if one of the agents picked by the scheduler belongs to an LR state, and the other agent is at a position in which the states of z̄ and z̄ ∗ differ in the ordering of the agents; hence, the probability ε 3ε that the coupling fails at this step is at most O( knn·n ) ≤ O(n5ε−2 ). In the second case, 2 we likewise analyze the ordering of the agents considered by the scheduler, and note that the interacting agent, which belongs to the part of the ordering in which z̄t and z̄t∗ differ, must be in a HR state, since the agents in a LR state in z̄ ∗ are matched by their counterparts in z̄ (as noted in clause 1 of the discussion of the coupling). If the other interacting agent is in a state 3ε 1−6ε from LR ∪ HR0 , then such an event occurs with probability O( n ·kn ) ≤ O(n−2.9ε−1 ), n2 and we say that with this probability the coupling has failed. Finally, if the other interacting agent is in a state from V HR, then by Lemma 27, we have that the probability of picking a rule under which the coupling fails is at most O(n−14ε ), conditioned on the event j 6= j ∗ holding, hence overall the probability of failure is O(n−14ε n3ε−1 ) = O(n−11ε−1 ). Overall, we obtain that FD (t + 1) holds with probability O(n−2.9ε−1 ). Given FD (t + 1), S1,d(t+1) , and the box condition, the remaining conditions F· (t + 1) follow directly. Overall, we obtain that following a time t satisfying S0,d (t) and all conditions F· (t), we reach the following successor state (see Fig. 8):  50    S0,d (t + 1) ∧ F· (t + 1),      S0,d+1 (t + 1) ∧ F· (t + 1), S1,d (t + 1) ∧ F· (t + 1),       failure:  with probability 1 − O(n3ε−1 ), with probability ≤ 2nε−1 , if d + 1 ≤ 4n3ε , 3ε−1 ), with ( probability O(n with probability O(n−2.9ε−1 ), if d + 1 ≤ 4n3ε , with some probability ≤ 1, otherwise.  At this point, before proceeding further, we can provide some intuition on the meaning of the respective events S. The coupling process can be seen as a walk along the path (S0,d : d ≤ 4n3ε ), starting from state S0,0 , and at each step, either staying in the current state S0,d , moving on to the next state S0,d+1 , branching to a side branch S1,d (which we will analyze later), or failing. The process also fails if it reaches the endpoint of its path (d = 4n3ε ). Since the process is run for T = n1+2ε steps, the probability that failure will occur before the end of the path is reached is O(n−0.9ε ), and the probability of reaching the end of the path and failing is exponentially small in nε by a Chernoff bound (in expectation, the process will progress halfway along the path). Hence, we have that the process succeeds with probability 1 − O(n−0.9ε ), or otherwise may fail in a side branch S·,d . A side branch is entered with probability O(nε−1 ). To show that the coupling succeeds with the required probability, it suffices to show that we return from any state S1,d to state S0,d with probability at least 1 − O(n−6ε ); then, all (i.e., w.h.p. at most O(n1+2ε n3ε−1 ) = O(n5ε )) excursions into side branches during the process will succeed with probability 1 − O(n−ε ). Consider now an excursion into a side branch Sw,d (w ≥ 1) associated with a rule ι ∈ HP , which has been executed a different number of times in z̄t and z̄t∗ . Now, if the process meets condition Sw,d at time t and all conditions F· (t), then we have the following: • With probability at least 1 − O(n6ε−1 ), the coupling will follow clause 2.1 of its definition, selecting a single rule j. – If j 6= ι, then clause 3.1 will follow, and the two processes z̄ and z̄ ∗ will execute the same rule j (or both pause). Hence, at time t + 1, all of the conditions F· (t + 1) and condition Sw,d (t + 1) is satisfied. – Else, the event j = ι occurs. The probability of such an event is denoted πt ∈ [pι (z̄t ) − O(n6ε−1 ), pι (z̄t )] (due to the conditioning performed in the first clause of the coupling); since pι (z̄t ) ≥ n24ε−1 by the box condition for HP rules, it follows that 2πt ≥ n24ε−1 − O(n6ε−1 ) ≥ n24ε−1 /2. Now, following clause 3.2 of the coupling, depending on which of the two processes z̄t , z̄t∗ is chosen to execute the rule, with probability πt /2 =: πt0 the system moves to Sw−1,d (t + 1), and with probability πt0 the system moves to Sw+1,d (t + 1) (unless w + 1 > n6ε , in which case the coupling has failed). As before, given there was no failure, all conditions F· (t + 1) are readily verified to be satisfied in the new time step. • With probability at most O(n6ε−1 ), for simplicity of analysis we assume the coupling has failed. This time, for a time t satisfying Sw,d (t) distribution of successor states:   Sw−1,d (t + 1) ∧ F· (t + 1),      Sw+1,d (t + 1) ∧ F· (t + 1),  failure:       Sw,d (t + 1) ∧ F· (t + 1),  for w ≥ 1 and all conditions F· (t), we obtain the following with probability exactly πt0 ≥ n24ε−1 /4, 0 6ε with ( probability exactly πt , if w + 1 ≤ n ,  with probability O(n6ε−1 ), if w + 1 ≤ n6ε , with some probability ≤ 1, otherwise,  otherwise.  51  The picture here corresponds to a lazy random walk along the side line Sw,d for w ∈ [0, n6ε ], with an additional failure probability at each step. The walk starts at w = 1 and ends with a return to the primary line S0,d if the endpoint w = 0 is reached, or ends with failure if the other endpoint w ≥ n6ε =: wmax is reached. At each step, the walk is lazy (with probability of transition depending on the current step), but unbiased with respect to transitions to the left or to the right. Assuming that failure does not occur sooner, 1 2 ) = O(n12ε ) with probability 1 − O( wmax ) = 1 − O(n−6ε ) the walk will reach point w = 0 in O(wmax moves (transitions along the line), without reaching the other endpoint of the line sooner. Since a move is made in each step t with probability πt0 ≥ n24ε−1 /4, by a straightforward Chernoff bound, the number of steps spent on this line is given w.h.p. as at most O(n12ε /n24ε−1 ) = O(n1−12ε ). As the probability of failure in each of these steps is O(n6ε−1 ), the probability that the process fails during these steps is O(n−6ε ). Overall, by a union bound, we obtain that the process successfully returns to S0,d with probability 1 − O(n−6ε ) (and within O(n1−12ε ) steps). In view of the previous observations, we have that with probability 1 − O(n−ε ), all conditions F· and some condition Sw,d hold at time T . Thus, with probability Π − n−ε , process zT∗ is sufficiently close to B, i.e., there exists a point z ∈ B such that kzT∗ − zk1 = O(n6ε ).  9  Proof of Proposition 2  Proof. Fix protocol P with set of states K, in which the minimum positive probability of executing some rule is p. Let K 0 ⊆ K, K 0 3 X be any minimal subset of the set of states such that no evolution of protocol P starting in a configuration containing only states from set K 0 will ever contain an agent in a state outside K 0 . Denote κ = |K 0 | − 1. Consider an initialization of protocol P at time t0 = 0, at a configuration z(0) with x ∈ [c, 1/2] and with all other states from K 0 represented by the same number of agents, i.e., for each Q ∈ K 0 , we have q(0) = (1 − x)/κ. Let t ≥ kn be an arbitrarily chosen time step. Let t1 = t − (κ − 1)n. Fix Q1 ∈ K 0 \ {X} as any state such that q1 (t1 ) ≥ 1/2κ (we can, e.g., fix q1 as the state from K 0 \ {X} having the most agents at time t1 ). Observe that from the minimality of K 0 it follows that there must exist a sequence of states (Q1 , . . . , Qκ ), with {Q1 , . . . , Qκ = K 0 \ {X}, such that in the definition of protocol P , for all i ∈ {1, . . . , κ − 1}, some rule of protocol P creates at least one agent (i.e., either 1 or 2 agents) in state Qi+1 from an interaction of either the pair of agents in states (Qj , Qi ) or the pair of agents in states (Qi , Qj ), for some j ∈ {1, . . . , i}. (Indeed, if for some i there was no possibility of choosing Qi+1 in any way, then K 00 = {X, Q1 , . . . Qi } ⊆ K 0 would be closed under agent creation, contradicting the minimality of the choice of K 0 .) Now, we consider intervals of time steps [ts , ts+1 ], with ts = t1 + (s − 1)n for s > 1. We make the following claims: (1) Fix i ∈ {1, 2, . . . κ}. If qi (ts ) = Ω(1), then qi (t) ≥ 0.11qi (ts ) for all t ∈ [ts , ts+1 , with probaΩ bility 1 − e−n (1) . Indeed, in a sequence of n steps, the expected number of agents which do not participate in any interaction in the time interval [ts , ts+1 ] following the asynchronous scheduler n is ( n−2 n ) n > 0.13n, and thus the number of non-interacting agents is at least 0.12n, with probaΩ bility 1 − e−n (1) following standard concentration bounds for the number of isolated vertices in a random graph on n nodes with n edges. Since the choice of agents by the scheduler is independent of their state, and the probability for a uniformly random agent to be in state Qi at time ts is qi (ts ), a simple concentration bound shows that 0.11qi (ts )n having state Qi at time ts do not participate in any interaction in the interval [ts , ts+1 ]. (2) Fix i ∈ {1, 2, . . . κ − 1}. Denote mi = minj≤i qj (ti ). If mi = Ω(1), then qi+1 (ti+1 ) ≥ 0.01pm2i , Ω with probability 1 − e−n (1) . Indeed, consider the value j ≤ i such that the interaction (Qj , Qi ) or (Qi , Qj ) creates an agent in state Qi+1 . At any time t within the interval [ti , ti+1 ], we have by Ω Claim (1) that qj (t) ≥ 0.11mi and qi (t) ≥ 0.11mi , with probability 1 − e−n (1) . It follows that 52  an interaction creating a new agent in state Qi+1 is triggered with probability at least p(0.11mi )2 at each step. The number of agents in state Qi+1 at time step ti+1 may thus be dominated from below by the number of successes in a sequence of n Bernoulli trials with success probability p(0.11mi )2 , and the claim follows. By applying Claim (2) iteratively for i = {1, 2, . . . κ − 1}, where we note that m1 ≥ 1/2κ, we i Ω have qi+1 (ti+1 ) ≥ (0.01p/2κ)2 , with probability 1 − e−n (1) (through successive union bounds). i Then, applying Claim (1) up to time t = tκ−1 , we have qi+1 (tκ−1 ) ≥ 0.11κ−1−i−1 (0.01p/2κ)2 ≥ κ Ω (0.01p/2κ)2 , with probability 1 − e−n (1) . Applying once again a union bound, we have shown that κ Ω for all q ∈ K 0 , we have q(t) ≥ (0.01p/2κ)2 ≡ C0 , with probability 1 − e−n (1) . The claim of the lemma follows for a suitable choice of δ0 > 0.  Acknowledgment. We sincerely thank Dan Alistarh and Przemek Uznański for inspiring discussions, and Lucas Boczkowski for many detailed comments which helped to improve this manuscript.  References [1] M. A. Abdullah and M. Draief. Majority consensus on random graphs of a given degree sequence. CoRR, abs/1209.5025, 2012. [2] D. Aldous and J. A. Fill. Reversible markov chains and random walks on graphs, 2002. Unfinished monograph, recompiled 2014, available at http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/˜aldous/ RWG/book.html. [3] D. Alistarh, J. Aspnes, D. Eisenstat, R. Gelashvili, and R. L. Rivest. Time-space trade-offs in population protocols. In Proc. Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2017, Barcelona, Spain, pages 2560–2579, 2017. [4] D. Alistarh, J. Aspnes, and R. Gelashvili. Space-optimal majority in population protocols. (To appear, SODA 2018.) CoRR, abs/1704.04947, 2017. [5] D. Alistarh, B. Dudek, A. Kosowski, D. Soloveichik, and P. Uznanski. Robust detection in leakprone population protocols. In DNA, volume 10467 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 155–171. Springer, 2017. [6] D. Angluin, J. Aspnes, Z. Diamadi, M. J. Fischer, and R. Peralta. Computation in networks of passively mobile finite-state sensors. Distributed Computing, 18(4):235–253, 2006. [7] D. Angluin, J. Aspnes, and D. Eisenstat. A simple population protocol for fast robust approximate majority. Distributed Computing, 21(2):87–102, 2008. [8] D. Angluin, J. Aspnes, D. Eisenstat, and E. Ruppert. The computational power of population protocols. Distributed Computing, 20(4):279–304, 2007. [9] J. Aspnes and E. Ruppert. An introduction to population protocols. Bulletin of the EATCS, 93:98– 117, 2007. [10] L. Becchetti, A. E. F. Clementi, E. Natale, F. Pasquale, R. Silvestri, and L. Trevisan. Simple dynamics for majority consensus. CoRR, abs/1310.2858, 2013. [11] L. Boczkowski, A. Korman, and E. Natale. Minimizing message size in stochastic communication patterns: Fast self-stabilizing protocols with 3 bits. In Proc. Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2017, Barcelona, Spain, pages 2540–2559, 2017. 53  [12] O. Bournez, P. Fraigniaud, and X. Koegler. Computing with large populations using interactions. In MFCS, volume 7464 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 234–246. Springer, 2012. [13] F. R. K. Chung and L. Lu. Survey: Concentration inequalities and martingale inequalities: A survey. Internet Mathematics, 3(1):79–127, 2006. [14] C. Cooper, R. Elsässer, and T. Radzik. The power of two choices in distributed voting. In Proc. 41st International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2014, Copenhagen, Denmark, Part II, pages 435–446, 2014. [15] J. Czyzowicz, L. Gasieniec, A. Kosowski, E. Kranakis, P. G. Spirakis, and P. Uznanski. On convergence and threshold properties of discrete Lotka-Volterra population protocols. In Proc. 42nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2015, Kyoto, Japan, Part I, pages 393–405, 2015. [16] A. Dobrinevski and E. Frey. Extinction in neutrally stable stochastic Lotka-Volterra models. Phys. Rev. E, 85:051903, May 2012. [17] B. Doerr, C. Doerr, and T. Kötzing. The right mutation strength for multi-valued decision variables. In T. Friedrich, F. Neumann, and A. M. Sutton, editors, Proceedings of the 2016 on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, Denver, CO, USA, July 20 - 24, 2016, pages 1115–1122. ACM, 2016. [18] B. Doerr, M. Fouz, and T. Friedrich. Social networks spread rumors in sublogarithmic time. Electronic Notes in Discrete Mathematics, 38:303–308, 2011. [19] B. Doerr, D. Johannsen, and C. Winzen. Multiplicative drift analysis. CoRR, abs/1101.0776, 2011. [20] B. Doerr and M. Künnemann. Tight analysis of randomized rumor spreading in complete graphs. In 2014 Proc. Eleventh Workshop on Analytic Algorithmics and Combinatorics, ANALCO 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA, January 6, 2014, pages 82–91, 2014. [21] D. Doty. Timing in chemical reaction networks. In Proc. Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA, January 5-7, 2014, pages 772–784, 2014. [22] U. Feige, D. Peleg, P. Raghavan, and E. Upfal. Randomized broadcast in networks. In Algorithms, International Symposium SIGAL ’90, Tokyo, Japan, 1990, pages 128–137, 1990. [23] N. Fountoulakis and K. Panagiotou. Rumor spreading on random regular graphs and expanders. Random Struct. Algorithms, 43(2):201–220, 2013. [24] A. M. Frieze and G. R. Grimmett. The shortest-path problem for graphs with random arc-lengths. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 10(1):57–77, 1985. [25] L. Gasieniec and G. Stachowiak. Fast space optimal leader election in population protocols. (To appear, SODA 2018.) CoRR, abs/1704.07649, 2017. [26] G. Giakkoupis, Y. Nazari, and P. Woelfel. How asynchrony affects rumor spreading time. In Proc. 2016 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2016, Chicago, IL, USA, pages 185–194, 2016. [27] A. Goldbeter. Computational approaches to cellular rhythms. Nature, 420(6912):238–245, Nov. 2002.  54  [28] J. Hofbauer and K. Sigmund. Evolutionary Games and Population Dynamics. Cambridge University Press, 1998. [29] R. M. Karp, C. Schindelhauer, S. Shenker, and B. Vöcking. Randomized rumor spreading. In 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2000, 12-14 November 2000, Redondo Beach, California, USA, pages 565–574, 2000. [30] B. Kerr, M. A. Riley, M. W. Feldman, and B. J. M. Bohannan. Local dispersal promotes biodiversity in a real-life game of rock-paper-scissors. Nature, 418(6894):171–174, Jul 2002. [31] B. C. Kirkup and M. A. Riley. Antibiotic-mediated antagonism leads to a bacterial game of rockpaper-scissors in vivo. Nature, 428(6981):412–414, Mar 2004. [32] L. Lamport. Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system. Commun. ACM, 21(7):558–565, 1978. [33] P. K. Lehre and C. Witt. General drift analysis with tail bounds. CoRR, abs/1307.2559, 2013. [34] C. Lenzen, T. Locher, P. Sommer, and R. Wattenhofer. Clock synchronization: Open problems in theory and practice. In Proc. 36th Conference on Current Trends in Theory and Practice of Computer Science, SOFSEM 2010, Spindleruv Mlýn, Czech Republic, pages 61–70, 2010. [35] C. Lenzen, T. Locher, and R. Wattenhofer. Clock synchronization with bounded global and local skew. In 49th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2008, October 25-28, 2008, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pages 509–518, 2008. [36] A. J. Lotka. Contribution to the theory of periodic reactions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 14(3):271–274, 1909. [37] J. Lundelius and N. A. Lynch. A new fault-tolerant algorithm for clock synchronization. In Proc. Third Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, Vancouver, B. C., Canada, pages 75–88, 1984. [38] G. B. Mertzios, S. E. Nikoletseas, C. L. Raptopoulos, and P. G. Spirakis. Determining majority in networks with local interactions and very small local memory. Distributed Computing, 30(1):1–16, 2017. [39] O. Michail, I. Chatzigiannakis, and P. G. Spirakis. New Models for Population Protocols. Synthesis Lectures on Distributed Computing Theory. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2011. [40] K. Panagiotou and L. Speidel. abs/1608.01766, 2016.  Asynchronous rumor spreading on random graphs.  CoRR,  [41] M. Parker and A. Kamenev. Extinction in the Lotka-Volterra model. Phys. Rev. E, 80:021129, 2009. [42] B. Pittel. On spreading a rumor. SIAM J. Appl. Math., 47(1):213–223, Mar. 1987. [43] V. B. Priezzhev, D. Dhar, A. Dhar, and S. Krishnamurthy. Eulerian walkers as a model of selforganized criticality. Phys. Rev. Lett., 77:5079–5082, Dec 1996. [44] T. Reichenbach, M. Mobilia, and E. Frey. Coexistence versus extinction in the stochastic cyclic Lotka-Volterra model. Phys. Rev. E, 74:051907, Nov 2006. [45] T. Sauerwald. On mixing and edge expansion properties in randomized broadcasting. Algorithmica, 56(1):51–88, 2010. [46] A. Szolnoki, M. Mobilia, L. Jiang, B. Szczesny, A. M. Rucklidge, and M. Perc. Cyclic dominance in evolutionary games: A review. CoRR, abs/1408.6828, 2014. 55  56  Figure 9: Illustration of concentration of various features as a function of time steps for a simulation of the protocol Po for n = 106 , p = 6 · 10−2 , q = 10−2 , r = 10−1 , s = 1 in various scenarios. Left column shows concentration of species A1 , A2 , A3 , middle one the majority layer and right one light. First row: initialization from a corner configuration (#X = 1, left panel), further dynamics of the protocol after rumor source is removed (#X = 0, middle panel), further dynamics of the protocol after rumor source is reinserted (#X = 1, right panel). Middle row: initialization from a configuration with A1 = A2 = A3 = 1/3 and #X = 0. Bottom row: as above, with #X = 1. The range of the horizontal time scale corresponds to 2500 parallel rounds of the protocol.  APPENDIX: Simulation Examples for Oscillator Dynamics

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
