Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_2338

Abstract:
arXiv:1608.08193v2 [math.AC] 5 Mar 2017  BIG COHEN-MACAULAY AND SEED ALGEBRAS IN EQUAL CHARACTERISTIC ZERO VIA ULTRAPRODUCTS GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G. Abstract. Let R be a commutative, local, Noetherian ring. In a past article, the first author developed a theory of R-algebras, termed seeds, that can be mapped to balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebras. In prime characteristic p, seeds can be characterized based on the existence of certain colon-killers, integral extensions of seeds are seeds, tensor products of seeds are seeds, and the seed property is stable under base change between complete, local domains. As a result, there exist directed systems of big Cohen-Macaulay algebras over complete, local domains. In this work, we will show that these properties can be extended to analogous results in equal characteristic zero. The primary tool for the extension will be the notion of ultraproducts for commutative rings as developed by Schoutens and Aschenbrenner.  For a local ring (R, m), a big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra B is an R-algebra such that some system of parameters for R forms a regular sequence on B with the extra property that mB 6= B to ensure that B is not trivial. If this is true for every system of parameters for R, then B is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra. Big Cohen-Macaulay algebras were ﬁrst shown to exist in [HH92] using characteristic p methods related to tight closure theory (see [HH90]). Hochster and Huneke proved that the absolute integral extension R+ is a balanced big CohenMacaulay R-algebra when R is an excellent, local, domain of prime characteristic. These results were extended in further articles. For example, in [Ho94] Hochster makes explicit use of tight closure to provide an alternative proof of the existence of big Cohen-Macaulay algebras in prime characteristic based on the notion of algebra modiﬁcations. In [HH95] Hochster and Huneke proved the existence of balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebras for rings containing a ﬁeld of characteristic zero and proved the “weakly functorial” existence of big Cohen-Macaulay algebras, i.e., given complete local domains of equal characteristic R → S, there exists a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra B and a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay S-algebra C such that B → C extends the map R → S. The results in equal characteristic zero are based on reductions to prime characteristic that rely on Artin approximation. In [D07], the ﬁrst author introduced the notion of seed algebras. Given a local, Noetherian ring R, a seed algebra over R is an R-algebra S such that there exists an R-algebra map S → B where B is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay Ralgebra. Some of the noteworthy results in that paper for rings of prime characteristic are Theorem 4.8 (which characterizes seeds based on durable, colon-killers), Date: August 30, 2016. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 13C14; Secondary 13A35. Key words and phrases. big Cohen-Macaulay algebras, tight closure, equal characteristic zero, ultraproducts. The second author was partially supported by the National Science Foundation [grant numbers DGE 1256260, DMS 1401384]. 1  2  GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G.  Theorem 6.9 (which shows that integral extensions of seeds are seeds and thus partially generalizes Hochster and Huneke’s result for R+ ), Theorem 7.8 (which shows that every seed can be mapped to an absolutely integrally closed, m-adically separated, quasilocal, balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra domain), Theorem 8.4 (which shows that tensor products of seeds are seeds and thus that any two big Cohen-Macaulay algebras map to a common big Cohen-Macaulay algebra), and Theorem 8.10 (which shows that the seed property is stable under base change and thus generalizes the weakly functorial existence result of Hochster and Huneke). Our aim in this paper is to extend the results of [D07] to equal characteristic zero using the notion of ultraproducts of rings as developed by Schoutens and Aschenbrenner in works such as [Sch03], [AS07], and [Sch10], to name just a few. Although many reductions to characteristic p have relied more directly upon various forms of Artin approximation, we decided that the theory of ultraproducts better suited the arguments here. Theorems 3.3, 3.5, 4.2, 4.3, and 5.1 in this work will serve as analogues to the above mentioned Theorems 8.4, 8.10, 4.8, 7.8, and 6.9 (respectively) from [D07]. As an added bonus, we do not need a hypothesis of completeness on the rings in this work as was needed in [D07]. The equal characteristic zero local domains R in this work (complete or not) will each have an associated Lefschetz hull D(R) which is an ultraproduct of rings Rw almost all of which are complete, local domains of prime characteristic. See Discussion 1.10 and Theorem 1.11 for details. on the Lefschetz hull and its properties. We will then prove that properties of the Rw transfer back to R, even without the hypothesis of completeness on R. In the ﬁrst section, we will review some properties of ultraproducts and big Cohen-Macaulay algebras. With those tools established, we will proceed to discuss the notion of seeds in equal characteristic zero and then prove the analogues of the results named above from [D07] in the following sections. Throughout this paper, all rings are assumed to be commutative with identity, but not necessarily Noetherian unless stated explicitly. We will also follow the convention that “quasilocal” means that a ring (not necessarily Noetherian) has a unique maximal ideal while “local” means quasilocal and Noetherian. 1. Overview of Ultraproducts and Big Cohen-Macaulay Algebras We begin our eﬀorts by reviewing background material necessary for our results. The main area of focus will be the topics related to ultraproducts in commutative algebra. The primary references will be the works of Schoutens and Aschenbrenner. See [Sch10], [AS07], and [Sch03] for examples. Some of the results needed are listed below. References are provided to relevant sections of the works mentioned above. Definition 1.1 ((2.1.1), [Sch10]). Let W be an inﬁnite set. A filter on W is a proper, nonempty collection W of subsets of W that is closed under ﬁnite intersections and taking supersets. If we add the conditions that the empty set is not in W and that for every subset A of W , either A ∈ W or W − A ∈ W, then W is an ultrafilter. We say that W is principal if it contains a least element, i.e., a set contained in every other element of W. This least element in a principal ultraﬁlter will always be a singleton set. An ultraﬁlter that does not have a least element is non-principal. Note that all of the sets in a non-principal ultraﬁlter are inﬁnite, as intersections of ﬁnite sets always result in smaller sets and eventually lead to the empty set.  BIG C-M AND SEED ALGEBRAS . . . VIA ULTRAPRODUCTS  3  Following Schoutens, we will say (equivalently) that a non-principal ultrafilter on W is a collection W of inﬁnite subsets of W that is closed under ﬁnite intersection and such that for any W ′ ⊆ W , either W ′ ∈ W or W − W ′ ∈ W. Note that the requirement that all sets in W be inﬁnite implies that the empty set is not in W, and that W is not principal as it cannot contain a singleton set. Also, if W ′ ∈ W and W ′ ⊆ W ′′ , then under this notion we will have W ′′ ∈ W as otherwise W − W ′′ ∈ W. But W − W ′′ is disjoint from W ′ , so this would imply that the empty set is in W. All ultraﬁlters in this work will be non-principal ultraﬁlters. Example 1.2. Let W be any inﬁnite set, and take the collection of subsets of W whose complements are ﬁnite. This can be expanded to a non-principal ultraﬁlter via the axiom of choice. Hence there is always at least one ultraﬁlter on any inﬁnite set W . See Section 6.2 of [Ho93] for more details. Remark 1.3. In what follows, we will generally work with a ﬁxed non-principal ultraﬁlter on a given set W . In the later sections, W will be the set of positive prime integers, but the speciﬁc ultraﬁlter W on W will not be described as it mostly does not play a determining role in the results. The presence of a non-principal ultraﬁlter is all that is needed. The purpose of the ultraﬁlter is to specify which subsets of W are “large” and thus develop a notion of when a property is true for “almost all” elements in W . Definition 1.4. Let W be an inﬁnite set, and W a non-principal ultraﬁlter on W . We say that a property holds for almost all w ∈ W if it holds for all w in some W ′ ∈ W. In the later sections, we will prove a number of results in equal characteristic zero by appealing to a similar result already known to be true in characteristic p > 0. The idea is that many rings of equal characteristic zero have the structure of an ultraproduct, deﬁned below, of rings of characteristic p > 0, and many properties of the factors transfer to their ultraproduct. Definition 1.5 ((2.1.2)–(2.1.4), [Sch10]). Let W be an inﬁnite set with a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter W. For each w ∈ W , take a ring Aw . The ultraproduct A♮ of the Aw (with respect to W) is the quotient (Πw Aw ) /Inull , where Inull is the ideal of elements (xw )w∈W of Πw Aw where xw = 0 for almost all w. Any such ring A♮ is called an ultraring. Given an element (aw ) ∈ Πw Aw , we refer to its image a♮ in A♮ as the ultraproduct of the aw , and denote it by ulimw aw . We can take ultraproducts of Aw -modules as well: the ultraproduct of the Aw modules Mw is M♮ = (Πw Mw ) /Mnull , where Mnull consists of all elements of Πw Mw almost all of whose entries are 0. M♮ has the structure of an A♮ -module and will be called an ultramodule. Maps on the components of an ultraproduct lead to a map on the ultraproduct. Definition 1.6 ((2.1.7), [Sch10]). Given rings Aw and Bw and maps fw : Aw → Bw , the ultraproduct f♮ of the fw is deﬁned to be the map f♮ (ulimw aw ) = ulimw fw (aw ). We call f♮ a map of ultrarings. Similarly, given Aw -modules Mw and Nw and maps fw : Mw → Nw , the ultraproduct f♮ of the fw is deﬁned by f♮ (ulimw mw ) = ulimw fw (mw ). We call f♮ a map of ultramodules.  4  GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G.  The following theorem is one of the main tools for working with ultraproducts. Theorem 1.7 (Los’s Theorem, (2.3.1), [Sch10]). Let S be a system of equations f1 = f2 = . . . = fs = 0 and inequalities g1 6= 0, g2 6= 0, . . . , gt 6= 0 with fi , gj ∈ Z[x1 , . . . , xn ]. Then an element a♮ ∈ A♮ is a solution of S if and only if aw is a solution of S in Aw for almost all w. Ring theoretic properties that can be deﬁned equationally can typically be transferred between an ultraring and almost all of its components via Los’ Theorem. For example, almost all Aw are domains if and only if A♮ is a domain ([Sch10, 2.4.10]). Other critical examples for us are given below. Example 1.8 ((2.4.1)–(2.4.4), [Sch10]). A Lefschetz field K is a ﬁeld of characteristic zero that is an ultraproduct almost all of whose components Kw are ﬁelds of positive characteristic. The ﬁeld of complex numbers C is isomorphic to a Lefschetz ﬁeld constructed from the algebraic closures of the ﬁnite ﬁelds of characteristic p > 0. More generally, assuming the generalized Continuum Hypothesis, any uncountable algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic zero is also a Lefschetz ﬁeld. Example 1.9 ((2.9.7), [Sch03]). Let x♮ be a sequence of elements in an ultraring A♮ with corresponding sequences of elements xw in each of the Aw . Then x♮ is a regular sequence on A♮ if and only if xw is a regular sequence on Aw for almost all w. One of the most important constructions used below to transfer results from characteristic p > 0 to equal characteristic zero is the Lefschetz hull of an equal characteristic zero local ring. The reader is referred to [AS07, Sections 4 and 5] for the full treatment of these subjects, but we attempt to summarize some key results below. The following is the base assumption for all local rings in the following sections. Discussion 1.10. Let R denote an equal characteristic zero Noetherian local ring that is not necessarily complete. Let K denote a Lefschetz ﬁeld with respect to an unspeciﬁed non-principal ultraﬁlter placed upon the set of positive prime integers. The components Kw of K will then be algebraically closed ﬁelds of characteristic p(w). The cardinality of K needs to be suﬃciently large, e.g., a cardinality exceeding 2|R| . One can add extra data (including a local homomorphism to K) so that there exists a Lefschetz hull D(R) which is deﬁned to be an ultraproduct of rings Rw (called the approximations of R), where each Rw is a complete local Noetherian ring with algebraically closed, characteristic p > 0 residue ﬁeld Kw . The full deﬁnition and development of the Lefschetz hull is rather technical, and the curious reader is referred to [AS07, Section 4] for the complete details. We include several statements and theorems below that will attempt to describe the properties of the Lefschetz hull that are of the greatest interest to us for this present article. By ([AS07, (4.21)]), there is a faithfully ﬂat functorial map R → D(R). Given any r ∈ R, there is a corresponding element ulimw rw in D(R), where each rw ∈ Rw . The rw are called approximations of r. Also, D(R) is not necessarily Noetherian.  BIG C-M AND SEED ALGEBRAS . . . VIA ULTRAPRODUCTS  5  Given a local homomorphism R → S of equal characteristic zero local rings, choose K as above with suﬃciently large cardinality compared to both rings. Again by ([AS07, (4.26)]), there exist faithfully ﬂat Lefschetz hulls for both rings forming a commutative diagram / D(S) D(R) O O /S R We will consider this setup as our standing hypotheses on local equal characteristic zero rings and on local homomorphisms between them in the later sections. The sense in which the components Rw of the Lefschetz hull D(R) are characteristic p > 0 approximations of R is indicated by the following summary of results. Theorem 1.11. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in (1.10). (1) [AS07, (5.2.1)] Almost all Rw have the same dimension as R. (2) [AS07, (5.4)] A tuple x from R is a partial system of parameters for R if and only if xw is a partial system of parameters in Rw for almost all w. (3) [AS07, (5.17)] If R is a domain, then D(R) is a domain and Rw is a domain for almost all w. We close out this introduction with a very quick review of big Cohen-Macaulay algebras. Definition 1.12. Let (R, m) be a local ring of dimension d. An R-algebra B is a big Cohen-Macaulay algebra over R with respect to the system of parameters x1 , . . . , xd for R if x1 , . . . , xd forms a regular sequence on B and mB 6= B. We also call B a big Cohen-Macaulay algebra over R if the particular system of parameters is not relevant. An R-algebra B is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra over R if every system of parameters on R is a regular sequence on B and mB 6= B. As mentioned at the start of the paper, Hochster and Huneke [HH92] ﬁrst proved the existence of balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebras over excellent local rings R of characteristic p > 0 by showing that every system of parameters from R is a regular sequence on R+ . Hochster generalized this in [Ho94] by showing how to construct a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra over R using systems of algebra Pk modiﬁcations. If S is an R-algebra, and sxk+1 = i=1 xi si is a relation in S on a partial system of parameters from R, then an algebra modiﬁcation of S is T =  S[U1 . . . , Uk ] P s − ki=1 xi Ui  For characteristic p > 0 local rings R, a direct limit of algebra modiﬁcations can be built into a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra over R. Before we proceed further, we note that the Cohen-Macaulay property is preserved by ultraproducts. The result below is a generalization of [Sch10, Theorem 6.4.7], which proves something similar for the speciﬁc case of absolute integral clo+ sures Rw and their ultraproducts.  6  GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G.  Lemma 1.13. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. Suppose that B♮ = ulimw Bw , where Bw is an Rw -algebra. Then (a) B♮ is a big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra with respect to a fixed system of parameters x if and only if Bw is a big Cohen-Macaulay Rw -algebra with respect to any choice of approximations xw for almost all w. (b) B♮ is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra if and only if for almost all w, Bw is a big Cohen-Macaulay algebra over Rw with respect to the approximations xw for all systems of parameters x of R. (c) If almost all Bw are balanced big Cohen-Macaulay Rw -algebras, then B♮ is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra. Proof. Let x be a sequence of elements from R with corresponding approximations xw in each of the Rw . By [AS07, Lemma 5.4], x is a system of parameters for R if and only if xw is a system of parameters for almost all of the Rw . By Los’ Theorem (or see the details of the proof for [AS07, Lemma 5.4]), x will be a regular sequence on B♮ if and only if xw is regular on Bw for almost all w. Thus, B♮ is big Cohen-Macaulay over R with respect to x if and only if for almost all w, Bw is big Cohen-Macaulay over Rw with respect to xw . Part (b) follows from part (a). The single direction for part (c) then follows from part (b) as any approximation of a system of parameters from R will be a system of parameters for almost all Rw .  The converse of part (c) is likely to be false, but we do not have an explicit counterexample. There is no a priori reason why a big Cohen-Macaulay Rw -algebra with respect to approximations xw of the systems of parameters of R should still be big Cohen-Macaulay over Rw with respect to all systems of parameters of Rw , i.e., not every system of parameters for Rw will necessarily arise as an approximation of a system of parameters from R. 2. Seeds in Equal Characteristic Zero Definition 2.1. Given a local ring (R, m), a seed S over R is an R-algebra S such that there exists an R-algebra map S → B where B is a (balanced) big CohenMacaulay R-algebra [D07]. Remark 2.2. By the result of Bartijn and Strooker [BS83], there is no harm in leaving oﬀ the adjective “balanced” as any big Cohen-Macaulay algebra (or module) can be modiﬁed into a balanced version by applying the m-adic separated completion. In order to apply a reduction to characteristic p method via ultraproducts, we ﬁnd it necessary to set forth the following modiﬁed deﬁnition for rings of equal characteristic zero. Definition 2.3. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. An R-algebra S is called a rational seed if there exists an R-algebra map S → T♮ such that T♮ = ulimw Tw , where Tw is a seed algebra over Rw for almost all w. We will call the ultrarings T♮ ultraseeds. Rational seeds exist in equal characteristic zero.  BIG C-M AND SEED ALGEBRAS . . . VIA ULTRAPRODUCTS  7  Theorem 2.4. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. Then R is a rational seed and D(R) is an ultraseed over R. Proof. Consider a Lefschetz hull D(R) and the approximations Rw in characteristic p. By [AS07, (4.2) and (5.17)] almost all of the Rw are complete, local domains of characteristic p and so can be mapped to balanced big Cohen-Macaulay Rw algebras Bw by [HH92, (5.15)] or [D07, (6.11)]. (For the cases where Rw is not a complete, local domain, set Bw to be the zero ring.) As almost all of the Rw rings are seeds over themselves, D(R) is an ultraseed over R. The map R → D(R) shows that R is a rational seed.  The following lemma provides alternative characterizations of rational seeds. In short, the lemma says that when working with a rational seed S, we can skip over the ultraseed T♮ and work directly with an ultraring B♮ that is also a (balanced) big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra. Lemma 2.5. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. Then the following are equivalent for an R-algebra S: (1) S is a rational seed over R. (2) There exists an R-algebra map S → B♮ such that B♮ is an ultraring and a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra. (3) There exists an R-algebra map S → B♮ such that B♮ is an ultraring and a big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra with respect to a fixed system of parameters from R. Proof. For (1) ⇒ (2), there is a map S → T♮ , where almost all approximations Tw are seeds over Rw . Thus, almost all of the Tw can be mapped to balanced big Cohen-Macaulay Rw -algebras Bw . Let B♮ be the ultraproduct of the Bw . Then the map S → T♮ and maps Tw → Bw induce a composite map S → B♮ . Moreover, Lemma 1.13(c) implies that B♮ is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra. The implication (2) ⇒ (3) is obvious. Finally, for (3) ⇒ (1) note that Lemma 1.13(a) implies that almost all of the approximations Bw are big Cohen-Macaulay Rw algebras for some ﬁxed system of parameters from Rw and thus are seeds over Rw .  The next result indicates that R-algebras that are formed by algebra modiﬁcations of a rational seed are also rational seeds. Proposition 2.6. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. Let S be a rational seed over R. Suppose that T is an S-algebra that is also a direct limit of algebra modifications of S with respect to relations on the systems of parameters of R. Then T is a rational seed. Proof. As T is a direct limit of algebra modiﬁcations of S, it maps to every Salgebra that is also a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra [RG15]. Since S is a rational seed, Lemma 2.5 implies that there is a map S → B♮ , a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra and an ultraring. Thus, there is a map T → B♮ , showing that T is a rational seed.   8  GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G.  Question 2.7. Are there R-algebra seeds S in equal characteristic zero that are not rational seeds? This question reduces to the question of whether there are big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebras in equal characteristic zero that do not arise from some reduction to characteristic p argument or from a sequence of algebra modiﬁcations but exist “intrinsically” over R. Answering this question one way or another would inform us about whether or not there is a diﬀerence between rational seeds and ordinary seeds. For the time being however, the notion of rational seed seems robust enough. We can also show that direct limits of ultraseeds are ultraseeds under certain conditions, paralleling [D07, Lemma 3.2]. To do so we need a lemma about direct limits and ultralimits. Unlike the analogous work in [D07], Lemma 2.8 and Proposition 2.9 are not used in deriving the remaining results in this article. Lemma 2.8. Let Λ be a directed set. Let W be an ultrafilter on an infinite set W . Suppose that for all w ∈ W and all λ ≤ µ ≤ ν ∈ Λ we have ring maps (µ) fw(λ,µ) : A(λ) w → Aw (ν) fw(µ,ν) : A(µ) w → Aw (λ,ν)  fw (λ,ν)  such that fw  (µ,ν)  = fw  (λ,µ)  ◦ fw  (λ)  (ν)  : Aw → Aw  (λ)  . For all λ ∈ Λ let A♮  (λ)  = ulim Aw , for all w ∈ W  (λ)  let Aw = limλ Aw , and let A♮ = ulim Aw . Then −→ (λ)  A♮ = lim A♮ −→ λ  in the category of ultrarings with respect to W, with morphisms maps of ultrarings. (λ,µ)  Proof. First note that as the maps fw , etc. exist for all w ∈ W (and not just almost all w), the hypotheses on compositions of those maps induce analogous (λ) properties on maps f (λ,µ) in the directed system of ultrarings {A♮ }λ∈Λ by [Sch10, (λ)  (2.1.7)]. Therefore, limλ A♮ exists in the category of ultrarings. −→ (λ) We will now prove that A♮ = limλ A♮ by showing A♮ satisﬁes the universal −→ mapping property of a direct limit in the category of ultrarings. Indeed, suppose that C♮ = ulim Cw is an ultraring and that for all λ ∈ Λ there exists a map of (λ) ultrarings ψ (λ) : A♮ → C♮ such that ψ (λ) = ψ (µ) ◦ f (λ,µ) for all λ ≤ µ in Λ. Therefore, for all w ∈ W we have maps (λ) (λ) (µ) (λ,µ) ψw : A(λ) w → Cw such that ψw = ψw ◦ fw  for all λ ≤ µ in Λ. For each w ∈ W we apply the universal mapping property of (λ) direct limits to construct a map ψw : Aw → Cw as Aw = limλ Aw . As we have −→ maps for all w ∈ W , [Sch10, (2.1.7)] implies that we have a map ψ : A♮ → C♮ , (λ) which shows that A♮ is limλ A♮ in the category of ultrarings.  −→ Proposition 2.9. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. Adopt the same notation and hypotheses of Lemma 2.8 for Rw -algebras (λ) (λ) (λ) Aw and Aw and ultrarings A♮ and A♮ = ulim Aw = limλ A♮ . Then A♮ is −→  BIG C-M AND SEED ALGEBRAS . . . VIA ULTRAPRODUCTS  9  an ultraseed (i.e., Aw is a seed over Rw for almost all w) if and only if P = (λ) {w | Aw is a seed over Rw for all λ} is a set in the ultrafilter W on W . Proof. For the forward direction, note that if A♮ is an ultraseed, then the maps (λ) (λ) A♮ → A♮ in the direct limit system arise from maps Aw → Aw for all w, using the previous lemma to identify A♮ with ulim Aw . As the Aw are seeds over Rw for (λ) (λ) almost all w, for these values of w, the maps Aw → Aw imply that Aw is a seed over Rw for all λ, showing that the set P is in the ultraﬁlter W. Conversely, suppose that the set P is in the ultraﬁlter W. Then for almost (λ) all w we have that Aw is a seed over Rw for all λ. Hence for almost all w we (λ) have Aw = limλ Aw is a seed over Rw [D07, Lemma 3.2], which implies that −→ A♮ = ulim Aw is an ultraseed.  Remark 2.10. The proposition above, unlike most other results in this work, depends upon the choice of ultraﬁlter W. The subtlety lies in the fact that the set P in the statement is equal to the possibly infinite intersection of the sets (λ) (λ) Pλ = {w | Aw is a seed over Rw } . While each A♮ is an ultraseed if and only if Pλ is in the ultraﬁlter, the set P may or may not still live in the ultraﬁlter as ultraﬁlters need only be closed under ﬁnite intersections. There is no guarantee for inﬁnite intersections. 3. Tensor Products and Base Change In this section we aim to prove the analogues of two major results from [D07]: tensor products of seeds are seeds and base change applied to a seed maintains the seed property. As both results relate to tensor products, we need an initial elementary lemma relating tensor products to ultraproducts. The result is a partial generalization of [AS07, Proposition 1.2] for tensor products of arbitrary modules. Lemma 3.1. Let A♮ be an arbitrary ultraring, i.e., an ultraproduct of (not necessarily Noetherian) commutative rings Aw . Let Mw and Nw be arbitrary (not necessarily finitely generated) Aw -modules. Then there exists a canonical map M♮ ⊗A♮ N♮ → ulim(Mw ⊗Aw Nw ). Proof. Let m♮ , m′♮ ∈ M♮ and n♮ ∈ N♮ with approximations mw , m′w , and nw , respectively. Deﬁne a map M♮ × N♮ → (Mw ⊗Aw Nw )♮ by sending (m♮ , n♮ ) 7→ ulim(mw ⊗ nw ). This map is well-deﬁned on equivalence classes for m♮ or n♮ . Indeed, if m♮ = 0, then almost all mw = 0 and so (mw ⊗ nw ) = 0 for almost all w so that the ultraproduct is also 0. A similar situation holds when n♮ = 0. The map is also bilinear: we have (m♮ + m′♮ , n♮ ) = ((m + m′ )♮ , n♮ ) 7→ ulim((mw + m′w ) ⊗ nw ) = ulim(mw ⊗ nw ) + ulim(m′w ⊗ nw ). Similarly, the map is additive in the second coordinate. Finally, if a♮ ∈ A♮ with approximations aw , then (a♮ m♮ , n♮ ) = ((aw mw )♮ , n♮ ) 7→ ulim(aw mw ⊗ nw ) = a♮ · ulim(mw ⊗ nw ). By the universal mapping property of tensor products, we now have the desired  map M♮ ⊗A♮ N♮ → ulim(Mw ⊗Aw Nw ).  10  GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G.  Lemma 3.2. Let A♮ be an arbitrary ultraring, i.e., an ultraproduct of (not neces(i) sarily Noetherian) commutative rings Aw . Let Mw be arbitrary (not necessarily finitely generated) Aw -modules indexed set I. Then there exists a N by a common  N (i) (i) M . [Note that the first tensor product canonical map i∈I M♮ → ulim w i∈I  has A♮ as its base ring while the second has the Aw rings as bases.]  Proof. A similar argument to that above can be used to show that a similar map (i) deﬁned on the arbitrary product Πi∈I M♮ is A♮ -linear in every coordinate, which then gives a map from the tensor product to the desired ultraproduct of tensor products.  We present one of our main theorems next, which shows that tensor products of rational seeds are also rational seeds, an analogue of [D07, Theorem 8.4]. Theorem 3.3. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as N in Discussion 1.10. Let (Si )i∈I be a finite family of rational seeds over R. Then i∈I Si (tensored over R) is also a rational seed. Consequently, if B♮ and B♮′ are (balanced) big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebras and ultrarings, then there exists a (balanced) big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra and ultraring C♮ filling in the commutative diagram: B♮ O  / C♮ O  R  / B′ ♮ (i)  Proof. By the deﬁnition of rational seed, for each i ∈ I we have a map Si → T♮ (i)  such that T♮ is an ultraproduct of Rw -algebras, almost all of which are seeds over Rw . As the set I is ﬁnite and a ﬁnite intersection of sets in an ultraﬁlter still lies (i) in the ultraﬁlter, we can say that almost all Tw are Rw -seeds across all i ∈ I simultaneously. (In other words, the “almost all w” is independent of the choice of N (i) i.) Thus for almost all w, we have that i∈I Tw (tensored over Rw ) is a seed over Rw by [D07, Theorem 8.4]. Finally note that we have maps ! O O (i) O (i) Si → T♮ → ulim Tw , i∈I  i∈I  i∈I  where the ﬁrst product uses R as base, the second uses D(R) as base, the third N uses Rw as base, and the last map follows from Lemma 3.2. This shows that i∈I Si is a rational seed. Now that we have established that tensor products of rational seeds are rational seeds, we can deduce the ﬁnal claim by noting that B♮ and B♮′ are rational seeds by Lemma 2.5 and Lemma 1.13. As a result, there is a map B♮ ⊗R B♮′ → C♮ as the ﬁrst part of the proof shows that B♮ ⊗R B♮′ is a rational seed, and Lemma 1.13 shows that there is a map to a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra C♮ that is also an ultraring.   BIG C-M AND SEED ALGEBRAS . . . VIA ULTRAPRODUCTS  11  Remark 3.4. The characteristic p > 0 version of the theorem above is true for arbitrarily large families of tensor products. We kept the equal characteristic zero version limited to ﬁnite families because of subtleties related to ultraﬁlters. One can conclude that an inﬁnite tensor product of rational seeds is a rational seed as long as the set {w | Tw(i) is a seed over Rw for all i ∈ I} is a member of the ultraﬁlter. This is similar to the restriction applied in Proposition 2.9 earlier. We are also able to derive an equal characteristic zero version of [D07, Theorem 8.10], which will show that the rational seed property is stable under base change between local domains of equal characteristic zero. Theorem 3.5. Let R and S be local domains of equal characteristic zero with a local map R → S and Lefschetz hulls D(R) and D(S) with characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw and Sw as in Discussion 1.10. Suppose that T is a rational seed over R. Then T ⊗R S is a rational seed over S. Consequently, if B♮ is an ultraproduct and a big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra, then there exists C♮ which is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra over S and an ultraproduct that fills in a commutative diagram: / C♮ B♮ O O R  /S  Proof. As T is a rational seed over R, there exists an R-linear map T → U♮ , where almost all Uw are seeds over the complete, local domains Rw of characteristic p > 0. By [D07, Theorem 8.10], we know that Uw ⊗Rw Sw is a seed over Sw for almost all w. Therefore ulim(Uw ⊗Rw Sw ) is an ultraseed over S. Note that we have S-linear maps: T ⊗R S → U♮ ⊗R S → U♮ ⊗D(R) D(S) → ulim(Uw ⊗Rw Sw ), where the last map follows from Lemma 3.1. This chain of S-algebra maps shows that T ⊗R S is a rational seed over S. In the special case that T = B♮ is a big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra, B♮ ⊗R S will map further to an S-algebra C♮ with the desired properties by Lemma 2.5.  4. Other Properties of Seeds In this section we present two primary results, both of which are equal characteristic zero analogues of results from [D07]. The ﬁrst result will characterize rational seeds in terms of “durable colon-killers” while the second will show that rational seeds can be mapped to balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebras with a host of other nice properties. We start by restating the deﬁnition of durable colon-killer from [D07, Deﬁnition 4.7]. Definition 4.1. For a local ring (R, m) and an R-algebra S, an element c ∈ S is called a weak durable colon-killer over R if for some system of parameters x1 , . . . , xn of R, c((xt1 , . . . , xtk )S :S xtk+1 ) ⊆ (xt1 , . . . , xtk )S,  12  GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G.  for all 1 ≤ T k ≤ n − 1 and all t ∈ N, and if for each N ≥ 1, there exists a k ≥ 1 such that cN 6∈ k mk S. An element c ∈ S will be called a durable colon-killer over R if it is a weak durable colon-killer for every system of parameters of R. Notice that if S = R, then all colon-killers in R that are not nilpotent are durable colon-killers, and if R is reduced, all nonzero colon-killers are durable colon-killers. The following is an analogue of [D07, Theorem 4.8]. Theorem 4.2. Let (R, m) be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. Then the following three properties are equivalent for an R-algebra S: (1) S is a rational seed. (2) There exists a map S → T♮ such that T♮ contains a durable colon-killer c. (3) There exists a map S → T♮ with element c ∈ T♮ such that c = ulim cw where cw is a weak durable colon-killer in almost all Tw . Moreover, property (4) below implies (1)–(3): (4) There exists a map S → T♮ with element c ∈ T♮ such that c = ulim cw where cw is a durable colon-killer in almost all Tw . Proof. (1) along with Lemma 2.5 imply that there exists S → B♮ such that B♮ is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra. Thus, (1) implies (2) using T♮ = B♮ and c = 1. (2) implies (3) when one takes approximations cw of c and applies Los’ Theorem. Indeed, ﬁx a system of parameters x1 , . . . , xd for R and take approximations x1w , . . . , xdw in each Rw via D(R). Then almost all sequences x1w , . . . , xdw form a system of parameters in Rw by [Sch10, Corollary 4.3.8]. Powers of the system of parameters and their approximations are also systems of parameters for R and almost all Rw , respectively. By Los’ Theorem and the fact that c is a colon-killer, almost all cw will be weak colon-killers with respect to the powers of the T approximations of the system of parameters x. They will be durable as cN 6∈ k mk T♮ for all N implies that the same is true for almost all of the approximations cN w by Los’ T k N Theorem. Indeed, suppose that for some N we have cw ∈ k mw Tw for almost all w. As m is a ﬁnitely generated ideal, each inclusion can be speciﬁed equationally using polynomials and thus Los’ Theorem would imply that the same inclusion will hold for cN , a contradiction. We will show that (3) and (4) each imply (1) to complete the proof. By [D07, Theorem 4.8], (3) and (4) each imply that almost all of the Tw are seeds over Rw . Thus, the map S → T♮ shows that S is a rational seed.  We also present an analogue of [D07, Theorem 7.8] showing that rational seeds map to ultrarings with a host of other nice properties. Theorem 4.3. Let (R, m) be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. If S is a rational seed over R, then S maps to a quasilocal, absolutely integrally closed, m-adically separated, balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra domain B♮ . Proof. There exists a map S → T♮ such that almost all Tw are seeds over Rw . By [D07, Theorem 7.8], almost all of the Tw can be mapped to quasilocal, absolutely integrally closed, m-adically separated, balanced big Cohen-Macaulay Rw -algebra domains Bw . (Set Bw to be the zero ring for the cases where Tw is not a seed so that  BIG C-M AND SEED ALGEBRAS . . . VIA ULTRAPRODUCTS  13  there is still a map Tw → Bw .) By Lemma 1.13(c), we have that B♮ is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra with a composite map S → T♮ → B♮ induced by the maps Tw → Bw . Note that [Sch10, (2.4.10)] implies B♮ is a domain as almost all Bw are domains, and [Sch10, (2.4.8)] implies that B♮ will be quasilocal. To see that B♮ is also absolutely integrally closed, note that as the Bw are almost all absolutely integrally closed, all monic polynomials split in those Bw . Consider a monic polynomial in B♮ . Then almost all approximations over Bw will split. By Los’ Theorem, the original polynomial will split over B♮ as T well. Finally, to see that B♮ is m-adically separated, let b♮ ∈ k mk B♮ . TVia the Lefschetz hull D(R) and Los’ Theorem we obtain approximations bw ∈ k mkw Bw for almost all w. Due to the separation for almost all w, we have that bw = 0 for almost all w. Thus, b = 0 and so B♮ is m-adically separated.  5. Integral Extensions of Seeds We now show the ﬁnal promised result: integral extensions of rational seeds are also rational seeds, which is an analogue of [D07, Theorem 6.9]. Theorem 5.1. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. Let S be a rational seed over R, and let T be an integral extension of S. Then T is also a rational seed. Proof. Start with the integral extension S ֒→ T . We will expand this map into the diagram below, where I will be an ideal of S and U♮ will be an ultraseed domain. We will show that all vertical maps are integral extensions. / U♮ / S/I   S _ _ _  T   / T /IT   / T /IT ⊗S/I U♮  Indeed, by Theorem 4.3 the rational seed S maps to an ultraseed domain U♮ . (It actually has far more properties, but for this argument we only need it to be an ultraseed and a domain.) Let S/I be the homomorphic image of S within the domain U♮ , which implies that S/I is a domain and so I is a prime ideal of S. As S ֒→ T is integral, the induced map S/I → T /IT will still be integral. As I is a prime ideal (and hence integrally closed) and T is an integral extension of S, we have IT ∩ S = I and so S/I → T /IT remains injective as well. The existence of the two maps to T /IT ⊗S/I U♮ are then clearly established, but we need to show that the rightmost vertical map is an integral extension. The map is integral as it is a base change of the integral map S/I → T /IT (or S → T ). For injectivity, we appeal to the general lemma [D07, Lemma 6.2], which proves that given the integral extension S/I → T /IT and the domain (reduced is suﬃcient) extension S/I → U♮ , the vertical map on the right is also injective. In order to prove the theorem, it now suﬃces to prove that the ring T /IT ⊗S/I U♮ is a rational seed. Thus, we may reduce the whole problem to the case that S = U♮ is an ultraseed domain, and T = (U♮ )+ , the absolute integral closure of U♮ within an algebraic closure L♮ of the fraction ﬁeld of U♮ . By [Sch10, Remark 2.4.4], L♮ is also Lefschetz.  14  GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G.  For almost all w, we have that Uw is a domain and a seed over Rw , a complete local domain of characteristic p > 0, and Lw is an algebraic closure of the fraction ﬁeld of Uw . Thus, for almost all w we have the inclusions: Uw ֒→ (Uw )+ ֒→ Lw . By [D07, Theorem 6.9], almost all (Uw )+ will be seeds over Rw as they are integral extensions of the seeds Uw . Therefore, V = ulim((Uw )+ ) is an ultraseed over R. To ﬁnish the proof, we claim that V = (U♮ )+ within L♮ . Indeed, let v♮ ∈ V . Then almost all approximations vw live in (Uw )+ and satisfy a monic polynomial over Uw . Taking the ultralimit of the polynomials and applying Los’ Theorem shows that v♮ is the root of a monic polynomial over U♮ and so lives in (U♮ )+ . Conversely, let t ∈ (U♮ )+ . As t ∈ (U♮ )+ ⊆ L♮ , we have t = ulim tw where tw ∈ Lw . Also, t is the root of a monic polynomial over U♮ , so another application of Los’ Theorem shows that almost all tw are roots of the corresponding approximated monic polynomials over Uw . Therefore, almost all tw live in (Uw )+ within Lw , and so t lives in V = ulim((Uw )+ ) within L♮ .  We can then use this result to deduce an equal characteristic zero result about the absolute integral closure R+ of R, independent of Hochster and Huneke’s result that R+ is a balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra in characteristic p. Corollary 5.2. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero. Then the absolute integral closure R+ of R is a rational seed over R. 6. Applications to tight closure in equal characteristic zero Using Theorems 3.3 and 3.5, we can deﬁne a closure operation on equal characteristic zero rings using balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebras that are ultrarings formed from balanced big Cohen-Macaulay Rw -algebras. Definition 6.1. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with Lefschetz hull D(R) and characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. Let cl N ⊆ M be R-modules. For u ∈ M , we say that u ∈ NM if 1 ⊗ u ∈ Im(B♮ ⊗R N → B♮ ⊗R M ) for some balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra B♮ that is an ultraproduct of balanced big Cohen-Macaulay Rw -algebras. As tight closure in characteristic p > 0 is equivalent to extension and contraction from some balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra ([Ho94, Theorem 11.1]), the operation above provides a way to transfer tight closure from characteristic p > 0 to equal characteristic zero. In [Sch03, Deﬁnition 5.2], Schoutens deﬁnes generic tight closure, which is similar to the operation above as both rely on the approximations of an element residing in characteristic p > 0 tight closure for almost all p. However, they may not be equal. We do have the following: Proposition 6.2. Let R be a local domain of equal characteristic zero with characteristic p > 0 approximations Rw as in Discussion 1.10. We can extend generic tight closure to finitely-generated R-modules as in [E12, Lemma 7.0.5]. Then the closure operation cl given in Definition 6.1 is contained in generic tight closure, i.e. g cl ⊆ NM , where g denotes generic for any finitely-generated R-modules N ⊆ M , NM tight closure.  BIG C-M AND SEED ALGEBRAS . . . VIA ULTRAPRODUCTS  15  Proof. To show that generic tight closure can be extended to ﬁnitely-generated Rmodules, it suﬃces to note that both ultraproducts and tight closure commute with ﬁnite direct sums [E12, Lemma 7.0.5]. Let N ⊆ M be ﬁnitely-generated R-modules. By [Sch05, Section 2.5], they have approximations Nw and Mw , respectively, with ultraproducts N♮ = ulim Nw cl and M♮ = ulim Mw . Suppose that u ∈ NM . Then there is some balanced big Cohen-Macaulay R-algebra B♮ that is an ultraring, and such that 1 ⊗ u ∈ Im(B♮ ⊗R N → B♮ ⊗R M ). By Lemma 3.1, for any ﬁnitely-generated R-module Q, we have maps B♮ ⊗R Q → B♮ ⊗D(R) Q♮ → ulimw Bw ⊗Rw Qw . In particular, we have the following diagram: B♮ ⊗ R N  / B♮ ⊗ R M   ulim Bw ⊗Rw Nw   / ulim Bw ⊗Rw Mw  Since 1 ⊗ u is in the image of the ﬁrst horizontal map, ulim 1w ⊗ uw is in the image of the lower horizontal map. Hence for almost every w, 1w ⊗ uw ∈ Im(Bw ⊗ Nw → Bw ⊗ Mw ). Hence, for almost all w, we have uw ∈ (Nw )∗Mw over Rw by [Ho94, Theorem 11.1]. g This implies that u ∈ NM , as desired.  Remark 6.3. The reverse inclusion of above is still murky. The stumbling block to a proof is that as B♮ is not ﬁnitely generated, for a ﬁnitely generated R-module Q we only have known maps B♮ ⊗R Q → ulimw Bw ⊗Rw Qw , but we would need the g cl reverse directions to prove that NM ⊆ NM . As any two B♮ as above map to a common balanced big Cohen-Macaulay algebra (Theorem 3.3) and we have a base change property (Theorem 3.5), the closure operation cl above can be shown to have a host of nice properties, including: persistence, colon-capturing, phantom acyclicity, and triviality of all closures over regular rings. Given Theorems 3.3 and 3.5, the proofs of these claims (and more) can be found in [D05, Chapter 7]. Further study of the properties of this closure operation is merited. Acknowledgments Our thanks to Neil Epstein, Mel Hochster, and Hans Schoutens who each took the time to read initial drafts of this work. We also thank the anonymous referee for many helpful suggestions that improved the exposition of the paper. References [AS07] M. Aschenbrenner and H. Schoutens, Lefschetz extensions, tight closure and big Cohen-Macaulay algebras, Israel J. Math. 161 (2007), 221–310. MR2350164 [BS83] J. Bartijn and J.R. Strooker, Modifications Monomiales, Séminaire d’Algèbre DubreilMalliavin, Paris 1982, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1029, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983, 192–217. MR0732476 [D05] G. Dietz, Closure Operations in Positive Characteristic and Big Cohen-Macaulay Algebras, Thesis, Univ. of Michigan, 2005. MR2707771  16  GEOFFREY D. DIETZ AND REBECCA R.G.  [D07]  G. Dietz, Big Cohen-Macaulay algebras and seeds, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 359 (2007), no. 12, 5959–5989. MR2336312 (2008h:13021) [E12] N. Epstein, A guide to closure operations in commutative algebra, in: Progress in Commutative Algebra 2, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 2012, 1–37. MR2932590 [Ho93] W. Hodges, Model Theory, in: Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 42, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993. [Ho94] M. Hochster, Solid closure, in: Commutative Algebra: Syzygies, Multiplicities, and Birational Algebra, Contemp. Math. 159, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1994, 103–172. MR1266182 (95a:13011) [HH90] M. Hochster and C. Huneke, Tight closure, invariant theory, and the Briançon-Skoda theorem, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 3 (1990), 31–116. MR1017784 (91g:13010) [HH92] M. Hochster and C. Huneke, Infinite integral extensions and big Cohen-Macaulay algebras, Annals of Math. 135 (1992), 53–89. MR1147957 [HH95] M. Hochster and C. Huneke, Applications of the existence of big Cohen-Macaulay algebras, Adv. Math. 113 (1995), no. 1, 45–117. MR1332808 [RG15] R. R.G., Closure operations that induce big Cohen-Macaulay algebras, preprint, 2015: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.07862 . [Sch03] H. Schoutens, Non-standard tight closure for affine C-algebras, Manuscripta Math. 111 (2003), no. 3, 379?412. MR1993501 [Sch05] H. Schoutens, Log-terminal singularities and vanishing theorems via non-standard tight closure, J. Algebraic Geom., 14 (2005), no. 2, 357–390. MR2123234 [Sch10] H. Schoutens, The use of ultraproducts in commutative algebra. Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1999, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2010). MR2676525 Department of Mathematics, Gannon University, Erie, PA 16541 E-mail address: gdietz@member.ams.org Mathematics Department, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244 E-mail address: rirebhuh@syr.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
