Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_2508

Abstract:
Asphericity of groups defined by graphs Vadim Bereznyuk A graph Γ labelled by a set S defines a group G(Γ) whose generators are the set of labels S and whose relations are all words which can be read on closed paths of this graph. We introduce the notion of aspherical graph and prove that such a graph defines an aspherical group presentation. This result generalizes  arXiv:1711.05293v1 [math.GR] 14 Nov 2017  a theorem of Dominik Gruber on graphs satisfying graphical C(6)-condition.  1  Introduction  Every group can be deﬁned by a set of generators and a set of relations among these generators. The latter set can be excessive: there can be some non-trivial identities among its elements. For example, in a group ha, b, c | ab−1 , bc−1 , ac−1 i a relation ac−1 can be written as ab−1 bc−1 . Roughly speaking, a presentation is called aspherical if all identities among its relations are trivial. It can be formalized in various ways, so there are quite a few diﬀerent deﬁnitions of asphericity (see, for example, [2]). It is well known that asphericity follows from the classical small cancellation conditions. In 2003 Mikhail Gromov brieﬂy introduced a graphical analogue of small cancellation theory in his paper [5]. After that Yann Ollivier gave a combinatorial proof of a theorem of Gromov, which in particular states asphericity of groups deﬁned by graphs satisfying graphical C ′ (1/6)condition [6]. In 2015 Dominik Gruber proved asphericity of groups deﬁned by graphs satisfying graphical C(6)-condition [4]. We introduce a notion of aspherical graph and prove that such a graph deﬁnes an aspherical group. It is easy to show that a graph satisfying graphical C(6)-condition is aspherical. Thus our result generalizes Gruber’s theorem. Classical small cancellation theory operates with presentations where every two distinct relations have quite short common parts. In graphical small cancellation theory, a group is deﬁned by a labelled graph. The set of generators is the set of labels and the set of relations is the set of all words which can be read on closed paths of the graph. Thus every relation corresponds to a closed path where this relation can be read. Unlike classical case, two distinct relations can have a long common part, but only if this common part originates from the graph. It means that paths of the graph corresponding to these relations have the same common part as relations themselves. Recall that a reduction pair in a diagram is a pair of distinct faces of the diagram such that their boundary cycles share a common edge and such that their boundary cycles, read starting from that edge, clockwise for one of the faces and counter-clockwise for the other, are equal as words. A spherical diagram is reduced if there are no reduction pairs. If there exists no reduced spherical diagram over a presentation, then the presentation is called diagrammaticaly aspherical. It is well known that presentations satisfying classical small cancellation conditions are diagrammaticaly aspherical. In graphical case, we call a pair of faces a graphical reduction pair if these faces share an edge originating from the graph. A spherical diagram is graphically reduced if there exists no graphical reduction pair in this diagram. If there exists no graphically reduced diagram over a presentation whose set of relations is the set of labels of all simple closed paths of the graph, then we call this graph aspherical. It is easy to show that asphericity of a graph follows from the graphical small cancellation C(6)-condition. It turns out that asphericity of a graph implies topological asphericity of the corresponding group. This is the main result of this paper. 1  Note that, when we deﬁne a group by a graph, we can restrict the set of relations to the set of labels of all simple closed paths. It does not change the group. This set of relations can be reduced further. We can choose an arbitrary basis of the fundamental group of the graph. Then the set of relations will be the set of cyclically reduced paths of that basis. Again it does not change the group. The obtained presentation is topologically aspherical if the graph is aspherical. The paper begins with a brief introduction to theory of groups deﬁned by graphs. In Section 1.2 the main result is formulated and in Section 1.3 the proof is outlined. In Section 2 we give exact deﬁnitions of main notions. Section 3 is devoted to the link between identities among relations of a presentation and spherical diagrams over this presentation. The full proof of the main theorem can be found in Section 4. In Section 5 we show that our result generalizes Gruber’s theorem. The author thanks Anton Klyachko for many useful conversations and remarks.  1.1  Groups defined by graphs and graphical small cancellation conditions  Let Γ be an oriented graph every edge of which is labelled by an element of a ﬁnite set S. Let p be a path in the graph Γ. If we go along this path then we can read a word ℓ(p) in the alphabet S ⊔ S −1 . Each edge of the path gives a letter which equals to its label if we traverse the edge in its direction and equals to its label with exponent −1 if we traverse the edge in the opposite direction. The word ℓ(p) is called the label of the path p. Let Rc be a set of labels of all closed paths in Γ, Rs be a set of labels of all simple closed paths in Γ and Rf be a set of cyclically reduced labels of paths which generate a basis of a fundamental group of each connected component of the graph Γ (note that Rc and Rs are determined by the graph Γ itself while Rf depends on the chosen basis of the fundamental group of Γ). Then a group G(Γ) are deﬁned by one of the three following presentations: hS | Rc i, hS | Rs i or hS | Rf i. Clearly, all these presentations deﬁne the same group.  a  b  b  c  b c  Fig. 1: G(Γ) ∼ = ha, b, c | bbc, c−1 bc−1 , b−1 a−1 b−1 i Definition 1. A lift of a word w in the graph Γ is such a path p̄ in the graph that ℓ(p̄) ≡ w (i.e., the label of the path p̄ coincides with the word w character by character). Definition 2. A word w is a piece (with respect to Γ) if it has two (or more) distinct lifts in the graph Γ. Definition 3. Let p be a path in a graph labelled by a set S. A lift of the path p in the graph Γ is such a path p̄ in the graph that ℓ(p̄) ≡ ℓ(p) (i.e., the label of the path p coincides with the label of the path p̄ character by character). Definition 4. Let p be a path in a graph labelled by a set S. The path p is a piece (with respect to Γ) if it has two (or more) distinct lifts in the graph Γ. 2  b  D  Γ b  a  b  b  a  b a  c  b  c  b  c  b  c  b  a Fig. 2: A graph Γ and a diagram D over ha, b, c | Rs i. Dotted edges originate from the graph. If no edge occurs more than once in p, then the lift p̄ of p induces a unique lift for every subpath q of p. We call such a lift the lift of q to Γ via p → p̄. Everywhere further it will be clear about which graph Γ we talk, so we will call words and paths just “pieces”, not “pieces with respect to Γ”. Similarly it will be clear about which lift of p we talk, so we will just say “lift via p”, not “lift via p → p̄”. Consider an example. Let Γ be a graph as in Figure 1. Then the words b, b−1 , c and c−1 are all pieces of lengths 1. The words a and a−1 are not pieces. The words bb and (bb)−1 are all pieces among reduced words of length 2. A labelling of a graph Γ is reduced if any two distinct edges starting at the same vertex have distinct labels and any two distinct edges ending at the same vertex have distinct labels. Definition 5. Let Γ be a labelled graph and let k ∈ N. We say Γ satisfies graphical C(k)condition (or Γ is a C(k)-graph) if: • the labelling of Γ is reduced and • no simple closed path is a concatenation of stricly fewer than k pieces. A graph as in Figure 1 satisﬁes graphical C(2)-condition, but does not satisfy graphical C(3)-condition because the simple closed path with the label bbc is a concatenation of the pieces bb and c. Henceforth we assume that a graph Γ satisﬁes graphical C(2)-condition. It implies that the graph Γ has a reduced labelling and that any word from Rs has only one lift in this graph. Let D be a diagram over the presentation hS | Rs i (see the next section for deﬁnitions). Let p be a path consisted of internal edges of D and lying between faces Π1 and Π2 . A word from Rs is written on the boundary of any face of D. Thus the boundary of any face has a lift in the graph Γ. This lift is unique due to the above remark. Lift the boundary of the face Π1 in the graph. After that the path p, as subpath of the boundary, maps to some path p1 in the graph. Similarly lift the boundary of the face Π2 and determine a path p2 . We say that the path p originates from the graph Γ if p1 = p2 . Roughly speaking, a path p originates from the graph Γ if faces Π1 and Π2 share the same path in the diagram and in the graph Γ itself. Note that if a path p, lying between faces Π1 and Π2 , does not originate from the graph Γ then it is a piece. Indeed, if p does not originate from the graph then its lifts via Π1 and via Π2 are distinct. Therefore this path have two distinct lifts in the graph Γ, i.e., this path is a piece.  1.2  Main result  Recall that a presentation complex K(S; R) of a presentation hS | Ri is a 2-complex which has a 1-skeleton which consists of a single vertex and a loop labelled by s for every element s 3  from S, and which have a face with the boundary label r attached to the 1-skeleton for every element r from R. Definition 6. A presentation hS | Ri is called aspherical if its presentation complex K(S; R) is aspherical, i.e., πq (K(S; R)) = 0 for all q ≥ 2. Definition 7. We say that a diagram D over the presentation hS | Rs i is graphically reduced if it does not have edges originating from the graph Γ. Definition 8. We say that a graph Γ is aspherical if it satisfies graphical C(2)-condition and there exists no graphically reduced spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rs i. The following theorem is the main result of this paper. Theorem. If a graph Γ is aspherical, then the presentation hS | Rf i is aspherical.  1.3  Idea of proof  Propositions 1.3 and 1.5 of the paper [2] implies that a presentation hS | Ri, where all relations from R are not empty and freely reduced, is aspherical if and only if the presentation is concise, no relation is a proper power and any identity among relations of this presentation is trivial. Recall that a presentation hS | Ri is concise if for any two distinct relations r and r′ from R nor r, neither r−1 is conjugate to r′ . Also recall a notion of identity among relations of a presentation hS | Ri. Assume we are given a sequence π = (p1 , . . . , pn ) such that pi = ui riǫi u−1 i , where ri ∈ R, ui ∈ F (S) and ǫi ∈ {+1, −1}. It is called an identity if a product of its elements is equal to the identity element of the free group, i.e., p1 · · · pn = 1 in F (s). There are identities which we should consider as trivial. For this reason Peiﬀer transformations are introduced: 1. Replace any pair of consecutive elements (pi , pi+1 ), either by the pair (pi pi+1 p−1 i , pi ) or by the pair (pi+1 , p−1 p p ). i i+1 i+1 2. Delete the pair of consecutive elements (pi , pi+1 ) if pi pi+1 = 1 in F (S). 3. Insert at any place a pair of inverse elements (p, p−1 ). An identity is called trivial if it can be transformed to an empty identity by the ﬁnite number of Peiﬀer transformation. Lemma 2.22 of the paper [4] guarantees the ﬁrst two conditions: conciseness of a presentation and absence of proper powers. Thus we only should show that any identity among relations is trivial. To prove this fact we use a link between identities among relations of a presentation and spherical diagrams over this presentation which was obtained in [3]. A plan of the proof is the following. Assume the contrary, that there exists non-trivial identities over the presentation hS | Rf i or, equivalently, that there exists non-trivial spherical diagrams over the presentation hS | Rf i. Consider a part of an 1-skeleton of a spherical diagram which consists of all edges not originating from a graph Γ. We call such a part a not originating skeleton. Consider a non-trivial spherical diagram with the smallest not originating skeleton. Delete all edges originating from the graph from this diagramm. It turns out that the obtained diagram is a diagram over the presentation hS | Rs i. Moreover, it is graphically reduced because we deleted all originating edges. A contradiction with asphericity of the graph Γ.  2  Main notions  Deﬁnitions of graphs and diagrams are given in this section.  4  2.1  Graphs  We use a deﬁnition of graph according to [1], i.e., a graph is a union of two sets V and E with three maps α : E → V , ω : E → V , ·−1 : E → E. The elements of V is called vertices and the elements of E is calles edges. If e ∈ E then α(e) is called the initial point and ω(e) the terminal point. The map ·−1 assigns to every edge its inverse. For convenience we write ·−1 (e) as e−1 . The map ·−1 should be an involution without ﬁxed elements such as α(e−1 ) = ω(e) and ω(e−1 ) = α(e). In fact, it is a deﬁnition of undirected graph, because for every edge e graph also contains e−1 . −1 A labelling of a graph Γ by a set S is such a map ℓ : E → S ⊔ S −1 that ℓ(e−1 ) = ℓ(e) . A labelled graph is a graph with its labelling. One can think of a labbeled graph as an oriented graph every edge of which labelled by an element of S. A labelling of a graph Γ is reduced if any two distinct edges starting at the same vertex have distinct labels and any two distinct edges ending at the same vertex have distinct labels. Continue the map ℓ to a set of all paths in the graph Γ. Let p = (e1 , . . . , en ) be a path in the graph, then put ℓ(p) = ℓ(e1 ) · · · ℓ(en ), where w1 ·w2 is concatenation. Thus ℓ(p) is a word over an alphabet S ⊔ S −1 (not necessarily reduced). We call ℓ(p) as the label of the path p. Let p = (e1 , . . . , en ) be a path in a graph. The path p is reduced if it contains no subpaths (e, e−1 ). The path is trivial if it becomes empty after consecutive deletion of all subpaths (e, e−1 ). The path is closed if its initial point coincides with its terminal point or if it is empty. The path is simple if it is not empty and it does not contain non-empty closed subpaths. The path p is simple closed if it is not trivial, is closed and no proper subpaths of p is closed. An edge e is a spure if degree of at least one of its vetices is equal to 1.  2.2  Diagrams over graphs  Let R be a set of relations, then we deﬁne Rsym as the set obtained from the sets R and R−1 by considering all its elements up to cyclic shifts. A singular disk diagram in the alphabet S is a ﬁnite and simply connected 2-dimensional CW-complex embedded into R2 such that its 1-skeleton is a graph labelled by the set S. The closures of its 1-cells and 2-cells are called edges and faces, respectively. The label of a face is a cyclic word obtained by reading its boundary path in a counterclockwise direction. A singular disk diagram over a presentation hS | Ri is a singular disk diagram in the alphabet S every face of which has a label from Rsym . A simple disk diagram is a singular disk diagram homeomorphic to a disk. We introduce spherical diagrams following [3]. First we inductively deﬁne a sphercial complex. A 2-sphere is a spherical complex. If D is a spherical complex, then D′ obtained by attaching a simple curve or a 2-sphere to a point of D is also a spherical complex. A spherical complex is a complex which can be obtained from a 2-sphere by the ﬁnite number of such attachments. In other words, a spherical complex is a tree embedded into R3 some vertices of which (at least one) are replaced by spheres or by some number of spheres attached to each other. A spherical diagram over a presentation hS | Ri is a 2-dimensional CW-complex homeomorphic to some spherical complex, such that its 1-skeleton is a graph labelled by the set S and such that the labels of all its faces lie in Rsym . A simple spherical diagram is a spherical diagram homeomorphic to a sphere We will denote the set of positively oriented (i.e., obtained by reading the boundary in a counterclockwise direction) boundary paths of a face Π as ∂Π+ , and the set of negatively oriented as ∂Π− . It is clear that ∂Π− = {γ −1 : γ ∈ ∂Π+ }. If P and Q are two sets of paths then P ∩ Q = {r : ∃p ∈ P, ∃q ∈ Q such as p = rp′ , q = rq ′ }. We can consider a lift of ∂Π+ or ∂Π− in the graph Γ as a lift of an arbitrary path from this set. Then a lift of any else path from this set can be obtained as a cyclic shift of the known lift. Definition 9. Let D be a diagram over the presentation hS | Rc i. Let Π1 and Π2 be two 5  − faces of D (not necessary distinct) and let p ∈ ∂Π+ 1 ∩ ∂Π2 . We say that the path p originates + + from the graph Γ if there exists such lifts of ∂Π1 and ∂Π− 2 in Γ, that a lift of p in Γ via ∂Π1 − and via ∂Π2 are equal.  Note again that if the graph Γ satisﬁes graphical C(2)-condition then lifts of ∂Π+ 1 and ∂Π− 2 are unique.  3  Identities and spherical diagrams  For any identity π = (p1 , . . . , pn ) over a presentation hS | Ri we can construct a spherical diagram over the same presentation by the so-called van Kampen construction. First, ﬁx draw a face with a spur such a point v on the plane. After that for each pi = ui riεi u−1 i that the spur starts at v, the label of the spur is ui and the label of the face is riεi . Then the boundary label of the obtained diagram is equal to the word p1 · · · pn . So this boundary label is trivial because π is an identity. It means that there exists 2 consecutive edges with opposite labels on the boundary. Glue these edges together. We obtain again a diagram with a trivial boundary label but with the smaller boundary size. Consecutively gluing pairs of edges with opposite labels we ﬁnally obtain a spherical diagram D which is called a diagram for π (see [3, Section 1.5] for details). This procedure can be reversed. By “ungluing” faces of a spherical diagram D over a presentation hS | Ri along edges we can obtain a bouquet of faces with spurs that gives us a sequence of elements π over the same presentation. Moreover, π is an identity because the diagram was spherical. Note that D is a diagram for π because we can reverse the described procedure. These procedures are not unique. We may obtain diﬀerent diagrams and identities changing the order of gluings and ungluings. But at the same time Proposition 8 from [3] implies that if D is a diagram for π1 and a diagram for π2 then π1 is trivial if and only if π2 is. It allows us to deﬁne trivial spherical diagrams with correct correspondence to trivial identies. We will call D a trivial spherical diagram if a trivial identity can be obtained from D. Due to the fact noted above, every identity obtained from a trivial spherical diagram D will be trivial. Thus only trivial identities can be obtained from a trivial diagram, and only trivial diagrams can be obtained from a trivial identity. Note also that actually a diagram D which is a diagram for some identity π has an marked point (the initial vertex v from the construction). Replacing of the marked point conjugates all elements of the identity π by the same element — label of the path connecting old and new marked points. Clearly, it does not change triviality of the diagram. Therefore we are free to choose any point of the diagram as the marked point. Thus we wo not explicitly specify the marked point. And ﬁnally note that a spherical diagram can have spurs. But Proposition 8 from [3] implies that inserting and deleting of spurs does not change triviality of the diagram.  4  Proof of the theorem  In this section Γ is a labelled by the set S graph and Rc , Rs and Rf are the sets deﬁned at the beginning of the section 1.1 Definition 10. Let D be a diagram over the presentation hS | Rs i. A not originating skeleton of D is a graph that consists of all edges of D which do not originate from the graph Γ. Lemma 1. Suppose Γ satisfies graphical C(2)-condition and let D be a simple spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rs i. Then a not originating skeleton of D has no spurs. Proof. Assume the contrary. Let D be a simple spherical diagram whose not originating skeleton contains a spur e with endpoint v. It means that all other edges incidental to v 6  Π3  Π2  e2 v  e1  e  Π1  e3 Π4  Fig. 3: Illustration for Lemma 1. Dotted edges originate from the graph. originate from the graph Γ because otherwise the edge e would not be a spur in the originating skeleton. We may assume that a part of the diagram in a neighborhood of the point v is embedded into the plane. Draw a circle with a center at v with quite a small radius such that the circle intersects all incidental to v edges and only them. Once if an edge is not a loop and twice if an edge is a loop. Let us traverse this circle in a counterclockwise direction starting at C ∩ e. We cross some number of faces Π1 , . . . , Πn . We cross also the edges e1 , . . . , en−1 , en = e, where ei lie in the intersection of faces Πi and Πi+1 . The boundary of each face has a unique lift to the graph because Γ satisﬁes graphical C(2)condition. Let vi be a vertex of the graph obtained by lifting v via the boundary of the face Πi . The edge ei originates from the graph for i = 1, . . . , n − 1, therefore vi = vi+1 for + i = 1, . . . , n − 1. Thus v1 = vn . It means that lifts of the edge e via ∂Π+ 1 and via ∂Π1 have a common vertex in the graph and, moreover, have the same label. It implies that these lifts coincide because a labelling of the graph is reduced. Thus e originates fron the graph. A contradiction. Definition 11. We will call D a minimal non-trivial spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rf i if it is a non-trivial spherical diagram such that 1. A not originating skeleton of D has the smallest number of edges among all non-trivial diagrams and among all such diagrams a not originating skeleton of D has the smallest number of vertices. 2. D has the smallest number of edges among all diagrams satisfying the first condition. Note that a minimal non-trivial spherical diagram D is always a simple spherical diagram. Indeed, assume the contrary, let D not be a simple spherical diagram. We noted earlier that insertion and deletion of spurs does not aﬀect its triviality. Therefore D does not have spurs. It means that there exists such a point v in D that the diagram splits into two spherical diagrams D1 and D2 after cutting D at v. Let π1 be an identity obtained from the diagram D1 and π2 be an identity obtained from the diagram D2 . These identities are trivial because D is a minimal non-trivial spherical diagram. Then an identity π = (π1 , π2 ) is trivial as well. But π can be obtained from the diagram D. Thus D is a trivial spherical diagram that contradicts its deﬁnition. Lemma 2. Let Γ be a C(2)-graph. Let D be a minimal non-trivial spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rf i and let ∆ be a proper subdiagram of D such that it have at least one face and such that ∂∆ lies in the not originating skeleton of D. Then the boundary label of ∆ is not trivial as an element of the free group F (S). Proof. The proof is very similar to the proof of the fact that D is a simple spherical diagram. Assume the contrary. Denote by ∆′ a diagram obtained from D by cutting oﬀ ∆. Since ∆ 7  and ∆′ have a trivial boundary label we can obtain some identity π from ∆ and some identity π ′ from D′ . Denote by ∆s a spherical diagram obtained from ∆ by gluing its boundary. It is clear that ∆s is a diagram for π. And it is also clear that a not originating skeleton of ∆s is smaller than a not originating skeleton of D because ∆s was obtained by gluing the boundary of ∆, and this boundary consists only of not originating edges. Thus ∆s is a trivial spherical diagram and π is a trivial identity. The same is true for π ′ . Then an identity Σ = (π, π ′ ) is trivial as well. But D is a diagram for Σ and it means that D is a trivial spherical diagram. A contradiction. Let D be a simple spherical diagram. Denote by D̄ a simple spherical diagram obtained from D by erasing all edges originating from the graph Γ (if isolated vertices are left we delete them). Clearly, a 1-skeleton of D̄ coincides with a not originating skeleton of D. Note that actually D̄ may have some not simply connected “faces”, but we still consider them as faces and call them not simply connected faces. Note that the boundary of a not simply connected face consists of some connected components. Lemma 3. Let Γ be a C(2)-graph. Let D be a minimal non-trivial spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rf i. Then the boundary label of any face of the diagram D̄ is reduced (the boundary label of any connected component for not simply connected faces). Proof. Assume the contrary. Let Π̄ be a face with a not reduced boundary label. Let e and f be the edges where reduction is occured. We will use diamond moves introduced in [3]. For deﬁniteness we assume that ω(e) = ω(f ) and ℓ(e) = ℓ(f ) = a. Consider in detail only the case when all 3 points ω(e), α(e), α(f ) are distinct. Transform the diagram D as shown in Fig. 4. Note that we reduce the not originating skeleton at least by one edge because one of the two new edges appears to be inside the face Π̄. But the not originating skeleton does not have spurs so this edge originates from the graph.  Π̄  Π̄ a  Π̄ a  a  a  a  a  a a  Fig. 4: The ﬁrst case of the Lemma 3. Diamond moves for other cases can be found in [3, Section 1.4]. We do not consider these cases in detail because they do not diﬀer much from the ﬁrst case: after applying a diamond move two old edges are replaced by two new ones and one of the two new edges appears to be inside the face Π̄ and therefore originates from the graph. Thus the not originating skeleton is reduced anyway. Lemma 4. Let p be a simple closed path in the graph Γ. Then there exists a diagram D over the presentation hS | Rf i such that ∂D lifts to the path p and all internal edges of D originates from the graph Γ. Proof. Forget for a while that Γ is labelled by the set S. Label every edge e of the graph Γ by the new unique label te . Assume the path p lies in the connected component Γ′ of the graph Γ and let B ′ be the basis of Π(Γ′ , v) from which some relations of Rf are obtained. Let q be a path which runs from the vertex α(p) to the vertex v and let B = {qb′ q −1 | b′ ∈ B ′ }. Then the path p are generated by the paths from B, i.e, p = bǫ11 · · · bǫnn , bi ∈ B. Each bi = ui ri u−1 i 8  where ri is a cyclic reduction of the path bi . Due to the deﬁnition of the set Rf , the label of each path ri lie in Rf . Fix a point s on the plane. For each bǫi i draw a face with a spur such that the spur starts at s and has a label ℓ(ui ) and such that the boundary label of the face is ℓ(riǫi ). Thus we obtain a diagram E such that its boundary label is freely equal to the label of the path p. If there exists a pair of consecutive edges with the same labels and opposite directions on the boundary of E then glue them. Doing this several times we obtain a reduced boundary label. The labelling of Γ is reduced and p is a simple closed path so its label is reduced. Thus the boundary label of E and the label of p is equal as words. Note that all internal edges of E originate from the graph because they have unique labels and therefore have unique lifts to the graph. Now recall the original labelling by the set S. After replacing unique labels by original ones all internal edges still originate from the graph (because boundaries of the faces still have unique lifts to the graph and these lifts coincide with lifts to the graph with unique labels) and the boundary label of the diagram still is equal to the label of p as words. Thus we obtain the desired diagram for the path p over the presentation hS | Rf i. Lemma 5. Let Γ be a C(2)-graph. Let D be a minimal non-trivial spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rf i and let Π be a face of D̄. Then if Π is simply connected and its boundary is a simple closed path then this boundary lifts to a simple closed path in the graph Γ. Proof. Assume the contrary, that there exists a face Π in D̄ such that it have a simple boundary which lifts to a not simple closed path in the graph. By Lemma 3, the boundary label of Π is reduced so there exists a subpath p of the path ∂Π which lifts to a simple closed path p̃ in the graph. Let s and t be respectively the start and the end of the path p. Transform the diagram as shown in Fig. 5: cut the diagram along the path p and glue together s and t. Both ∂Π1 and ∂Π2 lift to the simple closed path p̃ in the graph Γ. By the previous lemma, there exists a diagram E over the presentation hS | Rf i such that its boundary coincides with p̃ and all internal edges originate from the graph. Glue E at the place of Π1 and a diagram symmetric to E at the place of Π2 . Thus we again obtain a spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rf i. Denote it by D′ . Note that Π ∩ Π1 = ∂Π1 originates from the graph because it lifts to the simple closed path in the graph and due to the graphical C(2)-condition such a lift is unique. Therefore D′ has a smaller not originating skeleton than D because we glued together the vertices s and t which lay in a not originating skeleton of D and so we reduced the number of vertices in the not originating skeleton while the number of not originating edges are still the same, because all internal edges of E originate from the graph. Moreover, D′ is not trivial because we glued into D the set of opposite faces and we can −1 think of it as adding to the not trivial identity π some sequence (p1 , . . . , pn , p−1 n , . . . , p1 ) that corresponds to the n-fold application of the insert Peiﬀer transformation. Thus we obtained a not trivial spherical diagram with a smaller not originating skeleton than D has. A contradiction. Lemma 6. Let Γ be an aspherical graph and let D be a minimal non-trivial spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rf i. Then every face of D̄ is simply connected and the boundary of every face of D̄ lifts to a simple closed path in the graph Γ. Proof. Assume the contrary. Then there are two types of bad faces: not simply connected faces and simply connected faces with a not simple boundary path which does not lift to a simple closed path in the graph. Note that since a not originating skeleton does not have spurs every face with a not simple boundary encloses some subdiagram which has at least one face. Similarly every not simply connected face does. Consider a face Π which is the innermost bad face. It means that a subdiagram ∆ enclosed by this face contains only simply connected faces which boundaries lift to simple closed paths. 9  s  Π  s  Π  Π  t  Π1  Π2  t Fig. 5: Illustration for Lemma 5.  First examine the case when Π is a simple connected face. As before let p be a subpath of ∂Π which lifts to a simple closed path and let s and t be respectively the start and the end of the path p. If s 6= t then acting as in the proof of Lemma 4 we obtain a contradiction with minimality of D. Thus s = t. Let q be such a subpath of ∂Π that pq ∈ ∂Π+ . Note that either p or q encloses some subdiagram ∆′ of the diagram ∆. If q does then we can again assume that there is a subpath p′ in q with the end points s′ and t′ which lifts to a simple closed path. Arguing as before we obtain s′ = t′ . And now p′ encloses some subdiagram ∆′ of the diagram ∆. Note that ∆′ as a subdiagram of ∆ does not contains bad faces. So in the both cases there is a subpath which encloses some subdiagram without bad faces and which lifts to a simple closed path. We denote this path by p and this subdiagram by ∆. Since ∆ does not contain bad faces boundaries of all faces of ∆ lift to a simple closed paths. But the boundary of ∆ itself, which equals to a path p, lifts to a simple closed path. Thus we can think of ∆ as a spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rs i no edge of which originates from the graph. But it contradicts asphericity of the graph Γ. In the case of a not simple connected face we act similarly. Let ∆ be a subdiagram enclosed by Π. Due to the choice of Π all faces of ∆ lift to simple closed paths. If ∂∆ lifts to a simple closed path in the graph then we again contradict asphericity of the graph. Otherwise we take a subpath p of ∂∆ with the end points s and t which lifts to a simple closed path in the graph. If s 6= t then we contradict minimality of D. If s = t then a subdiagram enclosed by p gives a spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rs i where no edge originates from the graph that contradicts asphericity of the graph.  s  t ∆ Π  Fig. 6: Illustration for Lemma 6.  10  The following lemma can be found in [4]. Lemma 7 (Gruber). Let Γ be a connected C(2)-labelled graph. Let R be the set of cyclic reductions of words read a set of free generators of π1 (Γ, v) for some v ∈ Γ. Let (D, v) be a simple disk diagram over R with freely trivial boundary word such that every interior edge originates from Γ. Then any sequence obtained from (D, v) is a trivial identity sequence. Now we can prove the theorem. Proof of the theorem. Assume the contrary, that there exists non-trivial identities. Let D be a minimal non-trivial spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rf i. Consider a not originating skeleton of D. If the skeleton is empty then all edges of the diagram originate from the graph. In this case we can unglue D along some edge connecting distict vertices and we obtain a simple disk diagram with a trivial boundary label all edges of which originate from the graph Γ. Clearly, all these edges lift to the same connected component of the graph. Then, by the previous lemma, D is a diagram for a trivial identity that contradicts its deﬁnition. Thus the not originating skeleton is not empty. By the all previous lemmas every face of D̄ is simply connected and lifts to a simple closed path of the graph. Therefore D̄ is a spherical diagram over the presentation hS | Rs i where no edge originates from the graph that contradicts asphericity of the graph.  5  Corollary of the main result  Now we show that graphical C(6)-condition implies asphericity of a graph. To do this we will need a notion of [p, q]-diagrams introduced in [1]. Let p and q be positive integers such that p1 + q1 = 12 . Degree of a face is a number of edges in its boundary path. A face of a diagram is called interior if it has no common edges with the boundary of the diagram. If D is a non-empty diagram such that each interior vertex of D has degree at least p and all faces of D have degree at least q, then D is called [p, q]-diagram. If D is a non-empty diagram such that each interior vertex of D has degree at least p and each interior face of D have degree at least q, then D is called (p, q)-diagram. The following theorem can be found in [1]. Theorem (Curvature formula). Let D be a simply connected [p, q]-diagram which contains at least two vertices. Then  X p + 2 − d(v) ≥ p q v∈∂D  This theorem implies that there do not exist any simple spherical (3, 6)-diagrams. Indeed, note at ﬁrst that a simple spherical (3, 6)-diagram contains more than one vertex because otherwise there would exist a face with degree 1 that contradicts the fact that the diagram is a (3, 6)-diagram. Second, we can unglue the diagram along an edge connecting two distinct vertices. Then we obtain a [3, 6]-diagram with exactly 2 vertices in the boundary and these vertices have degree at least 3. It contradicts the curvature formula. We also need an operation of “forgetting” vertices of degree 2. Let D be a diagram without spurs. Call an arc such a path in D that its every internal vertex has degree 2 and the end points have degrees more than 2. Then if we replace every arc in D by an edge, we obtain a diagram where each vertex has degree at least 3. Now we are ready to prove that graphical C(6)-condition implies asphericity of the graph. Proof. Assume the contrary, that there exists a simple spherical diagram D over the presentation hS | Rs i no edge of which originates from the graph. By Lemma 1, the diagram D has no spurs. Note that for any two adjacent faces Π1 and Π2 their common boundary is a piece because it does not originate from the graph. Due to graphical C(6)-condition it means that every face consists of at least 6 arcs. Therefore after “forgetting” vertices 11  of degree 2 the diagram D becomes a simple spherical (3, 6)-diagram which does not exist. A contradiction. Corollary. If Γ is a C(6)-graph, then the presentation hS | Rf i is aspherical. For the ﬁrst time this result was obtained by Dominic Gruber in [4].  References [1] R. C. Lyndon, P. E. Schupp, Combinatorial Group Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1977 [2] I. M. Chiswell, D. J. Collins, J. Huebschmann, Aspherical group presentations, Math. Z. 178 (1981), 1–36. [3] D. J. Collins and J. Huebschmann, Spherical diagrams and identities among relations, Math. Ann. 261 (1982), 155–183. [4] D. Gruber, Groups with graphical C(6) and C(7) small cancellation presentations, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 367 (2015), no. 3, 2051-2078, preprint versions: arXiv:1210.0178 [5] M. Gromov, Random Walk in Random Groups, GAFA, Geom. Funct. Anal. 13 (2003), no. 1, 73–146. [6] Y. Ollivier, On a small cancellation theorem of Gromov, Bull. Belg. Math. Soc. Simon Stevin 13 (2006), no. 1, 75–89.  12

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
