Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_2957

Abstract:
Inferring protein-protein interaction and protein-DNA interaction directions based on cause–effect pairs in undirected and mixed networks1 Mehdy Roayaei2 and MohammadReza Razzazi3 Department of Computer Engineering and Information Technology, AmirKabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran  Abstract We consider the following problem: Given an undirected (mixed) network and a set of ordered source-target, or cause-effect pairs, direct all edges so as to maximize the number of pairs that admit a directed source-target path. This is called maximum graph orientation problem, and has applications in understanding interactions in protein-protein interaction networks and proteinDNA interaction networks. We have studied the problem on both undirected and mixed networks. In the undirected case, we determine the parameterized complexity of the problem (for non-fixed and fixed paths) with respect to the number of satisfied pairs, which has been an open problem. Also, we present an exact algorithm which outperforms the previous algorithms on trees with bounded number of leaves. In addition, we present a parameterized-approximation algorithm with respect to a parameter named the number of backbones of a tree. In the mixed case, we present polynomial-time algorithms for the problem on paths and cycles, and an FPTalgorithm based on the combined parameter the number of arcs and the number of pairs on general graphs. Keywords: protein-protein interaction, protein-DNA interaction, cause–effect pairs, fixedparameter tractable, W[1]-hardness  1  This research was in part supported by a grant from I.P.M. Corresponding author (mroayaei@aut.ac.ir). Tel: +982164542732, P.O. Box 15875-4413, #424 Hafez Avenue, AmirKabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran 3 razzazi@aut.ac.ir 2  1  1  Introduction  Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) form the skeleton of signal transduction in the cell. These interactions carry directed signaling information. However, current technologies [8], [11] cannot decide the direction in which the signal flows. Inferring the directions of these interactions is fundamental to our understanding of how these networks work. Perturbation experiments [16] provide additional information for possible direction of information in these networks. In this experiment, a gene is perturbed (cause) and as a result other genes change their expression levels (effects), to guide the orientation inference. It is assumed that there must be a directed path in the network from the causal gene (source) to the affected gene (target). The resulting combinatorial problem, which is called the maximum graph orientation, is to orient the edges of the network such that a maximum number of cause-effect pairs admit a directed path from the causal to the affected gene. When studying a PPI network in isolation, the input network is undirected. However, the more biologically relevant variant considers also protein-DNA interactions as these are necessary to explain the expression changes. Moreover, the directionality of some PPIs is known in advance [6]. Therefore, generally, the input network is considered as a mixed graph containing both directed and undirected edges. In this paper, we consider the maximum graph orientation on both undirected and mixed graphs. The maximum graph orientation problem on undirected graphs and mixed graphs is defined as follows: Definition 1 (Maximum undirected graph orientation problem- MUGO). An undirected graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸), and a set 𝑃 = {(𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ): 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑝} of ordered source-target pairs are given, where 𝐸 is the set of edges. Direct all edges so as to maximize the number of pairs that admit a directed source-target path. Definition 2 (Maximum mixed graph orientation problem- MMGO). A mixed graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸, 𝐴), and a set 𝑃 = {(𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ): 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑝} of ordered source-target pairs are given, where 𝐸 is the set of edges and 𝐴 is the set of arcs. Direct all edges so as to maximize the number of pairs that admit a directed source-target path. In the remainder of the paper, let P be the set of input pairs, |𝑃| = 𝑝, V the set of vertices of a tree or a graph, and |𝑉| = 𝑛. By edge, we mean an undirected edge, and by arc, we mean a directed edge. A pair is satisfied, if it admits a directed source-target path. It is shown than an MUGO problem can be converted to an equivalent problem on a tree, which is obtained by contracting cycles of the input graph [12]. Thus, the interesting case is when the input graph is a tree. This problem is called maximum tree orientation (MTO). MTO is NP-hard, even on stars, caterpillars, and binary trees [12], but it is polynomial-solvable on paths. The best approximation ratio obtained for MTO is Ω(  log log 𝑛 log 𝑛  2  ) [10]. It is NP-hard to approximate MTO  within a factor of  11 . 12  Also, MTO has been studied from the parameterized complexity point of  view. It is shown that this problem is fixed-parameter tractable with respect to the parameters the maximum number of pairs passing through a vertex, and the maximum number of cross pairs passing through a vertex (the cross pair is defined as a source-target pair whose corresponding path is directed either towards the root or towards the leaves, but do not change its direction.) [4]. However, it is not fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the maximum number of pairs passing through an edge. MMGO is also NP-hard. Furthermore, although MTO, the feasibility version of MMGO, the problem of deciding whether a mixed graph G can be oriented so that the resulting directed graph contains a directed source-target path for all input pairs, is NP-complete [1]. The best approximation ratio obtained for MMGO is Ω( within a factor of  7 8  1 (𝑛|𝑃|)1/3  ) [9]. It is NP-hard to approximate MMGO  [6]. To our knowledge, there has been no significant results on the  parameterized complexity of MMGO problem. An orientation of a graph is an assignment of a direction to each edge. We say that the pair (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ) conflicts with the pair (𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ) if there exist no orientation of the input graph for which both (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ) and (𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ) are satisfied. We call an tree with exactly one vertex of degree more than two, a star-like tree. Split vertex is a vertex of degree two, whose incident arcs have different directions. After orienting an undirected path between the vertices v and w, the nearest split vertex to the vertex v on that path, is denoted by 𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑡(𝑣, 𝑤). A path between two vertices a and b is denoted by a-to-b or [a-to-b]. If this path does not contain the vertex a (b) and its incident edge, it is denoted by (a-to-b] ([a-to-b)). A path between a vertex v of degree more than two and a vertex of degree one, is called a branch incident to the vertex v. A vertex v is far-adjacent to a vertex w, if by ignoring the vertices of degree two, the vertex v is adjacent to the vertex w. Let T1 and T2 be two subtrees of the tree T. The graph resulting from the merging of these two subtrees is denoted by T1 + T2. A graph is called K4-free, if it does not contain any clique of size 4. Parameterized computation is a new approach dealing with NP-hard problem [2], [17], and [3]. A fixed-parameter tractable algorithm (FPT-algorithm) is an algorithm that solves a problem of input size n and a parameter k in 𝑓(𝑘). 𝑛𝑂(1) time, in which 𝑓 is a computable function depending only on the parameter k [13]. If a problem is W[1]-hard with respect to a parameter k, then it means there is no FPT-algorithm for it (unless FPT = 𝑊[1]). The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the MUGO problem on undirected graphs is studied. We determine the parameterized complexity of the problem (for 3  non-fixed and fixed paths) w.r.t. the number of satisfied pairs, which has been an open problem. Also, we present an exact algorithm which outperforms the previous algorithms on trees with a limited number of leaves. In addition, we present a parameterized-approximation algorithm w.r.t. a parameter named the number of backbones of a tree. In section 3, the MMGO on mixed graphs problem is studied. We present polynomial-time algorithms for paths and cycles, and an FPTalgorithm based on the combined parameter the number of arcs and the number of pairs for general graphs. We conclude our paper in section 4 by introducing some open problems.  2  Undirected Networks  In this section, we study the complexity of the MUGO problem w.r.t. the number of satisfied pairs, the number of leaves of the input tree, and a parameter named the number of backbones of the input tree.  2.1 Number of satisfied pairs The parameterized complexity of MUGO problem w.r.t. the number of satisfied pairs has been an open problem [4]. In this subsection, we determine the parameterized complexity of this problem for fixed and non-fixed paths. The fixed-path variant of MUGO is identical to MUGO with the exception that each pair (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ) ∈ 𝑃 is associated with a fixed path 𝑝𝑗 from 𝑠𝑗 to 𝑡𝑗 in the graph. Hence, a pair (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ) is satisfied only if the edges of the path 𝑝𝑗 is oriented from the vertex 𝑠𝑗 towards the vertex 𝑡𝑗 . First, we study the problem for non-fixed paths. Since paths are non-fixed, we can assume that the input graph is a tree. Each instance of the MTO problem can be modeled as an instance of the Maximum Independent Set (MIS) problem. An independent set is a set of vertices in a graph, no two of which are adjacent. A maximum independent set is an independent set of largest possible size for a given graph. Each pair (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ) of MTO instance is considered as a vertex 𝑣𝑗 in the MIS instance. There is an edge between two vertices of MIS instance, if and only if the corresponding pairs conflict with each other. We call the resulting graph a conflict graph. It is clear that finding the optimal solution of the MIS problem on the conflict graph is equivalent to finding the optimal solution of the corresponding MTO instance. Lemma 2.1.1 [4]. The resulting conflict graph of an MTO instance is K4-free. Now, we model the MIS problem as the Party problem [15]: find the minimum number of guests that must be invited so that at least 𝛼 guests will know each other (a clique of size 𝛼) or at least 𝛽 guests will not know each other (an independent set of size 𝛽). The solution of the problem is known as the ramsey number 𝑅(𝛼, 𝛽). Thus, if we consider each vertex of the conflict graph as a 4  guest, and each edge between two vertices as the corresponding guests knowing each other, the rumsey number 𝑛 = 𝑅(𝛼, 𝛽) returns the minimum number of vertices such that a graph with at least n vertices contains a clique of size 𝛼 or an independent set of size 𝛽. Ramsey's theorem states that such a number exists for all 𝛼 and 𝛽. 𝛼+𝛽−2  Lemma 2.1.2 [7]. 𝑅(𝛼, 𝛽) ≤ ( 𝛽−1 ). According to the lemma 2.1.1, the conflict graph whose the number of vertices is equal to or more than 𝑅(4, 𝛽), has an independent set of size at least 𝛽. According to lemma 2.1.2, 𝑅(4, 𝛽) ≤  (𝛽+2)(𝛽+1)(𝛽)  (𝛽+2)(𝛽+1)(𝛽)  6  6  . Hence, a conflict graph for which 𝑛 ≥  , has an independent  set of size at least 𝛽. Theorem 2.1.1. The MTO problem is fixed-parameter tractable with respect to the maximum number of satisfied pairs. Proof. Let 𝛽 be the maximum number of satisfied pairs. First, create the conflict graph 𝑇𝑐 of the MTO problem. If 𝑝 >  (𝛽+2)(𝛽+1)(𝛽)  (𝛽+2)(𝛽+1)(𝛽)  6  6  , we can remove arbitrary 𝑝 −  vertices from 𝑇𝑐 .  According to Ramsey's theorem, 𝑇𝑐 has still an independent set of size at least 𝛽. Thus, regardless of the size of 𝑇𝑐 , it can be reduced to a kernel of size at most  (𝛽+2)(𝛽+1)(𝛽) 6  such that  there is an independent set of size 𝛽 in the kernel, if and only if there is an independent set of size 𝛽 in 𝑇𝑐 . Since we have reduced the input instance to a polynomial-size kernel w.r.t. to the parameter 𝛽, MTO is fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the maximum number of satisfied pairs. □ We show that, despite the non-fixed version, the MUGO problem with fixed paths is W[1]-hard w.r.t. the number of satisfied pairs. We reduce from the K-clique problem: Given an undirected graph 𝐺𝑐 = (𝑉𝑐 , 𝐸𝑐 ), and a parameter K, is there a clique (a set of vertices that are pairwise adjacent) of size K in 𝐺𝑐 ? The K-clique problem is W[1]-hard w.r.t. the parameter K [5]. Given an instance 𝐺𝑐 = (𝑉𝑐 , 𝐸𝑐 ) of K-clique problem, we construct an instance 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸) of MUGO as follows. For each vertex 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝑐 , we create two vertices 𝑠𝑖 and 𝑡𝑖 such that the pair (𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ) is connected by a fixed path 𝑝𝑖 . If there is no edge between the two vertices 𝑣𝑖 , 𝑣𝑗 ∈ 𝑉𝑐 , intersect the corresponding two paths 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑝𝑗 as shown in Figure 1 (a). In this case, the path 𝑝𝑖 contains the edge 𝑢𝑖𝑗 -𝑣𝑖𝑗 , and the path 𝑝𝑗 contains the subpath 𝑢𝑗𝑖 -𝑣𝑖𝑗 -𝑢𝑖𝑗 -𝑣𝑗𝑖 . Otherwise, if there is an edge between two vertices 𝑣𝑖 , 𝑣𝑗 ∈ 𝑉𝑐 , pass one of them above the other, as shown in Figure 1 (b). In this case, the path 𝑝𝑖 contains the edge 𝑢𝑖𝑗 -𝑣𝑖𝑗 , and the path 𝑝𝑗 contains the edge 𝑢𝑗𝑖 -𝑣𝑗𝑖 .  5  ( )  ( )  Figure 1. Intersection of two paths in an MUGO instance  In Figure 2, a graph of size five, which contains a 3-clique, and its corresponding MUGO instance is depicted. One can see that the three vertices 𝑣2 , 𝑣3 , and 𝑣5 of the 3-clique in K-clique instance are one-to-one corresponding to the three paths 𝑝2 , 𝑝3 , and 𝑝5 that can be satisfied at the same time in the MUGO instance. The following theorem is the conclusion of the discussion above. Theorem 2.1.2. The maximum graph orientation problem with fixed paths is W[1]-hard w.r.t. the number of satisfied pairs. Proof. According to the discussion above, we reduce from the K-clique problem. Since the Kclique problem is W[1]-hard w.r.t. the parameter K, and the number of satisfied pairs in the MUGO instance is equal to the size of a clique in the K-clique instance, the MUGO problem with fixed paths is W[1]-hard w.r.t. the number of satisfied pairs. □  6  1  12  5  2 1  21  21 12  3  2  23  13 3 31  31  23  1  2  1  1  32  32  13  1  3  2  2  3  3  2  15  3  5  35  25  5  5 51  51  15  52  52  25  53  53  5  35  1  2  3  5  5  Figure 2. An instance of clique problem and its corresponding MUGO instance  2.2 Number of leaves In [4], the parameterized complexity of MTO was studied w.r.t. to the maximum signal flow over vertices or edges. They defined the notion of cross pair as a source-target pair whose corresponding path is directed either towards the root or towards the leaves, but do not change its direction. They showed that MTO is fixed-parameter tractable with respect to the maximum number of cross pairs passing through a vertex, denoted by 𝑞𝑣 , and presented an 𝑂(2𝑞𝑣 𝑞𝑣 𝑛2 ) time algorithm to solve it. In this subsection, we present an exact algorithm which outperforms the mentioned algorithm on the trees with bounded number of leaves. In fact, We show that the MTO problem is tractable for a constant number of leaves. We use the following straightforward lemmas in this subsection.  7  Lemma 2.2.1. Maximum tree orientation can be solved on paths in 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time [4]. Lemma 2.2.2. The number of vertices of degree more than two in a tree is at most the number of leaves minus two. Consider the star-like tree in Figure 3 (a), which has three leaves.  Figure 3. star-like trees with three leaves  Without loss of generality, assume that 𝑛 = 3𝑖 + 1, for some even integer i; and there are 𝑖 vertices on each branch of the tree. Regardless of the vertex selected as the root, the maximum number of cross pairs passing through a vertex is 𝑂(𝑛). Hence, using the FPT-algorithm based on the parameter 𝑞𝑣 , this instance is solved in 𝑂(2𝑛 ) time. We present another algorithm that solves this instance in 𝑂(𝑛5 ). We illustrate the core idea of our algorithm in Figure 3 (b). Consider the path between the vertex r and the leaf 𝑣1 . In an arbitrary orientation of the tree, when we walk away from the vertex r to the vertex 𝑣1 , all arcs are in the same direction until we reach to an arc with the different direction (that is, until a split vertex appears). If there is not a split vertex in the path r-to-𝑣1 , it means that all arcs on this path have the same direction. Now, as in Figure 3 (b), assume that the first split vertex on the path (from r-to-𝑣1 ) is the vertex a. One can see that there cannot be a satisfied pair (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ) such that 𝑠𝑗 ∈ path (a-to-𝑣1 ] and 𝑡𝑗 ∉ path [a-to-𝑣1 ] or vice versa (that is, 𝑡𝑗 ∈ path (a-to-𝑣1 ] and 𝑠𝑗 ∉ path [a-to-𝑣1 ]). Hence, we can process the subpath a-to-𝑣1 independently.  8  This approach can be applied on all branches of the tree. For each branch, there are at most 𝑂(𝑛) possible choices for choosing the first split vertex on that branch. If there is no split vertex on a branch, the leaf of the branch is considered as its first split vertex. Hence, there are at most 𝑂(𝑛3 ) possible combinations for choosing the first split vertices of the branches of the tree. For each combination, the tree is decomposed into three independent paths (a-to-𝑣1 , b-to-𝑣2 , and cto-𝑣3 ), called separated paths, and a star-like tree with the leaves a, b, and c, where all edges of each branch have the same direction. The branches r-to-𝑎, r-to-𝑏, and r-to-𝑐 are called new branches of the tree. According to lemma 2.2.1, the separated paths can be processed simultaneously in 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time. Also, the newly generated star-like tree can be processed in polynomial time. Therefore, the MTO problem on a tree with three leaves can be solved in 𝑂(𝑛5 ) time. This algorithm can be easily generalized for all star-like trees with k leaves, in 𝑂(𝑛𝑘+2 . 2𝑘 . 𝑘) time. We show how our algorithm can be generalized for all trees. Consider the situation, where there is more than one vertex of degree more than two, as in Figure 4(a). First, consider the vertex 𝑟1. Assume that the vertices a, b, and c are the split vertices of the branches incident to 𝑟1. As in the previous case, we decompose the tree at these vertices, and orient each of the new branches (𝑟1 − 𝑎, 𝑟1 − 𝑏, and 𝑟1 − 𝑐). Note that for each separated path, the set of input pairs contains the pairs for which both endpoints are on that path. Also, the remaining subtree can be processed independently. However, the set of input pairs P must be updated for this subtree. For each pair (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ) ∈ 𝑃, one of the following cases occurs:         Pairs such as (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ), for which 𝑠𝑗 and 𝑡𝑗 are on one of the separated subpaths. Such pairs must be deleted from the set P. Pairs such as (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ), for which 𝑠𝑗 (or 𝑡𝑗 ) belongs to one of the separated subpaths (as (𝑠1 , 𝑡1 ) in Figure 4 (a)). Such pairs cannot be satisfied, thus, are removed form P. Pairs such as (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ), for which 𝑠𝑗 (or 𝑡𝑗 ) belongs to one of the new branches, but cannot be satisfied according to the current orientation (as (𝑠2 , 𝑡2 ) in Figure 4(a)). Such pairs are also removed from P. Pairs such as (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ), for which 𝑠𝑗 (or 𝑡𝑗 ) belongs to one of the new branches, and may be satisfied according to the current orientation. (as (𝑠3 , 𝑡3 ) in Figure 4 (a)). In this case, 𝑠𝑗 (or 𝑡𝑗 ) is transformed to the corresponding vertex of degree more than two (as 𝑠3 is transformed to 𝑟1 in Figure 4 (b)). In this case, the pair (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑡𝑗 ) in P is replaced by the new pair. Other pairs, which are remained in P.  After updating the set P of source-target pairs for each combination of split vertices and new branches orientation, the new branches are removed from the subtree obtained from the decomposition of the tree, as in Figure 4 (b).  9  Thus, after selecting the split vertices of the branches of 𝑟1, decomposing the tree at the split vertices, and then orienting its new branches, the remaining subtree, which has one fewer vertex of degree more than two, can be processed independently. Note that there is always a vertex of degree more than two, which is far-adjacent to exactly one vertex of degree more than two. We start the processing of the tree by choosing such vertex (as 𝑟1 in Figure 4 (a)). Then, this process is iteratively performed until the whole tree is processed. 1  1  2  3 3  5  2  1 2  3 1 6  (a)  2  2  3 5 2  1  3 1  (b)  6  Figure 4. Illustration of the algorithm on general graphs  Theorem 2.2.1. Maximum tree orientation can be solved on trees in 𝑂((2𝑛)2𝑘 ) time, where k is the number of leaves of the tree. Proof. As described above, in each iteration of the algorithm, we choose a vertex of degree more than two that is far-incident to exactly one vertex of degree more than two. We determine the split vertices on its branches, decompose the tree at these vertices, orient the new branches, update the source-target pairs, and remove the new branches. This process continues until the whole tree is processed. The number of split vertices that are selected for branches of the tree during the algorithm, are corresponding to the number vertices of degree one or degree more than two. According to lemma 2.2.2, the total number of these split vertices is at most 2𝑘 − 2. Thus, there are 𝑂(𝑛2𝑘−2 ) 10  combinations for selecting the split vertices. Also, there are two possible orientations for each new branch which is obtained after the decomposition of the tree at a split vertex. Therefore, there are 𝑂(22𝑘−2 ) combinations for selecting the orientations of new branches. Altogether, the algorithm runs in 𝑂(𝑛2𝑘 . 22𝑘−2 ) time. Note that we have omitted some polynomial factors from the time complexity of the algorithm to simplify it. This algorithm is depicted in Figure 5. □  11  Figure 5. The algorithm based on the number of leaves  12  2.3 Number of backbones As stated before, the best approximation ratio obtained for MTO is Ω(  log log 𝑛 log 𝑛  ) [10], and there has  been no constant-ratio approximation algorithm for it. In this section, we introduce the notion of the backbone in a tree, and present a parameterized-approximation algorithm with respect to the number of backbone of a tree, which provides a constant ratio for trees with bounded number of backbones. A caterpillar is a tree in which all vertices are within distance one of a central path. We define a caterpillar-like tree as a tree in which all vertices of degree more than two are on the same path. We call this central path, a backbone. Consider the star-like tree and the caterpillar-like tree in Figure 6.(a). In the star-like tree, orient each branch randomly. Since each pair passes through at most two branches, thus, each pair is satisfied with a probability of at least 1/4. In the caterpillar-like tree, orient the central path (the backbone) 𝑣1 -to-𝑣2 and each of the branches incident to it randomly. Analogously, each pair is satisfied with a probability of at least 1/8.  1  2  (a)  3  1 2  (b)  Figure 6. (a) a star-like and a caterpillar-like tree (b) a tree with two backbones  13  In general trees, vertices of degree more than two may be on more than one path (backbones). Note that these backbones must be edge-disjoint so that we can orient each of them randomly. For example, consider the tree in Figure 6 (b), in which, the vertices of degree more than two are at least on the two backbones 𝑣1 -to-𝑣2 and 𝑣3 -to-𝑣 . Assume that the vertices of degree more than two of a tree reside on b edge-disjoint backbones. Then, by a random orientation of backbones and branches incident to the backbones, each pair is satisfied with a probability of at 1  least 2𝑏+2 . Now, we must find the minimum number of edge-disjoint backbones that cover all vertices of degree more than two. The first step is to contract all edges that are incident to a vertex of degree one or two. The resulting tree, which we call the backbone tree 𝑇𝑏 , shows the far-adjacency of the vertices of degree more than two. It is obvious that a decomposition of 𝑇𝑏 into b edge-disjoint paths provides b edge-disjoint backbones that cover all vertices of degree more than two in T. So, it is sufficient to decompose 𝑇𝑏 into the minimum number of edge-disjoint paths. Lemma 2.3.1. Let T be a tree with 2𝑏, 𝑏 > 0, vertices of odd degree. Then, T can be decomposed into b edge-disjoint paths. Also, any decomposition of T into edge-disjoint paths contains at least b paths. Proof. The proof is by induction on b. If 𝑏 = 0, T has no edge. Assume that a tree with 2𝑏 − 2 vertices of odd degree can be decomposed into 𝑏 − 1 paths. Let a tree T be a tree with 2𝑏 vertices of odd degree. T has at least two vertices of degree one, namely 𝑣1 and 𝑣2 . Deleting the edges of the path 𝑣1 -to-𝑣2 , does not change the parity of the vertices except 𝑣1 and 𝑣2 . Let the resulting tree be 𝑇𝑏−1 . 𝑇𝑏−1 is a tree with 2𝑏 − 2 vertices of odd degree, which can be decomposed into 𝑏 − 1 paths. Thus, using the path 𝑣1 -to-𝑣2 , T can be decomposed into b edgesdisjoint paths. Since adding an edge-disjoint path to a tree will increase the number of vertices of odd degree at most by 2, any decomposition contains at least b edge-disjoint paths; otherwise, the resulting tree has less than 2𝑏 vertices of odd degree. □ The algorithm is illustrated in Figure 7.  14  Figure 7. The algorithm based on the number of backbones  It is easy to use the method of conditional expectations to obtain a deterministic algorithm from the algorithm in Figure 7 that produces an orientation for a graph with b backbones that satisfies 1  at least 2𝑏+2 of the pairs. Theorem 2.3.1. There is an approximation algorithm with the approximation ratio  1 2𝑏+2  for the  MTO problem, where b is the minimum number of edge-disjoint backbones (paths) that cover all vertices of degree more than two.  3  Mixed Networks  Unlike the MTO problem, there may be more than one path between the source and the target of a pair of P in an MMGO instance. Thus, there has been no efficient algorithm for determining conflicts between the pairs in P. Therefore, we state the following conjecture: Conjecture 3.1. MMGO is not fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the number of pairs. When the input is restricted to trees, because each pair corresponds to a path, MMGO is fixedparameter tractable w.r.t. the number of pairs. Proposition 3.1. MMGO on trees is fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the number of pairs.  3.1 Paths Assume that a path is considered from left to right, and the vertices are numbered from 1 to n. For all 𝑣, 𝑤 ∈ 𝑉, where 𝑣 ≤ 𝑤, 𝑆(𝑣, 𝑤) is the maximum number of pairs with both endpoints on the path 𝑣-to-𝑛 that can be satisfied on the path 𝑣-to-𝑛 such that the subpath 𝑣-to-𝑤 is oriented from 𝑣 to 𝑤. Analogously, 𝑆(𝑤, 𝑣) is the maximum number of pairs with both endpoints on the path 𝑣-to-𝑛 that can be satisfied on the path 𝑣-to-𝑛 such that the subpath 𝑣-to-𝑤 is oriented from 𝑤 to 𝑣. Also, 𝐴(𝑣, 𝑤) is the number of pairs with both endpoints on the path 𝑣-to-𝑤 that are satisfied when orienting the path from 𝑣 to 𝑤. 15  When there is an arc on the path 𝑣-to-𝑤 whose direction is toward 𝑣, then 𝐴(𝑣, 𝑤) = 𝑆(𝑣, 𝑤) = 0. Analogously, when there is an arc on the path 𝑣-to-𝑤 whose direction is toward 𝑤, then 𝐴(𝑤, 𝑣) = 𝑆(𝑤, 𝑣) = 0. Also, 𝐴(𝑣, 𝑣) = 0 for all 𝑣. Then, 𝑆(𝑣, 𝑤) and 𝑆(𝑤, 𝑣) can be calculated as follows: 𝑆(𝑣, 𝑤) = 𝐴(𝑣, 𝑤) + max{𝑆(𝑢, 𝑤), 𝑆(𝑣, 𝑢) − 𝐴(𝑣, 𝑤)} (3.1.1), 𝑆(𝑤, 𝑣) = 𝐴(𝑤, 𝑣) + max{𝑆(𝑤, 𝑢), 𝑆(𝑢, 𝑣) − 𝐴(𝑤, 𝑣)} (3.1.2), where u is the right-hand side vertex of w, that is 𝑢 = 𝑤 + 1. Note than when 𝑤 = 𝑛, then 𝑆(𝑣, 𝑤) = 𝐴(𝑣, 𝑤), and 𝑆(𝑤, 𝑣) = 𝐴(𝑤, 𝑣). The main idea behind the recurrence relations (3.1.1) and (3.1.2) is that when a split vertex appears on a path, the path can be decomposed at that vertex and the two resulting subpaths can be processed independently. The following theorem is straightforward. Theorem 3.1.1. MMGO on paths can be solved in 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time. Proof. In the first step, initialization, as stated above, is done in 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time. The matrix A can be easily computed in 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time. Also, the matrix S is computed in 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time. 𝑆(1,1) returns the value of the optimal solution of the MMGO problem on the input path. □  3.2 Cycles If a cycle has no arc, or has one arc, or all of its arcs have the same direction, it can be oriented such that all pairs are satisfied. In this case, it is sufficient to orient all edges such that all edges (and all arcs) have the same direction. Consider the cycle in Figure 8, in which there are two arcs with opposite directions. Because of these two arcs, there must be at least two split vertices in any optimal orientation. There are 𝑂(𝑛2 ) combinations for choosing these two split vertices. Assume that a and b are those two split vertices. We can decompose the cycle at the split vertices into two subpaths between a and b. The two subpaths are independent of each other except for the pair (𝑎, 𝑏). The pair (𝑎, 𝑏) is satisfied if and only if the path is oriented from 𝑎 to 𝑏. { |𝑎𝑏1 + | + |𝑎𝑏2 + | − 𝛼(𝑎,𝑏) , |𝑎𝑏1 + | + |𝑎𝑏2 |𝑃−(𝑎,𝑏) , |𝑎𝑏| = max (3.2.1), |𝑎𝑏2 + | + |𝑎𝑏1 |𝑃−(𝑎,𝑏) , |𝑎𝑏1 |𝑃−(𝑎,𝑏) + |𝑎𝑏2 |𝑃−(𝑎,𝑏) } where |𝑎𝑏1 |𝑃−(𝑎,𝑏) (|𝑎𝑏2 |𝑃−(𝑎,𝑏) ) is the value of the optimal solution of the MMGO on the path 𝑎𝑏1 (𝑎𝑏2 ) with input pairs 𝑃 − (𝑎, 𝑏). Also, 𝛼(𝑎,𝑏) = 1, if the pair (𝑎, 𝑏) ∈ 𝑃, otherwise 𝛼(𝑎,𝑏) = 0.  16  2  1  3  Figure 8. Two arcs with opposite directions in a cycle  This approach can be easily generalized for all cycles. Theorem 3.2.1. Given a cycle 𝐶 = (𝑉, 𝐸, 𝐴), and a set 𝑃 = {(𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ): 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑝} of source-target pairs. The MMGO problem can be solved on C in 𝑂(𝑛 ) time. Proof. The algorithm is depicted in Figure 9. The algorithm is similar to the example showed above. The only difference is that a path 𝑎𝑏𝑗 (𝑗 = 1,2) may have an arc with the direction opposite to the direction from a to b. In this case, we assign |𝑎𝑏𝑗 + | = 0. There are 𝑂(𝑛2 ) combinations for choosing the two split vertices. Since the two subpaths are independent of each other, for each combination, the solution can be calculated in 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time. Thus, the MMGO problem on cycles can be solved in 𝑂(𝑛 ) time. □  17  Figure 9. The algorithm for mixed cycles  3.3 Number of arcs and pairs According to conjecture 3.1, the MMGO is probably not fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the number of pairs. On the other hand, it is clear that MMGO is not fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the number of arcs, |𝐴|, otherwise, MTO could be solved in polynomial time. We show that MMGO is fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the combined parameter the number of pairs and the number of arcs. In the remainder of this section, let |𝐴| = 𝑘. Without loss of generality, we assume that the input graph G is a mixed-acyclic graph [14]. One can see that the graph G can be considered as a set of undirected trees which are connected using the arcs in A. We call each undirected tree an undirected component. For an illustration, consider the mixed graph in Figure 10, where the arcs are shown as dashed arrows.  18  1 2 1  3  2  1  2 5  6  Figure 10. Illustration of a mixed graph as connections of some undirected components  The pairs in P can be divided into two types 𝑃𝑈 and 𝑃𝐷 . A pair (𝑠, 𝑡) ∈ 𝑃𝑈 if both 𝑠, 𝑡 are in the same undirected component. Other pairs belong to 𝑃𝐷 . Satisfying each type of pair can be handled as follows:    Pair (𝑠, 𝑡) ∈ 𝑃𝑈 : in this case, there is only one path corresponding to the pair. Thus, this path must be oriented from 𝑠 to 𝑡 to satisfy the pair (such as (𝑠2 , 𝑡2 ) in Figure 10). Pair (𝑠, 𝑡) ∈ 𝑃𝐷 : in this case, there may be more than one path corresponding to the pair. Thus, it is sufficient to orient one of them from 𝑠 to 𝑡 to satisfy the pair (such as (𝑠1 , 𝑡1 ) in Figure 10). Each path may pass through one or more undirected components. If for each of this component, we determine the vertex through which a path enters the undirected component (the input vertex), and the vertex from which a path exits the undirected component (the output vertex), in fact, we have determined the path from 𝑠 to 𝑡, because in each undirected component there is only one path between the input vertex and the output vertex. Also, the remainder of the path is constituted by arcs.  Note that the input and output vertices are endpoints of the arcs that belong to an undirected component, thus, there are at most 2𝑘 of them. A vertex of an undirected component that is the head (tail) of an arc, is an input (output) vertex. For each vertex of an undirected component which is the endpoint of an arc, we must determine that the paths of which pairs pass through it. For example, the path corresponding to the pair (𝑠1 , 𝑡1 ) may pass through the vertices 𝑣1 , 𝑣2 , 𝑣3 , 𝑣 , 𝑣5 , 𝑣6 . Note that the vertex 𝑠𝑖 is considered as the input vertex through which the pair (𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ) enters to the component containing 𝑠𝑖 . Analogously, the vertex 𝑡𝑖 is considered as the output vertex from which the pair (𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ) exits the component containing 𝑡𝑖 . For each consistent assignment of the pairs to the input and output vertices, some of the pairs in 𝑃𝐷 are satisfied. An assignment is consistent if for all components, the path from the input vertex to the output vertex, for all pairs that pass through that component, can be oriented. After 19  orienting a consistent assignment, each undirected component has been converted to a mixed component. Since the pairs of 𝑃𝑈 in a component are independent of the pairs of 𝑃𝑈 in other components, the mixed components can be processed independently. According to proposition 3.1, the maximum number of pairs of 𝑃𝑈 that can be satisfied in each mixed component can be computed in 𝑂(2|𝑃𝑈 | ) time. The maximum number of total satisfied pairs among all consistent assignments of the pairs to the input and output vertices is the optimal solution to the problem. The algorithm is depicted in Figure 11.  Figure 11. The algorithm for mixed graphs based on the number of pairs and arcs  Theorem 3.3.1. Given a mixed graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸, 𝐴) and a set 𝑃 = {(𝑠𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 ): 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑝} of sourcetarget pairs, where |𝐴| = 𝑘. The MMGO problem is fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the combined parameter (𝑝, 𝑘). Proof. There are 𝑂(22𝑝𝑘 ) assignments of the pairs to the input and output vertices. Consistency checking of each assignment can be done in polynomial time. According to proposition 3.1, the MMGO problem can be solved on each mixed component in 𝑂(2𝑝 ) time. Thus, the problem can be solved in 𝑂(2(2𝑘+1).𝑝 ) time. Note that we have omitted some polynomial factors from the time complexity of the algorithm to simplify it. □  20  4  Conclusion  In this paper, we studied the maximum graph orientation problem on undirected and mixed graphs. In the undirected case, we determined the parameterized complexity of the problem (for non-fixed and fixed paths) w.r.t. the number of satisfied pairs, which was an open problem. Also, we presented an exact algorithm based on the number of leaves of a tree. In addition, we presented a parameterized-approximation algorithm w.r.t. a parameter named number of backbones of a tree. In the mixed case, we presented polynomial-time algorithms for paths and cycles, and an FPT-algorithm based on the combined parameter the number of arcs and the number of pairs for general graphs. There are still some open problems for future investigations, some of which are:     5  What is the parameterized complexity of the MMGO problem w.r.t. the parameter “number of pairs”? What is the parameterized complexity of the MTO problem w.r.t. the parameter “number of all pairs minus the number of input pairs”? Are there constant-ratio approximation algorithms for MTO and MMGO problems?  References  [1] E. Arkin and R. Hassin, “A note on orientations of mixed graphs,” Discret. Appl. Math., pp. 1–10, 2002. [2] J.E. Chen, “Parameterized computation and complexity: a new approach dealing with NPhardness,” J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 18–37, 2005. [3] J. Chen and Q.L. Feng, “On Unknown Small Subsets and Implicit Measures: New Techniques for Parameterized Algorithms,” J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 870– 878, 2014. [4] B. Dorn, F. Hüffner, D. Krüger, R. Niedermeier, and J. Uhlmann, “Exploiting bounded signal flow for graph orientation based on cause – effect pairs,” Algorithms Mol. Biol., vol. 6, no. 1, p. 21, Jan. 2011. [5] R. G. Downey and M. R. Fellows, Fundamentals of parameterized complexity, vol. 4. Springer, 2013. [6] M. Elberfeld and D. Segev, “Approximation algorithms for orienting mixed graphs,” Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 483, pp. 96–103, Apr. 2011. [7] P. Erdös and G. Szekeres, “A combinatorial problem in geometry,” Compos. Math., vol. 2, pp. 463–470, 1935. 21  [8] S. Fields, “High-throughput two-hybrid analysis,” FEBS J., vol. 272, no. 21, pp. 5391–5399, 2005. [9] Gamzu and M. Medina, “Improved approximation for orienting mixed graphs,” Struct. Inf. Commun. Complex., vol. 7355, pp. 243–253, 2012. [10] Gamzu, D. Segev, and R. Sharan, “Improved orientations of physical networks,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), vol. 6293 LNBI, pp. 215–225, 2010. [11] A.C. Gavin, M. Bösche, R. Krause, P. Grandi, M. Marzioch, A. Bauer, J. Schultz, J. M. Rick, A.-M. Michon, C.-M. Cruciat, and others, “Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes,” Nature, vol. 415, no. 6868, pp. 141–147, 2002. [12] Medvedovsky, V. Bafna, U. Zwick, and R. Sharan, An algorithm for orienting graphs based on cause-effect pairs and its applications to orienting protein networks. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. [13] R. Niedermeier, Invitation to Fixed Parameter Algorithms. Oxford University Press, 2006. [14] D. Silverbush, “Optimally orienting physical networks,” J. Comput. Biol., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 1437–48, Nov. 2011. [15] D. B. West and others, Introduction to graph theory, vol. 2. Prentice hall Upper Saddle River, 2001. [16] C.H. Yeang, T. Ideker, and T. Jaakkola, “Physical network models,” J. Comput. Biol., vol. 11, no. 2–3, pp. 243–262, 2004. [17] X. Zhao and D. Ding, “Fixed-parameter tractability of disjunction-free default reasoning,” J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 118–124, 2003.  22

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
