Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_28

Abstract:
IntPhys: A Framework and Benchmark for Visual Intuitive Physics Reasoning Ronan Riochet Ecole Normale Superieure INRIA  Mario Ynocente Castro ycmario@gmail.com  arXiv:1803.07616v1 [cs.AI] 20 Mar 2018  ronan.riochet@inria.fr  Mathieu Bernard Ecole Normale Superieure INRIA mathieu.a.bernard@inria.fr  Adam Lerer Facebook AI Research  Rob Fergus Facebook AI Research  alerer@fb.com  robfergus@fb.com  Véronique Izard Université Paris Descartes CNRS veronique.izard@parisdescartes.fr  Emmanuel Dupoux CoML, ENS/CNRS/EHESS/INRIA/PSL Research University emmanuel.dupoux@gmail.com  Abstract  to predict how they interact in the physical world. Experimental evidence shows that very young infants and many animals do have an intuitive grasp of how objects interact in the world, and that they exploit this ”intuitive physics” to make predictions about future outcomes and plan their actions [4]. At 2-4 months, infants are able to parse visual inputs in terms of permanent, solid and spatiotemporally continuous objects ([29], [65]). At 6 months, they understand the notion of stability, support and causality ([63], [6], [5]). Between 8 and 10 months, they grasp the notions of gravity, inertia, and conservation of momentum in collision; between 10 and 12 months, shape constancy [70], and so on. Such tacit knowledge is intuitive and nonverbal (as opposed to formal knowledge as taught in physics classes) and follows a developmental path parallel to early language acquisition. Both occur quickly, spontaneously, and without explicit training by caregivers [53]. In living organisms, intuitive physics is a latent construct: it can only be observed and measured indirectly through its effects on specific tasks like planning, problem solving, or in humans, verbal descriptions and explanations. It can also be revealed through the measurement of surprise reactions to ”magic tricks”, i.e., physically impossible events, such as objects disappearing or appearing out of nowhere, passing through each other, or defying gravity ([11] for a review). The latent nature of intuitive physics raises two difficult challenges for vision systems: an evaluation challenge and an engineering challenge. The evaluation challenge can be formulated as follows: given an artificial vision system, define a measure which quantifies how much this system understands about (intu-  In order to reach human performance on complex visual tasks, artificial systems need to incorporate a significant amount of understanding of the world in terms of macroscopic objects, movements, forces, etc. Inspired by work on intuitive physics in infants, we propose an evaluation framework which diagnoses how much a given system understands about physics by testing whether it can tell apart well matched videos of possible versus impossible events. The test requires systems to compute a physical plausibility score over an entire video. It is free of bias and can test a range of specific physical reasoning skills. We then describe the first release of a benchmark dataset aimed at learning intuitive physics in an unsupervised way, using videos constructed with a game engine. We describe two Deep Neural Network baseline systems trained with a future frame prediction objective and tested on the possible versus impossible discrimination task. The analysis of their results compared to human data gives novel insights in the potentials and limitations of next frame prediction architectures.  1. Introduction Despite impressive progress in machine vision on many tasks (face recognition [68], object recognition [33], [26], object segmentation [52], etc.), artificial systems are still far from human-level understanding of complex scenes. Scene understanding involves not only segmenting and tracking of objects across time, but also representing the spatial and temporal relationships between these objects and being able 1  Figure 1: Popular end-to-end applications involving scene understanding and proposed evaluation method based on physical plausibility judgments. itive) physics. One possible answer would be to measure intuitive physics through real-worlds applications like Visual Question Answering (VQA), object tracking or action planning (see Figure 1). However, this runs into two risks: (a) dataset bias (b) noisy measure. The first risk (also known as the Clever Hans problem [28]), is that real life application datasets often contain inherent statistical biases, which make it sometimes possible to achieve good performance with only minimal involvement in solving the problem at hand. The second risk is that the overall performance of a system is a complicated function of the performance of its parts; therefore, if a VQA system has a better performance than another one, it could be, not because it better understands physics, but because it has a better language model. We propose a framework, which we call the ”physical plausibility test”, which directly evaluates intuitive physics in a task-free and model-free fashion. This framework is inspired by research on infant and animal intuitive physics. It recasts physical reasoning as a simple yes-no classification problem: presented with the video of a simple scene, the question is whether the depicted event is physically possible or not. The trick is in preparing matched sets of videos where the physical violation introduces minimal differences between the frames of possible vs impossible movies. By varying the nature of the physical violation, one can probe different types of reasoning (laws regarding objects and their properties, laws regarding objects movement and interactions, etc.). Given that our method involves videos of events that could not arise spontaneously in nature, it should be taken as a diagnostic test, and in no way as a practical method for training physical reasoning systems. Yet, it’s advantage is that it can be applied to a variety of systems that have been engineered or trained on some other task, so long as these systems have the minimal requirement to compute a global scalar number for a given scene, which we can interpret as a ’plausibility’ score. Any system based on probability or reconstruction error can easily derive such a score. The engineering challenge can be formulated as follows:  construct a system which incorporates as much intuitive physics as possible (at least as much as infants have, for a start). We already discarded the use of impossible movies to train such a system on the grounds of practicality. Another approach using supervised learning with high level annotations (physical entities, laws or relations, etc.) would also be impractical. First, a system could have a good physical understanding of a scene without performing full 3D reconstruction. Second, as shown by infants, it is possible to learn intuitive physics without being fed with any high level tag or label. In fact, they only experience ’positive’ physical instances (physically possible events). Additionally, infants get useful feedback from their environment, as they become more competent at motor control, although such feedback only consists in possible events. One way to address the challenge would be therefore to construct an unsupervised or weakly supervised system that learns the laws of physics using the same type of data available to infants (i.e., abundant amount of observational sensory data, limited but informative environmental feedback, only positive instances). Here, we propose IntPhys, an intuitive physics benchmark which aims at getting a first stab at both the engineering and the evaluation challenges. It consists of synthetic videos constructed with a python interfaced game engine (UnrealEngine 4), enabling both realistic physics and precise control. The training set consists only of positive cases, i.e. possible movies, as seen from a first-person perspective by an immobile agent. This is probably a more difficult task than the one faced by infants, because they can explore and interact with their environment. It is however interesting to establish how far one can get with such simplified inputs, which are easy to gather in abundant amounts in the real world with video cameras. In addition, this enables an easier comparison of models, because they all get the same training data. The test set is constructed according to our evaluation framework, i.e., it requires the system to output a plausibility score, and is evaluated on its ability to separate possible from impossible movies. The test set can also be used as a standalone diagnostic evaluation of systems trained in other ways (real videos, interactive training in a virtual environment, etc., see [58, 27, 10]) The structure of this paper is as follows: in Section 2, we review related work in high level vision evaluation and models. In Section 3, we detail our intuitive physics evaluation framework. In Section 4, we present the first release of IntPhys Benchmark (V1.0) which addresses the most basic component of intuitive physics, namely object permanence. In Section 5, we present two baseline systems trained with a frame prediction cost on this dataset only, and analyze their results compared to human performance.  2. Related work Most of the previous work relevant for intuitive physics has been conducted in the context of particular end-to-end applications. We distinguish three broad classes of applications depending on the type of data they use. The first class includes tasks at the vision-language interface, where a model’s ability to reason about an image is assessed through a language task (e.g. generating a caption or answering a question about the image). The second class includes tasks which only use images or videos as input, such as predicting future events in a video or tracking objects through time. The third class involves vision-action interface, with applications in robotics. In that case, systems require vision reasoning to control actions and predict their outcome.  2.1. Vision-Language Interface Going beyond the standard object classification tasks [62, 33, 26], some of the more recent work in the visionlanguage interface have focused on classifying relations between objects [31, 28]. This requires in principle some understanding of the underlying physics (e.g. the distinction between hanging and supporting). Two tasks are currently receiving a lot of attention: captioning and VQA. Scene captioning ([14, 18, 42, 71]) consists in generating a sentence that describes an image, or matching an image with one or several captions. This task requires not only to recognize objects in an image, but also understand spatial relations and interactions between these objects. Visual Question Answering ([3, 23, 31, 43, 59, 72, 75]), requires to provide a verbal answer to a verbal question about an image; alternatively, one is only required to rank several potential answers. Like in image captioning, this task requires to understand spatial relations between objects, but in addition it has to understand the question and extract the right information to answer it. Some datasets ([66]) use videos as input, instead of static images. Because they go beyond a closed set of predefined outputs, these two tasks raise evaluation difficulties. As shown in [1] and [73], VQA systems can ”cheat” and obtain good performance by exploiting statistical biases in the images/questions dataset. For example, if the question ”What covers the ground?” is highly correlated with images of snow-covered ground, a statistical learner would perform well on that question by always answering snow, whatever the image. These biases make it harder to understand models’ weaknesses and strengths. In the CLEVR dataset [28], authors focus on testing visual reasoning ability while minimizing questionconditional biases. They provide ground-truth representations for both images and questions, as well as detailed annotations describing the kind of reasoning each question requires. In a similar spirit, we aim to propose a diagnostic tool for visual reasoning systems, providing systematically constructed tasks minimizing statistical biases. Our  proposed task gets rid of language altogether and directly taps into understanding of objects and their interactions.  2.2. High level Vision Many research projects in vision define tasks which aim at recovering high level structure from low level (pixel) information. One example is the recovery of 3D structure from static or moving images ([12, 64, 69, 15, 60]). Two tasks have been proposed to tackle the temporal dynamics of objects in videos: object tracking and future prediction. Classic formulations of object tracking focus on matching instance labels through video frames. For a given video, it results in a collection of object instances, with their location at every time step. This is a well-studied problem with its own literature [51, 44, 55, 9] and challenges [32, 34]. Contrary to learning systems, hand-crafted tracking models use priors regarding objects motion, assuming for instance that objects have constant speed when they are occluded, or that their appearance only have small changes through time.  2.3. Intuitive Physics and Forward Modelling Prediction can be seen as a more general task than object tracking. Given an image, or a stack of images around time t, the task is to produce a predicted image some time in the future. Recent studies have investigated models for predicting the stability and forward modeling the dynamics of towers of blocks ([8, 35, 74, 39, 46, 40]). [8] proposes a model based on an intuitive physics engine, [35] and [39] follow a supervised approach using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), [74] makes a comparison between simulation-based models and CNN-based models, [46] improves the predictions of a CNN model by providing it with a prediction of a generative model. In [45], authors propose different feature learning strategies (multi-scale architecture, adversarial training method, image gradient difference loss function) to predict future frames in raw videos. Even though next frame prediction tasks could be used to learned aspects of intuitive physics through observed regularities of object motion, current pixel-based forward models still struggle to predict outcomes beyond a few frames. Other models use more structured representation of objects to derive longer-term predictions. In [7] and [13], authors learn objects dynamics by modelling their pairwise interactions and predicting the resulting objects states representation (e.g. position / velocity / object intrinsic properties) . In [67], [21] and [17] authors combine factored latent object representations, object centric dynamic models and visual encoders. Each frame is parsed into a set of object state representations, which are used as input of a dynamic model. In [21] and [17], authors use a visual decoder to reconstruct the future frames, allowing the model to learn from raw (though synthetic) videos.  2.4. Vision-Action Interface Other studies have focused on vision-action interface, with potential applications in robotics. The main tasks are of two kinds: i) predicting the outcome of an action in a visual environment (forward modelling) and ii) predicting the optimal action to make in order to reach the desired outcome (action planning). Forward modelling has been studied in [19], where authors train a model to predict the outcome of interactions between a robot and an object. Conditioned with an input image, the state and the action of the robot, their model is trained to predict the resulting image after the action. In [20] they use this forward model to train the robot to execute a given action on an object. In [49], authors construct 10355 indoor scenes in a physics simulator and apply forces to various objects in these scenes. They train a deep neural network to predict effects of forces on objects, the ground truth being simulated by the physics simulator, using properties like mass, friction, gravity and solidity. In [48], they train a model to predict the dynamics of object from static images. Other studies focused on learning control from visual inputs. In [54] and [38], authors train deep neural networks to coordinate robotic vision and action, on the specific task of object grasping. Learning visual control policies with reinforcement learning has been investigated either in simulation ([41]) or in the real world [37]. Some systems use a prediction model in the purpose of action planning. In [50], authors train a model to predict future frames in videos, using these predictions to train a Q-controller for playing Atari games. Integrating a model of the dynamic of the external world to an agent was also done in [25], to plan novel actions by running multiple internal simulations. Finally, robots pushing (”poking”) objects was investigated in [2], where the model does not predict the image directly but rather a latent representation of it. This latent representation and the forward model are learned jointly with an inverse model that predicts how to move the object to a desired position, so that the latent representation has to keep information about object location. Being able to manipulate objects or predict dynamics in billiard game ([22]) seems to require notions like solidity, mass, collisions and causality. Even though the proposed framework for testing intuitive physics involves vision only, integrating vision and action during training may help to learn these notions.  3. A diagnostic test for intuitive physics As we just saw, there is a great diversity of systems and applications that rely in some way or other on physical understanding. We propose a single diagnostic test which can be run (provided minor modifications) on any of these systems (captioning and VQA systems, systems performing 3D  reconstruction, tracking, planning, etc), be they engineered by hand or trained using statistical learning. The main idea is to draw from work in developmental or comparative psychology (infants or animals), to construct a well controlled test avoiding potential statistical biases and cheap tricks, and to obtain relatively pure tests measuring different types of physical reasoning abilities. Intuitive physics is best described at the latent body of knowledge which allow organisms to predict events and plan actions and, when applicable, describe them. This body of knowledge may be incomplete, not totally coherent, and not used in all situations due to variations in attention, memory etc. Here, we will take the view that it is a rudimentary version of Newtonian physics, in so far as it deals with solid macroscopic objects existing in a 3D world with their intrinsic properties (mass, shape, position, velocities, etc.). We illustrate our diagnostic test on object permanence, one of the most basic principle of intuitive physics which states that an object continue to exist even when not seen. We present the design features of our test: minimal sets, parametric task difficulty, and evaluation metric. We then show how this can be extended to a wide range of intuitive physics reasoning problems.  3.1. Minimal sets design An important design principle of our evaluation framework relates to the organization of the possible and impossible movies in extremely well matched sets to avoid the Clever Hans problem. This is illustrated in Figure 2 for object permanence. We constructed matched sets comprising four movies, which contain an initial scene at time t1 (either one or two objects), and a final scene at time t2 (either one or two objects), separated by a potential occlusion by a screen which is raised and then lowered for a variable amount of time. At its maximal height, the screen completely occludes the objects so that it is impossible to know in this frame how many objects are behind the occluder. The four movies are constructed by combining the two possible beginnings with the two possible endings, giving rise to two possible (1→1 and 2→2) and two impossible (1→2 and 2→1) movies. Importantly, across these 4 movies, the possible and impossible ones are made of the exact same frames, the only factor distinguishing them being the temporal coherence of these frames. Such a design is intended to make it difficult for algorithms to use cheap tricks to distinguish possible from impossible movies by focusing on low level details, but rather requires models to focus on higher level temporal dependencies between frames.  3.2. Parametric manipulation of task complexity Our second design principle is that in each block, we will vary the stimulus complexity in a parametric fashion. In the  3.4. A hierarchy of intuitive physics problems  Figure 2: Illustration of the minimal sets design with object permanence. Schematic description of a static condition with one vs. two objects and one occluder. In the two possible movies (green arrows), the number of objects remains constant despite the occlusion. In the two impossible movies (red arrows), the number of objects changes (goes from 1 to 2 or from 2 to 1).  case of the object permanence block, for instance, stimulus complexity can vary according to three dimensions. The first dimension is whether the change in number of objects occurs in plain view (visible) or hidden behind an occluder (occluded). A change in plain view is evidently easier to detect whereas a hidden change requires an element of short term memory in order to keep a trace of the object’s through time. The second dimension is the complexity of the object’s motion. Tracking an immobile object is easier than if the object has a complicated motion. The third dimension is the number of objects involved in the scene. This tests for the attentional capacity of the system as defined by the number of objects it can track simultaneously. Manipulating stimulus complexity is important to establish the limit of what a vision system can do, and where it will fail. For instance, humans are well known to fail when the number of objects to track simultaneously is greater than four ([56]).  3.3. The physical possibility metrics Our evaluation metrics depend on the system’s ability to compute a plausibility score P (x) given a movie x. Because the test movies are structured in N matched k-uplets (in Figure 2, k = 4) of positive and negative movies Si=1..N = {P os1i ..P oski , Imp1i ..Impki }, we derive two different metrics. The relative error rate LR computes a score within each set. It requires only that within a set, the positive movies are more plausible than the negative movies. 1 X P LR = 1 j P (P osji )<Pj P (Impji ) (1) N i The absolute error rate LA requires that globally, the score of the positive movies is greater than the score of the negative movies. It is computed as: LA = 1 − AU C({i, j; P (P osji )}, {i, j; P (Impji )}) (2) Where AU C is the Area Under the ROC Curve, which plots the true positive rate against the false positive rate at various threshold settings.  We now explain how the design principles we presented above can be applied to study physical reasoning with progressively more complicated problems. Taking advantage of behavioral work on intuitive studies [4], we organize the tests into levels and blocks, each one corresponding to a core principle of intuitive physics, and each raising its particular machine vision challenge. Our typology of problems is presented in Table 1. It is organized in two levels: at the level 1, the problems only deal with properties and movement characteristics of single objects. At the level 2, the problems involve interactions between objects. In the first level, we define 5 blocks as follows. The first two are related to the conservation through time of intrinsic properties of objects. Object permanence (O1), already discussed, corresponds to the fact that objects continuously exist through time and do not pop in or out of existence. This turns into the computational challenge of tracking objects through occlusion. The second block, shape constancy (O2) describes the tendancy of rigid objects to preserve their shape through time. This principle is more challenging than the preceding one, because even rigid objects undergo a change in appearance due to other factors (illumination, distance, viewpoint, partial occlusion, etc.). The other three blocks (O3-5) relate to object’s movement through time, and the conservation laws which govern these movements for rigid inanimate macroscopic objects. These principles map into progressively more challenging problems of trajectory prediction. Regarding the interactions between objects (level 2), we also define 5 blocs, in increasing order of complexity. The first two test for very basic principles. Solidity (I1) states that two objects cannot occupy the same physical space. Causality (I2) states that object’s interactions can only occur through physical contact. This is of course not true for gravitational and electromagnetic forces, but still the principle of contact is deeply entrenched in human perception [36, 61]. Further, forces acting at a distance would have limited practical value for many applications, another reason to leave them for further extensions. The last three blocks (I3-5) correspond to modes of interactions between objects through contact (elastic collision, support and containment). All of these blocks raise difficult challenges for action planning, and some of them also for correctly describing a scene or an event using language (causality, support, containment).  4. The IntPhys Benchmark (V1.0) We present the first release of IntPhys, a benchmark designed to address both the engineering and evaluation challenges for intuitive physics in vision systems. This first release (V1.0) is focused on unsupervised learning, and tests only the first Block of our hierarchy of problems (O1, ob-  Table 1: List of the conceptual blocks of the Intuitive Physics Framework. Block Name O1. Object permanence O2. Shape constancy O3. Spatio-temporal continuity O4. Energy / Momentum O5. Gravity I1. Solidity I2. Causality  Physical principles Computational challenge Objects & objects attributes Objects don’t pop in and out of existence Occlusion-resistant object tracking Objects keep their shapes Appearance-robust object tracking Trajectories of objects are continuous Tracking/predicting object trajectories Constant kinetic energy and momentum Tracking/predicting object trajectories Downwards gravitational field Predicting objects trajectories Relations & Interactions Two objects cannot occupy the same space Predicting objects trajectories/planning Mechanical interactions require spatio- Planning/event description  I3. Mass, elastic collisions  temporal proximity Objects keep their mass; conservation of system’s momentum  Planning  I4. Support I5. Containment  gravity + solidity (polygon of support) solidity + continuity  Event prediction/planning/event description Solving the shell game/planning/event  ject permanence). Future releases will include more of the blocks of Table 1. The benchmark consists of three components: (1) a training set containing only physically possible events involving simple inanimate objects moving and interacting in a virtual environment - (2) a dev and test set containing both physically possible and physically impossible videos, carefully matched in tuples as described above - (3) an evaluation software. We describe these three components, as well as the results of humans plausibility judgments on the test set, which can serve as a reference for algorithms modeling human perception.  4.1. The training set The training set has been constructed using Unreal Engine 4.0; it contains a large variety of objects interacting one with another, occluders, textures, etc. See Figure 3 for some examples. It is composed of 15K videos of possible events (around 7 seconds each at 15fps), totalling 21 hours of videos. Each video is delivered as stacks of raw image (288 x 288 pixels), totalling 157Gb of uncompressed data. We also release the source code for data generation, allowing users to generate a larger training set if desired. Even though the spirit of IntPhys is the unsupervised learning of intuitive physics, we do provide additional information which may help the learner. The first one is the depth field for each image. This is not unreasonable, given that in infants, stereo vision and motion cues could provide an approximation of this information. We also deliver object instance segmentation masks. Given that this information it is probably not available as such in infants, we provide it only in the training set, not in the test set, for pretraining purposes.  Figure 3: Examples of frames from the training set.  4.2. The dev and test sets This section describes the dev and test sets for block O1 (object permanence). The design of these dev and test sets follow the general structure of matched sets described in section 3.2. As for parametric complexity, we vary the number of objects (1, 2 or 3), the presence and absence of occluder(s) and the complexity of the movement (static, dynamic 1 and dynamic 2). In the static case, the objects do not move; in the dynamic 1 case, they bounce or roll from left to right or right to left. In both these types of events, one occluder may be present on the scene, and objects may sometimes pop into existence (a 0→1 event), or disappear suddenly (1→0) - these impossible events occur behind the occluder when it is present, or in full view otherwise. In dynamic 2 events (illustrated in Supplementary Material, Figure 4), two occluders are present and the existence of objects may change twice. For example, one object may be present on the scene at first, then disappear after going behind the first occluder, later reappearing behind the sec-  ond occluder (1→0→1). Dynamic 2 events were designed to prevent systems from detecting inconsistencies merely by comparing the number of objects visible at the beginning and at the end of the movie. Matched sets contain four videos: two possible events (0→0→0 and 1→1→1) and two impossible events (0→1→0 and 1→0→1). In total, the Block O1 test set contains 18 types of movies (3 objects, 2 occlusions and 3 types of movements). The dev set is instantiated by 20 different renderings of these 18 scenarios, objects positions, shapes, trajectories, resulting in 360 movies. The test set is instantiated by 200 different renderings of these scenarios (for a total of 3600 movies) and uses different objects, textures, motions, etc. All of the objects and textures of the dev and test sets are present in the training set. The purpose of the dev set released in IntPhys V1.0 is to help in the selection of an appropriate plausibility score, and in the comparison of various architectures (hyperparameters), but it should not serve to train the model’s parameters (this should be done only with the training set). This is why the dev set is kept intentionally small. The test set has more statistical power and enables a fine grained evaluation of the results across the different movie subtypes.  4.3. Evaluation software For each movie, the model should issue a scalar plausibility score. This number together with the movie ID is then fed to the evaluation software which outputs two tables of results, one for the absolute score and the other for the relative score. The evaluation software is provided for the dev set, but not the test set. For evaluating on the test set, participants are invited to submit their system and results (see www.intphys.com) and their results will be registered and time-stamped on the website leaderboard.  4.4. Human Judgments We presented the 3600 videos from the test set (Block O1) to human participants using Amazon Mechanical Turk. The experiment and human judgements results are detailed in Supplementary Section 8.  5. Baseline Systems In this section, we present two baseline systems which attempt to learn intuitive physics in an unsupervised setting, i.e., using only the possible movies of the training set. The two baselines consist in training deep neural networks with a future frame prediction objective. Based on the literature on next frame prediction, we propose two neural network models, predicting a future frame given a set of current frames. Our first model has a CNN encoder-decoder structure and the second is a conditional  Generative Adversarial Network (GAN, [24]), with a similar structure as DCGAN ([57]). For both model architectures, we investigate two different training procedures: in the first, we train models to predict short-future images with a prediction span of 5 frames; in the second, we predict long-future images with a prediction span of 35 frames. Preliminary work with predictions at the pixel level revealed that our models failed at predicting convincing object motions, especially for small objects on a rich background. For this reason, we switched to computing predictions at a higher level, using object masks. We use the metadata provided in the benchmark training set to train a semantic mask Deep Neural Network (DNN). This DNN uses a resnet-18 pretrained on Imagenet to extract features from the image, from which a deconvolution network is trained to predict the semantic mask which only distinguished three types of entities: background, occluders and objects. We then use this mask as input to a prediction component which predicts future masks based on past ones. To evaluate these models on our benchmark, our system needs to output a plausibility score for each movie. For this, we compute the prediction loss along the movie. Given past frames, a plausibility score for the frame ft can be derived by comparing ft with the prediction fˆt . Like in [22], we use the analogy with an agent running an internal simulation (visual imagination); here we assimilate a greater distance between prediction and observation with a lower plausibility. In subsection 5.2 we detail how we aggregate the scores of all frames into a plausibility score for the whole video.  5.1. Models Through out the movie, our models take as input two frames (fi1 , fi2 ) and predict a future frame ftarget . The prediction span is independent from the model’s architecture and depends only on the triplets (fi1 , fi2 , ftarget ) provided during the training phase. Our two architectures are trained either on a short term prediction task (5 frames in the future), or a long term prediction task (35 frames). Intuitively, short-term prediction will be more robust, but long-term prediction will allow the model to grasp long-term dependencies and deal with long occlusions. CNN encoder-decoder We use a resnet-18 ([26]) pretrained on Imagenet ([62]) to extract features from input frames (fi1 , fi2 ). A deconvolution network is trained to predict the semantic mask of future frame ftarget conditioned to these features, using a L2 loss. Generative Adversarial Network As a second baseline, we propose a conditional generative adversarial network (GAN, [47]) that takes as input predicted semantic masks from frames (fi1 , fi2 ), and predicts the semantic mask of future frame ftarget . In this setup, the discriminator has to distinguish between a mask predicted from ftarget directly  (real), and a mask predicted from past frames (fi1 , fi2 ). Like in [16], our model combines a conditional approach with a similar structure as of DCGAN [57]. At test time, we derive a plausibility score by computing the conditioned discriminator’s score for every conditioned frame. This is a novel approach based on the observation that the optimal discriminator D computes a score for x of Pdata (x) (3) D(x) = PG (x) + Pdata (x) For non-physical events x̂, Pdata (x̂) = 0; therefore, as long as PG (x̂) > 0, D(x̂) should be 0 for non-physical events, and D(x) > 0 for physical events x. Note that this is a strong assumption, as there is no guarantee that the generator will ever have support at the part of the distribution corresponding to impossible videos. All our models’ architectures, as well as training procedures and samples of predicted semantic masks can be found in Supplementary Material (Tables 3, 4, 5, 6 and Figure 6). The code will be made available.  5.2. Video Plausibility Score From forward models presented above, we can compute a plausibility score for every frame ftarget , conditioned to previous frames (fi1 , fi2 ). However, because the temporal positions of impossible events are not given, we must decide of a score for a video, given the scores of all its conditioned frames. An impossible event can be characterized by the presence of one or more impossible frame(s), conditioned to previous frames. Hence, a natural approach to compute a video plausibility score is to take the minimum of all conditioned frames’ scores: Plaus(v) =  min (fi1 ,fi2 ,ftarget )∈v  Plaus(ftarget |fi1 , fi2 )  (4)  where v is the video, and (fi1 , fi2 , ftarget ) are all the frame triplets in v, as given in the training phase.  5.3. Results Short-term prediction The first training procedure is a short-term prediction task; it takes as input frames ft−2 , ft and predicts ft+5 , which we note (ft−2 , ft ) → ft+5 in the following. We train the two architectures presented above on short-term prediction task and evaluate them on the test set. For the relative classification task, CNN encoderdecoder has an error rate of 0.10 when impossible events are visible and 0.53 when they are occluded. The GAN has an error rate of 0.12 when visible and 0.48 when occluded. For the absolute classification task, CNN encoder-decoder has a LA (see eq. 2) of 0.31 when impossible events are visible and 0.50 when they are occluded. The GAN has a LA of 0.27 when visible and 0.51 when occluded. Results are detailed in Supplementary Material (Tables 7, 8, 9, 10).  We observe that our short-term prediction models show good performances when the impossible events are visible, especially on the relative classifications task. However they perform poorly when the impossible events are occluded. This is easily explained by the fact that they have a prediction span of 5 frames, which is usually lower than the occlusion time. Hence, these models don’t have enough ”memory” to catch occluded impossible events. Long-term prediction The second training procedure consists in a long-term prediction task: (ft−5 , ft ) → ft+35 . For the relative classification task, CNN encoder-decoder has an error rate of 0.19 when impossible events are visible and 0.49 when they are occluded. The GAN has an error rate of 0.20 when visible and 0.43 when occluded. For the absolute classification task, CNN encoder-decoder has a LA of 0.43 when impossible events are visible and 0.50 when they are occluded. The GAN has a LA of 0.33 when visible and 0.50 when occluded. Results are detailed in Supplementary Material (Tables 11, 12, 13, 14). As expected, long-term models perform better than shortterm models on occluded impossible events. Moreover, results on absolute classification task confirm that it is way more challenging than the relative classification task. Because some movies are more complex than others, the average score of each quadruplet of movies may vary a lot. It results in cases where one model returns a higher plausibility score to an impossible movie M{imp, easy} from an easy quadruplet than to a possible movie M{pos, complex} from a complex quadruplet. Aggregated model To grasp short and long-term dependencies, we aggregate the scores of short-term and longterm models: Pagg (v) = (Pshort-term (v) + Plong-term (v))/2. For the relative classification task, CNN encoder-decoder has an error rate of 0.14 when impossible events are visible and 0.51 when they are occluded. The GAN has an error rate of 0.12 when visible and 0.51 when occluded. For the absolute classification task, CNN encoder-decoder has a LA of 0.35 when impossible events are visible and 50 when they are occluded. The GAN has a LA of 0.27 when visible and 0.51 when occluded. Results are detailed in Supplementary Material (Tables 15, 16, 17, 18, Figure 10).  6. Discussion We defined a general framework for measuring intuitive physics in artificial systems inspired by research on conceptual development in infants. In this framework, a system is asked to return a plausibility score for a video sequence showing physical interaction between objects. The system’s performance is assessed by measuring its ability to discriminate possible from impossible videos illustrating several types of physical principles. In addition we present IntPhys:  a benchmark designed to test for the unsupervised learning of intuitive physics (learning from positive examples only). On the first release of this benchmark (V1.0), dedicated to object permanence, we provide both human performance and proof of principle baseline systems. Humans show a generally good performance, although some attentional limitations start to appear when using occlusion and several objects to track simultaneously. The computational system shows that it is possible to obtain above chance performance using a mask prediction task, although occlusion presents a particularly strong challenge. The relative success of the mask prediction system compared to what can be expected from pixel-based systems indicates that operating at a more abstract level is a worth pursuing strategy. As new blocks of the Benchmark are released (see Table 1), the prediction task will become more and more difficult and progressively reach the level of scene comprehension achieved by one-year-old humans.  References [1] A. Agrawal, D. Batra, and D. Parikh. Analyzing the behavior of visual question answering models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.07356, 2016. 3 [2] P. Agrawal, A. Nair, P. Abbeel, J. Malik, and S. Levine. Learning to poke by poking: Experiential learning of intuitive physics. CoRR, abs/1606.07419, 2016. 4 [3] S. Antol, A. Agrawal, J. Lu, M. Mitchell, D. Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and D. Parikh. Vqa: Visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2425–2433, 2015. 3 [4] R. Baillargeon and S. Carey. Core cognition and beyond. In S. Pauen, editor, Early childhood development and later outcome, chapter 3, pages 33–65. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2012. 1, 5 [5] R. Baillargeon and S. Hanko-Summers. Is the top object adequately supported by the bottom object? young infants’ understanding of support relations. Cognitive Development, 5(1):29–53, 1990. 1 [6] R. Baillargeon, A. Needham, and J. DeVos. The development of young infants’ intuitions about support. Infant and Child Development, 1(2):69–78, 1992. 1 [7] P. Battaglia, R. Pascanu, M. Lai, D. Jimenez Rezende, and k. kavukcuoglu. Interaction networks for learning about objects, relations and physics. In D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, pages 4502– 4510. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016. 3 [8] P. W. Battaglia, J. B. Hamrick, and J. B. Tenenbaum. Simulation as an engine of physical scene understanding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110(45), 2013. 3 [9] L. Bertinetto, J. Valmadre, J. F. Henriques, A. Vedaldi, and P. H. Torr. Fully-convolutional siamese networks for object tracking. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 850–865. Springer, 2016. 3  [10] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. Openai gym. CoRR, abs/1606.01540, 2016. 2 [11] S. Carey. The origin of concepts. Oxford series in cognitive development. Oxford University Press, Oxford ; New York, 2009. 1 [12] A. X. Chang, T. Funkhouser, L. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q. Huang, Z. Li, S. Savarese, M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015. 3 [13] M. B. Chang, T. Ullman, A. Torralba, and J. B. Tenenbaum. A compositional object-based approach to learning physical dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.00341, 2016. 3 [14] J. Chen, P. Kuznetsova, D. Warren, and Y. Choi. Déjà imagecaptions: A corpus of expressive descriptions in repetition. In HLT-NAACL, pages 504–514, 2015. 3 [15] C. B. Choy, D. Xu, J. Gwak, K. Chen, and S. Savarese. 3dr2n2: A unified approach for single and multi-view 3d object reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00449, 2016. 3 [16] E. L. Denton, S. Gross, and R. Fergus. Semi-supervised learning with context-conditional generative adversarial networks. CoRR, abs/1611.06430, 2016. 8 [17] S. Ehrhardt, A. Monszpart, N. J. Mitra, and A. Vedaldi. Learning a physical long-term predictor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00247, 2017. 3 [18] A. Farhadi, M. Hejrati, M. Sadeghi, P. Young, C. Rashtchian, J. Hockenmaier, and D. Forsyth. Every picture tells a story: Generating sentences from images. Computer vision–ECCV 2010, pages 15–29, 2010. 3 [19] C. Finn, I. Goodfellow, and S. Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical interaction through video prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 64– 72, 2016. 4 [20] C. Finn and S. Levine. Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017 IEEE International Conference on, pages 2786–2793. IEEE, 2017. 4 [21] M. Fraccaro, S. Kamronn, U. Paquet, and O. Winther. A disentangled recognition and nonlinear dynamics model for unsupervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, NIPS, 2017. 3 [22] K. Fragkiadaki, P. Agrawal, S. Levine, and J. Malik. Learning visual predictive models of physics for playing billiards. ICLR, 2016. 4, 7 [23] H. Gao, J. Mao, J. Zhou, Z. Huang, L. Wang, and W. Xu. Are you talking to a machine? dataset and methods for multilingual image question. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2296–2304, 2015. 3 [24] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 2672–2680, 2014. 7 [25] J. B. Hamrick, R. Pascanu, O. Vinyals, A. Ballard, N. Heess, and P. Battaglia. Imagination-based decision making with physical models in deep neural networks. 4 [26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-  [27]  [28]  [29]  [30] [31]  [32]  [33]  [34]  [35]  [36] [37]  [38]  [39]  [40]  [41]  [42]  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 770–778, 2016. 1, 3, 7 Y. Jiang, J. Liu, A. R. Zamir, G. Toderici, I. Laptev, M. Shah, and R. Sukthankar. Thumos challenge: Action recognition with a large number of classes, 2014. 2 J. Johnson, B. Hariharan, L. van der Maaten, L. Fei-Fei, C. L. Zitnick, and R. Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.06890, 2016. 2, 3 P. J. Kellman and E. S. Spelke. Perception of partly occluded objects in infancy. Cognitive psychology, 15(4):483–524, 1983. 1 D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR, abs/1412.6980, 2014. 12 R. Krishna, Y. Zhu, O. Groth, J. Johnson, K. Hata, J. Kravitz, S. Chen, Y. Kalantidis, L.-J. Li, D. A. Shamma, et al. Visual genome: Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. International Journal of Computer Vision, 123(1):32–73, 2017. 3 M. Kristan, A. Leonardis, J. Matas, M. Felsberg, R. Pflugfelder, L. Čehovin, T. Vojir, G. Häger, A. Lukežič, and G. Fernandez. The visual object tracking vot2016 challenge results. Springer, Oct 2016. 3 A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, pages 1097–1105. Curran Associates, Inc., 2012. 1, 3 L. Leal-Taixé, A. Milan, I. Reid, S. Roth, and K. Schindler. MOTChallenge 2015: Towards a benchmark for multitarget tracking. arXiv:1504.01942 [cs], Apr. 2015. arXiv: 1504.01942. 3 A. Lerer, S. Gross, and R. Fergus. Learning physical intuition of block towers by example. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016. 3 A. M. Leslie and S. Keeble. Do six-month-old infants perceive causality? Cognition, 25(3):265–288, 1987. 5 S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(39):1–40, 2016. 4 S. Levine, P. Pastor, A. Krizhevsky, J. Ibarz, and D. Quillen. Learning hand-eye coordination for robotic grasping with deep learning and large-scale data collection. The International Journal of Robotics Research, page 0278364917710318, 2016. 4 W. Li, A. Leonardis, and M. Fritz. To fall or not to fall: A visual approach to physical stability prediction. arXiv preprint, 2016. 3 W. Li, A. Leonardis, and M. Fritz. Visual stability prediction and its application to manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04861, 2016. 3 T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015. 4 T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollár, and C. L. Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Com-  [43]  [44]  [45]  [46]  [47] [48]  [49]  [50]  [51]  [52]  [53] [54]  [55]  [56]  [57]  [58]  mon objects in context. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 740–755. Springer, 2014. 3 M. Malinowski and M. Fritz. A multi-world approach to question answering about real-world scenes based on uncertain input. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1682–1690, 2014. 3 V. Manohar, P. Soundararajan, H. Raju, D. Goldgof, R. Kasturi, and J. Garofolo. Performance Evaluation of Object Detection and Tracking in Video, pages 151–161. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. 3 M. Mathieu, C. Couprie, and Y. LeCun. Deep multi-scale video prediction beyond mean square error. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05440, 2015. 3 M. Mirza, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio. Generalizable features from unsupervised learning. ICLR Workshop submission, 2017. 3 M. Mirza and S. Osindero. Conditional generative adversarial nets. CoRR, abs/1411.1784, 2014. 7 R. Mottaghi, H. Bagherinezhad, M. Rastegari, and A. Farhadi. Newtonian scene understanding: Unfolding the dynamics of objects in static images. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3521–3529, 2016. 4 R. Mottaghi, M. Rastegari, A. Gupta, and A. Farhadi. ”what happens if...” learning to predict the effect of forces in images. ECCV, 2016. 4 J. Oh, X. Guo, H. Lee, R. L. Lewis, and S. Singh. Actionconditional video prediction using deep networks in atari games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2863–2871, 2015. 4 V. Papadourakis and A. Argyros. Multiple objects tracking in the presence of long-term occlusions. Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 114(7):835–846, 2010. 3 P. O. Pinheiro, R. Collobert, and P. Dollar. Learning to segment object candidates. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1990–1998, 2015. 1 S. Pinker. The language instinct. Harper, 1994. 1 L. Pinto and A. Gupta. Supersizing self-supervision: Learning to grasp from 50k tries and 700 robot hours. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2016 IEEE International Conference on, pages 3406–3413. IEEE, 2016. 4 H. Pirsiavash, D. Ramanan, and C. C. Fowlkes. Globallyoptimal greedy algorithms for tracking a variable number of objects. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2011 IEEE Conference on, pages 1201–1208. IEEE, 2011. 3 Z. W. Pylyshyn and R. W. Storm. Tracking multiple independent targets: Evidence for a parallel tracking mechanism. Spatial vision, 3(3):179–197, 1988. 5 A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. CoRR, abs/1511.06434, 2015. 7, 8, 12 E. Real, J. Shlens, S. Mazzocchi, X. Pan, and V. Vanhoucke. Youtube-boundingboxes: A large high-precision human-annotated data set for object detection in video. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.00824, 2017. 2  [59] M. Ren, R. Kiros, and R. Zemel. Exploring models and data for image question answering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2953–2961, 2015. 3 [60] D. J. Rezende, S. A. Eslami, S. Mohamed, P. Battaglia, M. Jaderberg, and N. Heess. Unsupervised learning of 3d structure from images. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 4996–5004, 2016. 3 [61] M. Rolfs, M. Dambacher, and P. Cavanagh. Visual adaptation of the perception of causality. Current Biology, 23(3):250–254, 2013. 5 [62] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015. 3, 7 [63] R. Saxe and S. Carey. The perception of causality in infancy. Acta psychologica, 123(1):144–165, 2006. 1 [64] A. Saxena, M. Sun, and A. Y. Ng. Make3d: Learning 3d scene structure from a single still image. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 31(5):824– 840, 2009. 3 [65] E. S. Spelke, R. Kestenbaum, D. J. Simons, and D. Wein. Spatiotemporal continuity, smoothness of motion and object identity in infancy. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 13(2):113–142, 1995. 1 [66] M. Tapaswi, Y. Zhu, R. Stiefelhagen, A. Torralba, R. Urtasun, and S. Fidler. Movieqa: Understanding stories in movies through question-answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4631–4640, 2016. 3 [67] N. Watters, A. Tacchetti, T. Weber, R. Pascanu, P. Battaglia, and D. Zoran. Visual Interaction Networks. ArXiv e-prints, June 2017. 3 [68] J. Wright, A. Y. Yang, A. Ganesh, S. S. Sastry, and Y. Ma. Robust face recognition via sparse representation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 31(2):210–227, 2009. 1 [69] Z. Wu, S. Song, A. Khosla, F. Yu, L. Zhang, X. Tang, and J. Xiao. 3d shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1912–1920, 2015. 3 [70] F. Xu and S. Carey. Infants metaphysics: The case of numerical identity. Cognitive psychology, 30(2):111–153, 1996. 1 [71] P. Young, A. Lai, M. Hodosh, and J. Hockenmaier. From image descriptions to visual denotations: New similarity metrics for semantic inference over event descriptions. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2:67– 78, 2014. 3 [72] L. Yu, E. Park, A. C. Berg, and T. L. Berg. Visual madlibs: Fill in the blank description generation and question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2461–2469, 2015. 3 [73] P. Zhang, Y. Goyal, D. Summers-Stay, D. Batra, and D. Parikh. Yin and yang: Balancing and answering binary visual questions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5014– 5022, 2016. 3  [74] R. Zhang, J. Wu, C. Zhang, W. T. Freeman, and J. B. Tenenbaum. A comparative evaluation of approximate probabilistic simulation and deep neural networks as accounts of human physical scene understanding. CogSci, 2016. 3 [75] C. L. Zitnick and D. Parikh. Bringing semantics into focus using visual abstraction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3009–3016, 2013. 3  Supplementary Material 7. Framework details  ties was reversed, presumably because participants started using heuristics, such as checking that the number of objects at the beginning is the same as at the end, and therefore missed the intermediate disappearance of an object. These results suggest that human participants are not responding according to the gold standard laws of physics due to limitations in attentional capacity - and this, even though the number of objects to track is below the theoretical limit of 4 objects. The performance of human observers can thus serve as a reference besides ground truth, especially for systems intended to model human perception.  9. Models and training procedure Figure 4: Illustration of the ’dynamic 2’ condition. In the two possible movies (green arrows), the number of objects remains constant despite the occlusion. In the two impossible movies (red arrows), the number of objects changes temporarily (goes from 0 to 1 to 0 or from 1 to 0 to 1).  9.1. Detailed models See Tables 3, 4, 5, 6 for models’ architectures, and Figure 6 for samples of predicted semantic masks. The code will be made available on https://github.com/ rronan/IntPhys-Baselines  9.2. Training Procedure  8. Human Judgement - Experiment We presented the 3600 videos from the test set (Block O1) to human participants using Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants were first presented 8 examples of possible scenes from the training set, some simple, some more complex. They were told that some of the test movies were incorrect or corrupted, in that they showed events that could not possibly take place in the real world (without specifying how). Participants were each presented with 40 randomly selected videos, and labeled them as POSSIBLE or IMPOSSIBLE. They completed the task in about 7 minutes, and were paid $1. A response was counted as an error when a possible movie was classified as impossible or vice versa. A total of 346 persons participated, but for 99 of them the data were discarded because they failed to respond 100% correctly to the easiest condition, i.e., static, one object, visible. A mock sample of the AMT test is available in http://129.199.81.135/naive physics experiment. The average error rates were computed across condition, number of objects and visibility for each remaining participant and are shown in Table 2. The overall error rate was rather low (16.5%), but, in general, observers missed violations more often when the scene was occluded. There was an increase in error going from static to dynamic 1 and from dynamic 1 to dynamic 2, but this pattern was only consistently observed in the occluded condition. For visible scenario, the dynamic 1 appeared more difficult than the dynamic 2. This was probably due to the fact that when objects are visible, the dynamic 2 impossible scenarios contain two local discontinuities and are therefore easier to spot than when one discontinuity only is present. When the discontinuities occurred behind the occluder, the pattern of difficul-  We separate 10% of the training dataset to control the overfitting of our forward predictions. All our models are trained using Adam [30]. For the CNN encoder-decoder we use Adam’s default parameters and stop the training after one epoch. For the GAN, we use the same parameters as in [57]: we set the generator’s learning rate to 8e − 4 and discriminator’s learning rate to 2e − 4. On the short-term prediction task, we train the GAN for 1 epoch; on the longterm prediction task we train it for 5 epochs. Learning rate decays are set to 0 and beta1 is set to 0.5 for both generator and discriminator.  10. Detailed baseline results  Table 2: Average error rate on plausibility judgments collected in humans using MTurk for the IntPhys(Block O1) test set. * this datapoint has been ”forced” to be zero by our inclusion criterion. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Avg.  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Avg.  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.00* 0.13 0.08  0.09 0.08 0.05  0.07 0.11 0.09  0.06 0.11 0.07  0.22 0.24 0.26  0.20 0.21 0.26  0.20 0.26 0.37  0.21 0.24 0.29  Avg.  0.07  0.07  0.09  0.08  0.24  0.22  0.28  0.25  Figure 5: Results of our baselines in cases where the impossible event occurs in the open (visible) or behind an occluder (occluded). Y-axis represents the losses LR (see Equation 1) for the relative performance and LA (see Equation 2) for the absolute performance. Table 3: Mask predictor (9747011 parameters). BN stands for batch-normalization. Input frame 3 x 64 x 64 7 first layers of resnet-18 (pretrained, frozen weights) Reshape 1 x 8192 FC 8192 → 128 FC 128 → 8192 Reshape 128 x 8 x 8 UpSamplingNearest(2), 3 x 3 Conv. 128 - 1 str., BN, ReLU UpSamplingNearest(2), 3 x 3 Conv. 64 - 1 str., BN, ReLU UpSamplingNearest(2), 3 x 3 Conv. 3 - 1 str., BN, ReLU 3 sigmoid Target mask  Table 4: CNN for forward prediction (13941315 parameters). BN stands for batch-normalization. Input frames 2 x 3 x 64 x 64 7 first layers of resnet-18 (pretrained, frozen weights) applied to each frame Reshape 1 x 16384 FC 16384 → 512 FC 512 → 8192 Reshape 128 x 8 x 8 UpSamplingNearest(2), 3 x 3 Conv. 128 - 1 str., BN, ReLU UpSamplingNearest(2), 3 x 3 Conv. 64 - 1 str., BN, ReLU UpSamplingNearest(2), 3 x 3 Conv. 3 - 1 str., BN, ReLU 3 sigmoid Target mask  Table 5: Generator G (14729347 parameters). SFConv stands for spatial full convolution and BN stands for batchnormalization. Input masks 2 x 3 x 64 x 64 4 x 4 conv 64 - 2 str., BN, ReLU 4 x 4 conv 128 - 2 str., BN, ReLU Noise ∈ R100 4 x 4 conv 256 - 2 str., BN, ReLU ∼ Unif(−1, 1) 4 x 4 conv 512 - 2 str., BN, ReLU 4 x 4 conv 512, BN, ReLU stack input and noise 4 x 4 SFConv. 512 - 2 str., BN, ReLU 4 x 4 SFConv. 256 - 2 str., BN, ReLU 4 x 4 SFConv. 128 - 2 str., BN, ReLU 4 x 4 SFConv. 64 - 2 str., BN, ReLU 4 x 4 SFConv. 3 - 2 str., BN, ReLU 3 sigmoid Target mask  Table 6: Discriminator D (7629698 parameters). BN stands for batch-normalization. history input 2 x 3 x 64 x 64 3 x 64 x 64 Reshape 3 x 3 x 64 x 64 4 x 4 convolution 512 - 2 strides, BN, LeakyReLU 4 x 4 convolution 254 - 2 strides, BN, LeakyReLU 4 x 4 convolution 128 - 2 strides, BN, LeakyReLU 4 x 4 convolution 64 - 2 strides, BN, LeakyReLU 4 x 4 convolution 5 - 2 strides, BN, LeakyReLU fully-connected layer 1 sigmoid Figure 6: Output examples of our semantic mask predictor. From left to right: input image, ground truth semantic mask, predicted semantic mask.  Table 7: Detailed relative classification scores for the CNN encoder-decoder with prediction span of 5. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.04 0.00 0.00  0.04 0.20 0.04  0.00 0.44 0.16  0.03 0.21 0.07  0.44 0.56 0.60  0.48 0.48 0.48  0.72 0.44 0.56  0.55 0.49 0.55  Total  0.01  0.09  0.20  0.10  0.53  0.48  0.57  0.53  Table 8: Detailed absolute classification scores for the CNN encoder-decoder with prediction span of 5. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.16 0.33 0.33  0.12 0.40 0.39  0.11 0.49 0.46  0.13 0.41 0.40  0.50 0.50 0.50  0.50 0.50 0.50  0.50 0.50 0.49  0.50 0.50 0.50  Total  0.27  0.30  0.36  0.31  0.50  0.50  0.50  0.50  Table 9: Detailed relative classification scores for the GAN with prediction span of 5. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.00 0.00 0.00  0.08 0.16 0.20  0.00 0.36 0.28  0.03 0.17 0.16  0.44 0.40 0.44  0.60 0.52 0.44  0.40 0.52 0.52  0.48 0.48 0.47  Total  0.00  0.15  0.21  0.12  0.43  0.52  0.48  0.48  Table 10: Detailed absolute classification scores for the GAN with prediction span of 5. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.05 0.30 0.22  0.13 0.42 0.39  0.09 0.45 0.42  0.09 0.39 0.34  0.50 0.50 0.50  0.52 0.52 0.50  0.52 0.47 0.51  0.52 0.50 0.50  Total  0.19  0.31  0.32  0.27  0.50  0.52  0.50  0.51  Table 11: Detailed relative classification scores for the CNN encoder-decoder with prediction span of 35. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.04 0.00 0.00  0.16 0.36 0.40  0.00 0.28 0.44  0.07 0.21 0.28  0.60 0.44 0.40  0.48 0.40 0.56  0.60 0.52 0.40  0.56 0.45 0.45  Total  0.01  0.31  0.24  0.19  0.48  0.48  0.51  0.49  Table 12: Detailed absolute classification scores for the CNN encoder-decoder with prediction span of 35. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.31 0.39 0.40  0.40 0.48 0.48  0.37 0.48 0.50  0.36 0.45 0.46  0.51 0.50 0.50  0.50 0.50 0.49  0.48 0.50 0.50  0.50 0.50 0.50  Total  0.37  0.46  0.45  0.43  0.50  0.50  0.50  0.50  Table 13: Detailed relative classification scores for the GAN with prediction span of 35. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.00 0.00 0.00  0.12 0.36 0.44  0.00 0.48 0.40  0.04 0.28 0.28  0.48 0.36 0.24  0.48 0.36 0.52  0.60 0.44 0.36  0.52 0.39 0.37  Total  0.00  0.31  0.29  0.20  0.36  0.45  0.47  0.43  Table 14: Detailed absolute classification scores for the GAN with prediction span of 35. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.07 0.31 0.37  0.23 0.43 0.48  0.18 0.45 0.47  0.16 0.40 0.44  0.50 0.47 0.49  0.50 0.49 0.49  0.52 0.50 0.49  0.51 0.49 0.49  Total  0.25  0.38  0.37  0.33  0.49  0.50  0.50  0.50  Table 15: Detailed relative classification scores for the aggregation of CNN models with prediction spans of 5 and 35. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.00 0.00 0.00  0.04 0.20 0.32  0.00 0.44 0.24  0.01 0.21 0.19  0.64 0.52 0.48  0.48 0.52 0.44  0.60 0.36 0.52  0.57 0.47 0.48  Total  0.00  0.19  0.23  0.14  0.55  0.48  0.49  0.51  Table 16: Detailed absolute classification scores for the aggregation of CNN models with prediction spans of 5 and 35. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.18 0.35 0.38  0.20 0.44 0.43  0.16 0.49 0.47  0.18 0.43 0.43  0.51 0.50 0.50  0.50 0.50 0.49  0.49 0.50 0.50  0.50 0.50 0.50  Total  0.30  0.36  0.37  0.35  0.50  0.50  0.49  0.50  Table 17: Detailed relative classification scores for the aggregation of GAN models with prediction spans of 5 and 35. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.00 0.00 0.00  0.12 0.16 0.20  0.00 0.32 0.28  0.04 0.16 0.16  0.52 0.48 0.44  0.60 0.52 0.44  0.48 0.56 0.52  0.53 0.52 0.47  Total  0.00  0.16  0.20  0.12  0.48  0.52  0.52  0.51  Table 18: Detailed absolute classification scores for the aggregation of GAN models with prediction spans of 5 and 35. Visible  Occluded  Type of scene  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  1 obj.  2 obj.  3 obj.  Total  Static Dynamic (1 violation) Dynamic (2 violations)  0.01 0.30 0.22  0.17 0.42 0.39  0.07 0.44 0.42  0.08 0.39 0.34  0.51 0.50 0.50  0.52 0.52 0.51  0.52 0.48 0.51  0.52 0.50 0.50  Total  0.17  0.33  0.31  0.27  0.50  0.51  0.50  0.51

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
