Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_258

Abstract:
Fundamental Diagram of Rail Transit and Its Application to Dynamic Assignment  arXiv:1708.02147v1 [cs.SY] 7 Aug 2017  Toru Seo∗† Kentaro Wada‡ Daisuke Fukuda§ August 8, 2017  Abstract Urban rail transit often operates with high service frequencies to serve heavy passenger demand during rush hours. Such operations can be delayed by train congestion, passenger congestion, and the interaction of the two. Delays are problematic for many transit systems, as they become amplified by this interactive feedback. However, there are no tractable models to describe transit systems with dynamical delays, making it difficult to analyze the management strategies of congested transit systems in general, solvable ways. To fill this gap, this article proposes simple yet physical and dynamic models of urban rail transit. First, a fundamental diagram of a transit system (3-dimensional relation among train-flow, train-density, and passenger-flow) is analytically derived by considering the physical interactions in delays and congestion based on microscopic operation principles. Then, a macroscopic model of a transit system with time-varying demand and supply is developed as a continuous approximation based on the fundamental diagram. Finally, the accuracy of the macroscopic model is investigated using a microscopic simulation, and applicable range of the model is confirmed.  Keywords: public transport; rush hour; fundamental diagram; kinematic wave theory; MFD; dynamic traffic assignment  1  Introduction  Urban rail transit, such as metro systems, plays a significant role in handling the transportation needs of metropolitan areas (Vuchic 2005). Its most notable usage is the morning commute, in which heavy passenger demand is focused into a short time period. To obtain general policy implications for management strategies of transit systems (e.g., pricing, gating, scheduling), many studies have theoretically analyzed such situations under certain simplifications, such as the static travel time of transit operations (de Cea and Fernández 1993; Tabuchi 1993; Kraus and Yoshida 2002; Tian et al. 2007; Gonzales and Daganzo 2012; Trozzi et al. 2013; de Palma et al. 2015a,b). It is known that urban mass transit often suffers from delays caused by congestion, even if no serious incidents or accidents occur (Kato et al. 2012; Tirachini et al. 2013; Kariyazaki et al. 2015). This means that the dynamical aspect of transit systems is important during periods of congestion. ∗  Corresponding author. t.seo@plan.cv.titech.ac.jp Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1-M1-20, O-okayama, Meguro, Tokyo 152-8552, Japan ‡ Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, Cw504, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan § Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1-M1-11, O-okayama, Meguro, Tokyo 152-8552, Japan †  1  For instance, in the Tokyo metropolitan area (TMA), which is one of the most populated regions in the world, rail transit systems are essential and operated with high service frequency (up to 30 trains per hour per line; headway of two minutes) to serve the heavy passenger demand during peak hours (Kariyazaki 2016). Unfortunately, even if there are no accidents, chronic delays occur almost daily and passengers experience longer and unreliable travel times due to congestion. For example, the mean delay of one of the major transit lines in Tokyo during the rush hour is about eight minutes, whereas the standard deviation of the delay is about two minutes (Iwakura et al. 2013). Kariyazaki (2016) estimated that, on a typical weekday, three million commuters across the entire TMA experience such delays, and the social cost caused by the delay corresponds to 230 billion Japanese yen (approximately 2 billion USD) per year. Appropriate management strategies to solve this issue are therefore desirable. In general, the following types of congestion are observed in urban rail transit: • train-congestion: congestion involving consecutive trains using the same tracks, also known as ‘knock-on delay’ (Carey and Kwieciński 1994). • passenger-congestion: congestion of passengers at station platforms, namely, bottleneck congestion at the doors of a train while it is stopped at a station (Wada et al. 2012; Kariyazaki et al. 2015).1 These two types of congestion interact with each other and cause delay (Newell and Potts 1964; Wada et al. 2012; Kato et al. 2012; Tirachini et al. 2013; Kariyazaki et al. 2015; Cuniasse et al. 2015). For example, passenger-congestion can prolong the time that a train spends at a station. This extended dwell time interrupts the operation of subsequent trains, and causes train-congestion at times of high service frequency. As passenger throughput deteriorates when train-congestion occurs, the passenger congestion at stations intensifies—this is a short-term vicious cycle. The extreme case is known as ‘bunching’ (Newell and Potts 1964). Cuniasse et al. (2015) reported macroscopic-scale production loss phenomena which occur almost daily in a railway system due to congestion. Moreover, in the long term, such chronic delays could affect passengers’ departure time choice; Kato et al. (2012) observed this phenomenon in TMA. Kim et al. (2015) also reported that route choice of metro passengers is affected by congestion, crowding, and delay. Therefore, these congestion dynamics affect both the within-day and day-to-day dynamics of transit systems. For this reason, it would be preferable to consider these dynamical aspects of transit systems in order to obtain general policy implications for transit management under heavy demand during rush hours, similar to road traffic congestion problems (c.f., dynamic traffic assignment, Szeto and Lo 2006; Iryo 2013). However, to the authors’ knowledge, no study has investigated such problems in transit systems. In the aforementioned theoretical studies on transit commuting (i.e., de Cea and Fernández 1993, and others), the travel time of a transit system is assumed to be constant and/or determined by static models, meaning that the dynamical aspect is neglected. One reason for this might be that we do not have tractable models of transit systems that can consider the dynamics of delay and congestion.2 To fill this gap, this article proposes tractable models of the dynamics of urban rail transit considering the physical interaction between train-congestion and passenger-congestion. The 1Note that passenger-congestion differs from in-vehicle passenger-crowding, which results in discomfort due to standing and crowding, but is not necessarily cause any delay directly. 2Several operation models have been proposed by considering the detailed mechanism of such delay and congestion (see Vuchic 2005; Koutsopoulos and Wang 2007; Parbo et al. 2016; Cats et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017; Alonso et al. 2017, and references therein), and these have been used to develop efficient operation schemes. However, their purposes are case-specific optimization and evaluation such as time-tabling; it would be difficult to use them to obtain general policy implications for management strategies, as they are essentially complex and intractable.  2  remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, a simple and tractable operation model of rail transit is formulated by considering train-congestion, passenger-congestion, and the interaction between them. The model describes the theoretical relation among train-flow, train-density, and passenger-flow under ideal conditions—that is, a fundamental diagram (FD). In Section 3, a macroscopic loading model of a transit system in which demand and supply change dynamically is developed based on the proposed FD. The model is based on a continuous approximation approach with the FD, which is widely used for automobile traffic flows—that is, an exit-flow model. The model is called macroscopic because it describes the aggregated behavior of trains and passengers in a certain (e.g., urban-scale) spatial domain. In Section 4, the approximation accuracy and other properties of the proposed macroscopic model are investigated through a comparison with the results of a microscopic simulation. Section 5 concludes this article.  2  Fundamental Diagram of Rail Transit System  In this section, we analytically derive an FD of a rail transit system based on microscopic operation principles. The FD is defined as the relation among train-flow, train-density, and passenger-flow.  2.1  Assumptions of the Rail Transit System  We assume two principles of rail transit operation, namely, the train’s dwell behavior at a station for passenger boarding and the cruising behavior on the railroad. Note that they are equivalent to those employed by Wada et al. (2012). The passenger boarding time is modeled using a point-queue bottleneck model. That is, the flow-rate of passenger boarding to a dwelling train is assumed to be constant, µp ; and there is a buffer time (e.g., time required for door opening/closing), gb , for the dwell time. The dwell time of a train at a station, tb , is expressed as tb =  np + gb , µp  (1)  where np is the number of passengers waiting to board the train at the station.3 Passengers waiting for a train at a station are assumed to board the first train that arrives. This means that the passenger storage capacity of a train is assumed to be unlimited. The cruising behavior of a train is modeled using Newell’s simplified car-following model (Newell 2002), which is a special case of the well-known road traffic flow model, the Lighthill–Whitham– Richards model (Lighthill and Whitham 1955; Richards 1956). In this model, a vehicle travels as fast as possible while maintaining the minimum safety clearance. Specifically, let xm (t) be the position of train m at time t. It is described as xm (t) = min {xm (t − τ ) + vf τ, xm−1 (t − τ ) − δ} ,  (2)  where m−1 indicates the preceding train, τ is the physical minimum headway time (similar to reaction time of the vehicle), vf is the free-flow speed (i.e., maximum speed), and δ is the minimum spacing. 3 The parameter np can also be interpreted as the total number of passengers who are getting on and off the train. In fact, this more general definition is preferable in some sense. However, it will complicate the following discussions; thus, we neglect passengers getting off the train. Note that, by carefully distinguishing the two types of passengers, the following discussions are valid and do not affect the final results.  3  The first term in the min operation indicates that the traffic is in the free-flowing regime, where the train can travel at its maximum speed. The second term indicates the traffic is in the congested regime, where the train catches the preceding one and is required to decrease its speed to maintain the safety headway τ and distance δ simultaneously. In a critical regime, a train’s speed is vf and the train catches the preceding one. Without loss of generality, we introduce a variable buffer headway time hf ≥ 0 to describe traffic in the free-flow regime.  2.2  Steady State of Rail Transit System  Here, we consider the steady state of rail transit operation under the assumptions stated in Section 2.1. The steady state is an idealized traffic state that does not change over time, and its traffic state variables (typically combination of flow, density, and speed) are characterized by certain relation (called an FD) of the traffic flow (e.g., Daganzo 1997). In the case of rail transit operation, the steady state can be defined as a state that satisfies all of the following conditions: • • • • •  The model parameters, namely, µp , gb , vf , τ, δ, are constant. The distance between adjacent stations, l, is constant. The headway time between successive trains, H, is constant. The cruising speed v of all trains is the same. The passenger-flow arriving to each station platform, qp , is the same.  Additionally, we assume that all trains stop at every station. In order to operate the transit system, qp < µp is assumed; otherwise, passenger boarding will never end. Under the steady state, the dwell time of a train at a station, represented by Eq. (1), can be transformed to qp H/µp + gb , because np is equal to qp H. Note that the control strategy of the transit operation (e.g., schedule-based, headway-based) need not be specified here, because reasonable control strategies should follow such steady operation if there is no disturbance; otherwise, train bunching will occur (Wada et al. 2012). Transit systems under different steady states are illustrated as time–space diagrams in Fig. 1, where the horizontal axis indicates the time of day, the vertical axis indicates space, and the curves indicate train trajectories. In each sub-figure, train m arrives at and departs from station i, then travels to station i + 1 at cruising speed v, and finally arrives at station i + 1 under different conditions. In Fig. 1a, the speed v is equal to the free-flow speed vf and hf is greater than zero; therefore, the state is classified into the free-flowing regime. In Fig. 1b, the speed is equal to vf and hf is equal to zero; therefore, the state is classified into the critical regime. In Fig. 1c, the speed is less than vf ; therefore, the state is classified into the congested regime.  2.3  Fundamental Diagram  In general, the following can be considered as the traffic state variables of a rail transit system: • • • • • •  train-flow q, train-density k, train-mean-speed v̄, passenger-flow qp , passenger-density kp , passenger-mean-speed v̄p .  4  Space x  Train m − 1 Train m  Station i + 1 δ  hf τ v  l  qp H/µp + gb Station i H  Time t  (a) Free-flowing regime: v = vf , hf > 0.  Space x  Train m − 1 Train m  Station i + 1 δ τ  v  l  qp H/µp + gb Station i H  Time t  (b) Critical regime: v = vf , hf = 0.  Space x  Train m − 1  Station i + 1  Train m  δ τ v  l  qp H/µp + gb Station i H  Time t  (c) Congested regime: v < vf , hf = 0.  Figure 1: Time–space diagrams of rail transit system under steady states.  5  Among these, there are three independent variables: for example, the combination of q, k, and qp . This is because of the identities in continuum flow, namely, q = kv̄ and qp = kp v̄p , and the identity v̄ = v̄p .4 Now suppose that the relation among the independent variables of the traffic state under every steady state can be expressed using a function Q as q = Q(k, qp ).  (3)  The function Q can be regarded as an FD of the rail transit system. If the rail transit operation principle follows Eqs. (1) and (2), the FD function can be specified as  lk − qp /µp   , if k < k ∗ (qp ),  gb + l/vf Q(k, qp ) = (4)  lδ   − (k − k ∗ (qp )) + q ∗ (qp ), if k ≥ k ∗ (qp ), (l − δ)gb + τ l with  1 − qp /µp , gb + δ/vf + τ (l − δ)/vf − τ gb + l/vf k ∗ (qp ) = − qp + , (gb + δ/vf + τ )µp l (gb + δ/vf + τ )l q ∗ (qp ) =  (5) (6)  where q ∗ (qp ) and k ∗ (qp ) represent train-flow and train-density, respectively, at a critical state with passenger-flow qp . For the derivation of Eqs. (4)–(6), see Appendix A.  2.4 2.4.1  Discussions Features of Fundamental Diagram  The FD has the following features that can be derived analytically from Eq. (4). Note that they can easily be found in the numerical example in Fig. 2. The FD can be interpreted as a function that determines train-flow q and mean-speed v̄ = q/k under a given train-density k (i.e., supply) and passenger-flow qp (i.e., demand) for the given technical parameters of the transit system (i.e., µp , gb , vf , τ, δ, l). Although the FD equation (4) looks complicated, it represents a simple relation: namely, a piecewise linear (i.e., triangular) relation between q and k under fixed qp . As mentioned, the traffic state of a transit system can be categorized into three regimes (free-flowing, critical, and congested), as in the standard traffic flow theory. Therefore, there is a critical train-density k ∗ (qp ) for any given qp . Train traffic is in the free-flowing regime if k < k ∗ (qp ), in the critical regime if k = k ∗ (qp ), or in the congested regime otherwise. The congested regime can be considered as inefficient compared with the free-flowing regime, because the congested regime takes more time to transport the same amount of passengers. The critical regime is the most efficient in terms of travel time (i.e., 1/v̄, 1/v̄p ) as well as passenger-crowding (i.e., number of passengers per train, qp /q). However, the critical regime requires more trains (i.e., higher train- density) than the free-flowing regime; therefore, it may not be the most efficient if the operation cost is taken into account. 4Note that the mean speed v̄ differs from the cruising speed v; the former takes the dwelling time at a station and cruising between stations into account, whereas the latter only considers the cruising time.  6  Even in the critical regime, the mean speed v̄ is inversely proportional to passenger demand qp . This means that travel time increases as passenger demand increases. In addition, the size of the feasible area of (q, k) narrows as qp increases. Thus, the operational flexibility of the transit system declines as the passenger demand increases. Flow and density in the critical regime satisfy the following relations: q ∗ (qp ) =  l 1 k ∗ (qp ) − . (l − δ)/vf − τ (l − δ)/vf − τ  (7)  (Here, we have assumed (l − δ)/vf − τ 6= 0.) Therefore, the critical regime can be represented as a straight line whose slope (l/[(l−δ)/vf −τ ]) is either positive or negative in the q–k plane. This implies a qualitative difference between transit systems. Specifically, if the slope is positive, a transit operation with constant train-density would transition from the free-flowing regime to the congested regime as passenger demand increases (Fig. 2). On the contrary, if the slope is negative, such an operation would transition from free-flowing to congested as passenger demand decreases. This seems paradoxical, but it is actually reasonable because the operational efficiency can be degraded if the number of trains is excessive compared to passenger demand. Note that Eqs. (3) and (4) are consistent with Edie’s generalized definition (Edie 1963) of traffic states. Therefore, the FD is consistent with the fundamental definition of traffic. For steady-state transit operation, Edie’s traffic state is derived as5 1 , H qp H/µp + gb + l/v k= , lH l v̄ = . qp H/µp + gb + l/v  q=  (8) (9) (10)  One can easily confirm that Eqs. (8)–(10) satisfy the FD equation. 2.4.2  Numerical Example  For ease of understanding, a numerical example is shown in Fig. 2; the parameter values are presented in Table 1. In the figure, the horizontal axis represents train-density k, the vertical axis represents train-flow q, and the plot color represents passenger-flow qp . The slope of the straight line from a traffic state to the origin represents the mean speed v̄ of the state. The features of the FD described in Section 2.4.1 can be easily confirmed. For example, the figure can be read as follows. Suppose that the passenger demand per station is qp = 16000 (pax/h). If the number of trains in the transit system is given by the train-density k = 0.3 (train/km), then the resulting train traffic has a train-flow of q ' 15 (train/h) and a mean speed of v̄ ' 50 (km/h). This is the traffic state in the free-flowing regime. There is a congested state corresponding to a free-flowing state: for the aforementioned state with (q, k, v̄) ' (15 veh/h, 0.3 veh/km, 50 km/h), the corresponding congested state is (15 veh/h, 0.55 veh/km, 27 km/h). The critical state under qp = 16000 (pax/h) is (22 veh/h, 0.42 veh/km, 52 km/h). Notice that this state has the fastest average speed under the given 5These relations are derived by applying Edie’s definition to the ‘minimum component of the time–space diagram’ of the steady state, which is a parallelogram-shaped area in Fig. 1 whose vertexes are time–space points of (i) train m departs from station i, (ii) train m arrives at station i + 1, (iii) train m − 1 arrives at station i + 1, and (iv) train m − 1 departs from station i.  7  Figure 2: Numerical example of the FD. Table 1: Parameters of the numerical example. parameter u τ δ µp gb l  value 70 km/h 1/70 h 1 km 36000 pax/h 10/3600 h 3 km  passenger demand. The triangular q–k relation mentioned before is clearly shown in the figure; the ‘left edge’ of the triangle corresponds to the free-flowing regime, the ‘top vertex’ corresponds to the critical regime, and the ‘right edge’ corresponds to the congested regime. 2.4.3  Validity of the Assumptions  Here, we discuss the relation between the operation principles, the proposed FD, and an actual transit system. First of all, it is worth mentioning that all parameters in the proposed model have an explicit physical meaning. Therefore, the parameter calibration required to approximate an actual transit system is relatively simple. In the train cruising model (2), each train is assumed to maintain a headway that is greater than the given minimum headway. This is reasonable; similar models with minimum headways have been used in existing studies (Carey and Kwieciński 1994; Higgins and Kozan 1998; Huisman et al. 2005) to analyze the effect of train congestion (i.e., knock-on delay). Additionally, the model can be considered as the so-called ‘moving block control,’ which is one of the standard operation schemes for trains (Wada et al. 2012). Under the presence of well-designed adaptive control strategies, such as schedule-based and headway-based control (Daganzo 2009; Wada et al. 2012), the steady state is likely to be realized. This is because the aim of such adaptive control is usually to eliminate bunching—in other words, such control makes the operation steady. 8  The passenger boarding model (1), namely, the bottleneck model, is a coarse approximation of actual phenomena that would be fairly reasonable. This is because the capacity of a fixed-width bottleneck for ordinary pedestrian flow is often considered to be constant (Lam et al. 1998; Hoogendoorn and Daamen 2005). However, some observational studies have reported that, in heavily crowded conditions, the boarding time could increase nonlinearly as passenger numbers increase, probably due to passenger-crowding (interference between passengers and a lack of space in carriages) (Harris 2006; Tirachini et al. 2013). Moreover, there is no stock capacity for passengers in the proposed model. Therefore, states with excessively large qp and small q in the FD might correspond to unrealistic situations. This is a limitation of the current model. Nevertheless, the scale of passenger-crowding can be derived by the model: that is, qp /q represents the number of passengers per train. 2.4.4  Relation to the Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram  The proposed FD resembles the macroscopic fundamental diagram (MFD) (Geroliminis and Daganzo 2007; Daganzo 2007) and its extensions (e.g., Geroliminis et al. 2014; Chiabaut 2015). They are similar in the following sense. First, they both consider dynamic traffic. Second, they both describe the relations among macroscopic traffic state variables in which the traffic is not necessarily steady or homogeneous at the local scale (i.e., they use area-wide aggregations based on Edie’s definition). Third, they both have unimodal relations, meaning that there are free-flowing and congested regimes, where the former has higher performance than the latter; in addition, there is a critical regime where the throughput is maximized. Therefore, it is expected that existing approaches for MFD applications, such as modeling, control and the optimization of transport systems (e.g., Daganzo 2007; Geroliminis and Levinson 2009; Geroliminis et al. 2013; Fosgerau 2015), are also suitable for the proposed transit FD. However, there are substantial differences between the proposed FD and the existing MFD-like concepts. In comparison with the original MFD (Geroliminis and Daganzo 2007; Daganzo 2007) and its railway variant (Cuniasse et al. 2015), the proposed FD has an additional dimension, that is, passenger-flow. In comparison with the three-dimensional MFD of Geroliminis et al. (2014), which describes the relations among total traffic flow, car density, and bus density in a multi-modal traffic network, the proposed FD explicitly models the physical interaction among the three variables. In comparison with the passenger MFD of Chiabaut (2015), which describes the relation between passenger flow and passenger density when passengers can choose to travel by car or bus, in the proposed FD, passenger demand can degrade the performance (i.e., speed) of the vehicles because of the inclusion of the boarding time.  3  Dynamic Model Based on Fundamental Diagram  Recall that the proposed FD describes the relationship among traffic variables under the steady state; therefore, the behavior of a dynamical system in which demand and supply change over time is not described by the FD itself. This feature is the same as in the road traffic FD and MFDs. In this section, we formulate a model of urban rail transit operation where the demand (i.e., passenger-flow) and supply (i.e., train-density) change dynamically. In the proposed model, individual train and passenger trajectories are not explicitly described; therefore, the model is called macroscopic. The proposed model is based on an exit-flow model (Merchant and Nemhauser 1978; Carey and McCartney 2004) in which the proposed FD is employed as the exit-flow function. In other words, the transit system is considered as an input–output system, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The exit-flow 9  modeling approach is often employed for area-wide traffic approximations and analysis using MFDs, such as optimal control to avoid congestion (Daganzo 2007) and analyses of user equilibrium and social optimum in morning commute problems (Geroliminis and Levinson 2009; Fosgerau 2015). The advantage of this approach is that it may be possible to conduct mathematically tractable analysis of dynamic, large-scale, and complex transportation systems, where the detailed traffic dynamics are difficult to model in a tractable manner—this is the case for transit operations. train in-flow: a(t) its cumulative: A(t)  passenger in-flow: ap (t) its cumulative: Ap (t)  Railway system internal average train-flow: Q(k(t) ap (t)) dynamics of internal average train-density: dk(t) = a(t) − Q(k(t), ap (t)) dt travel time: T (t)  train out-flow: Q(k(t), ap (t)) its cumulative: D(t)  passenger out-flow: dp (t) (determined by the model) its cumulative: Dp (t)  Figure 3: Railway system as an input–output system.  3.1  Formulation  At time t, let a(t) be the inflow of trains to the transit system, ap (t) be the inflow of passengers, d(t) be the outflow of trains from the transit system, and dp (t) be the outflow of passengers. We set the initial time to be 0, and therefore t ≥ 0. Let A(t), Ap (t), D(t), and Dp (t) be the cumulative values Rt of a(t), ap (t), d(t), and dp (t), respectively (e.g., A(t) = 0 a(s)ds). Let T (t) be the travel time of a train that entered the system at time t, and let its initial value T (0) be given by the free-flow travel time under q = a(0) and qp = ap (0). To simplify the formulation, the trip length of the passengers is assumed to be equal to that of the trains.6 This means that T (·) is the travel time of both the trains and the passengers. These functions can be interpreted as follows: a(t): trains’ departure rate from their origin station at time t. ap (t): passengers’ arrival rate at the platform of their origin station at time t. d(t): trains’ arrival rate at their final destination station at time t. dp (t): passengers’ arrival rate at their destination station at time t. T (t): travel time of a train and passengers from origin (departs at time t) to destination. Note that the arrival time at the destination is t + T (t). Therefore, in reality, a(·) and ap (·) will be determined by the transit operation plan and passenger departure time choice, respectively. d(·), dp (·), and T (·) are endogenously determined through the operational dynamics. In accordance with exit-flow modeling, the train traffic is modeled as follows. First, the exit flow d(t) is assumed to be d(t) = Q(k(t), ap (t))  (11)  6This assumption is reasonable if the average trip length is shared by trains and passengers. If they are different, a modification such as Tp (t) = T (t)/λ, where λ is the ratio of average trip length of the passengers to that of the trains, would be useful.  10  where the FD function Q(·) is considered to be an exit-flow function.7 This means that the dynamics of the transit system are modeled by taking the conservation of trains into account as follows: dLk(t) = a(t) − Q(k(t), ap (t)), dt  (12)  where L represents the length of the transit route. This exit-flow model has been employed in several studies to represent the macroscopic behavior of a transportation system (e.g., Merchant and Nemhauser 1978; Carey and McCartney 2004; Daganzo 2007). Note that the average train-density k(t) can be defined as k(t) =  A(t) − D(t) , L  (13)  which is consistent with Eq. (12). Based on above functions and equations (i.e., T (0), a(t), ap (t), and Eqs. (11) and (13)), d(t) and D(t) can be sequentially computed—in other words, the train traffic can be computed using the initial and boundary conditions and the exit-flow model based on the FD. The passenger traffic can be derived as follows. By the definition of the travel time of trains, A(t) = D(t + T (t))  (14)  holds. As A(t) and D(t) have already been obtained, the travel time T (t) such that Eq. (14) holds can be computed. Then, Dp (t) and dp (t) can be computed from the definition of the travel time of passengers, which is also T (t): Ap (t) = Dp (t + T (t)).  3.2  (15)  Discussion  The proposed macroscopic model computes train out-flow d(t) and passenger out-flow d(t) based on the FD function Q(·), the initial and boundary conditions a(t), ap (t), and T (0). The notable feature of the model is that it is highly tractable, as it is based on an exit-flow model. Therefore, we expect the proposed model to be useful for analyzing various management strategies for transit systems (e.g., dynamic pricing during the morning commute). The proposed model can accurately approximate the macroscopic behavior of a transit operation with high-frequency operation (i.e., small headway time) under moderate changes in demand and/or supply. This is because exit-flow models are reasonable when the changes in inflow are moderate compared with the relaxation time of the dynamical system. Because such situations often occur in busy metropolitan subway systems, which suffer from congestion and delay during rush hours because of heavy demand, the model may be useful for investigating such congestion problems. However, the accuracy of the model is expected to decrease if the operation has low steadiness, such as in the event of train bunching. In the next section, the quantitative accuracy of the model is verified using numerical experiments. The model can also derive the social cost and benefit of a transit system. For example, the generalized travel cost of passengers (e.g., travel time, schedule delay, crowding disutility) can be calculated from Ap (t) and Dp (t). In addition, the operation cost of the transit system can be calculated from A(t), D(t), and the FD parameters. 7If np is considered as the sum of the number of passengers who are boarding and alighting (as mentioned in note 3), we can simply define d(t) to be equal to Q(k(t), ap (t) + dp (t)). Such a model is also computable using a similar procedure.  11  4  Verification of the Macroscopic Model  In this section, we verify the quantitative accuracy of the macroscopic model by comparing its results with that of the microscopic model (i.e., Eqs. (1) and (2)). The validity of the macroscopic model can be investigated by comparing its solutions with those of microscopic models using the same initial and boundary conditions and model parameters.  4.1  Simulation Setting  The parameter values of the transit operation are listed in Table 1 for both the microscopic and macroscopic models. The railroad is considered to be a one-way corridor. The stations are equally spaced at intervals of l, and there are a total of 10 stations. Trains enter the railroad with flow a(t); in the microscopic model, a discrete train enters the railroad from the upstream boundary station if bA(t)c (i.e., integer part of A(t)) is incremented. In the microscopic model, trains leave the railroad from the downstream boundary station without any restrictions, other than the passenger boarding and minimum headway clearance. Passengers arrive at each station with flow ap (t). The functions a(t) and ap (t) are exogenously determined to mimic morning rush hours, with each having a peak at t = 2. The flow before the peak time increases monotonically, whereas the flow after the peak time decreases monotonically—in other words, the so-called S-shaped A(t) and Ap (t) are considered. These functions are specified as  if t < 2,  a(0) + (a(2) − a(0)) 2t , 4−t a(0) + (a(2) − a(0)) 2 , if 2 ≤ t < 4, a(t) = (16)  a(0), if 4 ≤ t,  if t < 2,  ap (0) + (ap (2) − ap (0)) 2t , 4−t ap (0) + (ap (2) − ap (0)) 2 , if 2 ≤ t < 4, (17) ap (t) =  ap (0), if 4 ≤ t, where the values of a(0), a(2), ap (0), and ap (2) are given as scenario parameters. The simulation duration is set to 4 h for the baseline scenario in Section 4.2.1 and to 8 h for the sensitivity analysis in Section 4.2.2 (the reason will be explained later). The microscopic model without any control is asymptotically unstable, as proven by Wada et al. (2012); this means that time-varying demand and supply always cause train bunching, making the experiment unrealistic and useless. Therefore, the headway-based control scheme proposed by Wada et al. (2012) is implemented in the microscopic model to prevent bunching and stabilize the operation. This scheme has two control measures: holding (i.e., extending the dwell time) and an increase in free-flow speed, similar to Daganzo (2009). The former is activated by a train if its following train is delayed, and can be represented as an increase in gb in the microscopic model. The latter is activated by a train if it is delayed, and can be represented as an increase in vf up to a maximum allowable speed vmax . In this experiment, vmax is set to 80 km/h and vf is 70 km/h. This control scheme can be considered realistic and reasonable, as similar operations are executed in practice. See Appendix B for further details of the control scheme.  4.2  Results  First, to examine how well the proposed model reproduces the behavior of the transit system under time-varying conditions, the results for the baseline scenario are presented in Section 4.2.1. A 12  Figure 4: Result of the microscopic model in the baseline scenario.  (a) Train  (b) Passenger  Figure 5: Result of the macroscopic model in the baseline scenario. sensitivity analysis of the demand/supply conditions is then conduced and applicable ranges of the proposed model are investigated in Section 4.2.2. 4.2.1  Baseline scenario  The baseline scenario with parameter values a(0) = 10 (train/h), a(2) = 15 (train/h), ap (0) = 0.1µp (pax/h), and ap (2) = 0.5µp (pax/h) is investigated first. A solution of the microscopic model is shown in Fig. 4 as a time–space diagram. The colored curves represent the trajectories of each train traveling in the upward direction while stopping at every station. Around the peak time period (t = 2), train congestion occurs; namely, some of the trains stop occasionally between stations in order to maintain the safety interval. The congestion is caused by heavy passenger demand; therefore, the situation during rush hour is reproduced. The result given by the macroscopic model is shown in Fig. 5 as cumulative plots. Fig. 5a shows the cumulative curves for the trains, where the blue curve represents the inflow A and the red curve represents the outflow D. Fig. 5b shows those of passengers in the same manner. Congestion and delay can be observed around the peak period (it is more remarkable in the passenger traffic). For example, during the peak time period, dp (t) is less than ap (t) and ap (t0 ), where t0 is time such that t = t0 + T (t0 ). This means that the throughput of the transit system is reduced by the heavy passenger demand. Consequently, T (t) is greater during peak hours than in off-peak periods such as T (0), meaning that delays occur due to the congestion. The macroscopic and microscopic models are compared in terms of the cumulative number of 13  Figure 6: Comparison between the macroscopic and microscopic models in the baseline scenario. trains in Fig. 6. In the figure, the solid curves denote the macroscopic model and the dots denote the microscopic model. It is clear that D in the macroscopic model follows that of the microscopic model fairly precisely. For example, the congestion and delay during the peak time period are captured very well. However, there is a slight bias: the macroscopic model gives a slightly shorter travel time. This is mainly due to the large-scale unsteady state (i.e., train bunching) generated in the microscopic model; the delay caused by such large-scale bunching cannot be recovered by the microscopic model under the implemented headway-based control scheme (for details, see Appendix B). It means that if the control is schedule-based, the bias could be reduced. 4.2.2  Sensitivity analysis of the demand/supply conditions  The accuracy of the macroscopic model regarding the dynamic patterns of demand/supply is now examined. This is worth investigating quantitatively because it is qualitatively clear that the exit-flow model is valid if the speed of demand/supply changes is ‘sufficiently’ small as discussed in Section 3.2. Specifically, the sensitivity of the peak passenger demand ap (2) and train supply a(2) is evaluated by assigning various values to these parameters. The simulation duration is set to 8 h to take the residual delay after t = 4 (h) in some scenarios into account. The other parameters are the same as in the baseline scenario. The results are summarized in Fig. 7. Fig. 7a shows the relative difference in total travel time (TTT) of trains between the microscopic and macroscopic models for various peak passenger flows (negative values indicate that TTT of the macroscopic model is smaller). The relative difference can be considered as an error index of the macroscopic model. Fig. 7b compares the absolute value of TTT in each model. Note that there are some missing values, such as the relative error with a(2) = 18 and ap (2)/µp = 0.60; this is due to that the macroscopic model does not derive a solution under the given conditions (e.g., k(t) exceeds the jam density); this corresponds to ‘gridlock’ in the transportation system. According to the results in Fig. 7, the accuracy of the macroscopic model is high when the peak passenger demand is low. These are the expected results, as the speed of demand change is slow in these cases. TTT given by the macroscopic model is almost always less than that of the microscopic model; this might be due to the aforementioned inconsistency between the steady state assumption of the macroscopic model and headway-based control of the microscopic model. As the peak passenger demand increases, the relative error increases gradually when the demand is low, and increases suddenly when the demand exceeds a certain value. This sudden increase in the 14  (a) Relative error regarding passenger demand  (b) Absolute values of TTT  Figure 7: Comparison between the microscopic and macroscopic models under different demand/supply conditions. error is because of extraordinary large-scale train bunching in the microscopic model. As confirmed by Fig. 7b, the absolute value of TTT in the microscopic model also exhibits a sudden increase when the demand exceeds the certain value. This bunching often occurs in cases with excessive passenger demand, such as ap (2) > µp /2. Such demand can be considered as unrealistically excessive, as the dwell time of a train at a station is longer than the cruising time between adjacent stations in such situations; this usually does not occur even in rush hours. As for the sensitivity of the train supply a(·), there is a weak tendency for faster variations in supply to cause larger errors. This is also the expected result. From these results, we conclude that the proposed model is fairly accurate under ordinary passenger demand, although it is not able to reproduce extraordinary and unrealistic situations (for daily travel) with excessive train bunching. This might be acceptable for representing transit systems during usual rush hours.  5  Conclusion  In this paper, the following three models of an urban rail transit system have been analyzed: Microscopic model: A model describing the trajectories of individual trains and passengers based on Newell’s car-following model and passenger boarding model. This is represented in Eqs. (1) and (2), and can be solved using simulations. Fundamental diagram: An exact relationship among train-flow, train-density, and passenger-flow in the microscopic model under a steady state. This is represented in Eqs. (3)–(6). It is a closed-form equation. Macroscopic model: A model describing train and passenger traffic using an exit-flow model whose exit-flow function is the FD. This is represented in Eqs. (11), (13), (14), and (15), and can be solved using simple simulations. The FD and macroscopic model are the original contributions of this study, whereas the microscopic model was proposed by Wada et al. (2012). The microscopic model can be considered as a lower-order 15  approximation of an actual transit system. The FD represents the exact relation among steady state traffic variables in the microscopic model. The macroscopic model can be considered as an FD-based macroscopic approximation of the area-wide behavior of the microscopic model. The FD itself implies several insights on transit system. In addition, according to the results of the numerical experiment, the macroscopic model can reproduce the behavior of the microscopic model accurately, except for cases with unrealistically excessive demands. Because of the simplicity, mathematical tractability, and good approximation accuracy of the proposed FD and macroscopic model in ordinary situations, we expect that they will contribute for obtaining general policy implications on management strategies of rail transit systems, such as pricing and control for morning commute problems. Some improvements to the proposed model can be considerable. First, the model ignores in-vehicle passenger-crowding. This could be solved using a nonlinear passenger boarding model instead of Eq. (1), or by introducing a disutility crowding term into the departure time choice problem in the macroscopic model, as in Tian et al. (2007); de Palma et al. (2015a). Second, the variability and reliability of a transit system (e.g., robustness against unpredictable disturbances, travel time reliability issues) are not considered by the proposed model. A stochastic extension of the model might be useful for this problem. Third, the extension to cases with heterogeneity, such as spatially heterogeneous station distributions and passenger demand, would make the model considerably more realistic. As an application of the proposed model, the following morning commute problems are being investigated by the authors: user equilibrium departure time choice problem (find the equilibrium Ap (t) for a given A(t) and desired arrival time of passengers, Zp (t)), optimal demand control problem (find Ap (t) such that the total travel cost is minimized for a given A(t) and Zp (t)), and optimal demand and supply control problem (find Ap (t) and A(t) such that total travel cost is minimized for a given Zp (t)). The solutions to these problems would provide general insights into both demand and supply management strategies for transit systems (e.g., dynamic pricing, operation planning). Furthermore, multimodal commuting problems combined with travel mode choices (e.g., trains modeled by the proposed FD and cars and buses modeled by MFDs) are also considerable.  Acknowledgements Part of this research was financially supported by a KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) #17H03320.  A  Derivation of FD  This appendix describes derivation of the FD expressed in Eqs. (4)–(6). Consider a looped rail transit system under steady state operation. Let L be the length of the railroad, S be the number of the stations, M be the number of trains, H be the headway time of the operation, tb be the dwelling time of a train at a station, tc be the cruising time of a train between adjacent stations, and qp be the passenger demand flow rate per station. Note that the distance between adjacent stations l is L/S and the number of passengers boarding a train at each station is qp H. The headway time of the operation is derived as follows. The round trip time of a train in the looped railroad is S(tb + tc ), and M trains pass the station during that time. Then, the identities N H = S(tb + tc ) and  16  H=  gb + tc M/S − qp /µp  (18)  hold. Moreover, by the definition of headway and Newell’s car-following rule, the headway time H must satisfy δ + vτ + hf . v  (19)  gb + δ/v + τ + hf . 1 − qp /µp  (20)  H = tb + This reduces to H=  The q–k relation in a free-flowing regime is derived as follows. As the train-flow is 1/H and train-density is M/L by definition, Eq. (18) can be transformed to q(k) =  kl − qp /µp . gb + l/vf  The train-flow and train-density under a critical state, (q ∗ , k ∗ ), are derived as follows. substituting v = vf and hf = 0 into Eq. (20) and using the identity q = kv̄, we obtain 1 − qp /µp , gb + δ/vf + τ (1 − qp /µp )(gb + l/vf ) , k ∗ = k0 + (gb + δ/vf + τ )l  q∗ =  (21) By (22) (23)  where k0 is the minimum train-density where the train-flow is zero, namely, k0 = qp /(µp l). The q–k relation in a congested regime is derived as follows. First, the k–v relation in a congested regime can be easily derived from the q–v relation (20) with hf = 0 and the identity q = kv̄: k(v) = k0 +  (1 − qp /µp )(gb + l/v) . (gb + δ/v + τ )l  (24)  Now, consider dq/dk, which is identical to (dq/dv) · (dv/dk). This can be derived as dq lδ = , dk (δ − l)gb − τ l  (25)  which is constant and negative; therefore, the q–k relation is linear in a congested regime. Then, recalling that the linear q–k curve passes the point (q ∗ , k ∗ ) with a slope of dq/dk, the q–k relation in a congested regime can be derived as q(k) = with  lδ k + q0 (δ − l)gb − τ l  dq ∗ ·k . dk Eqs. (4)–(6) are constructed based on Eqs. (21), (22), (23), (26), and (27). q0 = q ∗ −  17  (26)  (27)  B  Adaptive control scheme in the microscopic model  This appendix briefly explains the adaptive control scheme for preventing train bunching, proposed by Wada et al. (2012). This scheme consists of two control measures: holding at a station and increasing the maximum speed during cruising. First, the scheme modifies the buffer time for dwelling (originally defined as gb in Eq. (1)) of train m at station i to gb := max{0, gb − Em (i)}  (28)  Em (i) = (1 − α)εm (i) + αµp (εm (i) − εm−1 (i)) ,  (29)  with  where εm (i) ≡ tm (i) − Tm,i represents the delay, tm (i) represents the time at which train m arrives at station i, Tm,i represents the scheduled time (i.e., without delay) at which train m should arrive at station i, and α ∈ [0, 1] is a weighting parameter. This scheme represents a typical holding control strategy, similar to the bunching prevention method of Daganzo (2009), which extends the dwelling time of a vehicle if the headway to the preceding vehicle is too small and vice versa. Second, the scheme modifies the free-flow cruising speed vf such that the interstation travel time is reduced by  min l/vf − l/vmax , max{0, Em (i) − gb } .  (30)  This means that, in the event of a delay, the train tries to catch up by increasing its cruising speed up to the maximum allowable speed vmax (which implies that the free-flow speed vf is a ‘buffered’ maximum speed). Meanwhile, the proposed train operation model in this study does not have a schedule—it is a frequency-based operation. Therefore, in this study, the scheduled headway in the scheme (Tm,i − Tm−1,i ) is approximated by the planned frequency (1/a(tm (i))). Thus, we set α = 1 and substitute Em (i) with  µp tm (i) − tm−1 (i) − 1/a(tm (i)) .  (31)  The stationary state of the operational dynamics under the original scheme is identical to the steady state defined in Section 2.2. In the case of α < 1, the scheme makes the train operation asymptotically stable, meaning that the operation schedule is robust to small disturbances. In the case of α = 1, the scheme prevents the propagation and amplification of delay, but does not recover the original schedule (the small ‘shift’ found in Fig. 6 is due to α = 1). Note that these control measures do not interrupt passenger boarding or violate the safety clearance between trains, meaning that most of the fundamental assumptions of the proposed FD are satisfied.  References B. Alonso, J. C. Munoz, A. Ibeas, and J. L. Moura. A congested and dwell time dependent transit corridor assignment model. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 2017.  18  M. Carey and A. Kwieciński. Stochastic approximation to the effects of headways on knock-on delays of trains. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 28(4):251–267, 1994. M. Carey and M. McCartney. An exit-flow model used in dynamic traffic assignment. Computers & Operations Research, 31(10):1583–1602, 2004. O. Cats, J. West, and J. Eliasson. A dynamic stochastic model for evaluating congestion and crowding effects in transit systems. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 89:43–57, 2016. N. Chiabaut. Evaluation of a multimodal urban arterial: The passenger macroscopic fundamental diagram. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 81:410–420, 2015. P.-A. Cuniasse, C. Buisson, J. Rodriguez, E. Teboul, and D. de Almeida. Analyzing railroad congestion in a dense urban network through the use of a road traffic network fundamental diagram concept. Public Transport, 7(3):355–367, 2015. C. F. Daganzo. Fundamentals of Transportation and Traffic Operations. Pergamon Oxford, 1997. C. F. Daganzo. Urban gridlock: Macroscopic modeling and mitigation approaches. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 41(1):49–62, 2007. C. F. Daganzo. A headway-based approach to eliminate bus bunching: Systematic analysis and comparisons. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 43(10):913–921, 2009. J. de Cea and E. Fernández. Transit assignment for congested public transport systems: an equilibrium model. Transportation Science, 27(2):133–147, 1993. A. de Palma, M. Kilani, and S. Proost. Discomfort in mass transit and its implication for scheduling and pricing. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 71:1–18, 2015a. A. de Palma, R. Lindsey, and G. Monchambert. The economics of crowding in public transport. Working Paper (hal-01203310), 2015b. L. C. Edie. Discussion of traffic stream measurements and definitions. In J. Almond, editor, Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on the Theory of Traffic Flow, pages 139–154, 1963. M. Fosgerau. Congestion in the bathtub. Economics of Transportation, 4:241–255, 2015. N. Geroliminis and C. F. Daganzo. Macroscopic modeling of traffic in cities. In Transportation Research Board 86th Annual Meeting, 2007. N. Geroliminis and D. M. Levinson. Cordon pricing consistent with the physics of overcrowding. In W. H. K. Lam, S. C. Wong, and H. K. Lo, editors, Transportation and Traffic Theory 2009, pages 219–240. Springer, 2009. N. Geroliminis, J. Haddad, and M. Ramezani. Optimal perimeter control for two urban regions with macroscopic fundamental diagrams: A model predictive approach. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 14(1):348–359, 2013. N. Geroliminis, N. Zheng, and K. Ampountolas. A three-dimensional macroscopic fundamental diagram for mixed bi-modal urban networks. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 42:168–181, 2014. E. J. Gonzales and C. F. Daganzo. Morning commute with competing modes and distributed demand: User equilibrium, system optimum, and pricing. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 46(10):1519– 1534, 2012.  19  N. G. Harris. Train boarding and alighting rates at high passenger loads. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 40(3):249–263, 2006. A. Higgins and E. Kozan. Modeling train delays in urban networks. Transportation Science, 32(4):346–357, 1998. S. P. Hoogendoorn and W. Daamen. Pedestrian behavior at bottlenecks. Transportation Science, 39(2):147–159, 2005. D. Huisman, L. G. Kroon, R. M. Lentink, and M. J. C. M. Vromans. Operations research in passenger railway transportation. Statistica Neerlandica, 59(4):467–497, 2005. T. Iryo. Properties of dynamic user equilibrium solution: existence, uniqueness, stability, and robust solution methodology. Transportmetrica B: Transport Dynamics, 1(1):52–67, 2013. S. Iwakura, I. Takahashi, and S. Morichi. A multi agent simulation model for estimating knock-on train delays under high-frequency urban rail operation. In Transport Policy Studies’s Review, volume 15. Institute For Transport Policy Studies, 2013. (in Japanese). K. Kariyazaki. Investigation of train delay recovery mechanism and delay prevention schemes in urban railway. PhD thesis, National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies, 2016. (in Japanese). K. Kariyazaki, N. Hibino, and S. Morichi. Simulation analysis of train operation to recover knock-on delay under high-frequency intervals. Case Studies on Transport Policy, 3(1):92–98, 2015. H. Kato, Y. Kaneko, and Y. Soyama. Departure-time choices of urban rail passengers facing unreliable service: Evidence from Tokyo. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Systems for Public Transport 2012, 2012. K. M. Kim, S.-P. Hong, S.-J. Ko, and D. Kim. Does crowding affect the path choice of metro passengers? Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 77:292–304, 2015. H. Koutsopoulos and Z. Wang. Simulation of urban rail operations: Application framework. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2006:84–91, 2007. M. Kraus and Y. Yoshida. The commuter’s time-of-use decision and optimal pricing and service in urban mass transit. Journal of Urban Economics, 51(1):170–195, 2002. W. H. K. Lam, C. Y. Cheung, and Y. F. Poon. A study of train dwelling time at the Hong Kong mass transit railway system. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 32(3):285–295, 1998. S. Li, M. M. Dessouky, L. Yang, and Z. Gao. Joint optimal train regulation and passenger flow control strategy for high-frequency metro lines. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 99:113–137, 2017. M. J. Lighthill and G. B. Whitham. On kinematic waves. II. a theory of traffic flow on long crowded roads. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 229(1178): 317–345, 1955. D. K. Merchant and G. L. Nemhauser. A model and an algorithm for the dynamic traffic assignment problems. Transportation Science, 12(3):183–199, 1978. G. F. Newell. A simplified car-following theory: a lower order model. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 36(3):195–205, 2002. G. F. Newell and R. B. Potts. Maintaining a bus schedule. In Proceedings of the 2nd Australian Road Research Board, volume 2, 1964.  20  J. Parbo, O. A. Nielsen, and C. G. Prato. Passenger perspectives in railway timetabling: A literature review. Transport Reviews, 36(4):500–526, 2016. P. I. Richards. Shock waves on the highway. Operations Research, 4(1):42–51, 1956. W. Y. Szeto and H. K. Lo. Dynamic traffic assignment: properties and extensions. Transportmetrica, 2(1): 31–52, 2006. T. Tabuchi. Bottleneck congestion and modal split. Journal of Urban Economics, 34(3):414–431, 1993. Q. Tian, H.-J. Huang, and H. Yang. Equilibrium properties of the morning peak-period commuting in a many-to-one mass transit system. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 41(6):616–631, 2007. A. Tirachini, D. A. Hensher, and J. M. Rose. Crowding in public transport systems: effects on users, operation and implications for the estimation of demand. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 53: 36–52, 2013. V. Trozzi, G. Gentile, M. G. H. Bell, and I. Kaparias. Dynamic user equilibrium in public transport networks with passenger congestion and hyperpaths. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 57:266–285, 2013. V. R. Vuchic. Urban Transit: Operations, Planning, and Economics. John Wiley & Sons, 2005. K. Wada, S. Kil, T. Akamatsu, and M. Osawa. A control strategy to prevent delay propagation in high-frequency railway systems. Journal of Japan Society of Civil Engineers, Ser. D3 (Infrastructure Planning and Management), 68(5):I_1025–I_1034, 2012. (in Japanese; extended abstract in English was presented at the 1st European Symposium on Quantitative Methods in Transportation Systems and available at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281823577).  21

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
