Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_2280

Abstract:
arXiv:1304.5248v1 [math.AG] 18 Apr 2013  Gorenstein in codimension 4 – the general structure theory Miles Reid Abstract I describe the projective resolution of a codimension 4 Gorenstein ideal, aiming to extend Buchsbaum and Eisenbud’s famous result in codimension 3. The main result is a structure theorem stating that the ideal is determined by its (k+1)×2k matrix of first syzygies, viewed as a morphism from the ambient regular space to the Spin-Hom variety SpHk ⊂ Mat(k + 1, 2k). This is a general result encapsulating some theoretical aspects of the problem, but, as it stands, is still some way from tractable applications.  This paper introduces the Spin-Hom varieties SpHk ⊂ Mat(k + 1, 2k) for k ≥ 3, that I define as almost homogeneous spaces under the group GL(k + 1) × O(2k) (see 2.4). These serve as key varieties for the (k + 1) × 2k first syzygy matrixes of codimension 4 Gorenstein ideals I in a polynomial ring S plus appropriate presentation data; the correspondence takes I to its matrix of first syzygies. Such ideals I are parametrised by an open subscheme of SpHk (S) = Mor(Spec S, SpHk ). The open condition comes from the Buchsbaum–Eisenbud exactness criterion “What makes a complex exact?” [BE1]: the classifying map α : Spec S → SpHk must hit the degeneracy locus of SpHk in codimension ≥ 4. The map α has Cramer-spinor coordinates Li and σJ in standard reprek−1 sentations kk+1 and k2 of GL(k + 1) and Pin(2k) (see 3.3), and the k × k minors of M1 (I) are in the product ideal I · Sym2 ({σJ }). The spinors themselves should also be in I, so that the k×k minors of M1 (I) are in I 3 ; this goes some way towards explaining the mechanism that makes the syzygy matrix M1 (I) “drop rank by 3 at one go” – it has rank k outside V (I) = Spec(S/I) and ≤ k − 3 on V (I). 1  The results here are not yet applicable in any satisfactory way, and raise almost as many questions as they answer. While Gorenstein codimension 4 ideals are subject to a structure theorem, that I believe to be the correct codimension 4 generalisation of the famous Buchsbaum–Eisenbud theorem in codimension 3 [BE2], I do not say that this makes them tractable. Thanks I am grateful to Chen Jungkai for inviting me to AGEA, and to him and his colleagues at University of Taiwan for generous hospitality. My visit was funded by Korean Government WCU Grant R33-2008-000-10101-0, which also partly funded my work over the last 4 years, and I am very grateful to Lee Yongnam for setting up the grant and administering every aspect of it. I wish to thank Fabrizio Catanese, Eduardo Dias, Sasha Kuznetsov and Liu Wenfei for contributing corrections, questions and stimulating discussion. I owe a particular debt of gratitude to Alessio Corti for detailed suggestions that have helped me improve the layout and contents of the paper. Website See www.warwick.ac.uk/staff/Miles.Reid/codim4 for material accompanying this paper.  1  Introduction  Gorenstein rings are important, appearing throughout algebra, algebraic geometry and singularity theory. A common source is Zariski’s standard constructionL of graded ring over a polarised variety X, L: the graded ring 0 R(X, L) = n≥0 H (X, nL) is a Gorenstein ring under natural and fairly mild conditions (cohomology vanishing plus KX = kX L for some kX ∈ Z, see for example [GW]). Knowing how to construct R(X, L) by generators and relations gives precise answer to questions on embedding X ֒→ Pn and determining the equations of the image.  1.1  Background and the Buchsbaum–Eisenbud result  I work over a field k containing 12 (such as k = C, but see 4.5 for the more general case). Let S = k[x1 , . . . , xn ] be a positively graded polynomial ring with wt xi = ai , and R = S/IR a quotient of S that is a Gorenstein ring. Equivalently, Spec R ⊂ Spec S = Ank is a Gorenstein graded scheme. By the Auslander–Buchsbaum form of the Hilbert syzygies theorem, R has a  2  minimal free graded resolution P• of the form 0 ← P0 ← P1 ← · · · ← Pc ← 0 ↓ R  (1.1)  where P0 = S → R = S/IR is the quotient map, and P1 → S gives a minimum set of generators of the ideal IR . Here the length c of the resolution equals n − depth R, and each Pi is a graded free module of rank bi . I write Lbi ⊕bi Pi = bi S (as an abbreviation for S ), or Pi = j=1 S(−dij ) if I need to keep track of the gradings. The condition depth R = dim R that the depth is maximal characterises the Cohen–Macaulay case, and then c = codim R = codim(Spec R ⊂ Spec S). If in addition Pc is a free module of rank 1, so that Pc ∼ number, then R is a Gorenstein ring of = S(−α) with α the adjunction P canonical weight κR = α − ai ; for my purposes, one can take this to be the definition of Gorenstein. Duality makes the resolution (1.1) symmetric: the dual complex (P• )∨ = HomS (P• , Pc ) resolves the dualising module ωR = ExtcS (R, ωS ), which P is isomorphic to R (or, as a graded module, to R(κR ) with κR = α − ai ), so that P• ∼ = (P• )∨ . In particular the Betti numbers bi satisfy the symmetry bc−i = bi , or Pc−i = HomS (Pi , Pc ) ∼ =  bi M  S(−α + dij ),  j=1  where Pi =  bi M  S(−dij ).  j=1  The Buchsbaum–Eisenbud symmetriser trick [BE2] adds precision to this (this is where the assumption 12 ∈ S comes into play): There is a symmetric perfect pairing S 2 (P• ) → Pc inducing the duality P• ∼ = (P• )∨ . The idea is to pass from P• as a resolution of R to the complex P• ⊗ P• (the total complex of the double complex) as a resolution of R ⊗S R (left derived tensor product), then to replace P• ⊗ P• by its symmetrised version S 2 (P• ). In the double complex P• ⊗ P• , one decorates the arrows by signs ±1 to make each rectangle anticommute (to get d2 = 0). The symmetrised complex S 2 (P• ) then involves replacing the arrows by half the sum or differences of symmetrically placed arrows. (This provides lots of opportunities for confusion about signs!) 3  For details, see [BE2]. The conclusion is that P• has a ±-symmetric bilinear form that induces perfect pairings Pi ⊗ Pc−i → Pc = S for each i, compatible with the differentials. The Buchsbaum–Eisenbud structure theorem in codimension 3 is a simple consequence of this symmetry, and a model for what I try to do in this paper. Namely, in codimension 3 we have 0 ← P0 ← P1 ← P2 ← P3 ← 0,  (1.2)  with P0 = S, P3 ∼ = P1∨, and the matrix M defining = S, P2 = Hom(P1 , P3 ) ∼ the map P1 ← P2 is skew (that is, antisymmetric). If I set P1 = nS then the respective ranks of the differentials in (1.2) are 1, n − 1 and 1; since M is skew, his rank must be even, so that n = 2ν + 1. Moreover, the kernel and cokernel are given by the Pfaffians of M, by the skew version of Cramer’s rule. Generalising the Buchsbaum–Eisenbud Theorem to codimension 4 has been a notoriously elusive problem since the 1970s.  1.2  Main aim  This paper starts by describing the shape of the resolution of a codimension 4 Gorenstein ring by analogy with (1.2). The first syzygy matrix M1 : P1 ← P2 is a (k + 1) ×2k matrix whose k + 1 rows generically span a maximal isotropic space of the symmetric quadratic form on P2 . The ideal IR is generated by the entries of the map L : P0 ← P1 , which is determined by the linear algebra of quadratic forms as the linear relation that must hold between the k + 1 rows of M1 . This is all uncomplicated stuff, deduced directly from the symmetry trick of [BE2]. It leads to the definition of the Spin-Hom varieties SpHk in the space of (k + 1) × 2k matrixes (see Section 2.4). The first syzygy matrix M1 is then an S-valued point of SpHk , or a morphism α : Spec S → SpHk . The converse is more subtle, and is the main point of the paper. By construction, SpHk supports a short complex P1 ← P2 ← P3 of free modules with a certain universal property. If we were allowed to restrict to a smooth open subscheme S 0 of SpHk meeting the degeneracy locus SpHdgn in codik mension 4, the reflexive hull of the cokernel of M1 and the kernel of M2 would provide a complex P• that resolves a sheaf of Gorenstein codimension 4 ideals in S 0 . (This follows by the main proof below). 4  Unfortunately, this is only an adequate description of codimension 4 Gorenstein ideals in the uninteresting case of complete intersection ideals. Any other case necessarily involves smaller strata of SpHk , where SpHk is singular. Thus to cover every codimension 4 Gorenstein ring, I am forced into the logically subtle situation of a universal construction whose universal space does not itself support the type of object I am trying to classify, namely a Gorenstein codimension 4 ideal. See 4.3 for further discussion of this point. Main Theorem 2.5 gives the universal construction. To paraphrase: for a polynomial ring S graded in positive degrees, there is a 1-to-1 correspondence between: (1) Gorenstein codimension 4 graded ideals I ⊂ S and (2) graded morphisms α : Spec S → SpHk for which α−1 (SpHdgn k ) has codimension ≥ 4 in Spec S. I should say at once that this is intended as a theoretical structure result. It has the glaring weakness that it does not so far make any tractable predictions even in model cases (see 4.7 for a discussion). But it is possibly better than no structure result at all.  1.3  Contents of the paper  Section 2.1 describes the shape of the free resolution and its symmetry, following the above introductory discussion. Section 2.4 defines the Spin-Hom variety SpHk ⊂ Mat(k + 1, 2k), to serve as my universal space. The definition takes the form of a quasihomogeneous space for the complex Lie group G = GL(k + 1) × O(2k) or its spin double cover GL(k + 1) × Pin(2k). More explicitly, define SpHk as the closure of the G-orbit SpH0k = G · M0 of the typical matrix M0 = ( I0k 00 ) under the given action of G = GL(k + 1) × O(2k) on Mat(k + 1, 2k). The degeneracy locus SpHdgn is the complement SpHk \ SpH0k . Once these k definitions are in place, Section 2.5 states the main theorem, and proves it based on the exactness criterion of [BE1]. The Spin-Hom varieties SpHk have a rich structure arising from representation theory. A matrix M1 ∈ SpH0k can be viewed as an isomorphism between a k-dimensional space in kk+1 and a maximal isotropic space for ϕ in k2k . This displays SpH0k as a principal GL(k) bundle over Pk ×OGr(k, 2k). Section 3 discusses the properties of the SpHk in more detail, notably their 5  symmetry under the maximal torus and Weyl group. The spinor and nonspinor sets correspond to the two different spinor components OGr(k, 2k) and OGr′ (k, 2k) of the maximal isotropic Grassmannian. I introduce the Cramer-spinor coordinates σJ in 3.3; the main point is that, for a spinor subset J ∪ J c , the (k + 1) × k submatrix of M1 ∈ SpHk formed by those columns has top wedge factoring as (L1 , . . . , Lk+1 ) · σJ2 where L : P0 ← P1 is the vector of equations (see Lemma 3.3.2). Ensuring that the appropriate square root σJ is defined as an element σJ ∈ S involves the point that, whereas the spinor bundle defines a 2-torsion Weil divisor on the V affine orthogonal Grassmannian a OGr(k, 2k) ⊂ k k2k (the affine cone over OGr(k, 2k) in Plücker space) and on SpHk , its birational transform under the classifying maps α : Spec S → SpHk of Theorem 2.5 is the trivial bundle on Spec S. The spinor coordinates vanish on the degeneracy locus SpHdgn and define k 0 k+1 2k−1 an equivariant morphism SpHk → k ⊗k . At the same time, they vanish on the nonspin variety SpH′k , corresponding to the other component OGr′ (k, 2k) of the Grassmannian of maximal isotropic subspaces; this has nonspinor coordinates, that vanish on SpHk . Between them, these give set theoretic equations for SpHk and its degeneracy locus. The final Section 4 discusses a number of issues with my construction and some open problems and challenges for the future.  2  The main result  For a codimension 4 Gorenstein ideal I with k + 1 generators, the module P2 of first syzygies is a 2k dimensional orthogonal space with a nondegenerate (symmetric) quadratic form ϕ. The k + 1 rows of the first syzygy matrix M1 (R) span an isotropic subspace in P2 with respect to ϕ. Since the maximal isotropic subspaces are k-dimensional, this implies a linear dependence relation (L1 , . . . , Lk+1 ) that bases coker M1 and thus provides the generators of I. A first draft of this idea was sketched in [Ki], 10.2.  2.1  The free resolution  Let S = k[x1 , . . . , xN ] be the polynomial ring over an algebraically closed field k of characteristic 6= 2, graded in positive degrees. Let IR be a homogeneous ideal with quotient R = S/IR that is Gorenstein of codimension 4; 6  equivalently, IR defines a codimension 4 Gorenstein graded subscheme V (IR ) = Spec R ⊂ AN k = Spec S. Suppose that IR has k + 1 generators L1 , . . . , Lk+1 . It follows from the Auslander–Buchsbaum form of the Hilbert syzygies theorem and the symmetriser trick of Buchsbaum–Eisenbud [BE2] that the free resolution of R is 0 ← P0 ← P1 ← P2 ← P3 ← P4 ← 0, (2.1) where P0 = S, P4 ∼ = P1∨; and moreover, P2 has a = S, P3 = Hom(P1 , P4 ) ∼ nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form ϕ : S 2 P2 → P4 compatible with the complex P• , so that P2 → P1 is dual to P3 → P2 under ϕ. The simple cases of 2.3, Examples 2.1–2.3 give a sanity check (just in case you are sceptical about the symmetry of ϕ). A choice of basis of P2 gives ϕ the standard block form1 ( 0I I0 ). Then the first syzygy matrix in (2.1) is M1 (R) = (A B), where the two blocks are (k + 1) × k matrixes satisfying (A B) ( 0I I0 ) t (A B) = 0,  (2.2)  that is, A tB + B tA = 0, or A tB is skew. I call this a (k + 1) × 2k resolution (meaning that the defining ideal IR has k + 1 generators yoked by 2k first syzygies).  The number of equations in (2.2) is k+2 . For example, in the typical case 2  k = 8, the variety defined by (2.2) involves k+2 = 45 quadratic equations 2 in 2k(k + 1) = 144 variables. The scheme Vk defined by (2.2) appears in the literature as the variety of complexes. However it is not really the right object – it breaks into 2 irreducible components for spinor reasons, and it is better to study just one, which is my SpHk .  2.2  The general fibre  Let ξ ∈ Spec S = AN be a point outside V (IR ) = Spec R with residue field K = k(ξ) (for example, a k-valued point, with K = k, or the generic point, 1  In the graded case this is trivial because ϕ is homogeneous of degree 0, so is basically a nondegenerate quadratic form on a vector space V2 with P2 = V2 ⊗ S. See the discussion in 4.5 for the more general case.  7  with K = Frac S). Evaluating (2.1) at ξ gives the exact sequence of vector spaces 0 ← V0 ← V1 ← V2 ← V3 ← V4 ← 0 (2.3) over K, where V0 = K, V4 ∼ = V1∨ , = K, V1 = (k + 1)K, V3 = Hom(V1 , V4 ) ∼ and V2 = 2kK with the nondegenerate quadratic form ϕ = ( 0I I0 ). Over K, the maps in (2.3) can be written as the matrixes    0! ..  Ik 0 0 0 . . 0 ... 0 1 (2.4) 0 0 Ik 0 0 1  This data determines a fibre bundle over AN \ V (IR ) with the exact complex (2.3) as fibre, and structure group the orthogonal group of the complex, which I take to be GL(k + 1) × O(2k) or its double cover GL(k + 1) × Pin(2k).  2.3  Simple examples  Example 2.1 A codimension 4 complete intersection has L = (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) and Koszul syzygy matrix   −x4 . . . x3 −x2  . −x4 . −x3 . x1  . (2.5) (A B) =   . . −x4 x2 −x1 .  x1 x2 x3 . . . V In this choice, A = M1,2,3 has rank 3 and 3 A = x24 · (x1 , . . . , x4 ). See 3.3 for spinors. A spinor subset J ∪ J c has an odd number i of columns from A and the complementary 3V− i columns from B. For example, columns 1, 5, 6 give a 4 × 3 matrix with 3 M1,5,6 = x21 · (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ). Example 2.2 Another easy case is that of a hypersurface section h = 0 in a codimension 3 ideal given by the Pfaffians Pf i of a (2l + 1) × (2l + 1) skew matrix M. The syzygy matrix is ! −hI2l+1 M (A B) = . (2.6) Pf 1 . . . Pf 2l+1 0...0  One sees that a spinor σJ corresponding to 2l + 1 − 2i columns from A and a complementary 2i from B is of the form hl−i times a diagonal 2i × 2i Pfaffian of M. Thus the top wedge of the left-hand block A of (2.6) equals σ 2 · (h, Pf 1 , . . . , Pf 2l+1 ) where σ = hl . 8  Example 2.3 The extrasymmetric matrix   a b d e f  c e g h     f h i  M =     −λa −λb −λc  (2.7)  with a single multiplier λ is the simplest case of a Tom unprojection (see [TJ], Section 9 for details). Let I be the ideal generated by the 4 × 4 Pfaffians of M. The diagonal entries d, g, i of the 3 × 3 symmetric top right block are all unprojection variables; thus i appears linearly in 4 equations of the form i · (a, d, e, g) = · · · , and eliminating it projects to the codimension 3 Gorenstein ring defined by the Pfaffians of the top left 5 × 5 block. If λ ∈ S is a perfect square, I is the ideal of√Segre(P2√× P2 ) ⊂ P8 up to a coordinate change, but the Galois symmetry λ 7→ − λ swaps the two factors. See [TJ], Section 9 for more details, and for several more families of examples; in any of these cases, writing out the resolution matrixes (A B) with the stated isotropy property makes a demanding but rewarding exercise for the dedicated student. By extrasymmetry, out of the 15 entries of M, 9 are independent and 6 repeats. His 4 × 4 Pfaffians follow a similar pattern. I write the 9 generators of the ideal I of Pfaffians as the vector L =  λac + eh − f g, −λab − dh + ef, λa2 + dg − e2 , ah − bg + ce, −af + be − cd, λb2 + di − f 2 ,  λbc + ei − f h, λc2 + gi − h2 , ai − bh + cf  9  Its matrix of first syzygies M1 is the transpose of . a b −a . c −b −c . −d −e −f −e −g −h  −h . f −h . f  . . .  d e f . λa  e g h −λa .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  λc . . g −e −λb λc −g . d . −λb e −d .  i . . . .  . i h . .  . . i . .  . . . i .  . . −λc . i  . . c  −b −c .  . . .  . . −h  f h .  . h . . c  . . . . . . . . (2.8)  −h f −λc −f . λb e −d −λa −c b −h −b . f  −a . . . −a . . . −a  d e g  M1 is of block form (A B) with two 9×8 blocks, and one checks that LM1 = 0, and M1 is isotropic for the standard quadratic form J = ( 0I I0 ), so its kernel is t M2 = tB . The focus in (2.8) is on i as an unprojection variable, multiplying A d, e, g, a. One recognises its Tom3 matrix as the top 5 × 5 block, and the Koszul syzygy matrix of d, e, g, a as Submatrix([6, 7, 8, 14, 15, 16], [6, 7, 8, 9]); compare [KM]. For some of the spinors (see Section 3), consider the 8 × 9 submatrixes formed by 4 out of the first 5 rows of (2.8), and the complementary 4 rows from the last 8. One calculates their maximal minors with a mild effort: V8 M1,2,3,4,13,14,15,16 = a2 (af − be + cd)2 · L, V8 M1,2,3,5,12,14,15,16 = a2 (ah − bg + ce)2 · L, V8 (2.9) M1,2,4,5,11,14,15,16 = a2 (−λa2 − dg + e2 )2 · L, V8 M1,3,4,5,10,14,15,16 = a2 (−λab − dh + ef )2 · L, V8 M2,3,4,5,9,14,15,16 = a2 (−λac − eh + f g)2 · L. The factor a comes from the 3 × 3 diagonal block at the bottom right, and the varying factors are the 4 × 4 Pfaffians of the first 5 × 5 block. Compare 4.4 for a sample Koszul syzygy. 10  Exercise 2.4 Apply column and isotropic row operations to put the variable f down a main diagonal of B; check that this puts the complementary A in the form of a skew 8 × 8 matrix and a row of zeros. Hint: order the rows as 15, 16, 12, 11, 6, 2, 1, 5, 7, 8, 4, 3, 14, 10, 9, 13 and the columns as 1, 2, −3, 4, 5, −7, 8, 9, 6. (See the website for the easy code.) Do the same for either variable e, h, and the same for any of a, b, c (involving the multiplier λ). Thus the isotropy condition tMJM can be thought of as many skew symmetries. These examples provide useful sanity checks, with everything given by transparent calculations; it is reassuring to be able to verify the symmetry of the bilinear form on P2 asserted in Proposition 1, the shape of A tB in (2.2), which parity of J gives nonzero spinors σJ , and other minor issues of this nature. I have written out the matrixes, spinors, Koszul syzygies etc. in a small number of more complicated explicit examples (see the website). It should be possible to treat fairly general Tom and Jerry constructions in the same style, although so far I do not know how to use this to predict anything useful. The motivation for this paper came in large part from continuing attempts to understand Horikawa surfaces and Duncan Dicks’ 1988 thesis [Di], [R1].  2.4  Definition of the Spin-Hom variety SpHk  Define the Spin-Hom variety SpHk ⊂ Mat(k + 1, 2k) as the closure under G = GL(k + 1) × O(2k) of the orbit of M 0 = I0k 00 , the second matrix in (2.4). It consists of isotropic homomorphisms V1 ← V2 , in other words matrixes M1 whose k + 1 rows are isotropic and mutually orthogonal vectors in V2 w.r.t. the quadratic form ϕ, and span a subspace that is in the given component of maximal isotropic subspaces if it is k-dimensional. In more detail, write SpH0k = G · M 0 ⊂ Mat(k + 1, 2k) for the orbit, SpHk for its closure, and SpHdgn = SpHk \ SpH0k for the degeneracy locus, consisting k of matrixes of rank < k. Section 3 discusses several further properties of SpHk and its degeneracy locus SpHdgn k .  11  2.5  The Main Theorem  Assume that S is a polynomial ring graded in positive degrees. Let I be a homogeneous ideal defining a codimension 4 Gorenstein subscheme X = V (I) ⊂ Spec S. Then a choice of minimal generators of I (made up of k + 1 elements, say) and of the first syzygies between these defines a morphism α : Spec S → SpHk such that α−1 (SpHdgn ) has the same support as X, and hence codimension 4 in Spec S. Conversely, let α : Spec S → SpHk ⊂ Mat(k + 1, 2k) be a morphism for which α−1 (SpHdgn ) has codimension ≥ 4 in Spec S. Assume that α is graded, that is, equivariant for a positively graded action of Gm on SpHk ⊂ Mat(k + 1, 2k). Let M1 = (A B) be the matrix image of α (the matrix entries of M1 or the coordinates of α are elements of S). Then by construction M1 and J tM1 define the two middle morphisms of a complex. I assert that this extends to a complex L  J tM  M  tL  1 1 0 ← P0 ← − P1 ←−− P2 ←−−− P3 ← − P4 ← 0.  (2.10)  in which P0 , P4 ∼ = S, the complex is exact except at P0 , and the image of L = (L1 , . . . , Lk+1 ) generates the ideal of a Gorenstein codimension 4 subscheme X ⊂ Spec S.  2.6  Proof  The first part follows from what I have already said. The converse follows by a straightforward application of the exactness criterion of [BE1]. The complex P• of (2.10) comes directly from M1 . Namely, define P0 as the reflexive hull of coker{M1 : P1 ← P2 } (that is, double dual); it has rank 1 because M1 has generic rank k. A graded reflexive module of rank 1 over a graded regular ring is free (this is the same as saying that a Weil divisor on a nonsingular variety is Cartier), so P0 ∼ = S. Given P3 ∼ = P1∨ , the generically surjective map S ∼ = P0 ← P1 is dual to an inclusion S ֒→ P3 that maps to the kernel of P2 ← P3 . The key point is to prove exactness of the complex ϕ1  ϕ2  ϕ3  ϕ4  P0 ←− P1 ←− P2 ←− P3 ←− P4 ← 0, where I write ϕ1 = (L1 , . . . , Lk+1 ), ϕ2 = M1 , etc. to agree with [BE1]. The modules and homomorphisms P0 , ϕ1 , P1 , ϕ2 , P2 , ϕ3 , P3 , ϕ4 , P4 of this complex 12  have respective ranks 1, 1, k + 1, k, 2k, k, k + 1, 1, 1, which accords with an exact sequence of vector spaces, as in (2.3–2.4); this is Part (1) of the criterion of [BE1], Theorem 1. The second condition Part (2) requires the matrixes of ϕi to have maximal nonzero minors generating an ideal I(ϕi ) that contains a regular sequence of length i. However, P• is exact outside the degeneracy locus, that is, at any point ξ ∈ Spec S for which α(ξ) ∈ / SpHdgn k , and by assumption, the locus of such points has codimension ≥ 4. Thus the maximal minors of each ϕi generate an ideal defining a subscheme of codimension ≥ 4. In a Cohen– Macaulay ring, an ideal defining a subscheme of codimension ≥ i has height ≥ i. Q.E.D.  3  Properties of SpHk and its spinors  This section introduces the spinors as sections of the spinor line bundle S on SpHk . The nonspinors vanish on SpHk and cut it out in Vk set theoretically. The spinors vanish on the other component SpH′k and cut out set theoretically the degeneracy locus SpHdgn in SpHk . k The easy bit is to say that a spinor is the square root of a determinant on Vk ⊂ Mat(k + 1, 2k) that vanishes to even order on a divisor of SpHk because it is locally the square of a Pfaffian. The ratio of two spinors is a rational function on SpHk . The tricky point is that the spinors are sections of the spinor bundle S on SpHk that is defined as a Pin(2k) equivariant bundle, so not described by any particularly straightforward linear or multilinear algebra. As everyone knows, the spinor bundle S on OGr(k, 2k) is the ample generator of Pic(OGr(k, 2k)), with the property that S ⊗2 is the restriction of the Plücker bundle O(1) on Gr(k,V2k). On the affine orthogonal Grassmannian in Plücker space a Gr(k, 2k) ⊂ k k2k , it corresponds to a 2-torsion Weil divisor class. I write out a transparent treatment of the first example in 3.2. I need to argue that the spinors pulled back to my regular ambient Spec S by the appropriate birational transform are elements of S (that is, polynomials), rather than just sections of a spinor line bundle. The reason that I expect to be able to do this is because I have done many calculations like the Tom unprojection of 2.3, Example 2.3, and it always works. In the final analysis, I win for the banal reason that the ambient space Spec S has no 2-torsion Weil divisors in its class group (because S is factorial), so that the 13  birational transform of the spinor bundle S to Spec S = AN is trivial. The Cramer-spinor coordinates of the syzygy matrix M1 = (A B) have the potential to clarify many points about Gorenstein codimension 4: the generic rank of M1 is k, but it drops to k − 3 on Spec R; its k × k minors are in IR3 . There also seems to be a possible explanation of the difference seen in examples between k even and odd in terms of the well known differences between the Weyl groups Dk (compare 3.1.3).  3.1  Symmetry  View GL(k+1) as acting on the first syzygy matrix M1 (R) by row operations, and O(2k) as column operations preserving the orthogonal structure ϕ, or the matrix ( 0I I0 ). The maximal torus Gk+1 m and Weyl group Ak = Sk+1 of the first factor GL(k + 1) act in the obvious way by scaling and permuting the rows of M1 . I need some standard notions for the symmetry of O(2k) and its spinors. For further details, see Fulton and Harris [FH], esp. Chapter 20 and [CR], Section 4. Write V2 = k2k for the 2k dimensional vector space with basis e1 , . . . , ek and dual basis f1 , . . . , fk , making the quadratic form ϕ = ( I0 I0 ). Write U = U k = he1 , . . . , ek i, so that V2 = U ⊕ U ∨ . The orthogonal Grassmannian OGr(k, 2k) is defined as the variety of k-dimensional isotropic subspaces that intersect U in even codimension, that is, in a subspace of dimension ≡ k modulo 2. 3.1.1  The Dk symmetry of OGr(k, 2k) and SpHk  I describe the Dk Weyl group symmetry of the columns in this notation (compare [CR], Section 4). The maximal torus Gkm of O(2k) multiplies ei by λi and fi by λ−1 i , and acts likewise on the columns of M1 = (A B). The Weyl group Dk acts on the ei , fi and on the columns of M1 = (A B) by permutations, as follows: the subgroup Sk permutes the ei simultaneously with the fi ; and the rest of Dk swaps evenly many of the ei with their corresponding fi , thus taking U = he1 , . . . , ek i to another coordinate k-plane in OGr(k, 2k). Exercise: The younger reader may enjoy checking that the k − 1 permutations si = (i, i + 1) = (ei ei+1 )(fi fi+1 ) together with sk = (ek fk+1 )(ek+1fk ) are involutions satisfying the standard Coxeter relations of type Dk , especially (sk−1 sk )2 = 1 and (sk−2 sk )3 = 1.  14  3.1.2  Spinor and nonspinor subsets  The spinor sets J ∪ J c index the spinors σJ (introduced in 3.3). Let {ei , fi } be the standard basis of k2k with form ϕ = ( I0 I0 ). There are 2k choices of maximal isotropic subspaces of k2k based by a subset of this basis; each is based by a subset J of {e1 , . . . , ek } together with the complementary subset J c of {f1 , . . . , fk }. The spinor subsets are those for which #J has the same parity as k, or in other words, the complement #J c is even; the nonspinor subsets are those for which #J has the parity of k −1. The spinor set indexes a basis σJ of the spinor space of OGr(k, 2k), and similarly, the nonspinor set indexes the nonspinors σJ′ ′ of his dark twin OGr′ (k, 2k). The standard affine piece of OGr(k, 2k) consists of k-dimensional spaces based by k vectors that one writes as a matrix (I A) with A a skew k × k matrix. The spinor coordinates of (I A) are the 2i × 2i diagonal Pfaffians of A for 0 ≤ i ≤ [ k2 ]. They correspond in an obvious way to the spinor sets just defined and they are the spinors apart from the quibble about taking an overall square root and what bundle they belong to. 3.1.3  Even versus odd  The distinction between k even or odd is crucial for anything to do with O(2k), Dk , spinors, Clifford algebras, etc. The spinor and nonspinor sets correspond to taking a subset J of {e1 , . . . , ek } and the complementary set J c of {f1 , . . . , fk }. The 2k choices correspond to the vertices of a k-cube. When k is even this is a bipartite graph; the spinors and nonspinors form the two parts. By contrast, for odd k, both spinors and nonspinors are indexed by the vertices of the k-cube divided by the antipodal involution ([CR], Section 4 writes out the case k = 5 in detail). For simplicity, I assume that k is even in most of what follows; the common case in applications that I really care about is k = 8. Then J = ∅ and J c = {1, . . . , k} is a spinor set, and the affine pieces represented by (I X) and (Y I) (with skew X or Y ) are in the same component of OGr(k, 2k). The odd case involves related tricks, but with some notable differences of detail (compare [CR], Section 4). 3.1.4  The other component OGr′ and SpH′k  I write OGr′ (k, 2k) for the other component of the maximal isotropic Grassmannian, consisting of subspaces meeting U in odd codimension. Swapping 15  oddly many of the ei and fi interchanges OGr and OGr′ . Likewise, SpH′k is the closure of the G-orbit of the matrix M0′ obtained by interchanging one corresponding pair of columns of M0 . Claim 3.1 Write Vk for the scheme defined by (2.2) (that is, the “variety of complexes”). It has two irreducible components Vk = SpHk ∪ SpH′k containing matrixes of maximal rank k. The two components are generically reduced and intersect in the degenerate locus SpHdgn k . (But one expects Vk to have embedded primes at its smaller strata, as in the discussion around (3.5).) This follows from the properties of spinor minors ∆J discussed in Exercise 3.2.1: the ∆J are k × k minors defined as polynomials on Vk , and vanish on SpH′k but are nonzero on a dense open subset of SpHk .  3.2  A first introduction to OGr(k, 2k) and its spinors  The lines on the quadric surface provide the simplest calculation, and already have lots to teach us about OGr(2, 4) and OGr(k, 2k): the conditions for the 2 × 4 matrix   a b x y (3.1) N= c d z t to be isotropic for ( 0I I0 ) are ax + by = 0,  az + bt + cx + dy = 0,  cz + dt = 0.  (3.2)  Three equations (3.2) generate an ideal IW defining a codimension 3 complete intersection W ⊂ A8 that breaks up into two components Σ⊔Σ′ , corresponding to the two pencils of lines on the quadric surface: the two affine pieces of OGr(2, 4) that consist of matrixes row equivalent to (I A) or (A I), with A a skew matrix, have one of the spinor minors ∆1 = ad − bc or ∆2 = xt − yz nonzero, and dx − bz = at − cy = 0 and dy − bt = −(az − cx)  (3.3)  on them. This follows because all the products of ∆1 , ∆2 with the nonspinors minors dx − bz, at − cy are in IW , as one checks readily. Thus if ∆1 6= 0 (say), I can multiply by the adjoint of the first block to get      ∆1 0 dx − bz dy − bt a b x y d −b (3.4) = 0 ∆1 az − cx at − cy c d z t −c a 16  where the second block is skew. Note that  ∆1 · ∆1 ∆2 − (az − cx)2 ∈ IW .  (3.5)  If ∆1 6= 0, the relations (3.2) imply that we are in Σ. The ideal of Σ is obtained from (3.2) allowing cancellation of ∆1 ; in other words IΣ = [IW : ∆1 ] is the colon ideal with either of the spinor minors ∆1 or ∆2 . The second block in (3.4) is only skew mod IW after cancelling one of a, b, . . . , t; similarly ∆1 ∆2 − (az − cx)2 ∈ / IW , so that (3.5) involves cancelling ∆1 . Thus a geometric description of Σ, Σ′ ⊂ Mat(k, 2k) should usually lead to ideals with embedded primes at their intersection or its smaller strata. Now by relation (3.5), the Plücker embedding takes OGr(2, 4) to the conic XZ = Y 2 , with X = ∆1 = ad − bc, Y = az − cx, Z = ∆2 = xt − yz. This is (P1 , O(2)) parametrised by u2 , uv, v 2 where u, v base H 0 (P1 , O(1)). Thus X = u2 , Y = uv and Z = v 2 on OGr(2, 4); the spinors are u and v. The ratio u : v equals X : Y = Y √ : Z. Each √ of ∆1 and ∆2 vanishes on a double divisor, but the quantities u = ∆1 , v = ∆2 are not themselves polynomial. The conclusion is that the minors ∆1 and ∆2 are spinor squares, that is, squares of sections u, v of a line bundle S, the spinor bundle on OGr(2, 4). If we view OGr(2, 4) as a subvariety of Gr(2, 4), only S ⊗2 extends to V the Plücker line bundle O(1). Embedding OGr(2, 4) in the Plücker space P( 2 C4 ) and taking the affine cone gives the affine spinor variety a OGr(2, 4) as the cone over the conic, and S with its sections u, v as the ruling. In fact a OGr(2, 4) and his dark twin a OGr′ are two ordinary V quadric cones in linearly disjoint vector subspaces of the Plücker space 2 C4 , and the spinor bundle on the union has a divisor class that is a 2-torsion Weil divisor on each component. This picture is of course the orbifold quotient of ±1 acting on two planes A2 meeting transversally in A4 . 3.2.1  Exercise  Generalise the above baby calculation to the subvariety Wk ⊂ Mat(k, 2k) of matrixes (A X) whose k rows span an isotropic space for ( 0I I0 ), or in equations, the k × k product A tX is skew. Assume k is even. (1) Wk ⊂  Mat(k, 2k) is a complete intersection subvariety of codimension k+1 . [Hint: Just a dimension count.] 2  (2) Wk breaks up into two irreducible components Σ∪Σ′ , where Σ contains the space spanned by (I X) with X skew, or more generally, by the span 17  of the columns J ∪ J c for J a spinor set; its nondegenerate points form a principal GL(k) bundle over the two components OGr ⊔ OGr′ of the maximal isotropic Grassmannian. (3) For J a spinor set, the k ×k spinor minor ∆J of (A X) (the determinant of the submatrix formed by the columns J ∪ J c ) is a polynomial on Mat(k × 2k) that vanishes on Σ′ , and vanishes along a double divisor of Σ, that is, twice a prime Weil divisor DJ . (4) The Weil divisors DJ1 and DJ2 corresponding to two spinor sets J1 and J2 are linearly equivalent. [Hint: First suppose that J1 is obtained from J by exactly two transpositions, say (e1 f2 )(e2 f1 ), and argue as in (3.5) to prove that σJ σJ1 restricted to Σ is the square of either minor obtained by just one of the transpositions.] 3.2.2  Spinors on OGr(k, 2k)  The orthogonal Grassmann variety OGr(k, 2k) has a spinor embedding into k−1 P(k2 ), of which the usual Plücker embedding OGr(k, 2k) ⊂ Gr(k, 2k) ֒→ P  k ^  k−1  k2k    is the Veronese square. The space of spinors k2 is a representation of the spin double cover Pin(2k) → O(2k). A point W ∈ OGr(k, 2k) is a k-dimensional subspace W k ⊂ k2k isotropic for ( I0 I0 ) and intersecting U = he1 , . . . , en i in even codimension. I can write a basis as the rows of a k × 2k matrix NW . If I view W as a point of Gr(k, 2k),  its Plücker coordinates are all the k × k minors of NW . There are 2k of k these (that is, 12870 if k = 8), a fraction of which vanish OGr(k, 2k), as the determinant of a skew matrix of odd size. The finer embedding of OGr(k, 2k) is by spinors. The spinors σJ are sections of the spinor line bundle S, 2k−1 of them (which is 128 if k = 8, about 1/100 of the number of Plücker minors). Each comes by taking a k × k submatrix formed by a spinor subset of columns of NW (in other words, restricting to an isotropic coordinate subspace of k2k in the  k  specified component OGr(k, 2k)), taking its 2κ × 2κ minor (where κ = 2 ) and factoring it as the perfect square of a section of S. The only general reason for a 2κ × 2κ minor to be a perfect square is that the submatrix is skew in some 18  basis; in fact, as in (3.4), after taking one fixed square root of a determinant, and making a change of basis, the maximal isotropic space can be written as (I X) with X skew, and the spinors are all the Pfaffians of X.  3.3 3.3.1  Cramer-spinor coordinates on SpHk Geometric interpretation  A point of the open orbit SpH0k ⊂ SpHk is a matrix M of rank k; it defines an isomorphism from a k-dimensional subspace of V1 (the column span of M) to its row span, a maximal isotropic subspace of V2 in the specified component OGr(k, 2k). Therefore the nondegenerate orbit SpH0k ⊂ SpHk has a morphism to P(V1∨ ) × OGr(k, 2k) that makes it a principal GL(k) bundle. The product P(V1∨ ) × OGr(k, 2k) is a projective homogeneous space under G = GL(k + 1) × Pin(2k) k−1 It embeds naturally in the projectivisation of kk+1 ⊗k2 , with the second factor the space of spinors. This is the representation of G with highest weight vector v = (0, . . . , 0, 1) ⊗ (1, 0, . . . , 0). The composite k−1  SpH0k → P(V1∨ ) × OGr(k, 2k) ֒→ P(kk+1 ⊗ k2  )  (3.6)  takes the typical matrix M0 (or equivalently, the complex (2.4)) to v. The Cramer-spinor coordinates of α ∈ SpHk (S) are the bihomogeneous coordinates under the composite map (3.6). 3.3.2  Spinors as polynomials  The spinors σJ occur naturally as sections of the spinor line bundle S on OGr(k, 2k), and so have well defined pullbacks to SpH0k or to any scheme T with a morphism α : T → SpH0k . For σJ to be well defined in H 0 (OT ), the pullback of the spinor line bundle to T must be trivial. Lemma 3.2 Let α ∈ Mor(Spec S, SpHk ) = SpHk (S) be a classifying map as in Theorem 2.5 and write M1 ∈ Mat(S, k + 1, 2k) for its matrix (with entries in S). Then for a spinor set J ∪ J c (as in 3.1.2), the (k + 1) × k submatrix NJ of M1 with columns J ∪ J c has ^k NJ = L · σJ2 , (3.7) where L = (L1 , . . . , Lk+1 ) generates the cokernel of M1 , and σJ ∈ S. 19  3.4  Proof  A classifying map α ∈ SpHk (S) as in Theorem 2.5 restricts to a morphism α from the nondegenerate locus Spec S \ V (IR ) to SpH0k ; on the complement of V (IR ), the matrix M1 has rank k, and its kth wedge defines the composite morphism to the product Pk × Gr(k, 2k) in its Segre embedding: Spec S \ V (IR ) → SpH0k → Pk × OGr(k, 2k)    ^k ֒→ Pk × Gr(k, 2k) ⊂ P kk+1 ⊗ V 2k . (3.8)  V The entries of k NJ are k + 1 coordinates of this morphism, and are of the form Li · σJ2 already on the level of Pk × OGr(k, 2k). Note that Spec S \ V (IR ) is the complement in Spec S = AN of a subset of codimension ≥ 4 so has trivial Pic. Each maximal minor of NJ splits as Li times a polynomial that vanishes on a divisor that is a double (because it is the pullback of the square of a spinor); therefore the polynomial is a perfect square in S. QED The following statement is the remaining basic issue that I am currently unable to settle in general. Conjecture 3.3 Under the assumptions of Lemma 3.3.2, σJ ∈ IR .  This is clear when R is reduced, that is, IR is a radical ideal. Indeed if σJ is a unit at some generic point ξ ∈ V (IR ) = Spec R, then (3.7) implies that IR is generated at ξ by the k × k minors of the (k + 1) × k matrix NJ ; these equations define a codimension 2 subscheme of Spec S, which is a contradiction. This case is sufficient for applications to construction of ordinary varieties, but not of course to Artinian subschemes of A4 . The conjecture also holds under the assumption that IR is generically a codimension 4 complete intersection. Indeed, the resolution of IR near any generic point ξ ∈ V (IR ) is then the 4 × 6 Koszul resolution of the complete intersection direct sum some nonminimal stuff that just add invertible square matrix blocks. Then both the Li and the σJ are locally given by Example 2.1. At present, the thing that seems to make the conjecture hard is that the definition of the σJ and the methods currently available for getting formulas for them consists of working on the nondegenerate locus of SpHk : choose a block diagonal form and take the Pfaffian of a skew complement, . . . This is just not applicable at points σ ∈ V (IR ). 20  The conjecture could possibly be treated by a more direct understanding of the spin morphism Spec S → k2k defined by spinors and nonspinors, not passing via the square Vk root of the Plücker morphism as I do implicitly in Lemma 1 by taking .  4 4.1  Final remarks, open problems Birational structure and dimension of SpHk  A general M = (A B) ∈ SpHk has k + 1 rows that span a maximal isotropic space U ∈ OGr(k, 2k) and 2k columns that span a k-dimensional vector subspace of kk+1 , that I can view as a point of Pk ; thus SpH0k is a principal  GL(k) bundle over Pk ×OGr(k, 2k). In particular, dim SpHk = k 2 +k + k2 = 3k 2 +k . 2  Ik 0 is calculated The tangent space to SpHk at the general point M = 0 0 0   A′  B′  k k by writing an infinitely near matrix as M0 + ak+1 bk+1 ; here the blocks A′k and Bk′ are k × k matrixes, and ak+1 and bk+1 are 1 × k rows. Then the tangent space to Vk defined by A tB = 0 is the affine subspace obtained by setting Bk′ to be skew and bk+1 = 0. Therefore SpHk has codimension  2 k+1 + k and dimension 2k(k + 1) − k+1 − k = 3k 2+k . 2 2 ′ It is interesting to observe that equations (2.2) express SpH  k ∪ SpHk as k+1 an almost complete intersection. Namely, (2.2) is a set of 2 equations in 2 A2k(k+1) vanishing on a variety of dimension 3k 2+k , that is, of codimension  k+1 − 1. 2  4.2  Intermediate rank  The Spin-Hom variety SpHk certainly contains degenerate matrixes M1 of rank k − 1 or k − 2, but any morphism Spec S → SpHk that hits one of these must hit the degeneracy locus in codimension ≤ 3, so does not correspond to anything I need here. The following claim must be true, but I am not sure where it fits in the logical development. Claim 4.1 Every point P ∈ SpHk corresponds to a matrix M1 = (A B) of rank ≤ k. If a morphism α : Spec S → SpHk takes ξ to a matrix M1 of rank k + 1 − i for i = 1, 2, 3, 4 then α−1 (SpHdgn k ) has codimension ≤ i in a neighbourhood of ξ. In other words, a morphism α that is regular in the 21  sense of my requirement never hits matrixes M1 of rank intermediate between k and k − 3; and if α is regular then α−1 (SpHdgn k ) has codimension exactly 4.  4.3  The degeneracy locus as universal subscheme  The proof in 2.6 doesn’t work for SpHk itself in a neighbourhood of a point of SpHdgn k , because taking the reflexive hull, and asserting that P0 is locally free works only over a regular scheme. Moreover, it is not just the proof that goes wrong. I don’t know what happens over the strata of SpHdgn where M1 k drops rank by only 1 or 2. We discuss the speculative hope that SpHdgn ⊂ SpHk has a description k as a kind of universal codimension 4 subscheme, with the inclusions enjoying some kind of Gorenstein adjunction properties. But if this is to be possible at all, we must first discard uninteresting components of SpHdgn corresponding k to matrixes of intermediate rank k − 1 or k − 2. It is possible that there is some universal blowup of some big open in SpHk that supports a Gorenstein codimension 4 subscheme and would be a universal space in a more conventional sense. Or, as the referee suggests, there might be a more basic sense in which appropriate codimension 4 components Γ of the degeneracy locus are universal Gorenstein embeddings, meaning that the adjunction calculation ωΓ = Ext4OSpH (OΓ , ωSpH ) for the dualising sheaf is locally free and commutes with regular pullbacks.  4.4  Koszul syzygies  Expressing the generators of I as a function of the entries of the syzygy V2 matrix is essentially given by the map P1 → P2 that writes the Koszul syzygies as linear combinations of the minimal syzygies. The Li are certainly linear combinations of the entries of M1 . More precisely, since the 2k columns of M1 provide a minimal basis for the syzygies, they cover in particular the Koszul syzygies Li · Lj − Lj · Li ≡ 0. This means that for every i 6= j there is column vector vij with entries in S such that M1 vij = (. . . , Lj , . . . , Li , . . . ) is the column vector with Lj in the ith place and Li in the jth and 0 elsewhere. For example, referring to Example 2.3, you might enjoy the little exercise in linear algebra of finding the vector v = (−λc, λb, 0, 0, 0, d, e, g, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) for which v tM1 = (−λab − dh + ef, −λac − eh + f g, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0), 22  where tM1 is the matrix of (2.8), and similarly for 35 other values of i, j.  4.5  More general ambient ring S  I restrict to the case of ideals in a graded polynomial ring over a field of characteristic 6= 2 in the belief that progress in this case will surely be followed by the more general case of a regular local ring. Then P2 is still a free module, with a perfect symmetric bilinear form S 2 (P2 ) → P4 , with respect to which P1 ← P2 is the dual of P2 ← P3 . This can be put in the form ( 0I I0 ) over the residue field k0 = S/mS of S if we assume that k(S) is algebraically closed and contains 12 ; we can do the same over S itself if we assume that S is complete (to use Hensel’s Lemma). At some point if we feel the need for general regular rings, we can probably live with a perfect quadratic form ϕ and the dualities it provides, without the need for the normal form ( I0 I0 ).  4.6  More general rings and modules  Beyond the narrow question of Gorenstein codimension 4, one could ask for the structure of any free resolution of an S-module M or S-algebra R. As in 2.2, one can say exactly what the general fibre is, and think of the complex P• as a fibre bundle over S \ Supp M with some product of linear groups as structure group. If we are doing R-algebras, the complex P• also has a symmetric bilinear structure, that reduces the structure group. My point is that if we eventually succeed in making some progress with Gorenstein codimension 4 rings, we might hope to also get some ideas about Cohen– Macaulay codimension 3 and Gorenstein codimension 5. For example, in vague terms, there is a fairly clear strategy how to find a key variety for the resolution complexes of Gorenstein codimension 5 ideals, by analogy with my Main Theorem 2.5. In this case, the resolution has the shape 0 ← P0 ← P1 ← P2 ← P3 ← P4 ← P5 ← 0, (4.1) with P0 = S, P1 = (a + 1)S, P2 = (a + b)S and P3 , . . . , P5 their duals. The complex is determined by two syzygy matrixes M1 ∈ Mat(a + 1, a + b) of generic rank a defining P1 ← P2 and a symmetric (a+b)×(a+b) matrix M2 of generic rank b defining P2 ← P3 = P2∨ , constrained by the complex condition  M1 M2 = 0. The “general fibre” is given by the pair M1 = ( I0a 00 ), M2 = 00 I0b , the appropriate key variety is its closed orbit under GL(a + 1) × GL(a + b). 23  The maximal nonzero minors of M1 and M2 define a map to a highest weight orbit in a a b ^  ^  ^ 2 Hom P2 , P1 × Sym P2 .  4.7  Difficulties with applications  I expand what the introduction said about the theory currently not being applicable. We now possess hundreds of constructions of codimension 4 Gorenstein varieties, for example, the Fano 3-folds of [TJ], but their treatment (for example, as Kustin–Miller unprojections) has almost nothing to do with the structure theory developed here. My Main Theorem 2.5 does not as it stands construct anything, because it does not say how to produce morphisms α : Spec S → SpHk , or predict their properties. The point that must be understood is not the key variety SpHk itself, but rather the space of morphisms Mor(Spec S, SpHk ), which may be intractable or infinitely complicated (in the sense of Vakil’s Murphy’s law [Va]); there are a number of basic questions here that I do not yet understand. Even given α, we do not really know how to write out the equations (L1 , . . . , Lk+1 ), other than by the implicit procedure of taking hcfs of k × k minors. One hopes for a simple formula for the defining relations Li as a function of the first syzygy matrix M1 = (A B). Instead, one gets Vk the vector (L1 , . . . , Lk+1 ) by taking out the highest common factor from MI for any spinor subset I, asserting that it is a perfect square σJ2 . The disadvantage is that as it stands this is only implicitly a formula for the Li .  4.8  Obstructed constructions  One reason that Mor(S, SpHk ) is complicated is that the target is big and singular and needs many equations. However, there are also contexts in which S-valued points of much simpler varieties already give families of Gorenstein codimension 4 ideals that are obstructed in interesting ways. Given a 2V × 4 matrix A = ( ab11 ab22 ab33 ab44 ) with entries in a regular ring S, the 6 equations 2 A = 0 define a Cohen–Macaulay codimension 3 subvariety V ⊂ Spec S. An elephant X ∈ |−KV | is then a Gorenstein subvariety of codimension 4 with a 9 × 16 resolution. If we are in the “generic” case with 8 independent indeterminate entries, V is the affine cone over Segre(P1 × P3 ), and X is a cone over a divisor of bidegree (k, k + 2) in Segre(P1 × P3 ). 24  Although X ⊂ V is a divisor, if we are obliged to treat it by equations in the ambient space Spec S, it needs 3 equations in “rolling factors format”. The general case of this is contained in Dicks’ thesis [Di], [R1]: choose two vectors m1 , m2 , m3 , m4 and n1 , n2 , n3 , n4 , and assume that the identity X X ai ni ≡ bi mi (4.2)  holds as an equality in the ambient ring S. Then the 3 equations X X X X ai mi = bi mi ≡ ai ni = bi ni = 0  (4.3)  define a hypersurface X ⊂ V that is an elephant X ∈ |−KV | and thus a Gorenstein subvariety with 9 × 16 resolution. The problem in setting up the data defining X is then to find solutions in S of (4.2). In other words, these are S-valued points of the affine quadric cone Q16 , or morphisms Spec S → Q16 . How to map a regular ambient space to the quadratic cone Q16 is a small foretaste of the more general problem of the classifying map Spec S → SpHk . This case is discussed further in [Ki], Example 10.8, which in particular writes out explicitly the relation between (4.3) and the classifying map Spec S → SpHk of Theorem 2.5. There are many quite different families of solutions to this problem, depending on what assumptions we make about the graded ring S, and how general we take the matrix A to be; different solutions have a number of important applications to construction and moduli of algebraic varieties, including my treatment of the Horikawa quintic n-folds. Another illustration of the phenomenon arises in a recent preprint of Catanese, Liu and Pignatelli [CLP]. Take the 5 × 5 skew matrix   v u z2 D  z1 y m25   (4.4) M =  l m35  m45 with entries in a regular ring S0 , and suppose that v, u, z2, D forms a regular sequence in S. Assume that the identity z1 m45 − ym35 + lm25 ≡ av + bu + cz2 + dD  (4.5)  holds as an equality in S0 . The identity (4.5) puts the Pfaffian Pf 23.45 in the ideal (v, u, z2 , D); the other 4 Pfaffians are in the same ideal for the trivial reason that every term involves one entry from the top row of M. 25  This is a new way of setting up the data for a Kustin–Miller unprojection: write Y ⊂ Spec S0 for the codimension 3 Gorenstein subscheme defined by the Pfaffians of M. It contains the codimension 4 complete intersection V (v, u, z2 , D) as a codimension 1 subscheme, and unprojecting V in Y adjoins an unprojection variable x2 having 4 linear equations x2 · (v, u, z2, D) = · · · , giving a codimension 4 Gorenstein ring with 9 × 16 resolution. The problem of how to fix (4.5) as an identity in S0 is again a question of the S0 -valued points of a quadric cone, this time a quadric Q14 of rank 14. [CLP], Proposition 5.13 find two different families of solutions, and exploit this to give a local description of the moduli of their surfaces. At first sight this looks a bit like a Jerry15 unprojection. In fact one of the families of [CLP] (the one with c0 = Bx = 0) can easily be massaged to a conventional Jerry15 having a double Jerry structure (compare [TJ], 9.2), but this does not seem possible for the more interesting family in [CLP] with Dx = (l/c0 )Bx . Question Do these theoretical calculations contain the results of [Di], [CLP] and the like? Answer Absolutely not. They may provide a framework that can produce examples, or simplify and organise the construction of examples. To get complete moduli spaces, it is almost always essential to use other methods, notably infinitesimal deformation calculations or geometric constructions. Question The fact that S can have various gradings seems to add to the complexity of the space Mor(S, SpHk ), doesn’t it? Answer That may not be the right interpretation – we could perhaps think that Mor(S, SpHk ) (or even the same just for Mor(S, Q2k ) into a quadric of rank 2k ≥ 4) is infinite dimensional and infinitely complicated, so subject to Murphy’s law [Va], but that when we cut it down to graded in given degrees, it becomes finitely determined, breaking up into a number of finite dimensional families that may be a bit singular, but can be studied with success in favourable cases.  4.9 4.9.1  Problem session Computing project  It is a little project in computer algebra to write an algorithm to put the projective resolution (2.1) in symmetric form. This might just be a straight26  forward implementation of the Buchsbaum–Eisenbud symmetrised complex S 2 P• outlined in Section 1. Any old computer algebra package can do syzygies, but as far as I know, none knows about the symmetry in the Gorenstein case. We now have very many substantial working constructions of codimension 4 Gorenstein varieties. We know in principle that the matrix of first syzygies can be written out in the (A B) form of (2.8), but as things stand, it takes a few hours or days of pleasurable puzzling to do any particular case. 4.9.2  Linear subvarieties  What are the linear subvarieties of SpHk ? The linear question may be tractable, and may provide a partial answer to the quest for an explicit structure result. The Spin-Hom variety SpHk is defined near a general point by quadratic equations, so its linear subspaces can be studied by the tangent-cone construction by analogy with the linear subspaces of quadrics, Segre products or Grassmannians: the tangent plane TP at P ∈ V intersects V in a cone, so that linear subspaces of V through P correspond to linear subspaces in the base of the cone. Now choose a point of the projected variety and continue. Presumably at each stage there are a finite number of strata of the variety in which to choose our point P , giving a finite number of types of Π up to symmetry. I believe that the two famous cases of the Segre models of P2 × P2 and P1 × P1 × P1 are maximal linear space of SpH8 . It is possible that this method can be used to understand more general morphisms Spec S → SpHk from the regular space Spec S. In this context, it is very suggestive that Tom and Jerry [TJ] are given in terms of linear subspaces of Gr(2, 5). In this case, the intersection with a tangent space is a cone over P1 × P2 , so it is clear how to construct all linear subspaces of Gr(2, 5), and equally clear that there are two different families, and how they differ. 4.9.3  Breaking the Ak and Dk symmetry  Experience shows that the bulk constructions of Gorenstein codimension 4 ideals do not have the symmetry of the Buchsbaum–Eisenbud Pfaffians in codimension 3. The equations and syzygies invariably divide up into subsets that one is supposed to treat inhomogeneously. For example, in the 9 × 16 27  unprojection cases, the defining equations split into two sets, the 5 Pfaffian equations of the variety in codimension 3 not involving the unprojection variable s, and the 4 unprojection equations that are linear in s. The columns of the syzygy matrix (A B) are governed by the algebraic group Spin(2k) of type Dk , whereas its rows are governed by GL(k + 1) of type Ak . The common bulk constructions of Gorenstein codimension 4 ideals seem to to accommodate the Ak symmetry of the rows of M1 and the Dk symmetry of its columns by somehow breaking both to make them compatible. This arises if you try to write the 128 spinor coordinates σJ as linear combinations of the 9 relations (L1 , . . . , Lk+1), so relating something to do with the columns of M1 to its rows. This symmetry breaking and its effect is fairly transparent in 2.3, Example 2.2, (2.6). Example 2.3 is more typical. (This case comes with three different Tom projections, so may be more amenable.) Of the 128 spinors σJ , it turns out that 14 are zero, 62 are of the form a monomial times one of the relations Li (as in (2.9)), and the remainder are more complicated (probably always a sum of two such products). Mapping this out creates a correspondence from spinor sets to relations, so from the rows of M1 to its columns; there is obviously a systematic structure going on here, and nailing it down is an intriguing puzzle. How this plays out more generally for Kustin–Miller unprojection [KM], [PR] and its special cases Tom and Jerry [TJ] is an interesting challenge. 4.9.4  Open problems  To be useful, a structure theory should make some predictions. I hope that the methods of this paper will eventually be applicable to start dealing with issues such as the following: • k = 3. A 4 × 6 resolution is a Koszul complex. • k = 4. There are no almost complete intersection Gorenstein ideals. Equivalently, a 5 × 8 resolution is nonminimal: if X is Gorenstein codimension 4 and (L1 , . . . , L5 ) generate IX then the first syzygy matrix M1 has a unit entry, making one of the Li redundant. This is a well known theorem of Kunz [K], but I want to deduce it by my methods. • k = 5. Is it true that a 6 × 10 resolution is a hypersurface in a 5 × 5 Pfaffian as in 2.3, Example 2.2? 28  The same question for more general odd k: are hypersurfaces in a codimension 3 Gorenstein varieties the only cases? Is this even true for all the known examples in the literature? This might relate to my even versus odd remark in 3.1.3. • k = 6. I would like to know whether every case of 7 × 12 resolution is the known Kustin–Miller unprojection from a codimension 4 complete intersection divisor in a codimension 3 complete intersection. • k = 8. As everyone knows, the main case is 9×16. How do we apply the theory to add anything useful to the huge number of known examples? There are hints that something along these lines may eventually be possible, but it is not in place yet.  References [TJ]  Gavin Brown, Michael Kerber and Miles Reid, Fano 3-folds in codimension 4, Tom and Jerry. Part I, Compositio Math. 148 (2012) 1171–1194  [BE1] David Buchsbaum and David Eisenbud, What makes a complex exact? J. Algebra 25 (1973) 259–268 [BE2] David Buchsbaum and David Eisenbud, Algebra structures for finite free resolutions, and some structure theorems for ideals of codimension 3, Amer. J. Math. 99 (1977) 447–485 [CLP] Fabrizio Catanese, LIU Wenfei, Roberto Pignatelli, The moduli space of even surfaces of general type with K 2 = 8, pg = 4 and q = 0, arXiv:1209.0034, 29 pp. [CR]  A. Corti and M. Reid, Weighted Grassmannians, in Algebraic geometry, de Gruyter, Berlin, 2002, pp. 141–163  [Di]  Duncan Dicks, Surfaces with pg = 3, K 2 = 4 and extensiondeformation theory, 1988, Warwick PhD thesis, 125 + vi pp. (available from my website)  [FH]  W. Fulton and J. Harris, Representation theory. A first course, Grad. Texts in Math. 129, Springer-Verlag, New York 1991 29  [GW] GOTO Shiro and WATANABE Keiichi, On graded rings. I, J. Math. Soc. Japan 30 (1978) 179–213 [K]  Ernst Kunz, Almost complete intersections are not Gorenstein rings, J. Algebra 28 (1974) 111–115  [KM]  A. Kustin and M. Miller, Constructing big Gorenstein ideals from small ones, J. Algebra 85 (1983) 303–322  [PR]  Stavros Argyrios Papadakis and Miles Reid, Kustin–Miller unprojection without complexes, J. Algebraic Geom. 13 (2004) 563–577, Preprint math.AG/0011094  [Ki]  M. Reid, Graded rings and birational geometry, in Proc. of algebraic geometry symposium (Kinosaki, Oct 2000), K. Ohno (Ed.), 1–72, get from www.warwick.ac.uk/staff/Miles.Reid/3folds  [R1]  M. Reid, Surfaces with pg = 3, K 2 = 4 according to E. Horikawa and D. Dicks, in Proceedings of Algebraic geometry mini-symposium (Tokyo, Dec 1989), 1–22  [Va]  Ravi Vakil, Murphy’s law in algebraic geometry: badly-behaved deformation spaces, Invent. Math. 164 (2006) 569–590  Miles Reid, Mathematics Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, England e-mail: Miles.Reid@warwick.ac.uk  30

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
