Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_2494

Abstract:
Error Reporting in Parsing Expression Grammars André Murbach Maidl Polytechnic School – PUCPR – Curitiba – Brazil  Fabio Mascarenhas Department of Computer Science – UFRJ – Rio de Janeiro – Brazil  arXiv:1405.6646v3 [cs.PL] 13 Jul 2016  Sérgio Medeiros School of Science and Technology – UFRN – Natal – Brazil  Roberto Ierusalimschy Department of Computer Science – PUC-Rio – Rio de Janeiro – Brazil  Abstract Parsing Expression Grammars (PEGs) describe top-down parsers. Unfortunately, the errorreporting techniques used in conventional top-down parsers do not directly apply to parsers based on Parsing Expression Grammars (PEGs), so they have to be somehow simulated. While the PEG formalism has no account of semantic actions, actual PEG implementations add them, and we show how to simulate an error-reporting heuristic through these semantic actions. We also propose a complementary error reporting strategy that may lead to better error messages: labeled failures. This approach is inspired by exception handling of programming languages, and lets a PEG define different kinds of failure, with each ordered choice operator specifying which kinds it catches. Labeled failures give a way to annotate grammars for better error reporting, to express some of the error reporting strategies used by deterministic parser combinators, and to encode predictive top-down parsing in a PEG. Keywords: parsing, error reporting, parsing expression grammars, packrat parsing, parser combinators  1. Introduction When a parser receives an erroneous input, it should indicate the existence of syntax errors. Errors can be handled in various ways. The easiest is just to report that an error Email addresses: andre.murbach@pucpr.br (André Murbach Maidl), mascarenhas@ufrj.br (Fabio Mascarenhas), sergiomedeiros@ect.ufrn.br (Sérgio Medeiros), roberto@inf.puc-rio.br (Roberto Ierusalimschy) Preprint submitted to Science of Computer Programming  July 14, 2016  was found, where is was found and what was expected at that point and then abort. At the other end of the spectrum we find mechanisms that attempt to parse the complete input, and report as many errors as best as possible. The LL(k) and LR(k) methods detect syntax errors very efficiently because they have the viable prefix property, that is, these methods detect a syntax error as soon as k tokens are read and cannot be used to extend the thus far accepted part of the input into a viable prefix of the language [1]. LL(k) and LR(k) parsers can use this property to produce suitable, though generic, error messages. Parsing Expression Grammars (PEGs) [2] are a formalism for describing the syntax of programming languages. We can view a PEG as a formal description of a top-down parser for the language it describes. PEGs have a concrete syntax based on the syntax of regexes, or extended regular expressions. Unlike Context-Free Grammars (CFGs), PEGs avoid ambiguities in the definition of the grammar’s language due to the use of an ordered choice operator. More specifically, a PEG can be interpreted as a the specification of a recursive descent parser with restricted (or local) backtracking. This means that the alternatives of a choice are tried in order; as soon as an alternative recognizes an input prefix, no other alternative of this choice will be tried, but when an alternative fails to recognize an input prefix, the parser backtracks to try the next alternative. On the one hand, PEGs can be interpreted as a formalization of a specific class of topdown parsers [2]; on the other hand, PEGs cannot use error handling techniques that are often applied to predictive top-down parsers, because these techniques assume the parser reads the input without backtracking [3]. In top-down parsers without backtracking, it is possible to signal a syntax error as soon as the next input symbol cannot be accepted. In PEGs, it is more complicated to identify the cause of an error and the position where it occurs, because failures during parsing are not necessarily errors, but just an indication that the parser cannot proceed and a different choice should be made elsewhere. Ford [3] has already identified this limitation of error reporting in PEGs, and, in his parser generators for PEGs, included an heuristic for better error reporting. This heuristic simulates the error reporting technique that is implemented in top-down parsers without backtracking. The idea is to track the position in the input where the farthest failure occurred, as well as what the parser was expecting at that point, and report this to the user in case of errors. Tracking the farthest failure position and context gives us PEGs that produce error messages similar to the automatically produced error messages of other top-down parsers; they tell the user the position where the error was encountered, what was found in the input at that position, and what the parser was expecting to find. In this paper, we show how grammar writers can use this error reporting technique even in PEG implementations that do not implement it, by making use of semantic actions that expose the current position in the input and the possibility to access some form of mutable state associated with the parsing process. We also propose a complementary approach for error reporting in PEGs, based on the concept of labeled failures, inspired by the standard exception handling mechanisms as found 2  Tiny CmdSeq Cmd IfCmd RepeatCmd AssignCmd ReadCmd WriteCmd Exp SimpleExp Term Factor  ← CmdSeq ← (Cmd SEMICOLON) (Cmd SEMICOLON)∗ ← IfCmd / RepeatCmd / AssignCmd / ReadCmd / WriteCmd ← IF Exp THEN CmdSeq (ELSE CmdSeq / ε) END ← REPEAT CmdSeq UNTIL Exp ← NAME ASSIGNMENT Exp ← READ NAME ← WRITE Exp ← SimpleExp ((LESS / EQUAL) SimpleExp / ε) ← Term ((ADD / SUB) Term)∗ ← Factor ((MUL / DIV) Factor )∗ ← OPENPAR Exp CLOSEPAR / NUMBER / NAME Figure 1: A PEG for the Tiny language  in programming languages. Instead of just failing, a labeled PEG can produce different kinds of failure labels using a throw operator. Each label can be tied to a more specific error message. PEGs can also catch such labeled failures, via a change to the ordered choice operator. We formalize labeled failures as an extension of the semantics of regular PEGs. With labeled PEGs we can express some alternative error reporting techniques for topdown parsers with local backtracking. We can also encode predictive parsing in a PEG, and we show how to do that for LL(∗) parsing, a powerful predictive parsing strategy. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 contextualizes the problem of error handling in PEGs, explains in detail the failure tracking heuristic, and shows how it can be realized in PEG implementations that do not support it directly; Section 3 discusses related work on error reporting for top-down parsers with backtracking; Section 4 introduces and formalizes the concept of labeled failures, and shows how to use it for error reporting; Section 5 compares the error messages generated by a parser based on the failure tracking heuristic with the ones generated by a parser based on labeled failures; Section 6 shows how labeled failures can encode some of the techniques of Section 3, as well as predictive parsing; finally, Section 7 gives some concluding remarks. 2. Handling Syntax Errors with PEGs In this section, we use examples to present in more detail how a PEG behaves badly in the presence of syntax errors. After that, we present a heuristic proposed by Ford [3] to implement error reporting in PEGs. Rather than using the original notation and semantics of PEGs given by Ford [2], our examples use the equivalent and more concise notation and 3  semantics proposed by Medeiros et al. [4, 5, 6]. We will extend both the notation and the semantics in Section 4 to present PEGs with labeled failures. A PEG G is a tuple (V, T, P, pS ) where V is a finite set of non-terminals, T is a finite set of terminals, P is a total function from non-terminals to parsing expressions and pS is the initial parsing expression. We describe the function P as a set of rules of the form A ← p, where A ∈ V and p is a parsing expression. A parsing expression, when applied to an input string, either fails or consumes a prefix of the input and returns the remaining suffix. The abstract syntax of parsing expressions is given as follows, where a is a terminal, A is a non-terminal, and p, p1 and p2 are parsing expressions: p = ε | a | A | p1 p2 | p1 /p2 | p ∗ | !p Intuitively, ε successfully matches the empty string, not changing the input; a matches and consumes itself or fails otherwise; A tries to match the expression P (A); p1 p2 tries to match p1 followed by p2 ; p1 /p2 tries to match p1 ; if p1 fails, then it tries to match p2 ; p∗ repeatedly matches p until p fails, that is, it consumes as much as it can from the input; the matching of !p succeeds if the input does not match p and fails when the the input matches p, not consuming any input in either case; we call it the negative predicate or the lookahead predicate. Figure 1 presents a PEG for the Tiny language [7]. Tiny is a simple programming language with a syntax that resembles Pascal’s. We will use this PEG, which can be seen as the equivalent of an LL(1) CFG, to show how error reporting differs between top-down parsers without backtracking and PEGs. PEGs usually express the language syntax at the character level, without the need of a separate lexer. For instance, we can write the lexical rule IF as follows, assuming we have non-terminals Skip, which consumes whitespace, and IDRest, which consumes any character that may be present on a proper suffix of an identifier1 : IF ← if !IDRest Skip Now, we present an example of erroneous Tiny code so we can compare approaches for error reporting. The program in Figure 2 is missing a semicolon (;) in the assignment in line 5. A predictive top-down parser that aborts on the first error presents an error message like: factorial.tiny:6:1: syntax error, unexpected ’until’, expecting ’;’ The error is reported in line 6 because the parser cannot complete a valid prefix of the language, since it unexpectedly finds the token until when it was expecting a command terminator (;). In PEGs, we can try to report errors using the remaining suffix, but this approach usually does not help the PEG produce an error message like the one shown above. In general, when 1  In the presented PEG, we omitted the lexical rules for brevity.  4  01 02 03 04 05 06 07  n := 5; f := 1; repeat f := f * n; n := n - 1 until (n < 1); write f; Figure 2: Program for the Tiny Language with a Syntax Error  a PEG finishes parsing the input, a remaining non-empty suffix means that parsing did not reach the end of file due to a syntax error. However, this suffix usually does not indicate the actual place of the error, as the error will have caused the PEG to backtrack to another place in the input. In our example, the problem happens when the PEG tries to recognize the sequence of commands inside the repeat command. Even though the program has a missing semicolon (;) in the assignment in line 5, making the PEG fail to recognize the sequence of commands inside the repeat command, this failure is not treated as an error. Instead, this failure makes the recognition of the repeat command also fail. For this reason, the PEG backtracks the input to line 3 to try to parse other alternatives for CmdSeq, and since these do not exist, its ancestor Cmd. Since it is not possible to recognize a command other than repeat at line 3, the parsing finishes without consuming all the input. Hence, if the PEG uses the remaining suffix to produce an error message, the PEG reports line 3 instead of line 6 as the location where no further progress can be made. There is no perfect method to identify which information is the most relevant to report an error. In our example it is easy for the parser to correctly report what the error is, but it is easy to construct examples where this is not the case. If we add the semicolon in the end of line 6 and remove line 3, a predictive top-down parser would complain about finding an until where it expected another statement, while the actual error is a missing repeat. According to Ford [3], using the information of the farthest position that the PEG reached in the input is a heuristic that provides good results. PEGs define top-down parsers and try to recognize the input from left to right, so the position farthest to the right in the input that a PEG reaches during parsing usually is close to the real error [3]. The same idea for error reporting in top-down parsings with backtracking was also mentioned in Section 16.2 of [8]. Ford used this heuristic to add error reporting to his PEG implementation using packrat parsers [3]. A packrat parser generated by Pappy [9], Ford’s PEG parser generator, tracks the farthest position and uses this position to report an error. In other words, this heuristic helps packrat parsers to simulate the error reporting technique that is implemented in deterministic parsers. Although Ford only has discussed his heuristic in relation to packrat parsers, we can use the farthest position heuristic to add error reporting to any implementation of PEGs that 5  provides semantic actions. The idea is to annotate the grammar with semantic actions that track this position. While this seems onerous, we just need to add annotations to all the lexical rules to implement error reporting. For instance, in Leg [10], a PEG parser generator with Yacc-style semantic actions, we can annotate the rule for SEMICOLON as follows, where | is Leg’s ordered choice operator, and following it is a semantic action (in the notation used by Leg): SEMICOLON = ";" Skip | &{ updateffp() } The function updateffp that the semantic action calls updates the farthest failure position in a global variable if the current parsing position is greater than the position that is stored in this global, then makes the whole action fail so parsing continues as if the original failure had occurred. However, storing just the farthest failure position does not give the parser all the information it needs to produce an informative error message. That is, the parser has the information about the position where the error happened, but it lacks the information about what terminals failed at that position. Thus, we extend our approach by including the terminals in the annotations so the parser can also track these names in order to compute the set of expected terminals at a certain position: SEMICOLON = ";" Skip | &{ updateffp(";") } The extended implementation of updateffp keeps, for a given failure position, the names of all the symbols expected there. If the current position is greater than the farthest failure, updateffp initializes this set with just the given name. If the current position equals the farthest failure, updateffp adds this name to the set. Parsers generated by Pappy also track the set of expected terminals, but with limitations. The error messages include only symbols and keywords that were defined in the grammar as literal strings. That is, the error messages do not include terminals that were defined through character classes. Our approach of naming terminals in the semantic actions avoids the kind of limitation found in Pappy, though it increases the annotation burden because the implementor of the PEG is also responsible for adding one semantic action for each terminal and its respective name. The annotation burden can be lessened in implementations of PEGs that treat parsing expressions as first-class objects, because this makes it possible to define functions that annotate the lexical parts of the grammar to track errors, record information about the expected terminals to produce good error messages, and enforce lexical conventions such as the presence of surrounding whitespace. For instance, in LPEG [11, 12], a PEG implementation for Lua that defines patterns as first-class objects, we can annotate the rule CmdSeq as follows, where the patterns V"A", p1 * p2, and p^0 are respectively equivalent to parsing expressions A, p1 p2 , and p∗ (in the notation used by LPEG): CmdSeq = V"Cmd" * symb(";") * (V"Cmd" * symb(";"))^0; 6  The function symb receives a string as its only argument and returns a parser that is equivalent to the parsing expression that we used in the Leg example. That is, symb(";") is equivalent to ";" Skip | &{ updateffp(";") }. We implemented error tracking and reporting using semantic actions as a set of parsing combinators on top of LPeg and used these combinators to implement a PEG parser for Tiny. It produces the following error message for the example we have been using in this section: factorial.tiny:6:1: syntax error, unexpected ’until’, expecting ’;’, ’=’, ’<’, ’-’, ’+’, ’/’, ’*’ We tested this PEG parser for Tiny with other erroneous inputs and in all cases the parser identified an error in the same place as a top-down parser without backtracking. In addition, the parser for Tiny produced error messages that are similar to the error messages produced by packrat parsers generated by Pappy. We annotated other grammars and successfully obtained similar results. However, the error messages are still generic; they are not as specific as the error messages of a hand-written top-down parser. 3. Error Reporting in Top-Down Parsers with Backtracking In this section, we discuss alternative approaches for error reporting in top-down parsers with backtracking. Mizushima et al. [13] proposed a cut operator (↑) to reduce the space consumption of packrat parsers; the authors claimed that the cut operator can also be used to implement error reporting in packrat parsers, but the authors did not give any details on how the cut operator could be used for this purpose. The cut operator is borrowed from Prolog to annotate pieces of a PEG where backtracking should be avoided. PEGs’ ordered choice works in a similar way to Prolog’s green cuts, that is, they limit backtracking to discard unnecessary solutions. The cut proposed for PEGs is a way to implement Prolog’s white cuts, that is, they prevent backtracking to rules that will certainly fail. The semantics of cut is similar to the semantics of an if-then-else control structure and can be simulated through predicates. For instance, the PEG (with cut) A ← B ↑ C/D is functionally equivalent to the PEG (without cut) A ← BC/!BD that is also functionally equivalent to the rule A ← B[C, D] on Generalized Top-Down Parsing Language (GTDPL), one of the parsing techniques that influenced the creation of PEGs [3, 9, 2]. On the three cases, the expression D is tried only if the expression B fails. Nevertheless, this translated PEG still backtracks whenever B successfully matches and C fails. Thus, it is not trivial to use this translation to implement error reporting in PEGs. Rats! [14] is a popular packrat parser that implements error reporting with a strategy similar to Ford’s, with the change that it always reports error positions at the start of productions, and pretty-prints non-terminal names in the error message. For example, an error in a ReturnStatement non-terminal becomes return statement expected. Even though error handling is an important task for parsers, we did not find any other research results about error handling in PEGs, beyond the heuristic proposed by Ford and 7  the cut operator proposed by Mizushima et al. However, parser combinators [15] present some similarities with PEGs so we will briefly discuss them for the rest of this section. In functional programming it is common to implement recursive descent parsers using parser combinators [15]. A parser is a function that we use to model symbols of the grammar. A parser combinator is a higher-order function that we use to implement grammar constructions such as sequencing and choice. One kind of parser combinator implements parsers that return a list of all possible results of a parse, effectively implementing a recursive descent parser with full backtracking. Despite being actually deterministic in behavior (parsing the same input always yields the same list of results), these combinators are called non-deterministic parser combinators due to their use of a non-deterministic choice operator. We get parser combinators that have the same semantics as PEGs by changing the return type from list of results to Maybe. That is, we use deterministic parser combinators that return Maybe to implement recursive descent parsers with limited backtracking [16]. In the rest of this paper, whenever we refer to parser combinators we intend to refer to these parser combinators with limited backtracking. Like PEGs, most deterministic parser combinator libraries also use ordered choice, and thus suffer from the same problems as PEGs with erroneous inputs, where the point that the parser reached in the input is ususally far away from the point of the error. Hutton [15] introduced the nofail combinator to implement error reporting in a quite simple way: we just need to distinguish between failure and error during parsing. More specifically, we can use the nofail combinator to annotate the grammar’s terminals and non-terminals that should not fail; when they fail, the failure should be transformed into an error. The difference between an error and a failure is that an ordered choice just propagates an error in its first alternative instead of backtracking and trying its second alternative, so any error aborts the whole parser. This technique is also called the three-values technique [17] because the parser finishes with one of the following values: OK, Fail or Error. Röjemo [18] presented a cut combinator that we can also use to annotate the grammar pieces where parsing should be aborted on failure, on behalf of efficiency and error reporting. The cut combinator is different from the cut operator2 (↑) for PEGs because the combinator is abortive and unary while the operator is not abortive and nullary. The cut combinator introduced by Röjemo has the same semantics as the nofail combinator introduced by Hutton. Partridge and Wright [17] showed that error detection can be automated in parser combinators when we assume that the grammar is LL(1). Their main idea is: if one alternative successfully consumes at least one symbol, no other alternative can successfully consume any symbols. Their technique is also known as the four-values technique because the parser finishes with one of the following values: Epsn, when the parser finishes with success without consuming any input; OK, when the parser finishes with success consuming some input; Fail, when the parser fails without consuming any input; and Error, when the parser fails consuming some input. Three values were inspired by Hutton’s work [15], but with new 2  Throughout this paper, we refer to combinators of parser combinators and to operators of PEGs, but these terms are effectively interchangeable.  8  p1 Error Error Error Error Fail Fail Fail Fail Epsn Epsn Epsn Epsn OK (x) OK (x) OK (x) OK (x)  p2 Error Fail Epsn OK (x) Error Fail Epsn OK (x) Error Fail Epsn OK (x) Error Fail Epsn OK (y)  p1 p2 Error Error Error Error Fail Fail Fail Fail Error Fail Epsn OK (x) Error Error OK (x) OK (y)  p1 | p2 Error Error Error Error Error Fail Epsn OK (x) Error Epsn Epsn OK (x) OK (x) OK (x) OK (x) OK (x)  Table 1: Behavior of sequence and choice in the four-values technique  meanings. In the four-values technique, we do not need to annotate the grammar because the authors changed the semantics of the sequence and choice combinators to automatically generate the Error value according to the Table 1. In summary, the sequence combinator propagates an error when the second parse fails after consuming some input while the choice combinator does not try further alternatives if the current one consumed at least one symbol from the input. In case of error, the four-values technique detects the first symbol following the longest parse of the input and uses this symbol to report an error. The four-values technique assumes that the input is composed by tokens which are provided by a separate lexer. However, being restricted to LL(1) grammars can be a limitation because parser combinators, like PEGs, usually operate on strings of characters to implement both lexer and parser together. For instance, a parser for Tiny that is implemented with Parsec [19] does not parse the following program: read x;. That is, the matching of read against repeat generates an error. Such behavior is confirmed in Table 1 by the third line from the bottom. Parsec is a parser combinator library for Haskell that employs a technique equivalent to the four-values technique for implementing LL(1) predictive parsers that automatically report errors [19]. To overcome the LL(1) limitation, Parsec introduced the try combinator, a dual of Hutton’s nofail combinator. The effect of try is to translate an error into a backtrackeable failure. The idea is to use try to annotate the parts of the grammar where arbitrary lookahead is needed. Parsec’s restriction to LL(1) grammars made it possible to implement an error reporting 9  technique similar to the one used in top-down parsers. Parsec produces error messages that include the error position, the character at this position and the FIRST and FOLLOW sets of the productions that were expected at this position. Parsec also implements the error injection combinator (<?>) for naming productions. This combinator gets two arguments: a parser p and a string exp. The string exp replaces the FIRST set of a parser p when all the alternatives of p failed. This combinator is useful to name terminals and non-terminals to get better information about the context of a syntax error. Swierstra and Duponcheel [20] showed an implementation of parser combinators for error recovery, although most libraries and parser generators that are based on parser combinators implement only error reporting. Their work relies on the fact that the grammar is LL(1) and shows an implementation of parser combinators that repairs erroneous inputs, produces an appropriated message, and continues parsing the rest of the input. This approach was later extended to also deal with grammars that are not LL(1), including ambiguous grammars [21]. The extended approach relies heavily on some features that the implementation language should have, such as lazy evaluation. 4. Labeled Failures Exceptions are a common mechanism for signaling and handling errors in programming languages. Exceptions let programmers classify the different errors their programs may signal by using distinct types for distinct errors, and decouple error handling from regular program logic. In this section we add labeled failures to PEGs, a mechanism akin to exceptions and exception handling, with the goal of improving error reporting while preserving the composability of PEGs. In the next section we discuss how to use PEGs with labeled failures to implement some of the techniques that we have discussed in Section 3: the nofail combinator [15], the cut combinator [18], the four-values technique [17] and the try combinator [19]. A labeled PEG G is a tuple (V, T, P, L, pS ) where L is a finite set of labels that must include the fail label, and the expressions in P have been extended with the throw operator, explained below. The other parts use the same definitions from Section 2. The abstract syntax of labeled parsing expressions adds the throw operator ⇑l , which generates a failure with label l, and adds an extra argument S to the ordered choice operator, which is the set of labels that the ordered choice should catch. S must be a subset of L. p = ε | a | A | p1 p2 | p1 /S p2 | p ∗ | !p | ⇑l Figure 3 presents the semantics of PEGs with labels as a set of inference rules. The PEG semantics of PEGs with labels is defined by the relation among a parsing expression, an PEG input string and a result. The result is either a string or a label. The notation G[p] xy y means that the expression p matches the input xy, consumes the prefix x and leaves the PEG suffix y as the output. The notation G[p] xy l indicates that the matching of p fails with label l on the input xy. Now a matches and consumes itself and fails with label fail otherwise; p1 p2 tries to match p1 , if p1 matches an input prefix, then it tries to match p2 with the suffix left by p1 , 10  Empty  G[ε] x  Terminal  PEG  (empty.1)  x  PEG  G[a] ax  (char.1)  x  G[P (A)] x  Non-terminal  G[A] x  PEG  G[p1 ] xy  Concatenation  PEG  PEG  PEG  PEG  G[p] x  PEG  G[p∗] x  PEG  PEG  G[p] x G[p∗] x  PEG  Negative Predicate  PEG  fail  l  l l  PEG  y  PEG  l  /S  G[p1  G[⇑l ] x  G[p2 ] y  G[p1 /S p2 ] xy G[p1 ] x  Throw  y  G[p1 ] xy  y  , b 6= a (char.2)  G[a] ε  fail  p2 ] x  PEG  X  X  (ord.1)  G[p2 ] x PEG  (rep.1)  x  PEG  PEG  X  X  PEG  G[p1 p2 ] x  G[p1 ] x  PEG  G[p1 /S p2 ] x  l  l  PEG  l  PEG  G[!p] x  (char.3) fail  fail  PEG  y  G[p∗] xy  G[p] x  PEG  l  G[!p] x  PEG  l  x  (not.1)  , l 6∈ S (ord.2)  PEG  l  G[p∗] y  PEG  PEG  X  X  G[p] xy G[!p] xy  PEG  PEG  y  fail  , l 6= fail (not.3)  (throw.1)  Figure 3: Semantics of PEGs with labels  11  (con.2)  , l ∈ S (ord.3)  PEG  G[p] xy  G[p1 ] x  (con.1)  (rep.2)  , l 6= fail (rep.3)  G[p] x  PEG  (var.1)  X  G[p1 p2 ] xy  Ordered Choice  Repetition  X  G[b] ax  (not.2)  the label l is propagated otherwise; p1 /S p2 tries to match p1 in the input and tries to match p2 in the same input only if p1 fails with a label l ∈ S, the label l is propagated otherwise; p∗ repeatedly matches p until the matching of p silently fails with label fail, and propagates a label l when p fails with this label; !p successfully matches if the input does not match p with the label fail, fails producing the label fail when the input matches p, and propagates a label l when p fails with this label, not consuming the input in all cases; ⇑l produces the label l. We faced some design decisions in our formulation that are worth discussing. First, we use a set of labels in the ordered choice as a convenience. We could have each ordered choice handling a single label, and it would just lead to duplication: an expression p1 /{l1 ,l2 ,...,ln} p2 would become ( ... ((p1 /l1 p2 ) /l2 p2 ) ... /ln p2 ). Second, we require the presence of a fail label to maintain compatibility with the original semantics of PEGs, where we only have fail to signal both error and failure. For the same reason, we define the expression p1 /p2 as syntactic sugar for p1 /{fail} p2 . Another choice was how to handle labels in a repetition. We chose to have a repetition stop silently only on the fail label to maintain the following identity, which holds for unlabeled PEGs: an expression p∗ is equivalent to a fresh non-terminal A with the rule A ← p A / ε. Finally, the negative predicate succeeds only on the fail label to allow the implementation of the positive predicate: the expression &p that implements the positive predicate in the original semantics of PEGs [3, 9, 2] is equivalent to the expression !!p. Both expressions successfully match if the input matches p, fail producing the label fail when the input does not match p, and propagate a label l when p fails with this label, not consuming the input in all cases. Figure 4 presents a PEG with labels for the Tiny language from Section 2. The expression l [p] is syntactic sugar for (p / ⇑l ). The strategy we used to annotate the grammar was the following: first, annotate every terminal that should not fail, that is, making the PEG backtrack on failure of that terminal would be useless, as the whole parse would either fail or not consume the whole input in that case. For an LL(1) grammar like the one in the example, that means all terminals in a production except the one in the very beginning of the production. After annotating the terminals, we do the same for whole productions. We annotate productions where failing the whole production always implies an error in the input, adding a new alternative that throws an error label specific to that production. For Tiny, we end up annotating just two productions, Factor and CmdSeq. Productions Exp, SimpleExp, and Term also should not fail, but after annotating Factor they always either succeed or throw the label exp. The Cmd production can fail, because it controls whether the repetition inside CmdSeq stops or continue. Notice that this is just an example of how a grammar can be annotated. More thorough analyses are possible: for example, we can deduce that Cmd is not allowed to fail unless the next token is one of ELSE, END, UNTIL, or the end of the input (the FOLLOW set of Cmd), and instead of ⇑cmd add !(ELSE / END / UNTIL / !.) ⇑cmd as a new alternative. This would remove the need for the ⇑cmd annotation of CmdSeq. 12  Tiny ← CmdSeq CmdSeq Cmd IfCmd RepeatCmd AssignCmd ReadCmd WriteCmd Exp SimpleExp Term Factor  ← (Cmd [SEMICOLON]sc ) (Cmd [SEMICOLON]sc )∗ / ⇑cmd ← IfCmd / RepeatCmd / AssignCmd / ReadCmd / WriteCmd ← IF Exp [THEN]then CmdSeq (ELSE CmdSeq / ε) [END]end ← REPEAT CmdSeq [UNTIL]until Exp ← NAME [ASSIGNMENT]bind Exp ← READ [NAME]read ← WRITE Exp ← SimpleExp ((LESS / EQUAL) SimpleExp / ε) ← Term ((ADD / SUB) Term)∗ ← Factor ((MUL / DIV) Factor )∗ ← OPENPAR Exp [CLOSEPAR]cp / NUMBER / NAME / ⇑exp Figure 4: A PEG with labels for the Tiny language  The PEG reports an error when parsing finishes with an uncaught label. Each label is associated with a meaningful error message. For instance, if we use this PEG for Tiny to parse the code example from Section 2, parsing finishes with the sc label and the PEG can use it to produce the following error message: factorial.tiny:6:1: syntax error, there is a missing ’;’ Note how the semantics of the repetition works with the rule CmdSeq. Inside the repetition, the fail label means that there are no more commands to be matched and the repetition should stop while the sc label means that a semicolon (;) failed to match. It would not be possible to write the rule CmdSeq using repetition if we had chosen to stop the repetition with any label, instead of stopping only with the fail label, because the repetition would accept the sc label as the end of the repetition whereas it should propagate this label. Although the semantics of PEGs with labels presented in Figure 3 allows us to generate specific error messages, it does not give us information about the location where the failure probably is, so it is necessary to use some extra mechanism (e.g., semantic actions) to get this information. To avoid this, we can adapt the semantics of PEGs with labels to give us a tuple (l, y) in case of a failure, where y the suffix of the input that PEG was trying to match when label l was thrown. Updating the semantics of Figure 3 to reflect this change is straightforward. In the next section, we try to establish a comparison between the farthest failure position heuristic and the labeled failure mechanism by contrasting two different implementations of a parser for a dialect of the Lua language. 13  5. Labeled Failures versus Farthest Failure Position In this section we will compare two parser implementations for the Typed Lua language, one that uses the farthest failure position heuristic for error reporting, which was implemented first, and one based on labeled failures. Typed Lua [22] is an optionally-typed extension of the Lua programming language [23]. The Typed Lua parser recognizes plain Lua programs, and also Lua programs with type annotations. The first version of the parser was implemented using Ford’s heuristic and the LPeg library 3 . As LPeg does not have a native error reporting mechanism based on Ford’s strategy, the failure tracking heuristic was implemented following the approach described in Section 2, which uses semantic actions. Below we have the example of a Lua statement with a syntax error: a = function (a,b,) end In this case, the parser gives us the following error message, which is quite precise: test.lua:1:19: syntax error, unexpected ’)’, expecting ’...’, ’Name’ In the previous case, the list of expected tokens had only two candidates, but this is not always the case. For example, let us consider the following Lua program, where there is no expression after the elseif in line 5: 01 02 03 04 05 06 07  if a then return x elseif b then return y elseif end  The corresponding error message has a lengthy list of tokens, which does not help much to fix the error: test.lua:7:1: syntax error, unexpected ’end’, expecting ’(’, ’Name’, ’{’, ’function’, ’...’, ’true’, [9 more tokens] When using the Typed Lua parser based on Ford’s heuristic it is not uncommon to get a message like this. An analysis of the test cases available in the parser package shows us that around half of the expected error messages have a list of at least eight expected tokens (there were messages with a list of 39 expected tokens). 3  The first version of Typed Lua parser is available at https://github.com/andremm/typedlua/blob/master/typedlua  14  The second implementation of the Typed Lua parser was based on labeled failures and used the LPegLabel library [24], which is an extension of the LPeg library that supports labeled failures 4 . The use of labeled failures implies in an annotation burden to specify when each label should be thrown. In the case of Typed Lua grammar, we defined almost 50 different labels, using the same basic strategy that we used to annotate the Tiny grammar of Section 4. Given the previous Lua program, the error message presented now is: test.lua:7:1: expecting <exp> after ’elseif’ This error message is more informative than the previous one, which was generated automatically. We analyzed the error messages generated by the two parsers in 53 examples, and considered that in more than half of these examples the parser based on labeled failures produced a better error message. In about 20% of the cases we considered the error messages of both approaches similar, and in other 20% of the cases the parser based on Ford’s heuristic generated better error messages. The error location indicated by the two parsers in the examples analyzed was essentially the same. This seems to indicate that the main difference in practice between both approaches is related to the length of the error message generated. By using labeled failures we can probably get a simple error message at the cost of annotating the grammar, while by using the farthest failure tracking heuristic we can automatically generate error messages, which sometimes may contain a long list of expected tokens. A point that is worth mentioning about the labeled failure approach is that it is not mandatory to annotate the entire grammar. The grammar can be annotated incrementally, at the points where the current error message is not good enough, and when no specific label is thrown, i.e., when the label fail is thrown, an error message can be generated automatically by using the position where the failure occurred. This means that combining labeled failures with the farthest failure position reduces the annotation burden, and helps to identify the places in the parser where the a label is desirable. In the next section, we discuss some applications of labeled failures: we can use labeled PEGs to express the error reporting techniques that we have discussed in Section 3 [15, 18, 17, 19], and also to efficiently parse context-free grammars that can use the LL(∗) parsing strategy [25]. 6. Applications of Labeled Failures This section shows that PEGs with labeled failures can express several error reporting techniques used in the realm of parsing combinators. They can also efficiently parse contextfree grammars that are parseable by the LL(∗) top-down parsing strategy. In Hutton’s deterministic parser combinators [15], the nofail combinator is used to distinguish between failure and error. We can express the nofail combinators using PEGs 4  The second version of Typed Lua parser is available at https://github.com/sqmedeiros/lpeglabel/tree/master/ex  15  with labels as follows: nofail p ≡ p / ⇑error That is, nofail is an expression that transforms the failure of p into an error to abort backtracking. Note that the error label should not be caught by any ordered choice. Instead, the ordered choice propagates this label and catches solely the fail label. The idea is that parsing should finish with one of the following values: success, fail or error. The annotation of the Tiny grammar to use nofail is similar to the annotation we have done using labeled failures. Basically, we just need to change the grammar to use nofail instead of [p]l . For instance, we can write the rule CmdSeq as follows: CmdSeq ← (Cmd (nofail SEMICOLON)) (Cmd (nofail SEMICOLON))∗ If we are writing a grammar from scratch, there is no advantage to use nofail instead of more specific labels, as the annotation burden is the same and with nofail we lose more specific error messages. The cut combinator [18] was introduced to reduce the space inefficiency of backtracking parsers, where the possibility of backtracking implies that any input that has already been processed must be kept in memory until the end of parsing. Semantically it is identical to nofail, differing only in the way the combinators are implemented: to implement cut the parser combinators use continuation-passing style, so cut can drop the failure continuation and consequently any pending backtrack frames. Hutton’s nofail is implemented in direct style, and is not able to drop pending backtrack frames. Expressing a cut operator with the same properties is not possible in our semantics of PEGs. The four-values technique changed the semantics of parser combinators to implement predictive parsers for LL(1) grammars that automatically identify the longest input prefix in case of error, without needing annotations in the grammar. We can express this technique using labeled failures by transforming the original PEG with the following rules: JεK ≡ ⇑epsn JaK ≡ a JAK ≡ A Jp1 p2 K ≡ Jp1 K (Jp2 K / ⇑error /{epsn} ε) /{epsn} Jp2 K Jp1 /p2 K ≡ Jp1 K /{epsn} (Jp2 K / ⇑epsn ) / Jp2 K  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)  This translation is based on three labels: epsn means that the expression successfully finished without consuming any input, fail means that the expression failed without consuming any input, and error means that the expression failed after consuming some input. In our translation we do not have an ok label because a resulting suffix means that the expression successfully finished after consuming some input. It is straightforward to check that the translated expressions behave according to the Table 1 from Section 3. Parsec introduced the try combinator to annotate parts of the grammar where arbitrary lookahead is needed. We need arbitrary lookahead because PEGs and parser combinators 16  usually operate at the character level. The authors of Parsec also showed a correspondence between the semantics of Parsec as implemented in their library and Partridge and Wright’s four-valued combinators, so we can emulate the behavior of Parsec using labeled failures by building on the five rules above and adding the following rule for try: Jtry pK ≡ JpK /{error} ⇑fail  (6)  If we take the Tiny grammar of Figure 1 from Section 2, insert try in the necessary places, and pass this new grammar through the transformation J K, then we get a PEG that automatically identifies errors in the input with the error label. For instance, we can write the rule RepeatCmd as follows: RepeatCmd ← (try REPEAT) CmdSeq UNTIL Exp LL(∗) [25] is a parsing strategy used by the popular parsing tool ANTLR [26, 27] 5 . An LL(∗) parser is a top-down parser with arbitrary lookahead. The main idea of LL(∗) parsing is to build a deterministic finite automata for each rule in the grammar, and use this automata to predict which alternative of the rule the parser should follow, based on the rest of the input. Each final state of the DFA should correspond to a single alternative, or we have an LL(∗) parsing conflict. Mascarenhas et al. [6] shows how CFG classes that correspond to top-down predictive parsing strategies can be encoded with PEGs by using predicates to encode the lookahead necessary for each alternative. As translating a Deterministic Finite Automata (DFA) to a PEG is straightforward [12, 6], this gives us one way of encoding an LL(∗) parsing strategy in a PEG, at the cost of encoding a different copy of the lookahead DFA for each alternative. Labeled PEGs provide a more straightforward encoding, where instead of a predicate for each alternative, we use a single encoding of the lookahead DFA, where each final state ends with a label corresponding to one of the alternatives. Each alternative is preceded by a choice operator that catches its label. To make the translation clearer, let us consider the following example, from Parr and Fisher [25], where non-terminal S uses non-terminal Exp (omitted) to match arithmetic expressions: S → ID | ID ‘=’ Exp | ‘unsigned’ ‘∗’ ‘int’ ID | ‘unsigned’ ‘∗’ ID ID After analyzing this grammar, ANTLR produces the DFA of Figure 5. When trying to match S, ANTLR runs this DFA on the input until it reaches a final state that indicates which alternative of the choice of rule S should be tried. For example, ANTLR chooses the second alternative if the DFA reaches state s4 . Figure 6 gives a labeled PEG that encodes the LL(∗) parsing strategy for rule S. Rules S0 , S1 , and S2 encode the lookahead DFA of Figure 5, and correspond to states s0 , s1 , and s2 , respectively. The throw expressions correspond to the final states. As the throw expressions make the input backtrack to where it was prior to parsing S0 , we do not need to use a predicate. We can also turn any uncaught failures into errors. 5  The recently released version 4 of ANTLR uses adaptive LL(∗) as its parsing strategy.  17  s4 → 2 = s1  EOF  ID start  s0  s6 → 1  ID  unsigned  s2  ID s5 → 4  unsigned int int  s3 → 3  Figure 5: LL(∗) lookahead DFA for rule S  7. Conclusions In this paper, we discussed error reporting strategies for Parsing Expression Grammars. PEGs behave badly on the presence of syntax errors, because backtracking often makes the PEG lose track of the position where the error happened. This limitation was already known by Ford, and he tried to fix it in his PEG implementation by having the implementation track the farthest position in the input where a failure has happened [3]. We took Ford’s failure tracking heuristic and showed that it is not necessary to modify a PEG implementation to track failure positions as long as the implementation has mechanisms to execute semantic actions, and the current parsing position is exposed to these actions. In addition, we also showed how it is easy to extend the semantics of PEGs to incorporate failure tracking, including information that can indicate what the PEG was expecting when the failure happened. Tracking the farthest failure position, either by changing the PEG implementation, using semantic actions, or redefining the semantics of PEGs, helps PEG parsers produce error messages that are close to error messages that predictive top-down parsers are able to produce, but these are generic error messages, sometimes with a long list of expected tokens. As a way of generating more specific error messages, we introduced a mechanism of labeled failures to PEGs. This mechanism closely resembles standard exception handling in programming languages. Instead of a single kind of failure, we introduced a throw operator ⇑l that can throw different kinds of failures, identified by their labels, and extended the 18  S S0 S1 S2  ← S0 /1 ID /2 ID ‘=’ Exp /3 ‘unsigned’ ‘∗’ ‘int’ ID /4 ‘unsigned’ ‘∗’ ID ID / ⇑error ← ID S1 / ‘unsigned’ S2 / ‘int’ ⇑3 ← ‘=’ ⇑2 / !. ⇑1 / ID ⇑4 ← ‘unsigned’ S2 / ID ⇑4 / ‘int’ ⇑3 Figure 6: PEG with Labels that Simulates the LL(∗) Algorithm  ordered choice operator to specify the set of labels that it catches. The implementation of these extensions in parser generator tools based on PEGs is straightforward. We showed how labeled failures can be used as a way to annotate error points in a grammar, and tie them to more meaningful error messages. Labeled failures are orthogonal to the failure tracking approach we discussed earlier, so grammars can be annotated incrementally, at the points where better error messages are judged necessary. We also showed that the labeled failures approach can express several techniques for error reporting used in parsers based on deterministic parser combinators, as presented in related work [15, 18, 17, 19]. Labeled failures can also be used as a way of encoding the decisions made by a predictive top-down parser, as long as the decision procedure can be encoded as a PEG, and showed an example of how to encode an LL(∗) grammar in this way. Annotating a grammar with labeled failures demands care: if we mistakenly annotate expressions that should be able to fail, this modifies the behavior of the parser beyond error reporting. In any case, the use of labeled PEGs for error reporting introduces an annotation burden that is lesser than the annotation burden introduced by error productions in LR parsers, which also demand care, as their introduction usually lead to reduce-reduce conflicts [28]. We showed the error reporting strategies in the context of a small grammar for a toy language, and we also discussed the implementation of parsers for the Typed Lua language, an extension of the Lua language, based on these strategies. Moreover, we also implemented parsers for other languages, such as Céu [29], based on theses approaches, improving the quality of error reporting either with generic error messages or with more specific error messages. References [1] A. V. Aho, M. S. Lam, R. Sethi, J. D. Ullman, Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, 2nd Edition, Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA, 2006. [2] B. Ford, Parsing expression grammars: A recognition-based syntactic foundation, in: Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL ’04, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2004, pp. 111–122. [3] B. Ford, Packrat parsing: a practical linear-time algorithm with backtracking, Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (September 2002). [4] S. Medeiros, F. Mascarenhas, R. Ierusalimschy, From regular expressions to parsing expression grammars, in: Brazilian Symposium on Programming Languages, 2011.  19  [5] S. Medeiros, F. Mascarenhas, R. Ierusalimschy, Programming Languages: 16th Brazilian Symposium, SBLP 2012, Nat Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012, Ch. Left Recursion in Parsing Expression Grammars, pp. 27–41. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-33182-4\_4. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33182-4_4 [6] F. Mascarenhas, S. Medeiros, R. Ierusalimschy, On the relation between context-free grammars and parsing expression grammars, Science of Computer Programmingdoi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2014.01.012. [7] K. C. Louden, Compiler Construction: Principles and Practice, PWS Publishing Co., Boston, MA, USA, 1997. [8] D. Grune, C. J. Jacobs, Parsing Techniques: A Practical Guide, 2nd Edition, Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2010. [9] B. Ford, Packrat parsing: Simple, powerful, lazy, linear time, in: Proceedings of the Seventh ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming, ICFP ’02, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2002, pp. 36–47. [10] I. Piumarta, peg/leg — recursive-descent parser generators for C, http://piumarta.com/software/peg/, [Visited on March 2013] (2007). [11] R. Ierusalimschy, LPeg parsing expression grammars for Lua, http://www.inf.puc-rio.br/~roberto/lpeg/lpeg.html, [Visited on March 2013] (2008). [12] R. Ierusalimschy, A text pattern-matching tool based on parsing expression grammars, Software: Practice & Experience 39 (3) (2009) 221–258. [13] K. Mizushima, A. Maeda, Y. Yamaguchi, Packrat parsers can handle practical grammars in mostly constant space, in: Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGSOFT Workshop on Program Analysis for Software Tools and Engineering, PASTE ’10, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 29–36. [14] R. Grimm, Better extensibility through modular syntax, in: Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’06, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 38–51. doi:10.1145/1133981.1133987. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1133981.1133987 [15] G. Hutton, Higher-order functions for parsing, Journal of Functional Programming 2 (3) (1992) 323– 343. [16] M. Spivey, When maybe is not good enough, Journal of Functional Programming 22 (2012) 747–756. doi:10.1017/S0956796812000329. URL http://journals.cambridge.org/article_S0956796812000329 [17] A. Partridge, D. Wright, Predictive parser combinators need four values to report errors, Journal of Functional Programming 6 (2) (1996) 355–364. [18] N. Röjemo, Efficient parsing combinators, Tech. rep., Department of Computer Science, Chalmers University of Technology (1995). [19] D. Leijen, E. Meijer, Parsec: Direct style monadic parser combinators for the real world, Tech. Rep. UU-CS-2001-35, Department of Computer Science, Utrecht University (2001). [20] S. D. Swierstra, L. Duponcheel, Deterministic, error-correcting combinator parsers, in: Advanced Functional Programming, Vol. 1129 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 1996, pp. 184–207. [21] S. D. Swierstra, Combinator parsers: a short tutorial, in: A. Bove, L. Barbosa, A. Pardo, J. Sousa Pinto (Eds.), Language Engineering and Rigorous Software Development, Vol. 5520 of LNCS, Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 252–300. [22] A. M. Maidl, F. Mascarenhas, R. Ierusalimschy, Typed Lua: An optional type system for Lua, in: Proceedings of the Workshop on Dynamic Languages and Applications, Dyla’14, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 3:1–3:10. doi:10.1145/2617548.2617553. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2617548.2617553 [23] R. Ierusalimschy, Programming in Lua, 3rd Edition, Lua.Org, 2013. [24] S. Medeiros, LPegLabel - an extension of LPeg that supports labeled failures, https://github.com/sqmedeiros/lpeglabel, [Visited on October 2015] (2014). [25] T. Parr, K. Fisher, Ll(*): The foundation of the antlr parser generator, in: Proceedings of the 32Nd  20  [26] [27] [28] [29]  ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’11, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 425–436. doi:10.1145/1993498.1993548. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1993498.1993548 T. Par, The Definitive ANTLR 4 Reference, 2nd Edition, Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2013. T. Parr, ANTLR, http://www.antlr.org, [Visited on March 2014]. C. L. Jeffery, Generating LR syntax error messages from examples, ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS) 25 (5) (2003) 631–640. F. Sant’Anna, Safe system-level concurrency on resource-constrained nodes with céu, Ph.D. thesis, PUC–Rio (2013).  21  Appendix A. Formalization of Farthest Failure Tracking In Section 2, we saw that a common approach to report errors in PEGs is to inform the position of the farthest failure, and how we can use semantic actions to implement this approach in common PEG implementations. In this appendix, we show a conservative extension of the PEG formalism that expresses this error reporting approach directly, making it a part of the semantics of PEGs instead of an ad-hoc extension to PEG implementations. The result of a PEG on a given input is either fail or a suffix of the input. Returning a suffix of the input means that the PEG succeeded and consumed a prefix of the input. PEGs with farthest failure tracking return the product of the original result and either another suffix of the input, to denote the position of the farthest failure during parsing, or nil to denote that there were no failures. Figure A.7 presents a formal semantics of PEGs with farthest failure tracking as a set PEG of inference rules. The notation G[p] xy (y, v?) represents a successful match of the parsing expression p in the context of a PEG G against the subject xy, consuming x and PEG leaving the suffix y. In a similar way, G[p] xy (fail, v?) represents an unsuccessful match. The term v? denotes a value that is either a suffix v of the original input or nil. We cannot use an empty string to denote that there were no failures, as an empty string already means that a failure has occurred after the last position of the input. The term X denotes a value that is either a suffix of the current input or fail. The auxiliary function smallest that appears on Figure A.7 compares two possible error positions, denoted by a suffix of the input string, or nil if no failure has occurred, and returns the furthest: any suffix of the input is a further possible error position than nil and a shorter suffix is a further possible error position than a longer suffix. Rule empty.1 deals with the empty expression. This expression never fails, so the failure position is always nil. Rule var.1 deals with non-terminals, so it just propagates the result of matching the right-hand side of the non-terminal. Rules char.1, char.2, and char.3 deal with terminals. The latter two rules denote failures, so they return the subject as the failure position. Rules con.1 and con.2 deal with concatenation. The second rule just propagates the failure position, but rule con.1 needs to take the farthest position between the two parts of the concatenation. The rules for ordered choice (ord.1 and ord.2) and repetition (rep.1 and rep.2) work in a similar way: whenever there are two possible farthest failure positions, we use smallest to take the farthest of them. Finally, rules not.1 and not.2 deal with the syntactic predicate. Fitting this predicate in this error reporting framework is subtle. The rules not only need to make sense for the predicate in isolation, but also have to make sense for !!p, which works as a “positive lookahead” predicate that succeeds if p succeeds but fails if p fails while never consuming any input. For not.1, the case where !p succeeds, we have two choices: either propagate p’s farthest failure position, or ignore it (using nil). The first choice can lead to an odd case, where the failure that made !p succeed can get the blame for the overall failure of the PEG, so not.1 takes the second choice. 22  Empty  G[ε] x  PEG  Terminal  (x, nil)  G[a] ax  PEG  G[b] ax  Concatenation  Ordered Choice  Repetition  PEG  (empty.1)  (x, nil)  (fail, ax)  G[p1 ] xy  PEG  (y, v?)  G[p1 p2 ] xy G[p1 ] xy  PEG  G[p1 / p2 ] xy  G[p] x  PEG  G[p∗] x  Negative Predicate  (y, v?)  (fail, v?)  PEG  (x, v?)  G[p] x  PEG  G[!p] x  G[p2 ] y  (y, v?)  (rep.1)  (x, nil)  PEG  (X, w?)  (ord.1)  (fail, v?)  PEG  PEG  G[a] ε  (X, smallest(v?, w?))  PEG  G[A] x  PEG  PEG  (X, v?)  (X, v?)  (var.1)  (char.1)  , b 6= a (char.2)  PEG  G[P (A)] x  Non-terminal  G[p] xyz  (con.1)  G[p1 ] x  PEG  PEG  (yz, v?) PEG  G[p1 ] x  PEG  G[p1 p2 ] x  PEG  (fail, v?)  PEG  (fail, v?)  G[p2 ] x  G[p∗] yz  PEG  PEG  PEG  (con.2)  (X, w?)  (X, smallest(v?, w?)) PEG  (z, w?)  (z, smallest(v?, w?))  G[p] xy G[!p] xy  (char.3)  (fail, v?)  G[p1 / p2 ] x  G[p∗] xyz  (not.1)  (fail, ε)  (y, v?)  (fail, xy)  (rep.2)  (not.2)  Figure A.7: Semantics of PEGs with farthest failure tracking  We also have two choices for the case where !p fails: either propagate the failure position from p or just use the current position. The first choice can also lead to an odd cases where the overall failure of the PEG might be blamed on something in p that, if corrected, still makes p succeed and !p fail, so not.2 also takes the second choice. The end result is that what happens inside a predicate simply does not take part in error reporting at all, which is the simplest approach, and also gives a consistent result for !!p. As an example that shows the interaction of these rules, let us consider again the Tiny program in Figure 1, reproduced below: 01 02 03 04 05 06 07  n := 5; f := 1; repeat f := f * n; n := n - 1 until (n < 1); write f; 23  (ord.2)  The missing “;” at the end of line 5 makes the repetition (Cmd SEMICOLON)* inside CmdSeq succeed through rule rep.1 and propagate the failure position to the concatenation inside this same non-terminal. Rule con.2 then propagates the same failure position to the concatenation inside RepeatCmd. Another failure occurs in RepeatCmd when until does not match n, but rule con.2 again propagates the position of the missing “;”, which is farthest. This leads to a failure inside the repetition on CmdSeq again, which propagates the position of the missing “;” through rule rep.2. Finally, rules con.2 and var.1 propagate this failure position to the top of the grammar so the missing semicolon gets the blame for the PEG not consuming the whole program. We can translate the failure suffix into a line and column number inside the original subject, and extract the first token from the beginning of this suffix to produce an error message similar to the error messages in Section 2: factorial.tiny:6:1: syntax error, unexpected ’until’ While this message correctly pinpoints the location of the error, it could be more informative. Appendix B shows how we can extend the semantics of Figure A.7 to gather more information than just the farthest failure position, thus making us able to generate error messages as informative as the ones produced by Pappy, which we discussed in the end of Section 2. In the next section, we will introduce another approach for error reporting in PEGs, which can produce more precise error messages, at the cost of annotating the grammar. Appendix B. Formalization of Farthest Failure Tracking and Error Lists In this appendix we show how the formalization of the farthest failure tracking from Appendix A can easily be adapted to build a more elaborate error object, instead of just returning a position. The new semantics formalizes a strategy similar to the one used by Ford [3] in his PEG implementation. The basic idea is to keep a list of the simple expressions that the PEG was expecting to match when a failure occurred, and use this list to build an error message. PEG Figure B.8 gives inference rules for the relation of this new semantics. The result of the matching of a PEG G against an input x is still a pair, but the second component is now another pair, the error pair. The first component of the error pair is the farthest error position, same as in the previous semantics. The second component is a list of parsing expressions that were expected at this error position. If the grammar does not have syntactic predicates, the expressions in this list are just terminals and non-terminals. Rules empty.1 and char.1 do not change, and rules char.2 and char.3 just return a list with the terminal that they tried to match.  24  Empty  G[ε] x  PEG  Terminal  G[A] x  (X, joinVar((v?, L), x, A))  G[a] ax  PEG  (x, (nil, {}))  PEG  PEG  G[p1 p2 ] x  (fail, (ax, {b})) G[p1 ] xy  (fail, (v?, L))  G[p1 / p2 ] xy  (fail, (v?, L1 ))  G[p2 ] y  (y, (v?, L))  PEG  (y, (v?, L))  G[p2 ] x  PEG  G[p] x  PEG  (fail, (v?, L))  G[p] xyz  PEG  (x, (v?, L))  (yz, (v?, L1 ))  G[p∗] xyz  PEG  Negative Predicate  G[p∗] yz  PEG  G[!p] x  (char.3)  (con.1)  PEG  (z, (w?, L2 ))  (fail, (v?, L))  PEG  (ord.2)  (rep.1)  (z, join((v?, L1 ), (w?, L2 ))) G[p] x  (X, (w?, L2 ))  (X, (w?, L2 ))  (X, join((v?, L1 ), (w?, L2 )))  G[p∗] x  (fail, (ε, {a}))  (ord.1)  G[p1 / p2 ] x  PEG  PEG  PEG  (X, join((v?, L1 ), (w?, L2 )))  PEG  Repetition  G[a] ε  (con.2)  PEG  G[p1 ] xy  , b 6= a (char.2)  PEG  (var.1)  (char.1)  (y, (v?, L1 ))  (fail, (v?, L))  PEG  PEG  PEG  G[p1 p2 ] xy  Ordered Choice  G[p1 ] x  (X, (v?, L))  PEG  Concatenation  G[p1 ] x  PEG  G[P (A)] x  Non-terminal  G[b] ax  (empty.1)  (x, (nil, {}))  (x, (nil, {}))  (not.1)  (rep.2)  G[p] xy G[!p] xy  PEG  PEG  (y, (v?, L))  (fail, (xy, {!p}))  Figure B.8: Semantics of PEGs with farthest failure tracking and error lists  25  (not.2)  Rule var.1 uses an auxiliary function joinVar, defined as follows: joinVar((x, L), x, A) = (x, {A}) joinVar((nil, {}), x, A) = (nil, {}) joinVar((v, L), x, A) = (v, L)  where x 6= v  The idea behind joinVar is simple: if the right-hand side of terminal A has a farthest error position that is the same as the current position in the input, it means that we can treat this possible error as an error while expecting A itself. This is expressed in the first case of joinVar by replacing the list of expected expressions L with just {A}. The other cases just propagate the failure information returned by P (A). To further understand how joinVar works, let us consider an example, adapted from the grammar in Figure 1: Factor ← “(” Exp “)” / Digit Digit∗ Digit ← “0” / “1” / “2” / “3” / “4” / “5” / “6” / “7” / “8” / “9” When we try to match Factor against an input that does not match either “(” or Digit, such as id, both alternatives of the ordered choice fail and the farthest failure position of both matches is the same input that we were trying to match with Factor. So, instead of keeping an error list that would later give us an error message like the following one: Unexpected ’id’, expecting ’(’ or ’0’ or ’1’ or ’2’ or ’3’ or ’4’ or ’5’ or ’6’ or ’7’ or ’8’ or ’9’ Or even an error message like this one: Unexpected ’id’, expecting ’(’ or Digit We replace the error list built during the matching of the right-hand side of Factor with just {Factor}. From this new list we can get the following higher-level error message: Unexpected ’id’, expecting Factor If the failure occurred in the middle of the first alternative of Factor (for example, because of a missing “)’, we would keep the original error list instead of replacing it with {Factor}. Using the names of the non-terminals in the error message instead of a list of terminals that might have started this non-terminal might not be better if the names of the nonterminals give no indication to the user of what was expected. It is easy to replace joinVar with just (v?, L), propagating the failure information from the expansion of the non-terminal and keeping the error message just with symbols that the user can add to the input. Another possibility is to have two kinds of non-terminals, and use joinVar for informative nonterminals and simple propagation for the others. In the case of concatenation, a failure in the first expression of the concatenation means we just need to propagate the error list, so case con.2 is straightforward. If both expressions 26  succeed, we might need to merge both error lists, if the two parts of the concatenation have the same failure position. Rule con.1 uses the auxiliary join function, defined below: join((x, L), (nil, {})) = (x, L) join((nil, {}), (x, L)) = (x, L) join((xy, L1 ), (y, L2)) = (y, L2 ) join((y, L1 ), (xy, L2)) = (y, L1 ) join((x, L1 ), (x, L2 )) = (x, L1  where x 6= ε where x = 6 ε L2 )  The first four cases of join keep the furthest and associated set of expected expressions. In the first two cases, nilmeans that no error has occurred, so any error automatically becomes the farthest error position. In the next two cases, one of the furthest error positions is a strict suffix of the other, so is the furthest of the two and the other is discarded. The only remaining possibility, expressed in the last case, is that the two positions are identical, and we merge their expected sets. The rules for ordered choice and repetition use the same join function, where applicable. Finally, the rules for the syntactic predicate !p also ignore the error information inside p. Rule not.2 blames the failure on the predicate itself. Going back to our running example (Figure 2), our error tracking semantics will give an error list that lets us generate the following error message: factorial.tiny:6:1: syntax error, unexpected ’until’, expecting ’;’, ’=’, ’<’, ’-’, ’+’, ’/’, ’*’ The operators also end up in the error list because their lexical rules all fail in the same position as the semicolon. This error message is similar to the error message we get using the error tracking combinators that we implemented on LPeg, at the end of Section 2. We might try to tweak the error tracking heuristics of repetition and ordered choice to ignore errors that happen in the first symbol of the input, which would let us take out the operators from the error list in our previous example, and give a more succinct error message: factorial.tiny:6:1: syntax error, unexpected ’until’, expecting ’;’ This heuristic is not sound in the general case, though. Suppose we replace line 6 of Figure 2 with the following line: 6 n ; until (n < 1); The tweaked heuristic would still produce an error list with just the semicolon, which is clearly wrong, as the problem is now a missing operator. It is common in PEGs to mix scanning and parsing in the same grammar, as syntactic predicates and repetition make lexical patterns convenient to express. But this can lead to problems in the automatic generation of error messages because failures are expected while 27  recognizing a token, and these failures related to scanning can pollute the error list that we use to generate the error message. As an example, let us consider the lexical rule THEN from the PEG for the Tiny language of Section 2: THEN ← then !IDRest Skip The pattern in the right-hand side fails if any alphanumeric character follows then in the input, putting the predicate in the error list. The error will be reported to the user as an unexpected character after then instead of a missing then keyword. One solution is to split the set of non-terminals into lexical and non-lexical non-terminals. Non-lexical non-terminals follow rule var.1, but lexical terminals follow a pair of new rules: G[P (A)] xy G[A] xy  PEG  G[P (A)] x G[A] x  PEG  (y, (nil, {}))  PEG  PEG  (y, (v?, L))  (lvar.1)  (fail, (v?, L))  (fail, (x, {A}))  (lvar.2)  Intuitively, a lexical non-terminal reports errors just like a terminal. Any failures that happen in a successful match are ignored, as they are considered to be expected, and a failed match of the whole non-terminal gets blamed on the non-terminal itself, at its starting position in the input. All the extensions to the semantics of PEGs that we discussed in this section are conservative: if a PEG fails with some subject in the original semantics, it will also fail in all of our extensions, and if a PEG matches some subject and leaves a suffix, it will also match and leave the same suffix in all of our extensions. This is stated by the following lemma, PEG where we use the symbol to represent the regular semantics of PEGs [6], and the symbol PEGF to represent the extended semantics of PEGs presented in Figure A.7: Lemma Appendix B.1 (Conservativeness of farthest failure tracking). Given a PEG G, a PEG PEGF parsing expression p and a subject xy, we have that G[p] xy y iff G[p] xy (y, v?), PEG PEGF and that G[p] xy fail iff G[p] xy (fail, v?). Proof. By induction on the height of the respective proof trees. The proof is straightforward, PEG PEGF since the only difference between the rules of and is presence of the farthest failure position, but this position has no influence on whether the expression successfully consumes part of the input or fails. A similar Lemma for the semantics with expected expression lists of Figure B.8 is also PEGL straightforward to prove, where we use the symbol to represent those extended semantics: Lemma Appendix B.2 (Conservativeness of farthest failure tracking with expected lists). PEG Given a PEG G, a parsing expression p and a subject xy, we have that G[p] xy y iff PEGL PEG PEGL G[p] xy (y, (v?, L)), and that G[p] xy fail iff G[p] xy (fail, (v?, L)). 28  Proof. By induction on the height of the respective proof trees. The proof is also straightPEG PEGL forward, since the only difference between the rules of and is presence of the farthest failure position and list of expected expressions, but this extra information has no influence on whether the expression successfully consumes part of the input or fails.  29

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
