Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_2497

Abstract:
HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  arXiv:1509.00632v3 [math.GR] 14 Feb 2017  JASON BEHRSTOCK, MARK F. HAGEN, AND ALESSANDRO SISTO  Abstract. We introduce a number of tools for finding and studying hierarchically hyperbolic spaces (HHS), a rich class of spaces including mapping class groups of surfaces, Teichmüller space with either the Teichmüller or Weil-Petersson metrics, right-angled Artin groups, and the universal cover of any compact special cube complex. We begin by introducing a streamlined set of axioms defining an HHS. We prove that all HHSs satisfy a Masur-Minsky-style distance formula, thereby obtaining a new proof of the distance formula in the mapping class group without relying on the Masur-Minsky hierarchy machinery. We then study examples of HHSs; for instance, we prove that when M is a closed irreducible 3–manifold then π1 M is an HHS if and only if it is neither N il nor Sol. We establish this by proving a general combination theorem for trees of HHSs (and graphs of HH groups). We also introduce a notion of “hierarchical quasiconvexity”, which in the study of HHS is analogous to the role played by quasiconvexity in the study of Gromov-hyperbolic spaces.  Contents Introduction 1. The main definition and background on hierarchically hyperbolic spaces 2. Tools for studying HHSs 3. Realization of consistent tuples 4. Hierarchy paths and the distance formula 5. Hierarchical quasiconvexity and gates 6. Hulls 7. The coarse median property 8. Combination theorems for hierarchically hyperbolic spaces 9. Hyperbolicity relative to HHGs 10. Hierarchical hyperbolicity of 3-manifold groups 11. A new proof of the distance formula for mapping class groups References  1 8 14 17 20 27 31 34 36 47 49 51 53  Introduction One of the most remarkable aspects of the theory of mapping class groups of surfaces is that the coarse geometry of the mapping class group, MCGpSq, can be fully reconstructed from its shadows on a collection of hyperbolic spaces — namely the curve graphs of subsurfaces of the underlying surface. Each subsurface of the surface S is equipped with a hyperbolic curve graph and a projection, the subsurface projection, to this graph from MCGpSq; there  Behrstock was supported as a Simons Fellow. Hagen was supported by NSF Grant Number 1045119 and by EPSRC. Sisto was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation project 144373. 1  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  2  are also projections between the various curve graphs. The powerful Masur–Minsky distance formula [MM00] shows that the distance between points of MCGpSq is coarsely the sum over all subsurfaces of the distances between the projections of these points to the various curve graphs. Meanwhile, the consistency/realization theorem [BKMM12] tells us that tuples with coordinates in the different curve graphs that obey “consistency” conditions characteristic of images of actual points in MCGpSq are, coarsely, images of points in MCGpSq. Finally, any two points in MCGpSq are joined by a uniform-quality quasigeodesic projecting to a uniform unparameterized quasigeodesic in each curve graph — a hierarchy path [MM00]. It is perhaps surprising that analogous behavior should appear in CAT(0) cube complexes, since the mapping class group cannot act properly on such complexes, c.f., [Bri10, Hag07, KL96]. However, mapping class groups enjoy several properties reminiscent of nonpositively/negatively curved spaces, including: automaticity (and, thus, quadratic Dehn function) [Mos95], having many quasimorphisms [BF02], super-linear divergence [Beh06], etc. Mapping class groups also exhibit coarse versions of some features of CAT(0) cube complexes, including coarse centroids/medians [BM11] and, more generally, a local coarse structure of a cube complex as made precise in [Bow13], applications to embeddings in trees, [BDS11], etc. Accordingly, it is natural to seek a common thread joining these important classes of groups and spaces. In [Hag14] it was shown that, for an arbitrary CAT(0) cube complex X , the intersectiongraph of the hyperplane carriers — the contact graph — is hyperbolic, and in fact quasiisometric to a tree. This object seems at first glance quite different from the curve graph (which records, after all, non-intersection), but there are a number of reasons this is quite natural, two of which we now mention. First, the curve graph can be realized as a coarse intersection graph of product regions in MCG. Second, the contact graph is closely related to the intersection graph of the hyperplanes themselves; when X is the universal cover of the Salvetti complex of a right-angled Artin group, the latter graph records commutation of conjugates of generators, just as the curve graph records commutation of Dehn twists. The cube complex X coarsely projects to its contact graph. Moreover, using disc diagram techniques, it is not hard to show that any two 0–cubes in a CAT(0) cube complex are joined by a combinatorial geodesic projecting to a geodesic in the contact graph [BHS14]. This observation — that CAT(0) cube complexes have “hierarchy paths” with very strong properties — motivated a search for an analogue of the theory of curve graphs and subsurface projections in the world of CAT(0) cube complexes. This was largely achieved in [BHS14], where a theory completely analogous to the mapping class group theory was constructed for a wide class of CAT(0) cube complexes, with (a variant of) the contact graph playing the role of the curve graph. These results motivated us to define a notion of “spaces with distance formulae”, which we did in [BHS14], by introducing the class of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces (HHSs) to provide a framework for studying many groups and spaces which arise naturally in geometric group theory, including mapping class groups and virtually special groups, and to provide a notion of “coarse nonpositive curvature” which is quasi-isometry invariant while still yielding some of those properties available via local geometry in the classical setting of nonpositively-curved spaces. As mentioned above, the three most salient features of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces are: the distance formula, the realization theorem, and the existence of hierarchy paths. In the treatment given in [BHS14], these attributes are part of the definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic space. This is somewhat unsatisfactory since, in the mapping class group and cubical settings, proving these theorems requires serious work. In this paper, we show that although the definition of hierarchically hyperbolic space previously introduced identifies the right class of spaces, there exist a streamlined set of axioms for that class of spaces which are much easier to verify in practice than those presented  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  3  in [BHS14, Section 13] and which don’t require assuming a distance formula, realization theorem, or the existence of hierarchy paths. Thus, a significant portion of this paper is devoted to proving that those results can be derived from the simplified axioms we introduce here. Along the way, we obtain a new, simplified proof of the actual Masur-Minsky distance formula for the mapping class group. We then examine various geometric properties of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups, including many reminiscent of the world of CAT(0) spaces and groups; for example, we show that hierarchically hyperbolic groups have quadratic Dehn function. Finally, taking advantage of the simpler set of axioms, we prove combination theorems enabling the construction of new hierarchically hyperbolic spaces/groups from old. The definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic space still has several parts, the details of which we postpone to Section 1. However, the idea is straightforward: a hierarchically hyperbolic space is a pair pX , Sq, where X is a metric space and S indexes a set of δ– hyperbolic spaces with several features (to each U P S the associated space is denoted CU ). Most notably, S is endowed with 3 mutually exclusive relations, nesting, orthogonality, and transversality, respectively generalizing nesting, disjointness, and overlapping of subsurfaces. For each U P S, we have a coarsely Lipschitz projection πU : X Ñ CU , and there are relative projections CU Ñ CV when U, V P S are non-orthogonal. These projections are required to obey “consistency” conditions modeled on the inequality identified by Behrstock in [Beh06], as well as a version of the bounded geodesic image theorem and large link lemma of [MM00], among other conditions. A finitely generated group G is hierarchically hyperbolic if it can be realized as a group of HHS automorphisms (“hieromorphisms”, as defined in Section 1) so that the induced action on X by uniform quasi-isometries is geometric and the action on S is cofinite. Hierarchically hyperbolic groups, endowed with word-metrics, are hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, but the converse does not appear to be true. Combination theorems. One of the main contributions in this paper is to provide many new examples of hierarchically hyperbolic groups, thus showing that mapping class groups and various cubical complexes/groups are just two of many interesting families in this class of groups and spaces. We provide a number of combination theorems, which we will describe below. One consequence of these results is the following classification of exactly which 3– manifold groups are hierarchically hyperbolic: Theorem 10.1 (3–manifolds are hierarchically hyperbolic). Let M be a closed 3– manifold. Then π1 pM q is a hierarchically hyperbolic space if and only if M does not have a Sol or Nil component in its prime decomposition. This result has a number of applications to the many fundamental groups of 3–manifolds which are HHS. For instance, in such cases, it follows from results in [BHS14] that: except for Z3 , the top dimension of a quasi-flat in such a group is 2, and any such quasi-flat is locally close to a “standard flat” (this generalizes one of the main results of [KL97, Theorem 4.10]); up to finite index, Z and Z2 are the only finitely generated nilpotent groups which admit quasi-isometric embeddings into π1 pM q; and, except in the degenerate case where π1 pM q is virtually abelian, such groups are all acylindrically hyperbolic (as also shown in [MO14]). Remark (Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces vs. hierarchically hyperbolic groups). There is an important distinction to be made between a hierarchically hyperbolic space, which is a metric space X equipped with a collection S of hyperbolic spaces with certain properties, and a hierarchically hyperbolic group, which is a group acting geometrically on a hierarchically hyperbolic space in such a way that the induced action on S is cofinite. The latter property is considerably stronger. For example, Theorem 10.1 shows that π1 M , with any word-metric, is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, but, as we discuss in Remark 10.2, π1 M probably fails  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  4  to be a hierarchically hyperbolic group in general; for instance we conjecture this is the case for those graph manifolds which can not be cocompactly cubulated. In the course of proving Theorem 10.1, we establish several general combination theorems, including one about relative hyperbolicity and one about graphs of groups. The first is: Theorem 9.1 (Hyperbolicity relative to HHGs). Let the group G be hyperbolic relative to a finite collection P of peripheral subgroups. If each P P P is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, then G is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Further, if each P P P is a hierarchically hyperbolic group, then so is G. Another of our main results is a combination theorem establishing when a tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces is again a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Theorem 8.6 (Combination theorem for HHS). Let T be a tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Suppose that: ‚ edge-spaces are uniformly hierarchically quasiconvex in incident vertex spaces; ‚ each edge-map is full; ‚ T has bounded supports; ‚ if e is an edge of T and Se is the Ď–maximal element of Se , then for all V P Se˘ , the elements V and φ♦ pS q are not orthogonal in Se˘ . e˘ e Then XpT q is hierarchically hyperbolic. Hierarchical quasiconvexity is a natural generalization of both quasiconvexity in the hyperbolic setting and cubical convexity in the cubical setting, which we shall discuss in some detail shortly. The remaining conditions are technical and explained in Section 8, but are easily verified in practice. As a consequence, we obtain a set of sufficient conditions guaranteeing that a graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups is a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Corollary 8.22 (Combination theorem for HHG). Let G “ pΓ, tGv u, tGe u, tφ˘ e uq be a finite graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Suppose that G equivariantly satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 8.6. Then the total group G of G is a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Finally, we prove that products of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces admit natural hierarchically hyperbolic structures. As mentioned earlier, we will apply the combination theorems to fundamental groups of 3– manifolds, but their applicability is broader. For example, they can be applied to fundamental groups of higher dimensional manifolds such as the ones considered in [FLS11]. The distance formula and realization. As defined in [BHS14], the basic definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic space is modeled on the essential properties underlying the “hierarchy machinery” of mapping class groups. In this paper, we revisit the basic definition and provide a new, refined set of axioms; the main changes are the removal of the “distance formula” and “hierarchy path” axioms and the replacement of the “realization” axiom by a far simpler “partial realization”. These new axioms are both more fundamental and more readily verified. An important result in mapping class groups which provides a starting point for much recent research in the field is the celebrated “distance formula” of Masur–Minsky [MM00] which provides a way to estimate distances in the mapping class group, up to uniformly bounded additive and multiplicative distortion, via distances in the curve graphs of subsurfaces. We give a new, elementary, proof of the distance formula in the mapping class group. The first step in doing so is verifying that mapping class groups satisfy the new axioms of a hierarchically hyperbolic space. We provide elementary, simple proofs of the axioms for which elementary proofs do not exist in the literature (most notably, the uniqueness axiom); this  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  5  is done in Section 11. This then combines with our proof of the following result which states that any hierarchically hyperbolic space satisfies a “distance formula” (which in the case of the mapping class group provides a new proof of the Masur–Minsky distance formula): Theorem 4.5 (Distance formula for HHS). Let pX, Sq be hierarchically hyperbolic. Then there exists s0 such that for all s ě s0 there exist constants K, C such that for all x, y P X , ÿ dX px, yq —pK,Cq ttdW px, yquus , W PS  where dW px, yq denotes the distance in the hyperbolic space CW between the projections of x, y and ttAuuB “ A if A ě B and 0 otherwise. Moreover, we show in Theorem 4.4 that any two points in X are joined by a uniform quasigeodesic γ projecting to a uniform unparameterized quasigeodesic in CU for each U P S. The existence of such hierarchy paths was hypothesized as part of the definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic space in [BHS14], but now it is proven as a consequence of the other axioms. The Realization Theorem for the mapping class group was established by Behrstock– Kleiner–Minsky–Mosher in [BKMM12, Theorem 4.3]. This theorem states that given a surface S and, for each subsurface W Ď S, a point in the curve complex of W : this sequence of points arises as the projection of a point in the mapping class group (up to bounded error), whenever the curve complex elements satisfy certain pairwise “consistency conditions.” Thus the Realization Theorem provides another sense in which all of the quasi-isometry invariant geometry of the mapping class group is encoded by the projections onto the curve graphs of subsurfaces.1 In Section 3 we show that an arbitrary hierarchically hyperbolic space satisfies a realization theorem. Given our elementary proof of the new axioms for mapping class groups in Section 11, we thus obtain a new proof of [BKMM12, Theorem 4.3]. Hulls and the coarse median property. Bowditch introduced a notion of coarse median space to generalize some results about median spaces to a more general setting, and, in particular, to the mapping class group [Bow13]. Bowditch observed in [Bow15] that any hierarchically hyperbolic space is a coarse median space; for completeness we provide a short proof of this result in Theorem 7.3. Using Bowditch’s results about coarse median spaces, we obtain a number of applications as corollaries. For instance, Corollary 7.9 is obtained from [Bow14a, Theorem 9.1] and says that any hierarchically hyperbolic space satisfies the Rapid Decay Property and Corollary 7.5 is obtained from [Bow13, Corollary 8.3] to show that all hierarchically hyperbolic groups are finitely presented and have quadratic Dehn functions. This provides examples of groups that are not hierarchically hyperbolic, for example: Corollary 7.6 (OutpFn q is not an HHG). For n ě 3, the group OutpFn q is not a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Indeed, OutpFn q was shown in [BV95, HM13b, BV] to have exponential Dehn function. This result is interesting as a counter-point to the well-known and fairly robust analogy between OutpFn q and the mapping class group of a surface; especially in light of the fact that OutpFn q is known to have a number of properties reminiscent of the axioms for an HHS, c.f., [BF14b, BF14a, HM13a, SS]. The coarse median property, via work of Bowditch, also implies that asymptotic cones of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces are contractible. Moreover, in Corollary 6.7, we bound the homological dimension of any asymptotic cone of a hierarchically hyperbolic space. This 1In [BKMM12], the name Consistency Theorem is used to refer to the necessary and sufficient conditions  for realization; since we find it useful to break up these two aspects, we refer to this half as the Realization Theorem, since anything that satisfies the consistency conditions is realized.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  6  latter result relies on the use of hulls of finite sets of points in the HHS X . This construction generalizes the Σ–hull of a finite set, constructed in the mapping class group context in [BKMM12]. (It also generalizes a special case of the ordinary combinatorial convex hull in a CAT(0) cube complex.) A key feature of these hulls is that they are coarse retracts of X (see Proposition 6.3), and this plays an important role in the proof of the distance formula. Hierarchical spaces. We also introduce the more general notion of a hierarchical space (HS). This is the same as a hierarchically hyperbolic space, except that we do not require the various associated spaces CU , onto which we are projecting, to be hyperbolic. Although we mostly focus on HHS in this paper, a few things are worth noting. First, the realization theorem 3.1 actually makes no use of hyperbolicity of the CU , and therefore holds in the more general context of HS; see Section 3. Second, an important subclass of the class of HS is the class of relatively hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, which we introduce in Section 6.2. These are hierarchical spaces where the spaces CU are uniformly hyperbolic except when U is minimal with respect to the nesting relation. As their name suggests, this class includes all metrically relatively hyperbolic spaces; see Theorem 9.3. With an eye to future applications, in Section 6.2 we prove a distance formula analogous to Theorem 4.5 for relatively hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, and also establish the existence of hierarchy paths. The strategy is to build, for each pair of points x, y, in the relatively hierarchically hyperbolic space, a “hull” of x, y, which we show is hierarchically hyperbolic with uniform constants. We then apply Theorems 4.5 and 4.4. Standard product regions and hierarchical quasiconvexity. In Section 5.1, we introduce the notion of a hierarchically quasiconvex subspace of a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq. In the case where X is hyperbolic, this notion coincides with the usual notion of quasiconvexity. The main technically useful features of hierarchically quasiconvex subspaces generalize key features of quasiconvexity: they inherit the property of being hierarchically hyperbolic (Proposition 5.6) and one can coarsely project onto them (Lemma 5.5). Along with the hulls discussed above, the most important examples of hierarchically quasiconvex subspaces are standard product regions: for each U P S, one can consider the set PU of points x P X whose projection to each CV is allowed to vary only if V is nested into or orthogonal to U ; otherwise, x projects to the same place in CV as CU does under the relative projection. The space PU coarsely decomposes as a product, with factors corresponding to the nested and orthogonal parts. Product regions play an important role in the study of boundaries and automorphisms of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces in the forthcoming paper [DHS15], as well as in the study of quasi-boxes and quasiflats in hierarchically hyperbolic spaces carried out in [BHS14]. Some questions and future directions. Before embarking on the discussion outlined above, we raise a few questions about hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups that we believe are of significant interest. The first set of questions concern the scope of the theory, i.e., which groups and spaces are hierarchically hyperbolic and which operations preserve the class of HHS: Question A (Cubical groups). Let G act properly and cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex. Is G a hierarchically hyperbolic group? Conversely, suppose that pG, Sq is a hierarchically hyperbolic group; are there conditions on the elements of S which imply that G acts properly and cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex? Substantial evidence for this conjecture was provided in [BHS14] where we established that a CAT(0) cube complex X containing a factor system is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, and the associated hyperbolic spaces are all uniform quasi-trees. (Roughly speaking,  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  7  X contains a factor-system if the following collection of subcomplexes has finite multiplicity: the smallest collection of convex subcomplexes that contains all combinatorial hyperplanes and is closed under collecting images of closest-point projection maps between its elements.) The class of cube complexes that are HHS in this way contains all universal covers of special cube complexes with finitely many immersed hyperplanes, but the cube complexes containing factor systems have not been completely characterized. In the forthcoming paper [DHS15], we show that the above question is closely related to a conjecture of the first two authors on the simplicial boundary of cube complexes [BH, Conjecture 2.8]. More generally, we ask the following: Question B (Factor systems in median spaces). Is there a theory of factor systems in median spaces generalizing that in CAT(0) cube complexes, such that median spaces/groups admitting factor systems are hierarchically hyperbolic? Presumably, a positive answer to Question B would involve the measured wallspace structure on median spaces discussed in [CDH10]. One would have to develop an analogue of the contact graph of a cube complex to serve as the underlying hyperbolic space. One must be careful since, e.g., the Baumslag-Solitar group BSp1, 2q is median but has exponential Dehn function [Ger92] and is thus not a hierarchically hyperbolic space, by Corollary 7.5. On the other hand, if the answer to Question B is positive, one might try to do the same thing for coarse median spaces. There are a number of other groups and spaces where it is natural to inquire whether or not they are hierarchically hyperbolic. For example: Question C (Handlebody group). Let H be a compact oriented 3–dimensional genus g handlebody, and let Gg ď MCGpBHq be the group of isotopy classes of diffeomorphisms of H. Is Gg a hierarchically hyperbolic group? Question D (Graph products). Let G be a (finite) graph product of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Is G hierarchically hyperbolic? The answer to Question C is presumably no, while the answer to D is most likely yes. The positive answer to Question D would follow from a strengthened version of Theorem 8.6. There are other candidate examples of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. For example, it is natural to ask whether a right-angled Artin group with the syllable-length metric, introduced in [KK14], which is analogous to Teichmüller space with the Weil-Petersson metric, is hierarchically hyperbolic. As far as the difference between hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups is concerned, we conjecture that the following question has a positive answer: Question E. Is it true that the fundamental group G of a non-geometric graph manifold is a hierarchically hyperbolic group if and only if G is virtually compact special? It is known that G as above is virtually compact special if and only if it is chargeless in the sense of [BS05], see [HP13]. There remain a number of open questions about the geometry of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces in general. Theorem 7.3 ensures, via work of Bowditch, that every asymptotic cone of a hierarchically hyperbolic space is a median space [Bow13]; further properties in this direction are established in Section 6. Motivated by combining the main result of [Sis11] on 3–manifold groups with Theorem 10.1, we ask: Question F. Are any two asymptotic cones of a given hierarchically hyperbolic space biLipschitz equivalent?  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  8  The notion of hierarchical quasiconvexity of a subgroup of a hierarchically hyperbolic group pG, Sq generalizes quasiconvexity in word-hyperbolic groups and cubical convex-cocompactness in groups acting geometrically on CAT(0) cube complexes with factor-systems. Another notion of quasiconvexity is stability, defined by Durham-Taylor in [DT14]. This is a quite different notion of quasiconvexity, since stable subgroups are necessarily hyperbolic. In [DT14], the authors characterize stable subgroups of the mapping class group; it is reasonable to ask for a generalization of their results to hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Many hierarchically hyperbolic spaces admit multiple hierarchically hyperbolic structures. However, as discussed in [BHS14], a CAT(0) cube complex with a factor-system has a “minimal” factor-system, i.e., one that is contained in all other factor systems. In this direction, it is natural to ask whether a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq admits a hierarchically hyperbolic structure that is canonical in some way. Organization of the paper. Section 1 contains the full definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic space (and, more generally, a hierarchical space) and some discussion of background. Section 2 contains various basic consequences of the definition, and some tricks that are used repeatedly. In Section 3, we prove the realization theorem (Theorem 3.1). In Section 4 we establish the existence of hierarchy paths (Theorem 4.4) and the distance formula (Theorem 4.5). Section 5 is devoted to hierarchical quasiconvexity and product regions, and Section 6 to coarse convex hulls and relatively hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. The coarse median property and its consequences are detailed in Section 7. The combination theorems for trees of spaces, graphs of groups, and products are proved in Section 8, and groups hyperbolic relative to HHG are studied in Section 9. This is applied to 3-manifolds in Section 10. Finally, in Section 11, we prove that mapping class groups are hierarchically hyperbolic. Acknowledgments. MFH and AS thank the organizers of the Ventotene 2015 conference, and JB and MFH thank CIRM and the organizers of GAGTA 2015, where some of the work on this paper was completed. 1. The main definition and background on hierarchically hyperbolic spaces 1.1. The axioms. We begin by defining a hierarchically hyperbolic space. We will work in the context of a quasigeodesic space, X , i.e., a metric space where any two points can be connected by a uniform-quality quasigeodesic. Obviously, if X is a geodesic space, then it is a quasigeodesic space. Most of the examples we are interested in are geodesic spaces, but in order to construct hierarchically hyperbolic structures on naturally-occurring subspaces of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, we must work in the slightly more general setting of quasigeodesic spaces. Definition 1.1 (Hierarchically hyperbolic space). The q–quasigeodesic space pX , dX q is a hierarchically hyperbolic space if there exists δ ě 0, an index set S, and a set tCW : W P Su of δ–hyperbolic spaces pCU, dU q, such that the following conditions are satisfied: (1) (Projections.) There is a set tπW : X Ñ 2CW | W P Su of projections sending points in X to sets of diameter bounded by some ξ ě 0 in the various CW P S. Moreover, there exists K so that each πW is pK, Kq–coarsely Lipschitz. (2) (Nesting.) S is equipped with a partial order Ď, and either S “ H or S contains a unique Ď–maximal element; when V Ď W , we say V is nested in W . We require that W Ď W for all W P S. For each W P S, we denote by SW the set of V P S such that V Ď W . Moreover, for all V, W P S with V Ĺ W there is a specified CV . subset ρVW Ă CW with diamCW pρVW q ď ξ. There is also a projection ρW V : CW Ñ 2 V (The similarity in notation is justified by viewing ρW as a coarsely constant map CV Ñ 2CW .)  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  9  (3) (Orthogonality.) S has a symmetric and anti-reflexive relation called orthogonality: we write V KW when V, W are orthogonal. Also, whenever V Ď W and W KU , we require that V KU . Finally, we require that for each T P S and each U P ST for which tV P ST | V KU u ‰ H, there exists W P ST ´ tT u, so that whenever V KU and V Ď T , we have V Ď W . Finally, if V KW , then V, W are not Ď–comparable. (4) (Transversality and consistency.) If V, W P S are not orthogonal and neither is nested in the other, then we say V, W are transverse, denoted V &W . There exists κ0 ě 0 such that if V &W , then there are sets ρVW Ď CW and ρW V Ď CV each of diameter at most ξ and satisfying: ( min dW pπW pxq, ρVW q, dV pπV pxq, ρW V q ď κ0 for all x P X . For V, W P S satisfying V Ď W and for all x P X , we have: ( min dW pπW pxq, ρVW q, diamCV pπV pxq Y ρW V pπW pxqqq ď κ0 .  &  The preceding two inequalities are the consistency inequalities for points in X . V Finally, if U Ď V , then dW pρU W , ρW q ď κ0 whenever W P S satisfies either V Ĺ W or V &W and W U . (Finite complexity.) There exists n ě 0, the complexity of X (with respect to S), so that any set of pairwise–Ď–comparable elements has cardinality at most n. (Large links.) There exist λ ě 1 and E ě maxtξ, κ0 u such that the following holds. Let W P S and let x, x1 P X . Let N “ λdW pπW pxq, πW px1 qq ` λ. Then there exists tTi ui“1,...,tN u Ď SW ´ tW u such that for all T P SW ´ tW u, either T P STi for some i, or dT pπT pxq, πT px1 qq ă E. Also, dW pπW pxq, ρTWi q ď N for each i. (Bounded geodesic image.) For all W P S, all V P SW ´ tW u, and all geodesics V γ of CW , either diamCV pρW V pγqq ď E or γ X NE pρW q ‰ H. (Partial Realization.) There exists a constant α with the following property. Let tVj u be a family of pairwise orthogonal elements of S, and let pj P πVj pX q Ď CVj . Then there exists x P X so that: ‚ dVj px, pj q ď α for all j,  (5) (6)  (7) (8)  V  ‚ for each j and each V P S with Vj Ď V , we have dV px, ρVj q ď α, and V ‚ if W &Vj for some j, then dW px, ρWj q ď α. (9) (Uniqueness.) For each κ ě 0, there exists θu “ θu pκq such that if x, y P X and dpx, yq ě θu , then there exists V P S such that dV px, yq ě κ. We say that the q–quasigeodesic metric spaces tXi u are uniformly hierarchically hyperbolic if each Xi satisfies the axioms above and all constants, including the complexities, can be chosen uniformly. We often refer to S, together with the nesting and orthogonality relations, the projections, and the hierarchy paths, as a hierarchically hyperbolic structure for the space X . Observe that X is hierarchically hyperbolic with respect to S “ H, i.e., hierarchically hyperbolic of complexity 0, if and only if X is bounded. Similarly, X is hierarchically hyperbolic of complexity 1 with respect to S “ tX u, if and only if X is hyperbolic. Notation 1.2. Where it will not cause confusion, given U P S, we will often suppress the projection map πU when writing distances in CU , i.e., given x, y P X and p P CU we write dU px, yq for dU pπU pxq, πU pyqq and dU px, pq for dU pπU pxq, pq. Note that when we measure distance between a pair of sets (typically both of bounded diameter) we are taking the minimum distance between the two sets. Given A Ă X and U P S we let πU pAq denote YaPA πU paq. Remark 1.3 (Surjectivity of projections). One can always replace each CU with a thickening of πU pX q, and hence make each πU coarsely surjective. The details can be found in the  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  10  forthcoming paper [DHS15], where this procedure gets used; the resulting spaces are termed normalized hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Remark 1.4 (Large link function). It appears as though there is no actual need to require in Definition 1.1.(6) that N depend linearly on dW px, x1 q. Instead, we could have hypothesized that for any C ě 0, there exists N pCq so that the statement of the axiom holds with N “ N pCq whenever dW px, x1 q ď C. However, one could deduce from this and the rest of the axioms that N pCq grows linearly in C, so we have elected to simply build linearity into the definition. Remark 1.5 (Summary of constants). Each hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq is associated with a collection of constants often, as above, denoted δ, ξ, n, κ0 , E, θu , K, where: (1) CU is δ–hyperbolic for each U P S, (2) each πU has image of diameter at most ξ and each πU is pK, Kq–coarsely Lipschitz, and each ρU V has (image of) diameter at most ξ, (3) for each x P X , the tuple pπU pxqqU PS is κ0 –consistent, (4) E is the constant from the bounded geodesic image axiom. Whenever working in a fixed hierarchically hyperbolic space, we use the above notation freely. We can, and shall, assume that E ě q, E ě δ, E ě ξ, E ě κ0 , E ě K, and E ě α. Remark 1.6. We note that in Definition 1.1.(1), the assumption that the projections are Lipschitz can be replaced by the weaker assumption that there is a proper function of the projected distance which is a lower bound for the distance in the space X . From this weaker assumption, the fact that the projections are actually coarsely Lipschitz then follows from the fact that we assume X to be quasi-geodesic. Since the Lipschitz hypothesis is cleaner to state and, in practice, fairly easy to verify, we just remark on this for those that might find this fact useful in proving that more exotic spaces are hierarchically hyperbolic.  &  1.2. Comparison to the definition in [BHS14]. Definition 1.1 is very similar to the definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic space given in [BHS14], with the following differences: (1) The existence of hierarchy paths and the distance formula were stated as axioms in [BHS14]; below, we deduce them from the other axioms. Similarly, the below realization theorem was formerly an axiom, but has been replaced by the (weaker) partial realization axiom. (2) We now require X to be a quasigeodesic space. In [BHS14], this follows from the existence of hierarchy paths, which was an axiom there. (3) We now require the projections πU : X Ñ CU to be coarsely Lipschitz; although this requirement was not imposed explicitly in [BHS14], it follows from the distance formula, which was an axiom there. (4) In [BHS14], there were five consistency inequalities; in Definition 1.1.(4), there are two. The last three inequalities in the definition from [BHS14] follow from Proposition 1.7 below. (Essentially, the partial realization axiom has replaced part of the old consistency axiom.) V (5) In Definition 1.1.(4), we require that, if U Ď V , then dW pρU W , ρW q ď κ0 whenever W P S satisfies either V Ĺ W or V &W and W U . In the context of [BHS14], this follows by considering the standard product regions constructed using realization (see [BHS14, Section 13.1] and Section 5.2 of the present paper). Proposition 1.7 (ρ–consistency). There exists κ1 so that the following holds. Suppose that U, V, W P S satisfy both of the following conditions: U Ĺ V or U &V ; and U Ĺ W or U &W . Then, if V &W , then ( V U W min dCW pρU W , ρW q, dCV pρV , ρV q ď κ1  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  11  and if V Ĺ W , then ( V U W U min dCW pρU W , ρW q, diamCV pρV Y ρV pρW qq ď κ1 . Proof. Suppose that U Ĺ V or U &V and the same holds for U, W . Suppose that V &W or V Ď W . Choose p P πU pX q. There is a uniform α so that partial realization (DefiniU tion 1.1.(8)) provides x P X so that dU px, pq ď α and dT px, ρU T q ď α whenever ρT is defined U and coarsely constant. In particular, dV px, ρU V q ď α and dW px, ρW q ď α. The claim now follows from Definition 1.1.(4), with κ1 “ κ0 ` α. l In view of the discussion above, we have: Proposition 1.8. The pair pX , Sq satisfies Definition 1.1 if and only if it is hierarchically hyperbolic in the sense of [BHS14]. In particular, as observed in [BHS14]: Proposition 1.9. If pX , Sq is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, and X 1 is a quasigeodesic space quasi-isometric to X , then there is a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX 1 , Sq. 1.3. A variant on the axioms. Here we introduce two slightly simpler versions of the HHS axioms and show that in the case, as in most situations which arise naturally, that the projections are coarsely surjective, then it suffices to verify the simpler axioms. The following is a subset of the nesting axiom; here we remove the definition of the CV in the case V Ĺ W . projection map ρW V : CW Ñ 2 Definition 1.1.(2)1 (Nesting variant). S is equipped with a partial order Ď, and either S “ H or S contains a unique Ď–maximal element; when V Ď W , we say V is nested in W . We require that W Ď W for all W P S. For each W P S, we denote by SW the set of V P S such that V Ď W . Moreover, for all V, W P S with V Ĺ W there is a specified subset ρVW Ă CW with diamCW pρVW q ď ξ. The following is a subset of the transversality and consistency axiom. Definition 1.1.(4)1 (Transversality). If V, W P S are not orthogonal and neither is nested in the other, then we say V, W are transverse, denoted V &W . There exists κ0 ě 0 such that if V &W , then there are sets ρVW Ď CW and ρW V Ď CV each of diameter at most ξ and satisfying: ( min dW pπW pxq, ρVW q, dV pπV pxq, ρW V q ď κ0  &  for all x P X . V Finally, if U Ď V , then dW pρU W , ρW q ď κ0 whenever W P S satisfies either V Ĺ W or V &W and W U . The following is a variant of the bounded geodesic image axiom: Definition 1.1.(7)1 (Bounded geodesic image variant). Suppose that x, y P X and V Ĺ W have the property that there exists a geodesic from πW pxq to πW pyq which stays pE ` 2δq-far from ρVW . Then dV px, yq ď E. Proposition 1.10. Given a quasigeodesic space X and an index set S, then pX , Sq is an HHS if it satisfies the axioms of Definition 1.1 with the following changes: ‚ Replace Definition 1.1.(2) by Definition 1.1.(2)1 . ‚ Replace Definition 1.1.(4) by Definition 1.1.(4)1 . ‚ Replace Definition 1.1.(7) by Definition 1.1.(7)1 . ‚ Assume that for each CU the map πU pX q is uniformly coarsely surjective.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  12  Proof. To verify Definition 1.1.(2), for each V, W P S with V Ĺ W , we define a map CV as follows. If p P CW ´ N pρV q, then let ρW ppq “ π pxq for some x P X ρW E W V V : CW Ñ 2 V with πW pxq — p. Since p does not lie E–close to ρVW , this definition is coarsely independent of x by Definition 1.1.(7)1 . On NE pρVW q, we define ρW V arbitrarily. By definition, the resulting map satisfies Definition 1.1.(4). Moreover, coarse surjectivity of πW and Definition 1.1.(7)1 ensure that Definition 1.1.(7) holds. The rest of the axioms hold by hypothesis. l Remark 1.11. The definition of an HHS provided by Proposition 1.10 is convenient because it does not require one to define certain maps between hyperbolic spaces: Definition 1.1.(2)1 is strictly weaker than Definition 1.1.(2). On the other hand, it is often convenient to work with HHSes in which some of the projections πU are not coarsely surjective; for example, this simplifies the proof that hierarchically quasiconvex subspaces inherit HHS structures in Proposition 5.6. Hence we have included both definitions. In practice, we almost always apply consistency and bounded geodesic image in concert, which involves applying bounded geodesic image to geodesics of CW joining points in πW pX q. Accordingly, Definition 1.1.(7)1 is motivated by the following easy observation: Proposition 1.12. Let pX , Sq be an HHS. Then the conclusion of Definition 1.1.(7)1 holds for all x, y P X and V, W P S with V Ĺ W . 1.4. Hierarchical spaces. Although most of our focus in this paper is on hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, there are important contexts in which hyperbolicity of the spaces CU, U P S is not used; notably, this is the case for the realization theorem (Theorem 3.1). Because of the utility of a more general definition in later applications, we now define the following more general notion of a hierarchical space; the reader interested only in the applications to the mapping class group, 3–manifolds, cube complexes, etc. may safely ignore this subsection. Definition 1.13 (Hierarchical space). A hierarchical space is a pair pX , Sq as in Definition 1.1, with X a quasigeodesic space and S an index set, where to each U P S we associate a geodesic metric space CU , which we do not require to be hyperbolic. As before, there are coarsely Lipschitz projections πU : X Ñ CU and relative projections ρU V : CU Ñ CV whenever U, V are non-orthogonal. We require all statements in the Definition 1.1 to hold, except for hyperbolicity of the CU . Remark 1.14. Let X be a quasigeodesic space that is hyperbolic relative to a collection P of subspaces. Then X has a hierarchical space structure: the associated spaces onto which we project are the various P, together with the space Xp obtained by coning off the elements of P in X . When the elements of P are themselves hierarchically hyperbolic, we obtain a hierarchically hyperbolic structure on X (see Section 9). Otherwise, the hierarchical structure need not be hierarchically hyperbolic since Xp is the only one of the elements of S known to be hyperbolic. Remark 1.15. Other than hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, we are mainly interested in hierarchical spaces pX , Sq where for all U P S, except possibly when U is Ď–minimal, we have that CU is hyperbolic. This is the case, for example, in relatively hyperbolic spaces. 1.5. Consistency and partial realization points. The following definitions, which abstract the consistency inequalities from Definition 1.1.(4) and the partial realization axiom, Definition 1.1.(8), play important roles throughout our discussion. We will consider this topic in depth in Section 3. ś Definition 1.16 (Consistent). Fix κ ě 0 and let ~b P U PS 2CU be a tuple such that for each U P S, the coordinate bU is a subset of CU with diamCU pbU q ď κ. The tuple ~b is κ–consistent  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  13  if, whenever V &W , ( min dW pbW , ρVW q, dV pbV , ρW V q ďκ and whenever V Ď W , ( min dW pbW , ρVW q, diamCV pbV Y ρW V pbW qq ď κ. Definition 1.17 (Partial realization point). Given θ ě 0 and a κ–consistent tuple ~b, we say that x is a θ–partial realization point for tVj u Ď S if (1) dVj px, bVj q ď θ for all j, V  (2) for all j, we have dV px, ρVj q ď θ for any V P S with Vj Ď V , and V (3) for all W such that W &Vj for some j, we have dW px, ρWj q ď θ. 1.6. Level. The following definition is very useful for proving statements about hierarchically hyperbolic spaces inductively. Although it is natural, and sometimes useful, to induct on complexity, it is often better to induct on level: Definition 1.18 (Level). Let pX, Sq be hierarchically hyperbolic. The level `U of U P S is defined inductively as follows. If U is Ď-minimal then we say that its level is 1. The element U has level k ` 1 if k is the maximal integer such that there exists V Ď U with `V “ k and V ‰ U . Given U P S, for each ` ě 0, let S`U be the set of V Ď U with `U ´ `V ď ` and let T`U “ S`U ´ S`´1 U . 1.7. Maps between hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Definition 1.19 (Hieromorphism). Let pX , Sq and pX 1 , S1 q be hierarchically hyperbolic structures on the spaces X , X 1 respectively. A hieromorphism, consists of a map f : X Ñ X 1 , an injective map f ♦ : S Ñ S1 preserving nesting, transversality, and orthogonality, and, for each U P S a map f ˚ pU q : CU Ñ Cpf ♦ pU qq which is a quasi-isometric embedding where the constants are uniform over all elements of S and for which the following two diagrams coarsely commute (with uniform constants) for all nonorthogonal U, V P S: f  X πU    CpU q  f ˚ pU q  / X1   πf ♦ pU q  / Cpf ♦ pU qq  and CU ρU V  f ˚ pU q  / Cpf ♦ pU qq ♦    CV  f ˚ pV  q  f pU q  ρf ♦ pV q  / Cpf ♦ pV qq  where ρU V : CU Ñ CV is the projection from Definition 1.1, which, by construction, is coarsely constant if U &V or U Ď V . As the functions f, f ˚ pU q, and f ♦ all have distinct domains, it is often clear from the context which is the relevant map; in that case we periodically abuse notation slightly by dropping the superscripts and just calling all of the maps f . Definition 1.20 (Automorphism, hierarchically hyperbolic group). An automorphism of the hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq is a hieromorphism f : pX , Sq Ñ pX , Sq such that f ♦ is bijective and each f ˚ pU q is an isometry; hence f : X Ñ X is a uniform quasi-isometry by the distance formula (Theorem 4.5). The full automorphism group of pX , Sq is denoted AutpSq. The finitely generated group G is hierarchically hyperbolic if there exists a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq and an action G Ñ AutpSq so that the uniform quasi-action of G on X is metrically proper and cobounded and S contains finitely many G–orbits. Note that  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  14  if G is hierarchically hyperbolic by virtue of its action on the hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq, then pG, Sq is a hierarchically hyperbolic structure with respect to any word-metric on G; for any U P S the projection is the composition of the projection X Ñ CU with a G–equivariant quasi-isometry G Ñ X . In this case, pG, Sq (with the implicit hyperbolic spaces and projections) is a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure. Definition 1.21 (Equivariant hieromorphism). Let pX , Sq and pX 1 , G1 q be hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and consider actions G Ñ AutpSq and G1 Ñ AutpS1 q. For each g P G, let pfg , fg♦ , tfg˚ pU quq denote its image in AutpSq (resp., for g 1 P G1 we obtain pfg1 , fg♦1 , tfg˚1 pU quq in AutpS1 q). Let φ : G Ñ G1 be a homomorphism. The hieromorphism pf, f ♦ , tf ˚ pU quq : pX , Sq Ñ ♦ pX 1 , S1 q is φ–equivariant if for all g P G and U P S, we have f ♦ pfg♦ pU qq “ fφpgq pf ♦ pU qq and the following diagram (uniformly) coarsely commutes: f ˚ pU q  CU fg˚ pU q    Cpfg♦ pU qq  f ˚ pfg♦ pU qq  / Cpf ♦ pU qq /  ˚ pU qq fφpgq ♦ ♦ Cpf pfg pU qqq    œ  œ  In this case, f : X Ñ X 1 is (uniformly) coarsely φ-equivariant in the usual sense. Also, we ♦ : S1 , and f ♦ : S Ñ S1 . note for the reader that fg♦ : S , while fφpgq 2. Tools for studying HHSs We now collect some basic consequences of the axioms that are used repeatedly throughout the paper. However, this section need not all be read in advance. Indeed, the reader should feel free to skip this section on a first reading and return to it later when necessary. Throughout this section, we work in a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq. 2.1. Handy basic consequences of the axioms. Lemma 2.1 (“Finite dimension”). Let pX , Sq be a hierarchically hyperbolic space of complexity n and let U1 , . . . , Uk P S be pairwise-orthogonal. Then k ď n. Proof. By Definition 1.1.(3), there exists W1 P S, not Ď–maximal, so that U2 , . . . , Uk Ď W1 . Applying Definition 1.1 inductively yields a sequence Wk´1 Ď Wk´2 Ď . . . Ď W1 Ď S of distinct elements, where S is Ď–maximal, so that Ui´1 , . . . , Uk Ď Wi for 1 ď i ď k ´ 1. Hence k ď n by Definition 1.1.(5). l Lemma 2.2. There exists χ so that |S1 | ď χ whenever S1 Ď S does not contain a pair of transverse elements. Proof. Let S1 Ď S be a collection of pairwise non-transverse elements, and let n be large enough that any collection of pairwise orthogonal (resp. pairwise Ď-comparable) elements of S has cardinality at most n; the complexity provides such an n, by Definition 1.1.(5) and Lemma 2.1. By Ramsey’s theorem, there exists N so that if |S1 | ą N then S1 either contains a collection of elements, of cardinality at least n ` 1, that are pairwise orthogonal elements or pairwise Ď-comparable. Hence, |S1 | ď N . l Lemma 2.3 (Consistency for pairs of points). Let x, y P X and V, W P S satisfy V &W and dV px, yq, dW px, yq ą 10E. Then, up to exchanging V and W , we have dV px, ρW V q ď E and V dW py, ρW q ď E. V Proof. Suppose that dV px, ρW V q ą E, which then, by consistency, implies dW px, ρW q ď V E. Then, either dW py, ρW q ď 9E, in which case dW px, yq ď 10E, a contradiction, or dW py, ρVW q ą E, in which case consistency implies that dV py, ρW l V q ď E.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  15  Corollary 2.4. For x, y, V, W as in Lemma 2.3, and any z P X , there exists U P tV, W u such that dU pz, tx, yuq ď 10E. V Proof. By Lemma 2.3, we may assume that dV px, ρW V q, dW py, ρW q ď E. Suppose that dW pz, tx, yuq ą 10E. Then dW pz, ρVW q ą 9E, so that, by consistency, dV pz, ρW V q ď E, whence dV pz, xq ď 2E. l  The following is needed for Theorem 3.1 and in the forthcoming [DHS15]. Lemma 2.5 (Passing large projections up the Ď–lattice). For every C ě 0 there exists N with the following property. Let V P S, let x, y P X , and let tSi uN i“1 Ď SV be distinct and satisfy dCSi px, yq ě E. Then there exists S P SV and i so that Si Ĺ S and dCS px, yq ě C. Proof. The proof is by induction on the level k of a Ď-minimal S P SV into which each Si is nested. The base case k “ 1 is empty. Suppose that the statement holds for a given N “ N pkq when the level of S is at most k. Suppose further that |tSi u| ě N pk ` 1q (where N pk ` 1q is a constant much larger than N pkq that will be determined shortly) and there exists a Ď-minimal S P SV of level k ` 1 into which each Si is nested. There are two cases. If dCS px, yq ě C, then we are done. If not, then the large link axiom (Definition 1.1.(6)) yields K “ KpCq and T1 , . . . , TK , each properly nested into S (and hence of level less than k ` 1), so that any given Si is nested into some Tj . In particular, if N pk ` 1q ě KN pkq, there exists a j so that at least N pkq elements of tSi u are nested into Tj . By the induction hypothesis and the finite complexity axiom (Definition 1.1.(5)), we are done. l The next lemma is used in the proof of Proposition 4.12, on which the existence of hierarchy paths (Theorem 4.4) relies. It is used again in Section 7 to construct coarse media. Lemma 2.6 (Centers are consistent). There exists κ with the following property. Let x, y, z P X . Let ~b “ pbW qW PS be so that bW is a point in CW with the property that there exists a geodesic triangle in CW with vertices in πW pxq, πW pyq, πW pzq each of whose sides contains a point within distance δ of bW . Then ~b is κ–consistent. Proof. Recall that for w P tx, y, zu the tuple pπV pwqqV PS is E–consistent. Let U, V P S be transverse. Then, by E–consistency, up to exchanging U and V and substituting z for one U U of x, y, we have dV px, ρU V q, dV py, ρV q ď E, so dV px, yq ď 3E (recall that the diameter of ρV is at most E). Since bV lies at distance δ from the geodesic joining πV pxq, πV pyq, we have dV pbV , ρU V q ď 3E ` δ, whence the lemma holds with κ “ 3E ` δ. Suppose now U Ĺ V . If bV is within distance 10E of ρU V , then we are done. Otherwise, up to permuting x, y, z, any geodesic rπV pxq, πV pyqs is 5E–far from ρU V . By consistency of pπW pxqq, pπW pyqq and bounded geodesic image, we have dU px, yq ď 10E, diamU pρVU pπV pyqqYπU pyqq ď E, and diamU pρVU pbV Y πV pyqqq ď 10E. The first inequality and the definition of bU imply dU pbU , yq ď 20E, and taking into account the other inequalities we get diamU pρVU pbV qYbU q ď 100E. l 2.2. Partially ordering sets of maximal relevant elements of S. In this subsection, we describe a construction used several times in this paper, including: in the proof of realization (Theorem 3.1), in the construction of hierarchy paths (Theorem 4.4), and in the proof of the distance formula (Theorem 4.5). We expect that this construction will have numerous other applications, as is the case with the corresponding partial ordering in the case of the mapping class group, see for example [BKMM12, BM11, CLM12]. ś Fix x P X and a tuple ~b P U PS 2impπU q , where the U –coordinate bU is a set of diameter at most some fixed ξ ě 0. For example, ~b could be the tuple pπU pyqq for some y P X .  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  16  In the remainder of this section, we choose κ ě 0 and require that ~b is κ–consistent. (Recall that if ~b is the tuple of projections of a point in X , then ~b is E–consistent.) Definition 2.7 (Relevant). First, fix θ ě 100 maxtκ, Eu. Then U P S is relevant (with respect to x, ~b, θ) if dU px, bU q ą θ. Denote by Relpx, ~b, θq the set of relevant elements. Let Relmax px, ~b, θq be a subset of Relpx, ~b, θq whose elements are pairwise Ď–incomparable (for example, they could all be Ď–maximal in Relpx, ~b, θq, or they could all have the same level). Define a relation ĺ on Relmax px, ~b, θq as follows. Given U, V P Relmax px, ~b, θq, we have U ĺ V if U “ V or if U &V and dU pρVU , bU q ď κ. Figure 1 illustrates U ă V .  Figure 1. Heuristic picture of U ă V (for ~b the coordinates of y P X , for concreteness). The idea is that “on the way” from x to y one “first encounters” U and is forced to change the projection from πU pxq to πU pyq „ ρVU . In doing so the projection to V is not affected. Proposition 2.8. The relation ĺ is a partial order. Moreover, either U, V are ĺ–comparable or U KV . Proof. Clearly ĺ is reflexive. Antisymmetry follows from Lemma 2.9. Suppose that U, V are ĺ–incomparable. If U KV , we are done, and we cannot have U Ď V or V Ď U , so suppose U &V . Then, by ĺ–incomparability of U, V , we have dU pρVU , bU q ą κ and dV pρU V , bV q ą ~ κ, contradicting κ–consistency of b. This proves the assertion that transverse elements of Relmax px, ~b, θq are ĺ–comparable. Finally, transitivity follows from Lemma 2.10. l Lemma 2.9. The relation ĺ is antisymmetric. Proof. If U ĺ V and U ‰ V , then dU pbU , ρVU q ď κ, so dU px, ρVU q ą θ ´ κ ě 99κ ą E. Then, U dV px, ρU l V q ď E, by consistency. Thus dV pbV , ρV q ą κ, and so, by definition V ł U . Lemma 2.10. The relation ĺ is transitive. Proof. Suppose that U ĺ V ĺ W . If U “ V or V “ W , then U ĺ W , and by Lemma 2.9, we cannot have U “ W unless U “ V “ W . Hence suppose U &V and dU pρVU , bU q ď κ, while ~ V &W and dV pρW V , bV q ď κ. By the definition of Relmax px, b, θq, we have dT px, bT q ą 100κ for T P tU, V, W u. W V V We first claim that dV pρU V , ρV q ą 10E. Indeed, dU pbU , ρU q ď κ, so dU pρU , xq ě 90κ, U whence dV pρV , xq ď E ď κ by E–consistency of the tuple pπT pxqqT PS . On the other hand, U W dV pρW V , bV q ď κ, so dV pρV , ρV q ą 10E as claimed. Hence, by Lemma 2.11, we have U &W .  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  17  Since diampimpπW qq ą 100κ — indeed, dW px, bW q ą 100κ and bW P impπW pX qq — partial V realization (Definition 1.1.(8)) provides a P X satisfying dW pa, tρU W , ρW uq ě 10κ. We thus have dU pa, ρW U q ď E by E–consistency of pπT paqqT PS , and the same is true V with V replacing U . Hence dV pρU V , aq ą E, so consistency implies dU pa, ρU q ď E. Thus W W dU pρVU , ρW U q ď 2E. Thus dU pbU , ρU q ď 2E ` κ ă 10κ, whence dU px, ρU q ą 50κ ą E, so U dW px, ρW q ď E by consistency and the fact that U &W . It follows that dW pbW , ρU Wq ě 100κ ´ E ą κ, so, again by consistency, dU pbU , ρU q ď κ, i.e., U ĺ W . l W Lemma 2.11. Let U, V, W P S satisfy diampimpπU qq, diampimpπV qq, diampimpπW qq ą 10E, W and U &V, W &V , and dV pρU V , ρV q ą 10E. Suppose moreover that U and W are Ď–incomparable. Then U &W . Proof. If U KW , then by the partial realization axiom (Definition 1.1.(8)) and the lower bound on diameters, there exists an E–partial realization point x for tU, W u so that dU pρVU , xq, dW pρVW , xq ą E. W U This contradicts consistency since dV pρU V , ρV q ą 10E; indeed, by consistency dV pρV , xq ď W U W E, dV pρV , xq ď E, i.e., dV pρV , ρV q ď 2E. Hence U &W . l  2.3. Coloring relevant elements. In this subsection, the key result is Lemma 2.14, which we will apply in proving the existence of hierarchy paths in Section 4.3. Fix x, y P X . As above, let Relpx, y, 100Eq consist of those V P S for which dV px, yq ą 100E. Recall that, given U P S, we denote by T`U the set of V P SU such that `U ´`V “ `. In particular, if V, V 1 P T`U and V Ď V 1 , then V “ V 1 . Let Rel`U px, y, 100Eq “ Relpx, y, 100EqX T`U , the set of V Ď U so that dV px, yq ą 100E and `U ´ `V “ `. By Proposition 2.8, the relation ĺ on Rel`U px, y, 100Eq defined as follows is a partial order: 1 V ĺ V 1 if either V “ V 1 or dV py, ρVV q ď E. Definition 2.12 (Relevant graph). Denote by G the graph with vertex-set Rel`U px, y, 100Eq, with two vertices adjacent if and only if the corresponding elements of Rel`U px, y, 100Eq are orthogonal. Let G c denote the complementary graph of G, i.e., the graph with the same vertices and edges corresponding to ĺ–comparability. The next lemma is an immediate consequence of Proposition 2.8: Lemma 2.13. Elements of V, V 1 P Rel`U px, y, 100Eq are adjacent in G if and only if they are ĺ–incomparable. Lemma 2.14 (Coloring relevant elements). Let χ be the maximal cardinality of a set of pairwise orthogonal elements of T`U . Then there exists a χ–coloring of the set of relevant elements of T`U such that non–transverse elements have different colors. Proof. Since each clique in G — i.e., each ĺ–antichain in Rel`U px, y, 100Eq — has cardinality at most χ, Dilworth’s theorem [Dil50, Theorem 1.1] implies that G can be colored with χ colors in such a way that ĺ–incomparable elements have different colors; hence non-transverse elements have different colors. l Remark 2.15. The constant χ provided by Lemma 2.14 is bounded by the complexity of pX , Sq, by Lemma 2.2. 3. Realization of consistent tuples The goal of this section is to prove Theorem 3.1. In this section we will work with a fixed hierarchical space pX , Sq. We will use the concepts of consistency and partial realization points; see Definition 1.16 and Definition 1.17.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  18  Theorem 3.1 (Realization of consistent tuples). For each κ ě 1 there exist θe , θu ě 0 such ś that the following holds. Let ~b P W PS 2CW be κ–consistent; for each W , let bW denote the CW –coordinate of ~b. Then there exists x P X so that dW pbW , πW pxqq ď θe for all CW P S. Moreover, x is coarsely unique in the sense that the set of all x which satisfy dW pbW , πW pxqq ď θe in each CW P S, has diameter at most θu . Proof. The main task is to prove the following claim about a κ–consistent tuple ~b: Claim 1. Let tVj u be a family of pairwise orthogonal elements of S, all of level at most `. Then there exists θe “ θe p`, κq ą 100Eκα and pairwise-orthogonal tUi u so that: (1) each Ui is nested into some Vj , (2) for each Vj there exists some Ui nested into it, and (3) any E–partial realization point x for tUi u satisfies dW pbW , xq ď θe for each W P S for which there exists j with W Ď Vj . Applying Claim 1 when ` “ `S , where S P S is the unique Ď–maximal element, along with the Partial Realization axiom (Definition 1.1.(8)), completes the existence proof, giving us a constant θe . If x, y both have the desired property, then dV px, yq ď 2θe ` κ for all V P S, whence the uniqueness axiom (Definition 1.1.(9)) ensures that dpx, yq ď θu , for an appropriate θu . Hence to prove the theorem it remains to prove Claim 1, which we do now. The claim when ` “ 1 follows from the partial realization axiom (Definition 1.1.8), so we assume that the claim holds for ` ´ 1 ě 1, with θe p` ´ 1, κq “ θe1 , and prove it for level `. Reduction to the case |tVj u| “ 1: It suffices to prove the claim in the case where tVj u has a single element, V . To see this, note that once we prove the claim for each Vj separately, yielding a collection of pairwise-orthogonal sets tUij Ď Vj u with the desired properties, then we take the union of these sets to obtain the claim for the collection tVj u. The case tVj u “ tV u: Fix V P S so that `V “ `. If for each x P X that satisfies dV px, bV q ď E we have dW pbW , xq ď 100Eκα for W P SV , then the claim follows with tUi u “ tV u. Hence, we can suppose that this is not the case. We are ready for the main argument, which is contained in Lemma 3.2 below. We will construct tUi u incrementally, using Lemma 3.2, which essentially says that either we are done at a certain stage or we can add new elements to tUi u. We will say that the collection U of elements of SV is totally orthogonal if any pair of distinct elements of U are orthogonal. Given a totally orthogonal family U we say that W P SV is U–generic if there exists U P U so that W is not orthogonal to U . Notice that no W is H–generic. A totally orthogonal collection U Ď SV is C–good if any E–partial realization point x for U has the property that for each W P SV we have dW px, bW q ď C. (Notice that our goal is to find such U.) A totally orthogonal collection U Ď SV is C–generically good if any E–partial realization point x for U has the property that for each U–generic W P SV we have dW px, bW q ď C (e.g., for U “ H). We can now quickly finish the proof of the claim using Lemma 3.2 about extending generically good sets, which we state and prove below. Start with U “ H. If U is C–good for C “ 100Eκα, then we are done. Otherwise we can apply Lemma 3.2 and get U1 “ U1 as in the lemma. Inductively, if Un is not 10n C–good, we can apply the lemma and extend Un to a new totally orthogonal set Un`1 . Since there is a bound on the cardinality of totally orthogonal sets by Lemma 2.1, in finitely many steps we necessarily get a good totally orthogonal set, and this concludes the proof of the claim, and hence of the theorem. l  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  19  Lemma 3.2. For every C ě 100Eκα the following holds. Let U Ď SV ´ tV u be totally orthogonal and C–generically good but not C–good. Then there exists a totally orthogonal, 10C–generically good collection U1 Ď SV with U Ĺ U1 . Proof. Let x0 be an E–partial realization point for U so that there exists some W Ď V for which dW pbW , x0 q ą C. The idea is to try to “move towards” ~b starting from x0 , by looking at all relevant elements of SV that lie between them and finding out which ones are the “closest” to ~b. Let Vmax be the set of all W Ď V for which: (1) dW pbW , x0 q ą C and (2) W is not properly nested into any element of SV satisfying the above inequality. We now establish two facts about Vmax . Applying Proposition 2.8 to partially order Vmax : For U, U 1 P Vmax , write U ĺ U 1 1 if either U “ U 1 or U &U 1 and dU pρU U , bU q ď 10Eκ; this is a partial order by Proposition 2.8, which also implies that if U, U 1 P Vmax are transverse then they are ĺ-comparable. Hence any two ĺ–maximal elements of Vmax are orthogonal, and we denote by V1max the set of ĺ–maximal (hence pairwise-orthogonal) elements of Vmax . Finiteness of Vmax : We now show that |Vmax | ă 8. By Lemma 2.2 and Ramsey’s theorem, if Vmax was infinite then it would contain an infinite subset of pairwise transverse elements, so, in order to conclude that |Vmax | ă 8, it suffices to bound the cardinality of a pairwise-transverse subset of Vmax . Suppose that W1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă Ws P Vmax are pairwise transverse. By partial realization s (Definition 1.1.(8)) there exists z P X such that dWs pz, bWs q ď α and dWi pρW Wi , zq ď α s ~ for each i ‰ s, and such that dV pz, ρW V q ď α. By consistency of b and bounded geodesic s image, ρW V has to be within distance 10Eκ of a geodesic in CV from x0 to bV . In particular dV px0 , zq ď θe1 ` 100Eκα ` 10Eκ. Also, for each i ‰ s, Ws s dWi px0 , zq ě dWi px0 , bWi q ´ dWi pbWi , ρW Wi q ´ dWi pρWi , zq ě 100Eκα ´ 10Eκ ´ α ě 50Eκα ě 50E. Ws s Indeed, dWi pbWi , ρW Wi q ď 10Eκ since Wi ă Ws , while dWi pρWi , zq ď α by our choice of z. Lemma 2.5 now provides the required bound on s. Choosing U1 : Since `U ă `V for all U P V1max , by induction there exists a totally orthogonal set tUi u so that any E–partial realization point x for tUi u satisfies dT pbT , xq ď θe1 for each T P S nested into some U P V1max . Let U1 “ tUi u Y U. Choose such a partial realization point x and let W Ď V be U1 –generic. Our goal is to bound dW px, bW q, and we will consider 4 cases. If there exists U P U that is not orthogonal to W , then we are done by hypothesis, since any E–partial realization point for U1 is also an E–partial realization point for U. Hence, from now on, assume that W is orthogonal to each U P U, i.e. W is not U–generic. If W Ď U for some U P V1max , then we are done by induction. Suppose that W &U for some U P V1max . For each Ui Ď U — and our induction hypothesis i implies that there is at least one such Ui — we have dW px, ρU W q ď E since x is a partial realization point for tUi u and either Ui Ď W or Ui &W (since W is U1 –generic but not U–generic). The triangle inequality therefore yields: U U i dW px, bW q ď E ` dW pρU W , ρW q ` dW pbW , ρW q. U U i By Definition 1.1.(4), dW pρU W , ρW q ď E, and we will show that dW pbW , ρW q ď 2C, so that dW px, bW q ď 2E ` 2C.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  20  W Suppose, for a contradiction, that dW pbW , ρU W q ą 2C. If dU pρU , x0 q ď E, then  dU pρW U , bU q ě C ´ E ą κ, by consistency, whence dW pρU W , bW q ď κ, a contradiction. U On the other hand, if dU pρW U , x0 q ą E, then dW px0 , ρW q ď E by consistency. Hence dW px0 , bW q ě 2C ´ E. Hence there exists a Ď–maximal W 1 ‰ V with the property that W Ď W 1 Ď V and dW 1 px0 , bW q ą C (possibly W 1 “ W ). Such a W 1 is in Vmax by definition. Since W &U , and W 1 and U are Ď–incomparable, W 1 &U . Thus U and W 1 are ĺ– comparable, by Proposition 2.8. Since W 1 ‰ U and U is ĺ–maximal, we have W 1 ĺ U , i.e., W1 dW 1 pbW 1 , ρU W 1 q ď 10Eκ. Since ĺ is antisymmetric, by Lemma 2.9, we have dU pbU , ρU q ą W1 W 10Eκ. Since dU pρW U , ρU q ď E (from Definition 1.1.(4)), we have dU pbU , ρU q ą 10Eκ ´ E ą U κ, since E ě 1, so, by consistency, dW pbW , ρW q ď κ, a contradiction. Finally, suppose U Ĺ W for some U P V1max . In this case, by Ď–maximality of U , we i have dW px0 , bW q ď C. Also, dW px, ρU W q ď E for any Ui Ď U since x is a partial realization Ui U point, so that dW px, ρU W q ď 2E, since dW pρW , ρW q ď E by Definition 1.1.(4). If dW px, bW q ą 2C, then we claim dU px0 , bU q ď 10Eκ, a contradiction. Indeed, any geodesic in CW from πW px0 q to bW does not enter the E–neighborhood of ρU W . By bounded geodesic image, W W diamU pρU pπW px0 qq Y ρU pbW qq ď E and by consistency, diamU pρW U pπW px0 qq Y πU px0 qq ď E and diamU pρW pb qYb q ď κ, and we obtain the desired bound on dU px0 , bU q. This completes W U U the proof of the lemma. l 4. Hierarchy paths and the distance formula Throughout this section, fix a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq. 4.1. Definition of hierarchy paths and statement of main theorems. Our goal is to deduce the existence of hierarchy paths (Theorem 4.4) from the other axioms and to prove the distance formula (Theorem 4.5). Definition 4.1 (Quasigeodesic, unparameterized quasigeodesic). A pD, Dq–quasigeodesic in the metric space M is a pD, Dq–quasi-isometric embedding f : r0, `s Ñ M ; we allow f to be a coarse map, i.e., to send points in r0, `s to uniformly bounded sets in M . A (coarse) map f : r0, `s Ñ M is a pD, Dq–unparameterized quasigeodesic if there exists a strictly increasing function g : r0, Ls Ñ r0, `s such that f ˝ g : r0, Ls Ñ M is a pD, Dq–quasigeodesic and for each j P r0, Ls X N, we have diamM pf pgpjqq Y f pgpj ` 1qqq ď D. Definition 4.2 (Hierarchy path). For D ě 1, a (not necessarily continuous) path γ : r0, `s Ñ X is a D–hierarchy path if (1) γ is a pD, Dq-quasigeodesic, (2) for each W P S, the path πW ˝ γ is an unparameterized pD, Dq–quasigeodesic. Notation 4.3. Given A, B P R, we denote by ttAuuB the quantity which is A if A ě B and 0 otherwise. Given C, D, we write A —C,D B to mean C ´1 A ´ D ď B ď CA ` D. Theorem 4.4 (Existence of Hierarchy Paths). Let pX , Sq be hierarchically hyperbolic. Then there exists D0 so that any x, y P X are joined by a D0 -hierarchy path. Theorem 4.5 (Distance Formula). Let pX, Sq be hierarchically hyperbolic. Then there exists s0 such that for all s ě s0 there exist constants K, C such that for all x, y P X , ÿ dX px, yq —pK,Cq ttdW px, yquus . W PS  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  21  The proofs of the above two theorems are intertwined, and we give the proof immediately below. This relies on several lemmas, namely Lemma 4.11, proved in Section 4.3, and Lemmas 4.19 and 4.18, proved in Section 4.4. Proof of Theorems 4.5 and 4.4. The lower bound demanded by Theorem 4.5 is given by Lemma 4.19 below. By Lemma 4.11 and Lemma 4.18, there is a monotone path (see Definition 4.8) whose length realizes the upper bound on dX px, yq, and the same holds for any subpath of this path, which is therefore a hierarchy path, proving Theorem 4.4 and completing the proof of Theorem 4.5. l 4.2. Good and proper paths: definitions. We now define various types of (non-continuous) paths in X that will appear on the way to hierarchy paths. Definition 4.6 (Discrete path). A K–discrete path is a map γ : I Ñ X , where I is an interval in Z and dX pγpiq, γpi ` 1qq ď K whenever i, i ` 1 P I. The length |α| of a discrete path α is max I ´ min I. Definition 4.7 (Efficient path). A discrete path α with endpoints x, y is K–efficient if |α| ď KdX px, yq. Definition 4.8 (Monotone path). Given U P S, a K–discrete path α and a constant L, we say that α is L–monotone in U if whenever i ď j we have dU pαp0q, αpiqq ď dU pαp0q, αpjqq`L. A path which is L–monotone in U for all U P S is said to be L–monotone. Definition 4.9 (Good path). A K–discrete path that is L–monotone in U is said to be pK, Lq–good for U . Given S1 Ď S, a path α that is pK, Lq–good for each V P S1 is pK, Lq– good for S1 . Definition 4.10 (Proper path). A discrete path α : t0, . . . , nu Ñ X is pr, Kq–proper if for 0 ď i ă n ´ 1, we have dX pαpiq, αpi ` 1qq P rr, r ` Ks and dX pαpn ´ 1q, αpnqq ď r ` K. Observe that pr, Kq-properness is preserved by passing to subpaths. 4.3. Good and proper paths: existence. Our goal in this subsection is to join points in X with proper paths, i.e., to prove Lemma 4.11. This relies on the much more complicated Proposition 4.12, which produces good paths (which are then easily made proper). Lemma 4.11. There exists K so that for any r ě 0, any x, y P X are joined by a Kmonotone, pr, Kq–proper discrete path. Proof. Let α0 : t0, . . . , n0 u Ñ X be a K–monotone, K–discrete path joining x, y, which exists by Proposition 4.12. We modify α0 to obtain the desired path in the following way. Let j0 “ 0 and, proceeding inductively, let ji be the minimal j ď n such that either dX pα0 pji´1 q, α0 pjqq P rr, r ` Ks or j “ n. Let m be minimal so that jm “ n and define α : t0, . . . , mu Ñ X by αpjq “ α0 pij q. The path α is pr, Kq-proper by construction; it is easily checked that K–monotonicity is not affected by the above modification; the new path is again discrete, although for a larger discreteness constant. l It remains to establish the following proposition, whose proof is postponed until the end of this section, after several preliminary statements have been obtained. Proposition 4.12. There exists K so that any x, y P X are joined by path that is pK, Kq– good for each U P S. Definition 4.13 (Hull of a pair of points). For each x, y P X , θ ě 0, let Hθ px, yq be the set of all p P X so that, for each W P S, the set πW ppq lies at distance at most θ from a geodesic in CW joining πW pxq to πW pyq. Note that x, y P Hθ px, yq.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  22  Remark 4.14. The notion of a hull is generalized in Section 6 to hulls of arbitrary finite sets, but we require only the version for pairs of points in this section. Lemma 4.15 (Retraction onto hulls). There exist θ, K ě 0 such that, for each x, y P X , there exists a pK, Kq–coarsely Lipschitz map r : X Ñ Hθ px, yq that restricts to the identity on Hθ px, yq. Proof. Let κ be the constant from Lemma 2.6, let θe be chosen as in the realization theorem ś (Theorem 3.1), and let p P X ´ Hθe px, yq. Define a tuple ~b “ pbpW q P W PS 2CW so that bpW is on a geodesic in CW from πW pxq to πW pyq and is within distance δ of the other two sides of a triangle with vertices in πW pxq, πW pyq, πW ppq. By the realization theorem (Theorem 3.1), there exists rppq P Hθe px, yq so that dW pπW prppqq, bpW q ď θe . For p P Hθe px, yq, let rppq “ p. To see that r is coarsely Lipschitz, it suffices to bound dX prppq, rpqqq when p, q P X satisfy dX pp, qq ď 1. For such p, q we have dW pbpW , bqW q ď 100E, so that Theorem 3.1 implies dX prppq, rpqqq ď θu p100Eq, as required. l Corollary 4.16. There exist θ, K ě 0 such that, for each x, y P X , there exists a K–discrete and K–efficient path that lies in Hθ px, yq and joins x to y. Proof. We can assume that dX px, yq ě 1. Since X is a quasigeodesic space, there exists C “ CpX q ě 1 and a pC, Cq–quasi-isometric embedding γ : r0, Ls Ñ X with γp0q “ x, γpLq “ y. Let ρ be the path obtained by restricting r ˝ γ : r0, Ls Ñ Hθ px, yq to r0, Ls X N, where r is the retraction obtained in Lemma 4.15. Then dX pρpiq, ρpi ` 1qq ď 10KC since r is pK, Kq– coarsely Lipschitz and γ is pC, Cq–coarsely Lipschitz, i.e., ρ is 10KC–discrete. Finally, ρ is efficient because L ď CdX px, yq ` C ď 2CdX px, yq. l The efficiency part of the corollary is used in Lemma 4.19. 4.3.1. Producing good paths. We will need the following lemma, which is a special case of Proposition 6.4.2. We give a proof in the interest of a self-contained exposition. Lemma 4.17. For any θ0 there exists a constant θ such that for every x, y P X and every x1 , y 1 P Hθ0 px, yq, we have Hθ0 px1 , y 1 q Ď Hθ px, yq. Proof. For any z P Hθ0 px1 , y 1 q and W P S the projection πW pzq lies 2pδ ` θ0 q–close to a geodesic in CW from πW pxq to πW pyq, by a thin quadrilateral argument. l We now prove the main proposition of this subsection. Proof of Proposition 4.12. Recall that, for ` ě 0 and U P S, the set S`U consists of those V P SU with `U ´ `V ď `, and that T`U consists of those V P SU with `U ´ `V “ `. We prove by induction on ` that there exist θ, K such that for any ` ě 0, x, y P X and U P S, there is a path α in Hθ px, yq connecting x to y such that α is pK, Kq–good for S`U . It then follows that for any x, y P X , there exists a path α in Hθ px, yq connecting x to y such that α is pK, Kq–good for S; this latter statement directly implies the proposition. For a, b P X , denote by ra, bsW a geodesic in CW from πW paq to πW pbq. Fix U P S. The case ` “ 0: In this case, S0U “ tU u. By Corollary 4.16, there exists θ0 , K and a K–discrete path α01 : t0, . . . , ku Ñ Hθ0 px, yq joining x to y. Similarly, for each x1 , y 1 P Hθ0 px, yq there exists a K–discrete path β contained in Hθ0 px1 , y 1 q, joining x1 to y 1 , and recall that Hθ0 px1 , y 1 q is contained in Hθ px, yq for a suitable θ in view of Lemma 4.17. We use the term straight path to refer to a path, such as β, which for each V P S projects uniformly close to a geodesic of CpV q.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  23  We now fix U P S, and, using the observation in the last paragraph explain how to modify α01 to obtain a K–discrete path α0 in Hθ px, yq that is K–monotone in U ; the construction will rely on replacing problematic subpaths with straight paths. A point t P t0, . . . , ku is a U –omen if there exists t1 ą t so that dU pα01 p0q, α01 ptqq ą dU pα01 p0q, α01 pt1 qq ` 5KE. If α01 has no U –omens, then we can take α0 “ α01 , so suppose that there is a U –omen and let t0 be the minimal U –omen, and let t10 ą t0 be maximal so that dU pα01 p0q, α01 pt0 qq ą dU pα01 p0q, α01 pt10 qq. Inductively define tj to be the minimal U –omen with tj ě t1j´1 , if such tj exists; and when tj exists, we define t1j to be maximal in t0, . . . , ku satisfying dU pα01 p0q, α01 ptj qq ą dU pα01 p0q, α01 pt1j qq. For each j ě 0, let x1j “ α01 ptj q and let yj1 “ α01 pt1j q. See Figure 2. α01 pt1j q Ðx  α01 ptj q  yÑ  Figure 2. The picture above shows part of α01 in X , and that below shows its projection to U . The point tj is an omen, as witnessed by the point marked with a square. Inserting the dashed path βj , and deleting the corresponding subpath of α01 , makes tj cease to be an omen. For each j, there exists a K–discrete path βj which lies in Hθ0 px1j , yj1 q Ď Hθ px, yq and is a straight path from x1j to yj1 . Let α0 be obtained from α01 by replacing each α01 prtj , t1j sq with βj . Clearly, α0 connects x to y, is K–discrete, and is contained in Hθ px, yq. For each j we have that diamCU pβj q ď dU px1j , yj1 q ` 2θ0 . Notice that dU px1j , yj1 q ă 2KE ` 10θ0 . In fact, since α01 p0q, α01 ptj q, α01 pt1j q lie θ0 -close to a common geodesic and dU pα01 p0q, α01 ptj qq ě dU pα01 p0q, α01 pt1j qq, we would otherwise have dU pα01 p0q, α01 ptj qq ´ dU pα01 p0q, α01 pt1j qq ě dU px1j , yj1 q ´ 5θ0 ě 2KE ` θ0 . However, dU pα01 ptj q, α01 ptj ` 1qq ď 2KE because of K–discreteness and the projection map to CU being E-coarsely Lipschitz. Hence, the inequality above implies dU pα01 p0q, α01 ptj qq ą dU pα01 p0q, α01 pt1j qq ` 2KE ě dU pα01 ptj q, α01 ptj ` 1qq, which contradicts the maximality of t1j . (Notice that t1j ‰ k, and hence t1j ` 1 P t0, . . . , ku because dU pα01 p0q, α01 pt1j qq ` θ0 ă dU pα01 p0q, α01 ptj qq ď dU pα01 p0q, α01 pkqq ` θ0 .) In particular, we get diamCU pβj q ď 2KE ` 12θ0 , and it is then easy to check that α0 is maxt5KE, 2KE ` 12θ0 u–monotone in U . By replacing K with maxt5KE, 2KE ` 12θ0 u, we thus have a K–discrete path α0 Ă Hθ px, yq that joins x, y and is K–monotone in U . We now proceed to the inductive step. Specifically, we fix ` ě 0 and we assume there exist θind , K such that for any x, y P X and U P S, there is a path α in Hθind px, yq connecting x to y such that α is pK, Kq–good for S`U . Let now x, y, U be as above. The coloring: For short, we will say that V P S is A–relevant if dU px, yq ě A, see Definition 2.7. Notice that to prove that a path in Hθ px, yq is monotone, it suffices to restrict our attention to only those W P S which are, say, 10KE–relevant. By Lemma 2.14, there exists χ ě 0, bounded by the complexity of X , and a χ–coloring c of the 10KE–relevant elements of T`U such that cpV q “ cpV 1 q only if V &V 1 . In other words,  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  24  Ůχ´1 ´1 the set of 10KE–relevant elements of T`U has the form i“0 c piq, where c´1 piq is a set of pairwise-transverse relevant elements of T`U . Induction hypothesis: Given p ă χ ´ 1, assume by induction (on ` and p) that there exist θp ě θind , Kp ě K, independent of x, y, U , and a path αp : t0, . . . , ku Ñ Hθp px, yq, Ů joining x, y, that is pK, Kq–good for pi“0 c´1 piq and good for S`´1 U . Resolving backtracks in the next color: Let θp`1 be provided by Lemma 4.17 with input θp . We will modify αp to construct a Kp`1 –discrete path αp`1 in Hθp`1 px, yq, for some Ůp`1 ´1 Kp`1 ě Kp , that joins x, y and is pKp`1 , Kp`1 q–good in i“0 c piq. Notice that we can restrict our attention to the set Cp`1 of 100pKp E`θp q–relevant elements of c´1 pp ` 1q. A point t P t0, . . . , ku is a pp ` 1q–omen if there exists V P Cp`1 and t1 ą t so that dV pαp p0q, αp ptqq ą dV pαp p0q, αp pt1 qq ` 5Kp E. If αp has no pp ` 1q–omens, then we can take αp`1 “ αp , since αp is good in each V with cpV q ă p ` 1. Therefore, suppose that there is a pp ` 1q–omen, let t0 be the minimal pp ` 1q–omen, witnessed by V0 P Cp`1 . We can assume that t0 satisfies dV0 ptx, yu, αp pt0 qq ą 10Kp E. Let t10 ą t0 be maximal so that dV0 pαp p0q, αp pt0 qq ą dV0 pαp p0q, αp pt10 qq. In particular dV0 py, αp pt10 qq ě 10E. Let x10 “ α0 pt0 q and y01 “ α0 pt10 q. Inductively, define tj as the minimal pp ` 1q–omen, witnessed by Vj P Cp`1 , with tj ě t1j´1 , if such tj exists and let t1j be maximal so that dVj pαp p0q, αp ptj qq ą dVj pαp p0q, αp pt1j qq and dVj py, αp pt1j qq ą 100E. We can assume that tj satisfies dVj ptx, yu, αp ptj qq ą 10Kp E. Also, let x1j “ αp ptj q, yj1 “ αp pt1j q. Let βj be a path in Hθp px1j , yj1 q joining x1j to yj1 that is pKp , Kp q–good for each relevant V with cpV q ď p and each relevant V P S`´1 U . Such paths can be constructed by induction. By Lemma 4.17 βj lies in Hθp`1 px, yq. Let αp`1 be obtained from αp by replacing each αp pttj , . . . , t1j uq with βj . Clearly, αp`1 connects x to y, is Kp –discrete, and is contained in Hθp`1 px, yq. We observe that the same argument as in the case ` “ 0 gives dVj px1j , yj1 q ď 2Kp E ` 10θp . Verification that αp`1 is good for current colors: We next check that each βj is Ůp`1 ´1 103 pKp E ` θp q–monotone in each W P i“0 c piq. We have to consider the following cases. (We can and shall assume below W is 100pKp E ` θp q–relevant.) ‚ If W Ď Vj , then W “ Vj , since `W “ `Vj . Since the projections on CW of the endpoints of the straight path βj coarsely coincide, βj is p2Kp E ` 12θp q–monotone in W . (See the case ` “ 0.) ‚ Suppose Vj Ď W , and Vj ‰ W . We claim that the projections of the endpoints of βj lie at a uniformly bounded distance in CW . V We claim that ρWj has to be E–close to either rx, x1j sW or ryj1 , ysW . In fact, if this was not the case, we would have dVj px, yq ď dVj px, x1j q ` dVj px1j , yj1 q ` dVj pyj1 , yq ď 2E ` 2Kp E ` 10θp , where we applied bounded geodesic image (Definition 1.1.(7)) to the first and last terms. This is a contradiction with Vj being 100pKp E ` θp q–relevant. Suppose by contradiction that dW px1j , yj1 q ě 500pKp E ` θp q. Suppose first that V  V  ρWj is E–close to rx, x1j sW . Then, by monotonicity, ρWj is E–far from rαp pt1j q, ysW . V  By bounded geodesic image, this contradicts dVj py, αp pt1j qq ě 10E. If instead ρWj is E–close to ryj1 , ysW , then by bounded geodesic image we have dVj px, αp ptj qq ď E, contradicting that tj is an omen witnessed by Vj . See Figure 3. Hence dW px1j , yj1 q ě 500pKp E ` θp q and βj is 103 pKp E ` θp q–monotone in W .  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  25  y α0 pt1j ´ 1q  yj1 “ α0 pt1j q  V  ρWj x1j x CW  Figure 3. The situation in CW . ‚ Suppose W &Vj . We again claim that the projections of the endpoints of βj are V uniformly close in CW , by showing that they both coarsely coincide with ρWj . Since W Vj is relevant, either dVj px, ρW Vj q ě E or dVj py, ρVj q ě E. Thus, by consistency, V  dW pρWj , tx, yuq ď E. Suppose for a contradiction, that dW px1j , yj1 q ą 100pKp E ` θp q. V  V  We consider separately the cases where dW px, ρWj q ď E and dW py, ρWj q ď E V V First, suppose that dW px, ρWj q ď E. Then dW py, ρWj q ě 10Kp E ´ E ą E, so by 1 1 consistency, dVj py, ρW Vj q ď E. If dVj px, txj , yj uq ą E, then consistency implies that V  V  dW px1j , ρWj q ď E and dW pyj1 , ρWj q ď E, whence dW px1j , yj1 q ď 2E, a contradiction. If dVj px, tx1j , yj1 uq ď E, then since dVj px1j , yj1 q ď 2Kp E ` 10θp , we have dVj px, x1j q ď 5Kp E ` 10θp , contradicting that, since tj was a pp ` 1q–omen witnessed by Vj , we must have dVj px, x1j q ą 5Kp E. V  Second, suppose dW py, ρWj q ď E. Then by relevance of W and consistency, 1 1 1 dVj px, ρW Vj q ď E. As above, we have dVj pxj , xq ą 5Kp E ` 10θp , so dVj px, txj , yj uq ą Kp E ą 3E (since dVj px1j , yj1 q ď 2Kp E ` 10θp and we may assume Kp ą 3), so 1 1 1 1 dVj pρW Vj , txj , yj uq ą E. Thus, by consistency, πW pxj q, πW pyj q both lie at distance at V  most E from ρWj , whence dW px1j , yj1 q ď 3E. ‚ Finally, suppose that W KVj . Then either cpW q ă cpVj q and βj is Kp –monotone in W , or W is irrelevant. Hence, each βj is 103 pKp E ` θp q–monotone in each W P c´1 pt0, . . . , p ` 1uq. Verification that αp`1 is monotone: Suppose that there exist t, t1 such that t ă t1 and dV pαp`1 p0q, αp`1 ptqq ą dV pαp`1 p0q, αp`1 pt1 qq ` 104 pKp E ` θp q for some V P c´1 pt0, . . . , p ` 1uq. We can assume t, t1 R Yi pti , t1i q. Indeed, if t P pti , t1i q (respectively, t1 P ptj , t1j q), then since all βm are 103 pKp E ` θp q–monotone, we can replace t with t1i (respectively, t1 with tj ). After such a replacement, we still have dV pαp`1 p0q, αp`1 ptqq ą dV pαp`1 p0q, αp`1 pt1 qq ` 5Kp E. Let i be maximal so that t1i ď t (or let i “ ´1 if no such t1i exists). By definition of ti`1 , we have ti`1 ď t, and hence ti`1 “ t. But then t1i`1 ą t1 , which is not the case. Conclusion: Continuing the above procedure while p ă χ produces the desired path which is pKχ , Kχ q–good for S`U . In particular, when U “ S is Ď–maximal and ` is the length of a maximal Ď–chain, the proposition follows. l  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  26  4.4. Upper and lower distance bounds. We now state and prove the remaining lemmas needed to complete the proof of Theorem 4.5 and 4.4. Lemma 4.18 (Upper bound). For every K, s there exists r with the following property. Let α : t0, . . . , nu Ñ X be a K-monotone, pr, Kq-proper discrete path connecting x to y. Then ÿ |α| ´ 1 ď ttdW px, yquus . W PS  Proof. Let r “ rpK, E, sq be large enough that, for any a, b P X , if dX pa, bq ě r, then there exists W P S so that dW pa, bq ě 100KEs. This r is provided by Definition 1.1.(9). For 0 ď j ď n ´ 1, choose Vj P S so that dVj pαpjq, αpj ` 1qq ě 100KEs. By monotonicity of α in Vj , for any j 1 ą j we have dVj pαp0q, αpj 1 qq ě dVj pαp0q, αpjqq ` 50KEs. ř It follows by induction on j ď n that W PS ttdW pαp0q, αpjqquus ě mintj, n ´ 1u.  l  Lemma 4.19 (Lower bound). There exists s0 such that for all s ě s0 , there exists C with the following property. 1 ÿ ttdW px, yquus . dX px, yq ě C W PS Proof. From Corollary 4.16, we obtain a K–discrete path α : t0, nu Ñ X joining x, y and having the property that the (coarse) path πV ˝ α : t0, . . . , nu Ñ CV lies in the K–neighborhood of a geodesic from πV pxq to πV pyq. Moreover, α is K–efficient, by the same corollary. Fix s0 ě 103 KE. A checkpoint for x, y in V P S is a ball Q in CV so that πV ˝ α intersects Q and dV ptx, yu, Qq ě 10KE ` 1. Note that any ball of radius 10KE centered on a geodesic from πV pxq to πV pyq is a checkpoint for x, y in V , provided Q it isUsufficiently far from tx, yu. px,yq 3 For each V P Relpx, y, 10 KEq, choose a set CV of dV 10 checkpoints for x, y in V , subject to the requirement that dV pC1 , C2 q ě 10KE for all distinct C1 , C2 P CV . For each V P Relpx, y, 103 KEq, we have 10|CV | ě dV px, yq, so ÿ |CV | ě V PS  1 ÿ ttdW px, yquus0 . 10 W PS  Each j P t0, . . . , nu is a door if there exists V P Relpx, y, 103 KEq and C P CV such that πV pαpjqq P C but πV pαpj ´ 1qq R C. The multiplicity of a door j is the cardinality of the set Mpjq of V P Relpx, y, 103 KEq for which there exists C P CV with πV pαpjqq P C and πV pαpj ´ 1qq R C. Since CV is a set of pairwise-disjoint checkpoints, j is a door for at most one element of CV , for each V . Hence the multiplicity of j is precisely the total number of checkpoints in YV PRelpx,y,103 KEq CV for which j is a door. We claim that the set Mpjq does not contain a pair of transverse elements. Indeed, suppose that U, V P Mpjq, satisfy U &V . Let QV P CV , QU P CU be the checkpoints containing πV pαpjqq, πU pαpjqq respectively, so that dU pαpjq, tx, yuq, dV pαpjq, tx, yuq ě 10KE `1 ą 10E, contradicting Corollary 2.4. Lemma 2.2řthus gives |MV | ď χ. Now, |α| is at least the number of doors in t0, . . . , nu, whence |α| ě χ1 V PS |CV |. Since α is K–efficient, we obtain dX px, yq ě For s ě s0 ,  ř  W PS ttdW px, yquus  ď  ř  ÿ 1 ttdW px, yquus0 . 10χK W PS  W PS ttdW px, yquus0  , so the claim follows.  l  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  27  5. Hierarchical quasiconvexity and gates We now introduce the notion of hierarchical quasiconvexity, which is essential for the discussion of product regions, the combination theorem of Section 8, and in the forthcoming [DHS15]. Definition 5.1 (Hierarchical quasiconvexity). Let pX , Sq be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then Y Ď X is k–hierarchically quasiconvex, for some k : r0, 8q Ñ r0, 8q, if the following hold: (1) For all U P S, the projection πU pYq is a kp0q–quasiconvex subspace of the δ– hyperbolic space CU . ś (2) For all κ ě 0 and κ-consistent tuples ~b P U PS 2CU with bU Ď πU pYq for all U P S, each point x P X for which dU pπU pxq, bU q ď θe pκq (where θe pκq is as in Theorem 3.1) satisfies dpx, Yq ď kpκq. Remark 5.2. Note that condition (2) in the above definition is equivalent to: For every κ ą 0 and every point x P X satisfying dU pπU pxq, πU pYqq ď κ for all U P S, has the property that dpx, Yq ď kpκq. The following lemma and its corollary allow us to check the second condition of hierarchical quasiconvexity for one value of κ only, which is convenient. Lemma 5.3. For each Q there exists κ so that the following holds. Let Y Ď X be such that πV pYq is Q–quasiconvex for each V P S. Let x P X and, for each V P S, let pV satisfy dV px, pV q ď dV px, Yq ` 1. Then ppV q is κ–consistent. Proof. For each V , choose yV P Y so that πV pyV q “ pV . Suppose that V &W or V Ď W . By Lemma 2.6 and Theorem 3.1, there exists z P X so that for all U P S, the projection πU pzq lies C–close to each of the geodesics rπU pxq, πU pyV qs, rπU pxq, πU pyW qs, and rπU pyW q, πU pyV qs, where C depends on X . Hence dV ppV , zq and dW ppW , zq are uniformly bounded, by quasiconvexity of πV pYq and πW pYq. Suppose that V &W . Since the tuple pπU pzqq is consistent, either yV lies uniformly close in CV to ρW V , or the same holds with V and W interchanged, as required. Suppose that V Ď W . Suppose that dW ppW , ρVW q is sufficiently large, so that we have to bound diamV pρW V ppW q Y pV q. Since dW pz, pW q is uniformly bounded, dW pz, ρVW q is sufficiently large that consistency ensures that diamV pρW V pπW pzqq Y πV pzqq is uniformly bounded. Since any geodesic from pW W to z lies far from ρVW , the sets ρW V pπW pzqq and ρV ppV q coarsely coincide. Since πV pzq coarsely coincides with pV by construction of z, we have the required bound. Hence the tuple with V –coordinate pV is κ–consistent for uniform κ. l Definition 5.4 (Gate). A coarsely Lipschitz map gY : X Ñ Y is called a gate map if for each x P X it satisfies: gY pxq is a point y P Y such that for all V P S, the set πV pyq (uniformly) coarsely coincides with the projection of πV pxq to the kp0q–quasiconvex set πV pYq. The point gpxq is called the gate of x in Y. The uniqueness axiom implies that when such a map exists it is coarsely well-defined. We first establish that, as should be the case for a (quasi)convexity property, one can coarsely project to hierarchically quasiconvex subspaces. The next lemma shows that gates exist for k–hierarchically quasiconvex subsets. Lemma 5.5 (Existence of coarse gates). If Y Ď X is k–hierarchically quasiconvex and nonempty, then there exists a gate map for Y, i.e., for each x P X there exists y P Y such that for all V P S, the set πV pyq (uniformly) coarsely coincides with the projection of πV pxq to the kp0q–quasiconvex set πV pYq.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  28  Proof. For each V P S, let pV satisfy dV px, pV q ď dV px, Yq ` 1. Then ppV q is κ–consistent for some κ independent of x by Lemma 5.3. Theorem 3.1 and the definition of hierarchical quasiconvexity combine to supply y 1 P Nkpκq pYq with the desired projections to all V P S; this point lies at distance kpκq from some y P Y with the desired property. We now check that this map is coarsely Lipschitz. Let x0 , xn P X be joined by a uniform quasigeodesic γ. By sampling γ, we obtain a discrete path γ 1 : t0, . . . , nu Ñ X such that dX pγ 1 piq, γ 1 pi ` 1qq ď K for 0 ď i ď n ´ 1, where K depends only on X , and such that řn´1 dX pgY pγ 1 piqq, gY pγ 1 pi`1qqq, γ 1 p0q “ x0 , γ 1 pnq “ xn . Observe that dX pgY px0 q, gY pxn qq ď i“0 1 so it suffices to exhibit C such that dX pgY pxq, gY px qq ď C whenever dX px, x1 q ď K. But if dX px, x1 q ď K, then each dU px, x1 q ď K 1 for some uniform K 1 , by Definition 1.1.(1), whence the claim follows from the fact that each CU Ñ πU pYq is coarsely Lipschitz (with constant depending only on δ and kp0q) along with the uniqueness axiom (Definition 1.1.(9)). l 5.1. Hierarchically quasiconvex subspaces are hierarchically hyperbolic. Proposition 5.6. Let Y Ď X be a hierarchically k-quasiconvex subset of the hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq. Then pY, dq is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, where d is the metric inherited from X . Proof. There exists K so that any two points in Y are joined by a uniform quasigeodesic. Indeed, any two points in Y are joined by a hierarchy path in X , which must lie uniformly close to Y. We now define a hierarchically hyperbolic structure. For each U , let rU : CU Ñ πU pYq be the coarse projection, which exists by quasiconvexity. The index set is S, and the associated hyperbolic spaces are the various CU . For each U , define a projection πU1 : ÑCU by πU1 “ rU ˝ πU , and for each non-orthogonal pair U, V P S, the corresponding relative projection CU Ñ CV is given by rV ˝ ρU V . All of the requirements of Definition 1.1 involving only the various relations on S are obviously satisfied, since we have only modified the projections. The consistency inqualities continue to hold since each rU is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz. The same is true for bounded geodesic image and the large link lemma. Partial realization holds by applying the map gY to points constructed using partial realization in pX , Sq. l Remark 5.7 (Alternative hierarchically hyperbolic structures). In the above proof, one can replace each CU by a thickening CUY of πU pYq (this set is quasiconvex; the thickening is to make a hyperbolic geodesic space). This yields a hierarchically hyperbolic structure with coarsely surjective projections. 5.2. Standard product regions. In this section, we describe a class of hierarchically quasiconvex subspaces called standard product regions that will be useful in future applications. We first recall a construction from [BHS14, Section 13]. Definition 5.8 (Nested partial tuple). ś Recall SU “ tV P S : V Ď U u. Fix κ ě κ0 and let FU be the set of κ–consistent tuples in V PSU 2CV . Definition 5.9 (Orthogonal partial tuple). Let SK U “ tV P S : V KU u Y tAu, where A is a Ď–minimal element W ś such that V Ď W for all V KU . Fix κ ě κ0 , let EU be the set of κ–consistent tuples in V PSK ´tAu 2CV . U  Construction 5.10 (Product regions in X ). Given X and U P S, there are coarsely welldefined maps φĎ , φK : FU , EU Ñ X whose images are hierarchically quasiconvex and which extend to a coarsely well-defined map φU : FU ˆ EU Ñ X with hierarchically quasiconvex image. Indeed, for each p~a, ~bq P FU ˆ EU , and each V P S, define the co-ordinate pφU p~a, ~bqqV  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  29  as follows. If V Ď U , then pφU p~a, ~bqqV “ aV . If V KU , then pφU p~a, ~bqqV “ bV . If V &U , then pφU p~a, ~bqqV “ ρU a, ~bqqV “ ρU V . Finally, if U Ď V , and U ‰ V , let pφU p~ V. ~ We now verify that the tuple φU p~a, bq is consistent. If W, V P S, and either V or W is transverse to U , then the consistency inequality involving W and V is satisfied in view of Proposition 1.7. The same holds if U Ď W or U Ď V . Hence, it remains to consider the cases where V and W are each either nested into or orthogonal to U : if V, W Ď U or V, W KU then consistency holds by assumption; otherwise, up to reversing the roles of V and W we have V Ď U and W KU , in which case V KW and there is nothing to check. Theorem 3.1 thus supplies the map φU , and the maps φĎ and φK come from restricting to the appropriate factor. Where it will not introduce confusion, we abuse notation and regard FU , EU as subspaces of X , i.e., FU “ im φĎ , EU “ im φK . Proposition 5.11. When EU , FU are endowed with the subspace metric d, the spaces pFU , SU q and pEU , SK U q are hierarchically hyperbolic; if U is not Ď–maximal, then their complexity is strictly less than that of pX , Sq. Moreover, φĎ and φK determine hieromorphisms pFU , SU q, pEU , SK U q Ñ pX , Sq. Proof. For each V Ď U or V KU , the associated hyperbolic space CV is exactly the one used in the hierarchically hyperbolic structure pX , Sq. For A, use an appropriate thickening C ˚ A of πA pim φK q to a hyperbolic geodesic space. All of the projections FU Ñ CV, V P SU and K ˚ EU Ñ CV, V P SK U are as in pX , Sq (for A, compose with a quasi-isometry πA pim φ q Ñ C A). K Observe that pFU , SU q and pEU , SU q are hierarchically hyperbolic (this can be seen using a simple version of the proof of Proposition 5.6). If U is not Ď–maximal in S, then neither is A, whence the claim about complexity. K The hieromorphisms are defined by the inclusions SU , SK U Ñ S and, for each V P SU YSU , ˚ K the identity CV Ñ CV , unless V “ A, in which case we use C A Ñ πA pim φ q ãÑ CA. These give hieromorphisms by definition. l  &  Remark 5.12 (Dependence on A). Note that A need not be the unique Ď–minimal element of S into which each V KU is nested. Observe that EU (as a set and as a subspace of X ) is defined independently of the choice of A. It is the hierarchically hyperbolic structure from Proposition 5.11 that a priori depends on A. However, note that A ­Ď U , since there exists V Ď A with V KU , and we cannot have V Ď U and V KU simultaneously. Likewise, A U by definition. Finally, if U Ď A, then the axioms guarantee the existence of B, properly nested into A, into which each V KU is nested, contradicting Ď–minimality of A. Hence U &A. It follows that πA pEU q is bounded — it coarsely coincides with ρU A . Thus the hierarchically hyperbolic structure on EU , and the hieromorphism structure of φK , is actually essentially canonical: we can take the hyperbolic space associated to the Ď–maximal element to be a point, whose image in each of the possible choices of A must coarsely coincide with ρU A. Remark 5.13 (Orthogonality and product regions). If U KV , then we have FU Ď EV and FV Ď EU , so there is a hierarchically quasiconvex map φU ˆ φV : FU ˆ FV Ñ X extending K to φU ˆ φK U and φV ˆ φV . Remark 5.14. Since FU , EU are hierarchically quasiconvex spaces, Definition 5.4 provides coarse gates gFU : X Ñ FU and gEU : X Ñ EU . These are coarsely the same as the following maps: given x P X , let ~x be the tuple defined by xW “ πW pxq when W Ď U and xW “ πW pxq when W KU and ρU x is consistent and coarsely equals gFU ˆEU pxq. W otherwise. Then ~ Definition 5.15 (Standard product region). For each U P S, let PU “ im φU , which is coarsely FU ˆ EU . We call this the standard product region in X associated to U .  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  30  &  The next proposition follows from the definition of the product regions and the fact that, V if U Ď V , then ρU W , which holds W , ρW coarsely coincide whenever V Ď W or V &W and U by Definition 1.1.(4). Proposition 5.16 (Parallel copies). There exists ν ě 0 such that for all U P S, all V P SU , and all u P EU , there exists v P EV so that φV pFV ˆ tvuq Ď Nν pφU pFU ˆ tuuqq. 5.2.1. Hierarchy paths and product regions. Recall that a D–hierarchy path γ in X is a pD, Dq–quasigeodesic γ : I Ñ X such that πU ˝γ is an unparameterized pD, Dq–quasigeodesic for each U P S, and that Theorem 4.4 provides D ě 1 so that any two points in X are joined by a D–hierarchy path. In this section, we describe how hierarchy paths interact with standard product regions. Given x, y P X , declare V P S to be relevant if dV px, yq ě 200DE. Proposition 5.17 (“Active” subpaths). There exists ν ě 0 so that for all x, y P X , all V P S with V relevant for px, yq, and all D–hierarchy paths γ joining x to y, there is a subpath α of γ with the following properties: (1) α Ă Nν pPV q; (2) πU |γ is coarsely constant on γ ´ α for all U P SV Y SK V. Proof. We may assume γ : t0, nu Ñ X is a 2D–discrete path. Let xi “ γpiq for 0 ď i ď n. First consider the case where V is Ď–maximal among relevant elements of S. Lemma 5.18 provides ν 2 ě 0, independent of x, y, and also provides i ď n, such that dS pxi , ρVS q ď ν 2 . Let i be minimal with this property and let i1 be maximal with this property. Observe that there exists ν 1 ě ν 2 , depending only on ν 2 and the (uniform) monotonicity of γ in CS, such that dS pxj , ρVS q ď ν 1 for i ď j ď i1 . For j P ti, . . . , i1 u, let x1j “ gPV pxj q. Let U P S. By definition, if U Ď V or U KV , then πU pxj q coarsely coincides with πU px1j q, while πU px1j q coarsely coincides with ρVU if V Ď U or V &U . We claim that there exist i1 , i11 with i ď i1 ď i11 ď i1 such that for i1 ď i ď i11 and U P S with V Ď U or U &V , the points πU pxj q and πU px1j q coarsely coincide; this amounts to claiming that πU pxj q coarsely coincides with ρVU . If V Ď U and some geodesic σ in CU from πU pxq to πU pyq fails to pass through the Eneighborhood of ρVU , then bounded geodesic image shows that ρU V pσq has diameter at most E. On the other hand, consistency shows that the endpoints of ρU V pσq coarsely coincide with πV pxq and πV pyq, contradicting that V is relevant. Thus σ passes through the E– neighborhood of ρVU . Maximality of V implies that U is not relevant, so that πV pxq, πV pyq, and πV pxj q all coarsely coincide, whence πV pxj q coarsely coincides with ρVU . If U &V and U is not relevant, then πU pxj q coarsely coincides with both πU pxq and πU pyq, each of which coarsely coincides with ρVU , for otherwise we would have dV px, yq ď 2E by consistency and the triangle inequality, contradicting that V is relevant. If U &V and U is relevant, then, by consistency, we can assume that πU pyq,ρVU coarsely coincide, as do V πV pxq,ρU V . Either πU pxj q coarsely equals ρU , or πV pxj q coarsely equals πV pxq, again by consistency. If dV px, xj q ď 10E or dV py, xj q ď 10E, discard xj . Our discreteness assumption and the fact that V is relevant imply that there exist i1 ď i11 between i and i1 so that xj is not discarded for i1 ď j ď i11 . For such j, the distance formula now implies that dpxj , x1j q is bounded by a constant ν independent of x, y. We thus have i1 , i11 such that xj P Nν pPV q for i ď j ď i1 and xj R Nν pPV q for j ă i or j ą i1 , provided V is Ď–maximal relevant. If W Ď V and W is relevant, and there is no relevant W 1 ‰ W with W Ď W 1 Ď V , then we may apply the above argument to γ 1 “ gPV pγ|i,...,i1 q to produce a subpath of γ 1 lying ν–close to PW Ď PV , and hence a subpath of γ lying 2ν–close to PW . Finiteness of the complexity (Definition 1.1.(5)) then yields assertion (1). Assertion (2) is immediate from our choice of i1 , i11 . l  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  31  Lemma 5.18. There exists ν 1 ě 0 so that for all x, y P X , all relevant V P S, and all D–hierarchy paths γ joining x to y, there exists t P γ so that dS pt, ρVS q ď ν 1 . Proof. Let σ be a geodesic in CS joining the endpoints of πS ˝ γ. Since dV px, yq ě 200DE, the consistency and bounded geodesic image axioms (Definition 1.1.(4),(7)) imply that σ enters the E–neighborhood of ρVS in CS, whence πS ˝ σ comes uniformly close to ρVS . l 6. Hulls In this section we build “convex hulls” in hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. This construction is motivated by, and generalizes, the concept in the mapping class group called Σ–hull, as defined by Behrstock–Kleiner–Minsky–Mosher [BKMM12]. Recall that given a set A of points in a δ–hyperbolic space H, its convex hull, denoted hullH pAq, is the union of geodesics between pairs of points in this set. We will make use of the fact that the convex hull is 2δ–quasiconvex (since, if p P rx, ys, q P rx1 , y 1 s, then rp, qs Ď N2δ prp, xs Y rx, x1 s Y rx1 , qsq Ď N2δ pry, xs Y rx, x1 s Y rx1 , y 1 sq). The construction of hulls is based on Proposition 6.3, which generalizes Lemma 4.15; indeed, the construction of hulls in this section generalizes the hulls of pairs of points used in Section 4 to prove the distance formula. The second part of Proposition 6.3 (which is not used in Section 4) relies on the distance formula. Definition 6.1 (Hull of a set). For each set A Ă X and θ ě 0, let Hθ pAq be the set of all p P X so that, for each W P S, the set πW ppq lies at distance at most θ from hullCW pAq. Note that A Ă Hθ pAq. Lemma 6.2. There exists θ0 so that for each θ ě θ0 there exists k : R` Ñ R` and each A Ď X , we have that Hθ pAq is k–hierarchically quasiconvex. Proof. For any θ and U P S, due to δ–hyperbolicity we have that πU pHθ pAqq is 2δ–quasiconvex, so we only have to check the condition on realization points. Let A1 be the union of all D0 –hierarchy paths joining points in A, where D0 is the constant from Theorem 4.4. Then the Hausdorff distance between πU pA1 q and πU pAq is bounded by C “ Cpδ, D0 q for each U P S. Also, πU pA1 q is Q “ Qpδ, D0 q–quasiconvex. Let κ be the constant from Lemma 5.3, and let θ0 “ θe pκq be as in Theorem 3.1. Fix any θ ě θ0 , and any κ ě 0. Let pbU q be a κ1 –consistent tuple with bU Ď Nθ phullCU pAqq for each U P S. Let x P X project θe pκ1 q–close to each bU . We have to find y P Hθ pAq uniformly close to x. By Lemma 5.3, ppU q is κ–consistent, where pU P hullCW pAq satisfies dU px, pU q ď dU px, hullCW pAqq ` 1. It is readily seen from the uniqueness axiom (Definition 1.1.9) that any y P X projecting close to each pU has the required property, and such a y exists by Theorem 3.1. l We denote the Hausdorff distance in the metric space Y by dHaus,Y p¨, ¨q. The next proposition directly generalizes [BKMM12, Proposition 5.2] from mapping class groups to general hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Proposition 6.3 (Retraction onto hulls). For each sufficiently large θ there exists C ě 1 so that for each set A Ă X there is a pK, Kq–coarsely Lipschitz map r : X Ñ Hθ pAq restricting to the identity on Hθ pAq. Moreover, if A1 Ă X also has cardinality at most N , then dX prA pxq, rA1 pxqq is C–coarsely Lipschitz in dHaus,X pA, A1 q. Proof. By Lemma 6.2, for all sufficiently large θ, Hθ pAq is hierarchically quasiconvex. Thus, by Lemma 5.5 there exists a map r : X Ñ Hθ pAq, which is coarsely Lipschitz and which is the identity on Hθ pAq. We now prove the moreover clause. By Definition 1.1.(1), for each W the projections πW are each coarsely Lipschitz and thus dHaus,CW pπW pAq, πW pA1 qq is bounded by a coarsely  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  32  Lipschitz function of dHaus,X pA, A1 q. It is then easy to conclude using the distance formula (Theorem 4.5) and the construction of gates (Definition 5.4) used to produce the map r. l 6.1. Homology of asymptotic cones. In this subsection we make a digression to study homological properties of asymptotic cones of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. This subsection is not needed for the proof of distance formula, and in fact we will use the distance formula in a proof. Using Proposition 6.3, the identical proof as used in [BKMM12, Lemma 5.4] for mapping class groups, yields: Proposition 6.4. There exists θ0 ě 0 depending only on the constants of the hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq such that for all θ, θ1 ě θ0 there exist K, C, and θ2 such that given two sets A, A1 Ă X , then: (1) diampHθ pAqq ď K diampAq ` C (2) If A1 Ă Hθ pAq then Hθ pA1 q Ă Hθ2 pAq. (3) dHaus,X pHθ pAq, Hθ pA1 qq ď KdHaus,X pA, A1 q ` C. (4) dHaus,X pHθ pAq, Hθ1 pAqq ď C Remark 6.5. Proposition 6.4 is slightly stronger than the corresponding [BKMM12, Lemma 5.4], in which A, A1 are finite sets and the constants depend on their cardinality. The source of the strengthening is just the observation that hulls in δ–hyperbolic spaces are 2δ–quasiconvex regardless of the cardinality of the set (cf. [BKMM12, Lemma 5.1]). It is an easy observation that given a sequence A of sets An Ă X with bounded cardinality, the retractions to the corresponding hulls Hθ pAn q converge in any asymptotic cone, Xω , to a Lipschitz retraction from that asymptotic cone to the ultralimit of the hulls, HpAq. A general argument, see e.g., [BKMM12, Lemma 6.2] implies that the ultralimit of the hulls is then contractible. The proofs in [BKMM12, Section 6] then apply in the present context using the above Proposition, with the only change needed that the reference to the rank theorem for hierarchically hyperbolic spaces as proven in [BHS14, Theorem J] must replace the application of [BM08]. In particular, this yields the following two results: Corollary 6.6. Let X be a hierarchically hyperbolic space and Xω one of its asymptotic cones. Let X Ă Xω be an open subset and suppose that for any sequence, A, of finite subsets of X we have HpAq Ă X. Then X is acyclic. Corollary 6.7. If pU, V q is an open pair in Xω , then Hk pU, V q “ t0u for all k greater than the complexity of X . 6.2. Relatively hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and the distance formula. In this section, we work in the following context: Definition 6.8 (Relatively hierarchically hyperbolic spaces). The hierarchical space pX , Sq is relatively hierarchically hyperbolic if there exists δ such that for all U P S, either U is Ď–minimal or CU is δ–hyperbolic. Our goal is to prove the following two theorems, which provide hierarchy paths and a distance formula in relatively hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. We will not use these theorems in the remainder of this paper, but they are required for future applications. Theorem 6.9 (Distance formula for relatively hierarchically hyperbolic spaces). Let pX , Sq be a relatively hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then there exists s0 such that for all s ě s0 , there exist constants C, K such that for all x, y P X , ÿ ttdU px, yquus . dX px, yq —K,C U PS  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  33  Proof. By Proposition 6.14 below, for some suitably-chosen θ ě 0 and each x, y P X , there exists a subspace Mθ px, yq of X (endowed with the induced metric) so that pMθ px, yq, Sq is a hierarchically hyperbolic space (with the same nesting relations and projections from pX , Sq, so that for all U P S, we have that πU pMθ px, yqq Ă Nθ pγU q, where γU is an arbitrarilychosen geodesic in CU from πU pxq to πU pyq. We emphasize that all of the constants from Definition 1.1 (for Mθ px, yq) are independent of x, y. The theorem now follows by applying the distance formula for hierarchically hyperbolic spaces (Theorem 4.5) to pMθ px, yq, Sq. l Theorem 6.10 (Hierarchy paths in relatively hierarchically hyperbolic spaces). Let pX , Sq be a relatively hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then there exists D ě 0 such that for all x, y P X , there exists a pD, Dq–quasigeodesic γ in X joining x, y so that πU pγq is an unparameterized pD, Dq–quasigeodesic. Proof. Proceed exactly as in Theorem 6.9, but apply Theorem 4.4 instead of Theorem 4.5. l We now define hulls of pairs of points in the relatively hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq. Let θ be a constant to be chosen (it will be the output of the realization theorem for a consistency constant depending on the constants associated to pX , Sq), and let x, y P X . For each U P S, fix a geodesic γU in CU joining πU pxq to πU pyq. Define maps rU : CU Ñ γU as follows: if CU is hyperbolic, let rU be the coarse closest-point projection map. Otherwise, if CU is not hyperbolic (so U is Ď–minimal), define rU as follows: parametrize γU by arc length with γU p0q “ x, and for each p P CU , let mppq “ mintdU px, pq, dU px, yqu. Then rU ppq “ γU pmppqq. This rU is easily seen to be an L–coarsely Lipschitz retraction, with L independent of U and x, y. (When U is minimal, rU is 1–Lipschitz.) Next, define the hull Mθ px, yq to be the set of points x P X such that dU px, γU q ď θ for all U P S. In the next proposition, we show that Mθ px, yq is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, with the following hierarchically hyperbolic structure: (1) the index set is S; (2) the nesting, orthogonality, and transversality relations on S are the same as in pX , Sq; (3) for each U P S, the associated hyperbolic space is γU ; (4) for each U P S, the projection πU1 : Mθ px, yq Ñ γU is given by πU1 “ rU ˝ πU ; (5) for each pair U, V P S of distinct non-orthogonal elements, the relative projection CU Ñ CV is given by rV ˝ ρU V. Since there are now two sets of projections (those defined in the original hierarchical space pX , Sq, denoted π˚ , and the new projections π˚1 ), in the following proofs we will explicitly write all projections when writing distances in the various CU . Lemma 6.11 (Gates in hulls). Let Mθ px, yq be as above. Then there exists a uniformly coarsely Lipschitz retraction r : X Ñ Mθ px, yq such that for each U P S, we have, up to uniformly (independent of x, y) bounded error, πU ˝ r “ rU ˝ πU . Remark 6.12. It is crucial in the following proof that CU is δ–hyperbolic for each U P S that is not Ď–minimal. Proof of śLemma 6.11. Let z P X and, for each U , let tU “ rU ˝ πU pzq; this defines a tuple ptU q P U PS 2CU which we will check is κ–consistent for κ independent of x, y. Realization (Theorem 3.1) then yields m P X such that dU pπU pmq, tU q ď θ for all U P S. By definition, tU P γU , so m P Mθ px, yq and we define gx,y pzq “ m. Note that up to perturbing slightly, we may take gx,y pzq “ z when z P Mθ . Hence it suffices to check consistency of ptU q. First let U, V P S satisfy U &V . Then dV pπV pxq, πV pyqq ď 2E (up to exchanging U and V ), and moreover each of πU pxq, πU pyq is E–close to ρU V . Since tV lies on γV , it follows that U dV ptV , ρV q ď 2E.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  34  Next, let U, V P S satisfy U Ĺ V . Observe that in this case, CV is δ–hyperbolic because V is not Ď–minimal. First suppose that dV pγV , ρU V q ą 1. Then by consistency and bounded geodesic image, dU px, yq ď 3E, and diamU pρVU pγV qq ď E. It follows that diamU ptU Y ρU V ptV qq ď 10E. U Hence, suppose that dV pρU V , γV q ď 10E but that dV ptV , ρV q ą E. Without loss of gener1 ality, ρU V lies at distance ď E from the subpath of γV joining tV to πV pyq. Let γV be the subpath joining x to tV . By consistency, bounded geodesic image, and the fact that CV is δ–hyperbolic and tV “ rV ˝ πV pzq, the geodesic triangle between πV pxq, πV pzq, and tV projects under ρVU to a set, of diameter bounded by some uniform ξ, containing πU pxq, πU pzq, and ρVU ptV q. Hence, since tU “ rU ˝ πU pzq, and πU pxq P γU , the triangle inequality yields a uniform bound on diamU ptU Y ρVU ptV qq. Hence there exists a uniform κ, independent of x, y, so that ptU q is κ–consistent. Finally, gx,y is coarsely Lipschitz by the uniqueness axiom (Definition 1.1.(9)), since each rU is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz. l Lemma 6.13. Let m, m1 P Mθ px, yq. Then there exists C ě 0 such that m, m1 are joined by a pC, Cq–quasigeodesic in Mθ px, yq. Proof. Since X is a quasigeodesic space, there exists K ě 0 so that m, m1 are joined by a K–discrete pK, Kq–quasigeodesic σ : r0, `s Ñ X with σp0q “ m, σp`q “ m1 . Note that gx,y ˝ σ is a K 1 –discrete, efficient path for K 1 indepdent of x, y, since the gate map is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz. A minimal-length K 1 –discrete efficient path in Mθ px, yq from x to y has the property that each subpath is K 1 –efficient, and is a uniform quasigeodesic, as needed. l Proposition 6.14. For all sufficiently large θ, the data (1)–(5) above makes pMθ px, yq, Sq a hierarchically hyperbolic space, where Mθ px, yq inherits its metric as a subspace of X . Moreover, the associated constants from Definition 1.1 are independent of x, y. Proof. By Lemma 6.13, Mθ px, yq is a uniform quasigeodesic space. We now verify that the enumerated axioms from Definition 1.1 are satisfied. Each part of the definition involving only S and the Ď, K, & relations is obviously satisfied; this includes finite complexity. The consistency inequalities hold because they hold in pX , Sq and each rU is L–coarsely Lipschitz. The same holds for bounded geodesic image and the large link lemma. We now verify the two remaining claims: Uniqueness: Let m, m1 P Mθ px, yq, so that dU pπU pmq, γU q, dU pπU pm1 q, γU q ď θ for all U P S. The definition of rU ensures that dU prU ˝ πU pmq, rU ˝ πU pm1 qq ě dU pπU pmq, πU pm1 qq ´ 2θ, and uniqueness follows. Partial realization: Let tUi u be a totally orthogonal subset of S and choose, for each i, some pi P γUi . By partial realization in pX , Sq, there exists z P X so that dUi pπUi pzq, pi q ď E 1 i for each i and dV pπV pzq, ρU V q ď E provided Ui Ĺ V or Ui &V . Let z “ gx,y pzq P Mθ px, yq. Then, by the definition of the gate map and the fact that each rU is L–coarsely Lipschitz, there i exists α, independent of x, y, so that dUi prUi ˝ πUi pz 1 q, pi q ď α, while dV prV ˝ πV pz 1 q, ρU V qďα 1 whenever Ui &V or Ui Ď V . Hence z is the required partial realization point. This completes the proof that pMθ px, yq, Sq is an HHS. l 7. The coarse median property In this section, we study the relationship between hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and spaces that are coarse median in the sense defined by Bowditch in [Bow13]. In particular, this discussion shows that OutpFn q is not a hierarchically hyperbolic space, and hence not a hierarchically hyperbolic group, for n ě 3. Definition 7.1 (Median graph). Let Γ be a graph with unit-length edges and path-metric d. Then Γ is a median graph if there is a map m : Γ3 Ñ Γ such that, for all x, y, z P Γ, we have  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  35  dpx, yq “ dpx, mq ` dpm, yq, and likewise for the pairs x, z and y, z, where m “ mpx, y, zq. Note that if x “ y, then mpx, y, zq “ x. Chepoi established in [Che00] that Γ is a median graph precisely when Γ is the 1-skeleton of a CAT(0) cube complex. Definition 7.2 (Coarse median space). Let pM, dq be a metric space and let m : M 3 Ñ M be a ternary operation satisfying the following: (1) (Triples) There exist constants κ, hp0q such that for all a, a1 , b, b1 , c, c1 P M , ` ˘ dpmpa, b, c, q, mpa1 , b1 , c1 qq ď κ dpa, a1 q ` dpb, b1 q ` dpc, c1 q ` hp0q. (2) (Tuples) There is a function h : N Y t0u Ñ r0, 8q such that for any A Ď M with p0q 1 ď |A| “ p ă 8, there is a CAT(0) cube complex Fp and maps π : A Ñ Fp and p0q λ : Fp Ñ M such that dpa, λpπpaqqq ď hppq for all a P A and such that dpλpmp px, y, zqq, mpλpxq, λpyq, λpzqqq ď hppq p0q  for all x, y, z P Fp , where mp is the map that sends triples from Fp to their median. Then pM, d, mq is a coarse median space. The rank of pM, d, mq is at most d if each Fp above can be chosen to satisfy dim Fp ď d, and the rank of pM, d, mq is exactly d if d is the minimal integer such that pM, d, mq has rank at most d. The next fact was observed by Bowditch [Bow15]; we include a proof for completeness. Theorem 7.3 (Hierarchically hyperbolic implies coarse median). Let pX , Sq be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then X is coarse median of rank at most the complexity of pX , Sq. Proof. Since the spaces CU, U P S are δ-hyperbolic for some δ independent of U , there exists for each U a ternary operation mU : CU 3 Ñ CU so that pCU, dU , mU q is a coarse median space of rank 1, and the constant κ and function h : N Y t0u Ñ r0, 8q from Definition 7.2 can be chosen to depend only on δ (and not on U ). Definition of the median: Define a map m : X 3 Ñ X as follows. Let x, y, z P X and, for ś each U P S, let bU “ mU pπU pxq, πU pyq, πU pzqq. By Lemma 2.6, the tuple ~b P U PS 2CU whose U -coordinate is bU is κ–consistent for an appropriate choice of κ. Hence, by the realization theorem (Theorem 3.1), there exists θe and m “ mpx, y, zq P X such that dU pm, bU q ď θu for all U P S. Moreover, this is coarsely well-defined (up to the constant θe from the realization theorem). Application of [Bow13, Proposition 10.1]: Observe that, by Definition 1.1.1, the projections πU : X Ñ CU, U P S are uniformly coarsely Lipschitz. Moreover, for each U P S, the projection πU : X Ñ CU is a “quasimorphism” in the sense of [Bow13, Section 10], i.e., dU pmU pπU pxq, πU pyq, πU pzqq, πU pmpx, y, zqqq is uniformly bounded, by construction, as U varies over S and x, y, z vary in X . Proposition 10.1 of [Bow13] then implies that m is a coarse median on X , since that the hypothesis pP 1q of that proposition holds in our situation by the distance formula. l The following is a consequence of Theorem 7.3 and work of Bowditch [Bow13, Bow14a]: Corollary 7.4 (Contractibility of asymptotic cones). Let X be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then all the asymptotic cones of X are contractible, and in fact bi-Lipschitz equivalent to CAT(0) spaces. Corollary 7.5 (HHGs have quadratic Dehn function). Let G be a finitely generated group that is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then G is finitely presented and has quadratic Dehn function. In particular, this conclusion holds when G is a hierarchically hyperbolic group.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  Proof. This follows from Theorem 7.3 and [Bow13, Corollary 8.3].  36  l  Corollary 7.6. For n ě 3, the group OutpFn q is not a hierarchically hyperbolic space, and in particular is not a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Proof. This is an immediate consequence of Corollary 7.5 and the exponential lower bound on the Dehn function of OutpFn q given by the combined results of [BV95, HM13b, BV]. l We also recover a special case of Theorem I of [BHS14], using Corollary 7.5 and a theorem of Gersten-Holt-Riley [GHR03, Theorem A]: Corollary 7.7. Let N be a finitely generated virtually nilpotent group. Then G is quasiisometric to a hierarchically hyperbolic space if and only if N is virtually abelian. Corollary 7.8. Let S be a symmetric space of non-compact type, or a thick affine building. Suppose that the spherical type of S is not Ar1 . Then S is not hierarchically hyperbolic. Proof. This follows from Theorem 7.3 and Theorem A of [Hae14].  l  Finally, Theorem 9.1 of [Bow14a] combines with Theorem 7.3 to yield: Corollary 7.9 (Rapid decay). Let G be a group whose Cayley graph is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then G has the rapid decay property. 7.1. Coarse media and hierarchical quasiconvexity. The natural notion of quasiconvexity in the coarse median setting is related to hierarchical quasiconvexity. Definition 7.10 (Coarsely convex). Let pX , Sq be a hierarchically hyperbolic space and let m : X 3 Ñ X be the coarse median map constructed in the proof of Theorem 7.3. A closed subspace Y Ď X is µ–convex if for all y, y 1 P Y and x P X , we have mpy, y 1 , xq P Nµ pYq. Remark 7.11. We will not use µ–convexity in the remainder of the paper. However, it is of independent interest since it parallels a characterization of convexity in median spaces: a subspace Y of a median space is convex exactly when, for all y, y 1 P Y and x in the ambient median space, the median of x, y, y 1 lies in Y. Proposition 7.12 (Coarse convexity and hierarchical quasiconvexity). Let pX , Sq be a hierarchically hyperbolic space and let Y Ď X . If Y is hierarchically k-quasiconvex, then there exists µ ě 0, depending only on k and the constants from Definition 1.1, such that Y is µ–convex. Proof. Let Y Ď X be k–hierarchically quasiconvex, let y, y 1 P Y and x P X . Let m “ mpx, y, y 1 q. For any U P S, the projection πU pYq is by definition kp0q-quasiconvex, so that, for some k 1 “ k 1 pkp0q, δq, we have dU pmU , πU pYqq ď k 1 , where mU is the coarse median of πU pxq, πU pyq, πU py 1 q coming from hyperbolicity of CU . The tuple pmU qU PS was shown above to be κ–consistent for appropriately-chosen κ (Lemma 2.6), and dU pmU , mpx, y, y 1 qq ď θe pκq, so, by hierarchical quasiconvexity dX pmpx, y, y 1 q, Yq is bounded by a constant depending on kpκq and k 1 . l 8. Combination theorems for hierarchically hyperbolic spaces The goal of this section is to prove Theorem 8.6, which enables the construction of new hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups from a tree of given ones. We postpone the statement of the theorem until after the relevant definitions. Definition 8.1 (Quasiconvex hieromorphism, full hieromorphism). Let pf, f ♦ , tf ˚ pU quU PS q be a hieromorphism pX , Sq Ñ pX 1 , S1 q. We say f is k–hierarchically quasiconvex if its image is k–hierarchically quasiconvex. The hieromorphism is full if:  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  37  (1) there exists ξ ě 0 such that each f ˚ pU q : CU Ñ Cpf ♦ pU qq is a pξ, ξq–quasi-isometry, and (2) for each U P S, if V 1 P S1 satisfies V 1 Ď f ♦ pU q, then there exists V P S such that V Ď U and f ♦ pV q “ V 1 . Remark 8.2. Observe that Definition 8.1.(2) holds automatically unless V 1 is bounded. Definition 8.3 (Tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces). Let V, E denote the vertex and edge-sets, respectively, of the simplicial tree T . A tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces is a quadruple ` ˘ T “ T, tXv u, tXe u, tφe˘ : v P V, e P Eu satisfying: (1) tXv u and tXe u are uniformly hierarchically hyperbolic: each Xv has index set Sv , and each Xe has index set Se . In particular, there is a uniform bound on the complexities of the hierarchically hyperbolic structures on the Xv and Xe . (2) Fix an orientation on each e P E and let e` , e´ denote the initial and terminal vertices of e. Then, each φe˘ : Xe Ñ Xe˘ is a hieromorphism with all constants bounded by some uniform ξ ě 0. (We adopt the hieromorphism notation from Definition 1.19. Hence we actually have maps φe˘ : Xe Ñ Xe˘ , and maps φ♦ e˘ : Se Ñ Se˘ preserving nesting, transversality, and orthogonality, and coarse ξ–Lipschitz maps φ˚e˘ pU q : CU Ñ Cpφ♦ e˘ pU qq satisfying the conditions of that definition.) Given a tree TŮ of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, denote by X pT q the metric space constructed from vPV Xv by adding edges of length 1 as follows: if x P Xe , we declare φe´ pxq to be joined by an edge to φe` pxq. Given x, x1 P X in the same vertex space Xv , define d1 px, x1 q to be dXv px, x1 q. Given x, x1 P X joined by an edge, define d1 px, x1 q “ 1. Given a sequence x0 , x1 , . . . , xk P X , with consecutive points either joined by an edge or in a common vertex ř 1 1 1 space, define its length to be k´1 i“1 d pxi , xi`1 q. Given x, x P X , let dpx, x q be the infimum of the lengths of such sequences x “ x0 , . . . , xk “ x1 . Remark 8.4. Since the vertex spaces are (uniform) quasigeodesic spaces, pX , dq is a quasigeodesic space. Definition 8.5 (Equivalence, support, bounded support). Let T be a tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. For each e P E, and each We´ P Se´ , We` P Se` , write We´ „d We` ♦ The transitive closure „ of „d is an if there exists We P Se so that φ♦ e´ pWe q “ φe` pWe q. Ť Ť equivalence relation on v Sv . The „–class of W P v Sv is denoted rW s. The support of an equivalence class rW s is the induced subgraph TrW s of T whose vertices are those v P T so that Sv contains a representative of rW s. Observe that TrW s is connected. The tree T of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces has bounded supports if there exists n P N such that each „–class has support of diameter at most n. We can now state the main theorem of this section: Theorem 8.6 (Combination theorem for hierarchically hyperbolic spaces). Let T be a tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Suppose that: (1) there exists a function k so that each edge–hieromorphism is k–hierarchically quasiconvex; (2) each edge–hieromorphism is full; (3) T has bounded supports of diameter at most n; (4) if e is an edge of T and Se is the Ď–maximal element of Se , then for all V P Se˘ , the elements V and φ♦ pS q are not orthogonal in Se˘ . e˘ e Then XpT q is hierarchically hyperbolic.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  38  We postpone the proof until after the necessary lemmas and definitions. For the remainder of this section, fix a tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces T “ pT, tXv u, tXe u, tφe˘ uq satisfying the hypotheses of Theorem 8.6; let n be the constant Ť implicit in assumption 3. Denote by S the union of tT u with the set of all „–classes in v Sv . Definition 8.7 (Nesting, orthogonality, transversality in S). For all rW s P S, declare rW s Ď T . If rV s, rW s are „–classes, then rV s Ď rW s if and only if there exists v P T such that rV s, rW s are respectively represented by Vv , Wv P Sv and Vv Ď Wv ; this relation is nesting. For convenience, for A P S, we write SA to denote the set of B P S such that B Ď A. Likewise, rV sKrW s if and only if there exists a vertex v P T such that rV s, rW s are respectively represented by Vv , Wv P Sv and Vv KWv ; this relation is orthogonality. If rV s, rW s P S are not orthogonal and neither is nested into the other, then they are transverse, written rV s&rW s. Equivalently, rV s&rW s if for all v P TrV s X TrW s , the representatives Vv , Wv P Sv of rV s, rW s satisfy Vv &Wv . Fullness (Definition 8.1.(2)) was introduced to enable the following two lemmas: Lemma 8.8. Let T be a tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, let v be a vertex of the underlying tree T , and let U, U 1 P Sv satisfy U Ď U 1 . Then either U “ U 1 or U  U 1 . Proof. Suppose that U „ U 1 , so that there is a closed path v “ v0 , v1 , . . . , vn “ v in T and a sequence U “ U0 , U1 , . . . , Un “ U 1 such that Ui P Svi and Ui „d Ui`1 for all i. If U ‰ U 1 , then Condition (2) (fullness) from Definition 8.1 and the fact that hieromorphisms preserve nesting yields U 2 P Sv , different from U 1 , such that U 2 „ U and U 2 Ĺ U 1 Ĺ U (where Ĺ denotes proper nesting). Repeating this argument contradicts finiteness of complexity. l Lemma 8.9. The relation Ď is a partial order on S, and T is the unique Ď–maximal element. Moreover, if rV sKrW s and rU s Ď rV s, then rU sKrW s and rV s, rW s are not Ď–comparable. Proof. Reflexivity is clear. Suppose that rVv s Ď rUu s Ď rWw s. Then there are vertices v1 , v2 P V and representatives Vv1 P rVv s, Uv1 P rUu s, Uv2 P rUu s, Wv2 P rWw s so that Vv1 Ď Uv1 and Uv2 Ď Wv2 . Since edge–hieromorphisms are full, induction on dT pv1 , v2 q yields Vv2 Ď Uv2 so that Vv2 „ Vv1 . Transitivity of the nesting relation in Sv2 implies that Vv2 Ď Wv2 , whence rVv s Ď rWw s. Suppose that rUu s Ď rVv s and rVv s Ď rUu s, and suppose by contradiction that rUu s ‰ rVv s. Choose v1 , v2 P V and representatives Uv1 , Uv2 , Vv1 , Vv2 so that Uv1 Ď Vv1 and Vv2 Ď Uv2 . The definition of „ again yields Uv2 „ Uv1 with Uv2 Ď Vv2 ‰ Uv2 . This contradicts Lemma 8.8 below. Hence Ď is antisymmetric, whence it is a partial order. The underlying tree T is the unique Ď–maximal element by definition. Suppose that rV sKrW s and rU s Ď rV s. Then there are vertices v1 , v2 and representatives Vv1 , Wv1 , Uv2 , Vv2 such that Vv1 KWv1 and Uv2 KVv2 . Again by fullness of the edge– hieromorphisms, there exists Uv1 „ Uv2 with Uv1 Ď Vv1 , whence Uv1 KWv1 . Thus rU sKrW s as required. Finally, Ď–incomparability of rV s, rW s follows from fullness and the fact that edge-hieromorphisms preserve orthogonality and nesting. l Lemma 8.10. Let rW s P S and let rU s Ď rW s. Suppose moreover that ( rV s P SrW s : rV sKrU s ‰ H. Then there exists rAs P SrW s ´ trW su such that rV s Ď rAs for all rV s P SrW s with rV sKrU s. Proof. Choose some v P V so that there exists Vv P Sv and Uv P Sv with rUv s “ rU s and Vv KUv . Then by definition, there exists Av P Sv so that Bv Ď Av whenever Bv KUv and so that rBv s Ď rW s. It follows from the fact that the edge-hieromorphisms are full and preserve (non)orthogonality that rBs Ď rAv s whenever rBsKrU s. l  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  39  Lemma 8.11. There exists χ ě 0 such that if tV1 , . . . , Vc u Ă S consists of pairwise orthogonal or pairwise Ď–comparable elements, then c ď χ. Proof. For each v P T , let χv be the complexity of pXv , Sv q and let χ “ maxv χv ` 1. Let rV1 s, . . . , rVc s P S´ tT u be „–classes that are pairwise orthogonal or pairwise Ď–comparable. The Helly property for trees yields a vertex v lying in the support of each rVi s; let Viv P Sv represent rVi s. Since edge–hieromorphisms preserve nesting, orthogonality, and transversality, c ď χv . However, each Vi Ď T , whence χ is the correct upper bound. l Definition 8.12 (Favorite representative, hyperbolic spaces associated to equivalence classes). Let CT “ T . For each „–class rW s, choose a favorite vertex v of TrW s and let Wv P SWv be the favorite representative of rW s. Let CrW s “ CWv . Note that each CrW s is δ–hyperbolic, where δ is the uniform hyperbolicity constant for T . Definition 8.13 (Gates in vertex spaces). For each vertex v of T , define a gate map gv : X Ñ Xv as follows. Let x P Xu for some vertex u of T . We define gv pxq inductively on dT pu, vq. If u “ v, then set gv pxq “ x. Otherwise, u “ e´ for some edge e of T so that dT pe` , vq “ dT pu, vq´1. Then set gv pxq “ gv pφe` pφ´1 pg pxqqqq. We also have a map βVv : X Ñ CVv , e´ φe´ pXe q defined by βVv pxq “ πVv pgv pxqq. (Here, gφe´ pXe q : Xe´ “ Xu Ñ φe´ pXe q is the usual gate map to a hierarchically quasiconvex subspace, described in Definition 5.4, and φ´1 is a quasie˘ inverse for the edge-hieromorphism.) Lemma 8.14. There exists K, depending only on E and ξ, such that the following holds. Let e, f be edges of T and v a vertex so that e´ “ f ´ “ v. Suppose for some V P Sv that there exist x, y P φe´ pXe q Ď Xv with dV pgφf ´ pXf q pxq, gφf ´ pXf q pyqq ą 10K. Then V P φ♦ pSe q X φ♦ pSf q. e´ f´ Proof. Let Ye “ φe´ pXe q and let Yf “ φf ´ pXf q; these spaces are uniformly hierarchically quasiconvex in Xv . Moreover, by fullness of the edge-hieromorphisms, we can choose K ě 100E so that the map πV : Ye Ñ CV is K–coarsely surjective for each V P φ♦ pSe q, and e´ ♦ ♦ likewise for φf ´ pSf q and Yv . If V P Sv ´ φf ´ pSf q, then πV is K–coarsely constant on Yf , by the distance formula, since Xf is quasi-isometrically embedded. Likewise, πV is coarsely constant on Ye if V R φ♦ pSe q. (This also follows from consistency when V is transverse e´ to some unbounded element of φ♦ pSe q and from consistency and bounded geodesic image e´ otherwise.) Suppose that there exists V P Sv such that dV pgφf ´ pXf q pxq, gφf ´ pXf q pyqq ą 10K. Since gφf ´ pXf q pxq, gφf ´ pXf q pyq P Xf , we therefore have that V P φ♦ pSf q. On the other hand, the f´ definition of gates implies that dV px, yq ą 8K, so V P φ♦ pSe q. e´  l  Lemma 8.15. There exists a constant K 1 such that the following holds. Let e, f be edges of T and suppose that there do not exist Ve P Se , Vf P Sf for which φ♦ pV q „ φ♦ pV q. Then e´ e f´ f 1 ge´ pXf q has diameter at most K . In particular, the conclusion holds if dT pe, f q ą n, where n bounds the diameter of the supports. Proof. The second assertion follows immediately from the first in light of how n was chosen. We now prove the first assertion by induction on the number k of vertices on the geodesic in T from e to f . The base case, k “ 1, follows from Lemma 8.14. For k ě 1, let v0 , v1 , . . . , vk be the vertices on a geodesic from e to f , in the obvious order. Let b be the edge joining vk´1 to vk , with b´ “ vk . It follows from the definition of gates that ge´ pXf q has diameter (coarsely) bounded above by that of gφb´ pXb q pXf q and that of ge´ pXb q. Hence suppose that diampgφb´ pXb q pXf qq ą 10K  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  40  Xe  Xb Xb´ Xf  Figure 4. Schematic of the subset of X near Xb´ . and diampge´ pXb qq ą 10K. Then, by induction and Lemma 8.14, we see that there exists Ve P Se , Vf P Sf for which φ♦ pV q „ φ♦ pV q, a contradiction. l e´ e f´ f Lemma 8.16. The map gv : X Ñ Xv is coarse Lipschitz, with constants independent of v. Proof. Let x, y P X . If the projections of x, y to T lie in the ball of radius 2n ` 1 about v, then this follows since gv is the composition of a bounded number of maps, each of which is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz by Lemma 5.5. Otherwise, by Remark 8.4, it suffices to consider x, y with dX px, yq ď C, where C depends only on the metric d. In this case, let vx , vy be the vertices in T to which x, y project. Let v 1 be the median in T of v, vx , vy . Observe that there is a uniform bound on dT pvx , v 1 q and dT pvy , v 1 q, so it suffices to bound dv pgv pgv1 pxqq, gv pgv1 pyqqq. Either dT pv, v 1 q ď 2n ` 1, and we are done, or Lemma 8.15 gives the desired bound, since equivalence classes have support of diameter at most n. l Definition 8.17 (Projections). For each rW s P S, define the projection πrW s : X Ñ CrW s by πrW s pxq “ βWv pxq, where Wv is the favorite representative of rW s. Note that these projections take points to uniformly bounded sets, since the collection of vertex spaces is uniformly hierarchically hyperbolic. Define πT : X Ñ T to be the usual projection to T . Lemma 8.18 (Comparison maps). There exists a uniform constant ξ ě 1 such that for all Wv P Sv , Ww P Sw with Wv „ Ww , there exists a pξ, ξq–quasi-isometry c : Wv Ñ Ww such that c ˝ βv “ βw up to uniformly bounded error. Definition 8.19. A map c as given by Lemma 8.18 is called a comparison map. Proof of Lemma 8.18. We first clarify the situation by stating some consequences of the definitions. Let e` , e´ be vertices of T joined by an edge e. Suppose that there exists W ` P Se` , W ´ P Se´ such that W ` „ W ´ , so that there exists W P Se with πpφe˘ qpW q “ W ˘ . Then the following diagram coarsely commutes (with uniform constants): X ge´  ge`      Xe´ πW ´  X` ? e _    CW ´_      Xe    πW ´  ` CW ?  πW      CW where Xe Ñ Xe˘ is the uniform quasi-isometry φe˘ , while Xe˘ Ñ Xe is the composition of a quasi-inverse for φe˘ with the gate map Xe˘ Ñ φe˘ pXe q, and the maps CW Ø CW ˘ are the quasi-isometries implicit in the edge hieromorphism or their quasi-inverses. The proof  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  41  essentially amounts to chaining together a sequence of these diagrams as e varies among the edges of a geodesic from v to w; an important ingredient is played by the fact that such a geodesic has length at most n. Let v “ v0 , v1 , . . . , vm , vm`1 “ w be the geodesic sequence in T from v to w and let ei be the edge joining vi to vi`1 . For each i, choose Wi P Sei and Wi˘ P Sei so that (say) W0´ “ Wv ˘  ` “ W and so that φ♦ pW q “ W ˘ for all i. For each i, let q ˘ : CW Ñ CW ˘ be and Wm w i i i i i ei ˘  qi “ φ˚ei pWi q be the pξ 1 , ξ 1 q–quasi-isometry packaged in the edge–hieromorphism, and let q̄i˘ ˘  be a quasi-inverse; the constant ξ 1 is uniform by hypothesis, and m ď n since T has bounded supports. The hypotheses on the edge–hieromorphisms ensure that the Wi˘ are uniquely determined by Wv , Ww , and we define c by 1  1  m m c “ qm q̄m ¨ ¨ ¨ q11 q̄11 ,  where i , 1i P t˘u depend on the orientation of ei , and 1i “ ` if and only if i “ ´. This is a pξ, ξq–quasi-isometry, where ξ “ ξpξn1 q. If v “ w, then c is the identity and c ˝ βv “ βv . Let d ě 1 “ dT pv, wq and let w1 be the penultimate vertex on the geodesic of T from v to w. Let c1 : CWv Ñ CWw1 be a comparison map, so that, by induction, there exists λ1 ě 0 so that dCWw1 pc1 ˝ βv pxq, βw1 pxqq ď λ1 for all x P X . Let c2 “ q̄k` qk´ : CWw1 Ñ CWw be the pξ 1 , ξ 1 q–quasi-isometry packaged in the edge–hieromorphism, so that the following diagram coarsely commutes: X  gv  Xv πWv  z    CWv    gw  gw1  $  / Xw1  /  Xw gw πWw  gw 1 πW c1  w1  / CWw1   / CWw 2  c  c2 ˝c1  Since c “ and the constants implicit in the coarse commutativity of the diagram depend only on the constants of the hieromorphism and on d ď n, the claim follows. l Lemma 8.20. There exists K such that each πrW s is pK, Kq–coarsely Lipschitz. Proof. For each vertex v of T and each V P Sv , the projection πV : Xv Ñ CV is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz, by definition. By Lemma 8.16, each gate map gv : X Ñ Xv is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz. The lemma follows since πrW s “ πWv ˝ gv , where v is the favorite vertex carrying the favorite representative Wv of rW s. l Definition 8.21 (Projections between hyperbolic spaces). If rV s Ď rW s, then choose vertices v, v 1 , w P V so that Vv , Ww are respectively the favorite representatives of rV s, rW s, while Vv1 , Wv1 are respectively representatives of rV s, rW s with Vv1 , Wv1 P Sv1 and Vv1 Ď Wv1 . Let cV : CVv1 Ñ CVv and cW : CWv1 Ñ CWw be comparison maps. Then define ´ ¯ V 1 rV s ρrW s “ cW ρWv 1 , v  rW s  which is a uniformly bounded set, and define ρrV s : CrW s Ñ CrV s by W  rW s  1  ρrV s “ cV ˝ ρV v1 ˝ c̄W , v  W  1  where c̄W is a quasi–inverse of cW and ρV v1 : CWv1 Ñ CVv1 is the map provided by Definiv tion 1.1.(2). Similarly, if rV s&rW s, and there exists w P T so that Sw contains representatives Vw , Ww of rV s, rW s, then let ´ ¯ rV s ρrW s “ cW ρVWww .  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  42  Otherwise, choose a closest pair v, w so that Sv (respectively Sw ) contains a representative of rV s (respectively rW s). Let e be the first edge of the geodesic in T joining v to w, so v “ e´ (say). Let S be the Ď–maximal element of Se , and let ¯ ´ πpφ ´ qpSq rW s . ρrV s “ cV ρVv e This is well-defined by hypothesis (4). rW s For each „–class rW s, let ρT be the support of rW s (a uniformly bounded set since T has bounded supports). Define ρTrW s : T Ñ CW as follows: given v P T not in the support of rW s, let e be the unique edge with e´ (say) separating v from the support of rW s. Let rφ ´ pSqs . If v is in the support of rW s, then let S P Se be Ď–maximal. Then ρTrW s pvq “ ρrWe s ρTrW s pvq be chosen arbitrarily. We are now ready to complete the proof of the combination theorem. Proof of Theorem 8.6. We claim that pX pT q, Sq is hierarchically hyperbolic. We take the nesting, orthogonality, and transversality relations for a tree of spaces given by Definition 8.7. In Lemmas 8.9 and 8.10, it is shown that these relations satisfy all of the conditions (2) and (3) of Definition 1.1 not involving the projections. Moreover, the complexity of pX pT q, Sq is finite, by Lemma 8.11, verifying Definition 1.1.(5). The set of δ–hyperbolic spaces tCA : A P Su is provided by Definition 8.12, while the projections πrW s : X Ñ CrW s required by Definition 1.1.(1) are defined in Definition 8.17 and are uniformly coarsely LipsrV s chitz by Lemma 8.20. The projections ρrW s when rV s, rW s are non-orthogonal are described in Definition 8.21. To complete the proof, it thus suffices to verify the consistency inequalities (Definition 1.1.(4)), the bounded geodesic image axiom (Definition 1.1.(7)), the large link axiom (Definition 1.1.(6)), partial realization (Definition 1.1.(8)), and uniqueness (Definition 1.1.(9)). Consistency: Suppose that rU s&rV s or rU s Ď rV s and let x P X . Choose representatives Uu P Su , Vu P Sv of rU s, rV s so that dT pu, vq realizes the distance between the supports of rU s, rV s. By composing the relevant maps in the remainder of the argument with comparison maps, we can assume that Uu , Vv are favorite representatives. Without loss of generality, there exists a vertex w P T so that x P Xw . If u “ v, then consistency follows since it holds in each vertex space, so assume that u, v have disjoint supports and in particular rU s&rV s. If w R ru, vs, then (say) u separates w from v. Then πrV s pxq “ πVv pgv pxqq. Let e be the rV s  edge of the geodesic ru, vs emanating from u, so that ρrU s “ ρSUu , where S is the image in  &  Su of the Ď–maximal element of Se . If dCUu pgu pxq, ρSUu q ď E, then we are done. Otherwise, u by consistency in Su , we have dCS pgu pxq, ρU S q ď E, from which consistency follows. Hence suppose that w P ru, vs. Then without loss of generality, there is an edge e containing v and separating w from v. As before, projections to V factor through the Ď-maximal element of Se , from which consistency follows. It remains to verify consistency for T, rW s for each „–class rW s. Choose x P Xv . If dT pv, TrW s q ě n ` 1, then let e be the edge incident to TrW s separating it from v, so that (up to a comparison map) ρTrW s pvq “ ρSW , where W P Se` represents W , and e` P TrW s , and S is the image in Se` of the Ď–maximal element of Se . (Note that W &S by hypothesis (4) of the theorem and the choice of e). On the other hand (up to a comparison map) πrW s pxq “ πW pge` pxqq — πW pge` pXv qq — πW pFS q “ ρSW , as desired. Finally, suppose that rU s Ď rV s and that either rV s Ĺ rW s or rV s&rW s and rU s rW s. We rU s rV s claim that drW s pρrW s , ρrW s q is uniformly bounded. Choose representatives Uu P Su , Vu P Su of rU s, rV s with Uu Ď Vu . Choose representatives Vw , Ww P Sw so that Vw Ď Ww or Vw &Uw  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  43  &  according to whether rV s Ď rW s or rV s&rW s, and choose representatives Uv , Wv P Sv of rU s, rW s so that Uv Ď Wv or Uv &Wv according to whether rU s Ď rW s or rU s&rW s. Let m P T be the median of u, v, w. Since u, w lie in the support of rU s, rW s, so does m, since supports are connected. Likewise, m lies in the support of rV s. Let Um , Vm , Wm be the representatives of rU s, rV s, rW s in m. Since edge-maps are full hieromorphisms, we have Um Ď Vm and Um Wm and either Vm Ď Wm or Vm &Wm . Hence Definition 1.1.(4) implies Vm m that dWm pρU Wm , ρWm q is uniformly bounded. Since the comparison maps are uniform quasirU s  rV s  isometries, it follows that drW s pρrW s , ρrW s q is uniformly bounded, as desired. Bounded geodesic image and large link axiom in T : Let γ be a geodesic in T and rW s let rW s be a „–class so that dT pγ, ρT q ą 1, which is to say that γ does not contain vertices in the support of rW s. Let e be the terminal edge of the geodesic joining γ to the support of rSs rW s. Then for all u P γ, we have by definition that ρTrW s puq “ ρrW s for some fixed „–class rSs. This verifies the bounded geodesic image axiom for T, rW s. By Lemma 8.15, there exists a constant K 2 such that if x, x1 P X respectively project to vertices v, v 1 , then any rW s P S ´ tT u with drW s px, x1 q ě K 2 is supported on a vertex vrW s on the geodesic rv, v 1 s and is hence nested into rSvW s, where SvW is maximal in SvrW s . Indeed, choose w in the support of rW s. Then either drW s px, x1 q is smaller than some specified constant, or dXw pgw pxq, gw px1 q ą K 1 . Thus gXw pXm q has diameter at least K 1 , where m is the median of v, v 1 , w. Hence m lies in the support of rW s, and m P rv, v 1 s, and rW s Ď rSs, where rSv  s  S is Ď–maximal in Sm . Finally, for each such SvW , it is clear that dT px, ρT W q ď dT px, x1 q, verifying the conclusion of the large link axiom for T . Bounded geodesic image and large link axiom in W Ă T : Let rW s be non-Ď– maximal, let rV s Ď rW s, and let γ be a geodesic in CrW s. Then γ is a geodesic in CWw , by definition, where w is the favorite vertex of rW s with corresponding representative Ww . Let rV s Vw be the representative of rV s supported on w, so that ρrW s “ ρVWww , so that γ avoids the rV s  E–neighborhood of ρrW s exactly when it avoids the E–neighborhood of ρVWww . The bounded geodesic image axiom now follows from bounded geodesic image in Sw , although the constant E has been changed according to the quasi-isometry constant of comparison maps. Now suppose x, x1 P Xv , Xv1 and choose w to be the favorite vertex in the support of rW s. Suppose for some rV s Ď rW s that drV s px, x1 q ě E 1 , where E 1 depends on E and the quasi-isometry constants of the edge-hieromorphisms. Then dVw pgw pxq, gw px1 qq ě E, for some representative Vw P Sw of rV s, by our choice of E 1 . Hence, by the large link axiom in Sw , we have that Vw Ď Ti , where tTi u is a specified set of N “ tdWw pgw pxq, gw px1 qqu “ tdrW s px, x1 qu elements of Sw , with each Ti Ă Ww . Moreover, the large link axiom in Sw rT s  implies that drW s px, ρrWi s q “ dWw pgw pxq, ρTWi w q ď N for all i. This verifies the large link axiom for pX pT q, Sq. Partial realization: Let rV1 s, . . . , rVk s P S be pairwise–orthogonal, and, for each i ď k, let pi P CrVi s. For each i, let Ti Ď T be the induced subgraph spanned by the vertices w such that rVi s has a representative in Sw . The definition of the „–relation implies that each Ti is connected, so by the Helly property of trees, there exists a vertex v P T such that for each i, there exists Vvi P Sv representing rVi s. Moreover, we have Vvi KVvj for i ‰ j, since the edge–hieromorphisms preserve the orthogonality relation. Applying the partial realization axiom (Definition 1.1.(8)) to tp1i P CVvi u, where p1i is the image of pi under the appropriate comparison map, yields a point x P Xv such that πVvi pxq is coarsely equal to p1i for all i, whence drVi s px, pi q is uniformly bounded. If rVi s Ď rW s, then W has a representative Wv P Sv such rV s  that Vvi Ď W , whence drW s px, ρWi q is uniformly bounded since x is a partial realization  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  44  point for tVvi u in Sv . Finally, if rW s&rVi s, then either the subtrees of T supporting rW s and rV s rVi s are disjoint, in which case drW s px, ρrWi s q is bounded, or rW s has a representative in Sv transverse to Vvi , in which case the same inequality holds by our choice of x. Uniqueness of realization points: Suppose x, y P X satisfy drV s px, yq ď K for all rV s P S. Then for each vertex v P T , applying the uniqueness axiom in Xv to gv pxq, gv pyq shows that, since dXv pgv pxq, gv pyqq ď ζ “ ζpKq. Indeed, otherwise we would have dV pgv pxq, gv pyqq ą ξK`ξ for some V P Sv , whence drV s px, yq ą K. There exists k ď K and a sequence v0 , . . . , vk of vertices in T so that x P Xv0 , y P Xvk . For each j, let xj “ gvj pxq and yj “ gvj pyq. Then x “ x0 , y0 , x1 , y1 , . . . , yj´1 , xj , yj , . . . , xk , yk “ y is a path of uniformly bounded length joining x to y. Indeed, dXvj pxj , yj q ď ζ and k ď K by the preceding discussion, while xj coarsely coincides with a point on the opposite side of an edge-space from yj´1 by the definition of the gate of an edge-space in a vertex-space and the fact that xj´1 and yj´1 coarsely coincide. This completes the proof. l 8.1. Equivariant definition of pX pT q, Sq. Let T denote the tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces pT , tXv u, tXe u, tπe˘ uq, and let pX pT q, Sq be the hierarchically hyperbolic structure defined in the proof of Theorem 8.6. Various arbitrary choices were made in defining the constituent hyperbolic spaces and projections in this hierarchically hyperbolic structure, and we now insist on a specific way of making these choices in order to describe automorphisms of pX pT q, Sq. Recall that an automorphism of pX pT q, Sq is determined by a bijection g : S Ñ S and a set of isometries g : CrV s Ñ CgrV s, for rV s P S. Via the distance formula, this determines a uniform quasi-isometry X pT q Ů Ñ X pT q. Ů A bijection g : vPV Sv Ñ vPV Sv is T –coherent if there is an induced isometry g of the Ů underlying tree, T , so that f g “ gf , where f : vPV Sv Ñ T sends each V P Sv to v, for all v P V. The T –coherent bijection g is said to be T –coherent if it also preserves the relation „. Noting that the composition of T –coherent bijections is T –coherent, denote by PT the group of T –coherent bijections. For each g P PT , there is an induced bijection g : S Ñ S. Recall that the hierarchically hyperbolic structure pX pT q, Sq was completely determined except for the following three types of choices which were made arbitrarily. (1) For each rV s P S, we chose an arbitrary favorite vertex v in the support of rV s; and, (2) we chose an arbitrary favorite representative Vv P Sv with rV s “ rVv s. (Note that if, as is often the case in practice, edge-hieromorphisms Se Ñ Sv are injective, then Vv is the unique representative of its „–class that lies in Sv , and hence our choice is uniquely determined.) (3) For each rW s P S, the point ρTrW s is chosen arbitrarily in CW , where W is the favorite representative of rW s. We now constrain these choices so that they are equivariant. For each PT –orbit in S, choose a representative rV s of that orbit, choose a favorite vertex v arbitrarily in its support, and choose a favorite representative Vv P Sv of rV s. Then declare gVv P Sgv to be the favorite representative, and gv the favorite vertex, associated to grV s, for each g P PT . Recall that, for each rW s P S, we defined CrW s to be CW , where W is the favorite representative of rW s. Suppose that we have specified a subgroup G ď PT and, for each rW s P S and g P PT , an isometry g : CrW s Ñ CgrW s. Then we choose ρTrW s in such a way that ρTgrW s “ gρTrW s for each rW s P S and g P G. 8.2. Graphs of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Recall that the finitely generated group G is hierarchically hyperbolic if there is a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq such that G ď AutpSq and the action of G on X is metrically proper and cobounded and the  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  45  action of G on S is co-finite (this, together with the definition of an automorphism, implies that only finitely many isometry types of hyperbolic space are involved in the HHS structure). Endowing G with a word-metric, we see that pG, Sq is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. If pG, Sq and pG1 , S1 q are hierarchically hyperbolic groups, then a homomorphism of hierarchically hyperbolic groups φ : pG, Sq Ñ pG1 , S1 q is a homomorphism φ : G Ñ G1 that is also a φ–equivariant hieromorphism as in Definition 1.21. Recall that a graph of groups G is a graph Γ “ pV, Eq together with a set tGv : v P V u of vertex groups, a set tGe : e P Eu of edge groups, and monomorphisms φ˘ e : Ge Ñ Ge˘ , where e˘ are the vertices incident to e. As usual, the total group G of G is the quotient of p˚vPV Gv q ˚ FE , where FE is the free group generated by E, obtained by imposing the following relations: ‚ e “ 1 for all e P E belonging to some fixed spanning tree T of Γ; ´ ´1 for e P E and g P G . ‚ φ` e e pgq “ eφe pgqe We are interested in the case where Γ is a finite graph and, for each v P V, e P E, we have sets Sv , Se so that pGv , Sv q and pGe , Se q are hierarchically hyperbolic group structures for which φ˘ e : Ge Ñ Ge˘ is a homomorphism of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. In this case, G is a finite graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. If in addition each φ˘ e has hierarchically quasiconvex image, then G has quasiconvex edge groups. r denote the Bass-Serre tree, observe that T “ Gr “ pΓ, r tGṽ u, tGẽ u, tφẽ ˘uq is a Letting Γ r and each tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, where ṽ ranges over the vertex set of Γ, r Gṽ is a conjugate in the total group G to Gv , where ṽ ÞÑ v under Γ Ñ Γ, and an analogous statement holds for edge-groups. Each φ˘ ẽ is conjugate to an edge-map in G in the obvious way. We say G has bounded supports if T does. Corollary 8.22 (Combination theorem for HHGs). Let G “ pΓ, tGv u, tGe u, tφ˘ e uq be a finite graph of hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Suppose that: (1) G has quasiconvex edge groups; (2) each φ˘ e , as a hieromorphism, is full; (3) G has bounded supports; (4) if e is an edge of Γ and Se the Ď–maximal element of Se , then for all V P Se˘ , the elements V and πpφe˘ qpSe q are not orthogonal in Se˘ . Then the total group G of G is a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Proof. By Theorem 8.6, pG, Sq is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Observe that G ď PG , r and this action is induced by an action on Ť since G acts on the Bass-Serre tree Γ, vPV Sv preserving the „–relation. Hence the hierarchically hyperbolic structure pG, Sq can be chosen according to the constraints in Section 8.1, whence it is easily checked that G acts by automorphisms on pG, Sq. The action is obviously proper and cocompact; the action on S is co-finite since each Gv is a hierarchically hyperbolic group. l If we apply the Corollary to hyperbolic groups, we immediately recover the following special case of the celebrated Bestvina–Feighn Combination theorem [BF92]. The bounded supports condition appears to be an obstruction to obtaining any substantially larger portion of their theorem. Remark 8.23 (Combination theorem for some graphs of hyperbolic groups). Corollary 8.22 implies that, if G is a finite graph of hyperbolic groups such that: (1) for all edges e of Γ, Ge is quasiconvex in Ge˘ and (2) for all vertices v of Γ, the collection tGe : v P te˘ uu is almost malnormal in Gv then the total group G admits a hierarchically hyperbolic structure with trivial orthogonality relation, from which it follows that G is again hyperbolic, by a result in [DHS15].  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  46  Remark 8.24 (Examples where the combination theorem does not apply). Examples where one cannot apply Theorem 8.6 or Corollary 8.22 are likely to yield examples of groups that are not hierarchically hyperbolic groups, or even hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. (1) Let G be a finite graph of groups with Z2 vertex groups and Z edge groups, i.e., a tubular group. In [Wis14], Wise completely characterized the tubular groups that act freely on CAT(0) cube complexes, and also characterized those that admit cocompact such actions; Woodhouse recently gave a necessary and sufficient condition for the particular cube complex constructed in [Wis14] to be finite-dimensional [Woo15]. These results suggest that there is little hope of producing hierarchically hyperbolic structures for tubular groups via cubulation, except in particularly simple cases. This is because the obstruction to cocompact cubulation is very similar to the obstruction to building a hierarchically hyperbolic structure using Theorem 8.6. Indeed, if some vertex-group Gv – Z2 has more than 2 independent incident edge-groups, then, if G satisfied the hypotheses of Theorem 8.6, the hierarchically hyperbolic structure on Gv would include 3 pairwise-orthogonal unbounded elements, contradicting partial realization. This shows that such a tubular group does not admit a hierarchically hyperbolic structure by virtue of the obvious splitting, and in fact shows that there is no hierarchically hyperbolic structure in which Gv and the incident edge-groups are hierarchically quasiconvex. (2) Let G “ F ¸φ Z, where F is a finite-rank free group and φ : F Ñ F an automorphism. When F is atoroidal, G is a hierarchically hyperbolic group simply by virtue of being hyperbolic [BF92, Bri00]. There is also a more refined hierarchically hyperbolic structure in this case, in which all of the hyperbolic spaces involved are quasi-trees. Indeed, by combining results in [HW15] and [Ago13], one finds that G acts freely, cocompactly, and hence virtually co-specially on a CAT(0) cube complex, which therefore contains a G-invariant factor system in the sense of [BHS14] and is hence a hierarchically hyperbolic group; the construction in [BHS14] ensures that the hierarchically hyperbolic structure for such cube complexes always uses a collection of hyperbolic spaces uniformly quasi-isometric to trees. However, the situation is presumably quite different when G is not hyperbolic. In this case, it seems that G is rarely hierarchically hyperbolic. 8.3. Products. In this short section, we briefly describe a hierarchically hyperbolic structure on products of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Proposition 8.25 (Product HHS). Let pX0 , S0 q and pX1 , S1 q be hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Then X “ X0 ˆ X1 admits a hierarchically hyperbolic structure pX , Sq such that for each of i P t0, 1u the inclusion map Xi Ñ X induces a quasiconvex hieromorphism. Proof. Let pXi , Si q be hierarchically hyperbolic spaces for i P t0, 1u. Let S be a hierarchically hyperbolic structure consisting of the disjoint union of S0 and S1 (together with their intrinsic hyperbolic spaces, projections, and nesting, orthogonality, and transversality relations), along with the following domains whose associated hyperbolic spaces are points: S, into which everything will be nested; Ui , for i P t0, 1u, into which everything in Si is nested; for each U P Si a domain VU , with |CVU | “ 1, into which is nested everything in Si`1 and everything in Si orthogonal to U . The elements VU are pairwise–transverse, and are all transverse to U0 and U1 . Projections πU : X0 ˆ X1 Ñ U P S are defined in the obvious way when U R S0 Y S1 ; otherwise, they are the compositions of the existing projections with projection to the relevant factor. Projections of the form ρU V are either defined already, uniquely determined, or are chosen to coincide with the projection of some fixed basepoint (when V P S0 YS1 and U is not). It is easy to check that this gives a hierarchically hyperbolic structure on X1 ˆ X2 .  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  47  The hieromorphisms pXi , Si q Ñ pX , Sq are inclusions on Xi and S; for each U P Si , the map Si Q CU Ñ CU P S is the identity. It follows immediately from the definitions that the diagrams from Definition 1.19 coarsely commute, so that these maps are indeed hieromorphisms. Hierarchical quasiconvexity likewise follows from the definition. l Product HHS will be used in defining hierarchically hyperbolic structures on graph manifolds in Section 10. The next result follows directly from the proof of the previous proposition. Corollary 8.26. Let G0 and G1 be hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Then G0 ˆ G1 is a hierarchically hyperbolic group. 9. Hyperbolicity relative to HHGs Relatively hyperbolic groups possess natural hierarchically hyperbolic structures: Theorem 9.1 (Hyperbolicity relative to HHGs). Let the group G be hyperbolic relative to a finite collection P of peripheral subgroups. If each P P P is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, then G is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Further, if each P P P is a hierarchically hyperbolic group, then so is G. Proof. We prove the statement about hierarchically hyperbolic groups; the statement about spaces follows a fortiori. For each P P P, let pP, SP q be a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure. For convenience, assume that the P P P are pairwise non-conjugate (this will avoid conflicting hierarchically hyperbolic structures). For each P and each left coset gP , let SgP be a copy of SP (with associated hyperbolic spaces and projections), so that there is a hieromorphism pP, SP q Ñ pgP, SgP q, equivariant with respect to the conjugation isomorphism P Ñ P g . p be the usual hyperbolic space formed from G by coning off each left coset of each Let G p YŮ P P P. Let S “ tGu gP PGP SgP . The nesting, orthogonality, and transversality relations on each SgP are as defined above; if U, V P SgP , Sg1 P 1 and gP ‰ g 1 P 1 , then declare U &V . p The hyperbolic space C G p is G, p while the hyperbolic space Finally, for all U P S, let U Ď G. CU associated to each U P SgP was defined above. p is the inclusion. For each U P SgP , let The projections are defined as follows: πGp : G Ñ G ggP : G Ñ gP be the closest-point projection onto gP and let πU “ πU ˝ ggP , to extend the domain of πU from gP to G. Since each πU was coarsely Lipschitz on U , and the closest-point projection is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz, the projection πU is uniformly coarsely Lipschitz. For each U, V P SgP , the coarse maps ρVU and ρU V were already defined. If U P SgP and U 1 1 1 1 V P Sg P , then ρV “ πV pgg P pgP qq, which is a uniformly bounded set (here we use relative hyperbolicity, not just the weak relative hyperbolicity that is all we needed so far). Finally, p we define ρU to be the cone-point over the unique gP with U P SgP , and for U ‰ G, p G p p p G p is a cone-point ρ : G Ñ CU is defined as follows: for x P G, let ρG pxq “ πU pxq. If x P G U  S  U  1  1  g P over g 1 P 1 ‰ gP , let ρG , where Sg1 P 1 P Sg1 P 1 is Ď–maximal. The cone-point over U pxq “ ρU gP may be sent anywhere in U . By construction, to verify that pG, Sq is a hierarchically hyperbolic group structure, it suffices to verify that it satisfies the remaining axioms for a hierarchically hyperbolic space given in Definition 1.1, since the additional G–equivariance conditions hold by construction. Specifically, it remains to verify consistency, bounded geodesic image and large links, partial realization, and uniqueness. Consistency: The nested consistency inequality holds automatically within each SgP , so p but this follows directly from the definition: it remains to verify it only for U P SgP versus G, p from the cone-point over gP , then ρGp pxq “ πU pxq, by definition. To if x P G is far in G U  p  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  48  verify the transverse inequality, it suffices to consider U P SgP , V P Sg1 P 1 with gP ‰ g 1 P 1 . Let x P G and let z “ gg1 P 1 pxq. Then, if dU px, zq is sufficiently large, then dgP px, zq is correspondingly large, so that by Lemma 1.15 of [Sis13], gg1 P 1 pxq and gg1 P 1 pgP q coarsely coincide, as desired. The last part of the consistency axiom, Definition 1.1.(4), holds as follows. Indeed, if U Ď V , then either U “ V , and there is nothing to prove. Otherwise, if U Ď V and either p The latter V Ĺ W or W &V , then either U, V P SgP for some g, P , or U P SgP and V “ G. situation precludes the existence of W , so we must be in the former situation. If W P SgP , we p then U, V both project to the cone-point are done since the axiom holds in SgP . If W “ G, U V over gP , so ρW “ ρW . In the remaining case, W P Sg1 P 1 for some g 1 P 1 ‰ gP , in which case V ρU W , ρW both coincide with πW pgg 1 P 1 pgP qq. Bounded geodesic image: Bounded geodesic image holds within each SgP by construcp Let γ̂ be a geodesic in tion, so it suffices to consider the case of U P SgP nested into G. p G avoiding gP and the cone on gP . Lemma 1.15 of [Sis13] ensures that any lift of γ̂ has p uniformly bounded projection on gP , so ρG U ˝ γ̂ is uniformly bounded. Large links: The large link axiom (Definition 1.1.(6)) can be seen to hold in pG, Sq by combining the large link axiom in each gP with malnormality of P and Lemma 1.15 of [Sis13]. Partial realization: This follows immediately from partial realization within each SgP and the fact that no new orthogonality was introduced in defining pG, Sq, together with the p and the definition of projection between elements of SgP and Sg1 P 1 when definition of G 1 1 gP ‰ g P . More precisely, if U P SgP and p P CU , then by partial realization within gP , there exists x P gP so that dU px, pq ď α for some fixed constant α and dV px, ρU Vq ď α U for all V P SgP with U Ď V or U &V . Observe that dGp px, ρ p q “ 1, since x P gP and G ρUp is the cone-point over gP . Finally, if g 1 P 1 ‰ gP and V P Sg1 P 1 , then dV px, ρU Vq “ G dV pπV pgg1 P 1 pxqq, πV pgg1 P 1 pgP qqq “ 0 since x P gP . p then either they are uniformly close in G, Uniqueness: If x, y are uniformly close in G, or they are uniformly close to a common cone-point, over some gP , whence the claim follows from the uniqueness axiom in SgP . l Remark 9.2. The third author established a characterization of relative hyperbolicity in terms of projections in [Sis13]. Further, there it was proven that like mapping class groups, there was a natural way to compute distances in relatively hyperbolic groups from certain related spaces, namely: if pG, Pq is relatively hyperbolic, then distances in G are coarsely p together obtained by summing the corresponding distance in the coned-off Cayley graph G with the distances between projections in the various P P P and their cosets. We recover a new proof of Sisto’s formula as a consequence of Theorem 9.1 and Theorem 4.5. Theorem 9.1 will be used in our analysis of 3–manifold groups in Section 10. However, there is a more general statement in the context of metrically relatively hyperbolic spaces (e.g., what Drutu–Sapir call asymptotically tree-graded [DS05], or spaces that satisfy the equivalent condition on projections formulated in [Sis12]). For instance, arguing exactly as in the proof of Theorem 9.1 shows that if the space X is hyperbolic relative to a collection of uniformly hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, then X admits a hierarchically hyperbolic structure (in which each peripheral subspace embeds hieromorphically). More generally, let the geodesic metric space X be hyperbolic relative to a collection P of subspaces, and let Xp be the hyperbolic space obtained from X by coning off each P P P. Then we can endow X with a hierarchical space structure as follows: ‚ the index-set S consists of P together with an additional index S;  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  49  ‚ for all P, Q P P, we have P &Q, while P Ĺ S for all P P P (the orthogonality relation is empty and there is no other nesting); ‚ for each P P P, we let CP “ P ; ‚ we declare CS “ Xp; ‚ the projection πS : X Ñ Xp is the inclusion; ‚ for each P P P, let πP : X Ñ P be the closest-point projection onto P ; ‚ for each P P P, let ρPS be the cone-point in Xp associated to P ; ‚ for each P P P, let ρSP : Xp Ñ P be defined by ρSP pxq “ πP pxq for x P X , while ρSP pxq “ πP pQq whenever x lies in the cone on Q P P. ‚ for distinct P, Q P P, let ρPQ “ πQ pP q (which is uniformly bounded since X is hyperbolic relative to P). The above definition yields: Theorem 9.3. Let the geodesic metric space X be hyperbolic relative to the collection P of subspaces. Then, with S as above, we have that pX , Sq is a hierarchical space, and is moreover relatively hierarchically hyperbolic. Proof. By definition, for each U P S, we have that either U “ S and CS “ Xp is hyperbolic, or U is Ď–minimal. The rest of the conditions of Definition 1.1 are verified as in the proof of Theorem 9.1. l 10. Hierarchical hyperbolicity of 3-manifold groups In this section we show that fundamental groups of most 3–manifolds admit hierarchical hyperbolic structures. More precisely, we prove: Theorem 10.1 (3–manifolds are hierarchically hyperbolic). Let M be a closed 3–manifold. Then π1 pM q is a hierarchically hyperbolic space if and only if M does not have a Sol or Nil component in its prime decomposition. Proof. It is well known that for a closed irreducible 3–manifold N the Dehn function of π1 pN q is linear if N is hyperbolic, cubic if N is Nil, exponential if N is Sol, and quadratic in all other cases. Hence by Corollary 7.5, if π1 pM q is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, then M does not contain Nil or Sol manifolds in its prime decomposition. It remains to prove the converse. Since the fundamental group of any reducible 3–manifold is the free product of irreducible ones, the reducible case immediately follows from the irreducible case by Theorem 9.1. When M is geometric and not Nil or Sol, then π1 pM q is quasi-isometric to one of the following: ‚ R3 is hierarchically hyperbolic by Proposition 8.25; ‚ H3 , S3 , S2 ˆ R are (hierarchically) hyperbolic; ‚ H2 ˆ R and P SL2 pRq: the first is hierarchically hyperbolic by Proposition 8.25, whence the second is also since it is quasi-isometric to the first by [Rie01]. We may now assume M is not geometric. Our main step is to show that any irreducible non-geometric graph manifold group is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Let M be an irreducible non-geometric graph manifold. By [KL98, Theorem 2.3], by replacing M by a manifold whose fundamental group is quasi-isometric to that of M , we may assume that our manifold is a flip graph manifold, i.e., each Seifert fibered space component is a trivial circle bundles over a surfaces of genus at least 2 and each pair of adjacent Seifert fibered spaces are glued by flipping the base and fiber directions. Let X be the universal cover of M . The decomposition of M into geometric components induces a decomposition of X into subspaces tSv u, one for each vertex v of the Bass-Serre  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  50  tree T of M . Each such subspace Sv is bi-Lipschitz homeomorphic to the product of a copy Rv of the real line with the universal cover Σv of a hyperbolic surface with totally geodesic boundary, and there are maps φv : Sv Ñ Σv and ψv : Sv Ñ Rv . Notice that Σv is hyperbolic, and in particular hierarchically hyperbolic. However, for later purposes, we endow Σv with the hierarchically hyperbolic structure originating from the fact that Σv is hyperbolic relative to its boundary components, see Theorem 9.1. By Proposition 8.25 each Sv is a hierarchically hyperbolic space and thus we have a tree of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Each edge space is a product B0 Σv ˆ Rv , where B0 Σv is a particular boundary component of Σv determined by the adjacent vertex. Further, since the graph manifold is flip, we also have that for each vertices v, w of the tree, the edgehieromorphism between Sv and Sw sends B0 Σv to Rw and Rv to B0 Σw . We now verify the hypotheses of Corollary 8.22. The first hypothesis is that there exists k so that each edge-hieromorphism is k–hierarchically quasiconvex. This is easily seen since the edge-hieromorphisms have the simple form described above. The second hypothesis of Theorem 8.6, fullness of edge-hieromorphisms, also follows immediately from the explicit description of the edges here and the simple hierarchically hyperbolic structure of the edge spaces. The third hypothesis of Theorem 8.6 requires that the tree has bounded supports. We can assume that the product regions Sv are maximal in the sense that each edge-hieromorphism sends the fiber direction Rv to B0 Σw in each adjacent Sw . It follows that the support of each „–class (in the language of Theorem 8.6) consists of at most 2 vertices. The last hypothesis of Theorem 8.6 is about non-orthogonality of maximal elements and again follows directly from the explicit hierarchically hyperbolic structure. All the hypotheses of Theorem 8.6 are satisfied, so π1 M (with any word metric) is a hierarchically hyperbolic space for all irreducible non-geometric graph manifolds M . The general case that the fundamental group of any non-geometric 3–manifold is an hierarchically hyperbolic space now follows immediately by Theorem 9.1, since any 3–manifold group is hyperbolic relative to its maximal graph manifold subgroups. l Remark 10.2 ((Non)existence of HHG structures for 3–manifold groups). The proof of Theorem 10.1 shows that for many 3–manifolds M , the group π1 M is not merely a hierarchically hyperbolic space (when endowed with the word metric arising from a finite generating set), but is actually a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Specifically, if M is virtually compact special, then π1 M acts freely and cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex X that is the universal cover of a compact special cube complex. Hence X contains a π1 M –invariant factor system (see [BHS14, Section 8]) consisting of a π1 M –finite set of convex subcomplexes. This yields a hierarchically hyperbolic structure pX , Sq where π1 M ď AutpSq acts cofinitely on S and geometrically on X , i.e., π1 M is a hierarchically hyperbolic group. The situation is quite different when π1 M is not virtually compact special. Indeed, when M is a nonpositively-curved graph manifold, π1 M virtually acts freely, but not necessarily cocompactly, on a CAT(0) cube complex X , and the quotient is virtually special; this is a result of Liu [Liu11] which was also shown to hold in the case where M has nonempty boundary by Przytycki and Wise [PW11]. Moreover, π1 M acts with finitely many orbits of hyperplanes. Hence the π1 M –invariant factor system on X from [BHS14] yields a π1 M –equivariant HHS structure pX , Sq with S π1 M –finite. However, this yields an HHG structure on π1 M only if the action on X is cocompact. In [HP13], the second author and Przytycki showed that π1 M virtually acts freely and cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex, with special quotient, only in the very particular situation where M is chargeless. This essentially asks that the Ă from the proof of Theorem 10.1 construction of the hierarchically hyperbolic structure on M Ă can be done π1 M –equivariantly. In general, this is impossible: recall that we passed from M  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  51  to the universal cover of a flip manifold using a (nonequivariant) quasi-isometry. Motivated by this observation and the fact that the range of possible HHS structures on the universal cover of a JSJ torus is very limited, we conjecture that π1 M is a hierarchically hyperbolic group if and only if π1 M acts freely and cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex. 11. A new proof of the distance formula for mapping class groups We now describe the hierarchically hyperbolic structure of mapping class groups. In [BHS14] we gave a proof of this result using several of the main results of [Beh06, BKMM12, MM99, MM00]. Here we give an elementary proof which is independent of the Masur–Minsky “hierarchy machinery.” One consequence of this is a new and concise proof of the celebrated Masur–Minsky distance formula [MM00, Theorem 6.12], which we obtain by combining Theorem 11.1 and Theorem 4.5. (1) Let S be closed connected oriented surface of finite type and let MpSq be its marking complex. (2) Let S be the collection of isotopy classes of essential subsurfaces of S, and for each U P S let CU be its curve complex. (3) The relation Ď is nesting, K is disjointness and & is overlapping. (4) For each U P S, let πU : MpSq Ñ CU be the (usual) subsurface projection. For U, V P S satisfying either U Ď V or U &V , denote ρU V “ πV pBU q P CV , while for CV be the subsurface projection. : CU Ñ 2 V Ď U let ρU V Theorem 11.1. Let S be closed connected oriented surface of finite type. Then, pMpSq, Sq is a hierarchically hyperbolic space, for S as above. In particular the mapping class group MCGpSq is a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Proof. Hyperbolicity of curve graphs is the main result of [MM99]; more recently, elementary proofs of this were found in [Aou13, Bow14b, CRS15, HPW13, PS15]. Axioms 1, 2, 3 and 5 are clear. Both parts of axiom 4 can be found in [Beh06]. The nesting part is elementary, and a short elementary proof in the overlapping case was obtained by Leininger and can be found in [Man10]. Axiom 7 was proven in [MM00], and an elementary proof is available in [Web13]. In fact, in the aforementioned papers it is proven that there exists a constant C so that for any subsurface W , markings x, y and geodesic from πW pxq to πW pyq the following holds. If V Ď W and V ‰ W satisfies dV px, yq ě C then some curve along the given geodesic does not intersect BV . This implies Axiom 6, since we can take the Ti to be the complements of curves appearing along the aforementioned geodesic. Axiom 8 follows easily from the following statement, which clearly holds: For any given collection of disjoint subsurfaces and curves on the given subsurfaces, there exists a marking on S that contains the given curves as base curves (or, up to bounded error, transversals in the case that the corresponding subsurface is an annulus). Axiom 9 is hence the only delicate one. We are finished modulo this last axiom which we verify below in Proposition 11.2. l Proposition 11.2. pMpSq, Sq satisfies the uniqueness axiom, i.e., for each κ ě 0, there exists θu “ θu pκq such that if x, y P MpSq satisfy dU px, yq ď κ for each U P S then dMpSq px, yq ď θu . Proof. Note that when the complexity (as measured by the quantity 3g ` p ´ 3 where g is the genus and p the number of punctures) is less than 2 then MpSq is hyperbolic and thus the axiom holds. We thus will proceed by inducting on complexity: thus we will fix S to have  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  52  complexity at least 2 and assume that all the axioms for a hierarchically hyperbolic space, including the uniqueness axiom, hold for each proper subsurface of S. Now, fixed our surface S, the proof is by induction on dCS pbasepxq, basepyqq. If dCS pbasepxq, basepyqq “ 0, then x and y share some non-empty multicurve σ “ c1 Y ¨ ¨ ¨ Y ck . For x1 , y 1 the restrictions of x, y to S ´ σ we have that, by induction, dMpS´σq px1 , y 1 q is bounded in terms of κ. We then take the markings in a geodesic in MpS ´ σq from x1 to y 1 and extend these all in the same way to obtain markings in MpSq which yield a path in MpSq from x to ŷ whose length is bounded in terms of κ, where ŷ is the marking for which: ‚ ŷ has the same base curves as y, ‚ the transversal for each ci is the same as the corresponding transversal for x, and ‚ the transversal for each curve in basepyq ´ tci u is the same as the corresponding transversal for y. Finally, it is readily seen that dMpSq pŷ, yq is bounded in terms of κ because the transversals of each ci in the markings x and y are within distance κ of each other. This completes the proof of the base case of the Proposition. Suppose now that that the statement holds whenever dCS pbasepxq, basepyqq ď n, and let us prove it in the case dCS pbasepxq, basepyqq “ n ` 1. Let cx P basepxq and cy P basepyq satisfy dCS pcx , cy q “ n ` 1. Let cx “ σ0 , . . . , σn`1 “ cy be a tight geodesic (hence, each σi is a multicurve). Let σ be the union of σ0 and σ1 . Using the realization theorem in the subsurface S ´ σ we can find a marking x1 in S ´ σ whose projections onto each CU for U Ď S ´ σ coarsely coincide with πU pyq. Let x̂ be the marking for which: ‚ basepx̂q is the union of basepx1 q and σ, ‚ the transversal in x̂ of curves in basepx̂q X basepx1 q are the same as those in x1 , ‚ the transversal of cx in x̂ is the same as the one in x, ‚ the transversal in x̂ of a curve c in σ1 is πAc pyq, where Ac is an annulus around y. Note that dCS pbasepx̂q, basepyqq “ n. Hence, the following two claims conclude the proof. Claim 1. dMpSq px, x̂q is bounded in terms of κ. Proof. It suffices to show that we have a bound on dCU px, x̂q in terms of κ for each U Ď S ´ cx . In fact, once we do that, by induction on complexity we know that we can bound dMpS´cx q pz, ẑq, where z, ẑ are the restrictions of x, x̂ to S ´ cx , whence the conclusion easily follows. If U is contained in S ´ σ, then the required bound follows since πU px̂q coarsely coincides with πU px1 q in this case. If instead BU intersects σ1 , then πU px̂q coarsely coincides with πU pσ1 q. At this point, we only have to show that πU pσ1 q coarsely coincides with πU pyq, and in order to do so we observe that we can apply the bounded geodesic image theorem to the geodesic σ1 , . . . , σn`1 . In fact, σ1 intersects BU by hypothesis and σi intersects BU for i ě 3 because of the following estimate that holds for any given boundary component c of BU dCpSq pσi , cq ě dCpSq pσi , σ0 q ´ dCpSq pσ0 , cq ě i ´ 1 ą 1. Finally, σ2 intersects BU because of the definition of tightness: BU intersects σ1 , hence it must intersect σ0 Y σ2 . However, it does not intersect σ0 , whence it intersects σ2 .  Claim 2. There exists κ1 , depending on κ, so that for each subsurface U of S we have dCU px̂, yq ď κ1 . Proof. If σ0 intersects BU , then πU px̂q coarsely coincides with πU pσ0 q. In turn, πU pσ0 q coarsely coincides with πU pxq, which is κ–close to πU pyq.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  53  On the other hand, if U does not intersect σ, then we are done by the definition of x1 . Hence, we can assume that U is contained in S´σ0 and that σ1 intersects BU . In particular, πU px̂q coarsely coincides with πU pσ1 q. But we showed in the last paragraph of the proof of Claim 1 that πU pσ1 q coarsely coincides with πU pyq, so we are done.  As explained above, the proofs of the above two claims complete the proof.  l  References [Ago13]  Ian Agol. The virtual Haken conjecture (with an appendix by Ian Agol, Daniel Groves and Jason Manning). Doc. Math., J. DMV, 18:1045–1087, 2013. [Aou13] Tarik Aougab. Uniform hyperbolicity of the graphs of curves. Geometry & Topology, 17(5):2855– 2875, 2013. [BDS11] J. Behrstock, C. Druţu, and M. Sapir. Median structures on asymptotic cones and homomorphisms into mapping class groups. Proc. London Math. Soc., 102(3):503–554, 2011. [Beh06] J. Behrstock. Asymptotic geometry of the mapping class group and Teichmüller space. Geometry & Topology, 10:2001–2056, 2006. [BF92] M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. A combination theorem for negatively curved groups. J. Differential Geometry, 35:85–101, 1992. [BF02] M. Bestvina and K. Fujiwara. Bounded cohomology of subgroups of mapping class groups. Geometry & Topology, 6:69–89 (electronic), 2002. [BF14a] Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Hyperbolicity of the complex of free factors. Adv. Math., 256:104–155, 2014. [BF14b] Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Subfactor projections. J. Topol., 7(3):771–804, 2014. [BH] Jason Behrstock and Mark F. Hagen. Cubulated groups: thickness, relative hyperbolicity, and simplicial boundaries. Arxiv:1212.0182. To appear in Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics. [BHS14] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces I: curve complexes for cubical groups. arXiv:1412.2171, 2014. [BKMM12] Jason Behrstock, Bruce Kleiner, Yair Minsky, and Lee Mosher. Geometry and rigidity of mapping class groups. Geom. Topol, 16(2):781–888, 2012. [BM08] Jason A Behrstock and Yair N Minsky. Dimension and rank for mapping class groups. Annals of Mathematics, 167:1055–1077, 2008. [BM11] Jason A. Behrstock and Yair N. Minsky. Centroids and the rapid decay property in mapping class groups. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 84(3):765–784, 2011. [Bow13] Brian H. Bowditch. Coarse median spaces and groups. Pacific J. Math, 261(1):53–93, 2013. [Bow14a] Brian H Bowditch. Embedding median algebras in products of trees. Geometriae Dedicata, 170(1):157–176, 2014. [Bow14b] Brian H. Bowditch. Uniform hyperbolicity of the curve graphs. Pacific J. Math, 269(2):269–280, 2014. [Bow15] Brian H. Bowditch. Large–scale rigidity properties of the mapping class groups. Preprint, 2015. [Bri00] Peter Brinkmann. Hyperbolic automorphisms of free groups. Geometric & Functional Analysis, 10(5):1071–1089, 2000. [Bri10] Martin R Bridson. Semisimple actions of mapping class groups on CAT(0) spaces. Geometry of Riemann surfaces, 368:1–14, 2010. [BS05] S Buyalo and P Svetlov. Topological and geometric properties of graph-manifolds. St. Petersburg Mathematical Journal, 16(2):297–340, 2005. [BV] M R Bridson and K Vogtmann. The Dehn functions of OutpFn q and AutpFn q. arXiv:1011.1506. [BV95] M R Bridson and K Vogtmann. On the geometry of the automorphism group of a free group. Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society, 27(6):544–552, 1995. [CDH10] Indira Chatterji, Cornelia Druţu, and Frédéric Haglund. Kazhdan and Haagerup properties from the median viewpoint. Advances in Mathematics, 225(2):882–921, 2010. [Che00] Victor Chepoi. Graphs of some CATp0q complexes. Adv. in Appl. Math., 24(2):125–179, 2000. [CLM12] Matt T. Clay, Christopher J. Leininger, and Johanna Mangahas. The geometry of right-angled Artin subgroups of mapping class groups. Groups Geom. Dyn., 6(2):249–278, 2012. [CRS15] Matt Clay, Kasra Rafi, and Saul Schleimer. Uniform hyperbolicity of the curve graph via surgery sequences. Algebraic and Geometric Topology, 14(6):3325–3344, 2015. [DHS15] Matthew Gentry Durham, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Boundaries of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. In preparation, 2015.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  [Dil50] [DS05] [DT14] [FLS11] [Ger92] [GHR03] [Hae14] [Hag07] [Hag14] [HM13a] [HM13b] [HP13] [HPW13] [HW15] [KK14] [KL96] [KL97] [KL98] [Liu11] [Man10] [MM99] [MM00] [MO14] [Mos95] [PS15] [PW11] [Rie01] [Sis11] [Sis12] [Sis13] [SS] [Web13] [Wis14] [Woo15]  54  R. P. Dilworth. A decomposition theorem for partially ordered sets. Ann. of Math, 51:161–166, 1950. C. Druţu and M. Sapir. Tree-graded spaces and asymptotic cones of groups. Topology, 44(5):959– 1058, 2005. With an appendix by Denis Osin and Mark Sapir. Matthew Gentry Durham and Samuel J Taylor. Convex cocompactness and stability in mapping class groups. arXiv:1404.4803, 2014. Roberto Frigerio, Jean-François Lafont, and Alessandro Sisto. Rigidity of high dimensional graph manifolds. arXiv:1107.2019, 2011. To appear in Asterisque. Stephen M Gersten. Dehn functions and `1 -norms of finite presentations. Springer, 1992. Steve M Gersten, Derek F Holt, and Tim R Riley. Isoperimetric inequalities for nilpotent groups. Geometric & Functional Analysis, 13(4):795–814, 2003. Thomas Haettel. Higher rank lattices are not coarse median. arXiv:1412.1714, 2014. Frédéric Haglund. Isometries of CAT(0) cube complexes are semi-simple. arXiv:0705.3386, 2007. Mark F. Hagen. Weak hyperbolicity of cube complexes and quasi-arboreal groups. J. Topol., 7(2):385–418, 2014. Michael Handel and Lee Mosher. The free splitting complex of a free group, I: hyperbolicity. Geom. Topol., 17(3):1581–1672, 2013. Michael Handel and Lee Mosher. Lipschitz retraction and distortion for subgroups of OutpFn q. Geometry & Topology, 17(3):1535–1579, 2013. Mark F. Hagen and Piotr Przytycki. Cocompactly cubulated graph manifolds. To appear in Isr. J. Math. arXiv:1310.1309, 2013. Sebastian Hensel, Piotr Przytycki, and Richard CH Webb. Slim unicorns and uniform hyperbolicity for arc graphs and curve graphs. arXiv:1301.5577, 2013. Mark F. Hagen and Daniel T. Wise. Cubulating hyperbolic free-by-cyclic groups: the general case. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 25(1):134–179, 2015. Sang-Hyun Kim and Thomas Koberda. The geometry of the curve graph of a right-angled Artin group. International Journal of Algebra and Computation, 24(02):121–169, 2014. Michael Kapovich and Bernhard Leeb. Actions of discrete groups on nonpositively curved spaces. Math. Ann., 306(2):341–352, 1996. M. Kapovich and B. Leeb. Quasi-isometries preserve the geometric decomposition of Haken manifolds. Invent. Math., 128(2):393–416, 1997. M. Kapovich and B. Leeb. 3-manifold groups and nonpositive curvature. Geom. Funct. Anal., 8(5):841–852, 1998. Yi Liu. Virtual cubulation of nonpositively curved graph manifolds. ArXiv:1110.1940, 2011. Johanna Mangahas. Uniform uniform exponential growth of subgroups of the mapping class group. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 19(5):1468–1480, 2010. Howard A Masur and Yair N Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves I: Hyperbolicity. Inventiones mathematicae, 138(1):103–149, 1999. Howard A Masur and Yair N Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves II: Hierarchical structure. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 10(4):902–974, 2000. Ashot Minasyan and Denis Osin. Acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups acting on trees. Mathematische Annalen, pages 1–51, 2014. L. Mosher. Mapping class groups are automatic. Ann. of Math., 142:303–384, 1995. Piotr Przytycki and Alessandro Sisto. A note on acylindrical hyperbolicity of mapping class groups. arXiv:1502.02176, 2015. Piotr Przytycki and Daniel T. Wise. Graph manifolds with boundary are virtually special. ArXiv:1110.3513, 2011. E. Rieffel. Groups quasi-isometric to H2 ˆ R. J. London Math. Soc. (2), 64(1):44–60, 2001. Alessandro Sisto. 3-manifold groups have unique asymptotic cones. arXiv:1109.4674, 2011. Alessandro Sisto. On metric relative hyperbolicity. arXiv:1210.8081, 2012. Alessandro Sisto. Projections and relative hyperbolicity. Enseignment Math., (59):165–181, 2013. L. Sabalka and D. Savchuk. Submanifold projection. arXiv:1211.3111. Richard CH Webb. A short proof of the bounded geodesic image theorem. arXiv:1301.6187, 2013. Daniel Wise. Cubular tubular groups. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 366(10):5503–5521, 2014. Daniel J Woodhouse. Classifying finite dimensional cubulations of tubular groups. arXiv:1502.02619, 2015.  HHS II: COMBINATION THEOREMS AND THE DISTANCE FORMULA  Lehman College and The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, New York, USA Current address: Barnard College, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA E-mail address: jason@math.columbia.edu Dept. of Pure Maths and Math. Stat., University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK E-mail address: markfhagen@gmail.com ETH, Zürich, Switzerland E-mail address: sisto@math.ethz.ch  55

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
