Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_2126

Abstract:
ON THE RECOGNITION PROBLEM FOR VIRTUALLY SPECIAL CUBE COMPLEXES  arXiv:1408.2325v2 [math.GR] 19 Jun 2017  MARTIN R. BRIDSON AND HENRY WILTON  Abstract. We address the question of whether the property of being virtually special (in the sense of Haglund and Wise) is algorithmically decidable for finite, non-positively curved cube complexes. Our main theorem shows that it cannot be decided by examining one hyperplane at a time. Specifically, we prove that there does not exist an algorithm that, given a compact non-positively curved squared 2-complex X and a hyperplane H in X, will decide whether or not there is a finite-sheeted cover of X in which no lift of H self-osculates.  1. Introduction Haglund and Wise’s concept of a special cube complex [6] has had profound ramifications in geometric group theory and low-dimensional topology, most notably in Agol’s solution to the Virtually Haken Conjecture [2]. A compact, non-positively curved cube complex is special if it admits a local isometry to the canonical cube complex associated to a right-angled Artin group. When phrased thus, this is not a condition that one expects to be able to check in a practical manner, given a compact cube complex X. But Haglund and Wise proved that being special is equivalent to a purely combinatorial condition which requires that each of the finitely many hyperplanes in X should not behave in one of a small number of forbidden ways: a hyperplane should not cross itself, it should be 2-sided, it should not self-osculate, and it should not inter-osculate with another hyperplane (see [6] for details). We say that a hyperplane is clean if it does not exhibit any of these forbidden behaviours. Given the combinatorial nature of these conditions, it is easy to check if a given hyperplane is clean and hence whether a given compact cube complex is special or not. However, in applications, it is not specialness that matters so much as virtual specialness, i.e. whether the complex has a finite-sheeted covering space that is special. Agol [1, p. 33] has promoted the study of the following question. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20F10, 20F67, 57M07. Both authors are supported by the EPSRC. Bridson is also supported by a Wolfson Research Merit Award from the Royal Society. 1  2  MARTIN R. BRIDSON AND HENRY WILTON  Question 1. Is there an algorithm that, given a finite, non-positively curved cube complex, will determine whether or not that complex is virtually special? This is equivalent to the question: Question 11 . Is there an algorithm that, given a finite, non-positively curved cube complex X (whose hyperplanes are H1 , . . . , Hn , say), will p Ñ X in which determine the existence of a finite-sheeted covering X each lift of each Hi is clean. One has to think clearly for a moment to see that this question is not equivalent to: Question 2. Is there an algorithm that, given a finite, non-positively curved cube complex X and a collection of hyperplanes H1 , . . . , Hn , will p Ñ X in which determine the existence of a finite-sheeted covering X each lift of each Hi is clean. One’s first thought is that a positive solution to Question 11 should proceed via a positive solution to Question 2. But on reflection one realises that the latter would be significantly more powerful because certain of the complexes X for which one did establish the existence p would not be virtually special. Focusing on this difference, we of X shall answer Question 2 in the negative. The following theorem is an immediate consequence of our main technical result, Theorem 2.4. Theorem 1.1. There does not exist an algorithm that, given a finite, non-positively curved cube complex X and a hyperplane H in X, can p ÑX determine whether or not there exists a finite-sheeted covering X in which each lift of H is clean. Note that this theorem is equivalent to the corresponding statement p Ñ X is normal, and with ‘each’ replaced by ‘some’: this is clear if X since the lift of a clean hyperplane is clean, we are free to pass to a finite-sheeted normal covering. The main ingredient in our proof of Theorem 2.4 (and hence Theorem 1.1) is our work in [3], in which we showed that there is no algorithm that determines whether or not a finite complex has a proper finite-sheeted cover (see Theorem 3.2). In [3] we also proved that this undecidability persists in the setting of finite, non-positively curved cube complexes (see Theorem 3.1). The point of this paper is to note that, with care, the same procedure can be made to translate the nonexistence of a proper finite-sheeted cover into the failure of a certain hyperplane to be virtually clean. The obstruction to cleanness that we focus on to prove Theorem 2.4 is self-osculation. Our construction shows that the question of whether one can remove self-osculations in finite-sheeted covers is already undecidable in dimension 2, and this is the context in which we shall work  ON RECOGNIZING VIRTUALLY SPECIAL CUBE COMPLEXES  3  for the remainder of this paper. Although this theorem does not settle Question 1, it strongly constrains the nature of any possible positive solution: a putative recognition algorithm would have to take account of all the hyperplanes of X simultaneously. We therefore believe that Question 1 has a negative solution: Conjecture 1.2. Virtual specialness is an undecidable property of nonpositively curved cube complexes. 2. VH-complexes Rather than working with non-positively curved cube complexes in full generality, we restrict attention to the class of VH-complexes. Definition 2.1. A square complex is VH if there is a partition of the edges of the 1-skeleton into vertical and horizontal subgraphs, such that the boundary cycle of each 2-cell crosses vertical and horizontal edges alternately. We refer the reader to [4, 7] for the basic theory of VH-complexes, but we recall some salient facts here. In common with all cube complexes, much of the geometry of a VH-complex X is encoded in its set of hyperplanes Y Ď X. (A hyperplane is a maximal connected union of midcubes.) We are concerned with certain regularity hypotheses on the hyperplanes. Definition 2.2. Let Y be a hyperplane embedded in a VH-complex X. The union of all the open cells intersecting Y , together with the closest-point projection map, defines a bundle N̊ Ñ Y with fibre p0, 1q, which has a natural completion to an I-bundle denoted by N Ñ Y equipped with a map ι : N Ñ X extending the inclusion of N̊ into X. If N is a trivial bundle then Y is called non-singular (or 2-sided ). In this case, N – Y ˆ r0, 1s, and the two maps Bt : y ÞÑ ιpy, tq for t “ 0, 1, are called the pushing maps associated to Y . The hyperplane Y is called clean if the pushing maps B0 , B1 are both embeddings. If every hyperplane is non-singular then the complex X is nonsingular, and if every hyperplane is clean then the whole complex X is called clean. The following theorem of Haglund and Wise reconciles this terminology with that of virtually special complexes. Theorem 2.3. [6, Theorem 5.7] A VH-complex is virtually special if and only if it is virtually clean. Thus, we may specialize Question 1 to the case of VH-complexes as follows.  4  MARTIN R. BRIDSON AND HENRY WILTON  Question 3. Is there an algorithm that decides whether or not a given finite VH-complex is virtually clean? As in the introduction, our focus here is a local version of this question. We call a hyperplane Y in a VH-complex X virtually clean if p Ñ X and a connected there exists a finite-sheeted covering map p : X p is clean. Our component Yp Ď p´1 Y such that the hyperplane Yp of X main theorem can now be stated as follows. Theorem 2.4. There is a recursive sequence of pairs of compact VHcomplexes Xn and hyperplanes Yn Ď Xn such that the set of natural numbers n for which Yn is virtually clean is recursively enumerable but not recursive. The complexes Xn that we shall construct to prove Theorem 2.4 are never (globally) virtually clean—indeed, π1 Xn is not residually finite— so they are not themselves candidates to answer Question 3. 3. Undecidability and finite covers The proof of Theorem 2.4 relies on our recent work on the triviality problem for profinite completions, in which we proved the following theorem [3, Theorem B]. Theorem 3.1. There is a recursive sequence of compact, non-positively curved square complexes Xn such that the set tn P N | πz 1 Xn fl 1u is recursively enumerable but not recursive. p denotes the profinite completion of a group Γ. By definition, Here, Γ p is trivial if and only if every finite quotient of Γ is trivial. Γ The proof of this theorem begins with a non-positively curved square complex J that has no proper finite-sheeted covers. With a careful choice of J, we can ensure that, in the output sequence pXn q, each Xn is a VH-complex. The main result of this section is Theorem 3.7, a slight refinement of Theorem 3.1. We will start by explaining the construction that proves Theorem 3.1, and then observe some additional properties of the examples that we use to deduce Theorem 3.7. The first ingredient in the proof of Theorem 3.1 is the corresponding result for finitely presented groups (without any non-positive curvature condition). Theorem 3.2. There is a recursive sequence of finite presentations Pn of groups Γn such that the set pn fl 1u tn P N | Γ is recursively enumerable but not recursive. For J we will use a complex that was constructed by Wise.  ON RECOGNIZING VIRTUALLY SPECIAL CUBE COMPLEXES  5  Theorem 3.3 (Wise [7]). There exists a compact VH-complex J such that π1 J is infinite but has no proper finite quotients. Burger and Mozes exhibited compact VH-complexes with the even more striking property that their fundamental groups are infinite and simple [5]. We next perform a construction reminiscent of the well known Kan– Thurston construction. Definition 3.4. Let J be as above and fix a simple closed loop c in a vertical component of the 1-skeleton of J. Let K be the presentation 2complex associated to a finite presentation P ” xa1 , . . . , an | r1 , . . . , rm y of a group Γ, and let V :“ K p1q . We define JP to be the space obtained by attaching m copies of J to V , with the j-th copy attached by a cylinder joining c to the edge-loop in V labelled rj . More formally, writing ρj : S1 Ñ V for this last loop, we define „ to be the equivalence relation on ž ž` ˘ S1 ˆ r0, 1s ˆ t1, . . . , mu J ˆ t1, . . . , mu V defined by @t P S1 @j P t1, . . . , mu : ρj ptq „ pt, 0, jq and pt, 1, jq „ pcptq, jq, and define JP to be the quotient space.  J  c φ  J  c  V  K  Figure 1. The complex JP and the map φ. The construction of JP is illustrated in Figure 1. The next proposition collects together some easy properties of this construction. Proposition 3.5. Let JP be as above. Then we have the following properties: (1) JP has the structure of a VH-complex; (2) there is a natural continuous map φ : JP Ñ K, with the property that every homomorphism from π1 JP to a finite group factors through φ˚ ; (3) the composition φ˚  π1 V Ñ π1 JP Ñ Γ  6  MARTIN R. BRIDSON AND HENRY WILTON  is surjective. Proof. To prove (1), we subdivide the copies of J and V so that the attaching maps of the cylinders have the same length at either end. The gluing cylinders can then be subdivided into squares, giving the whole space the structure of a square complex, which is obviously VH. The map φ is defined to crush each copy of J to a point; since a cylinder with one end identified with a point is homeomorphic to a disc, the resulting space is homeomorphic to Y . The kernel of φ˚ is normally generated by the copies of π1 J. Since π1 J has no finite quotients, if f is a homomorphism from π1 JP to a finite group, then f kills the conjugacy classes defined by the loops in each copy of J, and therefore factors through φ˚ . This proves (2). Since V is the entire 1-skeleton of K, item (3) is immediate.  Definition 3.6. A pointed VH-pair is a triple pL, V, ˚q where L is a compact VH-complex, V is a vertical component of the 1-skeleton and ˚ is a vertex of V . Theorem 3.7. There is a recursive sequence of pointed VH-pairs pLn , Vn , ˚n q such that the following set is recursively enumerable but not recursive: tpn, γq | n P N, γ̂ ‰ 1 in πy 1 Ln u where γ runs through simple loops in Vn based at ˚n and γ̂ denotes the element of πy 1 Ln defined by γ. Proof. Let Pn and Γn be as in Theorem 3.2 and let Kn be the presentation complex for Pn . Set Ln “ JPn , let Vn be the vertical subgraph of JPn from Proposition 3.5 and let ˚n be the unique vertex of Vn . Note that the construction of pLn , Vn , ˚n q from Pn is algorithmic, and therefore the sequence is recursive. Consider now a finite set of simple based loops γ1 , . . . , γk that generate π1 pVn , ˚n q. If there were an algorithm to determine whether or not such a loop γ survives in some quotient of π1 pLn , ˚n q then, applying the algorithm to each γi in turn, we would obtain an algorithm to determine whether or not π1 pVn , ˚n q has non-trivial image in some finite quotient of π1 pLn , ˚n q. But the latter occurs if and only if Γn has a non-trivial finite quotient (by items (2) and (3) of Proposition 3.5), which is undecidable. This proves that the set of pairs pn, γq for which γ survives in some finite quotient of π1 pLn , ˚n q is not recursive. However, if γ does survive in some finite quotient then a systematic search will eventually discover this. Therefore, the set of such pn, γq is recursively enumerable.  It will be convenient in what follows to have a fixed enumeration of the pairs pn, γq with γ a simple loop in Vn based at ˚n : denote this by m ÞÑ pnm , γm q. Correspondingly, we write pLm , Vm , ˚m q in place of pLnm , Vnm , ˚nm q, so γm is a simple loop in Vm based at ˚m .  ON RECOGNIZING VIRTUALLY SPECIAL CUBE COMPLEXES  7  4. Proof of Theorem 2.4 In this final section, we modify the output of Theorem 3.7 in order to deduce Theorem 2.4. First we construct L1n from Ln by attaching a vertical loop α (consisting of a single edge) at ˚n . We also let Vn1 “ Vn Y α. For each simple based loop γ in Vn we define γ 1 to be the concatenation γ 1 ¨ α in L1n . Each loop γn1 is a local isometry γn1 : S1 Ñ L1n which induces a cellular structure on S1 , sending vertices to vertices and edges to edges. To construct the complex Xn , take two copies of L1n , and attach an annulus An – S1 ˆ I, where the two ends of the cylinder An are attached by the two copies of the map γn1 . The construction is illustrated in Figure 2. Yn  γn γn1 Ln  ˚n L1n  An  α L1n  Figure 2. The construction of the complex Xn . Since the loops γ 1 are vertical and locally geodesic, we can extend the VH-structures of the two copies of L1n to a non-singular VH-structure on Xn by dividing the annulus An into squares. The hyperplane Yn is defined to be the unique vertical hyperplane in the annulus An . It is homeomorphic to a circle, and two-sided (i.e. non-singular) by definition. Our final lemma relates the geometry of Yn in finite-sheeted covers of Xn to the group-theoretical properties of φ˚ pγn q P Γn (in the notation of Proposition 3.5 with Ln “ JPn ). Lemma 4.1. The following statements are equivalent. (1) The hyperplane Yn Ď Xn is virtually clean. (2) There is a based, finite-sheeted covering space pR, :q Ñ pLn , ˚n q so that the lift at : of γn is not a loop. (3) There is a subgroup N of finite index in π1 Ln such that γn R N . (4) The group element rγn s survives in some finite quotient of π1 Ln . (5) The element φ˚ prγn sq survives in some finite quotient of Γn . Proof. We first show that (1) implies (2). Suppose that p : Z Ñ Xn is a finite-sheeted covering map and that some component W of p´1 Yn is  8  MARTIN R. BRIDSON AND HENRY WILTON  clean. Consider the pushing map B0 : W Ñ Z. Choose some : P p´1 p˚n q that lies in B0 pW q. Let R be the component of p´1 Ln that contains :. Because B0 is an embedding, it follows that the lift of γn at : is not a loop. We next show that (2) implies (1); to this end, we define a certain retraction ρ : Xn Ñ Ln . Consider the natural retraction Xn Ñ L1n which identifies the two copies of L1n and maps the gluing annulus via γn1 . Next, consider the retraction L1n Ñ Ln which maps αptq to γ n ptq, where γ n is the path γn in the opposite direction. The concatenation Xn Ñ L1n Ñ Ln defines the retraction ρ. To show that (2) implies (1), we pull the covering map R Ñ Ln back along ρ to obtain a covering space Z Ñ Xn . Let W be the unique component of the preimage of Yn such that : is contained in Bt pW q for some t “ 0 or 1. By construction, W is a circle and Bt is given by the lift of γn1 “ γn ¨ α. Since the lift of γn is an embedded arc with distinct endpoints, the lift of γn1 is an embedded loop, as required. Items (2) and (3) are equivalent by standard covering-space theory: in one direction, take N “ π1 pR, :q, and in the other take pR, :q to be the based covering space corresponding to the subgroup N . The equivalence of items (3) and (4) is also standard. To show that (4) implies (3), just take N to be the kernel of the finite quotient map. For the converse, the action of π1 Ln by left translation on πLn {N defines a homomorphism π1 Ln Ñ SympπLn {N q in which γn survives. Finally, that (4) and (5) are equivalent follows from item (2) of Proposition 3.5.  Lemma 4.1 tells us that deciding if the hyperplane Yn Ď Xn is virtually clean is equivalent to deciding if pn, γn q lies in the set considered in Theorem 3.7; and this set is recursively enumerable but not recursive. This completes the proof of Theorem 2.4. References [1] Ian Agol. Virtual properties of 3-manifolds. https://dl.dropboxusercontent. com/u/8592391/virtualspecialICM.pdf. [2] Ian Agol. The virtual Haken conjecture. Doc. Math., 18:1045–1087, 2013. With an appendix by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning. [3] Martin R. Bridson and Henry Wilton. The triviality problem for profinite completions. Invent. Math., 202(2):839–874, 2015. [4] Martin R. Bridson and Daniel T. Wise. V H complexes, towers and subgroups of F ˆ F . Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 126(3):481–497, 1999. [5] Marc Burger and Shahar Mozes. Finitely presented simple groups and products of trees. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math., 324(7):747–752, 1997. [6] Frédéric Haglund and Daniel T. Wise. Special cube complexes. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 17(5):1551–1620, 2008.  ON RECOGNIZING VIRTUALLY SPECIAL CUBE COMPLEXES  9  [7] Daniel T. Wise. Complete square complexes. Comment. Math. Helv., 82(4):683– 724, 2007. Martin R. Bridson, Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Andrew Wiles Building, Oxford, OX2 6GG, UK E-mail address: bridson@maths.ox.ac.uk Henry Wilton, DPMMS, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge, CB3 0WB, UK E-mail address: h.wilton@maths.cam.ac.uk

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
