Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_2291

Abstract:
A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms  Nesime Tatbul 1 2 Tae Jun Lee 3 * Stan Zdonik 4 Justin Gottschlich 1  arXiv:1803.03639v1 [cs.LG] 8 Mar 2018  Abstract Classical anomaly detection (AD) is principally concerned with point-based anomalies, anomalies that occur at a single point in time. While pointbased anomalies are useful, many real-world anomalies are range-based, meaning they occur over a period of time. Therefore, applying classical point-based accuracy measures to range-based AD systems can be misleading. In this paper, we present a new mathematical model that more accurately gauges the classification correctness of AD systems for range-based anomalies. Unlike prior work, our mathematical definitions are a superset of the classical AD definitions, enabling our system to also subsume point-based anomalies. Moreover, our system is broadly generalizable and provides a number of specialization functions that can control the application’s bias along a multi-dimensional axis.  1. Introduction Anomaly detection (AD) is the process of identifying abnormal events. Anomalies are in general domain- or problemspecific. For example, in medical applications, one might wish to represent each unique disease or illness as its own anomaly. In the cyber-security space, each individually known vulnerability might be classified as its own anomaly as a means to track frequency, or grouped together based on commonality, rarity, and emergency. In parallel software correctness, one might wish to represent each type of race condition as its own anomaly. Although the problems in each of the prior examples are different, they all have one thing in common. Each of their anomalies are events that occur over a period of time rather than at a fixed point. Disease and illness manifest gradually (Kourou et al., 2015). Cyber-attacks are almost always multi-step processes (AlEroud & Karabatis, 2012). Soft1  Intel Labs, Santa Clara, CA, USA 2 MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 Microsoft, Seattle, WA, USA 4 Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. ∗ The work was done while a Brown student. Correspondence to: Nesime Tatbul <tatbul@csail.mit.edu>. Copyright 2018 by the author(s).  ware correctness and performance bugs generally emerge from the execution of several serial operations in a precise sequence (Alam & Muzahid, 2016). It is therefore critical that the fundamental accuracy measurements for anomalies, and the systems that detect them, reason about them as they occur over a period of time. We call such events rangebased anomalies, which are a subset of collective anomalies (Chandola et al., 2009). Unfortunately, the classical metrics for anomaly detection, which are widely used today, were designed to handle only single-point anomalies (Aggarwal, 2013). The core of this paper addresses this problem. An AD algorithm is essentially a form of binary classification. It recognizes certain patterns in its input and classifies them as either normal or not. For this general class of algorithms, measurements of Recall and Precision are widely used for evaluating the accuracy of the results. They are formally defined as follows (where TP , FP , FN are number of true positives, false positives, false negatives, respectively): Recall = T P ÷ (T P + F N ) P recision = T P ÷ (T P + F P )  (1) (2)  Informally, Recall is the rate at which a system can identify real anomalies without excluding any, while Precision is the rate a system can identify anomalies without including any non-anomalous ones. In this sense, Recall and Precision are complementary. This characterization proves useful when they are combined, such as in F1 score, as such combinations help gauge the quality of both anomalous and non-anomalous predictions. While useful for point-based anomalies, classical recall and precision suffer from the inability to capture and bias the classification of domain-specific time series anomalies. This is beginning to have profound negative side-effects on the advancement of both practical and research AD systems. In particular, many time series AD systems’ accuracy are being misrepresented, because point-based recall and precision are being used to measure their effectiveness for rangebased anomalies. Moreover, the need to accurately identify time series anomalies is growing in importance due to the explosion of streaming and real-time systems (Anava et al., 2015; Malhotra et al., 2015; Twitter, 2015; Guha et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2016; Ahmad et al., 2017). To address this, we redefine recall and precision to encompass range-based anomalies. Unlike prior work (Lavin &  A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms  (a) Precision = 0.6, Recall = 0.5  (b) Precision = ?, Recall = ?  Figure 1: Point-based vs. Range-based Anomalies Ahmad, 2015; Ahmad et al., 2017), our mathematical definitions are a superset of the classical point-based definitions, enabling our system to subsume point-based anomalies. Further, our system is broadly generalizable by providing specialization functions that can control a domain’s bias along a multi-dimensional axis that is necessary to properly accommodate the needs of a specific domain or problem space. The key contribution of this paper is a new mathematical model, which can be used to evaluate, rank, and compare results of AD algorithms. Although outside of the scope of this paper, our model can also be used as the objective function for machine learning (ML) training, which may have a profound impact on AD training strategies, giving rise to fundamentally new ML techniques in the future. In what follows, we first set the context by detailing the problem and giving an overview of prior work. Then in Sections 4 and 5, we formally present our new model. Finally, Section 6 provides an experimental study of our new model in comparison to the classical model as well as a recent scoring model provided by the Numenta Anomaly Benchmark (Lavin & Ahmad, 2015).  2. Problem Motivation and Design Goals Classical recall and precision are defined for sets of independent points (Figure 1a), which is sufficient for point-based anomalies. Time series AD algorithms, on the other hand, work with sequences of time intervals (Figure 1b). Unfortunately, due to the design of the classical model, important time series specific characteristics cannot be captured by it. Many of these distinctions are due to partial overlaps. In the point-based case, a predicted anomaly point Pi is either a member of the set of real anomalies (a TP in Figure 1a) or not (an FP in Figure 1a). In the range-based case, it may happen that a predicted anomaly range might partially overlap with a real one. In this case, a single prediction  range is partially a TP and partially an FP at the same time. The size of this partial overlap needs to be quantified, but there may be additional criteria. For example, one may want to consider the position of the overlap. After all, a range consists of an ordered collection of points and the order might be meaningful for the application. For instance, detecting the earlier portion of an anomaly (i.e., its “frontend”) might be more critical for a real-time application to reduce the time to react to it. Furthermore, overlaps are no longer 1-to-1 as in the classical model. One or more predicted anomaly ranges may (partially) overlap with one or more real ones. Figure 1b illustrates one such situation. The specific domain might care if each independent anomaly range is detected as a single unit or not. Thus, we may want to also capture cardinality when measuring overlap. If all anomalies were point-based, or if there were no partialoverlap situations, then we could reuse the classical model, by simply treating each range in a sequence like a point in a set. For general range-based anomalies, the classical model falls short. Motivated by these observations, we propose a new model that meets the following design goals: • Expressive: captures criteria that are unique to rangebased anomalies such as overlap position and cardinality. • Flexible: supports adjustable weights across multiple criteria for domain-specific needs. • Extensible: supports inclusion of additional domainspecific criteria that cannot be known a priori. Intuitively, our model should enable ranking the results of time series AD algorithms in a way that is as close to human judgment as possible.  3. Related Work There is a growing body of research emphasizing the importance of time series AD. Bailis et al.’s work focuses on prioritization techniques when analyzing fast, streaming data including time series outlier detection (Bailis et al., 2017). Malhotra et al. and Guha et al. have proposed new ML techniques to handle time series anomalies, ranging from space shuttles to Amazon web services (Malhotra et al., 2015; Guha et al., 2016). Lipton et al. have investigated the viability of existing ML-based AD techniques on medical time series data (Lipton et al., 2016), while Patcha and Park have drawn out weaknesses for AD systems to properly handle cyber-attacks in a time series setting, amongst others (Patcha & Park, 2007). Despite these advances, the techniques designed to judge the efficacy of time series AD systems are insufficient. They largely rely on classical recall and precision, which are severely limited when applied to range-based anomalies. This is a notable shortcoming in the measurement, and even training, of future-generation ML models and algorithms.  A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms  We are not the first to make this observation. Lavin and Ahmad have also discussed the lack of proper time series measurement techniques for AD in their Numenta Anomaly Benchmark (NAB) (Lavin & Ahmad, 2015). Similar to our findings, they note the limitations of classical recall and precision in accurately measuring AD systems. Focusing specifically on real-time streaming applications, they state that: (i) only early anomaly detection matters (i.e., frontend bias) and (ii) only the first point of the anomaly range matters (i.e., an emphasis of precision over recall and a bias toward single-point true positive prediction systems). They then propose an anomaly scoring system based on anomaly windows, application profiles, and a sigmoidal scoring function, which is specifically designed to reward detections earlier in a window. While such an approach may be suitable for their restricted domain, it is not generally applicable to range-based anomalies. For example, in some time series scenarios such as the identification of medical anomalies (e.g., cancer detection), it is critical to capture when an illness is recessing due to the use of life threatening medical treatments used to address such illnesses (Formenti & Demaria, 2017). Under Lavin and Ahmad’s single-point reward system, there is no clear distinction for such state changes, because the single-point prediction algorithm and the scoring system that they propose only indicate the presence of an anomalous state, not the beginning or ending of it. Furthermore, as discussed in detail in a follow-up analysis by Singh and Olinsky (Singh & Olinsky, 2017), the NAB scoring system has a number of limitations that makes it challenging to use in real-world applications, even within its restricted domain (e.g., the need to determine window size in advance, ambiguities in scoring function, and magic numbers). Unlike Lavin and Ahmad’s approach, our accuracy model does not have a fixed disposition to a single domain. Rather, it is general and flexible enough to support multiple application scenarios, including the classical recall/precision measures and Numenta’s front-end bias scoring system, among potentially many others, as we demonstrate with experiments in Section 6.  4. Range-based Recall The purpose of the Recall measurement is to reward a prediction system when anomalies are successfully identified (i.e., TP) and to penalize it when they are not (i.e., FN). In the classical point-based model, Recall is computed by counting the number of real anomaly points that are predicted by an AD system, which is then divided by the total number of real anomaly points. As such, this model is not sensitive to real anomalies that may be organized as a range of contiguous points but collectively indicate a single anomalous event. In this section, we propose a new way to compute the recall score for such range-based anomalies. Table 1 provides a  Notation R Ri P Pj N Nr Np α β γ() ω() δ()  Table 1: Notation Description set of real anomaly ranges the ith real anomaly range set of predicted anomaly ranges the j th predicted anomaly range total number of all points number of real anomaly ranges number of predicted anomaly ranges relative weight of existence reward relative weight of overlap reward overlap cardinality function overlap size function positional bias function  summary of the notation used in our equations. Given a set of real anomaly ranges R = {R1 , .., RNr } and a set of predicted anomaly ranges P = {P1 , .., PNp }, our RecallT (R, P ) formulation iterates over the set of all real anomaly ranges (R), computing a recall score for each real anomaly range (Ri ∈ R) and adding them up into a total recall score. This total score is then divided by the total number of real anomalies (Nr ) to obtain an average recall score for the whole time series. PNr RecallT (R, P ) =  i=1  RecallT (Ri , P ) Nr  (3)  When computing the recall score RecallT (Ri , P ) for a single real anomaly range Ri , we consider the following: • Existence: Catching the existence of an anomaly (even by predicting only a single point in Ri ) by itself might be valuable for the application. • Size: The larger the size of the correctly predicted portion of Ri , the higher the recall score will likely be. • Position: In some cases, not only size, but also the relative position of the correctly predicted portion of Ri might matter to the application. • Cardinality: Detecting Ri with a single prediction range Pj ∈ P may be more valuable than doing so with multiple different ranges in P . We capture all of these points as a sum of two main reward terms weighted by α and β, respectively, where 0 ≤ α, β ≤ 1 and α + β = 1. α represents the relative importance of rewarding existence, whereas β represents the relative importance of rewarding size, position, and cardinality, all of which stem from the actual overlap between Ri and the set of all predicted anomaly ranges (Pi ∈ P ). RecallT (Ri , P ) = α × ExistenceReward(Ri , P ) + β × OverlapReward(Ri , P )  (4)  If anomaly range Ri is caught (i.e., |Ri ∩ Pj | ≥ 1 across all Pj ∈ P ), then an existence reward of 1 is earned.  A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms function δ(i, AnomalyLength) return 1 function δ(i, AnomalyLength) return AnomalyLength - i + 1 function δ(i, AnomalyLength) return i function δ(i, AnomalyLength) if i ≤ AnomalyLength/2 then return i else return AnomalyLength - i + 1  function ω(AnomalyRange, OverlapSet, δ) MyValue ← 0 MaxValue ← 0 AnomalyLength ← length(AnomalyRange) for i ← 1, AnomalyLength do Bias ← δ(i, AnomalyLength) MaxValue ← MaxValue + Bias if AnomalyRange[i] in OverlapSet then MyValue ← MyValue + Bias return MyValue/MaxValue (a) Overlap Size  . Flat bias . Front-end bias . Back-end bias . Middle bias  (b) Positional Bias  Figure 2: Example Functions for ω() and δ() in Range-based Recall  ( ExistenceReward(Ri , P ) =  P Np  1, if j=1 |Ri ∩ Pj | ≥ 1 (5) 0, otherwise  Additionally, a cumulative overlap reward that depends on three application-defined functions 0 ≤ γ() ≤ 1, 0 ≤ ω() ≤ 1, and δ() ≥ 1 is earned. These capture the cardinality (γ), size (ω), and position (δ) aspects of the overlap. More specifically, the cardinality term serves as a scaling factor for the rewards earned from overlap size and position. OverlapReward(Ri , P ) = CardinalityF actor(Ri , P ) ×  Np X  ω(Ri , Ri ∩ Pj , δ)  (6)  cancer detection scenario or real-time anomaly detection), then the front-end bias function should be used instead. If later ones are more important (e.g., missile defense alarm system scenario), then the back-end bias function should be used. Finally, the middle bias function is for prioritizing mid-portions of anomalies. Our recall formulation for range-based anomalies subsumes the classical one for point-based anomalies, i.e., RecallT ≡ Recall when: (i) all Ri ∈ R and Pj ∈ P are represented as unit-size ranges (e.g., range [1, 3] as [1, 1], [2, 2], [3, 3]), and (ii) α = 0, β = 1, γ() = 1, ω() is as in Figure 2a, and δ() returns flat positional bias as in Figure 2b.  j=1  The cardinality factor gets the largest value of 1 when Ri overlaps with at most one predicted anomaly range (i.e., it is identified by a single prediction range). Otherwise, it receives a value 0 ≤ γ() ≤ 1 defined by the application.  CardinalityF actor(Ri , P ) =    1  , if Ri overlaps with at most (7) one Pj ∈ P   γ(Ri , P ), otherwise  It is important to note that the RecallT constants (α and β) and functions (γ(), ω(), and δ()) are tunable according to the needs of the application. Below, we provide an example for these functions to illustrate how they can be customized. Intuitively, the cardinality factor should be inversely proportional to the number of distinct prediction ranges that a real anomaly range Ri overlaps. Let us denote this number by Card (Ri ). A typical example for γ() could then be 1 /Card (Ri ). Figure 2 provides an example for the ω() function for size, which can be used with many different δ() functions, four of which we provide, for positional bias. If all index positions are equally important for the application, then the flat bias function should be used. In this case, the larger the size of the overlap, the higher the reward will be. If earlier index positions are more important than later ones (e.g.,  5. Range-based Precision In the classical point-based accuracy model, the precision score is computed by counting the number of successful prediction points (i.e., TP) in proportion to the total number of prediction points (i.e., TP+FP). As such, the key difference between Precision and Recall is that Precision penalizes FPs instead of FNs. In this section, we extend the classical precision formulation to range-based anomalies over timeseries. Our formulation follows a similar structure as the one for RecallT presented in the previous section. Given a set of real anomaly ranges R = {R1 , .., RNr } and a set of predicted anomaly ranges P = {P1 , .., PNp }, our P recisionT (R, P ) formulation iterates over the set of all predicted anomaly ranges (P ), computing a precision score for each predicted anomaly range (Pi ∈ P ) and adding them up into a total precision score. This total score is then divided by the total number of predicted anomalies (Np ) to obtain an average precision score for the whole time-series. PNp P recisionT (R, P ) =  i=1  P recisionT (R, Pi ) Np  (8)  When computing the precision score P recisionT (R, Pi ) for a single predicted anomaly range Pi , there is no need for an existence reward, since precision by definition emphasizes prediction quality, and existence by itself is too  A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms  low a bar for judging the quality of a prediction. On the other hand, we still need the overlap reward to capture the cardinality, size, and position aspects of a prediction. P recisionT (R, Pi ) = CardinalityF actor(Pi , R) ×  Nr X  ω(Pi , Pi ∩ Rj , δ)  (9)  j=1  Like in our recall formulation, the γ(), ω(), and δ() functions are tunable according to application semantics. Furthermore, P recisionT ≡ P recision under the same settings provided in the previous section (except the α and β constants, which are not used in P recisionT ). It is important to notice that the positional bias function (δ()) used in P recisionT refers to relative index positions in a predicted anomaly range, not in a real anomaly range (unlike RecallT ). Furthermore, while δ() provides a potential knob for positional bias, we believe that in many domains a flat bias function will suffice for P recisionT , as an F P is typically considered uniformly bad wherever it appears in a prediction range.  6. Experimental Study In this section, we present an experimental study of our range-based model applied to AD results of a state-of-the-art ML system over a collection of diverse time series datasets. We aim to demonstrate two key features of our model: (i) its expressive power for range-based anomalies compared to the classical model, (ii) its flexibility in supporting diverse application semantics in comparison to the Numenta scoring model (Lavin & Ahmad, 2015). Furthermore, we provide a cost analysis for computing our new metrics, which is important for their practical application. 6.1. Experimental Setup System: All experiments were run on a Windows 10 maTM chine with an Intel R Core i5-6300HQ processor running at 2.30 GHz with 4 cores and 8 GB of RAM. Datasets: We used a mixture of real and synthetic datasets. The real datasets are taken from the NAB Data Corpus (Numenta, 2017), whereas the synthetic datasets are generated by the Paranom tool (Gottschlich, 2018). All data is time-ordered, univariate, numeric time series, for which anomalous points/ranges (i.e., “the ground truth”) are already known. NYC-Taxi: A real dataset collected by the NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission. The data represent the number of passengers over time recorded as 30-minute aggregates. There are five anomalies: the NYC Marathon, Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year’s day, and a snow storm. Twitter-AAPL: A real dataset with a time series of the number of tweets that mention Apple’s ticker symbol (AAPL), recorded as 5-minute aggregates.  Machine-Temp: A real dataset with readings from a temperature sensor attached to a large industrial machine. There are three anomalies: a planned shutdown, an unidentified error, and a catastrophic failure. ECG: A dataset from Paranom based on a real Electrocardiogram (ECG) dataset (Malhotra et al., 2015; Keogh, 2005); augmented to include additional synthetic anomalies over the original single pre-ventricular contraction anomaly. Space-Shuttle: A dataset based on sensor measurements from valves on a NASA space shuttle. It is also generated by Paranom based on a real dataset from the literature with multiple additional synthetic anomalies (Malhotra et al., 2015; Keogh, 2005). Sine: A dataset from Paranom that includes a sine wave oscillating between 0.2 and 0.5 with a complete period over 360 timestamps. It contains many stochastic anomalous events ranging from 50 − 100 time intervals. Time-Guided: A Paranom dataset that monotonically increases a univariate value loosely associated with the time interval. Multiple ranged-based stochastic anomalies appear with inverted negative values. For training and testing, we carefully partition each of the datasets to ensure each anomaly range is kept intact in spite of the segmentation. Anomaly Detection Algorithm: We trained a TensorFlowimplemented version of LSTM-AD, a long short-term memory AD model (Malhotra et al., 2015), across all datasets. We interpret adjacent anomalous points as part of a single anomaly range. Thus, the LSTM-AD testing phase output is a sequence of predicted anomaly ranges for a given dataset. Compared Approaches: We evaluated the prediction accuracy of each output from our LSTM-AD runs using three models: classical point-based precision/recall, the Numenta scoring model (Lavin & Ahmad, 2015) (see Section 3), and our range-based precision/recall model. Unless otherwise stated, we use the following default parameter settings for computing our RecallT and PrecisionT equations: α = 0, β = 1, γ() = 1, ω() is as in Figure 2a, and δ() returns flat positional bias as in Figure 2b. 6.2. Comparison to the Classical Point-Based Model First, we compare our range-based model with the classical point-based model. The goal of this experiment is twofold: (i) verify that our model subsumes the classical one, (ii) show that our model can capture additional variations for anomaly ranges that the classical one cannot. We present our results in Figure 3 with three bar charts, which show Recall, Precision, and F1 Score values for our LSTM-AD testing over the  A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms  each metric. Note that γ() is set to 1/Card(Ri ). Recall: In Figure 3a, we provide RecallT measurements for four positional biases: flat, front, back, and middle (see Figure 2b). Recall is perfect (= 1.0) in all runs for the Machine-Temp dataset. When we analyzed the real and predicted anomaly ranges for this dataset, we see two real anomaly ranges for which LSTM-AD predicts as a single anomaly. Both real anomalies are fully predicted (i.e., no false negatives and Card(Ri ) = 1 for both ranges). Therefore, recall has the largest possible value independent from what δ() is, and is the expected behavior for this scenario.  (a) Recall  For all remaining datasets except Time-Guided, RecallT has a smaller value than Recall , which we expected for the following reasons. Real anomaly ranges are rarely captured (i) entirely by LSTM-AD (i.e., overlap reward is partially earned) and (ii) by exactly one predicted anomaly range (i.e., cardinality factor downscales the overlap reward). Analyzing the real and predicted anomalies for Time-Guided reveals that LSTM-AD predicts 7/12 ranges fully, 2/12 ranges half-way, and none of the remaining 3/12. As such, differences amongst RecallT biases are mainly due to the two half-predicts. Both half-predicts lie at back-ends, which explains why Recall T Back is larger than other biases. This demonstrates the positional bias sensitivity of RecallT , something that cannot be captured by the classical Recall .  (b) Precision  (c) F1 Score  Figure 3: Our Model vs. the Classical Point-based Model seven datasets, respectively. Recall values are computed using Equation 1 for Recall (bar labeled Recall Classical) and Equation 3 for RecallT (bars labeled Recall T *). Similarly, Precision values are computed using Equation 2 for P recision (bar labeled Precision Classical) and Equation 8 for P recisionT (bars labeled Precision T *). Finally, F1 Score values are computed using the following wellknown F-score equation, which essentially represents the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall: F1 = 2 ×  P recision × Recall P recision + Recall  (10)  The first observation we make is that in all three graphs the first two bars are equal for all datasets. This demonstrates that our model, when properly configured as described in the last paragraph of Section 4, subsumes the classical model. Secondly, we observe the impact of positional bias (δ()) on  We make similar observations for ECG, Space-Shuttle, and Sine. That is, different positional bias leads to different RecallT values. These demonstrate the sensitivity of RecallT to the positions of correctly predicted portions of anomalies. For NYC-Taxi and Twitter-AAPL, the differences are not as pronounced. Data indicates that these datasets contains few real anomaly ranges (2 and 3, respectively), but LSTM-AD predicts a larger number of small anomaly ranges. As such, overlaps are small and highly fragmented, likely making δ() less dominant than ω() and γ(). Precision: In Figure 3b, we present PrecisionT only with flat positional bias, as we expect this to be the typical use case (see Section 5). PrecisionT is typically smaller than Precision in all but one dataset (NYC-Taxi). When reviewing the predictions for NYC-Taxi, we found many narrowrange predictions, with a majority of them being false positives. Because Np < N dominates the rewards earned for true positives, the value of PrecisionT is larger than Precision for this dataset. Furthermore, all precision values are similar for Sine and Time-Guided. For these two datasets, both real and predicted anomaly ranges are narrow, diminishing the differences between points and ranges. Precision Classical and Precision T flat follow a similar pattern, except the latter ranks higher on Sine than Space-Shuttle. Comparing these two runs, we notice that Space-Shuttle contains a larger number of predicted  A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms  (a) Numenta Standard  (b) Numenta Reward-Low-FP  (c) Numenta Reward-Low-FN  Figure 4: Our Model vs. the Numenta Model anomaly ranges where many of them were complete mispredictions. This has a more significant negative impact on the precision score in range-based Precision T flat than in point-based Precision Classical. This scenario demonstrates that PrecisionT is more range-aware than Precision and can, therefore, judge exactness of rangebased predictions more accurately. F1 Score: In Figure 3c, we present F1 scores. The general behavior is as in the classical use case, because F1 is the harmonic mean of respective recall and precision values in both models. A noteworthy observation is that the F1 scores display similar sensitivity to positional bias variations as in recall graph of Figure 3a. This demonstrates that our range-based model’s expressiveness for recall and precision carries into combined metrics like F1 scores. 6.3. Comparison to the Numenta Scoring Model In this section, we report results from our comparative experiment with the Numenta scoring model (Lavin & Ahmad, 2015). To our knowledge, the Numenta model is currently the only alternative to the classical one for time series AD. Our goals are: (i) to determine if our model can mimic the Numenta model, (ii) to explore the potential of our model in providing further flexibilities beyond Numenta. Numenta is domain-specific. It focuses solely on rewarding early predictions, similar to our front-end bias function. Moreover, it is structurally different from precision/recallbased models as it provides a single, sigmoidal scoring function, whose weights can be adjusted according to three pre-defined application profiles (Standard, Reward-Low-FP, Reward-Low-FN). In each profile, contribution of TP, FP, and FN points are weighed differently. Although Numenta is primarily point-based in nature, it has the concept of a fixedsize anomaly window. Each point prediction is mapped to its closest preceding anomaly window and earns a reward based on its position within that window. However, in practice anomaly ranges vary and cannot be fixed to a single value in advance. Numenta uses additional window padding to help manage this. Finally, Numenta’s upper bound scoring value is 1, but it has no fixed lower bound. Given these irregularities (and several others (Singh & Olinsky, 2017)), it is challenging to make a direct and unbiased  comparison to the Numenta model. Instead, we focus on comparing general trends of our Fβ score measurements to Numenta’s scores, rather than their absolute values. To obtain a behavior that is similar to Numenta’s, we used the following settings for our model: α = 0, β = 1, γ() = 1, ω() is as in Figure 2a, δ() is front-bias for Recall and flat-bias for Precision. Because Numenta makes pointbased predictions, we represent Pi as points. For each run, we compute Recall T Front and Precision T Flat and their F score corresponding to the Numenta application profile under consideration (i.e., F1 for Numenta Standard , F0.5 for Numenta Reward Low FP , and F2 for Numenta Reward Low FN ). Figure 4 contains three bar charts, one for each Numenta profile. The datasets on the x-axis are presented in descending order of the Numenta accuracy scores. For ease of exposition, we scaled the negative Numenta scores by a factor of 100 and lower-bounded the y-axis at -1. For all charts, we added approximate trends. At a high level, although the accuracy values vary slightly across the charts, the trend curves follow a similar pattern. Therefore, we only discuss Figure 4a. In Figure 4a, both models trend in a decreasing fashion across the datasets from left to right, with one visible exception from the Space-Shuttle dataset. Analyzing the real and predicted data for the Space-Shuttle, we noted a small number of mid-range real anomalies and a much larger number of mid-range predicted anomalies. Contrarily, when we analyzed similar data for Sine, we found it had many narrow-range real and predicted anomalies that appear close together. These findings reveal that Space-Shuttle data had more FPs with a greater probability of TPs, which is therefore reflected in its smaller PrecisionT score and larger RecallT score (see Figure 3). Moreover, because Numenta favors precision over recall, this discrepancy is further magnified. Overall, this experiment shows that, not only can our model mimic Numenta, but also catch additional intricacies. To illustrate this further, we investigated how the two models behave under two contrasting positional bias scenarios: (i) anomaly predictions overlap with front-end portions of real anomaly ranges (Front Predicted) and (ii) anomaly predic-  A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms  tions overlap with back-end portions of real anomaly ranges (Back Predicted) as shown in Table 2. As these scenarios did not exist in our real and Paranom-generated datasets, we artificially generated the desired ranges in a symmetric fashion to make them directly comparable. We then scored them using Numenta Standard , F1 T Front Flat, and F1 T Back Flat. As shown in Table 2, Numenta’s scoring function is not sufficiently sensitive to distinguish between the two scenarios. This is not too surprising, as Numenta was designed to reward early detections (closer to Front Predicted). However, our model clearly distinguishes between the two scenarios when its positional bias is set appropriately. This experiment demonstrates our model’s flexibility and generality over the Numenta model in evaluating a wider range of time series AD algorithms and scenarios.  (a) Naive  Table 2: Sensitivity to Positional Bias Front Predicted Back Predicted  Numenta Std 0.67 0.63  F1 T Front 0.42 0.11  F1 T Back 0.11 0.42  6.4. Cost Analysis In this section, we analyze the computational overhead of our RecallT and P recisionT equations, both mathematically and experimentally. Naive: In our RecallT and P recisionT equations, we need to keep track of two sets, R and P . A naive algorithm, which compares each Ri ∈ R with all Pj ∈ P for RecallT (and vice versa for P recisionT ) has a computational complexity of O(Nr × Np ). Optimization1: We can eliminate many of these comparisons by taking advantage of sequential relationships among ranges. Assume that all ranges are represented as timestamp pairs, ordered by their first timestamps. We can iterate over R and P simultaneously, only comparing those pairs that are in close proximity in terms of their timestamps. This optimized algorithm brings the computational complexity to linear (O(Nr ) if Nr ≥ Np , otherwise O(Np )). Optimization2: An additional optimization is possible in computing the positional bias functions. Instead of computing them for each point, we can use them in a closed form, leading to a single computation per range. We note that these optimizations are not exhaustive. In fact, many others (e.g., using bit vectors and bitwise operations) can be applied. These are beyond the goals of our analysis. We implemented five alternative ways of computing recall and precision, and analyzed how the computation time for each of them scales with increasing number of real and predicted anomaly ranges. Two of these are naive algorithms for both classical and our recall/precision equations. The rest are their optimized variants. Ranges used in this experiment are randomly generated from a time series of 50K data points. Figure 5 shows our results. We plot naive and  (b) Optimized  Figure 5: Cost Analysis optimized approaches in separate graphs, as their costs are orders of magnitude different. In Figure 5a, we see that computing our range-based metrics naively is significantly more costly than doing so for the classical ones. Fortunately, we can optimize our model’s computational cost. The optimized results in Figure 5b provide an improvement in performance. Both the classical metrics and ours can be computed in almost three orders of magnitude less time than their corresponding naive baselines when optimized. There is still a factor of 2-3 difference, but our model’s values are notably closer at this scale to the classical model. This analysis shows that our new range-based metrics can be computed efficiently, and their overhead compared to the classical ones is acceptably low.  7. Conclusion Precision/recall measures are commonly used to evaluate accuracy of algorithms with imprecise results, like anomaly prediction. In this paper, we argued that classical precision/recall were invented for point-based data, whereas for time series data, anomalies are in the form of ranges. In response, we offer a new formal model that accounts for range-specific issues such as partial overlaps between real vs. predicted ranges as well as their relative positions. Moreover, our approach allows users to supply customizable bias functions that enable weighing multiple criteria differently. Experiments with diverse datasets compared to two existing models show that our new model is expressive, flexible, and extensible. Future work includes designing new ML algorithms that are optimized for our new accuracy model.  A New Model for Evaluating Range-Based Anomaly Detection Algorithms  Acknowledgements We thank Eric Metcalf for his help with the cost experiments. This research has been funded in part by Intel.  References Aggarwal, C. C. Outlier Analysis. Springer, 2013. Ahmad, S., Lavin, A., Purdy, S., and Agha, Z. Unsupervised Real-time Anomaly Detection for Streaming Data. Neurocomputing, 262:134–147, 2017. Alam, M. M. U. and Muzahid, A. Production-Run Software Failure Diagnosis via Adaptive Communication Tracking. In ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pp. 354–366, 2016. AlEroud, A. and Karabatis, G. A Contextual Anomaly Detection Approach to Discover Zero-Day Attacks. In International Conference on CyberSecurity (ICCS), pp. 40–45, 2012. Anava, O., Hazan, E., and Zeevi, A. Online Time Series Prediction with Missing Data. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2191–2199, 2015. Bailis, P., Gan, E., Madden, S., Narayanan, D., Rong, K., and Suri, S. MacroBase: Prioritizing Attention in Fast Data. In ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pp. 541–556, 2017. Chandola, V., Banerjee, A., and Kumar, V. Anomaly Detection: A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 41(3):15:1– 15:58, 2009. Formenti, S. and Demaria, S. Systemic Effects of Local Radiotherapy. The Lancet Oncology, pp. 718–726, 2017. Gottschlich, J. Paranom: A Parallel Anomaly Dataset Generator. https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.03164/, 2018. Guha, S., Mishra, N., Roy, G., and Schrijvers, O. Robust Random Cut Forest Based Anomaly Detection on Streams. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2712–2721, 2016. Keogh, E. UCR Time-Series Datasets. http://www.cs.ucr. edu/˜eamonn/discords/, 2005. Kourou, K., Exarchos, T. P., Exarchos, K. P., Karamouzis, M. V., and Fotiadis, D. I. Machine Learning Applications in Cancer Prognosis and Prediction. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, 13:8–17, 2015. Lavin, A. and Ahmad, S. Evaluating Real-Time Anomaly Detection Algorithms - The Numenta Anomaly Benchmark. In IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 38–44, 2015.  Lipton, Z. C., Kale, D. C., Elkan, C., and Wetzel, R. C. Learning to Diagnose with LSTM Recurrent Neural Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016. Malhotra, P., Vig, L., Shroff, G., and Agarwal, P. Long Short Term Memory Networks for Anomaly Detection in Time Series. In European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning (ESANN), pp. 89–94, 2015. Numenta. NAB Data Corpus. https://github.com/ numenta/NAB/tree/master/data/, 2017. Patcha, A. and Park, J. An Overview of Anomaly Detection Techniques: Existing Solutions and Latest Technological Trends. Computer Networks, 51(12):3448–3470, 2007. Singh, N. and Olinsky, C. Demystifying Numenta Anomaly Benchmark. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1570–1577, 2017. Twitter. AnomalyDetection R Package. https://github. com/twitter/AnomalyDetection/, 2015. Yu, H., Rao, N., and Dhillon, I. S. Temporal Regularized Matrix Factorization for High-dimensional Time Series Prediction. In Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 847–855, 2016.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
