Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_266

Abstract:
Almost Hyperbolic Groups with Almost Finitely Presented Subgroups  arXiv:1802.01658v1 [math.GR] 5 Feb 2018  Robert Kropholler February 7, 2018 Abstract We construct new examples of CAT(0) groups containing non finitely presented subgroups that are of type F P2 , these CAT(0) groups do not contain copies of Z3 . We also give a construction of groups which are of type Fn but not Fn`1 with no free abelian subgroups of rank greater than r n3 s.  1  Introduction  Subgroups of CAT(0) groups can be shown to exhibit interesting finiteness properties. In [2] there are examples of groups satisfying Fn but not Fn`1 for all n as well as the first examples of groups of type F P2 that are not finitely presented answering a question of Brown. Definition 1.1. A group G satisfies property Fn , if there is a classifying space KpG, 1q with finite n skeleton. Definition 1.2. A group G is of type F Pn if there is a partial resolution of the trivial ZG module, Pn  ...  P1  P0  Z  0  where Pi is a finitely generated projective ZG module. It can easily be seen that F1 is equivalent to finite generation and F2 is equivalent to finite presentability. In [2] the groups are kernels of maps φ : G Ñ Z where G is a right angled Artin group, the finiteness properties of the kernel depend solely on the defining flag complex for the right angled Artin group. The construction of groups of type F P2 that are not finitely presented are contained in right angled Artin groups having free abelian subgroups of rank 3. Since [2] there have been other constructions of groups with subgroups of type F P2 not F2 see [?, 10]. In many cases these groups are subgroups of groups G of type F , in these cases the maximal rank of a free abelian subgroup of G is at least 3. We construct the first examples of groups of type F containing no free abelian subgroups of rank 3 containing a subgroup of type F P2 that is not F2 . Theorem A. There exists a non positively curved space X such that π1 pXq contains no subgroups isomorphic to Z3 , which contains a subgroup of type F P2 not F2 . 1  The groups constructed in [2] which are of type Fn´1 not Fn all contain a free abelian subgroup of rank n ´ 1. Brady asked in [?, Question 8.5] whether there exist groups of type Fn´1 but not Fn which do not contain Z2 ; he notes that the known examples all contain Zn´2 . While we are not able to find examples without Z2 , we reduce the bound to a fraction of n. Theorem B. For every positive integer n, there exists a group of type Fn´1 but not Fn that contains no abelian subgroups of rank greater than r n3 s. In the future, we would like to extend these theorems, giving examples of hyperbolic groups with such subgroups. The author would like to thank Federico Vigolo for kindly helping draw several of the figures contained within. The author would also like to thank Martin Bridson and Gareth Wilkes for reading earlier drafts of this paper and providing helpful and constructive comments.  2  Preliminaries  2.1  Cube Complexes  A cube complex can be constructed by taking a collection of disjoint cubes and gluing them together by isometries of their faces. There is a standard way in which cube complexes can be endowed with metrics. There is a well known criterion of [7] that characterises those cube complexes that are locally CAT(0). The precise definition of a cube complex is given in [5, Def. 7.32] as follows. Definition 2.1. A cube complex X is a quotient of a disjoint union of cubes Ů K “ C r0, 1snc by an equivalence relation „. The restrictions χc : r0, 1snc Ñ X of the natural projection χ : K Ñ X “ K{ „ are required to satisfy: • for every c P C the map χc is injective; • if χc pr0, 1snc q X χc1 pr0, 1snc1 q ‰ H, then there is an isometry hc,c1 from a 1 face Tc Ă r0, 1snc onto a face Tc1 Ă r0, 1snc such that χc pxq “ χc1 px1 q if 1 and only if x “ hc,c1 pxq. Definition 2.2. A metric space is non-positively curved if its metric is locally CAT(0) Gromov’s insight allows us to easily check whether a P E complex is nonpositively curved. Lemma 2.3 (Gromov, [7], p. 120). A P E complex is non-positively curved if and only if the link of each vertex is a CAT(1) space. In a cube complex the link of each vertex is a spherical complex built from all-right speherical simplices (see [5, §5.18]). Gromov realised that an all-right spherical complex is CAT(1) if and only if it is flag. Definition 2.4. A complex L is a flag complex if it is simplicial and every set tv1 , . . . , vn u of pairwise adjacent vertices spans a simplex.  2  Flag complexes are completely determined by their 1-skeleta. Thus we arrive at the following combinatorial condition for cube complexes. Lemma 2.5 (Gromov, [7]). A cube complex is non-positively curved if the link of every vertex is a flag complex. We wish to limit the rank of free abelian subgroups, in fact we will limit the largest dimension of an isometrically embedded flat. The following theorem shows that in the CAT(0) world the maximal dimension of a flat is the same as the maximal rank of a free abelian subgroup. Theorem 2.6 (Bridson-Haefliger, [5], II.7). Let X be a compact non positively curved cube complex, X̃ its universal cover and G “ π1 pXq. If H “ Zn is a subgroup of G, then there is an isometrically embedded copy of i : Rn ãÑ X̃. Moreover, the quotient ipRn q{H is an n-torus Finally we would like to know when a cube complex is hyperbolic. Bridson shows that the only obstruction is containing an isometrically embedded flat. Theorem 2.7 (Bridson, [4], Theorem A). Let X be a compact non-positively curved cube complex and X̃ be its universal cover. X̃ is not hyperbolic if and only if there exists an isometric embedding i : E2 ãÑ X̃.  2.2  Right angled Artin groups  Right angled Artin groups have been at the centre of a lot of recent study, particularly because of their interesting subgroup structure [1, 2, 8, 12]. In particular, their subgroups have interesting connections with finiteness properties of groups, as shown in [2]. For completeness, we recall the basic theory of right angled Artin groups. Definition 2.8. Given a flag complex Γ, we define the associated right angled Artin group (RAAG) AΓ , as the group, ˇ @ D AΓ “ Γp0q ˇ rv, ws “ 1 if rv, ws P Γp1q . These groups have non-positively curved cube complexes as classifying spaces, which are unions of tori: Definition 2.9. Given a flag complex Γ the Salvetti complex SΓ is defined as follows. For each vertex vi in Γ, let Sv1i “ S 1 be a copy of the circle cubulated with 1 vertex. For each simplex σ “ rv0 , . . . , vn s of Γ there is an associated torus Tσ “ Sv10 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Sv1n . If τ ă σ, then there is a natural inclusion Tτ ãÑ Tσ . Now define O ž SΓ “ Tσ „ σăΓ  where the equivalence relation „ is generated by the inclusions Tτ ãÑ Tσ . p0q  There is a map SΓ Ñ pS 1 qΓ sending each circle in SΓ to the respective p0q circle in pS 1 qΓ and extending linearly over cubes; this map is an inclusion of cubical complexes. It is a standard fact that SΓ has fundamental group AΓ and is a nonpositively curved cube complex. Proofs of the following can be found in [2]. 3  Lemma 2.10. π1 pSΓ q “ AΓ . Lemma 2.11. SΓ is non-positively curved. 2.2.1  A new classifying space  We will construct a new classifying space, which will also be a non-positively curved cube complex and will be more amenable to taking branched covers. We will build such a classifying space in the case that the flag complex satisfies the following condition. Definition 2.12. A simplicial complex Γ has an n-partite structure if Γ is contained in the join V1 ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ Vn of several discrete sets Vi . In the case n “ 2 we will say bipartite and in the case n “ 3, tripartite. Any finite simplicial complex can be given an n-partite structure as a subcomplex of a simplex. We define a cube complex KΓ for an n-partite complex Γ as follows. i Let Vi “ tv1i , . . . , vm u and I “ t1, . . . , nu. For each vertex vki , let Sv1i be a i k  copy of S 1 cubulated with two vertices labelled 0 and 1, and two edges evki and ev0i . Definition 2.13. Given J P PpIq, J “ ti1 , . . . , il u, we say that σ is a J-simplex if it is of the form rvki11 , . . . , vkill s. Remark 1. Every simplex is a J simplex for some unique (possibly empty) J. For each J-simplex σ “ rvki11 , . . . , vkill s in Γ we associate the following space. ˜ ¸ ˜ ¸ ź ź Sv1 ˆ ev0i . Tσ “ vPσ  iRJ  This is the product of a torus and a cube. š Let TJ “ tTσ : σ is a J-simplexu and T “ JPPpIq TJ . Given simplices τ ă σ there is a natural inclusion Tτ ãÑ Tσ . O ž KΓ “ T „. T PT  Where once again the equivalence relation is generated via the inclusions Tτ Ñ Tσ . We need to prove the two key lemmata: the fundamental group of KΓ is AΓ , and KΓ is non-positively curved. Lemma 2.14. π1 pKΓ q “ AΓ . Proof. Apply the Seifert-van Kampen Theorem repeatedly. Lemma 2.15. KΓ is non-positively curved. Proof. There are 2n vertices in KΓ . Given two vertices v, w there is a cellular isomorphism KΓ Ñ KΓ which sends v to w. Thus we only need to check the link of one vertex; we will check the link of 0 “ p0, . . . , 0q. Let L “ Lkp0, KΓ q. Let Vi “ Vi Y tv0i u. š There is a vertex in L for each edge at 0, so Lp0q “ Vi . Two distinct vertices vki11 and vki22 are connected if one of the following conditions holds: 4  1. k1 “ 0, k2 “ 0, 2. k1 “ 0, i1 ‰ i2 , 3. i1 ‰ i2 , k2 “ 0, 4. rvki11 , vki22 s is an edge of Γ. These edges come from the following subcomplexes. 1. TH , 2. Tvi1 , k1  3. Tvi2 , k2  4. Trvi1 ,vi2 s . k1  k2  This tells us that L Ă V1 ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ Vn . We now want to prove that L is in fact a flag complex. Given a set W “ tvki11 , . . . vkill u of pairwise adjacent vertices in L we want to show that rvki11 , . . . vkill s is also in L. We split W into two sets ( i W0 “ vkjj : kj “ 0 and W1 “ W r W0 “ tw1 , . . . , wa u. Since the vertices in W1 are pairwise adjacent there is a simplex σ Ă Γ spanning them. We see that the subcomplex Tσ contains an pl ` 1q-cell which fills the required simplex in L. It should be noted the natural projections are injective on each closed cube and not just on the interior. Remark 2. The complex KΓ requires a choice of n-partite structure. Given two n-partite structures the complexes are homotopy equivalent but are not isomorphic as cube complexes. This is shown in Figure 1, together with some examples of the construction. Remark 3. Let Θi be a “cage graph” with two vertices that has an edge śn for each element of Vi , then the complex KΓ constructed above embeds in i“1 Θi . This fact will come in useful later, as will the fact that in the case n “ 3 there is an embedded copy of Θ1 > Θ2 > Θ3 in KΓ . 2.2.2  Finiteness properties of subgroups of RAAGs  We will require one theorem on the finiteness properties of subgroups of RAAGs from [?]. A homomorphism f : AΓ Ñ Z can be defined by putting an integer label on each vertex and sending the corresponding generator of AΓ to its label. Definition 2.16. Let f : AΓ Ñ Z be a homomorphism. We denote Γ: ă Γ the full subcomplex spanned by those vertices with label 0. Let L˚ be the full subcomplex spanned by vertices not in Γ: . Theorem 2.17 (Bux-Gonzalez [?], Theorem A). Let f : AΓ Ñ Z be a homomorphism. Then the following are equivalent: • The kernel of f is of type F Pn , respectively F2 . • For every, possibly empty, dead simplex σ ă Γ: the complex Γ˚ X Lkpσ, Γq is homologically pn ´ dimpσq ´ 2q-connected, respectively L˚ is simply connected. 5  KΓ  Γ  1  1  1  2  1  2  1  2  Y  Figure 1: Some examples of KΓ . The labels on vertices exhibit the n-partite structure. In the last example the shaded regions are identified.  6  2.3  Branched Covers of Cube Complexes  We will take branched covers of cube complexes to get rid of high dimensional flats. The techniques we will use were developed in [3]. The idea is to take an appropriate subset which intersects the high dimensional flats. Definition 2.18. Let X be a non-positively curved cube complex. We say that Y Ă X is a branching locus if it satisfies the following conditions: 1. Y is a locally convex cubical subcomplex, 2. Lkpc, Xq r Y is connected and non-empty for all cubes c in Y . The first condition is required to prove that non-positive curvature is preserved when taking branched covers. The second is a reformulation of the the classical requirement that the branching locus has codimension 2 in the theory of branched covers of manifolds, ensuring that the trivial branched covering of X is X. Definition 2.19. A branched cover X̂ of X over the branching locus Y is the result of the following process. 1. Take a finite covering X r Y of X r Y . 2. Lift the piecewise Euclidean metric locally and consider the induced path metric. 3. Take the metric completion X̂ of X r Y . We require some key results from [3] which allow us to conclude that this process is natural and that the resulting complex is still a non-positively curved cube complex. Lemma 2.20 (Brady, [3], Lemma 5.3). There is a natural surjection b : X̂ Ñ X and X̂ is a piecewise Euclidean cube complex. Lemma 2.21 (Brady, [3], Lemma 5.5). If Y is a finite graph, then X̂ is nonpositively curved.  3  Hyperbolisation in dimension 2  This section will be a warm up to our key theorems which are all related to dimension 3. The lower dimensional case carries a lot of the ideas that will be used later. Throughout this section Γ will be a bipartite graph; say Γ Ă V1 ˚ V2 . Let i Vi “ tv1i , . . . , vm u. Let Θi be the graph with two vertices, labelled 0 and 1, i i , all directed from 0 to 1. We noted and |Vi | ` 1 edges, labelled v0i , v1i , . . . , vm i in Remark 3 that the complex KΓ constructed in Section 2.2.1 is a subcomplex of Θ1 ˆ Θ2 . Theorem 3.1. Let Γ be a bipartite graph, let AΓ be the associated RAAG and let KΓ be the classifying space constructed in Section 2.2.1. Then there is a branched cover RΓ of KΓ which has hyperbolic fundamental group.  7  vk1  vl1  vk1  p0, 0q ù vl1  2 vm  vn2  2 vm  vn2  Figure 2: Depiction of the deformation retraction T 2 r tp0, 0qu Ñ S 1 _ S 1 . There are in fact many branched covers delivering this result. During the course of the proof we will pick a prime p and as this varies different hyperbolic branched covers are obtained. Proof. The branching locus will be one of the 4 vertices of KΓ . Given two vertices v and w there is a homeomorphism of KΓ which sends v to w. Therefore, it does not matter which vertex we pick to be our branching locus. We will choose the vertex 0 “ p0, 0q. KΓ r t0u deformation retracts onto the graph Θ1 _ Θ2 . This can be seen as follows. We start with a torus cubulated as in Figure 2. From each torus we remove the center vertex. The complement deformation retracts onto the graph depicted in Figure 2. We now identify the edges via their labels, which will result in Θ1 _ Θ2 . This argument shows that π1 pKΓ r t0uq is a free group on |V1 | ` |V2 | gen1 erators. We will denote these generators ai “ vi´1 vi1 for i P t1, . . . , |V1 |u and 2 bj “ vj´1 vj2 for j P t1, . . . , |V2 |u. From the deformation described we get a map Lkp0, KΓ q Ñ Θ1 _ Θ2 . Each loop of length 4 in Lkp0, KΓ q corresponds to a torus as in Figure 2. Under the deformation retraction this gets sent to aśloop in Θ1 _ Θ2 corresponding to the śk`l m`n 2 2 vn s “ r i“k`1 ai , j“m`1 bj s. commutator rvk1 vl1 , vm Let p ą 1 ` maxp|V1 |, |V2 |q be a prime and Sp be the symmetric group on p letters. Let λ be a p-cycle in Sp and µ an element which conjugates λ to λr , where r is a generator of Zˆ p . We define our cover using the map, ρ : π1 pΘ1 _ Θ2 q Ñ Sp , ai ÞÑ λ, bj ÞÑ µ, taking the cover corresponding to the stabiliser of 1 in Sp . n Note that the commutator rλm , µn s “ λpr ´1qm is a p-cycle. This means that the loops of length 4 in the link have connected preimage in the cover. We take the completion RΓ of the resulting complex; there is a natural map b : RΓ Ñ KΓ . The link of the vertex which maps to 0 will contain no cycles of length ă 5. 8  We now prove that the resulting complex has hyperbolic universal cover. rΓ is a non-positively curved cube complex. So to prove that We know that R it is hyperbolic we just have to show that there are no isometric embeddings E2 Ñ R˜Γ by Theorem 2.7. If there is such an embedding, then it will contain at least one square 2-cell. However, each square contains one vertex which is a lift of 0 and in the link of this vertex there are no loops of length 2π. However, were the flat plane to be isometrically embedded there would be a loop of length 2π in the link of every vertex on the plane. This contradiction completes the proof. We use this theorem along with Morse theoretic ideas from Section 5 to find more examples of hyperbolic groups with finitely generated subgroups that are not finitely presentable. Proposition 3.2. Let Γ be a complete bipartite graph on sets A “ ta1 , a2 , a3 u and B “ tb1 , b2 , b3 u, fix p satisfying the above hypotheses and let b : RΓ Ñ KΓ be the branched cover constructed above. Then π1 pRΓ q has a finitely generated subgroup which is not finitely presentable. Proof. In this case KΓ “ Θ1 ˆ Θ2 where Θi is as above and has 4 edges. Put an orientation on each edge of Θi such that there are 2 edges oriented towards each vertex and 2 edges oriented away from each vertex. Cubulating S 1 with one vertex and one oriented edge. Define maps hi : Θi Ñ S 1 on each edge by their orientation. Define h : KΓ Ñ S 1 by hpx1 , x2 q “ h1 px1 q ` h2 px2 q. Precomposing with the branched covering map b and lifting to universal covers, we obtain a Morse function f : R̃Γ Ñ R, which is phbq˚ -equivariant. The ascending and descending links of this Morse functions are the preimages, under b, of the ascending and descending links of h. For the Morse function h the ascending and descending links are joins of the ascending and descending links for hi . These will be copies of S 0 , so the ascending and descending links will be copies of S 1 . There are now two possibilities, if we look at a vertex in RΓ which does not map to 0 the ascending and descending links will remain unchanged and will still be copies of S 1 . If the vertex in question maps to 0 we will study the ascending link the other case being identical. The ascending link of 0 is a loop of length 4. Taking a branched cover cause this loop of length 4 to lengthen but in the preimage it will still be a copy of S 1 . It follows that the kernel of phbq˚ is finitely generated but not finitely presentable by 5.9. Sizeable graphs are used in [9] to give examples of hyperbolic groups with subgroups which are type F2 not F3 . Here we outline a procedure for producing examples of sizeable graphs. Proposition 3.3. Let A and B be sets with partitions A “ A` \ A´ and B “ B ` \ B ´ where A´ , B ´ are non-empty and |A` |, |B ` | ą 1. Let Γ be the complete bipartite graph on A and B. Let AΓ be the associated right angled Artin group, KΓ the classifying space from 2.13 and RΓ the branched covering constructed in Theorem 3.1. Let v P RΓ be a vertex mapping to p0, 0q. Then Lkpv, RΓ q is sizeable.  9  Proof. The link of a vertex is a cover Λ of the graph Λ. Λ is the complete bipartite graph on sets A1 “ A Y ta0 u and B 1 “ B Y tb0 u. Define A1` “ A` and A1´ “ A1 r A1` , defining B 1` and B 1´ similarly. The graph Λ has the following properties. It is bipartite as it is the cover of a bipartite graph and it has no cycles of length 4 since the branching process was designed to remove these. To check the last property we let A` be the set of Λ ´ 1` vertices mapping to A Ă Λ and AΛ the complement of these in the bipartite structure. We define BΛ` and BΛ´ similarly. We must prove that ΛpAsΛ Y BΛt q is connected. ΛpA1s , B 1t q can be covered by finitely many loops c1 , c2 , . . . of length 4 such that cm`1 X Ym i“1 cm ‰ H for all m. When taking the branched cover each ci has connected preimage and the intersection will still be non empty so the resulting union will be connected.  4  Almost hyperbolisation in dimension 3  Notation 4.1. Given a tripartite complex L Ă V1 ˚ V2 ˚ V3 , let Lij be the full subcomplex spanned by the vertices of Vi Y Vj . The main theorem of this section is the following. Theorem 4.2. Let Γ be a tripartite flag complex, AΓ the associated RAAG and KΓ the classifying space constructed in Section 2.2.1. Then there exists a branched cover X of KΓ , such that π1 pXq contains no subgroups isomorphic to Z3 . Proof. Our branching locus will be B “ pΘ1 ˆ t0u ˆ t1uq Y pt1u ˆ Θ2 ˆ t0uq Y pt0u ˆ t1u ˆ Θ3 q, where Θi is the graph with 2 vertices, 0 and 1, and |Vi | ` 1 edges, each directed from 0 to 1. We have three maps p1 : KΓ r B Ñ KΓ12 r tp0, 1qu, p2 : KΓ r B Ñ KΓ23 r tp0, 1qu, p3 : KΓ r B Ñ KΓ31 r tp0, 1qu, which are the restrictions of the projections Θ1 ˆ Θ2 ˆ Θ3 Ñ Θi ˆ Θj . The maps from Section 3 give us three maps π1 pKΓ12 r tp0, 1quq Ñ Sq12 π1 pKΓ23 r tp0, 1quq Ñ Sq23 π1 pKΓ31 r tp0, 1quq Ñ Sq31 . Here, qij are the primes picked in the process of taking a branched cover in Theorem 3.1. Let q “ q12 q23 q31 . We can combine these permutation representations with the projection maps above to get a map π1 pKΓ r Bq Ñ Sq , which defines a q-fold cover of KΓ r B by taking the subgroup corresponding to the stabiliser of 1 in Sq . We complete this cover to get our branched cover X. Let ti, j, ku “ t1, 2, 3u. The maps p1 , p2 , p3 are retractions to see this consider the natural map " * 1 ãÑ KΓij ˆ ev0k ãÑ KΓ . KΓij ãÑ KΓij ˆ 2 10  v02  v01  vi1  vj2  Figure 3: A loop corresponding to the commutator rvi1 , vj2 s. It follows that π1 pKΓ r Bq Ñ π1 pKΓij r tp0, 1quq is surjective. We will now consider what the link of a vertex in the branched cover is. We will restrict our attention to a vertex mapping to p0, 1, 0q all the other cases are similar. We will consider the image of the link of p0, 1, 0q under the three maps p1 , p2 , p3 . In the image of the map p1 , this link is sent surjectively onto the link of p0, 1q in KΓ12 . By Section 3 we know that KΓ12 r tp0, 1qu deformation retracts onto the graph Θ1 _ Θ2 . Loops of length 4 are sent to commutators of the form rvi1 v 1j , vk2 v 2l s. In the map π1 pKΓ12 r tp0, 1quq Ñ Sq this commutator is sent to a q12 -cycle. We must now consider the image under the maps p2 , p3 . These maps send the link to a disjoint union of contractible subsets, so the maps π1 pKΓ r Bq Ñ Sq23 and π1 pKΓ r Bq Ñ Sq31 send the image of the fundamental group of the link to the identity. From this we can see that, in the cover of KΓ r B corresponding to the stabiliser of 1 in Sq , the preimage of one of the loops of length 4 depicted in Figure 3 will have q23 q31 components, and each component is a loop of length 4q12 . We will now prove that there are no isometrically embedded planes of dimension ą 2. This, combined with Theorem 2.6, will complete the proof of the theorem. Since the resulting cube complex has cubes of dimension at most 3, we can see that the dimension of an isometrically embedded flat plane is at most 3. If such a copy E of E3 were isometrically embedded in X̃, it would contain at least one cube and would in fact be a cubical embedding of the flat. For each vertex contained in the flat, the link would contain a subcomplex isomorphic to an octahedron. Let B̃ be the lift of the branching locus B. We can see how this intersects each cube in X̃ by Figure 4. As such any 3-flat will intersect a vertex on B̃. Let x be a vertex on B̃ X E. Then Lkpx, X̃q has a tripartite structure. If there is an octahedron in this complex it has a tripartite structure of the form S 0 ˚ S 0 ˚ S 0 . One of the copies of S 0 will be contained in the vertices corresponding to B̃. The other 4 vertices form a loop of length 4 in the bipartite graph defined by the edges not in B̃. However, we constructed the branched 11  Figure 4: Intersection pattern of L̃ on a cube in X̃. cover so that this graph has no cycles of length ă 6.  5  Bestvina-Brady Morse theory  While Bestvina-Brady Morse theory is defined in the more general setting of affine cell complexes, in this instance we shall only need it for non-positively curved cube complexes. For the remainder of this section, let X be a CAT(0) cube complex and let G be a group which acts freely, cellularly, properly and cocompactly on X. Let φ : G Ñ Z be a homomorphism and let Z act on R by translations. Recall that χc is the characteristic map of the cube c. Definition 5.1. We say that a function f : X Ñ R is a φ-equivariant Morse function if it satisfies the following 3 conditions. • For every cube c Ă X of dimension n, the map f χc : r0, 1sn Ñ R extends to an affine map Rn Ñ R and f χc : r0, 1sn Ñ R is constant if and only if n “ 0. • The image of the 0-skeleton of X is discrete in R. • f is φ-equivariant, i.e. f pg ¨ xq “ φpgq ¨ f pxq. We will consider the level sets of our function, which we will denote as follows. Definition 5.2. For a non-empty closed subset I Ă R we denote by XI the preimage of I. We also use Xt to denote the preimage of t P R. The kernel H of φ acts on the cube complex X in a manner preserving each level set XI . Moreover, it acts properly and cocompactly on the level sets. We will use the topological properties of the level sets to gain information about the finiteness properties of the group. We will need to examine how they vary as we pass to larger level sets. 12  Theorem 5.3 (Bestvina-Brady, [2], Lemma 2.3). If I Ă I 1 Ă R are closed intervals and XI 1 r XI contains no vertices of X, then the inclusion XI ãÑ XI 1 is a homotopy equivalence. If XI 1 r XI contains vertices of X, then the topological properties of XI 1 can be very different from those of XI . This difference is encoded in the ascending and descending links. Definition 5.4.ŤThe ascending link of a vertex is LkÒ pv, Xq “ tLkpw, cq | χc pwq “ v and w is a minimum of f χc u Ă Lkpv, Xq The descending Ť link of a vertex is LkÓ pv, Xq “ tLkpw, cq | χc pwq “ v and w is a maximum of f χc u Ă Lkpv, Xq Theorem 5.5 (Bestvina-Brady, [2], Lemma 2.5). Let f be a Morse function. Suppose that I Ă I 1 Ă R are connected, closed and min I “ `min I˘1 (resp. max I “ max I 1 q, and that I 1 r I contains only one point r of f X p0q . Then XI 1 is homotopy equivalent to the space obtained from XI by coning off the descending (resp. ascending) links of v for each v P f ´1 prq. We can now deduce a lot about the topology of the level and sub-level sets. We know how they change as we pass to larger intervals and so we have the following. Corollary 5.6 (Bestvina-Brady, [2], Corollary 2.6). Let I, I 1 be as above. 1. If each ascending and descending link is homologically pn ´ 1q-connected, then the inclusion XI ãÑ XI 1 induces an isomorphism on Hi for i ď n ´ 1 and is surjective for i “ n. 2. If the ascending and descending links are connected, then the inclusion XI ãÑ XI 1 induces a surjection on π1 . 3. If the ascending and descending links are simply connected, then the inclusion XI ãÑ XI 1 induces an isomorphism on π1 . Knowing that the direct limit of this system is a contractible space allows us to compute the finiteness properties of the kernel of φ. Theorem 5.7 (Bestvina-Brady, [2], Theorem 4.1). Let f : X Ñ R be a φequivariant Morse function and let H “ kerpφq. If all ascending and descending links are simply connected, then H is finitely presented (i.e. is of type F2 ). We would also like to have conditions which will allow us to deduce that H does not satisfy certain other finiteness properties. A well known result in this direction is: Proposition 5.8 (Brown, [6], p. 193). Let H be a group acting freely, properly, r i pX, Zq “ cellularly and cocompactly on a cell complex X. Assume further that H r 0 for 0 ď i ď n ´ 1 and that Hn pX, Zq is not finitely generated as a ZH-module. Then H is of type F Pn but not F Pn`1 . In [3], the above result was used to prove that a certain group is not of type F P3 . However in our theorems not all the links will satisfy the assumptions of [3, Theorem 4.7] and we require the following. 13  Theorem 5.9 (Kropholler, [9], Theorem 2.23). Let f : X Ñ R be a φ-equivariant Morse function and let H “ kerpφq. Suppose that for all vertices v the reduced homology of LkÒ pvq and LkÓ pvq is 0 in dimensions 0, . . . , n´1 and n`1. Further ` ˘ ` ˘ r n LkÒ pv 1 q ‰ 0 or H r n LkÓ pv 1 q ‰ 0 assume that there is a vertex v 1 such that H (possibly both). Then H is of type F Pn but not of type F Pn`1 . Finally, we prove a key theorem regarding ascending and descending links. Theorem 5.10. For i “ 1, 2 let Xi be a CAT(0) cube complex, Gi a group acting freely, properly and cocompactly on Xi , φi : Gi Ñ Z a surjective homomorphism and fi : Xi Ñ R a φi -equivariant Morse function. Then, there is a Morse function f : X1 ˆ X2 Ñ R such that ` ˘ LkÒ pv1 , v2 q, X1 ˆ X2 “ LkÒ pv1 , X1 q ˚ LkÒ pv2 , X2 q and ` ˘ LkÓ pv1 , v2 q, X1 ˆ X2 “ LkÓ pv1 , X1 q ˚ LkÓ pv2 , X2 q . We will prove the staement for ascending links, the proof for descending links is the same. The proof really relies on the following key lemma. Lemma 5.11. Let X be a CAT(0) cube complex with Morse function f . Then LkÒ pv, Xq is the full subcomplex of Lkpv, Xq spanned by the vertices in LkÒ pv, Xq. At first sight this does not appear to be an improvement, however, it allows for simple calculation of the ascending and descending links once the link of a vertex is known. Proof. Let v1 , . . . , vn be n pairwise adjacent vertices in LkÒ pv, Xq, proving that the simplex rv1 , . . . , vn s is in LkÒ pv, Xq will prove the claim. Let ei be the edge in X corresponding to vi . We must prove that v is a minimum for f restricted to c “ e1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ en . We note that since f extends to an affine map, c is foliated by level sets f ´1 ptq for t P R. Each of these level sets corresponds to a linear subspace of dimension n ´ 1 not containing any subcubes of dimension ą 0. When intersected with the cube c there are exactly two subspaces where the intersection is a single vertex. One of these corresponds to the minimum of f |c and the other to the maximum of f |c . One of these must be at the vertex mapping to v and this is the minimum. Proof of Theorem 5.10. We define a Morse function f : X1 ˆ X2 Ñ R by f px1 , x2 q “ f1 px1 q ` f2 px2 q. This satisfies all the conditions of being a Morse function and is φ-equivariant with respect to the map φpg1 , g2 q “ φ1 pg1 q`φ2 pg2 q. The link of a vertex pv1 , v2 q in X1 ˆ X2 is Lkpv1 , X1 q ˚ Lkpv2 , X2 q. It is easy to see that the ascending link is the full subcomplex spanned by LkÒ pv1 , X1 q \ LkÒ pv2 , X2 q Ă Lkpv1 , X1 q˚Lkpv2 , X2 q, which is equal to LkÒ pv1 , X1 q˚LkÒ pv2 , X2 q.  14  5.1  Groups of type Fn´1 but not Fn  In [?], Question 8.5 Brady asks whether there exist groups of type Fn´1 but not Fn which do not contain Z2 ; he notes that the known examples all contain Zn´2 . While we are not able to find examples without Z2 , we can drastically reduce the rank of a free abelian subgroup as shown by the following. Theorem B. For every positive integer n, there exists a group of type Fn´1 but not Fn that contains no abelian subgroups of rank greater than r n3 s. Proof. For our general construction, we require 4-tuples pGi , Xi , φi , fi q for i “ 1, 2, 3, where: • Gi is a hyperbolic group, • Xi is a CAT(0) cube complex with a free cocompact Gi action, • φi : Gi Ñ Z is a surjective homomorphism, • fi is a φi -equivariant Morse function. We also require that all ascending and descending links of fi are pi ´ 2qconnected but at least one is not pi ´ 1q-connected. The existence of such a Morse function would show by Theorem 5.9 that Gi has a subgroup of type Fi´1 not Fi , namely kerpφi q. Let G1 be a free group of rank 2, X1 a 4-valent tree (the Cayley graph of Gi with respect to generators a and b), φ1 the exponent sum homomorphism with respect to a and b, and f1 the map that is linear on edges and whose restriction to the vertices of X1 is φ1 . Let pG2 , X2 , φ2 , f2 q be the group, classifying space, homomorphism and Morse function from Proposition 3.2. Let pG3 , X3 , φ3 , f3 q be the group, classifying space, homomorphism and Morse function from [3]. We could also use the examples of groups from [9, 11]. An important point to note is that for i “ 1, 2, 3, the ascending and descending links for pGi , Xi , φi , fi q are isomorphic to S i´1 . Now let n be an integer, let l “ t n3 u, and let pGl , Xl , φl , fl q be the 4-tuple with l l ź ź Gl “ G3 , Xl “ X3 , i“1  φl “  l ÿ  i“1  φ3 , fl “  i“1  l ÿ  f3 .  i“1  By Theorem 5.10 the ascending and descending links of fl are ˚li“1 S 2 “ S 3l´1 which is p3l ´ 2q-connected but not p3l ´ 1q-connected. If n ” 0 mod 3, then 3l “ n, and we define G “ Gl . If not, let m be the residue of n mod 3 and consider the 4-tuple pG “ Gl ˆ Gm , X “ Xl ˆ Xm , φ “ φl ` φm , f “ fl ` fm q. The φ-equivariant Morse function f on the cube complex X has ascending and descending links that are all copies of S n´1 . In all cases, Kerpφq is of type Fn´1 not Fn by Theorem 5.9. The group G contains no free abelian subgroups of rank greater than r n3 s since Gi as a hyperbolic group contains no copy of Z2 .  15  6  Subgroups of type F P2 that cannot be finitely presented  We will now apply our branched covering technique with carefully chosen flag complexes Γ to prove the following. Theorem A. There exists a non positively curved space X such that π1 pXq contains no subgroups isomorphic to Z3 , which contains a subgroup of type F P2 not F2 . We will do this using the following steps. 1. Start with a connected 2-dimensional tripartite flag complex L such that π1 pLq is a perfect group with the the link of every vertex connected and not a point. Take an auxiliary complex Γ “ RpLq. Then build the complex KΓ in Section 2.2.1. 2. Define a function f : KΓ Ñ S 1 which lifts to a Morse function on universal covers. Examine the ascending and descending links of this Morse function. 3. Take a branched covering of KΓ as in Section 4 to get a complex X with an associated Morse function. Examine the ascending and descending links of this Morse function. This will show that the kernel of f˚ is of type F P2 . 4. Prove that the kernel of f˚ is not finitely presented.  6.1  The complex RpLq  The construction of this complex is required, the key point of this complex is that it satisfies Proposition 6.4. This is required to make sure that the fundamental group of the links is not changed in the branching process. Firstly, we prove that none of the assumptions from the first step are restrictive. We can realise any finitely presented group as the fundamental group of a finite connected 2-dimensional simplicial complex. It is also well known that the barycentric subdivision of a 2-dimensional simplicial complex is flag and we can put an obvious tripartite structure, on the barycentric subdivision, labelling vertices by the dimension of the corresponding cell. So we can realise any group as the fundamental group of a connected 2-dimensional tripartite flag complex. Given a connected 2-dimensional tripartite flag complex there is a homotopy equivalent complex of the same form such that the link of every vertex is connected and not a point. To see this, first note that if there is a vertex where the link is just a single point, then we can contract this edge without changing the homotopy type of the complex. Next, note that if there is a vertex x with disconnected link, then we perform the following procedure: pick two vertices v, w in two different components of the link, add an extra vertex y and connect it to v, w and x while also adding two triangles rv, y, xs and ru, y, xs. The result is that we have reduced the number of components of the link at x, without adding any extra components to the link of v or w, and the link of y is connected. We have also not changed the homotopy type, since we have added a contractible space glued  16  along a contractible subspace. Repeating this procedure, we can make sure that the link of every vertex is connected. Definition 6.1. For a simplicial complex L the octahedralisation SpLq is defined as follows. For each vertex v of L, let Sv0 “ tv ` , v ´ u be a copy of S 0 . For every simplex σ of L take Sσ “ ˚vPσ Sv0 . If τ ă σ, then there is a natural map Sτ Ñ Sσ . SpLq “ YσăL Sσ { „, where the equivalence relations „ is generated by the inclusions Sτ Ñ Sσ . The complex SpLq can also be seen as the link of the vertex in the Salvetti complex for the RAAG defined by L. If L has an n-partite structure then there is a natural n-partite structure on SpLq. Let L be contained in V1 ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ Vn . Then SpLq is contained in SpV1 q ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ SpVn q. Remark 4. The map defined by Sv0 Ñ tvu extends to a retraction of SpLq to L (not a deformation retraction). In particular, if π1 pLq ‰ 0, then π1 pSpLqq ‰ 0. It is proved in [2] that if L is a flag complex, then SpLq is a flag complex. Lemma 6.2. Assume L is a connected simplicial complex and Lkpv, Lq is connected and not equal to a point for all vertices v P L. If H1 pLq “ 0, then H1 pSpLqq “ 0. Proof. Let L` be the full subcomplex of SpLq spanned by the set tv ` : v P Lu, and let L´ be defined similarly. Let N ` be the interior of the star of L` and N ´ the interior of the star of L´ . It is clear that SpLq is contained in N ´ YN ` . We can also see that N ` X N ´ is the union of the open simplices which are contained in neither L` nor L´ . Here we are using the fact that N ` is homotopy equivalent to L and similarly N ´ is homotopy equivalent to L. By considering the Mayer-Vietoris sequence for N ´ and N ` we see that H1 pSpLqq is isomorphic to H̃0 pN ` X N ´ q, so we must prove that N ` X N ´ is connected. Let x, y be points of N ` XN ´ . We can always connect x and y to open edges contained in N ` X N ´ ; label these edges ex and ey . Let vx be the end point of ex in L` and wx the end point in L´ ; define vertices vy and wy similarly. Let v “ pvx “ v0 , v1 , . . . , vn “ vy q be a sequence of vertices in L` corresponding to a geodesic in Lp1q from vx to vy . The vertices wx and wy have corresponding vertices in L` , these are adjacent to vx and vy respectively. We split into 4 cases by whether these vertices are on the geodesic v. We will define a path P in each of these four cases. 1. If wx “ v1 and wy “ vn´1 , then let P “ v0 , v1 , . . . , vn . 2. If wx “ v1 and wy ‰ vn´1 , then let P “ v0 , v1 , . . . , vn , wy . 3. If wx ‰ v1 and wy “ vn´1 , then let P “ wx , v0 , v1 , . . . , vn . 4. If wx ‰ v1 and wy ‰ vn´1 , then let P “ wx , v0 , v1 , . . . , vn , wx . We will now describe how to get a sequence of edges ex “ e0 , . . . , em “ ey such that ei , ei`1 are on a 2-simplex in L. The corresponding sequence of edges in N ` X N ´ will give a path from ex to ey . Thus completing the proof of the lemma.  17  b1  b3  b2  a1  a3  a2  Figure 5: The key idea from Lemma 6.2. A path in the link of a vertex v can be viewed as a sequence of edges in L such that adjacent edges are on a 2-simplex. We will relabel the path P to a1 , b1 , . . . . Let Ai be a path in the link of bi from ai to ai`1 . Let Bi be a path in the link of ai from bi to bi`1 . This can be done since the link of every vertex is connected. The sequence of edges A1 , B2 , A2 , . . . defines the sequence of edges we require. The key idea is encapsulated in Figure 5, where the curved arcs correspond to the paths Ai , Bi . We can now define the complex RpLq. 1. Let L be a 2-dimensional tripartite flag complex with π1 pLq perfect, such that the link of every vertex in L is connected and not a point. Label the sets of vertices from the tripartite structure V0 , V1 , V2 . 2. Construct SpLq as above. This is a 2-dimensional tripartite flag complex with π1 pLq perfect. 3. Add 3 extra vertices v 0 , v 1 , v 2 which are of type 0, 1, 2 respectively. Connect v i to all the vertices not of type i. Define RpLq to be the flag completion of the resulting complex. Take a simplicial complex L as above and let Γ “ RpLq. We can now construct the cubical complex KΓ from Section 2.2.1.  6.2  The Morse function f  As noted in Remark 3, we can view KΓ as a subcomplex of Θ1 ˆ Θ2 ˆ Θ3 , where Θi is a graph that has two vertices 0, 1 and has edges labelled by the vertices of Γ as well as one extra edge labelled v0i , such that each edge runs from 0 to 1. We define a Morse function on the product by putting an orientation on each edge of Θi as follows: if it is an edge corresponding to a vertex of SpLq Ă Γ we orient it towards 1, while for the vertices v i and v0i we orient towards 0. Now put an orientation on S 1 and map each graph by its orientation; we then extend linearly across cubes. Restricting this map to KΓ we get a map g, and by lifting to universal covers we get a Morse function f : K̃Γ Ñ R which is g˚ -equivariant. Let the vertices of type i in SpLq Ă Γ be the set Vi` and let Vi´ “ tv i , v0i u “: 0 Si . 18  a4  Vertex p0, 0, 0q p0, 0, 1q p0, 1, 0q p0, 1, 1q p1, 0, 0q p1, 0, 1q p1, 1, 0q p1, 1, 1q  LkÒ ΓpV1` Y V2` Y V3` q “ SpLq ΓpV1` Y V2` q ˚ S30 ΓpV1` Y V3` q ˚ S20 V1` ˚ S20 ˚ S30 ΓpV2` Y V3` q ˚ S10 V2` ˚ S10 ˚ S30 V3` ˚ S10 ˚ S20 2 S “ S10 ˚ S20 ˚ S30  LkÓ S 2 “ S10 ˚ S20 ˚ S30 V3` ˚ S10 ˚ S20 V2` ˚ S10 ˚ S30 ΓpV2` Y V3` q ˚ S10 V1` ˚ S20 ˚ S30 ΓpV1` Y V3` q ˚ S20 ΓpV1` Y V2` q ˚ S30 ` ΓpV1 Y V2` Y V3` q “ SpLq  Table 1: The ascending and descending links of the Morse function f : KΓ Ñ S 1 . The ascending and descending links of this Morse function are given in Table 1. Notation 6.3. Given a simplicial complex Λ and a subset S of the vertices of Λ, ΛpSq denotes the full subcomplex of Λ spanned by the vertices in S. Proposition 6.4. Given a complex of the form Vi` ˚Vj´ ˚Sk0 or ΓpVi` YVj` q˚Sk0 there is an ordering v1 , v2 , . . . , vq on the set Vjs such that Stpvm qXpYlăm Stpvl qq is connected and π1 pStpvm q X pYlăm Stpvl qqq ‰ 0 for 1 ă m ď q. Proof. In the case Vjs “ Vj´ “ Sj0 we have 2 vertices v1 and v2 and Stpv1 q X Stpv2 q “ Sk0 ˚ Vi` , which is connected but not simply connected. So either ordering will do. In the case Vjs “ Vj` , let Vj “ tw1 , . . . , wn u and Vj` “ tw1` , w1´ , w2` , . . . , wn´ u. The subgraph Z “ LpVi Y Vj q is connected since L is connected and the link of every vertex is connected and not a point. We can thus assume that Stpwl , Zq X pYmăl Stpwm qq ‰ H. Noting that Stpv s , SpLqq “ CpSpLkpv, Lqqq. We can see that Stpv s , SpLqq X Stpwt , SpLqq “ SpStpv, LqXStpw, Lqq. Thus ordering Vj` “ tw1` , w1´ , w2` , . . . , wn´ u we can see that Vi` X Stpvl , SpLqq X pYmăl Stpvm , SpLqqq contains at least two points. Noting that ¯¯ ´ ´ ¯ ´ ď ď Stpvl , SpLqqXp Stpvm , SpLqqq “ Vi` X Stpvl , SpLqq X Stpvm , SpLqq ˚Sk0 măl  măl  we can see that this is connected but not simply connected. Remark 5. In the above proof we are gluing contractible complexes along connected complexes. This shows that all the complexes in the statement of Proposition 6.4 are simply connected. Remark 6. At each stage in the above proof Stpvl , SpLqq X pYmăl Stpvm , SpLqqq could be covered by cycles of length 4, since it is the join of a discrete set and a copy of S 0 .  19  6.3  Almost hyperbolisation and the Morse function h : X Ñ S1  We use the almost hyperbolisation technique from Section 4 to get a branched cover X of KΓ , recall that there is a natural length preserving map b : X Ñ KΓ . We define a function h “ g ˝ b : X Ñ S 1 , lifting to universal covers we get a Morse function. In what follows G is the fundamental group of X which does not contain any copies of Z3 . In what follows, H :“ kerph˚ : G Ñ Zq. It is worth noting that in the almost hyperbolisation procedure we ensured that loops of length 4 in the link of a vertex have connected preimage. 6.3.1  Ascending and descending links of h  Recall that KΓ Ă Θ1 ˆ Θ2 Θ3 . We distinguish between 4 types of vertices in X and label them as follows: Vertices of type A are those which map to p0, 0, 0q or p1, 1, 1q. Vertices of type B are those which map to p0, 0, 1q or p1, 0, 1q. Vertices of type C are those which map to p1, 0, 0q or p1, 1, 0q. Vertices of type D are those which map to p0, 1, 0q or p0, 1, 1q. For a vertex in X the ascending (descending) link is the preimage of the ascending (descending) link of the corresponding vertex in KΓ . Type A vertices are disjoint from the branching locus, so a small neighbourhood of each lifts to X and the ascending and descending links are isomorphic to those of the corresponding vertex of KΓ . We claim that for vertices not of type A the ascending and descending links are simply connected. We will prove this in the case of a vertex of type B and the ascending link; the other cases are similar. A vertex x of type B is on a lift of Θ1 . We may assume that x maps to p0, 0, 1q. Now, LkÒ p0, 0, 1q “ ΓpV1` Y V2` q ˚ S30 . Let us consider the preimage of LkÒ p0, 0, 1q in Lkpx, Xq. To envisage this, we start by removing the vertices in V1 and taking the covering of the remaining space coming from the derivative map b˚ of b, then add back the vertices of V1 . By Remark 5 we can cover ΓpV1` Y V2` q ˚ S30 by Stpvq as v runs over vertices in V1` . We noted in Remark 6 that we can construct this cover in such a way that each Stpvm q X pYlăm Stpvl qq is connected and covered by loops of length 4 with non-empty intersection. Specifically, if S41 and S411 are 2 loops of length 4 in Stpvm q X pYlăm Stpvl qq, then S41 X S411 Ą S30 . In the procedure of passing to the branched covering b : X Ñ KΓ . Associated to each vertex of X there is a derivative map bLkpvq : Lkpv, Xq Ñ Lkpbpvq, KΓ q. Each of the 4 cycles above has connected preimage under the map bLkpvq , therefore the preimage of Stpvm q X pYlăm Stpvl qq is connected. Upon taking the completion, we replace the vertices in V1` ; this corresponds to coning off the lifts of their links. Thus we see LkÒ pxq is made from a sequence of contractible spaces glued along connected subspaces, and so is simply connected.  6.4  Proof that the kernel is not finitely presented  To prove that H is not finitely presented we need the following lemma. Lemma 6.5. π1 pXI q ‰ 0 for all compact intervals I Ă R  20  ĂΓ . In our case Γ: “ S 2 and Proof. For the purposes of this proof let Y “ K Γ˚ “ RpLq. By Theorem 2.17 we know that the kernel of g˚ is not finitely presented. Since the kernel of g˚ acts cocompactly on the level set YI we can see that YI is not simply connected. Let γ : S 1 Ñ YI be a non-trivial loop. Then there is a larger interval J 1 such that γ is trivial in YJ 1 . Let J 1 “ ra, bs. We can assume that γ is non-trivial in J “ ra ` , bs or J “ ra, b ´ s for all  ą 0; assume the latter. There is a sequence of vertices v1 , v2 , . . . such that YJ 1 “ YJ Y CpLkÒ pvi qq. There is an integer m such that γ is trivial in YJ Yiďm CpLkÒ pvi qq but not trivial in xJ . YJ Yiăm CpLkÒ pvi qq “ Y Since adding CpLkÒ pxm qq changes the fundamental group (γ becomes trivxJ which is also contained in LkÒ pxm q. ial), we can find a non-trivial loop γ̂ in Y We also know that it is contained in YJ since LkÒ pvi q X LkÒ pvj q “ H whenever i ‰ j, as the restriction of an affine map to a cube can only have one maximum and one minimum or it is constant on a subcube. Since adding CpLkÒ pxm qq changes π1 , we see that π1 pLkÒ pxm qq ‰ 0, so xm is a vertex mapping to p0, 0, 0q and γ̂ bounds a disc in Y which does not intersect L̃. It follows that this disc lifts to X̃ under the branched covering b̃ coming from the following commutative diagram: X̃  b̃  Y  X  b  KΓ  The boundary of this lifted disc is in XJ ; call this loop µ. If µ bounded a disc in XJ , then we could map this to YJ via b̃, but this would imply that b̃pµq “ γ̂ bounds a disc in YJ , which it does not. Thus µ is non-trivial in π1 pXJ q ‰ 1. Since π1 pXI q Ñ π1 pXJ q is surjective we deduce by Theorem 5.7 that π1 pXI q ‰ 1. Theorem 6.6. H “ kerpg˚ q is not finitely presentable. Proof. Assume that H is finitely presented. H acts cocompactly on XI so we can add finitely many 2-cells to the quotient to gain fundamental group H. Taking a universal cover of the space obtained in this way we arrive at XI with finitely many H-orbits of 2-cells attached, which is simply connected. In other words, there are finitely many H-orbits of loops which generate π1 pXI q. The direct limit of all the XI is the space X which is CAT(0) and in particular contractible. We can pass to a larger interval such that the H-orbits of loops which generate π1 pXI q are trivial. In other words, the map π1 pXI q Ñ π1 pXJ q is trivial. But it is also surjective by Theorem 5.7 and because we have assumed that all the ascending and descending links are connected. Thus π1 pXJ q is trivial, however we know this not to be the case by Lemma 6.5.  References [1] I. Agol. The virtual Haken conjecture. Doc. Math., 18:1045–1087, 2013. With an appendix by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning. 21  [2] M. Bestvina and N. Brady. Morse theory and finiteness properties of groups. Invent. Math., 129(3):445–470, 1997. [3] N. Brady. Branched Coverings of Cubical Complexes and Subgroups of Hyperbolic Groups. J. Lond. Math. Soc., 60(2):461–480, 1999. [4] M. R. Bridson. On the existence of flat planes in spaces of nonpositive curvature. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 123(1):223– 223, January 1995. [5] M. R. Bridson and A. Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. [6] K. S. Brown. Cohomology of Groups, volume 87 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer New York, New York, NY, 1982. [7] M. Gromov. Hyperbolic Groups. In S. S. Chern, I. Kaplansky, C. C. Moore, I. M. Singer, and S. M. Gersten, editors, Essays in Group Theory, volume 8, pages 75–263. Springer New York, 1987. [8] F. Haglund and D. T. Wise. Special cube complexes. Geom. Funct. Anal., 17(5):1551–1620, 2008. [9] R. Kropholler. Hyperbolic groups with almost finitely presented subgroups. In Preparation, 2015. [10] Ian J. Leary. Uncountably many groups of type $FP$. arXiv:1512.06609 [math], December 2015. arXiv: 1512.06609. [11] Yash Lodha. A hyperbolic group with a finitely presented subgroup that is not of type FP3, page 67?81. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Press, 2017. [12] D. T. Wise. The Structure of Groups with a Quasiconvex Hierarchy. 2011.  22

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
