Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_2123

Abstract:
arXiv:1611.04479v1 [math.AC] 14 Nov 2016  Giesbrecht’s algorithm, the HFE cryptosystem and Ore’s ps-polynomials Robert S. Coulter∗  George Havas  Marie Henderson  Abstract We report on a recent implementation of Giesbrecht’s algorithm for factoring polynomials in a skew-polynomial ring. We also discuss the equivalence between factoring polynomials in a skew-polynomial ring and decomposing ps -polynomials over a finite field, and how Giesbrecht’s algorithm is outlined in some detail by Ore in the 1930’s. We end with some observations on the security of the Hidden Field Equation (HFE) cryptosystem, where p-polynomials play a central role.  1  Introduction and Background  Let Fq denote the finite field with q = pe elements, p a prime. We use F∗q to denote the non-zero elements of Fq . The polynomial ring in an indeterminate X over any field K will be denoted by K[X] and for f, g ∈ K[X], f ◦ g = f (g) represents the composition of f with g. We recall that a permutation polynomial is a polynomial which permutes the elements of the finite field under evaluation. A p-polynomial (sometimes called an additive or linearised polynomial) is a polynomial L ∈ Fq [X] of the shape X i L(X) = ai X p i  with ai ∈ Fq . More specifically, for any integer s, a ps -polynomial is a ppolynomial where ai = 0 whenever i is not a multiple of s. We note that ps -polynomials are closed under composition (this is simply established). The problem of completely decomposing a polynomial f ∈ K[X] into indecomposable factors, where K is a field, has a long and rich history. When K is the complex plane, Ritt [23] showed that there exists an essentially unique decomposition for any chosen polynomial. It is unique in the sense that for any f ∈ K[X] in a complete decomposition of f : the number of factors is invariant; ∗ author now at Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 19716, U.S.A. A version of this paper appeared in the Proceedings of the 5th ASCM, 2001, pages 36–45, but is not widely available.  1  and the degrees of the factors are unique up to permutation. So, if we have two complete decompositions f = f1 ◦ · · · ◦ fm = g1 ◦ · · · ◦ gn , then m = n and deg(fi ) = deg(gπ(i) ) for some permutation π of {1, . . . , m}. Any class of polynomials defined over a field for which this property holds is commonly said to satisfy Ritt’s theorem. The generalisation of Ritt’s theorem to all fields of characteristic zero was carried out by Engstrom[10], and Levi[18]. However, for fields of non-zero characteristic, the situation is not so clearcut. A polynomial is called wild if its degree is divisible by the characteristic p, and tame otherwise. Any non-linear ps -polynomial is therefore a wild polynomial. A distinction between the behaviour of wild and tame polynomials arises when one considers Ritt’s theorem in the context of a finite field. Fried and MacRae[11] showed that any tame polynomial satisfies Ritt’s theorem. However, Dorey and Whaples[9] gave an example which showed that not all wild polynomials satisfied Ritt’s Theorem. Other properties (not discussed in this article) of tame and wild polynomials are also distinct. However, not all wild polynomials deviate from tame polynomial behaviour. Specific to this question, Ore[19] showed in the 1930’s that p-polynomials satisfy Ritt’s theorem. It is interesting to note that p-polynomials over a finite field appear to be the second class of polynomials shown to satisfy Ritt’s theorem, after Ritt had established the complex field case. This was not noted by Ore but is evident from his work: see Ore[19] (Chapter 2, Theorem 4) which gives a statement equivalent to Ritt’s theorem for p-polynomials. A further class of wild polynomials, known as (ps , d)-polynomials (or, sub-linearised polynomials) can be shown to satisfy Ritt’s theorem by using results of Henderson and Matthews[15]. Exponential-time algorithms for determining the complete decomposition of polynomials were first given by Alagar and Thanh[1], and Barton and Zippel[2]. The first polynomial-time algorithm was published by Kozen and Landau[17], and separately by Gutierrez, Recio and Ruiz de Velasco[14]. These results were improved for the tame case over a finite field by von zur Gathen[12]. A general purpose polynomial-time algorithm for finding a complete decomposition of a rational function over an arbitrary field was given by Zippel[26]. This last algorithm provides a method for decomposing any polynomial, wild or tame, over a finite field. However, one should note that in the wild case, the algorithm simply finds any complete decomposition, as there does not necessarily exist an essentially unique decomposition.  2  Although p-polynomials were the first polynomials over a finite field shown to satisfy Ritt’s theorem, they are the latest class of polynomials for which a polynomial-time decomposition algorithm has been given. The algorithm we refer to was described and analysed by Giesbrecht[13]. Giesbrecht presents his algorithm in terms of factoring in skew-polynomial rings but it is well known (and we later show) that the problem he considers is equivalent to decomposing p-polynomials over a finite field. We note that any decomposition algorithm for ps -polynomials can be adapted, at no computational cost, to decomposing (ps , d)-polynomials. For (p, d)-polynomials this was shown by the authors[5], following earlier work of Henderson and Matthews[15]. This can be extended to all (ps , d)-polynomials using the work of Ore[19]. This subject is covered in another paper under preparation by the authors. In this article, we report on a successful implementation of Giesbrecht’s algorithm, making some specific comments concerning the probabilistic part of the algorithm. We also recall the work of Oystein Ore, showing how Giesbrecht’s algorithm is equivalent to an algorithm described by Ore sixty years earlier. We also consider implications of Ore’s work to the security of the Hidden Field Equations (HFE) cryptosystem.  2  Giesbrecht’s algorithm and the work of Ore  Giesbrecht[13] introduces a probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm for obtaining a complete (essentially unique) factorisation of a polynomial in some classes of skew-polynomial ring defined over a finite field. This problem is intimately connected to the problem of determining an essentially unique complete decomposition of p-polynomials, a class of wild polynomials. In fact, there is a one-one correspondence between factoring in a particular skew-polynomial ring over a finite field and decomposing ps -polynomials over a finite field. The skew-polynomial ring Fq [Y ; σ], where Y is an indeterminate and σ is an automorphism of Fq , is a ring of polynomials with the usual componentwise addition, and with multiplication defined by Y a = σ(a)Y for any a ∈ Fq (we simply use juxtaposition to represent multiplication in Fq [X] and Fq [Y ; σ]). s Since σ is an automorphism of Fq , we must have σ(a) = ap for some integer s. Given the definition of multiplication above, it is easily seen that the skewpolynomial ring Fq [Y ; σ] is isomorphic to the ring of ps -polynomials over Fq with the operations of polynomial addition and composition. Explicitly, the required isomorphism Φ satisfies Φ(X p ) ◦ Φ(aX) = Y a = ap Y = Φ(ap X p ). From this it follows that composition of ps -polynomials acts in exactly the same manner as multiplication in the skew-polynomial ring Fq [Y, σ]. The theory introduced by Giesbrecht[13] is developed in its entirety in the works of Ore[19, 20, 21]. It may be more efficient to implement Giesbrecht’s algorithm using the ps -polynomial representation of the ring rather than the skew-polynomial ring representation as set out in Giesbrecht’s article but this is yet to be tested. While Giesbrecht refers to Ore[20], it is in Ore’s other two papers that he develops the algorithm which Giesbrecht has rediscovered.  3  Giesbrecht’s key contribution is to find a way of computing the crucial step, which is to find non-zero zero divisors in a small algebra. He does this by using what he refers to as Eigen rings. Ore[19] discusses the same method in Chapter 2, Section 6 where he uses invariant rings. In particular, Ore’s Theorem 12 of that section is the key idea in Giesbrecht’s algorithm. Of course, Ore develops his theory in terms of ps -polynomials rather than skew-polynomial rings. Ore obtains these results using an earlier paper, Ore[20], where he developed theory on factoring and primality of polynomials in more general skew-polynomial rings than discussed here. The problem of developing an algorithm for factoring polynomials over any skew-polynomial ring remains open. Recently, a successful implementation of Giesbrecht’s algorithm was produced by Larissa Meinecke at the University of Queensland using the Magma[4] algebra package. There is one step in Giesbrecht’s algorithm which is probabilistic in nature, the rest of the algorithm is strictly deterministic. Giesbrecht gives a lower bound for the probability of this step being successful as 1/9. We have carried out some testing regarding this step which suggests this lower bound is very conservative. While we have been unable to determine a worstcase scenario, in almost all cases tested, the step has been successful on the first attempt.  3  HFE and p-polynomials  The Hidden Field Equation (HFE) cryptosystem was introduced by Patarin[22]. HFE is a public key cryptosystem and can be described as follows: 1. Choose a finite field Fq , q = pe , and a basis (β1 , . . . , βe ) for Fq over Fp . 2. Select a polynomial D of “relatively small degree” with the shape X i j aij X p +p D(X) = i,j  where aij ∈ Fq for all i, j. 3. Choose two p-polynomials, S and T , that permute Fq . 4. Calculate E(X) = S ◦ D ◦ T (X) mod (X q − X). 5. Calculate n1 , . . . , ne ∈ Fp [X1 , . . . , Xe ] satisfying E(X) =  e X  βi ni (X1 , . . . , Xe )  i=1  and publish Fq and the ni , 1 ≤ i ≤ e. The polynomials S, T and D are the secret keys. If someone wishes to send a message m to the owner of E(X), then they simply calculate E(m) = y and send y. Decryption is carried out by performing the 4  following steps. As S and T are permutation polynomials, they have functional and compositional (modulo X q − X) inverses. As S and T are known to the owner, they can determine the inverse polynomials modulo X q − X (note that these inverses are also p-polynomials). Thus the recipient of the message y knows S, D, T , S −1 and T −1 . They determine z satisfying S −1 (y) = z = D(T (m)). Next they determine any m1 ∈ Fq so that D(m1 ) = z. Once m1 is chosen they determine m = T −1 (m1 ). The middle step is only computationally feasible because the degree of D is chosen to be “small”. The security of the system relies on the assumption that if deg(E) is large, then solving for m in E(m) = y is computationally infeasible. Note that several m1 ∈ Fq may need to be tried to find a “sensible” message m. This is because D is not necessarily chosen to be a permutation of Fq as the authors of HFE assumed that this may be too difficult. However, Blokhuis et al.[3] have since given examples of permutation polynomials from this class. Note that it makes no difference whether the polynomial E or the set of e polynomials ni is published if the basis used is known. In fact, an attacker need not know the basis chosen as they may choose any basis to reconstruct a different, but effectively equivalent encryption function (see the discussion below). If E is constructed from the e polynomials ni using a different basis, alternative secret keys S, T and D may be obtained and used to decipher messages. The HFE system is one of a family of cryptosystems which use functional composition. Recently, some general attacks for these systems were developed by Ye, Dai and Lam[25]. An attack which targets HFE specifically has been published by Kipnis and Shamir[16]. This is general in nature and is quite successful, but does not break HFE in all cases. This attack has since been improved by Courtois[7]. Polynomials with the shape D are known as Dembowski-Ostrom (DO) polynomials, see Dembowski[8], Coulter and Matthews[6] and Blokhuis et al.[3]. For any p-polynomial L ∈ Fq [X] and any DO polynomial D ∈ Fq [X], L◦D and D◦L are both DO polynomials. In other words, DO polynomials are closed under composition with p-polynomials. Also, it can be established that the reduction of a DO polynomial modulo X q − X is again a DO polynomial. The HFE description given above works in exactly the same way as that given by Patarin[22] precisely because of the above comments, coupled with the well known fact that any function over Fq can be represented by a polynomial in Fq [X] of degree less than q and a well known result concerning linear operators (discussed below). Kipnis and Shamir[16] note several problems an attacker faces when they consider this scheme. We address some of their concerns here. In the original description of HFE, two linear transformations (or linear operators) over the vector space Fep are chosen, rather than two linearised polynomials as described above. Kipnis and Shamir comment that “these mixing operations have natural interpretation over Fp but not over Fpe , and it is not clear apriori that the e published polynomials over Fp can be described by a single univariate polynomial G over Fpe ”. In fact, there is a natural interpretation. Roman[24] (pages 184-5) shows that every linear operator on Fep can be represented by a linearised polynomial over Fpe . So the description of HFE as given above is equivalent. 5  As DO polynomials are closed under composition with linearised polynomials and their reduction modulo X q − X still results in a DO, we are guaranteed that the published polynomials can be described by a single univariate polynomial: it must be a DO. Kipnis and Shamir continue “Even if it exists (a single univariate polynomial), it may have an exponential number of coefficients, and even if it is sparse, it may have an exponentially large degree which makes it practically unsolvable”. As the resulting polynomial is a DO polynomial, it has O(e2 ) terms (compare to a random polynomial which has O(pe ) terms), which is not exponential. Certainly, the degree may be large. It remains our objective, then, of finding a method of reducing the size of the degree. We can make more comments concerning the univariate description of HFE given above. Let E(X) be the public key, which is a DO polynomial. Suppose we can determine p-polynomials L1 and L2 which are permutation polynomials and satisfy L1 ◦ f ◦ L2 = E. Clearly, f must also be a DO polynomial. Then we can decrypt any message sent to the owner of E using exactly the same method used to decrypt in the standard way, but using the polynomials L1 , L2 and f , providing the degree of f is sufficiently small. Of course, it may not be possible to determine p-polynomials that permute Fq which are left or right decompositional factors of E(X). However, when considering this problem, the following result by Coulter and Matthews[6], immediately draws our attention. For any a ∈ Fq and any polynomial t ∈ Fq [X], define the difference polynomial of t with respect to a by ∆t,a (X) = t(X + a) − t(X) − t(a). Theorem 1 Let f ∈ Fq [X] with deg(f ) < q. The following conditions are equivalent. (i) f = D + L, where D is a Dembowski-Ostrom polynomial and L is a ppolynomial. (ii) For each a ∈ F∗q , ∆f,a = La where La is a p-polynomial depending on a. This result provides an alternative definition of DO polynomials and establishes an important connection between DO polynomials and p-polynomials. Let E be the published DO polynomial used in the HFE cryptosystem. We wish to find L1 , L2 and D satisfying E = L1 ◦ D ◦ L2 . For the remainder, we set f = D ◦ L2 so that E = L1 ◦ f and underline that f is also a DO polynomial. Our objective is to determine some information regarding L1 . By Theorem 1, ∆E,a is a p-polynomial for any choice of a. Moreover, we have ∆E,a (X) = E(X + a) − E(X) − E(a) = L1 (f (X + a)) − L1 (f (X)) − L1 (f (a)) = L1 (f (X + a) − f (X) − f (a)) = L1 ◦ ∆f,a . Thus for any non-zero choice of a, the polynomial L1 is a left decompositional factor of ∆E,a . Ore[20] shows that there exists a left and right decomposition algorithm similar to the well known greatest common divisor algorithm for a large class of non-commutative polynomial rings (note that, in general, commutativity for composition does not hold). He uses these results in Ore[19] to establish 6  and describe such algorithms for p-polynomials specifically. In particular, using a variant of the Euclidean algorithm, we can determine the Greatest Common Left-Decompositional Factor (GCLDF) of two p-polynomials. This suggests the following method of attack to determine the polynomial L1 . 1. Choose distinct elements a1 , a2 ∈ F∗q . 2. Calculate L(X) = GCLDF(∆E,a1 (X), ∆E,a2 (X)). 3. Test to see if L is a left decompositional factor of E. If it is, then L1 = L and we are done. 4. If L is not a left decompositional factor of E, then choose a new a ∈ F∗q , distinct from previous choices, and calculate L(X) = GCLDF(L(X), ∆E,a (X)). Return to Step 3. We make the following observations. Step 3 can be carried out in time O(logp (deg(E))) so has complexity much less than the Euclidean algorithm calculation required in step 2 or 4. Note also that as Ore’s work does not extend to DO polynomials, one cannot simply calculate GCLDF(L(X), E(X)) to obtain L1 . As mentioned, Giesbrecht’s algorithm determines a complete decomposition of a p-polynomial in probabilistic polynomial-time. However, this does not mean we can determine L1 methodically by completely decomposing L after step 2. Due to the nature of Ritt’s theorem, we are not guaranteed that in a full decomposition the proper factors of L1 would be determined strictly on the left. Further, the number of possible full decompositions is exponential in the number of indecomposable factors. We make no claims at this point concerning the number of GCLDF calculations required in step 4 to determine L1 . It may require O(q) such calculations, making the algorithm no better than exhaustive search. Finally, we note that this attack does not necessarily break HFE as the DO polynomial may not have a non-trivial GCLDF and even if it did then the resulting DO polynomial may not be of “sufficiently small” degree. We are undertaking further research to analyse this attack and to determine other methods of attacking HFE using the connections between the DO polynomial and ps -polynomial classes.  Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Australian Research Council.  References [1] V.S. Alagar and M. Thanh, Fast polynomial decomposition algorithms, Eurocal ’85 (B. Buchberger and B.F. Caviness, eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 204, 1985, pp. 150–153.  7  [2] D.R. Barton and R. Zippel, Polynomial decomposition algorithms, J. Symbolic Comput. 1 (1985), 159–168. [3] A. Blokhuis, R.S. Coulter, M. Henderson, and C.M. O’Keefe, Permutations amongst the Dembowski-Ostrom polynomials, Finite Fields and Applications: proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Finite Fields and Applications (D. Jungnickel and H. Niederreiter, eds.), 2001, pp. 37–42. [4] W. Bosma, J. Cannon, and C. Playoust, The Magma algebra system I: The user language, J. Symbolic Comput. 24 (1997), 235–265. [5] R.S. Coulter, G. Havas, and M. Henderson, Functional decomposition of a class of wild polynomials, J. Combin. Math. Combin. Comput. 28 (1998), 87–94. [6] R.S. Coulter and R.W. Matthews, Planar functions and planes of LenzBarlotti class II, Des. Codes Cryptogr. 10 (1997), 167–184. [7] N.T. Courtois, The security of Hidden Field Equations (HFE), Topics in Cryptology - CT - RSA (D.N. Naccache, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2020, 2001, pp. 266–281. [8] P. Dembowski and T.G. Ostrom, Planes of order n with collineation groups of order n2 , Math. Z. 103 (1968), 239–258. [9] F. Dorey and G. Whaples, Prime and composite polynomials, J. Algebra 28 (1974), 88–101. [10] H.T. Engstrom, Polynomial substitutions, Amer. J. Math. 63 (1941), 249– 255. [11] M.D. Fried and R.E. MacRae, On the invariance of chains of fields, Illinois J. Math. 13 (1969), 165–171. [12] J. von zur Gathen, Functional decomposition of polynomials: the tame case, J. Symbolic Computation 9 (1990), 281–299. [13] M. Giesbrecht, Factoring in skew-polynomial rings over finite fields, J. Symbolic Comput. 26 (1998), 463–486. [14] J. Gutierrez, T. Recio, and C. Ruiz de Velasco, A polynomial decomposition algorithm of almost quadratic complexity, AAECC 1988: proceedings (T. Mora, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 357, 1989, pp. 471– 476. [15] M. Henderson and R. Matthews, Composition behaviour of sub-linearised polynomials over a finite field, Finite Fields: Theory, Applications and Algorithms (R.C. Mullin and G.L. Mullen, eds.), Contemporary Mathematics, vol. 225, American Mathematical Society, 1999, pp. 67–75.  8  [16] A. Kipnis and A. Shamir, Cryptanalysis of the HFE public key cryptosytem by relinearization, Advances in Cryptology – Crypto ’99 (M. Wiener, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1666, 1999, pp. 19–30. [17] D. Kozen and S. Landau, Polynomial decomposition algorithms, J. Symbolic Computation 7 (1989), 445–456. [18] H. Levi, Composite polynomials with coefficients in an arbitrary field of characteristic zero, Amer. J. Math. 64 (1942), 389–400. [19] O. Ore, On a special class of polynomials, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 35 (1933), 559–584, Errata, ibid. 36, 275 (1934). [20] O. Ore, Theory of non-commutative polynomials, Annals of Math. 34 (1933), 480–508. [21] O. Ore, Contributions to the theory of finite fields, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 36 (1934), 243–274. [22] J. Patarin, Hidden fields equations (HFE) and isomorphisms of polynomials (IP): two new families of asymmetric algorithms, Advances in Cryptology – Eurocrypt ’96 (U. Maurer, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1070, 1996, pp. 33–48. [23] J.F. Ritt, Prime and composite polynomials, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 23 (1922), 51–66. [24] S. Roman, Field Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 158, Springer-Verlag, 1995. [25] D.F. Ye, Z.D. Dai, and K.Y. Lam, Decomposing attacks on asymmetric cryptography based on mapping compositions, J. Cryptology 14 (2001), 137– 150. [26] R. Zippel, Rational function decomposition, Proc. ACM Symp. Symbolic and Algebraic Computation, 1991, pp. 1–6.  9

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
