Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_2576

Abstract:
BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  arXiv:1710.08668v1 [cs.LO] 24 Oct 2017  YOTAM M. Y. FELDMAN, ODED PADON, NEIL IMMERMAN, MOOLY SAGIV, AND SHARON SHOHAM Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel e-mail address: yotam.feldman@gmail.com Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel UMass, Amherst, USA Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel  Abstract. We consider the problem of checking whether a proposed invariant ϕ expressed in first-order logic with quantifier alternation is inductive, i.e. preserved by a piece of code. While the problem is undecidable, modern SMT solvers can sometimes solve it automatically. However, they employ powerful quantifier instantiation methods that may diverge, especially when ϕ is not preserved. A notable difficulty arises due to counterexamples of infinite size. This paper studies Bounded-Horizon instantiation, a natural method for guaranteeing the termination of SMT solvers. The method bounds the depth of terms used in the quantifier instantiation process. We show that this method is surprisingly powerful for checking quantified invariants in uninterpreted domains. Furthermore, by producing partial models it can help the user diagnose the case when ϕ is not inductive, especially when the underlying reason is the existence of infinite counterexamples. Our main technical result is that Bounded-Horizon is at least as powerful as instrumentation, which is a manual method to guarantee convergence of the solver by modifying the program so that it admits a purely universal invariant. We show that with a bound of 1 we can simulate a natural class of instrumentations, without the need to modify the code and in a fully automatic way. We also report on a prototype implementation on top of Z3, which we used to verify several examples by Bounded-Horizon of bound 1.  Key words and phrases: Decidable Logic, Quantifier Instantiation, EPR, Inductive Invariants, Deductive Verification, Decision Procedures. ∗ A preliminary version of this paper appeared in [FPI+ 17].  LOGICAL METHODS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE  © Y.M.Y. Feldman, O. Padon, N. Immerman, M. Sagiv, and S. Shoham Creative Commons  DOI:10.2168/LMCS-???  1  2  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  1. Introduction This paper addresses a fundamental problem in automatic program verification: how to prove that a piece of code preserves a given invariant. In Floyd-Hoare style verification this means that we want to automatically prove the validity of the Hoare triple {P }C{P } where P is an assertion and C is a command. Often this is shown by proving the unsatisfiability of a formula of the form P (V ) ∧ δ(V, V 0 ) ∧ ¬P (V 0 ) (the verification condition) where P (V ) denotes the assertion P before the command, P (V 0 ) denotes the assertion P after the command, and δ(V, V 0 ) is a two-vocabulary formula expressing the meaning of the command C as a transition relation between pre- and post-states. When C is a loop body, such a P is an inductive invariant and can be used to prove safety properties of the loop (if it also holds initially and implies the desired property). For infinite-state programs, proving the validity of {P }C{P } is generally undecidable even when C does not include loops. Indeed, existing Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) solvers can diverge even for simple assertions and simple commands. Recent attempts to apply program verification to prove the correctness of critical system’s design and code [HHK+ 15] identify this as the main hurdle for using program verification. The difficulty is rooted in powerful constructs used in the SMT-based verification of interesting programs. Prominent among these constructs are arithmetic and other program operations modelled using background theories, and logical quantifiers. In this paper we target the verification of applications in which the problem can be modelled without interpreted theories. This is in line with recent works that show that although reasoning about arithmetic is crucial for low-level code, in many cases the verification of high-level programs and designs can be performed by reasoning about quantification in uninterpreted theories. Specifically, the decidable Effectively Propositional logic (EPR) has been successfully applied to application domains such as linked-list manipulation [IBI+ 13], Software-Defined Networks [BBG+ 14] and some distributed protocols [PMP+ 16, PLSS17]. Without interpreted theories it remains to address the complications induced by the use of quantifiers, and specifically by the use of alternating universal (∀) and existential (∃) quantifiers. In the presence of quantifier alternation, the solver’s ability to check assertions is hindered by the following issues: (1) An infinite search space of proofs that must be explored for correct assertions. A standard form of proofs with quantified formulas is instantiation, in which the solver attempts to replace universal quantifiers by a set of ground terms. The problem of exploring the inifnite set of candidates for instantiation is sometimes manifested in matching loops [DNS05]. (2) A difficulty of finding counterexamples for invalid assertions, notably when counterexamples may be of infinite size. Current SMT techniques often fail to produce models of satisfiable quantified formulas [GM09, RTG+ 13]. This is somewhat unfortunate since one of the main values of program verification is the early detection of flaws in designs and programs. The possibility of infinite counterexamples is a major complication in this task, as they are especially difficult to find. In uninterpreted domains, infinite counterexamples usually do not indicate a real violation and are counterintuitive to programmers, yet render assertions invalid in the context of general first-order logic (on which SMT proof techniques are based). Hence infinite counter-models pose a real problem in the verification process.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  3  Previous works on EPR-based verification [IBI+ 13, BBG+ 14, PMP+ 16] used universally quantified invariants with programs expressed by ∃∗ ∀∗ formulas (EPR programs)1. In that setting, checking inductive invariants is decidable, hence problems (1) and (2) do not occur. In particular, EPR enjoys the finite-model property, and so counterexamples are of finite size. EPR programs are in fact Turing-complete [PMP+ 16], but universal invariants are not always sufficient to express the program properties required for verification. For example, [HHK+ 15] describes a client-server scenario with the invariant that “For every reply message sent by the server, there exists a corresponding request message sent by a client”. (See Example 3.6 for further details.) This invariant is ∀∗ ∃∗ and thus leads to verification conditions with quantifier alternation. This kind of quantifier alternation may lead to divergence of the solver as problems (1) and (2) re-emerge. This paper aims to expand the applicability of the EPR-based verification approach to invariants of more complex quantification. We focus on the class of ∀∗ ∃∗ invariants. ∀∗ ∃∗ invariants arise in interesting programs, but, as we show, checking inductiveness of invariants in this class is undecidable. We thus study problems (1),(2) above for this setting using the notion of bounded quantifier instantiation, a technique we term Bounded-Horizon. Main results. This paper explores the utility of limited quantifier instantiations for checking ∀∗ ∃∗ invariants, and for dealing with the problems that arise from quantifier alternation: divergence of the proof search and infinite counter-models. We consider instantiations that are bounded in the depth of terms. Bounded instantiations trivially prevent divergence while maintaining soundness. Although for a given bound the technique is not complete, i.e. unable to prove every correct invariant, we provide completeness guarantees by comparing bounded instantiations to the method of instrumentation, a powerful technique implicitly employed in previous works [IBI+ 13, KBI+ 17, PMP+ 16]. Instrumentation tackles a ∀∗ ∃∗ invariant by transforming the program in a way that allows the invariant to be expressed using just universal quantifiers, and, accordingly, makes the verification conditions fall in EPR. We show that for invariants that can be proven using a typical form of instrumentation, bounded instantiations of a small bound are also complete, meaning they are sufficiently powerful to prove the original program without modifications and in a fully automatic way. This is encouraging since instrumentation is labor-intensive and error-prone while bounded instantiations are completely automatic. This result suggests that in many cases correct ∀∗ ∃∗ invariants of EPR programs can be proven using a simple proof technique. Typically in such cases existing tools such as Z3 will also manage to automatically prove the verification conditions. However, bounded instantiations guarantee termination a-priori even when the invariant is not correct. In this case, when the bounded instantiation procedure terminates, it returns a logical structure which satisfies all the bounded instantiations. This structures is not necessarily a true counterexample but “approximates” one. Interestingly, this capability suggests a way to overcome the problem of infinite models. This problem arises when the user provides an invariant that is correct for finite models but is not correct in general first-order logic. In such cases, state-of-the-art SMT solvers typically produce “unknown” or timeout as they fail to find infinite models. The user is thus left with very little aid from the solver when attempting to make progress and successfully verify the program. In contrast, bounded quantifier instantiation can be used to find finite models with increasing sizes, potentially 1 ∃∗ ∀∗ transition relations can be extracted from code by existing tools for C code manipulating linked  lists [IBI+ 13, IBR+ 14, KBI+ 17] and for the modeling language RML [PMP+ 16] which is Turing-complete.  4  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  indicating the existence of an infinite model, and provide hints as to the source of the error. This information allows the user to modify the program or the invariant to exclude the problematic models. We demonstrate this approach on a real example in which such a scenario occurred in one of our verification attempts. We show that the provided models assist in identifying and fixing the error, allowing the user to successfully verify the program. We also implemented a prototype tool that performs bounded instantiations of bound 1, and used it to verify several distributed protocols and heap-manipulating programs. The implementation efficiently reduces the problem of checking inductiveness with bound 1 to a Z3 satisfiability check on which the solver always terminates, thereby taking advantage of Z3’s instantiation techniques while guaranteeing termination. Outline. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides some technical background and notations. In Section 3 we define the Bounded-Horizon algorithm and discuss its basic properties. Section 4 defines the concept of instrumentation as used in this work, and shows that Bounded-Horizon with a low bound is at least as powerful. Section 5 relates instrumentation to bounded instantiation in the converse direction, showing that other forms of instrumentation can simulate quantifier instantiation of arbitrarily high depth. In Section 6 we show how bounded instantiations can be used to tackle the problem of infinite counterexamples to induction when the verification conditions are not valid. Section 7 describes our implementation of Bounded-Horizon of bound 1, and provides initial evaluation of its ability to prove some examples correct by bound 1 instantiation. Section 8 discusses related work, and Section 9 concludes. The discussion of the undecidability of checking inductiveness of ∀∗ ∃∗ invariants is deferred to Appendix A. 2. Preliminaries In this section we provide background and explain our notation. Σ will always denote a relational first-order vocabulary, which may contain constant symbols, ci , and relation symbols, rj , but no function symbols. For a formula ϕ we denote by const[ϕ] the set of constants that appear in ϕ. We write that ϕ ∈ ∃∗ (Σ) to mean that ϕ is an existential formula defined over vocabulary Σ. Similarly, the class of universal formulas is denoted by ∀∗ (Σ). We say that ϕ is quantifier-free, denoted ϕ ∈ QF(Σ) if it contains no quantifiers, and that it is alternation free, denoted ϕ ∈ AF(Σ), if it can be written as a Boolean combination of formulas in ∃∗ (Σ). FOL(Σ) stands for arbitrary first-order formulas over Σ. A term or formula is ground if it does not contain free variables. A sentence is a ground formula. EPR. The effectively-propositional (EPR) fragment of first-order logic, also known as the Bernays-Schönfinkel-Ramsey class, consists of ∃∗ ∀∗ (Σ) sentences. Such sentences enjoy the small model property; in fact, a satisfiable EPR sentence has a model of size no larger than the number of its constants plus existential quantifiers. Thus satisfiability of EPR sentences is decidable [Ram30]. EPR Transition Relation. We specify a transition relation via an EPR sentence, δ, over a vocabulary Σ ] Σ0 where Σ is a relational vocabulary used to describe the source (or pre-) state of a transition and Σ0 = {a0 | a ∈ Σ} is used to describe the target (or post-) state.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  5  Inductive Invariants. A first-order sentence I over Σ is an inductive invariant for δ if I ∧ δ → I 0 is valid, or, equivalently, if I ∧ δ ∧ ¬I 0 is unsatisfiable2, where I 0 results from substituting every constant and relation symbol in I by its primed version (i.e. I 0 ∈ FOL(Σ0 )). Counterexample to Induction. Given a first-order sentence I over Σ and transition relation δ (over Σ ] Σ0 ), a counterexample to induction is a structure A (over Σ ] Σ0 ) s.t. A |= I ∧ δ ∧ ¬I 0 . Skolemization. Let ϕ(z1 , . . . , zn ) ∈ FOL(Σ). The Skolemization of ϕ, denoted ϕS , is a universal formula over Σ ] ΣS , where ΣS consists of fresh constant symbols and function symbols, obtained as follows. We first convert ϕ to negation normal form (NNF) using the standard rules. For every existential quantifier ∃y that appears under the scope of the universal quantifiers ∀x1 , . . . , ∀xm , we introduce a fresh function symbol fy ∈ ΣS of arity n + m. We replace each bound occurrence of y by fy (z1 , . . . , zn , x1 , . . . , xm ), and remove the existential quantifier. If n + m = 0 (i.e., ϕ has no free variables and ∃y does not appear in the scope of a universal quantifier) a fresh constant symbol is used to replace y. It is well known that ϕS → ϕ is valid and ϕS and that ϕ are equi-satisfiable. 3. Bounded-Horizon In this section, we define a systematic method of quantifier instantiation called BoundedHorizon as a way of checking the inductiveness of first-order logic formulas, and explore some of its basic properties. Undecidability. We first justify the use of sound but incomplete algorithms, such as the Bounded-Horizon algorithm, for the problem of checking inductiveness of ∀∗ ∃∗ formulas. For a universal formula I ∈ ∀∗ (Σ), the formula I ∧ δ ∧ ¬I 0 is in EPR (recall that δ is specified in EPR). Hence, checking inductiveness amounts to checking the unsatisfiability of an EPR formula, and is therefore decidable. The same holds for I ∈ AF (Σ). However, this is no longer true when quantifier alternation is introduced. In Appendix A we show that checking inductiveness of ∀∗ ∃∗ formulas is indeed undecidable, even when the transition relation is restricted to EPR (see Theorem A.3). Thus, an attempt to check inductiveness must sacrifice either soundness, completeness, or termination. Techniques based on quantifier instantiation usually prefer completeness over termination. In contrast, the Bounded-Horizon algorithm guarantees termination a-priori, possibly at the expense of completeness (but is surprisingly powerful nonetheless). We now move to define the Bounded-Horizon algorithm for and discuss its basic properties in checking inductiveness. Bounded-Horizon Instantiations. Let δ ∈ ∃∗ ∀∗ (Σ, Σ0 ) be an EPR transition relation and I ∈ FOL(Σ) a candidate invariant. We would like to check the satisfiability of I ∧ δ ∧ ¬I 0 , and equivalently of Ind = IS ∧ δS ∧ (¬I 0 )S . Recall that ϕS denotes the Skolemization of ϕ, and note that IS and (¬I 0 )S possibly add Skolem functions to the vocabulary. Roughly speaking, for a given k ∈ N, Bounded-Horizon instantiates the universal quantifiers in Ind, while restricting the instantiations to produce ground-terms of function nesting at most k. We then check if this (finite) set of instantiations is unsatisfiable; if it is already unsatisfiable then we have a proof that I is inductive. Otherwise we report that I is not known to be 2 In this paper, unless otherwise stated, satisfiability and validity refer to general models and are not  restricted to finite models. Note that for EPR formulas, finite satisfiability and general satisfiability coincide.  6  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  inductive. The idea is to choose a (preferably small) number k and perform instantiations bounded by k instead of full-blown instantiation. As we will show, this algorithm is sound but not necessarily complete for a given k. Below we provide the formal definitions. We start with the notion of instantiations, and recall Herbrand’s theorem which establishes completeness of proof by unrestricted instantiations. Suppose that some vocabulary Σ̃ including constants and function symbols is understood (e.g., Σ̃ = Σ ] ΣS , where ΣS includes Skolem constants and function symbols). Definition 3.1 (Instantiation). Let ϕ(x) ∈ ∀∗ (Σ̃) be a universal formula with n free variables and m universal quantifiers. An instantiation of ϕ by a tuple t of n + m ground terms, denoted by ϕ[ t ], is obtained by substituting t for the free variables and the universally quantified variables, and then removing the universal quantifiers. Note that an instantiation is a quantifier-free sentence. ∗ Theorem 3.2 n (Herbrand’s Theorem). Let ϕ ∈ ∀ (Σ̃). Then o ϕ is satisfiable iff the (potentially infinite) set ϕ[ t ] | t is a tuple of ground terms over Σ̃ is satisfiable.  We now turn to restrict the depth of terms used in instantiations. Definition 3.3 (Bounded-Depth Terms). For every k ∈ N, we define BHTk to be the set of ground terms over Σ̃ with function symbols nested to depth at most k. BHTk is defined by induction over k, as follows. Let C be the set of constants in Σ̃, F the set of functions, and for every f ∈ F let Arityf be the arity of f . Then BHT0 = C BHTk = BHTk−1 ∪ {f (t1 , . . . tm ) | f ∈ F, m = Arityf , t1 , . . . , tm ∈ BHTk−1 }. We will also write t ∈ BHTk for a tuple of terms t, to mean that every entry of t is in BHTk (the number of elements in t should be clear from the context). Note that the set of S ground terms is BHT∞ = k∈N BHTk . Definition 3.4 (Depth of Instantiation). Let ϕ ∈ ∀∗ (Σ̃) and t ∈ BHT∞ . The depth of instantiation, denoted depth(ϕ[ t ]), is the smallest k such that all ground terms that appear in ϕ[ t ] are included in BHTk . We are now ready to define the algorithm and discuss its basic soundness and completeness properties. Bounded-Horizon algorithm. Given a candidate invariant I ∈ FOL(Σ), a transition relation δ over Σ ] Σ0 , and k ∈ N, the Bounded-Horizon algorithm constructs the formula Ind = IS ∧ δS ∧ (¬I 0 )S , and checks if the set  (3.1) Ind[ t ] | t ∈ BHTk , depth(Ind[ t ]) ≤ k is unsatisfiable. If it is unsatisfiable, then I is provably inductive w.r.t. δ with BoundedHorizon of bound k. Otherwise we report that I is not known to be inductive. Note that the satisfiability check performed by Bounded-Horizon is decidable since the set of instantiations is finite, and each instantiation is a ground quantifier-free formula.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  7  Bounded-Horizon for ∀∗ ∃∗ Invariants. We illustrate the definition of Bounded-Horizon in the case that I ∈ ∀∗ ∃∗ (Σ). Let I = ∀x. ∃y. α(x, y) where α ∈ QF. Then IS = ∀x. α(x, f (x)) where f are new Skolem function symbols. δS introduces Skolem constants but no function symbols, and in this case so does (¬I 0 )S . The Bounded-Horizon check of bound k can be approximately3 understood as checking the (un)satisfiability of ^ ^ ^     IS [ t ] ∧ δS [ t ] ∧ ¬I 0 S [ t ] . (3.2) t∈BHTk−1  t∈BHTk  t∈BHTk  Lemma 3.5 (Soundness). For every k ∈ N, Bounded-Horizon with bound k is sound, i.e., if Bounded-Horizon of bound k reports that I ∈ FOL(Σ) is inductive w.r.t. δ, then I is indeed inductive. Proof. Assume that I is not inductive w.r.t. δ, so there is a structure A such that A |= IS ∧ δS ∧ (¬I 0 )S . In particular A |= Ind[ t ] for every t ∈ BHT∞ and in particular for every t ∈ BHTk such that depth(Ind[ t ]) ≤ k. Hence, Bounded-Horizon of bound k will not report that I is inductive. As the algorithm is sound for any k, the crucial question that remains is an appropriate choice of k. A small k is preferable for efficiency, but a larger k could allow for proving more invariants. In the following example, a bound of even 1 suffices for proving that the invariant is inductive. We then show that for every correct invariant there is a suitable bound k, but a single choice of k cannot prove all correct invariants. Later, in Section 4, we show that bound of 1 or 2 is surprisingly powerful nonetheless. Example 3.6. Figure 1 presents a simple model of the client-server scenario described in [HHK+ 15]. The program induces an EPR transition relation, and its invariant is provable by Bounded-Horizon of bound 1. We first explain this example while ignoring the annotations denoted by “/@”. The system state is modeled using three binary relations. The req relation stores pairs of users and requests, representing requests sent by users. The resp relation similarly stores pairs of users and replies, representing replies sent back from the server. The match relation maintains the correspondence between a request and its reply. The action new request models an event where a user u sends a new request to the server. The action respond models an event where the server responds to a pending request by sending a reply to the user. The request and response are related by the match relation. The action check is used to verify the safety property that every response sent by the server has a matching request, by aborting the system if this does not hold. A natural inductive invariant for this system is I = ∀u, p. resp(u, p) → ∃q. req(u, q) ∧ match(q, p). The invariant proves that the then branch in action check will never happen and thus the system will never abort. This invariant is preserved under execution of all actions, and this fact is provable by Bounded Horizon of bound 1. 3 Equation (3.2) is an under-approximation of the set of instantiations used for bound k; variables that do  not appear in IS under a function symbol can be taken from BHTk in the conjunction without increasing the total depth of instantiation beyond k, and are therefore allowed in bounded instantiation of bound k. This approximation is illustrative nonetheless, and will be useful in the proofs in Section 4.  8  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  req := ∅; resp := ∅; match := ∅; action new request(u) { q := new request; req := req ∪ {(u, q)} /@ r := r ∪ {(u, y) | match(q, y)} } action respond(u, q) { assume req(u, q); p := new response; match := match ∪ {(q, p)}; /@ r := r ∪ {(x, p) | req(x, q)} resp := resp ∪ {(u, p)} }  action check(u, p) { if resp(u, p) ∧ ∀q. req(u, q) → ¬match(q, p) /@ ,→ if resp(u, p) ∧ ¬r(u, p) then abort } Invariant I = ∀u, p. resp(u, p) → ∃q. req(u, q) ∧ match(q, p) /@ r(x, y) ≡ ∃z. req(x, z) ∧ match(z, y) /@ Invariant Ib = ∀u, p. resp(u, p) → r(u, p)  Figure 1. Example demonstrating a ∀∗ ∃∗ invariant that is provable with bound 1. The reader should first ignore the instrumentation code denoted by /@ (see Example 4.1). This example models a simple client-server scenario, with the safety property that every response sent by the server was triggered by a request from a client. Verification of this example requires a ∀∗ ∃∗ invariant. This example is inspired by [HHK+ 15]. The complete program is provided in [add] (files client server ae.ivy, client server instr.ivy). Lemma 3.7 (Completeness for some k). For every I ∈ FOL(Σ) and δ such that I is inductive w.r.t. δ there exists a finite k ∈ N s.t. I is provably inductive w.r.t. δ with Bounded-Horizon of bound k. Proof. From Theorem 3.2 and compactness there is a finite unsatisfiable set S of instantiations. Take k to be the maximal depth of the instantiations in S. For example, if I ∈ ∀∗ then Bounded-Horizon of bound 0 is complete. However, as expected due to the undecidability of checking inductiveness (see Appendix A), BoundedHorizon is not complete for a given k for arbitrary invariants. Example 3.8. An example of a program and an inductive invariant for which a bound of 0 or 1 is insufficient appears in Figure 2. In this example the server operates as a middleman between clients and the database (DB), and is used to anonymize user requests before they reach the database. The server performs a translation p between clients’ identity and an anonymous unique id, sends a translated request to the DB, and forwards the DB’s response to the clients. The safety property is that every response sent by the server was triggered by a request from a client. The inductive invariant states, in addition to the safety property, that every server request to the DB was triggered by a client’s request from the server, and that every DB response was triggered by a server’s request. Proving that the invariant is inductive under the action server recv db response requires the prover to understand that for the response from the DB there is a matching request from the server to the DB, and that for this request to the DB there is a matching request from the client to the server. Every such translation requires another level of nesting in the instantiation. In this example, a bound of 2 manages to prove inductiveness. This example can be lifted to require an even larger depth of instantiation by adding more translation entities similar to the server, and describing the invariant in a similar, modular, way.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  9  req := ∅; resp := ∅; db req := ∅; db resp := ∅; t := ∅; action new request(u) { action server recv request(u, q) { q := new request; assume req(u, q); req := req ∪ {(u, q)} id := new DB request id; } t := t ∪ {(id , u)}; action db recv request(id , q) { db req := db req ∪ {(id , q)} assume db req(id , q); } p := DB response ensuring db(q, p); db resp := db resp ∪ {(id , p)} } action server recv db response(id , p) { action check(u, p) { assume db resp(id , p); assume resp(u, p); resp := resp ∪ {(x, p) | t(id , x)} if ∀q. req(u, q) → ¬db(q, p) } then abort } Invariant I = ∀u, p. resp(u, p) → ∃q. req(u, q) ∧ db(q, p) ∧ ∀id , q. db req(id , q) → ∃u. t(id , u) ∧ req(u, q) ∧ ∀id , p. db resp(id , p) → ∃q. db req(id , q) ∧ db(q, p) ∧ ∀id , u1 , u2 . t(id , u1 ) ∧ t(id , u2 ) → u1 = u2 Figure 2. Example demonstrating a ∀∗ ∃∗ invariant that is provable only with bound 2. The server anonymizes requests from clients to the database (DB) and forwards the answer to the client. The server performs a translation t between clients’ identity and an anonymous unique id. The safety property is that every response sent by the server to a client was triggered by a request from the client. The inductive invariant further states that every server request to the DB was triggered by a client’s request from the server, and that every DB response was triggered by a server’s request. The complete program corresponding to this Figure appears in [add] (file client server db ae.ivy). Small Bounded-Horizon for ∀∗ ∃∗ Invariants. Despite the incompleteness, we conjecture that a small depth of instantiations typically suffices to prove inductiveness. The intuition is that an EPR transition relation has a very limited “horizon” of the domain: it interacts only with a small fraction of the domain, namely elements pointed to by program variables (that correspond to logical constants in the vocabulary). When performing the Bounded-Horizon check with bound 1 on a ∀∗ ∃∗ invariant I = ∀x. ∃y. α(x, y), we essentially assume that the existential part of the invariant ψ(x) = ∃y. α(x, y) holds on all program variables — but not necessarily on all elements of the domain — and try to prove that it holds on all elements of the domain after the transition. We expect that for most elements of the domain, the correctness of ψ is maintained simply because they were not modified at all by the transition. For elements that are modified by the transition, we expect the correctness after modification to result from the fact that ψ holds for the elements of the domain that are directly involved in the transition. If this is indeed the reason that ψ is maintained, a bound of 1 sufficiently utilizes ψ in the pre-state to prove the invariant in the post-state, i.e. to prove that it is inductive.  10  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  This is the case in Example 3.6. Additional examples are listed in Section 7. The example of Figure 2 itself also admits a different invariant that is provable by bound 1. Section 4 further studies the power of Bounded-Horizon with a low bound. 4. Power of Bounded-Horizon for Proving Inductiveness We now turn to investigate the ability of Bounded-Horizon to verify inductiveness. In this section we provide sufficient conditions for its success by relating it to the notion of instrumentation (which we explain below). We show that Bounded-Horizon with a low bound of 1 or 2 is as powerful as a natural class of sound program instrumentations, those that do not add existential quantifiers. Section 7 demonstrates the method’s power on several interesting programs that we verified using Bounded-Horizon of bound 1. 4.1. Instrumentation. We present our view of the instrumentation procedure used in previous works [IBI+ 13, KBI+ 17, PMP+ 16] to eliminate the need for quantifier-alternation, thus reducing the verification task to a decidable fragment. The procedure begins with a program that induces a transition relation δ ∈ ∃∗ ∀∗ (Σ ∪ Σ0 ). The purpose of instrumentation is to modify δ into another transition relation δb that admits an inductive invariant with simpler quantification (e.g., universal, in which case it is decidable to check). We note that instrumentation is generally a manual procedure. For simplicity, we describe the instrumentation process informally, but provide the semantic soundness requirement in Definition 4.2. The instrumentation process is thoroughly described in a recent work [PLSS17]. The instrumentation procedure consists of the following three steps: (1) Identify a formula ψ(x) ∈ FOL(Σ) (usually ψ will be existential) that captures information that is needed in the inductive invariant. Extend the vocabulary with an instrumentation relation r(x) that intentionally should capture the derived relation b = Σ ∪ {r} denote the extended vocabulary4. defined by ψ(x). Let Σ (2) Add update code that updates r when the original (“core”) relations are modified, and maintains the meaning of r as encoding ψ. The update code must not block executions of real code, and can possibly be a sound approximation. Sometimes it can be generated automatically via finite differencing [RSL10]. (3) Modify the program to use r. Often this is performed by rewriting some program conditions, keeping in mind that r encodes ψ. This means replacing some quantified expressions by uses of r. Example 4.1. In the example of Figure 1, to achieve a universal invariant we add an instrumentation relation r defined by r(x, y) ≡ ∃z. req(x, z) ∧ match(z, y) (step 1). The simple form of ψ allows us to obtain precise update code, which appears as annotations marked with /@ in lines that mutate req and match (step 2). We also replace the if condition in the action check by an equivalent condition that uses r (step 3). The line marked with /@ ,→ in the check action replaces the line above it. The resulting program has the invariant Ib = ∀u, p. resp(u, p) → r(u, p), which is universal. 4It is also possible to instrument the program with constants rather than relations. This can be emulated  by adding a unary relation c(x) representing the constant, and adding the assumption that c contains exactly one element to the invariant. This form is in line with the conditions of Theorem 4.12.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  11  b ∪Σ b 0 ) denote the transition relation induced by the modified program Let δb ∈ ∃∗ ∀∗ (Σ (modifications occur in steps 2,3). The soundness of the instrumentation procedure is b formalized in the following connection between ψ, δ, and δ: b ∪Σ b 0 ) is a sound instrumentation for Definition 4.2 (Sound Instrumentation). δb ∈ ∃∗ ∀∗ (Σ ∗ ∗ 0 δ ∈ ∃ ∀ (Σ ∪ Σ ) and ψ ∈ FOL(Σ) if b δ → δ[ψ/r, ψ 0 /r0 ] is valid. Definition 4.2 ensures that the instrumented program includes at least all the behaviors of the original program, when r is interpreted according to ψ. Thus, if the instrumented program is safe, then it is sound to infer that the original program is safe. The instrumentation procedure does not require the user to know an inductive invariant for the original program. However, if a sound instrumentation which leads to an invariant exists, then an inductive invariant for the original δ can be produced by substituting back the “meaning” of r as ψ (thus, safety of the original program is implied): b be an inductive Lemma 4.3. Let δb be a sound instrumentation for δ and ψ, and Ib ∈ FOL(Σ) b b invariant for δ. Then I = I[ψ/r] is inductive w.r.t. δ. Proof. Ib ∧ δb → Ib0 is valid, thus, so is (Ib ∧ δb → Ib0 )[ψ/r, ψ 0 /r0 ]. δb is a sound instrumentation for δ, so (using Definition 4.2) I ∧ δ → I 0 is valid. b Note that typically the quantification structure of I is more complex than that of I. b Remark 4.4. In the expression δ[ψ/r, ψ 0 /r0 ] the update code of r in δb becomes a constraint over the core relations in Σ. In a sound instrumentation this constraint is required to follow from the way the core relations are updated by δ, essentially meaning that r is updated in a way that is consistent with its interpretation as ψ. Instrumentation without additional existential quantifiers. In order to relate instrumentation to Bounded-Horizon instantiations, we consider the typical case where the b This happens instrumentation process of δ does not add new existential quantifiers to δ. when the update code does not introduce additional existential quantifiers. Formally: b Σ b 0 ). Definition 4.5 (Existential Naming). Let δb = ∃z1 , . . . zm . ϕ(z1 , . . . , zm ) where ϕ ∈ ∀∗ (Σ, b b An existential naming η for (δ, δ) is a mapping η : {z1 , . . . , zm } → const[δS ] ∪ const[δS ]. We b to be ϕ[η(z1 )/z1 , . . . , η(zm )/zm ]. define η(δ) An existential naming provides a Skolemization procedure which uses existing constants rather than fresh ones. If such η exists, it maps the (Skolemized) existential quantifiers in δb to their counterparts in δ. For example, the instrumentation in Figure 1 results in δb that has an existential naming w.r.t. the original δ. Note that it is possible that δb has in fact fewer existential quantifiers than δ, for example due to the rewriting of conditions (as happens in the example of Figure 1 — see the if statement in action check). An instrumentation without additional existentials is an instrumentation from δ to b the δb whose soundness can be shown while respecting an existential naming from δ to δ; existential naming matches the existential quantifiers of δ with the vocabulary of δb in a sound way:  12  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  Definition 4.6 (Instrumentation Without Additional Existenials). δb is a sound instrumentation without additional existentials for δ if there exists an existential naming η such that b δS → η(δ)[ψ/r, ψ 0 /r0 ] is valid. 4.2. From Instrumentation to Bounded-Horizon. The results described in this section show that if there is an instrumentation without additional existentials, then BoundedHorizon with a low bound is able to prove the original invariant, without specific knowledge of the instrumentation and without manual assistance from the programmer. This is the case in the example of Figure 1, which admits an instrumentation that transforms the invariant to a universal invariant (see Example 4.1) in a form that matches Theorem 4.9, and indeed the original invariant is provable by Bounded-Horizon of bound 1. Interestingly, in case Bounded-Horizon with a small bound does not prove inductiveness the results imply that either the invariant is not inductive or no instrumentation that does not add existential quantifiers can be used to show that it is inductive (even with the programmer’s manual assistance). This is the case in the example of Figure 2, where a bound of 1 does not suffice.5 While we show that instrumentation that does not add existentials is at most as powerful as Bounded-Horizon with a low bound, sound instrumentations that do add existentials to the program (thereby not satisfying Definition 4.6) can be used to simulate quantifier instantiation of an arbitrary depth. This topic is explored in Section 5. In the remainder of this section we will assume that δb is a sound instrumentation without additional existentials for δ, and η is the corresponding naming of existentials. Further, we b assume that Ib is an inductive invariant for δb and denote I = I[ψ/r]. Results. We now state the results whose proofs are presented in the rest of this section. Theorem 4.9 and Theorem 4.10 consider I ∈ ∀∗ ∃∗ that is transformed to Ib ∈ ∀∗ . In Theorem 4.9 we show that a bound of 1 suffices to prove that I is inductive for δ when ψ ∈ ∃∗ (that is, the instrumentation defining formula is existential) and the instrumentation b or when ψ ∈ ∀∗ and r appears only negatively in I. b relation r appears only positively in I, This is an attempt to explain the success of bound 1 instantiations in proving our examples (see Section 7). In Theorem 4.10 we show that a bound of 2 suffices in the more general b setting of ψ ∈ AF (with no restriction on appearances of r in I). Theorem 4.12 considers a generalization to I that is 1-alternation and transformed to Ib ∈ AF. We show that a bound of 2 suffices in this case. 5Strictly speaking this shows that there is no such instrumentation where the instrumentation relation appears only positively in the invariant, which is the most common case. Examples that require an even larger bound (sketched above) do not admit any instrumentation without additional existential quantifiers that transforms the invariant to a universal form.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  13  Proof idea. The rest of the section is devoted to proofs of the these claims. The intuition behind the proofs is that the instrumented invariant is universal, so the fact that it is inductive can be shown by instantiating the universal quantifiers with the constants. Relating between the instrumented and original program, this constitutes a proof that the instrumented invariant is inductive (for the original program), where the proof is by instantiating the universal quantifiers with the constants, essentially by the same set of instantiations. With the existential quantifiers present in the program without instrumentation, this implies a proof by bounded instantiations. The formal proofs handle the fine details of which quantifiers are instantiated, and with what constants, to establish the results. To highlight the main points in the formal proof, the crux of the argument is as follows: Assume for the sake of contradiction that I cannot be shown to be inductive for δ by BoundedHorizon of a low bound, and take a counterexample to induction of the instantiated I (see Equation (4.2) in the proof of Lemma 4.8). By the assumption that δb is an instrumentation without additional existentials for δ, we can utilize properties of substitution to obtain a counterexample to induction for the instantiated Ib w.r.t. δb (see Equation (4.5)). By the assumption that Ib ∈ ∀∗ and δb ∈ ∃∗ ∀∗ , we use complete instantiation to argue that we have obtained a true counterexample to induction of Ib w.r.t. δb (see Equation (4.9)), in contradiction to the premise. Remark 4.7. The results of this section also apply when multiple instrumentation relations ψ1 , . . . , ψt ∈ FOL(Σ) are simultaneously substituted instead of the relation symbols r1 , . . . , rt b in δb and I. 4.3. Power for ∀∗ ∃∗ Invariants. We now establish that low bounds are sufficient for the Bounded-Horizon check, assuming that a sound instrumentation without additional b and I ∈ ∀∗ ∃∗ . To do so, we first prove the existentials exists, in the case of Ib ∈ ∀∗ (Σ) following lemma. Lemma 4.8. Let δb be a sound instrumentation of δ without new existentials and with b and let α = α naming η. Write Ib = ∀x. α b(x) where α b ∈ QF(Σ) b[ψ/r]. Then, ^  0 α(c) ∧ δS ∧ (¬I )S (4.1) c∈C n  is unsatisfiable, where C = const[δS ∧ (¬I 0 )S ] and n is the number of universal quantifiers in b I. Proof. Assume not, i.e., there exists a structure A0 such that, ^  A0 |= α(c) ∧ δS ∧ (¬I 0 )S .  (4.2)  c∈C n  b Let C b ∧ (¬Ib0 ) ]. Then, b = const[η(δ) We will show that Ib is not inductive for δ. S ^  0 A1 |= α(c) ∧ δS ∧ (¬I )S  (4.3)  b n c∈(C∪C)  b \ C as some arbitrary where A1 is the same as A0 but also interprets any constant in C constant in C. Thus α(c) holds for the new constants as well.  14  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  Removing some conjuncts from Equation (4.3), we get, ^  A1 |= α(c) ∧ δS ∧ (¬I 0 )S .  (4.4)  bn c∈C  By assumption (Definition 4.6), it follows that, ^  b A1 |= α(c) ∧ η(δ)[ψ/r, ψ 0 /r0 ] ∧ (¬I 0 )S .  (4.5)  bn c∈C  Recall that I 0 = Ib0 [ψ 0 /r0 ]. Since A1 |= (¬Ib0 [ψ 0 /r0 ])S , it follows that A1 |= (¬Ib0 )S [ψ 0 /r0 ]. In the latter formula, some existentially quantified variables from ψ or ¬ψ may remain, whereas in the former formula they were replaced by Skolem constants. Thus this is just a corollary of the fact that γS → γ is valid for any γ. Thus we have shown,   ^  b ∧ (¬Ib0 ) [ψ/r, ψ 0 /r0 ]. (4.6) A1 |= α b(c) ∧ η(δ) S bn c∈C  Now, consider the structure Ab that expands A1 by interpreting r and r0 the way that A1 interprets ψ and ψ 0 , respectively. Then, ^  b ∧ (¬Ib0 ) . α b(c) ∧ η(δ) (4.7) Ab |= S bn c∈C  Since the formula in Equation (4.7) is universal, it is also satisfied by Ab|Cb , the substructure b Ab, i.e., A’s b interpretation of the constant symbols C b (recall that of Ab with universe C 0 b b b C = const[η(δ) ∧ (¬I )S ]). Thus,  b ∧ (¬Ib0 ) . Ab|Cb |= ∀x. α b(x) ∧ η(δ) (4.8) S b → δb (for the same reasons), we know, Finally, since γS → γ is valid and so is η(δ) Ab|Cb |= Ib ∧ δb ∧ ¬Ib0 . (4.9) b But this contradicts the fact that Ib is inductive for δ. The following results are corollaries of Lemma 4.8. b or ψ ∈ ∀∗ Theorem 4.9. Let Ib ∈ ∀∗ . Assume ψ ∈ ∃∗ and r appears only positively in I, b Then I = I[ψ/r] b and r appears only negatively in I. is inductive for δ with Bounded-Horizon ∗ ∗ of bound 1. (Note that I ∈ ∀ ∃ .) Proof. Let Ib = ∀x. α b(x) where α b ∈ QF. In both cases of the claim α = α b[ψ/r] ∈ ∃∗ , and so b This implies that the satisfiability check of all the universal quantifiers in I are those of I. Lemma 4.8 is simply the Bounded-Horizon satisfiability check with bound 1, and it shows that the result must be unsatisfiable. More formally, assume for the sake of contradiction that I is not inductive w.r.t. δ with Bounded-Horizon of bound 1. Let α(x) = ∃y1 , . . . , ym . θ(x, y1 , . . . , ym ) where θ ∈ QF, and let αS (x) = θ(x, f1 (x), . . . , fm (x))  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  15  be its Skolemization with fresh Skolem function symbols f1 , . . . , fm (introduced for y1 , . . . , ym , respectively). Then there is a structure A satisfying ^ ^ ^     αS [ t ] ∧ δS [ t ] ∧ ¬I 0 S [ t ] . (4.10) t∈BHT0  t∈BHT1  t∈BHT1  Since αS has no universal quantifiers, the instantiation is just a substitution of the free variables, and A satisfies ^ ^ ^     αS (t) ∧ δS [ t ] ∧ ¬I 0 S [ t ] . (4.11) t∈BHT0  t∈BHT1  t∈BHT1  By reducing A to the elements pointed to by BHT1 terms we have that ^   A|BHT1 |= αS (t) ∧ δS ∧ ¬I 0 S  (4.12)  t∈BHT0  Note that in A|BHT1 the interpretations of the Skolem functions are possibly partial functions. The functions appear in the formula of Equation (4.12) only grounded, and applied on BHT0 , and these cases the interpretations of the functions are defined. (In particular, they can be extended to total functions in an arbitrary way, and the resulting structure still satisfies Equation (4.12).) We now move from the Skolem functions back to existential quantifiers. By the valuation that to every existentially quantified variable yi in α assigns the interpretation of fi (t) in A|BHT1 (recall that fi (t) appears in αS instead of the quantifier ∃yi in α), we know that ^   A|BHT1 |= (4.13) α(t) ∧ δS ∧ ¬I 0 S . t∈BHT0  Recall that BHT0 = const[δS ∧  ¬I 0  A|BHT1 |=   S  ]. Therefore, Equation (4.13) can be rewritten as ^   α(c) ∧ δS ∧ ¬I 0 S (4.14)  c∈C n   0  b where C n = const[δS ∧ ¬I S ]n and is the number of universal quantifiers in I (and I). b and By Lemma 4.8 this is a contradiction to the assumption that Ib is inductive w.r.t. δ, the claim follows. b Theorem 4.10. Let Ib ∈ ∀∗ . If ψ ∈ AF then I = I[ψ/r] is inductive for δ with Bounded∗ ∗ Horizon of bound 2. (Note that I ∈ ∀ ∃ .) Proof. As before, Let Ib = ∀x. α b(x) where α b ∈ QF. ψ ∈ AF implies that α = α b[ψ/r] ∈ AF . Let  α(x) = ∀v1 θ1,1 (x, v1 ) ∨ ∃z1 θ1,2 (x, z1 ) ∧ . . .  (4.15) ∧ ∀vr θr,1 (x, vr ) ∨ ∃zr θr,2 (x, zr ) where θ1,1 , θ1,2 , . . . , θr,1 , θr,2 ∈ QF. Assume for the sake of contradiction that I is not inductive w.r.t. δ with Bounded-Horizon of bound 2. For brevity denote ^ ^    ξ(k) = δS [ t ] ∧ ¬I 0 S [ t ] t∈BHTk  t∈BHTk  16  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  and let gi (x) denote the fresh Skolem function introduced for zi in αS . By the assumption that inductiveness is not provable using Bounded-Horizon of bound 2, ^  αS [ t ] ∧ ξ(2) (4.16) t∈BHT1  is satisfiable by a structure A. In particular ^   θ1,1 (c, d1 ) ∨ θ1,2 (c, g1 (c)) ∧  . . . ∧ θr,1 (c, dr ) ∨ θr,2 (c, gr (c)) ∧ ξ(1)  (4.17)  is satisfied by A, where the conjunction is over c ∈ BHT0 and d1 , . . . , dr ∈ BHT1 (with the relevant arity). Note that the difference from Equation (4.16) is that there are fewer conjuncts here, because the full Bounded-Horizon check with bound 2 has conjuncts for each c ∈ BHT1 and not just BHT0 , and we have ξ(1) instead of ξ(2). Reduce A to the elements pointed by BHT1 terms, let A↓ = A|BHT1 . Now, ^   ∀v1 θ1,1 (c, v1 ) ∨ ∃z1 θ1,2 (c, z1 ) ∧ . . . c∈BHT0 (4.18)  ∧ ∀vr θr,1 (c, vr ) ∨ ∃zr θr,2 (c, zr ) ∧ ξ(1) is satisfied by A↓ . This is because: • The universal quantifiers are semantically equivalent to a conjunction over all BHT1 elements because the domain was reduced, and • The existential quantifiers are justified by the following valuation: the valuation assigns every zi the interpretation of gi (c). With this valuation the conjunctions of formula 4.18 are all guaranteed by the conjunctions in formula 4.17. Now formula 4.18 exactly means that ^  A↓ |= α(c) ∧ ξ(1). (4.19) c∈BHT0  As in the proof of Theorem 4.9, using Lemma 4.8, this is a contradiction to the assumption b and the claim follows. that Ib is inductive w.r.t. δ, 4.4. Generalization to 1-Alternation Invariants. We now generalize the results of Section 4.3 to 1-alternation invariants. A formula is 1-alternation if it can be written as b and I = I[ψ/r] b a Boolean combination of ∀∗ ∃∗ formulas. In the sequel, Ib ∈ AF(Σ) ∈ 1-alternation(Σ). b be an inductive invariant for δb ∈ ∃∗ ∀∗ (Σ). b Lemma 4.11. Let ψ ∈ FOL(Σ). Let Ib ∈ AF(Σ) b = ∀x. α b Let α1 = α Write IbS = ∀x. α c1 (x) and (¬I) c2 (x), where α c1 , α c2 ∈ QF(Σ). c1 [ψ/r] and S  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  17  b Σ b 0 ) be a sound instrumentation of δ α2 = α c2 [ψ/r]. Let δ ∈ ∃∗ ∀∗ (Σ) and let δb ∈ ∃∗ ∀∗ (Σ, without new existentials and with naming η. Then, ^ ^   α1 (c1 ) ∧ δS ∧ α2 (c2 ) (4.20) c1 ∈C n  c2 ∈C m  is unsatisfiable, where C = const[IbS ∧ δS ∧ (¬I 0 )S ], n is the number of universal quantifiers b . in IbS and m is the number of universal quantifiers in (¬I) S Proof. The proof is similar to that of Lemma 4.8, with the transformations applied to the conjunction are performed both on the invariant in the pre-state and in the post-state. Assume not, i.e., there exists a structure A0 such that, ^ ^   A0 |= α1 (c1 ) ∧ δS ∧ α2 (c2 ) . (4.21) c1 ∈C n  c2 ∈C m  b Let C b ∧ (¬Ib0 ) ]. Then, b = const[IbS ∧ η(δ) We will show that Ib is not inductive for δ. S ^ ^   A1 |= (4.22) α1 (c1 ) ∧ δS ∧ α2 (c2 ) . bn c1 ∈C  bm c2 ∈ C  b \ C as some arbitrary where A1 is the same as A0 but also interprets any constant in C constant in C. By the assumption (Definition 4.6), it follows that, ^ ^   b A1 |= α1 (c1 ) ∧ η(δ)[ψ/r, ψ 0 /r0 ] ∧ α2 (c2 ) . (4.23) bn c1 ∈ C  Thus we have shown,  ^  b ∧ α c1 (c1 ) ∧ η(δ) A1 |= bn c1 ∈C  bm c2 ∈C   α c2 (c2 ) [ψ/r, ψ 0 /r0 ].  ^  (4.24)  bm c2 ∈C  Now, consider the structure Ab that expands A1 by interpreting r and r0 the way that A1 interprets ψ and ψ 0 , respectively. Then, ^ ^   b ∧ Ab |= α c1 (c1 ) ∧ η(δ) α c2 (c2 ) (4.25) bn c1 ∈ C  bm c2 ∈ C  Since the formula in Equation (4.25) is universal, it is also satisfied by Ab|Cb , the subb Ab, i.e., A’s b interpretation of the constant symbols C. b Thus, structure of Ab with universe C   b ∧ ∀x. α Ab|Cb |= ∀x. α c1 (x) ∧ η(δ) c2 (x) . (4.26) b ∧ (¬Ib0 ) ]. b was defined as C b = const[Ib ∧ η(δ) Recall that C S b → δb is valid, we know, Finally, since γS → γ is valid and for the same reasons η(δ) Ab|Cb |= Ib ∧ δb ∧ ¬Ib0 . (4.27) b But this contradicts the fact that Ib is inductive for δ.  18  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  The following result is a corollary of Lemma 4.11. b Theorem 4.12. Let Ib ∈ AF. If ψ ∈ AF then I = I[ψ/r] is inductive for δ with BoundedHorizon of bound 2. (Note that I ∈ 1-alternation.) c1 [ψ/r] ∈ AF and α2 (x) = α c2 [ψ/r] ∈ AF (recall that Proof. ψ ∈ AF implies that α1 (x) = α α c1 , α c2 ∈ QF). By the assumption that inductiveness is not provable using Bounded-Horizon of bound 2, ^ ^ ^    (α1 )S [ t ] ∧ δS [ t ] ∧ (α2 )S [ t ] (4.28) t∈BHT1  t∈BHT2  t∈BHT1  is satisfiable, where (α1 )S , (α2 )S introduce Skolem functions. Let A be such a satisfying structure, and A↓ = A|BHT1 . Because α1 ∈ AF, in the same way as in the proof of Theorem 4.10, ^ A↓ |= (4.29) α1 (c) c∈BHT0  and in the same way, since α2 ∈ AF as well, the same structure has ^ A↓ |= α2 (c).  (4.30)  c∈BHT0  b Overall we have Note that from Equation (4.28), A↓ |= δ. ^ ^  A↓ |= α1 (c) ∧ δS ∧ c∈BHT0  α2 (c)    (4.31)  c∈BHT0  b and by Lemma 4.11 this is a contradiction to the assumption that Ib a is inductive w.r.t. δ. 5. Instrumentation for High Depth Instantiations In this section we discuss the connection between quantifier instantiation and program instrumentation in the converse direction, i.e. simulating quantifier instantiation with instrumentation. In Section 4 we showed that instrumentation without adding existential quantifiers is powerful at most as bounded instantiations with a low bound. In this section we show that allowing additional existentials does increase the power of instrumentation in proving ∀∗ ∃∗ invariants. In particular, we show how to systematically construct instrumented programs in a way that corresponds to quantifier instantiation for ∀∗ ∃∗ -invariants: performing the required instantiations within the program allows expressing the invariant in a form that falls in the decidable fragment. Together with Section 4, this makes the point that, in the context of invariant checking, the form of instrumentation by a derived relation studied in this paper directly corresponds to quantifier instantiation. As before, the instrumentation process begins with a program that does not have a universal inductive invariant. We would like to transform the program in a sound way to a b As before, we start by identifying some program that has a universal inductive invariant I. ∗ existential formula ψ(x) ∈ ∃ (Σ) that expresses needed information, and encode it using an instrumentation relation r, with the meaning that “r(x) ≡ ψ(x)”. As before, we present the procedure for a single formula and instrumentation relation, but it can be used with multiple formulas and instrumentation relations (see Remark 4.7).  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  19  b express existential Intuitively, adding the instrumentation relation r lets Ib ∈ ∀∗ (Σ) information by referring to r. The modifications to the program must encode enough of “r(x) ≡ ψ(x)” to make Ib inductive. As opposed to the instrumentation described in Section 4.1, this will be done by instantiating the correspondence between ψ(t) and r(t) for specific variables in the program, using assume statements. This replaces the rewriting of program conditions that use ψ to use r. This approach is also extended to obtain deep instantiations which simulate Bounded-Horizon with an arbitrary bound. Local Instantiations. Rather than rewriting ψ(t) to r(t) in the program, we would like to enforce r to be interpreted according to ψ in the pre-state, i.e., to enforce ∀x. ψ(x) ↔ r(x). The direction ∀x. ψ(x) → r(x) is an EPR formula (since ψ ∈ ∃∗ ), and thus we can simply conjoin it to the verification conditions without sacrificing decidability. The converse implication, ∀x. r(x) → ψ(x), is a ∀∗ ∃∗ formula, and adding it to the verification condition will lead to undecidability. Note that Bounded-Horizon with bound 1 is analogous to enforcing r(t) → ψ(t) for every t that is a program variable. Inspired by this, we define the following instrumentation that lets the user locally enforce the definition of r for program variables. Definition 5.1 (Local Instantiation). Let ψ(x) = ∃y. ϕ(x, y). To generate an instantiation of ∀x. r(x) → ∃y. ϕ(x, y) on some tuple of program variables t, we instrument the program by adding new program variables c, and inserting the following code: c := ∗; assume r(t) → ϕ(t, c) This code uses the havoc statement, which sets the value of c to arbitrary values, followed by an assume statement that restricts the execution such that if r(t) holds, then ϕ(t, c) holds (see [PMP+ 16] for the formal semantics). Thus, this code realizes the restriction that r(t) → ∃y. ϕ(t, y), and also assigns to the new program variables c, the witnesses for the existential quantifiers. We call this addition to the program a local instantiation, as it imposes the connection between r and ψ locally for some program variables t. Lemma 5.2 (Soundness of Local Instantiations). If δb is obtained from δ by a local instantiation then δb is a sound instrumentation by Definition 4.2. Proof. The code added by a local instantiation for t that uses new variables c translates a new constraint in δb of the form γ = ∃c. r(t) → ϕ(t, c). Since ∀x. r(x) ↔ ψ(x) ⇒ γ, we have b which implies the condition of Definition 4.2. ∀x. r(x) ↔ ψ(x) ∧ δ ⇒ δ, Remark 5.3. The combination of adding ∀x. ψ(x) → r(x) to the verification condition and allowing the user to perform local instantiations on the program variables is at least as powerful as rewriting program conditions, since any rewrite of ψ(t) to r(t) can be simulated by a local instantiation on t. Instantiations for the Invariant. The mechanism of local instantiations is designed to b support instantiations of ∀x. ψ(x) ↔ r(x) required to prove that the invariant I = I[ψ/r] is preserved by the program. This proof is carried out by showing that (∀x. ψ(x) ↔ r(x)) ∧ 0 is unsatisfiable. This may require instantiating the definition of r on b Ib ∧ δ ∧ ¬(I[ψ/r]) Skolem constants that come from the negation of the invariant in the post-state. Thus, we extend our instrumentation method by adding new “program variables” that represent the elements of the domain on which the invariant is potentially violated in the post-state. For  20  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  /@ r1 (x, y) ≡ ∃z. req(x, z) ∧ db(z, y) /@ r2 (x, y) ≡ ∃z. t(x, z) ∧ req(z, y) /@ r3 (x, y) ≡ ∃z. db req(x, z) ∧ db(z, y) /@ Invariant Ib = ∀u, p. resp(u, p) → r1 (u, p) ∧ /@ ∀id , q. db req(id , q) → r2 (id , q) ∧ /@ ∀id , p. db resp(id , p) → r3 (id , p) ∧ /@ ∀id , u1 , u2 . t(id , u1 ) ∧ t(id , u2 ) → u1 = u2 action server process db response(id , p) { # instantiate r3 on (id , skp ) (depth 1) /@ c1 := ∗; /@ assume r3 (id , skp ) → db req(i, c1 ) ∧ db(c1 , skp ); # instantiate r2 on (id , c1 ) (depth 2) /@ c2 := ∗; /@ assume r2 (id , c1 ) → t(id , c2 ) ∧ req(c2 , c1 ); ... } action check(u, p) { # instantiate r1 on (u, p) (depth 1) /@ c3 := ∗; /@ assume r1 (u, p) → req(u, c3 ) ∧ db(c3 , p); ... } Figure 3. An illustration of instrumentation by local instantiations for the example of Figure 2. The instrumentation adds three instrumentation relations r1 , r2 , r3 , and performs three local instantiations in order to prove that the invariant is inductive. Note that an instantiation depth of 2 is used, in accordance with the fact that the original invariant is provable using bound 2 but not bound 1. The complete model corresponding to this Figure appears in [add] (file client server db instr.ivy). b we add a special program variable skx which every universally quantified variable x in I, can be used in local instantiations, enhancing their power to prove that Ib is inductive. Obtaining Deep Instantiations. Applying local instrumentation on a tuple t that consists of original program variables, or variables that represent Skolem constants, corresponds to instantiations of Bounded-Horizon with bound 1. However, once a local instantiation is performed, new program variables c are added. Performing a local instantiation on these new variables now corresponds to instantiation from depth 2. By iteratively applying local instantiations, where each iteration adds new program variables, we can thus obtain quantifier instantiations of arbitrary depth. Illustrating Example. Figure 3 illustrates the local instantiation procedure on the example of Figure 2. Recall that the ∀∗ ∃∗ invariant I of Figure 2 is not provable using BoundedHorizon of bound 1, but is provable using Bounded-Horizon of bound 2. The instrumentation  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  21  presented in Figure 3 introduces three instrumentation relations to encode the existential b parts of I, thereby producing the instrumented universal invariant I. b we use local instantiations in the actions check and To prove the inductiveness of I, server process db response. In server process db response, we instantiate the definition of r3 on (id , skp ), and assign the existential witness to c1 . Intentionally, c1 gets the request that was sent from the server to the DB that led to the response skp being sent from the DB to the server. skp is the response that supposedly causes a violation of the invariant when the action server process db response is executed (the instantiations are used to prove that a violation does not occur). This instantiation is of depth 1. Next, we make an instantiation of the definition of r2 on (id , c1 ) and obtain a new existential witness c2 . The use of c1 here makes this instantiation depth 2. The check action includes another instantiation of depth 1, which is simply used to prove that the abort cannot happen (similarly to rewriting a program condition). The reader can observe that the local instantiations introduced during the instrumentation process closely correspond to the instantiations required to prove that the original ∀∗ ∃∗ invariant I (see Section 3). We note that the process of instrumentation by local instantiations discussed here is different in spirit from those of Section 4: instrumentation by local instantiation consists of almost nothing but adding existential quantifiers to the transition relation, as opposed to the condition in Definition 4.6 where we do not allow the instrumentation to add new existential quantifiers. 6. Partial Models for Understanding Non-Inductiveness When conducting SMT-based deductive verification (e.g., using Dafny [Lei10]), the user constructs both the formal representation of the system and its invariants. In many cases, the invariant I is initially not inductive w.r.t. the given program, due to a bug in the program or in the invariant. Therefore, deductive verification is typically an iterative process in which the user attempts to prove inductiveness, and when this fails the user adapts the program, the invariant, or both. In such scenarios, it is extremely desirable to present the user with a counterexample to induction in the form of a state that satisfies I but makes a transition to a state that violates it. Such a state can be obtained from a model of the formula Ind = I ∧ δ ∧ ¬I 0 which is used to check inductiveness. It explains the error, and guides the user towards fixing the program and/or the invariant [Lei10, FLL+ 02]. However, in many cases where the check involves quantifier alternation, current SMT solvers are unable to produce counterexamples. Instead, SMT solvers usually diverge or report “unknown” [GM09, RTGK13]. In such cases, Bounded-Horizon instantiations can be used to present a concrete logical structure which is comprehensible to the user, obtained as a model of the (finite) instantiations of the formula Ind. While this structure is not a true counterexample (as it is only a model of a subset of the instantiations of the formula), it can still guide the user in the right direction towards fixing the program and/or the invariant. We illustrate this using a simple leader-election protocol in a ring [CR79], whose model is presented in Figure 4. The protocol assumes that nodes are organized in a directional ring topology with unique IDs, and elects the node with the highest ID as the leader. Each node sends its own ID to its successor, and forwards messages when they contain an ID higher than its own ID. A node that receives its own ID is elected as leader. We wish to prove a  22  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  action receive packet(n, m) { assume pending(m, n) pending := pending \ {(m, n)} if m = n then leader := leader ∪ {n} else if n < m then assume ring next(n, n0 ) pending := pending ∪ {(m, n0 )} else # do not forward }  pending := ∅; . . . # ring topology action send packet(n) { assume ring next(n, m) pending := pending ∪ {(n, m)} sent := sent ∪ {n} }  Figure 4. A sketch of the leader election protocol discussed in this section (the complete program appears in [add], file ring leader termination.ivy).  (a) (b)  (c)  Figure 5. Leader-election in a ring protocol as an illustration of the use of partial models for incorrect programs and invariants. (a),(b) show partial models of bound 1 and 2, respectively, and (c) illustrates an infinite structure that explains the root cause of the non-inductiveness. termination property which states that once all nodes have sent their ID, and there are no pending messages in the network, there must be an elected leader. To verify this we use a relational model of the protocol, similar to [PMP+ 16], and specify the property via the following formula: (∃n. leader(n)) ∨ (∃n1 , n2 . ¬sent(n1 ) ∨ pending(n1 , n2 ))  (6.1)  A natural attempt of proving this using an inductive invariant is by conjoining Equation (6.1) (which is not inductive by itself) with the following property (this was the authors’ actual next step in proving this termination property): ∀n1 . sent(n1 ) ∧ ¬leader(n1 ) → ((∃n2 . pending(n1 , n2 )) ∨ (∃n2 . n1 < n2 ))  (6.2)  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  23  meaning that if a node has sent its own ID but has not (yet) become leader, then there is either a message pending in the network with the node’s ID, or a node with a higher ID. Alas, the conjunction of Equations (6.1) and (6.2) is still not an inductive invariant for the protocol (as we explain below). Since Equation (6.2) contains ∀∗ ∃∗ quantification, the associated inductiveness check is outside of the decidable EPR fragment. Indeed, Z3 diverges when it is used to check Ind. This is not surprising since the formula has no satisfying finite structures, but has an infinite model (a scenario that is not unusual for ∀∗ ∃∗ formulas). On the other hand, applying Bounded-Horizon (with any bound) to Ind results in a formula that has finite models. These concrete models are partial models of Ind. Figs. 5(a) and (b) show partial models (restricted to the pre-states) obtained with bounds of 1 and 2, respectively, on this example. These models are not true counterexamples to induction: the sub-formula of Equation (6.2) residing under the universal quantifier does not hold for all the elements of the domain. It does, however, hold for all elements with which the quantifier was instantiated, which are the elements above the dashed line in the figure. These elements have all sent their own ID, which was blocked by their successor that has a higher ID, so none of them is the leader. In a finite model, this has to end somewhere, because one of the nodes must have the highest ID. Hence, no finite counter-model exists. However, extrapolating from Figure 5(a) and (b), we can obtain the infinite model depicted in Figure 5(c). This model represents an infinite (“open”) ring in which each node has a lower ID than its successor. This model is a true model of the formula Ind generated by the invariant in Equations (6.1) and (6.2), but the fact that it is infinite prevented Z3 from producing it. Since we use tools that check general (un)satisfiability, which is not limited to finite structures, the only way to prove that an invariant is inductive is to exclude infinite counterexamples to induction as well. Using Bounded-Horizon instantiations, we are able to obtain meaningful partial models that provide hints to the user of what is missing. In this case, the solution is to add an axiom to the system model which states that there is a node with maximal ID: ∃n1 . ∀n2 . n2 ≤ n1 . With this additional assumption, the formula Ind is unsatisfiable so the invariant is inductive, and this is proven both by Z3’s instantiation heuristics and by Bounded-Horizon with a bound of 1. This illustrates the usefulness of Bounded-Horizon when the invariant is not inductive. 7. Implementation and Initial Evaluation In this section, we describe our implementation of Bounded-Horizon of bound 1 and present an initial evaluation of the technique on several examples. While discussing the examples, we note that certain types of ghost code that records properties of the history of an execution can be viewed as a special case of instrumentation, and demonstrate how the Bounded-Horizon technique circumvents the need for augmenting the program with such ghost code. 7.1. Implementation. We implemented a prototype of Bounded-Horizon of bound 1 on top of Z3 [DMB08] and used it within Ivy [PMP+ 16] and the framework of [IBI+ 13]. Our implementation works by adding “guards” that restrict the range of universal quantifiers to the set of constants where necessary. Technically, recall that we are considering the satisfiability of Ind = IS ∧ δS ∧ (¬I 0 )S .6 Let ∀x. θ be a subformula of Ind. If θ contains 6 Skolemization is performed via Z3, taking advantage of heuristics that reduce the number of different Skolem functions.  24  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM   W function symbol applications7, we transform the subformula to ∀x. c x = c → θ where c ranges over const[Ind]. The resulting formula is then dispatched to the solver. This is a simple way to encode the termination criterion of bound 1 while leaving room for the solver to perform the necessary instantiations cleverly. The translation enlarges the formula by O(#Consts · #∀) although the number of bounded instantiations grows exponentially with #∀. The exponential explosion is due to combinations of constants in the instantiation, a problem we defer to the solver. Z3 terminates on the class of formulas because during the Model-Based Quantifier Instantiation process every instantiation of a universally quantified formula has the same truth value in the model as an instantiation using one of the existing ground terms (constants and then BHT1 terms). Z3’s instantiation engine will produce instantiations using existing terms rather than create superfluous new terms [Bjø]. An alternative approach of implementation is to integrate the termination criterion of the bound with the solver’s heuristics more closely (see [BRK+ 15]). 7.2. Examples. We applied the procedure to the incorrect example of Section 6, and also successfully verified several correct programs and invariants using bound 1. These examples are (the examples’ code can be found in [add]): • The client-server example of Figure 1. • List reverse [IBI+ 13], where the invariant states that the n edges (“next” pointers) are reversed. The invariant is ∀∗ ∃∗ due to the encoding of n via n∗ as explained in [IBI+ 13]. • Learning switch [BBG+ 14], in which the routing tables of the switches in the network are automatically constructed through observing the source packets arriving on each switch’s links. The invariant states that in every routing path, every routing node has a successor. • Hole-punching firewall [BBG+ 14], in which the firewall allows a packet from an external host to enter the network only if the host is recorded as trusted by the firewall. The invariant states that if a packet from an external host then is allowed, then there previously was an internal host that contacted the external host. We explored two modeling alternatives: using a ghost history relation, or existentially quantifying over time. We elaborate on this topic and this example below. • Leader election in a ring [CR79, PMP+ 16] with the invariant discussed in Section 6. (See Section 6 for full details.) Derived Relations Over the History. Sometimes expressing verification conditions requires modifications to the program in which the state is augmented with additional relations, but these relations cannot be defined as derived relations over the core program relations. Often the reason is that the property of interest depends not only on the current program state, but also on previous states in the execution history. An example where such a scenario occurs is a hole-punching firewall. In this example, a firewall controls packets entering and leaving the organization’s network. Packets from outside the organization are allowed if they originate from a host that is considered trusted. A host hosto is considered trusted if some host hosti in the organization’s network has previously sent a packet to hosti . This correctness condition depends on previous states in the execution history, and cannot be expressed in an inductive invariant without changing the vocabulary. 7 This in fact implements the approximation as of Equation (3.2). The exact bound 1 per Equation (3.1) can be implemented by a more careful consideration of which universally quantified variables should be restricted, but this was not necessary for our examples.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  25  A common method to overcome this problem is to introduce a ghost state to record historical information, and ghost code to mutate the ghost state, implementing this book-keeping. In the hole-punching firewall example, the user can add a relation ever-pending(host1 , host2 ), and add ghost code that adds the tuple (host1 , host2 ) to ever-pending whenever host1 sends a packet to host2 . We observe that it is sometimes possible to think of such ghost relations as standard derived relations, defined over a vocabulary in which past states are available, and view the procedure of adding appropriate ghost code as an instrumentation by a derived relation as defined in this paper (Definition 4.2). The ideas is as follows: In our first-order setting, we can lift the vocabulary to encode the time explicitly with a classical encoding (see e.g. [Aba89]), by adding a new parameter t to every relation and constant symbol. in the transition relation, references to p(·) are replaced by p(tnow , ·) and p0 (·) by p(t0now , ·), where tnow is a new constant that represents the current time. tnow is incremented in every transition (according to some total order on time). The transition relation also need to include the requirement that the previous states are not modified by the current transition, meaning that ∀t < tnow . ∀x. p(t, x) ↔ p0 (t, x). Call this modified transition relation δt . We now proceed to express the ghost relation as a derived relation over the history. In the example of the hole-punching firewall, the relation ever-pending can now be expressed by the derived relation ψ(host1 , host2 ) ≡ ∃t. t ≤ tnow ∧ pending(t, host1 , host2 ). With this construcrtion, we can directly use the derived relation in the inductive invariant instead of the ghost relation. Viewing the addition of the ghost relation and ghost code as a sound instrumentation, Lemma 4.3 implies that an inductive invariant for the program with ghost state enduces an inductive invariant for δt . This invariant is defined over the vocabulary that records the entire history, but without the ghost relation symbol. The value of this point of view is that the results of this paper imply that in certain cases the user can prove an invariant expressed over the history using bounded instantiations with a low bound, without resorting to ghost code manipulations. The reasoning is as follows: If adding the ghost code does not add existential quantifiers, then augmenting the program with the ghost code can be thought of as instrumentation without additional existentials. If, additionally, the derived relation — now defined over the entire execution history — can be expressed as a combination of universal and existential properties, Theorem 4.10 applies, showing that Bounded-Horizon with a low-bound is therefore guaranteed to prove the inductiveness of the invariant expressed for δt , with no need to add the ghost code. These conditions are satisfied by the hole-punching firewall example. We manually performed the transformation of the transition relation to a vocabulary over the history in Ivy [PMP+ 16], and successfully proved the inductive invariant with Bounded-Horizon of bound 1. 7.3. Initial Evaluation. An initial evaluation of the method’s performance appears in Table 1.  26  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  Table 1. Experimental results. Program Client-server List reverse Learning switch Hole-punching firewall with ghost Hole-punching firewall ∃ time Leader-election in a ring (correct) Leader-election in a ring (incorrect)  #∀ 14 47 70 15 32 41 40  #Func 1 3 1 1 2 1 1  #Consts 15 15 7 18 21 21 20  #∀↓ 2 4 37 3 3 1 1  B1 Total 58 ms 319 ms 245 ms 75 ms 102 ms 113 ms 1112 ms  B1 Solve 3 ms 211 ms 65 ms 4 ms 4 ms 36 ms 1008 ms  Baseline Z3 3 ms 50 ms 33 ms 4 ms 4 ms 27 ms —  B1 Total is the time in milliseconds for the bound 1 implementation. It is compared to Baseline Z3 which is the solving time in milliseconds of Ind as is (with quantifier alternation) by Z3. B1 Solve measures the solving time of the formula restricted to bound 1, which demonstrates that most of the overhead occurs when constructing the formula. #∀ is the number of universal quantifiers in Ind, #Func the number of different Skolem function symbols, and #Consts the number of constants. #∀↓ is the number of universally quantified variables that were restricted in the bound 1 check. Measurements were performed on a 3.5GHz Intel i5-4690 CPU with 8GB RAM running Linux 3.13 x86 64.  The results are encouraging because they suggest that the termination strategy of Bounded-Horizon, at least for bound 1, can be combined with existing instantiation techniques to ensure termination with only a slight performance penalty. Most encouraging is the satisfiable example of Section 6. On this instance, Z3 was able to return “sat” within seconds, although to do so, in theory, the solver must exhaust the entire set of bounded instantiations. This suggests that the Bounded-Horizon termination criterion might indeed be useful for “sat” instances on which the solver may diverge. 8. Related Work Quantifier instantiation. The importance of formulas with quantifier-alternation for program verification has led to many developments in the SMT and theorem-proving communities that aim to allow automated reasoning with such formulas. The Simplify system [DNS05] promoted the practical usage of quantifier triggers, which let the user affect the quantifier instantiation procedure in a clever way. Similar methods are integrated into modern SMT solvers such as Z3 [DMB08]. Recently, a method for annotating the source code with triggers has been developed for Dafny [LP16]. The notion of instantiation depth is related to the notions of matching-depth [DNS05] and instantiation-level [GBT09] which are used for prioritization within the trigger-based instantiation procedure. In addition to user-provided triggers, many automated heuristics for quantifier instantiation have been developed, such as Model-Based Quantifier Instantiation [GM09]. Even when quantifier instantiation is refutation-complete, it is still important and challenging to handle the SAT cases, which are especially important for program verification. Accordingly, many works (e.g., [RTGK13]) consider the problem of model finding. Local Theory Extensions and Psi-Local Theories [Sof05, IJS08, BRK+ 15] identify settings in which limited quantifier instantiations are complete. They show that completeness is achieved exactly when every partial model can be extended to a (total) model. In such settings Bounded-Horizon instantiations are complete for invariant checking. However, Bounded-Horizon can also be useful when completeness cannot be guaranteed.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  27  Classes of SMT formulas that are decidable by complete instantiations have been studied by [GM09]. In the uninterpreted fragment, a refined version of Herbrand’s Theorem generates a finite set of instantiations when the dependencies are stratified. Bounded-Horizon is a way to bound unstratified dependencies. Natural Proofs. Natural proofs [QGSM13] provide a sound and incomplete proof technique for deductive verification. The key idea is to instantiate recursive definitions over the terms appearing in the program. Bounded-Horizon is motivated by a similar intuition, but focuses on instantiating quantifiers in a way that is appropriate for the EPR setting. Decidable logics. Different decidable logics can be used to check inductive invariants. For example, Monadic second-order logic [HJJ+ 95] obtains decidability by limiting the underlying domain to consist of trees only, and in particular does not allow arbitrary relations, which are useful to describe properties of programs. There are also many decidable fragments of first-order logic [BGG01]. Our work aims to transcend the class of invariants checkable by a reduction to the decidable logic EPR. We note that the example of Section 6 does not fall under the Loosely-Guarded Fragment of first-order logic [Hod02] due to a use of a transitivity axiom, and does not enjoy the finite-model property. Abstractions for verification of infinite-state systems. Our work is closely related to abstractions of infinite-state systems. These abstractions aim at automatically inferring inductive invariants in a sound way. We are interested in checking if a given invariant is inductive either for automatic and semi-automatic verification. The View-Abstraction approach [AHH13, AHH14, AHH15] defines a useful abstraction for the verification of parameterized systems. This abstraction is closely related to universally quantified invariants. An extension of this approach [AHH14] adds contexts to the abstraction, which are used to capture ∀∗ ∃∗ invariants in a restricted setting where nodes have finite-state and are only related by specific topologies. Our work is in line with the need to use ∀∗ ∃∗ invariants for verification, but applies in a more general setting (with unrestricted high-arity relations) at the cost of losing completeness of invariant checking. Our work is related to the TVLA system [LS00, SRW02] which allows the programmers to define instrumentation relations. TVLA also employs finite differencing to infer sound update code for updating instrumentation relations [RSL10], but generates non-EPR formulas and does not guarantee completeness. The focus operation in TVLA implements materialization which resembles quantifier-instantiation. TVLA shows that very few built-in instrumentation relations can be used to verify many different programs. Instrumentation and update formulas. The idea of using instrumentation relations and generating update formulas is not limited to TVLA and was also used for more predictable SMT verification [LQ06, LQ08]. Instrumentation for Decidable Logics. The technique of instrumentation by derived relations to allow decidable reasoning is further discussed in a recent work [PLSS17]. Several variants of Paxos are proved safe using models in the decidable logic of EPR with stratified functions, whose use is enabled by instrumentation. Efficiently mplementing a bounded instantiations scheme that bounds instantiations only where they are unstratified is an interesting challenge, in hope of relieving the need for instrumentation also for such cases.  28  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  9. Conclusion We have provided an initial study of the power of bounded instantiations for tackling quantifier alternation. This paper shows that quantifier instantiation with small bounds can simulate instrumentation. This is a step in order to eliminate the need for instrumenting the program, which can be error-prone. The other direction, i.e. simulating quantifier instantiation with instrumentation, was also presented for conceptual purposes, although it is less appealing from a practical point of view. We are encouraged by our initial experience that shows that various protocols can be proven with small instantiation bounds, and that partial models are useful for understanding the failures of the solver to prove inductiveness. Some of these failures correspond to non-inductive claims, especially those due to infinite counterexamples. In the future we hope to leverage this in effective deductive verification tools, and explore meaningful ways to display infinite counterexamples to the user. Other interesting directions include further investigation into the automation of program transformations for the purpose of verification (of which instrumentation is an example), including types of ghost code, and the use of Bounded-Horizon for automatically inferring invariants with quantifier-alternation.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  29  References [Aba89] [add] [AHH13]  [AHH14] [AHH15] [BBG+ 14]  [BGG96] [BGG01] [Bjø] [BRK+ 15]  [CR79] [DMB08] [DNS05] [FLL+ 02]  [FPI+ 17] [GBT09] [GM09]  [HHK+ 15]  [HJJ+ 95]  [Hod02] [IBI+ 13]  [IBR+ 14]  Martı́n Abadi. The power of temporal proofs. Theor. Comput. Sci., 65(1):35–83, June 1989. Full code materials. http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/research/yotam.feldman/papers/tacas17/ examples_code.zip. Parosh Aziz Abdulla, Frédéric Haziza, and Lukás Holı́k. All for the price of few. In Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation, 14th International Conference, VMCAI 2013, Rome, Italy, January 20-22, 2013. Proceedings, pages 476–495, 2013. Parosh Aziz Abdulla, Frédéric Haziza, and Lukáš Holı́k. Block me if you can! In International Static Analysis Symposium, pages 1–17. Springer, 2014. Parosh Abdulla, Frédéric Haziza, and Lukáš Holı́k. Parameterized verification through view abstraction. International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer, pages 1–22, 2015. Thomas Ball, Nikolaj Bjørner, Aaron Gember, Shachar Itzhaky, Aleksandr Karbyshev, Mooly Sagiv, Michael Schapira, and Asaf Valadarsky. Vericon: towards verifying controller programs in software-defined networks. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’14, Edinburgh, United Kingdom - June 09 - 11, 2014, page 31, 2014. E. Börger, E. Grädel, and Y. Gurevich. The Classical Decision Problem. Springer-Verlag, 1996. Egon Börger, Erich Grädel, and Yuri Gurevich. The classical decision problem. Springer Science & Business Media, 2001. Nikolaj Bjørner. personal communication. Kshitij Bansal, Andrew Reynolds, Tim King, Clark W. Barrett, and Thomas Wies. Deciding local theory extensions via e-matching. In Computer Aided Verification - 27th International Conference, CAV 2015, San Francisco, CA, USA, July 18-24, 2015, Proceedings, Part II, pages 87–105, 2015. Ernest Chang and Rosemary Roberts. An improved algorithm for decentralized extrema-finding in circular configurations of processes. Communications of the ACM, 22(5):281–283, 1979. L. De Moura and N. Bjørner. Z3: An efficient SMT solver. In TACAS, 2008. David Detlefs, Greg Nelson, and James B. Saxe. Simplify: a theorem prover for program checking. J. ACM, 52(3):365–473, 2005. Cormac Flanagan, K. Rustan M. Leino, Mark Lillibridge, Greg Nelson, James B. Saxe, and Raymie Stata. Extended static checking for java. In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), Berlin, Germany, June 17-19, 2002, pages 234–245, 2002. Yotam M. Y. Feldman, Oded Padon, Neil Immerman, Mooly Sagiv, and Sharon Shoham. Bounded quantifier instantiation for checking inductive invariants. In TACAS, 2017. Yeting Ge, Clark W. Barrett, and Cesare Tinelli. Solving quantified verification conditions using satisfiability modulo theories. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell., 55(1-2):101–122, 2009. Yeting Ge and Leonardo De Moura. Complete instantiation for quantified formulas in satisfiabiliby modulo theories. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, pages 306–320. Springer, 2009. Chris Hawblitzel, Jon Howell, Manos Kapritsos, Jacob R. Lorch, Bryan Parno, Michael L. Roberts, Srinath T. V. Setty, and Brian Zill. Ironfleet: proving practical distributed systems correct. In Proceedings of the 25th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP, pages 1–17, 2015. Jesper G. Henriksen, Jakob L. Jensen, Michael E. Jørgensen, Nils Klarlund, Robert Paige, Theis Rauhe, and Anders Sandholm. Mona: Monadic second-order logic in practice. In Tools and Algorithms for Construction and Analysis of Systems, First International Workshop, TACAS ’95, Aarhus, Denmark, May 19-20, 1995, Proceedings, pages 89–110, 1995. Ian Hodkinson. Loosely guarded fragment of first-order logic has the finite model property. Studia Logica, 70(2):205–240, 2002. Shachar Itzhaky, Anindya Banerjee, Neil Immerman, Aleksandar Nanevski, and Mooly Sagiv. Effectively-propositional reasoning about reachability in linked data structures. In CAV, volume 8044 of LNCS, pages 756–772, 2013. Shachar Itzhaky, Nikolaj Bjørner, Thomas W. Reps, Mooly Sagiv, and Aditya V. Thakur. Property-directed shape analysis. In Computer Aided Verification - 26th International Conference, CAV 2014, Held as Part of the Vienna Summer of Logic, VSL 2014, Vienna, Austria, July 18-22, 2014. Proceedings, pages 35–51, 2014.  30  [IJS08]  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  Carsten Ihlemann, Swen Jacobs, and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans. On local reasoning in verification. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, 14th International Conference, TACAS 2008, Held as Part of the Joint European Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2008, Budapest, Hungary, March 29-April 6, 2008. Proceedings, pages 265–281, 2008. [Imm99] Neil Immerman. Descriptive complexity. Graduate texts in computer science. Springer, 1999. [IRR+ 04] Neil Immerman, Alexander Moshe Rabinovich, Thomas W. Reps, Shmuel Sagiv, and Greta Yorsh. The boundary between decidability and undecidability for transitive-closure logics. In CSL, 2004. [KBI+ 17] Aleksandr Karbyshev, Nikolaj Bjørner, Shachar Itzhaky, Noam Rinetzky, and Sharon Shoham. Property-directed inference of universal invariants or proving their absence. J. ACM, 64(1):7:1–7:33, 2017. [Lei10] K Rustan M Leino. Dafny: An automatic program verifier for functional correctness. In Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Reasoning, pages 348–370. Springer, 2010. [LP16] K. Rustan M. Leino and Clément Pit-Claudel. Trigger selection strategies to stabilize program verifiers. In Computer Aided Verification - 28th International Conference, CAV 2016, Toronto, ON, Canada, July 17-23, 2016, Proceedings, Part I, pages 361–381, 2016. Shuvendu K. Lahiri and Shaz Qadeer. Verifying properties of well-founded linked lists. In Proceed[LQ06] ings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2006, Charleston, South Carolina, USA, January 11-13, 2006, pages 115–126, 2006. Shuvendu K. Lahiri and Shaz Qadeer. Back to the future: revisiting precise program verification [LQ08] using SMT solvers. In Proceedings of the 35th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2008, San Francisco, California, USA, January 7-12, 2008, pages 171–182, 2008. [LS00] Tal Lev-Ami and Shmuel Sagiv. TVLA: A system for implementing static analyses. In Static Analysis, 7th International Symposium, SAS 2000, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, June 29 - July 1, 2000, Proceedings, pages 280–301, 2000. [PLSS17] Oded Padon, Giuliano Losa, Mooly Sagiv, and Sharon Shoham. Paxos made epr: Decidable reasoning about distributed protocols. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 1(OOPSLA):108:1–108:31, October 2017. [PMP+ 16] Oded Padon, Kenneth L. McMillan, Aurojit Panda, Mooly Sagiv, and Sharon Shoham. Ivy: safety verification by interactive generalization. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2016, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, June 13-17, 2016, pages 614–630, 2016. [QGSM13] Xiaokang Qiu, Pranav Garg, Andrei Stefanescu, and Parthasarathy Madhusudan. Natural proofs for structure, data, and separation. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’13, Seattle, WA, USA, June 16-19, 2013, pages 231–242, 2013. [Ram30] F. P. Ramsey. On a problem of formal logic. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, s2-30(1):264–286, 1930. [RSL10] Thomas W. Reps, Mooly Sagiv, and Alexey Loginov. Finite differencing of logical formulas for static analysis. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 32(6), 2010. [RTG+ 13] Andrew Reynolds, Cesare Tinelli, Amit Goel, Sava Krstic, Morgan Deters, and Clark Barrett. Quantifier instantiation techniques for finite model finding in SMT. In Automated Deduction CADE-24 - 24th International Conference on Automated Deduction, Lake Placid, NY, USA, June 9-14, 2013. Proceedings, pages 377–391, 2013. [RTGK13] Andrew Reynolds, Cesare Tinelli, Amit Goel, and Sava Krstic. Finite model finding in SMT. In Computer Aided Verification - 25th International Conference, CAV 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia, July 13-19, 2013. Proceedings, pages 640–655, 2013. [Sof05] Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans. Hierarchic reasoning in local theory extensions. In Automated Deduction - CADE-20, 20th International Conference on Automated Deduction, Tallinn, Estonia, July 22-27, 2005, Proceedings, pages 219–234, 2005. [SRW02] Shmuel Sagiv, Thomas W. Reps, and Reinhard Wilhelm. Parametric shape analysis via 3-valued logic. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 24(3):217–298, 2002.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  31  Appendix A. Undecidability For a universal formula I ∈ ∀∗ (Σ), the formula I ∧ δ ∧ ¬I 0 is in EPR (recall that δ is specified in EPR). Hence, checking inductiveness amounts to checking the unsatisfiability of an EPR formula, and is therefore decidable. The same holds for I ∈ AF (Σ). However, this is no longer true when quantifier alternation is introduced. For example, checking inductiveness of I ∈ ∀∗ ∃∗ (Σ) amounts to checking unsatisfiability of a formula in a fragment for which satisfiability is undecidable. In this section we show that checking inductiveness of ∀∗ ∃∗ formulas is indeed undecidable, even when the transition relation is restricted to EPR. The undecidability of the problem justifies sound but incomplete algorithms for checking inductiveness, one of which is the Bounded-Horizon algorithm (defined in Section 3) which we study in this paper. Finite and infinite structures. We begin by showing that the problem is undecidable when structures, or program states, are assumed to be finite. This is the intention in most application domains [Imm99] (including the examples in Section 7), especially when the program does not involve numerical computations. Nevertheless, in this paper we mostly concern ourselves with the problem of checking inductiveness when structures may also be infinite. This is because SMT-based deductive verification relies on proof techniques from standard first-order logic, whose semantics are defined over general structures, i.e. both finite and infinite. We thus establish an undecidability result for this setting as well. It is interesting to note that the discrepancy between the intended finiteness of the domain and the proof techniques, which cannot incorporate this assumption, re-emerges in Section 6. We refer to inductiveness over finite structures when the validity of I ∧ δ → I 0 is considered over finite structures, and to inductiveness over general structures when it is considered over both finite and infinite structures. Scope of the proofs. The undecidability proofs of this section are by reductions from tiling problems. Although technically it is also possible to prove the results by a trivial reduction from the satisfiability of ∀∗ ∃∗ formulas (since invariants for the transition relation true are necessarily either valid or unsatisfiable), we believe that the proofs presented here demonstrate the intuition behind the inherent difficulty of checking inductiveness of ∀∗ ∃∗ formulas in a more profound and robust way. To further provide intuition, we prove the undecidability of a closely related problem, that of checking inductive invariants for safety of transition systems. Given a transition relation δ (over Σ ] Σ0 ), a sentence ϕ0 (over Σ) describing the set of initial states and a sentence ϕP (over Σ) describing the safety property, the problem is to check whether ϕ0 → I (initiation), I ∧ δ → I 0 (consecution), and I → ϕP (safety) are valid (over finite or general structures). We will consider this problem when I ∈ ∀∗ ∃∗ , ϕ0 ∈ ∀∗ , ϕP ∈ ∀∗ , in instances where ϕ0 → I and I → ϕP are valid (so it only remains to check whether I ∧ δ → I 0 is valid). With these restrictions, the undecidability of the problem of checking inductive invariants for safety of transition systems over general structures implies the undecidability of the problem of checking inductiveness as used elsewhere in this paper. We now proceed to state the undecidability results and their proofs. A.1. Inductiveness Over Finite Structures. Theorem A.1. It is undecidable to check given I ∈ ∀∗ ∃∗ and δ ∈ EPR whether I is inductive for δ over finite structures.  32  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  The proof is based on a reduction from a variant of tiling problems. We start by defining the specific tiling problem used in the proof of this theorem: Definition A.2 ([IRR+ 04]). A halting-tiling problem consists of a finite set of tiles T with designated tiles Tstart , Thalt ∈ T , along with horizontal and vertical adjacency relations H, V ⊆ T × T . A solution to a halting-tiling problem is an arrangement of instances of the tiles in a finite rectangular grid (“board”) such that the tile Tstart appears in the top left position, the tile Thalt appears in the end of a row (the rightmost position in some row), and the adjacency relationships H, V are respected, meaning: if a tile t2 appears immediately to the right of t1 it must hold that (t1 , t2 ) ∈ H, and if a tile t2 appears immediately below t1 it must hold that (t1 , t2 ) ∈ V. The problem is undecidable [IRR+ 04]. The proof is by a reduction from the halting problem: given a Turing machine we can compute a halting-tiling problem such that the problem has a solution iff the machine halts (on the empty input). In the reduction, rows represent the tape of the Turing machine as it evolves over time (computation steps). The tiles encode the location of the head and the current (control) state of the machine. The horizontal and vertical constraints ensure that successive tiled rows correspond to a correct step of the machine, and the locality of constratins is possible by the locality of computation in a Turing machine. See [BGG96] for further details. Proof of Theorem A.1. The proof is by a reduction from non-tilability in the halting-tiling problem (Definition A.2) to the problem of checking inductive invariants for safety of a transition system over finite structures where the initiation and safety requirements are valid. We think of the transition relation δ as incrementally placing tiles in a rectangle. Vocabulary. To express locations on the board, we use a total order for both the horizontal and vertical dimensions of the board. We add an immediate predecessor relation j = i − 1 which is true if j < i and there is no element of the order between j, i. We use a constant 0 for the minimal element of the order. These notions can be defined using a universally quantified formula.8 A location is a pair of elements of the order, a vertical and horizontal component. We sometimes use the term board order to refer to the lexicographic order of pairs of elements of the order. The transition system keeps track of the last tile placed on the board by a relation M (i, j) which is true only for the last updated location. Since the placing of tiles occurs in a sequential manner we also call this board location maximal, and a location active if it comes before the maximal location in the board order. The active area is the set of active locations. The state of tiles on the board is represented by a set of relations {Tk }, one for each tile type, encoding the locations on the board where a tile of type Tk is placed. In this proof we also use a constant max to be an element of the total order, representing the width of the rectangle. 8 The assumption that there exists a predecessor is left for the invariant to state explicitly when necessary, as this is the heart of the ∀∗ ∃∗ quantification in the proof.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  33  Transitions. In every step the transition system places a valid tile in the next board location. The next board location is considered while respecting the width of the rectangle, moving to the next row if the horizontal component of the current tile is max. Placing a tile of type Tnext on the board is done by an EPR update of the (two-vocabulary) form ∀i, j. M 0 (i, j) ↔ ((j = 0 ∧ M (i − 1, max) ∨ (j 6= 0 ∧ M (i, j − 1)))  0 ∀i, j. Tnext (i, j) ↔ Tnext (i, j) ∨ M 0 (i, j) (A.1) ∀i, j. Tk0 (i, j) ↔ Tk (i, j)  ∀Tk 6= Tnext .  The transition system nondeterministically chooses a tile Tnext type that respects the adjacency relationships. These relationships are with the tiles in the board location preceding the current location in the horizontal and vertical components, expressible using the immediate predecessor relation and existential quantification on these predecessors. (Note that the existential quantifiers do not need to reside in the scope of universal quantifiers — they depend only on the current location.) Because the set of tile types T is finite, expressing the allowed tile types given the two adjacent locations can be done by a quantifier-free formula. Overall the EPR formula describing a step of the system consists of a disjunction between choices for Tnext . Each of these possible choices is described via a conjunction of the guard that makes sure that it is legal to place Tnext , and a corresponding update to the relation that is a conjunction of the formulas in Equation (A.1). Initial state. Initially we only have Tstart placed in the upper-left corner, so ∀i, j. Tstart (i, j) ↔ (i = 0 ∧ j = 0) and ∀i, j. ¬Tk (i, j) for every other tile type Tk . Safety property. The safety property states that the special tile Thalt , is not placed on the board in the end of a row (in a max position) in the active area. Invariant. The invariant states that in the active area we have a valid partial tiling. We require this by a ∀∗ ∃∗ formula saying that for every tile placed in an active location (except for the maximal location) there is a successor tile, placed in the next board location, that conforms to the (local) ajdacency relations.9 We also conjoin the safety property to the invariant. Reduction argument. The invariant holds for the initial state, and trivially implies the safety property. If there exists a valid tiling with Thalt in the end of a row, a counterexample to induction can be obtained by encoding this valid tiling in the post-state and that same tiling without Thalt , which is the last-placed tile, in the pre-state. For the converse, assume that the invariant is not inductive over finite structures, i.e., there exists a finite counterexample to induction, and show that there exists a solution to the halting-tiling problem. The reasoning is as follows: A finite state satisfying the invariant induces a valid finite partial tiling (defined by the active area of the board in the structure). Since the transition system always places a tile that respects the adjacency relations, it is easy to see that a counterexample to induction must be such that the transition places Thalt on the board in the end of a row, and that this also induces a valid partial finite tiling in 9 We specify the requirement in this forward fashion, rather than requiring that every tile has a valid  predecessor, in order to easily reuse this invariant in the proof of Theorem A.3.  34  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  the post-state. Thus a finite counterexample to induction implies the existence of a valid finite tiling with Thalt in the end of a row, which is a solution to the halting-tiling problem. Thus the invariant is inductive iff the halting-tiling problem does not have a solution. A.2. Inductiveness Over General Structures. Theorem A.3. It is undecidable to check given I ∈ ∀∗ ∃∗ and δ ∈ EPR whether I is inductive for δ over general (finite and infinite) structures. The proof is based on a reduction from a variant of tiling problems. We start by defining the specific tiling problem used in the proof of this theorem: Definition A.4. A lower-triangular infinite-tiling problem consists of a finite set of tiles T , along with horizontal and vertical adjacency relations H, V ⊆ T × T . A solution to a lower-triangular infinite-tiling problem is an arrangement of instances of the tiles in the lower-triangular plane (i.e. a total function {(i, j) ∈ N×N | i ≤ j} → T ) where the adjacency relationships H, V are respected, meaning: if a tile t2 appears immediately to the right of t1 it must hold that (t1 , t2 ) ∈ H, and if a tile t2 appears immediately below t1 it must hold that (t1 , t2 ) ∈ V. The problem is undecidable The proof is by a reduction from the non-halting problem: given a Turing machine we can compute a lower-triangular infinite-tiling problem such that the problem has a solution iff the machine does not halt (on the empty input). The encoding is similar to [IRR+ 04]. Proof of Theorem A.3. The proof is by a reduction from non-tilability in the lower-triangular infinite-tiling problem (Definition A.4) to the problem of checking inductive invariants for safety of a transition system (over general structures) where the initiation and safety requirements are valid. We construct a transition relation similar to the one in the proof of Theorem A.1, with some changes, as described below. Discussion and motivation. To provide some intuition to the difference between the reductions, we remark that both of the proofs in this section are in essence a reduction from the halting (or non-halting) problem. The proof of Theorem A.1 encodes runs of the machine as finite tilings, and asks whether a tiling that represents a terminating computation, encoded by Thalt , is possible. This reduction is no longer adequate when structures may be infinite. The reason is that an infinite valid partial tiling may not correspond to reachable configuration of the Turing machine, so there may be such an infinite tiling with Thalt even though the Turing machine never halts.10 In fact, the reduction in this proof must be in the opposite direction: the invariant should be inductive iff the machine does not terminate, whereas in the proof of Theorem A.1 the invariant is inductive iff the machine does terminate. This is because satisfiability is recursively-enumerable over finite structures and co-recursively-enumerable over general structures (due to the existence of proofs), which reflects on checking inductiveness through the satisfiability check of the formula I ∧ δ ∧ ¬I 0 . 10 One way to construct such a tiling, using a tile in row ω of the board, is utilized in the proof that  follows.  BOUNDED QUANTIFIER INSTANTIATION FOR CHECKING INDUCTIVE INVARIANTS  35  Thus, we would like to have a counterexample to induction when the machine never halts, i.e. has an infinite run. As before, runs of the machine are encoded via tiling, only that now an infinite structure can encode an infinite run of the machine. (It is not necessary that an infinite tiling represents a valid infinite run of the machine, but every infinite run can be represented by such a structure.) We would like to “detect” this situation. Our way to do this is by the observation that induction on the number of rows, or execution steps, must hold when the number of rows is finite (but unbounded), as in Theorem A.1, but does not necessarily hold when there may be an infinite number of rows. This idea is implemented by a relation P with the invariant that it is preserved under successive board locations. In an infinite structure this does not imply that P is true for all locations. A flag f is used to express a transition that is aware of P not being globally true. Another technical detail is the lower-triangular formulation of the tiling problem, which is used to construct the infinite computation of the transition system by placing a single tile in each step. Returning to the proof, we describe the reduction and highlight its differences from the reduction in Theorem A.1. Following the lower-triangular formulation of the tiling proble, we restrict the board order to the lower-triangular part (locations (i, j) such that i ≤ j) and ignore other locations when considering successor in the board order. Vocabulary. We add a relation P over board locations, and a Boolean flag (nullary predicate) f. Transitions. In each step the transition system places a valid tile in the next board location, similar to the proof of Theorem A.1. The difference is that the criterion for moving to place tiles in the next tile is when the current location (i, j) has i = j (whereas in Theorem A.1 the criterion was j = max). To maintain the invariant that P is preserved under successor of active tiles in the board, when we place a new tile, if P holds for the maximal location before the step, set P to true for the new maximal location. If P does not hold for the new maximal location, turn f to false. Initial state. P is true for the first location (0, 0) only, and f is true. In this proof, initially the board is empty. Safety property. The safety property now asserts that f is true. Invariant. As before, the invariant states that the active board represents a valid partial tiling, i.e. every active tile except for the maximal one has a valid successor. The invariant also states that P is preserved under successor of board, i.e.: if (i1 , j1 ) and (i2 , j2 ) are successive active board locations w.r.t. the board order, then if P holds for (i1 , j1 ) is must also hold for (i2 , j2 ). We also conjoin the safety property to the invariant. Reduction argument. The invariant holds for the initial state, and trivially implies the safety property. Assume that there is no solution to the lower-triangular infinite-tiling problem, and show that the invariant is inductive. The reasoning is as follows: A state satisfying the invariant induces a partial valid tiling — either finite or infinite — over the active area of the board. Since there is no valid partial tiling with an infinite number of rows, the number of active locations must be finite (the number of columns in the active domain is bounded by  36  Y.M.Y. FELDMAN, O. PADON, N. IMMERMAN, M. SAGIV, AND S. SHOHAM  the number of rows, since we are discussing lower-triangular tilings). Because P is preserved under successor of the board order, by induction on the number of locations, P must hold for the maixmal location. After a transition is taken, f remains true. Since the transition system always places a tile that respects the horizontal and vertical ajdacency relations and sets P to true for the new maximal location, it is easy to see that the rest of the invariant is preserved by a transition as well. For the converse direction, if there is a solution to the lower-triangular infinite-tiling problem, then there is an infinite structure encoding this tiling. The transition begins with the infinite valid tiling, with a new additional row after this infinite sequence of tiled rows. (Recall that the board dimensions are axiomatized using a total order; the additional row index corresponds to ordinal ω of vertical order.) We place some tile in the first column of this row as in some valid row in the tiling. Note that when placing tiles in this row we need not worry about vertical constraints, because they were expressed in a forward fashion, and this row is not a successor of any other row. The first leftmost location in the new row is set to be the maximal active one, and we set P to be false for this location. Note that this does not violate the invariant: P is preserved under successor of the board location, but nonetheless does not hold for the location in the additional row (it is not the successor of any location). The transition will now place a new tile and turn f to false, P does not hold for the current maximal location, thereby violating the invariant. Thus the invariant is inductive iff the infinite tiling problem does not have a solution.  This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/2.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second St, Suite 300, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA, or Eisenacher Strasse 2, 10777 Berlin, Germany

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
