Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_2308

Abstract:
arXiv:1705.06366v2 [cs.LG] 31 May 2017  Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents  David Held∗ Computer Science, UC Berkeley davheld@berkeley.edu Carlos Florensa∗ Computer Science, UC Berkeley florensad@berkeley.edu  Xinyang Geng∗ Computer Science, UC Berkeley young.geng@berkeley.edu Pieter Abbeel OpenAI Computer Science, UC Berkeley International Computer Science Institute (ICSI) pabbeel@berkeley.edu  Abstract Reinforcement learning is a powerful technique to train an agent to perform a task. However, an agent that is trained using reinforcement learning is only capable of achieving the single task that is specified via its reward function. Such an approach does not scale well to settings in which an agent needs to perform a diverse set of tasks, such as navigating to varying positions in a room or moving objects to varying locations. Instead, we propose a method that allows an agent to automatically discover the range of tasks that it is capable of performing in its environment. We use a generator network to propose tasks for the agent to try to achieve, each task being specified as reaching a certain parametrized sub-set of the state-space. The generator network is optimized using adversarial training to produce tasks that are always at the appropriate level of difficulty for the agent. Our method thus automatically produces a curriculum of tasks for the agent to learn. We show that, by using this framework, an agent can efficiently and automatically learn to perform a wide set of tasks without requiring any prior knowledge of its environment. Our method can also learn to achieve tasks with sparse rewards, which traditionally pose significant challenges.  1  Introduction  Reinforcement learning (RL) can be used to train an agent to perform a task by optimizing a reward function. Recently, a number of impressive results have been demonstrated by training agents using reinforcement learning: such agents have been trained to defeat a champion Go player (Silver et al., 2016), to outperform humans in 49 Atari games (Guo et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2015), and to perform a variety of difficult robotics tasks (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Duan et al., 2016; Levine et al., 2016). In each of the above cases, the agent is trained to optimize a single reward function in order to learn to perform a single task. However, there are many real-world environments in which a robot will need to be able to perform not a single task but a diverse set of tasks, such as navigating to varying positions in a room or moving objects to varying locations. To automatically learn to achieve a diverse set of tasks, our algorithm allows an agent to generate its own reward functions, defined with respect to target sub-sets of the state space, called goals. Our method will propose different goals for the agent to try to reach, and then the agent will learn what actions are necessary to reach each ∗  Equal contribution.  proposed goal. After multiple training iterations, the agent learns to reach a wide variety of goals in its state space. Specifically, our approach learns a policy that takes as input not only the current observation but also the goal (i.e. the parameters describing the target state set) currently to be achieved, similar to the universal value functions in Schaul et al. (2015). We consider the problem of maximizing the average success rate of our agent over all possible goals, where success is defined as the probability of successfully reaching each goal by the current policy. In order to efficiently maximize this objective, the algorithm must intelligently choose which goals to focus on at every training stage: goals should be feasible and at the appropriate level of difficulty for the current policy. We generate such goals using a Goal Generative Adversarial Network (Goal GAN), a variation of to the GANs introduced by Goodfellow et al. (2014). A goal discriminator is trained to evaluate whether a goal is feasible and at the appropriate level of difficulty for the current policy, and a goal generator is trained to generate goals that meet this criteria. We show that such a framework allows a policy to quickly learn to reach all feasible goals in its environment, with no prior knowledge about the environment or the tasks being performed. Our method automatically creates a curriculum, in which, at each step, the generator generates goals that are only slightly more difficult than the goals that the agent already knows how to achieve. Due to this curriculum, the policy is able to learn even with a sparse reward function, such as an indicator that rewards the agent for reaching the goal. In summary, our main contribution is a method for automatic curriculum generation that considerably improves the sampling efficiency of learning to reach all feasible goals in the environment. Learning to reach multiple goals is useful for multi-task settings such as navigation or manipulation, in which we want the agent to perform a wide range of tasks. Our method naturally handles sparse reward functions, without needing to manually modify the reward function for every task, based on prior task knowledge. Instead, our method dynamically modifies the probability distribution from which goals are sampled to ensure that the generated goals are always at the appropriate difficulty level, until the agent learns to reach all goals within the feasible goal space.  2  Related Work  Intrinsic Motivation: Intrinsic motivation involves learning with an intrinsically specified objective (Schmidhuber, 1991, 2010). Recently there have been various formulations of intrinsic motivation, relating to optimizing surprise (Houthooft et al., 2016; Achiam & Sastry, 2016) or surrogates of state-visitation counts (Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2016). All these approaches improve learning in sparse tasks where naive exploration performs poorly. However, these formulations do not have a notion of what states are hard for the learner and the intrinsic motivation is independent of the current performance of the agent. In contrast, our formulation of intrinsic motivation directly relates to our policy improvement: the agent is motivated to train on tasks that push the boundaries of its capabilities. Skill-learning: We are often interested in training an agent to perform a collection of tasks rather than a single one, like reaching different positions in the agent’s state-space. Skill learning is a common approach to this problem as it allows the agent to re-use skills, improving learning compared to training for every task from scratch. Discovering useful skills is a challenging task that has mostly been studied for discrete environments (Vigorito & Barto, 2010; Mnih et al., 2016) or for continuous tasks where demonstrations are provided (Konidaris et al., 2011; Ranchod et al., 2015). More recent work overcomes some of these limitations by training low-level modulated locomotor controllers (Heess et al., 2016), or multimodal policies with an information theoretic regularizer to learn a fixed-size set of skills (Florensa et al., 2017). Nevertheless, previous work usually sees the skills learning as a pre-training step from which useful primitives are obtained and can later be used to achieve other tasks. Hence, additional downstream training is required to properly compose the skills in a purposeful way. On the other hand, our approach directly trains policies that take as input the desired goals, enabling generalization to new desired (test) goals without the need for fine tuning. The problem that we are exploring has been referred to as “multi-task policy search” (Deisenroth et al., 2014) or “contextual policy search,” in which the task is viewed as the context for the policy (Deisenroth et al., 2013; Fabisch & Metzen, 2014). As opposed to the work of Deisenroth et al. (2014), our work uses a curriculum to perform efficient multi-task learning, even in sparse reward 2  settings. In contrast to Fabisch & Metzen (2014), which trains from a small number of discrete contexts / tasks, our method generates a training curriculum directly in continuous task space. Curriculum Learning: The increasing interest on training single agents to perform multiple tasks is leading to new developments on how to optimally present the tasks to the agent during learning. The idea of using a curriculum has been explored in many prior works on supervised learning (Bengio et al., 2009; Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014; Bengio et al., 2015). However, these curricula are usually hand-designed, using the expertise of the system designer. Another line of work takes into explicit consideration which examples are hard for the current learner and allows it to not consider them (Kumar et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2015). However this has mainly been applied for supervised tasks and most curriculum learning in reinforcement learning still relies on fixed pre-specified sequences of tasks (Karpathy & Van De Panne, 2012). In contrast, we automatically create a curriculum with no prior knowledge by discovering which tasks are easy or difficult for a given policy. Other recent work has proposed using a given baseline performance for several tasks to gauge which tasks are the hardest and require more training (Sharma & Ravindran, 2017), but the framework can only handle a finite set of tasks and cannot handle sparse rewards. Our method trains a policy that generalizes to a set of continuously parameterized tasks and is shown to perform well even under sparse rewards by not allocating training effort to tasks that are too hard for the current performance of the agent. Finally, an interesting self-play strategy has recently been proposed that is concurrent to our work (Sukhbaatar et al., 2017), but, contrary to our approach that is designed to generate many training tasks at the right level of difficulty, the asymmetric component of their method could lead to biased exploration. Furthermore, they view their work as simply an exploration bonus for a single target task (and they evaluate their method accordingly); in contrast, we define a new problem of efficiently optimizing a policy across a range of goals, as we explain below.  3 3.1  Problem Definition Goal-parameterized Reward Functions  In the traditional reinforcement learning framework, at each timestep t, the agent in state st ∈ S ⊆ Rn takes an action at ∈ A ⊆ Rm , according to some policy π(at | st ) that maps from the current state st to a probability distribution over actions. Taking this action causes the agent to enter into a new state st+1 according to a transition distribution p(st+1 |st , at ), and receive a reward rt = r(st , at , st+1 ). The objective of the agent is to find the policy π that maximizes the expected PT return, defined as the sum of rewards R = t=0 rt , where T is a maximal time given to perform the task. The learned policy corresponds to maximizing the expected return for a single reward function. In our framework, instead of learning to optimize a single reward function, we consider a range of reward functions rg indexed or parametrized by a goal g ∈ G. Each goal g corresponds to a set of states S g ⊂ S such that goal g is considered to be achieved when the agent is in any state st ∈ S g . Then the objective is to learn a policy that, given any goal g ∈ G, acts optimally with respect to rg . In this paper, we define a very simple reward function that measures whether the agent has reached the goal rg (st , at , st+1 ) = 1{st+1 ∈ S g } ,  (1)  g  where 1 is the indicator function. In our case, we use S = {st : d(f (st ), g) ≤ }, where f (·) is a function that projects a state into goal space G, d(·, ·) is a distance metric in goal space, and  is the acceptable tolerance that determines when the goal is reached. However, our method can handle generic sparse rewards (as in Eq. (1)) and does not require a distance metric for learning. Furthermore, we define our MDP such that each episode terminates when st ∈ S g . Thus, the return PT Rg = t=0 rtg is a binary random variable whose value indicates whether the agent has reached the set S g in at most T time-steps. Hence, the return of a trajectory s0 , s1 , . . . can be expressed ST as Rg = 1{ t=0 st ∈ S g }. Now, policies are also conditioned on the current goal g, written as π(at | st , g), and the expected return obtained when we take actions sampled from it can then be expressed as the probability of succeeding on each goal within T timesteps, as shown in Eq. (2). Rg (π) = Eπ(· | st ,g) 1{  T [  st ∈ S g } = P  t=0  T [ t=0  3  st ∈ S g π, g    (2)  The sparse indicator reward function of Eq. (1) is not only simple but also represents a property of many real-world goal states: in many settings, it may be difficult to tell whether the agent is getting closer to achieving a goal, but easy to tell when a goal has been achieved. For example, for a robot moving in a maze, taking actions that maximally reduce the straight-line distance from the start to the goal is usually not a feasible approach for reaching the goal, due to the presence of obstacles along the path. In theory, one could hand-engineer a meaningful distance function for each task that could be used to create a dense reward function. Instead, we use the indicator function of Eq. (1), which simply captures our objective by measuring whether the agent has reached the goal state. We show that our method is able to learn even with such sparse rewards. 3.2  Overall Objective  We desire to find a policy π(at | st , g) that achieves a high reward for many goals g. We assume that there is a test distribution of goals pg (g) that we would like to perform well on. For simplicity, we assume that the test distribution samples goals uniformly from the set of goals G, although in practice any distribution can be used. The overall objective is then to find a policy π ∗ such that π ∗ (at | st , g) = arg max Eg∼pg (·) Rg (π) . π  (3)  Recall from Eq. (2) that Rg (π) is the probability of success for each goal g. Thus the objective of Eq. (3) measures the average probability of success over all goals sampled from pg (g). We refer to the objective in Eq. (3) as the coverage objective.  4  Method  Our approach can be broken down into three parts: First, we label a set of goals based on whether they are at the appropriate level of difficulty for the current policy. Second, using these labeled goals, we construct and train a generator to output new goals that are at the appropriate level of difficulty. Finally, we use these new goals to efficiently train the policy, improving its coverage objective. We iterate through each of these steps until the policy converges. 4.1  Goal Labeling  As shown in our experiments, sampling goals from pg (g) directly, and training our policy on each sampled goal may not be the most sample efficient way to optimize the coverage objective of Eq. (3). Instead, we modify the distribution from which we sample goals during training: we wish to find the set of goals g in the set Gi = {g : Rmin ≤ Rg (πi ) ≤ Rmax } ⊆ G. The justification for this is as follows: due to the sparsity of the reward function, for most goals g, the current policy πi (at iteration i) obtains no reward. Instead, we wish to train our policy on goals g for which πi is able to receive some minimum expected return Rg (πi ) > Rmin such that the agent receives enough reward signal for learning. On the other hand, if we only sample from goals for which Rg (πi ) > Rmin , we might sample repeatedly from a small set of already mastered goals. To force our policy to train on goals that still need improvement, we train on the set of goals g for which Rg (πi ) ≤ Rmax , where Rmax is a hyperparameter setting a maximum level of performance above which we prefer to concentrate on new goals. Thus, training our policy on goals in Gi allows us to efficiently maximize the coverage objective of Eq. (3). Note that from Eq. (2), Rmin and Rmax can be interpreted as a minimum and maximum probability of reaching a goal over T timesteps. Given a set of goals sampled from some distribution pdata (g), we wish to estimate a label yg ∈ {0, 1} for each goal g that indicates whether g ∈ Gi . To label a given goal, we empirically estimate g the expected return for this goal R̄ o of our current policy πi . The label n (πi ) by performing rollouts g for this goal is then set to yg = 1 Rmin ≤ R̄ (πi ) ≤ Rmax . In the next section we describe how we can generate more goals that also belong to Gi , in addition to the goals that we have labeled. 4.2  Adversarial Goal Generation  In order to sample new goals g uniformly from Gi , we introduce an adversarial training procedure called ”goal GAN”, which is a modification of to the procedure used for training Generative 4  Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). The modification allows to train the generative model both with positive examples from the distribution we want to approximate, and negative examples sampled from a distribution that does not share support with the desired one. This improves the accuracy of the generative model despite being trained with very few positive samples. Other generative models like Stochastic Neural Networks (Tang & Salakhutdinov, 2013) don’t accept negative examples and don’t have the potential to scale up to higher dimensions as well as GAN approaches. In our particular application, we use a neural network G(z) known as the “goal generator” to generate goals g from a noise vector z. We train the goal generator to uniformly output goals in Gi , using a second network D(g) known as a “goal discriminator”. The goal discriminator is trained to distinguish goals that are in Gi from goals that are not in Gi . We optimize our goal generator and discriminator in a manner similar to the training procedure for the Least-Squares GAN (LSGAN) (Mao et al., 2016), but introducing the binary label yg indicating whether g ∈ Gi . We found that the LSGAN works better than other forms of GAN for our problem. We use a = -1, b = 1, and c = 0, as in Mao et al. (2016). i h min V (D) = Eg∼pdata (g) yg (D(g) − b)2 + (1 − yg )(D(g) − a)2 + Ez∼pz (z) [(D(G(z)) − a)2 ] D  min V (G) = Ez∼pz (z) [D(G(z)) − c)2 ]  (4)  G  Unlike in the original LSGAN paper (Mao et al., 2016), we have three terms in our value function V (D) rather than the original two. For goals g for which yg = 1, the second term disappears and we are left with only the first and third terms, which are identical to that of the original LSGAN framework. Viewed in this manner, the discriminator is trained to discriminate between goals from pdata (g) with a label yg = 1 and the generated goals G(z). Looking at the second term, our discriminator is also trained with “negative examples,” i.e. goals with a label yg = 0 which our generator should not generate. The generator is trained to “fool” the discriminator, i.e. to output goals that match the distribution of goals in pdata (g) for which yg = 1. 4.3  Policy Optimization  Our full algorithm for training a policy Algorithm 1: Generative Goal Learning π(at | st , g) to maximize the coverage objective Input : Policy π0 in Eq. (3) is shown in Algorithm 1. At each iterOutput: Policy πN ation i, we generate a set of goals from our goal (G, D) ← initialize GAN() generator G(z). We use these goals to train our goalsold ← ∅ policy using reinforcement learning, with the for i ← 1 to N do reward function given by Eq. (1). The training z ← sample noise(pz (·)); can be done with any Reinforcement Learning goals ← G(z) ∪ sample(goalsold ); algorithm; in our case we use TRPO (Schulman πi ← update policy(goals, πi−1 ); et al., 2015) with GAE (Schulman et al., 2016). returns ← evaluate policy(goals, πi ); After training our policy, we evaluate our pollabels ← label goals(returns) icy’s performance on these goals; this perfor(G, D) ← mance is used to determine each goal’s label train GAN(goals, labels, G, D); yg , as described in Section 4.1. Next, we use goalsold ← update replay(goals) these labels to train our goal generator and our end goal discriminator, as described in Section 4.2. The generated goals from the previous iteration are used to compute the Monte Carlo estimate of the expectations with respect to the distribution pdata (g) in Eq. (4). By training on goals within Gi produced by the goal generator, our method efficiently finds a policy that optimizes the coverage objective. In addition to training our policy on the goals that were generated in the current iteration, we also save a list (“regularized replay buffer”) of goals that were generated during previous iterations and use these to train our policy as well, so that our policy does not forget how to achieve goals that it has previously learned. When we generate goals for our policy to train on, we sample two thirds of the goals from the Goal GAN and we sample the one third of the goals uniformly from the replay buffer. To prevent the replay buffer from concentrating in a small portion of goal space, we only insert new goals that are further away than  from the goals already in the buffer, where we chose the goal-space metric and  to be the same as the ones introduced in Section 3.1. 5  The algorithm described above naturally creates a curriculum for our policy. The goal generator generates goals in Gi , for which our policy obtains an intermediate level of return, and thus such goals are at the appropriate level of difficulty for our current policy πi . As our policy improves, the generator learns to generate goals in order of increasing difficulty. Hence, our method can be viewed as a way to automatically generate a curriculum of goals. However, the curriculum occurs as a by-product via our optimization, without requiring any prior knowledge of the environment or the tasks that the agent must perform. 4.4  Goal GAN Initialization  In order to begin our training procedure, we need to initialize our goal generator to produce an initial set of goals. If we initialize the goal generator randomly (or if we initialize it to sample uniformly from the goal space), it is likely that, for most (or all) of the sampled goals, our initial policy would receives no reward due to the sparsity of the reward function. Thus we might have that all of our initial goals g have R̄g (π0 ) < Rmin , leading to very slow training. To avoid this problem, we initialize our goal generator to output a set of goals that our initial policy is likely to be able to achieve with R̄g (πi ) ≥ Rmin . To accomplish this, we run our initial policy π0 (at | st , g) with goals sampled uniformly from the goal space. We then observe the set of states S v that are visited by our initial policy. These are states that can be easily achieved with the initial policy, π0 , so the goals corresponding to such states will likely be contained within S0I . We then train the goal generator to produce goals that match the state-visitation distribution pv (g), defined as the uniform distribution over the set f (S v ). We can achieve this through traditional GAN training, with pdata (g) = pv (g). This initialization of the generator allows us to bootstrap the Goal GAN training process, and our policy is able to quickly improve its performance.  5  Experimental Results  In this section we provide the experimental results to answer the following questions about our goal generation algorithm: • Does the automatic curriculum yield faster maximization of the coverage objective? • Does the Goal GAN dynamically shift to sample goals of the appropriate difficulty? • Does it scale to a higher-dimensional state-space with a low-dimensional space of feasible goals? To answer the first two questions, we demonstrate our method in a maze task where the goals are the (x, y) position of the Center of Mass (CoM) of a dynamically complex agent. Hence the feasible goal space is the interior of the maze, and we demonstrate how our goal generation can guide the agent around a turn in the maze. Then, we study how our method scales with the dimension of the state-space in an environment where the feasible region is kept of approximately constant volume in an embedding space that grows in dimension. For the implementation details refer to Appendices A.4 and A.5. Visualization of the learned policies are provided on our website 2 . We compare our Goal GAN method against three baselines. Uniform Sampling (baseline 3) is a method that does not use a curriculum at all, training at every iteration on goals uniformly sampled from the state-space. Many goals are unfeasible or too difficult for the current performance of the agent and hence no reward is received, making this method very sample-inefficient. To demonstrate that a straight-forward distance reward can be prone to local minima, Uniform Sampling with L2 loss (baseline 2) samples goals in the same fashion as baseline 3, but instead of the indicator reward that our method uses, it receives the negative L2 distance to the goal as a reward at every step. Finally, On-policy GAN (baseline 1) samples goals from a GAN that is constantly retrained using the state visitation distribution (as in Section 4.4). Finally, we also show the performance of using Rejection Sampling (oracle), where we sample goals uniformly from the feasible state-space and only keep them if they satisfy the criterion defined in Section 4.1. This method is orders of magnitude more expensive in terms of labeling, but serves to estimate an upper-bound for our method in terms of performance. 5.1  Ant Maze 2  https://sites.google.com/view/goalgeneration4rl  6  We test our method in the challenging environment of a complex robotic agent (Ant) navigating a U-shaped maze, as depicted in Fig. 1. Duan et al. (2016) describe the task of trying to reach the other end of the U-turn and they show that standard Reinforcement Learning methods are unable to solve it. We further extend the task to try to reach every point of the maze, still keeping the sparse indicator reward (here with  = 1). Our goal GAN method successfully learn how to cover most of the maze, including the other end. The goal space is two dimensional, allowing us to study the goals generated by the automatic curriculum and how it drives the training through the U-turn. The visualizations and the experimental results Figure 1: Ant Maze environwill help us answer the first two questions from the previous sec- ment tion. We first explore whether, by training on goals that are generated by our Goal GAN, we are able to improve our policy’s training efficiency, compared to the baselines described above. In Fig. 2 we see that our method leads to faster training compared to the baselines. Using the Goal GAN, we are always training our policy on goals that are at the appropriate level of difficulty, leading to more efficient learning. Interestingly, for this task our method is very close the oracle of rejection sampling. The On-policy GAN baseline is, in this environment, performing reasonably well because we inject high noise in the actions of the ant, making the current policy visit further and further regions. This baseline performs worse in other experiments presented in the supplementary material3 . The worse performing baseline is the one rewarding the L2 goal distance at every time-step, because the complex dynamics of the ant and the fact that goals are sampled all around make the optimization fall in the bad local optimal policy of not moving. The purpose of the Goal GAN is to always generate goals at the appropriate level of difficulty for the current policy, i.e. goals g for which Rmin ≤ R̄g (πi ) ≤ Rmax . We explore the difficulty of the generated goals in Fig. 3. Note that the goals in this figure include a mix of newly generated goals as well as goals from previous iterations that we use to prevent our policy from “forgetting.” It can be observed in these figures that the location of the generated goals shifts to different parts of the maze as the policy improves. The percentage of genFigure 2: Learning curves comparing the training efficiency erated goals that are at the appropriof our method and the baselines. The y-axis indicates the ate level of difficulty (“good goals”) average return over all goal positions in the maze, and the stays around 20% even as the policy x-axis shows the number of times that new goals have been improves. The Goal GAN learns to sampled. All plots are an average over 7 random seeds. generate goals at the appropriate locations based on the policy performance such that many of the generated goals are at the appropriate level of difficulty. The corresponding performance of the policy can be shown in Fig. 4. 5.2  N-dimensional Point Mass  In most real-world reinforcement learning problems, the set of feasible states is a lower-dimensional subset of the full state space, defined by the constraints of the environment. For example, the kinematic constraints of a robot limit the set of feasible states that the robot can achieve. Therefore, uniformly sampling goals from the full state-space would yield very few achievable goals. In this section we use an N-dimensional Point Mass to explore this issue and demonstrate the performance of our method as the embedding dimension increases. 3  https://sites.google.com/view/goalgeneration4rl  7  (a) Iteration 5  (b) Iteration 90  (c) Iterartion 350  Figure 3: Goals sampled by the Goal GAN (same policy training as in Fig. 4). “High rewards” (in green) are goals with R̄g (πi ) ≥ Rmax ; “Good goals” (in blue) are those with the appropriate level of difficulty for the current policy (Rmin ≤ R̄g (πi ) ≤ Rmax ). The red ones have Rmin ≥ R̄g (πi )  (a) Iteration 5: Coverage = 0.20  (b) Iteration 90: Coverage = 0.48  (c) Iteration 350: Coverage = 0.71  Figure 4: Visualization of the policy performance for different parts of the state space (same policy training as in Fig. 3). For illustration purposes, the feasible state-space (i.e. the space within the maze) is divided into a grid, and a goal location is selected from the center of each grid cell. Each grid cell is colored according to the expected return achieved on this goal: Red indicates 100% success; blue indicates 0% success. In our experiments, the full state-space of the N -dimensional Point Mass is the hypercube [−5, 5]N . However, the Point Mass can only move within a small subset of this state space. In the twodimensional case, the set of feasible states corresponds to the [−5, 5] × [−1, 1] rectangle, making up 20% of the full space. For N > 2, the feasible space is the Cartesian product of this 2D strip with [−, ]N −2 , where  = 0.3. In this √ higher-dimensional environment, our agent receives a reward of 1 when it moves within N = 0.3 √N2 of the goal state, to account for the increase in average L2 distance between points in higher dimensions. The ratio of the volume of the embedded space to the volume of the full state space decreases as the state-dimension N increases, down to a ratio of 0.00023:1 for 6 dimensions.  Figure 5: Goal coverage obtained on the N-dim point mass environment, for an increasing number of dimensions. Each policy is trained for the same number of total iterations. All plots are an average over 5 random seeds.  8  Fig. 5 shows the performance of our method compared to the baseline methods, as the number of dimensions increases. The uniform sampling baseline results in very poor performance as the number of dimensions increases. This is because the fraction of feasible states within the full state space decreases as the dimension increases. Thus, sampling uniformly results in sampling an increasing percentage of infeasible states as the dimension increases, leading to poor training. In contrast, the performance of our method does not decay as much as the state space dimension increases, because our Goal GAN always generates goals within the feasible portion of the state space, and at the appropriate level of difficulty. The On-policy GAN baseline suffers from the increase in dimension because it is not encouraged to keep exploring other parts of the space than the ones it has already visited. Finally, the oracle and the base-  line with an L2 loss as reward have perfect performance, which is expected in this simple task where the optimal policy is just to go in a straight line towards the goal.  6  Conclusions and Future Work  We propose a new paradigm in reinforcement learning where the objective is to train a single policy to succeed on a variety of goals, under sparse rewards. To solve this problem we develop a method for automatic curriculum generation that dynamically adapts to the current performance of the agent. The curriculum is obtained without any prior knowledge of the environment or of the tasks being performed. We use generative adversarial training to automatically generate goals for our policy that are always at the appropriate level of difficulty (i.e. not too hard and not too easy). We demonstrated that our method can be used to efficiently train a policy to reach a range of goal states, which can be useful for multi-task learning scenarios.  References Achiam, Josh and Sastry, Shankar. Surprise-based intrinsic motivation for deep reinforcement learning. In 2016 Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop at NIPS, 2016. Bellemare, Marc G, Srinivasan, Sriram, Ostrovski, Georg, Schaul, Tom, Saxton, David, and Munos, Remi. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016. Bengio, Samy, Vinyals, Oriol, Jaitly, Navdeep, and Shazeer, Noam. Scheduled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pp. 1171–1179. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. Bengio, Yoshua, Louradour, Jérôme, Collobert, Ronan, and Weston, Jason. Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pp. 41–48. ACM, 2009. Deisenroth, Marc Peter, Neumann, Gerhard, Peters, Jan, et al. A survey on policy search for robotics. Foundations and Trends in Robotics, 2(1–2):1–142, 2013. Deisenroth, Marc Peter, Englert, Peter, Peters, Jan, and Fox, Dieter. Multi-task policy search for robotics. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 3876– 3881. IEEE, 2014. Duan, Yan, Chen, Xi, Houthooft, Rein, Schulman, John, and Abbeel, Pieter. Benchmarking deep reinforcement learning for continuous control. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016. Fabisch, Alexander and Metzen, Jan Hendrik. Active contextual policy search. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):3371–3399, 2014. Florensa, Carlos, Duan, Yan, and Abbeel, Pieter. Stochastic neural networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International Conference in Learning Representations, 2017. Goodfellow, Ian, Pouget-Abadie, Jean, Mirza, Mehdi, Xu, Bing, Warde-Farley, David, Ozair, Sherjil, Courville, Aaron, and Bengio, Yoshua. Generative adversarial networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014. Guo, Xiaoxiao, Singh, Satinder, Lewis, Richard, and Lee, Honglak. Deep learning for reward design to improve monte carlo tree search in atari games. Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2016. Heess, Nicolas, Wayne, Greg, Tassa, Yuval, Lillicrap, Timothy, Riedmiller, Martin, and Silver, David. Learning and transfer of modulated locomotor controllers. 2016, arXiv:1610.05182. Houthooft, Rein, Chen, Xi, Duan, Yan, Schulman, John, De Turck, Filip, and Abbeel, Pieter. Variational information maximizing exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016. 9  Jiang, Lu, Meng, Deyu, Zhao, Qian, Shan, Shiguang, and Hauptmann, Alexander G. Self-paced curriculum learning. In AAAI, volume 2, pp. 6, 2015. Karpathy, Andrej and Van De Panne, Michiel. Curriculum learning for motor skills. In Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 325–330. Springer, 2012. Konidaris, George, Kuindersma, Scott, Grupen, Roderic A, and Barto, Andrew G. Autonomous skill acquisition on a mobile manipulator. In AAAI, 2011. Kumar, M. P., Packer, Benjamin, and Koller, Daphne. Self-paced learning for latent variable models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23, pp. 1189–1197. 2010. Levine, Sergey, Finn, Chelsea, Darrell, Trevor, and Abbeel, Pieter. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2016. Lillicrap, Timothy P, Hunt, Jonathan J, Pritzel, Alexander, Heess, Nicolas, Erez, Tom, Tassa, Yuval, Silver, David, and Wierstra, Daan. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. 2015, arXiv:1509.02971. Mao, Xudong, Li, Qing, Xie, Haoran, Lau, Raymond YK, Wang, Zhen, and Smolley, Stephen Paul. Least squares generative adversarial networks. 2016, arXiv:1611.04076. Mnih, Volodymyr, Kavukcuoglu, Koray, Silver, David, Rusu, Andrei A, Veness, Joel, Bellemare, Marc G, Graves, Alex, Riedmiller, Martin, Fidjeland, Andreas K, Ostrovski, Georg, et al. Humanlevel control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015. Mnih, Volodymyr, Agapiou, John, Osindero, Simon, Graves, Alex, Vinyals, Oriol, Kavukcuoglu, Koray, et al. Strategic attentive writer for learning macro-actions. 2016, arXiv:1606.04695. Ranchod, Pravesh, Rosman, Benjamin, and Konidaris, George. Nonparametric bayesian reward segmentation for skill discovery using inverse reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 471–477. IEEE, 2015. Schaul, Tom, Horgan, Daniel, Gregor, Karol, and Silver, David. Universal value function approximators. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-15), pp. 1312–1320, 2015. Schmidhuber, Jürgen. Curious model-building control systems. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pp. 1458–1463. IEEE, 1991. Schmidhuber, Jürgen. Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(3):230–247, 2010. Schulman, John, Levine, Sergey, Abbeel, Pieter, Jordan, Michael, and Moritz, Philipp. Trust region policy optimization. In Proceedings of The 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1889–1897, 2015. Schulman, John, Moritz, Philipp, Levine, Sergey, Jordan, Michael, and Abbeel, Pieter. Highdimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. ICLR, 2016. Sharma, Sahil and Ravindran, Balaraman. Online Multi-Task Learning Using Biased Sampling. 2017, arXiv:1702.06053. Silver, David, Huang, Aja, Maddison, Chris J, Guez, Arthur, Sifre, Laurent, Van Den Driessche, George, Schrittwieser, Julian, Antonoglou, Ioannis, Panneershelvam, Veda, Lanctot, Marc, et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016. Sukhbaatar, Sainbayar, Kostrikov, Ilya, Szlam, Arthur, and Fergus, Rob. Intrinsic Motivation and Automatic Curricula via Asymmetric Self-Play. 2017, arXiv:1703.05407. Tang, Haoran, Houthooft, Rein, Foote, Davis, Stooke, Adam, Chen, Xi, Duan, Yan, Schulman, John, Turck, Filip De, and Abbeel, Pieter. #exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1611.04717, 2016. 10  Tang, Yichuan and Salakhutdinov, Ruslan. Learning Stochastic Feedforward Neural Networks. Nips, 2:530–538, 2013. doi: 10.1.1.63.1777. Todorov, Emanuel, Erez, Tom, and Tassa, Yuval. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012. Vigorito, Christopher M and Barto, Andrew G. Intrinsically motivated hierarchical skill learning in structured environments. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(2):132–143, 2010. Zaremba, Wojciech and Sutskever, Ilya. Learning to execute. CoRR, abs/1410.4615, 2014.  A A.1  Implementation details Ant Maze Environment  The environment is implemented in Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012). The agent is constrained to move within the maze environment, which has dimensions of 6m x 6m. The full state-space has an area of size 10 m x 10 m, within which the maze is centered. To compute the coverage objective, goals are sampled from within the maze according to a uniform grid on the maze interior. For each goal, we estimate the empirical return with three rollouts. The maximum time-steps given to reach the current goal are 400. A.2  Ant specifications  The ant is a quadruped with 8 actuated joints, 2 for each leg. Besides the coordinates of the center of mass, the joint angles and joint velocities are also included in the observation of the agent. The high degrees of freedom and the required motor coordination make this task much harder than the point mass. More details found in Duan et al. (2016). A.3  Maze navigation with point-mass  We have also conducted experiments with a point-mass instead of the complex ant inside the maze, to understand the dynamics of our curriculum generation. Results are reported in Fig. 6. A.4  Point-mass specifications  For both the N-dim point mass of Section 5.2 and the results from Figure 6, in each episode (rollout) the point-mass has 400 timesteps to reach the goal, where each timestep is 0.02 seconds. The agent can accelerate in up to a rate of 5 m/s2 in each dimension (N = 2 for the maze). The observations of the agent are 2N dimensional, including position and velocity of the point-mass. A.5  Goal GAN design and training  After the generator generates goals, we add noise to each dimension of the goal sampled from a normal distribution with zero mean and unit variance. At each step of the algorithm, we train the policy for 5 iterations, each of which consists of 1000 episodes. After 5 policy iterations, we then train the GAN for 200 iterations, each of which consists of 1 iteration of training the discriminator and 1 iteration of training the generator. The generator receives as input 4 dimensional noise sampled from the standard normal distribution. The goal generator consists of two hidden layers with 128 nodes, and the goal discriminator consists of two hidden layers with 256 nodes, with relu nonlinearities. A.6  Policy and optimization  The policy is defined by a neural network which receives as input the goal appended to the agent observations described above. The inputs are sent to two hidden layers of size 32 with tanh nonlinearities. The final hidden layer is followed by a linear N -dimensional output, corresponding to accelerations in the N dimensions. For policy optimization, we use a discount factor of 0.998 and 11  Figure 6: Point-mass in the same maze as described for Ant a GAE lambda of 0.995. The policy is trained with TRPO with Generalized Advantage Estimation implemented in rllab (Schulman et al., 2015, 2016; Duan et al., 2016). Every ”update policy” consists of 5 iterations of this algorithm.  12

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
