Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_2587

Abstract:
Fast Simulation of Probabilistic Boolean Networks (Technical Report) Andrzej Mizera, Jun Pang, and Qixia Yuan ∗  arXiv:1605.00854v1 [cs.CE] 28 Apr 2016  Computer Science and Communications, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg firstname.lastname@uni.lu  Abstract. Probabilistic Boolean networks (PBNs) is an important mathematical framework widely used for modelling and analysing biological systems. PBNs are suited for modelling large biological systems, which more and more often arise in systems biology. However, the large system size poses a significant challenge to the analysis of PBNs, in particular, to the crucial analysis of their steadystate behaviour. Numerical methods for performing steady-state analyses suffer from the state-space explosion problem, which makes the utilisation of statistical methods the only viable approach. However, such methods require long simulations of PBNs, rendering the simulation speed a crucial efficiency factor. For large PBNs and high estimation precision requirements, a slow simulation speed becomes an obstacle. In this paper, we propose a structure-based method for fast simulation of PBNs. This method first performs a network reduction operation and then divides nodes into groups for parallel simulation. Experimental results show that our method can lead to an approximately 10 times speedup for computing steady-state probabilities of a real-life biological network.  1  Introduction  Systems biology aims to model and analyse biological systems from a holistic perspective in order to provide a comprehensive, system-level understanding of cellular behaviour. Computational modelling of a biological system plays a key role in systems biology. It connects the field of traditional biology with mathematics and computational science, providing a way to organize and formalize available biological knowledge in a mathematical model and to identify missing biological information using formal means. Together with biochemical techniques, computational modelling promotes the holistic understanding of real-life biological systems, leading to the study of large biological systems. This brings a significant challenge to computational modelling in terms of the state-space size of the system under study. Among the existing modelling frameworks, probabilistic Boolean networks (PBNs) is well-suited for modelling large-size biological systems. It is first introduced by Shmulevich et al. [1,2] as a probabilistic generalisation of the standard Boolean networks (BNs) to model gene regulatory networks (GRNs). The framework of PBNs incorporates rule-based dependencies between genes and allows the systematic study of global network dynamics; meanwhile, it is capable of dealing with uncertainty, which naturally occurs at different levels in the study of biological systems. ∗ Supported  by the National Research Fund, Luxembourg (grant 7814267).  2  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  Focusing on the wiring of a network, PBNs is essentially designed for revealing the long-run (steady-state) behaviour of a biological system. Comprehensive understanding of the long-run behaviour is vital in many contexts. For example, attractors of a gene regulatory network (GRN) are considered to characterise cellular phenotypes [3]. There have been a lot of studies in analysing the long-run behaviour of biological systems for better understanding the influences of genes or molecules in the systems [4]. Moreover, steady-state analyses have been used in gene intervention and external control [5,6], which is of special interest to cancer therapists to predict the potential reaction of a patient to treatment. In the context of PBNs, many efforts have been devoted to computing their steady-state probabilities. In [7,8], efficient numerical methods are provided for computing the steady-state probabilities of small-size PBNs. Those methods utilise an important characteristics of PBNs, i.e., a PBN can be viewed as a discrete-time Markov chain (DTMC) and its dynamics can be studied with the use of the rich theory of DTMCs. The key idea of those methods relies on the computation of the transition matrix of the underlying DTMC of the studied PBN. They perform well for small-size PBNs. However, in the case of large-size PBNs, the state-space size becomes so huge that the numerical methods are not scalable any more. Many efforts are then spent on addressing the challenge of the huge state-space in large-size PBNs. In fact, the use of statistical methods and Monte Carlo methods remain the only feasible approach to address the problem. In those methods, the simulation speed is an important factor in the performance of these approaches. For large PBNs and long trajectories, a slow simulation speed could render these methods infeasible as well. In our previous work [9], we have considered the two-state Markov chain approach and the Skart method for approximate analysis of large PBNs. Taking special care of efficient simulation, we have implemented these two methods in the tool ASSA-PBN [10] and successfully used it for the analysis of large PBNs with a few thousands of nodes. However, the required time cost is still expected to be reduced. This requirement is of great importance for the construction of a model, e.g., parameter estimation, and for a more precise and deep analysis of the system. In this work, we propose a structure-based method to speed up the simulation process. The method is based on analysing the structure of a PBN and consists of two key ideas: first, it removes the unnecessary nodes in the network to reduce its size; secondly, it divides the nodes into groups and performs simulation for nodes in a group simultaneously. We show with experiments that our structure-based method can significantly reduce the computation time for approximate steady-state analyses of large PBNs. To the best of our knowledge, our proposed method is the first one to apply structure-based analyses for speeding up the simulation of a PBN.  Structure of the paper. After presenting preliminaries in Section 2, we describe our structure-based simulation method in Section 3. We perform an extensive evaluation and comparison of our method with the previous state-of-art methods in Section 4 on a large number of randomly generated PBNs and a large real-life PBN model of apoptosis in hepatocytes. We conclude our paper with some discussions in Section 5.  Fast Simulation of Probabilistic Boolean Networks  2 2.1  3  Preliminaries Probabilistic Boolean networks (PBNs)  A PBN G(X, F) models elements of a biological system with a set of binary-valued nodes X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn }. For each node xi ∈ X, the update of its value is guided by (i) (i) (i) a set of predictor functions Fi = { f1 , f2 , . . . , f`(i) }, where `(i) is the number of pre(i)  dictor functions for node xi . Each f j is a Boolean function whose inputs are a subset of nodes, referred to as parent nodes of xi . For each node xi , one of its predictor functions will be selected to update the value of xi at each time point t. This selection is in (i) (i) (i) accordance with a probability distribution Ci = (c1 , c2 , . . . , c`(i) ), where the individual probabilities are the selection probabilities for the respective elements of Fi and they sum to 1. The value of node xi at time point t is denoted as xi (t) and the state of the PBN at time point t is denoted as s(t) = (x1 (t), x2 (t), . . . , xn (t)). The state space of the PBN is S = {0, 1}n and it is of size 2n . There are several variants of PBNs with respect to the selection of predictor functions and the synchronisation of nodes update. In this paper, we consider the independent synchronous PBNs, i.e., the choice of predictor functions for each node is made independently and the values of all the nodes are updated synchronously. The transition from state s(t) to state s(t + 1) is performed by randomly selecting a predictor function for each node xi from Fi and by applying those selected predictor functions to update the values of all the nodes synchronously. We denote f (t) the combination of all the selected predictor functions at time point t. The transition of state s(t) to s(t + 1) can then be denoted as s(t + 1) = f (t)(s(t)). Perturbations of a biological system are introduced by a perturbation rate p ∈ (0, 1) in a PBN. The dynamics of a PBN is guided with both perturbations and predictor functions: at each time point t, the value of each node xi is flipped with probability p; and if no flip happens, the value of each node xi is updated with selected predictor functions synchronously. Let γ(t) = (γ1 (t), γ2 (t), . . . , γn (t)), where γi (t) ∈ {0, 1} and P(γi (t) = 1) = p for all t and i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. The transition of s(t) to s(t + 1) in PBNs with perturbations is given by ( s(t) ⊕ γ(t) if γ(t) 6= 0 (1) s(t + 1) = f (t)(s(t)) otherwise, where ⊕ is the element-wise exclusive or operator for vectors. According to Equation (1), perturbations allow the system to move from a state to any other state in one transition, hence render the underlying Markov chain irreducible and aperiodic. Thus, the dynamics of a PBN with perturbations can be viewed as an ergodic DTMC [1]. Based on the ergodic theory, the long-run dynamics of a PBN with perturbations is governed by a unique limiting distribution, convergence to which is independent of the choice of the initial state. The density of a PBN is measured with its predictor function number and parent F φ (i), where n is nodes number. For a PBN G, its density is defined as D(G) = n1 ∑Ni=1 the number of nodes in G, NF is the total number of predictor functions in G, and φ (i) is the number of parent nodes for the ith predictor function.  4  2.2  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  Simulating a PBN  A PBN can be simulated via two steps based on its definition. First, perturbation is verified for each individual node and a node value is flipped if there is a perturbation. Second, if no perturbation happens for any of the nodes, the network state is updated by selecting predictor functions for all the nodes and applying them. For efficiency reason, the selection of predictor functions for each node xi is performed with the alias method [11], which allows to make a selection among choices in constant time irrespective of the number of choices. The alias method requires the construction of an alias table of size proportional to the number of choices, based on the selection probabilities of Ci .  3  Structure-based Parallelisation  The simulation method described in the above section requires to check perturbations, make a selection and perform updating a node for n times in each step. In the case of large PBNs and huge trajectory (sample) size, the simulation time cost can become prohibitive. Intuitively, the simulation time can be reduced if the n-time operations can be speeded up, for which we propose two solutions. One is to perform network reduction such that the total number of nodes is reduced. The other is to preform node-grouping in order to parallelise the process for checking perturbations, making selections, and updating nodes. For the first solution, we analyse the PBN structure to identify those nodes that can be removed and remove them to reduce the network size; while for the second solution, we analyse the PBN structure to divide nodes into groups and perform the operations for nodes in a group simultaneously. We combine the two solutions together and refer to this simulation technique as structure-based parallelisation. We formalise the two solutions in the following three steps: the first solution is described in step 1 and the second solution is described in steps 2 and 3. Step 1. Remove unnecessary nodes from the PBN. Step 2. Parallelise the perturbation process. Step 3. Parallelise updating a PBN state with predictor functions. We describe these three steps in the following subsections. 3.1  Removing unnecessary nodes  We first identify those nodes that can be removed and preform network reudction. When simulating a PBN without perturbations, if a node does not affect any other node in the PBN, the states of all other nodes will not be affected after removing this node. If this node is not of interest of the analysis, e.g., we are not interested in analysing its steadystate, then this node is dispensable in a PBN without perturbations. We refer to such a dispensable node as a leaf node in a PBN and define it as follow: Definition 1 (Leaf node). A node in a PBN is a leaf node (or leaf for short) if and only if either (1) it is not of interest and has no child nodes or (2) it is not of interest and has no other children after iteratively removing all its child nodes which are leaf nodes.  Fast Simulation of Probabilistic Boolean Networks  5  Algorithm 1 Checking perturbations of leaf nodes in a PBN 1: procedure C HECK L EAF N ODES(t) 2: if rand() > t then return true; 3: else return false; 4: end if 5: end procedure  According to the above definition, leaf nodes can be simply removed without affecting the simulation of the remaining nodes in a PBN without perturbations. In the case of a PBN with perturbations, perturbations in the leaf nodes need to be considered. Updating states with Boolean functions will only be performed when there is no perturbation in both the leaf nodes and the non-leaf nodes. Perturbations of the leaf nodes can be checked in constant time irrespective of the number of leaf nodes as describe in Algorithm 1. The input t in this algorithm is the probability that no perturbation happens in all the leaf nodes. It can be computed easily as t = (1 − p)` , where p is the perturbation rate for each node and ` is the number of leaf nodes in the PBN. With the consideration of their perturbations, the leaf nodes can be removed without affecting the simulation of the non-leaf nodes in a PBN with perturbations as well. Since the leaves are not of interest, results of analyses performed on the simulated trajectories of the reduced network, i.e.,. containing only non-leaf nodes, will be the same as performed on trajectories of the original network, i.e., containing all the nodes. 3.2  Performing perturbations in parallel  The second step of our method speeds up the process for determining perturbations. Normally, perturbations are checked for nodes one by one. In order to speed up the simulation of a PBN, we perform perturbations for k nodes simultaneously instead of one by one. For those k nodes, there are 2k different perturbation situations. We compute the probability for each situation and construct an alias table based on the distribution. With the alias table, we make a choice c among 2k choices and perturb the corresponding nodes based on the choice. The choice c is an integer in [0, 2k ) and for the whole network the perturbation can then be performed k nodes by k nodes using the logical bitwise exclusive or operation which outputs true only when inputs differ. To save memory, the alias table can be reused for all the groups since the perturbation rate for each node is the same. It might happen that the number of nodes in the last perturbation round will be less than k nodes. Assume there is k0 nodes in the last round and k0 < k. For those k0 nodes, we can reuse the same alias table to make the selection in order to save memory. After getting the choice c, we perform c = c&m, where & is a bitwise and operation and m is a mask constructed by setting the first k0 bits of m’s binary representation to 1 and the remaining bits to 0. Theorem 1. The above process for determining perturbations for the last k0 nodes guarantees that the probability for each of the k0 nodes to be perturbed is still p. Proof. Without loss of generality, we assume that in the last k0 nodes, t nodes should be perturbed and the positions of the t nodes are fixed. The probability for those t  6  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  Algorithm 2 The group perturbation algorithm 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: 20: 21:  procedure P REPARE P ERTURBATION(n, k) g = dn/ke; k = dn/ge; k0 = n − k ∗ (g − 1); construct the alias table A p and mask; return [A p , mask]. end procedure procedure P ERTURBATION(A p , mask, s) i = 0; perturbed = false; repeat c = Next(A p ); //Next(A p ) returns a random integer based on A p if c! = 0 then s = s ⊕ (c << (i ∗ k)); //shift c to flip only the bits (nodes) of current group perturbed = true; end if i + +; until i = g − 1 c = Next(A p ) & mask; if c! = 0 then s = s ⊕ (c << (i ∗ k)); perturbed = true; end if return [s, perturbed]. end procedure  0  fixed nodes to be perturbed is pt (1 − p)k −t . When we make a selection from the alias 0 table for k nodes, there are 2k−k different choices corresponding to the case that t fixed 0 position nodes in the last k nodes are perturbed. The sum of the probabilities of the 0 0 0 i k−k0 −i = pt (1 − p)k0 −t . 2k−k different choices is [pt (1 − p)k −t ] · ∑k−k t u i=0 p (1 − p) We describe the process for constructing groups and performing perturbations based on the groups in Algorithm 2. Algorithm 2 requires three inputs: n is the number of nodes,1 k is the maximum number of nodes that can be perturbed simultaneously and s is the PBN’s current state which is represented by an integer. As perturbing one node equals to flipping one bit of s, perturbing nodes in a group is performed via a logical bitwise exclusive or operation (see line 11 of Algorithm 2). Perturbing k nodes simultaneously requires 2k double numbers to store the probabilities of 2k different choices. The size of k is therefore restricted by the available memory.2 3.3  Updating nodes in parallel  The last step to speed up PBN simulation is to update a number of nodes simultaneously in accordance with their predictor functions. For this step, we need an initialisation pro1 In our methods, it is clear that steps 2 and 3 are independent of step 1. Thus, we consistently use n to denote the number of nodes in a PBN. 2 For the experiments, we set k to 16 and k could be bigger as long as the memory allows. However, a larger k requires larger table to store the 2k probabilities and the performance of a CPU drops when accessing an element of a much larger table due to the large cache miss rate.  Fast Simulation of Probabilistic Boolean Networks  7  cess to divide the n nodes into m groups and compute the combined predictor functions for each group. After this initialisation, we can select a combined predictor function for each group based on a sampled random number and apply this combined function to update the nodes in the group simultaneously. We first describe how predictor functions of two nodes are combined. The combination of functions for more than two nodes can be performed iteratively. Let xα and xβ be the two nodes to be considered. Their predictor functions are denoted as (α)  (α)  (α)  (β )  (β )  (β )  Fα = { f1 , f2 , . . . , f`(α) } and Fβ = { f1 , f2 , . . . , f`(β ) }. The corresponding selec(α)  (α)  (β )  (β )  β  tion probabilities are denoted as Cα = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cα`(α) } and Cβ = {c1 , c2 , . . . , c`(β ) }. After the grouping, the number of combined predictor functions is `(α) ∗ `(β ). We de(α) (β ) (α) (β ) (α) note the set of combined predictor functions as F̄αβ = { f1 · f1 , f1 · f2 , . . . , f`(α) · (β )  (α)  f`(β ) }, where for i ∈ [1, `(α)] and j ∈ [1, `(β )], fi  (β )  · fj  is a combined predictor func-  (α) (β ) tion that takes the input nodes of functions fi and f j as its input and (α) (β ) the Boolean output of functions fi and f j into integers as output. The  combines  combined integers range in [0, 3] and their 2-bit binary representations (from right to left) repre(α) (β ) sent the values of nodes xα and xβ . The selection probability for function fi · f j is (α)  (β )  `(α)  `(β )  (α  (β )  ci ∗ c j . It holds that ∑i=1 Σ j=1 (ci ∗ c j ) = 1. With the selection probabilities, we can compute the alias table for each group so that the selection of combined predictor function in each group can be performed in constant time. We now describe how to divide the nodes into groups. Our aim is to have as few groups as possible so that the updating of all the nodes can be finished in as few rounds as possible. However, fewer groups lead to many more nodes in a group, which will result in a huge number of combined predictor functions in the group. Therefore, the number of groups has to been chosen properly so that the number of groups is as small as possible, while the combined predictor functions can be stored within the memory limit of the computer performing the simulation. Besides, nodes with only one predictor function should be considered separately since selections of predictor functions for those nodes are not needed. In the rest of this section, we first formulate the problem for dividing nodes with more than one predictor function and give our solution afterwards; then we discuss how to treat nodes with only one predictor function. Problem description. Let S be a list of n items {µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µn }. For i ∈ [1, n], item µi represents a node in a PBN with n nodes and its weight is assigned by a function ω(µi ), which returns the number of predictor functions of node µi . We aim to find a minimum integer m to distribute the nodes into m groups such that the sum of the combined predictor functions numbers of the m groups will not exceed a memory limit θ . This is equivalent to finding a minimum m and an m-partition S1 , S2 , . . . Sm of S, i.e., S =  S1 ∪ S2 ∪ · · · ∪ Sm and Sk ∩ S` = 0/ for k, ` ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m}, such that ∑m ω(µ ) ≤ θ. Π j µ ∈S i=1 j i Solution. The problem in fact has two outputs: an integer m and an m-partition. We first try to estimate a potential value of m, i.e., the lower bound of m that could lead to an m-partition of S which satisfies ∑m i=1 Πµ j ∈Si ω(µ j ) ≤ θ . With this estimate, we then try to find an m-partition satisfying the above requirements.  8  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  Algorithm 3 The greedy algorithm 1: procedure F IND PARTITIONS(S, m) 2: sort S with descending orders based on the weight of items in S; 3: initialise A, an array of m lists; j = 0; //initially, each A[i] is an empty list 4: repeat //S[ j] ( j starts from 0) is the jth item in S 5: among the m elements of A, 6: find the one with the smallest total weight and add S[ j] to it; 7: j + +; 8: until j = S.size() //S.size() returns the number of items in S 9: return A. 10: end procedure  Denote the weight of a sub-list Si as wi and wi = Πµ j ∈Si ω(µ j ). The inequality in the problem description can be rewritten as ∑m i=1 wi ≤ θ . We first compute the minimum value of m̂ satisfying the following inequality and denote this minimum value as m̂min . q n ω(µ ) ≤ θ . (2) m̂ · m̂ Πi=1 i  Theorem 2. m̂min is the lower bound of m that allows a partition to satisfy ∑m i=1 wi ≤ θ . Proof. This is equivalent to proving that m̂min −1  ∑  0  wi > θ ,  (3)  i=1 0  where wi is the weight of the ith sub-list in an arbitrary partition of S into m̂min − 1 sub-lists. Since m̂p min is the minimum value of m̂ that satisfies Inequality (2), we have n ω(µ ) > θ . Hence, (m̂min − 1) · (m̂min −1) Πi=1 i (m̂min − 1) ·  q  (m̂min −1)  m̂min −1 Πi=1 wi > θ . 0  (4)  Based on the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means, we have m̂min −1  ∑  0  wi ≥ (m̂min − 1) ·  q  (m̂min −1)  m̂min −1 Πi=1 wi . 0  (5)  i=1  Inequality (3) follows from Inequality (4) and Inequality (5).  t u  Starting from the lower bound, we try to find a partition of S into m sub-lists that satisfies ∑m i=1 wi ≤ θ . Since the arithmetic and geometric means of non-negative real numbers are equal if and only if every number is the same, we get the heuristic that the weight of the m sub-lists should be as equal as possible so that the sum of the weights is as small as possible. Our problem then becomes similar to the NP-hard multi-way number partition problem: to divide a given set of integers into a collection of subsets,  Fast Simulation of Probabilistic Boolean Networks  9  Algorithm 4 Partition n nodes into groups. 1: procedure PARTITION(G, θ ) 2: compute two lists S and S0 based on G; //S0 contains nodes with one predictor function 3: compute the lower bound m̂; m = m̂; 4: repeat 5: A1 = F IND PARTITIONS(S, m); 6: compute the sum of the weight of the m partitions and assign it to sum; 7: m = m + 1; 8: until sum < θ 9: divide S0 into A2 ; //partition nodes with only one predictor function 10: merge A1 and A2 into A; 11: return A. 12: end procedure  so that the sum of the numbers in each subset are as nearly equal as possible. We adapt the greedy algorithm (see Algorithm 3 for details) for solving the multi-way number partition problem, by modifying the sum to multiplication, in order to solve our partition problem.3 If the m-partition we find satisfies the requirement ∑m i=1 wi ≤ θ , then we get a solution to our problem. Otherwise, we need to increase m by one and try to find a new m-partition. We repeat this process until the condition ∑m i=1 wi ≤ θ is satisfied. The whole partition process for all the nodes is described in Algorithm 4. Nodes with only one predictor function are treated in line 9. We divide such nodes into groups based on their parent nodes, i.e., we put nodes sharing the most common parents into the same group. In this way, the combined predictor function size can be as small as possible such that the limited memory can handle more nodes in a group. The number of nodes in a group is also restricted by the combined predictor function size, i.e., the number of parent nodes in this group.4 The partition is performed with an algorithm similar to Algorithm 3. The difference is that in each iteration we always add a node into a group which shares most common parent nodes with this node. 3.4  The new simulation method  We describe our new method for simulating PBNs in Algorithm 5. The procedure P REPARATION describes the whole preparation process of the three steps (network reduction for Step 1, and node-grouping for Step 2 and Step 3). The four inputs of the procedure P REPARATION are respectively the PBN network G, the memory limit θ , the maximum number k of nodes that can be put in a group for perturbation and the maximum number of parent nodes in a group. The P REPARATION procedure takes these inputs, performs network reduction and node grouping. The reduced network and the 3 There exist other algorithms to solve the multi-way number partition problem, and we choose the greedy algorithm for its efficiency. 4 In our experiments, the maximum number of parent nodes in one group is set to 18. Similar to the value of k in step 2, the number can be larger as long as the memory can handle. However, the penalty from large cache miss rate will diminish the benefits by having fewer groups when the number of parent nodes is too large.  10  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  Algorithm 5 Structure-based PBN simulation. 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: 20: 21: 22: 23: 24:  procedure P REPARATION(G, θ , k) perform network reduction for G and store the reduced network in G0 get the number of nodes n and perturbation rate p from G; get the number of nodes n0 from G0 ; t = pow(1 − p, n − n0 ); [A p , mask] =P REPARE P ERTURBATION(n0 , k); PA =PARTITION(G0 , θ ); for each group in PA, compute its combined functions F, and its alias table A, and the cumulative number of nodes in the group cum; return [A p , mask,t, A, F, cum]. end procedure procedure PARALLEL S IMULATION(A p , mask, A, F, cum,t, s) [s, perturbed] =P ERTURBATION(A p , mask, s); //perform perturbations by group if perturbed || C HECK L EAF N ODES(t) then return s; //check perturbations of leaves else i = 0; s0 = 0; count = size(A); //size(A) returns the number of elements in array A repeat index = Next(A[i]); //select a random integer based on the alias table of group i f = F.get(index); //obtain the predictor function at the given index v = f [s]; // f [s] returns the integer output of f based on state s s0 = s0 | (v << cum[i]); //shift v to update only nodes in the current group i + +; until i = count − 1; end if return s0 . end procedure  grouped nodes information are then provided for the PARALLEL S IMULATION procedure via six parameters: A p and mask are the alias table and mask used for performing perturbations of non-leaf nodes as explained in Algorithm 2; t is used for checking perturbations in leaf nodes as explained in Algorithm 1; A is an array containing the alias tables for predictor functions in all groups; F is an array containing predictor functions of all groups; and cum is an array storing the cumulative number of nodes in each group. Perturbations for leaf nodes and non-leaf nodes have been explained in Algorithms 1 and 2. We now explain how nodes in a group are simultaneously updated with combined predictor function. It is performed via the following three steps: 1) a random combined predictor function is selected from F based on the alias table A; 2) the output of the combined predictor function is obtained according to the current state s; 3) the nodes in this group are updated based on the output of the combined predictor function. To save memory, states are stored as integers and updating a group of nodes is implemented via a logical bitwise or operation. To guarantee that the update is performed on the required nodes, a shift operation is needed on the output of the selected function (line 19). The number of bits to be shifted for the current group is in fact the cumulative number of nodes of all its previous groups, which is stored in the array cum.  Fast Simulation of Probabilistic Boolean Networks  4  11  Evaluation  The evaluation of our new simulation method is performed on both randomly generated networks and a real-life biological network. All the experiments are performed on a high performance computing (HPC) machines, each of which contains a CPU of Intel Xeon X5675 @ 3.07 GHz. The program is written in Java and the initial and maximum Java virtual machine heap size is set to 4GB and 5.89GB, respectively. The evaluation data is available at http://satoss.uni.lu/software/ASSA-PBN/benchmark. 4.1  Randomly generated networks  With the evaluation on randomly generated networks, we aim not only to show the efficiency of our methods, but also to answer how much speedup our method is likely to provide for a given PBN. The first step of our new simulation method performs a network reduction technique, which is different from the node-grouping technique in the later two steps. Therefore, we evaluate the contribution of the first step and the other two steps to the performance of our new simulation method separately. We name the original simulation method as Methodold ; the simulation method applying the network reduction technique as Methodreduction ; and the simulation method applying both the network reduction and node-grouping techniques as Methodnew . Methodreduction and Methodnew require preprocessing of the PBN under study, which leads to a certain computational overhead. However, the proportion of the pre-processing time in the whole computation decreases with the increase of the sample size. In our evaluation, we first focus on comparisons without taking pre-processing into account to evaluate the maximum potential performance of our new simulation method; we then show how different sample sizes will affect the performance when pre-processing is considered. How does our method perform? Intuitively, the speedup due to the network reduction technique is influenced by how much a network can be reduced and the performance of node-grouping is influenced by both the density and size of a given network. Hence, the evaluation is performed on a large number of randomly generated PBNs covering different types of networks. In total, we use 2307 randomly generated PBNs with different percentages of leaves ranging between 0% and 90%; different densities ranging between 1 and 8.1; and different network sizes from the set {20, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500, 550, 600, 650, 700, 750, 800, 850, 900, 950, 1000}. We simulate 400 million steps for each of the 2307 PBNs with the three different simulation methods and compare their time costs. For the network reduction technique the speedups are computed as the ratio between the time of Methodreduction and the time of Methodold . The obtained speedups are between 1.00 and 10.90. For node-grouping, the speedups are computed as the ratio between the time of Methodnew and the time of Methodreduction . We have obtained speedups between 1.56 and 4.99. We plot in Figure 1 the speedups of the network reduction and node-grouping techniques with respect to their related parameters. For the speedups achieved with network reduction, the related parameters are the percentage of leaves and the density. In fact, there is little influence from density to the speedup resulting from network reduction as the speedups do not change much  12  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  (a) Methodreduction over Methodold .  (b) Methodnew over Methodreduction .  Fig. 1: Speedups contributed from network reduction and node-grouping.  with the different densities (see Figure 1a). The determinant factor is the percentage of leaves. The more leaves a PBN has, the more speedup we can obtain for the network. For the speedups obtained from node-grouping, the related parameters are the density and the network size after network reduction, i.e., the number of non-leave nodes. Based on Figure 1b, the speedup with node-grouping is mainly determined by the network density: a smaller network density could result in a larger speedup contributed from the node-grouping technique. This is mainly due to the fact that sparse network has a relatively small number of predictor functions in each node and therefore, the nodes will be partitioned into fewer groups. Moreover, while the performance of network reduction is largely influenced by the percentage of leaves, the node-grouping technique tends to provide a rather stable speedup. Even for large dense networks, the technique can reduce the time cost almost by half. The combination of these two techniques results in speedups (time of Methodnew over time of Methodold ) between 1.74 and 41.92. We plot in Figure 2 the speedups in terms of the percentage of leaves and density. The figure shows a very good performance of our new method on sparse networks with large percentage of leaves. What is the influence of sample size? We continue to evaluate the influence of sample size on our proposed new PBN simulation method. The pre-processing time for the network reduction step is relatively very small; therefore our evaluation focuses on the influence to the total time cost of all the 3 steps, i.e., the speedup of Methodnew with respect to Methodold . We selected 9 representative PBNs from the above 2307 PBNs, with respect to their densities, percentages of leaves and the speedups we have obtained. We simulate the 9 PBNs for different sample size using both Methodold and Methodnew . We show the average pre-processing time of Methodnew and the obtained speedups of Methodnew (taking into account pre-processing time costs) with different sample sizes in Table 1. As expected, with the increase of the sample size, the influence of preprocessing time becomes smaller and the speedup increases. In fact, in some cases, the pre-processing time is relatively so small that its influence becomes negligible, e.g., for networks 7 and 8 when the sample size is equal or greater than 100 million. Moreover,  Fast Simulation of Probabilistic Boolean Networks  13  Fig. 2: Speedups of Methodnew over Methodold .  network # 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  size 900 950 1000 600 800 900 450 550 1000  percentage pre-processing density of leaves time (second) 1.11 0.84 0.30 67.83 68.38 68.00 89.78 88.55 89.10  6.72 6.96 7.00 4.25 3.94 3.89 1.60 1.72 1.75  28.12 32.35 33.72 162.21 43.17 36.58 0.23 0.24 1.08  speedup with different sample sizes (million) 1 10 100 400 0.65 0.59 0.58 0.13 0.66 0.69 21.44 20.26 10.04  1.49 1.47 1.45 1.08 3.05 3.56 37.59 35.94 31.83  1.71 1.73 1.71 4.51 6.75 6.90 41.62 36.47 35.09  1.73 1.75 1.73 6.89 7.69 7.70 41.84 36.62 37.19  Table 1: Influence of sample sizes on the speedups of Methodnew over Methodold .  often with a sample size larger than 10 million, the effort spent in pre-processing can be compensated by the saved sampling time (simulation speedup). Performance prediction. To predict the speedup of our method for a given network, we apply regression techniques on the results of the 2307 PBNs to fit a prediction model. We use the normalised percentage of leaves and the network density as the predictor variables and the speedup of Methodnew over Methodold as the response variables in the regression model since network size does not directly affect the speedup based on the plotted pictures. In the end, we obtained a polynomial regression model shown in Equation 6, which can fit 90.9% of the data: y = b1 + b2 ∗ x1 + b3 ∗ x12 + b4 ∗ x2 + b5 ∗ x22 ,  (6)  where [b1 , b2 , b3 , b4 , b5 ] = [2.89, 2.71, 2.40, −1.65, 0.71], y represents the speedup, x1 represents the percentage of leaves and x2 represent the network density. The result of a 10-fold cross-validation of this model supports this prediction rate; hence we believe  14  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  this model does not overfit the given data. Based on this model, we can predict how much speedup is likely to be obtained with our proposed method for a given PBN. 4.2  An apoptosis network  In this section, we evaluate our method on a real-life biological network, i.e., an apoptosis network containing 96 nodes [12]. This network contains 37.5% of leaves and has a density of 1.78, which is suitable for applying our method to gain speedups. The apoptosis network has been analysed in [9]. In one of the analyses, i.e., the longterm influences [13] on complex2 from each of its parent nodes: RIP-deubi, complex1, and FADD, 7 steady-state probabilities of the apoptosis network need to be computed. In this evaluation, we compute the 7 steady-state probabilities using our proposed structure-based simulation method (Methodnew ) and compare it with the original simulation method (Methodold ). The precision and confidence level of all the computations, as required by the two-state Markov chain approach [14], are set to 10−5 and 0.95, respectively. The results of this computation are shown in Table 2. The sample sizes required by both methods are very close for computing same steady-state probabilities. Note that the speedups are computed based on the accurate data, which are slightly different from the truncated and rounded data shown in the table. We have obtained speedups (Methodnew over Methodold ) between 7.67 and 10.28 for computing those 7 probabilities. In total, the time cost is reduced from 1.5 hours to about 10 mins.  5  Discussion and Conclusion  In this work, we propose a structure-based method for speeding up simulations of PBNs. Using network reduction and node-grouping techniques, our method can significantly improve the simulation speed of PBNs. We show with experiments that our new simulation method is especially efficient in the case of analysing sparse networks with a large number of leaf nodes. The node-grouping technique gains speedups by using more memory. Theoretically, as long as the memory can handle, the group number can be made as small as possible. However, this causes two issues in practice. First, the pre-processing time increases dramatically with the group number decreasing. Second, the performance of the method drops a lot when operating on large memories due to the increase of cache miss rate. Therefore, in our experiments we do not explore all the available memory to maximise the groups. Reducing the pre-processing time cost and the cache miss rate would be two future works to further improve the performance of our method. We also plan to apply our method for the analysis of real-life large biological networks.  References 1. Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E.R.: Probabilistic Boolean Networks: The Modeling and Control of Gene Regulatory Networks. SIAM Press (2010) 2. Trairatphisan, P., Mizera, A., Pang, J., Tantar, A.A., Schneider, J., Sauter, T.: Recent development and biomedical applications of probabilistic Boolean networks. Cell Communication and Signaling 11 (2013) 46  Fast Simulation of Probabilistic Boolean Networks  15  Methodold Methodnew probability # sample size pre-processing sample size total speedup time (minute) (million) time (second) (million) time (minute) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  147.50 452.35 253.85 49.52 315.06 62.22 255.88  9.51 28.65 14.88 2.96 17.73 3.69 16.74  4.57 3.10 3.42 3.38 4.40 3.13 4.01  147.82 452.25 253.99 50.39 305.43 50.28 256.61  1.05 2.79 1.74 0.36 2.05 0.39 1.70  9.09 10.28 8.54 8.31 8.39 7.67 9.88  Table 2: Performance of Methodold and Methodnew on an apoptosis network.  3. Kauffman, S.A.: Homeostasis and differentiation in random genetic control networks. Nature 224 (1969) 177–178 4. Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E.R., Zhang, W.: From boolean to probabilistic boolean networks as models of genetic regulatory networks. Proceedings of the IEEE 90(11) (2002) 1778–1792 5. Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E.R., Zhang, W.: Gene perturbation and intervention in probabilistic Boolean networks. Bioinformatics 18(10) (2002) 1319–1331 6. Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E.R., Zhang, W.: Control of stationary behavior in probabilistic Boolean networks by means of structural intervention. Journal of Biological Systems 10(04) (2002) 431–445 7. Shmulevich, I., Gluhovsky, I., Hashimoto, R., Dougherty, E., Zhang, W.: Steady-state analysis of genetic regulatory networks modelled by probabilistic Boolean networks. Comparative and Functional Genomics 4(6) (2003) 601–608 8. Trairatphisan, P., Mizera, A., Pang, J., Tantar, A.A., Sauter, T.: optPBN: An optimisation toolbox for probabilistic boolean networks. PLOS ONE 9(7) (2014) 9. Mizera, A., Pang, J., Yuan, Q.: Reviving the two-state markov chain approach (technical report). Available online at http://arxiv.org/abs/1501.01779 (2015) 10. Mizera, A., Pang, J., Yuan, Q.: ASSA-PBN: a tool for approximate steady-state analysis of large probabilistic Boolean networks. In: Proc. 13th International Symposium on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis. LNCS, Springer (2015) Available at http:// satoss.uni.lu/software/ASSA-PBN/. 11. Walker, A.: An efficient method for generating discrete random variables with general distributions. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 3(3) (1977) 253–256 12. Schlatter, R., Schmich, K., Vizcarra, I.A., Scheurich, P., Sauter, T., Borner, C., Ederer, M., Merfort, I., Sawodny, O.: ON/OFF and beyond - a Boolean model of apoptosis. PLOS Computational Biology 5(12) (2009) e1000595 13. Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E.R., Kim, S., Zhang, W.: Probabilistic Boolean networks: a rule-based uncertainty model for gene regulatory networks. Bioinformatics 18(2) (2002) 261–274 14. Raftery, A.E., Lewis, S.: How many iterations in the Gibbs sampler? Bayesian Statistics 4 (1992) 763–773

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
