Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_2792

Abstract:
Packrat Parsing: Simple, Powerful, Lazy, Linear Time Functional Pearl Bryan Ford  arXiv:cs/0603077v1 [cs.DS] 18 Mar 2006  Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA  baford@lcs.mit.edu  Abstract  1 Introduction  Packrat parsing is a novel technique for implementing parsers in a lazy functional programming language. A packrat parser provides the power and flexibility of top-down parsing with backtracking and unlimited lookahead, but nevertheless guarantees linear parse time. Any language defined by an LL(k) or LR(k) grammar can be recognized by a packrat parser, in addition to many languages that conventional linear-time algorithms do not support. This additional power simplifies the handling of common syntactic idioms such as the widespread but troublesome longest-match rule, enables the use of sophisticated disambiguation strategies such as syntactic and semantic predicates, provides better grammar composition properties, and allows lexical analysis to be integrated seamlessly into parsing. Yet despite its power, packrat parsing shares the same simplicity and elegance as recursive descent parsing; in fact converting a backtracking recursive descent parser into a linear-time packrat parser often involves only a fairly straightforward structural change. This paper describes packrat parsing informally with emphasis on its use in practical applications, and explores its advantages and disadvantages with respect to the more conventional alternatives.  There are many ways to implement a parser in a functional programming language. The simplest and most direct approach is top-down or recursive descent parsing, in which the components of a language grammar are translated more-or-less directly into a set of mutually recursive functions. Top-down parsers can in turn be divided into two categories. Predictive parsers attempt to predict what type of language construct to expect at a given point by “looking ahead” a limited number of symbols in the input stream. Backtracking parsers instead make decisions speculatively by trying different alternatives in succession: if one alternative fails to match, then the parser “backtracks” to the original input position and tries another. Predictive parsers are fast and guarantee lineartime parsing, while backtracking parsers are both conceptually simpler and more powerful but can exhibit exponential runtime.  Categories and Subject Descriptors D.3.4 [Programming Languages]: Processors—Parsing; D.1.1 [Programming Techniques]: Applicative (Functional) Programming; F.4.2 [Mathematical Logic and Formal Languages]: Grammars and Other Rewriting Systems—Parsing  General Terms  This paper presents a top-down parsing strategy that sidesteps the choice between prediction and backtracking. Packrat parsing provides the simplicity, elegance, and generality of the backtracking model, but eliminates the risk of super-linear parse time, by saving all intermediate parsing results as they are computed and ensuring that no result is evaluated more than once. The theoretical foundations of this algorithm were worked out in the 1970s [3, 4], but the linear-time version was apparently never put in practice due to the limited memory sizes of computers at that time. However, on modern machines the storage cost of this algorithm is reasonable for many applications. Furthermore, this specialized form of memoization can be implemented very elegantly and efficiently in modern lazy functional programming languages, requiring no hash tables or other explicit lookup structures. This marriage of a classic but neglected linear-time parsing algorithm with modern functional programming is the primary technical contribution of this paper.  Languages, Algorithms, Design, Performance  Haskell, memoization, top-down parsing, backtracking, lexical analysis, scannerless parsing, parser combinators  Packrat parsing is unusually powerful despite its linear time guarantee. A packrat parser can easily be constructed for any language described by an LL(k) or LR(k) grammar, as well as for many languages that require unlimited lookahead and therefore are not LR. This flexibility eliminates many of the troublesome restrictions imposed by parser generators of the YACC lineage. Packrat parsers are also much simpler to construct than bottom-up LR parsers, making it practical to build them by hand. This paper explores the manual construction approach, although automatic construction of packrat parsers is a promising direction for future work.  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. ICFP’02, October 4-6, 2002, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Copyright 2002 ACM 1-58113-487-8/02/0010 ...$5.00  A packrat parser can directly and efficiently implement common disambiguation rules such as longest-match, followed-by, and notfollowed-by, which are difficult to express unambiguously in a context-free grammar or implement in conventional linear-time  Keywords  Additive ← Multitive ‘+’ Additive | Multitive Multitive ← Primary ‘*’ Multitive | Primary Primary ← ‘(’ Additive ‘)’ | Decimal Decimal ← ‘0’ | . . . | ‘9’ Figure 1. Grammar for a trivial language  parsers. For example, recognizing identifiers or numbers during lexical analysis, parsing if-then-else statements in C-like languages, and handling do, let, and lambda expressions in Haskell inherently involve longest-match disambiguation. Packrat parsers are also more easily and naturally composable than LR parsers, making them a more suitable substrate for dynamic or extensible syntax [1]. Finally, both lexical and hierarchical analysis can be seamlessly integrated into a single unified packrat parser, and lexical and hierarchical language features can even be blended together, so as to handle string literals with embedded expressions or literate comments with structured document markup, for example. The main disadvantage of packrat parsing is its space consumption. Although its asymptotic worst-case bound is the same as those of conventional algorithms—linear in the size of the input—its space utilization is directly proportional to input size rather than maximum recursion depth, which may differ by orders of magnitude. However, for many applications such as modern optimizing compilers, the storage cost of a pacrkat parser is likely to be no greater than the cost of subsequent processing stages. This cost may therefore be a reasonable tradeoff for the power and flexibility of linear-time parsing with unlimited lookahead. The rest of this paper explores packrat parsing with the aim of providing a pragmatic sense of how to implement it and when it is useful. Basic familiarity with context-free grammars and top-down parsing is assumed. For brevity and clarity of presentation, only small excerpts of example code are included in the text. However, all of the examples described in this paper are available, as complete and working Haskell code, at: http://pdos.lcs.mit.edu/˜baford/packrat/icfp02  The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces packrat parsing and describes how it works, using conventional recursive descent parsing as a starting point. Section 3 presents useful extensions to the basic algorithm, such as support for left recursion, lexical analysis, and monadic parsing. Section 4 explores in more detail the recognition power of packrat parsers in comparison with conventional linear-time parsers. Section 5 discusses the three main practical limitations of packrat parsing: determinism, statelessness, and space consumption. Section 6 presents some experimental results to demonstrate the practicality of packrat parsing for real languages. Section 7 discusses related work, Section 8 points out directions for future exploration, and Section 9 concludes.  2 Building a Parser Packrat parsing is essentially a top-down parsing strategy, and as such packrat parsers are closely related to recursive descent parsers. For this reason, we will first build a recursive descent parser for a trivial language and then convert it into a packrat parser.  2.1 Recursive Descent Parsing Consider the standard approach for constructing a recursive descent parser for a grammar such as the trivial arithmetic expression lan-  guage shown in Figure 1. We define four functions, one for each of the nonterminals on the left-hand sides of the rules. Each function takes takes the string to be parsed, attempts to recognize some prefix of the input string as a derivation of the corresponding nonterminal, and returns either a “success” or “failure” result. On success, the function returns the remainder of the input string immediately following the part that was recognized, along with some semantic value computed from the recognized part. Each function can recursively call itself and the other functions in order to recognize the nonterminals appearing on the right-hand sides of its corresponding grammar rules. To implement this parser in Haskell, we first need a type describing the result of a parsing function: data Result v = Parsed v String | NoParse  In order to make this type generic for different parse functions producing different kinds of semantic values, the Result type takes a type parameter v representing the type of the associated semantic value. A success result is built with the Parsed constructor and contains a semantic value (of type v) and the remainder of the input text (of type String). A failure result is represented by the simple value NoParse. In this particular parser, each of the four parse functions takes a String and produces a Result with a semantic value of type Int: pAdditive pMultitive pPrimary pDecimal  :: :: :: ::  String String String String  -> -> -> ->  Result Result Result Result  Int Int Int Int  The definitions of these functions have the following general structure, directly reflecting the mutual recursion expressed by the grammar in Figure 1: pAdditive pMultitive pPrimary pDecimal  s s s s  = = = =  ... (calls itself and pMultitive) ... ... (calls itself and pPrimary) ... ... (calls pAdditive and pDecimal) ... ...  For example, the pAdditive function can be coded as follows, using only primitive Haskell pattern matching constructs: -- Parse an additive-precedence expression pAdditive :: String -> Result Int pAdditive s = alt1 where -- Additive <- Multitive ’+’ Additive alt1 = case pMultitive s of Parsed vleft s’ -> case s’ of (’+’:s’’) -> case pAdditive s’’ of Parsed vright s’’’ -> Parsed (vleft + vright) s’’’ _ -> alt2 _ -> alt2 _ -> alt2 -- Additive <- Multitive alt2 = case pMultitive s of Parsed v s’ -> Parsed v s’ NoParse -> NoParse  To compute the result of pAdditive, we first compute the value of alt1, representing the first alternative for this grammar rule. This  alternative in turn calls pMultitive to recognize a multiplicativeprecedence expression. If pMultitive succeeds, it returns the semantic value vleft of that expression and the remaining input s’ following the recognized portion of input. We then check for a ‘+’ operator at position s’, which if successful produces the string s’’ representing the remaining input after the ‘+’ operator. Finally, we recursively call pAdditive itself to recognize another additiveprecedence expression at position s’’, which if successful yields the right-hand-side result vright and the final remainder string s’’’. If all three of these matches were successful, then we return as the result of the initial call to pAdditive the semantic value of the addition, vleft + vright, along with the final remainder string s’’’. If any of these matches failed, we fall back on alt2, the second alternative, which merely attempts to recognize a single multiplicative-precedence expression at the original input position s and returns that result verbatim, whether success or failure. The other three parsing functions are constructed similarly, in direct correspondence with the grammar. Of course, there are easier and more concise ways to write these parsing functions, using an appropriate library of helper functions or combinators. These techniques will be discussed later in Section 3.3, but for clarity we will stick to simple pattern matching for now.  2.2 Backtracking Versus Prediction The parser developed above is a backtracking parser. If alt1 in the pAdditive function fails, for example, then the parser effectively “backtracks” to the original input position, starting over with the original input string s in the second alternative alt2, regardless of whether the first alternative failed to match during its first, second, or third stage. Notice that if the input s consists of only a single multiplicative expression, then the pMultitive function will be called twice on the same string: once in the first alternative, which will fail while trying to match a nonexistent ‘+’ operator, and then again while successfully applying the second alternative. This backtracking and redundant evaluation of parsing functions can lead to parse times that grow exponentially with the size of the input, and this is the principal reason why a “naive” backtracking strategy such as the one above is never used in realistic parsers for inputs of substantial size. The standard strategy for making top-down parsers practical is to design them so that they can “predict” which of several alternative rules to apply before actually making any recursive calls. In this way it can be guaranteed that parse functions are never called redundantly and that any input can be parsed in linear time. For example, although the grammar in Figure 1 is not directly suitable for a predictive parser, it can be converted into an LL(1) grammar, suitable for prediction with one lookahead token, by “left-factoring” the Additive and Multitive nonterminals as follows: Additive AdditiveSuffix Multitive MultitiveSuffix  ← ← ← ←  Multitive AdditiveSuffix ‘+’ Additive | ε Primary MultitiveSuffix ‘*’ Multitive | ε  Now the decision between the two alternatives for AdditiveSuffix can be made before making any recursive calls simply by checking whether the next input character is a ‘+’. However, because the prediction mechanism only has “raw” input tokens (characters in this case) to work with, and must itself operate in constant time, the class of grammars that can be parsed predictively is very restrictive. Care must also be taken to keep the prediction mechanism consistent with the grammar, which can be difficult to do manu-  column  C1  C2  C3  C4  C5  C6  pAdditive  (7,C7)  (4,C7)  pMultitive  (3,C5)  (4,C7)  (3,C5)  (4,C7)  (3,C5)  (4,C7)  ?  pPrimary pDecimal input  ’2’  ’*’  ’(’  ’3’  ’+’  ’4’  C7  C8  ’)’  (end)  Figure 2. Matrix of parsing results for string ‘2*(3+4)’  ally and highly sensitive to global properties of the language. For example, the prediction mechanism for MultitiveSuffix would have to be adjusted if a higher-precedence exponentiation operator ‘**’ was added to the language; otherwise the exponentiation operator would falsely trigger the predictor for multiplication expressions and cause the parser to fail on valid input. Some top-down parsers use prediction for most decisions but fall back on full backtracking when more flexibility is needed. This strategy often yields a good combination of flexibility and performance in practice, but it still suffers the additional complexity of prediction, and it requires the parser designer to be intimately aware of where prediction can be used and when backtracking is required.  2.3 Tabular Top-Down Parsing As pointed out by Birman and Ullman [4], a backtracking top-down parser of the kind presented in Section 2.1 can be made to operate in linear time without the added complexity or constraints of prediction. The basic reason the backtracking parser can take super-linear time is because of redundant calls to the same parse function on the same input substring, and these redundant calls can be eliminated through memoization. Each parse function in the example is dependent only on its single parameter, the input string. Whenever a parse function makes a recursive call to itself or to another parse function, it always supplies either the same input string it was given (e.g., for the call by pAdditive to pMultitive), or a suffix of the original input string (e.g., for the recursive call by pAdditive to itself after matching a ‘+’ operator). If the input string is of length n, then there are only n + 1 distinct suffixes that might be used in these recursive calls, counting the original input string itself and the empty string. Since there are only four parse functions, there are at most 4(n + 1) distinct intermediate results that the parsing process might require. We can avoid computing any of these intermediate results multiple times by storing them in a table. The table has one row for each of the four parse functions and one column for each distinct position in the input string. We fill the table with the results of each parse function for each input position, starting at the right end of the input string and working towards the left, column by column. Within each column, we start from the bottommost cell and work upwards. By the time we compute the result for a given cell, the results of all would-be recursive calls in the corresponding parse function will already have been computed and recorded elsewhere in the table; we merely need to look up and use the appropriate results. Figure 2 illustrates a partially-completed result table for the input string ‘2*(3+4)’. For brevity, Parsed results are indicated as (v,c), where v is the semantic value and c is the column number at which the associated remainder suffix begins. Columns are labeled  C1, C2, and so on, to avoid confusion with the integer semantic values. NoParse results are indicated with an X in the cell. The next cell to be filled is the one for pPrimary at column C3, indicated with a circled question mark. The rule for Primary expressions has two alternatives: a parenthesized Additive expression or a Decimal digit. If we try the alternatives in the order expressed in the grammar, pPrimary will first check for a parenthesized Additive expression. To do so, pPrimary first attempts to match an opening ‘(’ in column C3, which succeeds and yields as its remainder string the input suffix starting at column C4, namely ‘3+4)’. In the simple recursive-descent parser pPrimary would now recursively call pAdditive on this remainder string. However, because we have the table we can simply look up the result for pAdditive at column C4 in the table, which is (7,C7). This entry indicates a semantic value of 7—the result of the addition expression ‘3+4’—and a remainder suffix of ‘)’ starting in column C7. Since this match is a success, pPrimary finally attempts to match the closing parenthesis at position C7, which succeeds and yields the empty string C8 as the remainder. The result entered for pPrimary at column C3 is thus (7,C8). Although for a long input string and a complex grammar this result table may be large, it only grows linearly with the size of the input assuming the grammar has a fixed number of nonterminals. Furthermore, as long as the grammar uses only the standard operators of Backus-Naur Form [2], only a fixed number of previouslyrecorded cells in the matrix need to be accessed in order to compute each new result. Therefore, assuming table lookup occurs in constant time, the parsing process as a whole completes in linear time. Due to the “forward pointers” embedded in the results table, the computation of a given result may examine cells that are widely spaced in the matrix. For example, computing the result for pPrimary at C3 above made use of results from columns C3, C4, and C7. This ability to skip ahead arbitrary distances while making parsing decisions is the source of the algorithm’s unlimited lookahead capability, and this capability makes the algorithm more powerful than linear-time predictive parsers or LR parsers.  2.4 Packrat Parsing An obvious practical problem with the tabular right-to-left parsing algorithm above is that it computes many results that are never needed. An additional inconvenience is that we must carefully determine the order in which the results for a particular column are computed, so that parsing functions such as pAdditive and pMultitive that depend on other results from the same column will work correctly. Packrat parsing is essentially a lazy version of the tabular algorithm that solves both of these problems. A packrat parser computes results only as they are needed, in the same order as the original recursive descent parser would. However, once a result is computed for the first time, it is stored for future use by subsequent calls. A non-strict functional programming language such as Haskell provides an ideal implementation platform for a packrat parser. In fact, packrat parsing in Haskell is particularly efficient because it does not require arrays or any other explicit lookup structures other than the language’s ordinary algebraic data types. First we will need a new type to represent a single column of the parsing result matrix, which we will call Derivs (“derivations”).  This type is merely a tuple with one component for each nonterminal in the grammar. Each component’s type is the result type of the corresponding parse function. The Derivs type also contains one additional component, which we will call dvChar, to represent “raw” characters of the input string as if they were themselves the results of some parsing function. The Derivs type for our example parser can be conveniently declared in Haskell as follows: data Derivs = Derivs { dvAdditive dvMultitive dvPrimary dvDecimal dvChar  :: :: :: :: ::  Result Result Result Result Result  Int, Int, Int, Int, Char}  This Haskell syntax declares the type Derivs to have a single constructor, also named Derivs, with five components of the specified types. The declaration also automatically creates a corresponding data-accessor function for each component: dvAdditive can be used as a function of type Derivs → Result Int, which extracts the first component of a Derivs tuple, and so on. Next we modify the Result type so that the “remainder” component of a success result is not a plain String, but is instead an instance of Derivs: data Result v = Parsed v Derivs | NoParse  The Derivs and Result types are now mutually recursive: the success results in one Derivs instance act as links to other Derivs instances. These result values in fact provide the only linkage we need between different columns in the matrix of parsing results. Now we modify the original recursive-descent parsing functions so that each takes a Derivs instead of a String as its parameter: pAdditive pMultitive pPrimary pDecimal  :: :: :: ::  Derivs Derivs Derivs Derivs  -> -> -> ->  Result Result Result Result  Int Int Int Int  Wherever one of the original parse functions examined input characters directly, the new parse function instead refers to the dvChar component of the Derivs object. Wherever one of the original functions made a recursive call to itself or another parse function, in order to match a nonterminal in the grammar, the new parse function instead instead uses the Derivs accessor function corresponding to that nonterminal. Sequences of terminals and nonterminals are matched by following chains of success results through multiple Derivs instances. For example, the new pAdditive function uses the dvMultitive, dvChar, and dvAdditive accessors as follows, without making any direct recursive calls: -- Parse an additive-precedence expression pAdditive :: Derivs -> Result Int pAdditive d = alt1 where -- Additive <- Multitive ’+’ Additive alt1 = case dvMultitive d of Parsed vleft d’ -> case dvChar d’ of Parsed ’+’ d’’ -> case dvAdditive d’’ of Parsed vright d’’’ -> Parsed (vleft + vright) d’’’ _ -> alt2 _ -> alt2  _ -> alt2 -- Additive <- Multitive alt2 = dvMultitive d  Finally, we create a special “top-level” function, parse, to produce instances of the Derivs type and “tie up” the recursion between all of the individual parsing functions: -- Create a result matrix for an input string parse :: String -> Derivs parse s = d where d = Derivs add mult prim dec chr add = pAdditive d mult = pMultitive d prim = pPrimary d dec = pDecimal d chr = case s of (c:s’) -> Parsed c (parse s’) [] -> NoParse  The “magic” of the packrat parser is in this doubly-recursive function. The first level of recursion is produced by the parse function’s reference to itself within the case statement. This relatively conventional form of recursion is used to iterate over the input string one character at a time, producing one Derivs instance for each input position. The final Derivs instance, representing the empty string, is assigned a dvChar result of NoParse, which effectively terminates the list of columns in the result matrix. The second level of recursion is via the symbol d. This identifier names the Derivs instance to be constructed and returned by the parse function, but it is also the parameter to each of the individual parsing functions. These parsing functions, in turn, produce the rest of the components forming this very Derivs object. This form of data recursion of course works only in a non-strict language, which allow some components of an object to be accessed before other parts of the same object are available. For example, in any Derivs instance created by the above function, the dvChar component can be accessed before any of the other components of the tuple are available. Attempting to access the dvDecimal component of this tuple will cause pDecimal to be invoked, which in turn uses the dvChar component but does not require any of the other “higher-level” components. Accessing the dvPrimary component will similarly invoke pPrimary, which may access dvChar and dvAdditive. Although in the latter case pPrimary is accessing a “higher-level” component, doing so does not create a cyclic dependency in this case because it only ever invokes dvAdditive on a different Derivs object from the one it was called with: namely the one for the position following the opening parenthesis. Every component of every Derivs object produced by parse can be lazily evaluated in this fashion. Figure 3 illustrates the data structure produced by the parser for the example input text ‘2*(3+4)’, as it would appear in memory under a modern functional evaluator after fully reducing every cell. Each vertical column represents a Derivs instance with its five Result components. For results of the form ‘Parsed v d’, the semantic value v is shown in the appropriate cell, along with an arrow representing the “remainder” pointer leading to another Derivs instance in the matrix. In any modern lazy language implementation that properly preserves sharing relationships during evaluation, the arrows in the diagram will literally correspond to pointers in the heap, and a given cell in the structure will never be evaluated twice. Shaded boxes represent cells that would never be evaluated at all in  dvAdditive  14  7  7  ’4’  dvMultitive  14  7  3  4  dvPrimary  2  7  3  4  dvDecimal  2  dvChar  ’2’  4  3 ’*’  ’(’  ’3’  ’+’  ’4’  ’)’  Figure 3. Illustration of Derivs data structure produced by parsing the string ‘2*(3+4)’  the likely case that the dvAdditive result in the leftmost column is the only value ultimately needed by the application. This illustration should make it clear why this algorithm can run in O(n) time under a lazy evaluator for an input string of length n. The top-level parse function is the only function that creates instances of the Derivs type, and it always creates exactly n + 1 instances. The parse functions only access entries in this structure instead of making direct calls to each other, and each function examines at most a fixed number of other cells while computing a given result. Since the lazy evaluator ensures that each cell is evaluated at most once, the critical memoization property is provided and linear parse time is guaranteed, even though the order in which these results are evaluated is likely to be completely different from the tabular, right-to-left, bottom-to-top algorithm presented earlier.  3 Extending the Algorithm The previous section provided the basic principles and tools required to create a packrat parser, but building parsers for real applications involves many additional details, some of which are affected by the packrat parsing paradigm. In this section we will explore some of the more important practical issues, while incrementally building on the example packrat parser developed above. We first examine the annoying but straightforward problem of left recursion. Next we address the issue of lexical analysis, seamlessly integrating this task into the packrat parser. Finally, we explore the use of monadic combinators to express packrat parsers more concisely.  3.1 Left Recursion One limitation packrat parsing shares with other top-down schemes is that it does not directly support left recursion. For example, suppose we wanted to add a subtraction operator to the above example and have addition and subtraction be properly left-associative. A natural approach would be to modify the grammar rules for Additive expressions as follows, and to change the parser accordingly: Additive  ← | |  Additive ‘+’ Multitive Additive ‘-’ Multitive Multitive  In a recursive descent parser for this grammar, the pAdditive function would recursively invoke itself with the same input it was provided, and therefore would get into an infinite recursion cycle. In a packrat parser for this grammar, pAdditive would attempt to access the dvAdditive component of its own Derivs tuple—the same component it is supposed to compute—and thus would create a circular data dependency. In either case the parser fails, although the packrat parser’s failure mode might be viewed as slightly “friendlier” since modern lazy evaluators often detect circular data dependencies at run-time but cannot detect infinite recursion.  Fortunately, a left-recursive grammar can always be rewritten into an equivalent right-recursive one [2], and the desired leftassociative semantic behavior is easily reconstructed using higherorder functions as intermediate parser results. For example, to make Additive expressions left-associative in the example parser, we can split this rule into two nonterminals, Additive and AdditiveSuffix. The pAdditive function recognizes a single Multitive expression followed by an AdditiveSuffix: pAdditive :: Derivs -> Result Int pAdditive d = case dvMultitive d of Parsed vl d’ -> case dvAdditiveSuffix d’ of Parsed suf d’’ -> Parsed (suf vl) d’’ _ -> NoParse _ -> NoParse  The pAdditiveSuffix function collects infix operators and righthand-side operands, and builds a semantic value of type ‘Int → Int’, which takes a left-hand-side operand and produces a result: pAdditiveSuffix :: Derivs -> Result (Int -> Int) pAdditiveSuffix d = alt1 where -- AdditiveSuffix <- ’+’ Multitive AdditiveSuffix alt1 = case dvChar d of Parsed ’+’ d’ -> case dvMultitive d’ of Parsed vr d’’ -> case dvAdditiveSuffix d’’ of Parsed suf d’’’ -> Parsed (\vl -> suf (vl + vr)) d’’’ _ -> alt2 _ -> alt2 _ -> alt2 -- AdditiveSuffix <- <empty> alt3 = Parsed (\v -> v) d  3.2 Integrated Lexical Analysis Traditional parsing algorithms usually assume that the “raw” input text has already been partially digested by a separate lexical analyzer into a stream of tokens. The parser then treats these tokens as atomic units even though each may represent multiple consecutive input characters. This separation is usually necessary because conventional linear-time parsers can only use primitive terminals in their lookahead decisions and cannot refer to higher-level nonterminals. This limitation was explained in Section 2.2 for predictive top-down parsers, but bottom-up LR parsers also depend on a similar token-based lookahead mechanism sharing the same problem. If a parser can only use atomic tokens in its lookahead decisions, then parsing becomes much easier if those tokens represent whole keywords, identifiers, and literals rather than raw characters. Packrat parsing suffers from no such lookahead limitation, however. Because a packrat parser reflects a true backtracking model, decisions between alternatives in one parsing function can depend on complete results produced by other parsing functions. For this reason, lexical analysis can be integrated seamlessly into a packrat parser with no special treatment. To extend the packrat parser example with “real” lexical analysis, we add some new nonterminals to the Derivs type:  data Derivs = Derivs { -- Expressions dvAdditive :: Result Int, ... -- Lexical tokens dvDigits :: Result dvDigit :: Result dvSymbol :: Result dvWhitespace :: Result  (Int, Int), Int, Char, (),  -- Raw input dvChar :: Result Char}  The pWhitespace parse function consumes any whitespace that may separate lexical tokens: pWhitespace :: Derivs -> Result () pWhitespace d = case dvChar d of Parsed c d’ -> if isSpace c then pWhitespace d’ else Parsed () d _ -> Parsed () d  In a more complete language, this function might have the task of eating comments as well. Since the full power of packrat parsing is available for lexical analysis, comments could have a complex hierarchical structure of their own, such as nesting or markups for literate programming. Since syntax recognition is not broken into a unidirectional pipeline, lexical constructs can even refer “upwards” to higher-level syntactic elements. For example, a language’s syntax could allow identifiers or code fragments embedded within comments to be demarked so the parser can find and analyze them as actual expressions or statements, making intelligent software engineering tools more effective. Similarly, escape sequences in string literals could contain generic expressions representing static or dynamic substitutions. The pWhitespace example also illustrates how commonplace longest-match disambiguation rules can be easily implemented in a packrat parser, even though they are difficult to express in a pure context-free grammar. More sophisticated decision and disambiguation strategies are easy to implement as well, including general syntactic predicates [14], which influence parsing decisions based on syntactic lookahead information without actually consuming input text. For example, the useful followed-by and notfollowed-by rules allow a parsing alternative to be used only if the text matched by that alternative is (or is not) followed by text matching some other arbitrary nonterminal. Syntactic predicates of this kind require unlimited lookahead in general and are therefore outside the capabilities of most other linear-time parsing algorithms. Continuing with the lexical analysis example, the function pSymbol recognizes “operator tokens” consisting of an operator character followed by optional whitespace: -- Parse an operator followed by optional whitespace pSymbol :: Derivs -> Result Char pSymbol d = case dvChar d of Parsed c d’ -> if c ‘elem‘ "+-*/%()" then case dvWhitespace d’ of Parsed _ d’’ -> Parsed c d’’ _ -> NoParse else NoParse _ -> NoParse  Now we modify the higher-level parse functions for expressions to use dvSymbol instead of dvChar to scan for operators and parentheses. For example, pPrimary can be implemented as follows:  and simple aliases cannot be assigned type classes. We must instead wrap the parsing functions with a “real” user-defined type: newtype Parser v = Parser (Derivs -> Result v)  -- Parse a primary expression pPrimary :: Derivs -> Result Int pPrimary d = alt1 where -- Primary <- ’(’ Additive ’)’ alt1 = case dvSymbol d of Parsed ’(’ d’ -> case dvAdditive d’ of Parsed v d’’ -> case dvSymbol d’’ of Parsed ’)’ d’’’ -> Parsed v d’’’ _ -> alt2 _ -> alt2 _ -> alt2  We can now implement Haskell’s standard sequencing (>>=), result-producing (return), and error-producing combinators: instance Monad Parser where (Parser p1) >>= f2 = Parser pre where pre d = post (p1 d) post (Parsed v d’) = p2 d’ where Parser p2 = f2 v post (NoParse) = NoParse return x = Parser (\d -> Parsed x d) fail msg = Parser (\d -> NoParse)  -- Primary <- Decimal alt2 = dvDecimal d  This function demonstrates how parsing decisions can depend not only on the existence of a match at a given position for a nonterminal such as Symbol, but also on the semantic value associated with that nonterminal. In this case, even though all symbol tokens are parsed together and treated uniformly by pSymbol, other rules such as pPrimary can still distinguish between particular symbols. In a more sophisticated language with multi-character operators, identifiers, and reserved words, the semantic values produced by the token parsers might be of type String instead of Char, but these values can be matched in the same way. Such dependencies of syntax on semantic values, known as semantic predicates [14], provide an extremely powerful and useful capability in practice. As with syntactic predicates, semantic predicates require unlimited lookahead in general and cannot be implemented by conventional parsing algorithms without giving up their linear time guarantee.  3.3 Monadic Packrat Parsing A popular method of constructing parsers in functional languages such as Haskell is using monadic combinators [11, 13]. Unfortunately, the monadic approach usually comes with a performance penalty, and with packrat parsing this tradeoff presents a difficult choice. Implementing a packrat parser as described so far assumes that the set of nonterminals and their corresponding result types is known statically, so that they can be bound together in a single fixed tuple to form the Derivs type. Constructing entire packrat parsers dynamically from other packrat parsers via combinators would require making the Derivs type a dynamic lookup structure, associating a variable set of nonterminals with corresponding results. This approach would be much slower and less space-efficient. A more practical strategy, which provides most of the convenience of combinators with a less significant performance penalty, is to use monads to define the individual parsing functions comprising a packrat parser, while keeping the Derivs type and the “top-level” recursion statically implemented as described earlier. Since we would like our combinators to build the parse functions we need directly, the obvious method would be to make the combinators work with a simple type alias:  Finally, for parsing we need an alternation combinator: (<|>) :: Parser v -> Parser v -> Parser v (Parser p1) <|> (Parser p2) = Parser pre where pre d = post d (p1 d) post d NoParse = p2 d post d r = r  With these combinators in addition to a trivial one to recognize specific characters, the pAdditive function in the original packrat parser example can be written as follows: Parser pAdditive = (do vleft <- Parser dvMultitive char ’+’ vright <- Parser dvAdditive return (vleft + vright)) <|> (do Parser dvMultitive)  It is tempting to build additional combinators for higher-level idioms such as repetition and infix expressions. However, using iterative combinators within packrat parsing functions violates the assumption that each cell in the result matrix can be computed in constant time once the results from any other cells it depends on are available. Iterative combinators effectively create “hidden” recursion whose intermediate results are not memoized in the result matrix, potentially making the parser run in super-linear time. This problem is not necessarily serious in practice, as the results in Section 6 will show, but it should be taken into account when using iterative combinators. The on-line examples for this paper include a full-featured monadic combinator library that can be used to build large packrat parsers conveniently. This library is substantially inspired by PARSEC [13], though the packrat parsing combinators are much simpler since they do not have to implement lexical analysis as a separate phase or implement the one-token-lookahead prediction mechanism used by traditional top-down parsers. The full combinator library provides a variety of “safe” constant-time combinators, as well as a few “dangerous” iterative ones, which are convenient but not necessary to construct parsers. The combinator library can be used simultaneously by multiple parsers with different Derivs types, and supports user-friendly error detection and reporting.  type Parser v = Derivs -> Result v  4 Comparison with LL and LR Parsing  Unfortunately, in order to take advantage of Haskell’s useful do syntax, the combinators must use a type of the special class Monad,  Whereas the previous sections have served as a tutorial on how to construct a packrat parser, for the remaining sections we turn to  S R A P  the issue of when packrat parsing is useful in practice. This section informally explores the language recognition power of packrat parsing in more depth, and clarifies its relationship to traditional linear-time algorithms such as LL(k) and LR(k). Although LR parsing is commonly seen as “more powerful” than limited-lookahead top-down or LL parsing, the class of languages these parsers can recognize is the same [3]. As Pepper points out [17], LR parsing can be viewed simply as LL parsing with the grammar rewritten so as to eliminate left recursion and to delay all important parsing decisions as long as possible. The result is that LR provides more flexibility in the way grammars can be expressed, but no actual additional recognition power. For this reason, we will treat LL and LR parsers here as being essentially equivalent.  4.1 Lookahead The most critical practical difference between packrat parsing and LL/LR parsing is the lookahead mechanism. A packrat parser’s decisions at any point can be based on all the text up to the end of the input string. Although the computation of an individual result in the parsing matrix can only perform a constant number of “basic operations,” these basic operations include following forward pointers in the parsing matrix, each of which can skip over a large amount of text at once. Therefore, while LL and LR parsers can only look ahead a constant number of terminals in the input, packrat parsers can look ahead a constant number of terminals and nonterminals in any combination. This ability for parsing decisions to take arbitrary nonterminals into account is what gives packrat parsing its unlimited lookahead capability. To illustrate the difference in language recognition power, the following grammar is not LR(k) for any k, but is not a problem for a packrat parser: S A B  ← ← ←  A|B xAy|xzy xByy|xzyy  Once an LR parser has encountered the ‘z’ and the first following ‘y’ in a string in the above language, it must decide immediately whether to start reducing via nonterminal A or B, but there is no way for it to make this decision until as many ‘y’s have been encountered as there were ‘x’s on the left-hand side. A packrat parser, on the other hand, essentially operates in a speculative fashion, producing derivations for nonterminals A and B in parallel while scanning the input. The ultimate decision between A and B is effectively delayed until the entire input string has been parsed, where the decision is merely a matter of checking which nonterminal has a success result at that position. Mirroring the above grammar left to right does not change the situation, making it clear that the difference is not merely some side-effect of the fact that LR scans the input left-to-right whereas packrat parsing seems to operate in reverse.  4.2 Grammar Composition The limitations of LR parsing due to fixed lookahead are frequently felt when designing parsers for practical languages, and many of these limitations stem from the fact that LL and LR grammars are not cleanly composable. For example, the following grammar represents a simple language with expressions and assignment, which only allows simple identifiers on the left side of an assignment:  ← ← ← ←  R | ID ‘=’ R A | A EQ A | A NE A P | P ‘+’ P | P ‘-’ P ID | ‘(’ R ‘)’  If the symbols ID, EQ, and NE are terminals—i.e., atomic tokens produced by a separate lexical analysis phase—then an LR(1) parser has no trouble with this grammar. However, if we try to integrate this tokenization into the parser itself with the following simple rules, the grammar is no longer LR(1): ID EQ NE  ← ← ←  ’a’ | ’a’ ID ’=’ ’=’ ’!’ ’=’  The problem is that after scanning an identifier, an LR parser must decide immediately whether it is a primary expression or the lefthand side of an assignment, based only on the immediately following token. But if this token is an ‘=’, the parser has no way of knowing whether it is an assignment operator or the first half of an ‘==’ operator. In this particular case the grammar could be parsed by an LR(2) parser. In practice LR(k) and even LALR(k) parsers are uncommon for k > 1. Recently developed extensions to the traditional left-to-right parsing algorithms improve the situation somewhat [18, 16, 15], but they still cannot provide unrestricted lookahead capability while maintaining the linear time guarantee. Even when lexical analysis is separated from parsing, the limitations of LR parsers often surface in other practical situations, frequently as a result of seemingly innocuous changes to an evolving grammar. For example, suppose we want to add simple array indexing to the language above, so that array indexing operators can appear on either the left or right side of an assignment. One possible approach is to add a new nonterminal, L, to represent left-side or “lvalue” expressions, and incorporate the array indexing operator into both types of expressions as shown below: S R A P L  ← ← ← ← ←  R | L ‘=’ R A | A EQ A | A NE A P | P ‘+’ P | P ‘-’ P ID | ‘(’ R ‘)’ | P ‘[’ A ‘]’ ID | ‘(’ L ‘)’ | L ‘[’ A ‘]’  Even if the ID, EQ, and NE symbols are again treated as terminals, this grammar is not LR(k) for any k, because after the parser sees an identifier it must immediately decide whether it is part of a P or L expression, but it has no way of knowing this until any following array indexing operators have been fully parsed. Again, a packrat parser has no trouble with this grammar because it effectively evaluates the P and L alternatives “in parallel” and has complete derivations to work with (or the knowledge of their absence) by the time the critical decision needs to be made. In general, grammars for packrat parsers are composable because the lookahead a packrat parser uses to make decisions between alternatives can take account of arbitrary nonterminals, such as EQ in the first example or P and L in the second. Because a packrat parser does not give “primitive” syntactic constructs (terminals) any special significance as an LL or LR parser does, any terminal or fixed sequence of terminals appearing in a grammar can be substituted with a nonterminal without “breaking” the parser. This substitution capability gives packrat parsing greater composition flexibility.  4.3 Recognition Limitations Given that a packrat parser can recognize a broader class of languages in linear time than either LL(k) or LR(k) algorithms, what kinds of grammars can’t a packrat parser recognize? Though the precise theoretical capabilities of the algorithm have not been thoroughly characterized, the following trivial and unambiguous context-free grammar provides an example that proves just as troublesome for a packrat parser as for an LL or LR parser: S  ←  xSx|x  The problem with this grammar for both kinds of parsers is that, while scanning a string of ‘x’s—left-to-right in the LR case or rightto-left in the packrat case—the algorithm would somehow have to “know” in advance where the middle of the string is so that it can apply the second alternative at that position and then “build outwards” using the first alternative for the rest of the input stream. But since the stream is completely homogeneous, there is no way for the parser to find the middle until the entire input has been parsed. This grammar therefore provides an example, albeit contrived, requiring a more general, non-linear-time CFG parsing algorithm.  5 Practical Issues and Limitations Although packrat parsing is powerful and efficient enough for many applications, there are three main issues that can make it inappropriate in some situations. First, packrat parsing is useful only to construct deterministic parsers: parsers that can produce at most one result. Second, a packrat parser depends for its efficiency on being mostly or completely stateless. Finally, due to its reliance on memoization, packrat parsing is inherently space-intensive. These three issues are discussed in this section.  5.1 Deterministic Parsing An important assumption we have made so far is that each of the mutually recursive parsing functions from which a packrat parser is built will deterministically return at most one result. If there are any ambiguities in the grammar the parser is built from, then the parsing functions must be able to resolve them locally. In the example parsers developed in this paper, multiple alternatives have always been implicitly disambiguated by the order in which they are tested: the first alternative to match successfully is the one used, independent of whether any other alternatives may also match. This behavior is both easy to implement and useful for performing longestmatch and other forms of explicit local disambiguation. A parsing function could even try all of the possible alternatives and produce a failure result if more than one alternative matches. What parsing functions in a packrat parser cannot do is return multiple results to be used in parallel or disambiguated later by some global strategy. In languages designed for machine consumption, the requirement that multiple matching alternatives be disambiguated locally is not much of a problem in practice because ambiguity is usually undesirable in the first place, and localized disambiguation rules are preferred over global ones because they are easier for humans to understand. However, for parsing natural languages or other grammars in which global ambiguity is expected, packrat parsing is less likely to be useful. Although a classic nondeterministic top-down parser in which the parse functions return lists of results [23, 8] could be memoized in a similar way, the resulting parser would not be linear time, and would likely be comparable to existing tabular algorithms for ambiguous context-free grammars [3, 20]. Since  nondeterministic parsing is equivalent in computational complexity to boolean matrix multiplication [12], a linear-time solution to this more general problem is unlikely to be found.  5.2 Stateless Parsing A second limitation of packrat parsing is that it is fundamentally geared toward stateless parsing. A packrat parser’s memoization system assumes that the parsing function for each nonterminal depends only on the input string, and not on any other information accumulated during the parsing process. Although pure context-free grammars are by definition stateless, many practical languages require a notion of state while parsing and thus are not really context-free. For example, C and C++ require the parser to build a table of type names incrementally as types are declared, because the parser must be able to distinguish type names from other identifiers in order to parse subsequent text correctly. Traditional top-down (LL) and bottom-up (LR) parsers have little trouble maintaining state while parsing. Since they perform only a single left-to-right scan of the input and never look ahead more than one or at most a few tokens, nothing is “lost” when a state change occurs. A packrat parser, in contrast, depends on statelessness for the efficiency of its unlimited lookahead capability. Although a stateful packrat parser can be constructed, the parser must start building a new result matrix each time the parsing state changes. For this reason, stateful packrat parsing may be impractical if state changes occur frequently. For more details on packrat parsing with state, please refer to my master’s thesis [9].  5.3 Space Consumption Probably the most striking characteristic of a packrat parser is the fact that it literally squirrels away everything it has ever computed about the input text, including the entire input text itself. For this reason packrat parsing always has storage requirements equal to some possibly substantial constant multiple of the input size. In contrast, LL(k), LR(k), and simple backtracking parsers can be designed so that space consumption grows only with the maximum nesting depth of the syntactic constructs appearing in the input, which in practice is often orders of magnitude smaller than the total size of the text. Although LL(k) and LR(k) parsers for any nonregular language still have linear space requirements in the worst case, this “average-case” difference can be important in practice. One way to reduce the space requirements of the derivations structure, especially in parsers for grammars with many nonterminals, is by splitting up the Derivs type into multiple levels. For example, suppose the nonterminals of a language can be grouped into several broad categories, such as lexical tokens, expressions, statements, and declarations. Then the Derivs tuple itself might have only four components in addition to dvChar, one for each of these nonterminal categories. Each of these components is in turn a tuple containing the results for all of the nonterminals in that category. For the majority of the Derivs instances, representing character positions “between tokens,” none of the components representing the categories of nonterminals will ever be evaluated, and so only the small top-level object and the unevaluated closures for its components occupy space. Even for Derivs instances corresponding to the beginning of a token, often the results from only one or two categories will be needed depending on what kind of language construct is located at that position.  On the other hand, for parsing complex modern programming languages in which the source code is usually written by humans and the top priority is the power and expressiveness of the language, the space cost of packrat parsing is probably reasonable. Standard programming practice involves breaking up large programs into modules of manageable size that can be independently compiled, and the main memory sizes of modern machines leave at least three orders of magnitude in “headroom” for expansion of a typical 10– 100KB source file during parsing. Even when parsing larger source files, the working set may still be relatively small due to the strong structural locality properties of realistic languages. Finally, since the entire derivations structure can be thrown away after parsing is complete, the parser’s space consumption is likely to be irrelevant if its result is fed into some other complex computation, such as a global optimizer, that requires as much space as the packrat parser used. Section 6 will present evidence that this space consumption can be reasonable in practice.  6 Performance Results Although a detailed empirical analysis of packrat parsing is outside the scope of this paper, it is helpful to have some idea of how a packrat parser is likely to behave in practice before committing to a new and unfamiliar parsing paradigm. For this reason, this section presents a few experimental results with realistic packrat parsers running on real source files. For more detailed results, please refer to my master’s thesis [9].  6.1 Space Efficiency The first set of tests measure the space efficiency of a packrat parser for the Java1 programming language. I chose Java for this experiment because it has a rich and complex grammar, but nevertheless adopts a fairly clean syntactic paradigm, not requiring the parser to keep state about declared types as C and C++ parsers do, or to perform special processing between lexical and hierarchical analysis as Haskell’s layout scheme requires. The experiment uses two different versions of this Java parser. Apart from a trivial preprocessing stage to canonicalize line breaks and Java’s Unicode escape sequences, lexical analysis for both parsers is fully integrated as described in Section 3.2. One parser uses monadic combinators in its lexical analysis functions, while the other parser relies only on primitive pattern matching. Both parsers use monadic combinators to construct all higher-level parsing functions. Both parsers also use the technique described in Section 5.3 of splitting the Derivs tuple into two levels, in order to increase modularity and reduce space consumption. The parsers were compiled with the Glasgow Haskell Compiler2 version 5.04, with optimization and profiling enabled. GHC’s heap profiling system was used to measure live heap utilization, which excludes unused heap space and collectible garbage when samples are taken. 1 Java  is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc.  2 http://www.haskell.org/ghc/  100 Monadic parser and scanner Monadic parser, pattern-matching scanner  80  Maximum heap size (MB)  Even with such optimizations a packrat parser can consume many times more working storage than the size of the original input text. For this reason there are some application areas in which packrat parsing is probably not the best choice. For example, for parsing XML streams, which have a fairly simple structure but often encode large amounts of relatively flat, machine-generated data, the power and flexibility of packrat parsing is not needed and its storage cost would not be justified.  Avg. 695:1 60  40 Avg. 301:1  20  0 0  20000  40000  60000 80000 Source file size (bytes)  100000  120000  140000  Figure 4. Maximum heap size versus input size  The test suite consists of 60 unmodified Java source files from the Cryptix library3 , chosen because it includes a substantial number of relatively large Java source files. (Java source files are small on average because the compilation model encourages programmers to place each class definition in a separate file.) Figure 4 shows a plot of each parser’s maximum live heap size against the size of the input files being parsed. Because some of the smaller source files were parsed so quickly that garbage collection never occurred and the heap profiling mechanism did not yield any samples, the plot includes only 45 data points for the fully monadic parser, and 31 data points for the hybrid parser using direct pattern matching for lexical analysis. Averaged across the test suite, the fully monadic parser uses 695 bytes of live heap per byte of input, while the hybrid parser uses only 301 bytes of heap per input byte. These results are encouraging: although packrat parsing can consume a substantial amount of space, a typical modern machine with 128MB or more of RAM should have no trouble parsing source files up to 100-200KB. Furthermore, even though both parsers use some iterative monadic combinators, which can break the linear time and space guarantee in theory, the space consumption of the parsers nevertheless appears to grow fairly linearly. The use of monadic combinators clearly has a substantial penalty in terms of space efficiency. Modifying the parser to use direct pattern matching alone may yield further improvement, though the degree is difficult to predict since the cost of lexical analysis often dominates the rest of the parser. The lexical analysis portion of the hybrid parser is about twice as long as the equivalent portion of the monadic parser, suggesting that writing packrat parsers with pattern matching alone is somewhat more cumbersome but not unreasonable when efficiency is important.  6.2 Parsing Performance The second experiment measures the absolute execution time of the two packrat parsers. For this test the parsers were compiled by GHC 5.04 with optimization but without profiling, and timed on a 1.28GHz AMD Athlon processor running Linux 2.4.17. For this test I only used the 28 source files in the test suite that were larger than 10KB, because the smaller files were parsed so quickly that the Linux time command did not yield adequate precision. Figure 5 shows the resulting execution time plotted against source file size. On these inputs the fully monadic parser averaged 25.0 Kbytes 3 http://www.cryptix.org/  6 Monadic parser and scanner Monadic parser, pattern-matching scanner  Execution time (seconds)  5  Avg. 25.0Kbps  4  3  Avg. 49.8Kbps  2  1  0 0  20000  40000  60000 80000 Source file size (bytes)  100000  120000  140000  Figure 5. Execution time versus input size  per second with a standard deviation of 8.6 KB/s, while the hybrid parser averaged 49.8 KB/s with a standard deviation of 16 KB/s. In order to provide a legitimate performance comparison between packrat parsing and more traditional linear-time algorithms, I converted a freely available YACC grammar for Java [5] into a grammar for Happy4 , an LR parser generator for Haskell. Unfortunately, GHC was unable to compile the 230KB Haskell source file resulting from this grammar, even without optimization and on a machine with 1GB of RAM. (This difficulty incidentally lends credibility to the earlier suggestion that, in modern compilers, the temporary storage cost of a packrat parser is likely to be exceeded by the storage cost of subsequent stages.) Nevertheless, the generated LR parser worked under the Haskell interpreter Hugs.5 Therefore, to provide a rough performance comparison, I ran five of the larger Java sources through the LR and packrat parsers under Hugs using an 80MB heap. For fairness, I only compared the LR parser against the slower, fully monadic packrat parser, because the LR parser uses a monadic lexical analyzer derived from the latter packrat parser. The lexical analysis performance should therefore be comparable and only the parsing algorithm is of primary importance. Under Hugs, the LR parser consistently performs approximately twice the number of reductions and allocates 55% more total heap storage. (I could not find a way to profile live heap utilization under Hugs instead of total allocation.) The difference in real execution time varied widely however: the LR parser took almost twice as long on smaller files but performed about the same on the largest ones. One probable reason for this variance is the effects of garbage collection. Since a running packrat parser will naturally have a much higher ratio of live data to garbage than an LR parser over time, and garbage collection both increases in overhead cost and decreases in effectiveness (i.e., frees less space) when there is more live data, garbage collection is likely to penalize a packrat parser more than an LR parser as the size of the source file increases. Still, it is encouraging that the packrat parser was able to outperform the LR parser on all but the largest Java source files.  7 Related Work This section briefly relates packrat parsing to relevant prior work. For a more detailed analysis of packrat parsing in comparison with other algorithms please refer to my master’s thesis [9]. 4 http://www.haskell.org/happy 5 http://www.haskell.org/hugs  Birman and Ullman [4] first developed the formal properties of deterministic parsing algorithms with backtracking. This work was refined by Aho and Ullman [3] and classified as “top-down limited backtrack parsing,” in reference to the restriction that each parsing function can produce at most one result and hence backtracking is localized. They showed this kind of parser, formally known as a Generalized Top-Down Parsing Language (GTDPL) parser, to be quite powerful. A GTDPL parser can simulate any push-down automaton and thus recognize any LL or LR language, and it can even recognize some languages that are not context free. Nevertheless, all “failures” such as those caused by left recursion can be detected and eliminated from a GTDPL grammar, ensuring that the algorithm is well-behaved. Birman and Ullman also pointed out the possibility of constructing linear-time GTDPL parsers through tabulation of results, but this linear-time algorithm was apparently never put into practice, no doubt because main memories were much more limited at the time and compilers had to operate as streaming “filters” that could run in near-constant space. Adams [1] recently resurrected GTDPL parsing as a component of a modular language prototyping framework, after recognizing its superior composability in comparison with LR algorithms. In addition, many practical top-down parsing libraries and toolkits, including the popular ANTLR [15] and the PARSEC combinator library for Haskell [13], provide similar limited backtracking capabilities which the parser designer can invoke selectively in order to overcome the limitations of predictive parsing. However, all of these parsers implement backtracking in the traditional recursive-descent fashion without memoization, creating the danger of exponential worst-case parse time, and thereby making it impractical to rely on backtracking as a substitute for prediction or to integrate lexical analysis with parsing. The only prior known linear-time parsing algorithm that effectively supports integrated lexical analysis, or “scannerless parsing,” is the NSLR(1) algorithm originally created by Tai [19] and put into practice for this purpose by Salomon and Cormack [18]. This algorithm extends the traditional LR class of algorithms by adding limited support for making lookahead decisions based on nonterminals. The relative power of packrat parsing with respect to NSLR(1) is unclear: packrat parsing is less restrictive of rightward lookahead, but NSLR(1) can also take leftward context into account. In practice, NSLR(1) is probably more space-efficient, but packrat parsing is simpler and cleaner. Other recent scannerless parsers [22, 21] forsake linear-time deterministic algorithms in favor of more general but slower ambiguity-tolerant CFG parsing.  8 Future Work While the results presented here demonstrate the power and practicality of packrat parsing, more experimentation is needed to evaluate its flexibility, performance, and space consumption on a wider variety of languages. For example, languages that rely extensively on parser state, such as C and C++, as well as layout-sensitive languages such as ML and Haskell, may prove more difficult for a packrat parser to handle efficiently. On the other hand, the syntax of a practical language is usually designed with a particular parsing technology in mind. For this reason, an equally compelling question is what new syntax design possibilities are created by the “free” unlimited lookahead and unrestricted grammar composition capabilities of packrat parsing. Section 3.2 suggested a few simple extensions that depend on integrated lexical analysis, but packrat parsing may be even more useful  in languages with extensible syntax [7] where grammar composition flexibility is important. Although packrat parsing is simple enough to implement by hand in a lazy functional language, there would still be practical benefit in a grammar compiler along the lines of YACC in the C world or Happy [10] and Mı́mico [6] in the Haskell world. In addition to the parsing functions themselves, the grammar compiler could automatically generate the static “derivations” tuple type and the top-level recursive “tie-up” function, eliminating the problems of monadic representation discussed in Section 3.3. The compiler could also reduce iterative notations such as the popular ‘+’ and ‘*’ repetition operators into a low-level grammar that uses only primitive constant-time operations, preserving the linear parse time guarantee. Finally, the compiler could rewrite left-recursive rules to make it easier to express left-associative constructs in the grammar. One practical area in which packrat parsing may have difficulty and warrants further study is in parsing interactive streams. For example, the “read-eval-print” loops in language interpreters often expect the parser to detect at the end of each line whether or not more input is needed to finish the current statement, and this requirement violates the packrat algorithm’s assumption that the entire input stream is available up-front. A similar open question is under what conditions packrat parsing may be suitable for parsing infinite streams.  9 Conclusion Packrat parsing is a simple and elegant method of converting a backtracking recursive descent parser implemented in a non-strict functional programming language into a linear-time parser, without giving up the power of unlimited lookahead. The algorithm relies for its simplicity on the ability of non-strict functional languages to express recursive data structures with complex dependencies directly, and it relies on lazy evaluation for its practical efficiency. A packrat parser can recognize any language that conventional deterministic linear-time algorithms can and many that they can’t, providing better composition properties and allowing lexical analysis to be integrated with parsing. The primary limitations of the algorithm are that it only supports deterministic parsing, and its considerable (though asymptotically linear) storage requirements.  Acknowledgments I wish to thank my advisor Frans Kaashoek, my colleagues Chuck Blake and Russ Cox, and the anonymous reviewers for many helpful comments and suggestions.  10 References [1] Stephen Robert Adams. Modular Grammars for Programming Language Prototyping. PhD thesis, University of Southampton, 1991. [2] Alfred V. Aho, Ravi Sethi, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools. Addison-Wesley, 1986. [3] Alfred V. Aho and Jeffrey D. Ullman. The Theory of Parsing, Translation and Compiling - Vol. I: Parsing. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1972. [4] Alexander Birman and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Parsing algorithms with backtrack. Information and Control, 23(1):1–34, Aug 1973.  [5] Dmitri Bronnikov. Free Yacc-able Java(tm) grammar, 1998. http://home.inreach.com/bronikov/grammars/java.html. [6] Carlos Camarão and Lucı́lia Figueiredo. A monadic combinator compiler compiler. In 5th Brazilian Symposium on Programming Languages, Curitiba – PR – Brazil, May 2001. Universidade Federal do Paraná. [7] Luca Cardelli, Florian Matthes, and Martı́n Abadi. Extensible syntax with lexical scoping. Technical Report 121, Digital Systems Research Center, 1994. [8] Jeroen Fokker. Functional parsers. In Advanced Functional Programming, pages 1–23, 1995. [9] Bryan Ford. Packrat parsing: a practical linear-time algorithm with backtracking. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sep 2002. [10] Andy Gill and Simon Marlow. Happy: The parser generator for Haskell. http://www.haskell.org/happy. [11] Graham Hutton and Erik Meijer. Monadic parsing in Haskell. Journal of Functional Programming, 8(4):437–444, Jul 1998. [12] Lillian Lee. Fast context-free grammar parsing requires fast boolean matrix multiplication. Journal of the ACM, 2002. To appear. [13] Daan Leijen. Parsec, a fast combinator parser. http://www.cs.uu.nl/˜daan. [14] Terence J. Parr and Russell W. Quong. Adding semantic and syntactic predicates to LL(k): pred-LL(k). In Computational Complexity, pages 263–277, 1994. [15] Terence J. Parr and Russell W. Quong. ANTLR: A predicatedLL(k) parser generator. Software Practice and Experience, 25(7):789–810, 1995. [16] Terence John Parr. Obtaining practical variants of LL(k) and LR(k) for k > 1 by splitting the atomic k-tuple. PhD thesis, Purdue University, Apr 1993. [17] Peter Pepper. LR parsing = grammar transformation + LL parsing: Making LR parsing more understandable and more efficient. Technical Report 99-5, TU Berlin, Apr 1999. [18] Daniel J. Salomon and Gordon V. Cormack. Scannerless NSLR(1) parsing of programming languages. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN’89 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 170–178, Jul 1989. [19] Kuo-Chung Tai. Noncanonical SLR(1) grammars. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 1(2):295–320, Oct 1979. [20] Masaru Tomita. Efficient parsing for natural language. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1985. [21] M.G.J. van den Brand, J. Scheerder, J.J. Vinju, and E. Visser. Disambiguation filters for scannerless generalized LR parsers. In Compiler Construction, 2002. [22] Eelco Visser. Scannerless generalized-LR parsing. Technical Report P9707, Programming Research Group, University of Amsterdam, 1997. [23] Philip Wadler. How to replace failure by a list of successes: A method for exception handling, backtracking, and pattern matching in lazy functional languages. In Functional Programming Languages and Computer Architecture, pages 113– 128, 1985.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
