Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_2752

Abstract:
arXiv:1711.02953v1 [math.GR] 8 Nov 2017  Classification of pro-p PD2 pairs and the pro-p curve complex Gareth Wilkes November 9, 2017 Abstract We classify pro-p Poincaré duality pairs in dimension two. We then use this classification to build a pro-p analogue of the curve complex and establish its basic properties.  Introduction A key object in the study of self-homeomorphisms of a surface Σ is the curve complex, a simpicial complex whose simplices are isotopy classes of certain multicurves on Σ. When working with the curve complex one often simplifies matters by assuming that a class of multicurves is in some simple standard form, and asserts that this is acceptable by noting that every multicurve may be taken to a standard form by means of some self-homeomorphism of Σ. One proves this by cutting Σ along the multicurve and using the classification of surfaces with boundary. Thus the curve complex may be viewed as built using this classification as a foundation. In this paper we will carry out this program in the realm of pro-p groups. The notions of ‘relative (co)homology’ and ‘Poincaré duality pair’ for profinite groups were defined and developed in the author’s paper [Wil17a]. In the first part of this paper we will classify those pro-p group pairs which are Poincaré duality pairs of dimension 2. The end result (Theorem 3.3) is closely related to (and indeed relies upon) the classification of Demushkin groups completed by Demushkin, Serre, and Labute [Dem61, Dem63, Ser62, Lab67]. In Section 4 we use this classification to classify the ways that the pro-p completion G of π1 Σ (for Σ a compact orientable surface) may split as a graph of pro-p groups with edge stabilisers Zp and show that, up to automorphism, the only possible splittings are the obvious geometric ones. Considering splittings as being dual to ‘simple closed curves’ this analysis yields a ‘pro-p curve complex’— a profinite space, containing the abstract curve complex, on which OutpGq has a natural action. This raises the question of what properties of automorphisms can be deduced from the action on this pro-p curve complex—in particular, is it possible for a pseudo-Anosov automorphism of π1 Σ to fix a point in the pro-p curve complex? It is perhaps somewhat amusing to compare the order of this program with the classification of discrete PD2 groups and PD2 pairs. In the discrete realm, the PD2 groups were shown to be precisely the surface groups by Bieri, Eckmann, Müller and Linnell [BE78, EM80, EL83]. As noted in Section 11 of [BE78] 1  this implies the classification of PD2 pairs via the classification of splittings of surface groups. In our present case the PD2 pairs are classified first, and then applied to study splittings. The author would like to thank his supervisor Marc Lackenby for his support. The author was supported by the EPSRC. Conventions. In this paper we adopt the following conventions. • The symbol p will denote a prime number unless otherwise specified. The symbol Zp denotes the p-adic integers and Fp the field with p elements. • Any appearance of p8 for p a prime should be interpreted as zero. • All groups will be pro-p groups and all subgroups closed unless otherwise specified. All homomorphisms will be continuous. • For group elements x and y, the conjugate y ´1 xy will be denoted xy and the commutator rx, ys will mean x´1 y ´1 xy “ x´1 xy . • Let G be a pro-p group and let M be a finite p-primary G-module. Then M ˚ will denote the Pontrjagin dual HompM, Qp {Zp q with action pg ¨ f qpmq “ f pg ´1 mq. • The automorphism group AutpZp q will be denoted Up . • For a pro-p group G and a homomorphism ρ : G Ñ Up we will denote the the module with underlying abelian group Zp and G-action χ by Zp pχq. The module Z{pm with action given by ρ will be denoted Mm pρq and its Pontrjagin dual by Im pρq.  1  Preliminaries  1.1  Automorphisms of Zp  In this section we set up some notation and preliminaries concerning automorphisms of the p-adic integers and their quotient groups. First recall the structure of the automorphism group. Theorem 1.1 (Theorem 4.4.7 of [RZ00]). Let p be a prime. • If p ‰ 2 then Up “ Zˆp – Cp´1 ˆ Zp where the second factor is generated by the automorphism 1 ÞÑ 1 ` p. • U2 “ Zˆ2 – C2 ˆ Z2 “ x´1y ˆ x1 ÞÑ 1 ` 4y Note that for p ‰ 2 the image of any homomorphism from a pro-p group to Up meets Cp´1 trivially. Following [Lab67] we give the following notation to the pro-p subgroups of these automorphism groups. For 1 ď k ď 8 an integer set k Upkq p “ x1 ÞÑ 1 ` p y ď Up ,  rk`1s  U2  “ x1 ÞÑ ´1 ` 2k`1 y ď U2  Let G be a pro-p group and let χ : G Ñ Up be a homomorphism. Note that since Zp has a unique subgroup of index pm for any m there is an induced map from G to AutpZ{pm q. We may define an invariant qpχq to be the highest power 2  pm of p such that G Ñ AutpZ{pm q is trivial. If this maximum does not exist (i.e. χ is trivial) then by convention we set qpχq “ p8 “ 0. Note that for any pro-p group G and any χ : G Ñ Up the image of G in AutpFp q is trivial. pmq One may easily show that if qpχq “ pm ‰ 2 then impχq “ Up . If qpχq “ 2 rf s pf q then the image of χ may be either x´1y ˆ U2 or U2 where f ě 2 or f “ 8. p1q r2s Note that U2 “ U2 .  1.2  Lower central q-series  Let G be a pro-p group and let q “ pm for some 1 ď m ď 8. The lower central q-series of G is the sequence of closed subgroups of G defined by G1 “ G,  Gj`1 “ Gqj rGj , Gs  We may define grj pGq “ Gj {Gj`1 ,  grpGq “  ÿ  grj pGq  jě1  The fact that rGi , Gj s Ď Gi`j implies that grpGq is a graded Lie algebra over Zp {qZp , with Lie bracket induced by the commutator on homogeneous elements of grpGq. If q ‰ 0 then x ÞÑ xq induces a linear mapping φi : grj pGq Ñ grj`1 pGq for all j. If π denotes an indeterminate over Zp {qZp we may let the polynomial ring Zp {qZp rπs act on grpGq by defining π ¨ ξ “ φj pξq when ξ P grj pGq. By convention we extend this to the q “ 0 case by setting π “ 0 P Zp . This makes grpGq into an algebra over ř Zp {qZp rπs. It is a Lie algebra provided q “ 0 or p ‰ 2. When p “ 2 only ją1 grj pGq is a Lie algebra. This issue will not be of concern to us. All the identities concerning grj pGq are derived from commutator identites. We will record some here for later use. The proofs are elementary. Let u, v, w P G and k P Z. • ruv, ws “ ru, wsrru, ws, vsrv, ws • ru, vws “ ru, wsru, vsrru, vs, ws • for u P Gi , v P Gj we have ruk , vs ” ru, vsk ” ru, v k s modulo Gi`j`1 .  1.3  PDn groups and PDn pairs  It would be neither necessary nor expedient to give a full account of the theory of profinite PDn groups at a prime p. For a proper discussion for profinite groups see [SW00], and for pro-p groups see [Ser13], Section I.4.5. Depending on your viewpoint the following is either a definition or a theorem. Definition 1.2. Let G be a pro-p group. Then G is a PDn group if • dim H k pG, Fp q is finite for all k; • dim H n pG, Fp q “ 1; and • for all k the cup product H k pG, Fp q ˆ H n´k pG, Fp q Ñ H n pG, Fp q is a non-degenerate bilinear form. 3  One may show (see Proposition 30 of [Ser13] or Theorem 4.5.6 of [SW00]) that these conditions are enough to guarantee a more extensive duality as follows. There is a unique homomorphism χ : G Ñ Up called the orientation character with the following properties. Let Ip pGq “ pZp pχqq˚ denote Qp {Zp equipped with the G action dual to χ. Then H n pG, Ip pGqq “ Qp {Zp and the cup product H k pG, M q b H n´k pG, HompM, Ip pGqqq Ñ H n pG, Ip pGqq induces isomorphisms H k pG, M q – H n´k pG, HompM, Ip pGqqq˚ – Hn´k pG, Zp pχq b M q for any finite p-primary G-module M . Here the last isomorphism is induced by Pontrjagin duality (see for example Proposition 6.3.6 of [RZ00]), together with the identity HompM, Zp pχq˚ q “ pZp pχq b M q˚ The theory of the (co)homology of a profinite group relative to a collection of subgroups was defined and studied in [Wil17a]. We will just state a restricted version of the definition here and leave it to the curious reader to read further. Definition 1.3 (Definition 2.1 of [Wil17a]). Let G be a pro-p group and S “ tS0 , . . . , Sb u be a finite family of closed subgroups pb ě 0q. Consider the short exact sequence b à 0 Ñ ∆G,S Ñ Zp rrG{Si ss Ñ Zp Ñ 0 i“0  where the final map is the augmentation. Then define K H‚`1 pG, S; M q “ TorG ‚ p∆G,S , M q,  H ‚`1 pG, S, Aq “ Ext‚G p∆G,S , Aq  where M is an inverse limit of finite p-primary G-modules, A is a direct limit of such modules and ∆K G,S denotes ∆G,S when considered as a right module via δ ¨ g “ g ´1 δ. The definition can actually be made for certain infinite families of subgroups as well. However in the case of duality pairs the family of peripheral subgroups is forced to be finite (Proposition 5.4 of [Wil17a]) so we will not concern ourselves with this. If we replace each Si by a conjugate Sigi then this leaves the cohomology invariant up to natural isomorphism by Proposition 2.9 of [Wil17a]. This cohomology theory is natural with respect to maps of pro-p group pairs. If pG, Sq and pG1 , S 1 q are pro-p group pairs with S “ tS0 , . . . , Sb u and S 1 “ tS01 , . . . , Sb1 1 u, then a map of pairs pG, Sq Ñ pG1 , S 1 q consists of a function f : t1, . . . , bu Ñ t1, . . . , b1 u and a group homomorphism φ : G Ñ G1 such that φpSi q Ď Sf1 piq for all i. In this circumstance one obtains natural maps H‚ pG, S; M q Ñ H‚ pG1 , S 1 ; M q,  H ‚ pG1 , S 1 ; M q Ñ H ‚ pG, S; M q  for any G1 -module M , regarded as a G-module via φ. See Proposition 2.6 of [Wil17a]. Two important facts we will use freely are Pontrjagin duality H k pG, S; M ˚ q “ Hk pG, S; M q˚ 4  and the existence of a cup product H k pG, S; M q b H n´k pG, N q Ñ H n pG, S; Lq for (direct limits of) finite p-primary G-modules L, M and N and a pairing M b N Ñ L. Again the following definition is more properly a theorem. Definition 1.4 (Theorem 5.15 of [Wil17a]). Let G be a pro-p group and S a collection of closed subgroups of G. Then pG, Sq is a PDn pair if • dim H k pG, S; Fp q is finite for all k; • dim H n pG, S; Fp q “ 1; and • for all k the cup product H k pG, S; Fp q ˆ H n´k pG, Fp q Ñ H n pG, S; Fp q is a non-degenerate bilinear form. Again for a PDn pair pG, Sq there exits a unique orientation character χ : G Ñ Up with similar properties to above. Namely if Ip pG, Sq “ Zp pχq˚ denotes Qp {Zp equipped with the G action dual to χ, then H n pG, S; Ip pG, Sqq “ Qp {Zp and the cup product H k pG, S; M q b H n´k pG, HompM, Ip pG, Sqqq Ñ H n pG, S; Ip pG, Sqq with respect to the evaluation pairing induces isomorphisms H k pG, S; M q – H n´k pG, HompM, Ip pG, Sqqq˚ – Hn´k pG, Zp pχq b M q for any finite p-primary G-module M . See Section 5.1 of [Wil17a] for more details on PDn pairs. Let us now state the immediate consequences of being a PD2 pair. Proposition 1.5. Let pG, Sq be a PD2 pair with orientation character χ. Then G is a finitely generated free pro-p group and S is a finite family of infinite procyclic subgroups of G. Moreover χ vanishes on each element of S. Proof. By Proposition 5.4 of [Wil17a], S is a finite family S “ tS0 , . . . , Sb u with each Si a PD1 group with orientation character χ|Si . The only pro-p PD1 group is Zp , which is orientable and so each Si is cyclic with χ|Si “ 1. Furthermore by Corollary 5.8 in [Wil17a] we find cdp pGq “ 1, so by (for example) Theorem 7.7.4 of [RZ00] G is a free pro-p group. It is finitely generated since H 1 pG, Fp q is finite. Proposition 1.6. Let pG, Sq be a PD2 pair with S “ tS0 , . . . , Sb u. Fix a generator s0 of S0 . Then the rank of G is n ` b for some n ě 0 and we may choose a basis tx1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . , sb u of G such that • si is a generator of Si for all i • s0 ” s1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sb modulo Gp rG, Gs  5  • ζi ps0 q “ 1 for all i, where ζi is the projection G Ñ Zp obtained by killing all the elements of our chosen basis other than si . Proof. By the long exact sequence in relative cohomology and duality (Proposition 3.5, Theorem 5.6 and Proposition 5.7 of [Wil17a]) we have a commuting diagram (with coefficients in Fp ) H 0 pGq  p1,...,1q  H2 pG, Sq Àb  i“1  H 0 pSi q  Àb  H1 pSi q  i“0  –  whence  Àb  –  i“0  H1 pGq  H1 pSi q injects into H1 pGq. Therefore there is a basis B “ tx1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . , sb u  of G where si is a generator of Si and s0 ” s1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sb modulo Gp rG, Gs. It follows that modulo rG, Gs we have s0 ”  n ź  i ¨ xpµ i  b ź  sλi i  i“1  i“1  where the λi lie in Zˆp . Replacing each si by the generator sλi i of Si we may guarantee that ζi ps0 q “ 1 for all i. Note that the properties in the conclusion of the above theorem do not change if we replace each si (and Si ) a conjugate of itself for 1 ď i ď b. We will be needing a tool to identify their orientation character of a PD2 pair. Proposition 1.7. Let pG, Sq be a PDn pair at the prime p and let ρ : G Ñ Up . Then ρ coincides with the orientation character χ of pG, Sq if and only if |H n pG, S; Im pρqq| “ pm  for every m P N  Proof. By duality we have H n pG, S; Im pρqq˚ – HomG pIm pρq, Ip pG, Sqq “ HomG pZp pχq, Mm pρqq “ HomG pMm pχq, Mm pρqq Now if χ “ ρ then every group homomorphism from Z{pm to itself is an element of HomG pMm pχq, Mm pρqq so this group has size pm . Conversely if the size is pm then the identity map on Z{pm is an element of HomG pMm pχq, Mm pρqq, whence ρ and χ agree modulo pm . If they agree modulo pm for all m then χ “ ρ.  1.4  Demushkin groups  Definition 1.8. A pro-p group G is a Demushkin group if • dim H 1 pG, Fp q ď 8 • dim H 2 pG, Fp q “ 1 6  • the cup product H 1 pG, Fp q ˆ H 1 pG, Fp q Ñ H 2 pG, Fp q is a non-degenerate bilinear form. The first two conditions may be rephrased as ‘G is a finitely generated onerelator pro-p group’. We call an element r of a finitely generated free pro-p group F a Demushkin word if F {xxryy is a Demushkin group. Demushkin groups were classified by Demushkin [Dem61, Dem63] (for p ‰ 2), by Serre [Ser62] (when p “ 2 and the rank of G is odd) and by Labute [Lab67] for the remaining cases. The only Demushkin group which is not a PD2 group is Z{2, although some authors do not admit Z{2 as a Demushkin group. The missing constraint to force G to be PD2 is that G has cohomological dimension 2. This follows from the definition of a Demushkin group provided G is infinite— see Section 9.1 of [Ser62]. By convention we declare the orientation character of Z{2Z to be the natural inclusion Z{2 Ñ x´1y Ď U2 . The classification may be stated as follows. Theorem 1.9. Let F be a finitely generated free pro-p group and let r be a Demushkin word in F . Let G “ F {xxryy and let χ : G Ñ Up be the orientation character of the PD2 group G. Then there is a basis x1 , . . . , xn of F such that r takes one of the following forms. • If q ‰ 2 then n is even and r “ xq1 rx1 , x2 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rxn´1 , xn s rf s  • If q “ 2, n is even and impχq “ U2  for some f ě 2 then  f  r “ x2`2 rx1 , x2 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rxn´1 , xn s 1 pf q  • If q “ 2, n is even and impχq “ x´1y ˆ U2  for some f ě 2 then  f  r “ x21 rx1 , x2 sx23 rx3 , x4 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rxn´1 , xn s pf q  • If q “ 2, n is odd and impχq “ x´1y ˆ U2  for some f ě 2 then  f  r “ x21 x22 rx2 , x3 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rxn´1 , xn s Conversely all these forms of words are Demushkin words and the corresponding Demushkin groups have orientation characters as stated.  2  Capping off peripheral subgroups  We will attack the classification problem by reducing the number of boundary components in order to make use of the classification of Demushkin groups as a base case. We do this largely because computing an explicit formula for the cup product on H 1 pG, Sq b H 1 pGq in terms of the Si is rather awkward, and it is easier to deal with the induction. We will need the following basic proposition concerning non-degeneracy of bilinear forms. The proof is an exercise in undergraduate algebra. 7  Proposition 2.1. Let V, W be vector spaces over a field F , and let B : V ˆW Ñ F be a bilinear form. Assume that we have direct sum decompositions V “ V 1 ‘ V 2,  W “ W1 ‘ W2  and that Bpv 1 , w2 q “ 0 for all v 1 P V 1 , w2 P W 2 . Then B is non-degenerate if and only if the two bilinear forms B1 : V 1 ˆ W 1 Ñ F,  B2 : V 2 ˆ W 2 Ñ F  obtained by restriction from B are non-degenerate. We will first deal with the case b ě 1 as this only involves relative cohomology. Theorem 2.2. Let G be a free pro-p group of rank n ` b where n ě 0, b ě 1 and let S “ tSi ubi“0 be a family of cyclic subgroups of G. Suppose there exist generators si for the Si such that (1) s1 , . . . , sb generate a free factor of G and (2) s0 ” s1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sb modulo Gp rG, Gs. (3) Si X xxSb yy “ t1u for i ‰ b Define G to be the quotient of G by the normal subgroup generated by Sb , let φ : G Ñ G be the quotient map and let S i “ φpSi q for 0 ď i ă b. Let S “ tS i ub´1 i“0 . Note that pG, Sq satisfy the conditions (1) and (2) above. Then pG, Sq is a PD2 pair if and only if pG, Sq is a PD2 pair. When they are both PD2 pairs then their orientation characteristics χ, χ satisfy χ “ χφ. Remark. The assumption that Si X xxSb yy “ t1u for i ‰ b is equivalent to Si Ę xxSb yy since G is free, hence torsion-free. This is automatic for b ą 1 by the conditions (1) and (2). For the case when b “ 1 and S0 Ď xxS1 yy see Proposition 2.3. Proof. Extend s1 , . . . , sb to a free basis px1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . sb q for G and take px1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . sb´1 q as basis for G. There is a map of pairs pG, Sq Ñ pG, Sq induced by φ where we regard Sb as sent to 1 P Sb´1 . This gives a commutative diagram of long exact sequences in relative cohomology with Fp -coefficients. The set-up of the theorem and the fact that the coefficients are a field allow one to easily write down all the groups and maps in this sequence explicitly. In particular one finds that the natural map –  Fp – H 2 pG, Sq ÝÑ H 2 pG, Sq – Fp is an isomorphism and that there are splittings H 1 pG, Sq “ H 0 pSb q ‘ H 1 pG, Sq,  H 1 pGq “ H 1 pSb q ‘ H 1 pGq  Here the maps from H 0 pSb q and H 1 pG, Sq to H 1 pG, Sq are the natural maps from the commutative diagram and the maps from H 1 pGq and H 1 pSb q to H 1 pGq are respectively induced by φ and by the retraction G Ñ Sb which kills all the elements in our chosen basis other than sb . 8  Since cup products are natural with respect to maps of pairs (Proposition 3.1 of [Wil17a]), the cup product on H 1 pG, Sq b H 1 pGq is the restriction of the cup product on H 1 pG, Sq b H 1 pGq. Furthermore Equation 3.6 in Section 3.2 of [Wil17a] gives a commutative pentagon H 0 pSb q b H 1 pGq  H 0 pSb q b H 1 pSb q !  H 1 pG, Sq b H 1 pGq  H 1 pSb q ! – 2  H pG, Sq This shows firstly that the restriction of the cup product on H 1 pG, Sq b H 1 pGq to H 0 pSb q b H 1 pSb q via the direct sum decompositions above agrees with the cup product on Sb and that the cup product of an element of H 0 pSb q with an element of H 1 pGq vanishes. We may now apply Proposition 2.1 to conclude that pG, Sq is a PD2 pair if and only if pG, Sq is a PD2 pair. We move on to consideration of the orientation characters. Since χpSb q “ 1 there is a unique map ρ : G Ñ Up such that χ “ ρφ. We must show that ρ is the orientation character of G. Let m be a natural number. Note that our choices of bases give a splitting G “ G > Sb . Let φ! : G Ñ G be the inclusion map and note that φφ! “ idG . Note also that χ|G “ ρ. By excision (Theorem 4.8 of [Wil17a]) the map φ! induces an isomorphism H 1 pG, Sb ; Im pχqq Ñ H 1 pG, 1; Im pρqq. Therefore since φφ! is the identity, φ induces an isomorphism in the other direction. Let S 1 “ tS0 . . . Sb´1 u. The map of pairs pG, S 1 q Ñ pG, Sq and Propositions 2.4 and 2.6 of [Wil17a] give a commutative diagram (with coefficients in Im pχq on the top row and Im pρq on the bottom row): H 1 pG, Sb q –  H 1 pG, 1q  H 1 pS 1 q  H 2 pG, Sq  0  H 2 pG, S \ 1q  0  –  H 1 pSq  which demonstrates that |H 2 pG, S; Im pρqq| “ |H 2 pG, S \ 1; Im pρqq| “ |H 2 pG, S; Im pχqq| and we are done by Proposition 1.7. Proposition 2.3. Let G be a free pro-p group of rank n ` 1 where n ě 0 and let S “ tS0 , S1 u be a family of cyclic subgroups of G. Suppose there exist generators si for the Si such that (1) s1 generates a free factor of G and (2) s0 ” s1 modulo Gp rG, Gs. Assume further that S0 X xxS1 yy ‰ 1. If pG, Sq is a PD2 pair then n “ 0, hence G “ S0 “ S1 . Conversely if n “ 0 and G “ S0 “ S1 then pG, Sq is a PD2 pair.  9  Proof. Let G “ G{xxS1 yy. By considering the commuting diagram of long exact sequences for the map of pairs pG, Sq Ñ pG, t1u \ t1uq one may readily show that the maps H 1 pG, t1u \ t1uq Ñ H 1 pG, Sq,  H 1 pGq Ñ H 1 pGq  with coefficients Fp are respectively an isomorphism and an injection. Since G is free, H 2 pG, t1u \ t1uq “ 0 and the cup product on pG, t1u \ t1uq vanishes. Therefore the cup product of any element of H 1 pG, Sq with the n-dimensional subspace H 1 pGq of H 1 pGq is zero. This cup product is non-degenerate so n “ 0 as claimed. The converse statement is a case of Proposition 6.16 of [Wil17a]. We now tackle the somewhat more fiddly case when we ‘cap off’ the only peripheral subgroup. Theorem 2.4. Let G be a free pro-p group of rank n ą 0 and let S Ď rG, GsGp be a cyclic subgroup. Let G “ G{xxSyy and let φ be the quotient map. Then pG, Sq is a PD2 pair if and only if G is a Demushkin group. When this occurs the orientation characters χ and χ of pG, Sq and G are related by χ “ χφ. Proof. Firstly note that G is Demushkin if and only if H 2 pG, 1; Fp q “ Fp and the cup product H 1 pG, 1; Fp q b H 1 pG, Fp q Ñ H 2 pG, 1; Fp q is non-degenerate. This follows immediately from the natural isomorphisms H 1 pG, 1; Fp q – H 1 pG, Fp q,  H 1 pG, 1; Fp q – H 2 pG, Fp q  Now note that in our situation we have H 2 pG; Fp q – Fp unless S is trivial, in which case we are done. This follows since G is not free (since H 1 pGq “ H 1 pGq, if G were free the map φ would be an isomorphism and S trivial) so has nontrivial cohomology in dimension two (see Theorem 7.7.4 of [RZ00]). Furthermore the dimension of H 2 pGq is at most one since G is a one-relator pro-p group. See Section I.4.3 of [Ser13]. From the condition S Ď rG, GsGp and long exact sequences in cohomology one easily deduces that the natural map H 1 pG, 1; Fp q Ñ H 1 pG, S; Fp q is an isomorphism. Once we know that the corresponding map on H 2 is an isomorphism the first part of the theorem follows immediately. The long exact sequence implies that H 2 pG, Sq is also isomorphic to Fp . Verifying that the natural map H 2 pG, 1q Ñ H 2 pG, Sq is itself an isomorphism is rather technical and we delay it to the end of the proof. For now we move onto verifying that the orientation characters of pG, Sq and G agree. Let m be a natural number. We will make use of the Five Term Exact Sequence for the extension 1 Ñ R Ñ G Ñ G Ñ 1 (Corollary 7.2.5 of [RZ00]). Here the relevant portion takes the form H 1 pG, Im pρφqq Ñ H 1 pR, Z{pm qG Ñ H 2 pG, Im pρqq Ñ 0  (1)  where R “ xxSyy and ρ : G Ñ Up is any homomorphism. Taking ρ “ 1 shows that the middle term is finite (using H 2 pG; Fp q “ Fp and dévissage to prove 10  that H 2 pG, Z{pm q is finite). Now consider varying ρ. By Proposition 1.7 the modulus of the final term attains its unique maximum when ρ agrees with χ modulo pm . On the other hand if there is a ρ such that the first map in (1) vanishes then this ρ will maximise the size of the final term, hence this ρ agrees with χ modulo pm . In particular, since χ|S vanishes we may write χ “ ρ0 φ for some ρ0 . There is now a commutative diagram induced by Poincaré duality –  H 1 pG, Im pχqq  H1 pG, S; Z{pm q  H 1 pR, Z{pm qG  0  –  H 1 pS, Z{pm q  H0 pS; Z{pm q  where the fact that the rightmost map is zero follows from the long exact sequence in relative homology, and the fact that the lower left map is injective is the statement that any G-invariant homomorphism from xxSyy to Z{pm which vanishes on S is trivial. We have also used the fact that Zp pχq b Im pχq is isomorphic to the trivial module Z{pm . It follows that the upper left map vanishes and therefore ρ0 agrees with χ and χ agrees with χφ modulo pm for every m as required. We must now tackle the final verification we have been avoiding, that the natural map H 2 pG, 1q Ñ H 2 pG, Sq is an isomorphism. Here and for the rest of the proof the coefficient group is assumed to be Fp . We approach H 2 pGq using the Five Term Exact Sequence as above, so it will be necessary to understand the cohomology of R. Firstly note that the full five term exact sequence in this case is tg – 0 Ñ H 1 pGq ÝÑ H 1 pGq Ñ H 1 pRqG ÝÑ H 2 G Ñ 0 So that the transgression map tg is an isomorphism. By the Corollary to Proposition 26 of [Ser13] we know H 1 pRqG – Fp , and as above the natural map H 1 pRqG Ñ H 1 pSq is injective, hence it is an isomorphism. We may also consider the long exact sequence in cohomology for the pair pG, Rq with coefficients in Fp . This is a sequence of vector spaces so applying any additive functor—for instance the functor p´qG taking G-invariants—preserves exactness. From the Five Lemma and the data already collected we find that the natural map from the resulting sequence to the long exact sequence for pG, Sq is an isomorphism. We now have a diagram of maps H 1 pRqG  H 1 pRqG  tg –  H 2 pGq  – δ  –  – φ  ˚  H 2 pG, RqG  H 1S  –  H 2 pG, Sq  where the right hand square commutes. Here the bottom left horizontal map is induced by the map of pairs pG, Rq Ñ pG, 1q and the isomorphism H 2 pG, 1q “ H 2 pGq. Our aim is therefore to show that the composition along the bottom row is an isomorphism. It only remains to show that the left hand square actually commutes (in fact it will turn out that it commutes up to sign, but this is enough). This verification takes place on the level of chain complexes. 11  For a pro-p group H and a subgroup K, let C‚ pHq be the (inhomogeneous) bar resolution of H over Zp . See Section 6.2 of [RZ00]. For our purposes it is enough to recall that the lower stages are given by d  d  1 0 Zp rrHssrrH 2 ss ÝÑ Zp rrHssrrHss ÝÑ Zp rrHss  where the boundary maps are given on the basis elements rh1 , h2 s P H 2 and rhs P H by d1 prh1 , h2 sq “ h1 rh2 s ´ rh1 h2 s ` rh1 s,  d0 prhsq “ h ´ 1  Furthermore there is a natural chain map indK H pC‚ pKqq ãÑ C‚ pHq which is an isomorphism on the zero level. Each quotient module C‚ pH, Kq is projective; indeed it is a free Zp rrHss-module on the pointed profinite space obtained by collapsing the closed subset K n Ď H n to a point. See Section 5.2 of [RZ00] for information on free modules on pointed profinite spaces. The long exact sequence in homology for the short exact sequence of chain complexes qt  0 Ñ indK H pC‚ pKqq ÝÑ C‚ pHq ÝÑ C‚ pH, Kq Ñ 0 shows that the final term is a resolution for ∆H,K (shifted by one degree). In our case of interest this gives us standard chain complexes which may be used to compute the various cohomology groups in play. In particular we have an identification C‚ pG, 1q ” C‚`1 pGq and the obvious map (of G-modules) qt  C‚ pGq ÝÑ C‚ pG, Rq ÝÑ C‚ pGq gives the map H ˚ pGq Ñ H ˚ pG, Rq. Now let ζ : R Ñ Fp be a G-invariant homomorphism giving a generator of H 1 pRqG . Let σ : G Ñ G be a continuous section of the quotient map such that σp1q “ 1 and let πpgq “ gσpgRq´1 be the retraction G Ñ R so defined. The section σ exists by Proposition 2.2.2 of [RZ00]. The transgression tgpζq is defined in the following manner (see [Lab67], Section 1.4). The cochain ζπd2 : C2 pGq Ñ Fp may be shown to factor through C2 pGq, and this cochain gives tgpζq. It therefore also factors through C2 pG, Rq giving a cochain representing φ˚ tgpζq. Now let us compute the map δ : H 1 pRqG Ñ H 2 pG, Rq. Applying the Horseshoe Lemma (see [Wei95], Lemma 2.2.8) gives the commuting diagram of (par-  12  tial) resolutions C2 pG, Rq  C2 pG, Rq ‘ C1 pGq ¨ ˝  d1  C1 pG, Rq  qt  0  d0  ‚  C1 pG, Rq ‘ C0 pGq  d0  C0 pGq  pi˝d0 q‘ǫ  d0  ∆G,R  d1  C1 pGq  ˛  i  Zp rrG{Rss  ǫ  Zp  The central column has a chain map to the standard resolution given by C2 pG, Rq ‘ C1 pGq  C1 pG, Rq ‘ C0 pGq  α‘β  Zp rrGssrrRss  Zp rrG{Rss  ν‘id  Zp rrGss  Zp rrG{Rss  where νprgsq “ σpgRq ´ 1 and αprg1 , g2 sq “ g1 g2 rπ̃pg2 qs ´ g1 g2 rπ̃pg1 g2 qs ` g1 rπ̃pg1 qs ´ g1 r1s where π̃pgq “ g ´1 σpgSq “ pπpgq´1 qg for some map β (which is irrelevant to what follows). We now readily see that δpζq “ ζα : C2 pG, Rq Ñ Fp is induced by the cochain ζ π̃d2 : C2 pGq Ñ Fp . As ζ π̃ “ ´ζπ we are done.  3  Classification  In this section we will prove the main classification theorem. Definition 3.1. Let pG, Sq be a PD2 pair with S “ tS0 , . . . , Sb u. A basis for G in standard form (or simply standard form basis) is an ordered free generating set B “ tx1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . , sb u such that si generates some conjugate of Si for each i. Note that when b ě 1 any standard form basis of G{xxSb yy is the image of the first n ` b ´ 1 elements of some standard form basis of G. Definition 3.2. For integers n, b let G be a free group of rank n ` b on a generating set B “ tx1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . , sb u Let χ : G Ñ Up be a homomorphism vanishing on the si . Define the standard word r1 pn, b, χ; Bq P G according to the following cases. • If n is even and qpχq ‰ 2 then r1 pn, b, χ; Bq “ xq1 rx1 , x2 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rxn´1 , xn ss1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sb 13  rf s  • If qpχq “ 2, n is even and impχq “ U2  for some f ě 2 then  f  r1 pn, b, χ; Bq “ x2`2 rx1 , x2 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rxn´1 , xn ss1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sb 1 pf q  • If qpχq “ 2, n is even and impχq “ x´1y ˆ U2  for some f ě 2 then  f  r1 pn, b, χ; Bq “ x21 rx1 , x2 sx23 rx3 , x4 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rxn´1 , xn ss1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sb pf q  • If qpχq “ 2, n is odd and impχq “ x´1y ˆ U2  for some f ě 2 then  f  r1 pn, b, χ; Bq “ x21 x22 rx2 , x3 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rxn´1 , xn ss1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sb If none of these cases holds we leave r1 pn, b, χ, Bq undefined. Note that whether or not r1 is defined depends only on n and impχq, not on b or B. When the basis B or the invariants pn, b, χq are clear from context we will omit them from the notation. The main theorem of this paper is the following classification theorem. Theorem 3.3. Let G be a free pro-p group of rank n ` b and S “ tS0 , . . . , Sb u be a finite family of closed procyclic subgroups where b ě 0, n ě 0 and n ` b ě 1. Fix a generator s0 of S0 . Then pG, Sq is a PD2 pair with orientation character χ if and only there exists a standard form basis B “ tx1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . , sb u of G such that s0 “ r1 pn, b, χ; Bq. Remark. Implicit in the final sentence is the statement that r1 pn, b, χq is not undefined. The backwards implication—that these forms of words do genuinely give PD2 pairs—follows immediately by an induction using Theorems 2.2 and 2.4 and Proposition 2.3 taken together with the classification of Demushkin groups (Theorem 1.9). The forwards implication will proceed in two steps. First we will use the results of the previous section to find a basic form for the word s0 . Then we will use the method of successive approximation to erode this word down to one of the forms above. From now on let G be a free pro-p group of rank n ` b and S “ tS0 , . . . , Sb u be a finite family of closed procyclic subgroups where b ě 0, n ě 0 and n ` b ě 1 and assume pG, Sq is a PD2 pair with orientation character χ. Set q “ qpχq and let pGj q be the lower central q-series. Fix the generator s0 of S0 . Proposition 3.4. For some basis B of G in standard form we have s0 ” r1 pn, b, χ; Bq  modulo G3  (and r1 pn, b, χq is well-defined). Proof. We prove this by induction on b. The base cases are b “ 0—which holds by Theorem 2.4 and Theorem 1.9—and b “ 1, n “ 0, which holds by Proposition 2.3. Suppose that b ą 1 and that n ‰ 0 if b “ 1. Then we may apply Theorem 2.2 and an induction hypothesis to show that for some standard form basis B we have s0 P r1 pn, b ´ 1, χ; Bqxxsb yyG3 14  Let y be some element of xxsb yy such that s0 ” r1 pn, b ´ 1, χ; Bqy  modulo G3  By Proposition 1.6, replacing sb by a power sµb for some µ P Zˆp we may assume that ζb pyq “ 1 where ζb is the projection of G onto Sb given by killing the other elements of B. We claim that modulo G3 we may write y as an element of the form sgb for some g P G. Consider an expression of G{G3 as an inverse limit of finite p-group quotients lim ÐÝ Pk . Let ψk : G{G3 Ñ Pk be the quotient map. For each k we have ψk pyq P xxψk psb qyy and since ζb pyq “ 1 we have ψk pyq ” ψk psb q modulo rPk , Pk s. Now since Pk is finite, we have ψk pyq P xxψk psb qyy. That is, there are gi P Pk and mi P Z (1 ď i ď r) such that ψk pyq “ “  r ź  i“1 r ź  pψk psb qmi qgi ψk psb qmi rψk psb qmi , gi s  i“1 ř  mi  ś  gi  “ ψk psb q “ ψk psb q  r ź  rψk psb q, gimi s  i“1 mi  Here we have used the fact ř that ψk pyq ” ψk psb q modulo rPk , Pk s in the final line to show that ψk psb q mi “ ψk psb q. We have made frequent use of commutator identities and the fact that Pk was a quotient of G{G3 hence all third commutators in Pk vanish. Hence ψk pyq lies in the conjugacy class ψk psb qPk of sb for all k. Since these conjugacy classes form a surjective inverse system with inverse limit sG b , there does indeed exist g P G such that y “ sgb . Now replace sb by sgb so that s0 ” r1 pn, b ´ 1, χqsb “ r1 pn, b, χq modulo G3 . This concludes the proof. We will now use the method of successive approximation to improve congruence modulo G3 to equality. We will first examine the q ‰ 2 case to illustrate the method. The q “ 2 case simply requires more notation, together with some extra tidying up at the end. Proof of Theorem 3.3, q ‰ 2 case. Recall from Theorem 1.9 that if q ‰ 2 then n “ 2N is even. If q ‰ 0 then n ą 0. Let B “ tx1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . , sb u be a basis of G in standard form. If t “ pt1 , . . . , tn`b q P pGj´1 qn`b for j ě 3 then we may define t t B 1 “ B 1 ptq “ tx1 t1 , . . . , xn tn , s1n`1 , . . . , sbn`b u which is also a basis in standard form. One easily verifies that r1 pB 1 q ” r1 pBq modulo Gj 1 B so that there is a unique element dB j´1 ptq P Gn such that r1 pB q “ r1 pBqdj´1 ptq. Let the images of xi and si in gr1 pGq be denoted ξi and σi , let the image of ti in grj´1 pGq be τi and let the image of t in grj´1 pGqn`b be τ . Then the image  15  of dB j´1 ptq in grj pGq is ˆ ˙ b N ÿ ` ˘ ÿ q B δj´1 pτ q “ π ¨ τ1 ` rσi , τn`i s rτ2i´1 , ξ2i s ` rξ2i´1 , τ2i s ` rτ1 , ξ1 s ` 2 i“1 i“1 B as one may readily compute using commutator identities. This δj´1 is a Zp {qZp n`b linear homomorphism grj´1 pGq Ñ grj pGq. Up to certain minus signs in the σi terms and reordering some coordinates of grj´1 pGqn`b this is in fact the same as the map δj´1 described in Proposition 5 of [Lab67]. Hence by that B proposition we have impδj´1 q “ grj pGq. Therefore suppose that we have chosen a standard form basis Bj´1 such that  s0 ” r1 pBj´1 q  modulo Gj´1  Then s0 “ r1 pBj´1 qz for some z P Gj . There exists t P pGj´1 qn`b such that Bj´1 ptq equals the image of z in grj pGq. Form the new standard form basis δj´1 1 Bj “ Bj´1 ptq as above. Then Ş  s0 ” r1 pBj q  modulo Gj  Since Gj “ t1u and since Bj´1 and Bj agree modulo Gj , for each i the sequence comprising the ith elements of the Bj converges to a limit in G as j Ñ 8. One may easily see that the set of limits B is a standard basis for G and s0 “ r1 pBq as required. We now move on to the q “ 2 case. The principle is the same, but the notation is more involved. Proof of Theorem 3.3, q “ 2 case. Let B “ tx1 , . . . , xn , s1 , . . . , sb u be a basis of G in standard form. For j ě 3, t “ pt1 , . . . , tn`b q P pGj´1 qn`b and ǫ P t0, 1ub and define j´1  B 1 “ B 1 pt, ǫq “ tx1 t1 , . . . , xn tn , ps1`2 1  ǫ1 tn`1  q  j´1  , . . . , ps1`2 b  ǫb tn`b  q  u  which is again a basis in standard form. Again we have r1 pB 1 q ” r1 pBq modulo Gj , so that there exists a unique element dB j´1 pt, ǫq P Gj such that r1 pB 1 q “ r1 pBqdB j´1 pt, ǫq One may readily compute that the image of dB j´1 pt, ǫq in grj pGq is B δj´1 pτ q “ π ¨ τ1 ` rτ1 , ξ1 s `  N ÿ ` ˘ rτ2i´1 , ξ2i s ` rξ2i´1 , τ2i s  i“1  `  b ÿ ` ˘ rσi , τn`i s ` ǫi π ¨ σi  i“1  when n “ 2N is even and B δj´1 pτ q “ π ¨ τ1 ` rτ1 , ξ1 s `  N ÿ ` ˘ rτ2i , ξ2i`1 s ` rξ2i , τ2i`1 s  i“1  `  b ÿ ` ˘ rσi , τn`i s ` ǫi π ¨ σi  i“1  16  when n “ 2N ` 1 is odd—using the same notation as in the q ‰ 2 case. For either parity of n, Proposition 5 of [Lab67]—with minor notational tweaks— B shows that the image of δj´1 together with the elements π j´1 ¨ ξi generates grj pGq. Actually the cited proposition is slightly more precise than this, but we won’t need this precision here as it will be folded into the last step of the proof. As one final piece of notation, for λ P p4Z2 qn set epB, λq “ xλ1 1 ¨ ¨ ¨ xλnn Note that for any t, ǫ as above we have epB 1 pt, ǫq, λq ” epB, λq  modulo Gj`1  where the extra precision modulo Gj`1 follows since the λi are divisible by 4. Now suppose that j ě 3 there is a basis Bj of G in standard form and some λj´1 P p4Z2 qn such that s0 “ epB, λqr1 pBqz where z P Gj . This holds for j “ 3 by Proposition 3.4. From above there exist t, ǫ and α such that j´1  z ” x12  α1  j´1  ¨ ¨ ¨ xn2  αn B dj´1 pt, ǫq  modulo Gj`1  1 If Bj “ Bj´1 pt, ǫq then we have  s0  j´1  ”  epB, λj´1 qr1 pBqx12  α1  ”  epBj , λj´1 ` 2j´1 αqr1 pBj q  j´1  ¨ ¨ ¨ xn2  αn B dj´1 pt, ǫq  modulo Gj`1 . As before the Bj converge to a standard basis for G; furthermore λj converges to some λ P p4Z2 qn . So passing to the limit we have found a standard-form basis B8 such that s0 “ epB8 , λj´1 qr1 pB8 q “ epB8 , λj´1 qr1 pn, 0, χ; X qs1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sb Here we have written B8 “ X \ Y where X denotes the first n elements of B8 . Now by Theorems 2.2 and 2.4 we find that epB8 , λj´1 qr1 pn, 0, χ; X q is in fact a Demushkin word in the free group G1 “ xX y, and moreover the image of the orientation character of G1 equals the image of χ. Therefore by Theorem 1.9 there is a free basis X 1 of G1 such that epB8 , λj´1 qr1 pn, 0, χ; X q “ r1 pn, 0, χ; X 1 q Then if B “ X 1 \Y then B is a basis of G in standard form and s0 “ r1 pn, b, χ; Bq as required.  4  Splittings and the pro-p curve complex  An important tool in the study of surface automorphisms is the curve complex, which is a simplicial complex whose vertices are isotopy classes of essential simple closed curves on the surface. Translating into the language of group theory this may be rephrased as ‘a complex whose vertices are splittings of the 17  surface group over Z’. In this section we will define an analogous object for the pro-p completion of a surface group, on which the automorphism group of the pro-p group will act. One could no doubt study such an object for an arbitrary Demushkin group, but it is simpler and perhaps more interesting to restrict to the case of an orientable Demushkin group (i.e. the pro-p completion of an orientable surface group). For the rest of the section let Σ be a compact orientable surface which is not p ppq be the pro-p completion a sphere, disc or cylinder. Let Γ “ π1 Σ and let G “ Γ of Γ. Let S be a family of subgroups of G comprising the pro-p completion of one representative of the fundamental group of each boundary component. Definition 4.1. Define the relative automorphism group AutB pGq to be the group of automorphisms of G which send every S P S to a conjugate of itself. One may check that AutB pGq is a closed subgroup of AutpGq containing InnpGq. Define OutB pGq “ AutB pGq{ InnpGq. Similarly for Γ. Definition 4.2. Let ‫ג “ ג‬pΣq be the set of all equivalence classes of pairs pT, ρq with the following properties. • T is a pro-p tree and ρ : G Ñ AutpT q is a continuous left action of G on T by graph automorphisms such that GzT is finite. • For every e P EpT q the edge stabiliser stabρ peq is isomorphic to Zp • If GzT is not a loop, then for every vertex v P V pT q and every edge e incident to v the edge stabiliser stabρ peq is properly contained in the vertex stabiliser stabρ pvq. • Every S P S fixes a vertex of T , but does not fix any edge of T . Two such objects are regarded as equivalent if there is a G-equivariant graph isomorphism from one to another. The automorphism group AutB pGq acts on ‫ג‬pΣq on the right by pT, ρq ¨ ψ “ pT, ρ ˝ ψq where ψ P AutB pGq. Note that if ψ is an inner automorphism of G, then pT, ρq ¨ ψ is equivalent to pT, ρq so the action descends to an action of OutB pGq on ‫ג‬pΣq. The object ‫ג‬pΣq will be referred to as the pro-p curve complex of Σ. At present it is merely a set, but later we shall see that it has a topology making it into a profinite space such that the action of AutB pGq is continuous. We will usually abuse notation by ignoring the fact that elements of ‫ג‬pΣq are really equivalence classes and simply deal with the pairs pT, ρq themselves. Note that if one replaces G with Γ and ‘pro-p tree’ with ‘simplicial tree’ in the above definition then one recovers the curve complex CpΣq of Σ. For our purposes we will adopt the following definition. Definition 4.3. Given a set X, a simplicial structure on X is a partial ordering ď on X such that: • For every x P X there exist only finitely many y P X such that y ď x • Let X pnq be the set of elements x P X such that there are n ` 1 minimal elements of X which are smaller than or equal to x. Then for each x P X pnq , x is the join of these elements and the subposet ty P X | y ď xu is isomorphic to the face poset of an n-simplex. We refer to x P X pnq as an n-simplex of X. 18  The curve complex CpΣq has a natural AutB pΓq-equivariant simplicial structure which may be described as follows. For collections of isotopy classes of closed curves x, y P CpΣq, we say y ď x if y may be obtained by deleting some of the isotopy classes of closed curves in x. In terms of the action on dual trees, this corresponds to a Γ-equivariant epimorphism of trees. Therefore we define a poset structure on ‫ג‬pΣq as follows. Definition 4.4. For pT, ρq and pT 1 , ρ1 q in ‫ג‬pΣq, we declare pT, ρq ě pT 1 , ρ1 q if and only if there is a G-equivariant epimorphism of graphs T Ñ T 1 . Definition 4.5. We define a decomposition graph of Σ to be a finite connected graph X with two labelling functions n‚ , b‚ : V pXq Ñ N such that: ř • vPV pXq bv is the number of boundary components of Σ ř • rk Γ “ vPV pXq pnv ` bv q ` 2p1 ´ χpXqq ´ ǫ where ǫ is 1 if Σ has boundary or 0 if Σ is closed. • For a vertex v, if n “ 0 then either X is a loop and Σ is a torus or bv ` valpvq ą 2 Let D “ DpΣq be the set of decomposition graphs modulo isomorphism of labelled graphs. We will be aiming to prove the following theorem. Here we regard AutB pΓq as a subgroup of AutB pGq in the natural way. Theorem 4.6. Let Σ be a compact orientable surface and let CpΣq be the curve complex of Σ. There is an AutB pπ1 Σq-equivariant function i : CpΣq Ñ ‫ג‬pΣq such that: (1) i is an injection. If x, y P CpΣq then x ď y if and only if ipxq ď ipyq. Furthermore if z P ‫ג‬pΣq and z ď ipyq then z “ ipxq for some x ď y. (2) ď is a simplicial structure on ‫ג‬pΣq and i preserves the simplicial structure (3) There is a natural diagram of bijections i  CpΣq{ AutB pΓq d¯  ‫ג‬pΣq{ AutB pGq δ̄  DpΣq Remark. Part (3) of the theorem is perhaps the most interesting part, and may be paraphrased as ‘any splitting of G with edge groups Zp is equivalent under AutB pGq to a geometric splitting’. Construction of i. Let x be an n-simplex in the curve complex—that is, an isotopy class of collections of n ` 1 disjoint essential simple closed curves on Σ which may be made disjoint. Such a collection (together with various choices of base-points) induces a graph-of-groups splitting of Γ where all edge groups are copies of Z, where peripheral subgroups are conjugate into vertex groups but not edge groups, and where edge groups are not equal to adjacent vertex groups except in the case of a torus with a single non-separating simple closed curve. 19  This splitting is p-efficient (that is, well-behaved in the pro-p topology on Γ) by, for instance, Proposition 3.8 of [Wil17b]. Therefore by Propositions 6.5.3 and 6.5.4 of [Rib17] there is an induced splitting of G as an injective graph of pro-p groups with procyclic edge groups. The standard tree dual to this splitting (see Theorem 6.5.2 of [Rib17]) is a representative of an element ipxq of ‫ג‬pΣq. Taking different choices of basepoints does not affect the equivalence class of ipxq in ‫ג‬pΣq. Furthermore the abstract tree T abs dual to the splitting of π1 Σ along x is naturally embedded as an abstract subgraph of T which is dense in the topology on T by Proposition 6.5.4 of [Rib17]. Construction of d and δ. There is a function d : CpΣq Ñ DpΣq defined as follows. Given a representative of an element of the curve complex (i.e. a collection C of disjoint essential simple closed curves on Σ) there is a graph X dual to these curves, with one vertex in each component of the complement of these curves and one edge for each curve. For a component v of Σ r C set nv to be half the genus of v and bv to be the number of boundary components of Σ lying in v. One easily verifies that this is a decomposition graph for Σ. This defines the map d. Clearly d is AutB pΓq-invariant and therefore gives a map d : CpΣq{ AutB pΓq Ñ DpΣq. By the standard theory of surfaces this is a bijection. We may also define a map δ : ‫ג‬pΣq Ñ DpΣq. Let pT, ρq represent an element of ‫ג‬pΣq. Then GzT “ X is a finite connected graph. Choose a maximal subtree Y of X and a function s : X Ñ T which is a section of the quotient map and such that sd0 pxq “ d0 pspxqq for all x P X and sd1 pxq “ d1 spxq for all x P Y . Such a map s is a fundamental 0-section in the language of [Rib17]. Given s we may form a graph of groups G “ pX, G‚ q as in Section 6.6 of [Rib17], whose vertex and edge groups Gx are the stabilisers of the points spxq. This is an injective graph of pro-p groups whose fundamental pro-p group is G. Every S P S is conjugate into exactly one of the Gv . Replace every S by some such conjugate and for v P V pXq let Sv be the collection of elements of S lying in Gv . Further let Ev be the collection of edge groups of G incident to v. Since pG, Sq is a PD2 pair, Theorem 5.18 of [Wil17a] shows that pGv , Sv Y Ev q is also an orientable PD2 pair for every v P V pxq. Therefore Gx is a free pro-p group of rank nv ` |Sv | ` |Ev | ´ 1 for some nv P N. Set bv “ |Sv |. We have now defined a decomposition graph δpT, ρq. One may also characterise these invariants as follows: |Ev | is the number of Gv -orbits of edges of T incident to spvq, and bv is the number of Gv -conjugacy classes of the conjugates of elements of S that lie in Gv . Finally nv is defined as rk Gv ´ |Sv | ´ |Ev | ` 1 as before. This shows not only that δpT, ρq is independent of the choices of Y and s but is also AutB pGq-invariant. Hence we also have a map δ : ‫ג‬pΣq{ AutB pGq Ñ DpΣq. Proof of (3). The first characterisation of δ in terms of graphs of groups shows immediately that δ ˝ i “ d. This immediately shows that δ is a surjection. So to show that i induces the required bijection it remains to show that δ is an injection. For a finite graph X let DX pΣq be the set of decomposition graphs whose underlying graph is X, and let ‫ג‬X pΣq be the set of elements pT, ρq of ‫ג‬pΣq with GzT – X. Then δ breaks into a disjoint union of maps ‫ג‬X pΣq{ AutB pGq Ñ DX pΣq and it suffices to prove that each of these is an injection. We do this  20  by induction on the number of edges of X, over all surfaces Σ simultaneously. The idea of the induction is simple. Each action on a tree may be represented by a graph of groups, which may be thought of as a smaller graph of groups plus one additional edge. The induction hypothesis allows us to identify the smaller graphs of groups, and we may then glue back up to recover the full decompositions. The precise proof requires much notation. Let pT, ρq, pT 1 , ρ1 q P ‫ג‬X pΣq and suppose δpT, ρq “ δpT 1 , ρ1 q. Choose an edge e of X and let the component(s) of X r e be X1 (and X2 ). If e is separating we order the indices so that d0 peq P X1 . Further choose graphs of groups as above corresponding to T and T 1 . Let the fundamental pro-p groups of the restricted graphs of groups over X1 (and X2 ) be G1 and G11 (and G2 and G12 respectively). After replacing the S P S by conjugates if necessary each member of S lies in exactly one of G1 or G2 . Let S1 consist of d0 pGe q (and d1 pGe q if e is non-separating) together with those elements of S lying in G1 . If e is separating then set S2 to be the elements of S lying in G2 together with d1 pGe q. Similarly define Si1 . Finally choose generators s0 and s10 of Ge and G1e . If e is non-separating denote a choice of stable letter for the HNN extension G1 >Ge by t so that t´1 d0 ps0 qt “ d1 ps0 q. Similarly for t1 . By collapsing X1 and X2 and applying Theorem 5.18 of [Wil17a] we find that pGi , Si q is a PD2 pair. The rank and number of boundary components may be read off immediately from δpT, ρq “ δpT 1 , ρ1 q. Both pairs are orientable so the classification of PD2 pairs (Theorem 3.3) shows that pGi , Si q and pG1i , Si1 q are both isomorphic as pairs (after possibly changing the peripheral groups by conjugacies) to the pro-p completion of the fundamental group of some compact r surface Σ. r of Now over Xi we have graph of groups decompositions Ui , Ui1 P ‫ג‬Xi pΣq pGi , Si q and pG1i , Si1 q. Since δpT, ρq “ δpT 1 , ρ1 q and the graphs of groups are restrictions of those for pG, Sq it follows that δpU q “ δpU 1 q. By induction we therefore have an isomorphism ψi : Gi Ñ G1i (relative to Si and Si1 ) such that ψi pGx q is a Gi -conjugate of G1x for each x P Xi . Applying an inner automorphism we may assume ψ1 pd0 ps0 qq “ d0 ps10 q and, if e is separating, that ψ2 pd1 ps0 qq “ d1 ps10 q. When e is separating we may therefore glue these maps together (by the universal property of amalgamated free products) to give ψ P AutB pGq such that ψpGx q is a G-conjugate of G1x for all x P X. Therefore the two graphs of groups decompositions pX, ψpG‚ qq and pX, G1‚ q differ only by the choice of 0-section, which does not affect the Bass-Serre tree (see Section 6.6 of [Rib17]). Therefore pT, ρq ¨ ψ “ pT 1 , ρ1 q as required. It only remains to show that in the case when e is separating we must show that the automorphism ψ of G1 extends across the HNN extension to give an automorphism of G. The construction above ensured that ψ1 pd0 ps0 qq “ d0 ps10 q and that ψ1 pd1 ps0 qq “ pd1 ps10 qλ qg for some λ P Up and g P G1 . We must show that λ “ 1, for then t ÞÑ t1 g gives the required extension of ψ1 to ψ P AutB pGq.  21  We have a diagram of maps ψ˚ –  H1 pd0 pGe qq  – conjptq  H1 pd1 pGe qq  H2 pG1 , S1 q  ψ˚ –  H1 pd0 pG1e qq H2 pG11 , S11 q  – conjpt1 q  conjpg´1 q˝ψ˚ –  H1 pd1 pG1e qq  with coefficients in Zp . Here conjpxq denotes a map induced by conjugacy by x P G. The two triangles in this diagram commute because of the segment ‹  H2 pG, S1 q ÝÑ H2 pG1 , S1 q ÝÑ H1 pGe q of the (dual of) the long exact sequence in Theorem 4.11 of [Wil17a], where the starred map is the composition d´1 ´d´1  0 H2 pG1 , S1 q Ñ H1 pS1 q Ñ H1 pd0 pGe qq ‘ H1 pd1 pGe qq ÝÝ1ÝÝÝÝ Ñ H1 pGe q  Therefore the entire diagram commutes. Tracing d0 ps0 q around the outer rectangle shows that λ “ 1 as required. Proof of (1). Let us prove that i is an injection. Now suppose ipxq ď ipyq. Let the discrete tree dual to x be T abs and that dual to y be U abs , and let T and U be the trees for ipxq and ipyq. As mentioned above, T abs is embedded in T (and similarly for U ). Take a G-equivariant isomorphism f : T Ñ U “ X and identify GzT with GzU via f . Take a maximal subtree Y of X and fundamental 0-sections s : X Ñ T abs , s1 : X Ñ U abs lifting Y —which of course also provide 0-sections for T and U . Then f s and s1 are both fundamental 0-sections for U lifting the same tree Y . Then by Theorem 6.6.1 (or rather its proof) there is a Gequivariant isomorphism h : U Ñ U taking f s to s1 . Then since T abs “ Γ ¨ spXq and U abs “ Γ ¨ s1 pXq the map hf restricts to an equivariant graph isomorphism T abs Ñ U abs and we are done. To show that x ď y implies ipxq ď ipyq note that the graph of groups decomposition of Γ corresponding to x is obtained from the decomposition corresponding to y by collapsing some sub-graphs-of-groups; therefore the same is true of ipxq and ipyq, and this collapse gives the required equivariant epimorphism of trees as required. Also, if z ď ipyq then at at the level of graphs of groups z is obtained from ipyq by collapsing some sub-graphs-of-groups; such collapses are precisely those induced by collapses of the graph of discrete groups corresponding to y. This shows that z “ ipxq for some (unique) x ď y. Proof of (2). Part (2) follows from (1) and (3). For the notion of simplicial structure consists of conditions on ty P ‫ג‬pΣq | y ď xu for x P ‫ג‬pΣq. Part (1) and the simplicial structure on CpΣq show that these conditions hold when x P ipCpΣqq. Since the partial order is AutB pGq-invariant and every point in ‫ג‬pΣq may be translated to a point in ipCpΣqq via the action of AutB pGq this shows that the simplicial structure conditions hold at every point of ‫ג‬pΣq. This proves (2). 22  Notice that ‫ג‬pΣq has a natural topology making it into a profinite space on which AutB pGq acts continuously. For choosing any lift s : DpΣq Ñ ‫ג‬pΣq splitting the quotient map defines a surjection AutB pGq ˆ DpΣq Ñ ‫ג‬pΣq, to which we may give the quotient topology. This is homeomorphic to the disjoint union ğ ‫ג‬pΣq “ stabpspzqqz AutB pGq zPDpΣq  so that ‫ג‬pΣq is a profinite space. Because DpΣq is finite this topology does not depend on the choice of s.  References [BE78]  Robert Bieri and Beno Eckmann. Relative homology and Poincaré duality for group pairs. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 13(3):277– 319, 1978.  [Dem61] S. P. Demushkin. The group of a maximal p-extension of a local field. Izvestiya Rossiiskoi Akademii Nauk. Seriya Matematicheskaya, 25(3):329–346, 1961. [Dem63] S. Demushkin. On 2-extensions of a local field. Sibirsk. Mat. Zh, 4(4):951–955, 1963. [EL83]  Beno Eckmann and Peter Linnell. Poincaré duality groups of dimension two, II. Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici, 58(1):111–114, 1983.  [EM80]  Beno Eckmann and Heinz Müller. Poincaré duality groups of dimension two. Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici, 55(1):510–520, 1980.  [Lab67] John P. Labute. Classification of Demushkin groups. Canad. J. Math, 19(1):106–132, 1967. [Rib17]  Luis Ribes. Profinite Graphs and Groups, volume 66 of A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics. Springer, 2017.  [RZ00]  Luis Ribes and Pavel Zalesskii. Profinite groups. Springer, 2000.  [Ser62]  Jean-Pierre Serre. Structure de certains pro-p-groupes. Séminaire Bourbaki, 8:145–155, 1962.  [Ser13]  Jean-Pierre Serre. Galois cohomology. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.  [SW00]  Peter Symonds and Thomas Weigel. Cohomology of p-adic analytic groups. In New horizons in pro-p groups, volume 184, pages 347–408. Birkhäuser Boston, 2000.  [Wei95] Charles A. Weibel. An introduction to homological algebra. Number 38 in ‘Cambridge studies in advanced mathematics’. Cambridge university press, 1995. [Wil17a] Gareth Wilkes. Relative cohomology theory for profinite groups. arxiv preprint arXiv:1710.00730, 2017. 23  [Wil17b] Gareth Wilkes. Virtual pro-p properties of 3-manifold groups. Journal of Group Theory, 20(5):999–1023, 2017.  24

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
