Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_2805

Abstract:
Computing Maximum Flow with Augmenting Electrical Flows  arXiv:1608.06016v1 [cs.DS] 21 Aug 2016  Aleksander Mądry∗ MIT madry@mit.edu  Abstract  10 1  e m 7 U 7 -time algorithm for the maximum s-t ﬂow problem (and the We present an O minimum s-t cut problem) in directed  with m arcs and largest integer capacity U . This  graphs 10 e 7 -time algorithm of Mądry [43] in the unit-capacity matches the running time of the O (mU ) e (m√n log U )-time algorithm of Lee and Sidford case, and improves over it, as well as over the O [38], whenever U is moderately large and the graphis suﬃciently sparse.  1 10 e 7 7 By well-known reductions, this also gives us an O m B -time algorithm for the maximumcardinality bipartite  b-matching  problem in which the largest integer demand is B. This, 10 e again, matches the O (mB) 7 -time algorithm of Mądry [43], when B = 1, which corresponds to the maximum-cardinality bipartite matching problem, and outperforms it, as well as the e (m√n log B)-time algorithm of Lee and Sidford [38], for moderate values of B and suﬃciently O sparse graphs. One of the advantages of our algorithm is that it is signiﬁcantly simpler than the ones presented in [43] and [38]. In particular, these algorithms employ a sophisticated interior-point method framework, while our algorithm is cast directly in the classic augmenting path setting that almost all the combinatorial maximum ﬂow algorithms use. At a high level, the presented algorithm takes a primal dual approach in which each iteration uses electrical ﬂows computations both to ﬁnd an augmenting s-t ﬂow in the current residual graph and to update the dual solution. We show that by maintain certain careful coupling of these primal and dual solutions we are always guaranteed to make signiﬁcant progress.  ∗  Supported by NSF grant CCF-1553428, and a Sloan Research Fellowship.  1  Introduction  The maximum s-t ﬂow problem and its dual, the minimum s-t cut problem, are two of the most fundamental and extensively studied graph problems in combinatorial optimization [51, 1, 50]. They have a wide range of applications (see [2]), are often used as subroutines in other algorithms (see, e.g., [4, 53]), and a number of other important problems – e.g., bipartite matching problem [10] – can be reduced to them. Furthermore, these two problems were often a testbed for development of fundamental algorithmic tools and concepts. Most prominently, the Max-Flow Min-Cut theorem [14, 17] constitutes the prototypical primal-dual relation. Several decades of extensive work resulted in a number of developments on these problems (see Goldberg and Rao [22] for an overview) and many of their generalizations and special cases. Still, despite all this eﬀort, the basic problem of computing maximum s-t ﬂow and minimum s-t cut in general graphs resisted progress for a long time. In particular, for a number of years, the best 2 1 running time bound for the problem was an O(m min{m 2 , n 3 } log(n2 /m) log U ) (with U denoting the largest integer arc capacity) bound established in a a breakthrough paper by Goldberg and Rao 1 2 [22] and this bound, in turn, matched the O(m min{m 2 , n 3 }) bound for unit-capacity graphs due to Even and Tarjan [15] – and, independently, Karzanov [25] – that were put forth more than 40 years ago. The above bounds were improved only fairly recently. Speciﬁcally, in 2013, Mądry  [43]  presented 10 e an interior-point method based framework for ﬂow computations that gave an O m 7 -time1 algorithm for the unit-capacity caseof the  maximum s-t ﬂow and minimum s-t cut problems. This 3 e ﬁnally broke the long-standing O n 2 running time barrier for sparse graphs, i.e., for m = O(n). Later on, Lee and Sidford [38] developed a variant of interior-point method that enabled them to obtain improvement for the regime of dense graphs. In particular, their algorithm is able to compute e (m√n log U ) time and thus improve over the (general) maximum s-t ﬂow and minimum s-t cut in O the Goldberg-Rao bound whenever the input graph is suﬃciently dense. It is also worth mentioning that, as a precursor to the above developments, substantial progress was made in the context of (1 − ε)-approximate variant of the maximum s-t ﬂow problem in undirected graphs. In 2011, Christiano et al. [7] developed an algorithm that allows one to compute a (1 + ε)-approximation to the undirected maximum s-t ﬂow (and the minimum s-t cut) problem in  1 −11/3 e 3 O mn ε time. Their result relies on devising a new approach to the problem that combines electrical ﬂow computations with multiplicative weights update method (see [4]). Later, Lee et – algorithm that employs purely al. [37] presented a quite diﬀerent – but still electrical-ﬂow-based  e mn1/3 ε−2/3 -time (1 + ε)-approximation for the case of gradient-descent-type view to obtain an O unit capacities. Very recently, this line of work was culminated by Sherman [54] and Kelner et al. [26] who independently showed how to integrate non-Euclidean gradient-descent methods with fast poly-logarithmic-approximation algorithms for cut problems of Mądry [41] to get an O(m1+o(1) ε−2 )time (1 + ε)-approximation to the undirected maximum ﬂow problem. Then, Peng [48] built on e mε−2 , running time. these works to obtain a truly nearly-linear, i.e., O Finally, we note that, in parallel to the above work that is focused on designing weaklypolynomial algorithms for the maximum s-t ﬂow and minimum s-t cut problems, there is also a considerable interest in obtaining running time bounds that are strongly-polynomial, i.e., that do 1  e (f ) denotes O(f logc f ), for some constant c. We recall that O  1  not depend on the values of arc capacities. The current best such bound is O(mn) and it follows by combining the algorithms of King et al. [28] and Orlin [47]. Bipartite Matching Problem. Another problem that is related to the maximum s-t problem – and, in fact, can be reduced to it – is the (maximum-cardinality) bipartite matching problem. This problem is a fundamental assignment task with numerous applications (see, e.g., [1, 40]) and long history that has its roots in the works of Frobenius [18, 19] and König [29, 30, 31] from the early 20th century (see [52]). Already in 1931, König [32] and Egerváry [13] provided ﬁrst constructive characterization of maximum matchings in bipartite graphs. This characterization can be turned into a polynomial-time algorithm. Then, in 1973, Hopcroft and Karp [24] and, independently, √ Karzanov [25], devised the celebrated O(m n)-time algorithm. For 40 years this bound remained the best one known in the regime of relatively sparse graphs. Only recently Mądry [43] obtained an e m10/7 running time. It turns out, however, that whenever the input graph is dense, improved, O i.e., when m is close to n2 even better bounds can be obtain. In this setting, one can combine the algebraic approach of Rabin and Vazirani [49] – that itself builds on the work of Tutte [57] and Lovász [39] – with matrix-inversion techniques of Bunch and Hopcroft [6] to get an algorithm that runs in O(nω ) time (see [45]), where ω ≤ 2.3727 is the exponent of matrix multiplication [9, 59]. Also, later on, Alt et al. [3], and Feder and Motwani [16] developed combinatorial algorithms that √ 2 oﬀer a slight improvement – by a factor of, roughly, log n/ log nm – over the O(m n) bound of Hopcroft and Karp whenever the graph is suﬃciently dense. Finally, a lot of developments has been done in the context of the (maximum-cardinality) matching problem in general, i.e., not necessarily bipartite, graphs. Starting with the pioneering work of Edmonds [11], these developments led to bounds that essentially match the running time guarantees that were previously known only for bipartite case. More speciﬁcally, the running time bound of √ O(m n) for the general-graph case was obtained by Micali and Vazirani [44, 60] (see also [20] and [21]). Then, Mucha and Sankowski [46] gave an O(nω )-time algorithms for general graphs that builds on the algebraic characterization of the problem due to Rabin and Vazirani [49]. This result was later signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed by Harvey [23].  1.1  Our Contribution  In this paper, we put forth a new algorithm for solving the maximum s-t ﬂow and the minimum s-t cut problems in directed graphs. More precisely,  10 we develop an algorithm that computes the 1 e maximum s-t ﬂow of an input graph in time O m 7 U 7 , where m denotes the number of arcs of that graph and U its largest integer capacity. Known reductions imply similar running time bounds for the minimum s-t cut problem as well as for the maximum-cardinality bipartite b-matching problem, a natural generalization of the maximum bipartite matching problem each vertex   10 in1 which e 7 7 v has a degree demand bv . For that problem, our algorithm yields an O m B -time algorithm, with B being the largest (integer) vertex demand. In the light of the above, for the unit-capacity/demand cases, the resulting algorithms  match  e mU 107 the performance of the algorithm of Mądry [43]. The latter algorithm, however, runs in O   e (mB) 107 running time for the bipartite b-matching problem) in time (which translates into an O the case of arbitrary capacities/demands. Consequently, the signiﬁcantly better dependence of the running time of our algorithm on the largest capacity U / largest demand B makes it much more 2  favorable in that setting. In fact, even though that dependence on U /B is still polynomial it enables our algorithm to remain competitive, for a non-trivial range of parameters, with the best existing e (m√n log U )-time algorithm algorithms that run in time that is logarithmic in U /B, such as the O of Lee and Sidford [38]. Even more crucially, the key advantage of our algorithm is that it is signiﬁcantly simpler than both the algorithm of Mądry [43] and that of Lee and Sidford [38]). Both these algorithms rely heavily on the interior-point method framework. Speciﬁcally, [43] designed a certain new variant of path-following interior-point method algorithm for the near-perfect bipartite b-matching problem that encoded the input maximum s-t ﬂow instance. It then used electrical ﬂow computations  1to  e m2 converge to the near-optimal solution for that problem. In order to break the bottlenecking O iteration bound, however, Mądry [43] needed to, ﬁrst, develop an extensive toolkit for perturbing and preconditioning the underlying electrical ﬂow computation and, then, to combine this machinery with a very careful and delicate analysis of the resulting dynamics. Our algorithm also relies on electrical ﬂow computations but it abandons the above methodology and works instead fully within the classic augmenting path framework that almost all the previous combinatorial maximum s-t ﬂow algorithms used. In this framework, developed by Ford and Fulkerson [17] (see also [14]), the ﬂow is built in stages. Each stage corresponds to ﬁnding a so-called augmenting ﬂow in the current residual graph, which is a directed graph that encodes the solution found so far. The algorithm terminates when the residual graph admits no more augmenting ﬂows, i.e., there is no path from s to t in it, since in this case the solution found so far has to be already optimal. The chief bottleneck in the running time analysis of augmenting path based algorithms is ensuring that each ﬂow augmentation stage makes suﬃcient progress. Speciﬁcally, one wants to obtain a good trade oﬀ between the amount of ﬂow pushed in each augmentation step and the time needed to implement each such ﬂow push. One simple approach is to just use here s-t path computations. This is a nearly-linear time procedure but it only guarantees pushing one unit of ﬂow each time. A much more sophisticated primitive developed in this context are blocking ﬂow computations. Combining this primitive with a simple duality argument enabled Goldberg and Rao [22], who built 1 2 on the work of Even and Tarjan [15], to obtain an O(m min{m 2 , n 3 } log U )-time maximum ﬂow that remained the best known algorithm for nearly two decades. Unfortunately, trying to improve such blocking ﬂow-based approaches turned out to be extremely diﬃcult and no progress was made here so far, even in the unit-capacity case for which the best known bounds were established over 40 years ago. One of the key contributions of this paper is bringing a new type of primitive: electrical ﬂows to the augmenting path framework; and showing how to successfully use it to outperform the blocking ﬂow-based methods. Speciﬁcally, our algorithm ﬁnds augmenting ﬂows by computing electrical ﬂows in certain symmetrization of the current residual graph – see Section 3.3 for more details. (Note that performing such a symmetrization is necessary as residual graphs are inherently directed while electrical ﬂows are inherently undirected.) The key diﬃculty that arises in this context, however, is ensuring that this symmetrized residual graph can still support a signiﬁcant fraction of the s-t capacity of the original residual graph. It is not hard to see that, in general, this might not be the case. To address this problem we introduce a certain careful coupling of the primal and dual solutions, which is inspired by the so-called centrality condition arising in interior-point method based maximum ﬂow algorithms (see [43]). We then show that maintaining this coupling and applying a simple preconditioning technique let us guarantee that looking only for the ﬂows in 3  the symmetrized version of the residual graph stillprovides suﬃcient progress in each iteration and, e m 32 log U -time algorithm. in particular, immediately delivers a O We then (see Section 4) build on that basic algorithm and develop an ℓp -geometric understanding of its running time analysis. This understanding guides us towards a simple electrical ﬂow perturbation technique – akin to the perturbation techniques used in [7] and [43] – that enables us √ to break the Ω( m) iterations bottleneck that all the blocking ﬂow-based algorithms were suﬀering from, and thus get the ﬁnal, improved result. We believe that further study of this new augmenting ﬂow based framework will deliver even faster and simpler algorithms.  1.2  Organization of the Paper  We begin the technical part of the paper in Section 2 by presenting some preliminaries on the maximum ﬂow problem and the notion of electrical  3ﬂows.  Then, in Section 3, we present our e m 2 log U -time maximum s-t ﬂow algorithm. framework and demonstrate how it yields an O Finally, inSection 4, we show how to reﬁne our basic framework to obtain the improved running e m 107 U 17 . time of O  2  Preliminaries  Throughout this paper, we will be viewing graphs as having both lower and upper capacities. Speciﬁcally, we will denote by G = (V, E, u ) a directed graph with a vertex set V , an arc set E (we + allow parallel arcs), and two (non-negative) integer capacities u− e and ue , for each arc e ∈ E. (We will explain the role of these capacities below.) Usually, m will denote the number |E| of arcs of the graph in question and n = |V | will be the number of its vertices. We view each arc e of G as an ordered pair (u, v), where u is its tail and v is its head. Observe that this perspective enables us to view undirected graphs as directed ones in which the ordered pair (u, v) ∈ E is an (undirected) edge (u, v) and the order just speciﬁes the orientation of that edge (from u to v). Maximum Flow Problem. The basic notion of this paper is the notion of a flow. Given a graph G, we view a ﬂow in G as a vector f ∈ Rm that assigns a value fe to each arc e of G. If this value is negative we interpret it as having a ﬂow of |fe | ﬂowing in the direction opposite to the arc orientation. (This convention is especially useful when discussing ﬂows in undirected graphs.) We say that a ﬂow f is an σ-flow, for some demands σ ∈ Rn iﬀ it satisﬁes flow conservation constraints with respect to that demands. That is, we have that X X fe − fe = σv , for each vertex v ∈ V . (1) e∈E + (v)  e∈E − (v)  Here, E + (v) (resp. E − (v)) is the set of arcs of G that are entering (resp. leaving) vertex v. Intuitively, these constraints enforce that the net balance of the total in-ﬂow into vertex v and the total out-ﬂow out P of that vertex is equal to σv , for every v ∈ V . (Observe that this implies, in particular, that v σv = 0.) 4  Furthermore, we say that a σ-ﬂow f is feasible in G iﬀ f obeys the the capacity constraints: + −u− e ≤ fe ≤ ue ,  for each arc e ∈ E.  (2)  In other words, we want each arc e to have a ﬂow that is at most u+ e if it ﬂows in the direction − of e’s orientation (i.e., fe ≥ 0), and at most ue , if it ﬂows in the opposite direction (i.e., fe < 0). Note that setting all u− e s be equal to zero recovers the standard notion of ﬂow feasibility in directed graphs. One type of ﬂows that will be of special interest to us are s-t ﬂows, where s (the source) and t (the sink) are two distinguish vertices of G. Formally, an s-t flow is a σ-ﬂow whose demand vector σ is equal to F · χs,t, where F ≥ 0 is called the value of f and χs,t is a demand vector that has −1 (resp. 1) at the coordinate corresponding to s (resp. t) and zeros everywhere else. Now, the maximum flow problem corresponds to a task in which we are given a (directed) graph G = (V, E, u ) with integer capacities as well as a source vertex s and a sink vertex t and want to ﬁnd a feasible (in the sense of (2)) s-t ﬂow of maximum value. We will denote this maximum value as F ∗ . Residual Graphs. A fundamental object in many maximum ﬂow algorithms (including ours) is the notion of a residual graph. Given a graph G = (V, E, u ) and a feasible σ-ﬂow f in that graph (it is useful to think σ = F · χs,t ), we deﬁne the residual graph Gf (of G with respect to f ) as a b (f )) over the same vertex and arc set as G and such that, for each arc e = (u, v) graph Gf = (V, E, u of G, its lower and upper capacities are deﬁned as + u b+ e (f ) := ue − fe and  − u b− e (f ) := ue + fe .  (3)  b− We will refer to u b+ e (f )) as forward residual capacity (resp. backward residual capacity) e (f ) (resp. u of e and also deﬁne the residual capacity u be (f ) of e as the minimum of these two, i.e., u be (f ) := + (f )}. Note that the value of residual capacity depends on the ﬂow f but we will (f ), u b min{b u− e e ensure that it is always clear from the context with respect to which ﬂow the residual capacity is measured. Also, observe that feasibility of f implies that all residual capacities are always nonnegative (cf. (2)). The main reason why residual graphs are useful in computing maximum ﬂows is that they constitute a very convenient representation of the progress made so far. Speciﬁcally, we have the following important fact. (Again, it is useful to think here of the maximum s-t ﬂow setting, in which σ = F ∗ χs,t .) Fact 2.1. Let σ be some demand and G = (V, E, u ) be a graph in which a demand of σ can be routed, i.e., there exists a σ-flow f ∗ that is feasible in G. Also, for any 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, let f be a feasible b (f )) be the residual graph of G with respect to f . We have that ασ-flow in G, and Gf = (V, E, u  (a) one can route a demand of (1 − α)σ in Gf ;  (b) if f ′ is a feasible α′ σ-flow in Gf , for some α′ , then f + f ′ is a feasible (α + α′ )σ-flow in G.  Intuitively, the above fact enables us to reduce the task of routing a demand σ in G to a sequence of computations of augmenting α′ σ-ﬂows in the residual graph Gf . We know that as long as we have not yet computed a feasible σ-ﬂow in G, Gf can route a demand of (1 − α)σ-ﬂow, where (1 − α) > 0 is the fraction of routed demand that we are still “missing”, and each new augmenting α′ σ-ﬂow found in Gf brings us closer to routing σ in full in G. (Note that initially Gf is equal to G and Gf is changing after each new augmenting α′ σ-ﬂow is found.) 5  Electrical Flows and Vertex Potentials. Another notion that will play a fundamental role in this paper is the notion of electrical ﬂows. Here, we just brieﬂy review some of the key properties that we will need later. For an in-depth treatment we refer the reader to [5]. Consider a graph G and a vector of resistances r ∈ Rm that assigns to each edge e its resistance re > 0. For a given σ-ﬂow f in G, let us deﬁne its energy (with respect to resistances r ) Er (f ) to be X Er (f ) := re fe2 . (4) e  For a given demand vector σ and a vector of resistances r , we deﬁne the electrical σ-flow in G (that is determined by resistances r ) to be the ﬂow that minimizes the energy Er (f ) among all ﬂows with demand σ in G. As energy is a strictly convex function, one can easily see that such a ﬂow is unique. (It is important to keep in mind that such ﬂow is not required to be feasible with respect to capacities of G, in the sense of (2).) A very useful property of electrical ﬂows is that they can be characterized in terms of vertex potentials inducing them. Namely, one can show that a ﬂow f with demands σ in G is an electrical σ-ﬂow determined by resistances r iﬀ there exist vertex potentials φv (that we collect into a vector φ ∈ Rn ) such that, for any edge e = (u, v) in G, fe =  φv − φu . re  (5)  In other words, a f with demands σ is an electrical σ-ﬂow iﬀ it is induced via (5) by some vertex potential φ. (Note that the orientation of edges matters in this deﬁnition.) The above equation corresponds to the Ohm’s law known from physics. Note that we are able to express the energy Er (f ) (see (4)) of an electrical σ-ﬂow f in terms of the potentials φ inducing it as X (φv − φu )2 . (6) Er (f ) = re e=(u,v)  One of the consequences of the above is that one can develop a dual characterization of the energy of an electrical σ-ﬂow in terms of optimization over vertex potentials. Namely, we have the following lemma whose proof can be found, e.g., in [43] Lemma 2.1. Lemma 2.2. For any graph G = (V, E), any vector of resistances r , and any demand vector σ, 1 = min Er (f ∗ ) φ|σT φ=1  X  e=(u,v)∈E  (φv − φu )2 , re  where f ∗ is the electrical σ-flow determined by r in G. Furthermore, if φ∗ are the vertex potentials b := φ∗ /Er (f ∗ ). corresponding to f ∗ then the minimum is attained by taking φ to be equal to φ Note that the above lemma provides a convenient way of lowerbounding the energy of an electrical σ-ﬂow. One just needs to expose any vertex potentials φ such that σ T φ = 1 and this will immediately constitute an energy lowerbound.  6  Laplacian Solvers. The fact that the electrical σ-ﬂow determined by resistances r is the only ﬂow with demands σ that can be induced by vertex potentials (cf. (5)) has an important consequence. It enables us to reduce electrical σ-ﬂow computations to solving a linear system. In fact, the task of ﬁnding vertex potentials that induce that ﬂow can be cast as a Laplacian linear system. That is, a linear system in which the constraint matrix corresponds to a Laplacian of the underlying graph with weights given by the (inverses of) the resistances r . Now, from the algorithmic point of view, the crucial property of Laplacian systems is that we can solve them, up to a very good approximation, very eﬃciently. Namely, there is a long line of work [56, 33, 34, 27, 8, 35, 36] that builds on an earlier work of Vaidya [58] and Spielman and Teng [55] and gives us a number of Laplacian system solvers that run in only nearly-linear time and, in case of more recent variants, are conceptually fairly simple. In particular, this line of work establishes the following theorem. Theorem 2.3. For any ε > 0, any graph G with n vertices  and m edges, any demand vector −1 e σ, and any resistances r , one can compute in O m log ε time vertex potentials φ̃ such that ∗ kφ̃ − φ∗ kL ≤ εkφ∗ kL , where L is the Laplacian of G, φ are potentials inducing the electrical σ-flow p T determined by resistances r , and kφkL := φ Lφ. Even though the solutions delivered by the above Laplacian solvers are only approximate, the quality of approximation that it delivers is more than suﬃcient for our purposes. Therefore, in the rest of this paper we assume that these solutions are exact. (See, e.g., [43] for discussion how to deal with inexactness of the electrical ﬂows computed.)  Vector Norms. We will ﬁnd it useful to work with various ℓp -norms of vectors. To this end, for any p > 0, we deﬁne the ℓp -norm kh kp of a vector h as khkp :=  X i  !1  p  |hi |p  .  (7)  In particular, the ℓ∞ -norm is given by kh k∞ := maxi |hi |.  3  Augmenting Residual Graphs with Electrical Flows  In this section, we put forth the general framework we will use to solve the maximum s-t problem.2 In particular, we  3  demonstrate how this framework enables us to solve the maximum s-t ﬂow problem e 2 in O m log U time, where m = |E| is the number of arcs in of the input graph and U is its largest (integer) capacity. More precisely, for any  s-t ﬂow instance G = (V, E, u ) and any value F ≥ 0, our  maximum 3 e algorithm will work in O m 2 log U time and either: compute a feasible s-t ﬂow of value F in G; or conclude that the maximum s-t ﬂow value F ∗ of G is strictly smaller than F . 2  Observe that our treatment can be immediately extended to routing arbitrary demands since this problem can always be reduced to the directed maximum flow problem by adding a super-source and super-sink and connecting all the surpluses in the original graph to the former and all the deficits in that graph to the latter via arcs with appropriate capacities.  7  Note that such procedure can be turned into a “classic” maximum s-t ﬂow by applying binary search over values of F and incurring a multiplicative running time overhead of only O(log U n). (In fact, a standard use of capacity scaling technique [12] enables one to keep the overall running time of the resulting algorithm be only linear, instead of quadratic, in log U .) As mentioned earlier, our algorithm follows the primal dual augmenting paths based framework. At a high level, in each iteration (see Section 3.2), it uses electrical ﬂow computations to compute an augmenting ﬂow as well as an update to the dual solution. To ensure that each augmenting iteration makes enough progress, it maintains a careful coupling of the primal and dual solution. We describe it below.  3.1  Primal Dual Coupling  Let us ﬁx our target ﬂow value F and, for notational convenience, , for any 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, let us denote by χα the demand vector αF χs,t , i.e., the demand corresponding to routing α-fraction of the target ﬂow value F of the s-t ﬂow. Also, let us deﬁne χ to be the demand equal to χ1 . Again, our algorithm will be inherently primal dual in nature. That is, in addition to maintaining a primal solution: a χα -ﬂow f , for some 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, that is feasible in G, it will also maintain a dual solution y ∈ Rn , which should be viewed as an embedding of all the vertices of the graph G into a line. Consequently, our goal will be to either to make f be a feasible ﬂow with demands χα and α = 1, which corresponds to routing the target s-t ﬂow value F in full, or to make the dual solution y certify that the target demand χ1 = χ cannot be fully routed in G and thus F > F ∗ . Well-coupled Solutions. Our primal dual scheme will be enforcing a very speciﬁc coupling of the primal solution f and the dual solution y. More precisely, let us deﬁne for each arc e = (u, v) ∆e (y ) := yv − yu ,  (8)  to be the “stretch“ of the arc e in the embedding given by y. Also, let Gf be the residual graph of G with respect to f and let us deﬁne, for a given arc e, a potential function Φe (f ) :=  1  1  , u b− e (f )  (9)  for each arc e.  (10)  u b+ e (f )  −  − + b− where we recall that u b+ e (f ) := ue + fe ) are forward (resp. backward) e (f ) := ue − fe (resp. u residual capacities of the arc e. (See preliminaries, i.e., Section 2, for details.) Then, our intention is to maintain the following relation between f and y :  ∆e (y ) = Φe (f )  Intuitively, this condition ensures that the line embedding y stretches each arc e in the direction of the smaller of the residual capacities, and that this stretch is inversely proportional to the value of − that capacity. (Note that if G was undirected and thus the initial capacities u+ e and ue were equal, the direction of smaller residual capacity is also the direction in which the ﬂow f ﬂows through the arc e.) It is worth pointing out that this coupling condition is directly inspired by (and, in fact, can be directly derived from) a certain variant of centrality condition used by interior-point method based maximum ﬂow algorithms (see [43]). 8  Even though condition (10) expresses our intended coupling, it will be more convenient to work with a slightly relaxed condition that allows us to have small violations of that ideal coupling. Speciﬁcally, we say that a primal dual solution (f , y ) is γ-coupled iﬀ |∆e (y ) − Φe (f )| ≤  γe u be (f )  for all arcs e = (u, v).  (11)  m Here, u be (f ) = min{b u+ b− e (f ), u e (f )} is the (symmetrized) residual capacity of the arc e, and γ ∈ R is the violation vector that we intend to keep very small. In particular, we say that a primal dual 1 , i.e., solution (f , y ) is well-coupled iﬀ its violation vector γ has its ℓ2 -norm (see (7)) be at most 100 1 kγk2 ≤ 100 . One of the key consequences of maintaining a well-coupled primal dual pair of solutions (f , y ) is that it enables us to use y as a dual certiﬁcate for inability to route certain demands in G. The following lemma gives us a concrete criterion for doing that.  Lemma 3.1. Let (f , y ) be a well-coupled primal dual solution with f being a χα -flow, for some 0 ≤ α < 1. If 2m χT y > (1 − α)  then the demand χ cannot be routed in G, i.e., F > F ∗ .  Note that the choice of the constant 2 in the above lemma is fairly arbitrary. In principle, any constant strictly larger than 1 would suﬃce. 2m but the demand χ can still be routed Proof. Assume for the sake of contradiction that χT y > (1−α) in G. As f is an χα -ﬂow that is feasible in G, by Fact 2.1, there has to exist a χ(1−α) -ﬂow f ′ that is feasible in the residual graph Gf . Observe that, by (1) and (8), we have in that case that   X X X X X (f ′ )T ∆(y ) = fe′ ∆e (y ) = fe′ (yv − yu ) = yv  fe′ − fe′  (12) e  v  e=(u,v)  e∈E + (v)  e∈E − (v)  T  = (1 − α)F (yt − ys ) = (1 − α)χ y > 2m.  We want now to use the feasibility of f ′ to derive an upper bound on the inner produce (f ′ )T ∆(y ) that will violate the above lower bound and thus deliver the desired contradiction. To this end, let us consider some particular arc e. Assume wlog that fe′ ≥ 0 (handling of the case of fe′ < 0 is completely analogous). We have that the contribution of that arc to the inner product (f ′ )T ∆(y ) is, by (11), at most   1 1 γe fe′ γe fe′ ′ ′ ′ ≤ fe , − + fe ∆e (y ) ≤ fe Φe (f ) + u be (f ) u be (f ) u b+ u b− e (f ) e (f ) where we recall that γ is the violation vector of (f , y ) (cf. (11)). As f ′ is feasible in Gf , we need to have that fe′ ≤ u b+ b+ b− b+ e (f ). So, if u e (f ) ≤ u e (f ), i.e., u e (f ) = u be (f ), then   f ′ (1 + γe ) 1 1 γe fe′ ′ ′ ≤ e ≤ (1 + γe ). fe ∆e (y ) ≤ fe − − + + u be (f ) u be (f ) u be (f ) u be (f ) 9  Otherwise, we have that     1 (1 − γe )fe′ 1 1 − γe γe fe′ 1 ′ ′ ′ ≤ fe ≤ 1, ≤1− − − − fe ∆e (y ) ≤ fe + + + u be (f ) u be (f ) u be (f ) u be (f ) u be (f ) u be (f )  as γe ≤ kγk∞ ≤ kγk2 ≤ 12 . So, in either case, this contribution is at most (1 + γe ). Summing these contributions over all arcs we get that X X √ (f ′ )T ∆(y ) ≤ fe′ ∆e (y ) ≤ (1 + γe ) ≤ m + mkγk2 ≤ 2m, e  e  which indeed contradicts the lower bound (12). The lemma follows. In the light of the above discussion, for a given well-coupled primal dual solution (f , y ), we should view the value of α as a measure of our primal progress, while the value of the inner product σ T y can be seen as a measure of our dual progress. Initialization. The coupling condition (11) ties the primal and dual solutions f and y fairly tightly. In fact, coming up with some primal dual solutions that are well-coupled, which we need to initialize our framework, might be diﬃcult. Fortunately, ﬁnding such a pair of initial well-coupled solutions turns out to be easy, if our input graph G is undirected. In that case, just taking f to be a trivial zero ﬂow and y to be a trivial allzeros embedding makes condition (11) satisﬁed (with γe s being all zero). After all, the residual graph + − Gf with respect to such zero ﬂow f is just the graph G itself and thus u b+ b− e (f ) = ue = ue = u e (f ). Furthermore, even though we are interested in solving directed instances too, every such instance can be reduced to an undirected one. Speciﬁcally, we have the following lemma. Lemma 3.2. Let G be an instance of the maximum s-t flow problem with m arcs and the maximum e (m) time, one can construct an capacity U , and let F be the corresponding target flow value. In O ′ instance G of undirected maximum s-t flow problem that has O(m) arcs and the maximum capacity U , as well as target flow value F ′ such that: (a) if there exists a feasible s-t flow of value F in G then a feasible s-t flow of value F ′ exists in G′ ; e (m) time a feasible s-t flow of (b) given a feasible s-t flow of value F ′ in G′ one can construct in O value F in G.  The proof of the above lemma boils down to a known reduction of the directed maximum ﬂow problem to its undirected version – see, e.g., Theorem 3.6.1 in [42] for details. Consequently, from now on we can assume without loss of generality that we always have a well-coupled primal dual pair to initialize our framework.  3.2  Progress Steps  Once we described our basic framework and how to initialize it, we are ready to put forth its main ingredient: progress steps that enable us to gradually improve the primal dual solutions that we maintain. To this end, let us ﬁx a well-coupled primal dual solutions (f , y ) with f being a χα -ﬂow, for some 0 ≤ α < 1, that is feasible in G. Our goal in this section will be to use (f , y ) to compute, in nearly-linear time, another pair of well-coupled primal dual solutions (f + , y + ) that bring us closer 10  to the optimal solutions. The ﬂow f + we obtain will be a χα′ -ﬂow feasible in G, for α′ > α. So, the resulting ﬂow update f + − f is an augmenting ﬂow that is feasible in our current residual graph Gf and pushes (α′ − α)-fraction of the target s-t ﬂow. We will compute (f + , y + ) in two stages. First, in the augmentation step, we obtain a pair of b ), with fb being a χα′ -ﬂow, for α′ > α, that is feasible in G. These solutions make solutions (fb , y progress toward the optimal solutions but might end up being not well-coupled. Then, in the fixing step, we correct (fb, yb ) slightly by adding a carefully chosen ﬂow circulation, i.e., a ﬂow with allb so as to make the resulting solutions (f + , y + ) be zeros demands, to fb and an dual update to y well-coupled, as desired. The key primitive in both these steps will be electrical ﬂow computation. As we will see, the crucial property of electrical ﬂows we will rely on here is their“self-duality“. That is, the fact that each electrical ﬂow computation gives us both the ﬂow and the corresponding vertex potentials that are coupled to it via Ohm’s law (5). This enables us not only to update our primal and dual solutions with that ﬂow and vertex potentials, respectively, but also, much more crucially, this coupling introduced by Ohm’s law will be exactly what will allow us to (approximately) maintain our desired primal dual coupling property (11). Augmentation Step. To perform an augmentation step we compute ﬁrst an electrical χ-ﬂow fe in G with the resistances r deﬁned as 1 1 + , (13) re := + − (b ue (f ))2 (b ue (f ))2 for each arc e. Note that the resistance re is proportional, roughly, to the inverse of the square of the residual capacity u be (f ) of that arc. So, in particular, it becomes very large whenever residual capacity of the arc e is small, and vice versa. As we will see shortly, this correspondence will allow us to control the amount of ﬂow that fe sends over each edge and thus ensure that the respective residual capacities are not violated. Let φ̃ be the vertex potentials inducing fe (via the Ohm’s law (6)). Then, we obtain the new primal and dual solution (fb, yb ) as follows: fbe := fe + δfee ybv := yv + δφev  for each arc e  (14)  for each vertex v,  where δ is the desired step size. Observe that this update is exactly an augmentation of our current ﬂow f with the (scaled) electrical ﬂow δfe and adding to our dual solution the (scaled) vertex potentials δφ̃. This, in particular, means that the new ﬂow fb we obtain here is a χα′ -ﬂow with α′ = α + δ.  (15)  The step size δ, however, will have to be carefully chosen. On one hand, as we see in (15), the larger it is the more progress we make. On the other hand, though, it has to be small enough so as to keep the ﬂow δfe feasible in Gf (and thus, by Fact 2.1, to make the ﬂow fb + f feasible in G). Note that, a priori, we have no direct control over neither the directions in which the electrical χ-ﬂow fe is ﬂowing thorough each arc nor the amount of that ﬂow. So, in order to establish a grasp on what is the right setting of δ, it is useful to deﬁne a congestion vector ρ given by ρe :=  fee , u be (f )  11  (16)  for each arc e. One can view ρe as a normalized measure of how much the electrical ﬂow fe overﬂows the residual capacity u be (f ) of the arc e and in what direction. In other words, the sign of ρe encodes the direction of the ﬂow fee . It is now not hard to see that to ensure that δfe is feasible in Gf , i.e., that no residual capacity is violated by the update (14), it suﬃces that δ|ρe | ≤ 41 , for all arcs e, or, equivalently, that δ≤  1 , 4kρk∞  (17)  where k · k∞ is the standard ℓ∞ -norm. It is also worth pointing out that the congestion vector ρ turns out to capture (up to a small multiplicative factor) the contribution of each arc e to the energy Er (fe ) of fe. In particular, we have the following simple but important observation. Lemma 3.3. For any arc e, ρ2e ≤ re fee2 ≤ 2ρ2e and  where k · k2 is the standard ℓ2 -norm.  kρk22 ≤ Er (fe) ≤ 2kρk22 ,  Proof. Note that, by deﬁnition of the resistance re (13), (16), and the deﬁnition of the residual capacity u be , we have that ρ2e ≤   fee2 2fee2 (ρe u be (f ))2 + −2 − −2 e2 2 e ≤ ≤ (b u (f )) + (b u (f )) = 2ρ2e . f = r f ≤ e e e e e u be (f )2 u be (f )2 u be (f )2  We thus also have that  kρk22 = as desired.  X e  ρ2e ≤  X e  re fee2 = Er (fe) ≤  X  2ρ2e = 2kρk22 ,  e  This link between the energy-minimizing nature of the electrical σ-ﬂow fe and the ℓ2 -norm of the congestion vector ρ will end up being very important. One reason for that is the fact that ℓ∞ -norm is always bounded by the ℓ2 -norm. Consequently, we can use this connection to control the ℓ∞ -norm of the vector ρ and thus the value of δ needed to satisfy the feasibility condition (17). It turns out, however, that just ensuring that our augmenting ﬂow is feasible is not enough for our purposes. Speciﬁcally, we also need to control the coupling of our primal dual solutions, and the feasibility bound (17) might be not suﬃciently strong for this purpose. We thus have to develop analyze the impact of the update (14) on the coupling condition (11) more closely. To this end, let us ﬁrst notice the following fact that stems from a standard application of the Taylor’s theorem. Its proof appears in Appendix A.1 Fact 3.4. For any u1 , u2 > 0 and x such as |x| ≤ u4 , where u = min{u1 , u2 }, we have that     1 1 1 1 1 1 − − + = + x + x2 ζ, u1 − x u2 + x u1 u2 u21 u22 where |ζ| ≤  5 . u3  12  Now, the above approximation bound enables us to get an accurate estimate of how the coupling condition evolves during the augmentation step (14). That is, for any arc e, applying Fact 3.4 with e b− u1 = u b+ e (f ) and x = δ fe , gives us that e (f ), u2 = u   1 1 1 1 b Φe (f ) = + + − δfee + (δfee )2 ζe , (18) − − = Φe (f ) + 2 (b u+ (b ue (f ))2 u be (f ) − δfee u be (f ) + δfee e (f ))  with |ζe | ≤ ube (f5 )3 . Observe that the above expression tells us that the ﬁrst order approximation of the change in the primal contribution of the arc e to the coupling condition (11) caused by the update (14) is exactly   1 1 b + − δfee = re δfee , Φe (f ) − Φe (f ) ≈ 2 2 (b u+ (f )) (b u (f )) e e  where we also used (13). (In fact, the choice of the resistances r was made exactly to make the above statement true.) Furthermore, by Ohm’s law (5) and the deﬁnition of our augmentation step (14), we have that   re δfee = δ φev − φeu = ∆e (b y ) − ∆e (y ),  which is exactly the change in the dual contribution of the arc e = (u, v) to the coupling condition (11) caused by the augmentation step update (14). So, up to ﬁrst order approximation, these two contributions cancel out, leaving the coupling (11) intact. Consequently, any increase in the violation of the coupling condition must come from the second-order terms in the approximation (18). The following lemma makes this precise and is proved in Appendix A.2. Lemma 3.5. Let 0 < δ ≤ (4kρk∞ )−1 and the primal dual solution (f , y ) be γ-coupled. Then, we have that, for any arc e = (u, v), ∆e (b y ) − Φe (fb ) ≤  4 3 γe  + 7(δρe )2 . u be (fb)  Fixing Step. Although Lemma 3.5 enables us to bound the deterioration of the primal dual coupling during the augmentation step, we cannot prevent this eﬀect altogether. Therefore, we need to introduce a fixing step that deals with this problem. More precisely, we develop a procedure that uses a single electrical ﬂow computation to signiﬁcantly reduce that violation, provided it was not too large to begin with. This is formalized by the following lemma, whose proof appears in Appendix A.3. Lemma 3.6. Let (g , z ) be a ς-coupled primal dual solution, with g being a feasible χα′ -flow and 1 e (m) time, we can compute a primal dual solution (ḡ , z̄ ) that is well-coupled and in kςk2 ≤ 50 . In O which ḡ is still a χα′ -flow. Now, after putting Lemmas 3.5 and 3.6 together, we are ﬁnally able to state the condition that δ in the update (14) has to satisfy in order to ensure that the solutions (f + , y + ) we obtain after performing the augmentation and ﬁxing step is still well-coupled. 13  Lemma 3.7. (f + , y + ) is a well-coupled primal dual solution with f + being a χα′ -flow that is feasible in G whenever δ ≤ (33kρk4 )−1 , The above lemma tells us that the step size δ of our augmentation step (14) should be governed by the ℓ4 -norm (see (7)) of the congestion vector (16). Observe that the ℓ4 -norm of a vector is always upper bounding its ℓ∞ -norm. So, the condition (17) is subsumed by this ℓ4 -norm bound. Proof. Note that we always have that kρk4 ≥ kρk∞ . So, the condition (17) is automatically satisﬁed and the ﬂow f + is indeed a χα′ -ﬂow that is feasible in G. Now, to argue about well-coupling of (f + , y + ), notice that, in the light of Lemma 3.6, it suﬃces b ) obtained after executing the augmentation step (14) to argue that the primal dual solution (fb , y 1 b -coupled with kb is γ γ k2 ≤ 50 . To this end, observe that by Lemma 3.5 and the fact that (f , y ) are well-coupled, i.e., γ-coupled 1 , we have that with kγk2 ≤ 100 kb γ k2 = ≤  v u 2  uX 4 2 2 t γe + 7(δρe ) γ be ≤ 3 e e s X 4 2 7 1 4 2 kγk2 + 7δ + 7δ2 kρk24 ≤ + < . ρ4e ≤ 3 300 150 1089 50 e  sX  The lemma follows.  3.3  Analysis of the Algorithm  We want now to analyze the overall running time of our algorithm. Recall that given our target demand χ that corresponds to sending F units of ﬂow from the source s to the sink t, our overarching goal is to either route this demand fully in G or provide a dual certiﬁcate that it is impossible to route χ in G. We aim to achieve this goal by maintaining and gradually improving a primal dual solution (f , y ). In this solution, f is a χα -ﬂow (which corresponds to routing an α fraction of the desired demand χ) that is feasible in G and f and y are well-coupled, i.e., tied to each other via condition b having suﬃciently small ℓ2 -norm. As described in Section 3.2, each (11) with the violation vector γ iteration runs in nearly-linear time and boils down to employing electrical ﬂow computations to ﬁnd an augmenting ﬂow in the current residual graph Gf (as well as to update the dual solution to maintain well-coupling). Consequently, all we need to do now is to lower bound the amount of progress that each of these iteration makes. Ideally, we would like to prove that in each iteration in which f already routed α-fraction of the desired ﬂow, i.e., f is a feasible χα -ﬂow, the step size δ (see (14)) can be taken to be at least δ ≥ (1 − α)δ̂, (19) for some ﬁxed δ̂ > 0. Observe that if such a lower bound was established then, by (15), it would imply that each iteration ﬁnds an augmenting ﬂow that routes at least δ̂-fraction of the amount of ﬂow still to be routed. As a result, after executing at most O(δ̂−1 log mU ) iterations, the remaining value of ﬂow to be routed would be at most 1 and thus a simple ﬂow rounding and augmenting path 14  ﬁnding would yield the ﬁnal answer (see, e.g., [43]), making the overall running time be at most   −1 e δ̂ m log U . O Unfortunately, a priori, it is diﬃcult to provide any such non-trivial unconditional lower bound on the amount of primal progress we make in each iteration. After all, it could be the case that the target ﬂow cannot be even routed in G. More importantly though, even if the target ﬂow could be routed in G, and thus the residual graph always admitted augmenting ﬂows of suﬃciently large value, it is still not clear that our ﬂow augmenting procedure would be able to ﬁnd them. (It is worth noting that this problem is by no means speciﬁc to our algorithm. In fact, in all the maximum ﬂow algorithms that rely on the augmenting paths framework ensuring that each iteration makes a suﬃcient primal progress is a chief bottleneck in the analysis.) The root of the problem here is that our ﬂow augmenting procedure is based on electrical ﬂows and these are undirected in nature. Consequently, the augmenting ﬂows that it ﬁnds have to come from a fairly restricted class: s-t ﬂows that are feasible in a certain “symmetrized" version of the residual graph. bf to be an To make it precise, given a residual graph Gf , let us deﬁne its symmetrization G undirected graph in which each arc e has its forward and backward capacity equal to u be (f ), i.e., to + − the minimum of the forward u be (f ) and backward u be (f ) residual capacities in Gf . Observe now that each (electrical) augmenting ﬂow δfe found in the augmentation step (cf. (14)) is not only feasible bf – this is exactly what the condition (17) in the residual graph Gf but also in its symmetrization G enforces. bf too. In However, not all augmenting s-t ﬂows that are feasible in Gf have to be feasible in G fact, it can happen that a large maximum s-t ﬂow value that the residual graph Gf supports mostly bf , and thus prevents our algorithm from making a suﬃcient good vanishes in its symmetrization G primal progress. (Again, a diﬃculty of a exactly the same nature arises in the analysis of the classic ﬂow augmenting algorithms such as [15, 25, 22].) Preconditioning Arcs. It turns out, however, that there is a fairly simple way to circumvent the above diﬃculty and ensure that the kind of direct, “primal-only“ analysis we hoped for above can indeed be performed. Namely, we just need to “precondition“ our input graph by adding to it a large number of s-t arcs of suﬃciently large capacities. More precisely, we modify our input graph G by adding to it m undirected arcs between the source s and sink t with a forward and backward capacities equal to 2U and their orientation being from s to t. We will call these arcs preconditioning arcs. Observe that after this modiﬁcation the number of arcs of our graph as well as its maximum capacity at most doubled, and the maximum s-t ﬂow value changed additively by exactly 2mU . In particular, the preconditioning arcs constitute exactly half of all the arcs and the amount of s-t ﬂow that they alone can support is at least twice the s-t throughput of the rest of the graph. (Also, as these arcs are undirected they do not interfere with our initialization procedure – cf. Lemma 3.2.3 ) Consequently, we can just focus on analyzing the running time of our algorithm on this preconditioned instance and the bounds we establish will immediately translate over to the original instance.4 3 More precisely, we can just first initialize our framework for the original graph, as before, and only precondition the undirected graph resulting from that initialization. 4 Note that the preconditioning arcs have to be fully saturated in any maximum s-t flow. So, simply dropping these arcs and the flow on them will yield the maximum s-t flow in the original graph.  15  As already mentioned, somewhat surprisingly, once such preconditioning arcs are in place and bf our primal dual solution (f , y ) is well-coupled, it is always the case that the symmetrization G of our current residual graph Gf retains a constant fraction of the s-t throughput. Intuitively speaking, well-coupling prevents the “shortcutting” preconditioning arc from getting “clogged” too quickly. Instead, their residual capacity is consumed at the same rate as that of the rest of the graph. Consequently, these arcs alone are always able to provide enough of s-t throughput in the bf of the residual graph Gf . This is made precise in the following lemma, whose symmetrization G proof appears in Appendix A.4  Lemma 3.8. Let (f , y ) be a well-coupled primal dual solution in the (preconditioned) graph G and let f be a χα -flow, for some 0 ≤ α < 1, that is feasible in G. We have either that: bf of the residual graph Gf ; (a) there exists a χ (1−α) -flow f ′ that is feasible in the symmetrization G 10  (b) or  χT y  >  2m (1−α)  implying that our target demand χ cannot be routed in G (cf. Lemma 3.1).  Note that if our target demand χ is exactly the demand F ∗ χs,t of the maximum s-t ﬂow, the second condition cannot ever trigger and thus indeed it is the case that the symmetrization of the (preconditioned) residual graph retains a constant fraction of the original s-t throughput. bf of the residual graph Gf retains Lower Bounding δ̂. Once we proved that the symmetrization G most of its s-t ﬂow throughput (see Lemma 3.8), we are ﬁnally able to provide an absolute lower bound δ̂ (cf. (19)) on the amount of primal progress each iteration of our algorithm makes. To this end, we upper bound ﬁrst the energy, or, (almost) equivalently, the ℓ2 -norm of the congestion vector (see Lemma 3.3) of the electrical ﬂow that we use in our augmentation step (see (14)). Lemma 3.9. Let (f , y ) be a well-coupled primal dual solution, with f being a χα -flow that is feasible in Gf , for some 0 ≤ α < 1. Let fe be an electrical χ-flow determined by the resistances r given by (13). We have that either:  (a) kρk22 ≤ Er (fe) ≤ explicit constant; (b) or, χT y >  CE m , (1−α)2  2m (1−α) ,  where ρ is the congestion vector defined in (16), and CE > 0 is an  i.e., our target demand χ cannot be routed in G.  Proof. By Lemma 3.8, we either have that χT y >  2m (1−α) ,  i.e., our condition (b) triggers, or there bf of the residual graph Gf . exists a χ (1−α) -ﬂow f ′ that is feasible in the symmetrization G 10  Let us ﬁrst bound the energy Er (f ′ ) of that ﬂow f ′ . To this end, observe that, by deﬁnition (13), we have that ′  Er (f ) =  X e  re (fe′ )2  ≤  X e  1 1 + − + 2 (b ue (f )) (b ue (f ))2    (fe′ )2  X  f ′ 2 e ≤ 2m, ≤2 u b (f ) e e  bf . (Recall that the where the last inequality follows by the fact that the ﬂow f ′e is feasible in G bf are equal to u forward and backward capacities of an arc e in G be (f ).) 16  Consequently, if we scale f ′ by  10 (1−α)  then it will become a χ-ﬂow and its energy will be at most 200 m. However, by deﬁnition, the energy Er (fe) of the electrical χ-ﬂow fe cannot be larger than (1−α)2 the energy of any other χ-ﬂow. We thus can conclude that kρk22 ≤ Er (fe ) ≤  200 100 Er (f ′ ) ≤ m, (1 − α)2 (1 − α)2  where we also used Lemma 3.3. So, taking CE := 200 concludes the proof. Now, we should notice that by Lemma 3.7 it suﬃces that we always have that δ≤  1 (1 − α) 1 ≤ ≤ √ , 33kρk4 33kρk2 33 CE m  (20)  where we used Lemma 3.9 and the simple fact that it is always the case that kρk4 ≤ kρk  2 .3 Conse √ e m 2 log U quently, by (19), we see that we can take δ̂ := (33 CE m)−1 , which gives us the desired O time algorithm. Finally, we want to emphasize again that even though our above analysis was based solely on analyzing our primal progress5 , maintaining the dual solution and the primal dual coupling (11) was absolutely critical for its success.   10 1  e An Improved O m 7 U 7 -Time Algorithm  4    e m 107 U 17 , In this section, we present an improved maximum s-t ﬂow algorithm that runs in time O where U is the value of the largest (integer) capacity of the graph. In the case of the unit capacities, 10 e (m) 7 -time algorithm of Mądry i.e., U = 1, this running time matches the running time of the O  e (mU ) 107 , O e (m√n log U )} that stems for [43], and improves over the best known bound of min{O the work of Mądry [43] and Lee and Sidford [38] whenever U is moderately large (and the graph is suﬃciently sparse).   e m 23 log U -time algorithm presented in Section 3. To achieve this goal, we will modify the O These modiﬁcations will enable us to lower bound the amount of primal progress δ̂ (cf. (19)) this algorithm makes in each iteration. Speciﬁcally, we aim to show that  1 −1 , δ̂ ≥ m 2 −η  (21)  1 − 71 logm U − O(log log mU ), whenever that modiﬁed algorithm executes progress for certain η := 14 steps (see Section 3.2). Clearly, in Section 3.3, establish that lower bound on δ̂ ensures  1 as discussed   10 1 −η e e that we need at most O m 2 log U = O m 7 U 7 progress steps to converge to the optimum solution. 5  In fact, one could perform it even without resorting explicitly to the dual infeasibility certificates χT y .  17  4.1  Modified Algorithm    e m 32 log U -time algorithm we presented in Section 3, let Before we explain how we modify the O us understand ﬁrst what is its main running time bottleneck. To this end, recall that the key quantity that captures the progress that each augmentation iteration makes is the ℓ4 -norm kρk4 of the congestion vector ρ of the electrical χ-ﬂow fe determined by the resistances r (see (13)). More precisely, by Lemma 3.7, we need to always have that (1 − α)δ̂ ≤ δ ≤ (33kρk4 )−1 .  In Section 3.3, we bounded that ℓ4 -norm by simply noticing that it always has to be upper bounded by the ℓ2 -norm of that vector and that, by Lemma 3.3, this ℓ2 -norm is directly tied to the energy Er (fe ) ofthe electrical ﬂow fe . Furthermore, since we were able to also prove that this  √ m (see Lemma 3.9) the ﬁnal O( m) bound on δ̂−1 followed. (See (20) energy is always O (1−α) 2 for details.) Now, the key observation is that such bounding of the ℓ4 -norm of the vector ρ with its ℓ2 -norm might be wasteful. That is, even though it is not hard to construct examples in which the congestion vector ρ has these two norms be fairly close, such examples are inherently fragile. More precisely, as ﬁrst pointed out by Christano et al. [7] in the context of an analogous ℓ∞ - vs ℓ2 -norm trade oﬀ, whenever kρk4 ≈ kρk2 , it must be necessarily be the case that most of the energy of the electrical ﬂow fe is contributed by a very small set of arcs. Moreover, if one perturbs such arcs by increasing their resistance, this will result in a great increase of the energy of the corresponding electrical ﬂow. Christano et al. [7], and later Mądry [43] have demonstrated that a careful exploitation of this phenomena can lead to ensuring that such fragile worst-case instances do not appear too often and thus a better bound on the ℓ4 -norm can be achieved. Arc Boosting. Our improved algorithm will also follow the perturbation paradigm we outlined above. To this end, we introduce an operation of boosting that we will use to perturb high-energy contributing arcs whenever needed. Formally, let us ﬁx a primal dual well-coupled solution (f , y ) and a particular arc e = (u, v). be (f ) is completely symmetric). We be (f ) (the case of u b− Let us assume wlog that u b+ e (f ) = u e (f ) = u deﬁne a boost of e to be an operation that modiﬁes the input graph and the solution (f , y ) in the following way: (1) The arc e is replaced by an u-v path consisting of β(e) := 2 + ⌈ ub2U ⌉ arcs e1 , . . . , eβ(e) , all e (f ) oriented towards v. − − − + + (2) The ﬁrst two arcs e1 , e2 are just copies of the arc e, with u+ e1 = ue2 := ue and ue1 = ue2 := ue . − (3) For all the remaining (β(e) − 2) arcs, we have that u+ e, for 2 < i ≤ β(e), ei := +∞ and uei := u where u e ≥ U is a value that we will set below.  (4) The ﬂow f pushes the original ﬂow fe over the created u-v path.  (5) Finally, if v0 = u, v1 , . . . , vβ(e) = v are the consecutive vertices on the created path then: • yv0 := yu and yvβ(e) := yv ; 18  • yv1 := yv , and yv2 := yv1 + Φe (f ) = yv + Φe (f ); (y )  ∆  Φe (f ) e2 = − β(e)−2 , for each 2 < i ≤ β(e). • yv3 , . . . , yvβ(e)−1 are set so as ∆ei (y ) = − β(e)−2  Observe that after the above modiﬁcations, we have that ∆e1 (y ) − Φe1 (f ) = ∆e (y) − Φe (f )  ∆e2 (y ) = Φe2 (f ) = Φe (f ) 1 Φei (f ) = − = ∆ei (y ), (e u + fe )  for each 2 < i ≤ β(e), as long as we set u e :=  β(e) − 2 − fe . Φe (f )  Therefore, the solution (f , y ) remains feasible in the (modiﬁed) residual graph Gf and is wellcoupled too. Also, note that since Φe (f ) ≤ ube1(f ) and |fe | ≤ U , the fact that (β(e) − 2) ≥ ub2U e (f ) ensures that u− e ≥ U , for all 2 < i ≤ β(e). Consequently, the eﬀective forward and backward ei = u capacities of the created path are the same as the forward and backward capacities of the original arc e, and thus the s-t throughput of our graph remains unchanged. We thus see that, from our point of view, the boosting operation had only two real consequences: one of them is the intended eﬀect and the other one is an undesired side eﬀect. The intended eﬀect is that the eﬀective resistance with respect to the resistances r (cf. (13)) of the created path is at least twice as large as the original resistance re of the arc e. (Note that the arcs e1 and e2 have exactly the same residual capacities, and thus the resistances re1 and re2 are both equal to the resistance re of the original arc e.) The undesired consequence, however, is that the number of arcs in our graph increased by β(e) − 1. The key impact of that (at least) doubling of the resistance of the arc e is that, intuitively, it makes the energy of our electrical χ-ﬂow fe increase proportionally to the initial contribution of that arc to the (squared) ℓ2 -norm of the congestion vector ρ. This is made precise in the following lemma. (This lemma is stated in a slightly more general form for future reference. For now, one can think of the set S consisting of a single arc e.) Lemma 4.1. Let fe be an electrical χ-flow determined by the resistance r in our graph G and let ρ ′ be the corresponding congestion vector defined by (16). If fe is the electrical χ-flow determined by the resistances r ′ in the graph G′ that was obtained by boosting a set of arcs S then !! X ρ2 ′ 1 e Er (fe). Er ′ (fe ) ≥ 1 + 8 kρk22 e∈S  Proof. Let φ̃ be the vertex potentials inducing fe, by Lemma 2.2 and (16), we have that  and χT φ̃ = Er (fe).  1 = Er (fe )  X  e′ =(u′ ,v′ )  19  (φev′ − φeu′ )2 re′ Er (fe)2  ′ We want now to use the same voltages φ̃ to lowerbound the energy Er ′ (fe ) of the electrical χ-ﬂow ′ ′ fe after boosting the arcs in S. Observe that the eﬀective resistance ru,v between the endpoints u and v of some boosted arc e = (u, v) ∈ S after that boost is at least 2re . So, when we analyze the ′ energy of fe we can treat the u-v path that was created as just an arc e but with the resistance re′ ′ equal to ru,v ≥ 2re . Therefore, by using Lemma 2.2 again, we can conclude that   2 X X (φev − φeu )2 e e (φv′ − φu′ )  1  + ≤ ′ re′ Er (fe )2 re′ Er (fe)2 Er ′ (fe ) e′ =(u′ ,v′ )∈S / e=(u,v)∈S     2 X (φev′ − φeu′ )2 X X (φev − φeu )2 e e 1  (φv − φu )  − ≤  1− = 2 2 e e e re′ Er (f ) 2re Er (f ) Er (f ) 2re Er (fe) e′ =(u′ ,v′ ) e=(u,v)∈S e=(u,v)∈S ! ! X re fe2 X ρ2 1 1 e e 1− ≤ 1− ≤ , 4kρk22 Er (fe ) 2Er (fe) Er (fe ) e∈S  e∈S  where we also used Lemma 3.3 and Ohm’s law (5). The lemma follows by noticing that (1 + 2ε ) whenever 0 ≤ ε ≤ 14 .  1 (1−ε)  ≥  Boosting Use and Early Termination. Once we introduced the boosting operation, we can state the two modiﬁcations of the basic algorithm from Section 3 that we will make. The ﬁrst one is relatively minor: we terminate our algorithm whenever 1  (1 − α)F ≤ m 2 −η .  (22) 1  That is, once we know that we are within an additive factor of m 2 −η of the target ﬂow, we do not execute progress steps anymore. Observe that in that case we can just round our current ﬂow and 1 compute the optimal solution using at most m 2 −η augmenting paths computation (see, e.g., [43] for details). So, if we perform these operations, our algorithm will still run within the desired running time bound. The second modiﬁcation speciﬁes how and when we apply boosting operations. To this end, given an electrical χ-ﬂow fe and its congestion vector ρ, let us deﬁne an arc e to be high-energy if 1  |ρe | ≥ ρ∗ =  m 2 −3η , Cρ∗ (1 − α)  (23)  for certain constant Cρ∗ > 0 that we will set later (see (28) below). Now, recall that our goal is to ensure that (21) holds, which corresponds to ensuring that, by 1 −η  m2 . However, for reasons that will be clear shortly, we will actually want Lemma 3.7, kρk4 ≤ 33(1−α) to have a stronger, ℓ3 -norm bound on ρ. Speciﬁcally, we want to make a progress step only when 1  m 2 −η kρk3 ≤ , 33(1 − α)  and then use the step size δ=  1 δ̂ = (1 − α) 33(1 − α)kρk3 20  (24)  when making the augmentation step described in Section 3.2. Observe that as kρk3 ≥ kρk4 , this new condition still satisﬁes the ℓ4 -norm requirement set forth in Lemma 3.7. Unfortunately, as mentioned earlier, it can sometime happen that the bound (24) is violated. Therefore, we want to use our boosting technique to enforce that such violations do not happen too often. Speciﬁcally, whenever condition (24) does not hold we boost all the arcs in the set S ∗ , which is deﬁned to be the set of up to k∗ := m4η high-energy arcs e with highest values of |ρe |. In other words, we order all the high-energy arcs in a non-increasing order with respect to |ρe | and take S ∗ to consist of the ﬁrst up to k∗ of them. (Note that, in principle, in some iterations there can be only very few, or even no, high-energy arcs.) Once we boost the set S ∗ , we simply proceed to the next iteration (in the new version of the graph that our boosting operation created). Note that, at ﬁrst glance, there is nothing preventing us from needing to execute such a boosting step in each iteration, and thus to never be able to execute progress steps. However, as we argue in the next section, we are actually guaranteed to be able to execute progress steps often enough and thus make suﬃciently good progress overall.  4.2  Analysis of the Improved Algorithm  We proceed now to analyzing our modiﬁed algorithm and establishing the improved running time bound. This will require tackling two issues. First one is controlling the increase in the number of arcs resulting from performing of all our boosting operations. Speciﬁcally, we want to maintain the following invariant. Invariant 4.2. The total increase in the number of arcs is at most  m 10 .  As we will see, ensuring that this invariant is maintained will be what determines our ﬁnal bound on the value of η (cf. (21)). We need to maintain this invariant in order to be able to use the machinery we developed in Section 3. (It is not hard to check that, as long as that invariant is not violated, the whole analysis performed there is still valid, subject to slight adjustment of the corresponding constants.) The other issue we need to tackle corresponds to bounding the total number of boosting steps we execute. After all, we want to ensure that we execute progress steps often enough. In order to obtain such a bound we will perform a potential based argument with our potential function being the energy Er (fe ) of the electrical χ-ﬂow fe we compute in each iteration. (Note that this electrical ﬂow fe is always determined by the resistances r (cf. (13)) in the current version of the graph G.) One can easily convince oneself that this energy has to be at least U12 at the beginning of the algorithm and, by Lemma 3.9 (and provided Invariant 4.2 holds), it is never larger than Er (fe) ≤  CE m ≤ O(m3 U 2 ). (1 − α)2  (Here, the second inequality follows due to the fact that 1 ≤ F ≤ 2mU and we have our termination condition (22).) We want now to establish two claims: (I) Whenever a boosting step is executed, the energy Er (fe ) increases by a factor of at least  −2η 1 + CB m , for some constant CB > 0. (To prove this statement we will use Lemma 4.1.)  (II) Whenever a progress step is performed, with the condition (24) satisﬁed, the energy Er (fe )  −2η decreases by at most 1 + CD m , for some other constant CD > 1. (Proving this statement is where we leverage the fact that we enforce the stronger, ℓ3 -norm condition (24) on ρ.) 21  Observe that once the above two claims are established, we can amortize the number of boosting steps against the number of good progress steps. Speciﬁcally, a simple calculation shows that unless the number of boosting step is within a O(log m log U ) factor of the number of the progress steps, the resulting increase of the energy Er (fe ) would violate the absolute upper bound O(m3 U 2 ) we established. Furthermore, since we execute a progress step only when condition (24) is satisﬁed, this means that our desired lower bound (21) on δ̂ holds. Therefore, by our   reasoning  1 in Section  −1 e δ̂ log mU = O e m 2 −η log mU . 3.3, we know that the number of progress steps is at most O As each boosting and progress step can be executed in nearly-linear time, our desired improved running time bound will then follow. In the light of the above, it remains to only argue that claims (I) and (II) are indeed correct and that the Invariant 4.2 is never violated. Preservation of the Invariant 4.2. To prove that the Invariant 4.2 is indeed preserved, let us , where recall that each arc boosting operation increases the number of arcs by β(e) − 1 ≤ ub2U e (f ) u be (f ) is the residual capacity of the arc e at the time the boosting occurred. As it turns out, since we only boost arcs that are high-energy, i.e., arcs e with |ρe | ≥ ρ∗ at the time of the boosting, one can use a simple vertex potential based argument to argue that β(e) has to be always at most O(m4η U ). Lemma 4.3. Assume that Invariant 4.2 holds, let fe be an electrical χ-flow determined by the resistances r and let e = (u, v) be a high-energy arc that was boosted. Then, the total arc number increase β(e) − 1 is at most O(m4η U ). 2U u be (f ) .  So, it suﬃces that we prove that u be (f ) ≥ Ω(m−4η ). To this end, let φ̃ be vertex potentials inducing the electrical ﬂow fe and let Rs,t be the eﬀective resistance between the source s and sink t in our graph. As fe is an s-t ﬂow of value F , we need to have that Proof. Recall that β(e) − 1 ≤  F 2 Rs,t = Er (fe) ≤  CE m , (1 − α)2  where we used Lemma 3.9 and the fact that Invariant 4.2 holds. On the other hand, we know that the vertex potential drop φet −φes between s and t is non-negative (as the electrical ﬂow has to ﬂow from s to t) and at most 1  φet − φes = F Rs,t ≤  CE m 2 +η CE m ≤ , (1 − α)2 F (1 − α) 1  where the last inequality follows as (1 − α)F ≥ m 2 −η due to our termination condition (22). However, as fe is an s-t ﬂow it must be the case that the vertex potential diﬀerence between the endpoints of our arc e = (u, v) cannot be larger than such diﬀerence between the vertex potentials of s and t. That is, we have that 1  CE m 2 +η . |φev − φeu | ≤ |φet − φes | ≤ (1 − α)  (25)  But, by Ohm’s law (5) and deﬁnition (13) of the resistance r , we have that 1  |φev − φeu | = |fee |re ≥  |ρe | ρ∗ m 2 −3η |fee | = ≥ ≥ , u be (f )2 u be (f ) u be (f ) Cρ∗ (1 − α)b ue (f ) 22  where we used the deﬁnition (23) of the high-energy arcs. So, putting this inequality together with the bound (25), gives us the desired lower bound on u be (f ). The lemma follows.  ∗ 4η Observe now that as our boosting  operation never boosts more than k = m arcs at a time 1 −η e m 2 log U boosting steps, by Lemma 4.3, the total arc number increase and we have at most O throughout the whole algorithm is at most     e m 21 −η log U · O(m4η U ) = O e m 12 +7η U < m , m4η · O 10 1 − 17 logm U − O(log log mU ) with appropriately chosen constant in the provide we set η := 14 O(log log mU ) term. Thus Invariant 4.2 is indeed never violated.  Establishing Claim (I). We want now to prove that each boosting step results in an increase of the energy Er (fe) by a factor of at least 1 + Ω(m−2η ) . In the light of Lemma 4.1, it suﬃces we show that if S ∗ is the set of high-energy arcs that got boosted due to the condition (24) not holding then these arcs had to have a large contribution to the (square) of the ℓ2 -norm of the congestion vector ρ. That is, we want to argue that X ρ2 e −2η ). 2 ≥ Ω(m kρk 2 ∗  (26)  e∈S  Clearly, once we establish that then the desired energy increase will follow from Lemma 4.1 applied to S = S ∗ . To prove (26), let us ﬁrst consider the case that S ∗ has maximum size, i.e., |S ∗ | = k∗ = m4η . Note that all the arcs in S ∗ are high-energy arcs. Therefore, (23) gives us in this case that ∗ 2 X ρ2 m1−2η e 4η (ρ ) ≥ Ω(m−2η ), ≥ m · ≥ kρk22 kρk22 Cρ2∗ (1 − α)2 kρk22 ∗  e∈S  CE m where we used the fact that Lemma 3.9 implies that kρk22 ≤ (1−α) 2 . So, (26) holds in this case ∗ 4η and we can focus on the situation when |S | < m . Observe that this means that there is no high-energy arcs that are not in S ∗ . We want to argue that in such situation the arcs of S ∗ contribute at least a half of the total (cubed) ℓ3 -norm of the vector ρ. That is, that we have that  X  e∈S ∗  1  |ρe |3 ≥  m 2 −η 66(1 − α)  !3  (27)  .  To this end, observe that the contribution of arcs that are not high energy (and thus not in S ∗ ) to that (cubed) ℓ3 -norm is, by the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, (23) and Lemma 3.9, at most X  e∈S / ∗  |ρe |3  !  ≤     max |ρe | e∈S / ∗  X  e∈S / ∗  ρ2e  !  3  CE m 2 −3η ≤ ρ∗ kρk22 ≤ ≤ Cρ∗ (1 − α)3 23  1  m 2 −η 66(1 − α)  !3  ,  (28)  provided the constant Cρ∗ is set to be large enough. Therefore, since the condition (24) does not hold, we must have that the inequality (27) is indeed valid. Now, if there exists an arc e ∈ S ∗ such that |ρe | ≥  1  m 2 −η (1−α)  then the contribution of this arc  alone suﬃces to make (26) true. We can thus assume that maxe∈S ∗ |ρe | < Cauchy-Schwartz inequality to (27) to obtain that X  e∈S  P  |ρe |3 1 ρ2e ≥ ≥ maxe∈S ∗ |ρe | 66 ∗ e∈S ∗  1  m 2 −η 66(1 − α)  !2  1  m 2 −η (1−α)  and apply the  ,  which, by Lemma 3.9, establishes (26). Claim (I) is thus proved. Establishing Claim (II). To prove Claim (II) we will tie the potential decrease of energy during progress steps to the quantity that we already control: the ℓ3 -norm of the congestion vector ρ. (In fact, the desire to control the energy decrease is precisely the reason why we enforce the stronger ℓ3 -norm condition (24) instead of the ℓ4 -norm condition that Lemma 3.7 suggests.) We make this connection precise in the following lemma, whose proof appears in Appendix A.5. Lemma 4.4. Let (f , y ) be a well-coupled feasible primal dual solution and let fe be the corresponding electrical χ-flow determined by the resistances r and congestion vector ρ that satisfies the ℓ3 -norm condition (24). Then, after execution of the progress steps, as described in Section 3.2, the energy Er (fe) decreases by a factor of at most    kρk23 1+O . kρk22 Observe that, by (24) and Lemma 3.9, we have that m1−2η (1 − α)2 kρk23 ≤ = O(m−2η ), (33)2 CE m(1 − α)2 kρk22 which immediately establishes Claim (II) and thus concludes the analysis of the improved algorithm. Acknowledgments. We are grateful to Michael Cohen, Slobodan Mitrović, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu for a number of helpful discussions on this topic.  24  A A.1  Appendix Proof of Fact 3.4  Let us deﬁne g(x) := By Taylor’s theorem, we have that    1 1 − u1 − x u2 + x  1 1 x2 = − + g(x) = g(0) + g (0)x + g (z) 2 u1 u2 ′  ′′    1 1 + 2 2 u1 u2      .  x+x  2    1 1 − 3 (u1 − z) (u2 + z)3  where z is some value with |z| ≤ |x|. As a result, we can conclude that     64 1 64 5 1 ≤ − + ≤ 3, |ζ| = 3 3 3 3 (u1 − z) (u2 + z) u 27u1 27u2    (29)  (30)  as we wanted to show.  A.2  Proof of Lemma 3.5  By the deﬁnition of our update (14) and the approximation bound (18) as well as the coupling condition (11), we have that   1 1 b e e + − 2 δfee − (δfee )2 ζe ∆e (b y ) − Φe (f ) = ∆e (y ) + δ(φv − φu ) − Φ(f ) − 2 (b u+ ) (b ue ) e   γ e ≤ δ (φev − φeu ) − re fee − (δfee )2 ζe + u be (f ) e2  =  7δ2 fube2 + 34 γe 7(δρe )2 + 43 γe γe e (δfee ) ζe + = , ≤ u be (f ) u be (fb) u be (fb ) 2  where the second to last equality follows by Ohm’s law (6), the last equality follows by (16) and we be (f ) since δ ≤ (4kρk∞ )−1 . The lemma follows. also used the fact that u be (fb) ≥ 43 u  A.3  Proof of Lemma 3.6  For each arc e, let us deﬁne θe :=    1 1 + − 2 (b u+ (g )) (b u (g ))2 e e  −1  (31)  (∆e (z ) − Φe (g )) .  Intuitively, θe is the ﬁrst-order correction to the coupling of the primal dual solution (g , z ) with respect to the arc e. Note that by the fact that (g , z ) is ς-coupled we have that |θe | ≤    1 1 + − + 2 (b ue (g )) (b ue (g ))2  −1  2  |∆e (z ) − Φe (g )| ≤ u be (g ) 25    ςe u be (g )    = ςe u be (g ).  (32)  Let us now deﬁne a ﬂow g ′ to be the ﬂow g with the “correcting“ ﬂow θ added. That is, ge′ := ge + θe , 1 and, by (32), |θe | ≤ ςe u for each arc e. Observe that, as kςk∞ ≤ kςk2 ≤ 50 be (g ), this ﬂow g ′ is 51 u be (g ) ≥ u be (g ′ ) ≥ 49 be (g ). feasible in Gg and, in fact, 50 50 u Furthermore, if we analyze the coupling of (g ′ , z ), by Fact 3.4, for each arc e, we get that   1 1 ′ − − ∆e (z ) − Φe (g ) = ∆e (z ) − u b+ u be (g ) + θe e (g ) − θe   1 1 = ∆e (z ) − Φe (g ) − + − θe − θe2 ζe′ 2 2 (b u+ (g )) (b u (g )) e e 2ς 2 2 5b u (g ) 5ς 51ςe2 e e e = −θe2 ζe′ ≤ = ≤ , u be (g )3 u be (g ) 10b ue (g ′ )  where the third equality follows by the deﬁnition of θe (31) and the second to last inequality follows by (32). e -coupled with We thus see that the solutions (g ′ , z ) are well-coupled. In fact, they are γ v u s   X uX 11ςe2 2 51 51 2 t ke γ k2 = kςk22 ≤ . (33) ≤ γe = e 2 10 25000 e e  b )-ﬂow, where So, these solutions (g ′ , z ) have all the desired properties except g ′ is an (χα′ + σ b are the demands of the “correcting“ ﬂow θ we added – and not a χα′ -ﬂow we need. σ To remedy this deﬁciency, we compute an electrical (−b σ)-ﬂow θb determined by the to resistances rbe :=  1  ′ 2 (b u+ e (g ))  +  1  , ′ 2 (b u− e (g ))  (34)  and obtain our desired solutions (ḡ , z̄ ) by adding this electrical ﬂow to the ﬂow g ′ , and simultab that induce θb to the dual solution z . In other words, we neously adding the vertex potentials φ set ḡ z̄  := g ′ + θb b := z + φ.  (35)  Clearly, ḡ is a χα′ -ﬂow, as desired. It thus only remains to ensure that the solutions (ḡ , z̄ ) are still well-coupled. To analyze the coupling of (ḡ , z̄ ) one should note ﬁrst that the procedure we used to obtain b) these solutions from the solutions (g ′ , z ) is analogous to the one we used obtain the solutions (fb , y from the solutions (f , y ) in our augmentation step. More precisely, the update (35) is an exact analogue of the update (14) with δ = 1. So, to quantify the change in coupling we can follow the approach we used when analyzing the augmentation step. Speciﬁcally, let us deﬁne a congestion vector ρe as ρbe :=  θbe , u be (g ′ )  26  for each arc e. By Lemma 3.3, we know that b ≤ Erb (−θ), e 22 ≤ Erb (θ) kρk  where the second inequality follows by the energy minimizing property of electrical ﬂows. (Note that −θ is a (−b σ )-ﬂow.) We thus have that, by (34),  X X 1 1 2 2 rbe (−θe ) = Erb (−θ) = + ′ 2 + − ′ 2 θe (b u (g )) (b u (g )) e e e e X  51ςe 2 21 X 1 2 2 , (ςe u be (g )) ≤ 2 ≤ kςk22 ≤ ≤ ′ 2 u be (g ) 50 20 2000 e e where the ﬁrst inequality follows by (32). As a result, we can conclude that e 22 ≤ Erb (−θ) ≤ kρk  1 , 2000  (36)  which ensures, in particular, that our analogue of condition (17) (for δ = 1) is satisﬁed. b -coupled with Consequently, we can use Lemma 3.5 to conclude that the solutions (ḡ , z̄ ) is γ v u s  2 X uX 4 204 7 1 4 2 2 t e 22 ≤ γ ee + 7b ρe γ k2 + 7kρk + < , ≤ ke γ be ≤ kb γ k2 = 3 3 75000 2000 100 e e  where we used the estimates (33) and (36). So, (ḡ , z̄ ) is well-coupled, as desired.  A.4  Proof of Lemma 3.8  2m Let us assume that χT y ≤ (1−α) . Otherwise, by Lemma 3.1, we have a dual certiﬁcate that the target demand χ cannot be routed in G, i.e., the condition (b) triggers. As all the preconditioning arcs have s and t as their endpoints and are oriented from s to t, we have that χT y 2m ∆e (y ) = yt − ys = ≤ , (37) F (1 − α)F  for each such arc e. Also, all these preconditioning arcs are completely indistinguishable from the point of view of our algorithm. They have the same endpoints, orientation, and initial (residual) capacities and stretch. Consequently, their resistances are always equal when we compute our electrical ﬂows (see, e.g., (13)) and thus, in turn, their forward and backward residual capacities evolve in exactly the same way during each of the augmentation and ﬁxing steps (see Section 3.2). We want to argue that, for each such arc e, u be (f ) ≥  (1 − α)F . 5m  (38)  bf of the residual As the residual capacity u be (f ) is exactly the capacity of e in the symmetrization G graph Gf , and preconditioning arc constitute exactly half of all the m arcs, a ﬂow f ′ that just routes (1−α)F bf , and units of ﬂow from s to t on each such arc will be the desired χ (1−α) -ﬂow feasible in G 5m 10  our proof will follow.  27  To establish (38), let us ﬁx some representative preconditioning arc e and assume for the sake of contradiction that (38) does not hold. Since the total preconditioning arc capacity constitutes at least 23 -fraction of the total s-t capacity F ∗ of the graph G, we must have that − u+ e = ue ≥  2 2 ∗ 4F ∗ · F = , m 3 3m  (39)  − where u+ e and ue are the initial capacities of the preconditioning arcs. As a result, if (38) did not hold, by (3), we know that − |fe | ≥ max{u+ b+ b− e −u e (f ), ue − u e (f )} ≥  5 ∗ F + αF 4F ∗ (1 − α)F 2F ∗ − ≥ 2 > , 3m 5m 3m 3m  where we used the fact that F ≤ 23 F ∗ as otherwise we would be able to immediately tell that it is impossible to route at least 32 -fraction of the s-t ﬂow only via preconditioning arcs. In fact, we also know that fe > 0. This is so, as e is oriented from s to t and thus having ∗ fe < 0 would mean that there is a ﬂow of strictly more than F3 from t towards s over all the preconditioning arcs. It would, however, be impossible to balance this “backward” t-s ﬂow via an ∗ s-t ﬂow over the remaining arcs as they can support an s-t ﬂow of at most F3 . So, indeed fe > 0. Furthermore, if (38) would indeed not hold then fe > 0, (3) and (39) would imply that u b+ be (f ) < e =u  (1 − α)F F∗ 1 1 − u b− (f ) ≤ ≤ u− ue (f ) − fe ) ≤ e , e = (b 3m 2m 2 2 2  where we again used the fact that F ≤ 32 F ∗ . Now, combining the above bound with the fact that (f , y ) is well-coupled (11), we can conclude that, for any preconditioning arc e, γe 1 (1 − γe ) 1 1 γe = + ≥ − − − − u be (f ) be (f ) u be (f ) 2b ue (f ) u be (f ) u be (f ) u 2 5m(1 − √m ) (1 − 2γe ) 2m ≥ > , 2b ue (f ) 2(1 − α)F (1 − α)F  ∆e (y ) ≥ Φe (f ) − =  where we again used the assumption that (38) does not hold as well as the fact that γe ≤ √1m since otherwise the contribution of all the m 2 preconditioning arcs to the ℓ2 -norm of the violation vector γ alone would make this norm violate the well-coupling bound. However, the above lower bound on ∆e (y ) directly violates our bound (37). So, we reached a contradiction that proves (38) and thus our lemma follows.  A.5  Proof of Lemma 4.4  By examining the augmentation and ﬁxing steps that are performed during the progress steps (cf. (14) and (35) in the proof of Lemma 3.6) and applying standard Taylor approximations to the resulting changes in the resistances r (cf. (13)), one obtains that, for each arc e, the resulting arc resistance re′ change is such that re′ ≤ (1 + O(δ|ρe | + κe ))−1 re , 28  (40)  where ρ is the congestion vector (16), δ = (33kρk3 )−1 is the step size, and κ is a vector such that kκk2 ≤ 1. (Roughly speaking, the δρe term corresponds to augmentation step and the κe term corresponds to the ﬁxing step.) Now, let φe be the vertex potentials inducing the electrical χ-ﬂow fe. By Lemma 2.2, we know that X (φev − φeu )2 1 = . Er (fe) re Er (fe )2 e=(u,v)  ′ ′ Furthermore, if Er ′ (fe ) is the energy of an electrical χ-ﬂow fe determined by the new resistances r ′ , applying Lemma 2.2 again, we obtain that  1 ′ Er ′ (fe )  X (φev − φeu )2 X (1 + O(δ|ρe | + κe )) (φev − φeu )2 ≤ re′ Er (fe )2 re Er (fe )2 e=(u,v) e=(u,v) !! X (δρe + κe )(re fe2 ) 1 e 1+O = e e Er (f ) Er (f ) e !! 3 X (δρ + κe ρ2 ) 1 e e ≤ 1+O , kρk22 Er (fe ) e ≤  where we used (40), Ohm’s law (5) and Lemmas 3.3 and 3.9. Finally, observe that since δ = (33kρk3 )−1 and kκk2 ≤ 1, an application of the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality gives us that X (δρ3e + κe ρ2e ) ≤ δkρk33 + kκk2 kρk24 ≤ δkρk33 + kκk2 kρk23 ≤ O(kρk23 ), e  as desired. The lemma thus follows.  References [1] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin. Network flows: theory, algorithms, and applications. Prentice-Hall, 1993. [2] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, J. B. Orlin, and M. R. Reddy. Applications of Network Optimization, volume 7 of Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science. North-Holland, 1995. [3] H. Alt, N. Blum, K. Mehlhorn, and p M. Paul. Computing a maximum cardinality matching in 1.5 m/ log n). Inf. Process. Lett., 37(4):237–240, 1991. a bipartite graph in time O(n [4] S. Arora, E. Hazan, and S. Kale. The multiplicative weights update method: a meta-algorithm and applications. Theory of Computing, 8(1):121–164, 2012. [5] B. Bollobas. Modern Graph Theory. Springer, 1998. [6] J. R. Bunch and J. E. Hopcroft. Triangular factorization and inversion by fast matrix multiplication. Mathematics of Computation, 28(125):231–236, 1974. 29  [7] P. Christiano, J. Kelner, A. Mądry, D. Spielman, and S.-H. Teng. Electrical ﬂows, Laplacian systems, and faster approximation of maximum ﬂow in undirected graphs. In STOC’11: Proceedings of the 43rd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 273–281, 2011. [8] M. B. Cohen, R. Kyng, G. L. Miller, J. W. Pachocki, R. Peng, A. B. Rao, and S. C. Xu. Solving SDD linear systems in nearly m log1/2 n time. In STOC’14: Proceedings of the 46th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 343–352, 2014. [9] D. Coppersmith and S. Winograd. Matrix multiplication via arithmetic progressions. Journal of Symbolic Computation, 9:251–280, 1990. [10] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein. Introduction to Algorithms. The MIT Press, 3rd edition, 2009. [11] J. Edmonds. Paths, trees, and ﬂowers. Canadian Journal of Mathematics, 17:449–467, 1965. [12] J. Edmonds and R. M. Karp. Theoretical improvements in algorithmic eﬃciency for network ﬂow problems. Journal of the ACM, 19(2):248–264, 1972. [13] J. Egerváry. Matrixok kombinatorius tulajdonságairól. Matematikai és Fizikai Lapok, 38:16–28, 1931. [14] P. Elias, A. Feinstein, and C. E. Shannon. A note on the maximum ﬂow through a network. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 2, 1956. [15] S. Even and R. E. Tarjan. Network ﬂow and testing graph connectivity. SIAM Journal on Computing, 4(4):507–518, 1975. [16] T. Feder and R. Motwani. Clique partitions, graph compression and speeding-up algorithms. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 51(2):261Ű–272, 1995. [17] L. R. Ford and D. R. Fulkerson. Maximal ﬂow through a network. Canadian Journal of Mathematics, 8:399–404, 1956. [18] F. G. Frobenius. Über matrizen aus nicht negativen elementen. Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, pages 456–477, 1912. [19] F. G. Frobenius. Über zerlegbare determinanten. Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, pages 274–277, 1917. [20] H. N. Gabow and R. E. Tarjan. Faster scaling algorithms for general graph matching problems. Journal of the ACM, 38(4):815–853, 1991. [21] A. V. Goldberg and A. V. Karzanov. Maximum skew-symmetric ﬂows and matchings. Mathematical Programming, 100(3):537–568, 2004. [22] A. V. Goldberg and S. Rao. Beyond the ﬂow decomposition barrier. Journal of the ACM, 45(5):783–797, 1998. [23] N. J. A. Harvey. Algebraic algorithms for matching and matroid problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 39(2):679–702, 2009. 30  [24] J. Hopcroft and R. Karp. An n5/2 algorithm for maximum matchings in bipartite graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing, 2(4):225–231, 1973. [25] A. V. Karzanov. O nakhozhdenii maksimal’nogo potoka v setyakh spetsial’nogo vida i nekotorykh prilozheniyakh. Matematicheskie Voprosy Upravleniya Proizvodstvom, 5:81–94, 1973. (in Russian; title translation: On ﬁnding maximum ﬂows in networks with special structure and some applications). [26] J. A. Kelner, Y. T. Lee, L. Orecchia, and A. Sidford. An almost-linear-time algorithm for approximate max ﬂow in undirected graphs, and its multicommodity generalizations. In SODA’14: Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 217–226, 2014. [27] J. A. Kelner, L. Orecchia, A. Sidford, and Z. A. Zhu. A simple, combinatorial algorithm for solving SDD systems in nearly-linear time. In STOC’13: Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 911–920, 2013. [28] V. King, S. Rao, and R. Tarjan. A faster deterministic maximum ﬂow algorithm. Journal of Algorithms, 17(3):447–474, 1994. [29] D. König. Vonalrendszerek és determinánsok. Mathematikai és Természettudományi Értesitö, 33:221–229, 1915. [30] D. König. Über graphen und ihre anwendung auf determinantentheorie und mengenlehre. Mathematische Annalen, 77:453–465, 1916. [31] D. König. Sur un probléme de la théorie générale des ensembles et la théorie des graphes. Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale, 30:443–449, 1923. [32] D. König. Graphok és matrixok. Matematikai és Fizikai Lapok, 38:116–119, 1931. [33] I. Koutis, G. L. Miller, and R. Peng. Approaching optimality for solving SDD systems. In FOCS’10: Proceedings of the 51st Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 235–244, 2010. [34] I. Koutis, G. L. Miller, and R. Peng. A nearly m log n-time solver for SDD linear systems. In FOCS’11: Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 590–598, 2011. [35] R. Kyng, Y. T. Lee, R. Peng, S. Sachdeva, and D. A. Spielman. Sparsiﬁed cholesky and multigrid solvers for connection laplacians. In STOC’16: Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2016. [36] R. Kyng and S. Sachdeva. Approximate Gaussian elimination for Laplacians: Fast, sparse, and simple. In FOCS’16: Proceedings of the 57th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 2016. [37] Y. T. Lee, S. Rao, and N. Srivastava. A new approach to computing maximum ﬂows using electrical ﬂows. In STOC’13: Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 755–764, 2013. 31  [38] Y. T. Lee and √ A. Sidford. Path ﬁnding methods for linear programming: Solving linear programs in Õ( rank) iterations and faster algorithms for maximum ﬂows. In FOCS’14: Proceedings of the 55th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 424–433, 2014. [39] L. Lovász. On determinants, matchings and random algorithms. Fundamentals of Computation Theory, 565–574, 1979. [40] L. Lovász and D. M. Plummer. Matching Theory. Elsevier Science, 1986. [41] A. Mądry. Fast approximation algorithms for cut-based problems in undirected graphs. In FOCS’10: Proceedings of the 51st Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 245–254, 2010. [42] A. Mądry. From Graphs to Matrices, and Back: New Techniques for Graph Algorithms. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2011. [43] A. Mądry. Navigating central path with electrical ﬂows: from ﬂows to matchings, and back. In FOCS’13: Proceedings of the 54th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 253–262, 2013. p [44] S. Micali and V. V. Vazirani. An O( |V | · |E|) algoithm for ﬁnding maximum matching in general graphs. In FOCS’80: Proceedings of the 21st Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 17–27, 1980. [45] M. Mucha. Finding maximum matchings via Gaussian elimination. PhD thesis, University of Warsaw, 2005. [46] M. Mucha and P. Sankowski. Maximum matchings via Gaussian elimination. In FOCS’04: Proceedings of the 45th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 248–255, 2004. [47] J. B. Orlin. Max ﬂows in O(nm) time, or better. In STOC’13: Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 765–774, 2013. [48] R. Peng. Approximate undirected maximum ﬂows in O(mpolylog(n)) time. In SODA’16: Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1862– 1867, 2016. [49] M. O. Rabin and V. V. Vazirani. Maximum matchings in general graphs through randomization. J. Algorithms, 10(4):557–567, Dec. 1989. [50] A. Schrijver. On the history of the transportation and maximum ﬂow problems. Mathematical Programming, 91:437–445, 2002. [51] A. Schrijver. Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efficiency. Springer, 2003. [52] A. Schrijver. On the history of combinatorial optimization (till 1960). In R. W. K. Aardal, G.L. Nemhauser, editor, Handbook of Discrete Optimization, pages 1–68. Elsevier, 2005.  32  √ [53] J. Sherman. Breaking the multicommodity ﬂow barrier for O( log n)-approximations to sparsest cuts. In FOCS’09: Proceedings of the 50th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 363–372, 2009. [54] J. Sherman. Nearly maximum ﬂows in nearly linear time. In FOCS’13: Proceedings of the 54th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 263–269, 2013. [55] D. A. Spielman and S.-H. Teng. Solving sparse, symmetric, diagonally-dominant linear systems in time O(m1.31 ). In FOCS’03: Proceedings of the 44th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 416–427, 2003. [56] D. A. Spielman and S.-H. Teng. Nearly-linear time algorithms for graph partitioning, graph sparsiﬁcation, and solving linear systems. In STOC’04: Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 81–90, 2004. [57] W. T. Tutte. The factorization of linear graphs. Journal of the London Mathematical Society, 22:107–111, 1947. [58] P. M. Vaidya. Solving linear equations with symmetric diagonally dominant matrices by constructing good preconditioners. Unpublished manuscript, UIUC 1990. A talk based on the manuscript was presented at the IMA Workshop on Graph Theory and Sparse Matrix Computation, October 1991, Mineapolis. [59] V. Vassilevska Williams. Multiplying matrices faster than Coppersmith-Winograd. In STOC’12: Proceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 887–898, 2012. [60] V. p V. Vazirani. A theory of alternating paths and blossoms for proving correctness of the O( |V ||E|) general graph matching algorithms. Combinatorica, 14 (1):71–109, 1994.  33

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
