Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_2427

Abstract:
AD in Fortran Part 1: Design  arXiv:1203.1448v2 [cs.PL] 8 Mar 2012  Alexey Radul, Barak A. Pearlmutter, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind  Abstract We propose extensions to F ORTRAN which integrate forward and reverse Automatic Differentiation (AD) directly into the programming model. Irrespective of implementation technology, embedding AD constructs directly into the language extends the reach and convenience of AD while allowing abstraction of concepts of interest to scientific-computing practice, such as root finding, optimization, and finding equilibria of continuous games. Multiple different subprograms for these tasks can share common interfaces, regardless of whether and how they use AD internally. A programmer can maximize a function F by calling a library maximizer, XSTAR=ARGMAX(F, X0), which internally constructs derivatives of F by AD, without having to learn how to use any particular AD tool. We illustrate the utility of these extensions by example: programs become much more concise and closer to traditional mathematical notation. A companion paper describes how these extensions can be implemented by a program that generates input to existing F ORTRANbased AD tools. Key words: Nesting, multiple transformation, forward mode, reverse mode, TAPE NADE , A DIFOR, programming-language design  1 Introduction The invention of F ORTRAN was a major advance for numeric computing, allowing Alexey Radul Hamilton Institute, National University of Ireland Maynooth, Ireland, alexy.radul@nuim.ie Barak A. Pearlmutter Department and Computer Science and Hamilton Institute, National University of Ireland Maynooth, Ireland, barak@cs.nuim.ie Jeffrey Mark Siskind Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, IN, USA, qobi@purdue.edu  1  2  Alexey Radul, Barak A. Pearlmutter, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind  g(x; α , β ) =  β α α −1 −β x e x Γ (α )  ✞to be transcribed into a natural but unambiguous notation FUNCTION G(X,ALPHA,BETA) G=BETA**ALPHA/GAMMA(ALPHA)*X**(ALPHA-1)*EXP(-BETA*X) END  which could be automatically translated into an executable program. However, transcribing xi+1 = xi − f (xi )/ f ′ (xi ) ✞to F ORTRAN in FUNCTION RAPHSN(F, FPRIME, X0, N) EXTERNAL F, FPRIME X = X0 DO 1690 I=1,N 1690 X = X-F(X)/FPRIME(X) RAPHSN = X END  requires that the caller provide both F and FPRIME. Manually coding the latter from the former is, in most cases, a mechanical process, but tedious and error prone. This problem has traditionally been addressed by arranging for an AD preprocessor to produce FPRIME (Speelpenning, 1980; Wengert, 1964). That breakthrough technology not only relieves the programmer of the burden of mechanical coding of derivative-calculation codes, it also allows the derivative code to be updated automatically, ensuring consistency and correctness. However, this caller derives discipline has several practical difficulties. First, the user must learn how to use the AD preprocessor, which constitutes a surprisingly serious barrier to adoption. Second, it makes it very difficult to experiment with the use of different sorts of derivatives (e.g., adding a Hessian-vector product step in an optimization) in such called subprograms, or to experiment with different AD preprocessors. Third, although preprocessors might be able to process code which has already been processed in order to implement nested derivatives, the maneuvers required by current tools can be somewhat arcane (Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2008a). Fourth, software engineering principles of locality and atomicity are being violated: knowledge of what derivatives are needed is distributed in a number of locations which must be kept consistent; and redundant information, which must also be kept consistent, is being passed, often down a long call chain. We attempt to solve these problems, making the use of AD more concise, convenient, and intuitive to the scientific programmer, while keeping to the spirit of F ORTRAN. This is done using the Forward And Reverse Fortran Extension Language or FARFEL, a small set of extensions to F ORTRAN, in concert with an implementation strategy which leverages existing F ORTRAN compilers and AD preprocessors (Bischof et al., 1992; Hascoët and Pascual, 2004). The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes FARFEL. Section 3 describes a concrete example FARFEL program to both motivate and illuminate the proposed extensions. Section 4 situates this work in its broader context.  AD in Fortran: Design  3  Section 5 summarizes this work’s contributions. A companion paper (Radul et al., 2012) describes how FARFEL can be implemented by generating input to existing AD tools.  2 Language Extensions FARFEL consists of two principal extensions to F ORTRAN: syntax for AD and for nested subprograms. We currently support only F ORTRAN77, but there is no barrier, in principle, to adding FARFEL to more recent dialects. Extension 1: AD Syntax Traditional mathematical notation allows one to specify  φ′ =  d  1 1  x − x̄ 2  √ exp − dσ 2 σ 2πσ 2  ✞By analogy, we extend F ORTRAN to encode this as ADF(TANGENT(SIGMA) = 1) PHI = 1/SQRT(2*PI*SIGMA**2)*EXP(-0.5*((X-XBAR)/SIGMA)**2) END ADF(PHIPRM = TANGENT(PHI))  which computes the derivative PHIPRM of PHI with respect to SIGMA by forward AD. For syntactic details see companion paper (Radul et al., 2012). An analogous FARFEL construct supports computing the same derivative with reverse AD: ✞ ADR(COTANGENT(PHI) = 1) PHI = 1/SQRT(2*PI*SIGMA**2)*EXP(-0.5*((X-XBAR)/SIGMA)**2) END ADR(PHIPRM = COTANGENT(SIGMA))  Note that with the ADR construct, the dependent variable appears at the beginning of the block and the independent variable at the end—the variables and assignments in the opening and closing statements specify the desired inputs to and outputs from the reverse phase, whereas the statements inside the block give the forward phase. These constructs allow not just convenient expression of AD, but also modularity and encapsulation of code which employs AD. For instance, we can write a general ✞scalar-derivative subprogram DERIV1 at user level FUNCTION DERIV1(F, X) EXTERNAL F ADF(X) Y = F(X) END ADF(DERIV1 = TANGENT(Y)) END  ✞which could be used in, for example, FUNCTION PHI(SIGMA) PHI = 1/SQRT(2*PI*SIGMA**2)*EXP(-0.5*((X-XBAR)/SIGMA)**2) END  4  Alexey Radul, Barak A. Pearlmutter, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind PHIPRM = DERIV1(PHI, SIGMA)  ✞DERIV1 can be changed to use reverse AD without changing its API: FUNCTION DERIV1(F, X) EXTERNAL F ADR(Y) Y = F(X) END ADR(DERIV1 = COTANGENT(X)) END  allowing codes written with DERIV1 to readily switch between using forward and reverse AD. To take a more elaborate example, we can write a general gradient calculation GRAD using repeated forward AD: ✞ SUBROUTINE GRAD(F, X, N, DX) EXTERNAL F DO 1492 I=1,N ADF(TANGENT(X(J)) = 1-MIN0(IABS(I-J),1), J=1,N) Y = F(X) 1492 END ADF(DX(I) = TANGENT(Y)) END  (Note that the ADF and ADR constructs support implied-DO syntax for arrays.) ✞ This can be modified to instead use reverse AD without changing the API: SUBROUTINE GRAD(F, X, N, DX) EXTERNAL F ADR(Y) Y = F(X) END ADR(DX(I) = COTANGENT(X(I)), I=1,N) END  Although not intended to support checkpoint-reverse AD, our constructs are suffi✞ciently powerful to express a reverse checkpoint: C  CHECKPOINT REVERSE F->G. BOTH 1ST ARG IN, 2ND ARG OUT CALL F(X, Y) ADR(COTANGENT(Z(I)) = . . ., I=1,NZ) CALL G(Y, Z) END ADR(DY(I) = COTANGENT(Y(I)), I=1,NY) ADR(COTANGENT(Y(I)) = DY(I), I=1,NY) CALL F(X, Y) END ADR(DX(I) = COTANGENT(X(I)), I=1,NX)  This sort of encapsulation empowers numeric programmers to conveniently experiment with the choice of differentiation method, or with the use of various sorts of derivatives, including higher-order derivatives, without tedious modification of lengthy call chains. Extension 2: Nested Subprograms We borrow from A LGOL 60 (Backus et al., 1963) and generalize the F ORTRAN “statement function” construct by allowing subprograms to be defined inside other subprograms, with lexical scope. For example, given a univariate maximizer ARGMAX, we can express the idea of line search as follows:  AD in Fortran: Design  5  ✞ C  MAXIMIZE F ALONG THE LINE PARALLEL TO XDIR THROUGH X SUBROUTINE LINMAX(F, X, XDIR, LENX, N, XOUT) EXTERNAL F DIMENSION Y(50) FUNCTION ALINE(DIST) DO 2012 I=1,LENX 2012 Y(I) = X(I)+DIST*XDIR(I) ALINE = F(Y) END BESTD = ARGMAX(ALINE, 0.0, N) DO 2013 I=1,LENX 2013 XOUT(I) = X(I)+BESTD*XDIR(I) END  Here we are using a library univariate maximizer to maximize the univariate function ALINE, which maps the distance along the given direction to the value of our multidimensional function of interest F at that point. Note that ALINE refers to variables defined in its enclosing scope, namely F, X, XDIR, LENX, and Y. Note that if ARGMAX uses derivative information, AD will be performed automatically on ALINE.  3 Concrete Example We employ a concrete example to show the convenience of the above constructs. We will also illustrate the implementation on this example in (Radul et al., 2012). Let two companies, Apple and Banana, be engaged in competition in a common fashion accessories market. Each chooses a quantity of their respective good to produce, and sells all produced units at a price determined by consumer demand. Let us model the goods as being distinct, but partial substitutes, so that availability of products of A decreases demand for products of B and vice versa (though perhaps not the same amount). We model both companies as having market power, so the price each gets will depend on both their own output and their competitor’s. Each company faces (different) production costs and seeks to maximize its profit, so we can model this situation as a two player game. Let us further assume that the quantities involved are large enough that discretization effects can be disregarded. An equilibrium (a∗ , b∗ ) of a two-player game with continuous scalar strategies a and b and payoff functions A(a, b) and B(a, b) must satisfy a system of equations: a∗ = argmax A(a, b∗ )  b∗ = argmax B(a∗ , b)  a  (1)  b  Equilibria can be sought by finding roots of a∗ = argmax A(a, argmax B(a∗ , b)) a  (2)  b  which is the technique we shall employ.1 Translated into computer code in the most natural way, solving this equation involves a call to an optimization subprogram within the function passed to an optimization subprogram, itself within the function  6  Alexey Radul, Barak A. Pearlmutter, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind  passed to a root-finding subprogram. If said optimization and root-finding subprograms need derivative information, this gives rise to deeply nested AD. Note that in (2), the payoff function B is bivariate but argmax takes a univariate (in the variable of maximization) objective function. The a∗ variable passed to B is free in the innermost argmax expression. Free variables occur naturally in mathematical notation, and we support them by allowing nested subprogram definitions. ✞ We can use our extensions to code finding the roots of (2) in a natural style: C  ASTAR & BSTAR: GUESSES IN, OPTIMIZED VALUES OUT SUBROUTINE EQLBRM(BIGA, BIGB, ASTAR, BSTAR, N) EXTERNAL BIGA, BIGB FUNCTION F(ASTAR) FUNCTION G(A) FUNCTION H(B) H = BIGB(ASTAR, B) END BSTAR = ARGMAX(H, BSTAR, N) G = BIGA(A, BSTAR) END F = ARGMAX(G, ASTAR, N)-ASTAR END ASTAR = ROOT(F, ASTAR, N) END  where we implement just the minimal cores of one-dimensional optimization and ✞root finding to illustrate the essential point — root finding by the Rhapson method: FUNCTION ROOT(F, X0, N) X = X0 DO 1669 I=1,N CALL DERIV2(F, X, Y, YPRIME) 1669 X = X-Y/YPRIME ROOT = X END  ✞ SUBROUTINE DERIV2(F, X, Y, YPRIME) EXTERNAL F ADF(X) Y = F(X) END ADF(YPRIME = TANGENT(Y)) END  ✞and optimization by finding the root of the derivative: FUNCTION ARGMAX(F, X0, N) FUNCTION FPRIME(X) FPRIME = DERIV1(F, X) END ARGMAX = ROOT(FPRIME, X0, N) END  1  The existence or uniqueness of an equilibrium is not in general guaranteed, but our particular A and B have a unique equilibrium. Coordinate descent (alternating optimization of a∗ and b∗ ) would require less nesting, but has inferior convergence properties. Although this example involves AD through iterative processes, we do not address that issue in this work: it is beyond the scope of this paper, and used here only in a benign fashion, for vividness.  AD in Fortran: Design  7  On our concrete objective functions these converge rapidly, so for clarity we skip the clutter of convergence detection. This strategy impels us to compute derivatives nested five deep, in a more complicated pattern than just a fifth-order derivative of a single function. This undertaking is nontrivial with current AD tools (Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2008a), but becomes straightforward with the proposed extensions—embedded AD syntax and nested subprograms make it straightforward to code sophisticated methods that require complex patterns of derivative information.  4 Discussion The FARFEL AD extensions hew to the spirit of F ORTRAN, which tends to prefer blocks rather than higher-order operators for semantic constructs. (In this, these extensions are syntactically quite similar to a set of AD extensions integrated with the NAGware F ORTRAN 95 compiler (Naumann and Riehme, 2005), albeit quite different semantically. Unfortunately those NAGware extensions are no longer publicly available, and the limited available documentation is insufficient to allow a detailed comparison.) A reasonably straightforward implementation technology involves changing transformed blocks into subprograms that capture their lexical variable context and closure-converting these into top-level subprograms, rendering them amenable to processing with existing tools (Radul et al., 2012). Since the machinery for nested subprograms is present, allowing them imposes little additional implementation effort. Moreover, as seen in the example above, that extension makes code that involves heavy use of higher-order functions, which is encouraged by the availability of the AD constructs, more straightforward. In this sense AD blocks and nested subprograms interact synergistically. These new constructs are quite expressive, but this very expressiveness can tax many implementations, which might not support some combinations or usages. For instance, code which makes resolution of the AD at compile time impossible (an n-th derivative subprogram, say) would be impossible to support without a dynamic run-time AD mechanism. This would typically not be available. Another common restriction would be that many tools do not support reverse mode at all and even those that do typically do not allow nesting over reverse mode, either reverse-overreverse or forward-over-reverse. It is the responsibility of the implementation to reject such programs with a cogent error. The FARFEL extensions are implemented by the FARFALLEN preprocessor (Radul et al., 2012), which generates input for and invokes existing AD tools. This leverages existing AD systems to provide the differentiation functionality in a uniform and integrated way, extending the reach of AD by making its use easier, more natural, and more widely applicable. Such a prepreprocessor can target different AD systems (like A DIFOR (Bischof et al., 1992) and TAPENADE (Hascoët and Pascual, 2004)), allowing easy porting of code from one AD system to another. It could even mix AD systems, for example  8  Alexey Radul, Barak A. Pearlmutter, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind  using TAPENADE to reverse-transform code generated by using A DIFOR in forward mode, capturing their respective advantages for the application at hand. The effort of implementing such retargetings and mixings could then be factored to one developer (of the prepreprocessor) instead of many end users of AD. A more important benefit of extending F ORTRAN with AD syntax and nested subprograms is that a host of notions become reusable abstractions—not just firstorder derivatives, but also their variations, combinations, and uses, e.g., Jacobians, Hessians, Hessian-vector products, filters, edge detectors, Fourier transforms, convolutions, Hamiltonians, optimizations, integration, differential-equation solvers. The interfaces to different methods for these tasks can be made much more uniform because, as our ARGMAX did, they can accept subprograms that just accept the variables of interest (in this case, the argument of maximization) and take any needed side information from their lexical scope; and subprograms such as ARGMAX can obtain any derivative information they wish from AD without having to demand it be passed in as arguments. So different maximization methods can be tried out on the same objective function with ease, regardless of how much derivative information they require; and at the same time, different objective functions, that carry different side information, can be maximized by the same maximization subprogram without having to adjust it to transmit the needed side information. Essentially, derivatives are requested where they are needed, and the implementation does the necessary bookkeeping. These modularity benefits are illustrated by our example program: the FARFEL input is only 64 lines of code, whereas the amount of code it expands into, which is comparable to what would need to be written by hand without these extensions, weighs in at a much more substantial 160 for TAPENADE and 315 for A DIFOR, including the configuration data needed to run the AD preprocessors to produce the needed derivatives. Manually performing the 5 nested applications of AD this example calls for is a tedious, error prone, multi-hour effort, which must be undertaken separately for each preprocessor one wishes to try.2 Existing AD tools do already save the major labor of manually implementing derivative and gradient subprograms, and keeping them in sync with the subprograms being differentiated. The further preprocessing step outlined above leverages these tools into being even more useful. For larger programs, the savings of implementation and maintenance effort would be considerable. The present suggestion is not, of course, limited to F ORTRAN. Nested subprograms have gained wide adoption in programming-language designs from A L GOL 60 and beyond, and have yielded proven gains in programmer productivity. Their advantages for code expressiveness have led to functions with lexical scope being used as a mathematical formalism for reasoning about computing (Church, 1941), to programming languages organized around the function as the primary program construct (Jones, 2003), and to compilers that specialize in the efficient representation and use of functions (Jones et al., 1993; Steele, 1978). 2  A detailed step-by-step discussion of the transformation of this example along with all intermediate code is available at http://www.bcl.hamilton.ie/˜ qobi/fortran/.  AD in Fortran: Design Fig. 1 Performance comparison. Smaller is faster. Numeric solution of (2) with above FARFEL code, N = 1000 iterations at each level, FARFALLEN targeting two F ORTRAN -based AD tools; for comparison, the same computation is coded in VLAD (Pearlmutter and Siskind, 2008) and compiled with S TALINGRAD (Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2008b). Computer: Intel i7 870 @ 2.93GHz, G FORTRAN 4.6.29, 64-bit Debian sid, -Ofast -fwhole-program, single precision. See (Radul et al., 2012) for details.  9  CPU Time (seconds) 10  8.92 6.97 5.83  5  0  TAPENADE  A DIFOR  S TALINGRAD  One can also add ADF- and ADR-like constructs to other languages that have preprocessor implementations of AD, for example, C and ADIC (Bischof et al., 1997). One would not even need to add nested subprograms in the preprocessor, because GCC already implements them for GNU C. Doing so would expand the convenience (and therefore reach) of existing AD technology even further. Retrofitting AD onto existing languages by preprocessing is not without its limitations, however. Efficient AD preprocessors must construct a call graph in order to determine which subprograms to transform, along with a variety of other tasks already performed by the compiler. Moreover, optimizing compilers cannot be relied upon to aggressively optimize intricate machine-generated code, as such code often exceeds heuristic cutoffs in various optimization transformations. This imposes a surprisingly serious limitation on AD preprocessors. (Together, these also imply a significant duplication of effort, while providing room for semantic disagreements between AD preprocessors and compilers which can lead to subtle bugs.) This leads us to anticipate considerable performance gains from designing an optimizing compiler with integrated AD. Indeed, translating our concrete example into VLAD (Pearlmutter and Siskind, 2008) and compiling with S TALINGRAD (Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2008b), our prototype AD-enabled compiler, justifies that suspicion (see Fig. 1). We therefore plan to make a VLAD back-end available in version 2 of FARFALLEN.  5 Conclusion We have defined and motivated extensions to F ORTRAN for convenient, modular programming using automatic differentiation. The extensions can be implemented  10  Alexey Radul, Barak A. Pearlmutter, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind  as a prepreprocessor (Radul et al., 2012). This strategy enables modular, flexible use of AD in the context of an existing legacy language and tool chain, without sacrificing the desirable performance characteristics of these tools: only about 20%– 50% slower than a dedicated AD-enabled compiler, depending on which F ORTRAN AD system is used. Acknowledgements This work was supported, in part, by Science Foundation Ireland grant 09/IN.1/I2637, National Science Foundation grant CCF-0438806, the Naval Research Laboratory under Contract Number N00173-10-1-G023, and the Army Research Laboratory accomplished under Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-10-2-0060. Any views, opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations contained or expressed in this document or material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect or represent the views or official policies, either expressed or implied, of SFI, NSF, NRL, the Office of Naval Research, ARL, or the Irish or U.S. Governments. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes, notwithstanding any copyright notation herein.  References J. W. Backus, F. L. Bauer, J. Green, C. Katz, J. McCarthy, P. Naur, A. J. Perlis, H. Rutishauser, K. Samelson, B. Vauquois, J. H. Wegstein, A. van Wijngaarden, and M. Woodger. Revised report on the algorithmic language ALGOL 60. The Computer Journal, 5(4):349–367, 1963. doi: 10.1093/comjnl/5.4.349. Christian H. Bischof, Alan Carle, George F. Corliss, Andreas Griewank, and Paul D. Hovland. ADIFOR: Generating derivative codes from Fortran programs. Scientific Programming, 1(1):11–29, 1992. Christian H. Bischof, Lucas Roh, and Andrew Mauer. ADIC — An extensible automatic differentiation tool for ANSI-C. Software–Practice and Experience, 27(12):1427–1456, 1997. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-024X(199712) 27:12h1427::AID-SPE138i3.0.CO;2-Q. URL http://www-fp.mcs.anl. gov/division/software. Alonzo Church. The Calculi of Lambda Conversion. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1941. Laurent Hascoët and Valérie Pascual. TAPENADE 2.1 user’s guide. Rapport technique 300, INRIA, Sophia Antipolis, 2004. URL http://www.inria.fr/ rrrt/rt-0300.html. Simon Peyton Jones. Haskell 98 language and libraries: the revised report. Journal of Functional Programming, 13(1), January 2003. S.L.P. Jones, C. Hall, K. Hammond, W. Partain, and P. Wadler. The Glasgow Haskell compiler: a technical overview. In Proc. UK Joint Framework for Information Technology (JFIT) Technical Conference, volume 93, 1993. Uwe Naumann and Jan Riehme. Computing adjoints with the NAGWare Fortran 95 compiler. In H. M. Bücker, G. Corliss, P. Hovland, U. Naumann, and B. Norris, editors, Automatic Differentiation: Applications, Theory, and Implementations,  AD in Fortran: Design  11  volume 50 of Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, pages 159–169. Springer, New York, NY, 2005. doi: 10.1007/3-540-28438-9 14. Barak A. Pearlmutter and Jeffrey Mark Siskind. Using programming language theory to make automatic differentiation sound and efficient. In Christian H. Bischof, H. Martin Bücker, Paul D. Hovland, Uwe Naumann, and J. Utke, editors, Advances in Automatic Differentiation, volume 64 of Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, pages 79–90. Springer, Berlin, 2008. ISBN 978-3-540-68935-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-68942-3 8. Alexey Radul, Barak A. Pearlmutter, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind. AD in Fortran, Part 2: Implementation via prepreprocessor. In Advances in Automatic Differentiation, Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, Berlin, 2012. Springer. To appear. Also arXiv technical report http://arxiv.org/abs/ 1203.1450. Jeffrey Mark Siskind and Barak A. Pearlmutter. Putting the automatic back into AD: Part I, What’s wrong. Technical Report TR-ECE-08-02, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, jan 2008a. URL http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/ecetr/368. Jeffrey Mark Siskind and Barak A. Pearlmutter. Using polyvariant union-free flow analysis to compile a higher-order functional-programming language with a firstclass derivative operator to efficient Fortran-like code. Technical Report TRECE-08-01, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, jan 2008b. URL http://docs.lib.purdue. edu/ecetr/367. B. Speelpenning. Compiling Fast Partial Derivatives of Functions Given by Algorithms. PhD thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, IL, January 1980. Guy Lewis Steele, Jr. RABBIT, a compiler for Scheme. Technical Report TR474, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, May 1978. R. Wengert. A simple automatic derivative evaluation program. Communications of the ACM, 7(8):463–464, 1964.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
