Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_2609

Abstract:
Copyright ©2018 IEEE  Accepted to 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging  UNSUPERVISED DISCOVERY OF TOXOPLASMA GONDII MOTILITY PHENOTYPES Mojtaba S. Fazli1 , Stephen A. Vella2 , Silvia N.J. Moreno2 , Shannon Quinn1 1  Department of Computer Science, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA  arXiv:1801.02591v2 [cs.CV] 11 Jan 2018  2  Department of Cellular Biology, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA  ABSTRACT Toxoplasma gondii is a parasitic protozoan that causes disseminated toxoplasmosis, a disease that afflicts roughly a third of the worlds population. Its virulence is predicated on its motility and ability to enter and exit nucleated cells; therefore, studies elucidating its mechanism of motility and in particular, its motility patterns in the context of its lytic cycle, are critical to the eventual development of therapeutic strategies. Here, we present an end-to-end computational pipeline for identifying T. gondii motility phenotypes in a completely unsupervised, data-driven way. We track the parasites before and after addition of extracellular Ca2+ to study its effects on the parasite motility patterns and use this information to parameterize the motion and group it according to similarity of spatiotemporal dynamics.  We linked fluctuations of fluorescence (cytosolic Ca2+ concentration) to motility patterns. Using our algorithm, we extracted and quantified motility tracks, parameterized the motion trajectories, and use spectral clustering to identify distinct motility phenotypes. In particular, we repeat this procedure for T. gondii parasites both before and after addition of extracellular Ca2+ , which results in Ca2+ influx and stimulation of motility [5]. This not only allows us to identify distinct T. gondii motility phenotypes in a completely unsupervised, data-driven way, but also enriches our knowledge of these phenotypes with respect to the conditions under which they manifest. Ideally, this work will help pave the way to understanding key differences in the biology of T. gondii and mammalian cells and the potential for future therapeutic drug discovery.  Index Terms— Toxoplasma gondii, computer vision, tracking, spectral clustering, autoregressive models  2. METHODS  1. INTRODUCTION Toxoplasma gondii is the causative agent of toxoplasmosis and is considered one of the most successful parasitic infections. Approximately 1/3 of the worlds population will test positive for T. gondii, a parasite capable of infecting any nucleated cell [1]. Though T. gondii infection is usually mild or asymptomatic within in healthy host, infections are life-long, and the immunocompromised such as AIDS patients, fetuses, and organ-transplant recipients are at risk of developing severe complications from the reactivation of dormant tissue cysts [1, 2, 3]. Ca2+ is a universal signaling molecule that regulates numerous cellular processes in both prokaryotes, unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes [4]. T. gondiis pathogenesis is directly linked to its lytic cycle, comprised of invasion, replication, egress, and motility, and progression forward is regulated through Ca2+ signaling [5]. Therefore, the motion of T. gondii is critical to understanding its lytic cycle and, ultimately, in developing potential therapies. Cytosolic Ca2+ oscillations in T. gondii precede activation/enhancement of each step of the lytic cycle [5], making these oscillations a critical avenue through which to analyze T. gondii pathogenesis. Here we present an unsupervised, data-driven pipeline for identifying T. gondii motility patterns in response to cytosolic Ca2+ . We used extracellular parasites that express in vivo a derivatized variant of the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP), GCaMP6f, whose fluorescence is directly proportional to Ca2+ concentration [6].  2.1. Data Acquisition T. gondii tachyzoites (RH) strain were maintained as described previously using Dulbeccos modified minimal essential media with 1% FBS. GCaMP6f is genetically encoded calcium indicator whose fluorescence is sensitive to cytosolic calcium concentration (Ca2+ ) and allows us to track Ca2+ dynamics in motile cells. Construction of GCaMP6f-expressing parasites was performed by cloning the coding sequence of GCaMP6f into a ptubP30GFP (a selection-less plasmid and a kind gift from Boris Striepen). Plasmids were electroporated into RH parasites and subcloned via cell sorting. Videos were acquired using an LSM 710 confocal microscope on 10% FBS (Fetal Bovine Serum) coated glass bottom cover dishes (MATTEK) [5]. Addition of 2M Thapsigargin and/or 1.8 mM CaCl2 was noted. Images were processed using the FIJI ImageJ software suite [7] and converted to z-stacks for processing in OpenCV. For our experiments, we select 10 videos with average number of 14 cells in each video. 2.2. Software We implemented our pipeline using Python 3 and associated scientific computing libraries (NumPy, SciPy, scikit-learn, matplotlib). The core of our tracking algorithm used a combination of tools available in the OpenCV 3.1 computer vision library. The full code for our pipeline is available under the MIT open source license at https://github.com/ quinngroup/toxoplasma-isbi2018 .  Accepted to 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging Copyright ©2018 IEEE 2.3.3. Parameterization of normalized KLT trajectories 2.3. Computational Pipeline 2.3.1. Tracking Algorithm We used a Kanade-Lucas-Tomasi (KLT) tracker to develop trajectories for T. gondii parasites. KLT is an optical flow approach which uses spatial intensities to conduct a focused search of high-probability object locations in the future [8][9][10]. It is fast, requiring few matches between sequential images. Here, we identify features extracted from objects in each frame and process them through the KLT module to be tracked over the entire video. The resulting tracker has been shown to be robust in our previous work (Fig. 1) [11].  Performing unsupervised discovery of T. gondii motility phenotypes required featurizing the trajectories of each object in such a way as to be invariant to the absolute spatial locations, but sensitive to relative changes over time. Therefore, we used a simple linear model that encodes a Markov-based transition prediction method: an autoregressive (AR) model. AR models are a type of stochastic process, used heavily in modeling linear systems and predicting future observations as a function of some number of previous ones; in this way, it implements the Markov assumption, in which future observations are independent of all others, conditioned on some number of immediate preceding observations. The number of prior observations used to make future predictions is referred to as the order of the system, and follows as: p X xt = Aj xt−j + C (1) j  Fig. 1. (left) Object tracking results using KLT. (right) 3D visualization of a specific cells trajectory. Hue shows the fluorescence of the object, corresponding to Ca2+ concentration. 2.3.2. Preprocessing and normalization of KLT trajectories KLT trajectories for each parasite object comprised a twodimensional position vector for each frame. In order to standardize these data to be used in downstream analysis, we employed numerous preprocessing steps. First, we discarded any trajectories below a certain minimum number of frames. This happened if the KLT tracker lost an object (e.g., due to occlusion, movement outside plane of focus). Second, we split the trajectories of each object into two sets, capturing the object trajectory before and after the addition of extracellular Ca2+ , to be analyzed distinctly. Third, for each trajectory in the two sets, we truncated the number of frames to be equivalent across all objects. After applying these preprocessing steps, we ended with a corpus containing 139 trajectories, each capturing the twodimensional movement of distinct T. gondii parasites. Each trajectory consisted of 300 frames, half before and half after the addition of extracellular Ca2+ . Our data were represented in the following structures, X and Y (representing x and y coordinates of each object in each frame, respectively):   x(0,0) . . . x(0,149)   .. .. X(139,150) =  ...  . . x(138,0)  ...  y(138,149)  y(0,0)  .. = . y(138,0)  ... .. . ...   y(0,149)  ..  . y(138,149)    Y(139,150)  where Eq. 1 denotes a p-order system [12]. In our work, we are interested in the transition matrices {A1, ..., Ap}, which are quantitative encodings of how the system evolves, and therefore represents a parameterization of the system that is not sensitive to absolute spatial positions. In our work, we found a system of order p = 5 worked well, whereby each 139x150x2 object was represented as five 2x2 AR motion parameters:{A1, A2, A3, A4, A5}. These parameters were flattened and concatenated into a single 20-element feature vector, and this operation was repeated for each of the 139 objects. 2.3.4. Establishing pairwise motion similarity The AR motion parameters are powerful quantitative representations of movement that are invariant to absolute spatial coordinates. Unfortunately, they are geodesics that do not span a Euclidean space [13], and therefore are not amenable to more traditional unsupervised pattern-recognition strategies such as K-means that rely on Euclidean-based pairwise distance metrics. Instead, we constructed several custom kernel matrices to capture pairwise similarity, with the goal of using these matrices as graph embeddings to use in spectral clustering. To compute a pairwise similarity (kernel) matrix, we stacked the AR parameters learned from the before and after sequences of T. gondii motility to form two matrices:   ARb(0,0) . . . ARb(0,19)   .. .. .. ARBef ore(139,20) =   . . . ARb(138,0)  ...  ARa(0,0)  .. = . ARa(138,0)  ... .. . ...    ARAf ter(139,20)  ARb(138,19)  ARa(0,19)  ..  . ARa(138,19)  We then computed pairwise affinities, or similarities, using the radial-basis function (RBF) or Gaussian kernel. This kernel matrix A has the form:  Accepted to 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging Copyright ©2018 IEEE clustering results. The left column indicates trajectories from before the addition of cytosolic Ca2+ , and the right column of Aij = Aji = e−γ||xi −xj || after Ca2+ addition. Each subfigure is a single object, illuswhere γ is a free parameter that designates the width of the trated by a line showing the extent of its movement over the Gaussian kernel. Unfortunately, heat kernels are very sen150-frame duration of the segment. sitive to the choice of gamma, so the value was chosen by First, we observe that object trajectories are significantly empirical cross-validation, and selected =0.1 (Fig. 2). Other richer and more dynamic after the addition of cytosolic Ca2+ kernels were also tested, including trajectory-based kernels than before; we saw this in Fig. 1 (right), and is wellsuch as spatial covariance [14], angle covariance (using disunderstood that since Ca2+ regulates the T. gondii lytic cycle, placement angles instead of position vectors), and Pearson we can expect more activity when those concentrations are covariance matrices [15]. However, these did not yield lowhigh [4, 5]. Second, and most relevant to the goal of this dimensional embeddings of sufficient rank to be useful in work, is that we can observe qualitatively unmistakable simspectral clustering. ilarity of trajectory dynamics, especially in the after-Ca2+ clusters. Most of the before-Ca2+ trajectories are largely 2.3.5. Spectral clustering to identify similar motility phenoimmotile (Fig. 3, bottom left), but there are clusters that show types similar motion motifs, including full or partial circles (Fig. 3, Clustering methods are a natural choice for unsupervised upper left). The after-Ca2+ clusters show similar groupings learning; they typically impose few assumptions on the data, of motifs: a clear partial-twirl, sometimes combined with a defining only a notion of similarity with which to group data straight trajectory (Fig. 3, lower right), or seemingly rantogether. K-means is a favorite for its speed and simplicdom motion with a long outward arc (Fig. 3, upper right). ity; unfortunately, in our case, the drawbacks of K-means Particularly when viewed in context (Fig. 4), we can clearly make it an impractical option. For one, K-means assumes Euclidean data; AR motion parameters are geodesics that do not live in a Euclidean space. For two, K-means assumes isotropic clusters; it is possible that AR motion parameters exhibit isotropy in their space, but without a proper distance metric this cannot be explicitly tested. For these reasons, we chose spectral clustering. Spectral clustering operates on the spectrum of the underlying graph of the data [16], imposed through a similarity computation using a pairwise kernel. Using this affinity kernel, a graph Laplacian is computed, and its principal eigenvectors are used to embed the original data in a low-dimensional space where they are separable by simpler clustering strategies such as K-means. While this requires a full diagonalization of the Laplacian and can therefore pose a computational bottleneck with large data, our 139 trajectories is sufficiently small for to be solved by out-of-the-box spectral clustering implementations, such as scikit-learn [17] Fig. 3. Clustering results of trajectories before (left column) and after (right column) addition of cytosolic Ca2+ . Two sample clusters are shown in each column. Subplots are aligned to center for easy viewing.  Fig. 2. RBF kernels from AR motion parameters using gamma = 0.1, from AR motion parameters computed before (left) and after (right) addition of cytosolic Ca2+ . 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Using established heuristics from previous work on the T. gondii parasite and its lytic cycle [5, 11], we chose k = 5 clusters for our analysis. Figure 3 shows a summary of the  identify several distinct T. gondii motility phenotypes such as helical, twirling, and circularthat are identified through manual heuristics [1-5]. There are limitations to this approach. First, while the RBF kernel encodes nonlinear relationships, it still relies on a Euclidean-style pairwise comparison. Second, despite the empirical performance of AR parameters in encoding twodimensional spatial movement, this is not an ideal application of this technique; it is likely that the relative simplicity of T. gondii motility patterns, and the small number of motion motifs, are responsible for the relatively good empirical per-  Accepted to 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging Copyright ©2018 IEEE [3] Jeffrey L Jones, Monica E Parise, and Anthony E Fiore, “Neformance. Third, the combination of small quantity of data glected parasitic infections in the united states: toxoplasmoand low-resolution temporal models precludes a deeper exsis,” The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene, ploration of the manifold of T. gondii motility phenotypes. vol. 90, no. 5, pp. 794–799, 2014. Nevertheless, the results strongly suggest such a manifold ex[4] David E Clapham, “Calcium signaling,” Cell, vol. 80, no. 2, ists, and could be elucidated in future work. pp. 259–268, 1995.  Fig. 4. Aggregated plotting of trajectories before (A) and after (B) addition of cytosolic Ca2+ . Each object is colored by its cluster identifier, and placed according to its original absolute spatial location. Here, some trajectories(straight lines mostly in part B) are artifacts and were excluded from the final clustering results. 4. CONCLUSION In this work, we have demonstrated a computational pipeline for tracking, extracting, parameterizing, and clustering motion trajectories of T. gondii parasites in an initial effort to elucidate discrete patterns in the parasites lytic cycle. This is a first step toward a mechanistic understanding of the parasites virulence as a function of its motility patterns. We have also demonstrated the application of a linear time series (AR) model to the parameterization of two-dimensional spatial motility, and its effectiveness in clustering for recognizing gross motion patterns. Given the relatively short tracks of the T. gondii objects, we felt AR models (i.e., a linear model) would be sufficient to parameterize motion. This technique could be applied pretty much as-is to any trajectory analysis of discrete objects. In the future, we anticipate refining the elements of this pipeline to extract finer-grained motility patterns. Specifically, we anticipate deep learning to be the next evolution of this pipeline: using segmentation and tracking tools such as Faster RCNN to track the objects, and parameterizing the motility sequences using recurrent neural networks instead of linear systems. 5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge Zhu Hong Li for construction of the GCaMP6f non-selectable strain. This work was supported in part by AWS in Education Grant Award. We acknowledge partial support from the NSF Advances in Biological Informatics (ABI) under award number 1458766.The Toxoplasma work was funded by the National Institutes of Health (AI110027 and AI-096836 to SNJM). 6. REFERENCES [1] Geita Saadatnia and Majid Golkar, “A review on human toxoplasmosis,” Scandinavian journal of infectious diseases, vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 805–814, 2012. [2] Francis Derouin and H Pelloux, “Prevention of toxoplasmosis in transplant patients,” Clinical Microbiology and Infection, vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 1089–1101, 2008.  [5] Lucas Borges-Pereira, Alexandre Budu, Ciara A McKnight, Christina A Moore, Stephen A Vella, Miryam A Hortua Triana, Jing Liu, Celia RS Garcia, Douglas A Pace, and Silvia NJ Moreno, “Calcium signaling throughout the toxoplasma gondii lytic cycle a study using genetically encoded calcium indicators,” Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 290, no. 45, pp. 26914–26926, 2015. [6] Tsai-Wen Chen, Trevor J Wardill, Yi Sun, Stefan R Pulver, Sabine L Renninger, Amy Baohan, Eric R Schreiter, Rex A Kerr, Michael B Orger, Vivek Jayaraman, et al., “Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity,” Nature, vol. 499, no. 7458, pp. 295–300, 2013. [7] Johannes Schindelin, Ignacio Arganda-Carreras, Erwin Frise, Verena Kaynig, Mark Longair, Tobias Pietzsch, Stephan Preibisch, Curtis Rueden, Stephan Saalfeld, Benjamin Schmid, et al., “Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis,” Nature methods, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 676–682, 2012. [8] Bruce D Lucas, Takeo Kanade, et al., “An iterative image registration technique with an application to stereo vision,” 1981. [9] Carlo Tomasi and Takeo Kanade, “Detection and tracking of point features,” 1991. [10] Jianbo Shi et al., “Good features to track,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1994. Proceedings CVPR’94., 1994 IEEE Computer Society Conference on. IEEE, 1994, pp. 593– 600. [11] Mojtaba Sedigh Fazli, Stephen Andrew Vella, Silvia NJ Moreno, and Shannon Quinn, “Computational motility tracking of calcium dynamics in toxoplasma gondii,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.01871, 2017. [12] P. BOURKE, “Auto-regression analysis (ar),” http://local.wasp.uwa.edu.au/pbourkke/other/ar/, 1998. [13] Franco Woolfe and Andrew Fitzgibbon, “Shift-invariant dynamic texture recognition,” Computer Vision–ECCV 2006, pp. 549–562, 2006. [14] Andrew Gordon Wilson, “Covariance kernels for fast automatic pattern discovery and extrapolation with gaussian processes,” University of Cambridge, 2014. [15] Bruce Weaver and Karl L Wuensch, “Spss and sas programs for comparing pearson correlations and ols regression coefficients,” Behavior Research Methods, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 880– 895, 2013. [16] Ulrike Von Luxburg, “A tutorial on spectral clustering,” Statistics and computing, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 395–416, 2007. [17] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, no. Oct, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
