Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_2940

Abstract:
arXiv:1612.00198v2 [math.GR] 7 Jul 2017  Pro-p subgroups of profinite completions of 3-manifold groups Henry Wilton∗ and Pavel Zalesskii† July 10, 2017  Abstract We completely describe the finitely generated pro-p subgroups of the profinite completion of the fundamental group of an arbitrary 3manifold. We also prove a pro-p analogue of the main theorem of Bass–Serre theory for finitely generated pro-p groups.  1  Introduction  In recent years there has been a great deal of interest in detecting properties of the fundamental group π1 M of a 3-manifold via its finite quotients, or more conceptually by its profinite completion. This motivates the study of the profinite completion π[ 1 M of the fundamental group of a 3-manifold. As in the case of finite groups, there is a Sylow theory for profinite groups, and pro-p subgroups play the same central role in profinite group theory that p-subgroups play in the theory of finite groups. Note that pro-p subgroups of π[ 1 M are infinitely generated in general, so it is natural to begin the study from the finitely generated case. Amazingly enough, it is possible to give a complete description of the finitely generated pro-p subgroups of the profinite completions of all 3-manifold groups, and this is one of the objectives of this paper (see Theorem 1.3 below). ∗  Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge, CB3 0WB, United Kingdom † Department of Mathematics, University of Brası́lia, 70910-9000 Brası́lia, Brazil  1  The work of this paper was partially motivated by [WZ17, Theorem F], where it was proved that if M is hyperbolic then any finitely generated prop subgroup of π[ 1 M is free. In fact the proof of Theorem 1.3 follows the same strategy as in [WZ17]. By applying first the (profinite) Kneser–Milnor decomposition and then the (profinite) JSJ decomposition, the theorem is reduced to the cases of Seifert-fibred and hyperbolic manifolds, possibly with cusps. The main difficulty at this point is provided by hyperbolic manifolds with cusps. In the closed case the result was proved in [WZ17]. In this case (after passing to a finite-sheeted cover) there is a suitable hierarchy in which the corresponding actions on profinite trees are relatively profinitely acylindrical. However, we have to deal with cusps. At this point we make heavy use of the profinite analogue of Bass–Serre theory for groups acting on trees. Note that this theory does not have the full strength of its classical original. The main theorem of Bass–Serre theory asserts that a group G acting on a tree T is the fundamental group of a graph of groups (G, T /G, D), where D is a maximal subtree of T /G and G consists of edge and vertex stabilizers of a connected transversal of T /G. This does not hold in the profinite case: firstly D does not always exist and secondly even if it exists it might not lift to T . In this paper we prove a pro-p analogue of the main theorem of Bass– Serre theory for finitely generated pro-p groups, that stands independently as a contribution to the combinatorial theory of pro-p groups. Theorem 1.1. Let G be a finitely generated pro-p group acting on a pro-p tree T . Then G is the fundamental pro-p group of a profinite graph of pro-p groups (G, Γ). Moreover, the vertex and edge groups of (G, Γ) are stabilizers of certain vertices and edges of T respectively, and stabilizers of vertices and edges of T in G are conjugate to subgroups of vertex and edge groups of (G, Γ) respectively. We observe that (G, Γ) in this theorem is not (G, T /G) as in classical Bass–Serre theory. To construct the graph of pro-p groups (G, Γ) we use a decomposition of G as an inverse limit G = limU GU of finitely generated ←− virtually free pro-p groups GU , and their splittings as the fundamental groups of finite graphs of finite p-groups obtained in [HZ13]. We then apply this theorem to describe the finitely generated pro-p subgroups of the profinite completion of the fundamental group of a cusped hyperbolic 3-manifold. 2  Theorem 1.2. Let π1 M be the fundamental group of an orientable hyperbolic 3-manifold with cusps and H a finitely generated pro-p subgroup of π b1 M. Then H is a free pro-p product of free abelian pro-p groups of rank ≤ 2.  [ Analysing π 1 M for Thurston’s geometries case-by-case, we obtain the [ classification of finitely generated pro-p subgroups of π 1 M for an arbitrary compact, orientable 3-manifold. Theorem 1.3. A finitely generated pro-p subgroup of the profinite completion π[ 1 M of the fundamental group π1 M of a compact, orientable 3-manifold M is a free pro-p product of the pro-p groups from the following lists of isomorphism types. (i) For p > 3: Cp ; Zp ; Zp ×Zp ; the pro-p completion of (Z×Z)⋊Z; and the pro-p completion of a residually-p fundamental group of a non-compact Seifert fibred manifold with hyperbolic base orbifold; (ii) For p = 3, in addition to the list of (i) of possible free factors we have a torsion-free extension of Z3 × Z3 × Z3 by C3 . (iii) For p = 2, in addition to the list in (i) we have the following free factors: (1) the cyclic groups C2m ; (2) the dihedral groups D2k ; (3) the generalized quaternion groups Q2n ; (4) the infinite dihedral pro-2 group Z2 ⋊ C2 ; (5) the torsion-free extensions of Z2 × Z2 × Z2 by one of the following finite 2-groups: C2 , C4 , C8 , D2 , D4 , D8 , Q16 ; (6) the pro-2 extension of the Klein-bottle group Z ⋊ Z; (7) the pro-2 completion of all torsion free extensions of a soluble group (Z ⋊ Z) ⋊ Z with a group of order at most 2. We note that, because the finitely generated pro-p subgroups of profinite completions of 3-manifold groups are so restricted, they are not very useful for distinguishing 3-manifolds from each other. However, for the same reason, they are potentially useful for distinguishing the profinite completions of 3manifold groups from the profinite completions of other discrete groups. 3  Acknowledgements The first author was supported by the EPSRC and the second author by Capes. Much of the work for this paper was completed while the second author was a visiting fellow at Trinity College, Cambridge, and he acknowledges their hospitality. Thanks are also due to the anonymous referee for pointing out a mistake in the first version of this paper.  2  Preliminaries  In this section, we recall the necessary elements of the theory of profinite trees. A graph Γ is a disjoint union E(Γ)∪V (Γ) with two maps d0 , d1 : Γ → V (Γ) that are the identity on the set of vertices V (Γ). For an element e of the set of edges E(Γ), d0 (e) is called the initial and d1 (e) the terminal vertex of e. Definition 2.1. A profinite graph Γ is a graph such that: 1. Γ is a profinite space (i.e. an inverse limit of finite discrete spaces); 2. V (Γ) is closed; and 3. the maps d0 and d1 are continuous. Note that E(Γ) is not necessary closed. A morphism α : Γ −→ ∆ of profinite graphs is a continuous map with αdi = di α for i = 0, 1. By [ZM88, Prop. 1.7] every profinite graph Γ is an inverse limit of finite quotient graphs of Γ. For a profinite space X that is the inverse limit of finite discrete spaces b b j ], where [ZX b j ] is the free Z-module b Xj , [[ZX]] is the inverse limit of [ZX with basis Xj . For a pointed profinite space (X, ∗) that is the inverse limit b of pointed finite discrete spaces (Xj , ∗), [[Z(X, ∗)]] is the inverse limit of b b b [Z(Xj , ∗)], where [Z(Xj , ∗)] is the free Z-module with basis Xj \ {∗} [RZ10, Chapter 5.2]. For a profinite graph Γ, define the pointed space (E ∗ (Γ), ∗) as Γ/V (Γ), with the image of V (Γ) as a distinguished point ∗, and denote the image of  4  e ∈ E(Γ) by ē. By definition a profinite tree Γ is a profinite graph with a short exact sequence δ ǫ b b ∗ (Γ), ∗)]] → b (Γ)]] → 0 → [[Z(E [[ZV Z→0  where δ(ē) = d1 (e)−d0 (e) for every e ∈ E(Γ) and ǫ(v) = 1 for every v ∈ V (Γ). If v and w are elements of a profinite tree T , we denote by [v, w] the smallest profinite subtree of T containing v and w and call it a geodesic. A profinite graph is called a pro-p tree if one has the following exact sequence: δ  ǫ  0 → [[Fp (E ∗ (Γ), ∗)]] → [[Fp V (Γ)]] → Fp → 0 where δ(ē) = d1 (e)−d0 (e) for every e ∈ E(Γ) and ǫ(v) = 1 for every v ∈ V (Γ). Note that any profinite tree is a pro-p tree, but the converse is not true. In fact, a connected profinite graph is a profinite tree if and only if it is a pro-p tree for every prime p. By definition, a profinite group G acts on a profinite graph Γ if we have a continuous action of G on the profinite space Γ that commutes with the maps d0 and d1 . When we say that G is a finite graph of profinite groups, we mean that it contains the data of the underlying finite graph, the edge profinite groups, the vertex profinite groups and the attaching continuous maps. More precisely, let ∆ be a connected finite graph. The data of a graph of profinite groups (G, ∆) over ∆ consists of a profinite group G(m) for each m ∈ ∆, and continuous monomorphisms ∂i : G(e) −→ G(di (e)) for each edge e ∈ E(∆). A finite graph of groups (G, Γ) is said to be reduced, if for every edge e which is not a loop neither ∂1 : G(e) → G(d1 (e)) nor ∂0 : G(e) → G(d0 (e)) is an isomorphism; we call an edge e which is not a loop and such that one of the edge maps ∂i is an isomorphism fictitious. Any finite graph of groups can be transformed into a reduced finite graph of groups by collapsing fictitious edges using the following procedure. If e is a fictitious edge, we can remove {e} from the edge set of Γ, and identify d0 (e) and d1 (e) to a new vertex y. Let Γ′ be the finite graph given by V (Γ′ ) = {y} ⊔ V (Γ) \ {d0 (e), d1 (e)} and E(Γ′ ) = E(Γ)\{e}, and let (G′ , Γ′ ) denote the finite graph of groups based on Γ′ given by G′ (y) = G(d1 (e)) if ∂0 (e) is an isomorphism, and G′ (y) = G(d0 (e)) if ∂0 is not an isomorphism. This procedure can be continued until there are no fictitious edges. The resulting finite graph of groups (G, Γ) is reduced. 5  Remark 2.2. The reduction procedure just described does not change the fundamental group (as a group given by presentation), i.e. choosing a maximal subtree to contain the collapsing edge the morphism (G, Γ) −→ (G′ , Γ′ ) induces the identity map on the fundamental group given by presentation by eliminating redundant relations associated with fictitious edges that are just collapsed by reduction. The definition of the profinite fundamental group of a connected profinite graph of profinite groups is quite involved (see [ZM89]). However, the profinite fundamental group Π1 (G, Γ) of a finite graph of finitely generated profinite groups (G, Γ) can be defined as the profinite completion of the abstract (usual) fundamental group Πabs 1 (G, Γ) (we use here that every subgroup of finite index in a finitely generated profinite group is open [NS07, Theorem 1.1 ]). The fundamental profinite group Π1 (G, Γ) has the following presentation: Π1 (G, Γ) = hG(v), te | rel(G(v)), ∂1 (g) = ∂0 (g)te , g ∈ G(e), te = 1 for e ∈ T i;  (1)  here T is a maximal subtree of Γ and ∂0 : G(e) −→ G(d0 (e)), ∂1 : G(e) −→ G(d1 (e)) are monomorphisms. In contrast to the abstract case, the vertex groups of (G, Γ) do not always embed in Π1 (G, Γ), i.e., Π1 (G, Γ) is not always proper. However, the edge and vertex groups can be replaced by their images in Π1 (G, Γ) and after this replacement Π1 (G, Γ) becomes proper. Thus from now on we shall assume that Π1 (G, Γ) is always proper, unless otherwise stated. To obtain the definition of the fundamental pro-p group of a finite graph of finitely generated pro-p groups one simply replaces ‘profinite’ by ‘pro-p’ in the above definition. The profinite (resp. pro-p) fundamental group Π1 (G, Γ) acts on the standard profinite (resp. pro-p) tree S (defined analogously to the abstract one) associated to it, with vertex and edge stabilizers being conjugates of vertex and edge groups, and such that S/Π1 (G, Γ) = Γ [ZM88, Proposition 3.8]. Example 2.3. If G = π1 (G, Γ) is the fundamental group of a finite graph of (abstract) groups then one has the induced graph of profinite completions b Γ) (not necessarily proper) and a natural hoof edge and vertex groups (G, b Γ). It is an embedding if π1 (G, Γ) is momorphism G = π1 (G, Γ) −→ Π1 (G, b is simply the profinite completion. residually finite. In this case Π1 (G, Γ) = G 6  b if and only if the Moreover, the standard tree S(G) naturally embeds in S(G) edge and vertex groups G(e), G(v) are separable in π1 (G, Γ), or equivalently G(e) are closed in G(d0 (e)), G(d1 (v)) with respect to the topology induced by the profinite topology on G [CB13, Proposition 2.5]. In particular, this is the case if vertex and edge groups are finitely generated and G is subgroup separable. In what follows, the notion of the fundamental pro-p group of an infinite profinite graph of pro-p groups is used only in Theorem 3.1, and in fact only in the form of the inverse limit of fundamental groups of finite graphs of finite p-groups. We state this as a proposition that the reader can use as a definition. We need to define first a profinite graph of profinite groups. The definition is different from, but equivalent to, the one given in [ZM89]1 . Definition 2.4. An inverse limit of finite graphs of finite groups is called a profinite graph of profinite groups. Proposition 2.5. An inverse limit (G, Γ) = limi (Gi , Γi ) of finite graphs of ←− profinite (resp. pro-p) groups induces an inverse limit of the fundamental profinite (resp. pro-p) groups limi Π1 (Gi , Γi ) and Π1 (G, Γ) = limi Π1 (Gi , Γi ). ←− ←− Proof. One uses Definition 9 (a) in [Ser77] with a base vertex (rather than a maximal subtree). Then by [Bas93, Proposition 2.4 ] a morphism of graphs of groups induces a homomorphism of fundamental groups, that in turn induces a homomorphism of profinite completions. So choosing a base vertex v0 in Γ and considering its image voi in Γi to be the base point in Γi , we have an inverse system {Π1 (Gi , Γi )}. The proof of Π1 (G, Γ) = limi Π1 (Gi , Γi ) is just a ←− straightforward verification of the universal property from [ZM89, 2.1].  3  Finitely generated pro-p groups acting on profinite trees  We now prove Theorem 1.1. Theorem 3.1. Let G be a finitely generated pro-p group acting on a pro-p tree T . Then G is the fundamental pro-p group of a profinite graph of pro-p groups (G, Γ). Moreover, the vertex and edge groups of (G, Γ) are stabilizers 1  The equivalence is an easy argument which we leave as an exercise to the reader.  7  of certain vertices and edges of T respectively, and stabilizers of vertices and edges of T in G are conjugate to subgroups of vertex and edge groups of (G, Γ) respectively. Proof. For every open normal subgroup U of G consider Ũ , a subgroup generated by all intersections with vertex stabilizers. Then by Proposition 3.5 and Corollary 3.6 of [RZ00], the quotient group U/Ũ acts freely on the pro-p tree T /Ũ and therefore it is free pro-p. Thus GU := G/Ũ is virtually free pro-p. By [HZ13, Theorem 1.1] it follows that GU is the fundamental pro-p group Π1 (GU , ΓU ) of a finite graph of finite p-groups with cyclic edge stabilizers. By Remark 2.2 we have a morphism of graphs of groups η : (GU , ΓU ) −→ (GU , ΓU ) to a reduced graph of groups. By [WZar, Corollary 3.3] the number of reduced graphs of groups (GU , ΓU ) that can be obtained from (GU , ΓU ) is finite. Let ΩU be the set of such reduced graphs of groups. Since G is finitely generated we can choose a linearly ordered system B of open normal subgroups U that form a basis of neighbourhoods of 1. By [RZ14, Proposition 1.10] (see also its proof), for V ⊆ U both in B with G/Ṽ written as the fundamental pro-p group G/Ṽ = Π1 (GV , ΓV ) of a reduced graph of p-groups, one has a natural decomposition of G/Ũ as the pro-p fundamental group G/Ũ = Π1 (GV,U , ΓV ) of a finite graph of finite pgroups (GV,U , ΓV ), where the vertex and edge groups are GV,U (x) = G(x)Ũ /Ũ , x ∈ V (ΓV )⊔E(ΓV ). Thus we have a morphism νV,U : (GV , ΓV ) −→ (GV,U , ΓV ) of graphs of groups such that the induced homomorphism on the pro-p fundamental groups coincides with the canonical projection ϕV,U : G/Ṽ −→ G/Ũ . Choose a reduction morphism ηU : (GV,U , ΓV ) −→ (GV,U , ΓU ) to a reduced graph of groups (GV,U , ΓU ) (it is not unique); it induces the identity map on the fundamental group G/Ũ (see Remark 2.2) and so ηU νV,U induces the homomorphism Π1 (GV , ΓV ) −→ Π1 (GV,U , ΓU ) on the pro-p fundamental groups that coincides with the canonical projection ϕU V : G/Ṽ −→ G/Ũ. Observe that the morphisms νV,U and therefore ηU νV,U restricted on the second variable is just the collapse of fictitious edges. Thus, for V ⊆ U, one has a map ωV,U : ΩV → ΩU . Since B is linearly ordered this yields an inverse system (otherwise it would have not, since the reduction morphism is not unique). Hence Ω = limU ΩU is non-empty. Let (GU , ΓU ) ∈ Ω. Then (G, Γ) given ←− by (G, Γ) = lim(GU , ΓU ), is a profinite graph of pro-p groups satisfying G ≃ ←− Π1 (G, Γ) (cf. Proposition 2.5).  8  Corollary 3.2. Suppose the graphs ΓU in the proof of Theorem 3.1 are bounded independently of U. Then Γ is finite and so G is the fundamental group of a finite graph of pro-p groups (G, Γ). It is not known whether Γ can be made finite in Theorem 3.1. In the abstract case it comes automatically. One could achieve it if one could bound the size of a reduced finite graph of finite p-groups in terms of the minimal number of generators of its pro-p fundamental group. In the case of cyclic edge groups this is possible. Corollary 3.3. Let G be a finitely generated pro-p group acting on a pro-p tree T with cyclic edge stabilizers. Then G is the fundamental pro-p group of a finite graph of pro-p groups (G, Γ). Moreover, the vertex and edge groups of (G, Γ) are stabilizers of certain vertices and edges of T respectively, and stabilizers of vertices and edges of T in G are conjugate to subgroups of vertex and edge groups of (G, Γ) respectively. Proof. By [SZ14, Lemma 2.2] in the case of cyclic edge stabilizers the size of ΓU from the proof of Theorem 3.1 is bounded independently of U, so the result follows from Corollary 3.2. b on a profinite (or pro-p) Definition 3.4. The action of a profinite group Γ tree T is said to be k-acylindrical, for k a constant, if the set of fixed points of γ has diameter at most k whenever γ 6= 1. Proposition 3.5. Let G be a finitely generated pro-p group acting k-acylindrically and virtually freely on a pro-p tree. Then G is a free pro-p product of finite p-groups and a free pro-p group. Proof. Let F be an open subgroup of G acting freely on T . By [RZ00, Corollary 3.6] F is free pro-p. By [HZ08, Theorem 1] a virtually free pro-p group whose torsion elements have finite centralizers satisfies the conclusion of the proposition. So we just need to show that torsion elements have finite centralizers. Let g be a torsion element of G and let T g be the subtree of fixed points (see [ZM88, Theorem 2.8]. Then CG (g) acts on T g . Since the action is virtually free |CG (g)| = ∞ would imply |T g | = ∞ contradicting the hypothesis. Hence CG (g) is finite. This finishes the proof. Remark 3.6. The proposition is valid for second countable pro-p groups. One just needs to replace the reference [HZ08] in the proof with [MZ17]. 9  For a normal subgroup U of a profinite group G acting on a profinite tree T we denote by Ũ the subgroup of U generated by all vertex stabilizers. Clearly Ũ is normal in G and by [ZM88, Prop. 2.5] T /Ũ is a profinite tree. Lemma 3.7. Let G be a pro-p group acting k-acylindrically on a profinite tree T and U a closed normal subgroup of G. Then the action of GU = G/Ũ on TU = T /Ũ is k-acylindrical. Proof. First note that a nontrivial stabilizer of any edge e coincides with one of its vertex stabilizers Gv or Gw , say Gw , since otherwise by [WZ17, Lemma 11.2] the stabilizers of two vertices of e do not generate a pro-p group. It follows that a maximal connected subgraph D of T having nontrivial stabilizers in G of all its edges has diameter at most k. We shall prove that the same is true in GU ; we use the subscript U for images in T /Ũ . Consider 1 6= gU ∈ GU that stabilizes a vertex in TU . It suffices to show that a maximal connected subgraph containing vU such that all edge stabilizers of it are non-trivial is contained in DU . Let eU be an edge not in DU having a vertex wU ∈ DU . Let g ∈ G, stabilizing a vertex v ∈ T , be such that g Ũ/Ũ = gU , and choose D with v ∈ D. Let w be a vertex of D whose image in TU is wU . Then Gw 6= {1} and there exists an edge e incident to w whose image in TU is eU . But Ge is trivial and so (GU )eU is trivial. Thus all edges not in DU with vertices in DU have trivial stabilizers in GU , as required. Proposition 3.5 and Lemma 3.7 enable us to generalize [WZ17, Theorem 11.1] from the 1-acylindrical case to the k-acylindrical case, for any natural number k. Theorem 3.8. Let G be a finitely generated pro-p group acting k-acylindrically on a profinite tree T . Then G is a free pro-p product of vertex stabilizers and a free pro-p group. Proof. Since G is finitely generated, its Frattini series Φn (G) is a fundamen^ n (G) be the subgroup of Φn (G) tal system of neighbourhoods of 1. Let Φ ^ n (G) generated be all vertex stabilizers of Φn (G). By Lemma 3.7, Gn = G/Φ ^ n (G) and so by Proposition acts k-acylindrically on a profinite tree Tn = T /Φ 3.5 is a free pro-p product ! a ^ n (G) = Gn = G/Φ Gnv ∐ F0n , v  10  of finite p groups Gnv and a free group F0n in Gn . Since G = lim Gn and G is finitely generated, by choosing n large enough ←− we may assume that the number of free factors is the same for every m > n, i.e. v ranges over a finite set V . By [RZ00, Theorem 4.2] every finite subgroup of a free pro-p product is conjugate to a subgroup of a free factor. Therefore, the free factors of Gm+1 are mapped onto the free factors of Gm up to conjugation. But in a free pro-p product decomposition replacing any free factor by its conjugate does not change the group. So, starting from n, we can inductively choose Gm+1v in such a way that its image in Gm is Gmv .`Let Gv be the inverse limit of Gmv . Then by [RZ10, Lemma 9.1.5] G = v∈V Gv ∐ F0 . It remains to observe that Gmv is a stabilizer of a vertex in Tm so the set of fixed points T Gmv is non-empty and closed [RZ00, Theorem 3.7]. Therefore, Gv is the stabilizer of a non-empty set of vertices lim T Gvm . This finishes the ←− proof. We shall need these auxiliary lemmas in Section 4. Lemma 3.9. Let H be a pro-p group acting on a profinite tree T with compact non-empty set of edges having only finitely many maximal vertex stabilizers up to conjugation. Then H acts on a profinite tree D with non-empty set of edges such that, for every edge e of D, the edge stabilizer He fixes at least two edges in the original tree T . Proof. Let Hv1 , . . . Hvn be maximal stabilizers of vertices in T up to conjugation. Then the stabilizer Hm of any edge or vertex m ∈ T is contained in some of Hvi up to H-translation of m. So assuming Hm ≤ Hvi we see that Hm fixes the geodesic [m, vi ]. Since E(T ) is compact, Hm stabilizes an edge incident to vi whenever m 6= vi by [ZM88, Lemma 2.15]. So Snif m 6∈ star(vi ), the stabilizer Hm fixes at least two distinct edges. Now i=1 Hstar(vi ) is a profinite subgraph of T and, collapsing all its connected components in T , by the Proposition on page 486 of [Zal92], we get a profinite tree D on which H acts with edge stabilizers each stabilizing at least two distinct edges of S T (as was just explained). Finally note that the connected components of ni=1 Hstar(vi ) are stars, since the geodesic [gvi , hvj ] is infinite whenever gvi 6= hvj and g, h ∈ H. Indeed, otherwise choose a geodesic [gvi , hvj ] of minimal length with gvi 6= hvj for g, h ∈ H. To arrive at a contradiction we show that the group K generated by the stabilizers of gvi and hvj is not 11  pro-p. Note that B = K[gvi , hvj ] is a profinite tree with B/K finite. Since [gvi , hvj ] is minimal, the stabilizers of all internal vertices of the geodesic are equal to the stabilizers of their incident edges. Thus collapsing all but one edges of this geodesic and their K translates, we may assume that B/K has just one edge. Now we can apply [WZ17, Lemma 11.2 ] to deduce that K is not pro-p as required. Lemma 3.10. Let G be a profinite group acting on a profinite tree T with compact set of edges such that any non-trivial subgroup K of G stabilizing two edges e1 , e2 is at most procyclic. Let H be a finitely generated pro-p subgroup of G. Then H is the fundamental pro-p group Π1 (H, ∆) of a finite graph of finitely generated pro-p groups with edge groups that are stabilizers of some pairs of distinct edges of T . In particular, if the action of G on T is ` 1-acylindrical then H splits as a free pro-p product H = v∈V (∆) H(v) ∐ F , where F is a free pro-p group intersecting trivially all conjugates of vertex groups in H. Proof. First note that a nontrivial stabilizer of any edge e coincides with one of its vertex stabilizers Hv or Hw , say Hw , since otherwise by [WZ17, Lemma 11.2] the stabilizers of two vertices of e do not generate a pro-p group. This means that connected components of the abstract subgraph whose edges have non-cyclic H-stabilizers are at most edges. Now since H is finitely generated, its Frattini series Φn (H) is a fundan (H) be the subgroup of Φn (H) mental system of neighbourhoods of 1. Let Φ^ n (H) acts on a generated be all vertex stabilizers of Φn (H). Then Hn = H/Φ^ n (H) (cf. [ZM88, Proposition 2.5]) and Φn (H)/Φ ^ n (H) profinite tree Tn = T /Φ^ acts freely on Tn and therefore is free pro-p (see Theorem 2.6 [ZM88]). Note that the vertex and edge stabilizers of Hn acting on Tn are finite epimorphic images of the corresponding vertex and edge stabilizers of H acting on T and so the images in Tn of edges of T with trivial edge stabilizers have trivial stabilizers. Therefore, every abstract connected component Ωn of the subgraph of points of Tn with non-cyclic edge stabilizers in Hn is exactly the image of some abstract connected components Ω of the subgraph of points of T with non-procyclic H-stabilizers in T . Indeed, suppose on the contrary there exists an edge en ∈ Ωn not in the image of Ω but having a vertex vn in it. Let v be a vertex of Ω whose image in Tn is vn . Then Hv is not procyclic and there exists an edge e incident to v whose image in Tn is en . But e 6∈ Ω, so He is procyclic and therefore Hen is cyclic, contradicting the choice of en .  12  By [HZ08, Lemma 8], a virtually free pro-p group has only finitely many finite subgroups up to conjugation. This means that Tn has only finitely many edges en up to translation with (Hn )en that are not cyclic. Hence the union of them is a profinite subgraph of S and collapsing all its connected components in Tn , by the Proposition on page 486 in [Zal92] we get a profinite tree Dn on which Hn acts with cyclic edge stabilizers. Hence, by Corollary 3.3, Hn is the fundamental pro-p group of a finite graph of finite p-groups (Hn , Γn ) with cyclic edge groups, where the vertex and edge groups of (Hn , Γ) are stabilizers of certain vertices and edges of Dn respectively. Moreover, by collapsing edges that are not loops with a vertex group equal to the edge group we may assume that (Hn , Γ) is reduced (see Remark 2.2). Then by [SZ14, Lemma 2.2], the size of Γ is limited in terms of the minimal number of generators d(H) of H, i.e. is bounded independently of n. Therefore, by Corollary 3.2, H is the fundamental group Π1 (H, Γ) of a finite graph of pro-p groups with cyclic edge stabilizers whose vertex and edge groups are stabilizers of certain vertices and edges of T . In particular, it has only finitely many maximal stabilizers of vertices in T up to conjugation. Then we can apply Lemma 3.9 to deduce that H acts on a profinite tree D such that every edge stabilizer He , e ∈ D fixes at least two edges in T . Now applying Corollary 3.2 again we deduce that H is the fundamental group Π1 (H, ∆) of a finite graph of pro-p groups satisfying the statement of the lemma. Finite generation of the vertex groups H(v) follow easily from the presentation of Π1 (H, ∆), the finiteness of ∆, and the fact that the edge groups H(e) are procyclic. To show the last statement, observe that in the case of a 1-acylindrical action the edge groups H(e) of (H, ∆) are trivial (since each of them stabilizes a pair of distinct edges of T ), so the result follows from the presentation (1) of Π1 (H, ∆). We finish the section with two simple lemmas. Lemma 3.11. Let G = HNN(F (Y ∪ X), Ci , ti ), i = 1, . . . n be a pro-p HNN-extension of a free pro-p group F = F (Y ∪ X) on a finite set Y ∪ X ti such that ` each Ci and Ci are a conjugate of hyi in F for some y ∈ Y . Then G = y∈Y \Z (hyi × F (Ty )) ∐ F (Z ∪ X) is a free pro-p product, where Z is a subset of Y and Ty is a (possibly empty) subset of the set of stable letters t1 , . . . tn . Proof. We use induction on the cardinality of Y . If there exists ti such 13  that y1f1ti = y2f2 for some y1 6= y2 and f1 , f2 ∈ F then we can rewrite G as G = HNN(F (Y \ y2 ∪ (X ∪ f1 ti f2−1 ), Cj , tj ), j = 1, . . . i − 1, i + 1 . . . , n and the result follows from the inductive hypothesis. Thus we may assume that Cifi = Citi for some fi ∈ F for all i. Then replacing ti with ti fi−1 we may assume that ti centralizes Ci for every i. Moreover, conjugating Ci in F , we may assume that every Ci is generated by an element of Y . Now the result follows from the presentation G = HNN(F (Y ∪ X), Ci , ti ), i = 1, . . . n. Lemma 3.12. (i) Let H = H1 ∐H0 H2 be a pro-p free amalgamated product over a procyclic group H0 . Suppose CH (H0 ) is abelian of rank at most 2 and Hi = CH (H0 ) ∐ Li . Then H = CH (H0 ) ∐ L1 ∐ L2 . (ii) Let H = HNN(H1 , H0 , t) be a pro-p HNN-extension over a procyclic subgroup H0 . Suppose CH (H0 ) is abelian of rank at most 2, H1 = CH (H0 ) ∐ L1 and H0t is conjugate in H1 either to H0 or to a subgroup of L1 . Then either H = (Zp × H0 ) ∐ L1 or H = Zp ∐ L1 . Proof. (i) Since CH (H0 ) is abelian of rank at most 2, either H0 is selfcentralized in H1 or it is self-centralized in H2 ; say H0 is self-centralized in H1 . Then H = L1 ∐ H2 and the result follows. (ii) If H0 is conjugate to a subgroup of L1 then H = L1 ∐ hti. If H0t = H0h1 ` −1 for some h1 ∈ H1 then H = L1 (hth1 i × H0 ) so we are done as well.  4 4.1  Pro-p subgroups of profinite completions of 3-manifold groups Reduction to the geometric cases  Let M be a compact, orientable, non-geometric 3-manifold. Since every compact manifold is a retract of a closed manifold, it follows easily that we may reduce to the case in which M is closed. If M is reducible then its Kneser–Milnor decomposition is non-trivial. In particular, π1 M acts on a tree with trivial edge stabilizers (i.e. 0-acylindrically), and with vertex stabilizers exactly the conjugates of the reducible factors of M; such an action is 0-acylindrical. Since 3-manifold groups are residually finite, π[ 1M acts 0-acylindrically on a profinite tree, with vertex stabilizers the conjugates 14  of the completions of the irreducible factors. Therefore, by Theorem 3.8, we may reduce to the case where M is irreducible. If M is non-geometric, we now argue similarly using the JSJ decomposition. The action of an irreducible, non-geometric 3-manifold on its JSJ tree is 4-acylindrical [WZ10, Lemma 2.4]. The same is true for the action of the profinite completion on the profinite tree, as follows essentially from the results of [WZ10] and [HWZ13]. For completeness and ease of reference, we state the result here. Proposition 4.1. Let M be a closed, irreducible 3-manifold. Then the action [ of π 1 M on the profinite tree associated to the JSJ decomposition of M is 4acylindrical. This was stated in [WZ17, p. 376], and a careful proof was written down in [Wil17, Proposition 6.8]. Proposition 4.1 follows in a straightforward manner from the following statement. Lemma 4.2. Let N be geometric 3-manifold with incompressible toral boundary, not homeomorphic to an interval bundle over a torus or Klein bottle, and let P1 , P2 be two Z2 subgroups conjugate to the fundamental groups of boundγ̂ ary components. Then, for any γ̂ ∈ πd 1 N, P 1 ∩ P 2 is equal to the maximal normal procyclic subgroup of πd 1N .  Gareth Wilkes has pointed out that the results of [WZ10] and [HWZ13] in fact prove a weaker statement than Lemma 4.2, since they only handle the case in which γ̂ ∈ π1 N. However, similar techniques do indeed establish Lemma 4.2, and hence Proposition 4.1. For the Seifert fibred case, one argues as in [WZ10], appealing to [CZ07, Proposition 3.4 and Lemma 3.5] instead of [RZ96, Lemma 3.6]. (Alternatively, a proof using more recent technology might appeal to [WZ17, Theorem 3.3].) For the hyperbolic case, one argues as in [HWZ13], but replaces [HWZ13, Lemma 4.7] by [WZ17, Lemma 4.5]. With Proposition 4.1 in hand, by Theorem 3.8, a finitely generated pro-p [ subgroup of π 1 M is a free pro-p product of pro-p subgroups of the vertex groups, so it suffices to consider the geometric cases.  4.2  Hyperbolic manifolds  The closed hyperbolic case is the subject of [WZ17, Theorem F]; in this case our subgroup is free pro-p. 15  Thus we consider cusped hyperbolic 3-manifolds in this subsection. Recall that a subgroup of π1 M is called peripheral if it is conjugate to the fundamental group of a cusp and so is isomorphic to Z × Z. A conjugate of [ the closure of a peripheral group in π 1 M will also be called peripheral; it is b b isomorphic to Z × Z.  Definition 4.3. Suppose that a group G is hyperbolic relative to a collection of parabolic subgroups {P1 , . . . , Pn }. A subgroup H of G is called relatively malnormal if, whenever an intersection of conjugates H γ ∩H is not conjugate into some Pi , we have γ ∈ H. It is well known that π1 M is hyperbolic relative to its peripheral subgroups. Following Wise, we analyse the cusped hyperbolic 3-manifold M by cutting along an embedded family of surface Σi so every cusp is cut by some Σi . The following theorem is [WZ17, Theorem 9.1]. Theorem 4.4. A hyperbolic 3-manifold M with cusps has a finite-sheeted covering space N → M that contains a disjoint family of connected, geometrically finite, incompressible subsurfaces {Σ1 , . . . , Σn } such that: 1. each cusp of N contains a boundary component of some Σi ; 2. each π1 Σi ⊆ π1 N is relatively malnormal. Cutting along the family of surfaces given by Theorem 4.4 produces a graph-of-groups decomposition (G, ∆) for G = π1 N, with the property that every vertex and edge group is hyperbolic and virtually special. Any peripheral subgroup Pi leaves invariant an infinite (Tits’) axis and splits into direct product of infinite cyclic groups Pi = Li × Ri such that Li fixes every edge of the axis and Ri acts by translations. The stabilizer of any pair of distinct edges of the Bass–Serre tree S is conjugate to such Li for some peripheral subgroup Pi . Moreover, π1 N is subgroup separable (see [AFW15, Corollary 5.5]) and so by Example 2.3 we can pass to the corresponding b ∆) such that G b ∆) with G b = Π1 (G, b acting on graph of profinite groups (G, b By [WZ17, Theorem 4.2], π\ the standard profinite tree S(G). 1 (Σi ) are relatively malnormal in the profinite completion of peripheral subgroups and so b is conjugate to every non-trivial stabilizer of a pair of distinct edges of S(G) bi ≤ Pbi . a certain L We shall need however a more specific hierarchy on vertex groups G(v) of G given by the next proposition. 16  Theorem 4.5. Let M be a cusped hyperbolic 3-manifold. The fundamental group π1 M possesses a finite index subgroup G that admits a a graph-ofgroups decomposition (G, Γ) such that: 1. every vertex and edge group is hyperbolic and virtually special, and the stabilizer of any pair of two distinct edges of the Bass–Serre tree S is cyclic and is conjugate to a cyclic subgroup Li of a peripheral subgroup; 2. moreover, each vertex group G(v) has a malnormal hierarchy, which can be chosen so that, at each step, every Li belongs to a vertex group of the corresponding step-decomposition (so that at the last step of the vertex group being a free product of cyclic groups each Li is contained in some cyclic free factor). Proof. We consider the finite-sheeted cover N of M provided by Theorem 4.4. The fundamental group of N comes equipped with a decomposition that satisfies item (1) above. For item (2), we appeal to [AGM16, Theorem 2.11]. Indeed, let Nv be a component of the given decomposition of N. Then the Li that are conjugate into Nv from a malnormal family Lv , and so the pair (π1 Nv , Lv ) is relatively hyperbolic by [Bow12, Theorem 7.11]. Since π1 Nv is also hyperbolic and virtually special, we may apply [AGM16, Theorem 2.11] to obtain a normal subgroup Gv of finite index in π1 Nv so that the induced pair (Gv , L′v ) ⊳ (π1 Nv , Lv ) admits, in the terminology of [AGM16], a malnormal, quasiconvex, fully L′v -elliptic hierarchy. This means precisely that there is a finite hierarchy in which every vertex group is hyperbolic and virtually special, and every edge group is malnormal and quasiconvex, and in which the intersection with every conjugate of Li ∈ Lv is always elliptic, terminating in free products of groups from L′v and free groups. Since the subgroups π1 Nv are separable in π1 N, we may pass to a finiteindex normal subgroup G of π1 N so that every vertex group of the induced decomposition is contained in some π1 Nv . The subgroup G then has the properties claimed. We deduce from Lemma 3.10 the following. Corollary 4.6. Let H be a finitely generated pro-p subgroup of the profinite b Then H = (H, ∆) is the fundamental pro-p group of a finite completion G. graph of finitely generated pro-p groups with cyclic edge groups conjugate to subgroups of Li , and where the vertex groups of (H, ∆) are conjugate to some vertex groups of (G, Γ). 17  Corollary 4.7. Let H be a finitely generated pro-p subgroup of the profinite b b completion of a vertex group G(v). Let ṽ be a vertex in the standard tree S(G) mapping to v; consider the action of H on the set of incident edges at ṽ, and let e1 , . . . , en be a set of orbit representatives, with corresponding stabilizers ` H(ei ) in H. Then H splits as a free pro-p product H = i H(ei ) ∐ F , where F is a free pro-p group. Proof. We use induction on the hierarchy of Theorem 4.5 for G(v). So let K be a subgroup that belongs to this hierarchy. The base of the induction is the case in which K is a free product of cyclic vertex groups K(v). Since Pb is malnormal in π[ 1 M (see [WZ17, Lemma 4.5]) g b b and H(e) = Li for some g ∈ G, in this case each non-trivial intersection bg = K(v) so each H(e) = L bg generates a free factor. K(v) ∩ H(e) = K(v) ∩ L i i Now, to perform the inductive step, note that in this case by Lemma 3.10 ` H = v∈V (∆K ) H(v) ∐ F is a free pro-p product of vertex groups and a free pro-p group F intersecting trivially all conjugates of vertex groups. Applying the induction hypothesis to each vertex group HK (v) and using that a pro-p free factor of a finitely generated pro-p group is finitely generated, we deduce the statement. We are now ready to deduce the classification of pro-p subgroups in the cusped hyperbolic case. Theorem 4.8. Let π1 M be the fundamental group of an orientable hyperbolic 3-manifold with k cusps, and H a finitely generated pro-p subgroup of π[ 1M . Then H is a free pro-p product of free abelian pro-p groups of rank ≤ 2. Proof. Let G be the finite-index subgroup of π1 M given by Theorem 4.5. We b By Corollary 4.6, H is the fundamental prove first the theorem for H ≤ G. pro-p group of a finite graph of finitely generated pro-p groups (H, ∆), with bi , where the vertex groups of cyclic edge groups conjugate to subgroups of L b Moreover, by (H, ∆) are stabilizers of certain vertices and edges of` S(G). Corollary 4.7, for each vertex v ∈ ∆ we have H(v) = ( He ≤H(v) H(e)) ∐ Lv . We use induction on the size of ∆ to prove that H is a free pro-p product bg g ∈ G b being of free abelian pro-p groups of rank ≤ 2, with every H ∩ L i conjugate to a free factor. If`∆ is a vertex then the result just follows from the decomposition H(v) = ( He ≤H(v) H(e)) ∐ Lv mentioned above. Now let e be an edge of ∆. Then H = H1 ∐H(e) H2 or H = HNN(H1 , H(e), t), where H1 and H2 are the fundamental groups of the graph of groups (H, ∆) 18  restricted to the connected components ∆i of ∆ \ {e} (i = 1, 2 o i = 1). If H(e) = 1 then the amalgamated free products or HNN-extensions are free products and the result follows directly from the induction hypothesis. Suppose H(e) 6= 1. By the induction hypothesis we may assume that Hi = (H(e) × H0i ) ∐ Li . Since the profinite completion Pb of a parabolic subgroup P is malnormal in π[ 1 M the centralizer of H(e) in H is abelian of at most rank 2 so the result follows from Lemma 3.12. Now, to prove the general case, we observe that by what we just proved b satisfies the statement of the theorem. Then the statement for H H∩G follows from [Zal16, Theorem 1.2].  4.3  Seifert fibred manifolds over hyperbolic bases  In this section we deal with the cases in which N admits a geometric structure ^ modelled on either H2 × R or SL 2 (R). Recall that, when N is Seifert fibred, the fundamental group π1 N is torsion-free of the form 1 → Z → π1 N → π1 O → 1 (not necessarily central) where π1 O is a Fuchsian group. (We refer the reader to [Sco83] for details.) Our classification theorem in this case shows that the pro-p subgroups of the profinite completion of π1 N are either free pro-p products, or pro-p completions of fundamental groups π1 M, where M is a non-compact Seifert fibred manifold with residually p fundamental group. Theorem 4.9. Let G be the fundamental group a Seifert fibred manifold with ^ either H2 × R or SL 2 (R) geometry and H a finitely generated pro-p subgroup b Then H is a cyclic extension of a free pro-p-product of cyclic pro-p of G. groups. Proof. Consider H0 , the image of H in πd 1 O, and note that H0 is a finitely generated, pro-p subgroup. It suffices to prove that H0 is a free pro-p-product of cyclic pro-p groups. Indeed, let S be a surface subgroup of finite index of π1 O. Then H ∩ Sb is free pro-p by [Zal05, Proposition 1.2]. We now prove that the centralizer in πd 1 O of a torsion element of H0 is d finite. Since no open subgroup of π1 O is pro-p, we may replace O by a nontrivial finite-sheeted cover of degree n > 2, where n is coprime to p, whose completion contains H0 . We may therefore assume that π1 O is not a triangle 19  group. If π1 O is torsion-free there is nothing to prove; otherwise, π1 O splits as an amalgamation over an infinite cyclic group π1 O = K ∗C F , where F is free and K = ∗i Ci is a free product of cyclic groups. It follows that b b Fb is a free profinite product with cyclic amalgamation. Applying πd 1 O = K ∐C b [ZM88, Theorem 3.10] twice, any finite subgroup of πd 1 O is conjugate into K, b ∩K b g is contained in and thence to some Ci . By [ZM88, Theorem 3.12], K b b It follows that the centralizer C d (ci ) of any element a K-conjugate of C. π1 O b and so by [RZ10, Theorem 9.1.12], the centralizer ci of Ci is contained in K, coincides with Ci , as required. By [HZ08, Theorem 1], virtually free pro-p groups in which torsion elements have finite centralizers split as a free pro-p product of finite subgroups and a free pro-p group. Applying this to H0 now completes the proof.  4.4  Sol and Nil manifolds  Suppose that N is a compact 3-manifold with solvable fundamental group. The groups that arise in this way were classified by Evans and Moser [EM72], and are all virtually polycyclic. It follows from this classification that a compact, orientable manifold N with Nil or Sol geometry has a cover N0 of index at most two such that π1 N0 ∼ = Z2 ⋊ Z, and we deduce the following. Theorem 4.10. Let N be a compact, orientable, Nil- or Sol-manifold. If p is odd then the Sylow p-subgroup of πd 1 N is isomorphic to the pro-p completion 2 of a semidirect product Z ⋊ Z, and for p = 2, the Sylow p-subgroup has a subgroup of index at most 2 with this structure. Proof. Let H = π1 N0 as above. Denote by Op (G) the kernel of the epimorb −→ phism of a profinite group G to its maximal pro-p quotient. Let f : H 2 b b H/Op (Z ) be the canonical map. Clearly f restricts to an injection on H, so b 2 ) is Z2 on which H/O b p (H) b acts we identify H with f (H). The image f (Z p b p (H) b −→ GL2 (Zp ). by conjugation. Thus we have a homomorphism η : H/O Note that GL2 (Zp ) is virtually pro-p. Hence the preimage U of a p-Sylow subgroup of η(H) is open in H/Op (H). Consider the intersection K = U ∩ π1 N, a finite-index subgroup of π1 N. The pro-p completion Kp̂ has a normal subgroup Z2p which is the closure of Z2 and the kernel of the natural map Kp̂ −→ U intersects it trivially. One deduces then that this kernel is trivial, and the result follows. 20  4.5  The Euclidean case  This case consists of all 3d Bieberbach groups – i.e. torsion-free Z3 -by-finite groups with the finite groups of the following 32 types [Hah87, Chapter 10.1, p. 794]: 27 cyclic and dihedral groups, 3 tetrahedral groups T, Td , Th and 2 octahedral groups O and Oh . The orders of the these groups are divisors of 48, so only the primes p = 2, 3 can lead to non-trivial Sylow subgroups. For p = 3, all Sylow subgroups are C3 . See also [EM72, Lemma 4.9]. Suppose p = 2. Then we have the following list. 1. Cyclic groups: C2 , C4 , C8 . 2. Dihedral groups: D2 , D4 , D8 of orders 4, 8, 16 respectively. 3. Tetrahedral groups T, Td , Th have orders 12, 24, 24 and their Sylow 2subgroups are D4 and D8 , so we do not get anything new from the previous item. 4. The two octohedral groups O ∼ = S4 and Oh of order 24 and 48 respectively. The Sylow 2-subgroup of the first one is D4 , and of the second is the generalized quaternion group Q16 . Thus we can deduce the following: Proposition 4.11. The Sylow p-subgroup of the profinite completion of the fundamental group of a Euclidean 3-manifold is a pro-p group of one of the following types: (i) Z3p for any p. (ii) if p = 3, Z33 -by-C3 . (iii) p = 2, Z32 -by-C2 , -C4 , -C8 , -D2 , -D4 , -D8 , -Q16 . Remark 4.12. Each extension may yield several isomorphism classes, so this does not give the number of groups. There are the cases of Z and D∞ . We do not get anything new, just the pro-p and pro-2 completions respectively.  21  4.6  Interval bundles over Klein bottles  The JSJ decomposition of a non-geometric 3-manifold M may include pieces N which are homeomorphic to twisted interval bundles over the Klein bottle, with fundamental group the Klein-bottle group Z⋊Z. These can be removed by passing to a double cover, but when p = 2, the pro-2 completion of Z ⋊ Z \ arises as the Sylow 2-subgroup of Z ⋊ Z. We record this observation for later use. Proposition 4.13. The Sylow 2-subgroup of the profinite completion of the fundamental group of the twisted interval bundle over the Klein bottle is the pro-2 completion of Z ⋊ Z.  4.7  Spherical manifolds  We shall use here [Wol11, Theorem 2.4 ]. Theorem 4.14. (Theorem 2.4 [Wol11] ) Finite fixed-point free subgroup of SO(4) belongs to the following list: 1. Cyclic group Cn of order n. 2. Dihedral groups D2k (2n+1) , for k ≥ 2 and n ≥ 1, with presentation k hx, y | x2 = y 2n+1 = 1, xyx−1 = y −1i of order 2k (2n + 1). 3. Generalised quaternion groups Q4k of order 4k. 4. The binary icosahedral group I = SL2 (F5 ) of order 120. ′ 5. The groups P8·3 k = Q8 ⋊ C3k defined by the following presentation k 2 hx, y, z|x = (xy)2 = y 2, zxz −1 = y, zyz −1 = xy, z 3 = 1i of order 8 · 3k .  6. The direct product of any of the above group with a cyclic group of relatively prime order. We shall list p-subgroups of all these groups. Since Case 6 does not produce anything new we analyse cases 1–5 only. Looking at the orders we see that for p odd p-Sylow subgroups are cyclic. So we concentrate on the case p = 2. Then we have only 3 types of 2groups: cyclic, dihedrals D2k , generalized quaternions Q2n . Thus we deduce the following 22  Theorem 4.15. Let G be the profinite completion of the fundamental group of a spherical 3-manifold. (a) If p is odd, its Sylow p-subgroups are cyclic. (b) If p = 2, we have the following list of possible Sylow 2-subgroups: 1. cyclic; 2. dihedrals D2k ; 3. generalized quaternions Q2n . Putting the above results together we obtain Theorem 1.3.  References [AFW15] Matthias Aschenbrenner, Stefan Friedl, and Henry Wilton. 3manifold groups. Series of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. European Mathematical Society (EMS), Zürich, 2015. [AGM16] Ian Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Fox Manning. An alternate proof of Wise’s malnormal special quotient theorem. Forum Math. Pi, 4:e1, 54, 2016. [Bas93]  Hyman Bass. Covering theory for graphs of groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 89(1-2):3–47, 1993.  [Bow12]  B. H. Bowditch. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 22(3):1250016, 66, 2012.  [CB13]  Owen Cotton-Barratt. Detecting ends of residually finite groups in profinite completions. Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 155(3):379–389, 2013.  [CZ07]  S. C. Chagas and P. A. Zalesskii. Limit groups are conjugacy separable. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 17(4):851–857, 2007.  [EM72]  Benny Evans and Louise Moser. Solvable fundamental groups of compact 3-manifolds. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 168:189–210, 1972. 23  [Hah87]  Theo Hahn, editor. International tables for crystallography. Vol. A. Published for the International Union of Crystallography, Chester; by D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, 5-th edition, 2002. Spacegroup symmetry.  [HWZ13] Emily Hamilton, Henry Wilton, and Pavel A. Zalesskii. Separability of double cosets and conjugacy classes in 3-manifold groups. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 87(1):269–288, 2013. [HZ08]  W. Herfort and P. A. Zalesskii. Virtually free pro-p groups whose torsion elements have finite centralizer. Bull. Lond. Math. Soc., 40(6):929–936, 2008.  [HZ13]  Wolfgang Herfort and Pavel Zalesskii. Virtually free pro-p groups. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci., 118:193–211, 2013.  [MZ17]  J. W. MacQuarrie and P. A. Zalesskii. Second countable virtually free pro-p groups whose torsion elements have finite centralizer. Selecta Math. (N.S.), 23(1):101–115, 2017.  [NS07]  Nikolay Nikolov and Dan Segal. On finitely generated profinite groups. I. Strong completeness and uniform bounds. Ann. of Math. (2), 165(1):171–238, 2007.  [RZ96]  Luis Ribes and Pavel A. Zalesskii. Conjugacy separability of amalgamated free products of groups. Journal of Algebra, 179(3):751— 774, 1996.  [RZ00]  Luis Ribes and Pavel Zalesskii. Pro-p trees and applications. In New horizons in pro-p groups, volume 184 of Progr. Math., pages 75–119. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 2000.  [RZ10]  Luis Ribes and Pavel Zalesskii. Profinite groups, volume 40 of Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas. 3rd Series. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, second edition, 2010.  [RZ14]  Luis Ribes and Pavel A. Zalesskiı̆. Normalizers in groups and in their profinite completions. Rev. Mat. Iberoam., 30(1):165–190, 2014. 24  [Sco83]  Peter Scott. The geometries of 3-manifolds. The Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society, 15(5):401–487, 1983.  [Ser77]  Jean-Pierre Serre. Arbres, amalgames, SL2 , volume 46 of Astérisque. Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 1977.  [SZ14]  Ilir Snopce and Pavel A. Zalesskii. Subgroup properties of prop extensions of centralizers. Selecta Math. (N.S.), 20(2):465–489, 2014.  [Wil17]  Gareth Wilkes. Profinite rigidity of graph manifolds and JSJ decompositions of 3-manifolds. arXiv:1605.08244v2, 2017.  [Wol11]  Joseph A. Wolf. Spaces of constant curvature. AMS Chelsea Publishing, Providence, RI, sixth edition, 2011.  [WZ10]  Henry Wilton and Pavel Zalesskii. Profinite properties of graph manifolds. Geometriae Dedicata, 147(1):29—45, 2010.  [WZ17]  Henry Wilton and Pavel Zalesskii. Distinguishing geometries using finite quotients. Geom. Topol., 21(1):345–384, 2017.  [WZar]  Thomas S. Weigel and Pavel A. Zalesskii. Virtually free pro-p products. Israel J. Math., to appear.  [Zal92]  P. A. Zalesskiı̆. Open subgroups of free profinite products. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Algebra, Part 1 (Novosibirsk, 1989), volume 131 of Contemp. Math., pages 473– 491. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1992.  [Zal05]  P. A. Zalesskii. Profinite surface groups and the congruence kernel of arithmetic lattices in SL2 (R). Israel J. Math., 146:111–123, 2005.  [Zal16]  Pavel A. Zalesskii. Virtually free pro-p products. J. Group Theory, 19(3):543–560, 2016.  [ZM88]  P. A. Zalesskii and O. V. Mel’nikov. Subgroups of profinite groups acting on trees. Matematicheskii Sbornik, 135(177)(4):419—439, 1988.  25  [ZM89]  P. A. Zalesskii and O. V. Mel’nikov. Fundamental groups of graphs of profinite groups. Algebra i Analiz, 1(4):117—135, 1989.  26

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
