Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_2016

Abstract:
AN INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION OF HITCHIN SPECTRAL CURVES  arXiv:1705.05969v1 [math.AG] 17 May 2017  OLIVIA DUMITRESCU AND MOTOHICO MULASE  Abstract. This article consists of two parts. In Part 1, we present a formulation of twodimensional topological quantum field theories in terms of a functor from a category of Ribbon graphs to the endofuntor category of a monoidal category. The key point is that the category of ribbon graphs produces all Frobenius objects. Necessary backgrounds from Frobenius algebras, topological quantum field theories, and cohomological field theories are reviewed. A result on Frobenius algebra twisted topological recursion is included at the end of Part 1. In Part 2, we explain a geometric theory of quantum curves. The focus is placed on the process of quantization as a passage from families of Hitchin spectral curves to families of opers. To make the presentation simpler, we unfold the story using SL2 (C)-opers and rank 2 Higgs bundles defined on a compact Riemann surface C of genus greater than 1. In this case, quantum curves, opers, and projective structures in C all become the same notion. Background materials on projective coordinate systems, Higgs bundles, opers, and non-Abelian Hodge correspondence are explained.  Contents 0. Part 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.  Preface: An inspiration from the past  2  1. Topological Quantum Field Theory Frobenius algebras TQFT Cohomological field theory Category of cell graphs 2D TQFT from cell graphs TQFT-valued topological recursion  Part 2. Quantization of Higgs Bundles 7. Quantum curves 8. Projective structures, opers, and Higgs bundles 9. Semi-classical limit of SL2 (C)-opers 10. Non-Abelian Hodge correspondence between Hitchin moduli spaces References  5 5 9 13 21 26 29 33 33 36 47 48 50  2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary: 14H15, 14N35, 81T45; Secondary: 14F10, 14J26, 33C05, 33C10, 33C15, 34M60, 53D37. Key words and phrases. Topological quantum field theory; quantum curves; opers; Hitchin moduli spaces; Higgs bundles; Hitchin section; quantization; topological recursion. 1  2  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  0. Preface: An inspiration from the past A recent discovery of a cuneiform tablet dated around 350 to 50 B.C.E. suggests that ancient Babylonians must have used geometry of time-momentum space to establish accurate calculations of Jupiter’s orbit [87]. This impressive paper also contains the picture of the tablet which describes the Babylonian’s method of integration.  Figure 0.1. The cuneiform tablet used in the analysis of [87].  The orbit of the Jupiter is a graph in coordinate space-time. By considering the graph of momentum of the Jupiter in time-momentum space, Babylonians visualized integral of the momentum by the area underneath the curve, and using a trapezoidal approximation, they actually obtained an estimated value of the integral. This gives a prototype of Newton’s Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. This idea of Babylonians relating geometry of timemomentum space with the analysis of actual orbit of the Jupiter is striking, because it suggests their equal treatment of coordinate space the momentum space. Although it is a stretch, we could imagine the very foundation of symplectic geometry here. Many mathematical cuneiform tablets recording numbers and algebraic calculations have been our source of imagination. The most famous is Plimpton 322 of around 1,800 B.C.E. (see Figure 0.2). It lists 15 Pythagorean numbers in the increasing order of hypotenuse angles from about 45 degrees to 60 degrees [88].  Figure 0.2. Plimton 322  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  3  Babylonians seem to have known an algorithm to calculate an approximate value of the square root of any √ number. For example, there is a cuneiform tablet that shows the sexagesimal expansion of 2. Although there have been many speculations for practical purposes of Plimton 322 and mechanisms to come up with the listed numbers, our imagination goes to the surprise of the creator of the tablet. For the pair of numbers (y, z) listed in the second and the third columns, z 2 − y 2 is always a perfect square. Therefore, the square root algorithm terminates in a finite number of steps for these values, and gives an exact answer. They must have found a finiteness in the forest of infinity. This is a strong sentiment that resonates with our mind today. The tablet of Figure 0.1 does not show any geometry. The author of [87] convincingly argues that behind the list of these seemingly meaningless numbers on the tablets, there is a profound geometric investigation of the planetary motion. Our imagination is piqued by the discovery: the interplay between algebra, geometry, and astronomy; and the equal treatment of momentum space and coordinate space. What the feeling of the authors of the tablet would have been, when they were creating it? It must have been a sharp happiness of discovery that mathematics correctly predicts the very nature surrounding us, such as planetary motion. The accuracy of calculations of Babylonians is another astonishment, in addition to the lack of pictures. It is in sharp contrast to Euclid’s Elements, which was written around the same time in Greece. In Elements, we see many beautiful geometric pictures, and proofs. The discovery of axiomatic method culminated in it. This dichotomy, being able to calculate a quantity to a high precision, vs. having a proof of the formula based on a finiteness property, is our very motivation of writing these notes. There are a lot of amazing formulas around us in the direction that we describe. At this moment, we do not have the final understanding of them, yet. In the first part of these lectures, we explore two-dimensional topological quantum field theories formulated in terms of cell graphs. A cell graph of type (g, n) is the 1-skeleton of a cell-decomposition of a compact oriented topological surface of genus g ≥ 0 with n labeled 0-cells, or vertices. Such graphs are called in many different names: ribbon graphs, dessins d’enfants, maps, embedded graphs, etc. We use the terminology “cell graph” indicating the different nature of the graphs on surfaces, which record degeneration of surfaces. Although a cell graph is a 1-dimensional object, the notion of a face is well defined as a 2-cell of the cell decomposition that the cell graph defines on a given surface. The degree of a vertex of a cell graph is the number of incident half-edges. We call a 1-cell an edge of the graph. As explained in our previous lecture notes [30], the number of 1 Cm , where cell graphs of type (0, 1) with the unique vertex of degree 2m is 2m   1 2m Cm = m+1 m is the m-th Catalan number. A generating function ∞ X Cm z = z(x) = m=0  1 x2m+1  of Catalan numbers satisfies an algebraic equation 1 (0.0.1) x=z+ . z The story of [30, Section 2] tells us that enumeration problem of cell graphs of arbitrary type (g, n) is solved by the quantization of the algebraic curve (0.0.1). The key formula  4  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  for the quantization comes from the Laplace transform of a combinatorial equation [30, Catalan Recursion, Section 2.1]. There, the combinatorial formula is derived by analyzing the effect of edge-contraction operations on cell graphs. The new story we wish to tell in these lectures is that the category of cell graphs carries the information of all two-dimensional topological quantum field theories. In Part 1 of this article, we will present an axiomatic setup of 2D TQFT. The key idea is simple: exact same edge-contraction operations characterize Frobenius algebras. When we contract an edge of a cell graph, two vertices collide. It represents multiplication. When we shrink a loop, since it is a cycle on the topological surface, the process breaks a vertex into two vertices. This is the operation of comultiplication. The topological structure of a cell graph makes these operations dual to one another in the context of Frobenius algebras. We start with defining Frobenius algebras. Topological quantum field theories (TQFT) and cohomological field theories (CohFT) are introduced in the following sections. A category of cell graphs is defined. We explain that this category generates all Frobenius algebras. We then make a connection between cell graphs and 2D TQFT. The theory of topological recursion is a leitmotiv in this article. It is another manifestation of a quantization procedure. Since there are many review articles on topological recursion, we touch the subject only tangentially in this article. Our new result related to this topic is the 2D TQFT-twisted topological recursion, which is explained in the end of Part 1. The cohomology ring of a closed oriented manifold X is a Frobenius algebra. When we consider an even dimensional manifold and only even degree cohomologies (0.0.2)  A = H even (X, Q),  then we have a commutative Frobenius algebra, which is equivalent to a 2D TQFT. The Gromov-Witten invariants of X of genus 0 determine a quantum deformation of the ring A, known as the big quantum cohomology. This quantum structure then defines a holomorphic object Y , the mirror of X. Thus the holomorphic geometry of Y captures quantum cohomology of X. Gromov-Witten invariants are generalized to arbitrary genera. Here arises a question: Question 0.1. What should be the holomorphic geometry on Y that corresponds to highergenus Gromov-Witten theory of X? If we consider the passage from genus 0 to higher genera Gromov-Witten theory as quantization, then on the side on Y , we need a quantized holomorphic geometry. A good candidate is the D-module theory. The simplest such theory fitting to this context is the notion of quantum curves. The relation between quantum curves and B-model geometry is considered in [2, 19, 17, 27, 28, 30, 49, 50] and others. The key point for this idea to work is when the holomorphic geometry Y corresponding to the Gromov-Witten theory of X is captured by an algebraic or analytic curve. These curves often appear in other areas of mathematics as spectral curves, such as integrable systems, random matrix theory, and Hitchin’s theory of Higgs bundles. A spectral curve naturally comes with a projection to a base curve, making it a covering of the base curve. A quantum curve is a D-module on this base curve, quantizing the spectral curve. Since a CohFT based on the Frobenius algebra H even (X, Q) plays a role similar to Gromov-Witten theory of X, CohFT is a quantization of 2D TQFT. This process consists of two steps of quantizations. The first one is from the classical cohomology ring A to its quantum deformation, which is the mirror geometry. If the mirror is a curve, then the second step should be parallel to the quantization of a spectral curve to a quantum curve. We may be able to understand the reconstruction [36] of CohFT based on a semi-simple  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  5  Frobenius algebra from the 2D TQFT, that is obtained as the degree 0 part of the cohomology H 0 (Mg,n , Q) of the moduli space of stable curves, analogous to the construction of quantum curves. Part 2 deals with quantum curves. Since the authors have produced a long article [30] explaining the relation between quantum curves and topological recursion, the present article is focused on geometry of the process of quantization of Hitchin spectral curves from a perspective of opers. Instead of providing a general theory of [25, 26, 31], we use SL2 (C) to explain our ideas here. We will show that the classical notion of projective structures on a compact Riemann surface C of genus g ≥ 2 studied by Gunning [51], SL2 (C)-opers, and quantum curves of Hitchin spectral curves, are indeed the exact same notion. A conjecture of Gaiotto [42] relating non-Abelian Hodge correspondence and opers, together with its solution by [26], will be briefly explained in the final section. Acknowledgement. The authors are grateful to the organizers of the Warsaw Advanced School on Topological Quantum Field Theory for providing the opportunity to produce this article. They are in particular indebted to Piotr Sulkowski for constant encouragement and patience. The joint research of authors presented in this article is carried out while they have been staying in the following institutions in the last four years: the American Institute of Mathematics in California, the Banff International Research Station, Institutul de Matematică “Simion Stoilow” al Academiei Romane, Institut Henri Poincaré, Institute for Mathematical Sciences at the National University of Singapore, Kobe University, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Lorentz Center Leiden, Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach, MaxPlanck-Institut für Mathematik-Bonn, and Osaka City University Advanced Mathematical Institute. Their generous financial support, hospitality, and stimulating research environments are greatly appreciated. The research of O.D. has been supported by GRK 1463 Analysis, Geometry, and String Theory at the Leibniz Universität Hannover, Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, and a grant from MPIM-Bonn. The research of M.M. has been supported by IHÉS, MPIM-Bonn, Simons Foundation, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, and NSF grants DMS-1104734, DMS-1309298, DMS-1619760, DMS-1642515, and NSF-RNMS: Geometric Structures And Representation Varieties (GEAR Network, DMS-1107452, 1107263, 1107367). Part 1. Topological Quantum Field Theory 1. Frobenius algebras Throughout this article, we denote by K a field of characteristic 0. Most of the cases we consider K = Q or K = C. Let A be a finite-dimensional, unital, and associative algebra defined over a field K. A bialgebra comes with an extra set of structures, including a comultiplication. Examples of bialgebras include the group algebra A = K[G] of a finite group G. Its algebra structure is canonically determined by the multiplication rule of G. However, the group algebra has two distinct co-algebra structures. One of which makes K[G] a Frobenius algebra, and the other makes it a Hopf algebra. This difference is reflected in which topological invariants we are dealing with. The Frobenius structure is useful for twodimensional topology, and the Hopf structure is natural for three-dimensional topological invariants. Let us start with defining Frobenius algebras.  6  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Definition 1.1 (Frobenius algebras). A finite-dimensional, unital, and associative algebra A over a field K is a Frobenius algebra if there exists a linear map  : A −→ K called counit such that for every u ∈ A, (ux) = 0, or (xu) = 0, for all x ∈ A implies that u = 0. Proposition 1.2. If A1 and A2 are Frobenius algebras, then A1 ⊕ A2 and A1 ⊗ A2 are also Frobenius algebras. Let us denote by A the category of Frobenius algebras defined over K. Then C = (A, ⊗, K) is a monoidal category. Proof. Denote by i : Ai −→ K the counit of Ai , i = 1, 2. Then (A1 ⊕ A2 , 1 + 2 ) is a Frobenius algebra. Similarly, 1 · 2 : A1 ⊗ A2 3 u1 ⊗ u2 7−→ 1 (u1 )2 (u2 ) ∈ K makes A1 ⊗ A2 a Frobenius algebra.    Example 1.3. The one-dimensional vector space A = K, with the identity map (u) = u, is a simple commutative Frobenius algebra. More generally, by taking the direct sum A = K ⊕n and defining (u1 , . . . , un ) = u1 + · · · + un ∈ K, we construct a semi-simple commutative Frobenius algebra K ⊕n . Example 1.4. The full matrix algebra A = Matn (K) consisting of n × n matrices with (u) = trace(u) is an example of a non-commutative simple Frobenius algebra for n ≥ 2. Example 1.5. As mentioned above, the group algebra A = K[G] of a finite group G is a Frobenius algebra. Here, we define  : K[G] −→ K by linearly extending the map whose value for every g ∈ G is given by ( 1 g=1 (g) = 0 g 6= 1. Remark 1.6. If we define (g) = 1 for all g ∈ G, then the group algebra becomes a Hopf algebra. Example 1.7. The cohomology ring H ∗ (M, R) of an oriented compact differential manifold M of dimR M = n with the cup product and  : H ∗ (M, R) −→ H n (M, R) = R is a Frobenius algebra. The above example makes us wonder if an analogue of Poincaré pairing exists in a general Frobenius algebra. Indeed, the counterpart is a Frobenius bilinear form defined by (1.0.1)  η : A ⊗ A −→ K,  η(u, v) = (uv)  in terms of the counit  : A −→ K. The Frobenius form satisfies the Frobenius associativity (1.0.2)  η(uv, w) = η(u, vw),  u, v, w ∈ A.  The condition for the counit  of Definition 1.1 exactly means that the Frobenius form η is non-degenerate. It therefore defines a canonical isomorphism (1.0.3)  ∼  λ : A −→ A∗ ,  hλ(u), vi = η(u, v),  u, v ∈ A.  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  7  The isomorphism introduces a unique comultiplication δ : A −→ A ⊗ A by the following commutative diagram: (1.0.4)  δ  A λ    / A⊗A   A∗  m∗  λ⊗λ .  / A∗ ⊗ A∗  Here, m∗ : A∗ −→ A∗ ⊗ A∗ is the dual of the multiplication operation m : A ⊗ A −→ A in A. Since we are not assuming the multiplication to be commutative, we define the natural pairing (A∗ ⊗ A∗ ) ⊗ (A ⊗ A) −→ K by observing the order of entities as written. For example, for α, β ∈ A∗ and u, v ∈ A, we calculate (1.0.5)  hα ⊗ β, u ⊗ vi = hα, hβ, uivi = hβ, uihα, vi.  As the dual of the associative multiplication, the comultiplication δ is coassociative, i.e., it satisfies A8 ⊗ A  (1.0.6) δ  δ⊗1  &  A ⊗8 A ⊗ A.  A &  δ  1⊗δ  A⊗A Note that the identity element 1 ∈ A corresponds to  ∈ A∗ by λ, i.e., λ(1) = . This is because η(1, u) = η(u, 1) = (u). We now have the full set of data (A, 1, m, , δ) that defines a bialgebra. The algebra and coalgebra structures satisfy a compatibility condition, as described below. Proposition 1.8. The following diagram commutes: (1.0.7) 1⊗δ  A⊗A  A⊗ 8 A⊗A /A  m  δ⊗1  &  m⊗1  & / A ⊗ A. 8  δ  1⊗m  A⊗A⊗A Remark 1.9. Alternatively, we can define a Frobenius algebra as a bialgebra satisfying (1.0.7), together with a non-degenerate Frobenius form satisfying (1.0.2). Proof. Let he1 , e2 , . . . , er i be a K-basis for A, where r = dimK A. The bilinear form η defines r × r matrices (1.0.8)  η = [ηij ],  η −1 = [η ij ],  ηij := η(ei , ej ).  8  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  It gives the canonical basis expansion of v ∈ A: X X (1.0.9) v= η(v, ea )η ab eb = η(ea , v)η ba eb . a,b  a,b  From (1.0.4), we calculate δ(v) =  X  η(v, ei ej )(η jb eb ) ⊗ (η ia ea )  i,j,a,b  =  X  =  X  η(vei , ej )(η jb eb ) ⊗ (η ia ea )  i,j,a,b  (vei ) ⊗ (η ia ea )  i,a  = (m ⊗ 1)(v ⊗ δ(1)), using the pairing convention (1.0.5) and (1.0.10)  δ(1) =  X  η ab ea ⊗ eb .  a,b  We then have  (1 ⊗ m) ◦ (δ ⊗ 1)(u ⊗ v) = (1 ⊗ m)    X  η(u, ei ej )(η jb eb ) ⊗ (η ia ea ) ⊗ v   i,j,a,b  =  X  η(uei , ej )(η jb eb ) ⊗ (η ia ea v)  i,j,a,b  =  X  η(uei , ej )(η jb eb ) ⊗ η ia η(ea v, ec )η cd ed  i,j,a,b,c,d  =  X  uei ⊗ η ia η(ea , vec )η cd ed  i,a,c,d  =  X  (uvec ) ⊗ η cd ed  c,d  = (m ⊗ 1)(uv ⊗ δ(1)) = δ(uv). Similarly,  (m ⊗ 1) ◦ (1 ⊗ δ)(u ⊗ v) = (m ⊗ 1) u ⊗   X  η(v, ei ej )(η jb eb ) ⊗ (η ia ea )  i,j,a,b  =  X  uη(vei , ej )(η jb eb ) ⊗ (η ia ea )  i,j,a,b  =  X  uvei ⊗ η ia ea  i,a  = (m ⊗ 1)(uv ⊗ δ(1)) = δ(uv). This completes the proof of Proposition 1.8. Remark 1.10. We note that if A is commutative, then the quantities  (1.0.11) η ei1 · · · eij , eij+1 · · · en = (ei1 · · · ein ), 1 ≤ j < n,    INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  9  are completely symmetric with respect to permutations of indices. Definition 1.11 (Euler element). The Euler element of a Frobenius algebra A is defined by (1.0.12)  e := m ◦ δ(1).  In terms of basis, the Euler element is given by X (1.0.13) e= η ab ea eb . a,b  The Euler element provides the genus expansion of 2D TQFT, allowing us to calculate higher genus correlation functions from the genus 0 part of the theory. Another application of (1.0.9) is the following formula that relates the multiplication and comultiplication: (1.0.14)  (λ(u) ⊗ 1) δ(v) = uv.  This is because (λ(u) ⊗ 1) δ(v) = (λ(u) ⊗ 1)  X (vη ab ea ) ⊗ eb a,b  =  X  =  X  η(u, vea )η ab eb  a,b  η(uv, ea )η ab eb = uv.  a,b  2. TQFT In this section, we briefly review TQFT. Although there have been explosive mathematical developments in higher dimensional topological quantum field theories mixing different dimensions during the last decade (see for example, [13, 67] and more recent work inspired by them), we restrict our attention to the two-dimensional speciality in these lectures. From now on, Frobenius algebras we consider are finite-dimensional, unital, associative, and commutative. It has been established (see [1, 16]) that 2D TQFT’s are classified by these types of Frobenius algebras. The axiomatic formulation of conformal and topological quantum field theories was discovered in the 1980s by Atiyah [4] and Segal [89]. A (d−1)-dimensional TQFT is a monoidal functor Z from the monoidal category of (d − 1)-dimensional closed (i.e., compact without boundary) oriented smooth manifolds with oriented d-dimensional cobordism as morphisms, to the monoidal category of finite-dimensional vector spaces defined over a field K. The monoidal structure in the category of (d − 1)-dimensional smooth manifolds is defined by the operation of taking disjoint union, which is a symmetric operation. Disjoint union with the empty set is the identity of this operation. Therefore, we define the monoidal category of K-vector spaces by symmetric tensor products, with the field K serving as the identity operation of tensor product. The functor Z satisfies the non-triviality condition Z(∅) = K, and maps a disjoint union of smooth (d − 1)-dimensional manifolds to a symmetric tensor product of vector spaces.  10  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Let us denote by M an oriented closed smooth manifold of dimension d − 1, and by M op the same manifold with the opposite orientation. The functor Z satisfies the duality condition Z(M op ) = Z(M )∗ , where Z(M )∗ is the dual vector space of Z(M ). Suppose we have an oriented bordered d-dimensional smooth manifold N . The boundary ∂N is a smooth manifold of dimension d − 1, and the complement N \ ∂N is an oriented smooth manifold of dimension d. We give the orientation induced from N to its boundary ∂N . The TQFT functor Z then gives an element Z(N ) ∈ Z(∂N ). If N is closed, i.e., ∂N = ∅, then Z(N ) ∈ Z(∅) = K is a number that represents a topological invariant of N . Now consider a bordered oriented smooth manifold N1 with boundary ∂N1 = M1op t M2 , meaning that the two separate boundaries carry different orientations. We choose that M2 is given the induced orientation from N1 , and M1 the opposite orientation. We interpret the situation as N1 giving an oriented cobordism from M1 to M2 . In this case, the functor Z defines an element Z(N1 ) ∈ Z(M1 )∗ ⊗ Z(M2 ), or equivalently, a linear map Z(N1 ) : Z(M1 ) −→ Z(M2 ). Suppose we have another smooth manifold N2 with boundary ∂N2 = M2op t M3 corresponding to a linear map Z(N2 ) : Z(M2 ) −→ Z(M3 ). We can then smoothly glue N1 and N2 along the common boundary component M2 forming a new manifold N = N1 ∪M2 N2 . Clearly ∂N = M1op t M3 , and N gives a cobordism from M1 to M3 . The Atiyah-Segal sewing axiom [4] asserts that (2.0.1)  Z(M1 ) k    Z(M1 )  Z(N1 )  / Z(M2 )  Z(N2 )  Z(N )  / Z(M3 )   k  / Z(M3 ).  A d-dimensional TQFT Z defines a topological invariant Z(N ) for each closed d-manifold N . The essence of TQFT is to break N into simpler pieces by cutting along (d − 1)dimensional submanifolds, and represent the invariant Z(N ) from that of simpler pieces. The situation is special for the case of 2D TQFT. First of all, we already know all topological invariants of a closed surface. They are just functions of the genus g of the surface. So there should be no reason for another theory to study them. Since there is only one 1-dimensional connected compact smooth manifold, a 2D TQFT is based on a single vector space (2.0.2)  Z(S 1 ) = A,  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  11  and its tensor products. What else could we gain? The biggest surprise is that a 2D TQFT is further quantized [15, 24, 48, 63]. This process starts with a Frobenius algebra A of (0.0.2). It is quantized to a quantum cohomology, and then further to Gromov-Witten invariants. Construction of spectral curves, and then quantizing them, have a parallelism to this story. This is the story we now explore in this and the next sections, but only to take a snapshot of the converse direction, i.e., from a quantum theory to a classical theory. Let us denote by Σg,m̄,n a connected, bordered, oriented, smooth surface of genus g with m + n boundary circles. This is a surface obtained by removing m + n disjoint open discs from a compact oriented two-dimensional smooth manifold of genus g without boundary. We assume that the boundary of Σg,m̄,n itself is a smooth manifold, hence it is a disjoint union of m + n circles. We give the induced orientation from the surface to n boundary circles, and the opposite orientation to the m boundary circles. The surface Σg,m̄,n gives a cobordism of m circles to n circles. The orientation-preserving diffeomorphism class of such a surface is determined by the genus g and the two number m and n of boundary circles with different orientations. Therefore, the oriented equivalence class of cobordism is also determined by (g, m, n). The TQFT functor Z then assigns to each cobordism Σg,m̄,n a multilinear map def ωg,m̄,n = Z(Σg,m̄,n ) : A⊗m −→ A⊗n , which is completely determined by the label (g, m, n). This is the special situation of the two-dimensionality of TQFT, reflecting the simple topological classification of surfaces. Suppose we have another cobordism Σh,k̄,m of genus h from k circles to m circles, with orientation on the m circles induced from the surface, and the opposite orientation on k circles. We can compose two cobordisms, sewing the m circles of the first cobordism with the m circles of the second. Here, we notice that on each pair of circles, one from the first surface and the other from the second, the orientations are the same, and hence we can put one on top of the other. Therefore, the orientations of the two surfaces are consistent after sewing. This sewing process generates a new surface Σg+h+m−1,k̄,n of genus g + h + m − 1. This is because the m pairs of circles sewed together create m − 1 handles (see Figure 2.1). The sewing axiom of Atiyah-Segal [4] then requires that the functor Z associates the composition of linear maps to the composition of cobordisms. In our situation, the composition of two maps generates a new map ωg,m̄,n ◦ ωh,k̄,m = ωg+h+m−1,k̄,n : A⊗k −→ A⊗n , corresponding to the sewing of cobordisms.  Figure 2.1. A string of String Interactions. The physics of a simple model for interacting strings is captured by the sewing axiom of Atiyah-Segal.  The sewing procedure can be generalized, allowing partial sewing of the boundary circles of matching orientation. For example, if j ≤ ` and j ≤ m, then gluing only j pairs of circles,  12  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  we have a composition (2.0.3)  ωg,m̄,n ◦ ωh,k̄,` = ωg+h+j−1,k+m−j,n+`−j : A⊗k+m−j −→ A⊗n+`−j .  Furthermore, since TQFT does not require cobordism to be given by a connected manifold, we can stack up disjoint union of surfaces and apply partial sewing to create a variety of linear maps from A⊗n to A⊗m . It was Dijkgraaf [16] who noticed the equivalence between 2D TQFTs and commutative Frobenius algebras. We can see the resemblance immediately. On the vector space A, we have operations defined by  (2.0.4)  1 = ω0,0̄,1 : K −→ A,  m = ω0,2̄,1 : A⊗2 −→ A,   = ω0,1̄,0 : A −→ K,  δ = ω0,1̄,2 : A −→ A⊗2 ,  η = ω0,2̄,0 : A⊗2 −→ K. A connected cobordism of m incoming circles and n outgoing circles is classified by the genus g of the surface. It does not depend on the history of how the cobordisms are glued together. Thus the diffeomorphism classes of surfaces after sewing cobordisms tell us relations among the operations of (2.0.4). For example, ω0,1̄,0 ◦ ω0,2̄,1 = ω0,2̄,0 =⇒  ◦ m = η, which is (1.0.1). Associativity of multiplication comes from uniqueness of the topology of Σ0,3̄,1 with one boundary circle carrying the induced orientation and three the opposite orientation. Changing the orientation of each boundary component to its opposite provides coassociativity. In this way A = Z(S 1 ) acquires a bialgebra structure. To assure duality between algebra and coalgebra structures, we need to impose another condition here: nondegeneracy of η = ω0,2̄,0 . Then A becomes a commutative Frobenius algebra. Conversely, if we start with a finite-dimenionsal commutative Frobenius algebra A, then we first construct ω0,m̄,n on the list of (2.0.4). More general maps ωg,m̄,n are constructed by partial sewing (2.0.3). By construction, all these maps are associated with cobordism of circles, and hence determine a 2D TQFT [1]. With the above considerations, we give the following definition. Definition 2.1 (Two-dimensional Topological Quantum Field Theory). Let (A, , λ) be a set of data consisting of a finite-dimensional vector space A over K, a non-trivial linear ∼ map  : A −→ K, and an isomorphism λ : A −→ A∗ . A Two-dimensional Topological Quantum Field Theory is a system (A, {ωg,m̄,n }) consisting of linear maps ωg,k̄,` : A⊗k −→ A⊗` ,  0 ≤ g, k, `,  satisfying the following axioms. • TQFT 1. Symmetry: (2.0.5)  ωg,k̄,` : A⊗k −→ A⊗`  is symmetric with respect to the Sk -action on the domain. • TQFT 2. Non-triviality: (2.0.6)  ω0,1̄,0 =  : A −→ K.  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  13  • TQFT 3. Duality: A⊗m  (2.0.7)  λ⊗m    (A∗ )⊗m  ωg,m̄,n  (ωg,n̄,m  )∗  / A⊗n   λ⊗n .  / (A∗ )⊗n  • TQFT 4. Sewing: (2.0.8) ωg,m̄,n ◦ ωh,k̄,` = ωg+h+j−1,k+m−j,n+`−j : A⊗k+m−j −→ A⊗n+`−j ,  j ≤ m, j ≤ `.  Remark 2.2. As noted above, the vector space A acquires the structure of a commutative Frobenius algebra from these axioms. Conversely, if A is a commutative Frobenius algebra, then ω0,m̄,n of (2.0.4) can be extended to ωg,m̄,n that satisfy the TQFT axioms. 3. Cohomological field theory Recall that for any oriented closed manifold X, its cohomology ring H ∗ (X, K) is a Frobenius algebra defined over K. If we restrict ourselves to even dimensional manifold X and consider only even part of the cohomology, then A = H even (X, K) is a finite-dimensional commutative Frobenius algebra. This Frobenius algebra naturally defines a 2D TQFT. The role of a TQFT in general dimension is to represent a topological invariant of higher dimensional manifolds. We are now seeing that the classical topology of a manifold X is a 2D TQFT. Changing our point of view, we can ask if we start with X, then how do we find the corresponding 2D TQFT? Of course the Frobenius algebra structure automatically determine the unique 2D TQFT as we have seen in Section 2. But then the picture of sewing cobordisms is lost in this algebraic formulation. What is the role of the cobordism of circles in the context of understanding the manifold X? The amazing vision emerged in the early 1990s is that 2D TQFT can be further quantized into Gromov-Witten theory, which produces quantum topological invariants of X that cannot be reduced to classical invariants. This epoch making discovery was one of the decisive moments of the fruitful interaction of string theory and geometry, which is still continuing today. String theory deals with flying strings in a space-time manifold X. The trajectory of a moving string is a curved cylinder embedded in the manifold X, like a duct pipe in the attic. When strings are considered as quantum objects, they can interact one another. For example, Figure 2.1 can be interpreted as a string of string interactions. First, three strings collide in a complicated interaction to produce two strings. The complexity of the interaction is classified as “g = 2” in terms of the genus of the first surface. These two strings created in the first interaction then collide in an even more complicated (i.e., g = 3) interaction to produce four strings in the end. The trajectory of these interactions then forms a bordered surface of genus 6 with 7 boundary components embedded in the space-time X. Models for string theory were originally introduced to understand how the space-time X dictates string interactions. In this process, the importance of Calabi-Yau spaces was recognized, through considerations on the consistency of string theory as a physical theory. By changing the point of view 180◦ , researchers then noticed that a simple model of string interactions could be used to obtain a totally new class of topological invariants of X itself. These new invariants are not necessarily captured by the classical topology, such as (co)homology groups and homotopy groups. We use the terminology of quantum topological invariants for the invariants obtained by string theory considerations.  14  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Gromov-Witten theory is a mathematically rigorous interpretation of a model for a quantum string theory. A trajectory of interacting strings in X is the image of a map (3.0.1)  f : Σg,m̄,n −→ X  from a bordered surface Σg,m̄,n into X. Recall that the fundamental group π1 (X, x0 ) of X is determined by the connectivity of the pointed loop space  L(X, x0 ) = C ∞ (S 1 , ∗), (X, x0 ) , which is the moduli space of differentiable maps from S 1 to X that send a reference point ∗ ∈ S 1 to x0 ∈ X. In the same spirit, Gromov-Witten invariants are defined by looking at the classical topological invariants of appropriate moduli spaces of maps from Σg,m̄,n to X. When we have the notion of size of a string, the trajectory Σg,m̄,n has a metric on it. If the ambient manifold X has a geometric structure, such as a symplectic structure, complex structure, or a Kähler structure, then the map f needs to be compatible with the structures of the source and the target. For example, if X is Kähler, then we give a complex structure on Σg,m̄,n that is compatible with the metric it has, and require that f is a holomorphic map. Technical difficulties arise in defining moduli spaces of such maps. Even the moduli spaces are defined, they are often very different objects from the usual differentiable manifolds. We need to extend the notion of manifolds here. Thus identifying reasonable classical topological invariants of these spaces also poses a difficult problem. The simplest scenario is the following: We take X = pt to be just a single point. Of course nobody wants to know the topological structure of a point. We all know it! By exploring the Gromov-Witten theory of a point, we learn the structure of the theory itself. Since we can map anything to a point, a point may not be such a simple object, after all. It is like considering a vacuum in physics. Again, anything can be thrown into a vacuum. A quantum theory of a vacuum is inevitably a rich theory. When X = pt is a point, we consider all incoming and outgoing strings to be infinitesimally small. Thus the surfaces we are considering become closed, and boundary components are just several points identified on them. A metric on a closed surface naturally gives rise to a unique complex structure, making it a compact Riemann surface. And every compact Riemann surface acquires a unique projective algebraic structure, making it a projective algebraic curve. Since we are allowing strings to become infinitesimally small during the interaction, the trajectory may contain a process of an embedded S 1 in the surface shrinking to a point, and then becoming a finite size circle again a moment later. Such a process can be understood in complex algebraic geometry as a nodal singularity of an algebraic curve. Locally, every nodal singularity of a curve is the same as the neighborhood of the origin of a singular algebraic curve {(x, y) ∈ C2 | xy = 0}. We are talking about an abstract notion of trajectories here, because nothing can move in X = pt. In terms of the map idea (3.0.1), we note that there is a unique map f from any projective algebraic curve to a point, which satisfies any reasonable requirement of maps such as being a morphism of algebraic varieties. Then the moduli space of all maps simply means the moduli space of the source. A stable curve is a projective algebraic curve with only nodal singularities and a finite number of smooth points marked on the curve such that it has only a finite number of algebraic automorphisms fixing each marked point. We recall that the holomorphic automorphism group of P1 , Aut(P1 ) = P SL2 (C),  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  15  acts on P1 triply transitively. The number of automorphisms fixing up to 2 points is always infinity. Since P SL2 (C) is compact and three-dimensional, if we choose three distinct points on P1 and require the automorphism to fix each of these points, then we have only finitely many choices. Actually in our case, it is unique. For an elliptic curve E, since it is an abelian group, E acts on E transitively. To avoid these translations, we need to choose a point on E. We can naturally identify it as the identity element of the elliptic curve as a group. Automorphisms of an elliptic curve fixing a point then form a finite group. If a compact Riemann surface C has genus g = g(C) ≥ 2, then it is known that the order of the analytic automorphism group is bounded by |Aut(C)| ≤ 84(g − 1). This bound comes from hyperbolic geometry. It is easy to see the finiteness. First, we note that universal covering of C is the upper half plane H = {z ∈ C | Im(z) > 0}, and C is constructed by the quotient ∼  C −→ H/ρ(π1 (C)) through a faithful representation (3.0.2)  ρ : π1 (C) −→ P SL2 (R) = Aut(H)  of the fundamental group of C into the automorphism group of H. Every holomorphic automorphism of C extends to an automorphism of H. We know that C does not have any non-trivial holomorphic vector field v. If it did, then v would be a differentiable vector field with isolated zeros, and each zero comes with positive index, because locally it is given by z n d/dz. We learn from topology that the sum of the indices of isolated zeros of a vector field on C is equal to χ(C) = 2 − 2g < 0. It is a contradiction. Thus Aut(C) ⊂ P SL2 (C) is a discrete subgroup. Since P SL2 (R) is compact, |Aut(C)| is finite. An algebraic curve C is stable if and only if (1) every singularity is nodal, and (2) every irreducible component C 0 of C has a finite number of automorphisms. The second condition means that the total number of smooth marked points and singular points of C that are on C 0 has to be 3 or more if g(C 0 ) = 0, and 1 or more if g(C 0 ) = 1. There is no condition for an irreducible component of genus two or more. For a pair (g, n) of integers g ≥ 0 and n ≥ 1 in the stable range 2g − 2 + n > 0, we denote by Mg,n the moduli space of stable curves of genus g and n smooth marked points. It is a complex orbifold of dimension 3g − 3 + n. Quantum topological invariants of a point X = pt is then realized as classical topological invariants of Mg,n . Alas to this day, we cannot identify the cohomology groups H i (Mg,n , Q) for all values of i, g, n. From the very definition of these moduli spaces, we can construct many concrete cohomology classes on each of Mg,n , called tautological classes. What we do not know is indeed how much more we need to know to determine all of H i (Mg,n , Q). The surprise of Witten’s conjecture [93], proved in [62], is that we can actually explicitly write intersection relations of certain tautological classes for all values of g and n. Among many different proofs available for the Witten conjecture (see for example, [61, 62, 71, 72, 80, 85]), [72, 80] deal with recursive relations among surfaces much in the same spirit of TQFT. These relations are first noticed in [20]. We will discuss these relations in connection to topological recursion later in these lectures.  16  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Geometric relations among Mg,n ’s for different values of (g, n) have a simple meaning. Let us denote by Mg,n the moduli space of smooth n-pointed curves. Then the boundary Mg,n \ Mg,n consists of points representing singular curves. Simplest singular stable curve has one nodal singularity, which can be described as collision of two smooth points. Analyzing how these singularities occur via degeneration, we come up with three types of natural morphisms among the moduli spaces Mg,n . They are the forgetful morphisms (3.0.3)  π : Mg,n+1 −→ Mg,n  which simply erase one of the marked points on a stable curve, and gluing morphisms (3.0.4)  gl1 : Mg−1,n+2 −→ Mg,n  (3.0.5)  gl2 : Mg1 ,n1 +1 × Mg2 ,n2 +1 −→ Mg1 +g2 ,n1 +n2  that construct boundary strata of Mg,n . Under a gluing morphism, we put two smooth points of stable curves together to form a one nodal singularity. The first one gl1 glues two points on the same curve together, and gl2 one each on two curves. The fiber of π at a stable curve (C, p1 , . . . , pn ) ∈ Mg,n is the curve C itself, because another marked point can be placed anywhere on C. Thus π is a universal family of curves parameterized by the base moduli space Mg,n . When we place the extra marked point pn+1 at pi , i = 1, . . . , n, then as the point of Mg,n+1 on the fiber of π, the data represented is a singular curve obtained by joining C itself with a P1 at the location of pi ∈ C, but the two marked points pi , pn+1 are actually placed on the line P1 . Assigning this singular curve to (C, p1 , . . . , pn ) defines a section σi : Mg,n −→ Mg,n+1 , which is a right inverse of π. Geometrically, σi sends (C, p1 , . . . , pn ) to the point pi on the fiber C = π −1 (C, p1 , . . . , pn ). Obviously, π ◦ σi : Mg,n −→ Mg,n is the identity map. Gromov-Witten theory for a Kähler manifold X [15] concerns topological structure of the moduli space  Mg,n (X, β) = f : (C, p1 , . . . , pn ) −→ X [f (C)] = β of stable holomorphic maps f from a nodal curve C with n smooth marked points p1 , . . . , pn ∈ C to X such that the homology class of the image f (C) agrees with a prescribed homology class β ∈ H2 (X, Z). Here, stability of a map f is again defined by imposing the finiteness of possible automorphisms. Giving a definition of this moduli space is beyond our scope of this article. We refer to [15]. The moduli space, if defined, should come with natural maps ev  i Mg,n (X, β) −−−− → X   φy  Mg,n , where the forgetful map φ assigns the stabilization of the source (C, p1 , . . . , pn ) to the map f by forgetting about the map itself, and  evi f : (C, p1 , . . . , pn ) −→ X = f (pi ) ∈ X, i = 1, . . . , n,  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  17  is the value of f at the i-th marked point pi ∈ C. Stabilization means that evey irreducible component of (C, p1 , . . . , pn ) that is not stable is shrunk to a point. If we indeed know the moduli space Mg,n (X, β) and that its cohomology theory behaves as we expect, then we would have  ev∗ H ∗ Mg,n (X, β), Q ←−−i−− H ∗ (X, Q)   φ! y H ∗ (Mg,n , Q), where φ! is the Gysin map defined by integration along fiber. If Mg,n (X, β) were a manifold, and the map φ : Mg,n (X, β) −→ Mg,n were a fiber bundle, then Mg,n (X, β) would have been locally a direct product, hence the Gysin map φ! associated with φ would be defined by integrating de Rham cohomology classes of Mg,n (X, β) along fiber of φ. Choose any cohomology classes v1 , . . . vn ∈ H ∗ (X, Q) of X. We then could have defined the GromovWitten invariants by Z  X,β GWg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) := φ! ev1∗ (v1 ) · · · evn∗ (vn ) . Mg,n  In general, however, construction of the Gysin map does not work as we hope. This is due to the complicated nature of the moduli space Mg,n (X, β), which often has components of unexpected dimensions. The remedy is to define the virtual fundamental class [Mg,n (X, β)]vir of the expected dimension, and avoid the use of φ! by defining Z X,β (3.0.6) GWg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) := ev1∗ (v1 ) · · · evn∗ (vn ). [Mg,n (X,β)]vir  See [15] for more detail. Now recall that A = H even (X, Q) is a Frobenius algebra. Although Gromov-Witten theory goes through a big black box [Mg,n (X, β)]vir , what we wish is a map Ωg,n : H even (X, Q)⊗n −→ H ∗ (Mg,n , Q) whose integral over Mg,n gives the quantum invariants of X. Then what are the properties that Gromov-Witten invariants should satisfy? Can we list the properties as axioms for the above map Ωg,n so that we can characterize Gromov-Witten invariants? This was one of the motivations of Kontsevich and Manin to introduce CohFT in [63]. As we see below, a 2D TQFT can be obtained as a special case of a CohFT. The amazing relation between TQFT and CohFT, i.e., the reconstruction of CohFT from its restriction to TQFT due to Givental and Teleman [48, 91], plays a key role in many new developments (see for example, [3, 36, 39, 68]), some of which are deeply related with topological recursion. Definition 3.1 (Cohomological Field Theory [63]). Let A be a finite-dimensional, unital, associative, and commutative Frobenius algebra with a basis {e1 , . . . , er }. A Cohomological Field Theory is a system (A, {Ωg,n }) consisting of linear maps (3.0.7)  Ωg,n : A⊗n −→ H ∗ (Mg,n , K)  defined for (g, n) in the stable range 2g − 2 + n > 0 and satisfying the following axioms: CohFT 0:  Ωg,n is Sn -invariant, and Ω0,3 (v1 , v2 , v3 ) = η(v1 v2 , v3 ).  CohFT 1:  Ωg,n+1 (v1 , . . . , vn , 1) = π ∗ Ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ). X gl1∗ Ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) = Ωg−1,n+2 (v1 , . . . , vn , ea , eb )η ab .  CohFT 2:  a,b  18  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  CohFT 3:  gl2∗ Ωg1 +g2 ,|I|+|J| (vI , vJ ) =  X  η ab Ωg1 ,|I|+1 (vI , ea ) ⊗ Ωg2 ,|J|+1 (vJ , eb ),  a,b  where I t J = {1, . . . , n} is a disjoint partition of the index set, and the tensor product operation on the right-hand side is performed via the Künneth formula of cohomology rings H ∗ (Mg1 ,n1 +1 × Mg2 ,n2 +1 , K) ∼ = H ∗ (Mg1 ,n1 +1 , K) ⊗ H ∗ (Mg2 ,n2 +1 , K). Remark 3.2. The condition Ω0,3 (v1 , v2 , v3 ) = η(v1 v2 , v3 ) says that the product of the Frobenius algebra is determined by the (0, 3)-value of the Gromov-Witten invariants. Proposition 3.3 (2D TQFT is a CohFT). Every 2D TQFT is a CohFT that takes values in H 0 (Mg,n , K). More precisely, let (A, ωg,m̄,n ) be a 2D TQFT. Then ωg,n = ωg,n̄,0 satisfies the CohFT axioms, by identifying K = H 0 (Mg,n , K). Proof. Since Mg,n is connected, the three types of morphisms (3.0.3), (3.0.4), and (3.0.5) all produce isomorphisms of degree 0 cohomologies. Thus the axioms CohFT 1–3 become (3.0.8) (3.0.9)  ωg,n+1 (v1 , . . . , vn , 1) = ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ), X ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) = ωg−1,n+2 (v1 , . . . , vn , ea , eb )η ab , a,b  (3.0.10)  ωg1 +g2 ,|I|+|J| (vI , vJ ) =  X  η ab ωg1 ,|I|+1 (vI , ea ) · ωg2 ,|J|+1 (vJ , eb ).  a,b  We wish to show that (3.0.8)-(3.0.10) are consequences of the partial sewing axiom (2.0.8) of TQFT under the identification ωg,n = ωg,n̄,0 . Since ω0,0̄,1 = 1, we have ωg,n+1,0 ◦(n+1) ω0,0̄,1 = ωg,n̄,0 = ωg,n : A⊗n −→ K from (2.0.8), which is (3.0.8). Here, ◦(n+1) is the composition taken at the (n + 1)-th slot of the input variables of ωg,n+1,0 . Next, we need to identify ω0,0̄,2 : K −→ A ⊗ A. Since P ω0,0̄,2 = ω0,1̄,2 ◦ ω0,0̄,1 , we see that ω0,0̄,2 (1) = δ(1) = a,b η ab ea ⊗ eb . Denoting by ◦(n+1,n+2) to indicate composition taking at the last two slots of variables, we have (3.0.9) ωg−1,n+2,0 ◦(n+1,n+2) ω0,0̄,2 = ωg,n̄,0 : A⊗n −→ K. If we have two disjoint sets of variables vI and vJ , then we can apply composition of ω0,0̄,2 simultaneously to two different maps. For example, we have  ωg1 ,|I|+1,0 ⊗ ωg2 ,|J|+1,0 ◦ ω0,0̄,2 = ωg1 +g2 ,|I|+|J|,0 : A⊗(|I|+|J|) −→ K, which is (3.0.10). Notice that a linear map ωg,m+n : A⊗m ⊗ A⊗n −→ K is equivalent to A⊗m −→ (A∗ )⊗n . Thus we can re-construct a map ωg,m̄,n from ωg,m+n by (3.0.11)  A⊗m k    A⊗m  ωg,m+n  / (A∗ )⊗n ωg,m̄,n  (λ−1 )⊗n  / A⊗n   k,  / A⊗n  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  19  ∼  where λ : A −→ A∗ is the isomorphism of (1.0.3). For the case of g = 0, m = 2, and n = 1, (3.0.11) implies that λ−1 ω0,3 (v1 , v2 , · ) = ω0,2̄,1 (v1 , v2 ) = v1 v2 for v1 , v2 ∈ A. Or equivalently, we have (3.0.12)  ω0,3 (v1 , v2 , v3 ) = η(v1 v2 , v3 ) = (v1 v2 v3 ).  This completes the proof.    Conversely, the degree 0 part of the cohomology of a CohFT is a 2D TQFT. Proposition 3.4 (Restriction of CohFT to the degree 0 part of the cohomology ring). Let (A, Ωg,n ) be a CohFT associated with a Frobenius algebra A. The Frobenius algebra A itself defines a unique 2D TQFT (A, ωg,m̄,n ). Denote by r : H ∗ (Mg,n , K) −→ H 0 (Mg,n , K) = K the restriction of the cohomology ring to its degree 0 component, and define (3.0.13)  ωg,n = r ◦ Ωg,n : A⊗n −→ K.  Then we have the equality of maps (3.0.14)  ωg,n = ωg,n̄,0 : A⊗n −→ K  for all (g, n) with 2g − 2 + n > 0. In other words, the degree 0 restriction of a CohFT is the 2D TQFT determined by the Frobenius algebra A. Proof. We already know that (A, ωg,m̄,n ) defines a CohFT with values in H 0 (Mg,n , K). We need to show that this CohFT is exactly the degree 0 restriction of the given CohFT we start with. First we extend ωg,n to the unstable range by (3.0.15)  ω0,1 =  : A −→ K,  ω0,2 = η : A⊗2 −→ K.  We then note that from (2.0.4) and (3.0.15), we see that (3.0.14) holds for ω0,1 and ω0,2 . The general case of (3.0.14) follows by induction on 3g−3+n, provided that ω0,3 is appropriately defined. This is because (3.0.9) and (3.0.10) are induction formula recursively generating ωg,n from those with smaller values of g and n. Since • Case of (3.0.9): 3g − 3 + n = [3(g − 1) − 3 + (n + 2)] + 1, • Case of (3.0.10): 3(g1 + g2 ) − 3 + |I| + |J| = [3g1 − 3 + |I| + 1] + [3g2 − 3 + |J| + 1] + 1, we see that the complexity 3g −3+n is always reduced by 1 in each of the recursive formulas. Finally, we see that since M0,3 is just a point as we have noted above in the discussion of Aut(P1 ), we have ω0,3 = Ω0,3 . Hence (3.0.16)  ω0,3 (v1 , v2 , v3 ) = η(v1 v2 , v3 ),  which makes (3.0.14) holds for all values of (g, n). This completes the proof.    Remark 3.5. The above two propositions show that a 2D TQFT can be defined either just by a commutative Frobenius algebra A, by a system of maps {ωg,m̄,n } satisfying the TQFT axioms, or the degree 0 part of a CohFT. From now on, we use (A, ωg,n ) to denote a 2D TQFT, which is less cumbersome and easier to deal with. Proposition 3.6. The genus 0 values of a 2D TQFT is given by (3.0.17)  ω0,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) = (v1 · · · vn ).  Proof. This is a direct consequence of CohFT 3 and (1.0.9).    20  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  One of the original motivations of TQFT [4, 89] is to identify the topological invariant Z(N ) of a closed manifold N . In our current setting, it is defined as  (3.0.18) Z(Σg ) :=  λ−1 (ωg,1 ) for a closed oriented surface Σg of genus g. Here, ωg,1 : A −→ K is an element of A∗ , and ∼ λ : A −→ A∗ is the canonical isomorphism (1.0.3). Proposition 3.7. The topological invariant Z(Σg ) of (3.0.18) is given by Z(Σg ) = (eg ),  (3.0.19)  where e ∈ A is the Euler element of (1.0.12). Lemma 3.8. We have e := m ◦ δ(1) = λ−1 (ω1,1 ).  (3.0.20) Proof. This follows from ω1,1 (v) =  X  ω0,3 (v, ea , eb )η ab =  a,b  X  η(v, ea eb )η ab = η(v, e)  a,b  for every v ∈ A.    Proof of Proposition 3.7. Since the starting case g = 1 follows from the above Lemma, we prove the formula by induction, which goes as follows: X ωg,1 (v) = ωg−1,3 (v, ea , eb )η ab a,b  =  X  ω0,4 (v, ea , eb , ei )ωg−1,1 (ej )η ab η ij  i,j,a,b  =  X  =  X  η(vea eb , ei )ωg−1,1 (ej )η ab η ij  i,j,a,b  η(ve, ei )ωg−1,1 (ej )η ij  i,j  = ωg−1,1 (ve) = ω1,1 (veg−1 ) = η(veg−1 , e) = η(v, eg ).  A closed genus g surface is obtained by sewing g genus 1 pieces with one output boundaries to a genus 0 surface with g input boundaries. Since the Euler element is the output of the genus 1 surface with one boundary, we obtain the same result g  z }| { Z(Σg ) = ω0,g (e, . . . , e). Finally we have the following: Theorem 3.9. The value of a 2D TQFT is given by (3.0.21)  ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) = (v1 · · · vn eg ).  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  21  Proof. The argument is the same as the proof of Proposition 3.7: ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) = ω1,n (v1 eg−1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) X = ω0,n+2 (v1 eg−1 , v2 , . . . , vn , ea , eb )η ab a,b  = (v1 · · · vn eg ).  4. Category of cell graphs In the original formulation of 2D TQFT, the operations of multiplication and comultiplication are associated with an oriented surface of genus 0 with three boundary circles. In this section, we introduce a category of ribbon graphs, which carries the information of all finite-dimensional Frobenius algebras. To avoid unnecessary confusion, we use the terminology of cell graphs in this article, instead of more common ribbon graphs. Ribbon graphs naturally appear for encoding complex structures of a topological surface (see for example, [62, 75]). Our purpose of using ribbon graphs are for degeneration of stable curves, and we label vertices, instead of faces, of a ribbon graph. Definition 4.1 (Cell graphs). A connected cell graph of topological type (g, n) is the 1-skeleton of a cell-decomposition of a connected closed oriented surface of genus g with n labeled 0-cells. We call a 0-cell a vertex, a 1-cell an edge, and a 2-cell a face, of the cell graph. We denote by Γg,n the set of connected cell graphs of type (g, n). Each edge consists of two half-edges connected at the midpoint of the edge. Remark 4.2. • The dual of a cell graph is a ribbon graph, or Grothendieck’s dessin d’enfant. We note that we label vertices of a cell graph, which corresponds to face labeling of a ribbon graph. Ribbon graphs are also called by different names, such as embedded graphs and maps. • We identify two cell graphs if there is a homeomorphism of the surfaces that brings one cell-decomposition to the other, keeping the labeling of 0-cells. The only possible automorphisms of a cell graph come from cyclic rotations of half-edges at each vertex. Definition 4.3 (Directed cell graph). A directed cell graph is a cell graph for which an arrow is assigned to each edge. An arrow is the same as an ordering of the two half-edges forming an edge. The set of directed cell graphs of type (g, n) is denoted by ~Γg,n . Remark 4.4. A directed cell graph is a quiver. Since our graph is drawn on an oriented surface, a directed cell graph carries more information than its underlying quiver structure. The tail vertex of an arrowed edge is called the source, and the head of the arrow the target, in the quiver language. To label n vertices, we normally use the n-set [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}. However, it is often easier to use any totally ordered set of n elements for labeling. The main reason we label the vertices of a cell graph is we wish to assign an element of a K-vector space A to each vertex. In this article, we consider the case that a cell graph γ ∈ Γg,n defines a linear map (4.0.1)  Γg,n 3 γ : A⊗n −→ K.  22  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  The set of values of these functions γ can be more general. We discuss some of the general cases in [33]. An effective tool in graph enumeration is edge-contraction operations. Often edge contraction leads to an inductive formula for counting problems of graphs. The same edgecontraction operations acquire algebraic meaning in our consideration. Definition 4.5 (Edge-contraction operations). There are two types of edge-contraction operations applied to cell graphs. ~ = p−→ • ECO 1: Suppose there is a directed edge E i pi in a cell graph γ ∈ Γg,n , ~ in γ, and put connecting the tail vertex pi and the head vertex pj . We contract E the two vertices pi and pj together. We use i for the label of this new vertex, and call it again pi . Then we have a new cell graph γ 0 ∈ Γg,n−1 with one less vertices. In this process, the topology of the surface on which γ is drawn does not change. Thus genus g of the graph stays the same.  E p i  p j  p i  Figure 4.1. Edge-contraction operation ECO 1. The edge bounded by two vertices pi and pj is contracted to a single vertex pi .  ~ for the edge-contraction operation • We use the notation E ~ : Γg,n 3 γ 7−→ γ 0 ∈ Γg,n−1 . (4.0.2) E ~ in γ ∈ Γg,n at the i-th vertex pi . Since • ECO 2: Suppose there is a directed loop L a loop in the 1-skeleton of a cell decomposition is a topological cycle on the surface, its contraction inevitably changes the topology of the surface. First we look at the half-edges incident to vertex pi . Locally around pi on the surface, the directed loop ~ separates the neighborhood of pi into two pieces. Accordingly, we put the incident L half-edges into two groups. We then break the vertex pi into two vertices, pi1 and pi2 , so that one group of half-edges are incident to pi1 , and the other group to pi2 . ~ upward near at vertex The order of two vertices is determined by placing the loop L pi . Then we name the new vertex on its left by pi1 , and on its right by pi2 . ~ and Let γ 0 denote the possibly disconnected graph obtained by contracting L separating the vertex to two distinct vertices labeled by i1 and i2 . ~ is a loop of handle. We use the • If γ 0 is connected, then it is in Γg−1,n+1 . The loop L ~ to indicate the edge-contraction operation same notation L ~ : Γg,n 3 γ 7−→ γ 0 ∈ Γg−1,n+1 . (4.0.3) L • If γ 0 is disconnected, then write γ 0 = (γ1 , γ2 ) ∈ Γg1 ,|I|+1 × Γg2 ,|J|+1 , where ( g = g1 + g2 . (4.0.4) I t J = {1, . . . , bi, . . . , n} The edge-contraction operation is again denoted by ~ : Γg,n 3 γ 7−→ (γ1 , γ2 ) ∈ Γg ,|I|+1 × Γg ,|J|+1 . (4.0.5) L 1 2  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  23  p  i  L  p  i1  p  i2  ~ Figure 4.2. Edge-contraction operation ECO 2. The contracted edge is a loop L ~ of a cell graph. Place the loop so that it is upward near at pi to which L is attached. The vertex pi is then broken into two vertices, pi1 on the left, and pi2 on the right. Half-edges incident to pi are separated into two groups, belonging to two sides of the loop near pi .  ~ a separating loop. Here, vertices labeled by I belong to In this case we call L the connected component of genus g1 , and those labeled by J are on the other component of genus g2 . Let (I− , i, I+ ) (reps. (J− , i, J+ )) be the reordering of I t {i} (resp. J t {i}) in the increasing order. Although we give labeling i1 , i2 to the two vertices created by breaking pi , since they belong to distinct graphs, we can simply ~ translates use i for the label of pi1 ∈ γ1 and the same i for pi2 ∈ γ2 . The arrow of L into the information of ordering among the two vertices pi1 and pi2 . Remark 4.6. Let us define m(γ) = 2g − 2 + n for a graph γ ∈ Γg,n . Then every edgecontraction operation reduces m(γ) exactly by 1. Indeed, for ECO 1, we have m(γ 0 ) = 2g − 2 + (n − 1) = m(γ) − 1. The ECO 2 applied to a loop of handle produces m(γ 0 ) = 2(g − 1) − 2 + (n + 1) = m(γ) − 1. For a separating loop, we have +)  2g1 − 2 + |I| + 1 2g2 − 2 + |J| + 1 2g1 + 2g2 − 4 + |I| + |J| + 2 = 2g − 2 + n − 1.  The motivation for our introduction of directed cell graphs is that we need them when we deal with non-commutative Frobenius algebras. The operation of taking disjoint union is symmetric. Therefore, 2D TQFT inevitably leads to a commutative Frobenius algebra. The advantage of our formalism using directed cell graphs is that we can deal with noncommutative Frobenius algebras and non-symmetric tensor products. For the purpose of presenting the idea of the category of cell graphs as simple as possible, we restrict ourselves to undirected cell graphs in this article. Therefore, we will only recover commutative Frobenius algebras and usual 2D TQFT. A more general theory will be given in [33]. We now introduce the category of cell graphs. The most unusual point we present here is that a morphism between cell graphs is not a cell map. Recall that a cell map f : γ −→ γ 0 from a cell graph γ to another cell graph γ 0 is a topological map between 1-dimensional cell complexes. Thus f sends a vertex of γ to a vertex of γ 0 , and an edge of γ to either an edge or a vertex of γ 0 , keeping the incidence relations. In particular, a cell map is continuous with respect to the topological structure on cell graphs indued from the surface on which they are drawn.  24  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Definition 4.7 (Category of cell graphs). The category CG of cell graphs is defined as follows. • The set of objects of CG is the set of all cell graphs: a Γg,n . (4.0.6) Ob(CG) = g≥0,n>0  • A morphism f ∈ Hom(γ, γ 0 ) is a composition of a finite sequence of edge-contraction operations and cell graph automorphisms. In particular, Hom(γ, γ) = Aut(γ). If there is no way to bring γ to γ 0 by consecutive applications of edge-contraction operations and automorphisms, then we define Hom(γ, γ 0 ) = ∅, even though there may be cell maps between them. Remark 4.8. The triple (CG, t, ∅) forms a symmetric monoidal category. Remark 4.9. Automorphisms of a cell graph and ECOs of the first kind are cell maps, but ECO 2 operations are not. When an ECO 2 is involved, a morphism between cell graphs does not have to be a cell map. Even it may not be a continuous map. Example 4.10. A few simple examples of morphisms are given below. Note that vertices are all labeled, and automorphisms are required to keep labeling.  (4.0.8)  Hom (•, •) = {id}.   Hom •, • • = ∅.  (4.0.9)  E1 E2 Hom(• • •, • •) = {E1 , E2 }.  (4.0.7)  (4.0.10) (4.0.11)  E1 E2 Hom(• • •, •) = {E1 E2 = E2 E1 }.   E1 Hom • •, • = {E1 , E2 = σ(E1 )}. E2    (4.0.12)   Hom • •, • • = {E1 E2 = E2 E1 }. E1 E2  In (4.0.10), we note that E1 E2 := E1 ◦ E2 is equal to E2 E1 := E2 ◦ E1 , because they both produce the same result • • • → • • → •. The cell graph of the left of (4.0.11) and (4.0.12) has an automorphism σ that interchanges E1 and E2 . Thus as an edge-contraction operation, E2 = E1 ◦ σ = σ(E1 ). Note that there is a 2 : 1 covering cell map for the E1  case of (4.0.11) that sends both edges E1 and E2 on • • to the single loop of • , and E2  the two vertices on the first graph to the single vertex on the second. Since it is not an edge-contraction, this cell map is not a morphism. The morphism of (4.0.12) is not a cell map, since it is not continuous. Let Vect be the category of finite-dimensional K-vector spaces. The triple C = (Vect, ⊗, K) forms a monoidal category. Again for simplicity, we are concerned only with symmetric tensor products in this article, so we consider C a symmetric monoidal category. A Kobject in Vect is a pair (V,  : V −→ K) consisting of a vector space V and a linear map  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  25   : V −→ K. We denote by Vect/K the category of K-objects in Vect. It has the unique final object (K, id : K −→ K). Therefore,  C/K = Vect/K, ⊗, (K, id : K −→ K) is again a monoidal category. We denote by Fun(C/K, C/K)  (4.0.13)  the endofunctor category of the monoidal category C/K, which consists of monoidal functors α : C/K −→ C/K as its objects, and their natural transformations τ as morphisms. Schematically, we have V    α(h)    W  β(h)    >K g  β(f )  α(f )  f h  / β(V )  τ  α(V )  <K  α(g)    τ  α(W )   / K. <  τ   / β(W )  β(g)  Here, the triangle on the left shows two objects (V, f : V −→ K) and (W, g : W −→ K) of C/K, and a morphism h between them. The prism shape on the right represents two monoidal endofunctors α and β that assigns V 7−→ α(V ),  V 7−→ β(V )  W 7−→ α(W ),  W 7−→ β(W ),  and a natural transformation τ : α −→ β among them. The final object of Fun(C/K, C/K) is the functor (4.0.14)  φ : (V, f : V −→ K) −→ (K, idK : K −→ K)  which assigns the final object of the codomain C/K to everything in the domain C/K. With respect to the tensor product and the above functor (4.0.14) as its identity object, the endofunctor category Fun(C/K, C/K) is again a monoidal category. Definition 4.11 (ECO functor, [33]). The ECO functor is a monoidal functor (4.0.15)  ω : CG −→ Fun(C/K, C/K)  satisfying the following conditions. • The graph • ∈ Γ0,1 consisting of only one vertex and no edge corresponds to the identity functor (4.0.16)  ω(•) = id : C/K −→ C/K.  • Each graph γ ∈ Γg,n corresponds to a functor (4.0.17)  ω(γ) : (V,  : V −→ K) 7−→ (V ⊗n , ωV (γ) : V ⊗n −→ K).  • Edge-contraction operations correspond to natural transformations. Let us recall the notion of Frobenius object.  26  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Definition 4.12 (Frobenius object). Let (C, ⊗, K) be a symmetric monoidal category. A Frobenius object is an object V ∈ Ob(C) together with morphisms m : V ⊗ V −→ V,  1 : K −→ V,  δ : V −→ V ⊗ V,   : V −→ K,  satisfying the following conditions: • (V, m, 1) is a monoid object in C. • (V, δ, ) is a comonoid object in C. We also require the compatibility condition (1.0.7) among morphisms m and δ: id⊗δ  V ⊗V  V ⊗ 8 V ⊗V /V  m  δ⊗id  &  m⊗id δ  ' / V ⊗ V. 8  id⊗m  V ⊗V ⊗V Since we are considering the monoidal category of K-objects in Vect, there is a priori no notion of 1 in V . The existence of the morphism 1 : K −→ V requires a non-degeneracy condition. The following theorem is proved in [33]. Theorem 4.13 (Generation of Frobenius objects [33]). An object (V,  : V −→ K) of C/K is a Frobenius object if ωV (• •) : V ⊗V −→ K defines a non-degenerate symmetric bilinear form on V . 5. 2D TQFT from cell graphs The result of Section 3 tells us that a 2D TQFT can be defined as a system (A, ωg,n ) of linear maps (5.0.1)  ωg,n : A⊗n −→ K  defined for all values of g ≥ 0 and n ≥ 1, satisfying a set of conditions. The required conditions are the following: First, (A, ωg,n ) is a CohFT for 2g − 2 + n > 0. In addition, we require that ω0,1 =  : A −→ K, (5.0.2) ω0,2 = η : A ⊗ A −→ K. In this section we give a different formulation of a 2D TQFT, based on cell graphs and a different set of axioms. Our ultimate goal is to relate 2D TQFT, CohFT, mirror symmetry, topological recursion, and quantum curves. Later in these lectures, we introduce quantum curves. Relations between all these subjects will be discussed elsewhere [33]. Theorem 5.1 (Graph independence [29]). Let (A,  : A −→ K) be a Frobenius object under the ECO functor ω of Definition 4.11. Then every connected cell graph γ ∈ Γg,n gives rise to the same map (5.0.3)  ωA (γ) : A⊗n 3 v1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ vn 7−→ (v1 · · · vn eg ) ∈ K,  where e is the Euler element of (1.0.12). Corollary 5.2 (ECO implies TQFT). Define ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) = ωA (γ)(v1 , . . . , vn ) for every γ ∈ Γg,n . Then {ωg,n } is a 2D TQFT. Proof. Since the value of (5.0.3) is the same as (3.0.21), it is a 2D TQFT.    INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  27  The rest of the section is devoted to proving Theorem 5.1. We first give three examples of graph independence. Lemma 5.3 (Edge-removal lemma). Let γ ∈ Γg,n . • Case 1. There is a disc-bounding loop L in γ. Let γ 0 ∈ Γg,n be the graph obtained by simply removing L from γ. Note that we are not contracting L. • Case 2. The graph γ containts two edges E1 and E2 between two distinct vertices pi and pj that bound a disc. Let γ 0 ∈ Γg,n be the graph obtained by removing E2 . Here again, we are just eliminating E2 . • Case 3. Two loops, L1 and L2 , in γ are attached to the i-th vertex pi . If they are homotopic, then let γ 0 ∈ Γg,n be the graph obtained by removing L2 from γ. In each of the above cases, we have ωA (γ)(v1 , . . . , vn ) = ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vn ).  (5.0.4)  Figure 5.1. Removal of disc-bounding edges.  Proof. Case 1. Contracting a disc-bounding loop attached to pi creates (γ0 , γ 0 ) ∈ Γ0,1 ×Γg,n , where γ0 consists of only one vertex and no edges. The natural transformation corresponding to ECO 1 then gives X ωA (γ)(v1 , . . . , vn ) = η(vi , ek e` )η ka η `b ωA (γ0 )(ea )ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , eb , vi+1 . . . , vn ) a,b,k,`  =  X  η(vi , ek e` )η ka η `b η(1, ea )ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , eb , vi+1 . . . , vn )  a,b,k,`  =  X  =  X  η(vi , 1 · e` )η `b ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , eb , vi+1 . . . , vn )  b,k,`  η(vi , e` )η `b ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , eb , vi+1 . . . , vn )  b,`  = ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , vi , vi+1 . . . , vn ). Case 2. Contracting Edge E1 makes E2 a disc-bounding loop at pi . We can remove it by Case 1. Note that the new vertex is assigned with vi vj . Restoring E1 makes the graph exactly the one obtained by removing E2 from γ. Thus (5.0.4) holds. Case 3. Contracting Loop L1 makes L2 a disc-bounding loop. Hence we can remove it by Case 1. Then restoring L1 creates a graph obtained from γ by removing L2 . Thus (5.0.4) holds.  Remark 5.4. The three cases treated above correspond to removing degree 1 and 2 vertices from the dual ribbon graph.  28  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Definition 5.5 (Reduced graph). A cell graph is reduced if it does not contain any discbounding loops or disc-bounding bigons. In terms of dual ribbon graphs, the dual of a reduced cell graph has no vertices of degree 1 or 2. We can see from Lemma 5.3, Case 1, that every graph γ ∈ Γ0,1 gives the same map (5.0.5)  ωA (γ)(v) = (v).  Similarly, Cases 2 and 3 of Lemma 5.3 show that every graph γ ∈ Γ0,2 defines ωA (γ)(v1 , v2 ) = η(v1 , v2 ). This is because we can remove all edges and loops but one that connects the two vertices. Then by the natural transformation corresponding to ECO 1, the value of the assignment ωA (γ) is (v1 v2 ) = η(v1 , v2 ). Proof of Theorem 5.1. We use the induction on m = 2g − 2 + n. The base case is m = −1, or (g, n) = (0, 1), for which the theorem holds by (5.0.5). Assume that (5.0.3) holds for all (g, n) with 2g − 2 + n < m. Now let γ ∈ Γg,n be a cell graph of type (g, n) such that 2n − 2 + n = m. Choose an arbitrary straight edge of γ that connects two distinct vertices, say pi and pj . Then the natural transformation of contracting this edge to γ 0 gives ωA (γ)(v1 , . . . , vn ) = ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , vi vj , vi+1 . . . , vbj , . . . , vn ) = (v1 . . . vn eg ). If we have chosen an arbitrary loop attached to pi , then its contraction by ECO 2 gives two cases, depending on whether the loop is a loop of handle or a separating loop. For the former case, we have a graph γ 0 , and by appealing to (1.0.9) and (1.0.13), we obtain X ωA (γ)(v1 , . . . , vn ) = η(vi , ek e` )η ka η `b ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , ea , eb , vi+1 , . . . , vn ) a,b,k,`  =  X  η(vi ek , e` )η ka η `b ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , ea , eb , vi+1 , . . . , vn )  a,b,k,`  =  X  =  X  η ka ωA (γ 0 )(v1 , . . . , vi−1 , ea , vi ek , vi+1 , . . . , vn )  a,k  η ka (v1 · · · vn eg−1 ea eb )  a,k  = (v1 · · · vn eg ). For the case of a separating loop, ECO 2 makes γ → (γ1 , γ2 ), and we have X   ωA (γ)(v1 , . . . , vn ) = η(vi , ek e` )η ka η `b ωA (γ1 ) vI− , ea , vI+ ωA (γ2 ) vJ− , eb , vJ+ a,b,k,`  ! =  X  ka `b  η(vi , ek e` )η η  ea  Y  g1  vc e  !  eb  c∈I  a,b,k,`  Y  g2  vd e  d∈J  ! =  X  η(vi ek , e` )η ka η `b η  Y  vc , ea eg1  !  eb  c∈I  a,b,k,`  d∈J  ! =  X a,k  η ka η  Y c∈I  vc eg1 , ea  !  vi ek  Y  Y d∈J  vd eg2  vd eg2  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  29  ! =  vi  Y c∈I  vc eg1  Y  vd eg2  d∈J g1 +g2  = (v1 · · · vn e  ).  Therefore, no matter how we apply ECO 1 or ECO 2, we always obtain the same result. This completes the proof.  6. TQFT-valued topological recursion There is a direct relation between a Frobenius algebra and Gromov-Witten theory when A is given by the big quantum cohomology of a target space. Since these Frobenius algebras are usually infinite-dimensional over the ground field, they do not correspond to a 2D TQFT discussed in the previous sections. But for the case that the target space is 0-dimensional, the TQFT indeed captures the whole Gromov-Witten theory. In this section, we present a general framework. Fundamental examples are A = Q, which gives ψ-class intersection numbers on Mg,n , and the center of the group algebra of a finite group A = ZC[G], which produces Gromov-Witten invariants of the classifying space BG. The first example is considered in [29, 30]. The latter case will be discussed elswhere [33]. We wish to solve a graph enumeration problem, where as a graph we consider a cell graph, and each of its vertex is colored by a parameter v ∈ A. We also impose functoriality under the edge-contraction of Definition 4.5 for this coloring. The ECOs reduce the complexity of coloring considerably, because the functoriality makes the coloring process graph independent, as we have shown in the last section. Thus the answer is just the number of graphs times the value (v1 · · · vn eg ) for each topological type (g, n). Here comes the difficulty: there are infinitely many graphs for each topological type, since we allow multiple edges and loops. The standard idea for such counting problem is to appeal to the Laplace transform, which is introduced by Laplace for this particular context of counting an infinite number of objects. Let us denote by (6.0.1)  Γg,n (µ1 , . . . , µn )  the set of all cell graphs with labeled vertices of degrees (µ1 , . . . , µn ). Denoting by cd the number of d-cells in a cell-decomposition of a surface of genus g, d = 0, 1, 2, we have n = c0 , Pn µ i=1 i = 2c1 , and 2 − 2g = n − c1 + c2 . Therefore, (6.0.1) is a finite set. Counting processes become easier if we do not have any object with non-trivial automorphism. There are many ways to eliminate automorphism, for example, the minimalistic way of imposing the least possible conditions, or an excessive way to kill automorphisms but for the most objects the conditions are redundant. Actually, it is known that most of the cell graphs counted in (6.0.1) are without any non-trivial automorphisms. Since any possible automorphism induces a cyclic permutation of half-edges incident to each vertex, the easiest way to disallow any automorphism is to assign an outgoing arrow to one of these half-edges, as in [34, 79] (but not as a quiver). An automorphism should preserve the arrowed half-edges, in addition to labeled vertices. We denote by b g,n (µ1 , . . . , µn ) (6.0.2) Γ the set of arrowed cell graphs with labeled vertices of degrees (µ1 , . . . , µn ), and by (6.0.3)  b g,n (µ1 , . . . , µn ) Cg,n (µ1 , . . . , µn ) := Γ  its cardinality. This number is always a non-negative integer, and C0,1 (2m) = the m-th Catalan number.  2m 1 m+1 m    is  30  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  b g,n (µ1 , . . . , µn ). We use the notation ωA (γ) = ωg,n : A⊗n −→ K of Corollary 5.2 for γ ∈ Γ We are interested in considering the Cg,n (µ1 , . . . , µn )-weighted TQFT Cg,n (µ1 , . . . , µn ) · ωg,n : A⊗n −→ K,  (6.0.4)  and applying the edge-contraction operations to these maps. We contract the edge of γ that carries the outgoing arrow at the first vertex p1 , then place a new arrow to the half-edge next to the original half-edge with respect to the cyclic ordering induced by the orientation of the surface. If the edge that carries the outgoing arrow at p1 is a loop, then after splitting p1 , we place another arrow to the next half-edge at each of the two newly created vertices, again next to the original loop. From this process we obtain the following counting formula: Proposition 6.1. The 2D TQFT weighted by the number of arrowed cell graphs satisfies the following equation. Cg,n (µ1 , . . . , µn ) · ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) =  n X  µj Cg,n−1 (µ1 + µj − 2, µ2 , . . . , µ cj , . . . , µn ) · ωg,n−1 (v1 vj , v2 , . . . , vbj , . . . , vn )  j=2  (6.0.5)  +  X  Cg−1,n+1 (α, β, µ2 , . . . , µn ) · ωg−1,n+2 δ(v1 ), v2 , . . . , vn    α+β=µ1 −2  +  X  X  α+β=µ1 −2  X  η(v1 , ek e` )η ka η `b  g1 +g2 =g a,b,k,` ItJ={2,...,n}  × Cg1 ,|I|+1 (α, µI ) · ωg1 ,|I|+1 (ea , vI )     Cg2 ,|J|+1 (β, µJ ) · ωg2 ,|J|+1 (eb , vJ ) .  This is exactly the same formula of [34, 79, 92] multiplied by ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ) = (v1 . . . vn eg ). Let us now consider a Frobenius algebra twisted topological recursion. To simplify the notation, we adopt the following way of writing: X (6.0.6) (f ⊗ h) ◦ δ = η(•, ek e` )η ka η `b f (ea )h(eb ), a,b,k,`  where f, h : A −→ K are linear functions on A. First let us review the original topological recursion of [38] defined on a spectral curve Σ, which is just a disjoint union of r copies of open discs. Let U be the unit disc centered at 0 of the complex z-line. We choose r sets of functions (xα , yα ), α = 1, . . . , r, defined on U with Taylor expansions (6.0.7)  2  xα (z) = z +  ∞ X  k  aα,k z ,  k=3  yα (z) = z +  ∞ X  bα,k z k ,  k=2  and a meromorphic 1-form (Cauchy kernel) dz dz − + ωα z−a z−b on U , where a, b ∈ U , and ωα is a holomorphic 1-form on U . Since each xα : U −→ C is a 2 : 1 map, we have an involution on U that keeps the same xα -value:  (6.0.9) σα : U −→ U, xα σα (z) = xα (z). (6.0.8)  ωαa−b (z) =  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  31  To avoid confusion, we label r copies of U by U1 , . . . , Ur , and consider the functions (xα , yα ) to be defined on Uα . The topological recursion is the following recursive equation r I σ (z)−z ωαα (z1 ) 1 X   (6.0.10) Wg,n (z1 , . . . , zn ) = 2πi y σ (z) − y (z) dxα (z) α α α ∂U α α=1   No (0,1)    × Wg−1,n+1 z, σα (z), z2 , . . . , zn +  X g1 +g2 =g ItJ={2,...,n}   Wg1 ,|I|+1 (z, zI )Wg2 ,|J|+1 σα (z), zJ    on symmetric meromorphic n-differential forms Wg,n defined on the disjoint union U1n t · · · t Urn for 2g − 2 + n > 0. Here, zI = (zi )i∈I , and “No (0, 1)” in the summation means the partition g = g1 + g2 and the set partition I t J = {2, . . . , n} do not allow g1 = 0 and I = ∅, or g2 = 0 and J = ∅. The integration is performed with respect to z ∈ ∂U . Note that the differential form in the big bracket [ ] in (6.0.10) is a symmetric quadratic differential in the variable z ∈ Uα . The expression 1/dxα (z) is the contraction operator with respect to ∂z ∂ on Uα . Thus the integrand of the recursion becomes a meromorphic the vector field ∂x α ∂z 1-form on Uα in the z-variable, for which the integration is performed. The multiplication σ (z)−z by ωαα (z1 ) is simply the symmetric tensor product with a 1-form proportional to dz1 . The 1-form W0,1 and the 2-form W0,2 are defined separately: (6.0.11)  W0,1 (z) :=  r X  yα (z)dxα (z)  α=1  is defined on the disjoint union U1 t · · · t Ur . If z ∈ Uα , then W0,1 (z) = yα (z)dxα (z). In the form of (6.0.10), however, W0,1 does not appear anywhere. Similarly, W0,2 is defined by W0,2 (z1 , z2 ) := dz1 ωαz1 −b (z2 )  (6.0.12)  if z1 , z2 ∈ Uα . Here, the constant b ∈ Uα does not play any role. This 2-form explicitly appears in the recursion part (the terms in the big bracket [ ]) of the formula. Definition 6.2. A Frobenius algebra twisted topological recursion for Wg,n = Wg,n (z1 , . . . , zn ) : A⊗n −→ K is the following formula: Wg,n (z1 , . . . , zn ; v1 , . . . , vn ) r I X  1 X = Kα z, σα (z), z1 ; ek , e` , v1 2πi α=1 ∂Uα a,b,k,`  (6.0.13)   × Wg−1,n+1 z, σα (z), z2 , . . . , zn ; ea , eb , v2 , . . . , vn )  No (0,1)  +  X g1 +g2 =g ItJ={2,...,n}   Wg1 ,|I|+1 (z, zI ; ea , vI )Wg2 ,|J|+1 σα (z), zJ ; eb , vJ  .  Here (6.0.14)   ωασα (z)−z (z1 )η(ek e` , v1 )η ka η `b   Kα z, σα (z), z1 ; ek , e` , v1 = yα σα (z) − yα (z) dxα (z)  32  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  is the integration-summation kernel. Symbolically we can write (6.0.13) as r I  1 X Kα z, σα (z), z1 Wg,n = 2πi α=1 ∂Uα   (6.0.15) No (0,1) X    × W ◦ δ + W ⊗ W ◦ δ g−1,n+1 g ,|I|+1 g ,|J|+1 1 2   g1 +g2 =g ItJ={2,...,n}  with the usual integration kernel σ (z)−z   Kα z, σα (z), z1 :=  yα  ωαα (z1 )   . σα (z) − yα (z) dxα (z)  Theorem 6.3. The topological recursion (6.0.13) uniquely determines the (A⊗n )∗ -valued n-linear differential form Wg,n from the initial data W0,2 . If the initial data is given by W0,2 (z1 , z2 ; v1 , v2 ) = W0,2 (z1 , z2 ) · η(v1 , v2 ) for a 2-form (6.0.12), then there exists a solution {Wg,n } of the topological recursion (6.0.10) and a 2D TQFT {ωg,n } such that (6.0.16)  Wg,n (z1 , . . . , zn ; v1 , . . . , vn ) = Wg,n (z1 , . . . , zn ) · ωg,n (v1 , . . . , vn ).  Proof. The proof is done by induction on m = 2g − 2 + n with the base case m = 0. We assume that (6.0.16) holds for all (g, n) such that 2g − 2 + n < m, and use the value ωg,n = (v1 · · · vn eg ) given by (3.0.21) for the values of (g, n) in the range of induction hypothesis. Then by (6.0.13) and functoriality under ECO 2, we conclude that (6.0.16) also holds for all (g, n) such that 2g − 2 + n = m.  Remark 6.4. In comparison to edge-contraction operations, we note that the multiplication case ECO 1 does not seem to have a counterpart in an explicit way. It is actually included in the terms involving g1 = 0, |I| = 1 and g2 = 0, |J| = 1 in the partition sum, and (1.0.14) is used to change the comultiplication to multiplication. More precisely, if I = {i}, then it gives a term  W0,2 (z, zi ; ea , vi )Wg,n−1 σα (z), z2 , . . . , zbi , . . . , zn ; eb , v2 , . . . , vbi , . . . , vn  = W0,2 (z, zi )Wg,n−1 σα (z), z2 , . . . , zbi , . . . , zn · ω0,2 (ea , vi )ωg,n−1 (eb , v2 , . . . , vbi , . . . , vn ) in the partition sum, assuming the induction hypothesis. We also note that X η(ek e` , v1 )η ka η `b ω0,2 (ea , vi )ωg,n−1 (eb , v2 , . . . , vbi , . . . , vn ) a,b,k,`  =  X  =  X  η `b ω0,2 (v1 e` , vi )ωg,n−1 (eb , v2 , . . . , vbi , . . . , vn )  b,`  η `b η(v1 vi , e` )ωg,n−1 (eb , v2 , . . . , vbi , . . . , vn )  b,`  = ωg,n−1 (v1 vi , v1 , . . . , vbi , . . . , vn ). By taking the Laplace transform of (6.0.5) using the method of [34, 79], we obtain a D (z , . . . , z ) · ω D solution Wg,n = Wg,n 1 n g,n to the topological recursion, where Wg,n is given by  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  33  [34, (4.14)] with respect to a global spectral curve of [34, Theorem 4.3], and ωg,n is the TQFT corresponding to the Frobenius algebra A. Part 2. Quantization of Higgs Bundles 7. Quantum curves The cohomology ring H ∗ (X, C) of a Kähler variety X is a Z/2Z-graded Z/2Z-commutative Frobenius algebra over C. The genus 0 Gromov-Witten invariants of X define the big quantum cohomology of X, which is a quantum deformation of the cohomology ring. If the mirror symmetry is established for X, then the information of big quantum cohomology of X is supposed to be encoded in holomorphic geometry of a mirror dual space Y . GromovWitten invariants are generalized to all values of (g, n) with 2g − 2 + n > 0, g ≥ 0, n > 0. The question is: Question 7.1. What should be the holomorphic geometry on Y that captures all genera Gromov-Witten invariants of X through mirror symmetry? Since the transition from g = 0 to all values of g ≥ 0 is indeed a quantization, the holomorphic object on Y that should capture higer genera Gromov-Witten invariants of X is a quantum geometry of Y . A naı̈ve guess may be that it should be a D-module that represents Y as its classical limit. Hence the D-module is not defined on Y . Then where does it live? The idea of quantum curves concerns a rather restricted situation, when the mirror geometry Y is captured by an algebraic, or an analytic, curve. Typical examples are the mirror of toric Calabi-Yau orbifolds of three dimensions. Geometry of the mirror Y of a toric Calabi-Yau 3-fold is encoded in a complex curve known as the mirror curve. Another situation is enumeration problems of various Hurwitz-type coverings of P1 , and also many decorated graphs on surfaces. For these examples, although there are no “space” X, the mirror geometry exists, and is indeed a curve. These mirror curves are special cases of more general notion of spectral curves. Besides mirror symmetry, spectral curves appear in theory of integrable systems, random matrix theory, topological recursion, and Hitchin theory of Higgs bundles. A spectral curve Σ has two common features. The first one is that it is a Lagrangian subvariety of a holomorphic symplectic surface. The other is the existence of a projection π : Σ −→ C to another curve C, called a base curve. The quantum curve is a D-module on the base curve C such that its semi-classical limit is the spectral curve realized in the cotangent bundle Σ ⊂ T ∗ C. From the analogy of 2D TQFT and CohFT, we note that a spectral curve is already a quantized object, since it corresponds to quantum cohomology. The even part H even (X, C), which is a commutative Frobenius algebra, is not the one that corresponds to a spectral curve. In this sense, CohFT is a result of two quantizations: the first one from classical cohomology to a big quantum cohomology through n-point Gromov-Witten invariants of genus 0; and the second quantization is the passage from genus 0 to all genera. Remark 7.2. We note that quantum cohomology itself is a Frobenius algebra, though it is not finite dimensional, because it requires the introduction of Novikov ring. The even degree part forms a commutative Frobenius algebra, yet it does not correspond to a 2D TQFT in the way we presented in Part 1. Now let us turn to the topic of Part 2. The prototype of quantization is a Schrödinger equation. Consider a harmonic oscillator of mass 1, energy E, and the spring constant  34  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  1/4 in one dimension. It has a geometric description as an elliptical motion of a constant angular momentum in the phase space, or the cotangent bundle of the real axis. Here, the spectral curve is an ellipse 1 2 x + y2 = E 4 in a real symplectic plane. The quantization of this spectral curve is the quantization of the harmonic oscillator, which is a second order stationary Schrödinger equation in one variable:   1 d2 (7.0.1) −~2 2 + x2 − E ψ(x, ~) = 0. dx 4 The quantization we discuss in Part 2 is in complete parallelism to quantization of harmonic oscillator. As a holomorphic symplectic surface, we use (C2 , dx ∧ dy). A plane quadric 1 2 (7.0.2) x − y2 = 1 4 is an example of a spectral curve. In complex coordinates, we identify y = d/dx, ignoring the imaginary unit. An example of quantization of (7.0.2) is a Schrödinger equation !   1 1 2 d 2 + 1 − ~ − x ψ(x, ~) = 0, (7.0.3) ~ dx 2 4 which is essentially the same as quantum harmonic oscillator equation (7.0.1), and is known as the Hermite-Weber equation. Its solutions are all well studied. Question 7.3. Why do we care this well-known classical differential equation? A surprising answer [28, 30, 34, 79] to this question is that we find the intersection numbers of Mg,n through the asymptotic expansion! First we apply a gauge transformation !  2 1 2 1 2 d 1 1 e− 4~ x ~ + 1 − ~ − x2 e 4~ x Z(x, ~) dx 2 4 (7.0.4)  2  d d = ~ 2 + ~x + 1 Z(x, ~) = 0, dx dx 1  2  where Z(x, ~) = e− 4~ x ψ(x, ~). Recall the integer valued function Cg,n (µ1 , . . . , µn ) of (6.0.3), and define their generating functions by X Cg,n (µ1 , . . . , µn ) −µ n (7.0.5) Fg,n (x1 , . . . , xn ) := x1 1 · · · x−µ . n µ1 · · · µn µ1 ,...,µn >0  It is discovered in [34] that the derivatives Wg,n = d1 · · · dn Fg,n satisfy the topological recursion based on the spectral curve (0.0.1), which is the semi-classical limit of (7.0.4). With an appropriate adjustment for (g, n) = (0, 1) and (0, 2), we have the following allorder WKB expansion formula [30, 34, 79]: ! X 1 (7.0.6) Z(x, ~) = exp ~2g−2+n Fg,n (x, . . . , x) . n! g,n We find ([34]) that if we change the coordinate from x to t by t+1 t−1 (7.0.7) x = x(t) = + , t−1 t+1  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  35   then Fg,n x(t1 ), x(t2 ), . . . , x(tn ) is a Laurent polynomial for each (g, n) with 2g − 2 + n > 0. The coordinate change (7.0.7) is identified in [28] as a normalization of the singular curve (0.0.1) in the Hirzebruch surface P KP1 ⊕ OP1 by a sequence of blow-ups. The highest degree part of this Laurent polynomial is a homogeneous polynomial of degree 6g − 6 + 3n  2di +1 ! n X Y (−1)n ti highest (7.0.8) Fg,n (t1 , . . . , tn ) = 2g−2+n hτd1 · · · τdn ig,n |2di − 1|!! , 2 2 i=1  d1 +···+dn =3g−3+n  where the coefficients Z (7.0.9)  hτd1 · · · τdn ig,n =  Mg,n  ψ1d1 · · · ψndn  are cotangent class intersection numbers on the moduli space Mg,n . Topological recursion is a mechanism to calculate all Fg,n (x1 , . . . , xn ) from the single equation (7.0.3), or equivalently, (7.0.4). Thus the quantum curve (7.0.3) has the information of all intersection numbers (7.0.9). These are the topics discussed in our previous lectures [30]. Although the following topic is not what we deal with in this article, for the moment let us consider a symplectic surface (C∗ × C∗ , d log x ∧ d log y). As a spectral curve, we use the zero locus of the A-polynomial AK (x, y) of a knot defined in [14]. For a given knot K ⊂ S 3 , the SL2 (C)-character variety  (7.0.10) Hom π1 (S 3 \ K), SL2 (C) SL2 (C) of the fundamental group of the knot complement determines an algebraic curve in (C∗ )2 defined by AK (x, y) ∈ Z[x, y]. Here, (C∗ )2 , or to be more precise, (C∗ )2 /(Z/2Z), is the SL2 (C)-character variety of the fundamental group of the torus T 2 = S 1 × S 1 , which is the boundary of the knot complement. Now consider a function f (q, n) in 2 variables (q, n) ∈ C∗ × Z+ , and define operators ( (b xf )(q, n) := q n f (q, n) (7.0.11) (b y f )(q, n) := f (q, n + 1), following [41, 44]. These operators satisfy the commutation relation x b · yb = qb y·x b. The procedure of changing x 7−→ x b and y 7−→ yb is the Weyl quantization. Garoufalidis [44] conjectures that there exists a quantization of the A-polynomial such that (7.0.12)  bK (b A x, yb; q)JK (q, n) = 0,  where JK (q, n) is the colored Jones polynomial of the knot K indexed by the dimension n of the irreducible representation of SL2 (C). Here, the quantization means that the operator bK (b A x, yb; q) recovers the A-poynomial by the restriction bK (x, y; 1) = AK (x, y). A This relations is the semi-classical limit, which provides the initial condition of the WKB analysis. A geometric definition of a quantum curve that arises as the quantization of a Hitchin spectral curve is developed in [31], based on the work of [26] that solves a conjecture of Gaiotto [42, 43]. The WKB analysis of the quantum curve [27, 28, 30, 57, 58] is performed by applying the topological recursion of [38]. The Hermite-Weber differential equation is an example of this geometric theory. Although there have been many speculations [50] of  36  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  the applicability of the topological recursion to low-dimensional topology, still there is no counterpart of the Hitchin type geometric theory for the case of the quantization of Apolynomials. The appearance of the modularity in this context [22, 60, 95] is a tantalizing phenomenon, on which there has been a great advancement. In the following sections, we unfold a different story of quantum curves. In geometry, there is a process parallel to the passage from a spectral curve (0.0.1) to a quantum curve (7.0.4). This process is a journey from the moduli space of Hitchin spectral curves to the moduli space of opers [25, 31]. The quantization parameter, the Planck constant ~ of (7.0.4), acquires a geometric meaning in this process. We begin the story with finding a coordinate independent description of global differential equations of order 2 on a compact Riemann surface. 8. Projective structures, opers, and Higgs bundles In [27], the authors have given a definition of partial differential equation version of topological recursion for Hitchin spectral curves. When the spectral curve is a double sheeted covering of the base curve, we have shown that this PDE topological recursion produces a quantum curve of the Hitchin spectral curve through WKB analysis. The mechanism is explained in detail in [28, 30]. WKB analysis is certainly one way to describe quantization. Yet the passage from spectral curves to their quantization is purely geometric. This point of view is adopted in [31], based on our work [26] on a conjecture of Gaiotto [42]. Our statement is that the quantization process is a biholomorphic map from the moduli space of Hitchin spectral curves to the moduli space of opers [6]. In this section, we introduce the notion of opers, and construct the biholomorphic map mentioned above. In this passage, we give a geometric interpretation of the Planck constant ~ as a deformation parameter of vector bundles and connections. For simplicity of presentation, we restrict our attention to SL2 (C)-opers. We refer to [26, 31] for more general cases. To deal with linear differential equation of order higher then or equal to 2 globally on a compact Riemann surface C, we need a projective coordinate system. If ω is a global holomorphic or meromorphic 1-form on C, then (8.0.1)  (d + ω)f = 0  is a first order linear differential equation that makes sense globally on C. This is because d + ω is a homomorphism from OC to KC , allowing singularities if necessary. Here, KC is the sheaf of holomorphic 1-forms on C. Of course existence of a non-trivial global solution of (8.0.1) is a different matter, because it is equivalent to ω = −d log f . Suppose we have a second order differential equation   2 d − q(z) f (z) = 0 (8.0.2) dz 2 2  d locally on C with a local coordinate z. Clearly dz 2 is not globally defined, in contrast to the exterior differentiation d in (8.0.1). What is the requirement for (8.0.2) to make sense coordinate free, then? Let us find an answer by imposing "  # "  # d 2 d 2 2 2 (8.0.3) dz − q(z) f (z) = 0 ⇐⇒ dw − q(w) f (w) = 0. dz dw  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  37  We wish the shape of the equation to be analogous to (8.0.1). Since ω is a 1-form, we impose that q ∈ H 0 (C, KC⊗2 ) is a global quadratic differential on C. Under a coordinate change w = w(z), q satisfies q(z)dz 2 = q(w)dw2 . How should we think about a solution f ? For (8.0.2) to have a coordinate free meeting, we need to identify the line bundle L on C to which f belongs. Let us denote by e−g(w(z)) the transition function of L with respect to the coordinate patch w = w(z). A function g(w) = g w(z) will be determined later. A solution f satisfies the coordinate condition   (8.0.4) e−g w(z) f w(z) = f (z). Then  "  d dz  2   "  d dz  2  2  g w(z)  2  g w(z)  0 = dz · e = dz · e   = dz 2 · eg    w(z)  d −g e dz  # − q(z)  2  − q(z)  2  f (z) #   2  w(z)  e−g    w(z)   f w(z)   f w(z) − dw2 q(w)f (w)  2  d − gw (w)w0 f w(z) − dw2 q(w)f (w) dz "  # 2      d d 0 2 = dz 2 · − 2gw (w)w0 − gw (w)w0 − gw (w)w0 f w(z) − dw2 q(w)f (w) dz dz h  i  0 2  0 = dz 2 · fw (w)w0 − 2gw (w)w0 fw (w)w0 − gw (w)w0 − gw (w)w0 f (w) = dz 2 ·    − dw2 q(w)f (w)  dw 2 2 dz + fw (w)w00 dz 2 − 2gw (w)fw (w)dw2 = fww (w) dz  0 2  − gw (w)w0 − gw (w)w0 f (w)dz 2 − dw2 q(w)f (w) # "  2  d = dw2 · − q(w) f (w) + fw (w) w00 − 2gw (w)(w0 )2 dz 2 dw  0 2  − gw (w)w0 − gw (w)w0 f (w)dz 2 ,   where w0 = dw/dz. Therefore, for (8.0.3) to hold, we need (8.0.5) (8.0.6)  w00 − 2gw (w)(w0 )2 = 0 0 2 gw (w)w0 − gw (w)w0 = 0.  From (8.0.5) we find (8.0.7)  gw (w)w0 =  1 w00 . 2 w0  Substitution of (8.0.7) in (8.0.6) yields  00 0   w (z) 1 w00 (z) 2 (8.0.8) sz (w) := − = 0. w0 (z) 2 w0 (z)  38  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  We thus encounter the Schwarzian derivative sz (w). Since (8.0.7) is equivalent to 0 1 g(w)0 = log(w0 ) , 2 1 0 we obtain g(w) = 2 log w . Here, the constant of integration is 0 because g(z) = 0 when w = z. Then (8.0.4) becomes r dz − 12 log w0 f (w) ⇐⇒ f (z) = f (z) = e f (w), dw −1  which identifies the line bundle to which f belongs: f (z) ∈ KC 2 . We conclude that the coordinate change w = w(z) should satisfy the vanishing of the Schwarzian derivative sz (w) ≡ 0, and the solution f (z) should be considered as a (multivalued) section of the −1  inverse half-canonical KC 2 . The vanishing of the Schwarzian derivative dictates us to use a complex projective coordinate system of C. A holomorphic connection in a vector bundle E on C is a C-linear map ∇ : E −→ KC ⊗E satisfying the Leibniz condition ∇(f s) = f ∇(s) + df ⊗ s for f ∈ OC and s ∈ E. Since C is a complex curve, every connection on C is automatically flat. Therefore, ∇ gives rise to a holonomy representation (8.0.9)  ρ : π1 (C) −→ G  of the fundamental group π1 (C) of the curve C into the structure group G of the vector bundle E. A flat connection ∇ is irreducible if the image of the holonomy representation (8.0.9) is Zariski dense in the complex algebraic group G. In our case, since G = SL2 (C), this requirement is equivalent that Im(ρ) contains two non-commuting elements of G. The moduli space MdeR of irreducible holomorphic connections (E, ∇) in a G-bundle E has been constructed (see [90]). Definition 8.1 (SL2 (C)-opers). Consider a point (E, ∇) ∈ MdeR consisting of an irreducible holomorphic SL2 (C)-connection ∇ : E −→ E ⊗ KC acting on a vector bundle E. It is an SL2 (C)-oper if there is a line subbundle F ⊂ E such that the connection induces an OC -module isomorphism (8.0.10)  ∼  ∇ : F −→ (E/F ) ⊗ KC .  The notion of oper is a generalization of projective structures on a Riemann surface. Every compact Riemann surface C amsits a projective structure subordinating the given complex structure (see [51]). For our purpose of quantization of Hitchin spectral curves associated with holomorphic Higgs bundles, let us assume that g(C) ≥ 2 in what follows. When we allow singularities, we can relax this condition and deal with genus 0 and 1 cases. A complex projective coordinate system is a coordinate neighborhood covering [ C= Uα α  with a local coordinate zα of Uα such that for every Uα ∩ Uβ , we have a fractional linear transformation   aαβ zβ + bαβ aαβ bαβ (8.0.11) zα = , fαβ := ∈ SL2 (C), cαβ dαβ cαβ zβ + dαβ satisfying a cocycle condition [fαβ ][fβγ ] = [fαγ ]. Here, [fαβ ] is the class of fαβ in the projection (8.0.12)  0 −→ Z/2Z −→ SL2 (C) −→ P SL2 (C) −→ 0,  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  39  which determines the fractional linear transformation. A choice of ± on each Uα ∩ Uβ is an element of H 1 (C, Z/2Z) = (Z/2Z)2g , indicating that there are 22g choices of a lift. We make this choice once and for all, and consider fαβ an SL2 (C)-valued 1-cocycle. Since 1 dzβ , (cαβ zβ + dαβ )2  a transition function for KC is given by the cocycle (cαβ zβ + dαβ )2 on each Uα ∩ Uβ . A dzα =  1  theta characteristic (or a spin structure) KC2 is the line bundle defined by the 1-cocycle (8.0.13)  ξαβ = cαβ zβ + dαβ . 1  Here again, we have 22g choices ±ξαβ for a transition function of KC2 . Since we have already made a choice of the sign for fαβ , we have a consistent choice in (8.0.13), as explained below. 1  Thus we see that the choice of the lift (8.0.12) is determined by KC2 . From (8.0.13), we obtain ∂β2 ξαβ = 0.  (8.0.14)  This property plays an essential role in our construction of global connections on C. First we show that actually (8.0.14) implies (8.0.11). Proposition 8.2 (A condition for projective coordinate). A coordinate system of C with 1  which the second derivative of the transition function of KC2 vanishes is a projective coordinate system. 1  Proof. The condition (8.0.14) means that the transition function of KC2 is a linear polynomial cαβ zβ + dαβ satisfying the cocycle condition. Therefore, dzα 1 = . dzβ (cαβ zβ + dαβ )2 Solving this differential equation, we obtain (8.0.15)  za =  mαβ (cαβ zβ + dαβ ) − 1/cαβ cαβ zβ + dαβ  with a constant of integration mαβ . In this way we find an element of SL2 (C) on each Uα ∩ Uβ . The cocycle condition makes (8.0.15) exactly (8.0.11).  The transition function fαβ defines a rank 2 vector bundle E on C whose structure group is SL2 (C). Since fαβ is a constant element of SL2 (C), the notion of locally constant sections of E makes sense independent of the coordinate chart. Thus defining ∇α = d on Uα for each Uα determines a global connection ∇ in E. Suppose we have a projective coordinate system on C. Let E be the vector bundle we have just constructed, and P(E) its projectivization, i.e., the P1 bundle associated with E. Noticing that Aut(P1 ) = P SL2 (C), the local coordinate system {zα } of (8.0.11) is a global section of P(E). Indeed, this section defines a map (8.0.16)  zα : Uα −→ P1 ,  which induces the projective structure of P1 into Uα via pull back. The map (8.0.16) is not a constant, because its derivative dzα never vanishes on the intersection Uα ∩ Uβ . A  40  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  global section of P(E) corresponds to a line subbundle F of E, such that E is realized as an extension 0 −→ F −→ E −→ E/F −→ 0. The equality      1 za aαβ bαβ zβ = 1 1 cαβ zβ + dαβ cαβ dαβ   −1 z shows that a defines a global section of the vector bundle KC 2 ⊗ E, and that the 1 projectivization image of this section is the global section {zα } of P(E) corresponding to F . Here, the choice of the theta characteristic is consistently made so that the ± ambiguity of (8.0.13) and the one in the lift of the fractional linear transformation to fαβ ∈ SL2 (C) cancel. Since this section is nowhere vanishing, it generates a trivial subbundle −1  −1  OC = KC 2 ⊗ F ⊂ KC 2 ⊗ E. 1  −1  Therefore, F = KC2 . Note that det E = OC , hence E/F = KC 2 , and E is an extension 1  −1  0 −→ KC2 −→ E −→ KC 2 −→ 0, 1 −1 determining an element of Ext1 KC 2 , KC2 ∼ = H 1 (C, KC ) ∼ = C. There is a more straightforward way to obtain (8.0.17). (8.0.17)  Theorem 8.3 (Projective coordinate systems and opers). Every projective coordinate sys1  tem (8.0.11) determines an oper (E, ∇) of Definition 8.1 with F = KC2 . Proof. Let σαβ = −(d/dzβ )ξαβ  ξαβ gαβ : = (8.0.18)  = −1  = −cαβ , where ξαβ is defined by (8.0.13). Since    σαβ cαβ zβ + dαβ −cαβ −1 = ξαβ (cαβ zβ + dαβ )−1    1 aαβ bαβ zβ −1 , zα cαβ dαβ 1  which follows from aαβ − cαβ zα =  aαβ (cαβ zβ + dαβ ) − cαβ (aαβ zβ + bαβ ) 1 = , (cαβ zβ + dαβ ) (cαβ zβ + dαβ )  we find that fαβ and gαβ define the same SL2 (C)-bundle E. The shape of the matrix gαβ immediately shows (8.0.17). Since the connection ∇ in E is simply d on each Uα with respect to fαβ , the differential operator on Uα with respect to the transition function gαβ is given by       1 zα −1 0 0 (8.0.19) ∇α := d =d− dzα . −1 zα 1 1 0 Since the (2, 1)-component of the connection matrix is dzα which is nowhere vanishing, 1  (8.0.20)  1  ∇ F = KC2 −→ E ⊗ KC −→ (E/F ) ⊗ KC ∼ = KC2  given by this component is an isomorphism. This proves that (E, ∇) is an SL2 (C)-oper.  In the final step of the proof to show (E, ∇) is an oper, we need that (8.0.20) is an OC -linear homomorphism. This is because we are considering the difference of connections ∇ and ∇|F in E. More generally, suppose we have two connections ∇1 and ∇2 in the same vector bundle E. Then the Leibniz condition tells us that ∇1 (f s) − ∇2 (f s) = f ∇1 (s) − f ∇2 (s)  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  41  for f ∈ OC and s ∈ E. Therefore, ∇1 −∇2 : E −→ E⊗KC is an OC -module homomorphism. Although the extension class of (8.0.17) is parameterized by H 1 (C, KC ) = C, the complex structure of E depends only if σαβ = 0 or not. This is because       ξαβ σαβ λ−1 ξαβ λ2 σαβ λ (8.0.21) = , −1 −1 ξαβ ξαβ λ−1 λ hence we can normalize σαβ = 0 or σαβ = 1. The former case gives the trivial extension of 1  −1  two line bundles E = KC2 ⊕ KC 2 . Since σαβ = cαβ = 0, the projective coordinate system (8.0.11) is actually an affine coordinate system. Since we are assuming g(C) > 1, there is no affine structure in C. Therefore, only the latter case can happen. And the latter case gives a non-trivial extension, as we will show later. Suppose we have another projective structure in C subordinating the same complex structure of C. Then we can adjust the ± signs of the lift of (8.0.12) and the square root of (8.0.13) so that we obtain the exact same holomorphic vector bundle E of (8.0.17). Since we are dealing with a different coordinate system, the only change we have is reflected in the connection ∇. Thus two different projective structures give rise to two connections in the same vector bundle E. Hence this difference is an OC -linear homomorphism E −→ E ⊗ KC as noted above. This consideration motivates the following. A Higgs bundle of rank r [52, 53] defined on C is a pair (E, φ) consisting of a holomorphic vector bundle E of rank r on C and an OC -module homomorphism φ : E −→ E ⊗ KC . An SL2 (C)-Higgs bundle is a pair (E, φ) of rank 2 with a fixed isomorphism det E = OC and trφ = 0. It is stable if every line subbundle F ⊂ E that is invariant with respect to φ, i.e., φ : F −→ F ⊗ KC , has a negative degree degF < 0. The moduli spaces of stable Higgs bundles are constructed in [90]. We denote by MDol the moduli space of stable holomorphic SL2 (C)-Higgs bundles on C. It is diffeomorphic to the moduli space MdeR of pairs (E, ∇) consisting of an irreducible holomorphic connection in an SL2 (C)-bundle (see [23, 52, 90]). A particular diffeomorphism (8.0.22)  ∼  ν : MDol −→ MdeR  is the non-Abelian Hodge correspondence, which is explained in Section 10. The total space of the line bundle KC is the cotangent bundle π : T ∗ C −→ C of the curve C. We denote by η ∈ H 0 (T ∗ C, π ∗ KC ) the tautological section η  T ∗C  =  π; ∗ KC  / T ∗C  KC π   / C,  which is a holomorphic 1-form on T ∗ C. Since φ is an End(E)-valued holomorphic 1-form on C, its eigenvalues are 1-forms. The set of eigenvalues is thus a multivalued section of KC , and hence a multivalued section of π : T ∗ C −→ C. The image Σ ⊂ T ∗ C of this multivalued section is the Hitchin spectral curve, which defines a ramified covering of C. The formal definition of Hitchin spectral curve Σ is that it is the divisor of zeros in T ∗ C of the characteristic polynomial det(η − π ∗ φ) ∈ π ∗ KC⊗2 .  42  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Hitchin fibration [52] is a holomorphic fibration (8.0.23)  µH : MDol 3 (E, φ) 7−→ det(η − π ∗ φ) ∈ B,   B := H 0 C, KC⊗2 ,  that defines an algebraically completely integrable Hamiltonian system in MDol . Hitchin 1  notices in [52] that the choice of a spin structure KC2 that we have made allows us to construct a natural section κ : B ,→ MDol . Define       0 0 0 1 1 0 t (8.0.24) X− := , X+ := X− = , H := [X+ , X− ] = . 1 0 0 0 0 −1 These elements generate the Lie algebra hX+ , X− , Hi ∼ = sl2 (C). Lemma 8.4. Let q ∈ B = H 0 (C, KC⊗2 ) be an arbitrary point of the Hitchin base B, and define a Higgs bundle (E0 , φ(q)) consisting of a vector bundle  1 ⊗H 1 −1 = KC2 ⊕ KC 2 (8.0.25) E0 := KC2 and a Higgs field (8.0.26)  φ(q) := X− + qX+ =    0 q . 1 0  Then it is a stable SL2 (C)-Higgs bundle. The Hitchin section is defined by (8.0.27)  κ : B 3 q 7−→ (E0 , φ(q)) ∈ MDol ,  which gives a biholomorphic map between B and κ(B) ⊂ MDol . Proof. We first note that X− : E0 −→ E0 ⊗ KC is a globally defined End0 (E0 )-valued 1-form, since it is essentially the constant map 1  (8.0.28)  −1  =  1 : KC2 −→ KC 2 ⊗ KC .  Similarly, multiplication by a quadratic differential gives −1  3  1  q : KC 2 −→KC2 = KC2 ⊗ KC . Thus φ(q) : E0 −→ E0 ⊗ KC is globally defined as a Higgs field in E0 . The Higgs pair is stable because no line subbundle of E0 is invariant under φ(q), unless q = 0. And when 1  q = 0, the invariant line subbundle KC2 has degree g − 1, which is positive since g ≥ 2.    Remark 8.5. Hitchin sections exist for the moduli space of stable G-Higgs bundles for an arbitrary simple complex algebraic group G. The construction utilizes Kostant’s principal three-dimensional subgroup (TDS) [66]. The use of TDS is crucial in our quantization, as noted in [26, 31]. The image κ(B) is a holomorphic Lagrangian submanifold of a holomorphic symplectic space MDol . The holomorphic symplectic structure of MDol is induced from its open dense subspace T ∗ SU(2, C), where SU(2, C) is the moduli space of rank 2 stable bundles of degree 0 on C. Since the codimension of the complement of T ∗ SU(2, C) in MDol is 2, the natural holomorphic symplectic form on the cotangent bundle automatically extends to MDol . Our first step of constructing the quantization of the Hitchin spectral curve Σ is to define ~-connections on C that are holomorphically depending on ~. We use a one-parameter  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  43  family E of deformations of vector bundles E~  /E     / C × H 1 (C, KC ),  C × {~}  and a C-linear first-order differential operator ~∇~ : E~ −→ E~ ⊗ KC depending holomorphically on ~ ∈ H 1 (C, KC ) ∼ = C for ~ 6= 0. Here, we identify the Planck constant ~ of the quantization as a geometric parameter   1 − 12 1 1 2 ~ ∈ H (C, KC ) = Ext KC , KC ∼ = C, which determines a unique extension 1  −1  0 −→ KC2 −→ E~ −→ KC 2 −→ 0.  (8.0.29)  This is exactly the same as (8.0.17). The extension E~ is given by a system of transition functions   ξαβ ~σαβ (8.0.30) E~ ←→ −1 0 ξαβ on each Uα ∩Uβ . The cocycle condition for the transition functions translates into a condition −1 σαγ = ξαβ σβγ + σαβ ξβγ .  (8.0.31)  The application of the exterior differentiation d to the cocycle condition ξαγ = ξαβ ξβγ for 1  KC2 yields dξβγ dξαβ dξαγ dzβ ξβγ + ξαβ dzγ = dzγ . dzγ dzβ dzγ 2 = Noticing ξαβ  dzβ dzα ,  we find that σαβ := −  (8.0.32)  dξαβ = −∂β ξαβ dzβ  solves (8.0.31). The negative sign is chosen to relate (8.0.30) and (8.0.11). By the same reason as before, the complex structure of the vector bundle E~ is isomorphic to E1 if ~ 6= 0, and to E0 of (8.0.25) if ~ = 0. The transition function can also be written as  (8.0.33)         ξαβ ~σαβ 1 0 0 1 = exp log ξαβ exp −~∂β log ξαβ . −1 ξαβ 0 −1 0 0  Therefore, in the multiplicative sense, the extension class is determined by ∂β log ξαβ . Lemma 8.6. The extension class σαβ of (8.0.32) defines a non-trivial extension (8.0.29).  44  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Proof. The long exact sequences of cohomologies H 1 (C, C)  / H 1 (C, OC )      / H 2 (C, C)  k   / H 1 (C, O ∗ ) d log / H 1 (C, KC ) C  H 1 (C, C∗ ) 0  / H 1 (C, KC ) ∼  c1    =  H 2 (C, Z)   / H 2 (C, Z)  associated with exact sequences of sheaves 0  0  0   /Z  0   /C   / OC   / KC  /0  0   / C∗    / O ∗ d log / KC C  /0    0  =   /Z  /0  d    0    0  show that the class {σαβ } corresponds to the image of {ξab } via the map d log  ∗) − −−−→ H 1 (C, KC ). H 1 (C, OC  If d log{ξαβ } = 0 ∈ H 1 (C, KC ), then it comes from a class in H 1 (C, C∗ ), which is the moduli space of line bundles with holomorphic connections, as explained in [8]. It leads to a contradiction 1 0 = c1 KC2 = g − 1 > 0, because g(C) ≥ 2.  Remark 8.7. Gukov and Sulkowski [50] defines an intriguing  quantizability condition for a spectral curve in terms of the algebraic K-group K2 C(Σ) of the function field of spectral curve Σ. They relate the quantizability and Bloch regulators of [8]. The class {σαβ } of (8.0.32) gives a natural isomorphism H 1 (C, KC ) ∼ = C. We identify the deformation parameter ~ ∈ C with the cohomology class {~σαβ } ∈ H 1 (C, KC ) = C. S We trivialize the line bundle KC⊗2 with respect to a coordinate chart C = α Uα , and write q ∈ H 0 (C, KC⊗ 2) as {(q)α } that satisfies the transition relation (8.0.34)  4 (q)α = (q)β ξαβ .  The transition function of the trivial extension E0 is given by (8.0.35)  H ξαβ = exp(H log ξαβ ).  Since X− : E0 −→ E0 ⊗ KC is a globally defined Higgs filed, its local expressions {X− dzα } with respect to a coordinate system satisfies the transition relation (8.0.36)  X− dzα = exp(H log ξαβ )X− dzβ exp(−H log ξαβ )  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  45  on every Uα ∩ Uβ . The same relation holds for the Higgs field φ(q) as well: (8.0.37)  φα (q)dzα = exp(H log ξαβ )φβ (q)dzβ exp(−H log ξαβ ).  Theorem 8.8 (Construction of SL2 (C)-opers). On each Uα ∩Uβ define a transition function      ξαβ 1 −~∂β log ξαβ ~ (8.0.38) gαβ := exp(H log ξαβ ) exp − ~∂β log ξαβ X+ = , −1 · ξαβ 1 where ∂β =  d dzβ ,  and ~∂β log ξαβ ∈ H 1 (C, KC ). Then  ~ } satisfies the cocycle condition • The collection {gαβ ~ ~ ~ gαβ gβγ = gαγ ,  (8.0.39)  which defines the holomorphic vector bundle bundle E~ of (8.0.29). • The local expression 1 (8.0.40) ∇~α (0) := d − X− dza ~ on Uα for ~ 6= 0 defines a global holomorphic connection in E~ , i.e.,    −1 1 1 ~ ~ (8.0.41) d − X− dzα = gαβ d − X− dzβ gαβ , ~ ~ if and only if the coordinate is a projective coordinate system. We choose one. • With this particular projective coordinate system, every point (E0 , φ(q)) ∈ κ(B) ⊂ MDol of the Hitchin  section (8.0.27) gives rise to a one-parameter family of SL2 (C)~ opers E~ , ∇ (q) ∈ MdeR . In other words, the local expression 1 ∇~α (q) := d − φα (q)dzα ~ on every Uα for ~ 6= 0 determines a global holomorphic connection  −1 ~ ~ ∇~β (q) gαβ (8.0.43) ∇~α (q) = gαβ  (8.0.42)  in E~ satisfying the oper condition. • Deligne’s ~-connection ~∇~ (q) : E~ −→ E~ ⊗ KC  (8.0.44)  interpolates the Higgs pair and the oper, i.e., at ~ = 0, the family (8.0.44) gives the Higgs pair (E, −φ(q)) ∈ MDol , and at ~ = 1 it gives an SL2 (C)-oper E1 , ∇1 (q) ∈ MdeR . • After a suitable gauge transformation depending on ~, the ~ → ∞ limit of the oper ∇~ (q) exists and is equal to ∇~=1 (0). This point corresponds to the C∗ -fixed point on the Hitchin section. Proof. The cocycle condition of gαβ has been established in (8.0.32) and (8.0.33). Proof of (8.0.41) is a straightforward calculation, using the power series expansion of the adjoint action n  (8.0.45)  e  ~A  Be  −~A  ∞ ∞ }| { X X 1 nz 1 n ~ (adA )n (B) := ~ [A, [A, [· · · , [A, B] · · · ]]]. = n! n! n=0  It follows that  −1 ~ ~ gαβ X− gαβ  n=0  46  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  = exp(H log ξαβ ) exp (−~∂β log ξαβ X+ ) X− exp (~∂β log ξαβ X+ ) exp(−H log ξαβ ) = exp(H log ξαβ )X− exp(−H log ξαβ ) − ~∂β log ξαβ H − ~2 (∂β log ξαβ )2 exp(H log ξαβ )X+ exp(−H log ξαβ ). Note that (8.0.14) is equivalent to   −1 −2 ∂β ∂β log ξαβ = ∂β ξαβ ∂β ξαβ = −ξαβ (∂β ξαβ )2 = −(∂β log ξαβ )2 , hence to  −1 ~ ~ = ∂β log ξαβ H + ~(∂β log ξαβ )2 exp(H log ξαβ )X+ exp(−H log ξαβ ). ∂β gαβ gαβ Therefore, noticing (8.0.36), (8.0.14) is equivalent to   −1   −1 1 1 ~ ~ ~ ~ dzβ = exp(H log ξαβ )X− dzβ exp(−H log ξαβ ) + ∂β gαβ gαβ g X− gαβ ~ αβ ~ 1 = X− dzα . ~ The statement follows from Proposition 8.2. To prove (8.0.43), we need, in addition to (8.0.41), the following relation:  −1 ~ ~ . (q)β X+ dzβ gαβ (8.0.46) (q)α X+ dzα = gαβ But (8.0.46) is obvious from (8.0.37) and (8.0.38). 1  The line bundle F required in the definition of SL2 (C)-oper is simply KC2 . The isomorphism (8.0.10) is a consequence of (8.0.28). Finally, the gauge transformation of ∇~ (q) by a bundle automorphism " 1 # −2 H ~ (8.0.47) ~− 2 = 1 ~2 on each coordinate neighborhood Uα gives     H H 1 1 q (8.0.48) d − φ(q) 7−→ ~− 2 d − φ(q) ~ 2 = d − X− + 2 X+ . ~ ~ ~ This is because H  H  ~− 2 X− ~ 2 = ~X−  and  H  H  2 2 2 ~− 2 X+ ~ = ~−2 X+ ,  which follows from the adjoint formula (8.0.45). Therefore, lim ∇~ (q) ∼ d − X− = ∇~=1 (0), ~→∞  where the symbol ∼ means gauge equivalence. This completes the proof of the theorem.  The construction theorem yields the following. Theorem 8.9 (Biholomorphic quantization of Hitchin spectral curves). Let C be a compact Riemann surface of genus g ≥ 2 with a chosen projective coordinate system subordinating its complex structure. We denote by MDol the moduli space of stable holomorphic SL2 (C)Higgs bundles over C, and by MdeR the moduli space of irreducible holomorphic SL2 (C)1  connections on C. For a fixed theta characteristic KC2 , we have a Hitchin section κ(B) ⊂  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  47  MDol of (8.0.27). We denote by Op ⊂ MdeR the moduli space of SL2 (C)-opers with the 1  condition that the required line bundle is given by F = KC2 . Then the map   γ (8.0.49) MDol ⊃ κ(B) 3 (E0 , φ(q)) 7−→ E~ , ∇~ (q) ∈ Op ⊂ MdeR evaluated at ~ = 1 is a biholomorphic map with respect to the natural complex structures induced from the ambient spaces. The biholomorphic quantization (8.0.49) is also C∗ -equivariant. The λ ∈ C∗ action on the Hitchin section is defined by φ 7−→ λφ. The oper corresponding to (E0 , λφ(q)) ∈ κ(B) is d − λ~ φ(q). Proof. The C∗ -equivariance follows from the same argument of the gauge transformation (8.0.47), (8.0.48). The action φ 7−→ λφ on the Hitchin section induces a weighted action B 3 q 7−→ λ2 q ∈ B through µH . Then we have the gauge equivalence via the gauge transformation  H    − H   2 λ λ 2 λ λ λ2 q d − φ(q) ∼ d − φ(q) = d − X− + 2 X+ . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  λ ~   H2  :   Remark 8.10. In the construction theorem, our use of a projective coordinate system is essential, through (8.0.13). Only in such a coordinate, our particular definition (8.0.42) makes sense. This is due to the vanishing of the second derivative of ξαβ . And as we have seen above, the projective coordinate system determines the origin ∇1 (0) of the space Op of opers. Other opers are simply translation ∇1 (q) from the origin by q ∈ H 0 (C, KC⊗2 ). 9. Semi-classical limit of SL2 (C)-opers A holomorphic connection on a compact Riemann surface C is automatically flat. Therefore, it defines a D-module over C. Continuing the last section’s conventions, let us fix a projective coordinate system on C, and let (E0 , φ(q)) = κ(q) be a point on the Hitchin  section of (8.0.27). It uniquely defines an ~-family of opers E~ , ∇~ (q) . In this section, we establish that the ~-connection ~∇~ (q) defines a family of D-modules on C parametrized by B such that the semi-classical limit of the family agrees with the family of spectral curves over B. To calculate the semi-classical limit, let us trivialize the vector bundle E~ on each simply connected coordinate neighborhood Uα with coordinate zα of the chosen projective coordinate system. A flat section Ψα of E~ over Uα is a solution of   ~ψ ~ (9.0.1) ~∇α (q)Ψα := (~d − φα (q)) = 0, ψ α ~ Ψ , the function ψ on U satisfies with an appropriate unknown function ψ. Since Ψα = gαβ α β −1 the transition relation (ψ)α = ξαβ (ψ)β . It means that ψ is actually a local section of the −1  line bundle KC 2 . There are two linearly independent solutions of (9.0.1), because q is a holomorphic function on Uα . Since φ(q) is independent of ~ and takes the form   0 q (9.0.2) φ(q) = , 1 0  48  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  we see that (9.0.1) is equivalent to the second order equation ~2 ψ 00 − qψ = 0  (9.0.3) −1  for ψ ∈ KC 2 . Since we are using a fixed projective coordinate system, the connection ∇~ (q) takes the same form on each coordinate neighborhood Uα . Therefore, the shape of the differential equation of (9.0.3) as an equation for ψ is again the same on every coordinate neighborhood, as we wished to achieve in (8.0.2). This is exactly what we refer to as the quantum curve of the spectral curve det(η − φ(q)) = 0. It is now obvious to calculate the semi-classical limit of the D-module corresponding to ~∇~ (q). Theorem 9.1 (Semi-classical limit of an oper). Under the same setting of Theorem 8.9, let E(q) denote the D-module E~ , ~∇~ (q) associated with the oper of (8.0.49). Then the semiclassical limit of E(q) is the spectral curve Σ ⊂ T ∗ C of φ(q) defined by the characteristic equation det(η − φ(q)) = 0. The semi-classical limit of (9.0.3) is the limit "  # 2 1 1 d (9.0.4) lim e− ~ S0 (zα ) ~2 − q e ~ S0 (za ) = y 2 − q, ~→0 dzα where S0 (zα ) is a holomorphic function on Uα so that dS0 = ydzα gives a local trivialization of T ∗ C over Uα . The computation of semi-classical limit is the same as the calculation of the determinant of the connection ~∇~ (q), after taking conjugation by the scalar diagonal 1 matrix e− ~ S0 (zα ) I2×2 , and then take the limit as ~ goes to0. For every ~ ∈ H 1 (C, KC ), the ~-connection E~ , ~∇~ (q) of (8.0.44) defines a global DC module structure in E~ . Thus we have constructed a universal family EC of DC -modules on a given C with a fixed spin structure and a projective structure:  ⊃ E~ , ∇~ (q) (9.0.5) EC o   C × B × H 1 (C, KC ) o    C × {q} × {~}  The universal family SC of spectral curves is defined over C × B. (9.0.6)  P (KC ⊕ OC ) × B o   C ×B o  SC o   C ×B o  =  det η − φ(q)  ⊃   0    C × {q}.  The semi-classical limit is thus a map of families (9.0.7)  EC  / SC     / C × B.  C × B × H 1 (C, KC )  10. Non-Abelian Hodge correspondence between Hitchin moduli spaces The biholomorphic map (8.0.49) is defined by fixing a projective structure of the base curve C. Gaiotto [42] conjectured that such a correspondence would be canonically constructed through a scaling limit of non-Abelian Hodge correspondence. The conjecture has  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  49  been solved in [26] for holomorphic Hitchin moduli spaces MDol and MdeR constructed over an arbitrary complex simple and simply connected Lie group G. In this section, we review the main result of [26] for G = SL2 (C) and compare it with our quantization. We denote by E top the topologically trivial complex vector bundle of rank 2 on a compact Riemann surface C of genus g ≥ 2. The correspondence between stability conditions of holomorphic vector bundles on C and PDEs on differential geometric data is used in Narasimhan-Seshadri [83] to obtain topological structures of the moduli space of stable bundles (see also [5, 82]). Extending this classical case, the stability condition for an SL2 (C)-Higgs bundle (E, φ) translates into a system of PDEs, known as Hitchin’s equations, imposed on a set of geometric data [23, 52, 90]. The data we need are a Hermitian fiber metric h on E top , a unitary connection D in E top with respect to h, and a differentiable sl2 (C)-valued 1-form φ on C. In this section we use D for unitary connections to avoid confusion with holomorphic connections we have been using until the last section. Hitchin’s equations are the following system of nonlinear PDEs. ( FD + [φ, φ† ] = 0 (10.0.1) D0.1 φ = 0. Here, FD denotes the curvature 2-form of D, φ† is the Hermitian conjugate of φ with respect to the metric h, and D0,1 is the Cauchy-Riemann part of D defined by the complex structure of the base curve C. D0,1 determines a complex structure in E top , which we simply denote by E. Then φ becomes a holomorphic Higgs field in E because it satisfies the Cauchy-Riemann equation (10.0.1). The pair (E, φ) constructed in this way from a solution of Hitchin’s equations is a stable Higgs bundle. Conversely [90], a stable Higgs bundle (E, φ) gives rise to a unique harmonic Hermitian metric h and the Chern connection D with respect to h so that the data satisfy Hitchin’s equations. The stability condition for the holomorphic Higgs pair (E, φ) is thus translated into (10.0.1). Define a one-parameter family of connections 1 ζ ∈ C∗ . (10.0.2) D(ζ) := · φ + D + ζ · φ† , ζ Then the flatness of D(ζ) for all ζ is equivalent to (10.0.1). The non-Abelian Hodge correspondence [23, 52, 73, 90] is a diffeomorphic correspondence e ∇) e ∈ MdeR . ν : MDol 3 (E, φ) 7−→ (E, Proving the diffeomorphism of these moduli spaces is far beyond of the scope of this article. Here, we only give the definition of the map ν. We start with the solution (D, φ, h) of Hitchin’s equations corresponding to a stable Higgs bundle (E, φ). It induces a family of e in E top by D(ζ = 1)0,1 . Since D(ζ) is flat connections D(ζ). Define a complex structure E 1,0 e := D(ζ = 1) is automatically a holomorphic connection in E. e Stability of (E, φ) flat, ∇ e ∇) e ∈ MdeR . implies that the resulting holomorphic connection is irreducible, hence (E, Since this correspondence goes through the real unitary connection D, the change of the e is not a holomorphic deformation. complex structure of E to that of E Extending the idea of one-parameter family (10.0.2), Gaiotto conjectures: Conjecture 10.1 (Gaiotto [42]). Let (D, φ, h) be the solution of (10.0.1) corresponding to a sable Higgs bundle (E0 , φ(q)) on the SL2 (C)-Hitchin section (8.0.27). Consider the following two-parameter family of connections 1 (10.0.3) D(ζ, R) := · Rφ + D + ζ · Rφ† , ζ ∈ C∗ , R ∈ R+ . ζ  50  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  Then the scaling limit (10.0.4)  lim  R→0,ζ→0 ζ/R=~  D(ζ, R)  exists for every ~ ∈ C∗ , and forms an ~-family of SL2 (C)-opers. Remark 10.2. (1) The existence of the limit is non-trivial, because the Hermitian metric h blows up as R → 0. (2) Unlike the case of non-Abelian Hodge correspondence, the Gaiotto limit works only for a point in the Hitchin section. Theorem 10.3 ([26]). Gaiotto’s conjecture holds for an arbitrary simple and simply connected complex algebraic group G. Recall that the representation (3.0.2) gives a realization of C from its universal covering space H as   C∼ = H ρ π1 (C) . The representation ρ lifts to SL2 (R) ⊂ SL2 (C), and defines a projective structure in C subordinating its complex structure coming from H. This projective structure is what we call the Fuchsian projective structure. Corollary 10.4 (Gaiotto correspondence and quantization [26]). Under the same setting of Conjecture 10.1, the limit oper of (10.0.4) is given by 1 (10.0.5) lim D(ζ, R) = d − φ(q) = ∇~ (q), ~= 6 0, R→0,ζ→0 ~ ζ/R=~  with respect to the Fuchsian projective coordinate system. The correspondence   γ (E0 , φ(q)) 7−→ E~ , ∇~ (q) is biholomorphic, unlike the non-Abelian Hodge correspondence. Proof. The key point is that since E0 is made out of KC , the fiber metric h naturally comes from the metric of C itself. Hitchin’s equations (10.0.1) for q = 0 then become a harmonic equation for the metric of C, and its solution is given by the constant curvature hyperbolic metric. This metric in turn defines the Fuchsian projective structure in C. For more detail, we reefer to [25, 26].  Remark 10.5. The case of an arbitrary simple algebraic group G of the conjecture, and the whole story of Part 2 for G, have been worked out in [26, 31]. The key point is to use Kostant’s TDS of [66] and transcribe the SL2 (C) situation into G. References [1] L. Abrams, Two-dimensional topological quantum field theories and Frobenius algebras, Journal of Knot Theory and Ramifications 5, 335–352 (2000). [2] M. Aganagic, R. Dijkgraaf, A. Klemm, M. Mariño, and C. Vafa, Topological Strings and Integrable Hierarchies, [arXiv:hep-th/0312085], Commun. Math. Phys. 261, 451–516 (2006). [3] J.E. Andersen, S. Gukov, and D. Pei, The Verlinde formula for Higgs bundles, arXiv:1608.01761 (2016). [4] M.F. Atiyah, Topological quantum field theory, [arXiv:hep-th/0312085], Publications Mathématiques de l’I.H.É.S., 68, 175–186 (1988). [5] M.F. Atiyah and R. Bott, The Yang-Mills equations over Riemann surfaces, Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. London A 308, 523–615 (1982). [6] A. Beilinson and V. Drinfeld, Opers, arXiv:math/0501398v1 [math.AG] (2005). [7] A. Beauville, M. S. Narasimhan, and S. Ramanan, Spectral curves and the generalized theta divisor, J. reine angew. Math. 398, 169–179 (1989).  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  51  [8] S. Bloch, The dilogarithm and extensions of Lie algebras, in “Algebraic K-theory Evanston 1980,” 23 pages (1981). [9] V. Bouchard, D. Hernández Serrano, X. Liu, and M. Mulase, Mirror symmetry for orbifold Hurwitz numbers, arXiv:1301.4871 [math.AG] (2013). [10] V. Bouchard, A. Klemm, M. Mariño, and S. Pasquetti, Remodeling the B-model, Commun. Math. Phys. 287, 117–178 (2009). [11] V. Bouchard, A. Klemm, M. Mariño, and S. Pasquetti, Topological open strings on orbifolds, Commun. Math. Phys. 296, 589–623 (2010). [12] K. Chapman, M. Mulase, and B. Safnuk, The Kontsevich constants for the volume of the moduli of curves and topological recursion, Communications in Number Theory and Physics 5, 643–698 (2011). [13] R. Cohen and P. Norbury, Morse field theory, Asian Journal of Mathematics 16, 661–712 (2012). [14] D. Cooper, D.M. Culler, H. Gillet, D. Long, and P. Shalen, Plane curves associated to character varieties of 3-manifolds, Invent. Math. 118, 47–84 (1994). [15] D. Cox and S. Katz, Mirror symmetry and algebraic geometry, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs 68, 469 pps, American Mathematical Society (1999). [16] R. Dijkgraaf, A geometrical approach to two-dimensional Conformal Field Theory, Ph.D. Thesis, Universiteit Utrecht (1989). [17] R. Dijkgraaf, H. Fuji, and M. Manabe, The Volume Conjecture, Perturbative Knot Invariants, and Recursion Relations for Topological Strings, Nucl. Phys. B849,166–211 (2011). [18] R. Dijkgraaf, L. Hollands, and P. Sulkowski, Quantum curves and D-modules, Journal of High Energy Physics 0810.4157, 1–58 (2009). [19] R. Dijkgraaf, L. Hollands P. Sulkowski, and C. Vafa, Supersymmetric gauge theories, intersecting branes and free Fermions, Journal of High Energy Physics 0802.106, (2008). [20] R. Dijkgraaf, E. Verlinde, and H. Verlinde, Loop equations and Virasoro constraints in non-perturbative twodimensional quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B348, 435–456 (1991). [21] T. Dimofte, D. Gaiotto, and S. Gukov. 3-manifolds and 3d indices, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 17, 975–1076 (2013). [22] T. Dimofte and S. Garoufalidis, Quantum modularity and complex Chern-Simons theory arXiv:1511.05628 [math.GT] (2015). [23] S.K. Donaldson, A new proof of a theorem of Narasimhan and Seshadri, Journal of Differential Geometry, 18 (2): 269277, (1983). [24] B. Dubrovin and Y. Zhang, Normal forms of hierarchies of integrable PDEs, Frobenius manifolds and GromovWitten invariants, arxiv:math/0108160 [math.DG] (2001). [25] O. Dumitrescu, A journey from the Hitchin section to opers, arXiv:1701.00155 (2017). [26] O. Dumitrescu, L. Fredrickson, G. Kydonakis, R. Mazzeo, M. Mulase, and A. Neitzke, Opers versus nonabelian Hodge, arXiv:1608.03994 (2016). [27] O. Dumitrescu and M. Mulase, Quantum curves for Hitchin fibrations and the Eynard-Orantin theory, Lett. Math. Phys. 104, 635–671 (2014). [28] O. Dumitrescu and M. Mulase, Quantization of spectral curves for meromorphic Higgs bundles through topological recursion, arXiv:1411.1023 (2014). [29] O. Dumitrescu and M. Mulase, Edge-contraction operations on cell graphs and 2D TQFT, to appear in Journal of Algebra (2017). [30] O. Dumitrescu and M. Mulase, Lectures on the topological recursion for Higgs bundles and quantum curves, to appear in IMS Lecture Notes Series, National University of Singapore. arXiv:1509.09007 (2015). [31] O. Dumitrescu and M. Mulase, Interplay between opers, quantum curves, WKB analysis, and Higgs bundles, arXiv:1702.00511 (2017). [32] O. Dumitrescu and M. Mulase, Mirror of orbifold Hurwitz numbers as a spectral curve, preprint (2017). [33] O. Dumitrescu and M. Mulase, Category of cell graphs and cohomological field theory, in preparation. [34] O. Dumitrescu, M. Mulase, A. Sorkin and B. Safnuk, The spectral curve of the Eynard-Orantin recursion via the Laplace transform, in “Algebraic and Geometric Aspects of Integrable Systems and Random Matrices,” Dzhamay, Maruno and Pierce, Eds. Contemporary Mathematics 593, 263–315 (2013). [35] P. Dunin-Barkowski, M. Mulase, P. Norbury, A. Popolitov, and S. Shadrin, Quantum spectral curve for the Gromov-Witten theory of the complex projective line, arXiv:1312.5336 [math-ph] (2013). [36] P. Dunin-Barkowski, N. Orantin, S. Shadrin, and L. Spitz, Identification of the Givental formula with the spectral curve topological recursion procedure, arXiv:1211.4021 [physics.math-ph (math.AG, physics.hep-th)] (2012). [37] B. Eynard, M. Mulase and B. Safnuk, The Laplace transform of the cut-and-join equation and the BouchardMariño conjecture on Hurwitz numbers, Publications of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences 47, 629–670 (2011). [38] B. Eynard and N. Orantin, Invariants of algebraic curves and topological expansion, Communications in Number Theory and Physics 1, 347–452 (2007). [39] B. Fang, C.-C. M. Liu, and Z. Zong, All genus open-closed mirror symmetry for affine toric Calabi-Yau 3orbifolds, arXiv:1310.4818 [math.AG] (2013).  52  O. DUMITRESCU AND M. MULASE  [40] B. Fang, C.-C. M. Liu, and Z. Zong, On the Remodeling Conjecture for Toric Calabi-Yau 3-Orbifolds, arXiv:1604.07123 (2016). [41] C. Frohman, R. Gelca, and W. Lofaro, The A-polynomial from the noncommutative viewpoint, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 354, 735–747 (2002). [42] D. Gaiotto, Opers and TBA, arXiv:1403.6137 [hep-th] (2014). [43] D. Gaiotto, G.W. Moore, and A. Neitzke, Wall-crossing, Hitchin systems, and the WKB approximation, arXiv:0907.3987 [hep-th] (2009). [44] S. Garoufalidis, On the characteristic and deformation varieties of a knot, Geometry & Topology Monographs 7, 291–309 (2004). [45] S. Garoufalidis and T.T.Q. Lê, The colored Jones function is qholonomic, Geometry and Topology 9, 1253–1293 (2005). [46] S. Garoufalidis and R. Kashaev, From state integrals to q-series, arXiv:1304.2705 (2013). [47] S. Garoufalidis and R. Kashaev, Evaluation of state integrals at rational points, Commun. Number Theory Phys. 7, (2015). [48] A. Givental, Gromov-Witten invariants and quantization of quadratic hamiltonians, Moscow Mathematical Journal 1, 551–568 (2001). [49] A. Grassi, Y. Hatsuda, and M. Mariño, Topological strings from Quantum Mechanics, arXiv:1410.3382. (2014). [50] S. Gukov and P. Sulkowski, A-polynomial, B-model, and quantization, arXiv:1108.0002v1 [hep-th] (2011). [51] R.C. Gunning, Special coordinate coverings of Riemann surfaces, Math. Annalen 170, 67–86 (1967). [52] N.J. Hitchin, The self-duality equations on a Riemann surface, Proc. London Math. Soc. (Ser. 3) 55, 59–126 (1987). [53] N.J. Hitchin, Stable bundles and integrable systems, Duke Math. J. 54, 91–114 (1987). [54] A. Hodge and M. Mulase, Hitchin integrable systems, deformations of spectral curves, and KP-type equations, Advanced Studies in Pure Mathematics 59, 31–77 (2010). [55] L. Hollands, Topological strings and quantum curves, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Amsterdam arXiv:0911.3413 [hep-th] (2009). [56] D. Huybrechts and M. Lehn, Stable pairs on curves and surfaces, arXiv:alg-geom/9211001 (1992). [57] K. Iwaki, O. Marchal, and A. Saens-Rodriguez, Painlevé equations, topological type property and reconstruction by the topological recursion, arXiv:1601.02517 (2016). [58] K. Iwaki and A. Saens-Rodriguez, Quantum Curve and the First Painlevé Equation, arXiv:1507.06557 (2015). [59] A. Kapustin and E. Witten, Electric-magnetic duality and the geometric Langlands program, Communications in Number Theory and Physics 1, 1–236 (2007). [60] R. Kashaev and M. Mariño, Operators from mirror curves and the quantum dilogarithm, arXiv:1501.01014 [hepth], (2015). [61] M. Kazarian and S. Lando, An algebro-geometric proof of Witten?s conjecture, Journal of the American Mathematical Society 20, 1079–1089 (2007). [62] M. Kontsevich, Intersection theory on the moduli space of curves and the matrix Airy function, Communications in Mathematical Physics 147, 1–23 (1992). [63] M. Kontsevich and Y.I. Manin, Gromov-Witten classes, quantum cohomology, and enumerative geometry, Communications in Mathematical Physics 164, 525–562 (1994), [64] M. Kontsevich and Y. Soibelman, Wall-crossing structures in Donaldson-Thomas invariants, integrable systems and Mirror Symmetry, arXiv:1303.3253 [math.AG] (2013). [65] M. Kontsevich and Y. Soibelman, Airy structures and symplectic geometry of topological recursion, arXiv: arXiv:1701.09137 [mathAG] (2017). [66] B. Kostant, The principal three-dimensional subgroup and the Betti numbers of a complex simple Lie group, Amer. J. Math., 81, 973–1032 (1959). [67] J. Lurie, On the classification of topological field theories, Current Developments in Mathematics 2008, 129–280 (2009). [68] A. Marian, D. Oprea, R. Pandharipande, A. Pixton, and D. Zvonkine, The Chern character of the Verlinde bundle over Mg,n , arXiv:1311.3028 (2013). [69] M. Mariño, Open string amplitudes and large order behavior in topological string theory, J. High Energy Physics 0803-060, 1–33 (2008). [70] M. Mariño, Spectral Theory and Mirror Symmetry, arXiv:1506.07757 (2015). [71] M. Mirzakhani, Simple geodesics and Weil-Petersson volumes of moduli spaces of bordered Riemann surfaces, Invent. Math. 167, 179–222 (2007). [72] M. Mirzakhani, Weil-Petersson volumes and intersection theory on the moduli space of curves, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 20, 1–23 (2007). [73] T. Mochizuki, Wild harmonic bundles and wild pure twistor D-modules, arXiv:0803.1344, 621 pages (2010). [74] M. Mulase, Algebraic theory of the KP equations, in “Perspectives in Mathematical Physics,” R. Penner and S.-T. Yau, Editors, International Press Company, 157–223 (1994). [75] M. Mulase and M. Penkava, Ribbon graphs, quadratic differentials on Riemann surfaces, and algebraic curves defined over Q, The Asian Journal of Mathematics 2 (4), 875–920 (1998).  INVITATION TO 2D TQFT AND QUANTIZATION  53  [76] M. Mulase and M. Penkava, Topological recursion for the Poincaré polynomial of the combinatorial moduli space of curves, Advances in Mathematics 230, 1322–1339 (2012). [77] M. Mulase and B. Safnuk, Mirzakhani’s Recursion Relations, Virasoro Constraints and the KdV Hierarchy, Indian Journal of Mathematics 50, 189–228 (2008). [78] M. Mulase, S. Shadrin, and L. Spitz, The spectral curve and the Schrödinger equation of double Hurwitz numbers and higher spin structures, Communications in Number Theory and Physics 7, 1–19 (2013). [79] M. Mulase and P. Sulkowski, Spectral curves and the Schrödinger equations for the Eynard-Orantin recursion, arXiv:1210.3006 (2012). [80] M. Mulase and N. Zhang, Polynomial recursion formula for linear Hodge integrals, Communications in Number Theory and Physics 4, 267–294 (2010). [81] D. Mumford, Towards an enumerative geometry of the moduli space of curves, in “Arithmetic and Geometry,” M. Artin and J. Tate, eds., Part II, 271–328, Birkhäuser, 1983. [82] D. Mumford, J. Fogarty, and F. Kirwan, Geometric invariant theory, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, 294 pages, Springer-Verlag (1994). [83] M.S. Narasimhan and C.S. Seshadri, Stable and unitary vector bundles on a compact Riemann surface, Annals of Mathematics, Second Series, 82, 540–567 (1965). [84] T. Nakatsu and K. Takasaki, Open string amplitudes of closed topological vertex, arXiv:1507.07053 [math-ph] (2015). [85] A. Okounkov and R. Pandharipande, Gromov-Witten theory, Hurwitz numbers, and matrix models, I, Proc. Symposia Pure Math. 80, 325–414 (2009). [86] H. Ooguri, P. Sulkowski, M. Yamazaki, Wall Crossing As Seen By Matrix Models, arXiv:1005.1293 (2010). [87] M. Ossendrijver, Ancient Babylonian astronomers calculated Jupiter’s position from the area under a timevelocity graph, Science 351, Issue 6272, 482–484 (2016). [88] E. Robson, Words and pictures: New light on Plimpton 322 , Mathematical Association of America Monthly 109, 105–120 (2002). [89] G. Segal, Geometric aspect of quantum field theory, Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Kyoto, Japan 1990, 1387–1396 (1991). [90] C.T. Simpson, Higgs bundles and local systems, Publications Mathématiques de l’I.H.E.S. 75, 5–95 (1992). [91] C. Teleman, The structure of 2D semi-simple field theories, Inventiones Mathematicae 188, 525–588 (2012). [92] T.R.S. Walsh and A.B. Lehman, Counting rooted maps by genus. I, Journal of Combinatorial Theory B-13, 192–218 (1972). [93] E. Witten, Two dimensional gravity and intersection theory on moduli space, Surveys in Differential Geometry 1, 243–310 (1991). [94] E. Witten, Mirror symmetry, Hitchin’s equations, and Langlands duality, arXiv:0802.0999 (2008). [95] D. Zagier, Quantum modular forms, in “Quanta of maths,” Clay Math. Proc., vol. 11, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, pp. 659–675 (2010). [96] J. Zhou, Quantum Mirror Curves for C3 and the Resolved Confiold, arXiv:1207.0598v1 [math.AG] (2012). Olivia Dumitrescu: Department of Mathematics, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI 48859, U.S.A., and Simion Stoilow Institute of Mathematics, Romanian Academy, 21 Calea Grivitei Street, 010702 Bucharest, Romania E-mail address: dumit1om@cmich.edu Motohico Mulase: Department of Mathematics, University of California, Davis, CA 95616–8633, U.S.A., and Kavli Institute for Physics and Mathematics of the Universe, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan E-mail address: mulase@math.ucdavis.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
