Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_2076

Abstract:
Item Recommendation with Evolving User Preferences and Experience ∗  Subhabrata Mukherjee† , Hemank Lamba‡ and Gerhard Weikum† Planck Institute for Informatics, ‡ Carnegie Mellon University Email: {smukherjee, weikum}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, hlamba@cs.cmu.edu  arXiv:1705.02519v1 [cs.AI] 6 May 2017  † Max  Abstract—Current recommender systems exploit user and item similarities by collaborative filtering. Some advanced methods also consider the temporal evolution of item ratings as a global background process. However, all prior methods disregard the individual evolution of a user’s experience level and how this is expressed in the user’s writing in a review community. In this paper, we model the joint evolution of user experience, interest in specific item facets, writing style, and rating behavior. This way we can generate individual recommendations that take into account the user’s maturity level (e.g., recommending art movies rather than blockbusters for a cinematography expert). As only item ratings and review texts are observables, we capture the user’s experience and interests in a latent model learned from her reviews, vocabulary and writing style. We develop a generative HMM-LDA model to trace user evolution, where the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) traces her latent experience progressing over time — with solely user reviews and ratings as observables over time. The facets of a user’s interest are drawn from a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model derived from her reviews, as a function of her (again latent) experience level. In experiments with five real-world datasets, we show that our model improves the rating prediction over state-of-the-art baselines, by a substantial margin. We also show, in a use-case study, that our model performs well in the assessment of user experience levels.  more than recommendations for new blockbusters. Also, the facets of an item that a user focuses on change with experience. For example, a mature user pays more attention to narrative, light effects, and style rather than actors or special effects. Similar observations hold for ratings of wine, beer, food, etc. Our approach advances state-of-the-art by tapping review texts, modeling their properties as latent factors, using them to explain and predict item ratings as a function of a user’s experience evolving over time. Prior works considering review texts (e.g., [12], [15], [18], [23], [24]) did this only to learn topic similarities in a static, snapshot-oriented manner, without considering time at all. The only prior work [16], considering time, ignores the text of user-contributed reviews in harnessing their experience. However, user experience and their interest in specific item facets at different timepoints can often be observed only indirectly through their ratings, and more vividly through her vocabulary and writing style in reviews. Use-cases: Consider the reviews and ratings by two users on a “Canon DSLR” camera about the facet camera lens. • User 1: My first DSLR. Excellent camera, takes great pictures in  I. I NTRODUCTION  • User 2: The EF 75-300 mm lens is only good to be used outside.  HD, without a doubt it brings honor to its name. [Rating: 5] The 2.2X HD lens can only be used for specific items; filters are  Motivation and State-of-the-Art: Collaborative filtering algouseless if ISO, AP,... are correct. The short 18-55mm lens is cheap rithms are at the heart of recommender systems for items like and should have a hood to keep light off lens. [Rating: 3] movies, cameras, restaurants and beer. Most of these methods The second user is clearly more experienced than the first exploit user-user and item-item similarities in addition to the one, and more reserved about the lens quality of that camera history of user-item ratings — similarities being based on model. Future recommendations for the second user should take latent factor models over user and item features [11], and more into consideration the user’s maturity. As a second use-case, recently on explicit links and interactions among users [6][25]. consider the following reviews of Christopher Nolan movies All these data evolve over time leading to bursts in item where the facet of interest is the non-linear narrative style. popularity and other phenomena like anomalies[7]. State-ofthe-art recommender systems capture these temporal aspects by • User 1 on Memento (2001): “Backwards told is thriller noir-art empty ultimately but compelling and intriguing this.” introducing global bias components that reflect the evolution • User 2 on The Dark Knight (2008): “Memento was very compliof the user and community as a whole[10]. A few models also cated. The Dark Knight was flawless. Heath Ledger rocks!” consider changes in the social neighborhood of users[14]. What • User 3 on Inception (2010): “Inception is a triumph of style over is missing in all these approaches, though, is the awareness of substance. It is complex only in a structural way, not in terms of how experience and maturity levels evolve in individual users. plot. It doesn’t unravel in the way Memento does.” Individual experience is crucial in how users appreciate items, and thus react to recommendations. For example, a mature The first user does not appreciate complex narratives, making cinematographer would appreciate tips on art movies much fun of it by writing her review backwards. The second user prefers simpler blockbusters. The third user seems to appreciate ∗ This is an extended version of the paper published in ICDM 2015 [20]. the complex narration style of Inception and, more of, Memento. Refer to [19] for a general (continuous) version of this model with fine-grained temporal evolution of user experience, and resulting language model using We would consider this maturity level of the more experienced Geometric Brownian Motion and Brownian Motion, respectively. User 3 to generate future recommendations to her.  Approach: We model the joint evolution of user experience, interests in specific item facets, writing style, and rating behavior in a community. As only item ratings and review texts are directly observed, we capture a user’s experience and interests by a latent model learned from her reviews, and vocabulary. All this is conditioned on time, considering the maturing rate of a user. Intuitively, a user gains experience not only by writing many reviews, but she also needs to continuously improve the quality of her reviews. This varies for different users, as some enter the community being experienced. This allows us to generate individual recommendations that take into account the user’s maturity level and interest in specific facets of items, at different timepoints. We develop a generative HMM-LDA model for a user’s evolution, where the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) traces her latent experience progressing over time, and the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model captures her interests in specific item facets as a function of her (again, latent) experience level. The only explicit input to our model is the ratings and review texts upto a certain timepoint; everything else – especially the user’s experience level – is a latent variable. The output is the predicted ratings for the user’s reviews following the given timepoint. In addition, we can derive interpretations of a user’s experience and interests by salient words in the distributional vectors for latent dimensions. Although it is unsurprising to see users writing sophisticated words with more experience, we observe something more interesting. For instance in specialized communities like beeradvocate.com and ratebeer.com, experienced users write more descriptive and fruity words to depict the beer taste (cf. Table V). Table I shows a snapshot of the words used at different experience levels to depict the facets beer taste, movie plot and bad journalism, respectively. We apply our model to 12.7 million ratings from 0.9 million users on 0.5 million items in five different communities on movies, food, beer, and news media, achieving an improvement of 5% to 35% for the mean squared error for rating predictions over several competitive baselines. We also show that users at the same (latent) experience level do indeed exhibit similar vocabulary, and facet interests. Finally, a use-case study in a news community to identify experienced citizen journalists demonstrates that our model captures user maturity fairly well. Contributions: To summarize, this paper introduces the following novel elements: a) This is the first work that considers the progression of user experience as expressed through the text of item reviews, thereby elegantly combining text and time. b) An approach to capture the natural smooth temporal progression in user experience factoring in the maturing rate of the user, as expressed through her writing. c) Offers interpretability by learning the vocabulary usage of users at different levels of experience. d) A large-scale experimental study in five real world datasets from different communities like movies, beer and food; and an interesting use-case study in a news community.  Experience Beer  Movies  News  Level 1 Level 2 Level 3  stupid, bizarre storyline, epic realism, visceral, nostalgic  bad, stupid biased, unfair opinionated, fallacy, rhetoric  bad, shit sweet, bitter caramel finish, coffee roasted  TABLE I: Vocabulary at different experience levels. II. OVERVIEW A. Model Dimensions Our approach is based on the intuition that there is a strong coupling between the facet preferences of a user, her experience, writing style in reviews, and rating behavior. All of these factors jointly evolve with time for a given user. We model the user experience progression through discrete stages, so a state-transition model is natural. Once this decision is made, a Markovian model is the simplest, and thus natural choice. This is because the experience level of a user at the current instant t depends on her experience level at the previous instant t-1. As experience levels are latent (not directly observable), a Hidden Markov Model is appropriate. Experience progression of a user depends on the following factors: • Maturing rate of the user which is modeled by her activity in the community. The more engaged a user is in the community, the higher are the chances that she gains experience and advances in writing sophisticated reviews, and develops taste to appreciate specific facets. • Facet preferences of the user in terms of focusing on particular facets of an item (e.g., narrative structure rather than special effects). With increasing maturity, the taste for particular facets becomes more refined. • Writing style of the user, as expressed by the language model at her current level of experience. More sophisticated vocabulary and writing style indicates higher probability of progressing to a more mature level. • Time difference between writing successive reviews. It is unlikely for the user’s experience level to change from that of her last review in a short time span (within a few hours or days). • Experience level difference: Since it is unlikely for a user to directly progress to say level 3 from level 1 without passing through level 2, the model at each instant decides whether the user should stay at current level l, or progress to l+1. In order to learn the facet preferences and language model of a user at different levels of experience, we use Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). In this work, we assume each review to refer to exactly one item. Therefore, the facet distribution of items is expressed in the facet distribution of the review documents. We make the following assumptions for the generative process of writing a review by a user at time t at experience level et : • A user has a distribution over facets, where the facet preferences of the user depend on her experience level et . • A facet has a distribution over words where the words used to describe a facet depend on the user’s vocabulary at  Level 1: film will happy people back supposed good wouldnt cant Level 2: storyline believable acting time stay laugh entire start funny Level 3 & 4: narrative cinema resemblance masterpiece crude undeniable admirable renowned seventies unpleasant myth nostalgic Level 5: incisive delirious personages erudite affective dramatis nucleus cinematographic transcendence unerring peerless fevered  E1  E1  E2  E3  E4  E5  0  348  504  597  768  720  E1  E2  E3  E4  E5  E1  0  141  126  204  371  E2  146  0  36  129  321  E3  129  39  0  39  202  E4  225  153  42  0  106  E5  430  393  240  125  0  640  E2  384  0  449  551  742  560 480  E3  437  318  0  111  190  400 320  E4  509  352  109  0  138  240  E5  452  164  129  Experience Levels  0  80 0  300 250 200 150 100  160 577  400 350  Experience Levels  Experience Levels  Level 1: stupid people supposed wouldnt pass bizarre totally cant Level 2:storyline acting time problems evil great times didnt money ended simply falls pretty Level 3: movie plot good young epic rock tale believable acting Level 4: script direction years amount fast primary attractive sense talent multiple demonstrates establish Level 5: realism moments filmmaker visual perfect memorable recommended genius finish details defined talented visceral nostalgia  Experience Levels  50 0  (a) Divergence of language model (b) Divergence of facet preference as a function of experience. as a function of experience.  Fig. 1: KL Divergence as a function of experience.  Hypothesis 2: Facet Preferences Depend on Experience Level. The second hypothesis underlying our work is that users experience level et . Table II shows salient words for two at similar levels of experience have similar facet preferences. facets of Amazon movie reviews at different levels of user In contrast to the LM’s where words are observed, facets are experience, automatically extracted by our latent model. The latent so that validating or falsifying the second hypothesis is facets are latent, but we can interpret them as plot/script not straightforward. We performed a three-step study: and narrative style, respectively. • We use Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [2] to compute a As a sanity check for our assumption of the coupling between latent facet distribution hfk i of each review. user experience, rating behavior, language and facet prefer- • We run Support Vector Regression (SVR) [4] for each user. ences, we perform experimental studies reported next. The user’s item rating in a review is the response variable, with the facet proportions in the review given by LDA as B. Hypotheses and Initial Studies features. The regression weight wkue is then interpreted as Hypothesis 1: Writing Style Depends on Experience Level. the preference of user ue for facet fk . We expect users at different experience levels to have • Finally, we aggregate these facet preferences for each divergent Language Models (LM’s) — with experienced users experience level e to get the facet preference P corresponding ue ue exp(wk ) having a more sophisticated writing style and vocabulary distribution given by < >. #ue than amateurs. To test this hypothesis, we performed initial Figure 1b shows the KL divergence between the facet prefstudies over two popular communities1 : 1) BeerAdvocate erences of users at different experience levels in BeerAdvocate. (beeradvocate.com) with 1.5 million reviews from 33, 000 We see that the divergence clearly increases with the difference users and 2) Amazon movie reviews (amazon.com) with 8 in user experience levels; this confirms the hypothesis. The million reviews from 760, 000 users. Both of these span a heatmap for Amazon is similar and omitted. period of about 10 years. Note that Figure 1 shows how a change in the experience In BeerAdvocate, a user gets points on the basis of likes level can be detected. This is not meant to predict the experience received for her reviews, ratings from other users, number of level, which is done by the model in Section IV. posts written, diversity and number of beers rated, time in the community, etc. We use this points measure as a proxy for the III. B UILDING B LOCKS OF OUR M ODEL user’s experience. In Amazon, reviews get helpfulness votes Our model, presented in the next section, builds on and from other users. For each user, we aggregate these votes over compares itself against various baseline models as follows. all her reviews and take this as a proxy for her experience. We partition the users into 5 bins, based on the points A. Latent-Factor Recommendation / helpfulness votes received, each representing one of the According to the standard latent factor model (LFM) [9], experience levels. For each bin, we aggregate the review texts the rating assigned by a user u to an item i is given by: of all users in that bin and construct a unigram language model. rec(u, i) = βg + βu + βi + hαu , φi i (1) The heatmap of Figure 1a shows the Kullback-Leibler (KL) where h., .i denotes a scalar product. βg is the average rating divergence between the LM’s of different experience levels, for the BeerAdvocate case. The Amazon reviews lead to a very of all items by all users. βu is the offset of the average rating similar heatmap, which is omitted here. The main observation given by user u from the global rating. Likewise βi is the rating is that the KL divergence is higher — the larger the difference bias for item i. αu and φi are the latent factors associated with is between the experience levels of two users. This confirms our user u and item i, respectively. These latent factors are learned hypothesis about the coupling of experience and user language. using gradient descent by minimizing the mean squared error (M SE) between observed P ratings r(u, i) and predicted ratings 1 Data available at http://snap.stanford.edu/data/ rec(u, i): M SE = |U1 | u,i∈U (r(u, i) − rec(u, i))2 TABLE II: Salient words for two facets at five experience levels in movie reviews.  B. Experience-based Latent-Factor Recommendation The most relevant baseline for our work is the “user at learned rate” model of [16], which exploits that users at the same experience level have similar rating behavior even if their ratings are temporarily far apart. Experience of each user u for item i is modeled as a latent variable eu,i ∈ {1...E}. Different recommenders are learned for different experience levels. Therefore Equation 1 is parameterized as: receu,i (u, i) = βg (eu,i )+βu (eu,i )+βi (eu,i )+hαu (eu,i ), φi (eu,i )i (2) The parameters are learned using Limited Memory BFGS with the additional constraint that experience levels should be non-decreasing over the reviews written by a user over time. However, this is significantly different from our approach. All of these models work on the basis of only user rating behavior, and ignore the review texts completely. Additionally, the smoothness in the evolution of parameters between experience levels is enforced via L2 regularization, and does not model the natural user maturing rate (via HMM) as in our model. Also note that in the above parametrization, an experience level is estimated for each user-item pair. However, it is rare that a user reviews the same item multiple times. In our approach, we instead trace the evolution of users, and not user-item pairs. C. User-Facet Model In order to find the facets of interest to a user, [22] extends Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to include authorship information. Each document d is considered to have a distribution over authors. We consider the special case where each document has exactly one author u associated with a Multinomial distribution θu over facets Z with a symmetric Dirichlet prior α. The facets have a Multinomial distribution φz over words W drawn from a vocabulary V with a symmetric Dirichlet prior β. Exact inference is not possible due to the intractable coupling between Θ and Φ. Two ways for approximate inference are MCMC techniques like Collapsed Gibbs Sampling and Variational Inference. The latter is typically much more complex and computationally expensive. In our work, we thus use sampling.  Fig. 2: Supervised model for user facets and ratings.  Fig. 3: Supervised model for user experience, facets, and ratings. hyper-parameter α for the document-facet Multinomial distribution Θ is parametrized as αd,z = exp(xTd λz ). The model is trained using stochastic EM which alternates between 1) sampling facet assignments from the posterior distribution conditioned on words and features, and 2) optimizing λ given the facet assignments using L-BFGS. Our approach, explained in the next section, follows a similar approach to couple the User-Facet Model and the Latent-Factor Recommendation Model (depicted in Figure 2). IV. J OINT M ODEL : U SER E XPERIENCE , FACET P REFERENCE , W RITING S TYLE  We start with a User-Facet Model (UFM) (aka. AuthorTopic Model [22]) based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), where users have a distribution over facets and facets D. Supervised User-Facet Model have a distribution over words. This is to determine the The generative process described above is unsupervised and facets of interest to a user. These facet preferences can be does not take the ratings in reviews into account. Supervision interpreted as latent item factors in the traditional Latent-Factor is difficult to build into MCMC sampling where ratings are Recommendation Model (LFM) [9]. However, the LFM is continuous values, as in communities like newstrust.net. supervised as opposed to the UFM. It is not obvious how to For discrete ratings, a review-specific Multinomial rating incorporate supervision into the UFM to predict ratings. The distribution πd,r can be learned as in [13], [21]. Discretizing the user-provided ratings of items can take continuous values (in continuous ratings into buckets bypasses the problem to some some review communities), so we cannot incorporate them into extent, but results in loss of information. Other approaches [12], a UFM with a Multinomial distribution of ratings. We propose [15], [18] overcome this problem by learning the feature an Expectation-Maximization (EM) approach to incorporate supervision, where the latent facets are estimated in an Eweights separately from the user-facet model. An elegant approach using Multinomial-Dirichlet Regression Step using Gibbs Sampling, and Support Vector Regression is proposed in [17] to incorporate arbitrary types of observed (SVR) [4] is used in the M-Step to learn the feature weights continuous or categorical features. Each facet z is associated and predict ratings. Subsequently, we incorporate a layer for with a vector λz whose dimension equals the number of features. experience in the UFM-LFM model, where the experience Assuming xd is the feature vector for document d, the Dirichlet levels are drawn from a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) in the  E-Step. The experience level transitions depend on the evolution of the user’s maturing rate, facet preferences, and writing style over time. The entire process is a supervised generative process of generating a review based on the experience level of a user hinged on our HMM-LDA model. A. Generative Process for a Review  example, a user at a high level of experience may choose to write on the beer “hoppiness” or “story perplexity” in a movie. The word that she writes depends on the facet chosen and the language model for her current experience level. Thus, she draws a word from the multinomial distribution φetd ,zdi with a symmetric Dirichlet prior δ. For example, if the facet chosen is beer taste or movie plot, an experienced user may choose to use the words “coffee roasted vanilla” and “visceral”, whereas an inexperienced user may use “bitter” and “emotional” resp. Algorithm 1 describes this generative process for the review; Figure 3 depicts it visually in plate notation for graphical models. We use MCMC sampling for inference on this model.  Consider a corpus with a set D of review documents denoted by {d1 . . . dD }. For each user, all her documents are ordered by timestamps t when she wrote them, such that tdi < tdj for i < j. Each document d has a sequence of Nd words denoted by d = w1 . . . .wNd . Each word is drawn from a vocabulary V having unique words indexed by {1 . . . V }. Consider a set of U users involved in writing the documents in the corpus, Algorithm 1: Supervised Generative Model for a User’s where ud is the author of document d. Consider an ordered set Experience, Facets, and Ratings of experience levels {e1 , e2 , ...eE } where each ei is from a set for each facet z = 1, ...Z and experience level e = 1, ...E do E, and a set of facets {z1 , z2 , ...zZ } where each zi is from a choose φe,z ∼ Dirichlet(β) set Z of possible facets. Each document d is associated with end a rating r and an item i. for each review d = 1, ...D do At the time td of writing the review d, the user ud has Given user ud and timestamp td experience level etd ∈ E. We assume that her experience level /*Current experience level depends on previous level*/ transitions follow a distribution Π with a Markovian assumption 1. Conditioned on ud and previous experience etd−1 , choose and certain constraints. This means the experience level of ud etd ∼ πetd−1 at time td depends on her experience level when writing the /*User’s facet preferences at current experience level are previous document at time td−1 . influenced by supervision via α – scaled by hyper-parameter ρ controlling influence of supervision*/ πei (ej ) denotes the probability of progressing to experience 2. Conditioned on supervised facet preference αud ,etd of ud level ej from experience level ei , with the constraint ej ∈ at experience level etd scaled by ρ, choose {ei , ei + 1}. This means at each instant the user can either stay θud ,etd ∼ Dirichlet(ρ × αud ,etd ) at her current experience level, or move to the next one. for each word i = 1, ...Nd do The experience-level transition probabilities depend on the /*Facet is drawn from user’s experience-based facet interests*/ rating behavior, facet preferences, and writing style of the user. 3. Conditioned on ud and etd choose a facet The progression also takes into account the 1) maturing rate of zdi ∼ M ultinomial(θud ,etd ) ud modeled by the intensity of her activity in the community, /*Word is drawn from chosen facet and user’s and 2) the time gaps between writing consecutive reviews. We vocabulary at her current experience level*/ incorporate these aspects in a prior for the user’s transition 4. Conditioned on zdi and etd choose a word wdi ∼ M ultinomial(φetd ,zdi ) rates, γ ud , defined as: end D u d γ ud = + λ(td − td−1 ) /*Rating computed via Support Vector Regression with Dud + Davg chosen facet proportions as input features to learn α*/ Dud and Davg denote the number of reviews written by ud 5. Choose rd ∼ F (hαud ,etd , φetd ,zd i) and the average number of reviews per user in the community, end respectively. Therefore the first term models the user activity with respect to the community average. The second term reflects the time difference between successive reviews. The B. Supervision for Rating Prediction user experience is unlikely to change from the level when writing the previous review just a few hours or days ago. λ The latent item factors φi in Equation 2 correspond to controls the effect of this time difference, and is set to a very the latent facets Z in Algorithm 1. Assume that we have small value. Note that if the user writes very infrequently, the some estimation of the latent facet distribution φe,z of each second term may go up. But the first term which plays the document after one iteration of MCMC sampling, where e dominating role in this prior will be very small with respect denotes the experience level at which a document is written, to the community average in an active community, bringing and let z denote a latent facet of the document. We also have down the influence of the entire prior. Note that the constructed an estimation of the preference of a user u for facet z at HMM encapsulates all the factors for experience progression experience level e given by θu,e (z). outlined in Section II. For each user u, we compute a supervised regression function At experience level etd , user ud has a Multinomial facet- Fu for the user’s numeric ratings with the – currently estimated preference distribution θud ,etd . From this distribution she draws – experience-based facet distribution φe,z of her reviews as input a facet of interest zdi for the ith word in her document. For features and the ratings as output.  e  The learned feature weights hαu,e (z)i indicate the user’s Let mei−1 denote the number of transitions from experience i preference for facet z at experience level e. These feature level ei−1 to ei over all users in the community, with the weights are used to modify θu,e to attribute more mass to the constraint ei ∈ {ei−1 , ei−1 + 1}. Note that we allow selffacet for which u has a higher preference at level e. This is transitions for staying at the same experience level. The counts reflected in the next sampling iteration, when we draw a facet z capture the relative difficulty in progressing between different from the user’s facet preference distribution θu,e smoothed by experience levels. For example, it may be easier to progress αu,e , and then draw a word from φe,z . This sampling process to level 2 from level 1 than to level 4 from level 3. is repeated until convergence. The state transition probability depending on the previous In any latent facet model, it is difficult to set the hyper- state, factoring in the user-specific activity rate, is given by: e m i−1 +I(ei−1 =ei )+γ u parameters. Therefore, most prior work assume symmetric i P (ei |ei−1 , u, e−i ) = meei−1 u +I(e i−1 =ei )+Eγ . Dirichlet priors with heuristically chosen concentration paramwhere I(.) is an indicator function taking the value 1 when eters. Our approach is to learn the concentration parameter α the argument is true, and 0 otherwise. The subscript −i denotes of a general (i.e., asymmetric) Dirichlet prior for Multinomial th the value of a variable excluding the data at the i position. distribution Θ – where we optimize these hyper-parameters to All the counts of transitions exclude transitions to and from learn user ratings for documents at a given experience level. ei , when sampling a value for the current experience level ei during Gibbs sampling. The conditional distribution for the C. Inference experience level transition is given by: We describe the inference algorithm to estimate the distriP (E|U, Z, W ) ∝ P (E|U ) × P (Z|E, U ) × P (W |Z, E) (4) butions Θ, Φ and Π from observed data. For each user, we Here the first factor models the rate of experience progression factoring in user activity; the second and third factor models the facet-preferences of user, and language model at a specific level of experience respectively. All three factors combined decide whether the user should stay at the current level of experience, or has matured enough to progress to next level. In Gibbs sampling, the conditional distribution for each hidden variable is computed based on the current assignment of other hidden variables. The values for the latent variables are sampled repeatedly from this conditional distribution until convergence. In our problem setting we have two sets of latent Du Y du U Y E Y Z N variables corresponding to E and Z respectively. Y Y P (U, E, Z, W, θ, φ, π; α, δ, γ) = { We perform Collapsed Gibbs Sampling [5] in which we first u=1 e=1 i=1 z=1 j=1 sample a value for the experience level ei of the user for the × P (θu,e ; αu,e ) × P (zi,j |θu,ei ) P (πe ; γ u ) × P (ei |πe ) current document i, keeping all facet assignments Z fixed. In {z } | {z } | experience transition distribution user experience facet distribution order to do this, we consider two experience levels ei−1 and × P (φe,z ; δ) × P (wi,j |φei ,zi,j ) } ei−1 + 1. For each of these levels, we go through the current {z } | document and all the token positions to compute Equation 4 — experience facet language distribution (3) and choose the level having the highest conditional probability. Let n(u, e, d, z, v) denote the count of the word w occurring Thereafter, we sample a new facet for each word wi,j of the in document d written by user u at experience level e belonging document, keeping the currently sampled experience level of to facet z. In the following equation, (.) at any position in a the user for the document fixed. The conditional distributions for Gibbs sampling for the joint distribution indicates summation of the above counts for the update of the latent variables E and Z are given by: respective argument.  compute the conditional distribution over the set of hidden variables E and Z for all the words W in a review. The exact computation of this distribution is intractable. We use Collapsed Gibbs Sampling [5] to estimate the conditional distribution for each hidden variable, which is computed over the current assignment for all other hidden variables, and integrating out other parameters of the model. Let U, E, Z and W be the set of all users, experience levels, facets and words in the corpus. In the following, i indexes a document and j indexes a word in it. The joint probability distribution is given by:  Exploiting conjugacy of the Multinomial and Dirichlet ui = u, {zi,j = zj }, {wi,j = wj }, e−i ) ∝ distributions, we can integrate out Φ from the above distribution E-Step 1: P (ei = e|ei−1 ,Y P (ei |u, ei−1 , e−i ) × P (zj |ei , u, e−i ) × P (wj |zj , ei , e−i ) ∝ to obtain the posterior distribution P (Z|U, E; α) of the latent j variable Z given by: e U Y E Y u=1 e=1  P Q Γ( z αu,e,z ) z Γ(n(u, e, ., z, .) + αu,e,z ) P P Q z αu,e,z ) z Γ(αu,e,z )Γ( z n(u, e, ., z, .) +  where Γ denotes the Gamma function. Similarly, by integrating out Θ, P (W |E, Z; δ) is given by E Y Z Y e=1 z=1  P Q Γ( v δv ) v Γ(n(., e, ., z, v) + δv ) Q P P v Γ(δv )Γ( v n(., e, ., z, v) + v δv )  Y P j  zj  mei−1 + I(ei−1 = ei ) + γ u i × ei−1 m. + I(ei−1 = ei ) + Eγ u n(u, e, ., zj , .) + αu,e,zj n(., e, ., zj , wj ) + δ P ×P n(u, e, ., zj , .) + zj αu,e,zj wj n(., e, ., zj , wj ) + V δ  E-Step 2: P (zj = z|ud = u, ed = e, wj = w, z−j ) ∝ n(u, e, ., z, .) + αu,e,z n(., e, ., z, w) + δ P P ×P n(u, e, ., z, .) + α z z u,e,z w n(., e, ., z, w) + V δ (5)  The proportion of the z th facet in document d with words {wj } written at experience level e is given by: PNd j=1 φe,z (wj ) φe,z (d) = Nd For each user u, we learn a regression model Fu using these facet proportions in each document as features, along with the user and item biases (refer to Equation 2), with the user’s item rating rd as the response variable. Besides the facet distribution of each document, the biases < βg (e), βu (e), βi (e) > also depend on the experience level e. We formulate the function Fu as Support Vector Regression [4], which forms the M -Step in our problem: 1 M-Step: min αu,e T αu,e + C× αu,e 2 Du X  (max(0, |rd − αu,e T < βg (e),βu (e), βi (e), φe,z (d) > | − ))2  d=1  The total number of parameters learned is [E×Z+E×3]×U . Our solution may generate a mix of positive and negative real numbered weights. In order to ensure that the concentration parameters of the Dirichlet distribution are positive reals, we take exp(αu,e ). The learned α’s are typically very small, whereas the value of n(u, e, ., z, .) in Equation 5 is very large. Therefore we scale the α’s by a hyper-parameter ρ to control the influence of supervision. ρ is tuned using a validation set by varying it from {100 , 101 ...105 }. In the E-Step of the next iteration, we choose θu,e ∼ Dirichlet(ρ × αu,e ). We use the LibLinear2 package for Support Vector Regression. V. E XPERIMENTS Setup: We perform experiments with data from five communities in different domains: BeerAdvocate (beeradvocate.com) and RateBeer (ratebeer.com) for beer reviews, Amazon (amazon.com) for movie reviews, Yelp (yelp.com) for food and restaurant reviews, and NewsTrust (newstrust.net) for reviews of news media. Table III gives the dataset statistics3 . We have a total of 12.7 million reviews from 0.9 million users from all of the five communities combined. The first four communities are used for product reviews, from where we extract the following quintuple for our model < userId, itemId, timestamp, rating, review >. NewsTrust is a special community, which we discuss in Section VI. For all models, we used the three most recent reviews of each user as withheld test data. All experience-based models consider the last experience level reached by each user, and corresponding learned parameters for rating prediction. In all the models, we group light users with less than 50 reviews in training data into a background model, treated as a single user, to avoid modeling from sparse observations. We do not ignore any user. During the test phase for a light user, we take her parameters from the background model. We set Z = 20 for BeerAdvocate, RateBeer and Yelp facets; and Z = 100 for Amazon movies and NewsTrust which have much richer 2 http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/  cjlin/liblinear http://www.yelp.com/dataset challenge/  3 http://snap.stanford.edu/data/,  Dataset  #Users  #Items  #Ratings  Beer (BeerAdvocate) Beer (RateBeer) Movies (Amazon) Food (Yelp) Media (NewsTrust)  33,387 40,213 759,899 45,981 6,180  66,051 110,419 267,320 11,537 62,108  1,586,259 2,924,127 7,911,684 229,907 134,407  TOTAL  885,660  517,435  12,786,384  TABLE III: Dataset statistics. Models  Beer Rate Advocate Beer  News Trust  AmazonYelp  Our model (most recent experience level) f) Our model (past experience level) e) User at learned rate c) Community at learned rate b) Community at uniform rate d) User at uniform rate a) Latent factor model  0.363  0.309  0.373  1.174  1.469  0.375  0.362  0.470  1.200  1.642  0.379 0.383 0.391 0.394 0.409  0.336 0.334 0.347 0.349 0.377  0.575 0.656 0.767 0.744 0.847  1.293 1.203 1.203 1.206 1.248  1.732 1.534 1.526 1.613 1.560  TABLE IV: MSE comparison of our model versus baselines. latent dimensions. For experience levels, we set E = 5 for all. However, for NewsTrust and Yelp datasets our model categorizes users to belong to one of three experience levels. A. Quantitative Comparison Baselines: We consider the following baselines for our work, and use the available code4 for experimentation. a) LFM: A standard latent factor recommendation model [9]. b) Community at uniform rate: Users and products in a community evolve using a single “global clock” [10][27][26], where the different stages of the community evolution appear at uniform time intervals. So the community prefers different products at different times. c) Community at learned rate: This extends (b) by learning the rate at which the community evolves with time, eliminating the uniform rate assumption. d) User at uniform rate: This extends (b) to consider individual users, by modeling the different stages of a user’s progression based on preferences and experience levels evolving over time. The model assumes a uniform rate for experience progression. 4 http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/  jmcauley/code/  60 50 40 30 20 10 0  BeerAdvocate  RateBeer  NewsTrust  User at learned rate  Community at learned rate  User at uniform rate  Latent factor model  Amazon  Yelp  Community at uniform rate  Fig. 4: MSE improvement (%) of our model over baselines.  Experience Level 1: drank, bad, maybe, terrible, dull, shit e) User at learned rate: This extends (d) by allowing each user to evolve on a “personal clock”, so that the time to Experience Level 2: bottle, sweet, nice hops, bitter, strong light, head, smooth, good, brew, better, good reach certain experience levels depends on the user [16]. f) Our model with past experience level: In order to determine Expertise Level 3: sweet alcohol, palate down, thin glass, malts, poured thick, pleasant hint, bitterness, copper hard how well our model captures evolution of user experience over time, we consider another baseline where we randomly Experience Level 4: smells sweet, thin bitter, fresh hint, honey end, sticky yellow, slight bit good, faint bitter beer, red brown, sample the experience level reached by users at some timepoint good malty, deep smooth bubbly, damn weak previously in their lifecycle, who may have evolved thereafter. We learn our model parameters from the data up to this time, Experience Level 5: golden head lacing, floral dark fruits, citrus sweet, light spice, hops, caramel finish, acquired taste, and again predict the user’s most recent three item ratings. Note hazy body, lacing chocolate, coffee roasted vanilla, creamy that this baseline considers textual content of user contributed bitterness, copper malts, spicy honey reviews, unlike other baselines that ignore them. Therefore it is better than vanilla content-based methods, with the notion TABLE V: Experience-based facet words for the illustrative of past evolution, and is the strongest baseline for our model. beer facet taste. Discussions: Table IV compares the mean squared error (MSE) 0.6 for rating predictions, generated by our model versus the six baselines. Our model consistently outperforms all baselines, 0.5 reducing the MSE by ca. 5 to 35%. Improvements of our model 0.4 over baselines are statistically significant at p-value < 0.0001. 0.3 Our performance improvement is most prominent for the 0.2 NewsTrust community, which exhibits strong language features, and topic polarities in reviews. The lowest improvement (over 0.1 the best performing baseline in any dataset) is achieved 0 RateBeer BeeeAdvocate NewsTrust Amazon Yelp for Amazon movie reviews. A possible reason is that the Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 community is very diverse with a very wide range of movies and that review texts heavily mix statements about movie plots Fig. 5: Proportion of reviews at each experience level of users. with the actual review aspects like praising or criticizing certain facets of a movie. The situation is similar for the food and movies (e.g., by genre or production studios) that may better restaurants case. Nevertheless, our model always wins over the distinguish experienced users from amateurs or novices in best baseline from other works, which is typically the “user at terms of their refined taste and writing style. MSE for different experience levels: We observe a weak trend learned rate” model. Evolution effects: We observe in Table IV that our model’s that the MSE decreases with increasing experience level. Users predictions degrade when applied to the users’ past experience at the highest level of experience almost always exhibit the level, compared to their most recent level. This signals that lowest MSE. So we tend to better predict the rating behavior for the model captures user evolution past the previous timepoint. the most mature users than for the remaining user population. Therefore the last (i.e., most recent) experience level attained by This in turn enables generating better recommendations for the a user is most informative for generating new recommendations. “connoisseurs” in the community. Experience progression: Figure 5 shows the proportion of B. Qualitative Analysis reviews written by community members at different experience Salient words for facets and experience levels: We point levels right before advancing to the next level. Here we plot out typical word clusters, with illustrative labels, to show the users with a minimum of 50 reviews, so they are certainly not variation of language for users of different experience levels “amateurs”. A large part of the community progresses from and different facets. Tables II and V show salient words to level 1 to level 2. However, from here only few users move describe the beer facet taste and movie facets plot and narrative to higher levels, leading to a skewed distribution. We observe style, respectively – at different experience levels. Note that the that the majority of the population stays at level 2. facets being latent, their labels are merely our interpretation. User experience distribution: Table VI shows the number of users per experience level in each domain, for users with Other similar examples can be found in Tables I and VII. BeerAdvocate and RateBeer are very focused communities; > 50 reviews. The distribution also follows our intuition of so it is easier for our model to characterize the user experience a highly skewed distribution. Note that almost all users with evolution by vocabulary and writing style in user reviews. We < 50 reviews belong to levels 1 or 2. observe in Table V that users write more descriptive and fruity Language model and facet preference divergence: Figure 6b words to depict the beer taste as they become more experienced. and 6c show the KL divergence for facet-preference and For movies, the wording in reviews is much more diverse language models of users at different experience levels, as and harder to track. Especially for blockbuster movies, which computed by our model. The facet-preference divergence tend to dominate this data, the reviews mix all kinds of aspects. increases with the gap between experience levels, but not as A better approach here could be to focus on specific kinds of smooth and prominent as for the language models. On one hand,  Datasets  e=1  e=2  e=3  e=4  e=5  Models  F1  N DCG  BeerAdvocate RateBeer NewsTrust Amazon Yelp  0.05 0.03 -  0.59 0.42 0.72 -  0.19 0.35 0.15 0.13 0.30  0.10 0.18 0.60 0.10 0.68  0.07 0.02 0.25 0.05 0.02  User at learned rate [16] Our model  0.68 0.75  0.90 0.97  TABLE VI: Distribution of users at different experience levels. Level 1: bad god religion iraq responsibility Level 2: national reform live krugman questions clear jon led meaningful lives california powerful safety impacts Level 3: health actions cuts medicare nov news points oil climate major jobs house high vote congressional spending unemployment strong taxes citizens events failure  TABLE VII: Salient words for the illustrative NewsTrust topic US Election at different experience levels. this is due to the complexity of latent facets vs. explicit words. On the other hand, this also affirms our notion of grounding the model on language. Baseline model divergence: Figure 6a shows the facetpreference divergence of users at different experience levels computed by the baseline model “user at learned rate” [16]. The contrast between the heatmaps of our model and the baseline is revealing. The increase in divergence with increasing gap between experience levels is very rough in the baseline model, although the trend is obvious.  TABLE VIII: Performance on identifying experienced users. based on community engagement, time in the community, other users’ feedback on reviews, profile transparency, and manual validation. We use these member levels to categorize users as experienced or inexperienced. This is treated as the ground truth for assessing the prediction and ranking quality of our model and the baseline “user at learned rate” model [16]. Table VIII shows the F1 scores of these two competitors. We also computed the Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) [8] for the ranked lists of users generated by the two models. NDCG gives geometrically decreasing weights to predictions at various positions of ranked list: N DCGp = DCGp IDCGp  where DCGp = rel1 +  Pp  reli i=2 log2 i  Here, reli is the relevance (0 or 1) of a result at position i. As Table VIII shows, our model clearly outperforms the baseline model on both F1 and N DCG. VII. R ELATED W ORK  State-of-the-art recommenders based on collaborative filtering [9][11] exploit user-user and item-item similarities by latent factors. Explicit user-user interactions have been exploited in trust-aware recommendation systems [6][25]. The temporal VI. U SE -C ASE S TUDY aspects leading to bursts in item popularity, bias in ratings, or So far we have focused on traditional item recommendation the evolution of the entire community as a whole is studied for items like beers or movies. Now we switch to a different in [10][27][26]. Other papers have studied temporal issues kind of items - newspapers and news articles - tapping into the for anomaly detection [7], detecting changes in the social NewsTrust online community (newstrust.net). NewsTrust neighborhood [14] and linguistic norms [3]. However, none of features news stories posted and reviewed by members, many these prior work has considered the evolving experience and of whom are professional journalists and content experts. behavior of individual users. The recent work[16], which is one of our baselines, modeled Stories are reviewed based on their objectivity, rationality, and the influence of rating behavior on evolving user experience. general quality of language to present an unbiased and balanced However, it ignores the vocabulary and writing style of users in narrative of an event. The focus is on quality journalism. reviews, and their natural smooth temporal progression. In conIn our framework, each story is an item, which is rated trast, our work considers the review texts for additional insight and reviewed by a user. The facets are the underlying topic into facet preferences and smooth experience progression. distribution of reviews, with topics being Healthcare, Obama Prior work that tapped user review texts focused on other Administration, NSA, etc. The facet preferences can be mapped issues. Sentiment analysis over reviews aimed to learn latent to the (political) polarity of users in the news community. Recommending News Articles: Our first objective is to topics [13], latent aspects and their ratings [12][24], and userrecommend news to readers catering to their facet preferences, user interactions [25]. [15][23] unified various approaches viewpoints, and experience. We apply our joint model to this to generate user-specific ratings of reviews. [18] further task, and compare the predicted ratings with the ones observed leveraged the author writing style. However, all of these for withheld reviews in the NewsTrust community. The mean prior approaches operate in a static, snapshot-oriented manner, squared error (MSE) results are reported in Table IV in without considering time at all. Section V. Table VII shows salient examples of the vocabulary From the modeling perspective, some approaches learn a by users at different experience levels on the topic US Election. document-specific discrete rating [13][21], whereas others Identifying Experienced Users: Our second task is to find learn the facet weights outside the topic model (e.g., [12], experienced members of this community, who have potential [15], [18]). In order to incorporate continuous ratings, [1] for being citizen journalists. In order to find how good our proposed a complex and computationally expensive Variational model predicts the experience level of users, we consider the Inference algorithm, and [17] developed a simpler approach following as ground-truth for user experience. In NewsTrust, using Multinomial-Dirichlet Regression. The latter inspired our users have Member Levels calculated by the NewsTrust staff technique for incorporating supervision.  E3  E4  E5  138  123  93  18  135  105  E2 E3  134  0  33  8  65 90 75  112  34  0  21  43 60  E4  89  8  18  0  30  45 30  E5  19  63  48  31  0  E1  120  15  E1  E2  E3  E4  E5  0  180  71  140  125  E2  38  0  175  47  150  175  125  E3  83  149  5  0  88  100 75  E4 E5  86  155  1  E2  E3  0  180  48  203  100  140  180 150  259  E2  0  73  120 90 60  65  83  0  30  E3  160  2217  E2  181  0  1910  E3  601  309  0  1750 1500 1250 1000 750 500  0  Experience Levels  25  0  E2  0  2000  210  50  116  E1 E1  240  E3  86  0  E1  175  E1  0  Experience Levels  200  Experience Levels  E2  0  Experience Levels  E1  Experience Levels  Experience Levels  E1  250 0  Experience Levels  0  Experience Levels  (a) User at learned rate [16]: Facet preference divergence with experience. E3  E4  E5  0  104  76  141  114  E1  E2  E3  E4  E5  0  192  199  324  161  135  E2  120 105 98  0  78  77  91 90  E3  75  78  0  89  106  75 60  E4  320  E1  132  74  90  0  52  45  109  86  106  52  0  E2  200  0  20  267  167  E3  211  20  0  271  244  160 120  E4  332  284  296  0  129 80  E5  15  240 200  163  0  Experience Levels  E2  E3  0  216  234  E1  E2  E3  0  19  34  225  E1  30  E5  E1  54  280  Experience Levels  Experience Levels  E1  66  45  23  0  200  E1  175  Experience Levels  E2  Experience Levels  E1  150  E2  204  0  162  125 100 75  E3  156  222  50  0  42 36  E2  20  0  57  18  E3  55  34  0  12 6  0  Experience Levels  30 24  25  40  48  0  Experience Levels  0  Experience Levels  (b) Our model: Facet preference divergence with experience. E3  E4  E5  0  193  209  154  201  200  E1  E1  E2  E3  E4  E5  0  571  563  1242  1440  197  0  71  100  162  150 125  E3 E4  213  71  0  77  140  100 75  156  98  76  0  102 50  E5  203  161  138  102  Experience Levels  0  25 0  RateBeer  Experience Levels  Experience Levels  E2  1350  E2  575  0  78  303  390  1050 900  E3  593  105  0  333  362  750 600  E4  1264  326  329  0  213  E1  E2  E3  0  72  96  450  E1  1441  393  339  194  Experience Levels  Amazon Movies  0  E2  E3  0  32  210  200  70 60  E2  72  0  50  76  40 30  E3  96  76  150  E1  80  20  0  0  Experience Levels  175 150 125  E2  33  0  132  E3  209  132  0  100 75 50  10  300  E5  E1 90  1200  175  Experience Levels  E2  Experience Levels  E1  E1  Experience Levels  25 0  0  Yelp  NewsTrust  (c) Our model: Language model divergence with experience.  Fig. 6: Facet preference and language model KL divergence with experience. A general (continuous) version of this work is presented in [19] with fine-grained temporal evolution of user experience, and resulting language model using Geometric Brownian Motion and Brownian Motion, respectively. VIII. C ONCLUSION Current recommender systems do not consider user experience when generating recommendations. In this paper, we have proposed an experience-aware recommendation model that can adapt to the changing preferences and maturity of users in a community. We model the personal evolution of a user in rating items that she will appreciate at her current maturity level. We exploit the coupling between the facet preferences of a user, her experience, writing style in reviews, and rating behavior to capture the user’s temporal evolution. Our model is the first work that considers the progression of user experience as expressed in the text of item reviews. Our experiments – with data from domains like beer, movies, food, and news – demonstrate that our model substantially reduces the mean squared error for predicted ratings, compared to the state-of-the-art baselines. This shows our method can generate better recommendations than those models. We further demonstrate the utility of our method in a use-case study about identifying experienced members in the NewsTrust community who can be potential citizen journalists.  R EFERENCES [1] D. M. Blei and J. D. McAuliffe. Supervised topic models. NIPS, 2007. [2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3, 2003. [3] C. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, R. West, D. Jurafsky, J. Leskovec, and C. Potts. No country for old members: User lifecycle and linguistic change in online communities. WWW, 2013. [4] H. Drucker, C. J. C. Burges, L. Kaufman, A. Smola, and V. Vapnik. Support vector regression machines. NIPS, 1997. [5] T. Griffiths. Gibbs sampling in the generative model of latent dirichlet allocation. Technical report, 2002. [6] R. Guha, R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, and A. Tomkins. Propagation of trust and distrust. WWW, 2004. [7] S. Günnemann, N. Günnemann, and C. Faloutsos. Detecting anomalies in dynamic rating data: A robust probabilistic model for rating evolution. KDD, 2014. [8] K. Järvelin and J. Kekäläinen. Cumulated gain-based evaluation of IR techniques. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 20(4), 2002. [9] Y. Koren. Factorization meets the neighborhood: A multifaceted collaborative filtering model. KDD, 2008. [10] Y. Koren. Collaborative filtering with temporal dynamics. Commun. ACM, 53(4), 2010. [11] Y. Koren and R. Bell. Advances in collaborative filtering. In Recommender systems handbook. 2011. [12] H. Lakkaraju, C. Bhattacharyya, I. Bhattacharya, and S. Merugu. Exploiting coherence for the simultaneous discovery of latent facets and associated sentiments. SDM, 2011. [13] C. Lin and Y. He. Joint sentiment/topic model for sentiment analysis. CIKM, 2009. [14] H. Ma, D. Zhou, C. Liu, M. R. Lyu, and I. King. Recommender systems with social regularization. WSDM, 2011. [15] J. McAuley and J. Leskovec. Hidden factors and hidden topics: Understanding rating dimensions with review text. RecSys, 2013.  [16] J. J. McAuley and J. Leskovec. From amateurs to connoisseurs: modeling the evolution of user expertise through online reviews. WWW, 2013. [17] D. Mimno and A. McCallum. Topic models conditioned on arbitrary features with dirichlet-multinomial regression. UAI, 2008. [18] S. Mukherjee, G. Basu, and S. Joshi. Joint author sentiment topic model. SDM, 2014. [19] S. Mukherjee, S. Günnemann, and G. Weikum. Continuous experienceaware language model. SIGKDD, 2016. [20] S. Mukherjee, H. Lamba, and G. Weikum. Experience-aware item recommendation in evolving review communities. ICDM, 2015. [21] D. Ramage, C. D. Manning, and S. Dumais. Partially labeled topic models for interpretable text mining. KDD, 2011. [22] M. Rosen-Zvi, T. Griffiths, M. Steyvers, and P. Smyth. The author-topic model for authors and documents. UAI, 2004. [23] C. Wang and D. M. Blei. Collaborative topic modeling for recommending scientific articles. KDD, 2011. [24] H. Wang et al. Latent aspect rating analysis without aspect keyword supervision. KDD, 2011. [25] R. West, H. S. Paskov, J. Leskovec, and C. Potts. Exploiting social network structure for person-to-person sentiment analysis. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2(2):297–310, 2014. [26] L. Xiang, Q. Yuan, S. Zhao, L. Chen, X. Zhang, Q. Yang, and J. Sun. Temporal recommendation on graphs via long- and short-term preference fusion. KDD, 2010. [27] L. Xiong, X. Chen, T. K. Huang, J. Schneider, and J. G. Carbonell. Temporal collaborative filtering with bayesian probabilistic tensor factorization. SDM, 2010.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
