Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_231

Abstract:
Video Enhancement with Task-Oriented Flow Tianfan Xue† Google Research  Baian Chen MIT CSAIL  Jiajun Wu MIT CSAIL  Donglai Wei Harvard University  arXiv:1711.09078v1 [cs.CV] 24 Nov 2017  William T. Freeman MIT CSAIL, Google Research Frame interpolation  t=3 t=2 t=1 (I-a) Input Low-frame-rate Videos  (I-b) Epic Flow  (I-c) Interp. by Epic Flow  (I-d) Task-oriented Flow  (I-e) Interp. by Task-oriented Flow  Video denoising  t=7 t=4 t=1 (II-a) Input Noisy Videos  (II-b) Epic Flow  (II-c) Denoise by Epic Flow  (II-d) Task-oriented Flow  (II-e) Denoise by Task-oriented Flow  Figure 1: Many video processing tasks, e.g., temporal frame-interpolation (top) and video denoising (bottom), rely on flow estimation. In many cases, however, precise optical flow estimation is intractable and could be suboptimal for a specific task. For example, although EpicFlow [28] predicts precise movement of objects (I-b, the flow field aligns well with object boundaries), small errors in estimated flow fields result in obvious artifacts in interpolated frames, like the obscure fingers in (I-c). With the task-oriented flow proposed in this work (I-d), those interpolation artifacts disappear as in (I-e). Similarly, in video denoising, our task-oriented flow (II-d) deviates from EpicFlow (II-b), but leads to a cleaner output frame (II-e). Flow visualization is based on the color wheel shown on the corner of (I-b).  Abstract Many video processing algorithms rely on optical flow to register different frames within a sequence. However, a precise estimation of optical flow is often neither tractable nor optimal for a particular task. In this paper, we propose taskoriented flow (TOFlow), a flow representation tailored for specific video processing tasks. We design a neural network with a motion estimation component and a video processing component. These two parts can be jointly trained in a self-supervised manner to facilitate learning of the proposed TOFlow. We demonstrate that TOFlow outperforms the traditional optical flow on three different video processing tasks: frame interpolation, video denoising/deblocking, and video super-resolution. We also introduce Vimeo-90K, a large-scale, high-quality video dataset for video processing to better evaluate the proposed algorithm.  † This  work was done when Tianfan Xue was a student in MIT CSAIL.  1. Introduction Motion estimation is a key component in video processing tasks like temporal frame interpolation, video denoising, and video super-resolution. Most motion-based video processing algorithms use a two-step approach [16, 2, 15]. They first estimate motion between input frames and register them based on estimated flow fields, and then process the registered frames to generate the final output. Therefore, the accuracy of flow estimation greatly affects the performance of these two-step approaches. However, precise flow estimation can be challenging and slow. The brightness constancy assumption, which many motion estimation algorithms rely on, may fail due to variations in lighting or pose and the presence of motion blur or occlusion. Also, many motion estimation algorithms involve solving a large-scale optimization problem, making it inefficient for real-time applications. For example, the widely used EpicFlow algorithm [28] takes about 16 seconds for each frame of a million pixels.  Moreover, most motion estimation algorithms aim to solve for a motion field that matches the actual objects in motion. However, this may not be the best motion representation for video processing. Figure 1 shows an example in frame interpolation. Even though EpicFlow calculates a precise motion field (I-b) whose boundary is well-aligned with the fingers in the image (I-c), the interpolated frame (I-c) based on it contains obvious artifacts due to occlusion. In contrast, using the task-oriented flow introduced in this work, the model generates better interpolation result (I-e), though the estimated motion field (I-d) differs from optical flow in magnitude and does not align with object boundaries. Similarly, in video denoising, although EpicFlow shown in (II-b) matches the boundary of the girl’s hair, the frame denoised with EpicFlow is much noisier than the one with our task-oriented flow (II-e). This suggests that for specific video processing tasks, there exist flow representations that do not match the actual object movement, but lead to better results. In this paper, we propose to learn task-oriented flow (TOFlow) by performing motion analysis and video processing jointly in an end-to-end trainable convolutional network. Our network consists of three modules: the first one estimates the motion fields between input frames; the second one registers all input frames based on estimated motion fields; and the third one generates target output from registered frames. These three modules are jointly trained to minimize the loss between output frames and ground truth. Unlike other flow estimation networks [27, 6], the flow estimation module in our framework predicts a motion field tailored to a specific task, e.g., frame interpolation or video denoising, as it is trained together with the corresponding video processing module. The proposed TOFlow has several advantages: first, it significantly outperforms optical flow algorithms on three video processing tasks; second, it is highly efficient, taking only 15.8ms for an input image with a resolution of 448×256; third, it can be self-supervised, learning from unlabeled video frames. To evaluate TOFlow, we build a large-scale, high-quality video dataset for video processing. Most existing large video datasets, like Youtube-8M [1], are designed for high-level vision tasks like event classification. The videos are often of low resolutions with significant motion blurs, making them less useful for video processing. To evaluate video processing algorithms systematically, we introduce a new dataset, Vimeo-90K, which consists of 89,800 high-quality video clips (i.e., 720p or higher) downloaded from Vimeo∗ . We build three benchmarks from these videos for interpolation, denoising/deblocking, and super-resolution, respectively. We hope this dataset will contribute to future research in learning-based video processing through its high-quality videos and diverse examples. The contributions of this paper are three-fold. First, we propose TOFlow, a flow representation tailored to specific ∗ https://vimeo.com  video processing tasks, significantly outperforming standard optical flow. Second, we propose a self-supervised and endto-end trainable video processing framework that can handle various tasks, including frame interpolation, video denoising, and video super-resolution. Third, we also build a large-scale, high-quality video dataset, Vimeo-90K, for video processing.  2. Related Work Optical Flow Estimation Dated back to Horn and Schunck [9], most optical flow algorithms have sought to minimize hand-crafted energy terms for image alignment and flow smoothness [22, 3, 32]. Current state-of-the-art methods like EpicFlow [28] and DC Flow [34] further exploit image boundary and segment cues to improve the flow interpolation among sparse matches. Recently, end-to-end deep learning methods were proposed for faster inference, some trained with supervision [6, 27], and some without [35]. In this work, we used the same flow network as SpyNet [27]. But instead of training it to minimize the flow estimation error, as SpyNet does, we train it jointly with a video processing network to learn a flow representation that is the best for a specific task. Low-level Video Processing We focus on three video processing tasks: frame interpolation, video denoising, and video super-resolution. Most existing algorithms in these areas explicitly estimate the dense motion among input frames, and then reconstruct the reference frame according to image formation models for frame interpolation [2, 33, 36], video super-resolution [17], and denoising [15, 30, 20]. We refer readers to survey articles [23, 8] for comprehensive literature reviews on these flourishing research topics. Deep Learning for Video Enhancement Inspired by the success of deep learning, researchers have directly modeled video enhancement tasks as regression problems without representing motions, and have designed deep networks for frame interpolation [21, 24] and super-resolution [14, 10, 12, 29]. Recently, with differentiable image sampling layers in deep learning [11], motion information can be incorporated into networks and trained jointly with the video enhancement task. Such approaches have been applied to video interpolation [18], light-field video interpolation [31], object novel view synthesis [37], eye gaze manipulation [7], and superresolution [5, 29]. Although many of these algorithms also jointly train the flow estimation with the rest parts of network, there is no systematical study on the advantage of joint training. In this paper, we illustrate the advantage of the trained task-oriented flow through toy examples, and also demonstrate its superiority over general flow algorithm on various real-world tasks. We also present a general framework that can easily adapt to different video processing tasks.  3. Tasks In the paper, we explore three video enhancement tasks: frame interpolation, video denoising/deblocking, and video  super-resolution. Temporal Frame Interpolation Given a low frame rate video, a temporal frame interpolation algorithm generates a high frame rate video by synthesizing additional frames between two temporally neighboring frames. Specifically, let I1 and I3 be two consecutive frames in an input video, the task is to estimate the missing middle frame I2 . Temporal frame interpolation doubles the video frame rate, and can be recursively applied for even higher frame rates. Video Denoising/Deblocking Given a degraded video with artifacts from either the sensor or compression, video denoising/deblocking aims to remove the noise or compression artifacts to recover the original video. This is typically done by aggregating information from neighboring frames. Specifically, Let I1 , I2 , ..., IN be N-consecutive frames in an input video, the task of video denoising is to estimate the middle ∗ frame Iref given degraded frames I1 , I2 , ..., IN as input. For the ease of description, in the rest of paper, we simply call both tasks as video denoising. Video Super-Resolution (SR) Similar to video denoising, given N consecutive low-resolution frames as input, the task of video super-resolution is to recover the high-resolution middle frame. In this work, we first upsample all the input frames to the same resolution of the output using bicubic interpolation, and our algorithm only needs to recover the high-frequency component in the output image.  4. Task-Oriented Flow for Video Processing Most motion-based video processing algorithms has two steps: motion estimation and image processing. For example, in temporal frame interpolation, most algorithms first estimate how pixels move between input frames (frame 1 and 3), and then move pixels to the estimated location in the output frame (frame 2) [2]. Similarly, in video denoising, algorithms first register different frames based on estimated motion fields between them, and then remove noises by aggregating information from registered frames. In this paper, we propose to use task-oriented flow (TOFlow) to integrate the two steps. To learn the task-oriented flow, we design an end-to-end trainable network with three parts (Figure 3): a flow estimation module that estimates the movement of pixels between input frames; an image transformation module that warps all the frames to a reference frame; and a task-specific image processing module that performs video interpolation, denoising, or super-resolution on registered frames. Because the flow estimation module is jointly trained with the rest of the network, it learns to predict a flow field that fits to a particular task.  4.1. Toy Example Before discussing the details of network structure, we first start with two synthetic sequences to demonstrate why our TOFlow can outperform traditional optical flows. The left  Video Denoising  Frame Interpolation  ? Input frames  Input frames Case I: With Ground Truth Flows  GT flow  Warped by Interpolated GT flow 2nd frame  Case II: With Task-Oriented Flows  TOFlow  Warped by Interpolated 2nd frame TOFlow  Case I: With Ground Truth Flows  GT flow  Warped by TOFlow  Denoised frame  Case II: With Task-Oriented Flows  TOFlow  Warped by TOFlow  Denoised frame  Figure 2: A toy example that demonstrates the effectiveness of task oriented flow over the traditional optical flow. See Section 4.1 for details. of Figure 2 shows an example of frame interpolation, where a green triangle is moving to the bottom in front of a black background. If we warp both the first and third frames to the second, even using the ground truth flow (Case I, left column), there is an obvious doubling artifact in the warped frames due to occlusion (Case I, middle column), which is a well-known problem in the optical flow literature [2]. The final interpolation result based on these two warp frames still contains this artifact (Case I, right column). In contrast, TOFlow does not stick to object motion: the background should be static, but it has non-zero motion (Case II, left column). With TOFlow, however, there is barely any artifact in the warped frames (Case II, middle column) and the interpolated frame looks clean (Case II, right column). The hallucinated background motion actually helps to reduce the doubling artifacts. This shows that TOFlow can reduce errors and synthesize frames better than the ground truth flow. Similarly, on the right of Figure 2, we show an example of video denoising. The random small boxes in the input frames are synthetic noises. If we warp the first and the third frames to the second using the ground truth flow, the noisy patterns (random squares) remain, and the denoised frame still contains some noise (Case I, right column. There are some shadows of boxes on the bottom). But if we warp these two frames using TOFlow (Case II, left column), those noisy patterns are also reduced or eliminated (Case II, middle column), and the final denoised frame base on them contains almost no noise. This also shows that TOFlow learns to reduce the noise in input frames by inpainting them with neighboring pixels, which  Flow Network  Input at diff. scales  Frame 1  …  SPN Flow net  …  …  Reference  …  Motion L1  Not used in interp.  Frame T  …  …  Motion L2  …  Motion L4  Image Processing Network for Interpolation (with Mask)  Improc net Output frame  Warped frame 𝐼21 Motion 𝑣21  Mask 𝑚21  ′ Masked frame 𝐼21  Motion 𝑣23  Mask 𝑚23  ′ Masked frame 𝐼23  SPN Flow net Input frames  Motion fields  Flow Estimation  Warped input  Transformation  Image Processing  Interpolated frame 𝐼2  Warped frame 𝐼23  Figure 3: Left: our model using task-oriented flow for video processing. Given an input video, we first calculate the motion between frames through a task-oriented flo estimation network. We then warp input frames to the reference using spatial transformer networks, and aggregate the warped frames to generate a high-quality output image. Right top: the detailed structure of flow estimation network (the orange network on the left). Right bottom: the detailed structure of image processing network for interpolation (the gray network on the left). traditional flow cannot do. Now we discuss the details of each module as follows.  the later modules of the network can transform the first and the third frames to the second frame for synthesis.  4.2. Flow Estimation Module  4.3. Image Transformation Module  The flow estimation module calculates the motion fields between input frames. For a sequence with N frames (N = 3 for interpolation and N = 7 for denoising and super-resolution), we select the middle frame as the reference. The flow estimation module consists of N − 1 flow networks, all of which have the same structure and share the same set of parameters. Each flow network (the orange network in Figure 3) takes one frame from the sequence and the reference frame as input, and predicts the motion between them. We use the multi-scale motion estimation framework proposed by [27] to handle the large displacement between frames. The network structure is shown in the top right subfigure of Figure 3. The input to the network are Gaussian pyramids of both the reference frame and another frame rather than the reference. At each scale, a sub-network takes both frames at that scale and upsampled motion fields from previous prediction as input, and calculates a more accurate motion fields. We uses 4 sub-networks in a flow network, three of which are shown Figure 3 (the yellow networks). There is a small modification for frame interpolation, where the reference frame (frame 2) is not an input to the network, but what it should synthesize. To deal with that, the motion estimation module for interpolation consists of two flow networks, both taking both the first and third frames as input, and predict the motion fields from the second frame to the first and the third respectively. With these motion fields,  Using the predicted motion fields in the previous step, the image transformation module registers all the input frames to the reference frame. We use the spatial transformer networks [11] for registration, which synthesizes a new frame after transformation using bilinear interpolation. One important property of this module is that it can back-propagate the gradients from the image processing module to the flow estimation module, so we can learn a flow representation that adapts to different video processing tasks.  4.4. Image Processing Module We use another convolutional network as the image processing module to generate the final output. For each task, we use a slightly different architecture. Please refer to our appendix for details. Occluded regions in warped frames As mentioned Section 4.1, occlusion often results in doubling artifacts in the warped frames. To solve this, some interpolation algorithms [18, 24, 25] estimate occlusion masks and only use pixels that are not occluded in interpolation. Inspired by this, we also design an optional mask prediction network for frame interpolation, in addition to the image processing module. The mask prediction network takes the two estimated motion fields as input, one from frame 2 to frame 1, and the other from frame 2 to frame 3 (v21 and v23 in the bottom right of Figure 3). It predicts two occlusion masks: m21 is the mask  Input 𝐼1  Input 𝐼3  Warp 𝐼1 by Epicflow  Warp 𝐼3 by Epicflow  Warp 𝐼1 by TOFlow  TOFlow interp (no mask)  Warp 𝐼3 by TOFlow TOFlow interp (use mask)  Figure 4: Comparison between Epicflow interpolation [28] and TOFlow interpolation (both with and without mask). of the warped frame 2 from frame 1 (I21 ), and m23 is the mask of the warped frame 2 from frame 3 (I23 ). The invalid regions in the warped frames (I21 and I23 ) are masked out by multiplying them with their corresponding masks. The middle frame is then calculated through another convolutional neural network with both the warped frames (I21 and I23 ) and 0 0 the masked warped frames (I21 and I23 ) as input. Please refer to our appendix for details of the network structure. Even without the mask prediction network, our flow estimation is mostly robust to occlusion. As shown in the third column of Figure 4, the warped frames using TOFlow has little doubling artifacts. Therefore, just from two warped frames without the learned masks, the network synthesizes a decent middle frame (the top image of the right most column). The mask network helps to remove some tiny artifacts, such as the faint ghost of the bottom thumb circled by white (visible when zoomed in).  4.5. Training To accelerate the training procedure, we first pre-train some modules of the network and then fine-tune all of them together. Details are described below. Pre-training the Flow Estimation Network Pre-training the flow network consists of two steps. First, for all tasks, we pre-train the motion estimation network on the Sintel dataset [4], a realistically rendered video dataset with ground truth optical flow, by minimizing the l1 difference between estimated optical flow and the ground truth. In the second step, for video denoising and super-resolution, we fine-tune it with noisy or blurry input frames to improve its robustness to these input. For video interpolation, we fine-tune it with frames I1 and I3 from video triplets as input, minimizing the l-1 difference between the estimated optical flow and the ground truth flow V23 (or v21 ). This enables the flow network to calculate the motion from the unknown frame I2 to frame I3 given only frames I1 and I3 as input. Empirically we find that this two-step pre-training can improve the convergence speed.  Pre-training the Mask Network We also pre-train our occlusion mask estimation network for video interpolation as an optional component of video processing network before joint training. Two occlusion masks (m21 and m23 ) are estimated together with the same network and only optical flow v21 , v23 as input. The network is trained by minimizing the l-1 loss between the output masks and pre-computed occlusion masks. Joint Training After pre-training, we train all the modules jointly by minimizing the l1 loss between recovered frame and the ground truth, without any supervision on estimated flow fields. For optimization, we use ADAM [13] with a weight decay of 10−4 . We run 15 epochs with batch size 1 for all tasks. The learning rate for denoising/deblocking and superresolution is 10−4 , and the learning rate for interpolation is 3 × 10−4 .  5. The Vimeo-90K Dataset To acquire high quality videos for video processing, previous works [17, 14] take videos by themselves, resulting in video datasets that are small in size and limited in terms of content. Alternatively, we resort to Vimeo where many videos are taken with professional cameras on diverse topics. In addition, we only search for videos without inter-frame compression (e.g., H.264), so that each frame is compressed independently, avoiding artificial signals introduced by video codecs. As many videos are composed of multiple shots, we use a simple threshold-based shot detection algorithm to break each video into consistent shots and further use GIST feature [26] to remove shots with similar scene background. As a result, we collect a new video dataset from Vimeo, consisting of 4,278 videos with 89,800 independent shots that are different from each other in content. To standardize the input, we resize all frames to the fixed resolution 448×256. As shown in Figure 5, frames sampled from the dataset contain diverse content for both indoor and outdoor scenes. We keep consecutive frames when the average motion magnitude is between 1–8 pixels. The right column of Figure 5 shows the histogram of flow magnitude over the whole dataset, where the flow fields are calculated using SpyNet [27]. We further generate three benchmarks from the dataset for the three video enhancement tasks studied in this paper. Vimeo Interpolation Benchmark We select 73,171 frame triplets from 14,777 video clips with the following three criteria for the interpolation task. First, more than 5% pixels should have motion larger than 3 pixels between neighboring frames. This criterion removes static videos. Second, l1 difference between the reference and the warped frame using optical flow (calculated using SpyNet [27]) should be at most 15 pixels (the maximum intensity level of an image is 255). This removes frames with large intensity change, which are too hard for frame interpolation. Third, the average difference between motion fields of neighboring frames (v21 and v23 ) should be less than 1 pixel. This removes non-linear motion,  15.1  14.1  12.1  13.1  11.1  9.1  10.1  8.1  7.1  6.1  5.1  4.1  2.1  3.1  1.1  Frequency 0.1  Flow magnitude  (a) Sample frames  12.1  13.1  11.1  10.1  9.1  8.1  7.1  6.1  5.1  4.1  3.1  2.1  1.1  0.1  Frequency  (b) Pixel-wise flow frequency  Flow magnitude  (c) Image mean flow frequency  Figure 5: The Vimeo-90K dataset. (a) Sampled frames from the dataset, demonstrating the high quality and wide coverage of our dataset; (b) The histogram of flow magnitude of all pixels in Vimeo-90K; (c) The histogram of mean flow magnitude of all images (the flow magnitude of an image is the average flow magnitude of all pixels in that image). as most interpolation algorithms, including ours, are based on linear motion assumption. Vimeo Denoising/Deblocking Benchmark We select 91,701 frame septuplets from 38,990 video clips for the denoising task, using the first two criteria introduced for the interpolation benchmark. For video denoising, we consider two types of noises: a Gaussian noise with a standard deviation of 0.1, and mixed noises including a 10% salt-and-pepper noise in addition to the Gaussian noise. For video deblocking, we compress the original sequences using FFmpeg with codec JPEG2000, format J2k, and quality value q = 20. Vimeo Super-Resolution Benchmark We also use the same set of septuplets for denoising to build the Vimeo Super-Resolution Benchmark with down-sampling factor of 4: the resolution of input and output images are 112 × 64 and 448 × 256 respectively. To generate the low-resolution videos from high-resolution input, we use the MATLAB imresize function, which first blurs the input frames using cubic filters and then downsamples videos using bicubic interpolation.  Methods  Vimeo interp.  DVF dataset [18]  PSNR  SSIM  PSNR  SSIM  SpyNet [27] EpicFlow [28] DVF [18] AdaConv [24] SepConv [25]  31.95 32.02 — 32.33 33.45  0.9601 0.9622 — 0.9568 0.9674  33.60 33.71 34.12 — —  0.9633 0.9635 0.9631 — —  Fixed flow Fixed flow + Mask  29.09 30.10  0.9229 0.9322  31.61 32.23  0.9544 0.9575  TOFlow TOFlow + Mask  33.53 33.73  0.9668 0.9682  34.54 34.58  0.9666 0.9667  Table 1: Quantitative comparison between different frame interpolation algorithms on Vimeo interpolation test set and DVF test set [18].  6.1. Frame Interpolation Datasets We evaluate on two datasets: Vimeo Interpolation Benchmark and the dataset used by [14].  6. Evaluation  Metrics We use two quantitative measure to evaluate the performance of interpolation algorithms: peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity (SSIM) index.  In this section, we evaluate two variations of the proposed network. The first one is to train each module separately: we first pre-train motion estimation, and then train video processing while fixing the flow module. This is similar to the two-step video processing algorithms, and we refer to it as Fixed Flow. The other one is to jointly train all modules as described in Section 4.5, and we refer to it as TOFlow. Both networks are trained on Vimeo benchmarks we collected. We evaluate these two variations on three different tasks and also compare with other state-of-the-art image processing algorithms.  Baselines We first compare our framework with two-step interpolation algorithms. For the motion estimation, we use EpicFlow [28] and SpyNet [27]. To handle occluded regions as mentioned in Section 4.4, we calculate the occlusion mask for each frame using [38] and only use non-occluded regions to interpolate the middle frame. Further, we compare with state-of-the-art end-to-end models, Deep Voxel Flow (DVF) [18], Adaptive Convolution (AdaConv) [24], and Separable Convolution (SepConv) [25]. At last, we also compare with Fixed Flow, which is another baseline two-step interpolation algorithm.  Epicflow  AdaConv  SepConv  Fixed Flow  TOFlow  Ground truth  Figure 6: Comparison between different frame interpolation algorithms. Zoomed-in views are shown in lower right. Vimeo-Mixed Dataset  Vimeo-BW Dataset  V-BM4D Dataset  Input noisy frame  Fixed Flow  TOFlow  Ground truth  VBM4D  TOFlow  Ground truth  Figure 7: Comparison between different algorithms on video denoising. The differences are clearer when zoomed-in. Results Table 1 shows our quantitative results. On Vimeo Interpolation Benchmark, TOFlow in general outperforms the others interpolation algorithms, both the traditional two-step interpolation algorithms (EpicFlow and SpyNet) and recent deep-learning based algorithms (DVF, AdaConv, and SepConv), with a significant margin. Moreover, even our model is trained on our Vimeo-90K dataset, it also out-performs DVF on DVF dataset in both PSNR and SSIM. There is also a significant boost over Fixed Flow, showing that the network does learn a better flow representation for interpolation during joint training. Figure 6 also shows qualitative results. All the two-step algorithms (EpicFlow and Fixed Flow) generate a doubling artifacts, like the hand in the first row or the head in the second row. AdaConv on the other sides does not have the doubling artifacts, but it tends to generate blurry output, by directly synthesizing interpolated frames without a motion module. SepConv increases the sharpness of output frame compared with AdaConv, but there are still artifacts (see the hat on the bottom row). Compared with these methods, TOFlow correctly recovers sharper boundaries and fine details even in presence of large motion.  Baselines We compare our framework with the V-BM4D, with the standard deviation of Gaussian noise as its additional input on two grayscale datasets (Vimeo-BW and V-BM4D). As before, we also compare with the fixed flow variant of our framework on two RGB datasets (Vimeo-Gaussian and Vimeo-Mixed).  Results On two RGB datasets, Vimeo-Gaussian and VimeoMixed, TOFlow beats Fixed Flow in both two measurements, as shown in Table 2. The output of TOFlow also contains less noise (the differences are clearer when zoomed-in), as shown on the left side of Figure 7. This shows that TOFlow learns a motion field for denoising.  6.2. Video Denoising/Deblocking  On two grayscale datasets, Vimeo-BW and V-BM4D, TOFlow outperforms V-BM4D in SSIM, even we did not finetuned on V-BM4D dataset. Note that even though TOFlow only achieves a comparable performance with V-BM4D in PSNR, the output of TOFlow is much sharper than V-BM4D. As shown in Figure 7, the words on the billboard are kept in the denoised frame by TOFlow (the top right of Figure 7), and leaves on the tree are also clearer (the bottom right of Figure 7). Therefore, TOFlow beats V-BM4D in SSIM, which better reflects human’s perception than PSNR.  Setup We first train and evaluate our framework on Vimeo denoising benchmark, with either Gaussian noise or mixture noise. To compare our network with V-BM4D [20], which is a monocular video denoising algorithm, we transfer all videos in Vimeo Denoising Benchmark to grayscale to create VimeoBW (Gaussian noise only), and retrain our network on it. We also evaluate our framework on the V-BM4D dataset [20].  For video deblocking, Table 3 shows that TOFlow outperforms V-BM4D. Figure 8 also shows the qualitative comparison between TOFlow, Fixed Flow, and V-BM4D. Note that the compression artifacts around the girl’s hair (top) and the man’s nose (bottom) are completely removed by TOFlow. The vertical line around the man’s eye (bottom) due to a blocky compression is also removed by our algorithm.  Input compressed frames  VBM4D  Ground truth  TOFlow  Fixed Flow  Figure 8: Comparison between our algorithm and V-BM4D [20] on video deblocking. The difference are clearer when zoomed-in. Vimeo-Gaussian  Vimeo-Mixed  PSNR  SSIM  PSNR  SSIM  PSNR  SSIM  PSNR  SSIM  V-BM4D [20] Fixed flow  — 28.38  — 0.9333  — 28.56  — 0.9200  27.38 —  0.8664 —  30.63 —  0.8759 —  TOFlow  29.10  0.9544  28.85  0.9407  29.41  0.9271  30.36  0.8855  Methods  Vimeo-BW  V-BM4D [20]  Table 2: Quantitative comparisons on video denoising  Input  Methods  Vimeo SR  BayesSR [16]  PSNR  SSIM  PSNR  SSIM  — —  — —  22.69 24.32  0.7746 0.8486  Full clip  DeepSR [14] BayesSR [16, 19]  1 frame  Bicubic  29.79  0.9036  22.02  0.7203  DeepSR [14] BayesSR [16, 19] 7 frames Fixed flow  25.55 24.64 31.81  0.8498 0.8205 0.9288  21.85 21.95 22.85  0.7535 0.7369 0.7655  33.08  0.9417  23.54  0.8070  TOFlow  Table 4: Results of video super-resolution. Each clip in Vimeo SR contains 7 frames, and each clip in BayesSR contains 30– 50 frames.  6.3. Video Super-Resolution Datasets We evaluate our algorithm on two dataset: Vimeo Super-Resolution Benchmark and the dataset provided by [16] (BayesSR). The later one consists of 4 sequences, each of which has 30 to 50 frames. Baselines We compare our framework with bicubic upsampling, two video SR algorithms: BayesSR (we use the version provided by Ma et al. [19]) and DeepSR [14], as well as a baseline with a fixed flow estimation module. Both BayesSR and DeepSR can take various number of frames as input. Therefore, on BayesSR datset, we report two numbers. One is using the whole sequence, the other is to only use seven frames in the middle, as TOFlow and Fixed Flow only take 7 frames as input.  Methods  Vimeo-Blocky PSNR  SSIM  V-BM4D [20] Fixed flow  35.75 36.52  0.9587 0.9636  TOFlow  36.92  0.9663  Table 3: Results on video deblocking  Results Table 4 shows our quantitative results. Our algorithm performs better than baseline algorithms when using 7 frames as input, and it also achieves comparison performance to BayesSR when BayesSR uses all 30–50 frames as input while our framework only uses 7 frames. We show qualitative results in Figure 9. Compared with either DeepSR [14] or Fixed Flow, the jointly trained TOFlow generates sharper output. Notice the words on the cloth (top) and the tip of the knife (bottom) are clearer in the high-resolution frame synthesized by TOFlow. This shows the effectiveness of joint training. In all the experiments, we train and evaluate our network on a NVIDIA Titan X GPU. For an input clip with resolution 256 × 448, our network takes about 200 ms for interpolation and 400ms for denoising or super-resolution (the input resolution to the super-resolution network is 64 × 112), where the flow module takes 18 ms for each estimated motion field. At last, Figure 10 also visualizes the motion fields learned by different tasks. Even using the same network structure and taking the same input frames, the estimated flows for different tasks are very different: the flow field for interpolation is very smooth, even on the occlusion boundary, while the flow field for super-resolution has artificial movements along the texture edges. This is indicates that the network may learn to encode different information that is useful for different tasks in the learned motion fields.  7. Conclusion In this work, we propose a novel video processing model that exploits task-oriented motion cues. Traditional video  Bicubic  DeepSR  Fixed Flow  TOFlow  Ground truth  Figure 9: Comparison between different super-resolution algorithms. A close-up is shown on the top left of each result. The differences are clearer when zoomed-in. Input  Flow for Interpolation  Flow for Denoising  Flow for SR  Flow for Deblocking  Figure 10: Visualization of motion fields for different tasks. processing algorithms normally consist of two steps: motion estimation and video processing based on estimated motion fields. However, a genetic motion for all tasks might be suboptimal and the accurate motion estimation would be neither necessary nor sufficient for these tasks. Our self-supervised framework bypasses this difficulty by modeling motion signals in the loop. To evaluate our algorithm, we also create a new dataset, Vimeo-90K, for video processing. Extensive experiments on temporal frame interpolation, video denoising/deblocking, and video super-resolution demonstrate that our algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance. Acknowledgements This work is supported by NSF RI1212849, NSF BIGDATA-1447476, Facebook, Shell Research, and Toyota Research Institute.  References [1] S. Abu-El-Haija, N. Kothari, J. Lee, P. Natsev, G. Toderici, B. Varadarajan, and S. Vijayanarasimhan. Youtube-8m: A large-scale video classification benchmark. arXiv:1609.08675, 2016. 2 [2] S. Baker, D. Scharstein, J. Lewis, S. Roth, M. J. Black, and R. Szeliski. A database and evaluation methodology for optical flow. IJCV, 92(1):1–31, 2011. 1, 2, 3 [3] T. Brox, A. Bruhn, N. Papenberg, and J. Weickert. High accuracy optical flow estimation based on a theory for warping. In ECCV, 2004. 2 [4] D. J. Butler, J. Wulff, G. B. Stanley, and M. J. Black. A naturalistic open source movie for optical flow evaluation. In ECCV, 2012. 5 [5] J. Caballero, C. Ledig, A. Aitken, A. Acosta, J. Totz, Z. Wang, and W. Shi. Real-time video super-resolution with spatio-  [6]  [7]  [8]  [9] [10]  [11] [12]  [13] [14] [15]  [16] [17]  temporal networks and motion compensation. In CVPR, 2017. 2 P. Fischer, A. Dosovitskiy, E. Ilg, P. Häusser, C. Hazırbaş, V. Golkov, P. van der Smagt, D. Cremers, and T. Brox. Flownet: Learning optical flow with convolutional networks. In ICCV, 2015. 2 Y. Ganin, D. Kononenko, D. Sungatullina, and V. Lempitsky. Deepwarp: Photorealistic image resynthesis for gaze manipulation. In ECCV, 2016. 2 M. Ghoniem, Y. Chahir, and A. Elmoataz. Nonlocal video denoising, simplification and inpainting using discrete regularization on graphs. Signal Process., 90(8):2445–2455, 2010. 2 B. K. Horn and B. G. Schunck. Determining optical flow. Artif. Intell., 17(1-3):185–203, 1981. 2 Y. Huang, W. Wang, and L. Wang. Bidirectional recurrent convolutional networks for multi-frame super-resolution. In NIPS, 2015. 2 M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, et al. Spatial transformer networks. In NIPS, 2015. 2, 4 A. Kappeler, S. Yoo, Q. Dai, and A. K. Katsaggelos. Video super-resolution with convolutional neural networks. IEEE TCI, 2(2):109–122, 2016. 2 D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015. 5 R. Liao, X. Tao, R. Li, Z. Ma, and J. Jia. Video super-resolution via deep draft-ensemble learning. In CVPR, 2015. 2, 5, 6, 8 C. Liu and W. Freeman. A high-quality video denoising algorithm based on reliable motion estimation. In ECCV, 2010. 1, 2 C. Liu and D. Sun. A bayesian approach to adaptive video super resolution. In CVPR, 2011. 1, 8 C. Liu and D. Sun. On bayesian adaptive video super resolution. IEEE TPAMI, 36(2):346–360, 2014. 2, 5  [18] Z. Liu, R. Yeh, X. Tang, Y. Liu, and A. Agarwala. Video frame synthesis using deep voxel flow. In ICCV, 2017. 2, 4, 6 [19] Z. Ma, R. Liao, X. Tao, L. Xu, J. Jia, and E. Wu. Handling motion blur in multi-frame super-resolution. In CVPR, 2015. 8 [20] M. Maggioni, G. Boracchi, A. Foi, and K. Egiazarian. Video denoising, deblocking, and enhancement through separable 4-d nonlocal spatiotemporal transforms. IEEE TIP, 21(9):3952– 3966, 2012. 2, 7, 8 [21] M. Mathieu, C. Couprie, and Y. LeCun. Deep multi-scale video prediction beyond mean square error. In ICLR, 2016. 2 [22] E. Mémin and P. Pérez. Dense estimation and object-based segmentation of the optical flow with robust techniques. IEEE TIP, 7(5):703–719, 1998. 2 [23] K. Nasrollahi and T. B. Moeslund. Super-resolution: a comprehensive survey. MVA, 25(6):1423–1468, 2014. 2 [24] S. Niklaus, L. Mai, and F. Liu. Video frame interpolation via adaptive convolution. In CVPR, 2017. 2, 4, 6 [25] S. Niklaus, L. Mai, and F. Liu. Video frame interpolation via adaptive separable convolution. In ICCV, 2017. 4, 6 [26] A. Oliva and A. Torralba. Modeling the shape of the scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope. IJCV, 42(3):145– 175, 2001. 5 [27] A. Ranjan and M. J. Black. Optical flow estimation using a spatial pyramid network. In CVPR, 2017. 2, 4, 5, 6, 10 [28] J. Revaud, P. Weinzaepfel, Z. Harchaoui, and C. Schmid. Epicflow: Edge-preserving interpolation of correspondences for optical flow. In CVPR, 2015. 1, 2, 5, 6 [29] X. Tao, H. Gao, R. Liao, J. Wang, and J. Jia. Detail-revealing deep video super-resolution. In ICCV, 2017. 2 [30] G. Varghese and Z. Wang. Video denoising based on a spatiotemporal gaussian scale mixture model. IEEE TCSVT, 20(7):1032–1040, 2010. 2 [31] T.-C. Wang, J.-Y. Zhu, N. K. Kalantari, A. A. Efros, and R. Ramamoorthi. Light field video capture using a learning-based hybrid imaging system. In SIGGRAPH, 2017. 2 [32] A. Wedel, D. Cremers, T. Pock, and H. Bischof. Structure-and motion-adaptive regularization for high accuracy optic flow. In CVPR, 2009. 2 [33] M. Werlberger, T. Pock, M. Unger, and H. Bischof. Optical flow guided tv-l1 video interpolation and restoration. In EMMCVPR, 2011. 2 [34] J. Xu, R. Ranftl, and V. Koltun. Accurate optical flow via direct cost volume processing. In CVPR, 2017. 2 [35] J. J. Yu, A. W. Harley, and K. G. Derpanis. Back to basics: Unsupervised learning of optical flow via brightness constancy and motion smoothness. In ECCV Workshop, 2016. 2 [36] Z. Yu, H. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Hu, and C. W. Chen. Multi-level video frame interpolation: Exploiting the interaction among different levels. IEEE TCSVT, 23(7):1235–1248, 2013. 2 [37] T. Zhou, S. Tulsiani, W. Sun, J. Malik, and A. A. Efros. View synthesis by appearance flow. In ECCV, 2016. 2 [38] C. L. Zitnick, S. B. Kang, M. Uyttendaele, S. Winder, and R. Szeliski. High-quality video view interpolation using a layered representation. ACM TOG, 23(3):600–608, 2004. 6  Appendices Additional Qualitative Results In addition to the qualitative results shown in the main text (Figures 6–8), we show additional results on the following benchmarks: Vimeo Interpolation Benchmark (Figure 12), Vimeo Denoising Benchmark (Figure 13 for grayscale videos), Vimeo Deblocking Benchmark (Figure 14), and Vimeo Super-resolution Benchmark (Figure 15). To avoid cherry-picking, we randomly select testing images from test datasets and do not show close-up as Figures 6–9 in the main text. Differences between different algorithms are more clearer when zoomed in. Flow Estimation Module We used SpyNet [27] as our flow estimation module. It consists of 4 sub-networks with the same network structure, but each sub-network has an independent set of parameters. Each sub-network consists of 5 sets of 7x7 convolutional (with zero padding), batch normalization and ReLU layers. The number of channels after each convolutional layer is 32, 64, 32, 16 and 2 respectively. The input motion to the first network is a zero motion field. Image Processing Module We use slight different structures in the image processing module for different tasks. For temporal frame interpolation both with and without masks, we build a residual network that consists of a averaging network and a residual network. The averaging network simply averages the two transformed frames (from frame 1 and frame 3 respectively). The residual network also takes the two transformed frames as input, but calculates the difference between the actual second frame and the average of two transformed frames through a convolutional network consists of three convolutional layers, each of which is followed by a ReLU layer. The kernel sizes of three layers are 9x9, 1x1, 1x1 respectively (with zero padding), and the numbers of output channels are 64, 64, 3 respectively. The final output is the summation of the outputs of these two networks (averaging network and residual network). For video denoising/deblocking, the image processing module uses the same six-layer convolutional structure (3 convolutional layers and 3 ReLU layers) as interpolation, but without the residual structure. We have also tried the residual structure for denoising/deblocking, but there is no significant improvement. For video super-resolution, the image processing module consists of 4 pairs of convolutional layers and ReLU layers. The kernel sizes for these four layers are 9x9, 9x9, 1x1 and 1x1 respectively (with zero padding), and the numbers of output channels are 64, 64, 64, and 3 respectively. Mask Network Similar to our flow estimation module, our mask estimation network is also a 4-level convolutional neural network pyramid as in Figure 11. Each level consists of the same sub-network structure with 5 sets of 7x7 convolutional (with zero padding), batch normalization and ReLU layers, but an independent set of parameters (output channels are 32, 64, 32, 16, and 2 respectively). For the first level, the input to  Mask Network  Estimated flow at diff. scales …  … …  Masks L1 Masks L2  Masks L4  Figure 11: The structure of our mask network the network is a concatenation of two estimated optical flow fields (4 channels after concatenation), and the output is a concatenation of two estimated masks (1 channel per mask). From the second level, the inputs to the network switch to a concatenation of 1) two estimated optical flow fields at that resolution, and 2) bilinear-upsampled masks from the previous level (the resolution is twice of the previous level). In this way, the first level mask network estimates a rough mask, and the rest refines high frequency details of the mask.  Epicflow  AdaConv  SepConv  Fixed flow  TOFlow  Ground Truth  Figure 12: Qualitative results for video interpolation. Samples are randomly selected from Vimeo Interpolation Benchmark. The differences between different algorithms are clear only when zoomed in.  Input  Fixed Flow  TOFlow  Ground Truth  Input  Vbm4d  TOFlow  Ground Truth  Figure 13: Qualitative results for video denoising. The top five rows are results on color videos and bottom 4 rows are grayscale videos. Samples are randomly selected from Vimeo Denoising Benchmark. The differences between different algorithms are clear only when zoomed in.  Input  Vbm4d  TOFlow  Ground Truth  Figure 14: Qualitative results for video deblocking. Samples are randomly selected from Vimeo Deblocking Benchmark. The differences between different algorithms are clear only when zoomed in.  Bicubic  DeepSR  Fixed flow  TOFlow  Ground Truth  Figure 15: Qualitative results for video super-resolution. Samples are randomly selected from Vimeo Super-resolution Benchmark. The differences between different algorithms are clear only when zoomed in. DeepSR was originally trained on 30–50 images, but evaluated on 7 frames in this experiment, so there are some artifacts.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
