Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_2847

Abstract:
Understanding Deep Architectures by Interpretable Visual Summaries Marco Carletti∗ , Marco Godi∗ , Maedeh Aghaei† and Marco Cristani∗ ∗ University † University  of Verona, Italy; Email: name.surname@univr.it of Barcelona, Spain; Email: aghaei.maya@gmail.com  Summary 1  Summary 2  Summary 3  robin  arXiv:1801.09103v1 [cs.CV] 27 Jan 2018  bald eagle  pickup  police van  Fig. 1: Examples of visual summaries for AlexNet [1]. Each summary contains crisp regions used by the network to classify objects, exhibiting common semantic parts highlighted in red. Is it easy to see that, in the robin class, the network systematically considers the head (Summary 1), the body (Summary 2), the legs and the lower body (Summary 3). Best in colors. Abstract—A consistent body of research investigates the recurrent visual patterns exploited by deep networks for object classification with the help of diverse visualization techniques. Unfortunately, no effort has been spent in showing that these techniques are effective in leading researchers to univocal and exhaustive explanations. This paper goes in this direction, presenting a visualization framework owing to a group of clusters or summaries, each one formed by crisp image regions focusing on a particular part that the network has exploited with high regularity to classify a given class. In most of the cases, these parts carry a semantic meaning, making the explanation simple and universal. For example, the method suggests that AlexNet, when classifying the ImageNet class “robin”, is very sensible to the patterns of the head, the body, the legs, the wings and the tail, providing five summaries where these parts are consistently highlighted. The approach is composed by a sparse optimization step providing sharp image masks whose perturbation causes high loss in the classification. Regions composing the masks are then clustered together by means of a proposal flow-based similarity score, that associates visually similar patterns of diverse objects which are in corresponding positions. The final clusters are visual summaries easy to be interpreted, as found by the very first user study of this kind. The summaries can be also used to compare different architectures: for example, the superiority of GoogleNet w.r.t. AlexNet is explained by our approach since the former gives rise to more summaries, indicating its ability in capturing a higher number of diverse semantic parts.  I. I NTRODUCTION Distilling the visual information exploited by a deep network for classifying an image is important, since it allows to understand what makes an object class understandable  by a machine, foreseeing potential failures and highlighting differences among network architectures [2], [3], [4], [5]. For such a task, diverse visualization strategies have been designed so far: starting from the simple visualization of neuron filters and activations of [3], the works of [2], [6], [7], [3] individuate those images which activate a certain neuron the most; [8] and [5] generate dreamlike images bringing the classifier to high classification scores; image samples are masked in [9], highlighting more those parts which drive a classifier toward a class, adding in [4] the parts that are against a certain class. However, no study has been carried out yet to verify whether these systems are successful in conveying clear messages to the researchers, fostering human explanations that are expressive (much information is disclosed) and highly shared (diverse researchers give the same explanation). Notably, most of the previous visualization systems analyze single images: this brings to cumbersome human interpretation procedures where hundreds of images per class ought to be evaluated, undermining the usability of the whole system. In this work, we provide two main contributions. The first is a visual understanding system indicating the visual parts a classifier consistently uses for determining a class; the second is a user study validating the usability of the system, showing that the users quickly understand these visual parts with high inter-rater reliability. Our understanding system is composed by two phases: in the first one, crisp image masks are extracted from each image,  indicating the visual patterns more important for a given class, that is, those patterns that, if perturbed, owe to high classification loss. The masks are found by an optimization process borrowed from [10] and made sparse to provide binary values: in facts, most literature on visualization provide smooth masks where higher values mean higher importance [2], [4], [7], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14] On the contrary, we found that 1) having binary masks brings to the highest classification loss; 2) smooth masks are more difficult to be interpreted. Both of these claims are proven in the experiments. The second phase takes the connected regions of the crisp mask, grouping them across images by means of the affinity propagation algorithm [15], in which the similarity measure is borrowed by the proposal flow algorithm [16]: in practice, regions around the same object part will be grouped together, allowing for example to group the lights of the cars under different poses. The region clusters are opportunely visualized as mosaics, forming the visual summaries. In the experiments, we show that our system brings to crisp masks which cause systematically higher classification loss than [10]; in the user study, we show that users do explain the parts considered by a classifier (in term of textual tags) with a considerable number of tags (much information), in a shorter time, and with higher inter-rater reliability than what can be obtained by the visualization method of [10]. Finally, we show that our system allows to compare different network architectures in terms of what they capture in the images, motivating in a new way the superiority of the recent deep models. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec.II reviews the related works; our system is analyzed in Sec.III, with the experiments following in Sec.IV. Finally, Sec.V concludes the paper with some observations and future perspectives. II. R ELATED W ORK  this case the general output is a map showing how crucial is the covering of a particular area, that can be a pixel [2], [10] or superpixel-level map [19]. Our approach is also perturbation based, since it looks for crisp portions of images that, if perturbed, maximally distract the classifier. In all of the previous cases, the output are single images the user has to interpret to explain the behavior of a particular classifier on a particular class. Unfortunately, the visual semantics span of a visual class cannot be summarized in a single image, neither a few of them, and the analysis on hundreds of images becomes necessary. Only in this way one can actively figure out which would be the critical cases for a classifier, and the possible corrections a classifier has to take into account. For example, it would be nice to understand if, for the class “car”, which parts are recognizable and which one are not systematically captured. This type of analysis could be interesting for comparing different classifiers, or to suggest an enrichment of the training data for letting the classifier individuate that particular. At the best of our knowledge, our approach is the first of its kind in doing such kind of analysis, forging the definition of summarized visualization approach. III. M ETHOD Our method is composed by two phases, mask extraction and clustering. The former captures what visual patterns are maximally important for the classification, the latter organizes the visual patterns into summaries, which will ease the understanding of what these patterns do represent. A. Mask Extraction We define a classifier as a function y = f (x) where x is the input image and y is the classification score vector, in our case the softmax output of the last layer of a deep network. Our starting point is the gradient-based optimization of [10]. In that method, the output of the optimization is a mask m : Λ → [0, 1] with the same resolution of x, in which higher values mean higher saliency. The original optimization equation (Eq. (3) of [10]) is  Visualization approaches can be analyzed under different perspectives: local techniques focus on the understanding of single neurons by showing the filters or the activations [3]; under this umbrella, input-dependent approaches select the m = argmin fc (Φ(x; m)) + λ1 k1 − mk1 (1) images which activate a neuron the most [2], [5], [7]; global m∈[0,1]Λ approaches capture some general property of the network, like the tendency in focusing on some parts of the images for the where Φ(x; m) is a perturbed version of x in correspondence classification [4], [8], [10], [11], [12], [17]; these approaches of the non-zero pixels of m, in which the perturbation function are given as input single images, providing smooth saliency Φ does blurring: maps which highlight more those area which have been [Φ(x; m)] (u) = ∫ gσ0 m(u) (v − u)x(v)dv (2) important for a specific class. Global approaches are mostly gradient-based, computing the gradient of the class score with with u a pixel location, m(u) the mask value at u and σ0 the respect to the input image [5], [7], [11], [17]. Our approach maximum isotropic standard deviation of the Gaussian blur is a global technique. Other gradient-based approaches adds kernel gσ0 , σ0 = 10. The function fc (·) is the classification activations to the analysis, obtaining edge-based images with score of the model for the class c: the idea is to find a mask edges highlighted in correspondence of salient parts [11]. that perturbs the original image in a way that the classifier gets Other gradient-based approaches individuate also the pixels maximally confused, rejecting the sample for that class. The which are against a certain class [4]. Generative approaches second member of Eq. (1) is a L1-regularizer with strength generate dreamlike images bringing the classifier to high λ1 , which guides the optimization to minimally perturb the also classification scores [8], [18]. Perturbation-based approaches pixels of the input image. The authors P of [10] suggested β edit an input image and observe its effect on the output [4]. In a total variation (TV) regularizer u∈Λ k∇m(u)kβ , in which  r  (i ) j  Object proposal Extraction + Proposal flow  P1  Pi  Corr matrix creation    PPi1  PPiN  PN  Pruning Stage + Corr’’ Matrix Creation  Corr  P1 PPi1  PPiN    Pi  PN  Clustering + Post processing  Summary k  Corr ' '  Fig. 2: The proposed approach, sketch of the clustering phase of Sec. III-B. Best in colors.  the sum operates on the β-normed partial derivatives on m, calculated as the difference of the values of two contiguous pixels according to the direction. POur contribution consists in adding another regularizer u∈Λ |1 − m(u)|m(u) enforcing sparsity [20] in the values of the mask m, making it binary. This regularizer has been designed to start working after a certain number of iterations, so that we get a rough version of the mask before start optimizing its crisp version. The final version of the optimization is thus: X β m = argmin fc (Φ(x; m))+λ1 k1 − mk1 +λ2 k∇m(u)kβ m∈[0,1]Λ  u∈Λ  + λ3  X  |1 − m(u)|m(u) (3)  u∈Λ  All of the λ’s and β have been found by crossvalidation on the classification drop, so that λ1 = 0.01, λ2 = 0.0001, λ3 = 0 and β = 3 during the first 300 iterations. We then modified the parameters to λ2 = 1, λ3 = 2 for the next 150 iterations. At the end of the mask extraction stage, each image xi , i = 1...N of a given class becomes associated to the corresponding mask mi . B. Clustering Each saliency mask mi can be analyzed by considering its (i) connected components {rj }j=1...Ji called here regions. Some of the regions will be clustered together and will form the visual summaries. The idea is that each region represents an articulated visual item composed by parts, and a summary is an ensemble of regions exhibiting at least a common part. A graphical sketch of the procedure is shown in Fig. 2. In our implementation, we model the parts of the regions using object proposals [21], and we cluster the regions borrowing from the proposal flow technique [16]. Recently, object proposals have been found well-suited for matching, with the proposal flow exploiting local and geometrical constraints to compare structured objects exhibiting sufficiently diverse poses. Our procedure start by considering the whole images without resorting to the regions, in order to account as much as possible of the context where regions are merged. Given a class, all of its N images are processed; from image xi , the set of object proposals Pi is extracted. All of the images are thus matched in a pairwise fashion adopting the proposal flow algorithm. Each pair of images < xi , xj > will thus produce a Mi × Mj matrix P Pij , with Mi indicating the number of object proposals found in image xi . Each entry of the matrix  P Pij (k, l) contains the matching compatibility between the k-th and the l-th object proposal of the images xi and xj , respectively. After this, all the object proposals of all the pairs of images are combined together into a NP × NP matrix Corr, where P NP = i=1...N Mi is the total number of object proposals. A given row of Corr will contain the matching score of a particular object proposal with all the remaining object proposals. Corr could be very large but can made easily sparse by thresholding the minimal admissible matching score. (i) At this point, we get back to the image regions {rj }, keeping from Corr all of the object proposals that overlap sufficiently with a region (overlap ratio higher than 75%) and, in the case of two overlapping proposals, one of them is removed if the ratio between the two areas is less than a certain threshold (set to 2 during the experiments). The pruning stage leads to the Corr00 matrix. The matrix Corr00 is considered as a similarity matrix, and the Affinity Propagation clustering algorithm is applied [15] on top of it. The resulting clusters are ensembles of parts which, thanks to the proposal flow algorithm, should consistently identify a particular portion of an articulated object, thus carrying a clear visual semantics. Post-processing is carried out: Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) [22] is applied to all the pairs of a cluster, discarding it as inconsistent if the median value of SSIM for that cluster is lower than a threshold based on the global median of SSIM within the whole class (set to 90% of the median during the experiments). This has the purpose of removing obvious mistakes in the clusters, caused by the variety of different poses that the proposal flow has not been able to deal with1 . All the parts of a valid cluster are highlighted in red and shown surrounded by the regions they belong to; this eases the human interpretation and provides a summary (see an excerpt in Fig. 1). Each image class is thus formed by different summaries, depending on the number of valid clusters that have been kept. IV. E XPERIMENTS Three types of experiments are carried out: masks analysis, investigating how much an image perturbed with our sparse masks confuses a classifier; user study, checking how exhaustive, shared and fast is the human understanding of what the summaries do represent about the network; practical 1 Experimentally we found that in some cases of objects oriented in opposite directions, like cars towards right and left, proposal flow did not work properly providing erroneously high matching scores, as for some complex not rigid objects like animals in drastically different poses.  Fig. 3: Qualitative analysis of the masks. First row, original image from different Imagenet classes. Second line, heatmaps computed with the method proposed by [10]. Third line, crisp masks computed with our optimization procedure. Best in colors.  application, where the summaries are used to motivate the superiority of GoogleNet against AlexNet. A. Masks analysis We consider 18 classes of Imagenet, that have been randomly selected with the constraint of having instances of classes that are adjacent in a dense [23] semantic space (See Table I, adjacent classes are in subsequent rows with same background color). This gives rise to pairwise fine-grained classification instances which will be interesting for our user study, allowing to check how different are the corresponding summaries. From these classes we uniformly pick a total of 5000 images. The masks obtained by our approach are compared with those of the recent IEBB method [10].The protocol is the same as [10]: given an image, the classification confidence associated to it with respect to the ground truth class is measured; in the case of a deep network, this corresponds to checking the softmax output in the i-th entry for the i-th object class. Afterwards, the image x is blurred as written in Sec. III-A by using the corresponding mask m (the one of ours and the IEBB one), the classification score is re-computed and the drop w.r.t. the original image is calculated. We only compare with IEBB, which is shown in [10] to be the best in terms of classification drop, and for the sake of space. In addition, we compare with IEBB thresh, which is the modification presented in [10], in which the smooth mask generated by IEBB is made crisp by a thresholding operation, made on the intensity of the mask. This thresholding operation is done independently on each image, in order to maximize the drop: this is different and more expensive than our technique, in which the optimization is done only once on all of the data.  Table II, third column, shows the classification loss of the two approaches. Notably, we succeed in improving an already high classification loss, closely reaching the saturation at 100%, which cannot be reached since the softmax function. Interest-  TABLE I: Classes from ImageNet, classification accuracy of AlexNet and the set of tags collected during the user study with our approach. Class Name Robin  Acc. 83.8%  Bald eagle  78.6%  Golden retriever  59%  German shepherd  55.4%  Bullet train  91.6%  Steam locomotive  92%  Pick-up  61.4%  Police van  67.2%  Oboe Saxophone Crash helmet Football helmet Jeans Miniskirt Cowboy hat Windsor tie  55.6% 64.6% 59.6% 78% 59.8% 51.4% 45.2% 57.2%  Sweatshirt  92%  Running shoes  79.8%  Most Proposed Tag per Summary Head, Body, Legs, Wings, Tail Head, Neck border, Eye, Beak Face, Wing Nose, Eye, Ear, Mouth, Face, Legs, Head Eye, Leg, Neck, Body, Ear, Nose, Face, Feather Front train, Front glass, Train, Rails, Lights, Train body Chimney, Front train, Wheels, Engine, Side, Window Mudguard, Step bumpers, Side window, Windshield, Back, Wheel Wheel, Police flag, Side window, Light, Rear window, Vehicle, Capote, Bumpers, Mudguard, Body, Buttons Body, Buttons, Bell Base, Side, Front, Logo Front grids, Logo, Side, People Crotch, Pocket, Legs, Waistband Face, Waistband, Leg, Head Ear, Face, Chin Pattern, Knot, Collar, Neck Hoodie, Face, Arm, Laces, Wrinkles, Neck Laces, Logo, Shoe side  TABLE II: Mask Validation Method IEBB IEBB thresh. Ours  Ref. ICCV17[10] ICCV17[10]  %Drop (Var) 99.738365 (8.13e-4) 97.703865 (5.758e-3) 99.964912(< 10e-6)  ingly, with IEBB thresh, the overall performance diminishes, with higher variance. In Fig. 3, examples of the obtained masks using our approach and IEBB are shown. In general, the sparse optimization finds solutions which are close to the IEBB one: in facts, IEBB finds already masks which cause a nearly complete  Fig. 4: Coherency in terms of average Jaccard distance (yaxis) among the tags found with the user study, for our proposed approach (blue), and IEBB approach (red). Lower is better. The class labels come with two numbers, the tag dictionary size with our approach (blue) and with IEBB (red), respectively.  loss. Nonetheless, our improvement gives the same importance to all of the pixels, facilitating the human interpretation, other than ensuring a higher drop. In addition, noise is removed, especially on the background, which is also fruitful for the interpretation. For example, in the pick-up class there are visible three regions (tire and glasses). The classes of police van, golden retriever, bald eagle, football helmet the background cleaning is total. The other classes are basically noisier, since the masks are usually focusing on small portions of the object instead of the whole. Interestingly, in the class bullet train, our approach highlights that the AlexNet focuses steadily on visual patterns portraying train stations, instead of covering the train silhouette. B. User study Our user study quantifies how much a visualization system succeeds in communicating to the human users the visual patterns used by the deep network for the classification, in an expressive, agreeable and fast way. To validate this, we exploit textual tags, adopted by the users to state what the visualization system is communicating. In practice, for each image class, the user is asked to list a set of tags describing the regions which have been consistently highlighted by the visualization system. As in the previous experiment, we compare our approach against IEBB [10]. A total of 30 users are hired (21 male, 9 female subjects); the average age is 33 (std:8.4), with all of the subjects being comfortable with using computer for visualizing images. Half of the subjects are given the IEBB approach, half our system. All of them are asked to analyze the visualization results for the 18 classes, indicating what they are showing. Each class consists of about 100 images. With IEBB, the user is asked to observe a single scrollable page in which pairs <original image, smooth mask overlapping the image> are arranged in a 4 × 50 item plate (see the first two rows of Fig. 3 to get an idea of the content). On the interface, a text field is used to  host the tags written by the users. Only nouns are allowed, no verbs or adjectives. No predefined tags are adopted. With our approach, for each class we show to a user all of the summaries, each one of them equipped with 10 regions, with the object proposal used to build the cluster highlighted in red (as example, see Fig. 1). Even in this case, the user is able to scroll the summaries and writing tags in a separate text field. No time constraints are given to the experiment: each subject was free to work until she/he was happy with the list of tags associated to the class. Nonetheless, the timing of the experiments was collected. Given a visualization system, the tags collected over all the users on a single class were used to create a tag dictionary. Synonimous terms where manually fused, leading to a set of T different tags. Then, the output of each user was encoded as a T -dimensional binary vector having 1 at position l in the case the l-th tag was used. Obviously, different classes lead to different dictionaries, as so as the same classes analyzed with different visualization approaches. In order to compare the tag consistency among users that use the same visualization system, we compute the Jaccard distance between all the user descriptions, averaging over the number of users [24]. Jaccard distance is essentially the intersection over union usually adopted to compare binary data. Fig. 4 shows the Jaccard average distance, as soon as the number T of tags for each class (on the x-labels). As visible, our visualization system allows to discover a consistent number of tags, with a higher coherency. IEBB gives rise to a higher number of tags, but in most of the cases they are outliers given by single users with no shared support. In particular, Table I lists on the right the tags indicating the patterns individuated in the summaries, in bold representing the tags which do not overlap with those given by IEBB (omitted here for the lack of space). Interesting observations can be assessed: the classes with lower accuracy, cowboy hat, miniskirt, have visual patterns focusing on people instead of the object of interest; adjacent classes have many common visual patterns (german shepard, golden retriever), and usually highly specific patterns help the classification (the “chimney” pattern in the Steam locomotive class). As for the total time that users spent for their job, IEBB needs ≈ 34.5 minute, ours ≈ 10 minute, showing that expressive and shared descriptions are also obtained very fast. C. Practical Application: GoogleNet VS AlexNet The architectural differences between GoogleNet [25] and AlexNet [1] are widely known in the community, as much as the differences in the performances (around 10% over the top-5 error rate). We add another facet to this comparison, adopting our approach and discovering that in general GoogleNet is capable of capturing systematically more semantic parts than what AlexNet does, explaining once more its superiority. On the same classes analyzed above, we visualize the GoogleNet summaries. In average, our approach finds more summaries for GoogleNet (7) than AlexNet (5). Looking at the summaries,  Fig. 5: Motivating the superiority of GoogleNet against AlexNet: focusing on the pick-up class (ImageNet), our approach finds 9 summaries for the former architecture, 6 for the latter, showing that GoogleNet is capable of capturing more semantics, individuating salients parts as the cabin, the body and the front (summary tags suggested by the user study). Best in colors.  one can find that actually GoogleNet individuates systematically more semantic parts than what AlexNet is doing. For example, in Fig. 5 the pick-up class is taken into account. For each summary, a single image is shown, together with the most used textual tags found by the user study (bottom). GoogleNet has more summaries focusing on important visual parts as the cabin, the body and the front of the car. Similar reasoning are possible with the other classes. V. C ONCLUSION Our approach is the first visualization system which puts the emphasis in transmitting to the human user a clear and concise visual glimpse about what a classifier has captured from images. The approach uses crisp regions which are shown to be maximally important for the classification, thanks to a sparse optimization approach which let them emerge. Therefore, the regions are organized by visual summaries, each focusing on precise parts found by a robust clustering process. The user study promotes the summaries, showing higher inter rater reliability in having different tags, collected faster than considering the output of unstructured, per-image visualization tool as [10]. One may observe that our framework misses an automatic tagging procedure, and that it would be nice to let make automatic what the user study has done manually, that is, giving textual tags to the summaries. This is an interesting research question: from one side we can confirm this is a direction worth to be investigated. At the same time, in some occasion the visual knowledge represents the best way to understand things, and the use of textual references can be misleading. For example in fashion, one can immediately capture the difference between two clothing styles by looking at them, which will be much simpler than describing them verbally. Therefore, our next step will be to apply the approach to clothing data, analyzing what the content of the summaries would be with classifiers classifying different clothing styles as [26]. R EFERENCES [1] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1097–1105, 2012.  [2] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Object detectors emerge in deep scene cnns,” arXiv preprint, 2014. [3] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, A. Nguyen, T. Fuchs, and H. Lipson, “Understanding neural networks through deep visualization,” arXiv preprint. [4] L. M. Zintgracef, T. S. Cohen, T. Adel, and M. Welling, “Visualizing deep neural network decisions: Prediction difference analysis,” [5] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” in ECCV, pp. 818–833, Springer, 2014. [6] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” in ECCV, pp. 818–833, Springer, 2014. [7] A. Dosovitskiy and T. Brox, “Inverting visual representations with convolutional networks,” in CVPR, pp. 4829–4837, 2016. [8] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps,” [9] D. Erhan, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Visualizing higherlayer features of a deep network,” UofM, vol. 1341, p. 3, 2009. [10] R. C. Fong and A. Vedaldi, “Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful perturbation,” in ICCV, Oct 2017. [11] R. R. Selvaraju, A. Das, R. Vedantam, M. Cogswell, D. Parikh, and D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Why did you say that? visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization,” arXiv, 2016. [12] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Learning deep features for discriminative localization,” in CVPR, 2016. [13] A. Mahendran and A. Vedaldi, “Salient deconvolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the ECCV, 2016. [14] J. Zhang, Z. Lin, J. Brandt, X. Shen, and S. Sclaroff, “Top-down neural attention by excitation backprop,” in ECCV, Springer, 2016. [15] B. J. Frey and D. Dueck, “Clustering by passing messages between data points,” Science, vol. 315, no. 5814, pp. 972–976, 2007. [16] B. Ham, M. Cho, , C. Schmid, and J. Ponce, “Proposal flow,” in CVPR. [17] A. Mahendran and A. Vedaldi, “Understanding deep image representations by inverting them,” in CVPR, pp. 5188–5196, 2015. [18] A. Nguyen, J. Yosinski, and J. Clune, “Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confidence predictions for unrecognizable images,” in CVPR, pp. 427–436, 2015. [19] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should i trust you?: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in ACM SIGKDD. [20] R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 1996. [21] J. R. Uijlings, K. E. Van De Sande, T. Gevers, and A. W. Smeulders, “Selective search for object recognition,” IJCV, vol. 104, no. 2, 2013. [22] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE TIP, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004. [23] J. Deng, A. C. Berg, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “What does classifying more than 10,000 image categories tell us?,” in ECCV, Springer, 2010. [24] L. Kaufman and P. J. Rousseeuw, Finding groups in data: an introduction to cluster analysis, vol. 344. John Wiley & Sons, 2009. [25] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,” in CVPR, pp. 1–9, 2015. [26] M. H. Kiapour, K. Yamaguchi, A. C. Berg, and T. L. Berg, “Hipster wars: Discovering elements of fashion styles,” in ECCV, 2014.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
