Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_2461

Abstract:
Stability and Stabilization of Fractional-order Systems with Different Derivative Orders: An LMI Approach Pouya Badri1, Mahdi Sojoodi1* 1  Advanced Control Systems Laboratory, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.   Abstract— Stability and stabilization analysis of fractional-order linear time-invariant (FO-LTI) systems with different derivative orders is studied in this paper. First, by using an appropriate linear matrix function, a single-order equivalent system for the given different-order system is introduced by which a new stability condition is obtained that is easier to check in practice than the conditions known up to now. Then the stabilization problem of fractional-order linear systems with different fractional orders via a dynamic output feedback controller with a predetermined order is investigated, utilizing the proposed stability criterion. The linear matrix inequality based procedure of developing stabilizing output feedback control is preserved in spite of the complexity of assuming the most complete linear controller model, with direct feedthrough parameter. The proposed stability and stabilization theorems are applicable to FO-LTI systems with different fractional orders in one or both of and intervals. Eventually, some numerical examples are presented to confirm the obtained analytical results. Keywords: Fractional-order system, different fractional orders, stability, stabilization, linear matrix inequality, dynamic output feedback. I. INTRODUCTION Recently, study of applications of fractional calculus in the modeling and control of various real-world systems have attracted increasing interest [1, 2]. This is mainly due to the fact that fractional-order models can more precisely describe systems having responses with anomalous dynamics and long memory transients. Furthermore, many natural, biological, and practical engineering systems have inherent properties which can be better explained by fractional-order models. Accordingly, controllerdesigning methods for systems modeled by fractional-order dynamics are of great interest. Utilizing fractional-order controllers is a proper method for controlling such systems, because of their high performance and robustness [3, 4]. Moreover, stability and stabilization have become fundamental issues for all control systems including fractional-order systems, because in the most of control systems, stability is the first objective to be accomplished. In this paper, we are particularly concerned with fractional-order linear time-invariant (LTI) systems with different orders. This kind of system representation is used to analyze linear electrical circuits composed of resistors, supercondensators (ultracapacitors), coils, and voltage (current) sources [5], and formulate the problem of model reference adaptive control of fractional-order systems presented in [6]. Relaxation processes, viscoelastic materials models, and diffusion phenomena can be easily modeled by multi-order fractional differential equations [7]. The stability of fractional-order feedback systems was investigated in [8], by adapting classical root locus plot analysis to some viscoelastic structures. For fractional differential systems in state-space form, both internal and external stabilities are investigated in [9]. Stability of FO-LTI systems with different fractional orders is addressed in [10], using its characteristic equation. Multi-term fractional differential equations such as Bagley–Torvik and Basset equations were discussed in [11], where the solution is The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, P.O. Box 14115. Pouya.badri@modares.ac.ir, Sojoodi@modares.ac.ir (corresponding author to provide phone: +98 21 8288-3902)  proposed under the assumption that fractional derivatives are rational numbers. Stabilization of uncertain multi-order fractional systems with fractional orders is investigated in [12] using extended state observer. The utilization of linear matrix inequality (LMI)-based methods has been increased by the evolution of efficient numerical procedures to solve convex optimization problems [13–17] defined by LMI conditions. Appropriate LMI conditions for asymptotically stability analysis of FO-LTI systems with fractional orders in and intervals are presented in [18] and [19], respectively. The problem of pseudo-state feedback stabilization of fractional-order systems is presented in [19]. Necessary and sufficient conditions for the stability and stabilization of fractional-order interval systems is addressed in [20]. Furthermore, in [21], the robust stability and stabilization of fractional-order linear systems with positive real uncertainty are investigated. State feedback controller is utilized in the most of mentioned studies, in which all individual states are needed. However, in some cases measuring all states is impossible due to economic issues or physical limitations, where using output feedback control seems to be effective [14]. Moreover, it should be noted that dynamic controllers are superior to the static ones because of their more performance efficiency and degrees of freedom in achieving control objectives [22]. A large number of controller design procedures lead to high order controllers with expensive implementation, undesirable reliability, maintenance difficulties, and potential numerical errors. On the other hand, plant or controller order reduction methods do not always guarantee the desired closed-loop performance. Therefore, designing a controller with a low and fixed order, chosen by the designer according to the requirements of the problem, is an efficient solution [14]. Motivated by the above discussion, in this paper, using an appropriate linear matrix function, a singleorder equivalent system for the given different-order system is introduced by which a new stability condition is derived that is easier to check in practice comparing to the conditions known so far. As far as we know, there is no result on the analytical design of a stabilizing dynamic output feedback controller for fractional-order systems with different orders in the literature. In this paper, the stabilization problem of fractional-order linear systems with different fractional orders through a dynamic output feedback controller with a predetermined order is investigated based on the proposed stability theorem. The LMIbased approach of developing stabilizing controller is preserved, despite the intricacy of assuming the most complete model of linear controller with direct feedthrough parameter. Moreover, the proposed stability and stabilization theorems are applicable to FO-LTI systems with different fractional orders in one or both of and intervals. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, some preliminary concepts, lemmas, and definitions are included. Problem formulation is presented in section III. Section IV is devoted to the main results of the paper where a single-order equivalent system for the given different-order system is presented, a new stability condition is investigated for such systems, and the stabilization analysis of fractional-order systems with different orders is addressed. Some numerical examples are provided in Section V to illustrate the efficiency and validity of the proposed method. Eventually, section VI draws the conclusion. ( ) is the greatest Notation: Throughout the paper is the symbol of pseudo inverse, ). common divisor of n-tuple ( and represent the -th row and -th column of matrix , respectively. Moreover, is a matrix of suitable dimensions with zero entries and denotes the imaginary unit. Function space , - is the space of functions , having continuous -th derivative. ( ) Furthermore, symbols , ⌈ ⌉, ⌊ ⌋, and stand for natural number set, ceiling function, floor function, and -th derivative of , respectively.  II. PRELIMINARIES In this section, some basic concepts of fractional-order calculus and useful definitions and lemmas are presented. The following Caputo fractional derivative definition is adopted throughout this paper, due to its integer–order initial value that makes it applicable to physical systems. (  )  (  )  . /  ( )  ,  where ( ) is Gamma function defined by ( )  and  to or greater than . In the sequel, wherever the notation operator is meant.  is used, the Caputo fractional derivative  is the smallest integer that is equal  For the proofs of the theorems in this paper, we will use the following lemmas. , with  Lemma 1 [11]. Let there exists some  - for some and  and some . Moreover, let , -. Then  be such that (1)  Lemma 2 [11]. Let , - and ( )  , .  ⌈ ⌉. Moreover, assume that  and  ( )  Lemma 3 [23]. Commensurate system satisfied |  (  ( ))|  ,  -. Then,  ( ) is stable if the following conditions are (2)  ,  for all eigenvalues ( ) of the matrix . ( ) Lemma 4 [19]: Let , and . The fractional-order system is asymptotically stable if and only if there exists a positive definite Hermitian matrix such that ̅̅ /  .  (  ̅ ̅)  (  (  )  and the set  )  ,  ({ in which  (3)  ,  where Definition 1. For any square matrix function is defined as follows:  ) with  ( ) ,  ( ).  III. PROBLEM FORMULATION Consider the following fractional-order linear time-invariant FO-LTI system  the linear matrix  (4)  ( ) ( )  [  ( )  ]  ( )  (5)  ( ) ( )  ( )  subject to the initial conditions ( )(  )  .  ( )  (6)  ⌊ ⌋,  /  ( ) in which different fractional orders of the system, ( ) ( Furthermore, , matrices with appropriate dimensions. ( ),  Defining  denotes the pseudo-state vector, is the control input, and ) ( ) , and , and  are the is the output vector. are known constant  , one can obtain the following  equivalent pseudo-state space system () ( ) ( ) ( ), in which  ( ),  (7)  (  (8)  ) ,  and (  )  (9)  ,  with initial conditions ( ) ( )(  and  ( )  ( )  { (  ( )  {  ) ( )  ⌊ ⌋  (10)  is easily obtained using the linear matrix function F in Definition 1, as follows (  )  (  )  also we have ( )  where and .  )  ,  , (  [  ]  ,  , and  (  )  ,  (11)  ) -  ,  (12)  are submatrices in the -th row and -th column of partitioned matrices  ,  ,  IV. MAIN RESULTS In this section, first, an equivalent single-order system for the given different-order system (5) is derived using the matrix function (4). Then, utilizing the equivalent system, a new stability condition is derived for system (5) and an LMI approach is proposed for designing a dynamic output feedback control law to stabilize the fractional-order system (5), using the stabilizing controller parameters of system (7).  A. Equivalency First, equivalency of systems (5) and (7) is proved in the following theorem. Theorem 1. Consider the fractional-order linear system (5). Defining to be the greatest common divisor of s the FO-LTI systems (5) and (7) subject to the initial conditions ( ) and ( ) are equivalent in the following sense: ⌈ ⌉ 1. Whenever , defined in (7) and (8), with , - for some is the pseudo-state of the FO-LTI system (7), is the pseudo-state of (5). 2. Whenever is the pseudo-state of (5), , defined in (7) and (8), is the pseudo-state of the FO-LTI system (7). Proof. In the case that all fractional derivatives of FO-LTI system (5) are equal, we have which brings about the equality of systems (5) and (7). Therefore, from now on we assume that at least one of the s is different from the others. As a result we have . In order to prove the first claim, we have to assume that ( ) is the pseudo-state vector of system (7), and we define , . Since , by a repeated application of Lemma 1 combined with (9), we obtain , , (  )  ( (  )  (13) (  )  )  (  )  ,  ( ) According to the rows of and , which are made from that , the last equation can be rewritten as follows (  ( ) By definition, ( ) ( ) [ ]  )  ( ) and  rows respectively, and the fact (14)  ( ) (  )  ( )  and considering (14) for  we have  ( )  ( ) Therefore, ( ) is the pseudo-state vector of system (5). In addition, it is obvious from equation system (13) that for we have ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Therefore, ( ) also satisfies the initial conditions (6). ( ) is the pseudo-state of system For the second claim we have to assume that (5) with the initial conditions (6). The equation system (13) is valid in this case too, and therefore it ( ) follows that is the pseudo-state vector of system (7) with the initial conditions ( ) ( ) . / .  ( )  /  ⌊ ⌋ whenever  of Lemma 2 reveals that  ( )(  )  .  and ( ) ( )  /  (  )  ( )  for  . Finally, an application  in the other cases, and it completes the proof. ∎  B. STABILITY In this subsection a necessary and sufficient condition is established for the asymptotical stability of system (5) with ( ) .  Theorem 2. The fractional-order linear system (5) with ( ) orders , if and only if there exists a Hermitian matrix ̅ ̅)  (  ̅ ̅)  (  is asymptotically stable for different such that (15)  ,  in which and is defined in (11). Proof. It can be easily concluded that since the fractional orders are different from each other, then . Therefore, It follows from Lemma 4 that the fractional-order system (7) is asymptotically stable if and only if there exists a positive definite Hermitian matrix such that (15) holds, and since according to Theorem 1 the pseudo states of original system (5) are in the subset of system (7) pseudo states, asymptotically stability of (7) results that of the system (5). For the proof of necessity we suppose that system (5) is asymptotically stable. As derived in [5], pseudostates of system (5), i.e. ( ) , are equal to some finite linear combination of ⌈ ⌉  ( (  )  pseudo-states of system (7), i.e. (  )  functions, with this in mind and according to (13),  ( )  , are some finite linear combination of  ⌈ ⌉  )  ( (  (  )  )  )  functions. Due to the asymptotically  stability of ( ) together with the fact that ( ) is a vanishing term and ( ( ) ) holds, it can be concluded that pseudo-states of system (7) are some finite linear combinations of asymptotically stable functions, which brings about the asymptotically stability of ( ) , and it completes the proof. ∎ C. Stabilization The main purpose of this subsection is to design a fixed-order dynamic output feedback controller that asymptotically stabilizes the FO-LTI system (5) using LMIs. Hence, the following dynamic output feedback controller is presented ( ) ( )  ( )  ( )  (16)  ( )]  [ ( )  ( ) ( ) with , in which is the arbitrary order of the controller, and , , controller unknown parameters with appropriate dimensions. The resulting closed-loop augmented FO-LTI system using (5) and (16) is as follows  , and  are the  ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )  ( )  ( )  ( )  (17)     ( )]  [ where ( )  [  ( ) ] ( )  [  Next, a stabilization result is established.  ]   (18)  Theorem 3. Considering closed-loop system in (17), if a positive definite Hermitian matrix ( ) ( ) in the form of (  )    alongside with matrices [  (19)   exist in a way that  ,  ]   (  where  (  ̅ )  )  ̅ ̅)  (   then, the dynamic output feedback controller parameters of  and ̅ ̅̅̅) ̅ ̅̅̅)  ( (  (20)    ̅̅) ̅̅)  ( (  (21)     make the FO-LTI system in (5) asymptotically stable. Proof. It follows from Theorem 1 that the closed-loop FO-LTI system (17) is asymptotically stable if ( ) ( ) such that there exists a positive definite Hermitian matrix (22) ( ( ̅ ̅) ̅ ̅)   where (23) ( * +)  in (4). By some manipulations, it can be easily in which is the linear matrix function defined concluded that (  *  where matrices matrix [  ]  ,  , and (    ) (  (24) ]  are defined in (11) and (12). According to (22) and (24), and assuming )in the form of (19), the inequality (22) can be written as follows (  +)  [  ̅ ̅)  (  ̅̅)    (25)  The matrix inequality (25) is not linear due to several multiplications of variables. Therefore, by changing variables as  the linear matrix inequality of (20) is obtained. ∎ V.     (26)  SIMULATION  In this section, some numerical examples are given to validate the effectiveness of the derived results. Various efficient LMI Parsers and Solvers can be used to determine the feasibility of the proposed constraints and obtain the parameters of the controller design problem. In this paper, we use YALMIP parser [24] and SeDuMi [25] solver in Matlab tool [26]. A. Example 1 Consider system (5) with the following parameters  (27)   According to the stability criterion proposed in [10], characteristic equation of above system is as follows [  ]  (28)   The roots of characteristic equation (28) along with the stability boundary are depicted in Fig. 1. It can be concluded from [10] that the system (27) is asymptotically stable since roots of equation (28) satisfy the condition | ( )| , in which . The same conclusion can be drawn from proposed Theorem 2 with a relatively simpler method. The eigenvalues of and stability boundaries , with are demonstrated in Fig. 2. ( ) ( ) is stable for According to Lemma 3 and Fig. 2, the system ( ( )), since the eigenvalues of are located on the left side of boundaries. Subsequently, according to Theorem 2, system (5) with the parameters in (27) is asymptotically stable. Since the characteristic equation (28) is of order 372 and , checking the eigenvalues of is far easier than checking the arguments of roots of characteristic equation (28), which is obvious from Figures 1 and 2.  Fig. 1. Roots of characteristic equation (28) and stability boundaries  with  for the system of Example 1.  Fig. 2. The eigenvalues of  and stability boundaries  , with  for the system of Example 1.  B. Example 2 Consider the dynamic output feedback stabilization problem of the fractional-order system (5) with the following parameters (29)   The eigenvalues of and stability boundaries , with are depicted in Fig. 3. ( ) ( ) is unstable for According to Lemma 3 and Fig. 3, the system ( ( )), since one of the eigenvalues of are located on the right side of boundaries. Therefore, according to Theorem 2, system (5) with the parameters in (29) is unstable. However, according to Theorem 3, it can be concluded that this fractional-order system is asymptotically stabilizable utilizing the obtained dynamic output feedback controllers of arbitrary orders in the form of (16), tabulated in Table 1. The eigenvalues of are located in stability region which is depicted in Fig. 3. According to Theorem 3, stability of implies the stability of . Fig. 4 shows the time response of open-loop system and the resulted closed-loop system of form (17) via obtained controller with . It is obvious from Fig. 4 that all states of the closed-loop system asymptotically converge to zero. 0  1  ,  0 1  -  TABLE 1. CONTROLLER PARAMETERS OF EXAMPLE 2 OBTAINED BY THEOREM 3 0  0  0  0  -0.21  1  -1.10  1.77  1.73  -0.16  2  0  1  0  1  ,  - -0.16  Fig. 3. The eigenvalues of ,  and stability boundaries  , with  for the system of Example 2 with  .  Fig. 4. The time response of the open-loop (red) and closed-loop system in Example 2 via obtained output feedback controllers with (black), (blue) (red).  C. Example 3 Dynamic output feedback stabilization problem of the fractional-order system (5) is considered with the following parameters (30)   The eigenvalues of and stability boundaries , with are demonstrated in Fig. 5. ( ) ( ) is unstable for According to Lemma 3 and Fig. 5, the system ( ( )), since not all of the eigenvalues of are located on the left side of boundaries. Thus, according to Theorem 2, system (5) with the parameters in (30) is unstable. However, according to Theorem 3, it can be concluded that this fractional-order system is asymptotically stabilizable utilizing the obtained dynamic output feedback controllers of arbitrary orders in the form of (16), tabulated in Table 2. The eigenvalues of are located in stability region which is depicted in Fig. 3. According to Theorem 3, stability of implies the stability of . Fig. 6 shows the time response of open-loop system and the 0  1  0 1  ,  -  resulted closed-loop system of form (17) via obtained controllers with and . It is obvious from Fig. 6 that all the closed-loop system states asymptotically converge to zero. Furthermore, control effort signals of the obtained controllers are depicted in Fig. 7 in order to have an accurate comparison. It can be concluded from Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 that, with almost the same control effort amount, the obtained dynamic output feedback controllers, even with a low order of , have more appropriate control actions compared to that of the static controller of . Moreover, it is obvious that for output feedback stabilizing of fractional-order systems with orders in both and intervals, a unified method is utilized. TABLE 2. CONTROLLER PARAMETERS OF EXAMPLE 3 OBTAINED BY THEOREM 3 0  0  1  -21.78  2  Fig. 5. The eigenvalues of ,  0  0 1 ,  1 0  , and stability boundaries  , with  0  1.28  2.46  1.20 -  1.14  for the system of Example 3 with  .  Fig. 6. The time response of the open-loop (red) and closed-loop system in Example 3 via obtained output feedback controllers with (black), (blue).  Fig.7. The control effort of the dynamic output feedback controllers of Example 3 obtained by Theorem 3.  VI. CONCLUSION In this paper using an appropriate linear matrix function, a single-order equivalent system for the given different-order system is introduced through which a new stability condition has been obtained that is easier to check in practice compared with the conditions known up to now (Theorem 1 and 2). Then the stabilization problem of fractional-order linear systems with different fractional orders via a dynamic output feedback controller with a predetermined order has been addressed based on the proposed stability criterion (Theorem 3). The LMI-based approach of developing stabilizing controller is preserved, in spite of the intricacy of assuming the most complete model of linear controller. The proposed stability and stabilization theorems are applicable to FO-LTI systems with different fractional orders in one or both of and intervals. Eventually, some numerical examples are presented to show the validity of the proposed theorems. REFERENCES 1. Badri V, Tavazoei MS, “Achievable Performance Region for a Fractional-Order Proportional and Derivative Motion Controller,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 7171–7180 (2015). 2. Badri V, Tavazoei MS, “Some Analytical Results on Tuning Fractional-Order [ProportionalIntegral] Controllers for Fractional-Order Systems,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1059–1066 (2016). 3. Podlubny I, “Fractional-order systems and -controllers,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 208–214 (1999). 4. Jin Y, Chen YQ, Xue D, “Time-constant robust analysis of a fractional order [proportional derivative] controller,” IET Control Theory Appl., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 164–172 (2011). 5. Kaczorek T, “Positive Linear Systems Consisting of n Subsystems With Different Fractional Orders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Regul. Pap., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1203–1210 (2011). 6. Wei Y, Hu Y, Song L, Wang Y, “Tracking Differentiator Based Fractional Order Model Reference Adaptive Control: The Case,” in 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 6902–6907 (2014). 7. Taghavian H, Tavazoei MS, “Robust stability analysis of uncertain multiorder fractional systems: Young and Jensen inequalities approach,” Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control (2017). 8. Skaar SB, Michel AN, Miller RK, “Stability of viscoelastic control systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 348–357 (1988).  9. 10. 11. 12.  13. 14. 15. 16.  17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25.  26.  Matignon D, “Stability Results For Fractional Differential Equations With Applications To Control Processing,” in In Computational Engineering in Systems Applications, pp. 963–968 (1996). Deng W, Li C, Lü J, “Stability analysis of linear fractional differential system with multiple time delays,” Nonlinear Dyn., vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 409–416 (2007). Diethelm K, The Analysis of Fractional Differential Equations: An Application-Oriented Exposition Using Differential Operators of Caputo Type. Springer (2010). Chen L, Chen G, Wu R, Tenreiro Machado J a., Lopes AM, Ge S, “Stabilization of Uncertain Multi-Order Fractional Systems Based on the Extended State Observer,” Asian J. Control, DOI: 10.1002/asjc.1618 (2018). Sabatier J, Moze M, Farges C, “LMI Stability Conditions for Fractional Order Systems,” Comput Math Appl, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1594–1609 (2010). Badri P, Amini A, Sojoodi M, “Robust fixed-order dynamic output feedback controller design for nonlinear uncertain suspension system,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 80, pp. 137–151 (2016). Zhang H, Wang X, Lin X, “Stability and Control of Fractional Chaotic Complex Networks with Mixed Interval Uncertainties,” Asian J. Control, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 106–115 (2017). Amini A, Mohammadi A, Asif A, “Event-based consensus for a class of heterogeneous multi-agent systems: An LMI approach,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 3306–3310 (2017). Thuan MV, Huong DC, “New Results on Stabilization of Fractional-Order Nonlinear Systems via an LMI Approach,” Asian J. Control, DOI: 10.1002/asjc.1644 (2018). Moze M, Sabatier J, Oustaloup A “LMI Tools for Stability Analysis of Fractional Systems,” IDETC/CIE2005 Proceedings, pp. 1611–1619 (2005). Farges C, Moze M, Sabatier J, “Pseudo-state feedback stabilization of commensurate fractional order systems,” Automatica, vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 1730–1734 (2010). Lu J-G, Chen G, “Robust Stability and Stabilization of Fractional-Order Interval Systems: An LMI Approach,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1294–1299 (2009). Ma Y, Lu J, Chen W, “Robust stability and stabilization of fractional order linear systems with positive real uncertainty,” ISA Trans., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 199–209 (2014). Sontag ED, Mathematical Control Theory: Deterministic Finite Dimensional Systems. Springer Science & Business Media, (2013). Matignon D, “Stability properties for generalized fractional differential systems,” ESAIM Proc., vol. 5, pp. 145–158 (1998). Löfberg J, “YALMIP : a toolbox for modeling and optimization in MATLAB,” in 2004 IEEE International Symposium on Computer Aided Control Systems Design, pp. 284–289 (2004). Labit Y, Peaucelle D, Henrion D, “SEDUMI INTERFACE 1.02: a tool for solving LMI problems with SEDUMI,” in Proceedings. IEEE International Symposium on Computer Aided Control System Design, pp. 272–277 (2002). Higham DJ, Higham NJ, MATLAB Guide: Second Edition. SIAM, (2005).

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
