Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_2023

Abstract:
arXiv:1507.06739v5 [math.ST] 30 Nov 2016  Selective inference with a randomized response Xiaoying Tian, Jonathan Taylor∗ Department of Statistics Stanford University Sequoia Hall Stanford, CA 94305, USA e-mail: xtian@stanford.edu jonathan.taylor@stanford.edu Abstract: Inspired by sample splitting and the reusable holdout introduced in the field of differential privacy, we consider selective inference with a randomized response. We discuss two major advantages of using a randomized response for model selection. First, the selectively valid tests are more powerful after randomized selection. Second, it allows consistent estimation and weak convergence of selective inference procedures. Under independent sampling, we prove a selective (or privatized) central limit theorem that transfers procedures valid under asymptotic normality without selection to their corresponding selective counterparts. This allows selective inference in nonparametric settings. Finally, we propose a framework of inference after combining multiple randomized selection procedures. We focus on the classical asymptotic setting, leaving the interesting high-dimensional asymptotic questions for future work. AMS 2000 subject classifications: Primary 62M40; secondary 62J05. Keywords and phrases: selective inference, nonparametric, differential privacy.  1. Introduction Tukey (1980) promoted the use of exploratory data analysis to examine the data and possibly formulate hypotheses for further investigation. Nowadays, many statistical learning methods allow us to perform these exploratory data analyses, based on which we can posit a model on the data generating distribution. Since this model is not given a priori, classical statistical inference will not provide valid tests that control the Type-I errors. Selective inference seeks to address this problem, see Lee et al. (2013a), Lockhart et al. (2014), Lee & Taylor (2014), Fithian et al. (2014). Loosely speaking, there are two stages in selective inference. The first is the selection stage that explores the data and formulates a plausible model for the data distribution. Then we enter the inference stage that seeks to provide valid inference under the selected model which is proposed after inspecting the data. Inference under different models have been studied, notably the Gaussian families Lee et al. (2013a), Tian et al. (2015), Lee & Taylor (2014) as well as other exponential families Fithian et al. (2014). In this work, we consider selective inference in a general setting that include nonparametric settings. In addition, we introduced the use of randomized response in ∗ Supported  in part by NSF grant DMS 1208857 and AFOSR grant 113039. 1  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  2  model selection. A most common example of randomized model selection is probably the practice of data splitting. Assuming independent sampling, we can divide the data into two subsets, using the first for model selection and the second subset for inference. Though not emphasized, this split is often random. Hence, data splitting can be thought of as a special case of randomized model selection. To motivate the use of randomized selection and introduce the inference problem that ensues, we consider the following example. 1.1. A first example Publication bias, (also called the “file drawer effect” by Rosenthal (1979)) is a bias introduced to scientific literature by failure to report negative or non-confirmatory results. We formulate the problem in the simple example below. Example 1 (File drawer problem). Let n  X̄n =  1X Xi,n n i=1  be the sample mean of a sample of n iid draws from Fn in a standard triangular array. We set µn = EFn [X1,n ] and assume EFn [(X1,n − µn )2 ] = 1. Suppose that we are interested in discovering positive effects and would only report the sample mean if it survives the file drawer effect, i.e. n1/2 X̄n > 2.  (1)  Then what is the “correct” p-value to report for an observation X̄n,obs that exceeds the threshold? If we have Gaussian family, namely Fn = N (µn , 1), then the distribution of X̄n surviving the file drawer effect (1) is a truncated Gaussian distribution. We also call this distribution the selective distribution. Formally, its survival function is     1 1/2 P (t) = P X̄n > t|n X̄n > 2 , X̄n ∼ N µn , n  1/2 1 − Φ n (t − µn ) = 1 − Φ(2 − n1/2 µn ) where Φ is the CDF of an N (0, 1) random variable. Therefore, we get a pivotal quantity  1 − Φ n1/2 (X̄n,obs − µn ) ∼ Unif(0, 1), P (X̄n,obs ) = 1 − Φ(2 − n1/2 µn ) (2)   1 1/2 n X̄n,obs > 2, Xn,obs ∼ N µn , n The pivotal quantity in (2) allows us to construct p-values or confidence intervals for Gaussian families. When the distributions Fn ’s are not normal distributions, central limit theorem states that the sample mean X̄n is asymptotically normal when Fn  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  3  has second moments. Thus a natural question is whether the pivotal quantity in (2) is asymptotically Unif(0, 1) when Xi,n does not come from a normal distribution? The following lemma provides a negative answer to this question in the case when Fn is a translated Bernoulli distribution that has a negative mean. Essentially when the selection event n1/2 X̄n > 2 becomes a rare event with vanishing probability, the pivotal quantity in (2) no longer converges to Unif(0, 1). We defer the proof of the lemma to the appendix. Lemma 1. If Xi,n takes values in {−1.5, 0.5}, with P (Xi,n = −1.5) = P (Xi,n = 0.5) = 0.5. Thus µn = −0.5. Then the pivot in (2) does not converge to Unif(0, 1) P (X̄n ) 6→ Unif(0, 1), for the X̄n ’s surviving the file drawer effect (1). Randomized selection circumvents this problem. In the following, we propose a randomized version of the “file drawer problem”. Example 2 (File drawer problem, randomized ). We assume the same setup of a triangular array of observations Xi,n as in Example 1. But instead of reporting X̄n when it survives the file drawer effect (1), we independently draw ω ∼ G, and only report X̄n if n1/2 X̄n + ω > 2. (3) Note that the selection event is different from that in (1) in that we randomize the sample mean before checking whether it passes the threshold. In this case, if Fn = N (µn , 1), the survival function of X̄n is     1 1/2 ×G P (t) = P X̄n > t|n X̄n + ω > 2 , (X̄n , ω) ∼ N µn , n   = P Z > n1/2 (t − µn )|Z + ω > 2 − n1/2 µn , (Z, ω) ∼ N (0, 1) × G. (4) To compute the exact form of P (t), we have to compute the convolution of N (0, 1) and G which has explicit forms for many distributions G. Moreover, when G is Logistic or Laplace distribution, we have P (X̄n,obs ) → Unif(0, 1), as long as Fn has centered exponential moments in a fixed neighbourhood of 0. The convergence is in fact uniform for −∞ < µn < ∞. For details, see Lemma 10 in Section 5.2. The only difference between these two examples is the randomization in selection. After selection, we need to consider the conditional distribution for inference, which conditions on the selection event. If we denote by F∗n the distribution used for selective inference, we have in Example 1, 1{n1/2 X̄n >2} dF∗n (X̄n ) = . dFn PFn (n1/2 X̄n > 2)  (5)  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  4  We also call the ratio between F∗n and Fn the selective likelihood ratio. In this case, the selective likelihood ratio is simply a restriction to the X̄n ’s that survives the file drawer effect. We observe that √ √ nX̄n = nµn + Z, Z ∼ N (0, 1), which leads to three scenarios for selection. • µn > δ > 0, for some δ > 0. √ In this case, the dominant term for selection is nµn , and since we have a big positive effect, we would always report the sample mean X̄n when n is big. This corresponds to the selection event having probability tending to 1 and the selective likelihood ratio goes to 1 as well. In this case, there is very little selection bias, and the original law is a good approximation to the selective distribution for valid inference. • µn < −δ < 0, for some δ > 0. √ In this case, the dominant term is also nµn , but in the negative direction. As n → ∞, the selection probability vanishes and the selective likelihood becomes degenerate. We almost never report the sample mean in this scenario, but in the rare event where we do, by no means can we use the original distribution for inference. • −δ < n1/2 µn < δ, for some δ > 0. This corresponds to local alternatives. In this case, the selective likelihood neither converges to 1 or becomes degenerate. Rather, it becomes an indicator function of a half interval. Proper adjustment is needed for valid inference in this case. It is in the second scenario that pivotal quantity (2) will not converge to Unif(0, 1). Different distributions will have different behaviors in the tail. Since the conditioning event n1/2 X̄n > 2 becomes a large-deviations event, we cannot expect it to behave like the normal distribution in the tail. On the other hand, in Example 2, if we denote by F̃∗n the law for selective inference, we have  Ḡ 2 − n1/2 (X̄n − µn ) − n1/2 µn dF̃∗n Ḡ(2 − n1/2 X̄n )   (X̄n ) = = dFn EFn (Ḡ(2 − n1/2 X̄n )) EFn Ḡ 2 − n1/2 (X̄n − µn ) − n1/2 µn (6) R∞ where Ḡ(t) = t G(du) is the survival function of G. When µn < −δ < 0 for some δ > 0, and G is the Laplace or Logistic distribution so that Ḡ has an exponential tail, the dominant term exp(n1/2 µn ) in both the numerator and the denominator will cancel out, making the selective likelihood ratio properly behaved in this difficult scenario. It turns out that this selective likelihood ratio is fundamental to formalizing asymptotic properties of selective inference procedures. Its behavior determines not only the asymptotic convergence of the pivotal quantities like in (4), but also whether consistent estimation of the population parameters is possible with large samples. Again in the negative mean scenario where µn < −δ < 0, the sample mean X̄n surviving the non-randomized “file drawer effect” cannot be a consistent estimator for the underlying means µn because it will always be positive. But if X̄n is reported as in  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  5  Example 2, it will be consistent for µn even if µn is negative and bounded away from 0. For detailed discussion, see Section 3. In general, the behavior of the selective likelihood ratio can be used to study the asymptotic properties of selective inference procedures. We study consistent estimation and weak convergence for selective inference procedures in Section 3 and Section 5 respectively. We are especially inspired by the field of differential privacy (c.f. Dwork et al. (2014) and references therein) to study the use of randomization in selective inference. Privatized algorithms purposely randomize reports from queries to a database in order to allow valid interactive data analysis. To our understanding, our results are the first results related to weak convergence in privatized algorithms, as most guarantees provided in the differentially private literature are consistency guarantees. Some other asymptotic results in selective inference have also been considered in Tibshirani et al. (2015), Tian & Taylor (2015), though these have a slightly different flavor in that they marginalize over choices of models. We conclude this section with some more examples. 1.2. Linear regression Consider the linear regression framework with response y ∈ Rn , and feature matrix X ∈ Rn×p , with X fixed. We make a homoscedasticity assumption that Cov [y|X] = σ 2 I, with σ 2 considered known. Of interest is µ = E(y|X), a functional of F = F(X) the conditional law of y given X. When F is a Gaussian distribution, exact selective tests have been proposed for different selection procedures Tibshirani (1996), Taylor et al. (2014), Tian et al. (2015). Removing the Gaussian distribution on F, Tian & Taylor (2015) showed that the same tests are asymptotically valid under some conditions. Randomized selection in this setting is a natural extension of these works. Fithian et al. (2014) proposed to use a subset of data for model selection, which yields a significant increase in power. In this work, we study general randomized selection procedures. Consider the following example. Due to the sparsity of the solution of LASSO Tibshirani (1996) 1 β̂λ (y) = argmin ky − Xβk22 + λ · kβk1 , β∈Rp 2 a small subset of variables can be chosen for which we want to report p-values or confidence intervals. This problem has been studied in Lee et al. (2013a). However, instead of using the original response y to select the variables, we can independently draw ω ∼ Q and choose the variables using y ∗ = y + ω. Specifically, we choose subset E by solving 1 β̂λ (y, ω) = argmin ky ∗ − Xβk22 + λ · kβk1 , p 2 β∈R  y ∗ = y + ω,  (7)  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  6  and take E = supp(β̂λ (y, ω)). In Section 4.2.2, we discuss how to carry out inference after this selection procedure, with much increased power. We also discuss the reason behind this increase in Section 4.2. 1.3. Nonparametric selective inference All the previous works on selective inference assume a parametric model like the Gaussian family or the exponential family. In this work, we allow selective inference in a non-parametric setting. Consider the following examples. Suppose in a classification problem, we observe independent samples, iid  (xi , yi ) ∼ F,  (xi , yi ) ∈ Rp × {0, 1}.  with fixed p. This problem is non-parametric if we do not assume any parametric structure for F and are simply interested in some population parameters of the distribution F. In Section 5, we developed asymptotic theory to construct an asymptotically valid test for the population parameters of interest. More details can be found in Section 5.4.1. Also consider a multi-group problem where a response x is measured on p treatment groups. A special case is the two-sample problem where there are two groups. It is of interest to form a confidence interval for the effect size in the “best” treatment group. This arises often in medical experiments where multiple treatments are performed and we are interested to discover whether one of the treatment has a positive effect. The fact we have chosen to report the “best” treatment effect exposes us to selection bias and multiple testing issues Benjamini & Hochberg (1995), and therefore calls for adjustment after selection. Benjamini & Stark (1996) have considered the parametric setting iid where xj ∼ N (µj , σ 2 ) for each group. Suppose for robustness, it is of interest to report the median effect size instead of the mean (assuming responses are not symmetric). Then without any assumptions on the distribution of the measurements, this also becomes a nonparametric problem. But we can apply the theory in Section 5 to cope with this problem, for details, see Section 5.3. 1.4. Outline of the paper There are three main advantages of applying randomization for selective inference, • Consistent estimation under the selective distribution • Increase in power for selective tests • Weak convergence of selective inference procedures In the following sections, Section 2 gives the setup of selective inference and introduced selective likelihood ratio, which is the key for studying consistent estimation and weak convergence of selective inference procedures. Section 4 focuses on linear regression models with different randomization schemes, demonstrating the increase in power. Section 5 proposes an asymptotic test for the nonparametric settings. Theorem 9 proves that the central limit theorem holds under the selective distribution with mild conditions. Applications to the two examples in Section 1.3 are discussed. This is a  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  7  result for fixed dimension p. Finally, Section 6 discusses the possibility of extending our work to the setting, when multiple selection procedures are performed on different randomizations of the original data. One application is selective inference after cross validation for the square-root LASSO Belloni et al. (2011). 2. Selective Likelihood Ratio We first review some key concepts of selective inference. Our data D lies in some measurable space (D, F), with unknown sampling distribution D ∼ F. Selective inference seeks a reasonable probability model M – a subset of the probability measures on (D, F), and carry out inference in M . Central to our discussion is a selection algorithm, a set-valued map b:D→Q Q (8) where Q is loosely defined as being made up of “potentially interesting statistical questions”. For instance, in the linear regression setting, D = Rn , our data D = y and we have a fixed feature matrix X ∈ Rn×p . The unknown sampling distribution is F = L(y|X), the conditional law of y given X. b might be all linear regression modA reasonable candidate for the range of Q els indexed by subsets of {1, . . . , p} with known or unknown variance. For any selected subset of variables E, we carry out selective inference within the model M = {N (XE βE , σ 2 I), βE ∈ R|E| }. Since we use the data to choose the model M , it is only fair to consider the conditional distribution for inference, b D|M ∈ Q(D),  D ∼ F.  Therefore, we seek to control the selective Type-I error: b ≤α PM,H0 (reject H0 | M ∈ Q)  (9)  b and H0 ⊂ M is the where M is the selected family of distributions in the range of Q null hypothesis. Selective intervals for parametric models M can then be constructed by inverting such selective hypothesis tests, though only the one-parameter case has really been considered to date. 2.1. Randomized selection Randomized selection is a natural extension of the framework above. We enlarge our probability space to include some element of randomization. Specifically, let H denote an auxiliary probability space and Q is a probability measure on H. A randomized selection algorithm is then simply b∗ : D × H → Q. Q  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  8  Note the randomization is completely under the control of the data analyst and hence Q will be fully known. This is an extension of the non-randomized selective inference framework in the sense that we can take Q to be the Dirac measure at 0. Many choices b∗ are natural extensions of Q, b which we will see in many examples. of Q Randomized selective inference is simply based on the law F∗ , which we also call the selective distribution, b∗ (D, ω), (D, ω) ∼ F × Q. D|M ∈ Q  (10)  Note that although randomization is incorporated into selection, inference is still carried out using the original data D, after adjusting for the selection bias by considering the conditional distribution F∗ . Similar to the selective inference we defined above, we seek to control the selective Type-I error, b∗ ) ≤ α. PF∗ (reject H0 ) = PM,H0 (reject H0 |M ∈ Q  (11)  Moreover, we also want to achieve good estimation, which makes EF∗ ((θ̂(y) − θ(F))2 )  (12)  small. b∗ . But In Sections 3 to 5, we will discuss concrete examples of D, D, F and Q before that we first introduce the selective likelihood ratio, which is a crucial quantity in studying the selective distribution F∗ . 2.2. Selective likelihood ratio Selective likelihood ratio provides a way of connecting the original distribution F and its selective counterpart F∗ . It is easy to see from (10) that the selective distribution is simply a restriction of the (D, ω)’s such that model M will be selected. Thus F∗ is absolutely continuous with respect to F, and the selective likelihood ratio is W(M ; D) dF∗ (D) = = `F (D) ∀ F ∈ M, dF EF (W(M ; D)) n o b∗ (D, ω) . W(M ; D) = Q ω : M ∈ Q  (13)  The numerator in `F (D) is the restriction of (D, ω), integrated over the randomizations ω, and the denominator is simply a normalizing constant. One implication of the selective likelihood ratio is that for distributions F in parametric families, their selective counterparts may have the same parametric structure. 2.2.1. Exponential families One commonly used parametric family is the exponential family. Assume that F = Fθ is an exponential family with natural parameter space Θ and D = Rn and the data  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  9  D = y. Its density with respect to the reference measure dF0 is, dFθ (y) = exp{θT T (y) − ψ(θ)}, dF0  θ ∈ Θ.  (14)  Through the relationship in (13) we conclude, for any randomization scheme, the law F∗M,θ is another exponential family. Formally, Lemma 2. If Fθ belongs to the exponential family in (14), then for any randomized b∗ , the selective distribution is also an exponential family, selection procedure Q dF∗M,θ (y) ∝ W(M ; y) exp{θT T (y) − ψ(θ)}, dF0  θ ∈ Θ.  with the same sufficient statistic T (y) and natural parameters θ. Furthermore, to test H0j : θj = 0, we consider the following law, Tj (y) | T−j (y),  y ∼ F∗M,θ .  (15)  The first claim of the lemma is quite straight-forward using the relationship in (13). The second claim is a Lehmann–Scheffe (c.f. Chapter 4.4 in Lehmann (1986)) construction which was proposed in Fithian et al. (2014), to construct tests for one of the natural parameters treating the others as nuisance parameters. For detailed construction of such tests in the linear regression setting, see Section 4. 3. Consistent Estimation After Model Selection In this section, we leave the parametric setup and consider general models M . In particular, we study the consistency of estimators under the selective distribution for arbitrary models. We first introduce the framework of asymptotic analysis under the selective model. Then we state conditions for consistent estimation in Lemma 3 and conclude with examples. For any model M , which is a collection of distributions, we define its corresponding selective model, which is the collection of corresponding selective distributions,   ∗ ∗ ∗ dF (D) = `F (D), F ∈ M , (16) M = F : dF b∗ }. Selecwhere `F (D) is the selective likelihood ratio for the selection event {M ∈ Q ∗ tive inference is carried out under the selective model M . In order to make meaningful asymptotic statements, we consider a sequence of ranb∗n )n≥1 and models (Mn )n≥1 with each Mn in the domized selection procedures (Q ∗ b range of Qn . Often, we are interested in some population parameter θn , which can be thought be as a functional of the distribution Fn ∈ Mn , θn : Mn → R.  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  10  b∗ , which already incorporates the It is worth pointing out that Mn is selected by Q n statistical questions we are interested in. In this sense, Mn is chosen a posteriori. The selected model Mn∗ does not change our target of inference, it merely changes the distribution under which such inference should be carried out. In other words, if θn is the mean parameter, we are interested in the underlying mean of Fn , not F∗n . We might have a good estimator θ̂n : D → R for θn (Fn ) under Fn , namely i h EFn (θ̂n − θn (Fn ))2 → 0. θ̂n is a consistent estimator if our model Mn is given a priori. But as we use data select Mn , what really cares about is its performance under the selective distribution F∗n . Will this estimator still be consistent under the selective distribution F∗n ? Formally, we say an estimator θ̂n is uniformly consistent in Lp for θn (Fn ) under the sequence (Mn )n≥1 if lim sup sup kθ̂n − θn (Fn )kLp (Fn ) → 0. n  Fn ∈Mn  Similarly, we say that θ̂n is uniformly consistent in probability for the functional θn (Fn ) under the sequence (Mn )n≥1 if for every  > 0 there exists δ() > 0 such that for all δ ≥ δ() lim sup sup Fn (|θ̂n − θn (Fn )| > δ) ≤ . n  Fn ∈Mn  The following lemma states the conditions for consistency of θ̂n under the sequence of corresponding selective models (Mn∗ )n≥1 , b∗n , Mn )n≥1 of randomized selection procedures Lemma 3. Consider a sequence (Q and models. Suppose the selective likelihood ratios satisfies, for some p > 1, lim sup sup k`Fn kLp (Fn ) < C. n  (17)  Fn ∈Mn  Then for any sequence of estimators θ̂n uniformly consistent for θn (Fn ) in Lα , it is also uniformly consistent for θn (Fn ) in Lγ under (Mn∗ )n≥1 , γ ≤ α/q, p1 + 1q = 1.  Further, if θ̂n is uniformly consistent for θn in probability, then θ̂n is uniformly consistent for θn in probability under the sequence (Mn∗ )n≥1 . Proof. Let ∆n = θ̂n − θn (Fn ). To prove the first assertion note that for any F∗n ∈ Mn∗ Z k∆n kLγ (F∗n ) = |∆n |γ `Fn (y)Fn (dy) Dn  ≤ k|∆n |γ kLq (Fn ) k`Fn (y)kLp (Fn ) = k∆n kγLγq (Fn ) k`Fn (y)kLp (Fn ) ≤ k∆n kγLα (Fn ) k`Fn (y)kLp (Fn ) ≤ Ck∆n kγLα (Fn )  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  11  For any δ > 0, F∗n (|∆n |  Z > δ) = Dn  1{|∆n | > δ}`Fn (y)Fn (dy) 1/q  ≤ [Fn (|∆n | > δ)]  k`Fn kLp (F)  1/q  ≤ C [Fn (|∆n | > δ)]  .  We illustrate the application of Lemma 3 through our “file drawer effect” examples in Section 1.1. 3.1. Revisit the “file drawer problem” First we note that in Example 1 and 2, we observe data Dn = (X1,n , . . . , Xn,n ), with Xi,n ∼ Fn . The randomized selection in Example 2 can be realized as ( √ report p-values for X̄n , if nX̄n + ω > 2, ∗ b Q (Dn , ω) = √ do nothing, if nX̄n + ω ≤ 2, where we independently draw ω ∼ G. By law of large numbers, we easily see that if we always report X̄n , it will be an unbiased estimator for µn . However, since we only observe the sample means surviving the file drawer effect. Will X̄n still be consistent for µn ? In the most difficult scenario discussed in Section 1.1, where µn < −δ < 0 for some δ > 0, X̄n cannot be a consistent estimator for µn in Example 1. This is easy to see as Example 1 will only report positive sample means. A remarkable feature of randomized selection is that consistent estimation of the population parameters is possible even when the selection event has vanishing probabilities. In fact, the following lemma states that when G is a Logistic distribution, X̄n is consistent for µn after the randomized file drawer effect in Example 2. Lemma 4. Suppose as in Example 2, we observe a triangular array with Xi,n ∼ Fn . Fn has mean µn = µ < 0. If we draw ω ∼ Logistic(κ), where κ is the scale of the Logistic distribution. Then the sample means X̄n surviving the “randomized” file drawer effect are consistent for µ, √ p X̄n → µ, conditional on nX̄n + ω > 2. if Fn has moment generating function in a neighbourhood of 0. Namely, ∃a > 0, such that EFn [exp (a |Xi,n − µn |)] ≤ C. Before we prove the lemma, we want to point out that although the selection √ procedure in Example 2 is different from that in Example 1 because of randomization, nµn is still the dominant term in selection. Note that √ √ √ nX̄n + ω = nµn + n(X̄n − µn ) + ω.  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  12  √ Since both n(X̄n − µn ) and ω are Op (1) random variables, the dominant term √ nµn → −∞, would ensure that the selection event has vanishing probabilities in Example 2 as well. Thus it is particularly impressive that Example 2 gives consistent estimation where Example 1 cannot. The proof of Lemma 4 is deferred to the appendix. We also verified this theory of consistent estimation through simulations. Figure 1 shows the empirical distributions of the sample mean X̄n after the file drawer effect in Example 1 or the “randomized” file drawer effect in Example 2. They are marked with “blue” colors or “red” colors respectively. We set the true underlying mean to be µn = µ = −1 and mark it with the dotted vertical line in Figure 1. The upper panel Figure 1a is simulated with n = 100 and the lower panel Figure 1b is simulated with n = 250. We notice that in both simulations, the sample mean in Example 1 concentrates around the thresholding boundary, which is positive. Thus, these sample means can not be possibly for the underlying mean µ = −1. However, the existence of randomization allows us to report negative sample means. As a result, the sample mean in Example 2 will be consistent for µ = −1. We see that as we increase sample size n, the sample means concentrates closer to µ = −1. 4. Inference in linear regression models In the linear regression setting, we assume a fixed feature matrix X ∈ Rn×p , and observe the response vector D = y ∈ Rn . We assume the noises are normally distributed. There are two ways to parametrize a linear model, and both belong to some exponential family. Now we introduce the selected model, n o Msel (E) = N (XE βE , σ 2 I) : βE ∈ R|E| , E ⊂ {1, . . . , p} (18) with σ 2 known or unknown or the saturated model,  Msat = N (µ, σ 2 I) : µ ∈ Rn  (19)  with known variance. Now we consider some randomized selection procedures and inference after selection. 4.1. Data splitting and data carving In the introduction, we introduced data splitting Cox (1975) as a special case of randomized selective inference. In Fithian et al. (2014), the term data carving was introduced to demonstrate that data splitting is inadmissible. In data splitting (and data carving) inference makes most sense in the selected model Msel (E), hence we should b as returning a subset E of variables selected. think of Q Let us formalize this notion in our notation. Let Q be some measure on assignments b a selection algorithm defined on datasets of any of n data points into groups and Q size. The distribution Q determines a randomized selective inference procedure with b∗ , an algorithm applied to subsets of the original data set. In this selection algorithm Q  13  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  X̄ after file drawer effect  90 80  4.0  70  3.5  60  3.0  50  2.5  40  2.0  30  1.5  20  1.0  10  0.5  0 -1.2  -1.0  -0.8  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2  X̄ after randomized file drawer effect  4.5  0.0  0.2  0.4  0.0 −1.2  −1.0  −0.8  −0.6  −0.4  −0.2  0.0  0.2  0.4  0.2  0.4  (a) n = 100 X̄ after file drawer effect  120  X̄ after randomized file drawer effect  7 6  100  5  80  4 60 3 40 2 20  0 -1.2  1  -1.0  -0.8  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2  0.0  0.2  0.4  0 −1.2  −1.0  −0.8  −0.6  −0.4  −0.2  0.0  (b) n = 250  Fig 1: Empirical distributions of sample means X̄n in Example 1 and Example 2, with original or randomized file drawer effect. For the randomization, we draw ω ∼ Logistic(κ), with κ = 0.5.  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  14  case, it is easy to see that D  W(E; y) = W(Msel (E); y) ∝  X ω  qω · 1{Msel (E)∈Q(y b 1 (y,ω))}  where qω is the mass assigned to assignment ω by Q. Multiple assignments or splits considered in Meinshausen et al. (2009), Meinshausen & Bühlmann (2010) can be formalized in a similar fashion. We can construct UMPU tests for βE in the selected model Msel (E) by using Lemma 2, (also see Fithian et al. (2014)). We note that in Fithian et al. (2014) the authors conditioned unnecessarily on the split ω, and we would expect that aggregating over splits would yield a more powerful procedure. However, there are two disadvantages with this randomization scheme. First, it is computationally difficult to aggregate over all random splits. Second, it seems difficult to consider the saturated model Msat for inference, which is more robust to model misspecifications. To overcome those difficulties, we introduce other randomization schemes below. 4.2. Additive noise and more powerful tests Our second randomization scheme in linear regression involves additive noise. Specifically, we draw ω ∼ Q and use the randomized response y ∗ (y, ω) = y + ω for selection In this case, we can consider both the selected model Msel,E and the saturated model Msat . Per Lemma 2, we can perform valid inference for βE in Msel,E or linear functionals of µ in Msat . One major advantage of using a randomized response y ∗ for selective inference is that these procedures yield much more powerful tests, at a small cost of on the quality of the selected models. In other words, small amount of randomization is cause a small loss in the model selection stage, but we gain much more power in the inference stage. The reason for increased power can be explained by a notion called leftover Fisher Information first introduced in Fithian et al. (2014). Since selective inference is essentially inference under the selective distribution F∗n , the Fisher Information under F∗n would determine how efficient the selective tests are. In the saturated model with ∗ Gaussian noise Msat , y−µ σ 2 is the score statistic and its variance under Fn is exactly the leftover Fisher Information (a similar relationship holds in the selected model Msel,E ). Lemma 5 gives a lower bound on this leftover Fisher Information when the randomization noise Q = N (0, γ 2 I). Lemma 5. For either Msat or Msel (E), if we use Gaussian randomization noise Q = b ∗ ) = Q(y b + ω), then the leftover Fisher N (0, γ 2 ), and the selection is based on Q(y information is bounded below by (1 − τ )I(θ),  τ = σ 2 /(σ 2 + γ 2 ),  and I(θ) is the non-selective Fisher information for θ in Msat or Msel (E). The parameters θ depend on which of the two models we are considering.  15  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  b ∗ Proof. In the saturated model Msat , the score statistic is V = y−µ σ 2 . Since Q(y ) is measurable with respect to y ∗ , h i b ∗ ) ≥ Var [V | y ∗ ] = 1 Var [y | y ∗ ] . Var V | Q(y σ4 Since y and y ∗ = y + ω are both normal distributions with covariance matrices, Cov [y, y ∗ ] = σ 2 I, Var [y ∗ ] = (γ 2 + σ 2 )I, we have the leftover Fisher Information h i b ∗ ) ≥ 1 Var [y | y ∗ ] Var V | Q(y σ4 4 1 σ 1 = 4 (σ 2 I − 2 I) = 2 (1 − τ )I = (1 − τ )I(µ). 2 σ γ +σ σ In the selected model Msel,E , the score statistic is V =  T XE (y−XE βE ) . σ2  Similarly,  h i  T  b ∗ ) ≥ 1 Var XE Var V | Q(y y | y∗ 4 σ   1 σ4 1 2 T T T = 4 σ (XE XE ) − 2 (X XE ) = 2 (1 − τ )XE XE = (1 − τ )I(βE ). σ γ + σ2 E σ  When there is no randomization γ = 0, we potentially have no leftover Fisher information. This corresponds to a very rare selection event. However after randomization, even with very extreme selection, there is always leftover Fisher information, which makes the selective tests more powerful. Consider the following examples. 4.2.1. Revisit the “file drawer problem” In Example 1 and Example 2, if we assume Fn = N (µ, 1), they are a special case of the linear regression model, with the feature matrix X = 1, the all ones vector. In this case, nX̄n is the score statistic, and its variance under the selective distribution is the Fisher information. Lemma 5 states that the leftover Fisher information is lower bounded by n(1 − τ ) if we draw randomize using Gaussian variables, Q = N (0, γ 2 ), τ = 1/(1 + γ 2 ). Moreover, the increase in leftover Fisher information with randomization is not specific to Gaussian randomizations. For example, in Figure 1 when we use Logistic randomization, we also observe that under the selective distribution with randomization, X̄n has a much bigger variance than without randomization. As discussed above, this variance multiplied by n2 is exactly the leftover Fisher information, which explains why selective procedures after randomization will have better performances than without. We investigate the relationship between the leftover Fisher information and the length of confidence intervals constructed by inverting the pivot in (4). Specifically,  16  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  1.0  1.0  0.5  0.5  0.0  0.0  0.5  0.5  1.0  1.0  1.5 2.0 0.2  1.5  Gaussian randomization Nominal 0.1  0.0  0.1 Observed X̄  0.2  0.3  Logistic randomization Nominal  0.4  (a) Gaussian added noise  2.0 0.2  0.1  0.0  0.1 Observed X̄  0.2  0.3  0.4  (b) logistic added noise  Fig 2: Selective confidence intervals for different added noise  in Example 2, after observing a reported sample mean, we want to report confidence intervals for the underlying mean µ. Figure 2 demonstrates the selective intervals (solid lines) after (3) with ω being either Gaussian or Logistic noises. The sample size n = 100. Unlike the nominal confidence intervals (dashed lines), the selective intervals are valid with 90% coverage for the underlying mean. Since Lemma 3 gives a lower bound of (1 − τ )I(µ), we would intuitively expect the selective confidence intervals to be 1/(1 − τ ) the length of the nominal intervals. This is verified in Figure 2a, when we observe really negative sample means. (The sample means can be negative because we added randomization.) On the other hand, for Logistic randomization√in Figure 2b, the intervals are slightly wider than the nominal intervals around the 2/ n, but narrow to roughly the nominal size on both sides of the truncation point. This indicates that added logistic noise might preserve more information than Gaussian additive noise. Both additive noises improve significantly over a non-randomization scheme (c.f. Figure 3 in Fithian et al. (2014)). Of course, the increase in power and shortening of selective confidence intervals does not come without a price. Because we select with a randomized response, we are likely to select a worse model. But the trade-off between model quality and power is highly in favor of randomization. See the following example. 4.2.2. Linear regression with added noise Back to the general setup of linear regression models, we select a model by solving LASSO with the randomized response y ∗ = y + ω and return the active set E of the solution (as in (7)). Then per Lemma 2, we can construct valid selective tests in both Msat and Msel (E). For instance, in Msel (E), we can construct tests for the hypothesis H0j : βj = 0, j ∈ E based on the law, η T y AE (y + ω) ≤ bE , PE\j y,  (y, ω) ∼ N (XE βE , σ 2 I) × Q, βj = 0,  (20)  † T where η = (XE ) ej , ej is the j-th column of the identity matrix, PE\j is the projection matrix onto the column space of E but orthogonal to η, and AE , bE are the appropriate  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  0.5  Type II error  0.4  17  Data splitting Data carving Additive noise  0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 1.0  0.9  0.8  0.7  Probability of screening  0.6  0.5  Fig 3: Comparison of inference in additive noise randomization vs. data carving.  matrix and vector corresponding to LASSO selection. This is a UMPU test due to the Lehmann–Scheffe construction (Fithian et al. 2014) and controls the selective Type-I error (11). Although, we cannot compute the explicit forms of (20), the selection events in (20) are polyhedrons and thus a hit-and-run or Hamiltonian Monte Carlo algorithm Pakman & Paninski (2012) can be used for sampling. Figure 3 compares inference in the additive Gaussian noise scheme to the data carving procedure proposed in Fithian et al. (2014) as well as data splitting. In Msel (E), the probability of screening (i.e. selecting E including all the nonzero β’s) is a surrogate for the quality of the model. As additive noise uses a different randomization scheme than data splitting and data carving, we vary the amount of randomization used in each scheme and match on the probability of screening. Thus Figure 3 is like an ROC curve for the trade-off between model quality and power of tests. The x-axis goes in the direction of increased randomization, with the left most point corresponding to no randomization at all. We see even with a small randomization that barely affects model selection, we can substantially lower the Type-II error from 0.2 to less than 0.05. The trade-off is highly in favor of (small) randomization. We see in Figure 3 that additive noise lowers the Type-II error by almost half than data carving for the same screening probability and they both clearly dominate data splitting. For the concrete setup of the simulation, see Chapter 7 of Fithian et al. (2014). 5. Weak convergence and selective inference for statistical functionals In the nonparametric setting, we assume a triangular array of data, Dn = (d1,n , . . . , dn,n ), iid  and di,n ∼ Fn . When Fn = F, it is the special case of independent sampling. We are interested in some functional of the distribution µn = µ(Fn ). Associated with µn is our statistic T which is a linearizable statistic (Chung et al. 2013). iid  Definition 6 (Linearizable statistic). Suppose di,n ∼ Fn , we call T a linearizable  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  18  statistic for µn = µ(Fn ) if for any sample size n, n  T (Dn ) =  1X ξi,n + R, n i=1 p  E [ξi,n ] = µn ∈ R ,  ξi,n = ξ(di,n ),  Cov [ξi,n ] = Σn ∈ R  (21) p×p  . 1  where ξ a function of the data and R is bounded with probability 1, R = op (n− 2 ) under F. We use the slight abuse of notations to denote ξi,n as iid random variables as well. Throughout this section, we assume the dimension p is fixed. We are interested in establishing a pivotal quantity for Tn = T (Dn ) like (4) in Example 2 where Tn is the sample mean after the randomized “file drawer effect”. It turns out we have an exact pivotal quantity if Tn is normally distributed. To lighten notation, we suppress the script n in the following lemma, which is a finite sample result valid for any n. We prove the lemma in Section 7. Lemma 7. If the statistic T is normally distributed from N (µ, Σ n ) and the model M b∗ (T, ω), where ω ∼ Q. Then for any contrast η, is selected by randomized selection Q b∗ , we have which could depend on the outcome of selection Q  R∞ Q(t; Vη ) · exp −n(t − η T µ)2 /2ση2 dt F∗ ηT T T P (T ; η µ, Σ) = R ∞ ∼ Unif(0, 1) (22) Q(t; Vη ) · exp(−n(t − η T µ)2 /2ση2 ) dt −∞ where ση2 = η T Ση,  Q(t, Vη ) = Q   Vη =  I−  1 Σηη T ση2   T    b∗ t · Ση/ση2 + Vη , ω ω:M ∈Q .  Remark 8. In selected models Msel,E , the selection is often made not only based on (T, ω), but also other statistic of the data, which we call the null statistic N . Thus  b∗ (T, N ), ω }. To make notation the selection event should be expressed as {M ∈ Q simpler, we exclude such possibilities. But a slightly modified pivot where we replace Q(t; Vη ) with Q(t; Vη , N ) in (22) and integrate over N , is still Unif(0, 1) distributed. Note that Lemma 7 provides a valid pivotal quantity for any randomized selection b∗ and any randomization noise Q provided that T is normally distributed. procedure Q In fact, Lemma 7 does not require T to be a linearizable statistic. In some sense, the lemma is a reformulation (after rescaling) of the selective tests constructed in the linear regression model with additive noises (see Section 4.2.2). For example, in the selected model Msel,E , to test the hypothesis H0j : βj = 0, j ∈ E, we consider the law (20). After introducing the null statistic N = PE⊥ y, the pivot in (22) is in fact the CDF transform of this law, taking T = PE y, Σ = nσ 2 PE , and the selection event b∗ ((T, N ), ω)} to be the affine selection event defined in (20). With simple {M ∈ Q −2 calculation, it is easy to see Vη = (PE − kηk η T η)y = PE\η y, which we condition on in both (22) and (20).  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  19  Of course the pivot in (22) is very difficult to compute explicitly, and we need to use sampling schemes like in (20). But in a nutshell, P (T ; η T µ, Σ) is simply a CDF transform of the law   Σ T ∗ b η T | Vη , M ∈ Q (T, ω), (T, ω) ∼ N µ, × Q. (23) n After introducing the null statistic, Lemma 7 is agnostic to the selected model Msel,E , where µ = XE βE or the saturated model Msat , where the parameter is simply µ. The nuances between the two models in terms of sampling is that the saturated model condition on N (treating it as part of Vη ), but selected model integrate over N . Lemma 7 is written with T implicitly being the approximate average of n i.i.d variables, hence the distribution N (µ, Σ n ). Linearizable statistics are of particular interest as they converge to N (µ, Σ ) due to central limit theorem. In the following, we seek to esn tablish conditions under which the pivot P (T ; µ, Σ) will be asymptotically Unif(0, 1). 5.1. Selective central limit theorem In other work on asymptotics of selective inference Tian & Taylor (2015), Tibshirani et al. (2015), the setup considered is usually the saturated model Msat . These works b∗ . In considered asymptotics of selective inference marginalized over the range of Q contrast, we consider the convergence for any particular selected model Mn , under b∗n }. Specifically, we allow weak the conditional law of the selection event {Mn ∈ Q convergence of the pivot in (22) in the sequence of selected models (Mn )n≥1 . As explained above, selected models integrate over the null statistics while saturated models condition on those, thus the selective tests should have more power provided that the selected model is believable. In the saturated model, our result provides a finer measure of convergence than in Tian & Taylor (2015). On the other hand, Tian & Taylor (2015) allows high-dimensional setting in some cases while we consider fixed dimension p. Similar to the asymptotic setting in Section 3, we consider the convergence of P (Tn ; η T µn , Σn ) under a sequence of models (Mn )n≥1 selected by a sequence of b∗n )n≥1 . (Tn )n≥1 is a sequence of linearizable statistics defined selection procedures (Q in Definition 6, with asymptotic mean µn and asymptotic covariance matrix Σnn . It turns out that in this setting, the selective likelihood ratio `Fn again plays an important role in the convergence of the pivot. Recall that with randomized selection b∗ (Tn , ω), the selective likelihood is Q W(Tn ; Mn ) , EFn [W(Tn ; Mn )] n o b∗ (Tn , ω) W(Tn ; Mn ) = Q ω : Mn ∈ Q n `Fn (Tn ; Mn ) =  (24)  It will √ be convenient to rewrite the likelihood ratio in terms of the normalized vector Zn = n(Tn − µn ) `¯Fn (Zn ) = `F (n−1/2 Zn + µn ). (25) as well as the pivot (22) P̄Fn (Zn ) = P (n−1/2 Zn + µn ; ηnT µn , Σn ).  (26)  20  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  Our approach is basically a comparison of how the pivot will behave under Fn and its Gaussian counterpart Φn = N (µ(Fn ), Σ(Fn )). Specifically, it is a modification of the proof of Theorem 1.1 of Chatterjee (2005), modified to allow for the fact the derivatives of the pivot and the likelihood are not required to be uniformly bounded. Given a norm Ω on Rp , define n o r/k λΩ ∂ k f (s) exp(−rΩ(s)) : 1 ≤ k ≤ r , (27) r (f ) = sup s∈Rp  where ∂ k denotes the k-fold differentiation with respect to the p-dimensional vector s, k · k denotes element wise maximum. Now we state our selective central limit theorem, which we prove in Section 7. Theorem 9 (Selective central limit theorem). Suppose the statistics Tn = T (Dn ) are linearizable statistics according to Definition 6. We also assume the norms Ω : Rp → R are such that for each f ∈ {P̄n , `¯Fn , `¯Φn }, it satisfies sup λΩ 3 (f ) ≤ C1 .  (28)  Fn ∈Mn  Moreover, assume ξi,n has uniformly bounded moment generating function in some neighbourhood of 0. Namely, ∃a > 0, such that sup sup EFn (exp(akξi,n − µ(Fn )k1 )) ≤ C2 .  (29)  n≥1 Fn ∈Mn  Furthermore, we assume lim sup n1/2 · n  b∗n ] b∗n ] − P(Φ ×Q) [Mn ∈ Q P(Fn ×Q) [Mn ∈ Q n ≤ C3 . b∗ ] P(Φ ×Q) [Mn ∈ Q n  (30)  n  Then, for any g with uniformly bounded derivatives up to third order   EF∗n g P (Tn ) −  Z 0  1  g(x)dx ≤ n−1/2 K(g, C1 , C2 , C3 , p),  n ≥ n0  (31)  where K depends only on the bounds on the derivatives of g, the constants C1 , C2 , C3 and the dimension p. Thus the convergence is uniform in (Mn )n≥1 for models satisfying (28), (29) and (30). Theorem 9 provides a finite sample bound on the convergence of the pivot P (Tn ). Since we allow g to be functions with uniformly bounded derivatives up to the third order, (31) implies convergence of P (Tn ) to Unif(0, 1) under F∗n . In the following examples, we show how to verify conditions (28), (29) and (30). 5.2. Revisit the “file drawer problem” In Examples 1 and 2, we considered only reporting an interval or a p-value about µn when n1/2 X̄n > 2 or n1/2 X̄n + ω > 2. This is an example where we do not really  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  21  select a model, but rather select only a proportion of the data to report. The selective distribution simply refers to the law of the reported sample means, which pass the threshold. The data we observe is Dn = (X1,n,...,Xn,n ) with the linearizable statistic Tn simply being the sample mean X̄n . Example 1 corresponds to the degenerate randomization of adding 0 to X̄n . Work of Tian & Taylor (2015) show that in order for the corresponding pivot to converge weakly we can take, for ∆ < 0 fixed n o 3 Mn = F : EF [X̄n ] > n−1/2 ∆, EF [Xi,n ]<∞ . (32) That is, X̄n will satisfy a selective CLT when the population mean is not too negative. On the other hand, in Example 2, the pivot in (22) is of the form, R∞ √ 2 Ḡ(2 − nt)e−n(t−µn ) /2 dz X̄n , (33) P (X̄n ) = R ∞ √ Ḡ(2 − nt)e−n(t−µn )2 /2 dz −∞ and likelihood `Fn (X̄n ) is defined in (6). When G is the Logistic noise, then condition (28) and (30) can be verified. Formally, we have the following lemma whose proof we defer to the appendix, Lemma 10. If G = Logistic(κ), with κ being the scale parameter, then if centered Xi,n ’s have moment generating functions in the neighbourhood of zero, then the pivot P (X̄n ) is asymptotically Unif(0, 1). In other words, with Logistic randomization noise, we can take the sequence of models to be    Mn = Fn : EFn exp a |X1,n − µn | < ∞ , for some a > 0. (34) Requiring exponential moments is stricter than the third moment condition in (32), but we would have a stronger conclusion, namely weak convergence uniformly over all µn ’s. 5.3. Two-sample median problem In the two-sample median problem, we have two treatment groups from which we take iid iid measurements, x1i ∼ F1 and x2i ∼ F2 ; for simplicity of notation, we assume we observe n samples from each group, and drop n in the subscript. We will report the bigger median from this group in the non-randomized setting. Exact formulation of randomized selection will be discussed below. Suppose our underlying distribution is F = F1 ×F2 . Let µ = (µ1 , µ2 ) is the population median of the two groups, and T = (T1 , T2 ) is the sample median. The well-known result by Bahadur (1966) states that the sample median is a linearizable statistic for the median when the CDF of the distribution F has positive density f , and f 0 is bounded iid in a neighbourhood of the population median m. Formally, if xi ∼ F , then the sample median n 1 X 1{xi > m} − 1/2 + Rn , (35) T (x1 , . . . , xn ) = m + n i=1 F 0 (m)  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  22  with R = O(n−3/4 log n) with probability 1. b∗ reports Our (randomized) selection algorithm Q ( P (T ; µ1 , Σ), if T1 > T2 + n−1/2 ω P (T ; µ2 , Σ), if T1 ≤ T2 + n−1/2 ω, where ω ∼ Q and Σ = diag( 41 f1 (µ1 )−2 , 14 f2 (µ2 )−2 ) is a diagonal matrix. f1 , f2 are the densities of F1 and F2 . Without loss of generality, we suppose M1 is selected, i.e. the first group is the “best” group. We choose the randomization noise Q to be a Logistic(κ) with mean 0 and κ is the scale, and let Gκ be the CDF. The resulting pivot for µ1 is R∞ √ √ Gκ ( nt − nT2 ) · exp(−n(t − µ1 )2 /2σ12 ) dt 1 T1 , σ12 = . P (T ; µ1 , Σ) = R ∞ √ √ 2 2 4f1 (µ1 )2 G ( nt − nT2 ) · exp(−n(t − µ1 ) /2σ1 ) dt −∞ κ This pivot strikes a similarity with √ the pivot in (33) for Example 2 with the truncation threshold 2 being replaced by nT2 and plugging in the appropriate means and variances of the medians. A result similar to Lemma 10 can be established, which ensures convergence of the pivot uniformly for any underlying medians (µ1 , µ2 ). In order to construct the above pivot, we need knowledge of the variance σ12 . Without selection, there are natural estimates of this variance. One may ask, how will inference be affected if we plug this estimate into our pivot? We revisit this question in Section 5.5. 5.4. Affine selection events In this section, we discuss the special case of affine selection events (regions). This combined with the asymptotic result in Theorem 9 applies to more general settings. In particular, it allows us to approximate non-affine regions. For a concrete example, see Section 5.4.1. We drop the subscript n where possible to simplify notations. Suppose for our model b∗ } can be deM , the selection is based on (T, ω), and the selection event {M ∈ Q scribed as √ { nAM T + ω ∈ KM },  where the affine matrix AM ∈ Rd×p and KM is a region in Rd . Many examples of nonrandomized selective inference can be expressed in this way (c.f. Lee et al. (2013b), Taylor et al. (2014), Lee & Taylor (2014), Fithian et al. (2015)). In this section, we provide conditions under which Theorem √9 can be applied. We again normalize T to be Z = n(T − µ), then the selection event can be rewritten as {AM (Z + ∆) + ω ∈ KM }, (36) √ where nµ = ∆, Z converges to N (0, Σ). Suppose ω ∼ Q, which has distribution function G. Then we introduce some conditions on the selection region KM and the added noise distribution G,  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  23  Lower bound: We assume there is some norm h, such that   Z G(dw) ≥ C − exp − inf h(w) , ∀θ ∈ Rd . w∈KM −θ  KM −θ  Smoothness: Suppose G has density g, we assume the first 3 derivatives of g are integrable, Z k∂ j g(w)kdw ≤ Cj , j = 0, 1, 2, 3 Rd  where the norm on the left-hand side is the maximum element-wise of the partial derivatives. The above two conditions essentially require G to be differentiable and have heavier tails than (or equal to) exponential tails. In fact we prove that the lower bound and smoothness conditions ensure that (28) are satisfied under the local alternatives introduced below. Definition 11 (Local alternatives). For the sequence of selected model (Mn )n≥1 , we define the local alternatives of radius of B to be the set all sequences (µn )n≥1 , such that √ dh (0, KMn − AMn ∆) ≤ B, ∆ = nµn where dh (·, ·) is the distance induced by the norm h. The notion of local alternatives is natural in the asymptotic setting as we expect even a small effect size will be more prominent when we collect more and more data. Formally, we have the following lemma, whose proof is deferred to the appendix. Lemma 12. Suppose G, KM satisfy the lower bound and smoothness conditions, then condition (28) are satisfied under the local alternatives. Now, we are left to verify conditions (29) and (30). Condition (29) is essentially a moment condition on the centered statistics ξi,n − µn , which we have to assume. Condition (30) can be verified using the well known results in multivariate CLT (see Gotze (1991)). To be rigorous, we state the following lemma, which we also prove in the appendix. Lemma 13. If Fn is such that the centered statistics ξi,n −µn have finite third moments, then under the local alternatives, condition (30) is satisfied. To summarize, Lemma 12 and Lemma 13 state that if G has integrable derivatives and exponential tails, then the pivot in (22) converges to Unif(0, 1) uniformly for F∗n so long as Fn ’s are such that ξi,n − µn have exponential moments in a neighbourhood of 0. Unlike the sample mean and sample median examples, the pivot is difficult to compute explicitly in this case. However, as we discuss in the beginning of Section 5, the pivot is essentially the CDF transform of the conditional law (23), which we can sample from. As discussed above, we can just take ω to be from a Logistic distribution. Now we apply the above theory to logistic regression.  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  24  5.4.1. Example: randomized logistic lasso iid  Suppose we observe independent samples, di = (yi , xi ) ∼ F, where yi ’s are binary observations and xi ∈ Rp . The ordinary logistic regression solves the following problem, β̄ = argminβ∈Rp `(β) " n # X = argminβ∈Rp − yi log π(xi β) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − π(xi β)) ,  (37)  i=1  where π(x) = exp(x)/(1 + exp(x)). This is a nonparametric setting as we do not assume any parametric structure for F. The randomized logistic lasso adds an `1 penalty, a randomization term and a small quadratic term, 1 1 β̂ = argminβ∈Rp √ `(β) + ω T β + kΛβk1 + √ kβk22 , n 2 n  (38)  iid  where ωj ∼ Logistic(κ) is the perturbation to the gradient and Λ is a diagonal matrix which introduces (possibly) unequal feature weights, κ controls the amount of randomization added. The addition of the quadratic term ensures that (38) is strictly convex, thus has a unique solution. A similar formulation for linear regression has been proposed in Meinshausen & Bühlmann (2010). Selective inference in this setting has not been considered before. Without the Gaussian assumptions Lee et al. (2013a) does not apply. The parametric setting of this problem has been discussed in Fithian et al. (2014), but computation of the selective tests are mostly infeasible for general X. Finally, the asymptotic result by Tian & Taylor (2015) does not apply here as the framework require exactly affine selection regions, which is not the case in this setting. Suppose the solution to (38) has nonzero entry set E, then our target of inference ∗ βE , the unique population minimizer which satisfies T ∗ EF [XE (y − π(XE βE ))] = 0.  (39)  ∗ )) with independently samNote that a parametric model yi |xi ∼ Bernoulli(π(xi,E βE ∗ pled xi ’s will have βE satisfying (39). But we by no means assume such an underlying ∗ distribution. Rather, for any well-behaved distribution F, βE can be thought of of a statistical functional of the underlying distribution F, depending on the outcome of selection E. Selective inference in this setting is carried out conditioned on (E, sE ), the active set and its signs. We first introduce the following notations,  exp(XE βE ) , WE (βE ) = diag(πE (βE )(1 − πE (βE ))), 1 + exp(XE βE ) 1 T 1 T QE (βE ) = XE WE (βE )XE , CE (βE ) = X−E WE (βE )XE , n n DE (βE ) = CE (βE )Q−1 E (βE )  πE (βE ) =  25  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  where X is the feature matrix, and XE , X−E is the columns corresponding to the active set and inactive set respectively. By law of large numbers, we have p  def  ∗ ∗ QE (βE ) → EF QE (βE ) = Q, p  def  p  def  ∗ ∗ CE (βE ) → EF CE (βE ) = C,  ∗ DE (βE ) → CQ−1 = D.  (40)  Now we introduce our linearizable statistics and show that the conditioning event (E, sE ) can be expressed as affine regions of these statistics. Lemma 14. Suppose E is the active set of the solution of (38), and we denote " n # X β̄E = argmin − yi log π(xi,E βE ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − π(xi,E βE )) βE ∈RE  i=1  as the unpenalized MLE restricted to the selected variables E. ∗ The following statistic T is linearizable with asymptotic mean (βE , ρ) and variance Σ/n,   β̄E   + R, T = 1 T n X−E y − πE (β̄E )   ∗ )) . Morewhere R = op (n−1/2 ) is a small residual, and ρ = E xTi,−E (yi − π(xi,E βE over, √ the selection event {Ê, zÊ = (E, sE )} can be characterized as the affine region { nAM T + BM ω ≤ bM }, where       −SE 0 SE Q−1 0 −SE Q−1 ΛE sE I−E  , BM =  D −I−E  , bM = λ−E − DΛE sE  , AM =  0 0 −I−E −D I−E λ−E + DΛE sE where I−E denotes the identity matrix of n − |E| dimensions and ΛE , Λ−E denote the active block and the inactive block of Λ respectively and λ is the diagonal elements of Λ, SE = diag(sE ). The proof of this lemma is also deferred to the appendix. Thus using Lemma 12 and Lemma 13, we can conclude under local alternatives, the pivot (22) converges to Unif(0, 1). To test H0j : βj∗ = 0, we take η = ej , and sample  ∗   √ Σ βE η T T | Vη , nAM T + BM ω ≤ bM , (T, ω) ∼ N , × G, ρ n   ∗ where ρ = E xTi,−E (yi − π(xi,E βE )) . Since ρ is the nuisance parameters for testing H0j , j ∈ E, the conditional law above will not depend on its value. A hit-and-run algorithm for sampling this law can be implemented. Moreover, recent development by Tian et al. (2016), Harris et al. (2016) propose more general and efficient sampling schemes for this law. For details, see for example Chapter 3.2 Tian et al. (2016) where the sampling scheme for this very example is considered and simulation results are provided. In Lemma 14, we assume the covariance matrix Σ is known. In applications, we can bootstrap it. But is it valid to plug in the bootstrap estimate of Σ?  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  26  5.5. Plugging in variance estimates In Section 5.3 we derived quantities that were asymptotically pivotal for the best median, up to an unknown variance. In the sample median case, by (35), the variance of the sample median is approximately [4nf (m)2 ]−1 , where f (m) is the PDF evaluated at the median m. A simple consistent estimator for f (m) is to take 1/2 ± √1n quantiles an and bn , then 2 f (m) ≈ √ (41) n(bn − an )  is consistent for f (m) based on which we get a consistent estimator for σ12 . More generally, computing the pivot (22) requires knowledge of Σ. In practice, we usually do not have prior knowledge of the variance Σ and need a consistent estimate for Σ. We might use a bootstrap or jackknife estimator. When p is fixed, the bootstrap estimator is consistent and thus we get a consistent estimator Σ̂. Lemma 3 states that under moment conditions on the likelihood, Σ̂ will be consistent for Σ under F∗n as well, justifying the plug-in estimator of Σ. Figure 4 is some simulation results for the two-sample medians problem. In each case, we take the sample size for each treatment group to be 500, and generate the noise from a skewed distribution N (0, 1) + 0.5Exp(1). We standardize it such that the noise has median 0 under the null hypothesis. We use additive logistic noise with scale κ = 0.8 for randomization. The better group is decided using the randomized sample median, and selective inference is carried out. In Figure 4a, the pivot with plugin variance estimate σ b in (41) is plotted under both the null hypothesis H0 : µbetter = 0 and the HA : µbetter > √1n . The pivot has reasonable power even for identifying local alternatives. The pivot is almost exactly Unif(0, 1) under the null hypothesis with the sample size n = 500. In fact, it is very close at a relatively small sample size n = 50 justifying the application of asymptotics in the nonparametric setting. Figure 4b further illustrates the difference in the unselective v.s. selective distribution and its convergence to its theoretical limit. We see that there is a clear shift in selective distribution that calls for adjustment for the selection. For sample size n = 500, the empirical selective distribution converges to our theoretical distribution. 6. Multiple Randomizations of the Data Most of the examples above focus on a single randomization ω on the data, which we use for model selection. We naturally want to extend it to multiple randomizations, and multiple randomized selections, which will collectively suggest a model for inference. In this section, we allow multiple randomizations in a possibly sequential fashion and discuss how inference can be carried out.  27  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  1.0  ECDF for the pvalues, two-sample median, n=500 null alternative  Better median histogram, n=500 selected pdf median, unselected median, selected  6 5  0.8  4 0.6 3 0.4 2 0.2 0.0 0.0  1 0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  0 0.3  1.0  0.2  0.1  0.0  0.1 0.2 median values  0.3  0.4  0.5  (a) Null and alternative pivot for the “bet- (b) Selective v.s. unselective distribution, ter” median and theoretical PDF  Fig 4: Asymptotic distribution of the median for the selected group  6.1. Selective inference after cross-validation Consider the case where we first choose a regularization parameter by cross-validation, and then fit the square-root LASSO problem Belloni et al. (2011) at this parameter, β̂λ (y; X) = argmin ky − Xβk2 + λkβ|1 ,  (42)  β  where λ is picked from a fixed grid Λ = [λ1 , . . . , λk ]. The discussion below is not specific to selection by square-root LASSO. The model selected by cross-validated square-root LASSO involves two steps of selection. We denote by yCV the response for selecting the randomization parameter, and yselect the response vector for fitting the square-root LASSO at the selected regularization parameter λ. Both vectors are randomized version of the original vector y. Inference after cross validation requires combining two steps of randomized selection. Consider the following procedure. First, we randomize y to get the vector yCV and yselect ∼ N (y, σ12 I)  yinter |y, X  yCV |yinter , y, X  yselect |yinter , y, X  ∼  2 ∼ N (yinter , σ2,CV I)  (43)  2 N (yinter , σ2,select I).  Note the intermediate vector yinter is introduced convenience of sampling. The above is just one of the plausible randomization schemes. After having randomized, we select λ with K-fold cross-validation using yCV : λ̂ = λ̂(yCV , X) = argminλ∈Λ CVK (yCV , X, λ)  (44)  where CVK (y, X, λ) is the usual K-fold cross-validation score with coefficients estimated by the square-root LASSO. Alternatively, one could compute the cross-validation score using the OLS estimators of the selected variables. Note that we have left implicit  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  28  the randomization that splits observations into groups. That is λ̂ in (44) above is a function of (yCV , X, ω) where ω is a random partition of {1, . . . , n} into K groups. When we sample yCV below, we redraw ω each time. The subset of variables and signs is selected using the square-root LASSO with response yselect : n o Ê(yCV , yselect , X) = j : β̂λ̂(yCV ,X),j 6= 0 , (45) zÊ (yCV , yselect , X) = sign(β̂λ̂(yCV ,X) ). After seeing the selected variables Ê, we perform inference in the selected model Msel (Ê). Since Msel (Ê), we will still have an exponential family after selection. Per Lemma 2, we sample from the following law,   L XjT y λ̂(yCV , X) = λ, (Ê, zÊ ) = (E, zE ), PE\j y . The additional conditioning on the signs are for computational reasons. In fact, recent development in Harris et al. (2016) proposes sampling schemes that overcome these difficulties, so that we do not need to condition on this additional information. To sample from the above law, we use a Gibbs-type sampler, which iterate over y, yinter , yCV and yselect , conditional on the other three and the selection event. It includes the following steps. Sampling yCV Using the conditional independence of yCV and yselect given yinter , we have   n o 2 L yCV yinter , yselect , y, λ̂(yCV , X) = λ = N (yinter , σ2,CV I) λ̂(yCV , X) = λ . This is the computational bottleneck, as we do not have good description for the selection event for cross validation. A brute-force sampling scheme will be computationally expensive, as we need to refit the model over a grid of λ’s. Thus, we do not update yCV too often. Sampling yselect The conditional independence of yselect and yCV given yinter implies,   L yselect yinter , yCV , y, (Ê, zÊ )(yCV , yselect , X) = (E, zE ), λ̂(yCV , X) = λ n o 2 = N (yinter , σ2,select I) | (Êλ , zÊ,λ )(yselect , X) = (E, zE ) Tian et al. (2015) has given an explicit description of the selection event {Êλ , zÊ,λ = (E, zE )}. Thus hit-and-run sampling provides a tractable sampling scheme. Sampling yinter This is a simple step. Because the selection event is based on yCV and yselect , we have  L yinter y, yselect , yCV  !−1  1 y + σ21 yCV + σ2 1 yselect σ12 1 1 1 2,CV 2,select . , + 2 + 2 =N  1 1 1 σ12 σ2,CV σ2,select + + 2 2 σ σ σ2 1  2,CV  2,select  29  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  Sampling y This is also simple with our randomization scheme. Note that y is conditionally independent of yselect and yCV given yinter ,    1 1 1 σ 2 XE βE + σ12 yinter , 1 1 2 σ + 2 2 σ σ1    L y yinter , yCV , yselect = L y yinter = N  1 + 2 σ1  −1 !  Since we condition on PE\j y, we essentially take y and project out the update on the space orthogonal to that of Xj . A chain that iterates through the above four steps will give us samples from the desired distribution for inference. 6.2. Collaborative selective inference One of the motivations of the reusable holdout described in Dwork et al. (2014) is that it allows a data analyst to repeatedly query a database yet still be able to approximately estimate expectations even after asking many questions about the data. Another version of this model may be that several groups wish to model the same data and then, as a consortium, decide on a final model and be able to approximately estimate expectations in this final model. We might call this collaborative selective inference. Formally, suppose each of L groups has its own preferred method of model selecbl )1≤l≤L . We assume there is a central “data” tion, encoded as selection procedures (Q bank that decides what “data” each group is allowed to see. We express this is as a sequence of randomization schemes (yl∗ )1≤l≤L . Formally, this is equivalent to enlarging the probability space to D × B with measure F × B and fixing a function y ∗ (y, ω) = (y1∗ (y, ω), . . . , yl∗ (y, ω)). It may be desirable to choose the law of y ∗ |y so that the coordinates are conditionally independent given y, though it is not necessary. bl (y ∗ ) ∈ σ(y ∗ ) and convene Now suppose that the L groups choose models M̂l∗ = Q l l to discuss what the best model is M . For every choice of L models (M1 , . . . , ML ) and final model M , the following selective distribution can be used for valid selective inference b ∗ dF∗ B(ω : ∩L l=1 Ql (yl (y, ω)) = Ml ) (y) = . (46) b ∗ = Ml ) dF (F × B)(∩L Q l=1  l  When the yl∗ ’s are conditionally independent given y then it is clear that b ∗ B(∩L l=1 Ql (y (y, ω)) = Ml ) =  L Y l=1  bl (y ∗ (y, ω)) = Ml ). B(Q l  It is possible that the consortium has beforehand decided on an algorithm that will choose a best model automatically, determined by some function S(M1 , . . . , ML ). In this case, one should use the selective distribution dF∗ B(ω : S(M1∗ (y, ω), . . . , ML∗ (y, ω)) = M ) (y) = dF (F × B)(S(M1∗ , . . . , ML∗ ) = M )  (47)  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  30  When the models in question are parametric, perhaps Gaussian distributions, and the randomization is additive Gaussian noise the central data bank can explicitly lower bound the leftover information by ∗ Var(y|y1∗ , . . . , yL ).  This quantity is expressible in terms of the marginal variance of y and the central data bank’s noise generating distribution for y ∗ (y, ω) = (y + ω1 , . . . , y + ωL ). By maintaining a lower bound on the above quantity, the central data bank can maintain a minimum prescribed information in the data for final estimation and/or inference. In a sequential setting, where valid inference is desired at each step, maintaining a lower bound may involve releasing noisier and noisier versions of y. Sampling under this scheme seems quite difficult, and we leave it as an area of interesting future research. 7. Proof 7.1. Proof of Theorem 9 To prove Theorem 9, we first prove the following lemma, which might be of independent interest. Lemma 15.√Suppose Tn is a linearizable statistic for µn = µ(Fn ) as defined in (21). Let Zn = n(Tn − µn ) ∈ Rp and a function f : Rp → R with finite λΩ 3 (f ) for some norm Ω on Rp . Moreover, if Fn has finite centered exponential moments in a neighbourhood of zero. Then 1  −2 |EFn [f (Zn )] − EΦn [f (Zn )] | ≤ C(p)λΩ , 3 (f )n  n ≥ n0  for some n0 ≥ 1, where C(p) is a constant only dependent on the dimension. Lemma 15 can be seen as an extension of the result by Chatterjee (2005) in the sense that the author in Chatterjee (2005) established result for the case Ω = 0. The proof is also an adaptation of the technique in Chatterjee (2005). Pn Proof. Without loss of generality, we assume Tn = n1 i=1 ξi,n and the residual is 0. First, we define the normalizing operator. For any S ∈ Rn×p , n  1 X N (S) = √ S[i] ∈ Rp , n i=1 where S[i] is the i-th row of S. We also define for any n and 0 ≤ k ≤ n,  0   0  ξ1,n − µ(Fn ), ξ1,n − µ(Fn ), ..     ..     ., .,  0   0  ξk−1,n − µ(Fn ), ξ  − µ(F ), n  k−1,n  0   −     Sn,k =  ξk,n − µ(Fn ),  Sn,k =  0  ξk+1,n − µ(Fn ), ξk+1,n − µ(Fn ),         .. ..     ., ., ξn,n − µ(Fn )  ξn,n − µ(Fn )  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response iid  31  iid  0 where ξi,n ∼ Fn with mean µ(Fn ) and variance Σ(Fn ) and ξi,n ∼ N (µ(Fn ), Σ(Fn )). − − Let Fn,k . Fn,k denote the distribution of Sn,k and Sn,k ’s respectively. Note Fn,k and − Fn,k are determined by Fn . For simplicity of notation we only distinguish the two − distributions by Fn,k and Fn,k , avoiding verbose notations of S, e.g. EFn,k [S] = EFn,k [Sn,k ]. It is then easy to see Zn = N (Sn,0 ). Now by telescoping:  EFn [f ] − EΦn [f ] = EFn,0 [f ◦ N (S)] − EFn,n [f ◦ N (S)] n X ≤ EFn,i−1 [f ◦ N (S)] − EF − [f ◦ N (S)] + EF − [f ◦ N (S)] − EFn,i [f ◦ N (S)] . n,i  n,i  i=1  Let ∂i be the derivative with respect to the i-th row S[i]. Using Taylor’s expansion − at Sn,k , we have EFn,i [f ◦ N ] − EF − [f ◦ N ] n,i  i  1 h 1 T = √ EF − [∂i f ◦ N (S)] 0 + Tr EF − ∂i2 f ◦ N (S) · Σ(Fn ) + Rn,i n,i n n n,i where the precise form of the Taylor remainder Rn,i depends on realizing the laws Fn,i − and Fn,i on the same probability space. In order to not introduce new notation, we have avoided explicitly writing out this construction, directing readers to Chatterjee (2005) for details. Nevertheless,     1 Ω − 23 0 0 3 √ |Rn,i | ≤ c1 (p)[λ3 (f ) · n ]EF − exp Ω(N (S)) + Ω(ξi,n ) kξi,n k1 n,i n 0 where ξi,n are centered version of ξi,n and c1 is some dimension dependent constant. Let C(Ω) be the constant s.t Ω(·) ≤ C(Ω)k · k1 , C(Ω) only depends on the dimension p. Thus, using the independence of the ξi,n ’s,     1 0 0 3 EF − exp Ω(N (S)) + √ Ω(ξi,n ) kξi,n k1 n,i n !# " 0 C(Ω)kξi,n k1 0 3 √ . ≤EF − [exp (C(Ω)kN (S)k1 )] · EFn kξi,n k1 exp n,i n  Now we bound these two expectations. By the exponential moment condition (29) and Lemma 17, it is easy to conclude the first term is bounded by lim sup EFn [exp (C(Ω)kZn k1 )] ≤ c2 (p). n  0 The second expectation is bounded by γ, an upper bound on the third moment of ξi,n ,  " 0 lim sup EFn kξi,n k31 exp n  0 C(Ω)kξi,n k1 √ n  !# ≤ γ,  32  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  Thus it is not hard to see 3  −2 |Rn,i | ≤ c1 (p)c2 (p)γλΩ . 3 (f )n  Notice the first and second order terms in EFn,i [f ◦ N ] − EF − [f ◦ N ] cancel with n,i those in EFn,i−1 [f ◦ N ] − EF − [f ◦ N ], and therefore we have, n,i  EFn [f ] − EΦn [f ] ≤  n X  (Rn,i + R̃n,i )  i=1  where R̃n,i is the remainder of EFn,i−1 [f ◦ N ] − EF − [f ◦ N ]. With a similar argument n,i  3  −2 , |R̃n,i | ≤ c1 (p)c2 (p)γλΩ 3 (f )n  and summing over n terms, we have the conclusion of the lemma. Now we prove the main theorem, Theorem 9. Proof. First, notice that per Lemma 7, we have EΦ∗n [g ◦ P (Tn )] = the selective likelihood ratio, it is easy to see,  R1 0  g(x)dx. Using  EF∗n [g(P (Tn ))] = EFn [g(P (Tn ))`Fn (Tn )] The same equation holds for Φn = Φ(Fn ), thus we have EF∗n [g(P (Tn ))] − EΦ∗n [g(P (Tn ))] ≤  |EFn [g(P (Tn ))`Φn (Tn )] − EΦn [g(P (Tn ))`Φn (Tn )]| +  (48)  |EFn [g(P (Tn ))`Fn (Tn )] − EFn [g(P (Tn ))`Φn (Tn )]|  We need to bound both terms. Recall the notation P n and `¯Fn for the normalized statistic Zn . If we let f = g(P̄n ) · `¯Φn , then per Lemma 15, we have |EFn [g(P̄n ) · `¯Φn ] − EΦn [g(P̄n ) · `¯Φn ]| ≤ 2C(p) · C1 n−1/2 , where we use the bound in condition (28). Now we replace `Φn with `Fn in the second term. With some algebra, we can bound it by h i b∗ (Tn , ω) PFn ×Q M ∈ Q h i , EFn [g(P (Tn ))`Fn (Tn )] 1 − b∗ (Tn , ω) PΦn ×Q M ∈ Q which in turn is bounded by C(g)  b∗ ] − P(Φ ×Q) [M ∈ Q b∗ ] P(Fn ×Q) [M ∈ Q n ≤ C(g)C3 n−1/2 , b∗ ] P(Φ ×Q) [M ∈ Q n  per condition (30) and C(g) is a bound on g.  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  33  7.2. Proof of Lemma 7 Proof. Let φµ, n1 Σ denote the density for N (µ, n1 Σ) and T =  1 T ση2 Ση·(η T )+Vη , we see ∗  that Q(η T T, Vη ) is W(M ; T ) in (13). Thus under the selective law F , the distribution of T has density proportional to φµ, n1 Σ (T ) · Q(η T T, Vη ).  Since η T T ⊥ Vη under F, we can factorize φµ, n1 Σ (T ) into the product of densities of η T T and Vη . Thus conditioning on Vη , the density of η T T is proportional to   n(η T T − η T µ)2 exp − · Q(η T T, Vη ). 2ση2 Therefore, the pivot in (22) is the survival function of η T T under F∗ and is distributed as Unif(0, 1). Moreover, we note the distribution does not depend on the conditioned value of Vη , thus P (T ; η T µ, Σ) in (22) is Unif(0, 1). References Bahadur, R. R. (1966), ‘A note on quantiles in large samples’, The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 37(3), 577–580. Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V. & Wang, L. (2011), ‘Square-root lasso: pivotal recovery of sparse signals via conic programming’, Biometrika 98(4), 791–806. Benjamini, Y. & Hochberg, Y. (1995), ‘Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing’, J R Statist Soc B 57(1), 289–300. Benjamini, Y. & Stark, P. B. (1996), ‘Nonequivariant simultaneous confidence intervals less likely to contain zero’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 91(433), 329–337. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2291411 Chatterjee, S. (2005), ‘A simple invariance theorem’, arXiv preprint math/0508213 . Chung, E., Romano, J. P. et al. (2013), ‘Exact and asymptotically robust permutation tests’, The Annals of Statistics 41(2), 484–507. Cox, D. (1975), ‘A note on data-splitting for the evaluation of significance levels’, Biometrika 62(2), 441–444. Dwork, C., Feldman, V., Hardt, M., Pitassi, T., Reingold, O. & Roth, A. (2014), ‘Preserving statistical validity in adaptive data analysis’, arXiv:1411.2664 [cs] . arXiv: 1411.2664. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.2664 Fithian, W., Sun, D. & Taylor, J. (2014), ‘Optimal inference after model selection’, arXiv:1410.2597 [math, stat] . arXiv: 1410.2597. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.2597 Fithian, W., Taylor, J., Tibshirani, R. & Tibshirani, R. (2015), ‘Selective Sequential Model Selection’, ArXiv e-prints . Gotze, F. (1991), ‘On the rate of convergence in the multivariate clt’, The Annals of Probability pp. 724–739.  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  34  Harris, X. T., Panigrahi, S., Markovic, J., Bi, N. & Taylor, J. (2016), ‘Selective sampling after solving a convex problem’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05609 . Lee, J. D., Sun, D. L., Sun, Y. & Taylor, J. E. (2013a), ‘Exact post-selection inference with the lasso’, arXiv:1311.6238 [math, stat] . URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.6238 Lee, J. D. & Taylor, J. E. (2014), ‘Exact post model selection inference for marginal screening’, arXiv:1402.5596 [cs, math, stat] . URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1402.5596 Lee, J., Sun, D., Sun, Y. & Taylor, J. (2013b), ‘Exact inference after model selection via the lasso’, Preprint. Available at . Lehmann, E. (1986), Testing Statistical Hypotheses, Probability and Statistics Series, Wiley. URL: https://books.google.com/books?id=jexQAAAAMAAJ Lockhart, R., Taylor, J., Tibshirani, R. J. & Tibshirani, R. (2014), ‘A significance test for the lasso’, The Annals of Statistics 42(2), 413–468. URL: http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.aos/1400592161 Meinshausen, N. & Bühlmann, P. (2010), ‘Stability selection’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 72(4), 417–473. URL: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.14679868.2010.00740.x/abstract Meinshausen, N., Meier, L. & Bühlmann, P. (2009), ‘p-values for high-dimensional regression’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 104(488), 1671–1681. URL: http://amstat.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1198/jasa.2009.tm08647 Pakman, A. & Paninski, L. (2012), ‘Exact hamiltonian monte carlo for truncated multivariate gaussians’, arXiv:1208.4118 [stat] . arXiv: 1208.4118. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.4118 Rosenthal, R. (1979), ‘The file drawer problem and tolerance for null results.’, Psychological bulletin 86(3), 638. Taylor, J., Lockhart, R., Tibshirani, R. J. & Tibshirani, R. (2014), ‘Post-selection adaptive inference for least angle regression and the lasso’, arXiv:1401.3889 [stat] . URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.3889 Tian, X., Bi, N. & Taylor, J. (2016), ‘Magic: a general, powerful and tractable method for selective inference’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02630 . Tian, X., Loftus, J. R. & Taylor, J. E. (2015), ‘Selective inference with unknown variance via the square-root lasso’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.08031 . Tian, X. & Taylor, J. (2015), ‘Asymptotics of selective inference’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1501.03588 . Tibshirani, R. (1996), ‘Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B 58(1), 267–288. Tibshirani, R. J., Rinaldo, A., Tibshirani, R. & Wasserman, L. (2015), ‘Uniform asymptotic inference and the bootstrap after model selection’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06266 . Tukey, J. W. (1980), ‘We need both exploratory and confirmatory’, The American Statistician 34(1), 23–25.  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  35  Appendix A: Proof of Lemma 1 √ Proof. First we normalize the sample mean as Z = n(X̄n + 0.5) and rewrite the pivot as 1√ 1 − Φ(Z) n, Pe(Z) = √ , Z >2+ 2 1 − Φ(2 + 21 n)  and Φ is the CDF of the standard normal distribution. As n → √ ∞, we can use Mills ratio to approximate the normal tail. Specifically, denote bn = 12 n + 2,   1 − Φ(Z) bn 1 ≈ exp (bn + Z)(bn − Z) 1 − Φ(bn ) Z 2   (49) bn 1 = exp − (bn − Z)2 exp [−bn (Z − bn )] , Z > bn . Z 2 We study the behavior of −bn (Z − bn ) for Z > bn . By studying its distribution, we p will also see that Z − bn → 0, for Z > bn , thus the term   1 bn p exp − (bn − Z)2 → 1, as n → ∞. Rn = Z 2 Now we study the distribution of bn (Z − bn ) conditioning on Z > bn . Since X̄n is a translation of a binomial distribution divided by n, we can rewrite Z in terms of a Binomial distribution, which will be useful for calculating the conditional distribution of bn (Z − bn ). Specifically, Z=  2Sn − n √ , n  1 Sn ∼ Bin(n, ). 2  Thus for t ≥ 0,    2Sn − n √ − bn P (bn (Z − bn ) > t) = P bn n √  √ 3 t n =P Sn > n + n + = 4 2bn   √ √ t n 1 4 n− n− 2bn  X i=0    n 1 · n i 2  To study the conditional distribution P (bn (Z − bn ) > t | Z > bn ), we essentially need to study the ratio of two partial sums of binomial coefficients. Note for any n, m ∈ Z+ , n > m we have  n m m−1  = n n − m+1 m Noticing that  k n−k+1  ≤  m n−m+1 ,  for any k ≤ m, thus  Pm−1 n i Pi=0 ≤ m n i=0  i  m . n−m+1  36  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  Now let m = 14 n −  √  n, and use the above inequality j = Pm−j Pi=0 m  n i n i=0 i     ≤  m n−m+1  √ t n 2bn  times, we have  j .  Therefore we have, P (bn (Z − bn ) > t | Z > bn ) =  ≤  P (bn (Z − bn ) > t) P (bn (Z − bn ) > 0)  √  1+ t√4 − n n → exp[− log(3)t] √ 3 n + n + 1 4 1 4n  (50)  p  We can draw two conclusions from (50). First, conditional on Z > bn , Z − bn → 0, which implies the first term in the pivot approximation (49) Rn → 1. Moreover, (50) shows that the overshoot bn (Z − bn ) is not Exp(1) distributed in the limit. In fact, we can conclude its limit (if existed) is strictly stochastically dominated by an Exp(1). Thus, exp [−bn (Z − bn )] 6→ Unif(0, 1), and hence the pivot does not converge to Unif(0, 1). Appendix B: Proof of Lemma 14 Proof. We first prove that T is in fact a linearizable statistic. Since β̄E is the restricted MLE, we see that  1 T XE y − πE (β̄E ) n 1 T ∗ ∗ [y − πE (βE )] + Q(βE − β̄E ) + R1 , = XE n  0=  ∗ ∗ − β̄E ) + R̃1 , where R̃1 = op (n−1/2 ) is the residual ) − Q)(βE where R1 = (QE (βE ∗ ∗ ) from its from the Taylor’s expansion at βE . R1 = op (n−1/2 ) since deviations QE (βE −1/2 ∗ asymptotic mean should be Op (n ) and β̄E − βE = op (1). Thus, we can deduce  β̄E =  1 −1 T ∗ ∗ Q XE [y − πE (βE )] + βE + Q−1 R1 . n  Similarly,  1 T  1 T 1 ∗ T ∗ X−E y − πE (XE β̄E ) = X−E [y−πE (βE )]− DXE [y−πE (βE )]+op (n−1/2 ) n n n Thus we can conclude that T is a linearizable statistic with   T ∗ QXi,E (yi − π(xi,E βE )) ξi,n = . T ∗ ∗ Xi,−E (yi − π(xi,E βE )) − DXi,E (yi − π(xi,E βE ))  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  37  Now we rewrite the selection event in terms of (T, ω). Using the KKT conditions of (38),   √ β̂E T X (y − πE (β̂E )) = n(ω + Λz) + 0 (51)   sE β̂E ≥ 0, ku−E k∞ < 1,  , sE = sign(β̂E ) and u−E is the subgradient for the inactive  sE u−E variables. Using a Taylor expansion on the β̂E as well, we see that     1 1 T 0 Q X [y − πE (β̂E )] = + (β̄E − β̂E ) + op (n−1/2 ). T C X [y − π ( β̄ )] n n E E −E where z =  Plugging in the equalities in the KKT conditions, we will have, 1 β̂E = β̄E − √ Q−1 (ωE + ΛE zE ) + op (n−1/2 ) n 1 T 1 T X [y − πE (β̂E )] = X−E [y − πE (β̄E )] + C(β̄E − β̂E ) + op (n−1/2 ) n −E n 1 1 T [y − πE (β̄E )] + √ D(ωE + ΛE zE ) + op (n−1/2 ) = X−E n n Using the inequalities in the KKT conditions, we have the selection event is {AM T + BM ω ≤ bM } with AM , BM and bM defined in the lemma.  Appendix C: Proofs related to Logistic noise Throughout the article, logistic noise has played an important role in all the examples. The following lemma on the tail behavior of the logistic distribution is crucial to all the proofs with added logistic noise. Let G be the CDF of Logistic(κ), with κ being the scale parameter. g is the PDF of G. G(w) =  eκw , 1 + eκw  g(w) =  κe−κ|w| 1 + e−κ|w|  2 .  Lemma 16. The following lower bounds hold, Ḡ(κw) ≥  1 −κ|w| e , 2  g(w) ≥  1 −κ|w| e . 4  (52)  For k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . : ∂k ek e−κ|w| . g(w) ≤ κk+1 C ∂wk ek ’s are universal constants. where C  (53)  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  38  Proof. We can write ( g(w) =  κe−κw h0 (e−κw ) w > 0 κeκw h0 (eκw ) w≤0  where h0 (x) = (1 + x)−2 . For j ≥ 1, define hj (x) = x · h0j−1 (x). By induction, I claim that for each j, hj is rational such that the polynomial in the numerator is of order 2 less than the denominator, and the denominator polynomial is bounded below by 1. Hence, hj ’s are bounded on the interval [0, 1]. Now, it is not hard to see that ( Pk −(−κ)k+1 j=0 cj,k hj (e−κw )e−κw w > 0 ∂k g(w) = P k ∂wk κk+1 j=0 cj,k hj (eκw )eκw w≤0 for universal cj,k ’s and k = 0, 1, 2, . . . . Now we state the following lemmas which are foundations of the proofs of various lemmas in the article. Lemma 17. Assume Tn is a decomposable statistic and ξi,n has mean 0, variance σ 2 , and centered exponential moments in a neighbourhood of zero, i.e satisfies condition √ (29). Denote Zn = n(Tn − µn ), then  2 2 κ σ E [exp (κZn )] → exp , for κ > 0. 2 √ Lemma 18. In Example 2, if we normalize the sample mean Zn = n(X̄n − µn ), we can rewrite the selective likelihood ratio and the pivot as √ Ḡ(2 − Zn − nµn ) ,  `¯Fn (Zn ) = √ EFn Ḡ(2 − Zn − nµn ) and  R∞ P (Zn ) =  n RZ ∞ −∞  √  nµn ) exp(−t2 /2) dt . √ Ḡ(2 − t − nµn ) exp(−t2 /2) dt  Ḡ(2 − t −  Then for any Fn with finite centered exponential moment in a neighbourhood of zero, we have for k = 0, 1, 2, 3 ∂k ¯ `F (Z) ≤ C1 exp[κ|Z|], ∂Z k n  ∂k P (Z) ≤ C1 . ∂Z k  (54)  for some C1 only depending on κ. Proof of Lemma 17. Pn Proof. Without loss of generality, we assume Tn = n1 i=1 ξi,n . Since Fn has centered exponential moments in a neighbourhood of zero, it is each to see   n κ E [exp (κZn )] = M √ n  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  39  exists as long as √κn < a. M (·) is the moment generating function of ξi,n − µn , M (t) = EFn [exp(t(ξi,n − µ))]. Therefore,    √1 t= n κ log [M (κt)] lim n log M √ = lim n→∞ t→0 t2 n κ2 M 00 (κt) κ2 σ 2 = lim = . t→0 2M (κt) 2 To derive the equality, we used M 00 (0) = Var [ξi,n ] = σ 2 and M 0 (0) = 0, M (0) = 1. Proof of Lemma 18. Proof. Noticing the lower bound in (52), we have i 1 h i √ √  1 h  √ E Ḡ(2 − Zn − nµn ) ≥ E e(−κ|2−Zn − nµn |) ≥ E e(−κ|2−Zn |−κ n|µn |) 2 2 On the other hand, using the upper bounds in (53), we have for k = 1, 2, 3, √  ek−1 eκ|2−Z| ek−1 e−κ|2−Z− nµn | κk C ∂k ¯ κk C h i   ≤ 2 ` (Z) ≤ 2 √ F n ∂Z k E e(−κ|2−Z|) E e(−κ|2−Z|−κ n|µn |) Since x−1 is convex on the positive axis, it is hard to see h i   1   ≤ E e(κ|2−Z|) ≤ e2κ E eκZ + e−κZ . (−κ|2−Z|) E e   Thus using Lemma 17, we know E e±κZ → exp(κ2 /2). Thus, we conclude sup n  ∂k ¯ `F (Z) ≤ C1 exp[κ |Z|], ∂Z k n  k = 1, 2, 3.  (55)  √ To verify the above inequality for k = 0. Notice that for µn ≥ 0, Ḡ(2 − Z − nµn ) ≤ Ḡ(2 − Z). Thus the denominator of `¯Fn (Z) is bounded below using the argument above. For µ < 0, √ √ √ Ḡ(2 − Z − nµn ) ≤ exp(−κ(2 − Z − nµn ) ≤ exp(−κ n |µn | + κ |2 − Z|). √ The term exp(−κ n |µn |) cancels with the one in the denominator, thus (55) holds for k = 0 as well. Analogously, similar bounds can be derived for the derivatives of P (Z) as well, thus we have the conclusion of the lemma. C.1. Proof of Lemma 4 and Lemma 10 . The proof of Lemma 4 is a simple application of Lemma 17 and Lemma 18.  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  40  Proof. By law of large numbers, we know that X̄n is consistent for µ unselectively. Thus, using the result by Lemma 3, we only need to verify that the selective likelihood is integrable in Lq . For simplicity, we take q = 2. First notice from (54) that the selective likelihood ratio is bounded by a multiple of exp[κ|Z|]. Then by Lemma 17,   lim sup EFn `Fn (X̄)2 ≤ 2C12 exp(2κ2 ). n  The proof of Lemma 10 uses results in Lemma 18 and Lemma 15 Proof. It follows simply from (54) that condition (28) are satisfied with the norm function Ω simply being the absolute value function. Therefore, we only need to verify (30). Note for µn = µ < 0 √ √ PFn ×Q [ nXn + ω > 2] − PΦ×Q [ nXn + ω > 2] √ PΦ×Q [ nXn + ω > 2]     √ √ EFn Ḡ(2 − Z − nµ) − EΦ Ḡ(2 − Z − nµ)   = √ EΦ Ḡ(2 − Z − nµ)     √ √ √ exp(−κ nµ)EFn Ḡ(2 − Z − nµ) − EΦ Ḡ(2 − Z − nµ) ≤2 EΦ [exp(−κ|2 − Z|)] √ √ ≤2EΦ [exp(2κ + 2|Z|)] · C exp(−κ nµ) exp(κ nµ)n−1/2 ≤2C exp(κ2 )n−1/2 ,  √ Ω The second to last inequality uses Lemma 15 √ and the fact that λ3 (Ḡ) ≤ exp(κ nµ). For µn = µ ≥ 0, the denominator PΦ×Q [ nXn + ω > 2] is bounded below, and Ḡ has bounded derivatives. Therefore, a simple application of the Berry-Esseen Theorem will suffice. Appendix D: Proofs related to affine selection regions D.1. Proof of Lemma 12 The quantity that appears in both the pivot and the selective likelihood ratio is Z Q(z; ∆) = P(A(z + ∆) + ω ∈ K) = G(dw), K−A(z+∆)  where ω ∼ G. The associated selective likelihood in terms of z is `F (z; ∆) = R  Q(z; ∆) . Q(t; ∆)F(dt) Rq  We first rewrite the pivot in terms of U . R∞ Q(t; Lz, ∆) exp(−t2 /2ση2 ) dt ηT z P (z; ∆) = R ∞ , Q(t; Lz, ∆) exp(−t2 /2ση2 ) dt −∞  (56)  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  41  where we use the slight abuse of notation for the one dimensional function Q(t; Lz, ∆) 1 Σηη T ση2 1 Q(t; Lu, ∆) = P(t · 2 AΣη + ALu + A∆ + w ∈ K) ση Z = G(dw). L=I−  K−t· σ12 AΣη−ALu−A∆ η  We first establish a lower bound on EF [Q(Z; ∆)] = PFn ×Q [A(Z + ∆) + ω ∈ K] under the local alternatives. Lemma 19. If we assume the lower bound condition, then under the local alternatives with radius B, i.e. dh (0, K − A∆) ≤ B, we have Z Q(u; ∆)F(du) ≥ C − C(Φ, h) · e−B , Rp  where C(Φ, h) is a constant only depending on the normal distribution Φ = N (0, Σ) and the norm h in the local alternatives condition. Proof. We first see that the lower bound condition gives the following lower bound.   Z − Q(u; ∆) = G(dw) ≥ C exp − inf h(w) . (57) w∈K−A(u+∆)  K−A(u+∆)  Consider   Z Z Q(u; ∆)F(du) ≥ C − exp − inf h(w) F(du) w∈K−A(∆+u) Rp Rp   Z = C− exp − inf h(w − Au) F(du) w∈K−A∆ Rp   Z ≥ C− exp − inf h(w) + h(−Au) F(du) w∈K−A∆ Rp  Z = C − · exp − inf h(w) e−h(Au) F(du) w∈K−A∆ Rp Z − =C e−h(Au) F(du) · e−B . Rp  Finally, since the exp(−h(Au)) has uniformly bounded derivatives up to the third order, we have Z Z exp(−h(Au))F(du) → exp(−h(Au))Φ(du) Rp  Rp  as Z → N (0, Σ) in distribution. Let C(Φ, h) = have the conclusion of the lemma.  R Rp  exp(−h(Au))Φ(du), and we will  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  42  The following lemmas establish the bounds on the derivatives for the likelihood function `F and the pivot P (u; ∆). Lemma 12 is easily obtained using Lemma 20 and Lemma 21 below. Lemma 20. Suppose the smoothness and the lower bound conditions are satisfied, then for local alternatives with radius B, ∂α `F (z; ∆) ≤ C ∗ (B, Φ, h), ∂z α  Φ = N (0, Σ).  (58)  Proof. The smoothness condition implies the following upper bound. For a multi-index α, we have Z ∂α ∂α Q(z; ∆) = α g(w)dw ∂z α ∂z K−A(∆+z) Z ∂α g(w − Az)dw. = α K−A∆ ∂z Therefore, from the smoothness condition, ∂α def Q(z; ∆) ≤ C(A)Cα = Cα+ (A). ∂z α  (59)  This combined with Lemma 19 gives the conclusion of the lemma. Next, we derive the exponential bounds on the derivatives of the pivot P (z; ∆) with respect to z. Lemma 21. Assuming the conditions of Lemma 12, for a multi-index α up to the order of 3, ∂α P (z; ∆) ≤ Cα∗ · eα·Lip(h)kALzk2 , ∂z α where the norm on the left is the element-wise maximum and C is independent of (z, ∆) and Lip(h) is the Lipschitz constant of h with respect to `2 norm. Proof. To get a lower bound on the denominator, note (57)   1 − Q(t; Lz, ∆) ≥ C exp − inf h(w − t · 2 AΣη) w∈K−ALz−A∆ ση   ≥ C − exp − inf h(w) − |t|h(AΣη/ση2 ) . w∈K−ALz−A∆  Therefore, the denominator will be lower bounded by Z ∞ 1 √ Q(t; Lz, ∆) exp(−t2 /2ση2 )dt 2π −∞     − 2 2 2 ≥C exp h(AΣη/ση ) ση /2 · exp − inf h(w) w∈K−ALz−A∆   ≥C − exp h(AΣη/ση2 )2 ση2 /2 e−B · e−h(ALz) .  43  Tian and Taylor/Selective inference with a randomized response  On the other hand, the upper bound (59) ensures, Z ∂α 1 √ Q(t; Lz, ∆) exp(−t2 /2ση2 )dt ≤ Cα+ (A). 2π R ∂z α Note the derivatives of the pivot will be a polynomial in terms of the form, R∞ ∂ Q(t; Lz, ∆) exp(−t2 /2ση2 )dt ηT z α R∞ Q(t; Lz, ∆) exp(−t2 /2ση2 )dt −∞ and therefore, it is easy to get the conclusion of the lemma. D.2. Proof of Lemma 13 Using Lemma 19 and the following lemma, we can easily prove Lemma 13. √ Lemma 22. Let Zn = n(Tn − µn ) ∈ Rp , and Fn has finite third moments γ. Moreover, suppose the randomization noise ω ∈ Q, a probability measure on Rd . Then for any sequence of sets (Un )n≥1 , Un ⊆ Rp × Rd , we have 1  |PFn ×Q [(Zn , ω) ∈ Un ] − PΦn ×Q [(Zn , ω) ∈ Un ]| ≤ C3 γn− 2 , where Φn = N (µ(Fn ), Σ(Fn )) and C3 is a constant depending only on p. Proof of Lemma 22 uses the well known results of Berry-Esseen Theorem. A multivariate extension can be found in Gotze (1991). Proof. For each ω, we denote Un (ω) = {Z ∈ Rp : (Z, ω) ∈ Un } ⊆ Rp . Thus the difference in the two probabilities is |PFn ×Q [(Z, ω) ∈ Un ] − PΦn ×Q [(Z, ω) ∈ Un ]|  ≤EQ [|PFn [Z ∈ Un (ω)] − PΦ [Z ∈ Un (ω)]|] ≤ sup |Fn (U ) − Φn (U )| < C3 γn−1/2 , U ∈Rp  where C3 only depends on the dimension p. The last inequality is a direct application of equation (1.5) in Gotze (1991).

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
