Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_2074

Abstract:
arXiv:1206.5648v3 [cs.PL] 19 Sep 2013  C to O-O Translation: Beyond the Easy Stuff∗ Marco Trudel · Carlo A. Furia · Martin Nordio Bertrand Meyer · Manuel Oriol 19 April 2013  Abstract Can we reuse some of the huge code-base developed in C to take advantage of modern programming language features such as type safety, object-orientation, and contracts? This paper presents a source-to-source translation of C code into Eiffel, a modern object-oriented programming language, and the supporting tool C2Eif. The translation is completely automatic and handles the entire C language (ANSI, as well as many GNU C Compiler extensions, through CIL) as used in practice, including its usage of native system libraries and inlined assembly code. Our experiments show that C2Eif can handle C applications and libraries of significant size (such as vim and libgsl), as well as challenging benchmarks such as the GCC torture tests. The produced Eiffel code is functionally equivalent to the original C code, and takes advantage of some of Eiffel’s features to produce safe and easy-to-debug translations.  1  Introduction  Programming languages have significantly evolved since the original design of C in the 1970’s as a “system implementation language” [29] for the Unix operating system. C was a high-level language by the standards of the time, but it is pronouncedly low-level compared with modern programming paradigms, as it lacks advanced features—static type safety, encapsulation, inheritance, and contracts [20], to mention just a few—that can have a major impact on programmer’s productivity and on software quality and maintainability. C still fares as the most popular general-purpose programming language [38], and countless C applications are being actively written and maintained, that take advantage of the language’s conciseness, speed, ubiquitous support, and huge code-base. An automated solution to translate and integrate C code into a modern language would combine the large availability of C programs in disparate domains with the integration in a modern language that facilitates writing safe, robust, and easy-to-maintain applications. The present paper describes the fully automatic translation of C programs into Eiffel, an object-oriented programming language, and the tool C2Eif, which implements ∗ This  work was partially supported by ETH grant “Object-oriented reengineering environment”.  1  the translation. While the most common approaches to re-use C code in other host languages are based on “foreign function APIs” (see Section 5 for examples), sourceto-source translation solves a different problem, and has some distinctive benefits: the translated code can take advantage of the high-level nature of the target language and of its safer runtime. Main features of C2Eif. Translating C to a high-level object-oriented language is challenging because it requires adapting to a more abstract memory representation, a tighter type system, and a sophisticated runtime that is not directly accessible. There have been previous attempts to translate C into an object-oriented language (see the review in Section 5). A limitation of the resulting tools is that they hardly handle the trickier or specialized parts of the C language [7], which it is tempting to dismiss as unimportant “corner cases”, but figure prominently in real-world programs; examples include calls to pre-compiled C libraries (e.g., for I/O), inlined assembly, and unrestricted branch instructions including setjmp and longjmp. One of the distinctive features of the present work is that it does not stop at the core features but extends over the often difficult “last mile”: it covers the entire C language as used in practice. The completeness of the translation scheme is attested by the set of example programs to which the translation was successfully applied, as described in Section 4, including major applications such as the vim editor (276 KLOC), major libraries such as libgsl (238 KLOC), and the challenging “torture” tests for the GCC C compiler. C2Eif is available at http://se.inf.ethz.ch/research/c2eif. The webpage includes C2Eif’s sources, pre-compiled binaries, source and binaries of all translated programs of Table 1, and a user guide. Sections 2–3 describe the distinctive features of the translation: it supports the complete C language (including pointer arithmetic, unrestricted branch instructions, and function pointers) with its native system libraries; it complies with ANSI C as well as many GNU C Compiler extensions through the CIL framework [22]; it is fully automatic, and it handles complete applications and libraries of significant size; the generated Eiffel code is functionally equivalent to the original C code (as demonstrated by running thorough test suites), and takes advantage of some advanced features, such as strong typing and contracts, to facilitate debugging some programming mistakes. In our experiments, C2Eif translated completely automatically over 900,000 lines of C code from real-world applications, libraries, and testsuites, producing functionally equivalent1 Eiffel code. Safer code. Translating C code to Eiffel with C2Eif is quite useful to reuse C programs in a modern environment, and is the main motivation behind this work. However, it also implies other valuable side-benefits, which we demonstrate in Section 4. First, the translated code blends reasonably well with hand-written Eiffel code because it is not a mere transliteration from C; it is thus modifiable with Eiffel’s native tools and environments (EiffelStudio and related analysis and verification tools). Second, the 1 As  per standard regression testsuites and general usage.  2  translation automatically introduces simple contracts, which help detect recurring mistakes such as out-of-bound array access or null-pointer dereferencing. To demonstrate this, Section 4.4 discusses how we easily discovered a few unknown bugs in widely used C programs (such as libgmp) just by translating them into Eiffel and running standard tests. While the purpose of C2Eif is not to debug C programs, the source of errors is usually more evident when executing programs translated into Eiffel—either because a contract violation occurs, or because the Eiffel program fails sooner, before the effects of the error propagate to unrelated portions of the code. The translated C code also benefits from the tighter Eiffel runtime, so that certain buffer overflow errors are harder to exploit than in native C environments. Why Eiffel? We chose Eiffel as the target language not only out of our familiarity with it, but also because it offers features that complement C’s, such as an emphasis on correctness [44] through the native support of contracts. Another reason for the choice has to do with the size of Eiffel’s community of developers, which is quite small compared to those of other object-oriented languages such as Java or C#. While Java users can avail of countless libraries and frameworks offering high-quality implementations of a wide array of functionalities, Eiffel users often have to implement such functionalities themselves from scratch. An automatic translation tool could therefore bring immediate benefits to reuse the rich C code-base in Eiffel; in fact, translations produced by C2Eif are already being used by the Eiffel community. Finally, Eiffel uncompromisingly epitomizes the object-oriented paradigm; hence translating C into it cannot take the shortcut of merely transliterating similar constructs (as it would have been possible, for example, with C++). The results of the paper are thus applicable to other object-oriented languages.2 An abridged version of this paper was presented at WCRE 2012 [42]; a companion paper presents the tool C2Eif from the user’s point of view [40].  2  Overview and Architecture  C2Eif is a compiler with graphical user interface that translates C programs to Eiffel programs. The translation is a complete Eiffel program which replicates the functionality of the C source program. C2Eif is implemented in Eiffel. High-level view. Figure 1 shows the overall picture of how C2Eif works. C2Eif inputs C projects (applications or libraries) processed with the C Intermediate Language (CIL) framework. CIL [22] is a C front-end that simplifies programs written in ANSI C or using the GNU C Compiler extensions into a restricted subset of C amenable to program transformations; for example, there is only one form of loop in CIL. Using CIL input to C2Eif ensures complete support of the whole set of C statements, without having to deal with each of them explicitly (although it also introduces some limitations, discussed in Section 4.5). C2Eif then translates CIL programs to Eiffel projects 2 As proof of this, the first author has made some progress towards applying the technique described in this paper to automatic translations from C to Java; and has recently been granted startup funding to support this development and turn it into a commercial product.  3  Helper Classes  C application or library  CIL  CIL C file  C2Eif  Eiffel application or library  Eiffel Compiler  Binary  Figure 1: Usage workflow of C2Eif. consisting of collections of classes that rely on a small set of Eiffel helper classes (described below). Such projects can be compiled with any standard Eiffel compiler. Incremental translation. C2Eif implements a translation T from CIL C to Eiffel as a series T1 , . . . , Tn of successive incremental transformations on the Abstract Syntax Tree. Every transformation Ti targets exactly one language aspect (for example, loops or inlined assembly code) and produces a program in an intermediate language Li which is a mixture of C and Eiffel constructs: the code progressively morphs from C to Eiffel code. The current implementation uses around 45 such transformations (i.e., n = 45). Combining several simple transformations improves the decoupling among different language constructs and facilitates reuse (e.g., to implement a translator of C to Java) and debugging: the intermediate programs are easily understandable by programmers familiar with both C and Eiffel. Helper classes. The core of the translation from C to Eiffel must ensure that Eiffel applications have access to objects with the same capabilities as their counterparts in C; for example, an Eiffel class that translates a C struct has to support field access and every other operation defined on structs. Conversely, C external pre-compiled code may also have to access the Eiffel representations of C constructs; for example, the Eiffel translation of a C program calling printf to print a local string variable str of type char∗ must grant printf access to the Eiffel object that translates str, in conformance with C’s conventions on strings. To meet these requirements, C2Eif includes a limited number of hand-written helper Eiffel classes that bridge the Eiffel and C environments; their names are prefixed by CE for C and Eiffel. Rather than directly replicating or wrapping commonly used external libraries (such as stdio and stdlib), the helper classes target C fundamental language features and in particular types and type constructors. This approach works with any external library, even non-standard ones, and is easier to maintain because involves only a limited number of classes. We now give a concise description of the most important helper classes; Section 3 shows detailed examples of their usage. • CE POINTER [G] represents C pointers of any type through the generic parameter G. It includes features to perform full-fledged pointer arithmetic and to get pointer representations which C can access but the Eiffel’s runtime will not modify (in particular, the garbage collector will not modify pointed addresses nor relocate memory areas).  4  • CE CLASS defines the basic interface of Eiffel classes that correspond to unions and structs. It includes features (members) that return instances of class CE POINTER pointing to a memory representation of the structure that C can access. • CE ARRAY [G] extends CE POINTER and provides consistent array access to both C and Eiffel (according to their respective conventions). It includes contracts that check for out-of-bound access. • CE ROUTINE represents function pointers. It supports calls to Eiffel routines through agents—Eiffel’s construct for function objects (closures or delegates in other languages)—and calls to (and callbacks from) external C functions through raw function pointers. • CE VA LIST supports variadic functions, using the Eiffel class TUPLE (sequences of elements of heterogeneous type) to store a variable number of arguments. It offers an Eiffel interface that extends the standard C’s (declared in stdarg.h), as well as output in a format accessible by external C code.  3  Translating C to Eiffel  This section presents the major details of the translation T from C to Eiffel implemented in C2Eif, and illustrates the general rules with a number of small examples. The presentation breaks down T into several components that target different language aspects (for example, TTD maps C type declarations to Eiffel classes); these components mirror the incremental transformations Ti of C2Eif (mentioned in Section 2) but occasionally overlook inessential details for presentation clarity. External functions in Eiffel. Eiffel code translated from C normally includes calls to external C pre-compiled functions, whose actual arguments correspond to objects in the Eiffel runtime. This feature relies on the external Eiffel language construct: Eiffel routines can be declared as external and directly execute C code embedded as Eiffel strings3 or call functions declared in header files. For example, the following Eiffel routine (method) sin twice returns twice the sine of its argument by calling the C library function sin (declared in math.h): sin twice (arg: REAL 32): REAL 32 external C inline use <math.h> alias return 2*sin($arg); end Calls using external can exchange arguments between the Eiffel and the C runtimes only for a limited set of primitive type: numeric types (that have the same underlying machine representation in Eiffel and C) and instances of the Eiffel system class POINTER that corresponds to raw untyped C pointers (not germane to Eiffel’s pointer representation, unlike CE POINTER). In the sin twice example, argument arg of numeric type REAL 32 is passed to the C runtime as $arg. Every helper class (described in Section 2) includes an attribute c pointer of type POINTER that offers access to a C-conforming representation usable in external calls. 3 For  readability, we will omit quotes in external strings.  5  The mechanism of external calls is used not only in the translations produced by C2Eif but also in the Eiffel standard libraries, wherever interaction with the operating system is required, such as for input/output, file operations, and memory management. Supporting calls to native code is also the only strict requirement to be able to implement, in languages other than Eiffel, this paper’s approach to automatic translation from C. Java, for example, offers similar functionalities through the Java Native Interface (JNI).  3.1  Types and Type Constructors  C declarations T v of a variable v of type T become Eiffel declarations v :TTY (T), where TTY is the mapping from C types to Eiffel classes described in this section. Numeric types. C numeric types correspond to Eiffel classes INTEGER (signed integers), NATURAL (unsigned integers), REAL (floating point numbers) with the appropriate bit-size as follows4 : C TYPE T char short int int, long int long long int float double long double  E IFFEL CLASS TTY (T ) INTEGER 8 INTEGER 16 INTEGER 32 INTEGER 64 REAL 32 REAL 64 REAL 96  Unsigned variants follow the same size conventions as signed integers but for class NATURAL; for example TTY (unsigned short int) is NATURAL 16. Pointers. Pointer types are translated using class CE POINTER [G] with the generic parameter G instantiated with the pointed type: TTY (T ∗)  = CE POINTER [TTY (T)]  with the convention that TTY (void) maps to Eiffel class ANY, ancestor to every other class (Object in Java). The definition works recursively for multiple indirections; for example, CE POINTER[CE POINTER[REAL 32]] stands for TTY (float ∗∗). Function pointers. Function pointers are translated to Eiffel using class CE ROUTINE: TTY (T0 (∗) (T1 , ...,Tn )) = CE ROUTINE CE ROUTINE inherits from CE POINTER [ANY], and hence it behaves as a generic pointer, but customizes its behavior using references to agents that wrap the functions pointed to; Section 3.2 describes this mechanism. Arrays. Array types are translated to Eiffel using class CE ARRAY[G] with the generic parameter G instantiated with the array base type: TTY (T [n]) = CE ARRAY[TTY (T)]. 4 We  implemented class REAL 96 specifically to support long double on Linux machines.  6  The size parameter n, if present, does not affect the declaration, but initializations of array variables use it (see Section 3.2). Multi-dimensional arrays are defined recursively as arrays of arrays: TTY (T [n1 ][n2 ]...[nm ]) is then CE ARRAY[TTY (T[n2 ]...[nm ])]. Enumerations. For every type enum E defined or used, the translation introduces an Eiffel class E defined by the translation TTD (for type definition): TTD (enum E {v1 = k1 , . . . , vm = km }) = class E feature v1 : INTEGER 32 =k1 ; . . . ; vm : INTEGER 32 =km end Class E has as many attributes as the enum type has values, and each attribute is an integer that receives the corresponding value in the enumeration. Every C variable of type E also becomes an integer variable in Eiffel (that is, TTY (enum E ) = INTEGER 32), and the class E is only used to assign constant values according to the enum naming scheme. Structs and unions. For every compound type struct S defined or used, the translation introduces an Eiffel class S: class S inherit CE CLASS feature TF (T1 v1 ) . . . TF (Tm vm ) end for TTD (struct S {T1 v1 ; . . . ; Tm vm }). Correspondingly, TTY (S) = S; that is, variables of type S become references of class S in Eiffel. The translation TF (T v) of each field v of the struct S introduces an attribute of the appropriate type in class S, and a setter routine set v which also updates the underlying C representation of v: v: TTY (T) assign set v −− declares ‘set v’ as the setter of v set v (a v: TTY (T)) do v := a v ; update memory field (”v”) end Class CE CLASS, from which S inherits, implements update memory field using reflection, so that the underlying C representation is created and updated dynamically only when needed during execution (for example, to pass a struct instance to a native C library), thus avoiding any data duplication overhead whenever possible. Example 1. Consider a C struct car that contains an integer field plate num and a string field brand: typedef struct { unsigned int plate num; char∗ brand; } car; The translation TTD introduces a class CAR as follows: class CAR inherit CE CLASS feature plate num: NATURAL 32 assign set plate num brand: CE POINTER [INTEGER 8] assign set brand set plate num (a plate num: NATURAL 32) do plate num := a plate num; update memory field (”plate num”) end set brand (a brand: CE POINTER [INTEGER 8]) do brand := a brand; update memory field (”brand”) end end  7  The translation of union types follows the same lines as that of structs, with the only difference that classes translating unions generate the underlying C representation in any case upon initialization, even if the union is not passed to the C runtime; calls to update memory field update all attributes of the class to reflect the correct memory value. We found this to be a reasonable compromise between performance and complexity of memory management of union types where, unlike structs, fields share the same memory space.  3.2  Variable Initialization and Usage  Initialization. Eiffel variable declarations v : C only allocate memory for a reference to objects of class C, and initialize it to Void (null in Java). The only exceptions are, once again, numeric types: a declaration such as n: INTEGER 64 reserves memory for a 64-bit integer and initializes it to zero. Therefore, every C local variable declaration T v of a variable v of type T may also produce an initialization, consisting of calls to creation procedures of the corresponding helper classes, as specified by the declaration mapping TDE :   (NT) v : TTY (T ) TDE (T v;) = v : TTY (T ); create v.make( n1 , . . . , nm ) (AT)   v : TTY (T ); create v.make (OT) where definition (NT) applies if T is a numeric type; (AT) applies if T is an array type S[n1 ],. . ., [nm ]; and (OT) applies otherwise. The creation procedure make of CE ARRAY takes a sequence of integer values to allocate the right amount of memory for each array dimension; for example int a[2][3] is initialized by create a.make(2, 3). Memory management. Helper classes are regular Eiffel classes; therefore, the Eiffel garbage collector disposes instances when they are no longer referenced (for example, when a local variable gets out of scope). Upon collection, the dispose finalizer routines of the helper classes ensure that the C memory representations are also appropriately deallocated; for example, the finalizer of CE ARRAY frees the array memory area by calling free on the attribute c pointer. To replicate the usage of malloc and free, we offer wrapper routines that emulate the syntax and functionalities of their C homonym functions, but operate on CE POINTER: they get raw C pointers by external calls to C library functions, convert them to CE POINTER, and record the dynamic information about allocated memory size. The latter is used to check that successive usages conform to the declared size (see Section 4.4). Finally, the creation procedure make cast of the helper classes can convert a generic pointer returned by malloc to the proper pointed type, according to the following translation scheme: C CODE T∗ p; p = (T ∗)malloc(sizeof(T)); free(p);  T RANSLATED E IFFEL CODE p: CE POINTER[TTY (T)] create p.make cast (malloc (σ(T))) free(p)  8  where σ is an encoding of the size information. Variable usage. The translation of variable usage is straightforward: variable reads in expressions are replicated verbatim, and C assignments (=) become Eiffel assignments (:=); the latter is, for CE ARRAY, CE POINTER, and classes translating C structs and unions, syntactic sugar for calls to setter routines that achieve the desired effect. The only exceptions occur when implicit type conversions in C must become explicit in Eiffel, which may spoil the readability of the translated code but is necessary with strong typing. For example, the C assignment cr = ’s’—assigning character constant ’s’ to variable cr of type char—becomes the Eiffel assignment cr := (’s’).code.to integer 8 that encodes ’s’ using the proper representation. Variable address. Whenever the address &v of a C variable v of type T is taken, v is translated as an array of unit size and type T: TDE (T v) = TDE (T v[1]), and every usage of v is adapted accordingly: &v becomes just v, and occurrences of v in expressions become ∗v. This little hack makes it possible to have Eiffel assignments translate C assignment uniformly; otherwise, usages of v should have different translations according to whether the information about v’s memory location is copied around (with &) or not. Dereferencing and pointer arithmetic. The helper class CE POINTER features a query item which translates dereferencing (∗) of C pointers. Pointer arithmetic is translated verbatim, because class CE POINTER overloads the arithmetic operators to be aliases of proper underlying pointer manipulations, so that an expression such as p + 3 in Eiffel, for references p of type CE POINTER, hides the explicit expression c pointer + 3 ∗ element size. Example 2. Consider an integer variable num, a pointer variable p, and a double pointer variable carsp with target type struct car (defined in Example 1). The following C code fragment declares num, p, and carsp, allocates space for an array of num consecutive cars pointed to by carsp, and makes p point to the array’s third element. int num; car ∗ p; car ∗∗ carsp; ∗carsp = malloc(num ∗ sizeof(car)); p = ∗carsp + 2; C2Eif translates the C fragment as follows, where the implicit C conversion from signed to unsigned int become explicit in Eiffel (calls to routine to natural 32). num: INTEGER 32 p: CE POINTER [CAR] carsp: CE POINTER [CE POINTER [CAR]] carsp.item := create {CE POINTER [CAR]}.make cast (malloc (num.to natural 32 ∗ (create {CAR}.make).structure size. to natural 32)) p := carsp.item + 2  9  2:libffi 1:agent  Eiffel  C 3:libffi  Figure 2: Calls through function pointers. Using function pointers. Class CE ROUTINE, which translates C function pointers, is usable both in the Eiffel and in the C environment (see Figure 2). On the Eiffel side, its instances wrap Eiffel routines using agents—Eiffel’s mechanism for function objects. A private attribute routine references objects of type ROUTINE [ANY, TUPLE], an Eiffel system class that corresponds to agents wrapping routines, with any number of arguments and argument types stored in a tuple. Thus, Eiffel code can use the agent mechanism to create instances of class ROUTINE. For example, if foo denotes a routine of the current class and fp has type CE ROUTINE, create fp.make agent (agent foo) makes fp’s attribute routine point to foo. On the C side, when function pointers are directly created from C pointers (e.g., references to external C functions), CE ROUTINE behaves as a wrapper of raw C function pointers, and dynamically creates invocations to the pointed functions using the library libffi [9]. The Eiffel interface to CE ROUTINE will then translate calls to wrapped functions into either agent invocations or external calls with libffi according to how the class has been instantiated. Assume, for example, that fp is an object of class CE ROUTINE that wraps a procedure with one integer argument. If fp has been created with an Eiffel agent foo as above, calling fp.call ([42]) wraps the call foo (42) (edge 1 in Figure 2); if, instead, fp only maintains a raw C function pointer, the same instruction fp.call ([42]) creates a native C call using libffi (edge 2 in Figure 2). The services of class CE ROUTINE behave as an adapter between the procedural and object-oriented representation of routines: the signatures of C functions must change when they are translated to Eiffel routines, because routines in object-oriented languages include references to a target object as implicit first argument. Calls from external C code to Eiffel routines are therefore intercepted at runtime with libffi callbacks (edge 3 in Figure 2) and dynamically converted to suitable agent invocations.  3.3  Conditionals, Loops, and Functions  The translation TCF takes care of constructs to structure the control flow of computations: conditionals, loops, and function definitions and calls. Conditionals and loops. Sequential composition, conditional instructions, and loop instructions are similar in C and Eiffel; therefore, their translation is straightforward.5 5 Eiffel  loops have the general form: from init until exit loop B end. init is executed once before the ac-  10  TCF (I1 ; I2 ) TCF (if (c) {TB} else {EB})  = =  TCF (while (c) {LB})  =  T(I1 ) ; T(I2 ) if T(c) then T(TB) else T(EB) end from until not T(c) loop T(LB) end  Note that Eiffel has only one type of loop, which translates the unique type of C loops produced by CIL. Functions. Function declarations and function calls in C translate to routine declarations and routine calls in Eiffel. Given a function foo with arguments a1 , . . . , an of type T1 , . . . , Tn and return type T0 , the translation:  TCF T0 foo (T1 a1 , . . . , Tn an ){ B } is defined as follows: ( foo(a1: TTY (T1 ); . . . ; an: TTY (Tn )) do T(B) end if T0 is void foo(a1: TTY (T1 ); . . . ; an: TTY (Tn )) : TTY (T0 ) do T(B) end otherwise Correspondingly, function calls in C become routine calls in Eiffel with the actual arguments also recursively translated: TCF (foo (e1 , . . . , en ))  =  foo (T(e1 ), . . . , T(en ))  Variadic functions. The C language supports variadic functions, also known as varargs functions, which work on a variable number of arguments. The Eiffel translation of variadic function declarations uses the class TUPLE to wrap lists of arguments: the translation of a variadic function var foo with n ≥ 0 required arguments a1 , . . . , an of type T1 , . . . , Tn , optional additional arguments, and return type T0 :  TCF T0 var foo (T1 a1 , . . . , Tn an , . . .){ B } is defined as: var foo (args: TUPLE[a1 : TTY (T1 ); . . . ; an : TTY (Tn )]): TTY (T0 ) assuming T0 is not void; otherwise, the return type is omitted, as in the translation of standard functions. Calls to variadic functions with n required arguments may provide m ≥ 0 additional actual arguments en+1 , . . . , en+m after the n required ones e1 , . . . , en . The translation combines all arguments, required and additional, into an (n + m)-TUPLE denoted by square brackets: TCF (var foo (e1 , . . . , en , en+1 , . . . , en+m )) = var foo ([T(e1 ), . . . , T(en ), T(en+1 ), . . . , T(en+m )]) tual loop; the loop body B is executed until the Boolean condition exit becomes true; since the exit condition is tested before each iteration, the body may not be executed. Body B and init may be empty.  11  The correctness of this translation relies on Eiffel’s type conformance rule for instances of the TUPLE class: every (n + m)-TUPLE with types [T1 , . . . , Tn , Tn+1 , . . . , Tn+m ], for n, m ≥ 0, conforms to any shorter n-TUPLE with types [T1 , . . . , Tn ]. Thus, translated calls are type-safe because the assignment of actual to formal arguments is covariant [12]. The bodies of variadic functions can refer to the required arguments by name using the usual syntax. The C type va list and functions va start and va arg in library stdarg provide a means to access the optional arguments: va start(argp, last) initializes a variable argp of type va list to point to the first optional argument after last (the name of the last declared argument). Every successive invocation of va arg(argp, T) returns the argument of type T pointed to by argp, and then moves argp right after it. The Eiffel translation relies on the helper class CE VA LIST which replicates stdarg’s functionality: TDE ( va list argp ) T( va start(argp, last) ) T( va arg(argp, T) )  = = =  argp: CE VA LIST create argp.make (args, index) argp.TTY (T ) item  where args is the name of the argument TUPLE in the enclosing variadic function and index is the index of the first optional argument. While CE VA LIST provides a uniform interface to both Eiffel and C, the actual arguments of a variadic function may also be accessed in the Eiffel translation using the standard syntax for TUPLEs: in a variadic function with n required arguments, the expression args.ai refers to the ith named argument ai , for 1 ≤ i ≤ n; and args.Tj item(j) refers to the jth argument aj , for any 1 ≤ j ≤ n (required argument) or j > n (optional argument), where Tj is aj ’s type. Example 3. Continuing Examples 1 and 2, consider a variadic function init cars that takes a pointer carsp to an array of cars and num pairs of unsigned integers and strings (passed as optional arguments), and initializes the array with num cars whose plate numbers and brands respectively correspond to the integer and string in each pair. void init cars(car ∗∗carsp, int num, . . .) { va list argp; car ∗ccar; int n; ∗carsp = malloc(num ∗ sizeof(car)); ccar = ∗carsp; va start(argp, num); for(n = num ; n >0; n−−) { ccar →plate num = va arg(argp, unsigned int); ccar →brand = va arg(argp, char∗); ccar++; } } The translation into Eiffel uses the class CE VA LIST and accesses the optional unsigned integer arguments with argp.natural 32 item, and the optional strings with 12  argp.pointer item. The latter returns a generic pointer, which is cast to char ∗ with an explicit cast (line 15).  13  init cars (args: TUPLE [carsp: CE POINTER [CE POINTER [CAR]]; num: INTEGER 32]) local argp: CE VA LIST ccar: CE POINTER [CAR] n: INTEGER 32 do args.carsp.item := create {CE POINTER [CAR]}.make cast ( malloc ( num.to natural 32 ∗ (create {CAR}.make).structure size. to natural 32 ) ) ccar := args.carsp.item create argp.make (args, 3) n := num from until not n >0 loop ccar.item.plate num := argp.natural 32 item 15 ccar.item.brand := (create {CE POINTER [INTEGER 8]}.make cast (argp. pointer item)) ccar := ccar + 1 n := n − 1 end end  3.4  Unstructured Control Flow  In addition to constructs for structured programming, C offers control-flow breaking instructions such as jumps. This section discusses their translation to Eiffel. Jumps. Eiffel enforces structured programming, and hence it lacks control-flow breaking instructions such as goto, break, continue, and return. The translation TCF eliminates such instructions along the lines of the global version—using Harel’s terminology [13]—of the structured programming theorem. The body of a function using goto determines a list of instructions s0 , s1 , . . . , sn , where each si is a maximal sequential block of instructions, with no labels after the first instruction or jumps before the last one in the block. TCF translates the body into a single loop over an auxiliary integer variable pc that emulates a program counter:6 6 Eiffel’s  inspect/when instructions corresponds to a restricted form of switch/case without fall through.  14  from pc := 0 until pc = −1 loop inspect pc when 0 then T(s0 ) ; upd(pc) when 1 then T(s1 ) ; upd(pc) TCF (hs0 , s1 , . . . , sn i) = ..  .     when n then T(sn ) ; upd(pc)     end    end               Variable pc is initially zero; every iteration of the loop body executes spc for the current value of pc, and then updates pc (with upd(pc)) to determine the next instruction to be executed: blocks ending with jumps modify pc directly, other blocks increment it by one, and exit blocks set it to −1, which makes the overall loop terminate (whenever the original function terminates). This translation supports all control-flow breaking instructions, and in particular continue, break, and return, which are special cases of goto. TCF , however, improves the readability in these special simpler cases by directly using auxiliary Boolean flag variables with the same names as the instruction they replace. The flags are tested as part of the translated exit conditions for the loops where the control-flow breaking instructions appear. Using this alternative translation scheme where the generality of gotos is not required makes for translations with little changes to the code structure, which are usually more readable. The loop while (n > 0){ if (n == 3) break; n−−; }, for example, becomes: from until break or not n >0 loop if n = 3 then break := True end if not break then n := n − 1 end end Long jumps. The C library setjmp provides functions setjmp and longjmp to save an arbitrary return point and jump back to it across function call boundaries. The wrapping mechanism used for external functions (see Section 3.5) does not work to replicate long jumps, because the return values saved by setjmp wrapped as an external function are no longer valid after execution leaves the wrapper. Therefore, C2Eif translates setjmp and longjmp by means of the helper class CE EXCEPTION. As the name suggests, CE EXCEPTION uses Eiffel’s exception propagation mechanism to go back in the call stack to the allocation frame of the function that called setjmp. There, translated goto instructions jump to the specific point saved with setjmp within the function body. Example 4. Consider a C function target that executes setjmp(buf) to save a location using a global variable buf of type jmp buf. In the translated Eiffel code, buf becomes an attribute of type CE EXCEPTION, and the call to setjmp in target becomes a creation of an instance attached to buf: buf := create {CE EXCEPTION}.make (. . .); make’s actual arguments (omitted for simplicity) contain references to the stack frame of the current instance of target, and to the specific instruction where to jump. 15  Later during the execution, another function source called from target performs a longjmp(buf, 3), which diverts execution to the location previously marked by setjmp and returns value 3. In Eiffel, the longjmp becomes a raising of the exception object buf enclosing the return value: buf.raise (3). The flow of what happens next depends on the semantics of Eiffel exceptions, which is significantly different than that of other object-oriented languages such as Java and C#. The raised exception propagates to the recipient target, where it is handled by a rescue clause. Such exception handling blocks are routine-specific in Eiffel, rather than being associated to arbitrary scopes such as in Java’s try /catch blocks. The translation of setjmp also took care of setting up target’s rescue clause: if the raised exception stores a reference to the current instance of routine target, the code in the rescue clause modifies a variable pc local to target to point to the location of the setjmp and, using Eiffel’s retry instruction, executes target’s body again with this new value. Based on the value, the new execution of target’s body jumps to the correct location following a mechanism similar to the previously discussed translation of goto instructions. Finally, if the handled exception references a routine instance other than the current execution of target, the rescue clause propagates the exception through the call stack, so that it can reach the correct stack frame.  3.5  Externals and Encapsulation  The translation T uses classes to wrap header and source files, which give a simple modular structure to C programs. Externals. For every included system header header.h, T defines a class HEADER with wrappers for all external functions and variables declared in header.h. The wrappers are routines using the Eiffel external mechanism and performing the necessary conversions between the Eiffel and the C runtimes. In particular, external functions using only numeric types, which are interoperable between C and Eiffel, directly map to wrapper routines; for example, exit in stdlib.h becomes: exit (status: INTEGER 32) external C inline use <stdlib.h> alias exit($status); end When external functions involve types using helper classes in Eiffel, a routine passes the underlying C representation to the external calls; for example, fclose in stdio.h generates: fclose (stream: CE POINTER [ANY]): INTEGER 32 do Result := c fclose (stream.c pointer) end c fclose (stream: POINTER): INTEGER 32 external C inline use <stdio.h> alias return fclose($stream); end In some complex cases—typically, with variadic external functions—the wrapper can only assemble the actual call on the fly at runtime; this is done using CE ROUTINE. For example, printf is wrapped as:  16  printf (args: TUPLE[format: CE POINTER[INTEGER 8]]): INTEGER 32 do Result := (create {CE ROUTINE}.make shared (c printf)).integer 32 item (args) end c printf: POINTER external C inline use <stdio.h> alias return &printf; end The translation can also inline assembly code, using the same mechanisms as external function calls. Globals. For every source file source.c, T defines a class SOURCE that includes translations of all function definitions (as routines) and global variables (as attributes) in source.c. Class SOURCE also inherits from the classes translating the other system header files that source.c includes, to have access to their declarations. For example, if foo.c includes stdio.h, FOO is declared as class FOO inherit STDIO.  3.6  Formatted Output Optimization  The library function printf is the standard C output function, which displays values according to format strings passed as argument. In contrast, Eiffel provides the command Io.put string to put plain text strings on standard output, as well as type-specific formatter classes, such as FORMAT INTEGER, to produce string representations of arbitrary types. With the goal of making the translated code as close as possible to standard Eiffel, C2Eif tries to replace calls to printf with equivalent calls to Io.put string and routines of the formatter classes. Whenever printf’s returned value is not used and the format string is a constant literal, C2Eif parses the literal format string and encodes it as equivalent calls to Io.put string and formatters. This process may find mismatches between some format specifiers and the types of the corresponding value arguments, which C2Eif reports as warnings. Another situation where C2Eif can replace calls to printf with calls to put string is when only one argument is passed to the former, which is then interpreted verbatim as a string. Whenever a warning is issued or the usage of printf cannot be rendered using put string, C2Eif falls back to calling a wrapper of the native printf function (described in Section 3.5). The translation also implements similar optimizations for variants of printf such as fprintf.  4  Evaluation and Discussion  This section evaluates the translation T and its implementation in C2Eif. The bulk of the evaluation assesses correctness (Section 4.1) and performance (Section 4.2) based on experiments with 14 open-source programs. We also qualitatively discuss other aspects that influence maintainability (Section 4.3), the advantages in terms of safety deriving from switching to the Eiffel runtime (Section 4.4), as well as the current limitations of the C2Eif approach (Section 4.5).  17  4.1  Correct Behavior  To experimentally assess the translations produced by C2Eif, we applied it to 14 opensource C programs, including 7 applications, 6 libraries, and one testsuite; most of them are widely-used in Linux and other “*nix” distributions. hello world is the only toy application, which is however useful to have a baseline of translating from C to Eiffel with C2Eif. The other applications are: micro httpd 12dec2005, a minimal HTTP server; xeyes 1.0.1, a widget for the X Windows System which shows two googly eyes following the cursor movements; less 382-1, a text terminal pager; wget 1.12, a command-line utility to retrieve content from the web; links 1.00, a simple web browser; vim 7.3, a powerful text editor. The libraries are: libSDL mixer 1.2, an audio playback library; libmongoDB 0.6, a library to access MongoDB databases; libpcre 8.31, a library for regular expressions; libcurl 7.21.2, a URL-based transfer library supporting protocols such as FTP and HTTP; libgmp 5.0.1, for arbitrary-precision arithmetic; libgsl 1.14, a powerful numerical library. The gcc “torture tests” are short but semantically complex pieces of C code, used as regression tests for the GCC compiler. Table 1 shows the results of translating the 14 programs into Eiffel using C2Eif, running on a GNU/Linux box (kernel 2.6.37) with a 2.66 GHz Intel dual-core CPU and 8 GB of RAM, GCC 4.5.1, CIL 1.3.7, EiffelStudio 7.1.8. For each application, library, and testsuite Table 1 reports: (1) the size (in lines of code) of the CIL version of the C code and of the translated Eiffel code; (2) the number of Eiffel classes created; (3) the time (in seconds) spent by C2Eif to perform the source-to-source translation (not including compilation from Eiffel source to binary); (4) the size of the binaries (in MBytes) generated by EiffelStudio.7 We ran extensive trials on the translated programs to verify that they behave as in their original C version, thus validating the correctness of the translation T and its implementation in C2Eif. The trials comprised informal usage, systematic performance tests for some of the applications, and running the standard testsuites available for the three biggest libraries (libcurl, libgmp, and libgsl). The rest of this section describes the translated testsuites and their behavior with respect to correctness; Section 4.2 discusses the quantitative performance results. Library libcurl comes with a client application and a testsuite of 583 tests defined in XML and executed by a Perl script calling the client; libgmp and libgsl respectively include testsuites of 145 and 46 tests, consisting of client C code using the libraries. All tests execute and pass on both the C and the translated Eiffel versions of the libraries, with the same logged output. For libcurl, C2Eif translated the library and the client application. For libgmp and libgsl, it translated the test cases as well as the libraries. The gcc torture testsuite includes 1116 tests; the GCC version we used fails 4 of them; CIL (which depends on GCC) fails another 110 tests among the 1112 that GCC passes; finally, C2Eif (which depends on CIL) passes 989 (nearly 99%) and fails 13 of the 1002 tests passed by CIL. Given the challenging nature of the torture testsuite, this result is strong evidence that C2Eif handles the complete C language used in practice, and produces correct translations. 7 We  do not give a binary size for libraries, because EiffelStudio cannot compile them without a client.  18  Table 1: Translation of 14 open-source programs. S IZE (LOCS) CIL E IFFEL hello world micro httpd xeyes less wget links vim libSDL mixer libmongoDB libpcre libcurl libgmp libgsl gcc (torture) T OTAL  8 565 1,463 16,955 46,528 70,980 276,635 7,812 7,966 18,220 37,836 61,442 238,080 147,545 932,035  15 1,934 10,661 22,545 57,702 100,815 395,094 11,553 10,341 24,885 65,070 79,971 344,115 256,246 1,380,947  #E IFFEL CLASSES  T IME (S)  B INARY SIZE (MB)  1 16 78 75 183 211 663 47 43 38 289 370 978 2,569 5,561  1 1 1 5 25 33 144 3 3 14 18 21 85 79 433  1.3 1.5 1.8 2.6 4.5 13.9 24.2 – – – – – – 1,576 1,626  The 13 torture tests failing after translation to Eiffel target the following unsupported features. One test reads an int from a va list (variadic function list of arguments) which actually stores a struct whose first field is a double; the Eiffel typesystem does not allow this, and inspection suggests that it is probably a copy-paste error rather than a feature. Two tests exercise GCC-specific optimizations, which are immaterial after translation to Eiffel. Six tests target exotic GCC built-in functions, such as builtin frame address; one test performs explicit function alignment; and three rely on special bitfield operations.  4.2  Performance  We analyzed the performance of 5 applications, the GCC torture testsuite, and the standard testsuites of 3 libraries (described in Section 4.1) translated to Eiffel using C2Eif. Table 2 shows the result of the performance trials, running on the same system used for the experiments of Section 4.1.8 For each program or testsuite, Table 2 reports the execution time (in seconds), the maximum percentage of CPU, and the maximum amount of RAM (in MBytes) used while running. The table compares the performance of the original C versions (columns “C”) against the Eiffel translations with C2Eif (columns “T”), and, for the simpler examples, against manually written Eiffel implementations (columns “E”) that transliterate the original C implementations using the closest Eiffel constructs (for example, putchar becomes Io.put character) with as little changes as possible to the code structure (we manually wrote these transliterations 8 We  compiled all CIL-processed C programs with the GCC options -O2 -s; and all Eiffel programs with disabled void checking, inlining size 100, and stripped binaries.  19  Table 2: Performance comparison for 5 applications and 4 testsuites.  hello world micro httpd less wget vim libcurl libgmp libgsl gcc (torture)  E XECUTION TIME ( S ) C T E  M AX % CPU C T E  M AX MB RAM C T E  0 5 36 16 85 199 44 25 0  0 99 – 22 – – – – –  1.3 2.3 – 4.4 – – – – –  0 37 36 16 85 212 728 1501 5  0 46 – – – – – – –  30 99 – 22 – – – – –  30 99 – – – – – – –  5.5 7.8 – 69 – – – – –  5.3 5.6 – – – – – – –  ourselves). Maximum CPU and RAM usages are immaterial for the testsuites (torture and libraries), because their execution consists of a large number of separate calls. The rest of this section discusses the performance results together with other qualitative performance assessments. The performance of hello world demonstrates the base overhead, in terms of CPU and memory usage, of the default Eiffel runtime (objects, automatic memory management, and contract checking—which can however be disabled for applications where sheer performance is more important than having additional checks). The test with micro httpd consisted in serving the local download of a 174 MB file (the Eclipse IDE); this test boils down to a very long sequence (approximately 200 million iterations) of inputting a character from file and outputting it to standard output. The translated Eiffel version incurs a significant overhead with respect to the original C version, but is faster than the manually written Eiffel transliteration. This might be due to feature lookups in Eiffel or to the less optimized implementation of Eiffel’s character services. As a side note, we did the same exercise of manually transliterating micro httpd using Java’s standard libraries; this Java translation ran the download example in 170 seconds, using up to 99% of CPU and 150 MB of RAM. The test with wget downloaded the same 174 MB Eclipse package over the SWITCH Swiss network backbone. The bottleneck is the network bandwidth, and hence differences in performance are negligible, except for memory consumption, which is higher in Eiffel due to garbage collection (memory is deallocated only when necessary, thus the maximum memory usage is higher in operational conditions). The test with libcurl consisted in running all 583 tests from the standard testsuite mentioned before. The total runtime is comparable in translated Eiffel and C. The tests with libgmp and libgsl ran their respective standard testsuites. The overall slow-down seems significant, but a closer look shows that the large majority of tests run in comparable time in C and Eiffel: 30% of the libgmp tests take up over 95% of the running time; and 26% of the libgsl tests take up almost 99% of the time. The GCC torture tests incur only a moderate slow-down, concentrated in 3 tests that take 97% of the time. In all these experiments, the tests responsible for the conspicuous  20  slow-down target operations that execute slightly slowlier in the translated Eiffel than in the native C (e.g., accessing a struct field) and repeat it a huge number of times, so that the basic slow-down increases many-fold. These bottlenecks are an issue only in a small fraction of the tests and could be removed manually in the translation. The interactive applications (xeyes, less, links, and vim) run smoothly with good responsiveness, comparable to their original implementations. The test for less and vim consisted in scrolling through large text files one line at a time (by holding “arrow down” in less) or one page at a time (by holding “page down” in vim). Table 2 shows the running times, which are the same in C and Eiffel; the screen refresh rate is also indistinguishable. In all, the performance overhead in switching from C to Eiffel significantly varies with the program type but, even when it is significant, does not preclude the usability of the translated application or library in normal conditions—as opposed to the behavior in a few specific test cases.  4.3  Usability and Maintainability  A tool such as C2Eif, which provides automatic translation between languages, is applicable in different contexts within general software maintenance and evolution processes. This section discusses some of these applications and how suitable C2Eif can be for each of them. Reuse in clients. The first, most natural application is using C2Eif to automatically reuse large C code-bases in Eiffel. This is not merely a possibility, but something extremely valuable for Eiffel, whose user community is quite small compared to those of other mainstream languages such as C, Java, or C++. Since we released C2Eif to the public as open-source, we have been receiving several requests from the community to produce Eiffel versions of C libraries whose functionalities are sorely missed in Eiffel, and whose native implementation would require a substantial effort to get to software of quality comparable to the widely tested and used C implementations. This was the case, in particular, of libSDL mixer, libmongoDB, and libpcre, whose automatic translations created using C2Eif were requested from the community and are now being used in Eiffel applications. We are also aware of some Eiffel programmers directly trying to use C2Eif to translate useful C libraries and deploy them in their own software. This form of reuse mainly entails writing Eiffel client code that accesses translated C components. Supporting it requires tools that handle the full C language as used in practice, and that produce translated APIs understandable and usable with a programming style sufficiently close to what is the norm in Eiffel, without requiring in-depth understanding of the C conventions. To give an idea of how C2Eif fares in this respect, consider writing a simple class PRINT SOURCE SEHOME, which uses the API of cURL to retrieve and print the HTML code of the home page at http://se.inf.ethz.ch. Table 3 shows two versions of this client class. The one on the left uses the translation of libcurl automatically generated by C2Eif; the one on the right uses the wrapper of libcurl part of the Eiffel standard libraries included with the EiffelStudio IDE, written by EiffelSoftware programmers. The two  21  solutions are quite similar in structure and style. The version based on C2Eif still requires adhering to a couple of conventions that are a legacy of the translation from C: the arguments passed to routine curl easy setopt must be listed in a tuple, and the routine call itself includes a do nothing which is needed whenever a function that returns a value is used as an instruction (Eiffel enforces separation between functions and procedures). On the other hand, the “native” solution has a slightly more complex control structure, because it has to check that the dynamically linked cURL library is actually accessible at runtime; this is unnecessary with the implementation based on C2Eif, which does not depend on dynamically linked libraries since libcurl is available translated to Eiffel. When a C library undergoes maintenance, the introduced changes have the same impact on the C and on the Eiffel clients of the library. In particular, if the changes to the library do not break client compatibility (that is, the API does not change), one should simply run C2Eif again on the new library version and replace it in the Eiffel projects that depends on it. If the API changes, clients may have to change too, independent of the language they are written in. Evolution of translated libraries. Once a program is translated from C to Eiffel, one may decide it has become part of the Eiffel ecosystem, and hence it will undergo maintenance and evolution as any other piece of Eiffel code. In this scenario, C2Eif  class PRINT SOURCE SEHOME  class PRINT SOURCE SEHOME  inherit LIBCURL CONSTANTS  inherit CURL OPT CONSTANTS  create make  create make  feature  feature  make local easy: P EASY STATIC handle: CE POINTER [ANY] ret: NATURAL 32 do create easy handle := easy.curl easy init easy.curl easy setopt ([handle, Curlopt url, ce string (”se.inf.ethz.ch”)]).do nothing ret := easy.curl easy perform (handle) easy.curl easy cleanup (handle) end end  make local easy: CURL EASY EXTERNALS handle: POINTER ret: INTEGER 32 do create easy if easy.is dynamic library exists then handle := easy.init easy.setopt string (handle, Curlopt url, ”se.inf.ethz.ch”) ret := easy.perform (handle) easy.cleanup (handle) else Io.error.put string (”cURL not found.%N”) end end end  Table 3: Two Eiffel clients of cURL: using libcurl translated with C2Eif (left) and using the library wrapper provided by EiffelStudio (right). 22  provides an immediately applicable solution to port C code to Eiffel, whereas the ensuing maintenance effort is distributed over an entire lifecycle and devoted to improve the automatic translation (for example, removing the application-dependent performance bottlenecks highlighted in Section 4.2) and completely conforming it to the Eiffel style. Such maintenance of translations is the easier the closer the generated code follows Eiffel conventions and, more generally, the object-oriented paradigm. Providing a convincing empirical evaluation of the readability and maintainability of the code generated by C2Eif (not just from the perspective of writing client applications) is beyond the scope of the present work. Notice, however, that C2Eif already follows numerous Eiffel conventions such as for the names of classes, types, and local variables, which might look verbose to hard-core C programmers but are de rigueur in Eiffel. Follow-up work, which we briefly discuss in Section 6, has targeted the object-oriented reengineering of C2Eif translations. In all, while the translations produced by C2Eif still retain some “C flavor”, we believe they are overall understandable and modifiable in Eiffel with reasonable effort. Two-way propagation of changes. One more maintenance scenario occurs if one wants to be able to independently modify a C program and its translation to Eiffel, while still being able to propagate the changes produced in each to the counterpart. For example, this scenario applies if a C library is being extended with new functionality, while its Eiffel translation produced by C2Eif undergoes refactoring to optimize it to the Eiffel environment. This scenario is the most challenging of those discussed in this section; it poses problems similar to those of merging different development branches of the same project. While merge conflicts are still a bane of collaborative development, modern version control systems (such as Git or Mercurial) have evolved to provide powerful support to ease the process of conflict reconciliation. Thus, they could be very useful also in combination with automatic translators such as C2Eif to be able to integrate changes in C with other changes in Eiffel.  4.4  Safety and Debuggability  Besides the obvious advantage of reusing the huge C code-base, translating C code to Eiffel using C2Eif leverages some high-level feature which may improve safety and make debugging easier in some conditions. Uncontrolled format string is a well-known vulnerability [4] of C’s printf library function, which permits malicious clients to access data in the stack by supplying special format strings. Consider for example the C program: int main (int argc, char ∗ argv[]) { char ∗secret = ”This is secret!”; if (argc >1) printf(argv[1]); return 0; } If we call it with: ./example "{Stack: %x%x%x%x%x%x} --> %s", we get the output {stack: 0b7[. . .]469} --> This is secret!, which reveals the local string secret. The safe way to achieve the intended behavior would be the instruction printf (”%s”, argv[1]) instead of printf (argv[1]), so that the input string is interpreted literally. 23  What is the behavior of code vulnerable to uncontrolled format strings, when translated to Eiffel with C2Eif? In simple usages of printf with just one argument as in the example, the translation replaces calls to printf with calls to Eiffel’s Io.put string, which prints strings verbatim without interpreting them; therefore, the translated code is not vulnerable in these cases. The replacement was possible in 65% of all the printf calls in the programs of Table 1. C2Eif translates more complex usages of printf (for example, with more than one argument and no literal format string such as printf (argv[1], argv[2])) into wrapped calls to the external printf function, and hence the vulnerability still exists. However, it is less extensive or more difficult to exploit in Eiffel: primitive types (such as numeric types) are stored on the stack in Eiffel as they are in C, but Eiffel’s bulkier runtime typically stores them farther up the stack, and hence longer and more complex format strings must be supplied to reach the stack data (for instance, a variation of the example with secret requires 386 %x’s in the format string to reach local variables). On the other hand, non-primitive types (such as strings and structs) are wrapped by Eiffel classes in C2Eif, which are stored in the heap, and hence unreachable directly by reaching stack data. In these cases, the vulnerability vanishes in the Eiffel translation. Debugging format strings. C2Eif also parses literal format strings passed to printf and detects type mismatches between format specifiers and actual arguments. This analysis, necessary when moving from C to a language with a stronger type system, helps debug incorrect and potentially unsafe usages of format strings. Indeed, a mismatch detected while running the 145 libgmp tests revealed a real error in the library’s implementation of macro TESTS REPS: char ∗envval, ∗end; /∗ ... ∗/ long repfactor = strtol(envval, &end, 0); if(∗end || repfactor ≤ 0) fprintf (stderr, ”Invalid repfactor: %s.\n”, repfactor); String envval should have been passed to fprintf instead of long repfactor. GCC with standard compilation options does not detect this error, which may produce garbage or even crash the program at runtime. Interestingly, version 5.0.2 of libgmp patches the code in the wrong way, changing the format specifier %s into %ld. This is still incorrect because when envval does not encode a valid “repfactor”, the outcome of the conversion into long is unpredictable. Finally, notice that C2Eif may also report false positives, such as long v = ”Hello!”; printf(”%s”, v) which is acceptable (though probably not commendable) usage. Out-of-bound error detection. C arrays translate to instances of class CE ARRAY (see Section 3.1), which includes contracts that signal out-of-bound accesses to the array content. Therefore, out-of-bound errors are much easier to detect in Eiffel applications using components translated with C2Eif. Simply by translating and running the libgmp testsuite, we found an off-by-one error causing out-of-bound access (our patch has been included in more recent versions of the library); the error does not manifest itself when running the original C version. More generally, contracts help detect the precise location of array access errors. Consider, for example:  24  int ∗ buf = (int ∗) malloc(sizeof (long long int) ∗ 10); buf = buf − 10; buf = buf + 29; ∗buf = ’a’; buf++; ∗buf = ’b’;  1 2 3 4 5  buf is an array that stores 20 elements of type int (which has half the size of long long int). The error is on line 5, when buf points to position 20, out of the array bounds; line 2 is instead OK: buf points to an invalid location, but it is not written to. This program executes without errors in C; the Eiffel translation, instead, stops exactly at line 5 and signals an out-of-bound access to buf. Array bound checking may be disabled, which is necessary in borderline situations where out-of-bound accesses do not crash because they assume a precise memory layout. For example, links and vim use statements of the following form block ∗p = (block ∗)malloc(sizeof(struct block)+ len), with len >0, to allocate struct datatypes of the form struct block { /∗... ∗/char b[1]; }. In this case, p points to a struct with room for 1 + len characters in p→b; the instruction p→b[len]=‘i’ is then executed correctly in C, but the Eiffel translation assumes p→b has the statically declared size 1, hence it stops with an error. Another borderline situation is with multidimensional arrays, such as double a[2][3]. An iteration over a’s six elements with double ∗p = &a[0][0] translated to Eiffel fails to go past the third element, because it sees a[0][0] as the first element of an array of length 3 (followed by another array of the same length). A simple cast double ∗ p = (double∗)a achieves the desired result without fooling the compiler, hence it works without errors also in translated code. These situations are examples of unsafe programming more often than not. More safety in Eiffel. Our experiments found another bug in libgmp, where function gmp sprintf final had three formal input arguments, but was only called with one actual through a function pointer. Inspection suggests it is a copy-paste error of the other function gmp sprintf reps. The Eiffel version found the mismatch when calling the routine and reported a contract violation. Easily finding such bugs demonstrates the positive side-effects of translating widely-used C programs into a tighter, higher-level language.  4.5  Limitations  The only significant limitations of the translation T implemented in C2Eif in supporting C programs originate in the introduction of strong typing: programming practices that implicitly rely on a certain memory layout may not work in C applications translated to Eiffel. Section 4.4 mentioned some examples in the context of array manipulation (where, however, the checks on the Eiffel side can be disabled). Another example is a function int trick (int a, int b) that returns its second argument through a pointer to the stack, with the instructions int ∗p = &a; return ∗(p+1). C2Eif’s translation assumes p points to a single integer cell and cannot guarantee that b is stored in the next cell. Another limitation is the fact that C2Eif takes input from CIL, and hence it does not support legacy C such as K&R C. The support can, however, be implemented by di25  rectly extending the pre-processing CIL front-end. Similarly, the GCC torture testsuite highlighted a few exotic GCC features currently unsupported by C2Eif (Section 4.1), which may be handled in future work. Code using unrestricted gotos poses the biggest hurdles to producing readable Eiffel code. This is arguably unavoidable when translating to any programming language that does not have jumps. The translation T does, however, avoid the most complicated general translation scheme with the simpler control-flow breaking instructions continue, break, and return instructions, whose translation is normally much more readable than when using unrestricted gotos (see the example in Section 4).  5  Related Work  There are two main approaches to reuse source code written in a “foreign” language (e.g., C) in a different “host” language (e.g., Eiffel): define wrappers for the components written in the foreign language; and translate the foreign source code into functionally equivalent host code. We discuss related work pursuing these approaches in Sections 5.1 and 5.2. In Section 5.3, we review the major solutions to automate object-oriented reengineering, which is a natural follow-up of automatic translation into object-oriented languages.  5.1  Wrapping Foreign Code  Wrappers enable the reuse of foreign implementations through the API of bridge libraries. This approach (e.g., [6, 5, 30]) does not modify the foreign code, whose functionality is therefore not altered; moreover, the complete foreign language is supported. On the other hand, the type of data that can be retrieved through the bridging API is often restricted to a simple subset common to the host and foreign language (e.g., primitive types). C2Eif uses wrappers only to translate external functions and assembly code.  5.2  Translating Foreign Code  Industrial practices have long encompassed manual migrations of legacy code. Some semi-automated tools exist that help translate code written in legacy programming languages such as old versions of COBOL [37, 21], Fortran-77 [1, 34], and K&R C [46]. Terekhov et al. [37] review how automated language conversion is applied in industry; based on their experience, they conclude that “creating 100% automated conversion tools is neither possible, nor desirable”. Our experience with C2Eif, however, suggests that such a conclusion has only relative validity: in the rich design space of automatic translators, there are scenarios where trading off some performance for complete automation is possible and desirable. Rather than imposing an upfront heavyweight burden on developers in charge of migration, we suggest to start with an automatically translated version which is suboptimal but works out of the box, and then devote the manual programming effort to improving and adapting what is necessary—  26  incrementally with an agile approach which also depends on the specific application domain and requirements. Some translators focus on the adaptation of code into an extension (superset) of the original language. Examples include the migration of legacy code to object-oriented code, such as Cobol to OO-Cobol [25, 32, 45], Ada to Ada95 [35], and C to C++ [15, 47]. Some of such efforts try to go beyond the mere hosting of the original code, and introduce refactorings that take advantage of the object-oriented paradigm. Most of these refactorings are, however, limited to restructuring modules into classes (see the focused discussion in Section 5.3). C2Eif follows a similar approach, but also takes advantage of some advanced features (such as contracts) to improve the reliability of translated code. Ephedra [18] is a tool that translates legacy C to Java. It first translates K&R C to ANSI C; then, it maps data types and type casts; finally, it translate the C source code to Java. Ephedra handles a significant subset of C, but cannot translate frequently used features such as unrestricted gotos, external pre-compiled libraries, and inlined assembly code. A case study evaluating Ephedra [19] involved three small programs: the implementation of fprintf, a monopoly game (about 3 KLOC), and two graph layout algorithms. The study reports that the source programs had to be manually adapted to be processable by Ephedra. In contrast, C2Eif is completely automatic, and works with significantly larger programs. Other tools (proprietary or open-source) to translate C (and C++) to Java or C# include: C2J++ [39], C2J [27], and C++2C# and C++2Java [36]. Table 4 shows a feature comparison among the currently available tools that translate C to an objectoriented language, showing: • The target language. • Whether the tool is completely automatic, that is whether it generates translations that are ready for compilation. • Whether the tool is available for download and usable. In a couple of cases we could only find papers describing the tool but not a version of the implementation working on standard machines. • An (subjective to a certain extent) assessment of the readability of the code produced. In each case, we tried to evaluate if the translated code is sufficiently similar to the C source to be readily understandable by a programmer familiar with the latter. We judged C2J’s readability negatively because the tool puts data into a single global array to support pointer arithmetic. This is quite detrimental to readability and also circumvents type checking in the Java translation. • Whether the tool supports unrestricted calls to external libraries, unrestricted pointer arithmetic, unrestricted gotos, and inlined assembly code. The table demonstrates that C2Eif is arguably the first completely automatic tool that handles the complete C language as used in practice. In previous work, we developed J2Eif, an automatic source-to-source translator from Java to Eiffel [43]; translating between two object-oriented languages does not 27  completely automatic  available  readability  external libraries  pointer arithmetic  gotos  inlined assembly  Ephedra Convert2Java C2J++ C2J C++2Java C++2C# C2Eif  target language  Table 4: Tools translating C to O-O languages.  Java Java Java Java Java C# Eiffel  no no no no no no yes  no no no yes yes yes yes  + + + − + + +  no no no no no no yes  no no no yes no no yes  no no no no no no yes  no no no no no no yes  pose some of the formidable problems of bridging wildly different abstraction levels, which C2Eif had to deal with. TXL [2] is an expressive programming language designed to support source code analysis and transformation. It has been used to implement several language translation frameworks such as from Java to TCL and to Python. We could have used TXL to implement C2Eif; using regular Eiffel, however, allowed us to be independent of third-party closed-source tools, and to retain complete control over the implemented functionalities. Safer C. Many techniques exist aimed at ameliorating the safety of existing C code; for example, detection of format string vulnerability [3], out-of-bound array accesses and other memory errors [28, 24], or type errors [23]. C2Eif has a different scope, as it offers improved safety and debuggability as side-benefits of automatically porting C programs to Eiffel. This shares a little similarity with Ellison and Rosu’s formal executable semantics of C [7], which also finds errors in C program as a “side effect” of a rigorous translation.  5.3  Object-Oriented Reengineering  After code written in a procedural language has been migrated to an object-oriented environment, it is natural to reengineer it to conform to the object-oriented design style, taking full advantage of features such as inheritance; this is the goal of object-oriented reengineering. Object-oriented reengineering is beyond the scope of this paper; and we tackled it in follow-up work based on C2Eif which we mention in Section 6. Nonetheless, it is still useful to compare existing approaches to reengineering with C2Eif, solely based on features such as degree of automation and tool support; see our follow-up work [41] for a discussion focused on the object-oriented reengineering techniques. Table 5 summarizes some features of the main approaches to object-oriented reengineering of procedural code: • The source and the target languages (or if it is a generic methodology).  28  full language  evaluated  methodology methodology C–C++ C–C++ C–C++ C++–C++ Cobol–OOSM Cobol–Java Cobol–Java PL/I–Java C–Eiffel  completely automatic  Gall [11] Jacobson [14] Livadas [17] Kontogiannis [16] Frakes [10] Fanta [8] Newcomb [26] Mossienko [21] Sneed [33] Sneed [31] C2Eif  tool support  source–target  Table 5: Comparison of approaches to O-O reengineering.  no no yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes  no no no no no no yes no yes yes yes  – – no ? no no no no no no yes  yes yes no 10KL 2KL 120KL 168KL 25KL 200KL 10KL 932KL  YES  • Whether tool support was developed, that is whether there exists a tool or the paper explicitly mentions the implementation of a tool. A YES in small caps denotes the only currently publicly available tool, namely C2Eif. • Whether the approach is completely automatic, that is does not require any user input other than providing a source procedural program. • Whether the approach supports the full source language (as used in practice) or only a subset thereof. • Whether the approach has been evaluated, that is whether the paper mentions evidence, such as a case study, that the approach was tried on real programs. If available, the table indicates the size of the programs used in the evaluation. Newcomb’s [26] and Sneed’s [33] are the only automatic tools which have been evaluated on programs of significant size. Newcomb’s tool [26], however, produces hierarchical object-oriented state machine models (OOSM); the mapping from OOSM to an object-oriented language is out of the scope of the work. Sneed’s tool [33] translates Cobol to Java; the paper reports that manual corrections of the automatically generated code were needed to get to a correct translation. While these corrections have successively been incorporated as extensions of the tool, the full Cobol language remains unsupported, according to the paper.  6  Conclusions and Future Work  This paper presented the complete translation of C applications into Eiffel, and its implementation into the freely available automatic tool C2Eif. C2Eif supports the com29  plete C language, including unrestricted pointer arithmetic and pre-compiled libraries. Experiments in the paper showed that C2Eif correctly translates complete applications and libraries of significant size, and takes advantage of some of Eiffel’s advanced features to produce code of good quality. Future work. Future work will improve the readability and maintainability of the generated code. CIL, in particular, optimizes the code for program analysis, which is sometimes detrimental to readability of the Eiffel code generated by C2Eif. For example, CIL does not preserve comments, which are therefore lost in translation. We will also optimize the helper classes to improve on the few performance bottlenecks mentioned in Section 4.2. A major follow-up to the work described in this paper is the object-oriented reengineering of C code translated to Eiffel. In recent work [41], we have developed an automatic reengineering technique, and implemented it atop the translation produced by C2Eif and described in the present paper. The technique encapsulates functions and type definitions into classes that achieve low coupling and high cohesion, and introduces inheritance and contracts when possible. Other future work still remains in the direction of reengineering, such as in automatically replacing C data structure implementations (e.g., hash tables) with their Eiffel equivalents.  References [1] B. L. Achee and Doris L Carver. Creating object-oriented designs from legacy FORTRAN code. Journal of Systems and Software, 39(2):179–194, 1997. [2] James R. Cordy. The TXL source transformation language. Sci. Comput. Program., 61(3):190–210, 2006. [3] Crispin Cowan. FormatGuard: Automatic protection from printf format string vulnerabilities. In Proceedings of the 10th USENIX Security Symposium, 2001. [4] CWE-134. Uncontrolled format string. http://cwe.mitre.org/data/ definitions/134.html. [5] Andrea de Lucia, Giuseppe A. Di Lucca, Anna Rita Fasolino, Patrizia Guerra, and Silvia Petruzzelli. Migrating legacy systems towards object-oriented platforms. Proc. of ICSM, pages 122–129, 1997. [6] W. C. Dietrich, Jr., L. R. Nackman, and F. Gracer. Saving legacy with objects. SIGPLAN Not., 24(10):77–83, 1989. [7] Chucky Ellison and Grigore Rosu. An executable formal semantics of C with applications. In POPL, pages 533–544, 2012. [8] R. Fanta and V. Rajlich. Reengineering object-oriented code. In International Conference on Software Maintenance, 1998. Proceedings, pages 238–246, 1998. [9] FFI. A portable foreign function interface library. redhat.com/libffi/, 2011. 30  http://sources.  [10] William Frakes, Gregory Kulczycki, and Natasha Moodliar. An empirical comparison of methods for reengineering procedural software systems to objectoriented systems. In ICSR, volume 5030 of LNCS, pages 376–389, 2008. [11] H. Gall and R. Klosch. Finding objects in procedural programs: an alternative approach. In WCRE, pages 208–216. IEEE, 1995. [12] Carlo Ghezzi and Mehdi Jazayeri. Programming Language Concepts. Wiley, 3rd edition, 1998. [13] David Harel. On folk theorems. Commun. ACM, 23(7):379–389, 1980. [14] Ivar Jacobson and Fredrik Lindström. Reengineering of old systems to an objectoriented architecture. In OOPSLA, pages 340–350. ACM, 1991. [15] Kostas Kontogiannis and Prashant Patil. Evidence driven object identification in procedural code. In STEP, pages 12–21, 1999. [16] Kostas Kontogiannis and Prashant Patil. Evidence driven object identification in procedural code. In STEP, pages 12–21. IEEE, 1999. [17] Panos E. Livadas and Theodore Johnson. A new approach to finding objects in programs. Journal of Software Maintenance, 6(5):249–260, 1994. [18] Johannes Martin and Hausi A. Müller. Strategies for migration from C to Java. In CSMR, pages 200–210. IEEE Computer Society, 2001. [19] Johannes Martin and Hausi A. Müller. C to Java migration experiences. In CSMR, pages 143–153. IEEE Computer Society, 2002. [20] Bertrand Meyer. Object-Oriented Software Construction. Prentice Hall, 2nd edition, 1997. [21] M. Mossienko. Automated Cobol to Java recycling. In CSMR, pages 40–50. IEEE, 2003. [22] George C. Necula, Scott McPeak, S.P. Rahul, and Westley Weimer. CIL: Intermediate Language and Tools for Analysis and Transformation of C Programs. In Conference on Compilier Construction, pages 213–228, 2002. [23] George C. Necula, Scott McPeak, and Westley Weimer. CCured: type-safe retrofitting of legacy code. In POPL, pages 128–139, 2002. [24] Nicholas Nethercote and Julian Seward. Valgrind: a framework for heavyweight dynamic binary instrumentation. In PLDI, pages 89–100, 2007. [25] P. Newcomb and G. Kotik. Reengineering procedural into object-oriented systems. In WCRE, pages 237–249, 1995. [26] P. Newcomb and G. Kotik. Reengineering procedural into object-oriented systems. In WCRE, pages 237–249. IEEE, 1995. 31  [27] Novosoft. C2J: a C to Java translator. http://www.novosoft-us.com/ solutions/product_c2j.shtml, 2001. [28] Yutaka Oiwa. Implementation of the memory-safe full ANSI-C compiler. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGPLAN conference on Programming language design and implementation, PLDI ’09, pages 259–269, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM. [29] Dennis Ritchie. The development of the C language. In History of Programming Languages Conference (HOPL-II) Preprints, pages 201–208, 1993. [30] Miguel A. Serrano, Doris L. Carver, and Carlos Montes de Oca. Reengineering legacy systems for distributed environments. J. Syst. Softw., 64(1):37–55, 2002. [31] H. Sneed. Migrating PL/I code to Java. In CSMR, pages 287–296. IEEE, 2011. [32] H.M. Sneed. Migration of procedurally oriented Cobol programs in an objectoriented architecture. In Software Maintenance, pages 105–116, 1992. [33] H.M. Sneed. Migrating from COBOL to Java. In ICSM, pages 1–7. IEEE, 2010. [34] Gokul V. Subramaniam and Eric J. Byrne. Deriving an object model from legacy Fortran code. ICSM, pages 3–12, 1996. [35] Ricky Sward. Extracting ada 95 objects from legacy ada programs. In Albert Llamosı́ and Alfred Strohmeier, editors, Reliable Software Technologies - AdaEurope 2004, volume 3063 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 65–77. Springer, 2004. [36] Tangible Software Solutions. C++ to C# and C++ to Java. http://www. tangiblesoftwaresolutions.com/. [37] Andrey A. Terekhov and Chris Verhoef. The realities of language conversions. IEEE Software, 17(6):111–124, 2000. [38] The Language Popularity Index. http://lang-index.sourceforge. net, 2011. [39] Eli Tilevich. Translating C++ to Java. In First German Java Developers’ Conference Journal, Sun Microsystems Press. IEEE Computer Society, 1997. [40] Marco Trudel, Carlo A. Furia, and Martin Nordio. Automatic C to O-O translation with C2Eiffel. In Rocco Oliveto, Denys Poshyvanyk, James Cordy, and Thomas Dean, editors, Proceedings of the 19th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering (WCRE’12), pages 508–509. IEEE Computer Society, October 2012. Tool demonstration paper. [41] Marco Trudel, Carlo A. Furia, Martin Nordio, and Bertrand Meyer. Really automatic scalable object-oriented reengineering. In Giuseppe Castagna, editor, Proceedings of the 27th European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP), volume 7920 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 477–501. Springer, July 2013. 32  [42] Marco Trudel, Carlo A. Furia, Martin Nordio, Bertrand Meyer, and Manuel Oriol. C to O-O translation: Beyond the easy stuff. In Rocco Oliveto, Denys Poshyvanyk, James Cordy, and Thomas Dean, editors, Proceedings of the 19th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering (WCRE’12), pages 19–28. IEEE Computer Society, October 2012. [43] Marco Trudel, Manuel Oriol, Carlo A. Furia, and Martin Nordio. Automated translation of Java source code to Eiffel. In TOOLS Europe, volume 6705 of LNCS, pages 20–35, 2011. [44] Julian Tschannen, Carlo A. Furia, Martin Nordio, and Bertrand Meyer. Usable verification of object-oriented programs by combining static and dynamic techniques. In SEFM, volume 7041 of LNCS, pages 382–398, 2011. [45] Theo Wiggerts, Hans Bosma, and Erwin Fielt. Scenarios for the identification of objects in legacy systems. In WCRE, pages 24–32, 1997. [46] A. Yeh, D. Harris, and H. Reubenstein. Recovering abstract data types and object instances from a conventional procedural language. In WCRE, pages 227–236, 1995. [47] Ying Zou and Kostas Kontogiannis. A framework for migrating procedural code to object-oriented platforms. In APSEC, pages 390–399, 2001.  33

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
