Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3693

Abstract:
arXiv:1311.5375v2 [math.GT] 13 Feb 2018  Ann. Inst. Fourier, Grenoble Working version – 14 février 2018  SUR LA CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS ARITHMÉTIQUES  by Jean RAIMBAULT (*)  Résumé. Cet article est consacré à l’étude de la géométrie globale de certaines orbi-variétés localement isométriques à un produit d’espaces tridimensionnels et de plans hyperboliques. On démontre que pour les peties dimensions (pour l’espace ou le plan hyperbolique, ou un produit de plans hyperboliques) certaines suites de telles orbivariétés non-compactes de volume fini convergent vers l’espace symétrique en un sens géométrique précis (“convergence de Benjamini–Schramm”). On traite aussi le cas des réseaux arithmétiques maximaux en dimension trois dont les corps de traces sont quadratiques ou cubiques. Une des principales motivations est d’étudier l’asymptotique des nombres de Betti des groupes de Bianchi.  On the convergence of arithmetic orbifolds Résumé. We discuss the geometry of some arithmetic orbifolds locally isometric to a product X of real hyperbolic spaces Hm of dimension m = 2, 3, and prove that certain sequences of non-compact orbifolds are convergent to X in a geometric (“Benjamini–Schramm”) sense for low-dimensional cases (when X is equal to H2 × H2 or H3 ). We also deal with sequences of maximal arithmetic three–dimensional hyperbolic lattices defined over a quadratic or cubic field. A motivating application is the study of Betti numbers of Bianchi groups.  Keywords: Variétés hyperboliques arithmétiques, Multiplicités limites, Variétés tridimensionnelles. Math. classification: 22E40, 11F75, 11F72, 57M27. (*) During the writing of this paper I was supported by a research grant from the Max-Planck Gesellschaft. I am grateful to Miklos Abért, Misha Belolipetsky, Nicolas Bergeron, Ian Biringer, Aurel Page, Alexander Rahm, Juan Souto and Akshay Venkatesh for valuable input to or remarks on the contents of this paper. The referees also pointed out numerous imprecisions, mistakes and typos in previous versions of this paper.  2  JEAN RAIMBAULT  1. Introduction Let X be a Riemannian symmetric space without Euclidean or compact factors : this means that X is obtained as a quotient G∞ /K∞ of a semisimple, noncompact real Lie group G∞ by a maximal compact subgroup K∞ . The space X is a contractible manifold (homeomorphic to an Euclidean space) and can be endowed with the unique (up to homothety in each irreducible factor) Riemannian metric invariant under the action of G∞ by left translations. For any discrete subgroup Γ in G∞ the quotient M = Γ\X then has the structure of a Riemannian orbifold (i.e. there is a subset of codimension > 2 where the smooth structure and the metric can have singularities), and in particular various metric invariants can be associated to Γ : — the Riemannian volume vol(M ) ∈]0, +∞] ; — for each x ∈ M the injectivity radius injx (M ) is defined to be the largest R such that the ball of radius R around x in M is isometric to a ball in X ; equivalently, choosing a lift x̃ of x to X one has 1 inf d(x̃, γ x̃) injx (M ) = 2 γ∈Γ−{1} and the global injectivity radius inj(M ) is then defined as inf x∈M injx (M ) ; — the maximal radius of M is defined by max inj(M ) = supx∈M injx (M ). All these invariants have been well–studied in the case of real hyperbolic manifolds, usually with the purpose of establishing universal constraints (or the lack thereof) for a given dimension : we refer to the introduction of [24] for a recent survey on this type of result. In this paper we are interested in the relations of the volume to the other invariants in some specific sequences of arithmetic locally symmetric orbifolds (of finite volume) ; this is related to the Benjamini–Schramm convergence which was studied (in [3]) by M. Abért, N. Bergeron, I. Biringer, T. Gelander, N. Nikolov, I. Samet and the author for locally symmetric orbifolds, which in turn has consequences on the Betti numbers (among other things) of these spaces.  1.1. Geometric convergence of locally symmetric orbifolds 1.1.1. Benjamini–Schramm convergence to the universal cover The R-thin part of a Riemannian orbifold M is by definition (M )6R = {x ∈ M : injx (M ) 6 R}. ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  3  Its volume is a metric invariant of M . Fix X a contractible complete Riemannian manifold ; in [3] the notion of Benjamini–Schramm (BS) convergence of a sequence of finite–volume orbifold quotients Mn of X to X was introduced by the following definition : (Mn ) is BS-convergent to X if and only if for all R > 0 we have vol(Mn )6R −−−−→ 0. (1.1) n→∞ vol Mn In informal terms this means that ‘the injectivity radius of Mn goes to infinity at almost every point’. One should see this notion of convergence as a middle ground between the so-called pointed Gromov–Hausdorff convergence to X, which asks that the maximal radius of the Mn go to infinity, and the stronger statement that the global injectivity radius goes to infinity. Pointed Gromov–Hausdorff convergence is defined in a more general setting, and in fact any sequence of pointed Riemannian manifolds has accumulation points in this sense (the limit of course does not have to be a manifold itself), we refer to [34, Chapter 10] for more information. Benjamini– Schramm convergence is also defined for more general sequences than only those satisfying (1.1), and the limits arising in this context are invariant random subgroups of the group of isometries of X (see 2.1 below for a short introduction to this). An analogous notion was first considered in the context of regular graphs by I. Benjamini and O. Schramm in [6], elaborated upon by M. Abért, Y. Glasner and B. Virág in [2] and is the main tool used in [3]. In this Benjamini–Schramm topology, every sequence of lattices in G∞ is relatively compact (see 2.1 below). Thus, to prove (1.1) for a given sequence one can argue by compactness as follows : any subsequence of µΓn has a limit, and if one can show in some way that any such limit must be equal to X then (1.1) must hold for the whole sequence. This line of argument was used in [3] to prove that if G∞ is simple and of real rank larger than 2 then any sequence of X–orbifolds must satisfy (1.1). 1.1.2. Questions on the convergence of arithmetic orbifolds For this section we fix the Lie group G∞ . Recall that a lattice in G∞ is a discrete subgroup such that the quotient Γ\G∞ carries a finite, G∞ invariant Borel measure. An important class of lattices in G∞ are the socalled arithmetic subgroups, which are ‘integral points’ of Q-groups whose real points are isomorphic to G∞ up to a compact factor (see [30, Section 10.3] for a short introduction to arithmetic groups). This work is mainly concerned with them and their convergence properties, and especially with the following question :  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  4  JEAN RAIMBAULT  Question. — Let Γn be a sequence (a) of maximal arithmetic irreducible lattices in G∞ ; are the orbifolds Γn \X Benjamini–Schramm convergent to X ? Recall that a lattice in G∞ is said to be maximal if it is not contained in a strictly larger discrete subgroup of G∞ , and in the case where G∞ has more than one simple factor, a lattice it is said to be irreducible if its projection on every simple factor is dense. In the case where all simple factors of G∞ are of real rank 2 or higher an affirmative answer to the above question is provided by the much stronger result that all sequences of finite-volume irreducible X-orbifolds are BS-convergent to X [3, Theorem 1.5]. The irreducibility condition is needed in all cases, as is easily seen by considering the example of a sequence of maximal lattices which all contain a fixed lattice in one factor. In real rank one it is likely that the condition that the lattices be maximal (or congruence–see below) is needed ; for all lattices in real hyperbolic spaces, and for some in complex hyperbolic ones there are sequences of finite covers which are not BS-convergent to the symmetric space (this is related to the failure of the congruence subgroup property in real rank one (see for example the survey in [29, Chapter 7]), as can be seen from [3, Theorem 1.12]). The arithmetic lattices in G∞ can be constructed as follows. We need a number field F whose embeddings into R we denote by σ1 , . . . , σr1 , and σr1 +1 , . . . , σr2 are the remaining embeddings into C up to complex conjugation (thus the degree r = [F : Q] equals r1 + 2r2 ). We also need an algebraic group G over F , and we require that the group r2 r1 Y Y Gσi (C) Gσj (R) × G′∞ := G(F ⊗Q R) = j=1  i=r1 +1  has a surjective map to G∞ , with compact kernel. Suppose moreover that there is an F -embedding of G into some SLm , and let Γ be the subgroup G(F ) ∩ SLm (OF ) where OF is the ring of integers of F . Then the image of Γ is a lattice in G∞ by a theorem of A. Borel and Harish–Chandra. The construction above actually defines (without need to refer to an embedding into SLm ) a commensurability class (b) of lattices in G∞ . This commensurability class contains infinitely many maximal lattices, and thus we see that there are two ways to generate sequences of maximal arithmetic lattices : a. In this paper such sequences will always satisfy the following nontriviality assumption : for distinct n, n′ the subgroups Γn , Γ′n are not conjugated in G∞ . b. Recall that two subgroups Γ1 , Γ2 of G∞ are said to be commensurable if their intersection has finite index in both.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  5  — By taking a sequence of maximal lattices inside a commensurability class ; — By changing the group G and/or the field of definition F . We expect that in the first situation the sequence will always be BSconvergent to the universal cover. In the second situation we expect, with much less certainty however, that if the degree of the field is kept bounded the sequence will be convergent. One of the aims of this paper is to substantiate these expectations for low–dimensional examples with R-rank one factors, in particular hyperbolic three–manifolds. An alternative to considering maximal lattices is to study sequences of socalled congruence lattices. It is more usual to consider congruence subgroups of a given arithmetic group : if Γ stabilizes a lattice L in a representation of G∞ on a real vector space, one defines the principal congruence subgroups of Γ as the kernels Γ(n) of the reduction maps Γ → GL(L/nL) (where n is a positive integer and L/nL is considered as a Z/nZ-module), and a congruence subgroup of Γ is any subgroup containing some Γ(n) (see also [29, Chapter 6]). In general, given a F -form G of G∞ , the congruence lattices in G(F ) are defined as the subgroups of G(F ) which are equal to the intersection of G(F ) with their closure in the group of points over finite adèles G(Af ) (if Γ is a congruence lattice in G(F ) then the congruence subgroups of Γ as defined above are also congruence lattices in G(F )). Some of these are closely related to maximal arithmetic lattices (see [41]), and we expect also that in a sequence of commensurability classes the congruence subgroups be BS-convergent to the universal cover when the degree of the field F in the construction above is bounded. The case of congruence subgroups of a fixed arithmetic lattice was dealt with in [3] (actually only in the case of compact orbifolds–but the general case can be deduced from Theorem 1.11 in loc. cit. with little effort, see Proposition 2.2 below). 1.1.3. Non-arithmetic lattices We should say a word on the arithmeticity assumption in the question above. The only semisimple Lie groups G∞ known to contain infinitely many commensurability classes of irreducible non-arithmetic lattices (c) are the groups G∞ = SO(m, 1) for m > 2 (and groups isogenic to those). The c. The only other groups with known non-arithmetic lattices are SU(2, 1) and SU(3, 1), and these fall into finitely many commensurability classes (see for example [18]).  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  6  JEAN RAIMBAULT  symmetric space associated to SO(m, 1) is real hyperbolic space Hm ; for each m it can be seen that there are sequences of nonarithmetic minimal hyperbolic m-orbifolds which are far from being BS-convergent to the universal cover. For m = 2, 3 there are in fact sequences of nonconjugated maximal lattices in SO(m, 1) with bounded covolume (obtained by gluing pants for m = 2, and by Thurston’s hyperbolic Dehn surgery in dimension 3). For general m > 4 this latter phenomenon is impossible because of H. C. Wang’s finiteness theorem, but the variation on Gromov and PiatetskiShapiro’s construction of nonarithmetic lattices [26] given in [40] implies (for every m > 3) that there is a C > 0 and a sequence of pairwise noncommensurable hyperbolic m-manifolds Mn such that for all n and x ∈ Mn we have injx (Mn ) 6 C, so that if we take the manifold with minimal volume in the commensurability class of Mn we obtain a sequence of maximal lattices with covolume going to infinity but injectivity radius 6 C at every point. The limit points in the BS-topology in this case are the IRS studied in section 13 of [3].  1.1.4. Unbounded maximal radius  One can also ask whether the maximal injectivity radius is unbounded in a sequence of maximal (or congruence) arithmetic manifolds ; this is obviously weaker than asking for BS-convergence of the sequence but still fails for sequences of nonarithmetic manifolds because of the same example. We ask the following questions. Question. — Let R > 0 and m > 2 ; is there only a finite number of maximal (or congruence) arithmetic hyperbolic m-orbifolds M with max inj M 6 R ? More generally, without fixing the dimension, is there only a finite number of maximal (or congruence) arithmetic hyperbolic manifolds M with max inj M 6 R ? As a particular case of the second question one can ask whether for the sequence Mn = SO(n, 1; Z)\Hn we have max inj(Mn ) −−−−−→ +∞ or n→+∞  not (d) .  d. This question was communicated to the author by M. Belolipetsky, who heard it from Jun-Muk Hwang who asked it out of algebro-geometric motivations.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  7  1.2. Results on Benjamini–Schramm convergence 1.2.1. Arithmetic hyperbolic three–manifolds and Bianchi groups In the case where G∞ is a product of factors isomorphic to SL2 (R) or SL2 (C) and Γ is an irreducible lattice in G∞ one can use the field F generated by the set tr(adΓ) to define the commensurability class of Γ as above (this field is independant of the choic of Γ in the commensurability class ; it is called the invariant trace field of Γ, see [30, 3.3]). The main result in this paper is then the following. Theorem A. — Let Γn be a sequence of maximal arithmetic or congruence lattices in SL2 (C) and Fn the invariant trace field of Γn . Suppose that the Fn are quadratic, or that they are cubic and either the Γn are derived from a quaternion algebra or the size of the 2-torsion subgroup of Fn is ≪ Dn0.24 (where Dn is the discriminant of Fn ). Let Mn = Γn \H3 . Then the oribifolds Mn are Benjamini–Schramm convergent to H3 . In fact there is a δ > 0 such that for every R > 0 there is a constant C so that vol(Mn )6R 6 C(vol Mn )1−δ holds for all n. Here are a few remarks about the hypothesis on the class group in the cubic case : it is conjectured that the p-torsion subgroup is of size ≪ DFε for all p and F , with a bound depending on p and the degree of F (see for example [22], which also provides some bounds in this direction). In the case of interest to us (p = 2 and degree 3) the best currently known bound, due to Bhargava–Shankar–Taniguchi–Thorne–Tsimerman–Zhao [8], is DF0.2785 , which misses what we need by about 0.04. On the other hand the mean size of the 2-torsion is bounded by a result of Bhargava [9], so the hypothesis that it is ≪ DF0.24 is true for a subset of density one in the set of all cubic fields. The bound on the size of the thin part is reminescent of that obtained for congruence covers in [3, Theorem 1.12] ; however there is a big difference between the latter result and the one above, which is that in [3] the dependancy of C on R is made explicit (for compact orbifolds ; the case of congruence covers of non-compact arithmetic three–manifolds is dealt with in [39]), which we do not do here (we use a non-explicit finiteness argument at some point). An important example which the result above covers is that of the sequence of the Bianchi groups. These were historically among the first arithmetic groups studied in relation with hyperbolic geometry, by L. Bianchi  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  8  JEAN RAIMBAULT  in his paper [10] ; they are parametrized by positive square–free integers m as follows : for such m let D = m if m = 3 (mod 4) or 4m otherwise and √ FD be the quadratic imaginary number field Q( −m) (whose discriminant equals −D) and OD its ring of integers. The Bianchi group associated to m or D is defined to be : ΓD = SL2 (OD ). Then ΓD is obviously a congruence lattice in SL2 (C) with invariant trace field FD . As we will now explain the proof of Theorem A rests on this special case (for which we actually can take δ = 1/3 − ε for every ε > 0, see Theorem C below). The non-cocompact arithmetic lattices in SL2 (C) are all commensurable to one of the Bianchi groups [30, Theorem 8.2.3], and it is not very hard to deduce Theorem A in the case of maximal nonuniform lattices from the special case of Bianchi groups ; the congruence case then follows from this together with the statement that in a commensurability class a sequence of congruence lattices is BS-convergent to H3 . For the compact case one uses the ‘classical’ proof of the Jacquet–Langlands correspondance given in [12], which relates the length spectra of compact congruence lattices in SL2 (C) defined over a quadratic imaginary field with that of congruence subgroups of the Bianchi groups. For the cubic case, instead of considering Bianchi orbifolds one needs to consider the irreducible noncompact quotients of H3 × H2 . Using the compactness argument outlined in 1.1.1 we also prove the following result. Theorem B. — Let Mn be a sequence of arithmetic hyperbolic three– orbifolds with fields of definition Fn such that — for each n, Fn is a quadratic extension of a totally real subfield Bn ; — the relative discriminants DFn /Bn go to infinity ; — the absolute degree [Fn : Q] is bounded. Then Mn is BS-convergent to H3 . The first hypothesis on Mn is equivalent to the statement that Mn is an arithmetic manifold of the simplest type (in the commonly used terminology), i.e. it contains immersed totally geodesic hypersurfaces, or equivalently its commensurability class is defined by a quadratic form over Bn (using the isogeny from SO(3, 1) to SL2 (C)). Note that Theorem B includes the case of lattices defined over imaginary quadratic fields whose discriminant goes to infinity but not that of lattices defined over cubic fields.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  9  1.2.2. SL2 As explained above, the proof we give for Theorem A in the quadratic case rests on the study of the special case of Bianchi groups. We will actually study the latter within a slightly larger problem which we now explain. Fix (r1 , r2 ) and let F be the set of all number fields which have signature equal to (r1 , r2 ) ; we will denote by r = r1 + 2r2 the degree of those fields. For F ∈ F let ΓF be the group SL2 (OF ) ; then all ΓF are nonuniform arithmetic lattices in the Lie group G∞ = SL2 (R)r1 × SL2 (C)r2 , and we let MF be the finite–volume orbifold ΓF \X where X = (H2 )r1 × (H3 )r2 is the symmetric space associated to G∞ . Then we can ask the following question. Question. — Are the orbifolds MF BS-convergent to X as DF → +∞ and F ∈ F ? Here and in the remainder of this paper, we use DF to denote the absolute value of the discriminant of the field F . As stated in Theorem A, this has a positive answer for the Bianchi orbifolds (the case (r1 , r2 ) = (0, 1)). Theorem C. — For all R > 0, ε > 0 there is a C > 0 such that for any imaginary quadratic field F we have vol(MF )6R 6 C(vol MF )1−(1/3−ε) .  We also study real quadratic fields F , for which we get the following result. Theorem D. — There exists a sequence Fn of pairwise distinct real quadratic fields for which the following holds : for all R > 0, ε > 0 there is a C > 0 such that for all n we have vol(MFn )6R 6 C(vol MFn )1−1/10+ε .  The 1/10 is not optimal, even with our arguments. We note that a solution to Gauss’ conjecture that there are infinitely many real quadratic number fields of class-number one would yield such a sequence (with a much better estimate), and actually a good enough approximation to it √ also does. Let us make this rigorous : if Fn = Q( Dn ) satisfies hFn ≪ DFa n for some 0 < a < 1/4 then the sequence MFn BS-converges to H2 × H2 , with an estimate on the volume of the thin part of the order DF1+2a+ε for n all ε > 0 ; in particular an estimate like hFn ≪ log DFn is as efficient as the SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  10  JEAN RAIMBAULT  solution to Gauss conjecture would be here. Let us now briefly discuss the proof of these theorems ; until the last steps we actually work with fields of arbitrary signature. Recall that in both 3/2 cases the total volume of MF is of order DF . To estimate the volume of the thin part of MF it is natural to distinguish between components according to whether they correspond to cuspidal elements (belonging to an F -rational parabolic subgroup) or not. The part corresponding to the cuspidal elements is sufficiently explicit, and we can relate its volume to well–known invariants of the number field F (namely its discriminant, classnumber and regulator) to prove that it is bounded above by a power < 1 of the volume. The rest of the thin part corresponds to compact flats and we use a method already present in Bianchi’s work to estimate the number of such flats in MF . Namely, reduction theory provides us with a covering of MF by horoball regions (‘Siegel domains’), one for each cusp of MF . We actually need a quantitative description of the reduction theory of G, for which we rely on results of S. Ohno and T. Watanabe [32]. It is then easy to count the number of geodesics of a given length through one of these horoballs, and summing over all cusps we get an estimate for the number of geodesics of a given length. Since the cusps of MF are in one-to-one correspondance with the class group of F , we get a sum over the latter. r−1 P −r+2 , where Cj are The upper bound we obtain is then roughly DF 2 j |Cj | representants of least possible norm for the ideal classes of F . It simplifies to DF for r = 2 ; for r > 4 it diverges because of the cusp at infinity (C = OF ), and for r = 3 we can estimate it using an elementary argument about the distribution of norms of ideal classes (note that a much more precise statement holds : by a difficult result of M. Einsiedler, E. Lindenstrauss, P. Michel and A. Venkatesh [20] the ideal classes become equidistributed in the space of unimodular three–dimensional Euclidean lattices as the discriminant goes to infinity). The difficulties do not stop there, since we must then estimate the volume of the flats entering the count : these volumes are related to the relative regulators of quadratic extensions of F , and in general we did not manage to get good enough estimates for them. For F imaginary quadratic there is no problem (this is the only case where the flats are 1-dimensional, i.e. geodesics), and for F real quadratic we can use an ad hoc argument to find a sequence where we can control them. For the cubic case we do not know how to deal with this.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  11  Finally, note that via the Jacquet–Langlands correspondance, if we can estimate the number of maximal compact flats with given systole in MF for F of signature (r1 , r2 ) = (r − 2, 1) we get as a corollary the statement that a sequence of minimal arithmetic hyperbolic 3–orbifolds defined over fields of degree r is BS-convergent to H3 (we do not need estimates for the volume of the flats for this–in fact we care only about those of dimension 1). This is how the cubic case of Theorem A is proven.  1.2.3. Other cases We could also deduce from our methods a few other examples of BSconvergent maximal sequences ; since our interest is mostly in hyperbolic three–manifolds we will only state them briefly : — Sequences of maximal arithmetic Fuchsian lattices defined over totally real fields of degree less than 3 are BS-convergent to H2 ; — Sequences of irreducible cocompact lattices in SL2 (R × R) defined over the fields in Theorem D are BS-convergent to H2 × H2 . The argument of Theorem B can also be applied to higher-degree CM-fields to yield results of convergence towards (H3 )r for r > 1.  1.3. Applications 1.3.1. Quadratic forms As we mentioned the proof of Theorem C we give is a quantification of some of Bianchi’s arguments in [10] ; one of the purposes of his work was to establish the finiteness of the number hF (d) of classes of integral quadratic forms over F modulo SL2 (OF ) with discriminant d. Bianchi’s paper does not give an explicit estimate in terms of either d or DF : using our result we obtain the following estimate. Corollary. — For every ε > 0 there is a Cε > 0 such that for every discriminant d ∈ OF and every quadratic field F we have hF (d) 6 Cε (d · DF )1+ε . There are δ, Cε > 0 such that for every cubic field F we have hF (d) 6 3/2−δ . Cε d3/2+ε · DF SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  12  JEAN RAIMBAULT  1.3.2. Fibered arithmetic manifolds We can use Theorem A to prove a result on the virtual fibrations of arithmetic manifolds ; the proof of this was suggested by a discussion with J. Souto. We need to introduce some more terminology on hyperbolic three– manifolds to state the result. It is a seminal result of W. Thurston that for a so–called pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphism φ of a finitely triangulated surface S of Euler characteristic χ(S) < 0, the three–manifold Mφ obtained as the mapping torus Mφ = S × [0, 1]/ ∼, (φ(x), 1) ∼ (x, 0) has a complete hyperbolic structure of finite volume (this is proven for example in J. P. Otal’s book [33]). Amazingly, the converse is true up to finite covers : it was conjectured by Thurston, and recently proven by I. Agol [4] (following work of D. Wise) that any complete hyperbolic three– manifold M of finite volume admits a finite cover which is a fiber bundle over the circle ; the image of a fiber in such a fibration under the covering map to M is called a virtual fiber of M . Theorem 1.1 in [11], together with the fact that the Laplacian spectra on functions for congruence hyperbolic three–manifolds have a uniform lower bound [17], implies that for a given r there are only finitely many maximal or congruence lattices with invariant trace field of degree r having a virtual fiber of a given genus : see Theorem 7.2 in loc. cit.. From our results we can recover the following special case of this. Corollary. — For any g > 2 there are at most finitely many congruence arithmetic hyperbolic 3–manifolds defined over quadratic or cubic fields which contain a virtual fiber of genus g. Démonstration. — Suppose the contrary, and let S be a surface of genus g which is a virtual fiber for infinitely many such manifolds. Then by Theorem A we get that there exists a sequence of hyperbolic manifolds Mn which is BS-convergent to H3 and such that every Mn is fibered over the circle with fiber S. But the latter fact implies that any pointed Gromov– Hausdorff accumulation point of the sequence Mn has to be a so-called doubly degenerate manifold (cf. the proof of Theorem 12.8 in [3]), which contradicts the fact that Mn BS-converges to H3 .  Replacing “genus > 2” by “Euler characteristic < 0” we get a statement which deals also with noncompact manifolds and has the same proof.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  13  1.3.3. Heegard genera A handlebody H of genus g is a regular neighbourhood of an embedding in R3 of a wedge of g circles. Taking two copies H1 , H2 of H and identifying their boundaries via an diffeomorphism of the boundary ∂H (a closed surface of genus g) we get a closed three–manifold. The Heegard genus of a given closed three–manifold is defined to be the smallest g such that M can be obtained by the above construction with a handlebody of genus g. As in the case of fibered manifolds, bounds on the Heegard genus imply strong constraints on the geometry for hyperbolic manifolds. More precisely, D. Bachman, D. Cooper and M. White prove in [5] that for every g there is a C(g) such that any hyperbolic three–manifold M of Heegard genus g has max inj(M ) 6 C(g). Together with Theorem A this implies the following result, which is a particular case of the results discussed by M. Gromov and L. Guth in [27, Appendix A]. Corollary. — Given g > 0 there are at most finitely many congruence closed arithmetic hyperbolic three–manifolds of Heegard genus g whose invariant trace-field is of degree 2 or 3. 1.3.4. Growth of Betti numbers One of the original motivations for the study of BS-convergent sequences of manifolds is that in such sequences one can relate the growth of Betti numbers to the so-called L2 -Betti numbers of the limit [3, Theorem 1.15]. For hyperbolic three–manifolds, when the limit is the universal cover the L2 -Betti numbers vanish. Thus we get the following corollary of Theorem B. Corollary. — Let Γn be a sequence of maximal arithmetic or congruence lattices in SL2 (C) whose invariant trace fields are quadratic, or cubic and satisfying the conditions in Theorem A. Then lim  n→+∞  b1 (Γn ) = 0. vol(Γn \H3 )  Démonstration. — Let Γ′n be any sequence of torsion-free, finite index subgroups of Γn . Then by Proposition C in [38] (in the compact case it is Theorem 1.8 in [3]) we get that b1 (Γ′n ) = o(vol Γ′n \H3 ). Since b1 (Γn ) 6 b1 (Γ′n ), it suffices to prove that there exists a constant C independant of n such that all Γn have a torsion-free subgroup of index less than C.  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  14  JEAN RAIMBAULT  We will actually prove the following more general (well-known) claim : if r, G∞ are given, there is a C such that for any arithmetic lattice Γ in G∞ defined over a field F of degree r, there is a torsion-free subgroup of Γ of index less than C. To prove this we use a theorem of Minkowski (see [7, Théorème 2.13]) stating that if Π is a subgroup of GLd (Z), the kernel of the reduction map from Π to GLd (Z/3Z) is torsion-free. Thus the claim reduces to showing that we can find a morphism from Γ into GLd (Z) whose kernel is of uniformly bounded order, with a d depending only on G∞ and r. This is well-known, and can be proven as follows. Let G be the algebraic goup over F defining the commensurability class of Γ, and let G be its adjoint group and gF the F -Lie algebra of G. By [14, Proposition 1.2], we have that the image Γ of Γ in the adjoint group of G∞ is contained in G(F ) ; hence we get a map ρ : Γ → GL(gF ), whose kernel contains only central elements of Γ, and hence is of order less than the number of roots of unity contained in F (itself bounded by a constant depending only on r). By a local-global argument it is easily seen that ρ(Γ) stabilizes an OF -lattice in gF , hence ρ induces a map Γ → GLd (OF ) where d = dimF (gF ) whose kernel has its order bounded by a constant depending only on r. Weil’s restriction of scalars yields an embedding of GLd (OF ) into GLrd (Z), which concludes the proof of the claim.  In particular for Bianchi groups, whose covolume has the asymptotic behaviour vol(ΓD \H3 ) ≍ D3/2 , we get the following limit :  b1 (ΓD ) =0 D→+∞ D 3/2 which does not seem to have been previously known. Lower bounds of 2 the order D ≍ (vol MD ) 3 are known for b1 (ΓD ) (see [42]), and there are computations of H1 (ΓD ) for D 6 1867 in [36]. An interesting question would be to determine whether the limit log b1 (ΓD ) lim D→+∞ log D exists, and to evaluate it. The existing data indicates that it could be as small as possible, i.e. one : it may well be that almost all the cuspidal cohomology of the Bianchi groups comes from base change (which gives a lower bound of the order of Rohlfs’) ; cf. [37] for more information. lim  1.3.5. Torsion homology As in [3, Section 10] one can apply the convergence result above (Theorem A) to the growth of the torsion homology of uniform arithmetic lattices in  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  15  SL2 (C), with coefficients in nontrivial modules. Here is a sample of what can be proven : if Γn is a sequence of maximal lattices with quadratic trace field and we choose for each n an adΓn -stable latticeLn inside sl2 (C) then we have log |H1 (Γn , Ln )| 13 (1.2) lim = . n→+∞ vol(Γn \H3 ) 6π  and this generalizes without much problem to cubic lattices and to higherdimensional local systems. On the other hand the problem for Bianchi groups seem more complicated. It seems that the arguments of [31] can be adapted to this setting to prove the required asymptotics of analytic torsion, but assuming that there would still be some nontrivial analysis to perform to be able to conclude that (1.2) holds. Let us mention here that the computations of A. Rahm alluded to above show that the order of torsion classes in the first homology with trivial coefficients of the Bianchi groups can be quite large. 1.3.6. Trace formulae and limit multiplicities The following ‘limit multiplicities’ result is an immediate consequence of Theorem A and [3, Theorem 1.2]. Corollary. — Let Γn be a sequence of maximal or congruence uniform arithmetic lattices in G∞ = SL2 (C) defined over quadratic or cubic fields with the conditions in Theorme A ; for a unitary representation π of G∞ let m(π, Γn ) denote the multiplicity of π in L2 (Γn \G∞ ). Then for any regular, bounded open subset S of the unitary dual of G∞ we have P π∈S m(π, Γn ) = ν G∞ (S) lim n→+∞ vol Γn \H3 where ν G∞ is the Plancherel measure on the unitary dual.  Since SL2 (C) has no discrete series this implies that for a single representation π we have m(π, Γn )/ vol(Γn \H3 ) → 0 (see [3, Corollary 1.3]). In particular this result implies Corollary 1.3.4 on Betti numbers for uniform lattices. For the nonuniform case, rather than using an indirect argument as in the proof of above it would be more natural (and more susceptible of generalizing to other symmetric spaces, where the magic of hyperbolic Dehn surgery is not available) to give a proof using the trace formula. Such a proof was given in [39] for congruence covers of Bianchi orbifolds, but it needed an additional assumption on the asymptotic geometry, that the sum P 2 j |τj | over the cusps (see (2.2) for the definition of τ ) be an o(vol). This SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  16  JEAN RAIMBAULT  condition is easily seen to be realized for Bianchi groups (I am grateful to Akshay Venkatesh for pointing this out to me) as can be established using an argument similar to that in Lemma 5.3 below, and thus we have another proof of the Corollary. This proof is also the first step towards establishing limit multiplicities for the sequence of Bianchi groups ; the missing ingredient for this more precise result is the control of intertwining operators at large eigenvalues (see [39, Section 3.2]). There is a reverse result for the problem of limit multiplicities. In [1] Miklós Abért, Nicolas Bergeron and Balı́nt Virág extend the results of [2] to the setting of IRSs in Lie groups to obtain the following result. Let G∞ is a simple Lie group ; if Y is a Riemannian manifold let λ0 (Y ) denote the infimum of the spectrum of the Laplace operator on functions on Y . Then if ν is any IRS of G∞ supported on discrete subgroups and for ν-almost all Λ we have λ0 (Λ\X) > λ0 (X) then ν is trivial. This implies that if a sequence of lattices Γn 6 PSL2 (C) satisfies the condition sthat X dim ker(∆n − λ) = o(vol(Mn ) λ∈σ(∆n ) λ61  (where ∆n is the Laplacian of Mn = Γn \H3 ) then the associated locally symmetric spaces BS-converge to X. In particular it follows that the Ramanujan conjecture for GL2 implies (a more general version of) our nonquantitative results.  1.4. Outline In Section 2 we recall the notion of Benjamini–Schramm convergence from [3] and make various general observations about it which were not included there. The next section 4 recalls (mostly) well-known results on the geometry of the groups SL2 (OF ). We prove Theorem B in Section 3, and then Theorems C and D in Section 5. The end of the proof of Theorem A is finally completed in the last section 6 after recalling the description of maximal arithmetic lattices.  2. Finite–volume orbifolds and Benjamini–Schramm convergence In this section we fix a real, noncompact, semisimple Lie group G∞ (we will also suppose for clarity that G∞ has no center), a maximal compact ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  17  subgroup K∞ and let X = G∞ /K∞ be the associated symmetric space. We will study the volume of the thin part of X-orbifolds of finite volume by decomposing it into cuspidal and compact components. We will also recall the notion of Benjamini–Schramm convergence from [3] and prove criteria for BS-convergence to the universal cover. These results were not in the original paper [3] since the focus there was on compact manifolds rather than general finite-volume orbifolds ; this section should be seen as an appendix to this paper rather than a new development. We have however tried to be a little self-contained by recalling some important definitions from loc. cit..  2.1. A recapitulation of Benjamini–Schramm convergence As stated in the introduction, Benjamini–Schramm convergence of a sequence of X-orbifolds Mn = Γn \X of finite volume towards X means that Mn converges almost everywhere in the Gromov–Hausdorff sense to X as n tends to infinity. This can be rephrased in more group–theoretic terms as follows : for any Chabauty neighbourhood (e) W of the trivial subgroup Id of G∞ the proportion of g ∈ G/Γn for which gΓn g −1 intersects W trivially tends to 1. This allows us to define a more general notion of convergence for finite– volume X-orbifolds. Let SubG∞ be the compact space of closed subgroups of G∞ with its Chabauty topology ; an invariant random subgroup (IRS) of G∞ is a probability measure on SubG∞ which is invariant under conjugation (this term was first coined in [2]). Endowed with the topology of weak convergence the set IRS(G∞ ) of IRS of G∞ is compact. Moreover, there is a map from the isometry classes of finite-volume X-orbifolds to IRS(G∞ ) defined as follows : for any such orbifold M we may choose a monodromy from π1 (M ) to a lattice Γ in G∞ . To a lattice Γ we may then associate the only G∞ -invariant probability measure µΓ on SubG∞ which is supported on the conjugacy class of Γ ; in other terms we take µΓ to be the pushforward of the G∞ -invariant probability on G∞ /Γ by the map gγ 7→ gΓg −1 . This measure does not depend on the choice of the monodromy group Γ and we say that a sequence Mn is BS-convergent to an IRS µ if the sequence of IRS µΓn converges weakly to µ. It is established in [3, Lemma 3.5] that BS-convergence to the Dirac mass δId on the trivial subgroup is the same as e. For the definition of the Chabauty topology we refer to the beginning of section 2 of [3].  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  18  JEAN RAIMBAULT  BS-convergence to X in the sense given in (1.1). This is intuitively clear : (1.1) translates in group-theoretical terms to the statement that for almost all gn ∈ G/Γn the sequence gn Γn gn−1 converges in Chabauty topology to the trivial group. Invariant random subgroups should be thought of as a generalization of lattices and their normal subgroups ; there is a neat analogue of Borel’s density theorem for IRS ([3, Theorem 2.6]) which states that any nontrivial IRS of G∞ is supported on discrete, Zariski–dense subgroups of G∞ . Recall that an isometry of X is said to be elliptic if it has a fixed point in X, unipotent if it has a unique fixed point on the boundary at infinity and hyperbolic otherwise. Since a Zariski–dense subgroup must contain hyperbolic elements we get the following consequence : Lemma 2.1. — Let µ ∈ IRS(G∞ ) and suppose that there exists an open subset U in SubG∞ such that any Λ ∈ U does not contain an hyperbolic element of G∞ and µ(U ) > 0. Then µ = δId . In more informal language this means that for an IRS µ 6= δId a µ-random subgroup must contain an hyperbolic element.  2.2. A criterion for BS–convergence in rank one If M is a closed Riemannian manifold with (strictly) negative sectional curvature and R > 0 we define NR (M ) to be equal to the number (f) of closed geodesics of length less than R in M . Proposition 2.2. — Let X be a rank-one irreducible symmetric space and Mn be a sequence of finite-volume X-orbifolds. Suppose that there exists a δ > 0 such that for all n the systole sys(Mn ) is larger than δ. Then Mn is BS–convergent to X if and only if for all R > 0 we have NR (Mn ) = 0. lim n→+∞ vol Mn This allows to deduce from [3, Theorem 1.11] the following corollary. Corollary. — Let G∞ be a Lie group of real rank 1 and let Γ be an nonuniform arithmetic lattice in G∞ . If Γn is a sequence of congruence subgroups of Γ then the sequence Γn \X is BS-convergent to X. f. This number is well-known to be finite : in the Hausdorff topology the set of closed geodesics of length 6 R is compact, and the negative curvature forbids that it has an accumulation point.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  19  Proof of Proposition 2.2. — For each n fix a monodromy Γn for π1 (Mn ) and let µ be any limit point of a subsequence of µΓn . We will prove that µ-random subgroups do not contain hyperbolic elements, from which it follows by the generalization of Borel’s density theorem to IRS [3, Theorem 2.6] (see Lemma 2.1 above) that we must have µ = δId . Let g0 ∈ G∞ be any hyperbolic isometry, let U be a relatively compact, open neighbourhood of g0 in G∞ which contains only hyperbolic elements, and let WU ⊂ SubG∞ be the set of closed subgroups of G∞ which contain at least one element in U ; then WU is open in the Chabauty topology. We will see that for any U as above we have (2.1)  lim µΓn (WU ) = 0  n→+∞  whence it follows by a standard argument that for any µ as above we must have µ(WU ) = 0 for all U , which finally yields the claim that a µ-random subgroup does not contain hyperbolic elements. To prove (2.1) it suffices to show that there is a R > 0 depending on U such that µΓn (WU ) ≪ (vol Mn )−1 NR (Mn ), which we will now do. Let x0 be the fixed point of K∞ in X and R = sup dX (x0 , hx0 ). h∈U  Now let Sn be the compact subset of points in Mn through which passes a closed curve of length 6 R which is homotopic to a closed geodesic in Mn . Then for all x ∈ Mn \ Sn and g such that x = gΓn x0 we have that (gΓn g −1 ) ∩ U = ∅ (for any h ∈ g −1 Γn g the image in Mn of the geodesic segment [x0 , hx0 ] is a closed curve homotopic to a closed geodesic and of length 6 R), and it follows that µΓn (WU ) 6  vol Sn . vol Mn  On the other hand by Lemma 2.3 below we have that vol Sn ≪ NR (Mn ), so (2.1) follows from the hypothesis. The converse statement is [3, Proposition 6.7] : we note that we do not use it in the paper.   2.3. Estimating the volume of the thin part for products of hyperbolic spaces In this subsection we restrict to G∞ = SL2 (R)r1 × SL2 (C)r2 (so that X = (H2 )r1 × (H3 )r2 ) and we let Γ be an arithmetic irreducible lattice SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  20  JEAN RAIMBAULT  in G∞ (if r1 + r2 > 1 then arithmeticity is a consequence of Margulis’ arithmeticity theorem). Then either Γ is co-compact or it is commensurable to SL2 (OF ) for some number field F of signature (r1 , r2 ). Here we will give a rough description of the R-thin part of Γ\X in terms of the geometry of its compact flats and its cusps (the latter will be described in Section 4 in terms of number-theoretic quantities). 2.3.1. Geometry of flat manifolds For the contents of this section we refer the reader to Siegel’s book [45]. If Λ is a lattice in Euclidean space Rr we denote by α1 (Λ) 6 . . . 6 αr (Λ) the successive minima of L, by vol Λ the covolume of Λ and we put vol Λ α2 (Λ) . . . αr (Λ) (2.2) τ (Λ) = ≍ . α1 (Λ)r α1 (Λ)r−1 The asymptotics on the right follow from Minkowski’s second theorem and thus depend only on r ; note that Mahler’s criterion affirms that a set of unimodular lattices is bounded in SLn (R)/SLn (Z) if and only if τ is bounded on this set. For a compact Euclidean manifold T = ∆\Rr we define τ (T ) = τ (Λ) and also α1 (T ) = α1 (Λ) where Λ is the translation subgroup of ∆. 2.3.2. Neighbourhoods of compact flats If g is a semisimple isometry of X = (H2 )r1 × (H3 )r2 there is a maximal subset in X which is a union of flats on which g acts as a Euclidean translation or trivially. We will denote it by Min(g), and by ℓ(g) the distance d(x, gx) for x ∈ Min(g) (this is the minimal displacement of g, and Min(g) is the set on which it is attained—see [15, II.6] for a discussion in a larger context). Lemma 2.3. — There is a function f :]0, +∞[→]0, +∞[ such that for any R > 0 and any semisimple g with ℓ(g) 6 R, the subset {x ∈ X : d(x, gx) 6 R} is contained in the f (R)-neighbourhood of Min(g). Démonstration. — This is easily seen for a semisimple isometry of H2 or H . The result on a product follows immediately (note that the isometry may be trivial in some factor, in which case Min(g) is not a flat subspace but a union of such).  3  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  21  Lemma 2.4. — If Γ is an irreducible lattice in G∞ then Min(g) is a flat of X for every semisimple g ∈ Γ. Moreover, if Γ is co-compact, or if Γ is commensurable to SL2 (OF ) and g does not fix a point in P1 (F ), then Min(g) projects to a compact subset in Γ\X. Démonstration. — The first statement follows immediately from the fact that a non-trivial element in an irreducible lattice in G∞ cannot be trivial in any factor (since the lattice is arithmetic, hence obtained by restriction of scalars from a F -form G of SL2 for some number field F ). If g does not belong to a F -rational proper parabolic subgroup of G∞ , then it is contained in a maximal torus T of G which is anisotropic over F . On the other hand, Min(g) is contained in the flat preserved by T. By Godement’s compactness criterion we know that (T(F ⊗Q R) ∩ Γ)\T(F ⊗Q R) is compact (see for example [35, Proposition 10.16]) and it follows that Min(g) itself must map to a compact set in the quotient Γ\X.  2.3.3. Cusps Here we suppose that Γ is not uniform, so that it is a lattice in G∞ commensurable to SL2 (OF ). The cusps of Γ\X correspond to the points of the projective space P1 (F ). If ξ ∈ P1 (F ) the corresponding cusp is described as follows. Let P be the Borel subgroup of SL2 (F ) stabilising ξ and ΓP = Γ ∩ P . Then the cusp associated to ξ (or P ) is C = ΓP \X. Let N be the unipotent subgroup of P and Λ = Γ ∩ N , viewed as a lattice in the Euclidean space N and let T = Λ\N , a flat torus of dimension r = r1 + 2r2 . Let A be a maximal (split of rank r1 + r2 ) torus in P with the following property : ΓP is generated by Λ and U = Γ ∩ A. Let M be the (r1 + r2 − 1)-dimensional subtorus of A containing U , in other words ) (    Y r1 a1 0 0 ar1 +r2 |ai | = 1 g −1 M =g ,..., : 0 a−1 0 a−1 r1 +r2 1 i=1  for g such that g∞ = ξ and let S be the compact manifold U \M . Then C is topologically ]0, +∞[×B where B is a flat torus bundle with fiber T over S, and the fibers over {a} × S are isometric to T scaled by a factor proportional to a−1 . The length element on ]0, +∞[ is da/a and the metric on S is constant along a so the volume of the cusp truncated at ε is ε−r vol(T ) vol(S). We choose the parameter a so that α1 (T ) = 1 and let η ∈ Λ realise it (as an euclidean translation). Then the euclidean displacement of η on  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  22  JEAN RAIMBAULT  the horosphere at height a is equal to a−1 and its dispacement in X is ≍ log(1 + a−1 ). We now fix R > 0 ; we see that the part of C where there is some unipotent element with a displacement less than R is of volume C(R) vol(T ) vol(S) (where CR ≍ erR , which we won’t use in the sequel). To express this in terms of the conformal geometry of T we use (2.2) : we have vol(T ) ≍ τ (Λ). We record the conclusion of the discussion in the following lemma : let M6R,Λ = {x ∈ M : ∃x̃ a lift of x, λ ∈ Λ \ {1} : d(x, λx) 6 R} be the subset of M where some non-trivial element of (the conjugacy class of) Λ displaces less than R. Lemma 2.5. — Let R > 0. Then vol(M6R,Λ ) ≪R τ (Λ) vol(S) for any maximal unipotent subgroup Λ where S is the flat (r1 +r2 −1)-torus associated to Λ as above. We still have to estimate the volume of the chunk of the thin part of Γ\X coming from non-unipotent elements of ΓP . For this we define, for ζ ∈ P1 (F ), ζ 6= ξ, a subgroup Uζ = StabΓP (ζ). Then ΓP is the disjoint union of Λ and all Uζ − {1}. There is a unique maximal flat Fζ stabilised by Uζ , foliated by hyperplanes on which it acts cocompactly with quotient Sξ,ζ . Now we fix R > 0 and we suppose that the injectivity radius of Sξ,ζ is 6 R (there are only finitely many ζ with this property). By Lemma 2.3 the part of X where some non-trivial element of Uζ displaces of less than R is an f (R)-neighbourhood of Fζ . We do not need to estimate the volume of its image in Γ\X, only that of the part where there in no unipotent element which displaces less than all non-trivial elements of Uζ . Let :  nu M6R,ξ = {x ∈ M : for all unipotent λ ∈ Γ : d(x̃, λx̃) > R and ∃γ ∈ ΓP \Λ : d(x̃, γ x̃) 6 R} S the subset of M \ Λ′ M6R,Λ′ where some element of ΓP \ Λ displaces less than R. Projecting that to Fζ we find a subset bounded by two parallel hyperplanes : we let ℓ(ζ) be the distance between these two hyperplanes. Then the volume we want to estimate is bounded by ℓ(ζ) vol(Sξ,ζ ) and we get the following lemma.  Lemma 2.6. — Let R > 0. Then nu vol(M6R,ξ )≪  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  X  ζ∈P1 (F ), ζ6=ξ inj(Sξ,ζ )6R  ℓ(ζ) vol(Sξ,ζ ).  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  23  for all ξ ∈ P1 (F ), with a constant depending only on R. 2.3.4. Conclusion Putting together all lemmas proven in this subsection we get the following result.  Proposition 2.7. — Fix δ, R > 0 ; then for any irreducible arithmetic non-uniform lattice Γ in G∞ , such that M = Γ\X has a systole sys(M ) > δ, we have : e h h X X X X X qj vol M ℓ(ζ) vol(Sξj ,ζ )+ vol(Sj )τ (Λj )+ vol T + vol M6R ≪ T :α1 (T )6R  j=1  j=1 ζ∈P1 (F ), ζ6=ξj inj(Sξj ,ζ )6R  where the constant depends only on R, δ, X. The first sum on the right is over top-dimensional compact flats T of M , q1 , . . . , qj are the orders of γ1 , . . . , γe where the γj are generators for a set of representatives for the conjugacy classes of maximal finite cyclic subgroups in Γ, and M [γj ] is the image in M of the fixed flat of γj . Finally, N1 , . . . , Nh are representatives for the Γ-conjugacy classes of maximal unipotent subgroups of SL2 (F ), Λj = Γ ∩ Nj (R), ξj is the fixed point in P1 (F ) of Nj and the Sj are compact quotients of the Levi subgroups of the parabolics associated with the Λj . In the case where M is compact we have the same result, without the second and third term in the sum above. Démonstration. — If g ∈ Γ is a semisimple element of infinite order with ℓ(g) 6 R, then by Lemmas 2.3 and 2.4 the image in M of the region of X where g displaces by distance less than R is contained in an f (R)neighbourhood of a compact flat T . The volume of the former is bounded by C(R) vol(T ) where C(R) depends only on X and R (for example it can be taken to be the volume of a R-ball in X). Hence the first term ; the last one is obtained in the same way. The second and third terms follow immediately from Lemmas 2.5 and 2.6.   3. Proof of Theorem B 3.1. Closed geodesics in arithmetic orbifolds Here we briefly explain how to describe the lengths of closed geodesics in hyperbolic arithmetic three–orbifolds (up to multiplication by a rational)  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  j=1  24  JEAN RAIMBAULT  and prove a finiteness result. We will suppose the reader familiar with the description of arithmetic lattices in SL2 (C) (which can be found for example in [30]). If Γ is any arithmetic subgroup of SL2 (C) defined over a number field F it is well–known that we can relate the lengths of closed geodesics in Γ\H3 to the norms of units in quadratic extensions of F . More precisely : Γ is commensurable to an arithmetic subgroup of G(F ) for some quaternion algebra A over F and G = SL1 (A). We will now state a general result on translation lengths on products of hyperbolic planes and spaces, to be re-used later (see also [30, 12.3]). We use m to denote the logarithmic Mahler measure defined for a ∈ Q by X (3.1) m(a) = max(0, log |aσ |) σ  where the sum runs over all conjugates of a in Q. Let γ ∈ G(F ) have eigenvalues λ±1 and let σ : F → C is a real (resp. imaginary) embedding of F . There is a unique extension of σ to F (λ) such that |λσ | > 1, and the minimal displacement of γ σ ∈ SL2 (R) (resp. SL2 (C)) on H2 (resp. H3 ) is then equal to log |λσ |. Note that the formula is also valid in case A ramifies at σ since it gives 0 in this case. So in the end we get that the double of the minimal displacement on the relevant symmetric space is equal to P σ σ δ max(0, log |λ |) where the sum is over all conjugates of λ in C and σ δ = 2 if λ ∈ R and 1 otherwise. Let r1Ram be the number of real places where A ramifies and r1′ = r1 − r1Ram and ℓ(γ) the minimal displacement of ′ γ on (H2 )r1 × (H3 )r2 . By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality we finally obtain (3.2)  m(λ) p 6 ℓ(γ) 6 2m(λ). r2 + r1′  Now we suppose that F has exactly one complex place and A ramifies at all real places. We may suppose that F ⊂ C such that RF = C, and we will view Γ as a subgroup of SL1 (A ⊗ C) ∼ = SL2 (C). Let tr be the reduced trace of A ; any γ ∈ Γ has integral trace t = tr(γ) ∈ OF , and √ if it is moreover a semisimple element it can be diagonalized over E = F ( d), d = t2 −4, with eigenvalues ε±1 where ε is a unit of E such that NE/F (ε) = 1. Note that this kernel is an abelian group of rank 1 since E/F is inert at all infinite places but one. The proof for the following lemma follows an argument of N. Elkies [21]. Lemma 3.1. — Fix an integer r > 1 and a real R > 0 ; there exists a finite set {t1 , . . . , tm } of algebraic integers (depending only on R and the degree r) such that the following holds : for any number field F of degree  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  25  [F : Q] 6 r, any quaternion algebra A/F (split at an infinite place) and any hyperbolic γ ∈ A1 with integral trace, of minimal displacement 6 R (on the symmetric space associated to (A ⊗Q R)1 ) there is i ∈ {1, . . . , m} such that tr γ = ti . ×  Démonstration. — The set TR = {u ∈ Z : [Q(u) : Q] 6 r, m(u) 6 R} is finite for all R > 0, as the coefficients of the minimal polynomial of such an u are bounded by polynomials in exp(m(u)). By (3.2) (in this case the lefmost term there is simply m(λ)), the eigenvalues of a γ as in the statement must be some εi in TR . Putting TR = {ε1 , . . . , εm } and setting ti = εi + εi−1 we get the result.  3.2. Convergence of orbifolds of the simplest type We prove here Theorem B. The ingredients are only Lemma 3.1 and the following result. Lemma 3.2. — Suppose that Γn is a sequence of finite-covolume Kleinian groups such that for any R > 0, for large enough n any hyperbolic element in Γn with minimal displacement less than R has real trace. Then the sequence of orbifolds Γn \H3 is BS-convergent to H3 . Démonstration. — To prove this it suffices to prove that any limit of a subsequence of µΓn is equal to the trivial IRS δId . We will show that any such limit must be supported on non Zariski-dense subgroups of PSL2 (C), which forces it to be trivial by ‘Borel’s density theorem’ [3, Theorem 2.6]. The proof of this claim is similar to that of Proposition 2.2 : if U is an open, relatively compact subset of (C \ R)/{±1} let WU be the open subset of SubG (G = PSL2 (C)) of subgroups which contain an element having its trace in U . We can choose a countable set U of such U s so S S that U∈U U = (C \ R)/{±1}. Then the complement of U∈U WU in SubG contains only non-Zariski-dense subgroups. Indeed, the condition ± tr(g) = ±tr(g) describes a Zariski-closed subset in PSL2 (C), so every Zariski-dense subgroup of G must contain an element with trace in (C \ R)/{±1} and so belongs to WU for some U ∈ U. Thus it suffices to prove that for every U ∈ U we have : lim µΓn (WU ) = 0  n→+∞  (from which the result follows by the σ-additivity of any limit measure). But since for any given U , there is a R > 0 so that WU is contained in  {z : |z| 6 R} we have in fact that µΓn (WU ) = 0 for large enough n. SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  26  JEAN RAIMBAULT  We now check the condition of Lemma 3.2 for the sequence Γn in the statement of Theorem B. Fix R > 0, and let t1 , . . . , tm be the finite set given by Lemma 3.1, ordered so that the totally real ones are exactly t1 , . . . , tl . Then for any l < i 6 m we have ti 6∈ Fn for n large enough : indeed, since ti is not totally real we have ti ∈ Fn ⇒ Fn = Bn (ti ) but the relative discriminants DBn (ti )/Bn for i = 1, . . . , m are bounded so we must have ti 6∈ Fn for large n since DFn /Bn is by hypothesis unbounded. Thus, for n large enough, the traces of the elements in Γn of displacement less than R are among those of the ti which are totally real numbers.  4. Geometry of MF Recall from the introduction that if F is a number field with signature (r1 , r2 ) we denote by MF the finite-volume orbifold MF = PSL2 (OF )\(H2 )r1 × (H3 )r2 . This section is preliminary to the proof of our main results ; we record various known results about the global geometry of the orbifolds MF . We will also set notation as we go along. We begin by recalling the volume formula for MF given in [13] : (4.1)  vol MF =  2ζF (2) 23r2 π r1 +2r2  3  DF2 .  4.1. Reduction theory for SL2 We describe here the well–known reduction theory for the groups ΓF = SL2 (OF ) in a manner suitable to the use we will make of it later. We will work with the adelic version of reduction theory, which is much better suited to the study of manifolds which have more than one cusp. For this subsection we fix a number field F with r1 real places and r2 complex ones, and let r = r1 + 2r2 be its absolute degree. We will denote by Vf , V∞ the set of finite and infinite places of F . For each v either finite of infinite we denote by |·|v the absolute value at v and by Fv the metric completion of F for | · |v . We will use Af to signify the ring of finite adèles of F , and denote Q F∞ = v∈V∞ Fv and A = F∞ × Af the complete ring of adèles. If v is a finite place of F we let Kv = SL2 (Ov ), and we denote by Kf the closure Q of ΓF in SL2 (Af ) (which equals v∈Vf Kv ). For each v ∈ V∞ we choose the maximal compact subgroup Kv of SL2 (Fv ) to be SO(2) if Fv = R and Q SU(2) if Fv ∼ = C. The product K = Kf × v∈V∞ Kv is then a compact subgroup of SL2 (A). ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  27  4.1.1. Minkowski–Hermite reduction Let B be the standard Borel subgroup (upper triangular matrices) over F for SL2 , N its unipotent subgroup and T the maximal F -split torus of diagonal matrices. Let hF be the class-number of F and C1 = OF , C2 , . . . , ChF a set of representatives for the class-group of F . For each i = 1, . . . , hF we choose ai to be an idèle of (idélic) norm 1 such that for all v ∈ Vf we  have ai Ov = Ci Ov ; we will (abusively) also denote by ai the matrix ai 0 ∈ SL2 (A). Let T∞ = T(F∞ ) and for any c > 1 define −1 0 ai T∞ (c) =    t 0 0 t−1     ∈ T∞ : |t|∞ > c ,  Q where we put |t|∞ = v∈V∞ |tv |v . The following result is then a straighforward consequence of classical reduction theory (see for example [25]) : for small enough cF we have (g) : (4.2)  SL2 (A) =  hF [  i=1  SL2 (F ) · N(A)T∞ (cF )ai K.  There is an estimate for cF for number fields due to S. Ohno and T. Watanabe [32] : they prove that ! 2 1 kgvk r 6 CDFr (4.3) γ(F ) := sup inf 2 1 | det g| r g∈GL2 (A) v∈F where k · k is a norm on A2 given at each place v by a norm preserved by Kv and normalized so that ke1 k = 1. It is easy to see that we can take r cF > γ(F )− 2 in (4.2). Using strong approximation for G it is possible to replace each ai in (4.2) by an element of SL2 (A) which is equal to some γi ∈ SL2 (F ) at all finite places. We will give an explicit choice for these γi (which will actually circumvent the use of the strong approximation property of G). For ξ ∈ F we put   0 1 (4.4) γξ = . −1 ξ g. To make the sets on the right-hand side of finite volume one usually replace N(A) by a compact subset U such that N(A) = N(F )U ; we will not need to do so here.  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  28  JEAN RAIMBAULT  Let v ∈ Vf ; if v(ξ) 6 1 then γξ ∈ Kv ; if v(ξ) > 1 then one can easily compute the Iwasawa decomposition of γξ at v :  −1   ξ 1 1 0 (4.5) γξ = . 0 ξ −ξ −1 1 Fix i = 1, . . . , hF ; choose α, β ∈ OF such that (h) Ci = (β)/(α, β) and let ξ = α/β then it follows from (4.5) that N(Af )ai Kf = N(Af )γξ Kf . Putting γi = γξ we thus get from (4.2) SL2 (A) =  hF [  i=1  =  hF [  i=1  SL2 (F ) · N(A)T∞ (cF )(ai )∞ K∞ (ai )f Kf SL2 (F ) · N(A)T∞ (|ai |∞ cF )K∞ γi Kf ,  as we have |ai |∞ = |Ci | we can write the last equality as : (4.6)  SL2 (A) =  hF [  i=1  where ci = |Ci | · cF .  SL2 (F )N(A)T∞ (ci )K∞ (γi Kf )  4.1.2. Height functions Let α be the simple root of T defined over F given by   t 0 α = t2 . 0 t−1 We extend it as a character of B trivial on N, and we define a function on SL2 (A) by α(bk) = α(b). Then the height function yA on SL2 (A) is defined by yA (g) = maxγ∈SL2 (F ) |α(γg)|. We will identify this adelic function with height functions on the symmetric space X in the sense of [38, 2.1,2.2]. First we need to fix once and for all a model for X : for v ∈ V∞ we identify Xv = SL2 (Fv )/Kv with Fv ×]0, +∞[ using the Iwasawa decomposition in the usual manner where (0, 1) is the fixed point of Kv , so that Q X = G∞ /K∞ = v∈V∞ is identified with a product F∞ ×]0, +∞[r of halfplanes and -spaces. We define a height function y on X as follows : for h. This is possible since a=every ideal of OF is generated by two elements, hence if we take α, β to generate a representative for the inverse class of Ci we get that the integral ideal (β)/(α, β) is a representative of Ci .  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  29  Q (z, y) ∈ F∞ ×]0, +∞[r put y∞ (z, y) = v∈V∞ |yv |v , and for ξ ∈ P1 (F ) choose a γ ∈ SL2 (F ) such that γ · ξ = ∞ and an Iwasawa decomposition γ = bf kf with kf ∈ Kf , bf ∈ B(Af ) (see [16, Proposition 4.5.2]), and put (4.7)  yξ (x) = |α(bf )|f · y∞ (γx)  (which does not depend on the particular γ chosen). Then y(x) = maxξ∈P1 (F ) yξ (x) is a ΓF -invariant height function, and if π is the natural isomorphism SL2 (F )\SL2 (A)/K → ΓD \H3 we have yA = y ◦ π. We record that if ξ ∈ F and γξ is defined as in (4.4) then (4.5) yields : (4.8)  yξ (x) = |B|−1 y∞ (γξ x)  where B is the ideal (β)/(α, β) if ξ = α/β. 4.1.3. A fundamental set in classical setting From the decomposition (4.6) one can deduce a fundamental set for ΓF in X : let x0 be the fixed point of K∞ and for Y > 0 let B∞ (Y ) = {x ∈ X : y∞ (x) > Y } be the horoball about infinity of height Y ; one has B∞ (Y ) = T∞ (Y )N(F∞ )· x0 . Thus it follows from (4.6) that (4.9)  X = ΓF  hF [  i=1  γi−1 B∞ (Yi ).  where for each i = 1, . . . , hF we put Yi = ci = cF |Ci |. 4.2. Cusps In this subsection we make the discussion of cusps in section 2.3 more explicit. 4.2.1. Cusp stabilizers Let ξ ∈ P1 (F ) = F ∪ {∞} and let Pξ its stabiliser in G∞ = SL2 (R)r1 × SL2 (C)r2 . Let Γξ = Γ ∩ Pξ ; if ξ = ∞ then we have    t z × (4.10) Γ∞ = . : t ∈ O , z ∈ O F F t−1 SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  30  JEAN RAIMBAULT  For ξ = α β ∈ F let as before B be the ideal (β)/(α, β). Then an easy computation yields (4.11)   t−1 − zξ zξ 2 + (t − t−1 )ξ : t ∈ OF× , z ∈ B, zξ + (t − t−1 ) ∈ B . Γξ = −z t + zξ 4.2.2. Unipotent part Let Nξ be the unipotent radical of Pξ : in this subsection we study the shape of the flat tori Tξ = (Nξ ∩ Γ)\Nξ . The unipotent subgroup of Γ∞ is   0 1 1 + OF X where X = . It follows that T∞ is isometric to OF \F∞ . 0 0 From (4.11) we compute that the unipotent part of Γξ is :     −zξ zξ 2 2 (4.12) Λξ = 1 + : z∈B −z zξ  and it follows that Tξ is isometric to (B2 \F∞ ). There is a crude estimate for the shape of the lattice in F∞ associated to an ideal of OF . Let A be an ideal and a ∈ A such that kak = α1 (A). Then A contains the finite-index lattice aOF which has the same α1 , and 1/2 it follows that τ (A) 6 τ (aOF ) = τ (OF ) = DF . So we get : (4.13)  1/2  τ (Tξ ) = τ (B2 ) 6 DF .  We will also need (because of the term ℓ(u) in Proposition 2.7) an estimate of the displacement of elements in Λξ at a given height. It follows easily from the explicit description (4.12) and Minkowski’s first theorem implies that on the horosphere H = {yξ = 1}, we have α1 (Λξ \H) ≪ |B| with an absolute constant. 4.2.3. Levi component Here we describe the geometry of the flat tori Sξ (which may be called the “Levi components” of the cusps, since they come from the Levi components of the Pξ ). We will use the usual notation Log for the map OF× → Rr1 +r2 −1 defined by u 7→ (log |u|v )v∈V∞ , where we have fixed an isometry Rr1 +r2 −1 ∼ = P {(xv )v∈V∞ ∈ RV∞ : v xv = 0}, and RF for the regulator, i.e. the covolume of Log OF× . We will work at all places of F and hence need to describe things using F -algebraic groups. We fix ξ ∈ P1 (F ) and let Bξ be the stabiliser of ξ in SL2 /F , and Nξ its unipotent radical. Recall that for any finite place v of  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  31  F we have defined Kv = SL2 (Ov ). In the sequel we will make use of the Bruhat-Tits tree of SL2 (Fv ) which we will denote by Xv . Lemma 4.1. — There exists an F -split torus Tξ in Bξ such that for every finite place v, Tξ (Fv )∩Kv is a maximal compact subgroup in Tξ (Fv ). Démonstration. — Let xv be the fixed point of Kv in Xv . It suffices to show that there exists a ζ ∈ F such that for each v ∈ Vf the geodesic ]ξ, ζ[ determined by ξ, ζ in Xv goes through xv ; starting from any ζ0 ∈ F we can move it at each v by an nv ∈ N(Fv ) so that xv ∈]ξ, nv ζ0 [ ; strong approximation for N tells us that there is a n ∈ N(F ) such that nv N(Ov ) = nN(Ov ) for all v, and since N(Ov ) fixes xv it follows that ζ = nζ0 yields what we need.  We have an identification of Tξ (F ) ∩ Γξ with the group of units OF× , so that Sξ,ζ0 is isometric to Log (OF× )\Rr1 +r2 −1 . The following lemma gives a similar description for the other Sξ,ζ , where we denote by OF× (I) the congruence subgroup (1 + IOF ) ∩ OF× . Lemma 4.2. — Let ζ ∈ P1 (F ), ζ 6= ξ, let x′v ∈ Xv such that ]ζ, ξ[∩]ζ0 , ξ[= [x′v , ξ[, and mv = dXv (xv , x′v ) in case xv lies on [x′v , ξ[ and 0 otherwise. Put Q Iξ,ζ = v∈Vf Pmv ; then Sξ,ζ is isometric to Log (OF× (I))\Rr1 +r2 −1 . Démonstration. — We denote by Tξ,ζ the F-torus in SL  2 fixing ξ and Q ζ. Let Uv = Kv ∩ Tξ,ζ (Fv ) and Uζ = Tξ,ζ (F ) ∩ v∈Vf Uv . Let α be any  nontrivial F -character of Tξ,ζ and let Mξ,ζ be the Q-subgroup ker(NF/Q ◦ α). Then Uζ ⊂ Mξ,ζ (F ) and we have M := Mξ,ζ (R) ∼ = Rr1 +r2 −1 × U(1)r2 . r2 We get that Sξ,ζ is isometric to Uζ \M/U(1) , so we need to describe Uζ . In case xv lies on [x′v , ξ[ we have that Uv is a maximal compact subgroup. Now suppose that mv > 0. We prove that for every v ∈ Vf we have that v Uv = Tξ,ζ (Fv ) ∩ Kv is a subgroup identified with 1 + Pm v Ov in a maximal × compact subgroup of Tξ,ζ (Fv ) identified with Ov . We have that Uv fixes x′v since this point is on [xv , ξ[ and Uv fixes both xv and ξ. Thus we see that Uv is the subgroup of the maximal compact subgroup StabTξ,ζ (Fv ) (x′v ) acting trivially on the ball of radius mv , which is exactly the right subgroup. By strong approximation for SL2 we can conclude that Uζ ⊂ Tξ,ζ (F ) is conjugated by an element of SL2 (F ) to       u 0 t 0 × × (4.14) : u ∈ OF (I) ⊂ . : t∈F 0 u−1 0 t−1 It follows from (4.14) that Sξ,ζ is isometric to (Log OF× (I))\Rr1 +r2 −1 . SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX    32  JEAN RAIMBAULT  It follows from Lemma 4.2 that vol Sξ,ζ = RF · φ(I)  (4.15)  where φ(I) is the number of units of the ring OF /I, so that φ(I) 6 |I|. We also get that : inj Sξ,ζ ≫ log |I|  (4.16)  with a constant depending only on r. Indeed, the coefficients of the elements in Log OF× (I) in any basis of Log (OF× ) are > log |I|, and the minimal norm of an element of log OF× is bounded below by a constant depending only on r. Finally, we can also describe ℓ(ζ) in this setting : let ζ ∈ P1 (F ), ζ 6= ξ, then on the geodesic between them in X we have 1 (4.17) | log yξ − log yζ | 6 log |Iξ,ζ | + log DF . 2 To see this we argue as follows : let Tξ,ζ as above and choose γ0 ∈ SL2 (F ) sending (0, ∞) to (ζ, ξ). For each v ∈ Vf let x′v be the projection on the geodesic (ζ, ξ) in Xv of the point xv and x′′v = γ0 xv . We can choose for each v an element av ∈ Tξ,ζ (Fv ) such that av x′′v = x′v , and then (av )v∈Vf can be approximated, up to an element C of the idèle class-group, by  an element  0 −1 ′ a0 ∈ T(F ). Let γ1 = a0 γ0 , γ1 = γ1 w (where as usual w = ), so 1 0 that we have : (i) γ1 · ∞ = ξ and γ1′ · ∞ = ζ ; (ii) For all v ∈ Vf , dXv (xv , γ1−1 xv ) = dXv (xv , (γ1′ )−1 xv ) 6 logqv |Cv | + mv . The claim that (4.17) holds then follows from (i) and (ii) and the defi1/2 nition (4.7), as we have |C| 6 DF , | log α(bv )| 6 log dXv (xv , bv xv ) and Q v α(wbw−1 ) = α(b)−1 for all b ∈ B(Fv ) (and recall that Iξ,ζ = v Pm v ). By using (4.17) and the bound mentioned above on the displacement of unipotent elements on horospheres of height one we finally get the following upper bound on ℓ(ζ) : (4.18)  ℓ(ζ) ≪ log DF + log |I|  with an absolute constant.  4.3. Flats There is a well–known bijection between the ΓF -equivalence classes of quadratic forms over OF and the top-dimensional compact flats in MF ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  33  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  which we will now briefly describe ; for details we refer to [43, Section 4] and [19, Chapitre I.5] (which treat respectively the case of imaginary quadratic and totally real F , but similar arguments work in general). We will also relate the geometry of the flats to the invariants of the quadratic forms for later use. 4.3.1. Correspondance with quadratic forms The set of fundamental discriminants of F is defined as follows : DF = {d ∈ OF : d 6∈ OF2 , ∃x ∈ OF : d = x2  (mod 4)};  it is the set of discriminants d = b2 − 4ac of quadratic forms q = az12 + bz1 z2 + cz22 on F 2 when a, b, c ∈ OF have no common factor in OF (note that it may not be the case that the ideal (a, b, c) is the whole of OF ). To such a quadratic form q we can associate an abelian subgroup of ΓF as follows : Γq = SO(q) ∩ ΓF . We will now construct a flat subspace Z ⊂ X of maximal dimension, whose (setwise) stabilizer in ΓF is Γq which will act cocompactly. For v ∈ V∞ let σv be the corresponding embedding of F in C and define Zv to be : — If Fv ∼ = H3 between the isotropic lines in = C, the geodesic in Xv ∼ 1 P (Fv ) = ∂Xv of the quadratic form q σv ; — If Fv ∼ = R and dσv > 0, the geodesic between the isotropic lines in 1 P (Fv ) = ∂Xv of the quadratic form q σv ; — If Fv ∼ = R and dσv < 0, the point in Xv ⊂ P1 (Fv ⊗ C) corresponding to an isotropic line of q σv . Let r′ = |{v ∈ V∞ : Fv ∼ = R, dσ > 0}, m = r2 + r′ ; 1  1  note that m is the dimension of maximal flats in X. There is a unique flat Zq in X of dimension m which contains all Zv ; clearly the setwise stabiliser StabΓF Zq = Γq , and we will now explain (following [19, Theorem 5.6]) that Γq is of rank m, and thus acts cocompactly on Zq (since it acts properly discontinuously). Let A be the √ ideal generated by a, b, c in OF , let E be the quadratic extension F ( d) of F , and let Oq be the order : ) ( √ t+u d : t ∈ OF , u ∈ A−1 Oq = 2  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  34  JEAN RAIMBAULT  in OE . It is proven in [19] that the group Γq consists of the matrices : ( ) √  t+bu t + u d cu 2 (4.19) Γq = ∈ Oq , NE/F (ε) = 1 : ε= −au t−bu 2 2 where NE/F denotes the relative norm of the field extension E/F . A quick computation shows that E has exactly 2r1′ real places and 2r2 + r1 − r1′ × complex ones ; it follows that the rank of the abelian group OE ∩ker(NE/F ) equals r2 + r1′ = m. 4.3.2. Volume and systole Let us define the notation : ( {d ∈ DF : ∃σ, dσ > 0} + DF = DF  if r2 = 0; otherwise.  Thus the results of the previous paragraph mean that there is a bijection between maximal compact flats (of dimension > 0) in MF and ΓF equivalence classes of integral quadratic forms on F 2 whose discriminant belongs to DF+ . We will now describe the geometry of the flats in function of d. Recall that m is the logarithmic Mahler measure defined in 3.1. As the matrices on the right-hand side of (4.19) has eigenvalues equal to ε±1 it follows from (3.2) that the lengths of closed geodesics in Γq \Zq are, up to a bounded factor, equal to m(ε) for ε ∈ Oq× , NE/F (ε) = 1. As for the volume, it is proven in [19, Chapitre I.7] that the volume of Γq \Zq is equal to the covolume of Log (Oq× ∩ ker(NE/F )) in its R-span in RV∞ (E) ; it is easily seen that Log OF× is orthogonal in RV∞ (E) to ker(NE/F ), and it follows that vol(Γq \Zq ) = vol(Oq× ∩ ker(NE/F )) =  × : Oq× ] [OE  × [NE/F (OE ) : NE/F (Oq× )]  vol ker(NE/F )  and since we have RF = vol OF× = 2−  ′ r2 +r1 2  × −1 [OF× : NE/F (OE )]  × vol OE vol ker(NE/F )  we finally get that (4.20)  vol(Γq \Zq ) = 2−  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  ′ r2 +r1 2  [O× : Oq× ] RE . × × E RF [OF : NE/F (Oq× )]  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  35  × Note that the term [OE : Oq× ] on the right-hand side is bounded above by a constant depending only on d, r : indeed, it is bounded by a constant depending only on p, NF/Q (d) at each place of F dividing p, and equal to 1 if v does not divide d.  4.4. Singular locus We will be very brief here ; since the eigenvalues of elliptic elements belong to quadratic extensions of F their order is bounded by a constant depending only on r. As for the volume of their fixed flat we have the following (see [43, equation (4.8)]). Lemma 4.3. — If d ∈ DF and |d|∞ > 4 then Γq is torsion-free for all q whose discriminant equals d. Démonstration. — If Γq contains torsion this means that there exists a ε ∈ Oq× , NE/F (ε) = 1 such that |ε|v = 1 for all v ∈ V∞ (E) ; writing √ √ ε = (t + u d)/2 with t2 − u2 d = 4 we get that |t ± u d|∞ = 1 and it follows that |t|2∞ + |u|2∞ |d|∞ = 4, hence |d|∞ 6 4.   5. Geometry of MF as DF → +∞ 5.1. Counting flats in a cusp neighbourhood In this section we establish upper bounds for the number of flats containing geodesic of length less than a given R ; in view of Proposition 2.2 they BS would be sufficient to prove than MF −−−−−−→ X. DF →+∞  5.1.1. A criterion for going through an horoball For ξ = α β ∈ F recall that we have defined B as the ideal (β)/(α, β). We recall that we denote by Bξ (Y ) the horoball around ξ of height |B|−1 Y ; it follows from the description (4.8) of heights functions that it is equal to γξ−1 B∞ (Y ). Lemma 5.1. — Let ξ ∈ F , a, b, c ∈ OF , q = ax21 + bx1 x2 + cx22 and d = b2 − 4ac. Then the flat Zq goes through the horoball Bξ (Y ) is and only if 1/2 |d|∞ > 2r1 +r2 Y. 2 |aξ + bξ + c|∞ SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  36  JEAN RAIMBAULT  If ξ = ∞ this condition degenerates to 1/2  |d|∞ > 2r1 +r2 Y. |a|∞ Démonstration. — It is simpler to prove this at infinity and then pass to a given ξ than to√try to do all√computations for ξ ; thus we will do so. Let z± = (−b ± d)/2a ∈ F ( d) be the roots of az 2 + bz + c. If v is a complex place or a real place such that dσv > 0 then the highest point in Zv with respect to ∞ is the point on the geodesic line between z± which is directly height of this point equals p above (z+ + z− )/2, and the |z+ − z− |v /2 = p |d|v /2|a|v . If v is real and dσv < 0 then Zv is a point of height Im(z+ ) = |d|v /2|a|v . Thus the maximal height of a point on Zq 1/2 equals |d|∞ /2r1 +r2 |a|∞ , and this proves the lemma for ξ = ∞. Now let ξ ∈ F , and recall that we have defined   0 1 γξ = . −1 ξ Let c be the flat of X corresponding to the quadratic form q = ax21 + bx1 x2 + cx22 . Then the image of c under γξ corresponds to the quadratic form γξ · q := q ◦ γξ−1 and we can compute that : γξ · q = a(ξx1 − x2 )2 + b(ξx1 − x2 )x1 + cx21  = (aξ 2 + bξ + c)x21 − (b + 2aξ)x1 x2 + ax22 .  Thus the lemma follows from the computation we did just above.    5.1.2. We will need the following classical counting result : if Λ is a lattice in Rr then we have ρr + τ (Λ) (5.1) |{v ∈ Λ : |v| 6 ρ}| ≪ vol Λ where the constant depends only on r. This follows rather immediately from Minkowski’s second theorem and the fact that one can find a basis of Λ whose vectors realize its successive minima (see [38, Lemma 2.2] for a detailed proof in the two-dimensional case). Let Nξ,d (Y ) be the number of closed flats which intersect Bξ (Y ) and correspond to forms of discriminant d. We will now prove :  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  37  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  Lemma 5.2. — For any ε > 0 we have −1  Nξ,d (Y ) ≪ Y −r−ε |B|2+ε DF 2 with a constant depending only on d, ε.  Démonstration. — Let Se ⊂ OF3 be the set of triples (a, b, c), b2 − 4ac = d corresponding to closed geodesics meeting B, and let Φξ be the self-map of F 3 defined by Φξ (a, b, c) = (aξ 2 + bξ + c, 2aξ + b, a); in other words Φξ corresponds to the map q 7→ γξ ·q in the space of quadratic forms. Thus it preserves the quadratic form b2 − 4ac, and it follows from Lemma 5.1 above that e ⊂ Φξ (S)  (  1/2  −2  (a, b, c) ∈ B  −1  ×B  2  × OF : b − 4ac = d, a 6 2  r1 +r2  |d|∞ Y  )  .  Since Φξ intertwines the actions of Λξ and γξ Λξ γξ−1 (which we identify with B2 according to (4.12)) and the latter is given by  B2 × B−2 × B−1 × OF ∋ (u, (a, b, c)) 7→ (a, b + 2ua, c + ub + u2 a)  we get that the quotient S of Se by Γξ is identified through Φξ with a subset of ′  S =  (  −2  (a, b) ∈ B  −1  ×B  : |a| 6 2  r1 +r2  ) 1/2 |d|∞ 2 , ∃c ∈ OD : b − 4ac = d /B2 Y  where the action of B2 is given by u · (a, b) = (a, b + 2ua). Now we fix an ε > 0 ; it is easily seen that for a given d ∈ OF the number of solutions to the congruence b2 = d (mod 2a) has ≪ |a|ε solutions in B−1 modulo 2aB2 , where the constant is absolute : indeed, at each finite place there are at most two solutions, so the total number is bounded by 2l (where l is the number of prime divisors of B) which is ≪ |B|ε for all ε > 0. So we get that for a given a ∈ B−2 there are ≪ |B−1 /aB|ε possible choices for SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  38  JEAN RAIMBAULT  b ∈ B−1 (mod 2aB) such that (a, b) ∈ S ′ . It follows that X  |S ′ | = | b ∈ B−1 /2aB2 : b2 = d (mod 2aB2 ) | ≪ −2  a∈B√ |a|∞ 6 d/Y  X  64  ε  −2  a∈B√ |a|∞ 6 d/Y ε  2 ε  |aB| 6 |B| (d/Y )  2 ε  ≪ |B| (d/Y )  ε  (  −2  a∈B  : |a|∞  X  [B−1 : 2aB2 ]ε  −2  a∈B√ |a|∞ 6 d/Y  √ ) d 6 Y  ! r/2 |d|∞ + τ (B) . Y r vol(B−2 )  (using (5.1) for Λ = B at the third line) for any ideal I in OF the volume of its inverse I−1 is equal to |I|−1 vol OF so the right-hand side is bounded above by 1 1 Y −r−2ε |B|2+2ε D− 2 + Y −2ε |B|2ε D 2  which finishes the proof of the lemma.    5.2. Estimating the volume of the thin part of MF Let C1 , . . . , ChF associated to ξj are the integral representatives of lowest norm for the ideal classes of F and ξj = αj /βj , j = 1, . . . , hF such that Cj = (βj )/(αj , βj ). Let γj = Γξj ; by (4.9) we know that the projections −1/2 to MF of the horoballs γj B∞ (Yj ) cover it entirely when Yj = c0 |Cj |DF for a constant c0 depending only on r. For a field F let DR,F be the set of fundamental discriminants for F which yield units in the set TR in the P proof of Lemma 3.1. We put Nξ (Y ) = d∈DR,F Nξ,d (Y ) ; it follows from Lemma 5.2 that for all ε > 0 we have :   hF X X RF (√d) Nξj (Yj ) max Cd · vol T 6 d∈DR,F RF j=1 T,α1 (T )6R !−r−ε   hF RF (√d) X |Cj | −1/2 ≪ max Cd · · |Cj |2+ε · DF 1/2 d∈DR,F RF D j=1 F    hF X r−1 RF (√d) +ε |Cj |−r+2+ε ≪ max Cd · DF 2 d∈DR,F RF j=1  × Here Cd is a constant independant of F , since the term [OE : Oq× ] on the right-hand side of (4.20) is bounded independantly of F . In particular,  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  39  when r = 2 (which is the case of interest for later) we get using the estimate 1/2 hF ≪ DF log D that :   X RF (√d) vol T ≪ DF1+ε max Cd · (5.2) . d∈DR,F RF T,α1 (T )6R  For cubic fields we record independently the following estimates for the number of compact flats. Lemma 5.3. — For all R, ε > 0 there exists Cr,ε > 0 such that for 5/4+2ε , where NR (M ) is the all cubic fields F we have NR (MF ) 6 CR,ε DF number of maximal compact flats in M whose systole is less than R. Démonstration. — From Lemma 5.2 and (4.9) we get the estimate : NR (MF ) ≪ε,R DF1+ε  hF X j=1  |Cj |−1/2+ε .  The number of ideals Cj of norm 6 DFa is less than Cε DFa+ε for some absolute Cε > 0 (this follows from elementary arguments, see for example the proof of Theorem 3.5 in [28]) and we get that for any a > 0 we have : NR (MF ) ≪ε,R DF1+2ε−a |hF | + DF1+2ε DFa+ε . Taking a = 1/4 we get the estimate in the lemma.    Now we deal with the cusps : for a given ξ, the S[u] which contribute to the R-thin part are those with log |I| 6 CR according to (4.16) (where C depends only on r). Thus there is a uniform bound on their number, the volume of each of the associated compact flats is bounded above by RF , and we have ℓ(u) ≪ log DF by (4.18). In particular, since hF RF ≪ 1  DF2 (log DF )r−1 we get that X 1/2 (5.3) vol ℓ(u)S[u] ≪ CR hF log(DF )RF ≪ DF (log DF )r . ξ,u  On the other hand, by (4.13) and the description of the Levi component of cusps we have that the contribution of the unipotent elements is bounded by X 1/2 (5.4) RF τ (Λξ ) ≪ hF RF DF ≪ DF (log DF )r−1 ξ  Finally, the description of the compact singular locus yields that there exists a R0 such that for r = 2 we have   e X X RF (√d) . vol T ≪ DF1+ε max Cd · vol Mn [γj ] ≪ (5.5) d∈DR0 RF j=1 T,α1 (T )6R0  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  40  JEAN RAIMBAULT  5.3. Bianchi orbifolds √ We are interested here in the sequence MD = MF , F = Q( −m), D = DF as the square-free, positive integer m tends to infinity. In this case we have that OF× is trivial as soon as D > 6. The proof of Lemma 3.1 yields that for any R, for D large enough the only discriminants d ∈ DF which yield closed geodesics of length less than R in MD are among a finite set d1 , . . . , dk ∈ Z, and for each d among these the unit group OF×(√d) is equal  ×√ . It follows that maxd∈DR Cd RF (√d ) is bounded independantly of to OQ( d)  F and thus (5.2) yields that for all ε > 0 we have vol(MD )6R ≪ D1+ε  (there is no Levi part in the cusps, and the contribution of unipotents is ≪ D log D by (5.4)). This finishes the proof of Theorem C. 5.4. Hilbert–Blumenthal surfaces √ Here we consider the sequence of fields F = Q( D) for square–free D > 0, as above we denote MF = MD . This case is more subtle, as we × have that OF× is of rank one, and OE is of rank three for any totally real extension of F , and we will have to use some elementary manipulations to circumvent this problem. In the sequel we arbitrarily choose an embedding F → R for all real fields we encounter and denote by | · | the absolute value we get this way. Recall that for any number field L of degree r we have the bound (5.6)  1/2  RL ≪ DL (log DL )r−1 .  √ + Now let D, d ∈ DQ be two square-free positive integers, F = Q( D), F ′ = √ √ √ Q( dD) and E = F ( d) = F ′ ( d). Let ε, ε′ and √ εd be fundamental ′ units (such that |ε|, |ε√′ | > 1) for the fields F, F and Q( d) respectively, so √ that we have RF = 2 log |ε| and RF ′ = 2 log |ε′ |. We number the real embeddings √ : σ1 is√the identity, and √ of E√as follows — σ2 (√d) = √ d, σ2 ( √ D) = −√D ; D; — σ3 (√d) = −√d, σ2 (√D) = √ — σ4 ( d) = − d, σ2 ( D) = − D. Then we have εσi = ε for i = 1, 3 and ε−1 for i = 2, 4, (ε′ )σi = ε′ for i = 1, 2 and (ε′ )−1 for i = 3, 4 and finally εσd i = εd for i = 1, 4 and ε−1 d for i = 2, 3. It follows that the images of ε, ε′ and εd by Log are pairwise  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  41  × orthogonal and thus they generate a sublattice of finite index in Log OE . This implies that  (5.7)  RE 6 C(d)RF RF ′ √ where C(d) ≪ d1/2 by (5.6) for L = Q( d). Now there are two possibilities : 1/5 1/5 (i) both RF 6 DF and RF ′ 6 DF ′ ; 1/5 (ii) RF ′ > DF ′ . If we are in case (i) then we get from (5.7) that 1/5  RE /RF ≪d DF .  (5.8)  + On the other hand, if we are in case (ii) we get in that for all d′ ∈ DQ , √ ′ ′ ′ E = F ( d ) we have 1/2  1/2  RE ′ ≪ DE ′ (log DE ′ )3 ≪ DF ′ (log DF ′ )3 so that we finally obtain (5.9)  3/10  2/5  RE ′ /RF ′ ≪ DF ′ (log DF ′ )3 ≪ DF ′  with a constant depending only on d. Now we will define a sequence Fn as follows : let Rn = n ; by Lemma + + 3.1 there is a D(n) ∈ DQ such that for all D ∈ DQ , D > D(n) the only d ∈ DQ(√D) contibuting geodesics of length less than Rn belong to a finite . Now define : set DRn ⊂ Z>0p — Fn = Q(pD(n)) if we are in situation (i) for all d ∈ DRn ; — Fn = Q( dD(n)) if we are in situation (ii) for some d ∈ DRn . Thus in any case we obtain by (5.8) or by (5.9) that for all d ∈ DRn , √ 2/5 En = Fn ( d) we have REn /RFn ≪ DFn and in the proof of (5.2) we get (5.10)  (vol MFn )6Rn ≪ C(Rn )(vol MFn )1−1/10  where C(Rn ) = maxd∈DRn C(d) : by increasing D(n) we may suppose that C(Rn ) ≪ D(n)ε for all ε > 0, so that Theorem D follows from (5.10).  6. Convergence of congruence and maximal lattices 6.1. Description of maximal lattices 6.1.1. Unit groups of quaternion algebras We recall for the reader’s convenience, and for fixing notation, the description of the maximal lattices in an arithmetic commensurability class  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  42  JEAN RAIMBAULT  in G∞ = SL2 (C). For details we refer to the book [30]. Such classes are in correspondance with certain quaternion algebras. We restrict in what follows to lattices defined over quadratic or cubic fields, hence we will only need to consider quaternion algebras defined over quadratic or cubic fields. Moreover, in the cubic case we need only consider fields which have only one real place and algebras which ramify at that place. Fix a field F and a quaternion algebra A/F satisfying to the requirements above ; then the classification of quaternion algebras implies that there exists a set S of places of F not containing its complex place, containing the real place if F is cubic, and of even cardinality, such that A is isomorphic over F to the unique quaternion algebra whose ramification locus is exactly S. Suppose we are in this setting ; we let G = SL1 (A) be the F -algebraic group defined by the units of norm 1 in A, and at each place v 6∈ S (including the complex place) we fix an isomorphism Iv : G(Fv ) ∼ = SL2 (Fv ) and we put (i)    a b −1 −1 ∈ SL2 (Ov ) : |c|v < 1 . Kv = Iv SL2 (Ov ), K0,v = Iv c d For each finite set of places T ⊂ Vf − S we define a compact-open subgroup of G(Af ) as follows : Y Y Y KS (T ) = G(Fv ) × K0,v × Kv . v∈S∩Vf  v∈T  v∈Vf −S∪T  We finally define : ΓS (T ) = G(F ) ∩ KS (T ). Then all maximal arithmetic subgroups of G(F ) are locally conjugated to a ΓS (∅) for some collection of isomorphisms Iv as above. The conjugation is in general not global (see [30, Chapter 6.7]) but for our purposes (counting closed geodesics) all lattices obtained this way are equivalent (see Lemma 6.4 below) and we will not introduce further notation to distinguish between them. We recall that the lattice ΓS (T ) is nonuniform if and only if S = ∅. Finally, we remark that the usual definition of the lattices ΓS (T ) uses maximal orders and Eichler orders rather than the isomorphisms Iv : this is in particular the case in [30]. It is however trivial to pass from one to the other : the maximal order corresponding to (Iv ) is the one which is normalized by Kv at each v. i. This is equivalent to choosing a vertex of the Bruhat–Tits tree Xv and an adjacent edge in Xv , and taking Kv , K0,v to be the stabilizers in the action of G(Fv ) on Xv of this vertex and edge respectively (see for example [44, II.1.3]).  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  43  6.1.2. Maximal lattices The lattices ΓS (∅) are usually not maximal in SL2 (C), and not every maximal lattice in their commensurability class contains them. However any maximal lattice in SL2 (C) is obtained as the normalizer of some ΓS (T ). We will denote this normalizer by ΓS (T ) = NSL2 (C) ΓS (T ). We have a very good control over the index of ΓS (T ) in ΓS (T ) : Lemma 6.1. — We have for all F, S, T the equality (2)  [ΓS (T ) : ΓS (T )] 6 22+|T |+|S| hF  (6.1) (2)  where hF is the order of the 2-torsion subgroup of the class group of F . Démonstration. — By [30, Theorem 11.5.1] we have Y [ΓS (∅) : ΓS (T )] = 2−m (|P| + 1) [ΓS (T ) : ΓS (T )] P∈T  for some 0 6 m 6 |T |. It follows that  [ΓS (∅) : ΓS (T )] [ΓS (T ) : ΓS (T )] 6 2|T | Q = 2|T | [ΓS (∅) : ΓS (∅)] P∈T (|P| + 1) Q since [ΓS (∅) : ΓS (T )] = P∈T (|P| + 1). The result then follows from [30, Corollary 11.6.4, Theorem 11.6.5]. More precisely, there is a subgroup Γ between ΓS (∅) and ΓS (∅) such that [Γ : ΓS (∅)] 6 2|S|+2 [30, Corollary 11.6.4] and ΓS (∅)/Γ embeds in the 2-torsion subgroup of the class-group of F [30, Theorem 11.6.5].  6.1.3. Fixed points The following result is similar to [3, Theorem 1.11] (but much, much simpler to prove). For any finite place v of a number field we denote by Pv the prime ideal {a ∈ OF , v(a) < 1} and by qv the cardinality of the residue field fv = OF /Pv . Lemma 6.2. — There is a δ > 0 such that the for any R > 0, any imaginary quadratic field F , any finite set S ⊂ Vf and any loxodromic γ ∈ Γ = ΓS (∅) whose minimal displacement is 6 R and any T ⊂ Vf − S we have FixΓ/ΓS (T ) 6 C2|T | with a constant C depending only on R.  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  44  JEAN RAIMBAULT  Démonstration. — We will use the notation Kv (m) for v ∈ Vf , m ∈ N to denote the subgroup of matrices in Kv congruent to the identity modulo m Pm v Ov . First we oserve that if qv > 2 cosh(R/2) + 2 and γ is as in the statement then we must have γ 6∈ Kv (m). To see this, just note that if γ ∈ Kv (m) is not unipotent then we have | tr(γ) − 2| > qvm ; in particular we get that qvm 6 2 cosh(R/2) + 2, which proves the claim. Q Now we put C = v:qv 62 cosh(R/2)+2 (qv + 1). For any T ⊂ Vf − S we let T0 = {v ∈ T, qv 6 2 cosh(R/2)+ 2} and T1 = T − T0 . Let v ∈ T1 ; the action of Γ on Kv /K0,v is equivalent to the action on P1 (fv ) via Γ → PSL2 (fv ). So since γ does not belong to the kernel ±Kv (1) of the latter action it acts non-trivially. Any non-trivial element of PSL2 (fv ) has at most two fixed directions, so we get that γ has at most two fixed points on Kv /K0,v . It follows that : Y |FixΓ/ΓS (T ) (γ)| = |FixKv /ΓS (T ) (γ)| v∈Vf −S  =  Y  v∈T  |FixKv /K0,v (γ)| 6 2|T1 |  6 C2|T | .  Y  v∈T0  |Kv /K0,v |    6.2. Length spectra 6.2.1. A complicated formula In the adelic proof of the Jacquet–Langlands correspondance one does not care about the length spectra since all congruence subgroups are considered at once. However, when one wants results linking the spectrum of explicit orbifolds it is necessary to be more precise about that. This is developed for Riemann surfaces in [12], the French-reading reader is also refered to Chapter 8 of the book [7] ; here we “generalize” their results to imaginary quadratic number fields using the following result which we quote (j) from M.F. Vignéras’ book [46, Corollaire 5.17]. We use the standard notation (same as in loc. cit.) : for an order B in aquadratic extension E/F , and a finite place v of F the Eichler symbol Bv is given by : — 1 if Bv := BOv is not a maximal order in Ev or if v splits in E ; j. The quotation is not verbatim : her statement is in the language of orders, she considers also S-arithmetic groups and there are additional conditions in her statement which trivialize in our case.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  45  — −1 if Bv is maximal, and v is inert in E ; — 0 if Bv is maximal, and v ramifies in E. We also define an ad hoc Eichler symbol at infinity by : ( 1 if F is quadratic or E = F (λ) has no real place or A splits at the real p ε∞ (λ; A) = 0 otherwise. for λ ∈ Z of degree 2 over F . Let also h(B) denote the class-number of B ; the result is then : Theorem 6.3. — Let F be a quadratic or cubic field ; A a quaternion algebra over F . Let E = F (λ) be a quadratic extension, where λ ∈ OE . Then the number of ΓS (T )-conjugacy classes among the elements in ΓS (T ) which have λ as an eigenvalue is given by :     Y  X h(B) Y  B B · 1+ · 1− ε∞ (λ; A) · hE v v B∋λ  v∈S  w∈T  where the sum runs over all orders of L which contain λ. 6.2.2. Comparison of length spectra  First we have the obvious corollary of Theorem 6.3 above : Lemma 6.4. — The length spectrum of a group ΓS (∅) does not depend on the collection Iv (equivalently on the maximal order in AS ) chosen to define it. The precise form of the formula in 6.3 can be used to compare between the cases where S = ∅ or not ; the following lemma has a proof which follows exactly that of [12, Lemma 3.4] (see also [7, Lemme 8.23]), as the arguments used there are purely combinatorial. Lemma 6.5. — Let F be a quadratic field, and for ℓ > 0 let µ(S, T ; ℓ) be the number of closed geodesics of length ℓ in ΓS (T )\H3 . X ′ µ(S, T ; ℓ) = (−2)|S | µ(∅, S ′ ∪ T ; ℓ). S ′ ⊂S  If F is a cubic field we want to compare the length spectra of compact maximal congruence orbifolds defined over F with that of the 5-dimensional orbifolds Γ∅ (T )\(H3 × H2 ) where Γ∅ = SL2 (OF ). Let µ1 (∅, T ′ ; ℓ) is the number of 1-dimensional maximal compact flats of length ℓ in Γ∅ (T ′ )\(H3 × H2 ) (corresponding to elements which are elliptic at the real place).  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  46  JEAN RAIMBAULT  Lemma 6.6. — Let F be a cubic field with one real place, then we have : X ′ µ(S, T ; ℓ) = (−2)|S | µ1 (∅, S ′ ∪ T ; ℓ) S ′ ⊂S  where  6.3. Proof of Theorem A Theorem A follows from Proposition 2.7 with input from Proposition 6.7 (taking into account the fact that in rank 1, vol(T ) 6 R for a R-thin flat) and 6.3.4 in the compact case, and from the same plus (6.7) in the noncompact case.  6.3.1. Covolume of maximal lattices We begin by a remark about the covolumes of maximal lattices. For a field F and S, T ⊂ Vf , S ∩ T = ∅ we denote by MS (T ) the hyperbolic three-orbifold ΓS (T )\H3 . The volume of MS (T ) is given by the formula : Q 3 Y P∈T (|P| + 1) 2 (|P| − 1) (6.2) vol MS (T ) ≍ DF [ΓS (T ) : ΓS (T )] P ∈S with constants depending only on the degree of F (this follows from [30, (11.3) on page 333] and the formula for the index of ΓS (T ) in ΓS (∅)). In case F is quadratic, the 2-torsion subgroup of the class group is generated by the prime divisors of DF (see [23, Corollary 1 to Theorem 39]) (2) and in particular hF is less than the number of rational prime factors of DF so we have by comparing with (6.2) : (6.3)  (2)  [ΓS (T ) : ΓS (T )] 6 2|S|+|T |+2hF ≪ (vol MS (T ))ε  for all F, S, T and all ε > 0, where the constant depends only on ε. In the (2) case where F is cubic and we have hF ≪ DF0.24 we get (6.4)  (2)  [ΓS (T ) : ΓS (T )] 6 2|T |+|S|+1 hF ≪ (vol MS (T ))1/6−δ0  for some δ0 > 0.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  47  6.3.2. Closed geodesics Recall that for an hyperbolic three–orbifold we denote by NR (M ) the number of closed geodesics of length 6 R in M . Proposition 6.7. — There is a δ > 0 such that for any R > 0 there is a CR such that for all cubic or quadratic fields F and all S, T we have NR (MS (T )) 6 CR (vol MS (T ))1−δ .  Démonstration. — Let MS′ (T ) = ΓS (T )\H3 ; we will deduce below that for all R > 0 we have ′ (vol MS′ (T ))5/6+ε NR (MS′ (T )) 6 CR  (6.5)  for any ε > 0. The proposition then follows easily from this and Lemma 6.1, by the following argument : a theorem of Takeuchi [30, Corollary 8.3.3] states that for every γ ∈ ΓS (T ) we have γ 2 ∈ ΓS (T ), and it follows that NR (MS (T )) 6 N2R (MS′ (T )). It follows from (6.5) and Lemma 6.1 that (2)  ′ NR (MS (T )) 6 C2R · 2|T | hF · (vol MS (T ))5/6+ε) (2)  and since 2|T | hF ≪ (vol MS (T ))1/6−δ0 by (6.3) (in this case we actually get a much better bound) or (6.4) we can conclude that NR (MS (T )) ≪ vol(MS (T ))1−δ with δ = δ0 − ε, which can be made positive by taking ε small enough. The proof of (6.5) will follow from Theorem C by using Jacquet–Langlands and Lemma 6.2 with arguments similar to those used in [3],[39] ; we will repeat them here for the reader’s convenience. Fix F, S and let γ1 , . . . , γr be representatives of the hyperbolic conjugacy classes in Γ = ΓS (∅) corresponding to geodesics of length less than R in MS (∅) : we include in this count the conjugacy classes which are nonprimitive. For T ⊂ Vf − S and i = 1, . . . , r let ni (T ) be the number of ΓS (T )-conjugacy classes (in ΓS (T )) which are Γ-conjugated to γi ; then we have r X ′ ni (T ). NR (MS (T )) = i=1  Now ni (T ) is equal to the number of fixed points of γi in Γ/ΓS (T ) : indeed, for any subgroup Γ′ ⊂ Γ we see that g ∈ Γ conjugates γi into Γ′ if and only if γi fixes gΓ′ ∈ Γ/Γ′ . Thus it follows from Lemma 6.2 that (6.6)  NR (MS′ (T )) 6 C2|T | NR (MS′ (∅)) ≪R,ε (vol MS′ (∅))ε NR (MS′ (∅))  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  48  JEAN RAIMBAULT  since 2|T | ≪ (vol MS′ (∅))ε for all ε > 0. We now see that (6.5) can be deduced as follows : — For F quadratic and S = T = ∅ it follows from Theorem C (the case of Bianchi groups) and Lemma 6.4 for the other maximal congruence lattices in the commensurability class ; — For F quadratic and S = ∅ it follows from the previous case and (6.6) ; — When F is quadratic, S 6= ∅ we deduce (6.5) from the previous cases and Lemma 6.5 : we have X ′ NR (MS′ (T )) 6 2|S−S | NR (M∅′ (S ′ ∪ T )) S ′ ⊂S  6 2|S| · |2S | · 2|S| NR (M∅′ (T )) = 8|S| NR (M∅′ (T ))  and 8|S| ≪ (vol MS′ (T ))ε for all ε > 0. — When F is cubic the same sequence of arguments applies (for S = 6 5/4 ∅) by using Lemma 5.3 instead of Theorem C (note that DF ≍ (vol MF )5/6 ) and Lemma 6.6 instead of 6.5. This completes the proof of the proposition.  Note that Propositions 6.7 and 2.2 suffice to imply the mere statement of BS-convergence in Theorem A. 6.3.3. Unipotent elements 1/2  Since we have τ (I) 6 τ (OF ) 6 DF for all F and ideals I of OF , we 1/2 have τ (Λ′ ) 6 DF for any cuspidal subgroup Λ′ of any Γ∅ (T ) (see (4.12)). Now if Λ is a cuspidal subgroup of Γ∅ (T ) and Λ′ the corresponding cuspidal subgroup of Γ∅ (T ) we have 2Λ ⊂ Λ′ and it follows that τ (Λ) 6 2τ (Λ′ ). On the other hand the number of cusps of MT′ is less than 2|T | hF and it follows that the volume of the contribution of unipotent elements to the R-thin part of M∅ (T ) is bounded above by (6.7)  1/2  CR · 2|T | hF · 2DF  ≪ DF1+ε .  6.3.4. Singular locus We give here an estimate on the length of the singular locus of MS (T ) ; we will be quite sketchy about this. First, the proof of Lemma 4.3 applies in general and we thus have that there is a finite set Ds ⊂ Z of discriminants ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  49  such that the singular geodesics in an arithmetic manifold in a commensurability class defined by an algebraic group over an√imaginary quadratic field F are associated to the quadratic extensions F ( d), d ∈ Ds . Now, the singular locus of the MS′ (T ) can be dealt with using Lemma 6.2 : we leave the details to the reader, one obtains that its length is 6 ′ (vol MS′ (T ))1−δ with the same δ ′ as for the number of geodesics. It remains to bound the length of those geodesics which are singular for the elements of order 2 in ΓS (T ) not in ΓS (T ). The key point here is that those geodesics correspond to tori whose reduction modulo the primes in T belong to the reduction of K0,v : this can be seen by a local argument at each v ∈ T ; it follows that the length of the corresponding geodesics in MS′ (T ) is equal to the length of their projections in MS′ (∅), thus bounded, and the result follows from Proposition 6.7. BIBLIOGRAPHY [1] M. Abért, N. Bergeron & B. Virág, “Convergence of weakly ramanujan locally symmetric spaces”, In preparation. [2] M. Abért, Y. Glasner & B. Virág, “Kesten’s theorem for invariant random subgroups”, Duke Math. J. 163 (2014), no. 3, p. 465-488. [3] M. Abrt, N. Bergeron, I. Biringer, T. Gelander, N. Nikolov, J. Raimbault & I. Samet, “On the growth of L2 -invariants for sequences of lattices in Lie groups”, Annals of Math. (2017). [4] I. Agol, “The virtual Haken conjecture”, Doc. Math. 18 (2013), p. 1045-1087, With an appendix by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning. [5] D. Bachman, D. Cooper & M. E. White, “Large embedded balls and Heegaard genus in negative curvature”, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 4 (2004), p. 31-47 (electronic). [6] I. Benjamini & O. Schramm, “Recurrence of distributional limits of finite planar graphs”, Electron. J. Probab. 6 (2001), p. no. 23, 13 pp. (electronic). [7] N. Bergeron, Le spectre des surfaces hyperboliques, Savoirs Actuels (Les Ulis). [Current Scholarship (Les Ulis)], EDP Sciences, Les Ulis, 2011, x+338 pages. [8] M. Bhargava, A. Shankar, T. Taniguchi, F. Thorne, J. Tsimerman & Y. Zhao, “Bounds on 2-torsion in class groups of number fields and integral points on elliptic curves”, ArXiv e-prints (2017). [9] M. Bhargava, “The density of discriminants of quartic rings and fields”, Ann. of Math. (2) 162 (2005), no. 2, p. 1031-1063. [10] L. Bianchi, “Sui gruppi di sostituzioni lineari con coefficienti appartenenti a corpi quadratici immaginarı̂”, Math. Ann. 40 (1892), no. 3, p. 332-412. [11] I. Biringer & J. Souto, “A finiteness theorem for hyperbolic 3-manifolds”, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 84 (2011), no. 1, p. 227-242. [12] J. Bolte & S. Johansson, “A spectral correspondence for Maaß waveforms”, Geom. Funct. Anal. 9 (1999), no. 6, p. 1128-1155. [13] A. Borel, “Commensurability classes and volumes of hyperbolic 3-manifolds”, Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa Cl. Sci. (4) 8 (1981), no. 1, p. 1-33. [14] A. Borel & G. Prasad, “Finiteness theorems for discrete subgroups of bounded covolume in semi-simple groups”, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1989), no. 69, p. 119-171.  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX  50  JEAN RAIMBAULT  [15] M. R. Bridson & A. Haefliger, Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences], vol. 319, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999, xxii+643 pages. [16] D. Bump, Automorphic forms and representations, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 55, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997, xiv+574 pages. [17] L. Clozel, “Démonstration de la conjecture τ ”, Invent. Math. 151 (2003), no. 2, p. 297-328. [18] M. Deraux, J. R. Parker & J. Paupert, “New non-arithmetic complex hyperbolic lattices”, Invent. Math. 203 (2016), no. 3, p. 681-771. [19] I. Y. Efrat, “The Selberg trace formula for PSL2 (R)n ”, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 65 (1987), no. 359, p. iv+111. [20] M. Einsiedler, E. Lindenstrauss, P. Michel & A. Venkatesh, “Distribution of periodic torus orbits and Duke’s theorem for cubic fields”, Ann. of Math. (2) 173 (2011), no. 2, p. 815-885. [21] N. D. Elkies, “Fundamental units of imaginary quartic fields”, MathOverflow, http://mathoverflow.net/q/137480. [22] J. S. Ellenberg & A. Venkatesh, “Reflection principles and bounds for class group torsion”, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN (2007), no. 1, p. Art. ID rnm002, 18. [23] A. Fröhlich & M. J. Taylor, Algebraic number theory, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 27, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993, xiv+355 pages. [24] M. Gendulphe, “Systole et rayon interne des variétés hyperboliques non compactes”, Geom. Topol. 19 (2015), no. 4, p. 2039-2080. [25] R. Godement, “Domaines fondamentaux des groupes arithmétiques”, in Séminaire Bourbaki, 1962/63. Fasc. 3, No. 257, Secrétariat mathématique, Paris, 1964, p. 25. [26] M. Gromov & I. Piatetski-Shapiro, “Nonarithmetic groups in Lobachevsky spaces”, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1988), no. 66, p. 93-103. [27] M. Gromov & L. Guth, “Generalizations of the Kolmogorov-Barzdin embedding estimates”, Duke Math. J. 161 (2012), no. 13, p. 2549-2603. [28] H. W. Lenstra, Jr., “Algorithms in algebraic number theory”, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 26 (1992), no. 2, p. 211-244. [29] A. Lubotzky & D. Segal, Subgroup growth, Progress in Mathematics, vol. 212, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 2003, xxii+453 pages. [30] C. Maclachlan & A. W. Reid, The arithmetic of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 219, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2003, xiv+463 pages. [31] W. Müller & J. Pfaff, “The analytic torsion and its asymptotic behaviour for sequences of hyperbolic manifolds of finite volume”, J. Funct. Anal. 267 (2014), no. 8, p. 2731-2786. [32] S. Ohno & T. Watanabe, “Estimates of Hermite constants for algebraic number fields”, Comment. Math. Univ. St. Paul. 50 (2001), no. 1, p. 53-63. [33] J.-P. Otal, “Le théorème d’hyperbolisation pour les variétés fibrées de dimension 3”, Astérisque (1996), no. 235, p. x+159. [34] P. Petersen, Riemannian geometry, second ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 171, Springer, New York, 2006, xvi+401 pages. [35] M. S. Raghunathan, Discrete subgroups of Lie groups, Springer-Verlag, New YorkHeidelberg, 1972, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Band 68, ix+227 pages. [36] A. D. Rahm, “Higher torsion in the Abelianization of the full Bianchi groups”, LMS J. Comput. Math. 16 (2013), p. 344-365.  ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER  CONVERGENCE DES ORBI-VARIÉTÉS  51  [37] A. D. Rahm & M. H. Şengün, “On level one cuspidal Bianchi modular forms”, LMS J. Comput. Math. 16 (2013), p. 187-199. [38] J. Raimbault, “Asymptotics of analytic torsion for hyperbolic three–manifolds”, ArXiv e-prints (2012). [39] ——— , “Analytic, Reidemeister and homological torsion for congruence three– manifolds”, ArXiv e-prints (2013). [40] J. Raimbault, “A note on maximal lattice growth in SO(1, n)”, Int. Math. Res. Not. 2013 (2013), no. 16, p. 3722-3731. [41] J. Rohlfs, “Die maximalen arithmetisch definierten Untergruppen zerfallender einfacher Gruppen”, Math. Ann. 244 (1979), no. 3, p. 219-231. [42] ——— , “On the cuspidal cohomology of the Bianchi modular groups”, Math. Z. 188 (1985), no. 2, p. 253-269. [43] P. Sarnak, “The arithmetic and geometry of some hyperbolic three-manifolds”, Acta Math. 151 (1983), no. 3-4, p. 253-295. [44] J.-P. Serre, Arbres, amalgames, SL2 , Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 1977, Avec un sommaire anglais, Rédigé avec la collaboration de Hyman Bass, Astérisque, No. 46, 189 pp. (1 plate) page. [45] C. L. Siegel, Lectures on the geometry of numbers, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989, Notes by B. Friedman, Rewritten by Komaravolu Chandrasekharan with the assistance of Rudolf Suter, With a preface by Chandrasekharan, x+160 pages. [46] M.-F. Vignéras, Arithmétique des algèbres de quaternions, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 800, Springer, Berlin, 1980, vii+169 pages. Jean RAIMBAULT Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse ; UMR5219 Université de Toulouse ; CNRS UPS IMT, F-31062 Toulouse Cedex 9, France Jean.Raimbault@math.univ-toulouse.fr  SUBMITTED ARTICLE : ORBIFOLD˙FINAL˙AF.TEX

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
