Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_3261

Abstract:
1  Modeling and Optimal Operation of Distributed Battery Storage in Low Voltage Grids  arXiv:1603.06468v3 [cs.SY] 16 Mar 2017  Philipp Fortenbacher, Johanna L. Mathieu, and Göran Andersson  Abstract—Due to high power in-feed from photovoltaics, it can be expected that more battery systems will be installed in the distribution grid in near future to mitigate voltage violations and thermal line and transformer overloading. In this paper, we present a two-stage centralized model predictive control scheme for distributed battery storage that consists of a scheduling entity and a real-time control entity. To guarantee secure grid operation, we solve a robust multi-period optimal power flow (OPF) for the scheduling stage that minimizes battery degradation and maximizes photovoltaic utilization subject to grid constraints. The real-time controller solves a real-time OPF taking into account storage allocation profiles from the scheduler, a detailed battery model, and real-time measurements. To reduce the computational complexity of the controllers, we present a linearized OPF that approximates the nonlinear AC-OPF into a linear programming problem. Through a case study, we show, for two different battery technologies, that we can substantially reduce battery degradation when we incorporate a battery degradation model. A further finding is that we can reduce battery losses by 30% by using the detailed battery model in the real-time control stage. Index Terms—optimal control, power systems, predictive control, energy storage  N OMENCLATURE ηbat , ηin dis ch ηbat , ηbat  battery stack and inverter efficiency battery stack discharging and charging efficiency ηdis , ηch total battery system discharging and charging efficiency λ SOS2 set σ PV standard deviation of the PV forecast error Φ discrete battery system dynamics matrix a1 , a2 , a3 degradation plane parameter vectors of the triangles from the convex hull A continuous battery system dynamics matrix A1 , A2 , A3 , Az matrices to include battery degradation for multiple battery systems and time steps Aq matrix to describe polygonal regions for active and reactive power bbat battery system control input vector B battery system control input matrix for multiple battery systems B 1i , B 2i , bl Matrices and vector specifying the PWA network loss approximation This work was, in part, financed by the Swiss Commission for Technology and Innovation (CTI) 4/2013-10/2014 P. Fortenbacher and G. Andersson are with the Power Systems Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland (e-mail: fortenbacher@eeh.ee.ethz.ch, andersson@eeh.ee.ethz.ch). J. L. Mathieu is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, USA (e-mail: jlmath@umich.edu).  Br Bv Bq Cg C pv cE cE cd cn cp cr cw E e e(0) emin , emax E H i ib imax b Ibat l m n ng nl np npv ns N Pbat pagg bat loss Pbat ploss bat + − Pbat,r , Pbat,r  Pcell  branch flow matrix linearized active and reactive power to voltage matrix matrix to describe polygonal regions for active and reactive power controllable generator to bus mapping matrix PV generator to bus mapping matrix battery capacity battery capacity vector battery degradation cost in e/kWh feeder energy cost in e/MWh generator energy cost vector inverse charge recovery time in sec−1 parameter to describe the size of capacity wells state of energy of one battery system in MWh state of energy vector of ns battery systems initial state of energy vector of ns battery systems storage allocation bounds from scheduler state of energy evolution vector of ns battery systems discrete battery control input matrix nodal current vector in p.u. branch current vector in p.u. max branch current vector in p.u. battery current in A Luenberger observer gain penalty factor for setpoint regions number of buses number of controllable generators number of branches number of triangles number of PV units number of battery systems number of time steps in the scheduler horizon active battery stack power aggregated battery set point total active power losses of one battery system total active power loss vector of ns battery systems active battery power range for linear power loss approximation active battery cell power  2  pd , q d pgen , q gen pv pv ppv gen , q gen , p̂gen s ps,dis gen ∈ pgen s ps,ch gen ∈ pgen  ps,P gen ppl , pql pld , q ld , p̂ld pmin , pmax pnet R smax Sx, Su T1 , T2 U v v min , v max vs Voc wk ∈ W xk ∈ X xE xE1 xE2 xset  X 0, X 1 agg yset  z zk ∈ Z  non-controllable nodal active and reactive power load vectors controllable active and reactive generator power vectors active and reactive power PV measurement and prediction vectors active discharging battery system grid power vector active charging battery system grid power vector supporting point vector for nonconvex battery system loss calculation decision vectors of active network losses active and reactive power load measurement and prediction vectors min and max active generator power vectors active feeder generator power internal battery resistance max apparent generator power vector matrices to describe the storage evolution sample times for scheduler and RT controller decision vector for active battery power nodal RMS voltage vector in p.u. min and max nodal RMS voltage vectors slack bus voltage vector battery stack open-circuit voltage box-constrained uncertainty set decision vector for grid variables dynamic state vector of one battery system state of accessible energy well state of non-accessible energy well vector of helper decision variables to penalize deviations from the storage allocation band battery system state vectors (initial and after one time step) for ns battery systems helper decision variable to penalize deviations from the aggregated battery set point battery degradation variable for one battery system decision vector for battery degradation variables I. I NTRODUCTION  I  N the next few years, it can be expected that many battery systems will be installed in the Low Voltage (LV) distribution grid to cope with high in-feed from photovaltaics (PV) [1] and other fluctuating energy sources also connected to the distribution grid. In particular, battery systems can mitigate voltage violations and thermal line overloading, allowing Distribution System Operators (DSOs) to defer line and transformer upgrades. Some recent papers [2], [3] developed decentralized battery control strategies to provide voltage support. Decentralized control strategies have the advantage that they rely only on local measurements. Thus, they do not require  communication infrastructure. However, addressing thermal overloading requires coordination either via centralized or distributed control, since the power flows are not observable at a local level. In [4], a centralized predictive control scheme is developed to avoid thermal line overloading, but the authors do not consider voltage constraints. Furthermore, the proposed control strategies in [2]–[4] do not consider battery degradation or use detailed battery models. Since investment costs for batteries are still high [5], a battery’s expected lifetime greatly affects assessments of its economic viability. Each control action applied to a battery leads to charge capacity loss (i.e., degradation) [6], reducing its lifetime. Some recent papers propose methods to include battery degradation costs in economic cost functions [7], [8]. Another way to increase the economic viability of a battery is to exploit its full capacity, enabling operation in low/high state of charge regimes when the benefits outweigh the degradation costs. However, simple battery models do not capture the dynamics that are present when batteries operate in these regimes. For example, operation in these regimes is only possible at low charging/ discharging powers. It is possible to model these dynamics with detailed battery models [9], [10]. The objective of this paper is to develop computationallytractable methods to control distributed batteries in distribution networks with high penetrations of PV to manage network constraints such as voltage and thermal constraints. To exploit the full potential of the network and to dispatch the battery systems in an economic and efficient way, we formulate multi-period AC Optimal Power Flow (AC-OPF) problems. We use a linear approximation of the nonlinear nonconvex AC-OPF from our previous work [11] that exploits the radial structure of a LV network. The approximation captures line losses and is linear in active and reactive power injections. Linear approximations have been developed for distribution networks [12], [13]; however, these neglect line losses. The so-called DC power flow approximation and the approximation in [14] are not applicable for distribution grids since, in LV grids, active power flow is dominated by voltage magnitude differences rather than voltage angle differences. Nonlinear convex relaxations of the AC-OPF problem also exist; however, the resulting semi definite [15], [16] and second order cone [17], [18] programs are computationally large and not suitable for computationally-limited controllers. Linear programming approximations of the second order cone programming problem have been developed, but the number of the linear constraints is large [19]. Ref. [20] derives an AC power flow approximation for distribution networks that is linear between the complex voltage and the complex power injections, but does not demonstrate how to use the approximation within an Optimal Power Flow (OPF) problem. Our contribution is the development of a control strategy that leverages the linearized AC-OPF approximation to optimize distributed battery operation within a LV grid. We incorporate the linear AC-OPF into a two-stage Model Predictive Control (MPC) control scheme that consists of a scheduler and a real-time (RT) controller. The scheduler is a robust MPC that solves a multi-period OPF minimizing battery degradation and maximizing PV utilization subject to grid and storage  3  constraints. We use the concept of degradation maps allowing us to describe the impact on degradation associated with discrete control actions. By using a piecewise-affine (PWA) representation of the map, we are able to use efficient Linear Programming (LP) solvers. We link the planning domain with the RT domain by computing storage allocation bounds that are used by the RT controller, which solves an RT-OPF using a detailed battery model and RT measurements of the network and battery states to minimize the battery and network losses. As a further contribution, we show that simple battery models lead to high power errors within RT control applications. This paper is organized as follows: Section II defines the problem that we aim to solve. Section III presents the battery models used in the proposed controllers. Section IV reviews the linearized OPF formulation that is included in our controllers. Section V describes the controller formulations for the scheduler and RT controller. Section VI presents the simulation results and a battery lifetime assessment. Finally, Section VII presents the conclusions.  III. BATTERY M ODELING In this section, we extend the linear battery models developed in our previous work [9]. The resulting models capture the main relevant characteristics of battery systems and allow  SoE  Local Area Control RT Control  Scheduler (LAC)  Figure 1. Illustration of the problem environment. The overall control objective is to maximize PV infeed while managing grid constraints and minimizing battery degradation.  II. P ROBLEM D EFINITION Existing inverter-level strategies to maximize PV infeed include active power curtailment [21] and reactive power control [22], which are used by DSOs in Germany [23]. In contrast to OPF methods, no communication infrastructure is needed. However, OPF methods enable optimal utilization of the grid. We propose a method that combines distributionlevel OPF with a storage control strategy that could leverage high bandwidth communication links already available at most households. Figure 1 illustrates the problem environment. Battery systems are used to mitigate voltage violations and thermal line overloading that results from high PV infeed in LV networks, enabling the DSO to defer equipment upgrades. The overall control objective is to maximize PV infeed, while managing grid constraints and minimizing battery degradation. PV maximization can be achieved by minimizing the net power pnet . We assume local area control (LAC) entities compute optimal allocation schedules for the storage devices in their area every hour for a 24 hour horizon. We assume each area contains a fraction of the total number of storage devices within the full distribution network, for example, 10-200 devices connected to a feeder. It uses the storage allocation schedule, knowledge of each battery’s State of Energy (SoE), and RT measurements of the active and reactive power consumption of the loads (pld , qld ) and power production of the PV generators pv (ppv gen , qgen ) to solve an RT-OPF to compute RT active and s reactive power battery setpoints (psgen , qgen ) every 10 seconds. Figure 2 shows the relationships between the sections of the paper. Different battery models are presented in Section III. The linearized AC-OPF (Section IV) is incorporated into the scheduler (Section V-B) and RT controller (Section V-C).  ppv gen pv qgen  pld qld  pnet  psgen s qgen  Li  fet  el Mod Map Scheduler c i s (Sec.V-B) Ba dation ra g e D  Battery Modeling (Sec.III)  im eA  sse  ssm  en  t Results (Sec.VI)  Linearized OPF (Sec.IV)  Ex Det tende aile d M RT control d L od oss el (Sec.V-C) Mo del  l tro ce n o c an RT rform Pe  Figure 2. Relationships between the sections of the paper.  Pcell  ηbat Ibat R Voc  Pbat  ηin ps,dis gen ps,ch gen  Figure 3. Block diagram of a battery system consisting of a grid connected inverter (right block) and battery stack (left block).  for tractable controller formulations. Note that these models are used within our controllers, but not used to simulate realistic battery systems. Recognizing that these models do not capture all battery dynamics, we use the DUALFOIL electrochemical battery model [24] to represent real batteries in the RT simulations presented in Section VI. A. Efficiency In order to determine the cost optimal operation of multiple battery systems, we first need a model that describes the total efficiency of an individual battery system considering both the battery and inverter losses. The models developed in [9] only included the battery losses so we extend them to include the inverter losses. Figure 3 shows a block diagram  4  Pcell  1 bat  ηbat ηin  1  0.5  ηdis ηch 0 −10  −5 Grid Power ps,ch (kW) gen  0  0 5 10 s,dis Grid Power pgen (kW)  of a battery system. The crucial parameter that influences the battery efficiency ηbat is the battery’s internal resistance R. Using a Thevenin circuit equivalent, the battery power Pbat is Pbat = Voc Ibat − RIbat 2  ,  − Pbat,r  (1)  where Voc is the open circuit voltage (OCV). The battery efficiency for discharging currents Ibat > 0 is  1) Linear Basic Model: The first model is an integrator model Ė = −Pcell , (7) where E denotes the time-varying SoE. As shown in Fig. 5, Pcell is a nonlinear function of the battery power. To derive a linear model, we linearize Pcell between 0 and rated powers − + Pbat,r , Pbat,r by evaluating (5) at those points. By including an averaged inverter efficiency η̄in , we obtain  s,dis  pgen − + −1 −1 . Ė ≈ [−ηbat (Pbat,r ) η̄in −ηbat (Pbat,r )η̄in ] s,ch pgen {z } | {z } |  ,  ch ηbat =  RIbat Pcell =1+ Pbat Voc − RIbat  .  (3)  ch For Voc >> RIbat , we can approximate ηbat as follows: ch dis ηbat ≈ ηbat =1−  RIbat Voc  .  |  (2)  where the internal cell power Pcell is referred to as the power input. The battery efficiency for charging currents Ibat < 0 is  (4)  The battery efficiency can be expressed as a function of Pbat by solving (1) for Ibat and substituting the resulting expression into (4) √ Voc − Voc 2 − 4RPbat ηbat = 1 − . (5) 2Voc Including the inverter efficiency ηin the total losses are (   s,dis −1 ηbat −1 ηin −1 − 1 ps,dis gen = ηdis − 1 pgen loss Pbat = s,ch (ηbat ηin − 1)ps,ch gen = (ηch − 1) pgen , (6) s,ch where ps,dis gen ≥ 0 and pgen < 0 represent the discharging and charging grid powers. The multiplication of ηbat and ηin leads to a non-convex loss function, which is shown in Fig. 4 (blue curve). The inverter efficiency is obtained from [25]. B. Dynamics We also model fast battery dynamics. The models in [9] expressed the state variable in terms of normalized charge, and here we express it in terms of energy for convenience.  −ηch  −1 −ηdis  2  Voc Ibat − RIbat RIbat Pbat = =1− Pcell Voc Ibat Voc  + Pbat Pbat,r  Figure 5. Linear approximation of the cell power Pcell with respect to the battery power Pbat .  Figure 4. Battery system efficiencies and total power losses as a function of the grid power. The plot is calculated for a 10kW battery system with R= 10mΩ,Voc = 42V, and a standard inverter efficiency curve from [25].  dis ηbat =  discharging −1 Pcell = ηbat Pbat  charging Pcell = ηbat Pbat  Ploss Efficiency η  Power Losses (kW)  2  {z  bT bat  }  (8) 2) Linear Extended Model: The linear extended model allows us to capture the rate capacity effect [26] or charge relaxation effect [27]. This effect accounts for the ion diffusion in the electrolyte and reduces the accessible battery capacity for high battery powers. As we have presented in [9] we capture this effect by modifying the KiBaM model [28]. The model is " #  T   s,dis  cr − ccwr pgen bbat 1−cw ẋE = x + E cr − cr s,ch pgen 0 cw 1−cw | {z } A  E  = xE1 + xE2  , T  (9)  where xE = [xE1 , xE2 ] denotes the state vector for two virtual wells that are interconnected. Energy can only be withdrawn from the available well xE1 . The parameter cw determines the size of the wells and cr is the inverse charge recovery time. 3) Comparison of models: Figure 6 demonstrates the merit of the linear extended model as compared to the linear basic model, which does not capture the rate capacity effect. The figure shows the relative error between the maximum power that could be applied to the system as modeled with the linear basic model as compared the linear extended model for different states of energy and as a function of the sample time used within discrete versions of the models. The linear basic model overestimates the maximum power available at high/low SoE regimes for short sample times (seconds to minutes); however, it is as accurate as the linear extended model for sample times greater than or equal to 45 min. This means that for RT control applications, the linear extended model is significantly more accurate than the linear basic model.  5  0.8  0.6  0.6  0.4  0.4  0.2  0.2  Degradation (kWh/h)  State of Energy SoE (-)  0.8  Relative power error  1  1  Identified Degradation Map PWA Convex Hull  0.01  0.005  0  10  -10  0  0 Power (kW)  0  0  15  30 45 Sample Time T (min)  60  Figure 6. Relative battery power error of the linear basic model as compared to the linear extended model as a function of the sample time.  0  Figure 7. Illustration of the degradation map for a 10 kWh battery system (cE = 10kWh). The red surface is the PWA convex hull (11) of the identified map (blue surface). Table I DUALFOIL C ONFIGURATION  C. Degradation Charge capacity loss in lithium ion (Li-ion) batteries is a slow process and hard to model. Among the contributors to capacity loss are two chemical side reactions that irreversibly transform cyclable ions into solids during battery operation. In [9], we presented a method to identify a stationary degradation process on an arbitrary battery usage pattern. The method produces a degradation map, where degradation is a function of the battery power and SoE. Calendar life degradation is also included in the degradation map. Specifically, when the battery power is zero (i.e., the battery is resting), the degradation map in Fig. 7 shows non-zero degradation, which is a function of the SoE. Unfortunately, degradation maps are in general nonconvex [29], such that we cannot apply efficient convex solvers in our optimization framework. As an extension to the work in [9], we compute the convex hull of the degradation map from [9] using Delaunay triangulation [30]. Figure 7 shows the convex hull (red surface) of the identified degradation map (blue surface), assuming a LiCoO2 graphite cell modeled with the DUALFOIL electrochemical battery model [24] configured as in Table I. The operating conditions used to determine the map are detailed in [9]. The rate constants rsc and rsa are tuned in such a way that after 4000 full cycles 80% of the initial battery capacity remains. The map in [9] is normalized with respect to the energy capacity cE allowing us to scale the map for any battery size. By evaluating the plane parameters a1 , a2 , a3 ∈ Rnp ×1 of np triangles from the convex hull, we can define the following PWA mapping for the normalized degradation rate z/cE :   z Pbat E = max a1 + a2 + a3 cE cE cE  10  5 Energy (kWh)  .  (10)  By multiplying (10) by cE , we can express the degradation z in absolute terms for any battery with energy capacity cE as    Pbat z = max [a1 a2 a3 ]  E  . (11) cE  ambient conditions cathode anode electrolyte Acell  isothermal LiCoO2 Graphite LiPF6 1 m2  rsc rsa off Vcut  1e-11 1e-11 3.0 – 4.2 V  cell area corresponds to 30 Ah for the cut-off voltage window side reaction rate constant cathode side reaction rate constant anode cut-off voltage window  IV. O PTIMAL P OWER F LOW FOR L OW VOLTAGE G RIDS In our previous work [10], [11], we derived a linearized OPF formulation. Based on the Forward Backward Sweep (FBS) power flow method from [31], we linearly approximated voltage, power losses, and branch flow limits as linear functions of the nodal reactive and active power injections. The following assumptions were made. • We assume three-phase balanced radial LV networks. It is common to assume three-phase balanced LV networks in Europe [32] since houses and PV inverters are connected to three phases; however, this assumption is less valid for North America. However, many studies make this assumption e.g., [16], [33]–[35]. The power flow equations we use could also be extended to handle unbalanced networks [31] and can be incorporated in the proposed control framework. For example, [33] describes how one might extend a related power flow method. • We assume that LV networks have high resistance over reactance ratios (R/X ≥ 2) [32]. • We assume that voltage angle differences in LV networks are small (≤ 10◦ ). We summarize the formulation here; for full details see [11]. First, we give the generic formulation, before we specialize it to our scenario in Section V. We  T define following decision vector x = pgen , q gen , ppl , pql , v , where pgen ∈ Rng ×1 and q gen ∈ Rng ×1 are the active and reactive generator powers, where ng is the number of generators; ppl ∈ Rnl ×1 and pql ∈ Rnl ×1 are the approximate active power losses due to active and reactive power injections (defined in [11]), where nl is the number of lines; and v ∈ Rn×1 is the voltage vector, where n is the number of buses. Assuming positive linear  6  pgen  pgen smax smax  φ  φ  qgen  qgen  a)  b)  Figure 8. Approximated reactive power capability areas a) circular-bounded b) cos φ-bounded. The polygonal convex regions can be described with the constraints (12h-l). [10]  costs cp for the active generator powers, the OPF problem can be approximated as the following LP problem: J ∗ = min cTp pgen x  1T Cg pgen − 1Tppl − 1T pql = 1T pd C g pgen pd (b) B v − v = Bv − vs C g q gen qd (c) B 1l ppl − B 2l C g pgen ≥ B 2l pd + bl (d) B 1l pql − B 2l C g q gen ≥ B 2l q d + bl + B r pd + B r pd ≤ B r C g pgen ≤ imax (e) −imax b b (f) v min ≤ v ≤ v max (g) pmin ≤ pgen ≤ pmax (h) pgen + Aq q gen ≤ smax (i) pgen − Aq q gen ≤ smax (j) pgen + Aq q gen ≥ −smax (k) pgen − Aq q gen ≥ −smax (l) −B q smax ≤ q gen ≤ B q smax , (12) where pd ∈ Rn×1 and q d ∈ Rn×1 are the active and reactive net load; C g ∈ Rn×ng maps generators to buses; and B v , B r , Aq , and B q are matrix parameters defined in [11] and [10]. Constraint (12a) enforces power balance in the grid. The voltage approximation is included in (12b), where each element of v s ∈ Rnl ×1 is the slack bus voltage. The constraints (12c,d) incorporate epigraph formulations that are piecewise linear inner approximations of the power losses. We specify the matrix and vector parameters B 1l , B 2l , and bl to obtain a more compact form of the inequalities defined in [11]. Constraint (12e) includes branch flow limits, where ib ∈ Rnl ×1 are the branch flow currents. Constraints (12f,g) specify the lower and upper bounds for the voltage (v min , v max ) and active generator powers (pmin , pmax ). Constraints (12h-l) approximate the generators’ apparent power limits, where smax is the generators’ maximum apparent power; specifically, we define circular-bounded and cos φ-bounded active and reactive power settings by approximating the circular area/segments with convex sets [10] that describe the polygons depicted in Fig 8. s.t.  (a)  V. O PTIMAL BATTERY O PERATION A. Control Structure As shown in Fig. 9 our proposed control scheme consists of two control entities working at different time scales. We  Local Area Control Forecast emin , emax PV, Load Scheduler RT pagg bat T1 = 1h Control p , q T2 = 10 s d  e  d  Figure 9. Centralized control scheme consisting of a scheduler and an RT controller. The scheduler uses robust MPC. The RT controller solves a RTOPF using the storage allocation from the scheduler and RT measurements.  do not allow for PV curtailment and so the scheduler has to calculate future storage allocation bounds in terms of energy emin , emax and aggregated power pagg bat that are feasible under the worst case PV forecast scenarios. The RT controller tries to control the storage units within these bounds, while minimizing network and storage losses and taking into account RT measurements of the net load. B. Scheduler We solve a robust multi-period OPF subject to the worst case PV predictions. Since we solve the multi-period problems in a receding horizon fashion every hour with updated energy levels, the scheduler acts as a robust MPC. 1) Incorporation of Distributed Storage: Due to its high sample time T1 = 1 hour, the scheduler cannot capture the detailed battery dynamics so we use the linear basic model (8). The discrete version of (8) for ns battery systems is   e(k + 1) = I ns e(k) + T1 diag{−η −1 dis } diag{−η ch } | {z } B   ps,dis gen , ps,ch gen | {z }   psgen  (13) ns ×1 ns ×1 s,ch < 0 ∈ R , η , η ≥ 0 ∈ R , p where ps,dis dis ch ∈ gen gen Rns ×1 are the total discharging and charging efficiencies of the storage units, and I ns denotes the identity matrix of dimension ns . The complete SoE evolution E = [e(1), ..., e(N − 1)]T for a time horizon of length N is  ns    s  pgen (0) I B 0      ..  E =  ...  e(0)+ ... . . .  .  , |  I ns {z } Sx  B |  ··· {z Su  B }|  psgen (N − 1) {z } U  (14) where e(0) is the initial SoE vector. 2) Incorporation of Battery Degradation: In Section III-C we calculated the PWA convex hull (11) of the degradation map. To incorporate degradation into the planning problem, we define helper decision variables Z = [z(0), . . . , z(N − 1) ∈ Rns ×1 ]T and include the epigraphs of (11) as constraints in our problem. Specifically, we substitute E from (14) into an extended version of (11) that includes ns battery systems with energy capacities cE ∈ Rns ×1 and obtain a degradation equation in terms of the control variable U as follows: (A1 + A2 S u ) U + Az Z ≤ −A2 S x e0 − A3 cE  ,  (15)  7  where A1 = [I N ns ⊗ a1 ][I N ⊗ [I N ns I N ns ]], A2 = [I N ns ⊗ a2 ], A3 = I N ⊗ [I ns ⊗ a3 ], and Az = [I N ns ⊗ −1np ×1 ]. The operator ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product. 3) Robust Scheduling: To solve a multi-period OPF we first incorporate a temporally-coupled sequence of single period OPF problems (12). We extend the decision vector to X = [x0 , · · · , xN −1 ]T , where pgen,k = [pnet (k) psgen (k)]T ∈ xk and pnet (k) (i.e., the net power into or out of the LAC) is treated as a slack generator. Since we do not allow for PV curtailment, we set T pd,k = −C pv (p̂pv gen,k + w k 3σ pv,k ) + p̂ld,k  ,  (16)  RT Control emin , emax pagg bat pd , q d  s,1 ps,1 e1 gen , qgen Battery 1 .. MPC . s,n s,n Control pgen , qgen en Battery n  x1 Observer 1 .. . xn Observer n  Figure 10. Block diagram of the RT controller.  p̂pv gen,k  where the PV and load forecasts are denoted by and p̂ld,k , and C pv ∈ Rn×npv maps the npv PV units to the buses. The standard deviation σ pv,k of the PV forecast error could be determined by using the results from [36]. We define W = [w0 , . . . , wN −1 ]T , which is a box-constrained uncertainty set where −1 ≤ W ≤ 1. Note that we do not consider load forecast uncertainty, since absolute load forecast errors are generally much smaller than absolute PV forecast errors for a grid with high PV penetration. The scheduling problem is ! N −1 X T min T1 cn pnet (k) + cd 1 z(k) X,Z k=0 (17) s.t. (a) −S x e(0) ≤ S u U ≤ cE − S x e(0) ∀xk : max (12a-c,e), (12d,g-l),(15) , −1≤W ≤1  where cn and cd are cost parameters for the net power and the battery degradation. With this formulation, the PV infeed will be maximized since the optimizer minimizes pnet . The constraint set (17a) operates the storage devices at their minimum and maximum bounds. To retrieve the robust counterpart of (17), we eliminate wk and use |σ pv,k | within each constraint [37], since X does not multiply the random variable [38]. 4) Determination of Robust Storage Level Bounds: To link the planning domain with the RT domain, the scheduler sends robust allocation bounds for the RT controller emin  =  min(e(0), e(1))  (18)  emax  =  max(e(0), e(1)) ,  (19)  where we evaluate e(1) with (14). The scheduler also sends the aggregated battery setpoint pagg bat to give the RT controller the ability to operate the batteries at their individual optimal operation points T ∗s pagg bat = 1 pgen (1)  ,  (20)  where p∗s gen (1) is a portion of the optimal decision vector of the robust problem (17). C. Real-Time Control As depicted in Fig. 10, the RT controller receives the storage allocation bounds and aggregated battery power setpoint. pv Using RT measurements of the PV injections ppv gen , q gen and loads pld , q ld to compute pd , q d , it sets the reactive and active battery powers psgen , q sgen by solving an RT-OPF. In particular, we solve an MPC problem for one step incorporating the  linear extended battery model (9), allowing us to estimate the power available from each individual battery system and utilize its full capacity potential. The decision vector is u0 = agg T loss [psgen q sgen λ ploss bat yset xset ] , where λ and pbat are helper variables to incorporate battery losses into the problem and agg yset and xset are helper variables to penalize deviations from the storage allocation bounds. The RT-OPF problem is min u0  1T pgen + 1T ploss + | {zbat} | {z }  network losses  s.t.  battery losses  (12a) − (12l) (a) X 1 = (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m)  agg yset + 1T xset {z } |  deviations from setpoint regions  ΦX 0 + Hpsgen    cw 0 ≤ X1 ≤ 1 ⊗ 1 − cw ns − diag{m}CX 1 − I xset ≤ −emin m diag{m}CX 1 − I ns xset ≤ emax m I ns xset ≤ 0 agg ≤ −mpagg −m1T psgen − yset bat agg −yset ≤ 0 pd = −C pv ppv gen + pld q d = −C pv qpv gen + q ld  −I ns psgen + I ns ⊗ ps,P gen λ = 0 ns loss + I ns ⊗ f (ps,P −I gen ) λ = 0  ns pbat1×n s λ=1 I ⊗1 λ = [λ1 , . . . , λns ]T ∀λi : SOS2 , ns ×1  (21) where (21a) is the discrete version of (9) for multiple battery systems. Specifically, X 0 is the initial battery system state and X 1 is the state after one time step; Φ is the battery system dynamics matrix, H is the RT control input matrix, and C maps the internal states of each battery system to the SoE. Constraint (21b) avoids overspill of the battery capacity wells. Constraints (21c-e) define two regions and enable us to penalize deviations outside of the storage allocation bounds emin , emax with the penalty factor m, where diag{m} is a square matrix with m on the diagonal. We only penalize the aggregated power setpoint in the discharging direction with (21f,g), since overcharging can be dealt with in RT as it will not result in line limit violations. This yields lower storage utilization and thus results in lower battery degradation. Constraints (21h,i) incorporate the RT measurements and (21j-m) represent nonconvex piecewise linear functions of the battery losses using an efficient Special Ordered Set (SOS) formulation [39]. In particular, we discretize (6) with  8  R14  Table II S IMULATION PARAMETERS .  R15  R13  R12  R6  R3  R0  R1  R2  R4  R11  Storage units Storage parameters  R17  R5  R10  R7  R16  18 s,max = 10 kVar, =10 kW, qgen ps,max gen cE =20 kWh, ηdis = 0.91, ηch = 0.91 Voc = 42 V, R = 10 mΩ efficiency curve from [25] convexified degradation map from [9] convexified degradation map from [29] 24 @ 1h sample time 100 e/MWh 400 e/kWh P = 10 m = 1000 18 = 20 kW (λ = 1) ppv,max gen 1 year 18 @ 4kW (randomized profile) European LV network [32] vmax = 1.1,vmin = 0.9  R8  Inverter Deg. model LiCoO2 Deg. model LiFePO4 Scheduler horizon N Net energy cost cn Degradation cost cd Supporting points Penalization factor PV units PV power Simulation horizon Households Grid Voltage Limits  R9  R18  P supporting points ps,P gen and evaluate (6) for each point and for each battery system. The sum of the elements in the set λi has to be equal to 1, which is enforced in (21l), and at most two elements in the set have to be consecutively non-zero (21m). This is referred to as an SOS2 set. Constraint (21m) makes the problem a Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem. We also implemented an observer to estimate the internal states xE of each individual battery system, since battery management systems typically provide only the SoE. Since the system (9) is detectable, [40] we can design following Luenberger observer    1 Pbat ˙x̂E = (A − l[1 1])x̂E + l , (22) 0 E  Energy Level (MWh)  Figure 11. Modified Cigre test grid [32] with PV generators (20kW) and battery storage units (10kVA/20kWh).  0.02  0.01  0 25  5 6 20  15  7 10  where l ∈ R2×1 is chosen such that (A − l[1 1]) is stable.  5  8 0  9  Storage ID  Time (h)  VI. S IMULATION R ESULTS Through case studies we demonstrate the performance of our centralized control scheme. The parameters are listed in Table II. Figure 11 shows the units within the test grid. We assess each control stage with simulations on different timescales. To study the RT controller, we simulate its performance on a sunny day and use the DUALFOIL electrochemical battery model [41] in place of a real battery system. We assume perfectly balanced cells, such that we can scale the model to emulate any required power and energy capacity. To study the impact of the scheduler on battery lifetimes, we need to consider a long time horizon. However, to reduce simulation times, we omit the RT stage and run our scheduler with the simplified battery model and model the capacity loss with the convexified degradation maps. To assess battery lifetimes, we compute the capacity loss from the original degradation maps.  A. RT control performance In Fig. 12 we show the RT evolution of the battery energy levels. The gray boxes are the allocation bounds emin , emax from the scheduler. The scheduler uses the linear basic model, which does not include the rate capacity effect. However, the RT controller uses the linear extended model and so, in high state of energy regimes, it reduces the battery power to make  Figure 12. RT evolution of the battery energy levels. The gray boxes are the storage allocation bounds from the scheduler, in which the RT controller can operate. For high state of energy regimes, the RT controller has to reduce the battery power to make the full capacity available.  the full capacity available, corresponding to a slower rise in energy levels. To reduce battery system losses, the RT controller dispatches the batteries to loss-optimal operating points, while keeping them within the allocation bounds. This can be seen in Fig. 13, where the RT controller sets the battery powers in a rolling fashion, resulting in switched battery operation. Figure 14 shows compliance with the voltage and line flow constraints. Since we use a linear approximation of the power flow in our controllers, we calculate the exact power flows by running the full nonlinear AC power flow with all power injection variables set to the setpoints calculated by the RT controller. As already shown in [11], the linear approximation leads to a solution that is always feasible. This we can see from Fig. 14, since the maximum line capacity is not fully utilized and the allowable voltage band (0.9 − 1.1 pu) is not fully used. The mean absolute errors (MAEs) in voltage magnitudes/angles between the approximate power flow equations and the AC power flow equations are 1.06 × 10−3 pu and 5.94 × 10−3 ◦ . To illustrate the merit of the detailed power loss model,  9  0  Power (MW)  0.2 0.1 −0.05 0.5  1  1.5  2  0 −0.1 −0.2 −0.3 −0.4  5  10 15 Time (h)  20  pagg bat  time (h) 0 0.25  1.05  1 0  5  10  15  20  25  Time (h) line 1−2 line 2−3 line 3−4 line 6−7 line 4−12 line 14−15  0.5 0 −0.5 −1 0  5  10  15  20  25  10  15  20  25 0.025 0.02  0.15  0.015  0.1  0.01  0.05  0.005  0  RT−LP Method  RT−MILP Method  0  Figure 15. Battery and network losses for a sunny day. The bars show the energy losses as a function of the RT control configuration. The curves show power loss over the day for the different RT control configurations. With the detailed loss model (RT-MILP) the system incurs almost 30% fewer losses. Table III L OSSES FOR DIFFERENT RT CONTROL CONFIGURATIONS RT control configuration RT-MILP RT-LP  Normalized Total Capacity  Voltage magnitude |v| (pu) Branch flow sb/sb,max  node 0 node 6 node 12 node 15 node 16 node 17 node 18  5  0.2  Figure 13. RT dispatch for a one day simulation with a snapshot of the battery discharging phase. The blue curve shows the aggregated battery power signal from the scheduler. To reduce battery losses, the batteries are discharged (positive powers) and charged (negative powers) in a switched way.  1.1  network losses battery losses RT−LP net losses RT−LP bat losses RT−MILP net losses RT−MILP bat losses  Power losses (MW)  0.05 0.3  Energy Losses (MWh)  bat 1 bat 2 bat 3 bat 4 bat 5 bat 6 bat 7 bat 8 bat 9 bat 10 bat 11 bat 12 bat 13 bat 14 bat 15 bat 16 bat 17 bat 18 net load PV  0.4  battery loss model nonconvex linear  network losses (kWh) 141.8 141.2  battery losses (kWh) 47.5 68.4  1 0.8 0.6 0.4  LiFePO4 w deg model LiFePO4 w/o deg model LiCoO2 w deg model LiCoO2 w/o deg model  0.2 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Time (month)  Figure 16. Normalized total battery capacity over one year for different battery technologies, with (w) and without (w/o) a degradation (deg) model.  Time (h)  Figure 14. Voltage magnitudes and normalized branch power flows for a one day simulation with high PV infeed. The allowable voltage band is v min = 0.9 to v max = 1.1 pu.  we simulate the RT controller using the full model in (21) (referred to as the RT-MILP configuration) and using a simpler linear loss model, resulting in an LP problem (referred to as the RT-LP configuration). As shown in Fig. 15 the battery losses are 30% smaller, if we use the RT-MILP configuration. Table III quantifies this finding. The loss reduction is mainly due to the reduced battery losses. Network losses are almost identical in both cases and are approximately two third of the total losses. Table IV shows the computation time of each stage. We use the CPLEX [42] optimization solver running on an Intel Core i7 computer. The computation time for the MILP problem is less than one second, which is reasonable for the RT control stage. The MILP computation time for 200 devices is approximately 4 seconds and so the approach could be implemented in real-time.  B. Lifetime Assessment We next determine how the scheduler affects battery lifetimes, and compare two different battery technologies: LiCoO2 and LiFePO4. For LiCoO2, we take the degradation map from [9]. For LiFePO4, we discretize the analytic degradation function presented in [29] to obtain a map. Both maps are convexified as described in Section III-C and are included in the scheduler. We also simulate the scheduler without using the degradation model, but constrain the minimum SoE level to 5% of the capacity. In Fig. 16, we compare the charge capacity loss over one year for the different battery technologies. The scheduler without the degradation model operates the batteries in low SoE regimes. Those regimes result in high degradation, especially for the LiCoO2 system. In Fig. 17, we also show the charge capacity loss for each battery. Using degradation models, the scheduler balances degradation across the batteries, contributing to longer battery lifetimes (see Table V). We also extrapolated these results to  10  Table IV P ROBLEM SIZES AND COMPUTATION TIMES FOR THE CONTROLLERS problem class number of constraints number of decision variables computation time ±1σ (sec)  Scheduler LP 14328 4392 2.85 ± 0.26  LiFePO4 w deg model LiFePO4 w/o deg model LiCoO2 w deg model LiCoO2 w/o deg model initial capacity  0.025  Battery Capacity (MWh)  RT Controller MILP (18 SOSs) 381 327 0.78 ± 0.12  0.02 0.015 0.01 0.005  ba t ba 1 t ba 2 t ba 3 t ba 4 t ba 5 t ba 6 t ba 7 t ba 8 ba t 9 t ba 10 t ba 11 t ba 12 t ba 13 t ba 14 t ba 15 t ba 16 t ba 17 t1 8  0  Figure 17. Remaining battery capacities for each battery (bat) after a one year simulation for different battery technologies, with (w) and without (w/o) a degradation (deg) model. The blue line shows the initial battery capacities.  obtain estimates for the number of full cycles and lifetimes assuming an end of life (EOL) criterion of 0.8, which means that 80% of the initial capacity remains. We find that by using a degradation model, we can prolong the lifetime by a factor 10 for the LiCoO2 system and by a factor 2 for the LiFePO4.  VII. CONCLUSION In this paper, we present a novel two-stage centralized MPC scheme for distributed battery storage to mitigate voltage and line flow violations that are induced by high PV penetrations in LV grids. To link the planning and real time domains, our control scheme consists of a robust scheduler and a RT controller. This division enables planning using course PV and load forecasts on timescales of hours and RT control to manage dynamics and forecast error on timescales of seconds. Therefore, the scheduler uses simple battery models, while the RT controller uses detailed models. We incorporate a linearized AC-OPF into both the scheduler and RT controller to reduce the computational complexity of the algorithms. To guarantee secure grid operation, the scheduler solves a robust multi-period OPF taking the worst-case PV forecast into account. It produces robust feasible storage allocation bounds for the RT controller, which maximizes PV utilization, while keeping battery degradation to a minimum by solving a single step OPF problem. We find that the control scheme can substantially reduce both battery losses and degradation. R EFERENCES [1] “Battery energy storage for smart grid applications,” Eurobat, Tech. Rep., 2013. [Online]. Available: https://http://www.eurobat.org/sites/ default/files/eurobat smartgrid publication may 2013 0.pdf  Table V L IFETIME ASSESSMENT FOR DIFFERENT BATTERY TECHNOLOGIES Battery Technology LiFePO4 LiCoO2  Configuration w deg model w/o deg model w deg model w/o deg model  Expected number of full cycles 2816 1609 1652 166  Expected lifetime (years) 4.4 2.64 2.63 0.29  [2] F. Marra, G. Yang, C. Træholt, J. Østergaard, and E. Larsen, “A decentralized storage strategy for residential feeders with photovoltaics,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 974–981, 2014. [3] K. H. Chua, Y. S. Lim, P. Taylor, S. Morris, and J. Wong, “Energy storage system for mitigating voltage unbalance on low-voltage networks with photovoltaic systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 1783–1790, 2012. [4] T. Wang, H. Kamath, and S. Willard, “Control and optimization of gridtied photovoltaic storage systems using model predictive control,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1010–1017, 2014. [5] B. Nykvist and M. n. Nilsson, “Rapidly falling costs of battery packs for electric vehicles,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 329–332, 2015. [6] S. J. Moura, J. C. Forman, S. Bashash, J. L. Stein, and H. K. Fathy, “Optimal control of film growth in lithium-ion battery packs via relay switches,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 3555–3566, 2011. [7] M. Koller, T. Borsche, A. Ulbig, and G. Andersson, “Defining a degradation cost function for optimal control of a battery energy storage system,” in Proceedings of POWERTECH, 2013, pp. 1–6. [8] A. Trippe, R. Arunachala, T. Massier, J. Jossen, and T. Hamacher, “Charging optimization of battery electric vehicles including cycle battery aging,” in Proceedings of ISGT EUROPE, Oct 2014. [9] P. Fortenbacher, J. Mathieu, and G. Andersson, “Modeling, identification, and optimal control of batteries for power system applications,” in Proceedings of the Power Systems Computation Conference, 2014. [10] ——, “Optimal real-time control of multiple battery sets for power system applications,” in Proceedings of POWERTECH, 2015. [11] P. Fortenbacher, M. Zellner, and G. Andersson, “Optimal sizing and placement of distributed storage in low voltage networks,” in 19th Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC), Genoa, Italy, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.01218 [12] L. Gan and S. H. Low, “Convex relaxations and linear approximation for optimal power flow in multiphase radial networks,” Proceedings 2014 Power Systems Computation Conference, PSCC 2014, 2014. [13] M. E. Baran and F. F. Wu, “Optimal sizing of capacitors placed on a radial distribution system.” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 735–743, 1989. [14] J. A. Taylor and F. S. Hover, “Linear relaxations for transmission system planning,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 2533–2538, 2011. [15] D. K. Molzahn and I. A. Hiskens, “Moment-based relaxation of the optimal power flow problem,” in Proceedings of Power Systems Computation Conference, 18-22 Aug. 2014. [16] E. Dall’Anese, S. V. Dhople, and G. B. Giannakis, “Optimal dispatch of photovoltaic inverters in residential distribution systems,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 487–497, 2014. [17] S. H. Low, “Convex relaxation of optimal power flow - part I: Formulations and equivalence,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 15–27, March 2014. [18] K. Christakou, D.-C. Tomozei, J.-Y. L. Boudec, and M. Paolone, “AC OPF in radial distribution networks - parts i,ii,” 2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.06809 [19] S. Mhanna, G. Verbic, and A. Chapman, “Tight LP approximations for the optimal power flow problem,” 2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.00773 [20] S. Bolognani and S. Zampieri, “On the existence and linear approximation of the power flow solution in power distribution networks,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 163–172, 2016. [21] R. Tonkoski, L. A. Lopes, and T. H. El-Fouly, “Coordinated active power curtailment of grid connected PV inverters for overvoltage prevention,” IEEE Trans on Sustainable Energy, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 139–147, 2011. [22] G. Kerber, R. Witzmann, and H. Sappl, “Voltage limitation by autonomous reactive power control of grid connected photovoltaic inverters,” in Compatibility and Power Electronics., May 2009, pp. 129–133.  11  [23] “VDE-AR-N 4105 power generation systems connected to the lowvoltage distribution network - technical minimum requirements for the connection to and parallel operation with low-voltage distribution networks,” VDE Application Rule, 2011. [24] T. F. Fuller, M. Doyle, and J. Newman, “Simulation and optimization of the dual lithium ion insertion cell,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 141, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 1994. [25] “Efficiency and derating sunny boy / sunny tripower / sunny mini central,” SMA, Tech. Rep., 2015. [Online]. Available: http: //files.sma.de/dl/1348/WirkungDerat-TI-en-40.pdf [26] M. Doyle and J. Newman, “Analysis of capacity-rate data for lithium batteries using simplified models of the discharge process,” Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 846–856, 1997. [27] T. F. Fuller, “Relaxation phenomena in lithium-ion-insertion cells,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 141, no. 4, p. 982, 1994. [28] J. F. Manwell and J. G. McGowan, “Lead acid battery storage model for hybrid energy systems,” Solar Energy, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 399 – 405, 1993. [29] J. C. Forman, S. J. Moura, J. L. Stein, and H. K. Fathy, “Optimal experimental design for modeling battery degradation,” in Proceedings of ASME Dynamic Systems and Control Conference, vol. 1, 2012, pp. 309–318. [30] D. T. Lee and B. J. Schachter, “Two algorithms for constructing a delaunay triangulation,” International Journal of Computer & Information Sciences, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 219–242, 1980. [31] J.-H. Teng, “A direct approach for distribution system load flow solutions,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 882– 887, July 2003. [32] “Benchmark systems for network integration of renewable and distributed energy resources,” Cigre Task Force C6.04.02, Tech. Rep., 2014. [Online]. Available: http://c6.cigre.org/Publications/Technical-Brochures [33] E. Dall’Anese, S. V. Dhople, and G. B. Giannakis, “Photovoltaic inverter controllers seeking AC optimal power flow solutions,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 2809–2823, 2016. [34] L. Reyes-Chamorro, A. Bernstein, J.-Y. L. Boudec, and M. Paolone, “A composable method for real-time control of active distribution networks with explicit power setpoints. part ii: Implementation and validation,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 125, pp. 265 – 280, 2015. [35] F. Olivier, P. Aristidou, D. Ernst, and T. V. Cutsem, “Active management of low-voltage networks for mitigating overvoltages due to photovoltaic units,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 926–936, March 2016. [36] P. Bacher, H. Madsen, and H. A. Nielsen, “Online short-term solar power forecasting,” Solar Energy, vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1772 – 1783, 2009. [37] A. Ben-Tal, L. El Ghaoui, and A. Nemirovski, Robust Optimization. Princeton University Press, 2009. [38] J. Löfberg, “Automatic robust convex programming,” Optimization Methods and Software, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 115–129, 2012. [39] J. A. Tomlin, “Special ordered sets and an application to gas supply operations planning,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 69–84, 1988. [40] J. O’Reilly, Observers for Linear Systems. Elsevier Science, 1983. [41] M. Doyle, T. F. Fuller, and J. Newman, “Modeling of galvanostatic charge and discharge of the lithium/polymer/insertion cell,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 140, no. 6, pp. 1526–1533, 1993. [42] “IBM ILOG CPLEX user’s manual,” IBM, Tech. Rep., 2015.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
