Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_3986

Abstract:
To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming  1  arXiv:1405.2850v2 [cs.PL] 14 May 2014  A Simple and Efficient Lock-Free Hash Trie Design for Concurrent Tabling MIGUEL AREIAS and RICARDO ROCHA CRACS & INESC TEC, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto Rua do Campo Alegre, 1021/1055, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal (e-mail: {miguel-areias,ricroc}@dcc.fc.up.pt) submitted 1 January 2003; revised 1 January 2003; accepted 1 January 2003  Abstract A critical component in the implementation of a concurrent tabling system is the design of the table space. One of the most successful proposals for representing tables is based on a two-level trie data structure, where one trie level stores the tabled subgoal calls and the other stores the computed answers. In this work, we present a simple and efficient lock-free design where both levels of the tries can be shared among threads in a concurrent environment. To implement lock-freedom we took advantage of the CAS atomic instruction that nowadays can be widely found on many common architectures. CAS reduces the granularity of the synchronization when threads access concurrent areas, but still suffers from low-level problems such as false sharing or cache memory side-effects. In order to be as effective as possible in the concurrent search and insert operations over the table space data structures, we based our design on a hash trie data structure in such a way that it minimizes potential low-level synchronization problems by dispersing as much as possible the concurrent areas. Experimental results in the Yap Prolog system show that our new lock-free hash trie design can effectively reduce the execution time and scale better than previous designs. KEYWORDS: Tabling, Concurrency, Hash Tries, Lock-Freedom, Performance.  1 Introduction Tabling (Chen and Warren 1996) is a recognized and powerful implementation technique that overcomes some limitations of traditional Prolog systems in dealing with recursion and redundant sub-computations. Multithreading in Prolog is the ability to perform concurrent computations, in which each thread runs independently but shares the program clauses (Moura 2008). Despite the availability of both multithreading and tabling in some Prolog systems, the efficient implementation of these two features, such that they work together, implies a complex redesign of several components of the underlying engine. XSB was the first Prolog system to combine tabling with multithreading (Marques and Swift 2008). In more recent work (Areias and Rocha 2012b), we have proposed an alternative view to XSB’s approach, where each thread views its tables as private but, at the engine level, we use a common table space, i.e., from the thread point of view, the tables are private but, from the implementation point of view, tables are shared among all threads. A critical component in the implementation of an efficient tabling system is the design of the data structures and algorithms to access and manipulate tabled data. To deal with  2  M. Areias and R. Rocha  concurrent table accesses, our initial approach, implemented on top of the Yap Prolog system (Santos Costa et al. 2012), was to use lock-based data structures (Areias and Rocha 2012b). Yap implements the table space using a two-level trie data structure, where one trie level stores the tabled subgoal calls and the other stores the computed answers. More recently (Areias and Rocha 2014), we presented a sophisticated lockfree design to deal with concurrency in both trie levels. Lock-freedom allows individual threads to starve but guarantees system-wide throughput. To implement lock-freedom we took advantage of the CAS atomic instruction that nowadays can be widely found on many common architectures. The CAS reduces the granularity of the synchronization when threads access concurrent areas, but still suffers from contention points where synchronized operations are done on the same memory locations, leading to low-level problems such as false sharing or cache memory ping pong side-effects. In this work, we go one step further and we present a simpler and efficient lockfree design based on hash tries that minimizes these problems by dispersing as much as possible the concurrent areas. Hash tries (or hash array mapped tries) are a triebased data structure with nearly ideal characteristics for the implementation of hash tables (Bagwell 2001). An essential property of the trie data structure is that common prefixes are stored only once (Fredkin 1962), which in the context of hash tables allows us to efficiently solve the problems of setting the size of the initial hash table and of dynamically resizing it in order to deal with hash collisions. The aim of our proposal is to be as effective as possible in the search and insert operations, by exploiting the full potentiality of lock-freedom on those operations, and in such a way that it minimizes the bottlenecks and performance problems mentioned above without introducing significant overheads for sequential execution. Several approaches do exist in the literature for the implementation of lock-free hash tables, such as Shalev and Shavit split-ordered lists (Shalev and Shavit 2006), Triplett et al. relativistic hash tables (Triplett et al. 2011) or Prokopec et al. CTries (Prokopec et al. 2012). However, to the best of our knowledge, none of them is specifically aimed for an environment with the characteristics of our tabling framework that does not requires concurrent deletion support. In general, a tabled program is deterministic, finite and only executes search and insert operations over the table space data structures. In Yap Prolog, space is recovered when the last running thread abolish a table. Since no delete operations are performed, the size of the tables always grows monotonically during an evaluation. Initial experiments, on top of a 32 core AMD machine, show that our new lock-free hash-trie design can effectively reduce the execution time and scale better than all the previously implemented lock-based and lock-free strategies.  2 Background A trie is a tree structure where each different path corresponds to a term described by the tokens labeling the nodes traversed. For example, the tokenized form of the term p(1, f (X)) is the sequence of 4 tokens p/2, 1, f /1 and V AR0 , where each variable is represented as a distinct V ARi constant. Two terms with common prefixes will branch off from each other at the first distinguishing token. Consider, for example, a second term p(1, a). Since the main functor and the first argument, tokens p/2 and 1, are common to  A Simple and Efficient Lock-Free Hash Trie Design for Concurrent Tabling  3  both terms, only one additional node will be required to fully represent this second term in the trie. Figure 1 shows Yap’s trie structure that represents both terms. Whenever the chain of child nodes for a common parent node bep/2 comes larger than a predefined threshold value, a hash mechanism is used to provide direct node access and therefore optimize the search. To 1 deal with hash collisions, all previous Yap’s approaches implemented a dynamic resizing of the hash tables by doubling the size of the bucket f/1 a entries in the hash. Our initial approach to support concurrent tabling was lock-based, which required synchronization between threads when VAR 0 performing the hash expansion procedure (Areias and Rocha 2012b). More recently, we proposed a lock-free design for concurrent table ac- Fig. 1. Trie excesses that avoids thread synchronization, even when threads are ex- ample panding the hash tables (Areias and Rocha 2014). In this work, we present a simpler and efficient lock-free design based on hash tries to implement the hash mechanism inside the subgoal and answer tries. To put our proposal in perspective, table entry Fig. 2 shows a schematic representation of the trie hierarchical levels we subgoal trie are proposing to implement Yap’s table hash subgoal frame space. For each predicate being tabled, trie Yap implements tables using two levsubgoal/answer trie els of tries together with the table entry answer trie and subgoal frame auxiliary data structures (Rocha et al. 2005). The first level, Fig. 2. Trie hierarchical levels overview the subgoal trie, stores the tabled subgoal calls and the second level, the answer trie, stores the answers for a given call. Then, for each particular subgoal/answer trie, we have as many trie levels as the number of parent/child relationships (for example, the trie in Fig. 1 has 4 trie levels). Finally, to implement hashing inside the subgoal/answer tries, we use another trie-based data structure, the hash trie, which is the focus of the current work. In a nutshell, a hash trie is composed by internal hash arrays and leaf nodes. The leaf nodes store key values and the internal hash arrays implement a hierarchy of hash levels of fixed size 2w . To map a key into this hierarchy, we first compute the hash value h for key and then use chunks of w bits from h to index the entry in the appropriate hash level. Hash collisions are solved by simply walking down the tree as we consume successive chunks of w bits from the hash value h. 3 Our Proposal By Example We will use three examples to illustrate the different configurations that the hash trie assumes for one, two and three levels (for more levels, the same idea applies). We begin with Fig. 3 showing a small example that illustrates how the concurrent insertion of nodes is done in a hash level. Figure 3(a) shows the initial configuration for a hash level. Each hash level Hi is formed by a bucket array of 2w entries and by a backward reference to the previous level (represented as P rev in the figures that follow). For the root level, the backward reference is N il. In Fig. 3(a), Ek represents a particular bucket entry of the hash level.  4  M. Areias and R. Rocha Hi Prev  Ek  ...  ...  (a)  K1  Ek Ek  K1  K2  K3  ...  ...  Ek  Hi Prev ...  ...  2w entries  Hi Prev  (b)  (c)  Fig. 3. Insert procedure in a hash level Ek and the remaining entries are all initialized with a reference to the current level Hi . During execution, each bucket entry stores either a reference to a hash level or a reference to a separate chaining mechanism, using a chain of internal nodes, that deals with the hash collisions for that entry. Each internal node holds a key value and a reference to the next-on-chain internal node. Figure 3(b) shows the hash configuration after the insertion of node K1 on the bucket entry Ek and Fig. 3(c) shows the hash configuration after the insertion of nodes K2 and K3 also in Ek . Note that the insertion of new nodes is done at the end of the chain and that any new node being inserted closes the chain by referencing back the current level. During execution, the different memory locations that form a hash trie are considered to be in one of the following states: black, white or gray. A black state represents a memory location that can be updated by any thread (concurrently). A white state represents a memory location that can be updated only by one (specific) thread (not concurrently). A gray state represents a memory location used only for reading purposes. As the hash trie evolves during time, a memory location can change between black and white states until reaching the gray state, where it is no further updated. The initial state for Ek is black, because it represents the next synchronization point for the insertion of new nodes. After the insertion of node K1 , Ek moves to the white state and K1 becomes the next synchronization point for the insertion of new nodes. To guarantee the property of lock-freedom, all updates to black states are done using CAS operations. Since we are using single word CAS operations, when inserting a new node in the chain, first we set the node with the reference to the current level and only then the CAS operation is executed to insert the new node in the chain. When the number of nodes in a chain exceeds a M AX_N ODES threshold value, then the corresponding bucket entry is expanded with a new hash level and the nodes in the chain are remapped in the new level. Thus, instead of growing a single monolithic hash table, the hash trie settles for a hierarchy of small hash tables of fixed size 2w . To map our key values into this hierarchy, we use chunks of w bits from the hash values computed by our hash function. For example, consider a key value and the corresponding hash value h. For each hash level Hi , we use the w ∗ i least significant bits of h to index the entry in the appropriate bucket array, i.e., we consume h one chunk at a time as we walk down the hash levels. Starting from the configuration in Fig. 3(c), Fig. 4 illustrates the expansion mechanism with a second level hash Hi+1 for the bucket entry Ek . The expansion procedure is activated whenever a thread T meets the following two conditions: (i) the key at hand was not found in the chain and (ii) the number of nodes in the chain is equal to the threshold value (in what follows, we consider a threshold value of three nodes). In such case, T starts by pre-allocating a second level hash Hi+1 , with all entries referring the respective level (Fig. 4(a)). At this stage, the bucket entries in  A Simple and Efficient Lock-Free Hash Trie Design for Concurrent Tabling Hi Prev  Hi+1 Prev  ...  Em  Ek  En  Hi+1 Prev Em K1  K2  (b) Hi+1 Prev  Ek K3  Em K1  K2  ...  ...  En  Hi+1 Prev  En  (c) Hi Prev  Hi Prev ...  Ek  Hi+1 Prev  ...  Em  K4  K2  En  Hi Prev  Hi+1 Prev  ...  Hi Prev  K3  Em K1  ...  ...  En  Hi+1 Prev ...  Em ...  K1  Em  (e)  K5  K3  K4  K2  Ek Ek  ...  ...  En  ...  K1  K3  K4  K5  K1  K3  K4  K2  (f)  ...  Ek  K3  (d)  Hi+1 Prev  ...  Ek  ...  Em  ...  K2  Hi Prev  ...  ...  K1  K3  En  (a) Hi Prev  Ek  ...  K3  ...  K2  ...  K1  ...  ...  Ek  Hi Prev  5  En  (g)  K2  (h)  Fig. 4. Expanding a bucket entry with a second level hash  Hi+1 can be considered white memory locations, because the hash level is still not visible for the other threads. The new hash level is then used to implement a synchronization point with the last node on the chain (node K3 in the figure) that will correspond to a successful CAS operation trying to update Hi to Hi+1 (Fig. 4(b)). From this point on, the insertion of new nodes on Ek will be done starting from the new hash level Hi+1 . If the CAS operation fails, that means that another thread has gained access to the expansion procedure and, in such case, T aborts its expansion procedure. Otherwise, T starts the remapping process of placing the internal nodes K1 , K2 and K3 in the correct bucket entries in the new level. Figures 4(c) to 4(h) show the remapping sequence in detail. For simplicity of illustration, we will consider only the entries Em and En on level Hi+1 and assume that K1 , K2 and K3 will be remapped to entries Em , En and En , respectively. In order to ensure lock-free synchronization, we need to guarantee that, at any time, all threads are able to read all the available nodes and insert new nodes without any delay from the remapping process. To guarantee both properties, the remapping process is thus done in reverse order, starting from the last node on the chain, initially K3 . Figure 4(c) then shows the hash trie configuration after the successful CAS operation that adjusted node K3 to entry En . After this step, En moves to the white state and K3 becomes the next synchronization point for the insertion of new nodes on En . Note that the initial chain for Ek has not been affected yet, since K2 still refers to K3 . Next, on Fig. 4(d), the chain is broken and K2 is updated to refer to the second level hash Hi+1 .  6  M. Areias and R. Rocha  The process then repeats for K2 (the new last node on the chain for Ek ). First, K2 is remapped to entry En (Fig. 4(e)) and then it is removed from the original chain, meaning that the previous node K1 is updated to refer to Hi+1 (Fig. 4(f)). Finally, the same idea applies to the last node K1 . Here, K1 is also remapped to a bucket entry on Hi+1 (Em in the figure) and then removed from the original chain, meaning in this case that the bucket entry Ek itself becomes a reference to the second level hash Hi+1 (Fig. 4(h)). From now on, EK is also a gray memory location since it will be no further updated. Concurrently with the remapping process, other threads can be inserting nodes in the same bucket entries for the new level. This is shown in Fig. 4(e), where a new node K4 is inserted before K2 in En and, in Fig. 4(g), where a node K5 is inserted before K1 in Em . As mentioned before, lock-freedom is ensured by the use of CAS operations when updating black state memory locations. To ensure the correctness of the remapping process, we also need to guarantee that the nodes being remapped are not missed by any other thread traversing the hash trie. Please remember that any chaining of nodes is closed by the last node referencing back the hash level for the node. Thus, if when traversing a chain of nodes, a thread U ends in a second level hash Hi+1 different from the initial one Hi , this means that U has started from a bucket entry Ek being remapped, which includes the possibility that some nodes initially on Ek were not seem by U . To guarantee that no node is missed, U simply needs to restart its traversal from Hi+1 . We conclude the description of our proposal with a last example that shows a expansion procedure involving three hash levels. Starting from the configuration on Fig. 4(b), Fig. 5 assumes a scenario where a set of nodes (K4 , K5 , K6 and K7 in the figure) are inserted in the bucket entries Em and En before the beginning of the remapping process of nodes K1 , K2 and K3 . Again, we will consider only the entries Em and En on level Hi+1 and assume that K1 , K2 and K3 will be remapped to entries Em , En and En , respectively. Figure 5(a) shows the situation where K3 is scheduled to be remapped to entry En on level Hi+1 but, since the number of nodes on En is equal to the threshold value, a preliminary expansion procedure for En should be done, which leads to the pre-allocation of a third level hash Hi+2 . Figure 5(b) then shows the hash trie configuration after the remapping of the nodes on En to the level Hi+2 . Please note that En became a gray state memory location since it is now referring the third level hash Hi+2 , which means that any operation scheduled to En should be rescheduled to Hi+2 . This is the case shown in Fig. 5(c), where K3 and K2 were both rescheduled to entry Ez on Hi+2 . Despite this third level remapping, the chaining reference of the last node on the chain (for example, K1 in Fig. 5(c)) is still made to refer to the second level hash Hi+1 . To conclude the example, Fig. 5(d) shows the configuration at the end of the remapping process. Here, K1 is remapped to the bucket entry Em on Hi+1 and removed from the initial chain, meaning that Ek itself becomes a reference to Hi+1 and moves to a gray state. For each configuration shown, the reader is encourage to verify that, at any moment, all threads are able to access all available nodes. Consider, for example, the configuration shown in Fig. 5(c) and a thread entering on level Hi searching for a node with the key K7 . The thread would begin by hashing the key K7 on level Hi and obtain the bucket entry Ek . Then, it would follow the chain of nodes (K1 in this case) and reach level Hi+1 . At level Hi+1 , it would hash again the key K7 , obtain the bucket entry En and follow  A Simple and Efficient Lock-Free Hash Trie Design for Concurrent Tabling Hi Prev  Hi+1 Prev  ...  Hi+2 Prev  Em K2  K3  K5  Ex  ...  En  Hi Prev  Hi+1 Prev  ...  K1  ...  Ek  7  K4  K6  Ez  K7  (a)  ...  K5  Em K2  K3  K6  Ex  ...  ...  K1  ...  Ek  Hi+2 Prev  En  Ez  K7  K4  (b) Hi Prev  Hi+1 Prev  ...  Em  Ex  K5  ...  ...  K1  ...  Ek  Hi+2 Prev  En  Ez  K6  K7  K4  K3  K6  K7  K4  K3  K2  (c) Hi Prev  Hi+1 Prev  ...  Em  Hi+2 Prev K5  K1  Ex  Ek  ...  ...  ...  En  Ez  K2  (d)  Fig. 5. Remapping nodes on a third level hash the reference to level Hi+2 . Finally, it would hash one more time the key K7 , now for level Hi+2 , obtain the entry Ex and follow the chain until reaching node K7 . We argue that a key design decision in our approach is thus the combination of hash tries with the use of a separate chaining (with a threshold value) to resolve hash collisions (the original hash trie design expands a bucket entry when a second key is mapped to it). Also, to ensure that nodes being remapped are not missed by any other thread traversing the hash trie, any chaining of nodes is closed by the last node referencing back the hash level for the node, which allows to detect the situations where a node changes level. This is very important because it allows to implement a clean design to resolve hash collisions by simply moving nodes between the levels. In our design, updates and expansions of the hash levels are never done by using replacement of data structures (i.e., create a new one to replace the old one), which also avoids the complex mechanisms necessary to support the recovering of the unused data structures. Another important design decision which minimizes the low-level synchronization problems leading to false sharing or cache memory side-effects, is the insertion of nodes done at the end of the separate chain. Inserting nodes at the end of the chain allows for dispersing as much as possible the memory locations being updated concurrently (the last node is always different) and, more importantly, reduces the updates for the memory locations accessed more frequently, like the bucket entries for the hash levels (each bucket entry is at most only updated twice).  8  M. Areias and R. Rocha 4 Performance Evaluation  To put our results in perspective, we compared our new lock-free hash trie design (LFHT) against all the previously implemented Yap’s lock-based and lock-free strategies for concurrent tabling. For the sake of simplicity, here we will only consider Yap’s best lock-based strategy (LB) and the lock-free design (LF) presented in (Areias and Rocha 2014). For benchmarking, we used the set of tabling benchmarks from (Areias and Rocha 2012a) which includes 19 different programs in total. We choose these benchmarks because they have characteristics that cover a wide number of scenarios in terms of trie usage. The benchmarks create different trie configurations with lower and higher number of nodes and depths, and also have different demands in terms of trie traversing. Since the system’s performance is highly dependent on the available concurrency that a particular program might have, our initial goal was to evaluate the robustness of our implementation when exposed to worst case scenarios and, for that, we ran the benchmarks with all threads executing the same query goal. By doing that, we avoid the peculiarities of the program at hand and we try to focus on measuring the real value of our new design. Since, all threads are executing the same query goal, it is expected that all threads will access the table space, to check/insert for subgoals and answers, at similar times, thus stressing the synchronization on common memory locations, which can increase the aforementioned problems of false sharing and cache memory side-effects and thus penalize the less robust designs. The environment for our experiments was a machine Execution Time by Design (TD(p)) with 2x16 (32) Core AMD Opteron (tm) Processor 6274 @ 2.2 GHz with 32 GBytes of memory and running the 200 Linux kernel 3.8.3-1.fc17.x86_64 with Yap Prolog 6.3. 150 We experimented with intervals of 8 threads up to 32 100 threads and all results are the average of 5 runs for each 50 benchmark. Figure 6 shows the average execution time, 0 in seconds, and the average overhead, compared against 8 16 24 32 #threads (p) the respective execution time with one thread, for the LFHT, LF and LB designs when running the set of Overhead by Design (TD(p) / TD(1)) tabling benchmarks with all threads executing the same 5 4 query goal. The results clearly show that the new LFHT design 3 achieves the best performance for both the execution 2 time and the overhead. As expected, LF is the second best and LB is the worst. In general, our design clearly 1 8 16 24 32 outperforms the other designs with a overhead of at most #threads (p) 1.74 for 32 threads (the number of cores in the machine). Another important observation is that both LF Fig. 6. Average execution and LB show an initial high overhead in the execution time, in seconds, and average time in most experiments, mainly when going from 1 to overhead, against the execu8 threads, in contrast to LFHT that shows more smooth tion time with one thread, for curves. The difference between LFHT and LF/LB for the set of tabling benchmarks the overhead ratio in these benchmarks clearly shows the with all threads executing the same query goal distinct potential of the LFHT design.  A Simple and Efficient Lock-Free Hash Trie Design for Concurrent Tabling  9  Besides measuring the value of our new design through Execution Time by Benchmark (TB(p)) the use of worst case scenarios, we conclude the paper by showing the potential of our work to speedup 60 the execution of tabled programs. Other works have al40 ready showed the capabilities of the use of multithreaded tabling to speedup tabled execution (Marques and Swift 20 2008; Marques et al. 2010). Here, for each program, we 0 8 16 24 32 considered a set of different queries and then we ran this #threads (p) set with different number of threads. To do that, we implemented a naive scheduler in Prolog code that initially 20 Speedup by Benchmark (TB(1) / TB(p)) launches the number of threads required and then uses a mutex to synchronize access to the pool of queries. We 15 experimented with a Path program using a grid-like con- 10 figuration and with two well-known ILP data-sets, the 5 Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis data-sets. We used the same 32 Core AMD machine, experimented with inter8 16 24 32 #threads (p) vals of 8 threads up to 32 threads and the results that follow are the average of 5 runs. Figure 7 shows the averFig. 7. Execution time, in age execution time, in seconds, and the average speedup, seconds, and speedup, against compared against the respective execution time with one the execution time with one thread, for running the naive scheduler on top of these thread, for running the naive three programs with the LFHT design. scheduler program with the The results show that our design has potential to LFHT design speedup the execution of tabled programs. For the Path benchmark, the speedup increases up to 10.24 with 16 threads, but then it starts to slow down. We believe that this behavior is related with the large number of tabled dependencies in the program. For the Carcino and Muta benchmarks, the speedup increases up to a value of 16.68 and 18.84 for 32 threads, respectively. Note that our goal with these experiments was not to achieve maximum speedup because this would require to take into account the peculiarities of each program and eventually develop specialized schedulers for each one, which is orthogonal to the focus of this work. 5 Conclusions We have presented a novel, simple and efficient lock-free design for concurrent tabling. A key design decision in our approach is the combination of hash tries with the use of a separate chaining closed by the last node referencing back the hash level for the node. This allows us to implement a clean design to solve hash collisions by simply moving nodes between the levels. In our design, updates and expansions of the hash levels are never done by using replacement of data structures (i.e., create a new one to replace the old one), which also avoids the need for memory recovery mechanisms. Another important design decision which minimizes the bottlenecks and performance problems leading to false sharing or cache memory side-effects, is the insertion of nodes done at the end of the separate chain. This allows for dispersing as much as possible the memory locations being updated concurrently and, more importantly, reduces the updates for the memory locations accessed more frequently, like the bucket entries for the hash levels.  10  M. Areias and R. Rocha  Experimental results in the context of Yap’s concurrent tabling environment, showed that our design clearly achieved the best results for the execution time, speedups and overhead ratios. In particular, for worst case scenarios, our design clearly outperformed the previous designs with a superb overhead always below 1.74 for 32 threads or less. We thus argue that our design is the best proposal to support concurrency in general purpose multithreaded tabling applications. Acknowledgments This work is partially funded by the ERDF (European Regional Development Fund) through the COMPETE Programme and by FCT (Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology) within project SIBILA (NORTE-07-0124-FEDER-000059). Miguel Areias is funded by the FCT grant SFRH/BD/69673/2010. References Areias, M. and Rocha, R. 2012a. An Efficient and Scalable Memory Allocator for Multithreaded Tabled Evaluation of Logic Programs. In International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems. IEEE Computer Society, 636–643. Areias, M. and Rocha, R. 2012b. Towards Multi-Threaded Local Tabling Using a Common Table Space. Journal of Theory and Practice of Logic Programming, International Conference on Logic Programming, Special Issue 12, 4 & 5, 427–443. Areias, M. and Rocha, R. 2014. On the Correctness and Efficiency of Lock-Free Expandable Tries for Tabled Logic Programs. In International Symposium on Practical Aspects of Declarative Languages. Number 8324 in LNCS. Springer-Verlag, 168–183. Bagwell, P. 2001. Ideal Hash Trees. Es Grands Champs 1195. Chen, W. and Warren, D. S. 1996. Tabled Evaluation with Delaying for General Logic Programs. Journal of the ACM 43, 1, 20–74. Fredkin, E. 1962. Trie Memory. Communications of the ACM 3, 490–499. Marques, R. and Swift, T. 2008. Concurrent and Local Evaluation of Normal Programs. In International Conference on Logic Programming. Number 5366 in LNCS. Springer-Verlag, 206–222. Marques, R., Swift, T., and Cunha, J. C. 2010. A Simple and Efficient Implementation of Concurrent Local Tabling. In International Symposium on Practical Aspects of Declarative Languages. Number 5937 in LNCS. Springer-Verlag, 264–278. Moura, P. 2008. ISO/IEC DTR 13211–5:2007 Prolog Multi-threading Predicates. Prokopec, A., Bronson, N. G., Bagwell, P., and Odersky, M. 2012. Concurrent Tries with Efficient Non-Blocking Snapshots. In ACM Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming. ACM, 151–160. Rocha, R., Silva, F., and Santos Costa, V. 2005. On applying or-parallelism and tabling to logic programs. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 5, 1 & 2, 161–205. Santos Costa, V., Rocha, R., and Damas, L. 2012. The YAP Prolog System. Journal of Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 12, 1 & 2, 5–34. Shalev, O. and Shavit, N. 2006. Split-Ordered Lists: Lock-Free Extensible Hash Tables. Journal of the ACM 53, 3, 379–405. Triplett, J., McKenney, P. E., and Walpole, J. 2011. Resizable, Scalable, Concurrent Hash Tables via Relativistic Programming. In USENIX Annual Technical Conference. USENIX Association, 11–11.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
