Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3743

Abstract:
arXiv:1703.00616v1 [math.GT] 2 Mar 2017  Action Dimension of Lattices in Euclidean Buildings Kevin Schreve March 3, 2017 Abstract The action dimension of a group Γ is the minimal dimension of a contractible manifold that Γ acts on properly discontinuously. We show that if Γ acts properly and cocompactly on a thick Euclidean building, then the action dimension is bounded below by twice the dimension of the building. We also compute the action dimension of S-arithmetic groups over number fields, partially answering a question of Bestvina, Kapovich, and Kleiner.  1  Introduction  The action dimension of a countable discrete group Γ, actdim(Γ), is the minimal dimension of contractible manifold M that Γ acts on properly discontinuously. If Γ is torsion-free, then M/Γ is a model for the classifying space BΓ, and hence actdim(Γ) is the minimal dimension of such a manifold model. If we assume that Γ has a finite model for BΓ, a theorem of Stallings implies that actdim(Γ) is bounded above by twice the geometric dimension of Γ [22]. The motivation for this paper is the following conjecture of Davis and Okun [14], which claims that nontrivial L2 -Betti numbers of a discrete group should provide a lower bound for action dimension. This generalizes an older conjecture of Singer on the vanishing of the L2 -cohomology of closed aspherical manifolds. Action Dimension Conjecture. If Γ has nontrivial ith L2 -Betti number, then actdim(Γ) ≥ 2i. For a nice introduction to L2 -cohomology, we refer the reader to [17]. If Γ is the fundamental group of a closed Riemannian manifold, then the L2 -Betti numbers of Γ measure the size of the space of square summable harmonic forms on the universal cover. A positive solution to the Action Dimension Conjecture has several nice implications, in particular it implies a conjecture of Hopf-Thurston that the Euler characteristic of a closed, aspherical 2n-manifold has sign (−1)n . Though both L2 -cohomology and action dimension seem difficult to compute, the Action Dimension Conjecture has been verified for many important classes of groups, such as lattices in Lie groups [6], Out(Fn ) [7], mapping class groups [16], [20], [18], and most Artin groups [4], [13], [9].  1  We show the conjecture holds for groups that act properly and cocompactly on thick Euclidean buildings. The L2 -Betti numbers of these groups are concentrated in the dimension of the building, and we show that their action dimension is greater than or equal to twice this dimension. Theorem 1.1. If Γ is a cocompact lattice in a thick, n-dimensional Euclidean building, then actdim(Γ) ≥ 2n. If Γ is torsion-free, then actdim(Γ) = 2n. The second statement follows immediately from Stallings’ theorem, since the geometric dimension of such Γ will be n. Our main application of this theorem is to compute the action dimension of S-arithmetic groups. These groups act properly on the product of a symmetric space and a Euclidean building. Bestvina and Feighn showed that lattices in symmetric spaces have action dimension equal to the dimension of the symmetric space [6], and it was conjectured in [7] that the action dimension of S-arithmetic groups was equal to the dimension of the symmetric space plus twice the dimension of the Euclidean building. We confirm the conjecture for S-arithmetic groups over number fields in Section 6. To prove Theorem 1.1, we use the obstructor dimension method introduced by Bestvina, Kapovich, and Kleiner in [7], which involves finding subcomplexes of the visual boundary of our building that are hard to embed into Euclidean space. Surprisingly, this is what all of the above computations of action dimension rely on. For Euclidean buildings, the visual boundary admits the structure of a spherical building, and the following corollary of our method may be of independent interest. Theorem 1.2. Let B be a finite k-dimensional, spherical building, and fix a chamber C. Let Opp(C) denote the subcomplex of chambers opposite to C. If Hk (Opp(C), Z2 ) 6= 0, then B does not embed into R2k . Therefore, the only way to embed these spherical buildings into Euclidean space is by appealing to general position. This was shown earlier by Tancer and Worwerk [23] for type An and certain type Bn buildings. In the general case, we do not know of a thick spherical building which does not have a chamber ∆ with Hk (Opp(∆), Z2 ) 6= 0. In [4], the action dimension of right-angled Artin groups was computed. The key tool was a computation of the van Kampen obstruction for certain simplicial complexes called octahedralizations. Our computation for spherical buildings relies on finding embedded octahedralizations based on Opp(∆) inside the spherical building. This paper is structured as follows: In Sections 2 and 3, we review the obstructor methods of [7] and the computation of the van Kampen obstruction of the octahedralization. In Section 4, we review spherical buildings and compute their van Kampen obstruction. In Section 5, we show the Action Dimension Conjecture for lattices in Euclidean buildings, and in Section 6, we compute the action dimension of S-arithmetic groups. Acknowledgement. I thank Boris Okun for many helpful conversations. The author is partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1045119. This material is based upon work supported under NSF grant DMS-1440140 while the author was in residence  2  at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, California in the Fall 2016 semester. The author wishes to thank MSRI for hosting him during this time.  2  The van Kampen Embedding Obstruction  The first cohomological obstruction to embedding a simplicial complex in Rn was developed by van Kampen [25]. In this section we review this obstruction and describe how a coarsening of this obstruction gives a lower bound for action dimension. Let K a simplicial complex, and let ∆ ⊂ K × K denote the simplicial neighbourhood of the diagonal: ∆ := {(σ, τ )|σ, τ ∈ K, σ ∩ τ 6= ∅.} The complement K × K − ∆ admits a free Z2 -action by flipping the factors. Let C(K) = (K × K − ∆)/Z2 be the simplicial configuration space of K. So, C(K) is the space of unordered pairs of disjoint simplices of K: C(K) := {{σ, τ }|σ, τ ∈ K, σ ∩ τ = ∅}. Definition 2.1. Let K be a k-dimensional simplicial complex, and let f : K → Rn be a general position map. The images of two disjoint simplices σ and τ with dim σ + dim τ = n intersect under f in a finite number of points. The Z2 -valued van Kampen obstruction vknZ/2 (K) ∈ H n (C(K), Z2 ) is defined by vknZ/2 ({σ, τ }) = |f (σ) ∩ f (τ )| mod 2. One can show that the class of this cocycle does not depend on f , which implies that if vknZ/2 (K) 6= 0, then K does not embed into Rn . In this case, we say K is an n-obstructor. An easy argument shows that such K actually cannot embed into any contractible n-manifold. Example. Suppose K3,3 is the Kuratowski graph, i.e the join of 3 points with 3 points. There is a class in H2 (C(K3,3 ), Z2 ) which consists of all unordered pairs of disjoint simplices. By drawing the graph in the plane and counting intersections, it is easy to see that vk2Z/2 (K) evaluates nontrivially on this class. We will now use the van Kampen obstruction to give a lower bound for the action dimension. This requires the following concept of Bestvina: e Z) of spaces satisfying Definition 2.2. A Z-structure on a group Γ is a pair (X, the following four axioms: e is a Euclidean retract. • X e − Z admits a covering space action of Γ with compact quotient. • X=X e i.e. there exists a homotopy X e × [0, 1] → X e such that H0 • Z is a Z-set in X, is the identity and Ht (X) ⊂ X for all t > 0.  3  • The collection of translates of a compact set in X forms a null-sequence in e i.e. for every open cover U of X e all but finitely many translates are X, contained in a single element of U . e Z) on Γ. For example, A space Z is a boundary of Γ if there is a Z-structure (X, if Γ acts properly and cocompactly on a CAT (0) space X, then compactifying X by the visual boundary ∂X gives a Z-structure on Γ. Theorem 2.3 ([7]). Suppose Z is a boundary of a group Γ, and that K is an embedded n-obstructor in Z. Then actdim(Γ) ≥ n + 2. Heuristically, if Γ admits a Z-structure and acts properly on a contractible (n + 1)-manifold M , then there would be an injective boundary map Z → ∂M . Since M is contractible, ∂M should be a n-sphere. This would contradict K being an n-obstructor, and hence prove Theorem 2.3. Of course, these optimistic statements are false in general, and the proof of Theorem 2.3 requires much more work. Example. Let Γ = F2 × F2 be the direct product of two finitely generated free groups. Γ acts properly and cocompactly on a product of trees, whose visual boundary is a product of Cantor sets. This contains the graph K3,3 , so by Theorem 2.3, actdim(Γ) = 4. More generally, Bestvina, Kapovich, and Kleiner showed that the n-fold product of free groups has actdim = 2n, using the fact that the n-fold 2n−2 6= 0. join of 3 points has vkZ/2 When we compute the action dimension of S-arithmetic groups over number fields, we use the slightly more general concept of obstructor dimension, denoted obdim(Γ). For simplicity, we only give the definition for type VF groups. We lose no generality since S-arithmetic groups over number fields are virtually of finite type. Let K be a simplicial complex, and let Cone(K) := K × [0, ∞)/(K × 0) denote the infinite cone on K. Given a triangulation of Cone(K), we set every edge to have length 1 and equip Cone(K) with the induced path metric. Definition 2.4. Let X be a proper metric space and K a simplicial complex. A map h : Cone(K) → X is expanding if for every σ and τ in K with σ ∩ τ = ∅ the images Cone(σ) and Cone(τ ) diverge, i.e. for every D > 0 there exists t ∈ R+ such that h(σ × [t, ∞]) and h(τ × [t, ∞]) are > D apart in X. Definition 2.5. Let Γ be a discrete group, and assume Γ acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on a contractible proper metric space X. Then obdim(Γ) is the maximal n + 2 such that there is a proper expanding map h : Cone(K) → X with K an n-obstructor. The following is the main theorem of [7]. Theorem 2.6. obdim(Γ) ≤ actdim(Γ). Finally, we need the following product lemma for obstructor dimension, which follows immediately from the Join Lemma in [7]. Lemma 2.7. Suppose X is a proper cocompact contractible Γ-complex and f : Cone(J) × Cone(K) → X a proper expanding map. If J is an n-obstructor and K is an m-obstructor, then obdim(Γ) ≥ n + m + 2.  4  ∆  ∆+ Figure 1: If L is an n-cycle, then D∆ (L) is a subdivided K3,3 .  3  Octahedralizations  In this section, we recall the definiition of a certain simplicial complex with nontrivial van Kampen obstruction. This complex was used in [4] to give lower bounds for the action dimension of right-angled Artin groups. We will show this complex also provides lower bounds for the action dimension of groups acting properly and cocompactly on Euclidean buildings. Given a finite set V , let ∆(V ) denote the full simplex on V and let O(V ) denote the boundary complex of the octahedron on V . In other words, O(V ) is the simplicial complex with vertex set V × {±1} such that a subset {(v0 , ε0 ), . . . , (vk , εk )} of V × {±1} spans a k-simplex if and only if its first coordinates v0 , . . . , vk are distinct. Projection onto the first factor V × {±1} → V induces a simplicial projection p : O(V ) → ∆(V ). We will denote the vertex (v, +1) or (v, −1) by v + and v respectively, and the simplex (σ, 1) or (σ, −1) by σ + and σ respectively, Any finite simplicial complex L with vertex set V is a subcomplex of ∆(V ). The octahedralization O(L) of L is the inverse image of L in O(V ): O(L) := p−1 (L) ⊂ O(V ). We also will say that O(L) is the result of “doubling the vertices of L”. In particular, an n-simplex in L becomes an n-octahedron (the n-fold join of two points) in O(L), and inclusions of simplices induce inclusions of octahedra in a canonical way. We will usually assume that L is a flag complex, which means that if the 1-skeleton of a simplex is in L, then the entire simplex is in L. Fix a simplex ∆ in L, and let D∆ (L) denote the full subcomplex of O(L) containing L and ∆+ . We say D∆ (L) is L doubled over ∆. In [4], the van Kampen obstruction of D∆ (L) was calculated. Theorem 3.1. Let L be a k-dimensional flag simplicial complex. We have vk2k Z/2 (D∆ (L)) 6= 0 if and only if Hk (L, Z2 ) 6= 0.  5  4  Spherical Buildings  We will only give a brief description of buildings, the reader is encouraged to refer to [3] for complete details. Definition 4.1. A Coxeter group (W, S) is a group generated by involutions si ∈ S, with the only other relations being that every pair of elements si sj generates a dihedral group (perhaps D∞ ). In other words, (W, S) has a presentation < s1 , s2 , . . . , sn |(si sj )mij = 1 > for mij ∈ N ∪ ∞ such that mii = 1. For example, proper cocompact reflection groups acting on Sn , En and Hn are all examples of Coxeter groups. We will assume from now on that |S| < ∞. A mirror structure over S on a space X is a family of subspaces {Xs }s∈S indexed by S. If (W, S) is a Coxeter system and X has a mirror structure over S, let S(x) := {s ∈ S | x ∈ Xs }. Now, define an equivalence relation ∼ on W × X by (w, x) ∼ (w′ , y) if and only if x = y and w−1 w′ ∈ WS(x) . Let U (W, X) denote the quotient space: U (W, X) = (W × X)/ ∼ . U (W, X) is called the basic construction. There is a natural W -action on W × X which respects the equivalence relation, and hence descends to an action on U (W, X). One can think of U (W, X) as pasting copies of X with the exact gluing given by the Coxeter group. Definition 4.2. Let (W, S) be a Coxeter group, and let ∆ be a simplex of dimension |S| − 1. We can label the codimension-one faces of ∆ by the elements of S. The set of codimension-one faces is a mirror structure on ∆. The space U (W, S) is called the Coxeter complex of (W, S). If W is finite, ΦW is homeomorphic to a sphere, and if W is infinite, ΦW is contractible. Definition 4.3. A building is a simplicial complex with a distinguished set of subcomplexes called apartments. This collection of apartments satisfies the following axioms: • Each apartment is isomorphic to a Coxeter complex. • For any two simplices, there is an apartment containing both of them. • If two apartments contain simplices σ and τ , then there is an isomorphism between these apartments fixing σ ∩ τ pointwise. The top dimensional simplices of a building are called chambers. A building is thick if each codimension-one face is contained in at least 3 chambers. If W is finite, then the building is called spherical, since each apartment is homeomorphic to a sphere. In a spherical Coxeter complex, there is a well-defined notion of opposite chambers. Note that every chamber σ corresponds to a Coxeter group element wσ . Two chambers σ and τ are opposite if they correspond to Coxeter group elements wσ , wτ such that wσ = w0 wτ , where w0 is the longest  6  element of W with respect to the standard generating set S. Opposition naturally extends to spherical buildings; in fact, two chambers σ and τ are opposite in one apartment if and only if they are opposite in each apartment containing them both. It is important that two chambers in an apartment are opposite if and only if they are on opposite sides of every wall in that apartment, where a wall is a fixed point set inside an apartment of a reflection in W . One can analagously define opposition of simplices: α and β are opposite in an apartment if they are contained in the same walls and separated by every wall that does not contain them both, and opposite in a building if they are opposite in each apartment which contains them. A spherical building is called right-angled if all apartments are isomorphic to an n-octahedron, which is the Coxeter complex of the right-angled Coxeter group W ∼ . In an octahedron, the vertices v and v + are opposite. More generally, = Zn+1 2 two simplices σ and τ in an octahedron are opposite if and only if p(σ) = p(τ ) and σ ∩ τ = ∅. Example. Let P denote the poset of subspaces of Rn . Let Flag(P) denote the associated flag complex, i.e. the vertices of Flag(P) consist of elements of P and simplices of Flag(P) correspond to chains of inclusions between these subspaces. Flag(P) has a natural structure of a spherical building, where apartments correspond to choosing a basis of Rn and then considering all subspaces generated by proper subsets of these basis vectors. In this case, the Coxeter group is the symmetric group Sn , which acts by permuting the basis vectors. The Coxeter complex can be identified with the barycentric subdivision of the (n − 2)-simplex. A chamber is a maximal chain [v0 ] ⊂ [v0 , v1 ] ⊂ · · · ⊂ [v0 , v1 , . . . , vn−2 ]. Two chambers C and C ′ are opposite in this building precisely when any two subspaces in C and C ′ respectively are in general position.  4.1  Bending homeomorphisms  We will now give our main construction. Essentially, we will exhibit obstructors in a spherical building B by embedding D∆ (Opp) into B and applying Theorem 3.1. Definition 4.4. Let B be an n-dimensional spherical building. Let A be an apartment in B, fix a chamber C in A, and let {H1 , H2 , ..., Hn+1 } be the set of walls of A that intersect C in a codimension-one face. If On is an n-octahedron, then ′ } analogously we fix a n-simplex C ′ in O n and define a set of walls {H1′ , H2′ , ..., Hn+1 ′ that intersect C in a codimension-one face. Then there is an obvious "bending" homeomorphism f : On → A which maps each wall Hi′ → Hi , maps C ′ to C, and respects all intersections of walls. Now, fix a chamber ∆+ ∈ B, and let Opp(∆+ ) be the simplicial complex of opposite simplices. For each chamber σ ∈ Opp(∆+ ), there is a unique apartment Aσ containing ∆+ and σ. Given an octahedron O(σ) which is doubled over σ, we have a bending homeomorphism fσ : O(σ) → Aσ which takes σ to σ and σ + to ∆+ .  7  F (∆)  F (σ)  σ  τ  F (τ )  F  ∆ ∆+  ∆+  Figure 2: Embedding D∆ (Opp(∆+ )) into the flag complex of subspaces of F32 . The red cycle is the opposite complex of ∆+ . Lemma 4.5. Suppose α ⊂ σ and let fσ : O(σ) → Aσ be the bending homeomorphism. Then fσ sends O(α) to the convex hull of α and the opposite simplex of α in ∆+ . Proof. Note that O(α) is the intersection of all walls in O(σ) which contain α. Since fσ preserves the intersection of walls, we have that fσ sends O(α) to the intersection of all walls which contain f (α), and that f (α+ ) is opposite to f (α). The convex hull in Aσ of two simplices is the intersection of all roots which contain them both. In this case, this is the intersection of all walls which contain f (α). Lemma 4.6. The collection of bending homeomorphisms fσ extends to a map F : O(Opp(∆+ )) → B. Proof. It suffices to show that if σ and τ are chambers in Opp(∆+ ), then fσ (O(σ ∩ τ )) = fτ (O(σ ∩τ )). By Lemma 4.5 we know fσ and fτ send O(σ ∩τ ) to the convex hull of σ ∩ τ and (σ ∩ τ )+ in Aσ and Aτ , so we must show these intersections coincide. Since each apartment is convex, we have that both convex hulls are the convex hull of σ ∩ τ and (σ ∩ τ )+ in B. Since this is unique, fσ and fτ agree on O(σ ∩ τ ). Now, we will show that F restricts to an embedding on D∆ (Opp(∆+ )), for some choice of a chamber ∆ in Opp(∆+ ). To do this, we need to be more precise about the image of simplices under F . Definition 4.7. Let (W, S) be a Coxeter group, and let w ∈ W . Then In(w) = {s ∈ S| ℓ(ws) < ℓ(w)} where ℓ(w) denotes the length of w in W with respect to the generating set S.  8  In(w) is precisely the set of letters with which a reduced expression for w can end. Note that In(w−1 ) is precisely the elements s ∈ S such that ℓ(sw) < ℓ(w), i.e. it consists of w which are separated from the identity chamber by the s-wall. Definition 4.8. Let α ∈ D∆ (Opp(∆+ )) be a simplex. Let V + (α) denote the vertices of α contained in ∆+ and V (α) denote the vertices of α contained in Opp(∆+ ). For a chamber σ in Opp(∆+ ), identify O(σ) as the Coxeter complex of (Z2 )n+1 , and identify ∆+ with the identity chamber. Given a vertex s ∈ σ, we say that the s-wall is the unique wall in O(σ) containing every other vertex in σ. A chamber α ⊂ O(σ) corresponds to an element w with In(w−1 ) = V (α), i.e. w is separated from the identity by each s-wall for s ∈ V (σ). Since the bending homeomorphism f preserves walls containing σ and the chamber ∆+ , we have in general: Lemma 4.9. For σ ∈ Opp(∆+ ) and α a chamber in O(σ), F (α) is a union of chambers of Aσ corresponding to Coxeter group elements w with In(w−1 ) = V (α). Lemma 4.10. F restricted to D∆ (Opp(∆+ )) is an embedding. Proof. It is obvious that F restricted to each simplex is a homeomorphism. Therefore, it suffices to show that disjoint top dimensional simplices are mapped disjointly under F . Note that this is obviously true for F restricted to Opp(∆+ ). Let σ, τ be chambers in Opp(∆+ ), and let α and β be disjoint chambers in O(σ) ∩ D∆ (Opp(∆+ )) and O(τ ) ∩ D∆ (Opp(∆+ ) respectively. We must show that F (α) ∩ F (β) = ∅. Again, we identify ∆+ with the identity chamber of W . If α contains a vertex s+ in ∆+ , the chambers in the image of F (α) correspond to Coxeter group elements w with s ∈ / In(w−1 ). On the other hand, since s+ ∈ / −1 β, the chambers in F (β) correspond to elements with s ∈ In(w ). Therefore, any intersection between α and β must occur on the s-wall of the respective apartments. If α contains no other vertices of ∆+ , then the intersection of the image of α with the s-wall is in Opp(∆+ ). Therefore, if there is a nontrivial intersection between α and β, α must contain another vertex in ∆+ . Repeating this argument verbatim would eventually imply that α = ∆+ , which implies F (α)∩F (β) = ∅. Now that we have embedded D∆ (Opp(∆+ )) into our spherical building, we would like to verify the assumptions of Theorem 3.1. Therefore, we need to show that Opp(∆+ ) is a flag complex with top dimensional Z2 -homology. The first statement follows straight from the definitions, we record it as a lemma. Lemma 4.11. For any chamber C in B, Opp(C) is a flag complex. Proof. We will show that Opp(C) is a full subcomplex. This means that if the vertex set of a simplex in B is contained in Opp(C), then the simplex itself is contained in Opp(C). It implies that Opp(C) is also a flag complex. We prove the contrapositive: suppose σ is a simplex not in Opp(C), so there exists a wall such that σ and C lie on the same side. Therefore, all the vertices  9  of σ are not opposite to C. Therefore, if a simplex has vertex set in C, then the simplex is in C. On the other hand, it is not obvious to us that Hk (Opp(C), Z2 ) 6= 0 for every thick spherical building. In the next lemma, we verify that this does occur for infinitely thick buildings, which will suffice for our purposes. Lemma 4.12. If B has infinite thickness, then there exists a chamber C such that Opp(C) contains an apartment. Proof. Let A ⊂ B be any apartment and ∆0 be any chamber. If ∆0 is opposite to all chambers in A, then we are done. If not, for each chamber Ai in A, there are only finitely many chambers that share a panel with ∆0 and are closer to Ai . Therefore, we can ‘push’ ∆0 to a new chamber ∆1 that is further from each Ai (or perhaps the same distance if ∆0 is already opposite to Ai ). Continuing in this way, we find a chamber C0 opposite to each Ai , and therefore Ai ∈ Opp(C0 ). Example. If k is an infinite field and Flag(P) the associated spherical building, then it is easy to construct an apartment in Opp(C) for any chamber C. Any chamber C corresponds to a flag of subspaces C = [v0 ] ⊂ [v0 , v1 ] ⊂ · · · ⊂ [v0 , v1 , . . . , vn−2 ]. The opposite apartment is determined by choosing another basis in general position (e.g. choose all ek to not lie in [v0 , v1 . . . , vn−2 ]). Remark. For the finite thickness case, there are some obvious cases where we can find cycles in Opp. If the thickness of each panel is odd, then Opp is itself a Z2 -cycle. Note that this implies that Opp has nontrivial homology if the spherical building contains a spherical subbuilding of odd thickness. Also, for large enough thickness, a simple counting argument shows that Opp has top homology as it contains more n-simplices than (n − 1) simplices. In general, we do not know if there always exist chambers such that Opp has top dimensional homology. This may be subtle: in [2], Abramenko constructs examples of infinitely thick 1-dimensional buildings where for certain chambers Opp is a disjoint union of trees. However, other chambers inside these buildings have opposite complexes which contain apartments by Lemma 4.12. Note that higher rank spherical buildings have been fully classified by Tits [24]. It seems likely that one can construct top dimensional cycles in the opposite complexes for each list in the classification, but the calculations were too hard for the author.  5 The Action Dimension Conjecture for lattices in Euclidean buildings The following theorem is classical. In [11], an alternate proof is given which also computes the L2 -cohomology of arbitrary buildings in terms of the weighted L2 cohomology of an apartment. Theorem 5.1. If Γ acts properly and cocompactly on a thick, n-dimensional, Euclidean building, then the L2 -cohomology of Γ is concentrated in dimension n, and is nontrivial if the building is thick.  10  Therefore, the following is a confirmation of the Action Dimension Conjecture in this case. Theorem 5.2. If Γ acts properly and cocompactly on a thick, Euclidean building of rank n, then actdim(Γ) ≥ 2n. If Γ is torsion-free, actdim(Γ) = 2n. Proof. It is well known that the visual boundary of a thick, Euclidean building admits the structure of a thick, spherical building of rank n − 1 with infinite thickness [Section 11.8, [3]]. By Theorem 2.3, Theorem 3.1, and Lemmas 4.10– 4.12, it follows that actdim(Γ) ≥ 2n. If Γ is torsion-free, then equality follows from Stallings’ theorem since the geometric dimension of Γ is n.  5.1  More general buildings  For general buildings, the above strategy fails as we lose the spherical building at infinity. However, there are some specific examples where the action dimension is known. For example, Dymara and Osajda have shown that the boundary of a thick, n-dimensional right-angled hyperbolic building is the universal Menger space [15] (these exist for n ≤ 4). For non right-angled buildings, this was shown for n = 2 by Benakli [5]. Therefore, for cocompact lattices acting on such buildings the action dimension is at least twice the dimension of the building. It would be nice to extend Theorem 5.2 to all hyperbolic buildings, where we suspect the same bounds on action dimension should hold. The link of each vertex in a thick, locally finite, hyperbolic building B is a thick, finite, spherical building. The difficulty here is pushing this link in a compatible way to the building to get a proper expanding map Cone(Lk) → B. For general buildings, the geometric dimension of lattices can be less than the dimension of the building, so by Stallings’ theorem, the action dimension must sometimes be less than twice the dimension of the building. For example, let L be a flag (n − 1)-dimensional flag complex such that Hn−1 (L, Z2 ) = 0. Form any graph product GL such that every vertex group Gs is finite. Then GL acts properly and cocompactly on a n-dimensional thick, locally finite right-angled building XL [10]. The geometric dimension of GL is the same as the geometric dimension of the underlying Coxeter group, which has been explicitly computed and with these assumptions is less than n [12]. We conjecture that if Γ acts properly and cocompactly on a locally finite, thick building then actdim(Γ) ≥ 2 gdim(Γ).  6  S-arithmetic groups  In this section, we describe our main application of Theorem 5.2. Let k be a number field, i.e. a finite degree extension of Q. Let G(k) be a semisimple linear algebraic group over k. For each finite place p let νp : k → Z denote the corresponding valuation. Let S be a set of finite places of k, including the set of infinite places. Let kp be the completion of k with respect to the norm induced by νp . The ring of S-integers is defined by: OS := {x ∈ k|νp (x) ≥ 0 for all p ∈ / S}.  11  A subgroup of G(k) is an S-arithmetic subgroup if it is commensurable with G(OS ). Example. Let S = {p1 , p2 , . . . pm } be a finite set of primes. Each prime determines a p-adic valuation Q → Z which sends u → n if u = pn x and neither the numerator nor the denominator of x is divisible by p. The ring of S-integers in this case is ZS := Z[ p11 , p12 , . . . p1m ]. An S-arithmetic subgroup Γ of G(Q) is commensurable to G(ZS ). For simplicity, we will pass to a torsion-free finite index subgroup Γ of G(OS ), which always exists in this setting [8]. If S consists of only infinite places, then Γ is an arithmetic subgroup and acts on a symmetric space X∞ . If S has finite places, then for each finite place ν thereQis a Euclidean building Xν associated to G(kν ), and Γ acts properly on X∞ × νp Xνp . Furthermore, there is a partial BS compactification of X∞ due to Borel-Serre, which we denote Q X∞ . The Γ-action BS extends to a proper and cocompact action on X∞ × νp Xνp [8]. It will be Q important for us that if we fix a vertex v in νp Xνp and restrict to the Γ-action Q on νp Xνp , the stabilizer of v in Γ is an arithmetic subgroup Γ∞ . Bestvina and Feighn construct a proper, expanding map f from a coned (dim(X∞ ) − 2)-obstructor Cone(J) into X∞ that is bounded distance from Q a Γ∞ orbit. Theorem 5.2 gives a proper, expanding map g from a coned (2 dim( νp Xνp )− Q 2)-obstructor Cone(K) into νp Xνp . Q We take the product embedding into X∞ × νp Xνp and then compose with the inclusion into the Borel-Serre partial compactification: Y BS Xνp h := f × g : Cone(J) × Cone(K) → X∞ × νp  . We will now show that h is Q proper and expanding with respect to a proper BS Γ-invariant metric on X∞ × νp Xνp . We first show that such a metric exists. BS is a manifold with corners, it is separable and metrizable, and hence Since X∞ Q BS so is X∞ × νp Xνp . Therefore, the following general theorem applies.  Theorem 6.1 (Theorem 4.2, [1]). Suppose X is σ-compact. If the action of Γ on X is proper and X is metrizable, then there is a Γ-invariant proper metric dΓ on X that induces the topology of X.  Suppose Γ acts by isometries on two metric spaces X and Y , and suppose the diagonal action of Γ on X × Y is proper. Suppose that X admits a partial compactification X̂ such that the Γ-action extends to a proper and cocompact action on X̂ × Y . Let dX and dY denote the left Γ-invariant metrics on X and Y , and let dΓ be a left Γ-invariant metric on X̂ × Y as in Theorem 6.1. We shall prove the following general theorem in the next section. Theorem 6.2. Suppose that there is a proper expanding map f : Cone(J) → X and a proper expanding map g : Cone(K) → Y . Let (x, y) = (f (0), g(0)), and suppose Cone(J) maps a bounded distance in the dX -metric from the StabΓ (y)orbit of (x, y). For any Γ-invariant proper metric on X̂ × Y , the product map h = f × g : Cone(J) × Cone(K) → X̂ × Y is proper and expanding.  12  By the above remarks and Theorem 2.6 this theorem implies the following: Corollary 6.3. If ΓQ is an S-arithmetic group over a number field then h : Cone(J)× BS Cone(K) → X∞ × νp Xνp defined as above is proper and expanding, and hence P|S| actdim(Γ) ≥ dim(X∞ ) + i=1 2 dim(Xν ).  6.1  Proof of Theorem 6.2  We first need the following two lemmas. Lemma 6.4. Let (xi , yi ) and (x′i , yi′ ) in X̂×Y be a pair of sequences. If dY (yi , yi′ ) → ∞, then dΓ ((xi , yi ), (x′i , yi′ )) → ∞. Proof. By contradiction, suppose there exists a subsequence (xi , yi ), (x′i , yi′ ) with dΓ ((xi , yi ), (x′i , yi′ )) uniformly bounded. Since the Γ-action on X̂ ×Y is cocompact, there exists γi ∈ Γ such that (γi xi , γi yi ), and hence (γi x′i , γi yi′ ) are contained in a compact set K. We still have dY (γi yi , γi yi′ ) → ∞ since dY (γyi , γyi′ ) = dY (yi , yi′ ). Since K projects to a compact set in Y , this is a contradiction. Lemma 6.5. Let (xi , yi ) and (x′i , yi′ ) in X ×Y be a pair of sequences. Assume that yi remains bounded dY -distance from a basepoint y0 . Suppose that xi and x′i are bounded dX -distance from the StabΓ (y0 )-orbit of a basepoint x0 . If dX (xi , x′i ) → ∞, then dΓ ((xi , yi ), (x′i , yi′ )) → ∞. Proof. Again, assume by contradiction that there exist subsequences (xi , yi ) and (x′i , yi′ ), with dΓ ((xi , yi ), (x′i , yi′ )) uniformly bounded. Choose γi in StabΓ (y0 ) such that dX (γi xi , x0 ) is uniformly bounded. Since we assume yi are in a compact set of Y , we know that dY (γi yi , y0 ) is uniformly bounded. The sequence (γi xi , γi yi ) is contained in a compact set in X × Y , which implies dΓ ((γi xi , γi yi ), (x0 , y0 )) is uniformly bounded. Therefore by assumption dΓ ((γi x′i , γi yi′ ), (x0 , y0 )) is uniformly bounded. We have dX (γi x′i , x0 ) → ∞ since dX (γi xi , γi x′i ) → ∞ and dX (γi xi , x0 ) is uniformly bounded. Choose γi′ in StabΓ (y0 ) such that dX (γi′ x′i , x0 ) is uniformly bounded. Then the sequence dΓ ((γi (γi′ )−1 x0 , y0 ), (x0 , y0 )) is uniformly bounded Since dX (xi , x′i ) → ∞, we have the distance in the word metric of Γ between γi and γi′ → ∞, which contradicts the properness of the Γ-action on X̂ × Y . Now, we can prove Theorem 6.2. Proof. We show that f × g is proper and expanding. We will let (j, k) denote points in Cone(J) × Cone(K). Proper: Let (f (j0 ), g(k0 )) be the image of the cone point. Suppose f × g is not proper. Then there is a sequence (ji , ki ) which leaves every compact set of Cone(J) × Cone(K) such that h(ji , ki ) is contained in a compact set C of X̂ × Y . Since C projects to a compact set in Y and g is proper, the ki are contained in a compact subset of Cone(K). Therefore, the ji leave every compact set in Cone(J), and since f is proper, this implies that dX (f (j0 ), f (ji )) → ∞ which contradicts Lemma 6.5.  13  Expanding: Assume σ × τ and σ ′ × τ ′ are disjoint simplices in Cone(J) × Cone(K). Suppose f × g is not expanding. Then there are sequences (ji , ki ) in Cone(σ) × Cone(τ ) and (ji′ , ki′ ) in Cone(σ ′ ) × Cone(τ ′ ), which leave every compact set, and have dΓ (h(ji , ki ), h(ji′ , ki′ )) uniformly bounded. By Lemma 6.4, this implies that dY (ki , ki′ ) is uniformly bounded. Since g is expanding, this implies that ki and ki′ are contained in a compact set. Therefore, ji and ji′ leave every compact set, and since f is expanding we have dX (f (ji ), f (ji′ )) → ∞, which contradicts Lemma 6.5. Example. Let Γ = SL2 (Z[1/2]). In this case, Γ acts properly on H2 × T , where T is a trivalent tree. The obstructor complex we want to use is Cone(K3,3 ) ∼ = Cone(3pts) × Cone(3pts). In the trivalent tree, we map Cone(3pts) by choosing 3 disjoint rays emanating from a fixed base point. In H2 , which we identify with the upper half plane, we send Cone(3pts) to the orbit of i under the matrices:   [  1 0  1 t { | t ∈ R} { | t ∈ R+ } 0 1 t 1 Unfortunately, one cannot immediately use the product embedding Cone(3pts)× Cone(3pts) → H2 × T . This map is obviously proper and expanding, and if the image was bounded distance from an SL2 (Z[1/2])-orbit we could take a neighbourhood of the orbit to see that obdim(SL2 (Z[1/2])) = 4. The difficulty here is that the image is not bounded distance from any orbit. It seems in this case that one could perturb the product embedding to stay within a bounded distance of an orbit, but for the general case we chose to keep our simple definition of the product embedding and lose the nice structure of the product metric on H2 × T . Remark. These obstructor methods also apply for certain S-arithmetic groups over function fields. Let K be the function field of an irreducible projective smooth curve C defined over a finite field k := Fq . Let S be a finite nonempty set of (closed) points of C, and let OS < K be the ring of functions that have no poles except possibly at points in S. If S is a single point p, it determines a valuation νp : K → Z which assigns to a function its order of vanishing at p. If G is a linear algebraic group over K, then any group commensurable to G(OS ) is an S-arithmetic subgroup. Similarly as in the number field case, to each S-arithmetic group there is a corresponding Euclidean building XS , and in this case G(OS ) acts properly on XS , with no symmetric space factor. In the general setting, the action is not cocompact, and we cannot conclude anything from Theorem 5.2. However, we do have the following theorem: Theorem 6.6. For K and S as above, if G(OS ) acts cocompactly on XS , then actdim(G(OS )) ≥ 2 dim XS (this is true exactly when the K-rank of G = 0.)  References [1] H. Abels, A. Manoussos, and G. Noskov, Proper actions and proper invariant metrics, J. London Math. Soc. 83 (2011), no. 2, 619-636.  14  [2] P. Abramenko, Twin buildings and applications to S-arithmetic subgroups, Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics (1996). [3] P. Abramenko and K. Brown, Buildings: Theory and Applications, Springer, 2008. [4] G. Avramidi, M. W. Davis, B. Okun, and K. Schreve, Action dimension of rightangled Artin groups, Bull. London Math. Soc 48 (2016), no. 1, 115-126. [5] N. Benakli, Polyhedres hyperboliques, passage du local au global (1992). Thesis, Universite e Paris Sud. [6] M. Bestvina and M. Feighn, Proper actions of lattices on contractible manifolds, Invent. Math. 150 (2002), no. 2, 237–256. [7] M. Bestvina, M. Kapovich, and B. Kleiner, Van Kampen’s embedding obstruction for discrete groups, Invent. Math. 150 (2002), no. 2, 219–235. [8] A. Borel and J-P Serre, Cohomologie d’immeubles et de groupes S-arithmetiques, Topology 15 (1976), 211-232. [9] M. W. Davis and J. Huang, Determining the action dimension of an Artin group by using its complex of abelian subgroups. arXiv:1608.03572v2. [10] M. W. Davis and J. Meier, The topology at infinity of Coxeter groups and buildings, Comm. Math. Helv 77 (2002), 1-21. [11] M. W. Davis, J. Dymara, T. Januskiewicz, and B. Okun, Weighted ℓ2 -cohomology of Coxeter groups, Geom. Topol. 11 (2007), 47–138. [12] M. W. Davis, J. Dymara, T. Januskiewicz, J. Meier, and B. Okun, Compactly supported cohomology of buildings, Comment. Math. Helv. 85 (2010), 551-582. [13] M. W. Davis and I. J. Leary, The l2 -cohomology of Artin groups, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 68 (2003), no. 2, 493–510. [14] M. W. Davis and B. Okun, Vanishing theorems and conjectures for the ℓ2 -homology of right-angled Coxeter groups, Geom. Topol. 5 (2001), 7–74. [15] J. Dymara and D. Osajda, Boundaries of right-angled hyperbolic buildings, Fundamenta Mathematicae 197 (2007), 123-165. [16] Z. Despotovic, Action Dimension of Mapping Class Groups, 2006. [17] B. Eckmann, Introduction to ℓ2 -methods in topology: reduced ℓ2 -homology, harmonic chains, and ℓ2 -Betti numbers, Israeli Journal of Mathematics 117 (2000), 183-219). [18] M. Gromov, Kähler hyperbolicity and L2 -Hodge theory, J. Differential Geom. 33 (1991), no. 1, 263–292. MR92a:58133 [19] L. Ji, Buildings and their applications in geometry and topology, Asian J. of Math 1 (2006), 011–080. [20] C. T. McMullen, The moduli space of Riemann surfaces is Kähler hyperbolic, Ann. of Math. (2) 151 (2000), no. 1, 327–357. [21] B. Okun and K. Schreve, The L2 -(co)homology of groups with hierarchies, Alg. and Geom. Top. (2016). [22] J. R. Stallings, Embedding homotopy types into manifolds (1965). unpublished. [23] M. Tancer and K. Vorwerk, Non-embeddability of geometric lattices and buildings, Discrete and Computational Geometry 47 (2014). [24] J. Tits, Buildings of spherical type and finite BN-pairs, Vol. 386, Springer-Verlag, 1974. [25] E. R. van Kampen, Komplexe in euklidischen Raumen, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 9 (1933), no. 1, 72–78.  15

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
