Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_3523

Abstract:
Which NP-Hard SAT and CSP Problems Admit Exponentially Improved Algorithms?  arXiv:1801.09488v1 [cs.DS] 29 Jan 2018  Victor Lagerkvist∗1 and Magnus Wahlström†2 1  2  Institut für Algebra, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, Great Britain  Abstract We study the complexity of SAT(Γ) problems for potentially inﬁnite languages Γ closed under variable negation, which we refer to as sign-symmetric languages Γ. Via an algebraic connection, this reduces to the study of restricted partial polymorphisms we refer to as pSDI-operations (for partial, self-dual and idempotent), under which the language Γ is invariant. First, we focus on the language classes themselves. We classify the structure of the least restrictive pSDI-operations, corresponding to the most powerful languages Γ, and ﬁnd that these operations can be divided into levels, corresponding to a rough notion of diﬃculty, where every level k has an easiest language class, containing the language for (k − 1)-SAT, and a hardest language class, containing (among other things) constraints encoded as roots of multivariate polynomials of degree (k − 1). Particular classes in each level correspond to the natural partially deﬁned versions of previously studied total algebraic invariants. In particular, the easiest class on level k ≥ 3 corresponds to the partial k-ary near-unanimity (k-NU) operation, and a larger class corresponds to the partial k-edge operation. The largest class at each level corresponds to a partial operation uk we call k-universal. Furthermore, every sign-symmetric language Γ not preserved by uk implements all k-clauses, hence SAT(Γ) is at least as hard as k-SAT; and if Γ is not preserved by uk for any k, then SAT(Γ) is trivially SETH-hard (i.e., takes time O∗ (2n ) under SETH). Second, we consider implications of this for the complexity of SAT(Γ). We ﬁnd that particular classes in the hierarchy correspond to previously known algorithmic strategies. In particular, languages preseved by the partial 2-edge operation can be solved via Subset Sum-style meet in the middle, and languages preserved by the partial 3-NU operation can be solved via fast matrix multiplication. These results also hold for the correspondning non-Boolean CSP problems. We also ﬁnd that symmetric 3-edge languages reduce to ﬁnding a monochromatic triangle in an edge-coloured graph, which can be done using algorithms for sparse matrix multiplication; and if the sunflower conjecture holds for sunﬂowers with k petals, then the partial k-NU language has an improved algorithm via Schöning-style local search. Complementing this, we show a lower bound, showing that for every level k there is a constant ck such that for every partial operation p on level k, the problem SAT(Γ) with Γ = Inv(p) cannot be solved faster than O∗ (cnk ) unless SETH fails. In particular, when Γ = Inv(2-edge), this gives us the ﬁrst NP-hard SAT problem which simultaneously has non-trivial upper and lower bounds on the running time, assuming SETH. Finally, we note a possible conjecture: It is consistent with our present knowledge that SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm if and only if Γ is preserved by uk for some constant k. However, to show this in the positive poses some signiﬁcant diﬃculty.  ∗ †  victor.lagerqvist@tu-dresden.de magnus.wahlstrom@rhul.ac.uk  1 Introduction Signiﬁcant attention has been paid to the exact time complexity of SAT and its various restrictions; in particular CNF-SAT and k-SAT, but also other restrictions such as Not-All-Equal SAT, 1-in-k SAT, and several more cases [15, 23, 25, 42, 49]. The usual focus is on an improved algorithm for some particular variant, i.e., showing that the problem can be solved in time O∗ (cn ) for some c < 2, or, in some cases, that such an improvement is not feasible, up to our current knowledge (i.e., it would require disproving the strong exponential-time hypothesis, SETH; see below). Here, and in the sequel, the parameter n will in this context always denote the number of variables in a given instance. But what is the general rule for when a SAT problem admits such an improved algorithm? And can we say anything at all about lower bounds on such improvements? To reﬁne the question, let us recall some terminology. A constraint language is a (possibly inﬁnite) set Γ of ﬁnitary relations R ⊆ D ar(R) over some domain D, where ar(R) denotes the arity of R. We will mainly focus on the Boolean case, i.e., D = {0, 1}. Then SAT(Γ), occasionally called the parameterized satisfiability problem, is the SAT problem where the constraints of the instance are applications of relations from Γ, i.e., the constraints are statements that R(x1 , . . . , xr ) must hold, for some R ∈ Γ and some variables x1 , . . . , xr from the variable set (where we do allow repetitions of a variable). The multi-valued generalization of SAT, the constraint satisfaction problem over Γ (CSP(Γ)) is deﬁned in essentially the same way, except that Γ may be non-Boolean. Full deﬁnitions of the problems under consideration follow in Section 2. Thus, for example, 3-SAT corresponds to SAT(Γ3SAT ) where Γ3SAT for each 3-clause in {(x ∨ y ∨ z), . . . , (¬x ∨ ¬y ∨ ¬z)} contains the relation excluding only the tuple forbidden by that particular clause. Similarly, for k ≥ 3 let ΓkSAT denote the constraint language of all k-clauses, i.e., SAT(ΓkSAT ) is equivalent to k-SAT. Let us also tentatively deﬁne c(Γ) as the inﬁmum over all constants c > 1 such that SAT(Γ) can be solved in O(cn ) on n variables. Then the exponential time hypothesis (ETH), due to Impagliazzo and Paturi, states that c(ΓkSAT ) > 1 for every k, and was shown to be equivalent to the statement that c(Γ3SAT ) > 1 [25]. It has also been shown to be equivalent to the statement that c(Γ) > 1 for every Γ such that SAT(Γ) is NP-hard [31]. The strong exponential time hypothesis (SETH) is the statement that limk→∞ c(ΓkSAT ) = 2 [10, 25]. Then our main research question can be rephrased as, for which constraint languages Γ is c(Γ) < 2, respectively, when would c(Γ) < 2 contradict SETH? We say that SAT(Γ) allows an improved algorithm in the former case, and that it is SETH-hard in the latter. Hence, our main interest is in exponential improvements rather than subexponential improvements of the form O(2n−o(n) ) which have been proven to exist for CNF-SAT [17]. Before we discuss our approach for the general case, we consider a few examples. First of all, the algorithms for k-SAT imply that c(Γ) < 2 for every ﬁnite language Γ. However, such bounds are also known for some inﬁnite languages. One example is Exact SAT, the language of 1-in-k-clauses of all arities, which admits an improved algorithm [53]. As has been shown more recently, so does the problem where constraints are encoded as the roots of bounded-degree multivariate polynomials over a ﬁnite ﬁeld [42]. Thus, we need a way to discuss properties of inﬁnite arbitrary languages, and we need to consider the representation of constraints from such a language. We address these issues in Section 1.2. Lower bounds on c(Γ) for some Γ have been signiﬁcantly harder to come by. Some SAT problems have been shown to be SETH-hard, in particular Not-All-Equal SAT and problems related to SAT such as Hitting Set [15]. It is also known that assuming ETH, the value of c(ΓkSAT ) increases inﬁnitely often [25]. However, we do not even have conjectural evidence against any particular value of c(Γ) for any language Γ such that SAT(Γ) is not SETH-hard, other than for trivial cases.1 We also are not aware of any previous attempts to engage with the question of what makes a SAT problem SETH-hard or not in general. In this paper, we study these questions using tools from universal algebra. It is known that the value 1By trivial cases, we mean problems where the natural search space is smaller than 2n but otherwise unrestricted. Consider a language where every variable is involved in a disequality, e.g., the language of relations R′ (x1 , . . . , x2k ) ≡ (x1 6= xk+1 ) ∧ . . . ∧ (xk 6= x2k ) ∧ R(x1 , . . . , xk ) for arbitrary relations R. It is easy to see that under SETH, this problem has c(Γ) = 21/2 .  1  of c(Γ) is determined by algebraic invariants of Γ known as partial polymorphisms [31]. It is not diﬃcult to prove that if Γ has no interesting partial polymorphisms, then SAT(Γ) is trivially SETH-hard. We study the converse to this question, to essentially ask, does the existence of even a single relevant partial polymorphism p imply that SAT(Γ) has an improved algorithm? In particular, is it possible to design an algorithm with an exponentially improved running time, whose correctness depends only on p? One of the main strengths of using such an algebraic approach is that it makes the task of identifying languages Γ such that c(Γ) < 2 considerably easier. In fact, as we discuss in Section 1.1, these languages can be succinctly classiﬁed according to the expressive power of individual partial operations. Our paper has two main contributions. First, we characterize the structure of the weakest non-trivial invariants p. In this, we restrict ourselves to sign-symmetric languages (see below). This reveals a characterization of problem complexity, with close ties to several previously studied problems and algorithm classes. Second, we use the framework to provide both upper and lower bounds on c(Γ) for the corresponding languages Γ, under SETH. We show that algorithms from the literature can be extended to work for every language having a certain partial polymorphism p. In the negative direction, we are able to prove lower bounds on c(Γ) for every language Γ characterised purely by its invariants. As a result, we produce the ﬁrst language Γ such that c(Γ) has both non-trivial upper and lower bounds under SETH. Finally, we make connections between these SAT(Γ) problems and some problems in polynomial-time ﬁne-grained complexity. Our approach also implies some results for CSPs on a non-Boolean domain, but our main focus in the present paper lies in studying the Boolean case.  1.1 Universal algebraic aspects of SAT problems To make the discussion of our approach more precise, we need to review some notions from universal algebra. This is simply intended as an introduction and overview to make the extended abstract self-contained; full deﬁnitions follow later in the paper in Section 2. The universal algebraic approach to problem complexity originates in research into the constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) [29]. Recall the deﬁnitions of a constraint language Γ and the problem CSP(Γ) from the preceding section. Clearly, the complexity of CSP(Γ) varies as a function of Γ: if Γ is simple enough, then CSP(Γ) is in P; and if Γ is rich enough, then CSP(Γ) is NP-complete. The dichotomy conjecture, ﬁrst posed by Feder and Vardi [19], states that these are the only two cases and that no NP-intermediate CSP problems exist: for every ﬁxed language Γ, CSP(Γ) is either in P or is NP-complete. This conjecture has been the subject of intense research and the piece remaining to complete the puzzle was recently resolved by two independent authors [7, 57]. The algebraic approach turned out to be central in this research programme. In short, this approach boils down to the realization that properties of constraint languages can be expressed by properties of their polymorphisms. Informally, a polymorphism of a constraint language Γ is an operation which yields a method to combine satisfying assignments of instances of CSP(Γ). The algebraic reformulation of the CSP dichotomy theorem then states that CSP(Γ) is tractable if there exists a non-trivial method to combine solutions, and is NP-complete otherwise. More formally, we may deﬁne polymorphisms as follows. First, let R ⊆ D n be a relation on D, and let p : Dr → D be an r-ary operation over D. We can then generalise p to an operation (Dn )r → D n on tuples over D by p(x1 , . . . , xr )[i] = p(x1 [i], . . . , xr [i]) for every position i ∈ [n] (where xj [i] denotes the ith element of the tuple xj ). Then p is a polymorphism of R if this generalised operation preserves R, i.e., if p(x1 , . . . , xr ) ∈ R for any x1 , . . . , xr ∈ R. Note that if p is a projection, i.e., p(t1 , . . . , tr ) = ti for some i ∈ [r], then p preserves every possible relation. The notion of a polymorphism easily extends to constraint languages, and we say that p is a polymorphism of the constraint language Γ if p is a polymorphism of R for every relation R ∈ Γ, and let Pol(Γ) denote this set. It is then known that the complexity of CSP(Γ), up to polynomial-time many-one reductions, is determined entirely by Pol(Γ) [28]. Theorem 1. Let Γ and ∆ be finite constraint languages over a finite domain D. If Pol(∆) ⊆ Pol(Γ), then CSP(Γ) is polynomial-time many-one reducible to CSP(∆). 2  At this stage this result may seem slightly puzzling since we do not yet have a clear correspondence between polymorphisms and their implications on constraint languages. However, there exists a dual concept to polymorphisms on the relational side called implementations. Given a set of relations Γ over a domain D, a k-ary relation R is deﬁnable by a primitive positive implementation over Γ (pp-deﬁnable) if there exists a ﬁrst-order formula making use of existential quantiﬁcation and conjunctive constraints over Γ such that the set of models of this formula is precisely R. Given a constraint language Γ we then let hΓi be the smallest set of relations containing Γ and which is closed under taking pp-deﬁnitions. The polymorphisms of Γ then characterize the power of pp-deﬁnitions over Γ in the following sense. Theorem 2 ([5, 6, 21]). Let Γ and ∆ be two constraint languages. Then Γ ⊆ h∆i if and only if Pol(∆) ⊆ Pol(Γ). This duality has two implications. First, note that an instance of CSP(Γ) can be viewed as a special case of a pp-deﬁnition over Γ, hence the polymorphisms of Γ describe closure properties for the whole CSP(Γ) problem, and can be used to design polynomial-time algorithms. This is in line with the intuition that a polymorphism yields a method for combining satisfying assignments. Second, if R has a pp-deﬁnition in Γ then there is a polynomial-time many-one reduction from CSP(Γ ∪ {R}) to CSP(Γ); essentially, the ppdeﬁnition describes a classical “gadget reduction” between the problems obtained by replacing constraints over R by the collection of constraints over Γ prescribed by the pp-deﬁnition. Therefore, dually to the previous point, the absence of suﬃciently interesting polymorphisms for Γ would imply a polynomial-time reduction from an NP-hard problem CSP(Γ′ ), e.g., 3-SAT, to CSP(Γ). In practice, for CSPs beyond the Boolean domain, the complexity landscape gets very complex and one needs to apply a richer algebraic toolbox to make progress. However, it was realized early that not only does the complexity of CSP(Γ) depend on Pol(Γ), but in fact only the identities satisﬁed by the operations in Pol(Γ) [9]. In technical terms this means that the complexity of CSP(Γ) only depends on the variety generated by Pol(Γ). We will not deﬁne these concepts formally since they are not needed to present the main results; it is suﬃcient to know that the complexity of CSP(Γ) only depends on the identities satisﬁed by the operations in Pol(Γ). For example, CSP(Γ) is solvable using k-consistency if Pol(Γ) contains a majority operation, i.e., a ternary operation m satisfying the identities m(x, y, y) = y, m(y, x, y) = y, m(y, y, x) = y [29]. Moreover, all operations resulting in tractable CSPs can be characterized using such identities. It is worth remarking that for the Boolean domain the situation is considerably simpliﬁed due to Post’s classiﬁcation of Boolean Pol(Γ) [46], and a large range of such problems have been proven to admit dichotomies [14]. For example, Schaefers dichotomy theorem for SAT(Γ) [48] can be proven in an extremely straightforward manner using this approach. However, for our purposes the above methods are too coarsegrained, since the precise running time O∗ (cn ) for a problem SAT(Γ) is not preserved by the introduction of existentially quantiﬁed variables. Hence, we are in need of more ﬁne-grained algebraic tools than usual, which can be applied as follows. A partial operation over D (of some arity r) is an operation p : X → D for some domain X ⊆ D r . Similar to the total case we again extend it to a partial operation on tuples over D: for x1 , . . . , xr ∈ D n , we let p(x1 , . . . , xr )[i] = p(x1 [i], . . . , xr [i]) if this is deﬁned for every position i ∈ [n]; otherwise p(x1 , . . . , xr ) is undeﬁned. Then p is a partial polymorphism of a relation R ⊆ D n if, for any x1 , . . . , xr ∈ R such that p(x1 , . . . , xr ) is deﬁned we have p(x1 , . . . , xr ) ∈ R. We will occasionally also say that R is invariant under the partial operation p. A partial projection is a subfunction of a projection; such an operation preserves every possible relation. A partial polymorphism of a constraint language Γ is a partial polymorphism of every relation R ∈ Γ and we let pPol(Γ) denote the set of all partial polymorphisms of Γ. Similarly, given a set of partial operations P we write Inv(P) to denote the set of relations invariant under P , and if P = {p} is singleton we write Inv(p) instead of Inv({p}). Dually to this relaxed notion of a polymorphism, we have a strengthened notion on the relational side: a quantifier-free primitive positive definition (qfpp-deﬁnition) 3  over Γ is a pp-deﬁnition without existential quantiﬁcation. We let hΓi6∃ denote the smallest set of relations containing Γ and which is closed under qfpp-deﬁnitions, and then obtain the following correspondence. Theorem 3 ([21, 47]). Γ ⊆ h∆i6∃ if and only if pPol(∆) ⊆ pPol(Γ) for any constraint languages Γ and ∆. With the help of this correspondence Jonsson et al. [31] proved that partial polymorphisms indeed can be used for studying the ﬁne-grained complexity of SAT and CSP. Theorem 4. Let Γ and ∆ be two finite constraint languages. If pPol(Γ) ⊆ pPol(∆) then there is a polynomial-time many-one reduction from CSP(∆) to CSP(Γ) which does not increase the number of variables. Unfortunately, this theorem is diﬃcult to apply in practice since it requires a good understanding of the structure of the closed sets pPol(Γ) for all possible choices of Γ. Despite advances made by several diﬀerent researchers [12, 13, 35, 51], no such classiﬁcation is known even for Boolean Γ, and even less is known for Γ such that SAT(Γ) is NP-hard. Hence, we propose a method inspired by the rich algebraic toolbox developed for studying the classical complexity of CSP: does the SETH-hardness of SAT(Γ) and CSP(Γ) only depend on the identities satisﬁed by the partial polymorphisms of Γ? On the one hand, it is easily veriﬁed that if the only partial polymorphisms of Γ are the partial projections, then Γ can qfpp-deﬁne all k-clauses for every k ≥ 1, and SAT(Γ) is SETH-hard. On the other hand, we would have to show that every non-trivial partial polymorphism p allows the design of an algorithm that solves SAT(Γ) in O∗ (cn ) time for some c < 2. One issue which speaks against the feasibility of this approach is that individual partial polymorphisms are very weak restrictions. For one thing, it is known that for every ﬁnite set P of partial operations (that does not imply any non-trivial total operation), the set Inv(P) of all relations that are invariant under P contains a double-exponential number of relations as a function of the arity n [37, Lemma 35]. Note that for k a ﬁnite language such as k-SAT, there are in contrast only 2O(n ) distinct instances on n variables. Hence, languages Inv(p) for a single partial operation p would be much richer than previously studied problems. Very similarly, in a related study [36], it was shown that the existence of so-called polynomial kernels for SAT(Γ) cannot be characterised by such a ﬁnite set P , whereas every ﬁnite problem, as well as Exact SAT and problems deﬁned via bounded-degree polynomials, have polynomial kernels [27]. Nevertheless, contrary to these earlier results, we will prove that the presence of certain individual partial polymorphisms can be used to design improved algorithms for SAT problems. As a starting point we in the ﬁrst hand consider the partial analogues of well-studied polymorphisms resulting in tractable CSPs. For example, a Maltsev operation is a ternary operation φ satisfying the two identities φ(x, x, y) = y and φ(y, x, x) = y, and is well-known to result in tractable CSPs due to the algorithm by Bulatov and Dalmau [8]. We may then deﬁne the partial Maltsev operation over a domain D as the unique partial operation which for all x, y ∈ D satisﬁes these two identities, but which is undeﬁned otherwise. Similarly, it is possible to deﬁne partial variants of k-ary near unanimity (k-NU) and k-ary edge (k-edge) operations. These classes of operations are formally deﬁned in Section 2.5 and at the moment we will simply regard them as wellbehaved operations resulting in tractable CSPs, but we remark that a 2-edge operation is equivalent to a Maltsev operation and that a ternary NU-operation is nothing else than a majority operation. It may also be interesting to observe that the partial operations deﬁned in this manner are unique for every ﬁxed domain, even though there may exist a large number of total operations satisfying the identities.  1.2 Our results and structure of the paper For a partial polymorphism p, let Inv(p)-SAT refer to the problem SAT(Γ) where Γ = Inv(p). Hence, in this problem every involved relation is invariant under the given partial operation p. We will sometimes also refer to the CSP-variants of these problems and denote these by Inv(p)-CSP (and tacitly assume that the domain of the operation p is clear from the context, or is not relevant). We look at three related aspects of the complexity of these problems. Let us ﬁrst discuss our model more carefully. 4  Our questions and model. Since Γ is inﬁnite we ﬁrst need to ﬁx a constraint representation. Let R ⊆ {0, 1}r be a relation. An explicit representation of R is a list of all tuples t ∈ R. For inﬁnite languages the explicit representation is not always the most natural one since a relation may contain exponentially many tuples with respect to the arity. This is particuraly troublesome when proving lower bounds for Inv(p)-SAT since we may not be able to construct relations of arbitrary arity in the required time bound. Hence, we also consider an implicit representation. In this model of representation a contraint R(x1 , . . . , xr ) is represented by an oracle consisting of a computable function which, given an assignment to variables X ⊆ {x1 , . . . , xr }, can determine if this assignment can be extended to an assignment to {x1 , . . . , xr } consistent with R. Example 5. For each r ≥ 3 consider the relation Rr = {(x1 , . . . , xr ) ∈ {0, 1}r | x1 + . . . + xr is even}. Even though |Rr | is exponential with respect to r it is not difficult to see that constraints over Rr can be implicitly represented by computing the parity of the given assignment. Given these deﬁnitions, we consider the following three notions of improved algorithms. Definition 6. Let Γ be an infinite constraint language. 1. SAT(Γ) admits a non-uniform improved algorithm with running time O∗ (cn ), c < 2, if for every finite Γ′ ⊂ Γ the problem SAT(Γ′ ) can be solved in O∗ (cn ) time. 2. SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm in explicit representation if SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm for the problem variant where every relation is provided in explicit representation. 3. SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm in the oracle model if SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm when constraints are provided only as extension oracles. Note that for a non-uniform improved algorithm, the representation does not matter. Also note that these are gradually stronger requirements, and that in these terms, SETH states that CNF-SAT does not admit even a non-uniform improved algorithm. On the other hand, allowing constraints of unbounded arity via oracle P access can be useful; for example, the n-ary constraint ( ni=1 xi = k) has a simple extension oracle, and if included in the language, can be used to phrase optimisation problems as oracle-access SAT problems. To restrict our scope, we focus on constraint languages that are closed under variable negation. Informally, this means that whenever R ∈ Γ, in addition to constraints R(x1 , . . . , xr ) on only positive variables, we are also allowed to impose constraints such as R(x1 , . . . , ¬xi , . . . , xr ) with some occurrences of variables xi negated in the constraint. More formally, it means that for every R ∈ Γ, and for every subset S ⊆ [ar(R)] of positions of R, the relation produced by negating every tuple t ∈ R in positions S is also contained in Γ. In this case, we say that Γ is sign-symmetric. This is a natural restriction which holds for many well-studied constraint language, e.g., the languges corresponding to k-SAT, 1-in-k-SAT and the roots of bounded-degree polynomials are all sign-symmetric. Furthermore, it is known that the expressive power of a sign-symmetric constraint language is characterised by a restricted kind of partial polymorphism which we refer to as pSDIoperations (for partial, self-dual and idempotent) [34, 38]. Thus, the restriction to sign-symmetric languages corresponds directly to a restriction on the algebraic level. Most importantly, the Boolean partial operations arising from system of identities of the form considered in Section 1.1 are guaranteed to be pSDI. The fine-grained structure of NP-hard SAT problems. The ﬁrst part of the paper, Section 3, is dedicated to explaining the the structure of pSDI-operations. Due to the algebraic correspondence between partial polymorphisms and qfpp-deﬁnability this also serves as a classiﬁcation of the NP-hard SAT problems we need to consider for constructing improved algorithms. First, we study the structure of single pSDI-operations p that impose some non-trivial restrictions on the expressive power of Γ. We particularly consider the weakest such operations, i.e., such that the language 5  Γ = Inv(p) is as rich as possible. In particular, we consider p such that every subfunction of p which is pSDI is a partial projection. Let us refer to such an operation as being minimal. For example, the partial variants of Maltsev, k-NU, and k-edge operations are all minimal. Equipped with this notion we then show that minimal pSDI-operations are naturally organised into levels, with a structure as follows. • There is a single minimal operation on level 2, which is the partial Maltsev, or, equivalently, the partial 2-edge operation. This is also equivalent to the 2-universal operation deﬁned below. • For every other minimal pSDI-operation p, there is a unique largest constant k such that p is implied by the partial k-NU operation nuk . We refer to this as the level of k. Thus, the partial k-NU operation is the strongest operation on level k ≥ 3. • For every level k ≥ 2, there is also a unique weakest pSDI-operation uk which we refer to as the k-universal operation, such that uk is implied by every operation on level k. • The language ΓkSAT corresponding to k-SAT is preserved by the partial (k + 1)-NU operation, but not by any operation on a previous level; and every sign-symmetric language Γ that is not preserved by the k-universal operation can qfpp-deﬁne ΓkSAT . • Finally, as an interesting case, roots of polynomials of degree at most d are preserved by the (d + 1)universal operation, but not by any other operation on a level up to d + 1. Thus, the levels of minimal pSDI-operations correspond to a natural notion of diﬃculty. It also follows that if a sign-symmetric language Γ is not preserved by the k-universal operation for any constant k, then SAT(Γ) is trivially SETH-hard, whereas every other language Γ has some kind of restriction on its expressive power. We also note that there is no known case of a problem known to be SETH-hard, which ﬁts into a framework of searching through the set {0, 1}n for a solution, and which is k-universal for any k. Hence, it is consistent with our present knowledge that every k-universal problem SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm. Last, we remark that although we in this paper are mainly interested in the time complexity of SAT, the classiﬁcation of minimal pSDI-operations in this section may be of independant interest for any Boolean problem compatible with qfpp-deﬁnitions. In this vein, we also give a “vertical” result in the above hiearchy, and show that every sign-symmetric constraint language Γ not preserved by the partial k-NU operation for any k can qfpp-deﬁne either 1-in-k-clauses of all arities, or counting constraints modulo p of all arities for some ﬁxed prime p. This result is the main technical challenge in this section, and relies on an application of Szemerédi’s theorem [54] to analyse the structure of symmetric relations R ∈ / Inv(nuk ). Upper and Lower Bounds on the SAT problem. Second, in Section 4 and Section 5, we consider the strength of the problem Inv(p)-SAT for various pSDI-operations p, with an interest in bounding the value c(Γ) for Γ = Inv(p) from above and below. The ﬁrst question here is the matter of constraint representation. As mentioned previously, the language Inv(p) contains a double-exponential number of relations of arity r as a function of r; hence any ﬁxed representation would in the worst case use 2O(r) bits just to encode the relations. This becomes an issue when we allow constraints of unbounded arity. Recall that we consider three alternatives for representation: explicit representation, extension oracles, and non-uniform algorithms where the particular choice of representation does not matter. We then obtain the following results. • When p is the partial 2-edge operation, we refer to Inv(p)-SAT as 2-edge-SAT. We show that 2-edgen SAT can be solved in O∗ (2 2 ) time in the oracle setting using a meet-in-the-middle strategy combined n with the computation of a kind of canonical labels for partial assignments, similarly to the O∗ (2 2 )time algorithm for Subset Sum with n integers [24]. A similar improved algorithm is possible for the generalisation to 2-edge-CSP, i.e., for ﬁxed non-Boolean domains. Furthermore, if c(Inv(p)) < 21/2 6  1  in the extension oracle setting, then Subset Sum can be solved in O∗ (2( 2 −ε)n ) for some ε > 0, which is a long-standing open problem. • When p is the partial k-NU operation, we refer to Inv(p)-SAT as k-NU-SAT. For k = 3, this problem is equivalent to 2-SAT, and hence in P, but the generalisation 3-NU-CSP to larger ﬁxed domains is NPhard and admits an improved algorithm using fast matrix multiplication, similarly to the well-known algorithm for the CSP problem over binary constraints. • For k > 3, we show two conditional connections. First, if the (k, k − 1)-hyperclique problem for hypergraphs with ground set of size n can be solved in time O(nk−ε ) for any ε > 0, then both k-NU-SAT and k-NU-CSP admit improved algorithms in the oracle setting. Second, if the ErdősRado sunflower conjecture [18] holds for sunﬂowers with k sets, then k-NU-SAT admits an improved algorithm via a local search strategy in the explicit representation, similar to Schöning’s algorithm for k-SAT [52]. • We also investigate the case that p is the partial 3-edge operation e3 , and give a partial result. Assume that every relation R in the input is either preserved by the partial 2-edge relation, or by nu3 , or R is symmetric and preserved by e3 – i.e., whether t ∈ R depends only on the Hamming weight of t. Then the SAT problem has an improved algorithm via a reduction to the problem of ﬁnding monochromatic triangles in an edge-coloured graph, which in turn can be solved using fast algorithms for triangle ﬁnding in sparse graphs. We do not know whether this strategy generalises to non-symmetric relations. For further classes, we note that SAT(Γ) contains some highly challenging special cases. In particular an algorithm for the k-universal languages for k > 2 would need to generalise the algorithm of Lokshtanov et al. for bounded-degree polynomials [42], while only using the abstract properties guaranteed by uk . Finally, we show lower bounds in the oracle extension model: for every minimal pSDI-operation p, we get a concrete lower bound c(Inv(p)) ≥ ck > 1 assuming the randomized SETH, where k is the level of p. (1−ε)n ) for any ε > 0 and any That is, unless SETH is false, no algorithm can solve Inv(p)-SAT in time O∗ (ck log k p at level k. The bound ck converges to 2 at a rate of 2 − ck = Θ( k ). A connection to polynomial-time problems. Finally, we make some connections between the Inv(p)SAT and Inv(p)-CSP problems and some problems in polynomial-time algorithms. We show that the minimal pSDI-operations generalise not only to CSP problems on ﬁxed domains, but to abstract conditions on “CSP-like” problems on a domain of size n and with d = Θ(1) variables. We refer to this as the abstract Inv(p)-problem. Any solution to such a problem that runs in time O(nd−ε ) for any ε > 0 implies an improved algorithm for the corresponding Inv(p)-SAT and Inv(p)-CSP problems in the oracle setting for every ﬁxed domain. This lies behind the improved algorithms for 2-edge-CSP and 3-NU-CSP. However, there is some indication that these problems may be tougher than the original problems, since the reduction loses a signiﬁcant amount of instance structure (e.g., the local search strategy for k-NU-SAT cannot be lifted to the abstract problem). In fact, there are conjectures that would prevent improved algorithms for most cases of the abstract problem considered in this article: • The abstract k-NU problem is equivalent to (k, k − 1)-hyperclique, i.e., the problem of ﬁnding a k-hyperclique in a (k − 1)-regular hypergraph. Thus, it has an improved algorithm for k = 3 but the status is unknown for k > 3. Moreover, the general (l, k)-hyperclique problem for l > k has been conjectured to require nl−o(1) time [40]. • The abstract 3-universal problem contains the problem of ﬁnding a zero-weight triangle in an edgeweighted graph with arbitrary edge weights. This does not admit an improved algorithm unless the 3-SUM conjecture fails (but SETH-hardness is not known) [56]. 7  Considering the connections, we still consider it useful to ask which minimal pSDI-operations p suﬃce to guarantee an improved algorithm for the abstract Inv(p)-problem. We leave this question for future work.  1.3 Technical notes and proof methods Let us now give a few more details about the proofs of the above results. The structural characterisation builds on a description of minimal non-trivial pSDI-operations (Lemma 27) — they are precisely the operations produced by padding the partial k-NU operation by additional arguments. The weakest and strongest operations on each level follow from this almost by deﬁnition. It also follows that the operations on each level k are characterized by the presence or absence of each of roughly 2k possible types of padding argument. Note that such a padding makes an operation weaker; e.g., in order to apply the partial majority operation to a sequence of tuples t1 , . . . , tk ∈ R for some relation R, in a padded version of arity r we require that R further contains a sequence of tuples tk+1 , . . . , tr determined by the padding arguments from the tuples t1 , . . . , tk . This also provides a way to think about the consequences of not being preserved by such an operation. Assume e.g. that a relation R is not preserved by nuk . Then by deﬁnition there are t1 , . . . , tk ∈ R such that nuk (t1 , . . . , tk ) = t is deﬁned, and by sign-symmetry we may assume that t is the constant 0-tuple 0ar(R) . Then the witness produces a partition of the arguments of R, in a way which can be used to implement a relation R′ of arity k which accepts every tuple of weight 1 but none of weight 0. However, we have no information at this point about the remaining tuples in R′ . Continuing this line of reasoning to derive a consequence for an inﬁnite sign-symmetric language Γ with nuk ∈ / pPol(Γ) for every k, we ﬁrst observe that ′′ we can deﬁne a symmetric relation R ∈ / Inv(nuk ) as a conjunction of k! applications of R′ under argument permutation, then (as announced) analyse the possibilities for families of such relations using Szemerédi’s theorem. In particular, a broken arithmetic progression of i accepted weights in such a relation implies that we can qfpp-deﬁne an i + 1-clause using R. By contrast, if uk ∈ / pPol(R), then the tuples t1 , . . . , t2k −1 ∈ R required by the arguments of uk imply that such a relation R′ must have |R′ | = 2k − 1, i.e., it must be the relation corresponding to a k-clause. Moving on to the algorithmic applications, most of the positive results are relatively straight-forward applications of known ideas; the interesting aspect is that the applicability of these ideas follows from such simple conditions as the minimal pSDI-operations. Here, we particularly wish to highlight the conjectural connection to local search. Recall that Schöning’s algorithm [52] reduces k-SAT to several applications of local search, i.e., given a starting point x ∈ {0, 1}n and a parameter t, ﬁnd a satisfying assignment within Hamming distance t of x. By sign-symmetry, for our problem this reduces to the case x = 0n (alternatively, one could use monotone local search; cf. Fomin et al. [20]). Now, consider the set of all minimal tuples in any relation R ∈ Inv(nuk ) with 0ar(R) ∈ / R. It is easy to see that by the nuk -condition, this set does not contain a sunﬂower of k sets, and by the sunﬂower conjecture, this implies that for every i there are at most C i such minimal tuples in R of weight i for some C. A simple computation shows that a recursive algorithm that ﬁnds an unsatisﬁed relation R, enumerates minimal tuples in it, and recursively proceeds from every such tuple yields a total searching time of 2O(t) , which would be precisely suﬃcient to yield an improved algorithm for k-NU-SAT. This algorithm uses the explicit representation in order to be able to enumerate such minimal tuples. It is an interesting open question whether this can be achieved eﬃciently in the oracle setting. Finally, we move on to our lower bounds. These are of two kinds, a reduction from Subset Sum to 2-edge-SAT, and the generic lower bound under SETH against any problem Inv(p)-SAT. For the former, recall that the partial 2-edge operation is equivalent to u2 , and thus contains all constraints which can be phrased as linear equations, e.g., Subset Sum instances. But we are also required to provide an extension oracle for each constraint, which is clearly infeasible if we plug in the Subset Sum equation as-is. However, √ √ this is easily solved by splitting the binary expansion of the target number into O( n) blocks of O( n) 8  bits each. With some moderate guessing, each block reduces to one linear equation, and via the tabulation √ algorithm for Subset Sum an extension oracle each such block can be produced with a query time of 2O( n) . The generic bounds, in turn, work via a generic padding argument: we show that for every level k, and any set X of n variables, there is a universal padding formula R(X, Y ) on |Y | = Θ(n) additional variables such that R′ (X, Y ) ≡ R′ (X)∧ R(X, Y ) is k-NU for any relation R′ (X). Furthermore, random parity-check variables suﬃce to produce this padding formula, allowing for an eﬃcient extension oracle for the relation R′ (X, Y ). Finally, by the regularity of the padding formula, we can reuse the same variables Y for all constraints in an input instance of q-SAT, for any q, and only pay with |Y | = Θ(n) extra variables in total. The fact that some such padding exists was previously known [37]. Recall that every operation p considered has at least one tuple of values for which it is undeﬁned. Then, if we add enough random variables, for every attempt p(t1 , . . . , tr ) of ﬁnding a valid application of p on a relation R there will be a padding variable j such that (t1 [j], . . . , tr [j]) takes the values of such a tuple, and p is undeﬁned. The fact that parity-check variables suﬃce in our case follows from the fact that p contains k arguments that form a partial k-NU operation. It is easy to check that almost all parity-check variables form an undeﬁned tuple of values already over these arguments. This construction could be derandomized using a universal hash family, possibly at the cost of a larger constant |Y |/|X|, but we do not pursue this.  1.4 Related work Our work can be seen as an amalgamation of the following areas: ﬁne-grained time complexity and lower bounds under the SETH, and the algebraic approach for studying classical complexity of CSP. Concerning the former, SETH has turned out to be a highly useful conjecture for exact algorithms since a relative lower bound from SETH shows that any further improvements also implies a breakthrough speed-up for SAT. Many diﬀerent problems have been shown to admit lower bounds via the SETH, but in the current context of SAT, in addition to the foundational works of Impagliazzo et al. [25, 26] it is worth mentioning the lower bound for Not-all-equal SAT (NAE-SAT) by Cygan et al. [15] and the lower bound for Π2 3-SAT by Calabro et al. [11]. However, to the best of our knowledge, all concrete lower bounds using SETH for exponential-time algorithms falls into one of the following cases: either the lower bound matches the running time of a trivial algorithm, as in the case of Hitting Set, NAE-SAT, and Π2 -3-SAT, showing that no improvement is possible; or the lower bounds are with respect to a much more permissive complexity parameter than n, such as treewidth [41]. The one other example we are aware of is from the study of inﬁnite-domain CSPs by Jonsson and Lagerkvist [30], who obtained upper bounds of the form O∗ (2f (n) ) for non-linear functions f and a lower bound stating that the CSPs are not solvable in O(cn ) time for any constant c. These bounds are therefore in a sense closer to non-subexponentiality results usually obtained from the ETH. SETH and other conjectures have also seen signiﬁcant applications over recent years in producing conditional lower bounds for polynomial-time solvable problems, but these are only tangentially relevant here. With regards to the algebraic approach we wish to highlight a few related but diﬀerent results. Partial polymorphisms and the link to qfpp-deﬁnitions were ﬁrst introduced to the CSP community by Schnoor & Schnoor [50] even though these notions were well-known in the algebraic community much longer [21, 47]. However, the principal motivation by Schnoor & Schnoor was to obtain dichotomy theorems for CSPlike problems incompatible with existential quantiﬁcation, and the explicit connection to ﬁne-grained time complexity of CSP was not realized until later by Jonsson et al. [31]. This work utilized a lattice-informed approach which exploited the structure of the inclusion structure of closed sets of partial polymorphisms, in order to identify an NP-complete SAT(Γ) problem such that c(Γ) ≤ c(∆) for every other NP-complete SAT(∆). This problem was referred to as the easiest NP-complete SAT problem and was later generalized to a broad class of ﬁnite-domain CSPs [32]. However, continued advancements in understanding this inclusion structure revealed that even severely restricted classes of constraint languages had a very complicated 9  structure [12, 35]. In a similar vein of negative results it was also proven that (1) pPol(Γ) cannot be generated by any ﬁnite set of partial operations whenever Γ is ﬁnite and SAT(Γ) is NP-hard, and (2) if P is a ﬁnite set of partial operations such that Inv(P)-SAT is NP-hard, then any pp-deﬁnable relation over Inv(P) can be transformed into a pp-deﬁnition using only a linear number of existentially quantiﬁed variables [37]. In plain language, these results show that ﬁnite constraint languages result in complex partial polymorphisms, and that simple partial polymorphisms result in complex constraint languages. A previous attempt at grappling with this diﬃculty provided closure operators that generate pPol(Γ) for a ﬁnite Γ from a ﬁnite basis [34], but this intrinsically uses that Γ is ﬁnite, and is not applicable in the current paper. Our approach in this paper avoids the pitfalls of the lattice-informed approach since it is suﬃcient to understand the behaviour of individual pSDI-operations. This is in line with how the research programme of classifying the complexity of ﬁnite-domain CSPs evolved into a project of describing properties of operations deﬁned by system of identities (see the survey by Barto et al. for more details [3]). Another related paper by the present authors investigates the existence of polynomial (or linear) kernels for problems SAT(Γ), using ideas of extending the language Γ into a tractable CSP on a larger domain [36], including extensions into 2-edge (i.e., Maltsev) and k-edge languages. However, there is no concrete technical connection between that paper and this one, as having polynomial kernels turns out to be a much more restricted property than admitting improved algorithms.  1.5 Concluding remarks and open questions Our principal motivation in this paper is to study the SETH-hardness of the parameterized SAT(Γ) problem. To simplify our study we restricted our focus to sign-symmetric constraint languages, which is a common assumption for SAT problems studied in practice. Moreover, due to the connection between sign-symmetric constraint languages and pSDI-operations, understanding the inclusion structure between sign-symmetric constraint languages is tantamount to describing the expressive power of pSDI-operations. Even better, pSDI-operations can in many cases be understood as the partial analouges of well-studied operations such as Maltsev operations, NU-operations and edge-operations, making them easier to reason with. The main open question is whether our results can be strengthened into a dichotomy for sign-symmetric SAT problems. One direction is already clear: if Γ is not preserved by any k-universal operation then SAT(Γ) is SETH-hard and does not admit an improved algorithm without breaking the SETH. The other direction is harder and requires a substantially better understanding of languages invariant under a given k-universal operation; such languages include, but are not limited to, relations expressible as roots of polynomial equations of degree at most k + 1, where an improved algorithm is known [42]. It is not clear at this point how much richer the set Inv(uk ) is, compared to this class of problems. Existing (conjectured) lower bounds against polynomial-time problems captured by abstract Inv(p)-problems also indicate that the problem might be more diﬃcult for remaining cases. We also proved that the SAT problems under consideration admit lower bounds under the SETH. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst result showcasing both a non-trivial upper bound and a concrete lower bound under the SETH in terms of a natural parameter n. These bounds were obtained in the extension oracle setting and it is currently unclear if matching bounds can also be obtained if constraints are represented explicitly. The padding construction is still valid in this setting, but it is a challenge to apply it without creating constraints with exponentially many tuples. Last, our approach easily extends to ﬁnite-domain CSPs, as evidenced by the improved algorithms for 2-edge-CSP and 3-NU-CSP. The notion of a pSDI-operation is only relevant in the Boolean domain, but a similar notion can likely be deﬁned for arbitrary ﬁnite domains. For example, instead of self-duality, essentially meaning that the partial operation is closed under negation, we would require that the operation is closed under every unary operation over the domain. However, it is not clear if the inclusion structure of such generalized pSDI-operations can be characterized in a similar hierarchy as the Boolean pSDI-operations.  10  2 Preliminaries A k-ary relation over a domain D is a subset of D k . If t = (x1 , . . . , xn ) is a k-ary tuple we for every 1 ≤ i ≤ k let t[i] = xi , and if i1 , . . . , ik′ ∈ [k] = {1, . . . , k} we write Proji1 ,...,ik′ (t) = (t[i1 ], . . . , t[ik′ ]) for the projection of t on the coordinates i1 , . . . , ik′ . This notation easily extends to relations and we write Proji1 ,...,ik′ (R) for the relation {Proji1 ,...,ik′ (t) | t ∈ R}. A set of relations is called a constraint language, or simply a language, and will usually be denoted by Γ and ∆. We will typically deﬁne relations either by their deﬁning logical formulas or by their deﬁning equations. For example, the relation R1/3 = {(0, 0, 1), (0, 1, 0), (1, 0, 0)} may be deﬁned by the expression R1/3 ≡ x1 + x2 + x3 = 1. However, we will not always make a sharp distinction between relations and their deﬁning logical formulas and will sometimes treat e.g. a k-clause as a relation. We write ar(R) for the arity of a relation R, and use the notation EqD to denote the equality relation {(x, x) | x ∈ D} over D. A k-ary relation R is said to be totally symmetric, or just symmetric, if there exists a set S ⊆ [k] = {1, . . . , k} such that (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ R if and only if x1 + . . . + xk ∈ S. For example, R1/3 is totally symmetric as witnessed by the set S = {1}. Symmetric relations will prove to be useful since it is sometimes considerably simpler to describe the symmetric relations invariant under a partial operation.  2.1 The parameterized SAT and CSP Problems Let Γ be a Boolean constraint language. The parameterized satisfiability problem over Γ (SAT(Γ)) is the computational decision problem deﬁned as follows. Instance: A set V of variables and a set C of constraint applications R(v1 , . . . , vk ) where R ∈ Γ, ar(R) = k, and v1 , . . . , vk ∈ V . Question: Is there a function f : V → {0, 1} such that (f (v1 ), . . . , f (vk )) ∈ R for each R(v1 , . . . , vk ) in C? The constraint satisfaction problem over a constraint language Γ (CSP(Γ)) is deﬁned analogously with the only distinction that Γ is not necessarily Boolean. We write (d, k)-CSP for the CSP problem over a domain with d elements where each constraint has arity at most k.  2.2 The extension oracle model Recall from Section 1.2 that we consider two distinct representations of SAT and CSP instances. We now deﬁne these in more detail. In the ﬁrst representation each relation R occurring in a constraint R(x1 , . . . , xk ) is represented as a list of tuples. We call this representation the explicit representation. This is one of the most frequently occurring representation methods in the algebraic approach to CSP, but it is fair to say that it is not convenient in any practical application since a relation may contain exponentially many tuples with respect to the number of arguments. We therefore consider a more implicit representation where each constraint is represented by a procedure which can verify whether a partial assignment of its variables is consistent with the constraint. Definition 7. Let R be an n-ary relation over a set D. A computable function which given indices ′ i1 , . . . , in′ ∈ [n] and t ∈ Dn answers yes if and only if t ∈ Proji1 ,...,in′ (R) is called an extension oracle representation of R. Hence, given a constraint R(x1 , . . . , xn ) and a partial truth assignment f : X → D, X ⊆ {x1 , . . . , xn }, the extension oracle representation can be used to decide whether f can be completed into a satisfying assignment of R(x1 , . . . , xn ). Example 8. CNF-SAT can be succinctly represented in the extension oracle model. Consider e.g. a positive clause (x1 ∨ . . . ∨ xn ) and a partial truth assignment f on {x1 , . . . , xn }. We can then answer yes if and only if not every variable xi occurring in the clause is assigned the value 0. 11  2.3 Sign-symmetric constraint languages An n-ary sign pattern is an tuple s where s[i] ∈ {+, −} for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n. If t is an n-ary Boolean tuple and s an n-ary sign pattern then we let ts be the tuple where ts [i] = t[i] if s[i] = + and ts [i] = 1 − t[i] if s[i] = −. Similarly, if if R is a Boolean relation and s an n-ary sign pattern we by Rs denote the relation {ts | t ∈ R}. Last, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n and c ∈ {0, 1} we let Ri=c = {t | t ∈ R, t[i] = c} be the relation resulting from freezing the ith argument of R to c. Definition 9. A Boolean constraint language Γ is said to be sign-symmetric if (1) Rs ∈ Γ for every n-ary R ∈ Γ and every n-ary sign pattern s and (2) Ri=c ∈ Γ for every c ∈ {0, 1} and every 1 ≤ i ≤ n.  2.4 Partial polymorphisms and quantifier-free primitive positive definitions Let D be a ﬁnite set of values. A k-ary partial operation, or a partial function, f over D is a mapping X → D where X ⊆ Dk . The set X is said to be the domain of f and we let domain(f ) = X denote this set and ar(f ) = k denote the arity of f . If f and g are two n-ary partial operations over D such that domain(g) ⊆ domain(f ) and g(x1 , . . . , xn ) = f (x1 , . . . , xn ) for every (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ domain(g) then g is said to be a subfunction of g. For n ≥ 1 the i-ary projection, 1 ≤ i ≤ n, is the operation πin (x1 , . . . , xi , . . . , xn ) = xi and a partial projection is any subfunction of a total projection. If R is an n-ary relation over D and f a k-ary partial operation over D we say that f is a partial polymorphism of R, that R is invariant under f , or that f preserves R, if f (t1 , . . . , tk ) ∈ t or f (t1 , . . . , tk ) is undeﬁned, for each sequence of tuples t1 , . . . , tk . We let pPol(R) be the set of all partial polymorphisms of the relation R, and if Γ is a constraint language we let pPol(Γ) denote the set of partial operations preserving each relation in Γ. The notion of a total polymorphism can be deﬁned simply by requiring that f is total, i.e., domain(f ) = D k , and we let Pol(Γ) be the set of all total polymorphsims of the constraint language Γ. Similarly, if P is a set of partial operations we let Inv(P) be the set of all relations invariant under P . Each set of partial operations P naturally induces a SAT problem SAT(Inv(P)) where each relation involved in a constraint is preserved by every partial operation in P . Recall from Section 1.2 that we as a shorthand denote this problem by Inv(P)-SAT. The two operators Inv(·) and pPol(·) are related by the following Galois connection. Theorem 10 ([21, 47]). Let Γ and ∆ be two constraint languages. Then Γ ⊆ Inv(pPol(∆)) if and only if pPol(∆) ⊆ pPol(Γ). The applicability of partial polymorphism in the context of ﬁne-grained time complexity might not be evident from these deﬁnitions. However, sets of the form Inv(P), called weak systems or weak co-clones, are closed under certain restricted ﬁrst-order formulas which are highly useful in this context. Say that a k-ary relation R has a quantifier-free definition (qfpp-deﬁnition) over a constraint language Γ over a domain D if R(x1 , . . . , xk ) ≡ R1 (x1 ) ∧ . . . ∧ Rm (xm ) where each Ri ∈ Γ ∪ {Eq D } and each xi is a tuple of variables of length ar(Ri ). It is then known that Inv(P) for any set of partial operations P is closed under taking qfpp-deﬁnitions. With this property the following theorem is then a straightforward consequence. Theorem 11. [31] Let Γ and ∆ be two finite constraint languages. If pPol(Γ) ⊆ pPol(∆) then there exists a polynomial-time many-one reduction from SAT(∆) to SAT(Γ) which maps an instance (V, C) of SAT(∆) to an instance (V ′ , C ′ ) of SAT(Γ) where |V ′ | ≤ |V | and |C ′ | ≤ c|C|, where c depends only on Γ and ∆. In particular this implies that if CSP(Γ) is solvable in O(cn ) time and pPol(Γ) ⊆ pPol(∆) then CSP(∆) is solvable in O(cn ) time, too. We will now brieﬂy describe the closure properties of pPol(Γ), which are usually called strong partial clones. First, if f, g1 , . . . , gm ∈ pPol(Γ) where f is m-ary and each gi is n-ary, then the composition f ◦ g1 , . . . , gm (x1 , . . . , xn ) = f (g1 (x1 , . . . , xn ), . . . , gm (x1 , . . . , xn )) is also included 12  in pPol(Γ). This operation will be deﬁned on a tuple (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ D n if and only if each gi (x1 , . . . , xn ) is deﬁned and the resulting application over f is deﬁned. Second, pPol(Γ) contains every partial projection, which is known to imply that pPol(Γ) is closed under taking subfunctions (i.e., if f ∈ pPol(Γ) then every subfunction of f is included in pPol(Γ)). If P is a set of partial operations we write [P ]s = pPol(Inv(P)) for the smallest strong partial clone containing P .  2.5 Polymorphism patterns In this section we describe a method for constructing partial polymorphisms that have a strong connection to the sign-symmetric constraint languages deﬁned in Section 2.3. As a shorthand we will sometimes denote the k-ary constant tuple (d, . . . , d) by dk . Definition 12. Let f be a Boolean partial operation. We say (1) that f is self-dual if x ∈ domain(f ) for every x ∈ domain(f ) and f (x) = 1 − f (x), where x denotes the complement of the tuple x, and (2) that f is idempotent if dk ∈ domain(f ) and f (dk ) = d for every d ∈ D. In the sequel, we will call a Boolean partial operation which is both self-dual and idempotent a pSDIoperation, short for partial, self-dual, and idempotent operation. Let a polymorphism pattern of arity r be a set of pairs (t, x) where t is an r-ary tuple of variables and where x occurs in t. We say that a r-ary partial operation f over a set of values D satisfies an r-ary polymorphism pattern P if domain(f ) = {(τ (x1 ), . . . , τ (xr )) | ((x1 , . . . , xr ), x) ∈ P, τ : {x1 , . . . , xr } → D} and f (τ (x1 ), . . . , τ (xr )) = τ (x) for every ((x1 , . . . , xr ), x) ∈ P and every τ : {x1 , . . . , xr } → D. A Boolean operation is pSDI if and only if it satisﬁes a polymorphism pattern. To see this, note that if f is pSDI, then it is easy to create a polymorphism pattern P by letting each tuple t ∈ domain(f ) such that f (t) = 0 correspond to an entry in P . Similarly, it is not diﬃcult to show that any partial operation satisfying a polymorphism pattern must be self-dual and idempotent. We then have the following link between sign-symmetric constraint languages and partial operations satisfying polymorphism patterns. Theorem 13. [38] Let f be a pSDI-operation. Then Inv(f) is sign-symmetric. Hence, pSDI-operations provide a straightforward way to describe broad classes of sign-symmetric constraint languages. It is also known that if Γ is sign-symmetric and SAT(Γ) is NP-hard, then every partial polymorphism of Γ is a subfunction of a pSDI-operation preserving Γ [38][Theorem 3] (see Lagerkvist [34] for a full proof). We will now deﬁne the pSDI-operations that will play a central role in our current pursuit. Definition 14. Let k ≥ 2. A (k+1)-ary partial operation is a partial k-edge operation if it satisfies the pattern consisting of ((x, x, y, y, y, . . . , y, y), y), ((x, y, x, y, y, . . . , y, y), y), and for each i ∈ {4, . . . , k + 1}, the tuple ((y, . . . , y, x, y, . . . , y), y), where x appears in position i. We will typically denote partial k-edge operations by ek , and, if the underlying set D is important, by eD . k A partial 2-edge operation will sometimes be called a partial Maltsev operation. Definition 15. Let k ≥ 3. A k-ary partial operation is a partial k-ary near-unanimity operation (partial kNU operation) if it satisfies the pattern which for each i ∈ {1, . . . , k} contains ((x, x, . . . , x, y, x, . . . , x), x), where y occurs in position i. We write nuD k to denote this operation over the domain D, and nuk if the domain is clear from the context, or not relevant. Ternary partial NU-operations will sometimes be called partial majority operations. Note that the partial majority operation is total in the Boolean domain but is properly partial for every larger domain. Last, we deﬁne the following class of self-dual partial operations. Say that the argument i of a k-ary partial operation f is redundant if there exists j 6= i such that t[i] = t[j] for every t ∈ domain(f ). 13  Subset Sum Linear Equations 1-in-k SAT  Sidon Sets Degree-2 Polynomials  2-edge = 2-universal  2-SAT (d, 2)-CSP Graph k-Clique  3-NU  3-edge  3-universal  3-SAT (d, 3)-CSP (3, ℓ)-Hyperclique  4-NU  4-edge  4-universal  ...  ...  ...  k-NU  k-edge  k-universal  (k − 1)-SAT (d, k − 1)-CSP (k − 1, ℓ)-Hyperclique  Degree-3 Polynomials  Degree-(k − 1) Polynomials  Figure 1: The inclusion structure between selected minimal pSDI-operations (solid outlines), and some problems that reduce to the corresponding SAT or CSP problem (dotted outlines). Several classes on each level k ≥ 3 have been omitted. Definition 16. Let k ≥ 2. The k-universal operation uk is the Boolean (2k − 1)-ary pSDI-operation defined on 2k +2 tuples such that (1) uk is not a partial projection and (2) uk does not have any redundant arguments. While not immediate from the deﬁnition, the operation uk is in fact unique up to permutation of arguments. To see this, simply take the k non-constant tuples t1 , . . . , tk ∈ domain(uk ) such that uk (t1 ) = . . . = uk (tk ) = 0. Since uk is not a projection and is pSDI, it follows that there cannot exist i ∈ [2k − 1] such that (t1 [i], . . . , tk [i]) = 0k . Hence, since uk does not have any redundant arguments, there for every t ∈ {0, 1}k \ {0k } must exist a unique i ∈ [2k − 1] such that (t1 [i], . . . , tk [i]) = t. Last, we remark that there is a connection between our notion of polymorphism patterns and the operations studied in connection to the CSP dichotomy (see e.g. the survey by Barto et al. [3]). In technical terms polymorphism patterns essentially matches strong Maltsev condititions where the right-hand side is restricted to a single variable. Similar restrictions, called height-1 identities, have been considered earlier and it is known that the complexity of a CSP(Γ) problem only depends on the height-1 identities satisﬁed by the operations in Pol(Γ) [33].  3 Structure of Constraint Languages under Minimal Restrictions We now properly begin the ﬁrst part of the paper, investigating the structure of maximally expressive, yet restricted sign-symmetric constraint languages. This investigation is performed via the study of the weakest non-trivial pSDI-operations, including the operations deﬁned in Section 2.5. As a preview of the structure, and of some of the included problems, we refer to Figure 1. The problem and language inclusions illustrated in this ﬁgure will be shown across the next two subsections. More precisely, by “weakest” pSDI-operations, we mean partial operations that are minimal in the following sense. Recall that for every pSDI-operation f and every subfunction f ′ of f , we have Inv(f) ⊆ Inv(f ′ ). This motivates the following deﬁnition.  14  Definition 17. Let f be a pSDI-operation. We say that f is trivial if it is a subfunction of a projection, and a minimal non-trivial pSDI-operation if f is non-trivial but every proper subfunction f ′ of f which is a pSDI-operation is trivial. Our study in this section is focused on constraint languages Γ = Inv(f) where f is a single minimal non-trivial pSDI-operation, since these are the most expressive sign-symmetric constraint languages that are still restricted in expressive power. We begin by giving some examples for the particular classes of k-NU, k-edge and k-universal partial operations deﬁned in Section 2.5.  3.1 Properties of specific sign-symmetric constraint languages In this section, we provide some illustrative examples of languages included in Inv(f) for particular pSDIoperations f . We ﬁrst recall the following result from Lagerkvist & Wahlström. Theorem 18. [37] Let F be a finite set of partial operations such that Inv(F)-SAT is NP-complete. Then any n-ary Boolean relation has a pp-definition over Inv(F) using at most O(n) existentially quantified variables. In eﬀect, this implies that any constraint language Inv(F), where F is a ﬁnite set of pSDI-operations, cn is extremely expressive. One direct consequence is that Inv(F) contains at least 22 n-ary relations for some constant 0 < c ≤ 1. This makes such constraint languages markedly diﬀerent from ﬁnite constraint languages, since for any ﬁnite constraint language Γ, the number of n-ary qfpp-deﬁnable relations over Γ is bounded by O(2p(n) ) for a polynomial p depending on Γ. This also implies that there cannot exist a ﬁnite Γ such that pPol(Γ) = [F]s . In fact, the relations of Inv(F) for such an F are dense enough that for any n-ary relation R, a random padding of R by O(n) parity-check variables is enough to create a variable in Inv(F) with high probability. This fact will be exploited in Section 5.3. Despite this, we will see that the pSDI-operations deﬁned in Section 2.5 do correspond roughly to natural restrictions on the expressive power of a language Γ. We now illustrate the classes with a few examples. In the process will occasionally refer to the language inclusions illustrated in Figure 1. Proofs of these inclusions is given in Theorem 29 in Section 3.2. Let us now begin with a basic example. Lemma 19. R ∈ Inv(nuk ) for every (k − 1)-ary relation R, k ≥ 3. Proof. Let t1 , . . . , tk ∈ R be such that nuk (t1 , . . . , tk ) is deﬁned, and for i ∈ [k − 1] let t(i) = (t1 [i], . . . , tk [i]). For every i ∈ [k − 1], either t(i) is constant or there is a single index j where t(i) [j] deviates from its other entries. By the pigeonhole principle, there is at least one index j ∈ [k] such that t(i) [j] does not deviate from the majority for any i ∈ [k − 1]. Then we have nuk (t1 , . . . , tk ) = tj . We also show a corresponding negative statement. By the inclusions shown in the next section, this will imply that a k-clause is not preserved by any operation at “level k” of the hierarchy in Figure 1. Lemma 20. Let R ⊂ {0, 1}k be a k-clause, i.e., |R| = 2k − 1, k ≥ 2. Then R is not preserved by the partial k-universal operation. Proof. By sign-symmetry, we assume that R = {0, 1}k \ {0k }. Let t1 , . . . , tk be the non-constant tuples in domain(uk ) such that uk (ti ) = 0 for each i ∈ [k]. Then for each i ∈ [2k −1], the tuple t(i) = (t1 [i], . . . , tk [i]) deﬁnes a tuple of R; thus the application k −1)  uk (t(1) , . . . , t(2  ) = 0k  is deﬁned and shows that R ∈ / Inv(uk ). Next, we consider a canonical example of a useful relation preserved by the partial 2-edge operation. 15  Lemma 21. Let R(x1 , . . . , xn ) ⊆ {0, 1}n be defined via a linear equation n X  αi xi = β  i=1  evaluated over a finite field F. Then R ∈ Inv(e2 ). Proof. This is a special case of the notion of a Maltsev embedding of R previously investigated by the authors [36]. It is known that a relation with a Maltsev embedding is closed under a family of partial operations, of which e2 is the simplest. A particular example of such relations is the Exact SAT problem. We show that its 1-in-k relations are also not closed under nuk . s Lemma 22. Let R1/k = {(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ {0, 1}k | x1 + . . . + xk = 1}, and ΓXSAT = {R1/k | k ≥ 1, s is a k-ary sign-pattern}. Then ΓXSAT ⊆ Inv(e2 ) but is not preserved by nuk for any k.  Proof. The positive direction follows from Lemma 21, since R1/k can be phrased as a linear equation over the integers mod p, for p ≥ k + 1. The negative direction is immediate: let R1/k = {t1 , . . . , tk }. Then nuk (t1 , . . . , tk ) is deﬁned and equals 0k . Another example of a problem with the character of linear equations is Subset Sum. Even though an instance of Subset Sum is deﬁned by just a single linear equation rather than as a SAT(Γ) instance, we show in Section 5.2 that the complexity of 2-edge-SAT and Subset Sum are closely connected. As for the class Inv(ek ) for k ≥ 3, the inclusions illustrated in Figure 1 imply that this class contains both relations with linear equation extensions and all (k − 1)-clauses. Finally, we show two examples for the partial k-universal operation uk . The ﬁrst is a previously studied class of Lokshtanov et al. [42]. Note this problem does admit an improved algorithm. Definition 23. Let Pd denote the set of Boolean relations such that each n-ary R ∈ Pd is the set of roots of an n-variate polynomial equation where each polynomial has degree at most d. Lemma 24. Let R ∈ Pd be an n-ary relation. Then R is preserved by ud+1 , but not by any other non-trivial pSDI-operation of domain size at most 2d + 2. Proof. For the ﬁrst direction, let P (x1 , . . . , xn ) be the polynomial deﬁning R, and let t1 , . . . , tr ∈ R be such that ud+1 (t1 , . . . , tr ) = t′ is deﬁned. Since the set of relations representable by bounded-degree polynomials is sign-symmetric, we may assume for simplicity that t′ = 1n . The tuples (t1 , . . . , tr ) deﬁne a new polynomial of degree at most d and with at most d + 1 variables, deﬁned by identifying all pairs of variables xi and xj that have the same pattern in (t1 , . . . , tr ), i.e., if ta [i] = ta [j] for every a ∈ [r]. We also eliminate any variable xi such that tj [i] = 1 for every j ∈ [r] by replacing xi by the constant 1 in P . Let P ′ be the resulting polynomial, and let R′ be the corresponding relation. If ar(R′ ) < d + 1, then by Lemma 20 R′ is preserved by nud+1 and thus by ud+1 as well (see Theorem 29). Otherwise, for each Q I ⊂ [d + 1] let αI be the coeﬃcient of the monomial i∈I xi in P ′ , and let χI ∈ {0, 1}d+1 be the tuple such P that χI [i] = 1 if and only if i ∈ I. Note that P ′ (χI ) = I ′ ⊆I αI ′ . We ﬁnd that αI = 0 for every I. Indeed, α∅ = 0 since 0d+1 ∈ R′ ; and α{i} = 0 for every i since P ′ (χ{i} ) = α{i} + α∅ = α − {i} = 0; and so on, in order of increasing cardinality of I. Then P ′ is the constantly-zero polynomial, and 1d+1 ∈ R′ , hence t′ = 1n ∈ R. We have thus shown that relations deﬁned as roots of polynomials of degree d are preserved by the (d + 1)-universal operation. In the other direction, the same argument will show that for any pSDI-operation f with |domain(f )| ≤ 2d+2 other than the (d+1)-universal operation, it is possible to deﬁne a polynomial on (|domain(f )|−2)/2 16  variables and of degree at most d such that the corresponding relation is not preserved by f . Indeed, let n = (|domain(f ) − 2|)/2 and r = ar(f ), and let t1 , . . . , tr be tuples of arity n such that no tuple (t1 [i], . . . , tr [i]) is constant and f (t1 , . . . , tr ) = 1n is deﬁned. If n ≤ d, then we may simply consider the Q polynomial P (x1 , . . . , xn ) = i∈[n] xi , whose corresponding relation R is not preserved by f . Otherwise, let I ⊂ [d + 1] be such that χI ∈ / {t1 , . . . , tr }; this exists since f is not the (d + 1)-universal partial operation. Let P ′ be the d + 1-variate polynomial with coeﬃcients αJ = 0 if I 6⊆ J, and with αJ = (−1)|J|−|I| otherwise, for all J ⊂ [d + 1]. Then P ′ (tI ) = 1, and it can be veriﬁed that P ′ (tJ ) = 0 for every J ⊂ [d + 1], J 6= I, whereas P ′ (1d+1 ) = −(−1)d+1−|I| . Hence the relation corresponding to P ′ is not preserved by f. Finally, we give one example of a symmetric relation in Inv(u3 ) that has no obvious connection to roots of polynomials. A Sidon set is a set S ⊆ {0, . . . , n} in which all sums i + j, i, j ∈ S are distinct. Lemma 25. Let S ⊆ {0, . . . , n} be a Sidon set, and define a relation R(x1 , . . . , xn ) ⊆ {0, 1}n as n X  R(x1 , . . . , xn ) ≡ (  i=1  xi ∈ S).  Then R is preserved by u3 . Proof. Assume that there exists t1 , . . . , t7 ∈ R such that u3 (t1 , . . . , t7 ) = t ∈ / R. For i ∈ [n], let xi = (t1 [i], . . . , t7 [i]) be the tuple of values taken by argument i of R in these tuples. Then the tuples xi take up to 8 diﬀerent values, partitioned as two constant tuples and three pairs of complementary tuples. Let Xj for j = 1, 2, 3 be the set of arguments i ∈ [n] such that the tuple xi belongs to the j:th of these pairs, and let nj be the diﬀerence in Hamming weight compared to t if ﬂipping all values belonging to Xj . Let W be the Hamming weight of t. Then S contains the values W + n1 , W + n2 , W + n1 + n3 and W + n2 + n + 3, forming two pairs of weights with common diﬀerence n3 . Since n3 6= 0, we must have n1 = n2 . By symmetry, we have n1 = n2 = n3 . But then S contains the values W + n1 , W + n1 + n2 = W + 2n1 , and W + n1 + n2 + n3 = W + 3n1 , which is a contradiction. Thus nj = 0 for at least one j, hence W ∈ S and t ∈ R, contradicting the original assumption.  3.2 Structure of minimal non-trivial pSDI-operations Note that if f is a pSDI-operation, then |domain(f )| = 2k + 2 for some k, since f is deﬁned on the two constant tuples and since the tuples of the domain can be paired up as (t, t) where t is the complement of t. Hence, we deﬁne the level of a minimal non-trivial pSDI operation f as (|domain(f )| − 2)/2. We ﬁnd no examples on level 0 or 1, and the only non-trivial example on level 2 is the 2-edge operation. At each level k ≥ 3 the partial k-NU and k-universal operations are the unique strongest and weakest minimal non-trivial pSDI-operation, respectively, whereas the k-edge operation is intermediate. This structure is also illustrated in Figure 1. We also ﬁnd that the k-universal operations uk are maximally weak in the sense that any non-trivial pSDI-operation with a domain of size 2k + 2 can deﬁne uk . We begin with the following lemma, which formalizes one of the main methods of constructing a (k + 1)-ary partial operation from a k-ary partial operation. We refer to g as an argument padding of f . Lemma 26. Let f be a k-ary partial operation and let g be a (k + 1)-ary partial operation such that (1) Proj1,...,k (domain(g)) = domain(f ) and (2) f (x1 , . . . , xk ) = g(x1 , . . . , xk , xk+1 ) for every (x1 , . . . , xk , xk+1 ) ∈ domain(g). Then g ∈ [f ]s . Proof. Let f and g be as in the statement, and ﬁrst construct the (k + 1)-ary partial operation f ′ (x1 , . . . , xk , xk+1 ) = f (π1k+1 (x1 , . . . , xk , xk+1 ), . . . , πkk+1 (x1 , . . . , xk , xk+1 )). 17  Clearly, f ′ ∈ [f ]s , since it is a composition of f and the projections π1k+1 , . . . , πkk+1 , and it is not diﬃcult to see that Proj1,...,k (domain(f ′ )) = domain(f ) and that g can be obtained as a subfunction of f ′ . Since [f ]s is closed under taking subfunctions it follows that g ∈ [f ]s . The following will aid us in reasoning about minimal non-trivial pSDI-operations. Lemma 27. Let f be a pSDI-operation with |domain(f )| = 2k + 2, k ≥ 3. Then f is a minimal non-trivial operation if and only if f is an argument padding of nuk . Proof. In the one direction, assume that f is a padding of nuk . It is not hard to verify that every subfunction f ′ of f which is pSDI is a partial projection, and that f is non-trivial. Thus, f is minimal non-trivial. In the other direction, assume that f is minimal and non-trivial, and let r = ar(f ). Let t1 , . . . , tk be the non-constant tuples such that f (t1 ) = 0 is deﬁned. For each i ∈ [k], let ji ∈ [r] be such that making f undeﬁned on ti and its complement ti leaves a subfunction of πjri . It follows that for all a ∈ [k], ta [ji ] 6= 0 if and only if a = i. Then the arguments j1 , . . . , jk of f deﬁne the partial k-NU operation, and f is a padding of it. Our claims about the weakest and strongest operations follows from this. Lemma 28. The following hold. 1. The unique non-trivial non-total pSDI-operation at level k < 3 is the partial 2-edge operation. 2. For any minimal non-trivial pSDI-operation f at level k ≥ 3, we have Inv(nuk ) ⊆ Inv(f) ⊆ Inv(uk ). k −k−1  3. There are at most 22  distinct minimal non-trivial pSDI-operations at level k.  Proof. 1. It is easy to verify that no non-trivial operation is possible on level 1. Let f be a non-trivial pSDI-operation on level 2, and let t1 , t2 ∈ domain(f ) be the non-constant tuples such that f (t1 ) = 0. Consider the options for the pairs (t1 [i], t2 [i]) for i ∈ [ar(f )]. If two distinct positions i, i′ give identical pairs, then t[i] = t[i′ ] for every t ∈ domain(f ) and i and i′ are redundant arguments in f , which we may assume does not occur. If t1 [i] = t2 [i] = 0 for some i ∈ [ar(f )] then f is a partial projection. This leaves three possible arguments, and unless all three exist, f will be a total operation. The remaining case is that f = e2 . 2. By Lemma 27 f is a padding of nuk , which provides the ﬁrst inclusion. For the second, we may assume that f has no redundant arguments, since otherwise f is equivalent to an operation with fewer arguments. But then by design, uk is a padding of f , and the second inclusion follows. 3. By Lemma 27, we can restrict our attention to paddings of nuk . Since f is a pSDI-operation, it is deﬁned by the values of the k non-constant tuples t in the domain with f (t) = 0. Let t1 , . . . , tk be those tuples, and for i ∈ [ar(f )] let t(i) = (t1 [i], . . . , tk [i]). As above, we may assume that t(i) 6= t(j) for all distinct i, j ∈ [ar(f )]. This leaves at most 2k possible arguments. Furthermore, t(i) cannot be all-zero unless f is a partial projection, and k arguments are determined by nuk . This leaves 2k − k − 1 arguments, whose presence or absence deﬁnes f . The inclusion structure between the k-NU, k-edge and k-universal partial operations are now straightforward to prove with these results. Theorem 29. Let k ≥ 3. Then the following inclusions hold. 1. Inv(e2 ) ⊂ Inv(ek ), 2. Inv(nuk ) ⊂ Inv(ek ) ⊂ Inv(uk ), 18  3. Inv(nuk ) ⊂ Inv(nuk+1 ), 4. Inv(ek ) ⊂ Inv(ek+1 ), and 5. Inv(uk ) ⊂ Inv(uk+1 ). Proof. For the inclusions, the second item follows from Lemma 28, and every other inclusion follows from Lemma 26. Indeed, it is readily veriﬁed that for every k ≥ 3, ek is an argument padding of ek−1 and nuk+1 is an argument padding of nuk . For the universal operations, let t1 , . . . , tk+1 be the non-constant tuples of domain(uk+1 ) such that uk+1 (ti ) = 0, i ∈ [k + 1]. Then the tuples t(i) = (t1 [i], . . . , tk+1 [i]), i ∈ [2k+1 − 1] spell out all (k + 1)-tuples except 0k+1 , without repetition. Consider the subset I ⊂ [ar(uk+1 )] consisting of indices i such that tk+1 [i] = 0. Note that t(i) for i ∈ I enumerates all k-tuples except 0k , padded with a 0. It follows that ProjI (uk+1 ) = domain(uk ) and that uk+1 is an argument padding of uk . By Lemma 26 the inclusion follows. To show that the inclusions are strict, consider the following: a k-clause is preserved by nu k+1 (Lemma 19) but not by uk (Lemma 20); a 1-in-k constraint is preserved by e2 but not by nuk (Lemma 22); and the language Pk−1 of roots of polynomials of degree at most k − 1 is preserved by uk but not by any other operation on level k by Lemma 24. Finally, we have an easy consequence in more general terms. Corollary 30. Let f be a pSDI-operation with |domain(f )| = 2k + 2. Then Inv(f) ⊆ Inv(uk ). Proof. Let f ′ be an arbitrary minimal pSDI-operation that is a subfunction of f . Then f ′ belongs to some level k′ ≤ k, hence Inv(f) ⊆ Inv(uk′ ) ⊆ Inv(uk ) by Lemma 28 and Theorem 29.  3.3 Complementary consequences We now consider some dual questions, i.e., what consequences can we (in general) draw from the information that some sign-symmetric language Γ is not preserved by f , for some pSDI-operation f ? We begin with an easy result, which forms the building block of later results. Lemma 31. Let Γ be a sign-symmetric language which is not preserved by nuk , for some k ≥ 3. Then Γ can qfpp-define a k-ary symmetric relation R such that R does not contain tuples of weight 0, but does contain tuples of weight 2. Proof. Let k ≥ 3 be an arbitrary constant, and let R ∈ Γ be a relation not preserved by nuk of some arity n = ar(R). Let t1 , . . . , tk ∈ R be witnesses to this, i.e., t = nuk (t1 , . . . , tk ) is deﬁned and t ∈ / R. Deﬁne t(i) = (t1 [i], . . . , tk [i]). By sign-symmetry, we may assume that t = 0n . Furthermore, if there is an argument i ∈ [n] such that t(i) = 0k , then we can ﬁnd a smaller counterexample by ﬁxing argument i of R to be constantly 0. Thus, for every i ∈ [n], the tuple t(i) now contains precisely one non-zero value. Let us deﬁne a new relation R′ (x1 , . . . , xk ) of arity k by identifying arguments according to this, i.e., for every position i ∈ [n] such that t(i) is non-zero in position j ∈ [k], insert variable xj in position i in R. Additionally deﬁne R′′ as the result of the conjunction of all k! applications of R′ with permuted argument order. Then R′′ is a symmetric relation which contains all tuples of weight 1 but none of weight 0. Thus, Γ qfpp-deﬁnes a relation Rk = R′′ as described of every arity k ≥ 3. By a similar strategy, we have an important result about languages not preserved by the k-universal operation.  19  Lemma 32. Let Γ be a sign-symmetric language not preserved by uk for some k ≥ 2. Then Γ can qfpp-define all k-clauses. Proof. Let R ∈ Γ be a relation not preserved by uk , and let n = ar(R) and r = 2k − 1 be the arity of uk . Let t1 , . . . , tr ∈ R be such that uk (t1 , . . . , tr ) = t is deﬁned and t ∈ / R. By sign-symmetry of Γ, we may assume t = 0n . Create a new relation by identifying all variables xi and xj in R(x1 , . . . , xn ) for which ta [i] = ta [j] for every a ∈ [r]. Also assume that there is no variable xi such that ta [i] = 0 for every a ∈ [r], or else replace xi by the constant 0 in R (again by sign-symmetry). This deﬁnes a new relation R′ of arity at most k. Since t ∈ / {t1 , . . . , tr }, we ﬁnd that R′ has arity precisely k and contains every possible k-tuple except 0k , i.e., R′ qfpp-deﬁnes a k-clause. By sign-symmetry, Γ qfpp-deﬁnes all k-clauses. 3.3.1  Infinitary case  Finally, we consider consequences of a language not being preserved by any operation in a family of operations. Theorem 33. Let Γ be a sign-symmetric language that is not preserved by the partial k-NU operation, for any k. Then one of the following holds. 1. Γ can qfpp-define all k-clauses for every k. 2. Γ can qfpp-define 1-in-k-clauses for every k. 3. There is a fixed prime p such that Γ can qfpp-define relations k X i=1  xi ≡ a  (mod p)  for every 0 ≤ a < p, of every arity k. Before we proceed with the proof, let us make a simple observation about qfpp-deﬁnitions among symmetric relations. Lemma 34. Let R be a symmetric n-ary relation, including tuples of weights S ⊆ {0, . . . , n}. Using R, we can qfpp-define symmetric relations of the following descriptions. 1. Shift down: a relation of arity n − 1 accepting values S ′ = {x − 1 | x ∈ S, x > 0}. 2. Truncate: a relation of arity n − 1 accepting values S ′ = {x ∈ S | x < n}. 3. Grouping: for any integer p > 1, a relation of arity ⌊n/p⌋ accepting values S ′ = {x′ | x′ p ∈ S}. Proof. These are implemented by, respectively, ﬁxing an argument to 1 in R; ﬁxing an argument to 0 in R; and grouping arguments of R in groups of size p (after truncating ar(R) to an even multiple of p). We can now show the result. Proof of Theorem 33. Let k ≥ 3 be an arbitrary constant. By Szemerédi’s theorem [54] there is a constant n = N (2k, 1/2(k +1)) such that every set S ⊆ [n] with |S| ≥ n/(2k +1) contains an arithmetic progression a, a + p, . . . of at least 2k items. Let Rn be a relation produced by Lemma 31 of arity n, and let S be the accepted weights for Rn . Say that an arithmetic progression a, a + p, . . . is complete in S if S contains all values {x ∈ {0, . . . , n} | x ≡ a (mod b)}. We consider a few cases. 20  Case: S contains an incomplete arithmetic progression with at least k items. We show that in this case, Γ can qfpp-deﬁne all k-clauses. Let a, a + p, . . . , a + (k − 1)p ∈ S be an arithmetic progression that in one direction does not continue. If a ≥ p and a − p ∈ / S, then by shifting, truncating and grouping we can P / S, then we can qfpp-deﬁne the k-ary relation ( i xi ≥ 1); in the other case, if a + kp ≤ n and a + kp ∈ P similarly qfpp-deﬁne the k-ary relation ( i xi < k). In both cases, taking closure under sign-symmetry shows that we can qfpp-deﬁne all k-clauses. This ﬁnishes this case. Case: S is sparse. Assume that |S| < n/(2k + 2) and that S contains no incomplete arithmetic progression of at least k items. By truncation, we can assume that n is an even multiple of k + 1. By self-intersecting Rn by its shifted variant, if needed repeated up to k times, we can further ensure that S contains no pairs i, i + 1, except possibly in a chain n − i, n − i + 1, . . . ending with n, while retaining that n is a multiple of k. By only doing this as many times as needed, we can be sure that there is at least one isolated weight w, 0 < w < n, such that tuples of weight w are accepted but not w − 1 or w + 1 (recall that we start with a relation with 1 ∈ S). Now partition {0, . . . , n} into windows (0, . . . , k), (k + 1, . . . , 2k + 1), . . . of length k + 1. By the density of S (which did not increase during our modiﬁcations), at least half the windows contain no elements. We may safely assume n ≥ 5k; thus there is an empty window that is not the ﬁrst or the last. Let w be an isolated weight. Then by sliding the window containing w towards the internal empty window, we must eventually reach a window where there is an isolated weight which is either in position 1 or k − 1 of the window. This lets us qfpp-deﬁne either a 1-in-k-clause or a (k − 1)-in-k-clause; and in the latter case we get a 1-in-k-clause by negating all variables. Thus if S is sparse and contains no incomplete progressions of length k, we can qfpp-deﬁne a 1-in-k-clause. Case: S is dense. Finally, we assume that |S| ≥ n/(2k + 2) but does not contain any incomplete progressions of length k. By Szemerédi’s theorem, S contains at least one complete progression {x | 0 ≤ x ≤ n, x ≡ a (mod p)} for some a and p, with at least 2k entries (i.e., (2k−1)p ≤ n). Let Rn−i be the (n−i)−(k−1)p ary relation produced by shifting Rn i steps down and consider the relation Rn′ = Rn ∧ Rn−p ∧ . . . ∧ Rn −i of arity n − (k − 1)p, with applications of Rn and Rn padded with zeroes as necessary. Then Rn′ is the union of complete progressions with diﬀerence p, since every weight w accepted by Rn′ corresponds to a progression of length k in S. Furthermore, the same holds for any constant shift Rn′−i of Rn′ , i < p. Note that Rn′ still has arity at least pk. Let A ⊆ {0, . . . , p − 1} be the weights a such that Rn′ contains the complete progression with oﬀset a. Note that 0 ∈ / A. By shifting and self-intersecting we can reduce to the case that |A| = 1, i.e., the remaining P relation is equivalent to ( xi ≡ a (mod p)) for some a and p. If p ≥ k, then clearly Rn′ qfpp-deﬁnes a 1-in-k relation by further shifting and truncation. Thus, if the diﬀerence p of the relations produced this way can grow without bound, then Γ qfpp-deﬁnes 1-in-k relations of all arities k. Otherwise, if none of the above cases applies inﬁnitely often, then there is a ﬁxed p such that this P process produces relations ( xi ≡ a (mod p)) of inﬁnitely many arities k, which leads to the last case in the theorem. Assume we are in this case. If p is not a prime, we ﬁx a prime p′ that divides p, and let a′ = a mod (p/p′ ). Shift the relation down by a′ and group the variables into blocks of size p/p′ . Then the P remaining relation is equivalent to ( i xi ≡ a′′ (mod p)′ ) for some a′′ . By shifting, and by starting from a suﬃciently large relation with period p′ , we can produce all relations as in the last case in the theorem. Finally, we note that since k-clauses can qfpp-deﬁne the other two kinds of clauses, the same statement holds with only 1-in-k clauses and the counting relations mod p. Section summary. In summary of this section, towards the purpose of discussing sign-symmetric languages Γ such that SAT(Γ) does, or does not, admit an improved algorithm under SETH, we conclude the following. Recall that ΓkSAT denotes the language of all k-clauses. We ﬁnd that ΓkSAT is preserved by every minimal 21  operation on level k′ > k (in particular, by nuk+1 ); not preserved by any operation on a level k′ ≤ k; and that any sign-symmetric language Γ which is not preserved by the k-universal partial operation uk can qfpp-deﬁne ΓkSAT. Assuming SETH, the minimal non-trivial pSDI-operations that preserve Γ therefore appear to be reasonable proxies for the complexity of SAT(Γ). Finally, for each level k, there is a language – namely the language of roots of polynomials of degree less than k – which is preserved by uk but not by any other operation at level k′ ≤ k, and which does admit an improved algorithm [42]. This shows that any “dichotomy” characterizing sign-symmetric languages Γ for which SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm under SETH, cannot require a minimal non-trivial pSDI-operation other than uk for some k. It remains to show that these very mild restrictions, of requiring only the presence of a single non-trivial pSDI-operation f preserving Γ, can be powerful enough to ensure that SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm. This is our topic of study for the next section.  4 Upper bounds for sign-symmetric satisfiability problems In this section, we consider the feasibility of designing an improved algorithm directly for Inv(f)-SAT and Inv(f)-CSP for a minimal non-trivial pSDI-operation f , i.e., an improved algorithm that only uses the abstract properties guaranteed by such an operation f . We show this unconditionally for f = e2 and for f = nu3 , over arbitrary ﬁnite domains (where the latter result is only interesting for the non-Boolean case, since the Boolean case is in P). The algorithms for these cases use, respectively, a Subset Sum-style meet-in-the-middle algorithm and fast matrix multiplication over exponentially large matrices. These algorithms all work in the extension oracle model. We also show conditional or partial results. We show two conditional results for partial k-NU operations, showing that k-NU-CSP admits an improved algorithm in the oracle model if the (k, k − 1)-hyperclique problem admits an improved algorithm, and that k-NU-SAT admits an improved algorithm in the explicit representation model if the Erdős-Rado sunflower conjecture [18] holds for sunﬂowers with k sets. The ﬁrst of these results is a direct generalisation of the matrix multiplication strategy; the second uses fast local search in the style of Schöning [52]. Finally, we also consider the symmetric special case of 3-edge-SAT, and show that this problem reduces to a problem of ﬁnding a unit-coloured triangle in an edge-coloured graph. This, in turn, follows from fast algorithms for sparse triangle detection. Several of the algorithms we reduce to have a running time that depends on the matrix multiplication exponent ω; the best currently known value is ω < 2.373 [39, 55]. Before we begin, we need the following lemma, which shows that if a relation is preserved by a pSDIoperation, then it is possible to view the relation as a relation of smaller arity over a larger domain, which is preserved by the corresponding partial operation over the larger domain. Lemma 35. Let R be an n-ary relation over a set of values D, P a polymorphism pattern, and f a partial operation preserving R and satisfying P . Let I1 . . . , Im be a partition of [n], and RI1 ,...,Im the m-ary relation RI1 ,...,Im = {(ProjI1 (t), . . . , ProjIm (t)) | t ∈ R} over the set of values {ProjI1 (R) ∪ . . . ∪ Proj(Im )(R)}. Then every partial operation f ′ satisfying P over {ProjI1 (R) ∪ . . . ∪ Proj(Im )(R)} preserves RI1 ,...,Im  Proof. Let k = ar(f ′ ) = ar(f ). Let t1 , . . . , tk ∈ R and let t′1 , . . . , t′k ∈ RI1 ,...,Im be the corresponding tuples of RI1 ,...,Im . Assume that f ′ (t1 , . . . , tk ) is deﬁned, i.e., (t1 [j], . . . , tk [j]) ∈ domain(f ′ ) for each j ∈ [k]. Let i ∈ [n] and let Ij be the index set such that i ∈ Ij . Since f ′ (t1 [j], . . . , tk [j]) is deﬁned it must be an instantiation of a tuple p ∈ P . It follows that (t′1 [i], . . . , t′k [i]) must be an instantiation of p as well, implying that f (t′1 [i], . . . , t′k [i]) is deﬁned. Hence, f ′ preserves RI1 ,...,Im . 22  n  4.1 An O ∗ (|D| 2 ) algorithm for 2-edge-CSP Given a binary relation R one can construct a bipartite graph where two vertices x and y have an edge between them if and only if (x, y) ∈ R. Formally, the vertices V1 ∪ V2 of this graph will consist of the disjoint union of Proj1 (R) and Proj2 (R), i.e., V1 = {(1, x) | x ∈ Proj1 (R)} and V2 = {(2, x) | x ∈ Proj2 (R)}. However, whenever convenient, we will not make this distinction and instead assume that V1 = Proj1 (R) and V2 = Proj2 (R). We say that a binary relation R is rectangular if its bipartite graph representation is a disjoint union of bicliques. Lemma 36. Let φD be the partial Maltsev operation over a domain D. Then every binary relation preserved by φD is rectangular. Proof. The proof is very similar to the total case, which is essentially folklore in universal algebra. First note that R is rectangular if and only if a path of length 4 between nodes x, x′ , y, y ′ implies that there is an edge between x and y ′ . Therefore, let (x, y), (x′ , y), (x′ , y ′ ) ∈ R. But then φD ((x, y), (x′ , y), (x′ , y ′ )) = (φD (x, x′ , x′ ), φD (y, y, y ′ )) = (x, y ′ ), implying that (x, y ′ ) ∈ R since R is preserved by φD . Hence, R is rectangular. If R is an n-ary relation, I1 ∪ I2 a partition of [n], and s ∈ ProjI1 (R), t ∈ ProjI2 (R), we write s I1×I2 t to denote the n-ary tuple in R satisfying ProjI1 (s I1 ×I2 t) = s and ProjI2 (s I1 ×I2 t) = t. Let D = {d0 , d1 , . . . , dk−1 } be a ﬁnite set of values. We can then order D according to a total order <, by letting d0 < d1 < . . . < dk−1 . This order easily extends to n-ary tuples s and t over D by letting s < t if and only if there exists an i ∈ [n] such that Proj1,...,i (s) = Proj1,...,i (t) and s[i + 1] < t[i + 1]. Given a relation R we say that the tuple t is lex-min if t ∈ R and there does not exist any t′ ∈ R such that t′ 6= t and t′ < t. Lemma 37. Let R be an n-ary relation preserved by φD and let I1 ∪ I2 be a partition of [n]. Then there exists a bipartite graph (V, E) where V is the disjoint union of ProjI1 (R) and ProjI2 (R) such that 1. (V, E) is a disjoint union of bicliques, 2. {s, t} ∈ E if and only if s I1×I2 t ∈ R, 3. for every s ∈ V occurring in a biclique C1 ∪ C2 a pair s0 ∈ C1 , t0 ∈ C2 such that s0 is lex-min in C1 and t0 lex-min in C2 can be computed in O(poly(n, |D|)) time in the extension oracle model. Proof. Consider the binary relation RI1 ,I2 = {(ProjI1 (t), ProjI2 (t)) | t ∈ R} over the set of values ProjI1 (R) ∪ ProjI2 (R). By Lemma 35 this relation is preserved by φ over the larger domain, and Lemma 36 then implies that RI1 ,I2 is rectangular. Take the bipartite graph representation (V1 ∪ V2 , E) of RI1 ,I2 (which by the rectangularity property is a disjoint union of bicliques), and thus satisﬁes property (1). Property number (2) then follows easily from the construction of the bipartite graph (V1 ∪ V2 , E) since two vertices s and t are connected with an edge if and only if (s, t) ∈ RI1 ,I2 , which holds if and only if s I1 ×I2 t ∈ R. For property (3) we need to show that we, given s ∈ V , can compute lex-min representatives of the biclique C1 ∪ C2 containing s, in polynomial time with respect to n and |D|. Assume without loss of generality that s ∈ V1 , and order I2 in ascending order as i1 , . . . , i|I2 | . Then determine the smallest value d1 ∈ D such that s I1×{i1 } (d1 ) is included in the projection ProjI1 ∪{i1 } (R). This can be computed in polynomial time using the extension oracle. Then continue, by for each i2 , . . . , ij determine the smallest dj ∈ D such that s I1×{i1 } (d1 ) ∈ ProjI1 ∪{i1 ,...,ij } (R). Let t0 denote the resulting tuple, and observe that t0 ∈ C2 and that {s, t0 } ∈ E. We then repeat this using the index set I1 in order to obtain a lex-min tuple s0 such that {s0 , t0 } ∈ E, which again can be done in polynomial time in the extension oracle model. n  Theorem 38. 2-edge-CSP is solvable in O∗ (|D| 2 ) time in both the extension oracle model and the explicit representation. 23  Proof. Let (V, C) be an instance of 2-edge-CSP, where V = {x1 , . . . , xn } and C = {C1 , . . . , Cm }. Assume without loss of generality that n is even, and let I = [ n2 ] and J = [n] \ I. Consider two sets P and Q constructed as follows. Initially we let P and Q consist of all n2 -ary tuples over D. Then, for each p ∈ P , q ∈ Q we enumerate each constraint in the instance containing only variables indexed by I or J and check whether p or q is contradicted by the constraint. If this is the case we remove p from P or q from Q. More formally, if p ∈ P and Ri (xi1 , . . . , xik ) ∈ C, k = ar(Ri ), such that {i1 , . . . , ik } ⊆ I, we check whether Proji1 ,...,ik (p) ∈ Proji1 ,...,ik (Ri ), and similarly for q ∈ Q. Each such step can be done in O(poly(k)) time in the extension oracle model and in O(k + |Ri |) time if constraints are explicitly represented. By repeating this for all elements in P and Q we will therefore obtain two sets of partial assignments that do not directly contradict individual constraints in the input instance. Next, for each p ∈ P and q ∈ Q create two m-ary tuples p′ and q ′ . By using Lemma 37 we for each constraint Ci ∈ C will associate the ith element of p′ and q ′ with a representative of the biclique corresponding to Ci , p, and q. Hence, let Ci = Ri (xi1 , . . . , xik ) ∈ C, k = ar(Ri ), be a constraint. We distinguish between two cases. First, assume that {i1 , . . . , ik } ⊆ I or that {i1 , . . . , ik } ⊆ J. In this case we for every t ∈ P ∪ Q let t′ [i] = 1. Second, assume that i1 , . . . , ik ∈ I ∪ J but that {i1 , . . . , ik } 6⊆ I and {i1 , . . . , ik } 6⊆ J. In other words the constraint contains variables indexed by members of both I and J. For every p ∈ P compute the lex-min representatives p0 and q0 of the biclique containing p, with respect to the two index sets Pi = {j | ij ∈ I} and Qi = {j | ij ∈ J}. This can be done in polynomial time via Lemma 37. Assign the ith value to the tuple p′ the value (p0 , q0 ), and then repeat this for every q ∈ Q. Let P ′ = {p′ | p ∈ P } and Q′ = {q ′ | q ∈ Q} be the sets resulting from repeating this for every constraint in the instance. We observe that the combination of p ∈ P and q ∈ Q satisﬁes a constraint Ri (xi1 , . . . , xik ) ∈ C if and only if p′ [i] = q ′ [i], due to property (2) in Lemma 37. Hence, the instance is n satisﬁable if and only if the two sets P ′ and Q′ intersect. Since P ′ and Q′ contain at most |D| 2 tuples, each n of length m, this test can easily be accomplished in O∗ (|D| 2 ) time using standard algorithms.  4.2 An O ∗ (|D|  ωn 3  ) algorithm for 3-NU-CSP  The algorithm in Section 4.1 used the rectangularity property of binary relations in order to obtain an ωn improved algorithm for 2-edge-CSP. In this section we will devise an O∗ (|D| 3 ) time algorithm for 3NU-CSP by exploiting a structural property that is valid for all ternary relations preserved by nu3 . Here, ω < 2.373 is the matrix multiplication exponent. We will need the following deﬁnition. Definition 39. An n-ary relation R over D is k-decomposable if there for every t ∈ / R exists an index set I ⊆ [n], |I| ≤ k, such that ProjI (t) ∈ / ProjI (R). In the total case it is known that R is k-decomposable if R is preserved by a total k-ary NU-operation [29]. In general, this is not true for partial NU-operations, but we still obtain the following result. Lemma 40. Let R be a k-ary relation preserved by nuk . Then R is (k − 1)-decomposable. Proof. Let t be a k-ary tuple not included in R. Assume that ProjI (t) ∈ ProjI (R) for every index set I ⊆ [k], |I| < k. But then there must exist t1 , . . . , tk ∈ R such that each ti diﬀer from t in at most one position. This furthermore implies that nuk (t1 , . . . , tk ) is deﬁned, and therefore also that nuk (t1 , . . . , tk ) = t ∈ / R. This contradictions the assumption that nuk preserves R, and we therefore conclude that there must exist an index set I ⊆ [k] of size at most k − 1, such that ProjI (t) ∈ / ProjI (R). ωn  Theorem 41. 3-NU-CSP is solvable in O∗ (|D| 3 ) time in both the extension oracle model and the explicit representation, where ω < 2.373 is the matrix multiplication exponent.  24  Proof. Let (V, C) be an instance of 3-NU-CSP where V = {x1 , . . . , xn } and C = {C1 , . . . , Cm }. Partition [n] into three sets I1 , I2 , I3 such that |Ii | = n3 (or, if this is not possible, as close as possible). Let F1 , F2 , F3 n denote the set of all partial truth assignments corresponding to I1 , I2 , I3 , and observe that |Fi | ≤ |D| 3 . First, for each partial truth assignment f ∈ Fi , remove it from the set Fi if there exists a constraint in the instance which is not satisﬁed by f . This can be done in polynomial time with respect to the number of constraints in the instance, using a extension oracle query for each constraint. Second, construct a 3-partite graph where the node set is the disjoint union of F1 , F2 and F3 , and add an edge between two nodes in this graph if and only if the combination of this partial truth assignment is not contradicted by any constraint in the instance. Last, answer yes if and only if the resulting graph contains a triangle. We begin by proving correctness of this algorithm and then analyse its complexity. We ﬁrst claim that if the combination of f1 ∈ F1 , f2 ∈ F2 , f3 ∈ F3 does not satisfy a constraint in the instance, then there exists g1 , g2 ∈ F1 ∪ F2 ∪ F3 which do not satisfy the instance either. Hence, take a constraint R(xi1 , . . . , xik ) ∈ C, k = ar(R), which is not satisﬁed by the combination of f1 , f2 , f3 . Let I1′ = {j | ij ∈ I1 }, I2′ = {j | ij ∈ I2 }, and I3′ = {j | ij ∈ I3 } and consider the relation RI1′ ,I2′ ,I3′ = {(ProjI1 (t), ProjI2 (t), ProjI3 (t)) | t ∈ R} over the set of values ProjI1 (R) ∪ ProjI2 (R) ∪ ProjI3 (R). By Lemma 35 this relation is preserved by the nuk operation over the larger domain, and it then follows from Lemma 40 that this relation is 2-decomposable. But then it is easy to see that there must exist partial truth assignments y1 , y2 ∈ F1 ∪ F2 ∪ F3 such that y1 and y2 do not satisfy R(xi1 , . . . , xik ). Hence, if (V, C) is satisﬁable, then there clearly exists a triangle in the 3-partite graph, and if there exists a triangle, then by following the reasoning above, the instance must be satisﬁable. For the complexity, we begin by enumerating the three sets of partial truth assignments, which takes n O(|D| 3 ) time. We then remove any partial truth assignment which is not consistent with the instance, which increases this by a polynomial factor, depending only on the number of constraints and the extension queries for each constraint. Similarly, when constructing the 3-partite graph we enumerate all binary combinations of partial truth assignments from the three sets and check whether they are consistent. After this we check n nω for the existence of a triangle in the resulting graph with O(|D| 3 ) nodes, which can be solved in O(|D| 3 ) time for ω < 2.373, using fast matrix multiplication.  4.3 Strategies for k-NU-SAT It is easy to see that the strategy used in Theorem 41 extends to reducing k-NU-CSP problems to (k, k − 1)hyperclique, i.e., the problem of ﬁnding a k-vertex hyperclique in a (k − 1)-regular hypergraph. Thus we get the following. Lemma 42. Assume that (k, k − 1)-hyperclique on n vertices can be solved in time O∗ (nk−ε ) for some ε > 0. Then k-NU-CSP admits an improved algorithm in the extension oracle model, i.e., an algorithm ′ running in time O∗ (|D|(1−ε )n ) on domain size D and on n variables, for some ε′ > 0. However, it should be noted that this is a notoriously diﬃcult problem, and there is some evidence against such results [40]. Thus, we also investigate a less general algorithm that rests on a milder assumption. 4.3.1  k-NU-SAT via local search  We show that subject to a popular conjecture, k-NU-SAT admits an improved algorithm in the explicit representation model via a local search strategy. To state this we need a few basic deﬁnitions. A sunflower (with k sets) is a collection of k sets S1 , . . . , Sk with common intersection S = S1 ∩ . . . ∩ Sk , called the core, such that for every pair i, j ∈ [k], i 6= j, we have Si ∩ Sj = S. Note that we may have S = ∅. The sunflower conjecture [18], in the form we will need, states that for every k there is a constant Ck such that for every n, every collection of at least Ckn sets of cardinality n contains a sunﬂower with k petals. This 25  conjecture was the subject of the Polymath 10 collaborative mathematics project, but remains a notorious open problem. See Alon, Shpilka and Umans [1] for variations of the conjecture and connections to other problems. We ﬁrst show a simple connection between the sunﬂower conjecture for sunﬂowers with k sets and relations R ∈ Inv(nuk ). For convenience, for a set S ⊆ [n] we denote by χnS the tuple t ∈ {0, 1}n such that for each i ∈ [n], t[i] = 1 is i ∈ S and t[i] = 0 otherwise. Lemma 43. Let R ⊂ {0, 1}n be a relation with 0n ∈ / R. Say that a tuple t = χnS is minimal in R if t ∈ R ′ n / R. For i ∈ [n], let Fi be the set of minimal tuples in R of Hamming but for every S ⊂ S we have χS ′ ∈ weight i. If R is preserved by nuk , then Fi does not contain a sunflower of k sets. Proof. Let Fi be as in the statement, and assume that R is preserved by nuk . Assume that there are distinct sets S1 , . . . , Sk forming a sunﬂower with some core S, such that χSj ∈ Fi for every j ∈ [k]. But then the operation nuk (χS1 , . . . χSk ) is deﬁned, and produces the tuple χS . This contradicts that the tuples are minimal in R. We show that the sunﬂower conjecture is suﬃcient to allow an improved algorithm. Lemma 44. Assume that the sunflower conjecture holds for sunflowers with k sets, with some constant Ck . Let Γ be a sign-symmetric language preserved by nuk . Assume that for every n-ary relation R ∈ Γ and every p ∈ [n], the minimal tuples in R of Hamming weight at most p can be enumerated in time O∗ (2O(p) ). Then SAT(Γ) admits an improved algorithm. Proof. We ﬁrst show that the assumptions are suﬃcient to allow a solution for the local search problem for SAT(Γ), in the following form. Let an instance (V, C) of SAT(Γ) with |V | = n, a tuple t ∈ {0, 1}n , and an integer p ∈ [n] be provided. We can in O∗ (2O(p) ) time decide whether there is a tuple t′ ∈ {0, 1}n with Hamming distance at most p from t that satisﬁes (V, C). For this, we repeatedly perform the following procedure. Verify whether the present tuple t satisﬁes (V, C), and if not, let R(X) be a constraint in C falsiﬁed by t, and let I ⊆ [n] be the set of indices corresponding to the set of variables X. Let s be the sign pattern such that (ProjI (t))s = 0|X| . Note that Rs ∈ Γ by assumption. We then enumerate the minimal tuples in Rs of Hamming weight at most p, and for every such tuple t′ , of weight i, let t′′ be the tuple t with bits ﬂipped according to t′ , and recursively solve the local search problem from tuple t′′ with new parameter p − i. Correctness is clear, since the search is exhaustive (because we loop through all minimal tuples). We argue that this solves the local search problem itself in O∗ (2O(p) ) time. For the running time, assume for simplicity that producing the tuples takes O∗ (cp ) time and, for the same constant c, there are at most ci minimal tuples of weight i (by Lemma 43). Up to polynomial factors, the running time is then bounded by a recurrence T (p) = cp +  p X i=1  ci T (p − i),  which is bounded as T (p) ≤ (2c)p . From here on, well-known methods can be used to complete the above into an improved algorithm; cf. Schöning’s algorithm for k-SAT [52] and its derandomization [16], or even restrict the above to monotone local search instead of arbitrary local search and apply the method of Fomin et al. [20]. In particular, this is allows for an algorithm in the explicit representation model. Theorem 45. Assume that the sunflower conjecture holds for sunflowers with k sets. Then k-NU-SAT admits an improved algorithm in the explicit representation model.  26  We leave it as an open question whether access to an extension oracle (also known as an interval oracle) suﬃces to solve the local search problem in single-exponential time. The problem, of course, is that the bounds above only apply to the minimal tuples, and while it is easy to ﬁnd a single minimal tuple using an extension oracle, it is less obvious how to test for the existence of a minimal tuple within a given interval. Meeks [43] showed how a similar result is possible, but her method would require an oracle for ﬁnding minimal satisfying tuples of weight exactly i, which is also not clear how to do. 4.3.2  k-NU-SAT and bounded block sensitivity  Finally, we brieﬂy investigate connections between the nuk partial operation and a notion from Boolean function analysis known as block sensitivity, introduced by Nisan [44]. See also the book by O’Donnell [45]. We ﬁrst introduce some temporary notation. For any relation R ⊆ {0, 1}n , let fR : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} be a function deﬁned as fR (t) = [t ∈ R], i.e., fR (t) = 1 if t ∈ R and fR (t) = 0 otherwise. For a tuple t ∈ {0, 1}n and a set S ⊆ [n], let tS denote the tuple t with the bits of S ﬂipped. A function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} has block sensitivity bounded by b if for every t ∈ {0, 1}n there are at most b disjoint sets S1 , . . . , Sb ⊆ [n] such that f (tSi ) 6= f (t) for every i ∈ [b]. We show that nuk can be seen as a one-sided version of block sensitivity. Lemma 46. Let R ⊆ {0, 1}n be a relation. Then fR has block sensitivity less than k if and only if both R and its complement R := {0, 1}n \ R are preserved by nuk . Proof. In the ﬁrst direction, assume that f has block sensitivity at least k. Let t ∈ {0, 1}n be a tuple and let [n] = X0 ∪ . . . ∪ Xk be a partition of [n] into blocks such that for each 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we have f (tXi ) 6= f (t). Then if f (t) = 1, then the tuples tXi form a witness that R is not preserved by nuk , and if f (t) = 0 they form a witness against R being preserved by nuk . In the other direction, let t1 , . . . , tk ∈ R be such that nuk (t1 , . . . , tk ) = t is deﬁned and t ∈ / R. For i ∈ [k], let Xi be the positions j where t[j] 6= ti [j]. Then X1 ∪ . . . ∪ Xk forms a subpartition of [n], showing that f has block sensitivity at least k. The case that R is not preserved by nuk , instead of R, is completely dual. It is known that a block sensitivity of at most b implies a certificate complexity of at most b2 , i.e., for any / R [44]. This relation R ∈ Inv(nuk ) and any tuple t ∈ R, there are at most b2 bits in t that certify that t ∈ suggests a branching or local search algorithm for SAT(Γ) where Γ contains such relations. However, more strongly, it implies that R has a decision tree of bounded depth [44], and thus, since k is a constant, that R only depends on constantly many arguments. Thus, block sensitivity is a signiﬁcantly stronger restriction than what nuk imposes. However, one related question remains. Assume that R is an n-ary relation preserved by nuk , and which does depend on all its arguments. Is there a non-trivial upper bound on |R|, e.g., does it hold that |R| ≤ (2 − εk )n for some εk depending on k? A positive answer to this question would imply a trivial improved algorithm for k-NU-SAT via enumeration of satisfying assignments, constraint by constraint.  4.4 Symmetric 3-edge-SAT We ﬁnish this section with a result showing that a number of special cases of 3-edge-CSP admits an improved algorithm via sparse triangle ﬁnding. The class in particular contains 3-edge-SAT for symmetric relations R ∈ Inv(e3 ). We begin by characterising the symmetric relations in Inv(e3 ). Lemma 47. Let R ⊆ {0, 1}n be a symmetric relation preserved by e3 , Let S ⊆ {0, . . . , n} be the weights accepted by R. Then either S is a complete arithmetic progression (possibly a trivial one, of length 1), or S = {a, a + b} or S = {n − a, n − a − b} for some a < b. 27  Proof. Let us ﬁrst make a simpler claim: If a, a + b ∈ S is a pair that does not extend to a complete progression in S, then either a − b < 0 or a + 2b > n. To see this, let a, a + b ∈ S, and assume a + 2b ∈ / S, a + 2b ≤ n. First assume a ≥ b. We subpartition [n] into one set T0 of size a − b ≥ 0 and three sets Ti of size b, i = 1, 2, 3. This is possible since a − b + 3b = a + 2b ≤ n. Let t = χT0 ∪...∪T3 and for i = 1, 2, 3 let ti = tTi . Finally, let t4 = tT1 ∪T2 . Then e3 (t1 , . . . , t4 ) is deﬁned and produces t. Thus we conclude a < b, i.e., a − b < 0. By the symmetric argument, if a, a + b ∈ S with a − b ≥ 0 and a − b ∈ / S, then a + 2b > n. This ﬁnishes the claim. Next, assume that |S| > 2 and that S contains some pair a, a + b such that the progression does not continue. Let b > 0 be the smallest value such that such a pair exists, and again by symmetry assume that a+ 2b ≤ n; thus a− b < 0. Let c ∈ S \{a, a+ b}. First assume c > a+ 2b. Then we may, similarly to above, pack sets with |T0 | = a, |T1 | = |T2 | = b, and |T3 | = c − a − 2b, and we have a witness showing a + 2b ∈ S. But in the remaining cases, c must be involved in a complete progression with either a or a + b, by the choice of a and b. It is easy to check that this implies the existence of a value c′ ∈ S with a < c′ < a + b, and that iterating the claim eventually produces an arithmetic progression of step size dividing b, covering a and a + b, contradicting the assumption that a + 2b ∈ / S. Thus |S| = 2, i.e., S = {a, a + b}. In particular, this lemma shows that every symmetric relation in Inv(e2 ) is a simple arithmetic progression. It also shows that R has a simple-to-compute 2-edge embedding, i.e., R̂ ⊇ R, R̂ ∩ {0, 1}ar(R) = R, and R̂ is preserved by a total 2-edge operation [36], produced by extending S into a complete progression. We now describe the algorithm. Let R be a relation with arguments X. For a partition X = X1 ∪ X2 and an assignment f to X1 , we refer to the 2-edge label of f as the pair (f0 , g0 ) produced by ﬁrst extending f to a lex-min assignment g0 such that (f, g0 ) ∈ R, then extending g0 to a lex-min assignment f0 such that (f0 , g0 ) ∈ R. Note that this is the same procedure used in the algorithm for 2-edge-CSP. We extend this to 3-partite graphs as follows. Let the variable set be partitioned as [n] = X ∪ Y ∪ Z, and deﬁne a graph G = (V, E) with partition V = VX ∪ VY ∪ VZ , where the nodes of each part represent partial assignments as in Section 4.2. For each edge, verify that the corresponding partial assignment is consistent with each relation in the input instance. We proceed to give labels to edges of G for each relation R as follows. We assume that for each relation, the “type” of R is known to us (2-edge, 3-NU, or symmetric 3-edge). If R ∈ Inv(nu3 ), all edges get the same label. Otherwise, let R̂ ⊇ R be the 2-edge-embedding of R (with R̂ = R if R is already 2-edge). Let pq be an edge in G, corresponding to partial assignments p, q. If one of these assignments, say p, is an assignment to X, then we set the label of pq to the 2-edge label of p in the partition X ∪ (Y ∪ Z). Otherwise, p ∪ q is an assignment to Y ∪ Z, and we set the label of pq to the 2-edge label of this assignment in X ∪ (Y ∪ Z). We show that this label scheme captures our language. Lemma 48. Let R be a relation with arguments U , for some U ⊆ [n], and let G = (V, E) and X ∪ Y ∪ Z be as above. If either R ∈ Inv(e2 ), or R ∈ Inv(nu3 ), or R is Boolean, symmetric and R ∈ Inv(e3 ), then a triple (f, g, h) with f ∈ VX , g ∈ Vy , h ∈ Vz satisfies R if and only if f gh is a triangle in G where the edges f g, f h, gh all have the same label. Proof. Refer to a triangle f gh with all edge labels identical as a single-label triangle. We will also slightly abuse notation by treating R as a 3-ary relation taking values from VX × VY × VZ . First assume that R ∈ Inv(e2 ), and recall that R is rectangular. Let f gh be a single-label triangle with shared label L = (f0 , g0 h0 ); we show that (f, g, h) ∈ R. Since L is the label of the edge gh, it must be that (f0 , g, h), (f0 , g0 , h0 ) ∈ R, and by the edges f g and f h it must be that (f, g0 , h0 ) ∈ R as well. By the partial 2-edge operation, this implies (f, g, h) ∈ R. Thus every single-label triangle corresponds to a satisfying assignment. In the other direction, let (f, g, h) ∈ R. Since R is rectangular, there is a unique lex-min pair (f0 , g0 h0 ) in the biclique containing (f, gh), and both extensions (f, g0 h0 ) and (f0 , gh) are compatible with R. Thus all three edges get the same label and the algorithm works for R ∈ Inv(e2 ). 28  The case R ∈ Inv(nu2 ) is trivial. Since such a relation is 2-decomposable, the entire veriﬁcation of R happens in the stage where edges are ﬁltered, and in the remaining graph, every triangle represents a satisfying assignment and every triangle is single-label. Finally, assume R ∈ Inv(e3 ) and is symmetric. If R ∈ Inv(e2 ), then we argue as above. Otherwise, by Lemma 47, either S = {a, a + b} or S = {n − a, n − a − b} for a < b, and R̂ veriﬁes that each assignment (f, g, h) has the correct weight when computed mod b. First assume that f gh is a single-label triangle in G. First assume S = {a, a + b}. By the edge-ﬁltering step, we know that for each of the edges f g, gh, f h the corresponding partial assignment has weight at most a + b. Thus the total weight of (f, g, h) is at most (a + b)(3/2) ≤ a + b + (a + b)/2 < a + 2b. Dually, assume S = {n − a − b, n − a}. No edge in f gh has more than a + b zeroes, thus the total assignment has weight greater than n − a − 2b. In both case, since the edge-labels work to verify the value mod b, we conclude (f, g, h) ∈ R. On the other hand, assume (f, g, h) ∈ R. Since the edge labels verify the more permissive relation R̂, the triangle f gh is a single-label triangle. The remaining problem can now be solved via algorithms for triangle-ﬁnding in sparse graphs. Theorem 49. Assume a CSP or SAT problem with the following characteristic: for every relation R, either R ∈ Inv(e2 ) and R is labelled with type e2 , or R ∈ Inv(nu3 ) and R is labelled with type nu3 , or the language is Boolean, R is a symmetric relation in Inv(e3 ) and R is labelled with type e3 . This problem can ω+3 be solved in time O∗ (|D| 6 ) in the extension oracle model, where ω < 2.373 is the matrix multiplication exponent. Proof. By the description above, we create a 3-partite graph G on 3|D|n/3 vertices (where |D| = 2 in the Boolean case), and for every edge in G we give it a vector of labels, one label per relation in the input instance. We refer to this vector as the colour of the edge. Note that a symmetric relation R can be “inspected” using its extension oracle to ﬁnd out the set S of accepted weights. By Lemma 48, the instance has a satisfying assignment if and only if G has a triangle where all edges have the same colour. This we solve as follows. For every colour c used by an edge in G, we generate the graph Gc consisting of all edges of colour c. Let mc be the number of edges of Gc , and let N ≤ 3|D|n/3 be the number of vertices in G. We check if Gc contains a triangle. If Gc is dense enough, then we use the usual triangle-ﬁnding algorithm for this, with running time O∗ (N ω ), otherwise we use an algorithm for triangle ﬁnding in sparse 2ω/(ω+1) graphs. Alon, Yuster and Zwick [2] show such an algorithm with running time O(mc ), where ω < 2.373 is the matrix multiplication exponent. Hence, the crossover point at which we use the dense P algorithm is mc ≥ N (ω+1)/2 =: N α . Summing over all colours, we have c mc ≤ N 2 . Since the algorithm for sparse graphs has a super-linear running time, the worst case is when we are at the crossover density and use the sparse algorithm N 2−α times for a cost of O(N ω ) each time. This works out to a total running time O(N (ω+3)/2 ) for triangle-ﬁnding, i.e., the CSP is solved in time O∗ (|D|(ω+3)n/6 ) = O∗ (|D|0.896n ) using ω = 2.373. We do not know whether this strategy can be extended to arbitrary relations R ∈ Inv(e3 ), even for a non-uniform algorithm. Section summary. We have proven that it is indeed feasible to construct improved algorithms for Inv(p)SAT and Inv(p)-CSP for individual pSDI-operations p. A crucial step for constructing algorithms of this form is ﬁrst to identify non-trivial properties of relations invariant under p, which for the partial 2-edge operation turned out be rectangularity, and for the partial 3-NU operation 2-decomposability. However, it might not always be the case that every invariant relation satisﬁes such a clear-cut property, and for 3-edge-SAT we had to settle for an improved algorithm for symmetric relations.  29  For k-NU-CSP and k-NU-SAT we also gave conditional improvements in terms of (k, k−1)-hyperclique and the sunﬂower conjecture. At the present, it is too early to say whether these algorithms constitute the only source of improvement or if more direct arguments are applicable.  5 Lower Bounds In this section we turn to the problem of proving lower bounds for sign-symmetric SAT problems.  5.1 Lower bounds based on k-SAT As an easy warm-up, we ﬁrst consider languages Γ such that SAT(Γ) is at least as hard as k-SAT for some k. For each k ≥ 3 let ck ≥ 0 denote the inﬁmum of the set {c | k-SAT is solvable in O(2cn ) time}. Under the ETH, ck > 0 for each k ≥ 3, and for each k ≥ 3 there exists k′ > k such that ck′ > ck [25]. The best known upper bounds yield ck ≤ 1 − Θ(1/k), but no methods for lower-bounding the values ck are known. Recall that Lemma 32 gives a condition under which a language Γ can qfpp-deﬁne all k-clauses. We observe the immediate consequence of this. Lemma 50. Let Γ be a sign-symmetric constraint language not preserved by the k-universal partial operation. Then SAT(Γ) cannot be solved in time O∗ (2cn ) for any c < ck , even in the non-uniform model. Proof. By Lemma 32, Γ can qfpp-deﬁne all k-clauses. More concretely, there is a ﬁnite set Γ′ ⊆ Γ of relations such that every k-clause has a ﬁxed, ﬁnite-sized gadget implementation over Γ′ . Thus, given a k-SAT instance on n variables, we can produce an equivalent instance of SAT(Γ′ ) in linear time, with the same variable set. As a consequence, ck is also a lower bound on the running time for Inv(f)-SAT for every minimal pSDIoperation at level k + 1 and higher. However, this above lemma applies to any sign-symmetric constraint language, and not just to the special case when Γ = Inv(f). We can also observe a similar consequence for SETH-hardness. Corollary 51. Let Γ be a sign-symmetric constraint language not preserved by the k-universal partial operation for any k. Then assuming SETH, SAT(Γ) does not admit an improved algorithm, even in the non-uniform model. Proof. By SETH, there is for every ε > 0 a constant k such that k-SAT cannot be solved in O∗ ((2 − ε)n ) time. By Lemma 50, there is a reduction from k-SAT to SAT(Γ) for this k. Thus, SAT(Γ) does not admit an improved non-uniform algorithm.  5.2 2-edge-SAT and Subset Sum Next, we sharpen the connection between Subset Sum and 2-edge-SAT. Recall that an instance of Subset Sum consists of a set S = {x1 , . . . , xn } of n numbers and a target integer t, with the question of whether P there is a set X ′ ⊆ S such that X ′ = t. This can also be phrased as asking for z1 , . . . , zn ∈ {0, 1} such that n X  zi xi = t.  i=1  Also recall from Lemma 21 that such a relation is contained in Inv(e2 ). However, this does not by itself imply a problem reduction, since an instance or 2-edge-SAT assumes the existence of an extension oracle for every constraint. We show that such a reduction can be implemented by splitting the above equation apart into several equations, based on the bit-expansion of t. 30  Theorem 52. If 2-edge-SAT is solvable in O(2cn ) time for c > 0 in the extension oracle model, then Subset Sum is solvable in O(2(c+ε)n ) time for every ε > 0. Proof. Let x1 , . . . , xn , t ∈ N be the input to a Subset Sum instance. We will reduce this instance in subexponential time to a disjunction over 2-edge-SAT instances on n variables each. We proceed as follows. Harnik and Naor [22] give a randomized procedure for this that reduces a Subset Sum instance to bit length at most 2n + log ℓ, where ℓ is the bit length of the input. If ℓ ≥ 2n , then we solve the instance by brute force in time polynomial in the input length, otherwise we are left with an instance of bit length ℓ′ ≤ 3n. √ Next, set a parameter k = n, and split the binary expansion of the input integers into k blocks of equal √ √ length, giving n blocks of length O( n). For each block guess the contribution of the solution to the target value. Note that the maximum overﬂow that can carry over to the next block is n, which means that for a single block there are O(n2 ) options for the contribution within the block. We get at most O(n2k ) = 2o(n) √ P guesses in total, after which we have replaced the original equation i zi xi = t by the conjunction of n √ linear equations, each with a target integer of O( n) √ bits. This allows us to implement an extension oracle for every such constraint with a running time of 2O( n) , using the well-known tabulation approach. This encodes an instance of 2-edge-SAT in the extension oracle model with n variables. Using an algorithm for this problem, and multiplying its running time by the time required for answering an oracle query, yields the claimed running time for Subset Sum. Given that the running time for 2-edge-SAT in the extension oracle model given in this paper matches the best known running time for Subset Sum, and given that improving the latter is a long-open problem, it seems at the very least that an improvment to 2-edge-SAT would require signiﬁcant new ideas.  5.3 Padding formulas We now give a combinatorial interlude, showing how relations R ⊆ {0, 1}n can be padded with additional variables such that the new relation lies in Inv(f), for any non-total partial operation f . This will be leveraged in the next section to ﬁnally provide concrete lower bounds on the running time of Inv(f)-SAT for pSDI-operations f . For a partial operation p, say of arity k, and a sequence of tuples t1 , . . . , tk , we say that p(t1 , . . . , tk ) is a projective application if p(t1 , . . . , tk ) is either undeﬁned or p(t1 , . . . , tk ) ∈ {t1 , . . . , tk }. Similarly, if p(t1 , . . . , tk ) is deﬁned and p(t1 , . . . , tk ) ∈ / {t1 , . . . , tk } we call p(t1 , . . . , tk ) a non-projective application. Definition 53. Let R ⊆ {0, 1}n be a relation and P a set of Boolean partial operations. A padding of R with respect to P is an (n + m)-ary relation PR such that (1) Proj1,...,n (PR ) = R, (2) |PR | = |R|, and (3) PR ∈ Inv(P). A universal padding formula for n ≥ 1 with respect to P is an (n + m)-ary relation U P P which (1) is a padding of the relation {0, 1}n and (2) p(t1 , . . . , tar(p) ) is a projective application for every partial operation p ∈ P and every sequence of tuples t1 , . . . , tar(p) ∈ U P P . Note that if R is a relation and p a k-ary partial operation such that p(t1 , . . . , tk ) is a projective application for every sequence t1 , . . . , tk ∈ R, then R ∈ Inv(P). In particular this implies that U P P ∈ Inv(P) for every universal padding formula U P P of P . Also, critically, if U P P is an (n + m)-ary universal padding formula for a set of partial operations P , and R is an n-ary relation, then the relation R′ (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) ≡ R(x1 , . . . , xn ) ∧ U P P (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) is a padding formula for R. Hence, a universal padding formula can be viewed as a blueprint which can be applied to obtain a concrete padding formula for any relation. It is known that if P contains no total operation, then a universal padding formula can be constructed using a universal hash family [37].  31  Lemma 54. Let P be a finite set of partial operations such that the only total functions in [P ]s are projections. For every n ≥ 1 there exists an (n + m)-ary universal padding formula U P P such that m ≤ c · n, for a constant c depending on P . Proof. See Lagerkvist & Wahlström [37, Lemma 35]. A quick note is in place on the role of universal padding formulas in obtaining lower bounds for Inv(P)SAT, when P is a ﬁnite set of partial operations. Note that in a standard “gadget” reduction from CNF-SAT to some problem SAT(Γ), one would introduce some number of local variables for every clause of the input, to create an equivalent output formula that only uses constraints from Γ. The existence of padding formulas does allow us to do this for Inv(P)-SAT, but for lower bounds under SETH this is not useful since we have no control over the number of additional variables created this way. However, the universality property of universal padding formulas allow us to reuse the padding variables between diﬀerent constraints, to produce an output which only has n + m = O(n) variables in total. The details are given in the next section, but ﬁrst we investigate concrete values of the constant c for partial k-edge and k-NU operations. L  Lemma 55. Let X = {x1 , . . . , xn } be a set of variables, and let y = i∈S xi be the parity sum for a set S ⊆ [n] chosen uniformly at random. For any tuple t ∈ {0, 1}n , let t′ be t padded by y. Let p be a partial operation as specified below, let r = ar(p), and let (t1 , . . . , tr ) be a sequence of tuples in {0, 1}n such that p(t1 , . . . , tr ) is a non-projective application. Then the following hold. 1. If p is the partial 2-edge operation, with r = 3, then the probability that p(t′1 , t′2 , t′3 ) is defined is 3/4. 2. If p is the partial 3-edge operation, with r = 4, then the probability that p(t′1 , . . . , t′4 ) is defined is 1/2. 3. If p is the partial k-NU operation, k ≥ 4, then the probability that p(t′1 , . . . , t′r ) is defined is (2k+2)/2k . For every weaker operation, e.g., for the partial k-edge or k-universal operations, the probability is at most this high. 4. If p is the partial k-universal operation, k ≥ 3, then the probability that p(t′1 , . . . , t′r ) is defined is (k + 1)/2k . L  Proof. Throughout the proof, we write y(t) = i∈S t[i]. Let us consider each case in turn. 1. We have ar(p) = 3. Let I respectively J be the set of indices i ∈ [n] such that t1 [i] = t2 [i] 6= t3 [i], respectively, t1 [i] 6= t2 [i] = t3 [i]. Note that both I and J are non-empty since p(t1 , t2 , t3 ) is a non-projective application. Then p(y(t1 ), y(t2 ), y(t3 )) is undeﬁned if and only if the parity of S ∩ I and S ∩ J are both odd. Since I and J are disjoint, the probability of this is exactly 1/4. 2. For the partial 3-edge operation, recall from Theorem 28 that p can be constructed by adding a ﬁctitious argument to the partial 3-NU operation. Hence, the arguments i ∈ [n] such that (t1 [i], . . . , t4 [i]) is non-constant partition into three sets I1 , I2 , I3 ⊆ [n], and since p(t1 , . . . , t4 ) is a non-projective application, all three sets must be nonempty. It can be veriﬁed that p(y(t1 ), . . . , y(t4 )) is deﬁned if and only if S ∩ Ii is odd for at most one i ∈ [3]. This happens with exactly 1/2 probability. 3. For the partial k-NU operation, we have ar(p) = k; let p(t1 , . . . , tk ) = t. There are k non-empty pairwise disjoint sets I1 , . . . , Ik such that ti [j] 6= t if and only if j ∈ Ii , for each i ∈ [k], j ∈ [n]. The tuple (y(t1 ), . . . , y(tk )) has one value, say b, in every row i ∈ [k] where S ∩ Ii is odd, and another value, 1 − b, in every row i where S ∩ Ii is odd. Thus p(y(t1 ), . . . , y(tk )) is deﬁned if either S ∩ Ii is odd for at most one index or S ∩ Ii is even for at most one index; these are 2k + 2 possibilities. For all other 2k − (2k + 2) possibilities, the operation is undeﬁned. Note that all these possibilities happen with equal probability, since the sets Ii are non-empty and pairwise disjoint. 4. We have ar(p) = 2k − 1 = r, with the non-constant parts of domain(p) partitioned into k pairs. Let Ii , i ∈ [k] be the sets of indices j ∈ [n] such that (t1 [j], . . . , tr [j]) belongs to the ith of these pairs, in some 32  enumeration. We claim that p(y(t1 ), . . . , y(tr )) is deﬁned if and only if S ∩ Ii is odd for at most one i ∈ [k]. On the one hand, if this holds, then (y(t1 ), . . . , y(tr )) is contained in pair number i or is constant, and it is clear that the operation is deﬁned. Otherwise, let S ∩ Ii and S ∩ Ij both be odd, i 6= j. Let t = p(t1 , . . . , tr ); let a ∈ [r] be the argument such that ta [i] 6= t[i] if and only if i ∈ Ii ; let b ∈ [r] be the argument such that tb [i] 6= t[i] if and only if i ∈ Ij ; and let c ∈ [r] be the argument such that tc [i] 6= t[i] if and only if i ∈ Ii ∪ Ij . Then the three positions y(ta ), y(tb ), y(tc ) have a pattern that is not compatible with any domain element of p. It follows that the probability that p(t′1 , . . . , t′r ) is deﬁned is exactly (k + 1)/2k . Lemma 56. Let p be a partial operation. There are (|domain(p)|)n sequences (t1 , . . . , tar(p) ) of tuples in {0, 1}n such that p(t1 , . . . , tar(p) ) is defined. Proof. For every argument i ∈ [n], we choose which element from domain(p) the tuple (t1 [i], . . . , tar(p) [i]) will correspond to. Every such choice results in a distinct sequence of tuples. Lemma 57. Let R(x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) be a padding formula for {0, 1}n , where each yi is a a parity bit over {x1 , . . . , xn } chosen uniformly at random. Then the following hold. 1. For the partial 2-edge operation, R(x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) is a universal padding formula with probability at least 1 − ε if m ≥ 6.23n + log(1/ε). 2. For the partial 3-edge operation, R(x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) is a universal padding formula with probability at least 1 − ε if m ≥ 3n + log(1/ε). 3. For the partial k-NU operation, k ≥ 4, and for any operation weaker than it, R(x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) is a universal padding formula with exponentially small failure probability if m = Ω( logk k n). Proof. 1. By Lemma 56, there are 6n triples such that p is deﬁned. For each such triple such that the application of p is non-projective, the probability that it remains deﬁned after the addition of a single random parity bit is 3/4. Thus after adding t parity bits, the expected number of non-projective triples is at most 6n (3/4)t = 2n log 6−t log(4/3) . With t = (n log 6)/(log 4/3)+d, this number equals 1/2d , which means that with probability at least 1−1/2d , no deﬁned triples remain. The constant factor works out to (log 6)/(log(4/3)) = (1 + log 3)/(2 − log 3) < 6.23. 2. There are 8n tuples (t1 , . . . , t4 ) such that p is deﬁned, and for each of them which is non-projective the probability of remaining deﬁned after the addition of a single parity bit is 1/2. Thus adding 3n + d parity bits leaves in expectation at most 8n (1/2)3n+d = 2−d non-projective tuples, and the probability that no non-projective tuples remain is at least 1 − 1/2d . 3. In the general case, there are (2k + 2)n = 2(1+log(k+1))n deﬁned tuples, and the probability of a non-projective tuple remaining deﬁned after the addition of a random parity bit is O(k/2k ). Note that (ck/2k )t = 2(log c+log k−k)t . Thus the expected number of non-projective tuples after t parity bits is at most ′  2(1+log(k+1))n−(k−log k−c )t , and it suﬃces to let t = Ω( logk k n). We remark that with a padding strategy other than simple parity bits, a signiﬁcantly lower scaling ratio may be possible for the partial k-universal operation. However, the advantage of paddding with parity bits is that the padding can be eﬃciently inverted, allowing for eﬃcient extension oracles for the padded relation. 33  5.4 Lower bounds in the extension oracle model In this section we use the bounds obtained in Section 5.3 to obtain lower bounds for Inv(P)-SAT in the extension oracle model. Lemma 58. Let U P P be an (n + m)-ary universal padding formula via the construction in Lemma 57. Let R = {0, 1}k \ {t} for a k-ary tuple t ∈ {0, 1}k . Then there is a polynomial-time extension oracle for R(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∧ U P P (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ). Proof. Let α : X → {0, 1}, X ⊆ {x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , ym }, be a partial truth assignment. We need to show that we can decide if α is consistent with R(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∧ U P P (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) in polynomial time. First, we check whether α is consistent with the constraint R(x1 , . . . , xk ), which is easy to do due to the L representation of R. Second, recall that there for each yi exists an index set Si such that yi = s∈Si xs . Hence, the partial assignment α together with R(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∧ U P P (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) induces a system of linear equations over GF(2) where the unknown variables are those unassigned by α. We may thus solve this system and check whether it has any solution f where f [i] 6= t[i] for some i ∈ [k]. Theorem 59. Let P be a set of partial operations, and set m ≥ cn + log n such that a random paritypadded formula U P P (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) is a universal padding formula with high probability. Then Inv(P)-SAT cannot be solved in time O∗ (2(1/(c+1)−ε)n ) for any ε > 0, assuming the randomized version of the SETH is true. In particular, we have the following lower bounds for specific problems: 1. 2-edge-SAT cannot be solved in O(2(c−ε)n time for any ε > 0, where c ≈ 1/7.28. 2. 3-edge-SAT cannot be solved in O(2(c−ε)n time for any ε > 0, where c = 1/3. 3. For k ≥ 4, k-NU-SAT cannot be solved in O(2(c−ε)n ) time for any ε > 0, where c = 1 − Θ( logk k ), and the same bound holds for the harder problems k-edge-SAT and k-universal SAT. Proof. Let F be a CNF-SAT instance on variable set X, |X| = n, and compute a random padding formula U P P (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ), with m as stated. We assume that the construction is successful, i.e., that the resulting relation is a universal padding formula with respect to P . For every clause in the input, deﬁned on a tuple of variables (xi1 , . . . , xir ), let R(xi1 , . . . , xir ) be the corresponding relation, and let R′ (xi1 , . . . , xir ) ∧ U P P (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , ym ) be the relation as in Lemma 58 (up to the ordering of variables). Note that we do not need to explicitly enumerate the tuples in this relation, since we may simply provide the extension oracle proven to exist in Lemma 58. Then the output is a conjunction of Inv(P)-SAT relations, with a polynomial-time extension oracle for each one, and the resulting instance is equivalent to F. Since the output instance has n + m = (c + 1) · n variables, an algorithm solving Inv(P)-SAT faster than the time stated would imply an improved algorithm for CNF-SAT. The bounds for speciﬁc problems follow from the bounds for universal padding formulas computed in Lemma 57. Finally, we note that the convergence of the lower bounds for k-NU-SAT towards 2n , assuming SETH, is at a slower rate than the upper bounds for the best known algorithms for k-SAT, which scale as ck ≤ 1 − Θ(1/k) [25]. There are also signiﬁcant diﬀerences in problem model (ﬁnite language versus inﬁnite language, and concrete constraints versus extension oracles). It would be interesting to improve these results, to either improve the convergence rate or provide bounds in some explicit representation model, assuming SETH.  34  Section summary. We have proven lower bounds under SETH. The bounds obtained in Theorem 59 are only valid in the extension oracle model, and it does not appear entirely straightforward to extend them to the explicit representation. However, for 2-edge-SAT we also gave a lower bound subject to the Subset Sum n problem, which as remarked is strong evidence that the O∗ (2 2 ) algorithm from Theorem 38 is the best we could reasonably hope for.  6 Discussions and Conclusions We have investigated the structure of constraint languages under ﬁne-grained reductions, with a focus on sign-symmetric Boolean languages, and applied the results to an analysis of the time complexity of NP-hard SAT problems, in a general setting. The structural analysis uses an algebraic connection to analyse constraint languages via their partial polymorphisms. Thereby the structural conclusions are relevant for any problem that takes as input a constraint formula over some ﬁxed constraint language, under just a few assumptions: (1) that the constraints in the formula are “crisp” rather than soft, and are required to all be satisﬁed (as opposed to problems such as MAX-SAT, where a feasible solution may falsify some constraints); (2) that there are no structural restrictions of the formula itself (e.g., no bounds on the number of occurrences per variable); and (3) that the constraint language is sign-symmetric, i.e., allows the free application of negated variables and the use of constants in constraints. Thus it naturally applies to SAT(Γ) problems, but would also be relevant for the analysis of problems such as #SAT and optimisation problems, or even parameterized problems such as Local Search SAT(Γ) – is there a solution within distance k of a given non-satisfying assignment t? Structural results. The expressive power of sign-symmetric languages is characterised by the restricted partial polymorphisms in this paper referred to as pSDI-operations. We characterise the structure of all minimal non-trivial pSDI-operations, and ﬁnd that they are organised into a hierarchy, whose levels correspond to the problem complexity, with close connections to being able to express the k-SAT languages. Moreover, we described the weakest and strongest operations on each level. We ﬁnd that particular families of pSDI-operations correspond to partially deﬁned versions of well-known algebraic conditions from the study of CSPs; in particular, the strongest operation at each level k corresponds to the k-NU condition. Finally, we also give a result in the “vertical” direction of the hierarchy, giving a simple characterisation of languages not preserved by the partial k-NU operation for any k. By the above discussion, this result should be of interest also for other inquiries. Complexity of SAT(Γ) problems. We apply our results to an analysis of the ﬁne-grained time complexity of SAT(Γ) for sign-symmetric languages, under SETH. We consider previously studied languages with improved algorithms – i.e., such that SAT(Γ) can be solved in time O∗ (cn ) for some c < 2 – and ﬁnd that they correspond well to particular classes of the hierarchy. Conversely, every known language Γ such that SAT(Γ) is SETH-hard – i.e., admits no improved algorithm assuming SETH – lives entirely outside of the hierarchy. We also show the feasibility of giving improved algorithms whose correctness relies only and directly on the above-mentioned pSDI-operations, by showing that known algorithmic strategies such as fast matrix multiplication and (conjecturally) fast local search can be extended to work for such classes. Finally, we give complementary lower bounds – for every invariant f as above, there is a constant cf such that Inv(f)-SAT cannot be solved in O∗ (cn ) time for any c < cf , assuming SETH. These results are arguably the ﬁrst of their kind; every previously known concrete lower bound under SETH has either been for showing that a problem admits no non-trivial algorithm, or has been applied to problems analysed under more permissive parameters such as treewidth. In particular, 2-edge-SAT is the ﬁrst SAT problem which simultaneously has non-trivial upper and lower bounds on the running time under SETH.  35  6.1 The abstract problem and polynomial-time connections Finally, let us make a short detour to consider what we may call the abstract problem. We have noted that for every Boolean pSDI-operation f , there is a set of equational conditions that characterise f , similarly to deﬁnitions of varieties in universal algebra, and for every larger domain D, these conditions will uniquely determine a partial operation over the domain D. Furthermore, these conditions are preserved under taking powers of the domain, which we have exploited for particular cases of Inv(f)-SAT and Inv(f)-CSP to reduce input instances to instances of polynomial-time solvable problems on exponentially many variables. These polynomial-time problem will in general be search problems, like CSPs, and will be preserved by the same type of operation f , but have a ﬁxed number of variables d and with an unbounded domain size n. Let us refer to this as the abstract Inv(f)-problem. The question can be raised, for which pSDI-operations f does such a problem allow improved polynomial-time algorithms? We refrain from phrasing the question formally, because the polynomial-time complexity may be strongly aﬀected by details such as constraint representation, but we note that the class of problems deﬁned this way, unlike the original problems SAT(Γ), contain several problems conjectured not to have such an improvement. First, we note that every constraint of arity less than d is preserved by the k-NU-type partial operation with k ≥ d. This in particular includes the k-hyperclique problem for (k − 1)-uniform hypergraphs, which has been conjectured not to be solvable in time O(nk−ε ) for any ε > 0 and k > 3 [40]. Thus the abstract d-NU problem does not admit an improved algorithm for d > 3 under this conjecture. Second, it can be veriﬁed that the problem of ﬁnding a zero-weight triangle, under arbitrary large edge weights, if viewed as a single constraint of arity d = 3, is preserved by the corresponding 3-universal partial operation. It is known that subject to the 3SUM conjecture, this problem cannot be solved in O(n3−ε ) for any ε > 0 [56]. If we restrict ourselves to the minimal non-trivial pSDI-operations f deﬁned for the Boolean domain in this paper, this leaves only a small number of concrete problems open under the above conjectures. By the inclusions we have established, any operation f at a level k > 3 yields an abstract problem as hard as the k-NU operation. Furthermore, the abstract 3-NU problem does admit an improved algorithm via fast matrix multiplication. It can be easily checked that up to argument permutation, there are only eight distinct pSDI-operations f at level 3 of the hierarchy; and by the above discussion, the easiest and the hardest are (conjecturally) resolved. We consider it an interesting question to investigate the complexity of the problem for these remaining cases.  6.2 Regarding a dichotomy for sign-symmetric SAT problems Ignoring for the moment the lower bounds discussed in the previous section, the results throughout our paper suggest a simple potential dichotomy between NP-complete SAT problems solvable in O(2cn ) time for c < 1 and SAT problems not solvable in O(2cn ) time for any c < 1 unless SETH fails. We can formulate this conjecture as follows. To simplify the conjecture we restrict ourselves to the non-uniform model. Conjecture 60. Let Γ be a possibly infinite sign-symmetric Boolean constraint language such that SAT(Γ) is NP-complete. Then SAT(Γ) admits a non-uniform algorithm with running time in O(2cn ) time for c < 1 if and only if Γ is preserved by a non-trivial pSDI-operation. Note that by Corollary 51, the negative direction of this conjecture is already known, up to SETH. It thus remains to consider whether k-universal SAT admits a non-uniform improved algorithm for every k. Furthermore, as discussed in the Introduction, the class of constraints deﬁnable as the roots of bounded-degree multivariate polynomials represents an example which by Lemma 24 is directly associated with k-universal SAT, and which has an improved algorithm by Lokshtanov et al. [42]. Thus, the above conjecture at least represent a kind of Occam’s razor-type extrapolation of least mathematical surprise. 36  However, at the moment this conjecture seems diﬃcult to settle. An extreme negative result, such as the conclusion that the full problem Inv(f)-SAT admits an improved algorithm only when the abstract Inv(f)problem does, would by Theorem 45 need to refute the sunﬂower conjecture. A full positive resolution would need to generalise the result of Lokshtanov et al. [42] to apply based only on a weak abstract condition, whereas their present algorithm strongly uses properties speciﬁc to polynomials. Intermediate outcomes are of course possible, but would raise further questions of which pSDI-operations f are powerful enough to guarantee the existence of an improved algorithm.  6.3 Future work The investigations in this paper leave several concrete open questions, and signiﬁcant avenues for future work, regarding all parts of the paper. Let us highlight a few. Structural aspects. Assuming that the class of partial k-edge operations turn out to be relevant for the analysis of future problems, it would be valuable to have a set of canonical consequences to a language not being preserved by any partial k-edge operation, similarly to Theorem 33. To this aim, it may also be enlightening to fully describe the symmetric relations contained in various classes in the hierarchy. Another concrete question is regarding the structure of Inv(nuk ) for k > 3. Assume that R ∈ Inv(nuk ) is an n-ary Boolean relation, which depends on every argument. Is there a non-trivial upper bound on |R|? Extension to CSPs. Many questions remain regarding an extension of the project to CSPs on nonBoolean domains. While the minimal non-trivial pSDI-operations deﬁned in this paper do have higherdomain analogues, via polymorphism patterns, and while these analogues do in some cases have useful consequences for the complexity of the corresponding CSP, it is not clear that they are in general the only kind of condition that is relevant for the ﬁne-grained complexity of CSPs. In particular, in the Boolean domain there is a known correspondence between pSDI-operations and sign-symmetric languages. No such correspondence has been shown for CSPs in general. In a diﬀerent vein, for higher-domain CSPs there are also classes of NP-hard problems whose time complexity is far better than O∗ (|D|n ), e.g., k-Colouring corresponds to a CSP of domain size |D| = k and can be solved in O∗ (2n ) time for every k [4]. Arguably, we do not have a good understanding of when this occurs in general, and we cannot claim that an O(cn ) time algorithm for c < |D| is necessarily an improvement. A reasonable starting point to mitigate some of these technical diﬃculties is to initially only consider consider constraint languages whose total polymorphisms are the projections. Problems. Let us mention a few concrete algorithmic questions. First of all, by Lemma 25, symmetric relations deﬁned by Sidon sets are preserved by the 3-universal operation, but they do not seem to be captured by currently known algorithms for problems in this class. Does the language consisting of all such relations admin an improved algorithm? Another problem is to ﬁnd a generalisation of the algorithm for constraints deﬁned via bounded-degree polynomials [42], without explicitly using properties speciﬁc to polynomials. A diﬀerent generalisation of this class was considered by the present authors (see the arXiv version of [36]), in the form of relations with bounded-degree Maltsev embeddings. Since this properly generalises bounded-degree polynomials, it is natural to ask whether this class admits an improved algorithm. More broadly, as remarked earlier, the classiﬁcation of the expressiveness of sign-symmetric constraint languages may be of interest for questions other than just satisﬁability. The algorithm for 2-edge-SAT, for instance, can be used to solve the corresponding counting problem, showing that pSDI-operations may be powerful enough also in other settings. Concrete questions to consider here include improved algorithms for the counting problem #SAT(Γ) and the parameterized problem Local search SAT(Γ). Lower bounds. Can the padding scheme be improved to give better asymptotics with respect to the level k? Recall that the lower bound behaves as a bound of 2 − Θ((log k)/k), whereas all known algorithmic strategies yield running times of the form (2 − Θ(1/k))n . 37  It would also be very interesting to have a SETH-based lower bound in the explicit representation model. As discussed earlier the padding construction is valid also in this representation, but is diﬃcult to implement in practice since the resulting relations may contain exponentially many tuples with respect to the number of variables.  References [1] N. Alon, A. Shpilka, and C. Umans. On sunﬂowers and matrix multiplication. Computational Complexity, 22(2):219–243, 2013. [2] N. Alon, R. Yuster, and U. Zwick. Finding and counting given length cycles. Algorithmica, 17(3):209– 223, 1997. [3] L. Barto, A. Krokhin, and R. Willard. Polymorphisms, and How to Use Them. In A. Krokhin and S. Zivny, editors, The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability, volume 7 of Dagstuhl Follow-Ups, pages 1–44. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2017. [4] A. Björklund, T. Husfeldt, and M. Koivisto. Set partitioning via inclusion-exclusion. SIAM Journal on Computing, 39(2):546–563, 2009. [5] V. G. Bodnarchuk, L. A. Kaluzhnin, V. N. Kotov, and B. A. Romov. Galois theory for Post algebras. I. Cybernetics, 5:243–252, 1969. [6] V. G. Bodnarchuk, L. A. Kaluzhnin, V. N. Kotov, and B. A. Romov. Galois theory for Post algebras. II. Cybernetics, 5:531–539, 1969. [7] A. Bulatov. A dichotomy theorem for nonuniform CSPs. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS-2017). IEEE Computer Society, 2017. [8] A. Bulatov and V. Dalmau. A simple algorithm for Mal’tsev constraints. SIAM Journal On Computing, 36(1):16–27, 2006. [9] A. Bulatov, P. Jeavons, and A. Krokhin. Classifying the complexity of constraints using ﬁnite algebras. SIAM Journal on Computing, 34(3):720–742, Mar. 2005. [10] C. Calabro, R. Impagliazzo, and R. Paturi. The complexity of satisﬁability of small depth circuits. In Parameterized and Exact Computation, 4th International Workshop (IWPEC 2009), pages 75–85, 2009. [11] C. Calabro, R. Impagliazzo, and R. Paturi. On the exact complexity of evaluating quantiﬁed k-CNF. Algorithmica, 65(4):817–827, Apr 2013. [12] M. Couceiro, L. Haddad, V. Lagerkvist, and B. Roy. On the interval of Boolean strong partial clones containing only projections as total operations. In Proceedings of the 47th International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic (ISMVL-2017), pages 88–93. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. [13] M. Couceiro, L. Haddad, K. Schölzel, and T. Waldhauser. Relation graphs and partial clones on a 2-element set. In Proceedings of the 44th International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic (ISMVL2014), pages 161–166. IEEE Computer Society, 2014.  38  [14] N. Creignou and H. Vollmer. Boolean constraint satisfaction problems: When does Post’s lattice help? In N. Creignou, P. G. Kolaitis, and H. Vollmer, editors, Complexity of Constraints, volume 5250 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 3–37. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. [15] M. Cygan, H. Dell, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, J. Nederlof, Y. Okamoto, R. Paturi, S. Saurabh, and M. Wahlström. On problems as hard as CNF-SAT. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 12(3):41:1– 41:24, 2016. [16] E. Dantsin, A. Goerdt, E. A. Hirsch, R. Kannan, J. M. Kleinberg, C. H. Papadimitriou, P. Raghavan, and U. Schöning. A deterministic (2 − 2/(k + 1))n algorithm for k-SAT based on local search. Theoretical Computer Science, 289(1):69–83, 2002. [17] E. Dantsin and A. Wolpert. Derandomization of Schuler’s algorithm for SAT. In Proceedings of Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing (SAT-2004), pages 80–88, 2005. [18] P. Erdős and R. Rado. Intersection theorems for systems of sets. Journal of the London Mathematical Society, s1-35(1):85–90, 1960. [19] T. Feder and M. Vardi. The computational structure of monotone monadic SNP and constraint satisfaction: A study through datalog and group theory. SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(1):57–104, 1998. [20] F. V. Fomin, S. Gaspers, D. Lokshtanov, and S. Saurabh. Exact algorithms via monotone local search. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2016), pages 764–775, 2016. [21] D. Geiger. Closed systems of functions and predicates. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 27(1):95–100, 1968. [22] D. Harnik and M. Naor. On the compressibility of NP instances and cryptographic applications. SIAM Journal on Computing, 39(5):1667–1713, 2010. [23] T. Hertli. 3-SAT faster and simpler - unique-SAT bounds for PPSZ hold in general. SIAM Journal on Computing, 43(2):718–729, 2014. [24] E. Horowitz and S. Sahni. Computing partitions with applications to the knapsack problem. Journal of the ACM, 21(2):277–292, Apr. 1974. [25] R. Impagliazzo and R. Paturi. On the complexity of k-SAT. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 62(2):367 – 375, 2001. [26] R. Impagliazzo, R. Paturi, and F. Zane. Which problems have strongly exponential complexity? Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 63:512–530, 2001. [27] B. M. P. Jansen and A. Pieterse. Optimal sparsiﬁcation for some binary CSPs using low-degree polynomials. In Proceedings of the 41st International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS-2016), volume 58, pages 71:1–71:14, 2016. [28] P. Jeavons. On the algebraic structure of combinatorial problems. Theoretical Computer Science, 200:185–204, 1998. [29] P. Jeavons, D. Cohen, and M. Gyssens. Closure properties of constraints. Journal of the ACM, 44(4):527–548, July 1997. 39  [30] P. Jonsson and V. Lagerkvist. An initial study of time complexity in inﬁnite-domain constraint satisfaction. Artificial Intelligence, 245:115–133, 2017. [31] P. Jonsson, V. Lagerkvist, G. Nordh, and B. Zanuttini. Strong partial clones and the time complexity of SAT problems. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 84:52 – 78, 2017. [32] P. Jonsson, V. Lagerkvist, and B. Roy. Time complexity of constraint satisfaction via universal algebra. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS-2017), pages 17:1–17:15, 2017. [33] M. P. L. Barto, J. Oprsal. The wonderland of reﬂections. Israel Journal of Mathematics. To appear. [34] V. Lagerkvist. Strong Partial Clones and the Complexity of Constraint Satisfaction Problems: Limitations and Applications. PhD thesis, Linköping University, The Institute of Technology, 2016. [35] V. Lagerkvist and B. Roy. A Preliminary Investigation of Satisﬁability Problems Not Harder than 1-in-3-SAT. In Proceedings of the 41st International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS-2016), pages 64:1–64:14, 2016. [36] V. Lagerkvist and M. Wahlström. Kernelization of constraint satisfaction problems: A study through universal algebra. In Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - 23rd International Conference (CP 2017), pages 157–171, 2017. [37] V. Lagerkvist and M. Wahlström. The power of primitive positive deﬁnitions with polynomially many variables. Journal of Logic and Computation, 27(5):1465–1488, 2017. [38] V. Lagerkvist, M. Wahlström, and B. Zanuttini. Bounded bases of strong partial clones. In Proceedings of the 45th International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic (ISMVL-2015), pages 189–194, 2015. [39] F. Le Gall. Powers of tensors and fast matrix multiplication. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation (ISSAC-2014), pages 296–303, 2014. [40] A. Lincoln, V. Vassilevska Williams, and R. Williams. Tight hardness for shortest cycles and paths in sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA-2018), pages 1236–1252, 01 2018. [41] D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, and S. Saurabh. Known algorithms on graphs of bounded treewidth are probably optimal. In Proceedings of the Twenty-second Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA-2011), pages 777–789, 2011. [42] D. Lokshtanov, R. Paturi, S. Tamaki, R. R. Williams, and H. Yu. Beating brute force for systems of polynomial equations over ﬁnite ﬁelds. In P. N. Klein, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2017), pages 2190–2202, 2017. [43] K. Meeks. Randomised enumeration of small witnesses using a decision oracle. In 11th International Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computation (IPEC 2016), pages 22:1–22:12, 2016. [44] N. Nisan. CREW PRAMs and decision trees. SIAM Journal On Computing, 20(6):999–1007, 1991. [45] R. O’Donnell. Analysis of Boolean Functions. Cambridge University Press, 2014. [46] E. Post. The two-valued iterative systems of mathematical logic. Annals of Mathematical Studies, 5:1–122, 1941. 40  [47] B. Romov. The algebras of partial functions and their invariants. Cybernetics, 17(2):157–167, 1981. [48] T. Schaefer. The complexity of satisﬁability problems. In Proceedings of the 10th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory Of Computing (STOC-1978), pages 216–226. ACM Press, 1978. [49] D. Scheder and J. P. Steinberger. PPSZ for general k-SAT - making Hertli’s analysis simpler and 3-SAT faster. In Proceedings of the 32nd Computational Complexity Conference (CCC-2017), pages 9:1–9:15, 2017. [50] H. Schnoor and I. Schnoor. Partial polymorphisms and constraint satisfaction problems. In N. Creignou, P. G. Kolaitis, and H. Vollmer, editors, Complexity of Constraints, volume 5250 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 229–254. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. [51] K. Schölzel. Dichotomy on intervals of strong partial Boolean clones. Algebra Universalis, 73(34):347–368, 2015. [52] U. Schöning. A probabilistic algorithm for k-SAT and constraint satisfaction problems. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS-1999), pages 410–414, 1999. [53] R. Schroeppel and A. Shamir. A T = O(2n/2 ), S = O(2n/4 ) algorithm for certain NP-complete problems. SIAM Journal On Computing, 10(3):456–464, 1981. [54] E. Szemerédi. On sets of integers containing no k elements in arithmetic progression. Acta Arithmetica, 27:199–245, 1975. [55] V. V. Williams. Multiplying matrices faster than Coppersmith-Winograd. In Proceedings of the 44th Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference (STOC 2012), pages 887–898, 2012. [56] V. V. Williams and R. Williams. Finding, minimizing, and counting weighted subgraphs. SIAM Journal On Computing, 42(3):831–854, 2013. [57] D. Zhuk. The proof of CSP dichotomy conjecture. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS-2017). IEEE Computer Society, 2017.  41

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
