Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_3370

Abstract:
On the control of agents coupled through shared resources  arXiv:1803.10386v1 [cs.SY] 28 Mar 2018  Syed Eqbal Alam∗ , Robert Shorten† , Fabian Wirth‡ , and Jia Yuan Yu∗  Abstract— We consider a control problem involving a number of agents coupled through multiple unit-demand resources. Such resources are indivisible and each agent’s consumption is modeled as a Bernoulli random variable. Controlling such agents in a probabilistic manner, subject to capacity constraints, is ubiquitous in smart cities. For instance, such agents can be humans are in a feedback loop—who respond to a price signal), or automated decision-support systems that strive toward system-level goals. In this paper, we consider both a single feedback loop corresponding to a single resource and multiple coupled feedback loops corresponding to multiple resources consumed by the same population of agents. For example, when a network of devices allocate resources to deliver a number of services, these services are coupled through capacity constraints on these resources. We present a new algorithm with basic guarantees of convergence and optimality, as well as an example illustrating its performance.  Keywords— distributed optimization, optimal control, multi-resource allocation, unit-demand resources, smart city, electric vehicle charging I. I NTRODUCTION Classical control has much to offer in a smart city context. However, while this is without doubt true, many problems arising in the context of smart cities reveal subtle constraints that are relatively unexplored by the control community. At a high level both classical control, and smart city control, deal with regulation problems. However, in many (perhaps most) smart-city applications, control involves orchestrating the aggregate effect of a number of agents who respond probabilistically to a signal (sometimes called a price). A fundamental difference between classical control and smart-city control, is the need to study the effect of control signals on the statistical properties of the populations that we wish to influence (while at the same time ensuring that the control is in some sense optimal). This fundamental difference concerns the need of ergodic feedback systems, and even though this problem is rarely studied in control, it is the issue that is perhaps the most pressing in real-life applications, since the need for predictability, at the level of individual agents, underpins an operator’s ability to write economic contracts. Our starting point for this work is our previous published papers [1], [2] and the the observation that many problems ∗ Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, email: sy al@encs.concordia.ca, jiayuan.yu@concordia.ca † School of Electrical, Electronic and Communications Engineering, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, email: robert.shorten@ucd.ie ‡ Faculty of Computer Science and Mathematics, University of Passau, Passau, Germany, email: fabian.wirth@uni-passau.de  in smart-cities can be cast in a framework, where a large number of agents, such as people, cars, or machines, often with unknown objectives, compete for a limited resource. The challenge of allocating this resource in a manner that is not wasteful, utilized the resource optimally, and gives a guaranteed level of service to each of the agents competing for that resource. For example, allocating parking spaces [3], [4], [5], regulating cars competing for shared road space [6], or allocating shared bikes [7], [8], are all examples in which resource utilization should be maximized, while at the same time delivering a certain quality of service to individual agents is a paramount constraint. As we have noted in [2], at a high level these are primarily optimal control problems but with the added objective of controlling the microscopic properties of the agent population. Thus, the design of feedback systems for deployment in cities must combine notions of regulation, optimization, and the existence of this unique invariant measure [9]. Specifically, in this paper we consider the problem of controlling a number of agents coupled through multiple shared resources, where each agent demands the resources in a probabilistic manner. This work builds strongly on our previous work in [1] in which the optimal control and ergodic control of a single population of agents is considered. As we have mentioned, controlling networks of agents which demand resources in a probabilistic manner is ubiquitous in the study of problems in smart cities. In smart city applications, the probabilistic intent of agents can be natural (where humans are in a feedback loop and respond, for example, to a price signal), or designed (implemented in a decision support system) so that the network achieves system level goals. Often, such feedback loops are coupled together as agents contribute or participate in multiple services. For example, when a network of devices allocate resources to deliver a number of services, these services are coupled through the consumption of multiple shared resources, usually we call such resources as unit demand resources which are either allocated one unit of the resource or not allocated. A concrete manifestation of such a system is the IBM’s Research project parked cars as a service deliver platform [10]. Here, networks of parked cars collaborate to offer services to city managers. Examples of services include wifi coverage, finding missing objects, and gas leak detection and localization. Here vehicle owners allocate parts of their resource stochastically to contribute to different services, each of which are managed by a feedback loop. The allocation between services is usually coupled via some nonlinear function that represents the trade-off between resource allocation (energy, sensors),  and the reward for participating in delivering a particular service. We shall give a concrete example of such a system later in the paper. It is our firm belief that such systems are ubiquitous in smart cities, and represent a new class of problems in feedback systems. Our principal contribution in this paper is to establish stochastic schemes for practically important class of problems for number of agents coupled through multiple shared resources in coupled feedback loops. Each agent demands the shared resources in a probabilistic manner based on its private cost, and the constraints are based on multiple shared resources. This scheme is generalization of the single resource allocation algorithm of [1]. Furthermore, the results of convergence as well as optimality are derived for single resources. The paper is organized as follows, in Section II we describe the notations used as well as formulate the problem and provide the optimality conditions for the optimization problem. A brief description of unit-demand single resource allocation through single feedback loop is presented in Section III. Some convergence properties are also provided there. We describe the distributed stochastic unit-demand multiresource allocation algorithms through coupled feedback loops in Section IV. In Section V we present an application of the proposed algorithm in which a number of electric cars are coupled through level 1 and level 2 charging points, we also illustrate the simulation results. Section VI lists open problems and possible applications. II. P RELIMINARIES Suppose that there are n coupled agents. They are coupled through m resources R1 , R2 , . . . , Rm and each agent has a cost function that depends on the allocation of these resources in the closed coupled feedback loop. Let the desired value or capacity of R1 , R2 , . . . , Rm is C 1 , C 2 , . . . , C m , respectively. We denote N := {1, 2, . . . , n}, M := {1, 2, . . . , m} and use i ∈ N as an index for agents and j ∈ M to index the resources. Let ξij (k) denotes independent Bernoulli random variable which represents the instantaneous allocation of resource Rj of agent i at time step k. Furthermore, let yij (k) ∈ [0, 1] denotes the average allocation of resource Rj of agent i at time step k. We calculate yij (k) as follows, k  yij (k)  1 X j ξi (`), = k+1  (1)  `=0  for i ∈ {1, . . . , n} and j ∈ {1, . . . , m}. We assume that agent i has a cost function gi : (0, 1]m → R which associates a cost to a certain allotment of resources and depends on the agent. We assume that gi is twice continuously differentiable, convex, and increasing in all variables, for all i. We also assume that the agents do not share their cost functions or allocation information with other agents or control unit. Then, instead of defining the resource allocation problem in terms of the instantaneous allocations ξij (k) ∈ {0, 1}, we  define the objective and constraints in terms of averages as follows, n X  min 1  m y1 ,...,yn  subject to  gi (yi1 , . . . , yim ),  i=1 n X  yij = C j ,  (2)  j ∈ M,  i=1  yij ≥ 0,  i ∈ N , j ∈ M.  Let y ∗ = (y1∗1 , . . . , yn∗m ) ∈ (0, 1]nm denotes the solution to (2). Let N denotes the set of natural numbers and k ∈ N denotes the time steps. Next, our objective is to propose a distributed iterative algorithm that determines instantaneous allocations {ξij (k)} and ensures that the long-term average allocations, as defined in (1) converge to optimal allocations, as in (3) to achieve minimum social cost, for every agent i and resource Rj (treated in Section IV). yij (k) → yi∗j ,  (3)  as k → ∞, thereby achieving the minimum social cost in the sense of long-term averages. By compactness of the constraint set optimal solutions exist. Assumption Pn that gi is strictly convex leads to strict convexity of i=1 gi , which follows that the optimal solution is unique. A. Optimality conditions Let L : Rn × Rm × Rm → R, and µj and τ j are the Lagrange multipliers of resource Rj , for j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m}. Then we define the Lagrangian of Problem (2) as follows, L(y 1 , . . . , y m , µ1 , . . . , µm , τ 1 , . . . , τ m ) n m n m X X X X = gi (yi1 , . . . , yim ) − µj ( yij − C j ) + τ j yij . i=1  j=1  i=1  j=1  (4) yi∗1 , . . . , yi∗m  Recall that ∈ (0, 1] are the optimal allocations of agent i of Problem (2) (primal values) and suppose that µ∗j and τ ∗j are the optimal Lagrange multipliers for j ∈ {1, . . . , m}. Now, let ∇L denotes the Jacobian of L. Since yi∗1 , . . . , yi∗m minimize L(y 1 , . . . , y m , µ∗1 , . . . , µ∗m , τ ∗1 , . . . , τ ∗m ) which leads that its Jacobian ∇L(y 1 , . . . , y m , µ∗1 , . . . , µ∗m , τ ∗1 , . . . , τ ∗m ) must be zero. Thus, from (4) we obtain as follows, n X  ∇gi (yi∗1 , . . . , yi∗m )  i=1  −  m X j=1  n m X X µ∗j ∇( yi∗j − C j ) + ∇τ ∗j yi∗j = 0. i=1  (5)  j=1  As for all i and j, yi∗j ∈ (0, 1] and τ ∗j ≥ 0 then from complementary slackness τ ∗j yi∗j = 0 =⇒ τ ∗j = 0, hence the last term of (4) and (5) vanishes. Thus, we rewrite (5) as follows, n X i=1  ∇gi (yi∗1 , . . . , yi∗m )  =  m X j=1  n X µ ∇( yi∗j − C j ). ∗j  i=1  (6)  With careful analysis we find that the optimal values satisfy all KKT conditions which are necessary and sufficient conditions of optimality for differentiable convex functions (Chap. 5.5.3 [11]). Now, to find the derivative of cost function of each agent we proceed as follows. Let ∇j gi denotes (partial) derivative of gi with respect to resource Rj . Then, from (6), we obtain: ∇j gi (yi∗1 , . . . , yi∗m )  ∗j  =µ .  In other words, we have: ∇j gi (yi∗1 , . . . , yi∗m ) = ∇j gu (yu∗1 , . . . , yu∗m ), for all i, u ∈ N and j ∈ M.  (7)  Hence, the derivatives of cost functions of all agents competing for a particular resource must reach consensus at an optimal average allocation. Throughout the paper, we use this principle to show analytically and empirically that our proposed algorithm is optimal in the limit. III. A LLOCATING ONE RESOURCE THROUGH A FEEDBACK LOOP  In this section, we consider the single-resource case of [1], and the proposed distributed, iterative, and stochastic allocation algorithm. We briefly describe this algorithm and provide the first proof of its convergence and optimality properties. With a single resource, we can simplify notation by dropping the index j. Each agent i has a strictly convex cost function gi : (0, 1] → R+ . The binary random variable ξi (k) ∈ {0, 1} denotes the allocation of the unit resource for agent i at time step k. Let yi (k) be the averagePallocation k 1 up to time step k of agent i, i.e., yi (k) = k+1 `=0 ξi (`). In the following ξ(k), y(k) ∈ Rn denote the vectors with entries ξi (k), yi (k). The idea is to choose probabilities for the random variables ξi so as to ensure convergence to the social optimum and to adjust overall consumption to the desired level C by applying a normalization factor Ω to the probabilities. When an agent joins the system at a time step k; it receives the normalization factor Ω(k). At each time step k, the central agency updates Ω(k) using a gain parameter τ , past utilization of the resource and its capacity and broadcasts the new value to all agents, n X  Ω(k + 1) = Ω(k) − τ ξi (k) − C , (8) i=1   where τ ∈ 0,  max  y∈[0,1]n  n X i=1  yi gi0 (yi )  !−1  .  (9)  After receiving this signal agent i responds in a random fashion based on its available information. The probability functions σi (·) use the average allocation of resource to agent i and the derivative of the cost function and are given by, yi σi (Ω, yi ) = Ω 0 . (10) gi (yi )  Agent i updates its resource demand at each time step either by demanding one unit of the resource or not demanding it, as follows, ( 1 with probability σi (Ω(k), yi (k)); ξi (k + 1) = 0 with probability 1 − σi (Ω(k), yi (k)). It needs to be pointed out that for the formulation above we require assumptions on the gi and on admissible value of Ω, because the scheme requires that (10) does in fact define a probability. For ease of notation we define vi (z) := z/gi0 (z), z ∈ [0, 1] and v(y) to be the vector with components vi (yi ), y ∈ [0, 1]n . Definition 3.1 (Admissibility): Let n ∈ N and gi : [0, 1] → R+ be twice continuously differentiable, and strictly convex, i = 1, . . . , n. We call the set {gi , i = 1, . . . , n} and Ω > 0 admissible, if (i) vi is well defined on [0, 1], for all i = 1, . . . , n, (ii) there are constants 0 < a < b < 1 such that σi (Ω, z) = Ωvi (z) ∈ [a, b] for all i = 1, . . . , n, z ∈ [0, 1]. The definition of admissibility imposes several restrictions on the possible cost functions gi similar to those imposed in [12]. See this reference for a detailed discussion and possible relaxations. For the case that Ω is independent of time, so that (8) is not active, the convergence of the scheme follows using tools from classical stochastic approximation, [13]. Theorem 3.2 (Convergence of average allocations): Let n ∈ N. Assume the functions gi : [0, 1] → R+ are strictly convex, twice continuously differentiable and strictly increasing, i = 1, . . . , n. Let Ω > 0 and assume that {gi , i = 1, . . . , n} and Ω > 0 are admissible. Then, almost surely, limk→∞ y(k) = y ∗ , where y ∗ is characterized by the condition, Ω = gi0 (yi∗ ), i = 1, . . . , n. Proof: By definition we have,  (11)  1 k y(k) + ξ(k). k+1 k+1 This may be reformulated as, y(k + 1) =  y(k + 1) 1 [(σ(y(k)) − y(k)) + (ξ(k) − σ(y(k)))] . k+1 For the latter formulation Theorem 2.2 of [13] is applicable. To this end we note that, = y(k) +  E(ξ(k + 1) − σ(y(k + 1))|Fk ) = 0, where Fk is the σ-algebra generated by the events up to time k. This follows immediately from the definition of the probabilities σi (·). Also the sequence {ξ(k) − σ(y(k))} is of course bounded. By assumption the map h : y 7→ σ(y)−y = Ωv(y) − y is Lipschitz continuous. P Also step-sizes a(k) = 1/k satisfy k a(k) = P the ∞, k a2 (k) < ∞ and the iterates y(k) are bounded. By [13, Theorem 2.2] it follows that almost surely y(k) converges to a connected chain transitive set of the differential equation, ẋ = Ωv(x) − x.  It remains to show that the differential equation has an asymptotically stable fixed point whose domain of attraction contains the set [0, 1]n as this then determines the unique possible limit point of {y(k)}. We note first that the differential equation is given by the n decoupled equations, ẋi = Ωvi (xi ) − xi . The fixed points for each of these 1-dimensional equations is characterized by the condition Ωx∗i /gi0 (x∗i ) − x∗i = 0. We have by Definition 3.1 (ii) that, Ωvi (0) > 0  and  Ωvi (1) − 1 < 0.  (12)  x∗i  This shows that ∈ (0, 1) and so a little manipulation shows that fixed points are characterized by, Ω = gi0 (x∗i ). As gi is strictly convex, gi0 is strictly increasing and so the fixed point for each of the decoupled equations is unique. Now (12) together with sign considerations shows asymptotic stability and the desired property of the domain of attraction. The proof is complete. Remark 3.3 (Optimality): We note that the fixed point condition (11) can be interpreted as an optimality Pn condition—as established in (7). If we define C ∗ := i=1 yi∗ then (11) shows that y ∗ is the unique optimal point of the optimization problem, minimize  n X i=1  gi (yi ) subject to  n X  yi = C ∗ ,  yi ≥ 0.  i=1  The equation shows furthermore that Ω may be used to adjust the fixed point and thus the constraint. As the gi are strictly convex and increasing, the gi0 are positive and increasing. Thus increasing Ω increases each yi∗ (Ω) and thus the total constraint C ∗ (Ω), while decreasing Ω has the opposite effect. The simple PI controller for Ω in (8) thus has the purpose to adjust to the right level of resource consumption. The full proof of the convergence of the scheme with the PI-controller in the loop is beyond the scope of the present paper. IV. A LLOCATING MULTIPLE RESOURCES THROUGH COUPLED FEEDBACK LOOPS  We turn our attention in this section to the case of multiple resources shared by the same population of agents. We present a new algorithm that generalizes the singleresource algorithm of the previous section to multiple unitdemand resources. The agents are coupled through these shared resources. In contrast to the single-resource case however, we do not provide a proof of the convergence of the allocations over time and the optimality property of the proposed algorithm. We present nonetheless in Section V empirical evidence that the allocations converge rapidly to a socially optimal allocation. Before presenting the algorithm, we introduce the following additional notions. Suppose that there exists δ > 0 such that Gδ is a set of second order continuously differentiable, convex and increasing functions and g1 , g2 , . . . , gn ∈ Gδ . We assume that Gδ is common knowledge to the control unit and  each cost function gi is private and should be kept private. Despite the fact that Gδ is common knowledge, due to large number of cost functions gi in Gδ , it is difficult for control unit to guess gi of a particular agent. The distributed unit-demand multi-resource allocation algorithm is run by each agent in the system. Let τ j denotes the gain parameter, Ωj (k) denotes the normalization factor or the signal of controller of the feedback loop and C j represents the desired value or capacity of resource Rj , respectively, for all j. We use term control unit instead of controller here. The control unit updates Ωj (k) according to (14) at each time step and broadcasts it to all agents in the system, for all j and k. When an agent joins the system at a time step k; it receives the parameter Ωj (k) for resource Rj , for all j. Every agent’s algorithm updates its resource demand each time step either by demanding one unit of the resource or not demanding it. The normalization factor Ωj (k) depends on its value at previous time step, τ j , the capacity C j and total utilization of resource Rj at previous time step, for all j and k. After receiving this signal the agent i’s algorithm responds in a probabilistic manner. It calculates its probability σij (k) using its average allocation yij (k) of resource Rj and the derivative of its cost function, for all j and k, as described in (15). Using this probability it finds out the Bernoulli distribution, based on the numerical outcome 0 or 1 of the random variable, the algorithm decides whether to demand one unit of the resource or not. If numerical value is 1, then the algorithm demands one unit of the resource otherwise it does not demand that resource. This process repeats over time. We present the proposed unit-demand multi-resource allocation algorithm for the control unit in Algorithm 1 and for each agent in Algorithm 2. Algorithm 1: Algorithm of control unit Input: C 1 , . . . , C m , τ 1 , . . . , τ m , ξi1 (k), . . . , ξim (k), for k ∈ N and i ∈ N . Output: Ω1 (k + 1), Ω2 (k + 1), . . . , Ωm (k + 1), for k ∈ N. Initialization: Ωj (0) ← 0.3501 , for j ∈ M, foreach k ∈ N do foreach j ∈ M do calculate Ωj (k + 1) according to (14) and broadcast in the system; end end After introducing the algorithms, we describe here how to calculate different factors. Let x11 , . . . , xm n ∈ R+ be the deterministic values of average allocations, then the control unit calculates the gain parameter τ j with common knowledge of Gδ as follows, τ j ∈ 0, (  sup  n X  x11 ,...,xm n ∈R+ ,g1 ,...,gn ∈Gδ i=1  1 We   xji )−1 . 1 2 m ∇j gi (xi , xi , . . . , xi ) (13)  initialize it with a positive real number for each resource.  Algorithm 2: Unit-demand multi-resource allocation algorithm of agent i Input: Ω1 (k), Ω2 (k), . . . , Ωm (k), for k ∈ N. Output: ξi1 (k + 1), ξi2 (k + 1), . . . , ξim (k + 1), for k ∈ N. Initialization: ξij (0) ← 1 and yij (0) ← ξij (0), for j ∈ M. foreach k ∈ N do foreach j ∈ M do y j (k)  i ; σij (k) ← Ωj (k) ∇j gi (y1 (k),...,y m i (k)) i generate Bernoulli independent random variable bji (k) with the parameter σij (k); if bji (k) = 1 then ξij (k + 1) ← 1; else ξij (k + 1) ← 0; end j j 1 yij (k + 1) ← k+1 k+2 yi (k) + k+2 ξi (k + 1); end end  Now, we define Ωj (k + 1) which is based on utilization of resource Rj at time step k and common knowledge of Gδ as follows, Ωj (k + 1) = Ωj (k) − τ j  n X   ξij (k) − C j .  (14)  i=1  We call Ωj (k) as normalization factor, used by the control unit. Now, after receiving normalization factor Ωj (k) from the control unit at time step k, an agent responds with probability σij (k) in the following manner to demand for resource Rj at next time step, for all i, j and k, σij (k) = Ωj (k)  yij (k) . ∇j gi (yi1 (k), yi2 (k), . . . , yim (k))  (15)  Notice that, Ωj (k) is used to bound the probability σij (k) ∈ (0, 1), for all i, j and k. Remark 4.1 (Privacy of probabilities): By using Ωj (k) as normalizationPfactor, the algorithm ensures the privacy of n probabilities i=1 σij (k) of agents, Pnthereby the control unit only knows about the utilization i=1 ξij (k) of resource Rj at previous time step k. Observe that if limk→∞ yij (k) → yi∗j for every resource j and agent i, as is the case in Theorem 3.2 for a single resource, then we can show that both σij (k) and Ωj (k) converge. In turn, by the definition (14), we would obtain that the consensus property of (7) and hence optimality. Notice furthermore that the system has very little communication overhead. Suppose that Ωj (k) takes the floating point values represented by µ bits. If there are m unitdemand resources in the system, then the communication overhead in the system will be µm bits per time unit. Moreover, the communication complexity in this is independent of the number of agents participating in the system.  V. A PPLICATION TO ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING In this section, we use Algorithms 1 and 2 to control electric vehicles that share a limited number of level 1 and level 2 charging points. We illustrate through numerical results that utilization of a charging point is concentrated around its desired value or capacity and agents receive the optimal charging points in long-term averages, we verify this using the consensus of derivatives of cost functions of agents which satisfies all the KKT conditions for the optimization Problem 2. As background perspective, the transportation sector in US contributed around 27% of green house gas (GHG) emission in 2015, in which light-duty vehicles like cars have 60% contribution. Furthermore, the share of carbon dioxide is 96.7% of all GHG gases from transportation sector [14]. To put it in context, currently we have more than 1 billion vehicles (electric (EV) as well as internal combustion engine (ICE)) on road worldwide [15], the number is increasing very rapidly which will result in increased CO2 emission in future. Therefore, strategies are needed to reduce the CO2 emission. Though, electric only vehicles produce zero emission but the electricity generating units produce GHG emissions at source depending on the power generation techniques used, for example, thermal-electric, hydro-electric, wind power, nuclear power, etc. US department of energy [16] states that the annual CO2 emission by an electric vehicle (EV) is 2, 079.7 kg (share of CO2 emission in producing electricity for charging the EV) and a gasoline vehicle or ICE is 5, 186.8 kg. Consider now a situation where a city sets aside a number of free (no monetary cost) electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) which supports level 1 and level 2 chargers at public EV charging station to serve the residents and/or to promote usage of electric vehicles. Level 1 charger works at 110 - 120 V AC, 15 - 20 A and takes around 8 - 12 hours to fully charge the battery of an EV whereas level 2 charger works at 240 V AC, 20 - 40 A and takes around 4 - 6 hours to fully charge the battery, depending on the battery capacity, on-board charger capacity, etc., [17]. The voltage and current rating of chargers vary, details of ranges can be found in [18], [19]. Now, suppose that the city has installed C 1 EVSEs which support level 1 chargers and C 2 EVSEs which support level 2 chargers. Let there are n electric cars coupled through level 1 and level 2 charging points. Now, the city must decide whether to allocate level 1 charge point or level 2 charge point to an electric car user to control total utilization of charging points. Clearly, in such a situation, charging points should be allocated in a distributed manner that preserves the privacy of individual users, but which also maximizes the benefit to a municipality. We use the proposed distributed stochastic algorithm which ensures the privacy of electric car users and allocates charging points optimally to maximize social welfare (for example, minimize total electricity consumption or CO2 emission). According to [20], on average 0.443 kg of CO2 is produced to generate and distribute 1 kWh of electric energy in European union with mix energy sources. Let, I be the  0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  0  500  1.2  1  0.8  0  1000  7  ∇1 gi(.)  Derivative of gi  Level 1, charger 22 Level 2, charger 22 Level 1, charger 981 Level 2, charger 981  Derivative of gi  Avg. alloc. of charge points  1  5000  6 5 4 3  10000  ∇2 gi(.)  0  Iterations  Iterations (a)  5000  10000  Iterations  (b)  (c)  Level 1 charger Level 2 charger  550 500 450 400 350  700  Utilization  Total average allocations  Fig. 1: (a) Evolution of average allocation of charging points, (b) evolution of profile of derivatives of gi of all electric cars with respect to level 1 chargers, (c) evolution of profile of derivatives of gi of all electric car with respect to level 2 chargers.  600 500 400 300  0  2000  4000  Iterations (a)  Level 1 charger Level 2 charger  0  20  40  60  Iterations (b)  Fig. 2: (a) Evolution of sum of average allocation of charging points, (b) utilization of charging points over last 60 time steps, the capacities of level 1 and level 2 chargers are C 1 = 400 and C 2 = 500, respectively.  current flowing in the circuit and V be the voltage rating of the circuit, ECO2 be the rate of CO2 emission per kWh. If an EV is charged for t hours at a charging point, then its total share of CO2 emission, say TCO2 (t) for generation and distribution of I×V ×t kWh electric energy can be calculated as TCO2 (t) = I × V × t × ECO2 , we use ECO2 = 0.443 kg [20]. Table V illustrates the total CO2 emission in kg by level 1 and level 2 chargers in 4 hours duration. We use this data to formulate the cost function of an agent. CO2 emission using different EV chargers Charger type power (kW) CO2 emission in 4h Level 1 1.65 - 2.4 2.924 - 4.253 kg Level 2 4.8 - 9.6 8.51 - 17.01 kg Suppose that each car user has private cost function gi which depends on the average allocations yi1 (k) and yi2 (k) of level 1 and level 2 charging points, respectively. We assume that the city agency (control unit) broadcasts the normalization factors Ω1 (k) and Ω2 (k) to each competing electric car after every 4 hours, here we chose duration of 4 hours because of charging rate of level 2 chargers. Note that an EV user can unplug the vehicle in the middle of charging without fully charging the battery. Now, suppose that the cost functions are classified into four classes based on the type of vehicle, its battery capacity, on-board charger capacity, etc., a set of  vehicles belong to each class. Let a = 2.9, b = 8.51 be the constants and f1i , f2i be uniformly distributed random variables, where f1i ∈ [1, 1.5], f2i ∈ [1, 2], for all i. The cost functions are listed in (16), where first and second term represents CO2 emission at basic assumed rate of charging of the battery whereas third and subsequent terms are CO2 emission due to different charging losses or factors. We observe that no allocation of charge points produce zero CO2 emission, the cost functions are as follows,  1 2 1 2 2 4   (i) ayi 1+ byi 2+ af1i (yi 1) 4+ bf2i (yi ) ,2 2    (ii) ayi + byi + af1i (yi ) /2 + bf2i (yi ) , (iii) ayi1 + byi2 + af1i (yi1 )4 /3 + af1i (yi1 )6 + gi (yi1 , yi2 ) =   bf2i (yi2 )4 ,    (iv) ayi1 + byi2 + af1i (yi1 )2 + bf2i (yi2 )6 . (16) Now, let the number of coupled electric cars be n = 1200 that are coupled through level 1 and level 2 chargers, we classify the (electric) cars as follows; cars 1 to 300 belong to class 1, cars 301 to 600 belong to class 2, cars 601 to 900 belong to class 3 and cars 901 to 1200 belong to class 4, each class has a set of cost functions and the probability of occurrence of each class are equal. Let C 1 = 400 and C 2 = 500. The parameters of the algorithms are initialized with the following values, Ω1 (0) = 0.328, Ω2 (0) = 0.35, τ 1 = 0.0002275, τ 2 = 0.0002125. We use the proposed  Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 to allocate charging points to a number of electric cars coupled through level 1 and level 2 charging points. If a car user is looking for a free charging point then the user sends a request to the city agency using its cost function gi based on its average allocation of level 1 and level 2 charging points and city agency allocates any of these charging points or none in a stochastic manner. Car users do not share their cost functions or history of its allocations with other car users or with city agency. We present here, results of automatic allocation of charging points. We observe that the electric car users receive optimal allocation of each type of charging point and minimize overall CO2 emission. We observe in Figure 1(a) that the long-term average allocations of charging points of electric cars converge to their respective optimal values. As described earlier in (7), to show the optimality of a solution, the derivative of cost function of all cars with respect to a particular type of charger should make a consensus. The profile of derivatives of cost functions of all electric cars with respect to level 1 and level 2 chargers for a single simulation is illustrated in Figure 1(b) and 1(c), respectively. We observe that they converge with time and hence make a consensus, which meets the KKT condition for optimality. Note that we used third and subsequent terms of (16) to calculate ∇j gi which just shifts the value of derivatives by constants a or b without affecting the KKT points, but it provides faster convergence in simulation. The empirical results thus obtained, show the convergence of the longterm average allocations of charging points to their respective optimal values using the consensus of derivatives of the cost functions, which results in the optimum emission of CO2 . We also observed that σij (k) is in (0, 1) most of the time with the current values of Ωj (k) and τ j with a few initial overshoots. To overcomenthe overshoots of probability σij (k), o y j (k) we use σij (k) = min Ωj (k) ∇j gi (y1 (k),yi2 (k),...,ym (k)) , 1 , i i i for all i, j and k. 2(a) illustrates the sum of average allocations PFigure n j y (k) over time. We observe that the sum of average i=1 i allocations of charge pointsP converge to respective capacity n over time, i.e., for large k, i=1 yij (k) ≈ C j , for all j. We further illustrate the utilization of charging points for last 60 time steps in Figure 2(b). It is observed that most of the time total allocation of charging points is concentrated around its capacity. To reduce the overshoot of total allocation of level j charging points, we assume a constant γ j < 1 and modify the algorithm of city agency (control unit) to calculate Ωj (k +1) (cf. (14)) in the following manner, n X  j j j Ω (k + 1) = Ω (k) − τ ξij (k) − γ j C j , i=1  for all j ∈ {1, 2} and k. VI. C ONCLUSION We proposed a new algorithm to solve a class of multivariate resource allocation problems. The solution approach is distributed among the agents and requires no communication between agents and little communication with a central  agent. Each agent can therefore keep its own cost function private. This generalizes the unit-demand single resource allocation algorithm of [1]. In the single-resource case, we showed that the long-term average allocation of resources converge to optimal values. In the multiple-resources case, experiments show that likewise the allocation converges rapidly to an optimum. One open problem is to prove convergence in the latter setting. Another one is to analyze the rate of convergence. In terms of applications, our proposed approach can be used to allocate resources such as Internet-connected devices in hospitals, smart grids, etc. It can also be used to allocate virtual machines to users in cloud computing. R EFERENCES [1] W. M. Griggs, J. Y. Yu, F. R. Wirth, F. Hausler, and R. Shorten, “On the design of campus parking systems with QoS guarantees,” IEEE Trans. Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1428– 1437, 2016. [2] A. R. Fioravanti, J. Marecek, R. N. Shorten, M. Souza, and F. R. Wirth, “On classical control and smart cities,” in IEEE 56th Annual Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Dec 2017, pp. 1413– 1420. [3] R. Arnott and J. Rowse, “Modeling parking,” Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 97 – 124, 1999. [4] D. Teodorovic and P. Lucic, “Intelligent parking systems,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 175, no. 3, pp. 1666 – 1681, 2006. [5] T. Lin, H. Rivano, and F. L. Moul, “A survey of smart parking solutions,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 3229–3253, Dec 2017. [6] I. Jones, “Road space allocation: the intersection of transport planning, governance and infrastructure,” 2014. [7] T. Raviv and O. Kolka, “Optimal inventory management of a bikesharing station,” IIE Transactions, vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1077–1093, 2013. [8] P. DeMaio, “Bike-sharing: History, impacts, models of provision, and future,” Journal of Public Transportation, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 41–56, 2009. [9] E. Crisostomi, R. Shorten, and F. Wirth, “Smart cities: A golden age for control theory? [industry perspective],” IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 23–24, Sept 2016. [10] R. Cogill, O. Gallay, W. Griggs, C. Lee, Z. Nabi, R. Ordonez, M. Rufli, R. Shorten, T. Tchrakian, R. Verago, F. Wirth, and S. Zhuk, “Parked cars as a service delivery platform,” in 2014 International Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), Nov 2014, pp. 138–143. [11] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2004. [12] F. Wirth, S. Stuedli, J. Y. Yu, M. Corless, and R. Shorten, “Nonhomogeneous Place-Dependent Markov Chains, Unsynchronised AIMD, and Network Utility Maximization,” ArXiv e-prints, Apr. 2014. [13] V. S. Borkar, Stochastic Approximation. Cambridge University Press, 2008. [14] U. EPA, “Fast facts: U.s. transportation sector ghg emissions 19902015,” July 2017. [15] J. Sousanis, “World vehicle population tops 1 billion units,” Aug. 2015. [16] U. D. Energy, “Emissions from hybrid and plug-in electric vehicles,” Feb. 2018. [17] S. Schey, “Canadian electric vehicle infrastructure deployment guidelines,” 2014. [18] M. Yilmaz and P. T. Krein, “Review of battery charger topologies, charging power levels, and infrastructure for plug-in electric and hybrid vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 2151–2169, May 2013. [19] Q. Wang, X. Liu, J. Du, and F. Kong, “Smart charging for electric vehicles: A survey from the algorithmic perspective,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1500–1517, 2016. [20] E. assoc. BEV, “Energy consumption, CO2 emissions and other considerations related to battery electric vehicles,” European association for battery electric vehicles, April 2009.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
