Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_3313

Abstract:
Directional Training and Fast Sector-based Processing Schemes for mmWave Channels Zheda Li1 , Nadisanka Rupasinghe 2 , Ozgun Y. Bursalioglu3 , Chenwei Wang3 , Haralabos Papadopoulos3 , Giuseppe Caire4 1  Dept. of EE, University of Southern California, Los Angeles Dept. of ECE North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 3 Docomo Innovations Inc, Palo Alto, CA 4 Technische Universität Berlin, Germany zhedali@usc.edu, rprupasi@ncsu.edu, {obursalioglu, cwang, hpapadopoulos}@docomoinnovations.com, caire@tu-berlin.de  arXiv:1611.00453v3 [cs.IT] 19 May 2017  2  Abstract—We consider a single-cell scenario involving a single base station (BS) with a massive array serving multi-antenna terminals in the downlink of a mmWave channel. We present a class of multiuser MIMO schemes, which rely on uplink training from the user terminals, and on uplink/downlink channel reciprocity. The BS employs virtual sector-based processing according to which, user-channel estimation and data transmission are performed in parallel over non-overlapping angular sectors. The uplink training schemes we consider are non-orthogonal, that is, we allow multiple users to transmit pilots on the same pilot dimension (thereby potentially interfering with one another). Elementary processing allows each sector to determine the subset of user channels that can be resolved on the sector (effectively pilot contamination free) and, thus, the subset of users that can be served by the sector. This allows resolving multiple users on the same pilot dimension at different sectors, thereby increasing the overall multiplexing gains of the system. Our analysis and simulations reveal that, by using appropriately designed directional training beams at the user terminals, the sector-based transmission schemes we present can yield substantial spatial multiplexing and ergodic user-rates improvements with respect to their orthogonal-training counterparts.  I. I NTRODUCTION 5G standardization efforts and deployments are projected to bring great performance gains with respect to their predecessors in a multitude of performance metrics, including user and cell throughput, end-to-end delay, and massive device connectivity. It is widely expected that these 5G requirements will be met by utilizing a combination of additional resources, including newly available licensed and unlicensed bands, network densification, large antenna arrays, and new PHY/network layer technologies. To meet the throughput/unit area requirements, for instance, 5G systems would need to provide much higher spatial multiplexing gains (e.g., number of users served simultaneously) than their 4G counterparts. Large antenna arrays and massive MIMO are considered as key technologies for 5G and beyond. It is expected that new generation deployments would have to utilize the cm and mmWave bands where wide chunks of spectrum are readily available. Note that the spacing of antenna arrays is proportional to the wavelength, at mmWave, so large arrays can be packed even on small footprints. Such large-size arrays will be critical in combatting with the harsher propagation characteristics experienced at mmWave.  Massive MIMO, originally introduced in [1], [2], can yield large spectral efficiencies and spatial multiplexing gains through the use of a large number of antennas at the base stations (BSs). Large arrays enable focusing the radiated signal power and creating sharp beams to several users simultaneously, allowing a BS to serve them simultaneously at large spectral efficiencies. In order to achieve large spectral efficiencies in the downlink (DL) via multiuser (MU) MIMO, channel state information at the transmitter (CSIT) is needed. Following the massive MIMO approach [2], CSIT can be obtained from the users’ uplink (UL) pilots via Time-Division Duplexing (TDD) and UL/DL radio-channel reciprocity. This allows training large antenna arrays by allocating as few UL pilot dimensions as the number of single-antenna users simultaneously served. As is well known, with isotropic channels, the number of users that can be simultaneously trained (or the system multiplexing gains) is limited by the coherence time and bandwidth of the channel [3], [4]. Noting that the coherence time is inversely proportional to the carrier frequency, increasing the carrier frequency ten-fold, e.g., from 3 GHz to 30 GHz, results in a ten-fold decrease in coherence time, and, thereby, in the number of user channels that can be simultaneously trained within the coherence time of the channel. In this paper we focus on single-cell DL transmission over a mmWave channel, enabled by UL training and UL/DL channel reciprocity [5]. We take advantage of the sparsity of mmWave channels in the angular domain to devise schemes that yield increases in the system spatial multiplexing gains. Indeed, typical mmWave channels are characterized by fewer multipath components than channels at lower frequencies [6], [7], [8], [9] resulting in a sparser angular support, both at the BS and the user terminal. This channel sparsity can be exploited to train multiple user channels simultaneously, that is, training multiple users using the same pilot dimension. We consider a combination of non-orthogonal UL training from the user terminals based on pilot designs in [10] and sector-based processing and precoding from the BS with the goal to increase aggregate spatial multiplexing gains and user rates. The challenge with more than one user transmitting pilots on the same pilot dimension is pilot contamination  which can substantially limit massive MIMO performance, as the beam used to send data (and therefore beamforming) to one user also beamforms unintentionally at the other (contaminating) user terminal.  k is the M ˆ M̃ matrix1 [6], [13]:  In this work, multiple users, each equipped with many antenna elements and a single RF chain, are scheduled to transmit beamformed pilots on the same pilot dimension, thereby increasing the number of users simultaneously transmitting pilots for training. We exploit the presence of a massive Uniform Linear Array (ULA) at the BS and a form of pre-sectorization in the Angle of Arrival (AoA) domain. Elementary processing at each sector allows determining the subset of user channels that can be resolved on the sector, effectively pilot contamination free. Each sector then serves only the subset of users whose channels it can resolve. This allows resolving multiple users on the same pilot dimension at different sectors, thereby increasing the overall multiplexing gains of the system.  where Np is the number of paths, and βn and τn denote the complex gain and relative delay, respectively, associated with the n-th path2 . The M ˆ 1 vector apθq and the M̃ ˆ 1 vector ãpθq represent the array response and steering vectors, and are 1-periodic in θ. The normalized angle θ is related to the physical angle φ (measured with respect to array broadside) as θ “ D sinpφq, where D is the antenna spacing between two antenna elements normalized by the carrier wavelength. Assuming a maximally spread channel in angular domain, the support of both apθq and ãpθq are r´1{2, 1{2s, as in [6]. In this paper, we assume TDD operation and focus on DL data transmission enabled by UL pilot transmissions from the user terminals and reciprocity-based training [2]. As a result, in the case of uplink pilot (downlink data) transmission, θn and θ̃n denote the n-th path angles of arrival (departure) and departure (arrival). Spatial filtering can be applied at both the BS and the user terminal side. Given that each user terminal has a single RF chain, a user may transmit its pilot on an arbitrary M̃ ˆ 1 beam b. Letting αn pbq “ βn ãH pθ̃n qb, and using Ppbq to denote the set of indices of paths that are excited with user’s UL transmission via beam b, the physical model for the vector channel can be written as follows: ÿ hk pf q “ hk pf ; bq “ αn pbqapθn qe´j2πτn f . (1)  Our approach has strong connections but also important differences with respect to joint spatial division and multiplexing (JSDM), a two-stage method proposed in [11]. JSDM partitions users into groups with approximately similar channel covariances, and exploits two-stage downlink beamforming. In particular, precoding comprises a pre-beamformer, which depends on the user-channel covariances and minimizes interference across groups, in cascade with a MU MIMO precoder, which uses instantaneous CSI to multiplex users within a group. Using JSDM, two users with no overlapping AoA support in their channels can be trained and served simultaneously. JSDM has also been studied over mmWave band channels [12]; assuming full knowledge of the angular spectra of all the users, user scheduling algorithms were devised to maximize the spatial multiplexing, or received signal power. Our work similarly harvests spatial multiplexing gains, but the support of each user’s spectra are not a priori known and no special scheduling is employed. We also study how varying the user beam width can affect these harvested multiplexing gains. Indeed, using a directional beam at a user terminal makes its user-channel sparser in terms of the number of sectors that are excited at the BS, thereby leaving more sectors available to resolve other users’ channels. Our analysis and simulations reveal that a proper choice of the user beam width can positively impact both multiplexing gains and long-term user rates. II. S YSTEM M ODEL We consider a single-cell scenario, involving a single BS serving Ktot user terminals. The BS is equipped with an M -element ULA and M RF chains (i.e., one RF chain per antenna), while each terminal is equipped with an M̃ -element ULA and a single RF chain. We assume OFDM and a quasistatic block fading channel model whereby the channel of the k-th user stays fixed within a fading block (within the coherence time and bandwidth of the channel). During a given fading block, the channel response between the BS and user  Hk pf q “  Np ÿ  βn apθn qãH pθ̃n qe´j2πτn f ,  n“1  nPPpbq  ‰ “ ∆ We let Rk “ E hk pf qhH k pf q denote the k-th user channel covariance matrix and note that, due to uncorrelated scattering, Rk is independent of the tone index, f . Given that our focus is on the large M case, we will assume that the DFT matrix whitens Rk and, as a result, Rk is circulant3 . Hence, the eigendecomposition of Rk is given by Rk “ FΛk FH , with F denoting the M ˆ M DFT matrix, and Λk “ diag pλ1,k . . . , λM,k q where λ1,k . . . , λM,k are the eigenvalues of Rk . The MU MIMO schemes we consider in this paper combine a form of spatial division and multiplexing based on instantaneous CSI. The schemes rely on a form of presectorization in the AoA domain. First hk pf q is projected onto F to generate the M ˆ 1 vector of channel observations H ∆ gk pf q “ F hk pf q. Subsequently, the M entries of gk pf q are split into S non-overlaping “sector” groups. In particular, assuming without loss of generality, that g “ M {S is an integer, each sector comprises g consecutive entries of gk pf q.4 1 We assume reciprocal uplink and downlink channels hence we use H pf q k for both. See [5]. 2 For notational convenience, we have suppressed the dependence of N , p βn , τn , θn and θ̃n on the user index k. 3 Indeed, for ULAs with large M , the eigenvectors of the channel covariance matrix are accurately approximated by the columns of a DFT matrix [11]. 4 If M is not divisible by S, groups of different sizes can be arranged.  We let gs,k pf q denote the g ˆ 1 vector associated with sector s for s P t1, 2, . . . , Su: gs,k pf q can be expressed as H  gs,k pf q “ Fs hk pf q,  (2)  where the M ˆ g matrix Fs comprises the s-th set of g consecutive columns of F. It is worth “remarking that, ‰ since the entries of gk pf q are uncorrelated (E gk pf qgkH pf q “ Λk ); in this way the M ˆ 1 channel vector between a single BS and a user is turned into S orthogonal g ˆ 1 sector channels with uncorrelated entries. We define the average channel gain between a user k and a sector s as follows: sg ÿ 1 λi,k . (3) λ̄s,k “ g i“ps´1qg`1  In the schemes we consider, the UL pilot transmissions by the user terminals allow each sector to detect the subset of the users it sees with sufficiently high pilot SINR, and subsequently serve the associated user streams with a form of zero-forced beamforming. In the baseline training schemes where each user is given a dedicated UL pilot dimension and is thus not interfered by the other users’ pilots, user k is considered to have a high pilot SINR in sector s as long as λ̄s,k exceeds some predetermined threshold γ as the user’s pilot is not interfered with other users’ pilots. We also investigate the viability of non-orthogonal training schemes according to which multiple users are assigned on the same UL pilot dimension. In this case, if the pilots of multiple users using the same pilot dimension are received at sufficiently high power at a given sector (i.e., UL pilots collide at this sector), none of these user channels are resolvable. With non-orthogonal training, user k is considered resolvable in sector s if no collision is declared in its dedicated pilot dimension on sector s, and λ̄s,k exceeds γ. Details of detecting high pilot SINR (or, resolvable) users are given in Sec. IV. With non-orthogonal training, given τ dimensions per quasistatic fading block are used for UL training, each sector can at most serve simultaneously τ users per fading block. A user can be served by more than one sector at a time and each sector can serve more than one user at a time.5 The instantaneous multiplexing gain over a fading block is thus the number of users that are served (by at least one sector) in that block and can exceed the available pilot dimensions, τ . With orthogonal training, the multiplexing gains are upperbounded by the number of scheduled users τ . As (1) reveals, the choice of the beam b employed by the user terminal to transmit its UL pilot affects Ppbq, the set of indices of paths that are excited. As explained in Appendix A, different training beams may excite different paths but also different numbers of paths. In fact, the sparsity of the user channel in the AoA domain (as reflected by the number of λ̄s,k ’s exceeding γ) can be controlled by the choice of the user beam width. In Secs. III-IV we describe UL training and 5 Note that, although a user’s stream transmissions from different sectors are precoded independently, they coherently combine at the user terminal.  precoding schemes and tools for analyzing their performance for the case that each user employs a fixed but arbitrary beam for UL pilot transmission (and DL data reception). Subsequently, Sec. V studies the effect of the beam width choice on multiplexing gains and user rates. It is worth noting that [12] also uses sparsity in AoA domain in the mmwave band to increase multiplexing gains. In [12], the Λk ’s are assumed to be known prior to scheduling. Indeed, various user scheduling algorithms are designed to assign users to individual eigen directions based on knowledge of the Λk ’s. In contrast, our work does not assume knowledge of the eigenvalues λi,k ’s or λ̄s,k ’s to schedule transmission of user streams in each sector. III. DL MU-MIMO P RECODING In this section we describe the DL precoding schemes under consideration. We assume wideband scheduling, according to which a scheduling slot comprises Q ą 1 concurrent fading blocks, an let τ denote the number of available orthogonal pilot dimensions per fading block. Each fading block can be viewed as spanning a contiguous set of time-frequency elements in the OFDM plane that are within the coherence bandwidth and time of the user channels. Since the fading blocks in a slot are concurrent (i.e., distinct fading blocks span distinct subbands over the same set of OFDM symbols), we index the fading blocks in a slot using a fading-block frequency index f P t1, 2, ¨ ¨ ¨ , Qu. With this interpretation gs,k pf q in (2) denotes to the channel of user k in sector s and fading block f . We assume L users (out of the total of Ktot users served by the BS) are scheduled (in round robin fashion) per slot by the BS. In the context of the baseline orthogonal training scheme, the BS schedules L “ τ users per scheduling slot for UL pilot transmission. Thus τ users send orthogonal pilots on each fading block, i.e., one user per pilot dimension (K “ 1). With non-orthogonal UL training, as in [10], the BS schedules L “ Kτ users per slot for some K ą 1. Hence, K ą 1 users send pilots per pilot dimension. We use σk to denote the pilot dimension used by user k, and Kσ to denote the indices of users assigned to pilot dimension σ for 1 ď σ ď τ . We consider DL transmission over a generic slot, and assume without loss of generality that the scheduled users have indices from 1 to L. Assuming user k uses the same beam b “ bk for UL pilot transmission and as a receive front-end in the DL MIMO phase, the received signal at user k over one channel use within fading block f is given by ? (4) rk “ ρd xT pf q hk pf q ` nk , where x is the precoded signal, and where nk represents IID noise with nk „ CN p0, 1q and ρd is the DL SNR. In the MU-MIMO schemes we consider, precoding is sector based. In particular, based on UL training, each sector resolves the channels of a subset of the L users and serves them simultaneously. We let Xs,k “ 1rγ, 8q pλ̄s,k q  (5)  “ ‰ where uT “ u1 u2 . . . uL is the information bearing signal with uk „ CN p0, 1q, and “ ‰ Vs pf q “ vs,1 pf q vs,2 pf q . . . vs,L pf q (11)  Sec. 1  X1,1 = 1 X1,2 = 0 Sec. 2  X 2,1 = 1 X 2,2 = 1  D1,1 = 1 D2,1 = 0, D2,2 = 0  User 1  Sec. 3  D3,2 = 1  X3,1 = 0  X3,2 = 1  Sec. 4  User 2  X 4,1 = 0 X 4,2 = 0  Fig. 1. Example of resolving two user channels on a common pilot dimension on each of the first 4 sectors of a BS.  denote whether or not user k is present on sector s and Xs “ tk; Xs,k “ 1u  (6)  denote the set of all users that are present in sector s. In the precoding schemes we consider, user k is resolved on sector s (and thus will be served by sector s) if and only if Xs,k “ 1 and there is no other user k 1 sharing the same dimension as user k for which Xs,k1 “ 1. Specifically we let Ds,k denote whether or not user k’s channel can be resolved on sector s: fi » ź p1 ´ Xs,k1 qfl , (7) Ds,k “ Xs,k – k1 PKσk ztku  Ds  “  tk; Ds,k “ 1u  (8)  be the subset of present users whose channels are resolvable in sector s. Fig. 1 shows an example, involving two users using a common pilot dimension, a BS and four of its sectors, and two scatterers. As the figure reveals, user 1 is present in sectors 1 and 2, while user 2 is present in sectors 2 and 3. As a result, the channel of user 1 is resolvable in sector 1, the channel of user 2 is resolvable in sector 3, and neither user channel is resolvable in sector 2 or 4. In general, not all present users are resolvable and we have Ds Ď Xs . Indeed, as inspection of (7) reveals if there are two users k and k 1 present in sector s (i.e., Xs,k “ Xs,k1 “ 1) that use the same pilot dimension (i.e., with σk “ σk1 ), we have Ds,k “ Ds,k1 “ 0. This is consistent with the fact that neither channel can be resolved due to the pilot collision. The number of sectors that can resolve (and thus will serve) user řS k is hence given by Nk “ s“1 Ds,k , while the number of users that are actually served in the slot is given by L1 “ |tk; Nk ą 0u|  (9)  and, in general, L1 ď L. In this paper we focus on a particular form of linear zeroforced beam-forming. All L1 users are given equal power, that is, power ρd {L1 . Furthermore for any served user k, the power allocated to its stream is equally split across all sectors that resolved the user’s channel. Hence, the k-th user’s stream receives power ρd {pL1 Nk q from each sector that serves the user. The precoded 1 ˆ M signal transmitted by the BS is given by S ÿ xT pf q “ uT pf qVsH pf qFH (10) s s“1  denotes the g ˆ L precoder at sector s and fading block f . In particular, vs,k pf q “ 0 for any k R Ds . For any k P Ds , vs,k pf q is in the direction of the unit-norm vector that is zeroforced to all other resolvable user-sector channel estimates, i.e., to tĝs,k1 pf q; k 1 P Ds ztku u where tĝs,k u’s denote the estimates of tgs,k u’s. Also }vs,k pf q}2 “ 1{pL1 Nk q. Note that with this type of precoding, Vs pf q is invariant to any scalar (and complex) scalings of any of the ĝs,k pf q, for k P Ds . Substituting the expression for xpf q from (10) in (4), and using the fact that hk pf q “ Fgk pf q we obtain rk “  ?  ρd  S ÿ  uT pf qVsH pf qgs,k ` nk .  s“1  IV. T RAINING , R ESOLVABLE CHANNELS AND P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS We next consider orthogonal and non-orthogonal UL training and its implications on user channel resolvability. Each scheduled user k for 1 ď k ď L is scheduled to transmit pilots on pilot dimension σk , that is, one of the τ pilot dimensions. Each pilot dimension comprises“ Q resource elements, one per ‰T fading block. We let pk “ pk p1q pk p2q ¨ ¨ ¨ pk pQq denote the UL pilot vector transmitted by user k, with pk pf q denoting the pilot value used by user k on fading block f . The received signal by the BS array that is based on the pilots transmitted by the user set Kσ on the pilot dimension σ in fading block f is given by ÿ ? hk pf qpk pf q ` wσul pf q, (12) yσul pf q “ ρp kPKσ  where yσul pf q is the received vector of length M , ρp is the UL SNR, and the noise wσul is CN p0, Iq. The corresponding s-th sector observations are given by projecting yσul pf q onto Fs ÿ ? ul ul ȳs,σ pf q “ FH ρp pk pf qgs,k pf q` w̄s,σ , (13) s yσ pf q “ kPKσ ul ul H and where w̄s,σ “ FH s wσ „ CN p0, Iq, since Fs Fs “ I.  A. Orthogonal training: In the orthogonal training setting, user k for 1 ď k ď τ transmits pilots on the dedicated pilot dimension σk “ k (i.e., Kσ “ tσu), and, as a result, there is no user k 1 ‰ k for which σk “ σk1 . Assuming also, without loss of generality, that pk pf q “ 1, the associated received signal in fading block f by the BS array based on the pilot transmitted by user k on the pilot dimension k (since σk “ k) from (12) is given by ? (14) ykul pf q “ ρp hk pf q ` wul pf q, while the corresponding s-th sector observations are given by ? ul ȳs,k pf q “ ρp gs,k pf q ` w̄s,k . (15)  The precoder uses the following estimate of the k-th user’s instantaneous channel on fading block f and sector s: ĝs,k pf q “ ȳs,k pf q .  (16)  Note that this estimate does not make any use of the pilot SNR, and does not rely on knowledge of λ̄s,k . Inspection of (7) reveals, that in the orthogonal scheme, Xs,k “ Ds,k , as there is no user k 1 for which σk “ σk1 . That is, in the orthogonal scheme, a sector can resolve the channel of user k if a user is present in sector s (i.e., λ̄s,k,ě γ), and thus Xs “ Ds . Subsequently, the sector s forms Vs pf q for its resolvable user set Ds according to (11) and using ĝs,k pf q from (16) for all k P Ds . Practical schemes for detecting the set of resolvable user channels can be devised by exploiting the key fact that “ ‰ ` ˘ H E gs,k pf qgs,k pf q “ diag λps´1qg`1,k , λps´1qg`2,k , . . ., λsg,k (17) for“ each fading block ‰ ` “ f in the slot.‰˘ Noting also that E }ȳs,k pf q}2 “ tr E ȳs,k pf qȳs,k pf qH “ gpρp λ̄s,k ` 1q, we can devise simple practical detection schemes that benefit from averaging over both the g beams and the Q tones, e.g.: Q 1 1 ÿ }ȳs,k pf q}2 ´ Qρp g f “1 ρp  D̂s,k “1  ¡  γ.  (18)  D̂s,k “0  If D̂s,k “ 1, then user k’s channel on sector s is considered as resolvable by the BS based on received UL signal. B. Non-Orthogonal training In the non-orthogonal training setting we consider, the pilots of K ą 1 users pilots are aligned on a single pilot dimension. As a result, the non-orthogonal scheme splits the L “ Kτ scheduled users uniformly across the Kσ sets, so that |Kσ | “ K for each σ P t1, 2, ¨ ¨ ¨ , τ u. It is worth noting that, given Xs (the set of present users in sector s) the set of detected and served users from sector s, Ds , is given by (8) and in general satisfies Ds Ď Xs . For example, if there is a σ for which multiple users are present in sector s, i.e., |Xs X Kσ | ą 1 then Ds Ă Xs . Such situation would correspond to a collision, that is, two or more users using the same pilot dimension are present in sector s, in which case, neither one’s channel is resolvable for transmission. Given Ds , sector s forms Vs pf q according to (11) and using ĝs,k pf q “ ȳs,σk pf q for all k P Ds where ȳs,σk pf q is given by (13). Practical detection schemes that detect which user channels are resolvable in a sector can be also readily devised. Noting ¸ ˜ ÿ “ ‰ 2 2 E }ȳs,σ pf q} “ g ρp λ̄s,k |pk pf q| ` 1 , (19) kPKσ  and assuming a sufficiently large number of beams/sector, g, the RHS of (19) can be approximated by }ȳs,σ pf q}2 . This suggests that a system of Q linear equations (one per fading block on pilot dimension σ) can be used to obtain tλ̄s,k ; k P Kσ u’s. “ ‰T Letting, rs,σ “ }ȳs,σ p1q}2 }ȳs,σ p2q}2 ¨ ¨ ¨ }ȳs,σ pQq}2 , we have the following system of equations: rs,σ “ g ρp Pσ λ̄s,σ ` g1 ` noise,  (20)  where λ̄s,σ is a K ˆ 1 vector whose entries comprise the set tλ̄s,k ; k P Kσ u, and where row f of the Q ˆ K matrix Pσ contains the associated |pk pf q|2 values. For each k in Kσ , let also ik denote the index i for which rλ̄s,σ si “ λ̄s,k . For Q ě K, the set tpk pf q; k P Kσ , 1 ď f ď Qu can be chosen a priori so that Pσ in (20) has full column rank, and hence the presence of each user can be individually detected. One such simple detector of the presence of user k is given by 1 T 1 eik Aσ rs,σ ´ eT δσ ρp g ρ p ik  X̂s,k “1  ¡  γ,  X̂s,k “0  ` ˘´1 H where Aσ “ PH Pσ , and δ σ “ Aσ 1, and where en σ Pσ is the nth column of the K ˆ K identity matrix. Note that both Aσ and δ σ are independent of the user channels and can be computed offline. Subsequently user channel resolvability can be detected by substituting X̂s,m for Xs,m in (7): » fi ´ ¯ ź D̂s,k “ X̂s,k – 1 ´ X̂s,k1 fl . (21) k1 PKσk ztku  Various codes can be designed when Q ě K that yield Pσ having full column rank. A full column rank matrix Pσ allows estimating each user’s large-scale response on each sector, i.e., all the tλ̄s,k u’s, thereby allowing to determine the presence of all users on all sectors. This together with (21) allows detecting the users with resolvable channels. To estimate the channels of any user k that has been resolved, however, it is also necessary that pk pf q ‰ 0, @f P t1, . . . , Qu. We remark that choosing a Pσ that is column rank allows detecting the presence of each user but is not necessary for detecting the resolvable user channels. Indeed, in the case that multiple active users (on a common pilot dimension σ) are present (i.e., collide) on a sector, the code design need only detect the collision event, and not the identities (and largescale channel gains) of the users that are present in the sector. This fact was exploited in [10] to design ON-OFF codes that are capable of resolving user channels even in cases with Q ă K (where Pσ cannot be full rank). However, pilot resource elements where a user’s pilot is OFF (i.e., the f values where where pk pf q “ 0) provide no information for channel estimation. As a result, these ON-OFF codes incur extra pilot overheads in order to enable the BS to estimate the resolved-user channels throughout the band [10]. C. Performance Metrics We consider two types of metrics in evaluating the performance of the proposed schemes. The first metric we use is the slot-averaged multiplexing gains provided by orthogonal and non-orthogonal training schemes: T ÿ y “ lim 1 L1 ptq, MG T Ñ8 T t“1  (22)  where L1 ptq represents the instantaneous multiplexing gain over slot t and is given by (9). The second performance metric is based on ergodic user-rate bounds. In Appendix B,  we provide closed-form rate bound expressions assuming IID channels within each sector, that is, assuming λ̄s,k “ λps´1qg`1,k “ λps´1qg`2,k “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ λsg,k .  (23)  This abstraction is justified in Appendix C. D. Directional Training and Angular Spectra Sparsity As inspection of (1) reveals, the number of excited paths and thus the extent to which a trained user channel is sparse in the AoA domain depends on the choice of the user beam. Similar to the AoA domain, where projecting onto the DFT basis F both whitens and sparsifies the channel (that is, gk is both white and sparse), we consider creating the user-pilot beam as a linear combination of the AoD eigen directions,6 i.e., of the columns of the M̃ ˆ M̃ DFT matrix, F̃. In particular, we consider training beams that arise from activating a subset of eigen directions. Letting f̃i denote the i-th AoD eigen direction (i.e., the i-th column of F̃), we can describe such an M̃ ˆ 1 user training beam b in terms of an M̃ ˆ 1 vector c with zero-one entries. For each m̃, with 1 ď m̃ ď M̃ , rcsm̃ is 1 if f̃m̃ is activated (i.e., used as part of the training beam), while rcsm̃ “ 0 otherwise. We also define the training beam width as the number of activated eigen directions, that is w “ 1T c “ řM̃ corresponding training m̃“1 rcsm̃ . Consequently given c, the ? beam b is given by b “ bpcq “ F̃c{ w. Note that w “ 1 corresponds to the user training on a beam with the narrowest possible width, while w “ M̃ corresponds to omni training. V. S IMULATIONS AND C ONCLUSION In this section, we study the multiplexing gains and userthroughput performance of the proposed schemes with orthogonal training (K “ 1) and non-orthogonal training (K ą 1). In order to study the effects of user beam width on channel sparsity in the AoA domain and, subsequently, on multiplexing gains and user throughput, we consider a probabilistic connectivity channel model between each elemental training eigen direction in tf̃m̃ ; 1 ď m̃ ď M̃ u and each of the S BS sectors. Specifically, we model the connection between BS sector s and a directional beam f̃m̃ from user k as a Bernoulli random pm̃q variable Xs,k with success probability p. We also model the pm̃q Xs,k ’s as IID7 in s, k, and m̃. pm̃q  In addition, we use λ̄s,k to denote the λ̄s,k induced on sector s when user k training with elemental eigen direction b “ f̃m̃ , and model it as follows: # pm̃q UrλL , λH s if Xs,k “ 1, pm̃q λ̄s,k „ pm̃q 0 if Xs,k “ 0, 6 For further details regarding how directional training sparsifies the channel in the AoA domain, see Appendix A. 7 In general, PrrX pm̃q “ 1s is, s, k, and m̃ dependent. In addition, X pm̃q ’s s,k s,k may be dependent random variables. Indeed, for two users k and k1 nearby pm̃q pm̃1 q it is possible that Xs,k and Xs,k1 are strongly correlated for some specific training directions m̃ and m̃1 . Although important in their own right, such spatial consistency investigations are beyond the scope of this paper. For spatial consistency investigations, see [14].  for some λL , λH with λH ą λL ą 0 and where U ra, bs denotes a uniform distribution in ra, bs. Consequently, using a beam bk “ bpck q with beam width wk “ wpck q results in λ̄s,k “ λ̄s,k pbk q “  M̃ 1 ÿ pm̃q λ̄ rck sm̃ . wk m̃“1 s,k  (24)  It can be readily verified that, by choosing as a threshold in (5) a value of γ in the range 0 ă γ ă λL {M̃ , and using λ̄s,k pbk q as in (24) the resulting Xs,k in (5) satisfies Xs,k “ pm̃q Xs,k pbk q “ ORm̃; rck sm̃ “1 Xs,k . Consequently, when user k uses a given training beam bk of beam width wk , we have P pXs,k “ 1q “ qpwk q,  (25)  ∆  where qpwq “ 1 ´ p1 ´ pqw . Also, the Xs,k ’s are IID in s, k. We focus on the case where all users choose beams with the same beam width w, and study the resulting multiplexing gains and user throughputs as a function of w, in the range 1 ď w ď M̃ . Note that, given a common beam width w, the average number of sectors activated by a user is given by Sqpwq. Also, the expected number of scheduled users that are not present at any of the sectors is given by Lp1 ´ qpwqqS . As expected, wider beams result in broader angular support, but wider beams also make it less likely that a user is not present at any of the sectors. Using (7), (9), and (25) yields y in (22): the following expression for MG ff « K ÿ “ 1‰ ` ˘ y MGpw, Kq “ E L “ E 1 ´ 1tN “0u (26) k  “  k“1 „ ´ ¯S  K´1 K 1 ´ 1 ´ qpwq r1 ´ qpwqs .  We next present a simulation-based study of the proposed schemes using the above model assuming Ktot “ 100 users terminals with M̃ “ 6 antennas each, and a BS with M “ 1000 BS antennas, using sector-based processing over S “ 25 sectors (hence g “ M {S “ 40 beams per sector). We assume p “ 0.1, and that τ “ 5 pilot dimensions are available for training per fading block. With these parameters, we have qp1q “ p “ 0.1 and qpM̃ q “ 0.47, implying that the average AoA angular support for a user ranges from 2.5 sectors (achieved with the finest-directional training, i.e., w “ 1) to about 11.72 sectors (achieved with omni-directional training i.e., w “ M̃ “ 6). A single drop is created, i.e., a single set pbq of rXs,k s’s are randomly created according to the model. For any given common beam width, w, at any given scheduling instance, each scheduled user picks a c at random (out of those c’s yielding beams with beam width w) . According to (26), Fig. 2 shows the multiplexing gains per pilot dimension as a function of K for different beam width values in the range 1 ď w ď M̃ . If orthogonal training is used (K “ 1), for any beam width the multiplexing gain is approximately equal to (and always upper-bounded by) 1. Considering all K ě 1 options, for any given training-beam opt width w, there is an optimal value of K, KMG pwq, which y maximizes MGpw, Kq. The best combination of beam width,  1 0.9 0.8 0.7  CDF  0.6 0.5 0.4  y vs. K for different values of w Fig. 2. MG  0.3  w=1,K roaptte = 11  0.2  w=3,K roaptte = 5  0.1  w=6,K roaptte = 3 w=1,K=1 w=6,K=1  0 1.2  1  Geometric mean UE throughput [bit/s/Hz]  Arithmetic mean UE throughput [bit/s/Hz]  1.2  w=1 w=2 w=3 w=4 w=5 w=6  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2  5  10 K  15  20  w=2,K roaptte = 6  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1 1.2 UE throughput  1.4  1.6  1.8  1  Fig. 4. User (UE) throughput CDF: different settings of w with corresponding opt Krate pwq  w=1 w=2 w=3 w=4 w=5 w=6  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2  0 5  10 K  15  20  Fig. 3. Arithmetic/geometric mean user (UE) throughput vs. K for various settings of w  w, and number of scheduled users per pilot dimension, K, is y given by pwopt , K opt q “ arg maxpw,Kq MGpw, Kq “ p1, 13q and results in a more than 6-fold increase in multiplexing gains with respect to the orthogonal training scheme. With the DL SNR ρd being 10 dB, Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b, respectively, display the arithmetic and geometric mean of user throughput as a function of K for beam widths in the range 1 ď w ď M̃ . Inspection of the two figures reveals similar trends between the arithmetic and geometric mean of the user rates as a function of K and w. Also both the arithmetic mean and the geometric mean are maximized with pw, Kq “ p1, 10q, exhibiting in each case more than a 3-fold increase with respect to the orthogonal training scheme. Fig. 4 shows the empirical user-rate CDFs for all beam widths in the range 1 ď w ď M̃ . For any w, the value of K that maximizes the user-rate arithmetic mean is used. We also plot the empirical user-rate CDF with orthogonal training, for w “ 1 and w “ 6 (omni-training). Inspection reveals that optimized non-orthogonal training uniformly outperforms orthogonal training in terms of individual user rates. Furthermore, the minimum pilot beam width is best in this example, as its user-rate CDF dominates all the others. In conclusion, non-orthogonal UL pilots and simple largearray BS processing are jointly exploited to significantly increase cell and cell-edge throughputs over sparse mmWave channels. The proposed method leverages scheduling multiple users randomly on each available pilot dimension with random (user-chosen) training directions, and coupled with low-complexity spatial processing at the BS to resolve user channels at each BS virtual sector. Although the focus of  the paper is cellular transmission and, in particular, singlecell performance, the proposed methods are directly applicable to CRAN scenarios and cell-free type operation [10], [14]. Indeed, large improvements in multiplexing gains are also reported in the context of cell-free type networks in [14], based on simple, albeit spatially consistent channel models that include the effects of common scatterers and blockers. A PPENDIX A S PARSITY AND U SER B EAMS The physical model is a very accurate representation of the real physical channel which depends on a very large number of parameters. But due to finite array apertures, limited bandwidth, W , the channel that is experienced in practice can be very well approximated by a discretized approximation, which is commonly known as virtual or canonical channel model [6]. In fact, virtual channel model is discretized version of Hk pf q where uniform sampling is applied in angle-delay domains at the Nyquist rates of 1{M, 1{M̃ , 1{W . Virtual representation of Hk pf q is denoted by Ȟk pf q and is given as follows [6]: Hk pf q « Ȟk pf q M ÿ  M̃ ÿ  L ÿ  “  (27) `  Ȟk pi, m, `qapi{M qãH pm{M̃ qe´j2π W f ,  i“1 m“1 `“1  where Ȟk pi, m, `q is the virtual channel coefficient and it is approximately equal to the sum of complex gains of all physical paths whose angles, delays lie within the angle delay resolution bin of size 1{M, 1{M̃ , 1{W and centered around the sampling point i{M, m{M̃ , `{W , see [6] for more details. Assuming a ULAs at both sides, it? is well known that ãpm{M̃ q “ M̃ f̃m and api{M q “ M fi , where fi is the ith column of F and f̃m is the mth column of F̃. To investigate the sparseness of the channel in the angledelay domain, the virtual representation comes handy, where paths are binned together. Although the virtual channel model provides M M̃ W many bins, and hence M M̃ W resolvable  ~  0.5  1/ M  −0.5  AoD  0.5  AoA  AoA  AoA  1/ M  AoD  AoD  b)  c)  a)  Consider S BSs (sectors), where each has g antennas, serving K single-antenna UEs,8 we assume that BSs only share the transmitted data and form beamformers individually, which alleviates the burden of instantaneous CSI exchange. Let’s first investigate the phase of uplink training and channel estimation. Consider a general random pilot reuse scheme, where K UEs are randomly partitioned into τ groups and UEs in the same group share the common pilot sequence. The received g ˆ τ training matrix at the BSs is Ysul “  Fig. 5. a) An idealized sparsity pattern for AoA and AoD domain [6] b) AoA sparsity with eigen beam c) AoA sparsity with omni-directional beam  paths, in reality not necessarily all of these bins have significant paths. The sparsity of a channel can be measured by the number of bins such that |Ȟk pi, m, `q| ą  for some  ą 0. In Fig. 5, we see a sparsity pattern in angle domain. In each bin, the dots show different paths come within the specific angular bin but possibly with different delays. The bins with no paths represent the bins who virtual channels absolute value is below the threshold, ie. |Ȟk pi, m, `q| ă . Next, we show how the effective sparsity of the channel is effected by the beam selection at the user side. Let b be the user beam of size M̃ ˆ 1 and unit norm, then the M ˆ M̃ physical channel Ȟk pf q effectively becomes an M ˆ 1 vector ∆ channel ȟk pf ; bq “ Ȟk pf qb. Assuming UL, we investigate the dependency of sparsity in AoA domain to the user beam b: Consider two different extreme cases: ‚  ‚  ?  τ ρp  K ÿ  ul gs,k ϕH Gpkq ` W̄s ,  k“1  where gs,k „ λ̄s,k Cp0, Igˆg q is the g-by-1 transfer channel between BSs and UEk , Gpkq P r1, 2, ..., τ s denotes the group index of UEk . rϕi sτi“1 are orthogonal pilot codes and }ϕi } “ 1, @i. Entries of W̄sul P Cgˆτ are IID zero-mean unit-variance complex Gaussian variables. Multiplicative scalars τ and ρp indicate processing gain and uplink SNR, respectively. BSs projects its received training matrix on different pilot codes and obtains observations from different pilot codes as ÿ ? ul ul 4 gs,k ` w̄l,s , @l, ȳl,s “ Ysul ϕl “ τ ρp Gpkq“l  ul where w̄l,s “ W̄sul ϕl „ Cp0, Igˆg q is the effective noise vector. With the IID channel assumption, we obtain the minimum mean square error (MMSE) channel estimation, its second moment and the variance of MMSE estimation error, respectively: ? τ ρp λ̄s,k γs,k Eigen beam:řb “ f̃m ř ř ĝ “ ȳul “? ȳul , ` s,k L M i ´j2π W f , ȟk pf ; bq “ i“1 ap M q `“1 Ȟk pi, m, `qe τ ρp Gpuq“Gpkq λ̄s,u ` 1 Gpkq,s τ ρp λ̄s,k Gpkq,s (28) řM̃ Omni-directional beam: b “ ?1 f̃ 2 m 2 m“1 τ ρp λ̄s,k 4 Er|ĝs,k | s M̃ ř “ , γs,k “ řM řM̃ řL ` i ´j2π W f g τ ρp Gpuq“Gpkq λ̄s,u ` 1 ȟk pf ; bq “ i“1 ap M q m“1 `“1 Ȟk pi, m, `qe .  It is possible to see that in case of an eigen beam, in the AoA domain, bins are filled up with paths that fall into the mth bin in AoD. On the other hand, in case of omni-directional beam, AoA bins are filled up with paths that are coming from any angle in AoD. See Fig. 5 b) and c) for the sparsity comparison of these two cases. Vector channel is more sparse in AoA domain when eigen beam is used, compared to that of omnidirectional beam. One can also imagine other beam options which can be written as a weighted sum of DFT columns. Hence by using various beams for users, we can effectively, create different random sparsity columns in AoA.  ∆  2 δe,k,s “  Er}ês,k }2 s “ λ̄s,k ´ γs,k , g  2 where ês,k „ δe,k,s Cp0, Igˆg q is the estimation error vector. According to the principle of orthogonality, gs,k can be expressed as gs,k “ ĝs,k ` ês,k , while ĝs,k and ês,k are independent of each other. At the downlink transmission phase, the received signal rk at UEk is S S ? ÿ 12 H ? ÿ ÿ 12 H rk“ ρd ηs,k gs,k vs,k xk` ρd ηs,u gs,k vs,u xu`nk . s“1  A PPENDIX B R ATE D ERIVATION With the spatial filtering, we treat each sector as an individual virtual BS. Therefore, in this part we provide a general rate bound derivation for the multi-cell distributed MIMO. The resulting expressions provide the required ergodic-rate bounds for the single-cell sector-based schemes we consider in this paper, as a special case.  s“1 u‰k  (29) Since the received signal (29) is a combination of desired signal and interference plus noise, we can represent it as rk “ Dk xk ` zk ,  (30)  8 In our proposed system, after the phase of prebeamforming [12] channel dimension is reduced to the number of RF chains. Thus, the derivation in this part fits the scenario where UE is equipped with many antennas but a single RF chain.  where Dk “  ?  ρd  S ÿ  1  H 2 ηs,k gs,k vs,k ,  where ΠpBs,k q is a projection matrix denoting the null space of Bs,k . The mean of desired signal becomes  s“1  zk “  ?  ρd  ÿ  Ik,u xu ` nk ,  ErDk s “  ?  ρd  u‰k  Ik,u “  S ÿ  1 2  H ηs,u gs,k vs,u .  “  ?  ρd  s“1  Based on (30), we develop rate bound approximations to evaluate the system performance. By assuming UE only has the knowledge of channel statistics for decoding [15], [16] utilizes (31) for rate evaluation: ` |ErDk s|2 ˘ , (31) Rk “ log p1 ` SINRq “ log 1 ` varpDk q ` δz2k where ErDk s denotes the mean of desired signal, varpDk q is the variance of Dk , indicating the self-interference brought by unknowing of instantaneous CSI, and δz2k is the variance of inter-user interference plus noise. However, in a practical system with finite array size, the self-interference, dominating at high SNR regime, will make ergodic rate approximation by (31) too conservative. Therefore, in this paper, we focus on the following rate approximation [17]: R̄k “ logp1 `  Er|Dk |2 s 1 Er|Dk |2 sTd q ´ logp1 ` q, (32) δz2k Td δz2k  where Td is the coherence time. Later, we will develop expressions for the terms, including ErDk s, Er|Dk |2 s and δz2k ,which can be also used to compute the bound (31). In this paper, we consider the normalized zero-forcing beamforming (ZFBF) for downlink transmission, where }vs,u } “ 1, @s, u.9 An interesting observation of (28) is that estimated channels of different UEs from the same group align with the observation signal on the signal space. Therefore, ul τ spanprĝs,k sK k“1 q “ spanprȳl,s sl“1 q, @s, and we can directly perform ZFBF on the space spanned by training observations from different pilot codes. Without loss of generality, let’s stick with the beamforming vector vs,k formed by BSs to serve UEk . Assume that BSs uses observations from a subset of pilot codes, i.e., Ks whose cardinality is Ks “ |Ks | ď τ , to form zero-forcing precoder. Note that Ks contains pilot codes not only corresponding to served UEs of BSs but also those UEs, to whom BSs will null out leakage interference. Define matrix of interference channel ∆  ul Bs,k “ rȳlul1 ,s , ..., ȳlulKs ,s szȳl,s , s where Ks “ rli sK i“1 and l “ Gpkq P Ks . The beamforming vector vs,k becomes  vs,k “  ΠpBs,k qĝs,k , }ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }  ∆  ´1 H ΠpBs,k q “ Igˆg ´ Bs,k pBH Bs,k , s,k Bs,k q  “  ?  ρd  S ÿ s“1 S ÿ s“1 S ÿ  1  H 2 ηs,k Erpĝs,k ` êH s,k q 1 2 ηs,k ErEr  H ĝs,k ΠpBs,k qĝs,k |Bs,k ss }ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }  (33)  1 2 ηs,k ErEr}ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }|Bs,k ss.  (34)  s“1  In (33), since ês,k is independent of rĝs,k sK k“1 , we strike out the term related to it and apply the chain rule of expectation. Substitute (35) into (33), we obtain (34). H H ĝs,k ΠpBs,k qĝs,k “ ĝs,k ΠpBs,k qH ΠpBs,k qĝs,k  “ }ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }2 .  (35)  The singular value decomposition of Bs,k is Bs,k “ H Us,k Λs,k Vs,k , where Us,k P CgˆpKs ´1q is semi-unitary. We can represent ΠpBs,k q as H ΠpBs,k q “ Igˆg ´ Us,k UH s,k “ Ūs,k Ūs,k ,  (36)  where semi-unitary matrix Ūs,k P Cgˆpg´Ks `1q indicates the complement space of Us,k . Substituting (36) into (34), we first evaluate the inner conditional expectation ˇ Er}ΠpBs,k qĝs,k ||ˇBs,k s b H ΠpB “Er ĝs,k s,k qĝs,k |Bs,k s b H Ū H “Er ĝs,k s,k Ūs,k ĝs,k |Bs,k s b H g̃ “Er g̃s,k s,k |Bs,k s “Er}g̃s,k }|Bs,k s, 4  where we define g̃s,k “ ŪH s,k ĝs,k . Since ĝs,k is independent of Bs,k , g̃s,k follows γs,k Cp0, Ipg´Ks `1qˆpg´Ks `1q q for a given Bs,k . Therefore, the conditional expectation becomes the mean of a random variable with chi-distribution: Er}ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }|Bs,k s “  ?  γs,k  Γpg ´ Ks ` 32 q , Γpg ´ Ks ` 1q  (37)  Γp¨q is the Gamma function defined as Γptq “ şwhere 8 t´1 ´x x e dx. From (37), we can observe that the conditional 0 expectation is independent of realizations of Bs,k . Therefore, we obtain the mean of desired signal ErDk s “ “  ? ?  ρd ρd  S ÿ s“1 S ÿ  1  1  2 2 ηs,k γs,k  1  Γpg ´ Ks ` 32 q Γpg ´ Ks ` 1q  1  2 2 ηs,k γs,k Ωpg, Ks q,  s“1  9  [16] exhibits the derivations for the rate bound (31) with the normalized conjugate beamforming (CBF).  ΠpBs,k qĝs,k s }ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }  4  where we define function Ωpg, Ks q “  Γpg´Ks ` 32 q Γpg´Ks `1q .  For the second moment of desired signal, we have Er|Dk |2 s “ ρd Er|  S ÿ  1  H 2 ηs,k pĝs,k ` êH s,k q  s“1  “ ρd Er|  S ÿ  1 2 ηs,k p}ΠpBs,k qĝs,k } `  s“1 S ÿ  Combining (43) and (44), we develop the expression for the second moment of the useful signal  ΠpBs,k qĝs,k 2 | s }ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }  êH s,k ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }ΠpBs,k qĝs,k }  êH s,k ḡs,k 2 q| s “ ρd Er| ηs,k p}ḡs,k } ` }ḡs,k } s“1 “ ρd  1 2  1 2  ηj,k ηi,k Er}ḡj,k }}ḡi,k } `  j“1 i“1  ηs,k tEr}ḡs,k }2 s ` Er  s“1  H êH j,k ḡj,k ḡi,k êi,k  }ḡj,k }}ḡi,k }  s,  H ḡs,k ḡs,k ês,k êH su. s,k }ḡs,k } }ḡs,k }  To calculate the second term in (40), we substitute vs,k “ ḡs,k }ḡs,k } and get g H ÿ ḡs,k ḡs,k H ês,k ês,k s“ Er|vs,k pqq|2 ¨ |ês,k pqq|2 s Er }ḡs,k } }ḡj,k } q“1 2 Er|vs,k pqq|2 sEr|ês,k pqq|2 s “ σe,k,s ,  (42)  q“1  Er|Ik,u |2 s “ Er|  S ÿ  where vpqq indicates the q-th element of a vector v. Substituting (41) and (42) into (40), we obtain S ÿ  1  s“1  2 ηs,k ppg ´ Ks ` 1qγs,k ` σe,k,s q.  Therefore, we define RGpkq as the set of BSs that uses observations from Gpkq-th pilot code for zero-forcing, i.e., RGpkq “ ts|Gpkq P Ks u. Therefore, when Gpuq ‰ Gpkq, we have Er|Ik,u |2 s S ÿ 1 ΠpBs,u qĝs,u 2 2 ηs,u “Er| êH | ` s,k }ΠpBs,u qĝs,u } s“1 ÿ 1 ΠpBs,u qĝs,u 2 H 2 | ηs,u ĝs,k | s }ΠpBs,u qĝs,u } sRR Gpkq  S ÿ  S ÿ S ÿ  “ρd  1 2  Let us simplify the second term in (46):  ÿ “ ÿ “  S ÿ S ÿ  “ρd j“1 i‰j  1 2  1 2  1 2  sRRGpkq  1 2  1 2  ηj,k ηi,k γj,k γi,k Ωpg, Kj qΩpg, Ki q.  ÿ “ “ sRRGpkq  1  H 2 2 ηj,u ηi,u Erĝj,k  H ḡj,u ḡi,u ĝi,k s }ḡj,u } }ḡi,u }  H ḡs,u ḡs,u H ĝs,k ĝs,k s }ḡs,u } }ḡs,u }  ηs,u Er  H ḡs,u ḡs,u H Erĝs,k ĝs,k |ḡs,u s s }ḡs,u } }ḡs,u }  ηs,u γs,k Er  sRRGpkq  ÿ (44)  ΠpBs,u qĝs,u 2 | s }ΠpBs,u qĝs,u }  ηs,u Er  sRRGpkq  1 2  1 2  1  ÿ  jRRGpkq iRRGpkq  1 2  1 2  1  H 2 ηs,u ĝs,k  Er|  “  Γpg ´ Kj ` 23 q Γpg ´ Ki ` 32 q “ρd ηj,k ηi,k γj,k γi,k Γpg ´ Kj ` 1q Γpg ´ Ki ` 1q j“1 i‰j 1 2  ΠpBs,u qĝs,u 2 | s. }ΠpBs,u qĝs,u } (46)  sRRGpkq  ηj,k ηi,k Er}ḡj,k }sEr}ḡi,k }s  1  H 2 ĝs,k ηs,u  sRRGpkq  ÿ  j“1 i‰j S ÿ S ÿ  ÿ  2 ηs,u σe,k,s ` Er|  “  ÿ  H êH j,k ḡj,k ḡi,k êi,k ρd ηj,k ηi,k Er}ḡj,k }}ḡi,k || ` s }ḡj,k }}ḡi,k } j“1 i‰j  ΠpBs,u qĝs,u 2 | s, }ΠpBs,u qĝs,u }  H ĝs,k ΠpBs,u qĝs,u “ 0.  (43)  Consider terms where i ‰ j in (39), we have 1 2  (45)  where δ 2 is the variance of noise. For Er|Ik,u |2 s, let’s first consider cases when Gpuq ‰ Gpkq and Gpuq P Ks . Thus, ĝs,k and vs,u are orthogonal to each other:  s“1  S ÿ S ÿ  1  H 2 pĝs,k ` êH ηs,u s,k q  s“1  ρd  1  Now let’s consider interference terms. We need to find ÿ σz2k “ ρd Er|Ik,u |2 s ` δ 2 ,  (40)  Er}ḡs,k }2 s “ ErEr}ḡs,k }2 |Bs,k ss “ pg ´ Ks ` 1qγs,k . (41)  “  1  1  2 2 2 2 ηi,k γj,k γi,k Ωpg, Kj qΩpg, Ki qs. ηj,k  u‰k  H Given Bs,k , ḡs,k“Ūs,k ŪH s,k ĝs,k following γs,k Cp0, Ūs,k Ūs,k q. Therefore, we have  g ÿ  S ÿ S ÿ  (38)  where we define the unnormalized beamforming vector 4 ḡs,k “ ΠpBs,k qĝs,k to obtain (38). From (38) to (39), we strike out cross terms with mean zero. Then, consider terms where i “ j in (39), we have S ÿ  2 ηs,k ppg ´ Ks ` 1qγs,k ` σe,k,s q`  j“1 i‰j  (39)  ρd  S ÿ  s“1  q|2 s  1 2  S ÿ S ÿ  Er|Dk |2 s “ ρd r  ηs,u γs,k .  H ḡs,u ḡs,u s }ḡs,u } }ḡs,u }  (47)  S ř  ρd |  1  s“1  SINRk,ZF BF,p32q “ 2  δ ` ρd  1  2 2 ηs,k γs,k Ωpg, Ks q|2 ` ρd  ř  γs,k ` ρd  ř  r  S ř  S ř  ηs,k γs,k pg ´ Ks ` 1 ´ Ω2 pg, Ks qq ` ρd  s“1  s“1  2 ηs,k σe,k,s  .  2 ηs,u σe,k,s `  u‰k s“1  sRRGpkq  ρd  S ř ř  S ř  ηs,u pg ´ Ks ` 1 ´ Ω2 pg, Ks qqγs,k s ` ρd  u‰k,Gpuq“Gpkq s“1  ř  |  S ř  u‰k,Gpuq“Gpkq s“1  1  1  2 2 γs,k Ωpg, Ks q|2 ηs,u  (50) ρd |  S ř s“1  SINRk,ZF BF,p32q,asy. “ ř  δ 2 ` ρd  S ř  γs,k ` ρd  s“1  sRRGpkq  1 2  S ÿ  ÿ  2 ηs,u σe,k,s `  s“1  2 σe,k,s ` ρd  S ÿ  ηs,u γs,k .  (48)  sRRGpkq  2 ηs,u ppg ´ Ks ` 1qγs,k ` σe,k,s q  s“1 S ÿ S ÿ  1  1  1  1  2 2 2 2 ηi,u γj,k γi,k Ωpg, Kj qΩpg, Ki q. (49) ηj,u  ` j“1 i‰j  To achieve (49) follows similar procedure to get (45). Combining (49) and (48), we can get the expression for the variance of interference plus noise: σz2k “ ρd  S ÿ ÿ  2 ηs,u σe,k,s ` ρd  u‰k s“1  ρd  ÿ  ÿ  ηs,u γs,k `  Gpuq‰Gpkq sRRGpkq S ÿ  ÿ  ηs,u pg ´ Ks ` 1qγs,k `  r u‰k,Gpuq“Gpkq s“1  S ÿ S ÿ  1  1  1  1  2 2 2 2 ηi,u γj,k γi,k Ωpg, Kj qΩpg, Ki qs ` δ 2 . ηj,u  j“1 i‰j  The final SINR expression of (32) is exhibited in (50)10 . To investigate asymptotic analysis at the massive MIMO regime, we introduce a scalar factor n for a set of parameters g, rKs s and rηs,k s. Therefore, the number of BS antennas is ng, the number of used pilot codes by BSs is nKs , and the power η coefficients are reduced by a factor of n, i.e., r s,k n s. Therefore, let n go to infinity, we can obtain the asymptotic result of (50) as (51) shows by utilizing the following property of Gamma function lim  nÑ8  ř  ˇ2 ˇ |  S ř  u‰k,Gpuq“Gpkq s“1  1 ? 1 2 2 ηs,u g ´ Ks γs,k |2  .  (51)  A PPENDIX C Rflat APPROXIMATION k  Then, let’s consider the case when Gpuq “ Gpkq: Er|Ik,u |2 s “  1 2  ηs,k g ´ Ks γs,k  Substituting (47) back to (46), we can get Er|Ik,u |2 s “  ?  Γpn ` αq “ 1. Γpnqnα  10 Note that for (32), we can obtain its close-form expression for arbitrary settings of Td by substituting expressions of Er|Dk |2 s and δz2k . In Sec. V, we assume Td is infinite for simplicity, so that we can strike out its second term and directly use (50) for evaluation  In this part, we aim to justify the assumption of IID channels within each sector in (23). IID channel assumption in each sector actually results in a piece-wise flat covariance matrix, Rflat k . Justification of this assumption will be done by rate performance comparisons between covariance matrices created by 3GPP [18] model and piece-wise flat covariance matrix. Covariance matrices of 3GPP models with finite length ULA, R3GPP ’s, are not necessarily circulant. We first k define ` a circulant˘ approximation as follows: Rk “ Fdiag eigpR3GPP q FH , where eigp¨q returns a vector conk sisting of all the eigen values. The piece-wise flat approximation of Rk is given by Rflat “ k H F , where FΛflat k ` ˘ 3GPP H Λflat “ diag λ̄3GPP 1H k 1,k g , . . . , λ̄S,k 1g , where 1g is an all-ones vector of size g ˆ 1 and λ̄3GPP ’s are s,k obtained according to (3) from the eigenvalues of R3GPP . k In this comparison, we assume ideal CSI is available for all users. As we want this comparison to be general, not specific to our scheme, we also do not use spatial filters at the receiver. We consider both ZFBF and CBF. All L users are given equal power, that is, power ρd {L. Focusing on a single fading block f , the received signal at user k P t1, . . . , Lu is given by (4), where xT pf q is the precoded vector signal of size 1 ˆ M transmitted by the BS xT pf q “ uT pf qV, “ ‰ where uT “ u1 u2 . . . uL is the information bearing signal with uk „ CN p0, 1q, and “ ‰ Vpf q “ v1 pf q v2 pf q . . . vL pf q denotes the L ˆ M precoder at fading block f . For ZFBF, vk pf q is in the direction of the unit-norm vector that is zero-forced to all other user channel estimates. For CBF, vk pf q is in the direction of the unit norm vector which is given by normalizing the conjugate of the user’s channel estimate.  ZFBF  CBF  80 60 40 20 0 −10  R EFERENCES  40 Ergodic sum rate [bit/s/Hz]  Ergodic sum rate [bit/s/Hz]  100  R3GPP R R fl a t 0  10 SNR [dB]  20  35 30 25 20 15 −10  30  R3GPP R R fl a t 0  10 SNR [dB]  20  30  Fig. 6. Ergodic sum rate vs. SNR: for rRflat s, we have S “ 10, and g “ M “ 40 S CBF  ZFBF 6.5  16  6  12  R̄ k [bit /s /Hz ]  R̄ k [bit /s /Hz ]  14  10 8 6  5 4.5 4 3.5  R3GPP R R fl a t  4 2 −10  5.5  0  10  SNR [dB]  20  R3GPP R R fl a t  3 30  2.5 −10  0  10 SNR [dB]  20  30  Fig. 7. Ergodic rate of individual UE vs. SNR: for rRflat s, we have S “ 10, “ 40 and g “ M S  Also }vk pf q}2 “ 1{L. We can re-write the received signal as a summation of signal and interference-noise as follows: ? ? ÿ rk “ ρd hk pf qH vk pf quk ` ρd hk pf qH vk1 pf quk1 ` nk . k1 ‰k  The ergodic rate of user k is given by « ff 2 ρd |hH k pf qvk pf q| R̄k “ E log p1 ` ř q , 2 1 ρd k1 ‰k |hH k pf qvk pf q| ` 1  (52)  where the expectation is to average out the randomness of hk pf q. In this section Monte Carlo simulations are used to evaluate (52) in Fig. 6, 7. Consider a single cell with M “ 400 and M̃ “ 1, we generate synthetic channel profiles for 3 UEs with line-ofsight (LOS) and 3 UEs without LOS, respectively. The large scale loss (pathloss plus shadowing) is neglected through simulations, so that we can better investigate the impact of channel covariance approximation. Simulating rhk s by original channel covariance rR3GPP s,11 circulant approximation rRk s, k and piecewise constant approximation rRflat k s, respectively, we make comparisons over ergodic rates for both ZFBF and CBF as Fig. 6, 7 show. Fig. 6 exhibits comparisons of ergodic sum rates of 6 UEs, while Fig. 7 shows the individual rate of one of UEs. For ZFBF, we can observe that in both figures the piecewise constant approximation is consistent with the original channel covariance in the sense of ergodic rate. Nevertheless, CBF is more sensitive to the piecewise constant approximation, since it may span the angular spectrum of interference signal and exaggerate its impact. 11 Details  of channel covariance extraction can be found in [12].  [1] T. L. Marzetta, “How much training is required for multiuser MIMO?” in Proc. of the Fortieth Asilomar Conf. on Signals, Systems and Computers, Nov. 2006. [2] ——, “Noncooperative cellular wireless with unlimited numbers of base station antennas,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 3590 –3600, Nov. 2010. [3] G. Caire, N. Jindal, M. Kobayashi, and N. Ravindran, “Multiuser MIMO achievable rates with downlink training and channel state feedback,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2845–2866, Jun. 2010. [4] L. Zheng and D. N. C. Tse, “Communication on the Grassmann Manifold: A geometric approach to the noncoherent multiple-antenna channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 359–383, 2002. [5] R. Rogalin, O. Y. Bursalioglu, H. Papadopoulos, G. Caire, A. F. Molisch, A. Michaloliakos, V. Balan, and K. Psounis, “Scalable synchronization and reciprocity calibration for distributed multiuser MIMO,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 14, Apr. 2014. [6] W. U. Bajwa, J. Haupt, A. M. Sayeed, and R. Nowak, “Compressed channel sensing: A new approach to estimating sparse multipath channels,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 98, no. 6, pp. 1058–1076, June 2010. [7] W. C. Ao, C. Wang, O. Y. Bursalioglu, and H. Papadopoulos, “Compressed sensing-based pilot assignment and reuse for mobile UEs in mmWave cellular systems,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun., May 2016. [8] M. K. Samimi and T. S. Rapport, “3-D statistical channel model for millimeter-wave outdoor mobile broadband communications,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun., June 2015. [9] K. Taejon and D. J. Love, “Virtual AoA and AoD estimation for sparse mmwave MIMO channels,” in IEEE Int. Works. on SPAWC, June 2015. [10] O. Y. Bursalioglu, C. Wang, H. Papadopoulos, and C. Caire, “RRH based massive MIMO with “on the fly” pilot contamination control,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun., May 2016. [11] J. Nam, A. Adhikary, J. Y. Ahn, and G. Caire, “Joint spatial division and multiplexing: Opportunistic beamforming, user grouping and simplified downlink scheduling,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Proc., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 876–890, Oct. 2014. [12] A. Adhikary, E. Al Safadi, M. K. Samimi, R. Wang, G. Caire, T. S. Rappaport, and A. F. Molisch, “Joint spatial division and multiplexing for mm-wave channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1239–1255, June 2014. [13] A. M. Sayeed, “Deconstructing multiantenna fading channels,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Proc., vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2563–2579, Oct. 2002. [14] O. Y. Bursalioglu, C. Wang, H. Papadopoulos, and C. Caire, “A novel alternative to cloud RAN for throughput densification: Coded pilots and fast user-packet scheduling at remote radio heads,” in Proc. of the Fiftieth Asilomar Conf. on Signals, Systems and Computers, Nov. 2016. [15] B. Hassibi and B. M. Hochwald, “How much training is needed in multiple-antenna wireless links?” IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 951–963, 2003. [16] G. Interdonato, H. Ngo, E. Larsson, and P. Frenger, “On the performance of cell-free massive mimo with short-term power constraints,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.05121, 2016. [17] E. Biglieri, J. Proakis, and S. Shamai, “Fading channels: informationtheoretic and communications aspects,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 2619–2692, 2002. [18] 3GPP TR 36.873 V12.2.0, “Study on 3D channel model for LTE”, Jun. 2015.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
