Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_313

Abstract:
Causal inference for interfering units with cluster and population level treatment allocation programs  arXiv:1711.01280v1 [stat.ME] 3 Nov 2017  Georgia Papadogeorgou, Fabrizia Mealli, Corwin Zigler  Abstract Interference arises when an individual’s potential outcome depends on the individual treatment level, but also on the treatment level of others. A common assumption in the causal inference literature in the presence of interference is partial interference, implying that the population can be partitioned in clusters of individuals whose potential outcomes only depend on the treatment of units within the same cluster. Previous literature has defined average potential outcomes under counterfactual scenarios where treatments are randomly allocated to units within a cluster. However, within clusters there may be units that are more or less likely to receive treatment based on covariates or neighbors’ treatment. We define estimands that describe average potential outcomes for realistic counterfactual treatment allocation programs taking into consideration the units’ covariates, as well as dependence between units’ treatment assignment. We discuss these estimands, propose unbiased estimators and derive asymptotic results as the number of clusters grows. Finally, we estimate effects in a comparative effectiveness study of power plant emission reduction technologies on ambient ozone pollution.  keywords: interference, causal inference, air pollution  1  Introduction Most causal inference literature assumes that a unit’s potential outcome depends solely  on its treatment, and does not depend on the treatments of other units in the population. However, this assumption is often not reasonable. Perhaps the most classical example arises in vaccination studies (Ali et al., 2005; Hudgens and Halloran, 2008) where a unit’s disease status depends on their own vaccination status but also on the vaccination status of others in their social network. The presence of interference can lead to misleading results for familiar causal estimands (Sobel, 2006), or estimands that lack clear causal interpretation (Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele, 2012), but can also introduce new estimands of intrinsic scientific interest. Sobel (2006) defined estimands for interference when the population can be partitioned into clusters for which a unit’s potential outcomes depend only on the treatment of units within the same cluster. Such assumption is called partial interference, and the interference clusters are also called interference groups. Hudgens and Halloran (2008) formalized causal inference in the presence of interference in the context of two-stage randomization designs, which was extended to observational studies by Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2012); Perez-Heydrich et al. (2015). In order to continue development in the context of observational studies, we highlight a key distinction that arises when formulating average potential outcomes in the presence of interference, which generally requires consideration of vectors of treatment assignments. We use the term treatment allocation strategy to refer to a process giving rise to either observed or hypothesized vectors of treatment assignments. The observed treatment allocation strategy refers to that which gives rise to observed treatments. The counterfactual treatment allocation strategy refers to how treatments may have been assigned in some hypothesized counterfactual world for which causal contrasts can be considered. This distinction between observed and counterfactual treatment allocation programs helps illuminate that existing causal estimands, such as those in Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2012), are limited to counterfactual treatment allocation programs that remain agnostic with regard to covariate information (as would be the case in a two-stage randomized study). These estimands ignore the possible role of unit-level covariates that relate to treatment adoption, implicitly assuming an intervention manipulating each individual unit’s treatment propensity. Consequently, these estimands pertain to counterfactual worlds where, for example, treatments are allocated to units according to a Bernoulli distribution with equal probability for each unit within a cluster. In many settings, however, treatment allocations corresponding to unit-level manip-  1  ulation are difficult to conceive. For example, policy interventions may be designed to increase the prevalence of a treatment without direct control over the individual treatment propensity. In such settings, individual treatment adoption might generally depend on unit-level covariates or the treatment status of neighboring units. To address such settings, we develop new causal estimands anchored to counterfactual treatment allocations that are conceived at the cluster level, where a particular allocation strategy dictates the cluster-average propensity of receiving treatment without directly specifying individuallevel treatment propensities. Specifically, under the assumption of partial interference, we introduce estimands for counterfactual treatment allocation programs which 1) do not assume unit-level manipulation of treatment propensities; 2) but allow for correlation of treatment assignment within a cluster; and 3) unit-level propensity of treatment that depends on individual and group level covariates. Note that, in focusing on new estimands for covariate-dependent counterfactual treatment allocations programs, our work has commonalities with independent ongoing work in Barkley and Hudgens (2017). Causal inference may also be motivated to investigate interventions on the distribution of cluster-average treatment propensities. Such may be the case when evaluating policies that are not designed to manipulate individual or cluster-average treatment propensity, but rather change the distribution of cluster-average propensities of receiving treatment by, for example, providing a population-wide incentive to adopt treatment. Accordingly, we also define estimands for counterfactual treatment allocation strategies defined at the population level that shift the distribution of the cluster-average propensity of receiving the treatment, without specifying the average treatment propensity of any specific cluster. Definition of the new causal estimands described above is accompanied here by new estimators and derivation of corresponding asymptotic properties as the number of clusters grows. Related work can be found in Ferracci et al. (2012). Other relevant work includes Liu and Hudgens (2014) where asymptotic results are derived for growing number of clusters or number of individuals within clusters, Perez-Heydrich et al. (2015) where large sample variance estimators for the estimator of Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2012) are derived, and Liu et al. (2016), where estimands and estimators are extended to the case of a network where partial interference does not hold, but asymptotic results are derived under the assumption of partial interference. The motivating context for this work is the evaluation of interventions to limit harmful pollution from power plants that are geographically clustered. The movement of air pollution through space leads to interference: intervening on one power plant can affect the air pollution surrounding nearby power plants. Existing estimands such as those in Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2012) represent quantities for counterfactual 2  treatment allocations in two steps where 1) a constant treatment probability governs the proportion of power plants that would be “treated” within a cluster, and 2) based on that probability, power plants within the cluster are randomly and independently assigned the treatment. However, this structure does not cohere to that of air pollution regulations, where, in reality, the adoption of treatments at power plants is not directly mandated and is heavily influenced by power-plant characteristics (e.g., the size or operating capacity of the plant). Instead, regulatory programs often work by incentivizing regions of power plants to adopt certain technologies (e.g., by changing the penalties for overemission), but which power plants actually adopt them is highly dependent on covariates and may be spatially correlated. Thus, new estimands for counterfactual treatment allocations where individual-level treatment adoption depends on covariates - subject to a cluster average treatment propensity - coheres more closely to the realities of air pollution regulations. Additionally, estimands at the population level of clusters could refer to counterfactual situations where some higher level of government (e.g., federal) issues additional incentives for power plants to install the technologies, but cannot mandate installation, and different regions can comply to different degrees. The new estimators are deployed here to an analysis of U.S. power plants investigating the comparative effectiveness of Selective Catalytic or non-Catalyitic Reduction systems (relative to other strategies) for reducing ambient ozone pollution. A preliminary investigation of these same data in Papadogeorgou et al. (2017) ignored interference and indicated that these systems causally reduced NOx emissions (an important precursor to ozone pollution) but did not lead to a reduction in ambient ozone. The analysis here to address the possibility of interference produces meaningfully different results that are more consistent with the literature relating NOx emissions to ambient ozone pollution. Note that, despite the focus on air pollution interventions, similar considerations could be construed in more classical interference settings such as vaccine studies, where certain types of community members might be more likely to receive the vaccine and vaccine programs may be designed to increase vaccine coverage at the community, or national level. In §2 we introduce the notation and the new estimands for the cluster-level intervention, for which estimators are presented in §3, along with unbiasedness, consistency and asymptotic distribution results for an increasing number of clusters. In §4, the estimand for interventions at the population of clusters level is introduced. The rest of the paper presents some simulations in §5, our data application in §6 and concludes with some discussion on the limitations and future directions of this paper in §7.  3  2  Estimands under partial interference We adopt the notation used in Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2012). Let N  be the number of clusters, and ni the number of units in cluster i, i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }. Furthermore, denote Ai = (Ai1 , Ai2 , . . . , Aini ) ∈ A(ni ) to be the cluster treatment vector, and Ai,−j = (Ai1 , Ai2 , . . . , Aij−1 , Aij+1 , . . . , Aini ) ∈ A(ni − 1) to be the treatment of all units in cluster i apart from unit j, where A(n) = {0, 1}n . Furthermore, let Lij be a vector of individual and cluster-level covariates, and Li = (Li1 , Li2 , . . . , Lini ) be the collection of coviarates within a cluster including and excluding the covariates of unit j. Under the assumption of partial interference, the potential outcome of unit j in cluster i may depend on the treatment of units in cluster i, but not on the treatment of units in different clusters. For every i we postulate the existence of group i’s potential outcomes Yi (·) = {Yi (ai ), ai ∈ Ai }, where Yi (ai ) = (Yi1 (ai ), Yi2 (ai ), . . . , Yini (ai )). 2.1  Average potential outcome  Under the assumption of partial interference, we  define the individual average potential outcome for a counterfactual treatment allocation strategy with two features: 1) treatment assignment for units within a cluster is unlikely to be independent, and 2) individual covariates can be predictive of a unit’s treatment probability. Let Pα,L represent the (arbitrarily specified) counterfactual treatment allocation program, specified specifically to depend on covariates and/or allow correlated assignments within clusters. Pα,L is governed by parameters α, which represent features of the counterfactual treatment allocation program of interest. For the purpose of this paper, we consider α to represent the cluster-average propensity of treatment. The individual average potential outcome is defined as: X L Y ij (a; α) = Yij (Aij = a, Ai,−j = s)Pα,L (Ai,−j = s|Aij = a, Li ),  (2.1)  s∈A(ni −1)  and represents the expected outcome for unit j in cluster i in the counterfactual world where treatment is assigned with respect to Pα,L , but the treatment of unit j is fixed to a. This estimand is well-defined for any fixed choice of Pα,L . Based on the individual average potential outcome, group and population average potential outcomes are defined as  ni 1 X L Y (a; α), ni j=1 ij  (2.2)  N 1 X L Y (a; α) = Y (a; α). N i=1 i  (2.3)  L  Y i (a; α) = L  2.2  The counterfactual treatment allocation in existing literature  As men-  tioned previously, Pα,L can be arbitrarily chosen and represents the process with which 4  treatment is assigned in the counterfactual world, driving the interpretation of all estimands. The above development has left unspecified the term Pα,L in (2.1) providing relative weights to different cluster treatment vectors in the individual average potential outcomes. The estimands in Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2012) and PerezHeydrich et al. (2015) correspond to counterfactual treatment strategies Pα,L (ai |Li ) = ni Y π(ai ; α) = αaij (1 − α)1−aij , giving equal probability to all cluster-treatment vectors j=1  with the same number of treated units, irrespective of which those units are. For this choice of Pα,L the estimands represent quantities in counterfactual worlds where individual treatment probability can be manipulated and units are assigned to treatment independently and with equal probability α. 2.3  Realistic counterfactual treatment allocation program  However, in some  situations, counterfactual treatment allocations can only be realistically conceived if allowed to depend on covariates or if they incorporate correlation between treatment of units in the same cluster. In the study of power plant interventions on ambient air quality, the decision of whether to “treat” a power plant is at the discretion of the power company and heavily influenced by power plant covariates. Therefore, a hypothesized counterfactual treatment allocation is realistic only when such covariates are incorporated. As an example, consider the power-plant level covariate ‘heat input’, a proxy for the size of the power plant, and let Lij be the heat input of power plant j in cluster i. Then, one specification of a counterfactual treatment allocation strategy that would acknowledge that different-sized power plants are more or less likely to adopt treatment is: logitPα,L (Aij = 1|Lij ) = ξiα + δL Lij , for some fixed, pre-specified value of δL , and ξiα such that ni 1 X expit (ξiα + δL Lij ) = α. ni j=1  The value δL here could be specified according to knowledge of how the size of the power plant is expected to impact the propensity to adopt treatment. Based on this specification of Pα,L , the estimands of interest correspond to quantities in a hypothesized world where treatment is assigned independently across units with treatment propensity that depends on Lij , but is on average equal to α. A data-driven way to choose Pα,L is presented in §6. Alternatively, a counterfactual treatment allocation strategy can also be defined to incorporate dependence of treatments in the same cluster. For example, consider logitPα,L (Aij = 1|Lij ) = ξiα + δL Lij + γij , 5  where γij is a mean 0 spatial random effect with fixed correlation matrix decaying with distance. This choice of Pα,L corresponds to a counterfactual treatment allocation program that depends on covariates and incorporates dependent treatment assignment of units within a cluster. 2.4  Direct and indirect effects  Different contrasts of average potential outcomes  can be considered to characterize how treatment affects the outcome of interest. For counterfactual allocation strategy Pα,L , direct effects represent contrasts in average potential outcomes when only the individual treatment changes. On the other hand, indirect effects contrast average potential outcomes for a fixed level of individual treatment, but different specification of the parameter α governing the counterfactual allocation program. For that reason, indirect effects represent expected changes in potetntial outcomes for changes only in the “treatment of neighbors”, and they can be thought of as a measure of interference. Indirect effects are also known in the literature as spillover effects. Based on the individual, group and population average potential outcomes, one can define the individual, group and population direct effects as L  L  DEijL (α) =Y ij (1; α) − Y ij (0; α),  DEiL (α)  =Y  L i (1, α)  −Y  L i (0; α)  ni 1 X = DEijL (α) ni j=1  N 1 X DE (α) =Y (1, α) − Y (0; α) = DEiL (α) N i=1 L  L  L  accordingly. Similarly, the individual indirect effect is defined as L  L  IEijL (α1 , α2 ) = Y ij (0, α2 ) − Y ij (0, α1 ), based on which group and population indirect effects can be defined. Contrasts other than the difference can also be considered. Based on these estimands, total effects can be defined as the sum of direct and indirect effects (Hudgens and Halloran, 2008), while similar development can lead to the definition of overall effects. 3  Estimating the population average potential outcome For a fixed choice of Pα,L , we provide estimators of the population average poten-  tial outcome in (2.3), unbiasedness and consistency results, and derive the estimator’s asymptotic distribution when the number of clusters increases to infinity, for a known or correctly specified parametric cluster-propensity score model (defined below). Based on 6  these, estimators and asymptotic distributions for the estimands in §2.4 can be acquired as demonstrated in Example A.1. Proofs are in Appendix A. We start by making the sample cluster-level positivity, and ignorability assumptions: Assumption 1. Positivity. For i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, the probability of observing cluster treatment vector ai given cluster covariates Li is denoted by fA|L,i (Ai = ai |Li ) and is positive for all ai ∈ A(ni ). fA|L,i is the cluster-propensity score. Assumption 2. Ignorabililty. For i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, the observed cluster treatment Ai is conditionally independent of the set of cluster potential outcomes Yi (·) given the covariates Li , denoted as Ai q Yi (·)|Li . 3.1 Let  Estimators of the group and population average potential outcome ni 1 X Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) L b Yi (a; α) = I(Aij = a)Yij ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  (3.1)  N 1 X bL Yb L (a; α) = Y (a; α) N i=1 i  (3.2)  where fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) is the cluster-level propensity score for the observed treatment, and Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) is the probability of the observed treatment on units other than j given Aij = a, under the counterfactual treatment allocation program. Assuming that the group level propensity score fA|L,i (·|Li ) is known, and AssumpL L tions 1, 2 hold, then Yb L (a; α), Yb L (a; α) are unbiased for Y (a, α), Y (a, α) accordingly. i  i  Unbiasedness is derived for a fixed set of clusters with respect to the distribution of the observed treatment assignment. (Proof in Appendix A.) The population average potential outcome (2.3) is defined as the average of the group average potential outcomes. Alternative definitions could weigh each cluster by cluster sample size (which is what the population average potential outcome of Liu et al. (2016) simplify to under the assumption of partial interference). In Appendix C, we discuss this distinction and provide an argument why an equal-weight estimand and the corresponding estimator (3.2) might be preferable. 3.2  Asymptotic results for Yb L (a; α) for known propensity score  We derive  the asymptotic properties of the estimator in (3.2) for an increasing number of clusters  T N , denoted by Yb L (a; α). Let Yb L (α) = Yb L (0; α), Yb L (1; α) . N  N  N  N  Assume that the N clusters are a sample of an infinite superpopulation of clusters from which they are sampled randomly. Therefore (Yi (·), Ai , Li ) are now independent and identically distributed random vectors, whose distribution is denoted as F0 . (For 7  notational simplicity, ni is included in Li .) The sample positivity and ignorability assumptions are translated to their super-population counterparts. Assumption 3. Super-population positivity. There exists ∃ρ > 0 such that fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) > ρ with probability 1. Assumption 4. Super-population ignorability. For F0 , Ai q Yi (·)|Li . h L i a 1 T 0 Theorem 1. Let µ0 = (µ0 , µ0 ) where µ0 = EF0 Y i (a; α) . Under Assumptions 3, 4, for known propensity score, and bounded outcome (there exists M > 0 : |Yij | < M with probability 1), Yb L (α) is  consistent for µ0 and asymptotically normal with limiting √  LN d distribution N YbN (α) − µ0 → N (0, V (µ0 )), where   V (µ0 ) = EF0 ψ(yi , li , ai ; µ0 )ψ(yi , li , ai ; µ0 )T ,  T ψ(yi , li , ai ; µ0 ) = ψ0,α yi , li , ai ; µ00 , ψ1,α yi , li , ai ; µ10  ψa,α (yi , li , ai ; µa0 ) =  ni 1 X Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) I(Aij = a)Yij − µa0 . ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  The above theorem leads to the approximation YbNL (α)  approx  ∼   M V N2 µ0 , N −1 V (µ0 )  for large numberh of clusters. Even ifiassumptions about F0 are made, the elements of T V (µ0 ) = CovF0 Y i (0, α), Y i (1, α) (proof in Appendix B) are often hard to calculate analytically. Instead, the asymptotic variance of Yb L (α) can be estimated using the N  empirical expectation N  1 X b ψ(Yi , Li , Ai ; µ)ψ(Yi , Li , Ai ; µ)T , V (µ) = N i=1  evaluated  at µ =  YbNL (α). Under regularity conditions, discussed in Iverson and Randles (1989), Vb Yb L (α) will be consistent for V (µ0 ). Using Theorem 1 one can acquire the N  asymptotic distribution of a contrast between Yb L (0; α), Yb L (1; α) specifying a direct effect, by an application of the multivariate delta method, as shown in Example A.1. 3.3  Asymptotic results for Yb L (a; α) for estimated propensity score from a  correctly-specified parametric model  However, most of the times the propensity  score is not known, and has to be estimated using the observed data. In the next theorem, we provide the asymptotic distribution of Yb L (α) when the propensity score is estimated N  using a correctly specified parametric propensity score model. In this case, the clusterpropensity score for the observed treatment vector will be denoted by fA|L,i (Ai |Li ; γ) where γ are the model parameters. 8  Theorem 2. Assume that assumptions 3, 4 hold, the outcome is bounded with probability 1 (as in Theorem 1) and the parametric form of the propensity score model indexed by γ, fA|L,i (ai |li ; γ), is correctly specified and differentiable with respect to γ. Let µ0 be as in b of the propensity score Theorem 1, and YbNL (a, α) calculated using consistent estimates γ ∂ ∂γ T  fA|L,i . Let ψ γ (li , ai ; γ) =  log f (ai |li ; γ) be the score functions. Assume that:  1. γ 0 is in an open subset of the Euclidean space 2. γ → ψ γ (li , ai ; γ) is twice continuously differentiable ∀(li , ai ) 2  3. EF0 ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ 0 ) 2 < ∞   · 4. EF0 ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ 0 ) exists and is non-singular ··  ··  5. ∃ measurable integrable function ψ γ (li , ai ) fixed such that ψ γ dominates the second partial derivatives of ψ γ for all γ in a neighborhood of γ 0 . ·  where γ 0 are the true parameters of the propensity score model, and ψ γ (li , ai ; γ) isthe √  L d matrix of partial derivatives of ψ γ (li , ai ; γ) with respect to γ. Then, n YbN (α) − µ0 → N (0, W (γ 0 , µ0 )), where T −1 T −1 −1 W (γ 0 , µ0 ) = V (µ0 ) + A21 B11 A21 + A21 B11 B12 + A21 B11 B12 , h h i h i T A21 = E ∂ψ0 /∂γ ∂ψ1 /∂γ , B11 = E ψ γ ψ Tγ , B12 = E ψ γ ψ0 , ψ γ ψ1 , evaluated at (γ 0 , µ0 ), ψa = ψa,α (Yi , Ai , Li ; µa0 ) and V (µ0 ) is that of Theorem 1.   L c (γ, µ) is the matrix c b b , YN (α) , where W W (γ 0 , µ0 ) can be easily estimated using W γ W (γ, µ) where all expectations are substituted with the empirical expectations. For b11 = 1 PN ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ)ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ)T . example, B N  i=1  b IE = Next, we derive the asymptotic distribution for µ    YbNL (0; α0 ), YbNL (0; α1 )  T  for  the estimated propensity score from a correctly specified parametric model.  h L i h L iT IE Theorem 3. Denote µ0 = EF0 Y i (0, α0 ) , EF0 Y i (0, α1 ) , and assume that the  √  IE b − µIE → N (0, Q(γ 0 , µ0 )), where Assumptions of Theorem 2 hold. Then, n µ 0 −1 −1 −1 T Q(γ, µ) = D22 + C21 B11 C21 + C21 B11 D12 + C21 B11 D12  D22 = Cov    Y  T L L (0, α ), Y (0, α ) 1 2 i i     , D12 = E ψ γ ψ0,α1 , ψ γ ψ0,α2 ,    C21 = E ∂ψ0,α1 /∂γ ∂ψ0,α2 /∂γ , and B11 as in Theorem 2. 9  T  4  Counterfactual distribution of cluster-average treatment propensity In §2 we defined the individual average potential outcome for unit j in cluster i (and  other estimands based on it) when the cluster-average propensity of treatment α is fixed to a counterfactual value. Those estimands correspond to quantities of interest in counterfactual worlds were one intervenes at the level of the cluster, but units within the cluster are still allowed to choose their own treatment. In this section, new individual average potential outcomes are defined, when the unit’s treatment is set to a, but the cluster average propensity of treatment is not fixed to a specific value α but arises from a hypothesized distribution. These estimands play an important role for policy interventions that occur at a high (vs. local) administrative level. For example, consider an observed distribution of clusteraverage treatment propensity Fbα , and an intervention that takes place over all clusters incentivizing the increase of cluster treatment coverage. This intervention does not enforce a specific average propensity of treatment for each cluster separately, but leads to an overall shift in the distribution of cluster average propensity of treatment. Let Fα (·) denote the observed or a hypothesized distribution of cluster-average propensity of treatment. Then, define the Fα -individual potential outcome as Z L L Y ij (a; Fα ) = Y ij (a; α) dFα (α) (4.1) Z X = Yij (Aij = a, Ai,−j = s) Pα,L (Ai,−j = s|Aij = a, Li ) dFα (α). s∈A(ni −1) L  Thus, Y ij (a; Fα ) describes the average potential outcome of unit j in cluster i, for cluster average probability of treatment arising from Fα . Consequently, the Fα -group and ni 1 X L L population average potential outcomes are defined as Y i (a; Fα ) = Y ij (a; Fα ) and ni j=1 N  1 X L Y (a; Fα ) = Y (a; Fα ) accordingly. Although the above estimands are well-defined N i=1 i for a distribution Fα different than the observed one, Fα needs to have overlapping support with the empirical distribution Fbα in order to reliably estimate such quantities. L  Similar arguments to the ones in §3 lead to estimators of the Fα -group and population average potential outcome as Z ni 1 X PFα ,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) L L b b Yi (a; Fα ) = Yi (a; α)dFα = I(Aij = a)Yij , ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) Z ni 1 X L L b b Yb L (a; Fα ) Y (a, Fα ) = Y (a; α)dFα = N i=1 i 10  (4.2) (4.3)  accordingly, where PFα ,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) =  R  Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) dFα (α).  Even though direct effect estimands based on the Fα -population average potential L  L  outcome can easily be defined as DE(Fα ) = Y (1; Fα ) − Y (0; Fα ), the contrast of Fα population average potential outcomes is more interesting for the indirect effect. For two hypothesized distributions of cluster-average propensity of treatment Fα1 , Fα2 , define    L L IE Fα1 , Fα2 = Y 0; Fα2 − Y 0; Fα1 . Then, IE (Fα1 , Fα2 ) represents the expected outcome change for control units when the distribution of cluster-average propensity of treatment changes from Fα1 to Fα2 . Assume that Fα1 , Fα2 represent discrete distributions with values α1 , α2 , . . . , αK ∈ (0, 1) and probability p1k and p2k of assigning value αk to a cluster accordingly, such that PK k=1 pjk = 1, j = 1, 2. Then, Y  0, Fαj    =  K X  pjk Y (0, αk ) ⇒ IE  Fα1 , Fα2  k=1    =  K X  (p2k − p1k )Y (0, αk ).  k=1  Clearly, a consistent estimator for IE (Fα1 , Fα2 ) is K  X c F 1, F 2 = (p2k − p1k )Yb (0, αk ). IE α α k=1  c (F 1 , F 2 ) is straightforward following simAcquiring the asymptotic distribution of IE α α ilar 3 to acquire the asymptotic distribution of  arguments to the ones in Theorem T Yb (0, α1 ), Yb (0, α2 ), . . . , Yb (0, αK ) and applying the multivariate delta method. 5  Simulations We generate a fixed population of 2,000 clusters including 14 to 18 units each, resulting  to a total of 31,553 units. Four independent N (0, 1) covariates were generated, and are denoted as L1 , L2 , L3 , L4 . For every individual in the population (unit j in cluster i), the potential outcomes under all possible treatment allocations were generated, following a model Y ∼ Bernoulli(expit(lY )) where lY = 0.5 − 0.6a − 1.4  a+k a+k − 0.098L1ij − 0.145L2ij + 0.1L3ij + 0.3L4ij + 0.351a , (5.1) ni ni  L1ij , L2ij , L3ij , L4ij are the values of the covariates for observation j of cluster i, a is the individual treatment, k is the number of treated neighbors, and (a + k)/ni is the percentage of units in the cluster that are treated.  11  5.1  A simulated data set  The simulations test the operating characteristics of  the estimator in (3.2) using the true and estimated propensity score in terms of the resampling of the observed treatment vector. Specifically, each simulated dataset includes the whole population, but a different set of potential outcomes is observed according to a treatment vector generated as Aij ∼ Bernoulli(expit(lA )) where lA = −0.2 + bi + 0.3L1ij − 0.15L2ij + 0.2L3ij − 0.18L4ij , bi ∼ N (0, 0.52 ).  (5.2)  Once the observed treatment is generated, the observed outcome is the corresponding value of the potential outcomes. Clusters with all treated or all control units are dropped. Ybi (a; α) is estimated from (3.1) for counterfactual treatment allocation described in §5.2, and fA|L,i (Ai |Li ; γ) =  Z Y ni   fe (Aij |Lij , δ0 , βi , δ) φ βi |σβ2 dβi ,  j=1  where fe (Aij |Lij , δ0 , βi , δ) = expit δ0 + bi + LTij δ   Ai  1−Ai 1 − expit δ0 + bi + LTij δ ,     LTij = (L1ij , L2ij , L3ij , L4ij ), φ ·; σβ2 the density of a N 0, σβ2 , and γ = δ0 , δ, σβ2 known and equal to the coefficients in (5.2), or the maximum likelihood estimates from the correctly specified propensity score model. We calculate the population average potential outcomes, direct and indirect effects, and the corresponding asymptotic variances. 5.2  Covariate-dependent counterfactual treatment allocation  The counter-  factual treatment allocation Pα,L is allowed to depend on the same covariates that are included in the observed propensity score, using the log odds coefficients used to generate the observed treatment. Specifically, for a fixed α ∈ (0, 1), logitPα,L (Aij = 1|Lij ) = ξiα + 0.3L1ij − 0.15L2ij + 0.2L3ij − 0.18L4ij , for ξiα satisfying 5.3  1 ni  Pni  j=1  Pα,L (Aij = 1|Lij ) = α.  Calculating the true average potential outcomes  For every observation  j in cluster i, the individual average potential outcome for individual treatment a and for cluster-average propensity of treatment α is calculated based on (2.1). Based on the individual average potential outcome, the true group and population average potential outcome are calculated according to (2.2), (2.3).  12  Table 1: Range of calculated coverage over 500 simulated data sets for the population average potential outcome, direct and indirect effects for the true or the correctly specified propensity score.. L  5.4  L  Y (0; α)  Y (1; α)  DE L (α)  IE L (α1 , α2 )  True PS  94.4 - 96.2%  94.4 - 97.2%  94.4 - 95.6%  92-97.2%  Estimated PS  86.6 - 96%  92.8 - 96.6%  91.6 - 96%  78.4 - 95.6%  Simulation results  We present results for values of alpha between 0.3 and 0.6  th  corresponding to the 20 and 80th quantiles of the distribution of the observed treatment proportions across clusters and simulated data sets. As expected, the estimator based on the true propensity score is unbiased, while the estimator based on the estimated propensity score, which is consistent but not unbiased, indicates small biases. Figure 1 shows the mean estimate across 500 simulated data sets for the population average potential outcome for a = 1 (results were similar for a = 0), direct and indirect effect, and Table 1 shows the coverage range over different values of α of the population average potential outcome, direct and indirect effect. Moreover, Figure 5 in Appendix E shows the mean of the estimated variance based Y(1, α)  DE(α)  −0.11  method truth 0.36 TruePS EstPS  Mean Estimate  Mean Estimate  0.38  method truth −0.12 TruePS EstPS −0.13  0.34  −0.14 0.3  0.4  α  0.5  0.6  0.3  IE(0.3, α)  0.4  α  0.5  0.6  IE(0.4, α) 0.04  0.000  Mean Estimate  method truth  −0.050  TruePS EstPS  Mean Estimate  0.02 −0.025  −0.075  method 0.00 truth TruePS  −0.02  EstPS −0.04  −0.06  −0.100 0.3  0.4  α  0.5  0.6  0.3  0.4  α  0.5  0.6  Figure 1: Mean estimate of population average potential outcome, direct, and indirect effect over 500 simulated data sets for the true or the correctly specified propensity score. 13  on the asymptotic results, against the variance of the estimates calculated over the 500 simulated data sets. The points (one for each value of α) lie mostly on the 45 degree line indicating that, on average, the variance based on the asymptotic theory is a good approximation of the true variance. 6  Application: Effectiveness of Power Plant Emissions Controls for Reducing Ambient Ozone Pollution Limited literature exists in the evaluation of U.S. air pollution regulations in a causal  inference framework. Power plant regulations for the reduction of NOx emissions have been predicated on the knowledge that reducing NOx emissions would lead to a subsequent reduction in ambient ozone. Among various NOx emission reduction strategies, SCR and SNCR are believed to be the most effective in reducing emissions. While work in Papadogeorgou et al. (2017) corroborated this effectiveness of SCR and SNCR in an analysis for NOx emissions, the analysis of ambient ozone pollution in that paper ignores the possibility of interference and estimates a null effect on ambient ozone. However, interference is a key component in the study of air pollution: ambient pollution concentrations near a power plant will depend on the treatment levels of other nearby power plants. Causal estimands tailored to settings of interference can answer important questions related to the effectiveness of interventions in the presence of long-range pollution transport. We use the same data as in Papadogeorgou et al. (2017) to estimate direct and indirect effects of SCR/SNCR against alternatives on ambient ozone under realistic counterfactual programs. The publicly-available data set includes 473 coal or gas burning power generating facilities in the U.S. operating during June, July and August 2004, with covariate information on power plant characteristics, weather and demographic information of the surrounding areas. For every power plant, the value of ozone is calculated as the average across EPA monitoring locations within 100km of the 4th highest ozone measurements. See Papadogeorgou et al. (2017) for a full description of the data set and linkage. Power plant facilities are grouped into 50 clusters according to Ward’s agglomerative clustering method (Ward, 1963) based on coordinates. The grouping and treatment of facilities are depicted in Figure 2. 10 out of 50 clusters were excluded from the analysis because they included only control power plants. 6.1  Plausibility of the ignorability and positivity assumption  While regu-  latory programs provide incentives to install emission-control technologies, power plants have latitude to select which (if any) technology to adopt. Such decisions are largely  14  determined by the plant’s characteristics such as plant size and operating capacity, as well as by factors related to local or regional air pollution incentives that are influenced by area-level characteristics such as population density and urbanicity. To capture such factors, 18 covariates are included in the data set describing power plant, weather, and demographic characteristics, based on which ignorability is expected to hold. The variability in the observed proportion of treated power plants across clusters provides an additional indication that the positivity assumption is plausible. Based on these covariates, the propensity score was modeled as in Papadogeorgou et al. (2017) augmented with a cluster-specific random effect logitP (Aij = 1|Lij ) = δ0 + bi + LTij δ, bi ∼ N (0, σb2 ). 6.2  (6.1)  Counterfactual treatment allocation for the installation of SCR/SNCR  emission control technologies  Recall from §2.3 that Pα,L governing treatment as-  signment in the counterfactual allocation programs of interest must be specified. To specify counterfactual treatment allocations that reflect realistic relationships between covariates and the propensity to adopt treatment, we specify Pα,L such that the log-odds of treatment installation related to individual covariates are as observed in the propensity score model for the observed treatment in (6.1). Even though this choice of Pα,L depends on the data through the estimated log-odds, the corresponding estimands are well-defined and the asymptotic results are valid for Pα,L fixed across replications of the sampling or an increasing number of clusters. Values of α were considered between the 20th and 80th quantiles of the observed cluster treatment proportions, corresponding to α ∈ [0.141, 0.508]. Figure 3 shows the population direct effect DE(α), and population indirect effect IE(α1 , α2 ) for a subset of values  Other SCR/SNCR  Figure 2: Treated (SCR/SNCR) and control (Other) power plant facilities during June, July, August of 2004. Shaded areas depict the interference clusters according to the agglomerative clustering method.  15  −0.02  −0.04  0.2  0.3  α  0.4  0.00  IE(0.414,alpha)  IE(0.226,alpha)  DE(α)  0.00  −0.02 −0.04 −0.06  0.5  0.2  0.3  α  0.4  0.050  0.025  0.000  0.5  0.2  0.3  α  0.4  0.5  Figure 3: Direct effect of control versus treated power plants on ozone concentrations as a function of α, and indirect effect where the first value of α is fixed to a specific value. Ozone is measured in parts per million. of α1 (for presentation simplicity). The direct effect is significantly negative for all values of α, but has a somewhat increasing trend, implying that in a world where the average probability of SCR/SNCR among power plants in a cluster is fixed, the installation of SCR/SNCR at one power plant would lead to significant reductions in ozone concentrations in the surrounding area, but these reductions are smaller when the cluster average propensity of treatment is high (larger number of treated neighbors). The indirect effect is, in a way, a measure of pollution transport since it quantifies the effect of changes in the cluster average propensity of treatment on ozone concentrations near control power plants. For all values of α1 , IE(α1 , α2 ) is decreasing in α2 , and almost all contrasts considered were significant at the 0.05 significance level. The decreasing trend in IE(α1 , α2 ) for a fixed value of α1 implies that higher cluster-average SCR/SNCR propensity leads to further decrease in ambient ozone concentrations in the surrounding area of control power plants. Next, we considered estimating the effect of hypothesized federal regulations that would shift the distribution of cluster-average propensity of treatment. Fα1 (Fα2 ) was assumed to be a discrete distribution within the 20th (50th ) and 80th quantiles of the observed cluster-treatment proportions. In Figure 4, we show the empirical probability mass function, as well as the two counterfactual treatment allocations. IE (Fα1 , Fα2 ) was estimated to be −0.0162 parts per million (95% CI: −0.0252 to −0.007) implying that federal regulations that encourage the installation of SCR/SNCR and would lead to cluster average treatment probabilities like Fα2 would reduce ambient ozone concentrations in the surrounding areas of control power plants by 0.0162 parts per million compared to similar regulations that would lead to Fα1 . For reference, these effect estimates can be compared against the national ozone air quality standard of 0.07 parts per million.  16  Observed  Observed−restricted  Counterfactual  α  0.75  0.50  0.25  0.00  0.05  0.10  0.15  0.20  0.25  0.00  0.05  0.10  0.15  0.20  0.25  0.00  0.05  0.10  0.15  0.20  0.25  Probability mass function  Figure 4: Observed cluster treatment proportions (“Observed”), and two discrete hypothesized distributions of cluster-average probability of treatment. One corresponds to the observed restricted within the 20th and 80th quantiles of the observed cluster treatment proportions (“Observed-restricted”), and the other one (“Counterfactual”) corresponds to the observed (or the Observed-restricted) further restricted between the 50th and 80th quantiles of the observed cluster treatment proportions. We explored the sensitivity of the data application results to the choice of hierarchical clustering method and number of clusters, and saw that the qualitative results for the effectiveness of SCR/SNCR emission reduction technologies are mostly consistent. We further estimated the estimands of Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2012) that assume manipulation of individual power-plant treatment propensities and ignore the fact that covariates can be important predictors of the treatment received by power plants. These estimators returned results with similar pattern as the ones in Figure 3, but of smaller magnitude. Therefore, the potential benefits of SCR/SNCR would be understated, if counterfactual scenarios of independent and identically distributed treatment assignment was considered. These results can be found in Appendix F. 7  Discussion Analyzing data in the context of interference disentangles the effect of the individual  treatment from the treatment of one’s neighbors. New estimands in the presence of interference were proposed for counterfactual strategies that manipulate treatment at the cluster-level, or at the level of population of clusters. These new estimands represent scenarios where individual treatment in the counterfactual world is allowed to depend on covariates and the treatment of one’s neighbors. Such estimands are relevant for public health interventions that do not manipulate treatment at the unit level. For the estimands referring to interventions at the population level, the counterfactual distribution Fα represented the distribution of the cluster-average propensity of treatment, and each cluster was assumed to be equally likely to receive α from Fα . However, 17  Fα could be alternatively defined to depend on cluster-level covariates that act as predictors of cluster-average propensity of treatment. Consistent estimators were proposed for which the asymptotic distribution was derived. These estimators were employed in the comparative effectiveness of power plant emission control strategies on ambient ozone, and showed the potential of a set of emission reduction technologies in reducing ozone concentrations. These results are more in line with subject-matter knowledge than results from a previous study that assumed no interference. Through comparison with existing estimands in the literature, this analysis also highlighted the potential gains of the proposed estimands in a setting where relevant counterfactual treatment allocations depend on covariates, showing that existing estimands would understate the potential benefits of treatment. Even though the data application showed the potential for causal inference methods for interference to lead to important results in air pollution research, there are several limitations to the analysis. First of all, the number of clusters was low, rising questions for the appropriateness of use of asymptotic distributions to acquire variance estimates. Furthermore, in air pollution studies the assumption of partial interference may be violated, since pollution from one power plant can travel long distances and affect ozone concentrations within a different cluster. However, we considered it important to analyze air quality data, which in our knowledge have not been previously analyzed to acknowledge interference. Despite the approximation entailed by the partial interference assumption, we believe this is an important advance for studies of air pollution interventions, and methods relaxing the assumption of partial interference for unknown networks are the topic of future research. Lastly, asymptotic results show that the sampling distribution F0 plays an important role in better understanding the proposed estimands. It is important to consider what the superpopulation of clusters we imagine corresponds to, and how the observed clusters arise from the superpopulation. Acknowledgements The authors thank Dr. Christine Choirat for tools created to reproducibly manage and link the disparate (publicly-available) data used for this analysis. References Ali, M., Emch, M., Von Seidlein, L., Yunus, M., Sack, D. A., Rao, M., Holmgren, J., and Clemens, J. D. (2005). Herd immunity conferred by killed oral cholera vaccines in 18  Bangladesh: A reanalysis. Lancet 366, 44–49. Barkley, B. and Hudgens, M. G. (2017).  Poster presentation at the Atlantic Causal  Inference Conference. Ferracci, M., Jolivet, G., and Van Den Berg, G. J. (2012). Evidence of Treatment Spillovers Within Markets. Hudgens, M. G. and Halloran, M. E. (2008). Toward Causal Inference With Interference. Journal of the American Statistical Association 103, 832–842. Iverson, H. K. and Randles, R. H. (1989). The Effects on Convergence of Substituting Parameter Estimates into U-Statistics and Other Families of Statistics. Probability Theory and Related Fields 81, 453–471. Liu, L. and Hudgens, M. G. (2014). Large sample randomization inference of causal effects in the presence of interference. Journal of the American Statistical Association pages 288–301. Liu, L., Hudgens, M. G., and Becker-Dreps, S. (2016). On inverse probability-weighted estimators in the presence of interference. Biometrika 103, 829–842. Papadogeorgou, G., Choirat, C., Zigler, C., and Chan, H. T. H. (2017). Adjusting for Unmeasured Spatial Confounding with Distance Adjusted Propensity Score Matching. Perez-Heydrich, C., Hudgens, M. G., Halloran, M. E., Clemens, J. D., Ali, M., and Emch, M. E. (2015). Assessing Effects of Cholera Vaccination in the Presence of Interference. Biometrics 33, 395–401. Serfling, R. J. (1980). Approximation Theorems of Mathematical Statistics. Sobel, M. E. (2006). What Do Randomized Studies of Housing Mobility Demonstrate? Journal of the American Statistical Association 101, 1398–1407. Tchetgen Tchetgen, E. J. and VanderWeele, T. J. (2012). On causal inference in the presence of interference. Statistical Methods in Medical Research 21, 55–75. van der Vaart, A. W. (1998). Asymptotic statistics. Cambridge University Press. Ward, J. H. J. (1963). Hierarchical Grouping to Optimize an Objective Function. Journal of the American Statistical Association 58, 236–244.  19  A  Proofs of unbiasedness, consistency and asymptotic normality  A.1  Unbiasedness  Theorem A.1. If fA|L,i (·|Li ) is known, and Assumptions 1, 2 hold, then YbiL (a; α) is an unbiased estimator for the group average potential outcome, and Yb L (a; α) is an unbiased estimator of the population average potential outcome for individual treatment a and cluster average propensity of treatment α. Proof. All expectations are taken with respect to the conditional distribution Ai |Li , Yi (·), where Yi (·) are all the potential outcomes for all units in cluster i. Yi j, Yi denote the observed individual outcome, and the vector of observed outcomes in cluster i accordingly. E[YbiL (a; α)]    ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X = E I(Aij = a)Yij ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )   ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X I(Aij = a)Yij (Ai ) E = ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) ni X fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j = si,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X I(sij = a)Yij (s)P (Ai = s|Li , Yi (·)) = ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai = s|Li ) s∈A(ni )  =  1 ni  ni X  X  fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j = si,−j |Aij = a, Li , α)I(sij = a)Yij (s)  j=1 s∈A(ni )  (From Assumption 2 P (Ai = s|Li , Yi (·)) = P (Ai = s|Li ) = fA|L,i (Ai = s|Li ).) ni 1 X = ni j=1  X  fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j = s|Aij = a, Li , α)Yij (aij = a, ai,−j = s)  s∈A(ni −1)  L  =Y i (a; α). By linearity of expectations, the proof for the population average potential outcome is trivial. A.2  Proofs of asymptotic results for known propensity score  For notational  simplicity, denote Õi = (Ai , Li ), Oi = (Yi , Ai , Li ), õi = (ai , li ), and oi = (yi , ai , li ). Also, denote as F0 the distribution of (Yi (·), Ai , Li ) in the superpopulation. P Consider the estimating equation ΨN (µ) = N i=1 ψa,α (Oi ; µ) = 0, where ! ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X ψa,α (Oi ; µ) = I(Aij = a)Yij − µ. ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  20  It is easy to see that the solution to this equation is µ b = YbNL (a; α): ! # " ni N X fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X I(Aij = a)Yij − µ = 0 ⇐⇒ ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) i=1 N X i=1  N 1 X bL YbiL (a; α) = N µ ⇐⇒ µ b= Y (a; α) = YbNL (a; α) N i=1 i  R If µa0 is the solution to Ψ0 (µ) = ψa,α (Oi ; µ)dF0 (oi ) = 0. Then, # Z " X n 1 i fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) I(Aij = a)Yij − µa0 dF0 (oi ) = 0 ⇐⇒ ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) # " ni h L i X f (A |A = a, L , α) 1 i,−j ij i A|L,i,α I(Aij = a)Yij = EF0 Y i (a; α) µa0 = EF0 ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) Proof of Theorem 1. First, we will show that YbNL (α) is consistent for µ0 . For this proof, we use an alteration of Lemma A in section 7.2.1 of Serfling (1980). ·  Note that ψa,α (Oi ; µ) is monotone in µ with ψ a,α (Oi ; µ) =  ∂ ψ (Oi ; µ) ∂µ a,α  = −1 < 0.  Therefore, ΨN (µ), Ψ0 (µ) are also monotone in µ (implying uniqueness of their roots). a.s.  From the strong law of large numbers we have that ΨN (µ) → Ψ0 (µ). From this, we have that: |Ψ0 (b µ) − Ψ0 (µ0 )| = |Ψ0 (b µ) − Ψn (b µ)| ≤ sup |Ψ0 (µ) − Ψn (µ)| → 0, µ a.s. a.s. which, b → µ0 , and YbNL (a; α) → h Lby thei uniqueness of the roots for Ψ0 , ΨN , implies µ EF0 Y i (a; α) . a.s.  a.s.  From basic probability laws we have that (Xn , Yn )T → (X, Y )T if and only if Xn → X a.s.  and Yn → Y . We showed that the individual components converge almost surely to their limit, and therefore  T  T   a.s YbNL (0, α), YbNL (1; α) → EF0 ȲiL (0, α) , EF0 ȲiL (1, α) , which also establishes convergence in probability. Now we will show that YbNL (a; α) has an asymptotically univariate normal distribution, for a = 0, 1, and afterwards we extend this to showing that Yb L (α) has an asymptotically N  bivariate normal distribution. Univariate result h L i p L b Based on the above, Y (a, α) → EF0 Y i (a, α) = µa0 . Theorem A in section 7.2.2 of Serfling (1980) requires: (i) µa0 is an isolated root of Ψ0 (µ) = 0 and ψa,α (·; µ) is monotone in µ. (Shown above) 21  (ii) Ψ0 (µ) is differentiable at µa0 with Ψ00 (µa0 ) 6= 0. R 2 (oi ; µ)dF0 (oi ) is finite in a neighborhood of µa0 . (iii) ψa,α Proof of (ii) Z " Ψ0 (µ) = 1 = ni  # ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X I(Aij = a)Yij − µ dF0 (oi ) ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  Z X ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) I(Aij = a)Yij dF0 (oi ) − µ f (A |L ) i i A|L,i j=1  So Ψ0 is linear in µ and therefore differentiable everywhere, with Ψ00 (µ) = −1 6= 0. Proof of (iii) Consider a neighborhood of µa0 of the form (µa0 − , µa + ), for some  > 0. Then, Z 2 ψa,α (Oi ; µ)dF0 (oi ) !2 Z ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X I(Aij = a)Yij − µ dF0 (oi ) = ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) Z =  2  ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X I(Aij = a)Yij − µ dF0 (oi ) ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  I will show that  1 ni  Pni  j=1  fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij =a,Li ,α) I(Aij fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  = a)Yij − µ is bounded by a con-  stant c in a neighborhood of µ0 and therefore the integral is bounded by c2 . ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X I(Aij = a)Yij − µ ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) ni fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X ≤ |Yij | + |µ| ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) ni 1 X |Yij | ≤ + |µ| ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  Z ni X 2 −1 ⇒ ψa,α (Oi ; µ)dF0 (oi ) ≤ |µ| + (ni ) EF0 j=1  ≤ |µ| + (ni )−1  |Yij | fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  ni q X    EF0 (Yij2 )EF0 (fA|L,i (Ai |Li )−2 ) < |µ| + M ρ−1 = c  (A.1)  j=1  We have shown that the conditions of Theorem A (section 7.2.2 of Serfling (1980)) are satisfied, and therefore h L i √  L d n YbN (a; α) − EF0 Y i (a, α) → N (0, σ 2 ),  2  where σ 2 = E ψa,α (Oi ; µa0 ) , since Ψ00 (µ0 ) = −1. 22  Bivariate result We will use Theorem 5.41 of van der Vaart (1998). The assumptions of this theorem are the so-called “classical” conditions, and are stricter than necessary to prove asymptotic normality. However, this theorem is often used in practice, since the conditions are sometimes easy to prove, as they are here. We denote ψ(oi ; µ) = (ψ0,α (oi ; µ0 ), ψ1,α (oi ; µ1 ))T , for µ = (µ0 , µ1 ),. and Ψn (µ), Ψ0 (µ) similarly as above, but for the vector ψ. It was shown that µ0 satisfies Ψ0 (µ) = 0, and that YbNL (α) is a consistent estimator of µ0 . In order to apply Theorem 5.41, we show that (i) the function µ → ψ(oi ; µ) is twice 2 continuously differentiable for every vector oi , (ii)   EF0 kψ(Oi ; µ0 )k2 < ∞ (where k · k2 · is the 2-norm1 ), (iii) The matrix EF0 ψ(Oi ; µ0 ) exists and is nonsingular, (iv) ∃ fixed ··  ··  integrable function ψ(oi ) such that ψ dominates the second order partial derivatives of ψ ∀µ in a neighborhood of µ0 . Proof of (i). It has already been shown that ψa,α (oi ; µ) is linear in µ and therefore twice continuously differentiable with respect to µ for every vector (oi ). Proof of (ii).  " #2  ni  X  X 1 Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) I(Aij = a)Yij − µa0 EF0 kψ(Oi ; µ0 )k22 =E   ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) a∈{0,1} " #2 ni X fA|L,i,α (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li , α) 1 X = E I(Aij = a)Yij − µa0 ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) a∈{0,1}  ≤2c2  (because of (A.1))  Proof of (iii).   ·  ψ(oi ; µ)  ∂ψ0,α (oi ;µ0 ) 0 =  ∂ψ ∂µ 1 1,α (oi ;µ ) 0 ∂µ    ∂ψ0,α (oi ;µ0 ) ∂µ1  ∂ψ1,α (oi ;µ1 ) ∂µ1  =  !  −1  0  0  −1  = −I2 < ∞ and non-singular, (A.2)  where the diagonal elements of partial derivatives are calculated in the proof of consistency, and the non-diagonal elements are clearly 0 since the functions do not include the corresponding components of µ. Proof of (iv). Based on equation (A.2), we have that all second order derivatives are ··  equal to 0, and are therefore dominated by the integrable function ψ(oi ) = 0. 1  k(v1 , v2 , . . . , vn )k2 = (v12 + v22 + . . . , vn2 )1/2  23  From Theorem 5.41 of van der Vaart (1998), we have that   −1 N  · √  L 1 X b √ n YN (α) − µ0 = − E ψ(Oi ; µ0 ) ψ(Oi ; µ0 ) + oP (1) n i=1   T   √  d ⇒ n YbNL (α) − µ0 → N 0, A(µ0 )−1 V (µ0 ) A(µ0 )−1 ,      where A(µ0 ) = E −ψ(Oi ; µ0 ) = I2 (from A.2), and V (µ0 ) = E ψ(Oi ; µ0 )ψ(Oi ; µ0 )T . ·  Example A.1. We provide an example of the application of the delta method on the L  L  L  result of Theorem 1. Consider the direct effect defined as DE (α) = Y (0; α) − Y (1; α). d L (α) = Yb L (0; α) − Yb L (1, α) is a consistent estimator, and can be written as Then DE g(b µ) for g((x1 , x2 )T ) = x1 − x2 . From the Delta method, we know that  √  L L d n DE (α) − DE (α) → N (0, σ 2 ) ∂g for σ 2 = ∇g(µ0 )T V (µ0 )∇g(µ0 ), where ∇g((x1 , x2 )T ) = ( ∂x , ∂g )T = (1, −1)T , and 1 ∂x2  V (µ0 ) is as in Theorem 1. A.3  Proofs of asymptotic results for correctly specified propensity score   Lemma 1. If condition 3 of Theorem 2 holds, then E ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ 0 ) < ∞ Proof of Lemma 1. Denote ψ γ = (ψγ1 , ψγ2 , . . . , ψγp )T . Then, EF2 0  ψγk    ≤E  h  2 ψγk  i  ≤  p X  E  h  ψγl  2 i  = EF2 0 ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ)  2   < ∞ ⇒ EF0 ψγk < ∞  l=1  where the first inequality uses Jensen’s inequality for g(x) = x2 . From this, we see that the score functions are integrable with finite expectation. Lemma 2. Assuming that the conditions of Theorem 2 hold, the estimator YbNL (α) using the estimates of the correctly specified propensity score model is consistent for µ0 . Proof of Lemma 2. Consider the augmented estimated equations defined as Ψn (θ) = PN i=1 ψ(Yi , Ai , Li ; θ), where   ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ)   0  ψ(Yi , Ai , Li ; θ) =  ψ (Y , A , L ; µ , γ) 0,α i i i   1 ψ1,α (Yi , Ai , Li ; µ , γ) (p+2)×1  where θ = (γ T , µ0 , µ1 )T and p is the number of parameters of the parametric propensity score model. Note that ψa,α is now a function of γ since it uses the estimated propensity 24  b The first p elements of θ b correspond score. Denote the vector that solves Ψn (θ) = 0 as θ. to estimators of the propensity score model parameters, which are consistent for γ 0 . Since Yb L (α) based on the true propensity score is consistent, f (ai |li ; γ) is differentiable N  p b which correspond in γ and therefore continuous, and γ → γ 0 , the last two elements of θ to Yb L (0, α), Yb L (1, α) using the estimated propensity score are consistent estimators of L  L  Y (0, α), Y (0, α). Proof of Theorem 2. We will again use Theorem 5.41 of van der Vaart (1998). Since consistency has been established in Lemma 2, showing the four conditions stated in the proof of Theorem 1 for the augmented ψ will establish asymptotic normality. Denote θ 0 = (γ T0 , µT0 )T . Proof of (i). By the conditions of the theorem, γ → ψ γ (li , ai ; γ) is twice continuously differentiable. This implies that ψa,α (yi , li , ai ; µa0 , γ), a = 0, 1 are three times continuously differentiable with respect to γ. Therefore, the second order partial derivatives with respect to γ exist and are continuous. Moreover, since ψ γ (li , ai ; γ) is not a function of µa , and using (A.2), the second partial derivatives with respect to elements of µ = (µ0 , µ1 ) exist and are continuous. Lastly, all second order derivatives with respect to an element of µ and an element of γ exist and are 0, and therefore continuous. This shows that θ → ψ(yi , li , ai ; θ) is twice continuously differentiable. Proof of (ii). We want to show that EYi ,Li ,Ai kψ(Yi , Li , Ai ; θ 0 )k22 < ∞. But EYi ,Li ,Ai kψ(Yi , Li , Ai ; θ 0 )k22 = ELi ,Ai kψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ 0 )k22 +  X  EYi ,Li ,Ai kψa,α (Yi , Ai , Li ; µa0 )k2 ,  a∈{0,1}  where the first term is finite from the assumptions on the propensity score model, and the terms in the summation are finite from (A.1).   · Proof of (iii). We want to show that the matrix EYi ,Li ,Ai ψ(yi , li , ai ; θ 0 ) exists and is non singular. We have   ∂ ∂γ T  ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ)p×p  ·  ∂ 0 ψ(yi , li , ai ; θ) =   ∂γ T ψ 0,α (Yi , Li , Ai ; µ , γ)1×p ∂ ∂γ T  ψ 1,α (Yi , Li , Ai ; µ1 , γ)1×p  0p×1 0p×1 −1 0     0  , −1  0 1 where the theh0’s in the top row iare because ψ γ is not a function h of µ , µ . We have as- i sumed that E ∂γ∂T ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ 0 ) exists and we will show that E ∂γ∂T ψa,α (Yi , Li , Ai ; µa0 , γ 0 )  exists for a = 0, 1.  25  Showing that E  h  ∂ ∂γ T  i ψa,α (Yi , Li , Ai ; µa0 ) < ∞ for a = 0, 1.  2  !  ni 1 X ∂ 1 Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li )I(Aij = a)Yij ni j=1 ∂γk fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) ! ! ni ∂ log fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) 1 X ∂γk Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li )I(Aij = a)Yij =− ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) ! ni   1 X P (A |A = a, L ) α,L i,−j ij i = − ψγk Õi ; γ I(Aij = a)Yij , (A.3) ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )     h  i where ψγk Õi ; γ is the k th component of ψ γ Õi ; γ for which EF0 ψγk Õi ; γ 0 < ∂ ψa,α (Oi ; µa , γ) = ∂γk  ∞ (Lemma 1). Also,  Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij =a,Li ) I(Aij fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  = a)Yij < M/δo using the conditions of i Theorem 1. So, we have shown that E ∂γ∂T ψa,α (Yi , Li , Ai ; µa0 ) < ∞.   · From this, we conclude that EF0 ψ(yi , li , ai ; θ) exists. Furthermore, from the theh i orem assumptions we have that E ∂γ∂T ψ γ (Li , Ai ; γ 0 ) is non-singular and the rows of h  ∂ψ γ /∂γ T are linearly independent. The bottom two rows are linearly independent to the rest since they are the only ones to includenon-zero elements  in the last two columns. · From this, we conclude that the rows of E ψ(Yi , Li , Ai ; θ 0 ) are linearly independent, and the matrix is full rank and non-singular. Proof of (iv). We need to show that ∃ integrable function α(oi ) fixed, such that α(oi ) dominates all the second order partial derivatives of ψ(oi ; θ). Therefore, we need to show that for k, l ∈ {1, 2, . . . , p}, a ∈ {0, 1}: 1.  ∂ 2 ψ γ (õi ; γ) ≤ αkl (oi ), ∂γk ∂γl  ∂ 2 ψ γ (õi ; γ) 2. ≤ αka (oi ), a ∂γk ∂µ 3.  ∂ 2 ψ γ (õi ; γ) ≤ αa1 a2 (oi ), ∂µa1 ∂µa2  4.  ∂ 2 ψa,α (oi ; µa , γ) ≤ ξ a1 a2 (oi ), ∂µa1 ∂µa2  ∂ 2 ψa,α (oi ; µa , γ) 5. ≤ ξka1 (oi ), a 1 ∂µ ∂γk 6. 2  ∂ 2 ψa,α (oi ; µa , γ) ≤ ξkl (oi ), ∂γk ∂γl  Note that even if the estimates of γ were used to define the counterfactual treatment allocation  Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ), it is considered fixed as a function of γ, since it is used to represent a fixed realistic treatment allocation program.  26  for θ in a neighborhood of θ 0 , where αkl (oi ), αka (oi ), αa1 a2 (oi ), ξ a1 a2 (oi ), ξka (oi ), ξkl (oi ) are F0 -integrable. If we show the above, by setting α(oi ) = maxk,l,a {αkl (oi ), αka (oi ), αa1 a2 (oi ), ξ a1 a2 (oi ), ξka (oi ), ξkl (oi )} we have that all second order partial derivatives are dominated by the F0 integrable α(oi ). Since ψ γ (õi ; γ) is not a function of µa , conditions 2, 3 are easy to satisfy by setting αka (oi ) = αa1 a2 (oi ) = 0. The same is true for conditions 4, 5, since ∂ψa,α (oi ; µa , γ)/∂µa1 = −I(a = a1 ) and therefore all second order derivatives that include at least one derivative with respect to µa1 will be equal to 0. So we can set ξ a1 a2 (oi ) = ξka (oi ) = 0. ··  From the assumptions of the theorem, we know that ∃ ψ γ (li , ai ) integrable such that ·· ·· ∂ 2 ψ γ (li , ai ; γ) ≤ ψ γ (li , ai ), for all γ in a neighborhood of γ 0 . Then, αkl (oi ) = ψ γ (oi ) ∂γk ∂γl satisfy condition 1. Since γ0 is in an open subset of the Euclidean space, there exists  > 0 ··  such that the second partial derivatives of ψ γ are dominated by ψ for all γ ∈ N  (γ 0 ) = {γ : kγ − γ 0 k < }, subset of the parameter space. Let N /2} ⊂ N  (γ 0 ). Then, N  /2  /2  (γ 0 ) = {γ : kγ − γ 0 k ≤  (γ 0 ) is a compact subset of the Euclidean space.  We will show that for γ ∈ N  /2  (γ 0 ) the second order partial derivatives in 6 are  bounded by an integrable function. First, let’s acquire their form: !# " ni   1 X ∂ ∂ 2 ψa,α (Oi ; µa , γ) P (A |A = a, L ) α,L i,−j ij i = −ψγl Õi ; γ I(Aij = a)Yij ∂γk ∂γl ∂γk ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) ! ni  1 X ∂ l Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) =− I(Aij = a)Yij ψ Õi ; γ ∂γk γ ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )   ∂ l − ψγ Õi ; γ ψa,α (Oi ; µa , γ) ∂γk  ∂ l =− ψγ Õi ; γ ∂γk  ni Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) 1 X I(Aij = a)Yij ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  !  ! ni X 1 P (A |A = a, L ) α,L i,−j ij i + ψγl I(Aij = a)Yij ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) #   " X ni      ∂ l 1 Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) = ψγl Õi ; γ ψγk Õi ; γ − ψγ Õi ; γ I(Aij = a)Yij ∂γk ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )       Õi ; γ ψγk Õi ; γ  where the first and third equation use (A.3), and the second equation is an application of the chain rule. Then     ∂ 2 ψa,α (Oi ; µa , γ) M l ∂ l k < ψ Õi ; γ ψγ Õi ; γ − ψ Õi ; γ ∂γk ∂γl δo γ ∂γk γ  27  (A.4)    For all k, l ∈ {1, 2, . . . , p}, ψγl Õi ; γ ,  ∂ ψl ∂γk γ    Õi ; γ    are differentiable and therefore  continuous in γ, implying that the function on the right-hand side of (A.4) is continuous in γ.      ∂ l Define g(γ) = EF0 ψγl Õi ; γ ψγk Õi ; γ − ψγ Õi ; γ . Then g(γ) is continuous ∂γk /2 /2 in γ. But since N (γ 0 ) is a compact set, g(γ) is bounded in N (γ 0 ), and in fact achieves a maximum. Let ξkl (oi ) = ξkl =  n o M /2 max g(γ), γ ∈ N (γ 0 ) . δo  ∂ 2 ψa,α (Oi ; µa , γ) /2 < ξkl (oi ), ∀γ ∈ L (γ 0 ), and ξkl is integrable since it is a ∂γk ∂γl constant function. Then  Then, set α(oi ) = max{αkl (oi ), αka (oi ), αa1 a2 (oi ), ξ a1 a2 (oi ), ξka (oi ), ξkl (oi )}, and all second order partial derivatives are dominated by the F0 -integrable α(oi ), for all θ ∈ N /2 (θ 0 ) = {θ : kθ − θ0 k < /2}. From Theorem 5.41 of van der Vaart (1998), we have that  √  N →∞ n θb − θ0 → N (0, Q(θ0 )), where Q(θ0 ) = A(θ0 )−1 B(θ)[A(θ0 )−1 ]T   ·   for A(θ0 ) = E ψ(Oi ; θ 0 ) , and B(θ0 ) = E ψ(Oi ; θ 0 )ψ(Oi ; θ 0 )T . However, we are only interested in the bottom-right 2 × 2 submatrix of Q(θ0 ) which corresponds to the asymptotic variance of (b µ0 , µ b1 )T when the propensity score model is estimated. Note that A(θ), B(θ) can be rewritten as " #     A11 0 ∂ψγ ∂(ψ0 , ψ1 )T A(θ) = where A11 = E A21 = E , ∂γ T p×p ∂γ T A21 −I2 2×p " #   B11 B12 T , and B(θ) = for B11 = E ψγ ψγT p×p B12 = E[ψγ ψ0 , ψγ ψ1 ]p×2 , B21 = B12 B21 B22 " # ψ02 ψ0 ψ1 B22 =E , ψ1 ψ0 ψ12 where the arguments (Yi , Li , Ai ) have been suppressed. Then, " A(θ)−1 B(θ)[A(θ)−1 ]T =  A−1 11  0  A21 A−1 −I2 11 28  #" #" B11 B12 A−1 11 B21 B22  0  A21 A−1 −I2 11  #T  " =  =  A−1 11 B12  #" # −1 T T (A−1 ) (A A ) 21 11 11  −1 A21 A−1 0 −I2 11 B11 − B21 A21 A11 B12 − B22 " #" # −1 −1 T −1 T −Ip −B11 B12 −(B11 ) −(A21 B11 ) −1 −A21 − B21 −A21 B11 B12 − B22  " =  ... ...  " =  A−1 11 B11  (A21 +  ... ...  +  −1 A21 B11 B12  + B22  −1 (B11 symmetric ⇒ B11 symmetric)  #  ... −1 T A21 B11 A21  +  (Since A11 = −B11 .)  #  ... −1 T B21 )B11 A21  −I2  0  −1 A21 B11 B12  +  T −1 A21 B11 B12  + B22  T (B21 = B12 )  −1 T −1 So the asymptotic covariance matrix of (b µ0 , µ b1 ) is equal to A21 B11 A21 + A21 B11 B12 +  T −1 A21 B11 B12 + B22 .  B  Asymptotic variance of the population average potential outcome estimator Denote [V (µ0 )]ij the ij element of the covariance matrix, and remember that µa =  EF0 [Y i (a, L0i , α)]. Then   [V (µ0 )](a+1)(a+1)  [V (µ0 )]12  C  !2  ni X 1 Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) =EF0  I(Aij = a)Yij − µa  ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  !2  ni X Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) 1 I(Aij = a)Yij  + µ2a − =EF0  ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) # " ni Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) 1 X I(Aij = a)Yij − 2µa EF0 ni j=1 fA|L,i (Ai |Li )   L   L =EF0 Y i (a, α)2 + µ2a − 2µa EF0 Y i (a, α)  L    L   L =EF0 Y i (a, α)2 − EF2 0 Y i (a, α) = V arF0 Y i (a, α)  h   i L b Yi (1, α) − µ1 =EF0 h i h i h i =EF0 YbiL (0, α)YbiL (1, α) − µ0 EF0 YbiL (1, α) − µ1 EF0 YbiL (0, α) + µ0 µ1 h i h i h i =EF0 YbiL (0, α)YbiL (1, α) − EF0 YbiL (0, α) EF0 YbiL (1, α)  L  L =CovF0 Y i (0, α), Y i (1, α) YbiL (0, α) − µ0  Population average potential outcome definitions in the literature Assuming partial interference, Hudgens and Halloran (2008), and Tchetgen Tchetgen  and VanderWeele (2012) defined the population average potential outcome as an average 29  1 N  of the group-level potential outcomes Y (a; α) =  PN  i=1  Y i (a; α). On the other hand, Liu  et al. (2016) define the population average potential outcomes without assuming partial interference (and therefore without assuming the existence of interference clusters) as the average of the individual average potential outcomes. However, their asymptotic results are based on the assumption of partial interference, under which the population average potential outcome can be written as Y  Liu  ni N X X  1  (a; α) = PN  i=1 ni  Y ij (a; α) =  N X  ni PN  i=1  i=1 j=1  i=1 ni  Y i (a; α).  Therefore, the estimand of Liu et al. (2016), if partial interference is assumed, is equal to a weighted average of the group average potential outcomes with weights proportional to the number of individuals in the cluster. Estimators for both quantities can be written in the form Yb (a; α) =  N X  di PN  i=1  i=1 di  Ybi (a; α), di > 0,  (C.1)  where Ybi (a; α) is an unbiased estimator of the group average potential outcome for cluster i. The difference of the population average estimators lies in the specification of di , where di = 1 and di = ni accordingly, for the two definitions of population average potential outcome. Proposition 1. Under the assumption of partial interference (which is also assumed by Liu et al. (2016) in their asymptotic results), all population average potential outcome estimators of the form (C.1) for which di > 0 does not depend on N , EF0 [di ] < ∞, and   di q Y i (a; α) are consistent for EF0 Y i (a; α) . Proof of Proposition 1. This can be shown by considering the estimating equation PN i=1 Gi (Yi , Li , Ai , di ; µ) = 0, where h i Gi (Yi , Li , Ai , di ; µ) = di Ybi (a; α) − µ , The solution to this equation is µ b=  N X i=1  and the solution to  di PN  i=1 di  R  Ybi (a, α),  Gi (yi , li , ai , di ; µ)dF0 (yi , li , ai ) = 0 is n  n o  o b b E E d Y (a; α)|d E d E Y (a; α) i i i i i E[di Ybi (a; α)] µ0 = = = E[di ] E[di ] E[di ]     E di Y i (a; α) = = EF0 Y i (a; α) , E[di ] 30  since di q Y i (a; α). Since Gi is monotone in µ, both  PN  i=1  Gi and  R  Gi are monotone in µ which implies  p  uniqueness of the roots and establishes µ b → µ0 . Based on this, both estimators are consistent for the same quantity (assuming ni q Y i (a; α)3 ). However, when the propensity score is known, the weighting scheme di = c, constant, leads to the asymptotically most efficient estimator among all of the estimators of the form (C.1), based on the following proposition. Since two estimators using di and d0i = cdi are exactly the same, the estimator (C.1) for di = 1 is the asymptotically efficient estimator. Proposition 2. Assuming that the conditions of Theorem 1 and Proposition 1 hold, and P b ∃Md such that di < Md , ∀i, then Yb (a; α) = N1 N i=1 Yi (a; α) is the asymptotically most   efficient estimator of EF0 Y i (a; α) among all estimators of the class (C.1). PN di b P Y (a; α) are Proof of Proposition 2. Based on Proposition 1, µ bd (a; α) = h i=1 di ii   consistent for µ0 = EF0 Y i (a; α) . Since Gi (Yi , Li , Ai , di ; µ) = di Ybi (a; α) − µ is mono∂ tone decreasing in µ with ∂µ Gi (Yi , Li , Ai , di ; µ) = −di < 0, we have that µd and µ0 are R PN ∂ isolated roots of i=1 Gi = 0 and Gi = 0. Also, E[ ∂µ Gi (Yi , Li , Ai , di ; µ)] = −E[di ] 6= 0. R 2 Lastly, from (A.1) and di < Md we have that Gi is bounded by Md2 c2 . We can  straightforwardly use M-estimation theory to acquire the asymptotic variance. Lemma √ d A in section 7.2.1 of Serfling (1980), n(b µd − µ0 ) → N (0, σ 2 (d)), where σ 2 (d) = EF0 [G2i (·, di ; µ0 )]/EF2 0 [di ]. We will show that σ 2 (d) is minimized h when di = 1, ∀i. i Since di qY i (a; α), we have that h i EF0 d2i (Yb (a; α) − µ0 )2 EF0 [d2i ] 2 2 2 2 b ( Y (a; α) − µ ) = di q(Y i (a; α)−µ0 ) . Then σd = = E F i 0 [EF0 di ]2 EF2 0 [di ] 0 EF0 [d2i ] 2 σ , where σ12 is the asymptotic variance of the estimator for di = 1. From Jensen’s EF2 0 [di ] 1 inequality, and since φ(x) = x2 is a convex function, we have that EF2 0 [di ] ≤ EF0 [d2i ], which establishes σd2 ≥ σ12 . Equality holds if and only if all values di are equal. D  Computation notes  D.1  Propensity score intercept for a specific cluster average propensity of  treatment  As described in section 5.3, ξiα is chosen such that ni 1 X Pα,L (Aij = 1|Li ) = α, ni j=1  3  Note that for di = 1, the independence condition is satisfied.  31  (D.1)  where logitPα,L (Aij = 1|Li ) = ξiα + Lij δ, and Lij = (L1ij , L2ij , . . . , Lpij )T the value of the p predictors of the propensity score model. Then, (D.1) can be rewritten as ni ni ni 1 X 1 X exp {ξiα + Lij δ} 1 X exp {Lij δ} Pα,L (Aij = 1|Li ) = = =α α ni j=1 ni j=1 1 + exp {ξi + Lij δ} ni j=1 exp {ξiα } + exp {Lij δ}  ⇐⇒  ni 1 X exp{Lij δ} −α =0 ni j=1 exp{−ξiα } + exp{Lij δ}  Since the only unknown is ξiα , we use optimization techniques and set ξiα to be the value ξ at which the function ni 1 X exp {Lij δ} −α g(ξ) = ni j=1 exp{−ξ} + exp{Lij δ}  is minimized. D.2  Product of small numbers  Calculating the estimator (3.1) above can lead  to problems since it includes (both in the numerator and the denominator) products of probabilities. This can be simplified by rewriting the estimator as: 1 Ybi (a; α) = ni  ni X Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) I(Aij = a)Yij fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) j=1  ni 1 X Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) π(Ai ; α) I(Aij = a)Yij = , ni j=1 π(Ai,−j ; α) fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) αa (1 − α)1−a  where π(ai ; α) =  Qni  j=1  αaij (1 − α)1−aij , and  fA|L,i (Ai |Li ) =  Z Y ni  fA|L,i (Aij |Lij , δ̃, σb2 , bi )f (bi ; σb2 )dbi .  j=1  For the first ratio, we write Pα,L (Ai,−j |Aij = a, Li ) Y fA|L,i,α (Aij |Lij , α) , = π(Ai,−j ; α) αAij0 (1 − α)1−Aij0 j 0 6=j and for the second ratio #−1 2 2 f (A |L , δ̃, σ , b )f (b ; σ )db ij ij i i i A|L,i b b j=1 Qni A ij (1 − α)1−Aij α j=1 #−1 "Z n i Y fA|L,i (Aij |Lij , δ̃, σb2 , bi ) 2 f (bi ; σb )dbi , = αAij (1 − α)1−Aij j=1  π(Ai ; α) = fA|L,i (Ai |Li )  " R Qn i  which is much more stable to calculate.  32  E  Simulation results  Estimated PS  Estimated PS  Estimated PS  DE(α )  IE(0.3, α )  Y(1, α )  9e-05 6e-05  8e-05  5e-05  7e-05  4e-05 4e-05  6e-05 2e-05  Monte Carlo variance  5e-05  3e-05  4e-05 4e-05  0e+00 6e-05  8e-05  1e-04  0e+00  2e-05  True PS DE(α ) 0.000175  4e-05  6e-05  3e-05  4e-05  5e-05  True PS  True PS  IE(0.3, α )  Y(1, α )  6e-05  0.00020  0.000150  8e-05  0.00015 0.000125 0.00010  6e-05  0.000100 0.00005 0.000075  4e-05 0.000050 0.00005  0.00000 0.00010  0.00015  0.000000.000050.000100.000150.00020  3e-05  5e-05  7e-05  9e-05  Mean of estimated variances  Figure 5: Mean estimated variance from the asymptotic distribution, and Monte Carlo variance of the estimates. The diagonal lines correspond to the 45 degree line, and each point corresponds to a value of α.  F F.1  Data application Sensitivity of data application results to the choice of clustering  Rows  correspond to the direct effect DE(α) and the indirect effects IE(α1 , α2 ) for α1 ∈ {0.32, 0.41}. Columns correspond to the clustering method and correspond to Ward’s Ward (1963) method for 30 and 70 clusters, and complete clustering with 50 clusters. The increasing trend in the indirect effect persists for all clustering specifications, while the direct effect results are sensitive to the specification of the hierarchical clustering method used.  33  Ward 30  Ward 70  Complete 50  Ward 30  Ward 70  Complete 50  Ward 30  Ward 70  Complete 50  DE(α)  0.01  0.00  −0.01  IE(0.226, α)  0.01  0.00  −0.01  −0.02  IE(0.414, α)  0.03 0.02 0.01 0.00 −0.01 0.2  F.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.2  0.3  α  0.4  0.5  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  Estimates and confidence intervals of the direct and indirect effect  under an independent Bernoulli treatment allocation  We estimate the direct  and indirect effects under the counterfactual scenario found in Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2012) that considers assigning treatment to units independently and with equal probability. Confidence intervals are based on asymptotic distributions derived as in Theorems 2, 3. 0.01 0.04  −0.01  −0.02  IE(0.414,alpha)  0.00  IE(0.226,alpha)  DE(α)  0.00  −0.01 −0.02 −0.03  0.03 0.02 0.01 0.00  −0.04 −0.01 −0.05 0.2  0.3  α  0.4  0.5  0.2  0.3  α  0.4  0.5  0.2  0.3  α  0.4  0.5  The results’ pattern is similar to the ones in Figure 3, but all estimates are closer to 0. This implies that basing our inferences on estimands in unrealistic counterfactual treatment allocation programs would underestimate the potential benefits of SCR/SNCR. 34

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
