Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3455

Abstract:
QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  arXiv:1704.04271v1 [math.GT] 13 Apr 2017  JASON BEHRSTOCK, MARK F HAGEN, AND ALESSANDRO SISTO  Abstract. The rank of a hierarchically hyperbolic space is the maximal number of unbounded factors of standard product regions; this coincides with the maximal dimension of a quasiflat for hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Several noteworthy examples for which the rank coincides with familiar quantities include: the dimension of maximal Dehn twist flats for mapping class groups, the maximal rank of a free abelian subgroup for right-angled Coxeter groups and right-angled Artin groups (in the latter this can also be observed as the clique number of the defining graph), and, for the Weil–Petersson metric the rank is the integer part of half the complex dimension of Teichmüller space. We prove that, in a hierarchically hyperbolic space, any quasiflat of dimension equal to the rank lies within finite distance of a union of standard orthants (under a very mild condition on the HHS satisfied by all natural examples). This resolves outstanding conjectures when applied to a number of different groups and spaces. The mapping class group case resolves a conjecture of Farb, in Teichmüller space this resolves a question of Brock, and in the context of CAT(0) cubical groups it strengthens previous results (so as to handle, for example, the right-angled Coxeter case). An important ingredient in the proof, which we expect will have other applications, is our proof that the hull of any finite set in an HHS is quasi-isometric to a cube complex of dimension equal to the rank (if the HHS is a CAT(0) cube complex, the rank can be lower than the dimension of the space). We deduce a number of applications of these results; for instance we show that any quasi-isometry between HHS induces a quasi-isometry between certain factored spaces, which are simpler HHS. This allows one, for example, to distinguish quasi-isometry classes of right-angled Artin/Coxeter groups. Another application of our results is to quasi-isometric rigidity. Our tools in many cases allow one to reduce the problem of quasi-isometric rigidity for a given hierarchically hyperbolic group to a combinatorial problem. As a template, we give a new proof of quasi-isometric rigidity of mapping class groups, using simpler combinatorial arguments than in previous proofs.  Contents Introduction 1. Background 2. Cubulation of hulls 3. Quasiflats and asymptotic cones 4. Orthants and quasiflats 5. Induced maps on hinges: mapping class group rigidity 6. Factored spaces References  Date: April 17, 2017. 1  2 6 15 22 24 29 33 35  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  2  Introduction A classical result of Morse shows that in a hyperbolic space quasigeodesics lie close to geodesics [Mor24]. This raises the question of what constraints exist on the geometry of quasiflats in more general non-positively curved spaces. A key step in proving Mostow Rigidity is proving that an equivariant quasi-isometry of a symmetric space sends each flat to within a bounded neighborhood of a flat [Mos73]. Unlike the case of quasigeodesics in hyperbolic space, in general, a quasiflat need not lie close to any one flat. Generalizing Mostow’s result, in a higher-rank symmetric space an arbitrary quasiflat must lie close to a finite number of flats [EF97, KL97b]. This result can be used to prove quasi-isometric rigidity for uniform lattices in higher-rank symmetric spaces [KL97b], see also [EF97]. In this paper, we control the structure of quasiflats in a broad class of spaces and groups with a property called hierarchical hyperbolicity [BHS14, BHS15b, BHS15a]. This class effectively captures the negative curvature phenomena visible in many important groups and spaces, including mapping class groups, right-angled Artin groups, CAT(0) cube complexes, most 3–manifold groups, Teichmüller space (in any of the standard metrics), etc. Formal definitions and relevant properties of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces (HHS) will be given below in Section 1. For now, we recall that a hierarchically hyperbolic space consists of: a space, X ; an index set, S, for which each U P S is associated with a hyperbolic space CU ; and, some maps and relations between elements of the index set. Before stating the main theorem, we informally recall a few facts about the geometry of HHS. Any HHS X contains certain standard product regions, in which each of the (boundedly many) factors is an HHS itself. In mapping class groups, these are products of mapping class groups of pairwise disjoint subsurfaces, and in cube complexes these are certain convex subcomplexes that split as products. Pairs of points in X can be joined by particularly well-behaved quasigeodesics called hierarchy paths, and similarly we have well-behaved quasigeodesic rays called hierarchy rays. Given a standard product region P , and a hierarchy ray in each of the k factors of P , the product of the k hierarchy rays r0, 8q Ñ X is a quasi-isometric embedding r0, 8qk Ñ X which we call a standard orthant. The rank ν of an HHS is the largest possible number of factors in a standard product region, each of whose factors is unbounded. (Equivalently, it is the maximal integer so that there exist pairwise orthogonal U1 , . . . , Uν P S for which each CUi is unbounded.) We will impose a mild technical assumption on our spaces, which we call being asymphoric; this condition is satisfied by the motivating examples of HHS, including all hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Under this condition, Theorem 1.14 implies that the rank is a quasi-isometry invariant. Theorem A (Quasiflats Theorem for HHS). Let X be an asymphoric HHS of rank ν. Let f : Rν Ñ X be a quasi-isometric embedding. Then there exist standard orthants Qi Ď X , i “ 1, . . . , k, so that dhaus pf pRν q, Yki“1 Qi q ă 8. We now give a few immediate applications of this theorem. ‚ Mapping class groups are hierarchically hyperbolic, by [BHS15b, Theorem 11.1]. Theorem A applied to this case resolves a conjecture of Farb, by proving that any top-dimensional quasiflat in the mapping class group is uniformly close to a finite union of standard flats. Outside of the hyperbolic cases, this question was completely open. ‚ Brock asked whether every top-dimensional quasiflat in the Weil-Petersson metric on Teichmüller space is a bounded distance from a finite number of top-dimensional flats [Bro02, Question 5.3]. Since the Weil-Petersson metric is a HHS [BHS14, Theorem G], this application of our theorem completely resolves Brock’s question in the affirmative. The only previously known cases of this question were: in the rank one cases, where  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  3  the space is hyperbolic [BF06]; and, in the three rank two cases, where the space is relatively hyperbolic, [BM08, Theorem 3]. ‚ Fundamental groups of non-geometric 3–manifolds are HHS of rank 2, [BHS15b]. For these groups, the above theorem allows us to recover the quasiflat theorem of Kapovich–Leeb [KL97a]. For CAT(0) cube complexes, the following is a more explicit reformulation of Theorem A; this result generalizes the main theorems of [BKS16] and [Hua14b] in the cocompact case: Corollary B (Quasiflats theorem for cubulated groups). Let X be a CAT(0) cube complex admitting a proper cocompact group action. Let ν be the maximum dimension of an `1 – isometrically embedded cubical orthant in X . Let f : Rν Ñ X be a quasi-isometric embedding. Then dhaus pf pRν q, Yki“1 Qi q ă 8, where each Qi can be chosen to be either: ‚ an `1 –isometrically embedded copy of the standard cubical tiling of r0, 8qν , or ‚ a CAT p0q–isometrically embedded copy of r0, 8qν with the Euclidean metric. Proof. As shown in [HS16], X p1q with the combinatorial metric admits an HHS structure based on the construction in [BHS14, Section 8]. In particular, the hierarchy paths/rays in X p1q are combinatorial geodesics, so standard ν–orthants (which are products of hierarchy rays) can be taken to be `1 –embedded copies of the standard cubical tiling of r0, 8qν . By Theorem A we are done, if we choose all our Qi to be of the first type listed above. ś To conclude, it suffices to produce N so that for any `1 –isometric embedding o : νi“1 γi Ñ X with γi a combinatorial geodesic ray, there is a CAT(0) orthant o1 with dhaus pimpoq, o1 q ď N . For each i, let Yi be the convex hull of γi , i.e., the intersection of all combinatorial halfspaces ś containing γi . Then the hull of impoq decomposes as νi“1 Yi . Since Yi contains a CAT(0)– geodesic ray crossing all hyperplanes, it suffices to show that Yi lies uniformly close to γi . But if there is no such bound, then for any m, we can choose o so that for some i, we have an `1 –isometric embedding r0, ms2 Ñ Yi , and thus an `1 –isometric embedding r0, ms2 ˆr0, 8qν´1 Ñ X . Cocompactness would then allow us to produce a pν`1q–dimensional cubical orthant in X , which is impossible by our choice of ν.  Observe that the quasiflats in the corollary may have dimension strictly less than the dimension of X , since a cube complex may contain cubes of high dimension that are not contained in cubical orthants; for instance, there exists hyperbolic (and hence rank one) cubulated groups, whose associated cube complexes have arbitrarily large dimension. In this sense, this corollary is stronger than the cases covered in [Hua14b], since our result applies to all cubical groups, not just ones whose dimension is equal to their rank; on the other hand, this application requires a geometric group action, which is not needed in [Hua14b]. Approximating with cube complexes. In Section 2, we introduce a new tool for studying hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, which we expect will have a number of applications beyond those of this paper. Roughly, this theorem says that “convex hulls” of finite sets, denoted Hθ pAq, are approximated by finite CAT(0) cube complexes: Theorem C (Approximation of convex hulls in HHS by CAT(0) cube complexes). Let X be an asymphoric HHS of rank ν. Then for any N there exists C so that the following holds. Let A Ď X have cardinality at most N . Then there exists a CAT(0) cube complex Y of dimension at most ν and a C–quasimedian pC, Cq–quasi-isometry pA : Y Ñ Hθ pAq. Any HHS is coarse median in the sense of [Bow13], as shown in [BHS15b, Section 7]. However, since Theorem C provides an approximation of the entire convex hull, the “cubical approximations of finite sets” provided by Theorem C have much stronger properties than the “cubical approximations of finite sets” provided by the definition of a coarse median space, or the metric approximation result given in [Zei16, Theorem 6.2]. In fact, the quasimedian  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  4  map from a finite median algebra provided by the coarse median property can be very far from having uniformly (hierarchically) quasiconvex image. To see the distinction, consider the case where X “ Z2 and A “ tp0, 0q, pn, nqu for some n ě 0. Then the Y provided by Theorem C is a n–by–n square, while the 2–point median algebra tp0, 0q, pn, nqu satisfies the requirements of the definition of a coarse median space, and is a “metric approximation” in the sense of [Zei16] when endowed with the natural metric. Theorem C allows us to control the rank of X as a coarse median space more precisely than we did in [BHS15b]; see Corollary 2.15. This also leads to a characterization of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces which are hyperbolic, Corollary 2.16. Induced quasi-isometries on factored spaces and quasi-isometric classification. In [BHS15a], we introduced the notion of factored spaces of an HHS. These are obtained from a given HHS by “coning off” a collection of product regions, and they are HHS themselves with respect to a substructure of the original HHS. Factored spaces are central in the proof of finite asymptotic dimension [BHS15a], and naturally occurring examples include: the Weil-Petersson metric on Teichmüller space, which is (quasi-isometric to) a factored space of the corresponding mapping class group; and, in any HHS, a space quasi-isometric to the image of X in CS for the Ď–maximal element S (e.g., CS is the curve graph of S when S is a surface and X “ MCGpSq). In Theorem 6.2 we use the Quasiflats Theorem as a starting point to show that the image of any quasiflat in a certain factored space is bounded. For now, we just state a new result about mapping class groups which is a special case of Theorem 6.2: Theorem D (Quasiflats have finite diameter CS projection). Let pX , Sq be the mapping class group of a non-sporadic surface S. Then for every K there exists L so that any pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embedding f : Rν Ñ X satisfies diamCS pπS pf pRν qqq ď L. As Corollary 6.3 we prove that any quasi-isometry between HHS satisfying a mild condition induces a quasi-isometry of the factored spaces obtained by coning off the standard product regions containing top-dimensional quasiflats. This is very important because one can extract further information about the original quasi-isometry from the induced quasi-isometry on factored spaces, and even take further factored spaces for additional data. This is totally unexplored territory, since, for example, it provides a way to study quasi-isometries of CAT(0) cube complexes that requires leaving the world of cube complexes. We expect this strategy to be crucial to prove quasi-isometric rigidity results for, say, right-angled Artin and Coxeter groups. We discuss this in more detail below; for now we just give an example of two right-angled Artin groups whose quasi-isometry classes can be distinguished using this method, but not by any other known methods: see Figure 1. The obstruction to their being quasi-isometric is that, despite having the same rank, their factored spaces as in Corollary 6.3 have different rank (which is a quasi-isometry invariant by Theorem 1.14). We note that the graphs we chose do not fit the hypotheses of [Hua14a, Hua16], or that of any other class of right-angled Artin groups which have been classified including those considered in [BN08, BJN10, BKS08]. Induced automorphisms of combinatorial data and quasi-isometric rigidity. The Quasiflats Theorem provides a powerful tool for proving quasi-isometric rigidity results for classes of HHS, for example right-angled Artin and Coxeter groups. In fact, the set of quasiflats and, more importantly, their intersection patterns, can be easily converted into purely combinatorial data. In good cases, one can extract from the output of the Quasiflats Theorem (and with basically no further knowledge about the geometry of the HHS) an automorphism of a combinatorial structure encoding the data, and therefore reduce proving quasi-isometric rigidity to proving that a certain combinatorial structure is “rigid”. The kind  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  5  Figure 1. The right-angled Artin groups associated to the two graphs both have rank 4. However, the 4-dimensional flats get collapsed in the corresponding factored spaces, leaving only 2-dimensional flats in the case of the first RAAG, while there are 3-dimensional flats that persist in the case of the second RAAG.  of combinatorial structure that the reader should keep in mind is S endowed with the partial order given by nesting, Ď, and the symmetric relation of orthogonality, K. Rather than a general but complicated statement, we give a template for this procedure. In Theorem 5.8 we give an example of the combinatorial automorphism one can extract from a quasi-isometry, under additional assumptions on the HHS. These additional assumptions are satisfied by mapping class groups. Accordingly, in Theorem 5.11, we use Theorem 5.8 to give a short new proof of quasi-isometric rigidity of mapping class groups that relies on much simpler combinatorial considerations than previous proofs, cf. [BKMM12, Bow15, Ham07]. Theorem 5.8 applies to other spaces and groups as well, including, for example, the WeilPetersson metric on the Teichmüller space of a surface of complexity at least 4, right-angled Artin groups with no triangles and no leaves in their presentation graph, and fundamental groups of non-geometric graph manifolds. Variations of Theorem 5.8 can be tailored to treat other families of groups as well. In the case of mapping class groups, there is no need to pass to factored spaces, but in other contexts (e.g., the right-angled Artin groups in Figure 1) the induced quasi-isometries on factored spaces provide extra combinatorial data. In the study of right-angled Artin and Coxeter groups our results allow one to reduce the question of quasi-isometric rigidity to the following type of combinatorial problem, which we believe is of independent interest. Let Γ be a finite simplicial graph, and let BΓ be either the associated right-angled Artin group or the associated right-angled Coxeter group. Recall from [BHS14, Section 8] that the standard hierarchically hyperbolic structure on such a group is obtained by setting SΓ “ tgBΛ u{„ , where g P BΓ and Λ is an induced subgraph of Γ, where „ is the equivalence relation defined by gBΛ „ hBΛ if g ´1 h P BstarpΛq , and where starpHq “ Γ (i.e. g ´1 h commutes with each b P BΛ ). Declare rgBΛ s Ď rgBΛ1 s if Λ Ď Λ1 and rgBΛ sKrgBΛ1 s if Λ Ď linkpΛ1 q and Λ1 Ď linkpΛq. Answers to the following can be used to obtain results on the problems of quasi-isometric rigidity and classification: Problem E. Study the automorphism group AutpSΓ , Ď, Kq of pSΓ , Ď, Kq. When is every element of AutpSΓ , Ď, Kq induced by left multiplication by an element of BΓ ? When is every element of AutpSΓ , Ď, Kq “induced” by an automorphism of BΓ ? (Not all automorphisms of BΓ need to “induce” an automorphism of pSΓ , Ď, Kq; which ones do?)  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  6  Theorem 5.8 states that, under three natural assumptions, a quasi-isometry f : pX , Sq Ñ pY, Tq induces a bijection from the set of hinges of X to that of Y; a hinge in X is a pair pU, pq with U P S and p P BCU , where U has the additional property that U P tUi uνi“1 where ν is the rank of X , each CUi is unbounded, and the Ui are pairwise-orthogonal. Since it preserves orthogonality, this bijection determines a simplicial isomorphism from the union of the top-dimensional simplices of the HHS boundary BX to BY (see [DHS16] for more on the HHS boundary and its simplices). One should be able to articulate natural conditions defining a subclass of HHS for which one can use this map, perhaps in conjunction with Section 6, to pass from a quasi-isometry to a map between HHS boundaries. Outline. Section 1 contains background on hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, wallspaces/cube complexes, median and coarse median spaces, and asymptotic cones. In Section 2 we build walls in hulls of finite sets, proving Theorem C. The main goal of Section 3 is to prove Corollary 3.8, showing that balls in quasiflats in an HHS can be uniformly well-approximated by hulls of uniformly finite sets of points. In Section 4, we develop background on standard orthants in HHS, and then prove Theorem A, as well as stronger versions in which we control both the number of standard orthants (using a volume growth argument) and the distance from the quasiflat to the approximating orthants, in terms of the quasi-isometry constants. In Section 5, we impose additional assumptions on an HHS enabling one to study the effect of quasi-isometries on the underlying combinatorial structure; see Theorem 5.8; it is in this section that we give a new proof of quasi-isometric rigidity of the mapping class group, i.e., Theorem 5.11. Finally, in Section 6, we discuss factored spaces, proving Theorem 6.2 and its important consequence yielding induced quasi-isometries of factored spaces, Corollary 6.3. Acknowledgments. We would like to thank an anonymous ancient Greek scholar for early input on this paper, in particular for suggesting the adjective “asymphoric,” derived from the word συµφoρά and roughly meaning “mishap averted.” The authors were supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMS1440140 at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley during Fall 2016 program in Geometric Group Theory. Hagen was supported by EPSRC grant EP/L026481/1. We thank the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, for support and hospitality during the program Non-positive curvature group actions and cohomology where work on this paper was done. This work was partly supported by EPSRC grant no. EP/K032208/1. In Section 2, we build walls; the Newton Institute paid for them. 1. Background 1.1. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Throughout this paper, we work with a hierarchically hyperbolic space, which is a pair pX , Sq with some additional extra structure described in Definition 1.1 of [BHS15b]. Roughly, an HHS consists of: a quasigeodesic metric space X ; a set of uniformly hyperbolic spaces tCU : U P Su; uniformly coarsely-Lipschitz coarsely-surjective maps πU : X Ñ CU ; three relations Ď (a partial order), K (an anti-reflexive symmetric relation), & (the complement of Ď and K) on S; ‚ a unique Ď–maximal element of S, and a uniform bound on the length of Ď–chains in S; ‚ for U Ĺ V or U &V , a uniformly bounded set ρU V; V ‚ for U Ĺ V , a coarse map ρU : CV Ñ CU .  ‚ ‚ ‚ ‚  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  7  Definition 1.1 of [BHS15b] consists of several axioms governing this data; [BHS15b] is the main reference for general properties of HHS. The properties of HHS which are central to this article are listed below. The first one says that the “coordinates” pπU pxqqU PS for some x P X cannot be arbitrary. In fact, for certain pairs U, V there are conditions that need to be satisfied by πU pxq, πV pxq. There is no condition for U KV , which corresponds to the fact that in this case U, V should be thought of as factors of a product region, as we will see later. Axiom 1.1 (Consistency axioms). Let pX , Sq be hierarchically hyperbolic. Then there is a constant E “ EpX , Sq so that the following hold for all x P X and U, V, W P S: ‚ if V &W , then ( min dW pπW pxq, ρVW q, dV pπV pxq, ρW V q ď E; ‚ if V Ĺ W , then ( min dW pπW pxq, ρVW q, diamCV pπV pxq Y ρW V pπW pxqqq ď E. &  V Finally, if U Ď V , then dW pρU W , ρW q ď E whenever W P S satisfies either V Ĺ W or V &W and W U .  The following theorem says that we can compute distances in X in terms of distances in the various CU , thereby reducing the study of the geometry of X to that of the family of hyperbolic spaces tCU uU PS . Notice that a special case of the distance formula is that, roughly speaking, if x, y P X are so that πU pxq, πU pyq are close for each U , then x, y are close in X (this is the uniqueness axiom). We write A —K,C B if A{K ´ C ď B ď KA ` C. Also, we let ttAuus “ A if A ě s, and ttAuus “ 0 otherwise. Moreover, we denote dW px, yq “ dCW pπW pxq, πW pyqq (the distance between x and y from the point of view of W ). Theorem 1.2 (Distance Formula; [BHS15b]). Let pX, Sq be hierarchically hyperbolic. Then there exists s0 such that for all s ě s0 there exist constants K, C such that for all x, y P X , ÿ ttdW px, yquus . dX px, yq —K,C W PS  Pairs of points in HHS are connected by special quasi-geodesics, called hierarchy paths: Theorem 1.3 (Existence of Hierarchy Paths; [BHS15b]). Let pX , Sq be hierarchically hyperbolic. Then there exists D so that any x, y P X are joined by a D-hierarchy path, i.e. a pD, Dq–quasi-geodesic projecting to an unparameterized pD, Dq–quasi-geodesic in CU for each U P S. The following theorem says that the conditions in the consistency axiom in fact characterize the coordinates that are (coarsely) realized by a point in X . Theorem 1.4 (Realization of consistent tuples; [BHS15b]). For each κ ě 1 there exist ś θe , θu ě 0 such that the following holds. Let ~b P W PS 2CW be κ–consistent ([BHS15b, Definition 1.16]); for each W , let bW denote the CW –coordinate of ~b. Then there exists x P X so that dW pbW , πW pxqq ď θe for all CW P S. Moreover, x is coarsely unique in the sense that the set of all x which satisfy dW pbW , πW pxqq ď θe in each CW P S, has diameter at most θu . The following says that when moving along a hierarchy path γ, in order to change projection to CU , when U Ĺ V , one must pass close in CV to a specific point, namely ρU V.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  8  Lemma 1.5. (Bounded geodesic image) Let X be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. There exists B so that the following holds. Let W P S, V Ĺ W . Suppose that γ is a geodesic in CW with γ X NB pρVW qq “ H. Then diamCV pρW V pγqq ď B. Moreover, suppose x, y P X and that there exists a geodesic γ in CW from πW pxq to πW pyq so that γ X NB pρVW qq “ H. Then dV px, yq ď B. The following is a variation of [BHS15b, Lemma 2.5]. For V P S, we denote SV “ tU P S : U Ď V u. Lemma 1.6 (Passing large projections up the Ď–lattice). There exists E with the following property. For every C ě 0 there exists N0 “ N0 pCq with the following property. Let V P S, 0 let x, y P X , and let tVi uN i“1 Ď SV be distinct and satisfy dVi px, yq ě E. Then there exists V W P SV and i, j so that Vi , Vj Ĺ W and dW pρVWi , ρWj q ě C. Proof. First of all, we choose constants. Let B ě 1 be the constant from Lemma 1.5, and suppose that B is also an upper bound on the diameter of ρU V for any U Ĺ V . Moreover, supposed B ě D, for D as in Theorem 1.3, and moreover that pD, Dq–quasi-geodesics in a δ–hyperbolic space stay B–close to geodesics with the same endpoints, where δ is a hyperbolicity constant for all the CU . If U P S is Ď–minimal, we say that its level is 1. Inductively, U P S has level k if it is Ď–minimal among all V P S not of level ď k ´ 1. The proof is by induction on the level k of a Ď-minimal V P S into which each Vi is nested, with E “ 100kB. The base case k “ 1 is empty. Suppose that the statement holds for a given N “ N pkq when the level of V as above is at most k. Suppose instead that |tVi u| ě N pk ` 1q (where N pk ` 1q is a constant much larger than N pkq that will be determined shortly) and there exists a Ď-minimal V P S of level k ` 1 into which each Vi is nested. There are two cases. V If maxi,j tdV pρVVi , ρVj qu ě C, then we are done. Hence, suppose not. All the ρVVi lie B–close to a geodesic rπV pxq, πV pyqs by bounded geodesic image, and by the assumption they all lie close to a sub-geodesic of length C ` 10B. Hence, we can replace x, y with suitable x1 , y 1 on a hierarchy path from x to y chosen so that ‚ dV px1 , y 1 q ď C ` 100B, ‚ πV px1 q, πV py 1 q lie B–close to a geodesic rπV pxq, πV pyqs, and ‚ the geodesics rπV pxq, πV px1 qs, rπV pyq, πV py 1 qs do not pass B–close to any ρVVi . By Lemma 1.5, dVi px1 , y 1 q ě 100kB, since dVi px1 , y 1 q is approximately equal to dVi px, yq. The large link axiom ([BHS15b, Definition 1.1.(6)]) implies that there exists K “ KpC ` 100Bq and T1 , . . . , TK , each properly nested in V (thus of level strictly less than k ` 1), so that any Vi is nested in some Tj . In particular, if N pk ` 1q ě KN pkq, there exists j so that ě N pkq elements of tVi u are nested into Tj . By the induction hypothesis, we are done.  Notation 1.7. In the remainder of the paper, following [BHS15b, Remark 1.5], we fix a constant E larger than each of the constants in [BHS15b, Definition 1.1] and also satisfying the conclusion of Lemma 1.6. Definition 1.8 (Relevant). Given points x, y P X , we say that U P S is relevant (with respect to x, y and a constant θ ą 0) if dU px, yq ą θ. Denote by Relθ px, yq the set of relevant elements. Definition 1.9 (Rank). The rank ν “ νpX , Sq of the HHS pX , Sq is the maximal n so that there exist pairwise orthogonal U1 , . . . , Un P S for which πUi pX q is unbounded for all i. Standard product regions are a standard useful tool; see [BHS14, Section 13] and [BHS15b]. These products are built out of the following two spaces, which we define abstractly, but often implicitly identify with their images as subsets of X .  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  9  Definition 1.10. Recall ś that SU “ tV P S | V Ď U u. Fix κ ě E and let FU be the set of κ–consistent tuples in V PSU 2CV . SK Definition U “ tV P S | V KU u. Fix κ ě E and let EU be the set of κ–consistent ś 1.11. Let CV tuples in V PSK 2 . U  Definition 1.12 (Standard product regions in X ). Given X and U P S, there are coarsely well-defined maps φĎ , φK : FU , EU Ñ X which extend to a coarsely well-defined map φU : FU ˆ EU Ñ X . Indeed, for each p~a, ~bq P FU ˆ EU , and each V P S, the coordinate pφU p~a, ~bqqV is defined as follows. If V Ď U , then pφU p~a, ~bqqV “ aV . If V KU , then pφU p~a, ~bqqV “ bV . If V &U , then pφU p~a, ~bqqV “ ρU a, ~bqqV “ ρU V . Finally, if U Ĺ V , let pφU p~ V . We refer to FU ˆ EU as a standard product region. 1.1.1. Rank as a quasi-isometry invariant. We now introduce a technical assumption on the HHS that we will assume throughout the paper. This condition is satisfied by all HHG; it is also satisfied for all naturally occurring examples of HHS. We impose it in order to rule out product regions with bounded but arbitrarily large factors. This hypothesis plays an important role in bounding the dimension of the CAT(0) cube complexes approximating hulls of finitely many point, and our theorems fail to hold without this assumption. Nonetheless, our results likely have analogues that hold in the absence of this hypothesis, but would require custom-tailoring to the situation at hand. Definition 1.13 (Asymphoric). We say that the HHS pX , Sq of rank ν is asymphoric if there exists a constant C with the property that there does not exist a set of ν ` 1 pairwise orthogonal elements U of S where each CU has diameter at least C. In this case, without loss of generality, we assume that E is chosen to be at least as large as C. For completeness, we remark that a result from [BHS14] implies that the rank is a quasi-isometry invariant of asymphoric HHS: Theorem 1.14 (Quasi-isometry invariance of rank). Let pX , Sq be an asymphoric HHS. Then the rank ν of X coincides with the maximal n for which there exists K and pK, Kq– quasi-isometric embeddings f : pBR p0q Ď Rn q Ñ X for all R ě 0. In particular, the rank is a quasi-isometry invariant of asymphoric HHS. Proof. It is easy to construct a quasi-isometric embeddings of balls in Rn starting from n pairwise orthogonal elements U of S with unbounded πU pX q. Hence, we have to show that if there exist quasi-isometric embeddings as in the statement, then n is at most the rank. This is because, by [BHS14, Theorem 13.11.(2)], there exists an asymptotic cone X where a copy of the unit ball in Rn is contained in an ultralimit of standard boxes. These are products of intervals contained in a subspace decomposing as product whose factors are various subspaces FU , so that any ultralimit of standard boxes in X is homeomorphic to a subset of Rν because X is asymphoric. Hence, n ď ν, as required.  1.2. Hulls and gates. Sets in an HHS have hulls, built from convex hulls in hyperbolic spaces: Definition 1.15 (Hull of a set; [BHS15b]). For each A Ă X and θ ě 0, let the hull, Hθ pAq, be the set of all p P X so that, for each W P S, the set πW ppq lies at distance at most θ from hullCW pAq, the convex hull of A in the hyperbolic space CW (that is to say, the union of all geodesics in CW joining points of A). Note that A Ă Hθ pAq. Definition 1.16 (Hierarchical quasiconvexity [BHS15b]). Let pX , Sq be a hierarchically hyperbolic space. Then Y Ď X is k–hierarchically quasiconvex, for some k : r0, 8q Ñ r0, 8q, if the following hold:  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  10  (1) For all U P S, the projection πU pYq is a kp0q–quasiconvex subspace of the δ–hyperbolic space CU . ś (2) For all κ ě 0 and κ-consistent tuples ~b P U PS 2CU with bU Ď πU pYq for all U P S, each point x P X for which dU pπU pxq, bU q ď θe pκq (where θe pκq is as in Theorem 1.4) satisfies dpx, Yq ď kpκq. Proposition 1.17. [BHS15b, Lemma 6.2] There exists θ0 so that for each θ ě θ0 there exists κ : R` Ñ R` so that for each A Ă X the set Hθ pAq is κ–hierarchically quasiconvex. Remark 1.18. We fix once and for all θ ě θ0 . We now recall a construction from Section 5 of [BHS15b], namely the gate map to a hierarchically quasiconvex subspace, and prove some additional facts about it. We fix a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq. Let A Ă X be κ–hierarchically quasiconvex. Recall, this implies that for each U P S, the set πU pAq is κp0q–quasiconvex in CU and there is thus a coarse closest-point projection pU,A : CU Ñ πU pAq. Define a gate map gA : X Ñ A as follows: given x P X , for each U P S let bU “ pU,A pxq. In [BHS15b, Section 5] we show that the tuple pbU qU PS is uniformly (depending on κp0q) consistent, so Theorem 1.4 and hierarchical quasiconvexity of A produce a coarsely unique point gA pxq P A such that πU pgA pxqq uniformly coarsely coincides with bU for all U P S. The following lemma contains a lot of information about the gates of a hierarchically quasiconvex sets A, B. It essentially describes a “bridge” of the form gA pBq ˆ Hθ pA, Bq, for suitable a P A, b P B that connects the two. An efficient way to go from a1 P A to b1 P B is to start at a1 , get to the bridge, cross it, and then go to b1 . The lemma collect more information than we will need in this paper, for future reference. The proof can be safely skipped on first reading. Lemma 1.19. For every κ there exists κ1 , K such that for any κ–hierarchically quasiconvex sets A, B, the following hold. (1) gA pBq is κ1 –hierarchically quasi-convex. (2) The composition gA ˝ gB |gA pBq is bounded distance from the identity gA pBq Ñ gA pBq. (3) For any a P gA pBq, b “ gB paq, we have a quasi-isometric embedding f : gA pBq ˆ Hθ pta, buq Ñ X with image Hθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqq, so that f pgA pBq ˆ tbuq K–coarsely coincides with gB pAq. Let H “ tU P S : diampgA pBqq ą Ku. (4) For each p, q P gA pBq and t P Hθ pta, buq, we have RelK pf pp, tq, f pq, tqq Ď H. (5) For each p P gA pBq and t1 , t2 P Hθ pta, buq, we have RelK pf pp, t1 q, f pp, t2 qq Ď HK . (6) For each p P A, q P B we have dpp, qq —K,K dpp, gA pBqq ` dpq, gB pAqq ` dpA, Bq ` dpggB pAq ppq, ggB pAq pqqq. Proof. We start with a definition and an observation. The sets V, H: Let V be the set of V P S with dV pA, Bq ě 100Eκp0q. As in the statement of the lemma, we define H to be the set of H P S with dH pa, a1 q ą 10Eκp0q for some a, a1 P gA pBq, say a “ gA pbq, a1 “ gA pb1 q for some b, b1 P B. We have V KH for all V P V and H P H, by Lemma 1.25 together with the following claim, which can be proved using standard quadrilateral arguments. Claim 1.20. πV pgA pBqq and πV pgB pAqq have diameter ď 10Eκp0q for V P V. For U P S ´ V and x P gA pBq, dU px, gB pxqq ď 10Eκp0q. Assertion (1) and Assertion (2): First we claim that πU pgA pBqq is uniformly quasiconvex for all U P S. Observe that πU pgA pBqq uniformly coarsely coincides with pU,A pπU pBqq.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  11  On the other hand, (uniform) quasiconvexity of πU pBq and a thin quadrilateral argument show that pU,A pπU pBqq is uniformly quasiconvex, as required. We now verify that gA pBq satisfies the second part of the definition of hierarchical quasiconvexity. To that end, let ptU qU PS be a consistent tuple so that tU “ pU,A pbU q for some bU P πU pBq for each U P S. Theorem 1.4 and hierarchical quasiconvexity of A provide a realization point x P A for ptU q. To complete the proof of hierarchical quasiconvexity, we must show that in fact x lies uniformly close to gA pBq. Let y “ gA pgB pxqq. Since y P gA pBq, it suffices to show that x and y are uniformly close. To do so, we show that πU pxq, πU pyq are uniformly close for each U P S, but this follows by considering the two possibilities for U covered by Claim 1.20. This proves Assertion (1). For b P B, Claim 1.20 can be applied as above to show that πU pgA pgB pgA pbqqqq uniformly coarsely coincides with πU pgA pbqq for each U P S, and hence gA pgB pgA pbqqq uniformly coarsely coincides with gA pbq for all b P B, thus proving Assertion (2). Defining f : Fix a P gA pBq. Choose b2 P B so that a “ gA pb2 q, and let b “ gB paq. Note that 100Eκp0q ď dV pa, bq ď dV pA, Bq ` 20Eκp0q for V P V; the second inequality here follows from Claim 1.20. Since a P A and b P B we also have dV pA, Bq ď dV pa, bq. For each fixed a1 P gA pBq (up to bounded distance, a1 “ gA pb1 q for some b1 P gB pAq, by Assertion (2)) and each U P S ´ V, we set bU “ πU pa1 q. For each V P V, let γV be a geodesic from πV paq to πV pbq and, for a fixed h P Hθ pta, buq, set bV “ πV phq, which lies θ–close to γV . Claim 1.21. Associated to each a1 , h as above: pbW qW PS is a uniformly consistent tuple.  &  Proof of Claim 1.21. If W, W 1 P S ´ V, or if W, W 1 P V, then bW , bW 1 satisfy any consistency inequality involving W, W 1 , since bW , bW 1 coincide with the projections to CW, CW 1 of a common point in those cases. If W P S ´ V and V P V, then either W P H or: diamW pπW pgA pBqqq ď 10Eκp0q and dW pa, bq ď 100Eκp0q. In the first case, V KW , so there is no consistency inequality to check. In the second case, if W V , then a 200Eκp0q–consistency inequality holds, as we now show. Indeed, if W &V , then πW pa1 q, πW pb1 q coarsely coincide, as do πV paq, πV pa1 q and 1 1 πV pbq, πV pb1 q. At least one of πV pa1 q or πV pb1 q is E–far from ρW V , so either πW pa q or πW pb q V 1 is uniformly close to ρW , but these two points coarsely coincide, so πW pa q “ bW is uniformly close to ρVW . The nested cases are similar.  Assertion (3): Given the consistent tuple provided by Claim 1.21, the realization theorem, Theorem 1.4, then provides a coarsely unique x P X realizing pbW q, and we let f pa1 , hq “ x. This gives a map f : gA pBq ˆ Hθ pa, bq Ñ X , and one can see using the distance formula that there exists K “ Kpκ, Eq so that f is a pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embedding. In the next claims, we check that f satisfies the remaining properties of Assertion (3). Claim 1.22. f pgA pBq ˆ Hθ pta, buqq is coarsely contained in Hθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqq. Proof of Claim 1.22. Let h P Hθ pta, buq. Let b1 P B and let x “ f pgA pb1 q, hq. Let U P S. If U P V, then πU pxq uniformly coarsely coincides with πU phq, which in turn lies θ–close to γU by definition. If U P S ´ V, then πU pxq lies uniformly close to πU pgA pb1 qq. In either case, πU pxq lies uniformly close to a geodesic starting and ending in πU pgA pBq Y gB pAqq, so x lies uniformly close to Hθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqq.  Claim 1.23. Hθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqq is coarsely contained in the image of f . Proof of Claim 1.23. Suppose that x P Hθ pgA pBqYgB pAqq. Let y “ f pggA pBq pxq, gHθ pta,buq pxqq. We claim that πU pyq coarsely coincides with πU pxq for all U P S, and hence x coarsely coincides with y. Indeed, suppose that U P V. By Claim 1.20, we have that πU pgA pBqq, πU pgB pAqq are uniformly bounded; thus πU pHθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqqq coarsely coincides with πU pHθ pta, buqq.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  12  Hence, since x P Hθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqq, we have πU pxq coarsely coincides with πU pgHθ pta,buq pxqq. By definition, this coarsely coincides with πU pyq. Suppose that U P S ´ V. Then πU pgA pBqq coarsely coincides with πU pgB pAqq and hence πU pHθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqqq coarsely coincides with πU pgA pBqq. Hence, since x P Hθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqq, we have πU pxq coarsely coincides with πU pggA pBq pxqq, which coarsely coincides with πU pyq by definition.  Claim 1.24. gB pAq coarsely coincides with f pgA pBq ˆ tbuq. Proof of Claim 1.24. By Claim 1.23, gB pAq is coarsely contained in the image of f . Moreover, if x P gB pAq, then πV pxq coarsely coincides with πV pbq for all V P V, since b P gB pAq and πV pgB pAqq is bounded by Claim 1.20. Hence gB pAq is coarsely contained in f pgA pBq ˆ tbuq. Conversely, for any a1 P gA pBq, f pa1 , bq coarsely coincides with gB pa1 q. Indeed, for V P V, πV pf pa1 , bqq coarsely coincides with πV pbq by definition. But πV pbq P πV pgB pAqq, by the choice of b. Since πV pgB pAqq is uniformly bounded, πV pgB pa1 qq coarsely coincides with πV pbq and hence πV pf pa1 , bqq. Let H P S ´ V. Since dH pA, Bq ď 100Eκp0q, we have that πV pgB pa1 qq coarsely coincides with πV pa1 q. By definition πV pf pa1 , bqq coarsely coincides with πV pa1 q. Hence f pgA pBq ˆ tbuq is coarsely contained in gB pAq.  Assertions (4),(5): Let p, q P gA pBq and t1 , t2 P Hθ pta, buq. For sufficiently large K, if H P RelK pf pp, t1 q, f pq, t1 qq, then by definition H P H. If V P RelK pf pp, t1 q, f pp, t2 qq, then by definition V P V, so V P HK by Lemma 1.25, as explained above. Assertion (6): Let F “ Hθ pgA pBq Y gB pAqq, and consider p P A and q P B. Assertion (3) and Lemma 1.26 provides K so that dpgF ppq, gF pqqq —K,K dpA, Bq ` dpggB pAq ppq, ggB pAq pqqq, so it suffices to compare dpp, qq with dpp, gF ppqq ` dpgF ppq, gF pqqq ` dpq, gF pqqq. The upper bound is just the triangle inequality. For U P S, examining a thin quadrilateral shows dU pp, qq ě dU pp, pU,F pπU ppqqq ` dU ppU,F pπU ppqq, pU,F pπU pqqqq ` dU pq, pU,F pπU pqqqq ´ T ě dU pp, gF ppqq ` dU pgF ppq, gF pqqq ` dU pq, gF pqqq ´ 10T ř for some uniform T . Given L ě 0, let σL pp, qq “ U PS ttdU pp, qquuL . By the distance formula (Theorem 1.2), dpp, qq ě K1´1 σ10T pp, qq ´ K1 for some K1 . Since, 10σ10T pp, qq ě σ100T pp, gF ppqq ` σ100T pgF ppq, gF pqqq ` σ100T pgF ppq, qq, the claim follows from another use of the distance formula (on the right, with threshold 100T ).  Lemma 1.25. Let C ě E and let a, b, a1 , b1 P X and suppose that H, V P S satisfy ‚ dV pa, a1 q, dV pb, b1 q ď C; ‚ dV pa, bq ą 10C; ‚ dH pa, bq, dH pa1 , b1 q ď C; ‚ dH pa, a1 q ą 10C; Then HKV . H H 1 Proof. Suppose V &H. If dV pa, ρH V q ď E, then dV pρV , bq ą 8C, and hence dV pρV , b q ą 6C. Then, by consistency ρVH lies E–close to both πH pbq, πH pb1 q, which is impossible since V 1 V dH pb, b1 q ą 6C. If dV pa, ρH V q ą E, then by consistency dH pa, ρH q ď E. Hence dH pa , ρH q ě 1 5E, so by consistency, dV pa1 , ρH V q ď E, and we argue as above with a replacing a. 1 1 Suppose V Ĺ H. Since dH pa, a q ą 10C and dH pb, b q ą 6C, at least one of the pairs a, b or a1 , b1 has the property that geodesics in CH connecting the corresponding projection points are E–far from ρVH . By bounded geodesic image, we have, say, dV pa, bq ď E, a contradiction. A similar argument rules out H Ĺ V . Hence HKV .   QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  13  Lemma 1.26. Let A, B Ă X be κ–hierarchically quasiconvex sets. Then there exists K “ Kpκ, X , Sq so that for all a P X we have dpa, Bq —K,K dpa, gB paqq. Moreover, for any a P A: dpA, Bq —K,K dpgB paq, gA pgB paqqq. Proof. First let a P X and b P B. Recall that for U P S, the map pU,B : CU Ñ πU pBq is coarsely the closest-point projection. For any U P S, we have dU pa, pU,B pπU paqqq ď dU pa, bq ` 1. By the definition of the gate, and the distance formula, we thus have K 1 , depending on κ, so that dpa, gB paqq ď K 1 dpa, bq ` K 1 . Since this holds for any b P B, this proves the first assertion. Now let a P A and let U P S. Then pU,A ppU,B pπU paqqq lies uniformly close to any CU – geodesic from πU paq to pU,B pπU paqq, so by the distance formula and the definition of the gate, dpa, gB paqq ě dpgB paq, gA pgB paqqq{K 1 ´ K 1 for K 1 depending only on X , S, and κ. Choose a P A so that dpA, Bq ě dpa, Bq´1. Then dpA, Bq ě K 1 dpa, gB paqq{K 1 ´K 1 ´1, by the first assertion and the choice of a. As above, dpa, gB paqq ě dpgB paq, gA pgB paqqq{K 1 ´ K 1 . Combining these facts shows that, up to uniform constants, dpA, Bq is bounded below by dpgB paq, gA pgB paqqq, as required.  1.3. Wallspaces. Wallspaces were introduced by Haglund–Paulin [HP98] and there are now numerous variants of the notion, surveyed in [HW14]. Here, we recall the relevant definitions for Section 2. See, e.g., [HW14] for more background on CAT(0) cube complexes. Definition 1.27 (Wallspace, coherent orientation). A wallspace pS, Wq consists of a set S Ð Ý Ý Ñ Ð Ý Ý Ñ and a collection W “ tpW , W qu of partitions of S. The subsets W , W Ă S are the halfspaces Ð Ý Ý Ñ Ð Ý Ý Ñ Ð Ý Ý Ñ Ð Ý Ý Ñ associated to pW , W q. A orientation x of W is a map W Q pW , W q ÞÑ xpW , W q P tW , W u. Ð Ý Ý Ñ Ð Ý1 Ý Ñ1 Ð Ý1 Ý Ñ1 Ð Ý Ý Ñ The orientation x is coherent if xpW , W q X xpW , W q ‰ H for all pW , W q, pW , W q P W. Ð Ý1 Ý Ñ1 The orientation x is canonical if there exists s P S so that s P xpW , W q for all but finitely Ð Ý1 Ý Ñ1 many pW , W q P W. When W is finite, as it is in this paper, any orientation is canonical. Definition 1.28 (Dual cube complex). The dual cube complex C “ CpS, Wq associated to the wallspace pS, Wq is the CAT(0) cube complex whose 0–cubes are the coherent, canonical orientations of W, with two 0–cubes joined by a 1–cube if the corresponding orientations differ on exactly one wall. The resulting graph is median [CN05, Nic04, Sag95] and thus the 1–skeleton of a uniquely determined CAT(0) cube complex [Che00] which we call C. Definition 1.29 (Hyperplane, crossing). A hyperplane in C is a connected subspace whose intersection with each cube c “ r´1, 1sn is either H or a subspace obtained by restricting exactly one coordinate to 0. The hyperplanes in CpS, Wq correspond bijectively to the walls in W. Moreover, two hyperplanes have nonempty intersection if and only if the corresponding walls cross in the sense that all four possible intersections of associated halfspaces are nonempty. It follows that the dimension of C is equal to the largest cardinality of a subset of W consisting of pairwise-crossing walls. We occasionally use the convex hull of a set A Ă CpS, Wq: this is the largest subcomplex contained in the intersection of all halfspaces containing A. 1.4. Ultralimits and asymptotic cones. Let pM, dq be a metric space and let ω Ă 2N be a non-principal ultrafilter on N. Given a sequence m “ pmn P M qnPN of observation n points and a positive sequence s “ psn qnPN with sn ÝÑ 8, the asymptotic cone ś M is the ultralimit of the based metric spaces limω pM, mn , sdn q: define a pseudometric d on n M by dpy, zq “ limω  dpyn ,zn q , sn  and consider the induced pseudometric on the component containing  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  14  m, i.e., # x“ M  pyn qnPN  + ź d P pM, q : dpy, mq ă 8 . dn n  x by identifying points y Then M is the associated quotient metric space, obtained from M and z for which dpy, zq “ 0. We refer the reader to [Dru02] for additional background on asymptotic cones. We will adopt the following notational conventions. We denote by ω a fixed non-principal ultrafilter on N. Given a sequence pMi qiPN of based metric spaces, we denote by M the corresponding ultralimit. Given m P M, a representative of m is a sequence pmi P Mi qiPN , and, when there is no possibility of confusion, we use a boldface letter to denote this representative, viz. m “ pmi q. We also denote by ω R` the ultrapower of the set R` of nonnegative reals. Given λ P ω R` , we sometimes use the notation, e.g., r to denote a sequence prm qmPN representing λ. 1.5. Median, coarse median, quasimedian. We recall some background on median and coarse median spaces; the reader is referred to [Bow13, Bow15] for a more detailed discussion. The discussion of coarse median spaces in [Bow13] is given in terms of (finite) median algebras. For concreteness, we first consider only the following example of a (finite) median algebra: let Y be a CAT(0) cube complex (with finitely many 0–cubes). Recall that there exists a median map µ : pY p0q q3 Ñ Y p0q with the property that, for all x1 , x2 , x3 P Y p0q , the 0–cube µpx1 , x2 , x3 q lies on a combinatorial geodesic from xi to xj for all distinct i, j P t1, 2, 3u, see e.g., [Che00]. This 0–cube with the given property is unique. Remark 1.30 (Median and walls). Let Y be a CAT(0) cube complex and let x, y, z be 0–cubes. The median, µ “ µpx, y, zq, can be described in terms of orientations of walls as follows. If W is a wall in Y so that some associated halfspace W ` contains x, y, z, then µ orients W toward W ` . Otherwise, W has two associated halfspaces W ˘ so that W ` contains exactly two of the points tx, y, zu and W ´ contains exactly one of these points. Then µ orients W toward W ` . This choice of orientation of all walls is coherent and easily verified to yield a 0–cube which is the median of x, y, z. The above discussion provides the basis for the definition of a coarse median space. Definition 1.31 (Coarse median space; [Bow13]). Let pL, dq be a metric space and let µ : L3 Ñ L be a ternary operation. We say that L, equipped with µ, is a coarse median space if there exists a constant k and a map h : N Ñ r0, 8q so that the following hold: ‚ For all x, y, z, x1 , y 1 , z 1 P L, dpµpx, y, zq, µpx1 , y 1 , z 1 qq ď kpdpx, x1 q ` dpy, y 1 q ` dpz, z 1 qq ` hp0q. ‚ For all p P N and A Ď L with |A| ď p, there is a CAT(0) cube complex YA with finite p0q p0q 0–skeleton and median map µA , and maps f : A Ñ YA and g : YA Ñ A so that the following hold: p0q – dpµpgpxq, gpyq, gpzqq, gpµA px, y, zqqq ď hppq for all x, y, z P YA ; – dpa, gpf paqqq ď hppq for all a P A. The coarse median rank ν of L is the smallest integer ν so that YA can be taken to have dimension ď ν for all finite A. It was shown in [BHS15b] that every hierarchically hyperbolic space is a coarse median space; we refer the reader there for details of the construction.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  15  Definition 1.32 (Quasimedian map). Let Y be a CAT(0) cube complex with median map µY on its 0–skeleton. Let pL, µ, dq be a coarse median space. Let h ě 0. An h–quasimedian map is a map q : Y Ñ L for which dpµpqpxq, qpyq, qpzqq, qpµY px, y, zqqq ď h for all x, y, z P Y. Note that quasimedian maps are precisely what [Bow13] calls “quasimorphisms”. Finally, we recall that a set M equipped with a ternary operation µ : M3 Ñ M is a median algebra if for all finite A Ă M, there is a finite B Ă M so that A Ď B, and B is closed under µ, and pB, µq is a finite median algebra in the above sense (i.e., we can identify its elements with points in a finite CAT(0) cube complex in such a way that µ coincides with the cubical median). The rank of a median algebra is defined as in Definition 1.31 in terms of the dimensions of the cube complexes approximating finite sets. Given a, b P M, the interval ra, bs is the set of c P M with µpa, b, cq “ c, and N Ă M is median convex if ra, bs Ď N whenever a, b P N . If M is also a Hausdorff topological space, and µ is continuous, then pM, µq is a topological median algebra. We consider the following special case. Let pM, dq be a metric space. For any a, b P M , let ra, bs be the set of c P M for which dpa, bq “ dpa, cq ` dpc, bq. If M has the property that for all a, b, c P M , the intersection ra, bs X rb, cs X rc, as consists of a single point µpa, b, cq, then the map pa, b, cq ÞÑ µpa, b, cq makes pM, dq a topological median algebra. In this situation, we say M is a median (metric) space. The metric notion of an interval agrees with the median notion discussed above. It is shown in Theorem 2.3 of [Bow13] that any asymptotic cone of a coarse median space of rank ν is a median space of rank ν, where the median of points represented by sequences pxn q, pyn q, pzn q is represented by a sequence whose nth term is the coarse median of xn , yn , zn . Definition 1.33 (Block, median gate). Let pM, dq be a median metric space. A n–block in M is a median convex subspace isometric to the product of n nontrivial compact intervals, endowed with the `1 metric. If N Ă M is a closed median convex subset, a median gate map gN : M Ñ N is a map such that gN pmq P rm, ns for all m P M, n P N . If gN exists, then it is unique; if intervals in M are compact, as occurs when M is complete and of finite rank, then gN exists for all closed median convex N . If N, N 1 are median convex, then gN pN 1 q is again median convex; see [Bow15]. 2. Cubulation of hulls Fix a hierarchically hyperbolic space pX , Sq. In this section, we prove that the hull of any finite set A Ă X can be cubulated. Roughly, our walls are built in the following way. We consider U P S and consider a tree which approximates the convex hull of πU pAq in CU . We then find an appropriate separated net in this tree and, for each point in this net, we use πU´1 of a connected component of the complement as one of our walls. Specifically, it is the goal of this section to prove: Theorem 2.1. Let pX , Sq be a hierarchically hyperbolic space and let k P N. Then there exists M0 so that for all M ě M0 there is a constant C1 so that for any A Ă X of cardinality ď k, there is a C1 –quasimedian pC1 , C1 q–quasi-isometry pA : Y Ñ Hθ pAq. Moreover, let U be the set of U P S so that dU px, yq ě M for some x, y P A. Then dim Y is equal to the maximum cardinality of a set of pairwise-orthogonal elements of U. Finally, there exist 0–cubes y1 , . . . , yk1 P Y so that k 1 ď k and Y is equal to the convex hull in Y of ty1 , . . . , yk1 u.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  16  The proof is carried out over the next several subsections. We fix once and for all pX , Sq, some k P N, and a subset A “ tx1 , . . . , xk u Ď X . 2.1. The candidate finite CAT(0) cube complex. Fix U P S. For each xj P A, recall that πU pxj q is a subset of the δ–hyperbolic space CU of diameter at most E; for each j, U U choose `U j P πU pxj q, to obtain k points `1 , . . . , `k P CU . There exists C “ Cpk, δq so that there is a finite tree TU and an embedding TU ãÑ CU , sending edges to geodesics of CU , with the following properties: ‚ dU pp, qq ď dTU pp, qq ď dU pp, qq ` C for all p, q P TU ; ‚ `U j is a leaf of TU for 1 ď j ď k; U ‚ each leaf of TU lies in t`U 1 , . . . , `k u. This is the usual spanning tree of a finite subset of a hyperbolic space; see [Gro87]. The given properties of TU ensure that, up to increasing C uniformly, dhaus pTU , hullCU pπU pAqqq ď C. Our choice of TU ensures that, for each xj P A, πU pxj q Ă CU contains a leaf of TU , and every leaf of TU is contained in πU pxj q for some xj P A. Let M be a (large) constant to be specified below. We will point out the conditions that M must satisfy as we proceed. Let U be the (finite) set of all U P S with diampπU pAqq ě 100M . Let U1 Ď U be the set of Ď–minimal elements of U. Given Un´1 , let Un Ď U be the set of all Finite complexity ensures that there is some s so that Ťs Ď–minimal elements of U ´ Un´1 . Ď,U “ tV P U : V Ĺ U u. For each V P U Ď,U , choose n“1 Us “ U. For each U P U, let U V V rU P TU closest to ρU ; the set of choices is bounded diameter (moreover, in Lemma 2.4, we prove that rUV is 100EC–close to ρVU ). Starting with each U P U1 and then repeating for U2 up to Us , we choose a finite set of U elements pU i P TU satisfying the following conditions (which provide that the pi together V with the rU provide a 10M –net which is M –separated): (1) dU ppU i , xj q ě M , U (2) dU ppU i , pj q ě M , V Ď,U (when U P U , there are no such V ), and (3) dU ppU i , rU q ě M for each V ´ PU ¯1 U V (4) each component of TU ´ tpi u Y trU uV PU Ď,U q has diameter at most 10M (when U P U1 , there are no such V , so the criterion is only about complements of the tpU i u). For each U P S, let βU be the composition of πU and a closest point projection to TU (for each p P Hθ pAq, we have diamCU pπU ppq Y βU ppqq ď 10pE ` θ ` Cq). Definition 2.2 (Walls in Hθ pAq). Given U P U and tpU i u as above, for each i we define a Ð ÝU Ý ÑU partition Hθ pAq “ W i \ W i of Hθ pAq as follows. Choose a component TU1 of TU ´ tpU i u U U U U Ð ÝU Ý Ñ Ð Ý Ð Ý Ý Ñ and let W i “ βU´1 pTU1 q X Hθ pAq, and set W i “ Hθ pAq ´ pW i q. Let LU i “ pW i , W i q. Observe that the (finite) set of walls in Hθ pAq specified in Definition 2.2 depends on our choice of M (since that determines U) and on our choice of the pU i (which is also constrained by the choice of M ). Let Y be the CAT(0) cube complex dual to the wallspace just defined. Since the set of walls is finite, there is exactly one 0–cube in Y for each coherent orientation of all the walls (recall that a coherent orientation is a choice of halfspace for each wall such that, for any two walls, the chosen halfspaces have nonempty intersection). 2.2. Lemmas supporting consistency of certain tuples. Lemma 2.3. For all M ą 10E, the following holds. Let U P U and V P S. If U &V then ρU V is E–close to some πV pxi q, and hence 2E–close to TV .  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  17  Proof. Since U P U, we have diamCU pπU pAqq ě 100M ą 103 E. Hence we can choose xi P A so that dU pxi , ρVU q ą E. Consistency yields dV pxi , ρU V q ď E. Since πV pxi q has diameter ď E U and contains a leaf of TV , we have dV pTV , ρV q ď 2E.  Lemma 2.4. For any M ą 10E, the following holds. Let U P U, V P S, with U Ĺ V . Then dV pρU V , TV q ď 100EC. Proof. Suppose that dV pρU V , TV q ą 100EC. Then, since TV C–coarsely coincides with hullCV pAq, and the latter is 5E–quasiconvex, we have that ρU V lies at distance greater than E from any geodesic joining points in πV pAq. Hence, by consistency and bounded geodesic image, any such geodesic projects to a geodesic in CU of diameter at most E, i.e., πU pAq has diameter bounded by 10E. This contradicts U P U, provided M ą 10E.  Lemma 2.5. For any M ą 10E the following holds. Consider U P U and any V P S with V Ĺ U . Then for each x P TU ´ NM pρVU q there exists xj P A with dV pρU V pxq, xj q ď 2E (in U particular, ρV pxq is 10E–close to TV ). Proof. There exists a leaf of TU , contained in πU pxj q for some xj P A, in the same connected component of TU ´ NM {2 pρVU q as x. Geodesics from x to πU pxj q thus stay E–far from ρVU , so that the desired conclusion follows from bounded geodesic image (and consistency, which says diamV pπV pxj q Y ρU  V pπU pxj qqq ď E). 2.3. The proof of Theorem 2.1. We now prove Theorem 2.1. Some auxiliary lemmas appear immediately below the proof, organized according to which part of the proof they support. Proof of Theorem 2.1. We break the proof into several parts. Definition of pA : We first define pA : Y Ñ X , noting that it suffices to define pA on the 0–skeleton of Y. Let p P Y p0q ; we view p as a coherent orientation of the walls LU i provided by Definition 2.2. Ð ÝU Ý ÑU For U P U, V P S and each pU i (which we recall gives a pair tW i , W i u), we can Ð ÝU Ý ÑU consider W i pU q P tW i , W i u which is the halfspace given by the orientation p, namely Ð Ý Ý Ñ ppW i pU q, W i pU qq. We let SU,i,V ppq Ď TV be the convex hull in TV of βV pW i pU qq, where, as above, βV is the composition of projection to CV and the closest point projection to TV . By the definition of a coherent orientation, for any U, i, U 1 , i1 , we have βV pW i pU qq X βV pW i1 pU 1 qq ‰ Ş H, whence SU,i,V ppq X SU 1 ,i1 ,V ppq ‰ H. The Helly property for Ş trees thus ensures that U,i SU,i,V ppq ‰ H for each V P S, and we let bV “ bV ppq “ U,i SU,i,V ppq. Lemma 2.8, below, proves that diampbV q are uniformly bounded. Lemma 2.9, below, shows the pbV q are η–consistent, where η “ ηpM, k, X q. We can now define pA ppq P X to be a realization point associated to pbU q via Theorem 1.4. Specifically, there exists ξ “ ξpη, Eq so that for all U P S, we have dU pπU ppA ppqq, bU q ď ξ. The image of pA coarsely coincides with Hθ pAq: For any x P Hθ pAq, one can orient the walls coherently by choosing, for each wall, the halfspace containing x. The resulting 0–cube p P Y has the property that dX px, pA ppqq ď C11 , where C11 “ C11 pM, k, X q. Hence Hθ pAq lies in a uniform neighborhood of im pA . On the other hand, if p P Y, then πU ppA ppqq lies uniformly close to hullpπU pAqq, so hierarchical quasiconvexity of Hθ pAq ensures that pA ppq lies uniformly close to Hθ pAq, i.e., im pA lies in a uniform neighborhood of Hθ pAq. U Distance estimates: For p P Y, we say pU i is a separator for p if pi separates βU ppA ppqq from bU . We call U the support of the separator. In Lemma 2.11 we prove there is a uniform bound, T , so that for each p P Y there are at most T separators for p. We now relate the number of walls separating a pair of points in Y to the number of points separating their images under pA . Namely, if p, q P Y, then dY pp, qq is the number of walls  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  18  between p and q, which in turn is the sum of the numbers of pVi separating bV ppq from bV pqq, as V varies. By Lemma 2.11, up to an additive error this is the same as the sum over V of the number of pVi separating βV ppA ppqq, βV ppA pqqq; we write Qpp, qq to denote this sum. Observe that: if, for some V , there exist distinct pVi , pVi1 separating βV ppA ppqq from βV ppA pqqq, then V contributes to the distance formula sum between p and q, at some fixed threshold L chosen in terms of E. Moreover, V also contributes to the distance formula sum in the case where βV ppA ppqq, βV ppA pqqq are both C–close to πV pAq and there exists at least one pVi separating βV ppA ppqq, βV ppA pqqq. Applying Lemma 2.6 and Lemma 2.10, we have ÿ ttdU ppA ppq, pA pqqquuL ě Qpp, qq ´ 100ECθN, dX ppA ppq, pA pqqq — U PS  where N is the constant from Lemma 2.10. Hence there exists C12 “ C12 pM, X , kq so that dX ppA ppq, pA pqqq ě dY pp, qq{C12 ´ C12 for p, q P Y. pA is coarsely Lipschitz: Crossing one hyperplane of Y corresponds to changing only one coordinate pbU q as above by a bounded amount, so there exists C13 “ C13 pM, k, X q so that pA is pC13 , C13 q–coarsely Lipschitz. Dimension: The assertion about dimension follows from Lemma 2.13 and the well-known fact that any finite set of n pairwise crossing hyperplanes in a CAT(0) cube complex intersect in the barycenter of some n–cube. Convex hull: For each xj P A, let yj be the orientation of the walls in Hθ pAq obtained by Ð ÝU Ý ÑU choosing, for each wall pW i , W i q, the halfspace containing xj . This orientation is coherent by definition, so determines a 0–cube of Y, which we also denote yj . By construction, each wall separates two elements of A, so every hyperplane of Y separates two of the chosen 0–cubes yi , yj . Thus no intersection of combinatorial halfspaces properly contained in Y contains all of the yj , so Y is the convex hull in Y of the set of yj . Conclusion: Lemma 2.7 provides C14 so that pA is C14 –quasimedian, so the proof is complete once we take C1 “ maxtC11 , C12 , C13 , C14 u.  Lemma 2.6. Let U P U. For each x, y P Hθ pAq, we have dU px, yq ` 50ECθ ě |ti : pU i P rβU pxq, βU pyqsu|. Moreover, if πU pxq, πU pyq are both C–close to πU pAq, then dU px, yq ě |ti : pU i P rβU pxq, βU pyqsu|. Proof. Let x, y P Hθ pAq. Recall that diampπU pxq Y βU pxqq ď 10pE ` C ` θq, so dU px, yq ě dU pβU pxq, βU pyqq ´ 20pE ` C ` θq. Hence dU px, yq ě dTU pβU pxq, βU pyqq ´ 40ECθ. Hence dU px, yq ě |ti : pU i P rβU pxq, βU pyqsu| ´ 40ECθ ´ 1, as required. The “moreover” statement follows in a similar way using the fact that the piU are M –far from leaves of TU .  Lemma 2.7. There exists C14 “ C14 pX , k, M q so that pA is C14 –quasimedian. Proof. Let µ : X 3 Ñ X be the coarse median map. Let x, y, z P Y, and let m be their median. By Remark 1.30, m corresponds to the following orientation of the walls of Y: for each wall W , mpW q is the halfspace which contains at least two of x, y, z. In other words, for each U P U and each pU i P TU , the orientation m assigns to Ð Ý Ý Ñ tW i pU q, W i pU qu is the halfspace W i pU q assigned by Ş at least two of the orientations x, y, z. By definition, for any V P S, we have bV pmq “ U PU ,i SU,i,V pmq, where, for each U, i, we have that SU,i,V pmq coincides with at least two of SU,i,V pxq, SU,i,V pyq, SU,i,V pzq. In particular, for each V R U, we have that bV pmq coarsely coincides with each of βV pxq, βV pyq, βV pzq. U Also, for each U P U and each pU i , we have that bU pmq lies in the same pi –halfspace of TU as at least two of the points bU pxq, bU pyq, bU pzq. Hence bU pmq lies in the same pU i –halfspace  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  19  of TU as mU , where mU is the median of bU pxq, bU pyq, bU pzq in the tree TU . We have shown that no pU i separates bU pmq from mU , for any U P U. Our p1, Cq–quasi-isometrically embedded choice of TU ensures that mU is, up to uniformly bounded error, a coarse median point for the images in CU of pA pxq, pA pyq, pA pzq. In other words, µppA pxq, pA pyq, pA pzqq is a realization point for pmV qV PS . As shown earlier in the proof of Theorem 2.1, the image of pA coarsely coincides with Hθ pAq, which is hierarchically quasiconvex by Proposition 1.17. Hence µppA pxq, pA pyq, pA pzqq uniformly coarsely coincides with pA pqq for some q P Y. The distance estimate in the proof of Theorem 2.1 shows that dX ppA pmq, µppA pxq, pA pyq, pA pzqqq — dX ppA pmq, pA pqqq — dY pm, qq can be bounded in terms of the number of walls separating m, q. Up to additive error, this is just the sum over U P U of the number of pU i separating bU pmq from mU , which we established above was 0, as required.  2.3.1. Lemmas supporting realization. The first two lemmas are used to construct a point in X via realization. Lemma 2.8. There exists τ “ τ pM, kq (independent of V ) so that diampbV q ď τ . Proof. If V P S ´ U, then diampbV q ď diampTV q ď 100M . Hence suppose that V P U. By definition of the pVi , there exists τ “ τ pM, kq ě 50M so that for all βV pxq, βV pyq P TV satisfying dV px, yq ą τ , there exists α P tpVi ui Y trVW uW PU1 XV Ď,U so that α is 10M –far from x, y and from all points of TV of valence larger than 2. The restriction to U1 is justified by 1 W the fact that for W 1 Ĺ W Ĺ U , we have that ρW V coarsely coincides with ρV . Choose any x, y P X projecting M –close to bV , and suppose by contradiction that dV pβV pxq, βV pyqq ą τ . Let α be as above. If α “ pVi , then we clearly have a contradiction since bV is contained in one of the connected components of TV ´ tpVi u. If α “ rVW , then we write A Y tx, yu “ A1 \ A2 , where we group together all elements of A Y tx, yu corresponding to a point of TV in a given connected component of TV ´ trVW u. By bounded geodesic image and the fact that rVW is close to 1 2 ρW V (Lemma 2.4), πW pA q and πW pA q are uniformly bounded, so that TW consists of two uniformly bounded sets, respectively containing πW pA1 q and πW pA2 q, that are joined by a segment in TW which is a geodesic γ of CW containing no valence–ą 2 vertex. Moreover, this geodesic has βW pxq, βW pyq uniformly close to its endpoints. Since W P U1 , there exists some pW i in TW . Let us show that SW,i,V ppq is far from one of W βV pxq or βV pyq, which is a contradiction. If there is a pW i in TW , then since pi was chosen W far from the leaves of TW , we have that pi P γ, lying at distance M {2 from βW pxq from βW pyq. ´1 Let T be one of the two connected components of TW ´ tpW i u. Then βW pT q cannot contain 1 1 1 1 W points x , y with βV px q, βV py q far from rV and in different components of TV ´ trVW u, which is the required property of SW,i,V ppq. Indeed, otherwise bounded geodesic image would imply that x1 , y 1 project respectively close to πW pA1 q and πW pA2 q, thus on opposite sides of pW i .  Lemma 2.9. pbV q is η–consistent, where η “ ηpM, k, X q. Proof. Let U &V . If U, V P S ´ U, we are done because the corresponding coordinates bU , bV p100M ` Eq–coarsely coincide with those of, say, x1 . If U P U and V P S ´ U, then any point in Hθ pAq projects in CV E–close to TV and hence 10E–close to ρU V by Lemma 2.3, so we are done. Now suppose that U, V P U. Let cU be a point in TU 10E–close to ρVU , and define cV similarly (cU and cV are provided by Lemma 2.3). If both bU and bV are 100M –far from the corresponding ρ, then there are SW,i,U ppq, SW 1 ,i1 ,V ppq containing bU , bV but far from cU , cV .  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  20  There cannot be q P X with βU pqq P SW,i,U ppq, βV pqq P SW 1 ,i1 ,V ppq by consistency, implying W1 that the intersection of the halfspaces chosen from LW i , Li1 is empty. This contradicts the coherence of the orientation defining p. CU  CV  ρU V  bU & or Ĺ bV  ρVU or ρVU pbV q  Figure 2. Proof of Lemma 2.9. SW,i,U ppq, SW 1 ,i1 ,V ppq are shown as oriented halfspaces in the trees TU , TV . Let U Ĺ V . If V P S ´ U, then by Lemma 2.4 we have that ρU V is 100EC–close to any point in TV , in particular bV . Hence, we can assume V P U. If U P S ´ U, similarly, the corresponding coordinates bU , bV coarsely coincide with those of a point in Hθ pAq that projects close to bV in CV . Finally, suppose U, V P U. The argument is very similar to the final argument in the transverse case above. Let cV “ rVU (which is 10E–close to ρU V by Lemma 2.4); and, as given by Lemma 2.5, we let cU be a point in TU which is 100EC–close to ρVU pbV q. If both bU and bV are 100M –far from the corresponding ρ, then there exist SW,i,U ppq, SW 1 ,i1 ,V ppq containing bU , bV but far from cU , cV . By bounded geodesic image, ρVU pSW 1 ,i1 ,V ppqq has uniformly bounded diameter. Hence, there cannot be q P X with βU pqq P SW,i,U ppq, βV pqq P SW 1 ,i1 ,V ppq by W1 consistency, implying that the intersection of the halfspaces chosen from LW i , Li1 is empty. This contradicts the coherence of the orientation defining p.  2.3.2. Control of separators. The next two lemmas prove that there is a uniform bound on the number of separators for each point; the first is a straightforward application of Ramsey theory. Lemma 2.10. There exists N “ N pX q so that for each x P Hθ pAq there are at most N elements U P U so that dU pβU pxq, πU pAqq ą 100E. Proof. One axiom of an HHS is that there is a bound, c, on the cardinality of subsets of S whose elements are pairwise Ď–comparable. By [BHS15b, Lemma 2.1], c also bounds the maximum cardinality of a set of pairwise orthogonal elements. Given x, consider the set of U P S such that dU px, Aq ą 100E. Ramsey’s theorem provides N (the Ramsey number Rpc, cq) for which either there are at most N such U , or there exist U1 , U2 with 1 U1 &U2 and dUl px, Aq ą 100E for l “ 1, 2. By Lemma 2.3, ρU U2 is 10E–close to an element of πU2 pAq and thus 90E–far from πU2 pxq. The same holds with U1 and U2 reversed, contradicting consistency.  Lemma 2.11. There exists T such that for any p P Y there exist at most T separators for p. Proof. For any V P S, since dV ppA ppq, bV q ď ξ, the number of separators with support V is bounded in terms of ξ. Hence, by Lemma 2.10, for any N 1 P N, there exists T pN 1 q so that,  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  21  if there are more than T pN 1 q separators for p, then there are at least N 1 distinct U P U so that, for some j, k: ‚ βU ppA ppqq is 100E–close to πU pxj q; ‚ there exists a separator pU i for p, with support U , separating βU pxk q from βU pxj q. The domains U as above are pj, kq–separators. Note that if U is a pj, kq–separator, then dU pxj , xk q ą M ą 10E. Hence, if N 1 exceeds the constant N0 “ N0 p100M q provided by Lemma 1.6, and the number of separators exceeds T pN 1 q, then Lemma 1.6 provides pj, kq–separators U1 , U2 , both properly nested into some V for which dV prVU1 , rVU2 q ą 10E ` ξ. l For l “ 1, 2, there exists pU iplq separating a point close to πUl pxj q from πUl pxk q, so dUl pxj , xk q ą M . Hence bounded geodesic image implies that the geodesic in TV from βV pxj q to βV pxk q must pass through rVU1 and rVU2 . Bounded geodesic image and consistency imply that βV ppA ppqq lies E–close to the connected component of TV ´trVUl u containing πV pxj q, and the same holds for bV and πV pxk q. Thus dV pβV ppA ppqq, bV q ą dV prVU1 , rVU2 q ´ 2E ą ξ, contradicting the definition of pA ppq.  2.4. Walls cross if and only if orthogonal. Lemma 2.12. Suppose U, V P U and U KV , and fix any p P hullCU pAq, q P hullCV pAq. Then there exists x P Hθ pAq that coarsely projects to p in CU and to q in CV . Proof. By partial realization, there exists x1 P X projecting E–close to p in CU and q in CV . Up to replacing E with a uniform constant depending on θ, the projection gHθ pAq px1 q to Hθ pAq has the same property, as required.  V Lemma 2.13 (Cross iff orthogonal). The walls LU i and Lj cross if and only if U KV .  &  V Proof. If U KV , then LU i crosses Lj (recall that this means that each of the four possible intersections of halfspaces, one associated to each wall, is nonempty) by Lemma 2.12. V Conversely, suppose U V . We claim LU i and Lj do not cross. First, suppose U &V . Then, by Lemma 2.3, ρVU and ρU V are uniformly close to leaves in the corresponding trees and hence V far from pVj , pU . Thus, we can choose a halfspace from LU i i (resp. Lj ) so that all its points project far from ρVU (resp. ρU V ). The chosen halfspaces are disjoint by consistency. Second, if U Ĺ V , apply the same argument, except that now pVj is far from ρU  V by construction.  2.5. Application to coarse median rank and hyperbolicity. In [BHS15b, Theorem 7.3], we showed that any HHS is a coarse median space (in the sense of [Bow13]) of rank bounded by the complexity. In the asymphoric case, the following strengthens that result. Corollary 2.14. Suppose that X is asymphoric. Then any cube complex Y from Theorem 2.1 satisfies dim Y ď ν, where ν is the rank of X . Corollary 2.15. If X is an asymphoric HHS of rank ν, then X is coarse median of rank ν. Proof of Corollary 2.14 and Corollary 2.15. Choose M as in the proof of Theorem 2.1; since M ą E, in particular M exceeds the asymphoricity constant. For any finite A Ă X , let Y be the cube complex and Y Ñ Hθ pAq be the C1 –quasimedian pC1 , C1 q–quasi-isometry provided by Theorem 2.1. By Lemma 2.13, dim Y is equal to the maximal cardinality of sets of pairwise-orthogonal elements of U. But since elements of U have associated hyperbolic spaces of diameter ě M , such subsets have cardinality bounded by ν. This proves Corollary 2.14. Moreover, Y p0q Ñ Hθ pAq is a quasimedian map from a finite median algebra satisfying the condition pC2q from the definition of a coarse median space in [Bow13, Section 8]. The rank of this median algebra is, by definition, dim Y ď ν. Hence X is coarse median of rank ν.   QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  22  We can also use the proof of Corollary 2.15 to characterize hyperbolic HHS. We say that a quasi-geodesic metric space X is hyperbolic if there exists D so that ‚ any pair of points of X is joined by a pD, Dq–quasi-geodesic, and ‚ pD, Dq–quasi-geodesic triangles are D–thin. For us, the distinction between hyperbolic geodesic spaces and hyperbolic quasi-geodesic spaces does not matter. Indeed, any quasi-geodesic metric space X is quasi-isometric to a geodesic metric space Y (in fact, a graph). If, in addition, X is hyperbolic then Y is hyperbolic (in the usual sense). There is a number of ways to see this, one of which is the “guessing geodesics” criterion for hyperbolicity from [MS13, Section 3.13][Bow14, Proposition 3.1]. It thus follows from [Bow13, Theorem 2.1] that a coarse median quasigeodesic space is hyperbolic if and only if it has rank at most 1. We thus get a characterization of HHS which are hyperbolic: Corollary 2.16. Let pX , Sq be an HHS. Then the following are equivalent: ‚ X is coarse median of rank ď 1, and is thus hyperbolic; ‚ (Bounded orthogonality) There exists q P R so that mintdiampCU q, diampCV qu ď q for all U, V P S satisfying U KV . Proof. The fact that hyperbolicity implies bounded orthogonality easily follows from the construction of standard product regions. The reverse implication follows from Corollary 2.15, with ν “ 1, and the aforementioned [Bow13, Theorem 2.1].  Remark 2.17. One can prove that bounded orthogonality implies hyperbolicity using the guessing geodesics criterion instead of the coarse median rank. More specifically, triangles of hierarchy paths are thin because any such triangle is contained in the hull of the vertices, which is quasi-isometric to a 1–dimensional cube complex, i.e. a tree. 3. Quasiflats and asymptotic cones 3.1. Ultralimits of hulls. For any hierarchically quasiconvex A Ď X and any p, q P A, x P X , the coarse median of pp, q, xq lies uniformly close to A. This easily yields: Lemma 3.1. For any κ, the ultralimit of any sequence of κ–hierarchically quasiconvex subspaces is median convex. Given m, m1 in a median space M , we let hullpm, m1 q denote the set of z P M for which the median of m, m1 , z is z. Lemma 3.2. Let x, y P X . Then hullptx, yuq “ limω Hθ ptxn , yn uq. Proof. If zn P Hθ pxn , yn q then mpxn , yn , zn q coarsely coincides with zn , which yields lim Hθ pxn , yn q Ď hullpx, yq. ω  To prove the other containment, suppose z 1 P hullpx, yq. Let zn “ mpxn , yn , zn1 q P Hθ pxn , yn q. We have z 1 “ z because of the definition of the median in X , so z 1 P limω Hθ pxn , yn q.  3.2. Topological flats in asymptotic cones. Lemma 3.3. Let X be an asymptotic cone of X and let F Ď X be a bilipschitz n–flat. Let H be an ultralimit of uniformly hierarchically quasiconvex subsets of X and suppose that F is contained in a neighborhood of H of finite radius. Then F Ď H. Proof. Suppose by contradiction that there exists some p P F ´ H. By [Bow15, Proposition 1.2, Lemma 3.3], there are arbitrarily large balls in F contained in a subset of F which is a union of blocks pairwise intersecting, if at all, in a common face.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  23  We let F1 be such a union of blocks which contains a ball around p P F of radius much larger than supxPF dpx, Hq. After possibly subdividing the cubulation of F1 , there is a ν–block B0 of F1 containing p and disjoint from H. Since blocks are convex hulls of any pair of opposite corners, by Lemma 3.2, B0 is the ultralimit H 0 of hulls of pairs of points. Recall from Section 1.5 that gH 0 pHq is a median convex subspace, so it must be a sub-block B 1 of B0 . If B 1 has dimension i then Lemma 1.19.(3) provides an pi ` 1q–dimensional topologically embedded copy of r0, 1si`1 in X . This implies i ă ν. For any face B2 of B0 not intersecting B 1 , there exists a block B11 whose intersection with B0 is B2 , so that B1 “ B0 Y B11 is a block by [Bow15, Lemma 3.2]. We claim gB1 pHq “ gB0 pHq, which implies that B1 is also disjoint from H. To prove the claim, note that B 1 “ gB0 pHq “ gB0 pgB1 pHqq. Since gB0 |B1 is just the natural retraction, which is one-to-one on B 1 , the claim follows. We can now proceed inductively until we find a block Bn that we cannot extend to a block Bn`1 using the procedure above, implying that we reached the boundary of F1 . Inductively, we have gBn pHq “ gB0 pHq, but this is impossible because there are points of H that are much closer to Bn than to B0 . This is the required contradiction.  3.3. Quasiflats and hulls. Proposition 3.4. Let F : Rν Ñ X be a quasiflat. Then, there exists N so that the following holds. For any  ą 0 and every R0 there exists a ball B Ď Rν of radius R ě R0 and a set A Ď X with |A| ď N so that F pBq Ď NR pHθ pAqq. Proof. Let X be any asymptotic cone of X with observation points in the image of F . Let F : Rν Ñ X be the corresponding ultralimit of F . Let B be a ball of radius 1 in Rν . By [Bow15, Proposition 1.2], F pBq is contained in a finite union of blocks. Notice that each block is the convex hull of a pair of opposite corners. By Lemma 3.2, F pBq is contained in the ultralimit of hulls of pairs of points. Thus, F pBq is contained in the ultralimit of a sequence of hulls of uniformly finite sets (the hull of a union contains the union of the hulls). This implies the conclusion by a standard contradiction argument.  Proposition 3.5. For every K, N there exist  ą 0, R0 and L with the following property. Let B be a ball of radius R ě R0 in Rν , and let F : B Ñ X be a pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embedding. Let A Ď X have |A| ď N , and suppose that F pBq Ď NR pHθ pAqq. Then F pB 1 q Ď NL pHθ pAqq, where B 1 is the sub-ball of B with the same center and radius R{2. Proof. If not, there exist constants K, N and: ‚ balls Bm “ Bm p0q of radius Rm in Rν , and pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embeddings Fm : Bm Ñ X , ‚ subsets Am Ď X with |Am | ď N and 1 lim sup dpFm pxq, Hθ pAm qq “ 0, mÑ8 Rm xPBm but limmÑ8 supxPBRm {2 p0q dpFm pxq, Hθ pAm qq “ 8. We define `m ptq “ supxPFm pBmintt,Rm u p0qq dpx, Hθ pAm qq. The ultralimit ` of the `m can be regarded as a function ` : ω R` Ñ ω R` . Note that ` is non-decreasing. Let σ P ω R` be represented by R. For S, T P ω R` we write S ! T if limω Sm {Tm “ 0, and we write S ă 8 if limω Sm ‰ 8, i.e. if S " 1 does not hold. We find a contradiction (with the second bullet above) provided we show `pσ{2q “ limω,m `m pRm {2q ă 8. The first part of the second bullet above implies that `pσq ! σ. We first need: Claim 3.6. For λ P ω R` , if `pλq " 1, then for any α " 1 we have `pλ ´ α`pλqq ! `pλq.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  24  Proof of Claim 3.6. Suppose not. Consider an asymptotic cone X of X with the observation point in F pBλ´α`pλq p0qq and scaling factor `pλ´α`pλqq. Then any point in the image of F has distance from H bounded above by `pλq{`pλ ´ α`pλqq ă 8. In fact, any point of the image of F which gives a point of X lies in a ball of radius λ´α`pλq`t`pλ´α`pλqq ď λ´α`pλq`t`pλq for some finite t, and hence in particular in the image of the ball of radius λ. By Lemma 3.3 we have F Ď H. But, we chose an arbitrary observation point in F pBλ´α`pλq p0qq, and thus we get a contradiction by choosing a point that maximizes the distance from Hθ pAq.  By a standard argument, Claim 3.6 implies that there exist T0 , α0 P R` so that the following holds. For ω–a.e. m, if `m ptq ě T0 for some t and α ě α0 , then `m pt ´ α`m ptqq ď `m ptq{2. Fix one such m, which furthermore satisfies `m pRm q ď Rm {p4α0 q (which is satisfied by ω–a.e. m by the second bullet). j 0 “R . Let Rm “ Rm p1 ` 2´j q{2. In particular, Rm m j i qăT . Claim 3.7. Either `pRm q ď `m pRm q{2j or there exists i ď j with `m pRm 0 j j Proof of Claim 3.7. We argue by induction on j. Suppose that Rm satisfy `m pRm q ď j j`1 j j j j j ´j´2 `m pRm q{2 and `m pRm q ě T0 . Note that Rm “ Rm ´ 2 Rm “ Rm ´ αm `m pRm q for j j`1 j some αm ě α0 . Hence, the claim gives `m pRm q ď `m pRm q{2 ď `pRm q{2j`1 , as required.  j In either of the two cases provided by Claim 3.7, there exists j with `m pRm q ă T0 . This implies `m pRm {2q ă T0 , and hence `pσ{2q ă T0 , as required.   Combining Proposition 3.4 and Proposition 3.5, one gets: Corollary 3.8. For every quasi-isometric embedding f : Rn Ñ X , there exist L, N so that the following holds. Then there exist arbitrarily large R so that for the ball B of radius R around 0, there is a set AR Ă X with |AR | ď N and f pB 1 q Ď NL pHθ pAR qq, where B 1 is as in Proposition 3.5. 4. Orthants and quasiflats From now on, we fix an asymphoric HHS pX , Sq of rank ν. 4.1. Orthants in X . We fix once and for all D so that for any U P S any two points in FU are connected by a D–hierarchy path. Definition 4.1. Let U1 , . . . , Uk be a pairwise-orthogonal family and let γi be a D–hierarchy ray in FUi so that πUi pγi q is unbounded. We call the image of γ1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ γk Ď FU1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ FUk under the standard embedding a standard k–orthant in X with support set tUi u. A standard orthant is a standard ν–orthant. Remark 4.2. Observe that if Q “ γ1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ γk Ď FU1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ FUk is a standard k–orthant, then it has uniformly bounded projection to CU unless U Ď Ui for some i. More precisely, each γi has uniformly bounded projection to CU unless U Ď Ui (in particular, πU pγi q is uniformly bounded for U Ď Uj , j ‰ i). For each i and each U Ď Ui , we have that πU pQq uniformly coarsely coincides with πU pγi q. Lemma 4.3. Consider a standard k–orthant O whose support set tUi u has the property that, for some C, we have mintdiamCU pπU pOqq, diamCV pπV pOqqu ď C whenever U, V Ď Ui are orthogonal and i ď k. Then O is κ–hierarchically quasiconvex, where κ depends on C, D, X , S. In particular, there exists a function κ, depending on pX , Sq, D, and the asymphoricity constant, so that standard orthants are κ–hierarchically quasiconvex, and the same holds for standard k–orthants contained in standard orthants.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  25  ś Proof. Let O be a standard k–orthant which is the image of ki“1 γi , where each γi is a hierarchy path in FUi and tU1 , . . . , Uk u is a pairwise orthogonal set supporting O, and let C be the given constant. By Remark 4.2 and the fact that hierarchy paths project close to geodesics, πU pOq is uniformly quasiconvex in CU , for U P S. Suppose x P X has the property that πU pxq lies uniformly close to πU pOq for each U P S; to verify hierarchical quasiconvexity ś of O, we must bound the distance from x ś to O. By hierarchical quasiconvexity of j FUj , our x must lie uniformly close to j FUj , so it suffices to show that gFj pxq lies uniformly close to γj for each j, where Fj denotes the parallel copy of Fj containing the “corner” of O. Since πU pxq coarsely coincides with πU pgFj pxqq when U Ď Ui , this follows from hierarchical quasiconvexity of γj , i.e., Lemma 4.4.  Lemma 4.4. Let γ : I Ñ X be a pD, Dq–hierarchy path, where I Ď R is an interval. Suppose that there exists C so that, whenever U KV , either πU pγq or πV pγq has diameter bounded by C. Then γ is κ–hierarchically quasiconvex, where κ “ κpD, X , S, Cq. Proof. Let i, j P I and let x “ γpiq, y “ γpjq. Choose M ě maxtC, M0 u, where M0 is the constant from Theorem 2.1. By Theorem 2.1, there exists C1 , depending on M , S and X , so that there is a CAT(0) cube complex Cpx, yq and a C1 –quasimedian pC1 , C1 q–quasi-isometric embedding Cpx, yq Ñ X whose image C1 –coarsely coincides with Hθ px, yq. Since γ|ri,js is a hierarchy path from x to y, γpri, jsq is coarsely (depending on D) contained in Hθ px, yq and hence coarsely (depending on C1 , D) contained in the image of Cpx, yq. On the other hand, the dimension bound from Theorem 2.1, the hypothesized property of C, and our choice of M ě C imply that dim Cpx, yq ď 1. Moreover, Theorem 2.1 implies that Cpx, yq is the convex hull of a set of at most two 0–cubes in Cpx, yq, so Cpx, yq is a subdivided interval. Hence γpri, jsq and Hθ px, yq uniformly coarsely coincide. Now fix  and suppose x P X has the property that πU pxq lies –close to the unparameterized pD, Dq–quasigeodesic πU pγq for each U P S. Then there exists i ě 0 so that x lies –close to the image of πU ˝ γ|r0,is for all U . Hence x lies κ–close to Hθ pγp0q, γpiqq, where κ depends only on  and the quasiconvexity function for hulls of pairs of points. But by the above discussion, this implies that x lies uniformly close to γpr0, jsq, as required.  Next we show that suitable quasi-isometric embeddings of cubical orthants have images which are approximated by standard orthants. Lemma 4.5. Let O be an ν–dimensional cubical orthant with a quasimedian quasi-isometric embedding q : O Ñ X . Then there is a standard orthant Q Ă X with dhaus pqpOq, Qq ă 8. Proof. Let λ be so that q is λ–quasimedian and a pλ, λq–quasi-isometric embedding. Related points and pairs: We say that x, y P O are i–related, for 1 ď i ď ν, if they only differ in the ith coordinate. The i–related pairs x, y and x1 , y 1 are j–related, for i ‰ j, if the pairs x, x1 and y, y 1 are j–related (i.e. if x, x1 , y, y 1 are the vertices of a rectangle in the pi, jq–plane). Relevant domains: Let M “ M pλ, X q be sufficiently large. For 1 ď i ď ν, let Ui be the collection of all U P S so that there exist i–related x, y P O with dU pqpxq, qpyqq ě M . For any K, we also let RelK pqpOqq “ tU P S : diamCU pπU pqpOqqq ě Ku. We now prove two claims about i–related pairs and Yi Ui : Claim 4.6. There exists C “ Cpλ, X q so that the following holds. Suppose that the i–related pairs x, y and x1 , y 1 are j–related. Then for any U P S either ‚ dU px, yq ď C and dU px1 , y 1 q ď C, or ‚ dU px, x1 q ď C and dU py, y 1 q ď C.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  26  Proof of Claim 4.6. Let m : O3 Ñ O be the median on O coming from the cubical structure (so each cube is an `1 ν–cube of unit side length). We have mpx1 , x, yq “ x, so that in each U P S we have that πU pxq lies uniformly close to geodesics rπU px1 q, πU pyqs. Similarly, πU py 1 q lies uniformly close to geodesics rπU px1 q, πU pyqs. Also, πU px1 q and πU pyq lie uniformly close to geodesics rπU pxq, πU py 1 qs, forcing the endpoints of rπU px1 q, πU pyqs and rπU pxq, πU py 1 qs to be uniformly close in pairs, as required.  Claim 4.7. For M sufficiently large, U KV whenever U P Ui , V P Uj and i ‰ j. Proof of Claim 4.7. Consider distinct i, j, an i–related pair x, y and some U with dU pqpxq, qpyqq ě M , and a j–related pair w, z and some V so that dV pqpwq, qpzqq ě M . Provided M ě 10pν ´ 1qC, applying Claim 4.6 at most ν ´ 1 times allows us to change the coordinates of w, z (other than the j th ) to find an i–related pair x1 , y 1 which is j–related to x, y. Moreover, we have: ‚ dV pqpxq, qpx1 qq ě M {2 and dV pqpyq, qpy 1 qq ě M {2; ‚ dU pqpxq, qpyqq ě M and dU pqpx1 q, qpy 1 qq ě M {2. Claim 4.6 implies that dU pqpxq, qpx1 qq ď C, dU pqpyq, qpy 1 qq ď C and dV pqpxq, qpyqq ď C, dV pqpx1 q, qpy 1 qq ď C. For M large enough, this implies that U KV . Indeed, if U “ V , then the triangle inequality yields 4C ě M {2, a contradiction. If U &V , then there exists p P tx, x1 , y, y 1 u with πU ppq E–far from ρVU and πV ppq E–far from ρU V , contradicting consistency. A similar contradiction arises if U, V are Ĺ–comparable. Hence U KV , as required.  The candidate standard orthant: Let γi1 be the image of the axis along the ith coordinate in O. Since q is quasimedian and a quasi-isometric embedding, γi1 is a quasi-geodesic projecting to unparameterized quasi-geodesics in every CU , i.e. it is a D1 “ D1 pλq–hierarchy ray. By [DHS16, Lemma 3.3], there exist U1i , . . . , Uki i so that πU i pγi1 q is unbounded. j  1 Uij KUij .  For 1 ď i ď ν, 1 ď j ă ď ki , we have Since each Uji P Ui , Claim 4.7 and the fact that X has rank ν implies that ki “ 1 for each i. To streamline notation, let Ui “ U1i . Since tU1 , . . . , Uν u is a pairwise-orthogonal set, the following holds for all i ď ν: if U, V Ĺ Ui have diampCU q, diampCV q ą E, then U V , for otherwise tU1 , . . . , Ui´1 , U, V, Ui`1 , . . . , Uν u would contradict that X is asymphoric. It follows from Corollary 2.16 that each FUi is hyperbolic. Hence there exists a D2 –hierarchy ray γi in FUi so that the distance between γi ptq and γi1 ptq is uniformly bounded for all t P r0, 8q. The γi define a standard orthant Q with support tUi u. qpOq and Q lie within finite Hausdorff distance: We claim the following. For p P O we denote by pi the point on the i–th coordinate axis with theŤsame i–th coordinate as p. Then there exists C 1 so that dCU pqppq, qppi qq ď C 1 whenever U R j‰i Uj . This holds because we can find a sequence of at most ν points, starting with p and ending with pi , so that consecutive elements are j–related for j ‰ i. By definition, if consecutive elements have far away projection to some CU , then U P Uj for j ‰ i. Let now p P O. By the above claim, πU pqppqq coarsely coincides with πU pqppi qq if U P Ui , and otherwise it coarsely coincides with πU pcq, where c is the image of the “corner” of O. We can find points γi pti q uniformly close to qppi q P γi1 , and the γi pti q define a point p1 of Q. It is readily checked that for every U , πU pqppqq coarsely coincides with πU pp1 q, so that qppq and p1 are within uniformly bounded distance. This proves that qpOq is contained in a finite radius neighborhood of Q. A very similar argument proves the other containment.  j1  &  4.2. Coarse intersections of orthants. Definition 4.8. Let A, B Ă X . Suppose that there exists R0 so that for any R, R1 ě R0 , we have dhaus pNR pAq X NR pBq, NR1 pAq X NR1 pBqq ă 8. Then we refer to any subspace at finite  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  27  Hausdorff distance from NR0 pAq X NR0 pBq as the coarse intersection of A and B, which we denote AX̃B. Lemma 4.9. Let A, B be hierarchically quasiconvex. Then AX̃B is well-defined and coarsely coincides with gA pBq. Proof. It is easily seen from Lemma 1.19.(3) that any point in gA pBq lies within uniformly bounded distance of both A and B. On the other hand, if p P NR pAq X NR pBq then p is close to gA pp1 q for some p1 P B which is R–close to p.  Lemma 4.10. Let O, O1 be standard orthants in X with supports tUi uiďν , tUi1 uiďν . Then OX̃O1 is well-defined, and coarsely coincides with gO pO1 q, as well as with a standard k–orthant whose support is contained in tUi uiďν X tUi1 uiďν . Proof. By Lemma 4.9, we only need to show that gO pO1 q coarsely coincides with a standard k–orthant whose support is contained in tUi u X tUi1 u. Let γi be the hierarchy ray in FUi participating in O, and similarly for γi1 and O1 . Let tVj uj“1,...,k be the set of all Vj “ Ui “ Ui11 so that γi and γi11 lie within bounded Hausdorff distance, in which case set αj “ γi . Let O2 be a standard k–orthant contained in O with support set tVj u defined by the αj . We claim that O2 represents OX̃O1 . By Lemma 4.3, O2 is hierarchically quasiconvex, and G “ gO pO1 q is hierarchically quasiconvex by Lemma 1.19.(1). We claim that O2 coarsely coincides with G. Since they are hierarchically quasiconvex, we only need to argue that their projections to each CU coarsely coincide. By Remark 4.2, for each U , πU pO2 q coarsely coincides with some πU pαj q. In particular, if U is not nested in some Uj , then πU pO2 q uniformly coarsely coincides with with each πU pαj p0qq. Also, πU pGq coarsely coincides with the projection of a single γi , if γi “ αj for some j. Otherwise πU pGq coarsely coincides with πU pαj p0qq for each j. Hence πU pGq and πU pO2 q coarsely coincide for all U .  4.3. Quasiflats theorem. Theorem 4.11. Let X be an asymphoric HHS of rank ν and let f : Rν Ñ X be a quasiisometric embedding. Then there exist finitely many standard orthants Qi Ď X for 1 ď i ď k, so that dhaus pf pRν q, Yki“1 Qi q ă 8. Proof. Let L, N be as in Corollary 3.8. Then there exist an increasing unbounded sequence R1 ă R2 ă . . . and sets Ai Ď X of cardinality at most N so that the following holds. Let Bi be the ball in Rν of radius Ri centered at a fixed basepoint, and let Hi “ Hθ pAi q. Then f pBi q Ď NL pHi q. Let ci : Yi Ñ Hi be the pC, Cq–quasi-isometry provided by Theorem 2.1, so Yi is a CAT(0) cube complex of dimension ď ν; the constant C depends on N . Now we pass to (non-rescaled!) ultralimits1. More specifically, f has an ultralimit which is a pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embedding fˆ: Rν Ñ Xp, for some ultralimit Xp of X . It is easily deduced from Corollary 2.15 that Xp is a coarse median space and we have the following: there is a CAT(0) cube complex Ŷ, an ultralimit of the Yi , endowed with a C–quasimedian pC, Cq–quasi-isometry ĉ : Ŷ Ñ Xp so that the image of fˆ lies in the L–neighborhood of impĉq. By Theorem 1.1 of [Hua14b], there exist n–dimensional cubical orthants O1 , . . . , Ok in Ŷ so that dhaus pfˆpRν q, ĉpYki“1 Oi qq ă 8. Moreover, ĉpOi q lies within finite Hausdorff distance 1If X is proper, one can take Hausdorff limits instead. To avoid that assumption, we use ultralimits instead.  If X is not proper then Xp is (much) bigger than X .  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  28  of fˆpOi1 q for some Oi1 Ď Rν . Hence, Qi “ f pOi1 q is the image of a C 1 –quasimedian pC 1 , C 1 q– quasi-isometric embedding, and hence by Lemma 4.5 it lies within finite Hausdorff distance of a standard orthant. The Qi are as required.  4.4. Controlled number of orthants. We now improve Theorem 4.11, by showing that the number of standard orthants required can be bounded in terms of the quasi-isometry constants: Theorem 4.12. Let X be an asymphoric HHS of rank ν. For every K there exists N so that the following holds. Let f : Rν Ñ X be a pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embedding. Then there exist standard orthants Qi Ď X , i “ 1, . . . , N , so that dhaus pf pRν q, YN i“1 Qi q ă 8. The following is a slightly stronger version of the well-known fact that quasi-isometric embeddings of Rn into itself are coarsely surjective, see [KL97a, Corollary 2.6]. Lemma 4.13. For every K, n ě 1 there exists C so that the following holds. Let f : Rn Ñ Rn be a pK, Kq–coarsely Lipschitz proper map. Then dhaus pf pRn q, Rn q ď C. Proof. We actually show that if f : Rn Ñ Rn is continuous and proper, then f is surjective, and the lemma follows from the fact that f can be approximated by a continuous map. Since f is proper, it extends to a continuous map f : Rn Ñ Rn between two copies of the 1–point compactification Rn of Rn , which is homeomorphic to the sphere S n . Also, it is easily seen that we can identify the domain Rn with S n in such a way that, since f is coarsely Lipschitz, no pair of antipodal points have the same image. But then f must be surjective, for otherwise the Borsuk-Ulam theorem would force the existence of such pair of antipodal points. Since f is surjective, then so is f , as required.  Proposition 4.14. For every K there exists N so that the following holds. Let F : Rν Ñ X be a pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embedding whose image lies at finite Hausdorff distance from Ťk i“1 Oi , where each Oi is a standard orthant. If dhaus pOi , Oj q “ 8 when i ‰ j, then k ď N . Proof. The idea of the proof is that each of the k orthants contributes at least Rν volume growth to F pRν q, but the volume growth of F pRν q is bounded above by Rν times a (large) constant depending on K. Ť Let D “ dhaus pF pRν q, ki“1 Oi q. By Lemma 4.10, since the Oi are pairwise at infinite Hausdorff distance, for each i we can find a sub-orthant Oi1 Ă Oi so that for each i, j, dpOi1 , Oj1 q ě 2D ` 1. We will identify Oi1 with r0, 8qν . Let Ai Ď Rν be the set of points whose image under F is at distance at most D from Oi1 . Note that the Ai are disjoint. For each R and i, there exists a sub-orthant OiR Ă Oi1 so that if x P Ai and dpF pxq, OiR q ď D, then BR pxq Ď Ai . Let gi be the composition of F and the gate map to Oi1 ; the map gi is pK 1 , K 1 q–coarsely Lipschitz for some K 1 “ K 1 pK, X q. Let C be as in Lemma 4.13 for K 1 . We claim that there are suborthants Oi2 Ă Oi1 so that Oi2 Ă NC pgi pAi qq X Oi1 . If not, for each n there exist pn P Ai with gi ppn q P Oin and some xn P Oin with dpxn , gi ppn qq ď 2C but dpxn , gi pAi qq ą C. Then, we consider the (non-rescaled!) ultralimit X of Rν with observation point ppn q, which is isometric to Rν . This yields a pK 1 , K 1 q–coarsely Lipschitz map from X to an ultralimit of the Oin , which is again a copy of Rν , but the map is not C–coarsely surjective, contradicting Lemma 4.13 and thus verifying the claim. We now bound from below βR “ |tx P Zν : F pxq P BR pF p0qqu|. There exists t “ tpKq so that βR ď tRn . Let C 1 “ C 1 pC, n, Kq satisfy Oi2 Ă NC 1 pgi pAi X Zν qq X Oi1 . Consider a maximal p2C 1 ` 1q–net Ni in Oi2 and, for any point p of the net, choose some q P Ai X Zν with dpp, F pqqq ď C 1 . Distinct p yield distinct q. Moreover, |Ni | X BR pF p0qq ě t1 Rn for all sufficiently large R and some t1 “ t1 pC 1 , X q. Since the Ai are disjoint, we have βR ě kt1 Rn for all sufficiently large R. Hence k ď t{t1 , and we are done.   QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  29  Proof of Theorem 4.12. By Theorem 4.11, the image of F lies at finite Hausdorff distance Ť from a union of orthants ki“1 Oi . We can assume that dhaus pOi , Oj q “ 8 when i ‰ j; indeed, if not, then we can drop Oi or Oj from the collection without affecting the conclusion. Hence, k ď N , for N as in Proposition 4.14.  4.5. Controlled distance. As in the cubical case, it is not possible in general to give an effective bound on the Hausdorff distance between a quasiflat and the corresponding union of orthants. However, we have the following: Lemma 4.15. For every K, N there exists L so that the following holds. Let F : Rν Ñ X be a pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embedding whose image lies at finite Hausdorff distance from ŤN ŤN i“1 Oi , where each Oi is a standard orthant. Then F Ă NL pHθ p i“1 Oi qq. Proof. Let F and Oi be as in the statement. Any bounded set in Oi lies in a uniform neighborhood of the hull of the “corner point” of Oi and some point along the diagonal. Hence, there exists D so that any ball B inŤRn has the property that F pBq is contained in the D–neighborhood of Hθ pAq for some A Ď i Oi with |A| ď 2N . For L as in Proposition 3.5, Ť there exist arbitrarily large balls B 1 in Rν so that F pB 1 q Ď NL pHθ pAqq Ď NL pHθ p N i“1 Oi qq Ť for some A Ď i Oi . Hence, the same holds for Rν , as required.  Corollary 4.16. For each K there exists L, N so that the following holds. Let F : Rν Ñ X be a pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embedding. Then there exist standard orthants O1 , . . . , ON so Ť that F Ă NL pHθ p N i“1 Oi qq. Proof. Follows immediately from Theorem 4.12 and Lemma 4.15.    5. Induced maps on hinges: mapping class group rigidity Let pX , Sq be an HHS. We will impose three additional assumptions on pX , Sq, which are satisfied by the standard HHS structure on the mapping class group, described in [BHS15b, Section 11]. First, we introduce a few relevant definitions. Definition 5.1 (Standard flat). Let U1 , . . . , Uk be a pairwise-orthogonal family and let γi be a bi-infinite D–hierarchy path in FUi with πUi pγi q unbounded. We call the image of γ1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ γk Ď FU1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ FUk under the standard embedding a standard k–flat in X with support set tUi u. For brevity, we refer to a standard ν–flat as a standard flat. The next definition describes those subsets of S which give rise to standard flats. Definition 5.2 (Complete support set). A complete support set is a subset tUi uνi“1 Ă S whose elements are pairwise orthogonal and satisfy diampCUi q “ 8 for all i ď ν. Note that a complete support set tUi u and a pair of distinct points tp˘ i u P BCUi for each i, allows one to construct a standard flat, FtpUi ,p˘ qu associated to some choice of bi-infinite i  hierarchy paths in each FUi whose projection to CUi has limit points tp˘ i u in CUi . Accordingly, it is easy to verify that a complete support set is the support set of some standard flat if and only if each BCUi contains at least two points. Definition 5.3 (Hinge, orthogonal hinges). A hinge is a pair pU, pq with: ‚ U P S; ‚ U belongs to some complete support set; and, ‚ p P BCU . Let HingepSq be the set of hinges. We say pU, pq, pV, qq P HingepSq are orthogonal if U KV .  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  30  Definition 5.4 (Ray associated to a hinge). A µ–ray associated to a hinge σ “ pU, pq is a µ–hierarchy path hσ so that πU phσ q is a quasigeodesic ray representing p and so that diampπV phσ qq ď µ for V ‰ U . Remark 5.5. Any two candidates for hσ lie at finite Hausdorff distance, so for our purposes an arbitrary choice is fine. If σ ‰ σ 1 P HingepSq, then dhaus phσ , hσ1 q “ 8. Remark 5.6. Each hinge corresponds to a 0–simplex in the HHS boundary BX ; see [DHS16]. The first additional assumption holds, for example, in any hierarchically hyperbolic group: Assumption 1. For every U P S, either diampCU q ď E or |BCU | ě 2 has at least two points at infinity. Remark 5.7. In what follows, we could replace Assumption 1 with: for each U P S which is the first coordinate of some hinge, |BCU | ě 2. Equivalently, each U P S which is the first coordinate of some hinge is the first coordinate of at least two hinges. The second assumption roughly says that, if a standard 1–flat is contained in some standard flat, then it can be realized as the intersection of a pair of standard flats. Assumption 2. For every U contained in a complete support set there exist complete support sets U1 , U2 with tU u “ U1 X U2 . The third assumption is a two-dimensional version of the second one; this assumption says that if a standard 2–flat is contained in a standard flat, then it can be obtained as the intersection of some pair of standard flats. Assumption 3. If ν ą 2, then for every U, V , with each contained in a complete support set and with U KV , there exist complete support sets U1 , U2 with tU, V u “ U1 X U2 . Theorem 5.8. Let pX , Sq, pY, Tq be asymphoric HHS satisfying assumptions (1), (2) and (3). For any quasi-isometry f : X Ñ Y, there exists a bijection f 7 : HingepSq Ñ HingepTq satisfying: ‚ f 7 preserves orthogonality of hinges; ‚ for all σ P HingepSq, we have dhaus phf 7 pσq , f phσ qq ă 8. Remark 5.9. Under suitable conditions, we expect that there exists an analogue of Theorem 5.8 in which hinges are replaced by sets of pairs tpUi , pi qu, where tUi ui is a pairwise orthogonal set and pi P BCUi . In particular, one should be able to show in this way that isolated flats are taken close to isolated flats. More strongly, one could consider the situation where flats coarsely intersect in subspaces of codimension ě 2, as in [FLS15]. Proof of Theorem 5.8. Let σ “ pU, pq P HingepSq. How we will define f 7 : We will produce a hinge σ 1 so that dhaus phσ1 , f phσ qq ă 8. Remark 5.5 implies that σ 1 is uniquely determined by this property, so we can set f 7 pσq “ σ 1 . To see that this is a bijection, let f¯ : Y Ñ X be a quasi-inverse of f . Then dhaus pf¯phσ1 q, hσ q ă 8, so we can define an inverse for f 7 in the same way. Choosing σ 1 : Since pU, pq is a hinge, U is in a complete support set tUi ui . By Assumption 1, |BCUi | ě 2 for each i. Hence there exists a standard flat F with support tUi u. Assumption 2 provides two standard flats F1 , F2 , the intersection of whose support sets is tU u; moreover, in view of Lemma 4.10, we can arrange that F1 X̃F2 is a line coarsely containing hσ . By Theorem 4.11, f pF1 q and f pF2 q are coarsely equal to unions of finitely many standard orthants. Hence f pF1 qX̃f pF2 q has the following three properties: ‚ f pF1 qX̃f pF2 q is a finite union of coarse intersections of pairs of standard orthants; ‚ f pF1 qX̃f pF2 q is coarsely R;  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  31  ‚ f pF1 qX̃f pF2 q coarsely contains f phσ q. By Lemma 4.10 and the first of the above properties, f pF1 qX̃f pF2 q is the finite union of standard k–orthants (arising as coarse intersections of pairs of standard orthants). Hence, one of these pairs gives a 1–orthant (in particular, a copy of R` ) which coarsely coincides with f phσ q. Let σ 1 be the hinge pV, qq, where V is the domain of the orthant just determined and q is the unique point in BV determined by the fact that f phσ q projects to a quasi-geodesic ray in CV . Then σ 1 is the hinge uniquely determined by f phσ q, as required. Preservation of orthogonality: Let σ, σ 1 be orthogonal hinges. Assumption 3 provides a standard 2–flat, F, coarsely containing hσ and hσ1 . Moreover, F coarsely coincides with F1 X̃F2 , for standard flats F1 , F2 . Hence f pF1 qX̃f pF2 q is a 2–dimensional quasiflat. On the other hand, by Theorem 4.11, f pF1 qX̃f pF2 q is the union of finitely many coarse intersections of pairs of standard orthants, so by Lemma 4.10, f pF1 qX̃f pF2 q is coarsely the union of disjoint standard 2–orthants O0 , . . . , Ot´1 . Moreover, hf 7 pσq and hf 7 pσ1 q coarsely coincide with coordinate rays of some Oi , Oj .  O1 O0  r1`  r0`  O2 r4` r2` O4  r3`  O3  Figure 3. The 2–orthants O0 , . . . , Ot and the cyclic ordering of their coordinate rays (up to coarse coincidence). Now, as shown in Figure 3, we can cyclically order the coordinate rays in O0 , . . . , Ot´1 . First, label the orthants so that for each s P Zt , the 2–orthant Os has the property that one of its coordinate rays rs´ coarsely coincides with a coordinate ray in Os´1 and the other, rs` , coarsely coincides with a coordinate ray in Os`1 . Now cyclically order the coarse equivalence ` classes of rays: r0` , r1` , . . . , rt´1 . We claim that hf 7 pσq , hf 7 pσ1 q must be adjacent in this order. This will imply that they are coarsely contained in a common 2–orthant, and hence f 7 pσqKf 7 pσ 1 q, as required. Indeed, if there was a coordinate ray r between hf 7 pσq and hf 7 pσ1 q , then r is coarsely hf 7 pσ2 q , so that by definition f ´1 prq is coarsely hσ2 . (Here we used Assumption 2, which guarantees that r is the ray associated to some hinge.) But then hσ , hσ1 , hσ2 pairwise have infinite Hausdorff distance, are contained in the same standard 2–orthant, and they each arise as the coarse intersection with some other orthant, contradicting Lemma 4.10.  5.1. Sharpening of f 7 . The hinge f 7 pσq prescribes a hierarchy ray which lies within finite distance of f phσ q, but it does not (and cannot) provide a uniform bound on the distance; which is what one typically needs to show that two given quasi-isometries coarsely coincide. Under many circumstances, finiteness can actually be promoted to a uniform bound, with  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  32  little extra work. As an illustration of this, we give an example tailored to the mapping class group case in the following lemma. Lemma 5.10. Let pX , Sq, pY, Tq be asymphoric HHS satisfying Assumptions (1), (2) and (3). There exists C with the following property. Let tUi uni“1 Ď S be a complete support set, and n let p˘ i be distinct points in BCUi . Suppose that there exists a complete support set tVi ui“1 Ď T ˘ and distinct points qi˘ P BCVi so that for each k “ 1, . . . , n we have f 7 pUk , p˘ k q “ pVk , qk q. Then, dhaus pf pFtpUi ,p˘ uu q, FtpVj ,q˘ qu q ď C. i  j  Proof. Hierarchical quasiconvexity of FtpVj ,q˘ qu implies it uniformly coarsely coincides with j  Hθ pFtpVj ,q˘ qu q. Containment of f pFtpUi ,p˘ qu q in a uniform neighborhood of FtpVj ,q˘ qu then j i j follows from Lemma 4.15. The other containment follows by applying the same argument to a quasi-inverse of f .  5.2. Mapping class groups. We now use Theorem 5.8 to provide a new proof of quasiisometric rigidity of mapping class groups. Theorem 5.11. [BKMM12] Let X be the the mapping class group of a non-sporadic surface S. Then for any K there exists L so that: for each quasi-isometry f : X Ñ X there exists a mapping class g so that f L–coarsely coincides with left-multiplication by g. Proof. Consider the standard HHS structure on X , so that S is the collection of all essential subsurfaces, and the CY are curve complexes. (For details on the structure, see [BHS15b, Section 11].) A subsurface Y lies in a complete support set if and only if it is an annulus, a once-punctured torus or a 4-holed sphere. The assumptions of Theorem 5.8 are clearly satisfied. Consider any quasi-isometry f : X Ñ X . A hinge pU, pq is annular if U is an annulus. We now show that if a hinge σ is annular, then so is f 7 pσq. Indeed, a hinge σ being annular is characterized by the following property: σ is contained in a maximal collection H of pairwise orthogonal hinges, and there exists a unique hinge σ 1 so that pH ´ tσuq Y tσ 1 u is a maximal pairwise orthogonal set of hinges. This property is illustrated in Figure 4, where, if σ is pU, p` q, then σ 1 is pU, p´ q, where BCU “ tp˘ u. Since the bijection f 7 preserves orthogonality and non-orthogonality, it preserves the above property, so f 7 preserves being annular. U  Figure 4. This figure shows a complete support set, consisting of five annuli and one once-punctured torus. This is the only complete support set containing all the subsurfaces except the annulus about the boundary of the once-puncture torus, denoted U in the figure. Hence U is non-replaceable. Note that for any annulus U , the set BCU has exactly two points. We now claim that for each annulus U there exists an annulus V so that, denoting tp˘ u “ BCU , we have f 7 pU, p˘ q “ pV, q ˘ q for q ˘ P BCV . This holds as above, since pU, p´ q is the only hinge that can replace pU, p` q in a certain maximal set of pairwise orthogonal hinges (one in which the core curve of U is a non-replaceable curve). We write V “ f ˚ pU q. Notice that Lemma 5.10 now applies to show that any Dehn twist flat of X is mapped within uniformly bounded distance of a Dehn twist flat.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  33  Moreover, we have a well defined simplicial automorphism φ of the curve graph CS, where φpαq “ β if B “ f ˚ pAq, where the annuli A, B have core curves α, β respectively. By a theorem of Ivanov [Iva97], any simplicial automorphism of CS is induced by an element of the mapping class group; we denote by g the element corresponding to φ. Suppose we are given a Dehn twist flat F with complete support set U. Then, as noted above, f pFq is coarsely a Dehn twist flat with complete support set tf ˚ pU quU PU “ tgU uU PU . We can now conclude that for any Dehn twist flat F, we have that f pFq and gF are within bounded Hausdorff distance. For any point x P X , we can find Dehn twist flats F1x , F2x that have neighborhoods of uniformly bounded radius whose intersection contains x and has uniformly bounded diameter. Since gFix , f pFix q coarsely coincide for i “ 1, 2, we see that gx and f pxq must coarsely coincide. Hence we get that the automorphism of X given by left-multiplication by g is uniformly close to the quasi-isometry f , as desired.  6. Factored spaces Notation 6.1. Given U Ď S, let UĎ be the collection of all V P S so that there exists U P U with V Ď U . We let U “ UX Ă S denote the union of all cardinality–ν pairwise-orthogonal subsets of S. Let Xp be the factored space associated to UĎ , which is the space obtained from X by coning off all FU for U P UĎ (as described in [BHS15a, Definition 2.1]). There exists a Lipschitz factor map q “ qX : X Ñ Xp by [BHS15a, Proposition 2.2]. Xp has a natural HHS structure with index set S ´ UĎ , by [BHS15a, Proposition 2.4]. Theorem 6.2. Let X be an asymphoric HHS of rank ν. For any K, there exists ∆ so that for all pK, Kq–quasi-isometric embeddings f : Rν Ñ X , we have diampq ˝ f pRν qq ď ∆. Proof. Observe that if A Ă X , then qpHθ pAqq lies at uniformly bounded Hausdorff distance from Hθ pqpAqq (where we take hulls in Xp in the second expression). In particular, if diamXp pqpAqq ď C for some C, then there exists C 1 “ C 1 pC, E, θq so that for any B Ă Hθ pAq we have diamXp pqpBqq ď C 1 . Ť Hence, by Corollary 4.16, it suffices to prove that diamXp qp N i“1 Oi q ď C, where the orthants Oi are as in the Corollary and C “ CpN, E, K, µ0 q. By the construction of q, it follows easily that there exists C 1 “ C 1 pµ0 , Eq such that diamXp pqpOi qq ď C 1 for each i. By Proposition 6.6, it suffices to bound the diameter of qpOi Y Oj q in the case where Oi X̃Oj is a codimension-1 sub-orthant; this is done in Lemma 6.5.  Before proceeding to the technical Lemmas and Propositions we needed to prove the above theorem, we state the following corollary which we consider the main result of this section. Corollary 6.3. Let X , Y be asymphoric HHS. Suppose that there exists D so that for each U P UX or U P UY , for any x, y P FU there exists a bi-infinite pD, Dq–quasi-geodesic containing x, y. Then for every quasi-isometry f : X Ñ Y there exists a quasi-isometry fˆ : Xp Ñ Yp so that the diagram X qX  f   qY    Xp  / Y  fˆ  / Y p  commutes. Proof. Since Xp, Yp are just re-metrized copies of X , Y, we can take fˆ “ f . We now show that fˆ is coarsely Lipschitz, and observe that the corresponding map for a quasi-inverse of f gives a coarsely Lipschitz inverse of fˆ.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  34  By the definition of the metric on Xp, Yp ([BHS15a, Definition 2.1]), we just have to verify p that if x, y lie in some FU for U P UĎ X , then their images are uniformly close in Y. By assumption, x, y lie close to a quasiflat with uniform constant, so that the conclusion follows from Theorem 6.2.  Lemma 6.4. There exists τ with the following property. Let O, O1 be standard orthants in X with supports U1 , U2 . Suppose that OX̃O1 is a k–orthant whose support is U. Then for each x, y P O Y O1 we have that any U P S with dU px, yq ě τ is either nested into some U 1 P U1 X U2 or orthogonal to all U 1 P U. Proof. Recall that OX̃O1 coarsely coincides with gO pO1 q by Lemma 4.10 (and also with a standard orthant whose support is contained in U1 X U2 , thereby describing U). The conclusion clearly holds if x, y both lie in either O or O1 (by definition of standard product regions). We can then prove the lemma for x P gO pO1 q and y “ gO1 pxq, but in this case the conclusion follows from Lemma 1.19.(5).  Lemma 6.5. There exists C “ CpE, µ0 q so that the following holds. Let O, O1 be standard orthants with OX̃O1 a codimension-1 sub-orthant. Then diamXp pqpO Y O1 qq ď C. Proof. Let x P O, y P O1 . Let M “ tU P S : dU px, yq ě τ u. By Lemma 6.4, each U P M belongs to a set of pairwise-orthogonal elements of size ν (note that in the case that U is orthogonal to the intersection, this has maximal rank because of the fact that we are assuming the intersection has co-dimension-1). Hence dU pqpxq, qpyqq ď τ for all U P S ´ U, so qpxq is uniformly close to qpyq by the uniqueness axiom.  Proposition 6.6. Suppose that the quasiflat F lies within finite Hausdorff distance of Ť m i“1 Oi , where the Oi are standard orthants with dhaus pOi , Oj q “ 8 for i ‰ j. Then for each pair of distinct orthants Oj , Ok there exists a sequence j “ j0 , . . . , jl “ k so that the coarse intersection of Oji and Oji`1 is an pν ´ 1q–orthant. Proof. Passing to an asymptotic cone, we get a bilipschitz copy F of Rν filled by bilipschitz copies O i of r0, 8qν . The intersections of the O i have some basic properties: Lemma 6.7. (1) The intersection of O i and O j is bilipschitz equivalent to r0, 8qt for some t “ tpi, jq. (2) tpi, jq “ ν ´ 1 if and only if O i and O j coarsely intersect in an pν ´ 1q–orthant. Proof. Recall that the coarse intersection of two standard orthants coarsely coincides with a standard k–orthant, as well as with the gate of one in the other (Lemma 4.10). We now show the following, which implies both statements: if the ultralimits A, B of uniformly hierarchically quasiconvex sets have non-empty intersection, then their intersection is the ultralimit gA pBq of the gates. By Lemma 1.19.(3), gA pBq is contained in A X B (this uses dpA, Bq “ 0). Lemma 1.19.(6) implies that the other containment holds.  Now, consider the subspace X Ă F consisting of the union of all O i X O j for i, Ťj with tpi, jq “ ν ´1. Let Y be the set of all O i XO j with i ‰ j and tpi, jq ă ν ´1. Let Y “ OPY O. Lemma 6.8. F ´ Y is path-connected. Proof. In this proof, when referring to homology, we always mean homology with rational coefficients. The goal is to show H0 pF ´ Y q “ Q. If dim F ď 2, then Y is a finite set (which is empty when dim F ď 1) and the claim is clear. Hence suppose that dim F ě 3. We argue by induction on |Y|. We first claim that for any O P Y and any closed O1 Ă O, F ´ O1 is path-connected and H1 pF ´ O1 q “ 0. We use the fact that, for A, B closed homeomorphic subsets of Rν we have H˚ pRν ´ Aq “ H˚ pRν ´ Bq, see e.g. [Dol93]. Hence, we can regard O as a coordinate orthant  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  35  in Rν – F. Hence the claim holds for O1 “ O. The fact that H1 pF ´ O1 q “ 0 follows from the fact that H1 pF ´ Oq “ 0, since a 1–cycle in F ´ O1 is homologous to one in F ´ O by, for example, a transversality argument. The same holds for H0 pF ´ O1 q. For the inductive step, let A be the union of all but one element of Y, and let B be the remaining one. We have a Mayer-Vietoris sequence: H1 pF ´ pA X Bqq Ñ H0 pF ´ pA Y Bqq Ñ H0 pF ´ Aq ‘ H0 pF ´ Bq Ñ H0 pF ´ pA X Bqq Ñ 0. By the claim above, the first term is 0, the last term is Q, and H0 pF ´ Bq “ Q. By induction, H0 pF ´ Aq “ Q. Hence F ´ pA Y Bq is connected.  We now finish the proof of Proposition 6.6. Let O j , O k be orthants. We will now produce a sequence O j “ O j0 , . . . , O jl “ O k of orthants so that tpji , ji`1 q “ ν ´ 1 for 0 ď i ď l ´ 1. Choose x P IntpO i q, y P IntpO j q and let σ : r0, 1s Ñ F ´ Y be a path joining them, which is provided by Lemma 6.8. Let t0 be the maximal t so that σptq P O j . If t0 “ 1, then we take l “ 0. Otherwise, there exists O j1 ‰ O j so that O j X O j1 has dimension ν ´ 1 and contains σpt0 q. Now apply the same argument to σ|rt0 ,1s and induct. The sequence in the cone yields a sequence of orthants in the space with the desired property.  References [BF06]  J. Brock and B. Farb. Curvature and rank of Teichmüller space. American Jour. Math., 128(1):1– 22, 2006. [BHS14] Jason Behrstock, Mark F Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces I: curve complexes for cubical groups. to appear in Geometry & Topology, arXiv:1412.2171, 2014. [BHS15a] Jason Behrstock, Mark F Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Asymptotic dimension and smallcancellation for hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups. to appear in Proceedings of LMS, arXiv:1512.06071, 2015. [BHS15b] Jason Behrstock, Mark F Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces II: combination theorems and the distance formula. arXiv:1509.00632, 2015. J. Behrstock, T. Januszkiewicz, and W. Neumann. Quasi-isometric classification of high dimen[BJN10] sional right angled artin groups. Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics, 4(4):681–692, 2010. [BKMM12] Jason Behrstock, Bruce Kleiner, Yair Minsky, and Lee Mosher. Geometry and rigidity of mapping class groups. Geom. Topol., 16(2):781–888, 2012. [BKS08] M. Bestvina, B. Kleiner, and M. Sageev. The asymptotic geometry of right-angled Artin groups. I. Geometry & Topology, 12(3):1653–1699, 2008. [BKS16] Mladen Bestvina, Bruce Kleiner, and Michah Sageev. Quasiflats in CATp0q 2-complexes. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 16(5):2663–2676, 2016. [BM08] J. Brock and H. Masur. Coarse and synthetic Weil–Petersson geometry: quasi-flats, geodesics, and relative hyperbolicity. Geometry & Topology, 12:2453–2495, 2008. [BN08] J. Behrstock and W. Neumann. Quasi-isometric classification of graph manifold groups. Duke Math. J., 141(2):217–240, 2008. [Bow13] Brian Bowditch. Coarse median spaces and groups. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 261(1):53–93, 2013. [Bow14] Brian Bowditch. Uniform hyperbolicity of the curve graphs. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 269(2):269–280, 2014. [Bow15] Brian H Bowditch. Large-scale rigidity properties of the mapping class groups. preprint, 2015. [Bro02] Jeffrey F. Brock. Pants decompositions and the Weil-Petersson metric. In Complex manifolds and hyperbolic geometry (Guanajuato, 2001), volume 311 of Contemp. Math., pages 27–40. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2002. [Che00] Victor Chepoi. Graphs of some CATp0q complexes. Adv. in Appl. Math., 24(2):125–179, 2000. [CN05] Indira Chatterji and Graham Niblo. From wall spaces to CATp0q cube complexes. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 15(5-6):875–885, 2005. [DHS16] Matthew G Durham, Mark F Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Boundaries and automorphisms of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. to appear in Geometry & Topology, arXiv:1604.01061, 2016.  QUASIFLATS IN HIERARCHICALLY HYPERBOLIC SPACES  [Dol93] [Dru02] [EF97] [FLS15] [Gro87] [Ham07] [HP98]  [HS16] [Hua14a] [Hua14b] [Hua16] [HW14] [Iva97] [KL97a] [KL97b] [Mor24] [Mos73] [MS13] [Nic04] [Sag95] [Zei16]  36  Albrecht Dold. A simple proof of the Jordan-Alexander complement theorem. Amer. Math. Monthly, 100(9):856–857, 1993. Cornelia Druţu. Quasi-isometry invariants and asymptotic cones. International Journal of Algebra and Computation, 12(01n02):99–135, 2002. A. Eskin and B. Farb. Quasi-flats and rigidity in higher rank symmetric spaces. Jour. AMS, 10(3):653–692, 1997. Roberto Frigerio, Jean-François Lafont, and Alessandro Sisto. Rigidity of high dimensional graph manifolds. Astérisque, (372):xxi+177, 2015. M. Gromov. Hyperbolic groups. In S. Gersten, editor, Essays in group theory, volume 8 of MSRI Publications. Springer, 1987. U Hamenstädt. Geometry of the mapping class group iii: Quasi-isometric rigidity. preprint. arXiv preprint math.GT/051242, 2007. Frédéric Haglund and Frédéric Paulin. Simplicité de groupes d’automorphismes d’espaces à courbure négative. In The Epstein birthday schrift, volume 1 of Geom. Topol. Monogr., pages 181–248. Geom. Topol. Publ., Coventry, 1998. Mark F Hagen and Tim Susse. Hierarchical hyperbolicity of all cubical groups. arXiv:1609.01313, 2016. Jingyin Huang. Quasi-isometry rigidity of right-angled Artin groups I: the finite out case. to appear in Geometry & Topology, arXiv:1410.8512, 2014. Jingyin Huang. Top dimensional quasiflats in CAT p0q cube complexes. to appear in Geometry & Topology, arXiv:1410.8195, 2014. Jingyin Huang. Quasi-isometry classification of right-angled Artin groups II: several infinite out cases. arXiv:1603.02372, 2016. G. C. Hruska and Daniel T. Wise. Finiteness properties of cubulated groups. Compos. Math., 150(3):453–506, 2014. Nikolai V Ivanov. Automorphisms of complexes of curves and of teichmuller spaces. International Mathematics Research Notices, 1997(14):651–666, 1997. M. Kapovich and B. Leeb. Quasi-isometries preserve the geometric decomposition of Haken manifolds. Invent. Math., 128(2):393–416, 1997. B. Kleiner and B. Leeb. Rigidity of quasi-isometries for symmetric spaces and euclidean buildings. IHES Publ. Math., 86:115–197, 1997. H. M. Morse. A fundamental class of geodesics on any closed surface of genus greater than one. Trans. AMS, 26(1):25–60, 1924. G. D. Mostow. Strong Rigidity of Locally Symmetric Spaces. Number 78 in Annals of Math. Studies. Princeton Univ. Press, 1973. Howard Masur and Saul Schleimer. The geometry of the disk complex. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 26(1):1–62, 2013. Bogdan Nica. Cubulating spaces with walls. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 4:297–309, 2004. Michah Sageev. Ends of group pairs and non-positively curved cube complexes. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 71(3):585–617, 1995. Rudolf Zeidler. Coarse median structures and homomorphisms from Kazhdan groups. Geometriae Dedicata, 180(1):49–68, 2016.  Lehman College and The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, New York, USA E-mail address: jason.behrstock@lehman.cuny.edu Dept. of Pure Maths and Math. Stat., University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK E-mail address: markfhagen@gmail.com ETH, Zürich, Switzerland E-mail address: sisto@math.ethz.ch

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
