Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3347

Abstract:
arXiv:1602.00834v2 [math.GT] 7 Apr 2017  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ Abstract. We introduce the notions of geometric height and graded (geometric) relative hyperbolicity in this paper. We use these to characterize quasiconvexity in hyperbolic groups, relative quasiconvexity in relatively hyperbolic groups, and convex cocompactness in mapping class groups and Out(Fn ).  Contents 1. Introduction 2. Relative Hyperbolicity, coarse hyperbolic embeddings 2.1. Electrification by cones 2.2. Quasiretractions 2.3. Gluing horoballs 2.4. Relative hyperbolicity and hyperbolic embeddedness 2.5. Persistence of hyperbolicity and quasiconvexity 3. Algebraic Height and Intersection Properties 3.1. Algebraic Height 3.2. Geometric i-fold intersections 3.3. Algebraic i-fold intersections 3.4. Existing results on algebraic intersection properties 4. Geometric height and graded geometric relative hyperbolicity 4.1. Hyperbolic groups 4.2. Relatively hyperbolic groups 4.3. Mapping Class Groups 4.4. Out(Fn ) 4.5. Algebraic and geometric qi-intersection property: Examples 5. From quasiconvexity to graded relative hyperbolicity 5.1. Ensuring geometric graded relative hyperbolicity 5.2. Graded relative hyperbolicity for quasiconvex subgroups 6. From graded relative hyperbolicity to quasiconvexity 6.1. A Sufficient Condition 6.2. The Main Theorem 6.3. Examples Acknowledgments References  2 4 4 5 6 7 7 20 20 21 22 24 24 26 26 27 29 30 33 33 34 35 35 36 37 37 37  Date: April 11, 2017. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20F65, 20F67 (Primary); 22E40 (Secondary). The first author acknowledge support of ANR grant ANR-11-BS01-013, and from the Institut Universitaire de France. The research of the second author is partially supported by a DST J C Bose Fellowship. 1  2  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  1. Introduction It is well-known that quasiconvex subgroups of hyperbolic groups have finite height. In order to distinguish this notion from the notion of geometric height introduced later in this paper, we shall call the former algebraic height: Let G be a finitely generated group and H a subgroup. We say that a collection of conjugates {gi Hgi−1 }, i = 1, . . . , n are essentially distinct if the cosets {gi H} are distinct. We say that H has finite algebraic height if there exists n ∈ N such that the intersection of any (n + 1) essentially distinct conjugates of H is finite. The minimal n for which this happens is called the algebraic height of H. Thus H has algebraic height one if and only if it is almost malnormal. This admits a natural (and obvious) generalization to a finite collection of subgroups Hi instead of one H. Thus, if G is a hyperbolic group and H a quasiconvex subgroup (or more generally if H1 , . . . , Hn are quasiconvex), then H (or more generally the collection {H1 , . . . , Hn }) has finite algebraic height [GMRS97]. (See [Dah03, HW09] for generalizations to the context of relatively hyperbolic groups.) Swarup asked if the converse is true: Question 1.1. [Bes04] Let G be a hyperbolic group and H a finitely generated subgroup. If H has finite height, is H quasiconvex? An example of an infinitely generated (and hence non-quasiconvex) malnormal subgroup of a finitely generated free group was obtained in [DM15] showing that the hypothesis that H is finitely generated cannot be relaxed. On the other hand, Bowditch shows in [Bow12] (see also [Mj08, Proposition 2.10]) the following positive result: Theorem 1.2. [Bow12] Let G be a hyperbolic group and H a subgroup. Then G is strongly relatively hyperbolic with respect to H if and only if H is an almost malnormal quasiconvex subgroup. One of the motivational points for this paper is to extend Theorem 1.2 to give a characterization of quasiconvex subgroups of hyperbolic groups in terms of a notion of graded relative hyperbolicity defined as follows: Definition 1.3. Let G be a finitely generated group, d the word metric with respect to a finite generating set and H a subgroup. Let Hi be the collection of intersections of i essentially distinct conjugates of H, let (Hi )0 be a choice of conjugacy representatives, and let CHi be the set of cosets of elements of (Hi )0 . Let di be the metric on (G, d) obtained by electrifying1 the elements of CHi . We say that G is graded relatively hyperbolic with respect to H (or equivalently that the pair (G, {H}) has graded relative hyperbolicity) if (1) H has algebraic height n for some n ∈ N. (2) Each element K of Hi−1 has a finite relative generating set SK , relative to H ∩ Hi (:= {H ∩ Hi : Hi ∈ Hi }). Further, the cardinality of the generating set SK is bounded by a number depending only on i (and not on K). (3) (G, di ) is strongly hyperbolic relative to Hi−1 , where each element K of Hi−1 is equipped with the word metric coming from SK . 1The second author acknowledges the moderating influence of the first author on the more extremist terminology electrocution [Mj14, Mj11]  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  3  The following is the main Theorem of this paper (see Theorem 6.4 for a more precise statement using the notion of graded geometric relative hyperbolicity defined later) providing a partial positive answer to Question 1.1 and a generalization of Theorem 1.2: Theorem 1.4. Let (G, d) be one of the following: (1) G a hyperbolic group and d the word metric with respect to a finite generating set S. (2) G is finitely generated and hyperbolic relative to P, S a finite relative generating set, and d the word metric with respect to S ∪ P. (3) G is the mapping class group M od(S) and d a metric that is equivariantly quasi-isometric to the curve complex CC(S). (4) G is Out(Fn ) and d a metric that is equivariantly quasi-isometric to the free factor complex Fn . Then (respectively) (1) if H is quasiconvex, then (G, {H}) has graded relative hyperbolicity; conversely, if (G, {H}) has geometric graded relative hyperbolicity then H is quasiconvex. (2) if H is relatively quasiconvex then (G, {H}, d) has graded relative hyperbolicity; conversely, if (G, {H}, d) has geometric graded relative hyperbolicity then H is relatively quasiconvex. (3) if H is convex cocompact in M od(S) then (G, {H}, d) has graded relative hyperbolicity; conversely, if (G, {H}, d) has geometric graded relative hyperbolicity and the action of H on the curve complex is uniformly proper, then H is convex cocompact in M od(S). (4) if H is convex cocompact in Out(Fn ) then (G, {H}, d) has graded relative hyperbolicity; conversely, if (G, {H}, d) has geometric graded relative hyperbolicity and the action of H on the free factor complex is uniformly proper, then H is convex cocompact in Out(Fn ). Structure of the paper: In Section 2, we will review the notions of hyperbolicity for metric spaces relative to subsets. This will be related to the notion of hyperbolic embeddedness [DGO11]. We will need to generalize the notion of hyperbolic embeddedness in [DGO11] to one of coarse hyperbolic embeddedness in order to accomplish this. We will also prove results on the preservation of quasiconvexity under electrification. We give two sets of proofs: the first set of proofs relies on assembling diverse pieces of literature on relative hyperbolicity, with several minor adaptations. We also give a more self-contained set of proofs relying on asymptotic cones. In Section 3.1 and the preliminary discussion in Section 4, we give an account of two notions of height: algebraic and geometric. The classical (algebraic) notion of height of a subgroup concerns the number of conjugates that can have infinite intersection. The notion of geometric height is similar, but instead of considering infinite intersection, we consider unbounded intersections in a (not necessarily proper) word metric. This naturally leads us to dealing with intersections in different contexts: (1) Intersections of conjugates of subgroups in a proper (Γ, d) (the Cayley graph of the ambient group with respect to a finite generating set). (2) Intersections of metric thickenings of cosets in a not necessarily proper (Γ, d).  4  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  The first is purely group theoretic (algebraic) and the last geometric. Accordingly, we have two notions of height: algebraic and geometric. In line with this, we investigate two notions of graded relative hyperbolicity in Section 4 (cf. Definition 4.3): (1) Graded relative hyperbolicity (algebraic) (2) Graded geometric relative hyperbolicity In the fourth section, we also introduce and study a qi-intersection property, a property that ensures that quasi-convexity is preserved under passage to electrified spaces. The property exists in both variants above. In the fifth and the sixth sections, we will prove our main results relating height and geometric graded relative hyperbolicity. On a first reading, the reader is welcome to keep the simplest (algebraic or group-theoretic) notion in mind. To get a hang of where the paper is headed, we suggest that the reader take a first look at Sections 5 and 6, armed with Section 3.3 and the statements of Proposition 4.5, Theorem 4.6, Theorem 4.10, Theorem 4.14 and Proposition 4.15. This, we hope, will clarify our intent. 2. Relative Hyperbolicity, coarse hyperbolic embeddings We shall clarify here what it means in this paper for a geodesic space (X, d), to be hyperbolic relative to a family of subspaces Y = {Yi , i ∈ I}, or to cast it in another language, what it means for the family Y to be hyperbolically embedded in (X, d). There are slight differences from the more usual context of groups and subgroups (as in [DGO11]), but we will keep the descending compatibility (when these notions hold in the context of groups, they hold in the context of spaces). We begin by recalling relevant constructions. 2.1. Electrification by cones. Given a metric space (Y, dY ), we will endow Y × [0, 1] with the following product metric: it is the largest metric that agrees with dY on Y × {0}, and each {y} × [0, 1] is endowed with a metric isometric to the segment [0, 1]. Definition 2.1. [Far98] Let (X, d) be a geodesic length space, and Y = {Yi , i ∈ I} be a collection of subsets of X. The electrification (XYel , del Y ) of (X, d) along Y is defined as theFfollowing coned-off space: XYel = X ⊔ { i∈I Yi × [0, 1]}/ ∼ where ∼ denotes the identification of Yi × {0} with Yi ⊂ X for each i, and the identification of Yi × {1} to a single cone point vi (dependent on i). el The metric del Y is defined as the path metric on XY for the natural quotient metric coming from the product metric on Yi × [0, 1] (defined as above). ˆ when there is no scope for Let Yi ∈ Y. The angular metric dˆYi (or simply, d, confusion) on Yi is defined as follows: For y1 , y2 ∈ Yi , dˆYi (y1 , y2 ) is the infimum of lengths of paths in XYel joining y1 to y2 not passing through the vertex vi . (We allow the angular metric to take on infinity as a value). If (X, d) is a metric space, and Y is a subspace, we write d|Y the metric induced on Y . Definition 2.2. Consider a geodesic metric space (X, d) and a family of subsets Y = {Yi , i ∈ I}. We will say that Y is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  5  (X, d), if there is a function ψ : R+ → R+ which is proper (i.e. lim+∞ ψ(x) = +∞), and such that (1) the electrified space XYel is hyperbolic, (2) the angular metric at each Y ∈ Y in the cone-off is bounded from below by ψ ◦ d|Y . Remark 2.3. This notion originates from Osin’s [Osi06a], and was developed further in [DGO11] in the context of groups, where one requires that each subset Yi ∈ Y is a proper metric space for the angular metric. This automatically implies the weaker condition of the above definition. The converse is not true: if Y is a collection of uniformly bounded subgroups of a group X with a (not necessarily proper) word metric, it is always coarsely hyperbolically embedded, but it is hyperbolically embedded in the sense of [DGO11] only if it is finite. As in the point of view of [Osi06a], we say that (X, d) is strongly hyperbolic relative to the collection Y (in the sense of spaces) if Y is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in (X, d). As we described in the remark, unfortunately, it happens that some groups (with a Cayley graph metric) are hyperbolic relative to some subgroups in the sense of spaces, but not in the sense of groups. Note that there are other definitions of relative hyperbolicity for spaces. Druţu introduced the following definition: a metric space is hyperbolic relative to a collection of subspaces if all asymptotic cones are tree graded with pieces being ultratranslates of asymptotic cones of the subsets. 2.2. Quasiretractions. Definition 2.4. If (X, d) is a metric space, and Y ⊂ X is a subset endowed with a metric dY , we say that dY is λ-undistorted in (X, d) if for all y1 , y2 ∈ Y , λ−1 d(y1 , y2 ) − λ ≤ dY (y1 , y2 ) ≤ λd(y1 , y2 ) + λ. We say that dY is undistorted in (X, d) if it is λ-undistorted in (X, d) for some λ. For the next proposition, define the D-coarse path metric on a subset Y of a path-metric space (X, d) to be the metric on Y obtained by taking the infimum of lengths over paths for which any subsegment of length D meets Y . The next Proposition is the translation (to the present context) of Theorem 4.31 in [DGO11], with a similar proof. Proposition 2.5. Let (X, d) be a graph. Assume that Y is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in (X, d). Then, there exists D0 such that for all Y ∈ Y, the D0 -coarse path metric on Y ∈ Y is undistorted (or equivalently the D0 -coarse path metric on Y ∈ Y is quasi-isometric to the metric induced from (X, d)). We will need the following Lemma, which originates in Lemma 4.29 in [DGO11]. The proof is the same; for convenience we will briefly recall it. The lemma provides quasiretractions onto hyperbolically embedded subsets in a hyperbolic space. Lemma 2.6. Let (X, d) be a geodesic metric space. There exists C > 0 such that whenever Y is coarsely hyperbolically embedded (in the sense of spaces) in (X, d), then for each Y ∈ Y, there exists a map r : X → Y which is the identity on Y and ˆ such that d(r(x), r(y)) ≤ Cd(x, y).  6  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  Proof. Let p the cone point associated to Y , and for each x, choose a geodesic [p, x] and define r(x) to be the point of [p, x] at distance 1 from p. Then r(x) is in Y , and to prove the lemma, one only needs to check that there is C such that if ˆ d(x, y) = 1, then d(r(x), r(y)) ≤ C. The constant C will be 10(δ + 1) + 1. Assume that x and y are at distance > 5(δ + 1) from the cone point. By hyperbolicity, one can find two points in the triangle (p, x, y) at distance 2(δ + 1) from r(x), r(y) at distance ≤ 2δ from each other. This provides a path of length at most 6δ + 4. ˆ Hence d(r(x), r(y)) ≤ 6δ + 4. If x and y are at distance ≤ 5(δ + 1) from the cone ˆ point, then d(r(x), r(y)) ≤ d(r(x), x) + d(x, y) + d(y, r(y)) ≤ 2 × 5(δ + 1) + 1.  We can now prove the Proposition. Proof. Choose D0 = ψ(C): for all y0 , y1 ∈ Y at distance ≤ D0 , their angular distance is at most C (where C is as given by the Lemma above). Consider any path in X from y0 to y1 , call the consecutive vertices z0 , . . . , zn , and project that path by r. One gets r(z0 ), . . . , r(zn ) in Y , two consecutive ones being at distance at most D0 . This proves the claim.  Corollary 2.7. If (X, d) is hyperbolic, and if Y is coarsely hyperbolically embedded, then there is C such that any Y ∈ Y is C-quasiconvex in X. 2.3. Gluing horoballs. Given a metric space (Y, dY ) , one can construct several models of combinatorial horoballs over it. We recall a construction (similar to that of Groves and Manning [GM08] for a graph). We consider inductively on k ∈ N \ {0} the space Hk (Y ) = Y × [1, k] with the maximal metric dk that • induces an isometry of {y} × [k − 1, k] with [0, 1] for all y ∈ Y , and all k ≥ 1, • is at most dk−1 on Hk−1 (Y ) ⊂ Hk (Y ) • coincides with 2−k × d on Y × {k}. Then H(Y ) is defined as the inductive limit of the Hk (Y )’s and is called the horoball over Y . Let (X, d) be a graph, and Y be a collection of subgraphs (with the induced metric on each of them). F The horoballification of (X, d) over Y is defined to be the space XYh = X ⊔ { i∈I H(Yi )}/ ∼i where ∼i denotes the identification of the boundary horosphere of H(Yi ) with Yi ⊂ X. The metric dhY is defined as the path metric on XYh . One can electrify a horoballification XYh of a space (X, d): one gets a space quasi-isometric to the electrification XYel of X. We record this observation in the following. Proposition 2.8. Let X be a graph, and Y be a family of subgraphs. Let XYel and XYh be the electrification, and the horoballification as above. Let (X h )el H(Y) be the electrification of XYh over the collection of horoballs H(Yi ) over Yi , i ∈ I. Then there is a natural injective map XYel ֒→ (X h )el H(Y) which is the identity on X and sends the cone point of Yi to the cone point of H(Yi ). (0) Consider the map e : ((X h )el → XYel that H(Y) ) • is the identity on X, • sends each vertex of H(Yi ) of depth > 2 to vi ∈ XYel , • sends each vertex (y, n) ∈ H(Yi ) of depth n ≤ 2 to y ∈ Yi ⊂ X,  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  7  • sends the cone point of ((X h )el H(Y) ) associated to H(Yi ) to the cone point of el XY associated to Yi . Then e is a quasi-isometry that induces an isometry on XYel ⊂ (X h )el H(Y) . Proof. First, note that a geodesic in (X h )el H(Y) between two points of X never contains an edge with a vertex of depth ≥ 1. If it did, the subpath in the corresponding horoball would be either non-reduced, or would contain at least 3 edges, and could be shortened by substituting a pair of edges through the cone attached to that horoball. Thus the image of such a geodesic under e is a path of the same length. In other words, there is an inequality on the metrics dXYel ≤ d(X h )el (restricted H(Y )  to XYel ). On the other hand, there is a natural inclusion XYel ⊂ (X h )el H(Y) , and therefore on XYel , d(X h )el ≤ dXYel . Thus e is an isometry on XYel . Also, every H(Y )  point in (X h )el H(Y) is at distance at most 2 from a point in X, hence also from a point of the image of XYel .  2.4. Relative hyperbolicity and hyperbolic embeddedness. Recall that we say that a subspace Q of a geodesic metric space (X, d) is C-quasiconvex, for some number C > 0, if for any two points x, y ∈ Q, and any geodesic [x, y] in X, any point of [x, y] is at distance at most C from a point of Q. Definition 2.9. [Mj11, Definition 3.5] A collection H of (uniformly) C-quasiconvex sets in a δ-hyperbolic metric space X is said to be mutually D-cobounded if for all Hi , Hj ∈ H, with Hi 6= Hj , πi (Hj ) has diameter less than D, where πi denotes a nearest point projection of X onto Hi . A collection is mutually cobounded if it is mutually D-cobounded for some D. The aim of this subsection is to establish criteria for hyperbolicity of certain spaces (electrification, horoballification), and related statements on persistence of quasi-convexity in these spaces. We also show that hyperbolicity of the horoballification implies strong relative hyperbolicity, or coarse hyperbolic embeddedness. Two sets of arguments are given. In the first set of arguments, the pivotal statement is of the following form: Electrification or de-electrification preserves the property of being a quasigeodesic. The arguments are essentially existent in some form in the literature, and we merely sketch the proofs and refer the reader to specific points in the literature where these may be found. The second set of arguments uses asymptotic cones (hence the axiom of choice) and is more self-contained (it relies on Gromov-Cartan-Hadamard theorem). We decided to give both these arguments so as to leave it to the the reader to choose according to her/his taste. 2.5. Persistence of hyperbolicity and quasiconvexity. 2.5.1. The Statements. Here we state the results for which we give arguments in the following two subsubsections. Proposition 2.10. Let (X, d) be a hyperbolic geodesic space, C > 0, and Y be a family of C-quasiconvex subspaces. Then XYel is hyperbolic. If moreover the elements of Y are mutually cobounded, then XYh is hyperbolic. In the same spirit, we also record the following statement on persistence of quasiconvexity.  8  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  Proposition 2.11. Given δ, C there exists C ′ such that if (X, dX ) is a δ-hyperbolic metric space with a collection Y of C-quasiconvex, sets. then the following holds: If Q(⊂ X) is a C-quasiconvex set (not necessarily an element of Y), then Q is C ′ -quasiconvex in (XYel , de ). Finally, there is a partial converse. We need a little bit of vocabulary. If Z is a subset of a metric space (X, d), a (d, R)-coarse path in Z is a sequence of points of Z such that two consecutive points are always at distance at most R for the metric d. Let H and Y two subsets of X. We will denote by H +λ the set of points at distance at most λ from H. We will say that H (∆, ǫ)-meets Y if there are two points x1 , x2 at distance ≥ ∆ from each other, and at distance ≤ ǫ∆ from Y and H, and if for all pair of points at distance 20δ from {x1 , x2 }, either H or Y is at distance at least ǫ∆ − 2δ from one of them. The two points x1 , x2 are called a pair of meeting points in H (for Y ). We shall say that a subset H of X is coarsely path connected if there exists c ≥ 0 such that the c−neighborhood Nc (H) is path connected. Proposition 2.12. Let (X, d) be hyperbolic, and let Y be a collection of uniformly quasiconvex subsets. Let H be a subset of X that is coarsely path connected, and quasiconvex in the electrification XYel . Assume also that there exists ǫ ∈ (0, 1), and ∆0 such that for all ∆ > ∆0 , wherever H (∆, ǫ)-meets an item Y in Y, there is a path in H +ǫ∆ between the meeting points in H that is uniformly a quasigeodesic in the metric (X, d). Then H is quasiconvex in (X, d). The quasiconvexity constant of H can be chosen to depend only on the constants involved for (X, d), Y, ∆0 , ǫ, the coarse path connection constant, and the quasigeodesic constant of the last assumption. 2.5.2. Electroambient quasigeodesics. We recall here the concept of electroambient quasigeodesics from [Mj11, Mj14]. Let (X, d) be a metric space, and Y a collection of subspaces. If γ is a path in (X, d), or even in (XYel , del Y ), one can define an elementary electrification of γ in ) as follows: (XYel , del Y For x1 , x2 in γ, both belonging to some Yi ∈ Y, and at distance > 1, replace the arc of γ between them by a pair of edges (x1 , vi )(vi , x2 ), where vi is the cone-point corresponding to Yi . A complete electrification of γ is a path obtained after a sequence of elementary electrifications of subarcs, admitting no further elementary electrifications. One can de-electrify certain paths. Given a path γ in (XYel , del Y ), a de-electrification of γ is a path σ in (X, d) such that (1) γ is a complete electrification of σ, (2) (σ \ γ) ∩ Yi is either empty or a geodesic in Yi . A (λ, µ)-de-electrification of a path γ in (XYel , del Y ), is a path in X such that (1) γ is a complete electrification of σ, (2) (σ \ γ) ∩ Yi is either empty or a (λ, µ)-quasigeodesic in Yi . Observe that, given a path σ in X el , there might be several ways to de-electrify it, but these ways differ only in the choice of the geodesic (or the quasi-geodesic) in the family of subspaces Yi corresponding to the successive cone points vYi on the  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  9  path σ. It might also happen that there is no way of de-electrifying it, if the spaces in Y are not quasiconvex. We say that a path γ in (X, d) is an electro-ambient geodesic if it is a deelectrification of a geodesic. We say that it is a (λ, µ)− electro-ambient quasigeodesic if it is the (λ, µ)− de-electrification of a (λ, µ)−quasigeodesic in (XYel , del Y ). We begin by discussing Proposition 2.10. Proof. The first part is fairly well-known. In some other guise it appears in [Bow12, Proposition 7.4] [Szc98, Proposition 1] [Mj11]. In the first two, the electrification by cones is replaced by collapses of subspaces (identifications to points) which of course requires that the subspaces to electrify are disjoint and separated. However this is only a technical assumption (as explicated in [Mj11]). Indeed, by replacing (or augmenting) any Y ∈ Y by Y × [0, D] glued along Y × {0}, and replacing Y by the family {Y ×{D}, Y ∈ Y}, we achieve a D-separated quasiconvex family.  Next, we discuss Proposition 2.11. Proof. The proofs of Lemma 4.5 and Proposition 4.6 of [Far98], Proposition 4.3 and Theorem 5.3 of [Kla99] (see also [Bow12]) furnish Proposition 2.11. The crucial ingredient in all these proofs is the fact that in a hyperbolic space, nearest point projections decrease distance exponentially. Farb proves this in the setup of horoballs in complete simply connected manifolds of pinched negative curvature. Klarreich ”coarsifies” this assertion by generalizing it to the context of hyperbolic metric spaces.  The rest of this (subsub)section is devoted to discussing Proposition 2.12. Towards doing this, we will obtain an argument for showing a variant of the second point of Proposition 2.10, namely that in a hyperbolic space (X, d), a family Y of uniformly quasi convex subspaces that is mutually cobounded defines a strong relative hyperbolic structure on (X, d). The second point of 2.10 as it is stated will be however proved in the next subsection. We shall have need for the following Lemma [Mj11, Lemma 3.9] (see also [Kla99, Proposition 4.3] [Mj14, Lemma 2.5]). Lemma 2.13. Suppose (X, d) is δ-hyperbolic. Let H be a collection of C-quasiconvex D-mutually cobounded subsets. Then for all P ≥ 1, there exists ǫ0 = ǫ0 (C, P, D, δ) such that the following holds: Let β be an electric (P, P )-quasigeodesic without backtracking (i.e. β does not return to any H1 ∈ H after leaving it) and γ a geodesic in (X, d), both joining x, y. Then, given ǫ ≥ ǫ0 there exists D = D(P, ǫ) such that (1) Similar Intersection Patterns 1: if precisely one of {β, γ} meets an ǫneighborhood Nǫ (H1 ) of an electrified quasiconvex set H1 ∈ H, then the length (measured in the intrinsic path-metric on Nǫ (H1 ) ) from the entry point to the exit point is at most D. (2) Similar Intersection Patterns 2: if both {β, γ} meet some Nǫ (H1 ) then the length (measured in the intrinsic path-metric on Nǫ (H1 ) ) from the entry point of β to that of γ is at most D; similarly for exit points.  10  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  Note that Lemma 2.13 above is quite general and does not require X to be proper. The two properties occurring in Lemma 2.13 were introduced by Farb [Far98] in the context of a group G and a collection H of cosets of a subgroup H. The two together are termed ‘Bounded Coset Penetration’ in [Far98]. Remark 2.14. In [Mj11], the extra hypothesis of separatedness was used. However, this is superfluous by the same remark on augmentations of elements of Y that we made in the beginning of the proof of Proposition 2.10. Lemma 2.13 may be stated equivalently as the following (compare with 2.23 below) . If X is a hyperbolic metric space and H a collection of uniformly quasiconvex mutually cobounded subsets, then X is strongly hyperbolic relative to the collection H. We give a slightly modified version of [Mj11, Lemma 3.15] below by using the equivalent hypothesis of strong relative hyperbolicity (i.e. Lemma 2.13). Lemma 2.15. Let (X, d) be a δ−hyperbolic metric space, and H a family of subsets such that X is strongly hyperbolic relative to H. Then for all λ, µ > 0, there exists λ′ , µ′ such that any electro-ambient (λ, µ)-quasi-geodesic is a (λ′ , µ′ )-quasi-geodesic in (X, d). The proof of Lemma 2.15 goes through mutatis mutandis for strongly relatively hyperbolic spaces as well, i.e. hyperbolicity of X may be replaced by relative hyperbolicity in Lemma 2.15 above. We state this explicitly below: Corollary 2.16. Let (X, d) be strongly relatively hyperbolic relative to a collection Y of path connected subsets. Then, for all λ, µ > 0, there exists λ′ , µ′ such that any electro-ambient (λ, µ)-quasi-geodesic is a (λ′ , µ′ )-quasi-geodesic in (X, d). We include a brief sketch of the proof-idea following [Mj11]. Let γ be an electroambient quasigeodesic. By Definition, its electrification γ̂ is a quasi-geodesic in XYel . Let σ be the electric geodesic joining the end-points of γ. Hence σ and γ̂ have similar intersection patters with the sets Yi [Far98], i.e. they enter and leave any Yi at nearby points. It then suffices to show that an electro-ambient representative of σ is in fact a quasigeodesic in X. A proof of this is last statement is given in [McM01, Theorem 8.1] in the context of horoballs in hyperbolic space (see also Lemmas 4.8, 4.9 and their proofs in [Far98]). The same proof works after horoballification for an arbitrary relatively hyperbolic space. ✷ The proof of Proposition 2.12 as stated will be given in the next subsubsection. We shall provide here a proof that suffices for the purposes of this paper. We assume, in addition to the hypothesis of the Proposition that there exists an integer n > 0, and D0 ≥ 0 such that for all distinct Y1 , . . . , Yn ∈ Y, ∩i Yi+ǫ has diameter at most D. The existence of such a number n will translate into the notion of finite geometric height later in the paper. Proof. We prove the statement by inducting on n. For n = 1 there is nothing to show; so we start with n = 2. Note that in this case, the hypothesis is equivalent to the assumption that the Yi ’s are cobounded. Assume therefore that the elements of Y are uniformly quasiconvex in (X, d); and that they are uniformly mutually cobounded. We shall show that H is also quasiconvex for a uniform constant. First, since (X, d) is hyperbolic it follows by Proposition 2.10 that (XYel , del ) is hyperbolic.  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  11  Let x, y ∈ H. By assumption, there exists C0 ≥ 0 such that H is (C0 , C0 )−qi embedded in (G, del ). Denote by P the set of cone points corresponding to elements of Y and let γ be a (C, C)−quasi-geodesic without backtracking in (X, del ) with vertices in H ∪ P joining x, y ∈ H. By assumption, the collection Y is uniformly C-quasiconvex. Further, by assumption, there exists ǫ ∈ (0, 1), and ∆0 such that for all ∆ > ∆0 , wherever H (∆, ǫ)-meets an item Y in Y, there is a path in H +ǫ∆ between the meeting points in H that is uniformly a quasigeodesic in the metric (X, d). Hence, for some uniform constants λ, µ, we may (coarsely) (λ, µ)-de-electrify γ to obtain a (λ, µ)-electro-ambient quasigeodesic γ ′ in (X, d), that lies close to H. [Note that the meeting points of H with elements of Y are only coarsely defined. So we are actually replacing pieces of γ by quasigeodesics in H +ǫ∆ rather than in H itself.] Note that by assumption Y are uniformly quasiconvex in (X, d); and further that they are uniformly mutually cobounded. Hence the space X is actually strongly hyperbolic relative to Y. By Corollary 2.16, it follows that γ ′ is a quasi-geodesic in (X, d), for a uniform constant. Since this was done for arbitrary x, y ∈ Hi,ℓ , we obtain that H is D−quasiconvex in (X, d). This finishes the proof of Proposition 2.12 for n = 2. The induction step is now easy. Assume that the statement is true for n = m. We shall prove it for n = m + 1. Electrify all pairwise intersections of Yi+ǫ to obtain an electric metric d2 . Then the collection {Yi } is cobounded with respect to the electric metric d2 . Here again, the space (X, d2 ) is strongly hyperbolic relative to the collection {Yi }. By the argument in the case n = 2 above, H is quasiconvex in (X, d2 ). The collection of pairwise intersections of the Yi+ǫ ’s in X satisfies the property that an intersection of any m of them is bounded. We are then through by the induction hypothesis.  2.5.3. Proofs through asymptotic cones. The repeated use of different references coming from different contexts in the previous subsubsection might call for more systematic self-contained proofs of the statements of subsection 2.5.1. This is our purpose in this subsubsection. In this part we will use the structure of an argument originally due to Gromov, and developed by Coulon amongst others (see for instance [Cou14, Proposition 5.28]), which uses asymptotic cones in order to show hyperbolicity or quasiconvexity of constructions. We fix a non-principal ultrafilter ω and will use the construction of asymptotic cones with respect to this ultrafilter ω. A few observations are in order here. In all the following, (XN , xN ) is a sequence of pointed δN -hyperbolic spaces, with δN converging to 0. Recall then that the asymptotic cone limω (XN , xN ) is an R-tree, with a base point. If YN is a family of cN -quasiconvex subsets of XN (for cN tending to 0), we want to consider the asymptotic cone limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) and relate it to limω (XN , xN ). Let us define the following equivalence relation on the set of sequences in XN . Two sequences (uN ), (vN ) are equivalent if dXN (uN , vN ) = O(1) for the ultrafilter ω (more precisely, if there exists a constant C such that for ω-almost all values of N , dXN (uN , vN ) ≤ C). Let us consider the set of equivalence classes of sequences, and let us only keep those that have some (hence all) representative (uN ) such that the electric distance dXNel (xN , uN ) is O(1). Let us call C this set of equivalence  12  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  classes. For a sequence u = (uN ) we write ∼u for its class in C. We also allow ourselves to write limω (XN , ∼u ) for limω (XN , uN ) to avoid cluttered notation. G Lemma 2.17. There is a natural inclusion from the disjoint union lim(XN , ∼u ∼u ∈C  ω  ) into limω ((XN )el YN , xN ). Proof. By definition of C we have a well defined map limω (XN , ∼u ) → limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) for each class ∼u in C. Given two sequences (yN ), and (zN ) in the same class ∼u ∈ C, if dXN (zN , yN ) is not o(1) for ω, then in the electric metric, it is not o(1), since the added edges all have length 1. Thus this map is injective. If (yN ), and (zN ) are not in the same class in C, then dXN (zN , yN ) is not o(1) for ω, and again, in the electric metric, it is not o(1). The map of the lemma is thus injective.  Note that the inclusion is continuous, as inclusions along the sequence are distance non-increasing. But it is not isometric. We need to describe what happens with the cone off. Consider a sequence (YN ) of subsets of Y. One says that the sequence is visible in limω (XN , uN ) if dXN (uN , YN ) ≤ O(1). In that case, limω (YN , uN ) is a subset of limω (XN , uN ), consisting of the images of all the sequences of elements of YN that remain at O(1)-distance from uN . Note that given a sequence (YN ), it can be visible in several limits limω (XN , uN ) (for several non-equivalent (uN )). In those classes where (YN ) is not visible, limω (YN , uN ) is empty. Let us define limω (YN , ∗) to be ⊔∼u ∈C limω (YN , uN ) in ⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , uN ). By the previous lemma, this is naturally a subset of limω ((XN )el YN , xN ). ω We define Y to be the collection of all sets limω (YN , ∗), for all possible sequences Q (YN ) ∈ N >0 YN . This is a family of subsets of limω ((XN )el YN , xN ). el Let us define [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , uN )] to be the cone-off (of parameter 1) of [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )] over each limω (YN , ∗). Note that there is a natural copy of el el [limω (XN , ∼u )] in [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )] . el Lemma 2.18. limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) is isometric to [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )] . el Proof. First there is a natural bijection from limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) to [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )] . Indeed, for any sequence (yN ) with yN ∈ XN at distance O(1) from xN in the electric metric, Lemma 2.17 provides an image in [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )]el . For any el sequence (cN ) with cN a cone-point in XN \ XN , at distance O(1) from xN in the electric metric, cN is in the cone electrifying a certain YN , which is therefore at distance O(1) from xN for the electric metric. Choose uN ∈ YN , then the equivalence class of (uN ) is in C, and of course YN is visible in this class. Thus, el there is a cone point c ∈ [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )] at distance 1 from limω (YN , ∗). We choose this point as the image of the sequence (cN ) in limω ((XN )el YN , xN ). This is well defined, and injective, for if c′N is another sequence of cone-points ω-almost everywhere different from cN , then it defines an ω-almost everywhere different sequence YN′ , and a different set limω (YN′ , ∗). We also can extend our map to all limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) linearly on the cone-edges. This produces a bijection el el limω ((XN )YN , xN ) → [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )] . To show that it is an isometry, consider two sequences (yN ), (zN ) both in XN , such that the distance in XYelN converges (for ω) to ℓ. Then there is a path of length ℓN (converging to ℓ) in XYelN with, eventually, at most ℓ/2 cone points on  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  13 el  it. It follows from the construction that their images in [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )] are at distance at most ℓ. Conversely, assume (yN ) and (zN ) are sequences in XN giving points in limω (XN , ∼u ) and limω (XN , ∼v ), for ∼u , ∼v ∈ C, and take el a path γ between these points in limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) ≃ [⊔∼u ∈C limω (XN , ∼u )] , of length ℓ > 0. It has finite length, so it contains finitely many cone points ci (i) (i) (i = 1, . . . , r), coning limω (YN , ∗), for which YN is visible in both ∼ui , ∼ui+1 . This easily produces a path in limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) of length ℓ, by using the corresponding (i)  cone points and the path between the spaces YN given by the restriction of γ. We have thus observed that the bijection we started with is 1-Lipschitz as is its inverse. It is therefore an isometry.  We finally describe a tree-like structure on [⊔C limω (XN , ∼u )]el where the pieces el are the subspaces [limω (XN , ∼u )] for ∼u ∈ C, which are electrifications Q of limω (XN , ∼u ) over the subsets of the form limω (YN , ∼u ), for all sequences (YN ) ∈ (YN ) that are visible in ∼u . Let us say that two classes ∼u and ∼v are joined by a sequence (YN ) if the latter sequence is visible in both of them. First we describe a simpler case of this tree-like structure. Lemma 2.19. Assume that YN consists of cN -quasiconvex subsets of XN with cN tending to 0. For any pair of different classes ∼u , ∼v in C, the subspaces [limω (XN , ∼u )]el and el el [limω (XN , ∼v )] of [⊔∼w ∈C limω (XN , ∼w )] have intersection of diameter at most 2. Proof. Note that by Lemma 2.17 the intersection consists of cone points. Thus consider two sequences (YN ), (YN′ ) both visible in ∼u and ∼v . Consider then yN (u), yN (v) ∈ YN such that yN (u) is visible in ∼u (hence not in ∼v ) and sym′ ′ metrically yN (v) is visible in ∼v (hence not in ∼u ), and take yN (u), yN (v) ∈ YN′ ′ ′ similarly. The distances dXN (yN (u), yN (u)) and dXN (yN (v), yN (v)) both are O(1) ′ ′ (u), yN (v)) both go to infinity (for ω). The whereas dXN (yN (u), yN (v)) and dXN (yN space XN being a δN -hyperbolic space (for δN → 0), the quadrilateral with these ′ ′ four vertices have their sides [yN (u), yN (v)] and [yN (u), yN (v)] getting o(1)-close to each other, on sequences that are visible for ∼u and sequences that are visible for ∼v . But these sides are close to YN and YN′ respectively. It follows that in limω (XN , ∼u ) and in limω (XN , ∼v ), the limit of YN and of YN′ share a point. Thus the cone point of their electrifications are at distance 2.  Note that if there is a bound on the diameter of the projection of YN on YN′ , then there is only one point in the intersection. Lemma 2.20. If there is a cycle of classes ∼u1 , ∼u2 , . . . , ∼uk , ∼uk+1 =∼u1 where (i) ∼ui is joined to ∼ui+1 by a sequence (YN ), then there is 1 < i0 < k + 1 such that (1) (i ) (i ) (YN 0 ) is visible in ∼u1 , ∼u2 and the cone points of (YN 0 ) and of (YN ) are at el el distance 2 from each other in [limω (XN , ∼u1 )] , and in [⊔C limω (XN , ∼u )] . el  As a corollary, limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) is a quasi-tree of the spaces [limω (XN , ∼)] , and more precisely, all paths from [limω (XN , ∼u )]el to [limω (XN , ∼v )]el , if ∼u 6=∼v el have to pass through the 2-neighborhood of a certain cone point of [limω (XN , ∼u )] .  14  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  Proof. The number k is fixed, and the argument will generalize the one of the (i) (i) (i) previous lemma. For each i, let (yN ) and (zN ) be sequences of points of YN (i) (i) respectively visible in ∼ui and in ∼ui+1 . One has dXN (yN , zN ) unbounded, and (i) (i+1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (k) (k) dXN (zN , yN ) = O(1). Therefore in the 2k-gon (yN , zN , yN , zN , . . . , yN , zN ), using the approximation by a finite tree (for hyperbolic spaces), we see that one of (1) (1) (i) (i) the segments [yN , zN ] (i 6= 1) must come kδN -close to [yN , zN ], and at distance (1) O(1) from yN . After extracting a subsequence, one can assume that i is constant in N , and we (i ) choose it to be our i0 . It follows that the sequence (YN 0 ) is visible for ∼u1 and (i0 ) the limit of (YN ) and of (YN1 ) share a point in limω (XN , ∼u1 ). The conclusion (1) (i ) that the cone points of (YN 0 ) and of (YN ) are at distance 2 from each other in el [limω (XN , ∼u1 )] follows, and this also implies that they are at distance at most 2 el in [⊔C limω (XN , ∼u )] .  Note that if the subsets of YN are cn -mutually cobounded, with cn going to 0 (or even bounded) then one can improve the lemma by saying that eventually (1) (i ) YN 0 = YN . From the previous lemmas we get: el  el  Corollary 2.21. [⊔C limω (XN , ∼u )] is the union of spaces of the form [limω (XN , ∼u )] for ∼u ∈ C, with some cone points identified. el Moreover, if ∼u 6=∼v , and if γ1 , γ2 are any (finite) paths from [limω (XN , ∼u )] to el el [limω (XN , ∼v )] , then for each i ∈ {1, 2}, there exists a cone point ci ∈ [limω (XN , ∼u )] in γi such that the distance between c1 and c2 is at most 2.  Indeed, such a pair of paths provides us with a certain finite cycle of classes, starting with ∼u , and we may apply the previous lemma. el el We say that [⊔C limω (XN , ∼u )] is a 2-quasi-tree of spaces of the form [limω (XN , ∼u )] for ∼u ∈ C. Let us prove Proposition 2.10. For convenience of the reader we repeat the statement. Proposition. 2.10 Let (X, d) be a hyperbolic geodesic space, C > 0, and Y be a family of C-quasiconvex subspaces. Then XYel is hyperbolic. If moreover the elements of Y are mutually cobounded, then XYh is hyperbolic. Proof. We claim that, for all ρ, there exists δ0 < ρ/1014 and C0 < ρ/1014 such that if X is δ0 -hyperbolic, and if Y is a collection of C0 -quasiconvex subsets, then every ball of radius ρ of XYel is 10-hyperbolic. For proving the claim, assume it false, and consider a sequence of counterexamples (XN , YN ) for δ0 = C0 = N1 , N = 1, 2, . . . . This means that (XN )el YN fails to be 10-hyperbolic. There are four points xN , yN , zN , tN , all at distance at most 2ρ from xN , such that (xN , zN )tN ≤ inf{(xN , yN )tN , (yN , zN )tN } − 10. We pass el to the ultralimit for ω. In limω (XN , xN ), each sequence xN , yN , zN , tN converges, since these points stay at bounded distance from xN , and the inequality persists. Hence one gets four points falsifying the 10-hyperbolicity condition in a pointed space limω ((XN )el YN , xN ).  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  15  But the asymptotic cone limω ((XN )el YN , xN ) is, by Corollary 2.21, a 2-quasitree of spaces that are electrifications (of parameter 1) of real trees limω (XN , x′N ), for some base point x′N over the family Y ω , consisting of convex subsets (i.e. of subtrees). el This space (limω (XN , x′N ))el Y ω has 2-thin geodesic triangles, therefore limω ((XN )YN , xN ) el itself is 10-hyperbolic, a contradiction. The claim hence holds: XY is ρ-locally 10hyperbolic. We now claim that, under the same hypothesis, it is (2 + 10C0 + 10δ0 )-coarsely simply-connected, that is to say that any loop in it can be homotoped to a point by a sequence of substitutions of arcs of length < (2 + 10C0 + 10δ0) by its complement in a loop of length < (2+10C0 +10δ0 ). Indeed, any time such a loop passes through a cone point associated to some Y ∈ Y, one can consider a geodesic in X between its entering and exiting points in Y , which stays in the C0 neighborhood of Y . Therefore, a (2 + 10C0 )-coarse homotopy of the loop transforms it into a loop in X, which is δ-hyperbolic. Since a δ- hyperbolic space is 10δ-coarsely simply-connected, the second claim follows. The final ingredient is the Gromov-Cartan-Hadamard theorem [Cou14, Theorem A.1], stating that, if ρ is sufficiently large compared to µ, any ρ-locally 10-hyperbolic space which is µ-coarsely simply connected is (globally) δ ′ -hyperbolic, for some δ ′ . We thus get that there exists δ0 < ρ/1014 and C0 < ρ/1014 such that if X is δ0 -hyperbolic, and if Y is a collection of C0 -quasiconvex subsets, then XYel is δ ′ hyperbolic. Now let us argue that this implies the first point of the proposition. If X and Y are given as in the statement, one may rescale X by a certain factor λ > 1, so that it is δ0 -hyperbolic, and such that Y is a collection of C0 -quasiconvex subsets. Let us define XYelλ to be G XYelλ = X ⊔ { Yi × [0, λ]}/ ∼ i∈I  where ∼ denotes the identification of Yi × {0} with Yi ⊂ X for each i, and the identification of Yi × {1} to a single cone point vi (dependent on i), and where Yi × [0, λ] is endowed with the product metric as defined in the first paragraph of 2.1 except that {y} × [0, n] is isometric to [0, λ]. The claim ensures that XYelλ is hyperbolic. However, it is obviously quasi-isometric to XYel . We have the first point. For the second part, one can proceed with a similar proof, with horoballs. The claim is then that for all ρ, there exist δ0 , C0 and D0 such that if X is δ0 -hyperbolic, and if Y is a collection of C0 -quasiconvex subsets, D0 -mutually cobounded, then any ball of radius ρ of the horoballification XYh is 10-hyperbolic. The proof of the claim is similar. Consider a sequence of counterexamples XN , YN , for the parameters δ = C = D = 1/N for N going to infinity, with the four points xN , yN , zN , tN in (XN )hY , in a ball of radius ρ, falsifying the hyperbolicity condition. There are two cases. Either xN (which is in (XN )hY ) escapes from XN , i.e. its distance from some basepoint in XN tends to ∞ for the ultrafilter ω, or it does not. In the case that it escapes from XN , then, when it is larger than ρ all four points xN , yN , zN , tN are in a single horoball, but such a horoball is 10-hyperbolic hence a contradiction.  16  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  The other case is when there is x′N ∈ XN whose distance to xN remains bounded (for the ultrafilter ω). Note that {xN , yN , zN , tN } converge in the asymptotic cone limω ((XN )hYN , x′N ) of the sequence of pointed spaces ((XN )hYN , x′N ). It is also immediate by definition of limω YN that limω ((XN )hYN , x′N ) is the horoballification of the asymptotic cone of the sequence (XN , x′N ) over the family limω (YN , x′N ) defined above. This family limω (YN , x′N ) consists of convex subsets (hence subtrees), such that any two share at most one point. This horoballification is therefore a tree-graded space in the sense of [DS05], with pieces being the combinatorial horoballs over the subtrees constituting limω YN . As a tree of 10-hyperbolic spaces, this space is 10hyperbolic, contradicting the inequalities satisfied by the limits limω {xN , yN , zN , tN }. Therefore, XYh is ρ-locally 10-hyperbolic. As before, one may check that (under the same assumptions) XYh is (2 + 10C0 + 10δ0 )-coarsely simply connected, and again this implies by the Gromov-CartanHadamard theorem that (under the same assumptions) XYh is hyperbolic. This implies the second point. Indeed, let us denote by λ1 X the space X with metric rescaled by λ1 . The previous claim shows that, under the assumption of the second point of the proposition, there exists λ > 1 such that λ( λ1 X)h1 Y is hyperbolic. Consider the λ  map η between XYh → λ( λ1 X)h1 Y that is identity on X and that sends {y} × {n} to λ  {y} × {λ × (n + ⌊log2 λ⌋)} for all y ∈ Yi and all Yi (and all n). All paths in XYh that have only vertical segments in horoballs have their length expanded (under the map η) by a factor between 1 and λ + log2 λ. But the geodesics in XYh and λ( λ1 X)h1 Y are λ paths whose components in horoballs consist of a vertical (descending) segment, followed by a single edge, followed by a vertical ascending segment (see [GM08]). Hence η is a quasi-isometry, and the space XYh is hyperbolic.  We continue with the persistence of quasi-convexity. Proposition. 2.11 Given δ, C there exists C ′ such that if (X, dX ) is a δ-hyperbolic metric space with a collection Y of C-quasiconvex, sets, then the following holds: If Q(⊂ X) is some (any) C-quasiconvex set (not necessarily an element of Y), then Q is C ′ -quasiconvex in (XYel , de ). Proof. The strategy is similar to that in the previous proposition. The main claim is that for all ρ, there is δ0 < 1, C0 < 1 such that if (X, dX ) is δ0 -hyperbolic, if Y is a collection of C0 -quasiconvex subsets and if Q is another C0 -quasiconvex subset of X, then Q is ρ-locally 10-quasiconvex in XYel (of course δ0 , C0 will be very small). To prove the claim, again, by contradiction, consider a sequence XN , YN , QN of counter examples for δN = CN = 1/N for N = 1, 2, . . . . There exist two points xN , yN in QN , at distance ≤ ρ from each other (for the electric metric), and a geodesic [xN , yN ] in XYel with a point zN on it at distance > 10 from Q. We record ′ a point zN in Q at minimal distance (≤ ρ in any case) from zN . With a non principal ultrafilter ω, we may take the asymptotic cone of the family el of pointed spaces (XN , xN ). In limω ((XN )el Y , xN ), the sequences (yN ), ([xN , yN ]) and (zN ) have limits for which the distance inequalities persist, and we get that limω (QN , xN ) is not ρ-locally 10-quasiconvex in limω ((XN )el Y , xN ). But as we noticed in Corollary 2.21 limω ((XN )el Y , xN ) is a 2-quasi-tree of spaces of the form ′ (limω (XN , x′N ))el Y ω , which are the electrifications of R-trees limω (XN , xN ) over a  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  17  family of convex subsets (i.e. subtrees). In this space, limω (QN , xN ) is also a subforest of ⊔(uN )∈C limω (XN , uN ). Also observe that if (QN ) is visible in two adjacent classes, then limω (QN , xN ) is adjacent to their common cone point over sequences (i) (j) (YN ), (YN ). Hence limω (QN , xN ) is 2-quasiconvex in limω ((XN )el Y ω , xN ), and this ′ contradicts the inequalities satisfied by limω {xN , yN , zN , zN }. The claim is established for all ρ. Now there exists ρ0 such that, in any 1-hyperbolic space, any subset that is ρ0 -locally 10-quasiconvex is 1014 -globally quasiconvex (this classical fact, perhaps found elsewhere with other (better!) constants, follows also from the GromovCartan-Hadamard theorem for instance). So, by choosing an appropriate ρ, we have proven that there is δ0 < 1, C0 < 1 and C1 , such that if (X, dX ) is δ0 -hyperbolic, if Y is a collection of C0 -quasiconvex subsets and if Q is another C0 -quasiconvex subset of X, then Q is C1 -quasiconvex in XYel . Coming back to the statement of the proposition, by rescaling our space, we have proven that if (X, dX ) is a δ-hyperbolic metric space with a collection Y of C-quasiconvex sets, and if Q is C-quasiconvex, then Q is λC1 -quasiconvex in XYelλ (as defined in the previous proof) for λ = max{δ/δ0 , C/C0 }. Since XYelλ is quasiisometric to XYel , by a (λ, λ)-quasi-isometry, it follows that Q is C ′ -quasiconvex in XYel for C ′ depending only on δ, C.  Finally, we consider the proposed converse. Proposition. 2.12 Let (X, d) be hyperbolic, and let Y be a collection of uniformly quasiconvex subsets. Let H be a subset of X that is coarsely path connected, and quasiconvex in the electrification XYel . Assume also that there exists ǫ ∈ (0, 1), and ∆0 such that for all ∆ > ∆0 , wherever H (∆, ǫ)-meets an item Y in Y, there is a path in H +ǫ∆ between the meeting points in H that is uniformly a quasigeodesic in the metric (X, d). Then H is quasiconvex in (X, d). The quasiconvexity constant of H can be chosen to depend only on the constants involved for (X, d), Y, ∆0 , ǫ, the coarse path connection constant, and the quasigeodesic constant of the last assumption. We use the same strategy again. The claim is now the lemma below. To state it, we need to define the m-coarse path metric on an m-coarse path connected subspace of a metric space. A subset Y ⊂ X of a metric space is m-coarse path connected if for any two points x, y in it there is a sequence x0 = x, x1 , . . . , xr = y for some r such that xi ∈ Y and dX (xi , xi+1 ) ≤ m for all i. We call such a sequence an mcoarse path or a path with mesh ≤ m. The length of the coarse path (x0 , . . . , xr ) is P dX (xi , xi+1 ). The m-coarse path metric on Y is the distance obtained by taking the infimum of lengths of coarse paths between its points. An m-coarse geodesic is a coarse path realizing the coarse path metric between two points. el , R > 0, Q > 1, ǫ > 0, and ∆ > 10ǫ. Then there exists Lemma 2.22. Fix CH δ0 , C0 , m0 > 0, such that the following holds: Assume that (X, d) is geodesic, δ0 -hyperbolic, with a collection Y of C0 -quasiconvex subsets. Further suppose that H is an m0 -coarsely connected subset of X which  18  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  el is CH -quasiconvex in the electrification XYel . Equip H +ǫ∆ with its m0 -coarse path metric dH . Assume also that whenever H (∆, ǫ)-meets a set Y ∈ Y, there is a (Q, C0 )quasigeodesic path, which is an (m0 /10)-coarse path, in H +ǫ∆ joining the meeting points in H. Then for all a, b ∈ H +ǫ∆ at dH -distance at most R from each other, any m0 coarse δ0 -quasi-geodesic of H +ǫ∆ (for its coarse path metric) between a, b is (∆ × el CH )-close to a geodesic of X.  Proof. Suppose that the claim is false: For all choice of δ, C, m there is a counterexample. Set δN = CN = 1/N . For each ǫ, there exists N such that, in a N1 -hyperbolic space, for any two points x, y, and any (Q, 1/N )-quasigeodesic p which is a (1/N )-coarse path between these two points, the ǫ-neighborhood of p contains the geodesics [x, y]. (This, for instance, is visible on an asymptotic cone). Thus, it is possible to choose a sequence mN > 10/N decreasing to zero, such 1 that pairs of 9∆ 10 -long (Q, 1/N )-quasigeodesics with mesh ≤ 1/N in a N -hyperbolic spaces, with starting points at distance ≤ ∆/10 from each other, and ending points at distance ≤ ∆/10 from each other, necessarily lie at distance (mN /10) from one another. Let then XN , HN , YN be a counterexample to our claim for these values: for each +∆ +∆ N there is aN , bN in HN , R-close to each other for dHN , and a point cN ∈ HN el in a coarse δN -quasi-geodesic in [aN , bN ]dHn at distance at least (∆ × CH ) from el a geodesic [aN , bN ] in XN . However cN is CH -close to a geodesic [aN , bN ]el in el X . Passing to an asymptotic cone, we find a map pω from an interval [0, R] to a continuous path in limω (HN , aN ) from aω to bω (which can be equal to aω ) el that passes through a point cω at distance ≥ (∆ × CH ) from the arc [aω , bω ] in limω (XN , aN ). el However, it is at distance ≤ CH in the electrification of limω (XN , aN ) by Y ω . It follows that on the path in limω (XN , aN ) from [aω , bω ] to cω , there must exist a segment of length ≥ ∆ belonging to the same Y ω ∈ Y ω . Let us say that Y ω is the limit of a sequence YN . Note that the limit path pω crosses this segment at least twice (once in either direction). Thus, for N large enough, HN (∆, ǫ)-meets YN , with two pairs of meeting points (r1 , r2 ), (s1 , s2 ) in HN , where d(r1 , r2 ) ≥ 9∆/10 (and (s1 , s2 ) ≥ 9∆/10) and d(r1 , s1 ) ≤ 3∆/10 and d(r2 , s2 ) ≤ 3∆/10. By assumption, there is a (Q, N1 )quasi-geodesic path in H +ǫ∆ from s1 to s2 and another from r1 to r2 , with mesh < mN /10. They have to fellow travel on a large subpath, and pass at distance ≤ mN /10 from each other, by choice of mN . One can therefore find a shortcut that is still a path in H +∆ of mesh ≤ mN , a contradiction.  From the claim, we can prove the statement of the Proposition. Consider a situation as in the statement. We may choose the coarse path connectivity constant of H to be more than 10 times the quasigeodesic constant of the last assumption there. Take ǫ, given by the assumption of the Proposition, and ∆ > max{100ǫ, ∆0}. Let Q be the quasi-geodesic constant given by the the assumption of the proposition el on (∆, ǫ)-meetings, and CH be as given by the assumption. Take R larger (how large will be made clear in the proof).  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  19  Rescale the space X so that the hyperbolicity constant, the quasiconvexity constant of items of Y, and the constant of coarse path connection of H are respectively smaller than δ0 , C0 , m0 of the Lemma above. Note that the assumption of the proposition on (∆, ǫ)-meetings is invariant under rescaling (except for the value of ∆0 ). Thus, this assumption still holds, with the same ǫ, and for the specified ∆ chosen above. The Lemma applies, and H +ǫ∆ is R-locally quasiconvex for the rescaled metric. By the local to global principle (in δ0 hyperbolic spaces), with a suitable preliminary (large enough) choice of R, H +ǫ∆ is then globally quasiconvex. After rescaling back to the original metric of X, H +λ is still quasiconvex for some λ (depending on ǫ∆, and the coefficient of rescaling); hence H is quasiconvex. By construction, we also have the statement on the dependence of the quasiconvexity constant. ✷ 2.5.4. Coarse hyperbolic embeddedness and Strong Relative Hyperbolicity. The following Proposition establishes the equivalence of Coarse hyperbolic embeddedness and Strong Relative Hyperbolicity in the context of this paper. Proposition 2.23. Assume that (X, d) is a metric space, and that Y is a collection of subspaces. If the horoballification XYh of X over Y is hyperbolic, then Y is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in the sense of spaces. If X is hyperbolic and if Y is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in the sense of spaces, then XYh is hyperbolic. We remark here parenthetically that the converse should be true without the assumption of hyperbolicity of X. However, this is not necessary for this paper. Proof. Assume that the horoballification XYh of X over Y is δ−hyperbolic. The horoballs Y h (corresponding to Y ) are thus 10δ-quasiconvex. Therefore, by Proposition 2.10, the electrified space obtained by electrifying (coning off) the horoballs Y h is hyperbolic. Since by Proposition 2.8, this space is quasi-isometric to (XYel , del Y ), it follows that the later is hyperbolic. This proves the first condition of Definition 2.2. We want to prove the existence of a proper increasing function ψ : R+ → R+ , such that the angular metric at each cone point vY (for Y ∈ Y) of (XYel , del Y ) is bounded below by ψ ◦ d|Y . Define ψ(r) = inf  Y ∈Y  inf  y1 ,y2 ∈Y,d(y1 ,y2 )≤r  ˆ 1 , y2 ). d(y  Of course, the angular metric at vY is bounded below by ψ ◦ d|Y . The function ψ is obviously increasing. We need to show that it is proper, i.e. that it goes to +∞. If ψ is not proper, then there exists θ0 > 0 such that for all D, there exist Y ∈ Y ˆ y ′ ) ≤ θ0 (where dˆ is the angular and y, y ′ ∈ Y at d−distance greater than D but d(y, metric on Y ). We choose D >> θ0 δ (for instance D = exp(100(θ0 + 1)(δ + 1))). Consider a path in (XYh )el of length less than θ0 from y to y ′ avoiding the cone point of Y . Because D >> θ0 , this path has to pass through other cone points. It can thus be chosen as a concatenation of N + 1 geodesics whose vertices are y, y ′ and some cone points v1 , . . . , vN (corresponding to Y1 , . . . , YN with N < θ0 ). Adjoining the (geodesic) path [y, vY ] ∪ [vY , y ′ ] (where vY corresponds to the cone  20  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  point for Y ), we thus have a geodesic (N + 2)-gon σ. Next replace each passage of σ through a cone point (vi or vY ) in XYel by a geodesic (µi or µY respectively) in the corresponding horoball (Yih or Y h respectively) in XYh to obtain a geodesic (2N + 2)-gon P in XYh . The geodesic segments µi or µY comprise (n + 1) alternate sides of this geodesic (2N + 2)-gon. Since XYh is δ−hyperbolic, it follows that the mid-point m of µY is at distance ≤ (2N + 2)δ from another edge of P . Note that m is in the horoball of Y , and because the distance in Y between y and y ′ is larger than D, we have that dh (m, Y ) is at least log(D)/2. Since no other edge of P enters the horoball Y h , this forces log(D) (and hence D) to be bounded in terms of θ0 and δ: D ≤ exp(4(N + 1)δ). Since N ≤ θ0 , this is a contradiction with the choice of D. We can conclude that ψ is proper, and we have the first statement. Let us consider the second statement. If X is hyperbolic and if Y is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in the sense of spaces, then elements of Y are uniformly quasiconvex in (X, d) by 2.7, and, by the property of the angular distance on any Y ∈ Y, they are mutually cobounded. The statement then follows by Proposition 2.10.  3. Algebraic Height and Intersection Properties 3.1. Algebraic Height. We recall here the general definition for height of finitely many subgroups. Definition 3.1. Let G be a group and {H1 , . . . , Hm } be a finite collection of subgroups. Then the algebraic height of this collection is n if (n + 1) is the smallest number with the property that for any (n+1) distinct left cosets g1 Hα1 , . . . , gn+1 Hαn+1 , T the intersection 1≤i≤n+1 gi Hαi gi−1 is finite. We shall describe this briefly by saying that algebraic height is the largest n for which the intersection of n essentially distinct conjugates of H1 , . . . , Hm is infinite. Here ‘essentially distinct’ refers to the cosets of H1 , . . . , Hm and not to the conjugates themselves. For hyperbolic groups, one of the main Theorems of [GMRS97] is the following: Theorem 3.2. [GMRS97] Let G be a hyperbolic group and H a quasiconvex subgroup. Then the algebraic height of H is finite. Further, there exists R0 such that if H ∩ gHg −1 is infinite, then g has a double coset representative with length at most R0 . The same conclusions hold for finitely many quasiconvex subgroups {H1 , . . . , Hn } of G. We quickly recall a proof of Theorem 3.2 for one subgroup H in order to generalize it to the context of mapping class groups and Out(Fn ). Proof. Let G be hyperbolic, X(= ΓG ) a Cayley graph of G with respect to a finite generating set (assumed to be δ−hyperbolic), and H a C0 −quasiconvex subgroup of G. Suppose that there exist N essentially distinct conjugates {H gi }, i = 1, . . . , N , of H that intersect in an infinite subgroup. The N left-cosets gi H are disjoint and share an accumulation point p in the boundary of G (in the limit set of ∩i H gi ). Since all gi H are C0 −quasiconvex, there exist N disjoint quasi-geodesics σ1 , . . . , σN  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  21  (with same constants λ, µ depending only on C0 , δ) converging to p such that σi is in gi H. Since X is δ−hyperbolic, there exists R(= R(λ, µ, δ) = R(C0 , δ)) and a point p0 sufficiently far along σ1 such that all the quasi-geodesics σ1 , . . . , σN pass through BR (p0 ). Hence N ≤ #(BR (p0 )) giving us finiteness of height. Further, any such σi furnishes a double coset representative gi′ of gi (say by taking a word that gives the shortest distance between H and the coset gi H) of length bounded in terms of R. This furnishes the second conclusion.  Remark 3.3. A word about generalizing the above argument to a family H of finitely many subgroups is necessary. The place in the above argument where H consists of a singleton is used essentially is in declaring that the N left-cosets gi H are disjoint. This might not be true in general (e.g. H1 < H2 for a family having two elements). However, by the pigeon-hole principle, choosing N1 large enough, any N1 distinct conjugates {Higi }, i = 1, . . . , N, Hi ∈ H must contain N essentially distinct conjugates {H gi }, i = 1, . . . , N of some H ∈ H and then the above argument for a single H ∈ H goes through. Remark 3.4. A number of other examples of finite algebraic height may be obtained from certain special subgroups of Relatively Hyperbolic Groups, Mapping Class Groups and Out(Fn ). These will be discussed after we introduce geometric height later in the paper. 3.2. Geometric i-fold intersections. Given a finite family of subgroups of a group we define collections of geometric i−fold intersections. Definition 3.5. Let G be endowed with a left invariant word metric d. Let H be a finite family of subgroups of G. For i ∈ N, i ≥ 2, define the geometric i-fold intersection, or simply the i-fold intersection of cosets of H, Hi , to be the set of subsets J of G for which there exist H1 , . . . , Hi ∈ H and g1 , . . . , gi ∈ G, and ∆ ∈ N satisfying:   \ +∆ J =  (gj Hj )  j  T  +∆  and j (gj Hj ) is not in the 20δ-neighborhood of eter of J is at least 10∆.  T  +∆−2δ  (gj Hj )  , and the diam-  Geometric i−fold intersections are thus, by definition, intersections of thickenings of cosets. The condition that the diameter of the intersection is larger than 10 times the thickening is merely to avoid counting myriads of too small intersections. The next proposition establishes that the collection of such intersections is again closed under intersection. Proposition 3.6. Consider J ∈ Hj , and K ∈ Hk for j < k and let ∆J , ∆K be J and K respectively. Write J = Tconstants as in Definition T 3.5 for defining  +∆J ′ ′ +∆K and K = , and let ∆0 > max(∆J , ∆K ). i (gi Hi ) i (gi Hi ) Assume that J and K (∆, ǫ)-meet, for some ∆ > 20∆0 , and for ǫ < 1/50. Then either K ⊂ J, or for any pair of (∆, ǫ)-meeting points of J and K, there is L ∈ Hj+1 contained in J, that contains it. Proof. Let x, y be (∆, ǫ)-meeting points of J and K. If K 6⊂ J, we can assume that +∆ +ǫ∆ x, y are in (g1′ H1′ ) K for some g1′ H1′ not contained in the collection {gi Hi }.  22  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  T T +∆′ +∆ +ǫ∆ +∆ +ǫ∆ ∩ ∩(g1′ H1′ ) K , hence in i (gi Hi ) Notice that x, y are in i (gi Hi ) J ′ ′ ′ +∆ ′ (g1 H1 ) for ∆ the greater of ∆K + ǫ∆ and ∆J + ǫ∆. We argue by contradiction. Suppose that x, y are contained in the 20δ-thickening of a 2δ-lesser intersection. It follows that there are x′ , y ′ such that d(x, x′ ) ≤ 20δ, d(y, y ′ ) < 20δ and still d(x′ , J) ≤ ǫ∆ − 2δ, and d(y ′ , J) ≤ ǫ∆ − 2δ. But by definition of (∆, ǫ)-meeting, this is a contradiction. Finally, the diameter of the intersection of ∆′ -thickenings of our cosets, is larger than ∆. Since the thickening constant is ∆′ ≤ ∆0 + ǫ∆, the ratio of the thickening constant by the diameter is at most (∆0 + ǫ∆)/∆ which is less than 1/10, hence the result.  Let (G, d) be a group with a word metric and H < G a subgroup. The restriction of d on H will be called the induced metric on H from G. Proposition 3.7. Let (G, d) be a group with a δ-hyperbolic word metric (not necessarily locally finite). Assume that A1 , . . . , AT n are C-quasiconvex subsets of G. Then for all ∆ > C + 20δ, the intersection A+∆ is (4δ)-quasiconvex in (G, d). i Moreover, if A and B are C-quasiconvex subsets of G, and if ΠB (A) denotes the set of nearest points projections of A on B, then, either ΠB (A) ⊂ A+3C+10δ or DiamΠB (A) ≤ 4C + 20δ. T Proof. Consider x, y ∈ A+∆ and take ai , bi some nearest point projection on Ai . i On a geodesic [x, y] take p at distance greater than 4δ from x and y. Hyperbolicity applied to the quadrilateral (x, ai , bi , y) tells us that x is 4δ-close to [x′i , ai ]∪[ai , bi ]∪ [bi , yi′ ], where x′i and yi′ are the points of, respectively [x, ai ] and [y, bi ], at distance 4δ from, respectively, x and y. Let us call [x′i , ai ], [bi , yi′ ] the approaching segment, and [ai , bi ] the traveling segments. Hence for each i, p is closed to either an approaching segment, or the traveling segment, with subscript i. If p is close to an approaching segment of index i, then it is in A+∆ i . If x is close to the traveling segment of index i, then it is at distance at most because ∆ > C + 10δ. C + 10δ from Ai , hence in A+∆ i T We thus obtain that [x, y] remains at distance 4δ from A+∆ i . To prove the second statement, take a0 , b0 in A and B respectively realizing the distance (up to δ if necessary). Let b ∈ ΠB (A), and assume that it is the projection of a. In the quadrilateral a, a0 , b, b0 , the geodesic [a, a0 ] stays in A+C and [b, b0 ] is in B +C . Since b is a projection, [b, a] fellow-travels [b, b0 ] for less than 2C + 10δ, and similarly for [b0 , a0 ] with [b0 , b]. By hyperbolicity [b, b0 ] thus stays 10δ close to [a, a0 ] except for the part (2C + 10δ)-close to either b or b0 . It follows that either b ∈ A+(3C+10δ) or b is at distance ≤ 4C + 20δ from b0 . Thus ΠB (A) ⊂ A+3C+10δ or DiamΠB (A) ≤ 4C + 20δ.  3.3. Algebraic i-fold intersections. We provide now a more algebraic (group theoretic) treatment of the preceding discussion. This is in keeping with the more well-known setup of intersections of subgroups and their conjugates cf. [GMRS97]. Given a finite family of subgroups of a group we first define collections of i−fold conjugates or algebraic i-fold intersections.  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  23  Definition 3.8. Let G be endowed with a left invariant word metric d. Let H be a family of subgroup of G. For i ∈ N, i ≥ 2, define Hi to be the set of subgroups J of G for which there exists H1 , . . . , Hi ∈ H and g1 , . . . , gi ∈ G satisfying: • the cosets gj Hj are pairwise distinct (and hence as in [GMRS97] we use the terminology that the conjugates {gj Hj gj−1 , j = 1, . . . , i} are essentially distinct) T • J is the intersection j gj Hj gj−1 . • J is unbounded in (G, d). We shall call Hi the family of algebraic i-fold intersections or simply, i−fold conjugates. The second point in the following definition is motivated by the behavior of nearest point projections of cosets of quasiconvex subgroups of hyperbolic groups on each other. Let (G, d) be hyperbolic and H1 , H2 be quasiconvex. Let aH1 , bH2 be cosets and c = a−1 b. Then the nearest point projection of bH2 onto aH1 is the (left) a−translate of the nearest point projection of cH2 onto H1 . Let ΠB (A) denote the (nearest-point) projection of A onto B. Then ΠH1 (cH2 ) lies in a bounded neighborhood (say D0 −neighborhood) of H2c ∩ H1 and so ΠaH1 (bH2 ) lies in a D0 −neighborhood of bH2 b−1 a ∩ aH1 . The latter does lie in a bounded neighborhood of (H2 )b ∩ (H1 )a , but this bound depends on a, b and is not uniform. Hence the somewhat convoluted way of stating the second property below. The language of nearest-point projections below is in the spirit of [Mj11, Mj14] while the notion of geometric i-fold intersections discussed earlier is in the spirit of [DGO11]. Definition 3.9. Let G be a group and d a word metric on G. A finite family H = {H1 , . . . , Hm } of subgroups of G, each equipped with a wordmetric di is said to have the uniform qi-intersection property if there exist C1 , . . . , Cn , . . . such that (1) For all n, and all H ∈ Hn , H has a conjugate H ′ such that if d′ is any induced metric on H ′ from some Hi ∈ H, then (H ′ , d′ ) is (C1 , C1 )−qiembedded in (G, d). (2) For all n, let (Hn )0 be a choice of conjugacy representatives of elements of Hn that are C1 -quasiconvex in (G, d). Let CHn denote the collection of left cosets of elements of (Hn )0 . For all A, B ∈ CHn with A = aA0 , B = bB0 , and A0 , B0 ∈ (Hn )0 , ΠB (A) either has diameter bounded by Cn for the metric d, or ΠB (A) lies in a (left) a−translate translate of a Cn −neighborhood of A0 ∩ B0c , where c = a−1 b. In keeping with the spirit of the previous subsection, we provide a geometric version of the above definition below. Definition 3.10. Let G be a group and d a word metric on G. A finite family H = {H1 , . . . , Hm } of subgroups of G, each equipped with a wordmetric di is said to have the uniform geometric qi-intersection property if there exist C1 , . . . , Cn , . . . such that (1) For all n, and all H ∈ Hn , (H, d) is Cn -coarsely path connected, and (C1 , C1 )−qi-embedded in (G, d) (for its coarse path metric). (2) For all A, B ∈ Hn either diamG,d (ΠB (A)) ≤ Cn , or ΠB (A) ⊂ A+Cn for d.  24  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  Remark 3.11. The second condition of Definition 3.10 follows from the first condition if d is hyperbolic by Proposition 3.7. Further, the first condition holds for such (G, d) so long as ∆ is taken of the order of the quasiconvexity constants (again by Proposition 3.7). Note further that if G is hyperbolic (with respect to a not necessarily locally finite word metric) and H is C-quasiconvex, then by Proposition 3.6 the collection of geometric n-fold intersections Hn is mutually cobounded for the metric of (G, d)el Hn+1 (as in Definition 2.9). 3.4. Existing results on algebraic intersection properties. We start with the following result due to Short. Theorem 3.12. [Sho91, Proposition 3] Let G be a group generated by the finite set S. Suppose G acts properly on a uniformly proper geodesic metric space (X, d), with a base point x0 . Given C0 , there exists C1 such that if H1 , H2 are subgroups of G for which the orbits Hi x0 are C0 -quasiconvex in (X, d) (for i = 1, 2) then the orbit (H1 ∩ H2 )x0 is C1 −quasiconvex in (X, d). We remark here that in the original statement of [Sho91, Proposition 3], X is itself the Cayley graph of G with respect to S, but the proof there goes through without change to the general context of Proposition 3.12. In particular, for G (Gromov) hyperbolic, or G = M od(S) acting on Teichmuller space T eich(S) (equipped with the Teichmuller metric) and Out(Fn ) acting on Outer space cvN (with the symmetrized Lipschitz metric), the notions of (respectively) quasiconvex subgroups or convex cocompact subgroups of M od(S) or Out(Fn ) (see Sections 4.3 and 4.4 below for the Definitions) are independent of the finite generating sets chosen. Hence we have the following. Theorem 3.13. Let G be either M od(S) or Out(Fn ) equipped with some finite generating set. Given C0 , there exists C1 such that if H1 , H2 are C0 −convex cocompact subgroups of G, then H1 ∩ H2 is C1 −convex cocompact in G. The corresponding statement for relatively hyperbolic groups and relatively quasiconvex groups is due to Hruska. For completeness we recall it. Definition 3.14. [Osi06b, Hru10] Let G be finitely generated hyperbolic relative to a finite collection P of parabolic subgroups. A subgroup H ≤ G is relatively quasiconvex if the following holds. Let S be some (any) finite relative generating set for (G, P), and let P be the union of all Pi ∈ P. Let Γ denote the Cayley graph of G with respect to the generating set S ∪ P and d the word metric on G. Then there is a constant C0 = C0 (S, d) such that for each geodesic γ ⊂ Γ joining two points of H, every vertex of γ lies within C0 of H (measured with respect to d). Theorem 3.15. [Hru10] Let G be finitely generated hyperbolic relative to P. Given C0 , there exists C1 such that if H1 , H2 are C0 −relatively quasiconvex subgroups of G, then H1 ∩ H2 is C1 −relatively quasiconvex in G. 4. Geometric height and graded geometric relative hyperbolicity We are now in a position to define the geometric analog of height. There are two closely related notions possible, one corresponding to the geometric notion of i−fold intersections and one corresponding to the algebraic notion of i−fold conjugates.  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  25  The former is relevant when one deals with subsets and the latter when one deals with subgroups. Definition 4.1. Let G be a group, with a left invariant word metric d(= dG ) with respect to some (not necessarily finite) generating set. Let H be a family of subgroups of G. The geometric height, of H in (G, d) (for d) is the minimal number i ≥ 0 so that the collection Hi+1 of (i + 1)−fold intersections consists of uniformly bounded sets. If H is a single subgroup, its geometric height is that of the family {H}. Remark 4.2. Comparing notions of height: • Geometric height is related to algebraic height, but is more flexible, since in the former, we allow the group G to have an infinite generating set. We are then free to apply the operations of electrification, horoballification in the context of non-proper graphs. • In the case of a locally finite word metric, algebraic height is less than or equal to geometric height. Equality holds if all bounded intersections are uniformly bounded. • For a locally finite word metric, finiteness of algebraic height implies that i−fold conjugates are finite (and hence bounded in any metric) for all sufficiently large i. Hence finiteness of geometric height follows from finiteness of algebraic height and of a uniform bound on the diameter of the finite intersections. • When the metric on a Cayley graph is not locally finite, we do not know of any general statement that allows us to go directly from finiteness of diameter of an intersection of thickenings of cosets (geometric condition) to finiteness of diameter of intersections of conjugates (algebraic condition). Some of the technical complications below are due to this difficulty in going from geometric intersections to algebraic intersections. We generalize Definition 1.3 of graded relative hyperbolicity to the context of geometric height as follows. Definition 4.3. Let G be a group, d the word metric with respect to some (not necessarily finite) generating set and H a finite collection of subgroups. Let Hi be the collection of all i−fold conjugates of H. Let (Hi )0 be a choice of conjugacy representatives, and CHi the set of left cosets of elements of (Hi )0 Let di be the metric on (G, d) obtained by electrifying the elements of CHi . Let CHN be the graded family (CHi )i∈N . We say that G is graded geometric relatively hyperbolic with respect to CHN if (1) H has geometric height n for some n ∈ N, and for each i there are finitely many orbits of i-fold intersections. (2) For all i ≤ n + 1, CHi−1 is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in (G, di ). (3) There is Di such that all items of CHi are Di -coarsely path connected in (G, d). Remark 4.4. Comparing geometric and algebraic graded relative hyperbolicity: Note that the second condition of Definition 4.3 is equivalent, by Proposition 2.23,  26  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  to saying that (G, di ) is strongly hyperbolic relative to the collection Hi−1 . This is exactly the third (more algebraic) condition in Definition 1.3. Also, the third condition of Definition 4.3 is the analog of (and follows from) the second (more algebraic) condition in Definition 1.3. Thus finite geometric height along with (algebraic) graded relative hyperbolicity implies graded geometric relative hyperbolicity. The rest of this section furnishes examples of finite height in both its geometric and algebraic incarnations. 4.1. Hyperbolic groups. Proposition 4.5. Let (G, d) be a hyperbolic group with a locally finite word metric, and let H be a quasiconvex subgroup of G. Then H has finite geometric height. More precisely, if C is the quasi-convexity constant of H in (G, d), and if δ be the hyperbolicity constant in (G, d), and if N is the cardinality of a ball of (G, d) of radius 2C + 10δ, and if g0 H, . . . , gk H are distinct cosets of H for which there exists Tk ∆ such that the total intersection i=0 (gi H)+∆ has diameter more than 10∆, and more that 100δ, then there exists x ∈ G such that each gi H intersects the ball of radius N around x. First note that the second statement implies the first in the (by the third point of Remark 4.2). We will directly prove the second. The proof is similar to the finiteness of the algebraic height. Also note that the second statement can be rephrased in terms of double cosets representatives of the gi : under the assumption on the total intersection, and if g0 = 1, there are double coset representatives of the gi of length at most 2(2C + 10δ). Proof. Assume that there exists ∆ > 0, and elements 1 = g0 , g1 , . . . , gk for which Tk the cosets gi H are distinct, and i=0 (gi H)+∆ has diameter larger than 10∆ and than 100δ. First we treat the Tk case ∆ > 5δ. Pick y1 , y2 ∈ i=0 (gi H)+∆ at distance 10∆ from each other, and pick x ∈ [y1 , y2 ] at distance larger than ∆ + 10δ from both yi . For each i an application of hyperbolicity and quasi-convexity tells us that x is at distance at most 2C + 10δ from each of gi H. The ball of radius 2C + 10δ around x thus meets each coset gi H. Tk If ∆ ≤ 5δ, we pick y1 , y2 ∈ i=0 (gi H)+∆ at distance 100δ from each other, and take x at distance greater than 10δ from both ends. The end of the proof is the same.  4.2. Relatively hyperbolic groups. If G is hyperbolic relative to a collection of subgroups P, then Hruska and Wise defined in [HW09] the relative height of a subgroup H of G as n if (n + 1) is the smallest number with the property that for any (n + 1) elements g0 , . . .T, gn such that the gi H are (n + 1)- distinct cosets, the intersections of conjugates i gi Hgi−1 is finite or parabolic. The notion of relative algebraic height is actually the geometric height for the relative distance, which is given by a word metric over a generating set that is the union of a finite set and a set of conjugacy representatives of the elements of P. Indeed, in a relatively hyperbolic group, the subgroups that are bounded in the relative metric are precisely those that are finite or parabolic. We give a quick  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  27  argument. It follows from the Definition of relative quasiconvexity that a subgroup having finite diameter in the electric metric on G (rel. P) is relatively quasiconvex. It is also true [DGO11] that the normalizer of any P ∈ P is itself and that the subgroup generated by any P and any infinite order element g ∈ G \ P contains the free product of conjugates of P by g kn , k ∈ Z. Since any proper supergroup of P necessarily contains such a g, it follows that no proper supergroup of P can be of finite diameter in the electric metric on G (rel. P). It follows that bounded subgroups are precisely the finite subgroups or those contained inside parabolic subgroups. The notion of relative height can actually be extended to define the height of a collection of subgroups H1 , . . . , Hk , as in the case for the algebraic height. Hruska and Wise proved that relatively quasiconvex subgroups have finite relative height. More precisely: Theorem 4.6. [HW09, Theorem 1.4, Corollaries 8.5-8.7] Let (G, P) be relatively hyperbolic, let S be a finite relative generating set for G and Γ be the Cayley graph of G with respect to S. Then for σ ≥ 0, there exists C ≥ 0 such that the following holds. Let H1 , . . . , Hn be a finite collection of σ−relatively quasiconvex subgroups of (G, P). Suppose that there exist distinct cosets {gm Hαm } with αm ∈ {1, . . . , n}, m = −1 is not contained in a parabolic P ∈ P. Then 1, . . . , n, such that ∩m gm Hαm gm there exists a vertex z ∈ G such that the ball of radius C in Γ intersects every coset gm Hαm . Further, for any i ∈ {1, . . . ,Tn}, there are only finitely many double cosets of the form Hi gi Hαi such that Hi ∩ i gi Hαi gi−1 is not contained in a parabolic P ∈ P. Let G be a relatively hyperbolic group, and let H be a relatively quasiconvex subgroup. Then H has finite relative algebraic height. This allows us to give an example of geometric height in our setting. Proposition 4.7. Let (G, P) be a relatively hyperbolic group, and (G, d) a relative word metric d (i.e. a word metric over a generating set that is the union of a finite set and of a set of conjugacy representatives of the elements of P, and hence, in general, not a finite generating set). Let H be a relatively quasiconvex subgroup. Then, H has finite geometric height for d. This just a rephrasing of Hruska and Wise’s result Theorem 4.6. The proof is similar to that in the hyperbolic groups case, using for instance cones instead of balls. 4.3. Mapping Class Groups. Another source of examples arise from convexcocompact subgroups of Mapping Class Groups, and of Out(Fn ) for a free group Fn . We establish finiteness of both algebraic and geometric height of convex cocompact subgroups of Mapping Class Groups in this subsubsection. In the following S will be a closed oriented surface of genus greater than 2, and T eich(S) and CC(S) will denote respectively the Teichmuller space and Curve Complex of S. Definition 4.8. [FM02] A finitely generated subgroup H of the mapping class group M od(S) for a surface S (with or without punctures) is σ−convex cocompact if for some (any) x ∈ T eich(S), the Teichmuller space of S, the orbit Hx ⊂ T eich(S) is σ−quasiconvex with respect to the Teichmuller metric.  28  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  Kent-Leininger [KL08] and Hamenstadt [Ham08] prove the following: Theorem 4.9. A finitely generated subgroup H of the mapping class group M od(S) is convex cocompact if and only if for some (any) x ∈ CC(S), the curve complex of S, the orbit Hx ⊂ CC(S) is qi-embedded in CC(S). One important ingredient in Kent-Leininger’s proof of Theorem 4.9 is a lifting of the limit set of H in ∂CC(S) (the boundary of the curve complex) to ∂T eich(S) (the boundary of Teichmuller space). What is important here is that T eich(S) is a proper metric space unlike CC(S). Further, they show using a Theorem of Masur [Mas80], that any two Teichmuller geodesics converging to a point on the limit set ΛH (in ∂T eich(S)) of a convex cocompact subgroup H are asymptotic. An alternate proof is given by Hamenstadt in [Ham10]. With these ingredients in place, the proof of Theorem 4.10 below is an exact replica of the proof of Theorem 3.2 above: Theorem 4.10. (Height from the Teichmuller metric) Let G be the mapping class group of a surface S, and T eich(S) the corresponding Teichmuller space with the Teichmuller metric, and with a base point z0 . Then for σ ≥ 0, there exists C ≥ 0, and D ≥ 0 such that the following holds. Let H1 , . . . , Hn be a finite collection of σ−convex cocompact subgroups of G. Suppose that there exist distinct cosets {gm Hαm } with αm ∈ {1, . . . , n}, m = 1, . . . , n, such that, for some ∆, ∩m (gm Hαm )+∆ is larger than max{10∆, D}. Then there exists a point z ∈ T eich(S) such that the ball of radius C in T eich(S) intersects every image of z0 by a coset gm Hαm z0 . Further, for any i ∈ {1, . . . ,Tn}, there are only finitely many double cosets of the form Hi gi Hαi such that Hi ∩ i gi Hαi gi−1 is infinite. The collection {H1 , . . . , Hn } has finite algebraic height. A more geometric strengthening of Theorem 4.10 can be obtained as follows using recent work of Durham and Taylor [DT14b], who have given an intrinsic quasi-convexity interpretation of convex cocompactness, by proving that convex cocompact subgroups of Mapping Class Groups are stable: in a word metric, they are undistorted, and quasi geodesics with end points in the subgroup remain close to each other [DT14b]. Theorem 4.11. (Height from a word metric) Let G be the mapping class group of a surface S and d the word metric with respect to a finite generating set. Then for σ ≥ 0, and any subgroup H that is σ-convex cocompact, the group H has finite geometric height in (G, d). Moreover, any σ-convex cocompact subgroup H has finite geometric height in (G, d1 ), where d1 is the word metric with respect to any (not necessarily finite) generating set. Proof. Assume that the theorem is false: there exists σ such that for all k, and all D, there exists a σ-convex cocompact subgroup H, with a collection of distinct cosets {gm H, m = 0, . . . , k} (with g0 = 1), satisfying the property that ∩m (gm H)+∆ has diameter larger than max{10∆, D}. Let a, b be two points in ∩m (gm H)+∆ such that d(a, b) ≥ max{10∆, D}. For each i, let ai , bi in gi H be at distance at most ∆ from a and b respectively. Consider γi geodesics in H from gi−1 ai to gi−1 bi . Consider also a′i and b′i − nearest point  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  29  projections of a0 and b0 on gi γi . Finally, denote by gi γi′ the subpath of gi γi between a′i and b′i By [DT14b, Prop. 5.7], H is quasiconvex in G (for a fixed chosen word metric), and for each i, gi γi is a f (σ)-quasi-geodesic (for some function f ). We thus obtain from a0 to b0 a family of k + 1 paths, namely γ0 and (one for all i), the concatenation ηi = [a0 , a′i ] · gi γi′ · [b′i , b0 ]. For D large enough, the paths ηi are 2f (σ)-quasigeodesics in G. Stability of H ([DT14b, Thm. 1.1]) implies that, there exists R(σ) such that in G, the paths remain at mutual Hausdorff distance at most R(σ). This is thus also true in the Teichmuller space by the orbit map. Hence it follows that all the subpaths gi γi′ are at distance at most 2R(σ) from each other, but are disjoint, and all lie in a thick part of the Teichmuller space, where the action is uniformly proper. This leads to a contradiction. Since the diameter of intersections can only go down if the generating set is increased, the last statement follows.  4.4. Out(Fn ). Following Dowdall-Taylor [DT14a], we say that a finitely generated subgroup H of Out(Fn ) is σ−convex cocompact if (1) all non-trivial elements of H are atoroidal and fully irreducible. (2) for some (any) x ∈ cvn , the (projectivized) Outer space for Fn , the orbit Hx ⊂ cvn is σ−quasiconvex with respect to the Lipschitz metric. Remark 4.12. The above Definition, while not explicit in [DT14a], is implicit in Section 1.2 of that paper. Also, a word about the metric on cvn is in order. The statements in [DT14a] are made with respect to the unsymmetrized metric on outer space. However, convex cocompact subgroups have orbits lying in the thick part; and hence the unsymmetrized and symmetrized metrics are quasi-isometric to each other. We assume henceforth, therefore, that we are working with the symmetrized metric, to which the conclusions of [DT14a] apply via this quasi-isometry. The following Theorem gives a characterization of convex cocompact subgroups in this context and is the analog of Theorem 4.9. Theorem 4.13. [DT14a] Let H be a finitely generated subgroup of Out(Fn ) all whose non-trivial elements are atoroidal and fully irreducible. Then H is convex cocompact if and only if for some (any) x ∈ Fn (the free factor complex of Fn ), the orbit Hx ⊂ Fn is qi-embedded in Fn . Dowdall and Taylor also show [DT14a, Theorem 4.1] that any two quasi-geodesics in cvn converging to the same point p on the limit set ΛH (in ∂cvn ) of a convex cocompact subgroup H are asymptotic. More precisely, given λ, µ and p ∈ ΛH there exists C0 (= C0 (λ, µ, p)) such that any two (λ, µ)−quasi-geodesics in cvn converging to p are asymptotically C0 −close. As observed before in the context of Theorem 4.10, this is adequate for the proof of Theorem 4.10 to go through: Theorem 4.14. Let G = Out(Fn ), and cvn the Outer space for G with a base point z0 . Then for σ ≥ 0, there exists C ≥ 0 such that the following holds. Let H1 , . . . , Hn be a finite collection of σ−convex cocompact subgroups of G. Suppose that there exist distinct cosets {gm Hαm } with αm ∈ {1, . . . , n}, m = 1, . . . , n, −1 is infinite. Then there exists a point z ∈ cvn such that the such that ∩m gm Hαm gm ball of radius C in cvn intersects every image of z0 by a coset gm Hαm z0 .  30  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  Further, for any i ∈ {1, . . . ,Tn}, there are only finitely many double cosets of the form Hi gi Hαi such that Hi ∩ i gi Hαi gi−1 is infinite. The collection {H1 , . . . , Hn } has finite algebraic height. Since an analog of the stability result of [DT14b] in the context of Out(Fn ) is missing at the moment, we cannot quite get an analog of Theorem 4.11. 4.5. Algebraic and geometric qi-intersection property: Examples. In the Proposition below we shall put parentheses around (geometric) to indicate that the statement holds for both the qi-intersection property as well as the geometric qi-intersection property. Proposition 4.15. (1) Let H be a quasiconvex subgroup of a hyperbolic group G, endowed with a locally finite word metric. Then, {H} satisfies the uniform (geometric) qi-intersection property. (2) Let H be a relatively quasiconvex subgroup of a relatively hyperbolic group (G, P). Let P0 be a set of conjugacy representatives of groups in P, and d a word metric on G over a generating set S = S0 ∪ P0 , where S0 is finite. Then {H} satisfies the uniform (geometric) qi-intersection property with respect to d. (3) Let H be a convex-cocompact subgroup of the Mapping Class Group M od(Σ) of an oriented closed surface Σ of genus ≥ 2. If d is a word metric on M od(Σ) that makes it quasi-isometric to the curve complex of Σ, then H satisfies the uniform (geometric) qi-intersection property with respect to d. (4) Let H be a convex-cocompact subgroup of Out(Fn ) for some n ≥ 2. If d is a word metric on Out(Fn ) that makes it quasi-isometric to the free factor complex of Fn , then H satisfies the uniform (geometric) qi-intersection property with respect to d. Proof. All four cases have similar proofs. Consider the first point. Case 1: G hyperbolic, H quasiconvex. Let h be the height of H (which is finite by Theorem 3.2): every h + 1-fold intersection of conjugates of H is finite, but some h-fold intersection is infinite. The first conditions of Definition 3.9 and Definition 3.10 follow from this finiteness and Proposition 4.5 and Theorem 3.12. The second condition of Definition 3.10 follows from Proposition 3.7. We prove the second condition of Definition 3.9 (on mutual coboundedness of elements of CHi ) iteratively. By Theorem 3.12, there exists Ch such that two elements of CHh are Ch quasiconvex in (G, d). Let D > 0. If A and B are two distinct such elements such that the projection of A on B has diameter greater than D, then there are D/Ch pairs of elements (ai , bi ) in A × B, such that a−1 i bi are elements of length at most 20δCh . Choose N0 larger than the cardinality of finite subgroups of G. By a standard pigeon hole argument, if D is large enough, there are N0 such pairs for which a−1 i bi take the same value. It follows that there are two essentially distinct conjugates of elements of Hh that intersect on a subset of at least N0 elements, hence on an infinite subgroup. This contradicts the definition of height, and it follows that D is bounded, and elements of CHh are mutually cobounded.  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  31  We continue by descending induction. Assume that the second property of Definition 3.9 is established for CHi+1 . By Proposition 2.10 it follows that (G, di+1 ) is hyperbolic. Let δi+1 be its hyperbolicity constant. By Proposition 2.11, there exists Ci such that two elements of CHi are Ci - quasiconvex in (G, di+1 ). Again take A and B two distinct elements of CHi such that the projection of A on B has diameter greater than D > 1000δi+1 for di+1 . Then there are at least D/Ci pairs of elements (ai , bi ) in A × B, such that a−1 i bi is an element of length at most 20δi+1 Ch for the metric di+1 , and for all i there exists i′ such that the segments [ai , bi ], [ai′ , bi′ ] are (200δi+1 )-far from one another. Apply the Proposition 2.12 to each geodesic [ai , bi ] to find quasi-geodesics qi from ai to bi in (G, d) (this can also be done by Lemma 2.15). We know that in (G, d), A and B are quasiconvex (for the constant Ch ). By their definition, and by hyperbolicity, the paths qi end at bounded distance of a shortest-point projection of ai to B (for d). Therefore, since (G, d) is hyperbolic, and since the qi are far from one another for d, it follows that the qi are actually short for the metric d (shorter than (200δCh )). Since there are D/Ci pairs of elements (ai , bi ), by the pigeon hole argument, there is an element g0 (of length at most (200δCh ) in the metric d) such that for D/(Ci × BG,d(200δCh )) such pairs, the difference a−1 b equals g0 . If D is large enough, D/(Ci × BG,d (200δCh )) is larger than the cardinality of the finite order elements of G. It follows that the two essentially distinct conjugates of elements of Hi , corresponding to the cosets A and B, intersect on a set of size larger than any finite subgroup of G (and of diameter larger than 3 in di+1 ). Thus the intersection is an infinite subgroup of G. This subgroup is necessarily among the conjugates of some Hj for j ≥ i + 1, but therefore must have diameter 2 in the metric di+1 . Case 2: G relatively hyperbolic, H relatively quasiconvex. The geometric height of H for the relative metric is finite, by Proposition 4.7. Let h be its value. The first points of Definition 3.9 follows from this finiteness and Theorem 3.15. The second point has a similar proof as the first case, except that the pigeon hole argument needs to be made precise because the relative metric (G, d) is not locally finite. Let D > 0. If A and B are two distinct elements of CHh such that the projection of A on B has diameter greater than D, then there are D/CH pairs of elements (ai , bi ) in A×B, such that a−1 i bi are elements of length at most 20δCh . Moreover, if D > 100δCh , for each [ai , bi ], there is [aj , bj ] such that both segments are short (for d) and are at distance at least (50δCh ) from each other. It follows that, in the Coneoff Cayley graph of G, the maximal angle of [ai , bi ] at the cone vertices is uniformly bounded by (100δCh ) + 2(2Ch + 5δ). Indeed, consider α and β quasi-geodesic paths in A and B respectively, from ai to aj and from bi to bj . By hyperbolicity and quasigeodesy, at distance 30δCh from ai and bi , there is a path of length 2(2Ch + 5δ) joining α to β. Being too short, this path cannot possibly intersect [ai , bi ]. There is thus a path from ai to bi of length at most 2 × (30δCh ) + 2(2Ch + 5δ) that does not intersect [ai , bi ] outside its end points. It follows indeed that the maximal angle of [ai , bi ] is at most 2 × (30δCh ) + 2(2Ch + 5δ) + 20δCh . From this bound on angles, we may use the fact that the angular metric at each cone point is locally finite (by definition of relative hyperbolicity) and the bound  32  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  on the length in the metric d, to get that all the elements a−1 i bi are in a finite set, independent of D. We can now use the pigeon hole argument, as in the hyperbolic case, and conclude similarly that D is bounded. The rest of the argument is also by descending induction. Assume that the second property of Definition 3.9 is established for CHi+1 . We proceed in a very similar way as in the hyperbolic case, with the difference is that, after establishing that the paths qi are small for the metric d, one needs to check that their angles at cone points are bounded, which is done by the argument we just used. We provide the details now. By Proposition 2.10 it follows that (G, di+1 ) is hyperbolic. Let δi+1 be its hyperbolicity constant. By Proposition 2.11, there exists Ci such that two elements of CHi are Ci - quasiconvex in (G, di+1 ). Take A and B two distinct elements of CHi such that the projection of A on B has diameter greater than some constant D for di+1 . Take a quasigeodesic in the projection of A on B, of length D. Then there are at least D/Ci pairs of elements (ai , bi ) in A × B, with bi on that quasigeodesic, and such that a−1 i bi is an element of length at most 20δi+1 Ch for the metric di+1 , and for all i there exists i′ such that the segments [ai , bi ], [ai′ , bi′ ] are (200δi+1 )-far from one another. Apply the Proposition 2.12 (or alternatively 2.15) to each geodesic [ai , bi ] to find quasi-geodesics qi from ai to bi in (G, d). We know that in (G, d), A and B are quasiconvex (for the constant Ch ). By their definition, and by hyperbolicity, the paths qi end at bounded distance of a shortest-point projection of ai to B (for d). Therefore, since (G, d) is hyperbolic, and since the qi are far from one another for d, it follows that the qi are actually short for the metric d (shorter than (200δCh )). By the argument used at the initial step of the descending induction, we also have an uniform upper bound on the maximal angle of these paths, and therefore on the number of elements of G that label one of the paths qi . Since there are D/Ci pairs of elements (ai , bi ), if D is large enough, by the pigeon hole argument, there is an element g0 (of length at most (200δCh ) in the metric d), and a pair (ai0 , bi0 ), such that ai−1 bi = g0 and such that for 1000δi+1 Ci other such pairs (aj , bj ), the difference a−1 j bj is also equal to g0 . The intersection of two essentially distinct conjugates of elements of Hi , corresponding to the cosets A and −1 B, thus contains a−1 i0 aj for all those indices j. There are indices j for which ai0 aj labels a quasi-geodesic paths in A of length at least 1000δi+1 Ci . Such an element is either loxodromic, or elliptic with fixed point at the midpoint [ai0 , aj ]. But if all of them are elliptic, for two indices j1 , j2 , we get two different fixed points, hence the product of the elements ai−1 aj1 a−1 i0 aj2 is loxodromic. 0 This element is in the intersection of conjugates of elements of Hi , thus is in a subgroup among the conjugates of some Hj for j ≥ i + 1, but therefore must have diameter 2 in the metric di+1 , and cannot contain loxodromic elements. This is thus a contradiction. Cases 3 and 4: G = M od(Σ) or Out(Fn ), H convex cocompact. Consider the Teichmuller metric on Teichmuller space (T eich(Σ), dT ) and the (symmetrization of the) Lipschitz metric on Outer space (cvn , dS ) respectively for M od(Σ) and Out(Fn ). Though T eich(Σ) and cvn are non-hyperbolic, they are proper metric spaces.  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  33  For the mapping class group M od(Σ), the curve complex (CC(Σ), d) is hyperbolic and quasi-isometric to (M od(Σ), d), where d is the word-metric on M od(Σ) obtained by taking as generating set a finite generating set of M od(Σ) along with all elements of certain sub-mapping class groups (see [MM99]). Similarly for Out(Fn ), the free factor complex (Fn , d) is hyperbolic, and is quasiisometric to (Out(Fn ), d) for a certain word metric over an infinite generating set ([BF14]). This establishes that the hypotheses in the statements of Cases 3 and 4 are not vacuous. Recall that if a subgroup H of M od(Σ) or Out(Fn ) is C-convex co-compact, then by Theorem 4.9 (and 4.13) the orbit of a base point in CC(Σ) (or Fn ) is a quasi-isometric image of the orbit of a base point in Teichmuller space. Finiteness of height of convex cocompact subgroups follows from Theorems 4.11 and 4.14 for G = M od(Σ) and Out(Fn ) respectively. The first condition of Definition 3.9 now follows from Theorems 3.13. We now proceed with proving the second condition of Definition 3.9. We first remark that, given C, there exists ∆, C ′ such that if A, B are cosets of C-convex co-compact subgroups, and if a1 , a2 ∈ A, b1 , b2 ∈ B are such that, in CC(Σ), d(a1 , b1 ) and d(a2 , b2 ) are at most 10Cδ and that d(a1 , a2 ) and d(b1 , b2 ) are larger than ∆ then, dT (ai , bi ) ≤ C ′ for both i = 1, 2. Indeed, by definition of convex cocompactness, the segment [a1 , a2 ] in Teichmuller space maps on a parametrized quasi-geodesic in the curve complex. A result of Dowdall Duchin and Masur ensures that Teichmuller geodesics that make progress in the curve complex, are contracting in Teichmuller space [DDM14, Theorem A] (see the formulation done and proved in [DH15, Prop. 3.6]). Thus the segment [a1 , a2 ] is contracting in Teichmuller space: any Teichmuller geodesic whose projection in the curve complex fellow-travels that of [a1 , a2 ] has to be uniformly close to [a1 , a2 ]. Applying that to the segment [b1 , b2 ], it follows that it must remain at bounded distance (for Teichmuller distance) from [a1 , a2 ], as demanded. A similar statement is valid for Out(Fn ) with the objects that we introduced, it suffice to use [DH15, Prop. 4.17], an arrangement of Dowdall-Taylor’s result [DT14a], in place of the Dowdall-Duchin-Masur criterion. With this estimate, one can easily adapt the proof of the first case to get the result.  5. From quasiconvexity to graded relative hyperbolicity Recall that we defined graded geometric relative hyperbolicity in Definition 4.3. 5.1. Ensuring geometric graded relative hyperbolicity. Proposition 5.1. Let G be a group, d a word metric on G with respect to some (not necessarily finite) generating set, such that (G, d) is hyperbolic. Let H be a subgroup of G. If {H} has finite geometric height for d and has the uniform qi-intersection property, then (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity. Proof. As in Definition 3.9, Hn denotes the collection of intersections of n essentially distinct conjugates of H. Let (Hn )0 denote a set of conjugacy representatives of (Hn ) that are C1 -quasiconvex, and let CHn denote the collection of cosets of elements of (Hn )0 . Let dn be the metric on X = (G, d) after electrifying the elements of CHn .  34  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  By Definition 3.9 and Remark 3.11, for all n, all elements of CHn and of CHn+1 are C1 -quasiconvex in (G, d). Therefore, by Proposition 2.11, all elements of CHn are C1′ -quasiconvex in (G, dn+1 ) for some C1′ depending on the hyperbolicity of d, and on C1 . By Definition 3.9, CHn is mutually cobounded in the metric dn+1 . Proposition 2.10 now shows that the horoballification of (G, dn+1 ) over CHn is hyperbolic, for all n. Proposition 2.23 then guarantees that CHn is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in (G, dn+1 ). Since H is assumed to have finite geometric height, (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity.  5.2. Graded relative hyperbolicity for quasiconvex subgroups. Proposition 5.2. Let H be a quasiconvex subgroup of a hyperbolic group G, with a word metric d (with respect to a finite generating set). Then the pair (G, {H}) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity, and graded relative hyperbolicity. Proof. For the word metric d with respect to a finite generating set, graded geometric relative hyperbolicity agrees with the notion of graded relative hyperbolicity (Definition 1.3). By Theorem 3.2, H has finite height. By Proposition 4.15 it satisfies the uniform qi-intersection property 3.9. Therefore, by Proposition 5.1, the pair (G, {H}) has graded relative hyperbolicity. Finally, note that since the word metric we use is locally finite, and all i−fold intersections are quasiconvex, graded relative hyperbolicity follows.  Proposition 5.3. Let (G, P) be a finitely generated relatively hyperbolic group. Let H be a relatively quasiconvex subgroup. Let S be a finite relative generating set of G (relative to P) and let d be the word metric with respect to S ∪ P. Then (G, {H}, d) has graded relative hyperbolicity as well as graded geometric relative hyperbolicity. Proof. The proof is similar to that of Proposition 5.2. By Theorem 4.6, H has finite relative height, hence it has finite geometric height for the relative metric (see Example 4.7). Next, by Proposition 4.15, H satisfies the uniform qi-intersection property for a relative metric, and graded geometric relative hyperbolicity follows from Proposition 5.1. Again, since G has a word metric with respect to a finite relative generating set, and H and all i−fold intersections are relatively quasiconvex as well, the above argument furnishes graded relative hyperbolicity as well.  Similarly, replacing the use of Theorem 3.2 by Theorems 4.10 and 4.14, one obtains the following. Proposition 5.4. Let G be the mapping class group M od(S) (respectively Out(Fn )). Let d be a word metric on G making it quasi-isometric to the curve complex CC(S) (respectively the free factor complex Fn ). Let H be a convex cocompact subgroup of G. Then (G, {H}, d) has graded relative hyperbolicity. Again, replacing the use of Theorem 3.2 by Theorem 4.11, we obtain: Proposition 5.5. Let G be the mapping class group M od(S). Let d be a word metric on G making it quasi-isometric to the curve complex CC(S). Let H be a convex cocompact subgroup of G. Then (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity.  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  35  Remark 5.6. Since we do not have an exact (geometric) analog of Theorem 4.11 for Out(Fn ) (more precisely an analog of the stability result of [DT14b]) as of now, we have to content ourselves with the slightly weaker Proposition 5.4 for Out(Fn ). 6. From graded relative hyperbolicity to quasiconvexity 6.1. A Sufficient Condition. Proposition 6.1. Let G be a group and d a hyperbolic word metric with respect to a (not necessarily finite) generating set. Let H be a subgroup such that (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity. Then H is quasiconvex in (G, d). Proof. Assume (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity as in Definition 4.3. Then H has finite geometric height in (G, d). Let k be this height. Thus, Hk+1 is a collection of uniformly bounded subsets, and dk+1 is quasi-isometric to d. It follows that (G, dk+1 ) is hyperbolic. Further, by Definition 4.3, Hk is hyperbolically embedded in (G, dk+1 ). This means in particular that the electrification (G, dk+1 )el Hk is hyperbolic. Since (G, dk ) is quasi-isometric to (G, dk+1 )el (being the restriction of the metric on G) it follows Hk that (G, dk ) is hyperbolic as well. Further, by Corollary 2.7 the elements of Hk , are uniformly quasiconvex in (G, dk+1 ). We now argue by descending induction on i. The inductive hypothesis for (i + 1): We assume that di+1 is a hyperbolic metric on G, and that there is a constant ci+1 such that, for all j ≥ 1 the elements of Hi+j are uniformly ci+1 -quasiconvex in (G, d). We assume the inductive hypothesis for i + 1 (i.e. as stated), and we now prove it for i. Of course, we also assume, as in the statement of the Proposition, that Hi is coarsely hyperbolically embedded in (G, di+1 ). Hence di is a hyperbolic metric on G. We will now check that the assumptions of Proposition 2.12 are satisfied for (X, d) = (G, di+1 ), Y = Hi+1 , and Hi,ℓ arbitrary in Hi . Elements of Hi in (G, di+1 ) are uniformly quasiconvex in (G, di+1 ): this follows from Corollary 2.7. We will write Ci for their quasiconvexity constant. A second step is to check that, for some uniform ∆0 and ǫ, for all ∆ > ∆0 , when an element Hi,ℓ of Hi (∆, ǫ)-meets an item of Hi+1 , then H +ǫ∆ contains a quasigeodesic between the meeting points in H. Thus, fix ǫ < 1/100, and take ∆0 larger than 20 times the thickening constants for the definition of elements in Hi (which is possible by finiteness of number of orbits of i-fold intersections). Assume Hi,ℓ (∆, ǫ)-meets Y ∈ Hi+1 . Then, by definition of i−fold intersections 3.5, and Proposition 3.6, either the pair of meeting points is in an item of Hi+1 inside Hi,ℓ , +ǫ∆ or Y ⊂ Hi,ℓ . In both cases, by the inductive assumption, there is a path in Hi,ℓ between the meeting points in Hi,ℓ that is a quasigeodesic for d. Hence the second assumption of Proposition 2.12 is satisfied. We can thus conclude by that proposition that Hi,ℓ is quasiconvex in (G, d) for a uniform constant, and therefore the inductive assumption holds for i. By induction it is then true for i = 0, hence the first statement of the Proposition holds, i.e. quasiconvexity follows from graded geometric relative hyperbolicity.   36  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  We shall deduce various consequences of Proposition 6.1 below. However, before we proceed, we need the following observation since we are dealing with spaces/graphs that are not necessarily proper. Observation 6.2. Let X be a (not necessarily proper) hyperbolic graph. For all C0 ≥ 0, there exists C1 ≥ 0 such that the following holds: Let H be a hyperbolic group acting uniformly properly on X, i.e. for all D0 there exists N such that for any x ∈ X, any D0 ball in X contains at most N orbit points of Hx. Then a C0 −quasiconvex orbit of H is (C1 , C1 )−quasi-isometrically embedded in X. Combining Proposition 6.1 with Observation 6.2 we obtain the following: Proposition 6.3. Let G be a group and d a hyperbolic word metric with respect to a (not necessarily finite) generating set. Let H be a subgroup such that (1) (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity. (2) The action of H on (G, d) is uniformly proper. Then H is hyperbolic and H is qi-embedded in (G, d). Proof. Quasi-convexity of H in (G, d) was established in Proposition 6.1. Qiembeddedness of H follows from Observation 6.2. Hyperbolicity of H is an immediate consequence.  6.2. The Main Theorem. We assemble the pieces now to prove the following main theorem of the paper. Theorem 6.4. Let (G, d) be one of the following: (1) G a hyperbolic group and d the word metric with respect to a finite generating set S. (2) G is finitely generated and hyperbolic relative to P, S a finite relative generating set, and d the word metric with respect to S ∪ P. (3) G is the mapping class group M od(S) and d the metric obtained by electrifying the subgraphs corresponding to sub mapping class groups so that (G, d) is quasi-isometric to the curve complex CC(S). (4) G is Out(Fn ) and d the metric obtained by electrifying the subgroups corresponding to subgroups that stabilize proper free factors so that (G, d) is quasi-isometric to the free factor complex Fn . Then (respectively) (1) H is quasiconvex if and only if (G, {H}) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity. (2) H is relatively quasiconvex if and only if (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity. (3) H is convex cocompact in M od(S) if and only if (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity and the action of H on the curve complex is uniformly proper. (4) H is convex cocompact in Out(Fn ) if and only if (G, {H}, d) has graded geometric relative hyperbolicity and the action of H on the free factor complex is uniformly proper. Proof. The forward implications of quasiconvexity to graded geometric relative hyperbolicity in the first 3 cases are proved by Propositions 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 and  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  37  case 4 by Proposition 5.4. In cases (3) and (4) properness of the action of H on the curve complex follows from convex cocompactness. We now proceed with the reverse implications. Again, the reverse implications of (1) and (2) are direct consequences of Proposition 6.1. The proofs of the reverse implications of (3) and (4) are similar. Proposition 6.3 proves that any orbit of H on either the curve complex CC(S) or the free factor complex Fn is qi-embedded. Convex cocompactness now follows from Theorems 4.9 and 4.13.  6.3. Examples. We give a couple of examples below to show that finiteness of geometric height does not necessarily follow from quasiconvexity. Example 6.5. Let G1 = π1 (S) and H =< h > be a cyclic subgroup corresponding to a simple closed curve. Let G2 = H1 ⊕ H2 where each Hi is isomorphic to Z. Let G = G1 ∗H=H1 G2 . Let d be the metric obtained on G with respect to some finite generating set along with all elements of H2 . Then G1 is quasiconvex in (G, d), but G1 does not have finite geometric height. Note however, that the action of G1 on (G, d) is not acylindrical. We now furnish another example to show that graded geometric relative hyperbolicity does not necessarily follow from quasiconvexity even if we assume acylindricity. Example 6.6. Let G = hai , bi : i ∈ N, ab2ii = a2i−1 i and let F be the (free) subgroup generated by {ai }. Then F bi ∩ F =< a2i−1 > for all i. Let d be the word metric on G with respect to the generators ai , bi . Then the action of F on (G, d) is acylindrical and F is quasiconvex. However there are infinitely many double coset representatives corresponding to bi such that F bi ∩ F is infinite. Acknowledgments This work was initiated during a visit of the second author to Institut Fourier in Grenoble during June 2015 and carried on while visiting Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata. He thanks the Institutes for their hospitality. The authors were supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMS-1440140 at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley during Fall 2016, where this research was completed. We thank the referee for a detailed and careful reading of the manuscript and for several extremely helpful and perceptive comments. References [Bes04] [BF14] [Bow12] [Cou14] [Dah03] [DDM14]  M. Bestvina. Geometric group theory problem list. M. Bestvina’s home page: http:math.utah.edu∼bestvina, 2004. M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. Hyperbolicity of the complex of free factors. Adv. Math. 256, pages 104–155, 2014. B. H. Bowditch. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Internat. J. Algebra and Computation. 22, 1250016, 66pp, 2012. Remi Coulon. On the Geometry of Burnside Quotients of Torsion Free Hyperbolic Groups. Internat. J. Algebra and Computation, 24(no.3):251–345, 2014. F. Dahmani. Combination of convergence groups. Geom. Topol. 7, pages 933–963, 2003. S. Dowdall, M. Duchin, and H. Masur. Statistical hyperbolicity in Teichmuller space. Geom. Funct. Anal. 24 no. 3, pages 748–795, 2014.  38  [DGO11]  FRANCOIS DAHMANI AND MAHAN MJ  F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, and D. Osin. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and rotating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces. preprint, arXiv:1111.7048, to appear in Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 2011. [DH15] F. Dahmani and C. Horbez. Spectral theorems for random walks on mapping class groups and Out(FN ). preprint, arXiv:1506.06790, 2015. [DM15] S. Das and M. Mj. Controlled Floyd Separation and Non Relatively Hyperbolic Groups. J. Ramanujan Math. Soc. 30, no. 3, pages 267–294, 2015. [DS05] Cornelia Druţu and Mark Sapir. Tree graded spaces and asymptotic cones of groups. Topology, 44(5):959–1058, 2005. [DT14a] S. Dowdall and S. J. Taylor. Hyperbolic extensions of free groups. preprint, arXiv:math.1406.2567, 2014. [DT14b] M. Durham and S. Taylor. Convex cocompactness and stability in mapping class groups. preprint, arXiv:1404.4803, 2014. [Far98] B. Farb. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 8, pages 810–840, 1998. [FM02] B. Farb and L. Mosher. Convex cocompact subgroups of mapping class groups. Geom. Topol., 6, pages 91–152, 2002. [GM08] D. Groves and J. Manning. Dehn filling in relatively hyperbolic groups. Israel Journal of Mathematics 168, pages 317–429, 2008. [GMRS97] R. Gitik, M. Mitra, E. Rips, and M. Sageev. Widths of Subgroups. Trans. AMS, pages 321–329, Jan. ’97. [Ham08] U. Hamenstadt. Word hyperbolic extensions of surface groups. preprint, arxiv:0807.4891v2, 2008. [Ham10] U. Hamenstadt. Stability of quasi-geodesics in teichmuller space. Geom. Dedicata, 146, pages 101–116, 2010. [Hru10] G. Christopher Hruska. Relative hyperbolicity and relative quasiconvexity for countable groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol. 10 no. 3, pages 1807–1856, 2010. [HW09] G. Christopher Hruska and D. T. Wise. Packing Subgroups in Relatively Hyperbolic Groups. Geom. Topol. 13, no. 4, pages 1945–1988, 2009. [KL08] R. P. Kent and C. J. Leininger. Shadows of mapping class groups: capturing convex cocompactness. Geom. Funct. Anal., 18(4), pages 1270–1325, 2008. [Kla99] E. Klarreich. Semiconjugacies between Kleinian group actions on the Riemann sphere. Amer. J. Math. 121, pages 1031–1078, 1999. [Mas80] H. Masur. Uniquely ergodic quadratic differentials. Comment. Math. Helv. 55 (2), pages 255–266, 1980. [McM01] C. T. McMullen. Local connectivity, Kleinian groups and geodesics on the blow-up of the torus. Invent. math., 97:95–127, 2001. [Mj08] M. Mj. Relative Rigidity, Quasiconvexity and C-Complexes. Algebraic and Geometric Topology 8, pages 1691–1716, 2008. [Mj11] M. Mj. Cannon-Thurston Maps, i-bounded Geometry and a Theorem of McMullen. Actes du séminaire Théorie spectrale et géométrie, Grenoble, vol 28, 2009-10, arXiv:math.GT/0511104, pages 63–108, 2011. [Mj14] M. Mj. Cannon-Thurston Maps for Surface Groups. Ann. of Math., 179(1), pages 1–80, 2014. [MM99] H. A. Masur and Y. N. Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves I: Hyperbolicity. Invent. Math.138, pages 103–139, 1999. [Osi06a] Denis Osin. Elementary subgroups of relatively hyperbolic groups and bounded generation. Internat. J. Algebra and Computation, 16(1):99–118, 2006. [Osi06b] D.V. Osin. Relatively hyperbolic groups: Intrinsic geometry, algebraic properties, and algorithmic problems. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 179(843), pages 1–100, 2006. [Sho91] H. Short. Quasiconvexity and a theorem of Howson’s. Group Theory from a Geometrical Viewpoint (E. Ghys, A. Haefliger, A. Verjovsky eds.), 1991. [Szc98] Andrzej Szczepanski. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Michigan Math. J., 45(3):611–618, 1998.  HEIGHT, GRADED RELATIVE HYPERBOLICITY AND QUASICONVEXITY  39  Institut Fourier, Universite Grenoble Alpes, 100 rue des Maths, CS 40700, F-38058 Grenoble Cedex 9, France E-mail address: francois.dahmani@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr Tata Institute of Fundamental Research. 1, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai-400005, India E-mail address: mahan@math.tifr.res.in E-mail address: mahan.mj@gmail.com

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
