Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3141

Abstract:
Jordan-like Characterization of Automorphism Groups of Planar Graphs∗ Pavel Klavı́k1 , Roman Nedela2 , and Peter Zeman3 1 Computer Science Institute, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic. E-mail: klavik@iuuk.mff.cuni.cz 2  European Centre of Excellence NTIS, University of West Bohemia, Pilsen, Czech Republic, and Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science SAS, Slovak Republic. E-mail: nedela@savbb.sk 3  arXiv:1506.06488v3 [math.CO] 29 Apr 2017  Department of Applied Mathematics, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic. E-mail: zeman@kam.mff.cuni.cz Abstract. In 1975, Babai characterized which abstract groups can be realized as the automorphism groups of planar graphs. In this paper, we give a more detailed and understandable description of these groups. We describe stabilizers of vertices in connected planar graphs as the class of groups closed under the direct product and semidirect products with symmetric, dihedral and cyclic groups. The automorphism group of a connected planar graph is then obtained as a semidirect product of a direct product of these stabilizers with a spherical group. The formulation of the main result is new and original. Moreover, it gives a deeper in the structure of the groups. As a consequence, automorphism groups of several subclasses of planar graphs, including 2-connected planar, outerplanar, and series-parallel graphs, are characterized. Our approach translates into a quadratic-time algorithm for computing the automorphism group of a planar graph which is the first such algorithm described in detail. Keywords: planar graphs, automorphism groups, group products, Jordan’s characterization, 3-connected reduction. Diagram: For a dynamic structural diagram of our results, see the following website (supported Firefox and Google Chrome): http://pavel.klavik.cz/orgpad/geom_aut_groups.html 1 2 3 4 5  6  7 8 9  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Reduction to 3-connected Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Automorphism Groups of Polyhedral Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1 Automorphism Groups of Planar Primitive Graphs and Atoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The Jordan-like Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.1 Characterization by Semidirect Product Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.2 Fixer of the Boundary of an Expanded Atom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.3 Composition of Spherical groups with Fixers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Applications of Jordan-like Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.1 Automorphism Groups of 2-connected Planar Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.2 Automorphism Groups of Outerplanar Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.3 Automorphism Groups of Series-Parallel Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Comparison with Babai’s Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Quadratic-time Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1  1 4 5 10 11 12 12 13 20 23 23 24 25 26 28 29  Introduction  A permutation of the vertices and the edges of a graph is an automorphism if it preserves the incidences. In this paper, we investigate which abstract groups can be realized as the automorphism groups of planar graphs (PLANAR). Restricted Classes of Graphs. Frucht’s Theorem [15] states that for every finite abstract group Ψ , there exists a graph G such that Aut(G) ∼ = Ψ ; so automorphism groups of graphs are universal. We ask which abstract groups can be realized by restricted graph classes:  Definition 1.1. For a graph class C, let Aut(C) = Ψ : ∃G ∈ C, Aut(G) ∼ = Ψ . We call C universal if every finite abstract group is in Aut(C), and non-universal otherwise. ∗  The authors are supported by CE-ITI (P202/12/G061 of GAČR) and by Charles University as GAUK 1334217. The second one is also supported by the Ministry of Education of the Slovak Republic, the grant VEGA 1/0150/14, by Project LO1506 of the Czech Ministry of Education and by the project APVV-15-0220.  In 1869, Jordan [24] characterized the automorphism groups of trees (TREE): Theorem 1.2 ([24]). The class Aut(TREE) is defined inductively as follows: (a) {1} ∈ Aut(TREE). (b) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 ∈ Aut(TREE), then Ψ1 × Ψ2 ∈ Aut(TREE). (c) If Ψ ∈ Aut(TREE), then Ψ o Sn ∈ Aut(TREE). Recently, the automorphism groups of several classes of graphs were characterized; see Fig. 1. It was proved that interval graphs have the same automorphism groups as trees [29], and unit interval graphs have the same automorphism groups as disjoint unions of caterpillars [29]. For permutation graphs and circle graphs [30], there are similar inductive descriptions as in Theorem 1.2. Comparability and function graphs can realize all abstract groups even for the order dimension at most four [30]. Understanding the structure of Aut(C) may lead to an effective algorithm for computation of generators of Aut(G) for a graph G ∈ C. There are two related problems of algorithmic nature which can be considered for a class C, in particular if C is the class of planar graphs. Graph Isomorphism. This famous problem asks, whether two given graphs G and H are isomorphic (the same up to a labeling). This problem clearly belongs to NP and it is a prime candidate for an intermediate problem between P and NP-complete. The graph isomorphism problem is related to computing automorphism groups. Suppose that G and H are connected. If we know permutation generators of Aut(G ∪˙ H), then G ∼ =H if and only if some generator swaps G and H. Mathon [33] proved that generators of the automorphism group can be computed using O(n3 ) instances of graph isomorphism. For a survey, see [27]. Regular Covering Testing. In [11,13], there was introduced a problem called regular graph covering testing which generalizes both graph isomorphism and Cayley graph testing. The input gives two graphs G and H. The problem asks whether there exists a semiregular subgroup Γ of Aut(G) such that G/Γ ∼ = H. The general complexity of this problem is open, no NP-hardness reduction is known. It is shown in [11,13] that the problem can be solved in FPT time with respect to the size of H when G is planar. For this algorithm, the structure of all semiregular subgroups of Aut(G) is described. In this paper, we extend this approach to describe the entire automorphism group Aut(G). Babai’s Characterization. The automorphism groups of planar graphs were first described by Babai [1, Corollary 8.12] in 1973; see Section 7 for the exact statement. The automorphism groups of 3-connected planar graphs can be easily described geometrically, they are so called spherical groups, since they correspond to the discrete groups of symmetries of the sphere. More details are given in Section 4 and in [2]. The automorphism groups of k-connected planar graphs, where k < 3, are constructed by wreath products of the automorphism groups of (k + 1)-connected planar graphs and of stabilizers of k-connected graphs. Babai’s characterization has several disadvantages. The statement is very long, separated into multiple cases and subcases. More importantly, is not clear precisely which abstract groups belong to Aut(PLANAR). The used language is complicated, very difficult for non-experts in permutation group theory and in graph symmetries. In [2, p. 1457–1459], Babai gives a more understandable overview of two key ideas (automorphism groups of 3-connected planar graphs, and 3-connected reduction), with his characterization only sketched as “a description of the automorphism groups of planar graphs in terms of generalized wreath products of symmetric groups and polyhedral groups.” Babai also states an easy consequence: Theorem 1.3 (Babai [2]). If G is planar, then the group Aut(G) has a subnormal chain Aut(G) = Ψ0 . Ψ1 . · · · . Ψm = {1}  PLANAR  IFA FUN  SERIES-PARALLEL  CIRCLE  CHOR  co-4-DIM  OUTERPLANAR  universal  TRAPEZOID PERM  PSEUDOFOREST TREE non-universal  BIP PERM  INT  CATERPILLAR  UNIT INT  CLAW-FREE co-BIP  Fig. 1. Hasse diagram of graph classes with understood automorphism groups. Characterization for the graph classes depicted in gray is described in this paper.  2  such that each quotient group Ψi−1 /Ψi is either cyclic or symmetric or A5 . This theorem describes Aut(G) only very roughly, by stating its building blocks. For comparison, an easy consequence of our characterization (Theorem 1.4) describes these building blocks more precisely and also states how they are “put together” in Aut(G). In particular, the composition of the action of a spherical group Σ with a stabilizer of a vertex in a planar graph depends on the action of Σ on vertices and edges of the associated 3-connected planar graph. To describe it in detail is not an easy task; see Table 1. Our characterization also describes “geometry” of the automorphism groups in terms of actions on planar graphs and around every 1-cut and 2-cut. See Section 7 for more details. The class of planar graphs is of great importance, and thus we are convinced that a more detailed and transparent description of their symmetries is of an interest. These reasons led us to write this paper which describes Aut(PLANAR) more understandably, and in more details. Our Characterization. Let G be a planar graph. If it is disconnected, then Aut(G) can be constructed from the automorphism groups of its connected components (Theorem 2.1). Therefore, in the rest of the paper, we assume that G is connected. In Section 3, we describe a reduction process which decomposes G into 3-connected components. It was used in [11,12] to study the behaviour of semiregular subgroups of Aut(G) with respect to 1-cuts and 2cuts. This natural idea of the reduction was first introduced in a seminal paper by Trakhtenbrot [38] and further extended in [22,20,6,39]. This reduction can be represented by a tree whose nodes are 3-connected graphs, and this tree is known in the literature mostly under the name SPQR tree [7,8,9,16]. The main difference, compared to our approach, is that the reduction applies only to 2-connected graphs, but we use it to reduce simultaneously parts separated by 1-cuts and 2-cuts. This allows to describe the geometry of symmetries, arising from articulations in G. Further, the reduction process is done in a way that the essential information on the symmetries is preserved (using colored and directed edges), so that the reconstruction of the automorphism group is possible. The reduction proceeds as follows. In each step, called reduction, we replace all atoms of the considered graph G by colored (possibly directed) edges, where atoms are certain inclusion minimal subgraphs of G. This gives a reduction series consisting of graphs G = G0 , . . . , Gr , where Gi+1 is created from Gi by replacing all of its atoms with some edges. The final graph Gr contains no proper atoms and is called primitive. It follows that Gr is either 3-connected, or a cycle, or K2 , or K1 . We can consider Gr as an associated skeleton: the graph G is obtained from Gr by attaching the expanded atoms to its vertices and edges. In Section 5, we characterize Aut(connected PLANAR). If G is planar, then all its atoms and Gr are planar graphs. Moreover, they are either very simple, or 3-connected. It is interesting that our characterization describes the automorphism groups of planar graphs without referring to planarity explicitly, as a simple recursive process which builds them from a few basic groups. A short version of our main result reads as follows: Theorem 1.4. Let G be a connected planar graph with the reduction series G = G0 , . . . , Gr . Then Aut(Gr ) is a spherical group and Aut(Gi ) ∼ = Ψi o Aut(Gi+1 ), where Ψi is a direct product of symmetric, cyclic and dihedral groups. We characterize Aut(connected PLANAR) in two steps. First, similarly as in Theorem 1.2, we give in Theorem 5.1 an inductive characterization of stabilizers of vertices of planar graphs, denoted Fix(PLANAR). It is the class of groups closed under the direct product, the wreath product with symmetric and cyclic groups and semidirect products with dihedral groups. In Theorem 5.10, we describe Aut(connected PLANAR) precisely as the class of groups (Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ`m` ) o Aut(H), where Ψi ∈ Fix(PLANAR) and H is a 3-connected planar graph with colored vertices and colored, possibly oriented, edges. The group Aut(H) acts on the factors of the direct product Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ`m` in the natural way, permuting the isomorphic factors, following the action of H on the vertices and edges of H; for more details, see Section 5. In Section 6, we apply Jordan-like characterization to describe automorphism groups of 2-connected planar graphs and of the following subclasses of planar graphs. Outerplanar graphs (OUTERPLANAR) are planar graphs having an embedding such that all vertices belong to the outer face. Pseudoforests (PSEUDOFOREST) are planar graphs such that each connected component contains at most one cycle, i.e., it is a pseudotree (PSEUDOTREE). Series-parallel graphs (SERIES-PARALLEL) are planar graphs created by two operations, see Section 6.3 for a detailed definition. Quadratic-time Algorithm. Graph isomorphism of planar graphs was attacked in papers [22,23]. Finally, linear-time algorithms were described by Hopcroft and Wong [21], and by Fontet [14]. As we explain in Section 8, the fundamental difficulty is deciding isomorphism of 3-connected (colored) planar graphs in linear time. The idea in [21] is to modify both graphs by a series of reductions ending with colored platonic solids, cycles, or K2 . This is a seminal paper used by many other computer science algorithms as a black box; e.g., [31,34,26,25]. Unfortunately, full versions of [14,21] were never published. 3  Colbourn and Booth [4] propose the idea to modify the algorithm of [21] for computing the automorphism groups of planar graphs in linear time. The following is stated in [4]: “Necessarily we will only be able to sketch our procedure. A more complete description and a proof of correctness would require a more thorough analysis of the Hopcroft-Wong algorithm than has yet appeared in the literature.” To the best of our knowledge, no such algorithm was ever described in detail. We note that it is not possible to use the result of [21] as a black box for computing generators of the automorphism group, since one has to check carefully that the applied reductions preserve the automorphism group. (Or that the change of the automorphism group is under control, similarly as in Proposition 3.7.) By combining the results of [14,21] and [33], the best previously known polynomial-time algorithm computing generators the automorphism group of a planar graph runs in time O(n4 ). In Section 8, we describe a quadratic-time algorithm based on our structural description of the automorphism groups of planar graphs. Theorem 1.5. There exists a quadratic-time algorithm which computes generators of Aut(G) of an input planar graph G in terms of group products of symmetric and spherical groups and of permutation generators. Visualization of Symmetries. As one of the applications of graph symmetries, drawing of planar graphs maximizing the symmetries of the picture were studied in [10,19,17,18]. Disadvantage of this approach is that even though the automorphism group Aut(G) of a planar graph G might be huge, it is possible to highlight only a small fraction of its symmetries; usually just a dihedral or cyclic subgroup. Even if we would consider drawing on the sphere, one can only visualize a spherical subgroup of Aut(G). Based on our structural decomposition of Aut(G), we propose in Conclusions a different spatial visualization which allows to capture the entire automorphism group, and thus visualize our characterization.  2  Preliminaries  In this paper, we work with an extended model of graph which is formally described in [12]. A multigraph G is a pair (V (G), E(G)) where V (G) is a set of vertices and E(G) is a multiset of edges. We denote |V (G)| by v(G) = |G| and |E(G)| by e(G). The graph can possibly contain parallel edges and loops, and each loop at u is incident twice with the vertex u. Each edge e = uv gives rise to two half-edges, one attached to u and the other to v. We denote by H(G) the collection of all half-edges. We denote |H(G)| by h(G), clearly h(G) = 2e(G). In the reductions, we obtain pendant edges, each consisting of two half-edges, lone attached to some vertex u, the other attached to no vertex. Unless the graph is K2 , we remove all vertices of degree 1 while keeping both half-edges of the incident edge. A pendant edge attached to v is called a single pendant edge if it is the only pendant edge attached to v. We consider graphs with colored edges and also with both directed and undirected edges. It might seem strange to consider such general graphs. But when we apply reductions, we replace some parts of the graph by edges and the colors are used to encode the isomorphism classes of the replaced parts. This allows the algorithm to work with smaller reduced graphs while preserving important information about the structure of the original large graph. Thus, even if the planar graph is simple, more complicated multigraphs are naturally constructed. Equivariance. Suppose that a group Σ acts on two sets A and B. We say that the actions are equivariant if there exists an equivariant map ϕ : A → B which is a bijection and for every π ∈ Σ, we have ϕ(π(x)) = π(ϕ(x)). Equivariance defines an equivalence relation on orbits of the action of Σ, consisting of equivalent classes of equivariant orbits. Automorphisms. Let G be a graph. An automorphism π of G is fully described by a permutation πh : H(G) → H(G) of the half-edges, preserving edges and the incidence relation between the half-edges and the vertices. It follows that πh induces two permutations πv : V (G) → V (G) and πe : E(G) → E(G) connected together by a natural property: πe (uv) = πv (u)πv (v), for every uv ∈ E(G). We often omit the subscripts and simply write π(u) or π(uv). In addition, we require that an automorphism preserves the colors of edges and the orientation of directed edges. Similarly as in the definition of an automorphism, two graphs G and H are isomorphic, denoted G ∼ = H, if there exists an isomorphism from G to H satisfying the aforementioned conditions. Automorphism Groups. We denote the group of all automorphisms of a graph G by Aut(G). Each element π ∈ Aut(G) acts on G, permutes its vertices and edges while it preserves the incidences. Let Ψ ≤ Aut(G). The orbit [v] of a vertex v ∈ V (G) is the set of all vertices {π(v) | π ∈ Ψ }, and the orbit [e] of an edge e ∈ E(G) is defined similarly as {π(e) | π ∈ Ψ }. The stabilizer of x is the subgroup of all automorphisms which fix x. Groups. In what follows, we recall some standard notation for particular permutation groups of degree n. We use Sn for the symmetric group, Cn for the cyclic group, Dn for the dihedral group (|Dn | = 2n), and An for the alternating group. We note that D1 ∼ = C2 and D2 ∼ = C22 . 4  3 4 1  2  1 2  3  3 4  1 2 3 4  4 G  2 1  1 2  3 4  1 2  4 3  2 1  4 3  2 1 2 1  4 3  4 3  Aut(G)  Fig. 2. On the left, the graph G consisting of two copies of K2 , together with the action of three generators of Aut(G). On the right, the Cayley diagram of Aut(G) ∼ = C22 o C2 ∼ = C2 o S2 . It is not C32 since applying the white generator exchanges the roles of the black and gray generators.  Given two groups Ψ and Σ, and a group homomorphism ϕ : Σ → Aut(Ψ ), the semidirect product Ψ oϕ Σ is defined as follows. The base set is the Cartesian product Ψ × Σ, and the operation is defined by the rule (ψ1 , σ1 ) · (ψ2 , σ2 ) = (ψ1 · ϕ(σ1 )(ψ2 ), σ1 · σ2 ). If the homomorphism ϕ is clear from the context, we omit it to simplify the notation. Suppose that Σ acts on {1, . . . , n}. The wreath product Ψ o Σ is a shorthand for the semidirect product Ψ n oϕ Σ, where ϕ is defined by setting ϕ(σ) = (ψ1 , . . . , ψn ) 7→ (ψσ(1) , . . . , ψσ(n) ). In what follows, we usually have Σ = Sn , Σ = Dn , or Σ = Zn with the natural action the index set {1, . . . , n}. For more details, see [3,36]. We note that when both Ψ and Σ are given in terms of permutation generators and also the image ϕ(Σ) of Σ is given, we can output permutation generators of Ψ oϕ Σ. Jordan described how to compute automorphism groups of graphs from automorphism groups of their connected components. We state it together with a proof since a similar argument is used in the proof of Proposition 3.7. Theorem 2.1 (Jordan [24]). If G1 , . . . , Gn are pairwise non-isomorphic connected graphs and G is the disjoint union of ki copies of each Gi , then Aut(G) ∼ = Aut(G1 ) o Sk1 × · · · × Aut(Gn ) o Skn . Proof. Since the action of Aut(G) is independent on non-isomorphic components, it is clearly the direct product of factors, each corresponding to the automorphism group of one isomorphism class of components. It remains to show that if G consists of k isomorphic components H1 , . . . , Hk of a connected graph H, then Aut(G) ∼ = Aut(H) o Sk . An example is given in Fig. 2. For i > 1, let σ1,i be an arbitrarily chosen isomorphism from H1 to Hi , and we put σ1,1 = id and σi,j = −1 σ1,j σ1,i . Observe that each isomorphism from Hi to Hj can be decomposed into σi,j and some automorphism of Hj . Let π ∈ Aut(G). It can be decomposed into a composition µ · σ of two automorphisms. The automorphism σ permutes the components as in π, so when π(Hi ) = Hj , then σ|Hi = σi,j . The automorphism µ maps each −1 component Hi to itself, so µ|Hi = π|Hi · σi,j . We have π = µ · σ since −1 µ|Hi · σ|Hi = π|Hi · σi,j σi,j = π|Hi .  The automorphisms µ can be bijectively identified with the elements of Aut(H)k and the automorphisms σ with the elements of Sk . Let π, π 0 ∈ Aut(G). Consider the composition µ · σ · µ0 · σ 0 , we want to swap σ with µ0 and rewrite this as a composition µ · µ̂ · σ̂ · σ. Clearly the components are permuted in π · π 0 exactly as in σ · σ 0 , so σ̂ = σ. On the other hand, µ̂ is not necessarily equal µ0 . Let µ0 be identified with the vector (µ01 , . . . , µ0k ) ∈ Aut(H)k . Since µ0 is applied after σ, it acts on the components permuted according to σ. Therefore µ̂ is constructed from µ0 by permuting the coordinates of its vector by σ: µ̂ = (µ0σ(1) , . . . , µ0σ(k) ). This is precisely the definition of the wreath product, so Aut(G) ∼ = Aut(H) o Sk .  3  t u  Reduction to 3-connected Components  In this section, we describe a modified reduction procedure, introduced in [11,12]. We show that under certain conditions, the reduction procedure allows to reconstruct Aut(G) from simpler graphs. 5  block atoms  proper atoms  dipoles  Fig. 3. An example of a graph with denoted atoms. The white vertices belong to the boundary of some atom, possibly several of them.  Block-tree and Central Block. The block-tree T of G is a tree defined as follows. Consider all articulations in G and all maximal 2-connected subgraphs which we call blocks (with bridge-edges also counted as blocks). The block-tree T is the incidence graph between the articulations and the blocks. It is well-known that the automorphisms of Aut(G) induces automorphisms of Aut(T ). Recall that for a tree, its center is either the central vertex or the central edge of a longest path, depending on the parity of its length. Every automorphism of a tree preserves its center. For a block-tree, there is always a central vertex. Therefore, every automorphism π ∈ Aut(G) preserves the central block or the central articulation. We orient the edges of the block-tree T towards the central vertex; so the block-tree becomes rooted. A (rooted) subtree of the block-tree is defined by any vertex different from the centrum acting as root and by all its descendants. Definition of Atoms. Let B be one block of G, so B is a 2-connected graph. Two vertices u and v form a 2-cut U = {u, v} if B \ U is disconnected. We say that a 2-cut U is non-trivial if deg(u) ≥ 3 and deg(v) ≥ 3. We first define a set P of subgraphs of G called parts which are candidates for atoms: – A block part is a subgraph non-isomorphic to a pendant edge induced by the blocks of a subtree of the block-tree. – A proper part is a subgraph S of G defined by a non-trivial 2-cut U of a block B. The subgraph S consists of a connected component C of G \ U together with u and v and all edges between {u, v} and C. In addition, we require that S does not contain the central block/articulation; so it only contains some block of the subtree of the block-tree given by B. – A dipole part is any dipole which is defined as follows. Let u and v be two distinct vertices of degree at least three joined by at least two parallel edges. Then the subgraph induced by u and v is called a dipole. The inclusion-minimal elements of P are called atoms. We distinguish block atoms, proper atoms and dipoles according to the type of the defining part. Block atoms are either pendant stars called star block atoms, or pendant blocks possibly with single pendant edges attached to them called non-star block atoms. Also each proper atom is a subgraph of a block, together with some single pendant edges attached to it. Notice that a dipole part is by definition always inclusion-minimal, and therefore it is an atom. For an example, see Fig. 3. We use the topological notation to denote the boundary ∂A and the interior Å of an atom A. If A is a dipole, we set ∂A = V (A). If A is a proper or block atom, we put ∂A equal to the set of vertices of A which are incident with an edge not contained in A. For the interior, we use the standard topological definition Å = A \ ∂A where we only remove the vertices ∂A, the edges adjacent to ∂A are kept in Å. Lemma 3.1 ([12], Lemma 3.3). For atoms A 6= A0 , we have A ∩ A0 = ∂A ∩ ∂A0 . Note that |∂A| = 1 for a block atom A, and |∂A| = 2 for a proper atom or dipole A. The interior of a dipole is a set of free edges. We note that dipoles are exactly the atoms with no vertices in their interiors. Observe for a proper atom A that the vertices of ∂A are exactly the vertices {u, v} of the non-trivial 2-cut used in the definition of proper parts. Also the vertices of ∂A of a proper atom are never adjacent in A, but may be adjacent in G. Further, no block or proper atom contains parallel edges; otherwise a dipole would be its subgraph, so it would not be inclusion minimal. Lemma 3.2 ([12], Lemma 3.8). Let A be an atom and let π ∈ Aut(G). Then the image π(A) is an atom isomorphic to A, π(∂A) = ∂π(A), π(Å) = π̊(A). 6  u u  v  u  v ′  A v  u  A v  Fig. 4. A symmetric proper atom A and an asymmetric proper atom A0 . In the reductions, explained later, they are replaced by undirected and directed edges, respectively.  Structure of Atoms. We call a graph essentially 3-connected if it is a 3-connected graph with possibly some single pendant edges attached to it. Similarly, a graph is called essentially a cycle if it is a cycle with possibly some single pendant edges attached to it. For a proper atom A with ∂A = {u, v}, we define A+ as A with the additional edge uv. Lemma 3.3 ([12], Lemma 3.5). Every non-star block atom A is either K2 with an attached single pendant edge, essentially a cycle, or essentially 3-connected. Lemma 3.4 ([12], Lemma 3.6). For every proper atoms A, the extended proper atom A+ is either essentially a cycle, or essentially 3-connected. Also, single pendant edges are always attached to Å. Symmetry Types of Atoms. For an atom A, we denote by Aut∂A (A) the set-wise stabilizer of ∂A in Aut(A), and by Fix(∂A) the point-wise stabilizer of ∂A in Aut(A). Let A be a proper atom or dipole with ∂A = {u, v}. We distinguish the following two symmetry types, see Fig. 4: – The symmetric atom. There exits an automorphism τ ∈ Aut∂A (A) which exchanges u and v. – The asymmetric atom. There is no such automorphism in Aut∂A (A). In Fig. 5, the dipoles are symmetric but the proper atoms are asymmetric. If A is a block atom, then it is by definition symmetric. For instance a dipole A with ∂A = {u, v} is symmetric, if and only if it has the same number of directed edges going from u to v as from v to u. For a block atom or an asymmetric atom, we have Fix(∂A) = Aut∂A (A), but not for a symmetric proper atom or dipole. Reduction. The reduction produces a series of graphs G = G0 , . . . , Gr . To construct Gi+1 from Gi , we find the collection of all atoms A. Two atoms A and A0 are isomorphic if there exists an isomorphism which maps ∂A to ∂A0 . We obtain isomorphism classes for A, and to each isomorphism class, we assign one new color not yet used in the graphs G0 , . . . , Gi . We replace a block atom A by a pendant edge of the assigned color based at u where ∂A = {u}, and a proper atom or a dipole A with ∂A = {u, v} by a new edge uv of the assigned color. If A is symmetric, the edge uv is undirected. If A is asymmetric, the edge uv is directed and we consistently choose one orientation for the entire isomorphism class. According to Lemma 3.1, the replaced interiors of the atoms of A are pairwise disjoint, so the reduction is well defined. We repeatedly apply reductions and we stop in the step r when Gr contains no atoms, and we call such Gr a primitive graph. For an example of the reduction, see Fig. 5. We note the following detail. Replacing proper atoms and dipoles by edges preserves the block structure. Replacing block atoms with pendant edges removes leaves from the block tree. The central block/vertex is preserved by the reductions, so we define the atoms A of Gi with respect to the central block/vertex of G0 (which may not be central in Gi ).  red.  G0  G1  Fig. 5. On the left, the graph G0 has three isomorphism classes of atoms, one of each type. We reduce G0 to G1 which is an eight cycle with single pendant edges, with four black halvable edges replacing the dipoles, four gray undirected edges replacing the block atoms, and four white directed edges replacing the proper atoms. The reduction series ends with G1 since it is primitive.  7  Lemma 3.5 ([12], Lemma 3.4). Let G be a primitive graph. If G has a central block, then it is a 3-connected graph, a cycle Cn for n ≥ 2, or K2 , or can be obtained from these graphs by attaching single pendant edges to at least two vertices. If G has a central articulation, then it is K1 , possible with a single pendant edge attached. Reduction Tree. For every graph G, the reduction series determines the reduction tree which is a rooted tree defined as follows. The root is the primitive graph Gr , and the other nodes are the atoms obtained during the reductions. If a node contains a colored edge, it has the corresponding atom as a child. Therefore, the leaves are the atoms of G0 , after removing them, the new leaves are the atoms of G1 , and so on. For an example, see Fig. 6. Reduction Epimorphism. The algebraic properties of the reductions, in particular how the groups Aut(Gi ) and Aut(Gi+1 ) are related, are captured by a natural G1 mapping Φi : Aut(Gi ) → Aut(Gi+1 ) called the reduction epimorphism which we define as follows. Let π ∈ Aut(Gi ). For the common vertices and edges of Gi and Gi+1 , we define Φi (π) equal to π. If A is an atom of Gi , then according to Lemma 3.2a, π(A) is an atom isomorphic to A. In Gi+1 , we replace the interiors of both A and π(A) by the edges eA and eπ(A) of the same Fig. 6. The reduction tree for the reduction series in type and color. We define Φi (π)(eA ) = eπ(A) . In the Fig. 5. The root is the primitive graph G1 and leaves same way, the action of Φi (π) is defined for half-edges. are atoms of G0 . Since π(∂A) = ∂(π(A)), we have Φi (π) ∈ Aut(Gi+1 ). It is proved in [12, Proposition 4.2] that the mapping Φi is a group epimorphism, in particular, it is surjective. By Homomorphism Theorem, we know that Aut(Gi ) is an extension of Aut(Gi+1 ) by Ker(Φi ) and Aut(Gi+1 ) ∼ = Aut(Gi )/Ker(Φi ). Lemma 3.6 ([12], Lemma 4.4). Ker(Φi ) ∼ =  Q  A∈A  Fix(∂A).  Our aim is to investigate when Aut(Gi ) ∼ = Ker(Φi ) o Aut(Gi+1 ).  (1)  Let A be an atom with ∂A = {u, v}. If A is symmetric, there exists some automorphism of A exchanging u and v. If A is a symmetric dipole, one can always find an involution exchanging u and v. This is not true when  Φi π′ e1 e2 u  A u  (b)  Ψ  e5 e4  id  π2  v e3  (a)  Φ i)  Ker(  e6  π′  π ′ Φ−1 i (π )  Gi+1  Aut(Gi+1 ) ∼ = D6  Aut(Gi )  v  Fig. 7. (a) An example of a symmetric proper atom A with no involution exchanging u and v. There are two automorphisms which exchange u and v, one rotates the four-cycle formed white directed edges by one clockwise, the other one counterclockwise. The set-wise stabilizer of u and v is C4 . (b) On the left, the graph Gi+1 having colored edges e1 , . . . , e6 corresponding to copies A1 , . . . , A6 of A. On the right, the groups Aut(Gi ) and Aut(Gi+1 ) ∼ = D6 with the homomorphism Φi . While the rotations in Aut(Gi+1 ) can be easily extended, consider the depicted reflection π 0 . Let π ∈ Aut(Gi ) such that Φi (π) = π 0 . The automorphism π|A1 is one of the two automorphisms of A exchanging u and v described in (a), and similarly π|A4 . Therefore, π 2 6= id (since π 2 |A1 6= id and π 2 |A4 6= id) while (π 0 )2 = id, and only π 4 = id. Therefore, no complementary subgroup Ψ ≤ Aut(Gi ) exists and Aut(Gi ) cannot be constructed using the semidirect product (1).  8  A is a symmetric proper atom. Figure 7a gives an example of a symmetric proper atom with no involution exchanging the two vertices of the boundary. When all symmetric proper atoms have such involutions, we derive (1). Figure 7b explains that this assumption is necessary. Proposition 3.7. Suppose that every symmetric proper atom A of Gi with ∂A = {u, v} has an involutory automorphism τ exchanging u and v. Then the following holds: (a) There exists Ψ ≤ Aut(Gi ) such that Φi (Ψ ) = Aut(Gi+1 ) and Φi |Ψ is an isomorphism. (b) Aut(Gi ) ∼ = Ker(Φi ) o Aut(Gi+1 ). Proof. (a) Let π 0 ∈ Aut(Gi+1 ), we want to extend π 0 to π ∈ Aut(Gi ) such that Φi (π) = π 0 . We just describe this extension on a single edge e = uv. If e is an original edge of G, there is nothing to extend. Suppose that e was created in Gi+1 from an atom A in Gi . Then ê = π 0 (e) is an edge of the same color and the same type as e, and therefore ê is constructed from an isomorphic atom Â of the same symmetry type. The automorphism π 0 prescribes the action on the boundary ∂A. We need to show that it is possible to define an action on Å consistently: – A is a block atom: The edges e and ê are pendant, attached by articulations u and u0 . We define π by an isomorphism σ from A to Â which takes ∂A to ∂ Â. – A is an asymmetric proper atom or dipole: By the definition, the orientation of e and ê is consistent with respect to π 0 . Since Å is isomorphic to the interior of Â, we define π on Å according to one such isomorphism σ. – A is a symmetric or a halvable proper atom or a dipole: Let σ be an isomorphism of A and Â. Either σ maps ∂A exactly as π 0 , and then we can use σ for defining π. Or we compose σ with an automorphism of A exchanging the two vertices of ∂A. (We know that such an automorphism exists since A is not antisymmetric.) To establish (a), we need to do this consistently, in such a way that these extensions form a subgroup Ψ which is isomorphic to Aut(Gi+1 ). Let e1 , . . . , e` be colored edges of one orbit of the action of Aut(Gi+1 ) such that these edges replace isomorphic atoms A1 , . . . , A` in Gi ; see Fig. 8 for an overview. We divide the argument into three cases: Case 1: The atom A1 is a block atom: Let u1 , . . . , u` be the articulations such that ∂Ai = {ui }. Choose −1 arbitrarily isomorphisms σ1,i from A1 to Ai such that σ1,i (u1 ) = ui , and put σ1,1 = id and σi,j = σ1,j σ1,i . If 0 π (ei ) = ej , we set π|Åi = σi,j |Åi . Since σi,k = σj,k σi,j ,  ∀i, j, k,  (2)  the composition of the extensions π1 and π2 of π10 and π20 is defined on the interiors of A1 , . . . , A` exactly as 0 · · · π10 = id is extended to an identity. the extension of π20 π10 . Also, by (2), an identity πk0 πk−1 Case 2: The atom A1 is an asymmetric proper atom or dipole: Let ei = ui vi . We approach it exactly as in Case 1, just we require that σ1,i (u1 ) = ui and σ1,i (v1 ) = vi . Case 3: The atom A1 is a symmetric proper atom or a dipole: For each ei , we arbitrarily choose one endpoint as ui and one as vi . Again, we arbitrarily choose isomorphisms σ1,i from A1 to Ai such that −1 σ1,i (u1 ) = ui and σ1,i (v1 ) = vi , and define σi,j = σ1,j σ1,i . We further consider an involution τ1 of A1 which exchanges u1 and v1 . (Such an involution exists for symmetric proper atoms by the assumptions, and for symmetric dipoles by the definition.) Then τ1 defines −1 an involution of Ai by conjugation as τi = σ1,i τ1 σ1,i . It follows that −1 τj = σi,j τi σi,j ,  and consequently  σi,j τi = τj σi,j ,  τ1  σ1,2 σ1,1 = id  u2  A1  u1  ∀i, j.  u1  A2  v1 A1  σ1,2 u3  σ̂1,2  u2  v2 A2  A3 σ1,3  Fig. 8. Case 1 is demonstrated on the left for ` = 3, the respective block atoms are A1 , A2 and A3 . Case 3 is demonstrated on the right for ` = 2. The additional semiregular involution τ1 ∈ Fix(∂A1 ) transposes u1 and v1 .  9  We put σ̂i,j = σi,j τi = τj σi,j which is an isomorphism mapping Ai to Aj such that σ̂i,j (ui ) = vj and 0 σ̂i,j (vi ) = uj . In the extension, we put π|Åi = σi,j |Åi if π 0 (ui ) = uj , and π|Åi = σi,j |Åi if π 0 (ui ) = vj . Aside (2), we get the following additional identities: σ̂i,k = σj,k σ̂i,j ,  σ̂i,k = σ̂j,k σi,j ,  and σi,k = σ̂j,k σ̂i,j ,  ∀i, j, k.  (3)  We just argue the last identity: σ̂j,k σ̂i,j = τk (σj,k σi,j )τi = τk σi,k τi = τk τk σi,k = σi,k , where the last equality holds since τk is an involution. It follows that the composition π2 π1 is correctly defined as above, and it maps identities to identities. We have described how to extend the elements of Aut(Gi+1 ) on one edge-orbit, and we apply this process repeatedly to all edge-orbits. The set Ψ ≤ Aut(Gi ) consists of all these extensions π from every π 0 ∈ Aut(Gi+1 ). It is a subgroup by (2) and (3), and since the extension π 0 7→ π is injective, Ψ ∼ = Aut(Gi+1 ). (b) By (a), we know that Ker(Φi ) E Aut(Gi ) has a complement Ψ isomorphic to Aut(Gi+1 ). Actually, this already proves that Aut(Gi ) has the structure of the internal semidirect product. We give more insight into its structure by describing it as an external semidirect product. Each element of Aut(Gi ) can be written as a pair (π 0 , σ) where π 0 ∈ Aut(Gi+1 ) and σ ∈ Ker(Φi ). We first apply the extension π ∈ Ψ of π 0 and permute Gi , mapping interiors of the atoms as blocks. Then σ permutes the interiors of the atoms, preserving the remainder of Gi . It remains to understand how composition of two automorphisms (π 0 , σ) and (π̂ 0 , σ̂) works. We get this as a composition of four automorphisms σ̂ ◦ π̂ ◦ σ ◦ π, which we want to write as a pair (τ, ρ). Therefore, we need to swap π̂ with σ. This clearly preserves π̂, since the action σ̂ on the interiors does not influence it; so we get τ = π̂ ◦ π. But σ is changed by this swapping. According to Lemma 3.6, we get σ = (σ1 , . . . , σs ) where each σi ∈ Fix(∂Ai )mi . Since π preserves the isomorphism classes of atoms, it acts on each σi independently and permutes the isomorphic copies of Ai . Suppose that A and A0 are two isomorphic copies of Ai and π(A) = A0 . Then the action of σi on the interior of A corresponds after the swapping to the same action on the interior of A0 = π(A). This can be described using the semidirect product, since each π defines an automorphism of Ker(Φi ) which permutes the coordinates of each Fix(∂Ai )mi , following the action of π 0 on the colored edges of Gi+1 . t u  4  Automorphism Groups of Polyhedral Graphs  In this section, we review geometric properties of automorphism groups of 3-connected planar graphs. They are based on Whitney’s Theorem [40] stating that 3-connected planar graphs have unique embeddings onto the sphere. Using these properties, we describe possible automorphism groups of planar atoms and primitive graphs. Spherical Groups. A group is spherical if it is the group of the isometries of a tiling of the sphere. The first class of spherical groups are the subgroups of the automorphism groups of the platonic solids. Their automorphism groups are S4 for the tetrahedron, S4 × C2 for the cube and the octahedron, and A5 × C2 for the dodecahedron and the icosahedron; see Fig. 9. The second class of spherical groups is formed by four infinite families, namely Cn , Dn , Cn × C2 , and Dn × C2 , n ≥ 2. They act as groups of automorphism of n-sided prisms. Maps. A (spherical) map M is a 2-cell decomposition of the sphere S. A map is usually defined by a 2-cell embedding of a connected graph i : G ,→ S. The connected components of S \ i(G) are called faces of M. An automorphism of a map is an automorphism of the graph preserving the incidences between vertices, edges, and faces. Clearly, Aut(M) is one of the spherical groups and with the exception of paths and cycles, it is a subgroup of Aut(G). As a consequence of Whitney’s theorem [40] we have the following.  S4  C2 × S 4  C2 × A5  Fig. 9. The five platonic solids together with their automorphism groups.  10  Theorem 4.1. Let M be the map given by the unique 2-cell embedding of a 3-connected graph into the sphere. Then Aut(G) ∼ t u = Aut(M ). Geometry of Automorphisms. Mani [32] gives the following insight into geometry of Aut(G) of a 3connected planar graph G. There exists a polyhedron P such that Aut(G) coincides with the group of isometries of P . Figure 9 gives examples of such polyhedra associated to the graphs of platonic solids. Also, the polyhedron P can be placed in the center of a sphere and projected onto it, so that each isometry of P correspond to some isometry of the sphere. Therefore, every automorphism in Aut(G) can be geometrically viewed as an isometry of the sphere with G drawn onto it, and this is essential for the Jordan-like characterization in for Section 5. In particular, we have: Theorem 4.2. Let G be a 3-connected graph. Then Aut(G) is isomorphic to one of the spherical groups. We recall some basic definitions from geometry [37,35]. An automorphism of a 3-connected planar graph G is called orientation preserving, if the respective isometry preserves the global orientation of the sphere. It is called orientation reversing if it changes the global orientation of the sphere. A subgroup of Aut(G) is called orientation preserving if all its automorphisms are orientation preserving, and orientation reversing otherwise. We note that every orientation reversing subgroup contains an orientation preserving subgroup of index two. (The reason is that the composition of two orientation reversing automorphisms is an orientation preserving automorphism.) Stabilizers. Let u ∈ V (G). The stabilizer of u in Aut(G) is a subgroup of a dihedral group and it has the following description in the language of isometries. If Stab(u) ∼ = Cn , for n ≥ 3, it is generated by a rotation of order n that fixes u and the opposite point of the sphere, and fixing no other point of the sphere. The opposite point of the sphere may be another vertex or a center of a face. If Stab(u) ∼ = Dn , it consists of rotations and reflections fixing a circle passing through u and the opposite point of the sphere. Each reflection always fixes either a center of some edge, or another vertex. When Stab(u) ∼ = D1 ∼ = C2 , it is generated either by a 180◦ rotation or by a reflection. Let e ∈ E(G). The stabilizer of e in Aut(G) is a subgroup of C22 . When Stab(e) ∼ = C22 , it contains the ◦ following three non-trivial isometries. First, the 180 rotation around the center of e and the opposite point of the sphere that is a vertex, center of an edge, or center of an even face. Next, two reflections orthogonal to each other which fix circles through u and the opposite point of the sphere. When Aut(G) ∼ = C2 , it is generated by only one of these three isometries. 4.1  Automorphism Groups of Planar Primitive Graphs and Atoms  Theorem 4.2 allows us to describe possible automorphism groups of planar atoms and primitive graphs which appear in the reduction tree for a planar graph G. First, we describe the automorphism groups of planar primitive graphs. Lemma 4.3. The automorphism group Aut(G) of a planar primitive graph G is a spherical group. Proof. Recall that a graph is essentially 3-connected if it is a 3-connected graph with attached single pendant edges to some of its vertices. If G is essentially 3-connected, then Aut(G) is a spherical group from Theorem 4.2. Since the family of spherical groups is closed under taking subgroups, the subgroup of color- and orientationpreserving automorphism is spherical as well. If G is K1 , K2 or Cn with attached single pendant edges, then Aut(G) is a subgroup of C2 or Dn . t u Next, we deal with the automorphism groups of planar atoms. Let A be a planar atom. Recall that Aut∂A (A) is the set-wise stabilizer of ∂A, and Fix(∂A) is the point-wise stabilizer of ∂A. The following lemma determines Aut∂A (A); see Fig. 10 for examples. Lemma 4.4 ([12], Lemma 5.3). Let A be a planar atom. (a) If A is a star block atom, then Aut∂A (A) = Fix(∂A) which is a direct product of symmetric groups. (b) If A is a non-star block atom, then Aut∂A (A) = Fix(∂A) and it is a subgroup of a dihedral group. (c) If A is a proper atom, then Aut∂A (A) is a subgroup of C22 and Fix(∂A) is a subgroup of C2 . (d) If A is a dipole, then Fix(∂A) is a direct product of symmetric groups. If A is symmetric, then Aut∂A (A) = Fix(∂A) o C2 . If A is asymmetric, then Aut∂A (A) = Fix(∂A). Proof. (a) The edges of each color class of the star block atom A can be arbitrarily permuted, so Aut∂A (A) = Fix(∂A) which is a direct product of symmetric groups. (b) For the non-star block atom A, the boundary ∂A = {u} is stabilized. We have one vertex in both Aut∂A (A) and Fix(∂A) fixed, thus the groups are the same. By Lemma 3.3, we have that A is either a 11  A  u  A  v A  u Fix(∂A) ∼ = S2 × S3 Aut∂A (A) ∼ = S2 × S3  u Fix(∂A) ∼ = D6 Aut∂A (A) ∼ = D6  Fix(∂A) ∼ = C2 Aut(A)∂A ∼ = C2 2  u A  v  Fix(∂A) ∼ = S22 Aut(A)∂A ∼ = S 2 ⋊ C2 2  Fig. 10. An atom A together with its groups Fix(∂A) and Aut∂A (A). From left to right, a star block atom, a non-star block atom, a proper atom, and a dipole.  essentially a cycle, K2 with attached single pendant edges, or essentially 3-connected, so Aut∂A (A) is a subgroup of Dn where n is the degree of u. (c) Let A be a proper atom with ∂A = {u, v}. By Lemma 3.4, A+ is either essentially a cycle, or essentially 3-connected. The first case is trivial, so we deal with the latter case. Since Aut∂A (A) preserves ∂A, we have Aut∂A (A) = Aut∂A+ (A+ ), and Aut∂A+ (A+ ) fixes in addition the edge uv. Because A+ is essentially 3connected, Aut∂A+ (A+ ) corresponds to the stabilizer of uv in Aut(M) for a map M of A+ . But such a stabilizer is a subgroup of C22 . Since Fix(∂A) stabilizes the vertices of ∂A, it is a subgroup of C2 . (d) For an asymmetric dipole, we have Aut∂A (A) = Fix(∂A) which is a direct product of symmetric groups. For a symmetric dipole, we can permute the vertices in ∂A, so we get the semidirect product with C2 . t u Last, we argue that every planar symmetric atom A has an involutory automorphism exchanging ∂A, so the assumptions of Proposition 3.7 are always satisfied for planar graphs. Lemma 4.5. For every planar symmetric proper atom A with ∂A = {u, v}, there exists an involutory automorphism exchanging u and v. Proof. Since Aut∂A (A) is a subgroup of C22 , all elements are involutions.  5  t u  The Jordan-like Characterization  The automorphism groups of planar graphs are constructed using Theorem 2.1 from the automorphism groups of its connected components. It remains to deal with the automorphism groups of connected planar graphs. We describe them in this section, using the results of Sections 3 and 4, thus proving the main result of this paper. We show that Aut(connected PLANAR) can be described by a semidirect product series composed from few basic groups. In Subsection 5.1, we prove Theorems 1.3 and 1.4 as an easy consequence of our previous results. In Subsection 5.2, we give a Jordan-like characterization of all point-wise stabilizers of a vertex, or of a pair of vertices, in the automorphism groups of connected planar graphs. In Subsection 5.3, we describe all possible compositions of actions of spherical groups with the stabilizers described in Subsection 5.2. 5.1  Characterization by Semidirect Product Series  First, we prove Theorems 1.3 and 1.4 which can be viewed as a rough approximation of the main result. Proof (Proof of Theorem 1.3). We define an epimorphism Θi : Aut(G) → Aut(Gi ) by Θi = Φ0 ◦ · · · ◦ Φi−1 , for i = 1, . . . , r −1. We have Ker(Θr−i ) > Ker(Θr−i−1 ) and since all the Ker(Θr−i ) are normal in Ker(Θr ), we can write Ker(Θr−i ) B Ker(Θr−i−1 ). By definition, Θr−i = Θr−i−1 ◦ Φr−i . Therefore, Ker(Θr−i )/Ker(Θr−i−1 ) ∼ = Ker(Φr−i ), for i = 1, . . . , r − 1. By Lemmas 3.5 and 4.4, Ker(Φr−i ) is isomorphic to a direct product of symmetric, cyclic, and dihedral groups. Moreover, Aut(G)/Ker(Θr−1 ) ∼ = Aut(Gr ). By Lemma 4.3 Aut(Gr ) is isomorphic to a spherical group. We have a subnormal chain Aut(G) = Ψ0 B Ψ1 B · · · B Ψr−1 = 1, where Ψi = Ker(Θr−i ) such that Ψi /Ψi+1 is a product of the required groups. By Jordan-Hölder theorem there exists a refinement satisfying the statement of the above subnormal chain. t u Proof (Proof of Theorem 1.4). The primitive graph Gr has Aut(Gr ) isomorphic to a spherical group by Lemma 4.3. By Lemma 4.5, we can apply Proposition 3.7 and Aut(Gi ) ∼ = Ker(Φi )oAut(Gi+1 ). By Lemma 3.6, the kernel Ker(Φi ) is the direct product of the groups Fix(∂A) for all atoms A in Gi . Each of these groups is isomorphic to either to a cyclic, or to a dihedral group, or to a direct product of symmetric groups. t u 12  Theorems 1.3 and 1.4 impose some necessary conditions fulfilled by the automorphism groups of a planar graph. On the other hand, not every abstract group satisfying these conditions is isomorphic to the automorphism group of some planar graph. First, Aut(Gi+1 ) admits an induced action on the groups Fix(∂A), where A ranges through all atoms of Gi . In particular, the sizes of orbits of Aut(Gi+1 ) are reflected in Aut(Gi ), since an orbit of length m gives rise to m copies of Fix(∂A), for some atom A. For instance, if Aut(Gr ) ∼ = Cn , then every orbit is of size 1, or n. Therefore, the possible powers of Fix(∂A) in Ker(Φr−1 ) are restricted. Applying Theorem 1.4 repeatedly, we can construct Aut(G) recursively, starting in the root of the reduction tree and terminating its leaves. In the remainder of this section, we revert the approach and construct a Jordan-like characterization of the automorphism groups of planar graphs from the leaves to the root of reduction trees. 5.2  Fixer of the Boundary of an Expanded Atom  Consider the reduction tree of a planar connected graph G. For an atom A in Gi , let A∗ denote the subgraph of G corresponding to the node A and all its descendants in the reduction tree. In other words, A∗ is the fully expanded atom A. Let Fix(∂A∗ ) be the point-wise stabilizer of ∂A∗ = ∂A in Aut∂A∗ (A∗ ).  Fix(connected PLANAR) = Fix(∂A∗ ) : A is an atom of the reduction tree of a planar graph . Equivalently, Fix(connected PLANAR) consists of all point-wise stabilizers of a vertex, or of a pair of vertices, in the automorphism groups of connected planar graphs. Theorem 5.1. The class Fix(connected PLANAR) is defined inductively as follows: (a) {1} ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR). (b) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR), then Ψ1 × Ψ2 ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR). (c) If Ψ ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR), then Ψ o Sn , Ψ o Cn ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR). (d) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR), then (Ψ12n × Ψ2n × Ψ3n ) o Dn ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR), ∀n odd. (e) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 , Ψ4 , Ψ5 ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR), then (Ψ12n × Ψ2n × Ψ3n × Ψ4n × Ψ5n ) o Dn ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR),  ∀n ≥ 4, even.  (f ) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 , Ψ4 , Ψ5 , Ψ6 ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR), then (Ψ14 × Ψ22 × Ψ32 × Ψ42 × Ψ52 × Ψ6 ) o C22 ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR). We prove this theorem in a series of lemmas below. We note that the homomorphisms defining the semidirect products in the operations (d), (e), and (f) are specified in the proofs of Lemmas 5.4, 5.7, 5.8, and 5.9. Lemma 5.2. The class Fix(connected PLANAR) is closed under operations (a)–(f ). Further, every such group can be realized by a block atom, by a proper atom, or by a dipole, in arbitrarily many non-isomorphic ways. Proof. It is clear for (a) and Fig. 11 shows the constructions for the operations (b)–(f). Concerning the second part, for every group Ψ , arbitrarily many non-isomorphic atoms A such that Ψ ∼ = Fix(∂A) can be constructed. For instance, we can do it by replacing edges of a realization of Ψ by suitable rigid planar graphs (having no non-trivial automorphisms) consistently with the action of Ψ . Similarly, if some group can be realized by, say block atom, we can attach the corresponding pendant edge to some, say, rigid proper atom which preserves the group. t u In the rest of this section, we prove that each group in Fix(connected PLANAR) arises by using operations (b)–(f) repeatedly. We prove this by induction according to the depth of the reduction tree. Let A be an atom in Gi+1 , with each colored edge corresponding to some atom Â in Gi which is expanded to Â∗ . The expanded atom A∗ is constructed from A by replacing all colored edges with expanded atoms Â∗ . By induction hypothesis, we assume that the groups Fix(∂ Â∗ ) can be constructed using (a)–(f). We relate Fix(∂A) and Fix(∂A∗ ) similarly as in Proposition 3.7. Let Φ : Fix(∂A∗ ) → Fix(∂A) be the reduction epimorphism Φ : π ∗ 7→ π defined as follows. For π ∗ ∈ Fix(∂A∗ ), the automorphism π = Φ(π ∗ ) maps the common parts of A and A∗ the same while π maps the colored edges in A as π ∗ maps the expanded atoms in A∗ . Note that ΦQ is Θi = Φ0 ◦ Φ1 ◦ · · · ◦ Φi restricted to Fix(∂A∗ ). Similarly as in the proof of Lemma 3.6, ∼ we have Ker(Φ) = Fix(∂ Â∗ ). Lemma 4.4 describes the group Fix(∂A), depending on the type of the atom A. Also, Lemma 4.5 generalizes to planar symmetric expanded atoms Â∗ . Therefore, every planar symmetric atom Â has an involution τ̂ ∗ ∈ Aut∂ Â∗ (Â∗ ) swapping the boundary ∂A∗ . Exactly as in Proposition 3.7b, we can prove that Fix(∂A∗ ) ∼ (4) = Ker(Φ) o Fix(∂A). 13  Ψ Ψ  Ψ1 u A  Ψ1 Ψ2  v  u A  Ψ2  Ψ3  v A  A u  4  Ψ1 × Ψ2 (b)  u (Ψ10 1  6  Ψ ⋊ S4  Ψ ⋊ C6 (c)  ×  × Ψ53 ) ⋊ D5 (d)  Ψ52  Ψ2 Ψ2  Ψ4 Ψ1  Ψ5  Ψ3  Ψ5  A  A u  ×  Ψ62  ×  Ψ6  Ψ1  Ψ3  (Ψ12 1  Ψ4  Ψ63  × (e)  u Ψ64  ×  Ψ65 )  (Ψ41  ⋊ D6  ×  Ψ22  ×  Ψ23  × Ψ24 × Ψ25 × Ψ6 ) ⋊ C22 (f)  Fig. 11. Constructions for the operations (b)–(f), every colored edge corresponds to an atom Â with Fix(∂ Â) isomorphic to the denoted group. In (d), we have three equivariant classes of edge-orbits in the action of Dn when n is odd. In (e), we have two further equivariant classes of edge-orbits in the action of Dn when n ≥ 4 is even. In (f), there is one extra equivariant class consisting of one edge-orbit in the action of D2 = C22 , generated by two reflections.  We describe the semidirect product in (4) in more detail. The group Ker(Φ) consists of all automorphisms which fix A and only act non-trivially on interiors of all expanded atoms Â∗ . Each automorphism π ∗ ∈ Fix(A∗ ) can be written as a composition σ · π 0 of two automorphisms. First, the automorphism σ ∈ Ker(Φ) acts on interiors of all Â∗ . Then, the automorphism π 0 acts on A∗ as π ∈ Fix(A) acts on A, and π 0 maps interiors of Â∗ exactly as π maps the corresponding colored edges. When we compose σ1 · π10 · σ2 · π20 , we want to swap π10 with σ2 to write the resulting automorphism in the form σ · π 0 , which is done by the semidirect product. In the proof of Proposition 3.7a, we explain how to define the correspondence π 7→ π 0 consistently. Below, we divide the proof into several lemmas, according to the type of A, and further simplify (4) to get the operations (b) to (f). Suppose that two edge-orbits of A, corresponding to expanded atoms Â∗1 and Â∗2 , respectively, are equivariant in Fix(∂A). Then using (b), we can construct Fix(∂ Â∗1 ) × Fix(∂ Â∗2 ) and work with it, using distributivity, as with one group in (4). Therefore, we need to identity all equivariance classes of edge-orbits in Fix(∂A). The following two types of edge-orbits are considered. An edge-orbit of size k is called fixed, denoted k, if the corresponding half-edges form two orbits of size k. An edge-orbit of size k is called reflected, denoted k↔ , if the corresponding half-edges form one orbit of size 2k. We distinguish different geometric actions on the set of half-edges H(A), so a fixed edge-orbit of size k is non-equivariant with a reflected orbit of size k. Dipoles and Star Block Atoms. Lemma 5.3. Let A be a star block atom or a dipole. Then Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed from the groups Fix(∂ Â∗ ), using operations (b) and operations (c) for symmetric groups, where Â ranges through all atoms corresponding to colored edges in A. Proof. The edges of the same type (for dipoles, we have undirected, directed in one way, directed in the other way) and color can be arbitrarily permuted. By Lemma 4.4, the action of Fix(∂A) has ` orbits, each consisting of all colored edges of one color and of the same type and orientation. These orbits have sizes m1 , . . . , m` , so Fix(∂A) ∼ = Sm1 × · · · × Sm` . Colored edges in these orbits correspond to atoms Â1 , . . . , Â` . Since Fix(∂A∗ ) acts independently on the atoms corresponding to each orbit of colored edges in Fix(∂A), each orbit contributes by one factor and Fix(∂A∗ ) is the direct product of these factors. The atoms corresponding to each orbit can be arbitrarily permuted, thus each factor is isomorphic to Fix(∂A∗i ) o Smi . t u 14  Proper Atoms. Lemma 5.4. Let A be a proper atom. Then Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed from the groups Fix(∂ Â∗ ), using operations (b) and operations (d) for D1 ∼ = C2 , where Â ranges through all atoms corresponding to colored edges in A. Proof. By Lemma 4.4, we know that Fix(∂A) is a subgroup of C2 . If Fix(∂A) ∼ = C1 , then Fix(∂A∗ ) can be ∼ easily constructed only using (b). Otherwise, Fix(∂A) = C2 . Then the non-trivial automorphism π ∈ Fix(∂A) corresponds to a reflection through ∂A. Therefore, Fix(∂A) has some edge-orbits of colored edges of size two, and at most two types of edge-orbits of colored edges of size one, as depicted in Fig. 12: – Edge-orbits of type 2. We have `1 equivariant edge-orbits of size two, whose edges are reflected to each other by π. The colored edges in these orbits correspond to atoms A1 , . . . , A`1 . – Edge-orbits of type 1. We have `2 equivariant edge-orbits of size one, in which both half-edges forming each edge are fixed by π, together with the incident vertices. The colored edges in these orbits correspond to atoms B1 , . . . , B`2 . – Edge-orbits of type 1↔ . We have `3 equivariant edge-orbits of size one, in which the half-edges forming each edge are exchanged by π. Therefore, these half-edges belong to one orbit, the incident vertices also belong to one orbit and the corresponding edges are reflected by π. The colored edges in these orbits correspond to (necessarily) symmetric atoms C1 , . . . , C`3 . Let τ ∈ Aut∂C1 (C1 ) × · · · × Aut∂C`3 (C`3 ) be an involution which exchanges the boundaries of each of these atoms (ensured by Lemma 4.5), and τ ∗ be a corresponding involution in Aut∂C1∗ (C1∗ ) × · · · × Aut∂C`∗ (C`∗3 ). 3 We need to distinguish two equivariant classes of edge-orbits of size one since the reflection π behaves differently with respect to them. For size one, fixed, two half-edges also form orbits of size one. On the other hand, for size one, reflected, both half-edges belong to the same orbit of size one. In π ∗ , the boundaries of Bi∗ are fixed, but the boundaries of Ci∗ are swapped, by applying τ ∗ on Ci∗ . To be able to distinguish these two cases in A, it is important to consider automorphisms on half-edges instead of edges. To construct Fix(∂A∗ ), we put Ψ1 =  `1 Y  Fix(∂A∗i ),  Ψ2 =  `2 Y  Fix(∂Bi∗ ),  Ψ3 =  Fix(∂Ci∗ )  i=1  i=1  i=1  `3 Y  using (b). Then it easily follows that Fix(∂A∗ ) ∼ = (Ψ12 × Ψ2 × Ψ3 ) oϕ C2 ,  (5)  where ϕ is the homomorphism defined as ϕ(1) = (α1 , α10 , α2 , α3 ) 7→ (α10 , α1 , α2 , τ ∗ · α3 ),  ϕ(0) = id,  α1 ∈ Ψ1 , α10 ∈ Ψ10 ∼ = Ψ1 , α2 ∈ Ψ2 , and α3 ∈ Ψ3 . So Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed using (b) and (d) (since ∼ D1 = C2 ). t u We note that semidirect product in (5) can be further simplified into (Ψ12 × Ψ3 ) oϕ C2 × Ψ2 since ϕ acts trivially on the coordinate corresponding to Ψ2 . So the operation (d) for D1 ∼ = C2 could be simplified. We use this simplification in Section 6.  A2 A1 π B1 A1  A4 A5 C1 C2 A4 A5  A3 C1∗  B2  C2∗  τ∗  A3  A2 Fig. 12. On the left, the action of Fix(∂A) is generated by the reflection π. Observe that π acts differently on the edges corresponding to B1 and B2 (π fixes them) than on the edges corresponding to C1 and C2 (π reflects them). Therefore, in Fix(∂A∗ ), we compose π with an involution τ ∗ reflecting C1∗ and C2∗ , depicted on the right.  15  60◦  A2  A2 A2  A2 A2  A1  (a)  B  A1  A2  72◦ C2  A1 A 1  A1  D A1 C1  v A1  A1  C2  (b)  A  A1 C1  A1  B1 C1 A1  A  u  u  B1  B1  C2 A1 A1 B1 C 1 B1 A1 C 2 C1 A1  A1 C2  Fig. 13. (a) An example of a non-star block atom A with Fix(∂A) ∼ = C6 generated by the 60◦ rotation through u and v. We have two orbits of colored edges of size 6, whose edges correspond to atoms A1 and A2 . Further, the vertex v has attached a single pendant edge, corresponding to a block atom B. (b) On the left, an example of a non-star block atom A with Fix(∂A) ∼ = D5 consisting of five rotations by multiples of 72◦ and five depicted reflections. On the right, the view from above, with colored edges labeled by the corresponding atoms. Different types of edge-orbits are depicted with different types of edges. We have `1 = `2 = 1 and `3 = 2.  Non-star Block Atoms. Now, we deal with non-star block atoms A which are the most involved. By Lemma 4.4, we know that Fix(∂A) is a subgroup of a dihedral group, so it is isomorphic either to Cn , or to Dn . By Lemma 3.3, A is either K2 with an attached pendant edge, essentially a cycle, or essentially 3connected. In the first two cases, Fix(∂A) is a subgroup of C2 . If Fix(∂A) is not isomorphic to a subgroup of C2 , then A is necessarily an essentially 3-connected graph. Lemma 5.5. Let A be a non-star block atom with Fix(∂A) ∼ = Cn . Then Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed from ∗ the groups Fix(∂ Â ), using operations (b), operations (c) for Cn , and operations (d) for D1 ∼ = C2 , where Â ranges through all atoms corresponding to colored edges in A. Proof. When Fix(∂A) ∼ = C1 , it has no non-trivial automorphism and Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed using only ∼ (b). When Fix(∂A) = C2 , it has a single non-trivial automorphism π which is either a reflection or a 180◦ rotation around ∂A. In the case of the 180◦ rotation, there is at most one edge-orbit of size 1 which is either fixed (for a pendant edge), or reflected (for a normal edge). Further, we proceed similarly as in the case of a proper atom in Lemma 5.4 to prove that Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed using (b) and (d). Suppose that Fix(∂A) ∼ = Cn for some n ≥ 3. Recall that A is essentially 3-connected. The situation is depicted in Fig. 13a. The group Fix(∂A) is the stabilizer of the unique vertex u in ∂A. Recall from Section 4 that in the language of isometries its action is generated by a rotation around u and the opposite point of the sphere. Therefore, every edge-orbit of Fix(∂A) is of size one or n. All the edge-orbits of size n are equivariant. Suppose that the action of Fix(∂A) consists of ` equivariant edge-orbits of colored edges of size n. The colored edges in these edge-orbits correspond to atoms A1 , . . . , A` . The opposite point of the sphere is a vertex v or the center of a face. (Since n ≥ 3, it cannot contain the center of an edge.) In the former case, there might be an edge-orbit of size one consisting of a single pendant edge attached to v, and suppose that this pendant edge corresponds to a block atom B. In the later case, there is no edge-orbit of size one. Let Ψ = Fix(∂A∗1 ) × · · · × Fix(∂A∗` ), we can construct it using (b). Then we get Fix(∂A∗ ) ∼ = Ψ o Cn × Fix(∂B ∗ ), where Fix(∂B ∗ ) = {1} if no edge-orbit of size one exists. So we construct Fix(∂A∗ ) using (b) and (c).  t u  It remains to deal with dihedral groups. First, we determine the possible counts of equivariant classes of edge-orbits. Lemma 5.6. Let A be a non-star block atom with Fix(∂A) ∼ = Dn . – If n is odd, then all edge-orbits of type n are equivariant and all edge-orbits of type n↔ are equivariant. – If n is even, then there are at most two equivariant classes of edge-orbits of types n and n↔ .  16  Proof. The statement clearly holds for n = 1, so in what follows, we assume n ≥ 2. Recall from Section 4 that in the language of isometries the action of Fix(∂A) consists of n rotations and n reflections. Each rotation fixes only ∂A and the opposite point of the sphere, and each reflection fixes a circle containing ∂A and the opposite point. Let r be the rotation by 360◦ /n, then all rotations are id, r, r2 , . . . , rn−1 . Let f1 , f2 , . . . , fn be the reflections as their planes are ordered cyclically, perpendicular to the axis of the rotations; see Fig. 14. These reflections are cyclically linked by the conjugation fi+2 = r−1 fi r. The key distinction is that for n odd, all reflections are conjugate of each other, but for n even, we get two conjugacy classes f1 , f3 , . . . , fn−1 and f2 , f4 , . . . , fn . Let e be an edge belonging to a fixed/reflected edge-orbit [e] of size n. The rotation r does not stabilize any edge in [e], so each edge is stabilized by some reflection. From the geometry, [e] = {e, r · e, r2 · e, . . . , rn−1 e}. Suppose that e is stabilized by fi . Then r · e is stabilized by fi+2 , r2 · e by fi+4 , and so on. When n is odd, each reflection stabilizes exactly one edge in [e]; see Fig.14 on the left. Therefore, two edge-orbits [e] and [e0 ] of size n, both fixed or reflected, are equivariant: the edges in [e] and [e0 ] having the same stabilizer can be matched. When n is even, only one conjugacy class of reflections stabilizes edges in [e], each stabilizing ri · e and i+n/2 r · e. When two edge-orbits [e] and [e0 ] of size n, both fixed or reflected, are stabilized by the same conjugacy class of reflections, they are equivariant. Therefore, we get at most two equivariant classes of both fixed and reflected edge-orbits of size n. t u To specify the semidirect products in (d) and (e), we describe the action of Dn on an edge-orbit [e] of size n. The rotation r maps rk · e to rk+1 · e. When the reflection fi stabilizes e0 ∈ [e], then it swaps r · e0 with r−1 · e0 , r2 · e0 with r−2 · e0 , and so on; it fixes e0 and for n even also rn/2 · e0 . The reflection fi+1 swaps r · e0 with e0 , r2 · e0 with r−1 · e0 , r3 · e0 with r−2 · e0 , and so on. As stated, the reflection fi+2 stabilizes r2 · e0 , and so on. Let h and h0 be the half-edges corresponding to e. Consider 2n half-edges corresponding to edges in [e]. In the action of hri, they form two orbits {h, r · h, r2 · h, . . . , rn−1 · h} and {h0 , r · h0 , r2 · h0 , . . . , rn−1 · h0 } of size n. When [e] is fixed, these two orbits are preserved in the action of Dn . When [e] is reflected, each reflection fk swaping ri · e with rj · e swaps ri · h with rj · h0 and ri · h0 with rj · h, so we get one orbit of half-edges of size 2n in the action of Dn . We note that the action of Dn on an edge-orbit of size 2n is the same as the action on the half-edges corresponding to n↔ . When Fix(∂A) ∼ = D1 ∼ = C2 , we use Lemma 5.5. We start with an easier case of Fix(∂A) ∼ = Dn , for n ≥ 3, odd. Lemma 5.7. Let A be a non-star block atom with Fix(∂A) ∼ = Dn for n ≥ 3 and odd. Then Fix(∂A∗ ) can be ∗ constructed from the groups Fix(∂ Â ), using operations (b), and operations (d), where Â ranges through all atoms corresponding to colored edges in A. Proof. As it is described in the proof of Lemma 5.6, the group Fix(∂A) ∼ = Dn consists of n rotations and n reflections; see Fig. 13b. It acts semiregularly on the angles of the map and all edge-orbits are of size one, n, or 2n. By Lemma 5.6, all fixed/reflected edge-orbits of size n are equivariant and Fix(∂A) acts on them as described below Lemma 5.6. – Edge-orbits of type 1. The opposite point of the sphere either contains a vertex v, or the center of a face. In the former case, there might be at most one edge-orbit of size one, consisting of a single pendant edge attached to v corresponding to a block atom D. In the latter case, no edge-orbit of size one exists.  f4  f3  r  f5 r  r  f5  f4  f3 r  f2  f6  f2  r f1  f1 r  f1  f1 r  r f2  f5  f2 f3  r  f6  r f3  f4  f4  r f5  Fig. 14. Two block atoms A with Fix(∂A) ∼ = Dn in the view from above, with n = 5 on the left and n = 6 on the right. The rotation r and the reflections f1 , . . . , fn are denoted. On the left, each edge of an edge-orbit of size n is stabilized by exactly one reflection. On the right, each pair of opposite edges of an edge-orbit of size n is stabilized by exactly one reflection from one of the conjugacy classes f1 , f3 , . . . , fn−1 and f2 , f4 , . . . , fn .  17  60◦ C1 D1  C1  A1 E1 B 1  E1  A1  B1 B1  A1 E1  B1  B1  A1  A  F  C1  A1  E1  A1  D1  D1 A1  D1  A1  B1 A1 C1  u  E1 A1 D1  E1 A1 D1  A1 C1  C1  Fig. 15. On the left, an example of a non-star block atom A with Fix(∂A) ∼ = D6 consisting of 6 rotations by multiples of 60◦ and six depicted reflections. On the right, the view from above, with colored edges labeled by the corresponding atoms. Different types of edge-orbits are depicted with different types of edges. We have `1 = `2 = `3 = `4 = `5 = 1.  – Edge-orbits of type n. We have `2 equivariant fixed edge-orbits of colored edges of size n, corresponding to atoms B1 , . . . , B`2 . – Edge-orbits of type n↔ . We have `3 equivariant reflected edge-orbits of colored edges of size n, corresponding to necessarily symmetric atoms C1 , . . . , C`3 . Let τi∗ ∈ Aut∂Ci∗ (Ci∗ ) be an involution exchaning ∂Ci∗ , ensured by Lemma 4.5. – Edge-orbits of type 2n. We have `1 equivariant edge-orbits of colored edges of size 2n, corresponding to atoms A1 , . . . , A`1 . We put Ψ1 =  `1 Y i=1  Fix(∂A∗i ),  Ψ2 =  `2 Y  Fix(∂Bi∗ ),  i=1  Ψ3 =  `3 Y  Fix(∂Ci∗ ).  i=1  It follows that Fix(∂A∗ ) ∼ = (Ψ12n × Ψ2n × Ψ3n ) oϕ D2n × Fix(∂D∗ ), where Fix(∂D∗ ) = {1} if there is no edge-orbit of size one. The homomorphism ϕ is defined based on the description of the action of D2n below Lemma 5.6. It permutes the coordinates of Ψ12n regularly as D2n acts on half-edges of a reflected edge-orbit of size n. It permutes the coordinates in Ψ2n and Ψ3n following the action on the edges of fixed and reflected edge-orbits of size n, respectively. For the edges of reflected edge-orbits corresponding to Ci∗ , when half-edges are swapped by an element π ∈ Fix(∂A), the involution τi∗ is used in the action of π ∗ ∈ Fix(∂A∗ ) on the corresponding atoms Ci∗ . Therefore, Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed using (b) and (d). t u Next, we deal with the case Fix(∂A) ∼ = Dn , for n ≥ 4 and even. Lemma 5.8. Let A be a non-star block atom with Fix(∂A) ∼ = Dn for n ≥ 4, even. Then Fix(∂A∗ ) can be ∗ constructed from the groups Fix(∂ Â ), using operations (b), and operations (e), where Â ranges through all atoms corresponding to colored edges in A. Proof. As it is described in the proof of Lemma 5.6, the group Fix(∂A) ∼ = Dn consists of n rotations and n reflections; see Fig. 15. It acts semiregularly on the angles of the map and all edge-orbits are of size one, n, or 2n. By Lemma 5.6, there are at most two equivariant classes of fixed/reflected edge-orbits of size n and Fix(∂A) acts on them as described below Lemma 5.6. – Edge-orbits of type 1. Exactly as in the proof of Lemma 5.7, there is at most one edge-orbit of size one, consisting of a single pendant edge corresponding to a block atom F . – Edge-orbits of type n. We have two equivariant classes of `2 and `4 fixed edge-orbits of colored edges of size n, corresponding to atoms B1 , . . . , B`2 and D1 , . . . , D`4 , respectively. 18  (1, 0)  (1, 0)  (0, 1) (1, 1) A3  E2  C1 A1  E1  A1  A2  E1  E2  F A1  A  A3  C2  A2  D1  B1  A1 C1  A2  D1 (0, 1)  C2  A2 A  u A3  B1  A3  180◦ Fig. 16. On the left, an example of a non-star block atom A with Fix(∂A) ∼ = C22 generated by two depicted reflections. On the right, the view from above, with colored edges labeled by the corresponding atoms, the central edge corresponds to an atom F . Different types of edge-orbits are depicted with different types of edges. We have `1 = 3, `2 = `4 = 1 and `3 = `5 = 2.  – Edge-orbits of type n↔ . We have two equivariance classes of `3 and `5 reflected edge-orbits of colored edges of size n, corresponding to necessarily symmetric atoms C1 , . . . , C`3 and E1 , . . . , E`5 . Let τi∗ ∈ Aut∂Ci∗ (Ci∗ ) be an involution exchanging ∂Ci∗ and let τ̂i∗ ∈ Aut∂Ei∗ (Ei∗ ) be an involution exchanging ∂Ei∗ , ensured by Lemma 4.5. – Edge-orbits of type 2n. We have `1 equivariant edge-orbits of colored edges of size 2n, corresponding to atoms A1 , . . . , A`1 . We put Ψ1 =  `1 Y  Fix(∂A∗i ),  i=1  It follows that  Ψ2 =  `2 Y i=1  Fix(∂Bi∗ ),  Ψ3 =  `3 Y  Fix(∂Ci∗ ),  i=1  Ψ4 =  `4 Y  Fix(∂Di∗ ),  i=1  Ψ5 =  `5 Y  Fix(∂Ei∗ ).  i=1  Fix(∂A∗ ) ∼ = (Ψ12n × Ψ2n × Ψ3n × Ψ4n × Ψ5n ) oϕ D2n × Fix(∂F ∗ ),  where Fix(∂F ∗ ) = {1} if there is no edge-orbit of size one. The homomorphism ϕ is defined based on the description of the action of D2n below Lemma 5.6. It permutes the coordinates of Ψ12n regularly following the action of D2n on half-edges of a reflected edge-orbit of size n. It permutes the coordinates in Ψ2n , Ψ3n , Ψ4n , and Ψ5n in the same way as the edges of two equivariance classes of fixed and reflected edge-orbits of size n, respectively. For the edges of reflected edge-orbits corresponding to Ci∗ and Ei∗ , when half-edges are swapped by an element π ∈ Fix(∂A), the involutions τi∗ and τ̂i∗ are used in the action of π ∗ ∈ Fix(∂A∗ ) on the corresponding atoms Ci∗ and Ei∗ , respectively. Therefore, Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed using (b) and (e). t u It remains to deal with the last case of Fix(∂A) ∼ = D2 ∼ = C22 which may have the most involved structure of edge-orbits. Lemma 5.9. Let A be a non-star block atom with Fix(∂A) ∼ = D2 ∼ = C22 . Then Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed ∗ from the groups Fix(∂ Â ), using operations (b) and (f ), where Â ranges through all atoms corresponding to colored edges in A. Proof. As it is described in the proof of Lemma 5.6, the group Fix(∂A) ∼ = D2 ∼ = C22 is generated by two reflections (1, 0) and (0, 1) through ∂A, orthogonal to each other. Composition of these two reflections forms the 180◦ rotation (1, 1) through ∂A and the opposite point of the sphere. (We identified the geometric transformations with the elements of the elementary abelian group of order 4.) Therefore, every edge-orbit of Fix(∂A) is of size one, two, or four, and we describe them below; see Fig. 16 for an example. – Edge-orbits of type 1 and of type 1↔ . The rotation (1, 1) and the reflections (1, 0) and (0, 1) stabilize, aside ∂A, the opposite point of the sphere which contains either a vertex, or the center of an edge, or the center of a face. 19  • If they stabilize the center of a face, there is no edge-orbit of size 1. • If they stabilize a vertex v, there might be a fixed edge-orbit of size 1 consisting of a single pendant edge attached at v. We deal with it using (b) as in the proofs of Lemmas 5.5, 5.7 and 5.8, and we put Ψ6 = {1} and τ6∗ = id. • If they stabilize the center of an edge e, then [e] is a reflected edge-orbit of size 1. Let F be a symmetric atom corresponding to the colored edge e and we put Ψ6 = Fix(∂F ∗ ). By Lemma 4.5, there exists an involution τ6 exchanging ∂F , and let τ6∗ be a corresponding involution in Aut∂F ∗ (F ∗ ). – Edge-orbits of type 2 and of type 2↔ . By Lemma 5.6, there are at most two equivariant classes of fixed/reflected edge-orbits of size 2, one class stabilized by (1, 0) and the other one by (0, 1). • There are `2 equivariant edge-orbits of colored edges fixed by the reflection (1, 0). These colored edges correspond to atoms B1 , . . . , B`2 . • There are `3 equivariant edge-orbits of colored edges reflected by (1, 0). These colored edges correspond to symmetric atoms C1 , . . . , C`3 . Let τ3∗ ∈ Fix(∂C1∗ ) × · · · × Fix(∂C`∗3 ) be an involution exchanging their boundaries. • There are `4 equivariant edge-orbits of colored edges fixed by the reflection (0, 1). These colored edges correspond to atoms D1 , . . . , D`4 . • There are `5 equivariant edge-orbits of colored edges reflected by (0, 1). These colored edges correspond to symmetric atoms E1 , . . . , E`3 . Let τ5∗ ∈ Fix(∂E1∗ ) × · · · × Fix(∂E`∗5 ) be an involution exchanging their boundaries. – Edge-orbits of type 4. The group Fix(∂A) acts regularly on edge-orbits of size four. Suppose we have `1 equivariant edge-orbits of colored edges of size four, and these colored edges correspond to atoms A1 , . . . , A ` 1 . We put Ψ1 =  `1 Y  Fix(∂A∗i ),  i=1  Ψ2 =  `2 Y i=1  It easily follows that  Fix(∂Bi∗ ),  Ψ3 =  `3 Y  Fix(∂Ci∗ ),  Ψ4 =  i=1  `4 Y  Fix(∂Di∗ ),  Ψ5 =  i=1  `5 Y  Fix(∂Ei∗ ).  i=1  Fix(∂A∗ ) ∼ = (Ψ14 × Ψ22 × Ψ32 × Ψ42 × Ψ52 × Ψ6 ) oϕ C22 .  Assuming that (1, 0) reverses the edge e6 , the homomorphism ϕ is defined by ϕ(1, 0) = (π1 , π10 , π100 , π1000 , π2 , π20 , π3 , π30 , π4 , π40 , π5 , π50 , π6 ) 7→ (π10 , π1 , π1000 , π100 , π2 , π20 , τ3∗ · π3 , τ3∗ · π30 , π40 , π4 , π50 , π5 , τ6∗ · π6 ), ϕ(0, 1) = (π1 , π10 , π100 , π1000 , π2 , π20 , π3 , π30 , π4 , π40 , π5 , π50 , π6 ) 7→ (π100 , π1000 , π1 , π10 , π20 , π2 , π30 , π3 , π4 , π40 , τ5∗ · π5 , τ5∗ · π50 , π6 ), where τ6∗ = id if e6 does not exist. Therefore, Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed using (b) and (f).  t u  Now, we are ready to prove the Jordan-like characterization of Fix(connected PLANAR). Proof (Theorem 5.1). Lemma 5.2 describes constructions. We prove the opposite implication by induction according to the depth of the subtree of a reduction tree. Let A be an atom and suppose that the subtrees rooted at all its children can be realized by (b) to (f). By Lemmas 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.7, 5.8, and 5.9, also Fix(∂A∗ ) can be realized by (b) to (f). t u 5.3  Composition of Spherical groups with Fixers  It remains to deal with the root of the reduction tree, corresponding to the primitive graph Gr . In comparison with atoms, Aut(Gr ) does not have to stabilize any vertex or edge, unlike Fix(∂A) which stabilizes ∂A. Therefore, all spherical groups are available for Aut(Gr ). Now, we are ready to prove the main result of this paper, classifying Aut(connected PLANAR). Theorem 5.10. Let H be a planar graph with colored vertices and colored (possibly oriented) edges, which is either 3-connected, or K1 , or K2 , or a cycle Cn . Let m1 , . . . , m` be the sizes of the vertex- and edge-orbits of the action of Aut(H). Then for all choices Ψ1 , . . . , Ψ` ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR), we have (Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ`m` ) o Aut(H) ∈ Aut(connected PLANAR), where Aut(H) permutes the factors of Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ`m` following the action on the vertices and edges of H. On the other hand, every group of Aut(connected PLANAR) can be constructed in the above way as (Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ`m` ) o Σ, where Ψ1 , . . . , Ψ` ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR) and Σ is a spherical group. 20  Ψ3  Ψ3 Ψ2  Ψ2  Ψ1  Ψ4  Ψ1  Ψ4 H  H  Fig. 17. On the left, a 3-connected planar graph H obtained from the cube, with only three front faces depicted. We have Aut(H) ∼ = C2 × S4 and its action *432 in Table 1. Different orbits are shown in different colors: there are two vertex-orbits (of sizes 8 and 6) and two edge-orbits (of sizes 24 and 12). On the right, H is modified by attaching single pendant edges of different colors for each vertex-orbit. For arbitrary choices of Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 , Ψ4 ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR), we can expand H to H ∗ with Aut(H ∗ ) ∼ = (Ψ124 × Ψ212 × Ψ38 × Ψ46 ) o (C2 × S4 ). Notice that some automorphisms of Aut(H) reflect some white edges and the corresponding automorphism in Aut(H ∗ ) reflect the expanded atoms corresponding to these edges by τ2∗ .  Proof. Let H be a graph satisfying the assumptions; for an example, see Fig. 17. First, we replace colors of the vertices of H with colored single pendant edges attached to them. Using Lemma 5.2, we choose arbitrary pairwise non-isomorphic extended atoms A∗1 , . . . , A∗` such that Fix(∂A∗i ) ∼ = Ψi , and we replace the corresponding colored edges with them. If the edge-orbit replaced by A∗i consists of undirected edges, we assume that A∗i are symmetric atoms, and let τi∗ ∈ Aut∂A∗i (A∗i ) be an involution exchanging ∂A∗i . If it consists of directed edges, we assume that A∗i are asymmetric atoms placed consistently with the orientation. We denote this modified planar graph by H ∗ . Exactly as in the proof of Proposition 3.7b, we get that m Aut(H ∗ ) ∼ = (Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ` ` ) oϕ Aut(H).  An automorphism π ∗ ∈ Aut(H ∗ ) permutes the extended atoms exactly as π ∈ Aut(H) permutes the colored edges. If π reflects an edge representing a symmetric atom A∗i , then π ∗ reflects A∗i using τi∗ . For the other implication, let G be a planar graph. We apply the reduction series and obtain a primitive graph Gr . By Lemma 4.3, we know that Aut(Gr ) is a spherical group. Suppose that we have ` edge-orbits of colored edges in the action of Aut(Gr ). Suppose that their sizes are m1 , . . . , m` and their colored edges correspond to expanded atoms A∗1 , . . . , A∗` . By Theorem 5.1, we know that Fix(∂A∗i ) ∈ Fix(connected PLANAR). Further, for symmetric expanded atoms A∗i , by Lemma 4.5, there exists an involution τi∗ exchanging ∂A∗i . We proceed exactly as in the proof of Proposition 3.7 and we obtain  Aut(G) ∼ = Fix(∂A∗1 )m1 × · · · × Fix(∂A∗` )m` oϕ Aut(Gr ). t u  Possible Lengths of Orbits. To describe the groups realizable as automorphism groups of connected planar graphs, we need to understand what are the possible restrictions on sizes mi of the orbits of Aut(G) in a 3-connected planar graph G. (When G is K1 , K2 or a cycle Cn , we get more restricted orbits than in the case of 3-connected planar graphs G. For instance, the wheel Wn is 3-connected and contains all orbits of Cn .) We investigate possible actions of spherical groups Σ realized as groups of isometries of polytopes projected onto the sphere. In [28], the following characterization of possible equivariance classes of orbits given in Table 1 is proved. Table 1 is organized as follows. Each row of the table corresponds to a distinguished (parametrized) spherical group Σ described using the notation of Conway and Thurston [5]. There are fourteen types of actions, several small special cases are discussed separately. The second column describes Σ as an abstract group and the third column gives the order of Σ. The fourth column gives the numbers of equivariance classes of point-orbits of Σ. By c · ab , we denote that there are c equivariance classes of point-orbits of size a, each class of size b. For instance, in the second row, the fourth entry contains 48∞ , 3·24∞ , 121 , 81 , 61 . This means that there are infinitely many mutually equivariant point-orbits of size 48, three infinite equivariant classes of point-orbits of size 24, and single point-orbits of sizes 12, 8, and 6. 21  |Σ|  Action  Σ  Vertex-orbits  Edge-orbits  *532  A5 × C2  120 120∞ , 3 · 60∞ , 301 , 201 , 121  120, 3 · 60, 30, 20, 12 120, 3 · 60, −, 20, 12  120, 3 · 60, 3 · 60↔ , −↔ 120, 3 · 60, 3 · 60↔ , 30↔  *432  S4 × C2  48  48∞ , 3 · 24∞ , 121 , 81 , 61  48, 3 · 24, 12, 8, 6 48, 3 · 24, −, 8, 6  48, 3 · 24, 3 · 24↔ , −↔ 48, 3 · 24, 3 · 24↔ , 12↔  *332  S4  24  24∞ , 2 · 12∞ , 61 , 42  24, 2 · 12, 6, 4 24, 2 · 12, −, 4  24, 2 · 12, 2 · 12↔ , −↔ 24, 2 · 12, 2 · 12↔ , 6↔  *22n  Dn × C2 , n ≥ 3, odd  4n  (4n)∞ , 2 · (2n)∞ , n2 , 21  4n, 2 · 2n, n, 2  4n, 2 · 2n, 2 · 2n↔ , n↔  *22n  Dn × C2 , n ≥ 4, even  4n  (4n)∞ , 3 · (2n)∞ , 2 · n1 , 21  4n, 3 · 2n, 2 · n, 2 4n, 3 · 2n, n, 2 4n, 3 · 2n, −, 2  4n, 3 · 2n, 3 · 2n↔ , −↔ 4n, 3 · 2n, 3 · 2n↔ , n↔ 4n, 3 · 2n, 3 · 2n↔ , 2 · n↔  *222  D2 × C2 = C32  8  8 ,3 · 4 ,3 · 2  532  A5  60  60∞ , 301 , 201 , 121  60, 30, 20, 12 60, −, 20, 12  60, −↔ 60, 30↔  432  S4  24  24∞ , 121 , 81 , 61  24, 12, 8, 6 24, −, 8, 6  24, −↔ 24, 12↔  332  A4  12  12∞ , 61 , 42  12, 6, 4 12, 6, 4  12, −↔ 12, 6↔  22n  Dn , n ≥ 3, odd  2n  (2n)∞ , n2 , 21  2n, n, 2  2n↔ , n↔  22n  Dn , n ≥ 4, even  (2n) , 2 · n , 2  2n, 2 · n, 2 2n, n, 2 2n, −, 2  2n, −↔ 2n, n↔ 2n, 2 · n↔ 4, −↔ 4, 2↔ 4, 2 · 2↔ 4, 3 · 2↔  2n  Point-orbits  ∞  ∞  ∞  8, 8, 8, 8,  1  1  1  3 · 4, 3 · 2 3 · 4, 2 · 2 3 · 4, 2 3 · 4, −  8, 8, 8, 8,  3 · 4, 3 · 4, 3 · 4, 3 · 4,  3 · 4↔ , −↔ 3 · 4↔ , 2↔ 3 · 4↔ , 2 · 2↔ 3 · 4↔ , 3 · 2↔  222  D2 = C22  4  4∞ , 3 · 21  4, 3 · 2 4, 2 · 2 4, 2 4, −  3*2  A4 × C2  24  24∞ , 12∞ , 81 , 61  24, 12, 8, 6 24, 12, 8, −  24, 12, 12↔ , −↔ 24, 12, 12↔ , 6↔  2*n  D2n , n ≥ 3  4n  (4n)∞ , (2n)∞ , (2n)1 , 21  4n, 2 · 2n, 2 4n, 2n, 2  4n, 2n, 2n↔ 4n, 2n, 2 · 2n↔  2*2  D4  8  8∞ , 4∞ , 41 , 21  8, 2 · 4, 2 8, 4, 2 8, 2 · 4, − 8, 4, −  *nn  Dn , n ≥ 3, odd  2n  (2n)∞ , n∞ , 12  2n, n, 1  2n, n, n↔  *nn  Dn , n ≥ 4, even  2n  (2n)∞ , 2 · n∞ , 12  2n, 2 · n, 1  2n, 2 · n, 2 · n↔  *22  D2 = C22  4  4∞ , 2 · 2∞ , 12  4, 2 · 2, 1  4, 2 · 2, 2 · 2↔ , 1↔  nn  Cn , n ≥ 3  n  n∞ , 12  n, 1  n  22  C2  n  2∞ , 12  2, 1  2, 1↔  nx  C2n , n ≥ 3  2n  (2n)∞ , 21  2n, 2  2n 4, −↔ 4, 2↔  8, 8, 8, 8,  4, 4↔ , 4, 2 · 4↔ , 4, 4↔ , 4, 2 · 4↔ ,  −↔ −↔ 2↔ 2↔  2x  C4  4  4∞ , 21  4, 2 4, −  n*  Cn × C2 , n≥3  2n  (2n)∞ , n∞ , 21  2n, n, 2  2n, n, n↔  2*  C2 × C2  4  4∞ , 2∞ , 21  4, 2 · 2 4, 2  4, 2, 2↔ 4, 2, 2 · 2↔  Table 1. The list of all possible types of lengths of orbits in Theorem 5.10.  22  The fifth and sixth columns describe equivariance classes of vertex- and edge-orbits of Σ, respectively. In the second row, there are two options for sequences of possible vertex- and edge-orbits: either or  48, 3 · 24, 12, 8, 6 48, 3 · 24, −, 8, 6  and and  48, 3 · 24, 3 · 24↔ , −↔ , 48, 3 · 24, 3 · 24↔ , 12↔ .  The multiplicity of orbits in equivariance classes is not displayed. The difference between the two cases comes from the fact that the unique point-orbit of size 12 is either a vertex-orbit or an edge-orbit. The subscript ↔ means that the edge-orbit is reflexive. Similarly as in the proofs in Section 5.2, we distinguish edge-orbits which are fixed (the corresponding half-edges form two orbits of the same size), depicted as c · a, and which are reflected, denoted as c · a↔ (the corresponding half-edges form one orbit of the double size).  6  Applications of Jordan-like Characterization  In this section, we apply the Jordan-like characterization of Theorems 5.1 and 5.10 to describe automorphism groups of several important subclasses of planar graphs. First, we determine possible atoms, and primitive graphs and their automorphism groups. Then we determine possible stabilizers similarly as in the proof of Theorem 5.1, however, only some of the group products appear. Lastly, we combine these stabilizers together with spherical groups which are representable by primitive graphs, again only some of the (possibly restricted) cases of Table 1 may happen. In what follows, for a subclass C of planar graphs, we set  Fix(C) = Fix(∂A∗ ) : A is an atom of the reduction tree of a graph in C . For instance, consider the class of all trees (TREE). The only primitive graph is K1 (with a single pendant edge attached), so its automorphism group is trivial. All atoms are block atoms (either star block atoms or K2 with a single pendant edge attached). Therefore, the stabilizers are determined by Lemma 5.3. The class is closed under the direct product and the wreath product with symmetric groups. Since K1 has the trivial automorphism group, we get that the automorphism groups of trees are same as are the vertex-stabilizers of trees, so we get the Jordan’s characterization; see Theorem 1.2. 6.1  Automorphism Groups of 2-connected Planar Graphs  Denote the class of 2-connected planar graphs by 2-connected PLANAR. Consider the reduction tree of a 2-connected planar graph. There are no block atoms since all the atoms are proper or dipoles. Note that Fix(2-connected PLANAR) consists of all point-wise stabilizers of edges in 2-connected planar graphs. The reason is that for a proper atom/dipole A with ∂A = {u, v}, we may consider the extended atom A+ constructed from A by adding the edge uv, and the corresponding expanded extended atom (A+ )∗ . Then Fix(∂A∗ ) is the point-wise stabilizer of the edge uv in Aut∂(A+ )∗ ((A+ )∗ ). Lemma 6.1. The class Fix(2-connected PLANAR) is defined inductively as follows: (a) {1} ∈ 2-Fix(2-connected PLANAR). (b) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 ∈ Fix(2-connected PLANAR), then Ψ1 × Ψ2 ∈ Fix(2-connected PLANAR). (c) If Ψ ∈ Fix(2-connected PLANAR), then Ψ o Sn ∈ Fix(2-connected PLANAR). (d) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 ∈ Fix(2-connected PLANAR), then (Ψ12 × Ψ2 ) o C2 ∈ Fix(2-connected PLANAR). Proof. The constructions are explained in Fig. 11b, c, d. For the other implication, we argue exactly as in the proof of Theorem 5.1. We apply induction according to the depth of the reduction tree. Let A be an atom with colored edges corresponding to proper atoms/dipoles Â. We assume that Fix(∂ Â∗ ) can be constructed using the operations (a)–(d). Since A is a proper atom or a dipole, only Lemmas 5.3 and 5.4 apply, so the operations (b), (c), (d) are sufficient. For (d), we use the simplification described below the proof of Lemma 5.4. t u Notice that the operations (c) and (d) are restrictions of (c) and (d) from Theorem 5.1 to Sn and D1 ∼ = C2 , respectively. Also, the class Fix(2-connected PLANAR) is more rich than the class Aut(TREE), characterized by Jordan (Theorem 1.2) employing the operations (a)–(c). Therefore, Aut(TREE) ( Fix(2-connected PLANAR) ( Fix(connected PLANAR). Finally, we deal with a primitive graph in the root of the reduction tree. We easily modify the characterization in Theorem 5.10. There are two key differences. First, we use the class Fix(2-connected PLANAR) instead of Fix(connected PLANAR). Second, we only consider edge-orbits since there are no single pendant edges in primitive graphs, i.e., no expanded block atoms attached to their vertices. 23  Theorem 6.2. The class Aut(2-connected PLANAR) consists of the following groups. Let H be a planar graph with colored (possibly oriented) edges, which is either 3-connected, or K2 , or a cycle Cn . Let m1 , . . . , m` be the sizes of the edge-orbits of the action of Aut(H). Then for all choices Ψ1 , . . . , Ψ` ∈ Fix(2-connected PLANAR), we have (Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ`m` ) o Aut(H) ∈ Aut(2-connected PLANAR), where Aut(H) permutes the factors of Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ`m` following the action on the edges of H. On the other hand, every group of Aut(2-connected PLANAR) can be constructed in the above way as (Ψ1m1 × · · · × Ψ`m` ) o Σ, where Ψ1 , . . . , Ψ` ∈ Fix(2-connected PLANAR) and Σ is a spherical group. Proof. The reduction tree of a 2-connected planar graph contains only proper atoms and dipoles, and the primitive graph cannot be K1 . The proof proceeds as in Theorem 5.10, the only difference is that we use Lemma 6.1 instead of Theorem 5.1. t u 6.2  Automorphism Groups of Outerplanar Graphs  Let G be a connected outerplanar graph with the reduction series G = G0 , . . . , Gr . All graphs Gi are outerplanar. Since no 3-connected planar graph is outerplanar, Gr is by Lemma 3.5 either K1 , K2 , or a cycle Cn (possibly with a single pendant edge attached). So, Aut(Gr ) is a subgroup of a dihedral group. Next, we describe possible atoms encountered in the reduction: – Star block atoms. We have arbitrary star block atoms. – Non-star block atoms. Each non-star block atom A is outerplanar. By Lemma 3.3, A is either K2 or Cn with single pendant edges attached. Therefore, Fix(∂A) is a subgroup of C2 . – Proper atoms. For a proper atom A with ∂A = {u, v}, the extended proper atom A+ is an outerplanar graph having an embedding with the edge uv in the outer face. Therefore, by Lemma 3.4, A is a non-trivial path, so Fix(∂A) ∼ = C1 . – Dipoles. For a dipole A with ∂A = {u, v}, the extended dipole A+ (with the edge uv) has an embedding such that the edge uv belong to the outer face. Therefore, assuming that G contains no parallel edges, A consists of exactly two edges, one corresponding to an edge of G, and the other to a proper atom. Again, Fix(∂A) ∼ = C1 . Lemma 6.3. Fix(connected OUTERPLANAR) = Aut(TREE). Proof. By induction, when A is a proper atom or a dipole, we get that Fix(∂A∗ ) is the direct product of Fix(∂ Â∗ ) of the attached extended block atoms. Alternatively, it can be argued that each 2-connected outerplanar graph G has Aut(G) a subgroup of Dn . Unless G is a cycle, Aut(G) stabilizes the outer face. We use the same approach as in the proof of Theorem 5.1. Only Lemmas 5.3, 3.4 for C1 , and 5.5 for subgroups of C2 apply. For a block atom A with Fix(∂A) ∼ = C2 , there might be either an edge-orbit of type 1 consisting of a pendant edge corresponding to a block-atom B, or an edge-orbit of type 1↔ consisting of an edge corresponding to a proper atom or a dipole C. In the latter case, Fix(∂C ∗ ) is just the direct product of extended block atoms attached in C ∗ , so the reflection in Fix(∂A) just swaps them, while at most one is fixed. Therefore, Fix(connected OUTERPLANAR) is defined inductively by the operations (a)–(c) from Theorem 1.2. t u By adapting the proof of Theorem 5.10, we get the following: Theorem 6.4. The class Aut(connected OUTERPLANAR) consists of the following groups: (i) If Ψ ∈ Fix(connected OUTERPLANAR), then Ψ o Cn ∈ Aut(connected OUTERPLANAR). (ii) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 ∈ Fix(connected OUTERPLANAR), then (Ψ12n × Ψ2n ) o Dn ∈ Aut(connected OUTERPLANAR),  ∀n odd.  (iii) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 ∈ Fix(connected OUTERPLANAR), then (Ψ12n × Ψ2n × Ψ3n ) o Dn ∈ Aut(connected OUTERPLANAR), Moreover, Aut(connected OUTERPLANAR) = Aut(PSEUDOTREE).  24  ∀n even.  T  (i)  T  T  T1  T1  T1  T  T  T2  T1  (ii)  T2  T2  T1  T1  T1  T1  T2  T3  T1  T1  T2  T2  T1  T1 T2  T1  T3  T1  T1  T2  (iii)  T1 T3  T3 T1  T2  T1  Fig. 18. Construction of the automorphism groups from Theorem 6.4, for Fix(∂T ) ∼ = Ψ and Fix(∂Ti ) ∼ = Ψi .  Proof. We have PSEUDOTREE ( connected OUTERPLANAR and all these automorphism groups are already realized by pseudotrees, see Fig. 18. It follows that Aut(connected OUTERPLANAR) = Aut(PSEUDOTREE). For the other direction, consider the primitive graph Gr associated to G. We assume that Gr is a cycle, otherwise it is trivial. We get three cases leading to different automorphism groups from the statement: (i) Aut(Gr ) ∼ = Cn , for n 6= 2, (ii) Aut(Gr ) ∼ = Dn , for n odd, (iii) Aut(Gr ) ∼ = Dn , for n even. In the case (i), we have only edge-orbits of type n corresponding to block atoms A1 , . . . , A` , so Ψ = Fix(∂A∗1 ) × · · · × Fix(∂A∗` ) and Aut(Gr ) ∼ = Ψ o Cn . In the case (ii), we have edge-orbits of types 2n, n, n↔ , each forming one equivariant class of orbits; see Lemma 5.6. We define Ψ1 , Ψ2 , and Ψ3 exactly as in the proof of Lemma 5.7. However, since Fix(∂A∗ ) of a proper atom or a dipole A is the direct product of Fix(∂ Â∗ ) of the attached extended block atoms Â∗ , we can place these factors into Ψ1 and Ψ2 . Therefore, Aut(Gr ) ∼ = (Ψ12n × Ψ2n ) o Dn . In the case (iii), the argument is similar as in (ii), but we have two equivariance classes of edge-orbits of type n and of type n↔ . Thus we adapt the proof of Lemma 5.8 instead. t u We get Aut(OUTERPLANAR) = Aut(PSEUDOFOREST), and their characterization follows from from Theorem 2.1, 6.3  Automorphism Groups of Series-Parallel Graphs  Series-parallel graphs are defined inductively as follows. Each series-parallel graph contains a pair of terminal vertices (s, t). The graph K2 with the vertices (s, t) is series-parallel. For two series-parallel graphs G1 (s1 , t1 ) and G2 (s2 , t2 ), we can construct a series-parallel graph on the vertices V (G1 )∪V (G2 ) by using two operations. The parallel operation identifies s1 = s2 and t1 = t2 and has the terminal vertices (s1 , t1 ). The series operation identifies t1 = s2 and has the terminal vertices (s1 , t2 ). The class of all generalized series-parallel graphs (or just series-parallel graphs) consists of all graphs having each block a series-parallel graph, we denote this class by SERIES-PARALLEL. Clearly, OUTERPLANAR ( SERIES-PARALLEL. Let G be a connected series-parallel graph with the reduction series G = G0 , . . . , Gr . All graphs the graphs Gi remain series-parallel since each 1-cut and 2-cut is introduced in the composition of the graph using one or the other operation. The only exception is Gr , where we allow Gr = K1 . Since no 3-connected planar graph is series-parallel, Gr is by Lemma 3.5 again either K1 , K2 , or a cycle Cn , with attached single pendant edges. So, Aut(Gr ) is a subgroup of a dihedral group. Next, we describe possible atoms encountered in the reduction: – Star block atoms. Star block atoms may be arbitrary. – Non-star block atoms. Each non-star block atom A is a series-parallel graph. By Lemma 3.3, we get that A is either K2 or a cycle with attached single pendant edges, so Fix(∂A) is again a subgroup of C2 . – Proper atoms. For a proper atom A, the extended proper atom A+ is a series-parallel graph. Therefore, by Lemma 3.4, A is a path, so Fix(∂A) ∼ = C1 . – Dipoles. Dipoles may be arbitrary. Lemma 6.5. Fix(connected SERIES-PARALLEL) = Fix(2-connected PLANAR). Proof. We use the same approach as in the proof of Theorem 5.1. Since the groups Fix(∂A) of encountered atoms A are restricted, by Lemmas 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5, the groups Fix(∂A∗ ) can be constructed using (a)–(d) of Lemma 6.1. We note that each non-star block atom A with Fix(∂A) ∼ = C2 has at most one edge-orbit of size 1, which is either of type 1, or of type 1↔ . t u By adapting the proof of Theorem 5.10, we get the following: 25  Ψ2 Ψ3  Ψ3  Ψ Ψ1  (i)  (ii)  Ψ2  Ψ3 Ψ2  Ψ1  Ψ1 Ψ2 Ψ1  Ψ3  (iii)  Fig. 19. Construction of the automorphism groups from Theorem 6.6. We get three possible combinations of edge-orbits in (iii), leading to different semidirect products with Dn .  Theorem 6.6. The class Aut(connected SERIES-PARALLEL) consists of the following groups: (i) If Ψ ∈ Fix(connected SERIES-PARALLEL), then Ψ o Cn ∈ Aut(connected SERIES-PARALLEL). (ii) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 ∈ Fix(connected SERIES-PARALLEL), then (Ψ12n × Ψ2n × Ψ3n ) o Dn ∈ Aut(connected SERIES-PARALLEL),  ∀n odd.  (iii) If Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 ∈ Fix(connected SERIES-PARALLEL), then (Ψ12n × Ψ2n × Ψ3n ) o Dn ∈ Aut(connected SERIES-PARALLEL),  ∀n even.  We note that the semidirect products in (ii) and (iii) are different, see the proof for details. Proof. Fig. 19 depicts the constructions. For the other direction, we deal with the case that the primitive graph Gr is a cycle Ck with attached single pendant edges, otherwise it is trivial. As in the proof of Theorem 6.4, we get three cases leading to different automorphism groups from the statement: (i) Aut(Gr ) ∼ = Cn , for n 6= 2, (ii) Aut(Gr ) ∼ = Dn , for n odd, (iii) Aut(Gr ) ∼ = Dn , for n even. The case (i) is exactly the same as in Theorem 6.4. In the cases (ii) and (iii), we have edge-orbits of types 2n, n, and n↔ . The group Aut(Gr ) acts on the edge-orbits of type 2n regularly, exactly as in the proofs of Lemmas 5.7 and 5.8. We argue that the edge-orbits of types n and n↔ are more restricted. In the case (ii), we have exactly one conjugacy class of reflections fi , recall the notation from the proof of Lemma 5.6. Each of the reflections either stabilizes two edges of the cycle or two vertices if n is even; or a vertex and an edge if n is odd. In the first case, we get two equivariant edge-orbits of type n↔ . In the second case, we get at most two equivariant edge-orbits of type n consisting of pendant-edges attached to stabilized vertices. In the last case, we get an edge-orbit of type n↔ and at most one edge-orbit of type n consisting of pendant-edges. The group Aut(G) can be constructed by the operation (ii) in the same way as in the case (d) in the proof of Lemma 5.7. In the case (iii), we have two conjugacy classes of reflections. Each reflection stabilizes either two edges of the cycle, or two vertices, belonging to the same orbit; and this is same for each conjugacy class. Therefore, each conjugacy class defines either an edge-orbit of type n of attached single pendant edges, or an edge-orbit of type n↔ , non-equivariant to the edge-orbit defined by the other class. In total, we get three possibilities: two non-equivariant orbits of type n, one edge-orbit of type n and one edge-orbit of type n↔ , or two nonequivariant edge-orbits of type n↔ . These three possibilities lead to different semidirect products in (iii) which are created by restrictions of the operations (e) from the proof of Lemma 5.8. t u  7  Comparison with Babai’s Characterization  In this section, we compare our characterization of automorphism groups of planar graphs with Babai’s characterization [1]. Statement of Babai’s Characterization. We include the full statement of Babai’s characterization of Aut(PLANAR), copied from [1] with an adapted notation. Theorem 7.1 (Babai [1], 8.12 The Main Corollary). Let Ψ be a finite group. All graphs below are assumed to be finite. (A) Ψ is representable by a planar graph if and only if Ψ∼ = Ψ1 o Sn1 × · · · × Ψt o Snt for some t, n1 , . . . , nt where the groups Ψi are representable by connected planar graphs. 26  (6)  (A’) Ψ is representable by a planar graph with a fixed point if and only if Ψ is representable by a planar graph. (A”) Ψ is representable by a planar fixed-point free graph if and only if a (6) decomposition exists with all groups Ψi possessing planar connected fixed-point-free graph representation. (B) For |Ψ | ≥ 3, Ψ is representable by a connected planar graph if and only if Ψ∼ = (Ψ1 o Sk ) o (Ψ2 |K )  (7)  for some positive integer k, where Ψ1 should be representable by a connected graph having a fixed point; and either Ψ2 is representable by a 2-connected planar graph G2 , or k ≥ 2 and |Ψ2 | = 1. In the former case, Ψ2 |K denotes the not necessarily effective permutation group, acting on some orbit K of Aut(G2 ). (B’) Ψ is representable by a connected planar graph having a fixed point if and only if a (7) decomposition exists as described under (B) with either |Ψ2 | = 1 or G2 a 2-connected planar graph with a fixed point. (B”) Ψ is representable by a connected fixed-point-free planar graph if and only if a (7) decomposition exists with |Ψ2 | = 6 1, G2 fixed-point free (hence |K| ≥ 2). (C) Ψ is representable by a 2-connected planar graph if and only if Ψ∼ = (Ψ1 o Sk ) o (Ψ2 |K )  (8)  where |Ψ1 | ≤ 2; Ψ2 is representable by some 2-connected planar graph G2 . If |Ψ1 | = k = 1, G2 should be 3-connected. Ψ2 |K denotes the action of Ψ2 ∼ = Aut(G2 ), as a not necessarily effective permutation group, on K, an orbit of either an ordered pair (a, b) or of an unordered pair {a, b} of adjacent vertices a, b ∈ V (G2 ). (C’) Ψ is representable by a 2-connected planar graph with a fixed point or with an invariant edge if and only if a (8) decomposition exists such that G2 has a fixed point or an invariant edge. (C”) Ψ is representable by a 2-connected planar fixed-point-free graph if and only if a (8) decomposition exists with G2 fixed-point-free. (D) Ψ is representable by a 3-connected planar graph if and only if Ψ is isomorphic to one of the finite symmetry groups of the 3-space: Cn ,  Dn ,  Cn × C2 ,  A4 ,  S4 ,  Dn × C2 ,  A5 , A4 × C2 ,  S4 × C2 ,  A5 × C2 .  (9)  (D’) Ψ is representable by a 3-connected planar graph with a fixed point if and only if Ψ is a cyclic or a dihedral group. (D”) Ψ is representable by a 3-connected planar fixed-point-free graph if and only if |Ψ | ≥ 2 and Ψ is one of the groups listed under (9). The characterization is very long and hard to understand, but it works in a nutshell as follows. The automorphism group of a k-connected planar graph (k ≤ 2) is constructed by combining automorphism groups of smaller k-connected planar graphs with stabilizers of k-connected planar graphs and automorphism groups of (k + 1)-connected graphs. The part (A) corresponds to Jordan’s Theorem 2.1. The automorphism groups listed in the part (D) are the spherical groups described in Section 4 and are based on the classical results from geometry. Therefore, the novel parts are (B) and (C). Unfortunately, it is not clear which groups are Ψ2 |K , used in (7) and (8). In principle, it would be possible to derive Theorem 7.1 from the described Jordan-like characterization of Theorems 5.1 and 5.10, and the reader can work out further details. The opposite is not possible because Jordan-like characterization contains more information about automorphism groups of planar graphs; for instance the one given in Table 1. We note that Jordan-like characterizations for all parts of Theorem 7.1 exist. For example, the characterization of Aut(2-connected PLANAR) in Section 6.1, corresponds to the part (C) of Theorem 7.1. Group Products Instead of Group Extensions. We explain why the simple version of our characterization given in Theorem 1.4 already describes the structure more accurately than Theorem 1.3. The following idea was invented by Jordan. If H is a normal subgroup of G, then we can understand G by studying two smaller groups: the subgroup H and the quotient group G/H. We repeat the same idea on both of these groups, till they cannot be further simplified, and such groups are called simple groups. We obtain a composition series G = H0 . H1 . · · · . Hm = {1}, such that each quotient group Hi−1 /Hi is simple. We can imagine these simple quotient groups as building blocks which construct G; they play the role of prime numbers for groups. A consequence of Babai’s characterization (Theorem 1.3) describes these building blocks for the automorphism groups of planar graphs. 27  G′  G  Fig. 20. Planar graphs G and G0 with Aut(G) ∼ = Aut(G0 ) ∼ = C22 , having different actions. For G, we get independent reflections/rotations for each of the blocks. For G0 , the group Aut(G0 ) is generated by two reflections.  The celebrated classification of finite simple groups describes all building blocks for finite groups. Therefore, it describes the structure of all finite groups. But this description gives just a part of information, since it is not clear how these building blocks are “put together” to form more complex groups. This is called the group extension problem. The problem to describe all extensions of a group H by G/H is in general a hard problem. In particular, Theorem 1.3 does not describe how the building blocks for automorphism groups of planar graphs are put together. In certain special cases, the structure of G can be described from H and G/H by semidirect products. This happens exactly when there exists a complement subgroup K ≤ G isomorphic to G/H such that K ∩ H = {1} and hK ∪ Hi = G. Then we can build G using the semidirect product: G∼ =H oK ∼ = H o G/H. A simple version of our characterization (Theorem 1.4) states that the automorphism groups of planar graphs can be build from standard building blocks using a series of semidirect product, so it describes the structure more accurately than Theorem 1.3. In Theorems 5.1 and 5.10, we describe these semidirect products in more detail. As far as we understand Babai’s approach, he uses generalized wreath products instead of semidirect products. More important difference between ours and Babai’s approach consists in the fact that we deal with the 1- and 2-connected case together. This allows us to apply recursion in a more compact way, thus deriving the Jordan-like characterization of stabilizers of 1-cuts and 2-cuts, established in Theorem 5.1. A group of symmetries of a graph is not fully described just by characterizing it as an abstract group. Figure 20 shows two simple graphs with isomorphic abstract automorphism groups, realized by different group actions on the graphs. From Babai’s characterization, the structure of this action is not very clear. On the other hand, Theorems 5.1 and 5.10 reveal the actions of automorphism groups on planar graphs, by describing them with respect to each 1-cut and 2-cut (Theorem 5.1), and with respect to the primitive graph (Theorem 5.10).  8  Quadratic-time Algorithm  In this section, we describe a quadratic-time algorithm which computes the automorphism groups of planar graphs. Lemma 8.1. Let G be an essentially 3-connected planar graph with colored edges. There exists a quadratictime algorithm which computes a generating set of Aut(G) or of the stabilizer of a vertex. Proof. Consider the unique embedding of G into the sphere. Let n be the number of vertices of G. We work with colored pendant edges as with colored vertices. Let (v, e, e0 ) be an arbitrary angle. For every other angle (v̂, ê, ê0 ) there exists at most one automorphism π ∈ Aut(M ) which maps (v, e, e0 ) to (v̂, ê, ê0 ). We introduce three involutions ρ, λ, τ on the set of oriented angles by setting: – ρ(v, e, e0 ) = (v, e0 , e), – λ(v, e, e0 ) = (v 0 , e00 , e0 ), where v 0 is the other vertex incident to e0 and the angles (v, e, e0 ) and (v 0 , e00 , e0 ) lie on the same side of e0 , and – τ (v, e, e0 ) = (v, e, e00 ), where (v, e, e00 ) is the other angle incident to v and e. The procedure checking whether the mapping π : (v, e, e0 ) 7→ (v̂, ê, ê0 ) extends to an automorphism is based on the observation that an automorphism of G commutes with ρ, λ, and τ . It follows that in time O(n), we can check whether the mapping π : (v, e, e0 ) 7→ (v̂, ê, ê0 ) extends to an automorphism or not. In the positive case, we get the automorphism π as a byproduct. Moreover, we can easily verify whether the automorphism preserves colors. Therefore, Aut(G) is computed in time O(n2 ) and the algorithm can easily identify which of the abstract spherical groups is isomorphic to Aut(G). Note that the number of edges of G is O(n). For the stabilizer, we just compute the automorphisms which map (v, e, e0 ) to (v, ê, ê0 ). t u Notice that by the above algorithm, we can compute Fix(∂A) of a non-star block atom A. 28  Lemma 8.2. There is a linear-time algorithm which computes a generating set of Fix(∂A) and Aut∂A (A) of a proper atom, dipole, or a star block atom A with colored edges. Proof. If A is a dipole or a star block atom, we get Fix(∂A) as the direct product of symmetric groups, one for each type and color class of edges. Further, if A is a dipole, it is symmetric if and only if it has the same number of directed edges of each color class in both directions, and then Aut(A) ∼ = Fix(∂A) o C2 ; otherwise Aut∂A (A) = Fix(∂A). Let A be a proper atom with ∂A = {u, v}. Since A+ is essentially 3-connected, the reasoning from Lemma 8.1 applies. We know that both Aut∂A (A) and Fix(∂A) are generated by automorphisms which maps the two angles containing u and uv and the two angles containing v and uv between each other. We can easily test in time O(n) which of these mappings are automorphisms. t u Proof (Proof of Theorem 1.5). Hopcroft and Tarjan [20] give a linear-time algorithm which computes the decomposition to 3-connected components, and it can be easily modified to our definition to output the reduction tree T of G. In the beginning, all nodes of T are unmarked. We process the tree from the leaves to the root, dealing with the nodes which have all children marked, and marking these nodes after. We compute colors and symmetry types of the considered atoms, the groups Fix(∂A) and for symmetric atoms also involutions τ exchanging the vertices in the boundaries. Let the colors be integers. Suppose that in some step, we process several atoms whose edges are colored and have computed symmetry types. Dipoles and star block atoms. To each dipole/star block atom with n edges, we assign the vector v = (t, c1 , . . . , cm ) where t is the type of the atom and c1 , . . . , cm is the sorted list of colors. By lexicographic sorting of these vectors for all dipoles/star block atoms, we can compute isomorphism classes and assign new colors to them. This runs in linear time. Non-star block atoms. Let A be a non-star block atom with ∂A = {u}. We work with single pendant edges as with colors of vertices. Let n be the number of its vertices and m the number of its edges. Consider a map of A. For each choice of an angle (u, e, e0 ), we compute labellings 1, . . . , n of the vertices and 1, . . . , m of the edges as they appear in BFS of the map. Starting with u, we visit all its neighbors, from the one incident with e following the rotational scheme. From each neighbor, we visit their unvisited neighbors, and so on.  For a labeling, we compute the vector v = c1 , . . . , cn , (x1 , y1 , c01 ), . . . , (xm , ym , c0m ) where ci is the color of the i-th vertex, and xj < yj are the endpoints and c0j the color of the j-th edge. We compute at most 2n of these vectors for all possible choices of (u, e, e0 ) and we choose the one which is lexicographically smallest. Notice that two atoms are isomorphic if and only if their associated vectors are identical. So, by sorting the chosen vectors for all non-star block atoms lexicographically, we compute isomorphism classes and assign new colors to them. This runs in quadratic time since we compute 2n vectors for each atom. Proper atoms. We approach A+ similarly as a non-star block atom, but we just need to consider the labellings starting from an angle containing uv and either u, or v. We have four choices for each vector, so it runs in linear time. For each considered atom A, we apply one of the algorithms described in Lemmas 8.1 and 8.2, and we compute Fix(∂A). If A is a dipole or a proper atom, we also compute its type, and if A is symmetric, we construct an involution τ ∈ Aut∂A (A) exchanging the vertices of ∂A. Following the proof of Theorem 5.1, we can compute in quadratic time also Fix(∂A∗ ) and τ ∗ for every node which is a child of the root node. By Theorem 5.10, we can compute Aut(G) as the semidirect product of these groups Fix(∂A∗ ) with Aut(H) computed by Lemma 8.1. We can output the automorphism groups in terms of permutation generators, or by assigning the computed groups Fix(∂A), τ and Aut(H) to the corresponding nodes of T . t u  9  Conclusions  D5  Let G be a connected planar graph. We propose the following way of imagining the action of Aut(G) geometrically, which can be used in a dynamic visualization in 3-space. Suppose that the reduction tree T of G is computed together with the corresponding parts of Aut(G), assigned to the nodes. For each 2-connected block, we have some 3-connected colored primitive graph which can be visualized by a symmetric polytope, and these polytopes are connected by articulations as in the block tree; see Fig. 21. Onto each polytope, we attach a hierarchical structure of colored atoms given by the decomposition. For a dipole A with ∂A = {u, v}, we know that independent color classes can be 29  S4  τ π  Fig. 21. The bold edges are symmetric proper atoms A with Fix(∂A) ∼ = C2 , generated by π. We visualize the automorphism group (D45 × C62 ) o S4 .  arbitrarily permuted, so we assign symmetric groups to them. For a proper atom A with ∂A = {u, v}, the non-trivial element of Fix(∂A) (if it exists) is the reflection through u and v, and we represent it. These symmetries generate the subgroup of Aut(G) which fixes all polytopes. Further, for an edge uv representing a symmetric atom A, we also add an involution τ ∈ Aut∂A (A) exchanging u and v, which is geometrically a reflection through uv in A+ , if τ is used in Aut(G). The central block is preserved by Aut(G), so it is transformed by a spherical group Aut(H), permuting also the attached polytopes. Multiple polytopes attached at an articulation correspond to a star block atom. So isomorphic subtrees of blocks can be arbitrarily permuted and we assign symmetric groups to them. Consider a polytope attached by the articulation u to its parent in the block tree. Since Fix(∂A) of a non-star block atom is either a dihedral or a cyclic group, the polytope can be only rotated/reflected around u. Problem 9.1. For a planar graph G, is it possible to compute a generating set of Aut(G) in a linear time? Our algorithm has two bottlenecks which need to be improved to get a linear-time algorithm: (i) the algorithm of Lemma 8.1, (ii) the procedure of finding lexicographically smallest vectors of non-star block atoms. Both of these can likely be solved by modifying the algorithm of [21].  References 1. L. Babai. Automorphism groups of planar graphs II. In Infinite and finite sets (Proc. Conf. Keszthely, Hungary, 1973) Bolyai-North-Holland, pages 29–84, 1975. 2. L. Babai. Automorphism groups, isomorphism, reconstruction. In Handbook of combinatorics (vol. 2), pages 1447–1540. MIT Press, 1996. 3. N. Carter. Visual group theory. MAA, 2009. 4. C. J. Colbourn and K. S. Booth. Linear time automorphism algorithms for trees, interval graphs, and planar graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 10(1):203–225, 1981. 5. J. H. Conway, H. Burgiel, and C. Goodman-Strauss. The symmetries of things. CRC Press, 2016. 6. W.H. Cuningham and J. Edmonds. A combinatorial decomposition theory. Canad. J. Math., 32:734–765, 1980. 7. G. Di Battista and R. Tamassia. Incremental planarity testing. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1989., 30th Annual Symposium on, pages 436–441. IEEE, 1989. 8. G. Di Battista and R. Tamassia. On-line graph algorithms with spqr-trees. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages 598–611. Springer, 1990. 9. G. Di Battista and R. Tamassia. On-line planarity testing. SIAM Journal on Computing, 25(5):956–997, 1996. 10. P. Eades and X. Lin. Spring algorithms and symmetry. Theor. Comput. Sci., 240(2):379–405, 2000. 11. J. Fiala, P. Klavı́k, J. Kratochvı́l, and R. Nedela. Algorithmic aspects of regular graph covers with applications to planar graphs. In Automata, Languages, and Programming, 41st International Colloquium, ICALP 2014, volume 8572 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 489–501, 2014. 12. J. Fiala, P. Klavı́k, J. Kratochvı́l, and R. Nedela. 3-connected reduction for regular graph covers. CoRR, abs/1503.06556, 2016. 13. J. Fiala, P. Klavı́k, J. Kratochvı́l, and R. Nedela. Algorithmic aspects of regular graph covers. CoRR, abs/1609.03013, 2016. 14. M. Fontet. Linear algorithms for testing isomorphism of planar graphs. In Proceedings Third Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages 411–423, 1976. 15. R. Frucht. Herstellung von graphen mit vorgegebener abstrakter gruppe. Compositio Mathematica, 6:239–250, 1939. 16. C. Gutwenger and P. Mutzel. A linear time implementation of spqr-trees. In International Symposium on Graph Drawing, pages 77–90. Springer, 2000. 17. S. Hong and P. Eades. Drawing planar graphs symmetrically, II: Biconnected planar graphs. Algorithmica, 42(2):159–197, 2005. 18. S. Hong and P. Eades. Drawing planar graphs symmetrically, III: Oneconnected planar graphs. Algorithmica, 44(1):67–100, 2006. 19. S. Hong, B. McKay, and P. Eades. Symmetric drawings of triconnected planar graphs. In Proceedings of the thirteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages 356–365, 2002. 20. J. E. Hopcroft and R. E. Tarjan. Dividing a graph into triconnected components. SIAM Journal on Computing, 2(3):135–158, 1973. 21. J. E. Hopcroft and J. Wong. Linear time algorithm for isomorphism of planar graphs (preliminary report). In Proceedings of the sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 172–184. ACM, 1974. 22. J.E. Hopcroft and R.E. Tarjan. A V 2 algorithm for determining isomorphism of planar graphs. Information Processing Letters, 1(1):32–34, 1971. 23. J.E. Hopcroft and R.E. Tarjan. A V log V algorithm for isomorphism of triconnected planar graphs. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 7(3):323–331, 1973. 24. C. Jordan. Sur les assemblages de lignes. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 70:185–190, 1869. 25. K. Kawarabayashi. Graph isomorphism for bounded genus graphs in linear time. CoRR, abs/1511.02460, 2015.  30  26. K. Kawarabayashi and B. Mohar. Graph and map isomorphism and all polyhedral embeddings in linear time. In Proceedings of the Fortieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’08, pages 471–480, 2008. 27. P. Klavı́k, D. Knop, and P. Zeman. Graph isomorphism restricted by lists. CoRR, abs/1607.03918, 2016. 28. P. Klavı́k, R. Nedela, and P. Zeman. On orbits of isometry groups of polyhedra. 2017. 29. P. Klavı́k and P. Zeman. Automorphism groups of geometrically represented graphs. In STACS 2015, volume 30 of LIPIcs, pages 540–553, 2015. 30. P. Klavı́k and P. Zeman. Automorphism groups of geometrically represented graphs. CoRR, 1407.2136, 2015. 31. D. Lichtenstein. Isomorphism for graphs embeddable on the projective plane. In ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’80, pages 218–224, 1980. 32. P. Mani. Automorphismen von polyedrischen graphen. Mathematische Annalen, 192(4):279–303, 1971. 33. R. Mathon. A note on the graph isomorphism counting problem. Information Processing Letters, 8(3):131–136, 1979. 34. G. Miller. Isomorphism testing for graphs of bounded genus. In ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’80, pages 225–235, 1980. 35. T. Needham. Visual complex analysis. Oxford University Press, 1998. 36. J.J. Rotman. An Introduction to the Theory of Groups. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, 1994. 37. J. Stillwell. Geometry of surfaces. Springer, 1992. 38. B.A. Trakhtenbrot. Towards a theory of non-repeating contact schemes. Trudi Mat. Inst. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 51:226–269, 1958. 39. T.R.S. Walsh. Counting unlabeled three-connected and homeomorphically irreducible two-connected graphs. J. Combin. Theory B, 32:12–32, 1982. 40. H. Whitney. Nonseparable and planar graphs. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 34:339–362, 1932.  31

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
