Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_3186

Abstract:
arXiv:1711.06399v2 [math.ST] 5 Jan 2018  Average treatment eﬀects in the presence of unknown interference∗ Fredrik Sävje†  Peter M. Aronow‡  Michael G. Hudgens§  fredrik.savje@yale.edu  peter.aronow@yale.edu  mhudgens@bios.unc.edu  January 8, 2018 Abstract We investigate large-sample properties of treatment eﬀect estimators under unknown interference in randomized experiments. The inferential target is a generalization of the average treatment eﬀect estimand that marginalizes over potential spillover eﬀects. We show that estimators commonly used to estimate treatment eﬀects under no-interference are consistent for the generalized estimand for most experimental designs under limited but otherwise arbitrary and unknown interference. The rates of convergence depend on the rate at which the amount of interference grows and the degree to which it aligns with dependencies in treatment assignment. Importantly for practitioners, the results imply that if one erroneously assumes that units do not interfere in a setting with limited, or even moderate, interference, standard estimators are nevertheless likely to be close to an average treatment eﬀect if the sample is suﬃciently large. Keywords: Causal eﬀects, causal inference, experiments, interference, sutva.  1 Introduction Investigators of causality routinely assume that subjects under study do not interfere with each other. The no-interference assumption is so ingrained in the practice of causal inference that its application is often left implicit. Yet, interference appears to be at the heart of the social and medical sciences. Humans interact, and that is precisely the motivation for much of the research in these ﬁelds. The assumption is prevalent because investigators assume that their methods require it. The opening chapter of a recent textbook captures the sentiment well. The authors write “causal inference is generally impossible without no-interference assumptions” (Imbens & Rubin, 2015, p. 10). This notion provides the motivation for the current study. ∗ We  thank Alex D’Amour, Matt Blackwell, Forrest Crawford, Peng Ding, Naoki Egami, Avi Feller, Owen Francis, Lihua Lei, Cyrus Samii and Jas Sekhon for helpful suggestions and discussions. This work was partially supported by NIH grant R01 AI085073. † Department of Political Science, Yale University. ‡ Department of Political Science & Department of Biostatistics, Yale University. § Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.  1  We investigate to what degree one can weaken the assumption of no-interference and still draw credible inferences about causal relationships. We ﬁnd that, indeed, causal inferences are impossible without assumptions about the interference, but the prevailing view severely exaggerates the issue. One must ensure that the interference is not all-encompassing but can otherwise allow the subjects to interfere in unknown and largely arbitrary ways. Our focus is estimation of average treatment eﬀects in randomized experiments. A random subset of a sample of units is exposed to some treatment, and the quantity of interest is the average eﬀect of the units’ treatments on their own outcomes. The no-interference assumption in this context is the restriction that no unit’s treatment aﬀects other units’ outcomes. We consider the setting where such spillover eﬀects exist, and in particular, when the form they may take is left unspeciﬁed. The contribution is two-fold. We ﬁrst introduce an estimand—the expected average treatment eﬀect or eate—that generalizes the conventional average treatment eﬀect (ate) to a setting with interference. The conventional inferential target is not well-deﬁned when units interfere since a unit’s outcome may be aﬀected by more than one treatment. We resolve the issue by marginalizing the eﬀects of interest over the assignment distribution of the incidental treatments. That is, for a given assignment, we may ask how a particular unit’s outcome is aﬀected when only its own treatment is changed. We may ask the same for each unit in the experiment, and we may average these eﬀects. This deﬁnes an average treatment eﬀect that remains unambiguous under interference. The results may, however, be diﬀerent if the exercise is repeated for another assignment; average eﬀects under this deﬁnition depend on which assignment we use as a reference. The eate estimand marginalizes the eﬀects over all possible reference assignments in order to capture the typical eﬀect in the experiment. The estimand is a generalization of ate in the sense that they coincide whenever the latter is well-deﬁned. The second contribution is to demonstrate that eate can be estimated consistently under mild restrictions on the interference and without structural knowledge thereof. Focus is on the standard Horvitz-Thompson and Hájek estimators. The results also pertain to the widely used diﬀerence-in-means and ordinary least squares estimators, as they are special cases of the Hájek estimator. The investigation starts with the Bernoulli and complete randomization experimental designs. We show that the estimators are consistent for eate under the designs as long as the average amount of interference grows at a suﬃciently slow rate (according to a measure we deﬁne shortly). Root-n consistency is achieved whenever the average amount of interference is bounded. The investigation then turns to the paired randomization design. The design introduces perfectly correlated treatment assignments, and we show that this can make the estimators unstable even when the interference is sparse. The degree to which the dependencies introduced by the experimental design align with the interference structure must be restricted in order to achieve consistency. Information about the interference structure 2  beyond the aggregated restrictions is, however, still not needed. The insights from the paired design extend to a more general setting, and similar restrictions result in consistency under arbitrary experimental designs. The ﬁndings are of inherent theoretical interest as they move the limits for casual inference under interference. They are also of practical interest. The results pertain to standard estimators under standard experimental designs. As such, they apply to many previous studies where interference might have been present, but where it was assumed not to be. Studies that mistakenly assume that units do not interfere might, therefore, not necessarily be invalidated. The reported estimates are likely to be close to the expected average treatment eﬀects if the samples are suﬃciently large.  2 Related work Our investigation builds on a recent literature on causal inference under interference (see Halloran & Hudgens, 2016, for a review). The no-interference assumption itself is due to Cox (1958). The iteration that is most commonly used today was, however, formulated by Rubin (1980) as a part of the stable unit treatment variation assumption, or sutva. Early departures from this assumption are modes of analysis inspired by Fisher’s exact randomization test (Fisher, 1935). The approach employs “sharp” null hypotheses that stipulates the outcome of all units under all assignments. The most common such hypothesis is simply that treatment is inconsequential so the observed outcomes are constant over all assignments. As this subsumes that both primary and spillover eﬀects do not exist, the approach tests for the existence of both types of eﬀects simultaneously. The test has recently been adapted and extended to study interference speciﬁcally (see, e.g., Rosenbaum, 2007; Luo et al., 2012; Aronow, 2012; Bowers et al., 2013, 2016; Athey et al., 2017; Basse et al., 2017; Choi, 2017). Early methods for point estimation restricted the interference process through structural models and thereby presumed that interactions took a particular form (Manski, 1993). While the structural approach has been extended to capture eﬀects under weaker assumptions in a larger class of interference processes (Lee, 2007; Graham, 2008; Bramoullé et al., 2009), it has still been criticized for being too restrictive (Goldsmith-Pinkham & Imbens, 2013; Angrist, 2014). A strand of the literature closer to the current exposition relaxes the structural assumptions. Interference is allowed to take arbitrary forms as long as it is contained within known and disjoint groups of units. The assumption is known as partial interference (see, e.g., Sobel, 2006; Hudgens & Halloran, 2008; Tchetgen Tchetgen & VanderWeele, 2012; Liu & Hudgens, 2014; Rigdon & Hudgens, 2015; Kang & Imbens, 2016; Liu et al., 2016; Basse & Feller, 2017). While partial interference allows for some progress on its own, it is typically coupled with stratiﬁed interference. The additional assumption stipulates that the only relevant aspect 3  of the interference is the proportion of treated units in the groups; the identities of the units are inconsequential for the spillover eﬀects. More recent contributions have focused on relaxing the partial interference assumption. Interference is not restricted to disjoint groups, and units are allowed to interfere along more general structures such as social networks (see, e.g., Manski, 2013; Toulis & Kao, 2013; Ugander et al., 2013; Eckles et al., 2016; Aronow & Samii, 2017; Basse & Airoldi, 2017b; Forastiere et al., 2017; Ogburn & VanderWeele, 2017; Sussman & Airoldi, 2017). This allows for quite general forms of interactions, but the suggested estimation methods require detailed knowledge of the interference structure. Two studies are particularly close to the current investigation. Basse & Airoldi (2017a) consider average treatment eﬀects under arbitrary and unknown interference just as we do. However, as discussed in the next section, they focus on a markedly diﬀerent estimand. This leads them to conclude that causal eﬀects cannot be investigated without additional information about the interference. Egami (2017) investigates a setting where the interference can be described by a set of networks. While his framework includes a stratiﬁed interference assumption, it admits quite general forms of interference since the networks are allowed to be overlapping and partially unobserved. Egami’s focus is, however, not large-sample properties of average treatment eﬀect estimators; he characterizes the ﬁnite sample bias when estimating spillover eﬀects.  3 Treatment eﬀects under interference Consider a sample of n units indexed by the set U = {1, 2, · · · , n}. An experimenter intervenes on the world in ways that potentially aﬀect the units. The intervention is described by a ndimensional binary vector z = (z1, z2, · · · , zn ) ∈ {0, 1} n . A particular value of z could, for example, denote that some drug is given to a certain subset of the units in U. We are particularly interested in how unit i is aﬀected by the ith dimension of z. For short, we say that zi is unit i’s treatment. The eﬀects of diﬀerent interventions are deﬁned as comparisons between the outcomes they produce. Each unit has a function yi : {0, 1} n → R denoting the observed outcome for the unit under a speciﬁc (potentially counterfactual) intervention (Neyman, 1923; Holland, 1986). In particular, yi (z) is the response of i when the intervention is z. We refer to the elements of the image of this function as potential outcomes. It will prove convenient to write the potential outcomes in a slightly diﬀerent form. Let z−i = (z1, · · · , zi−1, zi+1, · · · , zn ) denote the (n− 1)-element vector constructed by deleting the ith element from z. The potential outcome yi (z) can then equivalently be written as yi (zi ; z−i ). We assume that the potential outcomes are well-deﬁned throughout the paper. The assumption implies that the manner in which the experimenter manipulates z is inconsequential; 4  no matter how z came to take a particular value, the outcome is the same. Well-deﬁned potential outcomes also imply that no physical law or other circumstance prohibits z to take any value in {0, 1} n . This ensures that the potential outcomes are, indeed, potential. The assumption does, however, not restrict the way the experimenter chooses to intervene on the world, and some interventions may have no probability of being realized. The experimenter sets z according to some random vector Z = (Z1, · · · , Zn ). The probability distribution of Z is the design of the experiment. The design is the sole source of randomness we will consider. Let Yi denote the observed outcome of unit i. The observed outcome is a random variable connected to the experimental design through the potential outcomes: Yi = yi (Z). As above, Z−i denotes Z net of its ith element, so Yi = yi (Zi ; Z−i ).  3.1 Expected average treatment eﬀects It is conventional to assume that the potential outcomes are restricted so a unit’s outcome is only aﬀected by its own treatment. That is, for any two assignments z and z′, if a unit’s treatment is the same for both assignments, then its outcome is the same; it is assumed that zi = zi′ implies yi (z) = yi (z′). This no-interference assumption admits a deﬁnition of the treatment eﬀect for unit i as the contrast between its potential outcomes when we change its treatment: τi = yi (1; z−i ) − yi (0; z−i ), where z−i is any value in {0, 1} n−1 . No-interference implies that the choice of z−i is inconsequential for the values of yi (1; z−i ) and yi (0; z−i ). The variable can therefore be left free without ambiguity. The average of the unit-level eﬀects is the quantity experimenters commonly use to summarize treatment eﬀects. Deﬁnition 1. Under no-interference, the average treatment eﬀect (ate) is the average unitlevel treatment eﬀect: n 1X τi . τate = n i=1  The deﬁnitions require no-interference. References to the eﬀect of a unit’s treatment become ambiguous when units interfere since τi may vary under permutations of z−i . The ambiguity is contagious; the average treatment eﬀect similarly becomes ill-deﬁned. To resolve the issue, we redeﬁne the unit-level treatment eﬀect for unit i as the contrast between its potential outcomes when we change its treatment while holding all other treatments ﬁxed at a given assignment z−i . We call this quantity the assignment-conditional unit-level treatment eﬀect: τi (z−i ) = yi (1; z−i ) − yi (0; z−i ).  The only change from the conventional deﬁnition is that the connection to other units’ treatments is explicit. The new deﬁnition acknowledges that the eﬀect of a unit’s treatment may 5  depend on the treatments assigned to other units. The change makes the unit-level eﬀects unambiguous, and their average produces a version of the average treatment eﬀect that remains well-deﬁned under interference. Deﬁnition 2. An assignment-conditional average treatment eﬀect is the average of the assignment-conditional unit-level treatment eﬀect under a given assignment: τate (z) =  n 1X τi (z−i ). n i=1  The redeﬁned average eﬀects are unambiguous under interference, but they are unwieldy. An average eﬀect exists for each assignment, so their numbers grow exponentially in the sample size. Experimenters may for this reason not ﬁnd it useful to study them individually. Similar to how unit-level eﬀects are aggregated to an average eﬀect, we focus on a summary of the assignment-conditional eﬀects. Deﬁnition 3. The expected average treatment eﬀect (eate) is the expected assignmentconditional average treatment eﬀect: τeate = E[τate (Z)]. The expectation in the deﬁnition of eate is taken over the distribution of Z given by the experimental design. Under no-interference, τate (z) does not depend on z, and the marginalization is inconsequential. eate is, thus, a generalization of ate in the sense that the two estimands coincide whenever no-interference holds. When units interfere, eate marginalizes the eﬀects over all possible treatment assignments; it describes the typical average treatment eﬀect under the experimental design the experimenter actually implements.  3.2 Previous deﬁnitions under interference The eate estimand builds on previously proposed ideas. An estimand introduced by Hudgens & Halloran (2008) resolves the ambiguity of treatment eﬀects under interference in a similar fashion. The authors refer to the quantity as the average direct causal eﬀect, but we opt for another name to highlight how it diﬀers from ate and eate. Deﬁnition 4. The average distributional shift eﬀect (adse) is the average diﬀerence between the conditional expected outcomes for the two treatment conditions: τadse =   n  1X E[Yi | Zi = 1] − E[Yi | Zi = 0] . n i=1  Similar to eate, the average distributional shift eﬀect marginalizes the potential outcomes over the experimental design. The estimands diﬀer in which distributions they use for the 6  marginalization. The expectation in eate is over the unconditional assignment distribution, while adse marginalizes each potential outcome separately over diﬀerent conditional distributions. The diﬀerence becomes clear when the estimands are written in similar forms: n   1X E yi (1; Z−i ) − yi (0; Z−i ) , τeate = n i=1  n  1X E[yi (1; Z−i ) | Zi = 1] − E[yi (0; Z−i ) | Zi = 0] . τadse = n i=1  The two estimands answer diﬀerent causal questions. eate captures the expected eﬀect of changing a random unit’s treatment in the current experiment. It is the expected average unit-level treatment eﬀect. adse is the expected eﬀect of changing from an experimental design where we hold the average unit’s treatment ﬁxed at Zi = 1 to another design where its treatment is ﬁxed at Zi = 0. That is, the estimand captures the compound eﬀect of changing a unit’s treatment and simultaneously changing the experimental design (see, e.g., the discussion in Sobel, 2006). As a result, adse may be non-zero even if all unit-level eﬀects are exactly zero. That is, when τi (z−i ) = 0 for all i and z−i . VanderWeele & Tchetgen Tchetgen (2011) introduces a version of adse that resolves the issue by conditioning both terms with the same value on i’s treatment. Their estimand is a conditional average of unit-level eﬀects and, thus, mixes aspects of adse and eate. An alternative way to deﬁne average treatment eﬀects is as the contrast between the average outcome when all units are treated and the average outcome when no unit is treated: Pn n−1 i=1 [yi (1) − yi (0)] where 1 and 0 are the unit and zero vectors. ate under this deﬁnition coincides exactly with the estimand in Deﬁnition 1 (and thus eate) whenever no-interference holds. The alternative deﬁnition does, however, not coincide with eate under interference. The estimands provide diﬀerent descriptions of the causal setting. eate captures the typical treatment eﬀect in the experiment actually implemented, while the alternative estimand captures the eﬀect of completely scaling up or down treatment. Both descriptions could be of interest, but, as Basse & Airoldi (2017a) have established, no consistent estimator exists for the alternative estimand under arbitrary interference.  4 Quantifying interference Our results do not require detailed structural information about the interference. No progress can, however, be made if it is left completely unrestricted. Proposition 1 in the next section shows this formally. The intuition is simply that the change of a single unit’s treatment could lead to non-negligible changes in all units’ outcomes when the interference is unrestricted. The following deﬁnitions quantify the amount of interference. We say that unit i interferes with unit j if changing i’s treatment changes j’s outcome under at least one treatment assignment. We also say that a unit interferes with itself even if 7  its treatment does not aﬀect its outcome. The indicator Ii j denotes such interference:  ′ ,  1 if y j (z) , y j (z′) for some z, z′ ∈ {0, 1} n such that z−i = z−i     Ii j = 1 if i = j,     0 otherwise.   The deﬁnition allows for asymmetric interference; unit i may interfere with unit j without the converse being true. The collection of interference indicators simply describes the interference structure in a sample. The deﬁnition itself does not impose restrictions on how the units may interfere. In particular, the indicators do not necessarily align with social networks or other structures through which units are thought to interact. Experimenters do not generally have enough information about how the units interfere to deduce or estimate the indicators. Their role is to act as a basis for an aggregated summary of the interference. Deﬁnition 5 (Interference dependence). davg  n n X 1X = di j , n i=1 j=1  where  di j =  (  1 if Iℓi Iℓ j = 1 for some ℓ ∈ U, 0 otherwise.  The interference dependence indicator di j captures whether units i and j are aﬀected by a common treatment. That is, i and j are interference dependent if they interfere directly P with each other or if some third unit interferes with both i and j. The sum nj=1 di j gives the number of interference dependencies for unit i, so the unit-average number of interference dependencies is davg . The variable acts as a measure of how close an experiment is to nointerference. No-interference is equivalent to davg = 1, which indicates that units are only interfering with themselves. At the other extreme, davg = n indicates that interference is complete in the sense that all pairs of units are aﬀected by a common treatment. If suﬃciently many units are interference dependent (i.e., davg is large), small perturbations of the treatment assignments may be ampliﬁed by the interference and induce large changes in many units’ outcomes. Interference dependence can be related to simpler descriptions of the interference. Consider the following quantities: Ii =  n X j=1  Ii j ,  Iavg =  n 1X Ii , n i=1  Imsq =  n 1X I 2, n i=1 i  and  Imax = max Ii . i ∈U  The ﬁrst variable captures how many units i interferes with. That is, if changing unit i’s treatment would change the outcome of ﬁve other units, i is interfering with the ﬁve units and itself, and Ii = 6. Information about these quantities is useful (see, e.g., Aronow et al., 2016), but such knowledge is generally beyond our grasp. The subsequent three quantities provide 8  a more aggregated description of the interference. They are the average, mean square and maximum of the unit-level variable. The quantities bound davg from below and above. 2 . 2 ≤ davg ≤ Imsq ≤ Imax Lemma 1. Iavg  The proof of Lemma 1 and all other proofs are given in appendices. The lemma implies that we can use Imsq or Imax rather than davg to restrict the interference. While such restrictions are stronger than necessary, the connection is useful as it may be more intuitive to reason about Imsq and Imax than about interference dependencies.  5 Large sample properties We investigate an asymptotic regime inspired by Isaki & Fuller (1982). Consider a sequence of samples indexed by their sample size. An experiment is conducted for each sample in the sequence. All variables related to the samples, such as the potential outcomes and experimental designs, have their own sequence also indexed by n. The indexing is, however, left implicit. We investigate how two common estimators of average treatment eﬀects behave as the sample size approaches inﬁnity subject to conditions on the sequences. Deﬁnition 6 (Horvitz-Thompson, ht, and Hájek, há, estimators). n n ZiYi 1 X (1 − Zi )Yi 1X − , n i=1 pi n i=1 1 − pi , ! , ! n n n n X X Zi (1 − Zi )Yi X 1 − Zi ZiYi X − , = 1 − pi i=1 pi i=1 i=1 1 − pi i=1 pi  τ̂ht =  τ̂há  where pi = Pr(Zi = 1) is the marginal probability that unit i is assigned to Zi = 1. Estimators of this form were ﬁrst introduced in the sampling literature to estimate population means under unequal inclusion probabilities (Horvitz & Thompson, 1952; Hájek, 1971). They have since received much attention from the causal inference and policy evaluation literatures where they are often referred to as inverse probability weigthed estimators (see, e.g., Hahn, 1998; Hirano et al., 2003; Hernán & Robins, 2006). Other estimators commonly used to analyze experiments, such as the diﬀerence-in-means and ordinary least squares estimators, are special cases of the Hájek estimator. As a consequence, the results apply directly to those cases as well. We assume throughout the paper that the experimental design and potential outcomes are suﬃciently well-behaved as formalized in the following assumption. Assumption 1 (Regularity conditions). There exist constants k < ∞, q ≥ 2 and s ≥ 1 such that for all i ∈ U: 9  1A (Probabilistic assignment). k −1 ≤ Pr(Zi = 1) ≤ 1 − k −1 ,   1B (Bounded outcome moments). E |Yi | q ≤ k q ,   1C (Bounded potential outcome moments). E |yi (z; Z−i )| s ≤ k s for both z ∈ {0, 1}.  The ﬁrst regularity condition restricts the experimental design so that each treatment is realized with a positive probability. The condition does not restrict combinations of treatments, and assignments may exist such that Pr(Z = z) = 0. The second condition restricts the distributions of the observed outcomes so that the estimators remain well-deﬁned asymptotically. The last condition restricts the potential outcomes oﬀ the support of the experimental design and ensures that eate is well-deﬁned asymptotically. The exact values of q and s are inconsequential for the results in Section 5.2. The assumption can, in that case, be written simply with q = 2 and s = 1. However, the rate of convergence for an arbitrary experimental design depends on which moments can be bounded. The ideal case is when the potential outcomes themselves are bounded, in which case Assumption 1 holds as q → ∞ and s → ∞. The two moment conditions are similar in structure, but neither is implied by the other. Assumption 1B does not imply 1C since the former is only concerned with the potential outcomes on the support of the experimental design. The opposite implication does not hold since s may be smaller than q.  5.1 Restricting interference The sequence of davg describes the amount of interference in the sequence of samples. Our notion of limited interference is formalized as restrictions on this sequence. Assumption 2 (Restricted interference). davg = o(n). The assumption stipulates that units, on average, are interference dependent with an asymptotically negligible fraction of the sample. It still allows for substantial amounts of interference. The unit-average number of interference dependencies may even grow with the sample size. It is only assumed that the unit-average does not grow proportionally to the sample size. The total amount of interference dependencies may, thus, grow at a faster rate than n. In addition to restricting the amount of interference, Assumption 2 imposes weak restrictions on the structure of the interference. It rules out that the interference is so unevenly distributed that a few units are interfering with most other units. If the interference is concentrated so that a few treatments are aﬀecting many units, small perturbations of the treatment assignments could be ampliﬁed through those treatments. At the extreme, a single unit interferes with all other units, and all units’ outcomes would change if we were to change its 10  treatment. The estimators would not stabilize if the interference is structured in this way even if it otherwise was sparse. Restricted interference is not suﬃcient for consistency. Sequences of experiments exist for which the assumption holds but the estimators are not converging to eate with high probability. Assumption 2 is, however, necessary for consistency of the ht and há estimators in the following sense. Proposition 1. For every sequence of experimental designs, if Assumption 2 does not hold, there exists a sequence of potential outcomes satisfying Assumption 1 such that the ht and há estimators do not converge in probability to eate. A consequence of the proposition is that experimental designs themselves cannot ensure consistency. We must somehow restrict the interference in order to make progress. The proposition implies that the weakest possible restriction on davg is Assumption 2. If a weaker restriction is imposed, e.g., davg = O(n), potential outcomes exist (for any experimental design) so that the relaxed interference restriction is satisﬁed but the ht and há estimators do not converge. Naturally, it might be possible to achieve consistency if one imposes stronger regularity conditions or if one restricts the interference in some other way.  5.2 Common experimental designs The investigation starts with three speciﬁc experimental designs. The designs are commonly used by experimenters and, thus, of interest in their own right. They also provide a good illustration of the issues that arise under unknown interference and act as a backdrop to the investigation of arbitrary designs in the subsequent section. 5.2.1  Bernoulli and complete randomization  The simplest experimental design assigns treatment independently; the experimenter ﬂips a coin for each unit and administer treatment accordingly. We call this a Bernoulli randomization design, and it satisﬁes: n Y Pr(Z = z) = pizi (1 − pi )1−zi i=1  for some set of assignment probabilities p1, p2, · · · , pn bounded away from zero and one. The outcomes of any two units are independent under a Bernoulli design when nointerference holds. This is not the case when units interfere. A single treatment may then aﬀect two or more units, and the corresponding outcomes are dependent. That is, two units’ outcomes are dependent when they are interference dependent according to Deﬁnition 5. Restricting this dependence ensures that the eﬀective sample size grows with the nominal size and grants consistency. 11  Proposition 2. With a Bernoulli randomization design under restricted interference (Assumption 2), the ht and há estimators are consistent for eate and converge at the following rates: 0.5  , (τ̂ht − τeate ) = Op n−0.5 davg  and  0.5  (τ̂há − τeate ) = Op n−0.5 davg .  The Bernoulli design tends to be ineﬃcient in small samples because the size of the treatment groups vary over assignments. Experimenters often use designs that stabilize the group sizes. A common such design introduces dependencies in assignments so to keep the number of treated units ﬁxed but otherwise assigns treatment with equal probability: ( n  −1 Pn zi = m, if i=1 m Pr(Z = z) = 0 otherwise, where m = ⌊pn⌋ for some ﬁxed p strictly between zero and one. We call the design complete randomization. The dependencies introduced by complete randomization are not of concern under nointerference. The outcomes are only aﬀected by a single treatment, and the dependence between any two treatments is asymptotically negligible. This need not be the case when units interfere. There are two issues to consider. First, the interference could interact with the experimental design so that two units’ outcomes are strongly dependent asymptotically even when they are not aﬀected by a common treatment (i.e., when di j = 0). Consider, as an example, when one unit is aﬀected by the ﬁrst half of the sample and another unit is aﬀected by the second half. Complete randomization introduces a strong dependence between the two halves; the number of treated units in the ﬁrst half is perfectly correlated with the number of treated in the second half. The outcomes of the two units may therefore be (perfectly) correlated even when no treatment aﬀects them both. We cannot rule out that such dependencies exist, but we can show that they are suﬃciently rare whenever Assumption 2 holds. The second issue is that the dependencies introduced by the design distort our view of the potential outcomes. Whenever a unit is assigned to a certain treatment condition, units that interfere with the unit tend to be assigned to the other condition. One of the potential outcomes in each assignment-conditional unit-level eﬀect is, thus, observed more frequently than the other. The estimators implicitly weight the two potential outcomes proportionally to their frequency, but the eate estimand weights them equally. The discrepancy introduces bias. Stated in another way, the estimators do not separate the eﬀect of a unit’s own treatment from spillover eﬀects of other units’ treatments. As an illustration, consider when the potential outcomes are equal to the number of treated P units: yi (z) = nj=1 z j . eate equals one here, but the estimators are constant at zero since the number of treated units (and, thus, all revealed potential outcomes) are ﬁxed at m. The design 12  masks the eﬀect of a unit’s own treatment with a spillover eﬀect with the same magnitude but of the opposite sign. In general under complete randomization, if the number of units interfering with a unit is of the same order as the sample size, our view of the unit’s potential outcomes will be distorted also asymptotically. Similar to the ﬁrst issue, we cannot rule out that such distortions exist, but restricted interference implies that they are suﬃciently rare. Taken together, this establishes consistency under complete randomization with the same rate of convergence as under the Bernoulli design. Proposition 3. With a complete randomization design under restricted interference (Assumption 2), the ht and há estimators are consistent for eate and converge at the following rates: 0.5  , (τ̂ht − τeate ) = Op n−0.5 davg  and  0.5  (τ̂há − τeate ) = Op n−0.5 davg .  Recall that no-interference is equivalent to davg = 1. Propositions 2 and 3 reassuringly provide root-n consistency in that case. The propositions, however, make clear that nointerference is not necessary for such rates, and we may still allow for non-trivial amounts of interference. In particular, root-n rates follow whenever the unit-average amount of interference does not grow indeﬁnitely with the sample size, i.e., when davg is bounded. Corollary 1. With a Bernoulli or complete randomization design under bounded interference davg = O(1), the ht and há estimators are root-n consistent for eate. 5.2.2  Paired randomization  Complete randomization restricts treatment assignment to ensure treatment groups with a ﬁxed size. The paired randomization design imposes even greater restrictions. Units are divided into pairs, and exactly one unit in each pair is assigned to treatment. It is implicit that the sample size is even so that all units are paired. Paired randomization could be forced on the experimenter by external constraints or used to improve precision (see, e.g., Fogarty, 2017, and the references therein). Let ρ : U → U describe a pairing so that ρ(i) = j indicates that units i and j are paired. The pairing is symmetric, so the self-composition of ρ is the identity function. The paired randomization design then satisﬁes: ( 2−n/2 if zi , zρ(i) for all i ∈ U, Pr(Z = z) = 0 otherwise. The paired design accentuates the two issues we faced under complete randomization. The dependence within any set of ﬁnite number of treatments is asymptotically negligible under complete randomization; issues only arose when the number of treatments aﬀecting 13  a unit was of the same order as the sample size. Under paired randomization, Zi and Z j are perfectly correlated also asymptotically whenever ρ(i) = j. Dependencies may therefore remain in large samples even if the number of treatments aﬀecting a unit is of a lower order than the sample size. Assumption 2 is no longer suﬃcient for consistency. We must consider to what degree the dependencies between treatments introduced by the design align with the structure of the interference. The following two deﬁnitions quantify the alignment. Deﬁnition 7 (Pair-induced interference dependence). ( n n X 1 if (1 − di j )Iℓi Iρ(ℓ)j = 1 for some ℓ ∈ U, 1X bi j , where bi j = bavg = n i=1 j=1 0 otherwise. Deﬁnition 8 (Within-pair interference). R =  Pn  i=1 Iρ(i)i .  Under paired randomization, the dependence between the outcomes of two units not aﬀected by a common treatment can be asymptotically non-negligible even when each unit is aﬀected by a single treatment. In particular, the outcomes of units i and j such that di j = 0 could be (perfectly) correlated if two other units k and ℓ exist such that k interferes with i and ℓ interferes with j, and k and ℓ are paired. The purpose of Deﬁnition 7 is to capture such dependencies. The deﬁnition is similar in structure to Deﬁnition 5. Indeed, the upper bounds 2 . from Lemma 1 apply so that bavg ≤ Imsq ≤ Imax The second issue we faced under complete randomization is aﬀected in a similar fashion. No matter the number of units that are interfering with unit i, if one of those units is the unit paired with i, we cannot separate the eﬀects of Zi and Zρ(i) . The design imposes Zi = 1− Zρ(i) , so any eﬀect of Zi on i’s outcome could just as well be attributed to Zρ(i) . Such dependencies will introduce bias, just as they did under complete randomization. However, unlike the previous design, restricted interference does not imply that the bias will vanish asymptotically. We must separately ensure that this type of alignment between the design and the interference is suﬃciently rare. Deﬁnition 8 captures how common interference is between paired units. The two deﬁnitions allow us to restrict the degree to which the interference aligns with the pairing in the design. Assumption 3 (Restricted pair-induced interference). bavg = o(n). Assumption 4 (Pair separation). R = o(n). Experimenters may ﬁnd that the ﬁrst assumption is quite tenable under restricted interference. As both bavg and davg are bounded by Imsq , restricted pair-induced interference tends to hold in cases where restricted interference can be assumed. It is, however, possible that the latter assumption holds even when the former does not if paired units are interfering with suﬃciently disjoint sets of units. 14  Whether pair separation holds largely depend on how the pairs were formed. It is, for example, common that the pairs reﬂect some social structure (e.g., paired units may live in the same household). The interference tends, in such cases, to align with the pairing almost perfectly, and Assumption 4 is unlikely to hold. Pair separation is more reasonable when pairs are formed based on generic background characteristics. This is often the case when the experimenter uses the design to increase precision. The assumption could, however, still be violated if the background characteristics include detailed geographic data or other information likely to be associated with interference. Proposition 4. With a paired randomization design under restricted interference, restricted pair-induced interference and pair separation (Assumptions 2, 3 and 4), the ht and há estimators are consistent for eate and converge at the following rates:  0.5 + n−0.5 b0.5 (τ̂ht − τeate ) = O n−1 R + n−0.5 davg avg ,  0.5 + n−0.5 b0.5 (τ̂há − τeate ) = O n−1 R + n−0.5 davg avg .  5.3 Arbitrary experimental designs  We conclude our investigations by considering a general sequence of experiments with unspeciﬁed designs. An arbitrary experimental design may align with the interference just like the paired design. We start the ﬁnal investigation by introducing a set of deﬁnitions that allow us to characterize such alignment in the general setting. It will prove useful to collect all treatments aﬀecting a particular unit i into a vector: ZIi = (I1i Z1, I2i Z2, · · · , Ini Zn ). The vector is deﬁned so that its jth element is Z j if unit j is interfering with i, and zero otherwise. Similar to above, let ZI−i be the (n − 1)-dimensional vector constructed by deleting the ith element from ZIi . The deﬁnition has the following convenient property:   Yi = yi (Z) = yi ZIi , and yi (z; Z−i ) = yi z; ZI−i .  This allows us to capture the alignment between the design and the interference using ZIi .  Since Yi = yi ZIi , the outcomes of two units i and j are independent whenever ZIi and ZIj are independent. We can, thus, characterize the outcome dependence introduced by the experimental design by the dependence between ZIi and ZIj . Similarly, the dependence between Zi and ZI−i governs how distorted our view of the potential outcomes is. We use the alpha-mixing coeﬃcient introduced by Rosenblatt (1956) to measure the dependence between the assignment vectors. Speciﬁcally, for two random variables X and Y deﬁned on the same probability space, let:  α X, Y = sup Pr(x ∩ y) − Pr(x) Pr(y) , x ∈σ(X) y ∈σ(Y)  15  where σ(X) and σ(Y ) denote the sub-sigma-algebras generated by the respective random variable. The coeﬃcient α(X, Y ) is zero if and only if X and Y are independent, and increasing values indicate increasing dependence. The maximum is α(X, Y ) = 1/4. The alpha-mixing coeﬃcient is, thus, similar to the ordinary correlation coeﬃcient. It is, however, not restricted to linear associations between two scalar random variables but can capture any type of dependence between any two sets of random variables. The coeﬃcient allows us to deﬁne measures of the average amount of dependence between ZIi and ZIj and between Zi and Z−i . Deﬁnition 9 (External and internal mixing coeﬃcients). Let q and s be the maximum values such that Assumptions 1B and 1C hold: αext =  n n X    q−2 1X (1 − di j ) α ZIi, ZIj q , n i=1 j=1  and  αint =  n  X i=1  α Zi, ZI−i    s−1 s  ,  where 00 is deﬁned as zero to accommodate the cases q = 2 and s = 1.  Each term of the external mixing coeﬃcient, α ZIi, ZIj , captures the dependence between the treatments aﬀecting unit i and the treatments aﬀecting unit j. If the dependence between ZIi and ZIj tends to be weak or rare, αext will be small compared to n. Similarly, if dependence between Zi and ZI−i tends to be weak or rare, αint will be small relative to n. In this sense, the external and internal mixing coeﬃcients are generalizations of Deﬁnitions 7 and 8. Indeed, one can show that αext ∝ bavg and αint ∝ R under paired randomization where the proportionality constants are given by q and s. The generalized deﬁnitions allow for generalized assumptions. Assumption 5 (Design mixing). αext = o(n). Assumption 6 (Design separation). αint = o(n). Design mixing and separation stipulate that dependence between treatments are suﬃciently rare or suﬃciently weak (or some combination thereof). This encapsulates and extends the conditions in the previous sections. In particular, complete randomization under bounded  interference constitutes a setting where dependence is weak: α ZIi , ZIj approaches zero for pairs of units with di j = 0. Paired randomization under Assumptions 3 constitutes a setting  where dependence is rare: α ZIi, ZIj is equal to 1/4 for some pairs of units also asymptotically, but they are a small fraction of the total number of pairs. Complete randomization under  Assumption 2 combines the two settings: α ZIi, ZIj might be non-negligible asymptotically for some pairs with di j = 0, but such pairs are rare. For all other pairs with di j = 0, the pair-level mixing coeﬃcient approaches zero quickly. A similar comparison can be made for the design separation assumption.  16  Proposition 5. Under restricted interference, design mixing and design separation (Assumptions 2, 5 and 6), the ht and há estimators are consistent for eate and converge at the following rates: 0.5 0.5  + n−0.5 αext , (τ̂ht − τeate ) = O n−1 αint + n−0.5 davg  0.5 0.5 (τ̂há − τeate ) = O n−1 αint + n−0.5 davg + n−0.5 αext .  Remark 1. The convergence results for Bernoulli and paired randomization presented in the previous section can be proven as consequences of Proposition 5. That is not the case for complete randomization. The current proposition applied to that design would suggest slower rates of convergence than given by Proposition 3 (unless the potential outcomes are bounded). This highlights that Proposition 5 provides worst-case rates for all designs that satisfy Assumptions 1, 5 and 6. Particular designs might be better behaved and, thus, ensure that the estimators converge at faster rates. For complete randomization, one can prove that restricted interference implies a stronger mixing condition than the conditions deﬁned above. In particular, the conditions can be redeﬁned using the ψ-mixing coeﬃcient as introduced by Blum et al. (1963) and Philipp (1969) rather than the alpha-mixing coeﬃcient. This provides rates of convergence that are independent of which moments are bounded in the regularity conditions, and Proposition 3 would follow. Remark 2. If no units interfere, ZI−i is constant at zero, and Assumption 6 is trivially satisﬁed. No-interference does, however, not imply that Assumption 5 holds. Consider a design that restricts all treatments to be equal: Z1 = Z2 = · · · = Zn . The external mixing coeﬃcient would not be zero in this case; in fact, αext → n/4. This illustrates that one must limit the dependencies between treatment assignments even when units do not interfere. Proposition 5 can, in this sense, be seen as an extension of the restrictions imposed in Theorem 1 in Robinson (1982).  5.4 When design separation fails Experimental designs tend to induce dependence between treatments of units that interfere, and experimenters might ﬁnd it hard to satisfy design separation. We saw one example of such a design with the paired randomization. It might for this reason be advisable to choose simple designs such as the Bernoulli or complete randomization if one wants to investigate treatment eﬀects under unknown interference. These designs cannot align with the interference structure, and one need only consider whether Assumption 2 holds. Another approach is to design the experiment so to ensure design separation. For example, one should avoid pairing units that are suspected to interfere in the paired randomization design. It will, however, not always be possible to ensure that design separation holds, and we might want to ask what the consequences of such departures are. Without Assumption 6, 17  the eﬀect of units’ own treatments cannot be separated from potential spillover eﬀects, and the estimators need not be consistent for eate. They may, however, converge to some other quantity, and indeed, they do. The average distributional shift eﬀect (adse) is deﬁned using the conditional distributions of the outcomes. Thus, the estimand does not attempt to separate the eﬀect of units’ own treatments from spillover eﬀects, and design separation is immaterial. Proposition 6. Under restricted interference and design mixing (Assumptions 2 and 5), the ht and há estimators are consistent for adse and converge at the following rates: 0.5 0.5  + n−0.5 αext , (τ̂ht − τadse ) = Op n−0.5 davg −0.5 0.5 −0.5 0.5  davg + n αext . (τ̂há − τadse ) = Op n  6 Concluding remarks Experimenters worry about interference. The ﬁrst line of attack tends to be to design experiments so to minimize the risk that units interfere. One could, for example, physically isolate the units throughout the study. The designs needed to rule out interference may, however, make the experiments so alien to the topics under study that the ﬁndings are no longer relevant; the results would not generalize to the real world where units do interfere. When design-based ﬁxes are undesirable or infeasible, one could try to mend the situation by accounting for any lingering interference in the analysis. This, however, requires detailed information about the structure of the interference. The modal experimenter neither averts all interference by design nor accounts for it in the analysis. They conduct and analyze the experiment as if no units interfere, even when the no-interference assumption, at best, holds true only approximately or with some probability. The disconnect between assumptions and reality is reconciled by what appears to be a common intuition among experimenters that goes against the conventional view: unadjusted interference is not a fatal ﬂaw so long as it is limited. Our results provide rigorous justiﬁcation for that intuition. We have exclusively focused on point estimation. We conjecture that variance estimation requires stronger restrictions on the interference. If inference beyond point estimation is desired, the Fisherian approach referenced above is a feasible route. An approach similar to Aronow et al. (2016) could also be useful if additional information about the interference is available. The rates of convergences do, however, provide some guidance. The estimators converge at a slower rate than root-n whenever the average amount of interference grows with the sample size. Experimenters may, therefore, expect that conventional variance estimators are too optimistic relative to the true uncertainty when units interfere. The eate estimand generalizes the average treatment eﬀect to experiments with interference. All interpretations of ate do, however, not apply. In particular, eate cannot be interpreted as the diﬀerence between average outcomes when no unit and all units are treated. 18  The estimand is the expected, marginal eﬀect of changing a single treatment in the experiment actually implemented. A consequence is that eate depends on the experimental design. Experimenters know that the results from a single experiment may not extend beyond the present sample. When units interfere, concerns about external validity should include the experimental design as well. Our focus has been on the eﬀect of a unit’s own treatment, but the results are not restricted to “direct” treatment eﬀects as typically deﬁned. In particular, the pairing between units and treatments is arbitrary in the causal model, and an experiment could have several reasonable pairings. Consider, for example, when the intervention is to give some drug to the units in the sample. The most natural pairing might be to let a unit’s treatment indicator denote whether we give the drug to the unit itself. We may, however, just as well let it denote whether we give the drug to, say, the unit’s spouse (who may be in the sample as well). eate would then be the expected spillover eﬀect between spouses. The current investigation applies, in this sense, both to usual treatment eﬀects and rudimentary spillover eﬀects. We conjecture that the results can be extended to other deﬁnitions of treatment, and they would in that case aﬀord robustness to unknown and arbitrary interference for more intricate spillover eﬀects.  References Angrist, J. D. (2014). The perils of peer eﬀects. Labour Economics, 30, 98–108. Aronow, P. M. (2012). A general method for detecting interference between units in randomized experiments. Sociological Methods & Research, 41(1), 3–16. Aronow, P. M., Crawford, F. W., & Zubizarreta, J. R. (2016). Conﬁdence intervals for means under constrained dependence. arXiv:1602.00359v1. Aronow, P. M. & Samii, C. (2017). Estimating average causal eﬀects under general interference, with application to a social network experiment. Annals of Applied Statistics, in print. Athey, S., Eckles, D., & Imbens, G. W. (2017). Exact p-values for network interference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, in print. Basse, G. W. & Airoldi, E. M. (2017a). Limitations of design-based causal inference and A/B testing under arbitrary and network interference. arXiv:1705.05752v1. Basse, G. W. & Airoldi, E. M. (2017b). Model-assisted design of experiments in the presence of network correlated outcomes. arXiv:1507.00803v4. Basse, G. W. & Feller, A. (2017). Analyzing two-stage experiments in the presence of interference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, in print. 19  Basse, G. W., Feller, A., & Toulis, P. (2017). Exact tests for two-stage randomized designs in the presence of interference. arXiv:1709.08036v1. Blum, J. R., Hanson, D. L., & Koopmans, L. H. (1963). On the strong law of large numbers for a class of stochastic processes. Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und verwandte Gebiete, 2(1), 1–11. Bowers, J., Fredrickson, M. M., & Aronow, P. M. (2016). A more powerful test statistic for reasoning about interference between units. Political Analysis, 24(3), 395–403. Bowers, J., Fredrickson, M. M., & Panagopoulos, C. (2013). Reasoning about interference between units: A general framework. Political Analysis, 21(1), 97–124. Bramoullé, Y., Djebbari, H., & Fortin, B. (2009). Identiﬁcation of peer eﬀects through social networks. Journal of Econometrics, 150(1), 41–55. Choi, D. (2017). Estimation of monotone treatment eﬀects in network experiments. Journal of the American Statistical Association, in print. Cox, D. R. (1958). Planning of Experiments. New York: Wiley. Davydov, Y. A. (1970). The invariance principle for stationary processes. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 15(3), 487–498. Eckles, D., Karrer, B., & Ugander, J. (2016). Design and analysis of experiments in networks: Reducing bias from interference. Journal of Causal Inference, 5(1). Egami, N. (2017). Unbiased estimation and sensitivity analysis for network-speciﬁc spillover eﬀects: Application to an online network experiment. arXiv:1708.08171v2. Fisher, R. A. (1935). The Design of Experiments. London: Oliver & Boyd. Fogarty, C. B. (2017). On mitigating the analytical limitations of ﬁnely stratiﬁed experiments. arXiv:1706.06469v1. Forastiere, L., Airoldi, E. M., & Mealli, F. (2017). Identiﬁcation and estimation of treatment and interference eﬀects in observational studies on networks. arXiv:1609.06245v3. Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. & Imbens, G. W. (2013). Social networks and the identiﬁcation of peer eﬀects. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 31(3), 253–264. Graham, B. S. (2008). Identifying social interactions through conditional variance restrictions. Econometrica, 76(3), 643–660.  20  Hahn, J. (1998). On the role of the propensity score in eﬃcient semiparametric estimation of average treatment eﬀects. Econometrica, 66(2), 315–331. Hájek, J. (1971). Comment on "An essay on the logical foundations of survey sampling, part one". In V. P. Godambe & D. A. Sprott (Eds.), Foundations of Statistical Inference. Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Halloran, M. E. & Hudgens, M. G. (2016). Dependent happenings: a recent methodological review. Current Epidemiology Reports, 3(4), 297–305. Hernán, M. A. & Robins, J. M. (2006). Estimating causal eﬀects from epidemiological data. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 60(7), 578–586. Hirano, K., Imbens, G. W., & Ridder, G. (2003). Eﬃcient estimation of average treatment eﬀects using the estimated propensity score. Econometrica, 71(4), 1161–1189. Holland, P. W. (1986). Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81(396), 945–960. Horvitz, D. G. & Thompson, D. J. (1952). A generalization of sampling without replacement from a ﬁnite universe. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 47(260), 663–685. Hudgens, M. G. & Halloran, M. E. (2008). Toward causal inference with interference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(482), 832–842. Imbens, G. W. & Rubin, D. B. (2015). Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. New York: Cambridge University Press. Isaki, C. T. & Fuller, W. A. (1982). Survey design under the regression superpopulation model. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 77(377), 89–96. Kang, H. & Imbens, G. W. (2016). Peer encouragement designs in causal inference with partial interference and identiﬁcation of local average network eﬀects. arXiv:1609.04464v1. Lee, L. (2007). Identiﬁcation and estimation of econometric models with group interactions, contextual factors and ﬁxed eﬀects. Journal of Econometrics, 140(2), 333–374. Liu, L. & Hudgens, M. G. (2014). Large sample randomization inference of causal eﬀects in the presence of interference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 109(505), 288–301. Liu, L., Hudgens, M. G., & Becker-Dreps, S. (2016). On inverse probability-weighted estimators in the presence of interference. Biometrika, 103(4), 829–842.  21  Luo, X., Small, D. S., Li, C.-S. R., & Rosenbaum, P. R. (2012). Inference with interference between units in an fMRI experiment of motor inhibition. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107(498), 530–541. Manski, C. F. (1993). Identiﬁcation of endogenous social eﬀects: The reﬂection problem. The Review of Economic Studies, 60(3), 531. Manski, C. F. (2013). Identiﬁcation of treatment response with social interactions. The Econometrics Journal, 16(1), 1–23. Neyman, J. (1990/1923). On the application of probability theory to agricultural experiments. Essay on principles. Section 9. Statistical Science, 5(4), 465–472. (Original work published 1923). Ogburn, E. L. & VanderWeele, T. J. (2017). Vaccines, contagion, and social networks. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 11(2), 919–948. Philipp, W. (1969). The central limit problem for mixing sequences of random variables. Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und verwandte Gebiete, 12(2), 155–171. Rigdon, J. & Hudgens, M. G. (2015). Exact conﬁdence intervals in the presence of interference. Statistics & Probability Letters, 105, 130–135. Robinson, P. M. (1982). On the convergence of the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. Australian Journal of Statistics, 24(2), 234–238. Rosenbaum, P. R. (2007). Interference between units in randomized experiments. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102(477), 191–200. Rosenblatt, M. (1956). A central limit theorem and a strong mixing condition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 42(1), 43–47. Rubin, D. B. (1980). Randomization analysis of experimental data: The Fisher randomization test comment. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 75(371), 591. Sobel, M. E. (2006). What do randomized studies of housing mobility demonstrate? Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101(476), 1398–1407. Sussman, D. L. & Airoldi, E. M. (2017). Elements of estimation theory for causal eﬀects in the presence of network interference. arXiv:1702.03578v1. Tchetgen Tchetgen, E. J. & VanderWeele, T. J. (2012). On causal inference in the presence of interference. Statistical Methods in Medical Research, 21(1), 55–75.  22  Toulis, P. & Kao, E. (2013). Estimation of causal peer inﬂuence eﬀects. In S. Dasgupta & D. McAllester (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research (pp. 1489–1497). Atlanta: PMLR. Ugander, J., Karrer, B., Backstrom, L., & Kleinberg, J. (2013). Graph cluster randomization: Network exposure to multiple universes. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’13 (pp. 329–337). New York: ACM. VanderWeele, T. J. & Tchetgen Tchetgen, E. J. (2011). Eﬀect partitioning under interference in two-stage randomized vaccine trials. Statistics & Probability Letters, 81(7), 861–869.  Appendices A1 Miscellaneous deﬁnitions and lemmas Deﬁnition A1. n 1X E[yi (z; Z−i )], n i=1 n 1X 1[Zi = z]Yi µ̂z = , n i=1 Pr(Zi = z)  n 1X E[yi (z; Z−i ) | Zi = z], n i=1 n 1[Zi = z] 1X n̂z = . n i=1 Pr(Zi = z)  µ̆z =  µz =  Corollary A1. τeate = µ1 − µ0,  τadse = µ̆1 − µ̆0,  τ̂ht = µ̂1 − µ̂0,  Proof. Follows directly from Deﬁnitions 3, 4, 6 and A1.  τ̂há =  µ̂1 µ̂0 − . n̂1 n̂0   Corollary A2. (τ̂ht − τadse ) = ( µ̂1 − µ̆1 ) − ( µ̂0 − µ̆0 ),  (τ̂há − τadse ) = ( µ̂1 /n̂1 − µ̆1 ) − ( µ̂0 /n̂0 − µ̆0 ).  Proof. Follows directly from Corollary A1.    Lemma A1. µ̆z = O(1).  23  Proof. For some suﬃciently large constant k < ∞: n n   1X 1X E[Yi | Zi = z] ≤ E |Yi | Zi = z n i=1 n i=1 n   kX Pr(Zi = z) E |Yi | Zi = z (Assumption 1A) ≤ n i=1 n      kX ≤ Pr(Zi = 1) E |Yi | Zi = 1 + Pr(Zi = 0) E |Yi | Zi = 0 n i=1 n   kX = E |Yi | ≤ k 2, n i=1  | µ̆z | =  where the last inequality follows from Assumption 1B and Jensen’s inequality.    Lemma A2. E[ µ̂z ] = µ̆z . Proof. Assumption 1A ensures that Pr(Zi = z) > 0. Note that Yi = yi (Zi ; Z−i ) by deﬁnition, so:   n E 1[Z = z]Y n 1X Pr(Zi = z) E[Yi | Zi = z] 1X i i E[ µ̂z ] = = n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) n 1X E[yi (z; Z−i ) | Zi = z].  = n i=1 Lemma A3. E[n̂z ] = 1. Proof. Assumption 1A ensures that Pr(Zi = z) > 0, so:   n E 1[Z = z] n 1X Pr(Zi = z) 1X i E[n̂z ] = = = 1. n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) n i=1 Pr(Zi = z)    Lemma A4. There exists a constant k < ∞ such that for all i, j ∈ U and z ∈ {0, 1}:  Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi , 1[Z j = z]Yj ≤ k.  Proof. Cauchy–Schwarz’s inequality, Jensen’s inequality and Assumption 1B give us:  h   i 0.5 Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi , 1[Z j = z]Yj ≤ Var 1[Zi = z]Yi Var 1[Z j = z]Yj h     i 0.5   0.5 ≤ k2 = k. ≤ E Yi2 E Yj2  Lemma A5. There exists a constant k < ∞ such that for all i ∈ U and z ∈ {0, 1}: E[yi (z; Z−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; Z−i )] ≤ k.  24    Proof. For some suﬃciently large constant c < ∞, Assumption 1A gives us:     E |yi (z; Z−i )| Zi = z ≤ E |yi (z; Z−i )| Zi = z   Pr(Zi = 1 − z) E |yi (1 − z; Z−i )| Zi = 1 − z + Pr(Zi = z)     E |Yi |   E |yi (Zi ; Z−i )| = ≤ c E |Yi | . = Pr(Zi = z) Pr(Zi = z)  Let k = 2c2 , and consider the expression to be bounded:     E[yi (z; Z−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; Z−i )] ≤ E |yi (z; Z−i )| Zi = z + E |yi (z; Z−i )|     ≤ c E |Yi | + E |yi (z; Z−i )| ≤ k,  where the last inequality follows from Jensen’s inequality and Assumptions 1C and 1B .    A2 Proof of Lemma 1 2 2 . Lemma 1. Iavg ≤ davg ≤ Imsq ≤ Imax  Pn Proof. Note that 0 ≤ Ii j ≤ di0.5 j = di j ≤ ℓ=1 Iℓi Iℓ j and consider:  n 2  n n 2 1X 1 XX 2 Iavg = Ii j Ii = n i=1 n i=1 j=1  n n 2 1 X X 0.5 ≤ d n i=1 j=1 i j ≤  n n X 1X di j = davg n i=1 j=1  (0 ≤ Ii j ≤ di0.5 j ) (Jensen’s inequality)  n n X n X 1X Pn Iℓi Iℓ j (di j ≤ ℓ=1 Iℓi Iℓ j ) n i=1 j=1 ℓ=1  n  n n X n X 1X 1X 2 Iℓi Iℓ2 = Imsq ≤ Imax .  Iℓ j = = n ℓ=1 i=1 n ℓ=1 j=1  ≤  A3 Proof of Proposition 1 Proposition 1. For every sequence of experimental designs, if Assumption 2 does not hold, there exists a sequence of potential outcomes satisfying Assumption 1 such that the ht and há estimators do not converge in probability to eate. Proof. If Assumption 2 does not hold, there exists a constant 0 < c such that cn ≤ davg for suﬃciently large n. Consider the following potential outcomes:      n⌈c0.5 n⌉ −1 z1 zi Pr(Zi = 1) − (1 − zi ) Pr(Zi = 0) if i ≤ ⌈c0.5 n⌉,  yi (z) =   0 otherwise,  25  where ⌈·⌉ is the ceiling function. This implies: di j = so we have: 0.5  davg =      1 if i = j or i, j ≤ ⌈c0.5 n⌉,   0 otherwise,  0.5  n n X n X 1 ⌈cXn⌉ ⌈cXn⌉ 1 ⌈c0.5 n⌉ 2 n − ⌈c0.5 n⌉ 1X di j = di j + dii = + , n i=1 j=1 n i=1 n i= ⌈c0.5 n⌉+1 n n j=1  which gives limn→∞ n−1 davg = c as desired. We ﬁrst ensure that the stipulated potential outcomes satisfy our regularity conditions. For i > ⌈c0.5 n⌉, we have yi (z) = 0 for all z, so the moment conditions in Assumption 1 trivially hold for these units. For i ≤ ⌈c0.5 n⌉, we can bound the potential outcomes for all z by:   |yi (z)| ≤ n⌈c0.5 n⌉ −1 Pr(Zi = 1) + Pr(Zi = 0) ≤ c−0.5,  so Assumptions 1B and 1C hold even when q → ∞ and s → ∞ if set k = c−0.5 . Consider the eate estimand:  n  1X E[yi (1; Z−i )] − E[yi (0; Z−i )] τeate = n i=1  n  E[y1 (1; Z−1 )] X E[yi (1; Z−i )] E[yi (0; Z−i )] = + − n n n i=2  0.5  Pr(Z1 = 1) ⌈cXn⌉  0.5 −1 0.5 −1 = + E[⌈c n⌉ Z Pr(Z = 1)] + E[⌈c n⌉ Z Pr(Z = 0)] 1 i 1 i ⌈c0.5 n⌉ i=2 0.5  Pr(Z1 = 1) Pr(Z1 = 1) ⌈cXn⌉  Pr(Z = 1) + Pr(Z = 0) = Pr(Z1 = 1). + = i i ⌈c0.5 n⌉ ⌈c0.5 n⌉ i=2  Then consider the ht estimator:  n n 1X ZiYi (1 − Zi )Yi 1X − n i=1 Pr(Zi = 1) n i=1 Pr(Zi = 0) n n Zi yi (Z) (1 − Zi )yi (Z) 1X 1X Z1 y1 (Z) + − = n Pr(Z1 = 1) n i=2 Pr(Zi = 1) n i=2 Pr(Zi = 0)  τ̂ht =  =  Z1  ⌈c0.5 n⌉  0.5  +  1 ⌈cXn⌉ n⌈c0.5 n⌉ −1 Z1 Zi ⌈Zi = 1⌉ n i=2 Pr(Zi = 1) 0.5  =  Z1 ⌈c0.5 n⌉  1 ⌈cXn⌉ n⌈c0.5 n⌉ −1 Z1 (1 − Zi ) Pr(Zi = 0) + n i=2 Pr(Zi = 0) +  Z1  ⌈c0.5 n⌉  0.5 n⌉ ⌈cX  Zi +  i=2  26  Z1  ⌈c0.5 n⌉  0.5 n⌉ ⌈cX  i=2  (1 − Zi ) = Z1 .  By Assumption 1A, there exists a constant k > 0 such that k −1 ≤ Pr(Z1 = 1) ≤ 1 − k −1 . Subsequently, | τ̂ht − τeate | = |Z1 − Pr(Z1 = 1)| ≥ k −1 . The proof for τ̂há follows the same structure.   A4 Proof of Proposition 2 Lemma A6. Under Bernoulli randomization, (τadse − τeate ) = 0. Proof. From Deﬁnitions 2, 3 and 4, we have:  n  1X E[yi (1; Z−i ) | Zi = 1] − E[yi (0; Z−i ) | Zi = 0] n i=1  n  1X E[yi (1; Z−i )] − E[yi (0; Z−i )] = n i=1  n    1X =E [yi (1; Z−i ) − yi (0; Z−i )] = E τate (Z) = τeate, n i=1  τadse =  where the second equality follows from the Bernoulli design and its independent treatment assignments.   Lemma A7. Under Bernoulli randomization, Var( µ̂z ) = O n−1 davg .  Proof. For some suﬃciently large constant k < ∞:    n n Cov 1[Z = z]Y , 1[Z = z]Y n X 1 X 1 X 1[Zi = z]Yi i i j j = 2 Var( µ̂z ) = Var n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) Pr(Zi = z) Pr(Z j = z) n i=1 j=1 ≤  n n X  k X Cov 1[Z = z]Y , 1[Z = z]Y . i i j j n2 i=1 j=1  (Assumption 1A)  Recall di j and davg from Deﬁnition 5: Var( µ̂z ) ≤  n  n X   k X di j + (1 − di j ) Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj 2 n i=1 j=1  ≤ k 2 n−1 davg +  n n X  k X (1 − di j ) Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj , 2 n i=1 j=1  where the last inequality follows from Lemma A4. The Bernoulli design implies that the elements of Z are independent. When di j = 0, units i and j share no common treatments aﬀecting them, so ZIi and ZIj are independent. We have  Yi = yi (Z) = yi ZIi , so it follows:  (1 − di j ) Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj = 0.   0.5 . Lemma A8. Under Bernoulli randomization, ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) = Op n−0.5 davg 27    Proof. Markov’s inequality and Lemma A2 gives us:   Pr µ̂z − µ̆z  2  2 −1  ≥ k n davg     Var µ̂z ≤ 2 −1 k n davg  for any constant k > 0. Lemma A7 implies that for suﬃciently large k:  Var µ̂z kn−1 davg 1 ≤ = . 2 −1 2 −1 k k n davg k n davg Thus, for suﬃciently large n, the probability that µ̂z − µ̆z deviate from zero with more than a 0.5 can be bounded by any ε > 0 by setting k = 1/ε.  ﬁxed multiple of n−0.5 davg Corollary A3. Under Bernoulli randomization and Assumption 2, ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) = op (1). Proof. Follows directly from Assumption 2 and Lemma A8.      Lemma A9. Under Bernoulli randomization, n̂z − 1 = Op n−0.5 .  Proof. Consider the variance of n̂z :   n  n Var 1[Z = z] 1 X 1[Zi = z] 1 X i Var(n̂z ) = Var = 2   n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) 2 n 1 − Pr(Zi = z) 1 X = 2 ≤ n−1 k, n i=1 Pr(Zi = z)  where the last inequality follows from Assumption 1A. The lemma then follows from Markov’s inequality and Lemma A3 using the same approach as in the proof of Lemma A8.   Corollary A4. Under Bernoulli randomization, n̂z − 1 = op (1). Proof. Follows directly from Lemma A9.    Lemma A10. Under Bernoulli randomization and Assumption 2:  0.5  µ̂z /n̂z − µ̆z = Op n−0.5 davg .  Proof. Corollary A4 ensures us that we safely can disregard the event n̂z = 0, which gives us: µ̂z − µ̆z µ̆z (n̂z − 1) µ̂z − µ̆z = − . n̂z n̂z n̂z Let f (a, b) = a/b and consider the ﬁrst order Taylor expansion of the two terms around (0, 1):  µ̂z − µ̆z = f µ̂z − µ̆z, n̂z = ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) + r1, n̂z  µ̆z (n̂z − 1) = f µ̆z (n̂z − 1), n̂z = µ̆z (n̂z − 1) + r2, n̂z 28  and, thus: µ̂z − µ̆z = ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) − µ̆z (n̂z − 1) + r1 − r2, n̂z   where r1 = op ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) + (n̂z − 1) and r2 = op µ̆z (n̂z − 1) + (n̂z − 1) by Lemma A1 and Corollaries A3 and A4. [Note that we cannot expand µ̂z /n̂z directly since µ̂z and µ̆z may not be convergent; our assumptions only ensure that µ̂z − µ̆z converges.] Lemmas A1, A8 and A9 ﬁnish the proof.  Proposition 2. With a Bernoulli randomization design under restricted interference (Assumption 2), the ht and há estimators are consistent for eate and converge at the following rates: 0.5  0.5  , and (τ̂há − τeate ) = Op n−0.5 davg . (τ̂ht − τeate ) = Op n−0.5 davg  Proof. Decompose the errors of the estimators as such: τ̂ht −τeate = (τadse −τeate )+(τ̂ht −τadse ),  τ̂há −τeate = (τadse −τeate )+(τ̂há −τadse ).  Corollary A2 and Lemmas A6, A8 and A10 give the rates. Assumption 2 gives consistency.   A5 Proof of Proposition 3 Deﬁnition A2. Let m =  Pn  i=1  Zi be the element sum of Z (i.e., the number of treated units).  Remark A1. Complete randomization implies that m = ⌊pn⌋ almost surely for some ﬁxed p strictly between zero and one. P Deﬁnition A3. Let Ji = nj=1 I ji be the number of units interfering with unit i. Lemma A11. Under complete randomization, for any i ∈ U such that Ji ≤ min(m, n − m) and any z ∈ {0, 1}: max  I z∈ Z−i  Pr(ZI−i = z | Zi = z) Pr(ZI−i  = z)  −1 ≤    Ji , Pr(Zi = z) max(m, n − m)  I = z ∈ {0, 1} n−1 : Pr(ZI = z) > 0 is the support of ZI . where Z−i −i −i P P I Proof. Let t = j,i I ji z j be the element sum of some z ∈ Z−i , and let T = j,i I ji Z j be the element sum of ZI−i (i.e., the number of treated units interfering with i, excluding i itself). Complete randomization gives us that Zi and ZI−i are independent conditional on T, and as a consequence:    Pr T = t Zi = z Pr ZI−i = z T = t, Zi = z Pr ZI−i = z Zi = z =    Pr ZI−i = z Pr T = t Pr ZI−i = z T = t    Pr T = t Zi = z Pr T = t Zi = z Pr ZI−i = z T = t  . = =   Pr T = t Pr T = t Pr ZI−i = z T = t  29  We surely have T ≤ Ji ≤ min(m, n − m) which together with complete randomization imply that T is hyper-geometric according to:      −1 m n−m n Pr(T = t) = , t Ji − t Ji    −1  m−1 n−m n−1 Pr(T = t | Zi = z) = z t Ji − t Ji     −1 m n−m−1 n−1 + (1 − z) , t Ji − t Ji and, thus:  n Ji n−1  Ji   Pr T = t Zi = z  = Pr T = t  "  z  m−1  t m t  + (1 − z)  n−m−1  # Ji −t n−m  . Ji −t  Recall the deﬁnition of the binomial coeﬃcient:    −1 x x! (x − 1)! x y = , = x−1 y!(x − y)! y!(x − 1 − y)! x−y y  so we have:   Pr T = t Zi = z  −1= Pr T = t  n Ji n−1  Ji  "  z  m−1  t m t  + (1 − z)  n−m−1  # Ji −t n−m  Ji −t  −1  " # (n − m) − (Ji − t) m−t n + (1 − z) z −1 = n − Ji m n−m " # n (n − m) − (Ji − t) n − Ji m−t = + (1 − z) − z n − Ji m n−m n # " n t Ji − t Ji = − z − (1 − z) n − Ji n m n−m # " Ji Ji − t t = , Pr(Zi = z) − z − (1 − z) Pr(Zi = z)(n − Ji ) Ji Ji  n−m where the last equality exploits that Pr(Zi = z) = z m n + (1 − z) n under complete randomization. The expression within brackets is strictly between −1 and 1, so it follows:  Pr T = t Zi = z Ji Ji ≤ ,  −1 ≤ Pr(Zi = z)(n − Ji ) Pr(Zi = z) max(m, n − m) Pr T = t  where Ji ≤ min(m, n − m) gives the last inequality.  30    Lemma A12. Under complete randomization, for any i, j ∈ U such that di j = 0 and 4Ji Jj ≤ min(m, n − m): max  zi ∈ ZiI z j ∈ ZIj  Pr(ZIi = zi, ZIj = z j ) Pr(ZIi  =  zi ) Pr(ZIj  = zj )  −1 ≤  2Ji Jj , min(m, n − m)   where ZiI = z ∈ {0, 1} n : Pr(ZIi = z) > 0 is the support of ZIi .  P Proof. Let Tmin = min(m, n−m) be the size of the smallest treatment group. Let ti = nj=1 I ji z j P be the element sum of zi ∈ ZiI , and let Ti = nj=1 I ji Z j be the element sum of ZIi (i.e., the number of treated units interfering with i including i itself). We surely have 0 ≤ Ti + Tj ≤ Ji + Jj ≤ Tmin since 4Ji Jj ≤ Tmin by assumption and Ji ≥ 1 by deﬁnition. From di j = 0 we ⊥ ZIj | Ti, Tj and have that ZIi and ZIj are disjoint, thus complete randomization gives us ZIi ⊥ ZIi ⊥ ⊥ Tj | Ti : Pr(ZIi = zi, ZIj = z j ) Pr(ZIi = zi ) Pr(ZIj = z j ) =  = =  Pr(Ti = ti, Tj = t j ) Pr(ZIi = zi , ZIj = z j | Ti = ti, Tj = t j ) Pr(Ti = ti ) Pr(ZIi = zi | Ti = ti ) Pr(Tj = t j ) Pr(ZIj = z j | Tj = t j ) Pr(Ti = ti, Tj = t j ) Pr(ZIi = zi | Ti = ti ) Pr(ZIj = z j | Tj = t j ) Pr(Ti = ti ) Pr(ZIi = zi | Ti = ti ) Pr(Tj = t j ) Pr(ZIj = z j | Tj = t j ) Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) . Pr(Ti = ti )  Complete randomization implies that Ti is hypergeometric:      −1 m n−m n , Pr(Ti = ti ) = ti Ji − ti Ji  −1    m − t j n − m − (Jj − t j ) n − Jj , Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) = Ji ti Ji − ti thus: Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) = Pr(Ti = ti )  m−t j  n−m−(J j −t j ) n ti Ji −ti Ji . m n−m  n−J j  ti Ji −ti Ji  Recall the deﬁnition of the binomial coeﬃcient:   −1 y−1  x Y x−a (x − z)! x! y , = x−z  = y!(x − y)! y!(x − z − y)! a=0 x − z − a y  31  so we have: m−t j  ti m ti n−m−(J j −t j ) Ji −ti n−m  Ji −ti n Ji n−J j  Ji  =  tY i −1 a=0    i −1 m − t j − a tY tj = 1− , m−a m−a a=0   −ti −1  Jj − t j n − m − (Jj − t j ) − a Ji Y = 1− , n−m−a n−m−a a=0 a=0   JY JY i −1 i −1 Jj n−a = 1+ , = n − Jj − a a=0 a=0 n − Jj − a "   # "Ji −ti −1  # tY i −1 Y Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) tj Jj − t j = 1− 1− Pr(Ti = ti ) m−a n−m−a a=0 a=0 "  #  JY i −1 Jj × 1+ . n − Jj − a a=0 =  Ji Y −ti −1  First, consider when: 1≥  Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) ≥ 0, Pr(Ti = ti )  and note that: "  #     ti Jj ≥ 1− , Tmin − Ji a=0 "  Ji −ti #  Ji Y −ti −1  Jj − t j Jj 1− ≥ 1− , n−m−a Tmin − Ji a=0 "  # JY i −1 Jj 1+ ≥ 1, n − Jj − a a=0  tY i −1  tj 1− m−a  so we have:   ti   Ji −ti   Ji Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) Jj Jj Jj ≥ 1− 1− = 1− Pr(Ti = ti ) Tmin − Ji Tmin − Ji Tmin − Ji     a    a Ji Ji X X Jj −Jj Ji Ji ≥ 1− , = a=1 a Tmin − Ji a=0 a Tmin − Ji where the third equality is a binomial expansion. It follows that: a Ji    Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) X Jj Ji ≤ 1− . Pr(Ti = ti ) a=1 a Tmin − Ji Next, consider when: 1≤  Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) . Pr(Ti = ti )  32  We now bound the factors as follows: "  ti −1 Y 1− "  a=0  tj m−a  #  ≤ 1,  # Jj − t j ≤ 1, 1− n−m−a a=0 "   Ji #  JY i −1 Jj Jj 1+ ≤ 1+ , n − Jj − a Tmin − Ji a=0  Ji Y −ti −1   so we get:   Ji a Ji    X Jj Jj Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) Ji ≤ 1+ = Pr(Ti = ti ) Tmin − Ji a=0 a Tmin − Ji    a Ji X Jj Ji =1+ , a=1 a Tmin − Ji and it follows that: a Ji    X Jj Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) Ji −1 ≤ . Pr(Ti = ti ) a=1 a Tmin − Ji Taken together, have we:  a a Ji Ji    X X Jj Jj Pr(Ti = ti | Tj = t j ) Ji Jia ≤ −1 ≤ Pr(Ti = ti ) Tmin − Ji a=1 a=1 a Tmin − Ji     a  a Ji JX i −1 X Ji Jj Ji Jj Ji Jj = = Tmin − Ji a=0 Tmin − Ji a=1 Tmin − Ji  ∞  a  X Ji Jj Ji Jj . ≤ Tmin − Ji a=0 Tmin − Ji By assumption 4Ji Jj ≤ Tmin , so Ji Jj ≤ Tmin − Ji and the geometric series converge:   ∞  a    X Ji Jj Ji Jj Ji Jj Tmin − Ji = Tmin − Ji a=0 Tmin − Ji Tmin − Ji Tmin − Ji − Ji Jj Ji Jj 2Ji Jj Ji Jj ≤ ≤ , = Tmin − Ji − Ji Jj Tmin − 2Ji Jj Tmin where the last inequality follows from 4Ji Jj ≤ Tmin .  0.5 . Lemma A13. Under complete randomization, (τadse − τeate ) = O n−1 davg  33    Proof. Let Tmin = min(m, n − m) and hi = 1[Ji ≤ Tmin ]. Corollary A2 gives us: |τadse − τeate | = ( µ̆1 − µ1 ) − ( µ̆0 − µ0 )   1 n X 1X = (2z − 1) E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] n i=1 z=0 ≤ =  1 n X 1X E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] n i=1 z=0  n 1 X 1X hi E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] n i=1 z=0  +  n 1 X 1X (1 − hi ) E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] . n i=1 z=0  (A1)   I = z ∈ {0, 1} n−1 : Pr(ZI = z) > 0 be the support of ZI and consider the ﬁrst Let Z−i −i −i term in (A1): hi  1 X  E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )]  z=0  = hi  1 X  X z=0 z∈ ZI −i  ≤ hi  1 X X z=0 z∈ ZI  −i  ≤ hi  1 X z=0  = hi  1 X z=0  ≤ hi   Pr(ZI−i = z | Zi = z) − Pr(ZI−i = z) yi (z; z)  Pr(ZI−i = z)  Pr(Zi = z, ZI−i = z)  Pr(Zi = z) Pr(ZI−i = z)  X Ji Pr(ZI−i = z)|yi (z; z)| Pr(Zi = z)Tmin z∈ ZI  − 1 |yi (z; z)|  (Lemma A11)  −i    Ji E |yi (z; Z−i )| Pr(Zi = z)Tmin  kJi . Tmin  (Assumptions 1A and 1C)  We can apply Lemma A11 since hi = 1 implies Ji ≤ Tmin . −1 J by deﬁnition, so it follows with Lemma A5 Note that we have (1 − hi ) ≤ (1 − hi )Tmin i that: (1 − hi )  1 X  E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] ≤ (1 − hi )k ≤ (1 − hi )  z=0  and we get:  |τadse − τeate | ≤  kJi , Tmin   n n  n X kJi k 1X 1X −1 0.5 = I ji = kTmin Iavg ≤ k 2 n−1 Iavg ≤ k 2 n−1 davg , n i=1 Tmin Tmin n i=1 j=1  where the second to last inequality follows from Assumption 1A and the last follows from Lemma 1.  34   0.5 . Lemma A14. Under complete randomization, ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) = Op n−0.5 davg  Proof. For some suﬃciently large constant k < ∞, Assumption 1A gives us: Var( µ̂z ) ≤  n n X  k X Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj . 2 n i=1 j=1  Let hi j = 1[4Ji Jj ≤ Tmin ] and recall di j and davg from Deﬁnition 5: n  n X  k X di j + (1 − di j )hi j + (1 − di j )(1 − hi j ) 2 n i=1 j=1  × Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj n  n X  k X (1 − di j )hi j + (1 − di j )(1 − hi j ) ≤ k 2 n−1 davg + 2 n i=1 j=1  Var( µ̂z ) ≤   × Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj ,  where the last inequality follows from Lemma A4.   Note that Yi = yi (Z) = yi ZIi and let ZiI = z ∈ {0, 1} n : Pr(ZIi = z) > 0 be the support of ZIi . Furthermore let Tmin = min(m, n − m), and consider the terms in the double sum for which (1 − di j )hi j = 1:   Cov 1[Zi = z]yi ZIi , 1[Z j = z]y j ZIj        = E 1[Zi = z]yi ZIi 1[Z j = z]y j ZIj − E 1[Zi = z]yi ZIi E 1[Z j = z]y j ZIj   X X   I I Pr(Zi = zi, Z j = z j )1[zi = z]yi zi 1[z j = z]y j z j = zi ∈ ZiI z j ∈ ZIj  −  =    X X  zi ∈ ZiI z j ∈ ZIj  X  Pr(ZIi  = zi )1[zi = z]yi zi  zi ∈ ZiI        X  Pr(ZIj  = z j )1[z j = z]y j z j  z j ∈ ZIj  Pr(ZIi = zi, ZIj = z j ) − Pr(ZIi = zi ) Pr(ZIj = z j )          × 1[zi = z]yi zi 1[z j = z]y j z j X X Pr(ZIi = zi, ZIj = z j ) − Pr(ZIi = zi ) Pr(ZIj = z j ) |yi (zi )||y j (z j )| ≤ zi ∈ ZiI z j ∈ ZIj  =  X X  Pr(ZIi  zi ∈ ZiI z j ∈ ZIj  ≤  =  zi ) Pr(ZIj  = zj )  Pr(ZIi = zi, ZIj = z j )  Pr(ZIi = zi ) Pr(ZIj = z j )  2Ji Jj X X Pr(ZIi = zi ) Pr(ZIj = z j )|yi (zi )||y j (z j )| Tmin z ∈ ZI z ∈ ZI i  i  j  − 1 |yi (zi )||y j (z j )| (Lemma A12)  j     2Ji Jj     2kJi Jj 2Ji Jj  = E |yi (ZIi )| E |y j (ZIj )| = E |Yi | E |Yj | ≤ . (Assumption 1B) Tmin Tmin Tmin 35  We can apply Lemma A12 since (1 − di j )hi j = 1 implies 4Ji Jj ≤ Tmin . −1 J J . With Lemma Recall that hi j = 1[4Ji Jj ≤ Tmin ], so we have (1 − hi j ) < (1 − hi j )4Tmin i j A4, it follows that:   (1 − di j )(1 − hi j ) Cov 1[Zi = z]yi ZIi , 1[Z j = z]y j ZIj ≤ (1 − di j )(1 − hi j )k 4kJi Jj . < (1 − di j )(1 − hi j ) Tmin Taken together, we have: n  n X  Ji Jj 4k 2 X (1 − di j )hi j + (1 − di j )(1 − hi j ) 2 Tmin n i=1 j=1   n  n n n 4k 2 X X Ji Jj 4k 2 1 X 1X ≤ k 2 n−1 davg + 2 = k 2 n−1 davg + Ji Jj Tmin n i=1 n j=1 n i=1 j=1 Tmin  n n   n n X 1 XX 4k 2 1 X −1 Iki Ik j (Deﬁnition A3) = kn davg + Tmin n i=1 k=1 n j=1 k=1  Var( µ̂z ) ≤ k 2 n−1 davg +  −1 2 = kn−1 davg + 4k 2Tmin Iavg 2 = kn−1 davg + 4k 3 n−1 Iavg  (Assumption 1A)  ≤ kn−1 davg + 4k 3 n−1 davg .  (Lemma 1)  The lemma then follows from Markov’s inequality and Lemma A2 using the same approach as in the proof of Lemma A8.  Lemma A15. Under complete randomization, τ̂há = τ̂ht . Pn Zi = m, is ﬁxed under complete randomization. Proof. The size of each treatment group, i=1 Furthermore, the marginal treatment probability is Pr(Zi = z) = zmn−1 + (1 − z)(n − m)n−1 for all units. It follows that: n n X 1X 1[Zi = z] 1 n̂z = = 1[Zi = z] = 1. n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) zm + (1 − z)(n − m) i=1  Together with Corollary A1, we have: τ̂há =  µ̂1 µ̂0 − = µ̂1 − µ̂0 = τ̂ht . n̂1 n̂0    Proposition 3. With a complete randomization design under restricted interference (Assumption 2), the ht and há estimators are consistent for eate and converge at the following rates: 0.5  0.5  (τ̂ht − τeate ) = Op n−0.5 davg , and (τ̂há − τeate ) = Op n−0.5 davg . Proof. Using Lemma A15, decompose the errors of the estimators as such:  (τ̂ht − τeate ) = (τ̂há − τeate ) = (τadse − τeate ) + (τ̂ht − τadse ). Corollary A2 and Lemmas A13 and A14 give the rates. Assumption 2 gives consistency. 36    A6 Proof of Proposition 4 Lemma A16. Under paired randomization, (τadse − τeate ) = O(n−1 R). Proof. Corollary A2 gives us: |τadse − τeate | = ( µ̆1 − µ1 ) − ( µ̆0 − µ0 )   1 n X 1X (2z − 1) E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] = n i=1 z=0 ≤  1 n X 1X E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] . n i=1 z=0  By paired randomization, we have Zi = 1 − Zρ(i) and Zi ⊥ ⊥ Z j for all j , ρ(i). As a I consequence, (1 − Iρ(i)i ) E[yi (z; Z−i ) | Zi = z] = (1 − Iρ(i)i ) E[yi (z; ZI−i )], which gives us: |τadse − τeate | ≤  1 n  X 1X Iρ(i)i + (1 − Iρ(i)i ) E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] n i=1 z=0  1 n X 1X E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] Iρ(i)i n i=1 z=0 n X k Iρ(i)i = kn−1 R. ≤ n i=1  =  where the second to last inequality follows from Lemma A5.     Lemma A17. Under paired randomization, Var( µ̂z ) = O n−1 davg + n−1 bavg . Proof. We have Pr(Zi = z) = 0.5 under paired randomization, so:  n Cov 1[Z = z]Y , 1[Z = z]Y n X 1 X i i j j Var( µ̂z ) = 2 Pr(Zi = z) Pr(Z j = z) n i=1 j=1  ≤    n n X  4 X Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj . 2 n i=1 j=1  Recall di j and davg from Deﬁnition 5 and bi j and bavg from Deﬁnition 7: Var( µ̂z ) ≤  n  n X  4 X d + (1 − d )b + (1 − d )(1 − b ) i j i j i j i j i j n2 i=1 j=1  × Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj  ≤ 4kn−1 davg + 4kn−1 bavg n n X  4 X (1 − di j )(1 − bi j ) Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj . + 2 n i=1 j=1 where the last inequality follows from Lemma A4. 37   Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj is non-zero in two cases: either some unit ℓ is interfering with both i and j (i.e., di j = 1), or some unit ℓ is interfering with i and some other unit k is interfering with j and ρ(ℓ) = k so ℓ and k are paired (i.e., bi j = 1). Our deﬁnitions imply that di j + bi j = 1 whenever ρ(i) = j, so the indicators capture cases where the covariance is non-zero purely because of dependence between Zi and Z j . As a consequence, when di j = bi j = 0, the covariance is zero:  (1 − di j )(1 − bi j ) Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj = 0.     0.5 + n−0.5 b0.5 . Lemma A18. Under paired randomization, ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) = Op n−0.5 davg avg  Proof. Markov’s inequality and Lemma A2 gives us the following for any constant k > 0:    2 Var µ̂z 2 −0.5 0.5 −0.5 0.5  2 Pr µ̂z − µ̆z ≥ k n davg + n bavg ≤  0.5 + n−0.5 b0.5 2 k 2 n−0.5 davg avg  Var µ̂z , ≤ 2 −1 k n davg + n−1 bavg  where the last inequality follows from that all terms in the denominator are non-negative. Lemma A17 completes the proof using the same approach as in the proof of Lemma A8.  Lemma A19. Under paired randomization, τ̂há = τ̂ht . Pn 1[Zi = z] = n/2, it follows Proof. Under paired randomization Pr(Zi = z) = 0.5 and i=1 that: n n 1[Zi = z] 1X 2X 1[Zi = z] = 1. n̂z = = n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) n i=1  Corollary A1 completes the proof.    Proposition 4. With a paired randomization design under restricted interference, restricted pair-induced interference and pair separation (Assumptions 2, 3 and 4), the ht and há estimators are consistent for eate and converge at the following rates:  0.5 + n−0.5 b0.5 (τ̂ht − τeate ) = O n−1 R + n−0.5 davg avg ,  0.5 (τ̂há − τeate ) = O n−1 R + n−0.5 davg + n−0.5 b0.5 avg .  Proof. Using Lemma A19, decompose the errors of the estimators as such: (τ̂ht − τeate ) = (τ̂há − τeate ) = (τadse − τeate ) + (τ̂ht − τadse ). Corollary A2 and Lemmas A16 and A18 give the rates, and Assumptions 2, 3 and 4 give consistency.   38  A7 Proof of Proposition 5 Lemma A20. Under an arbitrary experimental design, (τadse − τeate ) = O(n−1 αint ). Proof. Corollary A2 gives us: |τadse − τeate | = ( µ̆1 − µ1 ) − ( µ̆0 − µ0 )   1 n X 1X = (2z − 1) E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] n i=1 z=0 1 n X 1X E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )] . n i=1 z=0  ≤  Let Li (z) = 1[|yi (z; ZI−i )| ≥ ci ] for some ci > 0, and consider the terms in the sum: 1 X  E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )]  z=0  =  1 X  E[Li (z)yi (z; ZI−i ) + (1 − Li (z))yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z]  z=0  ≤  1 X  − E[Li (z)yi (z; ZI−i ) + (1 − Li (z))yi (z; ZI−i )] E[(1 − Li (z))yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[(1 − Li (z))yi (z; ZI−i )]  z=0  +  1 X  E[Li (z)yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[Li (z)yi (z; ZI−i )] .  (A2)  z=0   I = z ∈ {0, 1} n−1 : Pr(ZI = z) > 0 Consider the ﬁrst term in expression (A2). Let Z−i −i be the support of ZI−i , and let k < ∞ be some suﬃciently large constant: 1 X  E[(1 − Li (z))yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[(1 − Li (z))yi (z; ZI−i )]  z=0  =  1 X  X z=0 z∈ ZI −i  =  1 X X  z=0 z∈ ZI −i   Pr(ZI−i = z | Zi = z) − Pr(ZI−i = z) 1[|yi (z; z)| < ci ]yi (z; z)    1 Pr(Zi = z, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = z) Pr(ZI−i = z) Pr(Zi = z) × 1[|yi (z; z)| < ci ]yi (z; z)  ≤  1 X X z=0 z∈ ZI  −i  1 Pr(Zi = z, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = z) Pr(ZI−i = z) Pr(Zi = z) × 1[|yi (z; z)| < ci ]|yi (z; z)|  ≤ kci  1 X X  Pr(Zi = z, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = z) Pr(ZI−i = z) ,  z=0 z∈ ZI  −i  39  where the last equality follows from 1[|yi (z; z)| < ci ]|yi (z; z)| ≤ ci and Assumption 1A. I : Note that, for any z ∈ {0, 1} and z ∈ Z−i Pr(Zi = z, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = z) Pr(ZI−i = z)     = Pr(ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = 1 − z, ZI−i = z) − 1 − Pr(Zi = 1 − z) Pr(ZI−i = z) = Pr(Zi = 1 − z, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = 1 − z) Pr(ZI−i = z) .  It follows that: kci  1 X X  Pr(Zi = z, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = z) Pr(ZI−i = z)  z=0 z∈ ZI  −i  = 2kci  X  Pr(Zi = 1, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(ZI−i = z) .  I z∈ Z−i  Consider the following sets:  + I Z−i = z ∈ Z−i : Pr(Zi = 1, ZI−i = z) ≥ Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(ZI−i = z) ,  − I Z−i = z ∈ Z−i : Pr(Zi = 1, ZI−i = z) ≤ Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(ZI−i = z) ,  so we can write: 2kci  X  Pr(Zi = 1, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(ZI−i = z)  I z∈ Z−i  = 2kci  X  Pr(Zi = 1, ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(ZI−i = z)  + z∈ Z−i  + 2kci  X  − z∈ Z−i    Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(ZI−i = z) − Pr(Zi = 1, ZI−i = z)  = 2kci Pr(Zi = 1, A+ ) − Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(A+ )    + 2kci Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(A− ) − Pr(Zi = 1, A− ) = 2kci Pr(Zi = 1, A+ ) − Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(A+ )      + 2kci Pr(Zi = 1, A− ) − Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(A− ) , + and A− is the event ZI ∈ Z− . A+ and A− are both in the where A+ is the event ZI−i ∈ Z−i −i −i I sub-sigma-algebra generated by Z−i (and so is the event Zi = 1 with respect to the algebra generated by Zi ). It follows:  2kci Pr(Zi = 1, A+ ) − Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(A+ ) + 2kci Pr(Zi = 1, A− ) − Pr(Zi = 1) Pr(A− ) ≤ 4kci  sup  Pr(A ∩ B) − Pr(A) Pr(B)  A∈σ(Zi ) B ∈σ(ZI−i )   = 4kci α Zi, ZI−i , 40   where α Zi, ZI−i is of alpha-mixing coeﬃcients as deﬁned in the main text. Consider the second term in expression (A2): 1 X  E[Li (z)yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[Li (z)yi (z; ZI−i )]  z=0  =  1 X  Pr(Zi = 1 − z) E[Li (z)yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z]  z=0  ≤  1  X  − Pr(Zi = 1 − z) E[Li (z)yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = 1 − z] Pr(Zi = 1 − z) E[Li (z)|yi (z; ZI−i )| | Zi = z]  z=0  ≤k  1  X  + Pr(Zi = 1 − z) E[Li (z)|yi (z; ZI−i )| | Zi = 1 − z] Pr(Zi = z) E[Li (z)|yi (z; ZI−i )| | Zi = z]  z=0  =k  + Pr(Zi = 1 − z) E[Li (z)|yi (z; ZI−i )| | Zi = 1 − z]  1 X   E Li (z)|yi (z; ZI−i )| ,     z=0  where the third inequality follows from Assumption 1A. Note that cis−1 Li (z)|yi (z; ZI−i )| ≤ |yi (z; ZI−i )| s almost surely for both z ∈ {0, 1} whenever s ≥ 1. It follows that:  so we have:      E Li (z)|yi (z; ZI−i )| ≤ ci1−s E |yi (z; ZI−i )| s ,     k E Li (1)| yi (1; ZI−i )| + k E Li (0)| yi (0; ZI−i )|     ≤ kci1−s E |yi (1; ZI−i )| s + kci1−s E |yi (0; ZI−i )| s .  The two terms in expression (A2) taken together yield: 1 X z=0  E[yi (z; ZI−i ) | Zi = z] − E[yi (z; ZI−i )]      ≤ 4kci α Zi, ZI−i + kci1−s E |yi (1; ZI−i )| s + kci1−s E |yi (0; ZI−i )| s .  The expression is trivially zero when ZI−i and Zi are independent, so we will consider  α Zi, ZI−i > 0. Recall that the inequality holds for any ci > 0 and s ≥ 1. Set s to    −1/s max  1/s the maximum value such that Assumption 1C holds and set ci = α Zi, ZI−i ȳi where:      ȳimax = max E |yi (1; ZI−i )| s , E |yi (0; ZI−i )| s . 41  It follows that:      4kci α Zi, ZI−i + kci1−s E |yi (1; ZI−i )| s + kci1−s E |yi (0; ZI−i )| s "    # I )| s I )| s E |y (1; Z E |y (0; Z  4 i i −i −i + = 6kci α Zi, ZI−i  +  6 6cis α Zi, ZI−i 6cis α Zi, ZI−i "  #   E |yi (0; ZI−i )| s   s−1 max  1/s 4 E |yi (1; ZI−i )| s I  s ȳi + + = 6k α Zi, Z−i 6 6 ȳimax 6 ȳimax     s−1  1/s   s−1 ≤ 6k α Zi, ZI−i s ȳimax ≤ 6k 2 α Zi, ZI−i s ,   1/s ≤ k which is implied by Assumption 1C. where the last inequality follows from ȳimax Returning to the main sum, we have from Deﬁnition 9: |τadse − τeate | ≤  n    s−1 1X 6k 2 α Zi, ZI−i s = 6k 2 n−1 αint . n i=1    Proposition 5. Under restricted interference, design mixing and design separation (Assumptions 2, 5 and 6), the ht and há estimators are consistent for eate and converge at the following rates: 0.5 0.5  (τ̂ht − τeate ) = O n−1 αint + n−0.5 davg + n−0.5 αext ,  0.5 0.5 + n−0.5 αext . (τ̂há − τeate ) = O n−1 αint + n−0.5 davg  Proof. Decompose the errors of the estimators as such: τ̂ht −τeate = (τadse −τeate )+(τ̂ht −τadse ),  τ̂há −τeate = (τadse −τeate )+(τ̂há −τadse ).  Assumptions 2, 5 and 6, Proposition 6 and Lemma A20 complete the proof.    A8 Proof of Proposition 6 Lemma A21. Let X and Y be two arbitrary random variables deﬁned on the same probability     space such that E |X | a = k a and E |Y | b = k b for some constants a, b and k where a−1 + b−1 ≤ 1 and k < ∞, we then have:   1−1/a−1/b  a  1/a  b  1/b , E |Y | E |X | |Cov(X, Y )| ≤ 10 α X, Y where α(X, Y ) is the alpha-mixing coeﬃcient for X and Y as deﬁned above.  Proof. The lemma is, apart from trivial changes, equivalent to Lemma 7 in Davydov (1970). Note that the condition on the exponents is erroneously written as a−1 + b−1 = 1 there.  Lemma A22. Under an arbitrary experimental design: 0.5 0.5  + n−0.5 αext . ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) = Op n−0.5 davg  42  Proof. For some suﬃciently large constant k < ∞, Assumption 1A gives us: Var( µ̂z ) ≤ ≤  n n X  k X Cov 1[Zi = z]Yi, 1[Z j = z]Yj 2 n i=1 j=1  n  n X   k X d + (1 − d ) Cov 1[Z = z]Y , 1[Z = z]Y i j i j i i j j n2 i=1 j=1  ≤ k 2 n−1 davg +  n n X   k X (1 − di j ) Cov 1[Zi = z]yi ZIi , 1[Z j = z]y j ZIj , 2 n i=1 j=1   where the last inequality follows from Deﬁnition 5, Lemma A4 and Yi = yi ZIi . Consider the terms in the double sum. We have Iii = 1 by deﬁnition, so the sub-sigma-algebra generated by ZIi is ﬁner than the algebra generated by Zi . Lemma A21 then gives us:    Cov 1[Zi = z]yi ZIi , 1[Z j = z]y j ZIj     1/q    1/q   q−2  E 1[Z j = z]|y j ZIj | q ≤ 10 α ZIi, ZIj q E 1[Zi = z]|yi ZIi | q    q−2    1/q    1/q E |y j ZIj | q ≤ 10 α ZIi, ZIj q E |yi ZIi | q   1/q  q  1/q  q−2  = 10 α ZIi , ZIj q E |Yi | q E |Yj | q−2   (Assumption 1B) ≤ k α ZIi , ZIj q ,  where q is the maximum value satisfying Assumption 1B. With Deﬁnition 9, we get: Var( µ̂z ) ≤ k 2 n−1 davg +  n X   q−2 k2 X I I q = k 2 n−1 davg + k 2 n−1 αext . (1 − d ) α Z , Z i j j i n2 i=1 j,i  The lemma then follows from Markov’s inequality and Lemma A2 using the same approach as in the proof of Lemma A18.  Corollary A5. Under an arbitrary experimental design and Assumptions 2 and 5, ( µ̂z − µ̆z ) = op (1). Proof. Follows directly from Lemma A22 and Assumptions 2 and 5. Lemma A23. Under an arbitrary experimental design:  0.5 0.5  n̂z − 1 = Op n−0.5 davg + n−0.5 αext .  Proof. For some suﬃciently large constant k < ∞, Assumption 1A gives us:   n n n X  k X 1 X 1[Zi = z] Cov 1[Zi = z], 1[Z j = z] ≤ 2 Var(n̂z ) = Var n i=1 Pr(Zi = z) n i=1 j=1 ≤  n n X n X   kdavg k X k X (1 − di j )α Zi, Z j , α Z , Z ≤ + i j 2 2 n n i=1 j,i n i=1 j=1  43    where the second to last inequality follows from that 1[Zi = z] is bounded by 1 and Lemma  A21. The last inequality follows from 0 ≤ α Zi, Z j ≤ 0.25. Note that Iii = 1 by deﬁnition; it follows that the sub-sigma-algebra generated by ZIi is   ﬁner than the algebra generated by Zi , and we have α Zi, Z j ≤ α ZIi, ZIj : Var(n̂z ) ≤ ≤  n n X  k X kdavg + 2 (1 − di j )α ZIi, ZIj n n i=1 j=1  n n X    q−2 k X kdavg (1 − di j ) α ZIi, ZIj q = kn−1 davg + kn−1 αext, + 2 n n i=1 j=1  where q is the maximum value satisfying Assumption 1B. The second to last inequality follows  from q ≥ 2 and 0 ≤ α ZIi , ZIj ≤ 0.25. The lemma then follows from Markov’s inequality and Lemma A3 using the same approach as in the proof of Lemma A18.   Corollary A6. Under an arbitrary experimental design and Assumptions 2 and 5, n̂z − 1 = op (1). Proof. Follows directly from Lemma A23 and Assumptions 2 and 5.    Lemma A24. Under an arbitrary experimental design and Assumptions 2 and 5:  0.5 0.5  + n−0.5 αext . µ̂z /n̂z − µ̆z = Op n−0.5 davg  Proof. Follows from Corollaries A5 and A6 and Lemmas A1, A22 and A23 using the same approach as in the proof of Lemma A10.  Proposition 6. Under restricted interference and design mixing (Assumptions 2 and 5), the ht and há estimators are consistent for adse and converge at the following rates: 0.5 0.5  + n−0.5 αext , (τ̂ht − τadse ) = Op n−0.5 davg  0.5 0.5 + n−0.5 αext . (τ̂há − τadse ) = Op n−0.5 davg  Proof. Follows directly from Assumptions 2 and 5, Corollary A2 and Lemmas A22 and A24.   44

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
