Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_336

Abstract:
TOPOLOGICAL NOETHERIANITY FOR ALGEBRAIC REPRESENTATIONS OF INFINITE RANK CLASSICAL GROUPS  arXiv:1708.06420v1 [math.AC] 21 Aug 2017  ROB H. EGGERMONT AND ANDREW SNOWDEN Abstract. Draisma recently proved that polynomial representations of GL∞ are topologically noetherian. We generalize this result to algebraic representations of infinite rank classical groups.  1. Introduction 1.1. Background. In recent years, a number of novel noetherianity results have been discovered and exploited; for but a few examples, see [AH, Co, Co2, CEF, DE, DES, DK, Eg, HS, NSS, PSa, Sn, SS2]. It is not yet clear where the ultimate line between noetherianity and non-noetherianity lies: of the reasonable structures to consider, some are known to be noetherian and some not, and in between is a vast unknown territory. Recently, Draisma [Dr] proved a breakthrough result claiming a large tract of the unknown for the noetherian side. To state it, we must recall some terminology. Fix an algebraically S closed field k and let GL = n≥1 GLn (k). A representation of GL is called polynomial if it is a S subquotient of a finite1 direct sum of tensor products of the standard representation V = n≥1 kn . If E is a polynomial representation then the dual space Ê is canonically identified with the k-points of the spectrum of the ring Sym(E), and in this way inherits a Zariski topology. Recall that if a group G acts on a space X (such as GL on Ê) then we say that X is topologically G-noetherian if every descending chain of G-stable closed subsets of X stabilizes. We can now state Draisma’s theorem: Theorem 1.1 (Draisma). Let E be a polynomial representation of GL. Then Ê is topologically GL-noetherian. This result has already found application: Erman–Sam–Snowden [ESS] have combined it with the resolution of Stillman’s conjecture by Ananyan–Hochster [AH2] to establish a vast generalization of Stillman’s conjecture. 1.2. The main theorem. Draisma’s theorem elicits a few natural follow-up questions. Does noetherianity hold for any non-polynomial representations of GL? And what about representations of similar groups, such as the infinite orthogonal group? The purpose of this paper is to S provide some answers to these questions. S Let O = n≥1 On (k) be the infinite orthogonal group, and let Sp = n≥1 Sp2n (k) be the infinite symplectic group. We say that a representation of O or Sp is algebraic if it appears as a subquotient of a finite direct sum of tensor powers of the standard representation V. S Let V∗ = n≥1 (kn )∗ , the so-called restricted dual of V. The group GL acts on V∗ . A Date: March 20, 2018. AS was supported by NSF grants DMS-1303082 and DMS-1453893 and a Sloan Fellowship. 1In other settings, one allows infinite sums of tensor powers, but in this paper we restrict to finite sums. 1  2  ROB H. EGGERMONT AND ANDREW SNOWDEN  representation of GL is called algebraic if it appears as a subquotient of a finite direct sum of representations of the form V⊗n ⊗V∗⊗m . We note that V ∼ = V∗ as representations of O and Sp, so one does not get a larger category of representations by using V∗ . In characteristic 0, algebraic representations of GL, O, and Sp have been studied in [DPS, PSe, PSt, SS]. The main theorem of this paper is: Theorem 1.2. Let G ∈ {O, Sp, GL} and let E be an algebraic representation of G. Then Ê is topologically G-noetherian. In §5, we show that certain very similar looking statements are false. It would be interesting to see if this theorem has any applications in commutative algebra along the lines of [ESS]. We note, however, that [ESS] makes use of the kind of statements found in §5 that are true in the case of polynomial representations, but false for algebraic representations. 1.3. Possible generalizations. There are two directions in which Theorem 1.2 might be generalized. First, one might hope for a statement at the level of ideals. That is, suppose that E is an algebraic representation of G (for G as in the theorem), and let A = Sym(E). The theorem is equivalent to the statement that any ascending chain of G-stable radical ideals in A stabilizes. A plausible stronger statement is that every ascending chain of Gstable ideals stabilizes. More generally, if E′ is a second algebraic representation, one might hope that every ascending chain of G-stable submodules of A ⊗ E′ stabilizes. Second, one might hope to extend topological noetherianity to certain analogs of algebraic representations. Let A = Sym(Sym2 (C∞ )), equipped with its natural action of GL. One can then consider the category ModA of A-modules equipped with a compatible polynomial be the Serre subcategory of torsion modules. It is known [NSS] action of GL. Let Modtors A that the quotient category ModA / Modtors A is equivalent to the category of algebraic representations of O (as a tensor category). Thus Theorem 1.2 in the case G = O can be stated as: every finitely generated algebra in the category ModA / Modtors is topologically noetherian. A It seems plausible that this statement might hold true for any A of the form Sym(E), with E a polynomial representation of GL. 1.4. Outline. In §2, we show that it suffices to prove Theorem 1.2 for any one of the three groups. In §3, we go over some preliminary material. The main theorem (in the general linear case) is proved in §4. In §5, we discuss counterexamples to certain variants of the main theorem. Acknowledgments. We thank Steven Sam for helpful discussions. 2. Reduction to the general linear case We now show that it suffices to prove Theorem 1.2 in any one of the three cases. Later, we will prove the theorem in the general linear case. Lemma 2.1. Suppose that G, H ∈ {GL, Sp, O} and that H → G is a homomorphism such that the standard representation of G pulls back to an algebraic representation of H. Suppose also that Theorem 1.2 holds for H. Then Theorem 1.2 holds for G. Proof. The hypothesis implies that any algebraic representation of G pulls back to an algebraic representation of H. Let E be an algebraic representation of G. Suppose that Z• ⊂ Ê is a descending chain of G-stable closed subset. Then it is also a descending chain of H-stable closed subsets, and thus stabilizes. Thus Ê is topologically G-noetherian.   TOPOLOGICAL NOETHERIANITY FOR ALGEBRAIC REPRESENTATIONS  3  Proposition 2.2. If Theorem 1.2 holds for any one of the three groups then it holds for the other two. Proof. Suppose the theorem holds for GL and char(k) 6= 2. Consider the representation V ⊕ V∗ of GL. This representation carries both a symmetric form and a symplectic form, defined by the formulas (v+λ, v ′ +λ′ ) = λ(v ′ )±λ′ (v). These forms give group homomorphisms GL → O and GL → Sp. These homomorphisms have the property that the standard representation pulls back to the representation V ⊕ V∗ . Thus Theorem 1.2 holds for O and Sp by Lemma 2.1. If char(k) = 2 then a similar argument works. The bilinear form defined in the previous paragraph is alternating in characteristic 2 (i.e., it satisfies (v + λ, v + λ) = 0) and thus yields a map GL → Sp that again allows us to apply Lemma 2.1. The representation V ⊕ V∗ also admits a quadratic form defined by (v, λ) 7→ λ(v), which affords a homomorphim GL → O to which we can apply Lemma 2.1. Now suppose that Theorem 1.2 holds for O. Applying Lemma 2.1 to the inclusion O → GL, we see that Theorem 1.2 holds for GL. Appealing to the previous two paragraphs, we thus see that Theorem 1.2 holds for Sp as well. Similarly, if Theorem 1.2 holds for Sp then we get it for GL and then O.  A similar argument is used in the following proposition, which we also require. A representation of GL × GL is polynomial if it appears as a subquotient of a finite sum of representations of the form V⊗n ⊗ V⊗m . Proposition 2.3. Let E be a polynomial representation of GL×GL. Then Ê is topologically GL × GL noetherian. Proof. Consider the diagonal copy of GL in GL × GL. The restriction E|GL is then polyL nomial: indeed, if E is a subquotient of ki=1 V⊗ni ⊗ V⊗mi then E|GL is a subquotient of Lk ⊗(ni +mi ) . Since Ê|GL is topologically noetherian by Draisma’s theorem, the result i=1 V follows.  3. Preliminaries 3.1. Spaces of matrices. Let M̂ be the set of matrices (ai,j )i,j∈N with ai,j ∈ k. Let M ⊂ M̂ be the subset consisting of matrices with only finitely many non-zero entries. We have a trace pairing h, i : M̂ × M → k, hA, Bi = tr(At B) that identifies M̂ with the linear dual of the space M. We let Mn ⊂ M be the set of matrices (ai,j ) with ai,j = 0 for i > n or j > n. We define M̂n similarly, but regard it as a quotient of M̂. Thus M is the union of the Mn and M̂ is the inverse limit of the M̂n . Let U, L ⊂ M and Û, L̂ ⊂ M̂ be the spaces of upper-triangular and lower-triangular matrices. The trace pairing identifies L̂ with the linear dual of L and Û with the dual of U. One cannot multiply arbitrary elements of M̂, as this would typically involve infinite sums. However, the product AB is defined for A ∈ L̂ and B ∈ M̂, or for A ∈ M̂ and B ∈ Û. We define Ln , Un , L̂n , and Ûn inSthe obvious ways. We let Vn = kn and V = n≥1 Vn . We let V̂ and V̂n be the dual spaces to V and Vn , so that V̂ is the inverse limit of the spaces V̂n .  4  ROB H. EGGERMONT AND ANDREW SNOWDEN  3.2. Polynomial representations. Let E be a polynomial representation of GL. Then the action of GLn ⊂ GL extends uniquely to an action of the monoid Mn , and these assemble to an action of M. Furthermore, the action of U on the dual Ê extends uniquely to a continuous action of Û, where continuous means that for fixed v ∈ Ê the quantity uv depends only on the projection of u to Ûn , for some n depending only on v. This is easy to see when E = V: the point is that, if ei denotes the ith basis vector of V, then ue∗i only depends on the top left i × i block of u. The action of L on Ê does not similarly extend to an action of L̂. We can then equivalently think of the representation E as a polynomial functor E on the category of k-vector spaces. We let En be the value of the functor E on kn , so that E itself is identified with the union of the En . We let Ê and Ên be the linear duals of E and En , so that Ê is the inverse limit of the Ên . We note that En ⊂ E is stable under the action of U and Û. It follows that the projection map Ê → Ên is compatible with the action of Û. For the purposes of this paper, we really only need to consider E’s that are finite sums of tensor powers of V. In this case, one does not need to think about polynomial functors: the space En is then the corresponding sum of tensor powers of Vn . We identify Ê with the spectrum of the ring Sym(E) (or more accurately, the k-points of the spectrum), and equip it with the Zariski topology. By definition, a regular function f on Ê is an element of Sym(E). Since E is the union of the En , it follows that f belongs to Sym(En ) for some n; we say that f has level n. This implies that f factors through the projection Ê → Ên . 4. The general linear case Let G = GL×GL, and let H be the subgroup of elements of the form (g, t g −1). Of course, H is isomorphic to GL. By definition, every algebraic representation of H is a subquotient of E|H for some polynomial representation E of G, so it suffices to prove noetherianity of Ê|H for all such E. We therefore fix E for the rest of this section, and prove that Ê|H is noetherian. Let G act on M by the formula (g, h) · A = gAt h. The dual action of G on M̂ is given by the formula (g, h) · A = t g −1 Ah−1 . Let I ∈ M̂ be the identity matrix. Note that the stabilizer of I in G is exactly H. Given an H-stable closed subset Z of Ê, let Z + be the closure of the G-orbit of the set {I} × Z in M̂ × Ê. (The topology on the product is the Zariski topology on the product of schemes, which is not the product topology.) We will prove: Proposition 4.1. Let Z be an H-stable closed subset of Ê. Then {I} × Z = ({I} × Ê) ∩ Z + . Before proving the proposition, we note an important consequence. Corollary 4.2. The function Z 7→ Z + defines an order-preserving injection (4.3)  {H-stable closed subsets of Ê} → {G-stable closed subsets of M̂ × Ê}  In particular, Ê is topologically H-noetherian. Proof. It is clear that Z 7→ Z + is order preserving. By the proposition, we can recover Z from Z + , and so the map is injective. Since M̂ × Ê is the dual of the polynomial representation M ⊕ E of G, Proposition 2.3 shows that it is topologically G-noetherian. In particular, the right side of (4.3) satisfies the descending chain condition. It follows that the left side does as well, and so Ê is topologically H-noetherian.   TOPOLOGICAL NOETHERIANITY FOR ALGEBRAIC REPRESENTATIONS  5  Let Û′ be the subset of Û consisting of matrices where all diagonal entries are 1, and let Ŵ = Û × Û′ . Let ϕ : Ŵ → M̂ be the function defined by ϕ(u, v) = t uIv. Note that since t u ∈ L̂ and v ∈ Û, this matrix product is defined. Let ϕn : Ŵn → M̂n be defined by the same formula. We note that the diagram Ŵ   Ŵn  ϕ  /  M̂   ϕn  M̂n /  commutes. That is, if i, j ≤ n then the (i, j) entry of ϕ(u, v) only depends on the top left n × n blocks of u and v. Lemma 4.4. Let X be an affine variety over k, and let h : Ŵn × X → k be a regular function. Then there is a monomial m in the diagonal entries of Ûn and a regular function H : M̂n × X → k such that H(ϕ(w), x) = m(u)h(w, x) holds for all w = (u, v) ∈ Ŵn and x ∈ X. Proof. Consider the polynomial ring R = Sym(Wn ) = k[uij , vkl ]1≤i≤j≤n,1≤k<l≤n ⊗ OX . The morphism ϕn induces an injective ring homomorphism Sym(Mn ) ⊗OX → R, so we may view the former as a subring of the latter. Note that this subring is generated (as an OX -algebra) P Pj−1 by terms of the form ik=1 uki vkj for i < j and terms of the form uji + k=1 uki vkj for i ≥ j. We denote these terms by aij . It thus suffices to show that all uij and vkl can be expressed as a quotient of a polynomial in the aij by a monomial in the uii . We do so by induction. a We have u1i = ai1 for any i ≥ 1 and v1j = u1j for any j > 1. Both of these are expressions 11 of the desired form. Now suppose that uki and vkj can be expressed in the desired form for all k ≤ i < j with k < K, for some K. For i ≥ K we see that aiK is equal to uKi plus terms of the form uki vkK with k < K; since we have an expression of the desired form for each of these other terms, we find one for uKi . For j > K, we find that aKj is equal to uKK vKj plus terms of the form ukK vkj with k < K; once again, this yields an expression of the desired form for vKj . This concludes the proof of the lemma.  Let f be a regular function on Ê of level n that vanishes on Z. We define a function hf on Ŵ × Ê by hf (w, x) = f (w · x). Note that the above formula makes use of the action map Û × Û × Ê → Ê, which exists since Ê is a polynomial representation of G. We claim that hf is a regular function of level n. Consider the diagram Ŵ × Ê   /  Ŵn × Ên  Ê   /  Ên  f  f  k /  /  k  The left horizontal maps are the action maps. Both squares commute, so the whole diagram does, and thus hf factors through the left map and so has level n. It follows from the Lemma 4.4 that there is a monomial mf in the diagonal entries of Ûn such that mf hf induces a regular function on M̂ × Ê of level n; call this function Hf .  6  ROB H. EGGERMONT AND ANDREW SNOWDEN  Lemma 4.5. The function Hf vanishes on Z + . Proof. Let Gm = GLm ×GLm , and let Hm ⊂ Gm be the set of matrices of the form (g, tg −1 ). It suffices to show that Hf vanishes on a dense subset of the Gm -orbit of {I} × Z for all m ≫ 0. Now, the set Wm Hm ⊂ Gm is dense, since a generic element of GLm can be written as a product of an upper triangular and lower triangular matrix. Suppose that g = wh, with m ≥ n. Writing w = (u, v), we have g = (uh, v th−1 ). Note that g · I = t (uh)−1 I(v t h−1 )−1 = t u−1 Iv −1 = ϕ(w −1 ). Let z ∈ Z. We then have Hf (g(I, z)) = Hf (ϕ(w −1), gz) = mf (u−1)hf (w −1 , gz). Now, by definition, we have hf (w −1 , gz) = f (w −1whz) = f (hz) Since Z is H-stable, we have hz ∈ Z. Since f vanishes on Z, we thus see that this expression vanishes.  Lemma 4.6. Suppose z ∈ Ê does not belong to Z. Then there exists f vanishing on Z such that Hf (I, z) 6= 0. Proof. Let n be such that the projection z of z to Ên does not belong to Zn . We can thus find a regular function f on Ên that vanishes on Zn but does not vanish at z. We have Hf (I, z) = Hf (ϕ(I, I), z) = mf (I)hf ((I, I), z). Since mf (u) is monomial in the diagonal entries of u, it follows that mf (I) 6= 0. Furthermore, we have hf (I, I, z) = f (z) 6= 0. We thus see that Hf (I, z) 6= 0.  Proof of Proposition 4.1. It is clear that {I} × Z is contained in the intersection of {I} × Ê and Z + . Suppose that z ∈ Ê does not belong to Z. Let f be as in Lemma 4.6. By Lemma 4.5, we see that Hf belongs to the ideal of Z + . Since Hf (I, z) 6= 0, it follows that (I, z) 6∈ Z + , which proves the result.  5. Some counterexamples Draisma’s theorem states that if E is a polynomial representation of G then Ê is topologically G-noetherian. One can identify En with the spectrum of Sym(Ên ), and in this way regard E = lim En as an ind-scheme. (The elements of Sym(Ê) define functions on E, −→ and their zero loci define the closed sets.) It is therefore sensible to ask if E is topologically noetherian. In [ESS] it is proved that this is the case: in fact, the G-stable closed sets of E and Ê are shown to be in bijection, and so noetherianity of E follows from Draisma’s theorem. We now explain that ind- version of Theorem 1.2 fails. In fact, noetherianity fails due to an obvious obstruction in each case. First consider the GL case. If m is an element of M then one can make sense of the determinant χ(m) = det(1 − tm), a polynomial in t. The action of GL on M by conjugation defines an algebraic representation, and leaves χ invariant. Let ci (m) be the coefficient of ti in χ(m). Then ci : M → A1 is a GL-invariant function. Taken together, the ci define an GL-invariant function c : M → A∞ , where the target is the ind-scheme lim An . It is easy to −→ see that c is surjective, from which it follows that M is not topologically H-noetherian. (If  TOPOLOGICAL NOETHERIANITY FOR ALGEBRAIC REPRESENTATIONS  7  Z• is an infinite strictly descending chain of closed subsets of A∞ then c−1 (Z• ) is an infinite strictly descending chain of H-stable closed subsets of S.) The other cases are similar. In the symplectic case, one considers the characteristic polynomial of anti-symmetric matrices, while in the orthogonal case one uses symmetric matrices. We remark that V̂ (and more generally V̂d for any d ≥ 1) is known to be topologically S-noetherian [Co, Co2, AH, HS], where S is the infinite symmetric group, and for similar reasons V is not topologically S-noetherian (one makes an invariant polynomial by using the coordinates as roots, so that the ci ’s are elementary symmetric functions). It is interesting to observe that these counterexamples do not apply in the pro- setting since the invariants they use no longer make sense: one cannot take the characteristic polynomial of an element of M̂, as this would involve infinite sums. Similarly, the proof of noetherianity in the pro- setting does not apply in the ind-setting since the element I ∈ M̂ does not belong to M. References [AH] [AH2] [Co] [Co2] [CEF] [Dr] [DE] [DES] [DK] [DPS] [Eg] [ESS] [HS] [NSS] [PSa] [PSe]  [PSt]  [Sn]  Matthias Aschenbrenner, Christopher Hillar. Finite generation of symmetric ideals. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 359 (2007), 5171–5192. arXiv:math/0411514. Tigran Ananyan, Melvin Hochster. Small Subalgebras of Polynomial Rings and Stillman’s Conjecture. arXiv:1610.09268 D. E. Cohen. On the laws of a metabelian variety. J. Algebra 5 (1967), 267–273. D. E. Cohen. Closure relations, Buchberger’s algorithm, and polynomials in infinitely many variables. Computation theory and logic, (1987), 78–87. Thomas Church, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Benson Farb. FI-modules and stability for representations of symmetric groups. Duke Math. J. 164 (2015), no. 9, 1833–1910. arXiv:1204.4533v4 Jan Draisma. Topological Noetherianity of polynomial functors. arXiv:1705.01419 Jan Draisma, Rob H. Eggermont. Plücker varieties and higher secants of Sato’s Grassmannian. J. Reine Angew. Math., to appear. arXiv:1402.1667 Harm Derksen, Rob Eggermont, Andrew Snowden. Topological noetherianity for cubic polynomials. Algebra & Number Theory, to appear. arXiv:1701.01849 J. Draisma, J. Kuttler. Bounded-rank tensors are defined in bounded degree. Duke Math. J.163 (2014), no. 1, 35–63. arXiv:1103.5336 Elizabeth Dan-Cohen, Ivan Penkov, Vera Serganova. A Koszul category of representations of finitary Lie algebras. Adv. Math. 289 (2016), 250-278. arXiv:1105.3407v2 Rob H. Eggermont. Finiteness properties of congruence classes of infinite matrices. Linear Algebra Appl. 484 (2015), 290–303. arXiv:1411.0526 Daniel Erman, Steven Sam, Andrew Snowden. Generalizations of Stillman’s conjecture via twisted commutative algebras. In preparation. Christopher Hillar, Seth Sullivant. Finite Gröbner bases in infinite dimensional polynomial rings and applications. Adv. in Math. 221 (2012), 1–25. arXiv:0908.1777 Rohit Nagpal, Steven V Sam, Andrew Snowden. Noetherianity of some degree two twisted commutative algebras. Selecta Math. (N.S.) 22 (2016), no. 2, 913–937. arXiv:1501.06925v2 Andrew Putman, Steven V Sam. Representation stability and finite linear groups. Duke Math. J., to appear. arXiv:1408.3694v2 Ivan Penkov, Vera Serganova. Categories of integrable sl(∞)-, o(∞)-, sp(∞)-modules. Representation Theory and Mathematical Physics, Contemp. Math. 557, AMS 2011, pp. 335–357. arXiv:1006.2749v1 Ivan Penkov, Konstantin Styrkas. Tensor representations of classical locally finite Lie algebras. Developments and trends in infinite-dimensional Lie theory, Progr. Math. 288, Birkhäuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 2011, pp. 127–150. arXiv:0709.1525v1 Andrew Snowden. Syzygies of Segre embeddings and ∆-modules. Duke Math. J. 162 (2013), no. 2, 225–277. arXiv:1006.5248v4  8  ROB H. EGGERMONT AND ANDREW SNOWDEN  [SS] [SS2]  Steven V Sam, Andrew Snowden. Stability patterns in representation theory. Forum Math. Sigma 3 (2015), e11, 108 pp. arXiv:1302.5859v2. Steven V Sam, Andrew Snowden. Gröbner methods for representations of combinatorial categories. J. Amer. Math. Soc., to appear. arXiv:1409.1670v3  Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI E-mail address: robegger@umich.edu URL: http://www-personal.umich.edu/~robegger/ Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI E-mail address: asnowden@umich.edu URL: http://www-personal.umich.edu/~asnowden/

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
