Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3002

Abstract:
OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  arXiv:1409.1085v3 [math.GR] 2 Apr 2016  WERNER THUMANN Abstract. We propose a new unifying framework for Thompson-like groups using a well-known device called operads and category theory as language. We discuss examples of operad groups which have appeared in the literature before. As a first application, we proof a theorem which implies that planar or symmetric or braided operads with transformations satisfying some finiteness conditions yield operad groups of type F∞ . This unifies and extends existing proofs that certain Thompson-like groups are of type F∞ .  Contents 1. Introduction 1.1. Structure of the article 1.2. Notation and conventions 1.3. Acknowledgements 2. Preliminaries on categories 2.1. Comma categories 2.2. The classifying space of a category 2.3. The fundamental groupoid of a category 2.4. Coverings of categories 2.5. Contractibility and homotopy equivalences 2.6. Smashing isomorphisms in categories 2.7. Calculus of fractions and cancellation properties 2.8. Monoidal categories 2.9. Cones and joins 2.10. The Morse method for categories 3. Operad groups 3.1. Basic definitions 3.2. Normal forms 3.3. Calculus of fractions and cancellation properties 3.4. Operads with transformations 3.5. Examples 4. A topological finiteness result 4.1. Three types of arc complexes 4.2. A contractible complex 4.3. Isotropy groups 4.4. Finite type filtration 4.5. Connectivity of the filtration 4.6. Applications References  2 3 4 4 4 4 5 5 6 7 8 9 11 13 14 18 18 22 23 24 26 32 33 39 39 42 43 53 54  2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 20F65; Secondary 57M07, 20F05, 18D50. Key words and phrases. Thompson groups, operads, finiteness properties. 1  2  WERNER THUMANN  1. Introduction In unpublished notes of 1965, Richard Thompson defined three interesting groups F, T, V . For example, F is the group of all orientation preserving piecewise linear homeomorphisms of the unit interval with breakpoints lying in the dyadic rationals and with slopes being powers of 2. It has the presentation F = x0 , x1 , x2 , . . . | x−1 k xn xk = xn+1 for k < n In the subsequent years until the present days, hundreds of papers have been devoted to these and to related groups. The reason for this is that they have the ability to unite seemingly incompatible properties. For example, Thompson showed that V is an infinite finitely-presented simple group which contains every finite group as a subgroup. Even more is true: Brown showed in [7] that V is of type F∞ which means that there is a classifying space for V with finitely many cells in every dimension. For F , this was proven by Brown and Geoghegan in [8]. They also showed that H k (F, ZF ) = 0 for every k ≥ 0. This implies in particular that all homotopy groups of F at infinity vanish and that F has infinite cohomological dimension. Thus, they found the first example of an infinite dimensional torsion-free group of type F∞ . In [6], Brin and Squier showed that F is a free group free group, i.e. contains no non-abelian free subgroups. Geoghegan conjectured in 1979 that F is non-amenable. If this is true, F would be an elegant counterexample to the von Neumann conjecture. Ol’shanskii disproved the von Neumann conjecture around 1980 by giving a different counterexample (see [32] and the references therein). Despite several attempts of various authors, the amenability question for F still seems to be open at the time of writing. During the 1970s, Thompson’s group F was rediscovered twice: In the context of homotopy theory by Freyd and Heller [21] and in connection with a problem in shape theory by Dydak [12]. Since the introduction of the classical Thompson groups F, T and V , a lot of generalizations have appeared in the literature which have a “Thompson-esque” feeling to them. Among them are the so-called diagram or picture groups [25], various groups of piecewise linear homeomorphisms of the unit interval [39], groups acting on ultrametric spaces via local similarities [26], higher dimensional Thompson groups nV [4] and the braided Thompson group BV [5]. A recurrent theme in the study of these groups are topological finiteness properties, most notably property F∞ . The proof of this property is very similar in each case, going back to a method of Brown, the Brown criterion [7], and a technique of Bestvina and Brady, the discrete Morse Lemma for affine complexes [2]. This program has been conducted in all the above mentioned classes of groups: For diagram or picture groups in [14, 15], for the piecewise linear homeomorphisms in [39], for local similarity groups in [16], for the higher dimensional Thompson groups in [20] and for the braided Thompson group in [9]. The main motivation to define the class of operad groups, which are the central objects in this article, was to find a framework in which a lot of the Thompsonlike groups could be recovered and in which the established techniques could be performed to show property F∞ , thus unifying and extending existing proofs in the literature. The main device to define these groups are discrete operads. Operads are well established objects whose importance in mathematics and physics has steadily increased during the last decades. Representations of operads constitute algebras of various types and consequently find applications in such diverse areas as LieTheory, Noncommutative Geometry, Algebraic Topology, Differential Geometry, Field Theories and many more. To apply our F∞ theorem to a given Thompsonlike group, one has to find the operadic structure underlying the group. Then one  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  3  has to check whether this operad satisfies certain finiteness conditions. In a lot of cases, the proofs of these conditions are either trivial or straightforward. 1.1. Structure of the article. Our language will be strongly category theory flavoured. Although we assume the basics of category theory, we collect and recall in Section 2 all the tools we will need for the definition of operad groups and for our main result. We lay a particular emphasis on topological aspects of categories by considering categories as topological objects via the nerve functor. This can be made precise by endowing the category of (small) categories with a model structure Quillen equivalent to the usual homotopy category of spaces, but we won’t use this fact. In Subsection 2.10, we will discuss a tool which is probably not so well-known as the others. There, we introduce the discrete Morse method for categories in analogy to the one for simplicial complexes: With the help of a Morse function, a category can be filtered by a nested sequence of full subcategories. The relative connectivity of such a filtration is controlled by the connectivity of certain categories associated to each filtration step, the so-called descending links. This can be used to compute lower bounds for the connectivity of categories. In Section 3, we will introduce the main objects of this article, the so-called operad groups. Before we do this, we recall the notion of operads (internal to the category of sets). This is an abstract algebraic structure generalizing that of a monoid. It comes with an associative multiplication and with identity elements. However, elements in an operad, which are called operations, can be of higher arity (or degree): An operation posseses several inputs and one output. If we have an operation with n inputs, then we can plug the outputs of n other operations into the inputs of the first one, yielding composition maps for the operad. This concept can be generalized even more: Just as one proceeds from monoids to categories by introducing further objects, we can introduce colors to operads and label the inputs and outputs of operations with these colors. Then we require that the composition maps respect this coloring. Furthermore, we can introduce actions of the symmetric or braid groups on the inputs of the operations and obtain symmetric or braided operads. We then attach, in a very natural way, a category to each operad, called the category of operators. When taking fundamental groups of these categories, we arrive at the concept of operad groups. In Subsection 3.5, we then discuss some examples of operads and corresponding operad groups. We will see that all of the Thompson-like groups mentioned in the first part of the introduction can be realized as operad groups. Furthermore, we give new examples and even a procedure how to generate a lot of these Thompson-like groups as operad groups associated to suboperads of endomorphism operads. We will also discuss so-called operads with transformations which are operads with invertible degree 1 operations. In this context, we will introduce very elementary and elementary operations. These model in some sense the generators and relations in such an operad with transformations. In particular, we can define what it means for such an operad to be finitely generated or of finite type. This will be important in Section 4 where we prove the following Theorem. Let O be a finite type (symmetric/braided) operad with transformations which is color-tame and such that there are only finitely many colors and degree 1 operations. Assume further that O satisfies the cancellative calculus of fractions. Then the operad groups associated to O are of type F∞ . The conditions are explained in the text and are usually not hard to verify in practice. The proof proceeds roughly as follows and the ideas are mainly inspired by [2, 7, 9, 20, 39]. Denote by S the category of operators of O. We then can  4  WERNER THUMANN  look at the universal covering category U of S which is contractible due to the conditions in the theorem. We mod out the isomorphisms in U and obtain the quotient category U/G which is still contractible. The operad group Γ, which is the fundamental group of S, acts on U by deck transformations. This induces an action on U/G. Brown’s criterion applied to this action yields that Γ is of type F∞ if we show that the isotropy groups of the action are of type F∞ and if we find a filtration by invariant finity type subcategories with relative connectivity tending to infinity. The latter is shown by appealing to the discrete Morse method for categories mentioned earlier. Thus, we have to inspect the connectivity of certain descending links. This is the hardest part of the proof. We filter each descending link by two subcategories, the core and the corona. The core is related to certain arc complexes in Rd with d = 1, 2, 3. A lower bound for the connectivity of these complexes is given in Theorem 4.9. The connectivity for the corona and for the whole descending link is then deduced from the connectivity of the core by using again the discrete Morse method. 1.2. Notation and conventions. When f : A → B and g : B → C are two composable arrows, we write f ∗ g or f g for the composite A → C instead of the usual notation g ◦ f . Consequently, it is often better to plug in arguments from the left. When we do this, we use the notation x⊲f for the evaluation of f at x. However, we won’t entirely drop the usual notation f (x) and use both notations side by side. Objects of type Aut(X) will be made into a group by the definition f · g := f ∗ g. Conversely, a group G is considered as a groupoid with one object and arrows the elements in G together with the composition f ∗ g := f · g. 1.3. Acknowledgements. I want to thank my adviser Roman Sauer for the opportunity to pursue mathematics, for his guidance, encouragement and support over the last few years. I also gratefully acknowledge financial support by the DFG grants 1661/3-1 and 1661/3-2. 2. Preliminaries on categories In this section, we review some aspects of category theory which we need for later considerations. In particular, we want to emphasize the concept of seeing categories as topological objects. Note that everything, except the Morse method for categories explained in Subsection 2.10, should be mathematical folklore and we make no claim of originality. f  g  2.1. Comma categories. Let A − → C ← − B be two functors. Then the comma category f ↓g has as objects all the triples (A, B, γ) where A resp. B is an object in A resp. B and γ : f (A) → g(B) is an arrow in C. An arrow from (A, B, γ) to (A′ , B ′ , γ ′ ) is a pair (α, β) of arrows α : A → A′ in A and β : B → B ′ in B such that the diagram f (A)  γ  f (α)   f (A′ )  / g(B) g(β)  γ′   / g(B ′ )  commutes. Composition is given by composing the components. If f is the inclusion of a subcategory, we write A↓g for the comma category f ↓g. Furthermore, if A is just a subcategory with one object A and its identity arrow, we write A↓g. In this case, the objects of the comma category are pairs (B, γ) where  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  5  B is an object in B and γ : A → g(B) is an arrow. An arrow from (B, γ) to (B ′ , γ ′ ) is an arrow β : B → B ′ such that the triangle g(B) ③< ③ ③③ ③③ ③③ g(β) A❉ ❉❉ ❉❉ ❉❉ ❉"  γ′ g(B ′ ) γ  commutes. Of course, there are analogous abbreviations for the right factor. 2.2. The classifying space of a category. We assume that the reader is familiar with the basics of simplicial sets (see e.g. [24]). The nerve N (C) of a category C is a simplicial set defined as follows: A k-simplex is a sequence α  α  αk−1  1 0 . . . −−−→ Ak A1 −→ A0 −→  of k composable arrows. The i’th face map di : N (C)k → N (C)k−1 is given by composing the arrows at the object Ai . When i is 0 or k, then the object Ai is removed from the sequence instead. The i’th degeneracy map si : N (C)k → N (C)k+1 is given by inserting the identity at the object Ai . The geometric realization |N (C)| of N (C) is a CW-complex which we call the classifying space B(C) of C. See [43] for the reason why this is called a classifying space. If the category C is a group, then B(C) is the usual classifying space of the group which is defined as the unique space (up to homotopy equivalence) with fundamental group the given group and with higher homotopy groups vanishing. Since we can view any category as a space via the above construction, any topological notion or concept can be transported to the world of categories. For example, if we say that the category C is connected, then we mean that B(C) is connected. Of course, one can easily think of an intrinsic definition of connectedness for categories and we will give some for other topological concepts below. But there are also concepts for which a combinatorial description is at least unknown, for example higher homotopy groups. Transporting topological concepts to the category CAT of (small) categories via the nerve functor can be made precise: The Thomason model structure on CAT [10, 40] is a model structure Quillen equivalent to the usual model structure on SSET, the category of simplicial sets. Every simplicial complex is homeomorphic to the classifying space of some category: A simplicial complex can be seen as a partially ordered set of simplices with the order relation given by the face relation. Moreover, a partially ordered set (poset) is just a category with at most one arrow between any two objects. The classifying space of a poset coming from a simplicial complex is exactly the barycentric subdivision of the simplicial complex. Even more is true: McDuff showed in [31] that for each connected simplicial complex there is a monoid (i.e. a category with only one object) with classifying space homotopy equivalent to the given complex. Thus, every path-connected space has the weak homotopy type of some monoid. For example, observe the monoid consisting of the identity element and elements xij with multiplication rules xij xkl = xil . In [17] it is shown that its classifying space is homotopy equivalent to the 2-sphere. 2.3. The fundamental groupoid of a category. Following the philosophy of transporting topological concepts to categories via the nerve functor, we define the fundamental groupoid π1 (C) of a category C to be the fundamental groupoid of its  6  WERNER THUMANN  classifying space. There is also an intrinsic description of the fundamental groupoid of C in terms of the category itself which we will describe now (see e.g. [24, Chapter III, Corollary 1.2] that these two notions are indeed the same up to equivalence). The objects of π1 (C) are the objects of C and the arrows of π1 (C) are paths modulo homotopy. Here, a path in C from an object A to an object B is a zig-zag of morphisms from A to B, i.e. starting from A, one travels from object to object over the arrows of C, regardless of the direction of the arrows. For example, the following zig-zag is a path in C A ← C1 → C2 ← C3 ← C4 → C5 → B Paths can be concatenated in the obvious way. The homotopy relation on paths is the smallest equivalence relation respecting the operation of concatenation of paths generated by the following elementary relations: α  β  α  β  α  α  A A  id  A  id  A  A− →B− →C A← −B← −C  αβ  ∼  A −−→ C  ∼  A ←−− C  A− →B← −A ∼ α α A← −B− →A ∼ A −→ A ∼ A ←− A ∼  βα  where the A’s on the right represent the empty path at A. Composition in π1 (C) is given by concatenating representatives. The identities are represented by the empty paths. If A is an object of C then we denote by π1 (C, A) the automorphism group of π1 (C) at A and call it the fundamental group of C at A. The fundamental groupoid of C has two further descriptions: First, denote by G the left adjoint functor to the inclusion functor from groupoids to categories. Then we have π1 (C) = G(C). Second, it is the localization C[C −1 ] of C (at all its morphisms) since it comes with a canonical functor ϕ : C → π1 (C) satisfying the following universal property: Having any other functor η : C → A with the property that η(f ) is an isomorphism in A for every arrow f in C, then there is a unique functor ǫ : π1 (C) → A such that ϕǫ = η. ϕ  / π1 (C) C❉ ❉❉ ❉❉ ❉ ǫ η ❉❉ ❉!  A 2.4. Coverings of categories. Let P : D → C be a functor. We say that P is a covering if for every arrow a in C and every object X in D which projects via P onto the domain or the codomain of a, there exists exactly one arrow b in D with domain resp. codomain X and projecting onto a via P . In other words, arrows can be lifted uniquely provided that the lift of the domain or codomain is given. Of course, P yields a map on the classifying spaces. To justify the definition of covering functor, we have the following: Proposition 2.1. Let P : D → C be a functor. Then P is a covering functor if and only if BP : BD → BC is a covering map of spaces. Proof. By [22, Appendix I, 3.2], BP = |N P | : |N D| → |N C| is a covering map if and only if N P : N D → N C is a covering of simplicial sets as defined in [22, Appendix I, 2.1]. This means that every n-simplex in N C uniquely lifts to N D provided that the lift of a vertex of the simplex is given. The lifting property for P as defined above says that this is true for 1-simplices. So it is clear that P is a covering functor  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  7  provided that BP is a covering map of spaces. For the converse implication, one exploits special properties of nerves of categories. Not every simplicial set arises as the nerve of a category. The Segal condition gives a necessary and sufficient condition for a simplicial set to come from a category: Every horn Λin for 0 < i < n can be uniquely filled by an n-simplex. Using this, the lifting property for 1simplices implies the lifting property for n-simplices.  Now let C be a category and X an object in C. Observe the canonical functor ϕ : C → π1 (C). Define UX (C) to be the category X↓ϕ. The canonical projection UX (C) → C sending an object (B, γ) to B is a covering. Furthermore, UX (C) is simply connected, i.e. connected and its fundamental groupoid is equivalent to the terminal category (see [33]). So it deserves the name universal covering category. More precisely, it is the universal covering of the component of C which contains the object X. There is a canonical functor π1 (C) → CAT taking objects X to the category UX (C) and an arrow f : X → Y to a functor UX (C) → UY (C) which is given by precomposition with f −1 . Fixing the object X, this functor restricts to a functor π1 (C, X) → CAT sending the unique object of the group π1 (C, X) to the universal covering UX (C). This is the same as a representation of π1 (C, X) in CAT, i.e. a group  homomorphism ρ : π1 (C, X) → Aut UX (C) into the group of invertible functors with multiplication given by f · g := f ∗ g. Equivalently, this is a right action of the group π1 (C, X) on UX (C) given by the formula α · γ := α⊲(γ⊲ρ) for γ ∈ π1 (C, X) and arrows α in UX (C). This gives the usual deck transformations on the universal covering. 2.5. Contractibility and homotopy equivalences. We say that a category is contractible if its classifying space is contractible and we say that a functor F : C → D is a homotopy equivalence if BF : BC → BD is one. There are some standard conditions which assure that a category is contractible or a functor is a homotopy equivalence. These will be recalled below. A non-empty category C is contractible if i) C has an initial object. ii) C has binary products. iii) C is a generalized poset (see Definition 2.8) and there is an object X0 together with a functor F : C → C such that for each object X there exist arrows X → F (X) ← X0 (compare with [35, Subsection 1.5]). iv) C is filtered which means that for every two objects X, Y there is an object Z with arrows X → Z, Y → Z and for every two arrows f, g : A → B there is an arrow h : B → C such that f h = gh. Of course, the dual statements are also true. It is instructive to sketch the arguments for these four claims: i) Let I be the category with two objects and one non-identity arrow from the first to the second object. The classifying space of I is the unit interval I. A natural transformation of two functors f, g : C → D can be interpreted as a functor C × I → D. On the level of spaces, this gives a homotopy BC × I → BD. If C is a category with initial object X0 , then there is a unique natural transformation from the functor constX0 (sending every arrow of C to idX0 ) to the identity functor idC . On the level of spaces, this yields a homotopy between idBC and the constant map BC → BC with value the point X0 . ii) Choose an object X0 in C. Let F : C → C be the functor Y 7→ X0 × Y . Projection onto the first factor yields a natural transformation F → constX0 and projection onto the second factor yields a natural transformation F →  8  WERNER THUMANN  idC . This gives two homotopies which together give the desired contraction of BC. iii) First note that, if F, G : C → C are two functors with the property that there is an arrow F (X) → G(X) for each object X, then this already defines a natural transformation F → G by uniqueness of arrows in the generalized poset. Now the conditions on X0 and F yield that there are natural transformations idC → F and constX0 → F . On the level of spaces this gives the desired contraction of BC. iv) First, let D be a finite subcategory of C. We claim that there exists a cocone over D in C, i.e. there is an object Z in C and for each object Y in D an arrow Y → Z which commute with the arrows in D. This cocone is contractible because Z is a terminal object. A cocone can be constructed as follows: First pick two objects Y1 , Y2 in D and find an object Z ′ with arrows Y1 → Z ′ and Y2 → Z ′ . Pick another object Y3 and find an object Z ′′ with arrows Y3 → Z ′′ and Z ′ → Z ′′ . Repeating this with all objects of D, we obtain an object Q together with arrows fY : Y → Q for every object Y in D. The fY probably won’t commute with the arrows in D yet, but we can repair this by repeatedly applying the second property of filteredness. Pick an arrow d : Y → Y ′ in D and observe the parallel arrows dfY ′ and fY . Apply the second property to find an arrow ω : Q → Q′ with dfY ′ ω = fY ω. Replace Q by Q′ and all the arrows fD for objects D in D by fD ω. Repeat this with all the other arrows in D. Now to finish the proof of this item, take a map S n → BC. Since S n is compact, it can be homotoped to a map such that the image is covered by the geometric realization of a finite subcategory. The cocone over this subcategory then gives the desired null-homotopy. We recall Quillen’s famous Theorem A from [34] which gives a sufficient but in general not necessary condition for a functor to be a homotopy equivalence. Theorem 2.2. Let f : C → D be a functor. If for each object Y in D the category Y ↓f is contractible, then the functor f is a homotopy equivalence. Similarly, if the category f ↓Y is contractible for each object Y in D, then f is a homotopy equivalence. Remark 2.3. When applying this theorem to an inclusion f : A → B of a full subcategory, it suffices to check Y ↓f = Y ↓A for objects Y not in A. If Y is an object in A, the comma category Y ↓A has the object (Y, idY ) as initial object and thus is automatically contractible. Similar remarks apply to the comma categories f ↓Y = A↓Y . Remark 2.4. If D is a groupoid, then for Y, Y ′ ∈ D the comma categories Y ↓f and Y ′ ↓f are isomorphic. Thus one has to check contractibility only for one Y . The same remarks apply to the comma categories f ↓Y . 2.6. Smashing isomorphisms in categories. Recall that a connected groupoid is equivalent, as a category, to any of its automorphism groups. Consequently, a connected groupoid is contractible if and only if its automorphism groups are trivial. This is the case if and only if there is exactly one isomorphism between any two objects. Let C be a category and G ⊂ C a subcategory which is a disjoint union of contractible groupoids. We define the quotient category C/G as follows: The objects of C/G are equivalence classes of objects of C where we say that X ∼ Y are equivalent if there is an isomorphism X → Y in G. Note that such an isomorphism is unique since each component of G is contractible. We define    HomC/G [X], [Y ] := A → B in C A ∈ [X], B ∈ [Y ] ∼  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  9  where two elements (A → B) ∼ (A′ → B ′ ) in the set are defined to be equivalent if the diagram /B A✤ ✤ ✤ ✤ G∋ ✤ ✤ ∈G   ′ / B′ A commutes. Let [α : A → B] and [β : C → D] be two composable arrows, i.e. [B] = [C], then there is a unique isomorphism γ : B → C in G and one defines [α : A → B] ∗ [β : C → D] := [αγβ : A → D] Set id[X] = [idX ]. One easily checks that C/G is a well-defined category. Remark 2.5. Observe that if X → Y is an arrow in C/G and representatives X and Y have been chosen for X and Y, then there is a unique arrow X → Y representing X → Y. Remark 2.6. Let X and Y be two objects in C/G. Fix some object X0 representing X . Then the arrows X → Y in C/G are in one to one correspondence with arrows X0 → Y in C modulo isomorphisms in G on the right. Likewise, if we fix some object Y0 representing Y, then arrows X → Y in C/G are in one to one correspondence with arrows X → Y0 in C modulo isomorphisms in G on the left. Proposition 2.7. The canonical projection p : C → C/G is a homotopy equivalence. Proof. We want to apply Quillen’s Theorem A (Theorem 2.2) to the projection p : C → C/G. Hence, we have to show that for each object [X] in C/G the comma category [X]↓p is contracible. Indeed, it follows with Remark 2.5 that the object (X, id[X] ) in [X]↓p is an initial object.  In the following, this technique will be applied primarily to generalized posets: Definition 2.8. A generalized poset is a category such that α = β whenever α, β : A → B. Recall that a (honest) poset is a category with at most one arrow between any two objects (regardless of the direction of the arow). In a generalized poset C, however, we allow objects to be uniquely isomorphic. Every subgroupoid G of a generalized poset is a disjoint union of contractible ones and C/G is a generalized poset again. If we collapse each connected component of the subgroupoid consisting of all the isomorphisms, we even get a homotopy equivalent (honest) poset which we call the underlying poset of the generalized poset. 2.7. Calculus of fractions and cancellation properties. The next definition is very classical and due to Gabriel and Zisman [22]. Definition 2.9. Let C be a category. It satisfies the calculus of fractions if the following two conditions are satisfied: • (Square filling) For every pair of arrows f : B → A and g : C → A there are arrows a : D → B and b : D → C such that af = bg. D  a  f  b   C  /B  g   /A  10  WERNER THUMANN  • (Equalization) Whenever we have arrows f, g : A → B and a : B → C such that f a = ga, then there exists an arrow b : D → A with bf = bg. D  b  /A  f g  // B  a  /C  More precisely, this is called the right calculus of fractions. There is also a dual left calculus of fractions. Since we are mainly interested in the right calculus of fractions, we omit the word “right”. Remark 2.10. The existence of binary pullbacks in C trivially implies the square filling property but it also implies the equalization property [1, Lemma 1.2]. So a category with binary pullbacks satisfies the calculus of fractions. The calculus of fractions has positive effects on the complexity of the fundamental groupoid π1 (C): One can show (see e.g. [22] or [3]) that each class in π1 (C) can be represented by a span which is a zig-zag of the form /• •o • Furthermore, two spans • ⑧ ❅❅❅ ⑧ ❅❅ ⑧ ❅❅ ⑧⑧  ⑧ ⑧ • _❅ • ? ❅❅ ⑧⑧ ❅❅ ⑧ ❅❅ ⑧⑧⑧ ⑧ • are homotopic if and only if the diagram can be filled in the following way: • ⑧ O ❅❅❅ ⑧ ❅❅ ⑧ ❅❅ ⑧⑧ o ⑧ ⑧ / • _❅ • ?• ❅❅ ⑧ ❅❅ ⑧⑧ ❅❅ ⑧⑧⑧  ⑧ • In other words, the elements in the localization can be described as fractions and this explains the name of the calculus of fractions. We will frequently write (α, β) for a span consisting of arrows α and β where the first arrow α points to the left (i.e. is the denominator) and the second arrow β points to the right (i.e. is the nominator). Two spans are composed by concatenating representatives to a zig-zag and then transforming the zig-zag into a span by choosing a square filling of the middle cospan. •❖ ❖ ♦ ♦ ❖ ❖ ♦ ♦ ❖ ❖ ♦ ♦   ❖'/ w♦ /•o • • •o • The canonical functor ϕ : C → π1 (C) is given by sending an arrow α to the class represented by the span id α / •o • • Using the special form of the homotopy relation from above, we see that two arrows α, β : X → Y are homotopic if and only if there is an arrow ω : A → X such that ωα = ωβ. We now turn to cancellation properties in categories.  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  11  Definition 2.11. Let C be a category. It is called right cancellative if f a = ga for arrows f, g, a implies f = g. It is called left cancellative if af = ag implies f = g. It is called cancellative if it is left and right cancellative. Remark 2.12. Note that we have the following implications: right cancellation =⇒ equalization equalization + left cancellation =⇒ right cancellation Proposition 2.13. Let C be a category satisfying the cancellative calculus of fractions. Then the canonical functor ϕ : C → π1 (C) is faithful and a homotopy equivalence. Proof. Injectivity is easy: Let f, g be arrows in C which are mapped to the same arrow in π1 (C). This means that f, g are homotopic. Since C satisfies the calculus of fractions, this implies that there is an arrow ω with ωf = ωg. From the cancellation property it follows that f = g. For showing that the functor is a homotopy equivalence, we apply Quillen’s Theorem A (Theorem 2.2) to the functor ϕ : C → π1 (C). Let X be an object in π1 (C), i.e. an object in C. We have to check that the comma category X↓ϕ is contractible. Note that this is the universal covering category UX (C). First we claim that this category is a generalized poset: Let (Z, a) and (Z ′ , a′ ) be objects in X↓ϕ and γ1 , γ2 be two arrows from (Z, a) to (Z ′ , a′ ). This means that Z, Z ′ are objects in C, a : X → Z⊲ϕ and a′ : X → Z ′ ⊲ϕ are arrows in π1 (C) and γ1 , γ2 : Z → Z ′ are arrows in C such that a ∗ (γ1 ⊲ϕ) = a′ = a ∗ (γ2 ⊲ϕ) in π1 (C). It follows γ1 ⊲ϕ = γ2 ⊲ϕ and therefore γ1 = γ2 by injectivity. Now we want to show that this generalized poset is cofiltered. Then we can apply item iv) of Subsection 2.5. We have to show that for each two objects A, A′ in X↓ϕ there is another object B and arrows B → A and B → A′ . Let A = (Z, a) and A′ = (Z ′ , a′ ) with arrows a : X → Z⊲ϕ and a′ : X → Z ′ ⊲ϕ which can be represented by spans (α, β) and (α′ , β ′ ) respectively. Choose a square filling (γ, γ ′ ) of the cospan (α, α′ ). Z⊲ϕ β ②②< O✤ ②② ✤ ②② ✤ • c❋❋ ✤ ⑥ γ ❋ α ⑥ ❋❋ ✤ ⑥ ⑥ ❋ ~⑥ X `❆o❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ Y✤ ❆❆ ①① ❆ ①① ✤ α′ ❆ {①① γ ′ ✤ • ❊❊ ✤ ❊❊ ❊❊ ✤ β′ "  Z ′ ⊲ϕ Then the arrow ω := γα = γ ′ α′ can be interpreted as the denominator of a span representing an arrow in π1 (C) which we denote by ω −1 . Furthermore, since ϕ : C → π1 (C) is the identity on objects, we can write Y = Y ⊲ϕ. Thus, we can define the object B := (Y, ω −1 ) in X↓ϕ. Finally, the arrows γβ and γ ′ β ′ give arrows B → A and B → A′ respectively.  Remark 2.14. The functor ϕ : C → π1 (C) in Proposition 2.13 is still a homotopy equivalence if we drop the cancellation property from the hypothesis. This is proved in [11, Section 7]. 2.8. Monoidal categories. We assume that the reader is acquainted with the definition of monoidal categories, symmetric monoidal categories and braided monoidal categories (see e.g. [30]). In the following, we will always assume the strict versions,  12  WERNER THUMANN  i.e. the associator, right and left unitor are identities. We frequently use the symbol I to denote the unit object. Moreover, for objects X and Y , the symbol γX,Y denotes the natural braiding isomorphism X ⊗ Y → Y ⊗ X. We will sometimes call a monoidal category planar in order to stress that it’s neither symmetric nor braided. Joyal and Street introduced the notion of braided monoidal categories in [27]. It is designed such that the braided monoidal category freely generated by a single object is the groupoid with components the braid groups Bn . More precisely, we have an object for each natural number n, there are no morphisms n → m with n 6= m and Hom(n, n) = Bn . More generally, they indroduced the braided monoidal category Braid(C) freely generated by another category C [27, page 37]: The objects are free words in the objects of C, i.e. finite sequences of objects of C. A morphism consists of a braid β ∈ Bn where the strands are labelled with morphisms αi : Ai → Bi of C, yielding an arrow (β, α1 , . . . , αn ) : (A1⊲β , . . . , An⊲β ) → (B1 , . . . , Bn ) in Braid(C). Composition is performed by composing the braids and applying composition in C to every strand. The tensor product is given by juxtaposition, i.e. by  (β, α1 , . . . , αn ) ⊗ (β ′ , α′1 , . . . , α′n ) = β ⊗ β ′ , α1 , . . . , αn , α′1 , . . . , α′n where β ⊗ β ′ means juxtaposition of braids. A set C can be viewed as a discrete category, so we also obtain the notion of a braided monoidal category Braid(C) freely generated by a set. The arrows are just braids with strands labelled by the elements of C, i.e. are colored. The same remarks apply to the symmetric version. In particular, a category C freely generates a symmetric monoidal category Sym(C). Even simpler, we can form the free monoidal category Mon(C) generated by a category C. The strands are decorated by arrows in C but they are not allowed to braid or cross each other.  If C is a (symmetric/braided) monoidal category, then there is exactly one tensor structure on π1 (C) making it into a (symmetric/braided) monoidal category and such that the canonical functor ϕ : C → π1 (C) respects that structure, i.e. ϕ(X ⊗ Y ) ϕ(α ⊗ β) ϕ(I) ϕ(γX,Y )  = ϕ(X) ⊗ ϕ(Y ) = ϕ(α) ⊗ ϕ(β) = I = γϕ(X),ϕ(Y )  for objects X, Y and arrows α, β. The tensor product on the level of arrows can be constructed as follows: Let one arrow be represented by the zig-zag A0  α  1 ←− A1  α  2 −→ ···  α  k −−→ Ak  and the other arrow by the zig-zag B0  β1  −→ B1  β2  ←−  ···  βl  −→ Bl  Then the tensor product may be represented by the zig-zag α  A0 ⊗  1 ←− ⊗  B0  ←−  id  α  A1 ⊗  2 −→ ··· ⊗ ···  B0  −→  id  ···  α  k −−→ Ak ⊗ ⊗  id  −→  B0  id  −→ ⊗ β1  −→  id  Ak ⊗  ←− ⊗  B1  ←−  β2  id  ··· ···  −→ ⊗  ···  −→  βl  Ak ⊗ Bl  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  13  2.9. Cones and joins. Let C, D be two categories. We define the join C ∗ D. The set of objects of C ∗ D is the disjoint union of the objects of C and D. The set of arrows is the disjoint union of the arrows of C and D together with exactly one arrow C → D for each pair (C, D) of objects C of C and D of D. The composition rules are the unique ones extending the compositions in C and D. The classifying space of the join is homotopy equivalent to the join of the classifying spaces B(C ∗D) ≃ BC ∗BD. Now we define the cone over a category. The objects of Cone(C) are the objects of C plus another object called tip. The arrows are the arrows of C together with exactly one arrow from tip to every object in C. Dually, there is a Cocone(C) over C. In the cocone, the extra arrows go from the objects of C to the extra object tip. Last but not least, when we have a join C ∗ D of two categories, there is a mixed version Coone(C ∗ D) which we call the coone over the join. Again, there is one extra object tip and for every object in C ∗ D we have an extra arrow. When we have an object in C, the extra arrow goes to tip. When we have an arrow in D, the extra arrow comes from tip. The composition of an arrow C → tip with an arrow tip → D is the unique arrow C → D from the definition of the join. All three coning versions give the usual conings on the topological level: B(Cone(C)) B(Cocone(C)) B(Coone(C ∗ D))  ∼ = ∼ = ∼ =  Cone(B(C)) Cone(B(C)) Cone(B(C ∗ D))  The join of two spaces X and Y is defined to be the homotopy pushout of the two projections X ← X × Y → Y . Thus, it is defined only up to homotopy and there is some freedom to choose models of a join. Indeed, there is another construction giving the join of two categories. For this, we need to recall the Grothendieck construction: Let J be some indexing categoryRand F : J → CAT a diagram in CAT. The objects of the Grothendieck construction F are pairs (J, X) of objects J in J and X in J⊲F . An arrow from (J, X) to (J ′ , X ′ ) is a pair (f, α) consisting of an arrow f : J → J ′ and an arrow α : X⊲(f ⊲F ) → X ′ . Composition is given by  (f, α) ∗ (f ′ , α′ ) := f ∗ f ′ , α⊲(f ′ ⊲F ) ∗ α′  In [40] it is shown that there is a model structure on CAT Quillen equivalent to SSET, nowadays called the Thomason model Rstructure, and in [41] it is shown that the nerve of the Grothendieck construction F is homotopy equivalent to the homotopy pushout of the diagram F R∗ N which is obtained from the diagram F by applying the nerve functor. In fact, F realizes the homotopy pushout of F with respect to the Thomason model structure on CAT [19, Section 3]. Now let C, D be categories. We call the Grothendieck construction of the diagram pr  pr  C D C ←−− C × D −−→ D  the Grothendieck join of C and D and denote it by C ◦ D. From [41] we know that B(C ◦ D) is homotopy equivalent to the homotopy pushout of the diagram pr  pr  BC ←−BC −− BC × BD −−BD −→ BD But the latter is the join BC ∗ BD by definition. So we have B(C ◦ D) ≃ BC ∗ BD. One can show that the Grothendieck join is associative and thus we can write C1 ◦ . . . ◦ Ck for a finite collection Ci of categories. The objects of such an iterated Grothendieck join are elements of the set a Y obj(C1 ◦ . . . ◦ Ck ) = obj(Cs ) S⊂{1,...,k} s∈S  14  WERNER THUMANN  Whenever we have S ⊂ T ⊂ {1, . . . , k}, objects (Yt )t∈T and (Xs )s∈S and arrows αs : Ys → Xs in Cs for each s ∈ S, then there is an arrow (αs )s∈S : (Yt )t∈T → (Xs )s∈S For R ⊂ S ⊂ T the composition is given by (αs )s∈S ∗ (βr )r∈R = (αr ∗ βr )r∈R There is also a dual notion of the Grothendieck join which we define as C • D := (C op ◦ Dop )op Since B(Aop ) = B(A) for any category, we still have B(C • D) ≃ BC ∗ BD. Furthermore, it is still associative, so that we can write C1 • . . . • Ck for a finite collection Ci of categories. The objects of such an iterated dual Grothendieck join are elements of the set a Y obj(C1 • . . . • Ck ) = obj(Cs ) S⊂{1,...,k} s∈S  Whenever we have S ⊂ T ⊂ {1, . . . , k}, objects (Xs )s∈S and (Yt )t∈T and arrows αs : Xs → Ys in Cs for each s ∈ S, then there is an arrow (αs )s∈S : (Xs )s∈S → (Yt )t∈T For R ⊂ S ⊂ T the composition is given by (βr )r∈R ∗ (αs )s∈S = (βr ∗ αr )r∈R  2.10. The Morse method for categories. We first recall the Morse method in the case of simplicial complexes which has been used in [2] to prove finiteness properties of certain groups. We then explain the same method in the context of categories. Let C be a simplicial complex. Let v be a vertex in C. Denote by C −v the full subcomplex spanned by the vertices of C except v. Observe the link lk(v) of v in C which is contained in C −v . We then have a canonical pushout diagram  / Cone lk(v) lk(v)  C −v   /C   where Cone lk(v) denotes the simplicial cone over lk(v). The following lemma expresses the connectivity of the pair (C, C −v ) in terms of the connectivity of lk(v). Lemma 2.15. Let X and L be two spaces and L → C a cofibration into a contractible space C. Let /C L   /Z X be a pushout of spaces. If L is (n−1)-connected, then the pair (Z, X) is n-connected. The proof is a standard application of the Seifert–van Kampen theorem, the Hurewicz theorem and the Mayer–Vietoris sequence for pushouts. More generally, let X0 be the full subcomplex of the simplicial complex X spanned by a subset of vertices. Then X can be built up from X0 by successively adding vertices. We thus get a filtration X0 ⊂ X1 ⊂ . . . ⊂ X of X by full subcomplexes. If v is the vertex in Xi which is not contained in Xi−1 , then we define lk↓ (v) := lkXi (v) = lkX (v) ∩ Xi−1  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  15  to be the descending link of v. If all the descending links appearing this way are highly connected, then also the pair (X , X0 ) will be highly connected and, using the long exact homotopy sequence, we obtain the following: Proposition 2.16. Let x0 ∈ X0 be a point. Assume that each descending link is n-connected. Then, we have πk (X0 , x0 ) ∼ = πk (X , x0 ) for k = 0, . . . , n. Note that, in general, the descending links depend on the order in which the vertices are added. We call two vertices v1 , v2 in X \ X0 independent if they are not joined by an edge in X . Assume now that we want to add v1 and then v2 at some step of the process. The independence condition ensures that the descending links of v1 and v2 do not depend on the order in which v1 and v2 are added. The adding order is often encoded in a Morse function. This is a function f assigning to each vertex in X \ X0 an element in a totally ordered set, e.g. N. We require that vertices with the same f -value are pairwise independent. We then add vertices in order of ascending f -values. Because of the independence property, the adding order of vertices with the same f -value can be chosen arbitrarily. Alternatively, we can add vertices with the same f -value all at once. We now give a version of this concept for categories. Let C be a category and X an object in C with HomC (X, X) = {idX }. Define C −X to be the full subcategory of C spanned by the objects of C except X. We define lk↓ (X) := C −X ↓X to be the descending up link of X and lk↓ (X) := X↓C −X to be the descending down link of X. Furthermore, define lk↓ (X) := lk↓ (X) ∗ lk↓ (X) to be the descending link of X. We have a commutative diagram D as follows: lk↓ (X)   / Coone lk↓ (X) ∗ lk (X) ↓   C −X   /C  The horizontal arrows are the obvious inclusions. We explain the vertical arrows, starting with lk ↓ (X) ∗ lk↓ (X) → C −X An object either comes from lk↓ (X) and thus is a pair (Y, Y → X) with Y an object in C −X or comes from lk↓ (X) and thus is a pair (Y, X → Y ) with Y an object in C −X . In both cases, the object will be sent to Y . Similarly, on the level of arrows, it is also the canonical projection from lk↓ (X) or lk ↓ (X) to C −X . However, for each object (Y, Y → X) in lk↓ (X) and each object (Y ′ , X → Y ′ ) in lk ↓ (X), there is another unique arrow in the join. Send this arrow to the composed arrow Y → X → Y ′ . Next, we will define the arrow  Coone lk↓ (X) ∗ lk↓ (X) → C Of course, in order to make the diagram commutative, this functor restricted to the base lk↓ (X) of the coone is the one already defined above. So we have to define the images of the extra object tip and the extra arrows. Send tip to X. Let  16  WERNER THUMANN  (Y, Y → X) be an object of lk↓ (X). The arrow from this object to tip is sent to the arrow Y → X. Similarly, let (Y, X → Y ) be an object of lk↓ (X). Then the arrow from tip to this object is sent to the arrow X → Y . Our goal is to show that the diagram D becomes a pushout on the level of classifying spaces. Unfortunately, this is not always the case. Consider for example the groupoid • ⇄ • with two objects and two non-identity arrows which are inverse to each other. In all these cases, however, the situation is even better: Lemma 2.17. Assume that there is an object A 6= X and arrows α : X → A and β : A → X. Then the inclusion C −X → C is a homotopy equivalence. Proof. We show that C −X ↓X is filtered and thus contractible. The lemma then follows from Theorem 2.2 and Remark 2.3. Let (Y, γ) be an object in C −X ↓X, i.e. γ : Y → X is an arrow in C with Y an object in C −X . Set ǫ := γα. Because of the assumption HomC (X, X) = {idX }, the arrow αβ : X → X must be the identity. Then we calculate γ = γ(αβ) = (γα)β = ǫβ This shows that ǫ represents an arrow (Y, γ) → (A, β) in C −X ↓X. In particular, for every two objects in the comma category, there are arrows to the object (A, β). This shows the first property of a filtered category. For the second property, we have to show that any two parallel arrows are coequalized by another arrow. So let (Z, ν) and (Y, γ) be two objects and ǫ, ǫ′ : (Z, ν) → (Y, γ) be two arrows, i.e. ǫ, ǫ′ : Z → Y are arrows in C −X and we have ǫγ = ν = ǫ′ γ. Set µ = γα which is an arrow (Y, γ) → (A, β) as already pointed out. Then we calculate ǫµ = ǫγα = να = ǫ′ γα = ǫ′ µ and we are done.  In all other cases, diagram D is indeed a pushout on the level of classifying spaces: Lemma 2.18. Assume that for any object A 6= X either there are only arrows from X to A or there are only arrows from A to X, but never both. Then the diagram B(D)   / Cone B lk↓ X B lk↓ X   B C −X   / B(C)  is a pushout of spaces.  Proof. We claim that the nerve functor applied to the diagram D   / N Coone lk↓ X ∗ lk↓ X N lk↓ X   N C −X   / N (C)  yields a pushout in SSET. Since the geometric realization functor |?| : SSET → TOP is left adjoint to the singular simplex functor, it preserves all colimits and in particular all pushouts. Therefore, applying the geometric realization functor |?| to the diagram N (D), we obtain a pushout in TOP, as claimed in the lemma. A simplex in N (C) is just a string of composable arrows A0 → . . . → Ak . One can easily deduce from the assumption that whenever there are two occurences of X in such a string of composable arrows, then there cannot be objects different  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  17  from X in between. In other words, if X occurs at all, then all the X in the string are contained in a maximal substring of the form X → X → . . . → X where all the arrows are (necessarily) idX . Assume now that we have a commutative diagram as follows:   / N Coone lk↓ X ∗ lk↓ X N lk↓ X ❇❇ ❇❇ ❇❇ ❇❇    ❇❇f −X / ❇❇ N C N (C) ◗ ❨❨❨❨❨❨❨ ❇ ❨❨❨❨❨❨ ◗ ◗ ◗h ❇❇❇ ❨❨❨❨❨❨ ❨❨❨❨❨❨ ◗ ❇❇ ❨❨❨❨❨❨ g ❨❨❨❨❨❨◗ ◗ ❇◗❇ ❨❨❨❨,( Z We will show that h is uniquely determined by f and g. Assume σ is a simplex in N (C) given by a string of composable arrows A0 → . . . → Ak . If all the Ai are −X contained then σ is a simplex in the simplicial subset  in the full subcategory C −X N C and then necessarily h(σ) = g(σ). On the other hand, assume that not all the Ai are objects of C −X , i.e. at least one Ai = X. As pointed out above, σ must be of the form B0 → . . . → Br → X → . . . → X → C0 → . . . → Cs where Bi 6= X for all i = 0, . . . , r and Cj 6= X for all j = 0, . . . , s. All the Bi are in the image of lk↓ (X) because, after composing, we get an arrow Bi → X. Analogously, all the Cj are in the image of lk↓ (X). Such a simplex σ always lifts to a unique simplex σ̄ along the map  N Coone lk ↓ X ∗ lk ↓ X → N (C)  Thus we have h(σ) = f (σ̄). This proves uniqueness of h. Showing that h actually defines a map of simplicial sets is left to the reader.  We combine Lemmas 2.15, 2.17 and 2.18 to get:  Proposition 2.19. If the descending link lk↓ (X) is (n − 1)-connected, then the pair (C, C −X ) is n-connected. More generally, let X0 be the full subcategory of the category X spanned by a collection of objects in X . Assume that HomX (X, X) = {idX } for all objects X in X \ X0 . Then X can be built up from X0 by successively adding objects. If all the descending links appearing this way are highly connected, then also the pair (X , X0 ) will be highly connected and, using the long exact homotopy sequence, we obtain the following: Theorem 2.20. Let x0 ∈ X0 be an object. Assume that each descending link is n-connected. Then, we have ∼ πk (X , x0 ) πk (X0 , x0 ) = for k = 0, . . . , n. We say that two objects x1 and x2 in X \ X0 are independent if there are no arrows x1 → x2 or x2 → x1 in X . This guarantees independence of lk↓ (x1 ) and lk↓ (x2 ) from the adding order of x1 and x2 . Again, we can encode the adding order with the help of a Morse function f which assigns to each object in X \ X0 an element in a totally ordered set, e.g. N. We require that objects with the same f -value are pairwise independent and we add objects in order of increasing f -values.  18  WERNER THUMANN  3. Operad groups In this section, we want to introduce our main objects of study, the operad groups. We first define the types of operads we will be working with. We will then define operad groups to be the fundamental groups of the category of operators naturally associated to operads. In the last subsection, we will discuss examples of operads and their corresponding operad groups. We will recover some already well-known Thompson-like groups this way. 3.1. Basic definitions. Definition 3.1. An operad O consists of a set of colors C and sets of operations O(a1 , . . . , an ; b) for each finite ordered sequence a1 , . . . , an , b of colors in C (the ai are the input colors and b is the output color) with n ≥ 1 (allowing operations with no inputs is possible, but we won’t consider such operads). See Figure 1 for a visualization of operations. There are composition maps (Figure 1) O(c11 , . . . , c1k1 ; a1 ) × . . . × O(cn1 , . . . , cnkn ; an ) × O(a1 , . . . , an ; b)  O(c11 , . . . , c1k1 , c21 , . . . , cnkn ; b) denoted by (φ1 , . . . , φn ) ∗ θ. Composition is associative (Figure 2):  (ψ11 , . . . , ψ1k1 ) ∗ φ1 , . . . , (ψn1 , . . . , ψnkn ) ∗ φn ∗ θ k  (ψ11 , . . . , ψ1k1 , ψ21 , . . . , ψnkn ) ∗ (φ1 , . . . , φn ) ∗ θ    For each color a there are distinguished unit elements 1a ∈ O(a; a) such that (1a1 , . . . , 1an ) ∗ θ = θ = θ ∗ 1b for each operation θ. Sometimes we call such an operad planar in order to distinguish it from the symmetric or braided versions below. A symmetric/braided operad comes with additional maps (Figure 3) x · : O(a1 , . . . , an ; b) → O(a1⊲x , . . . , an⊲x ; b) for each x in the symmetric group Sn or in the braid group Bn respectively. Here, i⊲x for x ∈ Sn means plugging the element i into the permutation x which is considered as a bijection of the set {1, . . . , n}. There is a canonical projection Bn → Sn , so this makes sense also in the braided case. These maps are assumed to be actions: x · (y · θ) = (xy) · θ 1·θ =θ They also have to be equivariant with respect to composition (Figure 4):  (φ1⊲x , . . . , φn⊲x ) ∗ (x · θ) = x̄ · (φ1 , . . . , φn ) ∗ θ  (y1 · φ1 , . . . , yn · φn ) ∗ θ = (y1 , . . . , yn ) · (φ1 , . . . , φn ) ∗ θ  Here, x̄ is obtained from x by replacing the i’th strand of x by ni strands and ni is the number of inputs of φi⊲x . Furthermore, (y1 , . . . , yn ) is the juxtaposition of the permutations resp. braidings yi . Remark 3.2. There is an equivalent way of writing the composition, namely with so-called partial compositions. The i’th partial compositions ∗i : O(c1 , . . . , ck ; ai ) × O(a1 , . . . , an ; b) → O(a1 , . . . , ai−1 , c1 , . . . , ck , ai+1 , . . . , an ; b) are defined as  φ ∗i θ := 1a1 , . . . , 1ai−1 , φ, 1ai+1 , . . . , 1an ∗ θ  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  c11 c12  a1 a2  θ  a3  a1  φ1  c21 c31 c32 c33  b  19  a2  φ2  θ  b  a3  φ3  Figure 1. Visualization of an operation and composition of operations. ψ11  φ1  ψ21  θ φ2  ψ22  ψ11  φ1  ψ21  θ φ2  ψ22  Figure 2. Associativity. aa22 a3 aa11  a1 a2 a3  θ  b  Figure 3. Action of the braid groups on the operations. φ1  φ2 φ3  θ  φ2  θ  φ3  φ1  φ1  φ1 φ2 φ3  θ  φ2 φ3  Figure 4. First and second equivariance property.  θ  20  WERNER THUMANN  φ1 φ2 φ3 Figure 5. Arrow in S(O). Conversely, one could define operads via partial compositions and obtain the usual composition from successive partial compositions. The planar operads, symmetric operads and braided operads can be organized into categories OP, SYM.OP and BRA.OP respectively. Denote by MON, SYM.MON and BRA.MON the categories of monoidal categories, symmetric monoidal categories and braided monoidal categories respectively. There are functors End : MON −→ OP End : SYM.MON −→ SYM.OP End : BRA.MON −→ BRA.OP assigning to each (symmetric/braided) monoidal category C an operad End(C), called the endomorphism operad. The colors of End(C) are the objects of C and the sets of operations are given by End(C)(a1 , . . . , an ; b) = HomC (a1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ an , b) Composition in End(C) is induced by the composition in C in the obvious way. The unit element in End(C)(a; a) is the identity ida : a → a in C. In the symmetric or braided case, C comes with additional natural isomorphisms γX,Y : X ⊗Y → Y ⊗X. These can be used to define the action of the symmetric resp. braid groups on the sets of operations. In the theory of operads, these endomorphism operads play an important role since morphisms of operads O → End(C) are representations of or algebras over the operad O. The functors End have left adjoints S : OP −→ MON S : SYM.OP −→ SYM.MON S : BRA.OP −→ BRA.MON The (symmetric/braided) monoidal category S(O) is called the category of operators. We will define these categories explicitly. We start with the planar case and then use it to define the braided case. The symmetric case is similar to the braided case. So let O be a planar operad with a set of colors C. The objects of S(O) are free words in the colors, i.e. finite sequences of colors in C. An arrow in S(O) is a finite sequence of operations in O: If X1 , . . . , Xn are operations in O, the (ordered) input colors of Xi are (c1i , . . . , cki i ) and the output color of Xi is di , then the Xi give an arrow (X1 , . . . , Xn ) : (c11 , . . . , ck11 , c12 , . . . , cknn ) → (d1 , . . . , dn ) in S(O). Composition is induced by the composition in the operad O and the identities are given by the identity operations in O. The tensor product is given by juxtaposition.  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  21  φ1 φ2 φ3  φ1 φ2 φ3  φ1 φ2 φ3  Figure 6. Equivalence in S(O). Now let O be a braided operad with set of colors C. By forgetting the action of the braid groups, we get a planar operad Opl . The braided monoidal category S(O) is a certain product Braid(C) ⊠ S(Opl ). The objects of S(O) are once more finite sequences of colors in C. Arrows in S(O) are equivalence classes of pairs (β, X) ∈ Braid(C) × S(Opl ) consisting of a C-colored braid β and a sequence X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) of operations of O where the codomain of β equals the domain of X (Figure 5). The equivalence relation on such pairs is the following: Let (β, X) be such a pair with X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ). For each i = 1, . . . , n let σi be a C-colored braid such that σi · Xi is defined. Let σ := σ1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ σn and define  σ · (β, X) := β ∗ σ −1 , (σ1 · X1 , . . . , σn · Xn ) We require (β, X) and (β ′ , X ′ ) to be equivalent if there exists a σ as above such that (β ′ , X ′ ) = σ · (β, X). In other words, it is the smallest equivalence relation respecting juxtaposition and which is generated by the relation (β ∗ σ, X) ∼ (β, σ · X) with X a single operation. This is visualized in Figure 6. Composition in S(O) is defined on representatives (β, X) and (δ, Y ). Loosely speaking, we push the sequence X of operations through the colored braid δ just as in the definition of equivariance for operads, obtain another colored braid Xyδ which is obtained from δ by multiplying the strands according to X and another sequence of operations Xxδ which is obtained from X by permuting the operations according to δ, and finally compose the left and right side in Braid(C) and S(Opl )  22  WERNER THUMANN  φ1  ψ1  φ2 ψ2  φ3  φ1  ψ1  φ3 φ2  φ1  ψ2  ψ1  φ3 φ2  ψ2  Figure 7. Composition in S(O). respectively:  (β, X) ∗ (δ, Y ) := β ∗ Xyδ, Xxδ ∗ Y See Figure 7 for a visualization of this procedure. That this definition is independent of the chosen representatives follows from the equivariance properties of operads. Last but not least, the tensor product is defined on representatives (β, X) and (δ, Y ) via juxtaposition, i.e. (β, X) ⊗ (δ, Y ) := (β ⊗ δ, X ⊗ Y ). The identity arrows are those represented by a pair of identities. Definition 3.3. The degree of an operation is its number of inputs. The degree of an object in S(O) is the length of the corresponding color word. The degree of an arrow in S(O) is the degree of its domain. A higher degree operation resp. object resp. arrow is one with degree at least 2. Definition 3.4. Let O be a planar, symmetric or braided operad and let X be an object in S(O). Then the group  π1 (O, X) := π1 S(O), X is called the operad group associated to O based at X.  3.2. Normal forms. In case O is a planar operad, arrows in S(O) are just tensor products of operations. In the symmetric and braided case, however, arrows are equivalence classes of pairs (β, X). In this subsection, we want to give a normal form of such arrows, i.e. canonical representatives (β, X). We will treat the braided case, the symmetric case is similar and simpler.  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  23  Consider a colored braid β with n strands. The i’th strand is the strand starting from the node with index i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Let S be a subset of the index set {1, . . . , n}. Deleting all strands in β other than those with an index in S yields another colored braid β|S . We say that β is unbraided on S if β|S is trivial. Let (n1 , . . . , nk ) be a sequence of natural numbers with 1 = n1 < n2 < . . . < nk = n + 1. A sequence like this is called a partition of n, denoted by [n1 , . . . , nk ], because the sets Si := {ni , . . . , ni+1 − 1} form a partition of the set {1, . . . , n}. We say β is unbraided with respect to the partition [n1 , . . . , nk ] if it is unbraided on the sets Si . Lemma 3.5. Let [n1 , . . . , nk ] be a partition of n and β a colored braid with n strands. Then there is a unique decomposition β = βp ∗ βu into colored braids βp and βu such that βp = βp1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ βpk−1 is a tensor product of colored braids βpi with |Si | strands and βu is unbraided with respect to [n1 , . . . , nk ]. Proof. Define βpi := β|Si and   −1 βu := β|−1 S1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ β|Sk−1 ∗ β  Then we have β = βp ∗ βu and βu is unbraided with respect to [n1 , . . . , nk ]. The uniqueness statement is left to the reader.  Now let [β, X] be an arrow in S(O) with X = (X1 , . . . , Xk ). Assume deg(Xi ) = Pi−1 di and d1 + . . . + dk = n. Define ni = 1 + j=1 dj for i = 1, . . . , k + 1 and observe the partition [n1 , . . . , nk+1 ]. Decompose the colored braid β −1 as in the previous lemma to obtain β = τ ∗ ρ where τ −1 is unbraided with respect to [n1 , . . . , nk+1 ] and ρ = ρ1 ⊗ . . .⊗ ρk is a tensor product of colored braids ρi with di strands. Define Yi = ρi · Xi . Then from the definition of arrows in S(O) it follows that [β, X] = [τ, Y ] with Y = (Y1 , . . . , Yk ). So each arrow has a representative (τ, Y ) such that τ −1 is unbraided in the ranges defined by the domains of the operations in the second component. It is easy to see that there is at most one such pair. Similarly, in the symmetric case, for each arrow in S(O), there is a unique representative (τ, Y ) such that the colored permutation τ −1 is unpermuted on the domains of the operations in the second component. Definition 3.6. The unique representative (τ, Y ) of an arrow in S(O) with τ −1 unpermuted resp. unbraided on the domains of the operations in Y is called the normal form of that arrow. 3.3. Calculus of fractions and cancellation properties. In the following, we write θ ≈ ψ if two operations θ, ψ in an operad are equivalent modulo the action of the symmetric resp. braid groups, i.e. there exists a permutation resp. braid γ such that θ = γ · ψ. Of course, in the planar case, this just means equality of operations. Definition 3.7. Let O be a (symmetric/braided) operad. We say that O satisfies the calculus of fractions if the following two conditions are satisfied: • (Square filling) For every pair of operations θ1 and θ2 with the same output color, there are sequences of operations Ψ1 = (ψ11 , . . . , ψ1k1 ) and Ψ2 = (ψ21 , . . . , ψ2k2 ) such that Ψi ∗ θi is defined for i = 1, 2 and such that Ψ1 ∗ θ1 ≈ Ψ 2 ∗ θ2 . • (Equalization) Assume we have an operation θ and sequences of operations Ψ1 = (ψ11 , . . . , ψ1k ) and Ψ2 = (ψ21 , . . . , ψ2k ) such that Ψ1 ∗θ ≈ Ψ2 ∗θ, i.e. there is a γ with Ψ1 ∗θ = γ ·(Ψ2 ∗θ). Then γ is already of the form γ = γ1 ⊗. . .⊗γk  24  WERNER THUMANN  such that γj · ψ2j is defined for each j = 1, . . . , k and there is a sequence of operations Ξj for each j = 1, . . . , k such that Ξj ∗ ψ1j = Ξj ∗ (γj · ψ2j ). Definition 3.8. Let O be a (symmetric/braided) operad. We define right cancellativity and left cancellativity for O as follows: • (Right cancellativity) Assume we have an operation θ and sequences of operations Ψ1 = (ψ11 , . . . , ψ1k ) and Ψ2 = (ψ21 , . . . , ψ2k ) such that Ψ1 ∗ θ ≈ Ψ2 ∗ θ, i.e. there is a γ with Ψ1 ∗ θ = γ · (Ψ2 ∗ θ). Then γ is already of the form γ = γ1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ γk such that γj · ψ2j is defined and equal to ψ1j for each j = 1, . . . , k. • (Left cancellativity) Assume we have operations θ1 and θ2 and a sequence of operations Ψ such that Ψ ∗ θ1 = Ψ ∗ θ2 . Then θ1 = θ2 . We say that O is cancellative if it is both left and right cancellative. These two definitions are designed such that the following two propositions hold. The proofs are straightforward and left to the reader (see also [42]). Proposition 3.9. O satisfies the calculus of fractions if and only if S(O) does. Proposition 3.10. O satisfies the left resp. right cancellation property if and only if S(O) does. 3.4. Operads with transformations. Observe that the colors of an operad O together with the degree 1 operations form a category I(O). In general, this category could be any category. Thus, to prove certain theorems, it is often necessary to impose restrictions on the degree 1 operations. Definition 3.11. A planar resp. symmetric resp. braided operad O is called a planar resp. symmetric resp. braided operad with transformations if the category I(O) is a groupoid. In other words, all the degree 1 operations are invertible. For such an operad, a transformation is an arrow in S(O) of the form [σ, X] where X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) is a sequence of operations of degree 1. The transformations form a groupoid which we call T (O). We say that two operations θ1 and θ2 are transformation equivalent if there is a transformation α such that θ2 = α ∗ θ1 . We denote by T C(O) the set of equivalence classes of operations modulo transformation. Note that two transformation equivalent operations have the same degree. Thus, we also have a notion of degree for elements in T C(O). We define a partial order on the set T C(O) as follows: Write Θ1 ≤ Θ2 if there is an operation θ1 with [θ1 ] = Θ1 and operations ψ1 , . . . , ψn such that (ψ1 , . . . , ψn ) ∗ θ1 ∈ Θ2 . Then, for every θ1 with [θ1 ] = Θ1 there are operations ψ1 , . . . , ψn such that (ψ1 , . . . , ψn )∗θ1 ∈ Θ2 . It is not hard to prove that this relation is indeed a partial order. Note that the degree function on T C(O) strictly respects this order relation which means Θ1 < Θ2  =⇒  deg(Θ1 ) < deg(Θ2 )  The following observation, which easily follows from the definitions, reinterpretes the square filling property of Definition 3.7 in terms of the poset T C(O) of transformation classes: Observation 3.12. Let O be a (symmetric/braided) operad with transformations. Then O satisfies the square filling property if and only if for each pair Θ1 , Θ2 of transformation classes with the same codomain color there is another transformation class Θ with Θ1 ≤ Θ ≥ Θ2 .  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  25  3.4.1. Spines in graded posets. We call a poset P graded if there is degree function deg : P → N such that deg(x) < deg(y) whenever x < y. For example, T C(O) above is graded. Definition 3.13. Let P be a graded poset and M ⊂ P be the subset of minimal elements in P . The spine S of P is the smallest subset S ⊂ P such that M ⊂ S and which satisfies the following property: Whenever v ∈ P \ S, then there is a greatest element g ∈ S such that g < v. We want to prove that the spine of a graded poset always exists. Construction 3.14. We define Si ⊂ P for i ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .} inductively. Set S0 = M . Assume that Si has been constructed. For each pair x, y ∈ Si with x 6= y, define Mi+1 (x, y) ⊂ P to be the set consisting of all the minimal elements z with the property x ≤ z ≥ y. Now, let Si+1 be the union of all the Mi+1 (x, y). Finally, S∞ define S = i=0 Si .  In the following, we want to show that this S satisfies the defining properties of the spine of P . Observation 3.15. Let A ⊂ P . Assume that v ∈ P satisfies a < v for all a ∈ A. We claim that there is a minimal element p in the set {z ∈ P | ∀a∈A a ≤ z} which also satisfies p ≤ v. If v is already minimal, then we can set p = v. If it is not minimal, there must be another element v ′ ∈ P with a ≤ v ′ < v for all a ∈ A. Then v ′ has strictly smaller degree than v. If we repeat this argument with v ′ , we have to end up with a minimal element p at some time, because the degree function is bounded below. This p surely satisfies p ≤ v. Let v ∈ P \ S. We want to find the greatest element in the set V := {z ∈ S | z < v} Si↓  For each i, set = Si ∩ V . We claim: There exists exactly one i0 such that |Sj↓ | > 1 for j < i0 , |Si↓0 | = 1 and Sj↓ = ∅ for j > i0 and the unique element in Si↓0 is the greatest element in V . Observation 3.15 applied to A = ∅ reveals that S0↓ 6= ∅. Note that either all but finitely many of the Si are empty or the sequence of numbers di := min{deg(z) | z ∈ Si } tends to infinity. But the degree of all the elements in all the Si↓ is bounded by deg(v). It follows that in any case there must be an i0 such that Sj↓ = ∅ for all j > i0 . Choose the i0 which is minimal with respect to this property, i.e. Si↓0 6= ∅. Assume |Si↓0 | > 1 and let x 6= y be two elements in this set. Write A = {x, y} and recall that x, y < v. Thus, by Observation 3.15, we know that there must be a p ∈ Mi0 +1 (x, y) with p ≤ v. Since v 6∈ S, we have indeed p < v. Consequently, p ∈ Si↓0 +1 , a contradiction. So we have indeed |Si↓0 | = 1. Next, observe that for any j, if Sj 6= ∅, then Sj−1 consists of at least two elements. This follows directly from the definitions. Consequently, the same holds for the Sj↓ . From this, it easily follows |Sj↓ | > 1 for j < i0 . We now use this to prove that the unique element g ∈ Si↓0 is the greatest element in V , i.e. x ≤ g whenever x ∈ S with x < v. Let x be such an element. If x 6= g, then there must be some j < i0 such that x ∈ Sj↓ . There is another element x′ ↓ in this Sj↓ . Observation 3.15 applied to A = {x, x′ } shows that there is p ∈ Sj+1 with x ≤ p. If j + 1 = i0 , that p must be g and we are done. Else, we repeat this process with p in place of x until we reach level i0 . This completes the proof that S satisfies the last property in Definition 3.13.  26  WERNER THUMANN  Remains to prove that S is the smallest subset containing M and satisfying this property. So let S ′ ⊂ P be another subset containing M and satisfying this property. We have to show S ⊂ S ′ . We will prove Si ⊂ S ′ by induction over i. The induction start is trivial because S0 = M . For the induction step, assume Si ⊂ S ′ . Let v ∈ Si+1 . Assume that v 6∈ S ′ . Then there is a greatest element p ∈ S ′ with p < v. Furthermore, there must be x, y ∈ Si with x 6= y and v ∈ Mi+1 (x, y). This means that v is minimal with respect to x ≤ v ≥ y. Since x, y ∈ S ′ but v 6∈ S ′ we have indeed x < v > y. Since p is the greatest element in S ′ with p < v, we obtain x ≤ p ≥ y. This contradicts the minimality of v. So we must have v ∈ S ′ and thus Si+1 ⊂ S ′ . 3.4.2. Elementary and very elementary operations. Denote by T C ∗ (O) the full subposet of T C(O) spanned by the higher degree classes (i.e. the elements of degree at least 2). Definition 3.16. Let O be a (symmetric/braided) operad with transformations. The minimal elements in T C ∗ (O) are called very elementary transformation classes. Denote the set of very elementary classes by V E. Let Θ, Θ1 , . . . , Θk ∈ T C(O) be (not necessarily distinct) transformation classes. We say that Θ is decomposable into the classes Θi if we find operations θi ∈ Θi for i = 1, . . . , k which can be partially composed (see Remark 3.2) in a certain way to an operation in Θ. It can be shown that any class in T C ∗ (O) decomposes into very elementary classes. Definition 3.17. Let O be a (symmetric/braided) operad with transformations. The elements in the spine of T C ∗ (O) are called elementary transformation classes. Denote the set of elementary classes by E. An operation in O is called (very) elementary if it is contained in a (very) elementary transformation class. We will call the elementary but not very elementary classes resp. operations strictly elementary. Definition 3.18. O is finitely generated if there are only finitely many very elementary transformation classes. It is of finite type if there are only finitely many elementary transformation classes. The following proposition states that the subsets V E and E are invariant under the right action of degree 1 operations. Proposition 3.19. Let O be a (symmetric/braided) operad with transformations. Let θ be a higher degree operation and γ be a degree 1 operation. Then the transformation class [θ] is (very) elementary if and only if the class [θ] ∗ γ := [θ ∗ γ] is (very) elementary. In particular, the operation θ is (very) elementary if and only if θ ∗ γ is (very) elementary. Proof. The main observation is that if Θ, Θ′ are two transformation classes, then Θ < Θ′ holds if and only if Θ ∗ γ < Θ′ ∗ γ holds. This implies that Θ ∈ V E if and only if Θ ∗ γ ∈ V E or, in other words, V E ∗ γ = V E. Now write E ′ = E ∗ γ. We then have V E ⊂ E ′ . Let Θ ∈ T C ∗ (O) \ E ′ . Then Θ ∗ γ −1 ∈ T C ∗ (O) \ E. Thus, by the definition of E as the spine of T C ∗ (O), we have that there is a greatest element Ψ ∈ E with Ψ < Θ ∗ γ −1 . Then Ψ ∗ γ ∈ E ′ is the greatest element with Ψ ∗ γ < Θ. Consequently, E ′ satisfies the defining properties of the spine E. It follows E ⊂ E ′ = E ∗ γ. Since this holds for arbitrary γ, we obtain E = E ∗ γ.  3.5. Examples. In this subsection, we want to present some examples of operads leading to already well-known operad groups as well as to new groups to which the finiteness result of Section 4 is applicable.  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  27  3.5.1. Free operads. Only very briefly we want to remark that the operad groups associated to operads freely generated by operations of degree at least 2 correspond exactly to the so-called diagram groups defined in [25]. When considering free symmetric operads, we get symmetric versions of diagram groups which are called “braided” in [25, Definition 16.2]. The truly braided diagram groups are the ones arising from free braided operads. In particular, the operad group associated to the operad OF freely generated by one color and a single binary operation is isomorphic to Thompson’s group F . This has first been observed in [18]. Moreover, if we consider the symmetric resp. braided operad OV resp. OBV freely generated by one color and a single binary operation, we obtain Thompson’s group V resp. the braided Thompson group BV . More details on the free case can be found in [42]. 3.5.2. Suboperads of endomorphism operads. Recall that there is a planar resp. symmetric resp. braided operad End(C) naturally associated to each planar resp. symmetric resp. braided monoidal category C, called the endomorphism operad. The colors of End(C) are the objects in C and the sets of operations are given by End(C)(a1 , . . . , an ; b) = HomC (a1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ an , b) Let G be a subgroupoid of C and S be a set of higher degree operations in E := End(C) with outputs and inputs being objects of G. Then we can look at the suboperad of E generated by this data: It is the smallest suboperad O such that I(O) = G and such that the elements in S are operations in O. These suboperads are in general not free in the sense of 3.5.1 though we have only specified generators. The relations are automatically modelled by the ambient category C. Not always is the map S → T C(O) sending an operation to its transformation class a bijection onto the set of very elementary classes. However, this is true if the following conditions are satisfied: (V1 ) If θ, θ′ ∈ S with θ 6= θ′ , then [θ] and [θ′ ] are incomparable, i.e. [θ] 6≤ [θ′ ] and [θ] 6≥ [θ′ ]. In particular, they are not equal. (V2 ) The set of transformation classes represented by operations in S is closed under right multiplication with operations in G, i.e. for each θ ∈ S and γ ∈ G there is θ′ ∈ S with [θ ∗ γ] = [θ′ ]. We want to be a bit more explicit now and observe suboperads of the endomorphism operad E of the symmetric monoidal category (TOP, ⊔) where ⊔ is the coproduct (i.e. the disjoint union) of topological spaces. We call an operation (f1 , . . . , fk ) in E mono if the images of the maps fi : Xi → X are pairwise disjoint in X and the fi are injective. We call it epi if the images cover X. It is not hard to prove that if all operations in a suboperad of E are mono, then it satisfies the right cancellation property. Likewise, if all the operations are epi, then it satisfies the left cancellation property. We give an explicit example to illustrate the above procedure. Consider the unit square and the right angled triangle obtained by halving the unit square:  Consider all isometries of the square and the triangle, i.e. the dihedral group D4 and Z/2Z. The disjoint union of these isometry groups forms a groupoid G lying in TOP. Consider the following subdivisions, called very elementary subdivisions:  28  WERNER THUMANN  The set S has three elements, one for each sudivision: The first one maps four squares to each square in the first subdivision via coordinate-wise linear transformations. The second one maps four triangles to each triangle in the second subdivision via orientation preserving similarities. The third one maps two triangles to each triangle in the third subdivision via orientation preserving similarities. As above, the groupoid G together with the set S generate a suboperad O of the symmetric operad E = End(TOP, ⊔). The transformation classes are in one to one correspondence with subdivisions of the square or the triangle which can be obtained by iteratively applying the three subdivisions above. We have Θ1 ≤ Θ2 if and only if Θ2 can be obtained from Θ1 by performing further subdivisions. For example, we have ≤ From this it follows easily that the transformation classes represented by the very elementary subdivisions are not comparable, i.e. (V1 ) is satisfied. Furthermore, when applying an isometry of the square or the triangle to one of the operations in S, we obtain the same operation with a transformation precomposed. Thus, also (V2 ) is satisfied. It follows that the very elementary subdivisions correspond exactly to the very elementary classes of O. To find all the elementary transformation classes, we have to follow the construction in 3.14. There is exactly one minimal subdivision of the square which refines the two very elementary subdivisions of the square:  Thus, this subdivision represents the only elementary class which is not very elementary. All the operations in O are clearly epi, so it satisfies the left cancellation property. Not all of them are mono, but we can change the definitions a little bit and obtain an isomorphic operad where all operations are mono: Instead of the closed square and triangle, we can consider the open square and triangle and also subdivisions into open squares and triangles. Thus, O also satisfies the right cancellation property. Moreover, we claim that it satisfies square filling. To see this, consider the following chains of subdivisions: ···  ··· These are cofinal in the sense that every subdivision of the square resp. triangle is smaller than or equal to one of the subdivisions of the first resp. second chain. From Observation 3.12 it follows that O satisfies square filling. All in all, O satisfies the cancellative calculus of fractions. ⊲ Cube cutting operads. Let N be a finite set of natural numbers greater than or equal to 2. Denote by hN i the multiplicative submonoid of N generated by the numbers in N . We say that the numbers in N are independent if, whenever a natural number n can be written as a product nr11 · · · nrkk of pairwise distinct numbers ni ∈ N , then the exponents ri are already uniquely determined by n. In  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  29  other words, N is a basis for hN i. This is satisfied for example if the numbers in N are pairwise coprime or, even stronger, if they are prime. For later reference, we record the following two trivial observations: (B1 ) No number n ∈ N is a product of other numbers in N . (B2 ) Whenever n1 , . . . , nk ∈ N are pairwise distinct numbers and n ∈ hN i is divisible by each ni in hN i, i.e. there is mi ∈ hN i with n = ni mi , then n is also divisible by the product n1 · · · nk in hN i. There are non-bases N which satisfy (B1 ) but not (B2 ), for example N = {2, 6, 7, 21}. For this N we have 6 · 7 = 42 = 2 · 21. In the same vein as above, we now construct cube cutting operads. For d ≥ 1, consider the d-dimensional unit cube and a subgroup if its group of isometries. Define this group to be the groupoid G lying in TOP. Next, we want to specify very elementary subdivisions of the cube. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , d}, let Nj ⊂ N be a set of natural numbers as in the preceding paragraph. For each such j and n ∈ Nj , there is a very elementary subdivision of the cube given by cutting it, perpendicularly to the j’th coordinate axis, into n congruent subbricks. The following are the very elementary subdivisions in the case d = 2, N1 = {2} and N2 = {3}:  There is one operation in S for each such very elementary subdivision: Cubes are coordinate-wise linearly rescaled to fit into the subbricks of the subdivisions. The groupoid G together with the set S generate a suboperad O of E = End(TOP, ⊔) which we call a symmetric cube cutting operad since we will also define planar cube cutting operads below. The transformation classes are in one to one correspondence with subdivisions of the cube obtained by iteratively applying n-cuts in direction j as above. Two transformation classes are comparable if and only if one is a subdivision of the other. From (B1 ) it follows that two very elementary subdivisions are not comparable. Consequently, (V1 ) is satisfied. It is not always true that right multiplication of elements in G with operations in S yields another operation in S up to transformation. For example, a rotation of a vertically cutted square by an angle of π/2 yields a horizontally cutted square. Whether (V2 ) is satisfied or not depends on the interplay between the isometries in G and the sets Nj . For example, it is satisfied if G = 1 or if N1 = . . . = Nd . Let us always assume that G and the Nj are compatible in a way such that (V2 ) is satisfied. Then the very elementary subdivisions are in one to one correspondence with the very elementary transformation classes. We want to identify the elementary transformation classes. For each element T = (T1 , . . . , Td ) ∈ 2N1 × . . . × 2Nd of the product of the power sets such that T 6= (∅, . . . , ∅), there is a transformation class ΘT which is obtained by iteratively performing, for each j ∈ {1, . . . , d} and each n ∈ Tj , an n-cut in direction j on every subbrick. The result is independent of the order of the cuts. These classes are exactly the elementary classes. To see this, we make the following claim: If ΘT and ΘT ′ are two such classes, then ΘT ∪T ′ is the smallest class Θ satisfying ΘT ≤ Θ ≥ ΘT ′ . Here, the inclusion T ⊂ T ′ and the union T ∪ T ′ is meant to be coordinate-wise. The figure below pictures the elementary operations in the case d = 2, N1 = {2, 3} and N2 = {2, 3}.  30  WERNER THUMANN  E0  E1  E2  E3 To see the above claim, we consider the case d = 1 and set N := N1 . The case d > 1 can be derived by applying the following observations coordinate-wise. Call a transformation class regular if all the subintervals in the corresponding subdivision of the unit interval have the same length. Now, let Θ be a transformation class with ΘT ≤ Θ ≥ ΘT ′ . It is not hard to find the greatest regular class Θr with Θr ≤ Θ. Since ΘT and ΘT ′ are regular, we have ΘT ≤ Θr ≥ ΘT ′ . There is a unique n ∈ hN i such that n1 is the length of the subintervals in the subdivision of Θr . Then ΘT ≤ Θr means that the product of the numbers in T divides n in hN i. In particular, each t ∈ T divides n in hN i. Likewise, each t′ ∈ T ′ divides n in hN i. It follows from (B2 ) that the product of the numbers in T ∪ T ′ divides n in hN i. This implies ΘT ∪T ′ ≤ Θr and it follows ΘT ∪T ′ ≤ Θ, q.e.d. All the operations in O are epi and O is isomorphic to a suboperad of E where all operations are mono by considering open cubes instead of closed ones. Consequently, O satisfies the left and right cancellation property. We also find a cofinal chain of subdivisions: The first subdivision in this chain is obtained by iteratively applying, for each j ∈ {1, . . . , d} and each n ∈ Nj , an n-cut in direction j on every subbrick. Then the whole chain is obtained by iterating this with every subbrick. For example, in the case d = 2, N1 = {2} and N2 = {3}, we can take the following chain: ··· Thus, O satisfies the square filling property. All in all, it satisfies the cancellative calculus of fractions. Note that the symmetric cube cutting operads are symmetric operads with transformations. When forgetting the symmetric structure on E, we obtain a planar operad Epl and we can define suboperads, which are then planar operads with transformations and which we call planar cube cutting operads, as follows: Consider the case d = 1. Set G = 1. Let N ⊂ N be a set of natural numbers as in the first paragraph. There is one very elementary subdivision of the unit interval for each n ∈ N , cutting it into n pieces of equal length. The operations in S linearly map unit intervals to the subintervals of very elementary subdivisions. This time, however, we specify the order of these maps. We require that they are ordered by their images via the natural ordering on the unit interval. Denote by O the suboperad of Epl generated by this data. Note that O is a planar operad with transformations which is degenerate in the sense that there are no degree 1 operations besides the identities. Thus, a transformation class is the same as an operation. Operations in O are in one to one correspondence with subdivision of the unit interval which are obtained by iteratively applying n-cuts for various n ∈ N . Two operations are related if and only if one is a subdivision of the other. The very  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  31  elementary operations are in one to one correspondence with the very elementary subdivisions and the elementary operations can be described just as in the case of symmetric cube cutting operads. Furthermore, O satisfies the cancellative calculus of fractions. We now look at the operad groups associated to these planar resp. symmetric cube cutting operads. Using the fact that arrows in the fundamental groupoid of a category satisfying the calculus of fractions can be represented by spans, it is easy to identify the following operad groups (where G = 1 in each case): • The Higman-Thompson groups Fn,r resp. Vn,r arise as the operad groups (based at the object represented by a disjoint union of r unit intervals) associated to the planar resp. symmetric cube cutting operads with d = 1 and N = {n}. • The groups of piecewise linear homeomorphisms of the (Cantor) unit   inter1 1 val F r, Z[ n1 ···n ], hn , . . . , n i resp. G r, Z[ ], hn , . . . , n i consid1 k 1 k n1 ···nk k ered in [39] arise as the operad groups (based at the object represented by a disjoint union of r unit intervals) associated to the planar resp. symmetric cube cutting operads with d = 1 and N = {n1 , . . . , nk }. • The higher dimensional Thompson groups nV (see [4]) arise as the operad groups (based at the object represented by the n-dimensional unit cube) associated to the symmetric cube cutting operads with d = n and Nj = {2} for all j = 1, . . . , d. ⊲ Local similarity operads. In [26] groups were defined which act in a certain way on compact ultrametric spaces. We recall the definition of a finite similarity structure: Definition 3.20. Let X be a compact ultrametric space. A finite similarity structure SimX on X consists of a finite set SimX (B1 , B2 ) of similarities B1 → B2 for every ordered pair of balls (B1 , B2 ) such that the following axioms are satisfied: • (Identities) Each SimX (B, B) contains the identity. • (Inverses) If γ ∈ SimX (B1 , B2 ), then also γ −1 ∈ SimX (B2 , B1 ). • (Compositions) If γ1 ∈ SimX (B1 , B2 ) and γ2 ∈ SimX (B2 , B3 ), then also γ1 γ2 ∈ SimX (B1 , B3 ). • (Restrictions) If γ ∈ SimX (B1 , B2 ) and B3 ⊂ B1 is a subball, then also γ|B3 ∈ SimX (B3 , γ(B3 )). Here, a similarity γ : X → Y of metric spaces is a homeomorphism such that there is a λ > 0 with d(γ(x1 ), γ(x2 )) = λd(x1 , x2 ) for all x1 , x2 ∈ X. Let SimX be a finite similarity structure on the compact ultrametric space X. A homeomorphism γ : X → X is said to be locally determined by SimX if for every x ∈ X there is a ball x ∈ B ⊂ X such that γ(B) is a ball and γ|B ∈ SimX (B, γ(B)). The set of all such homeomorphisms forms a group which we denote by Γ(SimX ). To a finite similarity structure SimX , we can associate a symmetric operad with transformations O, a suboperad of E = End(TOP, ⊔), and reobtain the groups Γ(SimX ) as operad groups. We do this by appealing to the procedure above. Two balls B1 , B2 in X are called SimX -equivalent if SimX (B1 , B2 ) 6= ∅. Choose one ball in each SimX -equivalence class (the isomorphism class of the operad we will define does not depend on this choice). Consider the groupoid G lying in TOP which is the disjoint union of the groups SimX (B, B) with B a chosen ball. The set S contains one operation in E for each chosen ball B: Consider the maximal proper subballs A1 , . . . , Ak of B. For each i = 1, . . . , k choose a similarity γi ∈ SimX (Bi , Ai ) where Bi is the unique chosen ball equivalent to Ai . Now the operation associated to B maps the chosen balls Bi to Ai using the similarities γi . The data (G, S) generates a suboperad O of E.  32  WERNER THUMANN  Each transformation class in O is uniquely determined by a chosen ball together with a subdivision into subballs. Two such subdivisions are related if and only if one can be obtained from the other by further subdividing the subballs. Condition (V1 ) is trivially true since the operations in S have different codomains. A similarity in SimX (B, B) is an isometry γ : B → B which permutes the maximal proper subballs and the restriction of γ to a maximal proper subball is again a similarity in SimX . It follows that right multiplication of an element in G with an operation in S gives the same operation modulo transformation. In particular, (V2 ) is satisfied. Thus, the very elementary classes of O are in one to one correspondence with the chosen balls together with their subdivisions into the proper maximal subballs. Since every two very elementary classes have different colors as codomains, there are no elementary classes which are not very elementary. All the operations in O are both mono and epi. Thus, it satisfies both left and right cancellation. It also satisfies square filling and thus the cancellative calculus of fractions since we again find a cofinal sequence of subdivisions for each chosen ball B: Define the chain inductively by subdividing each subball by their maximal proper subballs. Using the fact that arrows in the fundamental groupoid of a category satisfying the calculus of fractions can be represented by spans, it is not hard to establish an isomorphism π1 (O, X) ∼ = Γ(SimX ) where we assume that X is the chosen ball of its SimX -equivalence class. 3.5.3. Ribbon Thompson group. To close this subsection, we briefly want to discuss an operad yielding an operad group RV which naturally fits into the sequence of well-known groups F, V, BV . First observe the free braided operad with transformations generated by a single color, the group Z as groupoid of degree 1 operations and a single binary operation. The components of the corresponding groupoid of transformations are the groups Bn ⋉ Zn . Think of elements of these groups as ribbons which can braid and twist. A single twist corresponds to a generator in Z. Then we impose the following relation on this operad: = The caret corresponds to the generating binary operation. The operations in this braided operad with transformations are in one to one correspondence with binary trees together with braiding and twisting ribbons attached to the leaves. The transformation classes are in one to one correspondence with binary trees. The only very elementary class is represented by the binary tree with two leaves (the caret). There are no strictly elementary classes. It satisfies the cancellative calculus of fractions. Consequently, elements in the associated operad group based at 1 can be represented by pairs of binary trees where the leaves are connected by braiding and twisting ribbons. Composition is modelled by concatenating two such tree pair diagrams, removing all dipoles formed by carets and then applying the above relation in order to obtain another tree pair diagram. 4. A topological finiteness result Before we state the main theorem of this article, we have to introduce two more definitions. + Definition 4.1. We say that a group G is of type F∞ if G and all of its sub+ groups are of type F∞ . We then say that a groupoid is of type F∞ (or F∞ ) if its + automorphism groups are of type F∞ (or F∞ ).  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  33  + For example, all finite groups and Z are of type F∞ .  Definition 4.2. Let O be a (symmetric/braided) operad with transformations. An object X in S(O) is called reduced if no non-transformation arrow in S(O) has X as its domain. We call O color-tame if the degree of all reduced objects is bounded from above. Note that if O is monochromatic and there exists at least one higher degree operation, then it is automatically color-tame. Theorem 4.3. Let O be a planar or symmetric or braided operad with transformations. Assume that O has only finitely many colors and is color-tame. Assume further that O satisfies the cancellative calculus of fractions, is of finite type and + I(O) is a groupoid of type F∞ . Then for every object X in S(O) the operad group π1 (O, X) is of type F∞ . Question 4.4. Can the requirement color-tameness be dropped? Remark 4.5. There is also a version of this theorem for free operads: Assume that O is free as a (symmetric/braided) operad with transformations, has only finitely many colors, is color-tame, finitely generated and that I(O) is a groupoid of type F∞ . Then π1 (O, X) is of type F∞ . The proof of the free case is parallel to the proof in this article (with small modifications and additions, see [42]). Parts of the theorem for the free case are also proven in [14, 15] (in the language of diagram groups). Concerning the examples in Subsection 3.5, it should be noted that the free operads OF , OV and OBV also satisfy the conditions in Theorem 4.3. The main tool to prove this theorem is, as usual, Brown’s criterion [7]. More precisely, we will need the following special version of it: Theorem 4.6. Let Γ be a discrete group and X be a contractible Γ-CW-complex with isotropy groups of type F∞ . Assume we have a filtration (Xn )n∈N of X such that each Xn is a Γ-CW-subcomplex of finite type and such that the connectivity of the pairs (Xn , Xn−1 ) tends to infinity as n → ∞. Then Γ is of type F∞ . We sketch a geometric proof of this criterion using a blow-up construction of Lück [29, Lemma 4.1]: For each conjugacy class [H] of isotropy groups of X, we choose a free contractible H-CW-complex EH of finite type. Using these, we can construct a free Γ-CW-complex F (X) which is homotopy equivalent to X. The idea is to replace the equivariant cell Γ/H × Dn in X by the Γ-CW-complex (Γ ×H EH) × Dn . More details can be found in the proofs of [29, Lemma 4.1 and Theorem 3.1]. We can also apply this construction to each Γ-CW-subcomplex Xn and obtain free Γ-CW-complexes F (Xi ) homotopy equivalent to Xi and of finite type. For each n ∈ N we find k ∈ N big enough so that Xk and hence F (Xk ) is n-connected. By equivariantly gluing cells in dimensions n + 2 and higher, we obtain a free contractible Γ-CW-complex with finitely many equivariant cells up to dimension n + 1. Consequently, Γ is of type Fn+1 . Since n was arbitrary, it follows that Γ is of type F∞ (see e.g. [23, Proposition 7.2.2]). The remaining subsections are devoted to the proof of Theorem 4.3. 4.1. Three types of arc complexes. Let d ∈ {1, 2, 3} and C be a set of colors. Let X = (c1 , . . . , cn ) be a word in the colors of C. An archetype consists of a unique identifier together with a word in the colors of C of length at least 2. Let A be a set of archetypes. To this data, we will associate a simplicial complex AC d (C, A; X). Consider the points 1, . . . , n ∈ R and embed them into Rd via the first component embedding R → Rd . Color these points with the colors in the word X (i.e. the point  34  WERNER THUMANN  i is colored with the color ci ) and call them nodes. Denote the set of nodes by N . A link is the image of an embedding γ : [0, 1] → Rd such that γ(0) and γ(1) are nodes. Note that a link may contain more than two nodes. Two links connecting the same set of nodes are equivalent if there is an isotopy of Rd \ N which takes one link to the other. An equivalence class of links is called an arc. Note that in the case d = 1, arcs and links are the same since each arc is represented by a unique link. We say that two arcs are disjoint if there are representing links which are disjoint. In the cases d = 2, 3, we can choose representing links of a collection of arcs such that the links are in minimal position: Lemma 4.7. Assume d = 2 or d = 3. Let a0 , . . . , ak be arcs with ai 6= aj for each i 6= j. Then there are representing links α0 , . . . , αk such that |αi ∩ αj | is finite and minimal for each i 6= j. Proof. In the case d = 3, we can always find representing links which only intersect at nodes, if at all. The case d = 2 is a bit more complicated. We use the ideas from [9, Lemma 3.2]: Consider the nodes as punctures in the plane R2 . Then we can find a hyperbolic metric on that punctured plane. Now define αi to be the geodesic within the class ai .  A link connecting a set of nodes M is called admissible if there is an isotopy of Rd \ M taking the link into the image of the first component embedding R → Rd . In the case d = 1, this is vacuous. In the case d = 2, this implies in particular that, when travelling the link starting from the lowest node, the nodes are visited in ascending order. This last property is even equivalent to being admissible in the case d = 3. An arc is called admissible if one and consequently all of its links are admissible. Now label an admissible arc with the identifier of an archetype in A. We require that the word formed by the colors of the connected nodes (in ascending order) equals the color word of the archetype. Call such a labelled admissible arc an archetypal arc. The vertices of AC d (C, A; X) are the archetypal arcs. Two vertices are joined by an edge if the corresponding arcs are disjoint. This determines the complex as a flag complex. A k-simplex is therefore a set of k + 1 pairwise disjoint archetypal arcs. We call this an archetypal arc system. It follows from Lemma 4.7 above that if {a0 , . . . , ak } is an archetypal arc system, then we always find representing links αi of ai such that the αi are pairwise disjoint. The following are examples of 2-simplices in the cases d = 1, 2, 3 (where we have omitted the labels on the arcs).  The following are non-examples of simplices in the case d = 2. In the first diagram, the two arcs are not disjoint and in the second diagram, the arc is not admissible. However, the second diagram would represent an admissible arc in the case d = 3.  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  35  Definition 4.8. Let C be a set of colors and A be a set of archetypes. A word in the colors of C is called reduced if it admits no archetypal arc on it. The set of archetypes A is called tame if the length of all reduced words is bounded from above. The length of an archetype is the length of its color word. The set of archetypes A is of finite type if the length of all archetypes is bounded from above. Theorem 4.9. Let d ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Let C be a set of colors and A be a set of archetypes. Assume that A is tame and of finite type. Let mr be the smallest natural number greater than the length of any reduced color word and ma be the maximal length of archetypes in A. Define   l − mr −1 νκ (l) := κ Let X be a word in the colors of C and denote by lX the length of X. Then the complex AC d (C, A; X) is νκd (lX)-connected where κ1 := 2ma + mr − 2 κ2 := 2ma − 1 κ3 := 2ma − 1 For the proof in the case d = 2 we have to pass to a slightly larger class of complexes: Instead of R2 we consider links and arcs in the punctured plane S = R2 \ {p1 , . . . , pl } with finitely many punctures pi ∈ R2 disjoint from the nodes. Here, we define two links connecting the same set of nodes to be equivalent if they differ by an isotopy of S \ N and a link connecting a set of nodes M to be admissible if there is an isotopy of R2 \ M taking the link into the image of the first component embedding R → R2 . Note that in the latter case, we require an isotopy of R2 \ M and not of S \ M , i.e. we allow the links to be pulled over punctures. We denote the corresponding complex of archetypal arc systems again by AC d (C, A; X), suppressing the additional data of punctures since, as we will see, Theorem 4.9 is still valid for this larger class of complexes. 4.1.1. Proof of the connectivity theorem. The proof essentially consists of slightly modified ideas from [9, Subsection 3.3]. We induct over the length lX of X. The induction start is lX ≥ mr . This implies that X is not reduced and thus admits an archetypal arc on it. It follows that AC d (C, A; X) is non-empty, i.e. (−1)-connected. For the induction step, assume lX ≥ mr + κd . We look at the cases d = 1, 2, 3 separately, starting with the case d = 2 since it is the hardest one. ⊲ The two-dimensional case. Choose a vertex of AC 2 := AC 2 (C, A; X) represented by an archetypal arc b. Let v1 < . . . < vt be the nodes connected by b. Let AC 02 be the full subcomplex of AC 2 spanned by the archetypal arcs which do not meet the nodes vi . We want to estimate the connectivity of the pair (AC 2 , AC 02 ) using the Morse method for simplicial complexes (see e.g. Subsection 2.10). Let a be an archetypal arc. Define ( 1 if a meets vi si (a) := 0 else  36  WERNER THUMANN  for each i = 1, . . . , t. Now set  h(a) := s1 (a), . . . , st (a)  Note that the right side is a sequence of t numbers in {0, 1}. Interpret these sequences as binary numbers and order them accordingly. Then h is a Morse function building up AC 2 from AC 02 since archetypal arcs with h-value equal to (0, . . . , 0) are exactly the archetypal arcs in AC 02 and two archetypal arcs with the same h-value different from (0, . . . , 0) are not connected by an edge. We want to inspect the descending links with respect to this Morse function h. Let a be an archetypal arc with Morse height greater than (0, . . . , 0). Find the smallest τ ∈ {1, . . . , t} such that sτ (a) = 1. It is not hard to prove that lk↓ (a) is the full subcomplex of AC 2 spanned by archetypal arcs disjoint from a and not meeting any vi with i < τ . Let X ′ be the color word which is obtained from X by removing the colors corresponding to nodes which are contained in a and to the nodes vi with i < τ . Then we see that lk↓ (a) is isomorphic to AC 2 (C, A; X ′ ) with an additional puncture corresponding to a and further additional punctures corresponding to the nodes vi with i < τ . By induction, it follows that lk↓ (a) is νκ2 (lX ′ )-connected. Denote by la the length of a, i.e. the number of nodes it meets. Then we can estimate lX ′ = lX − la − (τ − 1) ≥ lX − la − t + 1 ≥ lX − ma − t + 1 ≥ lX − 2ma + 1 Thus, lk↓ (a) is νκ2 (lX − 2ma + 1)-connected. Consequently, by the Morse method, the connectivity of the pair (AC 2 , AC 02 ) is νκ2 (lX − 2ma + 1) + 1 = νκ2 (lX) because of κ2 = 2ma − 1. The second step of the proof consists of showing that the inclusion ι : AC 02 → AC 2 induces the trivial map in πm for m ≤ νκ2 (lX). It then follows from the long exact homotopy sequence of the pair (AC 2 , AC 02 ) that AC 2 is νκ2 (lX)-connected which completes the proof in the case d = 2. Let ϕ : S m → AC 02 be a map with m ≤ νκ2 (lX). We have to show that ψ := ϕ ∗ ι : S m → AC 2 is homotopic to a constant map. Think of S m as the boundary of an (m + 1)-simplex. By simplicial approximation [37, Theorem 3.4.8] we can subdivide S m and homotope ϕ to a simplicial map. So we will assume in the following that ϕ is simplicial. Next, we want to apply [9, Lemma 3.9] in order to subdivide S m further and homotope ψ to a simplexwise injective map. This means that whenever vertices v 6= w in S m are joined by an edge, then ψ(v) 6= ψ(w). To apply the lemma, we have to show that the link of every k-simplex σ in AC 2 is (m − 2k − 2)-connected. So let a0 , . . . , ak be pairwise disjoint archetypal arcs representing a k-simplex σ. The link of this simplex is the full subcomplex spanned by the archetypal arcs which are disjoint from every ai . Deleting every color corresponding to nodes which are contained in one of the ai from X, we obtain a color word X ′ and it is easy to see that the link of σ is isomorphic to AC 2 (C, A; X ′ ) with one additional puncture for each ai . By induction, we obtain that lk(σ) is νκ2 (lX ′ )-connected. We have the estimate lX ′ ≥ lX − (k + 1)ma and thus  νκ2 (lX ′ ) ≥ νκ2 lX − (k + 1)ma   lX − (k + 1)ma − mr = −1 2ma − 1  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  37   (k + 1)ma lX − mr −1 − 2ma − 1 2ma − 1   lX − mr (2k + 2)(2ma − 1) ≥ − −1 2ma − 1 2ma − 1 = νκ2 (lX) − (2k + 2)  =    ≥ m − 2k − 2  So the hypothesis of the lemma is satisfied and we will assume in the following that ψ is simplexwise injective. We now want to show that ψ can be homotoped so that the image is contained in the star of b. Since the star of a vertex is always contractible, this will finish the proof. We will homotope ψ by moving single vertices of S m step by step, eventually landing in the star of b. Consider the vertices a1 , . . . , al of ψ(S m ) which do net yet lie in the star of b, i.e. which are not disjoint to b. Choose representing links αi of ai and β of b such that the system of links (β, α1 , . . . , αl ) is in minimal position as in Lemma 4.7. Note the little subtlety that archetypal arcs may have the same underlying arc but are different because they have different labels. In this case, homotope the corresponding links a little bit so that they intersect only at nodes. Note also that each αi intersects β, but not at nodes since each ai comes from AC 02 . Last but not least, we can assume that whenever p is an intersection point of β with one of the αi , then there is at most one αi meeting the point p. Now look at the intersection point p of one of the αi with β which is closest to v1 along β. Write α for the link which intersects β at this point and a for the corresponding arc. α vj  w  vj+1  w′ β  Choose a vertex x in S m which maps to a via ψ. Define another link α′ as follows: Let j be such that the intersection point p lies on the segment of β connecting vj with vj+1 . Denote by w < w′ the nodes such that p lies on the segment of α connecting w with w′ . Now push this segment of α along β over the node vj such that α and α′ bound a disk whose interior does not contain any puncture or node other than vj .  α′  β Note that α′ is still admissible. Denote by a′ the archetypal arc with link α′ and the same label as a. Our goal is now to homotope ψ to a simplicial map ψ ′ such that ψ ′ (x) = a′ and ψ ′ (y) = ψ(y) for all other vertices y. Iterating this procedure often enough, we arrive at a map ψ ∗ homotopic to ψ such that ψ ∗ (y) ∈ st(b) for each vertex y. For example, the next step would be to move x to the vertex α′′ :  38  WERNER THUMANN  α′′  β By simplexwise injectivity, no vertex of lk(x) is mapped to a. Furthermore, a vertex of AC 2 in the image of ψ disjoint to a must also be disjoint to a′ because we have chosen α such that no other αi intersects β between p and v1 . From these observations, it follows that  ψ lk(x) ⊂ lk(a) ∩ lk(a′ )  This inclusion enables us to define a simplicial map ψ ′ : S m → AC 2 with ψ ′ (x) = a′ and ψ ′ (y) = ψ(y) for all other vertices y. Let X ′ be the color word obtained from X by removing all colors corresponding to nodes which are contained in a or to the node vj . Then lk(a) ∩ lk(a′ ) is isomorphic to AC 2 (C, A; X ′ ) with an additional puncture corresponding to the disk bounded by α ∪ α′ . Thus, by induction, it is νκ2 (lX ′ )-connected. We have the estimate lX ′ ≥ lX − ma − 1 and therefore  νκ2 (lX ′ ) ≥ νκ2 lX − ma − 1   lX − ma − 1 − mr −1 = 2ma − 1   ma + 1 lX − mr −1 − = 2ma − 1 2ma − 1   lX − mr 2ma − 1 ≥ − −1 2ma − 1 2ma − 1 = νκ2 (lX) − 1 ≥m−1 Since lk(x) is an (m − 1)-sphere, this connectivity bound for lk(a) ∩ lk(a′ ) implies that the map ψ|lk(x) : lk(x) → lk(a) ∩ lk(a′ ) can be extended to the star st(x) of x which is an m-disk. So we obtain a map ϑ : st(x) → lk(a) ∩ lk(a′ ) coinciding with ψ on the boundary lk(x). We can now homotope ψ|st(x) rel lk(x) to ϑ within st(a) and further to ψ ′ within st(a′ ). This finishes the proof of the theorem in the case d = 2. ⊲ The three-dimensional case. Choose an archetypal arc b connecting the nodes v1 < . . . < vt and let AC 03 be the full subcomplex of AC 3 := AC 3 (C, A; X) spanned by the archetypal arcs which do not meet the nodes vi . With a very similar Morse argument as in the case d = 2 above, we can show that the pair (AC 3 , AC 03 ) is νκ3 (lX)-connected. Again, the second step consists of showing that the inclusion ι : AC 03 → AC 3 induces the trivial map in πm for m ≤ νκ3 (lX). This is much easier in the case d = 3: Let ϕ : S m → AC 03 be a map and assume without loss of generality that it is simplicial. But then the map ψ := ϕ ∗ ι : S m → AC 3 already lies in the star st(b) of b since an archetypal arc not meeting any of the nodes vi is already disjoint to b. Consequently, ψ can be homotoped to a constant map and this concludes the proof in the case d = 3. ⊲ The one-dimensional case. Choose an archetypal arc b connecting the nodes v1 < . . . < vt such that the color word formed by the first r nodes w < v1 is reduced. Let AC 01 be the full subcomplex of AC 1 := AC 1 (C, A; X) spanned by the archetypal arcs which do not meet the nodes vi . This condition is equivalent to not  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  39  meeting any nodes w ≤ vt . These are simply the first s nodes w1 < . . . < ws where s = r + t. In other words, wi is the point i ∈ R colored with the color ci from X. For each archetypal arc a not contained in AC 01 there exists a unique 1 ≤ q ≤ s such that a meets wq but not w1 , . . . , wq−1 . In this case, define h(a) = −q. Then h is a Morse function building up AC 1 from AC 01 . So let a be such an archetypal arc. Let X ′ be the color word obtained from X by removing all colors corresponding to the nodes contained in a and to the nodes w1 , . . . , wq−1 . Then the descending link lk↓ (a) is isomorphic to AC 1 (C, A; X ′ ) and by induction, it is νκ1 (lX ′ )-connected. We can estimate lX ′ = lX − la − (q − 1) = lX − la − q + 1 ≥ lX − ma − q + 1 ≥ lX − ma − (ma + mr − 1) + 1 = lX − 2ma − mr + 2 Thus, lk↓ (a) is νκ1 (lX − 2ma − mr + 2)-connected. Consequently, by the Morse method, the connectivity of the pair (AC 1 , AC 01 ) is νκ1 (lX − 2ma − mr + 2) + 1 = νκ1 (lX) because of κ1 = 2ma + mr − 2. Just as in the case d = 3, one can show that the inclusion ι : AC 01 → AC 1 induces the trivial map in πm for m ≤ νκ1 (lX). This proves the theorem in the case d = 1. Remark 4.10. The method used in the proof of [14, Proposition 4.11] yields the better connectivity νκ (lX) with κ = ma + mr − 1 for the case d = 1. 4.2. A contractible complex. From now on, let O be an operad as in Theorem 4.3. Furthermore, let X be an object in S := S(O). By abuse of notation, the connected component of S containing the object X will again be denoted by S. Furthermore, we abbreviate Γ := π1 (O, X). As already noted above, the strategy to prove Theorem 4.3 is to apply Brown’s criterion 4.6 to a suitable contractible complex on which the group in question acts. Consider the universal covering category U := UX (S) of S based at X. We claim: U is a generalized poset and contractible. This follows from Proposition 2.13. The first claim together with the remarks after Definition 2.8 implies that we can form the quotient category U/G where G is the subgroupoid of U consisting of the transformations in S (lifted to U) and that U/G is a poset, the underlying poset of U. Recall that Γ acts on U which is encoded in a functor Γ → CAT sending the unique object of Γ to U. One can easily see that this functor induces a functor Γ → CAT sending the unique object to U/G. In other words, Γ also acts on U/G. More concretely, an arrow f : X → X in Γ acts on an object [g : X → Y ] of U/G from the right via [g] · f := [f −1 g]. This will be the action to which we want to apply Brown’s criterion. Since U/G is homotopy equivalent to U, the second claim implies that also U/G is contractible. So the first condition in Brown’s criterion is satisfied. 4.3. Isotropy groups. We continue to verify the conditions in Brown’s criterion for the action of Γ on U/G. In this subsection, we show that cell stabilizers are of type F∞ . First, we note that U/G is indeed a Γ-CW-complex. This follows from the following general remark. Remark 4.11. Let G be a group acting on a category C. An element g ∈ G fixing a cell setwise already fixes its vertices and so fixes the cell pointwise. Consequently,  40  WERNER THUMANN  a category with an action of a discrete group G is a G-CW-complex. If C is a generalized poset, a cell stabilizer is equal to the intersection of the vertex stabilizers of that cell. In the following, we abbreviate T := T (O) and I := I(O). Lemma 4.12. The groupoid T formed by the transformations in S is of type F∞ . Proof. By assumption, the groupoid I formed by the degree 1 operations is of type F∞ . The groupoid T is Mon(I) in the planar case, Sym(I) in the symmetric case and Braid(I) in the braided case (see Subsection 2.8 for the definitions of these categories). Choose a color in each component of I. Let Y be an object in T . We have to show that AutT (Y ) is of type F∞ . We can assume without loss of generality that Y decomposes as a tensor product of chosen colors: Y = c1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ ck . In the planar case we have AutMon(I) (Y ) = AutI (c1 ) × . . . × AutI (ck ) and the claim follows because the AutI (ci ) are of type F∞ . For the symmetric and braided case, first assume that all the colors ci are equal to one chosen color c. In the symmetric case, we then have AutSym(I) (Y ) = Sk ⋉ AutI (c)k where Sk , the symmetric group on k strands, acts by permutation of the factors. More precisely, we have the group homomorphism   ϕ : Sk → Aut(Gk ) σ 7→ (g1 , . . . , gk ) 7→ (g1⊲σ−1 , . . . , gk⊲σ−1 ) which gives a right action of Sk on Gk by the definition g · σ = g⊲(σ⊲ϕ). The multiplication in the semidirect product Sk ⋉ Gk is then given by  (σ, g) ∗ (σ ′ , g ′ ) := σ ∗ σ ′ , (g · σ ′ ) ∗ g ′ Since Sk is a finite group, it is also of type F∞ . Since semidirect products of type F∞ groups are of type F∞ [23, Exercise 1 on page 176 and Proposition 7.2.2], it follows that AutSym(I) (Y ) is of type F∞ . In the braided case we have AutBraid(I) (Y ) = Bk ⋉ AutI (c)k where Bk , the braid group on k strands, acts via permutation of the factors through the projection Bk → Sk . The braid groups Bk are of type F∞ [38, Theorem A]. As above, it follows that AutBraid(I) (Y ) is of type F∞ . Remains to handle the case where not all the colors ci lie in the same component of I. Denote by Bk′ the finite index subgroup of Bk consisting of the elements σ with the property ci⊲σ = ci . Since different ci are not connected by an isomorphism in I, we now have  AutBraid(I) (Y ) = Bk′ ⋉ AutI (c1 ) × .. × AutI (ck ) where Bk′ still acts by permuting the factors. This action is well-defined due to the definition of Bk′ . Recall that a group is of type F∞ if and only if a finite index subgroup is of type F∞ [23, Corollary 7.2.4]. It follows that Bk′ and thus AutBraid(I) (Y ) is of type F∞ . The symmetric case can be treated similarly.   Lemma 4.13. Let P be an object in U/G. Then the stabilizer subgroup StabΓ (P) is of type F∞ . Proof. Fix an arrow p : X → Y in π1 (S) which represents the object P in U/G, i.e. [p] = P. Let γ ∈ Γ fix the point P. This means [γ −1 p] = [p] · γ = [p]. It follows that there is some transformation t : Y → Y such that γ −1 p = pt. This is equivalent to p−1 γp = t−1 which implies that p−1 γp is an element in AutT (Y ).  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  41  Conversely, for τ a transformation in AutT (Y ), the element pτ p−1 is contained in StabΓ (P). Thus, the map StabΓ (P) → AutT (Y )  γ 7→ p−1 γp  is an isomorphism with inverse given by τ 7→ pτ p−1 . Since AutT (Y ) is of type F∞ by the previous lemma, the claim follows. Note that this isomorphism depends on the choice of p. However, two such choices differ by a transformation τ and the two corresponding isomorphisms differ by conjugation with τ .  We say that two operations θ1 and θ2 are two-sided transformation equivalent if there are transformations α, γ such that θ2 = α ∗ θ1 ∗ γ. Proposition 4.14. The stabilizer subgroups of cells in U/G are of type F∞ . Proof. In the following, we restrict ourselves to the braided case. The planar and symmetric cases are similar and simpler. We first choose a color in each connected component of I. Next, we choose an operation in each two-sided transformation class such that the output of the chosen operation is a chosen color. A non-degenerate cell in the geometric realization of U/G is a sequence of composable non-trivial arrows in U/G P0  ǫ0  ǫ1  / P1  / ···  ǫk−1  / Pk  Let pk : X → Yk be a representing path of Pk such that Yk = c1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ cl is a tensor product of chosen colors. In the proofs of Lemmas 4.12 and 4.13, we have seen that pk induces an isomorphism  ϕ : StabΓ (Pk ) → Bl′ ⋉ AutI (c1 ) × .. × AutI (cl )  Choose some Pi =: P different from Pk and observe the arrow ǫ : P → Pk which is the composition of the ǫj in between. Choose a representing path p : X → Y of P. Then there is exactly one arrow e : Y → Yk representing ǫ. One can compose p and pk with transformations η and λ such that λ : Yk → Yk is a tensor product of degree 1 operations λi : ci → ci and e is a tensor product of chosen operations. Write p′k = pk λ for the new representative of Pk . To p′k corresponds another isomorphism  ϕ′ : StabΓ (Pk ) → Bl′ ⋉ AutI (c1 ) × .. × AutI (cl ) which differs from ϕ by conjugation with λ. Denote the new representative pη of P again by p. Now let γ ∈ StabΓ (Pk ). Then γ fixes also P, i.e. P · γ = P, if and only if [p′k e−1 ] = [p] = [p] · γ = [γ −1 p] = [γ −1 p′k e−1 ] −1 −1 ′ −1 γ pk e ] ′ −1 −1 [pk tγ e ]  = [p′k p′k = −1  where we have set tγ := p′k γp′k , an element in the image of the isomorphism ϕ′ . Therefore, we have to identify all such tγ which satisfy this equation. In other words, we look for all tγ such that there is a transformation τ with etγ = τ e Roughly speaking, we look for all tγ which can be pulled through e from the codomain to the domain.  42  WERNER THUMANN  For better readability, we assume without loss of generality that the colors ci are all equal to one color c. In particular, the codomains of ϕ and ϕ′ are of the form Bl ⋉ AutI (c)l . Then write e = θ1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ θl where the θi are chosen operations with codomain the chosen color c. Define Hi to be the subgroup of AutI (c) consisting of elements h which can be pulled through the operation θi , i.e. there exists a transformation τ with θi h = τ θi . Furthermore, let Bl∗ be the finite index subgroup of Bl consisting of the elements σ with the property θi⊲σ = θi . Denote by StabΓ (P, Pk ) the subgroup of StabΓ (Pk ) which also fixes P. Then the isomorphism ϕ′ restricts to an isomorphism ϕ′P : StabΓ (P, Pk ) → Bl∗ ⋉ (H1 × . . . × Hl ) =: ΛP where the subgroup Bl∗ still acts via permutation of the factors and this is welldefined due to the definition of Bl∗ . The proof of this is straightforward and uses the fact that two two-sided transformation equivalent θi must be equal. Recall that ϕ′ differs from ϕ by conjugation with λ. So the image of StabΓ (P, Pk ) under ϕ is its image under ϕ′ conjugated with λ. More precisely, ϕ restricts to an isomorphism ϕP : StabΓ (P, Pk ) → λΛP λ−1 =: ΩP Consider the pure braid group Pl which is a finite index subgroup of Bl . It is also a finite index subgroup of Bl∗ . Recall that we have λ = λ1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ λl where the λi are degree 1 operations. We have   λ Pl ⋉ (H1 × . . . × Hl ) λ−1 = λ Pl × (H1 × . . . × Hl ) λ−1  = Pl × λ1 H1 λ1−1 × . . . × λl Hl λ−1 l  = Pl × H1P × . . . × HlP where HiP := λi Hi λ−1 is isomorphic to Hi . This is a finite index subgroup of ΩP . i Remains to consider the case when γ ∈ StabΓ (Pk ) fixes more than one additional vertex Pi . For this we have to show that the intersection ΩP0 ∩ . . . ∩ ΩPk−1 ⊂ Bl ⋉ AutI (c)l is of type F∞ . For better readability, we assume without loss of generality that k = 2. Then the last statement is equivalent to     Pl × H1P0 × . . . × HlP0 ∩ Pl × H1P1 × . . . × HlP1 =    Pl × H1P0 ∩ H1P1 × . . . × HlP0 ∩ HlP1  being of type F∞ since it is a finite index subgroup. This is true because Pl is of type F∞ and all the groups HiP0 ∩ HiP1 are of type F∞ . The latter statement is + . true because the groups HiP0 ∩ HiP1 are subgroups of AutI (c) which is of type F∞ This completes the proof of the proposition.  4.4. Finite type filtration. To apply Brown’s criterion to the Γ-CW-complex U/G, we need a filtration by Γ-CW-subcomplexes (U/G)n which are of finite type. Observe that the degree function on S induces degree functions on U and U/G. Define Sn resp. Un resp. (U/G)n to be the full subcategories spanned by the objects of degree at most n. Note that we have Un /Gn = (U/G)n where Gn = G ∩ Un . In the following, we want to show that (U/G)n only has finitely many Γ-equivariant cells in each dimension. Choose one operation in each very elementary transformation class and denote the resulting set of operations by S. By the assumptions in Theorem 4.3, S is a finite set.  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  43  Observation 4.15. Let θ ∈ S and γ be a degree 1 operation such that θ ∗γ is defined. Then, by Proposition 3.19, θ ∗ γ is again very elementary and there is a θ′ ∈ S and a transformation τ with θ ∗ γ = τ ∗ θ′ . Denote by Ω the set of all identity operations together with all operations of degree at most n which are obtained by partially composing operations in S. Note that Ω is finite because S is finite and there are only finitely many colors by assumption. Denote by Λ the set of arrows in Sn which are obtained by taking tensor products of operations in Ω. Again, the set Λ is finite. Let Λ∗p ⊂ Λp be the subset of p-tuples of composable arrows in Λ. We claim that there is a surjective function   Λ∗p ։ p-cells in (U/G)n Γ  which proves that there are only finitely many Γ-equivariant cells in (U/G)n . Let (e0 , . . . , ep−1 ) ∈ Λ∗p . Choose a path p0 : X → dom(e0 ). Define paths pk : X → dom(ek ) by the composite pk := p0 e0 . . . ek−1 . The pi represent objects Pi and the ei represent arrows ǫi : Pi → Pi+1 in (U/G)n . Thus, the sequence ǫ0 , . . . , ǫp−1 gives a p-cell in (U/G)n . This p-cell surely depends on the choice of p0 but two such choices give equivalent p-cells modulo the action of Γ. So we get a well-defined function as above. Remains to show that this function is indeed surjective. Consider a p-cell in (U/G)n in the form of a string ǫ  ǫ  ǫp−1  1 0 · · · −−−→ Pp P1 −→ P0 −→  of composable arrows in (U/G)n . For each Pi we can choose representatives Pi in Un . Then each ǫi is represented by a unique arrow ei : Pi → Pi+1 in Un . We now want to change these representatives so that each ei lies in Λ. Start with the last arrow ep−1 = [σ, Θ]. Let T be the set of operations of the form τ ∗ θ where τ is a transformation and θ ∈ S. In other words, T is the set of all very elementary operations. Each higher degree operation θ in the sequence Θ can be written, up to transformation, as a partial composition of operations in T (see the remarks after Definition 3.16). It follows θ = s ∗ ψ where s is a transformation and ψ is an operation decomposable into operations of the form (γ1 , . . . , γk ) ∗ ξ with ξ ∈ S and γi of degree 1. Using Observation 4.15, we can pull the degree 1 operations to the domain of ψ, starting with the rightmost degree 1 operations, and obtain θ = s ∗ ψ where s is a transformation and ψ is an operation decomposable into operations of S. We now have ep−1 = τ ∗Ψ where τ is some transformation and Ψ is simply a tensor product of identities or higher degree operations decomposable into operations of S. By changing the representives Pp−1 , ep−1 and ep−2 in their respective classes modulo the subgroupoid G, we can assume τ = id and thus that ep−1 lies in Λ. We can now repeat this argument with ep−2 and then with ep−3 and so forth until we have changed each ei to lie in Λ. This proves surjectivity. 4.5. Connectivity of the filtration. It remains to show the connectivity statement in Brown’s criterion, i.e. we have to show that the connectivity of the pair  (U/G)n , (U/G)n−1 tends to infinity as n → ∞. To show this, we apply the Morse method for categories. The degree function on U/G is a Morse function and the corresponding filtration is exactly (U/G)n . Thus, we have to prove that the connectivity of the descending link lk↓ (K) tends to infinity as the degree of the object K tends to infinity. Note that the descending up link lk↓ (K) is always empty, so we have lk↓ (K) = lk↓ (K). Definition 4.16. An arrow [σ, Θ] in S is called (very) elementary if it is not a transformation and every higher degree operation in Θ is (very) elementary. An  44  WERNER THUMANN  arrow in U is called (very) elementary if the corresponding arrow in S is (very) elementary. An arrow in U/G is called (very) elementary if there is a (very) elementary representative in U. It follows from Proposition 3.19 that the number of (very) elementary operations in an arrow a ∈ U does does not change if we replace a by another representative in the class [a] ∈ U/G. In particular, if the arrow α ∈ U/G is (very) elementary, then all representing arrows a ∈ U of α are (very) elementary. The data of an object in lk↓ (K) consists of an object Y in U/G with deg(Y) < deg(K) and an arrow α : K → Y in U/G. Now we define Core(K) to be the full subcategory of lk↓ (K) spanned by the objects (Y, α) where α is a very elementary arrow. Denote by Corona(K) the full subcategory of lk↓ (K) spanned by the objects (Y, α) with α an elementary arrow. So we have Core(K) ⊂ Corona(K) ⊂ lk ↓ (K) and we will study the connectivity of these spaces successively. 4.5.1. The core. In this subsubsection, we adopt the normal form point of view of Subsection 3.2: Arrows in S are always represented by a unique pair (σ, Θ) such that σ −1 is unpermuted resp. unbraided on the domains of the operations in the sequence Θ. We say that two operations θ1 and θ2 are right transformation equivalent if there is a transformation γ such that θ2 = θ1 ∗ γ. Recall from Proposition 3.19 that being elementary or very elementary is invariant under right transformations. The object K in U/G is a class of objects in U modulo transformations. Fix some representing object K. Then the objects in Core(K) are in one to one correspondence with pairs (Y, a) where Y is an object in U with deg(Y ) < deg(K) and a : K → Y is a very elementary arrow in U modulo transformations on the codomain (compare with Remark 2.6). Choose one operation in each right transformation equivalence class and denote the resulting set of operations by R. We choose the identity for a class of degree 1 operations so that the degree 1 operations in R are identities. Now define a very elementary R-arrow to be a very elementary arrow (σ, Θ) in S such that the operations in Θ are elements of R. Thus, Θ is a tensor product of identities and at least one very elementary operation lying in R. This notion of very elementary R-arrows can be lifted to arrows in U. Now the objects in Core(K) are in one to one correspondence with pairs (Y, a) where Y is an object with deg(Y ) < deg(K) and a : K → Y is • (planar case) a very elementary R-arrow. • (symmetric case) a very elementary R-arrow modulo colored permutations on the codomain. • (braided case) a very elementary R-arrow modulo colored braidings on the codomain. The equivalence relation modulo braidings on the codomain is called “dangling” in [9] because these objects may be visualized as a braiding where some strands at one end are connected by very elementary operations in R, called “feet”, and these are allowed to dangle freely (see [9, Figure 9]). Now let C be the set of colors of the operad O. We define a set of archetypes A as follows: For each operation in R, form an archetype with identifier this operation and with color word the domain of that operation. The object K in U is a path of arrows in S modulo homotopy. It starts at the color word X and ends at some other color word T . Consider the simplicial complex AC d (C, A; T ) from Subsection 4.1. It can be seen as a poset of simplices with an arrow from a simplex σ to another simplex σ ′ if and only if σ is a face of σ ′ .  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  45  Proposition 4.17. The category Core(K) is a poset and isomorphic, as a poset, to AC d (C, A; T ) where d = 1 in the planar case, d = 2 in the braided case and d = 3 in the symmetric case. Proof. We restrict our attention to the braided case, i.e. d = 2. The other two cases are much simpler. First, it is clear that Core(K) is a poset since U/G is a poset. We want to understand the poset structure a bit better: Let Λ be an object of Core(K) in the form of a very elementary R-arrow K → Y modulo dangling. Fix some very elementary R-arrow λ representing this class with the property that the colored braiding of that arrow is unbraided not only on the sets of strands connected to single operations but also on the set of strands connected to identity operations. Then arrows in Core(K) with domain Λ are in one to one correspondence with very elementary R-arrows α in U, modulo dangling, such that the very elementary operations of α only connect to identity operations of λ in the composition λ ∗ α (since compositions of very elementary operations are not very elementary anymore). The following diagram, in which the gray triangles are identity operations, illustrates such a situation: λ α  These considerations yield the following interpretation of the poset structure: We have Λ → Λ′ if and only if there is a very elementary R-arrow λ representing the dangling class Λ such that adding very elementary operations of R to loose strands of λ (i.e. strands connected to identity operations) gives a very elementary R-arrow representing the dangling class Λ′ . We will consider an isomorphism of posets comb : Core(K) → AC2 (C, A; T ) called “combing” as in [9, Section 4] and its inverse weave: AC2 (C, A; T ) → Core(K) which we call “weaving”. To define the first map, start with an object Λ in Core(K). As above, it is a very elementary R-arrow in normal form modulo dangling. Thus, it is represented by a colored braid with unbraided strands connected by very elementary operations in R. Think of the domain of the braid as being fixed on the line L1 := {(x, 0, 1) | x ∈ R} ⊂ R3 the codomain as being fixed on the line L0 := {(x, 0, 0) | x ∈ R} ⊂ R3 and visualize the operations as straight lines in L0 connecting the ends of the corresponding strands. Now “combing straight” the braid means moving around the ends of the braid in the plane P := R2 × {0} ⊂ R3 such that the whole braid becomes unbraided. The segments representing the operations get deformed in P this way and in fact become the archetypal arcs in comb(Λ). They are admissible  46  WERNER THUMANN  because the braid was required to be unbraided on the domains of the operations. This process is visualized in [9, Figure 17]. Note that combing does not depend on the representative under dangling, so it is a well-defined map on the objects of Core(K). It also respects the poset structures, so it is a map of posets. To define the second map, start with an archetypal arc system A. This is a priori embedded in R2 but embed it in R3 via the embedding R2 × {0} ⊂ R3 . Connect the nodes of the archetypal arc system with the line L1 by straight lines parallel to the third coordinate axis. The process of weaving first tries to separate the archetypal arcs by moving the nodes in the plane P . Here, being separate means being separated by a straight line in P parallel to the second coordinate axis. Also, the set of nodes which are not contained in an arc should be separated from the arcs. By doing these moves, the vertical strands connecting the nodes with the line L1 become braided in a certain way. The separation process is always possible but the resulting braid is not unique (think of two nodes connected by an arc and turn around the arc several times). To make the resulting braid unique (up to dangling), we additionally require that the subbraid determined by an archetypal arc never becomes braided during the separation process. This can be achieved for example by the following additional movement rule: The nodes of an archetypal arc always have to stay on the same line L in P parallel to the first coordinate axis. This line L may move up and down and the nodes of the archetypal arc may move left and right on L but they must never cross each other on L. Then, when the archetypal arcs are separated from each other and from the isolated nodes, the property admissible of the archetypal arcs ensures that they can be homotoped to straight lines lying in L0 . The following figure visualizes this process:  Replacing the archetypal arcs by the identifier operations of the corresponding archetype yields a representative of weave(A) and the class modulo dangling does not depend on the weaving process. Thus, we get a well-defined map on the objects of AC 2 (C, A; T ). It also respects the poset structures, so it is a map of posets.  It follows from the finiteness of V E that the set of archetypes A is of finite type (though not finite in general) and from the color-tameness of O that it is tame. More precisely, let mV be the largest degree of very elementary classes and mC be the smallest natural number greater than the degree of any reduced object in S. Then we can set ma = mV and mr = mC in Theorem 4.9. We thus get the following Corollary 4.18. Core(K) is νd (deg K)-connected where   l − mC −1 ν1 (l) := 2mV + mC − 2  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  47   l − mC −1 2mV − 1   l − mC ν3 (l) := −1 2mV − 1 ν2 (l) :=    Here, d = 1 corresponds to the planar case, d = 2 to the braided case and d = 3 to the symmetric case. 4.5.2. The corona. We build up Corona(K) from Core(K) using again the Morse method for categories. We then get a connectivity result for the corona from the connectivity result for the core. The idea is attributed to [20]. We assumed O to be of finite type, i.e. the set of elementary classes E is finite. Let mE be the largest degree of elementary classes. An object in Corona(K) is a pair (Y, α : K → Y) where deg(Y) < deg(K) and α is an elementary arrow in U/G. For 2 ≤ k ≤ mE denote by #kse (α) the number of strictly elementary operations of degree k in any representative of α. Define   mE −1 E (α), . . . , #2se (α), deg(Y) f (Y, α) := #m se (α), #se  Order the values of f lexicographically. Then f becomes a Morse function building up Corona(K) from Core(K). Define   l − mC −2 µ1 (l) := 2mV + mC + mE   l − mC µ2 (l) := −1 2mV + mE   l − mC −1 µ3 (l) := 2mV + mE  Proposition 4.19. For each object (Y, α) in Corona(K) which is not an object in Core(K), the descending link lk↓ (Y, α) with respect to the Morse function f above is µd (deg K)-connected. From Theorem 2.20 we get that Core(K) and Corona(K) share the same homotopy groups up to dimension µd (deg K). We already know that Core(K) is νd (deg K)-connected. Furthermore, we have νd (l) ≥ µd (l). Consequently, we get the following Corollary 4.20. Corona(K) is µd (deg K)-connected. In particular, its connectivity tends to infinity as deg(K) → ∞. In the rest of this subsubsection, we give a proof of Proposition 4.19. We distinguish between two sorts of objects (Y, α) in Corona(K) which are not objects in Core(K): Such an object is called mixed if there is at least one very elementary operation in α. It is called pure if there is no very elementary operation in α. Lemma 4.21. Let (Y, α) be mixed. Then lk↓ (Y, α) and therefore lk↓ (Y, α) is contractible. In particular, Proposition 4.19 is true for mixed objects.  Proof. The data of an object in lk ↓ (Y, α) is Ω = (L, β1 ), β2 where L is an object in U/G, β1 is an elementary arrow in U/G, β2 is an arrow in U/G such that β1 β2 = α and (L, β1 ) forms an object in Corona(K) of strictly smaller Morse height than (Y, α). Let Ω′ = (L′ , β1′ ), β2′ be another such object. An arrow Ω → Ω′ is  48  WERNER THUMANN  represented by an arrow δ : L → L′ such that β1 δ = β1′ and δβ2′ = β2 . α / K ❄❚❚❚❚ ❥❥❥⑦5? Y ❥ ❄❄ ❚❚❚❚ ❥ ❥ ❚❚❚❚ ❄❄ ❥❥❥ ⑦⑦⑦ ❚❚❚❚ ❄❄ ❥❥❥❥ ⑦ ❥ ❥ ′ ❚ ❥ ❄❄ β ❚❚❚❚ ❥❥❥ 2 β ⑦⑦β ′ β1 ⑦ ❥ ❄❄ 1 ❚ ❥ ⑦ 2 ❚❚❚❚ ❄ ❥❥❥❥ ⑦⑦ ❚❚❚) ❥ ❥ ❥ / L′ L❥ δ  It follows that lk ↓ (Y, α) is a poset since U/G is a poset. Choose representatives K and Y of K and Y. Then α is represented by a unique arrow a : K → Y . We can choose K such that a is a tensor product of higher degree operations and identities. Let av : K → Y v be the arrow obtained from a by replacing all strictly elementary operations θ with deg(θ) identity operations. Let ase : Y v → Y be the arrow obtained from a by replacing all very elementary operations by one identity operation each. We have av ase = a. An example of a, av , ase is pictured below. There, a white triangle is a placeholder for a strictly elementary operation. A black triangle indicates a very elementary operation. A straight horizontal line represents an identity operation. av  a  ase  Set Y v := [Y v ] and αv := [av ] as well as αse := [ase ]. Then (Y v , αv ) is an object in Core(K) and αse represents an arrow (Y v , αv ) → (Y, α) in Corona(K). Moreover, the pair Ξ := (Y v , αv ), αse is an object in lk↓ (Y, α).  Let Ω = (L, β1 ), β2 be an object in lk↓ (Y, α). We define another object F (Ω) =  (M, γ1 ), γ2 of lk↓ (Y, α) as follows: Choose a representative L of L such that β2 is represented by b2 : L → Y which is a tensor product of identities and higher degree operations. Then β1 is represented by a unique b1 : K → L. Note that b1 b2 = a. Think of b1 as splitting higher degree operations of a into operations of smaller degree and of b2 as merging them back to their original form. Now define the arrows g1 : K → M and g2 : M → Y to be the same splitting of a with the only exception that no very elementary operation of a is splitted. An example fitting to the example above is pictured below. There, a gray triangle is a placeholder for an elementary operation or a degree 1 operation, a blue triangle can be any operation and a dot on a straight horizontal line indicates a possibly non-trivial degree 1 operation. b1  b2  g1  Now set M := [M ] and γ1 := [g1 ] as well as γ2 = [g2 ].  g2  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  49  It is not hard to see that Ω 7→ F (Ω) extends to a functor lk↓ (Y, α) → lk↓ (Y, α) which means that whenever we have an arrow δ : Ω → Ω′ , then there is an arrow ∆ : F (Ω) → F (Ω′ ). M′ ✈: O ●●● ✈ ●● ✈✈ ∆ ●● ✈✈ ● ′ ✈ ′ M γ1 ✈✈ 6 P P ♥ PPP ●●●γ●2 ✈ ♥♥♥♥ ✈ P PPP ●●● ✈✈ ♥♥ P ● ✈✈♥♥♥♥γ1♥ ✈ γ2 PPPP ●● ✈♥♥♥ PPP●● ✈ P#( ✈✈♥♥ ♥ α K ❅❯ ❖❖❯❖❯❯❯ ✐4/? E Y ✐ ✐ ✐ ❅❅ ❖❖ ❯❯❯❯ ✐✐✐✐ ⑧⑧☛ ❅❅ ❖❖❖ ❯❯❯❯ β1′ ✐✐se✐✐ ′ ⑧⑧⑧☛☛☛ ❅❅ ❖❖❖ ❯❯❯❯ ✐ ✐ ✐ ❯❯ ✐✐ α ❖❖❖ β2 ⑧⑧ ☛ αv ❅❅❅ ❖✐❖✐❖✐✐✐✐❯✐❯❯❯❯❯❯ ⑧ ☛☛ ✐ ❯ ❖ ✐ ❯* ′ ⑧ ☛☛ β2 ❖❖❖ v ✐ LO ☛☛ Y ❖❖❖ ❖❖❖ ☛ δ ❖❖❖ ☛☛ β1 ' L We also have arrows ξΩ : Ξ → F (Ω) and ιΩ : Ω → F (Ω). 6M❖ ♥♥♥ ✌✌F W✵✵✵ ❖❖❖❖❖ ♥ ♥ ❖❖❖γ2 γ1 ♥♥♥ ✌ ✵✵ ❖❖❖ ιΩ ξΩ ✌✌ ♥♥♥ ✵ ♥ ❖❖❖ ♥ ✌ ✵✵ ♥♥ ✌ ❖❖' ♥ ♥ ✌ ♥ α ✵✵ ✌ K ❆❯❯❯❯ ✌ ✐4/ Y ✐ ✵ ✐ ✌ ❆❆ ❯❯❯❯❯ ✌ ✵✵ ✐✐✐✐✐ ⑧⑧? ✐ se ❆❆ β1 ❯❯❯✌✌❯ ✐✵✐ α ⑧⑧ ❆❆ ⑧ ✌ ❯❯❯❯❯❯✐✐✐✐✐✐✐ ✵✵ ❆❆ ✌✌ ❯ αv ✐ ⑧⑧ β2 ❯ ✐ ✵ ❯ ✐ ⑧ ❯ ✐ ❯ ✌ ✐✐✐✐ ❯❯❯* ⑧ L Yv The arrow ξΩ is represented by an arrow xΩ : Y v → M which satisfies av xΩ = g1 and xΩ g2 = ase . The arrow ιΩ is represented by iΩ : L → M which satisfies b1 iΩ = g1 and iΩ g2 = b2 . In the example from above, these arrows look as follows: xΩ  iΩ  The claim of the proposition now follows from item iii) in Subsection 2.5 applied to the functor F and the object Ξ.  Lemma 4.22. Let (Y, α) be pure. Then lk↓ (Y, α) is µd (deg K)-connected and Proposition 4.19 is true for pure objects. Proof. Choose representatives K and Y of K and Y such that a : K → Y representing α is a tensor product of higher degree operations and identities. First observe the descending up link lk↓ (Y, α). An object in lk ↓ (Y, α) is a pair  (L, β1 ), β2 with f (L, β1 ) < f (Y, α) and β1 β2 = α. When choosing a representative L of L, we get unique representatives b1 : K → L of β1 and b2 : L → Y of β2 such that b1 b2 = a. As in the proof of the previous lemma, b1 can be interpreted as splitting higher degree operations of a into operations of smaller degree and b2 as merging them back to their original form. Denote by Ai the full subcategory of lk↓ (Y, α) spanned by the objects which only split the i’th higher degree operation  50  WERNER THUMANN  in a. Denote by n the number of higher degree operations in a. Observe now that when splitting operations in a one by one, then we can also split all that operations at once. This observation reveals that lk↓ (Y, α) = A1 ◦ . . . ◦ An is the Grothendieck join of the Ai (see Subsection 2.9). Note that the categories Ai are all non-empty since all the higher degree operations in a are elementary but not very elementary and splitting such a strictly elementary operation decreases the Morse height. Thus, lk ↓ (Y, α) is (n − 2)-connected.  Now look at the descending down link lk↓ (Y, α). Objects are pairs (L, β1 ), β2 with f (L, β1 ) < f (Y, α) and αβ2 = β1 . When choosing a representative L of L, we get unique representatives b1 : K → L of β1 and b2 : Y → L of β2 such that ab2 = b1 . Looking at the Morse function f for the corona, one sees that the higher degree operations of b2 must be very elementary operations which only compose with identity operations of a. At this point, we have to distinguish between the planar case on the one hand and the braided resp. symmetric case on the other. We start with the braided resp. symmetric case: The arguments in the proof of Proposition 4.17 reveal that lk ↓ (Y, α) is isomorphic to AC d (C, A; T ′ ) where T ′ is the color word obtained from the codomain of a (viewed as an arrow in S) after deleting the higher degree operations. Denote by l the length of T ′ , i.e. the number of identity operations in a. Then we already know that AC d (C, A; T ′ ) is νd (l)connected (compare with Corollary 4.18). Consequently, the connectivity of the descending link lk↓ (Y, α) = lk↓ (Y, α) ∗ lk↓ (Y, α) is   l − mC −1 n + νd (l) = n + 2mV − 1   deg K − nmE − mC −1 ≥n+ 2mV − 1   deg K − nmE − mC ≥n+ −1 2mV + mE   deg K − mC + 2mV n = −1 2mV + mE   deg K − mC −1 ≥ 2mV + mE = µd (deg K) where we have used that nmE + l ≥ deg K. Now we turn to the planar case: An identity component in a is a maximal subsequence of identity operations. Let m be the number of identity components and denote by li for i = 1, . . . , m the length of the i’th identity component. Denote by l the total number of identity operations in a, i.e. the sum of the li . Define Bi to be the full subcategory of lk ↓ (Y, α) spanned by the objects which only add very elementary operations into the i’th identity component. Observe now that when adding very elementary operations into different identity components one by one, then we can also add all that operations at once. This reveals that lk↓ (Y, α) is the Grothendieck join of the Bi . Note, though, when inspecting the direction of the arrows in lk↓ (Y, α), one sees that it is in fact the dual Grothendieck join. So we have lk ↓ (Y, α) = B1 • . . . • Bm Similarly as in the braided resp. symmetric case, Bi is isomorphic to AC 1 (C, A; Ti ) where Ti is the color word obtained from the codomain of a after deleting all operations except the identity operations of the i’th identity component. The length  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  51  of Ti is li . Then we already know that AC 1 (C, A; Ti ) is ν1 (li )-connected. Therefore, the connectivity of lk↓ (Y, α) is at least 2m − 2 +  m X  ν1 (lj )  j=1  Thus, the connectivity of lk↓ (Y, α) is at least n + 2m − 2 +  m X  ν1 (lj ) ≥ n + m − 2 +  j=1  ≥n−2+   m  X lj − mC 2mV + mC j=1  m X lj − mC 2mV + mC j=1  l − mmC 2mV + mC deg K − nmE − (n + 1)mC ≥n−2+ 2mV + mC deg K − nmE − nmC − mC −2 ≥n+ 2mV + mC + mE deg K − mC + 2mV n = −2 2mV + mC + mE deg K − mC ≥ −2 2mV + mC + mE ≥ µ1 (deg K) =n−2+  where we have used in the fourth step that m ≤ n + 1 and nmE + l ≥ deg K.    4.5.3. The whole link. In this last step, we show that the inclusion Corona(K) ⊂ lk↓ (K) is a homotopy equivalence. It then follows from Corollary 4.20 that the connectivity of lk↓ (K) tends to infinity as deg(K) → ∞ which is what we wanted to show in order to finish the proof of Theorem 4.3. This step is analogous to the reduction to the Stein space of elementary intervals in [39]. We again apply the Morse method for categories to build lk↓ (K) up from Corona(K). The Morse function on objects of lk ↓ (K) which do not lie in Corona(K) is given by  f (Y, α) := − deg(Y)  We have lk↓ (Y, α) = ∅ and thus lk↓ (Y, α) = lk↓ (Y, α) with respect to this Morse function. Similarly as in the proofs of Lemmas 4.21 and 4.22, we obtain lk↓ (Y, α) = A1 ◦ . . . ◦ An where the Ai are full subcategories of lk↓ (Y, α) spanned by the objects which correspond to splitting exactly one of the n higher degree operations in a representative a of α. At least one of these operations must be non-elementary since (Y, α) is not an object in Corona(K). Without loss of generality, assume that A1 corresponds to such a non-elementary higher degree operation. If we show that A1 is contractible, it follows that lk↓ (Y, α) is contractible. Thus, we are building lk ↓ (K) up from Corona(K) along contractible descending links and it follows from Theorem 2.20 that the inclusion Corona(K) ⊂ lk↓ (K) is a homotopy equivalence. That A1 is contractible follows from Proposition 4.24 below. First, we want to reinterprete the defining property of E as the spine of T C ∗ (O) in terms of the category U/G.  52  WERNER THUMANN  Lemma 4.23. Let α : K → Y be a non-elementary arrow in U/G such that deg(K) = n > 1 and deg(Y) = 1. Then there is a unique pair (α1 , α2 ) of arrows in U/G (called the maximal elementary factorization of α) such that α2 is elementary, α1 α2 = α and such that the following universal property is satisfied: Whenever (β1 , β2 ) is another pair with β2 elementary and β1 β2 = α (called an elementary factorization of α), then there is a unique arrow γ with α1 γ = β1 and γβ2 = α2 . K ✌ ✶✶✶ ✌ ✶✶ ✌ ✶✶ ✌✌ ✌ α1 ✌ ✶✶β1 α ✌ ✶✶ ✌ ✌ ✶✶ ✌  ✌✌  / o Q α2 Y P A β 2 ❄ ⑧ ❏ γ t ❚ ❴ ❥ Proof. Recall that U/G is a poset. So there is at most one such γ. If also (β1 , β2 ) satisfies the universal property, then we must have Q = P and consequently α1 = β1 as well as α2 = β2 . This shows the uniqueness statements. Remains to prove the existence of such a pair: Choose representatives K, Y of K, Y. Then α is represented by a unique arrow a : K → Y . Note that a is just an operation since deg(Y ) = 1. Denote the transformation class of a by Ω. Its degree is deg(K) = n > 1 and it is non-elementary by assumption. Thus, by the definition of E as the spine, there is a greatest elementary class Θ with the property Θ < Ω. This implies that there is an operation θ ∈ Θ and an arrow q in S such that q ∗θ = a in S. Define Q := K ∗ q as an object in U and further Q := [Q] as an object in U/G. The arrows q : K → Q resp. θ : Q → Y in U represent arrows α1 resp. α2 in U/G such that α1 α2 = α and α2 is elementary. These two arrows satisfy the universal property: Let b1 : K → P and b2 : P → Y be representatives of β1 : K → P and β2 : P → Y. Obviously, the transformation class [b2 ] of b2 is elementary and satisfies [b2 ] < [a] = Ω. Since Θ = [θ] is the greatest such class, we obtain [b2 ] ≤ [θ]. This means that there is an arrow g in S such that g ∗ b2 = θ in S. If g is interpreted as an arrow Q → P in U, then it represents an arrow γ : Q → Y in U/G which satisfies γβ2 = α2 . We then also have α1 γ = β1 since U/G is a poset.  We now turn to the announced proposition which concludes the proof of the main theorem. Proposition 4.24. Let α : K → Y be a non-elementary arrow in U/G such that deg(K) = n > 1 and deg(Y) = 1. Let M be the full subcategory of K↓(U/G)n−1 spanned by the objects (Z, β : K → Z) with deg(Z) > 1 and L := M↓(Y, α) the descending up link of (Y, α) with respect to the Morse function f above. Then L is contractible. Proof. Note that the data of an object of L is a non-trivial factorization of α, i.e. a pair (α1 , α2 ) of arrows in U/G such that α1 6= id 6= α2 and α1 α2 = α. An arrow from (α1 , α2 ) to (β1 , β2 ) is an arrow γ such that α1 γ = β1 and γβ2 = α2 . Clearly, L is a poset. Apply Lemma 4.23 above to obtain a maximal elementary factorization (α1 , α2 ) of α. Note that (α1 , α2 ) is an object of L and the universal property says that this object is initial among the objects (β1 , β2 ) of L with β2 elementary.  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  53  More generally, for an object (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) of L with ǫ2 non-elementary, we can apply the lemma to obtain a maximal elementary factorization (ǫ∗1 , ǫ∗2 ) of ǫ2 . Then define F (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) := (ǫ1 ǫ∗1 , ǫ∗2 ) which is again an object in L. If ǫ2 is already elementary, we set ǫ∗1 = id and ǫ∗2 = ǫ2 so that F (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) = (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ). We claim that F extends to a functor L → L. So let (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) and (β1 , β2 ) be two objects of L and γ : (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) → (β1 , β2 ) an arrow in L. We have to show that there is an arrow ϕ : F (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) → F (β1 , β2 ). • ⑧ ❅❅❅ β1 ⑧ ❅❅ ⑧ ❅❅ ⑧⑧ α ⑧ γ ⑧ / • •❅ ❅❅ ⑧ ⑧ ❅❅ ǫ∗ ⑧⑧ β1∗ 1 ⑧ ǫ2 ❅❅ β    ⑧⑧ 2  • ∗ / • o ∗ B• β2 ❂ ǫ2 ❍ ϕ ✈ ✁ ❚❴❥ ǫ1  Observe first that if ǫ∗1 = id, then γβ1∗ is an arrow F (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) → F (β1 , β2 ) as required. Else, observe that the pair (γβ1∗ , β2∗ ) is another elementary factorization of ǫ2 . Thus, by the universal property, we get a unique arrow ϕ such that ϕβ2∗ = ǫ∗2 and ǫ∗1 ϕ = γβ1∗ . This amounts to an arrow F (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) → F (β1 , β2 ). Since F (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) is an elementary factorization of α, we get an arrow (α1 , α2 ) → F (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) for each object (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) in L. Furthermore, ǫ∗1 clearly gives an arrow (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ) → F (ǫ1 , ǫ2 ). The claim of the proposition now follows from item iii) in Subsection 2.5 applied to the functor F and the object (α1 , α2 ).  4.6. Applications. 4.6.1. Suboperads of endomorphism operads. Consider the example with squares and triangles, the cube cutting operads (planar or symmetric) and the local similarity operads from Subsubsection 3.5.2. There, we have seen that they all satisfy the cancellative calculus of fractions. The squares and triangles operad and the cube cutting operads are of finite type. The local similarity operads are of finite type if and only if there are only finitely many SimX -equivalence classes of balls, so we will assume this in the following. Then, in all three cases, the groupoid I(O) is finite. In order to apply Theorem 4.3, it therefore remains to check color-tameness. The cube cutting operads are monochromatic, so color-tameness is trivially satisfied here. The squares and triangles operad has two colors (the square and the triangle). It is easy to check that any sequence of at least five squares and triangles is the domain of a very elementary arrow in S(O). Consequently, it is color-tame as well. In general, a local similarity operad is not color-tame. As a special case, we obtain that the higher dimensional Thompson groups nV are of type F∞ . This has been shown before in [20]. The one dimensional cube cutting operads (planar or symmetric) with trivial groupoid of degree 1 operations yield the groups of piecewise linear homeomorphisms of the unit (Cantor) interval studied in [39] and from the main theorem, it follows that they are of type F∞ . This has already been shown in [39]. The finiteness result for the local similarity groups has also been obtained in [16, Theorem 6.5]. The hypothesis in this theorem consists of demanding that the finite similarity structure posseses only finitely many SimX -equivalence classes of balls and of the property rich in simple contractions which is implied by the easier to state property rich in ball contractions [16, Definition 5.12]. It is not hard to see  54  WERNER THUMANN  that the latter property exactly means that O, the local similarity operad associated to SimX , is color-tame. 4.6.2. Ribbon Thompson group. The braided operad O with transformations discussed in Subsubsection 3.5.3 satisfies the cancellative calculus of fractions. It is monochromatic and therefore color-tame. There is only one very elementary transformation class and thus, O is of finite type. The groupoid I(O) is the group Z + which is of type F∞ . The main theorem yields that the Ribbon Thompson group RV is of type F∞ . References [1] J. Bénabou, Some remarks on 2-categorical algebra. I, Bull. Soc. Math. Belg. Sér. A 41 (1989), no. 2, 127–194. [2] M. Bestvina and N. Brady, Morse theory and finiteness properties of groups, Invent. Math. 129 (1997), no. 3, 445–470. [3] F. Borceux, Handbook of categorical algebra. 1, Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 50, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994. [4] M. G. Brin, Higher dimensional Thompson groups, Geom. Dedicata 108 (2004), 163–192. [5] , The algebra of strand splitting. I. A braided version of Thompson’s group V , J. Group Theory 10 (2007), no. 6, 757–788. [6] M. G. Brin and C. C. Squier, Groups of piecewise linear homeomorphisms of the real line, Invent. Math. 79 (1985), no. 3, 485–498. [7] K. S. Brown, Finiteness properties of groups, Proceedings of the Northwestern conference on cohomology of groups (Evanston, Ill., 1985), 1987, pp. 45–75. [8] K. S. Brown and R. Geoghegan, An infinite-dimensional torsion-free FP∞ group, Invent. Math. 77 (1984), no. 2, 367–381. [9] K.-U. Bux, M. G. Fluch, M. Marschler, S. Witzel, and M. C. B. Zaremsky, The braided Thompson’s groups are of type F∞ , arXiv:1210.2931v2 (2014). [10] D.-C. Cisinski, La classe des morphismes de Dwyer n’est pas stable par retractes, Cahiers Topologie Géom. Différentielle Catég. 40 (1999), no. 3, 227–231 (French, with English summary). [11] W. G. Dwyer and D. M. Kan, Calculating simplicial localizations, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 18 (1980), no. 1, 17–35. [12] J. Dydak, A simple proof that pointed FANR-spaces are regular fundamental retracts of ANR’s, Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. Sér. Sci. Math. Astronom. Phys. 25 (1977), no. 1, 55–62 (English, with Russian summary). [13] D. S. Farley, Actions of picture groups on CAT(0) cubical complexes, Geom. Dedicata 110 (2005), 221–242. , Finiteness and CAT(0) properties of diagram groups, Topology 42 (2003), no. 5, [14] 1065–1082. [15] , Homological and finiteness properties of picture groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 357 (2005), no. 9, 3567–3584 (electronic). [16] D. S. Farley and B. Hughes, Finiteness properties of some groups of local similarities, Proc. Edinb. Math. Soc. (2) 58 (2015), no. 2, 379–402. [17] Z. Fiedorowicz, A counterexample to a group completion conjecture of J. C. Moore, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 2 (2002), 33–35 (electronic). [18] M. Fiore and T. Leinster, An abstract characterization of Thompson’s group F , Semigroup Forum 80 (2010), no. 2, 325–340. [19] T. M. Fiore, W. Lück, and R. Sauer, Euler characteristics of categories and homotopy colimits, Doc. Math. 16 (2011), 301–354. [20] M. G. Fluch, M. Marschler, S. Witzel, and M. C. B. Zaremsky, The Brin-Thompson groups sV are of type F∞ , Pacific J. Math. 266 (2013), no. 2, 283–295. [21] P. Freyd and A. Heller, Splitting homotopy idempotents. II, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 89 (1993), no. 1-2, 93–106. [22] P. Gabriel and M. Zisman, Calculus of fractions and homotopy theory, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Band 35, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York, 1967. [23] R. Geoghegan, Topological methods in group theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 243, Springer, New York, 2008. [24] P. G. Goerss and J. F. Jardine, Simplicial homotopy theory, Modern Birkhäuser Classics, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 2009. [25] V. Guba and M. Sapir, Diagram groups, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 130 (1997), no. 620.  OPERAD GROUPS AND THEIR FINITENESS PROPERTIES  55  [26] B. Hughes, Local similarities and the Haagerup property, Groups Geom. Dyn. 3 (2009), no. 2, 299–315. With an appendix by Daniel S. Farley. [27] A. Joyal and R. Street, Braided tensor categories, Adv. Math. 102 (1993), no. 1, 20–78. , The geometry of tensor calculus. I, Adv. Math. 88 (1991), no. 1, 55–112. [28] [29] W. Lück, The type of the classifying space for a family of subgroups, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 149 (2000), no. 2, 177–203. [30] S. Mac Lane, Categories for the working mathematician, 2nd ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 5, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998. [31] D. McDuff, On the classifying spaces of discrete monoids, Topology 18 (1979), no. 4, 313–320. [32] N. Monod, Groups of piecewise projective homeomorphisms, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110 (2013), no. 12, 4524–4527. [33] R. Paré, Universal covering categories, Rend. Istit. Mat. Univ. Trieste 25 (1993), no. 1-2, 391–411 (1994). [34] D. Quillen, Higher algebraic K-theory. I, Springer, Berlin, 1973, pp. 85–147. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 341. [35] , Homotopy properties of the poset of nontrivial p-subgroups of a group, Adv. in Math. 28 (1978), no. 2, 101–128. [36] P. Selinger, A survey of graphical languages for monoidal categories, New structures for physics, Lecture Notes in Phys., vol. 813, Springer, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 289–355. [37] E. H. Spanier, Algebraic topology, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York-Toronto, Ont.-London, 1966. [38] C. C. Squier, The homological algebra of Artin groups, Math. Scand. 75 (1994), no. 1, 5–43. [39] M. Stein, Groups of piecewise linear homeomorphisms, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 332 (1992), no. 2, 477–514. [40] R. W. Thomason, Cat as a closed model category, Cahiers Topologie Géom. Différentielle 21 (1980), no. 3, 305–324. [41] , Homotopy colimits in the category of small categories, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 85 (1979), no. 1, 91–109. [42] W. Thumann, Operad groups, PhD thesis, KIT Karlsruhe, 2015. urn:nbn:de:swb:90-454145. [43] M. Weiss, What does the classifying space of a category classify?, Homology Homotopy Appl. 7 (2005), no. 1, 185–195. Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
