Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_324

Abstract:
Sum of squares certificates for stability of planar, homogeneous, and switched systems  arXiv:1801.00070v1 [math.OC] 30 Dec 2017  Amir Ali Ahmadi and Pablo A. Parrilo  ∗  Abstract We show that existence of a global polynomial Lyapunov function for a homogeneous polynomial vector field or a planar polynomial vector field (under a mild condition) implies existence of a polynomial Lyapunov function that is a sum of squares (sos) and that the negative of its derivative is also a sum of squares. This result is extended to show that such sos-based certificates of stability are guaranteed to exist for all stable switched linear systems. For this class of systems, we further show that if the derivative inequality of the Lyapunov function has an sos certificate, then the Lyapunov function itself is automatically a sum of squares. These converse results establish cases where semidefinite programming is guaranteed to succeed in finding proofs of Lyapunov inequalities. Finally, we demonstrate some merits of replacing the sos requirement on a polynomial Lyapunov function with an sos requirement on its top homogeneous component. In particular, we show that this is a weaker algebraic requirement in addition to being cheaper to impose computationally.  1  Introduction  Consider a continuous time dynamical system ẋ = f (x),  (1)  where f : Rn → Rn is a polynomial and has an equilibrium at the origin, i.e., f (0) = 0. When a polynomial function V (x) : Rn → R is used as a candidate Lyapunov function for stability analysis of system (1), conditions of Lyapunov’s theorem reduce to a set of polynomial inequalities. For instance, if establishing global asymptotic stability of the origin is desired (see, e.g., [14, Chap. 4] for a formal definition), one would require a radially unbounded polynomial Lyapunov function candidate to satisfy: V (x) > 0  ∀x 6= 0  (2)  V̇ (x) = h∇V (x), f (x)i < 0  ∀x 6= 0.  (3)  Here, V̇ denotes the time derivative of V along the trajectories of (1), ∇V is the gradient vector of V , and h., .i is the standard inner product in Rn . In some other variants of the analysis problem, e.g. if LaSalle’s invariance principle is to be used, or if the goal is to prove boundedness of trajectories of (1), then the inequality in (3) is replaced with V̇ (x) ≤ 0 ∗  ∀x.  (4)  Amir Ali Ahmadi is with the Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering at Princeton University. Pablo A. Parrilo is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at MIT. Email: a a a@princeton.edu, parrilo@mit.edu.  1  In either case, the problem arising from this analysis approach is that even though polynomials of a given degree are finitely parameterized, the computational problem of searching for a polynomial V satisfying inequalities of the type (2),(3),(4) is intractable. In fact, even deciding if a given polynomial V of degree four or larger satisfies (2) is NP-hard [17], [2, Prop. 1]. An approach pioneered in [19] and quite popular by now is to replace the positivity or nonnegativity conditions by the requirement of existence of a sum of squares (sos) decomposition (see Section 2 for a definition): V  sos  (5)  −V̇ = −h∇V, f i sos.  (6)  Clearly, if a polynomial is a sum of squares of other polynomials, then it must be nonnegative. Moreover, it is well known that an sos decomposition constraint on a polynomial can be cast as a semidefinite programming (SDP) problem [20], which can be solved efficiently. 1 Over the last decade, Lyapunov analysis with sum of squares techniques has become a relatively well-established approach for a variety of problems in controls. Examples include stability analysis of switched and hybrid systems, design of nonlinear controllers, and formal verification of safetycritical systems, just to name a few; see, e.g., [11], [8], [13], [24], [18], and references therein. Despite the wealth of research in this area, the literature by and large focuses on proposing the sum of squares constraints as a sufficient condition for the underlying Lyapunov inequalities, without studying their necessity. For example, even for the basic notion of global asymptotic stability (GAS), the following question is to the best of our knowledge open: Problem 1: Does existence of a polynomial Lyapunov function satisfying (2)-(3) imply existence of a polynomial Lyapunov function (of possibly higher degree) satisfying (5)-(6)? We consider this question for polynomial vector fields, as well as switched systems, and provide a positive answer in some special cases. (We also study other related questions.) Before we outline our contributions, some remarks about the statement of Problem 1 are in order. First, we point out that between the two sos requirements in (5)-(6), the condition in (5) can simply be met by squaring a polynomial Lyapunov function (see Lemma 3.1). By contrast, the condition in (6) is typically more challenging to ensure. Second, we remark that imposing the sos conditions in (5)-(6) is not the only way to use the sos relaxation for proving GAS of (1). For example, even when polynomials are not sos, one can multiply them by a positive polynomial P these (e.g., a power of x2i ) and the result may become sos and then certify the desired inequalities. In this paper, however, we are interested in knowing whether the sos conditions on a Lyapunov function and its derivative can be met just by increasing the degree of the Lyapunov function. This is a very basic question in our opinion and it is in fact how the sos relaxation is most commonly used in practice. Finally, since our interest is mainly in establishing GAS of (1), a natural question that comes before Problem 1 is the following: “Does global asymptotic stability of a polynomial vector field imply existence of a polynomial Lyapunov function satisfying (2)-(3)?” The answer to this question is in general negative. The interested reader can find explicit counterexamples in [6], [3].  1.1  Contributions  Many of the results in this paper can be seen as establishing cases where semidefinite programming is guaranteed to succeed in finding proofs of Lyapunov inequalities. More precisely, in Section 3, we 1  If the SDP resulting from (5) and (6) is strictly feasible, then any interior solution automatically satisfies (2)-(3); see, e.g., [1, p. 41].  2  give a positive answer to Problem 1 in the case where the vector field is homogeneous (Theorem 3.3) or when it is planar and an additional mild assumption is met (Theorem 3.5). The general case remains open. The proofs of these two theorems are quite simple and rely on powerful and relatively recent Positivstellensätze due to Scheiderer (Theorems 3.2 and 3.4). In Section 3.1, we extend these results for stability analysis of switched linear systems. These are a widely-studied subclass of hybrid systems. Our result combined with a result of Mason et al. [15] shows that if such a system is asymptotically stable under arbitrary switching, then it admits a common polynomial Lyapunov function that is sos and that the negative of its derivative is also sos (Theorem 3.7). We also show that for switched linear systems (both in discrete and continuous time), if the inequality on the decrease condition of a Lyapunov function is satisfied with a sum of squares certificate, then the Lyapunov function itself is automatically a sum of squares (Propositions 3.10 and 3.11). This statement, however, is shown to be false for nonlinear systems (Lemma 3.12). Finally, in Section 4, we demonstrate a related curious fact, that instead of requiring a candidate polynomial Lyapunov function to be sos, it is better to ask its top homogeneous component to be sos. We show that this still implies GAS (Proposition 4.1 and Lemma 4.2), is a weaker algebraic requirement (Lemma 4.2), introduces no conservative in dimension two, and is cheaper to impose.  1.2  Related literature  In related work [21], [23], Peet and Papachristodoulou study similar questions for the notion of exponential stability on compact sets. In [21], Peet proves that exponentially stable polynomial systems have polynomial Lyapunov functions on bounded regions. In [22],[23], Peet and Papachristodoulou provide a degree bound for this Lyapunov function (depending on decay rate of trajectories) and show that it can be made sos. The question whether the inequality on the derivative of the Lyapunov function can also have an sos certificate is not studied in these references.  2  Preliminaries  Throughout the paper, we will be concerned with Lyapunov functions that are (multivariate) polynomials. We say that a polynomial function V : Rn → R is nonnegative if V (x) ≥ 0 for all x, positive definite if V (x) > 0 for all x 6= 0, negative definite if −V is positive definite, and radially unbounded if V (x) → ∞ as ||x|| → ∞. A polynomial V of degree d is said to be homogeneous if it satisfies V (λx) = λd V (x) for any scalar λ ∈ R. This condition holds if and only if all monomials of V have degree d. A homogeneous polynomial is also called a form. The top homogeneous component of a polynomial p is the homogeneous polynomial formed by the collection of the highest order monomials of p. P 2 We say that a polynomial V is a sum of squares (sos) if V = m i qi for some polynomials qi . We do not present here the SDP that decides if a given polynomial is sos since it has already appeared in several places. The unfamiliar reader is referred to [20]. If V is sos, then V is nonnegative, though the converse is in general not true [12], [25].  3  Converse SOS Lyapunov theorems  We start by observing that existence of a polynomial Lyapunov function immediately implies existence of a Lyapunov function that is a sum of squares.  3  Lemma 3.1. Given a polynomial vector field, suppose there exists a polynomial Lyapunov function V such that V and −V̇ are positive definite. Then, there also exists a polynomial Lyapunov function W such that W and −Ẇ are positive definite and W is sos. Proof. Take W = V 2 . Then W and −Ẇ = −2V V̇ are positive definite and W is sos (though −Ẇ may not be sos). We will next prove a result that guarantees the derivative of the Lyapunov function will also satisfy the sos condition, though this result is restricted to homogeneous systems. A polynomial vector field ẋ = f (x) is homogeneous if all entries of f are homogeneous polynomials of the same degree, i.e., if all the monomials in all the entries of f have the same degree. Homogeneous systems are extensively studied in the control literature; see e.g. [28], [5], [10], [27], [16], [7], and references therein. A basic fact about homogeneous vector fields is that for these systems the notions of local and global stability are equivalent. Indeed, a homogeneous vector field of degree d satisfies f (λx) = λd f (x) for any scalar λ, and therefore the value of f on the unit sphere determines its value everywhere. It is also well-known that an asymptotically stable homogeneous system admits a homogeneous Lyapunov function [27]. We will use the following Positivstellensätze due to Scheiderer to prove our converse sos Lyapunov theorem. Theorem 3.2 (Scheiderer, [30]). Given any two positive definite homogeneous polynomials p and q, there exists an integer k such that pq k is a sum of squares. Theorem 3.3. Given a homogeneous polynomial vector field, suppose there exists a homogeneous polynomial Lyapunov function V such that V and −V̇ are positive definite. Then, there also exists a homogeneous polynomial Lyapunov function W such that W and −Ẇ are both sos (and positive definite). Proof. Observe that V 2 and −2V V̇ are both positive definite and homogeneous polynomials. (Homogeneous polynomials are closed under products and the gradient of a homogeneous polynomial has homogeneous entries.) Applying Theorem 3.2 to these two polynomials, we conclude that there exists an integer k such that (−2V V̇ )(V 2 )k is sos. Let W = V 2k+2 . Then, W is clearly sos since it is a perfect even power. Moreover, −Ẇ = −(2k + 2)V 2k+1 V̇ = −(k + 1)2V 2k V V̇ is also sos by the previous claim. Positive definiteness of W and −Ẇ is clear from the construction. The polynomial W constructed in the proof above has higher degree than the polynomial V , though it seems difficult to construct vector fields for which this degree increase is necessary. In [2], we show that unless P=NP, there cannot be a polynomial time algorithm to test whether a cubic homogeneous vector field is globally asymptotically stable, or even to test whether it admits a quadratic Lyapunov function. Hence, just from complexity considerations, we expect there to exist GAS cubic vector fields (of possibly high dimensions) that admit a degree-2 polynomial Lyapunov function satisfying (2)-(3), but for which the minimum degree of a polynomial satisfying the sos constraints in (5)-(6) is arbitrarily high. One difficulty with explicitly constructing such examples 4  stems from non-uniqueness of Lyapunov functions. This makes it insufficient to simply engineer V or −V̇ to be “positive but not sos”; one needs to show that any polynomial Lyapunov function of a given degree fails to satisfy the sos constraints in (5)-(6). Next, we develop a theorem that removes the homogeneity assumption from the vector field in Theorem 3.3, but instead is restricted to vector fields on the plane. For this, we need another result of Scheiderer. Theorem 3.4 (Scheiderer, [29, Cor. 3.12]). Let p := p(x1 , x2 , x3 ) and q := q(x1 , x2 , x3 ) be two homogeneous polynomials in three variables, with p positive semidefinite and q positive definite. Then, there exists an integer k such that pq k is a sum of squares. Theorem 3.5. Given a (not necessarily homogeneous) polynomial vector field in two variables, suppose there exists a positive definite polynomial Lyapunov function V, with −V̇ positive definite, and such that the top homogeneous component of V has no zeros2 . Then, there also exists a polynomial Lyapunov function W such that W and −Ẇ are both sos (and positive definite). Proof. Let Ṽ = V + 1. So, Ṽ˙ = V̇ . Let us denote the degrees of Ṽ and Ṽ˙ by d1 and d2 respectively. Consider the (non-homogeneous) polynomials Ṽ 2 and −2Ṽ Ṽ˙ in the variables x := (x1 , x2 ). Note that Ṽ 2 is nowhere zero and −2Ṽ Ṽ˙ is only zero at the origin. Our first step is to homogenize these polynomials by introducing a new variable y. Observing that the homogenization of products of polynomials equals the product of their homogenizations, we obtain the following two trivariate forms: y 2d1 Ṽ 2 ( xy ), (7) − 2y d1 y d2 Ṽ ( xy )Ṽ˙ ( xy ).  (8)  Since by assumption the highest order term of V has no zeros, the form in (7) is positive definite. The form in (8), however, is only positive semidefinite. In particular, since Ṽ˙ = V̇ has to vanish at the origin, the form in (8) has a zero at the point (x1 , x2 , y) = (0, 0, 1). Nevertheless, since Theorem 3.4 allows for positive semidefiniteness of one of the two forms, by applying it to the forms in (7) and (8), we conclude that there exists an integer k such that − 2y d1 (2k+1) y d2 Ṽ ( xy )Ṽ˙ ( xy )Ṽ 2k ( xy )  (9)  is sos. Let W = Ṽ 2k+2 . Then, W is clearly sos. Moreover, −Ẇ = −(2k + 2)Ṽ 2k+1 Ṽ˙ = −(k + 1)2Ṽ 2k Ṽ Ṽ˙ is also sos because this polynomial is obtained from (9) by setting y = 1. Positive definiteness of W and −Ẇ is again clear from the construction. Note that while W does not vanish at the origin, it achieves its minimum there, and hence provides a proof of asymptotic stability. The polynomial W constructed in the proof above again has higher degree than the polynomial V . The example below shows that such a degree increase is sometimes necessary. 2 This requirement is only slightly stronger than the requirement of radial unboundedness, which is imposed on V by Lyapunov’s theorem anyway. See Section 4.  5  Theorem 3.6 (see [4]). The vector field x˙1 = −x31 x22 + 2x31 x2 − x31 + 4x21 x22 − 8x21 x2 + 4x21 −x1 x42 + 4x1 x32 − 4x1 + 10x22 x˙2 = −9x21 x2 + 10x21 + 2x1 x32 − 8x1 x22 − 4x1 − x32 +4x22 − 4x2 admits a degree-2 polynomial Lyapunov function that proves its global asymptotic stability. However, the minimum degree of a polynomial Lyapunov function that satisfies the sos constraints in (5)-(6) is equal to 4.  3.1  SOS certificates for stability of switched linear systems  The result of Theorem 3.3 extends in a straightforward manner to Lyapunov analysis of switched systems. In particular, we are interested in the highly-studied problem of establishing stability of arbitrary switched linear systems: ẋ = Ai x,  i ∈ {1, . . . , m},  (10)  Ai ∈ Rn×n . We assume the minimum dwell time of the system (i.e., the minimum time between two consecutive switches) is bounded away from zero. This guarantees that the solutions of (10) are well-defined. The (global) asymptotic stability under arbitrary switching (ASUAS) of system (10) is equivalent to asymptotic stability of the linear differential inclusion ẋ ∈ co{Ai }x,  i ∈ {1, . . . , m},  where co here denotes the convex hull. A common approach for analyzing stability of these systems is to use the sos technique to search for a common polynomial Lyapunov function [24],[9]. We will prove the following result. Theorem 3.7. The switched linear system in (10) is asymptotically stable under arbitrary switching if and only if there exists a common homogeneous polynomial Lyapunov function W such that W sos −Ẇi = −h∇W (x), Ai xi sos, for i = 1, . . . , m, where the polynomials W and −Ẇi are all positive definite. To prove this result, we make use of the following theorem of Mason et al. Theorem 3.8 (Mason et al., [15]). If the switched linear system in (10) is asymptotically stable under arbitrary switching, then there exists a common homogeneous polynomial Lyapunov function V such that V > 0 ∀x 6= 0 −V̇i (x) = −h∇V (x), Ai xi > 0 ∀x 6= 0, for i = 1, . . . , m. The next proposition is an extension of Theorem 3.3 to switched systems (not necessarily linear).  6  Proposition 3.9. Consider an arbitrary switched dynamical system ẋ = fi (x),  i ∈ {1, . . . , m},  where fi (x) is a homogeneous polynomial vector field of degree di (the degrees of the different vector fields can be different). Suppose there exists a common positive definite homogeneous polynomial Lyapunov function V such that −V̇i (x) = −h∇V (x), fi (x)i is positive definite for all i ∈ {1, . . . , m}. Then there exists a common homogeneous polynomial Lyapunov function W such that W is sos (and positive definite) and the polynomials −Ẇi = −h∇W (x), fi (x)i, for all i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, are also sos (and positive definite). Proof. Observe that for each i, the polynomials V 2 and −2V V̇i are both positive definite and homogeneous. Applying Theorem 3.2 m times to these pairs of polynomials, we conclude that there exist positive integers ki such that (−2V V̇i )(V 2 )ki is sos,  (11)  for i = 1, . . . , m. Let k = max{k1 , . . . , km }, and let W = V 2k+2 . Then, W is clearly sos. Moreover, for each i, the polynomial −Ẇi = −(2k + 2)V 2k+1 V̇i = −(k + 1)2V V̇i V 2ki V 2(k−ki ) is sos since (−2V V̇i )(V 2ki ) is sos by (11), V 2(k−ki ) is sos as an even power, and products of sos polynomials are sos. The proof of Theorem 3.7 now simply follows from Theorem 3.8 and Proposition 3.9 in the special case where di = 1 for all i.  3.2  The “V sos” requirement for switched linear systems  Our next two propositions show that for switched linear systems, both in discrete time and in continuous time, the sos condition on the Lyapunov function itself is never conservative, in the sense that if one of the “decrease inequalities” has an sos certificate, then the Lyapunov function is automatically sos. These propositions are really statements about linear systems, so we will present them as such. However, since stable linear systems always admit (sos) quadratic Lyapunov functions, the propositions are only interesting in the context where a common polynomial Lyapunov function for a switched linear system is seeked. Proposition 3.10. Consider the linear dynamical system xk+1 = Axk in discrete time. Suppose there exists a positive definite polynomial Lyapunov function V such that V (x) − V (Ax) is positive definite and sos. Then, V is sos.  7  Proof. Consider the polynomial V (x) − V (Ax) that is sos by assumption. If we replace x by Ax in this polynomial, we conclude that the polynomial V (Ax) − V (A2 x) is also sos. Hence, by adding these two sos polynomials, we get that V (x) − V (A2 x) is sos. This procedure can be repeated to infer that for any integer k ≥ 1, the polynomial V (x) − V (Ak x)  (12)  is sos. Since by assumption V and V (x) − V (Ax) are positive definite, the linear system must be GAS, and hence Ak converges to the zero matrix as k → ∞. Observe that for all k, the polynomials in (12) have degree equal to the degree of V , and that the coefficients of V (x) − V (Ak x) converge to the coefficients of V − V (0) as k → ∞. Since for a fixed degree and dimension the cone of sos polynomials is closed [26], it follows that V − V (0) is sos. Hence, V is sos. Similarly, in continuous time, we have the following: Proposition 3.11. Consider the linear dynamical system ẋ = Ax in continuous time. Suppose there exists a positive definite polynomial Lyapunov function V such that −V̇ = −h∇V (x), Axi is positive definite and sos. Then, V is sos. Proof. The value of the polynomial V along the trajectories of the dynamical system satisfies the relation Z t V (x(t)) = V (x(0)) + V̇ (x(τ ))dτ . o  Since the assumptions imply that the system is GAS, x(t) → 0 as t goes to infinity. By evaluating the above equation at t = ∞, rearranging terms, and substituting eAτ x for the solution of the linear system at time τ starting at initial condition x, we obtain Z ∞ V (x) = −V̇ (eAτ x)dτ + V (0). 0  By assumption, −V̇ is sos and therefore for any value of τ , the integrand −V̇ (eAτ x) is an sos polynomial. Since converging integrals of sos polynomials are sos, it follows that V is sos. One may wonder if a similar statement holds for nonlinear vector fields? The answer is negative. Lemma 3.12. There exist a polynomial vector field ẋ = f (x) and a polynomial Lyapunov function V, such that V and −V̇ are positive definite, −V̇ is sos, but V is not sos. Proof. Consider any positive form V that is not a sum of squares. (An example is x41 x22 + x21 x42 − 1 3x21 x22 x23 + x63 + 250 (x21 + x22 + x23 )3 .) Define a dynamical system by ẋ = −∇V (x). In this case, both V and −V̇ = ||∇V (x)||2 are positive definite and −V̇ is sos, though V is not sos. To see that −V̇ is positive definite, note that a homogeneous function V of degree d satisfies the Euler identity: V (x) = d1 xT ∇V (x). If we had −V̇ (x) = 0 for some x 6= 0, then we would have ∇V (x) = 0 and hence also V (x) = 0, which is a contradiction.  8  4  Working with the top homogeneous component of V  We show in this final section that for global stability analysis with sos techniques, the requirement of the polynomial Lyapunov function being sos can be replaced with the requirement of its top homogeneous component being sos. We also show that doing so has a number of advantages. The point of departure is the following proposition, which states that in presence of radial unboundedness, the positivity requirement of the Lyapunov function is not needed. Proposition 4.1. Consider the vector field (1). If there exists a continuously differentiable, radially unbounded Lyapunov function V that satisfies V̇ (x) < 0, ∀x 6= 0, then the origin is globally asymptotically stable. Proof. We first observe that since V is radially unbounded and continuous, it must be lower bounded. In fact, radial unboundedness implies that the set {x| V (x) ≤ V (1, 0, . . . , 0)} is compact, and continuity of V implies that the minimum of V on this set, which equals the minimum of V everywhere, is achieved. We further claim that this minimum can only be achieved at the origin. Suppose there was a point x̄ 6= 0 that was a global minimum for V . As a necessary condition of global optimality, we must have ∇V (x̄) = 0. But this implies that V̇ (x̄) = 0, which is a contradiction. Now consider a new Lyapunov function W defined as W (x) : = V (x) − V (0). Then W is positive definite, radially unbounded, and has Ẇ = V̇ < 0, for all x 6= 0. Hence, W satisfies all assumptions of Lyapunov’s theorem (see, e.g., [14, Chap. 4]), therefore implying global asymptotic stability.3 A sufficient condition for a polynomial p to be radially unbounded is for its top homogeneous component, denoted by t.h.c.(p), to form a positive definite polynomial. This condition is almost necessary: radial unboundedness of p implies that t.h.c.(p) needs to be positive semidefinite. Since we seek for radially unbounded Lyapunov functions anyway, this suggests that in our SDP search for Lyapunov functions, we can replace the conditions “V sos and −V̇ sos”, with “t.h.c.(V ) sos and −V̇ sos”. The following lemma tells us that this can only help us in terms of conservatism. Lemma 4.2. Consider the vector field (1) and suppose there exists a polynomial function V := V (x1 , . . . , xn ) that makes both t.h.c.(V ) and −V̇ sos (and positive definite), then the origin is GAS. Moreover the condition t.h.c.(V ) sos is never more conservative (and can potentially be less conservative) than the condition t.h.c.(V ) sos. Proof. The claim of global asymptotic stability follows from Proposition 4.1. To prove the claim about conservatism, we show that if V is sos, then t.h.c.(V ) is sos, while the converse is not true (even if V is nonnegative). Let d be the degree of V and consider the standard homogenization Vh of V in n + 1 variables given by Vh (x1 , . . . , x1 , y) = y d V ( xy ). Since V is sos, Vh must be sos [25]. But this implies that t.h.c.(V ) must be sos since it is a restriction of Vh : t.h.c.(V ) = Vh (x1 , . . . , xn , 0). A counterexample to the converse is the Motzkin polynomial x41 x22 + x21 x42 − 3x21 x22 + 1, whose top homogeneous component x41 x22 + x21 x42 is sos, but the polynomial itself is not sos even though it is nonnegative [25]. 3  The conditions of Proposition 4.1 do not imply that V (0) = 0 as is customary for Lyapunov functions. However, what we really need is for V to attain its global minimum at the origin, which is the case here.  9  In the particular case of the plane (n = 2), the constraint “t.h.c.(V ) sos” in fact introduces no conservatism at all. This is because all nonnegative bivariate homogeneous polynomials (of any degree) are sums of squares [25]. By contrast, the alternative condition “V sos” can be conservative as there are (non-homogeneous) nonnegative bivariate polynomials that are not sums of squares. In addition to these features in terms of conservatism, the requirement “t.h.c.(V ) sos” is a cheaper constraint to impose than “V sos”. Indeed, if V is an n-variate polynomial of degree 2d, simple calculation shows that the SDP underlying the former condition has 2d(n+2d−1)! fewer equality 2d!n! d(n+d−1)!((2n+d)(n+d−1)!+d!n!) constraints and fewer decision variables than the latter. Let us end 2(d!n!)2 with a concrete example. Example 4.1. Consider the vector field ẋ1 = 0.36x1 + 2x2 − 0.32x71 − 0.02x1 x62 + 8x72 + 3x21 x52 ẋ2 = −2x1 − 0.44x2 − 16x71 − x1 x62 − 0.16x72 − 0.06x21 x52 . We solve an SDP which searches for a polynomial Lyapunov function V of degree d that satisfies “t.h.c.(V ) sos and −V̇ sos”. This SDP is infeasible for d = 2, 4, 6. Because of Lemma 4.2, we know that the SDP with the more standard conditions “V sos and −V̇ sos” would have been infeasible also. Moreover, since nonnegative bivariate forms are sos, we know that our constraint “t.h.c.(V ) sos” is lossless (while we wouldn’t be able to make such a claim for the constraint “V sos”). For d = 8, our SDP returns the following solution: V (x) = 2.195x21 + 4.237x81 + 2.183x22 + 2.170x82 +1.055x21 x62 + 0.863x1 x2 − 0.286x71 x2 + 0.037x61 x22 +0.042x51 x32 − 0.011x41 x42 − 0.021x31 x52 + 0.039x1 x72 . By checking the eigenvalues of the Gram matrices in our SDP, we can see that the top homogeneous component of this polynomial, as well as −V̇ , are positive definite. Hence, by Lemma 4.2, we know that the system is GAS. For this example it happens that the returned solution V is sos although we asked for a weaker and cheaper condition. Indeed, the semidefinite constraint that we imposed to require t.h.c.(V ) to be sos has 105 fewer decision variables and 36 fewer equality constraints than the semidefinite constraint needed to impose V sos. In general, by leaving out the constant term in the parametrization of the polynomial V , we can make sure that V (0) = 0 and hence (in view of the proof of Proposition 4.1) radial unboundedness would automatically imply positive definiteness of our Lyapunov function. Acknowledgments.  The authors are grateful to Claus Scheiderer for insightful discussions.  References [1] A. A. Ahmadi. Non-monotonic Lyapunov functions for stability of nonlinear and switched systems: theory and computation. Master’s Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 2008. Available from http://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/44206. [2] A. A. Ahmadi. On the difficulty of deciding asymptotic stability of cubic homogeneous vector fields. In Proceedings of the 2012 American Control Conference, 2012. [3] A. A. Ahmadi, M. Krstic, and P. A. Parrilo. A globally asymptotically stable polynomial vector field with no polynomial Lyapunov function. In Proceedings of the 50th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2011. 10  [4] A. A. Ahmadi and P. A. Parrilo. Converse results on existence of sum of squares Lyapunov functions. In Proceedings of the 50th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2011. [5] A. Andreini, A. Bacciotti, and G. Stefani. Global stabilizability of homogeneous vector fields of odd degree. Systems and Control Letters, 10(4):251–256, 1988. [6] A. Bacciotti and L. Rosier. Liapunov functions and stability in control theory. Springer, 2005. [7] J. Baillieul. The geometry of homogeneous polynomial dynamical systems. Nonlinear analysis, Theory, Methods and Applications, 4(5):879–900, 1980. [8] G. Chesi and D. Henrion (editors). Special issue on positive polynomials in control. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 54(5), 2009. [9] G. Chesi, A. Garulli, A. Tesi, and A. Vicino. Polynomially parameter-dependent Lyapunov functions for robust stability of polytopic systems: an LMI approach. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 50(3):365–370, 2005. [10] L. Grüne. Homogeneous state feedback stabilization of homogeneous systems. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2000. [11] D. Henrion and A. Garulli, editors. Positive polynomials in control, volume 312 of Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sciences. Springer, 2005. [12] D. Hilbert. Über die Darstellung Definiter Formen als Summe von Formenquadraten. Math. Ann., 32, 1888. [13] Z. Jarvis-Wloszek, R. Feeley, W. Tan, K. Sun, and A. Packard. Some controls applications of sum of squares programming. In Proceedings of the 42th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pages 4676–4681, 2003. [14] H. Khalil. Nonlinear systems. Prentice Hall, 2002. Third edition. [15] P. Mason, U. Boscain, and Y. Chitour. Common polynomial Lyapunov functions for linear switched systems. SIAM Journal on Optimization and Control, 45(1), 2006. [16] L. Moreau, D. Aeyels, J. Peuteman, and R. Sepulchre. Homogeneous systems: stability, boundedness and duality. In Proceedings of the 14th Symposium on Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems, 2000. [17] K. G. Murty and S. N. Kabadi. Some NP-complete problems in quadratic and nonlinear programming. Mathematical Programming, 39:117–129, 1987. [18] A. Papachristodoulou and S. Prajna. On the construction of Lyapunov functions using the sum of squares decomposition. In IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2002. [19] P. A. Parrilo. Structured semidefinite programs and semialgebraic geometry methods in robustness and optimization. PhD thesis, California Institute of Technology, May 2000. [20] P. A. Parrilo. Semidefinite programming relaxations for semialgebraic problems. Mathematical Programming, 96(2, Ser. B):293–320, 2003. [21] M. M. Peet. Exponentially stable nonlinear systems have polynomial Lyapunov functions on bounded regions. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 54(5):979–987, 2009. 11  [22] M. M. Peet and A. Papachristodoulou. A converse sum of squares Lyapunov result: an existence proof based on the Picard iteration. In Proceedings of the 49th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2010. [23] M. M. Peet and A. Papachristodoulou. A converse sum of squares Lyapunov result with a degree bound. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 57(9), 2012. [24] S. Prajna and A. Papachristodoulou. Analysis of switched and hybrid systems – beyond piecewise quadratic methods. In Proceedings of the American Control Conference, 2003. [25] B. Reznick. Some concrete aspects of Hilbert’s 17th problem. In Contemporary Mathematics, volume 253, pages 251–272. American Mathematical Society, 2000. [26] R. M. Robinson. Some definite polynomials which are not sums of squares of real polynomials. In Selected questions of algebra and logic (collection dedicated to the memory of A. I. Mal0 cev) (Russian), pages 264–282. Izdat. “Nauka” Sibirsk. Otdel., Novosibirsk, 1973. [27] L. Rosier. Homogeneous Lyapunov function for homogeneous continuous vector fields. Systems Control Lett., 19(6):467–473, 1992. [28] N. Samardzija. Stability properties of autonomous homogeneous polynomial differential systems. Journal of Differential Equations, 48(1):60–70, 1983. [29] C. Scheiderer. Sums of squares on real algebraic surfaces. 119(4):395–410, 2006.  Manuscripta Mathematica,  [30] C. Scheiderer. A Positivstellensatz for projective real varieties. Manuscripta Mathematica, 138(1-2):73–88, 2012.  12

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
