Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3731

Abstract:
arXiv:1307.2108v4 [math.GR] 19 Jul 2016  On suspensions, and conjugacy of hyperbolic automorphisms and of a few more. François Dahmani∗ February 15, 2018  Abstract The two parts of this work have been through different publishing processes. The main reason of this is that part 2, and only part 2, relies at the time of writing on unpublished material. The two parts are shown here in a single arXiv document because it did not make much sense to separate them for other purposes than the one explained above. Please notice that numbering has been chosen to match the published versions. Therefore there are two sections called 1, etc. There are also inherently some repetitions (e.g. in both introductions), I apologise for that. The first part (page 3) proposes a solution to the conjugacy problem for hyperbolic automorphisms of finitely presented groups. The second part (page 20) proposes a solution to the conjugacy problem for some relatively hyperbolic automorphisms of free groups.  ∗  Partially supported by the ANR 2011-BS01-013 and the Institut Universitaire de France  1  Contents I On suspensions, and conjugacy of hyperbolic automorphisms. 3 1 Preliminary on automorphisms of graphs-of-groups 1.1 Trees and splittings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.2 Automorphisms, and the small modular group M odX . . . . .  6 6 7  Aut(G)-orbit of the fiber of a suspension An orbit problem for the small modular group . . . . . . . . No surface vertex group in splittings of suspensions . . . . . . The Aut(G)-orbit of the fiber in the hyperbolic case. . . . . .  9 9 11 14  2 The 2.1 2.2 2.3  3 Conjugacy and suspensions  16  II On suspensions, and conjugacy of a few more automorphisms of free groups. 20 1 Preliminary 22 1.1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 1.2 On polynomial growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 2 Conjugacy problems 27 2.1 Conjugacy of two relatively hyperbolic automorphisms without elementary splitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 2.2 Conjugacy of two relatively hyperbolic automorphisms without parabolic splitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 2.3 A lemma on Dehn fillings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40  2  Part I  On suspensions, and conjugacy of hyperbolic automorphisms. Abstract We remark that the conjugacy problem for pairs of hyperbolic automorphisms of a finitely presented group (typically a free group) is decidable. The solution that we propose uses the isomorphism problem for the suspensions, and the study of their automorphism group.  Introduction Let F be a finitely presented group, Aut(F ) be its automorphism group, and Out(F ) = Aut(F )/Inn(F ) be its outer automorphism group. A way to consider the conjugacy problem in Aut(F ), or Out(F ), is to relate it to an isomorphism problem on semi-direct products of F with Z. Given two semi-direct products, F ⋊α hti and F ⋊β ht′ i, their structural automorphisms α and β are conjugated in Aut(F ) if and only if there is an isomorphism F ⋊α hti → F ⋊β ht′ i sending F on F , and t on t′ . They are conjugated in Out(F ) if and only if there is an isomorphism sending F on F , and t in t′ F (though it is a well known fact with a standard proof, we refer to Lemma 1.1 for the version that we’ll use). By analogy with topology and dynamical systems, we wish to call such semi-direct products suspensions of F , in which F is the fiber and t is the choice of a transverse direction, and tF is the choice of a transverse orientation. The conjugacy problem in Out(F ) can be expressed as the problem of determining whether suspensions are fiber-and-orientation-preserving isomorphic. We carry out this approach for automorphisms of finitely presented groups producing word-hyperbolic suspensions. Consider for instance F = Fn a free group of finite rank n. In that case, a solution to the conjugacy problem in Out(Fn ) was announced by Lustig [Lu-00, Lu-01]. However, it might still be desirable to find short1 complete solutions for specific classes of elements in Out(Fn ). For instance, consider the class of atoroidal automorphisms: those whose powers do not preserve 1  In the sense that the exposition is short; in this paper we ostensibly ignore algorithmic complexity, and to some extend conceptual complexity hidden in the tools that are used.  3  any conjugacy class beside {1}. Since Brinkmann proved in [B] that an automorphism produces a hyperbolic suspension if and only if it is atoroidal, there is a conceptually simple (slightly brutal) way to algorithmically check whether a given automorphism is indeed atoroidal. It consists in two parallel procedures. The first one looks for a preserved conjugacy class, by enumerating elements, and their images by powers of the given automorphism; it halts when a non trivial element is found such that its image by a non-trivial power of the automorphism are found to be conjugated in Fn . The second is Papasoglu’s procedure [P] applied on the semi-direct product of Fn by Z (with given structural automorphism), that halts if and only if the semidirect product is word-hyperbolic. Brinkmann’s results says that exactly one of these two procedures will halt, and depending which one halts, we deduce whether or not the automorphism is atoroidal. If two given automorphisms are found to be atoroidal with this procedure, our main result will allow to decide whether they are conjugate in OutFn . For hyperbolic groups, the isomorphism problem is solved [Se, DGr, DG-11]. In several examples, the solution available can settle the conjugacy problem. Take two pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphisms of a hyperbolic surface. The mapping tori are closed hyperbolic 3-manifold, hence hyperbolic and rigid (in the sense that their outer-automorphism groups are finite). Sela’s solution to the isomorphism problem of their fundamental groups [Se, 0.3, 7.3] provides all conjugacy classes of isomorphisms (there are finitely many), and from that point, it is possible to check whether one of them preserves the fiber and the orientation. For automorphisms of a free group, the analogous situation is when the two automorphisms are atoroidal, fully irreducible (with irreducible powers), and for their conjugacy problem, see [Lo, Lu3, Se], the later (in Coro. 0.6 loc. cit.), using the same strategy as above. However, there are atoroidal automorphisms for which the suspension, though hyperbolic, is not rigid. In [Br2] Brinkmann gave several examples with different behaviors. In particular, the solution to the isomorphism problem of hyperbolic groups will not reveal all isomorphisms between suspensions, and since the fibers are exponentially distorted in the suspensions, the usual rational tools (see [D, DGu1]) do not work for solving the isomorphism problem with such a preservation constraint. One can thus merely detect the existence of one isomorphism (say ι), but for investigating the existence of an isomorphism with the aforementioned properties, one is led to consider an orbit problem of the automorphism group of F ⋊ hti: decide whether an automorphism sends ι(F ) on F and ι(t) in t′ F . 4  Orbits problems are not necessarily easier, especially if the group acting is large and complicated. In [BMV], for instance, Bogopolski, Martino and Ventura propose a subgroup of GL(4, Z) whose orbit problem on Z4 is undecidable. In this paper we prove that, if F is finitely generated and F ⋊ hti hyperbolic, then Out(F ⋊ hti) contains a finite index abelian subgroup, whose action on H1 (F ⋊ hti) is generated by transvections. This allows us to prove that the specific orbit problem above is solvable in that case, by reducing it to a system of linear Diophantine equations, read in H1 (F ⋊ hti). This is explained in 2.1. These are thus the key steps to produce what we see as a picturesque way of solving the conjugacy problem for automorphisms of finitely presented groups with hyperbolic suspension (Theorem 3.2). The proof that Out(F ⋊ hti) is virtually abelian is the conjunction of Proposition 2.1 (together with the remark 2.2, which is not actually needed in the rest of the proof) and Proposition 2.14. The proof of the later is is done by considering the canonical JSJ decomposition of the hyperbolic group F ⋊ hti, and by proving that this graph-of-groups decomposition does not contain any surface vertex group. We cannot resist to sketch the proof of this key fact (that will be detailed in 2.2, and that takes roots in the way Brinkmann produces his examples in [Br2]). Consider the tree of the JSJ decomposition T , and X the graph of group quotient of T by G = F ⋊ hti. Since F is normal in G, T is a minimal tree for F , and Y = F \T is a graphof-groups decomposition of F whose underlying graph is its own core, and since its genus is bounded by the rank of F , it is finite. It follows that every vertex group (resp. edge group) in X is the suspension of a vertex group (resp. edge group) in Y: lift the vertex in T , where its hti-orbit passes twice on a pre-image of a vertex in Y, thus yielding the suspension (see Lemma 2.6 for more details). Since edge groups in X are cyclic, edge groups in Y must be trivial. Therefore Y is a free decomposition of F , and its vertex groups are of finite type. Going back to X again, vertex groups of X are suspensions of infinite, finitely generated groups, hence cannot be free nor surface groups, because finitely generated normal subgroups of free groups (or surface groups) are of finite index or trivial. To present these arguments, the formalism of automorphisms of graph of groups is to be recalled, in a rather precise way in order to be useful. The confident reader may skip this part (section 1), and only retain that the small modular group is the group of automorphisms generated by Dehn twists on edges of a graph of groups. I am grateful to the referee for useful comments. 5  1 1.1  Preliminary on automorphisms of graphs-of-groups Trees and splittings  We fix our formalism for graphs and graph of groups. This material is classical, and can be found in Serre’s book [Ser]. A graph is a tuple X = (V, E,¯, o, t) where V is a set (of vertices), E is a set (of oriented edges) and ¯ : E → E, o : E → V , t : E → V verify (¯◦¯) = IdE and (o ◦¯) = t. A graph-of-groups X consists of a graph X, for each vertex v of X, a group Γv , for each unoriented edge {e, ē} of X, a group Γ{e,ē} (but we will write Γe = Γē for it), and for each oriented edge e of X, a injective homomorphism ie : Γe → Γo(e) , where o(e) is the origin vertex of the oriented edge e. The Bass group B(X) is [ B(X) = h( Γv ) ∪ E | ∀e ∈ E, ∀g ∈ Γe , ē = e−1 , e−1 iē (g)e = ie (g)i. v∈V  An element g0 e1 g1 e2 . . . gn en gn+1 is a path element from o(e1 ) to t(en ) if gi−1 ∈ o(ei ) and gi ∈ t(ei ) for all i. The fundamental group π1 (X, v0 ) of the graph-of-groups X at the vertex v0 , is the subgroup of the Bass group consisting of path elements from v0 to v0 . Choose a maximal subtree τ of the graph X, and consider π1 (X, τ ) = B(X)/hhe ∈ τ ii. Then the quotient map B(X) → π1 (X, τ ) is, in restriction to π1 (X, v0 ), an isomorphism. A G-tree is a simplicial tree with a simplicial action of G without inversion. It is minimal if there is no proper invariant subtree. It is reduced if the stabilizer of any edge is a proper subgroup of the stabilizer of any adjacent vertex. The quotient of a G-tree by G is naturally marked by the family of conjugacy classes of stabilizers of vertices and edges, and inherits a structure of a graph-of-groups (whose fundamental group is isomorphic to G). The Bass-Serre tree of a graph-of-groups is its universal covering in the sense of graphs of groups. It is a π1 (X, v0 )-tree. A collapse of a G-tree T is a G-tree S with an equivariant map from T to S that sends each edge on an edge or a vertex and no pair of edges of T in different orbits are sent in the same edge (but they may be sent on the same vertex). A collapse of an edge e in a graph-of-groups decomposition is a collapse of the corresponding Bass-Serre tree in which only the edges in the orbit of a preimage of e are mapped to a vertex.  6  Given a group G, and a class of groups C, a splitting of G over groups in C is an isomorphism between G and the fundamental group of a graph of groups whose edge groups are in C. Equivalently, a splitting of G can be though of as an action of G on a tree, with edge stabilizers in C. A splitting is called reduced if, in the tree, there is no edge whose stabilizer equals that of an adjacent vertex.  1.2  Automorphisms, and the small modular group ModX  Let X and X′ be two graphs-of-groups. An isomorphism of graphs-of-groups Φ : X → X′ is a tuple (ΦX , (φv ), (φe ), (γe )) such that • ΦX : X → X ′ is an isomorphism of the underlying graphs, • for all vertex v, φv : Γv → ΓΦX (v) is an isomorphism, for all edge e, φe = φē : Γe → ΓΦX (e) is an isomorphism, • and for each edge e, γe ∈ ΓΦX (t(e)) satisfying, for v = t(e), φv ◦ ie = adγe ◦ iΦX (e) ◦ φe , for (adγe : x 7→ γe−1 xγe ) the inner automorphism of ΓΦX (t(e)) defined by the conjugacy by γe . The last point is the commutation of the following diagram (for each edge e): adγe  φv  Γv → ΓΦX (v) ← ↑ Γe  φe  −→  ΓΦX (v) ↑  (1)  ΓΦX (e)  When X = X′ the isomorphisms can be composed in a natural way (see [Ba, 2.11]: (ΦX , (φv ), (φe ), (γe ))◦(ΨX , (ψv ), (ψe ), (ηe )) = (ΦX ◦ΨX , (φΨX (v) ◦ ψv ), (φΨX (e) ◦ ψe ), (φΨX (t(e)) (ηe )γΨX (e) )) ), thus providing the automorphism group of the graph-of-groups X, denote by δAut(X). This group δAut(X) naturally maps into the automorphism group of the Bass group B(X) in the following way: for all edge ǫ, and all automorphism Φ = (ΦX , (φv ), (φe ), (γe )) ∈ δAut(X), one has Φ(ǫ) = γǭ−1 ΦX (ǫ)γǫ , and Φ|Γv = φv . One can check that, for any Φ, the relations of the Bass group are preserved, and that the thus induced morphism is bijective. Remark 1.1. For this argument, see [Ba, 2.1, 2.2], but notice that Bass chose to let conjugations act on the left, while we chose to let them act on 7  the right (as in [DG-11]). This difference yields a few harmless inversions in the formulae, (actually the attentive reader may have spotted them already in the relations of the Bass group, [Ba, 1.5 (1.2) ]). and the only risk here is to mix both (incompatible) choices. Each automorphism in δAut(X) sends path elements to path elements, hence naturally provides an outer-automorphism of π1 (X, v0 ) (and a genuine automorphism if ΦX (v0 ) = v0 ), and we will often implicitly make this identification. Let us define the small modular group of X, denoted by M odX , to be the subgroup of δAut(X) consisting of elements of the form (IdX , (φv ), (IdΓe ), (γe )), for φv ∈ InnΓv inner automorphisms. One can check, using the composition rule, that this forms a subgroup of δAut(X). If we note φv = adγv , then the compatibility condition (1) imposes that −1 γv γe ∈ ZΓt(e) (ie (Γe )) for all edge e (where ZΓt(e) (ie (Γe )) denotes the centralizer of the attached edge group ie (Γe ) in the vertex group Γt(e) ). If one chooses a generating set Se for each group ZΓt(e) (ie (Γe )), then the small modular group is generated by the union of two collections of elements. First, the collection of oriented Dehn twists {Dǫ,γ , ǫ ∈ E, γ ∈ Sǫ }, defined by De,γ = (IdX , (Idv ), (Ide ), (xe )) for xǫ = γ and xe = 1 for all e 6= ǫ. Second, the collection of inert twists, {(IdX , (adγv )), (Ide ), (γe = γt(e) ))} (note that it is the same family of elements involved as (γe ) and in defining the (φv ), and that this defines an element of M odX ). The inert twists are not so interesting. They correspond to changing some choice of fundamental domain in the Bass-Serre tree. In particular: Lemma 1.2. Any inert twist vanishes in Out(π1 (X, v0 )). Proof. Consider an inert twist Φ. After conjugation over the whole group, we may assume that φv0 = IdΓv0 . Then take a path element in the Bass group, g0 e1 . . . gn en gn+1 that is a loop from v0 to v0 . Each gi is in Γt(ei ) = −1 ei γi . Concatenation makes Γt(ei+1 ) . Thus, Φ(gi ) = adγi (gi ), and Φ(ei ) = γi−1 everything collapse, and Φ(w) = w. We record how oriented Dehn twists are realized as automorphisms of π1 (X, v0 ). The following is an immediate consequence of the definitions. Lemma 1.3. Let ǫ ∈ E be an oriented edge of X, and γ ∈ ZΓt(ǫ) (i(Γǫ )). Let e be an oriented edge different from ǫ and ǭ. The oriented Dehn twist Dǫ,γ , seen as an automorphism of B(X), is such that Dǫ,γ (ǫ) = ǫγ, Dǫ,γ (ǭ) = γ −1 ǭ and Dǫ,γ (e) = e. Moreover, for all vertex v in X, and γv ∈ Γv , Dǫ,γ (γv ) = γv . 8  One should be nonetheless cautious with the interpretation of Dǫ,γ as an automorphism of π1 (X, v0 ), since the identification of a preferred copy of Γv in π1 (X, v0 ) is subject to a choice of path from v0 to v. If this path contains a (or several) copy of the edge ǫ, then Dǫ,γ is actually conjugating, on the right, Γv by γ −1 (or a power of it).  2 2.1  The Aut(G)-orbit of the fiber of a suspension An orbit problem for the small modular group  In this section, we discuss an orbit problem for M odX in H1 (G), the abelianisation of G. For that, we note that M odX naturally maps into Aut(H1 (G)) ≃ GL(H1 (G)). We will denote by¯ : G → H1 (G) the abelianisation map. Let us also choose E + ⊂ E a set of representatives of unoriented edges. Proposition 2.1. Let G = π1 (X, v0 ). The image of M odX in GL(H1 (G)) is abelian, generated by transvections. Proof. Since inert twists vanish in Out(G), the images of oriented Dehn twists, generate the image of M odX in GL(H1 (G). It suffice to show that oriented Dehn twists induce transvections on H1 (G) that commute. Any element γ of π1 (X, v0 ) has an expression as a normal form coming from the ambient Bass group: γ = g0 e0 g1 e1 . . . em gm+1 where for all i, ei ∈ E and gi+1 ∈ Γt(ei ) , g0 , gm+1 ∈ Γv0 . Q The normal form of γ turns, in H1 (G), into γ̄ = g0 . . . gm+1 × e∈E + en(γ,e) where n(γ, e) is the number of occurrences of e in (e0 , . . . , em ) minus the number of occurrences of ē. If Dǫ,h is the Dehn twist of h on ǫ, the induced automorphism on H1 (G) is denoted by Dǫ,h . From the expression of Dǫ,h (e) in 1.3, Dǫ,h is the following transvection   Y Dǫ,h (γ̄) = (g0 g1 . . . gm+1 ) ×  en(γ,e)  × h̄n(γ,ǫ) = γ̄ × h̄n(γ,ǫ) . (∗) e∈E +  Since h ∈ Γt(ǫ) , the element hn(γ,ǫ) is in a vertex group, and it is fixed (if seen in the Bass group) or conjugated (if seen in G) by all oriented Dehn twists on edges, thus oriented Dehn twists on edges commute in the abelianisation.  Remark 2.2. In fact, if ZΓt(e) (ie (Γe )) is abelian (which is the case if G torsion free hyperbolic), then M odX is abelian itself. 9  We keep the same notations. Note that the group H1 (G)/F̄ is infinite cyclic, by assumption, and is generated by the image of t̄. Define ¯ : G → H1 (G)/F̄ and for all γ ∈ G, define δ(γ) to be the unique integer such that γ̄¯ = t̄¯δ(γ) . Proposition 2.3. Let G be a finitely generated group that can be expressed as a semi-direct product F ⋊ hti. Given a splitting X of G, and for each e ∈ E, a generating set Se ⊂ Γt(e) for ZΓt(e) (ie (Γe )) and a family (γj )0≤j≤j0 of elements of G, one can decide whether there is an element η ∈ M odX whose image η̄ in Aut(H1 (G)) sends γ̄j in F̄ for all j < j0 and γ̄j0 inside t̄F̄ . More precisely, there is such an element η if and only if the explicit Diophantine linear system of equations X rse n(γj , e)δ(se ) = −δ(γj ) + diracj=j0 (2) ∀j, e∈E + se ∈Se  (with unknowns rse ) has a solution. Proof. By (∗) (from the proof of Proposition 2.1), δ(Dǫ,h (γ)) = δ(γ) + n(γ, ǫ)δ(h) and by induction, and the fact that h̄ is fixed by all Dehn twists, δ(Dǫ1 ,h1 Dǫ2 ,h2 . . . Dǫk ,hk (γ)) = δ(γ) +  k X  n(γ, ǫi )δ(hi ).  i=1  Assume that there exists η ∈ M odX such that δ(η(γj )) = 0 for j < j0 and = 1 for j = j0 . Since oriented Dehn twists generate the image of M odX in GL(H1 (G)), this element η can be chosen as a product of oriented Dehn twists Dǫ1 ,h1 Dǫ2 ,h2 . . . Dǫk ,hk , which by commutation in Aut(H1 (G)) can be chosen to be Y rse De,s . e e∈E + ,se ∈Se  Therefore by the previous equation, ∀e ∈ E, ∀se ∈ Se , ∃rse ∈ Z X rse n(γj , e)δ(se ) = −δ(γj ) + dirac(j=j0 ) ∀j, e∈E + se ∈Se  (in which diracj=j0 yields 0 if j 6= j0 and 1 otherwise). Conversely, if the system of equations X ∀j, rse n(γj , e)δ(se ) = −δ(γj ) + diracj=j0 e∈E + se ∈Se  10  Q rse has a solution (in unknowns rse ), then δ( e∈E + ,se ∈Se De,s e (γj )) = 0 for j < j0 and = 1 for j = j0 . We have thus reduced the orbit problem to an equivalent problem of satisfaction of a system of linear Diophantine equations, that are explicitly computable. The problem is therefore solvable, by classical technics of linear algebra. If we had the same statement with Aut(G) replacing M odX , we would be very close to our conclusion. What we will show is that M odX has finite index image in Out(G).  2.2  No surface vertex group in splittings of suspensions  Our aim is Proposition 2.11, that states that in any splitting of a suspension, there is no vertex whose group which is a surface group with boundary, where the boundary subgroups are the adjacent edge groups. More precisely, if T is a G-tree, we say that a vertex stabilizer H is a hanging surface group if it is the fundamental group of a non-elementary compact surface with boundary components, and the adjacent edge groups are exactly the subgroups of the boundary components. We say that it is a hanging bounded Fuchsian group if there is a finite normal subgroup K ⊳ H such that H/K is isomorphic to the fundamental group of a non-elementary hyperbolic compact 2-orbifold with boundary, by an isomorphism sending the images of the adjacent edge stabilizers on the boundary subgroups of the orbifold group. We will need the following well known fact about bounded Fuchsian groups, that we give for completeness. Lemma 2.4. Any hanging bounded Fuchsian group is virtually free. Proof. Let H be a hanging bounded Fuchsian group, and K a finite subgroup of H as above. Because H/K is the fundamental group of a hyperbolic compact 2-orbifold, it is a subgroup of P SL(2, R) ⋊ Z/2Z, and by Selberg’s lemma, it is residually finite, and it has a finite index subgroup H̄0 without torsion. This subgroup is the fundamental group of a finite cover of the orbifold, which is therefore a surface, with boundary, since the orbifold has boundary. Thus, H̄0 is free. It lifts as a free subgroup of H, whose index in H is the product of indices |K| × [H/K : H̄0 ] . We will show (Proposition 2.11) that a splitting of a suspension of a finitely generated group has no hanging bounded Fuchsian vertex group.  11  Let T be the Bass-Serre G-tree of a reduced splitting of G. Let us introduce Y = F \T and X = G\T . Both graphs provide respectively graphof-groups decompositions Y and X of F and of G. Lemma 2.5. Y is a finite graph, and the G-action on T induces, by factorisation, a ht̄i-action on Y . Proof. The second part of the statement is obvious since F is normal in G. Also, since F is normal in G, its minimal subtree in T is G-invariant, therefore it is T itself. In other words, Y is its own core. As for its genus, it it is finite, since it bounds from below the rank of F (the fundamental group of Y at a vertex v0 projects on the fundamental group of the underlying graph Y at v0 ). It follows that Y is a finite graph, and it is endowed with an action of ht̄i = G/F for which the quotient is X. Lemma 2.6. Given any vertex in T , its stabilizer in G is a suspension of its stabilizer in F . Proof. Let ν be such a vertex, and consider v its image in X and ṽ its image in Y . Because Y is finite, there is a smallest n > 0 such that t̄n ṽ is ṽ. Lifting in T , we obtain the existence of γ ∈ F such that γtn ν = ν. Therefore, if (F )ν is the stabilizer of ν in F , then it is normalized by γtn and (F )ν ⋊ hγtn i fixes ν. We claim that (F )ν ⋊ hγtn i is the stabilizer in G of ν. If there is another element in it, it is not in F by definition of (F )ν , and therefore it is some ηtm , η ∈ F, m 6= 0. By minimality of n, n divides m, and if γ ′ tm = (γtn )k , then γ ′ tm ν = ηtm ν, and t−m γ ′−1 ηtm fixes ν and is in F by normality of F . Thus it is in (F )ν , and ηtm ∈ (F )ν ⋊ hγtn i. This ensures the claim. Lemma 2.7. For any edge in T , its stabilizer in G is a suspension of its stabilizer in F . Proof. Subdivide such an edge (and all edges in its orbit, equivariantly) by inserting a vertex on its midpoint, and apply the previous lemma to this vertex. Up to now we have not used any assumption on the nature of edge groups. But now two remarks are of interest, and directly follow from the previous lemmas.  12  Lemma 2.8. A reduced G-tree T never has a finite edge stabilizer. If T has cyclic edge stabilizers in G, then Y is a free splitting of F . If T has virtually cyclic edge stabilizers in G, then Y is a splitting of F over finite subgroups. Lemma 2.9. Let X be a graph-of-groups decomposition of F ⋊ hti with virtually cyclic edge groups. Then no vertex group of X is free non-abelian, or even infinitely many ended. Proof. By Lemma 2.8, T , as an F -tree, is the tree of a virtually free splitting of F . In particular, since F is finitely generated, each vertex stabilizer in F is finitely generated. It follows from Lemma 2.6 that a vertex stabilizer of T in G contains an infinite index normal subgroup, which is as we saw, of finite type. Such a group cannot be free. It cannot be infinitely many ended neither (for the same reason actually, that we recall in the following lemma). Lemma 2.10. Let H be a finitely generated group with infinitely many ends, then H has no finitely generated infinite-index normal subgroup. Proof. By Stallings’ theorem [Sta, Thm. 4.A.6.5, Thm. 5.A.9], H is the fundamental group of a reduced finite graph-of-groups with finite edge groups (with at least one edge). Let T be the associated Bass-Serre tree, and N be a normal subgroup of H. Then, the tree T is minimal for N , hence T /N equals its own core. If N is finitely generated, T /N is finite. Moreover, the action of H on T factorizes through T /N , and if N has infinite index in H, there is an edge ẽ in T /N fixed by infinitely many different elements of H, {hi , i ∈ I}, all in different N -coset. Let e its image in T /H and ẽ˜ a choice of lift in T . There are ni ∈ N such that for all i, hi ni fix e. By finiteness of edge stabilizers, infinitely many of the elements hi ni are equal, contradicting that the hi were in different N -cosets.  Proposition 2.11. Let F be a finitely generated group, and G = F ⋊ hti a suspension. Given any graph-of-groups decomposition X of G, no vertex group of X is a hanging surface group, or a hanging bounded Fuchsian group. Proof. Assume the contrary: let Γv0 be an alleged hanging bounded Fuchsian group or hanging surface group, which is, in particular, virtually free (Lemma 2.4), hence infinitely-many ended because it is non-elementary. Because it is hanging, all the neighboring edges of v0 carry virtually cyclic 13  groups. Collapse all other edges in X in order to get X′ , whose edges are virtually cyclic. The image v0′ of v0 carries the same group, since no adjacent edge has been collapsed, and this group is infinitely-many ended, as we noticed. Apply Lemma 2.9 to X′ to get the contradiction.  2.3  The Aut(G)-orbit of the fiber in the hyperbolic case.  Let us recall that the canonical Zmax -JSJ decomposition of a one-ended hyperbolic group is a certain finite splitting X of G over certain virtually cyclic subgroups (maximal with infinite center), such that every automorphism of G induces an automorphism of graph of groups of X (see [DG-11, section 4.4]). In other word, the natural map δAut(X) → Out(G) is surjective. Remark 2.12. The choice to use the rather technical Zmax -JSJ splitting instead of the more natural “virtually-cyclic” JSJ-splitting, is only suggested by our ability to algorithmically compute this decomposition. In principle, we could work with the classical JSJ splitting as well in the same way. Let X be a graph-of-groups, v a vertex therein, and Γv the vertex group. The choice of an order on the oriented edges adjacent to v, and of a generating set of the edge groups, endows Γv with a marked peripheral structure, that is the tuple of conjugacy classes of the images of these generating sets by the attaching maps. We denote by T this tuple, and Outm (Γv , T ) the subgroup of Out(Γv ) preserving T (see also [DG-11]). In the following, the choices of order and generating sets are implicit, and done a priori. The following is a typical feature of a JSJ decomposition of a hyperbolic group, whose proof, in this specific setting, is essentially contained in [DG-11]. Lemma 2.13. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group. Let (Γv , T ) be a vertex group of the Zmax -JSJ decomposition X of G, with the marked peripheral structure induced by X (and some choice of finite generating sets of edge groups). If Outm (Γv , T ) is infinite, then G admits a splitting with a hanging bounded Fuchsian vertex group. Proof. By [DG-11, Prop. 3.1], such a vertex group Γv must have a further compatible splitting over a maximal virtually cyclic group with infinite center, which allows to use [DG-11, Prop 4.17] to ensure that (Γv , T ) is a so-called hanging orbisocket, which by definition [DG-11, Def. 4.15] allows to refine X in order to get a splitting of G whose one vertex group is a hanging bounded Fuchsian group.  14  Proposition 2.14. Let F a finitely presented group, and G = F ⋊ hti a suspension that is assumed to be hyperbolic. Then, the image in Out(G) of the small modular group of the Zmax JSJ decomposition of G has finite index in Out(G). Moreover, one can compute a set of right-coset representatives of M odX in Out(G) (in the form of automorphisms of G). Proof. Since δAut(X) surjects on Out(G) in the case of the Zmax -JSJ decomposition, it suffices to show that the small modular group has finite index in δAutX and that coset representatives can be computed in δAutX. Once again, this is essentially done in [DG-11] (and probably in other places). First, the splitting X can be effectively computed [DG-11, Prop. 6.3]. Consider the following three maps. First qX : δAut(X) → Aut(X) where Aut(X) is the automorphism group of the Q underlying finite graph X. Second, the natural map q : ker q → X e∈E Aut(Γe ). Third, the natural Q E map qV : ker qE → v∈V Outm (Γv , T ), where T is the marked peripheral structure induced by the ambient graph-of-groups X. The group ker qV is the small modular group. The two first maps have finite image. By Lemma 2.13 and Proposition 2.11, the map qV also has finite image. Therefore the small modular group has finite index in δAut(X). In order to reconstruct coset representatives of the small modular group in δAut(X), it is enough to find coset representatives for the kernel of each of these maps. In order to compute coset representatives of ker qE in δAut(X), we can make the finite list of all graph automorphisms of X for which ΓΦX (e) ≃ Γe . Let ΦX be any of them. We can make the list of all isomorphisms ΓΦX (e) ≃ Γe (there are finitely many such isomorphisms since these groups are virtually cyclic). Then we can apply [DG-11, Prop. 2.28] in order to reveal whether this automorphism ΦX has a preimage by qX . In order to compute coset representatives of ker qE in ker qX , we consider a collection of automorphisms of edge groups, and apply [DG-11, Prop. 2.28] in order to reveal whether this collection has a preimage by qE . Finally, in order to compute coset representatives of ker qV in ker qE , one can make the list of all elements in Out(Γv , T ) expressed as automorphisms (by [DG-11, Coro. 3.5], we can enumerate all of them) and for each choice of them (for each v), check whether the collection defines a graph-of-groups automorphism by solving the simultaneous conjugacy problem that allows the diagram 1 to commute.  15  Corollary 2.15. Let F be finitely presented, and G = F ⋊ hti a suspension that is assumed to be hyperbolic. Given a splitting X of G, generating sets for the centralizers of adjacent edge groups in vertex groups, and a family (γj )0≤j≤j0 of elements of G, one can decide whether there is an element η ∈ Aut(G) whose image η̄ in Aut(H1 (G)) sends γ̄j in F̄ for all j < j0 and γ̄j0 inside t̄F̄ . Proof. First we take note that η ∈ Aut(G) satisfies the conclusion if and only if any other automorphism in the same class in Out(F ) satisfies it. Thus, let α1 , . . . , αk be the right-coset representatives of M odX in Out(G) computed by Proposition 2.14, in the form of automorphisms. For each i, we compute, for each j, αi (γj ), and we use Proposition 1.2 in order to decide whether there is η0 ∈ M odX such that η¯0 (αi (γj )) ∈ F̄ for all j < j0 and η¯0 (αi (γj0 )) ∈ t̄F̄ . If there exists an index i such that the answer is positive, then η0 ◦ αi sends γ̄j in F̄ for all j < j0 and γ̄j0 inside t̄F̄ . If for all i the answer is negative, then no automorphism of G satisfies this property.  3  Conjugacy and suspensions  The following observations elaborate on some well known point of view (see for instance [Se], [ALM]...), and, as stated in the introduction, is our angle of attack of the conjugacy problem. Lemma 3.1. Let φ1 and φ2 be two automorphisms of F . The following assertions are equivalent. 1. φ1 and φ2 are conjugate in Out(F ); 2. there is an isomorphism between their suspensions that preserves the fiber (in both directions) and the orientation; 3. there is an isomorphism between their suspensions that preserves the orientation and sends the fiber inside the fiber; 4. there is an isomorphism between their suspensions whose factorization through the abelianisations preserves the orientation, and sends the image of the fiber inside the image of the fiber.  16  Proof. Of course, 2 implies 3, which implies 4. Assuming 4 we now show 3. If the given isomorphism ψ : F ⋊φ1 hti → F ⋊φ2 hti does not preserve the fiber, it sends some f ∈ F on some f ′ tk , f ′ ∈ F, k 6= 0. Since the fibers are kernels of some cyclic quotient, the derived subgroups of the suspensions are contained in the fibers. Thus the image of f ′ tk in the abelianisation of F ⋊φ2 hti is not in the image of F . thus, the factorisation through abelianisations of ψ does not send the image of the fiber inside the image of the fiber. If ψ does not preserve the orientation, it sends t to some f ′ tk , f ′ ∈ F, k 6= 1, and the same argument shows that the factorisation through abelianisations of ψ does not preserve the orientation. Thus we obtain that 4 implies 3. Let us prove that 3 implies 2. Let α the isomorphism given by 3. Then α(F ) is normal in (F ⋊φ2 hti) and the quotient is infinite cyclic. Thus the image of the fiber F is trivial in this quotient (because the further quotient by this image is also infinite cyclic). It follows that α(F ) = F . Let us prove that 1 is equivalent to 2. Assume that Ψ : F ⋊φ1 hti → F ⋊φ2 ht′ i sends F to F , and t to f0 t′ . Then write ψ for the restriction of Ψ to F . In F ⋊φ1 hti, for all f ∈ F , one has t−1 f t = φ1 (f ). Passing through Ψ, one gets (in F ⋊φ2 ht′ i) t′−1 f0−1 ψ(f )f0 t′ = ψ(φ1 (f )), that is φ2 ◦adf0 ◦ψ = ψ ◦φ1 . Thus, the classes of φ1 and φ2 are conjugate in Out(F ) and furthermore, if f0 = 1, φ1 and φ2 are conjugate in Aut(F ). Conversely, if φ1 = ψ −1 ◦ adf0 ◦ φ2 ◦ ψ for some ψ in Aut(F ), one can extend ψ to Ψ̃ : F ∗ hti → F ⋊φ2 hti by setting Ψ(t) = f0 t ∈ F ⋊φ2 hti. The relation of the semi-direct product by φ1 vanishes in the image, thus Ψ̃ factorizes through F ⋊φ1 hti producing a bijective morphism. Theorem 3.2. There is an algorithm that, given F a finitely presented group, and two automorphisms φ, φ′ of F such that the suspensions are wordhyperbolic, decides whether φ and φ′ are conjugated in Out(F ). Proof. By Lemma 1.1, it suffices to decide whether the associated semidirect products of F with Z with structural automorphisms φ and φ′ are isomorphic by an isomorphism satisfying characterization 4 in Lemma 1.1. Let F ′ be another copy of F , with same presentation. We read φ′ as an automorphism of F ′ . Let us denote by G and G′ the groups of the suspensions of F and F ′ by the given φ and φ′ respectively. Provided with a presentation of F , we have presentations of G and G′ . By the main result of [DG-11], we can decide whether there is an isomorphism between G and G′ . If there is none, we are done. If there is one,  17  say ψ : G → G′ , any other isomorphism is in the orbit of ψ by Aut(G′ ). Let {fi , i = 1, . . . , j0 − 1} be a generating set of F . We apply our solution to the orbit problem 2.15 to the elements γi = ψ(fi ) for i < j0 , and γj0 = ψ(t). By definition, the answer to this orbit problem is positive if and only if there is an automorphism η such that η ◦ ψ satisfies characterization 4 in Lemma 1.1. Since all isomorphisms G → G′ are of this form (i.e. η ◦ ψ for some automorphism η), this decides whether there is an isomorphism satisfying the assertion (4) of Lemma 1.1, hence, whether φ and φ′ are conjugated in Out(F ). Theorem 3.2 covers the case of atoroidal automorphisms of free groups, by [B]. Corollary 3.3. Let F be a free group. The conjugacy problem in Out(F ) restricted to atoroidal automorphisms is solvable.  References [ALM] G. Arzhantseva, J.-F. Lafont, A. Minasyan, Isomorphism versus commensurability for a class of finitely presented groups. J. Group Theory 17 (2014), no. 2, 361-378 [BMV] O. Bogopolski, A. Martino, E. Ventura, Orbit decidability and the conjugacy problem for some extensions of groups. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 362, No. 4, 2003-2036 (2010). [Ba] H. Bass, Covering theory for graph of groups, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 89 (1993), 3–47. [Br1] P. Brinkmann, Hyperbolic automorphisms of free groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 10 (2000), no. 5, 1071–1089. [Br2] P. Brinkmann, Splittings of mapping tori of free group automorphisms. Geom. Dedicata 93 (2002), 191–203. [D] F. Dahmani, Existential questions in (relatively) hyperbolic groups. Israel J. Math. 173 (2009), 91–124. [DGu1] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, Foliations for solving equations in groups: free, virtually free and hyperbolic groups, J. of Topology, 3, no. 2 (2010) 343–404. [DGu2] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, The isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 21 (2011), no. 2, 223–300. [DGr] F. Dahmani, D. Groves, The isomorphism problem for toral relatively hyperbolic groups. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. No. 107 (2008), 211–290. [Lo] J. Los, On the conjugacy problem for automorphisms of free groups. Topology 35 (1996), no. 3, 779–808. [Lu1] M. Lustig. Structure and conjugacy for automorphisms of free groups I. MPI-Bonn preprint series 2000, No. 241; http://www.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/preprints  18  [Lu2] M. Lustig. Structure and conjugacy for automorphisms of free groups II. MPI-Bonn preprint series 2001, No. 4; http://www.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/preprints [Lu3] M. Lustig, Conjugacy and centralizers for iwip automorphisms of free groups, in “Geometric Group Theory”, Trends in Mathematics, 197–224. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 2007 [P] P. Papasoglu, An algorithm detecting hyperbolicity. Geometric and computational perspectives on infinite groups (Minneapolis, MN and New Brunswick, NJ, 1994), 193–200, DIMACS Ser. Discrete Math. Theoret. Comput. Sci., 25, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1996. [Sel] Z. Sela, The isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups, Ann. Math., 141 (1995), 217–283. [Ser] J.-P. Serre, Arbres, Amalgames, SL2 , Société Mathématique de France, Asterisque no. 46 (1977). [Sta] J. Stallings, Group theory and three-dimensional manifolds. Yale Math., Monographs. no.4, Yale University Press (1971).  François Dahmani, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Institut Fourier UMR5582, F-38402 Grenoble, France. e-mail: francois.dahmani@ujf-grenoble.fr  19  Part II  On suspensions, and conjugacy of a few more automorphisms of free groups. Abstract In a previous work, we remarked that the conjugacy problem for pairs of atoroidal automorphisms of a free group was solvable by mean of the isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups and an orbit problem for the automorphism group of their suspensions (i.e. their semidirect product with Z for the relevant structural automorphism). We consider the same problem a few more automorphisms of free groups, those that produce relatively hyperbolic suspensions that do not split over a parabolic subgroup.  Introduction Let F be a finitely presented group (we will soon assume that it is free), Aut(F ) be its automorphism group, and Out(F ) = Aut(F )/Inn(F ) be its outer automorphism group. Given two semi-direct products, F ⋊α hti and F ⋊β ht′ i, their structural automorphisms α and β are conjugated in Out(F ) if and only if there is an isomorphism F ⋊β hti → F ⋊α ht′ i that preserves the fiber (which is F ) and the orientation (i.e. sends tF on t′ F ). This suggests a way of analysing the conjugacy problem in a class of elements of Out(F ) through an isomorphism problem in a class of semidirect products of F . A motivating case is that of a free group. Though a solution to the conjugacy problem of automorphisms of free groups was announced by Lustig [Lu-00, Lu-01], it might still be desirable to find short complete solutions for specific classes of elements in Out(Fn ). In [D] we considered the case of atoroidal automorphisms. In that case, the semi-direct product F ⋊α hti is a hyperbolic group [B], and since the isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups is solvable [Se, DGr, DG-11], the conjugacy problem for atoroidal automorphisms of free groups was reduced to an orbit problem for Out(F ⋊α hti) in H1 (F ⋊α hti, Z) (this orbit problem was an interpretation of the condition that there is an isomorphism F ⋊β hti → F ⋊α ht′ i that preserves the fiber and the orientation, once is given an 20  abstract isomorphism F ⋊β hti → F ⋊α ht′ i). We solved this orbit problem by showing that Out(F ⋊α hti) is a virtually abelian group, and by interpreting the orbit problem as a system of linear Diophantine equations. In view of [DGr], [DG-15], it is natural to ask whether one can approach the conjugacy problem of larger classes of automorphisms, namely those producing proper relatively hyperbolic suspensions. Definition 0.4. Let φ ∈ Aut(F ), and F1 , . . . , Fk finitely generated proper subgroups of F . We say that the automorphism φ is hyperbolic relative to {F1 , . . . , Fk } if there exists integers m1 , . . . , mk > 0 and elements f1 , . . . , fk ∈ F such that, for all i, tmi fi normalises Fi , and such that the group (F ⋊φ hti) is hyperbolic relative to {(Fi ⋊ htmi fi i), i = 1, . . . , k}. The case of automorphism of free groups is once again particularly interesting, since according to [GLu], all non-polynomial automorphisms of free groups should produce interesting relatively hyperbolic suspensions (of course it could be interesting to consider also a free product of nice groups). Thus from now on F is a free group. One says that a subgroup F0 of F is polynomial for a given automorphism φ if every conjugacy class of elements in F0 has polynomial growth under iterates of φ (more explicitly, that means that for all γ ∈ F0 , the length of a cyclically reduced representative of φn (γ) is bounded above by a polynomial in n). We say that an automorphism is polynomial if F itself is polynomial. For an outer automorphism Φ of F , we say that a subgroup F0 of F is polynomial for Φ if there is an automorphism φ in the class of Φ for which F0 is polynomial. In [L, Prop 1.4] Levitt proves that for any outer automorphism Φ of a free group F , there is a finite family of finitely generated subgroups of F , polynomial for Φ, such that all polynomial subgroups of Φ are conjugated into one of them (see also [GLu, Prop. 3.2]). The aim of this note is thus to explore to what extend the method used in [D] can be extended to larger classes of automorphisms of free groups, and in particular to (some) non-polynomial automorphisms. However, I ultimately had to restrict the study to those automorphisms whose suspension does not split over a parabolic subgroup. I also have to concede that this attempt uses three results unpublished at the time of writing (this issue will be made clear in a few lines). The main result of this attempt is the following. Theorem 0.5. There is an (explicit) algorithm that, given two automorphisms φ1 , φ2 of a finitely generated free group F , terminates if both produce 21  proper relatively hyperbolic suspensions, relative to suspensions of polynomial subgroups, without parabolic splitting, and it indicates whether φ1 and φ2 are conjugated in Out(F ). The arguments presented below involve other tools than in [D], in particular Dehn fillings, and growth of conjugacy classes under iterations of automorphisms. They rely on a certain number of currently unpublished results, so I would like to make this reliance clear. First, there is the main result of Gautero and Lustig paper [GLu]. This is used twice; to produce examples to which the results might apply (so, in some sense, as a motivation), and to compute explicitly the polynomial subgroups (actually, this is to certify that an exponentially growing automorphism is indeed exponentially growing). Then there is the splitting computation of Touikan [T]. And finally, there is the solution ot the isomorphism problem of some rigid relatively hyperbolic groups, by Guirardel and myself, [DG-15]. The authors wants to say merci to the referee, for useful comments and corrections.  1  Preliminary  1.1  General  Since this note is a sequel to [D], we assume that the reader has access to that previous paper, and we will freely use its content. For readability, though, we briefly introduce now a few items that we need from that paper. First is a variation on some classical fact. As in [D] we will call a semidirect product with Z, F ⋊φ Z a suspension of F by φ, whose fiber is F and whose orientation is defined by F t (this is to distinguish it from the suspension by φ−1 which is the same group, but with reverse orientation). Lemma 1.1. (see for instance [D, Lemma 2.3]) Let φ1 and φ2 be two automorphisms of F . The following assertions are equivalent. 1. φ1 and φ2 are conjugate in Out(F ); 2. there is an isomorphism between their suspensions (F ⋊φ1 hti) and (F ⋊φ2 ht′ i) that preserves the fiber F (in both directions) and the orientation (i.e sends t in F t′ ); 3. there is an isomorphism between their suspensions that preserves the orientation and sends the fiber inside the fiber; 22  4. there is an isomorphism between their suspensions whose factorization through the abelianisations preserves the orientation, and sends the image of the fiber inside the image of the fiber. When talking about a splitting of a group, we mean a graph-of-group decomposition (often noted X) as defined in Bass-Serre theory. This is presented in many places, beginning with Serre’s famous book. We recall very briefly our conventions for defining a splitting, and its automorphisms. One is given an underlying graph (unoriented, with possible double edges, and loops) X whose set of vertices and set and oriented edges we denote respectively by V and E, and whose involution on the oriented edges (reversion of orientation) we denote by : e 7→ e, and terminaison map t : E → V . One is given groups for each vertices, denoted Γv , v ∈ V , and for each edge e ∈ E, another group Γe , with Γe = Γē , and an injective morphism ie : Γe ֒→ Γt(e) . The Bass group is the group generated by all vertex groups and all edges with the relations that ē = e−1 and that ēiē (g)e = ie (g) everywhere it is defined. The fundamental group of the graph of group at a vertex v0 is the subgroup of the Bass group of all elements of the form e1 γ1 e2 γ2 . . . er γr where ei ∈ E, γi ∈ Γt(ei ) for all i, and such that consecutive ei define a loop at v0 in the graph X (that is, for all i, t(ei+1 ) = t(ei ), and t(er ) = t(e1 ) = v0 ). If this fundamental group (of the graph of group X) is isomorphic to a certain group G we say that X is a splitting of G. We call a splitting non-trivial if the action of its fundamental group on the Bass-Serre tree has no global fixed point. An automorphism of the graph of groups X is a tuple (ΦX , (φv ), (φe ), (γe )) where ΦX is a automorphism of the underlying graph X, for all vertices v, φv : Γv → ΓΦX (v) is an isomorphism, for all edges e, φe : Γe → ΓΦX (e) is also an isomorphism, and γe ∈ ΓΦX (t(e)) satisfies Bass Diagram: φt(e) ◦ ie = adγe ◦ iΦX (e) ◦ φe ,  (3)  for adγe : x 7→ γe−1 xγe . One might like to read the condition as: “each attaching map ie , e ∈ E commute with the isomorphisms φv , φe , v ∈ V, e ∈ E up to conjugation in the target vertex group”. The small modular group of a splitting was used in [D]. We suggest reading [D, §1] and more precisely §1.2 loc. cit. for a slightly broader discussion about it. The small modular group of a splitting X of a group G, denoted by M odX is a subgroup of the automorphism group of X consisting of those for which ΦX = IdX , φv ∈ Inn(Γv ) and φe = IdΓe for all v, e. It is generated by the union of two families of automorphisms, the oriented Dehn twists (for which the φv are all the identity, and only one element 23  γe ∈ ZΓt(e) (ie (Γe )) is non trivial), and the inert twists (for which φv = adγv and γe is the same γv if t(e) = v). The image of the small modular group in the outer automorphism group of G consists of the group generated by Dehn twists over edges of the splitting X. Its image in the automorphism group of the abelianisation of G is generated by Dehn twists over non separating edges of X. Given a suspension F ⋊ hti, we define the map δ : F ⋊ hti → Z to be the quotient by F . Of course, it factorises through the abelianisation of F ⋊ hti. We insist in seeing the targer of δ as Z to be able to interpret δ(γ) as an integer. Given a splitting X of F ⋊ hti, and a choice of base point in X, we can realise each element γ of F ⋊ hti as its expression in the Bass group, and for each (oriented) edge e of X we may define n(γ, e) as the number of occurences of e in the reduced form of this expression, minus the number of occurences of e. We obtained the following result. Proposition 1.2. (See [D, 2.3]) Let G be a finitely generated group that can be expressed as a semi-direct product F ⋊ hti. Given a splitting X of G, and for each e ∈ E, a generating set Se ⊂ Γt(e) for ZΓt(e) (ie (Γe )) and a family (γj )0≤j≤j0 of elements of G, one can decide whether there is an element η ∈ M odX whose image η̄ in Aut(H1 (G)) sends γ̄j in F̄ for all j < j0 and γ̄j0 inside t̄F̄ . More precisely, there is such an element η if and only if the explicit Diophantine linear system of equations X rse n(γj , e)δ(se ) = −δ(γj ) + diracj=j0 (4) ∀j, e∈E + se ∈Se  (with unknowns rse ) has a solution.  1.2  On polynomial growth  The following preliminary result is useful. It follows from the recent algorithmic construction of relative train tracks, by Feighn and Handel [FH, Theorem 2.1]. We give a different proof below (certainly not of the same scope as the mentioned reference) for the curiosity of the reader. Proposition 1.3. There is an algorithm that, provided with a free group F and an automorphism φ, terminates and indicates whether F is polynomial for φ. 24  Proof. First, we will give a procedure certifying that an automorphism is polynomial, and then a procedure certifying that an automorphism is of exponential growth on some conjugacy class. By [BFH-00, Coro 5.7.6], if φ is a polynomially growing automorphism, then there is n such that φn is unipotent in GL(H1 (F )). It is then sufficient to devise a procedure certifying whether a unipotent automorphism is polynomially growing. Then we use (a weak aspect of) Theorem [BFH-05, 3.11]: if the automorphism is polynomially growing, there exists a topological representative τ : G → G of φ on a graph G, and a filtration of G, {v} = G0 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Gn = G such that any edge e in Gi \ Gi−1 is sent on a path ec where c is a path in Gi−1 . Also, if such a representative exists, then, for every edge e ∈ Gi , the length of φn (e) can be bounded by a polynomial in n depending only on i (this can be seen by induction; it is obvious for i = 0 or 1 since G0 contains no edge, and if it is true for i − 1, let P(i−1) the corresponding polynomial, and for e ∈ Gi , n 2 . . . φ(c)n−1 , and the total with φ(e) = ec, we can Pwrite φ (e) = eφ(c)φ(c) P |c| length is bounded by k≤n−1 P(i−1) (k) , hence by k≤n−1 P(i−1) (k)M for M = max{|φ(e)|, e ∈ Gi }, which is polynomial in n). Thus, φ is polynomial if and only if there is such a topological representative. This can be certified by enumeration of topological representatives, since the condition used is easily algorithmically checked. We now need a procedure that produces a certificate that φ is not polynomialy growing when it is the case. For that, we’ll use that φ is not polynomially growing if and only if the suspension has a proper relative hyperbolic structure. One direction of this equivalence ( =⇒ ) is the content of [GLu] (actually [GLu] describes the relative hyperbolic structure). We present now an argument for the other direction. If the suspension is a proper relatively hyperbolic group (with at least one hyperbolic element), then there are hyperbolic elements in each coset of the fiber: this follows from [O-06b, Lemma 4.4] (I also find rather pleasant the following proof: a simple random walk on the relatively hyperbolic group F ⋊ Z will a.s. walk on only finitely many non-hyperbolic elements (apply Borel-Cantelli Lemma, with the exponentially decreasing probability to walk on a parabolic element, e.g. [Si]), and, by recurrence on Z, it will walk infinitely many times on the preimage of any chosen coset). Thus, there is a hyperbolic element fh in the fiber F , and another t′ = tf0 in the coset tF . The relative distance of F and t′k F grows therefore linarly in k, and by exponential divergence (in the hyperbolic coned-off graph), the shortest path, in t′k F , from t′k to fh t′k has exponential relative length in k, hence ex25  ponential absolute length. This makes fh an exponentially growing element for the automorphism φ ◦ adf0 . This means that this automorphism cannot be polynomialy growing (as it is visible on the topological representative τ of a polynomially growing automorphism that no element can be exponentially growing). Therefore φ has an exponentially growing conjugacy class in F . By [DG-13], and enumeration of the proper subgroups of F , if there exists a proper relative hyperbolic structure, one can eventually find it and thus a certificate that the automorphism is not polynomially growing (here a certificate is the data of an exponentially growing conjugacy class, with a proof that it is exponentially growing). Proposition 1.4. Let F be a free group. There is an explicit algorithm that, given φ ∈ Aut(F ) expressed on a basis of F , terminates and produces a basis for each group of a collection F1 , . . . , Fk of maximal polynomial subgroups of F for Φ the class of φ in Out(F ), and computes minimal exponents mi > 0 and elements fi so that tmi fi normalises Fi (see definition 0.4). Proof. Note that there is a unique relative hyperbolic structure for F ⋊φ hti whose parabolic groups are suspensions of polynomial subgroups. Indeed, the polynomial subgroups must be parabolic, by the observation made in the proof of 1.3. Moreover, by [GLu], F ⋊φ hti is indeed relatively hyperbolic to the subgroups that we need to compute. We enumerate the tuples (S, m, f ), where S is a finite subset of F , m is an integer, and f ∈ F . For each of them, by the usual Stallings’ folding process, we may find a basis of hSi, and we may check whether hSi is stable by conjugation by tm f and f −1 t−m . If so, hSi is normalized by tm f ; in that case, using Proposition 1.3, we may certify whether, the product hSi⋊htm f i is a suspension of a polynomial automorphism on hSi. For any collection of such subgroups, we may use [DG-13] in order to certify that F ⋊φ hti is relatively hyperbolic. When this happens, the algorithm is done. Recall that a splitting of a relatively hyperbolic group is peripheral if, in the Bass-Serre tree, all parabolic subgroups are elliptic. Let us say that φ ∈ Aut(F ) is relatively hyperbolic with no parabolic splitting (RH-noPS for short) if it is properly hyperbolic relative to a collection of polynomial subgroups of F , and the suspension F ⋊φ hti has no non-trivial peripheral splitting over a subgroup of a parabolic subgroup. Let us say that φ ∈ Aut(F ) is relatively hyperbolic with no elementary splitting (RH-noES for short) if it is properly hyperbolic relative to a col26  lection of polynomial subgroups of F , and the suspension F ⋊φ hti has no peripheral splitting over a cyclic or parabolic subgroup, except the trivial one. An unsatisfying aspect of this work is that I am unable to provide an algorithm certifying whether an element of Aut(F ) is RH-noPS. But if it is, then we can do something.  2  Conjugacy problems  2.1  Conjugacy of two relatively hyperbolic automorphisms without elementary splitting  Proposition 2.1. Let F be a free group. There is an (explicit) algorithm that, given two automorphisms, φ1 , φ2 , terminates if both φi are RH-noPS, and provides • either an isomorphism F ⋊φ1 hti → F ⋊φ2 hti preserving fiber, and orientation; • or a certificate that F ⋊φ1 hti and F ⋊φ2 hti are not isomorphic by an isomorphism preserving fiber, orientation; • or a non-trivial peripheral splitting of either F ⋊φi hti over a cyclic subgroup, which is either maximal cyclic or parabolic. The algorithm in question may terminate even if one of the φi is not RH-noPS. It never lies though. The following application is immediate, given Lemma 1.1. Corollary 2.2. The conjugacy problem for RH-noES elements of Out(F ) is solvable: there is an algorithm that given two automorphisms that are RH-noES, decides whether or not they are conjugated. Let us now prove Proposition 2.1 Proof. First, by Proposition 1.4, we may assume that we know explicitly both relative hyperbolic structures of Gi = F ⋊φi hti with presentations, as suspensions of subgroups of F , of the parabolic subgroups (that are nonvirtually cyclic). Let us write P1,j = F1,j ⋊ hrj i, j = 1, . . . , k conjugacy representatives of maximal parabolic subgroups of G1 , with P1,j ∩ F = F1,j (recall that we have explicit presentations of the groups P1,j as such suspensions). Similarily, we have P2,j = F2,j ⋊ hrj′ i, j = 1, . . . , k ′ conjugacy 27  representatives of maximal parabolic subgroups of G2 . If k 6= k′ , G1 and G2 cannot be isomorphic, hence we can assume that k = k′ . In parallel, we then perform the three following searchs (so-called procedures, below). The first procedure is the enumeration of morphisms G1 → G2 → G1 . It stops when mutually inverse isomorphisms preserving orientation and sending the fiber into the fiber are found. The second procedure is as follows. For incrementing integers m, we (m) compute N1,j the intersection of all subgroups of F1,j of index ≤ m. Note (m)  that for each j, N1,j is a sequence of normal subgroups of P1,j , with trivial (m)  intersection (as m goes to infinity). Denote by hh∪j N1,j ii the normal closure in G1 of their union (over j for a fixed m). Then we try to certify, using [P], (m) (m) that Ḡ1 = G1 /hh∪j N1,j ii is hyperbolic. (m)  (m)  We will denote by K1 the kernel hh∪j N1,j ii in G1 of the previous quotient. (m) Similarily, we compute Ḡ2 and check that it is hyperbolic. Since (m) P1,j /N1,j is virtually cyclic, by virtue of the Dehn Filling theorem [O-07, Thm. 1.1], for m large enough these groups are indeed hyperbolic. So this (m) step of the second procedure will eventually provide groups Ḡi , (i = 1, 2, (m) m sufficiently large), that are certified hyperbolic. For all m, ∪j N1,j is (m)  contained in F which is normal in G1 . Hence the whole group K1 is con(m) (m) (m) tained in F , and Ḡ1 is naturally a suspension Ḡ1 = (F/K1 ) ⋊ ht̄i. The second procedure then calls the algorithm of Theorem [D, 3.2] in order (m) (m) to decide whether Ḡ1 and Ḡ2 are isomorphic by a fiber and orientation preserving isomorphism. This is done in parallel for all incrementing m for which the groups are certified hyperbolic. The second procedure stops if an (m) (m) integer m is found so that Ḡ1 and Ḡ2 are not isomorphic by a fiber and orientation preserving isomorphism. The third procedure is as follows. For both i = 1, 2, one enumerates presentations of Gi = F ⋊φi hti by Tietze transformations, and, for each one exhibiting a splitting of Gi over a cyclic subgroup as an amalgamation, we check whether the splitting is non-trivial (it suffices to check that both factors have a generator that does not commute with the cyclic subgroup) and, for each one of the form of an HNN extension, hH, t | tct−1 = c′ , RH i we check whether the stable letter t is non trivial (so the presentation is genuinely that of an HNN-extension over a cyclic group). If we discover a non-trivial cyclic splitting, we may check whether its cyclic edge subgroup 28  is maximal cyclic or parabolic, using [O-06a, Thms 5.6 and 5.17]. We then enumerate the conjugates of the parabolic subgroups, and if we find that each parabolic subgroup has a conjugate contained in a vertex group, this third procedure stops, and outputs the splitting, with the relevant conjugations of parabolic subgroups. Now that we described the three procedures, we discuss the implication of their termination. If the first procedure terminates, then by Lemma 1.1, there exists a fiberand-orientation preserving isomorphism, and the two given automorphisms of F are conjugated in Out(F ). If the second procedure terminates, there cannot exist any isomorphism G1 → G2 preserving fiber and orientation (it would preserve the class of parabolic subgroups, characterised by being polynomial, and hence pass to the characteristic quotients). If the third procedure terminates, we have found a non-trivial splitting of either F ⋊φi hti over a cyclic subgroup. Now we need to show that there is always at least one procedure that terminates, i.e. the following lemma. Lemma 2.3. Assume that G1 and G2 are RH-noPS. If the third procedure and the second procedure never terminate, then the first procedure terminates. This Lemma is actually a consequence of a result obtained in a collaboration of Vincent Guirardel and the author. (m)  (m)  Proof. We assume that for all m large enough, φm : Ḡ1 → Ḡ2 is a fiber and orientation preserving isomorphism. (m) Observe that eventually, P1,j /N1,j contains a large finite subgroup and (m)  an infinite order element normalizing it. In G2 (for large m), all finite sub(m) groups lie in conjugates of P2,ℓ /N2,ℓ (by [DG-15, Lemma 4.3]), and since (m)  G2 is eventually hyperbolic relative to this collection of subgroups, any infinite order element normalizing a finite subgroup is in the same conjugate (m) of P2,ℓ /N2,ℓ . Thus, eventually each φm must send, for each j, the group (m)  (m)  P1,j /N1,j on some conjugate of some P2,ℓ /N2,ℓ , (ℓ ≤ k). Then, Theorem [DG-15, Thm. 5.2] states that either G1 or G2 has a peripheral splitting over a maximal cyclic, or a parabolic subgroup (which must be parabolic if we assume that the third procedure does not terminate, hence in contradiction with the assumption of the lemma), or there is an isomorphism φ : G1 → G2 that commutes with infinitely many φm , up to composition with a conju-  29  gation in  (m) Ḡ2  (in other words, it makes a diagram  G1 ↓ (m)  φ∞  →  adḡ ◦φm  G2 ↓ (m)  → Ḡ2 Ḡ1 commute, where adḡ is a conjugation). In this second circumstance, φ has to preserve the fiber and orientation, since the φm do, and the kernels are co-final.  There is a slightly stronger version of Proposition 2.1 that we will need for the next part. Given a suspension F ⋊ hti, a transverse cyclic peripheral structure is a tuple of elements of the form (tkj fj )j=1,...r , for kj 6= 0 and fj ∈ F . A fiber-and-orientation preserving isomorphism between suspensions equipped with such structures is said to preserve the structure if it sends the conjugacy classes of the first exactly on the conjugacy classes of the second. Let us amend our definition of RH-noPS, and say that a suspension with a transverse cyclic peripheral structure is RH-noPS relative to the transverse peripheral structure if it is properly hyperbolic relative to a collection of polynomial subgroups of F , and the suspension F ⋊φ hti has no non-trivial peripheral splitting over a subgroup of a parabolic subgroup, in which each element of the transverse peripheral structure (which is a group) is conjugated to a factor. The following Proposition is, as we said, similar to Proposition 2.1. The difference is in the presence of the transverse cyclic peripheral structure (a minor difference) but also in the fact that we had ambitionned to get the full list of fiber-and-orientation preserving isomorphisms. This ambition is not realized unfortunately, but enough is granted for the application in the next part. (m) (m) We keep the notation K1 , K2 for the normal subgroups introduced in the proof of Proposition 2.1. Proposition 2.4. Let F be a free group. There is an (explicit) algorithm that, given two automorphisms, φ1 , φ2 , and two transverse cyclic peripheral structures P1 , P2 of F ⋊φ1 hti and F ⋊φ2 hti respectively, terminates if both φi are RH-noPS relative to their transverse peripheral structures, and provides 1. either a list of isomorphisms F ⋊φ1 hti → F ⋊φ2 hti preserving fiber, orientation, and transverse cyclic peripheral structure, and an integer (m) (m) = G2 /K2 m such that for each p ∈ P2 , the centralizer of p̄ in G2 30  is the image of the centralizer of p in G2 and such that, for any other such isomorphism ψ, there is one, φ, in the list, an element g ∈ G2 , such that for all h ∈ G1 , there is zh ∈ Km for which ψ(h)g = φ(h)zh . 2. or a certificate that F ⋊φ1 hti and F ⋊φ2 hti are not isomorphic by an isomorphism preserving fiber, orientation, and transverse cyclic peripheral structure; 3. or a non-trivial peripheral splitting of either F ⋊φi hti over a cyclic subgroup, in which each element of the transverse peripheral structure is elliptic. The first point means that the list contains all isomorphisms up to conjugacy in G2 and multiplication by a large element of F . Proof. As in the proof of Proposition 2.1, we use three procedures. The first procedure is the enumeration of morphisms G1 → G2 → G1 . This procedure has an incrementing list L, which is empty at the beginning. Every time mutually inverse isomorphisms preserving the transverse peripheral structure, the orientation and sending the fiber into the fiber are found, such that the isomorphism G1 → G2 is not conjugated to any item of the list L, the procedure stores G1 → G2 into L. We precise below when this first procedure is set to stop. The second one slightly differs from Proposition 2.1. We still compute (m) (m) Ḡ1 and Ḡ2 (and the images of the transversal peripheral structure in them), and try to certify that they are hyperbolic and that the assumption of point 1, on the centralizers, is satisfied (which happens if m is large enough, by Lemma 2.12). Let us call this “certification α for m”. When this is the case, using [DG-11, Coro. 3.4], we check whether these groups are rigid (in the sense that they have no peripheral splitting over a virually cyclic group with infinite center, in which each element of the transverse peripheral structure is conjugated in a vertex group) and if they are we proceed and (m) compute by [DG-11, Coro. 3.5] the complete list of isomorphisms Ḡ1 → (m) (m) Ḡ2 up to conjugacy in Ḡ2 . Once this is done, we check which one of them are fiber-and-orientation preserving, and preserve the transverse peripheral structure, and we record them in a list Lm . The second procedure is set to stop if an m is found so that there is no (m) (m) fiber-and-orientation preserving isomorphisms Ḡ1 → Ḡ2 that preserves the transversal peripheral structure. The first procedure (which was run in parallel with the second) is set to stop if a list L is found and an integer m is found so that the following three 31  conditions are satisfied. First, “certification α” for m is done. Second, Lm is completely computed, and third, the currently computed list L surjects on Lm , by the natural quotient map. The third procedure looks for a non-trivial peripheral splitting over a cyclic subgroup which is maximal cyclic or parabolic, in which each element of the transverse peripheral structure is conjugated to a vertex group (it is similar to that of Proposition 2.1). Observe that, if the first procedure stops, we have in L a list of isomorphisms F ⋊φ1 hti → F ⋊φ2 hti preserving fiber (by Lemma 1.1 (3 =⇒ 2)), orientation, and transverse cyclic peripheral structure, such that any other such isomorphism differs from one in the list by a conjugation, and the multiplication by elements in the fiber (in the sense of 2.4-(1)). Observe also that if the second procedure stops, we have (as in 2.1) a certificate that F ⋊φ1 hti and F ⋊φ2 hti are not isomorphic by an isomorphism preserving fiber, orientation, and transverse cyclic peripheral structure. Again, we can conclude by the following lemma. Lemma 2.5. Assume that G1 and G2 are RH-noPS relative to their transverse cyclic peripheral structures. If the third procedure and the second procedure never terminate, then the first procedure terminates (i.e there is a finite list of isomorphisms (preserving the transverse peripheral structure, the orientation and sending the fiber into the fiber) from G1 to G2 , and an integer m as in (2.4-(1)) such that any isomorphism preserving fiber, (m) (m) orientation, and peripheral structure Ḡ1 → Ḡ2 is the image of an isomorphism G1 → G2 in the list). Proof. We endow G1 and G2 with the relatively hyperbolic structure consisting of their parabolic subgroups, and for each hyperbolic element in the transverse peripheral structure, the conjugates of the maximal cyclic subgroup containing it. This still makes a relatively hyperbolic group (see [O-06b, 1.7] for instance). In this context, the assumption that the third procedure does not stops says that the groups G1 and G2 have no splitting which is peripheral (for this extended peripheral structure), over an elementary subgroup. (m) (m) Observe that, eventually, the groups Ḡ1 and Ḡ2 are rigid (in the sense of the second procedure). Indeed, if it is not the case for the sequence (m) (Ḡ1 ) for instance, then after passing to a subsequence, for each m in the (m) subsequence, there are infinitely many automorphisms of Ḡ1 preserving the transverse peripheral structure, the orientation and the fiber (namely the iterates of a Dehn twist over an edge group of a splitting falsifying 32  rigidity). From there, by [DG-15, Corolary 5.10], one gets that G1 must have a splitting of a type contradicting the previous paragraph. Therefore, for sufficiently large m, the second procedure can compute the list Lm of isomorphisms preserving fiber orientation, and peripheral (m) (m) structure between Ḡ1 and Ḡ2 . Since the second procedure does not stop, for all sufficiently large m, this list is not empty. Assume that the first procedure does not stop. Then, for all finite list L of isomorphisms G1 → G2 (preserving transverse peripheral structure, fiber (m) (m) and orientation), and all n there exists m > n and ψm : Ḡ1 → Ḡ2 , an isomorphism preserving fiber orientation, and peripheral structure, that does not commute with any element of the list L, even after conjugation by (m) an element of Ḡ2 . Choosing a sequence of lists L exhausting the set of isomorphisms G1 → G2 (with the prescribed preservation property), and a increasing sequence of integers n, one gets a sequence of ψm as above, for a sequence of integers m going to infinity. We may use Theorem [DG-15, 5.2] to extract a subsequence of the isomorphisms ψm , and to find an isomorphism ψ∞ : G1 → G2 commuting with the composition of ψm with a conjugation (for all m in the extracted sequence), as our previous use of it in Lemma 2.3. By cofinality, such a ψ∞ has to preserve the fiber and the orientation. Since the transverse peripheral structure consists exactly of the cyclic groups among the parabolic groups of the relatively hyperbolic structures under consideration, we deduce that ψ∞ globally preserves the transverse cyclic structure. By [DG-15, Lemma 3.13], we know that, for sufficiently large m, non conjugate parabolic subgroups in (m) G2 map on non conjugate subgroups in Ḡ2 . Since each ψm preserves the transverse peripheral structure, and (after extraction of subsequence) commute with ψ∞ , it follows that ψ∞ sends the transverse peripheral structures of G1 to that of G2 . Therefore ψ∞ is eligible for being recorded in the list of the first procedure, and thus eventually appears in the sequence of our lists that served to define the ψm . But that is a contradiction, by definition of the ψm .  2.2  Conjugacy of two relatively hyperbolic automorphisms without parabolic splitting  The class of RH-noPS automorphisms, is larger than that of RH-noES. We can treat it as well, but it requires a little care. 33  Recall that if F ⋊φ1 hti splits as a graph of groups, then vertex groups and edge groups are suspension of subgroups of F that are vertex groups and edge groups (respectively) of a graph of group decomposition of F (see [D, Lemma 2.6]). Proposition 2.6. Let X1 , X2 be graph-of-groups decompositions of F ⋊φ1 hti and F ⋊φ2 hti respectively, over cyclic subgroups. Assume that ΦX : X1 → X2 is an isomorphism of the underlying graphs (0) of the decompositions, and that m is an integer, and, for all vertex v ∈ X1 , Lv is a list of isomorphisms from Γ1,v the vertex group of v in X1 to Γ2,ΦX (v) the group of ΦX (v) in X2 , that are all as in (2.4-(1)) (for Gi = Γi,v ) for the transverse peripheral structure consisting of the adjacent edge subgroups, and the fiber and orientation defined by [D, Lemma 2.6]. The following are equivalent. 1. There is an isomorphism Φ : π1 (X1 , τ ) → π1 (X2 , ΦX (τ )) that is fiber and orientation preserving, that induces a graph-of-groups isomorphism, and that induces ΦX at the level of graphs. 2. There is Φ0 = (ΦX , (φv ), (φe ), (γe )) an isomorphism of graphs of groups, such that φv is fiber-and-orientation preserving, and such that the linear diophantine equation (4) for the γi being the images of a fixed basis of F , and of t, by Φ0 , has a solution. 3. There is Φ′0 = (ΦX , (φ′v ), (φe ), (γe′ )) an isomorphism of graphs of groups, such that φ′v ∈ Lv , and such that the linear diophantine equation (4) for the γi being the images of a fixed basis of F , and of t, by Φ′0 , has a solution. Proof. The first point implies the second: by Lemma [D, 2.6], all vertex groups are suspensions of their intersections with F , therefore if Φ preserves the fiber and orientation, so do all φv , and the equation (4) admits an obvious solution (the null solution). The second point implies the first, because, by Proposition 1.2, the system (4) has a solution if and only if there is a modular graph-of-group automorphism of π1 (X2 , ΦX (τ )) that sends Φ0 (F ) exactly on F , and preserves orientation. The third point obviously implies the second one. We need to show that the second point implies the third one. This is a more subtle part. It basically says that if there is an isomorphism of graph of groups whose orbit under the small modular group intersects the 34  set of fiber-preserving isomorphisms, then there is one that is accessible to us, which might not quite be in the same orbit for the action of the small modular group, but that share the property that its orbit intersects the set of fiber-preserving isomorphisms. The key is in the assertions, in Lemma 2.7 that the different products are in F , and this is ensured by the (a priori non immediate) assumption (2.4-(1)). So, we have Φ0 = (ΦX , (φv ), (φe ), (γe )) an isomorphism of graphs of groups, as in the second point. By assumption on Lv , the given isomorphisms φv differ from isomorphisms in Lv by conjugation (in the target), and multiplication by elements of F that are also in the vertex group Gv . By composing with inert twists (vanishing in Out(F ⋊φ2 hti)), we can assume that each φv has same image as an element of Lv in the Dehn Filling reduction Γv  (m)  → ΓφX (v)  (m)  .  Lemma 2.7. There is an isomorphism of graphs of groups Φ′0 = (ΦX , (φ′v ), (φe ), (γe′ )) such that φ′v ∈ Lv has same image as φv in the Dehn Filling reduction (m) (m) Γv → ΓφX (v) , and such that for all edge e, (γe′ )−1 γe ∈ F , and also γe (γe′ )−1 ∈ F , and (γe′ )γe−1 ∈ F . Proof. We thus construct Φ′0 using these elements φ′v ∈ Lv . The morphisms φe are given by the marking of the cyclic edge groups. We need that there exists elements γe′ completing the collection into an isomorphism of graphof-groups, but this is actually the condition that, for v = o(e), φ′v preserve the peripheral structure of the adjacent cyclic edge groups. Note that one can choose the γe′ up to a multiplication on the left by an element of Γo(e) centralising ie (Γe ). Once such elements γe′ are chosen, Φ′0 is defined. Recall that on a Bass generator e ∈ X (1) \ τ , Φ′0 (e) = (γē′ )−1 ΦX (e)(γe′ ). We need to compute how Φ′0 differs from Φ0 on Bass generators. Let us call ce the marked generator of the edge group Γe . To make notations readable, we will still write ce for ie (ce ). One has cΦX (e) = φv (ce )γe by Bass diagram 3. By virtue of φ′v preserving the peripheral structure (for v = o(e)) this is also = (φ′v (ce ))he )γe , for some he ∈ ΓφX (v) which can be chosen up to left multiplication by an element ′ −1 centralising φ′v (ce ). By Bass diagram 3 (for φ′v ) this is = ((cΦX (e) )(γe ) )he )γe . It follows that (γe′ )−1 he γe centralises cΦX (e) , and lies in ΓφX (v) , for v = o(e). Recall that γe′ can be chosen up to a multiplication on the left by an element of Γo(e) centralising ie (Γe ). By a right choice of the collection of 35  γe′ (or, in different words, by the right application of Dehn twists), we may assume that (γe′ )−1 he γe = 1. (m) By virtue of φ′v coinciding with φv in the Dehn filling Γv , the image h̄e of he actually centralises φ′v (ce ). By assumption on m (see 2.4 -(1)), the m centralizers of the transverse peripheral structure in Ḡ2 are the images of the centralizers in G2 , so this makes he = ze fe for ze centralising φ′v (ce ) and fe in F . Thus, we may choose it so that ze = 1, hence he ∈ F . Finally, since F is normal, and (γe′ )−1 he γe = 1, it follows that (γe′ )−1 γe ∈ F . The two other relations are obtained respectively by conjugating by γe−1 (F is normal) and taking the inverse of the later. We can resume the proof of the Proposition (second point implies the third one). Finally, we need to check that the automorphism Φ′0 provided by the Lemma is suitable. We can compare the images of the Bass generator e, namely Φ0 (e) to Φ′0 (e). Lemma 2.8. For all edge e, Φ′0 (e)−1 Φ0 (e) ∈ F , and for all edge e′ , the number n(Φ′0 (e)−1 Φ0 (e), e′ ) that counts the number of occurences of e′ in the normal form of Φ′0 (e)−1 Φ0 (e), minus the number of occurences of e′ (see §1.1), is 0. Proof. Recall that Φ0 (e) = γē−1 φX (e)γe and Φ′0 (e) = (γē′ )−1 φX (e)γe′ . The difference is therefore Φ′0 (e)−1 Φ0 (e) = (γe′ )−1 φX (e)−1 (γē′ γē−1 )φX (e)γe which can also be written Φ′0 (e)−1 Φ0 (e) = (γe′ )−1 (γē′ γē−1 )φX (e) γe and slightly less naturally, Φ′0 (e)−1 Φ0 (e) = (γe (γe′ )−1 (γē′ γē−1 )φX (e) )γe . Since we established that γe (γe′ )−1 ∈ F , γē′ γē−1 ∈ F and F is normal, ′ Φ0 (e)−1 Φ0 (e) ∈ F . Moreover, since all factors in the product (γe (γe′ )−1 (γē′ γē−1 )φX (e) )γe are in vertex groups, except φX (e) and φX (e)−1 (which both appear once). Therefore, for all edge e′ , the quantity n(γē′ γē−1 , e′ ) is 0. We may now finish the argument and show that the system of equations (4) for the γi being the images by Φ′0 of a basis of F , and of t, has a solution. Consider an element f of the given basis of F . Write the normal form in π1 (X1 , τ ) as f = g0 e1 g1 e2 . . . en gn+1 . The normal form of its image by Φ0 in π1 (X2 , ΦX (τ )) is thus Φ0 (f ) = φv0 (g0 ) Φ0 (e0 ) . . . Φ0 (en ) φvn+1 (gn+1 ).  36  By assumption (2.4-(1)), each φvi (gi ) differs from φ′vi by a conjugation (say by ξi ), and the multiplication on the right by an element (say fi,ℓ ) of F , that lies in a vertex group (hence n(fi,ℓ , e′ ) = 0 for all e′ ). We also established in the lemma that Φ′0 (ei )−1 Φ0 (ei ) ∈ F (call it fi,r ), and that n(fi,r , e′ ) = 0 for all e′ ). We thus get Φ0 (f ) = (φ′v0 (g0 ))ξ0 f0,ℓ Φ′0 (e0 )f0,r . . . . . . (φ′vn (gn ))ξn fn,ℓ Φ′0 (en ) fn,r (φ′vn+1 (gn+1 ))ξn+1 fn+1,ℓ . We first observe that for all e, n(Φ0 (f ), e) = n(Φ′0 (f ), e) since all n(fi,ℓ , e) = 0 and all n(fi,r , e) = 0. In H1 (F ⋊φ2 hti) this normal form turns into Φ0 (f ) =  n+1 Y  !  φ′vi (gi )  i=0  where ftot is the image of Of course, Φ′0 (f )  =  Q  i fi,ℓ fi,r  n+1 Y i=0  ×  n Y  !  Φ′0 (ei )  i=0  × (ftot ),  in H1 , hence is in the image of F .  φ′vi (gi )  !  ×  n Y i=0  !  Φ′0 (ei )  .  In the notations of equation (4), δ(Φ′0 (f )) = δ(Φ0 (f )) because δ(ftot ) = 0 as ftot is in F . Moreover, we noticed that for all edge e, n(Φ′0 (f ), e) = n(Φ0 (f ), e). Therefore the two systems of Diophantine equations (4) for the γi being the images of a fixed basis of F by Φ0 and for the γi being the images of a fixed basis of F by Φ′0 , are syntaxically the same system of equations. Tautologically, if one has a solution, the other aslo. For the last (and main) result, we’ll need the theory of JSJ decompositions for relatively hyperbolic groups. The theory initiated by Rips and Sela is developed by Guirardel and Levitt in a very stable and useful formulation. We refer to [GL-10, GL-11], from which we recall the following existence and characteristic result. Proposition 2.9. [GL-10, Thm. 13.1, Coro. 13.2] Let (G, P) be a torsion free relatively freely indecomposable, relatively hyperbolic group. The canonical JSJ splitting of (G, P) is a finite graph-of-groups decomposition 37  of (G, P) with edge groups elementary (cyclic or parabolic), bipartite, such that the groups of a vertex of one color (black) are elementary, and those of the other color (white) are either fundamental groups of surfaces with boundary, the adjacent edge groups being associated to the boundary components, or groups that inherit a relatively hyperbolic structure for which there is no non-trivial elementary splitting in which the adjacent edge groups are conjugated into factors (the later are called rigid). The canonical JSJ splitting is such that any automorphism of (G, P) induces an automorphism of the splitting, and is also such that any other elementary splitting of (G, P) has a common refinement with it. Here, a refinement is an equivariant blow-up of vertices in the Bass-Serre tree. Recall that in the case of a suspension of a finitely generated group, no vertex group can be a surface group (see [D, 2.11]). Moreover, in the case of a suspension of a free group by an automorphism that is RH-noPS, then all black vertex groups are cyclic, non-parabolic, by definition of RH-noPS. Proposition 2.10. Given a finitely generated free group and an automorphism φ of F that is RH-noPS, one can compute the canonical JSJ splitting of F ⋊φ Z. Proof. Let (G, P) be the relatively hyperbolic structure for F ⋊φ Z. The computation of the relative hyperbolicity structure was done in 1.4. We can thus enumerate the non-trivial bipartite peripheral cyclic splitting of (G, P). Assume that we are proposed such a bipartite cyclic splitting of (G, P). We need to decide whether or not this proposed splitting is the JSJ splitting. Recall that vertex groups are suspensions of finitely generated subgroups of F , and we may find a presentation of the semidirect product for each of them, by enumeration. We use a result of Touikan here, specifically, [T, Thm C.] that allows to check whether or not, the white vertex groups are rigid (in the sense of Proposition 2.9). Note that since we assume the absence of parabolic splitting, we do not need to satisfy the assumption of [T] on algorithmic tractabiliy of parabolic subgroups. One can also easily check whether the black vertex groups are cyclic, and edge groups are maximal cyclic in their white adjacent vertex group. If all these conditions are verified for a splitting X, the splitting has, by the previous proposition, a common refinement with the JSJ splitting X0 . However, because of lack of surface groups in X and X0 , for all vertex group Gv in either of them, equipped with the peripheral structure of its adjacent edge groups, all splittings of Gv over cyclic groups in which the peripheral structure is elliptic, are trivial. 38  Thus considering T the Bass-Serre tree of a common refinement of X and X0 , it is apparant that the edges to be collaped to obtain the tree of X and the tree of X0 are exactly those with an end of valence 1, and after them, those with an end of valence 2 with same stabilizer (i.e. the redundant vertices; note that there is a choice, but either choice lead to the same tree). Since the two collapses toward X and X0 can be made by the same choices od edges to collapse, it follows that X and X0 coincide. Proposition 2.11. Let F be a finitely generated free group. There is an (explicit) algorithm that given two automorphisms φ1 , φ2 of F terminates if both are RH-noPS, and indicates whether they are conjugated in Out(F ). Proof. One can compute the JSJ decomposition of both suspensions, by the previous proposition. The situation reduces to the case where an isomorphism of underlying graphs of the JSJ splittings is chosen, and we need to decide whether there is an isomorphism of graph of groups (inducing that isomorphism of underlying graphs) that preserve the fiber, and the orientation. We also choose a maximal subtree τ of the underlying graph X so that all edges outside this subtree correspond to Bass generators in the fundamental group of the graph of group. Let us write X1 , X2 the JSJ splittings of G1 = F ⋊φ1 hti and G2 = F ⋊φ2 hti, and we identify the underlying graphs, according to the choice of isomorphism above (the algorithm has to treat all possible such isomorphisms of graphs in parallel). We write Γv,i for the vertex group of v in Xi . We remark that any elementary vertex group (or edge group) is cyclic, and transveral to the fiber (Lemma [D, 2.7]), hence the orientation of the suspension provides a canonical marking of each edge group. For each nonelementary vertex group, Lemma [D, 2.6] indicates that it is a suspension, and it is equiped with the thus marked cyclic transverse peripheral structure of its adjacent edge groups. Since, by [D, 2.11], it is not a surface nor a free group, by property of the JSJ decomposition, it is RH-noPS relative to the peripheral structure, and it is possible, thanks to Proposition 2.4 to decide whether there is an isomorphism Γv,1 → Γv,2 , preserving fiber, orientation, and the (cyclic, transverse) peripheral structure of its adjacent edge groups, thus marked. If for some vertex there is no such isomorphism, then there cannot be any fiber-and-orientation preserving isomorphism between G1 and G2 , inducing this graph isomorphism (hence φ1 and φ2 are not conjugated, in view of 39  Lemma 1.1). If, on the contrary, for all such vertices, there exists such an isomorphism, then Proposition 2.4 actually provides a list Lv of such isomorphisms, that satisfies (2.4-(1)), for all vertex v ∈ X (0) . Then, for Q any choice (Φv , v ∈ X (0) ) in v Lv , one can extend this collection into an isomorphism of graph-of-groups Φ, by chosing appropriately the images of the Bass generators to be be , e ∈ X \ τ (so that they conjugate the edge group in their origin Q vertex to the edge dgroup in their target vertex). Let us write (Φs , s ∈ v Lv ) the collection thus obtained. Q Using 1.2 we can decide whether, given Φs for some s ∈ v Lv , there is an automorphism of graph-of-groups, in the orbit of Φs under the small modular group of G2 , that is fiber-and-orientation preserving. If there is one, then we may stop and declare, in view of Lemma 1.1 that φ1 and φ2 are conjugated. Assume then that there is none such fiber-and-orientation preserving Q automorphism in the orbits of all Φs , s ∈ L . By Proposition 2.6 v v (“2 =⇒ 3”), there is no isomorphism of graph-of-groups preserving fiber and orientation. We are done.  2.3  A lemma on Dehn fillings  In this paragraph we prove a Lemma that we used above. We refer the reader to the setting of [DGO, §7.]. In particular we will use the parabolic cone-off construction, which is a specific way to cone off horosheres of a system of horoballs of a space associated to a relatively hyperbolic group. Using this specific way allows to get quantitative hyperbolicity estimates, and rotating families, while preserving, almost without distortion, most of what occurs (locally) in a thick part of that space. Lemma 2.12. Let (G, P) be a relatively hyperbolic group, and γ ∈ G, a hyperbolic element. There exists m0 such that for all m > m0 , if h is such that h̄ centralises γ̄ in Ḡ(m) , then, there is z ∈ Km , and h′ centralizing γ such that h = h′ z. The bound on m will be explicit (but we do not need this particular aspect), though probably not optimal. Proof. Consider a hyperbolic space X associated to (G, P), upon which G acts as a geometrically finite group, and for convenience, let us choose it to be a cusped-space as defined by Groves and Manning (see [GM, §3]). Let δ be a hyperbolicity constant for X. 40  After rescaling, we may assume that the hyperbolicity constant is actually less than a specific constant δc furnished by [C, 3.5.2], (that will allow, as we did in [DGO, §7] to satisfy [DGO, 5.38], to ensure quantitatively that the parabolic cone-off construction over a separated system of horoballs is hyperbolic). By assumption γ is hyperbolic in X, so let ρ0 be a quasi-axis, and kγk the translation lenght of γ on this axis. We choose m0 such that Nj,m0 \ {1} does not intersect the ball of Pj of radius 10 sinh(rU ) × 2100δ+kγk , for rU fixed as in [DGO, §5.3], namely rU = 5 × 1012 . We choose L0 such that in a δ-hyperbolic space, all L0 -local geodesic is a quasigeodesic (for some constants). And we choose L1 so that any quasigeodesic with these constants is at distance ≤ L1 from a geodesic with same end points. The constant L3 is set to be ≥ 50 × 16 × 900. Consider H0 the 2-separated invariant system of horoballs of X (associated to P), and in this system, consider the system of horoballs at depth (50δ + 20kγk + L0 + L1 + L3 ), which we call H. This way, ρ0 , which has a fundamental domain for γ of length kγk, and which intersects X \ H0 , does not get (L0 + L1 + L3 )-close to an horoball of H. We then consider the parabolic cone-off C(X, H), as defined in [DGO, §7, Def. 7.2], for this pair, and for a radius of cone rU = 5 × 1012 . By [DGO, Lem. 7.4], this parabolic cone-off is δp -hyperbolic, (for a value of δp estimated to be 16 × 900 in [DGO, §5.3]) and moreover the image of ρ0 is a L0 -local geodesic. By our choices of constants it follows that a quasiaxis ρ of γ in the parabolic cone-off does not approach any of the cones by a distance 50δp . We now work only in the parabolic cone-off. Observe also that, for the chosen m, any (non-trivial) element of Nj,m translate on the corresponding horosphere of H by a distance of at least 10 sinh(rU ) (measured in the graph distance of the horosphere). Therefore, for the chosen m, Km is the group of a very rotating family at the apices of the parabolic cone-off, in the sense of [DGO, §5.1]. Let x0 ∈ ρ. The segment [x0 , γx0 ] is contained in ρ, and thus does not get 50δp close to an apex. Consider the segment [x0 , hx0 ] and for all apex a on it, define the two points a− and a+ on [x0 , a] and [a, hx0 ] (subsegments of [x0 , hx0 ]) at distance 27δp from a (they exist since the cones have much larger radius than 27δp , and x0 is not in a cone). By multiplying h by elements of Km , we may assume that d(a− , a+ ) = d(a− , (Fix(a) ∩ Km )a+ ), for every apex a in the segment [x0 , hx0 ]. By assumption, hγh−1 γ −1 ∈ Km , and we can assume that it is non 41  trivial (otherwise there is nothing to prove). By [DGO, Lemma 5.10 (pointed Greendlinger lemma)], the segment [hγx0 , γhx0 ] contains an apex a0 and a 5δp -shortening pair: a pair of points at distance 27δp from the same apex, such that the image of one by an element fixing the apex and in the rotating group is at distance ≤ 5δp from the other. Hyperbolicity in the pentagon (x0 , hx0 , hγx0 , γhx0 , γx0 ), together with the absence of apices in [x0 , γx0 ], and in its image after translation by h, [hx0 , hγx0 ], shows that at least one segment among [x0 , hx0 ] and [γx0 , γhx0 ] must get at distance δp from a0 and 5δp -follows two arcs of [a0 , γhx0 ] and [a0 , hγx0 ] (both subsegments of [hγx0 , γhx0 ]) for at least 50δp . By properties of rotating families, we see that one of the two segments [x0 , hx0 ], [γx0 , γhx0 ] must contain the apex a0 . Assume that only one of them contains a0 , and let us say that it is [x0 , hx0 ] (if it is the other, the argument is identical). Hyperbolicity forces the 5δp -shortening pair of [hγx0 , γhx0 ] at a0 to be 5δp close to a− and a+ . Therefore some element of Km ∩ Fix(a0 ) takes a+ to a point at distance at most 20δp from a− , thus contradicting the above minimality condition. It follows that both [x0 , hx0 ] and [γx0 , γhx0 ] (which is its image by γ) must contain a0 . But then, the image of a0 by γ is at distance at most kγk from a0 . By separation of apices, it must then be a0 , and γ fixes an apex, contrarily to our assumption.  References [BFH-00] M. Bestvina, M. Feighn, M. Handel, The Tits alternative for Out(Fn). I. Dynamics of exponentially-growing automorphisms. Ann. of Math. (2) 151 (2000), no. 2, 517–623. [BFH-05] The Tits alternative for Out(Fn). II. A Kolchin type theorem. Ann. of Math. (2) 161 (2005), no. 1, 1–59. [B] P. Brinkmann, Hyperbolic automorphisms of free groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 10 (2000), no. 5, 1071–1089. [C] R. Coulon, Asphericity and small cancellation theory for rotation families of groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. 5, (2011), no.4 729–765. [DG-11] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, The isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 21 (2011), no. 2, 223–300. [DG-13] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, Presenting parabolic subgroups, Alg. Geom. Top. 13 (2013) 3203-3222. [DG-15] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, recognizing a relatively hyperbolic group by its Dehn Fillings, arXiv:1506.03233  42  [DGO] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, D. Osin, Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and rotating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces, arXiv:1111.7048. [DGr] F. Dahmani, D. Groves, The isomorphism problem for toral relatively hyperbolic groups. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. No. 107 (2008), 211–290. [D] F. Dahmani, On suspensions, and conjugacy of hyperbolic automorphisms, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. to appear. [FH] M. Feighn, M. Handel, Algorithmic constructions of relative train track maps and CTs, arXiv:1411.6302 [GLu] F. Gautero, M. Lustig, The mapping torus of a free group automorphism is hyperbolic relative to the canonical subgroups of polynomial growth. Preprint 2007 [GM] D. Groves, J. Manning, Dehn filling in relatively hyperbolic groups, Israel J. Math., 168 (2008), 317-429. [GL-10] V. Guirardel, G. Levitt, JSJ decompositions: definitions, existence, uniqueness II. Compatibility and acylindricity. arXiv:1002.4564. [GL-11] V. Guirardel, G. Levitt, Trees of cylinders and canonical splittings. Geom. Topol., 15(2) (2011) 977–1012. [L] G. Levitt, Counting growth types of automorphisms of free groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 19, no.4, 1119-1146 (2009). [Lu-00] M. Lustig. Structure and conjugacy for automorphisms of free groups I. MPI-Bonn preprint series 2000, No. 241; http://www.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/preprints [Lu-01] M. Lustig. Structure and conjugacy for automorphisms of free groups II. MPIBonn preprint series 2001, No. 4; http://www.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/preprints [O-06a] D. Osin Relatively hyperbolic groups, Intrinsic geometry, algebraic properties, and algorithmic problems, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 179 (2006) no. 843. vi+100pp. [O-06b] D. Osin, Elementary subgroups of relatively hyperbolic groups, and bounded generation, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 16 (2006) no.1 99-118. [O-07] D. Osin, Peripheral fillings of relatively hyperbolic groups. Invent. Math. 167 (2007), no. 2, 295–326. [P] P. Papasoglu, An algorithm detecting hyperbolicity. Geometric and computational perspectives on infinite groups (Minneapolis, MN and New Brunswick, NJ, 1994), 193–200, DIMACS Ser. Discrete Math. Theoret. Comput. Sci., 25, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1996. [Se] Z. Sela, The isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups, Ann. Math., 141 (1995), 217–283. [Si] A. Sisto, Contracting elements and random walks, arXiv:1112.2666. [T] N. Touikan, Finding tracks in 2-complexes, arXiv:0906.3902.  François Dahmani, Université Grenoble Alpes, Institut Fourier, F-38000 Grenoble, France. e-mail: francois.dahmani@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr  43

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
