Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_3266

Abstract:
1  Theory and Practice of Logic Programming  arXiv:cs/0312027v1 [cs.PL] 15 Dec 2003  PROGRAMMING PEARL An Open Ended Tree HENK VANDECASTEELE PharmaDM Ambachtenlaan 54D B-3001 Leuven, Belgium Henk.Vandecasteele@PharmaDM.com  GERDA JANSSENS Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Department of Computer Science Celestijnenlaan 200A B-3001 Leuven, Belgium Gerda.Janssens@cs.kuleuven.ac.be  Abstract An open ended list is a well known data structure in Prolog programs. It is frequently used to represent a value changing over time, while this value is referred to from several places in the data structure of the application. A weak point in this technique is that the time complexity is linear in the number of updates to the value represented by the open ended list. In this programming pearl we present a variant of the open ended list, namely an open ended tree, with an update and access time complexity logarithmic in the number of updates to the value.  1 Introduction Many applications in Logic Programming deal with variables of which the content changes over time. In this programming pearl these variables are called the application variables. An example of such an application is a Constraint Logic Programming Finite Domain solver (CLP(FD)) (Dincbas, Van Hentenryck, Simonis, Aggoun, Graf and Berthier. 1988). In such a solver the application variables are the finite domain variables. The solver changes the domains of the finite domain variables and also the set of constraints associated with the finite domain variables. Another example is found in a fix-point process that computes subsequent approximations for an entity before a final value – the fix-point – is reached. It is often the case that several entities depend on each other. The application variables are the entities for which a fix-point has to be computed. The application variables are updated and used in an interleaved way. The number of application variables is not known in advance. The problem is to find a representation for such application variables that are updated and accessed in an interleaved and unpredictable way. Several solutions exist to tackle this problem: • Replacement  2  Henk Vandecasteele, Gerda Janssens In this solution every occurrence of the application variable in the data structure must be replaced on every change of the content of the application variable. For simple applications this might be feasible, but in a complex application as a CLP Finite Domain solver this is not reasonable, since each finite domain variable can occur in numerous constraints and the solver has to traverse all these constraints at each change in the domain of a finite domain variable. • Threading Threading a pair of arguments, containing the current values of the application variables, is usually seen as the most obvious solution. The first argument then contains the incoming state, the current values at the time of the call. The second argument contains the set of values as the resulting state of the call. All occurrences of the application variables in other data structures simply refer to the values in these states (e.g. by some numbering scheme). Although preferable from logical point of view, it can be problematic from efficiency point of view. When dealing with a large number of application variables, the access and update is at least logarithmic in the number of application variables (e.g. when stored in a balanced tree). In the case of a demanding application with many values to be maintained, such as a Finite Domain solver, this extra time complexity is significant. If the application variables are known beforehand, the programmer can thread a corresponding number of pairs through the program and avoid the search for the value. In our examples, the number of application variables is different for each use of the program. • Open ended lists The use of open ended lists avoids dependency on the number of application variables in the application and also avoids replacing each occurrence of them whenever the value changes. The rule is that the last element before the open end is the current value of the application variable. Whenever the same application variable occurs in a data structure of the application, the same open ended list is referred to. Whenever the value of the application variable changes, the end of the list is instantiated to a new list with the new value as first element and with a new open end. In this way all the other occurrences of the same application variable can see the change. When storing an already existing application variable one can use a list that consists only of the last element and the open end. (e.g. [a,b,c,d|Var] can be replaced by [d|Var]). The target applications in this pearl do not often allow this replacement. As every application variable is represented by a separate open ended list, update and access times do not depend on the number of application variables. Every update to an application variable adds one element to the open ended list: the length of the list is equal to the number of updates to the application variable. From the observations that in order to add a value one has to instantiate the tail and that the current value is the last element in the open ended list, we can conclude that the update and access time is linear in the number of updates to the application variable. From data complexity point  Programming pearl  3  of view, open ended lists have a serious disadvantage compared to threading: the technique will keep alive all values that are in the list. This means that the garbage collector will never be able to collect any of the values used in the past. • Assert and retract Assert and retract can be used to store the changing content over time. This method has a time complexity for update and access which is independent of the number of application variables and the number of updates. One may have to deal with a high constant factor in most Prolog systems. Every lookup requires the creation of a new instance of the value. When the values of the application variables contain logic variables, this method will not work because every lookup will return an instance with fresh variables. When large values are used, it may lead to a lot of overhead due to the creation and the garbage collection of the instances. In all other solutions discussed here, no new instances are created when accessing the current value. When dynamic predicates are used, old values will not be restored on backtracking as it is the case for open ended lists or threading. Assigning a new value is now destructive and old values can be removed if the Prolog system has a garbage collector for dynamic code. • Non portable solutions Some Prolog systems provide their own solution based on backtrackable destructive assignment (Holzbauer 1992, Le Houitouze 1990), for example as attributed variables (Swe 2000) and meta variables (Eur 1998). Using these features is probably efficient but unfortunately not portable. The update and access times for these solutions are O(1). Also data complexity is optimal in these solutions: old values that are not kept alive by some choice point can be collected by the heap garbage collector. In this programming pearl we present the open ended tree as an alternative data structure for representing application variables that are updated and accessed in an interleaved and unpredictable way. The open ended tree is an ISO-compatible solution and has an update and access complexity which is logarithmic in the number of updates to the application variable at hand. The data complexity is equivalent to the data complexity of the open ended list solution. In Section 2 we explain how an open ended tree is used to represent an application variable. Section 3 gives the Prolog predicates for accessing and updating the value of an application variable. Section 4 shows some efficiency results and presents some variants that can be used to tune the application at hand.  2 Open ended trees In an open ended tree, the current value of the application variable is found in the rightmost leaf of the tree: it is the last instantiated node that would be encountered when the tree were traversed in a depth-first left-to-right way. The tree is constructed such that the number of steps for finding this rightmost leaf is loga-  4  Henk Vandecasteele, Gerda Janssens 1  _C  2  _B  _D  Fig. 1. An open ended tree with 1 collector node and a tree of depth 1  rithmic in the number of nodes in the tree. This number of nodes is the same as the number of updates. The main issue is the shape of the tree. Since the number of updates is not known in advance and the nodes of the tree can not be rearranged, a balanced tree is out of the question. The solution is to create a sequence of binary trees, where each tree is one level deeper than the previous tree. This sequence of trees could be stored in an open ended list, but for simplicity of the lookup-procedure the binary tree structure is reused. The nodes that are used to build the sequence of trees are called the collector nodes. The right child of a collector node is – if already created – again a collector node. A new collector node can only be created if the left child of the parent has reached depth N in all its branches. The left child of the newly created collector node is restricted to depth N+1. Each node in the open ended tree contains two children and a data field. A child can be a free variable or again a node. Such a free variable can be instantiated later with a node, as is done in open ended lists. The root node is a collector node, whose left child’s depth is limited to 1. An empty open ended tree is represented by a free variable. Example 2.1 Suppose the open ended tree O is used to represent an application variable whose subsequent values are 1, 2, 3, . . ., 10. These values will be added one after another to O. Firstly, “1” is added and O gets bound to tree( A,1, B),  a collector node with free variables as children. The left child becomes a binary tree of depth 1 when “2” is added: tree(tree( C,2, D),1, B).  This open ended tree is shown in Figure 1. Note that collector nodes are put in bold in the text. When adding the third value “3”, a new collector node is created as the right child of the root collector node: tree(tree( C,2, D),1,tree( E,3, F)).  Adding “4”, a tree of depth 2 is started: tree(tree( C,2, D),1, tree(tree( G,4, H),3, F))).  After “5” and “6” have been added, the tree of depth 2 is completed as shown in Figure 2: tree(tree( C,2, D), 1, tree(tree(tree( I,5, J),4,tree( K,6, L)),3, F)) .  Adding all values up to “10” gives the following open ended tree:  5  Programming pearl 1  _C  2  _D  3  _F  6  _L  4  _I  5  _J  _K  Fig. 2. An open ended tree with 2 collector nodes and a tree of depth 1 and depth 2 tree(tree( C,2, D), 1, tree(tree(tree( I,5, J),4,tree( K,6, L)), 3, tree(tree(tree(tree( T,10, U),9, S),8, Q),7, O))) .  The use of a set of trees to reduce the access time to some data structure is not new, e.g. Fibonacci heaps (Fredman, Tarjan 1987). However the shape and the properties of open ended trees are quite different: open ended trees are binary and have a different shape, and no reorganisation of the trees is ever needed to assure logarithmic time complexity for the operations we need. We can prove that the update and access to the data structure are logarithmic PN −1 in the number of updates. A tree of depth N contains maximum i=0 2i = 2N − 1 nodes. Since the collector node contains a value as well, we have 2N values in a tree of depth N and its corresponding collector node. After the tree of depth N has PN been completed, the data structure contains i=1 2i = 2N +1 − 2 elements. After the tree of depth N-1 is completed and the tree of depth N is under construction the data structure contains M nodes where (2N − 2) < M ≤ (2N +1 − 2)  (1)  M is also the number of updates. From (1) we deduce that N = ceil(log2(M +2))−1. Then finding the last tree takes N steps and finding the rightmost leaf in this tree takes at most N steps as well. This results in a time complexity of O(log(M )). The main disadvantage of this approach compared to an open ended list is its space consumption: it uses twice as much memory in most Prolog implementations. An open ended list uses one ./2 term for each element in the list. A ./2 term needs two heap cells, whereas an open ended tree has per element one tree/3 term which takes 4 heap cells. 3 Code for the open ended tree In this section we give the Prolog predicates that define the two operations on an open ended tree that represents an application variable:  6  Henk Vandecasteele, Gerda Janssens • lookup(ApplVar, Value) unifies Value with the current value of the application variable represented by ApplVar. • insert(ApplVar, New) stores New as the (updated) current value of the application variable represented by ApplVar.  Subsequent calls of insert(T, X) and lookup(T, Y) will always unify the two variables X and Y. % lookup(T,V) finds the current value V in the rightmost leaf of the tree T lookup(tree(Left, El, Right), Value):( var(Right) → ( var(Left) → El = Value ; lookup(Left, Value) ) ; lookup(Right, Value) ). % insert(T,V) stores the current value V in a new node in the tree T as the % rightmost leaf insert(Tree, Value):( nonvar(Tree) → insert1(Tree, Value, 1) ; Tree = tree( , Value, ) % the first collector node ). % insert1(T,V,D) first finds the last collector node in T and meanwhile computes % the depth D of the tree in the left branch of T. Next it inserts the value V % in the left branch of the collector node. In case this tree is full, insert1 creates % a new collector node in the right child of the node in variable T. insert1(tree(Left, , Right), Value, Depth):( var(Right) → insert2(Left, Value, Depth, Right) ; Depthplus1 is Depth + 1, insert1(Right, Value, Depthplus1) ). % insert2(T,V,D,R) inserts V in the tree T, unless this would make the depth of T % larger than D. In the latter case a node is created in the variable R. This variable % R is known to be the next subtree to be instantiated, it could be a collector node. insert2(tree(Left, El, Right), Value, Depth, Back):( var(El) → El = Value ; ( Depth == 1 → Back = tree( , Value, ) ; Depthmin1 is Depth - 1, ( var(Right) → insert2(Left, Value, Depthmin1, Right) ; insert2(Right, Value, Depthmin1, Back) ) ) ).  7  Programming pearl # updates  10 100 1000 10000  ilProlog updating lookup list tree list tree 0.07 0.53 4.88 49.86  0.16 0.28 0.39 0.52  0.07 0.51 4.85 48.82  0.08 0.15 0.20 0.27  SICStus updating lookup list tree list tree 0.18 1.50 14.67 147.1  0.32 0.62 0.90 1.29  0.19 1.82 18.11 181.2  0.22 0.41 0.53 0.82  Depth of tree  6 12 18 26  Table 1. Comparison of the execution times. 4 Efficiency results and optimisations 4.1 Measuring efficiency Our benchmarks measure the difference in efficiency between open ended lists and open ended trees, which are both portable solutions that can be used in the same kind of circumstances. Four experiments were done, each starting from a data structure with already several updates. In the first experiment we started with a data structure with already 10 updates; the subsequent experiments had a data structure with already 100, 1000 and 100000 updates. Then, in each of these experiments, the time to update the data structure, and the time to access the current value was measured. Each of the operations (update and access) was repeated 100000 times (In case of update, the update was undone by backtracking to prevent the data structure from growing). Each of the experiments was done on an implementation with open ended lists and open ended trees. The computation was performed on a Pentium III 666 Mhz, running Linux 2.2.20, both with ilProlog(version 0.9.6) (Vandecasteele, Demoen, Janssens 2000) and SICStus(version 3.9.0) (Swe 2000). The times are reported in seconds and do not include the time for setting up the benchmark. From the experiments we can see that with only 10 updates the overhead is larger than the benefit of using open ended trees: the disadvantage is rather small for lookup, but considerable for update. From 100 updates on, the overhead is compensated. Furthermore, the timings for the open ended tree exhibit the expected logarithmic behaviour. The timings for the open ended list show linear behaviour. 4.2 Variants • When using open ended lists, one can always replace the list by some tail of the list, as long as the tail contains at least one element (e.g [1,2,3,4|V] can be replaced by [4|V]). Although this does not change the time complexity of the resulting program, still a considerable speed-up can be realised. The same technique can be used with open ended trees, after a modification of the code above. This modification consists of storing the depth of the tree at each collector node. When this information is available at the collector  8  Henk Vandecasteele, Gerda Janssens #updates  10 100 1000 10000 100000  Starting depth = 1 updating lookup 0.16 0.28 0.39 0.52 0.66  0.08 0.15 0.20 0.27 0.34  Starting depth = 10 updating lookup 0.27 0.32 0.31 0.42 0.57  0.11 0.15 0.12 0.20 0.29  Table 2. Starting the sequence of trees with a larger depth node, the root node can always be replaced by one of the lower collector nodes. Optionally one can choose to put the depth in each node, such that computing depth while inserting can be avoided. • When memory consumption is an issue, all leaves of the tree can be replaced by a smaller term1 , e.g. leaf(value), or even simply the value if it is known to be nonvar. The leaves of an open ended tree are all the nodes that occur at the maximal depth in the trees. In ilProlog a tree/3 term takes 4 heap cells, whereas a leaf/1 term takes only 2. As on average half of the values are leaves and we gain 2 cells per leaf, the gain will be 1 heap cell per value. If the value is stored directly in the leaf, 2 heap cells per value can be gained, and we have almost the same memory consumption as with open ended lists. These observations are confirmed by our experiments. • When known in advance that application variables will have many updates, one can start with larger trees in the sequence (e.g depth 10). This speeds up the updates/lookups as can be seen in Table 2. The timings are obtained with ilProlog.  References Blockeel, H., Demoen, B., Dehaspe, L., Janssens, G., Ramon, J. and Vandecasteele, H. (2000). Executing query packs in ILP., Proceedings of the 10th International Conference in Inductive Logic Programming, volume 1866 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, London, UK, pp. 60–77, Springer. Dincbas, M., Van Hentenryck, P., Simonis, H., Aggoun, A., Graf, T. and Berthier., F. (1988). The constraint logic programming language CHIP., Proceedings of the International Conference on Fifth Generation Computer Systems, Tokyo, pp. 693–702. Eur (1998). ECLiPSe 3.7 User Manual. Fredman, M. L. and Tarjan, R. E. (July 1987). Fibonacci Heaps and Their Uses in Improved Network Optimization Algorithms Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 596–615. Holzbauer, C. (1992). Meta-structures vs. Attributed Variables in the Context of Extensible Unification. Proceedings of the Fourth International Symposium on Programming 1  Thanks to a referee mentioning this  Programming pearl  9  Language Implementation and Logic Programming, volume 631 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Leuven, Belgium, pp. 260–268, Springer. Le Houitouze, S. (1990). A New Data Structure for Implementing Extensions to Prolog. Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Programming Language Implementation and Logic Programming, volume 456 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Linköping, Sweden, pp. 136–150, Springer. Swe (2000). SICSTUS Prolog 3.8.5 User’s Manual. Vandecasteele, H., Demoen, B. and Janssens, G. (July 2000). Compiling Large Disjunctions, Technical report CW295, http://www.cs.kuleuven.ac.be/publicaties/rapporten/CW2000.html Leuven.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
