Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_3321

Abstract:
Listen, Attend and Spell  arXiv:1508.01211v2 [cs.CL] 20 Aug 2015  William Chan Carnegie Mellon University williamchan@cmu.edu  Navdeep Jaitly, Quoc V. Le, Oriol Vinyals Google Brain {ndjaitly,qvl,vinyals}@google.com  Abstract We present Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS), a neural network that learns to transcribe speech utterances to characters. Unlike traditional DNN-HMM models, this model learns all the components of a speech recognizer jointly. Our system has two components: a listener and a speller. The listener is a pyramidal recurrent network encoder that accepts filter bank spectra as inputs. The speller is an attentionbased recurrent network decoder that emits characters as outputs. The network produces character sequences without making any independence assumptions between the characters. This is the key improvement of LAS over previous end-toend CTC models. On a subset of the Google voice search task, LAS achieves a word error rate (WER) of 14.1% without a dictionary or a language model, and 10.3% with language model rescoring over the top 32 beams. By comparison, the state-of-the-art CLDNN-HMM model achieves a WER of 8.0%.  1  Introduction  Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have led to improvements in various components of speech recognizers. They are commonly used in hybrid DNN-HMM speech recognition systems for acoustic modeling [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. DNNs have also produced significant gains in pronunciation models that map words to phoneme sequences [7, 8]. In language modeling, recurrent models have been shown to improve speech recognition accuracy by rescoring n-best lists [9]. Traditionally these components – acoustic, pronunciation and language models – have all been trained separately, each with a different objective. Recent work in this area attempts to rectify this disjoint training issue by designing models that are trained end-to-end – from speech directly to transcripts [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. Two main approaches for this are Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) [10] and sequence to sequence models with attention [16]. Both of these approaches have limitations that we try to address: CTC assumes that the label outputs are conditionally independent of each other; whereas the sequence to sequence approach has only been applied to phoneme sequences [14, 15], and not trained end-to-end for speech recognition. In this paper we introduce Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS), a neural network that improves upon the previous attempts [12, 14, 15]. The network learns to transcribe an audio sequence signal to a word sequence, one character at a time. Unlike previous approaches, LAS does not make independence assumptions in the label sequence and it does not rely on HMMs. LAS is based on the sequence to sequence learning framework with attention [17, 18, 16, 14, 15]. It consists of an encoder recurrent neural network (RNN), which is named the listener, and a decoder RNN, which is named the speller. The listener is a pyramidal RNN that converts low level speech signals into higher level features. The speller is an RNN that converts these higher level features into output utterances by specifying a probability distribution over sequences of characters using the attention mechanism [16, 14, 15]. The listener and the speller are trained jointly. Key to our approach is the fact that we use a pyramidal RNN model for the listener, which reduces the number of time steps that the attention model has to extract relevant information from. Rare and out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words are handled automatically, since the model outputs the character 1  sequence, one character at a time. Another advantage of modeling characters as outputs is that the network is able to generate multiple spelling variants naturally. For example, for the phrase “triple a” the model produces both “triple a” and “aaa” in the top beams (see section 4.5). A model like CTC may have trouble producing such diverse transcripts for the same utterance because of conditional independence assumptions between frames. In our experiments, we find that these components are necessary for LAS to work well. Without the attention mechanism, the model overfits the training data significantly, in spite of our large training set of three million utterances - it memorizes the training transcripts without paying attention to the acoustics. Without the pyramid structure in the encoder side, our model converges too slowly - even after a month of training, the error rates were significantly higher than the errors we report here. Both of these problems arise because the acoustic signals can have hundreds to thousands of frames which makes it difficult to train the RNNs. Finally, to reduce the overfitting of the speller to the training transcripts, we use a sampling trick during training [19]. With these improvements, LAS achieves 14.1% WER on a subset of the Google voice search task, without a dictionary or a language model. When combined with language model rescoring, LAS achieves 10.3% WER. By comparison, the Google state-of-the-art CLDNN-HMM system achieves 8.0% WER on the same data set [20].  2  Related Work  Even though deep networks have been successfully used in many applications, until recently, they have mainly been used in classification: mapping a fixed-length vector to an output category [21]. For structured problems, such as mapping one variable-length sequence to another variable-length sequence, neural networks have to be combined with other sequential models such as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [22] and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) [23]. A drawback of this combining approach is that the resulting models cannot be easily trained end-to-end and they make simplistic assumptions about the probability distribution of the data. Sequence to sequence learning is a framework that attempts to address the problem of learning variable-length input and output sequences [17]. It uses an encoder RNN to map the sequential variable-length input into a fixed-length vector. A decoder RNN then uses this vector to produce the variable-length output sequence, one token at a time. During training, the model feeds the groundtruth labels as inputs to the decoder. During inference, the model performs a beam search to generate suitable candidates for next step predictions. Sequence to sequence models can be improved significantly by the use of an attention mechanism that provides the decoder RNN more information when it produces the output tokens [16]. At each output step, the last hidden state of the decoder RNN is used to generate an attention vector over the input sequence of the encoder. The attention vector is used to propagate information from the encoder to the decoder at every time step, instead of just once, as with the original sequence to sequence model [17]. This attention vector can be thought of as skip connections that allow the information and the gradients to flow more effectively in an RNN. The sequence to sequence framework has been used extensively for many applications: machine translation [24, 25], image captioning [26, 27], parsing [28] and conversational modeling [29]. The generality of this framework suggests that speech recognition can also be a direct application [14, 15].  3  Model  In this section, we will formally describe LAS which accepts acoustic features as inputs and emits English characters as outputs. Let x = (x1 , . . . , xT ) be our input sequence of filter bank spectra features, and let y = (hsosi, y1 , . . . , yS , heosi), yi ∈ {a, b, c, · · · , z, 0, · · · , 9, hspacei, hcommai, hperiodi, hapostrophei, hunki}, be the output sequence of characters. Here hsosi and heosi are the special start-of-sentence token, and end-ofsentence tokens, respectively. 2  We want to model each character output yi as a conditional distribution over the previous characters y<i and the input signal x using the chain rule: Y P (y|x) = P (yi |x, y<i ) (1) i  Our Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS) model consists of two sub-modules: the listener and the speller. The listener is an acoustic model encoder, whose key operation is Listen. The speller is an attentionbased character decoder, whose key operation is AttendAndSpell. The Listen function transforms the original signal x into a high level representation h = (h1 , . . . , hU ) with U ≤ T , while the AttendAndSpell function consumes h and produces a probability distribution over character sequences: h = Listen(x) P (y|x) = AttendAndSpell(h, y)  (2) (3)  Figure 1 visualizes LAS with these two components. We provide more details of these components in the following sections.  Speller y2  y3  y4  c1  c2  h  h  s1  heosi  Grapheme characters yi are modelled by the CharacterDistribution  AttentionContext creates context vector ci from h and si h  s2  y2  hsosi  yS−1  y3  h = (h1 , . . . , hU )  Long input sequence x is encoded with the pyramidal BLSTM Listen into shorter sequence h  Listener h1  x1  x2  h2  x3  x4  x5  x6  hU  x7  x8  xT  Figure 1: Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS) model: the listener is a pyramidal BLSTM encoding our input sequence x into high level features h, the speller is an attention-based decoder generating the y characters from h.  3  3.1  Listen  The Listen operation uses a Bidirectional Long Short Term Memory RNN (BLSTM) [30, 31, 12] with a pyramid structure. This modification is required to reduce the length U of h, from T , the length of the input x, because the input speech signals can be hundreds to thousands of frames long. A direct application of BLSTM for the operation Listen converged slowly and produced results inferior to those reported here, even after a month of training time. This is presumably because the operation AttendAndSpell has a hard time extracting the relevant information from a large number of input time steps. We circumvent this problem by using a pyramid BLSTM (pBLSTM) similar to the Clockwork RNN [33]. In each successive stacked pBLSTM layer, we reduce the time resolution by a factor of 2. In a typical deep BTLM architecture, the output at the i-th time step, from the j-th layer is computed as follows: hji = BLSTM(hji−1 , hij−1 )  (4)  In the pBLSTM model, we concatenate the outputs at consecutive steps of each layer before feeding it to the next layer, i.e.: h i j−1 hji = pBLSTM(hji−1 , hj−1 , h 2i 2i+1 )  (5)  In our model, we stack 3 pBLSTMs on top of the bottom BLSTM layer to reduce the time resolution 23 = 8 times. This allows the attention model (see next section) to extract the relevant information from a smaller number of times steps. In addition to reducing the resolution, the deep architecture allows the model to learn nonlinear feature representations of the data. See Figure 1 for a visualization of the pBLSTM. The pyramid structure also reduces the computational complexity. In the next section we show that the attention mechanism over U features has a computational complexity of O(U S). Thus, reducing U speeds up learning and inference significantly. 3.2  Attend and Spell  We now describe the AttendAndSpell function. The function is computed using an attention-based LSTM transducer [16, 15]. At every output step, the transducer produces a probability distribution over the next character conditioned on all the characters seen previously. The distribution for yi is a function of the decoder state si and context ci . The decoder state si is a function of the previous state si−1 , the previously emitted character yi−1 and context ci−1 . The context vector ci is produced by an attention mechanism. Specifically, ci = AttentionContext(si , h) si = RNN(si−1 , yi−1 , ci−1 ) P (yi |x, y<i ) = CharacterDistribution(si , ci )  (6) (7) (8)  where CharacterDistribution is an MLP with softmax outputs over characters, and RNN is a 2 layer LSTM. At each time step, i, the attention mechanism, AttentionContext generates a context vector, ci encapsulating the information in the acoustic signal needed to generate the next character. The attention model is content based - the contents of the decoder state si are matched to the contents of hu representing time step u of h, to generate an attention vector αi . αi is used to linearly blend vectors hu to create ci . Specifically, at each decoder timestep i, the AttentionContext function computes the scalar energy ei,u for each time step u, using vector hu ∈ h and si . The scalar energy ei,u is converted into a probability distribution over times steps (or attention) αi using a softmax function. This is used to 4  create the context vector ci by linearly blending the listener features, hu , at different time steps: ei,u = hφ(si ), ψ(hu )i exp(ei,u ) αi,u = P exp(ei,u ) Xu ci = αi,u hu  (9) (10) (11)  u  where φ and ψ are MLP networks. On convergence, the αi distribution is typically very sharp, and focused on only a few frames of h; ci can be seen as a continuous bag of weighted features of h. Figure 1 shows LAS architecture. 3.3  Learning  The Listen and AttendAndSpell functions can be trained jointly for end-to-end speech recognition. The sequence to sequence methods condition the next step prediction on the previous characters [17, 16] and maximizes the log probability: X ∗ log P (yi |x, y<i ; θ) (12) max θ  where  ∗ y<i  i  is the groundtruth of the previous characters.  However during inference, the groundtruth is missing and the predictions can suffer because the model was not trained to be resilient to feeding in bad predictions at some time steps. To ameliorate this effect, we use a trick that was proposed in [19]. During training, instead of always feeding in the ground truth transcript for next step prediction, we sometimes sample from our previous character distribution and use that as the inputs in the next step predictions: ỹi ∼ CharacterDistribution(si , ci ) X log P (yi |x, ỹ<i ; θ) max θ  (13) (14)  i  where ỹi−1 is the character chosen from the ground truth, or sampled from the model with a certain sampling rate. Unlike [19], we do not use a schedule and simply use a constant sampling rate of 10% right from the start of training. As the system is a very deep network it may appear that some type of pretraining would be required. However, in our experiments, we found no need for pretraining. In particular, we attempted to pretrain the Listen function with context independent or context dependent phonemes generated from a conventional GMM-HMM system. A softmax network was attached to the output units hu ∈ h of the listener and used to make multi-frame phoneme state predictions [34] but led to no improvements. We also attempted to use the phonemes as a joint objective target [35], but found no improvements. 3.4  Decoding and Rescoring  During inference we want to find the most likely character sequence given the input acoustics: ŷ = arg max log P (y|x) y  (15)  Decoding is performed with a simple left-to-right beam search algorithm similar to [17]. We maintain a set of β partial hypotheses, starting with the start-of-sentence hsosi token. At each timestep, each partial hypothesis in the beam is expanded with every possible character and only the β most likely beams are kept. When the heosi token is encountered, it is removed from the beam and added to the set of complete hypothesis. A dictionary can optionally be added to constrain the search space to valid words, however we found that this was not necessary since the model learns to spell real words almost all the time. We have vast quantities of text data [36], compared to the amount of transcribed speech utterances. We can use language models trained on text corpora alone similar to conventional speech systems 5  [37]. To do so we can rescore our beams with the language model. We find that our model has a small bias for shorter utterances so we normalize our probabilities by the number of characters |y|c in the hypothesis and combine it with a language model probability PLM (y): log P (y|x) s(y|x) = + λ log PLM (y) (16) |y|c where λ is our language model weight and can be determined by a held-out validation set.  4  Experiments  We used a dataset approximately three million Google voice search utterances (representing 2000 hours of data) for our experiments. Approximately 10 hours of utterances were randomly selected as a held-out validation set. Data augmentation was performed using a room simulator, adding different types of noise and reverberations; the noise sources were obtained from YouTube and environmental recordings of daily events [20]. This increased the amount of audio data by 20 times. 40-dimensional log-mel filter bank features were computed every 10ms and used as the acoustic inputs to the listener. A separate set of 22K utterances representing approximately 16 hours of data were used as the test data. A noisy test data set was also created using the same corruption strategy that was applied to the training data. All training sets are anonymized and hand-transcribed, and are representative of Googles speech traffic. The text was normalized by converting all characters to lower case English alphanumerics (including digits). The punctuations: space, comma, period and apostrophe were kept, while all other tokens were converted to the unknown hunki token. As mentioned earlier, all utterances were padded with the start-of-sentence hsosi and the end-of-sentence heosi tokens. The state-of-the-art model on this dataset is a CLDNN-HMM system that was described in [20]. The CLDNN system achieves a WER of 8.0% on the clean test set and 8.9% on the noisy test set. However, we note that the CLDNN uses unidirectional CLDNNs and would certainly benefit even further from the use of a bidirectional CLDNN architecture. For the Listen function we used 3 layers of 512 pBLSTM nodes (i.e., 256 nodes per direction) on top of a BLSTM that operates on the input. This reduced the time resolution by 8 = 23 times. The Spell function used a two layer LSTM with 512 nodes each. The weights were initialized with a uniform distribution U(−0.1, 0.1). Asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent (ASGD) was used for training our model [38]. A learning rate of 0.2 was used with a geometric decay of 0.98 per 3M utterances (i.e., 1/20-th of an epoch). We used the DistBelief framework [38] with 32 replicas, each with a minibatch of 32 utterances. In order to further speed up training, the sequences were grouped into buckets based on their frame length [17]. The model was trained using groundtruth previous characters until results on the validation set stopped improving. This took approximately two weeks. The model was decoded using beam width β = 32 and achieved 16.2% WER on the clean test set and 19.0% WER on the noisy test set without any dictionary or language model. We found that constraining the beam search with a dictionary had no impact on the WER. Rescoring the top 32 beams with the same n-gram language model that was used by the CLDNN system using a language model weight of λ = 0.008 improved the results for the clean and noisy test sets to 12.6% and 14.7% respectively. Note that for convenience, we did not decode with a language model, but rather only rescored the top 32 beams. It is possible that further gains could have been achieved by using the language model during decoding. As mentioned in Section 3.3, there is a mismatch between training and testing. During training the model is conditioned on the correct previous characters but during testing mistakes made by the model corrupt future predictions. We trained another model by sampling from our previous character distribution with a probability of 10% (we did not use a schedule as described in [19]). This improved our results on the clean and noisy test sets to 14.1% and 16.5% WER respectively when no language model rescoring was used. With language model rescoring, we achevied 10.3% and 12.0% WER on the clean and noisy test sets, respectively. Table 1 summarizes these results. On the clean test set, this model is within 2.5% absolute WER of the state-of-the-art CLDNN-HMM system, while on the noisy set it is less than 3.0% absolute WER worse. We suspect that convolu6  Table 1: WER comparison on the clean and noisy Google voice search task. The CLDNN-HMM system is the state-of-the-art system, the Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS) models are decoded with a beam size of 32. Language Model (LM) rescoring was applied to our beams, and a sampling trick was applied to bridge the gap between training and inference.  Model CLDNN-HMM [20] LAS LAS + LM Rescoring LAS + Sampling LAS + Sampling + LM Rescoring  Clean WER 8.0 16.2 12.6 14.1 10.3  Noisy WER 8.9 19.0 14.7 16.5 12.0  tional filters could lead to improved results, as they have been reported to improve performance by 5% relative WER on clean speech and 7% relative on noisy speech compared to non-convolutional architectures [20]. 4.1  Attention Visualization  Figure 2: Alignments between character outputs and audio signal produced by the Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS) model for the utterance “how much would a woodchuck chuck”. The content based attention mechanism was able to identify the start position in the audio sequence for the first character correctly. The alignment produced is generally monotonic without a need for any location based priors.  The content-based attention mechanism creates an explicit alignment between the characters and audio signal. We can visualize the attention mechanism by recording the attention distribution on the acoustic sequence at every character output timestep. Figure 2 visualizes the attention alignment between the characters and the filterbanks for the utterance “how much would a woodchuck chuck”. For this particular utterance, the model learnt a monotonic distribution without any location priors. The words “woodchuck” and “chuck” have acoustic similarities, the attention mechanism was slightly confused when emitting “woodchuck” with a dilution in the distribution. The attention model was also able to identify the start and end of the utterance properly. 7  In the following sections, we report results of control experiments that were conducted to understand the effects of beam widths, utterance lengths and word frequency on the WER of our model. 4.2  Effects of Beam Width  We investigate the correlation between the performance of the model and the width of beam search, with and without the language model rescoring. Figure 3 shows the effect of the decode beam width, β, on the WER for the clean test set. We see consistent WER improvements by increasing the beam width up to 16, after which we observe no significant benefits. At a beam width of 32, the WER is 14.1% and 10.3% after language model rescoring. Rescoring the top 32 beams with an oracle produces a WER of 4.3% on the clean test set and 5.5% on the noisy test set.  Beam Width vs. WER  20  WER WER LM WER Oracle  WER  15 10 5 0  12 4  8  16 Beam Width  32  Figure 3: The effect of the decode beam width on WER for the clean Google voice search task. The reported WERs are without a dictionary or language model, with language model rescoring and the oracle WER for different beam widths. The figure shows that good results can be obtained even with a relatively small beam size.  4.3  Effects of Utterance Length  We measure the performance of our model as a function of the number of words in the utterance. We expect the model to do poorly on longer utterances due to limited number of long training utterances in our distribution. Hence it is not surprising that longer utterances have a larger error rate. The deletions dominate the error for long utterances, suggesting we may be missing out on words. It is surprising that short utterances (e.g., 2 words or less) perform quite poorly. Here, the substitutions and insertions are the main sources of errors, suggesting the model may split words apart. Figure 4 also suggests that our model struggles to generalize to long utterances when trained on a distribution of shorter utterances. It is possible location-based priors may help in these situations as reported by [15]. 4.4  Word Frequency  We study the performance of our model on rare words. We use the recall metric to indicate whether a word appears in the utterance regardless of position (higher is better). Figure 5 reports the recall of each word in the test distribution as a function of the word frequency in the training distribution. Rare words have higher variance and lower recall while more frequent words typically have higher 8  Utterance Length vs. Error 90 80 70 Percentage  60  Data Distribution Insertion Deletion Substitution WER WER LM WER Oracle  50 40 30 20 10 0  5  10 15 20 Number of Words in Utterance  25+  Figure 4: The correlation between error rates (insertion, deletion, substitution and WER) and the number of words in an utterance. The WER is reported without a dictionary or language model, with language model rescoring and the oracle WER for the clean Google voice search task. The data distribution with respect to the number of words in an utterance is overlaid in the figure. LAS performs poorly with short utterances despite an abundance of data. LAS also fails to generalize well on longer utterances when trained on a distribution of shorter utterances. Insertions and substitutions are the main sources of errors for short utterances, while deletions dominate the error for long utterances.  recall. The word “and” occurs 85k times in the training set, however it has a recall of only 80% even after language model rescoring. The word “and” is frequently mis-transcribed as “in” (which has 95% recall). This suggests improvements are needed in the language model. By contrast, the word “walkerville” occurs just once in the training set but it has a recall of 100%. This suggests that the recall for a word depends both on its frequency in the training set and its acoustic uniqueness. 4.5  Interesting Decoding Examples  In this section, we show the outputs of the model on several utterances to demonstrate the capabilities of LAS. All the results in this section are decoded without a dictionary or a language model. During our experiments, we observed that LAS can learn multiple spelling variants given the same acoustics. Table 2 shows top beams for the utterance that includes “triple a”. As can be seen, the model produces both “triple a” and “aaa” within the top four beams. The decoder is able to generate such varied parses, because the next step prediction model makes no assumptions on the probability distribution by using the chain rule decomposition. It would be difficult to produce such differing transcripts using CTC due to the conditional independence assumptions, where p(yi |x) is conditionally independent of p(yi+1 |x). Conventional DNN-HMM systems would require both spellings to be in the pronunciation dictionary to generate both spelling permutations. It can also be seen that the model produced “xxx” even though acoustically “x” is very different from “a” - this is presumably because the language model overpowers the acoustic signal in this case. In the training corpus “xxx” is a very common phrase and we suspect the language model 9  Word Recall Percentage  Word Frequency vs. Recall 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 100  101  102  104 103 Word Frequency  105  106  Figure 5: The correlation between word frequency in the training distribution and recall in the test distribution. In general, rare words report worse recall compared to more frequent words.  Table 2: Example 1: “triple a” vs. “aaa” spelling variants. Beam Truth 1 2 3 4  Text call aaa roadside assistance call aaa roadside assistance call triple a roadside assistance call trip way roadside assistance call xxx roadside assistance  Log Probability -0.5740 -1.5399 -3.5012 -4.4375  WER 0.00 50.00 50.00 25.00  implicit in the speller learns to associate “triple” with “xxx”. We note that “triple a” occurs 4 times in the training distribution and “aaa” (when pronounced “triple a” rather than “a”-“a”-“a”) occurs only once in the training distribution. We are also surprised that the model is capable of handling utterances with repeated words despite the fact that it uses content-based attention. Table 3 shows an example of an utterance with a repeated word. Since LAS implements content-based attention, it is expected it to “lose its attention” during the decoding steps and produce a word more or less times than the number of times the word was spoken. As can be seen from this example, even though “seven” is repeated three times, the model successfully outputs “seven” three times. This hints that location-based priors (e.g., location based attention or location based regularization) may not be needed for repeated contents. Table 3: Example 2: Repeated “seven”s. Beam Truth 1 2 3 4  Text eight nine four minus seven seven seven eight nine four minus seven seven seven eight nine four nine seven seven seven eight nine four minus seven seventy seven eight nine four nine s seven seven seven  10  Log Probability -0.2145 -1.9071 -4.7316 -5.1252  WER 0.00 14.29 14.29 28.57  5  Conclusions  We have presented Listen, Attend and Spell (LAS), an attention-based neural network that can directly transcribe acoustic signals to characters. LAS is based on the sequence to sequence framework with a pyramid structure in the encoder that reduces the number of timesteps that the decoder has to attend to. LAS is trained end-to-end and has two main components. The first component, the listener, is a pyramidal acoustic RNN encoder that transforms the input sequence into a high level feature representation. The second component, the speller, is an RNN decoder that attends to the high level features and spells out the transcript one character at a time. Our system does not use the concepts of phonemes, nor does it rely on pronunciation dictionaries or HMMs. We bypass the conditional independence assumptions of CTC, and show how we can learn an implicit language model that can generate multiple spelling variants given the same acoustics. To further improve the results, we used samples from the softmax classifier in the decoder as inputs to the next step prediction during training. Finally, we showed how a language model trained on additional text can be used to rerank our top hypotheses.  Acknowledgements We thank Tara Sainath, Babak Damavandi for helping us with the data, language models and for helpful comments. We also thank Andrew Dai, Ashish Agarwal, Samy Bengio, Eugene Brevdo, Greg Corrado, Andrew Dai, Jeff Dean, Rajat Monga, Christopher Olah, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, Ilya Sutskever, Vincent Vanhoucke and the Google Brain team for helpful comments, suggestions and technical assistance.  References [1] Nathaniel Morgan and Herve Bourlard. Continuous Speech Recognition using Multilayer Perceptrons with Hidden Markov Models. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 1990. [2] Abdel-rahman Mohamed, George E. Dahl, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Deep belief networks for phone recognition. In Neural Information Processing Systems: Workshop on Deep Learning for Speech Recognition and Related Applications, 2009. [3] George E. Dahl, Dong Yu, Li Deng, and Alex Acero. Large vocabulary continuous speech recognition with context-dependent dbn-hmms. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2011. [4] Abdel-rahman Mohamed, George E. Dahl, and Geoffrey Hinton. Acoustic modeling using deep belief networks. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 20(1):14–22, 2012. [5] Navdeep Jaitly, Patrick Nguyen, Andrew W. Senior, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Application of Pretrained Deep Neural Networks to Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition. In INTERSPEECH, 2012. [6] Tara Sainath, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Brian Kingsbury, and Bhuvana Ramabhadran. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for LVCSR. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2013. [7] Kanishka Rao, Fuchun Peng, Hasim Sak, and Francoise Beaufays. Grapheme-to-phoneme conversion using long short-term memory recurrent neural networks. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2015. [8] Kaisheng Yao and Geoffrey Zweig. Sequence-to-Sequence Neural Net Models for Graphemeto-Phoneme Conversion. 2015. [9] Tomas Mikolov, Karafiat Martin, Burget Luka, Eernocky Jan, and Khudanpur Sanjeev. Recurrent neural network based language model. In INTERSPEECH, 2010. [10] Alex Graves, Santiago Fernandez, Faustino Gomez, and Jurgen Schmiduber. Connectionist Temporal Classification: Labelling Unsegmented Sequence Data with Recurrent Neural Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2006. 11  [11] Alex Graves. Sequence Transduction with Recurrent Neural Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning: Representation Learning Workshop, 2012. [12] Alex Graves and Navdeep Jaitly. Towards End-to-End Speech Recognition with Recurrent Neural Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014. [13] Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan Prenger, Sanjeev Satheesh, Shubho Sengupta, Adam Coates, and Andrew Ng. Deep Speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition. In http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.5567, 2014. [14] Jan Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. End-to-end Continuous Speech Recognition using Attention-based Recurrent NN: First Results. In Neural Information Processing Systems: Workshop Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop, 2014. [15] Jan Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Dmitriy Serdyuk, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Attention-Based Models for Speech Recognition. In http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.07503, 2015. [16] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015. [17] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc Le. Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014. [18] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwen, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning Phrase Representations using RNN EncoderDecoder for Statistical Machine Translation. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2014. [19] Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. Scheduled Sampling for Sequence Prediction with Recurrent Neural Networks. In http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.03099, 2015. [20] Tara N. Sainath, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Senior, and Hasim Sak. Convolutional, Long ShortTerm Memory, Fully Connected Deep Neural Networks. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2015. [21] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012. [22] Leonard E. Baum and Ted Petrie. Statistical Inference for Probabilistic Functions of Finite State Markov Chains. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 37:1554–1563, 1966. [23] John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira. Conditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2001. [24] Minh-Thang Luong, Ilya Sutskever, Quoc V. Le, Oriol Vinyals, and Wojciech Zaremba. Addressing the Rare Word Problem in Neural Machine Translation. In Association for Computational Linguistics, 2015. [25] Sebastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. On Using Very Large Target Vocabulary for Neural Machine Translation. In Association for Computational Linguistics, 2015. [26] Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and Dumitru Erhan. Show and Tell: A Neural Image Caption Generator. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015. [27] Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho, Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. Show, Attend and Tell: Neural Image Caption Generation with Visual Attention. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015. [28] Oriol Vinyals, Lukasz Kaiser, Terry Koo, Slav Petrov, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Grammar as a foreign language. In http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.7449, 2014. [29] Oriol Vinyals and Quoc V. Le. A Neural Conversational Model. In International Conference on Machine Learning: Deep Learning Workshop, 2015. [30] Sepp Hochreiter and Jurgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780, November 1997. 12  [31] Alex Graves, Navdeep Jaitly, and Abdel-rahman Mohamed. Hybrid Speech Recognition with Bidirectional LSTM. In Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop, 2013. [32] Salah Hihi and Yoshua Bengio. Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Networks for Long-Term Dependencies. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 1996. [33] Jan Koutnik, Klaus Greff, Faustino Gomez, and Jurgen Schmidhuber. A Clockwork RNN. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014. [34] Navdeep Jaitly, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Geoffrey Hinton. Autoregressive product of multiframe predictions can improve the accuracy of hybrid models. In INTERSPEECH, 2014. [35] Hasim Sak, Andrew Senior, Kanishka Rao, and Francoise Beaufays. Fast and Accurate Recurrent Neural Network Acoustic Models for Speech Recognition. In INTERSPEECH, 2015. [36] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2013. [37] Daniel Povey, Arnab Ghoshal, Gilles Boulianne, Lukas Burget, Ondrej Glembek, Nagendra Goel, Mirko Hannenmann, Petr Motlicek, Yanmin Qian, Petr Schwarz, Jan Silovsky, Georg Stemmer, and Karel Vesely. The Kaldi Speech Recognition Toolkit. In Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop, 2011. [38] Jeffrey Dean, Greg S. Corrado, Rajat Monga, Kai Chen, Matthieu Devin, Quoc V. Le, Mark Z. Mao, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Andrew Senior, Paul Tucker, Ke Yang, and Andrew Y. Ng. Large Scale Distributed Deep Networks. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.  13  A  Alignment Examples  In this section, we give additional visualization examples of our model and the attention distribution.  Figure 6: The spelling variants of “aaa” vs “triple a” produces different attention distributions, both spelling variants appear in our top beams. The ground truth is: “aaa emergency roadside service”.  14  Figure 7: The spelling variants of “st” vs “saint” produces different attention distributions, both spelling variants appear in our top beams. The ground truth is: “st mary’s animal clinic”.  15  Figure 8: The phrase “cancel” is repeated three times. Note the parallel diagonals, the content attention mechanism gets slightly confused however the model still emits the correct hypothesis. The ground truth is: “cancel cancel cancel”.  16

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
