Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_3227

Abstract:
arXiv:1804.00489v2 [cs.PL] 3 Apr 2018  Robustly Safe Compilation or, Efficient, Provably Secure Compilation Marco Patrignani1 1 2 CISPA MPI-SWS  Deepak Garg2 Saarbrücken, Germany  {marcopat | dg} @mpi-sws.org  Abstract Secure compilers generate compiled code that withstands many targetlevel attacks such as alteration of control flow, data leaks or memory corruption. Many existing secure compilers are proven to be fully abstract, meaning that they reflect and preserve observational equivalence. While this is a strong property, it comes at the cost of requiring expensive runtime constructs in compiled code that may have no relevance for security, but are needed to accommodate differences between the source language and the target language. As an alternative, this paper explores a different compiler security criterion called robustly safe compilation or RSC . Briefly, this criterion means that the compiled code preserves relevant safety properties of the source program against all adversarial contexts. We show that RSC can be attained easily and results in code that is much more efficient than that generated by fully abstract compilers. We also develop two illustrative RSC -attaining compilers and, through them, develop two different proof techniques for establishing that a compiler attains RSC . To better explain and clarify notions, this paper uses colours. For a better experience, please print or view this paper in colours.  1  Introduction  Secure compilers generate target (low-level) code that can withstand common target-level attacks such as alteration of control ﬂow, improper stack manipulation and unauthorized reading/writing of private memory. To achieve secure compilation, diﬀerent mechanisms have been employed: cryptographic primitives [3, 4, 16, 20], types [7, 8], address space layout randomisation [5, 30], protected module architectures [6, 42, 43] (also know as isolated enclaves [36]), tagged architectures [32], etc. Once designed, secure compilers should be formally shown to be secure, by proving that they conform to some criterion of compiler security. The most widely-used criterion for compiler security is fully abstract compilation (FAC ) [2, 29, 41], which has been shown to preserve many  1  interesting security properties like conﬁdentiality, integrity, invariant deﬁnitions, well-bracketed control ﬂow and local state [30, 42]. Recent work started questioning FAC as a criterion for compiler security. In fact, it was argued that FAC is not well-suited for source languages with undeﬁned behaviour and a strong notion of compartments [32]. Moreover, if used naively, FAC can fail to preserve even simple safety properties [44] (though, fortunately, no existing work falls prey to this naivety). Additionally, because FAC is concerned with preserving all source abstractions, it preserves also those that are security irrelevant. This aﬀects compiled code eﬃciency, as can be seen in existing fully abstract compilers [5, 6, 30, 42, 43]. For example, compiled code must often perform dynamic typechecks on all function arguments, even when they play no security role, or ‘wrap’ objects in proxies in order to hide their allocation addresses. The reason for these limitations can be found in the deﬁnition of FAC . Informally, a compiler attains FAC if it preserves and reﬂects observational equivalence. Most existing work instantiates observational equivalence with contextual equivalence: co-divergence of two programs in any program context (i.e., in any larger program they interact with). This is a very strong property. While it covers many relevant security properties, it also covers a plethora of other non-security ones, and in order to preserve these, ineﬃcient checks must be inserted into compiled code by fully abstract compilers. To overcome these limitations, recent work started investigating alternative criteria in the form of preservation of hyperproperties or classes of hyperproperties, such as hypersafety properties or safety properties [27]. This paper proposes a concrete instance of one of these criteria, namely, Robustly Safe Compilation (RSC ). Informally, a compiler attains RSC if it is correct and if it preserves robust safety of source programs. A program is robustly safe (RS) if it always respects relevant safety properties even in the presence of an adversary actively trying to disrupt or attack it. A compiler attains RSC if it maps any robustly safe source program to a robustly safe compiled program. We choose preservation of the single-trace, unary robust safety as it has clear security implications [14]. Speciﬁcally, robust safety can express data integrity, weak secrecy and even (approximations of) non-interference in the presence of active attacks. A RSC -attaining compiler focuses only on preserving security (as captured by RS) instead of contextual equivalence (typically captured by full abstraction). So, such a compiler can produce code that is more eﬃcient than code compiled with a fully abstract compiler. Additionally as robust safety scales naturally to thread-based concurrency, so does RSC (unlike FAC ) and we demonstrate this. RSC is a very recently proposed criterion for secure compilers. Garg et al. [27] deﬁne RSC abstractly in terms of preservation of program behaviours, but their development is limited to the deﬁnition only. Our goal in this paper is to examine how RSC can be realized and established, and show that it leads to compiled code that is more eﬃcient than what FAC leads to. Speciﬁcally, we present two RSC -attaining compilers in diﬀerent settings. The ﬁrst compiler compiles an untyped source language to an untyped target language with support for ﬁne-grained memory protection via so-called capabilities [51]. Here, we 2  guarantee that if a source program is robustly safe, then so is its compilation. On the other hand, the second compiler starts from a typed source language where the types already enforce robust safety, and compiles to a target language similar to that of the ﬁrst compiler. Here, we guarantee that all compiled target programs are robustly safe. In doing so, we develop two diﬀerent proof techniques for establishing RSC for compilers, and show how types simplify the proof of RSC in the second compiler, relative to the ﬁrst. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After presenting FAC and discussing its advantages and limitations (Section 2), we give the formal deﬁnition of RSC , comparing RSC and FAC for eﬃciency, providing details of the security properties RSC preserves through compilation, and discussing proof techniques for RSC (Section 3). Next, we present our two RSC -attaining compilers (Section 4 and Section 5). We discuss closely related work and further directions for research in Section 6. Finally, we discuss remaining related work (Section 7) and conclude (Section 8). The interested reader can ﬁnd formal details, full formalisations and proofs in the appendix. Conventions We use a blue, sans-serif font for source elements, an orange, bold font for target elements and a black , italic font for elements common to both languages (to avoid repeating similar deﬁnitions twice). Thus, C is a sourcelevel program, C is a target-level program and C is generic notation for either a source-level or a target-level program. Note that we distinguish whole programs or closed programs from partial programs or components. A partial program is a unit of compilation, and must be linked with other partial program(s) to form a whole program which can then be executed. The second partial program mentioned in the previous sentence, which is linked to a partial program of interest, is often called a “context” (this is standard terminology). The word “program” without qualiﬁcation refers to a partial program, not a whole program.  2  Fully Abstract Compilation  This section formalises and discusses FAC . Then it explains why FAC results in ineﬃcient code, often pointlessly (Section 2.1), and why proof techniques for establishing FAC are diﬃcult to apply (Section 2.2). As stated in Section 1, FAC amounts to showing the preservation and reﬂection of observational equivalence, and most existing work instantiates observational equivalence with contextual equivalence (≃ctx ). Contextual equivalence and FAC are deﬁned below. Informally, two components C1 and C2 are contextually equivalent if no context (linked component) C interacting with them can tell them apart, i.e., they are indistinguishable. Contextual equivalence can encode security properties such as conﬁdentiality, integrity, invariant maintenance and non-interference [5, 6, 42, 44]. Definition 1 (Contextual equivalence ≃ctx ). def  C1 ≃ctx C2 = ∀C. C [C1 ] ⇑ ⇐⇒ C [C2 ] ⇑ 3  where C represents a context, i.e., a partial program with a hole that can be ﬁlled by a component by linking the two together. Filling the hole in C with component C is denoted as C [C ], and it results in a whole program that can be run. Also, we indicate divergence, i.e., the execution of an unbounded number of reduction steps, as ⇑. S  In the following, we write J·KT for a compiler from language S to language T. S Informally, a compiler J·KT is fully abstract if it translates (only) contextuallyequivalent source components into contextually-equivalent target ones. Definition 2 (Fully abstract compilation). def  J·KST ∈ FAC = ∀C1 , C2 . C1 ≃ctx C2 ⇐⇒ JC1 KST ≃ctx JC2 KST  The security-relevant part of FAC is the ⇒ implication [22]. This part is security-relevant because the proof thesis concerns target contextual equivalence (≃ctx ). By unfolding the deﬁnition of ≃ctx , the universal quantiﬁcation over all possible target contexts C captures malicious attackers. In fact, there are contexts C that can interact with compiled code in ways that may not be possible in the source. A compiler that attains FAC towards untyped target languages often inserts checks in compiled code that detect these interactions and respond to them securely [44], often by halting execution [5, 6, 22, 30, 32, 33, 42, 43].  2.1  FAC and Inefficient Compiled Code  We introduce a running example to illustrate various ways in which FAC forces ineﬃciencies in compiled code. Consider a password manager written in an object-oriented source language that is being compiled to an assembly-like language. We elide most code details and focus only on the relevant aspects. 1  private db: Database;  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  public testPwd( user: Char[8], pwd: BitString): Bool{ if( db.contains( user )){ return db.get( user ).getPassword() == pwd; } } ... private class Database{ ... }  The source program exports the function testPwd to check whether a user stored password matches a given password pwd. The stored password is in a local database, which is represented by a piece of local state in the variable db. The details of db are not important here, but the database is marked private, so it is not directly accessible to the context of this program in the source language. user’s  Example 1 (Extensive checks). A fully-abstract compiler for the program above must generate code that checks that the arguments passed to testPwd by the context are of the right type [6, 26, 32, 42, 43]. More precisely, a fully abstract compiler will generate code similar to the following for testPwd (we assume that arrays are passed as pointers into the heap). 4  1 2 3 4 5 6  label testpwd for i = 0; i< 8; i++ add r0 i load the memory word stored at address r0 into r1 test that r1 is a valid char encoding ...  Basically, this code dynamically checks that the ﬁrst argument is a character array. Such a check can be very ineﬃcient. The problem here is that FAC forces these checks on all arguments, even those that have no security relevance.  Example 2 (Component size in memory). Let us now consider two diﬀerent ways to implement the Database class: as a List and as a RedBlackTree . As the class is private , its internal behaviour and representation of the database is invisible to the outside. Let Clist be the program with the List implementation and Ctree be the program with the RedBlackTree implementation; in the source language, these are equivalent. However, a subtlety arises when considering the assembly-level, compiled counterparts of Clist and Ctree : the code of a RedBlackTree implementation consumes much more memory than the code of a List implementation. Thus, a target-level context can distinguish Clist from Ctree by just inspecting the sizes of the code segments. So, in order for J·KST to be fully abstract, it must produce code of a ﬁxed size [6, 42, 43]. This wastes memory and makes it impossible to compile some components. An alternative would be to spread the components in an overly-large memory at random places (i.e., use ASLR) so that distinguishing based on size has negligible chance of success [5, 30]. However, ASLR is now known to be broken [10, 31]. Again, we see that FAC introduces an ineﬃciency in compiled code (pointless memory consumption) even though this has no security implication here.   Example 3 (Wrappers for heap resources). Assume that the Database class is implemented as a List. Shown below are two implementations of the newList method inside List which we call Cone and Ctwo . The only diﬀerence between Cone and Ctwo is that Ctwo allocates two lists internally; one of these (shadow ) is used for internal purposes only. 1 2 3 4  1 2 3 4 5 6  public newList(): List{ ell = new List(); return ell; } public newList(): List{ shadow = new List(); ell = new List(); ... return ell; }  Again, Cone and Ctwo are equivalent in the source. To get FAC , the pointers returned by newList in the two implementations must be the same, but this is  5  very diﬃcult to ensure since the second implementation does more allocations. A simple solution to this problem is to wrap ell in a proxy object and return the proxy [6, 37, 42, 43]. Compiled code needs to maintain a lookup table mapping the proxy to the original object. Proxies must have allocation-independent addresses. While proxies work, they are ineﬃcient due to the need to look up the table every time a list is accessed. The overhead becomes more prominent when the proxied object is of a primitive type that could be accessed directly via low-level reads and writes much more eﬃciently (e.g., if the object is a boolean). Another way to regain FAC is to weaken the source language, introducing an operation to distinguish object identities in the source [41]. However, this is a widely discouraged praxis, as it changes the source language from what it really is and the implication of such a change may be diﬃcult to fathom for programmers and veriﬁers.  Example 4 (Strict termination vs divergence). Consider a source language that is strictly-terminating while a target language that is not. Below is an extension of the password manager to allow database encryption via an externally-deﬁned function. As the database is not directly accessible from external code, the two implementations below Cenc (which does the encryption) and Cskip which skips the encryption are equivalent in the source. 1 2 3 4  1 2 3  public encryptDB( func : Database func( this.db ); return; }  →Bitstring) : void {  public encryptDB( func : Database return; }  →Bitstring) : void {  If we compile Cenc and Cskip to an assembly language, the compiled counterparts cannot be equivalent, since the target-level context can detect which function is compiled by passing a func that diverges. Calling the compilation of Cenc with such a func will cause divergence, while calling the compilation of Cskip will not cause divergence. This case presents a situation where FAC is outright impossible. The only way to get FAC is to make the source language artiﬁcially non-terminating [22]. (See [23] for more details of this particular problem.)   Remark It is worth noting that many of the ineﬃciencies above could be resolved by just replacing contextual equivalence with a diﬀerent equivalence in the statement of FAC . However, it is not known how to do this generally for arbitrary sources of ineﬃciency and, further, it is unclear what the security consequences of such instantiations of FAC would be. On the other hand, RSC is uniform and it does address all these ineﬃciencies. An issue that can normally not be added just by tweaking equivalences is side channels, as they are by deﬁnition not expressible in the language. Both FAC 6  and RSC do not deal with side channels, incorporating side channel defences in secure compilers is future work.  2.2  Proving FAC  Most papers that deﬁne fully-abstract compilers also prove that they attain FAC , as a means to ensure that the compiler is secure. When proving that a compiler is fully abstract, reasoning about target contexts C is key: the behaviour of all target contexts must be shown to be expressible in the source too. If this is possible, then a target-level attacker does not intuitively have any power that no source context has. This proof strategy is often called back translation, and it is a part of all common proof techniques (bisimulations, logical relations, trace semantics, etc.) to establish full abstraction [22, 26, 32, 39, 42]. Let us consider the hard part of FAC , the ⇒ implication. The statement S  S  C1 ≃ctx C2 ⇒ JC1 KT ≃ctx JC2 KT  can be stated in the contrapositive as S  S  JC1 KT 6≃ctx JC2 KT ⇒ C1 6≃ctx C2 .  By unfolding the deﬁnition of 6≃ctx we see that, given a target context C that S S distinguishes JC1 KT from JC2 KT , it is necessary to show that there exists a source context C that distinguishes C1 from C2 . That source context C must be built (back-translated) starting from the already given target context C. Example 4 shows the limitations of FAC when it comes to back-translation because it is not possible to translate an arbitrary target context C, which could possibly be divergent, to a source context C, which must be terminating. This is not the only possible instance where back-translation will not work. The existence of any major diﬀerences between the source and target languages can also cause the back-translation technique (and thus FAC ) to fail or become very diﬃcult to use. For example, if the source language does not have a heap but the target language does, then too the back translation will be impossible or very diﬃcult to deﬁne. Having described how FAC can force ineﬃciency into compiled code (sometimes pointlessly from the perspective of security), and how proof techniques for FAC can be diﬃcult, we now present RSC , which does not force similar ineﬃciency into compiled code and which can be easier to establish.  3  Robustly Safe Compilation  This section presents an overview of RSC . First, it discusses robust safety (RS ) as a language (not a compiler) property (Section 3.1). Then, it presents RSC along with techinques to attain and prove it for a compiler (Section 3.2).  7  3.1  Safety and Robust Safety  Safety is a general security notion which asserts that bad behaviour does not happen. Historically, safety was devised to reason about the absence of program bugs in whole programs. Robust safety lifts the notion of safety to partial programs that are co-linked with contexts, which may possibly be malicious attackers [9,12,17,25,28,35]. A component (note the change from whole program before) is robustly safe if its composition with an arbitrary attacker is safe. Here, an attacker is any context that never has bad behaviour in its own code. Thus, robust safety captures all safety properties even in the presence of an active attacker. This includes some forms of integrity, weak secrecy and even approximations of information ﬂow properties [14]. Our formalization of robust safety We need some representation of safety properties for our technical development. We ﬁnd it convenient to follow Schneider’s representation of safety properties as security automata [45]. Brieﬂy, a security automaton is a monitor that co-executes with a program. The automaton is a state machine that transitions states in response to speciﬁc security-relevant events of the program it monitors. By deﬁnition, the program is in violation of the safety property coded by the security automaton if the automaton is unable to make a transition in response to an event. Schneider argues that all properties codable this way are safety properties and that all enforceable safety properties can be coded this way. To keep things simple, we only consider properties of the heap of the monitored program. For example, if the program has an internal timestamp counter, the property of interest might be that the counter only increases in value over time. Our security automaton, also called the monitor, is an abstract state machine that gets to transition its internal state whenever the program relinquishes control via a special command called monitor . Whenever this command is executed, the monitor transitions its internal state based on the contents of the current heap. A property violation happens when the monitor has no valid transition. We use H to denote a heap, which for now is a map from locations l to values v (Section 5 uses other instances of heaps). Formally, a monitor M consists of a set of absract states {s}, the transition relation , an initial state s0 , the set of heap locations that matter for the monitor, {l }, and the current state sc . The transition relation is a set of triples of the form (ss , H , sf ) consisting of a starting state ss , a ﬁnal state sf and a heap H . The transition (ss , H , sf ) is interpreted as “The state ss transitions to sf when the heap is H ”. The heap H occurring in a transition must contain in its domain only locations from {l } (the set that the monitor cares about). We assume that the transition relation is deterministic: for any ss and H , there is at most one sf such that (ss , H , sf ) ∈ . A program C executing with a monitor M and a heap H is written as M , H ⊲ C . Program execution is represented as usual with a small step “stepsto” relation → (and →∗ is the reﬂexive-transitive closure of this relation). Pro8  grams can have a special instruction monitor that atomically invokes the monitor. Based on the current state of the monitor and the current heap, the monitor either has a (unique) valid transition or it does not have any transition. In the former case, formalized by Rule Abstract-monitor below, the internal state of the monitor is updated. In the latter case, the whole system enters a special state fail , with no possibility of recovery (Rule Abstract-monitor-fail). (Abstract-monitor)  M = ({s} , , s0 , {l } , sc ) sc , H {l} sf M ′ = ({s} , , s0 , {l } , sf ) M , H ⊲ monitor −→ M ′ , H ⊲ skip (Abstract-monitor-fail)  M = ({s} ,  , s0 , {l } , sc )  sc , H  {l}  6  _  M , H ⊲ monitor −→ fail With this setup in place, we can give abstract deﬁnitions of safety (Deﬁnition 8), attackers (Deﬁnition 4) and robust safety (Deﬁnition 10). For the sake of readability, we elide and simplify some notation. The precise deﬁnitions can be found in the appendix. Definition 3 (Safety). Let H0 be the initial heap for C . def  ⊢ C, M : safe = ⊢ C : whole and M , H0 ⊲ C 6→∗ fail A program C is safe wrt monitor M if C is whole and its execution with M never reaches fail (i.e., M never gets stuck during the execution). Definition 4 (Attacker). def  M ⊢ A : attacker = no monitor inside A and no location of M reachable or stored in A An attacker is any program (context) with no occurrence of monitor in it. Definition 5 (Robust Safety). def  ⊢ C, M : rs = ∀A. if M ⊢ A : attacker then ⊢ A [C] , M : safe A component C is robustly safe wrt monitor M if C composed with any attacker is safe wrt M .  3.2  Robustly Safe Compilation  A compiler is robustly safe if (i) it is correct, and (ii) given any source component that is robustly safe, its compiled counterpart is robustly safe (wrt target contexts). This informal deﬁnition consists of two parts, one regarding correctness and one regarding security. For the sake of simplicity, in this paper when 9  we talk about RSC we mostly refer to the second part, the ﬁrst part being a given, since it makes little sense to talk about the security of an incorrect compiler. (Of course, we prove both properties for all the compilers that we deﬁne in this paper.) 3.2.1  Compiler Correctness and Cross-Language Relations  A compiler is correct if it compiles whole programs to whole programs that have the same behaviour. Unlike most of the literature, we formalise having the same behaviour as terminating with heaps that contain related values. In order to do this, we assume a relation ≈ : v × v between source and target values that is total, so it maps any source value v to a target value v: ∀v.∃v.v ≈ v. This value relation is used to deﬁne a relation between heaps: H ≈ H, which intuitively holds when related locations point to related values. Next, we assume a relation M ≈ M between source and target monitors, which means that the source monitor M and the target monitor M code the same safety property, modulo the relation ≈ on values assumed above. The precise deﬁnition of this relation depends on the source and target languages; speciﬁc instances are shown in Sections 4.3.2 and 5.3. Equipped with these two ≈ relations, we can deﬁne compiler correctness. Definition 6 (Correct Compilation [34]). S  def  ⊢ J·KT : CC = if M ≈ M  S  and M, ∅ ⊲ JsKT −→∗ M′ , H ⊲ skip then M, ∅ ⊲ s −→∗ M′ , H ⊲ skip and H ≈ H  S  A compiler J·KT is correct (CC ) if whenever a compiled whole program terminates with a heap H, the source counterpart reduces to a related heap H. 3.2.2  Compiler Security  The security-relevant part of robustly safe compilation is deﬁned below. Definition 7 (Robustly safe Compilation). S  def  ⊢ J·KT : RSC = if M ≈ M and ⊢ C, M : rs S  S  then ⊢ JCKT , M : rs  A compiler J·KT attains RSC , if it maps any program C that is robustly safe wrt M to a program C that is robustly safe wrt M, where M ≈ M. Note that RSC is deﬁned as a single implication (⇒), unlike FAC that is a bi-implication ( ⇐⇒ ). This is because the backwards direction (⇐) does 10  not convey security aspects. It would only describe what to do in case of good behaviours, but this is already described by compiler correctness. Next, we discuss at a high-level how RSC can be established for a compiler. We discuss two techniques, that we illustrate on concrete instances in later sections. The later sections also show how an RSC -attaining compiler can generate more eﬃcient code than a FAC -attaining compiler. Proving RSC Proving that a compiler attains RSC can be done by either adapting existing techniques for establishing FAC , or with simpler ones. As discussed in Section 2.2, FAC proofs often rely on back-translations of contexts. If we unfold Deﬁnition 15 and then the two instances of Deﬁnition 10 inside it, we see that we have the following assumptions 1. if M, ∅ ⊲ A [P] →∗ M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] then M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] → M′ , H ⊲ A [skip] (for all A). 2. For some A: M, ∅ ⊲ A [P] →∗ M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] From these assumptions, we need to prove that • M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] → M′ , H ⊲ A [skip] One way to prove this is by back-translation. By contrapositivity, assume that the goal does not hold for a given target context A. Then, by backtranslating A, we can obtain a source context A that violates (1). We illustrate this proof strategy in Section 4.3.2. However, as for FAC , back-translation based proofs can be quite diﬃcult for RSC . However, a simpler proof strategy is also viable for RSC when we compile only those source programs that have been veriﬁed to be robustly safe (e.g., using a type system). The idea is this: using the veriﬁcation of the source program, we establish an invariant which is always maintained by the target code, and which, in turn, implies the robust safety of the target code. For example, if the safety property is that values in the heap always have their expected types, then the invariant can simply be that values in the target heap are always related to the source ones (which have their expected types). This is tantamount to proving type preservation in the target in the presence of an active adversary. This is harder than standard type preservation (because of the active adversary) but is still much easier than back-translation as there is no need to relate target constructs to source ones. We illustrate this proof technique in Section 5. 3.2.3  Compiling monitors  In our development, we assume that a source and a target monitor are related but do not actually compile a source monitor to obtain a related target monitor. While such compilation is feasible, it is at odds with our view of monitors as specifications of safety properties. Compiling monitors and, in particular, compiling monitors with the same compiler that we want to prove security of, leads to a circularity—we must understand the compiler to understand the 11  target safety property, which, in turn, acts as the speciﬁcation for the compiler! Consequently, we choose not to compile monitors and talk only of an abstract, compiler-independent relation between source and target monitors.  4  RSC : First instance  This section presents an instance of an RSC -attaining compiler. First, we present our source language LU , a simply typed imperative language. Its heap addresses are abstract and cannot be guessed by an adversary, which provides support for hidden local state in components. LU includes monitors that enforce safety properties over the heap (Appendix E). Then, we present our target language LP , an untyped imperative target language with a concrete heap, whose addresses are natural numbers. LP provides hidden local state via a ﬁne-grained capability mechanism on heap accesses (Appendix B). Finally, we present the LU  compiler J·KLP and prove that it attains RSC (Section 4.3). The languages of this section are deliberately simple. RSC for richer languages is discussed in Section 6. Due to space constraints, only excerpts of syntax, semantics, the compiler deﬁnition, etc. are presented here, while proofs and helper lemmas are elided entirely. Some aspects of the formalisation are also simpliﬁed for presentation. All the missing details are in the appendix.  4.1  The Source Language LU  LU is an untyped imperative “while” language [40] (Figures 1 and 2). Components C are collections of function deﬁnitions F together with a monitor M and the interfaces I. An interface is a context-deﬁned function that the component relies on (similar to C’s extern functions). Attackers A (also called program contexts) represent untrusted code that a component interacts with. Function bodies include standard boolean and arithmetic operations, generically written ⊕, heap manipulation statements, (recursive) function calls, etc. Expression evaluation is deﬁned by the small-step reduction relation ֒→ →. A program state Ω includes the monitor, the heap and a statement being executed. State evaluation, the main program semantics, are deﬁned by the reduction relation ( −→ ). Monitors M work as explained in Section 3.1, except that the description of a monitor includes a single location of interest ℓroot . All locations reachable directly or indirectly by pointer chasing starting from ℓroot are assumed to be of interest to the monitor and function reach(ℓroot , H) returns them for a heap H. In practice, ℓroot may, for instance, be the root of a data structure that the component being monitored wants to have a safety property on.1 Heaps H are maps from abstract locations ℓ to values v. The reduction semantics of states is labelled (labels are the annotations on −→ ). The labels 1 The use of a single root location is arbitrary and motivated by simplicity. This can be easily extended to a set of locations.  12  Components C ::= M; F; I Attackers A ::= H; F [·] Interfaces I ::= f Functions F ::= f(x) 7→ s; return; Values v ::= true | false | n ∈ N | hv, vi | ℓ Expressions e ::= x | v | e ⊕ e | e ⊗ e | he, ei | e.1 | e.2 | !e Statements s ::= skip | s; s | let x = e in s | monitor | call f e | let x = new e in s | x := e | if e then s else s Prog. States Ω ::= C, H ⊲ s | fail Monitors M ::= ({σ} , Mon. States σ ∈ S Mon. Trans.  ::= ∅ |  , σ0 , ℓroot , σc ) ; (s, H, s)  Figure 1: Syntax of LU (excerpts). A list of element e1 , · · · , en is indicated as e. record function calls and returns that occur between a component and the context implementing its interfaces. This is a standard technical device that is used in the proofs (see Section 4.3.2). Readers not interested in understanding our proofs may ignore these labels. Ω0 (C) denotes the initial state of a component C. In this state, the heap is empty, the monitor M is in its initial state and the executing statement is the ﬁrst line of a designated entry point (akin to C’s main function).  4.2  The Target Language LP  LP is an untyped, imperative language that follows the structure of LU (Figures 3 and 4); it has reduction for expressions ( ֒→ → ) and a small-step semantics ( −→ ). However, there are critical diﬀerences (to make the compiler interesting!). The main diﬀerence is that heap locations in LP are concrete natural numbers. An adversarial context can guess locations used as private state by a component and clobber them. To support hidden local state, a location can be “hidden” explicitly via the expression hide n. This expression allocates a new capability k, an abstract token that grants access to the location n [46]. Subsequently, all reads and writes to n must be authenticated with the capability. Unlike locations, capabilities cannot be guessed. To hide a location, a component hides the capability of the location. To bootstrap this hiding process, we assume that each component has one location that can only be accessed by it, a priori in the semantics (in our formalization, we always focus on only one component and we assume that, for this component, this special location is at 13  (ELU -op) ′ ′′  (ELU -val)  n⊕n =n H ⊲ n ⊕ n′ ֒→ → n′′  H ⊲ v ֒→ → v  (ELU -dereference)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → ℓ ℓ 7→ v ∈ H H⊲!e ֒→ → v (ELU -letin)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v C, H ⊲ let x = e in s −→ C, H ⊲ s[v / x] (ELU -alloc)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ℓ∈ / dom(H) C, H ⊲ let x = new e in s −→ C, H; ℓ 7→ v ⊲ s[ℓ / x] (ELU -update)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v H = H1 ; ℓ 7→ v′ ; H2 H′ = H1 ; ℓ 7→ v; H2 C, H ⊲ ℓ := e −→ C, H′ ⊲ skip (ELU -call)  f(x) 7→ s; return; ∈ C.funs H ⊲ e ֒→ → v C, H ⊲ call f e −→ C, H ⊲ s; return;[v / x] (ELU -monitor)  (ELU -monitor-fail)  M = ({s} , , s0 , ℓroot , sc ) C = M; F; I C′ = M′ ; F; I M; H M′ C, H ⊲ monitor −→ C′ , H ⊲ skip  M = ({s} , , s0 , ℓroot , sc ) C = M; F; I M; H 6 C, H ⊲ monitor −→ fail  (LU -Monitor Step)  M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ℓroot , σc ) M′ = ({σ} , , σ0 , ℓroot , σf ) (σc , H′ , σf ) ∈ H′ ⊆ H dom(H′ ) = reach(ℓroot , H) M; H M′ Figure 2: Semantics of LU (excerpts). A list of element e1 , · · · , en is indicated as e. address 0). In detail, LP heaps H are maps from natural numbers n to values v and a tag η. The tag η can be ⊥, which means that n is globally available (not protected) or a capability k, which protects n. A globally available location can be freely read and written (Rule ELP -assign-top, Rule ELP -deref-top) but one that is protected by a capability requires the capability to be supplied at the time of read/write for the operation to go through (Rule ELP -assign-k,  14  Values v ::= n ∈ N | hv, vi | k Expressions e ::= x | v | e ⊕ e | e ⊗ e | he, ei | e.1 | e.2 | !e with e Statements s ::= skip | s; s | let x = new e in s | x := e with e | let x = e in s | let x = hide e in s | call f e | monitor | ifz e then s else s Heaps H ::= ∅ | H; n 7→ v : η | H; k Tag η ::= ⊥ | k Monitors M ::= ({σ} ,  , σ0 , σc )  Figure 3: Syntax of LP (excerpts). (ELP -step)  (ELP -sequence)  C, H ⊲ s −→ C, H ⊲ s′ C, H ⊲ s; s′′ −→ C, H ⊲ s′ ; s  C, H ⊲ skip; s −→ C, H ⊲ s (ELP -deref-any)  (ELP -deref-k)  n 7→ v : ⊥ ∈ H H⊲!n with _ ֒→ → H⊲v  n 7→ (v, k) ∈ H H⊲!n with k ֒→ → H⊲v (ELP -new)  H = H1 ; n 7→ (v, η) H ⊲ e ֒→ → v H′ = H; n + 1 7→ v : ⊥ C, H ⊲ let x = new e in s −→ C, H′ ⊲ s[n + 1 / x] (ELP -hide)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → n k∈ / dom(H) H = H1 ; n 7→ v : ⊥; H2 H′ = H1 ; n 7→ v : k; H2 ; k C, H ⊲ let x = hide e in s −→ C, H′ ⊲ s[k / x] (ELP -assign-any)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v H = H1 ; n 7→ _ : ⊥; H2 H′ = H1 ; n 7→ v : ⊥; H2 C, H ⊲ n := e with _ −→ C, H′ ⊲ skip (ELP -assign-k)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v H = H1 ; n 7→ _ : k; H2 H′ = H1 ; n 7→ v : k; H2 C, H ⊲ n := e with k −→ C, H′ ⊲ skip Figure 4: Semantics of LP (excerpts). Rule ELP -deref-k). The locations of interest to a monitor are all those that can be reached from the address 0. 0 itself is protected with a capability kroot that  15  is assumed to occur only in the code of the component in focus. A second diﬀerence between LP and LU is that LP has no booleans, while U L has them.  4.3  Compiler from LU to LP LU  This section presents the compiler J·KLP from LU to LP , detailing how it uses LU  the capabilities of LP to achieve RSC (Section 4.3.1). Then, it proves that J·KLP LU  attains RSC (Section 4.3.2). Finally, it explains why code compiled with J·KLP does not have the ineﬃciencies that FAC would force (Section 4.3.3). 4.3.1  LU  The compiler J·KLP U  The compiler J·KLLP takes as input a source component C and a target monitor LU  M that is related to the monitor in C, so J·KLP : C × M → C. The compiler performs a simple pass on the structure of functions, statements and expressions (Figure 5). Each LU location is encoded as a pair of a LP location and LU  the capability to access the location (Rule (J·KLP -New)). Location update and LU  LU  dereference are compiled accordingly (Rules (J·KLP -Assign) and (J·KLP -Deref)).  4.3.2  Proof of RSC LU  The compiler J·KLP is robustly safe (Theorem 7 and Theorem 8). LU  LU  Theorem 1 (J·KLP is cc). ⊢ J·KLP : CC  In order to set up this theorem, we need to instantiate the cross-language relation for values, which we write as ≈β . The relation is parametrised by a partial bijection β : ℓ × n× η from source heap locations to target heap locations such that: • if (ℓ1 , n, η) ∈ β and (ℓ2 , n, η) then ℓ1 = ℓ2 ; • if (ℓ, n1 , η1 ) ∈ β and (ℓ, n2 , η2 ) then n1 = n2 and η1 = η2 . The bijection determines when a source location and a target location are related. The partial bijection β grows as we consider successive steps of program execution in our proof. For example, if executing let x = new e in s creates location some source ℓ, then executing its compiled counterpart will create some target location n. At this point we add (ℓ, n, ⊥) to β. More generally, ≈β is deﬁned as follows: • true ≈β 0; • false ≈β n such that n 6= 0; 16  q  yL U q yLU q yLU M; F; I, M LP = M; F LP ; I LP LU  LU  if M ≈β M  (J·KLP -Comp)  LU  LU  (J·KLP -Fun)  Jf(x) 7→ s; return;KLP = f (x) 7→ JsKLP ; return; LU  LU  (J·KLP -True)  JtrueKLP = 0 LU  LU  JfalseKLP = 1  (J·KLP -False)  JxKLP = x  (J·KLP -Var)  U  JnKLLP = n  U  (J·KLLP -nat)  LU LU  LU  LU  LU  LU  (J·KLP -Deref)  J!eKLP = !JeKLP .1 with JeKLP .2 U  U  U  U  Jlet x = e in sKLLP = let x = JeKLLP in JsKLLP LU  LU  L (J·KL P -Letin)  LU  LU  Jif e then st else se KLP = ifz JeKLP then Jst KLP else Jse KLP t |LU let x = new e LU = let xloc = new JeKLP in in s LP let xcap = hide xloc in  LU  (J·KLP -If) LU  (J·KLP -New)  LU  LU  let x = hxloc , xcap i in JsKLP  Jx := e′ KLP = let xloc = x.1 in  LU  (J·KLP -Assign)  let xcap = x.2 in LU  U  xloc := Je′ KLP with xcap U  Jcall f eKLLP = call f JeKLLP LU  JmonitorKLP = monitor  U  (J·KLLP -call) LU  (J·KLP -Mon)  LU  • ℓ ≈β hn, vi if  (  Figure 5: J·KLP excerpts.  v = k and (ℓ, n, k) ∈ β v 6= k and (ℓ, n, ⊥) ∈ β  • hv1 , v2 i ≈β hv1 , v2 i if v1 ≈β v1 and v2 ≈β v2 . This relation is used to deﬁne the heap, monitor and state relations. Heaps are related, written H ≈β H, when related locations in β point to related values. States are related, written Ω ≈β Ω, when they have related monitors and heaps. Monitor Relation The monitors in these languages are more concrete than what is described in Section 3.2. Two monitors are related when they can simulate each other on related heaps. Given a monitor-speciﬁc relation σ ≈ σ on monitor states, we say that a relation R on source and target monitors is 17  a bisimulation if the following hold whenever M = ({σ} , M = ({σ} , , σ0 , σc ) are related by R:  , σ0 , ℓroot , σc ) and  1. σ0 ≈ σ0 , and 2. σc ≈ σc , and 3. For all β containing (ℓroot , 0, kroot ) and all H, H with H ≈β H the following hold: (a) (σc , H, _) ∈ ′  (b) (σc , H, σ ) ∈  iﬀ (σc , H, _) ∈ ′  and (σc , H, σ ) ∈  , and imply ({σ},  , ℓroot , σ ′ )R({σ},  , σ0 , σ ′ ).  In words, R is a bisimulation only if MRM implies that M and M simulate each other on heaps related by any β.2 Note that the union of any two bisimulations is a bisimulation. Hence, there is a largest bisimulation, which we denote as ≈. Intuitively, M ≈ M implies that M and M encode the same safety property (up to the relation on values). LU  LU  Theorem 2 (J·KLP is rs-pres ). ⊢ J·KLP : RSC  As a technical device for this proof, both LU and LP are equipped with a α labelled semantics, written ==⇒ . Given a component C and a context A, the labelled semantics tracks transfers of control from the context to the component (decorated with a ? as in α?) and transfers of control from the component to the context (decorated with a ! as in α!). These boundary-crossing transfers of controls are usually called “actions”. We denote actions with α. Actions α ::= call f v H ? | call f v H ! | ret H ! | ret H ? We call the actions above call, callback, return and returnback, respectively. The H in an action is the heap at the time of the reduction on which the action is recorded. Finite lists of actions are called traces, written α. Well-formed traces have alternations of ! and ? decorated actions, starting with ? since execution starts in the context. We now outline our proof of Theorem 8. As mentioned in Section 3.2.2, unfolding the deﬁnition of RSC and then of robust safety in LU and LP we obtain the following two assumptions. α  1. if M, ∅ ⊲ A [C] ==⇒ M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] then M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] −→ M′ , H ⊲ A [skip] (for all A). i h α LU 2. For some A: M, ∅ ⊲ A JCKLP ==⇒ M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor].  2 In particular, this means that neither M nor M can be sensitive to the specific addresses allocated during the run of the program. However, they can be sensitive to the “shape” of the heap or the values stored in the heap.  18  From these assumptions, we need to prove that • M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] −→ M′ , H ⊲ A [skip] LP  To complete this proof, we deﬁne a back-translation hh·iiLU that takes a target trace α and builds a set of source contexts such that one of them when linked C, produces a related trace α in the source (Theorem 9). LP  Theorem 3 (hh·iiLU is correct). i h α LU if A JCKLP ==⇒ Ω P  α  =⇒ Ω and α ≈β α and Ω ≈β Ω. then ∃A ∈ hhαiiL LU . A [C] =  In prior work, back-translations return a single context [7,8,15,21,39,42,43]. This is because they all, explicitly or implicitly, assume that ≈ is injective from source to target. Under this assumption, the back-translation is unique: a target value v will be related to at most one source value v. We do away with this assumption and thus there can be multiple source values related to any given target value. This results in a set of back-translated contexts, of which at least one will reproduce the trace as we need it. To prove Theorem 8, we apply the back-translation to the target trace in the assumption (2). For the speciﬁc source context A which reproduces the trace in the source, the states in the source remain in sync (related) with states in the target (by Theorem 9). Hence, M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] ≈β M′ , H ⊲ A [monitor] for some β. This implies that M′ ≈ M′ , and H ≈β H. By deﬁnition of M′ ≈ M′ , this implies that either both monitors must step or neither will. Since, we know from (1) that M′ steps, it follows that M′ must step too, which immediately yields the required statement. Comparison to proofs of FAC Conceptually, our back-translation is similar to that typically needed for FAC [6,32,42,43]. Overall, our proof is simpler than a typical proof of FAC since establishing full abstraction requires showing that the trace semantics of the target are complete with respect to observational equivalence, whereas RSC does not need this (often diﬃcult) step. 4.3.3  Examples of RSC not forcing inefficiency LU  Having established that J·KLP attains RSC , we now take a look at how code LU  generated by J·KLP does not have the ineﬃciencies of a fully-abstract compiler (Section 2.1).  Extensive checks We saw in Example 1 that FAC forces dynamic type checks on the parameters of all exported functions. In contrast, RSC does not need LU these checks. Indeed, J·KLP does not insert them. Note that any robustly safe source program will have programmer-inserted checks for all parameters that 19  are relevant to the safety property of interest, and these checks will be compiled to the target. For other parameters, the checks are irrelevant, both in the source and the target, so there is no need to insert them. Component size In Example 2, we saw that FAC forces all components to have sizes independent of their code. In contrast, RSC does not require this unless the safety property(ies) of interest care about the size of the code (which is very unlikely in a security context). In particular, the monitors considered here cannot depend on code size. Wrappers for heap resources In Example 3, we explained that if the target language allows address comparison, then FAC forces all privately allocated locations to be wrapped in proxies. RSC does not require this. Our target language, LP , supports address comparison (addresses are natural numbers in LU  LP ) but J·KLP uses just capabilities to attain security eﬃciently. On the other hand, for attaining FAC , capabilities alone would be insuﬃcient since they do not hide addresses; proxies would still be required. Strict termination vs divergence We saw in Example 4 that FAC is usually impossible to attain when the source language is higher-order and strictly terminating but the target language is not strictly terminating. On the other hand, RSC can be easily attained even in such settings since it is completely independent of termination in the languages (note that program termination and nontermination are both diﬀerent from the monitor getting stuck, which is what RSC cares about). Indeed, if our source language LU were restricted to terminating programs only, the same compiler and the same proof of RSC would still work.  5  RSC : Second Instance with Simpler Proofs  When the source language has a veriﬁcation system that enforces robust safety, proving that a compiler attains FAC is even simpler than that in Section 4—it does not require back translation. To demonstrate this, we consider a speciﬁc class of monitors, namely those that enforce type invariants on a speciﬁc set of locations. Our source language, Lτ , is similar to LU but it has a type system that Lτ ensures that the monitor never fails in the source. Our compiler J·KLπ is directed by typing derivations, and its proof of FAC follows by establishing a speciﬁc cross-language invariant on program execution, rather than a back-translation. A second, independent goal of this section is to show that FAC is compatible with concurrency. Consequently, our source and target languages include constructs for forking threads.  20  5.1  The Source Language Lτ  Lτ extends LU with concurrency—it has a fork statement ({k s}), processes and process soups [13]—and with a more extensive type system (Figures 6 and 7).  Statements s ::= · · · | {k s} | endorse x = e as ϕ in s Types τ ::= Bool | Nat | τ × τ | Ref τ | UN Superf . Types ϕ ::= Bool | Nat | UN × UN | Ref UN Heaps H ::= ∅ | H; ℓ 7→ v : τ Monitors M ::= ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ) Mon. Trans. ::= ∅ | ; (s, s) Envs. Γ ::= ∅ | Γ; (x : τ ) Store Env . ∆ ::= ∅ | ∆; (ℓ : τ ) Processes π ::= (s) Soups Π ::= ∅ | Π k π Prog. States Ω ::= C, H ⊲ Π | fail  Figure 6: Syntax of Lτ (excerpts). The type system for Lτ is a standard type system that provides robust type safety [1,9,25,28,35]: no context can cause the static types of values in the heap to be violated at runtime. The type system includes a type called UN, which stands for “untrusted”. A location has type UN if the component of interest does not care about the contents of the location. A value has type UN if it is impossible to extract a location that the component cares about from the value. Overall, UN contains all values that the context (adversary) may possess or manipulate safely. We write τ ⊢ ◦ to mean that values of type τ are safe to share with the adversary, i.e., τ is a subtype of UN. (See Rule TLτ -coercion.) The language Lτ further contains an endorsement statement that dynamically checks the top-level constructor of a value of type UN (potentially coming from the adversary) and gives it a more precise superﬁcial type ϕ [18]. This is similar to existing type casts [38] but it only inspects one structural layer of the type (for simplicity of compilation). The goal of a monitor is to dynamically check that a certain set of heap locations have values of their intended (static) types. Accordingly, the description of the monitor includes a list of locations and their expected types (in the form of a context ∆). All these types τ should satisfy τ 6⊢ ◦. To facilitate checks of the monitor, every heap location carries a type at runtime (in addition to a value). As Theorem 10 shows, the monitor can never fail in a well-typed component. Theorem 4 (Typability Implies Robust Safety in Lτ ). if ⊢ C : UN then ⊢ C : rs 21  τ ⊢◦ (TLτ -bool-pub)  (TLτ -nat-pub)  Bool ⊢ ◦  Nat ⊢ ◦  (TLτ -pair-pub)  τ ⊢ ◦ τ′ ⊢ ◦ τ × τ′ ⊢ ◦  (TLτ -un-pub)  UN ⊢ ◦  (TLτ -references-pub)  Ref UN ⊢ ◦  ⊢ C : UN τ ⊢◦  Component C is well-typed. Type τ is insecure.  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s  Expression e has type τ in Γ and ∆. Statement s is well-typed in C, Γ and ∆. (TLτ -coercion)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ τ ⊢◦ ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN (TLτ -endorse)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN C, ∆, Γ; (x : ϕ) ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ endorse x = e as ϕ in s (ELτ -endorse)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ∆, ∅ ⊢ v : ϕ ∆ = {ℓ : τ | ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H} C, H ⊲ endorse x = e as ϕ in s −→ C, H ⊲ s[v / x] (ELτ -fork)  Π = Π1 k {k s}; s′ k Π2 Π′ = Π1 k skip; s′ k Π2 k s C, H ⊲ Π −→ C, H ⊲ Π′ Figure 7: Judgements, static and dynamic semantics of Lτ (excerpts).  5.2  The Target Language Lπ  Our target language, Lπ , extends the previous target language, LP , with support for concurrency (forking, processes and process soups), atomic co-creation of a protected location and its protecting capability (statement newhide) and for examining the top-level construct of a value according to a pattern, B (Figure 8). A monitor explicitly mentions the entire list of locations it cares about. These are represented together as a heap, written H0 .  22  Patterns B ::= nat | pair Statements s ::= · · · | {k s} | let x = newhide e in s | destruct x = e as B in s or s Monitors M ::= ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σc ) (ELπ -destruct-nat)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → n C, H ⊲ destruct x = e as nat in s or s′ −→ C, H ⊲ s[n / x] (ELπ -new)  H = H1 ; n 7→ (v, η)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v  k∈ / dom(H)  C, H ⊲ let x = newhide e in s −→ C, H; n + 1 7→ v : k; k ⊲ s[hn + 1, ki / x] Figure 8: Lπ additions to syntax and semantics (excerpts).  5.3  Compiler from Lτ to Lπ Lτ  The high-level structure of the compiler, J·KLπ , is similar to that of our earlier LU  Lτ  compiler J·KLP (Section 4.3). However, J·KLπ is deﬁned by induction on the type derivation of the component to be compiled (Figure 9). Additionally, some Lτ cases such as Rule (J·KLπ -New) explicitly use type information to achieve security eﬃciently. Lτ The compiler J·KLπ is both correct and robustly safe. Lτ  Lτ  Theorem 5 (Compiler J·KLπ is cc). ⊢ J·KLπ : cc  LU  The proof of this theorem is similar to that for J·KLP , but the cross-language monitor relation is diﬀerent. We describe that relation below. Monitor Relation Informally, a source and a target monitor are related if the target monitor can always step whenever the target heap satisﬁes the types speciﬁed in the source monitor (up to renaming by the partial bijection β). Formally, given a typing ∆ for the part of the source heap being monitored and a partial bijection β from source to target locations, we say that a target monitor M = ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σc ) is good, written ⊢ M : β, ∆, if for all σ ∈ {σ} and all H ≈β H such that ⊢ H : ∆, there is a σ ′ such that (σ, H, σ ′ ) ∈ . For a ﬁxed partial bijection β0 between the domains of ∆ and H0 , we say that the source monitor M and the target monitor M are related, written M ≈ M, if ⊢ M : β0 , ∆ for the ∆ in M. τ  τ  Theorem 6 (Compiler J·KLLπ is rs-pres ). ⊢ J·KLLπ : rs-pres Lτ  To prove that J·KLπ attains RSC we do not rely on a back-translation. Here, we know statically which locations can be monitor-sensitive: they must all be 23  u v  (TLτ -new)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ C, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ let x = newτ e in s   Lτ  let xo = new J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ     in let x = hxo, 0i    in JC, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLτπ L =    Lτ   let x = newhide J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ K  Lπ  τ  in JC, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLLπ  u v  (TLτ -coercion)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ τ ⊢◦ ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN u (TLτ -fork)  v  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ {k s}  }Lτ ~  ~  Lπ  if τ = UN Lτ  (J·KLπ -New) otherwise  Lτ  Lτ  (J·KLπ -Coerce)  Lπ  = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ  Lπ  = {k JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ sKLπ }  }Lτ ~  }Lτ  Lτ  Lτ  (J·KLπ -Fork)  Lτ  Figure 9: J·KLπ excerpts.  safe, i.e., must have a type τ satisfying τ 0 ◦. Using this, we set up a simple cross-language relation and show it to be an invariant on runs of source and compiled target components. The relation captures the following: • Heaps (both source and target) can be partitioned into two parts, a high part and a low part; • The high source heap contains only locations whose type is safe; • The high target heap contains only locations related to source high locations and these point to related values; more importantly, every target high location is protected by a capability; • In the target, any capability protecting a high location does not occur in attacker code, nor is it stored in a low heap location. We need to prove that this relation is preserved by reductions both in the compiled code and in the attacker code. The former follows from correctness and source robust safety (Theorems 10 and 11). The latter is simple since all high Lτ locations are protected with capabilities (Rule (J·KLπ -New)), attackers have no Lτ access to high locations (Rule (J·KLπ -Coerce)) and capabilities are unforgeable and unguessable (by the semantics of Lπ ). At this point, knowing that monitors are related, and that source heaps never make source monitors fail, we can conclude that monitors do not fail in the target either. 24  Note that this kind of an argument requires all compilable source programs LU to be robustly safe and is, therefore, impossible for our ﬁrst compiler J·KLP . Avoiding the back-translation here simpliﬁes the proof signiﬁcantly.  6  Discussion  In this section, we discuss some loose ends and possible extensions of our development. Richer Source Monitors In Lτ , source language monitors only enforce the weak property of type safety on speciﬁc memory locations (robustly). This can be generalized substantially to enforce arbitrary invariants other than types on locations. The only requirement is to ﬁnd a type system (e.g., based on reﬁnements or Hoare logics [48]) that can enforce robust safety in the source. Our compilation and proof strategy should work with little modiﬁcation. We did not make this generalization here to keep the type system simple and to retain focus on the compilation and the proof technique. Realizing Target Capabilites Both our target languages rely on capabilities for restricting access to sensitive locations from the context. These capabilities can be realized in many diﬀerent ways. First, we could use a capability machine such as Cheri that supports capabilities in hardware [51]. Capability machines have been advocated as a target for eﬃcient secure compilation [24] and preliminary work has been made to compile C-like languages to them, but using FAC , not RSC , as the criterion for compiler security [49]. Second, we could use memory isolation (via software-fault isolation [50] or an architecture like Intel’s SGX [36]) to isolate high locations. Non-Atomic Allocation of Capabilities In Section 5, we assumed a new target language construct, newhide, that simultaneously allocates a new location and protects it with a capability. This atomic construct simpliﬁes our proof of security in the concurrent setting at hand: if allocation and protection were not atomic, then a concurrent adversary thread could protect a location that had just been allocated and acquire the capability to it before the allocating thread could do so. This would break the cross-language relation we use in our proof. However, note that this is not really an attack since it does not give the adversary any additional power to break the safety property enforced by the monitor (the allocating thread just gets stuck when it tries to acquire the capability itself). Consequently, it is possible to do away with the newhide construct, at the cost of a slightly more involved cross-language relation. The appendix presents this alternate development as well. Security criteria In their preliminary work, Garg et al. [27] present new criteria for secure compilation that ensure preservation of arbitrary classes of  25  hyperproperties. Hyperproperties [19] are a formal representation of predicates on programs, i.e., they are predicates on sets of traces. Hyperproperties capture many security-relevant properties including not just conventional safety and liveness, which are predicates on traces, but also properties like non-interference, which is a predicate on pairs of traces. Modulo technical diﬀerences, our deﬁnition of RSC coincides with the criterion of safety property preservation in [27]. We show, through concrete instances, that this criterion can be easily realized by compilers, and develop two proof techniques for establishing it. We further show that the criterion leads to more eﬃcient compiled code than does FAC . More interestingly, [27] also proposes stronger criterion that imply preservation of larger classes of hyperproperties. One such criterion is the preservation of all robust hypersafety properties. We believe that this criterion is particularly interesting because it will also lead to eﬃcient compiled code, and it should be possible to generalize both the proof techniques we presented here to this criterion. The criteria in [27] assume that behaviours in the source and target are represented using the same grammar. Hence, the deﬁnitions (somewhat unrealistically or ideally) do not require a translation of source properties to target properties. In contrast, we consider diﬀerences in the representation of behaviour in the source and in the target. This diﬀerence is accounted for in our monitor relation M ≈ M. A slightly diﬀerent account of this diﬀerence is presented by Patrignani and Garg [44] in the context of reactive black-box programs. Investigating the deﬁnition of precise instances of this relation that account for preservation of speciﬁc security properties is left for future work.  7  Other Related Work  We have already discussed a lot of closely related work. We focus here on the remaining related work only. ASLR [5, 30], protected module architectures [6, 33, 42, 43], tagged architectures [32], capability machines [49] and cryptographic primitives [3, 4, 16, 20] have been used as targets for FAC . We believe all of these can also be used as targets of RSC -attaining compilers. In fact, some targets such as capability machines seem to be better suited to RSC than FAC . Ahmed et al. prove full abstraction for several compilers between typed languages [7, 8, 39]. As compiler intermediate languages are often typed, and as these types often serve as the basis for complex static analyses, full abstraction seems like a reasonable goal for (fully typed) intermediate compilation steps. In the last few steps of compilation, where the target languages are unlikely to be typed, one could establish robust safety preservation and combine the two properties (vertically) to get an end-to-end security guarantee. There are three main other criteria for secure compilation that we would like to mention: securely compartmentalised compilation (SCC) [32], tracepreserving compilation (TPC) [44] and non-interference-preserving compilation  26  (NIPC) [11]. SCC is a re-statement of the “hard” part of full abstraction that is better suited for languages with undeﬁned behaviour and a strict notion of components. Thus SCC suﬀers from much of the same eﬃciency drawbacks as FAC that RSC does not. TPC is a stronger criterion than FAC and that most existing fully abstract compilers also attain. Again, compilers attaining TPC also suﬀer from the drawbacks of compilers attaining FAC . NIPC is a criterion that preserves a single property: non-interference (NI). It has been described in the setting where NI is achieved by typing in both source and target languages and where the target uses the same security lattice as the source. Since noninterference is not a safety property, it is diﬃcult to compare NIPC to RSC directly. However, NIPC seeks to preserve information ﬂow properties, which can also be approximated as safety properties [14]. So, in principle, RSC can be applied to the same end-goals as NIPC. Swamy et al. [47] embed an F∗ model of a gradually and robustly typed variant of JavaScript into an F∗ model of JavaScript. Their type-directed compiler is proven to attain memory isolation as well as static and dynamic memory safety. However, they do not consider general safety properties, nor a speciﬁc, general criterion for compiler security. Gradual typing supports constructs similar to our endorsement construct in Lτ .  8  Conclusion  This paper has examined robustly safe compilation (RSC ), a soundness criterion for compilers with direct relevance to security, and shown that the criterion is easily realizable and leads to more eﬃcient code than does the current standard for secure compilers, fully abstract compilation wrt contextual equivalence. We have also presented two diﬀerent techniques for establishing that a compiler attains RSC . One is an adaptation of an existing technique, back-translation, and the other is based on inductive invariants. In ongoing work, we are both extending our work to the robust preservation of properties stronger than safety, and deepening our work by developing secure compilers for more realistic languages. Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Dominique Devriese, Frank Piessens, David Swasey, Catalin Hritcu and Marco Stronati for discussions and comments on the subject. This work was partially supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) through funding for the CISPA-Stanford Center for Cybersecurity (FKZ: 13N1S0762).  References [1] Martín Abadi. Secrecy by typing in security protocols. In TACS, pages 611–638, 1997.  27  [2] Martín Abadi. Protection in programming-language translations. In Secure Internet programming, pages 19–34. Springer-Verlag, London, UK, 1999. [3] Martín Abadi, Cédric Fournet, and Georges Gonthier. Authentication primitives and their compilation. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL ’00, pages 302–315, New York, NY, USA, 2000. ACM. [4] Martín Abadi, Cédric Fournet, and Georges Gonthier. Secure implementation of channel abstractions. Information and Computation, 174:37–83, 2002. [5] Martín Abadi and Gordon D. Plotkin. On protection by layout randomization. ACM Transactions on Information and System Security, 15:8:1–8:29, July 2012. [6] Pieter Agten, Raoul Strackx, Bart Jacobs, and Frank Piessens. Secure compilation to modern processors. In 2012 IEEE 25th Computer Security Foundations Symposium, CSF 2012, pages 171–185. IEEE, 2012. [7] Amal Ahmed and Matthias Blume. Typed closure conversion preserves observational equivalence. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming, ICFP ’08, pages 157–168, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM. [8] Amal Ahmed and Matthias Blume. An equivalence-preserving CPS translation via multi-language semantics. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming, ICFP ’11, pages 431–444, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM. [9] Michael Backes, Catalin Hritcu, and Matteo Maﬀei. Union, intersection and reﬁnement types and reasoning about type disjointness for secure protocol implementations. Journal of Computer Security, 22(2):301–353, 2014. [10] Antonio Barresi, Kaveh Razavi, Mathias Payer, and Thomas R. Gross. CAIN: Silently breaking ASLR in the cloud. In 9th USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 15), Washington, D.C., 2015. USENIX Association. [11] Gilles Barthe, Tamara Rezk, and Amitabh Basu. Security types preserving compilation. Computer Languages, Systems and Structures, 33:35–59, 2007. [12] Jesper Bengtson, Karthikeyan Bhargavan, Cédric Fournet, Andrew D. Gordon, and Sergio Maﬀeis. Reﬁnement types for secure implementations. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 33(2):8:1–8:45, February 2011. [13] Gérard Berry and Gérard Boudol. The chemical abstract machine. Theor. Comput. Sci., 96(1):217–248, 1992.  28  [14] Gérard Boudol. Secure information ﬂow as a safety property. chapter Formal Aspects in Security and Trust, pages 20–34. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. [15] William J. Bowman and Amal Ahmed. Noninterference for free. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming, ICFP ’15, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM. [16] Michele Bugliesi and Marco Giunti. Secure implementations of typed channel abstractions. In Proceedings of the 34th annual ACM SIGPLANSIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL ’07, pages 251–262, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM. [17] Luca Cardelli, Giorgio Ghelli, and Andrew D. Gordon. Secrecy and group creation. Inf. Comput., 196(2):127–155, 2005. [18] Stephen Chong. Expressive and Enforceable Information Security Policies. PhD thesis, Cornell University, August 2008. [19] Michael R. Clarkson and Fred B. Schneider. Hyperproperties. J. Comput. Secur., 18(6):1157–1210, September 2010. [20] Ricardo Corin, Pierre-Malo Deniélou, Cédric Fournet, Karthikeyan Bhargavan, and James Leifer. A secure compiler for session abstractions. Journal of Computer Security, 16:573–636, 2008. [21] Dominique Devriese, Marco Patrignani, Steven Keuchel, and Frank Piessens. Modular, Fully-Abstract Compilation by Approximate BackTranslation. Logical Methods in Computer Science, Volume 13, Issue 4, October 2017. [22] Dominique Devriese, Marco Patrignani, and Frank Piessens. Secure Compilation by Approximate Back-Translation. In POPL 2016, 2016. [23] Dominique Devriese, Marco Patrignani, and Frank Piessens. Parametricity versus the universal type. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2018, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2016, 2018. [24] Akram El-Korashy. A Formal Model for Capability Machines – An Illustrative Case Study towards Secure Compilation to CHERI. Master’s thesis, Universitat des Saarlandes, 2016. [25] Cédric Fournet, Andrew D. Gordon, and Sergio Maﬀeis. A type discipline for authorization policies. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 29(5), August 2007. [26] Cedric Fournet, Nikhil Swamy, Juan Chen, Pierre-Evariste Dagand, PierreYves Strub, and Benjamin Livshits. Fully abstract compilation to JavaScript. In Proceedings of the 40th annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT 29  Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL ’13, pages 371–384, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM. [27] D. Garg, C. Hritcu, M. Patrignani, M. Stronati, and D. Swasey. Robust Hyperproperty Preservation for Secure Compilation (Extended Abstract). ArXiv e-prints, October 2017. [28] Andrew D. Gordon and Alan Jeﬀrey. Authenticity by typing for security protocols. J. Comput. Secur., 11(4):451–519, July 2003. [29] Daniele Gorla and Uwe Nestman. Full abstraction for expressiveness: History, myths and facts. Math Struct Comp Science, 2014. [30] Radha Jagadeesan, Corin Pitcher, Julian Rathke, and James Riely. Local memory via layout randomization. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 24th Computer Security Foundations Symposium, CSF ’11, pages 161–174, Washington, DC, USA, 2011. IEEE Computer Society. [31] Yeongjin Jang, Sangho Lee, and Taesoo Kim. Breaking kernel address space layout randomization with intel tsx. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’16, pages 380–392, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM. [32] Yannis Juglaret, Cătălin Hriţcu, Arthur Azevedo de Amorim, and Benjamin C. Pierce. Beyond good and evil: Formalizing the security guarantees of compartmentalizing compilation. In 29th IEEE Symposium on Computer Security Foundations (CSF). IEEE Computer Society Press, July 2016. To appear. [33] Adriaan Larmuseau, Marco Patrignani, and Dave Clarke. A secure compiler for ML modules. In Programming Languages and Systems - 13th Asian Symposium, APLAS 2015, Pohang, South Korea, November 30 - December 2, 2015, Proceedings, pages 29–48, 2015. [34] Xavier Leroy. A formally veriﬁed compiler back-end. J. Autom. Reasoning, 43(4):363–446, 2009. [35] Sergio Maﬀeis, Martín Abadi, Cédric Fournet, and Andrew D. Gordon. Code-Carrying Authorization, pages 563–579. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. [36] Frank McKeen, Ilya Alexandrovich, Alex Berenzon, Carlos V. Rozas, Hisham Shaﬁ, Vedvyas Shanbhogue, and Uday R. Savagaonkar. Innovative instructions and software model for isolated execution. In HASP ’13, pages 10:1–10:1. ACM, 2013. [37] James H. Morris, Jr. Protection in programming languages. Commun. ACM, 16:15–21, 1973.  30  [38] Georg Neis, Derek Dreyer, and Andreas Rossberg. Non-parametric parametricity. SIGPLAN Not., 44(9):135–148, August 2009. [39] Max S. New, William J. Bowman, and Amal Ahmed. Fully abstract compilation via universal embedding. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming, ICFP 2016, pages 103–116, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM. [40] Flemming Nielson, Hanne R. Nielson, and Chris Hankin. Principles of Program Analysis. Springer-Verlag New York, USA, 1999. [41] Joachim Parrow. General conditions for full abstraction. Math Struct Comp Science, 2014. [42] Marco Patrignani, Pieter Agten, Raoul Strackx, Bart Jacobs, Dave Clarke, and Frank Piessens. Secure Compilation to Protected Module Architectures. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 37:6:1–6:50, April 2015. [43] Marco Patrignani, Dominique Devriese, and Frank Piessens. On Modular and Fully Abstract Compilation. In Proceedings of the 29th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Symposium, CSF 2016, 2016. [44] Marco Patrignani and Deepak Garg. Secure Compilation and Hyperproperties Preservation. In Proceedings of the 30th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Symposium CSF 2017, Santa Barbara, USA, CSF 2017, 2017. [45] Fred B. Schneider. Enforceable security policies. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., 3(1):30–50, 2000. [46] Ian Stark. Names and Higher-Order Functions. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge, December 1994. Also available as Technical Report 363, University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory. [47] Nikhil Swamy, Cedric Fournet, Aseem Rastogi, Karthikeyan Bhargavan, Juan Chen, Pierre-Yves Strub, and Gavin Bierman. Gradual typing embedded securely in javascript. SIGPLAN Not., 49(1):425–437, January 2014. [48] David Swasey, Deepak Garg, and Derek Dreyer. Robust and compositional veriﬁcation of object capability patterns. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2017. October 22 - 27, 2017, 2017. [49] Stelios Tsampas, Akram El-Korashy, Marco Patrignani, Dominique Devriese, Deepak Garg, and Frank Piessens. Towards Automatic Compartmentalization of C Programs on Capability Machines. In Workshop on Foundations of Computer Security 2017 August 21, 2017, FCS 2017, 2017.  31  [50] Robert Wahbe, Steven Lucco, Thomas E. Anderson, and Susan L. Graham. Eﬃcient software-based fault isolation. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., 27(5):203–216, December 1993. [51] Jonathan Woodruﬀ, Robert N.M. Watson, David Chisnall, Simon W. Moore, Jonathan Anderson, Brooks Davis, Ben Laurie, Peter G. Neumann, Robert Norton, and Michael Roe. The CHERI Capability Model: Revisiting RISC in an Age of Risk. In Proceeding of the 41st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecuture, ISCA ’14, pages 457–468, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2014. IEEE Press.  32  A  The Untyped Source Language: LU  This is a sequential while language with monitors.  A.1  Syntax Whole Programs P ::= M; H; F; I Components C ::= M; F; I Contexts A ::= H; F [·] Interfaces I ::= f Functions F ::= f(x) 7→ s; return; Operations ⊕ ::= + | − Comparison ⊗ ::= == | < | > Values v ::= b ∈ {true, false} | n ∈ N | hv, vi | ℓ Expressions e ::= x | v | e ⊕ e | e ⊗ e | he, ei | e.1 | e.2 | !e Statements s ::= skip | s; s | let x = e in s | if e then s else s | monitor | call f e | let x = new e in s | x := e Eval . Ctxs. E ::= [·] | e ⊕ E | E ⊕ n | e ⊗ E | E ⊗ n | he, Ei | hE, vi | E.1 | E.2 | !E Heaps H ::= ∅ | H; ℓ 7→ v Monitors M ::= ({σ} , Mon. States σ ∈ S  , σ0 , ℓroot , σc )  Mon. Reds. ::= ∅ | ; (s, H, s) Substitutions ρ ::= ∅ | ρ[v / x] Prog. States Ω ::= C, H ⊲ (s)f | fail Labels λ ::= ǫ | α Actions α ::= call f v H? | call f v H! | ret H! | ret H? Traces α ::= ∅ | α · α  A.2  Dynamic Semantics  Rules LU -Jump-Internal to LU -Jump-OUT dictate the kind of a jump between two functions: if internal to the component/attacker, in(from the attacker to the component) or out(from the component to the attacker). Rule LU -Plug tells how to obtain a whole program from a component and an attacker. Rule LU -Whole tells when a program is whole. Rule LU -Initial State tells the initial state of a whole program. Rule LU -Monitor Step tells when a monitor makes a single step given a heap. Helpers  33  (LU -Jump-Internal) ′  (LU -Jump-IN) ′  ((f ∈ I ∧ f ∈ I)∨ (f ′ ∈ / I∧f ∈ / I))  (LU -Jump-OUT) ′  f ∈I∧f ∈ /I I ⊢ f, f ′ : in  I ⊢ f, f ′ : internal A ≡ H; F [·] C M ≡ ({σ} , , σ0 , ℓroot , σ0 )  f∈ / I∧f ∈I I ⊢ f, f ′ : out  (LU -Plug) ≡ M; F′ ; I  ⊢ C, F : whole main ∈ names(F)  ℓroot ∩ H = ∅  A [C] = M; H; ℓroot 7→ 0; F; F′ ; I U  (L -Whole)  C ≡ M; F′ ; I names(F) ∩ names(F′ ) = ∅ names(I) ⊆ names(F) ∪ names(F′ ) fv(F) ∪ fv(F′ ) = ∅  (LU -Initial State)  P ≡ M; H; F; I C ≡ M; F; I Ω0 (P) = C; H ⊲ call main 0  ⊢ C, F : whole Let reach(ℓo , H) return a set of locations {ℓ} such that it is possible to reach any ℓ ∈ {ℓ} from ℓo just by dereferencing and projection expressions. To ensure monitor transitions have a meaning, they are assumed to be closed under bijective renaming of locations. M′  M; H  (LU -Monitor Step) , σ0 , ℓroot , σc ) M′ = ({σ} , ′ ′  M = ({σ} , (σc , H′ , σf ) ∈  , σ0 , ℓroot , σf ) H ⊆H dom(H ) = reach(ℓroot , H) M; H M′ (LU -Monitor No Step)  M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ℓroot , σc ) H′ ⊆ H (σc , H′ , σf ) ∈ M; H 6  A.2.1  Component Semantics  H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′ ǫ  Expression e reduces to e′ .  C, H ⊲ s −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′ α  Ω ==⇒ Ω′  Statement s reduces to s′ and evolves the rest accordingly, emitting label λ. Program state Ω steps to Ω′ emitting trace α.  H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′  34  (ELU -ctx)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′ H ⊲ E [e] ֒→ → E [e′ ] (ELU -p2)  H ⊲ hv, v′ i .1 ֒→ → v′  (ELU -val)  (ELU -p1)  H ⊲ v ֒→ → v  H ⊲ hv, v′ i .1 ֒→ → v  (ELU -op)  (ELU -comp)  n ⊕ n′ = n′′ H ⊲ n ⊕ n′ ֒→ → n′′  n ⊗ n′ = b H ⊲ n ⊗ n′ ֒→ → b  (ELU -dereference)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → ℓ ℓ 7→ v ∈ H H⊲!e ֒→ → v λ  C, H ⊲ s −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′ (ELU -step) λ  (ELU -sequence)  C, H ⊲ s −−→ C, H ⊲ s′  ǫ  C, H ⊲ skip; s −−→ C, H ⊲ s  λ  C, H ⊲ s; s′′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s′ ; s′′ (ELU -if-true)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → true ǫ C, H ⊲ if e then s else s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s (ELU -if-false)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → false ǫ C, H ⊲ if e then s else s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s (ELU -letin)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ǫ C, H ⊲ let x = e in s −−→ C, H ⊲ s[v / x] (ELU -alloc)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v  ℓ∈ / dom(H) ǫ  C, H ⊲ let x = new e in s −−→ C, H; ℓ 7→ v ⊲ s[ℓ / x] (ELU -update)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v H′ = H1 ; ℓ 7→ v; H2 H = H1 ; ℓ 7→ v′ ; H2 ǫ  C, H ⊲ ℓ := e −−→ C, H′ ⊲ skip U  (EL -monitor)  M = ({s} ,  , s0 , ℓroot , sc ) C = M; F; I M; H M′  C′ = M′ ; F; I  ǫ  C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ C′ , H ⊲ skip (ELU -monitor-fail)  M = ({s} ,  , s0 , ℓroot , sc ) M; H 6  C = M; F; I  ǫ  C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ fail (ELU -call-internal) ′  C.intfs ⊢ f, f : internal f(x) 7→ s; return; ∈ C.funs ǫ  f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′ H ⊲ e ֒→ → v  C, H ⊲ (call f e)f ′ −−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f  35  (ELU -callback)  f ′′ ; f ′  f′  = f(x) 7→ s; return; ∈ F C.intfs ⊢ f ′ , f : out H ⊲ e ֒→ → v call f v H!  C, H ⊲ (call f e)f ′ −−−−−−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f (ELU -call)  f ′′ ; f ′  f′  = f(x) 7→ s; return; ∈ C.funs C.intfs ⊢ f ′ , f : in H ⊲ e ֒→ → v call f v H?  C, H ⊲ (call f e)f ′ −−−−−−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f (ELU -ret-internal)  f′  =  f ′′ ; f ′  C.intfs ⊢ f, f ′ : internal ǫ  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ (ELU -retback)  f′  =  f ′′ ; f ′  C.intfs ⊢ f, f ′ : in ret H?  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ (ELU -return)  f′  =  f ′′ ; f ′  C.intfs ⊢ f, f ′ : out ret H!  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ α  Ω ==⇒ Ω′ (ELU -single) Ω= ⇒ Ω′′ ′′ α ′  Ω −−→ Ω α Ω ==⇒ Ω′  (ELU -silent) ǫ ′  Ω −−→ Ω Ω= ⇒ Ω′  36  (ELU -trans) α ′′  Ω ==⇒ Ω α′ Ω′′ ==⇒ Ω′ α·α′  Ω ====⇒ Ω′  The Target Language: LP  B B.1  Syntax  Whole Programs P ::= M; F; I Components C ::= M; F; I; kroot Contexts A ::= F [·] Interfaces I ::= f Functions F ::= f (x) 7→ s; return; Operations ⊕ ::= + | − Comparison ⊗ ::= == | < | > Values v ::= n ∈ N | hv, vi | k Expressions e ::= x | v | e ⊕ e | e ⊗ e | he, ei | e.1 | e.2 | !e with e Statements s ::= skip | s; s | let x = e in s | ifz e then s else s | call f e | x := e with e | let x = new e in s | let x = hide e in s | monitor Eval . Ctxs. E ::= [·] | e ⊕ E | E ⊕ n | e ⊗ E | E ⊗ n | !E with v | !e with E | he, Ei | hE, vi | E.1 | E.2 Heaps H ::= ∅ | H; n 7→ v : η | H; k Tag η ::= ⊥ | k Monitors M ::= ({σ} , Mon. States σ ∈ S  , σ0 , σc )  Mon. Reds. ::= ∅ | ; (s, H, s) Substitutions ρ ::= ∅ | ρ[v / x] Prog. States Ω ::= C, H ⊲ (s)f | fail Labels λ ::= ǫ | α Actions α ::= call f v H? | call f v H! | ret H! | ret H? Traces α ::= ∅ | α · α  B.2  Operational Semantics of LP Helpers (LP -Jump-Internal) ′  ((f ∈ I ∧ f ∈ I)∨ (f ′ ∈ / I∧f ∈ / I)) I ⊢ f , f ′ : internal  (LP -Jump-IN) ′  f ∈I∧f ∈ /I ′ I ⊢ f , f : in  37  (LP -Jump-OUT) ′  f∈ / I∧f ∈I I ⊢ f , f ′ : out  (LP -Plug)  A ≡ F [·] ⊢ C, F : whole M ≡ ({σ} ,  C ≡ M; F′ ; I; kroot main(x) 7→ s; return; ∈ F , σ0 , σc ) kroot ∈ / fn(A)  A [C] = M; F; F′ ; I (LP -Whole) M; F′ ; I; kroot  C≡ names(F) ∩ names(F′ ) = ∅  names(I) ⊆ names(F)  ⊢ C, F : whole (LP -Initial State)  P ≡ M; F; I C ≡ M; F′ ; I; kroot Ω0 (P) = C, kroot ; 0 7→ 0 : kroot ⊲ call main 0 Deﬁne reach(nr , kr , H) as the set of locations {n} such that it is possible to reach any n ∈ {n} from nr using any expression and relying on capability kr as well as any capability reachable from nr . Formally: ( ) H ⊲ e ֒→ → !n with v ֒→ → v′ reach(nr , kr , H) = n fv(e) = nr ∪ kr M; H  M′ (LP -Monitor Step) , σ0 , σc ) M′ = ′ ′  M = ({σ} , ({σ} , , σ0 , σf ) (sc , H′ , sf ) ∈ H ⊆ H dom(H ) = reach(0, kroot , H) M; H; kroot M′ (LP -Monitor No Step)  ∄H′ .H′ ⊆ H  B.2.1  M = ({σ} , , σ0 , σc ) (sc , H′ , sf ) ∈ dom(H′ ) = reach(0, kroot , H) M; H; kroot 6  Component Semantics  H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′ ǫ  Expression e reduces to e′ .  C, H ⊲ s −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′  Statement s reduces to s′ and evolves the rest accordingly, emitting label λ.  α  Ω ==⇒ Ω  ′  Program state Ω steps to Ω′ emitting trace α. H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′  38  (ELP -val)  (ELP -p1)  (ELP -p2)  H ⊲ v ֒→ → v  H ⊲ hv, v′ i .1 ֒→ → v  H ⊲ hv, v′ i .1 ֒→ → v′  P  P  (EL -op)  (EL -comp)  n ⊕ n′ = n′′ H ⊲ n ⊕ n′ ֒→ → n′′  if n ⊗ n′ = true then n′′ = 0 else n′′ = 1 H ⊲ n ⊗ n′ ֒→ → n′′  (ELP -deref-top)  (ELP -deref-k)  n 7→ v : ⊥ ∈ H H⊲!n with _ ֒→ → H⊲v  n 7→ (v, k) ∈ H H⊲!n with k ֒→ → H⊲v  (ELP -ctx)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′ H ⊲ E [e] ֒→ → H ⊲ E [e′ ] λ  H ⊲ s −−→ H′ ⊲ s′ (ELP -step) λ  (ELP -sequence)  C, H ⊲ s −−→ C, H ⊲ s′  ǫ  C, H ⊲ skip; s −−→ C, H ⊲ s  λ  C, H ⊲ s; s′′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s′ ; s  (ELP -if-true)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → 0 ǫ C, H ⊲ ifz e then s else s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s (ELP -if-false)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → n  n 6≡ 0 ǫ  C, H ⊲ ifz e then s else s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s′ P  (EL -letin)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ǫ C, H ⊲ let x = e in s −−→ C, H ⊲ s[v / x] (ELP -new)  H = H1 ; n 7→ (v, η)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v  ǫ  C, H ⊲ let x = new e in s −−→ C, H; n + 1 7→ v : ⊥ ⊲ s[n + 1 / x] (ELP -hide)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → n H = H1 ; n 7→ v : ⊥; H2  k∈ / dom(H) H′ = H1 ; n 7→ v : k; H2 ; k ǫ  C, H ⊲ let x = hide e in s −−→ C, H′ ⊲ s[k / x] (ELP -assign-top)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v H′ = H1 ; n 7→ v : ⊥; H2 H = H1 ; n 7→ _ : ⊥; H2 ǫ  C, H ⊲ n := e with _ −−→ C, H′ ⊲ skip P  (EL -assign-k)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v H = H1 ; n 7→ _ : k; H2 H′ = H1 ; n 7→ v : k; H2 ǫ  C, H ⊲ n := e with k −−→ C, H′ ⊲ skip  39  (ELP -monitor)  M = ({s} ,  , σ0 , σc )  C = M; F; I; kroot M; H; kroot M′  C′ = M′ ; F; I; kroot  ǫ  C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ C′ , H ⊲ skip (ELP -monitor-fail)  C = M; F; I; kroot M; H; kroot 6 ǫ  C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ fail (ELP -call-internal) ′  C.intfs ⊢ f , f : internal f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′ f (x) 7→ s; return; ∈ C.funs ǫ  C, H ⊲ (call f v)f ′ −−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f (ELP -callback)  f′  =  f ′′ ; f ′  f (x) 7→ s; return; ∈ F C.intfs ⊢ f ′ , f : out call f v H!  C, H ⊲ (call f v)f ′ −−−−−−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f (ELP -call)  f ′ = f ′′ ; f  ′  f (x) 7→ s; return; ∈ C.funs C.intfs ⊢ f ′ , f : in call f v H?  C, H ⊲ (call f v)f ′ −−−−−−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f (ELP -ret-internal)  C.intfs ⊢ f , f ′ : internal  f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′  ǫ  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ (ELP -retback) ′  C.intfs ⊢ f , f : in  f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′  ret H?  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ (ELP -return) ′  C.intfs ⊢ f , f : out  f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′  ret H!  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ α  Ω ==⇒ Ω′ (ELP -single) Ω= ⇒ Ω′′ ′′ α ′  Ω −−→ Ω α Ω ==⇒ Ω′  P  (EL -silent) ǫ  Ω −−→ Ω′ Ω= ⇒ Ω′  40  (ELP -trans) α ′′  Ω ==⇒ Ω α′ Ω′′ ==⇒ Ω′ α·α′  Ω ====⇒ Ω′  C  Language and Compiler Properties  C.1  Safety, Attackers and Robust Safety  These properties hold for both languages are written in black and only once. Definition 8 (Safety). def  ⊢ C : safe = ∀C . if ⊢ C , ∅ : whole α  then Ω0 (C ) == 6 ⇒ fail A source component is safe if whenever its monitor runs, it does not fail. Definition 9 (Attacker). def  M ⊢ A : attacker = no monitor inside A and no location of M reachable or stored in A An attacker is valid if it does not invoke monitors. Definition 10 (Robust Safety). def  ⊢ C : rs = ∀A if C .M ⊢ A : attacker then ⊢ A [C ] : safe A program is robustly safe if it is safe for any attacker it is composed with.  C.2  Cross-language Relations  Assume a partial bijection β : ℓ × n × η from source to target heap locations such that • if (ℓ1 , n, η) ∈ β and (ℓ2 , n, η) then ℓ1 = ℓ2 ; • if (ℓ, n1 , η1 ) ∈ β and (ℓ, n2 , η2 ) then n1 = n2 and η1 = η2 . we use this bijection to parametrise the relation so that we can relate meaningful locations. For compiler correctness we rely on a β0 which relates initial locations of monitors. Assume a relation ≈β : v × β × v that is total so it maps any source value to a target value v. • ∀v.∃v.v ≈β v. This relation is used for deﬁning compiler correctness. By inspecting the semantics of LU , Rules ELP -sequence and ELP -if-true let us derive that 41  • true ≈β 0; • false ≈β n where n 6= 0; ( v=k • ℓ ≈β hn, vi where v 6= k  if (ℓ, n, k) ∈ β otherwise, so (ℓ, n, ⊥) ∈ β  • hv1 , v2 i ≈β hv1 , v2 i iﬀ v1 ≈β v1 and v2 ≈β v2 . We overload the notation and use the same notation to indicate the (assumed) relation between monitor states: σ ≈ σ. We lift this relation to sets of states point-wise and indicate it as follows: {σ} ≈ {σ}. In these cases the bijection β is not needed as states do not have locations inside. Function names are related when they are the same: f ≈β f . Variables names are related when they are the same: x ≈β x. Substitutions are related when they replace related values for related variables: [v / x] ≈β [v / x] iﬀ v ≈β v and x ≈β x. α ≈β α (Call relation)  (Callback relation)  f ≈f v ≈β v H ≈β H call f v H? ≈β call f v H?  f≈f v ≈β v H ≈β H call f v H! ≈β call f v H!  (Return relation)  (Returnback relation)  H ≈β H ret H! ≈β ret H!  H ≈β H ret H? ≈β ret H?  (Epsilon relation)  ǫ ≈β ǫ  Definition 11 (MRM). Given a monitor-speciﬁc relation σ ≈ σ on monitor states, we say that a relation R on source and target monitors is a bisimulation if the following hold whenever M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ℓroot , σc ) and M = ({σ} , , σ0 , σc ) are related by R: 1. σ0 ≈ σ0 , and 2. σc ≈ σc , and 3. For all β containing (ℓroot , 0, kroot ) and all H, H with H ≈β H the following hold: (a) (σc , H, _) ∈  iﬀ (σc , H, _) ∈  (b) (σc , H, σ ′ ) ∈  and (σc , H, σ ′ ) ∈  , and imply ({σ},  , ℓroot , σ ′ )R({σ},  , 0, σ ′ ).  Definition 12 (M ≈ M). M ≈ M is the union of all bisimulations MRM, which is also a bisimulation. H ≈β H  42  (Heap relation) (Empty relation)  H ≈ β H1 ; H2 ℓ ≈β hn, _i v ≈β v H = H1 ; n 7→ v : η; H2 H; ℓ 7→ v ≈β H  ∅ ≈β k  The heap relation is crucial. A source heap H is related to a target heap H if for any location pointing to a value in the former, a related location points to a related value in the target (Rule Heap relation). The base case (Rule Empty relation) considers that in the target heap we may have keys, which are not related to source elements. As additional notation for states, we deﬁne when a state is stuck as follows (Stuck state)  Ω = M;F;I;H ⊲ s  λ  ∄Ω ′ , λ.Ω −−→ → Ω′  s 6≡ skip Ω×  A state that terminated is deﬁned as follows; this deﬁnition is given for a concurrent version of the language too (this is relevant for languages deﬁned later): (Terminated state)  (Terminated state - fail)  Ω = M ; F ; I ; H ⊲ skip  Ω = fail  Ω  Ω⇓  ⇓ (Terminated soup)  Ω = M;F;I;H ⊲ Π  ∀π ∈ Π . M ; F ; I ; H ⊲ π  ⇓  Ω⇓ To deﬁne compiler correctness, we rely on a cross-language relation for program states. Two states are related if their monitors are related and if their whole heap is related (Rule Related states – Whole) or if they are both fails (Rule Related states – Fail). Ω ≈β Ω (Related states – Whole)  Ω = M; F, F′ ; I; H ⊲ s q yL U Ω = M; F, F′ LP ; I; H ⊲ s M ≈β M H ≈β H Ω ≈β Ω  C.3  (Related states – Fail)  Ω = fail Ω = fail Ω ≈β Ω  Correct and Robustly-safe Compilation S  Consider a compiler to be a function of this form: J·KT : C × M → C, taking a source component and a target monitor and producing a target component (the target monitor is to be related to the monitor inside the source component).  43  Definition 13 (Correct Compilation). S  def  ⊢ J·KT : cc = ∀C ≡ (M; F; I), M...∃β. if ⊢ C : whole M ≈β M  ǫ  Ω0 (C) =⇒ Ω Ω⇓   S Ω0 (C) ≈β0 Ω0 JC, MKT   ǫ then Ω0 JC, MKST =⇒ Ω β0 ⊆ β  and Ω ≈β Ω Ω⇓  There are no labels because the component is whole already, so I is empty. Definition 14 (Robust Safety Preserving Compilation). S  def  ⊢ J·KT : rs-pres = ∀C ≡ (M; F; I), M. if ⊢ C : rs M ≈β M  then ⊢ JC, MKST : rs  Definition 15 (Safe Compilation). S  C.3.1  def  S  S  ⊢ J·KT : safecomp = ⊢ J·KT : rs-pres ∧ ⊢ J·KT : cc  Compiling Monitors  We can change the deﬁnition of compiler to also compile the monitor. Consider q yS this compiler to have this type and this notation: · T : C → C. Definition 16 (Robustly-safe Compilation with Monitors). ⊢  q yS def · T : rs-pres(M) = ∀C.  if ⊢ C : rs r zS then ⊢ C : rs T  44  D  Compiler from LU to LP U  L Definition 17 (Compiler LU to LP ). J·KL P : C × M → C U  JC, MKLLP is deﬁned as follows: q  yL U q yL U q yLU M; F; I, M LP = M; F LP ; I; kroot LP LU  if M ≈β M  LU  LU  (J·KLP -Comp) LU  (J·KLP -Function)  Jf(x) 7→ s; return;KLP = f (x) 7→ JsKLP ; return; LU  LU  (J·KLP -Interfaces)  JfKLP = f  Expressions LU  JtrueKLP = 0 U  JfalseKLLP = 1 LU  LU  if true ≈β 0  (J·KLP -True)  if false ≈β 1  (J·KLLP -False)  U  LU  if n ≈β n  JnKLP = n  (J·KLP -nat)  LU  LU  (J·KLP -Var)  JxKLP = x U  LU  L JℓKLP = hn, vi if ℓ ≈β hn, vi E D U U U Jhe1 , e2 iKLLP = Je1 KLLP , Je2 KLLP LU  LU  LU  LU  Je.1KLP = JeKLP .1  U  (J·KLLP -Pair) LU  (J·KLP -P1) LU  (J·KLP -P2)  Je.2KLP = JeKLP .2 U  (J·KLP -Loc)  U  U  U  J!eKLLP = !JeKLLP .1 with JeKLLP .2 LU  LU  LU  LU  LU  LU  (J·KLLP -Deref) LU  Je ⊕ e′ KLP = JeKLP ⊕ Je′ KLP  (J·KLP -op) LU  Je ⊗ e′ KLP = JeKLP ⊗ Je′ KLP  (J·KLP -cmp)  Statements LU  JskipKLP = skip U  LU  (J·KLP -Skip) U  U  Jsu ; sKLLP = Jsu KLLP ; JsKLLP LU  LU  U  (J·KLLP -Seq) LU  LU  (J·KLP -Letin)  Jlet x = e in sKLP = let x = JeKLP in JsKLP LU  LU  LU  LU  Jif e then st else se KLP = ifz JeKLP then Jst KLP else Jse KLP LU  LU  Jlet x = new e in sKLP = let xloc = new JeKLP in let xcap = hide xloc in  LU  let x = hxloc , xcap i in JsKLP 45  LU  (J·KLP -If) LU  (J·KLP -New)  LU  LU  Jx := e′ KLP = let x1 = x.1 in let x2 = x.2 in  (J·KLP -Assign)  LU  x1 := JeKLP with x2  LU  LU  Jcall f eKLP = call f JeKLP LU  LU  (J·KLP -call) LU  (J·KLP -Mon)  JmonitorKLP = monitor U  Note that the case for Rule (J·KLLP -New) only works because we are in a sequential setting. In a concurrent setting an adversary could access xloc before it Lτ is hidden, so the deﬁnition would change. See Rule (J·KLπ -New) for a concurrent correct implementation. . i h LU LU J[v / x]KLP = JvKLP x LU  Optimisation We could optimise Rule (J·KLP -Deref) as follows: • rename the current expressions except dereferencing to b; • reform expressions both in Lτ and LP as e ::= b | let x = b in e | !b. In the case of LP it would be · · · | !b with b. This allows expressions to compute e.g., pairs and projections. LU  • rewrite the Rule (J·KLP -Deref) case for compiling !b into: LU  let x = JbKLP in let x1 = x.1 in let x2 = x.2 in !x1 with x2.  • as expressions execute atomically, this would also scale to the compiler for concurrent languages deﬁned in later sections. We do not use this approach to avoid nonstandard constructs.  D.1  U  Properties of the J·KLLP Compiler LU  LU  Theorem 7 (Compiler J·KLP is cc). ⊢ J·KLP : cc LU  LU  Theorem 8 (Compiler J·KLP is rs-pres ). ⊢ J·KLP : rs-pres  D.2  D.2.1  Back-translation from LP to LU Values Backtranslation  Here is how values are back translated. LP  hh·iiLU : v → v  46  P  hh0iiL LU = true LP  if n 6= 0  hhniiLU = false L  P  where n ≈β n  hhniiLU = n P  hhkiiL LU = 0 D E LP LP LP hhhv, v′ iiiLU = hhviiLU , hhv′ iiLU LP  where ℓ ≈β hn, vi  hhhn, viiiLU = ℓ  The backtranslation is nondeterministic, as ≈β is not injective. In this case we cannot make it injective (in the next compiler we can index it by types and make it so but here we do not have them). This is the reason why the backtranslation algorithm returns a set of contexts, as backtranslating an action that performs call f v H? could result in either call f true H? or call f 0 H?. Now depending on f’s body, which is the component to be compiled, supplying true or 0 may have diﬀerent outcomes. Let us assume that the compilation of f, when receiving call f v H? does not get stuck. If f contains if x then s else s′ , supplying 0 will make it stuck. However, because we generate all possible contexts, we know that we generate also the context that will not cause f to be stuck. This is captured in Lemma 1 below. Lemma 1 (Compiled code steps imply existence of source steps). ∀ if Ω′′ ≈β Ω′′ U  α?  Ω′′ ==⇒ C, H ⊲ JsKLLP ; s′ ρ LU  λ!  C, H ⊲ JsKLP ; s′ ρ ==⇒ Ω′  {α?} = {α? | α? ≈β α?} {ρ} = {ρ | ρ ≈β ρ}  then ∃αj ? ∈ {α?} , ρy ∈ {ρ} , Cj , Hj , sj ; s′j ρ′ . αj ?  if Ω′′ ===⇒ Cj , Hj ⊲ sj ; s′j ρ′ LU  then Cj , Hj ⊲ sj ; s′j ρy ≈β C, H ⊲ JsKLP ; s′ ρ λ!  Cj , Hj ⊲ sj ; s′j ρy ==⇒ Ω′ λ! ≈β λ! Ω′ ≈ β Ω ′  D.2.2  Skeleton LP  hh·iiLU : I → F 47  P  P  hhf iiL LU = f(x) 7→ incrementCounter(); return;  (hh·iiL LU -fun)  Functions call incrementCounter() before returning to ensure that when a returnback is modelled, the counter is incremented right before returning and not beforehand, as doing so would cause the possible execution of other bactranslated code blocks. Its implementation is described below. LP  hh·iiLU : I → A I  LP LU  LP  (hh·iiLU -skel)  = ℓi 7→ 1; ℓglob 7→ 0 main(x) 7→ incrementCounter(); return; incrementCounter() 7→ see below register(x) 7→ see below update(x) 7→ see below LP  hhf iiLU  ∀f ∈ I  We assume compiled code does not implement functions incrementCounter, register and update, they could be renamed to not generate conﬂicts if they were. The skeleton sets up the infrastructure. It allocates global locations ℓi , which is used as a counter to count steps in actions, and ℓglob , which is used to keep track of attacker knowledge, as described below. Then it creates a dummy for all functions expected in the interfaces I as well as a dummy for the main. Dummy functions return their parameter variable and they increment the global counter before that for reasons explained later. D.2.3  Single Action Translation  We use the shortcut ak to indicate a list of pairs of locations and tag to access them hn, ηi that is what the context has access to. We use functions .loc to access obtain all locations of such a list and .cap to obtain all the capabilities (or 0 when η = ⊥) of the list. We use function incrementCounter to increment the contents of ℓi by one. incrementCounter( ) 7→ let c = !ℓi in let l = ℓi in l := c + 1 Starting from location ℓg we keep a list whose elements are pairs locationsnumbers, we indicate this list as Lglob . We use function register(hℓ, ni) which adds the pair hℓ, ni to the list Lglob . Any time we use this we are sure we are adding a pair for which no other existing pair in Lglob has a second projection equal to n. This function can be  48  deﬁned as follows: register(x) 7→ let xl = x.1 in let xn = x.2 in Lglob :: hxl, xni Lglob is a list of pair elements, so it is implemented as a pair whose ﬁrst projection is an element (a pair) and its second projection is another list; the empty list being 0. Where :: is a recursive function that starts from ℓglob and looks for its last element (i.e., it performs second projections until it hits a 0), then replaces that second projection with hhxn, xli , 0i Lemma 2 (register(ℓ, n) does not add duplicates for n). For n supplied as paP ǫ −→ C; H′ ⊲ skip and h_, ni ∈ / Lglob rameter by hh·iiL LU , C; H ⊲ register(ℓ, n) − P  P  L Proof. Simple analysis of Rules (hh·iiL LU -call) to (hh·iiLU -ret-loc).  We use function update(n, v) which accesses the elements in the Lglob list, then takes the second projection of the element: if it is n it updates the ﬁrst projection to v, otherwise it continues its recursive call. If it does not ﬁnd an element for n, it gets stuck ǫ  Lemma 3 (update(n, v) never gets stuck). C; H ⊲ update(n, v) −−→ C; H′ ⊲ skip L  P  for n and v supplied as parameters by hh·iiLU and H′ =H[ℓ 7→ v / ℓ 7→ _] for ℓ ≈β hn, _i. LP  LP  Proof. Simple analysis of Rules (hh·iiLU -call) and (hh·iiLU -retback). We use the meta-level function reachable(H, v, ak) that returns a set of pairs hn 7→ v : η, ei such that all locations in are reachable from H starting from any location in ak ∪ v and that are not already in ak and such that e is a sequence of source-level instructions that evaluate to ℓ such that ℓ ≈β hn, _i. Definition 18 (Reachable).                 reachable(H, v, ak) = hn 7→ v : k, ei                49            and kst ∈ kroot ∪ ak.cap      and n 7→ v : k ∈ H n ∈ reach(nst , kst , H) where nst ∈ v ∪ ak.loc  and H⊲!e ֒→ → !n with k      and ∀H. H ≈β H     P  L   H ⊲ hheiiLU ֒→ → ℓ    and (ℓ, n, k) ∈ β  Intuitively, reachable( · ) ﬁnds out which new locations have been allocated by the compiled component and that are now reachable by the attacker (the ﬁrst projection of the pair, n 7→ v : η). Additionally, it tells how to reach those locations in the source so that we can register(·) them for the source attacker (the backtranslated context) to access. In this case we know by deﬁnition that e can only contain one ! and several ·.1 or ·.2. The base case for values is as before. LP  hh·iiLU : e → e P  P  L hh!eiiL LU = !hheiiLU LP  LP  LP  LP  hhe.1iiLU = hheiiLU .1 hhe.2iiLU = hheiiLU .2 The next function takes the following inputs: an action, its index, the previous function’s heap, the previous attacker knowledge and the stack of functions called so far. It returns a set of: code, the new attacker knowledge, its heap, the stack of functions called and the function where the code must be put. In the returned parameters, the attacker knowledge, the heap and the stack of called functions serve as input to the next call.  LP hh·iiLU : α × n ∈ N × H × n × η × f → s × n × η × H × f × f  **  call f v H?, n, Hpre , ak, f  ++LP LU    if !ℓi == n then      incrementCounter()             let x1 = new v1 in register(hx1, n1 i)        ···              let xj = new v in register(hxj, n i)  j j     =  update(m1 , u1 )      ···            update(m , u )  l l           call f v      else skip     , ak′ , H, f; f, f ′  LP        ∀   P L   v1 = hhv1 iiLU       ···    LP    v = hhv ii j  u1 = ···  LP  ul = hhul iiLU  Hn = n1 7→ v1 : η1 , · · · , nj 7→ vj : ηj and H ∩ Hpre = Hc Hc = m1 7→ u1 : η1′ , · · · , ml 7→ ul : ηl′ and ak′ = ak, hn1 , η1 i , · · · , hnj , ηj i 50  LP  v = hhviiLU  (hh·iiLU -call)  where H \ Hpre = Hn  j LU LP hhu1 iiLU                         and f = f ′ f ′  **  call f v H!, n, Hpre , ak, f  ++LP LU     if !ℓi == n then        incrementCounter()                 let l1 = e in register(hl1, n i)  1 1 ′   =  , ak , H, f; f, f   · · ·                let lj = ej in register(hlj, nj i)        else skip LP  (hh·iiLU -callback-loc) if reachable(H, v, ak) = hn1 7→ v1 : η1 , e1 i , · · · , hnj 7→ vj : ηj , ej i and ak′ = ak, hn1 , η1 i , · · · , hnj , ηj i  **  ret H?, n, Hpre , ak, f; f  ++LP LU    if !ℓi == n then          //no incrementCounter() as explained         let x1 = new v1 in register(hx1, n1 i)        ···           let xj = new vj in register(hxj, nj i)    =  update(m1 , u1 )             ···           update(m , u ) l l      else skip    , ak′ , H, f, f LP        ∀   P L   v1 = hhv1 iiLU       ···    P L vj = hhvj iiLU   LP  u1 = hhu1 iiLU       ···    P  L   ul = hhul iiLU      (hh·iiLU -retback)  where H \ Hpre = Hn Hn = n1 7→ v1 : η1 , · · · , nj 7→ vj : ηj and H ∩ Hpre = Hc Hc = m1 7→ u1 : η1′ , · · · , ml 7→ ul : ηl′ and ak′ = ak, hn1 , η1 i , · · · , hnj , ηj i  **  ret H!, n, Hpre , ak, f; f  ++LP LU     if !ℓi == n then        incrementCounter()                 let l1 = e in register(hl1, n i)  1 1 ′ ′   =  , ak , H, f, f     ···                let lj = e in register(hlj, n i) j j       else skip P  (hh·iiL LU -ret-loc)  51  if reachable(H, 0, ak) = hn1 7→ v1 : η1 , e1 i , · · · , hnj 7→ vj : ηj , ej i and ak′ = ak, hn1 , η1 i , · · · , hnj , ηj i and f = f ′ f ′  This is the back-translation of functions. Each action is wrapped in an if statement checking that the action to be mimicked is that one (the same function may behave diﬀerently if called twice and we need to ensure this). After the if, the counter checking for the action index ℓi is incremented. This is not done in case of a return immediately, but only just before the return itself, so the increment is added in the skeleton already. (there could be a callback to the same function after the return and then we wouldn’t return but execute the callback code instead) When back-translating a ?-decorated, we need to set up the heap correctly before the call itself. That means calculating the new locations that this action allocated (Hn ), allocating them and registering them in the Lglob list via the register(·) function. These locations are also added to the attacker knowledge ak′ . Then we need to update the heap locations we already know of. These locations are Hc and as we know them already, we use the update(·) function. When back-translating a !-decorated action we need to calculate what part of the heap we can reach from there, and so we rely on the reachable( · ) function to return a list of pairs of locations n and expressions e. We use n to expand the attacker knowledge ak′ as these locations are now reachable. We use e to reach these locations in the source heap so that we can register them and ensure they are accessible through Lglob . Finally, we use parameter f to keep track of the call stack, so making a call to f pushes f on the stack (f; f) and making a return pops a stack f; f to f. That stack carries the information to instantiate the f in the return parameters, which is the location where the code needs to be allocated.  LP hh·iiLU : α × n ∈ N × H × n × η × f → s, f P  hh∅iiL LU = ∅   LP αα, n, Hpre , ak, f LU = s, f; s, f   P  (hh·iiL LU -listact-b)  LP s, ak′ , H′ , f ′ , f = α, n, Hpre , ak, f LU  LP  s, f ∈ α, n + 1, H′ , ak′ , f ′ LU LP  (hh·iiLU -listact-i)  This recursive call ensures the parameters are passed around correctly. Note that each element in a set returned by the single-action back-translation has the same ak′ , H and f ′ , the only elements that change are in the code s due to the backtranslation of values. Thus the recursive call can pass those parameters taken from any element of the set.  52  D.2.4  P  The Back-translation Algorithm hh·iiL LU LP  hh·iiLU : I × α → {A}  I, α  LP LU  =             A             A = Askel ✶ s, f        for all s, f ∈ s, f     P L where s, f = hhα, 1, H0 , ∅, mainiiLU    H0 = 0 7→ 0 : kroot     P  L  Askel = I LU  LP  (hh·iiLU -main)  This is the real back-translation algorithm: it calls the skeleton and joins it with each element of the set returned by the trace back-translation. ✶: A × s, f → A LP  A✶∅=A  (hh·iiLU -join)  H; F1 ; · · · ; F; · · · ; Fn ✶ s, f; s, f = H; F1 ; · · · ; F′ ; · · · ; Fn ✶ s, f where F = f(x) 7→ s′ ; return; F′ = f(x) 7→ s; s′ ; return;  When joining we add from the last element of the list so that the functions we create have the concatenation of if statements (those guarded by the counter on ℓi ) that are sorted (guards with a test for ℓi = 4 are before those with a test ℓi = 5). D.2.5  Correctness of the Back-translation LP  Theorem 9 (hh·iiLU is correct). ∀  h i α LU ==⇒ Ω if Ω0 A JCKLP ǫ  Ω =⇒ Ω′  I = names(A) α ≡ α′ · α? ℓi ; ℓglob ∈ /β  LP  then ∃A ∈ hhI, αiiLU α  such that Ω0 (A [C]) ==⇒ Ω and α ≈β α 53  Ω ≈β Ω Ω.H.ℓi = ||α|| + 1 The back-translation is correct if it takes a target attacker that will reduce to a state together with a compiled component and it produces a set of source attackers such that one of them, that together with the source component will reduce to a related state performing related actions. Also it needs to ensure the step is incremented correctly. D.2.6  Remark on the Backtranslation  Some readers may wonder whether the hassle of setting up a source-level representation of the whole target heap is necessary. Indeed for those locations that are allocated by the context, this is not. If we changed the source semantics to have an oracle that predicts what a let x = new e in s statement will return as the new location, we could simplify this. In fact, currently the backtranslation stores target locations in the list Lglob and looks them up based on their target name, as it does not know what source name will be given to them. The oracle would obviate this problem, so we could hard code the name of these locations, knowing exactly the identiﬁer that will be returned by the allocator. For the functions to be correct in terms of syntax, we would need to pre-emptively allocate all the locations with that identiﬁer so that their names are in scope and they can be referred to. However, the problem still persists for locations created by the component, as their names cannot be hard coded, as they are not in scope. Thus we would still require reach to reach these locations, register to add them to the list and update to update their values in case the attacker does so. Thus we simplify the scenario and stick to a more standard, oracle-less semantics and to a generalised approach to location management in the backtranslation.  54  E  The Source Language: Lτ  This is an imperative, concurrent while language with monitors. Whole Programs P ::= M; H; F; I Components C ::= M; F; I Contexts A ::= H; F [·] Interfaces I ::= f Functions F ::= f(x : τ ) 7→ s; return; Operations ⊕ ::= + | − Comparison ⊗ ::= == | < | > Values v ::= b ∈ {true, false} | n ∈ N | hv, vi | ℓ Expressions e ::= x | v | e ⊕ e | e ⊗ e | !e | he, ei | e.1 | e.2 Statements s ::= skip | s; s | let x : τ = e in s | if e then s else s | x := e | let x = newτ e in s | call f e | monitor | {k s} | endorse x = e as ϕ in s Types τ ::= Bool | Nat | τ × τ | Ref τ | UN Superficial Types ϕ ::= Bool | Nat | UN × UN | Ref UN Eval . Ctxs. E ::= [·] | e ⊕ E | E ⊕ n | e ⊗ E | E ⊗ n | !E | he, Ei | hE, vi | E.1 | E.2 Heaps H ::= ∅ | H; ℓ 7→ v : τ Monitors M ::= ({σ} , Mon. States σ ∈ S Mon. Reds.  ::= ∅ |  , σ0 , ∆, σc ) ; (s, s)  Environments Γ , ∆ ::= ∅ | Γ; (x : τ ) Store Env . ∆ ::= ∅ | ∆; (ℓ : τ ) Substitutions ρ ::= ∅ | ρ[v / x] Processes π ::= (s)f Soups Π ::= ∅ | Π k π Prog. States Ω ::= C, H ⊲ Π | fail Labels λ ::= ǫ | α Actions α ::= call f v? | call f v! | ret ! | ret ? Traces α ::= ∅ | α · α We highlight elements that have changed from LU .  55  E.1  Static Semantics of Lτ  The static semantics follows these typing judgements. Component C is well-typed. Function F takes arguments of type τ under component C.  ⊢ C : UN C⊢F:τ ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄  Environments Γ and ∆ are well-formed.  ∆ ⊢ ok τ ⊢◦  Environment ∆ is safe. Type τ is insecure.  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s  Expression e has type τ inΓ. Statement s is well-typed in C and Γ.  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ π C, ∆, Γ ⊢ Π  Single process π is well-typed in C and Γ. Soup Π is well-typed in C and Γ.  ⊢H:∆ ⊢M  Heap H respects the typing of ∆. Monitor M is valid.  E.1.1  Auxiliary Functions  We rely on these standard auxiliary functions: names( · ) extracts the deﬁned names (e.g., function and interface names). fv( · ) returns free variables while fn( · ) returns free names (i.e., a call to a deﬁned function). dom( · ) returns the domain of a particular element (e.g., all the allocated locations in a heap). We denote access to the parts of C and P via functions .funs, .intfs and .mon. We denote access to parts of M with a dot notation, so M.∆ means ∆ where M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ). E.1.2  Typing Rules ⊢C (TLτ -component)  C ≡ M; F; I C ⊢ F : UN names(F) ∩ names(I) = ∅ M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ) ∆ ⊢ ok ⊢M ⊢ C : UN C ⊢ F : UN (TLτ -function)  F ≡ f(x : UN) 7→ s; return; C, ∆; x : UN ⊢ s ∀f ∈ fn(s), f ∈ dom(C.funs) ∨ f ∈ dom(C.intfs) C ⊢ F : UN ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄  56  (TLτ -env-e)  ∅; ∅ ⊢ ⋄  (TLτ -env-var)  (TLτ -env-loc)  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ x ∈ / dom(Γ) ∆, Γ; (x : τ ) ⊢ ⋄  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ l ∈ / dom(∆) ∆; (l : τ ); Γ ⊢ ⋄  ∆, Γ ⊢ ok (TLτ -safe-loc)  (TLτ -safe-e)  ∆ ⊢ ok  ∅ ⊢ ok  l∈ / dom(Γ) UN ∈ /τ Γ; (l : τ ) ⊢ ok  ∆, Γ ⊢ UN (TLτ -env-e)  ∅ ⊢ UN  (TLτ -env-var)  (TLτ -env-loc)  ∆, Γ ⊢ UN x ∈ / dom(Γ) Γ, (x : UN) ⊢ UN  ∆, Γ ⊢ UN l ∈ / dom(Γ) Γ, (l : UN) ⊢ UN  τ ⊢◦ (TLτ -bool-pub)  (TLτ -nat-pub)  Bool ⊢ ◦  Nat ⊢ ◦  (TLτ -pair-pub)  τ ⊢ ◦ τ′ ⊢ ◦ τ × τ′ ⊢ ◦  (TLτ -un-pub)  UN ⊢ ◦  (TLτ -references-pub)  Ref UN ⊢ ◦ ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ (TLτ -true)  (TLτ -false)  (TLτ -nat)  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢ true : Bool  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢ false : Bool  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢ n : Nat (TLτ -pair)  (TLτ -var)  (TLτ -loc)  x:τ ∈Γ ∆, Γ ⊢ x : τ  l:τ ∈∆ ∆, Γ ⊢ l : Ref τ (TLτ -proj-2)  (TLτ -proj-1)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ × τ ∆, Γ ⊢ e.1 : τ  ∆, Γ ⊢ e1 : τ ∆, Γ ⊢ e2 : τ ′ ∆, Γ ⊢ he1 , e2 i : τ × τ ′  ′  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ × τ ∆, Γ ⊢ e.2 : τ ′  ′  (TLτ -op)  (TLτ -dereference)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Ref τ ∆, Γ ⊢ !e : τ (TLτ -cmp)  ′  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Nat ∆, Γ ⊢ e′ : Nat ∆, Γ ⊢ e ⊗ e′ : Bool  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Nat ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Nat ∆, Γ ⊢ e ⊕ e′ : Nat  (TLτ -coercion)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ τ ⊢◦ C, ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s  57  (TLτ -function-call) (TLτ -skip)  ((f ∈ dom(C.funs)) ∨ (f ∈ dom(C.intfs))) ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN ∆, Γ ⊢ call f e  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ skip (TLτ -sequence)  (TLτ -letin)  (TLτ -assign)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ su C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ su ; s  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ C, Γ; x : τ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ let x : τ = e in s  ∆, Γ ⊢ x : Ref τ ∆, Γ ⊢ e′ : τ C, ∆, Γ ⊢ x := e′  (TLτ -new)  (TLτ -if)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ C, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ let x = newτ e in s  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Bool C, ∆, Γ ⊢ st C, ∆, Γ ⊢ se C, ∆, Γ ⊢ if e then st else se  (TLτ -fork)  (TLτ -monitor)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ {k s}  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ monitor  (TLτ -endorse)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN C, ∆, Γ; (x : ϕ) ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ endorse x = e as ϕ in s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ π (TLτ -process)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ (s)f C, ∆, Γ ⊢ Π (TLτ -soup)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ π C, ∆, Γ ⊢ Π C, ∆, Γ ⊢ π k Π ⊢H:∆ (Lτ -Heap-ok-i)  ℓ :7→ v : τ ∈ H ⊢H:∆ ∅⊢v:τ ⊢ H : ∆; ℓ : τ  (Lτ -Heap-ok-b)  ⊢H:∅  ⊢M (Lτ -Monitor)  M ≡ ({s} ,  , s0 , ∆, sc ) ⊢M  58  ∀s∃s′ .(s, s′ ) ∈  Notes Monitor typing just ensures that the monitor is coherent and that it can’t get stuck for no good reason. E.1.3  UN Typing  Attackers cannot have monitor nor newτ t terms where τ is diﬀerent from UN. ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN (TULτ -true)  (TULτ -false)  (TULτ -nat)  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢UN true : UN  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢UN false : UN  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢UN n : UN (TULτ -pair)  (TULτ -var)  (TULτ -loc)  x:τ ∈Γ ∆, Γ ⊢UN x : UN  l:τ ∈∆ ∆, Γ ⊢UN l : UN  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e1 : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN e2 : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN he1 , e2 i : UN  (TULτ -proj-1)  (TULτ -proj-2)  (TULτ -dereference)  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN e.1 : UN  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN e.2 : UN  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN !e : UN  (TULτ -op)  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN e′ : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN e ⊕ e′ : UN (TULτ -cmp)  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN e′ : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN e ⊗ e′ : UN C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN s (TULτ -function-call) (TULτ -skip)  ((f ∈ dom(C.funs)) ∨ (f ∈ dom(C.intfs))) ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN call f e  C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN skip (TULτ -sequence)  (TULτ -letin)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN su C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN s C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN su ; s  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN C, Γ; x : UN ⊢UN s C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN let x : UN = e in s  (TULτ -assign)  (TULτ -new)  ∆, Γ ⊢UN x : UN ∆, Γ ⊢UN e′ : UN C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN x := e′  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : UN C, Γ; x : UN ⊢UN s C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN let x = newUN e in s  (TULτ -if)  ∆, Γ ⊢UN e : Bool C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN st C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN se C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN if e then st else se  59  (TULτ -fork)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN s C, ∆, Γ ⊢UN {k s}  E.2  Dynamic Semantics of Lτ  Function mon-care( · ) returns the part of a heap the monitor cares for (Rule Lτ -Monitor-related heap). Rules Lτ -Jump-Internal to Lτ -Jump-OUT dictate the kind of a jump between two functions: if internal to the component/attacker, in(from the attacker to the component) or out(from the component to the attacker). Rule Lτ -Plug tells how to obtain a whole program from a component and an attacker. Rule Lτ -Initial State tells the initial state of a whole program. Rule Lτ -Initial-heap produces a heap that satisﬁes a ∆, initialised with base values. Rule Lτ -Monitor Step tells when a monitor makes a single step given a heap. mon-care( · ) (Lτ -Monitor-related heap)  H′ = {ℓ 7→ v : τ | ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H} ⊢ mon-care(H, ∆) = H′ Helpers (Lτ -Jump-Internal) ′  (Lτ -Jump-IN) ′  ((f ∈ I ∧ f ∈ I)∨ / I∧f ∈ / I)) (f ′ ∈  (Lτ -Jump-OUT) ′  f ∈I∧f ∈ /I I ⊢ f, f ′ : in  I ⊢ f, f ′ : internal  f∈ / I∧f ∈I I ⊢ f, f ′ : out  (Lτ -Plug) M; F′ ; I M  A ≡ H; F [·] C≡ ≡ ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σ0 ) dom(H) ∩ dom(∆) = ∅ dom(∆) ∩ (fv(F) ∪ fv(H)) = ∅ ⊢ C, F : whole ∆ ⊢ H0 main(x : UN) 7→ s; return; ∈ F A [C] = M; H ∪ H0 ; F; F′ ; I (Lτ -Whole) C ≡ M; F′ ; I  (Lτ -Initial State)  P ≡ M; H; F; I C ≡ M; F; I Ω0 (P) = C, H ⊲ call main 0  names(F) ∩ names(F′ ) = ∅ names(I) ⊆ names(F) ∪ names(F′ ) ⊢ C, F : whole ∆ ⊢ H0 (Lτ -Initial-heap)  ∆⊢H ∅⊢v:τ ∆, ℓ : τ ⊢ H; ℓ 7→ v : τ M; H  M′ (Lτ -Monitor Step) , σ0 , ∆, σc ) M′ = ({σ} ,  M = ({σ} , (σc , σf ) ∈  , σ0 , ∆, σf ) ⊢H:∆  M′  M; H 60  E.2.1  Component Semantics  H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′  Expression e reduces to e′ .  λ  Process π reduces to π ′ and evolves the rest accordingly.  λ  Soup Π reduce to Π′ and evolve the rest accordingly.  C, H ⊲ π −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ π C, H ⊲ Π −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ α  Program state Ω steps to Ω′ emitting trace α.  Ω ==⇒ Ω′  H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′ (ELτ -p1)  (ELτ -val)  (ELτ -p2)  H ⊲ hv, v′ i .1 ֒→ → v  H ⊲ v ֒→ → v  H ⊲ hv, v′ i .1 ֒→ → v′  τ  τ  (EL -op)  (EL -comp)  n ⊕ n′ = n′′ H ⊲ n ⊕ n′ ֒→ → n′′  n ⊗ n′ = b H ⊲ n ⊗ n′ ֒→ → b (ELτ -ctx)  (ELτ -dereference)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → e′ H ⊲ E [e] ֒→ → E [e′ ]  H ⊲ e ֒→ → ℓ ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H H⊲!ℓ ֒→ → v ǫ  C, H ⊲ π −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ π ′ (ELτ -step) λ  (ELτ -sequence)  C, H ⊲ s −−→ C, H ⊲ s′  ǫ  C, H ⊲ skip; s −−→ C, H ⊲ s  λ  C, H ⊲ s; s′′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s′ ; s (EL -if-true) τ  H ⊲ e ֒→ → true ǫ C, H ⊲ if e then s else s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s (ELτ -if-false)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → false ǫ C, H ⊲ if e then s else s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s′ (ELτ -letin)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ǫ C, H ⊲ let x : τ = e in s −−→ C, H ⊲ s[v / x] (ELτ -alloc)  ℓ∈ / dom(H)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ǫ  C, H ⊲ let x = newτ e in s −−→ C, H; ℓ 7→ v : τ ⊲ s[ℓ / x] (ELτ -update) H1 ; ℓ 7→ v′ :  H= τ ; H2 H′ = H1 ; ℓ 7→ v : τ ; H2 ǫ  C, H ⊲ ℓ := v −−→ C, H′ ⊲ skip 61  (ELτ -monitor)  , s0 , ∆, sc ) C = M; F; I C′ = M′ ; F; I M; mon-care(H, ∆) M′  M = ({s} ,  ǫ  C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ C′ , H ⊲ skip τ  (EL -monitor-fail)  , s0 , ∆, sc ) C = M; F; I C′ = M′ ; F; I ¬M; mon-care(H, ∆) M′  M = ({s} ,  ǫ  C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ fail (EL -endorse) τ  ∆, ∅ ⊢ v : ϕ  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v  ∆ = {ℓ : τ | ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H} ǫ  C, H ⊲ endorse x = e as ϕ in s −−→ C, H ⊲ s[v / x] (ELτ -call-internal) ′  C.intfs ⊢ f, f : internal f(x : τ ) : τ ′ 7→ s; return; ∈ C.funs  f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′ H ⊲ e ֒→ → v  ǫ  C, H ⊲ (call f e)f ′ −−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f (ELτ -callback) ′  ′  f ′ = f ′′ ; f f(x : τ ) : τ 7→ s; return; ∈ F C.intfs ⊢ f ′ , f : out H ⊲ e ֒→ → v call f v!  C, H ⊲ (call f e)f ′ −−−−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f (ELτ -call)  f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′ f(x : τ ) : τ ′ 7→ s; return; ∈ C.funs C.intfs ⊢ f ′ , f : in H ⊲ e ֒→ → v call f v?  C, H ⊲ (call f e)f ′ −−−−−−−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;[v / x])f ′ ;f (ELτ -ret-internal) ′  C.intfs ⊢ f, f : internal  f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′  ǫ  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ (ELτ -retback) ′  C.intfs ⊢ f, f : in  f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′  ret ?  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−−−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ ′  C.intfs ⊢ f, f :  (ELτ -return) out f ′ = f ′′ ; f ′  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v  ret !  C, H ⊲ (return;)f ′ ;f −−−−→ C, H ⊲ (skip)f ′ λ  C, H ⊲ Π −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ (ELτ -par) (ELτ -fail)  Π = Π1 k (s)f k Π2 Π′ = Π1 k (s′ )f ′ k Π2 λ  Π = Π1 k (s)f k Π2 ǫ C, H ⊲ (s)f −−→ fail  λ  C, H ⊲ Π −−→ fail  C, H ⊲ (s)f −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ (s′ )f ′ C, H ⊲ Π −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ 62  ǫ  (ELτ -fork)  Π = Π1 k ({k s}; s′ )f k Π2 Π′ = Π1 k (skip; s′ )f k Π2 k (s)∅ ǫ  C, H ⊲ Π −−→ C, H ⊲ Π′ α  Ω ==⇒ Ω′ (ELτ -single) Ω= ⇒ Ω′′ ′′ α ′  Ω −−→ Ω α Ω ==⇒ Ω′  (ELτ -silent) ǫ ′  Ω −−→ Ω Ω= ⇒ Ω′  63  (ELτ -trans) α ′′  Ω ==⇒ Ω α′ Ω′′ ==⇒ Ω′ α·α′  Ω ====⇒ Ω′  F F.1  Lπ : Extending LP with Concurrency and Informed Monitors Syntax  This extends the syntax of Appendix B.1 with concurrency and a memory allocation instruction that atomically hides the new location. Statements s ::= · · · | {k s} | destruct x = e as B in s or s | let x = newhide e in s Patterns B ::= nat | pair Monitors M ::= ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σc ) Single Process π ::= (s)f Processes Π ::= ∅ | Π k π Prog. States Ω ::= C, H ⊲ Π | fail  F.2  Dynamic Semantics  Following is the deﬁnition of the mon-care( · ) function for Lπ . mon-care( · ) (Lπ -Monitor-related heap)  H′ = {n 7→ v : η | n ∈ dom(H0 ) and n 7→ v : η ∈ H} mon-care(H, H0 ) = H′ Helpers (Lπ -Plug)  A ≡ F [·] C ≡ M; F′ ; I ⊢ C, F : whole main(x) 7→ return;s ∈ F M ≡ ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σ0 ) ∀k ∈ H0 .k ∈ / fv(A) ∀n 7→ v : η ∈ H0 , η = k ∧ k ∈ H0 A [C] = M; F; F′ ; I (Lπ -Initial State)  P ≡ M; F; I M ≡ ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σ0 ) Ω0 (P) = C, H0 ⊲ call main 0 M; H M = ({σ} ,  M′ (Lπ -Monitor Step) , σ0 , H0 , σc ) M′ =  ({σ} , (sc , mon-care(H, H0 ), sf ) ∈ M; H M′  64  , σ0 , H0 , σf )  F.2.1  Component Semantics ǫ  C, H ⊲ Π −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′  Processes Π reduce to Π′ and evolve the rest accordingly.  ǫ  C, H ⊲ s −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′ (ELπ -destruct-nat)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → n ǫ C, H ⊲ destruct x = e as nat in s or s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s[n / x] (ELπ -destruct-pair) ′  H ⊲ e ֒→ → hv, v i ǫ  C, H ⊲ destruct x = e as pair in s or s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s[hv, v′ i / x] (ELπ -destruct-not)  otherwise ǫ C, H ⊲ destruct x = e as B in s or s′ −−→ C, H ⊲ s′ (ELπ -new)  H = H1 ; n 7→ (v, η)  H ⊲ e ֒→ → v  k∈ / dom(H)  ǫ  C, H ⊲ let x = newhide e in s −−→ C, H; n + 1 7→ v : k; k ⊲ s[hn + 1, ki / x] C, H ⊲ Π ֒→ → C′ , H ′ ⊲ Π ′ (ELπ -par)  Π = Π1 k (s)f k Π2 Π′ = Π1 k (s′ )f ′ k Π2 C, H ⊲ (s)f ֒→ → C′ , H′ ⊲ (s′ )f ′ C, H ⊲ Π ֒→ → C′ , H ′ ⊲ Π ′  (ELπ -fail)  Π = Π1 k (s)f k Π2 → fail C, H ⊲ (s)f ֒→ C, H ⊲ Π ֒→ → fail  (ELπ -fork)  Π = Π1 k ({k s})f k Π2 Π′ = Π1 k (0)f k Π2 k (s)∅ C, H ⊲ Π ֒→ → C, H ⊲ Π′  65  G  Extended Language Properties and Necessities  G.1  Properties of Lτ  Definition 19 (Lτ Semantics Attacker).    no monitor in A def C ⊢attacker A = ∀ℓ ∈ dom(C.∆), ℓ ∈ / fn(A)   no let x = newτ e in s in A such that τ 6= UN  This semantic deﬁnition of an attacker is captured by typing below, which allows for simpler reasoning. Definition 20 (Lτ Attacker). def  C ⊢att A = ⊢UN A def  C ⊢att π = π = (s)f;f and f ∈ C.itfs ǫ  def  C ⊢att Π −−→ Π′ = Π = Π1 k π k Π2 and Π′ = Π1 k π ′ k Π2 and C ⊢att π and C ⊢att π ′ The two notions of attackers coincide. Lemma 4 (Semantics and typed attackers coincide). if A [C] then C ⊢attacker A ⇐⇒ (C ⊢att A) Theorem 10 (Typability Implies Robust Safety in Lτ ). ∀C if ⊢ C : UN then ⊢ C : rs  G.2  Properties of Lπ  Definition 21 (Lπ Attacker). def  ⊢att A = no monitor inside A def  C ⊢att π = π = (s)f ;f and f ∈ C.itfs ǫ  def  C ⊢att Π −−→ Π′ = Π = Π1 k π k Π2 and Π′ = Π1 k π ′ k Π2 and C ⊢att π and C ⊢att π ′  66  Compiler from Lτ to Lπ  H H.1  Assumed Relation between Lτ and Lπ Elements  We can scale the ≈β relation to monitors, heaps, actions and processes as follows. M≈M (Ok Mon)  M = ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σc ) ∀σ ∈ {σ}, ∀H ≈β H. if ⊢ H : ∆ then ∃σ ′ .(σ, H, σ ′ ) ∈ β, ∆ ⊢ M ( Monitor relation )  M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ) M = ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σc ) β0 , ∆ ⊢ M β0 = (dom(∆), dom(H0 ), H0 .η) M≈M ∆ ⊢ H0 ∆ : τ ⊢ v (Initial-heap)  ∆ ⊢ H ∆, H ⊢ v: τ ℓ ≈β hn, ki ∆, ℓ : τ ⊢ H; n 7→ v : k (Initial-value)  ∨ (τ ≡ Nat ∧ v ≡ 0) ∨ (τ ≡ Bool ∧ v ≡ 0) (τ ≡ Ref τ ∧ v ≡ n′ ∧ n′ 7→ v′ : η ∈ H ∧ ℓ′ ≈β hn′ , k′ i ∧ ℓ : τ ∈ ∆, ∆, H ⊢ v′ : τ ) (τ ≡ τ1 × τ2 ∧ v ≡ hv1 , v2 i ∧ ∆, H ⊢ v1 : τ1 ∧ ∆, H ⊢ v2 : τ2 ) ∆, H ⊢ v: τ Π ≈β Π  H.2  (Single process relation)  (Process relation)  f ≈f (skip)f ≈β (skip)f  Π ≈β Π π ≈β π Π k π ≈β Π k π  Compiler Definition  The compiler needs a second argument to inform the translation of a monitorτ sensitive location to hide · that (Rule (J·KLLπ -Loc)) Lτ  Definition 22 (Compiler Lτ to Lπ ). J·KLπ : C × M → C  67  ∨  Given that C = M; F; I and M = ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σc ) and M = ({σ} , Lτ if ⊢ C : UN and M ≈ M then JC, MKLπ is deﬁned as follows: }Lτ u τ  , σ0 , ∆, σc ),  (TL -component)  w w w w w w w v  C ≡ M; F; I C ⊢ F : UN names(F) ∩ names(I) = ∅ ∆ ⊢ ok ⊢M ⊢ C : UN  u      , M   ~  (TLτ -function)  w w w w w v  F ≡ f(x : UN) 7→ s; return; C, ∆; x : UN ⊢ s ∀f ∈ fn(s), f ∈ dom(C.funs) ∨f ∈ dom(C.intfs) C ⊢ F : UN → UN  q yL τ q yL τ = M; F Lπ ; I Lπ  Lπ  }Lτ      ~  Lπ  τ  (J·KLLπ -Component)  Lτ  = f (x) 7→ JC; ∆; x : UN ⊢ sKLπ ; return; Lτ  (J·KLπ -Function) Lτ  Expressions u  (TLτ -true)  v  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢ true : Bool  v  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢ false : Bool u  u  (TLτ -false)  (TL -nat) τ  v  ∆, Γ ⊢ ⋄ ∆, Γ ⊢ n : Nat  t t  u w w v  (TLτ -var)  x:τ ∈Γ ∆, Γ ⊢ x : τ (TLτ -loc)  ℓ:τ ∈∆ ∆, Γ ⊢ ℓ : τ  (TLτ -pair)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e1 : τ ∆, Γ ⊢ e2 : τ ′ ∆, Γ ⊢ he1 , e2 i : τ × τ ′  }Lτ ~  if true ≈β 0  (J·KLπ -True)  =1  if false ≈β 1  (J·KLπ -False)  =n  if n ≈β n  Lτ  Lπ  }Lτ ~  Lτ  =0  Lπ  }Lτ ~  Lτ  (J·KLπ -Interfaces)  JfKLπ = f  Lτ  (J·KLπ -Nat)  Lπ  |Lτ  =x  |Lτ  = hn, vi  Lτ  (J·KLπ -Var)  Lπ  if ℓ ≈β hn, vi  Lτ  (J·KLπ -Loc)  Lπ  }Lτ   ~  Lπ  D E Lτ Lτ = J∆, Γ ⊢ e1 : τ KLπ , J∆, Γ ⊢ e2 : τ ′ KLπ Lτ  (J·KLπ -Pair)  68  u v  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ × τ ′ ∆, Γ ⊢ e.1 : τ  v  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ × τ ′ ∆, Γ ⊢ e.2 : τ ′  v  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Ref τ ∆, Γ ⊢ !e : τ  u  w v u w v u  ~ ~  Lπ  }Lτ  (TL -dereference) τ  ~  (TLτ -op)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Nat ∆, Γ ⊢ e′ : Nat ∆, Γ ⊢ e ⊕ e′ : Nat (TLτ -cmp)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Nat ∆, Γ ⊢ e′ : Nat ∆, Γ ⊢ e ⊗ e′ : Bool (TLτ -coercion)  v  Lπ  }Lτ  (TLτ -proj-2)  u  u  }Lτ  (TLτ -proj-1)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ τ ⊢◦ ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN  Lπ  Lπ  Lπ  }Lτ ~  Lτ  (J·KLLπ -P2)  = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ × τ ′ KLπ .2  Lτ  τ  Lτ  Lτ  = !J∆, Γ ⊢ e : Ref τ KLπ .1 with J∆, Γ ⊢ e : Ref τ KLπ .2 Lτ  Lτ  Lτ  = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : NatKLπ ⊕ J∆, Γ ⊢ e′ : NatKLπ Lτ  (J·KLπ -op)  }Lτ  ~  (J·KLπ -P1)  (J·KLπ -Deref)  }Lτ  ~  Lτ  = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ × τ ′ KLπ .1  Lπ  Lτ  Lτ  = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : NatKLπ ⊗ J∆, Γ ⊢ e′ : NatKLπ Lτ  (J·KLπ -cmp)  τ  (J·KLLπ -Coerce)  = skip  (J·KLπ -Skip)  = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLLπ  τ  Statements t  u w v  (TLτ -skip)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ skip  (TLτ -new)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ C, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ let x = newτ e in s  |Lτ  Lτ  Lπ  }Lτ  ~  Lπ  =   Lτ let xo = new J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ     in let x = hxo, 0i  τ    in JC, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLLπ    if τ = UN     Lτ   let x = newhide J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ   τ  L  in JC, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ    else Lτ  (J·KLπ -New)  69  u w w w v u w w w v  (TLτ -function-call)  ((f ∈ dom(C.funs)) ∨(f ∈ dom(C.intfs))) ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN ∆, Γ ⊢ call f e (TLτ -if)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : Bool C, ∆, Γ ⊢ st C, ∆, Γ ⊢ se C, ∆, Γ ⊢ if e then st else se u w v  u w v  (TLτ -sequence)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ su C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ su ; s  (TLτ -letin)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ C, ∆, Γ; x : τ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ let x : τ = e in s u  (TLτ -assign)  ∆, Γ ⊢ x : Ref τ ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ C, ∆, Γ ⊢ x := e  w v u v t  (TLτ -fork)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ {k s}  (TLτ -monitor)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ monitor u (TLτ -process)  v  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ (s)f  }Lτ    ~  Lπ  }Lτ    ~  Lπ  }Lτ  ~  Lπ  }Lτ  ~  Lπ  }Lτ  ~  Lπ  }Lτ  Lτ  = call f J∆, Γ ⊢ e : UNKLπ  τ  (J·KLLπ -call)  Lτ  ifz J∆, Γ ⊢ e : BoolKLπ τ  = then JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ st KLLπ τ  else JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ se KLLπ  τ  L (J·KL π -If)  Lτ  Lτ  = JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ su KLπ ; JC, ∆, Γ; Γ′ ⊢ sKLπ Lτ  (J·KLπ -Seq)  Lτ  =  let x=J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ  Lτ  in JC, ∆, Γ; x : τ ⊢ sKLπ  Lτ  (J·KLπ -Letin)  let x1 = x.1 = in let x2 = x.2 Lτ  in x1 := J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ with x2 Lτ  (J·KLπ -Assign)  Lτ  ~  = {k JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ sKLπ }  |Lτ  (J·KLLπ -Fork)  = monitor  (J·KLLπ -Mon)  Lπ  τ  τ  Lπ  }Lτ ~  Lπ  70  Lτ  = (JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ sKLπ )Jf KLτ  Lπ  Lτ  (J·KLπ -Proc)  u w w v  u w v  (TLτ -soup)  C, ∆, Γ ⊢ π C, ∆, Γ ⊢ Π C, ∆, Γ ⊢ π k Π  (TLτ -endorse)  ∆, Γ ⊢ e : UN C, ∆, Γ; (x : ϕ) ⊢ s C, ∆, Γ ⊢ endorse x = e as ϕ in s  }Lτ   ~  Lπ  }Lτ  ~  Lπ  τ  τ  L = JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ πKLLπ k JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ ΠKL π Lτ  (J·KLπ -Soup)  =   Lτ  destruct x = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : UNKLπ as nat in    ifz x then    Lτ  JC, ∆, Γ; (x : ϕ) ⊢ sKLπ     else ifz x − 1 then τ     JC, ∆, Γ; (x : ϕ) ⊢ sKLLπ     else wrong   or wrong     if ϕ = Bool         Lτ   destruct x = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : UNKLπ as nat in  τ   JC, ∆, Γ; (x : ϕ) ⊢ sKL   Lπ   or wrong  if ϕ = Nat       τ    destruct x = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : UNKLLπ as pair in   Lτ   JC, ∆, Γ; (x : ϕ) ⊢ sKLπ    or wrong     if ϕ = UN × UN         Lτ    destruct x = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : UNKLπ as pair in   !x.1 with x.2;   τ   JC, ∆, Γ; (x : ϕ) ⊢ sKLLπ    or wrong    if ϕ = Ref UN Lτ  (J·KLπ -Endorse)  LU  The remark about optimisation for J·KLP in Appendix D is also valid for the Lτ Rule (J·KLπ -Deref) case above. As expressions are executed atomically, we are sure that albeit ineﬃcient, dereferencing will correctly succeed. We can add reference to superﬁcial types and check this dynamically in the source, as we have the heap there. But how do we check this in the target? We only assume that reference must be passed as a pair: location- key from the Lτ attacker. Thus the last case of Rule (J·KLπ -Endorse), where we check that we can access the location, otherwise we’d get stuck.  71  Lτ  NonAtomic Implementation of New-Hide We can also implement Rule (J·KLπ -New) Lτ using non-atomic instructions are deﬁned in Rule (J·KLπ -New-nonat) below.  Lτ   let xo = new J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ   in let x = hxo, 0i    Lτ  in JC, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ      u }Lτ if τ = UN   (TLτ -new)   ∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ w  v ~ = let x = new 0 in C, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ s   let xk = hide x in   τ C, ∆, Γ ⊢ let x = newτ e in s  Lπ   let xc = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLLπ in     x := xc with xk;  Lτ    JC, ∆, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ   otherwise τ  (J·KLLπ -New-nonat)  H.3  Properties of the Lτ -Lπ Compiler Lτ  Lτ  Theorem 11 (Compiler J·KLπ is cc). ⊢ J·KLπ : cc τ  τ  Theorem 12 (Compiler J·KLLπ is rs-pres ). ⊢ J·KLLπ : rs-pres  72  I  Proofs  ∼ We deﬁne a more lenient relation on states ∼ ∼β analogous to ≈β (Rule Related states – Whole) but that ensures that all target locations that are related to secure source ones only vary accordingly: i.e., the attacker cannot change them. ∼ Ω∼ ∼β Ω (Lτ -Secure heap) ′  H = {ℓ 7→ v : τ | ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H and τ 0 ◦} ⊢ secure(H) = H′ (Lπ -Low Location)  ℓ ≈β hn, _i n ∈ dom(H) ∄ℓ ∈ secure(H) H, H ⊢ low-loc(n) (Lπ -High Location)  ℓ ∈ secure(H) ℓ ≈β hn, ki n 7→ _ : k ∈ H H, H ⊢ high-loc(n) = ℓ, k (Lπ -High Capability)  ℓ ∈ secure(H). ℓ ≈β hn, ki n 7→ _ : k ∈ H H, H ⊢ high-cap(k) Ω=  M; F, F′ ; I; H  (Related states – Secure) q yL τ Ω = M; F, F′ Lπ ; I; H  ⊲Π ⊲Π M ≈β M ∀k, n, ℓ. if H, H ⊢ high-loc(n) = ℓ, k then (1) ∀π ∈ Π if C ⊢ π : attacker then k ∈ / fv(π) (2) ∀n′ 7→ v : η ∈ H, (2a) if η = k then n = n′ and ℓ ≈β hn, ki and ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H and v ≈β v (2b) if η 6= k then H, H ⊢ low-loc(n′ ) and ∀k′ . H, H ⊢ high-cap(k′ ), v 6= k′ ∼β Ω Ω∼ ∼ There is no secure( · ) function for the target because they would be all locations that are related to a source location that itself is secure in the source. An alternative is to deﬁne secure( · ) as all locations protected by a key k but the point of secure( · ) is to setup the invariant to ensure the proof hold, so this alternative would be misleading. Rule Lπ -Low Location tells when a target location is not secure. That is, when there is no secure source location that is related to it. This can be because the source location is not secure or because the relation does not exist, as in order for it to exist the triple must be added to β and we only add the triple for secure locations. The intuition behind Rule Related states – Secure is that two states are related if they have related monitors and then: for any target location n that is high (i.e., it has a related source counterpart ℓ whose type is secure and that is protected with a capability k that we call a high capability), then we have: (1) the capability k used to lock it is not in in any attacker code; (2) for any target level location n′ : (2a) either it is locked with a high capability k (i.e., a  73  capability used to hide a high location) thus n′ is also high, in which case it is related to a source location ℓ and the values v, v they point to are related; or (2b) it is not locked with a high capability, so we can derive that n′ is a low location and its content v is not any high capability k′ . ♠ Lemma 5 (A target location is either high or low). ∀ if H ≈β H n 7→ v : η ∈ H then either H, H ⊢ low-loc(n) or ∃ℓ ∈ dom(H). H, H ⊢ high-loc(n) = ℓ, η Proof. Trivial, as Rule Lπ -Low Location and Rule Lπ -High Location are duals.  ♠  I.1  U  Proof of Theorem 7 (Compiler J·KLLP is cc)  Proof. The proof proceeds for β0 = (ℓ, 0, kroot ) and and then by Lemma 7 (Generalised compiler correctness for as initial states are related by deﬁnition and the languages are deterministic. ♠ LU  Lemma 6 (Expressions compiled with J·KLP are related). ∀  if H ≈β H  H ⊲ eρ ֒→ → v U  U  U  then H ⊲ JeKLLP JρKLLP ֒→ → JvKLLP  Proof. This proof proceeds by structural induction on e. Base case: Values U  U  true By Rule (J·KLLP -True), JtrueKLLP = 0. As true ≈β 0, this case holds. 74  LU  false Analogous to the ﬁrst case by Rule (J·KLP -False). LU  n∈ N Analogous to the ﬁrst case by Rule (J·KLP -nat). U  x Analogous to the ﬁrst case, by Rule (J·KLLP -Var) and by the relatedness of the substitutions. LU  ℓ Analogous to the ﬁrst case by Rule (J·KLP -Loc). LU  hv, vi By induction on v by Rule (J·KLP -Pair) and then it is analogous to the ﬁrst case. Inductive case: Expressions LU  e ⊕ e′ By Rule (J·KLP -op) we have that LU  LU  LU  Je ⊕ e′ KLP = JeKLP ⊕ Je′ KLP By HP we have that H ⊲ eρ ֒→ → n and H ⊲ e′ ρ ֒→ → n′ . By Rule ELU -op we have that H ⊲ n ⊕ n′ ֒→ → n′′ . LU  LU  LU  LU  LU  LU  → JnKLP and H ⊲ Je′ KLP JρKLP ֒→ → Jn′ KLP . By IH we have that H ⊲ JeKLP JρKLP ֒→ LU  LU  LU  By Rule ELP -op we have that H ⊲ JnKLP ⊕ Jn′ KLP ֒→ → Jn′′ KLP . So this case holds. LU  e ⊗ e′ Analogous to the case above by IH, Rule (J·KLP -cmp), Rule ELU -comp and Rules ELP -op and ELP -if-true. U  !e Analogous to the case above by IH twice, Rule (J·KLLP -Deref), Rule ELU -dereference and Rules ELP -p1, ELP -p2 and ELP -letin and a case analysis by Rules ELP -deref-top and ELP -deref-k. LU  he, ei Analogous to the case above by IH and Rule (J·KLP -Pair). LU  LU  LU  e.1 By Rule (J·KLP -P1) Je.1KLP = JeKLP .1. By HP H ⊲ e.1ρ ֒→ → hv1 , v2 i ֒→ → v1 . LU  LU  LU  By IH we have that H ⊲ JeKLP .1JρKLP ֒→ → Jhv1 , v2 iKLP .1. E D U U U LU By Rule (J·KLP -Pair) we have that Jhv1 , v2 iKLLP .1 = Jv1 KLLP , Jv2 KLLP .1. E D LU LU LU → Jv1 KLP . Now H ⊲ Jv1 KLP , Jv2 KLP .1 ֒→ So this case holds.  LU  e.2 Analogous to the case above by Rule (J·KLP -P2), Rule ELU -p2 and Rule ELP -p2.  ♠ LU  Lemma 7 (Generalised compiler correctness for J·KLP ). 75  Proof. ∀...∃β ′ if ⊢ C : whole C = M; F; I τ  JC, MKLLπ = M; F; I; kroot = C Lτ  C, H ⊲ s ≈β C, H ⊲ JsKLπ ǫ  C, H ⊲ sρ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′ ρ′ LU  Lτ  LU  Lτ  ǫ  then C, H ⊲ JsKLπ JρKLP −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Js′ KLπ Jρ′ KLP C′ = M′ ; F; I; kroot  LU  Lτ  C, H ⊲ s′ ρ′ ≈β ′ C, H ⊲ Js′ KLπ Jρ′ KLP β ⊆ β′  The proof proceeds by induction on C and the on the reduction steps. Base case LU  skip By Rule (J·KLP -Skip) this case follows trivially. Inductive let x = new e in s U U By Rule (J·KLLP -New) Jlet x = new e in sKLLP = U  let xloc = new JeKLLP in  let xcap = hide xloc in  By HP H ⊲ eρ ֒→ → v  LU  let x = hxloc , xcap i in JsKLP LU  LU  LU  → JvKLP and HPV So by Lemma 6 we have HPE: H ⊲ JeKLP JρKLP ֒→ U  v ≈β JvKLLP .  ǫ  By Rule ELU -alloc: C; H ⊲ let x = new e in s −−→ C; H; ℓ 7→ v ⊲ s[ℓ / x]. So by HPE: LU  C; H⊲let xloc = new JeKLP in let xcap = hide xloc in Rule ELP -new ǫ  LU  −−→ C; H; n 7→ JvKLP : ⊥⊲ let xcap = hide xloc in 76  LU  let x = hxloc , xcap i in JsKLP ρ  LU  U  ≡ C; H; n 7→ JvKLLP : ⊥⊲ let xcap = hide n in Rule ELP -hide LU  ǫ  LU  let x = hxloc , xcap i in JsKLP JρKLP [n / xloc ] LU  LU  let x = hn, xcap i in JsKLP JρKLP LU  LU  −−→ C; H; n 7→ JvKLP : k; k⊲ let x = hn, xcap i in JsKLP JρKLP [k / xcap ] LU  LU  ≡ C; H; n 7→ JvKLP : k; k⊲ let x = hn, ki in JsKLP ρ Rule ELP -letin  ǫ  LU  LU  LU  −−→ C; H; n 7→ JvKLP : k; k⊲ JsKLP JρKLP [hn, ki / x]  Let β ′ = β ∪ (ℓ, n, k). By deﬁnition of ≈β ′ and by β ′ we get HPL ℓ ≈β ′ hn, ki. By a simple weakening lemma for β for substitutions and values apLU plied to HP and HPV we can get HPVB v ≈β ′ JvKLP . As H ≈β H by HP, by a simple weakening lemma get that H ≈β ′ H too and by Rule Heap relation with HPL and HPVB we get H′ ≈β ′ H′ . LU  We have that ρ′ = ρ[ℓ / x] and ρ′ = JρKLP [hn, ki / x]. So by HPL we get that ρ′ ≈β ′ ρ′ . U  s; s′ Analogous to the case above by IH, Rule (J·KLLP -Seq) and a case analysis on what s reduces to, either with Rule ELU -sequence and Rule ELP -sequence or with Rule ELU -step and Rule ELP -step. LU  let x = e in s Analogous to the case above by IH, Rule (J·KLP -Letin), Rule ELU -letin and Rule ELP -letin. LU  x := e′ Analogous to the case above by Rule (J·KLP -Assign), Rule ELU -update and Rule ELP -letin (twice), Rules ELP -p1 and ELP -p2 and then a case analysis by Rules ELP -assign-top and ELP -assign-k. LU  if e then s else s′ Analogous to the case above by IH, Rule (J·KLP -If) and then either Rule ELU -if-true and Rule ELP -if-true or Rule ELU -if-false and Rule ELP -if-false. LU  LU  monitor By Rule (J·KLP -Mon) JmonitorKLP = monitor. There are two cases:  • Rule ELU -monitor. ǫ C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ C′ , H ⊲ skip We need to prove that ǫ C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ C′ , H ⊲ skip By HP H ≈ H, so we know can apply Rule ELP -monitor. As the only change in C′ and C′ is the new state of the monitor and they are related by Rule ELP -monitor, this case holds. 77  • Rule ELU -monitor-fail ǫ C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ fail We need to prove that ǫ C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ fail By HP H ≈ H, so we know can apply Rule ELP -monitor-fail and this case holds. LU  LU  LU  call f e By Rule (J·KLP -call) Jcall f eKLP = call f JeKLP By HP H ⊲ eρ ֒→ → v LU  LU  LU  So by Lemma 6 we have HPE: H ⊲ JeKLP ρ ֒→ → JvKLP and HPR v ≈β JvKLP . So as C is whole, we apply Rule ELU -call-internal ǫ  C, H ⊲ (call f eρ)f ′ −−→ C, H ⊲ (s; return;ρ[v / x])f ′ ;f  By Rule ELP -call-internal LU  LU  ǫ  C, H ⊲ (call f JeKLP JρKLP )f ′ −−→ h . i LU LU C, H ⊲ (s; return;JρKLP JvKLP x )f ′ ;f  By the ﬁrst induction on C we get IH1 C, H ⊲ (s; return;ρ′ )f ′ ;f ≈β C, H ⊲ (s; return;ρ′ )f ′ ;f h . i LU LU We instantiate ρ′ with ρ[v / x] and ρ′ with JρKLP JvKLP x . h . i LU LU So by HP and HPR we have that ρ[v / x] ≈β JρKLP JvKLP x  We we can use IH1 to conclude h . i U U C, H ⊲ (s; return;ρ[v / x])f ′ ;f ≈β C, H ⊲ (s; return;JρKLLP JvKLLP x )f ′ ;f As β ′ = β, this case holds.  ♠  I.2  U  Proof of Theorem 8 (Compiler J·KLLP is rs-pres)  Proof. HP1: ⊢ C : rs U TH1: ⊢ JC, MKLLP : rs We can state it in contrapositive form as: LU HP2: 0 JC, MKLP : rs TH2: 0 C : rs By expanding the deﬁnition of rs in HP2 and TH2, we get 78   h i α LU ==⇒ fail HP21 ∃A.Ω0 A JC, MKLP α  TH21 ∃A.Ω0 (A [C]) ==⇒ fail We can expand get:  hHP21 and i α LU ==⇒ Ω HPRT1 Ω0 A JC, MKLP HPRT2 Ω = ⇒ Ch ; Hh ⊲ monitor; s ǫ HPRMT1 Ch ; Hh ⊲ monitor; s −−→ fail P We can apply Theorem 9 (hh·iiL LU is correct) with HPRT1 and instantiate A with a A from hhAii and we get the following unfolded HPs α  HPRS Ω0 (A [C]) ==⇒ Ω HPRel Ω ≈β Ω. We need to show: ⇒ Ch ; Hh ⊲ monitor; s TH3 Ω = ǫ TH4 Ch ; Hh ⊲ monitor; s −−→ fail Note that reductions here are triggered by compiled components only. LU By Lemma 7 (Generalised compiler correctness for J·KLP ) and Lemma 1 (Compiled code steps imply existen with HPRT2 we get TH3 and HPMR Ch ; Hh ⊲ monitor; s ≈β Ch ; Hh ⊲ monitor; s We need to prove TH4. Assume by contradiction HPBOT: the monitor in the source does not fail ǫ HPBOT: Ch ; Hh ⊲ monitor; s −−→ Ch ; Hh ⊲ skip; s U By Rule EL -monitor with HPBOT we know that M′ HPM: M; Hh We can expand HPM by Rule LU -Monitor Step and get HPMR: (σc , H′h , σf ) ∈ for a heap H′h ⊆ Hh By deﬁnition of the compiler we have that M ≈β M for initial states. By Deﬁnition 12 (M ≈ M) and the second clause of Deﬁnition 11 (MRM) with HPMR we know that M ≈β M for the current states. By the ﬁrst clause of Deﬁnition 11 (MRM) we know that ⇐⇒ (σc , H, _) ∈ HPMRBI: (σc , H, _) ∈ By HPMRBI with HPMR we know that HPMRTC: (σc , H′h , σf ) ∈ However, by HPRMT1 and Rule ELP -monitor-fail we know that HPNR: M; H 6 so we get HPCON: ∄(σc , H′h , σf ) ∈ By HPCON and HPMRTC we get the contradiction, so the proof holds. ♠  79  I.3  Proof of Lemma 1 (Compiled code steps imply existence of source steps) λ  Proof. The proof proceeds by induction on ==⇒ . λ  λ  Base case: ==⇒ = −−→ We proceed by case analysis on λ λ=ǫ The proof proceeds by analysis of the target reductions. Rule ELP -sequence In this case we do not need to pick and the thesis holds by Rule ELU -sequence. Rule ELP -step In this case we do not need to pick and the thesis holds by Rule ELU -step. LU  Rule ELP -if-true We have: H ⊲ JeKLP ρ ֒→ → 0 We apply Lemma 8 (Compiled code expression steps implies existence of source expression steps and obtain a v ≈β 0 By deﬁnition we have 0 ≈β 0 and true ≈β 0, we pick the second. → true So we have H ⊲ eρ ֒→ We can now apply Rule ELU -if-true and this case follows. Rule ELP -if-false This is analogous to the case above. Rule ELP -assign-top Analogous to the case above. Rule ELP -assign-k This is analogous to the case above but for v = ℓ ≈β hn, ki. Rule ELP -letin This follows by Lemma 8 and by Rule ELU -letin. Rule ELP -new This follows by Lemma 8 and by Rule ELU -alloc. Rule ELP -hide By analisis of compiled code we know this only happens after a new is executed. In this case we do not need to perform a step in the source and the thesis holds. Rule ELP -monitor In this case we do not need to pick and the thesis holds by Rule ELU -monitor. Rule ELP -monitor-fail In this case we do not need to pick and the thesis holds by Rule ELU -monitor-fail. Rule ELP -call-internal This follows by Lemma 8 and by Rule ELU -call-internal. Rule ELP -ret-internal In this case we do not need to pick and the thesis holds by Rule ELU -ret-internal. λ=α! The proof proceeds by case analysis on α! call f v H! This follows by Lemma 8 and by Rule ELU -callback. ret H! In this case we do not need to pick and the thesis holds by Rule ELU -return. Inductive case: This follows from IH and the same reasoning as for the single action above. 80  ♠ Lemma 8 (Compiled code expression steps implies existence of source expression steps). ∀ LU  if H ⊲ JeKLP ρ ֒→ → v and if {ρ} = {ρ | ρ ≈β ρ} v ≈β v  H ≈β H then ∃ρj ∈ {ρ} . H ⊲ eρj ֒→ → v Proof. This proceeds by structural induction on e. U  Base case: true This follows from Rule (J·KLLP -True). LU  false This follows from Rule (J·KLP -False). LU  n ∈ N This follows from Rule (J·KLP -nat). x This follows from the relation of the substitutions and the totality of LU ≈β and Rule (J·KLP -Var). hv, v′ i This follows from induction on v and v′ . Inductive case: e ⊕ e′ By deﬁnition of ≈β we know that v and v′ could be either natural numbers or booleans. We apply the IH with: IHV1 n ≈β n IHV2 n′ ≈β n′ By IH we get LU  IHTE1 H ⊲ JeKLP ρ ֒→ → n LU  IHTE2 H ⊲ Je′ KLP ρ ֒→ → n′ IHSE1 H ⊲ eρj ֒→ → n IHSE2 H ⊲ e′ ρj ֒→ → n′ LU  LU  LU  LU  By Rule (J·KLP -op) we have that Je ⊕ e′ KLP =JeKLP ⊕ Je′ KLP .  LU  LU  By Rule ELP -op with IHTE1 and IHTE2 we have that H ⊲ JeKLP ⊕ Je′ KLP ֒→ → n′′ ′′ ′ where IHVT n = n ⊕ n By Rule ELU -op with IHSE1 and IHSE2 we have that H ⊲ e ⊕ e′ ֒→ → n′′ ′′ ′ if n = n ⊕ n This follows from IHVT and IHV1 and IHV2. 81  LU  e ⊗ e′ As above, this follows from IH and Rule (J·KLP -cmp) and Rule ELU -comp. LU  he, e′ i As above, this follows from IH and Rule (J·KLP -Pair). LU  e.1 As above, this follows from IH and Rule (J·KLP -P1) and Rule ELU -p1. e.2 Analogous to the case above. LU  !e As above, this follows from IH and Rule (J·KLP -Deref) and Rule ELU -dereference but with the hypothesis that e evaluates to a v related to a hn, vi.  ♠  I.4  P  Proof of Theorem 9 (hh·iiLLU is correct)   h i α LU Proof. HP1 Ω0 A JCKLP ==⇒ Ω ǫ  HPF Ω =⇒ Ω′ HPN I = names(A) HPT α ≡ α′ · α? HPL ℓi ; ℓglob ∈ /β  LP  THE ∃A ∈ hhI, αiiLU α  TH1 Ω0 (A [C]) ==⇒ Ω THA α ≈β α THS Ω ≈β Ω THC Ω.H.ℓi = ||α|| + 1 The proof proceeds by induction on α′ . Base case: α′ ≡ ∅ Case analysis on α? call f v H? Given  h i call f v H? LU =========⇒ Ω HP1 Ω0 A JCKL P We need to show that LP THE ∃A ∈ hhI, αiiLU α  TH1 Ω0 (A [C]) ==⇒ Ω THA call f v H? ≈β call f v H? THS Ω ≈β Ω THC Ω.H.ℓi = ||α|| + 1 LP  By Rule (hh·iiLU -call) the back-translated context executes this code inside main: 82  if !ℓi == n then incrementCounter() let x1 = new v1 in register(hx1, n1 i) ··· let xj = new vj in register(hxj, nj i) call f v else skip As Hpre is ∅, no updates are added. LP  Given that ℓi is initialised to 1 in Rule (hh·iiLU -skel), this code is executed and it generates action call f v H? where H=ℓ1 7→ v1 ; · · · ; ℓn 7→ vn for all ni ∈ dom(H) such that ℓi ≈β hni , _i and: HPHR H ≈β H By HPHR, Lemma 10 (Backtranslated values are related) and Lemma 1 (Compiled code steps imply with HPF we get THA, THE and TH1. By Rule Related states – Secure, THS holds too. Execution of incrementCounter() satisﬁes THC. ret H? This cannot happen as by Rule ELP -retback there needs to be a running process with a non-empty stack and by Rule LP -Initial State the stack of initial states is empty and the only way to add to the stack is performing a call via Rule ELP -call, which would be a diﬀerent label. Inductive case: We know that (eliding conditions HP that are trivially satisﬁed): i  h α α! α? LU IHP1 Ω0 A JCKLP ==⇒ Ω′ ==⇒ Ω′′ ==⇒ Ω And we need to prove:   α α! α? LP ITH1 Ω0 hhI, αiiLU [C] ==⇒ Ω′ ==⇒ Ω′′ ==⇒ Ω ITHA αα!α? ≈β αα!α? ITHS Ω ≈β Ω And the inductive HP is (for ∅ ⊆ β ′ ): i  h α LU IH-HP1 Ω0 A JCKLP ==⇒ Ω′   P α IH-TH1 Ω0 hhI, αiiL [C] ==⇒ Ω′ U L IH-THA α ≈β ′ α  IH-THS Ω′ ≈β ′ Ω′ By IHP1 and HPF we can apply Lemma 1 (Compiled code steps imply existence of source steps) and so we can apply the IH to get IH-TH1, IH-THA and IH-THS. 83  We perform a case analysis on α!, and show that the back-translated code performs α!. LP  By IH we have that the existing code is generated by Rule (hh·iiLU -listact-i): α, n, Hpre , ak, f  LP . LU  The next action α! produces code according to: HPF  α!, n, Hpre , ak, f  LP . LU  LP  By Rule (hh·iiLU -join), code of this action is the ﬁrst if statement executed. P  call f v H! By Rule (hh·iiL LU -callback-loc) this code is placed at function f so it is executed when compiled code jumps there if !ℓi == n then incrementCounter() let l1 = e1 in register(hl1, n1 i) ··· let lj = ej in register(hlj, nj i) else skip By IH we have that ℓi 7→ n, so we get IHL ℓi 7→ n + 1 By Deﬁnition 18 (Reachable) we have for i ∈ 1..j that a reachable location ni ∈ dom(H) has a related counterpart in ℓi ∈ dom(H) such that H ⊲ ei ֒→ → ℓi . By Lemma 9 (Lτ attacker always has access to all capabilities) we know all capabilities to access any ni are in ak. We use ak to get the right increment of the reach. ret H! In this case from IHF we know that f = f ′ f ′ . This code is placed at f ′ , so we identify the last called function and the code is placed there. Source code returns to f ′ so this code is LP executed Rule (hh·iiLU -ret-loc) if !ℓi == n then incrementCounter() let l1 = e1 in register(hl1, n1 i) ··· let lj = ej in register(hlj, nj i) else skip This case now follows the same reasoning as the one above. So we get (for β ′ ⊆ β ′′ ): HP-AC! α! ≈β ′′ α!  84  By IH-THS and Rule Related states – Whole and HP-AC! we get HPOM2: HP-OM2: Ω′′ ≈β ′′ Ω′′ The next action α? produces code according to: IHF1  α?, n + 1, H′pre , ak′ , f ′  LP LU  .  We perform a case analysis on α? and show that the back-translated code performs α?: LP  ret H? By Rule (hh·iiLU -retback), after n actions, we have from IHF1 that f ′ = f ′ f ′′ and inside function f ′ there is this code: if !ℓi == n then let x1 = new v1 in register(hx1, n1 i) ··· let xj = new vj in register(hxj, nj i) update(m1 , u1 ) ··· update(ml , ul ) else skip By IHL, ℓi 7→ n + 1, so the if gets executed. By deﬁnition, forall n ∈ dom(H) we have that n ∈ Hn or n ∈ Hc (from the case deﬁnition). By Lemma 9 (Lτ attacker always has access to all capabilities) we know all capabilities to access any n are in ak. We induce on the size of H; the base case is trivial and the inductive case follows from IH and the following: Hn : and n is newly allocated. In this case when we execute P ǫ ′′ C; H′ ⊲ let x1 = new v1 in register(hx1, n1 i) −−→ C; H′ ; ℓ′′ 7→ hhv1 iiL LU ⊲ register(hℓ , n1 i) ′′ ′′ ′ ′ and we create β by adding ℓ , n, η to β . By Lemma 2 (register(ℓ, n) does not add duplicates for n) we have that: ǫ LP LP C; H′ ; ℓ′′ 7→ hhv1 iiLU ⊲ register(hℓ′′ , n1 i) −−→ C; H′ ; ℓ′′ 7→ hhv1 iiLU ⊲ skip and we can lookup ℓ′′ via n. Hc : and n is already allocated. In this case ǫ C; H′ ⊲ update(m1 , u1 ) −−→ C; H′′ ⊲ skip By Lemma 3 (update(n, v) never gets stuck) we know that H′′ = H′ [ℓ′′ 7→ _ / ℓ′′ 7→ u1 ] and ℓ′′ such that (ℓ′′ , m1 , η ′′ ) ∈ β ′ . By Lemma 10 (Backtranslated values are related) on the values stored on the heap, let the heap after these reduction steps be H, we can conclude 85  HPRH H ≈β ′′ H. As no other if inside f is executed, eventually we hit its return stateLP LP ment, which by Rule (hh·iiLU -join) and Rule (hh·iiLU -fun) is incrementCounter(); return;. Execution of incrementCounter() satisﬁes THC. ret H?  So we have Ω′′ =====⇒ Ω (by Lemma 10) and with HPRH. call f v H? Similar to the base case, only with update bits, which follow the same reasoning above. So we get (for β ′′ ⊆ β): HP-AC? α? ≈β α? By IH-THA and HP-AC! and HP-AC? we get ITHA. Now by Rule Related states – Whole again and HP-AC? we get ITHS and ITH1, so the theorem holds.  ♠ Lemma 9 (Lτ attacker always has access to all capabilities). ∀ if  LP LU  α, n, H, ak, f  k. n 7→ v : k ∈ H   = s, ak′ , H′ , f ′ , f  then n ∈ reach(ak′ .loc, ak′ .cap, H) LP  LP  Proof. Trivial case analyisis on Rules (hh·iiLU -ret-loc) to (hh·iiLU -callback-loc).  ♠ Lemma 10 (Backtranslated values are related). ∀v, β. LP  hhviiLU ≈β v Proof. Trivial analysis of Appendix D.2.1. ♠  86  I.5  Proof of Theorem 10 (Typability Implies Robust Safety in Lτ )  Proof. ∀ if ⊢ C : UN C ⊢att A ⊢ A [C] , ∅ : whole α  then Ω0 (A [C]) == 6 ⇒ fail Since the initial state’s heap satisﬁes the typing of the monitor, we can apply Lemma 11 (Typing makes monitors not fail in Lτ ). This proof follows as monitor is the only expression that can reduce to fail and we know all those expression will reduce to skipinstead. ♠  I.5.1  Proof of Lemma 4 (Semantics and typed attackers coincide)  Proof. This is proven by trivial induction on the syntax of A. By the rules of Appendix E.1.3, points 1 and 3 follow, point 2 follows from the HP Rule Lτ -Plug. ♠ Lemma 11 (Typing makes monitors not fail in Lτ ). ∀C, A, M′ , H, E, f, Π, H′ , Π1 . if ⊢ C : UN C ≡ M; · · · C′ ≡ M′ ; · · · M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ) ⊢ secure(H, ∆) : ∆ α  C, H ⊲ Πρ ==⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π1 ρ1 k (monitor)f ρ′ ǫ  then C′ , H′ ⊲ Π1 ρ1 k (monitor)f ρ′ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π1 ρ1 k (skip)f ρ′ α  Proof. Let the state between ==⇒ and = ⇒ be C′′ , H′′ ⊲ s′′ . τ By Lemma 12 (L -α reductions respect heap typing) we have ⊢ secure(H′′ , ∆) : ∆ HP2 . By Lemma 16 (Lτ any ǫ reduction respects heap typing) with HP2 to know ⊢ secure(H′ , ∆) : ∆ HPHP . 87  By Rule ELτ -monitor we need to show that M′ ; secure(H′ , ∆) M′′ . τ ′ By Rule L -Monitor Step we need to show that ⊢ secure(H , ∆) : ∆. This holds by HPHP. ♠ Lemma 12 (Lτ -α reductions respect heap typing). if C ≡ M; · · · M = ({σ} ,  , σ0 , ∆, σc )  ⊢ secure(H, ∆) : ∆ α  C, H ⊲ Πρ ==⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ then ⊢ secure(H′ , ∆) : ∆ Proof. The proof proceeds by induction on α. Base case This trivially holds by HP. Inductive case This holds by IH plus a case analysis on the last action: call f v? This holds by Lemma 17 (Lτ -? actions respect heap typing). call f v! This holds by Lemma 18 (Lτ -! actions respect heap typing) ret ! This holds by Lemma 18 (Lτ -! actions respect heap typing) ret ? This holds by Lemma 17 (Lτ -? actions respect heap typing)  ♠ Lemma 13 (Lτ An attacker only reaches UN locations). ∀ if ℓ 7→ v : UN ∈ H then ∄e H ⊲ e ֒→ → ℓ′ ℓ′ 7→ v : τ ∈ H τ 6= UN Proof. This proof proceeds by contradiction. Suppose e exists, there are two cases for ℓ′  88  • ℓ′ was allocated by the attacker: This contradicts the judgements of Appendix E.1.3. • ℓ′ was allocated by the compiled code: The only way this was possible was an assignment of ℓ′ to ℓ, but Rule TLτ -assign prevents it.  ♠ Lemma 14 (Lτ attacker reduction respects heap typing). if C ≡ M; · · · M = ({σ} ,  , σ0 , ∆, σc )  ǫ  C ⊢att Π −−→ Π′ ǫ  C, H ⊲ Πρ −−→ C, H′ ⊲ Πρ′ then secure(H, ∆) = secure(H′ , ∆) Proof. Trivial induction on the derivation of Π, which is typed with ⊢UN and by Lemma 13 (Lτ An attacker only reaches UN locations) has no access to locations in ∆ or with a type τ ⊢ ◦ and no monitor. ♠ Lemma 15 (Lτ typed reduction respects heap typing). if C ≡ M; · · · M = ({σ} , C, Γ ⊢ s  , σ0 , ∆, σc )  C, Γ ⊢ s′ ⊢ secure(H, ∆) : ∆ ǫ  C, H ⊲ sρ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′ ρ′ then ⊢ secure(H′ , ∆) : ∆ Proof. This is done by induction on the derivation of the reducing statement. There, the only non-trivial cases are:  89  Rule TLτ -new By IH we have that H ⊲ eρ ֒→ → v So ǫ  C; H ⊲ let x = newτ e in s −−→ C; Hℓ 7→ v : τ ⊲ s[ℓ / x] By IH we need to prove that ⊢ secure(ℓ 7→ v : τ , ∆) : ∆ As ℓ ∈ / dom(∆), by Rule Lτ -Heap-ok-i this case holds. Rule TLτ -assign By IH we have (HPH) H ⊲ e ֒→ → v such that ℓ : Ref τ and v : τ . So ǫ  C; H ⊲ x := eρ −−→ C; H′ ⊲ skip where [x / ℓ] ∈ ρ and H = H1 ; ℓ 7→ v′ : τ ; H2 H′ = H1 ; ℓ 7→ v : τ ; H2 There are two cases ℓ ∈ dom(∆) By Rule Lτ -Heap-ok-i we need to prove that ℓ : Ref τ ∈ ∆. This holds by HPH and Rule Lτ -Initial State, as the initial state ensures that location ℓ in the heap has the same type as in ∆ . ℓ∈ / dom(∆) This case is trivial as for allocation. Rule TLτ -coercion We have that C, Γ ⊢ e : τ and HPT τ ⊢ ◦. By IH H ⊲ e ֒→ → v such that ⊢ secure(H′ , ∆) : ∆. By HPT we get that secure(H) = secure(H′ ) as by Rule Lτ -Secure heap function secure( · ) only considers locations whose type is τ 0 ◦, so none aﬀected by e. So this case by IH. Rule TLτ -endorse By Rule ELτ -endorse we have that H ⊲ e ֒→ → v and that C, H ⊲ endorse x = e as ϕ in s ֒→ → C, H ⊲ s[v / x]. So this holds by IH.  ♠ Lemma 16 (Lτ any ǫ reduction respects heap typing). if C ≡ M; · · · M = ({σ} ,  90  , σ0 , ∆, σc )  ⊢ secure(H, ∆) : ∆ ǫ  C, H ⊲ Πρ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ then ⊢ secure(H′ , ∆) : ∆ Proof. By induction on the reductions and by application of Rule ELτ -par. The base case follows by the assumptions directly. In the inductive case we have the following: ǫ  ǫ  C, H ⊲ Πρ −−→ C′′ , H′′ ⊲ Π′′ ρ′′ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ This has 2 sub-cases, if the reduction is in an attacker function or not. ǫ  C ⊢att Π′′ −−→ Π: this follows by induction on Π′′ and from IH and Lemma 14 (Lτ attacker reduction respects he ǫ  C 6⊢att Π′′ −−→ Π: In this case we induce on Π′′ . The base case is trivial.  The inductive case is (s)f k Π, which follows from IH and Lemma 15 (Lτ typed reduction respects heap typ  ♠ Lemma 17 (Lτ -? actions respect heap typing). if C ≡ M; · · · α?  C, H ⊲ Πρ ==⇒ C, H′ ⊲ v′ M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ) then secure(H, ∆) = secure(H′ , ∆) Proof. By Lemma 16 (Lτ any ǫ reduction respects heap typing), and a simple case analysis on α? (which does not modify the heap). ♠ Lemma 18 (Lτ -! actions respect heap typing). if C ≡ M; · · · C′ ≡ M′ ; · · · α!  C, H ⊲ Πρ ==⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ v′ M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ) ⊢ secure(H, ∆) : ∆ then ⊢ secure(H′ , ∆) : ∆ 91  Proof. By Lemma 16 (Lτ any ǫ reduction respects heap typing) and a simple case analyis on α! (which does not modify the heap). ♠  I.6  Proof of Theorem 11 (Compiler J·KLLπ is cc) τ  Proof. By deﬁnition initial states have related components, related heaps and well-typed, related starting processes, for β0 = (dom(∆), dom(H0 ), H0 .η) so we have:   Lτ HRS Ω0 (C) ≈β0 Ω0 JC, MKLπ . As the languages have no notion of internal nondeterminism we can apply Lτ Lemma 20 (Generalised compiler correctness for J·KLπ ) with HRS to conclude. ♠ Lτ  Lemma 19 (Expressions compiled with J·KLπ are related). ∀  if H ≈β H H ⊲ eρ ֒→ → v Lτ  Lτ  Lτ  then H ⊲ JeKLπ JρKLπ ֒→ → JvKLπ  LU  Proof. The proof is analogous to that of Lemma 6 (Expressions compiled with J·KLP are related) as the compilers perform the same steps and expression reductions are atomic. ♠ Lτ  Lemma 20 (Generalised compiler correctness for J·KLπ ). ∀...∃β ′ if C; Γ ⊢ Π,  ⊢ C : whole C = M; F; I M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ) M = ({σ} , , σ0 , H0 , σc )  92  Lτ  JC, MKLπ = M; F; I = C  τ  L C, H ⊲ Π ≈β C, H ⊲ JC; Γ ⊢ ΠKL π ǫ  C, H ⊲ Πρ =⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ Lτ  Lτ  Lτ  ǫ  Lτ  then C, H ⊲ JC; Γ ⊢ ΠKLπ JρKLπ =⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ JC; Γ ⊢ Π′ KLπ Jρ′ KLπ C′ = M′ ; F; I  Lτ  Lτ  C, H ⊲ Π′ ρ′ ≈β ′ C, H ⊲ JC; Γ ⊢ Π′ KLπ Jρ′ KLπ β ⊆ β′  Proof. This proof proceeds by induction on the typing of Π and then of π. τ  Base Case skip Trivial by Rule (J·KLLπ -Skip). Inductive Case In this case we proceed by induction on the typing of s Inductive Cases Rule TLτ -new There are 2 cases, they are analogous. τ = UN By HP Γ⊢e:τ H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ǫ C, H ⊲ let x = newτ e in sρ −−→ C, H; ℓ 7→ v : τ ⊲ s[ℓ / x]ρ By Lemma 19 we have: Lτ Lτ Lτ → JΓ ⊢ v : τ KLπ IHR1 H ⊲ JΓ ⊢ e : τ KLπ JρKLπ ֒→ Lτ By Rule (J·KLπ -New) we get Lτ let xo = new JΓ ⊢ e : τ KLπ in let x = hxo, 0i τ  in JC, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLLπ So:  τ  L C, H ⊲ let xo = new JΓ ⊢ e : τ KL π  in let x = hxo, 0i  Lτ  ǫ  in JC, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ τ  −−→ C, H; n 7→ JΓ ⊢ v : τ KLLπ : ⊥ ⊲ let x = hn, 0i ǫ  Lτ  Lτ  in JC, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ Lτ  −−→ C, H; n 7→ JΓ ⊢ v : τ KLπ : ⊥ ⊲ JC, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ [hn, 0i / x]  For β ′ = β ∪ (ℓ, n, ⊥), this case holds. else The other case holds follows the same reasoning but Lτ for β ′ = β∪(ℓ, n, k) and for H′ =H; n 7→ JC, Γ ⊢ v : τ KLπ : k; k. Case for Appendix H.2 This follows the case above though with more reductions.  93  Rule TLτ -sequence By HP Γ ⊢ s; Γ ⊢ s′ ǫ C, H ⊲ sρ =⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′′ ρ′′ There are two cases s′′ =skip Rule ELU -sequence ǫ C′ , H′ ⊲ skipρ′′ ; s′ ρ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′ ρ By IH ǫ Lτ Lτ Lτ Lτ C, H ⊲ JΓ ⊢ sKLπ JρKLπ =⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ JΓ ⊢ skipKLπ Jρ′′ KLπ τ L By Rule (J·KLπ -Seq) τ L Lτ JC, Γ ⊢ sKLπ ; JC, Γ ⊢ s′ KLπ So τ  ǫ  Lτ  τ  τ  C, H ⊲ JC, Γ ⊢ sKLLπ JρKLLπ ; JC, Γ ⊢ s′ KLπ JρKLLπ τ  Lτ  Lτ  τ  =⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ JΓ ⊢ skipKLLπ Jρ′′ KLπ ; JC, Γ ⊢ s′ KLπ JρKLLπ ǫ  Lτ  τ  −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ JC, Γ ⊢ s′ KLπ JρKLLπ  At this stage we apply IH and the case holds. else By Rule ELU -step we have ǫ C, H ⊲ s; s′ =⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ s′′ ; s′ This case follows by IH and HPs. Rule TLτ -function-call Analogous to the cases above. Rule TLτ -letin Analogous to the cases above. Rule TLτ -assign Analogous to the cases above. Rule TLτ -if Analogous to the cases above. Rule TLτ -fork Analogous to the cases above. Rule TLτ -monitor By HP: ǫ C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ C′ , H ⊲ skip IHMON M; mon-care(H, ∆) M′ τ By Rule TL -monitor t |Lτ (TLτ -monitor)  = monitor C, Γ ⊢ monitor Lπ So we need to prove that ǫ C, H ⊲ monitor −−→ C′ , H ⊲ skip P By Rule EL -monitor we need to prove that M; H M′ By Rule Lπ -Monitor Step we neet to prove that (sc , mon-care(H, H0 ), sf ) ∈ By Rule Monitor relation and then Rule Ok Mon we need to prove that • heaps states etc are related (By HP) • ⊢H:∆ By IHMON and Rule Lτ -Monitor Step we get M′ ≈ M′ and IHMS1 (σc , σf ) ∈ 94  IHD ⊢ H : ∆ so this case holds by IHD. • mon-care(H, ∆) ≈β mon-care(H, H0 ) this holds by deﬁnition of compilation. Having cleared all the cases this case holds. τ  Rule TLτ -coercion By Rule (J·KLLπ -Coerce), this follows from IH directly. Rule TLτ -endorse This has a number of trivial cases based on Lτ Rule (J·KLπ -Endorse) that are analogous to the ones above.  ♠  I.7  Proof of Theorem 12 (Compiler J·KLLπ is rs-pres) τ  Proof. Given: HP1: ⊢ C : rs We need to prove: S TP1: ⊢ JC, MKT : rs We unfold the deﬁnitions of rs and obtain: α fail HPE1: Ω0 (A 6 ⇒i h ==  [C]) Lτ  α  == THE1: Ω0 A JCKLπ 6 ⇒ fail By deﬁnition of the compiler  hwe have i that Lτ ∼ HPISR: Ω0 (A [C]) ∼ Ω A JCK π ∼β 0 L for β = dom(∆), H0 such that M = ({σ} , , σ0 , ∆, σc ) and M = ({σ} , We expand HPE1 and we get: α HPS1 Ω0 (A [C]) ==⇒ Ω ǫ HPS2 Ω =⇒ C′ , H ⊲ Π k (monitor; s)_ ǫ HPS3 C′ , H ⊲ Π k (monitor; s)_ −−→ C′′ , H ⊲ Π k (skip; s)_ Let us expandTHE1 i h analogously: τ α HPTHT1 Ω0 A JCKLLπ ==⇒ Ω  , σ0 , H0 , σc )  ǫ  HPTHT2 Ω =⇒ C′ , H ⊲ Π k (monitor; s)_ ǫ THT3 C′ , H ⊲ Π k (monitor; s)_ −−→ C′′ , H ⊲ Π k (skip; s)_ We now prove this point.  ∼ • By Lemma 21 (Related actions preserve ∼ ∼) with HPISR IHTHT1 HPS1 ′ ∼ we know that all related actions preserve ∼ ∼β , so for β ⊆ β : ∼ HPOM1: Ω ∼ ∼β ′ Ω  95  • Call Π′ = Π k (monitor; s)_ and Π′ = Π k (monitor; s)_ . We can reduce the possible reductions to two cases, given that Ω = C; H ⊲ Π′′ and Ω = C; H ⊲ Π′′ ǫ  ǫ  ǫ  ǫ  – C ⊢att Π′′ −−→ Π′ and C ⊢att Π′′ −−→ Π′ – C 6⊢att Π′′ −−→ Π′ and C 6⊢att Π′′ −−→ Π′ ∼) and in the In the ﬁrst case by Lemma 23 (LP Attacker actions preserve ∼ ∼ ∼ second case by Lemma 22 (Lτ -compiled actions preserve ∼ ∼) with HPOM1, ′ ∼ HPTHT2, HPS2 we know that these reductions preserve ∼ ∼β , so for β ⊆ ′′ β : ′ ∼ HPOM2: C′ , H ⊲ Π k (monitor; s)_ ∼ ∼β ′′ C , H ⊲ Π k (monitor; s)_ • BY Rule LP -Monitor Step we need to prove σ, H, σ ′ ∈  .  By Rule Monitor relation and Rule Ok Mon we need to prove – H ≈β ′′ H where for the heaps restricted by mon-care( · ), so dom(H) = dom(∆) and dom(H) = dom(H0 ). So by point (2a) of Rule Related states – Secure with HPOM2 we have ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H, n :7→ v : k ∈ H and v ≈β v and ℓ ≈β ′′ hn, ki. We can apply Rule Heap relation and this case holds. – ⊢ H : ∆. This follows from Rule Lτ -Monitor Step, and we need to prove M; H This holds by HPS3.  M′  ♠ ∼ Lemma 21 (Related actions preserve ∼ ∼). ∀... α  if Ω ==⇒ Ω′ α  Ω ==⇒ Ω′ α ≈β α ∼ Ω∼ ∼β Ω ′∼ ∼β ′ Ω′ then Ω ∼ ∼ Proof. This is done by trivial case analysis on α and with Lemma 22 (Lτ -compiled actions preserve ∼ ∼) P ∼ ∼ and Lemma 23 (L Attacker actions preserve ∼).  96  ∼ Lemma 22 (Lτ -compiled actions preserve ∼ ∼). ∀... ǫ  if C, H ⊲ Πρ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ Lτ  Lτ  Lτ  ǫ  Lτ  C, H ⊲ JC; Γ ⊢ ΠKLπ JρKLπ =⇒ C′ , H′ ⊲ JC; Γ ⊢ Π′ KLπ Jρ′ KLπ L ∼ C, H ⊲ Πρ ∼ ∼β C, H ⊲ JC; Γ ⊢ ΠKLπ ρ τ  C; Γ ⊢ Π  Lτ  Lτ  ′ ′ ′ ′ ∼ then C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ ∼ ∼β ′ C , H ⊲ JC; Γ ⊢ Π KLπ Jρ KLπ  Proof. Trivial induction on the derivation of Π, analogous to Lemma 20 (Generalised compiler correctness for J·K Rule TLτ -new There are 2 cases, they are analogous.  τ = UN By HP Γ⊢e:τ H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ǫ C, H ⊲ let x = newτ e in sρ −−→ C, H; ℓ 7→ v : τ ⊲ s[ℓ / x]ρ Lτ  By Lemma 19 (Expressions compiled with J·KLπ are related) we have: Lτ  Lτ  Lτ  IHR1 H ⊲ JΓ ⊢ e : τ KLπ JρKLπ ֒→ → JΓ ⊢ v : τ KLπ Lτ  By Rule (J·KLπ -New) we get Lτ  let xo = new JΓ ⊢ e : τ KLπ in let x = hxo, 0i Lτ  in JC, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ So:  Lτ  C, H ⊲ let xo = new JΓ ⊢ e : τ KLπ in let x = hxo, 0i Lτ  ǫ  in JC, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ Lτ  −−→ C, H; n 7→ JΓ ⊢ v : τ KLπ : ⊥ ⊲ let x = hn, 0i ǫ  Lτ  τ  in JC, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLLπ Lτ  −−→ C, H; n 7→ JΓ ⊢ v : τ KLπ : ⊥ ⊲ JC, Γ; x : Ref τ ⊢ sKLπ [hn, 0i / x]  For β ′ = β, this case holds.  else The other case holds follows the same reasoning but Lτ  for β ′ = β ∪ (ℓ, n, k) and for H′ =H; n 7→ JC, Γ ⊢ v : τ KLπ : k; k. We need to show that this preserves Rule Related states – Secure, speciﬁcally it preserves point (2a): ℓ ≈β hn, ki and ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H and v ≈β v Lτ  These follow all from the observation above and by Lemma 19 (Expressions compiled with J·KLπ are r 97  ∼ Lemma 23 (LP Attacker actions preserve ∼ ∼). ∀... ǫ  if C, H ⊲ Πρ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ ǫ  C, H ⊲ Πρ −−→ C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ ∼ C, H ⊲ Πρ ∼ ∼β C, H ⊲ Πρ ǫ  C ⊢att Πρ −−→ Π′ ρ′ ǫ  C ⊢att Πρ −−→ Π′ ρ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ∼ then C′ , H′ ⊲ Π′ ρ′ ∼ ∼β ′ C , H ⊲ Π ρ Proof. For the source reductions we can use Lemma 16 (Lτ any ǫ reduction respects heap typing) to know that secure(H) = secure(H′ ) and that C′ = C, so they don’t change ∼ the interested bits of the ∼ ∼β . By deﬁnition we already know that C′ = C. Suppose this does not hold by contradiction, there can be three clauses that do not hold based on Rule Related states – Secure: • violation of (1): ∃π ∈ Π. C ⊢ π : attacker and k ∈ fv(π). By HP5 this is a contradiction. • violation of (2a): n 7→ v : k ∈ H and ℓ ≈β hn, ki and ℓ 7→ v : τ ∈ H and ¬(v ≈β v) To change this value the attacker needs k which contradicts points (1) and (2b). • violation of (2b): either of these: – H, H 0 low-loc(n′ ) Since Rule Lπ -High Location does not hold, by Lemma 5 this is a contradiction. – v = k′ for H, H ⊢ high-cap(k′ ) This can follow from another two cases ∗ forgery of k;: an ispection of the semantics rules contradicts this ∗ update of a location to k′ : however k′ is not in the code (contradicts point (1)) and by induction on the heap H we have that k′ is stored in no other location, so this is also a contradiction.  98  I.8  Proofs for the Non-Atomic Variant of Lτ (Appendix H.2)  The only proof that needs changing is that for Lemma 22: there is this new case. ∼ For this we weaken ∼ ∼β and deﬁne ∼β as follows: Ω ∼β Ω (Non Atomic State Relation)  ∼ Ω∼ ∼β Ω Ω ∼β Ω  (Non Atomic State Relation -stuck)  Ω = C, H ⊲ Π  C = M, F, I Ω = C, H ⊲ Π ∃π ∈ Π. C 0 π : attacker ∃f ∈ f. f ≈β f C, H ⊲ π × π = (hide n; s)f ;f ∀ℓ. ℓ ∈ dom( ⊢ secure(H)) n 7→ v; k ∈ H ℓ 6∼β hn, ki ℓ ∼β hn, 0i Ω ∼β Ω Two states are now related if: ∼ • either they are related by ∼ ∼β • or the red process is stuck on a hide n where n 7→ v; k but ℓ ∼ hn, ki does not hold for a ℓ that is secure, and we have that ℓ ∼ hn, 0i (as this was after the new). And the hide on which the process is stuck is not in attacker code. Having this in proofs would not cause problems because now all proofs have an initial case analysis whether the state is stuck or not, but because it steps it’s not stuck. This relation only changes the second case of the proof of Lemma 22 for Lτ Rule (J·KLπ -New-nonat) as follows: Lτ  Proof. new· · is implemented as deﬁned in Rule (J·KLπ -New-nonat). τ 6= UN By HP Γ⊢e:τ H ⊲ e ֒→ → v ǫ  C, H ⊲ let x = newτ e in sρ −−→ C, H; ℓ 7→ v : τ ⊲ s[ℓ / x]ρ By Lemma 19 we have: Lτ  Lτ  Lτ  IHR1 H ⊲ JΓ ⊢ e : τ KLπ JρKLπ ֒→ → JΓ ⊢ v : τ KLπ τ  By Rule (J·KLLπ -New-nonat) we get  99  let x = new 0 in let xk = hide x in τ  let xc = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLLπ in x := xc with xk; Lτ  JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ sKLπ  So:  C, H ⊲ let x = new 0 in let xk = hide x in Lτ  let xc = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ in x := xc with xk; τ  JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ sKLLπ  ǫ  −−→ C, H, n 7→ 0 : ⊥ ⊲ let xk = hide n in Lτ  let xc = J∆, Γ ⊢ e : τ KLπ in x := xc with xk; Lτ  JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ sKLπ  And β ′ = β ∪ (ℓ, n, 0). Now there are two cases:  • A concurrent attacker reduction performs hide n, so the state changes.  C, H, n 7→ 0 : k; k ⊲ let xk = hide n in τ  L let xc = JC, Γ ⊢ e : τ KL π in  x := xc with xk; Lτ  JC, ∆, Γ ⊢ sKLπ  At this stage the state is stuck: Rule ELP -hide does not apply. Also, we have that this holds by the new β ′ : (ℓ ∼β ′ hn, 0i) And so this does not hold: (ℓ ∼β ′ hn, ki) As the stuck statement is not in attacker code, we can use Rule Non Atomic State Relation -stuck to conclude. • The attacker does not. In this case the proof continues as in Lemma 22.  100

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
