Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_376

Abstract:
DeepMasterPrint: Fingerprint Spoofing via Latent Variable Evolution  Philip Bontrager 1 Aditi Roy 1 Julian Togelius 1 Nasir Memon 1  arXiv:1705.07386v3 [cs.CV] 16 Feb 2018  Abstract Biometric authentication is important for a large range of systems, including but not limited to consumer electronic devices such as phones. Understanding the limits of and attacks on such systems is therefore crucial. This paper presents an attack on fingerprint recognition system using MasterPrints, synthetic fingerprints that are capable of spoofing multiple people’s fingerprints. The method described is the first to generate complete image-level Masterprints, and further exceeds the attack accuracy of previous methods that could not produce complete images. The method, Latent Variable Evolution, is based on training a Generative Adversarial Network on a set of real fingerprint images. Stochastic search in the form of the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy is then used to search for latent variable (inputs) to the generator network that optimize the number of matches from a fingerprint recognizer. We find MasterPrints that a commercial fingerprint system matches to 23% of all users in a strict security setting, and 77% of all users at a looser security setting. The underlying method is likely to have broad usefulness for security research as well as in aesthetic domains.  1. Introduction Fingerprints are commonly used for authentication in a large variety of systems. They are used for unlocking doors, unlocking personal data on smartphones, and authorizing payments. A person’s fingerprint has become their new signature. Unfortunately, like a signature, fingerprints can be faked. Fingerprints are vulnerable, as are all biometric authentication methods, to presentation attacks, where the attacker presents a spoofed fingerprint to the authenti1  Department of Computer Science, New York University Tandon, Brooklyn, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Philip Bontrager <philipjb@nyu.edu>, Aditi Roy <ar3824@nyu.edu>, Julian Togelius <julian@togelius.com>, Nasir Memon <memon@nyu.edu>.  cation system (Uludag & Jain, 2004), (Ratha et al., 2001), (Matsumoto et al., 2002). Since this type of attack does not need any knowledge of the target person, image specifications or database access privileges, it represents a real threat for fingerprint verification systems used in mobile devices (Frank, 2013), (Sousedik & Busch, 2014). Further, it was recently pointed out that smartphone sensors are particularly vulnerable (Roy et al., 2017). Due to the demand for quick matches, low cost, and the decreasing space left for fingerprint sensors, smartphones use small sensors that only read part of the fingerprint (Han et al., 2014). Small sections of the fingerprint are not nearly as unique as a full fingerprint and leave smartphones open to a particularly vicious type of presentation attack. There have already been instances where hackers have used images of fingerprints to get access to peoples fingerprints. Jan Krissler was able to spoof the German Defense Ministers fingerprints just from publicly available images (Hern, 2014). In this work, we look at the case where a single synthetic fingerprint can spoof many peoples fingerprints. Previous work (Roy et al., 2017) has shown that it is possible to perform a dictionary attack on a partial fingerprint dataset with substantial accuracy using a set of carefully chosen MasterPrints, partial fingerprints that can fool fingerprint recognition software into matching a large number of people. This means it is possible to spoof fingerprints for subjects for which the attacker has no information. The work thus far has generated MasterPrints at the “template level” by manipulating the minutiae, a relatively high-level representation of fingerprints. They relied on stochastic search in the space of minutiae to generate synthetic Masterprint templates, which cannot easily be translated to high-quality fingerprint images. However, to launch a spoof-attack in practice, it is required to construct a MasterPrint at the ”image level” which can then be transferred to a real physical artifact (Feng & Jain, 2011), (Cao et al., 2014), (Jain & Cao, 2015), (Cao & Jain, 2015a). This observation motivated us to find a method for generating MasterPrint images which are visually similar to natural fingerprint images. To design MasterPrint images, there needs to be a way to feasibly search the space of fingerprint images for the ideal image. Since not all authentication systems use minutiae, it is best if minutiae are not used during the design pro-  DeepMasterPrint  cess. Neural networks can be used to generate synthetic fingerprint images. In particular, Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) have shown great promise in generating images that reproduce a particular style or domain (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Goodfellow, 2016). However, their standard design is not controllable. In other words, it does not allow the generator to target additional constraints and objectives beyond reproducing the style of the training data. For a MasterPrint, we need to create a synthetic fingerprint that fools a fingerprint verification system. The verification system not only has to recognize that the image is a fingerprint, but also match the fingerprint to many different identities. Therefore, a generator network would need to be combined with a way of searching for fingerprints that are suitable for MasterPrints. In this paper, we present a novel technique for creating MasterPrints. This method uses a neural network to learn to generate images of fingerprints. It then uses evolutionary optimization to search the latent variables of the neural network for a MasterPrint. The Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) is used to search the input to the trained neural network for a fingerprint image a commercial fingerprint recognition software would identify as multiple people. This unique combination of evolution and generative neural networks allows the neural network to constrain the search space while the evolutionary algorithm can handle the discrete fitness function. This is the first work that creates a MasterPrint that could be directly used and proves the danger of this vulnerability. Previous work has proven the existence of this vulnerability but does not go as far as creating a method to make imagelevel MasterPrints. This work directly shows how to execute this exploit and is able to spoof 23% of the subjects in our dataset with an authentication system that has a 0.1% false match rate. With a 1% false match rate we spoof 77% of the subjects in the dataset. This work gets the state of the art one step closer to generating synthetic fingerprints that have an unacceptably high chance of unlocking any random phone. The cost of creating synthetic fingers based on images is high, but it is well documented and would only have to be done once for a MasterPrint attack. By demonstrating how to create MasterPrints, we show that this is a real vulnerability that needs to be addressed.  2. Background 2.1. Fingerprint presentation attacks Research and practice in a cybersecurity is a constant arms race between fixing vulnerabilities and discovering new ones. It is important for researchers to find vulnerabilities before bad actors so that the issue can be fixed. Sometimes it is not just necessary to show that a vulnerability exists,  but show how an attack would actually be executed. This does two things for people designing secure systems: it allows them to evaluate the immediate risk of this threat, and it gives them a concrete attack vector to protect against. Research around the MasterPrint vulnerability is important for these reasons. Recently, Roy et al.(Roy et al., 2017) studied the vulnerability of fingerprint-based biometric systems that have small sensors for authentication and therefore only scan part of the fingerprint. They found these systems are highly susceptible to a type of presentation attack (Une et al., 2007) that is known as a MasterPrint attack. A MasterPrint is a biometric sample, real or synthesized, that impersonates multiple subjects’ biometrics. This type of attack does not require an individual’s biometric sample but instead is be deployed against unknown people with some probability of a successful attack. Small fingerprint scanners are too small to read the entire fingerprint and therefore the system must authenticate on just the cross-section of the finger that is read from the sensor. Since it would be impractical to require the user to place their finger the exact same way every time, these systems normally take multiple readings from the same finger during enrollment. When an input is presented to the system during verification, it compares the input against all the partial prints that it has for a subject. If a subject has n fingers in the system and there are k partial prints saved per fingerprint, then there are n × k opportunities for a match and the system only needs a match one of them. This type of setup is common on consumer mobile devices. Roy et al. (Roy et al., 2017) showed that there exist synthetic MasterPrints that serendipitously match a large proportion of the fingerprint population in a dataset. Their method represents fingerprints as minutiae templates. A minutiae template represents all the points of interest in a fingerprint. This includes where ridges end, where they split, and the angle going away from that point. Many fingerprint identification systems will first identify the minutiae in the fingerprint and then compare them to the minutiae template saved in the system. Roy et al then use a hill-climbing algorithm to search for a minutiae template to use for a MasterPrint attack; the objective function is the number of people in the database that the fingerprint matches with. However, it may be noted that the MasterPrints generated by Roy et al. cannot be used directly to launch a spoof attack. Reconstruction of ”image level” MasterPrints is needed from these ”template level” MasterPrints (Cao & Jain, 2015b). This reconstruction step is a lossy technique which may reduce the attack accuracy and relies on the authentication system to use minutiae.  DeepMasterPrint  In this work, we generate the MasterPrint images directly instead of working with minutiae templates. The advantage of the approach we present here is that by working at the image level it is possible to optimize for systems that don’t use minutiae, systems such as the iPhone (Apple, 2017), or where we do not have access to the appropriate input vector for minutiae, such as in the case where we only have access to a physical sensor. 2.2. Image generation Recently, there have been rapid advancements in image generation by way of neural networks. Some of the most popular methods for image generation are Fully Visible Belief Networks (FVBN), Variational Autoencoders (VAE), and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow, 2016). FVBNs such as PixelRNN produce one pixel at a time, similar to text generation but can often be noisy in their output. VAEs, on the other hand, tend to produce very smooth outputs. Current GAN methods are perceived to produce results with fewer artifacts than FVBNs and sharper images than VAEs (Goodfellow, 2016). In the end, any of these methods could have been used with our method as long as they generate clear fingerprint images. GANs learn to generate images in an unsupervised fashion. There are two parts to GAN; a generator and a discriminator. The generator is typically a neural network that takes random noise as an input and outputs an image. The discriminator is also typically a neural network, it takes an image as an input and classifies it as real or generated. To train the generator to produce images within the domain of the sample images, training happens in three steps: 1. Provide real images to the discriminator. Train the discriminator to classify them as real. 2. Provide generated images to the discriminator. Train it to classify them as generated. 3. Provide the generator with the discriminator’s gradients. Train the generator to produce images that are classified as real. This process is repeated until the network converges on the distribution of the real data. A major difficulty during training is keeping the two networks balanced so one doesn’t get significantly better than the other. Much work since the invention of GANs has focused on stabilizing training; two popular approaches have been the Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) and WGAN with gradient penalty (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017). In standard GAN training, the discriminator classifies the input as either real or generated. The difference between  the real data distribution and the generated data is then measured using the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JS) (Arjovsky et al., 2017). This metric does not provide a gradient everywhere for the generator and therefore requires that the discriminator and generator are closely matched. This, in turn, makes training unstable. WGAN instead uses an approximation of the Wasserstein distance function to measure the difference between the real and fake distributions (Arjovsky et al., 2017). Since it is differentiable everywhere, it provides meaningful gradients for the generator. The two networks don’t have to be well balanced so the discriminator can be better trained preventing mode collapse. While we had success with WGAN, any GAN algorithm can be used. A recent study tested a number of GAN algorithms and found that with enough parameter tuning there was not a significant difference between them (Lui et al., 2017). If larger images are needed, recent work shows that progressive growing of GANs produces good results (Karras et al., 2017). 2.3. Evolutionary Optimization Optimization via evolutionary strategies has been used within AI for a long time. Evolutionary computation is a family of versatile optimization techniques that only need to be able to sample from a population and evaluate the relative fitness of each sample to operate. This makes evolution particularly suited to instances where the evaluation mechanism is a black box and only the final evaluation of each sample is available. The Covariance Matrix Adaption Evolutionary Strategy(CMA-ES) is a robust approach that’s been shown to work on non-linear and non-convex fitness domains (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001). CMA-ES samples its population from a multivariate normal distribution. Each generation it updates a covariance matrix of the correlation between each variable and successful samples. This is used to update the distribution of successful samples. The model it learns is an approximation of a second-order model of the fitness function (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001). This makes CMA-ES a powerful strategy when optimizing for difficult real-valued domains. Evolution has been used with neural networks for a long time. This has primarily occurred through neuroevolution, where evolution is used to evolve the weights and sometimes the topology of a neural network (Yao, 1999). Recently, researchers have shown that neuroevolution can be used on deep neural networks and can even compete against reinforcement learning algorithms (Such et al., 2017; Lehman et al., 2017). Our work does not involve evolving the weights of the neural networks. Instead, in our work, the neural networks are trained separately with gradient descent and evolution is applied to the network inputs. A similar  DeepMasterPrint  approach has recently been proposed for an interactive evolution system (Bontrager et al., 2018); the difference there is that human aesthetic preference is used as the fitness function.  3. Methods To create a MasterPrint that can be deployed as a real attack, there needs to be a fingerprint image. The ideal system for generating a MasterPrint image would be able to generate every possible image and test every possible image on all fingerprint biometric systems in existence and choose the image that matches the most people. Since it is infeasible to have access to every identity and system, it is necessary to build a MasterPrint with a sample of identities and verification systems and have it generalize. Limiting the images to images of fingerprints should help generalization. Our scaled back ideal system is able to generate any fingerprint and search over a sample of identities and matching systems to find the ideal fingerprint system. This setup not only provides an image but it also has the potential to find a better MasterPrint than previous approaches. To implement this system we developed Latent Variable Evolution. There are two parts to Latent Variable Evolution (LVE); (1) train a neural network to generate images of fingerprints (2) search the latent variables of the network (the input vector to the generator network) for a fingerprint that produces the best MasterPrint attack. To train an image generator, we use the WGAN method described earlier and then use CMA-ES to evolve the fingerprint. The method is tested on two different fingerprint datasets and with two different matching systems. 3.1. Fingerprint Generator In this work we train two generator networks, both using the WGAN algorithm. The networks are modeled after deep convolutional GAN and defined in Figure1 (Radford et al., 2015). One network is trained on a dataset of fingerprints scanned with a capacitive sensor and the other on a dataset of fingerprints rolled in ink. The networks are trained adversarially with a Wasserstein loss function and RMSProp with a learning rate of 0.00005 (Arjovsky et al., 2017). The generators are trained via minibatch. Each batch samples 64 images and 64 latent variable vectors. We trained each generator for 120,000 updates with the discriminator trained 5 times between each generator update. Originally we used deconvolutions in the generator but this kept causing blocky artifacts until we switched to upsampling with convolutions. It should be noted that there has been some work into how much of a data distribution a GAN actually learns (Arora & Zhang, 2017). Arora and Zhang tested a few GAN architectures for diversity and none of the GANs that they  1. Upsample x 2 2. Convolution 3. Tanh  128 x 128 x 3  1. Upsample x 2 2. Convolution Kernel: 3 Stride: 1 Padding: 1 3. Batch Norm 4. Relu  32 x 32 x 256  1. Dense 2. Batch Norm 3. Relu  64 x 64 x 128  16 x 16 x 512 8x8 x 1024 4x4 x 1024 100 values x ~ 𝒩(0,1)  Figure 1: Generator Network Architecture. The discriminator is the inverse of this model with subsampling instead of upsampling and LeakyReLu activation functions.  tested were able to model the entire data distribution well. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that WGAN will only model part of the image distribution and our technique will not be able to produce every type of fingerprint. 3.2. Searching the Space of Latent Variables Algorithm 1 Latent Variable Evolution f mr ← 1%, .1%, .01% and f ingerprint ← 12 partial 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15:  Gθ ← trainGAN(data) function MatchingScore(X) img ← Gθ (X) score ← 0 for f ingerprint in data do for partial in f ingerprint do if matching(img, partial, f mr) then score + + break end if end for end for return score end function M asterP rint ← CMAES(MatchingScore  To create a MasterPrint we must evolve the latent variables of the generator to the optimal values. The inputs to a generator are called latent variables because their effect on the network output is only understood through the observed image. Since our network takes a hundred latent variables as input, then the optimal solution is a point in a hundred dimensional space. As shown in Figure 2, LVE samples a number of these points, converts them to images, and then  DeepMasterPrint  Input Latent Variables  Sample from Distribution Trained Generator  Evaluate  Latent Variable Fitness Function  Score Output Image  Check for Matches  Update Model of Distribution *Size based on score  CMA-ES Optimization  Latent Variable Fitness Function  Figure 2: Latent Variable Evolution with trained network. On the left is a high level overview of CMA-ES and the box on the right shows how the latent variables are evaluated scores the images to learn the distribution over time of the best points. These optimal points are the genotypes of the MasterPrints which can then be mapped to images. LVE could use any evolutionary algorithm (or other stochastic global optimizers, such as Particle Swarm Optimization) to search the latent space. An evolutionary algorithm does not require gradients and therefore is ideal for black-box optimization. In this domain, the verification system can report how many identities match and how good each match is, but it does not provide any information about how it came to these results. There are no gradients that inform us which pixel of a MasterPrint is most or least effective. Since the fitness score for LVE is the number of identity matches, the fitness landscape is also discontinuous. Due to the hierarchical nature of convolutional networks, the latent variables are also not independently separable. For these reasons, it is important to use an evolutionary technique that works well on rugged fitness domains, such as CMA-ES (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001). Since CMA-ES learns a covariance matrix of the latent variables, it can also intelligently mutate the correlated variables. In this work, we use Hansens Python implementation of CMA-ES (Hansen, 2006). To evolve each fingerprint, we let the algorithm run for 3 days. As detailed in Algorithm 1, the fitness score is the sum total of identity matches. Each identity is represented by 12 partial fingerprints. To be verified, only one of the 12 partial fingerprint templates has to match. This is the fundamental weakness that MasterPrint is exploiting. The fitness of a latent variable involves converting each set of latent variables to an image, checking images against all the partial prints  in the verification system, and then summing up the unique identities that have at least one match. Using a discrete score discourages the system from matching all the identities a little while not having many complete matches. For our work, we use two different fingerprint verification systems. We use the widely deployed commercial fingerprint system, VeriFinger 9.0 SDK. This system is used in the fitness function in Algorithm 1 To be able to test how well optimization for one black-box transfers to another, we also use the Bozorth3 system. This system is provided open source by NIST as part of their NIST Biometric Image Software (NBIS). Both systems identify minutiae points on the fingerprint and then do matching via these points. 3.3. Experimental Setup Smartphones are the primary focus of a MasterPrint attack due to their smart sensors. Since smartphone systems currently use capacitive sensors, we evolve our MasterPrints for a capacitive dataset. We evolve the MasterPrints on the VeriFinger system, which is the current benchmark system used for MasterPrints. To stay consistent with previous work, we evolve MasterPrints for three different security levels, therefore we get 6 MasterPrints with the two generators. In the work of Roy et al. (Roy et al., 2017), they evolve minutiae points for a 1%, 0.1%, and 0.01% False Match Rate (FMR). The FMR is the probability that an impostor fingerprint will be marked as a match. If the FMR is set too high, the system is not very secure. If it is too low, it will reject too many legitimate fingerprint readings.  DeepMasterPrint  To verify that our MasterPrints generalize well we split the capacitive dataset in half, a test set and a training set. The test set is used for scoring the candidate MasterPrints during optimization. The MasterPrint should do well against these fingerprints as it is directly optimized for them. We test the generators on the test set to show how well the attack generalizes. The capacitive MasterPrints show the results for a scenario where the attacker can get similar data to the system while the rolled MasterPrints are from a completely different dataset to test the robustness of the attack. To test the effectiveness of a MasterPrint attack in the case where one does not have access to the target matching system, we test our MasterPrints on the Bozarth3 matching system using the same test set. The MasterPrints are not optimized for this verification system or the identities. This would be the easiest of our attack to perform in real life.  4. Datasets In this work, we model two types of fingerprint images; those scanned from rolled impressions and those obtained from a capacitive sensor. Rolled fingerprints are produced by applying ink to the finger and rolling the finger on paper. Capacitive sensors record ridge information based on where the finger contacts the sensor. 4.1. Rolled images The rolled fingerprints come from the publicly available NIST Special Database 9 fingerprint dataset (Watson, 1993). The dataset consists of all 10 fingerprints of 5400 unique subjects. Each fingerprint is an 8-bit grayscale image. For each subject, the right thumbprint is selected since that is a common finger used in authentication systems. The images are preprocessed by cropping out the whitespace and then downscaling to 256 × 256 pixels. To get partial fingerprint samples, a random 128 × 128 region is selected every time an image is selected. 4.2. Capacitive images The capacitive fingerprint images come from the FingerPass DB7 dataset (Jia et al., 2012). This dataset has 12 partial fingerprints per each of its 720 subjects. Each partial print is of size 144 × 144 pixels at a resolution of 500 dpi. This is similar to what is scanned by an iPhone (Apple, 2017). This is the same dataset used by Roy et al. (Roy et al., 2017).  5. Results 5.1. Generated fingerprints The results of training the WGAN generator can be seen in Figure 3. In the right column are the generated images, the  left column contains samples from the actual datasets. The image generator seems to have captured the basic structures in both instances. Figure 3a shows partial fingerprints for rolled fingerprints from the NIST dataset. Looking at the right batch, it is clear that the generator has learned the general ridge structure of a fingerprint. Looking closer, there are certain areas that look smudged. Most likely due to the fact that the data is generated from random sections of the fingerprint, the generator had a difficult time learning the more global shapes of a fingerprint. From visual inspection, it appears to have learned the texture. Some of the generated results do look like real fingerprints. Figure 3b displays the results for the capacitive fingerprints. The results look better for this dataset. There are fewer smudges on the images and the ridges are better connected. Looking at larger batches, the generated capacitive images are more consistently good than the rolled images. This is likely because the capacitive data is cleaner and there is far less detail to learn. To evaluate the images as fingerprints we can extract the minutiae points from the image. The randomly generated images have a similar number of minutiae points to real images in the dataset. Something interesting we noticed is that the generated images on average had double the False Match Rate as the real data. This means that without evolution, the fingerprints are already twice as good at spoofing a system than a random real fingerprint. This suggests that the generated images display common features more often than the real data distribution. As a sanity check, we provide images of randomly generated noise to the Verification systems and they found no minutiae points. This means that the generator is not only producing images that look like fingerprints to humans, but they are algorithmically being identified as fingerprints too. 5.2. MasterPrints The MasterPrints created via LVE can be seen in Figure 4. On the left are the MasterPrints optimized for the highest level of security and on the right are the ones for the lowest level of security. The results look very similar across different security settings but not between datasets. The evolutionary algorithm is able to get more distorted images by sampling latent variables far outside the distribution used to train the generator network. This occurred in these MasterPrints with the average latent value more than three standard deviations outside the original sampling distribution in some cases. This is not necessarily a problem as the images are still identified as fingerprints with around 20 minutiae points identified per MasterPrint. In Table 1 the percentage of false subject matches are dis-  DeepMasterPrint  (a) Real (left) and generated (right) samples for the NIST dataset.  (b) Real (left) and generated (right) samples for the FingerPass capacitive dataset.  Figure 3 5.2.1. ROLLED M ASTER P RINTS The three rolled MasterPrints make up the top of Figure 4. At the lowest security level, 1% FMR, a single MasterPrint is able to match with 78% of the people in the dataset. This is a large number of subjects but it is unlikely that many systems are running with this low of a security setting. At the 0.1% FMR level, the MasterPrint matches 8.61% of the dataset. This represents a much more realistic security expectation and is a much higher number of matches than the FMR would lead one to expect. At the highest security level (FMR 0.01%), the attack results arent very good, but this is also an unlikely security level as it would be inconvenient to the user. Figure 4: Evolved MasterPrints for rolled fingerprints (top) and for capacitive fingerprints (bottom). Left to right, each fingerprint is optimized for an FMR at 0.01%, 0.1%, and 1% respectively.  played. The number of false subject matches is the number of subjects in the dataset that the MasterPrint matches. The second row in the table shows the results on the VeriFinger system when used with the test data. The third row is the percentage of subjects matched to each MasterPrint by the Bozorth3 system. The results show the level to which LVE created MasterPrints work on unseen verification systems.  A very interesting part of the results is how well these MasterPrints do on the Bozorth3 verification system. These fingerprints are not optimized for it and yet the results are still good. At the medium security setting, the MasterPrint actually does better on the Bozorth3 system. This suggests that the fingerprint features in the MasterPrint that allow it to match so many subjects have general properties and it is not just targeting quirks in the VeriFinger system. Since both systems are minutiae based, it does not suggest generality beyond minutiae systems but it is an important first step in showing that these results are applicable.  DeepMasterPrint  Table 1: Attack accuracy of MasterPrints from Figure 4 on the capacitive training and test data using two authentication systems.  VeriFinger Training VeriFinger Test Bozorth3 Test  Rolled MasterPrint Matches 0.01% FMR 0.1% FMR 1% FMR 5.00% 13.89% 67.50% 0.28% 8.61% 78.06% 0.14% 16.25% 55.83%  5.2.2. C APACITIVE M ASTER P RINTS The three capacitive MasterPrints make up the bottom row of Figure 4. Since all the match rates are for capacitive data, the capacitive MasterPrints are much more visually similar to the subject data than the rolled MasterPrints. This should allow these MasterPrints to do better than the rolled MasterPrints. Looking at Table 1, the results are, as a whole, a little better than the rolled MasterPrints. At the 0.01% FMR level, the results are much better. A one in five subject match rate is very bad for an authentication system. The results on the Bozorth3 system are not nearly as good as what is seen with the rolled MasterPrint. One explanation for this is that the Bozorth3 system is designed and tested for the NIST data which consists of rolled fingerprint impressions. It may struggle with the capacitive MasterPrints. The images produced by the capacitive generator have much thicker ridges which mean the model might be less flexible in targeting the system. The rolled MasterPrints are for the most part coherent while the capacitive MasterPrints have a lot of noise at the center of the image. Noise can easily target an individual system, but it does not usually transfer. Figure 4 supports this observation. 5.2.3. C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS In our work, we created a MasterPrint that’s intended to spoof a system in a single try. Previous work had much worse success when only given a single attempt. Besides also providing an image, LVE creates a much more effective MasterPrint. Table 2 has the results of the minutiae approaches and the capacitive DeepMasterPrint. In the work by Roy et al. (Roy et al., 2017), they also evolved a suite of five fingerprints that can be used sequentially in the case where a system gives someone five attempts. Our result for a single MasterPrint is comparable to this suite of MasterPrints. We would expect LVE would do very well in creating a suite of sequential MasterPrints too.  Capacitive MasterPrint Matches 0.01% FMR 0.1% FMR 1% FMR 6.94% 29.44% 89.44% 1.11% 22.50% 76.67% 0.00% 5.28% 6.67%  Table 2: Percentage of subjects matched from our capacitive DeepMasterPrint and from previous state of the art results on VeriFinger. 0.01% FMR  0.1% FMR  1% FMR  1.88% 6.88% 1.11%  6.60% 30.69% 22.50%  33.40% 77.92% 76.67%  MasterPrint MasterPrint Suite DeepMasterPrint  ification systems. The first step is to train a GAN on a fingerprint dataset. Then LVE searches the latent variables of the image generator network for an image that maximizes the number of people identified as belonging to that fingerprint. The results of our method (1) improved the state of the art in terms of number of individuals identified as, and importantly (2) for the first time generates complete MasterPrint images, taking us a large step closer to a practical MasterPrint attack. Testing with two different fingerprint recognition systems, and two different datasets, show that the method is robust and not dependent on the artifacts of any particular fingerprint recognition system. Future testing should verify the effectiveness of this system in the wild, against e.g. smartphone fingerprint recognition systems. It is also plausible that the method could be extended to many other biometric modalities that are vulnerable to presentation attacks. Beyond the application of MasterPrints, this paper successfully shows the usefulness of searching the latent space of a generator network for images, or other artifacts, that meet a given objective. This idea is surprisingly under-explored and could be useful in computational creativity research as well as other security domains; see initial work on using a similar approach for aesthetic purposes in an interactive setting (Bontrager et al., 2018).  Acknowledgement 6. Conclusion This paper presents Latent Variable Evolution as a method for generating MasterPrint images; partial fingerprints which can be used for dictionary attacks on fingerprint ver-  We are thankful to NVIDIA for donating GPUs that were used for this project.  DeepMasterPrint  References Apple. ios security - white paper, 2017. Arjovsky, Martin, Chintala, Soumith, and Bottou, Léon. Wasserstein gan. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07875, 2017. Arora, Sanjeev and Zhang, Yi. Do gans actually learn the distribution? an empirical study. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08224, 2017. Bontrager, Philip, Lin, Wending, Togelius, Julian, and Risi, Sebastian. Deep interactive evolution. In International Conference on Evolutionary and Biologically Inspired Music and Art. Springer, 2018.  Hansen, Nikolaus and Ostermeier, Andreas. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution strategies. Evolutionary computation, 9(2):159–195, 2001. Hern, Alex. Hacker fakes german minister’s fingerprints using photos of her hands. Guardian News and Media, 2014. Jain, Anil K and Cao, Kai. Fingerprint image analysis: role of orientation patch and ridge structure dictionaries. Geometry Driven Statistics, 121:288, 2015.  Cao, Kai and Jain, Anil K. Learning fingerprint reconstruction: From minutiae to image. Information Forensics and Security, IEEE Transactions on, 10(1):104–117, 2015a.  Jia, Xiaofei, Yang, Xin, Zang, Yali, Zhang, Ning, and Tian, Jie. A cross-device matching fingerprint database from multi-type sensors. In Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2012 21st International Conference on, pp. 3001–3004. IEEE, 2012.  Cao, Kai and Jain, Anil K. Learning fingerprint reconstruction: From minutiae to image. IEEE Transactions on information forensics and security, 10(1):104–117, 2015b.  Karras, Tero, Aila, Timo, Laine, Samuli, and Lehtinen, Jaakko. Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196, 2017.  Cao, Kai, Liu, Eryun, and Jain, Anubhav K. Segmentation and enhancement of latent fingerprints: A coarse to fine ridgestructure dictionary. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, 36(9):1847–1859, 2014.  Lehman, Joel, Chen, Jay, Clune, Jeff, and Stanley, Kenneth O. Safe mutations for deep and recurrent neural networks through output gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06563, 2017.  Feng, Jianjiang and Jain, Anil K. Fingerprint reconstruction: from minutiae to phase. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, 33(2):209–223, 2011.  Lui, Mario, Kurach, Karol, Michalski, Marcin, Gelly, Sylvain, and Bousquet, Olivier. Are gans created equal? a large-scale study. arXiv, 2017. URL https://arxiv. org/pdf/1711.10337.pdf.  Frank. Chaos computer club breaks apple touchid, 2013. URL https://www.ccc.de/en/updates/ 2013/ccc-breaks-apple-touchid. Goodfellow, Ian. Nips 2016 tutorial: Generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.00160, 2016. Goodfellow, Ian, Pouget-Abadie, Jean, Mirza, Mehdi, Xu, Bing, Warde-Farley, David, Ozair, Sherjil, Courville, Aaron, and Bengio, Yoshua. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014. Gulrajani, Ishaan, Ahmed, Faruk, Arjovsky, Martin, Dumoulin, Vincent, and Courville, Aaron C. Improved training of wasserstein gans. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5769–5779, 2017.  Matsumoto, Tsutomu, Matsumoto, Hiroyuki, Yamada, Koji, and Hoshino, Satoshi. Impact of artificial gummy fingers on fingerprint systems. In Electronic Imaging, pp. 275– 289. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2002. Radford, Alec, Metz, Luke, and Chintala, Soumith. Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015. Ratha, Nalini K, Connell, Jonathan H, and Bolle, Ruud M. An analysis of minutiae matching strength. In Audioand Video-Based Biometric Person Auth., pp. 223–228. Springer, 2001.  Han, Byron B, Marciniak, Craig A, and Westerman, Wayne C. Fingerprint sensing and enrollment, April 3 2014. US Patent App. 14/244,143.  Roy, Aditi, Memon, Nasir, and Ross, Arun. Masterprint: Exploring the vulnerability of partial fingerprint-based authentication systems. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2017.  Hansen, Nikolaus. The cma evolution strategy: a comparing review. Towards a new evolutionary computation, pp. 75–102, 2006.  Sousedik, Ctirad and Busch, Christoph. Presentation attack detection methods for fingerprint recognition systems: a survey. IET Biometrics, 3(4):219–233, 2014.  DeepMasterPrint  Such, Felipe Petroski, Madhavan, Vashisht, Conti, Edoardo, Lehman, Joel, Stanley, Kenneth O, and Clune, Jeff. Deep neuroevolution: Genetic algorithms are a competitive alternative for training deep neural networks for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06567, 2017. Uludag, Umut and Jain, Anil K. Attacks on biometric systems: a case study in fingerprints. In SPIE Electronic Imaging, pp. 622–633. Intl Society for Optics and Photonics, 2004. Une, Masashi, Otsuka, Akira, and Imai, Hideki. Wolf attack probability: A new security measure in biometric authentication systems. In International Conference on Biometrics, pp. 396–406. Springer, 2007. Watson, Craig I. Nist special database 9, mated fingerprint card pairs. National Institute of Standard and Technology (February 1993), 1993. Yao, Xin. Evolving artificial neural networks. Proceedings of the IEEE, 87(9):1423–1447, 1999.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
