Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_3081

Abstract:
Enhancing human color vision by breaking binocular redundancy Bradley S. Gundlach1, Michel Frising1,2, Alireza Shahsafi1, Gregory Vershbow3, Chenghao Wan1,4, Jad Salman1, Bas Rokers5,6, Laurent Lessard1, Mikhail A. Kats1,4,6* 1  Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 2 Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 3 Department of Art, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 4 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 5 Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 6 McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI  To see color, the human visual system combines the response of three types of cone cells in the retina – a compressive process that discards a significant amount of spectral information. Here, we present an approach to enhance human color vision by breaking its inherent binocular redundancy, providing different spectral content to each eye. We fabricated and tested a set of optical filters that “splits” the response of the short-wavelength cone between the two eyes in individuals with typical trichromatic vision, simulating the presence of approximately four distinct cone types (“tetrachromacy”). Such an increase in the number of simulated cone types can reduce the prevalence of metamers – pairs of distinct spectra that resolve to the same perceived color. This technique may result in an enhancement of spectral perception, with applications ranging from camouflage detection and anti-counterfeiting to new types of artwork and data visualization. In the typical human eye, the three cone types – labeled “S” for short wavelengths, “M” for medium, and “L” for long – are primarily sensitive to light with wavelengths in the 390 - 530 nm, 400 670 nm, and 400 - 700 nm bands, respectively [1–4]. When excited by light, a signal from the cones is relayed though retinal ganglion cells, to the optic nerve, and then the brain, where it is further processed to produce a color sensation [5, 6]. This process can be understood as a type of lossy compression from an N-  1  dimensional spectrum, where N is the number of wavelength bins necessary to sufficiently approximate a continuous spectrum, into a color, which is a three-dimensional object (Fig. 1). A manifestation of this Nto-three compression is metamerism, a phenomenon in which different spectra appear as the same color. The number of cone types and the widths and separations of their spectral sensitivities govern the degree to which metamerism is a limitation of the visual system; for example, a hypothetical increase in the number of distinct cone types should result in a decrease in the prevalence of metamers. Cast in a signal processing perspective, an increase in the sampling rate of a spectrum (i.e., the number of cones) improves the ability to detect sharp features in the spectrum, even for non-uniform sampling [7, 8].  Figure 1: (a) A sample spectrum generated by a cathode ray tube (CRT) monitor displaying a purple color. The filled rectangle represents a single spectral bin, if the continuous spectrum is divided into N bins. (b) (i) Normalized spectral sensitivity of the cone types for a typical trichromatic observer ( = 3). (ii) Normalized spectral sensitivity of the effective cone types for a typical trichromatic observer enhanced using our device ( =  4). (c) A representation of the perceived color of the spectrum in (a). The case with  =  4 cannot be displayed, but extra spectral information would be present compared to the  = 3 case.  Several studies have reported that a small percentage of humans, primarily women, express a mutated L cone in addition to the standard one, resulting in a total of four cone types, which may enable  2  vision with four color dimensions (tetrachromacy) [9-11]. Reports suggest that a few of these individuals can utilize this fourth photopigment type, and thus “perceive significantly more chromatic appearances” compared to typical, healthy humans with three cone types (trichromats) [12, 13]. More broadly, it is reasonable to infer that an additional cone type would enhance spectral perception, provided subsequent neural processing can capitalize on its presence.  Figure 2: (a) Simplified schematic of an optical filter comprising several thin-film layers. (b) Measured transmission spectra of fabricated Filters 1 (black) and 2 (blue). (c) Magnified portion of the transmission spectrum from (b), including angle dependence with angle of incidence (AOI) from 0 to 15°. (d) Colors of an example metameric pair (1, 2) and D65 broadband white light (3), as perceived by a typical trichromat. The traces in each box are the underlying unfiltered spectra (arbitrary units), taken from our experiments, as described in Fig. 3. (e, f) Rendered monocular colors of the spectra in (d) after passing through Filter 1 and Filter 2, respectively. Note that e(1) and e(2), f(1) and f(2) are substantially distinct, while e(3) and f(3) are similar in color due to the white-balance constraint enforced in our design.  3  Here, we aim to simulate tetrachromatic (and possibly higher-dimensional) color vision in typical trichromatic humans by increasing the number of effective (simulated) cone types in the visual system comprising the two eyes and a passive optical device. This approach breaks the binocular redundancy of the two eyes, where the visual fields of each eye are overlapping, providing different spectral content to each eye via a wearable passive multispectral device comprising two optical transmission filters (Fig. 2). A number of existing vision-assistive devices or techniques operate by breaking binocular redundancy, though usually in the spatial rather than spectral domain. Examples include hemianopia (partial blindness in the left or right visual field) treatment using spectacles with a monocular sector prism that selectively relocates the visual field in one eye, leaving the other eye unaffected, and thus conferring an additional 20° of visual-field sensitivity for binocular vision [14, 15], and the treatment of presbyopia by correcting one eye for near vision and the other for distance vision [16]. The binocular redundancy can be broken spectrally by using filters that selectively attenuate different wavelength bands to yield effective cone sensitivities (i.e., the products of the cone sensitivities and the filter transmission spectra) that are different between the two eyes. This increases the number of effective cone types while preserving most spatial information. In this vein, the use of two simple bandpass filters was previously demonstrated to increase the dimensionality of color vision in dichromatic individuals (i.e., those with two functioning cone types) [17]. Conversely, the goal here is to enhance the dimensionality of a trichromat’s visual system to beyond that of a typical human. Such an approach was briefly suggested by Cornsweet in 1970 [18], but to our knowledge no specific design has been proposed or realized. We note that the use of even a single filter positioned in front of both eyes can help distinguish certain metamers [18], with the caveat that previously distinguishable spectra can become metamers when viewed through the filter; that is, a similar number of metamers are created as are destroyed. In contrast, the  4  use of two filters might be used to decrease the overall number of possible metamers; if at least one of the two filters can be used to differentiate a pair of spectra, we consider the pair to no longer be metamers. To design the set of filters, we used a standard psychophysical model to determine the perceived (monocular) colors corresponding to particular spectra [2, 19]. Here, colors are calculated using the International Commission on Illumination (CIE) 1931 standard observer matching functions. CIE LAB is our preferred color space, as it is more perceptually uniform than other color spaces; the coordinates in LAB space ([L, a, b]) correspond to the luminance (L) and hue (a & b) [20]. We calculate differences in monocular colors (e.g., between color 1 and color 2) in the LAB space using (see the supplementary information for further details) [2]:  ∆E12 = ( L2 − L1 ) 2 + (a2 − a1 ) 2 + (b2 − b1 ) 2  (1)  The filters are designed to enhance the ability of a typical trichromatic viewer to discriminate spectra while limiting adverse effects such as color clashing. For simplicity, we focused on a design that splits the response of the S cone, thus transforming the trichromatic visual system into one that emulates tetrachromatic vision. The responsivity of the S cone has relatively little overlap with those of the M and L cones (Fig. 1b(i)), so it can be attenuated while minimizing the impact on the effective responsivity of other two cone types. To provide parity between eyes, we partitioned the S cone responsivity such that each eye retains approximately half of the original response spectrum (Fig. 1b(ii)). We also imposed a “white-balance” constraint, ensuring that the transmission of broadband white light (defined using CIE illuminant D65 [21]) through the two filters results in a similar color. This constraint was put in place to minimize potential color clashing between the eyes when the device is used in daylight [22]. The detailed filter design process is presented in the supplementary information, briefly summarized here. The final device comprises a 450 nm long-pass filter (Filter 1) and a 450-500 nm, 6305  680 nm double-band-stop filter (Filter 2) (Fig. 2b-c). The 450 nm transition between Filters 1 and 2 is at the peak sensitivity of the S cone, and partitions it in half. However, due to the non-zero sensitivity of the M and L cones in the 450-500 nm region (Fig. 1b(i)), the M and L cones are also (unintentionally) attenuated by Filter 2. The 630-680 nm stopband was introduced to attenuate the effective responsivity of the M and L cones to broadband white light to preserve color balance. This double-band-pass filter was optimized by varying the stopband/passband positions and transmittances using simulated annealing methods to minimize the CIE ΔE color difference of D65 white light passing through Filters 1 and 2. Note that the design presented here is a proof of concept, and is not a unique or globally optimal solution. The optimized transmission function of Filter 2 was implemented using conventional thin-film technology [23], with alternating layers of silicon oxide (SiO2 , n = 1.46) and tantalum oxide (Ta2O5, n = 2.15) (Fig. 2a-b)). The required film thicknesses were determined by conventional thin-film optimization methods, including gradual evolution [24] and needle optimization [25] (see the supplementary information for further details), to implement the target transmission function. The final stack was constrained to be less than 75 total layers, and each layer between 10 and 500 nm thick. The filter was optimized such that the transmission would not change significantly for incident angles up to 5° away from the normal. The films were deposited using ion-assisted sputtering onto an NBK7 glass substrate at a thin-film foundry (Iridian). To reduce cost, Filter 1 was approximated by an off-the-shelf component (450LP RapidEdge, Omega Optical). The two filters were then characterized by angle-dependent transmission spectroscopy, demonstrating that the transmission spectra are robust to incidence angles up to 5° away from the normal (Fig. 2c). Following fabrication, the filters were constructed into a pair of glasses.  6  Figure 3: (a) Schematic of our metamer generation setup. Images from two monitors, an LCD and a CRT display, are combined using a 50/50 beam splitter (i), to be viewed at location (ii). The two monitors use different emission mechanisms, and thus generate different spectra for the same color. (b) Photograph taken at position (ii) in the schematic. (c) Measured emission spectra from the LCD (solid) and CRT (dashed) monitors while displaying the same purple color. Spectra are shown with arbitrary units. (d) Rendered colors of the spectra in (c) viewed through no filter, Filter 1, and Filter 2, respectively, showing that the metamers can be distinguished using either filter. See the supplementary information for discussion of the difference between rendered colors in (d) and those in the photograph in (b).  To test the performance of this design, we constructed a setup that generates metameric spectra using a liquid crystal display (LCD, True HD-IPS display on LG G3 smartphone) and a cathode ray tube (CRT, Dell E770P) monitor (Fig. 3a-b). The displays use different emission mechanisms, and thus produce distinct spectra when displaying the same color [26, 27]. In our experiment, pairs of metamers were presented side by side using a 50/50 beam splitter (Edmund Optics), allowing color comparisons to be made. The colors of each monitor were individually adjusted until no perceivable color difference was present. The spectra of light generated by the monitors with and without filters were acquired using a freespace spectrometer (Ocean Optics FLAME VIS-NIR with cosine corrector), and color difference calculations were performed to ensure the colors were indistinguishable given a standard observer. A 7  threshold value of 2.3 for the CIE ΔE “just noticeable difference” was used to define which spectra were indistinguishable (i.e., ΔE < 2.3) [28]. One representative example using a pair of metamers that appear purple is shown in Fig. 3b-d. Without the use of either filter, the two different spectra appeared as nearly identical patches of color. However, when observed through either of the filters, the two can be easily differentiated. Subjectively, we observed that, by looking at a particular patch through both filters simultaneously (i.e., Filter 1 over the left eye, Filter 2 over the right), a “meta-color” can be observed, which appears to be different from the color perceived through either filter individually or with no filter. This meta-color may be a manifestation of the approximately four effective cone types created by the pair of filters. We note that a related study involving dichromats demonstrated an increase in color dimensionality using band-pass filters, though the authors suggest the effect could be related to binocular lustre [17], which may also be responsible for the effect we observed. We emphasize that our experiment does not probe to what degree the neuronal processing system of a trichromat can take advantage of this extra information. Broadly stated, the number of cone types and their frequency-dependent responsivities determines the extent to which metamerism is a limitation to the visual system. Our method increases the number of effective/simulated cone types, which decreases the number of potential metamers, provided the subsequent neuronal processing can adapt appropriately (which seems to occur in the case of spatial multiplexing used for vision-assistive devices [14, 15]). In general, quantitatively determining the decrease in the metamer frequency is difficult because the set of possible metamers is not bounded. Nevertheless, various metrics can be applied to roughly estimate this quantity. As described in detail in the supplementary information, we estimated the ratio of metamer frequency reduction by linearizing the mapping between a discretized spectrum and the LAB space. Counting the number of metamers for a particular LAB reference point [Lo, ao, bo] amounts to counting the number of different spectra ( ) that map to tristimulus values that are within a sphere in LAB space of  8  radius Δ = 2.3 of the reference point. We discretized spectra using N samples to avoid working in infinite-dimensional space (Fig. 1a), bounding the set of possible spectra by considering D65 light reflected from (or transmitted through) an arbitrary object. Using the linearized mapping, the set of metamers in Ndimensional spectrum space is a high-dimensional ellipsoid. The volume of the ellipsoid describes the number of possible metamers for the unfiltered case. To estimate the number of metamers using the twofilter device presented here, the approximate volume of overlapping ellipsoids (corresponding to the two separately filtered spectra) bounded by box constraints (corresponding to the D65 illuminant, as discussed above) was used [29]. The ratio of metamer reduction for a given LAB reference point was calculated by the ratio of the volumes of metameric spectra between the unfiltered and filtered cases. To roughly sample the space of possible colors, we repeated the computation for 500 different reference points [Lo, ao, bo], selected by choosing discretized spectra uniformly at random and mapping them to LAB tristimulus values. Using this metric, we estimate a decrease in metamer frequency by one-to-two orders of magnitude when using our passive multispectral device (see Table 1 in the supplementary information). By the same metric, a single-filter system designed to improve vision in color-vision-deficient individuals [30] seems to provide no decrease in the frequency of apparent metamers. By breaking the inherent chromatic redundancy in binocular vision, our method provides the user with more spectral information than he/she would otherwise receive. In the present design, the S cone is partitioned using a pair of filters that results in photoreceptor responses consistent with a visual system that utilizes approximately four cone types (tetrachromacy). Although the current demonstration splits the S cone, which is more selectively sensitive to blue-colored objects, it is possible to use similar methods to design filters that more-strongly affect metamers that appears as green and red, that are more prevalent in nature [31]. While the possibility of natural tetrachromacy in a fraction of the population has received both academic and popular interest [11–13], the technology demonstrated here has the potential to provide  9  tetrachromatic vision to anyone with typical, healthy trichromatic vision. The extent to which observes can (or can learn) to take advantage of the additional spectral information is yet to be determined. Given two eyes and three types of cones, it should be possible to increase the number of effective cones up to six using our approach, and potentially even more with spatial or temporal multiplexing. It may also be possible to generate personalized designs to improve color discrimination for individuals with colorvision deficiencies. This technology can be integrated in a simple pair of eyeglasses or sunglasses, and could have immediate applications in camouflage detection, quality control, and anti-counterfeiting. More broadly, the ability to see many more colors has intriguing opportunities for design and artwork, and for data representation with extra color channels.  Funding. B. Gundlach is supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1256259. This work was supported by startup funds from UW Madison.  Acknowledgment. We thank Middleton Spectral Vision for access to their hyperspectral imaging systems.  10  REFERENCES 1. J. L. Schnapf, T. W. Kraft, and D. A. Baylor, "Spectral sensitivity of human cone photoreceptors," Nature 325, 439–441 (1987). 2. G. Wyszecki and W. S. Stiles, Color Science: Concepts and Methods, Quantitative Data and Formulae, 2 edition (Wiley-Interscience, 2000). 3. A. Stockman and L. T. Sharpe, "The spectral sensitivities of the middle- and long-wavelengthsensitive cones derived from measurements in observers of known genotype," Vision Res. 40, 1711–1737 (2000). 4. J. D. Mollon, "Color vision: Opsins and options," Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 96, 4743–4745 (1999). 5. W. Backhaus, R. Kliegl, and J. S. Werner, Color Vision: Perspectives from Different Disciplines (Walter de Gruyter, 1998). 6. L. Hurvich and D. Jameson, "An Opponent-Process Theory of Color Vision," Psychol. Rev. 64, 384–404 (1957). 7. H. B. Barlow, "What causes trichromacy? A theoretical analysis using comb-filtered spectra," Vision Res. 22, 635–643 (1982). 8. F. Marvasti, Nonuniform Sampling - Theory and Practice (Springer, 2001). 9. J. Neitz, M. Neitz, and G. H. Jacobs, "More than three different cone pigments among people with normal color vision," Vision Res. 33, 117–122 (1993). 10. J. Neitz and G. H. Jacobs, "Polymorphism in normal human color vision and its mechanism," Vision Res. 30, 621–636 (1990). 11. A. L. Nagy, D. I. A. MacLeod, N. E. Heyneman, and A. Eisner, "Four cone pigments in women heterozygous for color deficiency," JOSA 71, 719–722 (1981). 12. K. A. Jameson, S. M. Highnote, and L. M. Wasserman, "Richer color experience in observers with multiple photopigment opsin genes," Psychon. Bull. Rev. 8, 244–261 (2001). 13. G. Jordan and J. D. Mollon, "A study of women heterozygous for colour deficiencies," Vision Res. 33, 1495–1508 (1993). 14. E. Peli, "Vision Multiplexing: an Engineering Approach to Vision Rehabilitation," Optom. Vis. Sci. 78, 304–315 (2001). 15. E. Peli, "Treating with Spectacle Lenses: A Novel Idea!?," Optom. Vis. Sci. 79, 569–580 (2002). 16. D. Chernyak, "Binocular optical treatment for presbyopia," U.S. patent US20050261752 A1 (November 24, 2005). 17. K. Knoblauch and M. J. McMahon, "Discrimination of binocular color mixtures in dichromacy: evaluation of the Maxwell-Cornsweet conjecture," J. Opt. Soc. Am. A Opt. Image Sci. Vis. 12, 2219–2229 (1995). 18. T. N. Cornsweet, Visual Perception (Academic Press, 1970). 19. Colorimetry -- Part 1: CIE Standard Colorimetric Observers (2007). 20. Colorimetry -- Part 4: CIE 1976 L*a*b* Colour Space (2008). 21. Colorimetry -- Part 2: CIE Standard Illuminants (2007). 22. D. J. Polzella and D. A. Montgomery, "Dimensions of color harmony," Bull. Psychon. Soc. 31, 423–425 (1993). 23. A. MacLeod, Thin-Film Optical Filters, Fourth Edition (2010). 11  24. A. V. Tikhonravov, M.K. Trubetskov, T. V. Amotchkina, M. A. Kokarev, Proc. SPIE. 5250, Advances in Optical Thin Films 312 (2004). 25. A. V. Tikhonravov, M. K. Trubetskov, and G. W. DeBell, "Optical coating design approaches based on the needle optimization technique," Appl. Opt. 46, 704-710 (2007). 26. R. S. Berns, R. J. Motta, and M. E. Gorzynski, "CRT colorimetry. part I: Theory and practice," Color Res. Appl. 18, 299–314 (1993). 27. G. Sharma, "LCDs versus CRTs-color-calibration and gamut considerations," Proc. IEEE 90, 605–622 (2002). 28. G. Sharma and R. Bala, Digital Color Imaging Handbook (CRC Press, 2002). 29. E. K. Yang and J. W. Tolle, "A class of methods for solving large, convex quadratic programs subject to box constraints," Math. Program. 51, 223–228 (1991). 30. A. W. Schmeder and D. M. McPherson, "Multi-band color vision filters and method by lpoptimization," U.S. patent US20140233105 A1 (August 21, 2014). 31. M. E. Bulina, K. A. Lukyanov, I. V. Yampolsky, D. M. Chudakov, D. B. Staroverov, A. S. Shcheglov, N. G. Gurskaya, and S. Lukyanov, "New class of blue animal pigments based on Frizzled and Kringle protein domains," J. Biol. Chem. 279, 43367–43370 (2004).  12  Supplementary Information  Enhancing human color vision by breaking binocular redundancy Bradley S. Gundlach1, Alireza Shahsafi1, Michel Frising1,2, Gregory Vershbow3, Chenghao Wan1,4, Jad Salman1, Bas Rokers5,6, Laurent Lessard1, Mikhail A. Kats1,4,6* 1  Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 2 Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 3 Department of Art, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 4 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 5 Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 6 McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI  Narrative explanation of the filter design process The filters in this work were designed using a white-balance condition that ensures that broadband “white light” that passes through the two filters is perceived similarly, to prevent significant color clashing between the two eyes under typical viewing conditions. Simultaneously, the filters are designed to be sufficiently distinct, which results in each eye receiving different spectral information. We used a design approach where each revision increased in complexity, building intuition at each design stage. For the first revision, a brick-wall longpass filter and a band-stop filter were used to split the blue cone response without significantly affecting the other cone types (Fig. S1). The filters were constrained such that the longpass filter cut-on wavelength was equal to the band-stop filter cut-off wavelength, which ensured that at least one eye was sensitive to every region of the visible wavelengths (i.e., no wavelength was attenuated by both filters). The band-stop filter cut-on wavelength was chosen to be 450 nm to minimize the effect of the filters on the M and L cone responses; thus, we were left to decide the longpass cut-on and band-stop cut-off wavelengths (which are enforced to be equal), and which must be below 450nm. With these constraints, the position of the cut-on/cut-off wavelength was optimized in order to minimize the CIE  Δ  color difference between D65 white light passing through each filter. Figure S1(a) shows the result of  this optimization, with a minimum Δ color difference of 0.596 with the cut-on/cut-off wavelength at 437 nm. A Δ color difference less than 2.3 typically means that the colors are indistinguishable. The resulting optimized filters are: a longpass filter (Filter 1) with a 437 nm transition wavelength, and a band-stop filter (Filter 2) with a stopband of 437 - 450 nm. Figure S1(c) shows the rendered color of D65 white light through 13  each filter, and demonstrates the excellent white-balance between filters, because the color samples are indistinguishable. However, the band-stop width of the resulting Filter 2 is only 13 nm, quite low in comparison to the ~300 nm range of the visible wavelengths. In order to effectively differentiate spectral features, which are typically quite broad (>10 - 20 nm), the band-stop width must be larger.  (a)  (b)  (c) Filter 1  ΔE = 0.596 Filter 2  Figure S1: (a) Plot showing the CIE ΔE color difference between filters 1 and 2 when transmitting CIE D65 white light versus cut-on/cut-off wavelength. (b) Optimized transmission response for filters 1 and 2 after the first design revision, with a band-stop region between 437 – 450 nm. (c) Rendered colors for CIE D65 white light transmitted through each filter from (b), with an optimized ΔE color difference of 0.596.  Because this initial design produced a filter set with good white-balance, the same general approach was used in the following design revision. A similar optimization was performed as above, but the bandstop width of Filter 2 was constrained to be larger than 25 nm; this width was chosen such that it was larger than many typical spectral features found in nature, which could therefore be resolved with these filters. Instead of minimizing just the Δ color difference between the filters, a modified merit function (MF) was used that also accounted for the filter width:  = Δ ⁄ . A brute-force optimization was performed, which varied the cut-on and cut-off wavelengths of the two filters (again with the longpass cuton and bandstop cut-off wavelengths being equal). The transmission spectra of the optimized filters are given in Figure S2: a longpass filter (Filter 1) with a 450 nm cut-on wavelength, and a bandstop filter (Filter 2) with a stopband of 450 – 500 nm. The resulting filter set has a Δ color difference of 14.15, significantly above the 2.3 just noticeable difference threshold. Therefore, it is clear that for the simple design using a longpass and single-bandstop filter, there is a tradeoff between white-balance and width of the band stop region.  14  (b)  (a)  Filter 1  ΔE = 14.15 Filter 2  Figure S2: (a) Optimized transmission response for filters 1 and 2 after the second design revision, with a bandstop region of 450 - 500 nm. (b) Rendered colors for CIE D65 white light transmitted through each filter from (b), with an optimized ΔE color difference of 14.15  By considering the cone responses (Figure 1(b)), it is clear why this filter design results in worse white balance. Beyond 450 nm, the longpass filter allows all wavelengths of visible light through; the M and L cones have very little response below 450 nm. However, the band-stop filter attenuates wavelengths between 450 and 500 nm, where the M and L cones have significant sensitivity. Therefore, the two filters affect the M and L cones very differently, which results in poor color balance. In particular, the band-stop filter (Filter 2) introduces a slight red tint compared to the longpass filter (Filter 1), which is also clear from the rendered colors in figure S2. Therefore, in order to maintain the high band-stop width of Filter 2 while improving the white balance of the filter pair, a second stopband was introduced to Filter 2 in order to soften the “red response” of the previous design. In this design, the shorter wavelength band-stop region of Filter 2 splits the S cone, whereas the longer wavelength band-stop region improves the white balance of the filter pair. In the final design revision that was implemented and described in the main text, the response of the longpass filter (Filter 1) was not optimized any further; in fact, the transmission response of a commercially available 450 nm longpass filter was used to define Filter 1. This was done to decrease manufacturing costs, such that only Filter 2 required custom design and manufacturing. The shortwavelength band-stop region of the Filter 2 was also used from before (allowed to change only slightly during optimization), and a preliminary long wavelength band-stop region was added between 600 and 700 nm, to be optimized further. An error function was also implemented to smooth the transition regions; in  15  the previous design revisions, the transition regions had a sharp vertical slope, which is difficult to achieve in practice. The smoothness of the filters can be adjusted by changing the proportionality constant (a) of the error function:   erf"#. Unlike the previous revisions, Filter 2 was optimized using a more rigorous method compared to the brute force method used above. A constrained optimization by linear approximation (COBYLA) method was implemented in a stochastic basin-hopping algorithm to optimize the position of the cut-on/cut-off wavelengths, transmission of the pass and stop-bands, and slope of the transition regions. The transition regions of the filter’s short-wavelength band-stop region was constrained within +/- 10 nm of their previous values; this was done to maintain the overall shape of the previous design while allowing some room for color balance optimization. The transmittance was constrained between 5 and 15% in the stopbands, and between 80 and 95% in the passbands, to allow for high throughput and relative ease of manufacturing. The error function proportionality constant was constrained between 0.25 and 1. The long-wavelength stopband region was constrained between 600 – 700 nm, but the band-stop width was not constrained; this was done to prevent attenuation of the M and L cones at their peak sensitivities (~550nm, ~580 nm respectively), while also preventing needless optimization beyond the visible wavelengths (> 700 nm). With these constraints in place, Filter 2 was optimized in order to minimize the modified merit function: Δ ⁄ , where Δ  is the color difference between Filter 1 and Filter 2 when transmitting D65  white light and Widthbandstop is the spectral width of the short-wavelength band-stop region of Filter 2. This procedure yielded an optimized response for Filter 2 with stopbands at 450 - 500 nm and 630 - 680 nm, and  (a)  (b) Filter 1  ΔE = 5.21 (i)  Filter 2  (ii) (ii) Figure S3: (a) Optimized transmission response for filters 1 and 2 after the third design revision, with band-stop regions between 450 – 500 nm (i) and 630 – 680 nm (ii). Region (i) splits the short-wavelength cone, region (ii) improves the white-balance of the filter pair (b) Rendered colors for CIE D65 white light transmitted through each filter from (a), with a ΔE color difference of 5.21.  16  stopband/passband transmittance of 10% and 90%, respectively (Figure S3(a)). The rendered color of transmitted D65 white light through the filters is given in Figure S3(b), with a Δ color difference of 5.21.  Methodology for counting metamers: In this section, we describe the technique by which we estimated the reduction of the occurrence of metamerism using our vision enhancement device. Each spectrum   is mapped to LAB tristimulus values [%, ", '] via the CIE matching functions described earlier in the supplementary. Counting the number of metamers for a particular LAB reference point [%) , ") , ') ] amounts to counting the number of different spectra   that map to tristimulus values that are within a sphere in LAB space of radius ΔE of the reference point. The number of metameric spectra is infinite, so we instead compute a surrogate quantity. Roughly, we discretize each spectrum by wavelength so each spectrum can be abstracted as a point in a finite-dimensional space. We then count metamers by computing the volume that they occupy in this space. The details of the computation are described below. 1. Represent spectra by using  equally spaced samples in wavelength. For example,   is represented as a vector [+ , , , … , . ], which corresponds to the intensities at the wavelengths [ +,  , , … , . ].  2. The map [+ , … , . ] → [%, ", '] from the discretized spectrum to LAB tristimulus values is smooth and nonlinear. Since the map is only being evaluated in a local neighborhood of the reference point, the map is well approximated by its first order Taylor expansion. This allows us to replace the nonlinear map with an affine function 0+ , … , .   [%, ", ']. 3. Let 1)  2 [%, ", '] | (% − %) ), + (" − ") ), + (' − ') ), ≤ Δ  ,  7 be the set of tristimulus values  indistinguishable from the reference point. The set of metameric spectra is given by the image of 1) under the inverse map 08+ . 4. Since the inverse map 08+ is affine and the set 1) is a sphere in LAB space, the image 08+ (1) ) is an ellipsoid in the discretized spectrum space [S1]. Note that this ellipsoid is degenerate; it will be infinite in the directions corresponding to the kernel of 0. 5. We assume that we are counting “reflection metamers” or “transmission metamers” under a certain illuminant. That is, we are excluding metamers generated by active emissive sources for the sake of this calculation, since including unbounded emissive sources complicates this calculation further. Under this assumption, the allowed intensities are not infinite, since every admissible spectrum has intensities bounded by the corresponding intensities of the illuminant. More formally,  17  define the set of admissible spectra as 9) = : [+ , … , . ] ; 0 ≤ = ≤ =>?@ for B = 1, … , D, where =>?@ is the intensity at  =  of the D65 illuminant.  6. The volume of metameric spectra is therefore the volume of the set 08+ (1) ) ∩ 9). If the spectrum is filtered through a filter F( ), the map 0 must be replaced by a map 0G that accounts for the filter F. The derivation is otherwise identical; metameric spectra are given by the set 0G8+ (1) ) ∩ 9). If the spectrum is filtered through F+ ( ) for one eye and F, ( ) for the other eye, spectra are only counted if (1) ) ∩ 0G8+ (1) ) ∩ 9) . they are metameric for both eyes. This results in the set 0G8+ H I We can compare configurations (e.g. natural human vision versus vision augmented by our device, or vision augmented by two different filters sets) by comparing the volumes of their respective metameric spectra. For example, to compare the unfiltered case (natural human vision) to the case of vision modified by our two-filter passive multispectral device, we would compute the ratio: J=  Vol(08+ (1) ) ∩ 9) ) (1) ) ∩ 0G8+ (1) ) ∩ 9) N VolM0G8+ H I  A ratio of J = 20 would signify that metameric spectra are 20 times less abundant when the two-filter passive multispectral device is used as compared to the unfiltered case. Specifically, if spectra are sampled from a uniform distribution on intensities, a spectrum is 20 times less likely to be metameric. Computing the ratio J is challenging because the volumes involved have irregular shapes; they are intersections of degenerate (high-dimensional) ellipsoids with box constraints. In order to approximate the ratio J, we approximate each volume by the volume of its max-volume inscribed ellipsoid. An illustration of a max-volume inscribed ellipsoid is shown below (Fig. S4).  Figure S4: The shaded region is the intersection of ellipsoids and box constraints. The area is approximated by the max-area inscribed ellipsoid (dotted curve).  18  It turns out the max-volume inscribed ellipsoid can be efficiently computed using semidefinite programming techniques. See for example [S2]. We approximated the ratio J by using the inner ellipsoid approximation for both the numerator and denominator. Volume approximation ratios were computed using CVX, a package for specifying and solving convex programs [S3]. We computed approximate volume ratios for the two-filter case as well as the one-filter case, using the transmission spectrum of a filter sold by EnChroma for alleviating some of the adverse effects of red-green color vision deficiency (EnChroma filter [S4]). In each case, we tried several different discretization samples  and we repeated the computation for 500 different reference points [%) , ") , ') ]. The reference points were selected by choosing discretized spectra uniformly at random and mapping them to LAB tristimulus values. A summary of the results is shown in Table S1. Using two filters results in a dramatic decrease in metamers, roughly consistent over the range of tested discretizations. In contrast, using a single filter (EnChroma in this case) has little effect on the number of metamers.  Discretization samples ()  7  9  12  14  16  18  Two filters, mean  22.977  115.823  120.580  160.634  178.020  111.243  Two filters, median  17.251  80.690  57.4080  85.885  77.153  41.369  EnChroma, mean  0.945  0.887  1.090  0.944  1.125  1.086  EnChroma, median  0.945  0.870  1.082  0.944  0.924  1.017  Table S1 – Results of the metamer ratio approximation. Mean and median J values are computed over 500 randomly generated spectra for each discretization. Using two filters reduces the frequency of metamers by a factor of about 50 on average, while using a single EnChroma filter has a negligible effect on the frequency of metamers  Thin-film filter design The filter response design goal (Fig. S3(a)) used in this work is realized by conventional thin-film design methods. A commercial thin-film design software (Optilayer) was used to optimize a two-material thin-film stack to adequately meet the design goal. Tantalum oxide (Ta2O5) was chosen as the high index (n = 2.15) material and silicon dioxide (SiO2) was chosen as the low index (n = 1.46) material, as they are both easily deposited. The substrate was NBK7, a common optical glass. The final stack was constrained  19  to be less than 75 total layers to keep costs down, and each layer between 10 – 500 nm to prevent stress cracks in thick films. Using these constraints in tandem with the provided filter design goal, the thin-film stack was optimized for incident angles between 0 - 10°. A representative stack design produced by Optilayer for the design of Filter 2 is given in Fig. S5. The actual design for the device experimentally demonstrated in the main text was slightly modified from that of Fig. S5 by a thin-film foundry (Iridian), and the final design cannot be shared due to a non-disclosure agreement. Nevertheless, the specifics of the design are not critical as long as it implements the desired transmission spectrum (Fig. 2(b)).  Figure S5: Thin-film filter stack design for filter 2 (Fig. S3(a)), using Ta2O5 (n = 2.15, blue) and SiO2 (n = 1.46, red) dielectric layers.  Comparison of CRT and LCD monitors: The displays used in this work to generate metameric spectra were a True HD-IPS liquid crystal display (LCD) on a LG G3 smartphone and a conventional cathode ray tube (CRT) monitor (Dell E770P). These displays use very different mechanisms to generate colors, which results in significantly different spectra when displaying the same color (i.e. metamers). The LCD display uses a backlight, typically a white LED, which is transmitted through color filter arrays (red, green and blue color filters) to produce its color response. Therefore, the emitted spectrum is the product of the LCD backlight and color filter transmission response. The CRT monitor uses an electron gun, and relies on a phosphorescent screen to control its spectrum in the visible wavelength range. Because the two display types use significantly different methods to generate colors, the two emission technologies have different spectral features for the individual red,  20  green and blue color channels. The distinct features of the two displays are demonstrated in Figure S6(a), which shows the measured emitted spectrum of white light from each display (RGB = [255, 255, 255]). Figures S6(b, c) show the spectrum of each pure color channel (red, green and blue) for the LCD and CRT display, respectively.  Figure S6: (a) Measured emission spectra of the LCD and CRT displays used in this work, displaying a white color (RGB = 255, 255, 255). (b, c) Measured emission spectra of each individual color channel (R, G, B) for the LCD and CRT display, respectively. For blue curves, the displayed color was RGB = (0, 0, 255), red curves RGB = (255, 0, 0), and green curves RGB = (0, 255, 0)  Color accuracy of photographs: In this work, we used digitally generated color samples from spectroscopic data to demonstrate the splitting of a metameric pair using an LCD and CRT monitor (Fig. 3). This method was used because, due to the difference in spectral response between a camera sensor and the human eye, it is difficult to obtain a precisely color-accurate photograph. This difficulty is shown in Figure S7, which shows the original photograph of the experimental setup in Fig. 3(c), an edited photograph that better approximates the actual color, and a digitally rendered color sample showing the “actual color”. The colors are rendered using CIE matching functions, as described above; the [X,Y,Z] values calculated using the matching functions and the measured spectrum can then be converted to the sRGB color space, which is the working color space of most computers. Though the sRGB values will be the same across all display devices, the actual displayed color depends on the calibration of the monitor used. Therefore, the rendered color is Fig. S7(c) only represents the perceived color seen in the experiment when the monitor used to view the image has a perfect color calibration. It is clear that Fig. S7(a) is significantly different than the generated color sample in Fig. S7(c), even though the camera used in S7(a) and the spectrometer used to acquire the sample that generated the color in S8(c) sampled the same light. Fig. S7(b) is the figure used in the main text (Fig. 3(b)), and was edited to more closely represent the color in S8(c) to prevent confusion. The rendered color samples using spectroscopic data represent the perceived colors of both monitors much more accurately.  21  Figure S7: (a) Photograph of the setup shown in Fig. 3(c) of the main text, taken using a Sony α7R II camera. (b) The edited photograph that appears in Fig. 3(b) of the main text, which was modified to appear close in color to the rendered colors. This manipulation was performed to prevent confusion in the main text. (c) The actual color displayed during the experiment, rendered using spectra acquired using a grating spectrometer and cosine corrector.  Hyperspectral images To demonstrate the utility of our wearable passive multispectral device in a more natural setting, we acquired a hyperspectral image of a complex scene, and applied the filters digitally (Fig. S8). The scene included a variety of blue and violet objects, including patches of color made using paints and pastels, plants, and a Morpho butterfly featuring a structural blue color [S5]. The image was obtained using a Middleton Spectral Vision MSV-500 High Sensitivity VNIR hyperspectral camera. The enlarged images in Fig. S8d show the butterfly wing next to six similarly colored samples made using oil pastels, with no filters applied. In Fig. S8e and Fig. S8f, filters 2 and 1, respectively, are applied to these enlarged images. The numbers in each panel represent the CIE ΔE color difference between the oil pastel color and the butterfly wing, averaged over a small area to reduce pixel noise. Using filter 2 (Fig. S8e), the appearance of the butterfly wing becomes more dissimilar to the pastel samples compared to no filter (i.e., the butterfly “blue” becomes easier to distinguish from the pastel “blue” using the filter). This again demonstrates the effect of partitioning the S cone to provide more spectral information. The improvement is absent for filter 1 (Fig. S8f), demonstrating the need for both filters in the design. We note that each filter creates a new set of metamers that may have been distinguishable before; by using two filters, the set of overlapping newly created metamers becomes significantly smaller. Therefore, as long as 22  at least one filter creates an increase in contrast, more spectral information can be communicated to the visual system while decreasing the overall number of possible metamers. Although a slight yellow/green tint is applied to both filtered images, Fig. S8b and Fig. S8c have similar “white-balance” due to the whitebalance condition enforced during the design process.  Fig. S8: (a) RGB rendering of a hyperspectral image with natural and artificially colored objects, with no filter applied. (b) The render with filter 2 applied, and (c) the render with filter 1 applied. (d) Magnified view of butterfly wing and paint samples (outlined in green in (a)). (e) and (f) are the same samples as in (d), with filters 2 and 1 applied, respectively. The numbers inside each paint sample are the ΔE color difference, rounded to the nearest integer, between the paint sample and the butterfly wing with each respective filter applied.  Supplementary References S1. Giuseppe C, Ghaoui LE (2014) Optimization Models (Cambridge University Press). S2. Boyd S, Vandenberghe L (2004) Convex optimization (Cambridge University Press). S3. Grant M, Boyd S CVX: Matlab software for disciplined convex programming, version 2.1, http://cvxr.com/cvx, October 2016. S4. Schmeder AW, McPherson DM (2014) Multi-band color vision filters and method by lp-optimization. S5. P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles, C. R. Lawrence, R. J. Wootton, Quantified interference and diffraction in single Morpho butterfly scales. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 266, 1403–1411 (1999).  23

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
