Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_347

Abstract:
arXiv:0904.2136v1 [cs.PL] 14 Apr 2009  Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming  1  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and FD in CF LP S. ESTÉVEZ-MARTÍN, T. HORTALÁ-GONZÁLEZ, M. RODRÍGUEZ-ARTALEJO and R. DEL VADO-VÍRSEDA∗ Dpto. de Sistemas Informáticos y Computación Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain E-mails: {s.estevez,teresa,mario,rdelvado}@sip.ucm.es  F. SÁENZ-PÉREZ ∗ Dpto. de Ingenierı́a del Software e Inteligencia Artificial Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain E-mail: fernan@sip.ucm.es  A. J. FERNÁNDEZ † Dpto. de Lenguajes y Ciencias de la Computación, Universidad de Málaga, Spain E-mail: afdez@lcc.uma.es submitted 26 September 2008; revised 6 February 2009; accepted 6 April 2009  Abstract This paper presents a computational model for the cooperation of constraint domains and an implementation for a particular case of practical importance. The computational model supports declarative programming with lazy and possibly higher-order functions, predicates, and the cooperation of different constraint domains equipped with their respective solvers, relying on a so-called Constraint Functional Logic Programming (CF LP ) scheme. The implementation has been developed on top of the CF LP system T OY, supporting the cooperation of the three domains H, R and FD, which supply equality and disequality constraints over symbolic terms, arithmetic constraints over the real numbers, and finite domain constraints over the integers, respectively. The computational model has been proved sound and complete w.r.t. the declarative semantics provided by the CF LP scheme, while the implemented system has been tested with a set of benchmarks and shown to behave quite efficiently in comparison to the closest related approach we are aware of. To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming (TPLP) KEYWORDS: Cooperating Constraint Domains, Constraint Functional Logic Programming, Constrained Lazy Narrowing, Implementation.  ∗ The work of these authors has been partially supported by projects MERIT-FORMS (TIN200509207-C03-03), PROMESAS-CAM (S-0505/TIC0407) and STAMP (TIN2008-06622-C03-01). † The work of this author has been partially supported by projects TIN2008-05941 (from Spanish Ministry of Innovation and Science) and P06-TIC2250 (from Andalusia Regional Government).  2  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado 1 Introduction  Constraint Programming relies on constraint solving as a powerful mechanism for tackling practical applications. The well-known CLP Scheme (Jaffar and Lassez 1987; Jaffar and Maher 1994; Jaffar et al. 1998) provides a powerful and practical framework for constraint programming which inherits the clean semantics and declarative style of logic programming. Moreover, the combination of CLP with functional programming has given rise to various so-called CF LP (Constraint Functional Logic Programming) schemes, developed since 1991 and aiming at a very expressive combination of the constraint, logical and functional programming paradigms. This paper tackles foundational and practical issues concerning the efficient use of constraints in CF LP languages and systems. Both the CLP and the CF LP schemes must be instantiated by a parametrically given constraint domain D which provides specific data values, constraints based on specific primitive operations, and a dedicated constraint solver. Therefore, there are different instances CLP (D) of the CLP scheme for various choices of D, and analogously for CF LP , whose instances CF LP (D) provide a declarative framework for any chosen domain D. Useful ‘pure’ constraint domains include the Herbrand domain H which supplies equality and disequality constraints over symbolic terms; the domain R which supplies arithmetic constraints over real numbers; and the domain F D which supplies arithmetic and finite domain constraints over integers. Practical applications, however, often involve more than one ‘pure’ domain, and sometimes problem solutions have to be artificially adapted to fit a particular choice of domain and solver. Combining decision procedures for theories is a well-known problem, thoroughly investigated since the seminal paper of Nelson and Oppen (Nelson and Oppen 1979). In constraint programming, however, the emphasis is placed in computing answers by the interaction of constraint solvers with user given programs, rather than in deciding satisfiability of formulas. The cooperative combination of constraint domains and solvers has evolved during the last decade as a relevant research issue that is raising an increasing interest in the CLP community. Here we mention (Baader and Schulz 1995; Benhamou 1996; Monfroy 1996; Monfroy 1998; Granvilliers et al. 2001; Marin et al. 2001; Hofstedt 2001; Monfroy and Castro 2004; Hofstedt and Pepper 2007) as a limited selection of references illustrating various approaches to the problem. An important idea emerging from the research in this area is that of ‘hybrid’ constraint domain, built as a combination of simpler ‘pure’ domains and designed to support the cooperation of its components, so that more declarative and efficient solutions for practical problems can be promoted.  1.1 Aims of this paper The first aim of this paper is to present a computational model for the cooperation of constraint domains in the CF LP context, where sophisticated functional programming features such as higher-order functions and lazy evaluation must collaborate with constraint solving. Our computational model is based on the CF LP scheme and goal solving calculus recently proposed in (López-Fraguas et al. 2004;  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  3  López-Fraguas et al. 2007), which will be enriched with new mechanisms for modeling the intended cooperation. Moreover, we rely on the domain cooperation techniques proposed in our previous papers (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2008), where we have introduced so-called bridges as a key tool for communicating constraints between different domains. Bridges are constraints of the form X #==di ,dj Y which relate the values of two variables X :: di , Y :: dj of different base types, requiring them to be equivalent. For instance, X #==int,real Y (abbreviated as X #== Y in the rest of the paper) constrains the real variable Y :: real to take an integral real value equivalent to that of the integer variable X :: int. Note that the two types int and real are kept distinct and their respective values are not confused. Our cooperative computation model keeps different stores for constraints corresponding to various domains and solvers. In addition, there is a special store where the bridge constraints which arise during the computation are placed. A bridge constraint X #== Y available in the bridge store can be used to project constraints involving the variable X into constraints involving the variable Y, or vice versa. For instance, the R constraint RX <= 3.4 (based on the inequality primitive <= – ‘less or equal’ – for the type real) can be projected into the F D constraint X #<= 3 (based on the inequality primitive #<= – ‘less or equal’ – for the type int) in case that the bridge X #== RX is available. Projected constraints are submitted to their corresponding store, with the aim of improving the performance of the corresponding solver. In this way, projections behave as an important cooperation mechanism, enabling certain solvers to profit from (the projected forms) of constraints originally intended for other solvers. We have borrowed the idea of constraint projection from the work of P. Hofstedt et al. (Hofstedt 2000a; Hofstedt 2000b; Hofstedt 2001; Hofstedt and Pepper 2007), adapting it to our CF LP scheme and adding bridge constraints as a novel technique which makes projections more flexible and compatible with type discipline. In order to formalize our computation model, we present a construction of coordination domains C as a special kind of ‘hybrid’ domains built as a combination of various ‘pure’ domains intended to cooperate. In addition to the specific constraints supplied by its various components, coordination constraints also supply bridge constraints. As particular case of practical interest, we present a coordination domain C tailored to the cooperation of the three pure domains H, R and F D. Building upon the notion of coordination domain, we also present a formal goal solving calculus called CCLN C(C) (standing for Cooperative Constraint Lazy Narrowing Calculus over C) which is sound and complete with respect to the instance CF LP (C) of the generic CF LP scheme. CCLN C(C) embodies computation rules for creating bridges, invoking constraint solvers, and performing constraint projections as well as other more ad hoc operations for communication among different constraint stores. Moreover, CCLN C(C) uses lazy narrowing (a combination of lazy evaluation and unification) for processing calls to program defined functions, ensuring that function calls are evaluated only as far as demanded by the resolution of the constraints involved in the current goal. A second objective of the paper is to describe the implementation of a CF LP  4  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  system which supports the cooperation of solvers via bridges and projections for the Herbrand domain H and the two numeric domains R and F D, following the computational model provided by the CCLN C(C) goal solving calculus. The implementation follows the techniques summarized in our previous papers (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2008). It has been developed on top of the T OY system (Arenas et al. 2007), which is in turn implemented on top of SICStus Prolog (SICStus Prolog 2007). The T OY system already supported non-cooperative CF LP programming using the F D and R solvers provided by SICStus along with Prolog code for the H solver. This former system has been extended, including a store for bridges and implementing mechanisms for computing bridges and projections according to the CCLN C(C) computation model. Last but not least, another important aim of the paper is to provide some evidence on the practical use and performance of our implementation. To this purpose, we present some illustrative examples and a set of benchmarks tailored to test the performance of CCLN C(C) as implemented in T OY in comparison with the closest related system we are aware of, namely the META-S tool (Frank et al. 2003a; Frank et al. 2003b; Frank et al. 2005) which implements Hofstedt’s framework for solver cooperation (Hofstedt and Pepper 2007). The experimental results we have obtained are quite encouraging. The present paper thoroughly revises, expands and elaborates our previous related publications in many respects. In fact, (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007) was a very preliminary work which focused on presenting bridges and providing evidence for their usefulness. Building upon these ideas, (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007) introduced coordination domains and a cooperative goal solving calculus over an arbitrary coordination domain, proving local soundness and completeness results, while (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2008) further elaborated the cooperative goal solving calculus, providing stronger soundness and completeness results and experimental data on an implementation tailored to the cooperation of the domains H, F D and R. Significant novelties in this article include: technical improvements in the formalization of domains; a new notion of solver taking care of critical variables and well-typed solutions; a new notion of domain-specific constraint to clarify the behaviour of coordination domains; various elaborations in the cooperative goal solving transformations needed to deal with critical variables and domain-specific constraints; a more detailed presentation of the implementation results previously reported in (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2008; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2008); and quite extensive comparisons to other related approaches. 1.2 Motivating Examples As a motivation for the rest of the paper, we present in this subsection a few simple examples, intended to illustrate the different cooperation mechanisms that are supported by the computation model CCLN C(C), as well as the benefits resulting from the cooperation. To start with, we present a small program written in T OY syntax, which solves the problem of searching for a 2D point lying in the intersection of a discrete  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  5  grid and a continuous region. The program includes type declarations, equations for defining functions and clauses for defining predicates. Type declarations are similar to those used in functional languages such as Haskell (Peyton-Jones 2002). Function applications use curried notation, also typical of Haskell and other higherorder functional languages. The equations used to define functions must be understood as conditional rewrite rules of the form f tn → r ⇐ ∆, whose condition ∆ is a conjunction of constraints. Predicates are viewed as Boolean functions, and clauses are understood as an abbreviation of conditional rewrite rules of the form f tn → true ⇐ ∆, whose righthand side is the Boolean constant true. Moreover, conditions consisting of a Boolean expression exp are understood as an abbreviation of the strict equality constraint exp == true, using the strict equality operator == which is a primitive operation supplied by the Herbrand domain H. The program’s text is as follows: % Discrete versus continuous points: type dPoint = (int, int) type cPoint = (real, real) % Sets and membership: type setOf A = A -> bool isIn :: setOf A -> A -> bool isIn Set Element = Set Element % Grids and regions as sets of points: type grid = setOf dPoint type region = setOf cPoint % Predicate for computing intersections of regions and grids: bothIn :: region -> grid -> dPoint -> bool bothIn Region Grid (X, Y) :- X #== RX, Y #== RY, isIn Region (RX, RY), isIn Grid (X,Y), labeling [ ] [X,Y] % Square grid (discrete): square :: int -> grid square N (X,Y) :- domain [X,Y] 0 N % Triangular region (continuous): triangle :: cPoint -> real -> real -> region triangle (RX0,RY0) B H (RX,RY) :RY >= RY0 - H, B * RY - 2 * H * RX <= B * RY0 - 2 * H * RX0, B * RY + 2 * H * RX <= B * RY0 + 2 * H * RX0  % Diagonal segment (discrete):  6  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado diagonal :: int -> grid diagonal N (X,Y) :- domain [X,Y] 0 N, X == Y % Parabolic line (continuous): parabola :: cPoint -> region parabola (RX0,RY0) (RX,RY) :- RY - RY0 == (RX - RX0) * (RX - RX0)  Because of all the conventions explained above, the clause for the bothIn predicate included in the program must be understood as an abbreviation of the rewrite rule bothIn Region Grid (X,Y) -> true <== X #== RX, Y #== RY, isIn Region (RX,RY) == true, isIn Grid (X,Y) == true, labeling [ ] [X,Y] whose condition includes two bridge constraints, two strict equality constraints provided by the domain H, and a last constraint using the labeling primitive supplied by the domain F D. The other clauses and equations in the program can be analogously understood as conditional rewrite rules whose conditions are constraints supported by some of the three domains H, R or F D. Let us now discuss the intended meaning of the program. The bothIn predicate is intended to check if a given discrete point (X,Y) belongs to the intersection of the continuous region Region and the discrete grid Grid given as parameters, and the constraints occurring as conditions are designed to this purpose. More precisely, the two bridge constraints X #== RX, Y #== RY ensure that the discrete point (X,Y) and the continuous point (RX,RY) are equivalent; the two strict equality constraints isIn Region (RX, RY) == true, isIn Grid (X,Y) == true ensure membership to Region and Grid, respectively; and finally the F D constraint labeling [ ] [X,Y] ensures that the variables X and Y are bound to integer values.  Fig. 1. Triangular region Note that both grids and regions are represented as sets, represented themselves as Boolean functions. They can be passed as parameters because our programming framework supports higher-order programming features. The program also defines two functions square and triangle, intended to compute representations of square grids and triangular regions, respectively. Let us discuss them in  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  7  turn. We first note that the type declaration for triangle can be written in the equivalent form triangle :: cPoint -> real -> real -> (cPoint -> bool). A function call of the form triangle (RX0,RY0) B H is intended to return a Boolean function representing the region of all continuous 2D points lying within the isosceles triangle with upper vertex (RX0,RY0), base B and height H. Applying this Boolean function to the argument (RX,RY) yields a function call written as triangle (RX0,RY0) B H (RX,RY) and expected to return true in case that (RX,RY) lies within the intended isosceles triangle, whose three vertices are (RX0,RY0), (RX0-B/2,RY0-H) and (RX0+B/2,RY0-H). The three sides of the triangle are mathematically characterized by the equations RY = RY0-H, B*RY-2*H*RX = B*RY0-2*H*RX0 and B*RY+2*H*RX = B*RY0+2*H*RX0 (corresponding to the lines r1 , r2 and r3 in Fig. 1, respectively). Therefore, the conjunction of three linear inequality R constraints occurring as conditions in the clause for triangle succeeds for those points (RX,RY) lying within the intended triangle. Similarly, the type declaration for square can be written in the equivalent form square :: int -> (dPoint -> bool), and a function call of the form square N is intended to return a Boolean function representing the grid of all discrete 2D points with coordinates belonging to the interval of integers between 0 and N. Therefore, a function call of the form square N (X,Y) must return true in case that (X,Y) lies within the intended grid, and for this reason the single F D constraint placed as condition in the clause for square has been chosen to impose the interval of integers between 0 and N as the domain of possible values for the variables X and Y. Finally, the last two functions diagonal and parabola are defined in such a way that diagonal N returns a Boolean function representing the diagonal of the grid represented by square N, while parabola (RX0,RY0) returns a Boolean function representing the parabola whose equation is RY-RY0 = (RX-RX0)*(RX-RX0). The type declarations and clauses for these functions can be understood similarly to the case of square and triangle. Different goals can be posed and solved using the small program just described and the cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C) as implemented in the T OY system. For the sake of discussing some of them, assume two fixed positive integer values d and n such that n = 2*d. Then (d,d) is the middle point of the grid (square n), which includes (n+1)2 discrete points. The three following goals ask for points in the intersection of this fixed square grid with three different triangular regions: • Goal 1: bothIn (triangle (d, d+0.75) n 0.5) (square n) (X,Y). This goal fails. • Goal 2: bothIn (triangle (d, d+0.5) 2 1) (square n) (X,Y). This goal computes one solution for (X,Y), corresponding to the point (d,d). • Goal 3: bothIn (triangle (d, d+0.5) (2*n) 1) (square n) (X,Y). This goal computes n+1 solutions for (X,Y), corresponding to the points (0,d), (1,d), ..., (n,d). These three goals are illustrated in Fig. 2 for the particular case n = 4 and d = 2, although the shapes and positions of the three triangles with respect to the  8  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  middle point of the grid would be the same for any even positive integer n = 2*d. The expected solutions for each of the three goals are clear from the figures.  Fig. 2. Intersection of a fixed square grid with three different triangular regions In the three cases, cooperation between the R solver and the F D solver is crucial for the efficiency of the computation. In the case of Goal 2, cooperative goal solving implemented in T OY according to the CCLN C(C) computation model uses the clauses in the program and eventually reduces the problem of solving the goal to the problem of solving a constraint system that, suitably simplified, becomes: X #== RX, Y #== RY, RY >= d-0.5, RY-RX <= 0.5, RY+RX <= n+0.5, domain [X,Y] 0 n, labeling [ ] [X,Y]. The T OY system has the option to enable or disable the computation of projections. When projections are disabled, the two bridges do still work as constraints, and the last F D constraint labeling [ ] [X,Y] forces the enumeration of all possible values for X and Y within their domains, eventually finding the unique solution X = Y = d after O(n2 ) steps. When projections are enabled, the available bridges are used to project the R constraints RY >= d-0.5, RY-RX <= 0.5, RY+RX <= n+0.5 into the F D constraints Y #>= d, Y#-X #<= 0, Y#+X #<= n. Since n = 2*d, the only possible solution of these inequalities is X = Y = d. Therefore, the F D solver drastically prunes the domains of X and Y to the singleton set {d}, and solving the last labeling constraint leads to the unique solution with no effort. For a big value of n = 2*d the performance of the computation is greatly enhanced in comparison to the case where projections are disabled, as confirmed by the experimental results given in Subsection 5.2. The expected speed-up in execution time corresponds to the improvement from the O(n2 ) steps needed to execute the labeling constraint  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  9  labeling [ ] [X,Y] when the domains of both X and Y have size O(n), to the O(1) steps needed to execute the same constraint when the domains of both X and Y have been pruned to size O(1). Similar speedups are observed when solving Goal 1 (which finitely fails, and where the expected execution time also improves from O(n2 ) to O(1)) and Goal 3 (which has just n+1 solutions, and where the expected execution time reduces from O(n2 ) to O(n)). The three goals just discussed mainly illustrate the benefits obtained by the F D solver from the projection of R constraints. In fact, when T OY solves these three goals according to the cooperative computation model CCLN C(C), the available bridge constraints also allow to project the F D constraint domain [X,Y] 0 n into the conjunction of the R constraints 0 <= RX, RX <= n, 0 <= RY, RY <= n. These constraints, however, are not helpful for optimizing the resolution of the previously computed R constraints RY >= d-0.5, RY-RX <= 0.5, RY+RX <= n+0.5. In general, it seems easier for the F D solver to profit from the projection of R constraints than the other way round. This is because the solution of many practical problems is arranged to finish with solving F D labeling constraints, which means enumerating values for integer variables, and this process can greatly benefit from a reduction of the variables’ domains due to previous projections of R constraints. However, the projection of F D constraints into R constraints can help to define the intended solutions even if the performance of the R solver does not improve. For instance, assume that the value chosen for n = 2*d is big, and consider the goal • Goal 4: bothIn (triangle (d,d) n d) (square 4) (X,Y). whose resolution eventually reduces to the problem of solving a constraint system that, suitably simplified, becomes: X #== RX, Y #== RY, RY >= 0, RY-RX <= 0, RY+RX <= n, domain [X,Y] 0 4, labeling [ ] [X,Y]. The solutions correspond to the points lying in the intersection of a big isosceles triangle and a tiny square grid. Projecting RY >= 0, RY-RX <= 0, RY+RX <= n into F D constraints via the two bridges X #== RX, Y #== RY brings no significant gains to the R solver whose task is anyhow trivial. The R constraints projected from domain [X,Y] 0 4 (i.e., 0 <= RX, RX <= 4, 0 <= RY, RY <= 4) do not improve the performance of the R solver either, but they help to define the intended solutions. In this example, the last labeling constraint eventually enumerates the right solutions even if the projection of the domain constraint to R does not take place, but this projection would allow the R solver to compute suitable constraints as solutions in case that the labeling constraint were removed. There are also some cases where the performance of the R solver can benefit from the cooperation with the F D domain. Consider for instance the goal • Goal 5: bothIn (parabola (2,0)) (diagonal 4) (X,Y). asking for points in the intersection of the discrete diagonal segment of size 4 and  10  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  a parabola with vertix (2,0) (see Fig. 3). Solving this goal eventually reduces to solving a constraint system that, suitably simplified, becomes: X #== RX, Y #== RY, RY == (RX-2)*(RX-2), domain [X,Y] 0 4, X == Y, labeling [ ] [X,Y].  Fig. 3. Intersection of a parabolic line and a diagonal segment Cooperative goal solving as implemented in T OY processes the constraints within the current goal in left-to right order, performing projections whenever possible, and sometimes delaying a constraint that cannot be managed by the available solvers. In this case, the quadratic R constraint RY == (RX-2)*(RX-2) is delayed because the R solver used by T OY (inherited form SICStus Prolog) cannot solve non-linear constraints. However, since this strict equality relates expressions of type real, it is accepted as a R constraint and projected via the available bridges, producing the F D constraint Y == (X-2)*(X-2), which is submitted to the F D solver. Next, projecting the F D constraint domain [X,Y] 0 4 and solving X == Y causes the R constraints 0 <= RX, RX <= 4, 0 <= RY, RY <= 4 to be submitted to the R solver, and the variable X to be substituted in place of Y all over the goal. The bridges X #== RX, Y #== RY become then X #== RX, X #== RY, and the labeling constraint becomes labeling [ ] [X,X]. An especial mechanism called bridge unification infers from the two bridges X #== RX, X #== RY the strict equality constraint RX == RY, which is solved by substituting RX for RY all over the current goal. At this point, the delayed R constraint becomes RX == (RX-2)*(RX-2). Finally, the F D constraint labeling [ ] [X,X] is solved by enumerating all the possible values for X allowed by its domain, and continuing a different alternative computation with each of them. Due to the bridge X #== RX, each integer value v assigned to X by the labeling process causes the variable RX to be bound to the integral real number rv equivalent to v (in our computation model, this is part of the behaviour of a solver in charge of solving bridge constraints). The binding of RX to rv awakens the delayed constraint RX == (RX-2)*(RX-2), which becomes the linear (and even ground) constraint rv == (rv-2)*(rv-2) and succeeds if rv is an  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  11  integral solution of the delayed quadratic equation. In this way, the two solutions of Goal 5 are eventually computed, corresponding to the two points (X,Y) lying in the intersection of the parabolic line and the diagonal segment: (1,1) and (4,4), as seen in Fig. 3. All the computations described in this subsection can be actually executed in the T OY system and also formally represented in the cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C). The formal representation of goal solving computations in CCLN C(C) performs quite many detailed intermediate steps. In particular, constraints are transformed into a flattened form (without nested calls to primitive functions) before performing projections, and especial mechanisms for creating new bridges in some intermediate steps are provided. Detailed explanations and examples are given in Section 3. 1.3 Structure of the Paper To finish the introduction, we summarize the organization of the rest of the paper. Section 2 starts by presenting the main features of the CF LP scheme, including a mathematical formalization of constraint domains and solvers. The presentation follows (López-Fraguas et al. 2007), adding an explicit consideration of type discipline and an improved presentation of constraint domains, solvers and their formal properties. The rest of the section is new with respect to previous presentations of CF LP schemes: it discusses bridge constraints and the construction of coordination domains, concluding with a presentation of a particular coordination domain C tailored to the cooperation of the domains H, R and F D. In the subsequent sections, C always refers to this particular coordination domain. Section 3 presents our proposal of a computational model for cooperative programming and goal solving in CF LP (C). Programs and goals are introduced, the cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C) is discussed in detail, and its main formal properties (namely soundness and limited completeness w.r.t. the declarative semantics of CF LP (C) provided by the CF LP scheme) are presented. Section 4 sketches the implementation of the CCLN C(C) computational model on top of the T OY system (Arenas et al. 2007), which is itself implemented on top of SICStus Prolog (SICStus Prolog 2007). The architectural components of the current T OY system are described and the extensions of T OY responsible for the treatment of bridges and projections according to the formal model provided by the previous section are briefly discussed. Section 5 discusses the practical use of the T OY system for solving problems involving the cooperation of the domains H, R and F D. A significant set of benchmarks is analyzed in order to study how the cooperation mechanisms affect to the performance of the system, and a detailed comparison to the performance of the META-S tool is also presented. Section 6 is devoted to a discussion of related work, trying to give an overview of different approaches in the area of cooperative constraint solving. Section 7 summarizes the main results of the paper, points out to some limitations of the current T OY implementation, and presents a brief outline of planned future work.  12  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  The results reported in this paper are supported by the experimental results presented in Section 5 and a number of mathematical proofs, most of which have been collected in the Appendices A.1 and A.2. In the case of reasonings concerning type discipline, we have refrained from providing full details, that would be technically tedious and distract from the main emphasis of the paper. More detailed proofs could be worked out, if desired, by adapting the techniques from (González-Moreno et al. 2001). 2 Coordination of Constraint Domains in the CF LP Scheme The scheme presented in (López-Fraguas et al. 2007) serves as a logical and semantic framework for lazy Constraint Functional Logic Programming (briefly CF LP ) over a parametrically given constraint domain. The aim of this section is to model the coordination of several constraint domains with their respective solvers using instances CF LP (C) of the CF LP scheme, where C is a so-called coordination domain built as a suitable combination of the various domains intended to cooperate. We use an enhanced version of the CF LP scheme, extending (López-Fraguas et al. 2007) with an explicit treatment of a polymorphic type discipline in the style of HindleyMilner-Damas and an improved presentation of constraint domains, solvers and their formal properties. In this setting, we discuss the three ‘pure’ constraint domains H, R and F D along with their solvers. Next, we present bridge constraints and the construction of coordination domains, concluding with the construction of a particular coordination domain C tailored to the cooperation of the domains H, R and F D, which is the topic of the rest of the paper. 2.1 Signatures and Types We assume a universal signature Ω = hT C, BT, DC, DF, P F i consisting of five pairwise disjoint sets of symbols, where S • T C = n∈N T C n is a family of countable and mutually disjoint sets of type constructors, indexed by arities. • BT is a set of base types. S • DC = n∈N DC n is a family of countable and mutually disjoint sets of data constructors, indexed by arities. S • DF = n∈N DF n is a family of countable and mutually disjoint sets of defined function symbols, indexed by arities. S • P F = n∈N P F n is a family of countable and mutually disjoint sets of primitive function symbols, indexed by arities. The idea is that base types and primitive function symbols are related to specific constraint domains, while type constructors, data constructors and defined function symbols are related to user given programs. For each choice of a specific family of base types SBT ⊆ BT and a specific family of primitive function symbols SP F ⊆ P F , we will say that Σ = hT C, SBT, DC, DF, SP F i is a domain specific signature. Note that any domain specific signature Σ inherits all the type constructors, data constructors and defined function symbols from the universal signature  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  13  Ω, since different programs over a given constraint domain of signature Σ might use them. All symbols belonging to the family DC ∪ DF ∪ SP F are collectively called function symbols. All along the paper we will work with a static type discipline based on the Hindley-Milner-Damas type system (Hindley 1969; Milner 1978; Damas and Milner 1982). A detailed study of polymorphic type discipline in the context of Functional Logic Programming (without constraints) can be found in (González-Moreno et al. 2001). In the sequel we assume a countably infinite set TVar of type variables. Types τ ∈ T ypeΣ have the syntax τ ::= A | d | (ct τ1 . . . τn ) | (τ1 , . . . , τn ) | (τ1 → τ0 ), where A ∈ TVar, d ∈ SBT and ct ∈ T C n . By convention, parenthesis are omitted when there is no ambiguity, ct τ n abbreviates ct τ1 . . . τn , and “→” associates to the right, τ n → τ abbreviates τ1 → · · · → τn → τ . Types ct τ n , (τ1 , . . . , τn ) and τ1 → τ0 are used to represent constructed values, tuples and functions, respectively. A type without any occurrence of “→” is called a datatype. Type substitutions σt , θt ∈ T SubΣ are mappings from TVar into T ypeΣ, extended to mappings from T ypeΣ into T ypeΣ in the natural way. By convention, we write τ σt instead of σt (τ ) for any type τ . Whenever τ ′ = τ σt for some σt , we say that τ ′ is an instance of τ (or also that τ is more general than τ ′ ) and we write τ  τ ′ . The set of type variables occurring in τ is written tvar(τ ). A type τ is called monomorphic iff tvar(τ ) = ∅, and polymorphic otherwise. A polymorphic type τ must be understood as representing all its possible monomorphic instances τ ′ . Function symbols in any signature Σ are required to come along with a so-called principal type declaration, which indicates its most general type. More precisely, • Each n-ary c ∈ DC n must have attached a principal type declaration of the form c :: τ n → ct Ak , where n, k ≥ 0, A1 , . . . , Ak are pairwise differSn ent type variables, ct ∈ T C k , τ1 , . . . , τn are datatypes, and i=1 tvar(τi ) ⊆ {A1 , . . . , Ak } (so-called transparency property). • Each n-ary f ∈ DF n must have attached a principal type declaration of the form f :: τ n → τ , where τi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) and τ are arbitrary types. • Each n-ary p ∈ SP F n must have attached a principal type declaration of the form p :: τ n → τ , where τ1 , . . ., τn , τ are datatypes and τ is not a type variable. For the sake of semantic considerations, we assume a special data constructor (⊥ :: A) ∈ DC 0 , intended to represent an undefined value that belongs to any type. The type and data constructors needed to work with Boolean values and lists are also assumed to be present in the universal signature Ω. We also assume that SP F 2 includes the polymorphic primitive function symbol == :: A -> A -> bool, that will be written in infix notation and used to express strict equality constraints in those domains where it is available. In concrete programming languages such as T OY (Arenas et al. 2007) and Curry (Hanus 2006), data constructors and their principal types are introduced by datatype declarations, the principal types of defined functions can be either declared or inferred by the compiler, the principal types of primitive functions are predefined and known to the users, and ⊥ does not textually occur in programs.  14  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  Example 1 (Signatures and Types) In order to illustrate the main notions concerning signatures and types, let us consider the signature Σ underlying the program presented in Subsection 1.2. There we find: • Two base types int and real for the integer and real numeric values, respectively. • A nullary type constructor bool for the type of Boolean values, and a unary type constructor list for the type of polymorphic lists. The concrete syntax for list A is [A]. • [A] is a datatype, since it has no occurrences of the type constructor ->. Moreover, it is polymorphic, since it includes a type variable. Among the instances of [A] we can find [int] (for lists of integers) and [int -> int] (for lists of functions of type int -> int). Note that an instance of a datatype must not be a datatype. • Two nullary data constructors false, true :: bool (for Boolean values); a nullary data constructor nil :: [A] (for the empty list); and a binary data constructor cons :: A -> [A] -> [A] (for nonempty lists). The concrete syntax for nil (resp. cons) is [ ] (resp. :), where : is intended to be used as an infix operator. • The principal types of the constructors in the previous item can be derived from the datatype declarations data bool = false | true data [A] = [ ] | (A : [A]) which are predefined and do not need to be included within programs. • In the program presented in Subsection 1.2 there are also type alias declarations, such as type dPoint = (int,int) type setOf A = A -> bool type region = setOf dPoint Such declarations are just a practical convenience for naming certain types. They cannot involve recursion, and the names of type alias so introduced are not considered to belong to the signature. • Defined function symbols of various arities, as e.g. isIn, square ∈ DF 2 . These two function symbols are binary because the rewrite rules given for them within the program expect two formal parameters at their left hand sides. In general, rewrite rules included in programs for defining the behaviour of symbols f ∈ DF n are expected to have n formal parameters at their left hand sides. In some cases, this n may not identically correspond to the number of arrows observed in the principal type of f . For instance, although square ∈ DF 2 , the principal type is square :: int -> grid. The apparent contradiction disappears by noting that grid is declared as a type alias for (int,int) -> bool. Since the type constructor -> associates to the right, we have in fact square :: int -> (int,int) -> bool. • Primitive function symbols of various arities, as e.g. the binary primitives  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  15  #==, labeling, + and <=, and the ternary primitive domain. The concrete syntax requires #==, + and <= to be used in infix notation. Each primitive has a predefined principal type. For instance, #== :: int -> real -> bool, + :: real -> real -> real and domain :: [int] -> int -> int -> bool. These declarations do not need to be included within programs. 2.2 Expressions and Substitutions For any domain of specific signature Σ, constraint programming will use expressions which may have occurrences of certain values of base type. Therefore, in order to define the syntax of expressions we assume a SBT -indexed family B = {Bd}d∈SBT , where each Bd is a non-empty set whose elements are understood as base values of type d. In the sequel, we will use letters u, v, . . . to indicate base values. By an S abuse of notation, we will also write u ∈ B instead of u ∈ d∈SBT Bd . Moreover, we also assume a countable infinite set Var of data variables (disjoint from TVar and Σ), and we define applicative Σ-expressions e ∈ ExpΣ (B) over B with the syntax e ::= X | u | h | (e1 , . . . , en ) | (e e1 ), where X ∈ Var, u ∈ B and h ∈ DC ∪ DF ∪ SP F . Expressions (e1 , . . . , en ) represent ordered n-tuples, while expressions (e e1 ) – not to be confused with ordered pairs (e, e1 ) – stand for the application of the function represented by e to the argument represented by e1 . Following a usual convention, we assume that application associates to the left, and we use the notation (e en ) to abbreviate (e e1 . . . en ). More generally, parenthesis can be omitted when there is no ambiguity. Applicative syntax is common in higher-order functional languages. The usual first-order syntax for expressions can be translated to applicative syntax by means of so-called curried notation. For instance, f (X, g(Y )) becomes (f X (g Y )). Expressions without repeated variable occurrences are called linear, variable-free expressions are called ground and expressions without any occurrence of ⊥ are called total. Some particular expressions are intended to represent data values that do not need to be evaluated. Such expressions are called Σ-patterns t ∈ P atΣ (B) over B and have the syntax t ::= X | u | (t1 , . . . , tn ) | c tm | f tm | p tm , where X ∈ Var, u ∈ B, c ∈ DC n for some m ≤ n, f ∈ DF n for some n > m, and p ∈ SP F n for some n > m. The restrictions concerning arities in the last three cases are motivated by the idea that an expression of the form h tn (where h ∈ DF n ∪SP F n ) is potentially evaluable and therefore not to be viewed as representing data. The set of all ground patterns over B is noted GP atΣ (B). Sometimes we will write UΣ (B) in place of GP atΣ (B), viewing this set as the universe of values over B. The following classification of expressions is also useful: (X em ) (with X ∈ Var and m ≥ 0) is called a flexible expression; while u ∈ B and all expressions of the form (h em ) (with h ∈ DC ∪ DF ∪ SP F ) are called rigid. Moreover, a rigid expression (h em ) is called passive iff h ∈ DF n ∪ SP F n and m < n, and active otherwise. Tuples (e1 , . . . , en ) are also considered as passive expressions. The idea is that any passive expression has the outermost appearance of a pattern, although it might not be a pattern in case that any of its inner subexpressions is active. As illustrated by the program presented in Subsection 1.2, tuples are useful for  16  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  programming and therefore the tuple syntax is supported by many programming languages, including T OY. On the other hand, tuples can be treated as a particular case of constructed values, just by assuming data constructors tupn ∈ DC n in the universal signature and viewing any tuple (e1 , . . . , en ) as syntactic sugar for tupn e1 . . . en . For this reason, in the rest of the paper we will omit the explicit mention to tuples, although we will continue to use them in examples. As usual in programming languages that adopt a static type discipline, all expressions occurring in programs are expected to be well-typed. Deriving or checking the types of expressions relies on two kinds of information: Firstly, the principal types of symbols belonging to the signature, that we assume to be attached to the signature itself; and secondly, the types of variables occurring in the expression. In order to represent this second kind of information, we will use type environments Γ = {X1 :: τ1 , . . . , Xn :: τn }, representing the assumption that variable Xi has type τi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Following well-known ideas stemming from the work of Hindley, Milner and Damas (Hindley 1969; Milner 1978; Damas and Milner 1982), it is possible to define type inference rules for deriving type judgements of the form Σ, Γ ⊢W T e :: τ meaning that the assertion e :: τ (in words, “e has type τ ”) can be deduced from the type assumptions for symbols resp. variables given in Σ resp. Γ. The reader is referred to (González-Moreno et al. 2001) for a presentation of type inference rules well suited to Functional Logic Languages without constraints. Adding the treatment of constraints would be a relatively straightforward task. An expression e is called well-typed iff there is some type environment Γ such that Σ, Γ ⊢W T e :: τ can be derived for at least one type τ . Although this τ is not unique in general, it can be proved that a most general type τ (called the principal type of e and unique up to renaming of type variables) can be derived for any well-typed expression e. In practice, principal types of well-typed expressions can be automatically inferred by compilers. We will write Σ, Γ ⊢W T en :: τ n to indicate that Σ, Γ ⊢W T ei :: τi can be derived for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and Σ, Γ ⊢W T a :: τ :: b to indicate that both Σ, Γ ⊢W T a :: τ and Σ, Γ ⊢W T b :: τ hold. An expression e is called well-typed iff Σ, Γ ⊢W T e :: τ can be derived for some type τ using the underlying signature Σ and some suitable type environment Γ. Sometimes we will write simply e :: τ , meaning that Σ, Γ ⊢W T e :: τ can be derived using the underlying Σ and some proper choice of Γ (which can be just ∅ if e is ground). For the sake of semantic considerations, it is useful to define an information ordering ⊑ over ExpΣ (B), such that e ⊑ e′ is intended to mean that the information provided by e′ is greater or equal than the information provided by e. Mathematically, ⊑ is defined as the least partial ordering over ExpΣ (B) such that ⊥ ⊑ e′ for all e′ ∈ ExpΣ (B) and (e e1 ) ⊑ (e′ e′1 ) whenever e ⊑ e′ and e1 ⊑ e′1 . For later use, we accept without proof the following lemma. It is similar to the Typing Monotonicity Lemma in (González-Moreno et al. 2001) and it says that the type of any expression is also valid for its semantic approximations. It can be proved thanks to the fact that the undefined value ⊥ belongs to all the types.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  17  Lemma 1 (Type Preservation Lemma) Assume that Σ, Γ ⊢W T e′ :: τ and e ⊑ e′ hold. Then Σ, Γ ⊢W T e :: τ is also true. As part of the definition of signatures Σ we have required a transparency property for the principal types of data constructors. Due to transparency, the types of the variables occurring in a data term t can be deduced from the type of t. It is useful to isolate those patterns that have a similar property. To this purpose, we adapt some definitions from (González-Moreno et al. 2001). A type which can be written as τ m → τ is called m-transparent iff tvar(τ m ) ⊆ tvar(τ ) and m-opaque otherwise. Also, defined function symbols f and primitive function symbols p are called mtransparent iff their principal types are m-transparent and m-opaque otherwise. Note that a data constructor c is always m-transparent for all m ≤ ar(c). Then, transparent patterns can be defined as those having the syntax t ::= X | u | c tm | f tm | p tm , with X ∈ Var, u ∈ B, c ∈ DC n for some m ≤ n, f ∈ DF n for some n > m, and p ∈ SP F n for some n > m, where the subpatterns ti in (c tm ), (f tm ) and (p tm ) must be recursively transparent, and the principal types of both the defined function symbol f in (f tm ) and the primitive function symbol p in (p tm ) must be m-transparent. For instance, assume a defined function symbol with principal type declaration snd :: A -> B -> B. Then snd is 1-opaque and the pattern (snd X) is also opaque. In fact, the principal type B -> B of (snd X) reveals no information on the type of X, and different instances of (snd X) keep the principal type B -> B, independently of the type of the expression substituted for X. Such a behaviour is not possible for transparent patterns, due to the Transparency Lemma stated without proof below. Similar results were proved in (González-Moreno et al. 2001) in a slightly different context. Lemma 2 (Transparency Lemma) 1. Assume a transparent pattern t and two type environments Γ1 , Γ2 such that Σ, Γ1 ⊢W T t :: τ and Σ, Γ2 ⊢W T t :: τ , for a common type τ . Then Γ1 (X) = Γ2 (X) holds for every X ∈ var(t). 2. Assume that Σ, Γ ⊢W T h am :: τ :: h bm holds for some m-transparent h ∈ DC ∪ DF ∪ P F and some common type τ . Then, there exist types τi such that Σ, Γ ⊢W T ai :: τi :: bi holds for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Substitutions σ, θ ∈ SubΣ (B) over B are mappings from Var to P atΣ (B), extended to mappings from ExpΣ (B) to ExpΣ (B) in the natural way. For given e ∈ ExpΣ (B) and σ ∈ SubΣ (B), we will usually write eσ instead of σ(e). Whenever e′ = eσ for some substitution σ, we say that e′ is an instance of e (or also that e is more general than e′ ) and we write e  e′ . We write ε for the identity substitution and σθ for the composition of σ and θ, such that e(σθ) = (eσ)θ for any expression e. A substitution σ such that σσ = σ is called idempotent. The domain vdom(σ) and the variable range vran(σ) of a substitution are defined as usual: vdom(σ) = {X ∈ Var | Xσ 6= X} and vran(σ) = S X∈vdom(σ) var(Xσ).  18  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  A substitution σ is called finite iff vdom(σ) is a finite set, and ground iff Xσ is a ground pattern for all X ∈ vdom(σ). In the sequel, we will assume that the substitutions we work with are finite, unless otherwise said. We adopt the usual notation σ = {X1 7→ t1 , . . . , Xn 7→ tn }, whenever vdom(σ) = {X1 , . . . , Xn } and Xi σ = ti for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. In particular, ε = { } = ∅. We also write σ[X 7→ t] for the substitution σ ′ such that Xσ ′ = t and Y σ ′ = Y σ for any variable Y ∈ Var \ {X}. For any set of variables X ⊆ Var we define the restriction σ ↾X as the substitution σ ′ such that vdom(σ ′ ) = X and σ ′ (X) = σ(X) for all X ∈ X . We use the notation σ =X θ to indicate that σ ↾X = θ ↾X , and we abbreviate σ =Var\X θ as σ =\X θ. Given two substitutions σ and θ, we define the application of θ to σ as the substitution σ ⋆ θ =def σθ ↾ vdom(σ). In other words, for any X ∈ Var, X(σ ⋆ θ) = Xσθ if X ∈ vdom(σ) and X(σ ⋆ θ) = X otherwise. We consider two different ways of comparing given substitutions σ, σ ′ ∈ SubΣ (B): • σ is said to be more general than σ ′ over X ⊆ Var (in symbols, σ X σ ′ ) iff σθ =X σ ′ for some θ ∈ SubΣ (B). We abbreviate σ Var σ ′ as σ  σ ′ and σ Var\X σ ′ as σ \X σ ′ . • σ is said to bear less information than σ ′ over X ⊆ Var (in symbols, σ ⊑X σ ′ ) iff σ(X) ⊑ σ ′ (X) for all X ∈ X . We abbreviate σ ⊑Var σ ′ as σ ⊑ σ ′ and σ ⊑Var\X σ ′ as σ ⊑\X σ ′ . Example 2 (Well-typed Expressions) Let us consider the specific signature Σ and the family of base values B underlying the program presented in Subsection 1.2. There we find: • The sets of base values Bint = Z and Breal = R. • Well-typed expressions such as square 4 (2,3) :: bool, RX-RY :: real, (RY-RX <= RY0-RX0) :: bool. • Well-typed patterns such as 3 :: int, 3.01 :: real, [X,Y] :: [int], square 4 :: dPoint -> bool. Note that [X,Y] abbreviates (X:(Y:[ ])), as usual in functional languages that use an infix list constructor. • Finally, note that ⊥ ⊑ (0 : ⊥) ⊑ (0 : (1 : ⊥)) ⊑ ... illustrates the behaviour of the information ordering ⊑ when restricted to the comparison of patterns belonging to the universe UΣ (B). The list patterns of type [int] used in this example are not allowed to occur textually in programs because of the occurrences of the undefined value ⊥, but they are meaningful as semantic representations of partially computed lists of integers. 2.3 Domains, Constraints and Solutions Intuitively, a constraint domain provides data values and constraints oriented to some particular application domain. Different approaches have been proposed for formalizing the notion of constraint domain, using mathematical notions borrowed from algebra, logic and category theory; see e.g. (Jaffar and Lassez 1987; Saraswat 1992; Jaffar and Maher 1994; Jaffar et al. 1998). The following definition is an elaboration of the domain notion given in (López-Fraguas et al. 2007):  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  19  Definition 1 (Constraint Domain) A constraint domain of specific signature Σ (shortly, Σ-domain) is a structure D = hB D , {pD }p∈SP F i, where B D = {BdD }d∈SBT is a SBT -indexed family of sets of base values and the interpretation pD of each primitive function symbol p :: τ n → τ in SP F n is required to be a set of (n + 1)-tuples pD ⊆ UΣ (B D )n+1 . In the sequel, we abbreviate UΣ (B D ) as UD (called the universe of values of D), and we write pD tn → t to indicate (tn , t) ∈ pD . The intended meaning of “pD tn → t” is that the primitive function pD with given arguments tn can return a result t. Moreover, the interpretations of primitive symbols are required to satisfy four conditions: 1. Polarity: For all p ∈ SP F , “pD tn → t” behaves monotonically w.r.t. the arguments tn and antimonotonically w.r.t. the result t. Formally: For all tn , t′ n , t, t′ ∈ UD such that pD tn → t, tn ⊑ t′ n and t ⊒ t′ , pD t′ n → t′ also holds. 2. Radicality: For all p ∈ SP F , as soon as the arguments given to pD have enough information to return a result other than ⊥, the same arguments suffice already for returning a total result. Formally: For all tn , t ∈ UD , if pD tn → t then t = ⊥ or else there is some total t′ ∈ UD such that pD tn → t′ and t′ ⊒ t. 3. Well-typedness: For all p ∈ SP F , the behaviour of pD is well-typed w.r.t. any monomorphic instance of p’s principal type. Formally: For any monomorphic type instance (τ ′ n → τ ′ )  (τ n → τ ) and for all tn , t ∈ UD such that Σ ⊢W T tn :: τ ′ n and pD tn → t, the type judgement Σ ⊢W T t :: τ ′ also holds. 4. Strict Equality: The primitive == (in case that it belongs to SP F ) is interpreted as strict equality over UD , so that for all t1 , t2 , t ∈ UD , one has t1 ==D t2 → t iff some of the three following cases holds: (a) t1 and t2 are one and the same total pattern, and true ⊒ t. (b) t1 and t2 have no common upper bound in UD w.r.t. the information ordering ⊑, and f alse ⊒ t. (c) t = ⊥. With this definition, it is easy to check that ==D satisfies the polarity, radicality and well-typedness conditions. In Subsection 2.4 we will introduce the notion of solver, and we will see that the three domains H, R and F D mentioned in the introduction can be formalized according to the previous definition. In the rest of this subsection we discuss how to work with constraints over a given domain. For any given domain D of signature Σ, the set UD = UΣ (B D ) = GP atΣ (B D ) is called the universe of values of the domain D. We will also write ExpD , P atD and SubD in place of ExpΣ (B D ), P atΣ (B D ) and SubΣ (B D ), respectively. Note that requirement 4. in Definition 1 imposes a fixed interpretation of == as the strict equality operation ==D over UD , for every domain D whose specific signature includes this primitive. It is easy to check that the polarity, radicality and well-typedness requirements are satisfied by strict equality. The following definition will be useful:  20  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  Definition 2 (Conservative Extension of a given Domain) Given two domains D, D′ with respective signatures Σ and Σ′ , D′ is called a conservative extension of D iff the following conditions hold: 1. Σ ⊆ Σ′ , i.e. SBT ⊆ SBT ′ and SP F ⊆ SP F ′ . ′ 2. For all d ∈ SBT , one has BdD = BdD . ′ 3. For all p ∈ SP F n other than == and for every tn , t ∈ UD , one has pD tn → t iff pD tn → t. As usual in constraint programming, we define constraints over a given domain D as logical formulas built from atomic constraints by means of conjunction ∧ and existential quantification ∃. More precisely, constraints δ ∈ ConD over the constraint domain D have the syntax δ ::= α | (δ1 ∧ δ2 ) | ∃Xδ, where α is any atomic constraint over D and X ∈ Var is any variable. We allow two kinds of atomic constraints α over D: a) ♦ and , standing for truth (success) and falsity (failure), respectively; and b) atomic constraints of the form p en →! t with p ∈ SP F n , where en ∈ ExpD , t ∈ P atD , and t is required to be total (i.e., without any occurrences of ⊥). The intended meaning of p en →! t constrains the value returned by the call p en to be a total pattern matching the form of t. By convention, constraints of the form p en →! true are abbreviated as p en . Sometimes constraints of the form p en →! f alse are abbreviated as p′ en , using some symbol p′ to suggest the ‘negation’ of p. In particular, strict equality constraints e1 == e2 and strict disequality constraints e1 /= e2 are understood as abbreviations of e1 == e2 →! true and e1 == e2 →! f alse, respectively. The next definition introduces some useful notations for different kinds of constraints. Definition 3 (Notations for various kinds of constraints) Given two domains D, D′ with respective signatures Σ and Σ′ , such that D′ is a conservative extension of D. Let SP F ⊆ SP F ′ be the sets of specific primitive function symbols of D and D′ , respectively. We define: 1. AConD ⊆ ConD is the set of all atomic constraints over D. 2. AP ConD ⊆ AConD is the set of all atomic primitive constraints over D. By definition, α ∈ AP ConD iff α has the form ♦,  or p tn →! t, where tn ∈ P atD are patterns. 3. P ConD ⊆ ConD is the set of all primitive constraints π over D. By definition, a constraint π ∈ ConD is called primitive iff all the atomic parts of π are primitive. Note that AP ConD = AConD ∩ P ConD . 4. ConD′ ↾ SP F is the set of all SP F -restricted constraints over D′ . By definition, a constraint δ ∈ ConD′ is called SP F -restricted iff all the atomic parts of δ have the form ♦,  or p en →! t, where p ∈ SP F n . The subsets AP ConD′ ↾ SP F ⊆ AConD′ ↾ SP F ⊆ ConD′ ↾ SP F are defined in the natural way. In particular, AP ConD′ ↾ SP F is the set of all the SP F -restricted atomic primitive constraints over D′ , which have the form ♦ or  or p tn →! t, with p ∈ SP F n , tn , t ∈ P atD′ and t total. A particular occurrence of a variable X within a constraint δ is called free iff it is not affected by any quantification, and bound otherwise. In the sequel, we will write  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  21  var(δ) (resp. f var(δ)) for the set of all variables having some occurrence (resp. free occurrence) in the constraint δ. The notations var(∆) and f var(∆) for a set of constraints ∆ ⊆ ConD have a similar meaning. The type inference rules mentioned in Subsection 2.2 can be naturally extended to derive also type judgments of the form Σ, Γ ⊢W T δ, meaning that the constraint δ is well-typed w.r.t. the type assumptions for symbols resp. variables given in Σ resp. Γ. Sometimes we will simply claim that δ is well-typed to indicate that Σ, Γ ⊢W T δ can be derived using the underlying signature Σ and some suitable type environment Γ (which can be just ∅ if δ has no free variables). The set of valuations V alD over the domain D consists of all ground substitutions η such that vran(η) ⊆ UD . Those valuations which satisfy a given constraint are called solutions. For those constraints δ that include subexpressions of the form f en for some f ∈ DF n , the solutions of δ depend on the behaviour of f , which is not included in the domain D, but must be deduced from some user given program, as we will see in Section 3. However, the solutions of primitive constraints depend only on the domain D. More precisely: Definition 4 (Solutions of Primitive Constraints) 1. The set of solutions of a primitive constraint π ∈ P ConD is a subset SolD (π) ⊆ V alD defined by recursion on the syntactic structure of π as follows: • • • •  SolD (♦) = V alD ; SolD () = ∅. SolD (p tn →! t) = {η ∈ V alD | (p tn →!t)η ground, pD tn η → tη, tη total}. SolD (π1 ∧ π2 ) = SolD (π1 ) ∩ SolD (π2 ). SolD (∃Xπ) = {η ∈ V alD | exists η ′ ∈ SolD (π) s.t. η ′ =\{X} η}.  2. Any set Π ⊆ P ConD is interpreted as a conjunction, and therefore SolD (Π) = T π∈Π SolD (π). 3. The set of well-typed solutions of a primitive constraint π ∈ P ConD is a subset W T SolD (π) ⊆ SolD (π) consisting of all η ∈ SolD (π) such that πη is well-typed. T 4. Finally, for any Π ⊆ P ConD we define W T SolD (Π) = π∈Π W T SolD (π). Note that any solution η ∈ SolD (π) must verify vdom(η) ⊇ f var(π). For later use, we accept the two following technical lemmata. The first one can be easily proved by induction on the syntactic structure of Π and the second one is a simple consequence of the polarity properties of primitive functions. The notation (W T )Sol used in both lemmata is intended to indicate that they are valid both for plain solutions and for well-typed solutions. Lemma 3 (Substitution Lemma) For any given Π ⊆ P ConD , σ ∈ SubD and η ∈ V alD , the equivalence η ∈ (W T )SolD (Πσ) ⇔ ση ∈ (W T )SolD (Π) is valid. Lemma 4 (Monotonicity Lemma) For any given Π ⊆ P ConD and η, η ′ ∈ V alD such that η ⊑ η ′ and η ∈ (W T )SolD (Π), one also has η ′ ∈ (W T )SolD (Π).  22  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  A given solution η ∈ SolD (Π) can bind some variables X to the undefined value ⊥. Intuitively, this will happen whenever the value of X is not needed for checking the satisfaction of the constraints in Π. Formally, a variable X is demanded by a set of constraints Π ⊆ P ConD iff η(X) 6= ⊥ for all η ∈ SolD (Π). We write dvarD (Π) to denote the set of all X ∈ f var(Π) such that X is demanded by Π. In practice, CF LP programming requires effective procedures for recognizing ‘obvious’ occurrences of demanded variables in the case that Π is a set of atomic primitive constraints. We assume that for any practical constraint domain D and any primitive atomic constraint π ∈ AP ConD there is an effective way of computing a subset odvarD (π) ⊆ dvarD (π). Variables X ∈ odvarD (π) will be said to be obviously demanded by π. We extend the notion to finite constraint sets Π ⊆ AP ConD by defining the set odvarD (Π) of all variables obviously demanded S by Π as π∈Π odvarD (π). In this way, it is clear that odvarD (Π) ⊆ dvarD (Π) holds for any Π ⊆ AP ConD ; i.e., obviously demanded variables are always demanded. The inclusion is strict in general. In particular, for any constraint domain D whose specific signature includes the strict equality primitive == and any primitive atomic constraint of the form π = (t1 ==t2 →! t), odvarD (π) is defined by a case distinction, as follows: • • • • • • •  odvarD (t1 ==t2 →! R) = {R}, if R ∈ Var. odvarD (X==Y ) = {X, Y }, if X, Y ∈ Var. odvarD (X==t) = odvarD (t==X) = {X}, if X ∈ Var and t ∈ / Var. odvarD (t1 ==t2 ) = ∅, otherwise. odvarD (X/=Y ) = {X, Y }, if X, Y ∈ Var, X and Y not identical. odvarD (X/=t) = odvarD (t/=X) = {X}, if X ∈ Var and t ∈ / Var. odvarD (t1 /=t2 ) = ∅, otherwise.  The inclusion odvarD (π) ⊆ dvarD (π) is easy to check, by considering the behaviour of the interpreted strict equality operation ==D . The method for computing odvarD (π) for atomic primitive constraints based on primitive functions other than equality must be given as part of a practical presentation of the corresponding domain D. In the sequel, we will call critical to those variables occurring in Π which are not obviously demanded, and we will write cvarD (Π) = var(Π) \ odvarD (Π) for the set of all critical variables. As we will see in Section 3, goal solving methods for CF LP programming rely on the effective recognition of critical variables. Therefore, the proper behaviour of goal solving depends on well-defined methods for the computation of obviously demanded variables. In the rest of the paper we will often use constraint stores of the form S = Π ✷ σ, where Π ⊆ AP ConD and σ is an idempotent substitution such that vdom(σ) ∩ var(Π) = ∅. We will need to work with solutions of constraint stores, possibly affected by an existential prefix. This notion is defined as follows: Definition 5 (Solutions of Constraint Stores) 1. SolD (∃Y (Π ✷ σ)) = {η ∈ V alD | exists η ′ ∈ SolD (Π ✷ σ), s.t. η ′ =\Y η}. 2. SolD (Π ✷ σ) = SolD (Π) ∩ Sol(σ). 3. Sol(σ) = {η ∈ V alD | η = ση} (Note that η = ση holds iff Xη = Xση for all X ∈ vdom(σ)).  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  23  4. W T SolD (∃Y (Π ✷ σ)) = {η ∈ V alD | ex. η ′ ∈ W T SolD (Π ✷ σ), s.t. η ′ =\Y η}. 5. W T SolD (Π ✷ σ) = {η ∈ SolD (Π ✷ σ) | (Π ✷ σ) ⋆ η is well-typed}, where (Π ✷ σ) ⋆ η =def Πη ✷ (σ ⋆ η). Example 3 (Constraints and Their Solutions) Let us now illustrate different notions concerning constraints by referring again to the motivating example from Subsection 1.2. The domain C underlying this example is a ‘hybrid’ domain supporting the cooperation of three ‘pure’ domains named H, R and F D, as we will see in Subsections 2.4 and 2.5. For the moment, note that C allows to work with four different kinds of constraints, namely bridge constraints and the specific constraints supplied by H, R and F D, as explained in Section 1. 1. Concerning well-typed constraints, we note that the small program in this example is well-typed. Therefore, all the constraints occurring there are also well-typed. For instance: • domain [X,Y] 0 N is well-typed (w.r.t. any type environment which includes the type assumptions X :: int, Y :: int, N :: int). • RY+RX <= RY0+RX0 is also well-typed (w.r.t. any type environment which includes the type assumptions RY :: real, RX :: real, RY0 :: real, RX0 :: real). Of course, the signature underlying the example allows to write constraints such as domain [X,Y] true 3.2, which cannot be well-typed in any type environment. Due to static type discipline, the compiler will reject programs including ill-typed constraints. 2. Concerning constraint solutions, note that computing by means of the cooperative goal solving calculus presented in Section 3 eventually triggers the computation of solutions for primitive constraints. As already discussed in Subsection 1.2, solving Goal 2 eventually leads to the following set Π of primitive constraints (understood as logical conjunction): X #== RX, Y #== RY, RY >= d-0.5, RY-RX <= 0.5, RY+RX <= n+0.5, domain [X,Y] 0 n, labeling [ ] [X,Y]. Π happens to be the union of three sets of primitive constraints corresponding to the three lines above: A set of two bridge constraints ΠM , a set of three real arithmetical constraints ΠR , and a set of two finite domain constraints ΠF . Therefore, SolC (Π) = SolC (ΠM ) ∩ SolC (ΠR ) ∩ SolC (ΠF ). As we have seen in Subsection 1.2, the only possibility for η ∈ SolC (Π) is η(X) = η(Y) = d, and the computation proceeds with the help of constraint solvers and projections, among other mechanisms. 3. Concerning obviously demanded variables, let us remark that all the variables occurring in the constraint set Π shown in the previous item are obviously demanded. This will become clear from the discussion of the domains H, R and F D in Subsection 2.4.  24  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado 4. Concerning critical variables, note that a variable may be critical either because it is demanded but not obviously demanded, or else because it is not demanded at all. For instance, variables A and B are demanded but not obviously demanded by the strict equality constraint (A,2) == (1,B). Therefore, they are critical variables. To illustrate the case of critical but not demanded variables, consider the primitive constraint π = L /= X:Xs. Due to the definition of ‘obvious demand’ for strict disequality constraints, variable L is obviously demanded by π, while X and Xs are not obviously demanded, and therefore critical. Moreover, it can be argued that neither X nor Xs is demanded by π. Variable X is not demanded because there exist solutions η ∈ SolD (π) such that η(X) = ⊥ (either with η(L) = [ ] or else with η(L) = t : ts such that η(Xs) is different from ts). Variable Xs is not demanded because of similar reasons. 2.4 Pure Domains and their Solvers  In order to be helpful for programming purposes, constraint domains must provide so-called constraint solvers, which process the constraints arising in the course of a computation. For some theoretical purposes, it suffices to model a solver as a function which maps any given constraint to one of the three different values true, f alse or unknown; see e.g. (Jaffar et al. 1998). In practice, however, solvers are expected to have the ability of reducing primitive constraints to so-called solved forms, which are simpler and can be shown as computed answers to the users. As discussed in the introduction (see in particular Subsection 1.2), the constraint domain underlying many practical problems may involve heterogeneous primitives related to different base types. In such cases, it may be not realistic to expect that a single solver for the whole domain is directly available. In the sequel, we will make a pragmatic distinction between pure constraint domains which are given ‘in one piece’ and come equipped with a solver, and hybrid constraint domains which are built as a combination of simpler domains and must rely on the solvers of their components. In the rest of this subsection we give a mathematical formalization of the notion of solver tailored to the needs of the CF LP scheme, followed by a presentation of H, R and F D as pure domains equipped with solvers. In the case of R and F D, we limit ourselves to describe their most basic primitives, although other useful facilities are available in the T OY implementation. A proposal for the construction of so-called coordination domains as a particular kind of hybrid domains will be presented in Subsection 2.5. 2.4.1 Constraint Solvers For any pure constraint domain D we postulate a constraint solver which can reduce any given finite set Π of atomic primitive constraints to an equivalent simpler form, while taking proper care of critical variables occurring in Π. Since the value of a critical variable X may be needed by some solutions of Π and irrelevant for some other solutions, we require that solvers have the ability to compute a distinction of cases discriminating such situations.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  25  Definition 6 (Formal Requirements for Solvers) A constraint solver for the domain D is modeled as a function solveD which can be applied to pairs of the form (Π, X ), where Π ⊆ AP ConD is a finite set of atomic primitive constraints and X ⊆ cvarD (Π) is a finite set including some of the critical variables in Π, where the two extreme cases X = ∅ and X = cvarD (Π) are allowed. By convention, we may abbreviate solveD (Π, ∅) as solveD (Π). We require that any W solver invocation solveD (Π, X ) returns a finite disjunction kj=1 ∃Y j (Πj ✷ σj ) of existentially quantified constraint stores, fulfilling the following conditions: 1. Fresh Local Variables: For all 1 ≤ j ≤ k: (Πj ✷ σj ) is a store, Y j = var(Πj ✷ σj ) \ var(Π) are fresh local variables and vdom(σj ) ∪ vran(σj ) ⊆ var(Π) ∪ Y j . 2. Solved Forms: For all 1 ≤ j ≤ k: Πj ✷ σj is in solved form w.r.t. X . By definition, this means that solveD (Πj , X ) = Πj ✷ ε. 3. Safe Bindings: For all 1 ≤ j ≤ k and for all X ∈ X ∩ vdom(σj ): σj (X) is a constant. 4. Discrimination: Each computed X -solved form Πj ✷ σj (1 ≤ j ≤ k) must satisfy: Either X ∩ odvarD (Πj ) 6= ∅ or else X ∩ var(Πj ) = ∅ (i.e., either some critical variable in X becomes obviously demanded, or else all critical variables in X disappear). Sk 5. Soundness: SolD (Π) ⊇ j=1 SolD (∃Y j (Πj ✷ σj )). Sk 6. Completeness: W T SolD (Π) ⊆ j=1 W T SolD (∃Y j (Πj ✷ σj )). Moreover, solveD is called an extensible solver iff the solver invocation solveD (Π, X ) is defined and satisfies the conditions listed in this definition not just for Π ⊆ AP ConD and X ⊆ cvarD (Π), but more generally for Π ⊆ AP ConD′ ↾ SP F and X ⊆ cvarD′ (Π), where D′ is any conservative extension of D. The idea is that an extensible solver can deal with constraints involving the primitives in D and values described by patterns over arbitrary conservative extensions of D. The presentation of goal solving in Section 3 will discuss the proper way of choosing a set X of critical variables for each particular solver invocation. The idea is that X should include all critical variables which are waiting to be bound to the result of evaluating some expression at some other place within the goal. This idea also motivates the safe bindings condition. Operationally, the alternatives within the disjunctions returned by solver invocations are usually explored in some sequential order with the help of a backtracking W mechanism. Assuming that solveD (Π, X ) = kj=1 ∃Y j (Πj ✷ σj ), we will sometimes use the following notations: • Π ⊢⊢solveD ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) to indicate that ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) is ∃Y j (Πj ✷ σj ) for some X 1 ≤ j ≤ k. In this case we will speak of a successful solver invocation. • Π ⊢⊢solveD  to indicate that k = 0. In this case we will speak of a failed X solver invocation, yielding the obviously unsatisfiable store  =  ✷ ε. As defined above, a constraint store Π ✷ σ is said to be in solved form w.r.t. a set of critical variables X (or simply in solved form if X = ∅) iff solveD (Π, X ) = Π ✷ ε.  26  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  In practice, solved forms can be recognized by syntactical criteria, and a solver invocation solveD (Π, X ) is performed only in the case that Π ✷ σ is not yet solved w.r.t. X . Whenever a solver is invoked, the soundness condition requires that no new spurious solution (whether well-typed or not) is introduced, while the completeness condition requires that no well-typed solution is lost. In practice, any solver can be expected to be sound, but completeness may hold only for some choices of the constraint set Π to be solved. Demanding completeness for arbitrary (rather than well-typed) solutions would be still less realistic. The solvers of interest for this paper suffer some limitations regarding completeness, as explained in Subsections 2.4.2, 2.4.3 and 2.4.4 below. From a user’s viewpoint, a solver can behave as a black-box or as a glass-box. Black-box solvers can just be invoked to compute disjunctions of solved forms, but users cannot observe their inner workings, in contrast to the case of glassbox solvers. Users can define glass-box solvers by means of appropriate tools, such as Constraint Handling Rules (Frühwirth 1998). In this paper we propose to use store transformation systems as a convenient abstract technique for specifying the behaviour of glass-box solvers. A store transformation system (briefly sts) over the constraint domain D is specified as a set of store transformation rules (briefly strs) RL that describe different ways to transform a given store Π ✷ σ w.r.t. a given set X of critical variables. The notions and notations defined below are useful for working with stss. Some of them refer to a selected set of strs noted as RS. • Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ indicates that the store Π ✷ σ can be transformed into Π′ ✷ σ ′ in one step, using one of the available strs. This notation can be also used to indicate a failing transformation step, writing the inconsistent store  =  ✷ ε in place of Π′ ✷ σ ′ . • Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢∗D, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ indicates that Π ✷ σ can be transformed into Π′ ✷ σ ′ in finitely many steps. • The store Π ✷ σ is called RS-irreducible iff there is no str RL ∈ RS that can be applied to transform Π ✷ σ. Note that this is trivially true if RS is the empty set. If RS is the set of all the available strs, the store Π ✷ σ is called simply irreducible (or also a X -solved form). • Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢∗D, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ indicates that Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢∗D, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ holds, and moreover, the final store Π′ ✷ σ ′ is irreducible. Assume a given sts over D such that for any finite Π ⊆ AP ConD and any X ⊆ cvarD (Π), the set SF D (Π, X ) = {Π′ ✷ σ ′ | Π ✷ ε ⊢⊢∗D, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ } is finite. Then the solver defined by the sts can be specified to behave as follows: _ solveD (Π, X ) = {∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷σ ′ ) | Π′ ✷σ ′ ∈ SF D (Π, X ), Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷σ ′ ) \ var(Π)} Once solveD has been so defined, the notation Π ⊢⊢solveD ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) actually X happens to mean that Π ✷ ε ⊢⊢∗D, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ and Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π). Therefore, the symbols ⊢⊢solveD and ⊢⊢∗D, X ! should not be confused, but have related X meanings. The following definition specifies different properties of store transformation systems that are useful to check that the corresponding solvers satisfy the conditions stated in Definition 6.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  27  Definition 7 (Properties of Store Transformation Systems) Assume a store transformation system over D whose transition relation is ⊢⊢D, X , and a selected set RS of strs. Then the sts is said to satisfy: 1. The Fresh Local Variables Property iff Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ implies that Π′ ✷ σ ′ is a store, Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π ✷ σ) are fresh local variables, and σ ′ = σσ1 for some substitution σ1 (responsible for the variable bindings created at this step) such that vdom(σ1 ) ∪ vran(σ1 ) ⊆ var(Π) ∪ Y ′ . 2. The Safe Bindings Property iff Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ implies that σ1 (X) is a constant for all X ∈ X ∩ vdom(σ1 ), where σ ′ = σσ1 as in the previous item. 3. The Finitely Branching Property iff for any fixed Π ✷ σ there are finitely many Π′ ✷ σ ′ such that Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ . 4. The Termination Property iff there is no infinite sequence {Πi ✷ σi | i ∈ N} such that Πi ✷ σi ⊢⊢D, X Πi+1 ✷ σi+1 for all i ∈ N. 5. The Local Soundness Property iff for any D-store Π ✷ σ, the union [ {SolD (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) | Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ , Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ )\var(Π ✷ σ)} is a subset of SolD (Π ✷ σ). 6. The Local Completeness Property for RS-free steps iff for any D-store Π ✷ σ which is RS-irreducible but not in X -solved form, W T SolD (Π ✷ σ) is a subset of the union [ {W T SolD (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) | Π✷σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′ ✷σ ′ , Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷σ ′ )\var(Π✷σ)} If RS is the empty set (in which case all the stores are trivially RS-irreducible) this property is called simply local completeness. In the case of an extensible solver, the six conditions listed in this definition must be checked for any conservative extension D′ of D and any set Π of SP F -restricted atomic primitive constraints over D′ . Assume a solver solveD defined by means of a given sts with transition relation ⊢⊢D, X and a selected set RS of strs. If the sts is terminating, the following recursive definition makes sense: A given store Π ✷ σ is hereditarily RS-irreducible iff Π ✷ σ is RS-irreducible and all the stores Π′ ✷ σ ′ such that Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ (if any) are also hereditarily RS-irreducible. A solver invocation solveD (Π, X ) is called RS-free iff the store Π ✷ ε is hereditarily RS-irreducible. This notion occurs in the following technical lemma (proved in Appendix A.1), which can be applied to ensure that solveD satisfies the requirements for solvers listed in Definition 6. Lemma 5 (Solvers defined by means of Store Transformation Systems) Any finitely branching and terminating D-store transformation system verifies: 1. SF D (Π, X ) is always finite, and hence solveD is well defined and trivially satisfies the solved forms property. 2. solveD has the fresh local variables resp. safe bindings property if the store transformation system has the corresponding property. 3. solveD is sound if the store transformation system is locally sound.  28  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado 4. solveD is complete for RS-free invocations if the store transformation system is locally complete for RS-free steps. In the case that RS is empty, this amounts to say that solveD is complete if the store transformation system is locally complete.  Note that this lemma can be used for proving global properties of extensible solvers, provided that the sts can work with constraint stores Π ✷ σ, where Π is a finite set of SP F -restricted atomic primitive constraints over some arbitrary conservative extension D′ of D, and the local properties required by the lemma hold for any such D′ . In the rest of this paper, we will work with the three pure domains H, F D and R introduced in the following sections. We will rely on black-box solvers for R and F D provided by SICStus Prolog and we will define an extensible glass-box solver for H using the store transformation technique just explained. 2.4.2 The Pure Constraint Domain H The Herbrand domain H supports computations with symbolic equality and disequality constraints over values of any type. Formally, it is defined as follows: • Specific signature Σ = hT C, SBT, DC, DF, SP F i, where SBT is empty and SP F includes just the strict equality operator == :: A -> A -> bool. • Interpretation ==H , defined as for any domain whose specific signature includes ==. Recall Definition 2 and note that a conservative extension of H is any domain D whose specific signature includes the primitive ==. Such a D will be called a domain with equality in the sequel. The {==}-restricted constraints over a given domain with equality are also called extended Herbrand constraints. As already explained in Subsection 2.3, atomic Herbrand constraints have the form e1 == e2 →! t, strict equality constraints e1 == e2 abbreviate e1 == e2 →! true, and strict disequality constraints abbreviate e1 == e2 →! false. Obviously demanded variables (and thus critical variables) for primitive extended Herbrand constraints are computed as explained in Subsection 2.3. An extensible Herbrand solver must be able to solve any finite set Π ⊆ AP ConD ↾ {==} of atomic primitive extended Herbrand constraints, w.r.t. any X ⊆ cvarD (Π) of critical variables. Roughly speaking, the solver proceeds by symbolic decomposition and binding propagation transformations. More precisely, we define an extensible glass-box solver for H by means of the store transformation technique explained in Subsection 2.4.1, using the transformation rules for H stores shown in Table 1. Each of these rules has the form π, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ and indicates the transformation of any store π, Π ✷ σ, which includes the atomic constraint π plus other constraints Π; no sequential ordering is intended. We say that π is the selected atomic constraint for this transformation step. The notation tm ==sm in transformation H3 abbreviates t1 == s1 , . . . , tm == sm and will be used at some other places. All the stss make sense for arbitrary extended Herbrand constraints, which ensures extensibility of the H-solver. Note that transformations H3 and H7 involve decompositions. An  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  29  application of H3 or H7 is called opaque iff h is m-opaque in the sense explained in Subsection 2.2, in which case the new constraints resulting from the decomposition may become ill-typed. Note also that an application of transformation H13 may obviously lose solutions. An invocation solveH (Π, X ) of the H-solver is called safe iff it has been computed without any opaque application of the store transformation rules H3 and H7 and without any application of the store transformation rule H13. More formally, solveH (Π, X ) is a safe invocation of the H-solver iff it is URS-free, where URS is the set {OH3, OH7, H13} consisting of H13 and the unsafe instances OH3 and OH7 corresponding to opaque applications of H3 and H7, respectively.  H1 (t == s) →! R, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X (t == s, Π)σ1 ✷ σσ1  where σ1 = {R 7→ true}.  H2 (t == s) →! R, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X (t /= s, Π)σ1 ✷ σσ1  where σ1 = {R 7→ f alse}.  H3 h tm == h sm , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X tm ==sm , Π ✷ σ H4 t == X, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X X == t, Π ✷ σ  if t is not a variable.  H5 X == t, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X tot(t), Πσ1 ✷ σσ1 V if X ∈ / X, X ∈ / var(t), X 6= t, where σ1 = {X 7→ t}, tot(t) abbreviates Y ∈var(t) (Y ==Y ). H6 X == t, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X   if X ∈ var(t), X 6= t.  H7 h tm /= h sm , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X (ti /= si , Π ✷ σ) ′  H8 h tn /= h sm , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X Π ✷ σ H9 t /= t, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X   for each 1 ≤ i ≤ m.  ′  if h 6= h or n 6= m.  if t ∈ Var ∪ DC ∪ DF ∪ SP F .  H10 t /= X, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X X /= t, Π ✷ σ  if t is not a variable.  / , c∈DC n and X ∩ var(c tn )6=∅ H11 X/= c tn , Π✷σ ⊢⊢H,X (Zi /=ti , Π)σ1 ✷σσ1 if X ∈X where 1≤i≤n (non-deterministic choice), σ1 ={X7→ c Z n }, Z n fresh variables. / X , c ∈ DC n and X ∩ var(c tn ) 6= ∅ H12 X /= c tn , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X Πσ1 ✷ σσ1 if X ∈ where σ1 = {X 7→ d Z m }, c ∈ DC n , d ∈ DC m , d 6= c, d belongs to the same datatype as c, Z m fresh variables. H13 X /= h tm , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X   if X ∈ / X , X ∩ var(h tm ) 6= ∅ and h ∈ / DC m .  Table 1. Store Transformations for solveH The idea of using equality and disequality constraints in Logic Programming stems from Colmerauer (Colmerauer 1984; Colmerauer 1990). The problem of solving these constraints, as well as related decision problems for theories involving equations and disequations, has been widely investigated in works such as (Lassez et al. 1988; Maher 1988; Comon and Lescanne 1989; Comon 1991; Fernandez 1992; Buntine and Bürckert 1994), among others. These papers assume the classical algebraic semantics for the equality relation, and propose methods for solving so-called unification and disunification problems bearing some analogies to the transformation rules shown in Table 1. However, there are also some differences, because strict equality in CF LP is designed to work with lazy and possibly non-deterministic functions, whose behaviour does not correspond to the semantics of equality in classical algebra and equational logic, as argued in (Rodrı́guez-Artalejo 2001). Note  30  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  in particular transformation H5, which introduces constraints of the form Y == Y in H-solved forms. These are called totality constraints, because a valuation η is a solution of Y == Y iff η(Y ) is a total pattern. An approach to disequality constraints close to our semantic framework can be found in (Arenas et al. 1994), but no formalization of a Herbrand solver is provided. The following theorem ensures that the sts for H-stores can be accepted as a correct specification of an extensible glass-box solver for the domain H, which is complete for safe solver invocations. Theorem 1 (Formal Properties of solveH ) The sts with transition relation ⊢⊢H, X is finitely branching and terminating, and therefore _ solveH (Π, X ) = {∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) | Π′ ✷ σ ′ ∈ SF H (Π, X ), Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ )\var(Π)} is well defined for any domain with equality D, any finite Π ⊆ AP Con(D) ↾ {==} and any X ⊆ cvarD (Π). Moreover, for any arbitrary choice of a domain D with equality, solveH satisfies all the requirements for solvers enumerated in Definition 6, except that the completeness property may fail for some choices of the constraint set Π ⊆ AP Con(D) ↾ {==} to be solved, and is guaranteed to hold only if the solver invocation solveH (Π, X ) is safe (i.e., {OH3, OH7, H13}-free). The proof of the previous theorem is rather technical and can be found in Appendix A.1. At this point, we just make a few remarks related to the discrimination and completeness properties, that may help to understand some differences between our H-solver and more classical methods for solving unification and disunification problems. On the one hand, transformations H11 and H12 are designed to ensure the discrimination property while preserving completeness w.r.t. well-typed solutions. On the other hand, transformation H13 trivially ensures discrimination, but it sacrifices completeness because it fails without making sure that no welltyped solutions exist. This corresponds to situations unlikely to occur in practice and such that no practical way of preserving completeness is at hand. The other two failing transformations given in Table 1 (namely H6 and H9) respect completeness, because they are applied to unsatisfiable stores. Finally, the other cases where completeness may be lost correspond to unsafe decomposition steps performed with the opaque instances OH3 and OH7 of the strs H3 and H7. Due to the termination property of the H-sts, it is decidable wether a given H-store Π ✷ σ is hereditarily URS-irreducible, in which case no opaque decompositions will occur when solving the store. However, computations in the cooperative goal solving calculus presented in Section 3 can sometimes give rise to H-stores whose resolution involves opaque decomposition steps. Due to theoretical results proved in (González-Moreno et al. 2001), the eventual occurrence of opaque decomposition steps during goal solving is an undecidable problem. In case that opaque decompositions occur, they should be signaled as warnings to the user. Example 4 (Behaviour of solveH ) In order to illustrate the behaviour of solveH , consider the disequality constraint L /= X:Xs discussed in item 4. of Example 3. Remember that variable L is obviously  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  31  demanded, while variables X and Xs are both critical. Therefore, there are four possible choices for the set X of critical variables to be used within the solver invocation, namely: ∅, {X}, {Xs} and {X, Xs}. Let us discuss these cases one by one. • Choosing X = ∅ means that the solver is not asked to discriminate w.r.t. any critical variable. In this case, solveH (L/=X:Xs,∅) returns L/=X:Xs ✷ ε, showing that L/=X:Xs is seen as a solved form w.r.t. the empty set of critical variables. • Choosing X = {X} asks the solver to discriminate w.r.t. the critical variable X. solveH (L/=X:Xs,{X}) returns a disjunction of alternatives (♦ ✷{L 7→ [ ]}) ∨ (X’/= X ✷{L 7→ X′ : Xs′ }) ∨ (Xs’/= Xs ✷{L 7→ X′ : Xs′ }) whose members correspond to the three different stores Π′ ✷ σ ′ such that the step L/=X:Xs ✷ ε ⊢⊢H, {X} Π′ ✷ σ ′ can be performed with transformation H12. Since these stores are solved w.r.t. {X}, no further transformations are required. Note that X does not occur in the first and third alternatives, while it has become obviously demanded in the second one. In this way, the discrimination property required for solvers is fulfilled. • For each of the two choices X = {Xs} and X = {X, Xs}, it is easy to check that the solver invocation solveH (L/=X:Xs, X ) returns the same disjunction of three alternatives as in the previous item, and the discrimination property is also fulfilled w.r.t. the chosen set X in both cases. 2.4.3 The Pure Constraint Domain R The R domain supporting computation with arithmetic constraints over real numbers is a familiar idea, used in the well-known instance CLP (R) of the CLP scheme (Jaffar et al. 1992). In the context of our CF LP framework, a convenient formal definition of the domain R is as follows: • Specific signature Σ = hT C, SBT, DC, DF, SP F i, where SBT = {real} includes just one base type whose values represent real numbers, and SP F includes the following binary primitive symbols, all of them intended to be used in infix notation: — The strict equality operator == :: A -> A -> bool. — The arithmetical operators +, -, *, / :: real -> real -> real. — The inequality operator <= :: real -> real -> bool. R • Set of base values Breal = R. R • Interpretation == , defined as for any domain whose specific signature includes ==. • Interpretation +R , defined so that for all t1 , t2 , t ∈ UR : t1 +R t2 → t is defined to hold iff some of the following cases holds: Either t1 , t2 and t are real numbers, t being equal to the addition of t1 and t2 , or else t = ⊥. The interpretations of -, * and / are defined analogously.  32  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado • Interpretation <=R , defined so that for all t1 , t2 , t ∈ UR : t1 <=R t2 → t is defined to hold iff some of the following cases holds: Either t1 , t2 are real numbers such that t1 is less than or equal to t2 , and t = true; or else t1 , t2 are real numbers such that t1 is greater than t2 , and t = false; or else t = ⊥.  Atomic R-constraints have the form e1 ⊙ e2 →! t, where ⊙ is the strict equality operator or the inequality operator or an arithmetical operator. An atomic R-constraint is called proper iff ⊙ is not the strict equality operator, and an extended Herbrand constraint otherwise. As already explained in previous sections, strict equality constraints e1 == e2 and strict disequality constraints e1 /= e2 can be understood as abbreviations of extended Herbrand constraints. Moreover, various kinds of inequality constraints can also be defined as abbreviations, as follows: • e1 < e2 =def e2 <= e1 →! false • e1 > e2 =def e1 <= e2 →! false  e1 <= e2 =def e1 <= e2 →! true e1 >= e2 =def e2 <= e1 →! true  Concerning the solver solveR , we expect that it is able to deal with R-specific constraint sets Π ⊆ AP ConR consisting of atomic primitive constraints π of the two following kinds: • Proper R-constraints t1 ⊙ t2 →! t, where ⊙ is either the inequality operator or an arithmetical operator. • R-specific Herbrand constraints having the form t1 == t2 or t1 /= t2 , where each of the two patterns t1 and t2 is either a real constant value or a variable whose type is known to be real prior to the solver invocation. For any finite R-specific Π ⊆ AP ConR , it is clear that dvarR (Π) = var(Π). Therefore, it is safe to define odvarR (Π) = var(Π) and thus cvarR (Π) = ∅. Consequently, invocations to solveR can be assumed to be always of the form solveR (Π, ∅) (abbreviated as solveR (Π)), and the discrimination requirements for critical variables become trivial. Assuming that solveR is used under the restrictions described above and implemented as a black-box solver on top of SICStus Prolog, we are confident that the postulate stated below is a reasonable one. In particular, we assume that SICStus Prolog solves R-specific Herbrand constraints in a way compatible with the behaviour of the extensible H-solver described in the previous subsection. Postulate 1 (Assumptions on the R Solver ) solveR satisfies five of the six properties required for solvers in Definition 6 (namely Fresh Local Variables, Solved Forms, Safe Bindings, Discrimination and Soundness), although the Completeness property may fail for some choices of the R-specific Π ⊆ AP ConR to be solved. Moreover, whenever Π ⊆ AP ConR is R-specific and Π ⊢⊢solveR ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ), the constraint set Π′ is also R-specific, and for all X ∈ vdom(σ ′ ): Either σ ′ (X) is a real value, or else X and σ ′ (X) belong to var(Π).  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  33  Example 5 (Behaviour of the R Solver ) Let us now illustrate the behaviour of solveR by considering the set of primitive atomic constraints RY >= d-0.5, RY-RX <= 0.5, RY+RX <= n+0.5 occurring in item 2. of Example 3. The solver invocation solveR (ΠR ) returns one single alternative Π′R ✷ ε with Π′R = ΠR ∪ {RY <= d+0.5}. In this case, the new constraint RY <= d+0.5 has been inferred by adding the two former constraints RY-RX <= 0.5 and RY+RX <= n+0.5 and taking into account that n = 2*d. In other cases, the R solver can perform other inferences by means of arithmetical reasoning valid in the mathematical theory of the real number field. In general, solved forms computed by solvers help to make more explicit the requirements on variable values already ‘hidden’ in the constraints prior to solving (as the upper bound RY <= d+0.5 in this example). 2.4.4 The Pure Constraint Domain F D The idea of a F D domain supporting computation with arithmetic and finite domain constraints over the integers is a familiar one within the CLP community, see e.g. (van Hentenryck et al. 1994; van Hentenryck et al. 1998). In the context of our CF LP framework, a convenient formal definition of the domain F D is as follows: • Specific signature Σ = hT C, SBT, DC, DF, SP F i, where SBT = {int} includes just one base type whose values represent integer numbers, and SP F includes the following primitive symbols: — The strict equality operator == :: A -> A -> bool. — The arithmetical operators #+, #-, #*, #/ :: int -> int -> int. — The following primitive symbols related to computation with finite domains: – domain:: [int] -> int -> int -> bool – belongs:: int -> [int] -> bool – labeling:: [labelType] -> [int] ->bool, where labelType is an enumerated datatype used to represent labeling strategies. — The inequality operator #<= :: int -> int -> bool. FD • Set of base values Bint = Z. • Interpretation ==F D , defined as for any domain whose specific signature includes ==. • Interpretation #+F D , defined so that for all t1 , t2 , t ∈ UF D : t1 #+F D t2 → t is defined to hold iff some of the following cases holds: Either t1 , t2 and t are integer numbers, t being equal to the addition of t1 and t2 , or else t = ⊥. The interpretations of #-, #* and #/ are defined analogously. • Interpretation domainF D, defined so that for all t1 , t2 , t3 , t ∈ UF D : domainF D t1 t2 t3 → t is defined to hold iff some of the following cases holds: Either t2 and t3 are integer numbers a and b such that a ≤ b, t1 is a non empty finite list of integers belonging to the interval a..b and t = true; or else  34  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado t2 and t3 are integer numbers a and b such that a ≤ b, t1 is a non empty list of integers some of which does not belong to the interval a..b and t = false; or else t2 and t3 are integer numbers a and b such that a > b and t = false; or else t = ⊥. • Interpretation belongsF D, defined so that for all t1 , t2 , t ∈ UF D : belongsF D t1 t2 → t is defined to hold iff some of the following cases holds: Either t1 is an integer, t2 is a finite list of integers including t1 as element, and t = true; or else t1 is an integer, t2 is a finite list of integers not including t1 as element, and t = false; or else t = ⊥. • Interpretation labelingF D, defined so that for all t1 , t2 , t ∈ UF D : labelingF D t1 t2 → t is defined to hold iff some of the following cases holds: Either t1 is a defined value of type labelType, t2 is a finite list of integers, and t = true; or else t = ⊥. • Interpretation #<=F D , defined so that for all t1 , t2 , t ∈ UF D : t1 #<=F D t2 → t is defined to hold iff some of the following cases holds: Either t1 , t2 are integer numbers such that t1 is less than or equal to t2 , and t = true; or else t1 , t2 are integer numbers such that t1 is greater than t2 , and t = false; or else t = ⊥.  Atomic F D-constraints include those of the form e1 ⊙ e2 →! t, where ⊙ is either the strict equality operator or the inequality operator or an arithmetical operator, as well as domain constraints domain e1 e2 e3 →! t, membership constraints belongs e1 e2 →! t and labeling constraints labeling e1 e2 →! t. Atomic F D-constraints are called extended Herbrand if they have the form e1 == e2 →! t, and proper F Dconstraints otherwise. As already explained in previous sections, strict equality constraints e1 == e2 and strict disequality constraints e1 /= e2 can be understood as abbreviations of extended Herbrand constraints. Moreover, various kinds of inequality constraints can also be defined as abbreviations, as follows: • e1 #< e2 =def e2 #<= e1 →! false • e1 #> e2 =def e1 #<= e2 →! false  e1 #<= e2 =def e1 #<= e2 →! true e1 #>= e2 =def e2 #<= e1 →! true  Concerning the solver solveF D , we expect that it is able to deal with F D-specific constraint sets Π ⊆ AP ConF D consisting of atomic primitive constraints π of the two following kinds: • Proper F D atomic primitive constraints (which may be t1 ⊙ t2 →! t, where ⊙ is either an integer arithmetical primitive or an inequality primitive, or primitive domain, membership and labeling constraints). • F D-specific Herbrand constraints having the form t1 == t2 or t1 /= t2 , where each of the two patterns t1 and t2 is either an integer constant value or a variable whose type is known to be int prior to the solver invocation. For any finite F D-specific Π ⊆ AP ConF D , it is clear that dvarF D (Π) = var(Π). Therefore, it is safe to define odvarF D (Π) = var(Π) and thus cvarF D (Π) = ∅. Consequently, invocations to solveF D can be assumed to be always of the form solveF D (Π, ∅) (abbreviated as solveF D (Π)), and the discrimination requirements  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  35  for critical variables become trivial. Assuming that solveF D is used under the restrictions described above and implemented as a black-box solver on top of SICStus Prolog, we are confident that the postulate stated below is a reasonable one. In particular, we assume that SICStus Prolog solves F D-specific Herbrand constraints in a way compatible with the behaviour of the extensible H-solver described in the previous subsection. Postulate 2 (Assumptions on the F D Solver ) solveF D satisfies five of the six properties required for solvers in Definition 6 (namely Fresh Local Variables, Solved Forms, Safe Bindings, Discrimination and Soundness), although the Completeness property may fail for some choices of the F D-specific Π ⊆ AP ConF D to be solved. Moreover, whenever Π ⊆ AP ConF D is F D-specific and Π ⊢⊢solveFD ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ), the constraint set Π′ is also F D-specific, and for all X ∈ vdom(σ ′ ): Either σ ′ (X) is an integer value, or else X and σ ′ (X) belong to var(Π). In particular, labeling constraints are solved by a systematic enumeration of possible values for certain integer variables. Therefore, solveF D is unable to solve a labeling constraint π unless the current constraint store includes domain or membership constraints for all the variables occurring in π. The next example shows a typical situation. Example 6 (Behaviour of the F D Solver ) In order to illustrate the behaviour of solveF D , let us consider the set of primitive atomic constraints ΠF = {domain [X,Y] 0 n, labeling [ ] [X,Y]} occurring also in item 2. of Example 3. The solver invocation solveF D (ΠF ) must solve the conjunction of a domain constraint and a labeling constraint, both involving the integer variables X and Y. The solver proceeds by enumerating all the possible values of both variables X and Y within their respective domains (determined in this case by the domain constraint domain [X,Y] 0 n) and returns a disjunction of (n+1)2 alternatives, each of which describes one single solution: (♦ ✷{X 7→ 0, Y 7→ 0}) ∨ · · · ∨ (♦ ✷{X 7→ n, Y 7→ n}) In general, solving labeling constraints can give rise to very expensive enumerations of solutions, unless the finite domains of the integer variables involved have been pruned by some precedent computation. As already discussed in Subsection 1.2, the efficiency of solving the constraint system occurring in item 2. of Example 3 can be greatly improved by cooperation among the the domains H, R and F D. We propose to use the coordination domains defined in the next subsection as a vehicle for domain cooperation in CF LP programming. 2.5 Coordination Domains Coordination domains C are a kind of ‘hybrid’ domains built from various component domains Di , intended to cooperate. The construction of coordination domains also involves a so-called mediatorial domain M, whose purpose is to supply bridge constraints for communication among the component domains. In practice, the  36  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  component domains will be chosen as pure domains equipped with solvers, and the communication provided by the mediatorial domain will also benefit the solvers. Mathematically, the construction of coordination domains relies on a joinability condition. Two given constraint domains D1 and D2 with specific signatures Σ1 = hT C, SBT1 , DC, DF, SP F1 i and Σ2 = hT C, SBT2 , DC, DF, SP F2 i, respectively, are called joinable iff the two following conditions hold: • SP F1 ∩ SP F2 ⊆ {==}; i.e., the only primitive function symbol p allowed to belong both to SP F1 and SP F2 is the strict equality operator ==. • For every common base type d ∈ SBT1 ∩ SBT2 , one has BdD1 = BdD2 . The amalgamated sum S = D1 ⊕D2 of two joinable domains D1 and D2 is defined as a new domain with signature Σ = hT C, SBT1 ∪SBT2 , DC, DF, SP F1 ∪SP F2 i, constructed as follows: • For i = 1, 2 and for all d ∈ SBTi : BdS = BdDi . (no conflict will arise for those d ∈ SBT1 ∩ SBT2 , because of joinability) • For i = 1, 2, for all p ∈ SP Fi , p other than ==, and for all tn , t ∈ US : pS tn → t is defined to hold iff one of the two following cases holds: Either t = ⊥ or else there exist t′ n , t′ ∈ UDi such that t′ n ⊑ tn , t′ ⊒ t and p D i t′ n → t′ . Note that the value universe US underlying an amalgamated sum S = D1 ⊕ D2 is a superset of UDi for i = 1, 2. The interpretation of == in S will behave as defined for any constraint domain, see Subsection 2.3. For primitive functions p ∈ SP Fi other than ==, the definition of pS is designed to obtain an extension of pDi which satisfies the technical conditions required by Definition 1. The amalgamated sum D1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Dn of n pairwise joinable domains Di (1 ≤ i ≤ n) can be defined analogously. The following definition and theorem guarantee the expected behaviour of amalgamated sums as conservative extensions of their components. The proof of the theorem is given in Appendix A.1. Definition 8 (Domain specific constraints and truncation operator ) Assume S = D1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Dn of signature Σ, constructed as the amalgamated sum of n pairwise joinable domains Di of signatures Σi . Let any 1 ≤ i ≤ n be arbitrarily fixed. 1. A set Π ⊆ AP ConDi is called Di -specific iff every valuation η ∈ V alS such that η ∈ SolS (Π) satisfies η(X) ∈ UDi for all X ∈ var(Π). Note that the R-specific and F D-specific sets of constraints previously introduced in subsections 2.4.3 and 2.4.4 are also specific in the sense just defined. 2. Consider the information ordering ⊑ over US . The Di -truncation of a given S value t ∈ US is defined as the ⊑-greatest Di value | t |Di ∈ UDi which satisfies | t |Di ⊑ t, so that any other Di value t̂ ∈ UDi such that t̂ ⊑ t must satisfy t̂ ⊑ | t |Di . An effective construction of | t |Di from t can be obtained by substituting ⊥ in place of any subpattern of t which has any of the two following forms: a basic value u which does not belong to UDi , or a partial application of a primitive function which does not belong to Di specific signature. Note that | t |Di = t if and only if t ∈ UDi .  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  37  3. The Di -truncation of a given S-valuation η ∈ V alS is the Di valuation | η |Di defined by the condition | η |Di (X) = | η(X) |Di , for all X ∈ Var. Note that | η |Di = η if and only if η ∈ V alDi . Theorem 2 (Properties of Amalgamated Sums) For any S = D1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Dn of signature Σ constructed as the amalgamated sum of n pairwise joinable domains Di of signatures Σi (1 ≤ i ≤ n): 1. S is well-defined as a constraint domain; i.e., the interpretations of primitive function symbols in S satisfy the four conditions listed in Definition 1 from Subsection 2.3. 2. S is a conservative extension of Di for all (1 ≤ i ≤ n); i.e., for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, for any p ∈ SP Fim other than ==, and for every tm , t ∈ UDi , one has pDi tm → t iff pS tm → t. 3. For all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, for any set of primitive constraints Π ⊆ AP ConDi and for every valuation η ∈ V alDi , one has η ∈ (W T )SolDi (Π) iff η ∈ (W T )SolS (Π). 4. For all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, for any set of Di -specific primitive constraints Π ⊆ AP ConDi and for every valuation η ∈ V alS , one has η ∈ (W T )SolS (Π) iff | η |Di ∈ (W T )SolDi (Π). Note that amalgamated sums of the form H⊕ D are always possible, and give rise to compound domains that can profit from the extensible Herbrand solver. However, in order to construct more interesting sums tailored to the communication among several pure domains, so-called mediatorial domains are needed. Given n pairwise joinable domains Di with specific signatures Σi = hT C, SBTi , DC, DF, SP Fi i (1 ≤ i ≤ n), a mediatorial domain for the communication among D1 , . . . , Dn is defined as any domain M with specific signature Σ0 = hT C, SBT0 , DC, DF, SP F0 i constructed in such a way that the following conditions are satisfied: S • SBT0 ⊆ ni=1 SBTi , and SP F0 ∩ SP Fi = ∅ for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. • For each d ∈ SBT0 and for any 1 ≤ i ≤ n such that d ∈ SBTi , BdM = BdDi . (no confusion can arise, since the domains Di are pairwise joinable). • Each p ∈ SP F0 is a so-called equivalence primitive #==di,dj with declared principal type di → dj → bool, for some 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n and some di ∈ SBTi , dj ∈ SBTj . • Moreover, each equivalence primitive #==di ,dj is used in infix notation and D there is an injective partial mapping injdi ,dj : BdDii → Bdjj used to define the interpretation of #==di,dj in M as follows: For all s, t, r ∈ UM , s #==M di ,dj t → r iff some of the three cases listed bellow holds: D 1. s ∈ dom(injdi ,dj ), t ∈ Bdjj , t = injdi ,dj (s) and true ⊒ r. D  2. s ∈ dom(injdi ,dj ), t ∈ Bdjj , t 6= injdi ,dj (s) and f alse ⊒ r. 3. r = ⊥. Equivalence primitives #==di,dj allow to write well-typed atomic mediatorial constraints of the form a #==di,dj b →! c, using expressions a :: di , b :: dj and c :: bool. Constraints of the form a #==di ,dj b →! true resp. a #==di ,dj b →! false are abbreviated as a #==di ,dj b resp. a #/==di,dj b and called bridges and antibridges, respectively. The usefulness of bridges for cooperative goal solving in CF LP has been  38  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  motivated in the introduction and will elaborated when presenting the cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C) in Section 3. Antibridges and mediatorial constraints a #==di ,dj b →! R, where R is a variable, can also occur in CCLN C(C) computations, but they are not so directly related to domain cooperation as bridges. Each particular choice of injective partial mappings injdi ,dj and their corresponding equivalence primitives #==di,dj gives rise to the construction of a particular mediatorial domain M, suitable for communication among the Di . Moreover, it is clear by construction that the n + 1 domains M, D1 , . . . , Dn are pairwise joinable, and it is possible to build the amalgamated sum C = M ⊕ D1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Dn . This ‘hybrid’ domain supports the communication among the domains Di via bridge constraints provided by M. Therefore, M is called a coordination domain for D1 , . . . , Dn . In practice, it is advisable to include the Herbrand domain H as one of the component domains Di when building a coordination domain C. In application programs over such a coordination domain, the H solver is typically helpful for solving symbolic equality and disequality constraints over user defined datatypes, while the solvers of other component domains Di whose specific signatures include the primitive == may be helpful for computing with equalities and disequalities related to Di ’s specific base types. 2.6 The Coordination Domain C = M ⊕ H ⊕ F D ⊕ R In this subsection, we explain the construction of a coordination domain for cooperation among the three pure domains H, F D and R. First, we define a mediatorial domain M suitable to this purpose. It is built with specific signature Σ0 = hT C, SBT0 , DC, DF, SP F0 i, where SBT0 = {int, real} and SP F0 = {#==int,real }. The equivalence primitive #==int,real is interpreted with respect to the total injective mapping injint,real :: Z → R, which maps each integer value into the equivalent real value. In the sequel, we will write #== in place of #==int,real when referring to this equivalence primitive. We will use the same abbreviation for writing mediatorial constraints. Next, we use this mediatorial domain for building C = M ⊕ H ⊕ F D ⊕ R. In the rest of the paper, C will always stand for this particular coordination domain, whose usefulness has been motivated in Section 1 and will become more evident in Section 3. Note that bridges X #== RX and antibridges X #/== RX can be useful just as constraints; in particular, X #== RX acts as an integrality constraint over the value of the real variable RX. More importantly, in Section 3 the mediatorial domain C will serve as a basis for useful cooperation facilities, including the projection of R constraints to the F D solver (and vice versa) using bridges, the specialization of H constraints to become R-specific or F D-specific in some computational contexts, and some other special mechanisms designed for processing the mediatorial constraints occurring in computations. In particular, computation rules for simplifying mediatorial constraints will be needed. Although M is not a ’pure’ domain, simplifying M-constraints is most conveniently thought of as the task of a M-solver. This solver is expected to deal with M-specific constraint sets Π ⊆ AP ConM consisting of atomic primitive con-  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  39  straints π of the form t #==s →! b, where b is either a variable or a boolean constant and each of the two patterns t and s is either a variable or a numeric value of the proper type (int for t and real for s). For any finite set Π ⊆ AP ConM of such M-specific constraints, it is clear that dvarM (Π) = var(Π). Therefore, it is safe to define odvarM (Π) = var(Π) and thus cvarM (Π) = ∅. We define a glass-box solver solveM by means of the store transformation technique explained in Subsection 2.4.1, using the strs for M-stores shown in Table 2. Due to the absence of critical variables, one-step transformations of M-stores do not depend on a parametrically given set X of critical variables and have the form π, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M Π′ ✷ σ ′ , indicating the transformation of any store π, Π ✷ σ, which includes the atomic constraint π plus other constraints Π; no sequential ordering is intended. We say that π is the selected atomic constraint for this transformation step.  M1 (t #== s) →! B, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M (t #== s, Π)σ1 ✷ σσ1 if t ∈ Var ∪ Z, s ∈ Var ∪ R, B ∈ Var, where σ1 = {B 7→ true}. M2 (t #== s) →! B, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M (t #/== s, Π)σ1 ✷ σσ1 if t ∈ Var ∪ Z, s ∈ Var ∪ R, B ∈ Var, where σ1 = {B 7→ f alse}. M3 X #==u′ , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M Πσ1 ✷ σσ1 if u′ ∈ R, and there is u ∈ Z such that u #==M u′ → true, where σ1 = {X 7→ u}. M4 X #== u′ , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M  if u′ ∈ R, and there is no u ∈ Z such that u #==M u′ → true. M5 u #== RX, Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M Πσ1 ✷ σσ1 if u ∈ Z and u′ ∈R is so chosen that u #==M u′ → true, where σ1 = {RX 7→ u′ }. M6 u #== u′ , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M Π ✷ σ  if u ∈ Z, u′ ∈ R, and u #==M u′ → true.  M7 u #== u′ , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M   if u ∈ Z, u′ ∈ R, and u #==M u′ → f alse.  M8 u #/== u′ , Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢M Π ✷ σ  if u ∈ Z, u′ ∈ R, and u #==M u′ → f alse  M9 u #/== u′ , M ✷ σ ⊢⊢M   if u ∈ Z, u′ ∈ R, and u #==M u′ → true.  Table 2. Store Transformations for solveM The following theorem ensures that the sts for M-stores can be accepted as a correct specification of a glass-box solver for the domain M. Theorem 3 (Formal Properties of the M Solver ) The sts with transition relation ⊢⊢M is finitely branching and terminating, and therefore _ solveM (Π) = {∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) | Π′ ✷ σ ′ ∈ SF M (Π), Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π)} is well defined for any finite Π ⊆ AP ConM of M-specific constraints. The solver solveM satisfies all the requirements for solvers enumerated in Definition 6. Moreover, whenever Π ⊆ AP ConM is M-specific and Π ⊢⊢solveM ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ), the  40  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  constraint set Π′ is also M-specific and σ ′ (X) is either a boolean value, an integer value or a real value for all X ∈ vdom(σ ′ ). The proof is omitted, because it is completely similar to that of Theorem 1 but much easier. In fact, the sts for M-stores involves no decompositions. Actually, this sts is finitely branching, terminating, locally sound and locally complete. Therefore, Lemma 5 can be applied. The framework for cooperative programming and the cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C) presented in Section 3 essentially rely on the coordination domain C just discussed, and the instance CF LP (C) of the CF LP scheme (López-Fraguas et al. 2007) provides a declarative semantics for proving the soundness and completeness of CCLN C(C). As we will see, some cooperative goal solving rules in CCLN C(C) rely on the identification of certain atomic primitive Herbrand constraints π as F D-specific or R-specific, respectively, on the basis of the mediatorial constraints available in a given M-store M . The notations M ⊢ π in F D and M ⊢ π in R defined below serve to this purpose. Definition 9 (Inference of domain-specific extended Herbrand constraints) Assume a mediatorial store M and a well-typed atomic extended Herbrand constraint π having the form t1 == t2 or t1 /= t2 , where each of the two patterns t1 and t2 is either a numeric constant v or a variable V . Then we define: 1. M ⊢ π in F D (read as ‘M allows to infer that π is F D-specific’) iff some of the three following conditions holds: (a) t1 or t2 is an integer constant. (b) t1 or t2 is a variable that occurs as the left argument of the operator #== within some mediatorial constraint belonging to M . (c) t1 or t2 is a variable that has been recognized to have type int by some implementation dependent device. 2. M ⊢ π in R (read as ‘M allows to infer that π is R-specific’) iff some of the three following conditions holds: (a) t1 or t2 is a real constant. (b) t1 or t2 is a variable that occurs as the right argument of the operator #== within some mediatorial constraint belonging to M . (c) t1 or t2 is a variable that has been recognized to have type real by some implementation dependent device. 3 Cooperative Programming and Goal Solving in CF LP (C) This section presents our cooperative computation model for goal solving. After introducing programs and goals in the first subsection, the subsequent subsections deal with goal solving rules, illustrative computation examples, and results concerning the formal properties of the computation model. Our goal solving rules work by transforming initial goals into final goals in solved form which serve as computed answers, as in the previously published Constrained  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  41  Lazy Narrowing Calculus CLN C(D) (López-Fraguas et al. 2004), which works over any parametrically given domain D equipped with a solver. We have substantially extended CLN C(D) with various mechanisms for domain cooperation via bridges, projections and some more ad hoc operations. The result is a Cooperative Constrained Lazy Narrowing Calculus CCLN C(C) which is sound and complete (with some limitations) w.r.t. the instance CF LP (C) of the generic CF LP scheme (López-Fraguas et al. 2007). For the sake of typographic simplicity, we have restricted our presentation of CCLN C(C) to the case C = M ⊕ H ⊕ F D ⊕ R, although it could be easily extended to other coordination domains, as sketched in our previous paper (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007). 3.1 Programs and Goals CF LP (C)-programs are sets of constrained rewrite rules that define the behavior of possibly higher-order and/or non-deterministic lazy functions over C, called program rules. More precisely, a program rule Rl for a defined function symbol f ∈ DFΣn with principal type f :: τ n → τ has the form f tn → r ⇐ ∆, where tn is a linear sequence of patterns, r is an expression, and ∆ is a finite conjunction δ1 , . . . , δm of atomic constraints δi ∈ AConC . Each program rule Rl is required to be well-typed, i.e., there must exist some type environment Γ for the variables occurring in Rl such that Σ, Γ ⊢W T ti :: τi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, Σ, Γ ⊢W T r :: τ and Σ, Γ ⊢W T δi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m. The left-linearity requirement is quite common in functional and functional logic programming. As in constraint logic programming, the conditional part of a program rule needs no explicit occurrences of existential quantifiers. A program rule Rl is said to include free occurrences of higher-order logic variables iff there is some variable X which does not occur in the left-hand side of Rl but has some occurrence in a context of the form X em (with m > 0) somewhere else in Rl. A program P includes free occurrences of higher-order logic variables iff some of the program rules in P does. As in functional languages such as Haskell (Peyton-Jones 2002), our programs rules can deal with higher-order functions and are not expected to be always terminating. Moreover, in contrast to Haskell and most other functional languages, we do not require program rules to be confluent. Therefore, some program defined functions can be non-deterministic and return several values for a fixed choice of arguments in some cases. As a concrete example of typed CF LP (C)-program written in the concrete syntax of the T OY system, we refer to the program rules presented in Subsection 1.2. Programs are used to solve goals using a cooperative goal solving calculus which will be described in subsections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 below. Goals over the coordination domain C have the general form G ≡ ∃U . P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R, where the symbol ✷ is interpreted as conjunction and: • U is a finite set of so-called existential variables, intended to represent local variables in the computation. • P is a set of so-called productions of the form e1 → t1 , . . . , em → tm , where ei ∈ ExpC and ti ∈ P atC for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m. The set of produced variables of G  42  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  • •  • • •  is defined as the set pvar(P ) of variables occurring in t1 . . . tm . During goal solving, productions are used to compute values for the produced variables insofar as demanded, using the goal solving rules for constrained lazy narrowing presented in Subsection 3.2. We consider a production relation between variables, such that X ≫P Y holds iff X, Y ∈ pvar(P ) and there is some 1 ≤ i ≤ m such that X ∈ var(ei ) and Y ∈ var(ti ). C is the so-called constraint pool, a finite set of constraints to be solved, possibly including active occurrences of defined functions symbols. M = ΠM ✷ σM is the mediatorial store, including a finite set of atomic primitive constraints ΠM ⊆ AP ConM and a substitution σM . We will write BM ⊆ ΠM for the set of all π ∈ ΠM which are bridges t #== s, where each of the two patterns t and s may be either a variable or a numeric constant. H = ΠH ✷ σH is the Herbrand store, including a finite set of atomic primitive constraints ΠH ⊆ AP ConH and a substitution σH . F = ΠF ✷ σF is the finite domain store, including a finite set of atomic primitive constraints ΠF ⊆ AP ConF D and a substitution σF . R = ΠR ✷ σR is the real arithmetic store, including a finite set of atomic primitive constraints ΠR ⊆ AP ConR and a substitution σR .  A goal G is said to have free occurrences of higher-order logic variables iff there is some variable X occurring in G in some context of the form X em , with m > 0. Two special kinds of goals are particularly interesting. Initial goals just consist of a well-typed constraint pool C. More precisely, the existential prefix U , productions in P , and stores M , H, F and R are empty. Solved goals (also called solved forms) have empty P and C parts and cannot be transformed by any goal solving rule. Therefore, they are used to represent computed answers. We will also write  to denote an inconsistent goal. Example 7 (Initial and Solved Goals) Consider the initial goals Goal 1, Goal 2 and Goal 3 presented in T OY syntax in Subsection 1.2, for the choice d = 2, n = 4. When written with the abstract syntax for general CF LP (C)-goals they become 1) ✷ bothIn (triangle (2, 2.75) 4 0.5) (square 4) (X,Y) ✷✷✷✷ 2) ✷ bothIn (triangle (2, 2.5) 2 1) (square 4) (X,Y) ✷✷✷✷ 3) ✷ bothIn (triangle (2, 2.5) 8 1) (square 4) (X,Y) ✷✷✷✷ The expected solutions for these goals have been explained in Subsection 1.2. A general notion of solution for goals will be defined in Subsection 3.6. The resolution of these example goals in our cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C) will be discussed in detail in Subsection 3.5. The respective solved forms obtained as computed answers (restricted to the variables in the initial goal) will be: 1)  2) ✷✷✷✷ (♦ ✷ {X 7→ 2, Y 3) ✷✷✷✷ (♦ ✷ {X 7→ 0, Y ✷✷✷✷ (♦ ✷ {X 7→ 1, Y ✷✷✷✷ (♦ ✷ {X 7→ 2, Y  7→ 2}) ✷ 7→ 2}) ✷ 7→ 2}) ✷ 7→ 2}) ✷  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  43  ✷✷✷✷ (♦ ✷ {X 7→ 3, Y → 7 2}) ✷ ✷✷✷✷ (♦ ✷ {X → 7 4, Y → 7 2}) ✷ The goal solving rules of the CCLN C(C) calculus presented in the rest of this section has been designed as an extension of an existing goal solving calculus for the CF LP scheme (López-Fraguas et al. 2004), adding the new features needed to support solver coordination via bridge constraints. In contrast to previous related works such as (Loogen et al. 1993; Antoy et al. 1994; Antoy et al. 2000; del Vado-Vı́rseda 2003; del Vado-Vı́rseda 2005; del Vado-Vı́rseda 2007), we have omitted the use of socalled definitional trees to ensure an optimal selection of needed narrowing steps. This feature could be easily added to CCLN C(C) following the ideas from (del Vado-Vı́rseda 2005), but we have decided not do so in order to avoid technical complications which do not contribute to a better understanding of domain cooperation. Moreover, the design of CCLN C(C) is tailored to programs and goals having no free occurrences of higher-order logic variables. As shown in (González-Moreno et al. 2001), goal solving rules for dealing with free higher-order logic variables give rise to ill-typed solutions very often. If desired, they could be easily added to our present setting. Let us finish this subsection with a brief discussion of some technical issues needed in the sequel. The set odvar(G) of obviously demanded variables in a given goal G is defined as the least subset of var(G) which satisfies the two following conditions: 1. odvar(G) includes odvarM (ΠM ), odvarH (ΠH ), odvarF D (ΠF ) and odvarR (ΠR ) which are defined as explained in Subsections 2.3 and 2.4. 2. X ∈ odvar(G) for any production (Xak → t) ∈ P such that k > 0 and either t∈ / Var or else t ∈ odvar(G). Note that odvar(G) boils down to odvarM (ΠM ) ∪ odvarH (ΠH ) ∪ odvarF D (ΠF ) ∪ odvarR (ΠR ) in the case that G has no free occurrences of higher-order variables. Productions e → X such that e is an active expression and X ∈ / odvar(G) is a not obviously demanded variable are called suspensions, and play an important role during goal solving. Certain properties are trivially satisfied by initial goals and kept invariant through the application of goal transformations. Such goal invariant properties include those formalized in previous works as e.g. (López-Fraguas et al. 2004): Each produced variable is produced only once, all the produced variables must be existential, the transitive closure ≫+ P of the relation between produced variables must be irreflexive, and no produced variable occurs in the answer substitutions. Other goal invariants are more specific of our current cooperative setting based on the coordination domain C: • The domains of the substitutions σM , σH , σF and σR are pairwise disjoint. • For any store S in G, the application of σS causes no modification to the goal. • For any X ∈ vdom(σM ), σM (X) is either a boolean value, an integer value or a real value. • For any X ∈ vdom(σF ), σF (X) is either an integer value or a variable occurring in ΠF .  44  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado • For any X ∈ vdom(σR ), σR (X) is either a real value or a variable occurring in ΠR .  These properties remain invariant through goal transformations because of Theorem 3 and Postulates 2 and 1, and also because the bindings computed by each particular solver are properly propagated to the rest of the goal. In particular, whenever a variable binding {X 7→ t} arises in one of the stores during goal solving, the propagation of this binding to the goal applies the binding everywhere, but places it only within the substitution of this particular store, so that the first item above is ensured. At this point we must introduce some auxiliary notations in order to make this idea more precise. Let D stand for any of the four domains M, H, F D or R and consider the store S = ΠS ✷ σS corresponding to D. We will note as (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R)@D σ ′ the result of applying σ ′ to P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R and composing σS with σ ′ . More formally, in the particular case that D is chosen as F D, we define (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R)@F D σ ′ as P σ ′ ✷ Cσ ′ ✷ M ⋆ σ ′ ✷ H ⋆ σ ′ ✷ F @σ ′ ✷ R ⋆ σ ′ , where F @σ ′ is defined as ΠF σ ′ ✷ σF σ ′ and S ⋆ σ ′ is defined as ΠS σ ′ ✷ σS ⋆ σ ′ for S being M , H or R. Recall that the application of σ ′ to σS has been defined as σS ⋆ σ ′ = σS σ ′ ↾ vdom(σS ) in Subsection 2.2, and note that σS ⋆ σ ′ retains the same domain as σS . The notations explained in the previous paragraph will be used for presenting several goal transformation rules in the next subsections. The formal definition for the other three possible choices of D is completely analogous. In the rest of the paper, we will restrict our attention to so-called admissible goals G that arise from initial goals through the iterated application of goal transformation rules and enjoy the goal invariant properties just described. 3.2 Constrained Lazy Narrowing Rules The core of our cooperative goal solving calculus CLN C(C) consists of the goal solving rules displayed in Table 3. Roughly speaking, these rules model the behaviour of constrained lazy narrowing ignoring domain cooperation and solver invocation. They have been adapted from (López-Fraguas et al. 2004) and can be classified as follows: The first four rules encode unification transformations similar to those found in the H sts (see Subsection 2.4.2) and other related formalisms; rule EL discharges unneeded suspensions, rule DF (presented in two cases in order to optimize the k = 0 case) applies program rules to deal with calls to program defined functions; rule PC transforms demanded calls to primitive functions into atomic constraints that are placed in the pool; and rule FC, working in interplay with PC, transforms the atomic constraints in the pool into a flattened form consisting of a conjunction of atomic primitive constraints with new existential variables. The behaviour of the main rules in Table 3 will be illustrated in Subsection 3.5. Example 8 below focuses on the transformation rules PC and FC. Their iterated application flattens the atomic R-constraint (RX + 2*RY)*RZ <= 3.5 into a conjunction of four atomic primitive R-constraints involving three new existential variables, that are placed in the constraint pool. Note that (López-Fraguas et al. 2004)  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  45  DC DeComposition ∃U. h em → h tm , P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢DC ∃U. em → tm , P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R CF Conflict Failure ∃U. e → t, P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢CF  If e is rigid and passive, t ∈ / Var, e and t have conflicting roots. SP Simple Production ′  ∃U. s → t, P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢SP ∃U . (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R)@H σ′ If s = X ∈ Var, t ∈ / Var, σ = {X 7→ t} and U ′ = U or else s ∈ P atC , t = X ∈ Var, σ′ = {X 7→ s} and ′  ′  U = U \{X}. IM IMitation ∃X, U. h em →X, P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢IM ∃Xm , U . (em →Xm , P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R)σ′ If h em ∈ / P atC is passive, X ∈ odvar(G) and σ′ = {X 7→ h Xm }. EL ELimination ∃X, U. e → X, P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢EL ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R If X does not occur in the rest of the goal. DF Defined Function ∃U. f en → t, P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢DFf ∃Y , U. en → tn , r → t, P ✷ C ′ , C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R n  If f ∈ DF , t ∈ / Var or t ∈ odvar(G) and Rl : f tn → r ⇐ C ′ is a fresh variant of a rule in P, with Y = var(Rl) new variables. ∃U. f en ak → t, P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢DFf ∃X, Y , U. en → tn , r → X, X ak → t, P ✷ C ′ , C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R If f ∈ DF n (k > 0), t ∈ / Var or t ∈ odvar(G) and Rl : f tn → r ⇐ C ′ is a fresh variant of a rule in P, with Y = var(Rl) and X new variables. PC Place Constraint ∃U. p en → t, P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢PC ∃U. P ✷ p en →! t, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R If p ∈ P F n and t ∈ / Var or t ∈ odvar(G). FC Flatten Constraint ∃U. P ✷ p en →! t, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢FC ∃V m , U. am → Vm , P ✷ p tn →! t, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R If p ∈ P F n , some ei ∈ / P atC , am (m ≤ n) are those ei which are not patterns, Vm are new variables, and p tn is obtained from p en by replacing each ei which is not a pattern by Vi .  Table 3. Rules for Constrained Lazy Narrowing  46  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  and other previous related calculi also include rules that can be used to achieve constraint flattening, but the resulting atomic primitive constraints are placed in a constraint store. In our present setting, they are kept in the pool in order that the domain cooperation rules described in the next subsection can process them. Example 8 (Constraint Flattening) ✷ (RX + 2 ∗ RY ) ∗ RZ <= 3.5 ✷✷✷✷ ⊢⊢FC ∃RA. (RX + 2 ∗ RY ) ∗ RZ → RA ✷ RA <= 3.5 ✷✷✷✷ ⊢⊢PC ∃RA. ✷ (RX + 2 ∗ RY ) ∗ RZ →! RA, RA <= 3.5 ✷✷✷✷ ⊢⊢FC ∃RB, RA.RX + 2 ∗ RY → RB ✷ RB ∗ RZ→!RA, RA <= 3.5 ✷✷✷✷ ⊢⊢PC ∃RB, RA. ✷ RX + 2 ∗ RY →! RB, RB ∗ RZ →! RA, RA <= 3.5 ✷✷✷✷ ⊢⊢FC ∃RC, RB, RA. 2 ∗ RY → RC ✷ RX + RC→!RB, RB ∗ RZ→!RA, RA <= 3.5 ✷✷✷✷ ⊢⊢PC ∃RC, RB, RA. ✷ 2 ∗ RY →!RC, RX + RC→!RB, RB ∗ RZ→!RA, RA <= 3.5 ✷✷✷✷  Note that suspensions e → X can be discharged by rule EL in case that X does not occur in the rest of the goal. Otherwise, they must wait until X gets bound to a non-variable pattern or becomes obviously demanded, and then they can be processed by using either rule DF or rule PC, according to the syntactic form of e. Moreover, all the substitutions produced by the transformations bind variables X to patterns t, standing for computed values that are shared by all the occurrences of t in the current goal. In this way, the goal transformation rules encode a lazy narrowing strategy. 3.3 Domain Cooperation Rules This subsection presents the goal transformation rules in CCLN C(C) which take care of domain cooperation. The core of the subsection deals with bridges and projections. A few more ad hoc cooperation rules are presented at the end of the subsection. Given a goal G whose pool C includes an atomic primitive constraint π ∈ AP ConF D and whose mediatorial store M includes a set of bridges BM , we will consider three possible goal transformations intended to convey useful information from π to the R-solver: • To compute new bridges bridgesF D→R (π, BM ) to add to M , by means of a bridge generation operation bridgesF D→R defined to this purpose. • To compute projected R-constraints proj F D→R (π, BM ) to be added to R, by means of a projection operation proj F D→R defined to this purpose. • To place π into the F D store F . Similar goal transformations based on two operations bridgesR→F D and proj R→F D can be used to convey useful information from a primitive atomic constraint π ∈ P ConR to the F D-solver. Rules SB, PP and SC in Table 4 formalize these transformations, while tables 5 and 6 give an effective specification of the bridge generation and projection operations.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  47  SB Set Bridges ′  ∃U. P ✷ π, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢SB ∃V , U. P ✷ π, C ✷ M ′ ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R If π is a primitive atomic constraint and either (i) or (ii) holds, where (i) π is a proper F D-constraint or else an extended H-constraint such that M ⊢ π in F D, and M ′ = B ′ , M, where ∃V ′ B ′ = bridgesFD→R (π, BM ) 6= ∅. (ii) π is a proper R-constraint or else an extended H-constraint such that M ⊢ π in R, and M ′ = B ′ , M, where ∃V ′ B ′ = bridgesR→FD (π, BM ) 6= ∅. PP Propagate Projections ∃U. P ✷ π, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢PP ∃V ′ , U. P ✷ π, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ′ ✷ R′ If π is a primitive atomic constraint and either (i) or (ii) holds, where (i) π is a proper F D-constraint or else an extended H-constraint such that M ⊢ π in F D, ∃V ′ Π′ = proj FD→R (π, BM ) 6= ∅, F ′ = F , and R′ = Π′ , R, or else, (ii) π is a proper R-constraint or else an extended H-constraint such that M ⊢ π in R, ∃V ′ Π′ = proj R→FD (π, BM ) 6= ∅, F ′ = Π′ , F , and R′ = R. SC Submit Constraints ∃U. P ✷ π, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢SC ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ′ ✷ H ′ ✷ F ′ ✷ R′ If π is a primitive atomic constraint and one of the following cases applies: (i) π is a M-constraint, M ′ = π, M, H ′ = H, F ′ = F , and R′ = R. (ii) π is an extended H-constraint such that neither M ⊢ π in F D nor M ⊢ π in R, M ′ = M, H ′ = π, H, F ′ = F , and R′ = R. (iii) π is a proper F D-constraint or else an extended H-constraint such that M ⊢ π in F D, M ′ = M, H ′ = H, F ′ = π, F , and R′ = R. (iv) π is a proper R-constraint or else an extended H-constraint such that M ⊢ π in R, M ′ = M, H ′ = H, F ′ = F , and R′ = π, R.  Table 4. Rules for Bridges and Projections  The formulation of SB, PP and SC in Table 4 relies on the identification of certain atomic primitive Herbrand constraints π as F D-specific or R-specific, as indicated by the notations M ⊢ π in F D and M ⊢ π in R, previously explained in Subsection 2.6. The notation Π, S is used at several places to indicate the new store obtained by adding the set of constraints Π to the constraints within store S. The notation π, S (where π is a single constraint) must be understood similarly. In practice, SB, PP and SC are best applied in this order. Note that PP places the projected constraints in their corresponding stores, while constraints in the pool that are not useful anymore for computing additional bridges or projections will be eventually placed into their stores by means of transformation SC. ′ ′ The functions bridgesD→D and proj D→D are specified in Table 5 for the case D = F D, D′ = R and in Table 6 for the case D = R, D′ = F D. Note that the primitive #/ is not considered in Table 5 because integer division constraints cannot be projected into real division constraints. The notations ⌈a⌉ (resp. ⌊a⌋) used in Table 6 stand for the least integer upper bound (resp. the greatest integer lower bound) of a ∈ R. Constraints t1 > t2 , t1 >= t2 are not explicitly considered  48  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  in Table 6; they are treated as t2 < t1 , t2 <= t1 , respectively. In tables 5 and 6, the existential quantification of the new variables V ′ is left implicit, and results displayed as an empty set of constraints must be read as an empty (and thus trivially true) conjunction. bridgesF D→R (π, B)  π domain [X1 , . . . , Xn ] a b  belongs X [a1 , . . . , an ]  proj F D→R (π, B)  {Xi #== RXi | 1 ≤ i ≤ n, Xi has  {a <= RXi , RXi <= b | 1 ≤ i ≤ n  no bridge in B and RXi new}  and (Xi #== RXi ) ∈ B}  {X #== RX | X has no bridge in  {min(a1 , . . . , an ) <= RX, RX <= max(a1 , . . . , an ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ n and  B and RX new}  (X #== RX) ∈ B} t1 #< t2 (resp. #<=, #>, #=>)  {Xi #== RXi | 1 ≤ i ≤ 2, ti is a  R {tR 1 < t2 | For 1 ≤ i ≤ 2: Either  variable Xi with no bridge in B,  ti is an integer constant n and tR i  and RXi new}  is the integral real n, or else ti is a variable Xi with (Xi #== RXi ) ∈ B, and tR i is RXi }  t1 == t2  {X #== RX | either t1 is an inte-  R R {tR 1 == t2 | For 1 ≤ i ≤ 2: ti is  ger constant and t2 is a variable  determined as in the #< case}  X with no bridges in B (or vice versa) and RX is new} t1 /= t2  {X #== RX | either t1 is an inte-  R R {tR 1 /= t2 | For 1 ≤ i ≤ 2: ti is  ger constant and t2 is a variable  determined as in the #< case}  X with no bridges in B (or vice versa) and RX is new} t1 #+ t2 →! t3 (resp. #-, #*)  {Xi #== RXi | 1 ≤ i ≤ 3, ti is a  R R {tR 1 + t2 →! t3 | For 1 ≤ i ≤ 3:  variable Xi with no bridge in B  tR i is determined as in the #< case}  and RXi new}  Table 5. Computing Bridges and Projections from F D to R ′  ′  The next result states some basic properties of bridgesD→D and proj D→D . The easy proof is omitted. Proposition 1 (Properties of Bridges and Projections between F D and R) Let D and D′ be chosen as F D and R, or vice versa. Then: ′  ′  1. bridgesD→D (π, B) and proj D→D (π, B) make sense for any atomic primitive constraint π which is either D-proper or extended Herbrand and D-specific, and for any finite set B of bridges. ′ 2. bridgesD→D (π, B) returns a possibly empty finite set B ′ of new bridges in′ volving new variables V ′ . In particular, bridgesD→D (π, B) = ∅ is assumed  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  49  whenever Tables 5 and 6 do not include any row covering π. The completeness condition W T SolC (π ∧ B) ⊆ W T SolC (∃V ′ (π ∧ B ∧ B ′ )) holds, where B and B ′ are interpreted as conjunctions. Note that the correctness condition SolC (π ∧ B) ⊇ SolC (∃V ′ (π ∧ B ∧ B ′ )) also holds trivially. ′ 3. proj D→D (π, B) returns a finite set Π′ ⊆ AP ConD′ of atomic primitive D′ ′ constraints involving new variables V ′ . In particular, proj D→D (π, B) = ∅ is assumed whenever Tables 5 and 6 do not include any row covering π. The completeness condition W T SolC (π ∧ B) ⊆ W T SolC (∃V ′ (π ∧ B ∧ Π′ )) holds, where B and Π′ are interpreted as conjunctions. Note that the correctness condition SolC (π ∧ B) ⊇ SolC (∃V ′ (π ∧ B ∧ Π′ )) also holds trivially.  π  bridgesR→FD (π, B)  proj R→FD (π, B)  RX < RY  ∅ (no bridges are created)  {X #< Y | (X #== RX),(Y #== RY ) ∈ B}  RX < a  ∅ (no bridges are created)  {X #< ⌈a⌉ | a ∈ R, (X #== RX) ∈ B}  a < RY  ∅ (no bridges are created)  {⌊a⌋ #< Y | a ∈ R, (Y #== RY ) ∈ B}  RX <= RY  ∅ (no bridges are created)  {X #<= Y |(X #== RX),(Y #== RY ) ∈ B}  RX <= a  ∅ (no bridges are created)  {X #<= ⌊a⌋ | a ∈ R, (X #== RX) ∈ B}  a <= RY  ∅ (no bridges are created)  {⌈a⌉ #<= Y | a ∈ R, (Y #== RY ) ∈ B}  t1 == t2  {X #== RX | either t1 is an in-  t1 /= t2  {tFD == tFD | For 1 ≤ i ≤ 2: Either ti 1 2  tegral real constant and t2 is a  is an integral real constant n and tFD is i  variable RX with no bridges in  the integer n, or else ti is a variable RXi  B (or vice versa) and X is new}  is Xi } with (Xi #== RXi ) ∈ B, and tFD i  ∅ (no bridges are created)  {tFD /= tFD | For 1 ≤ i ≤ 2: Either ti 1 2 is an integral real constant n and tFD is i the integer n, or else ti is a variable RXi with (Xi #== RXi ) ∈ B, and tFD is Xi } i  t1 + t2 →! t3 (resp. -, *)  {X #== RX | t3 is a variable RX  {tFD #+ tFD →! tFD | For 1 ≤ i ≤ 3: tFD 1 2 3 i  with no bridge in B, X new, for  is determined as in the previous case}  1 ≤ i ≤ 2, ti is either an integral real constant or a variable RXi with bridge (Xi #== RXi ) ∈ B} t1 / t2 →! t3  ∅ (no bridges are created)  {tFD #* tFD →! tFD | For 1 ≤ i ≤ 3 is 2 3 1 determined as in the previous case}  Table 6. Computing Bridges and Projections from R to F D Example 9 below illustrates the operation of the goal transformation rules from  50  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  Table 4 for computing bridges and projections with the help of the functions specified in Tables 5 and 6. Example 9 (Computation of Bridges and Projections) ✷ (RX + 2 ∗ RY ) ∗ RZ <= 3.5 ✷ X #== RX, Y #== RY, Z #== RZ ✷✷✷ ⊢⊢FC3 ,PC3 ∃RC, RB, RA. ✷ 2 ∗ RY →! RC, RX + RC →! RB, RB ∗ RZ →! RA, RA <= 3.5 ✷ X #== RX, Y #== RY, Z #== RZ ✷✷✷ ⊢⊢SB3 ∃C, B, A, RC, RB, RA. ✷ 2 ∗ RY →! RC, RX + RC →! RB, RB ∗ RZ →! RA, RA <= 3.5 ✷ C #== RC, B #== RB, A #== RA, X #== RX, Y #== RY, Z #== RZ ✷✷✷ ⊢⊢PP4 ∃C, B, A, RC, RB, RA. ✷ 2 ∗ RY →! RC, RX + RC →! RB, RB ∗ RZ →! RA, RA <= 3.5 ✷ C #== RC, B #== RB, A #== RA, X #== RX, Y #== RY, Z #== RZ ✷✷ 2 #* Y →! C, X #+ C →! B, B #* Z →! A, A #<= 3 ✷ ⊢⊢SC4 ∃C, B, A, RC, RB, RA. ✷✷ C #== RC, B #== RB, A #== RA, X #== RX, Y #== RY, Z #== RZ ✷✷ 2 #* Y →! C, X #+ C →! B, B #* Z →! A, A #<= 3 ✷ 2 * RY →! RC, RX + RC →! RB, RB * RZ →! RA, RA <= 3.5  Note that the initial goal in this current example is an extension of the initial goal in Example 8. The first six steps of the current computation are similar to those in Example 8, taking care of flattening the R-constraint (RX+2*RY)*RZ <= 3.5. The subsequent steps use the transformation rules from Table 4 until no further bridges and projections can be computed and no constraints remain in the constraint pool. We have borrowed the projection idea from Hofstedt’s work, see e.g. (Hofstedt 2001; Hofstedt and Pepper 2007), but our proposal of using bridges to compute projections is a novelty. In Hofstedt’s approach, projecting constraints from one domain into another depends on common variables present in both stores. In our approach, well-typing requirements generally prevent one and the same variable to occur in constraints from different domains. In order to improve the opportunities for computing projections, our cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C) provides the goal transformation rule SB for creating new bridges during the computations. Some other differences between CCLN C(C) and the cooperative computation model proposed by Hofstedt et al. are as follows: • All the projections presented in this paper return just one ∃V ′ Π′ . In Hofstedt’s terminology, such projections are called weak, while projections reWl turning disjunctions k=1 ∃V ′ k Π′k with l > 1 are called strong. The use of strong projections is illustrated in (Hofstedt and Pepper 2007) by means of a problem dealing with the computation of resistors that have a certain capacity. The strong projection used in this example is a finite disjunction of conjunctions of the form X == x ∧ Y == y for various numeric values x and y. Solving this disjunction gives rise to an enumeration of solutions. In (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007) we have presented a solution of the resistors problem where an equivalent enumeration of solutions can be computed by the F D-solver via backtracking, without building any strong projection. This is possible in our framework due to the presence of labeling constraints, that are not used in the resistor example as presented in  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  51  (Hofstedt and Pepper 2007). Therefore, strong projections are not necessary for this particular example of cooperation between F D and R. Theoretically, strong projections could be useful in other problems, and rule PP in our CCLN C(C) calculus could be very straightforwardly adapted to work with strong projections. However, we decided not to do so because we are not aware of any useful extension to extend tables 5 and 6 for computing strong projections. We could find no formulation of practical procedures for computing projections in (Hofstedt and Pepper 2007) and related works, where all projections used in examples are presented in an ad hoc manner. • Currently, our CCLN C(C) calculus projects F D (resp. R) constraints from the pool C into the R store R (resp. F D store F ). Hofstedt’s proposal also allows to compute projections from constraints placed into the stores. In our previous paper (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007), we have sketched a cooperative goal solving calculus where an arbitrary coordination domain was assumed and projections could act over the constraints within constraint stores. In fact, the resistor problem mentioned in the previous item was solved in (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007) by making essential use of projections that acted over constraints within the F D and R stores. In the current paper, goal solving is restricted to the coordination domain C = M ⊕ H ⊕ F D ⊕ R and projections can be applied only to the constraints placed in the constraint pool. These two limitations correspond to the state of the current T OY implementation. In particular, projections acting over stored constraints are not yet handled because the current T OY system has no convenient mechanisms for processing the constraint stores handled by the underlying SICStus Prolog. • Goal solving in CCLN C(C) enjoys the soundness and completeness properties presented in Subsection 3.6. In our opinion, these are more elaborate than the soundness and completeness results provided in Hofstedt’s work.  IE Infer Equalities ∃U. P ✷C ✷ X #== RX, X ′ #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ F ✷R ⊢⊢UB ∃U . P ✷ C ✷ X #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ X == X ′ , F ✷R. ∃U. P ✷C ✷ X #== RX, X #== RX ′ , M ✷ H ✷ F ✷R ⊢⊢UB ∃U . P ✷ C ✷ X #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ F ✷RX==RX ′ , R. ID Infer Disequalities ∃U. P ✷C ✷ X#/==u′ , M ✷ H ✷ F ✷R ⊢⊢ID ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ X/=u, F ✷R if u ∈ Z, u′ ∈ R and u #==M u′ → true. ∃U. P ✷C ✷ u#/==RX, M ✷ H ✷ F ✷R ⊢⊢ID ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ RX/=u′ , R if u ∈ Z, u′ ∈ R and u #==M u′ → true.  Table 7. Rules for Inferring H-constraints from M-constraints To finish this subsection, we present the goal transformation rules in Table 7, which can be used to infer H-constraints from the M-constraints placed in the store  52  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  M . The inferred H-constraints happen to be F D-specific or R-specific, according to the case, and can be placed in the corresponding store. Therefore, the rules in this group model domain cooperation mechanisms other than bridges and projections. 3.4 Constraint Solving Rules The presentation of CCLN C(C) finishes with the constraint solving rules displayed in Table 8. Rule SF models the detection of failure by a solver, and the other rules describe the possible transformation of a goal by a solver’s invocation. Each time a new constraint from the pool is placed into its store by means of transformation SC, it is pragmatically convenient to invoke the corresponding solver by means of the rules in this table. The solvers for the four domains M, H, F D and R involved in the coordination domain C are considered. The availability of the M-solver means that solving mediatorial constraints contributes to the cooperative goal solving process, in addition to the role of bridges for guiding projections.  MS M-Constraint Solver (glass-box) ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢MS ∃Y ′ , U . (P ✷ C ✷ (Π′ ✷ σM ) ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R)@M σ′ If pvar(P ) ∩ var(ΠM ) = ∅, (ΠM ✷ σM ) is not solved, ΠM ⊢⊢solveM ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ′ ). HS H-Constraint Solver (glass-box) ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢HS ∃Y ′ , U . (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ (Π′ ✷ σH ) ✷ F ✷ R)@H σ′ If pvar(P ) ∩ odvarH (ΠH ) = ∅, X =def pvar(P ) ∩ var(ΠH ), (ΠH ✷ σH ) is not χ-solved, ΠH ⊢⊢solveH ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ′ ). X  FS F D-Constraint Solver (black-box) ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢FS ∃Y ′ , U . (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ (Π′ ✷ σF ) ✷ R)@FD σ′ If pvar(P ) ∩ var(ΠF ) = ∅, (ΠF ✷ σF ) is not solved, ΠF ⊢⊢solveFD ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ′ ). RS R-Constraint Solver (black-box) ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢RS ∃Y ′ , U. (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ (Π′ ✷ σR ))@R σ′ If pvar(P ) ∩ var(ΠR ) = ∅, (ΠR ✷ σR ) is not solved, ΠR ⊢⊢solveR ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ′ ). SF Solving Failure ∃U. P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R ⊢⊢SF  If S is the D-store (D being M, H, F D or R), pvar(P )∩odvarD (ΠS ) = ∅, X =def pvar(P )∩var(ΠS ), (ΠS ✷ σS ) is not χ-solved and ΠS ⊢⊢solveD . Note that X 6= ∅ is possible only in the case D = H. X  Table 8. Rules for M, H, F D and R Constraint Solving Let D be any of the four domains, and let Π be the set of constraints included in  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  53  the D store in a given goal G with productions P . As explained in Subsection 2.4.1, each invocation solveD (Π, X ) depends on a set of critical variables X ⊆ cvarD (Π) which must be properly chosen. On the other hand, the goal invariants explained in Subsection 3.1 require that no produced variable is bound to a non-linear pattern, and the safe binding condition satisfied by any solver ensures that a solver invocation never binds any variable X ∈ X , except to a constant. Because of these reasons, the rules in Table 8 allow a solver invocation solveD (Π, X ) only if the following two conditions are satisfied: (a) pvar(P ) ∩ odvarD (Π) = ∅. Motivation: If this condition does not hold, for any choice of X ⊆ cvarD (Π) there is some variable X ∈ pvar(P ) \ X , and the solver invocation could bind X to a non-linear pattern. (b) X = pvar(P ) ∩ var(Π). Motivation: Because of condition (a), this X is a subset of cvarD (Π), and the safe binding condition of solvers ensures that the invocation solveD (Π, X ) will bind no produced variable, except to a constant. When D is not H, we know from Section 2 that all the variables in Π can be assumed to be obviously demanded. Then odvarD (Π) = var(Π), condition (a) becomes pvar(P ) ∩ var(Π) = ∅, (b) becomes X = ∅, and solveD (Π, ∅) can be abbreviated as solveD (Π). The rules related to M, F D and R in Table 8 assume the simplified form of condition (a), (b). The notations Π ⊢⊢solveD ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) X and Π ⊢⊢solveD  introduced in Subsection 2.4.1 are used to indicate the nonX deterministic choice of an alternative returned by a successful D-solver invocation and a failed D-solver invocation, respectively. Note also the use of the notation (. . .)@D σ ′ explained near the end of Subsection 3.1. At this point, we can precise the notion of solved goal as follows: a goal G is solved iff it has the form ∃U . ✷ ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R (with empty P and C) and the CLN C(C)-transformations in Tables 7 and 8 cannot be applied to G. The CLN C(C)-transformations in Tables 3 and 4 are obviously not applicable to solved goals, since they refer to P and C. 3.5 One Example of Cooperative Goal Solving In order to illustrate the overall behavior of our cooperative goal solving calculus, we present a CCLN C(C) computation solving the goal Goal 2 discussed in Subsection 1.2. The reader is referred to Figure 2 for a graphical representation of the problem and to Subsection 3.1 for a formulation of the goal and the expected solution in the particular case d = 2, n = 4. However, the solution is the same for any choice of positive integer values d and n such that n = 2*d, and here we will discuss the general case. The CCLN C(C) calculus leaves ample room for choosing a particular goal transformation at each step, so that many different computations are possible in principle. However, the T OY implementation follows a particular strategy. The part P ✷ C of the current goal is treated as a sequence and processed from left to right,  54  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  with the only exception of suspensions e → X that are delayed until they can be safely eliminated by means of rule EL or the goal is so transformed that they cease to be suspensions. As long as the current goal is not in solved form, a subgoal is selected and processing according to a strategy which can be roughly described as follows: 1. If P includes some production which can be handled by the constrained lazy narrowing rules in Table 3, the leftmost such production is selected and processed. Note that the selected production must be either a suspension e → X that can be discharged by rule EL, or else a production that is not a suspension. The applications of rule DF are performed in an optimized way by using definitional trees (del Vado-Vı́rseda 2005; del Vado-Vı́rseda 2007). 2. If P is empty or consists only of productions e → X that cannot be processed by means of the constrained lazy narrowing rules in Table 3, and moreover some of the stores M , H, F or R is not in solved form and its constraints include no produced variables, then the solvers for such stores are invoked, choosing the set X of critical variables as explained in Table 8. 3. If neither of the two previous items applies and C is not empty, the leftmost atomic constraint δ in C is selected. In case it is not primitive, the flattening rule FC from Table 3 is applied. Otherwise, δ is a primitive atomic constraint π, and exactly one of the following cases applies: (a) If π is a proper F D-constraint or else an extended H-constraint such that M ⊢ π in F D, then π is processed by means of the rules SB, PP and SC from Table 4. This generates bridges and projected constraints π ′ , if possible, and submits π to the store F . Then, the rules from Table 8 are used for invoking the F D-solver (in case that the constraints in F include no produced variables) and the R-solver (in case that the constraints in R include no produced variables). (b) If π is a proper R-constraint or else an extended H-constraint such that M ⊢ π in R, then π is processed by means of the rules SB, PP and SC from Table 4. This generates bridges and projected constraints π ′ , if possible, and submits π to the store R. Then, the rules from Table 8 are used for invoking the R-solver (in case that the constraints in R include no produced variables) and the F D-solver (in case that the constraints in F include no produced variables). (c) If π is an extended H-constraint such that neither M ⊢ π in F D nor M ⊢ π in R, then π is submitted to the store H by means of rule SC, and the H-solver is invoked in case that the constraints in H include no obviously demanded produced variables. (d) If π is a M-constraint, then π is submitted to the store M by means of rule SC, the rules of Table 7 are applied if possible, and the M-solver is invoked in case that the constraints in M include no produced variables. The series of goals G0 up to G12 displayed below correspond to the initial goal, the final solved goal and a selection of intermediate goals in a computation which  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  55  roughly models the strategy of the T OY implementation, working with the projection functionality activated. In the initial goal, d and n are arbitrary positive integers such that n = 2*d and d’ = d+0.5. G0 : ✷ bothIn (triangle (d, d′ ) 2 1) (square n) (X, Y ) == true ✷✷✷✷ ⊢⊢FC G1 : ∃U1 . bothIn (triangle (d, d′ ) 2 1) (square n) (X, Y ) → A ✷ A== true ✷✷✷✷ ⊢⊢SC(ii) G2 : ∃U2 . bothIn (triangle (d, d′ ) 2 1) (square n) (X, Y ) → A ✷ ✷✷ A == true✷✷ ⊢⊢DFbothIn G3 : ∃U3 .triangle (d, d′ ) 2 1 → R, square n → G, (X, Y ) → (X ′ , Y ′ ), true → A ✷ X ′ #== RX, Y ′ #== RY , isIn R (RX, RY ) == true, isIn G (X ′ , Y ′ ) == true, labeling [ ] [X ′ , Y ′ ] ✷✷ A == true ✷✷ ⊢⊢∗ SP2 ,DC,SP3 ,HS G4 : ∃U4 . ✷X #== RX, Y #== RY , isIn (triangle (d, d′ ) 2 1) (RX, RY ) == true, isIn (square n) (X, Y ) == true, labeling [ ] [X, Y ] ✷✷ σH ✷✷ ⊢⊢∗ SC(i)2 ,MS G5 : ∃U5 . ✷ isIn (triangle (d, d′ ) 2 1) (RX, RY )== true, isIn (square n) (X, Y )== true, labeling [ ] [X, Y ] ✷X #== RX, Y #== RY ✷ σH ✷✷ ⊢⊢∗ CLN G6 : ∃U6 . ✷ RY >= d′ − 1, 2 ∗ RY − 2 ∗ 1 ∗ RX <= 2 ∗ d′ − 2 ∗ 1 ∗ d, 2 ∗ RY + 2 ∗ 1 ∗ RX <= 2 ∗ d′ + 2 ∗ 1 ∗ d, domain [X, Y ] 0 n, ′ labeling [ ] [X, Y ] ✷ X #== RX, Y #== RY ✷ σH ✷✷ ⊢⊢∗ FC,PC G7 : ∃U7 . ✷ d′ − 1 →!RA, RY >= RA, 2 ∗ RY − 2 ∗ 1 ∗ RX <= 2 ∗ d′ − 2 ∗ 1 ∗ d, 2 ∗ RY + 2 ∗ 1 ∗ RX <= 2 ∗ d′ + 2 ∗ 1 ∗ d, domain [X, Y ] 0 n, ′ labeling [ ] [X, Y ] ✷ X #== RX, Y #== RY ✷ σH ✷✷ ⊢⊢∗ SC(iv),RS G8 : ∃U8 . ✷ RY >= d′′ , 2 ∗ RY − 2 ∗ 1 ∗ RX <= 2 ∗ d′ − 2 ∗ 1 ∗ d, 2 ∗ RY + 2 ∗ 1 ∗ RX <= 2 ∗ d′ + 2 ∗ 1 ∗ d, domain [X, Y ] 0 n, ′ labeling [ ] [X, Y ] ✷ X #== RX, Y #== RY ✷ σH ✷✷ SR ⊢⊢∗ BP,CS G9 : ∃U9 . ✷ 2 ∗ RY − 2 ∗ 1 ∗ RX <= 2 ∗ d′ − 2 ∗ 1 ∗ d, 2 ∗ RY + 2 ∗ 1 ∗ RX <= 2 ∗ d′ + 2 ∗ 1 ∗ d, domain [X, Y ] 0 n, labeling [ ] [X, Y ] ✷ ′ X #== RX, Y #== RY ✷ σH ✷ Y # >= d ✷ RY >= d′′ , SR ⊢⊢∗ FR,BP G10 : ∃U10 . ✷ domain [X, Y ] 0 n, labeling [ ] [X, Y ] ✷ ′ ′ X #== RX, Y #== RY B #== RB, C #== RC, SM ✷ σH ✷ ′ Y # >= d, 2# ∗ Y # − 2# ∗ X →!B, B# <= 1, 2# ∗ Y # + 2# ∗ X →!C, C# <= n′ , SF ✷ ′′ ′ ′ RY >= d , 2 ∗ RY − 2 ∗ RX →!RB, RB <= 1, 2 ∗ RY + 2 ∗ RX →!RC, RC <= n , SR ⊢⊢∗ CS ′′ ′ ′′ ′′ ✷ σH ✷ SF ✷ SR ⊢⊢∗ G11 : ∃U11 . ✷ domain [d, d] 0 n, labeling [ ] [d, d] ✷ SM SC(iii),FS,SC(iii),FS ′′ ′ ′′ ′′ ✷ σH ✷ SF ✷ SR G12 : ∃U12 . ✷ ✷ SM  The local existential variables ∃Ui of each goal Gi are not explicitly displayed, and the notation Gi−1 ⊢⊢∗RS Gi is used to indicate the transformation of Gi−1 into Gi using the goal solving rules indicated by RS. At some steps, RS indicates a particular sequence of individual rules, named as explained in the previous subsections. In other cases, namely for i = 6 and 9 ≤ i ≤ 11, RS indicates sets of goal transformation rules, named according to the following conventions: • CLN names the set of constrained lazy narrowing rules presented in Table 3. • FR names the set consisting of the two rules FC and PC displayed at the end of Table 3, used for constraint flattening. • BP names the set of rules for bridges and projections presented in Table 4. • CS names the set of constraint solving rules presented in Table 8. We finish with some comments on the computation steps: • Transition from G0 to G1 : The only constraint in C is flattened, giving rise  56  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  to one suspension and one flat constraint in the new goal. The produced variable A is not obviously demanded because the constraint A == true is not yet placed in the H-store. Transition from G1 to G2 : The only suspension is delayed, and the only constraint in the pool is processed by submitting it to the H-store. However, the H-solver cannot be invoked at this point, because A has become an obviously demanded variable that is also produced. Transition from G2 to G3 : The former suspension has become a production which is processed by applying the program rule defining the function bothIn, which introduces new productions in P and new constraints in C. Transition from G3 to G4 : The four productions in P are processed by binding propagations and decompositions (rules SP and DC), until P becomes empty. Then the H-solver can be invoked. At this point, the H-store just contains a substitution σH resulting from the previous binding steps. Transition from G4 to G5 : P is empty, and the two first constraints in C are bridges. They are submitted to the M-store and the M-solver is invoked, which has no effect in this case. Transition from G5 to G6 : There are no productions, and the two first constraints in the pool are processed by steps similar to those used in the transition going from G0 to G4 . Upon completing this process, the new pool includes a number of new constraints coming from the conditions in the program rules defining the functions isIn, triangle and square, and the substitution stored in H has changed. At this point, P is empty again and the constraints in C plus the bridges in M amount to a system equivalent to the one used in Subsection 1.2 for an informal discussion of the resolution of Goal 2. Transition from G6 to G7 and from G7 to G8 : There are no productions, and flattening the first constraint in C gives rise to the primitive constraint d’-1 →! RA. This is submitted to the R-store and the R-solver is invoked, which computes d’’ as the numeric value of d’-1 and propagates the variable binding RA 7→ d’’ to the whole goal, possibly causing some other internal changes in the R-store. Transition from G8 to G9 : There are no productions, and the first constraint in C is now RY >= d’’. Since d’’ = d’-1 = d+0.5-1 = d-0.5, we have ⌈d’’⌉ = d. Therefore, projecting RY >= d’’ with the help of the available bridges (including Y #== RY) allows to compute Y #>= d as a projected F Dconstraint. Both RY >= d’’ and Y #>= d are submitted to their respective stores and the two solvers are invoked, having no effect in this case. Transition from G9 to G10 : There are no productions, and the two first atomic constraints in the pool of G9 (two R-constraints δ1 and δ2 ) are processed by steps similar to those used in the transition going from G6 to G9 , except that the solver invocations are delayed to the transition from G10 to G11 and commented in the next item. (Actually, the T OY implementation would invoke the solvers two times: The first time when processing δ1 and the second time when processing δ2 . Here we explain the overall effect of the two invocations for the sake of simplicity.) Upon completing this process, G10 stays as fol-  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  57  lows: P is empty, C includes the two other constraints which were there in G9 , and the stores M , F and R have changed because of new bridges and projections. In fact, the constraints within the stores F and R in G10 would be equivalent but not identical to the ones shown in this presentation, due to intermediate flattening steps that we have not shown explicitly. In particular, the R-constraint 2*RY-2*RX →! RB and its F D-projection 2#*Y#-2#*X →! B would really not occur in this form, but a conjunctions of primitive constraints obtained by flattening them would occur at their place. • Transition from G10 to G11 : At this point, the F D-solver is able to infer that the constraints in the F D store imply one single solution for the variables X and Y, namely {X 7→ d, Y 7→ d}. Therefore, the F D-solver propagates these bindings to the whole goal, affecting in particular to the bridges in M . Then, the M-solver propagates the corresponding bindings {RX 7→ rd, RY 7→ rd}. (rd being the representation of d as an integral real number), and the R-solver succeeds. • Transition from G11 to G12 : The two constraints in C have now become trivial. Submitting them to their stores and invoking the respective solvers leads to a solved goal, whose restriction to the variables in the initial goal is the computed answer ✷✷✷✷ (♦ ✷ {X 7→ d, Y 7→ d}) ✷. Note that no labeling whatsoever has been performed, independently of the size of n.  3.6 Properties of the Cooperative Goal Solving Calculus CCLN C(C) This final subsection presents the main semantic results of the paper, namely soundness and limited completeness of the cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C) w.r.t. the declarative semantics of CF LP (C) given in (López-Fraguas et al. 2007). To start with, we define the notion of solution for a given goal. Definition 10 (Solutions of Goals and their Witnesses) 1. Let G ≡ ∃U . P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R be an admissible goal for a given CF LP (C)-program P. The set of solutions SolP (G) of G w.r.t. P includes all those µ ∈ V alC such that there is some µ′ ∈ V alC verifying µ′ =\U µ and µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R), which holds iff the following two conditions are satisfied: (a) µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ C). By definition, this means P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)µ′ , which is equivalent to P ⊢CRW L(C) P µ′ and P ⊢CRW L(C) Cµ′ . This notation refers to the existence of proofs in the instance CRW L(C) of the Constrained Rewriting Logic CRW L, whose inference rules can be found in (López-Fraguas et al. 2007). (b) µ′ ∈ SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R), which is equivalent to µ′ ∈ SolC (M ) ∩ SolC (H) ∩ SolC (F ) ∩ SolC (R). 2. If M is a multiset having as its members the CRW L(C)-proofs mentioned in item 1.(a) above, we will say that M is a witness for the fact that µ ∈ SolP (G), and we will write M : µ ∈ SolP (G).  58  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado 3. A solution µ ∈ SolP (G) is called well-typed iff the valuation µ′ =\U µ mentioned in item 1. can be so chosen that (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R)µ′ is welltyped, which is noted as µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). The set of all well-typed solutions of G w.r.t. P is written as W T SolP (G). In case that M is a witness for µ ∈ SolP (G), we also say that M is a witness for µ ∈ W T SolP (G) and we write M : µ ∈ W T SolP (G).  In case that G is a solved goal S, we write SolC (S) (resp. W T SolC (S)) in place of SolP (S) (resp. W T SolP (S)). Concerning item 1.(b) in the previous definition, note that the equivalence η ∈ SolC (M ) ∩ SolC (H) ∩ SolC (F ) ∩ SolC (R) ⇔ η ∈ SolM (M ) ∩ SolH (H) ∩ SolF (F ) ∩ SolR (R) does not make sense in general, because a given valuation η ∈ V alC is not always a D valuation when D is chosen as one of the four components of C. However, Theorem 2 from Subsection 2.5 allows to reason with solutions known for C in terms of solutions known for the four components, as we will see in the mathematical proofs of Appendix A.2. Before presenting our soundness and completeness results for CCLN C(C) let us comment on some limitations concerning completeness: • As already said in Subsection 3.1, the design of CCLN C(C) is tailored to programs and goals having no free occurrences of higher-order logic variables. Therefore, the completeness results of this subsection are limited to this kind of programs and goals. • The completeness of CCLN C(C) is obviously conditioned by the completeness of the solvers invoked by the goal transformation rules in Table 8. On the other hand, the completeness requirement for solvers in Definition 6 is limited to well-typed solutions. Therefore, the completeness results of this subsection refer only to well-typed solutions of the initial goal. • As discussed in Subsections 2.4.2, 2.4.3 and 2.4.4, certain invocations of constraint solvers can be incomplete even w.r.t. well-typed solutions. Therefore, the completeness results of this subsection are also limited by the assumption that no incomplete solver invocations occur during goal solving. • Finally, the goal transformation rule DC from Table 3 can give rise to opaque decompositions. Similarly to the opaque decompositions caused by the transformation rules H3 and H7 for H-stores (see Subsection 2.4.2), the opaque decompositions caused by DC can lose well-typed solutions. In what follows, we will say that an application of the goal transformation rule DC is transparent iff the expression h em involved in the rule application is such that h is m-transparent (or equivalently, h is not m-opaque). Only transparent applications of the rule DC can be trusted to preserve well-typed solutions. For this reason, the completeness results of this subsection are limited by the assumption that no opaque applications of rule DC occur during goal solving. Unfortunately, the eventual occurrence of opaque decomposition steps during goal solving (be they due to rule DC from Table 3 or to the stss H3 and  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  59  H7 of the H-solver) is an undecidable problem, because of theoretical results proved in (González-Moreno et al. 2001). In the sequel we will use the notation G ⊢⊢RL,γ,P G′ to indicate that the admissible goal G for the CF LP (C)-program P is transformed into the new goal G′ by an application of the selected rule RL applied to the selected part γ of G. It is important to note that the selected part γ of G must have the form expected by the selected rule RL. More precisely, γ must be selected as one of the stores in case that RL is some the transformations in Table 8, as a pair of bridges in case that RL is the transformation IE from Table 7, and as an atom in any other case. We will ′ use also the notation G ⊢⊢+ RL,γ,P G to indicate the existence of some computation ∗ ′ of the form G ⊢⊢RL,γ,P G1 ⊢⊢P G transforming G in G′ in n steps for some n ≥ 1. We are now in a position to present the main results of this subsection. First, we state a theorem which guarantees local soundness and completeness for the one-step transformation of a given goal. A proof is given in Appendix A.2. Theorem 4 (Local Soundness and Limited Local Completeness) Assume a given program P and an admissible goal G for P which is not in solved form. Choose any rule RL applicable to G and select a part γ of G suitable for applying RL. Then there are finitely many possible transformations G ⊢⊢RL,γ,P G′j (1 ≤ j ≤ k), and moreover: Sk 1. Local Soundness: SolP (G) ⊇ j=1 SolP (G′j ). S 2. Limited Local Completeness: W T SolP (G) ⊆ kj=1 W T SolP (G′j ), provided that the application of RL to the selected part γ of G is safe in the following sense: it is neither an opaque application of DC nor an application of a rule from Table 8 involving an incomplete solver invocation. A global soundness result for CCLN C(C) follows easily from the first item of Theorem 4. In particular, it ensures that the solved forms obtained as computed answers for an initial goal using the rules of the cooperative goal solving calculus are indeed semantically valid answers of G. Theorem 5 (Soundness Theorem) Assume a CF LP (C)-program P, an admissible goal G for P, and a solved goal S such that G ⊢⊢∗P S. Then, SolC (S) ⊆ SolP (G). Proof As an obvious consequence of Theorem 4 (item 1.), one gets SolP (G′ ) ⊆ SolP (G) for any G′ such that G ⊢⊢P G′ . From this, an easy induction shows that SolP (S) ⊆ SolP (G) holds for each solved form S such that G ⊢⊢∗P S. Since SolP (S) = SolC (S), the soundness result is proved. Note that the local completeness part (item 2.) of Theorem 4 also implies that failing goals have no solution; i.e., from a failing transformation step G ⊢⊢RL,P  we can conclude W T SolP (G) = ∅, provided that the application of RL is safe. However, a global completeness result for CCLN C(C) does not immediately follow from item 2. of Theorem 4. For an arbitrarily given µ ∈ W T SolP (G), completeness needs to ensure a terminating CCLN C(C) computation ending up with a solved  60  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  form S such that µ ∈ W T SolC (S). According to Definition 10, µ ∈ W T SolP (G) implies the existence of a witness M : µ ∈ W T SolP (G). In Appendix A.2 we have defined a well-founded progress ordering ⊲ between pairs (G, M) formed by a goal G and a witness, and we have proved the following result: Lemma 6 (Progress Lemma) Consider an admissible goal G for a CF LP (C)-program P and a witness M : µ ∈ W T SolP (G). Assume that neither P nor G have free occurrences of higher-order variables, and that G is not in solved form. Then: 1. There is some RL applicable to G which is not a failing rule. 2. Assume any choice of a rule RL (not a failure rule) and a part γ of G, such that RL can be applied to γ in a safe manner. Then there is some finite ′ computation G ⊢⊢+ RL,γ,P G such that: • µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ). • There is a witness M′ : µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ) verifying (G, M) ⊲ (G′ , M′ ). Using the former lemma, we can prove the following completeness result: Theorem 6 (Limited Completeness Theorem) Let an admissible goal G for a program P and a well-typed solution µ ∈ W T SolP (G) be given. Assume that neither P nor G have free occurrences of higher-order variables. Then, unless prevented by some unsafe rule application, one can find a CCLN C(C)-computation G ⊢⊢∗P S ending with a goal in solved form S such that µ ∈ W T SolC (S). Proof The thesis of the theorem can be rephrased by writing µ ∈ W T SolP (S) in place of the equivalent condition µ ∈ W T SolC (S). The hypothesis allow us to choose a witness M : µ ∈ W T SolP (G). In order to prove the rephrased thesis we reason by induction on the well-founded ordering ⊲ (see e.g. (Baader and Nipkow 1998) for an explanation of this proof technique). In case that G is a solved goal, the rephrased thesis holds trivially with S taken as G itself. In case that G is not solved, we apply the Progress Lemma 6 to P and M : µ ∈ W T SolP (G) and we obtain a rule RL and a part γ of G such that RL can be applied to γ. Assuming that this rule application ′ is a safe one, Lemma 6 also provides a finite computation G ⊢⊢+ RL,γ,P G such that ′ ′ ′ ′ there is a witness M : µ ∈ W T SolP (G ) fulfilling (G, M) ⊲ (G , M ). Since neither P nor G have free occurrences of higher-order variables, the same must be true for G′ . By well-founded induction hypothesis we can then conclude that, unless prevented by some unsafe goal transformation step, one can find a computation G′ ⊢⊢∗P S ending with a goal in solved form S such that µ ∈ W T SolP (S). The ′ ∗ desired computation is then G ⊢⊢+ RL,γ,P G ⊢⊢P S. 4 Implementation This section sketches the implementation of the CCLN C(C) computational model on top of the T OY system. The current implementation has evolved from older  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  61  versions that supported the domains H and R, but not yet F D and its cooperation with H and R. We describe the architectural components of the current T OY system and we briefly discuss the implementation of the main cooperation mechanisms provided by CCLN C(C), namely bridges and projections. The reader is referred to (Arenas et al. 2007; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2006; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2008) for more details. Instead of using an abstract machine for running byte-code or intermediate code, T OY programs are compiled to and executed in Prolog, as in other related systems (Antoy and Hanus 2000). The compilation generates Prolog code that implements goal solving by constrained lazy narrowing guided by definitional trees, a well known device for ensuring an optimal behaviour of lazy narrowing (Loogen et al. 1993; Antoy et al. 1994; Antoy et al. 2000; del Vado-Vı́rseda 2003; del Vado-Vı́rseda 2005; del Vado-Vı́rseda 2007). T OY relies on an efficient Prolog system, SICStus Prolog (SICStus Prolog 2007), which provides many libraries, including constraint solvers for the domains F D and R. T OY is distributed (http://toy.sourceforge.net) as a free open-source Sourceforge project and runs on several platforms. Installation is quite simple. Console and windows executables are provided, no further software is required. In addition, T OY can be used inside ACIDE (Sáenz-Pérez 2007), an emerging multiplatform and configurable integrated development environment (alpha development status).  4.1 Architectural Components of the Cooperation Schema Fig. 4 shows the architectural components of the cooperation schema in T OY. As explained in Subsection 2.6, the three pure constraint domains H, R and F D are combined with a mediatorial domain M to yield the coordination domain C = M ⊕ H ⊕ F D ⊕ R which supports our cooperation model. Therefore, these four domains are supported by the implementation. Moreover, the set of primitives supported by the domains R and F D in the T OY implementation is wider than the simplified description given in subsections 2.4.3 and 2.4.4. TOY FD  R  H H Store SolverH  SolverFD  SolverR  FD Store CLP(FD)  R Store CLP(R) SICStus Prolog  M M Store SolverM  Fig. 4. Architectural Components of the Cooperation Schema in T OY The solvers and constraint stores for the domains F D and R are provided by the SICStus Prolog constraint libraries. The impedance mismatch problem among the  62  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  host language constraint primitives and these solvers is tackled by glue code (see Subsection 4.2). Proper F D− and R−constraints, as well as Herbrand constraints specific to F D and R (see Subsections 2.4.4 and 2.4.3) are posted to the respective stores and handled by the respective SICStus Prolog solvers. On the other hand, the stores and solvers for the domains H and M are built into the code of the T OY implementation, rather than being provided by the underlying SICStus Prolog system. 4.2 Implementing Domain Cooperation This subsection explains the implementation of the fundamental mechanisms for domain cooperation: Bridges and projections. The constraints provided by the mediatorial domain M and their semantics have been explained in Subsections 2.5 and 2.6. Mediatorial constraints have the general form a #== b →! c, with a ::int, b :: real and c :: bool, while bridges a #== b and antibridges a #/== b abbreviate a #== b →! true and a #== b →! false, respectively. In order to deal with H and M constraints, the T OY system uses a so-called mixed store which keeps a representation of the H and M stores as one single Prolog structure. It includes encodings of H-constraints in solved form (i.e., totality constraints X == X and disequality constraints X /= t), as well as encodings of bridges and antibridges. The implementation of the H and M solvers in T OY is plugged into the Prolog code of various predicates which control the transformation of the mixed store (passed as argument) by means of two auxiliary arguments Cin and Cout. In the next three subsections we discuss the implementation of mediatorial constraints and projections. We will show and comment selected fragments of Prolog code, involving various predicates with auxiliary arguments Cin and Cout, as explained above. Regarding projections, the T OY implementation has been designed to support two modes of use: A ‘disabled projections’ mode which allows to solve mediatorial constraints, but computes no projections; and a ‘enabled projections’ mode which also computes projections. For each particular problem, the user can analyze the trade-off between communication flow and performance gain and decide the best option to execute a goal in the context of a given program. 4.2.1 The Equivalence Primitive #== The equivalence primitive #== :: int → real → bool used for building mediatorial constraints is implemented as a Prolog predicate (also named #==) with five arguments, whose explanation follows. Arguments L and R stand for the left (integer) and right (real) parameters of the primitive #==. Argument Out stands for its result. Finally, arguments Cin and Cout stand for the state of the mixed store before and after performing a call to the primitive #==, respectively. Fig. 5 shows the Prolog code for the predicate #==, and the comments below explain why this code implements the M solver described in Table 2 of Subsection 2.6 and the special cooperation rules IE and ID of the CCLN C(C) calculus specified in Table 7 from Subsection 3.3.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  63  Lines (2) and (3) compute the head normal forms (hnfs) of L and R into HL and HR, respectively. This process may generate new Herbrand constraints that will be added to the mixed store. The value of HL resp. HR will be either a variable or a number, ensuring that no suspensions will occur in the Prolog code from line (4) on. This code is intended to process the constraint HL #== HR →! Out according to the behaviour of the M-solver specified in in Table 2, Subsection 2.6. Due to rules M1 and M2 in Table 2, the constraint is handled as a bridge HL #== HR when Out equals true, and as an antibridge HL #/== HR when Out equals false. For this reason, one can say that the #== primitive accepts reification. Indeed, in Fig. 5 we find that a bridge HL #== HR is posted to the mixed store if the value for Out can be unified with true (line (6)), whereas an antibridge HL #/== HR is posted if the value for Out can be unified with false (line (10)). (1) #==(L, R, Out, Cin, Cout):(2) hnf(L, HL, Cin, Cout1), (3) hnf(R, HR, Cout1, Cout2), (4) tolerance(Epsilon), (5) ( (Out=true, (6) Cout3 = [’#==’(HL,HR)|Cout2], (7) freeze(HL, {HL - Epsilon =< HR, HR =< HL + Epsilon} ), (8) freeze(HR, (HL is integer(round(HR))))); (9) (Out=false, (10) Cout3 = [’#/==’(HL,HR)|Cout2], (11) freeze(HL, (F is float(HL), {HR =\= F})), (12) freeze(HR, (0.0 is float_fractional_part(HR) -> (13) (I is integer(HR), HL #\= I); true)))), (14) cleanBridgeStore(Cout3,Cout).  Fig. 5. Implementation of Mediatorial Constraints (#== / 2) Solving both bridges and antibridges is accomplished by using the concurrent predicate freeze, which suspends the evaluation of its second argument until the first one becomes ground. Solving a bridge HL #== HR amounts to impose the equivalence of its two arguments (variables or constants), which are of different type (integer and real), so that type casting is needed. Variable HL is assigned to the integer version of HR (line (8)) via the Prolog functions round and integer, implementing rule M3 in Table 2. Similarly, line (7) is roughly intended to assign the float version of HL to HR in order to implement rule M5 in Table 2. However, due to the imprecise nature of real solvers, occasionally HR’s value will be an approximation to an integer value. Therefore, line (7) actually constrains the real variable HR to take a value between HL - Epsilon and HL + Epsilon, where Epsilon (line (4)) is a user-defined parameter (zero by default) which introduces a tolerance and avoids undesirable failures due to inexact computations of integer values. Lines (7) and (8) also cover the implementation of rule M6 in Table 2. On the other hand, solving an antibridge HL #/== HR amounts to impose that both arguments are not equivalent. Therefore, as soon as HL or HR becomes bound to one numeric value, a disequality constraint between the (suitably type-casted) value of the bound variable and its mate argument is posted to the proper SICStus Prolog solver (lines  64  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  11-13). The code in these lines implements rule M8 in Table 2 and rule ID in Table 7. Moreover, the failure rules in Table 2 (namely M4, M7 and M9) are also implemented by the frozen goals in lines (7)-(8) and (11)-(13) of Fig. 5. Indeed, whenever HL and HR become bound, the corresponding frozen goal is triggered and the equivalence (resp. non-equivalence) is checked, which may yield to success or failure, thus implementing rules M7 and M9; and wherever HR becomes bound to a non integral real value, the frozen goal in line (8) yields failure, thus implementing rule M4. Finally, line (14)) invokes a predicate that simplifies the mixed store by implementing the effect of rule IE in Table 7 applied as much as possible to all the available (encodings of) bridges between variables. 4.2.2 Projection: F D to R If the user has enabled projections with the command /proj, the T OY system can process a given atomic primitive F D-constraint by computing bridges and projected R-constraints as explained in Subsection 3.3. The Prolog implementation has a different piece of code (Prolog clause) for each F D primitive which can be used to build projectable constraints. The information included in Table 5 for computing bridges and projections from different kinds of F D-constraints, as well as the effect of the goal transformation rules in Table 4, is plugged into these pieces of Prolog code. The code excerpt below shows the basic behaviour of the implementation for the case of F D-constraints built with the inequality primitive #<, without considering optimizations: (1) #<(L, R, Out, Cin, Cout):(2) hnf(L, HL, Cin, Cout1), hnf(R, HR, Cout1, Cout2), (3) ((Out=true, HL #< HR); (Out=false, HL #>= HR)), (4) (proj_active -> (5) (searchVarsR(HL, Cout2, Cout3, RHL), (6) searchVarsR(HR, Cout3, Cout, RHR), (7) ((Out==true, { RHL < RHR }); (8) (Out==false, { RHL >= RHR }))); (9) Cout=Cout2).  Following a technique similar to that explained for #== above, the primitive #< is implemented by a Prolog predicate with five arguments (line (1)). Its two input arguments (L and R) are reduced to hnf (line (2)), and a primitive constraint is posted to the SICStus F D-solver, depending on the Boolean result (Out) returned by #< (line (3)). Moreover, if projection is active (indicated by the dynamic predicate proj active in line (4)), then, the predicate searchVarsR (lines (5-6)) inspects the mixed store looking for bridges relating the F D variable HL and HR to the R variables RHL and RHR, respectively. In case that some of these variables is bound to a numeric variable, the relation to the mate variable just means that their numeric values are equivalent. Predicate searchVarsR also creates new bridges if necessary, according to the specifications in Table 5, and returns the modified state of the mixed store in its third argument. Finally, the projected constraints computed as specified in Table 5 (in this case, a single constraint, which is either RHL < RHR or RHL >= RHR depending on the value of Out) are sent to the SICStus R-solver.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  65  4.2.3 Projection: R to F D If the user has enabled projections, the T OY system can also process a given atomic primitive R-constraint by computing bridges and projected F D-constraints as explained in Subsection 3.3. The Prolog implementation is similar to that discussed in the previous subsection, with a different piece of code (Prolog clause) for each R primitive which can be used to build projectable constraints, and encoding the information from Table 6. A comparison between Tables 5 and 6 shows that there are less opportunities for building bridges from R to F D than the other way round, but more opportunities for building projections. The code excerpt below shows the basic behaviour of the implementation for the case of R-constraints built with the inequality primitive >, ignoring optimizations: (1) >(L, R, Out, Cin, Cout):(2) hnf(L, HL, Cin, Cout1), hnf(R, HR, Cout1, Cout), (3) (Out = true, {HR > HL} ; Out = false, {HL =< HR}), (4) (proj_active -> (5) (searchVarsFD(HL, Cout, BL, FDHL), (6) searchVarsFD(HR, Cout, BR, FDHR), (7) ((BL == true, BR == true, Out == true, FDHL #> FDHR); (8) (BL == true, BR == true, Out == false, FDHL #=< FDHR); (9) (BL == true, BR == false, Out == true, FDHL #> FDHR); (10) (BL == true, BR == false, Out == false, FDHL #=< FDHR); (11) (BL == false, BR == true, Out == true, FDHL #> FDHR); (12) (BL == false, BR == true, Out == false, FDHL #=< FDHR); (13) true); true).  As in the previous subsection, the primitive > is implemented by a Prolog predicate with five arguments (line (1)). Its two input arguments (L and R) are reduced to hnf (line (2)), and a primitive constraint is posted to the SICStus R-solver, depending on the Boolean result (Out) returned by > (line (3)). Moreover, if projection is active (line (4)), then predicate searchVarsFD (lines (5-6)) inspects the mixed store looking for bridges relating the R-variables HL and HR to F D-variables. As shown in Table 6, no new bridges can be created during this process. Therefore, in contrast to the predicate searchVarsR presented in the previous subsection, the third argument of predicate searchVarsFD does not represent a modified state of the mixed store. Instead, it is a Boolean value that indicates whether a bridge has been found or not. More precisely, in line (5) there are two possibilities: Either BL is true and HL is a non-bound R-variable related to the F D-variable FDHL by means of some bridge in the mixed store Cout; or else BL is false, HL is bound to a real value u, and FDHL is computed as ⌈u⌉. Analogously, in line (6) there are two possibilities: Either BR is true and HR is a non-bound R-variable related to the F D-variable FDHR by means of some bridge in the mixed store Cout; or else BR is false, HR is bound to a real value u, and FDHR is computed as ⌊u⌋. Finally, lines (7-12) perform a distinction of cases corresponding to all the possiblities for projecting the constraint HL > HR →! Out according to Table 6 and the various values of BL, BR and Out. In each case, the projected F D-constraint is posted to the SICStus F D-solver.  66  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  As a concrete example, when solving the conjunctive goal X #== RX, RX > 4.3, line (11) in the Prolog code for > just explained will eventually work for solving the right subgoal. In this case, viewing RX as HL and 4.3 as HR, the value computed for BL will be true because the bridge X #== RX will be available in the mixed store, and FDHL will be X. On the other hand, the value computed for BR will be false, and the value of FDHR will be computed as ⌊4.3⌋, i.e. 4. Applying the proper case in Table 6, the projected constraint X #> 4 will be posted to the SICStus F D-solver. 5 Performance Results In this section we study the performance of the systems T OY (Arenas et al. 2007; Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2008) and META-S (Frank et al. 2003a; Frank et al. 2003b; Frank et al. 2005), i.e., the closest related approach we are aware of, when solving various problems requiring domain cooperation. After presenting a set of benchmarks in the first subsections, the three following subsections deal with an analysis of the benchmarks in each of the two systems and an a comparison between both. 5.1 The Benchmarks We have selected a reasonably wide set of benchmarks which allows to analyze what happens when the set of constraints involved in the formulation of a programming problem is solved differently depending on the combination of domains that are involved in their solving. A concise description of the benchmarks is presented below. • Donald (donald): A cryptoarithmethic problem with 10 F D variables, one linear equation, and one alldifferent constraint. It consists of solving the equation DONALD + GERALD = ROBERT. • Send More Money (smm): Another cryptoarithmethic problem with 8 F D variables ranging over [0,9], one linear equation, 2 disequations and one alldifferent constraint. It consists of solving the equation SEND + MORE = MONEY. • Non-Linear Crypto-Arithmetic (nl-csp): A problem with 9 F D variables and non-linear equations. • Wrong-Wright (wwr): Another cryptoarithmethic problem with 8 F D variables ranging over [1,9], one linear equation, and one alldifferent constraint. It consists of solving the equation WRONG + WRONG = RIGHT. • 3 × 3 Magic Square (mag.sq.): A problem that involves 9 F D variables and 7 linear equations. • Equation 10 (eq.10): A system of 10 linear equations with 7 F D variables ranging over [0,10]. • Equation 20 (eq.20): A system of 20 linear equations with 7 F D variables ranging over [0,10]. • Knapsack (knapsack): A classical knapsack problem taken from (Hooker 2000). We considered two versions: One as a constraint satisfaction problem (labeled as csp) and another one as an optimization one (labeled as opt).  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  67  • Electrical Circuit (circuit): A problem taken from (Hofstedt 2000a), in which one has an electric circuit with some connected resistors (i.e., R variables) and a set of capacitors (i.e., F D variables). The goal consists of knowing which capacitor has to be used so that the voltage reaches the 99% of the final voltage between a given time range. • bothIn (goal2): The problem of solving the goal presented as Goal 2 in Subsection 1.2 for several values of n. Instances goal2(n) of this benchmark correspond to solving an instance of Goal 2 for the corresponding n. • bothIn (goal3): The problem of solving the goal presented as Goal 3 in Subsection 1.2 for several values of n. Instances goal3(n) of this benchmark correspond to solving an instance of Goal 3 for the corresponding n. • Distribution (distrib). An optimized distribution problem involving the cooperation of the domains R and F D. The problem deals with a communication network where NR continuous and ND discrete suppliers of raw material have an attached cost to be minimized (see Appendix 8 in (Arenas et al. 2007)). The global optimum is computed. The various instances distrib(ND,NR) of this benchmark correspond to different choices of values for ND and NR. All the benchmarks were coded using F D variables and most of them demand the solving of (non-)linear equations. Only the last four of them strictly require cooperation between F D and R and cannot be solved by using just one of these domains. However, the rest of the benchmarks are also useful to evaluate the overhead introduced when the different solvers are enabled. The formulation of benchmarks nl-csp, mag.sq, circuit and smm was taken from the distribution of META-S. Full details and code of the benchmarks (written in both T OY and META-S) are available at http://www.lcc.uma.es/∼afdez/cflpfdr/. All the benchmarking process was done using the same Linux machine (under the professional version of Suse Linux 9.3) with an Intel Pentium M processor running at 1.70GHz and with a RAM memory of 1 GB. In the rest of this section, performance numbers, in milliseconds, have been computed as the average result of ten runs for each benchmark. In all tables, the best result obtained for each benchmark among those computed under the various configurations has been highlighted in boldface. 5.2 Benchmark Analysis in T OY In this section we briefly present empirical support for two claims: a) that the activation of the cooperation mechanism between F D and R does not penalize the execution time in problems which can be solved by using the domain F D; and b) that the cooperation mechanism using projections helps to speed-up the execution time in problems where both the domain F D and the domain R are needed. Tables 9-12 show the performance of each benchmark for several configurations of the T OY system, as explained below. The first column in each table displays the name of the benchmark to be solved, and the next columns corresponds to different activation modes of the T OY system, namely: • T OY(F D), an activation mode where the F D solver (but not the R solver)  68  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado is enabled. Actually, this corresponds to an older version of the T OY system which did not provide simultaneous support for R-constraints. • T OY(F D + R), an activation mode where both the F D solver and the R solver are enabled, but the projection mechanism is disabled. • T OY(F D + R)p , an activation mode where the F D solver, the R solver and the projection mechanism are all enabled.  FD Constraint Solving T OY(FD)  T OY(FD + R)  T OY(FD + R)p  BENCHMARK  naı̈ve  ff  naı̈ve  ff  naı̈ve  ff  donald smm nl-csp wwr maq.sq. eq.10 eq.20 knapsack (csp) knapsack (opt)  1078 16 15 18 92 74 138 5 40  195 15 20 19 91 90 134 5 15  1040 14 15 18 89 74 139 5 35  188 16 18 19 89 81 131 5 15  7476 47 39 58 87 284 431 5 70  678 49 86 52 91 261 421 5 40  Table 9. Solving F D Benchmarks in T OY (First Solution Search). Overload evaluation. The heading ‘F D Constraint Solving’ in Table 9 indicates that all the benchmarks have been formulated in such a way that all the constraints needed to solve them are submitted to the F D solver and the R solver is not invoked. Note that although the activation mode T OY(F D) is sufficient to execute all the benchmarks presented in this table, the benchmarks have been also executed in the modes T OY(F D + R) and T OY(F D + R)p with the aim of analyzing the overhead caused by the activation of these more complex modes when solving problems that do not need them. The heading ‘F D ∼ R Constraint Solving’ in Tables 10-12 indicates that the formulations of the benchmarks require both the F D solver and the R solver to be enabled; more precisely, although the benchmarks shown in Table 10 admit a natural formulation that can be totally solved by the F D solver, we have used an alternative formulation in which the (non-)linear constraints were submitted to the R solver, whereas the rest of the constraints were sent to the F D solver; also solving the benchmarks shown in Tables 11 and 12 strictly requires cooperation between F D and R. These tables only consider the two activation modes of the T OY system which make sense for such benchmarks, namely T OY(F D + R) and T OY(F D + R)p . Tables 9-12 also include two columns corresponding to two different labeling  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  69  strategies: naı̈ve, in which F D variables are labeled in a prefix order (i.e., the leftmost variable is selected); and first fail (ff ), in which the F D variable with the smallest domain is chosen first for enumerating. Combined with the distinct activation modes, this yields a number of configurations (i.e., six in Table 9 and four in the rest).  FD ∼ R Constraint Solving T OY(FD + R)  T OY(FD + R)p  BENCHMARK  naı̈ve  ff  naı̈ve  ff  donald smm nl-csp wwr maq.sq. eq.10 eq.20 knapsack (csp) knapsack (opt)  304970 22528 411 411 166 266 402 5 16  288700 22627 383 420 168 271 408 5 15  8305 41 44 54 158 290 433 5 11  727 40 87 58 163 269 397 5 14  Table 10. Solving F D ∼ R Benchmarks in T OY (First Solution Search). Evaluation of the constraint projection mechanism. Inspection of Table 9 reveals that the performance of all the benchmarks does not get worse when moving from T OY(F D) to T OY(F D + R) and T OY(F D + R)p , and it even improves in some cases. For those benchmarks that are most naturally coded in the domain F D (as, for instance, smm, wwr and mag.sq) the best results are not those obtained in T OY(F D + R)p , but even in such cases the appreciable overload is not a great one. Inspection of Tables 10 and 11 reveals that the projection mechanism causes a significant speed-up of the solving process in most cases. Note that this mechanism behaves specially well in solving the goal2(n) and goal3(n) benchmarks, where the running time is stabilized in the range between 11 ms and 17 ms when projections are enabled. Significant speed-ups (i.e., at least two or more magnitude orders) are also detected in donald and smm benchmarks as well as in the different distrib benchmark instances. Finally, Table 12 presents the results corresponding to computing all the results for the last five benchmarks in Table 11. The execution times are naturally higher than those shown in Table 11, where only first solutions were computed. However, the significant speed-up caused by the activation of projections remains clearly observable.  70  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado FD ∼ R Constraint Solving T OY(FD + R) BENCHMARK circuit distrib (2,5.0) distrib (3,3.0) distrib (3,4.0) distrib (4,5.0) distrib (5,2.0) distrib (5,5.0) distrib (5,10.0) goal2 (100) goal2 (200) goal2 (400) goal2 (800) goal2 (10000) goal2 (20000) goal2 (40000) goal2 (80000) goal2 (200000) goal3 (100) goal3 (200) goal3 (400) goal3 (800) goal3 (5000)  T OY(FD + R)p  naı̈ve  ff  naı̈ve  ff  14 662 1486 2098 20444 29108 141734 568665 25 40 70 131 704 1271 2325 4452 10725 18 26 41 75 354  13 506 810 1290 12670 5162 85856 464230 28 44 72 135 713 1270 2333 4472 10781 20 28 44 77 360  14 144 132 156 240 198 272 474 14 13 12 12 14 12 11 13 13 15 13 15 16 14  20 504 814 1178 12744 7340 86497 462980 14 15 13 15 16 16 16 16 15 16 13 16 17 16  Table 11. Solving F D ∼ R Benchmarks in T OY (First Solution Search). Evaluation of the constraint projection mechanism on benchmarks necessarily demanding solver cooperation.  5.3 Benchmark Analysis in META-S In this subsection, we present the results of executing benchmarks in META-S, a flexible meta-solver framework that implements the ideas proposed in (Hofstedt 2001; Hofstedt and Pepper 2007) for the dynamic integration of external stand-alone solvers to enable the collaborative processing of constraints. As already mentioned in Sections 1 and 3, the cooperative framework underlying META-S bears some analogies with the approach described in this paper. Both META-S and T OY provide means for different numeric constraints domains to cooperate. T OY supports cooperation between the domains H, F D and R, while META-S connects several kind of solvers, such as: • A F D solver (for floats, strings, and rationals) that was implemented in Common Lisp using as reference a library of routines for solving binary con-  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  71  FD ∼ R Constraint Solving T OY(FD + R) BENCHMARK goal3 goal3 goal3 goal3 goal3  (100) (200) (400) (800) (5000)  T OY(FD + R)p  naı̈ve  ff  naı̈ve  ff  673 1867 6527 24460 911880  625 1844 6573 24727 920670  265 329 583 976 5365  242 352 579 994 6135  Table 12. Solving goal3(n) Benchmarks in T OY (All Solutions Search).  straint satisfaction problems provided by Peter van Beek and available from http://www.ai.uwaterloo.ca/∼vanbeek/software/csplib.tar.gz. • A solver for linear arithmetic, i.e., the constraint solver LINAR described in (Krzikalla 1997). This solver is based on the Simplex algorithm and was implemented in the language C. It handles linear equations, inequalities, and disequations over rational numbers. • An interval arithmetic solver, that uses the sound math library (available at http://interval.sourceforge.net/interval/index.html), an ANSI C library implemented on the basis of the solver for interval arithmetic of Timothy J. Hickey from Brandeis University (available from http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/∼tim/). The interested reader is referred to (Frank and Mai 2002) for more details on the META-S solvers. There are also some other significant differences between both systems. META-S is implemented in Common Lisp whereas T OY is implemented in Prolog. In contrast to T OY, META-S does not support different activation modes (corresponding to T OY(F D), T OY(F D + R) and T OY(F D + R)p in T OY), neither explicit labeling strategies, nor facilities for optimization. On the other hand, META-S supports the choice of different constraint solving strategies (Frank et al. 2007), which is not the case in T OY. More details regarding the comparison between T OY and META-S can be found in Subsection 5.4. We have investigated the performance of META-S in solving the benchmarks already considered for T OY in the previous section and the performance results are shown in Tables 13-14. The organization of rows and columns is also similar to the T OY tables (but considering the two different strategies explained below). The occurrences of the symbol ‘−’ indicate that the corresponding benchmark (namely, the knapsack optimization and the distribution problem) could not be executed because the META-S system provides no optimization facilities; the term ‘error’ corresponds with a failure returned by the system, that was not able to solve the goal. We have used the version 1.0 of META-S (kindly provided by its implementors  72  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  on our request) compiled using SuSE Linux version 9.3 (professional version), based on CMU Common Lisp 18d.  META-S eager  heuristic  BENCHMARK  standard  ordered  standard  ordered  donald smm nl-csp wwr maq.sq. eq.10 eq.20 knapsack (csp) knapsack (opt) distrib (2,5.0) distrib (3,3.0) distrib (3,4.0) distrib (4,5.0) distrib (5,2.0) distrib (5,5.0) distrib (5,10.0) circuit goal2 (100) goal2 (200) goal2 (400) goal2 (800) goal3 (100) goal3 (200) goal3 (400) goal3 (800)  268510 950 344800 10930 1160 60 60 60 70 330 730 2340 8550 410 900 2870 10630  469370 620 1230 650 1220 60 60 60 70 330 740 2340 8540 410 900 2880 10720  5290 590 302314 620 520 70 70 70 70 330 740 2340 8560 460 1080 3520 13140  6140 580 970 620 540 70 70 70 70 330 740 2350 8560 460 1080 3540 13370  Table 13. Solving the Benchmarks in META-S (First Solution Search). For the META-S benchmarks we have utilized the combination of the F D solver (usually for rationals) and an arithmetic solver which was found analogous to the F D plus R combination used in the corresponding T OY benchmark. In fact, for META-S, we have selected the linear arithmetic solver since the interval arithmetic solver yielded poorer results in all cases. In addition, we have considered the best problem formulation (in terms of the target solver for each constraint) that yielded the best running time. Moreover, we have executed each META-S benchmark under four different constraint solving strategies: • Standard eager, in which all constraint information is propagated as early as possible.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  73  • Ordered eager, working as the previous one complemented with user-given information for determining the order of projection operations. • Standard heuristic, working as the standard eager strategy complemented with an heuristic for giving priority to those variable bindings more likely to lead to failure. • Ordered heuristic, working as the previous one complemented with user-given information for determining the order of projection operations. In certain form, naı̈ve and ff labeling in T OY are similar, respectively, to eager and heuristic strategies in META-S. For the sake of a fair comparison, whenever possible we have encoded the META-S benchmarks using exactly the same problem formulations as well as the same constraints that were used in the corresponding T OY benchmarks. Benchmarks were coded using the functional logic language FCLL of META-S. Also, we took care that the variable orders were identical for the different resolution/labeling strategies in both systems.  META-S eager BENCHMARK goal3 goal3 goal3 goal3  (100) (200) (400) (800)  heuristic  standard  ordered  standard  ordered  8930 60700 453330 error  8880 60870 459980 error  6940 47190 346930 error  6940 46880 348900 error  Table 14. Solving goal3(n) Benchmarks in META-S (All Solutions Search).  Note that the META-S benchmarks shown in Table 13 (resp. Table 14) correspond to the T OY benchmarks in Tables 9-11 (resp. Table 12), all of which refer to first solution search (resp. all solutions search). 5.4 T OY versus META-S The tables displayed in this subsection are intended to compare the performance of T OY and META-S. Table 15 compares the behaviour of both systems when computing the first solution of various benchmarks, while the results in Table 16 correspond to the computation of all the solutions for a few instances of the benchmark goal3(n). More precisely, the execution times and META-S/T OY rates displayed in Table 15 correspond to the best results for each benchmark under those obtained for the various configurations in Tables 10-11 and 13, respectively; while Table 16 has been built from the information displayed in Tables 12 and 14 in a similar way.  74  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado SYSTEM donald smm nl-csp wwr maq.sq. eq.10 eq.20 knapsack (csp) knapsack (opt) circuit goal2 (100) goal2 (200) goal2 (400) goal2 (800) goal3 (100) goal3 (200) goal3 (400) goal3 (800)  T OY  META-S  META-S/T OY  188 14 15 18 87 74 131 5 11 13 14 13 12 12 15 13 15 16  5290 580 970 620 520 60 60 60 70 330 730 2340 8540 410 900 2870 10630  28.13 41.42 64.66 34.44 5.97 0.81 0.45 12 5.38 23.57 56.15 195.00 711.66 27.33 69.23 191.33 664.375  Table 15. Solving Benchmarks in T OY vs. META-S (First Solution Search) The analogies and differences between the domain cooperation mechanisms supported by T OY and META-S have been discussed at the end of Subsection 3.3. In both cases, projections play a key role, and the information displayed on Tables 15 and 16 allows mainly to draw conclusions on the computational performance of both systems. META-S seems to behave particularly well in the solving of linear equations, especially when the problem requires no global constraints (such as an alldifferent constraint used in benchmarks eq10 and eq20). The reason maybe two-fold: First, that the linear arithmetic solver of META-S performs better than its F D solver, and, second, that flattening a nested constraint in T OY generates as many flat constraints as the number of operators it includes. However, in general, T OY shows an improvement of about one order of magnitude with respect to the META-S system, for the benchmarks used in our comparison. As an extreme case, the computation time for obtaining the first solution of the benchmark goal3(800) increases more than three orders of magnitude with respect to T OY, and computing all the solutions for this benchmark in META-S does not succeed. In certain form, the experimental results suggest that our proposal is not only promising but also interesting in its current state. In any case, the ‘superior’ performance of T OY with respect to META-S has to be interpreted carefully. One reason for T OY’s advantage may be that the numerical solvers connected in the current version of META-S have been implemented just to experiment with the concepts of the underlying theoretical framework described in (Hofstedt 2001; Hofstedt and Pepper 2007), without much concern for optimization, while T OY relies on the optimized solvers provided by SICStus Pro-  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP SYSTEM goal3 goal3 goal3 goal3  (100) (200) (400) (800)  T OY  META-S  META-S/T OY  242 329 579 976  6940 46880 346930 error  28.67 142.49 599.18 -  75  Table 16. Solving goal3(n) in T OY vs. META-S (All Solutions Search) log. Another advantage of T OY is the availability of global constraints such as alldifferent, that are lacking in META-S. Admittedly, a better comparison of the performance results in both systems would be obtained by comparing independently the integrated solvers in each of the systems, and then normalizing the global results for the systems; or alternatively, by connecting the same solvers to both systems. This would be possible if all the integrated solvers were effectively black-boxes that can be unplugged from the systems. Unfortunately, this is not the case, as the solvers attached to T OY are used as provided by SICStus Prolog and they were not internally adjusted to work in a cooperation system, whereas the solvers used in META-S were implemented with regard to their integration into the implementation of META-S as a system with cooperating components. In favor of META-S, we mention that the cooperation model proposed in METAS seems to be more flexible than the cooperation model currently implemented in T OY, and provides facilities not yet available in T OY. For instance, META-S allows to integrate and/or redefine evaluation strategies (Frank et al. 2003b) whereas T OY relies on a fixed strategy for goal solving and constraint evaluation. Also, the projection mechanism currently implemented in T OY is less powerful than in META-S, because projections cannot be applied to the constraints inside the constraint stores. Finally, META-S enables the integration of different host languages (Frank et al. 2005), whereas the CCLN C(C) goal solving calculus implemented in T OY is intended for declarative languages fitting the CF LP scheme.  6 Related Work In this section, in addition to already mentioned related works, we extend the discussion to other proposals developed in the area of cooperative constraint solving. Of course, the issues of communication and cooperation are relevant to many aspects of computation. Here, we discuss a selection of the literature concerning proposals for communication and cooperation in constraint and declarative programming. Existing cooperative systems are very diverse and range from domain combinations to a mix of distinct techniques for solving constraints over the same domain. Moreover, the cooperating systems may be very different in nature: Some of them perform complete constraint solving whereas others just execute basic forms of propagation. In general, depending on the nature of the cooperation, we catalogue cooperative constraint solving in four non-disjoint categories:  76  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado 1. Cooperation of (built-in) domains coexisting in the same system. 2. Interchange of information between different solvers/domains via special constructs. 3. Interoperability or communication between independent solvers. 4. Combination or integration of entities with distinct nature (i.e., methods and/or solvers based on different algorithms, or languages with different resolution mechanisms).  In the following four subsections we discuss some of the relevant work done in each of these categories, as well as their relation to our own approach. 6.1 Cooperation of (Built-In) Domains Coexisting in the Same System There are a number of constraint systems that provide support for the interaction between built-in and predefined domains. In these systems, a solver is viewed as a device that transforms the original set of constraints to an equivalent reduced set. As examples, we can cite the following systems: • CLP(BNR) (Benhamou and Older 1997), Prolog III (Colmerauer 1990) and Prolog IV (N’Dong 1997) allow solver cooperation, mainly limited to booleans, reals and naturals (as well as term structures such as lists and trees). • The language NCL (Zhou 2000) provides an integrated constraint framework that strongly combines boolean logic, integer constraints and set reasoning. Currently, NCL also integrates efficient CP domain cutting techniques and OR algorithms. Most existing systems of this kind have two main problems: firstly, the cooperation is restricted to a limited set of computation domains supported by the system; and secondly, the cooperation mechanism is very dependant on the involved computation domains and thus presents difficulties to be generalized to other computation domains. Our computational model for the cooperation of the domains H, F D and R and its current T OY implementation can be catalogued in this category, and insofar it shares the two limitations just mentioned. However, our approach is more general because it is based on a generic scheme for CF LP programming over a parametrically given coordination domain C. The cooperative goal solving calculus CLN C(C) presented in Section 3 refers to the particular coordination domain C = M ⊕ H ⊕ F D ⊕ R, but it can be easily extended to other coordination domains, as sketched in our previous paper (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007). 6.2 Interchange of Information between Computation Domains and/or Solvers via Special Constructs Another cooperation technique consists of providing special built-in constructs designed to propagate information among different computation domains that coexist in the same system. For example, this is the case with the reified constraints that enable a communication between arithmetic computations and a Boolean domain.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  77  Within this type of cooperation we can cite Conjunto (Gervet 1997), a constraint language for propagating interval constraints defined over finite sets of integers. This language provides so-called graduated constraints which map sets onto arithmetic terms, thus allowing a one-way cooperative channel from the set domain to the integer domain. Graduated constraints can be used in a number of applications as, for instance, to handle optimization problems by applying a cost function to quantifiable terms (i.e., arithmetic terms which are associated to set terms). Also, a generic framework for defining and solving interval constraints on any set of domains (finite or infinite) with a lattice structure is formulated in (Fernández and Hill 2004; Fernández and Hill 2006). This approach also belongs to the cooperation category described in Subsection 6.1. It enables the construction of new (compound) constraint solvers from existing solvers using lattice combinators, so that different solvers (possibly on distinct domains) can communicate and cooperate in solving a problem. The clp(L) language presented in (Fernández and Hill 2004) is a prototype implementation of this framework and allows information to be transmitted among different (possibly user-defined) computation domains. Our proposal in this paper can be also considered to fit into the special constructs category, by viewing bridge constraints as channels that enable the propagation of information between different computation domains. 6.3 Interoperability A number of recent publications deal with approaches to solver cooperation requiring interoperability, understood as the behaviour of some coordinating system that supports communication between several autonomous systems. In such settings, cooperation relies on suitable interfaces, which have to be specified and implemented according to the specific formats required by the various domains and solvers. For instance, (Goualard 2001) proposes a C++ constraint solving library called aLiX for communicating between different solvers, possibly written in different languages. Two of the main aims of aLiX are to permit the transparent communication of solvers and ensure type safety, that is to say, the capacity to prevent a priori the connection of a solver that does not conform to the input format of the interface with another solver. The current version of aLiX is not mature yet, although its interoperability approach offers interesting possibilities. One of the main shortcomings of the current aLiX version is that a component for solving continuous constraints is not yet integrated into the system, and thus real constraints cannot be processed. In the same spirit, many constraint systems provide both a linear and a non-linear solver for the real domain. As the linear solver is more efficient of the two, it should be used whenever the constraints are linear, and there is a need for communication between the two real solvers. As an example, (Monfroy et al. 1995) describes a client/server architecture to enable communication between the component solvers. This consists of managers for the system and the solvers that must be defined on the same computational domain (the real numbers, for example) but with different classes of admissible constraints (i.e., linear and non-linear constraints). The  78  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  constraint logic programming (CLP) system CoSAc is an implementation of this architecture. A built-in platform permits the integration and connection of the components. The exchange of information is managed by means of pipes and the exchanged data are character strings. One of the main drawbacks of this system is the lack of type safety. Moreover, the cooperation happens at a fixed level that prevents the communication of solvers in a transparent way, since the solvers cannot obtain additional information from the structure of the internal constraint store. As already discussed at the end of Subsection 3.3, the current T OY implementation of our cooperative computation model suffers from a similar limitation, preventing the constraints already placed into the F D and R stores to be projected. This issue should be addressed in future improvements of our system. As CoSAc does not permit solver combination, Monfroy designed a domain independent environment for solver collaboration, and he used this concept in order to unify solver cooperation and combination. Basically, solver cooperation means the use of several solvers with data exchange between them, whereas solver combination is understood as the construction of new solvers from other previously defined solvers. In his PhD thesis (Monfroy 1996), Monfroy developed the system BALI (Binding Architecture for Solver Integration) that facilitates the integration of heterogeneous solvers as well as the specification of solver cooperation via a number of cooperation primitives. Monfroy’s approach assumes that all the solvers work over a common store, while our own proposal requires communication among different stores. Monfroy also designed SoleX (Monfroy and Ringeissen 1999), a domainindependent scheme for constraint solver extension. This schema consists of a set of rules for transforming constraints that cannot be managed by a solver into constraints that can be treated by that solver, thus extending the range of solvable constraints. Unfortunately, as commented in (Monfroy 1996) (page 195), SoleX and BALI were not integrated. Such an integration could lead to a framework including both solver collaboration and solver extension. The interoperability category also includes a line of research dealing with the development of coordination languages, aiming at the specification of cooperation between solvers. There exist several proposals whose main goal is to study the use of control languages to specify elementary constraint solvers as well as the collaboration of solvers in a uniform and flexible way. For instance, (Arbab and Monfroy 1998) proposes to use the coordination language MANIFOLD for improving the constraint solver collaboration language of BALI. More recent works such as (Monfroy and Castro 2004; Castro and Monfroy 2004) aim at providing means of designing strategies that are more complex than simple master-slave approaches. Basically, Castro and Monfroy propose an asynchronous language composed of interaction components that control external agents (in particular solvers) by managing the data flow. A software framework for constructing distributed constraint solvers, implemented in the coordination language MANIFOLD, has been described in (Zoeteweij 2003). A different point of view regarding solver cooperation is analyzed in (Pajot and Monfroy 2003), where a paradigm to enable the user to separate computation strategies from the search phases is presented.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  79  Also it is worth mentioning the project COCONUT 1 whose goal was to integrate techniques from mathematical programming, constraint programming and interval analysis (and thus it can also be catalogued in the category of cooperation via techniques combination as described in Section 6.4). A modular solver environment, that can be extended with open-source and commercial solvers, was provided for nonlinear continuous global optimization. This framework was also designed for distributed computing and has a strategy engine that can be programmed using a specific interpreted language based on Python. Mircea Marin has developed in his PhD thesis (Marin 2000) a CF LP scheme that combines Monfroy’s approach to solver cooperation (Monfroy 1996) with a higherorder lazy narrowing calculus somewhat similar to (López-Fraguas et al. 2004) and the goal solving calculus presented in Section 3 of this paper. In this setting, Monfroy’s ideas are used to provide various primitives for solver combination, and the CF LP scheme allows to embed the resulting solvers into a Functional and Logic Programming language. In contrast to our proposal, Marin’s approach allows for higher-order unification, which leads both to greater expressivity and to less efficient implementations. Another difference w.r.t. our approach is the intended application domain. The instance of CF LP implemented by Marin and others (Marin et al. 2001) combines four solvers over a constraint domain for algebraic symbolic computation. This line of research has been continued in works such as (Kobayashi et al. 2001; Kobayashi et al. 2002; Kobayashi et al. 2003; Kobayashi 2003). These papers describe a collaborative CF LP system, called Open CF LP , which solves symbolic constraints by collaboration between distributed constraint solvers in an open environment such as Internet. The solvers act as providers of constraint solving services, and Open CF LP is able to use them without knowing their location and implementation details. The common communication infrastructure (i.e., the protocol) and the specification language were implemented using CORBA and MathML respectively. Another recent proposal for the combination of solvers in a declarative programming language can be found in (de la Banda et al. 2001). This paper deals with the construction of solvers in the HAL system, which supports the extension of existing solvers and the construction of hybrid ones. HAL provides semi-optional type, mode and determinism declarations for predicates and functions as well as a system of type classes over which constraint solvers’ capabilities are specified. In particular, HAL type classes can require that the types belonging to them must have a suitable associated constraint solver. A quite general scheme for solver cooperation fitting the interoperability category has been proposed by Hofstedt et al. in (Hofstedt 2000a; Hofstedt 2000b; Hofstedt 2001; Hofstedt and Pepper 2007). Here, constraint domains are formalized by using Σ-structures in a sorted language, constraints are modeled as n-ary relations, and cooperation of solvers is achieved by two mechanisms: Constraint propagation, that submits a constraint belonging to its corresponding store; and projec-  1  See http://www.mat.univie.ac.at/ neum/glopt/coconut/  80  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  tion of constraint stores, that consults the contents of a given store SD and deduces constraints for another domain. Relying on these mechanisms, different constraint solvers (possibly working over different domains, and implemented in various languages) can be used as components of an overall system, whose architecture provides a uniform interface for constraint solvers which allows a fine-grain formal specification of information exchange between them. This approach has been implemented in the system META-S (Frank et al. 2003a; Frank et al. 2003b; Frank et al. 2005), that supports the dynamic integration of arbitrary external (stand-alone) solvers to enable the collaborative processing of constraints. Some analogies and differences between this approach and our own have been discussed already at several places of this paper; see the Introduction, and sections 3.3 and 5. As a more theoretical line of work related to the interoperability category, there are a number of formal approaches to the combination of constraint solvers on domains modeled as algebraic structures. This kind of research stems from a seminal paper by Nelson and Oppen (Nelson and Oppen 1979). More recent relevant work includes several papers by Baader and Schulz. For instance, (Baader and Schulz 1995) provides an abstract framework to combine constraint languages and constraint solvers and focuses on ways in which different and independently defined solvers may be combined. This paper does not really deal with the constraint cooperation mechanism, but it focuses in defining algebraic properties needed for the combination of constraint languages and solvers. Later on, (Baader and Schulz 1998) generalized a proposal from a previous paper (Baader and Schulz 1996) and presented a general method for the combination of constraint systems, which is is applicable to so-called quasi-structures. This general notion comprises various instances, such as (quotient) term algebras, rational trees, lists, sets, etc. The methods proposed in (Baader and Schulz 1996; Baader and Schulz 1998) can be seen as extensions of previous approaches to the combination of unification algorithms for equational theories, viewing them as instances of constraint solvers (Kirchner and Ringeissen 1992; Kirchner and Ringeissen 1994). As pointed out in (Kepser and Richts 1999), a weak point of these approaches is the lack of practical use. Our proposal can clearly be catalogued in the interoperability category, because it aims at the cooperation of several constraint domains equipped with their respective solvers. Our main communication mechanism, namely bridges, has the advantage of syntactic simplicity, while being compatible with the static type systems used by many declarative languages. Moreover, our notion of coordination domain allows us to use a generic scheme for CF LP programming as a formal foundation. 6.4 Combining Methods and/or Solvers based on Different Algorithms One popular approach to cooperation consists of combining solvers or methods based on different algorithms. In this category we include the integration of different paradigms in one language. In the following, we provide a (non-exhaustive) list of proposals of this kind. For instance, one of the initial forms of cooperating constraint solving consisted of using different problem solvers (viewed as algorithms) to work individ-  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  81  ually over different sub-parts of an overall problem. This was the approach used in (Durfee et al. 1989) in order to integrate within a network a number of individual solvers intended to work over different parts of a problem. In a similar way, (Khedro and Genesereth 1994) proposed a multi-agent model where each agent acts independently to solve a distributed set of constraints that constitutes a distributed constraint satisfaction problem. The paper (Hong 1994) also studied the confluence of solvers to solve a common problem, suggesting to manage a set of algorithms each of which should be repeatedly applied on the problem until reaching a stable form. Within the area of Constraint Programming, (Benhamou 1996) described a unified framework for heterogeneous constraint solving. Here, the cooperation comes from the combination of different algorithms, possibly defined over distinct structures. The main idea is to represent the solvers as constraint narrowing operators (CNO) that are closure operators, and to use a generalized notion of arc-consistency. Conditions on the CNOs needed to ensure the main properties of the principal algorithm are identified. Solver communication involving shared common variables and sending and receiving information to each other is described. The paper also gives a fixed point semantics to describe the cooperation process. One of the main drawbacks of this proposal is that termination of the central algorithm relies on the finiteness of an approximate domain A built as a subset of the powerdomain ℘(D) of the domain D under consideration, including D among its members and closed under intersection. For instance, termination cannot be guaranteed in case that D is the domain of sets of real numbers, which is useful for dealing with real interval constraints. In relation to the problem of solving real constraints, (Benhamou et al. 1999) has proposed the combination of hull consistency and box consistency with the objective of reducing the computation time achieved by using box consistency alone. This idea was reflected in DecLic (Benhamou et al. 1997; Goualard et al. 1999), a CLP language that mixes boolean, integer and real constraints in the framework of intervals. This system was shown to be fairly efficient on classical benchmarks but at the expense of decreasing the declarativity of the language as a consequence of allowing the programmer to choose the best kind of consistency to use for each constraint. The combination of interval techniques for solving non-linear systems is also tackled in (Granvilliers 2001), Granvilliers describes a cooperative strategy to combine the interval-based local consistencies methods (i.e., box and hull consistency) with the multi-dimensional interval Newton method and shows the efficiency of the main algorithm. Another proposal for developing a cooperation technique for solving large scale combinatorial optimization problems was described in (Castro et al. 2004). This paper introduces a framework for designing cooperative strategies, describing a scheme for the sequential cooperation between Forward Checking and Hill-Climbing. A set of benchmarks for the Capacity Vehicle Routing Problem shows the advantages of using this framework, that always outperforms a single solver. The combination of linear programming solvers and interval solvers has also  82  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  been specially fertile in the last decades (Marti and Rueher 1995). Many of the cooperating systems resulting from this combination have been implemented as (prototype) declarative systems, as e.g., ICE (Beringer and Backer 1995), Prolog IV (N’Dong 1997), CIAL (Chiu and Lee 2002) and CCC (Rueher and Solnon 1997), among others. The integration of mathematical programming techniques in the CLP scheme (van Hoeve 2000) may be considered another form of cooperation that has been treated extensively in the literature; see e.g. the integration of Mixed Integer programming and CLP (Rodosěk et al. 1997; Harjunkoski et al. 2000; Thorsteinsson 2001), the combination of CLP and Integer Programming (Bockmayr and Kasper 2000) and the combination of CLP and Linear Programming (Vandecasteele and Rodosěk 1998), among others. The domain cooperation framework presented in this paper is quite generic, and its current implementation in T OY relies on the availability of black box solvers provided by SICStus Prolog (SICStus Prolog 2007). Therefore, it cannot be catalogued into the cooperation category considered in this subsection, which is very specific and relies on a detailed control of the techniques and solvers involved. Nevertheless, the work described in this subsection points to combination techniques which lead to improved performance and may be useful for future implementations of our approach. 7 Conclusions and Future Work The work presented in this paper is aimed as a contribution to the efficient use of constraint domains and solvers in declarative languages and systems. We have investigated foundational and practical issues concerning a computational framework for the cooperation of constraint domains in Constraint Functional Logic Programming, using constraint projection guided by bridge constraints as the main cooperation tool. Taking a generic scheme as a formal basis, we have focused on a particular case of practical importance, namely the cooperation among the symbolic Herbrand domain H and the two numeric domains R and F D. The relation to our previous related work and some pointers to related work by other researchers have been presented in Section 1, and a more detailed discussion of the state-of-the-art concerning cooperation of constraint domains can be found in Section 6. In the rest of this section we give a summary of the main results presented in the other sections of the paper, followed by some considerations concerning current limitations and possible lines of future work. 7.1 Summary of Main Results Our results include a formal computation model for cooperative goal solving in Constraint Functional Logic Programming, the development of an implemented system, and experimental evidence on the implementation’s performance and its comparison with the closest related system we are aware of. More precisely: • In Section 2 we have presented a formal framework for the cooperation of constraint domains in an improved version of an already existing CF LP scheme  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  83  for Constraint Functional Logic Programming. We have formalized a notion of constraint solver suitable for CF LP programming, as well as a mathematical construction of coordination domains, a special kind of hybrid domains built as a combination of several pure domains intended to cooperate. In addition to the facilities provided by their components, coordination domains supply special primitives for building bridge constraints to allow communication between different component domains. As particular case of practical interest, we have formalized a coordination domain C = M ⊕ H ⊕ F D ⊕ R tailored to the cooperation of three useful pure domains: the Herbrand domain H which supplies equality and disequality constraints over symbolic terms, the domain R which supplies arithmetic constraints over real numbers, and the domain F D which supplies finite domain constraints over integer numbers. Practical applications involving more that one of these pure domains can be naturally treated within the CF LP (C) instance of the CF LP scheme. From a programmer’s viewpoint, the domain H supports generic equality and disequality constraints over arbitrary user defined datatypes, while R and F D provide more specific numeric constraints. • Section 3 presents a formal calculus for cooperative goal solving in CF LP (C). The main programming features available to CF LP (C) programmers include a Milner’s like polymorphic type system, lazy and possibly higher-order functions, predicates, and the cooperation of the three domains witihin C. The goal solving calculus is presented as a set of goal transformation rules for reducing initial goals into solved forms. There are rules that use lazy narrowing to process program defined function calls in a demand-driven way, domain cooperation rules dealing among other things with bridges and projections, and constraint solving rules to invoke the solvers of the various pure domains involved in the cooperation. The section concludes with theoretical results ensuring soundness and completeness of the goal solving calculus, where completeness is guaranteed for well-typed solutions as far as permitted by the completeness of the underlying solvers and some other more technical requirements. • Section 4 presents the implementation of the cooperative goal solving calculus for CF LP (C) in a state-of-the-art declarative programming system. In addition to describing general aspects such as the software architecture, we have focused on the implementation of domain cooperation mechanisms, illustrating the correspondence between code generation in the implemented system and the goal transformation rules for cooperation formalized in the previous section. • Section 5 is devoted to performance analysis by means of a set of benchmarks. The experimental results obtained lead us to several conclusions. Firstly, we conclude that the activation of the domain cooperation mechanisms between F D and R does not penalize the execution time in problems which can be solved by using the domain F D alone. Secondly, we also conclude that the cooperation mechanism using projections helps to speed-up the execution time in problems where a real cooperation between F D and R is needed.  84  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado Thirdly, our experiments show a good performance of our implementation with respect to the closest related system we are aware of. In summary, we conclude that our approach to the cooperation of constraint domains has been effectively implemented in a practical system, that is distributed as a free open-source Sourceforge project (http://toy.sourceforge.net) and runs on several platforms. 7.2 Some Current Limitations and Planned Future Work  In the future we would like to improve some of the limitations of our current approach to domain cooperation, concerning both the formal foundations and the implemented system. More precisely: • The cooperative goal solving calculus CCLN C(C) presented in Section 3 should be generalized to allow for an arbitrary coordination domain C in place of the concrete choice M ⊕ H ⊕ F D ⊕ R. This is a straightforward task. However, for the purposes of the present paper we found more appropriate to deal just with the coordination domain supported by the current implementation. • The implemented system should be expanded to support some of these more general coordination domains, which could include specific domains for boolean values, sets, or different types of numeric values. More efficient and powerful constraint solvers for such domains should be also integrated within the implementation. • CCLN C(C) should be also expanded to allow the computation of projections from the primitive constraints placed within the constraint stores. These more powerful projections were allowed in the preliminary version of CCLN C(C) presented in (Estévez-Martı́n et al. 2007), but they were not implemented and no completeness result was given. Currently, projections are computed only from the constraints placed in the constraint pool (see rule PP in Table 4 in Subsection 3.3) and the T OY implementation only supports this kind of projections. Allowing projections to act over stored constraints will require to solve new problems both on the formal level (where some substantial difficulties are expected for proving a completeness result) and on the implementation level (where the current system will have to be modified to enable a transparent access to the constraint stores). • As a consequence of the previous improvement, the cooperative goal solving process will show more complicated patterns of interaction among solvers. Therefore, some means to describe goal solving strategies should be provided to enable users to specify some desired sequences of goal transformation rules, especially with regard to the activation of solvers and projections. In addition to being implemented as part of the practical system, goal solving strategies are expected to be helpful for proving the completeness of a cooperative goal solving calculus improved as described in the previous item. • The experimentation with benchmarks and application cases should be further developed.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  85  • Last but not least, the implemented system should be properly maintained and improved in various ways. In particular, library management should be standardized, both with respect to loading already existing libraries and with respect to developing new ones. References Antoy, S., Echahed, R., and M.Hanus. 1994. A needed narrowing strategy. In Proc. POPL’94. ACM Press. 268–279. Antoy, S., Echahed, R., and M.Hanus. 2000. A needed narrowing strategy. Journal of the ACM 74(4), 776–822. Antoy, S. and Hanus, M. 2000. Compiling Multi-Paradigm Declarative Programs into Prolog. In FroCoS. LNCS, vol. 1794. Springer, 171–185. Arbab, F. and Monfroy, E. 1998. Using coordination for cooperative constraint solving. In SAC. 139–148. Arenas, P., Estévez, S., Fernández, A., Gil, A., López-Fraguas, F., Rodrı́guezT OY. a multiparadigm declaraArtalejo, M., and Sáenz-Pérez, F. 2007. tive language. version 2.3.1. R. Caballero and J. Sánchez (Eds.), Available at http://toy.sourceforge.net. Arenas, P., Gil, A., and López-Fraguas, F. 1994. Combining Lazy Narrowing with Disequality Constraints. In PLILP’94. LNCS, vol. 844. Springer, 385–399. Baader, F. and Nipkow, T. 1998. Term rewriting and all that. Cambridge University Press. Baader, F. and Schulz, K. 1995. On the combination of symbolic constraints, solution domains and constraints solvers. In CP’95. LNCS, vol. 976. Springer, 380–397. Baader, F. and Schulz, K. 1996. Unification in the union of disjoint equational theories: combining decision procedures. Journal of Symbolic Computation 21, 2, 211–243. Baader, F. and Schulz, K. 1998. Combination of constraint solvers for free and quasifree structures. TCS 192, 1, 107–161. Benhamou, F. 1996. Heterogeneous constraint solving. In ALP’96. LNCS, vol. 1139. Springer, 62–76. Benhamou, F., Goualard, F., and Granvilliers, L. 1997. Programming with the declic language. In 2nd International Workshop on Interval Constraints. Port-Jefferson, NY, 1–13. Benhamou, F., Goualard, F., Granvilliers, L., and Puget, J.-F. 1999. Revising hull and box consistency. In ICLP’99. The MIT Press, 230–244. Benhamou, F. and Older, W. 1997. Applying interval arithmetic to real, integer and Boolean constraints. The Journal of Logic Programming 32, 1, 1–24. Beringer, H. and Backer, B. D. 1995. Combinatorial problem solving in constraint logic programming with cooperating solvers. In Logic Programming: Formal Methods and Practical Applications. Elsevier Science B.V./North-Holland, 245–272. Bockmayr, A. and Kasper, T. 2000. Branch and infer: a unifying framework for integer and finite domain constraint programming. INFORMS Journal of Computing 10, 3, 287. Buntine, W. L. and Bürckert, H. J. 1994. On solving equations and disequations. Journal of the ACM 41(4), 591–629. Castro, C. and Monfroy, E. 2004. Designing hybrid cooperations with a component language for solving optimisation problems. In AIMSA 2004. LNCS, vol. 3192. Springer, 447–458.  86  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  Castro, C., Moossen, M., and Riff, M.-C. 2004. A cooperative framework based on local search and constraint programming for solving discrete global optimisation. In SBIA’04. LNCS, vol. 3171. Springer, 93–102. Chiu, C.-K. and Lee, J. H.-M. 2002. Efficient interval linear equality solving in constraint logic programming. Reliable Computing 8, 2, 139–174. Colmerauer, A. 1984. Equations and inequations on finite and infinite trees. Communications of the ACM (CACM), 85–89. Colmerauer, A. 1990. An introduction to PROLOG III. Communications of the ACM (CACM) 33, 7, 69–90. Comon, H. 1991. Disunification: A survey. In Computational Logic - Essays in Honor of Alan Robinson. MIT Press, 322–359. Comon, H. and Lescanne, P. 1989. Equational problems and disunification. Journal of Symbolic Computation 7, 371–425. Damas, L. and Milner, R. 1982. Principal type-schemes for functional programs. In POPL’82. ACM Press, 207–212. de la Banda, M., Jeffery, D., Marriott, K., Nethercote, N., Stuckey, P., and Holzbaur, C. 2001. Building constraint solvers with HAL. In ICLP’01. LNCS, vol. 2237. Springer, 90–104. del Vado-Vı́rseda, R. 2003. A Demand-driven Narrowing Calculus with Overlapping Definitional Trees. In PPDP’03. ACM Press, 213–227. del Vado-Vı́rseda, R. 2005. Declarative Constraint Programming with Definitional Trees. In Proc. FroCoS’05. LNAI, vol. 3717. Springer, 184–199. del Vado-Vı́rseda, R. 2007. A Higher-Order Demand-driven Narrowing Calculus with Definitional Trees. In ICTAC’07. LNCS, vol. 4711. Springer, 165–179. Durfee, E., Lesser, V., and Corkill, D. 1989. Cooperative distributed problem solving. In The handbook of artificial intelligence, E. Feigenbaum, A. Barr, and P. Cohen, Eds. Vol. IV. Addison-Wesley, 83–147. Estévez-Martı́n, S., Fernández, A., Hortalá-González, T., Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, M., Sáenz-Pérez, F., and del Vado-Vı́rseda, R. 2007. A proposal for the cooperation of solvers in constraint functional logic programming. ENTCS 188, 37–51. Estévez-Martı́n, S., Fernández, A., and Sáenz-Pérez, F. 2006. Implementing TOY, a constraint functional logic programming with solver cooperation. Research Report LCC ITI 06-8, Universidad de Málaga. November. Estévez-Martı́n, S., Fernández, A. J., Hortalá-González, M. T., Rodrı́guezArtalejo, M., and del Vado Vı́rseda, R. 2007. A fully sound goal solving calculus for the cooperation of solvers in the CFLP scheme. ENTCS 177, 235–252. Estévez-Martı́n, S., Fernández, A. J., Hortalá-González, M. T., Rodrı́guezArtalejo, M., and del Vado Vı́rseda, R. 2008. Cooperation of constraint domains in the toy system. In PPDP’08. ACM Press, 258–268. Estévez-Martı́n, S., Fernández, A. J., and Sáenz-Pérez, F. 2007. About implementing a constraint functional logic programming system with solver cooperation. In proc. of CICLOPS’07. 57–71. Estévez-Martı́n, S., Fernández, A. J., and Sáenz-Pérez, F. 2008. Playing with T OY : Constraints and Domain Cooperation. In Proc. ESOP’08. LNCS, vol. 4960. Springer, 112–115. Fernández, A. J. and Hill, P. M. 2004. An interval constraint system for lattice domains. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 26, 1, 1–46. Fernández, A. J. and Hill, P. M. 2006. An interval constraint branching scheme for lattice domains. J. UCS 12, 11, 1466–1499.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  87  Fernandez, M. 1992. Narrowing based procedures for equational disunification. Applicable Algebra in Engineering, Communication and Computing 3, 1, 1–26. Frank, S., Hofstedt, P., and Mai, P. R. 2003a. A flexible meta-solver framework for constraint solver collaboration. In Proc. KI 2003. LNCS, vol. 2821. Springer, 520–534. Frank, S., Hofstedt, P., and Mai, P. R. 2003b. Meta-s: A strategy-oriented metasolver framework. In Proc. FLAIRS. AAAI Press, 177–181. Frank, S., Hofstedt, P., Pepper, P., and Reckmann, D. 2007. Solution strategies for multi-domain constraint logic programs. In 6th International Andrei Ershov Memorial Conference on Perspectives of Systems Informatics (PSI 2006), I. Virbitskaite and A. Voronkov, Eds. LNCS, vol. 4378. Springer, Novosibirsk, Russia, 209–222. Revised Papers. Frank, S., Hofstedt, P., and Reckman, D. 2005. Meta-s - combining solver cooperation and programming languages. In Proc. W(C)LP 2005. Ulmer Informatik-Berichte 2005-01, 159–162. Frank, S. and Mai, P. R. 2002. Strategies for cooperating constraint solvers. Diplomathesis. University of Technology, Berlin. Frühwirth, T. 1998. Theory and practice of constraint handling rules. Journal of Logic Programming, Special Issue on Constraint Logic Programming 37, 1-3, 95–138. Gervet, C. 1997. Interval propagation to reason about sets: definition and implementation of a practical language. Constraints 1, 3, 191–244. González-Moreno, J., Hortalá-González, M., López-Fraguas, F., and Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, M. 1996. A rewriting logic for declarative programming. In Proc. ESOP’96. LNCS, vol. 1058. Springer, 156–172. González-Moreno, J., Hortalá-González, M., López-Fraguas, F., and Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, M. 1999. An approach to declarative programming based on a rewriting logic. Journal of Logic Programming 40, 47–87. González-Moreno, J. C., Hortalá-González, M. T., and Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, M. 2001. Polymorphic types in functional logic programming. Journal of Functional and Logic Programming 2001, 1, 1–71. Goualard, F. 2001. Component programming and interoperatibility in constraint solver design. In ERCIM Workshop on Constraints. The Computing Research Repository (CoRR). Goualard, F., Benhamou, F., and Granvilliers, L. 1999. An extension of the WAM for hybrid interval solvers. The Journal of Functional and Logic Programming 1999, 1, 1–36. Granvilliers, L. 2001. On the combination of interval constraint solvers. Reliable Computing 7, 6, 467–483. Granvilliers, L., Monfroy, E., and Benhamou, F. 2001. Cooperative solvers in constraint programming: a short introduction. ALP Newsletter 14, 2. Hanus, M. 2006. Curry: An Integrated Functional Logic Language (version 0.8.2 of march 28, 2006). Available at:http://www.informatik.uni-kiel.de/~mh/curry/. Harjunkoski, Jain, V., and Grossmann, I. 2000. Hybrid mixed-integer/constraint logic programming strategies for solving scheduling and combinatorial optimization problems. Comp. Chem. Eng. 24, 337–343. Hindley, R. 1969. The principal type-scheme of an object in combinatory logic. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc 146, 29–60. Hofstedt, P. 2000a. Better communication for tighter cooperation. In 1st International Conference on Computational Logic (CL’2000). LNCS, vol. 1861. Springer, 342–357. Hofstedt, P. 2000b. Cooperating constraint solvers. In CP’2000. LNCS, vol. 1894. Springer, 520–524.  88  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  Hofstedt, P. 2001. Cooperation and coordination of constraint solvers. Ph.D. thesis, Technischen Universität Dresden, Fakultät Informatik. Hofstedt, P. and Pepper, P. 2007. Integration of declarative and constraint programming. Theory Pract. Log. Program. 7, 1-2, 93–121. Hong, H. 1994. Confluency of Cooperative Constraint Solving. Tech. Rep. 94-08, Johannes Kepler University, Austria. Hooker, J. 2000. Logic-based methods for optimization, combining optimization and constraint satisfaction. Discrete Mathematics and Optimization. Wiley&Sons. Jaffar, J. and Lassez, J. 1987. Constraint logic programming. In Proc. POPL’87. ACM Press, 111–119. Jaffar, J. and Maher, M. 1994. Constraint Logic Programming: a Survey. Journal of Logic Programming 19&20, 503–581. Jaffar, J., Maher, M., Marriott, K., and Stuckey, P. 1998. Semantics of constraints logic programs. Journal of Logic Programming 37, 1-3, 1–46. Jaffar, J., Michaylov, S., Stuckey, P., and Yap, R. 1992. The CLP(R) language and system. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 14, 3, 339–395. Kepser, S. and Richts, J. 1999. Optimisation techniques for combining constraint solvers. In FroCoS’98. 193–210. Khedro, T. and Genesereth, M. 1994. Modeling multiagent cooperation as distributed constraint satisfaction problem solving. In ECAI’94, A. Cohn, Ed. John Wiley & Sons, 249–253. Kirchner, H. and Ringeissen, C. 1992. A constraint solver in finite algebras and its combination with unification algorithms. In Proceedings of the Joint International Conference and Symposium on Logic Programming(JICSLP’92), K. R. Apt, Ed. MIT Press, 225–239. Kirchner, H. and Ringeissen, C. 1994. Combining symbolic constraint solvers on algebraic domains. J. Symb. Comput. 18, 2, 113–155. Kobayashi, N. 2003. Study of an open equational solving system. Ph.D. thesis, Institute of Information Sciences and Electronics, University of Tsukuba, Japan. Kobayashi, N., Marin, M., and Ida, T. 2001. Collaborative constraint functional logic programming in an open environment. In The Second Asian Workshop on Programming Languages and Systems (APLAS’01). Korea, 49–59. Kobayashi, N., Marin, M., and Ida, T. 2003. Collaborative constraint functional logic programming system in an open environment. IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems E86-D, 1, 63–70. Kobayashi, N., Marin, M., Ida, T., and Che, Z. 2002. Open CFLP: An open system for collaborative constraint functional logic programming. In 11th International Workshop on Functional and (Constraint) Logic Programming (WFLP2002). Grado, Italy, 229– 232. Krzikalla, O. 1997. Constraint solver für lineare constraints über reellen zahlen. Großer Beleg. Technische Universität Dresden. Lassez, J., Maher, M., and Marriot, K. 1988. Unification revisited. In Foundations of logic and functional programming. LNCS, vol. 306. Springer, 67–113. Loogen, R., López-Fraguas, F., and Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, M. 1993. A demand driven computation strategy for lazy narrowing. In Proc. PLILP’93. LNCS, vol. 714. Springer, 184–200. López-Fraguas, F., Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, M., and del Vado-Virseda, R. 2004. A Lazy Narrowing Calculus for Declarative Constraint Programming. In PPDP’04. ACM Press, 43–54.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  89  López-Fraguas, F., Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, M., and del Vado Vı́rseda, R. 2007. A new generic scheme for functional logic programming with constraints. Higher-Order and Symbolic Computation 20, 1/2, 73–122. Maher, M. J. 1988. Complete axiomatizations of the algebras of finite, rational and infinite trees. In LICS’88. IEEE Computer Society, 348–357. Marin, M. 2000. Functional logic programming with distributed constraint solving. Ph.D. thesis, Johannes Kepler Universität Linz. Marin, M., Ida, T., and Schreiner, W. 2001. CFLP: a Mathematica Implementation of a Distributed Constraint Solving System. In IMS’99. Vol. 8. WIT Press, 287–300. Marti, P. and Rueher, M. 1995. A distributed cooperating constraints solving system. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence Tools 4, 1–2, 93–113. Milner, R. 1978. A theory of type polymorphism in programming. Journal of Computer and Systems Sciences 17, 348–375. Monfroy, E. 1996. Solver collaboration for constraint logic programming. Ph.D. thesis, Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Nancy. Monfroy, E. 1998. A Solver Collaboration in BALI. In Proc. of JCSLP’98. MIT Press, 349–350. Monfroy, E. and Castro, C. 2004. A component language for hybrid solver cooperations. In ADVIS’04. LNCS, vol. 3261. Springer, 192–202. Monfroy, E. and Ringeissen, C. 1999. An open automated framework for constraint solver extension: the solex approach. Fundam. Inform. 39, 1-2, 167–187. Monfroy, E., Rusinowitch, M., and Schott, R. 1995. Implementing non-linear constraints with cooperative solvers. Research Report 2747, CRI Nancy. N’Dong, S. 1997. Prolog IV ou la programmation par contraintes selon PrologIA. In JFPLC’97. Edition HERMES, 235–238. Nelson, G. and Oppen, D. 1979. Simplification by cooperating decision procedures. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 1, 2, 245–257. Pajot, B. and Monfroy, E. 2003. Separating search and strategy in solver cooperations. In Proc. PSI’03. LNCS, vol. 2890. Springer, 401–414. Peyton-Jones, S. 2002. Haskell 98 language and libraries: the revised report. Tech. rep. http://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/. Rodosěk, R., Wallace, M., and Hajian, M. 1997. A new approach to integrating mixed integer programming and constraint logic programming. In Annals of Oper. Res. Vol. 86. 63–87. Rodrı́guez-Artalejo, M. 2001. Functional and constraint logic programming. In Constraints in Computational Logics: Theory and Applications. LNCS, vol. 2002. Springer, 202–270. Rueher, M. and Solnon, C. 1997. Concurrent cooperating solvers over reals. Reliable Computing 3, 3, 325–333. Sáenz-Pérez, F. 2007. ACIDE: An Integrated Development Environment Configurable for LaTeX. The PracTeX Journal 2007, 3 (August). Saraswat, V. 1992. The category of constraint systems is cartesian closed. In Proc. of the 7th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science. IEEE Press, 341–345. SICStus Prolog. 2007. http://www.sics.se/isl/sicstus. Thorsteinsson, E. 2001. Branch-and-check: A hybrid framework integrating mixed integer programming and constraint logic programming. In CP 2001, T. Walsh, Ed. LNCS, vol. 2239. Springer, 16–30. van Hentenryck, P., Saraswat, V., and Deville, Y. 1998. Design, implementation and evaluation of the constraint language cc(FD). Journal of Logic Programming 37, 139–164.  90  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  van Hentenryck, P., Simonis, H., and Dincbas, M. 1994. Constraint satisfaction using constraint logic programming. Artificial Intelligence 58, 113–159. van Hoeve, W. 2000. Towards the integration of constraint logic programming and mathematical programming. Master’s Thesis, University of Twente, the Netherlands. Vandecasteele, H. and Rodosěk. 1998. Modelling combinatorial problems for CLP(FD+R). In Proc. of the Benelux Workshop on Logic Programming. 1–9. Zhou, J. 2000. Introduction to the constraint language NCL. The Journal of Logic Programming 45, 1-3, 71–103. Zoeteweij, P. 2003. Coordination-based distributed constraint solving in DICE. In ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC’03). ACM, Melbourne, FL, USA, 360–366.  Appendix A [Auxiliary Results and Proofs] This Appendix collects proofs of the results stated in Section 2 and Section 3 omitted from the main text. Some of them rely on previously stated auxiliary results, especially Lemmata 1 and 2 from Subsection 2.2 and Lemma 3 from Subsection 2.3. In addition, some other auxiliary results will be included at the proper places. A.1 Properties of Constraint Solvers and Coordination Domains The first part of the Appendix includes the proofs of the main results stated in Section 2. First we present the proof of Lemma 5, about general properties of proof transformation systems. Proof of Lemma 5 1. The transition relation ⊢⊢D, X of the sts generates a tree with root Π ✷ ε, whose leaves correspond to the stores belonging to SF D (Π, X ). Since ⊢⊢D, X is finitely branching and terminating, this tree is locally finite and has no infinite branches. By so-called König’s Lemma (see (Baader and Nipkow 1998), Section 2.2) the tree must be finite. Therefore, it must have finitely many leaves, and SF D (Π, X ) is finite. For later use, we remark that solveD (Π, X ) can be characterized as _ {∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) | Π ✷ ε ⊢⊢D, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ , Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π)} 2. Assume that the sts has the fresh local variables property and the safe bindings property. Due to the remark at the end of item 1., for each X -solved form ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) computed by the call solveD (Π, X ) there is some sequence of ⊢⊢D, X steps Π ✷ ε = Π′0 ✷ µ′0 ⊢⊢D, X Π′1 ✷ µ′1 ⊢⊢D, X . . . ⊢⊢D, X Π′n ✷ µ′n such that Π′n ✷ µ′n = Π′ ✷ σ ′ is irreducible, and the following conditions hold for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n: Π′i ✷ µ′i is a store with fresh local variables Yi′ = var(Π′i ✷ µ′i ) \ var(Π′i−1 ✷ µ′i−1 ); µ′i = µ′i−1 µi for some substitution µi verifying vdom(µi )∪vran(µi ) ⊆ var(Π′i−1 ) ∪ Yi′ ; and µi (X) is a constant for all X ∈ X ∩ vdom(µi ). Then, Y ′ = Y1′ , . . . , Yn′ , and an easy induction on n allows to prove that vdom(σ ′ ) ∪ vran(σ ′ ) ⊆ var(Π) ∪ Y ′ and that σ ′ (X) is a constant for all X ∈ X ∩ vdom(σ ′ ). Therefore, the solver solveD also satisfies the fresh local variables property and the safe bindings property.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  91  3. Assume that the sts is locally sound. Because of the remark in item 1., to prove soundness of solveD it is sufficient to show that the union [ {SolD (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) | Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ , Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π ✷ σ)} is a subset of SolD (Π ✷ σ). In order to show this, we assume Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢nD, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ , Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π ✷ σ) and prove SolD (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) ⊆ SolD (Π ✷ σ) by induction on n: n = 0: In this case Y ′ = ∅, Π′ ✷ σ ′ = Π ✷ σ. The inclusion to be proved is trivial. n−1 ′ ′ ′ ′ n > 0: In this case Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′1 ✷ σ1′ ⊢⊢D, X ! Π ✷ σ for some store Π1 ✷ σ1 . ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ Let Y1 = var(Π1 ✷σ1 ) \ var(Π ✷ σ) and Y ′′ = var(Π ✷ σ ) \ var(Π1 ✷σ1 ). Then Y ′ = Y1′ , Y ′′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π ✷ σ). By induction hypothesis, we can assume SolD (∃Y ′′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) ⊆ SolD (Π′1 ✷ σ1′ ). Then, for any given η ∈ SolD (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) we can prove η ∈ SolD (Π ✷ σ) by the following reasoning: by definition of SolD , there is η ′ ∈ SolD (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) such that η ′ =\Y ′ η and hence η ′ =var(Π ✷ σ) η. Trivially, it follows that η ′ ∈ SolD (∃Y ′′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )), which implies η ′ ∈ SolD (Π′1 ✷ σ1′ ) by induction hypothesis. Trivially again, it follows that η ′ ∈ SolD (∃Y1′ (Π′1 ✷ σ1′ )) which implies η ′ ∈ SolD (Π ✷ σ) due to local soundness. Since η ′ =var(Π ✷ σ) η, we can conclude that η ∈ SolD (Π ✷ σ). 4. Assume now a selected set RS of strs such that the sts is locally complete for RS-free steps. Because of the remark in item 1., to prove completeness of solveD for RS-free invocations it is sufficient to show that W T SolD (Π ✷ σ) is a subset of the union [ {W T SolD (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) | Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ , Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π ✷ σ)} under the additional assumption that Π ✷ σ is hereditarily RS-irreducible. This can be viewed as a property of the store Π ✷ σ that can be proved by well-founded induction (see again (Baader and Nipkow 1998), Section 2.2) on the terminating store transformation relation ⊢⊢D, X : Base Case: Π ✷ σ is irreducible w.r.t. ⊢⊢D, X . In this case, the union reduces to the set W T SolD (Π ✷ σ) and the inclusion to be proved is trivial. Inductive Case: Π ✷ σ is reducible w.r.t. ⊢⊢D, X . In this case, since Π ✷ σ is hereditarily RS-irreducible and the sts is locally complete for RS-free steps, for any η ∈ W T SolD (Π ✷ σ) there is some hereditarily RS-irreducible (Π′1 ✷ σ1′ ) such that Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X Π′1 ✷ σ1′ and η ∈ W T SolD (∃Y1′ (Π′1 ✷ σ1′ )) where Y1′ = var(Π′1 ✷σ1′ ) \ var(Π ✷ σ). Then, by definition of SolD , there is η1′ ∈ W T SolD (Π′1 ✷ σ1′ ) such that η1′ =\Y ′ η. The induction hypothesis can be assumed for Π′1 ✷ σ1′ , and there must be 1  some Π′ ✷ σ ′ such that Π′1 ✷ σ1′ ⊢⊢D, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ , Y ′′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ )\ var(Π′1 ✷σ1′ ) and η1′ ∈ W T SolD (∃Y ′′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )). By definition of SolD , there is η ′ ∈ W T SolD (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) such that η ′ =\Y ′′ η1′ . Moreover, we get Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢D, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ and Y ′ = Y1′ , Y ′′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ )\var(Π ✷ σ) such that η ′ =\Y ′ η, and thus η ∈ W T SolD (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )). This completes the proof of the Lemma. Table A 1 displayed in the next page and the two auxiliary Lemmata stated and proved immediately afterwards will be used in the subsequent proof of Theorem  92  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  1, the main result in this subsection. It ensures that solveH satisfies the requirements for solvers listed in Definition 6 (except for a technical limitation concerning completeness). The proof of this theorem also relies on Lemma 5. Lemma 7 (Auxiliary Soundness Lemma) Assume Π ⊆ P ConD and σ, σ1 ∈ SubD such that σ is idempotent and Πσ = Π. Then SolD (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolD (σσ1 ) ⊆ SolD (Π) ∩ SolD (σ). Proof of Lemma 7 The hypothesis of the Lemma say that σ = σσ and Πσ = Π. On the other hand, because of the Substitution Lemma 3 and the definition of SolD , any η ∈ V alD verifies η ∈ SolD (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolD (σσ1 ) iff σ1 η ∈ SolD (Π) and σσ1 η = η. Therefore, to prove the lemma it suffices to assume (a) σ = σσ  (b) Πσ = Π  (c) σ1 η ∈ SolD (Π)  (d) σσ1 η = η  and to deduce from these assumptions that η ∈ SolD (Π) ∩ SolD (σ). First we prove that η ∈ SolD (Π) as follows: by (c) and (b), we obtain σ1 η ∈ SolD (Πσ), which amounts to σσ1 η ∈ SolD (Π) by the Substitution Lemma. By (d), this is the same as η ∈ SolD (Π). Next, we note that η ∈ SolD (σ) is equivalent to ση = η, which can be proved by the following chain of equalities: ση =(d) σσσ1 η =(a) σσ1 η =(d) η. Lemma 8 (Auxiliary Completeness Lemma) Assume Π ⊆ P ConD , σ, σ1 ∈ SubD and η, η ′ ∈ V alD such that η ∈ SolD (Π) ∩ SolD (σ), σ1 η ′ = η ′ and η ′ =\Y ′ η, where Y ′ are fresh variables away from var(Π) ∪ vdom(σ) ∪ vran(σ). Then ση ′ = η ′ and η ′ ∈ SolD (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolD (σσ1 ). Proof of Lemma 8 In what follows we can assume ση = η due to the hypothesis η ∈ SolD (σ). We prove ση ′ = η ′ by showing that Xση ′ = Xη ′ holds for any variable X ∈ Var. This is trivial for X ∈ / vdom(σ). For X ∈ vdom(σ), we can assume that Y ′ is away from X and var(Xσ); therefore η ′ =X,var(Xσ) η and hence Xση ′ = Xση = Xη = Xη ′ (where the assumption ση = η has been used at the 2nd step). Now we prove η ′ ∈ SolD (Πσ1 ). Because of the Substitution Lemma 3, this is equivalent to σ1 η ′ ∈ SolD (Π), which amounts to η ∈ SolD (Π) due to the hypothesis σ1 η ′ = η ′ , η ′ =\Y ′ η and Y ′ away from var(Π). But η ∈ SolD (Π) is also ensured by the hypothesis. Finally, η ′ ∈ SolD (σσ1 ) is equivalent to σσ1 η ′ = η ′ , which can be proved as follows: σσ1 η ′ = ση ′ = η ′ (where the 1st step relies on the assumption σ1 η ′ = η ′ and the 2nd step relies on a previously proved equality). Proof of Theorem 1 Consider the sts for H stores with transition relation ⊢⊢H, X as specified in Table 1 in Subsection 2.4.2, implicitly assuming that the notation used for the various strs is exactly the same as there. We prove that this sts satisfies the six properties enumerated in Definition 7. The last one (namely Local Completeness) holds for URS-free steps, where URS = {OH3, OH7, H13} is the set of unsafe H-strs, as explained in Subsection 2.4.2.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  93  1. Fresh Local Variables Property: The specification of the strs in Table 1 clearly guarantees this property. 2. Safe Bindings Property: An inspection of Table 1 shows that the strs H1 and H2 bind a variable to a constant, and the other strs never bind a variable X ∈ X . Therefore, this property is also satisfied. 3. Finitely Branching Property: This property holds because those strs that allow a non-deterministic choice of the next store provide only finitely many possibilities. 4. Termination Property: Given a H store Π ✷ σ and a set X ⊆ cvar(Π), we define a 5-tuple of natural numbers ||Π ✷ σ||X =def (P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 , P5 ) ∈ N5 where P1 is the number of occurrences of atomic constraints in Π which are unsolved w.r.t. X . In this context, an atomic constraint π occurring in Π is said to be unsolved w.r.t. X iff some of the strs can be applied taking π as the selected atomic constraint. P2 is the sum of the depths of all the occurrences of variables X ∈ X within patterns in Π. P3 is the sum of the syntactical sizes of all the patterns occurring in Π. P4 is the number of unsolved occurrences of obviously demanded variables in Π. In this context, an occurrence of an obviously demanded variable X in Π is called solved iff X occurs in a constraint of the form X == X, and unsolved otherwise. P5 is the number of occurrences of misplaced variables in Π. In this context, misplaced occurrences of X in Π are those occurrences of the form t == X or t /= X, with t ∈ Var and X 6= t. Let >lex be the lexicographic ordering induced by >N over N5 . We claim that: (⋆) Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ ⇒ ||Π ✷ σ||X >lex ||Π′ ✷ σ ′ ||X This is justified by Table A 1, which shows the behaviour of the different strs w.r.t. >lex . In order to understand the table, note that two different cases have been distinguished for the application of the str H11 , namely: • H11a Application of H11 choosing a value of i such that X ∩ var(ti ) 6= ∅. • H11b Application of H11 choosing a value of i such that X ∩ var(ti ) = ∅. Since >lex is a well-founded ordering, termination of ⊢⊢H, X can be concluded from (⋆). The reader is referred to Section 2.3 in (Baader and Nipkow 1998) for more information on this proof technique. 5. Local Soundness Property: Given a H store Π ✷ σ and a set X ⊆ odvarH (Π), we must prove that the union [ {SolH (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) | Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ , Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) \ var(Π ✷ σ)} is a subset of SolD (Π ✷ σ). Obviously, it suffices to prove the inclusion (†) SolH (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) ⊆ SolH (Π ✷ σ) for each Π′ ✷ σ ′ such that Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H, X ! Π′ ✷ σ ′ with Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷ σ ′ )\var(Π ✷ σ). However (†) is an easy consequence of (††) SolH (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) ⊆ SolH (Π ✷ σ)  94  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado RULES  P1  P2  P3  P4  H1  ≥  ≥  ≥  >  H2  ≥  ≥  ≥  >  H3  ≥  ≥  >  H4  ≥  ≥  ≥  H5  >  H6  >  H7  ≥  ≥  >  H8  >  H9  >  H10  ≥  ≥  ≥  H11a  ≥  >  H11b  >  H12  >  H13  >  P5  ≥  >  ≥  >  Table A 1. Well-founded progress ordering for >lex In fact, assuming (††) and an arbitrary η ∈ SolH (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )), there must be some η ′ ∈ SolH (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) such that η =\Y ′ η ′ . Then, η ′ ∈ SolH (Π ✷ σ) because of (††), and thus η ∈ SolH (Π ✷ σ) because η =\Y ′ η ′ and Y ′ ∩ var(Π ✷ σ) = ∅. Having proved that (††) entails (†), we proceed to prove (††) by a case distinction according to the str used in the step Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H, X Π′ ✷ σ ′ . In each case, we assume that the stores Π ✷ σ and Π′ ✷ σ ′ occurring in (††) have exactly the form displayed for the corresponding transformation in the Table 1 displayed in Subsection 2.4.2. For instance, in the case of transformation H1 we write (t == s) →! R, Π ✷ σ in place of Π ✷ σ. Moreover, in all the cases we silently use the fact that the constraints and variables within any store are not affected by the substitution kept in that store. H1 Assume η ∈ SolH ((t == s, Π)σ1 ✷ σσ1 ). Then η ∈ SolH ((t == s, Π)σ1 ) ∩ SolH (σσ1 ). We must prove η ∈ SolH ((t == s) →! R, Π ✷ σ). Since (t == s, Π) = (t == s, Π)σ, we can infer η ∈ SolH (t == s, Π) ∩ SolH (σ) from our assumptions and Lemma 7. It remains to prove that η ∈ SolH ((t == s) →! R). Since we already know that η ∈ SolH (t == s), it suffices to prove that Rη = true. But η ∈ SolH (σσ1 ) means σσ1 η = η, and therefore Rη = Rσσ1 η = Rσ1 η = true η = true.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP H2 H3 H4 H5  H6 H7 H8 H9 H10 H11  95  Very similar to H1. Trivial. Clearly, SolH (tm ==sm ) = SolH (h tm == h sm ). Trivial. Clearly, SolH (X == t) = SolH (t == X). Assume η ∈ SolH (tot(t), Πσ1 ✷σσ1 ). Then tη is a total pattern and η ∈ SolH (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolH (σσ1 ). We must prove η ∈ SolH (X == t, Π ✷σ). Since Π = Πσ, we can infer η ∈ SolH (Π) ∩ SolH (σ) from our assumptions and Lemma 7. It remains to prove that η ∈ SolH (X == t). But η ∈ SolH (σσ1 ) means σσ1 η = η. Thus, Xη = Xσσ1 η = Xσ1 η = tη, which implies η ∈ SolH (X == t), because tη is total. Trivial, because η ∈ SolH () is false for any η. Trivial. Clearly, SolH (ti / = si ) ⊆ SolH (h tm /= h sm ). Trivial, because η ∈ SolH (h tn /= h′ sm ) holds for any η. Trivial, for the same reason as H6. Trivial. Clearly, SolH (X /= t) = SolH (t /= X). Assume η ∈ SolH ((Zi /= ti , Π)σ1 ✷ σσ1 ). Then η ∈ SolH ((Zi /= ti )σ1 ) and η ∈ SolH (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolH (σσ1 ). We must prove η ∈ SolH (X /= c tn , Π ✷ σ). Since Π = Πσ, we can infer η ∈ SolH (Π) ∩ SolH (σ) from our assumptions and Lemma 7. It remains to prove that η ∈ SolH (X /= c tn ). Because of η ∈ SolH (σσ1 ), we know that σσ1 η = η. Therefore, it suffices to prove σσ1 η ∈ SolH (X /= c tn ), which can be reasoned as follows: σσ1 η ∈ SolH (X /= c tn ) ⇔(1) η ∈ SolH (X /= c tn )σσ1 ⇔ η ∈ SolH (X /= c tn )σ1 ⇐(2) η ∈ SolH (Zi /= ti σ1 ) ⇐(3) η ∈ SolH (Zi /= ti )σ1  where (1) holds because of the Substitution Lemma 3, (2) and (3) hold by construction of σ1 , and η ∈ SolH (Zi /= ti )σ1 holds because of the assumptions of this case. H12 Assume η ∈ SolH (Πσ1 ✷σσ1 ). Then η ∈ SolH (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolH (σσ1 ). We must prove η ∈ SolH (X /= c tn , Π ✷ σ). Since Π = Πσ, we can infer η ∈ SolH (Π) ∩ SolH (σ) from our assumptions and Lemma 7. It remains to prove that η ∈ SolH (X /= c tn ). This is the case because Xη = Xσσ1 η = Xσ1 η = (d Z m )η, where the first equality holds because of the assumption η ∈ SolH (σσ1 ) and the third equality holds by construction of σ1 . H13 Trivial, for the same reason as H6. 6. Local Completeness Property for URS-free steps: Recall the set of unsafe strs URS = {OH3, OH7, H13} defined in Subsection 2.4.2. Assume a H store Π ✷ σ and a set X ⊆ odvarH (Π), such that Π ✷ σ is URS-irreducible but not in X -solved form. We must prove that W T SolD (Π ✷ σ) is a subset of the union [ {W T SolD (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷σ ′ )) | Π✷σ ⊢⊢H,X Π′ ✷σ ′ , Y ′ = var(Π′ ✷σ ′ ) \ var(Π✷σ)} Given any well-typed solution η ∈ W T SolH (Π ✷ σ) (which satisfies in particular ση = η), we must find Π′ ✷ σ ′ and η ′ such that (‡) Π ✷ σ ⊢⊢H,X Π′ ✷ σ ′ , η ′ ∈ W T SolH (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ), η =\Y ′ η ′  96  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  so that η ∈ W T SolH (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) will be ensured. Because of the assumptions on Π ✷ σ, there must be some str Hi ∈ / URS that can be used to transform Π ✷ σ. Below we analyze all the possibilities for Hi , considering all the strs shown in Table 1 in Subsection 2.4.2 except OH3, OH7 and H13. In all the cases we conclude that the conditions (‡) displayed above can be ensured. When considering different strs that can be alternatively applied to one and the same store (as e.g. H1 and H2) we group all the possibilities within the same case, arguing that some rule in the group can be chosen to transform Π ✷ σ ensuring (‡). In all the cases, we assume that the stores Π ✷ σ and Π′ ✷ σ ′ occurring in (‡) have exactly the form displayed for the corresponding transformation in Table 1, we note the selected atomic constraint as π, and we silently use the fact that the constraints and variables within any store are not affected by the substitution kept in that store. H1, H2 In this case π is (t == s) →! R, η ∈ W T SolH (t == s →! R, Π ✷ σ) and Y ′ = ∅. Because of η ∈ W T SolH (π), one of the two following subcases must hold: (a) η(R) = true and η ∈ W T SolH(t == s) or else (b) η(R) = false and η ∈ W T SolH (t /= s)  H3  H4  H5  H7  Assume that subcase (a) holds. Then, (‡) can be ensured by transforming the given store with H1 and proving η ′ = η ∈ W T SolH(Πσ1 ✷ σσ1 ). Note that Lemma 8 can be applied with Y ′ = ∅, η ′ = η and σ1 = {R 7→ true}, because the condition σ1 η = η follows trivially from η(R) = true. Then, η ∈ SolH (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolH (σσ1 ) is ensured by Lemma 8, and η obviously remains a well-typed solution. Assume now that subcase (b) holds. Then a similar argument can be used, but choosing H2 instead of H1. In this case π is h tm == h sm and (‡) can be ensured by choosing to transform the given store with H3 and taking Y ′ = ∅ and σ ′ = σ. Note that h must be mtransparent because of the URS-freeness assumption, and the Transparency Lemma 2 can be applied to ensure that η remains a well-typed solution of the new store. In this case π is t == X, where t is not a variable, and (‡) can be trivially ensured by choosing to transform the given store with H4 and taking Y ′ = ∅ and σ ′ = σ. In this case π is t == X, with X ∈ / X,X ∈ / var(t), X 6= t. Moreover, η ∈ ′ W T SolH (X == t, Π ✷ σ) and Y = ∅. Then (‡) can be ensured by transforming the given store with H5 and proving η ′ = η ∈ W T SolH(tot(t), Πσ1 ✷ σσ1 ). The assumption η ∈ W T SolH(π) means that η(X) = tη is a total pattern, so that η(Y ) is also a total pattern for each variable Y ∈ var(t). In these conditions, η ∈ SolH (tot(t)) and σ1 η = η holds for σ1 = {X 7→ t}. This allows to apply Lemma 8 with Y ′ = ∅, η ′ = η and σ1 , ensuring that η ∈ SolH (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolH (σσ1 ). Obviously, η remains a well-typed solution. In this case, π is h tm /= h sm . Because of η ∈ W T SolH (π), there must be some index i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ m and η ∈ W T SolH(ti /= si ). Then (‡) can be ensured by choosing to transform the given store with H7 and this particular value of i, and taking Y ′ = ∅, σ ′ = σ. Note that h must be m-transparent  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  97  because of the URS-freeness assumption, and the Transparency Lemma 2 can be applied to ensure that η remains a well-typed solution of the new store. H8 In this case π is h tn /= h′ sm with h 6= h′ or n 6= m, and (‡) can be trivially ensured by choosing to transform the given store with H8, taking Y ′ = ∅ and σ ′ = σ. H10 This is a trivial case, similar to H4. H11, H12 In this case π is X /= c tn , with X ∈ / X , c ∈ DC n and X ∩ var(c tn ) 6= ∅, η ∈ W T SolH(X /= c tn Π ✷ σ). Because of η ∈ W T SolH (π), one of the two following subcases must hold for η(X): (a) η(X) = c sn , where si /= ti η holds for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n. (b) η(X) = d sm , where d ∈ DC m belongs to the same datatype as c, but d 6= c. Assume that subcase (a) holds. Then (‡) can be ensured by choosing to transform the given store with H11 and a particular value of i such that si /= ti η holds, taking Y ′ = Z n , defining η ′ as the valuation that satisfies η ′ (Zj ) = sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n and η ′ (Y ) = η(Y ) for any other variable Y and proving η ′ ∈ W T SolH ((Zi /= ti , Π)σ1 ✷ σσ1 ). Obviously, η =\Y ′ η ′ . Moreover, σ1 η ′ = η ′ , since Xσ1 η ′ = (c sn )η ′ = c sn = Xη = Xη ′ and Y σ1 η ′ = Y η ′ for any variable Y 6= X. Therefore, Lemma 8 can be applied to ensure that η ′ ∈ SolH (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolH (σσ1 ). Since η was a well-typed solution and data constructors have the transparency property (see Subsection 2.1), η ′ can be also well-typed under appropriated type assumptions for the new variables Y ′ = Z n introduced by the transformation step. It only remains to prove that η ′ ∈ SolH ((Zi /=ti )σ1 ). This can be reasoned by a chain of equivalences, ending with the condition known to hold in subcase (a): η ′ ∈ SolH ((Zi /=ti )σ1 ) ⇔(1) σ1 η ′ ∈ SolH (Zi /=ti ) ⇔(2) η ′ ∈ SolH (Zi /=ti ) ⇔ η ′ (Zi )/=ti η ′ ⇔(3) si /=ti η ′ Note that (1) holds because of Lemma 3, (2) holds because σ1 η ′ = η ′ , and (3) holds by construction of η ′ . This finishes the proof for this subcase. Finally, assume now that subcase (b) holds. Then (‡) can be ensured by choosing to transform the given store with H12 and the particular data constructor d ∈ DC m for which we know that η(X) = d sm , taking Y ′ = Z m , defining η ′ as the valuation that satisfies η ′ (Zj ) = sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ m and η ′ (Y ) = η(Y ) for any other variable Y and proving η ′ ∈ W T SolH (Πσ1 ✷ σσ1 ). Obviously, η =\Z m η ′ . Moreover, σ1 η ′ = η ′ can be easily checked, as in subcase (a). Therefore, Lemma 8 can be applied to ensure that η ′ ∈ SolH (Πσ1 ) ∩ SolH (σσ1 ). Finally, since η was a well-typed solution, η ′ is clearly also welltyped under appropriated type assumptions for the new variables Y ′ = Z n introduced by the transformation step. Using items 1. to 6. above and Lemma 5, we can now claim that solveH satisfies the requirements for solvers enumerated in Definition 6, except that the Com-  98  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  pleteness Property is guaranteed to hold only for safe (i.e., URS-free) solver invocations and the Discrimination Property has not been proved yet. The remark in item 1. of the proof of Lemma 5 allows to rephrase the Discrimination Property as follows: if a given H store Π ✷ σ satisfies neither (a) X ∩ odvar(Π) 6= ∅ nor (b) X ∩ var(Π) = ∅ then Π ✷ σ can be reduced by some ⊢⊢H, X transformation. Assume that Π ✷ σ satisfies neither (a) nor (b). Because of ¬ (b), there must be some π ∈ Π such that (c) X ∩ var(π) 6= ∅. Because of ¬ (a), this π must satisfy (d) X ∩ odvar(π) = ∅, which together with (c) entails (e) X ∩ cvar(π) 6= ∅. Using (d), (e) and reasoning by case distinction on the syntactic form of π, we find in all the cases some ⊢⊢H, X transformation which can be used to transform the store Π ✷ σ taking π as the selected atomic constraint. The cases are as follows: • π is (t == s) →! R. In this case the store can be transformed by means of H1 or H2. • π is h tm == h sm . In this case the store can be transformed by means of H3. • π is t == X with t ∈ / Var. In this case the store can be transformed by means of H4. • π is X == t with X ∈ / var(t), X 6= t. Because of (d) above we know that X ∈ / X, and the store can be transformed by means of H5. • π is X == t with X ∈ var(t), X 6= t. In this case the store can be transformed by means of H6. • π is h tm /= h sm . In this case the store can be transformed by means of H7. • π is h tn /= h′ sm with h 6= h′ or n 6= m. In this case the store can be transformed by means of H8. • π is t /= t with t ∈ Var ∪ DC ∪ DF ∪ SP F . In this case the store can be transformed by means of H9. • π is t /= X with t ∈ / Var. In this case the store can be transformed by means of H10. / X and • π is X /= c tn , with c ∈ DC n . Because of (d), (e) above we know that X ∈ X ∩ var(c tn ) 6= ∅. Therefore, the store can be transformed by means of H11 or H12. / DC m . Because of (d), (e) above we know that X ∈ / X and • π is X /= h tm with h ∈ X ∩ var(h tm ) 6= ∅. Therefore, the store can be transformed by means of H13. This completes the proof of the Discrimination Property and the Theorem. We refrain to include in this Appendix a proof of Theorem 3, stated in Subsection 2.6 and ensuring the properties required for the solver solveM . The proof would follow exactly the same pattern as the previous one, but with much simpler arguments, since the sts for M-stores involves no decompositions. Actually, this sts is finitely branching, terminating, locally sound and locally complete. Therefore, Lemma 5 can be applied to ensure all the properties required for solvers, including unrestricted completeness. We end this subsection with the proof of Theorem 2, ensuring that the amalgamated sums presented in Subsection 2.5 are well defined domains behaving as a conservative extension of their components.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP  99  Proof of Theorem 2 Assume S = D1 ⊕ · · ·⊕ Dn of signature Σ constructed as the amalgamated sum of n pairwise joinable domains Di of signatures Σi , 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Note that the information ordering ⊑ introduced in Subsection 2.2 has the same syntactic definition for any specific domain signature. Note also that any arguments concerning well typing needed for this proof can refer to the principal type declarations within signature Σ, which includes those within signature Σi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Let us now prove the four claims of the theorem in order. 1. S is well-defined as a constraint domain; i.e., the interpretations of primitive function symbols p ∈ SP F in S satisfy the four conditions listed in Definition 1 from Subsection 2.3. We consider them one by one, assuming that p is not the primitive == except in the fourth condition. (a) Polarity: Assume p ∈ SP F m and tm , t′ m , t, t′ ∈ US such that pS tm → t, tm ⊑ t′ m and t ⊒ t′ . In case that t is ⊥, we trivially conclude pS t′ n → t′ because t′ must be also ⊥. Otherwise, by the first assumption and the definition of pS , there must be some 1 ≤ i ≤ n and some t′′ m , t′′ ∈ UDi such that t′′ m ⊑ tm , t′′ ⊒ t and pDi t′′ m → t′′ . Since t′′ m ⊑ tm ⊑ t′ m and t′′ ⊒ t ⊒ t′ , pDi t′′ m → t′′ implies pS t′ m → t′ by definition of pS . (b) Radicality: Assume p ∈ SP F m and tm , t ∈ US such that pS tm → t and t is not ⊥. By the definition of pS there must be some 1 ≤ i ≤ n and some t′′ m , t′′ ∈ UDi such that t′′ m ⊑ tm , t′′ ⊒ t and pDi t′′ m → t′′ . By the radicality condition for Di , there must be some total t′ ∈ UDi such that pDi t′′ m → t′ ⊒ t′′ . Note that t′ ⊒ t′′ ⊒ t, and because of t′′ m ⊑ tm and t′ ⊒ t′ , pDi t′′ m → t′ implies pS tm → t′ by definition of pS . (c) Well-typedness: Assume p ∈ SP F m , a monomorphic instance τ ′ m → τ ′ of p’s principal type and tm , t ∈ US such that Σ ⊢W T tm :: τ ′ m and pS tm → t. In case that t is ⊥, the type judgement Σ ⊢W T ⊥ :: τ ′ holds trivially. Otherwise, by the assumption pS tm → t and the definition of pS there exist 1 ≤ i ≤ n and t′ m , t′ ∈ UDi such that t′ m ⊑ tm , t′ ⊒ t and pDi t′ m → t′ . Moreover, since t′ m ⊑ tm the assumption Σ ⊢W T tm :: τ ′ m and the Type Preservation Lemma 1 imply Σ ⊢W T t′ m :: τ ′ m Then, the well-typedness assumption for Di guarantees Σ ⊢W T t′ :: τ ′ , which implies Σ ⊢W T t :: τ ′ because of t ⊑ t′ and Lemma 1. (d) Strict Equality: The primitive == (in case that it belongs to SP F ) is interpreted as strict equality over US . This is automatically guaranteed by the amalgamated sum construction. 2. Given an index 1 ≤ i ≤ n, a primitive function symbol p ∈ SP Fim and values tm , t ∈ UDi , we must prove: pDi tm → t iff pS tm → t. By definition of pS , we know that pS tm → t holds iff there are some t′ m , t′ ∈ UDi such that t′ m ⊑ tm , t′ ⊒ t and pDi t′ m → t′ . But this condition is equivalent to pDi tm → t because pDi satisfies the polarity property. 3. Given an index 1 ≤ i ≤ n, a set of primitive constraints Π ⊆ AP ConDi and a valuation η ∈ V alDi , we will prove: η ∈ SolDi (Π) ⇔ η ∈ SolS (Π). The corresponding  100  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  equivalence for the case of well-typed solutions follows then easily. Since η ∈ SolDi (Π) ⇔ ∀π ∈ Π : η ∈ SolDi (π) ⇔ ∀π ∈ Π : η ∈ SolS (π) ⇔ η ∈ SolS (Π) it suffices to prove the equivalence (⋆) η ∈ SolDi (π) ⇔ η ∈ SolS (π) for a fixed π ∈ Π. Note that π must have the form p tm →! t for some p ∈ SP Fim , tm ∈ P atDi and total t ∈ P atDi . In case that p is ==, (⋆) is trivially true because t1 η==Di t2 η →!tη and t1 η==S t2 η →!tη hold under the same conditions, as specified in Definition 1 from Subsection 2.3. In case that p is not ==, let t′ m = tm η and t′ = tη. If t′ is not a total pattern, then neither η ∈ SolDi (π) nor η ∈ SolS (π) hold. Otherwise, η ∈ SolDi (π) ⇔ pDi t′ m → t′ ⇔(⋆⋆) pS t′ m → t′ ⇔ η ∈ SolS (π) where the (⋆⋆) step holds by the second item of this theorem, because t′ m , t′ ∈ UDi . 4. Given an index 1 ≤ i ≤ n, a set of Di -specific primitive constraints Π ⊆ AP ConDi and a valuation η ∈ V alS , we will prove: η ∈ SolS (Π) ⇔ | η |Di ∈ SolDi (Π). The corresponding equivalence for the case of well-typed solutions follows then easily. First we prove η ∈ SolS (Π) ⇐ | η |Di ∈ SolDi (Π). Assume | η |Di ∈ SolDi (Π). Applying the previous item of this theorem, we obtain | η |Di ∈ SolS (Π). Since | η |Di ⊑ η, we can apply the Monotonicity Lemma 4 and get η ∈ SolS (Π), as desired. Now we prove η ∈ SolS (Π) ⇒ | η |Di ∈ SolDi (Π). Assume η ∈ SolS (Π). Since Π is Di -specific, we can also assume that η(X) ∈ UDi for all X ∈ var(Π). Then η(X) = | η |Di (X) holds for all X ∈ var(Π), and therefore | η |Di ∈ SolS (Π), which implies | η |Di ∈ SolDi (Π), again because of the previous item of this theorem.  A.2 Properties of the CCLN C(D) Calculus The second part of the Appendix includes the proofs of the main results stated in Subection 3.6. First we present an auxiliary result which is not stated in the main text of the article. The (W T )Sol notation is intended to indicate that the lemma holds both for plain solutions and for well-typed solutions. Lemma 9 (Auxiliary Result for Checking Goal Solutions) Let G ≡ ∃U . P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R be an admissible goal for a given CF LP (C)-program P. Assume new variables Y ′ away from U and the other variables in G, and two valuations µ, µ̂ ∈ V alC such that µ̂ =\U,Y ′ µ and µ̂ ∈ (W T )SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Then µ ∈ (W T )SolP (G). Proof ˆ ∈ V alC univocally defined by the two conditions µ̂ ˆ = ′ µ̂ and µ̂ ˆ = ′ µ. Consider µ̂ \Y Y By hypothesis, µ̂ ∈ (W T )SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and the variables Y ′ do ˆ ∈ (W T )SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) is ensured by not occur in G. Therefore, µ̂ ˆ the construction of µ̂. Recalling Definition 10 (see Subsection 3.6), we only need to  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP 101 ˆ = µ in order to conclude µ ∈ (W T )SolP (G). In fact, given any variable prove µ̂ \U ˆ / Y ′ . In the first case, µ̂(X) = µ(X) by construction X∈ / U , either X ∈ Y ′ or X ∈ ˆ ˆ ˆ and µ̂(X) = µ(X) of µ̂. In the second case, µ̂(X) = µ̂(X) by construction of µ̂ because of one of the hypothesis. Next we present the proof of Theorem 4 which guarantees local soundness and completeness for the one-step transformation of a given goal. Proof of Theorem 4 Assume a given program P, an admissible goal G for P which is not in solved form, and a rule RL applicable to a selected part γ of G. The claim that there are finitely many possible transformations G ⊢⊢RL,γ,P G′j (1 ≤ j ≤ k) can be trivially checked by inspecting all the rules in Tables 3, 4, 7 and 8 one by one. We must prove two additional claims: Sk 1. Local Soundness: SolP (G) ⊇ j=1 SolP (G′j ). Sk 2. Limited Local Completeness: W T SolP (G) ⊆ j=1 W T SolP (G′j ), provided that the application of RL to the selected part γ of G is safe, i.e. it is neither an opaque application of DC nor an application of a rule from Table 8 involving an incomplete solver invocation. Claims 1. and 2. must be proved for each RL separately. In case that RL is some of the rules displayed in Table 3, proving 1. and 2. involves building suitable witnesses as multisets of CRW L(C) proof trees, using techniques originally stemming from (González-Moreno et al. 1996; González-Moreno et al. 1999) and later extended to CF LP programs without domain cooperation in (López-Fraguas et al. 2004). In case that RL is some of the rules shown in Tables 4, 7 and 8, proving 1. and 2. requires almost no work with building witnesses. We will consider rules DF and FC as representatives for Table 3, and most of the rules from Tables 4, 7 and 8, which are the main novelty in this paper. When dealing with each rule RL, we will assume that G resp. G′j are exactly as the original resp. transformed goal as displayed in the presentation of RL in Subsection 3.2, 3.3 or 3.4. In our reasonings we will use the notation M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)µ′ to indicate that the witness M is a multiset of CRW L(C) proof trees that prove (P ✷ C)µ′ from program P, using the inference rules of the CRW L(C) logic presented in (López-Fraguas et al. 2007). A.2.1 Selected rules from Table 3 Rule DF, Defined Function. In this case, γ is a production f en → t. 1. Local Soundness: Assume µ ∈ SolP (G′j ) for some 1 ≤ j ≤ k. Then there exists µ′ =\Y ,U µ such that µ′ ∈ SolP (en → tn , r → t, P ✷ C ′ , C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). From this we deduce that µ′ ∈ SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (en → tn , r → t, P ✷ C ′ , C)µ′ for a suitable witness M′ . A part of M′ proves (en → tn , r → t, C ′ )µ′ , which allows to deduce (f en → t)µ′ using the CRW L(C) inference rule which deals with defined functions. Therefore, M′ can be used to build another witness M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (f en → t, P ✷ C)µ′ . Since µ′ =\U µ, we can conclude that µ ∈ SolP (G).  102  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  2. Limited Local Completeness: Assume µ ∈ W T SolP (G). Then there is some µ′ =\U µ such that µ′ ∈ W T SolP (f en → t, P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Then, µ′ ∈ W T SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (f en → t, P ✷ C)µ′ for a suitable witness M. Note that M must include a CRW L(C) proof tree T proving the production (f en → t)µ′ using some instance of Rl : f tn → r ⇐ C ′ , suitably chosen as a variant of some P rule with new variables Y = var(Rl). Let us choose j so that G′j is the result of applying DF with f en → t as the selected part of G and Rl as the selected P rule for f . Consider a well typed µ′′ ∈ V alC that instantiates the variables in Y as required by the proof tree T , and instantiates any other variable V to µ′ (V ). By suitably reusing parts of M, it is possible to build a witness M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (en → tn , r → t, P ✷ C ′ , C)µ′′ . Since µ′′ =\Y ,U µ, we can conclude that µ ∈ W T SolP (G′j ). Rule FC, Flatten Constraint. In this case, γ is an atomic constraint p en →! t such that some ei is not a pattern and k = 1. We write G′ instead of G′1 . For the sake of simplicity, we consider p e1 t2 →! t, where e1 is not a pattern. The presentation of the rule is then as in Table 3 with n = 2, m = 1. 1. Local Soundness: Assume µ ∈ SolP (G′ ). Then there exists µ′ =\V1 ,U µ such that µ′ ∈ SolP (e1 → V1 , P ✷ p V1 t2 →! t, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Then, we get µ′ ∈ SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (e1 → V1 , P ✷ p V1 t2 →! t, C)µ′ for a suitable witness M′ . A part of M′ proves (e1 → V1 , p V1 t2 →! t)µ′ , which allows to deduce (p e1 t2 →! t)µ′ using the CRW L(C) inference rule which deals with primitive functions. Therefore, M′ can be used to build another witness M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ p e1 t2 →! t, C)µ′ . Since µ′ =\U µ, we can conclude that µ ∈ SolP (G). 2. Limited Local Completeness: Assume µ ∈ W T SolP (G). Then there is some µ′ =\U µ such that µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ p e1 t2 →! t, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Then, µ′ ∈ W T SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ p e1 t2 →! t, C)µ′ for a suitable witness M. Note that M must include a CRW L(C) proof tree T proving the atomic constraint (p e1 t2 →! t)µ′ . A part of T must prove a production of the form e1 µ′ → t1 for some suitable pattern t1 . Consider a well typed µ′′ ∈ V alC such that µ′′ (V1 ) = t1 and µ′′ =\V1 µ′ . By suitably reusing parts of M, it is possible to build a witness M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (e1 → V1 , P ✷ p V1 t2 →! t, C)µ′′ . Since µ′′ =\V1 ,U µ, we can conclude that µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ). A.2.2 Rules from Table 4 Rule SB, Set Bridges. In this case, γ is a primitive atomic constraint π which can be used to compute bridges, and k = 1. We write G′ instead of G′1 . The application ′ of the rule computes ∃V ′ B ′ = bridgesD→D (π, BM ) 6= ∅, where D = F D and D′ = R or vice versa, according to the two cases (i) and (ii) explained in Table 4. 1. Local Soundness: Assume µ ∈ SolP (G′ ). Then there exists µ′ =\V ′ ,U µ such that µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ π, C ✷ M ′ ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Therefore, µ′ ∈ SolC (M ′ ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ π, C)µ′ for a suitable witness M′ . Since M ′ is B ′ , M , we get µ′ ∈ SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ π, C)µ′ , which implies µ ∈ SolP (G) because of Lemma 9.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP 103 2. Limited Local Completeness: Assume µ ∈ W T SolP (G). Then there is some µ′ =\U µ such that µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ π, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Therefore, µ′ ∈ W T SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ π, C)µ′ for a suitable witness M. Since π is primitive, these conditions imply µ′ ∈ W T SolC (π ∧ BM ). By item 2. of Proposition 1 from Subsection 3.3, we know that V ′ are new fresh variables and W T SolC (π ∧ BM ) ⊆ W T SolC (∃V ′ (π ∧ BM ∧ B ′ )). From this we can conclude that µ′ ∈ W T SolC (∃V ′ (π ∧ BM ∧ B ′ )) and therefore there is some µ′′ =\V ′ µ′ such that µ′′′ ∈ W T SolC (π∧BM ∧B ′ ). Since V ′ are new variables not occurring in G, it is easy to check that µ′′ ∈ W T SolC (M ′ ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ π, C)µ′′ , which ensures µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ). Rule PP, Propagate Projections. In this case, γ is a primitive atomic constraint π which can be used to compute projections, and k = 1. We write G′ instead of G′1 . The application of the rule obtains G′ from G by computing ∃V ′ Π′ = ′ proj D→D (π, BM ) 6= ∅, where D = F D and D′ = R or vice versa, according to the two cases (i) and (ii) explained in Table 4. The reasonings for local soundness and limited local completeness are quite similar to those used in the case of rule SB, except that item 3. of Proposition 1 must be used in place of item 2. Rule SC, Submit Constraints. In this case, γ is a primitive atomic constraint π and k = 1. We write G′ instead of G′1 . 1. Local Soundness: Assume µ ∈ SolP (G′ ). Then there exists µ′ =\U µ such that µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ′ ✷ H ′ ✷ F ′ ✷ R′ ). Therefore, µ′ ∈ SolC (M ′ ✷ H ′ ✷ F ′ ✷ R′ ) and M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)µ′ for a suitable witness M′ . Due to the syntactic relationship between G and G′ (see Table 4), µ′ ∈ SolC (M ′ ✷ H ′ ✷ F ′ ✷ R′ ) amounts to µ′ ∈ SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and µ′ ∈ SolC (π). Due to µ′ ∈ SolC (π), the witness M′ can be expanded to another witness M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ π, C)µ′ . Thanks to this new witness we obtain µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ π, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and thus µ ∈ SolP (G). 2. Limited Local Completeness: Assume µ ∈ W T SolP (G). Then there is some µ′ =\U µ such that µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ π, C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Therefore, µ′ ∈ W T SolC (M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ π, C)µ′ for a suitable witness M. Because of the syntactic relationship between G and G′ and the fact that π is primitive, we can conclude that µ′ ∈ W T SolC (M ′ ✷ H ′ ✷ F ′ ✷ R′ ). Let M′ be the witness constructed from M by omitting the CRW L(C) proof tree for πµ′ which is part of M. Then M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)µ′ . This allows to conclude µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ′ ✷ H ′ ✷ F ′ ✷ R′ ) and thus µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ).  A.2.3 Rules from Table 7 Rule IE, Infer Equalities. This rule includes two similar cases. Here we will treat only the first one, the second one being completely analogous. The selected part γ is a pair of bridges of the form X #== RX, X ′ #== RX and k = 1. We write G′ instead of G′1 .  104  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  1. Local Soundness: Assume µ ∈ SolP (G′ ). Then there exists µ′ =\U µ such that µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ C ✷ X #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ X == X ′ , F ✷ R). This implies two facts: firstly, M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)µ′ for a suitable witness M′ ; and secondly, µ′ ∈ SolC (X #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ X == X ′ , F ✷ R). The second fact clearly implies µ′ ∈ SolC (X #== RX, X ′ #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Along with the witness M′ , this condition guarantees µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ C ✷ X #== RX, X ′ #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R) and hence µ ∈ SolP (G). 2. Limited Local Completeness: Assume µ ∈ W T SolP (G). Then there is some µ′ =\U µ such that µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C ✷ X #== RX, X ′ #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). This implies two facts: firstly, M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)µ′ for a suitable witness M; and secondly, µ′ ∈ W T SolC (X #== RX, X ′ #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). The second fact clearly implies µ′ ∈ W T SolC (X #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ X == X ′ , F ✷ R). Then, µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C ✷ X #== RX, M ✷ H ✷ X == X ′ , F ✷ R) holds thanks to the same witness M, and therefore µ ∈ SolP (G′ ). Rule ID, Infer Disequalities. This rule includes two similar cases. Here we consider only the first one, the second one being completely analogous. The selected part γ is an antibridge of the form X #/== u′ placed within the M store, and k = 1. We write G′ instead of G′1 . The application of the rule obtains G′ from G by dropping X #/== u′ from M and adding a semantically equivalent disequality constraint X /= u to the F store. The reasonings for local soundness and limited local completeness are very similar to those used in the case of rule IE. A.2.4 Rules from Table 8 Here we present only the proofs concerning the two rules FS and SF. Note that the soundness and completeness properties of the F D solver refer to valuations over the universe UF D , that must be related to valuations over the universe UC by means of Theorem 2 from Subsection 2.5, as we will see below. The same technique can be applied to the rules MS and RS. Rule HS can be also handled similarly to FS, but in this case Theorem 2 is not needed because the soundness and completeness properties of the extensible H-solver refer directly to valuations over the universe UC . Rule FS F D-Constraint Solver (black-box). The selected part γ is the F D-store F. 1. Local Soundness: Let us choose G′ as one of the finitely many goals G′j such that G ⊢⊢FS,γ,P G′j . Then G′ = ∃Y ′ , U .(P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ (Π′ ✷ σF ) ✷ R)@F D σ ′ for some ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) chosen as one of the alternatives computed by the F D-solver, i.e. such that ΠF ⊢⊢solveFD ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ). Assume now µ ∈ SolP (G′ ). Then there exists µ′ =\Y ′ ,U µ such that µ′ ∈ SolP ((P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ (Π′ ✷ σF ) ✷ R)@F D σ ′ ) for some ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) such that ΠF ⊢⊢solveFD ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ). Since Π′ ✷ σ ′ is a store, we can assume Π′ σ ′ = Π′ and deduce the following conditions: (0) M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)σ ′ µ′ for a suitable witness M′  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP 105 (1) µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠM σ ′ ✷ σM ⋆ σ ′ ) (2) µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠH σ ′ ✷ σH ⋆ σ ′ ) (3) µ′ ∈ SolC (Π′ σ ′ ✷ σF σ ′ ), where Π′ σ ′ = Π′ (4) µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠR σ ′ ✷ σR ⋆ σ ′ ) In particular, (3) implies µ′ ∈ Sol(σF σ ′ ), i.e. (5) σF σ ′ µ′ = µ′ In order to conclude that µ ∈ SolP (G), we show that the hypothesis of the auxiliary Lemma 9 hold for µ̂ = µ′ . Clearly, µ̂ =\U ,Y ′ µ and the new variables Y ′ are away from U and the other variables in G. We still have to prove that µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). • Proof of µ′ ∈ SolP (P ✷ C): Due to the invariant properties of admissible goals, (P ✷ C) = (P ✷ C)σF . Using this equality and (5) we get (P ✷ C)σ ′ µ′ = (P ✷ C)σF σ ′ µ′ = (P ✷ C)µ′ . Therefore, M′ : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)µ′ follows from (0). • Proof of µ′ ∈ SolC (S), S being any of the stores M , H, R: According to the choice of S we can use (1), (2) or (4) to conclude (6) µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠS σ ′ ) and (7) µ′ ∈ Sol(σS ⋆ σ ′ ) i.e. (σS ⋆ σ ′ )µ′ = µ′ — Proof of µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠS ): Due to the invariant properties of admissible goals, ΠS = ΠS σF . Then (6) is equivalent to µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠS σF σ ′ ). By applying the Substitution Lemma 3 we deduce σF σ ′ µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠS ), which amounts to µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠS ) because of (5). — Proof of µ′ ∈ Sol(σS ): Assume any variable X ∈ vdom(σS ). Then Xµ′ = XσS σ ′ µ′ = XσS σF σ ′ µ′ = XσS µ′ where the first equality holds because of (7), the second equality holds because the admissibility properties of G guarantee σS ⋆ σF = σS , and the third equality holds because of (5). • Proof of µ′ ∈ SolC (F ): First, we claim that (8) | σ ′ µ′ |F D ∈ Sol(σ ′ ) i.e. σ ′ | σ ′ µ′ |F D = | σ ′ µ′ |F D To prove the claim, assume any X ∈ vdom(σ ′ ). Because of Postulate 2 there are two possible cases: (a) σ ′ (X) is an integer value n. Then: Xσ ′ | σ ′ µ′ |F D = n = | Xσ ′ µ′ |F D = X | σ ′ µ′ |F D (b) X ∈ var(ΠF ) and σ ′ (X) is a variable X ′ ∈ var(ΠF ). Then σ ′ (X ′ ) = X ′ because σ ′ is idempotent, and: Xσ ′ | σ ′ µ′ |F D = X ′ | σ ′ µ′ |F D = | X ′ σ ′ µ′ |F D = | X ′ µ′ |F D = | Xσ ′ µ′ |F D = X | σ ′ µ′ |F D We continue our reasoning using (8). — Proof of µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠF ): From (3) and the Substitution Lemma 3 we get  106  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado σ ′ µ′ ∈ SolC (Π′ ). Because of Postulate 2 we can assume that all the constraints belonging to Π′ are F D-specific. Then, item 4. of Theorem 2 can be applied to conclude | σ ′ µ′ |F D ∈ SolF D (Π′ ). Using (8) we get | σ ′ µ′ |F D ∈ SolF D (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ), which trivially implies | σ ′ µ′ |F D ∈ SolF D (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )). Because of the soundness property of the F D-solver (see Definition 6 and Postulate 2) we obtain | σ ′ µ′ |F D ∈ SolF D (ΠF ). Applying again item 4. of Theorem 2, we get σ ′ µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠF ). Since ΠF ✷ σF is a store, ΠF = ΠF σF and therefore σ ′ µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠF σF ). Then, the Substitution Lemma 3 yields σF σ ′ µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠF ), which is the same as µ′ ∈ SolC (ΠF ) because of (5). — Proof of µ′ ∈ Sol(σF ): µ′ = σF µ′ follows from the following chain of equalities, which relies on (5) and the idempotency of σF : µ′ = σF σ ′ µ′ = σF σF σ ′ µ′ = σF µ′  2. Limited Local Completeness: At this point we assume that rule FS can be applied to G in a safe way, i.e. that the solver invocation solveF D (ΠF ) satisfies the completeness property for solvers stated in Definition 6 (see Subsection 2.4.1). Assume µ ∈ W T SolP (G). Then there is some µ′ =\U µ such that µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R). Consequently, we can assume: (9) (P ✷ C)µ′ is well-typed and M : P ⊢CRW L(C) (P ✷ C)µ′ for some witness M (10) µ′ ∈ W T SolC (M ) (11) µ′ ∈ W T SolC (H) (12) µ′ ∈ W T SolC (F ) (13) µ′ ∈ W T SolC (R) In particular, (12) implies µ′ ∈ W T SolC (ΠF ). Thanks to Postulate 2 we can assume that ΠF is F D-specific and apply item 4 of Theorem 2 to conclude | µ′ |F D ∈ W T SolF D (ΠF ). By completeness of the solver invocation solveF D (ΠF ) there is some alternative ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) computed by the solver (i.e. such that ΠF ⊢⊢solveFD ∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) verifying (14) | µ′ |F D ∈ W T SolF D (∃Y ′ (Π′ ✷ σ ′ )) Then G′ = ∃Y ′ , U .(P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ (Π′ ✷ σF ) ✷ R)@F D σ ′ is one of the the finitely many goals G′j such that G ⊢⊢FS,γ,P G′j . In the rest of the proof we will show that µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ) by finding µ′′ =\Y ′ ,U µ such that (†) µ′′ ∈ SolP ((P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ (Π′ ✷ σF ) ✷ R)@F D σ ′ ) ˆ ∈ V alF D such that Because of (14) there is µ̂ ˆ ∈ W T SolF D (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) (15) | µ′ |F D =\Y ′ µ̂ ˆ and µ′′ = ′ µ′ . Let µ′′ ∈ V alC be univocally defined by the conditions µ′′ =Y ′ µ̂ \Y ˆ because µ′ , it follows that µ′′ = ′ µ. Moreover, | µ′′ |F D = µ̂, Since µ = \U  \Y ,U  for any variable X ∈ Var there are two possible cases: either X ∈ Y ′ and then ˆ |F D (X) = µ̂(X), ˆ ˆ ∈ V alF D ; or else X ∈ | µ′′ |F D (X) = | µ̂ since µ̂ / Y ′ and ′′ ′ ′ ˆ ˆ then | µ |F D (X) = | µ |F D (X) = µ̂(X), since | µ |F D =\Y ′ µ̂. From (15) and ˆ we obtain µ′′ ∈ W T SolF D (Π′ ) by applying item 4 of Theorem 2. We | µ′′ |F D = µ̂  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP 107 now claim: (16) µ′′ ∈ W T SolF D (Π′ ✷ σ ′ ) To justify this claim it is sufficient to prove µ′′ ∈ Sol(σ ′ ), i.e. σ ′ µ′′ = µ′′ . In order to prove this let us assume any X ∈ vdom(σ ′ ). Because of Postulate 2, there are two possible cases: ˆ ∈ Sol(σ ′ ) and therefore (a) σ ′ (X) is an integer value n. From (15) we know µ̂ ′′ ′′ ˆ it follows that µ (X) = n, and then Xσ ′ µ′′ = ˆ µ̂(X) = n. Since | µ |F D = µ̂, n = Xµ′′ . (b) X ∈ var(ΠF ) and σ ′ (X) is a variable X ′ ∈ var(ΠF ). Then: Xσ ′ µ′′ = X ′ µ′′ = X ′ µ′ (using µ′′ =\Y ′ µ′ and X ′ ∈ / Y ′) ′ ′ = | X µ |F D (using the fact that ΠF is F D-specific and (12)) = X ′ | µ ′ |F D ˆ (using (15) and X ′ ∈ / Y ′) = X ′ µ̂ ′ˆ ˆ (using (15)) = Xσ µ̂ = X µ̂ = X | µ ′ |F D (using (15) and X ∈ / Y ′) ′ ′ = | Xµ |F D = Xµ (using the fact that ΠF is F D-specific and (12)) = Xµ′′ (using µ′′ =\Y ′ µ′ and X ∈ / Y ′) We are now in a position to prove (†), thereby finishing the proof: • Proof of µ′′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C)σ ′ : Because of the Substitution Lemma 3, this is equivalent to σ ′ µ′′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C). Because of (16), σ ′ µ′′ = µ′′ . Since µ′ =\Y ′ µ′′ and the variables Y ′ do not occur in P ✷ C, µ′′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C) is equivalent to µ′ ∈ W T SolP (P ✷ C), which is ensured by the same witness M given by (9). • Proof of µ′′ ∈ W T SolC (S ⋆ σ ′ ), S being any of the stores M , H, R: According to the choice of S we can use (10), (11) or (13) to conclude (17) µ′ ∈ W T SolC (ΠS ) and (18) µ′ ∈ Sol(σS ) i.e. σS µ′ = µ′ — Proof of µ′′ ∈ W T SolC (ΠS σ ′ ): Since µ′′ =\Y ′ µ′ and the variables Y ′ do not occur in ΠS , (17) implies µ′′ ∈ W T SolC (ΠS ), which is equivalent to σ ′ µ′′ ∈ W T SolC (ΠS ) because of (16). Then, µ′′ ∈ W T SolC (ΠS σ ′ ) follows from the Substitution Lemma 3. — Proof of µ′′ ∈ W T Sol(σS ⋆ σ ′ ): Assume any variable X ∈ vdom(σS ). Then XσS σ ′ µ′′ = XσS µ′′ = XσS µ′ = Xµ′ = Xµ′′ where the first equality holds because of (16), the second equality holds because µ′′ =\Y ′ µ′ and the variables Y ′ do not occur in XσS , the third equality holds because of (18), and the fourth equality holds because µ′′ =\Y ′ µ′ and the variables Y ′ do not include X. • Proof of µ′′ ∈ W T SolC (Π′ σ ′ ✷ σF σ ′ ): — Proof of µ′′ ∈ W T SolC (Π′ σ ′ ): This is a trivial consequence of (16), since Π′ σ ′ = Π′ (because Π′ ✷ σ ′ is a store).  108  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado — Proof of µ′′ ∈ Sol(σF σ ′ ): Because of (16) we can assume that µ′′ ∈ Sol(σ ′ ), i.e. σ ′ µ′′ = µ′′ . We must prove σF σ ′ µ′′ = µ′′ . Assume any variable X ∈ vdom(σF σ ′ ). Because of the invariant properties of admissible goals, there are three possible cases: (a) X ∈ vdom(σF ) and σF (X) is an integer value n. Because of (12), we know that µ′ ∈ Sol(σF ) and hence XσF µ′ = n = Xµ′ . Moreover, Xµ′′ = Xµ′ = n because µ′′ =\Y ′ µ′ and the variables Y ′ do not include X. Then we can conclude that XσF σ ′ µ′′ = n = Xµ′′ . (b) X ∈ vdom(σF ) and σF (X) = X ′ ∈ var(ΠF ). Then: XσF σ ′ µ′′ = X ′ σ ′ µ′′ = X ′ µ′′ (using (16)) / Y ′) = X ′ µ′ (using µ′′ =\Y ′ µ′ and X ′ ∈ ′ ′ = XσF µ = Xµ (using (12)) / Y ′) = Xµ′′ (using µ′′ =\Y ′ µ′ and X ∈ (c) X ∈ / vdom(σF ). Then XσF = X, and we can use µ′′ ∈ Sol(σ ′ ) to deduce that XσF σ ′ µ′′ = Xσ ′ µ′′ = Xµ′′ .  Rule SF, Solving Failure. The selected part γ is one of the four stores of the goal, the number k of possible transformations G ⊢⊢RL,γ,P G′j of G into a non-failed goal Sk G′j is 0, and therefore j=1 W T SolP (G′j ) = ∅. 1. Local Soundness: The inclusion SolP (G) ⊇ ∅ holds trivially. 2. Limited Local Completeness: The inclusion W T SolP (G) ⊆ ∅ is equivalent to W T SolP (G) = ∅. In order to prove this, we assume that the application of SF to G has relied on a complete invocation of the D solver. Since the invocation of the solver has failed (i.e., ΠS ⊢⊢solveD ) but it is assumed to be complete, we X know that W T SolD (ΠS ) = ∅. From this we can conclude W T SolC (ΠS ) = ∅, using item 4 of Theorem 2 in case that D is not H. Finally, W T SolP (G) = ∅ is a trivial consequence of W T SolC (ΠS ) = ∅.  A.2.5 Proof of the Progress Lemma In this Subsection we prove the Progress Lemma 6 used in Subsection 3.6 to obtain the Global Completeness Theorem 6. First, we define a well-founded progress ordering ⊲ between pairs (G, M) formed by an admissible goal G without free occurrences of higher-order variables and a witness M = {T1 , . . . , Tn } for the fact that µ ∈ SolP (G). Given such a pair, we define a 7-tuple ||(G, M)|| =def (O1 , O2 , O3 , O4 , O5 , O6 , O7 ) (where O1 is a finite multiset of natural numbers and O2 , . . . , O7 are natural numbers) as follows: O1 is the restricted size of the witness M, defined as the multiset of natural numbers {| T1 |, . . . , | Tn |}, where | Ti | (1 ≤ i ≤ n) denotes the restricted size of the CRW L(C) proof tree Ti as defined in (López-Fraguas et al. 2007), namely as the number of nodes in Ti corresponding to CRW L(C) inference steps that depend on the meaning of primitive functions p (as interpreted in  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP 109  O2  O3 O4 O5  O6 O7  the coordination domain C) plus the number of nodes in Ti corresponding to CRW L(C) inference steps that depend on the meaning of user-defined functions f (according to the current program P). is the sum of ||p en || for all the total applications p en of primitive functions p ∈ P F n occurring in the parts P and C of G, where ||p en || is defined as the number of argument expressions ei (1 ≤ i ≤ n) that are not patterns. is the number of occurrences of rigid and passive expressions h en that are not patterns in the productions P of G. is the sum of the syntactic sizes of the right hand sides of all the productions occurring in P . is the sum sf M + sf H + sf F + sf R of the solvability flags of the four constraint stores occurring in G. The solvability flag sf M takes the value 1 if rule MS from Table 8 can be applied to G, and 0 otherwise. The other three flags are defined analogously. is the number of bridges occurring in the mediatorial store M of G. is the number of antibridges occurring in the mediatorial store M of G.  Let >lex be the lexicographic product of the 7 orderings >i (1 ≤ i ≤ 7), where >1 is the multiset ordering >mul over multisets of natural numbers, and >i is the ordinary ordering > over natural numbers for 2 ≤ i ≤ 7. Finally, let us define the progress ordering ⊲ by the condition (G, M) ⊲ (G′ , M′ ) iff ||(G, M)|| >lex ||(G′ , M′ )||. As proved in (Baader and Nipkow 1998), >mul is a well-founded ordering and the lexicographic product of well-founded orderings is again a well-founded ordering. Therefore, ⊲ is well-founded. Now we can prove the Progress Lemma 6. Proof of Lemma 6 Consider an admissible goal G ≡ ∃U . P ✷ C ✷ M ✷ H ✷ F ✷ R for a program P, a well-typed solution µ ∈ W T SolP (G) and a witness M for the fact that µ ∈ SolP (G). Assume that neither P nor G have free occurrences of higher-order variables, and that G is not in solved form. 1. Let us prove that there must be some rule RL applicable to G which is not a failure rule. Since G is not in solved form, we know that either P 6= ∅ , or else C 6= ∅, or else some of the transformations displayed in Tables 7 and 8 can be applied to G. Note that CF cannot be applied to G because G has got solutions. Moreover, if the failing rule SF would be applicable to G, then some of the other rules in Table 8 would be applicable also. Let PR be the set of those transformation rules displayed in Table 3 which are different of CF, EL and FC. In the following items we analyze different cases according to the from of G. In each case we either find some rule RL that can be applied to G or we make some assumption that can be used to reason in the subsequent cases. In the last item we conclude that rule EL can be applied, if no previous item has allowed to prove the applicability of another rule. (a) If some of the transformation rules in Tables 7 and 8 can be applied to G, then we are ready. In the following items we assume that this is not the case.  110  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado  (b) If P 6= ∅ and some rule RL ∈ PR can be applied to G, then we are ready. In the following items we assume that this is not the case. (c) Due to the hypothesis that G has no free occurrences of higher-order variables, from this point on we can assume that each production occurring in P must have one of the three following forms: i h em → X, with h em passive but not a pattern. ii f en ak → X, with f ∈ DF n and k ≥ 0. iii p en → X, with p ∈ P F n .  (d)  (e)  (f)  (g)  If this were not the case, then P would include some production e → t of some other form, and a simple case analysis of the syntactic form of e → t would lead to the conclusion that some rule RL ∈ PR could be applied to it. If C 6= ∅ and includes some atomic constraint α that is not primitive, then the rule FC from Table 3 can be applied to α, and we are ready. In the following items we assume that this is not the case. If C 6= ∅ and only includes primitive atomic constraints π, then at least rule rule SC from Table 4 (and maybe also rules SB and PP) can be applied to G taking π as the selected part, and we are ready. In the following items we assume that C = ∅. At this point, if there would be some variable X ∈ pvar(P ) ∩ odvar(G), this X would be the right-hand side of some production in P with one of the three forms i, or ii or iii displayed in item (c) above, and one of the three rules IM or DF or PC could be applied, which contradicts the assumptions made at item (b). From this point on, we can assume that pvar(P ) ∩ odvar(G) = ∅. Let S = ΠS ✷ σS be any of the four stores, let D be the corresponding domain, and let χ = pvar(P ) ∩ var(ΠS ). Because of the assumptions made at item (a), S must be in χ-solved form and the discrimination property of the solver solveD ensures that one of the two following conditions must hold: i χ ∩ odvarD (ΠS ) 6= ∅, i.e. pvar(P ) ∩ var(ΠS ) ∩ odvarD (ΠS ) 6= ∅. ii χ ∩ varD (ΠS ) = ∅, i.e. pvar(P ) ∩ var(ΠS ) = ∅.  Since i contradicts the assumption pvar(P ) ∩ odvar(G) = ∅ made at item (f), ii must hold for the four stores. On the other hand, the invariant properties of admissible goals guarantee that produced variables cannot occur in the answer substitutions σS . (h) At this point, because of the assumptions made at the previous items, we can assume that C = ∅, the four stores are in solved form and include no produced variables, and all the productions occurring in P have the form e → X, where X is a variable. Since G is not solved, it must be the case that P 6= ∅. Note that pvar(P ) is finite and not empty. Moreover, the transitive closure ≫+ P of the production relation ≫P between produced variables must be irreflexive, due to the invariant properties of admissible goals. Therefore, there is some production (e → X) ∈ P such that X is minimal w.r.t. ≫P . The variable X cannot occur in e because this would imply X ≫P X, con′ ′ tradicting the irreflexivity of ≫+ P . For any other production (e → X ) ∈ P , ′ X must be different of X because of the invariant properties of admissible  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP 111 goals, and X cannot occur in e′ because this would imply X ≫P X ′ , contradicting the minimality of X w.r.t. ≫P . Moreover, X cannot occur in the stores because they include no produced variables. Therefore, X does not occur in the rest of the goal, and the rule EL can be applied to eliminate e → X. 2. Assume now any choice of a rule RL (not a failure rule) and a part γ of G, such that RL can be applied to γ in a safe manner, i.e. involving neither an opaque application of DC nor an incomplete solver invocation. We must prove the existence of a ′ ′ ′ finite computation G ⊢⊢+ RL,γ,P G and a witness M : µ ∈ W T SolP (G ) such that ′ ′ (G, M) ⊲ (G , M ). Due to the Limited Local Completeness of CCLN C(C) (Theorem 4, item 2.), there is one step G ⊢⊢RL,γ,P G′1 such that M′ : µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ) with a witness M′ constructed as we have sketched in the proof of Theorem 4. We define the desired finite computation by distinction of cases, as follows: (a) If RL is different from the two rules SB and PP, then the finite computation is chosen as G ⊢⊢RL,γ,P G′1 and G′ is G′1 . (b) If RL is SB and PP is applicable to γ, then the finite computation is chosen as G ⊢⊢SB,γ,P G′1 ⊢⊢PP,γ,P G′2 ⊢⊢SC,γ,P G′3 and G′ is G3 . (c) If RL is SB and PP is not applicable to γ, then the finite computation is chosen as G ⊢⊢SB,γ,P G′1 ⊢⊢SC,γ,P G′2 and G′ is G2 . (d) If RL is PP and SB is applicable to γ, then the finite computation is chosen as G ⊢⊢PP,γ,P G′1 ⊢⊢SB,γ,P G′2 ⊢⊢SC,γ,P G′3 and G′ is G3 . (e) If RL is PP and SB is not applicable to γ, then the finite computation is chosen as G ⊢⊢PP,γ,P G′1 ⊢⊢SC,γ,P G′2 and G′ is G2 . Note that cases (b), (c), (d), and (e) above refer to the rules in Table 4. In all these cases, the Limited Local Completeness of CCLN C(C) allows to find all the computation steps and a witness M′ : µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ). In all the cases, we claim that (G, M) ⊲ (G′ , M′ ), i.e. ||(G, M)|| >lex ||(G′ , M′ )||. This can be justified by Table A 2. Each file of this table corresponds to a possibility for the rule RL used ′ in a one-step finite computation G ⊢⊢+ RL,γ,P G of type (a), except for one file which + corresponds to a finite computation G ⊢⊢RL,γ,P G′ of type (b), (c), (d) or (e). Each column 1 ≤ i ≤ 7 shows the variation in Oi according to >i when going from ||(G, M)|| to ||(G′ , M′ )|| by means of the corresponding finite computation. For instance, the file for IE shows that the application of this rule does not increase Oi for 1 ≤ i ≤ 5 and decreases O6 . It only remains to show that the information displayed in Table A 2 is correct. Here we limit ourselves to explain the key ideas. A more precise proof could be presented on the basis of a more detailed construction of the witnesses M′ : µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ). • For every rule RL, the application of RL does not increase O1 , as shown by the first column of the table. This happens because the witness M′ can be constructed from M in such a way that all the inference steps within M′ dealing with primitive and defined functions are borrowed from M. • The application of any of the rule DF strictly decreases O1 , as seen in the table. The reason is that the witness M includes a CRW L(C) proof tree T  112  Estévez, Fernández, Hortalá, Rodrı́guez, Sáenz and del Vado RULES  O1  O2  O3  O4  O5  O6  DC  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  >  SP  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  >  IM  ≥mul  ≥  >  EL  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  >  DF  >mul  PC  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  >  FC  ≥mul  >  (b),(c),(d),(e)  >mul  IE  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  ≥  ≥  >  ID  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  ≥  ≥  ≥  MS  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  ≥  >  HS  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  ≥  >  FS  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  ≥  >  RS  ≥mul  ≥  ≥  ≥  >  O7  >  Table A 2. Well-founded progress ordering ⊲ for CCLN C(C)  for an appropriate instance of a production of the form f en → t. The root inference of this proof tree contributes to the restricted size of M and disappears in the witness M′ constructed from M as sketched in Subsection A.2.1. Therefore, the restricted size of M′ decreases by one w.r.t. the restricted size of M. • The table also shows that finite computations of type (b), (c), (d) or (e) strictly decrease O1 . The reason is that such finite computations always work with a fixed primitive atomic constraint π which is ultimately moved from the constraint pool C of G to one of the stores in G′ when performing the last SC computation step. The witness M : µ ∈ W T SolP (G) includes a CRW L(C) proof tree for an appropriate instance of π, while no corresponding proof tree is needed in the witness M′ . Therefore, the restricted size of M′ decreases by some positive amount. • The application of rule FC decrements O2 , because G includes a production p en → t with ||p en || > 0, which is replaced in G′ by a primitive atomic constraint p tn →! t with ||p tn || = 0 and some new productions ei → Vi whose contribution to the O2 measure of G′ must be smaller than ||p en ||.  On the Cooperation of the Constraint Domains H, R and F D in CF LP 113 • The application of rule IE decreases O6 and does not increment Oi for 1 ≤ i ≤ 5. This is because in this case the witness M′ can be chosen as M itself, the measures O2 , O3 , O4 and O5 are obviously not affected by IE, and the measure O6 obviously decreases by 1 when IE is applied. • Because of similar reasons, the application of rule ID decreases O7 and does not increment Oi for 1 ≤ i ≤ 6. • Let RL be any of the four constraint solving transformations MS, HS, FS and RS. The witness M′ : µ ∈ W T SolP (G′ ) can be guaranteed to exist only if the solver invocation has been a complete one. In this case, M′ can be chosen as the same witness M, and therefore the O1 measure does not increase when going from G to G′ . Measures O2 , O3 and O4 are not affected by the bindings created by the solver invocations (since they substitute patterns for variables). Measure O5 obviously decreases, since the solvability flag sf S for the store that has been solved descends from 1 to 0.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
