Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_3337

Abstract:
Small-loss bounds for online learning with partial information  arXiv:1711.03639v2 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2018  Thodoris Lykouris  ∗  Karthik Sridharan  †  Éva Tardos‡  Abstract We consider the problem of adversarial (non-stochastic) online learning with partial information feedback, where at each round, a decision maker selects an action from a finite set of alternatives. We develop a black-box approach for such problems where the learner observes as feedback only losses of a subset of the actions that includes the selected action. When losses of actions are non-negative, under the graph-based feedback model introduced by Mannor and Shamir, we offer algorithms that attain the so called “small-loss” o(αL⋆ ) regret bounds with high probability, where α is the independence number of the graph, and L⋆ is the loss of the best action. Prior to our work, there was no data-dependent guarantee for general feedback graphs even for pseudo-regret (without dependence on the number of actions, i.e. utilizing the increased information feedback). Taking advantage of the black-box nature of our technique, we extend our results to many other applications such as semi-bandits (including routing in networks), contextual bandits (even with an infinite comparator class), as well as learning with slowly changing (shifting) comparators. In the special case of classical bandit √ and semi-bandit problems, we provide optimal smalle dL⋆ ) for actual regret, where d is the number of actions, loss, high-probability guarantees of O( answering open questions of Neu. Previous bounds for bandits and semi-bandits were known only √ e κL⋆ ) regret guarantee for for pseudo-regret and only in expectation. We also offer an optimal O( fixed feedback graphs with clique-partition number at most κ.  ∗  Cornell University, teddlyk@cs.cornell.edu. Work supported under NSF grant CCF-1563714. Cornell University, sridharan@cs.cornell.edu. Work supported in part by NSF grant CDS&e-mss 1521544. ‡ Cornell University, eva@cs.cornell.edu. Work supported in part by NSF grant CCF-1563714.  †  1  Introduction  The online learning paradigm [LW94, CBL06] has become a key tool for solving a wide spectrum of problems such as developing strategies for players in large multiplayer games [BEDL06, BHLR08, Rou15, LST16, FLL+ 16], designing of online marketplaces and auctions [BH05, CBGM13, RW16], portfolio investment [Cov91, FS97, HAK07], online routing [AK04, KV05]. In each of these applications, the learner has to repeatedly select some action on every round. Different actions have different costs or losses associated with them on every round. The goal of the learner is to minimize “regret” which is defined as the difference between the cumulative loss of the learner, and the cumulative loss L⋆ of the benchmark. The term “small-loss regret bound” is often used to refer to bounds on regret that depend (or mostly depend) on L⋆ rather than the total number of rounds played T often referred to as the time horizon. For instance, for √ learning problems, one can in fact show that regret can be √ many classical online e T ). However, these algorithms use the full information model: e L⋆ ) rather than O( bounded by O( assume that on every round, the learner receives as feedback the losses of all possible actions (not only the selected actions). In such full information settings, it is well understood when small-loss bounds are achievable and how to design learning algorithms that attain them. However, in most applications, full information about losses of all actions is not available. Unlike the full information case, the problem of obtaining small-loss regret bounds for partial information settings is poorly understood. Even in the classical multi-armed bandit problem, small-loss bounds are only known in expectation against the so called oblivious adversaries or comparing against the lowest expected cost of an arm (and not the actual lowest cost), referred to as pseudo-regret. The goal of this paper is to develop robust techniques for extending the small-loss guarantees to a broad range of partial feedback settings where learner only observes losses of selected actions and some neighboring actions. In the basic online learning model, at each round t, the decision maker or learner chooses one action from a set of d actions, typically referred to as arms. Simultaneously an adversary picks a loss vector ℓt ∈ [0, 1]d indicating the losses for the d arms. The learner suffers the loss of her chosen arm and observes some feedback. The variants of online learning differ by the nature of feedback received. The two most prominent such variants are the full information setting, where the feedback is the whole loss vector, and the bandit setting where only the loss of the selected arm is observed. Bandits and full information represent two extremes. In most realistic applications, a learner choosing an action i, learns not only the loss ℓti associated with her chosen action i, but also some partial information about losses of some other actions. A simple and elegant model of this partial information is the graph-based feedback model of [MS11, ACG+ 14], where at every round, there is a (possibly timevarying) undirected graph Gt on the possible actions as nodes representing the information structure. If the learner selects a action i and incurs the loss ℓti , she observes the losses of all the nodes connected to node i by an edge in Gt . Our main result in Section 3 is a general technique that allows us to use any full information learning algorithm as a black-box, and design a learning algorithm whose regret can be bounded with high probability as o(αL⋆ ), where α is the maximum independent number of the feedback graphs. This graph-based information feedback model is a very general setting that can encode all of full information, bandit, as well as a number of other applications.  1.1  Our contribution  Our results We develop a unified, black-box technique to achieve small-loss regret guarantees with high probability in various partial information feedback models. We obtain the following results.  1  • In Section 3, we provide a generic black box reduction from any small-loss full information algoe (L⋆ )2/3 that rithm. When used with known algorithms it achieves actual regret guarantees of O hold with high probability for any of pure bandits, semi-bandits, contextual bandits, or feedback e as d1/3 for the first three, and graphs (with dependence on the information structure in the O α1/3 for feedback graphs). There are three novel features of this result. First, unlike all previous work in partial information that are heavily algorithm-specific, our technique is black-box in the sense that it takes as input a small-loss full information algorithm and, via a small modification, makes it work under partial information. Second, prior to our work, there was no data-dependent guarantee for general feedback graphs even for pseudo-regret (without dependence on the number of actions, i.e., taking advantage of the increased information feedback), while we provide a high probability small-loss guarantee. Last, our guarantees are not for pseudo-regret but actual regret guarantees that hold with high probability. • In Section 4, we show various applications. The black-box nature of our reduction allows us to use the full information learning algorithms best suited for each application. We obtain smallloss guarantees for semi-bandits [KV05] (including routing in networks), for contextual bandits [ACBFS03] (even with an infinite comparator class), as well as learning with slowly changing (shifting) comparators [HW98] as needed in games with dynamic population [LST16, FLL+ 16]. • In Section 5, we focus on the special case of bandits, semi-bandits, graph feedback from fixed graphs, and shifting comparators. In each setting we take advantage of properties of a learning algorithm best suited in the application to alleviate the inefficiencies resulting from the blackbox nature of our general reduction. For bandits and √ semi-bandits, we provide optimal small-loss e actual regret high-probability guarantees of O( dL⋆ ). Previous work for bandits and semibandits offered analogous regret guarantee only for pseudo-regret and only in expectation. This answers an √ open question of [Neu15b, Neu15a]. In the case of fixed feedback graphs, we achieve optimal L∗ dependence on loss, at the expense of the bound depending on clique-partition number of the graph, rather than the independent number. Our techniques Our main technique is a dual-thresholding scheme that temporarily freezes lowperforming actions, i.e. does not play them at the current round. Traditional partial information guarantees are based on creating an unbiased estimator for the loss of each arm and then running a full information algorithm on the estimated loses. The most prominent such unbiased estimator, called importance sampling, is equal to the actual loss divided by the probability with which the action is played. This division can make the estimated losses unbounded in the absence of a lower bound on the probability of being played. Algorithms like EXP3 [ACBFS03] for the bandit setting or Exp3-DOM √ [ACG+ 14] for the graph-based feedback setting mix in a 1/ T amount of noise which ensures that the range of losses is bounded. Adding such uniform noise works well for learners maximizing utility, but can be very damaging when minimizing losses. In the case of utilities, playing low performing arms with a small ǫ probability, can only lose at most an ǫ fraction of the utility. In contrast, when the best arm has small loss, the losses incurred due to the noise can dominate. This approach can only return √ uniform bounds with O( T ) regret since, even in the case that there is a perfect arm that has 0 loss, the algorithm keeps playing low-performing arms. Some specialized algorithms do achieve small-loss bounds for bandits, but these techniques extend neither to graph feedback nor to high probability guarantees (see also the discussion in related work). Instead of mixing in noise, we take advantage of the freezing idea, originally introduced by Allenberg et al. [AAGO06] with a single threshold γ offering a new way to adapt the multiplicative weights algorithm to the bandit setting. The resulting estimator is negatively biased for the arms that are frozen but is always unbiased for the selected arm. Using these expectations, the regret bound of the full information algorithm can be used to bound the expected regret compared to the expected loss of fixed arm, achieving low pseudo-regret in expectation. To achieve good bounds, we need to guarantee 2  that the total probability frozen is limited. By freezing arms with probability less than γ, the total probability that is frozen at each round is at most dγ and therefore contributes to a regret term of dγ times the loss of the algorithm which gives a dependence on d on the regret bound. This was analyzed in the context of multiplicative weights in [AAGO06]. Our main technical contribution is to greatly expand the power of this freezing technique. We show how to apply it in a black-box manner with any full information learning algorithm and extend it to graphbased feedback. To deal with the graph-based feedback setting, we suggest a novel and technically more challenging dual-threshold freezing scheme. The natural way to apply importance sampling in the graph-based feedback is by dividing the actual loss with the probability of being observed, i.e. the sum of the probabilities that the action and its neighbors are played. An initial approach is to freeze an action if its probability of being observed is below some threshold γ. We show that the total probability frozen by this step is bounded by αγ, where α is the size of the maximum independent number of the feedback graph. To see why, consider a maximal independent set S of the frozen actions and note that all frozen actions are observed by some node in S. This observation seems to imply that we can replace the dependence on d by a dependence on α. However there are externalities among actions as freezing one action may affect the probability of another being observed. As a result, the latter may need to be frozen as well to ensure that all active arms are observed with probability at least γ (and therefore obtain our desired upper bound on the range of the estimated losses). This causes a cascade of freezing, with possibly freezing a large amount of additional probability. To limit this cascade effect, we develop a dual-threshold freezing technique: we initially freeze arms that are observed with probability less than γ, and subsequently use a lower threshold γ ′ = γ/3 and only freeze arms that are observed with probability less than γ ′ . This technique allows us to bound the total probability of arms that are frozen subsequently by the total probability of arms that are frozen initially. We prove this via an elegant combinatorial charging argument of Claim 3.3. Last, to go beyond pseudo-regret and guarantee actual regret bounds with high probability, it does not suffice to have the estimator being negatively biased but we need to also obtain a handle on the e 1/3 (L⋆ )2/3 ) variance. We prove that freezing also provides such a lever leading to a high-probability O(α regret guarantee that holds in a black-box manner. Interestingly, this freezing technique via a small modification enables the same guarantee for semi-bandits where the independent set is replaced by the number of elements (edges). In order to obtain the optimal high-probability guarantee for bandits and semi-bandits, we need to combine our black box analysis with taking advantage of features of concrete full information learning algorithms. The black-box nature of the previous analysis is extremely useful in demonstrating where additional features are needed. Combining our analysis with the implicit exploration technique of Neu [Neu15a], we develop an algorithm based on multiplicative p weights, which we term GREEN-IX, which e achieves the optimal high-probability small-loss bound O( dL⋆ ) for the pure bandit setting. Using an alternative technique of Neu [Neu15b]: truncation in the follow the perturbed leader algorithm, we also obtain the corresponding result for semi-bandits.  1.2  Related work  Online learning with partial information dates back to the seminal work of Lai and Robbins [LR85]. They consider a stochastic version, where losses come from fixed distributions. The case where the losses are selected adversarially, i.e. they do not come from a distribution and may be adaptive to the algorithm’s choices, which we examine in this paper, was first studied by Auer et al. [ACBFS03] who provided the EXP3 algorithm for pure bandits and the EXP4 algorithm for contextual bandits. They 3  focus on uniform regret bounds , i.e. that grow as a function of time o(T ), and bound the expected performance, but such guarantees can also be derived with high probability [AB10]. Data-dependent guarantees are easily derived from the above algorithms for the case of maximizing some reward as even getting reward 0 with probability of ǫ only losses an ǫ fraction of the utility. In contrast, incurring high cost with a small probability ǫ can dominate the loss of the algorithm, if the best arm has small loss. In this paper we develop data-dependent guarantees for partial information algorithm for the cases of losses. There are a few specialized algorithms that achieve such small-loss guarantees for the case of bandits for pseudo-regret, e.g. by ensuring that the estimated losses of all arms remain close [AAGO06, Neu15b] or using a stronger regularizer [RS13, FLL+ 16], but all of these methods neither offer high probability small-loss guarantees even for the bandit setting, nor extend to graph-based feedback. Our technique allows us to develop small-loss bounds on actual regret with high probability. The graph-based partial information that we examine in this paper was introduced by √ Mannor and e Shamir [MS11] who provided ELP, a linear programming based algorithm achieving O( αT ) regret for undirected graphs. Alon et al. [ACBGM13, ACG+ 14] provided variants of Exp3 (Exp3-SET) that recovered the previous bound via what they call explicit exploration. Following this work, there has been multiple results on this setting, e.g.[ACDK15, CHK16, KNV16, TDD17], but prior to our work, there was no small-loss guarantee for the feedback graph setting that could exploit the graph structure. To obtain a regret bound depending on the graph structure, the above techniques upper bound the losses of the arms by the maximum loss which results in a dependence on the time horizon T instead of L⋆ . Addressing this, we achieve regret that scales with an appropriate problem dimension, the size of the maximum independent set α, instead of ignoring the extra information and only depending on the number of arms as all small-loss results of prior work. Biased estimators have been used prior to our work for achieving better regret guarantees. The freezing technique of [AAGO06] can be thought of as the first use of biased estimators. Their GREEN algorithm uses freezing in the context of the multiplicative weights algorithm for the case of pure bandits. Freezing keeps the range of estimated losses bounded and when used with the multiplicative weights algorithm, also keeps the cumulative estimated losses very close, which ensures that one does not lose much in the application of the full information algorithm. Using these facts Allenberg et al. [AAGO06] achieved small-loss guarantees for pseudo-regret in the classical multi-armed bandit setting. An approach very close to freezing is the implicit exploration of Neu et al. [NB13, KNVM14, Neu15a] who adds a term in the denominator of the estimator making the estimator biased, even for the selected arms. The TruFPL algorithm of Neu [Neu15b] is based on the Follow the Perturbed Leader algorithm using implicit exploration together with truncating the perturbations to guarantee that the estimated losses of all actions are close to each other. His technique provides small-loss regret bounds for pseudo-regret, but does not extend to high-probability guarantees. The EXP3-IX algorithm of Neu [Neu15a] combines implicit exploration with multiplicative weights to obtain high-probability uniform bounds. Focusing on uniform regret bounds, exploration and truncation were presented as strictly superior to freezing. In this paper, we show an important benefit of the freezing technique: it can be extended to handle feedback graphs (via our dual-thresholding). We also combine freezing with multiplicative weights √ to e dL⋆ ) develop an algorithm we term GREEN-IX which achieves optimal high-probability small-loss O( for the pure bandit setting. Finally, combining with the truncation idea, we obtain the corresponding result for semi-bandits.  4  2  Model  In this section we describe the basic online learning protocol and the partial information feedback model we consider in this paper. In the online learning protocol, in each round t, the learner selects a distribution wt over d possible actions, i.e. wit denotes the probability with which action i is selected on round t. The adversary then picks losses ℓt = (ℓt1 , . . . , ℓtd ) where ℓti ∈ [0, 1] denotes the loss of action i on round t. The learner then draws action I(t) from the distribution wt and suffers the corresponding loss ℓtI(t) for that round. In the end of the round t, the learner receives feedback about the losses of the selected action and some neighboring actions. The feedback received by the learner on each round is based on a feedback graph model described below.  2.1  Feedback graph model  We assume that the learner receives partial information based on an undirected feedback graph Gt that could possibly vary in every round. The learner observes the loss ℓtI(t) of the selected arm I(t) and, in addition, she also observes the losses of all arms connected to the selected arm I(t) in the feedback t graph. More formally, she observes the loss ℓtj for all the arms j ∈ NI(t) where Nit denotes the set containing arm i and all neighbors of i in Gt at round t. The full information feedback setting and the bandit feedback setting are special cases of this model where the graph Gt is the clique and the empty graph respectively for all rounds t. We allow the feedback graph Gt to change each round t, but assume that the graph Gt is known to the player before selecting her distribution wt . This model also includes the contextual bandits problem of [ACBFS03] as a special case, where each round the learner is also presented with an additional input xt , the context. In this contextual setting, the learner is offered d policies, each suggesting an action depending on the context, and each round the learner can decide which policy’s recommendation to follow. To model this with our evolving feedback graph, we use the policies as nodes, and connect two policies with an edge in Gt if they recommend the same action in the context xt of round t.  2.2  Regret  In the adversarial online learning framework, we assume only that losses ℓti are in the range [0, 1] in. The goal of the learner is to minimize the so called regret against an appropriate benchmark. The traditional notion of regret compares the performance of the algorithm to the best fixed action f in hindsight. For an arm f we define regret as: Reg(f ) =  T h X t=1  ℓtI(t) − ℓtf  i  where T is the time horizon. To evaluate performance, we consider regret against the best arm: Reg = max Reg(f ) f  Note that the regrets Reg(f ) and Reg are random variables. A slightly weaker notion of regret is the notion of pseudoregret (c.f. [BCB12]), that compares the expected performance of the algorithm to the expected loss of any fixed arm f , fixed in advance and  5  not in hindsight. More formally, this notion of expected regret is: PseudoReg = max f  E  I(1)...I(t)  [Reg(f )]  This is weaker than the expected regret EI(1)...I(t) [Reg] = EI(1)...I(t) [maxf Reg(f )].1 . We aim for an even stronger notion of regret, guaranteeing low regret with high probability, i.e. probability 1 − δ for all δ > 0 simultaneously, instead of only in expectation, at the expense of a logarithmic dependence on 1/δ in the regret bound for any fixed δ. Note that any high-probability guarantee concerning Reg(f ) for any fixed arm f with failure probability δ′ can automatically provide an overall regret guarantee with failure probability δ = dδ′ . A high-probability guarantee on low Reg also implies low regret in expectation. 2 Small-loss regret bound The goal of this paper is to develop algorithms with small-loss regret bounds, where the loss remains small when the best arm has small loss, i.e. when regret depends on the loss of the comparator, and not on the time horizon. To achieve this, we focus on the notion of approximate regret (c.f. [FLL+ 16]), which is a multiplicative relaxation of the regret notion. We define ǫ-approximate regret for a parameter ǫ > 0 as ApxReg(f, ǫ) = (1 − ǫ)  T X t=1  ℓtI(t)  −  T X  ℓtf  t=1  We will prove bounds on ApxReg(f, ǫ) in high probability and in expectation, and will use these to provide small-loss regret bounds by tuning ǫ appropriately, an approach that is often used in the literature in achieving classical regret guarantees and is referred to as doubling trick. Typically, approximate regret bounds depend inversely on the parameter ǫ. For instance, in classical full information p algorithms, the expected approximate p regret is bounded by O(log(d)/ǫ) and therefore setting ǫ = log(d)/T , one T log(d) uniform bounds. If we knew L⋆ , the loss of the best arm at the end obtains the classical O p  p of round T , one could set ǫ = log(d)/L⋆ and get the desired O L⋆ log(d) guarantee. Of course, L⋆ is not known in advance, and depending on the model of feedback, may not even be observed either. b the loss of the algorithm To overcome these difficulties, we can make the choice of ǫ depend on L, b and half ǫ when instead, and apply doubling trick: start with a relatively large ǫ, hoping for a small L we observe higher losses.  2.3  Other applications.  Semi-bandits We also extend our results to a different form of partial information: semi-bandits. In the semi-bandit problem we have a set of elements (E), such as edges in a network, and the learner needs to select from a set of possible actions (F), where each possible action f ∈ F correspond to a subset of the elements E. An example is selecting a path in a graph, where at round t, each element e ∈ E has a delay ℓte , and the learner P needs to select a path PP (connecting her source to her destination), and suffers the sum of the losses e∈P ℓte . We use ℓtP = e∈P ℓte as the loss of the strategy P at time t.  1 To see the difference, consider n arms that are similar but have high variance. Pseudoregret compares the algorithm’s performance against the expected performance of arms, while regret compares against the “best” arm depending on the outcomes of the randomness. This difference can be quite substantial, like when throwing n balls into n bins the expected load of any bin is 1, while the expected maximum load is Θ(log n/ log log n). 2 If the algorithm guarantees regret at most B log(1/δ) with probability at least R ∞(1 − δ) for any δ > 0, then we can get the expected regret bound of O(B) by using the bound to estimate the integral 0 x · P(Reg > x)dx.  6  We assume that the learner observes the loss on all edges e ∈ P in her selected strategy, but does not observe other losses. We measure regret compared to the best single strategy f ∈ F with hindsight, so use F as the set of (possibly exponentially many) comparators. Contextual bandits. Another class of important application is the contextual bandit problem, where the learner has a set of A actions to choose from, but each step t also has a context: At each time step t, she is presented with a context xt ∈ X , and can base her choice of action on the context. She also has a set F policies where each f ∈ F if a function fi (x) ∈ A from contexts to actions. As an example, actions can be a set of medical treatment options, and contexts are the symptoms of the patient. A possible policy class F can be finite given explicitly, or large and only implicitly given, or even can be an infinite class of possible policies. Regret with shifting comparators. In studying learning in changing environments [HW98], such as games with dynamic populations [LST16], it is useful to have regret guarantees against not only a single best arm, but also against a sequence of comparators, as changes in the environment may change the best arm over time. We overload f to denote the vector of the comparators (f (1), . . . , f (T )) in such settings. If the comparator changes too often, no learning algorithm can do well against this standard. We will consider sequences where f has only a limited number of changes, that is f (t) = f (t + 1) for all but k rounds (with k not known to the algorithm). To compare the performance to a sequence of different comparators, we need to extend our regret notions to this case by: ApxReg(f, ǫ) =  T h X t=1  (1 − ǫ)ℓtI(t) − ℓtf (t)  i  where ǫ corresponds to the multiplicative factor that comes in the regret relaxation. Typically the approximate regret guarantee depends linearly on the number of changes in the comparator sequence.  3  The black-box reduction for graph-based feedback  In this section, we present our black-box framework turning any full-information small-loss learning algorithm into an algorithm with a high-probability small-loss guarantee in the partial information feedback setting. Our approach is based on an improved version of the classical importance sampling. The idea of importance sampling is to create for each arm an estimator for the loss of the arm and run the full information algorithm on the estimated losses. In classical importance sampling, the estimated loss of an arm is equal to its actual loss divided by the probability of it being observed. This makes the estimator unbiased as the expected estimated loss of any arm is equal to its actual loss. This general framework of importance sampling is also used with feedback graphs in [ACG+ 14]. In the feedback graph observation model, we acquire information for all arms observed and not only for the ones played; we therefore create an unbiased estimator via dividing the observed losses of an arm by the probability of it being observed. However, there is an important issue all these algorithms need to deal with: the estimated losses can become arbitrarily large as the probability of observing an arm can be arbitrarily low. This poses a major roadblock in the black-box application of a classical full information learning algorithm. To deal with this, typical partial information algorithms, such as EXP3 [ACBFS03] or EXP3-DOM [ACG+ 14], mix the resulting distribution with a small amount of uniform noise across arms, guaranteeing a lower bound on the probability of being observed and therefore an upper bound on the range of estimated losses. Since the added noise makes the algorithm play badly performing arms, this approach results in uniform regret bounds and not small-loss guarantees. 7  We use an alternate technique, first proposed by Allenberg et al. [AAGO06] in the context of the Multiplicative Weights algorithm for the bandit feedback setting. We set a threshold γ and in each round neither play nor update the loss of arms with probability below this threshold. We refer to such arms as (temporarily) frozen. We note that frozen arms may get unfrozen in later rounds, if other arms incur losses, as we update frozen arms assuming their loss is 0. The resulting estimator for the loss of an arm is no longer unbiased since the estimated loss of frozen arms is 0. However, crucially the estimator is unbiased for the arms that we play and negatively biased for all arms, which allows us to extend the regret bound of the full information algorithm. When freezing some arms, we need to normalize the probabilities of the other arms so that they form a probability distribution. In order to obtain approximate regret guarantees, the total probability of all frozen arms should be at most ǫ. Allenberg et al. [AAGO06] guarantee this for the bandit feedback setting by selecting γ = ǫ/d resulting in a dependence on the number of arms in the approximate regret bound. In this section we extend this technique in three different ways. • We obtain small-loss learning algorithms for the case of feedback graphs, where the regret bound depends on the size of the maximum independent set α(Gt ), instead of d (number of nodes in Gt ). • We achieve the above via a black-box reduction using any full information algorithm, not only via using the Multiplicative Weights algorithm. • We provide a low loss guarantee that holds with high probability and not only in expectation.  Since we seek for bounds that are only a function of the size maxt α(Gt ), and have no dependence on the number of arms, we need to use a novel dual-threshold freezing technique. At each round t, we first freeze arms with probability of being observed less than some threshold γ. We show (Claim 3.2) that the total probability of all frozen arms is at most α(Gt )γ. Unfortunately, freezing an arm in turn decreases the probability that the neighbors are observed. This effect can propagate and cause additional arms to be observed with probability less than γ. To bound the total probability of all frozen arms as a function of α(Gt ) while still maintaining a lower bound on the probability of observation for the played arms, we recursively freeze arms whose observation probability is smaller than γ ′ = γ/3. We show in Claim 3.3 that the total probability frozen during the recursive process is at most 3 times the total probability frozen in the initial step. We proceed by providing the algorithm (Algorithm 1), the crucial lemma that enables improved bounds beyond bandit feedback (Lemma 3.1), and the black-box guarantee. For clarity of presentation we first provide the approximate regret guarantee in expectation (Theorem 3.4) and then show its highprobability version (Theorem 3.5), in both cases assuming that the algorithm has access to an upper bound of the size of the maximum independent set α as an input parameter. In Theorem 3.8 we provide the small-loss version of the above bound without explicit knowledge of the independence number. Pt t Lemma 3.1. At every round t, the total probability of frozen arms is at most ǫ: i∈F t pi ≤ ǫ, and hence any non-frozen arm i increases its probability due to freezing by a factor of at most (1 − ǫ).  Proof. We first consider the arms that are frozen due to the γ-threshold (line 3Pof the algorithm). Claim 3.2 shows that the total probability frozen in the initial set is bounded by i∈F t pti ≤ α(Gt )γ. 0 We then focus on the arms frozen due to the recursive γ ′ -threshold (line 4 of the algorithm). Claim 3.3 bounds the total probability of arms i ∈ Fkt with k ≥ 1 by three times the total probability of arms in F0t . Combining the two Claims, we obtain: X X X pti = pti ≤ α(Gt )γ + 3α(Gt )γ = 4α(Gt )γ ≤ ǫ. pti + i∈F t  i∈F0t  S i∈ k≥1 Fkt  8  Algorithm 1 The Black-Box Dual-Threshold Freezing Algorithm Require: Full information algorithm A, an upper bound on the size of maximum independent sets α, number of arms d, parameter ǫ. 1: Initialize p1i for arm i based on the initialization of A and set t = 1 (round 1). 2: for t = 1 to T do 3: Freeze arms whose observation probability is below γ = ǫ/4α to obtain:    X  t t F0 = i : pj < γ   t j∈Ni  4:  Recursively freeze remaining arms if their probability of being observed by unfrozen arms is S below γ ′ = γ/3 to obtain F t = k≥0 Fkt where, Fkt =  5:        i∈ /  k−1 [  t Fm  m=0  !  S t j∈(Nit \ k−1 m=0 Fm )  7:  ptj < γ ′     Normalize the probabilities of unfrozen arms so that they form a distribution.  0 if i ∈ F t t wit = p  1−P i pt else t j∈F  6:  X  :      j  Draw arm I(t) ∼ wt and incur loss ℓtI(t) . Compute estimated loss:  where Wit =  P  j∈Nit  wjt  ℓeti =  (  ℓti Wit  t \F t if i ∈ NI(t)  else  0  .  Update pt+1 using full information algorithm A with loss ℓet for round t. i 9: end for  8:  The lemma then follows from the relation in the normalization step of the algorithm (line 5). Next we show the two main claims of the previous proof. Claim 3.2. The total probability frozen in the initial set is bounded by  P  i∈F0t  pti ≤ α(Gt )γ.  Proof. Let S t be a maximal independent set on F0t . Since the independent set is maximal, every node in F0t has a neighbor in S t , so we obtain: X X X ptj < α(Gt ) · γ. pti ≤ i∈S t j∈(N t ∩F0t ) i∈F0t i where the last inequality follows from the fact that there are at most α(Gt ) nodes in S t and, since they are frozen, the probability of being observed is at most γ for each of them.  9  Claim 3.3. The total probability of arms i ∈ Fkt with k ≥ 1 is bounded by three times the total probability of arms in F0t . More formally: i∈  X  S  t k≥1 Fk  pti ≤ 3  X  pti .  i∈F0t  Proof. The purpose of the lower threshold γ ′ in line 4 is to limit the propagation of frozen probability. Consider an arm i frozen on step k ≥ 1. Since arm i was not frozen at step 0, the initial probability of being observed by any node of Gt is at least γ = 3γ ′ . When this arm becomes frozen, it is observed with probability at most γ ′ . Hence 2γ ′ of the original probability stems from arms frozen earlier. Using this, we can bound the probability mass in F1t by at most 1.5 times the mass of F0t . Further, from these arms at most γ ′ of the originally at least 3γ ′ probability is newly frozen, and hence can affect non yet frozen arms, creating a further cascade. We show that the total frozen probability can be at most 3 times the probability of nodes in F0t . The proof of this fact follows in a way that is analogous of how the number of internal nodes of a binary tree is bounded by the number of leaves, as any node can have at most 1 parent, while having 2 children. More formally, we consider an auxiliary function that serves as an upper bound of the left hand side and a lower bound of the right hand side, proving the claim. The claim is focused on a single round t. For simplicity of notation, we drop the dependence on t from the notations, i.e., use F = ∪k Fk for the set of nodes frozen, pi for the probability of node i, use G for the graph, and E for its edge-set. Let S F≥1 = k≥1 Fkt . We order all nodes in F based on when they are frozen. More formally, if i ∈ Fm and j ∈ Fk with m < k then i ≺ j. This is a partial ordering as ≺ does not order nodes frozen at the same iteration of the recursive freezing. We now introduce the heart of the auxiliary function which lies in the sum of the products of probabilities pi · pj along edges (i, j) with i ≺ j, such that (i, j) ∈ E, i.e. X pi pj i∈F,j∈F≥1 ,i≺j (i,j)∈E  To lower bound this quantity, we sum over j first. Node j total probability mass of at least γ = 3γ ′ . By the time j is less than γ ′ , so a total probability mass of at least 2γ ′ must  X  pi pj =  i∈F,j∈F≥1 ,i≺j (i,j)∈E  X  j∈F≥1  was not in F0 so its neighborhood has a frozen, the remaining probability mass is come from earlier frozen neighbors.   X  X  pj  pi  pj · 2γ ′  ≥ i∈F,i≺j (i,j)∈E  j∈F≥1  To upper bound the above quantity, we sum over i first, and separate the sum for i ∈ F0 and i ∈ F≥1 . Nodes i ∈ F0 have a total probability of less than γ = 3γ ′ in their neighborhood, as they are frozen in line 3 of the algorithm. Nodes i ∈ F≥1 have at most γ ′ probability mass left in their neighborhood when they become frozen and therefore at most this much total probability on neighbors later in the ordering.     X  i∈F,j∈F≥1 ,i≺j (i,j)∈E  pi pj =  X  i∈F0    pi    X  j∈F≥1 ,i≺j (i,j)∈E   X    pi  pj  +   i∈F≥1  10  X  j∈F≥1 ,i≺j (i,j)∈E   X X  pi · γ ′ pi · 3γ ′ + pj  ≤  i∈F0  i∈F≥1  P P P The above lower and upper bounds imply that 3γ ′ i∈F0 pi + γ ′ i∈F≥1 pi ≥ 2γ ′ i∈F≥1 pi and hence we obtain the claimed bound (reintroducing the round t in the notation): X X pti ≤ 3 pti S i∈ k≥1 Fkt  i∈F0t  Bounding pseudoregret. We are now ready to prove our first result: a bound for learning with partial information based on feedback graphs. We first provide the guarantee for approximate pseudoregret in expectation. We assume both the learning rate ǫ as well as an upper bound α on the size of the independent sets are given as an input. At the end of this section, we show how the results can be turned into regret guarantees via doubling trick without knowledge of the maximum independent number. Theorem 3.4. Let A be any full information algorithm with an expected approximate regret guarantee given by: E[ApxReg(f, ǫ/2)] ≤ 2L·A(d,T )/ǫ against any arm f , when run on losses in [0, L]. Algorithm 1 run on input A, α, d, has expected ǫ-approximate regret guarantee: E[ApxReg(f, ǫ)] = O(α·A(d,T )/ǫ2 ). Proof. First notice that our random estimated loss ℓet is negatively biased, so E[ℓet ] ≤ ℓt for all arms i  i  i  i and all rounds t, where expectation is taken over the choice of arm I(t). Bounding the loss of the algorithm against the expected estimated loss of arm f implies the bound we seek.  Next consider the losses incurred by the algorithm compared to the estimated losses the full information algorithm A observes. Note that the estimator is unbiased for the arms that the algorithm plays (as those are not frozen), so the expected loss of the full information algorithm when run on the estimated losses is equal to its expected loss when run on the actual losses: E[ℓetj ] = ℓtj for all j ∈ / F t . Last, freezing guarantees that the maximum estimated loss is L = 1/γ ′ (since the probability of being observed is at least γ ′ for any non-frozen arm else it would freeze at step 4 of the algorithm). Combining these and using that (1 − ǫ) ≤ (1 − ǫ/2)2 we obtain the following: # " # " X XX t et t wi ℓi (1 − ǫ) E ℓI(t) = (1 − ǫ) E t  t  i  # 1−ǫ pti ℓeti E ≤ 1 − ǫ/2 t i " # X A(d, T ) e t ≤E ℓf + L · ǫ′ t X   A(d, T ) ≤ E ℓtf + ′ ′ γ ·ǫ t X   A(d, T ) = E ℓtf + 16α · ǫ2 t "  XX  h i as E ℓeti = ℓti on all arms played. by Lemma 3.1. by the low approx regret of A. as the estimator is negatively biased using definitions of L, γ ′ , γ and ǫ′ .  Notice that it was important to be able to use a freezing threshold γ ∝ ǫ/α instead of γ ∝ ǫ/d for the above analysis, allowing an approximate regret bound with no dependence on d.  11  High probability bound. To obtain a high-probability guarantee (and hence a bound on the actual regret, not pseudoregret), we encounter an additional complication since we need to upper bound the cumulative estimated loss of the comparator by its cumulative actual loss. For this purpose, the mere fact that the estimator is negatively biased does not suffice. The estimator may, in principle, be unbiased (if the arm is never frozen), and the variance it suffers can be high, which could ruin the smallloss guarantee. To deal with this, we apply a concentration inequality, comparing the expected loss to a multiplicative approximation of the actual loss. This is inspired by the approximate regret notion, is a quantity with negative mean, and has variance that depends on 1/ǫ as well as the magnitude of the estimated losses which is 1/γ ′ . Theorem 3.5. Let A be any full information algorithm with an expected approximate regret guarantee of: E[ApxReg(f, ǫ/5)] ≤ 5L·A(d,T )/ǫ, against any arm f , whenrun on losses in [0, L]. Algorithm 1 run d/δ )) with probability 1 − δ with A has approximate regret guarantee: ApxReg(f, ǫ) = O α·(A(d,T ǫ)+log( 2 for any δ > 0. To prove the theorem, we need the following concentration inequality, showing that the sum of a sequence of (possibly dependent) random variables cannot be much higher then the sum of their expectations: Lemma 3.6. Let (xt )t≥1 be a sequence of non-negative random variables, s.t. xt ∈ [0, 1]. Let Et−1 [xt ] = E[xt |x1 , . . . , xt−1 ]. Then, for any ǫ, δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ X t  xt − (1 + ǫ)  X t  Et−1 [xt ] ≤  (1 + ǫ) ln(1/δ ) ǫ  and also with probability at least 1 − δ (1 − ǫ)  X t  Et−1 [xt ] −  X t  xt ≤  (1 + ǫ) ln(1/δ ) ǫ  The proof follows the outline of classical Chernoff bounds for independent variables combined with the law of total expectation to handle the dependence. For completeness, the proof details are provided in Appendix A. Proof of Theorem 3.5. To obtain a high-probability statement, we use Lemma 3.6 multiple times as follows: 1. Show that the sum of the algorithm’s losses stays close to the sum of the expected losses. 2. Show that the sum of the expected losses stays close the sum of the expected estimated losses used by the full information algorithm A 3. Show that the sum of the estimated losses of each arm f stays close to the sum of the actual losses. Starting with the item 1, we use xt = ℓtI(t) , and note that its expectation conditioned on the previous P losses is mt = i wit ℓti so we obtain that, for any δ′ , ǫ > 0, with probability at least (1 − δ′ ) X t  ℓtI(t) − (1 + ǫ′ )  XX t  i  wit ℓti ≤  (1 + ǫ′ ) ln(1/δ′ ) ǫ′  Next item 3, for a comparator f we use the lemma with xt = ℓetf and its expectation mt = ℓtf . Now xt 12  is bounded by 1/γ and not 1, so by scaling we obtain that with probability (1 − δ′ ) X t  ℓetf − (1 + ǫ′ )  X t  ℓtf ≤  (1 + ǫ′ ) ln(1/δ′ ) γǫ′  P Finally, we use the lower bound in the lemma to show item 2: for xtP = i pti ℓeti , the expected losses observed by the full information algorithm, and its expectation mt = i pti ℓti . Again, the xt ∈ [0, 1/γ ] so we obtain that with probability (1 − δ′ ) XX t  i  pti ℓti − (1 + ǫ′ )  XX t  i  pti ℓeti ≤  (1 + ǫ′ ) ln(1/δ′ ) γǫ′  Using union bound and δ′ = δ/(d + 2), all these inequalities hold simultaneously for all δ > 0. To ′ simplify notation, we use B = (1+ǫ ) ln((d+2)/δ) for the error bounds above. γǫ′ Combining all the bounds we obtain that X t  ℓtI(t) ≤ (1 + ǫ′ )  XX t  wit ℓti + B  i  1 + ǫ′ X X t t p i ℓi + B ≤ 1 − ǫ′ t i  !  (1 + ǫ′ )2 X X t et pi ℓi + 2B ≤ 1 − ǫ′ t i  ǫ′ )2  (1 + ≤ (1 − ǫ′ )2  X t  ℓetf  by item 1 above by Lemma 3.1 !  by item 2 above  A(d, T ) + 2B + γ · ǫ′  (1 + ǫ′ )3 X t A(d, T ) ≤ ℓf + 3B + ′ 2 (1 − ǫ ) γ · ǫ′ t The theorem then follows as  (1+ǫ′ )3 (1−ǫ′ )2  ! !  by the low approx. regret of A by 3 applied to f  ≤ (1 − ǫ)−1 for ǫ′ = ǫ/5.  The small-loss guarantee without knowing α. We presented the results so far in terms of approximate regret and assuming we have α, an upper bound for the maximum independent set, as an input. Next we show that we can use this algorithm with the classical doubling trick without knowing α, and achieving low regret both in expectation as well as with high probability, not only approximate regret. We start with a large ǫ and small α and halve and double them respectively, when observing that they are not set right. There are two issues worth mentioning. First, unlike full information, partial information does not provide access to the loss of the comparator L⋆ . As a result, we apply doubling trick on the loss of the algorithm instead and then bound the regret of the algorithm appropriately. This is formalized in the following lemma which follows standard doubling arguments and whose proof is provided in Appendix A for completeness. Lemma 3.7 (standard doubling trick). Suppose we have a randomized algorithm that takes as input any ǫ > 0 and guarantees that, for some q ≥ 1 and some function Ψ(·), and any δ > 0, with probability  13  1 − δ, for any time horizon s and any comparator f : (1 − ǫ)  s X t=1  ℓtI(t)  ≤  s X t=1  ℓtf +  Ψ(δ) . ǫq  Assume that we use this algorithm over multiple phases (by restarting the algorithm when a phase b τ denotes the cumulative loss of b τ > Ψ(δ)q where L end), we run each phase τ with ǫτ = 2−τ until ǫτ L (ǫτ ) the algorithm for phase τ . Then, for any δ > 0, the regret for this multi-phase algorithm is bounded, with probability at least 1 − δ as:   1    q q+1 δ δ ⋆ + Ψ log(L⋆ +1)+1 Reg ≤ O (L ) q+1 Ψ log(L⋆ +1)+1 Second, observing the maximum independent set is challenging since this task is NP-hard to approximate. However, if one looks carefully into our proofs, we just require knowledge of a maximal independent set on the γ-frozen arms and not one of maximum size. This can be easily computed greedily at each round. Combining these two observations, we prove the following small-loss guarantee. Theorem 3.8. Let A be any full information algorithm with ǫ-approximate regret bounded by L·A(d,T )/ǫ when run on losses in [0, L] and with parameter ǫ > 0. If one runs Algorithm 1 using the doubling scheme as in Lemma 3.7 and tuning α appropriately on each   phase, then for any δ > 0, with probability   ⋆ +1) . at least (1−δ) the regret of this algorithm is bounded by O (L⋆ )2/3 (αA(d, T ))1/3 + αA(d, T ) log d log(L δ Proof. First for simplicity assume that α is known in advance. In this case, using Theorem 3.5, we can conclude that for any  δ, ǫ > 0, Algorithm 1 run with A enjoys an ǫ-approximate regret guarantee of  α·(A(d,T )+log(d/δ)) . Hence, running Algorithm 1 while tuning ǫ-parameter using doubling trick as O ǫ2 in Lemma 3.7 with Ψ(δ) = O(α · (A(d, T ) + log(d/δ )) and q = 2 yields the regret guarantee of    d log(L⋆ + 1)  1/3 ⋆ 2/3 O (L ) (αA(d, T )) + αA(d, T ) log δ If α is not known in advance, we can begin with a guess (say α′ = 1) and double the guess every time that this is incorrect, i.e. the maximal independent set of the γ-frozen nodes has more than α′ nodes. We make at most log(α) updates. Within one phase with the same update, the previous guarantee holds with probability at least some δ′ . At the time of the update we can lose an extra of at most 1. For the rest of the rounds, the guarantees work additively. Therefore, setting δ′ = δ/log(α), we obtain the previous guarantee with an extra log(α) decay in the guarantee. Since α < d, the dependence on log(α) is dropped in the O notation of the regret bound.  4  Other applications of the black-box framework  The framework of the previous section can capture via a small modification other partial information feedback settings. We discuss here semi-bandits and contextual bandits (including applications with infinite comparator classes), as well as learning tasks against shifting comparators. In these settings, our framework converts data-dependent guarantees of full-information algorithms (which are well understood) to similar high-probability bounds under partial information.  14  4.1  Semi-bandits  To model semi-bandits as a variant of our feedback graph framework, we construct a bipartite graph with nodes F and E, and connect strategies f to the elements included in f . Similarly to the previous section, we provide a reduction from full information to partial information for this setting. The full-information algorithm runs on estimated losses created by importance sampling as before and induces, at round t, a probability distribution pt on the set of strategies F as only strategies can be selected and not individual elements. We assume a bound on the expected approximate regret of B(ǫ, T, F) for the full information algorithm when losses are in [0, 1]. This will scale linearly with the magnitude of losses L of an action f ∈ F. We apply importance sampling and freezing to the elements e ∈ E. The probability of observing an element is the sum of the probabilities of the adjacent strategies. For clarity of presentation, we first assume that we have access to these probabilities and then show how this can be obtained via sampling. This demonstrates the leverage freezing offers in bounding the number of samples required. We modify the freezing process to freeze elements when observed with probability less than γ, and then freeze all strategies that contain some frozen element. The reduction is similar to the one of Algorithm 1: In steps 3 and 4 of the algorithm, we only freeze nodes that are in the set E if their observation probability is below the threshold and apply a single threshold γ = ǫ/|E| for all the recursive steps (instead of multi-thresholding). We subsequently freeze any node in F that is adjacent to a frozen node in E, and repeat the recursive process until no unfrozen element e has probability of observation smaller than γ. After the freezing process, the final probability distribution wt is derived again via a renormalization on the non-frozen strategies as in step 5 of Algorithm 1. Given that, we can now provide the equivalent lemma to Lemma 3.1 to bound the total frozen probability. P Lemma 4.1. At round t, the total probability of frozen strategies F t ⊂ F is at most ǫ, i.e. i∈F t pti ≤ ǫ. Proof. When a node in E becomes frozen in the initial step, it means that its probability of observation is less than γ. Since the probability of playing adjacent nodes in F contributes to this probability of observation, at the initial step of the recursive process, the total probability frozen is less than γ times the number of nodes in E that are frozen. As before, freezing some nodes in E, may cause other nodes to become frozen. By freezing e ∈ E, we also freeze all its neighbors F, which can decrease the observation probability of other edges. In subsequent steps, if an element becomes frozen its total probability of observation by not already frozen strategies is at most γ. Hence the total frozen probability is at most γ · |E| which concludes the lemma.  Using the Follow the Perturbed Leader algorithm [KV05] we get an approximate regret bound of B(ǫ, T, F) = log(|F |)/ǫ. The magnitude of the estimated losses of a strategy is at most L = m/γ where m corresponds to the maximum number of elements in a strategy, e.g., the maximum length of any path. Theorem 4.2. Let A be any full information algorithm for the problem whose expected approximate regret is bounded as ApxReg(f, ǫ/3) ≤ L · B(ǫ, T, F) when run on losses bounded by L. Further assume that we have access to the probability of occurrence of each e ∈ E in the solution picked by A on every round. Then, A run on estimated losses with appropriate freezing guarantees that for any δ > 0 with probability 1 − δ,   2 m log(|E|/δ) mB(ǫ, T, F) + ∀f ∈ F, ApxReg(f, ǫ) = O ǫ2 ǫ Proof. The proof follows similarly as the one of Theorem 3.5 adjusted to the semi-bandit setting. We 15  denote by Wet the probability of observing an element e. Also we use the subscript i for strategy nodes (paths) and the subscript e for element nodes (edges). Recall that m is the maximum number of edges in any path. More formally, for each comparator f ∈ F, we obtain the following set of inequalities with probability at least 1 − δ′ : X X XX XX X X X Wet ℓete = Wet ℓete = wit ℓeti ℓtI(t) = ℓte = t  t  ≤  t  e∈I(t)  1 1 − ǫ′  XX t  pti  i∈F  t  e∈I(t)  X e∈i  e∈E  t  i∈F  ℓete  Using Lemma 4.1  Using the full information guarantee and noting that losses are bounded by L = m/γ, this is bounded by  ! X 1 B(ǫ′ , T, F) e t ≤ ℓf + m (1 − ǫ′ )2 γ t  Now by applying concentration Lemma 3.6, for each f and taking a union bound over f ∈ F,  ! ln(|F |/δ′ ) mB(ǫ′ , T, F) (1 + ǫ′ ) X t ℓf + ≤ + γ · ǫ′ γ (1 − ǫ′ )2 t Since |F| ≤ |E|m , using γ = ǫ/|E| and ǫ′ =  ǫ 3  such that (1 + ǫ) =  1+ǫ′ , (1−ǫ′ )2  we conclude the proof.  Sampling the probabilities of observation. In the previous part, we assumed that, at any point, we have access to the probability that an element is observed. This is used both to define which elements are frozen and to define the estimated loss ℓete . Note that algorithms for semi-bandits such as Follow the Perturbed Leader do not provide directly these probabilities, but instead maintain weights on elements only, and offer a method to sample the strategies using these weights. This assumption can be removed by appropriate sampling. More formally, we first create estimates on the observation probabilities of all the elements via drawing actions from the full information algorithm. If the elements have observation probability less than γ then we freeze them as in the recursive steps of the algorithm. This process could in principle require many samples to obtain such estimates. However, freezing provides leverage since we do not need to compute exact estimates but we are fine if we have established whether they are i) with high probability greater than γ/2 if we do not freeze them (so that we use 2/γ as a bound on the magnitude and ii) with high probability less than 2γ as we then just need to set ǫ half of what we discussed before to still get the same bound on the total probability of being frozen. This task requires e 1/ǫ2 γ ) steps with high probability. Since there is at most a 1 − ǫ probability that is not frozen, the O( samples that need to be discarded as they include frozen arms are rare and do not affect the high probability guarantee. We provide details of this argument in Appendix B.1.  4.2  Contextual bandits  Contextual bandits can be seen as a direct application of the graph based feedback learning problem. The nodes of our graph are the policies, and two policies f and f ′ are connected by an edge at time t if they recommend the same action in the context of time t, that is if f (xt ) = f ′ (xt ). The feedback graph Gt in this case is changing at each time step, but it is always a set of disjoint cliques. If the feedback graph consists of just cliques, we do not need the recursive freezing step of the Algorithm 1 16  (Step 4 ), as a node in Gt freezes together with the whole clique it is contained in: effectively, we are freezing an action in each step if the probability mass of the policies recommending the action is below γ. As a full information algorithm for this problem, we can use the oracle-efficient contextual bandit algorithms of [RS16, SLKS16], where oracle-efficient refers to the fact that the algorithm chooses an action using an oracle without needing to keep track of information for each policy, which allows it to p large policy sets. This algorithm has approximate regret at most B(ǫ, T, F) = T log(|F|) when losses are in [0, 1]. The magnitude of the estimated losses is 1/γ . We note that the above papers make some assumptions on the way the contexts are coming (the contexts are either known in advance or coming from a known distribution). Our result for partial information feedback needs exactly the assumptions used by the underlying full information algorithm. Theorem 4.3. Assuming that the oracle-efficient full-information algorithm A has ǫ-approximate p regret B(ǫ, T, F) = T log(|F |) when applied on losses in [0, 1], A run on the estimated losses coming from the freezing process with ǫ′ = ǫ/2, withprobability 1 − δ for any δ > 0 has ǫ-approximate  and √ |F | d· T log(|F |) regret ApxReg(f, ǫ) = O + d·log(ǫ2 /δ) for all f ∈ F. ǫ  The proof follows by exactly the same ideas as before and is provided in Appendix B.2. √ Applying the  e T + T 1/4 (L⋆ )1/2 . doubling trick as above, we can create a guarantee that is partly data-dependent, i.e. O If we use as a full information  algorithm the algorithm of Syrgkanis et al. [SLKS16], this guarantee √ 1/3 1 / 3 ⋆ e T + T (L ) e T 2/3 established by becomes O which improves on the best known bound of O their paper.   e (L⋆ )2/3 We note that, by using multiplicative weights as a full-information algorithm, one can derive a O guarantee that is however inefficient as it needs to keep weights for every policy. This was sketched in the open problem of Agarwal et al. [AKL+ 17] who asked for an oracle-efficient version of the above bound. Although we do not provide such a bound, our result improves on the best known bounds by replacing some of the dependence on the time horizon by L⋆ . Infinite comparator class F. The black-box analysis need not be restricted to finite set F of policies. One can also consider a, potentially uncountable, infinite set F. In this case, most of the black-box reduction works just as in the finite case. The non-trivial part is the union bound to obtain high probability bounds. After bounding the probability that a single comparator f has small approximate regret ApxReg(f, ǫ) with probability at least δ, using union bound, we can derive a high-probability bound for all comparators simultaneously with an additional log(|F |) factor. This is not possible for an uncountable infinite class F. To this end one needs tail bounds uniformly over F of the form: For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, ( T ) T X X  d log(1/δ) sup ℓt (f ) ≤ RT F, ǫ2 /d + ℓ̃t (f ) − (1 + ǫ) ǫ2 f ∈F t=1  t=1   where RT F, ǫ2 /d is the so called offset Rademacher Complexity introduced in [RS14]. This capacity measure of class F is defined as: # " T X 2 σt f (xt (σ1 , . . . , σt−1 )) − ǫ(f (xt (σ1 , . . . , σt−1 ))) RT (F, ǫ) = sup Eσ sup x1 ,...,xT  f ∈F t=1  17  where in the above each xt : {±1}t−1 7→ X is a mapping from a sequence of ±1 bits to the context space and σ1 , . . . , σT are Rademacher random variables. This capacity measure is close in spirit to the Rademacher complexity. If one drops the quadratic term in the definition, this would correspond to the sequential Rademacher complexity [RST10]. The quadratic term subtracted makes this complexity measure smaller than the Rademacher complexity. As a specific example, for a finite F, this complexity can be bounded as RT (F, ǫ) ≤ log |F |/ǫ thus giving us the finite class result as a special case. The above tail bound is proved in the Appendix B.2 and is based on the results from [RS17]. Using the tail bound above, we prove the following result just as in the finite case. Theorem 4.4. Assuming that the oracle-efficient full-information algorithm A has ǫ-approximate regret B(ǫ, T, F) when applied on losses in [0, 1], A run on the estimated losses coming from the freezing process and with ǫ′ = ǫ/2, with probability 1 − δ for any δ > 0 has ǫ-approximate regret    d log(1/δ) d B(ǫ, T, F) + RT F, ǫ2 /d + . ApxReg(f, ǫ) = O ǫ ǫ2  4.3  Shifting comparators  In shifting bandits, the set F corresponds to a sequence of arms in [d] that change over the T rounds, and for f ∈ F use f (t) to denote the arm in the sequence at time t. We will denote K(f ) as the number of times f changes over the T rounds. As in the previous application: nodes of the graph are the set of comparators F, and two comparators f and g are connected by an edge at time t if the sequences have the same arms at time t, that is, if f (t) = g(t). The expected approximate regret assumption for this setting in the full information case is K(f ) log(dTǫ )+2 log(d) if the losses are in [0, 1]. This full information assumption is satisfied for instance by the Noisy Hedge which is multiplicative weights algorithm (with uniform noise of 1/T added in) as presented in [FLL+ 16]. Using our black box reduction one can obtain a bandit shifting algorithm with the following bound on approximate regret. Theorem 4.5. Under the above assumptions about the full information algorithm A and the knowledge of the probabilities, A run on the estimated losses coming from the freezing process and with ǫ′ = ǫ/2, with probability 1 − δ for any δ > 0 has approximate regret against any sequence f ,   dK(f ) log(dT ) + 2d log(d) + d log(1/δ) ApxReg(f, ǫ) = O ǫ2 where for all f ∈ [d]T , K(f ) = |{t < d : f (t) 6= f (t + 1)}|, the number of times the comparator switches. Proof. The proof follows the same steps as the proof in the previous subsection with a more intricate union bound to account for the exponential number of comparators. A vanilla union bound would lead to a linear dependence on time horizon since the number of comparators is exponential. Instead for   T comparator f , we create an approximate regret with failure probability δ′ = δ/ 1+(K(f . Essentially )) δ the idea is to provide failure probability for each comparator level (number of changes) of /T and then split it uniformly across comparators of the same number of changes. Therefore, what is coming as a linear term from the log(1/δ′ ) term is a term logarithmic in T and linear to the number of changes of the comparator instead of the time horizon. This linear term already appears in the full information algorithm bound so there is no added term in the regret.  18  Implications to dynamic population games: Our guarantees on low approximate regret have significant implications to repeated game settings where the player set is evolving over time [LST16, FLL+ 16]. In these papers, learning is used as a behavioral assumption. The papers consider a dynamic population game where, at every round, each player is independently replaced by an adversarially selected player with some turnover probability. This model of evolving games was introduced in [LST16] and is further studied in [FLL+ 16]. These papers show that in a broad class of games, if all players use algorithms to select their strategies that satisfy low approximate regret with shifting comparators then the time-average social welfare of the corresponding learning outcomes is approximately efficient even when the turnover probability is large (constant with respect to the number of players and inversely dependent on the ǫ of the approximate regret property). This means that, even when a large fraction of the population changes at every single round, players manage to still adapt to the change and guarantee efficient outcomes in most time steps. The results of this paper can be applied to dynamic population games and strengthen the results of [LST16, FLL+ 16] extending it to games with cost and only partial feedback to the players. Previous work only provided full information algorithms for achieving low approximate regret. Our results strengthen the behavioral assumption showing that low approximate regret with shifting comparators is achievable even at the presence of partial information feedback by a small and natural change in any full information learning algorithms.  5  Obtaining  √ L⋆ bounds  In this section we focus our attention on proving improved guarantees for most of the settings considered in the previous section when our framework is applied on specific full-information algorithms. In Section √ e L⋆ ) bound for the classical bandit feedback answering 5.1, we present an optimal high-probability O( an open question of Neu [Neu15a], combining our analysis with the Multiplicative weights algorithm. In Section 5.2, we apply our framework to the Follow the Perturbed Leader algorithm and show how to obtain optimal high-probability small-loss guarantees for semi-bandits, answering open questions raised in [Neu15b, Neu15a]. In Section 5.3, we return on a general graph-based feedback but restrict our attention on fixed feedback graphs – for this case, we provide an optimal dependence on L⋆ at the expense of a dependence on the minimum clique partition instead of the independence number. Finally, in Section 5.4, we show how one can derive optimal approximate regret guarantees for shifting comparators.  5.1  Pure bandits  To achieve optimal dependence on L⋆ , we need to better understand the places where the inefficiency arises. The first such place is when we apply the bound of the full-information which, in a blackbox analysis, needs to have dependence both on the magnitude of losses, L ≤ 1/γ ′ , and on the approximation parameter ǫ. Instead of applying this bound, we provide a refined analysis that relates the expected estimated loss of the full information algorithm to the sum of the cumulative estimated losses of all the arms. Using multiplicative weights as a full-information algorithm guarantees that the cumulative estimated losses of all the arms are close to each other (Lemma 5.2) which enables us to remove this inefficiency. This was also used by Allenberg et al. [AAGO06] to prove optimal pseudoregret guarantees but their analysis did not extend to high-probability. To derive the high-probability guarantee, we address the second inefficiency of the black-box, where to bound the negative bias of the comparator’s cumulative estimated loss by its cumulative actual loss, we again had dependence on both the magnitude of the estimated losses and ǫ. For that we apply the implicit exploration idea of Neu et al. [NB13, KNVM14, Neu15a] which creates a negative bias to all arms and not only the 19  arms that are frozen (Lemma 5.3). Neu [Neu15a] used implicit exploration to provide high-probability uniform bounds. However, without combining it with freezing, his results did not extend to small-loss. Combining our framework with both multiplicative weights and implicit exploration, we obtain an algorithm we term GREEN-IX (Algorithm 2) that, with high-probability, guarantees regret bound of √ O( L⋆ ).   d Theorem 5.1. GREEN-IX run with parameter ǫ guarantees an ǫ-approximate regret of O d log(ǫ /δ) with probability at least 1 − δ. Algorithm 2 GREEN-IX Require: Number of arms d, parameter ǫ. 1: Initialize p1i for arm i uniformly (pti = 1/d) and set t = 1 (round 1). 2: for t = 1 to T do  3: Freeze arm i if its probability pti is below threshold γ = ǫ/2d to create the set F t = i : pti < γ . 4:  Normalize the probabilities of unfrozen arms so that they form a distribution.  0 if i ∈ F t t t wi = p  1−P i pt else t j∈F  wt  j  ℓtI(t) .  Draw arm I(t) ∼ and incur loss 6: Compute biased estimate of losses via implicit exploration ζ = ǫ/4d: ( ℓt i if i = I(t) t . ℓeti = wi +ζ 0 else 7: Update pt+1 via multiplicative weights update with learning rate η = ǫ/4d: pt+1 ∝ pti exp(−η ℓeti ). i i 8: end for 5:  Lemma 5.2 (implied by the proof of Theorem 2 in [AAGO06]). When using multiplicative weights as the full-information algorithm, for any two arms i and j, T X t=1  ℓeti ≤  T X t=1  1 ln(1/γ ) ℓetj + + γ η  Proof. Let Ti be the last round that i is not frozen. Thus its probability is then greater than γ.  P   P  Ti −1 et Ti −1 et exp −η t=1 ℓi exp −η t=1 ℓi ≤  P   P γ ≤ pTi i = P Ti −1 et Ti −1 et exp −η ℓ exp −η ℓ k t=1 k t=1 j  As a result:  TX i −1 t=1  ℓeti ≤  TX i −1 t=1  T  T  t=1  t=1  X X 1 ln(1/γ ) ln(1/γ ) ⇒ , ℓeti ≤ ℓetj + + ℓetj + η γ η  where the last inequality follows as ℓeti ≤ 1/γ for all arms at all times and the estimated loss of i is 0 after round Ti by definition of Ti . Lemma 5.3 (implied by Corollary 1 in [Neu15a]). With probability at least 1 − δ, any full information  20  algorithm run on estimated losses ℓet with implicit exploration satisfies: T  X t=1  for all arms i ∈ [d] simultaneously.   log(d/δ ) ℓeti − ℓti ≤ 2ζ  Proof. The lemma essentially follows from Corollary 1 in [Neu15a], that proves the analogous statement when there is just implicit exploration without freezing. Let’s consider some fictitious losses ℓ̄ti that are equal to the actual losses for all arms i ∈ / F t and 0 for arms i ∈ F t and let ℓbti be the estimated loss with  PT  bt t ℓ − ℓ̄t ≤ just implicit exploration the losses ℓ̄ . Then Corollary 1 in [Neu15a] establishes that: i  t=1  i  i  log(d/δ) 2ζ  simultaneously for all i with probability at least 1 − δ. The lemma follows by noting that the fictitious estimated losses are equal to the true estimated losses, i.e. ℓbt = ℓet , since all the non-frozen i  i  arms have the same actual losses and that the fictitious actual losses are no greater than the true actual losses, i.e. ℓ̄ti ≤ ℓti since the only difference occurs on arms with ℓ̄ti = 0 and all the actual losses are non-negative.  Lemma 5.4 (see for instance [CBL06]). Multiplicative weights with learning rate η applied on the estimated losses satisfies: XX X X X  2 log(d) pti ℓeti − ℓetf ≤ η pti ℓeti + η t t t i  i  Proof of Theorem 5.1. The proof follows the roadmap of the proof of Theorem 3.5 but handles the suboptimal places of the black-box theorem’s proof by applying Lemmas 5.2 and 5.3. We show that for each arm f , the guarantee holds with failure probability δ′ = δ/d. Therefore the guarantee holds against all the arms f simultaneously with probability at least 1 − δ. More formally: X XX  (1 − ǫ) wit + ζ · ℓeti by definition of ℓeti ℓtI(t) = (1 − ǫ) t  t  ≤  ≤ ≤ ≤  i  XX 1 − ǫ X X t et p i ℓi + ζ ℓeti 1 − γd t t i i X X  2 log(d) XX 1 − ǫ X et ℓf + η pti ℓeti + +ζ ℓeti 1 − γd t η t t i i X X X 1−ǫ log(d) ℓet + (η + ζ) ℓeti + 1 − γd t f η t i   X 1 ln(1/γ ) 1 − ǫ X et t e ℓ + (η + ζ) dℓf + d(η + ζ) + 1 − γd t f γ η t=1  by Lemma 3.1  by Lemma 5.4 as ℓti ≤ 1 and pti ≤ wit + ζ by Lemma 5.2  Now we use the strict negative bias of Lemma 5.3 to get that with probability at least (1 − δ′ ) we can continue the above inequalities as:   X X 1−ǫ X t log(d/δ′ ) 1 ln(1/γ ) log(d/δ′ ) t t (1 − ǫ) ℓI(t) ≤ ℓf + + (η + ζ) dℓf + d(η + ζ) + + 1 − γd 2ζ γ η 2ζ t t t=1 X 2 log(d2/δ ) + d(1 + 2 ln(2/ǫ) + log(d2/δ )) ≤ ℓtf + ǫ t 21  where the final inequality is derived by replacing the parameters γ, ζ, η, and δ′ , and using the fact that 1−ǫ 1−γd + (η + ζ)d ≤ 1 for the selection of the parameters.  p e Corollary 5.5. GREEN-IX applied with doubling trick on parameter ǫ guarantees regret of O d log(d/δ ) · L⋆ p e d log(d) · L⋆ ). with probability at least 1 − δ, and hence expected regret at most O( The proof follows similarly to the one of Theorem 3.5 by applying Lemma 3.7 with Ψ(δ) = O(d log(d/δ )) and q = 1.  5.2  Semi-bandits  In order to obtain an improved guarantee for semi-bandits, we need algorithm-specific arguments to address the inefficiencies in the black-box analysis. For semi-bandits we use the Follow the Perturbed Leader algorithm of [Han57, KV05], based on the idea of perturbing the cumulative loss of elements by adding a random variable coming from an exponential distribution and then selecting the strategy with the minimum perturbed cumulative loss. This way of selecting a strategy allows us to use an “oracle” to select the strategy with minimum perturbed loss without explicitly maintaining losses or probabilities for all strategies. For example, when choosing paths as strategies, one can compute shortest paths in an efficient way. Neu [Neu15b] provided an adaptation of the algorithm with optimal small-loss pseudoregret guarantee in expectation which he termed TruFPL. He adapted the Follow the Perturbed Leader in algorithm with two changes: implicit exploration and truncation. His analysis implies a small-loss guarantee for the full-information algorithm run on estimated losses. Lemma 5.6 (implied by Lemmas 6, 7, and 8 in [Neu15b]). TruFPL run on estimated losses satisfies the following guarantee for any f ∈ S: X g∈S  ptg ℓetg ≤  X t  ℓetf + η · m  XX t  j∈E  m log(dT/m) + 1 ℓetj + η  Proof. The proof follows the arguments in [Neu15b] but requires a stronger union bound (over the time horizon as well) in his proof of Lemma 6. This is necessary as Follow the Perturbed Leader requires fresh perturbations for each round to work against adaptive adversaries. As a result, the guarantee Neu provides for a fixed truncation (which is a function of the perturbation) needs to be strengthened to work for all truncations used (that correspond to each round in the time horizon). To ensure that the cumulative estimated losses are not too far from each other, Neu truncated the perturbations that are higher than some parameter. The effect of this truncation is similar to one of the effects of freezing: if two strategies differ significantly in their cumulative loss, adding truncated noise does not change their order, so the higher loss strategy is not selected. By using his algorithm he shows Lemma 5.7 which can be viewed as an equivalent of Lemma 5.2. This addresses the first inefficiency. Lemma 5.7 (Lemma 2 in [Neu15b]). TruFPL run on the estimated losses guarantees that, for any element j ∈ E and strategy g ∈ S, T X t=1  ℓetj ≤  T X X t=1  m log(d/m) eTj + ℓj ℓete + η e∈g  where Tj ≤ T is the last time that element j had non-zero probability.  22  To use Follow the Perturbed Leader as a basis in an algorithm with partial feedback, we need to create an estimated loss for each element. Using importance sampling, for each element e we need the probability that a strategy g including e selected. Neu uses the technique of geometric resampling [NB13] to create estimators that are equal in expectation to the ones developed by importance sampling (without actually computing the probabilities of each element). This technique works well in expectation but does not concentrate which creates a roadblock in providing high-probability guarantees. Instead, one can use actual sampling to create estimates close to these probabilities. With no lower bound on the targeted probability, the number of samples required for this purpose can be, in principle, unbounded. Freezing addresses this point by giving a lower bound on any probability of interest, and hence guaranteeing an upper bound on the number of samples required as established in Appendix B.1. Combining this with the implicit exploration technique (as in [Neu15a]) which, as before, addresses the inefficiency in the negative bias of the estimated loss of the comparator (Lemma 5.3), we provide the following optimal high-probability approximate regret guarantee (Theorem 5.8). Theorem 5.8. The algorithm of the previous section with Follow the Perturbed Leader as a full information algorithm run on estimated losses with parameters ǫ′ = ǫ/2, γ = ǫ/2d, and η = ǫ/2m2 and combined with implicit exploration with ζ = γ has, with probability at least 1 − δ, ǫ-approximate  (m3 +d) log(dT/mδ ) + m4 d . regret at most O ǫ Proof. Recall that we use Wet and Pet for an element e as the probability that e is observed after and before freezing respectively, i.e. the sum of the probabilities that a strategy g ∈ S containing e is used. X t  XX  1 X X t et 1 X X t et Pe ℓe = p g ℓg 1 − γd t 1 − γd t t e∈E e∈E g∈S   XX d/m) 1 X et m log( 1 ≤ ℓetj + ℓf + ηm · +  1 − γd η γ t j∈E t ! ! X X d/m) d/m) m log( m log( 1 1 1 ℓetf + ℓet + ηm2 · + + + ≤ 1 − γd t f η γ η γ t  ℓtI(t) =  Wet ℓete ≤  The first equality holds by the definition of importance sampling, the first inequality holds by Lemma 4.1, the second equality holds by Lemma 5.6, and the last inequality holds by Lemma 5.7. P Using implicit exploration allows us to bound the term t ℓetf with high probability by the actual losses P t log(d/δ (Lemma 5.3.) The theorem then follows by the substituting the t ℓf at the expense of a term ζ parameters of the statement. Since we have such a high-probability guarantee, we can apply doubling trick similarly as in Theorem 3.8 and derive the optimal small-loss high-probability guarantee answering the open question of Neu [Neu15b, Neu15a]. We can therefore obtain the following small-loss guarantee. Corollary 5.9. The above algorithm applied with  doubling trick on parameter ǫ guarantees regret of  p 4 ⋆ 3 O (L ) (m + d) log(dT/mδ ) + m d log(dT/mδ ) with probability at least 1 − δ.  5.3  Fixed feedback graphs using clique partition  In this section, we consider the partial information learning with feedback graph that is fixed across time, and provide an optimal dependence on L⋆ for this case at the expense of using the minimum  23  clique partition number κ(G) instead of the size α of the maximum independent set encountered by the algorithm.  p e To achieve the optimal O κ(G)L⋆ log(d) regret bound, we use the black box framework with mutliplicative weights as the full information engine for the estimated losses along with freezing. The resulting algorithm GREEN-IX-Graph combines features of black box framework of Algorithm 1 with the bandit algorithm GREEN-IX, and adds an additional freezing level to keep estimated losses of all arms close. We use three freezing thresholds: γ and γ ′ like in Algorithm 1, but define γ = Θ(ǫ/κ) using the clique-partition number κ in place of α, and add an additional β = Θ(ǫ/d) on the probabilities of arms being played (rather than observed). Like GREEN-IX, its graph version GREEN-IX-Graph uses the multiplicative weights algorithm as its full information learning algorithm with learning rate η = Θ(ǫ/κ), and updates estimated losses using the implicit exploration with a ζ = Θ(ǫ/κ) using the ℓt t formula ℓeti = (W ti+ζ) if i ∈ NI(t) and 0 otherwise. The algorithm is formally defined in Algorithm 3. i  This algorithm achieves an optimal high-probability small loss guarantee using the clique partition number: Theorem 5.10. Algorithm 3 run with an appropriate parameter ǫ′ has the following regret bound with probability at least (1 − δ):  p e κL⋆ log(d/δ) Reg(f ) = O  Proof. The novel idea of the proof is to think of the multiplicative weight algorithm as running on two levels: selecting a clique c in a clique partition on the top level, and then selecting an arm i ∈ c in the clique. At the top level there are κ options to choose from, and at the bottom level we are in a full information setting, any node i ∈ c can observe all other nodes in c.  To make this analysis work for clique partition, we need to overcome a few difficulties. • We are running the multiplicative weight algorithm, importance sampling and freezing on the real graph G: the algorithm is not explicitly using the clique-partition C, instead we brake the analysis into the two level structure suggested above. • To show the high probability guarantee we show that the expected loss is closely tied with the loss using expected losses observed by the full information algorithm. In particular, we show that P P P wt the algorithm’s loss t ℓtI(t) is very close to the following expression: t i Wit (Wit + ζ)ℓeti . It is P P i not hard to see that the two expressions have the same expectation: wi ℓi . To show that t P iwit t ′ they remain very close we use Lemma 3.6 with xt = ℓI(t) as well as xt = i W t (Wit + ζ)ℓeti . Note Pi wt that (Wit + ζ)ℓeti is either 0 or ℓti , so at most 1, and hence we get that x′t ≤ i Wit ≤ α(G), the i  independence number of G as shown by [ACBGM13] for any probability distribution wit .  • We add the third threshold β to make sure that the estimated losses of all arms remain close, a property used in low-loss guarantees for the case of bandits.  Based on this idea the proof follows a similar structure to the proofs of Theorems 3.5 and 5.1 but needs some extra care in i) introducing an extra freezing threshold based on probability of being played, ii) applying the concentration bounds, and iii) appropriately tackling the resulting second-order term. More formally, we first show the approximate regret guarantee compared to any arm f with probability at least 1 − δ′ where δ′ = dδ . To facilitate the exposition, we present it in steps.  24  Algorithm 3 GREEN-IX-Graph Require: Number of arms d, parameter ǫ, and an estimate on κ ≥ κ(G). 1: Initialize p1i for arm i uniformly (pti = 1/d) and set t = 1 (round 1). 2: for t = 1 to T do 3: Freeze arms whose probability is below β = ǫ/5d to obtain:  D t = i : pti < β 4:  Freeze arms whose observation probability is below γ = ǫ/5κ, to obtain:     X F0t = i : ptj < γ   t t j∈Ni \D  5:  Recursively freeze remaining arms S if their probability of being observed by unfrozen arms is ′ t t γ below γ = /3 to obtain F = D ∪ k≥0 Fkt where, Fkt =  6:        i∈ /  k−1 [  t Fm  m=0  !  S t j∈(Nit \ k−1 m=0 Fm )  8:  ptj < γ ′     Normalize the probabilities of unfrozen arms so that they form a distribution.  0 if i ∈ F t t wi = pt  1−P i pt else t j∈F  7:  X  :      j  Draw arm I(t) ∼ wt and incur loss ℓtI(t) . Compute biased estimate of losses via implicit exploration with parameter ζ = ǫ/30κ:  where Wit =  P  j∈Nit  wjt  ℓeti =  (  ℓti Wit +ζ  t \F t if i ∈ NI(t)  otherwise  0  via multiplicative weights update with learning rate η = ǫ/30κ: Update pt+1 i t e t pi exp(−η ℓi ). 10: end for 9:  pt+1 ∝ i  Concentration on actual losses: We proceed by upper bounding the loss of the algorithm by a sum of weighted estimated losses. In that, we apply Lemma 3.6 two times. First we relate the loss of the algorithm to its expected performance. With probability (1 − δ′/3) we have: X t  ℓtI(t) ≤ (1 + ǫ′ )  XX t  i  25  wit ℓti +  (1 + ǫ′ ) ln(3/δ′ ) ǫ′  (1)  Bounding total frozen probability: Since there are at most d arms, the total probability mass that is frozen at line 3 is at most β · d = ǫ′/5. In the subsequent freezing steps, by Lemma 3.1 is at most pt 4γ · α ≤ 4ǫ′/5. Therefore the total probability frozen is ǫ′ and for any non-frozen arm i: wit ≤ 1−ǫi ′ . (1 + ǫ′ )  XX t  i  wit ℓti ≤  1 + ǫ′ X X t t p i ℓi 1 − ǫ′ t  (2)  i  Reduction to estimated losses: We move forward by connecting the performance of the full information algorithm to an analogous expression on estimated losses. The following expression holds deterministically by analyzing the estimated loss term: # " 1 + ǫ′ X X t t 1 + ǫ′ X X pti t e t p i ℓi = (3) (W + ζ) · ℓi E 1 − ǫ′ t 1 − ǫ′ t Wit i i  i  Concentration on estimated losses: We now wish to connect this expectation to its realization. Unfortunately estimated losses of different arms are conditionally dependent for the same round. Therefore we define the whole summation over the numberPof arms as ourPrandom variable. Note that pt pt (Wit + ζ) · ℓeti ≤ 1 by definition of the estimated loss and i:W t 6=0 Wit ≤ i:W t 6=0 Pit ≤ α as observed i i i i in [ACBGM13]. Therefore we can apply the converse direction of Lemma 3.6 with range of values at most α, and obtain with probability (1 − δ′/3): " # ! (1 + ǫ′ ) X X t et X X pti et 1 + ǫ′ X X pti t e t E (W + ζ)ℓi ≤ p i ℓi + t ζ ℓi + 1 − ǫ′ t Wit i (1 − ǫ′ )2 W i t t i  i  i  (1 + ǫ′ )2 ln(3/δ′ ) α· (1 − ǫ′ )2 ǫ′  (4)  Second-order bound of multiplicative weights: We now relate the performance of the full information algorithm on estimated losses to the cumulative estimated loss of a comparator f via Lemma 5.4: XX X XX X X pt log(d) X et log(d) i et pti ℓeti ≤ ℓetf + η pti (ℓeti )2 + ℓi + ≤ (5) ℓf + η t η Wi η t t t t t i  i  i  Decomposing across cliques: What is left is to relate the double summation of the weighted estimated losses to the estimated loss of the comparator. For that we first decompose across cliques. Let C be such a clique partition of minimum size. For a clique c ∈ C, let Pct be the total probability of the nodes in the clique. Note that, for any such node i ∈ c which is non-frozen at round t, it holds that Wit ≥ Pit /3. This is because we are in one of two scenaria: i) no node in the clique is frozen; in this case Wit ≥ Pit ≥ Pct , or ii) some node is frozen which implies that Pct < γ; however i is not frozen and therefore Wit ≥ γ ′ = γ/3. We therefore obtain: X X X pt X X X pt X X X pt X X pt i et i et i et i et ℓ = ℓ ≤ 3 · ℓ = 3 · ℓ i i i t t t t i W W P P c c i i t t t t i  c∈C i∈c  c∈C i∈c  c∈C  (6)  i∈c  Fictitious multiplicative weights within each clique: The key insight of the proof is that the quantity pti/Pct appearing in the previous inequality is the probability of playing arm i if we commit 26  to play one arm from the clique. The sum for a clique in the right most expression is the expected loss of the multiplicative weight algorithm running on the clique. This is because, with multiplicative weights:   P t es exp −η ℓ t s=1 i pi .  P =P t t Pc es exp −η ℓ j∈c s=1 j  As a result we can again apply Lemma 5.4, utilizing that estimated losses are at most 1/γ ′ . Let f (c) denote an arbitary representative of the clique c ∈ C. Then: X X pt X X X pt log(d) X et η X X pti et log(d) i et i et 2 et + η ( ℓ ) + ≤ ℓ ℓ + ≤ ℓ + ℓ f (c) f (c) i i Pct Pct η γ′ t Pct i η t t t t i∈c  i∈c  i∈c  This implies (since γ ′ = 2η):  X X pt i et ℓ ≤ t i P c t i  P et log(d)/η t ℓf (c) + 1−  η/γ ′  ≤2  X t  log(d) . ℓetf (c) + 2 η  (7)  Estimated losses close to each other: We now use the same idea of Lemma 5.2 to show that the cumulative estimated losses of the representatives of the cliques are close to the cumulative estimated loss of the comparator f . To this end, for any c ∈ C, we define τc = max{t ≤ T : ptf (c) > β}. Beginning from: pτfc(c) > β and applying the arguments in the proof of Lemma 5.2 and the fact that estimated losses are still bounded by 1/γ ′ (since they are weighted by the probability of observation), we obtain: X t  ℓetf (c) ≤  X t  ln(1/β ) 1 ℓetf + ′ + γ η  (8)  Concentration from estimated to actual loss via implicit exploration: Last we need to relate the cumulative estimated loss of the comparator f to its actual loss. This occurs directly by Lemma 5.3, with probability at least 1 − δ′/3 T X t=1  ℓetf ≤  T X  ℓtf +  t=1  log(3/δ′ ) 2ζ  (9)  Putting everything together: Combining the numbered inequalities and setting η = ζ = γ ′ /2 and ′ )(1+6ζ+6η 1 ≤ 1−ǫ ǫ′ such that (1+ǫ(1−ǫ , and applying union bound on the failure probabilities concludes the ′ )2 proof for approximate regret. The proof for actual regret then follows doubling trick arguments similar as in previous theorems. LP relaxation: Beyond Clique Partition. In the proof above, we can replace the clique-partition number κ(G) with the smaller linear programming relaxation for clique partition κf (G). Unfortunately this fractional clique partition number is also computationally unfeasible to obtain.  27  κf (G) = min  X  yc  c Clique in G  s.t. ∀i ∈ [d] ∀c Clique in G  X c∋i  yc ≥ 1  yc ≥ 0  We call a solution y to the above linear program a fractional clique-partition, and will use y’s to represent the solution. We note that Algorithm 3 only needed a bound on κ and didn’t use the clique-partition in the algorithm. We claim that we can also use the fractional clique-partition number κf in place of κ and the analogous theorem would hold: Theorem 5.11. Algorithm 3 run with an appropriate parameter ǫ′ using κf in place of κ above, has the following regret bound with probability at least (1 − δ): q  ⋆ e κf L log(d/δ) Reg(f ) = O Proof Sketch: The proof is completely analogous to the proof P of Theorem 5.10: the only change occurs in Eq. (6) where one needs to replace summing over cliques c∈C in each sum with a weighted sum P of the cliques used in the clique partition c∈C yc . The first equation now becomes an inequality X X X pt X X pt i et i et ℓ ≤ yc t i t ℓi W W i i t t i  due to the constraint that  5.4  P  c∋i yc  c∈C  i∈c  ≥ 1. The rest of the proof follows as before.  Shifting comparators  Applying the black-box analysis for shifting comparators as in the previous section with multiplicative weights with the small noise and implicit exploration and applying Lemmas 5.2 and 5.3, we directly obtain the optimal high-probability approximate regret guarantee against shifting comparators. This is formally stated in the following corollary. Corollary 5.12. If we run the framework of the previous section with the Noisy Hedge algorithm of [FLL+ 16] we obtain approximate regret against any sequence f ,   dK(f ) log(dT ) + 2d log(d) + d log(1/δ) ApxReg(f, ǫ) = O ǫ where for all f ∈ [d]T , K(f ) = {t < d : f t 6= f t+1 } , the number of times the comparator switches. Remark 5.13. In the above we assumed that the full information algorithm was Noisy Hedge [FLL+ 16] which satisfies the shifting approximate regret in the full-information case. The reason why the small noise there was essential was to establish that, at the time of the switch of comparator, the new comparator arm does not have too low probability. However, this is directly offered by freezing since the cumulative estimated losses stay close to each other and therefore the probability of no arm becomes very small. This shows one more property of freezing: achieving directly shifting guarantees for partial 28  information even when applied on full information algorithms without this property.  6  Discussion  We have shown how to obtain small-loss regret guarantees with high probability for general partial information settings in the graph-based feedback model. Our technique captures as special cases important partial-information paradigms such as contextual bandits and semi-bandits, as well as learning with shifting comparators and bandit p feedback. For all these settings, we provide a black-box small-loss e α1/3 (L⋆ )2/3 ), where α can be thought of as an appropriate problem high-probability guarantee of O( dimension of each paradigm and corresponds to the independence number √ of the graph representing the feedback structure. We improve the guarantee to depending only on L⋆ for bandits, semi-bandits, as well as fixed feedback graphs. √ A number of important problems related to our work remain open. Our L⋆ bound for feedback graphs depends on the partition number, rather than the independence number and only works for fixed graph. Our results assume undirected feedback graphs, while a number of applications have directed feedback. Finally, our results for shifting comparators (in Section 5.4) either require knowing the number of changes of the comparator, or are suboptimal in the dependence on this number. We elaborate on each: √ ⋆ e • The first question √ is to derive an algorithm with an optimal dependence of O( αL ) or at least ⋆ e extend our O( κL ) result to evolving graphs. We have shown that our framework applied on specific algorithms can lead to such an improvement for the bandit and semi-bandit settings, resolving open questions by [Neu15b, Neu15a]. In Section 5 (with details in Appendix 5.3), we p e show that when the feedback graph G is not-evolving, we obtain a O( κ(G)L⋆ ) regret guarantee, where κ(G) is the minimum clique partition size. Recent work of [AZBY18] gave an optimal pseudo-regret bound for the contextual bandit setting (resolving an open problem raised by [AKL+ 17]), a special case of graph-based feedback where graphs are evolving and consist of t t disjoint cliques, which implies that κ(G √  √) = α(G ) for all t. This provides hope that our work e αL⋆ or O e κL⋆ result for general graphs. can be extended to a O • The second question is to derive an p algorithm that achieves a shifting regret bound for the e partial information case that is O( K(f ) · L⋆ ) without knowledge of the number of changes K(f ). In Section 5.4 we provide an optimal approximate regret bound. Such a bound is directly useful, for instance, in game-theoretic settings where the approximate regret is the essential quantity. However, unlike all of our other bounds, this one does not lift to small-loss guarantees through the usual doubling trick unless we know the number of changes. This is due to the fact that, if the tuning of ǫ does not depend√on the number of changes, using the doubling ⋆ e trick p only provides a regret bound of O(K(f ) L ). In contrast, in the full-information setting, e K(f )L⋆ ) guarantee algorithms are known [HS09, LS15]. It would be therefore interesting O( to obtain such guarantees in the partial-information setting. • Finally, it would be nice to extend the graph-based feedback results to directed graphs. Our work relies on the undirected nature of the graph in controlling the cascade of propagation in the freezing process. Some of the previous work on uniform bounds [ACG+ 14, ACBDK15] also offer bounds that apply also for the directed case. Providing small-loss bounds for directed feedback graphs is an interesting open problem. Acknowledgements We thank Haipeng Luo for pointing out the connection to the contextual bandit setting and Jake Abernethy, Adam Kalai, and Santosh Vempala for a useful discussion about Follow  29  the Perturbed Leader.  References [AAGO06]  Chamy Allenberg, Peter Auer, László Györfi, and György Ottucsák. Hannan Consistency in On-Line Learning in Case of Unbounded Losses Under Partial Monitoring, pages 229– 243. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.  [AB10]  Jean-Yves Audibert and Sébastien Bubeck. Regret bounds and minimax policies under partial monitoring. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:2785–2836, 2010.  [ACBDK15] Noga Alon, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Ofer Dekel, and Tomer Koren. Online Learning with Feedback Graphs: Beyond Bandits. COLT 2015 | JMLR W&CP, 2015. [ACBFS03] Peter Auer, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E. Schapire. The nonstochastic multiarmed bandit problem. SIAM J. Comput., 32(1):48–77, January 2003. [ACBGM13] Noga Alon, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Claudio Gentile, and Yishay Mansour. From bandits to experts: A tale of domination and independence. In Christopher J. C. Burges, Léon Bottou, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, NIPS, pages 1610–1618, 2013. [ACDK15]  Noga Alon, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Ofer Dekel, and Tomer Koren. Online learning with feedback graphs: Beyond bandits. In COLT, volume 40 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pages 23–35. JMLR.org, 2015.  [ACG+ 14]  Noga Alon, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Claudio Gentile, Shie Mannor, Yishay Mansour, and Ohad Shamir. Nonstochastic multi-armed bandits with graph-structured feedback. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.8428, 2014.  [AK04]  Baruch Awerbuch and Robert D. Kleinberg. Adaptive routing with end-to-end feedback: distributed learning and geometric approaches. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Chicago, IL, USA, June 13-16, 2004, pages 45–53, 2004.  [AKL+ 17]  Alekh Agarwal, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, Haipeng Luo, and Schapire Robert E. Open problem: First-order regret bounds for contextual bandits. In Satyen Kale and Ohad Shamir, editors, Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Learning Theory, volume 65 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 4–7, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 07–10 Jul 2017. PMLR.  [AZBY18]  Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sébastien Bubeck, and Li. Yuanzhi. Make the minority great again: First-order regret bound for contextual bandits. cite arXiv:1802.03386, 2018.  [BCB12]  Sébastien Bubeck and Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi. Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic multi-armed bandit problems. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 5(1):1– 122, 2012.  [BEDL06]  Avrim Blum, Eyal Even-Dar, and Katrina Ligett. Routing without regret: On convergence to nash equilibria of regret-minimizing algorithms in routing games. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC ’06, pages 45–52, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.  30  [BH05]  Avrim Blum and Jason D. Hartline. Near-optimal online auctions. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’05, pages 1156–1163, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2005. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  [BHLR08]  Avrim Blum, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Katrina Ligett, and Aaron Roth. Regret minimization and the price of total anarchy. In Proceedings of the Fortieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’08, pages 373–382, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.  [CBGM13]  Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Claudio Gentile, and Yishay Mansour. Regret minimization for reserve prices in second-price auctions. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth Annual ACMSIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’13, pages 1190–1204, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2013. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  [CBL06]  Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Gabor Lugosi. Prediction, Learning, and Games. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA, 2006.  [CHK16]  Alon Cohen, Tamir Hazan, and Tomer Koren. Online learning with feedback graphs without the graphs. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 48, ICML’16, pages 811–819. JMLR.org, 2016.  [Cov91]  Thomas M. Cover. Universal portfolios. Mathematical Finance, 1(1):1–29, 1991.  [FLL+ 16]  Dylan J. Foster, Zhiyuan Li, Thodoris Lykouris, Karthik Sridharan, and Éva Tardos. Learning in games: Robustness of fast convergence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016.  [FS97]  Yoav Freund and Robert E Schapire. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an application to boosting. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 55(1):119–139, August 1997.  [HAK07]  Elad Hazan, Amit Agarwal, and Satyen Kale. Logarithmic regret algorithms for online convex optimization. Mach. Learn., 69(2-3):169–192, December 2007.  [Han57]  J. Hannan. Approximation to bayes risk in repeated play. Contributions to the theory of games, 3:97—-139, 1957.  [HS09]  Elad Hazan and C. Seshadhri. Efficient learning algorithms for changing environments. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 393–400, 2009.  [HW98]  Mark Herbster and Manfred K. Warmuth. Tracking the best expert. Mach. Learn., 32(2):151–178, August 1998.  [KNV16]  Tomáš Kocák, Gergely Neu, and Michal Valko. Online learning with noisy side observations. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2016, Cadiz, Spain, May 9-11, 2016, pages 1186–1194, 2016.  [KNVM14]  Tomás Kocák, Gergely Neu, Michal Valko, and Rémi Munos. Efficient learning by implicit exploration in bandit problems with side observations. In NIPS, 2014.  [KV05]  Adam Kalai and Santosh Vempala. Efficient algorithms for online decision problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 71(3):291–307, October 2005.  [LR85]  T.L Lai and Herbert Robbins. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Adv. Appl. Math., 6(1):4–22, March 1985.  31  [LS15]  Haipeng Luo and Robert E Schapire. Achieving all with no parameters: Adanormalhedge. In Proceedings of The 28th Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages 1286–1304, 2015.  [LST16]  Thodoris Lykouris, Vasilis Syrgkanis, and Éva Tardos. Learning and efficiency in games with dynamic population. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 120–129. SIAM, 2016.  [LW94]  Nick Littlestone and Manfred K. Warmuth. The weighted majority algorithm. Inf. Comput., 108(2):212–261, February 1994.  [MS11]  Shie Mannor and Ohad Shamir. From bandits to experts: On the value of sideobservations. In John Shawe-Taylor, Richard S. Zemel, Peter L. Bartlett, Fernando C. N. Pereira, and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, NIPS, pages 684–692, 2011.  [NB13]  Gergely Neu and Gábor Bartók. An efficient algorithm for learning with semi-bandit feedback. In Sanjay Jain, Rémi Munos, Frank Stephan, and Thomas Zeugmann, editors, ALT, volume 8139 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 234–248. Springer, 2013.  [Neu15a]  Gergely Neu. Explore no more: Improved high-probability regret bounds for nonstochastic bandits. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’15, pages 3168–3176, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2015. MIT Press.  [Neu15b]  Gergely Neu. First-order regret bounds for combinatorial semi-bandits. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages 1360–1375, 2015.  [Rou15]  Tim Roughgarden. Intrinsic robustness of the price of anarchy. Journal of the ACM, 2015.  [RS13]  Alexander Rakhlin and Karthik Sridharan. Online learning with predictable sequences. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages 993–1019, 2013.  [RS14]  Alexander Rakhlin and Karthik Sridharan. Online non-parametric regression. In Proceedings of The 27th Conference on Learning Theory, COLT 2014, Barcelona, Spain, June 13-15, 2014, pages 1232–1264, 2014.  [RS16]  Alexander Rakhlin and Karthik Sridharan. Bistro: An efficient relaxation-based method for contextual bandits. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 48, ICML’16, pages 1977–1985. JMLR.org, 2016.  [RS17]  Alexander Rakhlin and Karthik Sridharan. On equivalence of martingale tail bounds and deterministic regret inequalities. In COLT, 2017.  [RST10]  Alexander Rakhlin, Karthik Sridharan, and Ambuj Tewari. Online learning: Random averages, combinatorial parameters, and learnability, 2010. cite arxiv:1006.1138.  [RW16]  Tim Roughgarden and Joshua R. Wang. Minimizing regret with multiple reserves. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, EC ’16, pages 601–616, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.  [SLKS16]  Vasilis Syrgkanis, Haipeng Luo, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Robert E Schapire. In D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, pages 3135–3143. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.  32  [TDD17]  A A.1  Aristide C. Y. Tossou, Christos Dimitrakakis, and Devdatt Dubhashi. Thompson sampling for stochastic bandits with graph feedback. In 14th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2017), 2017.  Supplementary material for Section 3 Concentration inequality  Lemma 3.6 (restated) Let x1 , x2 , . . . , xT be a sequence of nonnegative random variables, each with xt ∈ [0, 1], and let mt = Et−1 [xt ] = E[xt |x1 , . . . , xt−1 ], the random variable that is the expectation of xt P P conditioned on the sequence x1 , x2 , . . . , xt−1 . Let ǫ > 0, and X = Tt=1 xt and M = Tt=1 mt . Then, with probability at least 1 − δ (1 + ǫ) ln(1/δ ) X − (1 + ǫ)M ≤ ǫ and also with probability at least 1 − δ (1 − ǫ)M − X ≤  (1 + ǫ) ln(1/δ ) ǫ  Proof. The proof follows the basic outline of classical Chernoff bounds for independent variables combined with the law of total expectation to handle the dependence. We start with the first claim. # "T h i Y eλ(xt −(1+ǫ)mt ) P[X − (1 + ǫ)M > B] ≤ e−λB E eλ(X−(1+ǫ)M ) = e−λB E  (10)  t=1  We will prove by induction on T that the expectation above is at most 1 if we use λ = ln(1 + ǫ). Given this fact, we can set B such that e−λB = e− ln(1+ǫ)B = δ. Using that ln(1 + ǫ) ≥ ǫ/1+ǫ for all ǫ ≥ 0, it 1/δ ) ln(1/δ) . ≤ (1+ǫ)·ln( follows that B = ln(1+ǫ) ǫ Q  Now consider the expectation E t eλ(xt −(1+ǫ)mt ) , we will prove by induction on T that with the above choice of λ this is at most 1. For the base case of T = 1 we have  a single   random variable x ∈ [0, 1] and its expectation m = E[x]. The expectation is E eλ(x−(1+ǫ)m) = E eλx · e−λ(1+ǫ)m . We note that for a value x ∈ [0, 1] and any λ, the following simple inequality holds: eλx ≤ xeλ − x + 1 This is true as it holds with equation for x = 0 and 1, and the difference is a concave function (as the second derivative of g(x) = eλx − xeλ + x − 1 is g ′′ (x) = λ2 eλx ≥ 0), so the inequality is true between the two points. Now write the expectation as h i h   i   h i λ E eλx ≤ E xeλ − x + 1 = E x · eλ − 1 + 1 = m · eλ − 1 + 1 ≤ em·(e −1) .  Using this in the expectation we get i h λ λ E eλ(x−(1+ǫ)m) ≤ em·(e −1) · e−λ(1+ǫ)m = em(e −1−λ(1+ǫ)) ≤ 1 33  where the last inequality follows from the choice of λ = ln(1 + ǫ), as the multiplier of m in the exponent with this choice of λ is eλ − 1 − λ(1 + ǫ) = ǫ − (1 + ǫ) ln(1 + ǫ) ≤ ǫ − (1 + ǫ)(ǫ − ǫ2/2) = −  ǫ2 (1 − ǫ) < 0. 2  Now we are ready to prove the general case. Using the law of total expectation, we obtain: # # "T −1 "T Y Y eλ(xt −(1+ǫ)mt ) · eλ(xT −(1+ǫ)mT ) eλ(xt −(1+ǫ)mt ) = E E t=1  t=1  # "T −1 i h Y λ(xt −(1+ǫ)mt ) λ(xT −(1+ǫ)mT ) e · E e =E T −1  t=1  where Et−1 [·] is the random variable taking expectation over the last term conditioned on all the previous x1 , . . . , xT −1 . Note that conditioned on the previous terms, the conditional expectation  λ(xterms −(1+ǫ)m T T ) is exactly the base case, and hence at most 1 by the above, so we can conclude ET −1 e that # # "T −1 "T Y Y λ(xt −(1+ǫ)mt ) λ(xt −(1+ǫ)mt ) e ≤E e E t=1  t=1  and the statement follows by the induction hypothesis. To prove the lower bound, we proceed in an analogous way. For λ = − ln(1 − ǫ), using that 1/1−ǫ ≥ 1+ǫ, ln(1/δ) ln(1/δ ) we obtain the equivalent of the inequality (10) with B ≤ ln( 1/1−ǫ) ≤ ln(1+ǫ) . # "T h i Y eλ((1−ǫ)mt −xt ) P[(1 − ǫ)M − X > B] ≤ e−λB E eλ((1−ǫ)M −X) = e−λB E  (11)  t=1  Regarding the bound on the expectation, consider first a single variable m = E[x]. i h i   h −λ E e−λx ≤ E xe−λ − x + 1 = m e−λ − 1 + 1 ≤ em(e −1)  We now bound the expectation as i i h h −λ −λ E eλ((1−ǫ)m−x) ≤ eλ(1−ǫ)m E e−λx ≤ eλ(1−ǫ)m · em·(e −1) = em(λ(1−ǫ)+(e −1)) ≤ 1  where the last inequality follows from the choice of λ = − ln(1 − ǫ), as the multiplier of m in the exponent with this choice of λ is λ(1 − ǫ) + (e−λ − 1) = −(1 − ǫ) ln(1 − ǫ) − ǫ ≤ (1 − ǫ)ǫ − ǫ = −ǫ2 < 0. using the fact that ln(1 − ǫ) ≤ −ǫ. The induction then follows as before.  A.2  Transforming approximate regret to small-loss guarantees  Lemma 3.7 (restated). Suppose we have a randomized algorithm that takes as input any ǫ > 0 and guarantees that, for some q ≥ 1 and some function Ψ(·), and any δ > 0, with probability 1 − δ, for any 34  time horizon s and any comparator f : (1 − ǫ)  s X  ℓtI(t)  ≤  t=1  s X t=1  ℓtf +  Ψ(δ) . ǫq  Assume that we use this algorithm over multiple phases (by restarting the algorithm when a phase b τ denotes the cumulative loss of b τ > Ψ(δ)q where L end), we run each phase τ with ǫτ = 2−τ until ǫτ L (ǫτ ) the algorithm for phase τ . Then, for any δ > 0, the regret for this multi-phase algorithm is bounded, with probability at least 1 − δ as:   1    q q+1 δ δ ⋆ + Ψ log(L⋆ )+1 Reg ≤ O (L ) q+1 Ψ log(L⋆ )+1 b τ and the loss of the best arm within Proof. We denote the loss of the algorithm within phase τ as L ⋆ the phase as Lτ . Now note that on any phase τ , by our premise about approximate regret on each phase, we have that with probability at least 1 − δ′ , ′ b τ − L⋆ ≤ ǫτ L b τ + Ψ(δ ) L τ (ǫτ )q  b τ of the right hand side can be split in two terms, i) all but the last round of the phase The term ǫτ L ′) due to the doubling condition. The second and ii) the last round. The first term is bounded by Ψ(δ (ǫτ )q term can be upper bounded by ǫτ since the losses are in [0, 1]. Hence, for phase τ , with probability 1 − δ′ : ′ b τ − L⋆ ≤ 2 · Ψ(δq ) + ǫτ . L τ (ǫτ ) Letting Γ denote the last phase and summing over the phases, we have: b − L⋆ ≤ L  Γ−1 X  Γ−1  ′ 2Ψ(δ′ ) X b Γ + Ψ(δ q) ǫτ + ǫΓ L q + (ǫτ ) (ǫΓ ) τ =0 τ =0  ≤ 2Ψ δ′  Γ Γ−1 X X 1 bΓ 2−τ + ǫΓ L + −qτ 2 τ =0  2q(Γ+1)  ≤ 2Ψ δ′ ·  2q  τ =0  −1 bΓ + 2 + ǫΓ L −1   1 bΓ + 2 + ǫΓ L (ǫΓ )q  1 q/q+1   1/q+1  q/q+1 ′ Ψ(δ′ ) /q+1 q Ψ(δ ) b b · 2 + ǫ L · ǫ L +2 ≤4 Γ Γ Γ Γ (ǫΓ )q (ǫΓ−1 )q 1/q+1   q/q+1  Ψ(δ′ ) 1/q+1  q/q+1 ′ q+2 Ψ(δ ) b b · ǫ · ǫ L + L +2 ≤2 P Γ−1 Γ Γ (ǫΓ )q (ǫΓ )q ≤ 4Ψ δ′  Thus we conclude that:  b − L⋆ ≤ O L     1/q+1  q/q+1 b · L Ψ δ  Since q ≥ 1  ′  b by L⋆ , we apply Young’s inequality, the approximate regret property, To replace the dependence of L and the sub-additivity property. For simplicity of presentation, we remove the multiplicative and 35  additive constants and use a = q/q+1 so that the analysis is clear for different small-loss powers.  a   b − L⋆ ≤ Ψ δ′ 1−a · L b ≤ (1 − a)Ψ δ′ + aL b⇒ L b≤ L   1 L⋆ + Ψ δ ′ 1−a  Replacing to the previous guarantee and applying the subadditivity property    a    a 1 ⋆ ′ 1−a ′ 1−a ⋆ ′ b b L−L ≤Ψ δ · L ≤Ψ δ · L +Ψ δ 1−a 1−a  1 (L⋆ )a Ψ δ′ + Ψ δ′ ≤ 1−a  Since there are at most log(L⋆ + 1) + 1 phases, setting δ′ = statements to hold for all phases.  B B.1  δ log(L⋆ +1)+1  suffices for the high probability  Supplementary material for Section 4 Sample complexity to estimate probabilities in oracle-efficient settings  In this section we provide a formal upper bound on the number of samples needed to create the estimates on the probabilities we use for semi-bandits (sections 4.1 and 5.2) and for oracle-efficient contextual bandits (section 4.2). Since we are only allowed to sample solutions instead of directly computing the observation probabilities Pet , we draw N samples at each round and create estimates on these probabilities. t be these samples, and and let P bet = 1 PN 1e∈f t be the empirical frequency of appearLet f1t , . . . , fN i=1 N i ances of each element e. We now run our algorithm by doing importance sampling using Pb . We use t the losses ℓbt = ℓe as estimated losses for the elements e of the selected solution and apply freezing also e  Pbet  based on this estimate P̂ . That is we freeze element e if Pbet < γ and only look for solutions that do not contain frozen edges while sampling solutions. This gives us the following lemma that, with the appropriate concentration can result to an approximate regret guarantee as in Theorems 4.2 and 5.8.  Lemma B.1. If we run the semi-bandit algorithm with ǫ′ = ǫ/6 based on Pbet ’s as estimates in place of ′ /δ) Pet ’s, and N = (1+2ǫ )mǫ′log(dT then for any ǫ, δ > 0 with probability at least 1 − δ over randomization, γ the following inequality is true: X t  ℓtI(t) ≤ (1 + ǫ)  XX t  ℓ̃te +  e∈f  2 mB(ǫ/6, T, F) + γ γ  Proof. From Lemma 3.6, with probability at least 1 − δ, both the following statements are true: ∀e ∈ E, t ≤ T  (1 + ǫ) log(dT/δ ) Pbet ≤ (1 + ǫ)Pet + Nǫ  36  (12)  and ∀e ∈ E, t ≤ T  Pet ≤ (1 + ǫ)Pbet +  (1 + 2ǫ) log(dT/δ ) . Nǫ  (13)  We adapt the analysis in the proof of Theorem 4.2 to deal with the fact that we apply importance sampling based on samples and not the actual probabilities: X X X X X ℓtI(t) = ℓte = Wet ℓete t  t  =  t  =  =  =  e∈I(t)  X X t  e∈I(t)  X X t  ≤  e∈I(t)  X X t  ≤  e∈I(t)  X X  e∈I(t)  X X t  e∈I(t)  X X t  t  e∈I(t)   X X Wet ℓbte Wet ℓete − (1 + ǫ′ )ℓbte + (1 + ǫ′ )   t      Wet ℓete − (1 + ǫ′ )ℓbte + (1 + ǫ′ )     ǫ′  1+ Wet ℓete − (1 + ǫ′ )ℓbte + 1 − ǫ′     ǫ′  1+ Wet ℓete − (1 + ǫ′ )ℓbte + 1 − ǫ′   Wet ℓete − (1 + ǫ′ )ℓbte       e∈I(t)  XX t  e∈E  XX t  e∈E  XX t  i∈F    Wet ℓbte  Pet ℓbte  pti ℓbti   1 + ǫ′ X X bt mB(ǫ′ , T, F)  + ℓe + (1 − ǫ′ )2 γ t ǫ′  e∈f   X X ℓbte − (1 + ǫ′ )ℓete  1+ Wet ℓete − (1 + ǫ′ )ℓbte + (1 − ǫ′ )2 t e∈f e∈I(t)   (1 + ǫ′ )2 X X et mB(ǫ′ , T, F)  + ℓe + (1 − ǫ′ )2 γ t e∈f  where we used Lemma 4.1 for the first inequality and the regret bound for the full information algorithm for the second one, noting that the magnitude of the losses is L = m/γ . The third term can be bound similarly as in the proof of Theorem 4.2. What is left is to bound the two first terms.  37  First term: With probability at least 1 − δ, the following holds: X X t  e∈I(t)  ! 1 1 − (1 + ǫ′ ) t P Pbet e t e∈I(t)  X X 1  bt = Wet ℓte Pe − (1 + ǫ′ )Pet Pbet Pet t e∈I(t)   X X  Wet ℓte Wet ℓete − (1 + ǫ′ )ℓbte =  ≤ ≤ ≤  X X t  e∈I(t)  Wet ℓte  (1 + ǫ′ ) log(dT/δ ) N ǫ′ Pbet Pet 1  (1 + ǫ′ ) log(dT/δ ) X X ℓte bt N (1 − ǫ′ )ǫ′ t e∈I(t) Pe  (1 + ǫ′ ) log(dT/δ ) X X t ℓe N γ(1 − ǫ′ )ǫ′ t e∈I(t)  (1 + ǫ′ ) log(dT/δ ) X t ℓI(t) = N γ(1 − ǫ′ )ǫ′ t X ℓtI(t) ≤ ǫ′ t  where the first inequality holds with probability 1 − δ by relation (12). The second inequality holds by Lemma 4.1. The third inequality holds because Pbet ≥ γ for non-frozen nodes. The last inequality ′ ) log(dT/δ ) holds since N ≥ (1+ǫ . (ǫ′ )2 γ(1−ǫ′ )  Second term: We focus only on rounds where f is not frozen as else the quantity is anyway negative. With probability at least 1 − δ, the following holds: !  1 + ǫ′ X X t 1 1 + ǫ′ X X  bt ′ et ′ 1 ℓe − (1 + ǫ )ℓe = ℓe − (1 + ǫ ) t bt (1 − ǫ′ )2 t (1 − ǫ′ )2 t Pe P e e∈f e∈f  1 + ǫ′ X X ℓte  t ′ bt = P − (1 + ǫ ) P e bt t e (1 − ǫ′ )2 t e∈f Pe Pe ≤  ≤  (1 + 2ǫ′ ) log(dT/δ ) 1 + ǫ′ X X ℓte · (1 − ǫ′ )2 t N ǫ′ Pbet Pet e∈f  (1 + 2ǫ′ ) log(dT/δ ) X X ℓete 1 · · (1 − ǫ′ )2 N ǫ′ Pbet t + ǫ′  e∈f  + ǫ′  2ǫ′ ) log(dT/δ )  1 (1 + · ′ 2 (1 − ǫ ) N γǫ′ XX XX ≤ ǫ′ ℓete = ǫ′ ℓete  ≤  t  e∈f  t  ·  XX t  e∈f  ℓete  e∈f  The first inequality holds from relation (13). The second inequality holds since ℓete = ℓte /Pet . The third ′ dT /δ ) · inequality holds because for non-frtozen arms Pbet > γ. The final inequality hold as N ≥ 2(1+2ǫ(ǫ)′ )log( 2γ (1+ǫ′ )2 . (1−ǫ′ )2  Summing up: 38  ′  Using the above two bounds on the summands we finally conclude that using N = 2(1+2ǫ(ǫ)′ )log( 2γ samples on every round, with probability at least 1 − δ,   ′ ′ 2 X X X X XX mB(ǫ , T, F)  (1 + ǫ )  ℓete + ℓtI(t) ≤ ǫ′ ℓtI(t) + ǫ′ ℓete + ′ )2 (1 − ǫ γ t t t t  dT/δ )  ′ 2  (1+ǫ ) · (1−ǫ ′ )2  e∈f  e∈f  Assuming ǫ < 1 and ǫ′ = ǫ/6, we can conclude that X t  ℓtI(t) ≤ (1 + ǫ)  XX t  e∈f  (1 + ǫ/6)2 mB(ǫ/6, T, F) ℓete + (1 − ǫ/6)2 γ  The above lemma can be applied in Section 5.2 as well as in the proof of Theorem 5.8 to replace analysis for the case when Pet ’s can be computed exactly to one where its estimated via sampling. The statements are still true in high probability with only additional log(T ) factor term in regret bound.Moreover, it can be also applied in Section 4.2 for the oracle-efficient guarantees we provide.  B.2  Proofs for contextual bandits  Theorem 4.3 (restated). Assuming that the oracle-efficient full-information algorithm A has ǫp approximate regret B(ǫ, T, F) = T log(|F |) when applied on losses in [0, 1], A run on the estimated losses coming from the freezing process and with ǫ′ = ǫ/2, with  probability 1 − δ for any δ > 0 has  √ |F | d· T log(|F |) approximate regret ApxReg(f, ǫ) = O + d·log(ǫ2 /δ) for all f ∈ F. ǫ Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 4.2 adjusted to the contextual bandit setting. Note that the estimated losses ℓet are bounded by 1/γ and so, by our premise about the full information algorithm, we have: ′  (1 − ǫ )  T X t=1  ℓtI(t)  ′  = (1 − ǫ ) T X  ≤ min f ∈F  T X d X  wit ℓ̃ti  t=1 i=1  ℓ̃tf (xt ) +  t=1  1 B(ǫ′ , T, F) γ  (14)  Now note that by Lemma 3.6 we have that for any f ∈ F, and any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, T T X X (1 + ǫ′ ) log(1/δ ) t ′ ℓ̃f (xt ) ≤ (1 + ǫ ) ℓ̃tf (xt ) + ǫ′ t=1 t=1 Hence using union bound over f ∈ F we conclude that for any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, min f ∈F  T X t=1  ℓ̃tf (xt )  ′  ≤ (1 + ǫ ) min f ∈F  T X t=1  39  ℓ̃tf (xt ) +  (1 + ǫ′ ) log(|F |/δ ) ǫ′  (15)  Plugging the above in Eq. 14 we conclude that for any δ, with probability at least 1 − δ, (1 − ǫ′ ) Since  1+ǫ′ 1−ǫ′  =  1 1−ǫ  T X t=1  ℓtI(t) ≤ (1 + ǫ′ ) min f ∈F  T X  ℓ̃tf (xt ) +  t=1  (1 + ǫ′ ) log(|F |/δ ) 1 + B(ǫ′ , T, F) ǫ′ γ  for ǫ′ = ǫ/2 and using the fact that γ = ǫ′ /d, we conclude the proof.  Theorem 4.4 (restated). Assuming that the oracle-efficient full-information algorithm A has ǫapproximate regret B(ǫ, T, F) when applied on losses in [0, 1], A run on the estimated losses coming from the freezing process and with ǫ′ = ǫ/2, with probability 1 − δ for any δ > 0 has ǫ-approximate regret    d log(1/δ) d 2 ApxReg(f, ǫ) = O B(ǫ, T, F) + RT F, ǫ /d + ǫ ǫ2 Proof. The analogue of Theorem 4.3 for infinite set F has a similar proof as above. In fact, notice that if one has a full information algorithm for the problem in the same vein as in the above theorem, then irrespective of the fact F could be an uncountably infinite class, the proof till Eq. 14 is just true. The main hurdle comes when proving the analogue of Eq. 15. Unlike the finite F case, where we simply used union bound over the concentration statement from Lemma 3.6 for infinite classes we need a more careful analysis. Specifically we will replace Eq. 14 by an appropriate tail bound given by: for any δ > 0, w.p. at least 1 − δ: o Xn log(3/δ) ℓ̃tf (xt ) − (1 + ǫ)ℓtf (xt ) ≤ RT (F, γǫ) + ǫγ f ∈F t sup  where the term RT (F, ǫ) is the so called offset Rademacher complexity of class F defined in [RS14]. The above tail bound is proved in the following lemma. Using this tail bound in place of Eq. (15) and plugging it into Eq. (14) yields the infinite comparator version of Theorem 4.3. Now we are ready to prove the tail bound for the infinite class which is based on result from [RS17]. Lemma B.2. For any possibly infinite class F, (under mild assumption of F and X for measurability), for any δ > 0, w.p. at least 1 − δ: T n o X log(3/δ) (1 − ǫ)ℓ̃tf (xt ) − (1 + ǫ)ℓtf (xt ) ) > RT (F, ǫγ) + γǫ f ∈F  sup  t=1  i h Proof. Let us define the random variable Zt = (xt , ℓ̃t ). and define Et−1 [·] = E ·|x1 , . . . , xt , ℓ̃1 , . . . , ℓ̃t−1 .  Further we define the class G such that each g ∈ G corresponds to an f ∈ F and g(Zt ) = γ ℓ̃tf (xt ) . Notice that |g(Zt )| ≤ 1 because losses are bounded by 1/γ. Now, using Corollary 8 in [RS17] with regret bound for online non-parametric regression from [RS14] we obtain (just as in the proof of Theorem 18 in [RS17]) that for any class G ⊆ [0, 1]Z , ! T n o X ǫ P sup (g(Zt ) − Et−1 [g(Zt )]) − EZt′ (g(Zt ) − g(Zt′ ))2 > RT (G, ǫ) + θ ≤ 3 exp(−ǫθ) 2 g∈G t=1  40    Since EZt′ (g(Zt ) − g(Zt′ ))2 ≤ EZt′ [g(Zt′ )2 ] + g(Zt )2 ≤ EZt′ [g(Zt′ )] + g(Zt ) = (Et−1 [g(Zt )] + g(Zt )): P  sup  T X  g∈G t=1  {(g(Zt ) − Et−1 [g(Zt )]) − ǫ (Et−1 [g(Zt )] + g(Zt ))} > RT (G, ǫ) + θ  !  ≤ 3 exp(−ǫθ)  Hence we conclude the tail bound: P  sup  T n X  f ∈F t=1  o 1  > RT (G, ǫ) + θ ℓ̃tf (xt ) − Et−1 [ℓ̃tf (xt ) ] − ǫ (Et−1 [ℓ̃tf (xt ) ]) + ℓ̃tf (xt ) γ  !  ≤ 3 exp(−ǫγθ)  Now further noting that for our estimate, Et−1 [ℓ̃tf (xt ) ] ≤ ℓtf (xt ) , we conclude that, P  sup  T n X  f ∈F t=1  (ℓ̃tf (xt )  −  ℓtf (xt ) ) −  ǫ    ℓtf (xt )  +  ℓ̃tf (xt )  o  1 > RT (G, ǫ) + θ γ  !  ≤ 3 exp(−ǫγθ)  Noting that, γ1 RT (G, ǫ) = RT (1/γ G, ǫγ) = RT (F, ǫγ), and setting probability of failure to δ and rewriting the above statement we obtain that: for any δ > 0, w.p. at least 1 − δ, T n o X log(3/δ) (1 − ǫ)ℓ̃tf (xt ) − (1 + ǫ)ℓtf (xt ) ) > RT (F, ǫγ) + γǫ f ∈F  sup  t=1  This concludes the proof.  41

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
