Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_3608

Abstract:
Adversarial and Clean Data Are Not Twins Zhitao Gong 1 Wenlu Wang 1 Wei-Shinn Ku 1  arXiv:1704.04960v1 [cs.LG] 17 Apr 2017  Abstract Adversarial attack has cast a shadow on the massive success of deep neural networks. Despite being almost visually identical to the clean data, the adversarial images can fool deep neural networks into wrong predictions with very high confidence. In this paper, however, we show that we can build a simple binary classifier separating the adversarial apart from the clean data with accuracy over 99%. We also empirically show that the binary classifier is robust to a secondround adversarial attack. In other words, it is difficult to disguise adversarial samples to bypass the binary classifier. Further more, we empirically investigate the generalization limitation which lingers on all current defensive methods, including the binary classifier approach. And we hypothesize that this is the result of intrinsic property of adversarial crafting algorithms.  1. Introduction Deep neural networks have been successfully adopted to many life critical areas, e.g., skin cancer detection (Esteva et al., 2017), auto-driving (Santana & Hotz, 2016), traffic sign classification (CireşAn et al., 2012), etc. A recent study (Szegedy et al., 2013), however, discovered that deep neural networks are susceptible to adversarial images. Figure 1 shows an example of adversarial images generated via fast gradient sign method (Kurakin et al., 2016; Kurakin et al., 2016) on MNIST. As we can see that although the adversarial and original clean images are almost identical from the perspective of human beings, the deep neural network 1  Auburn University, Auburn, AL. Correspondence to: Zhitao Gong <gong@auburn.edu>.  will produce wrong predictions with very high confidence. Similar techniques can easily fool the image system into mistaking a stop sign for a yield sign, a dog for a automobile, for example. When leveraged by malicious users, these adversarial images pose a great threat to the deep neural network systems. Although adversarial and clean images appear visually indiscernible, their subtle differences can successfully fool the deep neural networks. This means that deep neural networks are sensitive to these subtle differences. So an intuitively question to ask is: can we leverage these subtle differences to distinguish between adversarial and clean images? Our experiment suggests the answer is positive. In this paper we demonstrate that a simple binary classifier can separate the adversarial from the original clean images with very high accuracy (over 99%). However, we also show that the binary classifier approach suffers from the generalization limitation, i.e., it is sensitive 1) to a hyper-parameter used in crafting adversarial dataset, and 2) to different adversarial crafting algorithms. In addition to that, we also discovered that this limitation is also shared among other proposed methods against adversarial attacking, e.g., defensive retraining (Huang et al., 2015; Kurakin et al., 2016), knowledge distillation (Papernot et al., 2015b), etc. We empirically investigate the limitation and propose the hypothesis that the adversarial and original dataset are, in effect, two completely different datasets, despite being visually similar. This article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give an overview of the current research in adversarial attack and defense, with a focus on deep neural networks. Then, it is followed by a brief summary of the state-of-the-art adversarial crafting algorithms in Section 3. Section 4 presents our experiment results and detailed discussions. And we conclude in Section 5.  Adversarial and Clean Data Are Not Twins  0 (1.00)  1 (1.00)  2 (1.00)  3 (1.00)  4 (1.00)  5 (1.00)  6 (1.00)  7 (1.00)  8 (1.00)  9 (1.00)  2 (1.00)  2 (1.00)  7 (1.00)  5 (1.00)  9 (1.00)  9 (1.00)  5 (1.00)  3 (1.00)  9 (1.00)  7 (1.00)  Figure 1. The adversarial images (second row) are generated from the first row via iterative FGSM. The label of each image is shown below with prediction probability in parenthesis. Our model achieves less then 1% error rate on the clean data.  2. Related Work The adversarial image attack on deep neural networks was first investigated in (Szegedy et al., 2013). The authors discovered that when added some imperceptible carefully chosen noise, an image may be wrongly classified with high confidence by a well-trained deep neural network. They also proposed an adversarial crafting algorithm based on optimization. We will briefly summarize it in section 3. They also proposed the hypothesis that the adversarial samples exist as a result of the high nonlinearity of deep neural network models. However, (Goodfellow et al., 2014) proposed a counter-intuitive hypothesis explaining the cause of adversarial samples. They argued that adversarial samples are caused by the models being too linear, rather than nonlinear. They proposed two adversarial crafting algorithms based on this hypothesis, i.e., fast gradient sign method (FGSM) and least-likely class method (LLCM) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). The least-likely class method is later generalized to target class gradient sign method (TGSM) in (Kurakin et al., 2016). (Papernot et al., 2015a) proposed another gradient based adversarial algorithm, the Jacobian-based saliency map approach (JSMA) which can successfully alter the label of an image to any desired category. The adversarial images have been shown to be transferable among deep neural networks (Szegedy et al., 2013; Kurakin et al., 2016). This poses a great threat to current learning systems in that the attacker needs not the knowledge of the target system. Instead, the attacker can train a different model to create adversar-  ial samples which are still effective for the target deep neural networks. What’s worse, (Papernot et al., 2016) has shown that adversarial samples are even transferable among different machine learning techniques, e.g., deep neural networks, support vector machine, decision tree, logistic regression, etc. Small steps have been made towards the defense of adversarial images. (Kurakin et al., 2016) shows that some image transformations, e.g., Gaussian noise, Gaussian filter, JPEG compression, etc., can effectively recover over 80% of the adversarial images. However, in our experiment, the image transformation defense does not perform well on images with low resolution, e.g., MNIST. Knowledge distillation is also shown to be an effective method against most adversarial images (Papernot et al., 2015b). The restrictions of defensive knowledge distillation are 1) that it only applies to models that produce categorical probabilities, and 2) that it needs model retraining. Adversarial training (Kurakin et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2015) was also shown to greatly enhance the model robustness to adversarials. However, as discussed in Section 4.2, defensive distillation and adversarial training suffers from, what we call, the generalization limitations. Our experiment suggests this seems to be an intrinsic property of adversarial datasets.  3. Crafting Adversarials The are mainly two categories of algorithms to generate adversarial samples, model independent and model dependent. We briefly summarize these two classes of methods in this section.  Adversarial and Clean Data Are Not Twins  By conventions, we use X to represent input image set (usually a 3-dimension tensor), and Y to represent the label set, usually one-hot encoded. Lowercase represents an individual data sample, e.g., x for one input image. Subscript to data samples denotes one of its elements, e.g., xi denotes one pixel in the image, yi denotes probability for the i-th target class. f denotes the model, θ the model parameter, J the loss function. We use the superscript adv to denote adversarial related variables, e.g., xadv for one adversarial image. δx denotes the adversarial noise for one image, i.e., xadv = x + δx. For clarity, we also include the model used to craft the adversarial samples where necessary, e.g., xadv(f1 ) denotes the adversarial samples created with model f1 . D denotes the image value domain, usually [0, 1] or [0, 255]. And  is a scalar controlling the scale of the adversarial noise, another hyper-parameter to choose. 3.1. Model Independent Method A box-constrained minimization algorithm based on L-BFGS was the first algorithm proposed to generate adversarial data (Szegedy et al., 2013). Concretely we want to find the smallest (in the sense of L2 -norm) noise δx such that the adversarial image belongs to a different category, i.e., f (xadv ) 6= f (x). δx = argmin ckrk∞ + J(x + r, y adv ) r  Equation 2.  δx =  sign  dJ(x, y) dx   (2)  Originally (Kurakin et al., 2016) proposes to generate adversarial samples by using the true label i.e., y adv = y true , which has been shown to suffer from the label leaking problem (Kurakin et al., 2016). Instead of true labels, (Kurakin et al., 2016) proposes to use the predicted label, i.e., y = f (x), to generate adversarial examples. This method can also be used iteratively as shown in Equation 3. Iterative FGSM has much higher success rate than the one-step FGSM. However, the iterative version is less robust to image transformation (Kurakin et al., 2016).   dJ(xadv adv adv k , yk ) xk+1 = xk +  sign dx (3) adv x0 = x yk = f (xadv k ) TA R G E T C L A S S G R A D I E N T S I G N M E T H O D (TGSM) This method tries to modify the input towards the direction where p(y adv | x) increases.  (1)  s.t. x + r ∈ D 3.2. Model Dependent Methods There are mainly three methods that rely on model gradient, i.e., fast gradient sign method (FGSM) (Kurakin et al., 2016), target class method (Kurakin et al., 2016; Kurakin et al., 2016) (TGSM) and Jacobianbased saliency map approach (JSMA) (Papernot et al., 2015a). We will see in Section 4 that despite that they all produce highly disguising adversarials, FGSM and TGSM produce compatible adversarial datasets which are complete different from adversarials generated via JSMA. FA S T G R A D I E N T S I G N M E T H O D ( F G S M ) FGSM tries to modify the input towards  the direction adv where J increases, i.e., dJ(x, y ) dx , as shown in   δx = − sign  dJ(x, y adv ) dx   (4)  Originally this method was proposed as the least-likely class method (Kurakin et al., 2016) where y adv was chosen as the least-likely class predicted by the model as shown in Equation 5. y adv = OneHotEncode (argmin f (x))  (5)  And it was extended to a more general case where y adv could be any desired target class (Kurakin et al., 2016). JAC O B I A N - BA S E D S A L I E N C Y M A P APPROACH (JSMA) Similar to the target class method, JSMA (Papernot et al., 2015a) allows to specify the desired target class. However, instead of adding noise to the whole input,  Adversarial and Clean Data Are Not Twins Table 1. Accuracy on adversarial samples generated with FGSM/TGSM.  f1 Dataset MNIST CIFAR10 SVHN  Xtest  f2 adv(f1 )  Xtest  0.0213 0.1500 0.2453  1.00 0.99 1.00  Xtest  0.9914 0.8279 0.9378  JSMA changes only one pixel at a time. A saliency score is calculated for each pixel and pixel with the highest score is chosen to be perturbed. ( 0 if st < 0 or so > 0 s(xi ) = st |so | otherwise (6) X ∂yj ∂yt so = st = ∂xi ∂xi j6=t  Concretely, st is the Jacobian value of the desired target class yt w.r.t an individual pixel, so is the sum of Jacobian values of all non-target class. Intuitively, saliency score indicates the sensitivity of each output class w.r.t each individual pixel. And we want to perturb the pixel towards the direction where p(yt | x) increases the most.  4. Experiment Generally, we follow the steps below to test the effectiveness and limitation of the binary classifier approach. 1. Train a deep neural network f1 on the original clean training data Xtrain , and craft adversarial dataset from the original clean data, Xtrain → adv(f ) adv(f ) Xtrain 1 , Xtest → Xtest 1 . f1 is used to generate the attacking adversarial dataset which we want to filter out. 2. Train a binary classifier f2 on the combined (shufadv(f ) fled) training data {Xtrain , Xtrain 1 }, where adv(f ) Xtrain is labeled 0 and Xtrain 1 labeled 1. adv(f1 )  3. Test the accuracy of f2 on Xtest and Xtest respectively.  ,  4. Construct second-round adversarial test data, adv(f ) adv(f ) {Xtest , Xtest 1 } → {Xtest , Xtest 1 }adv(f2 )  adv(f1 )  {Xtest }adv(f2 )  1.00 1.00 1.00  0.00 0.01 0.00  Xtest  adv(f1 ) adv(f2 ) }  {Xtest  1.00 1.00 1.00  and test f2 accuracy on this new adversarial dataset. Concretely, we want to test whether we could find adversarial samples 1) that can successfully bypass the binary classifier f2 , and 2) that can still fool the target model f1 if they bypass the binary classifier. Since adversarial datasets are shown to be transferable among different machine learning techniques (Papernot et al., 2016), the binary classifier approach will be seriously flawed if f2 failed this second-round attacking test. The code to reproduce our experiment are available https://github.com/gongzhitaao/ adversarial-classifier. 4.1. Efficiency and Robustness of the Classifier We evaluate the binary classifier approach on MNIST, CIFAR10, and SVHN datasets. Of all the datasets, the binary classifier achieved accuracy over 99% and was shown to be robust to a second-round adversarial attack. The results are summarized in Table 1. Each column denotes the model accuracy on the corresponding dataset. The direct conclusions from Table 1 are summarized as follows. adv(f )  1. Accuracy on Xtest and Xtest 1 suggests that the binary classifier is very effective at separating adversarial from clean dataset. Actually during our experiment, the accuracy on Xtest is aladv(f ) ways near 1, while the accuracy on Xtest 1 is either near 1 (successful) or near 0 (unsuccessful). Which means that the classifier either successfully detects the subtle difference completely or fails completely. We did not observe any values in between. adv(f )  2. Accuracy on {Xtest 1 }adv(f2 ) suggests that we were not successful in disguising adversarial  Adversarial and Clean Data Are Not Twins  samples to bypass the the classifier. In other words, the binary classifier approach is robust to a second-round adversarial attack. 3. Accuracy on {Xtest }adv(f2 ) suggests that in case of the second-round attack, the binary classifier has very high false negative. In other words, it tends to recognize them all as adversarials. This, does not pose a problem in our opinion. Since our main focus is to block adversarial samples. 4.2. Generalization Limitation Before we conclude too optimistic about the binary classifier approach performance, however, we discover that it suffers from the generalization limitation. 1. When trained to recognize adversarial dataset generated via FGSM/TGSM, the binary classifier is sensitive to the hyper-parameter . 2. The binary classifier is also sensitive to the adversarial crafting algorithm. In out experiment, the aforementioned limitations also apply to adversarial training (Kurakin et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2015) and defensive distillation (Papernot et al., 2015b). SENSITIVITY TO  Table 2 summarizes our tests on CIFAR10. For brevity, we use f2 =0 to denote that the classifier f2 is trained on adversarial data generated on f1 with  = 0 . The binary classifier is trained on mixed clean data and adversarial dataset which is generated via FGSM with  = 0.03. Then we re-generate adversarial dataset via FGSM/TGSM with different  values.  adversarial data are generated with  < 1 . Results on MNIST and SVHN are similar. This phenomenon was also observed in defensive retraining (Kurakin et al., 2016). To overcome this issue, they proposed to use mixed  values to generate the adversarial datasets. However, Table 2 suggests that adversarial datasets generated with smaller  are superset of those generated with larger . This hypothesis could be well explained by the linearity hypothesis (Kurakin et al., 2016; Warde-Farley & Goodfellow, 2016). The same conclusion also applies to adversarial training. In our experiment, the results of defensive retraining are similar to the binary classifier approach. D I S PA R I T Y A M O N G A D V E R S A R I A L SAMPLES In our experiment, we also discovered that the binary classifier is also sensitive to the algorithms used to generate the adversarial datasets. Specifically, the binary classifier trained on FGSM adversarial dataset achieves good accuracy (over 99%) on FGSM adversarial dataset, but not on adversarial generated via JSMA, and vise versa. However, when binary classifier is trained on a mixed adversarial dataset from FGSM and JSMA, it performs well (with accuracy over 99%) on both datasets. This suggests that FGSM and JSMA generate adversarial datasets that are far away from each other. It is too vague without defining precisely what is being far away. In our opinion, they are far away in the same way that CIFAR10 is far away from SVHN. A well-trained model on CIFAR10 will perform poorly on SVHN, and vise versa. However, a well-trained model on the the mixed dataset of CIFAR10 and SVHN will perform just as well, if not better, on both datasets, as if it is trained solely on one dataset.  Table 2.  sensitivity on CIFAR10  f2   Xtest  0.3 0.1 0.03 0.01  0.9996 0.9996 0.9996 0.9996  =0.03 adv(f ) Xtest 1  1.0000 1.0000 0.9997 0.0030  As shown in Table 2, f2 =0 can correctly filter out adversarial dataset generated with  ≥ 0 , but fails when  The adversarial datasets generated via FGSM and TGSM are, however, compatible with each other. In other words, the classifier trained on one adversarial datasets performs well on adversarials from the other algorithm. They are compatible in the same way that training set and test set are compatible. Usually we expect a model, when properly trained, should generalize well to the unseen data from the same distribution, e.g., the test dataset. In effect, it is not just FGSM and JSMA are incompati-  Adversarial and Clean Data Are Not Twins  Figure 2. Adversarial training (Huang et al., 2015; Kurakin et al., 2016) does not work. This is a church window plot (Warde-Farley & Goodfellow, 2016). Each pixel (i, j) (row index and column index pair) represents a data point x̃ in the input space and x̃ = x+hj +vi , where h is the direction computed by FGSM and v is a random direction orthogonal to h. The  ranges from [−0.5, 0.5] and (·) is the interpolated value in between. The central black dot represents the original data point x, the orange dot (on the right of the center dot) represents the last adversarial sample created from x via FGSM that is used in the adversarial training and the blue dot represents a random adversarial sample created from x that cannot be recognized with adversarial training. The three digits below each image, from left to right, are the data samples that correspond to the black dot, orange dot and blue dot, respectively. ( ) represents the data samples that are always correctly (incorrectly) recognized by the model. represents the adversarial samples that can be correctly recognized without adversarial training only. And represents the data points that were correctly recognized with adversarial training only, i.e., the side effect of adversarial training.  ble. We can generate adversarial data samples by a linear combination of the direction computed by FGSM and another random orthogonal direction, as illustrated in a church plot (Warde-Farley & Goodfellow, 2016) Figure 2. Figure 2 visually shows the effect of adversarial training (Kurakin et al., 2016). Each image represents adversarial samples generated from one data sample, which is represented as a black dot in the center of each image, the last adversarial sample used in adversarial training is represented as an orange dot (on the right of black dot, i.e., in the direction computed by FGSM). The green area represents the adversarial samples that cannot be correctly recognized without adversarial training but can be correctly recognized with adversarial training. The red area represents data samples that can be correctly recognized without adversarial training but cannot be correctly recognized with adversarial training. In other words, it represents the side effect of adversarial training, i.e., slightly reducing the model accuracy. The white (gray) area represents the data samples that are always correctly (incorrectly) recognized with or without adversarial training. As we can see from Figure 2, adversarial training does make the model more robust against the adversarial sample (and adversarial samples around it to some extent) used for training (green area). However, it does not rule out all adversarials. There are still adversarial samples (gray area) that are not affected by the adversarial training. Further more, we could observe that the green area largely distributes along the horizontal direction, i.e., the FGSM direction. In (Nguyen et al., 2014), they observed similar results for fooling images. In their experiment, adversarial training with fooling  images, deep neural network models are more robust against a limited set of fooling images. However they can still be fooled by other fooling images easily.  5. Conclusion We show in this paper that the binary classifier is a simple yet effective and robust way to separating adversarial from the original clean images. Its advantage over defensive retraining and distillation is that it serves as a preprocessing step without assumptions about the model it protects. Besides, it can be readily deployed without any modification of the underlying systems. However, as we empirically showed in the experiment, the binary classifier approach, defensive retraining and distillation all suffer from the generalization limitation. For future work, we plan to extend our current work in two directions. First, we want to investigate the disparity between different adversarial crafting methods and its effect on the generated adversarial space. Second, we will also carefully examine the cause of adversarial samples since intuitively the linear hypothesis does not seem right to us.  References CireşAn, Dan, Meier, Ueli, Masci, Jonathan, and Schmidhuber, Jürgen. Multi-column deep neural network for traffic sign classification. 32:333–338, 2012. Esteva, Andre, Kuprel, Brett, Novoa, Roberto A., Ko, Justin, Swetter, Susan M., Blau, Helen M., and Thrun, Sebastian. Dermatologist-level classifica-  Adversarial and Clean Data Are Not Twins  tion of skin cancer with deep neural networks. advance online publication, Jan 2017. ISSN 14764687. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ nature21056. Letter. Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J., and Szegedy, C. Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples. December 2014. Huang, Ruitong, Xu, Bing, Schuurmans, Dale, and Szepesvári, Csaba. Learning with a strong adversary. abs/1511.03034, 2015. URL http:// arxiv.org/abs/1511.03034. Kurakin, A., Goodfellow, I., and Bengio, S. Adversarial Examples in the Physical world. July 2016. Kurakin, Alexey, Goodfellow, Ian J., and Bengio, Samy. Adversarial machine learning at scale. abs/1611.01236, 2016. URL http://arxiv. org/abs/1611.01236. Nguyen, Anh Mai, Yosinski, Jason, and Clune, Jeff. Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confidence predictions for unrecognizable images. abs/1412.1897, 2014. URL http://arxiv. org/abs/1412.1897. Papernot, N., McDaniel, P., and Goodfellow, I. Transferability in Machine Learning: From Phenomena To Black-Box Attacks Using Adversarial Samples. May 2016. Papernot, Nicolas, McDaniel, Patrick, Jha, Somesh, Fredrikson, Matt, Celik, Z. Berkay, and Swami, Ananthram. The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings. abs/1511.07528, 2015a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.07528. Papernot, Nicolas, McDaniel, Patrick Drew, Wu, Xi, Jha, Somesh, and Swami, Ananthram. Distillation as a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks. abs/1511.04508, 2015b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.04508. Santana, Eder and Hotz, George. Learning a driving simulator. abs/1608.01230, 2016. URL http:// arxiv.org/abs/1608.01230. Szegedy, Christian, Zaremba, Wojciech, Sutskever, Ilya, Bruna, Joan, Erhan, Dumitru, Goodfellow,  Ian J., and Fergus, Rob. Intriguing properties of neural networks. abs/1312.6199, 2013. URL http: //arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199. Warde-Farley, D and Goodfellow, I. Adversarial Perturbations of Deep Neural Networks. 2016.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
