Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_3702

Abstract:
JMLR: Workshop and Conference Proceedings 80:1–16, 2017  ACML 2017  Computer Assisted Composition with Recurrent Neural Networks Christian Walder  christian.walder@data61.csiro.au  Data61 at CSIRO, Australia.  arXiv:1612.00092v2 [cs.AI] 29 Sep 2017  Dongwoo Kim  dongwoo.kim@anu.edu.au  Australian National University.  Editors: Yung-Kyun Noh and Min-Ling Zhang  Abstract Sequence modeling with neural networks has lead to powerful models of symbolic music data. We address the problem of exploiting these models to reach creative musical goals, by combining with human input. To this end we generalise previous work, which sampled Markovian sequence models under the constraint that the sequence belong to the language of a given finite state machine provided by the human. We consider more expressive non-Markov models, thereby requiring approximate sampling which we provide in the form of an efficient sequential Monte Carlo method. In addition we provide and compare with a beam search strategy for conditional probability maximisation. Our algorithms are capable of convincingly re-harmonising famous musical works. To demonstrate this we provide visualisations, quantitative experiments, a human listening test and audio examples. We find both the sampling and optimisation procedures to be effective, yet complementary in character. For the case of highly permissive constraint sets, we find that sampling is to be preferred due to the overly regular nature of the optimisation based results. The generality of our algorithms permits countless other creative applications. Keywords: Music, sequence models, composition, neural networks.  1. Introduction Algorithmic music composition has intrigued a wide range of thinkers, from times as distant as the earliest days of modern computing, and beyond. As early as 1843, Ada Lovelace famously speculated that a computer “might compose elaborate and scientific pieces of music of any degree of complexity or extent” (Menabrea and Lovelace, 1843). Still earlier, around 1757, there famously existed a number of musical games which used dice along with precise instructions, to generate musical compositions (Nierhaus, 2008). Much work has focused on machine learning methods, which combine musical examples with generic inductive principles, to generate new examples. For a survey of more recent advancements we recommend e.g. Fernandez and Vico (2013); Nierhaus (2008). By restricting to a highly structured and regular musical form, and providing a large number of training examples, we may obtain convincing musical results even with rather music-agnostic models (Sturm et al., 2015). Alternatively, with smaller datasets, more structured models are required, such as the hidden Markov model investigated by Allan and Williams (2005). Both of these methods lead to relatively convincing musical results. However, the plausibility of  c 2017 C. Walder & D. Kim.  Walder Kim  the results comes at the cost of variety. It is unreasonable to expect such approaches to give rise to interesting new musical forms. Unmanned machine learning algorithms capable of divining interesting new musical forms may arise, but this is far from a reality at the time of writing. In any case, hybrid man-machine systems are a promising avenue for exploration. The high level goal is a system for the partial specification of music, which relinquishes precise control for other gains.1 In this work, we investigate the combination of machine learning music models with human input. Our approach is most closely related to the work of Papadopoulos et al. (2015), who impose the constraint that the resulting sequence be a member of a language defined by a finite state machine. This is a rather general constraint which provides a rich language for human creativity via the partial specifications of music. In that work, the close relationship between Markov models and finite state machines was used to derive a simple but exact belief propagation algorithm. Here, we relax the constraint that our underlying sequence model be Markovian, and instead make use of approximate sampling techniques, namely that of sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) (Gordon et al., 1993; Doucet and Johansen, 2009). In addition to sampling, we compare and contrast with a maximum conditional probability approach based on a beam search. (given the finite state machine constraint). By allowing models which are not low-order Markovian, we obtain algorithms which are applicable to a broad range of more expressive probabilistic models of music. Concretely, here we adopt the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) based neural network sequence model (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997). By exploiting advances in massively parallel computing architectures, this class of models has proven remarkably effective in a range of domains, most notably natural language modeling (see e.g. Chelba et al. (2013)). Given the similarities between music and natural language (Patel, 2010), it is unsurprising that the LSTM is a natural model for music data. This was noted by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) in the original LSTM paper, and subsequently investigated by Eck and Schmidhuber (2002). This line of work has been taken up by a number of researchers, with recent examples including e.g. Boulanger-Lewandowski et al. (2012); Walder (2016), the latter approach being the one we adopt here. In section 2 we set the problem up and motivate our solution. We provide technical details of the approximate sampling method in section 3. Section 4 provides results including a visual illustration, quantitative investigation, human listening test, and audio examples. We conclude in section 5.  2. Set-up and Motivation 2.1. Required Background We take the model of Walder (2016) as our starting point, and while this work is a necessary accompaniment to the present work for those wishing to replicate our results, the present paper stands alone in the sense that it may be applied to any model which factorises in the causal manner subsection 2.2 described below. Furthermore, the finite state machine 1. I will argue that today’s composers are more frequently gardeners than architects and, further, that the composer as architect metaphor was a transitory historical blip — Eno (2011).  2  Computer Assisted Composition  description  symbolic music data with five events  a)  b)  x  1  x  2  x  3  x  t  1  t  2  t  3  t  d  1  d  2  d  3  d  4  4  x  5  t  5  d  5  x  x  x  x  x  t  t  t  t  t  5  d  5  1  c)  4  1  d  1  2  d  2  2  3  d  3  3  4  d  4  4  conditional x4 |x1:3 , t1:5 , d1:5 available in (2)  5  all but x2 and x3 are observed  Figure 1: An overview of our system: please refer to section 2 for more details on the background. Symbolic music consisting of five events (row a — note that the rests or silences are not counted) is represented by a sequence of five note names (roughly speaking, indices into a piano keyboard) x1:5 , along with start times t1:5 and durations d1:5 . Following Walder (2016) we model the conditional x1:5 |t1:5 , d1:5 , with a causal factorisation over x1:5 as indicated by the diagram (row b), and the equation (2). Row c depicts the simplest setting we consider, wherein the human input amounts to the partial observation of the sequence x1:5 (see subsection 3.1). In the case depicted in row c, we infer some fixed subset of the notes (here, x2 and x3 ), given the values for all the other variables. The resulting conditional x2 , x3 |x1 , x4 , x5 , t1:5 , d1:5 is non-trivial due to observed future values, which are not directly handled by the conditionals which we explicitly model via the causal factorisation (2). In rows b–c the box around t1:5 and d1:5 is meant to denote that the out-going arrow(s) emanate from all the variables in the box.  constraint formalism we adopt is closely related to Papadopoulos et al. (2015), which we also recommend as background material.  3  Walder Kim  2.2. Assumed Music Model We represent a musical composition by a set of n triples, {(xi , ti , di )}ni=1 ⊂ X × T × T . Here, X represents the set of possible pitches (from the 12-tet western musical system, including both the note name and octave). The set T represents time, with ti and di denoting the start time and duration of the i-th note event, respectively. Following Walder (2016), we assume throughout that the timing information is given, so that we have a model p({xi }ni=1 | n, {(ti , di )}ni=1 ). This model p is based on a reduction to a non-Markov sequence model. This means that (for some particular ordering of the indices, see Walder (2016)) neglecting the conditioning on {(ti , di )}m i=1 , we have p(x1:n ) =  n Y i=1  fi (xi |x1:i−1 ),  (1)  where the conditionals fi are represented explicitly. 2.3. Assumption of Fixed Rhythmic Information Ideally we would model the rhythmic structure, but this turns out to be rather challenging. Indeed, modeling pitches given the rhythmic structure is already rather non-trivial, so it is reasonable to subdivide the problem. Note that some authors have modeled timing information, by assuming e.g. 1. A simple note on/off representation on a uniform temporal grid as in e.g. BoulangerLewandowski et al. (2012), which assumed a temporal resolution of an eighth note. This has the drawback of not distinguishing, say, two eighth notes from a single quarter note (which has length two eighth notes). 2. Rather than explicitly processing each time step on a fixed temporal grid, one may model time increments as in Colombo et al. (2016); Simon and Oore (2017). In this case sampling conditionally given constraints as is our present focus becomes more technical. Indeed, point process machinery (Daley and Vere-Jones, 2003) is required, due to the variable dimension of the parameter space (that is, the number of notes). The sampling problems analogous to the present work become highly non-trivial in that case. This is the subject of ongoing work, and beyond the present scope. Short of developing the second approach, assuming fixed timing has the advantage of allowing arbitrarily complex rhythmic structures. In this way, rather than fully modeling an overly simplistic music representation, we partially model a more realistic music representation. Once we have satisfactorily modeled timing, our methods and findings may be generalised to the full joint distribution, as we can always employ the chain rule of probability to decompose p (n, {xi , tt , di }ni=1 ) = p({xi }ni=1 | n, {(ti , di )}ni=1 ) × p(n, {(ti , di )}ni=1 ), where the first factor on the r.h.s. is our present concern.  4  (2)  Computer Assisted Composition  2.4. Finite State Machine Constraint Formulation  3. Sequential Monte Carlo Details We describe detailed sequential sampling methods. In subsection 3.1 we consider partially observed sequences, and then in subsection 3.2 we extend this to more general constraints represented by an arbitrary finite state machine. Throughout this section we neglect conditioning on the start times ti and durations di , as they are fixed throughout. 3.1. Partially Observed Sequences Let x1:n be a sequence drawn from the non-Markov process with discrete state-space X . p(x1:n ) ∝ γn (x1:n ) =  n Y i=1  fi (xi |x1:i−1 ),  where γn is an un-normalised probability distribution which can be factorised into the conditionals fi , each of which depends on all of the previous states x1:i−1 . Our goal is to compute the posterior of x1:n with partial observations x̃. Let zi be 1 if xi is observed and 0 otherwise. The posterior distribution of the unobserved part is: p(x1:n ) p({xj }j:zj =1 ) Qn (xi |x1:i−1 ) i=1 fiQ , ∝P n xi ∈X , ∀i:zi =0 i=1 fi (xi |x1:i−1 )  p({xi }i:zi =0 |{x̃j }j:zj =1 , z1:n ) =  where we let x1:n be the full sequence with the partial observations. Even though our state space X is finite, naı̈vely P evaluating the probability of a partially observed sequence would involve computing |X | i (1−zi ) terms, so that the computational cost is exponential with respect to the number of unobserved notes. To resolve this computational problem, we develop employ a standard particle filter approach (Doucet and Johansen, 2009, section 3.2). One can approximate the posterior of x1:n Qn by importance sampling with fully factorised proposal distribution q(x1:n ) = i=1 qi (xi |x<i ), so that  (s)  γn (x1:n ) = wn (x1:n )q(x1:n ) wn (x1:n )q(x1:n ) p(x1:n ) = P . xi ∈X , ∀i=1,2,...,n wn (x1:n )q(x1:n )  With S samples x1:n from q(x1:n ), the posterior can be approximated by an empirical measure of the samples: p(x1:n |z1:n ) =  S X s=1  (s)  wn (x1:n )  PS  δ  (s)  (s0 ) x1:n s0 =1 wn (x1:n )  5  (x1:n ).  Walder Kim  (s)  The weight of each sample x1:n ∼ q(x1:n ) is: (s)  (s)  wn (x1:n ) = =  γn (x1:n ) (s)  q(x1:n ) Qn (s) (s) i=1 fi (xi |x1:i−1 ) (s)  q(x1:n )  (s)  (s)  =  γ̃n−1 (x1:n−1 ) (s)  q(x1:n−1 ) | {z } (s)  , wn−1 (x1:n−1 )  ×  (s)  fn (xn |x1:n−1 ) (s)  (s)  qn (xn |x<n ) | {z }  .  (3)  (s)  , wn (xn )  The above recursion defines the particle filter scheme (Doucet and Johansen, 2009). For our particular case of partial observations x̃, we define the proposal  zi  1−zi (s) qi (xi |x<i , z1:i ) = δx̃i (xi ) fi (xi |x1:i−1 ) , (4) so that our proposal always proposes x̃j whenever the sampler encounters the partial (s) observation. Then from (3) we have that the weight of sample xi ∼ qi (xi ) is ( 1 zi = 0 (s) wi (xi ) ∝ (5) (s) (s) fi (xi |x1:i−1 ) zi = 1  This expression is intuitive: we sample in temporal order using our original (unconstrained) model, and re-weight our particles only when encountering an observed symbol (or constraint), giving more weight to those particles whose history better agrees with the observed symbol, as measured by the conditional fi . This algorithm is a special case of that of the following subsection, for which pseudo-code is provided as algorithm 1. 3.2. General Constraints Here we extend the set-up of the previous section to the more general case of sampling with the hard constraint that the sampled sequence lie within a given regular language. In particular, we wish to sample from p(A) (x1:n ) , p(x1:n | x1:n ∈ L(A)) ( p(x1:n ) x1:n ∈ Ln (A), ∝ 0 otherwise.  (6)  Here, Ln (A) is the set of sequences of length n generated by finite state machine A = hQ, Σ, δ, q0 , F i, where Q is a set of states, Σ an alphabet of actions, δ the transition function linking a state q ∈ Q and a label a ∈ Σ to the successor state q 0 = δ(q, a), q0 ∈ Q the initial state, and F ⊆ Q the set of terminal states. We have X = Σ in our case. Similarly to Papadopoulos et al. (2015) we rewrite p(A) (x1:n ) ∝  n Y i=1  fi (xi |x1:i−1 )hi (x1:i ), 6  Computer Assisted Composition  where hi (x1:i ) =  ( 1  x1:i ∈ Li (A),  0  otherwise,  Papadopoulos et al. (2015) transformed their similar problem into one involving the Cartesian product of the domain of the xi and the state space of A to obtain a tree structured factor graph for which belief propagation is efficient. We are interested in non-Markov p and hence have nothing to gain from such a transformation. Instead, we simply encode the language membership constraint via the general functions hi and proceed with SMC as usual.2 Now, we generalise (4) of by choosing q (A) (xi |x1:i−1 ) =  1 fi (xi |x1:i−1 )hi (x1:i ), Zq (x1:i−1 )  (7)  P where Zq (x1:i−1 ) = xi ∈X fi (xi |x1:i−1 )hi (x1:i ). The re-sampling weights are derived similarly to (3), yielding (up to an irrelevant constant to which SystematicResample (Carpenter et al., 1999) of algorithm 1 is invariant): (A)  wi  (s)  (xi ) = Zq (x1:i−1 ) X (s) (s) = fi (x̃i |x1:i−1 )hi (x̃1:i ),  (8)  x̃i ∈X  (s)  (s)  (s)  where x̃1:i is the concatenation of x1:i−1 and x̃i . Hence (8) reduces to (5) for unary (s)  constraints. The above expression is intuitive — if all the hi (x̃1:i ) are one, the weights are one so we sample from p without modification. In other cases, we give greater weight to those particles for which the total probability mass of admissible continuations is greater. The overall procedure is summarised by algorithm 1. For concreteness, we provide two examples of finite state machine formulation. It is not crucial to understand these examples in detail however, as we may also formulate our user constraints by specifying the hi of Equation 3.2 directly. Example 1 (Sequence with unary constraints) We impose unary constraints at each time i of length-n sequence. Take A = hQ, Σ, δ, q0 , F i, where each time i has one-to-one corresponding state qi . Let Xi be a set of acceptable notes at time i. With transition function δ(qi , xi+1 ) = qi+1 if xi+1 ∈ Xi+1 , we only allow notes in Xn+1 and rejects notes not in Xi+1 . Furthermore choose the terminal states F to be {qn }. Hence, machine A only accepts lengthn sequences which satisfy predefined unary constraints Xi . For example, in the partially observed sequence case, Xi = {x̃i } if zi = 1 and Xi = X if zi = 0. Note that this partially observed constraint is a special case of general unary constraints where Xi consists of single observation x̃i . Example 2 (Prohibit repeated notes) One can disallow consecutive positions from having the same note as follows. Let the number of states be equal to the number of possible notes |X |, and each state qx be indexed by x. Choose the transition function δ(qxi , xj ) = qxj if xi 6= xj . A only accepts sequences which does not have the same two consecutive notes. 2. However, since we only ever append an xi to a given particle, we may leverage the finite state machine formulation of A in order to evaluate the hi , typically in O(1).  7  Walder Kim  1.0  75 50  part 1  75 50  0.8  part 2  0.6  75 50  part 3  0.4  75 50  part 4  0.2  0  final path distribution  midi  Particle Filter  10  20  30 time (quarter notes)  40  50  80 60 80 60 80 60  0  1.0  part 1  0.8  part 2  0.6  part 3  0.4  part 4  0.2  final path distribution  midi  Beam Search 80 60  10  20  30 time (quarter notes)  40  50  Figure 2: Visualisation of the final state of the particle filter (upper) and beam search (lower), with S = 2048 paths. In both cases the fourth part (lowest sub figure) is fixed to the original from Corelli’s Trio Op 1 No 1 (which actually contains four midi tracks) provided by Boulanger-Lewandowski et al. (2012); hence the fourth part appears above as a deterministic distribution, with probability mass one on a single note at each time step. The pitches (vertical axis) of Parts 1–3 were unconstrained, to be determined by our algorithms. For the particle filter, the plotted distribution is a sequential Monte Carlo approximation of the filtering distribution (which, given that we consider the final time step, is also the smoothing distribution). For the beam search, the plotted distribution is simply the set of the candidate paths maintained by the deterministic search algorithm at its final step. Note that the part numbers, which corresponding to the axes above, and which come from the original composition, are used only for plotting and not by our algorithms.  Following Papadopoulos et al. (2015) we formulate human input as the constraint that the sequence x1:n belong to the language of an arbitrary finite state machine, A. This has the advantage of being extremely general, yet amenable to belief propagation (for Markov  8  Computer Assisted Composition  p as in Papadopoulos et al. (2015)), and particle filtering/beam search (as in the present work). The experiments in section 4 utilise a fraction of the generality of this approach. We envisage a rich set of constraints which users may experiment with to discover interesting new music, and our algorithms facilitate this. One might enforce the repetition of patterns, transform relationships between sub-sequences (such as inversion / retrograde), and so on, with arbitrarily complex implications such as odd poly-metrical patterns, etc. Concrete examples are given by Roy and Pachet (2013), which imposes metrical structure, and Papadopoulos et al. (2016), which avoids the exact repetition of training sub-sequences. 3.3. Harmonisation by Sampling / Optimisation We consider two alternative means of incorporating the constraint of the previous subsection. The first is conditional sampling, from p(x1:n | x1:n ∈ L(A)), where L(A) is the set of sequences A can generate. The second is maximisation of the same conditional probability with respect to x1:n . The nature of (1) is such that given a partial sequence x1:i−1 we may keep track of a latent variable (the LSTM state vector) in order to compute fi (xi |x1:i−1 ) in time independent of i. The state vector may also be updated in time independent of i, when a new element xi is appended. This structure makes SMC the natural choice for sampling, since it only ever requires extending a given sequence by a single element. Section 3 provides the details. This approach is in contrast to e.g. Hadjeres and Pachet (2017), wherein a simpler conditional independence structure is assumed (a local dependency network), making sampling simpler but precluding the modelling of longer range dependencies as captured by the LSTM. Similarly, beam search methods are natural for maximising the conditional probability. In this case we maintain S candidate paths, and extend each path by one new element each time step, for all feasible continuations, retaining the S most probable resulting sequences.  4. Results Throughout the experiments, we employ finite state machines which merely fix certain notes xi to given values, and prevent unison intervals from occurring within a single part (which would be impossible to play on the piano, for example). 4.1. Visualisation A well known difficulty in particle filtering is the collapsing of the particles to a small number of unique paths. We observe little evidence of this in our setting however, which features a reasonable degree of uncertainty in the final particle distribution (Figure 2, upper plot). As expected, the beam search (Figure 2, lower plot) behaves very differently, with the majority of the solutions being identical other than at a few isolated temporal intervals. 4.2. Quantitative Investigation Both the beam search and particle filter algorithms have a single key free parameter S, the number of paths to store, which trades accuracy for computation time. In this subsection, we investigate this trade-off. For computational reasons, we restricted our analysis to the 9  Walder Kim  Ground truth filtering log probability  0.6  mean per-note log probability  mean per-note log probability  1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0 10  101  102 number of paths  1 / 4 fixed parts (particle filter) 1 / 4 fixed parts (beam search)  0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 0 10  103  Best log probability  2 / 4 fixed parts (particle filter) 2 / 4 fixed parts (beam search)  101  102 number of paths  3 / 4 fixed parts (particle filter) 3 / 4 fixed parts (beam search)  103 4 / 4 fixed parts  Figure 3: The effect of increasing the number of paths. Left: the filtering probability of the fixed (ground truth) parts, and right: the best (maximum) probability sequence found by the algorithm. The vertical axis is the mean log probability per musical note under our sequence model. The mean +/- one standard error of this quantity 4 choices of is depicted, taken over the 16 pieces we consider, multiplied by the Cm fixed parts, where the number m of fixed parts ranges from 1 to 4 and is denoted by the color. The beam search is plotted in solid lines and the particle filter in broken lines. See subsection 4.2 for the details.  sixteen shortest pieces (by number of notes) from those pieces in the MuseData test set from Boulanger-Lewandowski et al. (2012) which consist of exactly four voices (all of which turned out to be Bach chorales). For each piece, and for m ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}, we fixed m of the voices to that of the original piece, and applied our algorithms to choose the remaining (4 − m) parts. 4 possible ways, plotting in Figure 3 the mean and standard error over We did this in all Cm 4 all 16 × Cm possibilities of two different quantities, as a function of the number of paths S. The two quantities depicted are: 1. Figure 3 l.h.s.: the filtering probability of the fixed parts — in the notation of subsection 3.2 the mean of the log of S X s=1  (s)  w(x<i )  (s) f (x |x ), (s0 ) i i <i s0 =1 w(x<i )  PS  for all i corresponding to the fixed voices. For the particle filter, this is an SMC approximation of the probability of the ground truth for the fixed voices conditional on (s) previous observed values for the fixed voices. For the beam search we let w(x<i ) = 1, and the quantity heuristically measures how well the set of candidate paths agree with the fixed voices on average. 2. Figure 3 r.h.s.: the probability of the best complete harmonisation found by the algorithm. For the beam search, this is the log probability of the final path obtained 10  Binomial Prob["ours better than original"]  Computer Assisted Composition  1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0  90% Confidence Intervals  beamsearch particlefilter 0  1 2 number of fixed parts (out of four)  3  Figure 4: Results from the listening test described in subsection 4.3. We plot 90% confidence intervals for the probability that our results are preferred to the original compositions from which they were derived. The horizontal axis is the number of parts which were fixed to the values in the original composition. We see that with the provision of just one part from the original piece, we score approximately as well as the original composer (i.e. p = 0.5), namely Bach.  by the search algorithm. For the particle filter, we take the most likely solution from the final set of particles. Qualitatively, the results are as expected, with each algorithm dominating in the setting it is intended for: the particle filter is superior in terms of the filtering probability, while the beam search produces more probable solutions. Interestingly, given sufficiently large S, the best log probability exceeds the ground truth (4/4 fixed parts, red line). This indicates that either we are doing better than the original composer, or the probability under p does not fully reflect perceived quality. The listening test in subsection 4.3 indicates that the latter is of course most likely, although this does not necessarily imply that p is inadequate — see subsubsection 4.3.2 and footnote 4. Quantitatively, we see that around S = 500 paths are necessary in order to obtain good solutions (that the particle filter continues to improve for greater S in terms of the Figure 3 right hand side plot is to be expected since the algorithm does not explicitly search for the most likely sequence). The required number of paths is significantly more than reported by Sutskever et al. (2014), who observed marginal gains for S > 2. Broadly speaking, this difference is to be expected: locally, the best musical harmonisation may be highly ambiguous, requiring many paths to be maintained in order for the future fixed (or observed) notes to have a reasonable chance of resolving well in the musical sense. The machine translation problem considered by Sutskever et al. (2014) is less ambiguous, and furthermore future symbols (words) are not conditioned on as in our setting.  11  Walder Kim  (a) (b) (c) (d)  Hyper-link  Description  melody original beam search particle filter  original melody line in isolation complete original composition melody line + beam search melody line + particle filter  Table 1: Sample output based on the first movement of the Quartet No. 7 in E flat major by Mozart. In (a) the original melody line is rendered by itself with a piano timbre. In (b)—(d), three additional parts are rendered with a distinct classical guitar like timbre.  4.3. Human Listening Test We also investigated the effectiveness of our algorithms as judged by human evaluators, via an on-line survey using the Amazon Mechanical Turk 3 . 4.3.1. Methodology As the basis for the survey, we generated harmonisations as in the previous subsection 4.2, with the number of candidate paths S set to 4096. We excluded two of the sixteen pieces previously considered, due to the extended use of pure pedal point (repeating of a single note) in three out of four voices of the original compositions, leading to uninteresting constraints in the majority of cases. For each of the remaining fourteen pieces and for m ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, 4 we harmonised the pieces with m out of four voices fixed. As before, we did this all Cm possible ways, for both the particle filter and beam search methods. Each such output was compared with the original piece from which it was derived. This comparison was performed by ten unique human subjects per piece (not the same P ten for each piece; there were 67 unique respondents). This gave a grand total of 14 × 3n=0 Cn4 × 2 × 10 = 4200 comparisons, or — figuring conservatively at one minute per test — approximately 72 hours of listening. Each experiment presented the original and derived piece in random order, and asked the participant to decide which sounds better overall? To improve data quality we included two participant filters. First, we presented pieces with random notes drawn from uniform distribution over a four octave range, and excluded subjects who failed to do better than random at selecting the original piece over the random piece. Second, we tried to filter insincere subjects who responded in a very short time. 4.3.2. Findings A summary of the results is presented in Figure 4, which presents frequentist confidence intervals on the unknown binomial probability (Brown et al., 2002) of choosing our pieces as preferable to the original. Note that a probability (vertical axis) of greater than one half would imply that our results are on average preferable to the original piece. 3. http://www.mturk.com  12  Computer Assisted Composition  Retained Part 4 (melody) 3 2 1 (bass)  Particle Filter hyperlink (∼ d) hyperlink hyperlink hyperlink  Beam Search hyperlink (c) hyperlink hyperlink hyperlink  Table 2: Sample output based on the first movement of the Quartet No. 7 in E flat major by Mozart. Similarly to Table 1 (please see the corresponding caption), we retained a single part as composed by Mozart, and replaced the pitches in the remaining 3 voices. Retained Part: the part which we left unchanged from the original, from 4 (highest pitch) to 1 (lowest); Particle Filter: the sampling result; Beam Search: the beam search result. (c) is identical to that of Table 1, while (∼ d) is similar to (d) from Table 1, but used a different random seed.  The most clear result is that with no fixed parts, the beam search algorithm tends to produce inferior results. This is in line with the experience of our informal experimentation with the beam search approach which, in the absence of fixed notes to condition on, tended to produce overly regular patterns featuring long sequences of repeated notes, etc. This is not an erroneous result, but rather a natural consequence of maximising the sequence probability, rather than sampling from the distribution.4 It is worth noting that this overly regular behaviour of the beam search may be observed not only in that case of unconditional sampling, but also in pieces where the parts being conditioned on feature sufficiently protracted periods of inactivity, during which the beam search is relatively unconstrained (see the illustrative examples in subsection 4.4). The particle filter does only slightly worse than parity with no fixed parts, but this effect is not significant based on these tests. Our own informal experimentation indicated that the fully unconstrained (no fixed parts) particle filter tends to occasionally finish pieces with poorly resolved harmonic movements — an observation partially corroborated by Figure 4. Interestingly, both algorithms perform well given even a single fixed part to condition on (with the particle filter performing slightly but consistently better overall). This is a broadly satisfactory result, which indicates the possibility of constructing convincing musical results by specifying a single voice (out of four), along with the rhythmic structure of the piece. 4.3.3. Discussion One goal of our work is to create tools which facilitate the advancement of the musical art form. We believe that this may be be possible, through creative manipulation of the constraint set by skilled humans. Ideally, we would leverage the super human ability of the computer to sift through large numbers of possible solutions. In this way, constraint sets 4. Informal thought experiment: consider the stochastic relationship yi = xi + N (0, 1). We imagine the analogy that the xi represent the timing and the yi the pitch of a set of notes making up a piece. The most likely yi given an xi is exactly yi = xi , and yet for a set {xi }n i=1 such a perfect straight line is in n some sense highly atypical of a sample from the conditional {yi }n i=1 |{xi }i=1 .  13  Walder Kim  Algorithm 1: Sequential Monte Carlo for constrained non-Markov sequences, with systematic re-sampling (Carpenter et al., 1999). function ConstrainedSMC(S, {(fi , hi )}ni=1 ): for s ← 1, 2, . . . , S do x(s) ← () end for i ← 1, 2, . . . , n do for s ← 1, 2, . . . , S do (s) (s) sample xi ∼ q (A) (· | x1:i−1 )  initialise with empty sequence  proposal (7)  (s)  x(s) ← (x(s) , xi ) P (s) (s) ws ← x̃i ∈X fi (x̃i |x1:i−1 )hi (x̃1:i ) end k1:S = SystematicResample(w1:S ) (x(s) )Ss=1 ← (x(ks ) )Ss=1 end return x(1:S) function SystematicResample(w1:S ): PS ω1:S ← w1:S / s=1 ws sample u ∼ Uniform([0, 1]) ū ← u/S; j ← 1; Sω ← ω1 for l ← 1, 2, . . . , S do while Sω < ū do j ←j+1 Sω ← Sω + ωj end kl ← j ū ← ū + 1/S end return k1:S  append (8)  duplicate/delete particles approximate samples x(1:S) from p(A) of (6)  which are too complex and tightly coupled for human investigation may yield new musical forms. Evaluating such a scheme is beyond the present scope, likely requiring an entirely different approach than the simple listening test undertaken here (see Loughran and O’Neill (2016) for a discussion of the challenges). These experiments are intended merely to verify that our system can produce feasible solutions given a simplistic constraint set. 4.4. Illustrative Example Finally, in Table 1 we provide sample audio output from both the particle filter and beam search algorithms. To demonstrate the nature of the algorithms, we took a string quartet by Mozart, fixed the melody line, and re-harmonised the three remaining parts given their original rhythmic structure (note onset and offset times). The results are typical of the behaviour of the algorithms. In particular, the beam search produces more repetitive results than the particle filter. To demonstrate robustness, Table 2 provides further re-harmonisations. The methodology is identical to that of the previous paragraph; in this case however we vary which voice was fixed to the original composition of Mozart, while re-harmonising the remaining three. 14  Computer Assisted Composition  5. Conclusions We presented algorithms for combining sophisticated probabilistic models of polyphonic music with human input. We represent human input as a finite state machine which accepts allowed compositions. Such a constraint is rather general, and yet amenable both to sequential Monte Carlo (for sampling from implied conditional distribution) and beam search optimisation (for maximising the same conditional distribution). We demonstrated the efficacy of the methods both quantitatively and through a listening experiment with human subjects. When the constraints are highly permissive, it seems that conditional sampling should be preferred to probability maximisation, as the latter tends to produce overly regular results in this case. Furthermore, the two approaches lead to a different style of musical result, as exemplified by the included audio example.  References Moray Allan and Christopher K. I. Williams. Harmonising chorales by probabilistic inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 17, 2005. Nicolas Boulanger-Lewandowski, Yoshua Bengio, and Pascal Vincent. Modeling temporal dependencies in high-dimensional sequences: Application to polyphonic music generation and transcription. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2012. Lawrence D. Brown, T. Tony Cai, and Anirban DasGupta. Confidence intervals for a binomial proportion and asymptotic expansions. Annals of Statistics, 30(1):160–201, 2 2002. doi: 10.1214/aos/1015362189. J. Carpenter, P. Clifford, and P. Fearnhead. Improved particle filter for nonlinear problems. IEE Proc., Radar Sonar Navig., 146(1):2, 1999. Ciprian Chelba, Tomas Mikolov, Mike Schuster, Qi Ge, Thorsten Brants, and Phillipp Koehn. One billion word benchmark for measuring progress in statistical language modeling. CoRR, abs/1312.3005, 2013. Florian Colombo, Samuel P. Muscinelli, Alex Seeholzer, Johanni Brea, and Wulfram Gerstner. Algorithmic composition of melodies with deep recurrent neural networks. In Computer Simulation of Musical Creativity, 2016. D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An Introduction to the Theory of Point Processes Volume I: Elementary Theory and Methods. Springer, second edition, 2003. ISBN 0-387-95541-0. Arnaud Doucet and Adam M Johansen. A tutorial on particle filtering and smoothing: Fifteen years later. Handbook of nonlinear filtering, 12(656-704):3, 2009. Douglas Eck and Juergen Schmidhuber. A first look at music composition using LSTM recurrent neural networks. Istituto Dalle Molle Di Studi Sull Intelligenza Artificiale, 2002. Brian Eno. Composers as gardeners. https://vimeo.com/55969912, 2011. Accessed: July 2015 (transcripts can be found online).  15  Walder Kim  Jose D. Fernandez and Francisco J. Vico. Ai methods in algorithmic composition: A comprehensive survey. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), 48:513–582, 2013. N.J. Gordon, D.J. Salmond, and A.F.M. Smith. Novel approach to nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian state estimation. IEEE Proc. Radar and Signal Processing, 140(2):107–113, 1993. Gatan Hadjeres and Francois Pachet. Deepbach: a steerable model for bach chorales generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017. Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780, November 1997. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. Roisin Loughran and Michael O’Neill. Generative music evaluation: Why do we limit to “human”? In Computer Simulation of Musical Creativity, 2016. Luigi Federico Menabrea and Ada Lovelace. Sketch of the analytical engine invented by charles babbage. Scientific Memoirs, pages 666–731, 1843. Lawrence M. Murray, Anthony Lee, and Pierre E. Jacob. Parallel resampling in the particle filter. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 2015. Gerhard Nierhaus. Algorithmic Composition: Paradigms of Automated Music Generation. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st edition, 2008. Alexandre Papadopoulos, Francois Pachet, Pierre Roy, and Jason Sakellariou. Exact sampling for regular and markov constraints with belief propagation. In Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming, pages 341–350, 2015. Alexandre Papadopoulos, Francois Pachet, and Pierre Roy. Generating non-plagiaristic markov sequences with max order sampling. In Creativity and Univers. in Language, 2016. A.D. Patel. Music, Language, and the Brain. Oxford University Press, 2010. ISBN 9780198028772. Pierre Roy and Francois Pachet. Enforcing meter in finite-length markov sequences. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2013. Ian Simon and Sageev Oore. Performance rnn: Generating music with expressive timing and dynamics. https://magenta.tensorflow.org/performance-rnn, 2017. Bob Sturm, João Felipe Santos, and Iryna Korshunova. Folk music style modelling by recurrent neural networks with long short term memory units. In ISMIR demo, 2015. Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In Neural Information Processing Systems 27, pages 3104–3112, 2014. Christian Walder. Modelling symbolic music: Beyond the piano roll. In The 8th Asian Conference on Machine Learning (ACML), pages 174–189, 2016.  16

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
