Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_3216

Abstract:
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 1 (2015) 3-17  Submitted 6/91; published 9/91  Recursive Feature Generation for Knowledge-based Learning Lior Friedman Shaul Markovitch  LIORF @ CS . TECHNION . AC . IL SHAULM @ CS . TECHNION . AC . IL  arXiv:1802.00050v1 [cs.AI] 31 Jan 2018  Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Haifa 32000, Israel  Abstract When humans perform inductive learning, they often enhance the process with background knowledge. With the increasing availability of well-formed collaborative knowledge bases, the performance of learning algorithms could be significantly enhanced if a way were found to exploit these knowledge bases. In this work, we present a novel algorithm for injecting external knowledge into induction algorithms using feature generation. Given a feature, the algorithm defines a new learning task over its set of values, and uses the knowledge base to solve the constructed learning task. The resulting classifier is then used as a new feature for the original problem. We have applied our algorithm to the domain of text classification using large semantic knowledge bases. We have shown that the generated features significantly improve the performance of existing learning algorithms.  1. Introduction In recent decades, machine learning techniques have become more prevalent in a wide variety of fields. Most of these methods rely on the inductive approach: they attempt to locate a hypothesis that is supported by given labeled examples. These methods have proven themselves successful when the number of examples is sufficient, and a collection of good, distinguishing features is available. In many real-world applications, however, the given set of features is insufficient for inducing a high quality classifier (Levi & Weiss, 2004; Paulheim & Fümkranz, 2012). One approach for overcoming this difficulty is to generate new features that are combinations of the given ones. For example, the LFC algorithm (Ragavan, Rendell, Shaw, & Tessmer, 1993) combines binary features through the use of logical operators such as ∧, ¬. Another example is the LDMT algorithm (Brodley & Utgoff, 1995), which generates linear combinations of existing features. Deep Learning methods combine basic and generated features using various activation functions such as sigmoid or softmax. The FICUS framework (Markovitch & Rosenstein, 2002) presents a general method for generating features using any given set of constructor functions. The above approaches are limited in that they merely combine existing features to make the representation more suitable for the learning algorithm. While this approach often suffices, there are many cases where simply combining existing features is not sufficient. When people perform inductive learning, they usually rely on a vast body of background knowledge to make the process more effective (McNamara & Kintsch, 1996). For example, assume two positive examples of people suffering from some genetic disorder, where the value of the country-of-origin feature is Poland and Romania. Existing induction algorithms, including those generating features by combination, will not be able to generalize over these two examples. Humans, on the other hand, can easily generalize and generate a new feature, is located in Eastern Europe, based on their previously established background knowledge.  c 2015 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.  In this work, we present a novel algorithm that uses a similar approach for enhancing inductive learning with background knowledge through feature generation. Our method assumes that in addition to the labeled set of example it receives a body of external knowledge represented in relational form. The algorithm treats feature values as objects and constructs new learning problems, using the background relational knowledge as their features. The resulting classifiers are then used as new generated features. For example, in the above very simple example, our algorithm would have used the continent and region features of a country, inferred from a geographic knowledge base, to create the new feature that enables us to generalize. One significant advantage of using background knowledge in the form of generated features is that it allows us to utilize existing powerful learning algorithms for the induction process. We have implemented our algorithm in the domain of text classification, using Freebase and YAGO2 as our background knowledge bases, and performed an extensive set of experiments to test the effectiveness of our method. Results show that the use of background knowledge through our methodology significantly improves the performance of existing learning algorithms.  2. Motivation Before we delve into the detailed description of our algorithm, we would like to illustrate its main ideas using an example. Suppose we are attempting to identify people with a high risk of suffering from a genetic disorder. Assume that the target concept to be discovered is that those at risk are women with ancestors originating from desert areas. To identify women at risk, we are given a training sample of sick and healthy people, containing various features, including gender and their full name. We call this learning problem T1 . Assuming we have no additional information, an induction algorithm (a decision tree learner, in this example) would likely produce a result similar to that shown in Figure 1. While such a classifier will achieve a low training error, the hundreds of seemingly unrelated surnames will cause it to generalize poorly. The above example illustrates a case where, without additional knowledge, an induction algorithm will yield a very poor result. However, if we assume access to a relational knowledge base connecting surnames to common countries of origin, we can begin to apply our knowledge-based feature generation techniques to the problem, as we can move from the domain of surnames to that of countries. Our algorithm does so by creating a new learning problem T2 . The training objects for learning problem T2 are surnames; surnames of people at risk are labeled as positive. The features for these new objects are extracted from the knowledge base. In this case, we have a single feature: the country of origin. Solving the above learning problem through an induction algorithm yields a classifier on surnames that distinguishes between surnames of patients with the disease and surnames of healthy individuals. This classifier for T2 can then be used as a binary feature for the original problem T1 by applying it to the feature value of surname. For example, it can be used as a feature in the node corresponding a gender of female in Figure 1, yielding the tree seen in Figure 2. This new feature gives us a better generalization over the baseline solution, as we now abstract the long list of surnames to a short list of countries. This result also allows us to capture previously unseen surnames from those countries. However, this is not a sufficient solution, as we have no way of generalizing on previously unseen countries of origin. If, however, we would have recursively applied our method for solving T2 , we could have obtained a better generalization. When learning to classify surnames, our method creates a new learning problem, T3 , with countries as its objects. Countries of surnames belonging to people with high 2  Gender  Surname  hundreds of surnames  su e  rn  am  am  rn  e1  -  su  n  -  +  +  -  -  •••  Figure 1: A decision tree for the basic features surname Gender  dozens of countries  Country of Origin  1  Co  -  -  +  m  Co  un  try  try  un  -  +  +  -  •••  -  +  Figure 2: A constructed feature used within a decision tree risk are labeled as positive. The knowledge base regarding countries is then used to extract features for this new training set. Applying a standard learning algorithm to T3 will yield a classifier that separates between countries of origin of people at risk and those not at risk. This classifier will do so by looking at the properties of countries, and conclude that countries with high average temperature and low precipitation, the characteristics of desert areas, are associated with people at high risk. The result of this process, depicted in Figure 3, is a new feature for T2 , that is, a feature on surnames. This feature is then used to construct a classifier for T2 , which is in turn used as a feature for T1 , yielding a feature on patients. This new feature for patients will check whether their  3  Labeled Countries of Origin  country  (1)  population  avg. temp  precipit  ••••  (2)  training set for recursive learning problem  +  surname Gender  Average Temperature  -  F > 30°c  -  -  +  A classifier that tries to separate between countries of T origin of people with the disease and those of Precipitation people without the disease  F  Countries of origin of people with the disease  (4)  labeled feature vectors  Countries of origin of people without the disease  Induction algorithm  (3)  T < 250mm  -  + +  -  Figure 3: Recursive construction of a learning problem on countries of origin. (1) Creating the objects for the new problem. (2) Creating features using the knowledge base. (3) Applying an induction algorithm. (4) The resulting feature.  surname corresponds with a country of origin that has desert-like characteristics. We see that this feature allows us to correctly capture the target concept.  3. Generating features through recursive induction In the following sections, we formally define the feature generation problem, present a solution in the form of a simple algorithm that generates features by using relational expansions, and then proceed to describe our main recursive feature generation algorithm. 3.1 Problem definition We begin our discussion with a standard definition of an induction problem. Let O be a set of objects. Let Y = {0, 1} be a set of labels1 . Let C : O → Y be a target concept. Let S = {(o1 , y1 ), . . . , (om , ym )} be a set of labeled examples such that oi ∈ O, yi ∈ Y, C(oi ) = yi . Let F = {f1 , . . . , fn } be a feature map, a set consisting of feature functions fi : O → Ii where Ii is the image of fi . This definition implies a training set represented by feature vectors: SF = {(hf1 (oi ), . . . , fn (oi )i, yi )|(oi , yi ) ∈ S}. A learning algorithm L takes SF as inputs, and outputs a classifier hSF : O → Y . Definition 3.1. Let L(S, F ) = hSF be the classifier given as an output by L given hS, F i. Assuming S ∼ D, the generalization error of a learning algorithm L is the probability P r(hSF (x) 6= y), where (x, y) ∼ D. Definition 3.2. A feature generation algorithm A is an algorithm that, given hS, F i, creates a new feature map F 0 = {f10 , . . . , fk0 }, fi0 : O → Ii . In order to evaluate the output of a feature generation algorithm A, we must define its utility. Given hS, F i, A generates a feature set FA0 . Let S be a training set representative of the true 1. We assume binary labels for ease of discussion.  4  distribution of the target concept. Given S , a feature set F , a generated feature set FA0 and a learning algorithm L, the utility of A is U (A(S, F )) = P r(hSF (x) 6= y) − P r(hSF 0 (x) 6= y), A  where x ∈ O, y = C(x). Thus, in order for the utility of A to be positive, the generated feature set FA0 must yield a lower generalization error than the original feature map F . In this work, we assume that, in addition to SF , A also has access to a set of binary2 relations R = {R1 , . . . , Rt }, Rj : Dj × Dj 0 representing our knowledge base. For each individual relation Rj , its set of departure is marked Dj and its co-domain is denoted as Dj 0 . Definition 3.3. A knowledge-based feature-generation algorithm A is an algorithm that, given hS, F, Ri, creates a new feature map FR = {f10 , . . . , fk0 }, fi0 : O → Ii . 3.2 Expansion-based feature generation In this section, we present our first method for knowledge-based feature generation that ignores the labels of the original learning problem. The algorithm extends each feature value by all of the tuples it appears in. Let fi be an original feature. Let Rj : Dj × Dj 0 be a relation such that Image(fi ) ⊆ Dj . We can generate a new feature function fi,j : O → Dj 0 by composing Rj onto fi , yielding our new feature function fi,j (x) = Rj ◦ fi . In the general case, composing Rj onto Fi yields a set of values, meaning fi,j (x) = {v ∈ 0 Dj |(fi (x), v) ∈ Rj }. In our work, we preferred to work on singular values rather than set-based features. To do so, we use aggregation functions. For the experiments described in this paper, we use two aggregation function types: Majority and Any, but in general any other reasonable aggregation function can be used instead. The Majority aggregator, for example, is defined as follows. For each value v ∈ Dj 0 , we generate a binary feature function with value 1 only if v is the majority value: M ajority v (X) = 1 ⇐⇒ majority(X) = v. The pseudo-code of this algorithm (called Expander-FG) is listed in Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1 Expander-FG σ - An aggregation function family function G ENERATE F EATURES(S,F , R) generated = ∅ for fi ∈ F do for Rj ∈ R such that Image(fi ) ⊆ Dj do if Rj is a function then add {fi,j = Rj ◦ fi } to generated else σ add Fi,j = {σ v (fi,j )|v ∈ Dj 0 } to generated  . Rj is a relation Rj : Dj × Dj 0  return generated  3.3 Recursive feature generation algorithm One way to extend the Expander-FG algorithm described in the previous section is to apply it repeatedly to its own output. Extending the algorithm in this fashion, however, would yield an exponential 2. If our relations are not binary, we can use projection to create multiple binary relations instead.  5  increase in the number of generated features. To that end, we propose an alternative knowledgebased feature generation algorithm. Given an input hS, F, Ri, for each feature fi ∈ F, fi : O → Ii , our algorithm creates a recursive learning problem whose objects are the values of fi , where values associated with positive examples in S are labeled positive. Features for this generated problem are created using the relations in R. Once this new learning problem hSi0 , FR i is defined, an learning algorithm is used to induce a classifier hi : Ii → Y . Finally, our algorithm outputs a single generated feature for fi , fi0 (x) = hi ◦ fi = hi (fi (x)), fi0 : O → Y . Note that during the induction process of the newly created learning problem, we can apply a feature generation algorithm on hSi0 , FR , Ri. In particular, we can apply the above method recursively to create additional features. We call this algorithm FEAGURE (FEAture Generation Using REcursive induction). Given a feature fi , we create a recursive learning problem hSi0 , FR i. Let vi (S) = {v|(o, y) ∈ S, fi (o) = v} be the set of feature values for fi in the example set S. We use vi (S) as our set of objects. To label each v ∈ vi (S), we examine at the labels in the original problem. If there is a single example o ∈ S such that fi (o) = v, then the label of v will be the label of o. Otherwise, we take the majority label label(v) = majority({y|(o, y) ∈ S, fi (o) = v}). To define our learning problem, we must specify a feature map over vi (S). Similarly to ExpanderFG, we use the relations in R on the elements in the new training set Si0 = {(v, label(v))|v ∈ vi (S)}. For each Rj ∈ R, if it is relevant to the problem domain, meaning that vi (S) ⊆ Dj , we utilize it as a feature by applying it to v. If Rj (v) is a set, we use aggregators, as described in the previous section. The result of this process is a generated feature map for Si0 , denoted as FR . We now have a new induction problem hSi0 , FR i. We can further extend FR by recursively using 0 . The depth of recursion is controlled by a parameter FEAGURE, yielding a new feature map FR d, that will usually be set according to available learning resources. We proceed to use a learning 0 i in order to train a classifier, giving us h : I → Y . We can then use h on algorithm3 on hSi0 , FR i i i objects in S as discussed above, giving us a new feature fi0 (x) = hi (fi (x)), fi0 : O → Y . The full algorithm is listed in Algorithm 2. While the FEAGURE algorithm can be used as described above, we found it more useful to use it in the context of a divide & conquer approach, in a manner similar to the induction of decision trees. In this approach, the set of examples is given as an input to a decision tree induction algorithm. The FEAGURE algorithm is applied at each node. This allows us to generate features that are locally useful for a subset of examples. At the end of the process the tree is discarded and the generated features are gathered as the final output. 3. For our experiments, we used a decision tree learner, but any induction algorithm can be used.  6  Algorithm 2 FEAGURE algorithm function G ENERATE F EATURES(F , S, R, d) for fi ∈ F do Si0 , FR = C REATE N EW P ROBLEM(fi ,S,R,d) hi = I NDUCTIONA LGORITHM(Si0 , FR ) add fi0 (x) = hi ◦ fi to generated features return generated features function C REATE N EW P ROBLEM(fi , S, R, d) vi (S) = {v|(o, y) ∈ S, fi (o) = v} Let s(v) = {o|(o, y) ∈ S, fi (o) = v} Si0 = {(v, majority-label(s(v)))|v ∈ vi (S)} FR = {Rj (v)|Rj ∈ R, vi (S) ⊆ Dj } if d > 0 then FR = FR ∪G ENERATE F EATURES(FR , Si0 , R, d − 1) return Si0 , FR  3.4 Finding Locally Improving Features Some generated features may prove very useful for separating only a subset of the training data but may be difficult to identify in the context of the full training data. In the motivating example in Section 2, for instance, examples of male individuals (who are not at risk) are irrelevant to the target concept, and thus mask the usefulness of the candidates for feature generation. In this subsection, we present an extension of our FEAGURE algorithm that evaluates features in local contexts using the divide & conquer approach. This algorithm uses a decision tree induction method as the basis of its divide & conquer process. At each node, the FEAGURE algorithm is applied to the given set of features, yielding a set of generated features. Out of the expanded (base and generated) feature set, the feature with the highest information gain measure (Quinlan, 1986) is selected, and the training set is split based on the values of that feature. This feature may or may not be one of the generated features. We continue to apply this approach recursively to the examples in each child node, using the expanded feature set as a baseline. Once a stopping criterion has been reached, the generated features at each node are gathered as the final output. In our case, we stop the process if the training set is too small or if all examples have the same label. The decision tree is then discarded. In addition to generating features that operate within localized contexts of the original induction problem, our approach offers several advantages for feature generation: 1. Orthogonality: Because all examples with the same value for a given feature are grouped together, any further splits must make use of different features. Due to this and the fact that the features selected in each step have high IG, features chosen later in the process will be mostly orthogonal to previously chosen features. This results in a larger variety of features overall. The feature chosen as a split effectively prunes the search tree of possible features and forces later splits to rely on other features and thus different domains. 2. Interpretability: Looking at the features used at each splitting point gives us an intuitive understanding of the resulting subsets. Because of this, we can more easily understand why certain features were picked over others, which domains are no longer relevant, and so on. 3. Iterative construction: The divide & conquer approach allows for an iterative search process, which can be interrupted if a sufficient number of features were generated, or when the 7  remaining training set is no longer sufficiently representative for drawing meaningful conclusions. The above advantages give us a strong incentive to utilize this approach when attempting to generate features using FEAGURE. We call this new algorithm Deep-FEAGURE, as it goes into increasingly deeper local contexts. Pseudocode for this method is shown in Algorithm 3. Through the use of a divide & conquer approach, we can better identify strong, locally useful features that the FEAGURE algorithm may have difficulty generating otherwise. In our experiments, we used this approach to generate features. Algorithm 3 Deep FEAGURE- Divide & conquer feature generation minSize: minimal size of a node. generatedFeatures: A global list of all generated features. SelectFeature: Method that selects a single feature, such as highest information gain. function D EEP FEAGURE(S, F , R, d) if all examples in S are of same class c then return leaf(c) if |S| <minSize then return leaf(majority class of S) localGeneratedFeatures=FEAGURE(S, F , R, d) add localGeneratedFeatures to generatedFeatures f = S ELECT F EATURE(S, F ∪localGeneratedFeatures) children = ∅ for v ∈ Domain(f ) do S(f ) = {(o, y) ∈ S|f (o) = v} subTree= D EEP FEAGURE(S(f ), F ∪localGeneratedFeatures, R, d) add subTree to children return children  4. Empirical evaluation We have applied our feature generation algorithm to the domain of text classification. 4.1 Application of FEAGURE to Text Classification The text classification problem is defined by a set of texts O labeled by a set of categories Y 4 such that we create S = {(oi , yi )|oi ∈ O, yi ∈ Y }. Given S, the learning problem is to find a hypothesis h : O → Y that minimizes generalization error over all possible texts of the given categories. To measure this error, a testing set is used as an approximation. In recent years, we have seen the rise of Semantic Linked Data as a powerful semantic knowledge base for text-based entities, with large databases such as Google Knowledge Graph (Pelikánová, 2014), Wikidata (Vrandečić & Krötzsch, 2014) and YAGO2 (Hoffart et al., 2013) becoming common. These knowledge bases represent semantic knowledge through the use of relations, mostly represented by triplets of various schema such as RDF, or in structures such as OWL and XML. These structures conform to relationships between entities such as “born in” (hyponyms), as well as type information (hypernyms). 4. We can assume Y = {0, 1} for ease of analysis.  8  To use FEAGURE for text classification, we use words as binary features and Freebase and YAGO2 as our semantic knowledge bases. YAGO2 (Hoffart et al., 2013) is a large general knowledge base extracted automatically from Wikipedia, WordNet and GeoNames. YAGO2 contains over 10 million entities and 124 million relational facts, mostly dealing with individuals, countries and events. Freebase (Bollacker, Evans, Paritosh, Sturge, & Taylor, 2008) has been described as “a massive, collaboratively edited database of cross-linked data.” Freebase is constructed as a combination of data harvested from databases and data contributed by users. The result is a massive knowledge base containing 1.9 billion facts. To apply our approach to the domain of text classification, we perform a few minor adjustments to the FEAGURE algorithm: 1. To enable linkage between the basic features and the semantic knowledge bases, we use entity linking software (Hoffart, Yosef, Bordino, Fürstenau, Pinkal, Spaniol, Taneva, Thater, & Weikum, 2011; Milne & Witten, 2013) to transform these words into semantically meaningful entities. 2. Once we have created a new classifier hi , we cannot simply compose it on fi , since every example might contain multiple entities. To that end, we apply hi on each entity and take the majority vote. 3. Since our features are binary, we use the entities extracted from the text as the set of values vi (S). We split vi (S) into several subsets according to relation domains and apply the FEAGURE algorithm independently to each domain. 4.2 Methodology We evaluated our performance using a total of 101 datasets from two dataset collections: TechTC-100 (Davidov, Gabrilovich, & Markovitch, 2004) is a collection of 100 different binary text classification problems of varying difficulty, extracted from the Open Dictionary project. We used the training and testing sets defined in the original paper. As our knowledge base for this task, we used YAGO2. For entity extraction, we used AIDA (Hoffart et al., 2011), a framework for entity detection and disambiguation. OHSUMED (Hersh, Buckley, Leone, & Hickam, 1994) is a large dataset of medical abstracts from the MeSH categories of the year 1991. First, we took the first 20,000 documents, similarly to Joachims (Joachims, 1998). We limited the texts further to medical documents that contain only a title. Due to the relatively sparse size of most MeSH categories, we only used the two with the most documents, C1 and C20. The result is a dataset of 850 documents of each category, for a total of 1700 documents. We used ten-fold cross-validation to evaluate this dataset. Since the YAGO2 knowledge base does not contain many medical relations, we used Freebase instead. We used the same data dump used by Bast, Bäurle, Buchhold, and Haußmann (Bast et al., 2014). In our experiments, we generated features using the FEAGURE algorithm. We then proceeded to use these new features alongside three learning algorithms: SVM (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995), K-NN (Fix & Hodges Jr, 1951) and CART (Breiman, Friedman, Stone, & Olshen, 1984). We compared the performance of a learning algorithm with the generated features to the baseline of the same induction algorithm without the constructed features. In addition, since we could not obtain the code of competitive approaches for relation-based feature generation (such as FeGeLOD,  9  SGLR), we instead compared our algorithm to Expander-FG, which we believe to be indicative of the performance of these unsupervised approaches. 4.3 Results Table 1 shows average accuracies across all 10 folds for OHSUMED, as well as the average accuracies for all 100 datasets in techTC-100. When the advantage of our method over the baseline was found to be significant using a pairwise t-test (with p < 0.05), we marked the p-value. Best results are marked in bold. For the TechTC-100 dataset, FEAGURE shows a significant improvement over the baseline approach. Of particular note are the results for KNN and SVM, where the two-level activation of FEAGURE (d=2) shows statistically significant improvement over Expander-FG as well as the baseline accuracy (p < 0.05). One notable exception to our good results is the poor performance of K-NN for the OHSUMED dataset. This is likely due to the sensitivity of K-NN to the increase in dimension. For SVM as the external classifier, the FEAGURE algorithm showed an improvement in accuracy for 87 of 100 datasets for d = 1, and 91 datasets for d = 2. Using a Friedman test (Friedman, 1937), we see a significant improvement (p < 0.001) over the baseline. Table 1: Average accuracy over all datasets. The columns specify feature generation approach, with baseline being no feature generation. The rows specify the induction algorithm used on the generated features for evaluation. Results marked with * are significant with p < 0.001. Dataset OHSUMED  TechTC-100  Classifier KNN SVM CART KNN SVM CART  Baseline 0.777 0.797 0.806 0.531 0.739 0.81  Expander-FG 0.756 0.804 0.814 0.702* 0.782* 0.815  FEAGURE(d=1) 0.769 0.816 (p < 0.05) 0.809 0.772* 0.796* 0.814  FEAGURE(d=2) 0.75 0.819 (p < 0.05) 0.829 (p < 0.05) 0.775* 0.807* 0.825 (p < 0.05)  Figures 4 and 5 show the accuracies for datasets in techTC-100 using a SVM classifier. The x-axis represents the baseline accuracy without feature generation, and the y-axis represents the accuracy using our new feature set generated using FEAGURE. Therefore, any dataset that falls above the y = x line marks an improvement in accuracy. The results show a strong trend of improvement, with high (> 10%) improvement being common. We see that for 8 of the datasets, there is a degradation in accuracy. This can be a result of mistakes in the entity extraction and linking process. In their paper on TechTC-100, Davidov et al. (2004) define a metric called Maximal Achievable Accuracy (MAA). This criterion attempts to assess the difficulty of the induction problem by the maximal ten-fold accuracy over three very different induction algorithms (SVM, K-NN and CART). Figure 6 shows the performance of FEAGURE on the 25 hardest datasets in TechTC-100, in terms of the MAA criterion. We call this dataset collection “TechTC-25MAA.” Table 2 shows the accuracies for “TechTC-25MAA.” These results show a much more pronounced increase in accuracy, and illustrate that we can, in general, rely on FEAGURE to yield positive features for difficult classification problems.  10  1.0  0.9  0.9  FEAGURE 2-level Accuracy  FEAGURE Accuracy  1.0  0.8 0.7 0.6  10% difference 5% difference y=x  0.5 0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7 0.8 Baseline Accuracy  0.8 0.7 0.6  y=x 5% difference 10% difference  0.5  0.9  0.5  Figure 4: Accuracy of baseline approach compared to one-level activation of FEAGURE (SVM). Each point represents a dataset. The dotted lines represent a 5 and 10 percent difference in accuracy  0.6  0.7 0.8 Baseline Accuracy  0.9  Figure 5: Accuracy of baseline approach compared to two-level activation of FEAGURE (SVM). Each point represents a dataset. The dotted lines represent a 5 and 10 percent difference in accuracy  1.0  FEAGURE Accuracy  0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6  y=x 5% difference 10% difference  0.5 0.5  0.6  0.7 0.8 Baseline Accuracy  0.9  1.0  Figure 6: Accuracy of the baseline approach compared to single-level activation of FEAGURE (SVM). Displayed are the 25 hardest datasets (those with the lowest MAA)  11  Table 2: Average accuracy over the 25 hardest datasets in terms of MAA. The columns specify the feature generation approach, with the baseline being no feature generation. The rows specify the induction algorithm used on the generated features for evaluation. Best results are marked in bold. Dataset TechTC-25MAA  TechTC-100  Classifier KNN SVM CART KNN SVM CART  Baseline 0.524 0.751 0.82 0.531 0.739 0.81  Expander-FG 0.723 (p < 0.001) 0.815 (p < 0.001) 0.839 0.702 (p < 0.001) 0.782 (p < 0.001) 0.815  FEAGURE 0.803 (p < 0.001) 0.817 (p < 0.001) 0.837 0.772 (p < 0.001) 0.796 (p < 0.001) 0.814  FEAGURE 2-level 0.795 (p < 0.001) 0.829 (p < 0.001) 0.849 (p < 0.05) 0.775 (p < 0.001) 0.807 (p < 0.001) 0.825 (p < 0.05)  As we have discussed in section 3.3, FEAGURE creates a generic learning problem as part of its execution. For our main results we learned a decision tree classifier for this new induction problem. We also tested the effects of using K-NN and SVM classifiers instead. This choice is orthogonal to that of the learning algorithm used to evaluate the generated features. Our experiments showed that in general, replacing the internal tree induction algorithm lowers the achievable accuracy of the resulting feature map. The only exception to this trend is the case of an external K-NN classifier for the OHSUMED dataset. In this case, an internal RBF-SVM induction algorithm yields an average accuracy of 0.795 (across ten folds), a significant (p < 0.05) improvement over the baseline. 4.4 Quantitative Analysis To better understand the behavior of the Deep-FEAGURE algorithm, we measured its output and performed several aggregations over it. We first look at the average number of features considered by Deep-FEAGURE at every node: for TechTC-100, out of an average of 36.7 partitions by type that are considered for each feature, an average of 7.3 are expanded into new features by FEAGURE. The rest of the generated problems are discarded due to the filtering criteria mentioned in Section 3. We note that there are 46 available relations, and thus we can expect to look at no more than 46 features (if a relation does not apply to a sub-problem, it is not counted in this average). When the depth of the search tree increases, the number of generated features decreases rapidly, as shown in Figure 7. This is unsurprising, as we know that increased depth will cause generated problems to have a smaller training set, increasing the likelihood of those features to be filtered out. Additionally, we see that the number of available features decreases in a roughly linear manner with depth. This is again unsurprising, as features deeper in the tree cannot easily make use of the same relation multiple times due to the orthogonality trait discussed in Section 3.4. Let us now compare the relative size of recursive problems to the existing induction problems. Figure 8 shows the ratio between the number of examples (size) in the newly constructed induction problem and the size of the original learning problem at various depths of the divide & conquer search process. As depth in the search tree increases, the size ratio increases as well. This is somewhat surprising, as an increase in depth means a smaller induction problem, and thus we would expect a similar size ratio to be maintained. Even more unexpected, however, is that the average recursive problem size increases with problem depth. Intuitively, we would have expected the 12  number of features tried number of features generated  40  # Features  30  20  10  0 0  5  10 Tree depth  15  20  Figure 7: Average number of features tried vs. average number of features generated per depth. recursive problem size to decrease as problem depth increases. However, as we search smaller problems deeper down the search process, the relations that result in a smaller or roughly similar sized recursive induction problem have already been used, and thus relations that cause a larger size ratio are required. We also note that these recursive problems do not maintain the same label balance as the original learning problems: one label set is much larger. This is expected, as the divide & conquer search strategy aims to use the label set as a basis for separation. We may therefore wish to make use of various known strategies to reduce the impact of label imbalance in induction problems when using Deep-FEAGURE. 3.5 3.0  Mean Ratio  2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0  2  4  6  8 10 Tree depth  12  14  16  Figure 8: Mean size ratio of newly created recursive problem compared to the original learning problem size (new problem training set size divided by original problem training set size).  Finally, we look at the local information gain of the newly created features. In Figure 9, we see the mean information gain of generated features per depth, compared to the best information gain 13  achieved by a non-recursive feature for that depth. We see that our recursive features tend to have a much higher information gain, especially in the beginning of the search process. We see a decrease in both measures as depth increases, because it is then more difficult to find distinguishing features. 0.5  recursive tree ig base ig  0.4  mean ig  0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 0  2  4  6  8 10 Tree depth  12  14  16  Figure 9: Mean information gain of generated features compared to the best information gain for the original learning problem.  4.5 FEAGURE Demonstration To demonstrate FEAGURE, We selected one problem from TechTC-100. In this example, texts refer either to locations in and around Texas, or to locations in and around New York. The extracted entities are locations, with the “Located in” relation as our domain (Figure 10). Applicable relations are used to then create a new induction problem. FEAGURE uses the “Located in” and “Happened in” relations as features for this problem, as shown in Figure 11.  Texas text (+)  New York text (-)  Dallas(+) Tagged Entities  Texas text (+)  Located In Galveston (+)  New York text (-)  Manhattan (-)  Maryland (-)  Figure 10: Entities are extracted from the text, and entities in the “Located in” relation are used as labeled objects. Since we chose d = 2 as the recursion depth parameter, the algorithm calls FEAGURE recursively to try and generate new features for the new induction problem. The values of the feature 14  Dallas(+)  Galveston (+)  Manhattan (-)  Maryland (-)  Location  label  Is located in(x)  Happened in(x)  Dallas  +  {Dallas County, Texas, USA}  {Assassination of J.F.K}  Galveston  +  {Texas, USA}  {Battle of Galveston, American Civil War}  Manhattan  -  {New York City, USA}  {Manhattan Project}  Maryland  -  {USA}  {Battle of Antietam, American Civil War}  Figure 11: Construction of a recursive learning problem based on the “Located in” relation. Applicable relations are used to create a feature set for the newly constructed example set.  “Happened in” are events. These events are used as objects for a recursive learning problem (Figure 12). We use the “Type” relation as a feature, relying on hypernyms to classify events (Figure 13). The resulting classifier (a decision tree induction algorithm was used) is shown in Figure 14, and can be interpreted as “is this event a battle or conflict?”.  Assassination(+)  Dallas(+)  Galveston (+)  Manhattan (-)  Happened In  Maryland (-)  Battle of Galveston (+)  Battle of Antietam (-)  Manhattan Project (-)  American Civil War (+)  Figure 12: Construction of a second level recursive learning problem based on the “Happened in” relation. Feature values are treated as objects and labeled according to the labels of the problem on locations.  Once we have generated this classifier on events, we can use it as a binary feature. FEAGURE uses this new feature to expand the constructed induction problem on locations, shown in Figure 11. This feature is applied to a location through a majority vote over events that happened in that location. The result is a feature for locations representing the concept “were most notable events in this location battles/conflicts?” Finally, a decision tree learner is used on the expanded feature set to learn a classifier on locations to be used as a feature for our original learning problem. The new classifier for locations is shown in Figure 15. It can be described as “is this location located in Texas, or the site of battles or conflicts?”. Texts mentioning locations in and around Texas are more likely to link to locations that correspond to the output of this classifier. We note that this feature  15  Battle of Antietam (-)  Assassination (+) Battle of Galveston (+)  Manhattan Project (-)  Event  label  Type(x)  Assassination of J.F.K  +  {wordnet_event, wordnet_murder}  Battle of Galveston  +  {wordnet_event, wordnet_battle}  American Civil War  American Civil War (+)  {wordnet_event, wordnet_conflict}  Manhattan Project  -  {wordnet_event, wordnet_project}  Battle of Antietam  -  {wordnet_event, wordnet_battle}  Figure 13: Construction of a recursive learning problem based on the “Happened in” relation. Once the example set has been created, applicable relations are used to create a feature set for the newly constructed induction problem.  Type (x, wordnet_battle) False  True  +  Type (x, wordnet_conflict) False  -  True  +  Figure 14: Recursive feature constructed by FEAGURE for entities in the “happened in” relation. This feature operates on events, and can be used in a classifier on locations.  was generated by FEAGURE, and was later used by our external induction algorithm due to its high information gain.  16  Is located in(x, Texas) False  True  +  Type (x, wordnet_battle)  False  True  Type (x, wordnet_conflict)  False  True  -  +  False  -  +  True  +  Figure 15: Final generated feature constructed by FEAGURE for entities in the “located in” relation. The feature in the left branch is the recursive feature constructed by applying FEAGURE to the new learning problem.  5. Related work Many feature generation methodologies have been developed to search for new features that better represent the target concepts. There are three major approaches for feature generation: tailored methods, combinational techniques, and algorithms utilizing external knowledge.  17  Tailored approaches (Sutton & Matheus, 1991; Hirsh & Japkowicz, 1994) are designed for specific problem domains and rely on domain-specific techniques. One such example is the bootstrapping algorithm (Hirsh & Japkowicz, 1994), designed for the domain of molecular biology. The algorithm represents features as nucleotide sequences whose structure is determined by existing background knowledge. The algorithm uses an initial set of feature sequences, produced by human experts, and uses a domain-specific set of operators to change them into new sequence features. Such special-purpose algorithms may be effectively tailored for a given domain, but have proven difficult to generalize to other domains and problems. Combinational feature generation techniques are domain-independent methods for constructing new features by combining existing features. The LDMT algorithm (Brodley & Utgoff, 1995) performs feature construction in the course of building a decision-tree classifier. At each created tree node, the algorithm constructs a hyperplane feature through linear combinations of existing features in a way likely to produce concise, relevant hyperplanes. The LFC algorithm (Ragavan et al., 1993) combines binary features through the use of logical operators such as ∧, ¬. The FICUS algorithm (Markovitch & Rosenstein, 2002) allows the use of any combinational feature generation technique, based on a given set of constructor functions. Recent work by Katz et al. (2016) uses a similar approach. Deep Learning (Rumelhart et al., 1986; LeCun et al., 1998) is another major class of combinational feature generation approaches. Here, the activation functions of the nodes can be viewed as feature schemes, which are instantiated during the learning process by changing the weights. One limitation of combinational approaches is that they merely combine existing features to make the representation more suitable for the learning algorithm. Our FEAGURE algorithm belongs to a third class of approaches that inject additional knowledge into the existing problem through the feature generation process. Propositionalization approaches (Kramer & Frank, 2000; Cheng et al., 2011) rely on relational data to serve as external knowledge. They use several operators to create first-order logic predicates connecting existing data and relational knowledge. Cheng et al. (2011) devised a generic propositionalization framework using linked data via relation-based queries. FeGeLOD (Paulheim & Fümkranz, 2012) also uses linked data to automatically enrich existing data. FeGeLOD uses feature values as entities and adds related knowledge to the example, thus creating additional features. Unsupervised approaches allow us to utilize external knowledge, but they have a major issue: Should we try to construct deep connections and relationships within the knowledge base, we would experience an exponential increase in the number of generated features. To that end, FEAGURE and other supervised approaches use the presence of labeled examples to better generate deeper features. Most supervised methods can trace their source to Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) (Muggleton, 1991; Quinlan, 1990), a supervised approach that induces a set of first-order logical formulae to separate the different categories of examples in the training set. ILP methods start from single relation formulae and add additional relational constraints using the knowledge base, until formulae that separate the training set into positive and negative examples are found. To that end, these approaches make use of a refinement operator. When applied on a relational formula, this operator creates a more specialized case of that formula. For example, given the logical formula BornIn(X, Y ), where X is a person and Y is a city, one possible refinement is the formula BornIn(X, Y ) ∧ CapitalOf (Y, Z), where Z is a country. The result is a logical formula that considers a more specific case. Additionally, we can look at a refinement that restricts by a constant,  18  turning BornIn(X, Y ) into, for example, BornIn(X, United States). This refinement process continues until a sufficient set of consistent formulae is found. An algorithm suggested by Terziev (2011) shows an interesting approach to supervised feature generation. In his paper, Terziev (2011) suggests a decision tree based approach, where in each node of the tree, an expansion of features is done similarly to FeGeLOD, with an entropy-based criterion to decide whether further expansion is required. This technique bears several similarities to DeepFEAGURE (Algorithm 3). Unlike Deep-FEAGURE, the feature expansion process is unsupervised, and the resulting feature must be a decision tree, restricting the generality of the approach. The dynamic feature generation approach used by the SGLR algorithm (Popescul & Ungar, 2007) can be seen as the supervised equivalent of propositionalization methods. Feature generation is performed during the training phase, allowing for complex features to be considered by performing a best-first search on possible candidates. This process allows SGLR to narrow the exponential size of the feature space to a manageable number of candidates. While this supervised approach overcomes the exponential increase in features that unsupervised approaches suffer from, the space of generated features that it searches is significantly less expressive than that of our approach. Through the use of recursive induction algorithm, our approach automatically locates relationships and combinations that we would not consider otherwise. Since we have focused on the problem of text classification, we also discuss a few text-based approaches for feature generation. Linguistic methods such as those described in a study by Moschitti and Basili (2004) attempt to use part-of-speech and grammar information to generate more indicative features than the bag-of-words representation of texts. Concept-based approaches are the most similar to our own. Two examples of such methods are Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) (Gabrilovich & Markovitch, 2009), which generates explicit concepts from Wikipedia based on similarity scores, and Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), which generates latent concepts based on a large corpus. Both approaches provide us with a feature set of semantic concepts. These concepts can be used alongside our approach, allowing us to induce over them.  6. Conclusions When humans use inductive reasoning to draw conclusions from their experience, they use a vast amount of general and specific knowledge. In this paper we introduced a novel methodology for enhancing existing learning algorithms with background knowledge represented by relational knowledge bases. The algorithm works by generating complex features induced using the available knowledge base. It does so through the extraction of recursive learning problems based on existing features and the knowledge base, that are then given as input to induction algorithms. The output of this process is a collection of classifiers that are then turned into features for the original induction problem. An important strength of our approach is its generality. The features generated by FEAGURE can be used by any induction algorithm, allowing us to inject external knowledge in a general, algorithm independent manner. One potential limitation of our approach is that it requires features with meaningful values in order to operate. Despite this limitation, there is a wide range of problems where feature values have meaning. For these problems, we can apply one of several general and domain-specific knowledge bases, depending on the problem. In recent years, we have seen an increase in the number of available knowledge bases. These knowledge bases include both general knowledge bases such as Freebase, YAGO, Wikidata and the Google Knowledge Graph, and more 19  domain-specific knowledge bases, from the British Geographical Survey (BGS) linked dataset, containing roughly one million geological facts regarding various geographical formations, through biological databases such as Proteopedia, composed of thousands of pages regarding biological proteins and molecules, to entertainment-focused databases such as IMDB, containing millions of facts on movies, TV-series and known figures in the entertainment industry. With the recent surge of well-formed relational knowledge bases, and the increase in use of strong learning algorithms for a wide variety of tasks, we believe our approach can take the performance of existing machine learning techniques to the next level.  20  References Bast, H., Bäurle, F., Buchhold, B., & Haußmann, E. (2014). Easy access to the freebase dataset. In Proceedings of the companion publication of the 23rd international conference on World wide web companion, pp. 95–98. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee. Bollacker, K. D., Evans, C., Paritosh, P., Sturge, T., & Taylor, J. (2008). Freebase: a collaboratively created graph database for structuring human knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, pp. 1247–1250. AcM. Breiman, L., Friedman, J., Stone, C. J., & Olshen, R. A. (1984). Classification and regression trees. Wadsworth. Brodley, C. E., & Utgoff, P. E. (1995). Multivariate decision trees. Machine Learning, 19(1), 45–77. Cheng, W., Kasneci, G., Graepel, T., Stern, D. H., & Herbrich, R. (2011). Automated feature generation from structured knowledge. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management, pp. 1395–1404. ACM. Cortes, C., & Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20(3), 273–297. Davidov, D., Gabrilovich, E., & Markovitch, S. (2004). Parameterized generation of labeled datasets for text categorization based on a hierarchical directory. In Proceedings of the 27th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, pp. 250–257. ACM. Fix, E., & Hodges Jr, J. L. (1951). Discriminatory analysis-nonparametric discrimination: consistency properties. Tech. rep., DTIC Document. Friedman, M. (1937). The use of ranks to avoid the assumption of normality implicit in the analysis of variance. Journal of the american statistical association, 32(200), 675–701. Gabrilovich, E., & Markovitch, S. (2009). Wikipedia-based semantic interpretation for natural language processing. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 34, 443–498. Hersh, W. R., Buckley, C., Leone, T. J., & Hickam, D. H. (1994). OHSUMED: an interactive retrieval evaluation and new large test collection for research. In Proceedings of the 17th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, pp. 192–201. Springer. Hirsh, H., & Japkowicz, N. (1994). Bootstrapping training-data representations for inductive learning: A case study in molecular biology. In Proceedings of the 12th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 639–644. Hoffart, J., Suchanek, F. M., Berberich, K., & Weikum, G. (2013). YAGO2: a spatially and temporally enhanced knowledge base from Wikipedia. Artificial Intelligence, 194, 28–61. Hoffart, J., Yosef, M. A., Bordino, I., Fürstenau, H., Pinkal, M., Spaniol, M., Taneva, B., Thater, S., & Weikum, G. (2011). Robust disambiguation of named entities in text. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 782–792. Association for Computational Linguistics. Joachims, T. (1998). Text categorization with support vector machines: Learning with many relevant features. In European conference on machine learning, pp. 137–142. Springer.  21  Katz, G., Shin, E. C. R., & Song, D. (2016). Explorekit: Automatic feature generation and selection. In Data Mining (ICDM), 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on, pp. 979–984. IEEE. Kramer, S., & Frank, E. (2000). Bottom-up propositionalization.. In ILP Work-in-progress reports. LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., & Haffner, P. (1998). Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11), 2278–2324. Levi, K., & Weiss, Y. (2004). Learning object detection from a small number of examples: the importance of good features. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004. CVPR 2004. Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Computer Society Conference on, Vol. 2, pp. II–II. IEEE. Markovitch, S., & Rosenstein, D. (2002). Feature generation using general constructor functions. Machine Learning, 49(1), 59–98. McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence. Discourse processes, 22(3), 247–288. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J. (2013). Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 3111–3119. Milne, D., & Witten, I. H. (2013). An open-source toolkit for mining wikipedia. Artificial Intelligence, 194, 222–239. Moschitti, A., & Basili, R. (2004). Complex linguistic features for text classification: A comprehensive study. In European Conference on Information Retrieval, pp. 181–196. Springer. Muggleton, S. (1991). Inductive logic programming. New generation computing, 8(4), 295–318. Paulheim, H., & Fümkranz, J. (2012). Unsupervised generation of data mining features from linked open data. In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on web intelligence, mining and semantics, p. 31. ACM. Pelikánová, Z. (2014). Google knowledge graph.. Popescul, A., & Ungar, L. H. (2007). Feature generation and selection in multi-relational statistical learning. STATISTICAL RELATIONAL LEARNING, 453. Quinlan, J. R. (1986). Induction of decision trees. Machine learning, 1(1), 81–106. Quinlan, J. R. (1990). Learning logical definitions from relations. Machine learning, 5(3), 239–266. Ragavan, H., Rendell, L., Shaw, M., & Tessmer, A. (1993). Complex concept acquisition through directed search and feature caching. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-1993), pp. 946–951. Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning internal representations by error-propagation. In Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Volume 1, Vol. 1, pp. 318–362. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Sutton, R. S., & Matheus, C. J. (1991). Learning polynomial functions by feature construction.. In ML, pp. 208–212. Terziev, Y. (2011). Feature generation using ontologies during induction of decision trees on linked data..  22  Vrandečić, D., & Krötzsch, M. (2014). Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communications of the ACM, 57(10), 78–85.  23

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
