Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_3852

Abstract:
This article has been first published in International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 114, no. 2, pp. 168–194, 2015. The final publication is available at Springer via http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11263-015-0799-8.  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections  arXiv:1604.04767v1 [cs.LG] 16 Apr 2016  Markus Thom · Matthias Rapp · Günther Palm  Abstract Learning dictionaries suitable for sparse coding instead of using engineered bases has proven effective in a variety of image processing tasks. This paper studies the optimization of dictionaries on image data where the representation is enforced to be explicitly sparse with respect to a smooth, normalized sparseness measure. This involves the computation of Euclidean projections onto level sets of the sparseness measure. While previous algorithms for this optimization problem had at least quasi-linear time complexity, here the first algorithm with linear time complexity and constant space complexity is proposed. The key for this is the mathematically rigorous derivation of a characterization of the projection’s result based on a soft-shrinkage function. This theory is applied in an original algorithm called Easy Dictionary Learning (EZDL), which learns dictionaries with a simple and fast-to-compute Hebbian-like learning rule. The new algorithm is efficient, expressive and particularly simple to implement. It is demonstrated that despite its simplicity, the proposed learning algorithm is able to generate a rich variety of dictionaries, in particular a topographic organization of atoms or separable atoms. Further, the dictionaries are as expressive as those of benchmark learning algorithms in terms of the reproduction quality on entire images, and result in an equivalent denoising performance. EZDL learns approximately 30 % faster than the already very efficient Online Dictionary Learning algorithm, and is Communicated by Julien Mairal, Francis Bach, Michael Elad. M. Thom (B) driveU / Institute of Measurement, Control and Microtechnology Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany e-mail: markus.thom@uni-ulm.de M. Rapp driveU / Institute of Measurement, Control and Microtechnology Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany e-mail: matthias.rapp@uni-ulm.de G. Palm Institute of Neural Information Processing Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany e-mail: guenther.palm@uni-ulm.de  therefore eligible for rapid data set analysis and problems with vast quantities of learning samples. Keywords Sparse coding · Sparse representations · Dictionary learning · Explicit sparseness constraints · Sparseness-enforcing projections 1 Introduction In a great variety of classical machine learning problems, sparse solutions are attractive because they provide more efficient representations compared to non-sparse solutions. There is an overwhelming evidence that mammalian brains respect the sparseness principle (Laughlin and Sejnowski 2003), which holds true especially for the mammalian visual cortex (Hubel and Wiesel 1959; Olshausen and Field 1996, 1997). It suggests itself that sparseness be a fundamental prior to a variety of signal processing tasks. In particular, this includes low-level image processing since natural images can be represented succinctly using structural primitives (Olshausen and Field 1997; Mairal et al. 2009b). Interesting and biologically plausible sparse representations were discovered through computer simulations on natural images (Olshausen and Field 1996, 1997). Related representations can be obtained by analysis of temporal image sequences (van Hateren and Ruderman 1998; Olshausen 2003), stereo image pairs and images with chromatic information (Hoyer and Hyvärinen 2000), or by enforcing a topographic organization (Hyvärinen et al. 2001; Kavukcuoglu et al. 2009). Sparseness alleviates the effects of random noise in a natural way since it prevents arbitrary combinations of measured signals (Donoho 1995; Hyvärinen 1999; Elad 2006). In fact, methods based on sparse representations were shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance for image denoising (Mairal et al. 2009b). Further notable image processing applications that benefit from the efficiency gained through sparseness are as diverse as deblurring (Dong et al. 2011), super-resolution (Yang et al. 2010, 2012; Dong et al. 2011), compression (Skretting and Engan 2011; Horev et al. 2012), and depth estimation (Tošić et al. 2011).  2  Thom, Rapp, and Palm 1.0 0.8  0.5  0.6 0.0 0.4 -0.5  -1.0 -1.0  0.2  Sparseness σ(x1, x2)  Second Coordinate x2  1.0  0.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 First Coordinate x1  1.0  Fig. 1 Visualization of Hoyer’s sparseness measure σ . The abscissa and the ordinate specify the entries of a two-dimensional vector, the obtained sparseness degree is color coded. The dashed lines are contour levels at intervals of 0.25.  1.1 Dictionary Learning and Sparseness Measures Each of these tasks needs a model capable of reproducing the signals to be processed. In a linear generative model for sparse coding, a sample x ∈ Rd with d features should be expressed approximately as a linear combination of only a few atoms of a larger dictionary: x ≈ W h, where W ∈ R  d×n  1.2 Explicit Sparseness Constraints and Projections  n  and h ∈ R is sparsely populated.  Here, W is the dictionary which is fixed for all samples, and h is a sparse code word that depends on the concrete sample. The n columns of W represent the atoms, which are also called bases or filters. This sparse coding framework is well-suited for overcomplete representations where n  d. The dictionary can be generated by wavelets, for example, or adapted to a specific task by solving an optimization problem on measurement data. The latter is also called dictionary learning in this context. Sparseness acts as a regularizer. If h was not constrained to sparseness, then trivial choices of W would suffice for perfect reproduction capabilities. But when h is sparse, then x can be represented by additive superposition of only a small number of bases, thus preventing trivial solutions. A fundamental problem when working with sparse representations is how to decide on a function that formally assesses the sparseness of a vector. The L0 pseudo-norm k·k0 : Rn → {0, . . . , n},  Here, k·k1 and k·k2 denote the Manhattan norm and the Euclidean norm, respectively. The normalization has been designed such that σ attains values between zero and one. When x ∈ Rn satisfies σ (x) = 1, then all entries of x but one vanish. Conversely, when σ (x) = 0, then all the entries of x are equal. The function σ interpolates smoothly between these extremes, see Fig. 1. Moreover, it is scale-invariant so that the same sparseness degree is obtained when a vector is multiplied with a nonzero number. Hence if a quantity is given in other units, for example in millivolts instead of volts, no adjustments whatsoever have to be made. The sparseness degree with respect to σ does not change much if a small amount is added to all entries of a vector, whereas the L0 pseudo-norm would indicate that the new vector is completely non-sparse. These properties render Hoyer’s sparseness measure intuitive, especially for nonexperts. It has been employed successfully for dictionary learning (Hoyer 2004; Potluru et al. 2013), and its smoothness results in improved generalization capabilities in classification tasks compared to when the L0 pseudo-norm is used (Thom and Palm 2013).  x 7→ |{ i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | xi 6= 0 }| ,  simply counts the nonzero entries of its argument. It is a poor choice since it is non-continuous, prone to random noise and fails to fulfill desirable properties of meaningful sparseness measures (Hurley and Rickard 2009). Throughout this paper, we will use the smooth, normalized sparseness measure σ proposed by Hoyer (2004): √ n − kxk1/kxk2 n √ σ : R \ { 0 } → [0, 1] , x 7→ . n−1  A common approach to dictionary learning is the minimization of the reproduction error between the original samples from a learning set and their approximations provided by a linear generative model under sparseness constraints (Olshausen and Field 1996, 1997; Kreutz-Delgado et al. 2003; Mairal et al. 2009a). It is beneficial for practitioners and endusers to enforce explicit sparseness constraints by demanding that all the code words h in a generative model possess a target sparseness degree of σH ∈ (0, 1). This leads to optimization problems of the form min kx −W hk22 so that σ (h) = σH . W, h  Here, the objective function is the reproduction error implemented as Euclidean distance. Implicit sparseness constraints, on the other hand, augment the reproduction error with an additive penalty term, yielding optimization problems such as min kx −W hk22 + λ khk1 . W, h  Here, λ > 0 is a trade-off constant and the Manhattan norm is used to penalize non-sparse code words as convex relaxation of the L0 pseudo-norm (Donoho 2006). Trading off the reproduction error against an additive sparseness penalty is non-trivial since the actual resulting code word sparseness cannot easily be predicted. Explicit constraints guarantee that the adjusted sparseness degree is met, making tuning of intransparent scale factors such as λ  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections  in the example above obsolete. This way, one can concentrate on the actual application of the theory rather than having to develop an intuition of the meaning of each and every parameter. The mathematical tool to achieve explicit sparseness is a sparseness-enforcing projection operator. This is a vectorvalued function which maps any given point in Euclidean space to its nearest point that achieves a pre-set target sparseness degree. One use case of this theory is projected gradient methods (Bertsekas 1999), where a given objective function should be optimized subject to hard side conditions. Replacing the parameters with their best approximations lying in a certain set after each update step ensures that the constraints are satisfied during optimization progress.  3  the computation of the projection’s gradient during learning, which is feasible yet difficult to implement and has nonnegligible adverse effects on the execution time. The following approaches consider explicit L0 pseudonorm constraints: Aharon et al. (2006), Skretting and Engan (2010) and Coates and Ng (2011) infer sparse code words in each iteration compatible to the data and dictionary by employing basis pursuit or matching pursuit algorithms, which has a negative impact on the processing time. Zelnik-Manor et al. (2012) consider block-sparse representations, here the signals are assumed to reside in the union of few subspaces. Duarte-Carvajalino and Sapiro (2009) propose to simultaneously learn the dictionary and the sensing matrix from example image data, which results in improved reconstruction results in compressed sensing scenarios.  1.3 Contributions of this Paper and Related Work This paper studies dictionary learning under explicit sparseness constraints with respect to Hoyer’s sparseness measure σ . A major part of this work is devoted to the efficient algorithmic computation of the sparseness-enforcing projection operator, which is an integral part in efficient dictionary learning. Several algorithms were proposed in the past to solve the projection problem (Hoyer 2004; Theis et al. 2005; Potluru et al. 2013; Thom and Palm 2013). Only Thom and Palm (2013) provided a complete and mathematically satisfactory proof of correctness for their algorithm. Moreover, all known algorithms have at least quasi-linear time complexity in the dimensionality of the vector that should be projected. In this paper, we first derive a characterization of the sparseness projection and demonstrate that its computation is equivalent to finding the root of a real-valued auxiliary function, which constitutes a much simpler problem. This result is used in the proposition of an algorithm for the projection operator that is asymptotically optimal in the sense of complexity theory, that is the time complexity is linear and the space complexity is constant in the problem dimensionality. We show through experiments that when run on a real computing machine the newly proposed algorithm is far superior in its computational demands to previously proposed techniques, even for small problem dimensionalities. Existing approaches to dictionary learning that feature explicit sparseness constraints can be categorized into ones that use Hoyer’s σ and ones that employ the L0 pseudonorm. Hoyer (2004) and Potluru et al. (2013) considered matrix factorization frameworks subject to σ constraints, with space requirements linear in the number of learning samples which prevents processing large data sets. Thom and Palm (2013) designed sparse code words as the result of the sparseness-enforcing projection operator applied to the product of the dictionary with the samples. This requires  In addition to the contributions on sparseness projection computation, this paper proposes the Easy Dictionary Learning (EZDL) algorithm. Our technique aims at dictionary learning under explicit sparseness constraints in terms of Hoyer’s sparseness measure σ using a simple, fast-tocompute and biologically plausible Hebbian-like learning rule. For each presented learning sample, the sparsenessenforcing projection operator has to be carried out. The ability to perform projections efficiently makes the proposed learning algorithm particularly efficient: 30 % less training time is required in comparison to the optimized Online Dictionary Learning method of Mairal et al. (2009a). Extensions of Easy Dictionary Learning facilitate alternative representations such as topographic atom organization or atom sparseness, which includes for example separable filters. We furthermore demonstrate the competitiveness of the dictionaries learned with our algorithm with those computed with alternative sophisticated dictionary learning algorithms in terms of reproduction and denoising quality of natural images. Since other tasks, such as deblurring or super-resolution, build upon the same optimization problem in the application phase as reproduction and denoising, it can be expected that EZDL dictionaries will exhibit no performance degradations in those tasks either. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 derives a linear time and constant space algorithm for the computation of sparseness-enforcing projections. In Sect. 3, the Easy Dictionary Learning algorithm for explicitly sparseness-constrained dictionary learning is proposed. Section 4 reports experimental results on the performance of the newly proposed sparseness projection algorithm and the Easy Dictionary Learning algorithm. Section 5 concludes the paper with a discussion, and the appendix contains technical details of the mathematical statements from Sect. 2.  4  2 Efficient Sparseness-Enforcing Projections This section proposes a linear time and constant space algorithm for computation of projections onto level sets of Hoyer’s σ . Formally, if σ ∗ ∈ (0, 1) denotes a target sparseness degree and x ∈ Rn is an arbitrary point, the point from the level set S := { s ∈ Rn | σ (s) = σ ∗ } that minimizes the Euclidean distance to x is sought. The function that computes arg mins∈S kx − sk2 is also called sparseness-enforcing projection operator since the situation where σ (x) < σ ∗ is of particular interest. Due to symmetries of σ , the above described optimization problem can be reduced to finding the projection of a vector x ∈ Rn≥0 with non-negative coordinates onto the set  T := s ∈ Rn≥0 ksk1 = λ1 and ksk2 = λ2 ⊆ S, where λ1 and λ2 are target norms that should be chosen such √ √ that σ ∗ = ( n − λ1/λ2 ) / ( n − 1) (Hoyer 2004; Thom and Palm 2013). With this choice, σ constantly attains the value of σ ∗ on the entire set T , hence T is a subset of S. Thom and Palm (2013) proved that T is the intersection of a scaled canonical simplex and a hypercircle. They further demonstrated that projections onto T can be computed with a finite number of alternating projections onto these two geometric structures. The proof of correctness of this method could not rely on the classical alternating projection method (see for example Deutsch 2001) due to the lacking convexity of T , rendering the proof arguments quite complicated. The remainder of this section proceeds as follows. First, a succinct characterization of the sparseness projection is given. It is then shown that computing sparseness projections is equivalent to finding the zero of a monotone realvalued function. We prove that this can be achieved with optimal asymptotic complexity by proposing a new algorithm that solves the projection problem.  2.1 Representation of the Projection The main theoretical result of this paper is a representation theorem that characterizes the projection onto T . This was gained through an analysis of the intermediate points that emerge from the alternating projections onto a simplex and a hypercircle. A closed-form expression can then be provided by showing that the intermediate points in the projection algorithm satisfy a loop-invariant, a certain property fulfilled after each step of alternating projections. Since a mathematical rigorous treatment of this result is very technical, it is deferred to the appendix. We assume here that the vector x to be projected is given so that its projection is unique. Since it is guaranteed that for all points except for a null set there is exactly one projection (Theis  Thom, Rapp, and Palm  et al. 2005, Theorem 2.6), we can exclude points with nonunique projections in our considerations, which is no restriction in practice. We may now state a characterization of the projection outcome: Representation Theorem Let x ∈ Rn≥0 and let p ∈ T denote the unique projection of x onto T . Then there is exactly one real number α ∗ with p=  λ2 · q where q := max (x − α ∗ · e, 0) ∈ Rn . kqk2  Here, e ∈ { 1 }n is the n-dimensional vector where all entries are unity. If the indices of the positive coordinates of p are known, then α ∗ can be computed directly from x with an explicit expression. In words, the projection p is the point q rescaled to obtain an L2 norm of λ2 . The vector q is computed from the input vector x by subtracting the scalar α ∗ from all the entries, and afterwards setting negative values to zero. It is remarkable that the projection admits such a simple representation although the target set for the projection is non-convex and geometrically quite complicated. The function that maps a scalar ξ ∈ R to max(ξ − t, 0) for a constant offset t ∈ R is called the soft-shrinkage function. If t = 0, it is also called the rectifier function. Because the central element of the projection representation is a soft-shrinkage operation applied entry-wise to the input vector, carrying out projections onto level sets of Hoyer’s sparseness measure can be interpreted as denoising operation (Donoho 1995; Hyvärinen 1999; Elad 2006).  2.2 Auxiliary Function for the Sparseness Projection The projection problem can hence be reduced to determining the soft-shrinkage offset α ∗ , which is a one-dimensional problem on the real line. Further, it is reasonable that α ∗ must be smaller than the maximum entry of x since otherwise q would be the null vector, which is absurd. In the usual case where σ (x) < σ ∗ we can further conclude that α ∗ must be non-negative. Otherwise, the result of the projection using the representation theorem would be less sparse than the input, which is impossible. Therefore, the projection problem can be further reduced to finding a number from the bounded interval [0, xmax ) with xmax := maxi∈{1,...,n} xi . Next, a method for efficiently deciding whether the correct offset has been found is required. Similar to the projection onto a canonical simplex (Liu and Ye 2009), we can design a real-valued function that vanishes exactly at the wanted offset. The properties of Hoyer’s σ allow us to formulate this function in an intuitive way. We call Ψ : [0, xmax ) → R, α 7→  kmax (x − α · e, 0)k1 λ1 − , kmax (x − α · e, 0)k2 λ2  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections 0.50 0.25  Yes σ (x) < σ ∗  0.00 -0.25  No  Increase sparseness?  Receive input vector x and target sparseness σ ∗  Ψ Ψ' Auxiliary Function  5    Set α to middle of interval  Determine interval for α ∗ by finding x2nd-max  Determine neighbors x j and xk of α in x  Evaluate Ψ (α ), Ψ (x j ) and Ψ (xk )  -0.50 xj -0.75 0.0  0.1  0.2  α* xk  0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 Offset of Soft-Shrinkage α  0.9  1.0  Fig. 2 Plot of the auxiliary function Ψ and its derivative for a random vector x. The derivative Ψ 0 was scaled using a positive number for improved visibility. The steps in Ψ 0 are exactly the places where α coincides with an entry of x. It is enough to find an α with Ψ (x j ) ≥ 0 and Ψ (xk ) < 0 for the neighboring entries x j and xk in x, because then the exact solution α ∗ can be computed with a closed-form expression.  the auxiliary function for the projection onto T . The rationale for the concrete definition of Ψ is as follows. Due to the representation theorem we know that the projection p onto T is merely a scaled version of the point q := max (x − α ∗ · e, 0). Moreover σ (p) = σ ∗ , and due to the scale-invariance of Hoyer’s σ follows σ (q) = σ ∗ . The essence of σ is the ratio of the L1 norm to the L2 norm of its argument. Hence here the scale constants that make σ normalized to the interval [0, 1] are omitted and the target norms are used instead. We therefore have that kqk1/kqk2 = λ1/λ2 , and thus Ψ (α ∗ ) = 0. As α ∗ is unique, we can conclude that no other offset of the soft-shrinkage operation leads to a correct solution. In fact, if α 6= α ∗ and when we write q̃ := max (x − α · e, 0), then we have that σ (q̃) 6= σ ∗ and therefore Ψ (α) 6= 0. An exemplary plot of Ψ is depicted in Fig. 2. Clearly, the auxiliary function is continuous, differentiable except for isolated points and strictly decreasing except for its final part where it is constant. Since the constant part is always negative and starts at the offset equal to the second-largest entry x2nd-max := max { xi | i ∈ {1, . . . , n} and xi 6= xmax } of x, the feasible interval can be reduced even more. The step discontinuities in Ψ 0 coincide exactly with the entries of the input vector x. These appealing analytical properties greatly simplify computation of the zero of Ψ , since standard rootfinding algorithms such as bisection or Newton’s method (see for example Traub 1964) can be employed to numerically find α ∗ .  2.3 Linear Time and Constant Space Projection Algorithm We can improve on merely a numerical solution by exploiting the special structure of Ψ to yield an analytical solution to the projection problem. This is due to the closed-form  Update interval using sign of Ψ (α )  No  Sign change?   Yes Ψ (x j ) ≥ 0 and Ψ (xk ) < 0 λ2 · q where Return kqk 2 q := max (x − α ∗ · e, 0)  Determine α ∗ from closed-form expression  Fig. 3 Flowchart of the proposed algorithm for computing sparsenessenforcing projections. The algorithm starts with the box at the upper left and terminates with the box at the lower left.  expression for α ∗ which requires the indices of the coordinates in which the result of the projection is positive to be known. The other way around, when α ∗ is known, these indices are exactly the ones of the coordinates in which x is greater than α ∗ . When an offset sufficiently close to α ∗ can be determined numerically, the appropriate index set can be determined and thus the exact value of α ∗ . The decision if a candidate offset α is close enough to the true α ∗ can be made quite efficiently, since α ∗ is coupled via index sets to individual entries of the input vector x. Hence, it suffices to find the right-most left neighbor x j of α in the entries of x, and analogously the left-most right neighbor xk (see Fig. 2 for an example). Whenever Ψ (x j ) ≥ 0 and Ψ (xk ) < 0, the zero α ∗ of Ψ must be located between x j and xk for continuity reasons. But then all values in x greater than α ∗ are exactly the values greater than or equal to xk , which can be determined by simply scanning through the entries of x. Based upon these considerations, a flowchart of our proposed method for computing sparseness-enforcing projections is depicted in Fig. 3. The algorithm performs bisection and continuously checks for sign changes in the auxiliary function Ψ . As soon as this is fulfilled, α ∗ is computed and the result of the projection is determined in-place. A complete formal presentation and discussion of our proposed algorithm is given in the appendix. Each intermediate step of the algorithm (that is, determination of the second-largest entry of x, evaluation of the auxiliary function, projection result computation by appli-  6  cation of soft-shrinkage and scaling) can be carried out in a time complexity linear in the problem dimensionality n and a space complexity completely independent of n. Therefore, to show the overall algorithm possesses the same asymptotic complexity, it has to be proved that the number of bisection iterations required for finding α ∗ is independent of n. The length of the initial interval is upperbounded by x2nd-max as discussed earlier. Bisection is moreover guaranteed to stop at the latest once the interval length is smaller than the minimum pairwise distance between distinct entries of x,  δ := min xk − x j x j , xk ∈ X and x j < xk > 0 where X := { xi | i ∈ {1, . . . , n} }. This is due to the fact that it is enough to find a sufficiently small range to deduce an analytical solution. The required number of bisection iterations is then less than dlog2 (x2nd-max /δ )e, see Liu and Ye (2009). This number is bounded from above regardless of the dimensionality of the input vector since x2nd-max is upper-bounded and δ is lower-bounded due to finite machine precision (Goldberg 1991). Hence our sparseness-enforcing projection algorithm is asymptotically optimal in the sense of complexity theory. There may still be hidden constants in the asymptotic notation that render the proposed algorithm less efficient than previously known algorithms for a small input dimensionality. Experiments in Sect. 4 demonstrate that this is not the case.  3 Explicitly Sparseness-Constrained Dictionary Learning This section proposes the Easy Dictionary Learning (EZDL) algorithm for dictionary learning under explicit sparseness constraints. First, we introduce an ordinary formulation of the learning algorithm. Sparse code word inference with the sparseness projection algorithm proposed in Sect. 2 renders EZDL efficient and particularly simple to implement. We further discuss extensions that allow concentrating on different aspects of the data set under investigation, such as topographic organization of the atoms and atom sparseness. Only little implementation effort is required for these extensions and their computational demands are low. A description of the comprehensive EZDL learning algorithm is accompanied with several strategies that improve the optimization performance.  Thom, Rapp, and Palm  costly optimization procedure before updating the dictionary. EZDL learns a dictionary by first yielding sparse code words through simple inference models and then tuning the dictionary with a simple update step. An inference model is a function I : Rn → Rn which accepts filter responses in the form of the product of the dictionary W ∈ Rd×n with a learning sample x ∈ Rd , u := W T x ∈ Rn , and produces a representation h := I(u) with certain desirable properties. Here, the combination with the sparseness-enforcing projection operator is particularly interesting since it provides a natural method to fulfill explicit sparseness constraints. We call the choice I(u) := ΠσH (u) the ordinary inference model, where ΠσH denotes the Euclidean projection onto the set of all vectors that achieve a sparseness degree of σH ∈ (0, 1) with respect to Hoyer’s sparseness measure σ . This computation can also be interpreted as the trivial first iteration of a projected Landweber procedure for sparse code word inference (Bredies and Lorenz 2008). The dictionary W is adapted to new data by minimizing the deviation between a learning sample x and its approximation W h through the linear generative model. The goodness of the approximation is here assessed with a differentiable similarity measure ρ : Rd × Rd → R, so that the EZDL optimization problem becomes: min ρ(W h, x). W  Note that h is not a variable of the optimization problem since it is defined as output of an inference model. For the same reason, h does not need to be constrained further as it inherently satisfies explicit sparseness constraints. Although a wide range of similarity measures is possible, we decided to use the (Pearson product-moment) correlation coefficient since it is invariant to affine-linear transformations (Rodgers and Nicewander 1988). In the context of visual data set analysis, this corresponds to invariance with respect to DC components and gain factors. Moreover, differentiability of this similarity measure facilitates gradientbased learning (Thom and Palm 2013). If ρ 0 : Rd × Rd → Rd is the transposed derivative of ρ with respect to its first argument and g := ρ 0 (W h, x) ∈ Rd denotes its value in W h, the gradient of EEZDL for the dictionary is given by   ∂ EEZDL T = ghT ∈ Rd×n . ∂W Therefore, when W is tuned with gradient descent a simple and biologically plausible Hebbian-like learning rule (Hyvärinen et al. 2009) results:  3.1 EZDL—Easy Dictionary Learning  W new := W − η · ghT , where η > 0 denotes the step size.  Conventional dictionary learning algorithms operate in an alternating fashion, where code words are inferred with a  This update step can be implemented efficiently with simple rank-1 updates (Blackford et al. 2002).  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections  We here assumed h = I(W T x) to be constant and neglected that it actually depends on W . Without this assumption, the gradient would have to be extended with an additive term which comprises the gradient of the inference model (Thom and Palm 2013, Proposition 39). This, in turn, requires the computation of the sparseness-enforcing projection operator’s gradient. This gradient can be computed with simple vector operations as we show in the appendix. However, this constitutes a significant computational burden compared to the simple and fast-to-compute EZDL update step. Section 4 demonstrates through experiments that this simplification is still perfectly capable of learning dictionaries. 3.2 Topographic Atom Organization and Atom Sparseness Topographic organization of the dictionary’s atoms similar to Self-organizing Maps (Kohonen 1990) or Topographic Independent Component Analysis (Hyvärinen et al. 2001) can be achieved in a straightforward way with EZDL using alternative inference models proposed in this section. For this, the dictionary atoms are interpreted to be arranged on a two-dimensional grid. A spatial pooling operator subject to circular boundary conditions can then be used to incorporate interactions between atoms located adjacent on the grid. This can, for example, be realized by averaging each entry of the filter responses in a 3 × 3 neighborhood on the grid. This convolution operation can be expressed as linear operator applied to the vector u ∈ Rn , represented by a sparsely populated matrix G ∈ Rn×n . With G containing all atom interactions, we call I(u) := ΠσH (Gu) the topographic inference model. An alternative realization of topographic organization is enforcing structure sparseness on the filter responses reshaped as matrix to account for the grid layout. Structure sparseness can be assessed by application of a sparseness measure to the vector with the singular values of a matrix. When the L0 pseudo-norm is used, then this is the rank of a matrix. The matrix rank can also be measured more robustly through the ratio of the Schatten 1-norm to the Schatten 2norm, which is essentially Hoyer’s sparseness measure σ applied to the singular values (Lopes 2013). Clearly, any matrix M ∈ Ra×b where a, b ∈ N can be reshaped to a vector m := vec(M) ∈ Rab with the vectorization operator that stacks all columns of M on top of another (Neudecker 1969). This linear operation can be inverted provided the shape of the original matrix is known, ∗ M = vec−1 a×b (m). In the following, let Πκ denote the projection onto the set of all matrices that possess a target rank κ ∗ ∈ {1, . . . , min { a, b }}. A classical result states that any matrix can be projected onto the set of low-rank matrices by computation of its Singular Value Decomposition, applying an L0 pseudo-norm projection to the vector of singular  7  values thus retaining only the largest ones, and finally computing the reconstruction using the modified singular values (Eckart and Young 1936). Based on these considerations, let r and c with n = rc be natural numbers describing the topographic grid layout dimensionalities. The rank-κH topographic inference model is then defined by the composition  I(u) := vec ◦ΠκH ◦ vec−1 r×c ◦ΠσH (u). In words, this inference model operates as follows. It first approximates the filter responses u with a sparsely populated vector that attains a sparseness of σH with respect to Hoyer’s σ . These sparsified filter responses are then laid out on a grid and replaced with those best approximating filter responses that meet a lower rank of κH ∈ {1, . . . , min { r, c }}. Finally, the grid layout is reshaped to a vector since this should be the output type of each inference model. If κH = 1, then there are two vectors y ∈ Rr and z ∈ Rc T such that vec−1 r×c (I(u)) = yz , that is the filter responses can be expressed as a dyadic product when reshaped to a grid. We will demonstrate with experiments that this results in an interesting topographic atom organization similar to Independent Subspace Analysis (Hyvärinen and Hoyer 2000). Analogous to Non-negative Matrix Factorization with Sparseness Constraints (Hoyer 2004), the atoms can be enforced to be sparse as well. To achieve this, it is sufficient to apply the sparseness projection to each column of the dictionary after each learning epoch: W new ei := ΠσW (Wei ) for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, where ei ∈ Rn is the i-th canonical basis vector that selects the i-th column from W , and σW ∈ (0, 1) is the target degree of atom sparseness. In the situation where the learning samples resemble image patches, the atoms can also be restricted to fulfill structure sparseness using a low-rank approximation. Suppose the image patches possess ph × pw pixels, then the following projection can be carried out after each learning epoch:  W new ei := vec ◦ΠκW ◦ vec−1 ph ×pw (Wei ) for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Here, κW ∈ {1, . . . , min { ph , pw }} denotes the target rank of each atom when reshaped to ph × pw pixels. When the dictionary is used to process images through convolution, small values of κW are beneficial since computations can then be speeded up considerably. For example, if κW = 1 each atom can be expressed as outer product of vectors from R ph and R pw , respectively. The convolutional kernel is separable in this case, and two one-dimensional convolutions lead to the same result as one two-dimensional convolution, but require only a fraction of operations (Hoggar 2006).  8  3.3 Learning Algorithm In the previous sections, a simple Hebbian-like learning rule was derived which depends on abstract inference models. The core of the inference models is the sparseness-enforcing projection operator discussed in Sect. 2, which guarantees that the code words always attain a sparseness degree easily controllable by the user. On presentation of a learning sample x, an update step of the dictionary W hence consists of (a) determining the filter responses (u := W T x), (b) feeding the filter responses through the inference model involving a sparseness projection (h := I(u)), (c) computation of the approximation to the original learning sample (W h) using the linear generative model, (d) assessing the similarity between the input sample and its approximation (ρ(W h, x)) and the similarity measure’s gradient (g := ρ 0 (W h, x)), and eventually (e) adapting the current dictionary using a rank-1 update (W new := W − η · ghT ). All these intermediate steps can be carried out efficiently. The sparseness projection can be computed using few resources, and neither its gradient nor the gradient of the entire inference model is required. After each learning epoch it is possible to impose additional constraints on the atoms with atom-wise projections. In doing so, several aspects of the data set structure can be made more explicit since the atoms are then forced to become more simple feature detectors. An example of an individual learning epoch is given in Algorithm 1, where the topographic inference model and low-rank structure sparseness are used. In addition, the explicit expressions for the correlation coefficient and its gradient are given (Thom and Palm 2013, Proposition 40). The outcome of this parameterization applied to patches from natural images is depicted in Fig. 9b and will be discussed in Sect. 4.2.3. The efficiency of the learning algorithm can be improved with simple modifications described in the following. To reduce the learning time compared to when a randomly initialized dictionary was used, the dictionary should be initialized by samples randomly chosen from the learning set (Mairal et al. 2009a; Skretting and Engan 2010; Coates and Ng 2011; Thom and Palm 2013). When large learning sets with millions of samples are available, stochastic gradient descent has been proven to result in significantly faster optimization progress compared to when the degrees of freedom are updated only once for each learning epoch (Wilson and Martinez 2003; Bottou and LeCun 2004). The step size schedule η(ν) := η0/ν , where η0 > 0 denotes the initial step size and ν ∈ N \ { 0 } is the learning epoch counter, is beneficial when the true gradient is not available but rather an erroneous estimate (Bertsekas 1999). After each learning epoch, all the atoms of the dictionary are normalized to  Thom, Rapp, and Palm Algorithm 1 One epoch of the Easy Dictionary Learning algorithm, illustrated for the case of a topographic inference model and low-rank structure sparseness. Input: The algorithm accepts the following parameters: – An existing dictionary W ∈ Rd×n with n atoms. – Random access to a learning set with samples from Rd through a function "pick_sample". – Step size for update steps η ∈ R>0 . – Number of samples to be presented Mepoch ∈ N. – For the topographic inference model: – Target degree of dictionary sparseness σH ∈ (0, 1). – Topography matrix G ∈ Rn×n describing the interaction between adjacent atoms. – To obtain low-rank structure sparseness: – Number of pixels ph × pw so that d = ph pw . – Target rank κW ∈ {1, . . . , min { ph , pw }}. Output: Updated dictionary W ∈ Rd×n . 1  2  3 4  5  // Present samples and adapt dictionary. repeat Mepoch times // Pick a random sample. x := pick_sample() ∈ Rd ; // (a) Compute filter responses. u := W T x ∈ Rn ; // (b) Evaluate topographic inference model. h := ΠσH (Gu) ∈ Rn ; // (c) Compute approximation to x. x̃ := W h ∈ Rd ; // (d) Compute correlation coefficient ρx̃, x := ρ(W h, x) and its gradient g. Here, e ∈ { 1 }d is the all-ones vector. 2 λ := kx̃k22 − 1/d · eT x̃ ∈ R; 2 µ := kxk22 − 1/d · eT x ∈ R;   p ρx̃, x := x̃T x − 1/d · eT x̃ eT x / λ µ ∈ R;   ρ g := √1 x − eT x/d · e − λx̃, x x̃ − eT x̃/d · e ∈ Rd ;  6 7 8 9  λµ  // (e) Adapt dictionary with rank-1 update. W := W − η · ghT ∈ Rd×n ;  10 11  12  13  14  15 16  end // Atom-wise projection for low-rank filters. for i := 1 to n do // Extract i-th atom and normalize. w := Wei/kWei k2 ∈ Rd ; // Ensure atom has rank κW when reshaped to ph × pw pixels.  d w := vec ◦ΠκW ◦ vec−1 ph ×pw (w) ∈ R ; // Store modified atom back in dictionary. Wei := w; end  unit scale. Since the learning rule is Hebbian-like, this prevents the atoms from growing arbitrarily large or becoming arbitrarily small (Hyvärinen et al. 2009). This normalization step is also common in a multitude of alternative dictionary learning algorithms (Kreutz-Delgado et al. 2003; Hoyer 2004; Mairal et al. 2009a; Skretting and Engan 2010). Since the dictionary is modified with a rank-1 update where one of the factors is the result of an inference model and hence sparse, only the atoms that induce significant fil-  ter responses are updated. This may result in atoms that are never updated when the target sparseness degree σH is large. This behavior can be alleviated by adding random noise to the inference model’s output prior to updating the dictionary, which forces all the atoms to be updated. We used random numbers sampled from a zero-mean normal distribution, where the standard deviation was multiplicatively annealed after each learning epoch. As optimization proceeds, the atoms are well-distributed in sample space such that the lifetime sparseness is approximately equal to the population sparseness (Willmore and Tolhurst 2001), and randomness is not needed anymore. 4 Experimental Results This section reports experimental results on the techniques proposed in this paper. We first evaluate alternative solvers for the sparseness projection’s auxiliary function and show that our algorithm for the sparseness-enforcing projection operator is significantly faster than previously known methods. We then turn to the application of the projection in the Easy Dictionary Learning algorithm. First, the morphology of dictionaries learned on natural image patches is analyzed and put in context with previous methods. We further show that the resulting dictionaries are well-suited for the reproduction of entire images. They achieve a reproduction quality equivalent to dictionaries trained with alternative, significantly slower algorithms. Eventually, we analyze the performance of the dictionaries when employed for the image denoising task and find that, analogous to the reproduction experiments, no performance degradation can be observed. 4.1 Performance of Sparseness-Enforcing Projections Our proposed algorithm for sparseness projections was implemented as C++ program using the GNU Scientific Library (Galassi et al. 2009). We first analyzed whether solvers other than bisection for locating the zero of the auxiliary function would result in an improved performance. Since Ψ is differentiable except for isolated points and its derivatives can be computed quite efficiently, Newton’s method and Halley’s method are straightforward to apply. We further verified whether Newton’s method applied to a slightly transformed variant of the auxiliary function, Ψ̃ : [0, xmax ) → R, α 7→  kmax (x − α · e, 0)k21 kmax (x − α · e, 0)k22  −  λ12 , λ22  where the minuend and the subtrahend were squared, would behave more efficiently. The methods based on derivatives were additionally safeguarded with bisection to guarantee new positions are always located within well-defined intervals (Press et al. 2007). This impairs the theoretical property  9  Number of Function Evaluations  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections 35 Bisection Newton on Ψ Halley on Ψ Newton on Ψ̃  30 25 20 15 10 5 0 2  4  6  8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 log2(Dimensionality)  Fig. 4 Number of auxiliary function evaluations needed to find the final interval for the projection onto T using four different solvers. The error bars indicate ±1 standard deviation distance from the mean value. Since Newton’s method applied to Ψ̃ is consistently outperforming the other solvers, it is the method of choice for all practical applications.  that only a constant number of steps is required to find a solution, but in practice a significantly smaller number of steps needs to be made compared to plain bisection. To evaluate which solver would provide maximum efficiency in practical scenarios, one thousand random vectors for each problem dimensionality n ∈ {22 , . . . , 230 } were sampled and the corresponding sparseness-enforcing projections for σ ∗ := 0.90 were computed using all four solvers. We have used the very same random vectors as input for all solvers, and counted the number of times the auxiliary function needed to be evaluated until the solution was found. The results of this experiment are depicted in Fig. 4. The number of function evaluations required by plain bisection grew about linearly in log(n). Because the expected minimum difference of two distinct entries from a random vector gets smaller when the dimensionality of the random vector is increased, the expected number of function evaluations bisection needs increases with problem dimensionality. In either case, the length of the interval that has to be found is always bounded from below by the machine precision such that the number of function evaluations with bisection is bounded from above regardless of n. The solvers based on the derivative of Ψ or Ψ̃ , respectively, always required less function evaluations than bisection. They exhibited a growth clearly sublinear in log(n). For n = 230 ≈ 109 , Newton’s method required 11 function evaluations in the mean, Halley’s method needed 9 iterations, and Newton’s method applied to Ψ̃ found the solution in only 4.5 iterations. Therefore, in practice always the latter solver should be employed. In another experiment, the time competing algorithms require for computing sparseness projections on a real computing machine was measured for a comparison. For this, the algorithms proposed by Hoyer (2004), Potluru et al. (2013), and Thom and Palm (2013) were implemented using the  10  Thom, Rapp, and Palm  Speed-up over Hoyer (2004)  17 This Paper Potluru et al. (2013) Thom and Palm (2013)  15 13 11 9 7 5 3 1 2  4  6  8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 log2(Dimensionality)  Fig. 5 Speed-ups relative to the original algorithm of Hoyer (2004) obtained using alternative algorithms. The linear time algorithm proposed in this paper is far superior in terms of execution time. The time complexity of the competing methods is at least quasi-linear, which becomes noticeable especially for large problem dimensionalities.  GNU Scientific Library (Galassi et al. 2009) by means of C++ programs. An Intel Core i7-4960X processor was used and all algorithms were run in a single-threaded environment. Random vectors were sampled for each problem dimensionality n ∈ {22 , . . . , 230 } and initially projected to attain a sparseness of 0.50 with respect to Hoyer’s σ . This initial projection better reflects the situation in practice where not completely random vectors have to be processed. Next, all four algorithms were used to compute projections with a target sparseness degree of σ ∗ := 0.90 and their run time was measured. The original algorithm of Hoyer (2004) was the slowest, so by taking the ratio of the run times of the other algorithms to the run time of that slowest algorithm the relative speed-up was obtained. Figure 5 visualizes the results of this experiment. For all tested problem dimensionalities, the here proposed linear time algorithm dominated all previously described methods. While the speed-up of the algorithms of Potluru et al. (2013) and Thom and Palm (2013) relative to the original algorithm of Hoyer (2004) were already significant, especially for small to medium dimensionalities, they got relatively slow for very large vectors. This is not surprising, because both methods start with sorting the input vector and have to store that permutation to be undone in the end. The algorithm proposed in this paper is based on rootfinding of a monotone function and requires no sorting. Only the left and right neighbors of a scalar in a vector have to be found. This can be achieved by scanning linearly through the input vector, which is particularly efficient when huge vectors have to be processed. For n = 230 , the proposed algorithm was more than 15 times faster than the methods of Hoyer (2004), Potluru et al. (2013) and Thom and Palm (2013). Because of this appealing asymptotic behavior, there is now no further obstacle to applying smooth sparseness methods to large-scale problems.  4.2 Data Set Analysis with EZDL We used the Easy Dictionary Learning algorithm as a data analysis tool to visualize the structure of patches from natural images under different aspects, which facilitates qualitative statements on the algorithm performance. For our experiments, we used the McGill calibrated color image database (Olmos and Kingdom 2004), where the images had either 768 × 576 pixels or 576 × 768 pixels. The images were desaturated (SMPTE RP 177-1993, Annex B.4) and quantized to 8-bit precision. We extracted 10 000 patches with 16 × 16 pixels from each of the 314 images of the "Foliage" collection. The patches were extracted at random positions. Patches with vanishing variance were omitted since they carry no information. In total, we obtained 3.1 million samples for learning. We learned dictionaries on the raw pixel values of this learning set and on whitened image patches. The learning samples were normalized to zero mean and unit variance as the only pre-processing for the raw pixel experiments. The whitened data was obtained using the canonical preprocessing from Section 5.4 of Hyvärinen et al. (2009) with 128 principal components. EZDL was applied using each proposed combination of inference model and atom constraints. We presented 30 000 randomly selected learning samples in each of one thousand epochs, which corresponds to about ten sweeps through the entire learning set. The initial step size was set to η0 := 1. A noisy version of the final dictionary could already be observed after the first epoch, demonstrating the effectiveness of EZDL for quick analysis. Since the optimization procedure is probabilistic in the initialization and selection of training samples, we repeated the training five times for each parameter set. We observed only minor variations between the five dictionaries for each parameter set. In the following, we present details of dictionaries optimized on raw pixel values and analyze their filter characteristics. Then, we consider dictionaries learned with whitened data and dictionaries with separable atoms trained on raw pixel values and discuss the underlying reasons for their special morphology. 4.2.1 Raw Pixel Values Using the ordinary inference model, we trained two-times overcomplete dictionaries with n := 256 atoms on the normalized pixel values, where the dictionary sparseness degree was varied between 0.700 and 0.999. This resulted in the familiar appearance of dictionaries with Gabor-like filters, which resemble the optimal stimulus of visual neurons (Olshausen and Field 1996, 1997). While for small values of σH the filters were mostly small and sharply bounded, high sparseness resulted in holistic and blurry filters.  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections  11  Spatial Frequency Envelope Width x' Envelope Width y'  2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.70  σH = 0.75  30 Relative Frequency [%]  Value of Gabor Parameter  3.0 25  25  20  20  15  15  10  10  5  5  0 0.75  0.80 0.85 0.90 Dictionary Sparseness σH  0.95  1.00  σH = 0.99  30  0 0  π/4  π/2  Spatial Phase [rad]  0  π/4  π/2  Spatial Phase [rad]  Fig. 6 Mean values of three influential parameters of Gabor functions fitted to the atoms of the dictionaries learned with EZDL, in dependence on the target degree of dictionary sparseness σH . An increase in sparseness results in filters with a reduced spatial frequency, but with a significant increase in the width of the Gaussian envelope.  Fig. 7 Histograms of the spatial phase of fitted Gabor functions for σH = 0.75 (left) and σH = 0.99 (right). Low sparseness yields dictionaries where odd-symmetric filters dominate, whereas high dictionary sparseness results in a significant amount of both even-symmetric and odd-symmetric filters.  We used the methods developed by Jones and Palmer (1987) and Ringach (2002) for a more detailed analysis. In doing so, a two-dimensional Gabor function as defined in Equation (1) of Ringach (2002), that is a Gaussian envelope multiplied with a cosine carrier wave, was fit to each dictionary atom using the algorithm of Nelder and Mead (1965). We verified that these Gabor fits accurately described the atoms, which confirmed the Gabor-like nature of the filters. The differences in the dictionaries due to varying sparseness degrees became apparent through analysis of the parameters of the fitted Gabor functions. Figure 6 shows the mean values of three influential Gabor parameters in dependence on σH . All parameters change continuously and monotonically with increasing sparseness. The spatial frequency, a factor in the cosine wave of the Gabor function, constantly decreases for increasing dictionary sparseness. The width of the Gaussian envelope, here broken down into the standard deviation in both principal orientations x0 and y0 , is monotonically increasing. The envelope width in y0 direction increases earlier, but in the end the envelope width in x0 direction is larger. It can be concluded that more sparse code words result in filters with lower frequency but larger envelope. Since an increased sparseness reduces the model’s effective number of degrees of freedom, it prevents the constrained dictionaries from adapting precisely to the learning data. Similar to Principal Component Analysis, low-frequency atoms here minimize the reproduction error best when only very few effective atoms are allowed (Hyvärinen et al. 2009; Olshausen and Field 1996). Histograms of the spatial phase of the filters, an additive term in the cosine wave of the Gabor function, are depicted in Fig. 7. For σH = 0.75, there is a peak at π/2 which corresponds to odd-symmetric filters (Ringach 2002). The distribution is clearly bimodal for σH = 0.99, with peaks at 0 and  π/2 corresponding to even-symmetric and odd-symmetric fil-  ters, respectively. While the case of small σH matches the result of ordinary sparse coding, the higher dictionary sparseness results in filters with the same characteristics as the optimal stimulus of macaque visual neurons (Ringach 2002). This analysis proves that EZDL’s minimalistic learning rule is capable of generating biologically plausible dictionaries, which constitute a particularly efficient image coding scheme. To obtain dictionaries with diverse characteristics, it is enough to adjust the target degree of dictionary sparseness on a normalized scale. A major component in the learning algorithm is the sparseness projection, enforcing local competition among the atoms (Rozell et al. 2008) due to its absolute order-preservation property (Thom and Palm 2013, Lemma 12). 4.2.2 Whitened Image Patches Whitening as a pre-processing step helps to reduce sampling artifacts and decorrelates the input data (Hyvärinen et al. 2009). It also changes the intuition of the similarity measure in EZDL’s objective function, linear features rather than single pixels are considered where each feature captures a multitude of pixels in the raw patches. This results in differences in the filter structure, particularly in the emergence of more low-frequency filters. The dictionary depicted in Fig. 8a was learned using the topographic inference model with average-pooling of 3 × 3 neighborhoods. We set the dictionary sparseness degree to σH := 0.85 and the number of atoms to n := 256, arranged on a 16 × 16 grid. The dictionary closely resembles those gained through Topographic Independent Component Analysis (Hyvärinen et al. 2001, 2009) and Invariant Predictive Sparse Decomposition (Kavukcuoglu et al. 2009). It should be noted that here the representation is two times overcom-  12  Thom, Rapp, and Palm  plete due to the whitening procedure. Overcomplete representations are not inherently possible with plain Independent Component Analysis (Bell and Sejnowski 1997; Hyvärinen et al. 2009) which limits its expressiveness, a restriction that does not hold for EZDL. The emergence of topographic organization can be explained by the special design of the topographic inference model. The pooling operator acts as spatial low-pass filter on the filter responses, so that each smoothed filter response carries information on the neighboring filter responses. Filter response locality is retained after the sparseness projection, hence adjacent atoms receive similar updates with the Hebbian-like learning rule. Hence, there are only small differences between filters within the same vicinity. The learning process is similar to that of Self-organizing Maps (Kohonen 1990), where only the atom with the maximum filter response and the atoms in its direct surrounding are updated. However, EZDL simultaneously updates multiple clusters since the sparse code words laid out on the grid are multimodal.  (a) Topographic inference model.  Further, it is notable that we achieved a topographic organization merely through a linear operator G by simple average-pooling. This stands in contrast to the discussion from Bauer and Memisevic (2013) where the necessity of a nonlinearity such as multiplicative interaction or pooling with respect to the Euclidean norm was assumed. Our result that a simple linear operator plugged into the ordinary inference model already produces smooth topographies proves that linear interactions between the atoms are sufficient despite their minimality. Figure 8b shows a dictionary obtained with the rank-1 topographic inference model, using a sparseness degree of σH := 0.85 and n := 256 filters on a 16 × 16 grid. Here, the sparse code words reshaped to a matrix are required to have unit rank which results in a specially organized filter layout. For example, rows three and four almost exclusively contain low-frequency filters, and the filters in the sixth column are all oriented vertically. The grouping of similar atoms into the same rows and columns is related to Independent Subspace Analysis, which yields groups of Gabor-like filters where all filters in a group have approximately the same frequency and orientation (Hyvärinen and Hoyer 2000). The rank-1 topographic inference model guarantees that code words can be expressed as the dyadic product of two vectors, where the factors themselves are sparsely populated because the code words are sparse. This causes the code words to possess a sparse rectangular structure when reshaped to account for the grid layout, that is non-vanishing activity is always concentrated in a few rows and columns. The Hebbian-like learning rule therefore induces similar updates to atoms located in common rows or columns, which explains the obtained group layout.  (b) Rank-1 topographic inference model. Fig. 8 Two times overcomplete dictionaries trained with EZDL on whitened natural image patches.  4.2.3 Rank-1 Filters on Raw Pixel Values Enforcing the filters themselves to have rank one by setting κW := 1 resulted in bases similar to Discrete Cosine Transform (Watson 1994). This was also observed recently by Hawe et al. (2013) who considered a tensor decomposition of the dictionary, and by Rigamonti et al. (2013) who minimized the Schatten 1-norm of the atoms. Note that EZDL merely replaces the atoms after each learning epoch by their best rank-1 approximation. The computational complexity of this operation is negligible compared to an individual learning epoch using tens of thousands of samples and hence does not slow down the actual optimization. If no ordering between the filters was demanded, a multitude of checkerboard-like filters and vertical and horizontal contrast bars was obtained, see Fig. 9a for a dictionary with  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections  (a) Ordinary inference model.  13  oms to be distant from each other. In the space of rank-1 filters, there can be either vertical or horizontal structures, or checkerboards combining both principal orientations. The lack of fine details can be explained by the restriction of topographic organization, which reduces the effective number of degrees of freedom. Analogously to the situation in Sect. 4.2.1 where the dictionary sparseness was increased, the reproduction error can be reduced by a large amount using few filters with low frequencies. For the same reason, there are few such checkerboard-like filters: Minimization of the reproduction error is first achieved with principal orientations before checkerboards can be used to encode details in the image patches. In conclusion, these results show that the variety of the dictionaries produced by EZDL can be vast simply by adapting easily interpretable parameters. The algorithm covers and reproduces well-known phenomena from the literature, and allows a precise visualization of a data set’s structure. A first impression of the final dictionaries can already be obtained after one learning epoch, which takes no more than one second on a modern computer.  4.3 Experiments on the Reproduction of Entire Images  (b) Topographic inference model. Fig. 9 Dictionaries trained with EZDL on raw pixels, the atoms were replaced by their best rank-1 approximation after each epoch.  n := 256 atoms and a sparseness degree of σH := 0.85. Atoms with diagonal structure cannot be present at all in such constrained dictionaries because diagonality requires a filter rank greater than one. Although all filters were paraxial due to the rank-1 constraint, they still resembled contrast fields because of their grating-like appearance. This is due to the representation’s sparseness, which is known to induce this appearance. A similar filter morphology was obtained with a topographic filter ordering using a 16 × 16 grid, though the filters were blurrier, as shown in Fig. 9b. Here, checkerboard-like filters are located in clusters, and filters with vertical and horizontal orientation are spatially adjacent. This is as expected, because with a sparse topography there are only a few local blobs of active entries in each code word, causing similar atoms to be grouped together and dissimilar at-  It was demonstrated in Sect. 4.2 that the Easy Dictionary Learning algorithm produces dictionaries that correspond to efficient image coding schemes. We now analyze the suitability of EZDL dictionaries trained on raw pixel values for the reproduction of entire images. This is a prerequisite for several image processing tasks such as image enhancement and compression, since here essentially the same optimization problem should be solved as during reproduction with a given dictionary. Our analysis allows quantitative statements as the original images and their reproduction through sparse coding can be numerically compared on the signal level. Further, the EZDL dictionaries are compared with the results of the Online Dictionary Learning algorithm by Mairal et al. (2009a) and the Recursive Least Squares Dictionary Learning Algorithm by Skretting and Engan (2010) in terms of reproduction quality and learning speed. The evaluation methodology was as follows. First, dictionaries with different parameter sets were trained on 3.1 million 8 × 8 pixels natural image patches extracted from the "Foliage" collection of the McGill calibrated color image database (Olmos and Kingdom 2004). As in Sect. 4.2, 10 000 patches were picked from random positions from each of the desaturated and quantized images. All patches were normalized to zero mean and unit variance before training. The dictionaries were designed for a four times overcomplete representation, they had n := 256 atoms for samples with 64 pixels. After training, dictionary quality was  Thom, Rapp, and Palm  1.00  Mean SSIM on Evaluation Images  Mean SSIM on Evaluation Images  14  0.98 0.96 0.94 0.92 σH = 0.75, σI = 0.75 σH = 0.85, σI = 0.75 σH = 0.85, σI = 0.85 σH = 0.75, σI = 0.85  0.90 0.88 0.86 1  10 Number of Landweber Iterations  100  1.00 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.5  σH = 0.75 σH = 0.85 σH = 0.95 σH = 0.99 0.6  0.7 0.8 Inference Sparseness σI  0.9  1.0  (a) Reproduction quality in dependence on the number of Landweber (b) Achieved reproduction quality in dependence on the inference iterations carried out for inference. The four curves show different com- sparseness σI for four different dictionary sparseness degrees σH . Large binations of dictionary sparseness σH and inference sparseness σI . values of σH yield the best performance for large σI . Fig. 10 Results on the reproduction of entire images using Easy Dictionary Learning dictionaries. (a) While one Landweber iteration suffices for learning, better reproduction performance is yielded if the Landweber procedure is run until convergence. (b) The relation between the dictionary sparseness σH and the inference sparseness σI is influential. Hardly any information loss can be observed for σI < σH , while the case σI > σH shows dictionaries should be trained for very sparse code words when demanding such a sparseness for reproduction.  measured using the 98 images of the "Flowers" collection from the same image database. This evaluation set was disjoint from the learning set. Each single image was subsequently divided into nonoverlapping blocks with 8 × 8 pixels. All blocks were normalized to zero mean and unit variance, and then the optimized dictionaries were used to infer a sparse code word for each block. The resulting code word was then fed through a linear generative model using the currently investigated dictionary, and the mean value and variance were restored to match that of the original block. Sparse code word inference was achieved with a projected Landweber procedure (Bredies and Lorenz 2008), essentially the same as projected gradient descent starting with the null vector. Using the sparseness-enforcing projection operator after each iteration, the code words were tuned to attain an inference sparseness σI , which need not necessarily be equal to the sparseness degree used for dictionary learning. The correlation coefficient was used as the similarity measure for inference to benefit from invariance to shifting and scaling. Automatic step size control was carried out with the bold driver heuristic (Bishop 1995). We note that due to the representation theorem on the sparseness projection this process can also be understood as Iterative SoftThresholding (Bredies and Lorenz 2008). A reproduced image is yielded by applying this procedure to all distinct blocks of the original image using a single dictionary. The deviation between this output image and the original image was assessed with the SSIM index (Wang and Bovik 2009), which yielded qualitatively similar results as the peak signal-to-noise ratio. The SSIM index is, however, normalized to values between zero and one, and  it respects the local structure of images since it examines 11 × 11 pixels neighborhoods through convolution. Because it measures the visual similarity between images, it is more intuitive than measures based on the pixel-wise squared error (Wang and Bovik 2009). This evaluation method yielded one number from the interval [0, 1] for each image and dictionary. Each parameterization for dictionary learning was used to train five dictionaries to compensate probabilistic effects, and here the mean of the resulting 490 SSIMs is reported. 4.3.1 EZDL Results Figure 10 visualizes the results obtained for dictionaries produced by Easy Dictionary Learning using dictionary sparseness degrees σH ∈ { 0.75, 0.85, 0.95, 0.99 }. One thousand learning epochs were carried out, presenting 30 000 samples in each epoch, and using an initial step size of η0 := 1. During dictionary learning, only the first trivial iteration of a Landweber procedure is carried out for sparse code word inference by computing h := ΠσH (W T x) for the ordinary inference model. We first analyzed the impact of carrying out more Landweber iterations during the image reproduction phase, and the effect of varying the inference sparseness degree σI . A huge performance increase can be obtained by using more than one iteration for inference (Fig. 10a). Almost the optimal performance is achieved after ten iterations, and after one hundred iterations the method has converged. For σI = 0.75, the performance of dictionaries with σH = 0.75 and σH = 0.85 is about equal yielding the maximum SSIM of one. This value indicates that there is no visual difference between the reproduced images and the original images.  1.00 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.5  λ = 0.50 λ = 1.00 λ = 1.50 λ = 2.00 0.6  15  Mean SSIM on Evaluation Images  Mean SSIM on Evaluation Images  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections  0.7 0.8 Inference Sparseness σI  0.9  1.0  1.00 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.5  ζ = 32 ζ = 16 ζ=8 ζ=4 0.6  0.7 0.8 Inference Sparseness σI  0.9  1.0  (a) Results of the Online Dictionary Learning (ODL) algorithm by (b) Results of the Recursive Least Squares Dictionary Learning AlgoMairal et al. (2009a), where λ trades off between sparseness and re- rithm (RLS-DLA) by Skretting and Engan (2010). Here, ζ denotes the production capabilities in a model with implicit sparseness constraints. target L0 pseudo-norm of the code words for inference. Fig. 11 Experimental results on image reproduction where alternative dictionary learning algorithms were used. The dictionaries behave similarly to Easy Dictionary Learning dictionaries if the dictionary sparseness parameter and the inference sparseness are varied.  When the inference sparseness σI is increased to 0.85, a difference in the choice of the dictionary sparseness σH becomes noticeable. For σH = 0.85, performance already degrades, and the degradation is substantial if σH = 0.75. It is more intuitive when σH and σI are put in relation. Almost no information is lost in the reproduction by enforcing a lower inference sparseness than dictionary sparseness (σI < σH ). Performance is worse if σI > σH which is plausible because the dictionary was not adapted for a higher sparseness degree. In the natural case σI = σH the performance mainly depends on their concrete value, where higher sparseness results in worse reproduction capabilities. To further investigate this behavior, we set the number of Landweber iterations to 100 and varied σI smoothly in the interval [0.50, 1.0) for the four different dictionary sparseness degrees. The results of this experiment are depicted in Fig. 10b. For σI ≤ 0.80 there is hardly any difference in the reproduction quality irrespective of the value of σH . The difference when training dictionaries with different sparseness degrees first becomes visible for large values of σI . Performance is here better using dictionaries where very sparse code words were demanded during learning. Hence, tasks that require high code word sparseness should use dictionaries trained with high values of the dictionary sparseness. 4.3.2 Comparison with Alternative Dictionary Learning Algorithms For a comparison, we conducted experiments using the Online Dictionary Learning (ODL) algorithm of Mairal et al. (2009a) and the Recursive Least Squares Dictionary Learning Algorithm (RLS-DLA) by Skretting and Engan (2010). For inference of sparse code words, ODL minimizes the reproduction error under implicit sparseness constraints. RLS-  DLA uses an external vector selection algorithm for inference, hence explicit constraints such as a target L0 pseudonorm can be demanded easily. Both algorithms update the dictionary after each sample presentation. ODL does not require any step sizes to be adjusted. The crucial parameter for dictionary sparseness here is a number λ ∈ R>0 , which controls the trade-off between reproduction capabilities and code word sparseness. We trained five dictionaries for each λ ∈ { 0.50, 1.00, 1.50, 2.00 } using n := 256 atoms and presenting 30 000 learning samples in each of one thousand epochs. Then, the same evaluation methodology as before with σI ∈ [0.50, 1.0) was used to assess the reproduction capabilities. The results are shown in Fig. 11a. The choice of λ is not as influential compared to σH in EZDL. There are only small performance differences for σI < 0.925, and for σI ≥ 0.925 hardly any difference can be observed. Similar to the EZDL experiments, large values of λ result in better performance for large σI and worse performance for small σI . RLS-DLA provides a forgetting factor parameter which behaves analogously to the step size in gradient descent. We used the default forgetting factor schedule which interpolates between 0.99 and 1 using a cubic function over one thousand learning epochs. For inference, we chose an optimized Orthogonal Matching Pursuit variant (GharaviAlkhansari and Huang 1998) where a parameter ζ ∈ N controls the number of non-vanishing coordinates in the code words. We trained five dictionaries with n := 256 atoms for each ζ ∈ { 4, 8, 16, 32 }. Thirty thousand randomly drawn learning samples were presented in each learning epoch. The resulting reproduction performance is shown in Fig. 11b. Again, for large values of σI the dictionaries with the most sparse code words during learning perform best, that is those trained with small values of ζ .  Thom, Rapp, and Palm 1.00  Mean SSIM on Evaluation Images  Mean SSIM on Evaluation Images  16  0.98 0.96 0.94 0.92 0.90 0.88 0.86 0.84 0.82 0.5  ODL by Mairal et al. (2009a) RLS-DLA by Skretting and Engan (2010) EZDL (this Paper) 0.6  0.7 0.8 Inference Sparseness σI  0.9  1.0  Fig. 12 Comparison of dictionary performance when the dependency on the dictionary sparseness degrees λ , ζ and σH was eliminated, for ODL, RLS-DLA and EZDL, respectively. All three algorithms produce dictionaries equally well-suited to the reproduction of entire images.  To compare all three dictionary learning algorithms independent of the concrete dictionary sparseness, we took the mean SSIM value that belonged to the best performing dictionaries for each feasible value of σI . This can also be interpreted as using the convex hull of the results shown in Fig. 10b and Fig. 11. This yielded one curve for each dictionary learning algorithm, depicted in Fig. 12. There is only a minor difference between the curves over the entire range of σI . It can hence be concluded that the algorithms learn dictionaries which are equally well-suited for the reproduction of entire images. Although EZDL uses a very simple learning rule, this is sufficient enough to achieve a performance competitive with that of two state-of-the-art dictionary learning algorithms.  4.3.3 Comparison of Learning Speed We moreover compared the learning speed of the methods and investigated the influence of the initial step size on the EZDL dictionaries. In doing so, we carried out reproduction experiments on entire images using dictionaries provided by the learning algorithms after certain numbers of learning epochs. In each of one thousand overall epochs, 30 000 learning samples where input to all three algorithms. The dictionary sparseness parameters were set to σH := 0.99 for EZDL, to λ := 2.00 for Online Dictionary Learning, and to ζ := 4 for the Recursive Least Squares Dictionary Learning Algorithm. Timing measurements on an Intel Core i7-4960X processor have shown that one EZDL learning epoch takes approximately 30 % less time than a learning epoch of ODL. RLS-DLA was roughly 25 times slower than EZDL. Although the employed vector selection method was present as part of an optimized software library, only a fairly unoptimized implementation of the actual learning algorithm was  0.86 0.85 0.84 0.83 0.82 0.81  ODL RLS-DLA EZDL (η0 = 1) EZDL (η0 = 1/4) EZDL (η0 = 1/16)  0.80 1 10 100 1000 Number of Learning Epochs (Each 30 000 Samples)  Fig. 13 Reproduction quality in dependence on the number of samples presented to Online Dictionary Learning, the Recursive Least Squares Dictionary Learning Algorithm, and Easy Dictionary Learning, where the initial step size η0 was varied for the latter. All approaches achieved the same performance after 1000 learning epochs.  available. Therefore, a comparison of this algorithm with regard to execution speed would be inequitable. The inference sparseness was set to σI := 0.99 and one hundred Landweber iterations were carried out for sparse code word inference. The SSIM index was eventually used to assess the reproduction performance. Figure 13 visualizes the results of the learning speed analysis, averaged over all images from the evaluation set and five dictionaries trained for each parameterization to compensate probabilistic effects. Online Dictionary Learning is free of step sizes, dictionary performance increased instantly and constantly with each learning epoch. Only small performance gains could be observed after 100 learning epochs. The performance of dictionaries trained with RLS-DLA was initially better than that of the ODL dictionaries, but improved more slowly. After a hundred epochs, however, it was possible to observe a significant performance gain. Although tweaking the forgetting factor schedule may have led to better early reproduction capabilities, RLS-DLA achieved a performance equivalent to that of ODL after 1000 epochs. If EZDL’s initial step size was set to unity, performance first degraded, but started to improve after the fifth epoch. After 100 epochs, the performance was identical to ODL’s, and all three methods obtained equal reproduction capabilities after 1000 epochs. Reduction of the initial step size caused the dictionaries to perform better after few sample presentations. The quality of Online Dictionary Learning was achieved after 20 epochs for η0 = 1/4, and for η0 = 1/16 the EZDL dictionaries were always better in the mean until the 100th epoch. There is hardly any quality difference after 1000 epochs, a very small initial step size resulted however in a slightly worse performance. The choice of the initial step size for EZDL is hence not very influential. Although η0 = 1 caused small overfitting during the very first epochs, the dictionaries quickly recov-  ered so that no significant difference in reproduction capabilities could be observed after 100 epochs. Since an EZDL epoch is 30 % faster than an Online Dictionary Learning epoch, our proposed method produces better results earlier on an absolute time scale.  4.4 Image Denoising Experiments We have demonstrated in Sect. 4.3 that dictionaries learned with Easy Dictionary Learning are as good as those obtained from the Online Dictionary Learning algorithm of Mairal et al. (2009a) and the Recursive Least Squares Dictionary Learning Algorithm by Skretting and Engan (2010) in terms of the reproduction quality of entire images. In a final experiment, we investigated the suitability of EZDL dictionaries for image denoising using the image enhancement procedure proposed by Mairal et al. (2009b). This method carries out semi-local block matching and finds sparse code words by imposing a group sparseness penalty on the Euclidean reproduction error. In doing so, a pre-learned dictionary is used which explains the appearance of uncorrupted images and further helps to resolve ambiguities if block matching fails to provide large enough groups. A linear generative model is finally used to find estimators of denoised image patches from the sparse code words. This procedure is quite robust if the input data is noisy, since sparseness provides a strong prior which well regularizes this ill-posed inverse problem (Kreutz-Delgado et al. 2003; Foucart and Rauhut 2013). The denoising approach of Mairal et al. (2009b) also provides the possibility of dictionary adaptation while denoising concrete input data. We did not use this option as it would hinder resilient statements on a dictionary’s eligibility if it would be modified with another dictionary learning algorithm during denoising. The methodology of the experiment was as follows. We used the four-times overcomplete dictionaries trained on the 8 × 8 pixels image patches from the "Foliage" collection of the McGill calibrated color image database (Olmos and Kingdom 2004) as models for uncorrupted images. The dictionary sparseness parameters were σH := 0.99 for EZDL, λ := 2.00 for ODL and ζ := 4 for RLS-DLA. For evaluation, we used the 81 images of the "Animals" collection from the McGill database, and converted them to 8-bit grayscales as in the previous experiments. The images were synthetically corrupted with additive white Gaussian noise. Five noisy images were generated for each original image and each standard deviation from { 2.5, 5.0, . . . , 47.5, 50.0 }. These images were then denoised using the candidate dictionaries, where the window size for block matching was set to 32 pixels. Then, the similarity between the reconstructions and the original images was measured with the  17 Mean PSNR [dB] on Evaluation Images  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections 42 ODL by Mairal et al. (2009a) RLS-DLA by Skretting and Engan (2010) EZDL (this Paper)  40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 5  10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Standard Deviation of Gaussian Noise  45  50  Fig. 14 Denoising performance in terms of the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) using the denoising method proposed by Mairal et al. (2009b). There is only a small performance difference between dictionaries trained with ODL, RLS-DLA and EZDL.  peak signal-to-noise ratio. We also evaluated the SSIM index, which led to qualitatively similar results. The results are depicted in Fig. 14. Denoising performance degrades if the noise strength is increased. There is hardly any difference between the dictionaries trained with the three algorithms. The RLS-DLA and EZDL dictionaries perform slightly better for small synthetic noise levels, but this improvement is visually imperceptible. This result is not surprising, since Sect. 4.3 demonstrated that all three learning algorithms produce dictionaries equally well-suited for the reproduction of entire images. The denoising procedure of Mairal et al. (2009b) aims at reproduction capabilities as well, with the modification of employing noisy samples as input. Image enhancement and compression applications such as those proposed by Yang et al. (2010, 2012), Dong et al. (2011), Skretting and Engan (2011) and Horev et al. (2012) which also use problem formulations based on the reproduction error can hence be expected to benefit from more efficiently learned dictionaries as well. 5 Conclusions This paper proposed the EZDL algorithm which features explicit sparseness constraints with respect to Hoyer’s smooth sparseness measure σ . Pre-defined sparseness degrees are ensured to always be attained using a sparseness-enforcing projection operator. Building upon a succinct representation of the projection, we proved that the projection problem can be formulated as a root-finding problem. We presented a linear time and constant space algorithm for the projection which is superior to previous approaches in terms of theoretical computational complexity and execution time on real computing machines. EZDL adapts dictionaries to measurement data through simple rank-1 updates. The sparseness projection serves as  18  foundation for sparse code word inference. Due to the projection efficiency and since no complicated gradients are required, our proposed learning algorithm is significantly faster than even the optimized ODL algorithm. Topographic atom organization and atom sparseness can be realized with very simple extensions, allowing for versatile sparse representations of data sets. Its simplicity and efficiency does not hinder EZDL from producing dictionaries competitive with those generated by ODL and RLS-DLA in terms of the reproduction and denoising performance on natural images. Alternative image processing methods based on sparse representations rely on dictionaries subject to the same criteria, and can thus be expected to benefit from EZDL’s advantages as well. Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to Heiko Neumann, Florian Schüle, and Michael Gabb for helpful discussions. We would like to thank Julien Mairal and Karl Skretting for making implementations of their algorithms available. Parts of this work were performed on the computational resource bwUniCluster funded by the Ministry of Science, Research and Arts and the Universities of the State of BadenWürttemberg, Germany, within the framework program bwHPC. This work was supported by Daimler AG, Germany.  Thom, Rapp, and Palm  Representation Theorem Before proving a theorem on the characterization of the projection onto T , we first fix some notation. As above, let ei ∈ Rn denote the i-th canonical basis vector and let furthermore e := ∑ni=1 ei ∈ Rn be the vector where all entries are one. We note that if a point x resides in the non-negative orthant, then kxk1 = eT x. Subscripts to vectors denote the corresponding coordinate, except for e and ei . For example, we have that xi = eTi x. We abbreviate ξ ∈ R≥0 with ξ ≥ 0 when it is clear that ξ is a real number. When I ⊆ {1, . . . , n} is an index set with d := |I| elements, say i1 < · · · < id , then the unique matrix VI ∈ { 0, 1 }d×n with T VI x = xi1 , . . . , xid ∈ Rd for all x ∈ Rn is called the slicing operator. A useful relation between the L0 pseudo-norm, the Manhattan norm √ 1/2 and the Euclidean norm is kxk2 ≤ kxk1 ≤ kxk0 kxk2 ≤ n kxk2 for all points x ∈ Rn . We are now in a position to formalize the representation theorem: Theorem 1 Let x ∈ Rn≥0 \ T and p := projT (x) be unique. Then there is exactly one number α ∗ ∈ R such that p = β ∗ · max (x − α ∗ · e, 0) , where β ∗ := λ2/kmax(x−α ∗ ·e, 0)k2 > 0 is a scaling constant. Moreover, if I := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | pi > 0 } = {i1 , . . . , id }, d := |I| and i1 < · · · < id , denotes the set of the d coordinates in which p does not vanish, then   s 2 2 kV kV 1 d xk − xk I I 2 1 α ∗ = kVI xk1 − λ1 . d dλ22 − λ12  Appendix: Technical Details and Proofs for Section 2 This appendix studies the algorithmic computation of Euclidean projections onto level sets of Hoyer’s σ in greater detail, and in particular proves the correctness of the algorithm proposed in Sect. 2. For a non-empty subset M ⊆ Rn of the Euclidean space and a point x ∈ Rn , we call projM (x) := { y ∈ M | ky − xk2 = infz∈M kz − xk2 } the set of Euclidean projections of x onto M (Deutsch 2001). Since we only consider situations in which projM (x) = { y } is a singleton, we may also write y = projM (x). Without loss of generality, we can compute projT (x) for a vector x ∈ Rn≥0 within the non-negative orthant instead of projS (x) for an arbitrary point x ∈ Rn to yield sparseness-enforcing projections, where T and S are as defined in Sect. 2. First, the actual scale is irrelevant as we can simply re-scale the result of the projection (Thom and Palm 2013, Remark 5). Second, the constraint that the projection lies in the non-negative orthant Rn≥0 can easily be handled by flipping the signs of certain coordinates (Thom and Palm 2013, Lemma 11). Finally, all entries of x can be assumed non-negative with Corollary 19 from Thom and Palm (2013). We note that T is non-convex because of the ksk2 = λ2 constraint. Moreover, T 6= 0/ for all target sparseness degrees σ ∗ ∈ (0, 1) which we show here by construction (see also Remark √ 18 in√Thom  and Palm (2013) for further details): Let ψ := λ1 − nλ22 −λ12/ n−1 /n > 0 and n−1 ω := λ1 − (n − 1)ψ > 0, then the point q := ∑i=1 ψei + ωen ∈ Rn lies n in T , where ei ∈ R denotes the i-th canonical basis vector. Since all coordinates of q are positive, T always contains points with an L0 pseudonorm of n. If we had used the L0 pseudo-norm to measure sparseness, then q would have the same sparseness degree as, for example, the vector with all entries equal to unity. If, however, σ ∗ is close to one, then there is only one large value ω in q and all the other entries equaling ψ are very small but positive. This simple example demonstrates that in situations where the presence of noise cannot be eliminated, Hoyer’s σ is a much more robust sparseness measure than the L0 pseudo-norm.  Proof It is possible to prove this claim either constructively or implicitly, where both variants differ in whether the set I of all positive coordinates in the projection can be computed from x or must be assumed to be known. We first present a constructive proof based on a geometric analysis conducted in Thom and Palm (2013), which contributes to deepening our insight into the involved computations. As an alternative, we also provide a rigorous proof using the method of Lagrange multipliers which greatly enhances the unproven analysis of Potluru et al. (2013, Section 3.1). We first note that when there are α ∗ ∈ R and β ∗ > 0 so that we have p = β ∗ ·max (x − α ∗ · e, 0), then β ∗ is determined already through α ∗ because it holds that λ2 = kpk2 = β ∗ · kmax (x − α ∗ · e, 0)k2 . We now show that the claimed representation is unique, and then present the two different proofs for the existence of the representation. Uniqueness: It is d ≥ 2, since d = 0 would violate that kpk1 > 0 and d = 1 is impossible because σ ∗ 6= 1. We first show that there are two distinct indices i, j ∈ I with pi 6= p j . Assume this was not the case, then pi =: γ, say, for all i ∈ I. Let j := arg mini∈I xi be the index of the√smallest coordinate of x which has its index in I. Let  √ ψ := λ1 − dλ22 −λ12/ d−1 /d ∈ R and ω := λ1 − (d − 1)ψ ∈ R be numbers and define s := ∑i∈I\{ j } ψei + ωe j ∈ Rn . Then s ∈ T like in the argument where we have shown that T is non-empty. Because of kpk1 = ksk1 and kpk2 = ksk2 , it follows that kx − pk22 − kx − sk22 = 2xT (s − p) = 2 ∑i∈I\{ j } xi (ψ − γ) + 2x j (ω − γ) ≥ 2x j ((d − 1)ψ + ω − dγ) = 2x j (ksk1 − kpk1 ) = 0. Hence s is at least as good an approximation to x as p, violating the uniqueness of p. Therefore, it is impossible that the set { pi | i ∈ I } is a singleton. Now let i, j ∈ I with pi 6= p j and α1∗ , α2∗ , β1∗ , β2∗ ∈ R such that p = β1∗ · max (x − α1∗ · e, 0) = β2∗ · max (x − α2∗ · e, 0). Clearly β1∗ 6= 0 and β2∗ 6= 0 as d 6= 0. It is 0 6= pi − p j = β1∗ (xi − α1∗ ) − β1∗ (x j − α1∗ ) = β1∗ (xi − x j ), thus xi 6= x j holds. Moreover, 0 = pi − p j + p j − pi = (β1∗ − β2∗ )(xi − x j ), hence β1∗ = β2∗ . Finally, we have that 0 = pi − pi = β1∗ (xi − α1∗ ) − β2∗ (xi − α2∗ ) = β1∗ (α2∗ − α1∗ ), which yields α1∗ = α2∗ , and hence the representation is unique. Existence (constructive): Let H := { a ∈ Rn | eT a = λ1 } be the hyperplane on which all points in the non-negative orthant have an L1  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections norm of λ1 and let C := Rn≥0 ∩ H be a scaled canonical simplex. Further, let L := { q ∈ H | kqk2 = λ2 } be a circle on H, and for an arbitrary index set I ⊆ {1, . . . , n} let LI := { a ∈ L | ai = 0 for all i 6∈ I } be a subset of L where all coordinates not indexed by I vanish. With Theorem 2 and Appendix D from Thom and Palm (2013) there exists a finite sequence of index sets I1 , . . . , Ih ⊆ {1, . . . , n} with I j ) I j+1 for j ∈ {1, . . . , h − 1} such that projT (x) is the result of the finite sequence r(0) := projH (x),  s(0) := projL (r(0)),  r(1) := projC (s(0)),  s(1) := projLI (r(1)), . . .  r( j) := projC (s( j − 1)),  s( j) := projLI (r( j)), . . .  r(h) := projC (s(h − 1)),  s(h) := projLI (r(h)) = p.  1 j  h  All intermediate projections yield unique results because p was restricted to be unique. The index sets contain the indices of the entries that survive the projections onto C, I j := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | ri ( j) 6= 0 } for j ∈ {1, . . . , h}. In other words, p can be computed from x by alternating projections, where the sets L and LI j are non-convex for all j ∈ {1, . . . , h}. The expressions for the individual projections are given in Lemma 13, Lemma 17, Proposition 24, and Lemma 30, respectively, in Thom and Palm (2013). Let I0 := {1, . . . , n} for completeness, then we can define the following constants for j ∈ {0, . . . , h}. Let d j := I j be the number of relevant coordinates in each iteration, and let s  d j λ22 − λ12 1  β j := and α j := kVI j xk1 − λβ1j 2 2 dj d j kVI j xk2 − kVI j xk1 be real numbers. We have that d j λ22 −λ12 ≥ dh λ22 −λ12 ≥ 0 by construction which implies β j > 0 for all j ∈ {0, . . . , h}. We now claim that the following holds: (a) (b) (c) (d)  si ( j) = β j · (xi − α j ) for all i ∈ I j for all j ∈ {0, . . . , h}. α0 ≤ · · · ≤ αh and β0 ≤ · · · ≤ βh . xi ≤ α j for all i 6∈ I j for all j ∈ {0, . . . , h}. p = βh · max (x − αh · e, 0).  We start by showing (a) with induction. For j = 0, we have r(0) = x + 1/n · (λ1 − kxk1 ) e using Lemma 13 from Thom and Palm (2013). With Lemma 17 stated in Thom and Palm (2013), we   have s(0) = δ r(0) + (1 − δ )m with m = λ1/n · e and δ 2 = λ22 − λ12/n kr(0) − mk22 . We see that kr(0) − mk22 = kx − kxk1/n · ek22 = kxk22 − kxk21/n and therefore δ = β0 , and thus s(0) = β0 · (x − 1/n · (kxk1 − λ1/β0 ) e), so the claim holds for the base case. Suppose that (a) holds for j and we want to show it also holds for j + 1. It is r( j + 1) = projC (s( j)) by definition, and Proposition 31 in Thom and Palm (2013) implies r( j + 1) = max (s( j) − tˆ · e, 0) where  tˆ ∈ R can be expressed explicitly as tˆ = 1/d j+1 · ∑i∈I j+1 si ( j) − λ1 , which is the mean value of the entries that survive the simplex projection up to an additive constant. We note that tˆ is here always nonnegative, see Lemma 28(a) in Thom and Palm (2013), which we will need to show (b). Since I j+1 ( I j we yield si ( j) = β j · (xi − α j ) for all i ∈ I j+1 with the induction hypothesis,  and therefore we have that tˆ = 1/d j+1 · β j kVI j+1 xk1 −d j+1 β j α j −λ1 . We find that ri ( j +1) > 0 for i ∈ I j+1 by definition, and we can omit the rectifier so that ri ( j + 1) = si ( j) − tˆ. Using the induction hypothesis and the expression for tˆ we have ri ( j + 1) = β j xi − β j/d j+1 · kVI j+1 xk1 + λ1/d j+1 . For projecting onto LI j+1 , the distance between r( j + 1) and mI j+1 = λ1/d j+1 · ∑i∈I j+1 ei is  required for computation of δ 2 = λ22 − λ12/d j+1 kr( j + 1) − mI j+1 k22 , so that Lemma 30 from Thom and Palm (2013) can be applied. We have that kr( j + 1) − mI j+1 k22 = ∑i∈I j+1 β j xi − β j/d j+1 · kVI j+1 xk1 2 =  β j2 · kVI j+1 xk22 − kVI j+1 xk21/d j+1 , and further δ = β j+1/β j . Now let i ∈ I j+1 be an index, then we have si ( j + 1) = δ ri ( j + 1) + (1 − δ ) · λ1/d j+1 = β j+1 · xi − 1/d j+1 · kVI j+1 xk1 − λ1/β j+1 using Lemma 30 from Thom and Palm (2013). Therefore (a) holds for all j ∈ {0, . . . , h}.  19 Let us now turn to (b). From the last paragraph, we know that δ = β j+1/β j for all j ∈ {0, . . . , h − 1} for the projections onto LI j+1 . On the other hand, we have that kr( j +1)−mI j+1 k22 = kr( j +1)k22 − λ12/d j+1 from the proof of Lemma 30(a) from Thom and Palm (2013), and kr( j + 1)k22 ≤ λ22 holds from the proof of Lemma 28(f) in Thom and Palm (2013), so δ ≥ 1 which implies β0 ≤ · · · ≤ βh . As noted above, the separator for projecting onto C satisfies tˆ ≥ 0 for all j ∈ {0, . . . , h − 1}. By rearranging this inequalityand using β j ≤ β j+1 , we conclude that α j ≤ 1/d j+1 · kVI j+1 xk1 − λ1/β j ≤ α j+1 , hence α0 ≤ · · · ≤ αh . For (c) we want to show that the coordinates in the original vector x which will vanish in some iteration when projecting onto C are already small. The base case j = 0 of an induction for j is trivial since the complement of I0 is empty. In the induction step, we note that the complement of I j+1 can be partitioned into ICj+1 = ICj ∪ I j ∩ ICj+1 since I j+1 ( I j . For i ∈ ICj we already know that xi ≤ α j ≤ α j+1 by the induction hypothesis and (b). We have shown in (a) that si ( j) = β j · (xi − α j ) for all i ∈ I j , and if i ∈ I j \ I j+1 then si ( j) ≤ tˆ since 0 = ri ( j + 1) = max (si ( j) − tˆ, 0). By substituting the explicit expression  for tˆ and solving for xi we yield xi ≤ 1/d j+1 · kVI j+1 xk1 − λ1/β j ≤ α j+1 , and hence the claim holds for all i 6∈ I j+1 . If we can now show that (d) holds, then the claim of the theorem follows by setting α ∗ := αh and β ∗ := βh . We note that by construction p = s(h) and si (h) ≥ 0 for all coordinates i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. When i ∈ Ih , then si (h) = βh · (xi − αh ) with (a), which is positive by requirement, so when the rectifier is applied nothing changes. If i 6∈ Ih then xi − αh ≤ 0 by (c), and indeed βh · max (xi − αh , 0) = 0 = si (h). The expression therefore holds for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, which completes the constructive proof of existence. Existence (implicit): Existence of the projection is guaranteed by the Weierstraß extreme value theorem since T is compact. Now let f : Rn → R, s 7→ ks − xk22 , be the objective function, and let the constraints be represented by the functions h1 : Rn → R, s 7→ eT s − λ1 , h2 : Rn → R, s 7→ ksk22 − λ22 , and gi : Rn → R, s 7→ −si , for all indices i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. All these functions are continuously differentiable. If p = projT (x), then p is a local minimum of f subject to h1 (p) = 0, h2 (p) = 0 and g1 (p) ≤ 0, . . . , gn (p) ≤ 0. For application of the method of Lagrange multipliers we first have to show that p is regular, which means that the gradients of h1 , h2 and gi for i 6∈ I evaluated in p must be linearly independent (Bertsekas 1999, Section 3.3.1). Let J := IC = { j1 , . . . , jn−d }, say, then |J| ≤ n − 2 since d ≥ 2. Hence we have at most n vectors from Rn for which we have to show linear independence. Clearly h01 (s) = e, h02 (s) = 2s and g0i (s) = −ei for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Now let u1 , u2 ∈ R and v ∈ Rn−d n with u1 e + 2u2 p − ∑n−d µ=1 vµ e jµ = 0 ∈ R . Then, let µ ∈ {1, . . . , n − d}, then p jµ = 0 by definition of I and hence by pre-multiplication of the equation above with eTjµ we yield u1 − vµ = 0 ∈ R. Therefore u1 = vµ for all µ ∈ {1, . . . , n − d}. On the other hand, if i ∈ I then pi > 0 and eTi e jµ = 0 for all µ ∈ {1, . . . , n − d}. Hence u1 + 2u2 pi = 0 ∈ R for all i ∈ I. In the first paragraph of the uniqueness proof we have shown there are two distinct indices i, j ∈ I with pi 6= p j . Since u1 + 2u2 pi = 0 = u1 + 2u2 p j and thus 0 = 2u2 (pi − p j ) we can conclude that u2 = 0, which implies u1 = 0. Then v1 = · · · = vn−d = 0 as well, which shows that p is regular. The Lagrangian is L : Rn × R × R × Rn → R, (s, α, β , γ) 7→ f (s) + αh1 (s) + β h2 (s) + ∑ni=1 γi gi (s), and its derivative with respect to its first argument s is given by L0 (s, α, β , γ) := ∂/∂ s L(s, α, β , γ) = 2(s−x)+α ·e+2β ·s−γ ∈ Rn . Now, Proposition 3.3.1 from Bertsekas (1999) guarantees the existence of Lagrange multipliers α̃, β̃ ∈ R and γ̃ ∈ Rn with L0 (p, α̃, β̃ , γ̃) = 0, γ̃i ≥ 0 for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n} and γ̃i = 0 for i ∈ I. Assume β̃ = −1, then 2x = α̃ · e − γ̃ since the derivative of L must vanish. Hence xi = α̃/2 for all i ∈ I, and therefore { pi | i ∈ I } is a singleton with Remark 10 from Thom and Palm (2013) as p was assumed unique and T is permutation-invariant. We have seen earlier that this is absurd, so β̃ 6= −1 must hold.  20  Thom, Rapp, and Palm  Write α ∗ := α̃/2, β ∗ := 1/(β̃ +1) and γ ∗ := γ̃/2 for notational convenience. We then obtain p = β ∗ (x − α ∗ · e + γ ∗ ) because L0 vanishes. Then h1 (p) = 0 implies that λ1 = ∑i∈I pi = ∑i∈I β ∗ (xi − α ∗ ) = β ∗ (kVI xk1 − dα ∗ ), and with h2 (p) = 0 follows that λ22 = ∑i∈I p2i = (β ∗ )2 · (kVI xk22 − 2α ∗ kVI xk1 + d · (α ∗ )2 ). By taking the ratio λ12/λ22 and after elementary algebraic transformations we arrive at the quadratic  equation a · (α ∗ )2 + b · α ∗ + c = 0, where a := d · d − λ12/λ22 , b :=  2 2 2 2 2kVI xk1 · λ1 /λ22 − d and c := kVI xk1 −kVI xk2 · λ1 /λ22 are reals. The dis  criminant is ∆ := b2 −4ac = 4· λ12/λ22 · d − λ12/λ22 · dkVI xk22 −kVI xk21 . Since VI x ∈ Rd we have that dkVI xk22 −kVI xk21 ≥ 0. Moreover, the number d is not arbitrary. As p exists by the Weierstraß extreme value√ theorem with kpk0 = d, kpk1 = λ1 and kpk2 = λ2 , we find that λ1 ≤ dλ2 and hence ∆ ≥ 0, so there must be a real solution to the equation above. Solving the equation shows that s ( !) dkVI xk22 − kVI xk21 1 ∗ α ∈ kVI xk1 ± λ1 , d dλ22 − λ12  We call Ψ well-defined if all requirements from the definition are met. Note that the situation where σ (x) ≥ σ ∗ is trivial, because in this sparseness-decreasing setup we have that all coordinates of the projection must be positive. Hence I = {1, . . . , n} in Theorem 1, and α ∗ can be computed with the there provided formula. We need more notation to describe the properties of Ψ . Let x ∈ Rn be a point. We write X := { xi | i ∈ {1, . . . , n}} for the set that contains the entries of x. Let xmin := min X be short for the smallest entry of x, and xmax := max X and x2nd-max := max X \ { xmax } denote the two largest entries of x. Further, q : R → Rn , α 7→ max (x − α · e, 0), denotes the curve that evolves from application of the soft-shrinkage function to x. The Manhattan norm and Euclidean norm of points from q is given by `1 : R → R, α 7→ kq(α)k1 , and `2 : R → R, α 7→ kq(α)k2 , respectively. Therefore, Ψ = `1/`2 − λ1/λ2 and Ψ̃ from Sect. 4.1 can be written as `21/`22 − λ12/λ22 , such that its derivative can be expressed in terms of Ψ 0 using the chain rule. The next result provides statements on the auxiliary function’s analytical nature and links its zero with the projection onto T :  hence from h1 (p) = 0 we obtain   q .q dkVI xk22 − kVI xk21 . β ∗ ∈ ∓ dλ22 − λ12  Lemma 3 Let x ∈ Rn≥0 \ T be given such that the auxiliary function Ψ is well-defined. Then the following holds:  Suppose α ∗ is the number that arises from the "+" before the square root, then β ∗ is the number with the "−" sign, thus β ∗ < 0. We have seen earlier that there are two distinct indices i, j ∈ I with pi 6= p j . We can assume pi > p j , then 0 < pi − p j = β ∗ (xi − x j ) which implies that xi < x j . This is not possible as it violates the order-preservation property of projections onto permutation-invariant sets (Lemma 9(a) from Thom and Palm 2013). Thus our choice of α ∗ was not correct in the first place, and α ∗ must be as stated in the claim. It remains to be shown that p is the result of a soft-shrinkage function. If i ∈ I, then 0 < pi = β ∗ (xi − α ∗ ), and β ∗ > 0 shows xi > α ∗ such that pi = β ∗ · max (xi − α ∗ , 0). When i 6∈ I, we have 0 = pi = β ∗ (xi − α ∗ + γi∗ ) where γi∗ ≥ 0 and still β ∗ > 0, thus xi ≤ α ∗ and pi = β ∗ · max (xi − α ∗ , 0) holds. Therefore, the representation holds for all entries. t u Finding the set I containing the indices of the positive coordinates of the projection result is the key for algorithmic computation of the projection. Based on the constructive proof this could, for example, be achieved by carrying out alternating projections whose run-time complexity is between quasi-linear and quadratic in the problem dimensionality n and whose space complexity is linear. An alternative is the method proposed by Potluru et al. (2013), where the input vector is sorted and then each possible candidate for I is checked. Due to the sorting, I must be of the form I = {1, . . . , d}, where now only d is unknown (see also the proof of Theorem 3 from Thom and Palm 2013). Here, the run-time complexity is quasi-linear and the space complexity is linear in the problem dimensionality since also the sorting permutation has to be stored. When n gets large, algorithms with a smaller computational complexity are mandatory.  Properties of the Auxiliary Function We have already informally introduced the auxiliary function in Sect. 2.2. Here is a satisfactory definition: Definition 2 Let x ∈ Rn≥0 \ T be a point such that projT (x) is unique and σ (x) < σ ∗ . Let xmax denote the maximum entry of x, then Ψ : [0, xmax ) → R, α 7→  kmax (x − α · e, 0)k1 λ1 − , kmax (x − α · e, 0)k2 λ2  is called auxiliary function for the projection onto T .  (a) Ψ is continuous on [0, xmax ). (b) Ψ is differentiable on [0, xmax ) \ X . (c) Ψ is strictly decreasing on [0, x2nd-max ), and on [x2nd-max , xmax ) it is constant. (d) There is exactly one α ∗ ∈ (0, x2nd-max ) with Ψ (α ∗ ) = 0. It is then projT (x) = (λ2/`2 (α ∗ )) · q(α ∗ ). Proof In addition to the original claim, we also give explicit expressions for the derivative of Ψ and higher derivatives thereof in part (c). These are necessary to show that Ψ is strictly decreasing and constant, respectively, on the claimed intervals and for the explicit implementation of Algorithm 2. (a) The function q is continuous because so is the soft-shrinkage function. Hence `1 , `2 and Ψ are continuous as compositions of continuous functions. (b) The soft-shrinkage function is differentiable everywhere except at its offset. Therefore, Ψ is differentiable everywhere except for when its argument coincides with an entry of x, that is on [0, xmax )\X . (c) We start with deducing the first and second derivative of Ψ . Let x j , xk ∈ X ∪ { 0 }, x j < xk , such that there is no element from X between them. We here allow x j = 0 and xk = xmin when 0 6∈ X for completeness. Then the index set I := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | xi > α } of nonvanishing coordinates in q is constant for α ∈ (x j , xk ), and the derivative of Ψ can be computed using a closed-form expression. For this, let d := |I| denote the number of non-vanishing coordinates in q on that interval. With `1 (α) = ∑i∈I (xi − α) = ∑i∈I xi − dα we obtain `01 (α) = −d. Analogously, it is ∂/∂ α `2 (α)2 =p∂/∂ α ∑i∈I (xi − α)2 = −2`1 (α), and the chain rule yields `02 (α) = ∂∂α `2 (α)2 = −`1 (α)/`2 (α). Applica tion of the quotient rule gives Ψ 0 (α) = `1 (α)2/`2 (α)2 − d /`2 (α). The second derivative is of similar form. We find ∂/∂ α `1 (α)2 = −2d`1 (α), and hence ∂/∂ α `1 (α)2/`2 (α)2 = 2 (`1 (α)/`2 (α)2 ) · `1 (α)2/`2 (α)2 − d . We have ∂/∂ α (1/`2 (α)) = `1 (α)/`2 (α)3 and with the product rule we see that Ψ 00 (α) = 3 (`1 (α)/`2 (α)3 ) · `1 (α)2/`2 (α)2 − d = 3Ψ 0 (α) · `1 (α)/`2 (α)2 . First let α ∈ (x2nd-max , xmax ). It is then d = 1, that is q has exactly one non-vanishing coordinate. In this situation we find `1 (α) = `2 (α) and Ψ 0 ≡ 0 on (x2nd-max , xmax ), thus Ψ is constant on (x2nd-max , xmax ) as a consequence of the mean value theorem from real analysis. Because Ψ is continuous, it is constant even on [x2nd-max , xmax ). Next let α ∈ [0, x2nd-max ) \ X , and let x j , xk , I and d as in the first paragraph. We have d ≥ 2 since α < x2nd-max . It is furthermore √ `1 (α) ≤ d`2 (α) as d = kq(α)k0 . This inequality is in fact strict, because q(α) has at least two distinct nonzero entries. Hence Ψ 0 is negative on the interval (x j , xk ), and the mean value theorem guarantees that Ψ is strictly decreasing on this interval. This property holds for the entire interval [0, x2nd-max ) due to the continuity of Ψ .  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections (d) The requirement σ (x) < σ ∗ implies kxk1/kxk2 > λ1/λ2 and thus Ψ (0) > 0. Let α ∈ (x2nd-max , xmax ) be arbitrary, then `1 (α) = `2 (α) as in (c), and hence Ψ (α) < 0 since λ2 < λ1 must hold. The existence of α ∗ ∈ [0, x2nd-max ) with Ψ (α ∗ ) = 0 then follows from the intermediate value theorem and (c). Uniqueness of α ∗ is guaranteed because Ψ is strictly monotone on the relevant interval. Define p := projT (x), then with Theorem 1 there is an α̃ ∈ R so that p = (λ2/k max(x−α̃·e, 0)k2 ) · max (x − α̃ · e, 0) = (λ2/`2 (α̃)) · q(α̃). Since p ∈ T we obtain Ψ (α̃) = 0, and the uniqueness of the zero of Ψ implies that α ∗ = α̃. t u  21 Algorithm 2 Linear time and constant space evaluation of the auxiliary function Ψ . Input: Point to be projected x ∈ Rn≥0 , target norms λ1 , λ2 ∈ R, position α ∈ [0, xmax ) where Ψ should be evaluated. Output: Values Ψ (α), Ψ 0 (α), Ψ 00 (α), Ψ̃ (α), Ψ̃ 0 (α) ∈ R, finished ∈ { true, false } indicating whether the correct interval has been found, numbers `1 , `22 ∈ R and d ∈ N needed to exactly compute α ∗ with Ψ (α ∗ ) = 0. 1  As described in Sect. 2.3, the exact value of the zero α ∗ of Ψ can be found by inspecting the neighboring entries in x of a candidate offset α. Let x j , xk ∈ X be these neighbors with x j ≤ α < xk such that there is no element from X between x j and xk . When Ψ changes its sign from x j to xk , we know that its root must be located within this interval. Further, we then know that all coordinates with a value greater than x j must survive the sparseness projection, which yields the set I from Theorem 1 and thus the explicit representation of the projection. The next result gathers these ideas and shows that it is easy to verify whether a change of sign in Ψ is on hand. Rn≥0  Lemma 4 Let x ∈ \ T be given such that Ψ is well-defined and let α ∈ [0, xmax ) be arbitrary. If α < xmin , let x j := 0 and xk := xmin . Otherwise, let x j := max { xi | xi ∈ X and xi ≤ α } be the left neighbor and let xk := min { xi | xi ∈ X and xi > α } be the right neighbor of α. Both exist as the sets where the maximum and the minimum is taken are nonempty. Define I := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | xi > α } and d := |I|. Then: (a) When Ψ (x j ) ≥ 0 and Ψ (xk ) < 0 then there is exactly one number α ∗ ∈ [x j , xk ) with Ψ (α ∗ ) = 0. (b) It is `1 (ξ ) = kVI xk1 − dξ and `22 (ξ ) = kVI xk22 − 2ξ kVI xk1 + dξ 2 for ξ ∈ { x j , α, xk }. (c) If the inequalities λ2 `1 (x j ) ≥ λ1 `2 (x j ) and λ2 `1 (xk ) < λ1 `2 (xk ) are satisfied and p := projT (x) denotes the projection of x onto T , then I = { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | pi > 0 } and hence p can be computed exactly with Theorem 1. Proof The claim in (a) is obvious with Lemma 3. (b) We find that `1 (α) = ∑i∈I (xi −α) = kVI xk1 −dα and `2 (α)2 = ∑i∈I (xi − α)2 = kVI xk22 − 2αkVI xk1 + dα 2 . We have K = I \ K̃ with K := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | xi > xk } and K̃ := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | xi = xk }. One yields that `1 (xk ) = ∑i∈K (xi − xk ) = ∑i∈I (xi − xk ) − ∑i∈K̃ (xi − xk ) = kVI xk1 − dxk . The claim for `2 (xk )2 follows analogously. Likewise I = J \ J˜ with J := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | xi > x j } and J˜ := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | xi = x j }, and hence follows `1 (x j ) = ∑i∈J (xi − x j ) = ∑i∈I (xi − x j ) + ∑i∈J˜(xi − x j ) = kVI xk1 − dx j . The value of `2 (x j )2 can be computed in the same manner. (c) The condition in the claim is equivalent to the case of Ψ (x j ) ≥ 0 and Ψ (xk ) < 0, hence with (a) there is a number α ∗ ∈ [x j , xk ) with Ψ (α ∗ ) = 0. Note that α 6= α ∗ in general. Write p := projT (x) and let J := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | pi > 0 }. With Theorem 1 follows that i ∈ J if and only if xi > α ∗ . But this is equivalent to xi > x j , which in turn is equivalent to xi > α, therefore I = J must hold. Thus we already had the correct set of non-vanishing coordinates of the projection in the first place, and α ∗ and β ∗ can be computed exactly using the formula from the claim of Theorem 1, which yields the projection p. t u  Proof of Correctness of Projection Algorithm In Sect. 2.3, we informally described our proposed algorithm for carrying out sparseness-enforcing projections, and provided a simplified flowchart in Fig. 3. After the previous theoretical considerations, we now propose and prove the correctness of a formalized algorithm for  2  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  12 13 14 15  16 17  // Initialize. `1 := 0; `22 := 0; d := 0; x j := 0; ∆ x j := −α; xk := ∞; ∆ xk := ∞; // Scan through x. for i := 1 to n do t := xi − α; if t > 0 then `1 := `1 + xi ; `22 := `22 + xi2 ; d := d + 1; if t < ∆ xk then xk := xi ; ∆ xk := t; else if t > ∆ x j then x j := xi ; ∆ x j := t; end end // Compute Ψ (α), Ψ 0 (α) and Ψ 00 (α). 2 2 2 `1 (α) := `1 − dα; √ `2 (α) := `2 − 2α`1 + dα ; Ψ (α) := `1 (α)/ `2 (α)2 − λ1/λ2 ;  p Ψ 0 (α) := `1 (α)2/`2 (α)2 − d / `2 (α)2 ; Ψ 00 (α) := 3Ψ 0 (α) · `1 (α)/`2 (α)2 ; // Compute Ψ̃ (α) and Ψ̃ 0 (α). Ψ̃ (α) := `1 (α)2/`2 (α)2 − λ12/λ22 ; √ Ψ̃ 0 (α) := 2`1 (α)/ `2 (α)2 ·Ψ 0 (α);  18  // Check for sign change from Ψ (x j ) to Ψ (xk ). q finished := λ2 (`1 − dx j ) ≥ λ1 `22 − 2x j `1 + dx2j and q λ2 (`1 − dxk ) < λ1 `22 − 2xk `1 + dxk2 ;  19   return Ψ (α),Ψ 0 (α),Ψ 00 (α), Ψ̃ (α), Ψ̃ 0 (α), finished, `1 , `22 , d ;  the projection problem. Here, the overall method is split into an algorithm that evaluates the auxiliary function Ψ and, based on its derivative, returns additional information required for finding its zero (Algorithm 2). The other part, Algorithm 3, implements the root-finding procedure and carries out the necessary computations to yield the result of the projection. It furthermore returns information that will be required for computation of the projection’s gradient, which we will discuss below. Theorem 5 Let x ∈ Rn≥0 and p := projT (x) be unique. Then Algorithm 3 computes p in a number of operations linear in the problem dimensionality n and with only constant additional space. Proof We start by analyzing Algorithm 2, which evaluates Ψ at any given position α. The output includes the values of the auxiliary function, its first and second derivative, and the value of the transformed auxiliary function and its derivative. There is moreover a Boolean value which indicates whether the interval with the sign change of Ψ has been found, and three additional numbers required to compute the zero α ∗ of Ψ as soon as the correct interval has been found. Let I := { i ∈ {1, . . . , n} | xi > α } denote the indices of all entries in x larger than α. In the blocks from Line 1 to Line 11, the algorithm scans through all the coordinates of x. It identifies the elements of I, and computes numbers `1 , `22 , d, x j and xk on the fly. After Line 11, we clearly have that `1 = kVI xk1 , `22 = kVI xk22 and d = |I|. Additionally, x j  22  Thom, Rapp, and Palm  Algorithm 3 Linear time and constant space algorithm for projections onto T . The auxiliary function Ψ is evaluated by calls to "auxiliary", which are carried out by Algorithm 2. This algorithm operates in-place, the input vector is overwritten by the output vector upon completion. Input: Point to be projected x ∈ Rn≥0 , target norms λ1 , λ2 ∈ R, solver ∈ { Bisection, Newton, NewtonSqr, Halley }. Output: Projection projT (x) ∈ T as first element replacing the input vector, numbers `1 , `22 ∈ R and d ∈ N needed to compute the projection’s gradient with Algorithm 4. 1 2  3 4  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16  17  18  19  20 21 22 23 24 25  // Skip root-finding if decreasing sparseness.  Ψ (α),Ψ 0 (α),Ψ 00 (α), Ψ̃ (α), Ψ̃ 0 (α), finished, `1 , `22 , d := auxiliary(x, λ1 , λ2 , 0); if Ψ (α) ≤ 0 then go to Line 19; // Sparseness should be increased. lo := 0; up := x2nd-max ; α := lo +1/2 · (up − lo);  Ψ (α),Ψ 0 (α),Ψ 00 (α), Ψ̃ (α), Ψ̃ 0 (α), finished, `1 , `22 , d := auxiliary(x, λ1 , λ2 , α); // Start root-finding procedure. while not finished do // Update bisection interval. if Ψ (a) > 0 then lo := α else up := α; // One iteration of root-finding. if solver = Bisection then α := lo +1/2 · (up − lo); else // Use solvers based on derivatives. if solver = Newton then α := α − Ψ (α)/Ψ 0 (α); else if solver = NewtonSqr then α := α − Ψ̃ (α)/Ψ̃ 0 (α); else if solver = Halley then h := 1 − (Ψ (α)Ψ 00 (α))/(2Ψ 0 (α)2 ); α := α −Ψ (α)/ (max(0.5, min(1.5, h)) ·Ψ 0 (α)); end // Use bisection if α out of bounds. if α < lo or α > up then α := lo +1/2 · (up − lo); end // Evaluate auxiliary function anew.  Ψ (α),Ψ 0 (α),Ψ 00 (α), Ψ̃ (α), Ψ̃ 0 (α), finished, `1 , `22 , d := auxiliary(x, λ1 , λ2 , α); end // Correct interval has been found, compute α ∗ . q .q  1 α ∗ := `1 − λ1 d`22 − `21 dλ22 − λ12 ; d // Compute result of the projection in-place. ρ := 0; for i := 1 to n do t := xi − α ∗ ; if t > 0 then xi := t; ρ := ρ + t 2 else xi := 0; end for i := 1 to n do xi := (λ2/√ρ ) · xi ;  return x, `1 , `22 , d ;  and xk are the left and right neighbors, respectively, of α. Therefore, the requirements of Lemma 4 are satisfied. The next two blocks spanning from Line 12 to Line 17 compute scalar numbers according to Lemma 4(b), the definition of Ψ , the first two derivatives thereof given explicitly in the proof of Lemma 3(c), the definition of Ψ̃ and its derivative given by the chain rule. In Line 18, it is checked whether the conditions from Lemma 4(c) hold using the statements from Lemma 4(b). The result is stored in the Boolean variable "finished". Finally all computed numbers are passed back for further processing. Algorithm 2 clearly needs time linear in n and only constant additional space.  Algorithm 3 performs the actual projection in-place, and outputs values needed for the gradient of the projection. It uses Algorithm 2 as sub-program by calls to the function "auxiliary". The algorithm first checks whether Ψ (0) ≤ 0, which is fulfilled when σ (x) ≥ σ ∗ . In this case, all coordinates survive the projection, computation of α ∗ is straightforward with Theorem 1 using I = {1, . . . , n}. Otherwise, Lemma 3(d) states that α ∗ ∈ (0, x2nd-max ). We can find α ∗ numerically with standard root-finding algorithms since Ψ is continuous and strictly decreasing on the interval (0, x2nd-max ). The concrete variant is chosen by the parameter "solver" of Algorithm 3, implementation details can be found in Traub (1964) and Press et al. (2007). Here, the root-finding loop starting at Line 5 is terminated once Algorithm 2 indicates that the correct interval for exact computation of the zero α ∗ has been identified. It is therefore not necessary to carry out root-finding until numerical convergence, it is enough to only come sufficiently close to α ∗ . Line 19 computes α ∗ based on the projection representation given in Theorem 1. This line is either reached directly from Line 2 if σ (x) ≥ σ ∗ , or when the statements from Lemma 4(c) hold. The block starting at Line 20 computes max (x − α ∗ · e, 0) and stores this point’s squared Euclidean norm in the variable ρ. Line 24 computes the number β ∗ from Theorem 1 and multiplies every entry of max (x − α ∗ · e, 0) with it, such that x finally contains the projection onto T . It would also be possible to create a new vector for the projection result and leave the input vector untouched, at the expense of additional memory requirements which are linear in the problem dimensionality. When solver = Bisection, the loop in Line 5 is repeated a constant number of times regardless of n (see Sect. 2.3), and since Algorithm 2 terminates in time linear in n, Algorithm 3 needs time only linear in n. Further, the amount of additional memory needed is independent of n, as for Algorithm 2, such that the overall space requirements are constant. Therefore, Algorithm 3 is asymptotically optimal in the sense of complexity theory. t u  Gradient of the Projection Thom and Palm (2013) have shown that the projection onto T can be grasped as a function almost everywhere which is differentiable almost everywhere. An explicit expression for the projection’s gradient was derived, which depended on the number of alternating projections required for carrying out the projection. Based on the characterization we gained through Theorem 1, we can derive a much simpler expression for the gradient which is also more efficient to compute: Theorem 6 Let x ∈ Rn≥0 \ T such that p := projT (x) is unique. Let α ∗ , β ∗ ∈ R, I ⊆ {1, . . . , n} and d := |I| be given as in Theorem 1. When xi 6= α ∗ for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, then projT is differentiable in x with ∂/∂ x projT (x) = VIT GVI , where the matrix G ∈ Rd×d is given by q  G := ba Ed − √1ab λ22 ẽẽT + d p̃ p̃T − λ1 ẽ p̃T + p̃ẽT , with a := d kVI xk22 − kVI xk21 ∈ R≥0 and b := dλ22 − λ12 ∈ R≥0 . Here, Ed ∈ Rd×d is the identity matrix, ẽ := VI e ∈ { 1 }d is the point where all coordinates are unity, and p̃ := VI p ∈ Rd>0 . Proof When xi 6= α ∗ for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, then I and d are invariant to local changes in x. Therefore, α ∗ , β ∗ and projT are differentiable as composition of differentiable functions. In the following, we derive the claimed expression of the gradient of projT in x. p  Let x̃ := VI x ∈ Rd , then α ∗ = 1/d · kx̃k1 − λ1 a/b . Define q̃ := VI · max (x − α ∗ · e, 0), then q̃ = x̃ − α ∗ · ẽ ∈ Rd>0 because xi > α ∗ for all i ∈ I. Further p̃ = λ2 · q̃/kq̃k2 , and we have p = VIT VI p = VIT p̃ since pi = 0 for all i 6∈ I. Application of the chain rule yields   ∂p q̃ ∂ (x̃ − α ∗ · ẽ) ∂VI x ∂V T p̃ ∂ = I · λ2 · · · , ∂x ∂ p̃ ∂ q̃ kq̃k2 ∂ x̃ ∂x  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections Algorithm 4 Product of the gradient of the projection onto T with an arbitrary vector. Input: A point y ∈ Rn , target norms λ1 , λ2 ∈ R, and the results of Algorithm 3: Projection p = projT (x), numbers `1 , `22 ∈ R and d ∈ N. Output: z := (∂/∂ x projT (x)) · y ∈ Rn . 1 2 3 4 5  6 7 8 9  10 11 12  // Scan and slice input vectors. j := 0; p̃ ∈ { 0 }d ; ỹ ∈ { 0 }d ; sumỹ := 0; scp p̃, ỹ := 0; for i := 1 to n where pi > 0 do j := j + 1; p̃ j := pi ; ỹ j := yi ; sumỹ := sumỹ + ỹ j ; scp p̃, ỹ := scp p̃, ỹ + p̃ j · ỹ j ; end // Compute gradient product in sliced space. a := d`22 − `21 ; b := dλ22 − λ12 ; p ỹ := b/a · ỹ; p  ỹ := ỹ + 1/ab · λ1 · sumỹ − d · scp p̃, ỹ · p̃; p  ỹ := ỹ + 1/ab · λ1 · scp p̃, ỹ − λ22 · sumỹ · ẽ; // Un-slice to yield final result. j := 0; z ∈ { 0 }n ; for i := 1 to n where pi > 0 do j := j + 1; zi := ỹ j ; return z;  and with H := λ2 · (∂/∂ q̃ (q̃/kq̃k2 )) · (∂/∂ x̃ (x̃ − α ∗ · ẽ)) ∈ Rd×d follows ∂ p/∂ x = V T HVI , thus it only remains to show G = H. I  One obtains ∂/∂ q̃ (q̃/kq̃k2 ) = Ed − q̃q̃T/kq̃k22 /kq̃k2 . Since all the entries of q̃ and x̃ are positive, their L1 norms p equal the dot product with ẽ. We have kq̃k1 = kVI xk1 − dα ∗ = λ1 a/b, and we obtain that p   kq̃k22 = kx̃k22 − α ∗ · kx̃k1 + λ1 a/b = kx̃k22 − 1/d · kx̃k21 − λ12 · a/b =  2 2 a/d · 1 + λ1 /b = λ · a/b. Now we can compute the gradient of α. 2 T 1×d . Clearly b is independent of x̃. It is ∂ a/∂ x̃ = 2d x̃T − 2kx̃kp 1 ẽ ∈ R ∗ a Since x̃ = q̃ + α · ẽ it follows that d x̃ − kx̃k1 ẽ = d q̃ − λ1 /b · ẽ, and p p T √ hence ∂ a/∂ x̃ = 1/a · d q̃ − λ1 a/b · ẽ . Therefore, we conclude that  √ ∂ α ∗/∂ x̃ = λ22/b · ẽT − (λ1/ ab) · q̃T ∈ R1×d . By substitution into H and multiplying out we see that q    λ2 1 H = ba Ed − λb2 a q̃q̃T Ed − b2 ẽẽT + √λab ẽq̃T 2 q  λ2 1 ẽq̃T = ba Ed − b2 ẽẽT + √λab  λ2 1 − λb2 a q̃q̃T + √λab q̃ẽT − λ 21a q̃q̃T , 2  2  p p  where q̃q̃T ẽẽT = q̃ q̃T ẽ ẽT = λ1 a/b · q̃ẽT and q̃q̃T ẽq̃T = λ1 a/b · q̃q̃T 2 havep been used. The claim then follows with b/λ22 a + λ1 /λ22 a = d/a and q̃ = a/b · p̃. t u The gradient has a particular simple form, as it is essentially a scaled identity matrix with additive combination of scaled dyadic products of simple vectors. In the situation where not the entire gradient but merely its product with an arbitrary vector is required (as for example in conjunction with the backpropagation algorithm), simple vector operations are already enough to compute the product: Corollary 7 Algorithm 4 computes the product of the gradient of the sparseness projection with an arbitrary vector in time and space linear in the problem dimensionality n. Proof Let y ∈ Rn be an arbitrary vector in the situation of Theorem 6, and define ỹ := VI y ∈ Rd . Then one obtains q  Gỹ = ba ỹ + √1ab λ1 · ẽT ỹ − d · p̃T ỹ · p̃  + √1ab λ1 · p̃T ỹ − λ22 · ẽT ỹ · ẽ ∈ Rd .  23 Algorithm 4 starts by computing the sliced vectors p̃ and ỹ, and computes "sumỹ " which equals ẽT ỹ and "scp p̃, ỹ " which equals p̃T ỹ after Line 5. It then computes a and b using the numbers output by Algorithm 3. From Line 7 to Line 9, the product Gỹ is computed in-place by scaling of ỹ, adding a scaled version of p̃, and adding a scalar to each coordinate. Since (∂/∂ x projT (x)) · y = VIT Gỹ, it just remains to invert the slicing. The complexity of the algorithm is clearly linear, both in time and space. t u It has not escaped our notice that Corollary 7 can also be used to determine the eigensystem of the projection’s gradient, which may prove useful for further analysis of gradient-based learning methods involving the sparseness-enforcing projection operator.  References Michal Aharon, Michael Elad, and Alfred Bruckstein. K-SVD: An Algorithm for Designing Overcomplete Dictionaries for Sparse Representation. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 54(11): 4311–4322, 2006. Felix Bauer and Roland Memisevic. Feature Grouping from Spatially Constrained Multiplicative Interaction. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations. arXiv:1301.3391, 2013. Anthony J. Bell and Terrence J. Sejnowski. The "Independent Components" of Natural Scenes are Edge Filters. Vision Research, 37 (23):3327–3338, 1997. Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Nonlinear Programming. Athena Scientific, Belmont, 2nd edition, 1999. Christopher M. Bishop. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995. L. Susan Blackford, James Demmel, Jack Dongarra, Iain Duff, Sven Hammarling, Greg Henry, Michael Heroux, Linda Kaufman, Andrew Lumsdaine, Antoine Petitet, Roldan Pozo, Karin Remington, and R. Clint Whaley. An Updated Set of Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms (BLAS). ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, 28(2):135–151, 2002. Léon Bottou and Yann LeCun. Large Scale Online Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 16, pages 217–224, 2004. Kristian Bredies and Dirk A. Lorenz. Linear Convergence of Iterative Soft-Thresholding. Journal of Fourier Analysis and Applications, 14(5–6):813–837, 2008. Adam Coates and Andrew Y. Ng. The Importance of Encoding Versus Training with Sparse Coding and Vector Quantization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 921–928, 2011. Frank Deutsch. Best Approximation in Inner Product Spaces. Springer, New York, 2001. Weisheng Dong, Lei Zhang, Guangming Shi, and Xiaolin Wu. Image Deblurring and Super-Resolution by Adaptive Sparse Domain Selection and Adaptive Regularization. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 20(7):1838–1857, 2011. David L. Donoho. De-Noising by Soft-Thresholding. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 41(3):613–627, 1995. David L. Donoho. For Most Large Underdetermined Systems of Linear Equations the Minimal `1 -norm Solution Is Also the Sparsest Solution. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 59 (6):797–829, 2006. Julio Martin Duarte-Carvajalino and Guillermo Sapiro. Learning to Sense Sparse Signals: Simultaneous Sensing Matrix and Sparsifying Dictionary Optimization. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 18(7):1395–1408, 2009. Carl Eckart and Gale Young. The Approximation of One Matrix by Another of Lower Rank. Psychometrika, 1(3):211–218, 1936.  24 Michael Elad. Why Simple Shrinkage Is Still Relevant for Redundant Representations? IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 52 (12):5559–5569, 2006. Simon Foucart and Holger Rauhut. A Mathematical Introduction to Compressive Sensing. Birkhäuser, New York, 2013. Mark Galassi, Jim Davies, James Theiler, Brian Gough, Gerard Jungman, Patrick Alken, Michael Booth, and Fabrice Rossi. GNU Scientific Library Reference Manual. Network Theory Ltd., Bristol, 3rd edition, 2009. Mohammad Gharavi-Alkhansari and Thomas S. Huang. A Fast Orthogonal Matching Pursuit Algorithm. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, volume III, pages 1389–1392, 1998. David Goldberg. What Every Computer Scientist Should Know About Floating-Point Arithmetic. ACM Computing Surveys, 23(1):5–48, 1991. Simon Hawe, Matthias Seibert, and Martin Kleinsteuber. Separable Dictionary Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 438–445, 2013. Stuart G. Hoggar. Mathematics of Digital Images: Creation, Compression, Restoration, Recognition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2006. Inbal Horev, Ori Bryt, and Ron Rubinstein. Adaptive Image Compression using Sparse Dictionaries. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Systems, Signals and Image Processing, pages 592–595, 2012. Patrik O. Hoyer. Non-negative Matrix Factorization with Sparseness Constraints. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5:1457– 1469, 2004. Patrik O. Hoyer and Aapo Hyvärinen. Independent Component Analysis Applied to Feature Extraction from Colour and Stereo Images. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 11(3):191–210, 2000. David H. Hubel and Torsten N. Wiesel. Receptive Fields of Single Neurones in the Cat’s Striate Cortex. Journal of Physiology, 148 (3):574–591, 1959. Niall Hurley and Scott Rickard. Comparing Measures of Sparsity. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 55(10):4723–4741, 2009. Aapo Hyvärinen. Sparse Code Shrinkage: Denoising of Nongaussian Data by Maximum Likelihood Estimation. Neural Computation, 11(7):1739–1768, 1999. Aapo Hyvärinen and Patrik O. Hoyer. Emergence of Phase- and ShiftInvariant Features by Decomposition of Natural Images into Independent Feature Subspaces. Neural Computation, 12(7):1705– 1720, 2000. Aapo Hyvärinen, Patrik O. Hoyer, and Mika Inki. Topographic Independent Component Analysis. Neural Computation, 13(7):1527– 1558, 2001. Aapo Hyvärinen, Jarmo Hurri, and Patrik O. Hoyer. Natural Image Statistics – A Probabilistic Approach to Early Computational Vision. Springer, London, 2009. Judson P. Jones and Larry A. Palmer. An Evaluation of the TwoDimensional Gabor Filter Model of Simple Receptive Fields in Cat Striate Cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 58(6):1233–1258, 1987. Koray Kavukcuoglu, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Rob Fergus, and Yann LeCun. Learning Invariant Features through Topographic Filter Maps. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1605–1612, 2009. Teuvo Kohonen. The Self-Organizing Map. Proceedings of the IEEE, 78(9):1464–1480, 1990. Kenneth Kreutz-Delgado, Joseph F. Murray, Bhaskar D. Rao, Kjersti Engan, Te-Won Lee, and Terrence J. Sejnowski. Dictionary Learning Algorithms for Sparse Representation. Neural Computation, 15(2):349–396, 2003.  Thom, Rapp, and Palm Simon B. Laughlin and Terrence J. Sejnowski. Communication in Neuronal Networks. Science, 301(5641):1870–1874, 2003. Jun Liu and Jieping Ye. Efficient Euclidean Projections in Linear Time. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 657–664, 2009. Miles E. Lopes. Estimating Unknown Sparsity in Compressed Sensing. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 217–225, 2013. Julien Mairal, Francis Bach, Jean Ponce, and Guillermo Sapiro. Online Dictionary Learning for Sparse Coding. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 689–696, 2009a. Julien Mairal, Francis Bach, Jean Ponce, Guillermo Sapiro, and Andrew Zisserman. Non-local Sparse Models for Image Restoration. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2272–2279, 2009b. John Ashworth Nelder and Roger Mead. A Simplex Method for Function Minimization. The Computer Journal, 7(4):308–313, 1965. Heinz Neudecker. Some Theorems on Matrix Differentiation with Special Reference to Kronecker Matrix Products. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 64(327):953–963, 1969. Adriana Olmos and Frederick A. A. Kingdom. A Biologically Inspired Algorithm for the Recovery of Shading and Reflectance Images. Perception, 33(12):1463–1473, 2004. Bruno A. Olshausen. Learning Sparse, Overcomplete Representations of Time-Varying Natural Images. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Image Processing, volume I, pages 41–44, 2003. Bruno A. Olshausen and David J. Field. Emergence of Simple-Cell Receptive Field Properties by Learning a Sparse Code for Natural Images. Nature, 381(6583):607–609, 1996. Bruno A. Olshausen and David J. Field. Sparse Coding with an Overcomplete Basis Set: A Strategy Employed by V1? Vision Research, 37(23):3311–3325, 1997. Vamsi K. Potluru, Sergey M. Plis, Jonathan Le Roux, Barak A. Pearlmutter, Vince D. Calhoun, and Thomas P. Hayes. Block Coordinate Descent for Sparse NMF. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations. arXiv:1301.3527, 2013. William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery. Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 3rd edition, 2007. Roberto Rigamonti, Amos Sironi, Vincent Lepetit, and Pascal Fua. Learning Separable Filters. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2754– 2761, 2013. Dario L. Ringach. Spatial Structure and Symmetry of Simple-Cell Receptive Fields in Macaque Primary Visual Cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 88(1):455–463, 2002. Joseph Lee Rodgers and W. Alan Nicewander. Thirteen Ways to Look at the Correlation Coefficient. The American Statistician, 42(1): 59–66, 1988. Christopher J. Rozell, Don H. Johnson, Richard G. Baraniuk, and Bruno A. Olshausen. Sparse Coding via Thresholding and Local Competition in Neural Circuits. Neural Computation, 20(10): 2526–2563, 2008. Karl Skretting and Kjersti Engan. Recursive Least Squares Dictionary Learning Algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 58 (4):2121–2130, 2010. Karl Skretting and Kjersti Engan. Image Compression Using Learned Dictionaries by RLS-DLA and Compared with K-SVD. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pages 1517–1520, 2011. Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE). Recommended Practice RP 177-193: Derivation of Basic Television Color Equations, 1993.  Efficient Dictionary Learning with Sparseness-Enforcing Projections Fabian J. Theis, Kurt Stadlthanner, and Toshihisa Tanaka. First Results on Uniqueness of Sparse Non-Negative Matrix Factorization. In Proceedings of the European Signal Processing Conference, volume 3, pages 1672–1675, 2005. Markus Thom and Günther Palm. Sparse Activity and Sparse Connectivity in Supervised Learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14:1091–1143, 2013. Ivana Tošić, Bruno A. Olshausen, and Benjamin J. Culpepper. Learning Sparse Representations of Depth. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 5(5):941–952, 2011. Joe Fred Traub. Iterative Methods for the Solution of Equations. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1964. J. Hans van Hateren and Daniel L. Ruderman. Independent Component Analysis of Natural Image Sequences Yields Spatio-Temporal Filters Similar to Simple Cells in Primary Visual Cortex. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 265(1412):2315–2320, 1998. Zhou Wang and Alan C. Bovik. Mean Squared Error: Love It or Leave It? A New Look at Signal Fidelity Measures. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 26(1):98–117, 2009. Andrew B. Watson. Image Compression Using the Discrete Cosine Transform. The Mathematica Journal, 4(1):81–88, 1994. Ben Willmore and David J. Tolhurst. Characterizing the Sparseness of Neural Codes. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 12(3): 255–270, 2001. D. Randall Wilson and Tony R. Martinez. The General Inefficiency of Batch Training for Gradient Descent Learning. Neural Networks, 16(10):1429–1451, 2003. Jianchao Yang, John Wright, Thomas S. Huang, and Yi Ma. Image Super-Resolution via Sparse Representation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 19(11):2861–2873, 2010. Jianchao Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Zhe Lin, Scott Cohen, and Thomas Huang. Coupled Dictionary Training for Image Super-Resolution. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 21(8):3467–3478, 2012. Lihi Zelnik-Manor, Kevin Rosenblum, and Yonina C. Eldar. Dictionary Optimization for Block-Sparse Representations. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 60(5):2386–2395, 2012.  25

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
