Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_3058

Abstract:
Underapproximation of Procedure Summaries for Integer Programs Pierre Ganty1 , Radu Iosif2 , and Filip Konečný2,3  arXiv:1210.4289v3 [cs.PL] 24 Oct 2016  1  Imdea Software Institute, Madrid, Spain 2 Verimag/CNRS, Grenoble, France 3 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland  Abstract We show how to underapproximate the procedure summaries of recursive programs over the integers using off-the-shelf analyzers for nonrecursive programs. The novelty of our approach is that the non-recursive program we compute may capture unboundedly many behaviors of the original recursive program for which stack usage cannot be bounded. Moreover, we identify a class of recursive programs on which our method terminates and returns the precise summary relations without underapproximation. Doing so, we generalize a similar result for non-recursive programs to the recursive case. Finally, we present experimental results of an implementation of our method applied on a number of examples.  1  Introduction  Formal approaches to reasoning about behaviors of programs usually fall into one of the following two categories: certification approaches, that provide proofs of correctness, and bug-finding approaches, that explore increasingly larger sets of traces in order to find possible errors. While the methods in the first category are used typically in the development of safety-critical software whose failures may incur dramatic losses in terms of human lives (airplanes, space missions, or nuclear power plants), the methods in the second category have a broad application in industry, outside of the safety-critical market niche. Another difference between the two categories is methodological: certification approaches are based on over-approximations of the set of behaviors (if the over-approximation is free of errors, the original system is correct), while bug-finding needs systematic under-approximation techniques (if there are errors, the method will eventually discover all of them). Finally, over-approximation methods are guaranteed to terminate, but the answer might be inconclusive (spurious errors are introduced due to the abstraction), whereas under-approximation methods provide precise results (all reported errors are real), but with no guarantee for termination. Procedure summaries are relations between the input and return values of a procedure, resulting from its terminating executions. Computing summaries is important, as they are a key enabler for the development of modular verification techniques for inter-procedural programs, such as checking safety, termination 1  or equivalence properties. Summary computation is, however, challenging in the presence of recursive procedures with integer parameters, return values, and local variables. While many analysis tools exist for non-recursive programs, only a few ones address the problem of recursion (e.g. InterProc [19]). In this paper, we propose a novel technique to generate arbitrarily precise underapproximations of summary relations. Our technique is based on the following idea. The control flow of procedural programs is captured precisely by the language of a context-free grammar. A k-index underapproximation of this language (where k ě 1) is obtained by filtering out those derivations of the grammar that exceed a budget, called index, on the number (at most k) of occurrences of nonterminals occurring at each derivation step. As expected, the higher the index, the more complete the coverage of the underapproximation. From there we define the k-index summary relations of a program by considering the k-index underapproximation of its control flow. Our method then reduces the computation of k-index summary relations for a recursive program to the computation of summary relations for a non-recursive program, which is, in general, easier to compute because of the absence of recursion. The reduction was inspired by a decidability proof [4] in the context of Petri nets. The contributions of this paper are threefold. First, we show that, for a given index, recursive programs can be analyzed using off-the-shelf analyzers designed for non-recursive programs. Second, we identify a class of recursive programs, with possibly unbounded stack usage, on which our technique is complete, i.e. it terminates and returns the precise result. Third, we present experimental results of an implementation of our method applied on a number of examples. Motivating Example To properly introduce the reader to our result, we describe our source-to-source program transformation through an illustrative example. Consider the recursive program P “ tP u, consisting of a single recursive procedure P , given in Fig. 1 (a), whose control flow graph is given in Fig. 1 (b). The nodes of this graph represent control locations in the program, with a designated initial location Qinit and a final location ε. The 1 edges are labeled with relations denoting the program semantics, where primed variables x1 and z 1 denote the values at the next step. For instance, the edge z 1 “P px´1q^x1 “x  t2 : Q2 ÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ Q3 corresponds to the recursive call on line 3 in the program—the edge labels of the control flow graph explicitly mention the copies of variables not changed by the program action corresponding to the edge, e.g. x1 “ x. In this paper, we model programs using visibly pushdown grammars (VPG) [3]. The VPG for P is given in Fig. 1 (c). The role of the grammar is to define the set of interprocedurally valid paths in the control-flow graph of the program P . Every edge in the control-flow graph matches one or two symbols from the finite alphabet tτ1 , x τ2 , τ2 y , τ3 , τ4 u, where x τ2 and τ2 y denote the call and return, respectively. Each edge in the graph translates to a production rule in the grammar, labeled pb1 , pc2 , pa3 and pa4 —the superscript a, b and c distinguishes rules with 0, 1 and 2 nonterminals on the right-hand side, respectively. For instance, the call edge t2 becomes the rule Q2 Ñ x τ2 Qinit 1 τ2 y Q3 . The language of the n n grammar of Fig. 1 (c) (with axiom Qinit 1 ) is the set tpτ1 x τ2 q τ4 pτ2 y τ3 q | n P Nu of interprocedurally valid paths, where each call symbol x τ2 is matched by a return symbol τ2 y , and the matching relation is well-parenthesized. The outcome of the program transformation applied to P is the non-recursive  2  (K program Q “ query i i“0 , depicted in Fig. 1 (d), where K is a parameter of our analysis. The main idea is that the executions of the procedure query k , ending with an empty stack, correspond to the derivations of the VPG in Fig. 1 (c), of index at most k—since there is no derivation of index 0, the set of executions of query 0 will be empty. The body of a procedure query k consists of a main loop, starting at the control label begin_loop in Fig. 1 (d). Each branch inside the main loop corresponds to the simulation of one of the production rules of the grammar in Fig. 1 (c) and starts with a control label which is the name of that rule (pb1 , pc2 , pa3 , pa4 ). Next, we explain the relations labeling the control edges of query k . For each production rule p in the grammar we have a relation ρp pxI , zI , xO , zO q, where subscript I and O denote the input and output copies of the program variables of P , respectively. In addition, we consider auxiliary copies xJ , zJ , xK , zK and xL , zL , defined in a similar way. For instance, the auxiliary variables store intermediate results of the computation of pc2 as follows: rxI , zI s x τ2 rxJ , zJ s Qinit rxK , zK s τ2 y rxL , zL s Q3 rxO , zO s. The transition 1 pc2 Ñ in_order{out_of _order can be understood by noticing that x τ2 gives rise to the constraint xJ “ xI ´ 1, τ2 y to zL “ zK and xI “ xL corresponds to the frame condition x1 “ x. The peculiarity of the resulting program is that a function call is modeled in two possible ways: (i) in-order execution of the function body, followed by the continuation of the call, and (ii) out-of-order execution of the continuation, followed by the execution of the function body. The two cases correspond ˚ to k-index derivations of the VPG in Fig 1 (c) of the form uQinit 1 vQ3 w ñ ˚ init ˚ ˚ uv1 vQ3 w ñ uv1 vv2 w and uQ1 vv2 w ñ uv1 vv2 w ñ uv1 vv2 w, respectively, where Qinit ñ˚ v1 and Q3 ñ˚ v2 are derivations of the VPG. In the first case, 1 the control path simulating the derivation in query k follows the left branch in_order{out_of _order Ñ begin_loop, whereas the second case is simulated by the right branch. Since the only call of query k is to query k´1 , on the edges in_order{out_of _order Ñ begin_loop, the whole program is a non-recursive under-approximation of the semantics of the original program P , amenable to analysis using intra-procedural program analysis tools. Indeed, the computation of the pre-condition relation of the program Q “ tquery 2 , query 1 , query 0 u with the Flata tool [17] yields the formula zO “ 2 ¨ xI , which matches the summary z 1 “ 2 ¨ x of the program P . In other words, the analysis of the under-approximation of P of index at most 2 suffices to infer the complete summary of the program (the analysis for values K ą 2 will necessarily yield the same result, since the under-approximation method is monotonic in K). This fact matches the completeness result of Section 5, stating that the analysis needs to be carried up to a certain bound (linear in the size of the program’s VPG) whenever the language of the VPG is included in the language of the regular expression w1˚ . . . wn˚ , for some nonempty words w1 , . . . , wn . In our case, the completeness result applies due to n n ˚ ˚ tpτ1 x τ2 q τ4 pτ2 y τ3 q | n P Nu Ď pτ1 x τ2 q τ4˚ pτ2 y τ3 q . Related Work The problem of analyzing recursive programs handling integers (in general, unbounded data domains) has gained significant interest with the seminal work of Sharir and Pnueli [24]. They proposed two orthogonal approaches for interprocedural dataflow analysis. The first one keeps precise values (call strings) up to a limited depth of the recursion stack, which bounds the number of executions. In contrast to the methods based on the call strings approach,  3  q init 1  x > 0 x0 = x  int P(int x) { int z; 1: assume(x ≥ 0); 2: if (x > 0) 3:  z := P(x-1);  4:  z := z+2;  t1  q2 z 0 = P (x − 1) x0 = x  t4  t2  x = 0 z0 = 0  pb 1 pc 2 pa 3 pa 4  : Qinit → τ1 Q2 1 : Q2 → hhτ2 Qinit τ2 ii Q3 1 : Q3 → τ3 : Qinit → τ4 1  q3 t3  5: else 6: z := 0 7: return z; }  x0 = x z0 = z + 2  ε (b)  (a) k  query (X, xI , zI , xO , zO )  (c)  init P C0 = X begin loop  pa 3  P C = Q3 xO = xI zO = zI + 2  ε  (d)  pa 4  P C = Qinit 1 xI = 0 zO = 0  ε  pc 2  pb 1  P C = Qinit 1 xI > 0 xJ = xI 0 x = xJ I z 0 = zJ I P C 0 = Q2  x0 = xJ I z 0 = zJ I P C0 = Y x0 = xK O z 0 =zK O k−1 query (Z, xL , zL , xO , zO )  P C = Q2 Y 0 = Qinit 1 Z 0 = Q3 xJ = xI − 1 zK = zL xI = xL  out of order/in order  x0 = xL I z 0 = zL I P C0 = Z query k−1 (Y, xJ , zJ , xK , zK )  Figure 1: A recursive program returning the parameter value multiplied by two (a), its corresponding control flow graph (b) and visibly pushdown grammar (c), and the non-recursive program query k pX, xI , zI , xO , zO q resulting from our index-bounded under-approximation (d). our method can also analyse precisely certain programs for which the stack is unbounded, allowing for unbounded number of executions to be represented at once. The second approach of Sharir and Pnueli [24] is based on computing the least fixed point of a system of recursive dataflow equations (the functional approach). This approach to interprocedural analysis is based on computing an increasing Kleene sequence of abstract summaries. It is to be noticed that abstraction is key to ensuring termination of the Kleene sequence, the result being an over-approximation of the precise summary. Recently [11], a Newton sequence defined over the language semiring was shown to converge at least as fast as the Kleene sequence over the same semiring. An iterate of a Newton sequence is the set of control paths in the program that correspond to words produced by a grammar, with bounded number of nonterminals at each step in the derivation. By increasing this bound, we obtain an increasing sequence of languages that converges to the language of behavior of the program. Our contribution can be thus seen as a technique to compute the iterates of the Newton sequence for programs with integer parameters, return values, and local variables, the result being, at each step, an under-approximation of the precise summary.  4  The complexity of the functional approach was shown to be polynomial in the size of the (finite) abstract domain, in the work of Reps, Horwitz and Sagiv [23]. This result is achieved by computing summary information, in order to reuse previously computed information during the analysis. Following up on this line of work, most existing abstract analyzers, such as InterProc [19], also use relational domains to compute over-approximations of function summaries – typically widening operators are used to ensure termination of fixed point computations. The main difference of our method with respect to static analyses is the use of under-approximation instead of over-approximation. If the final purpose of the analysis is program verification, our method will not return false positives. Moreover, the coverage can be increased by increasing the bound on the derivation index. Previous works have applied model checking based on abstraction refinement to recursive programs. One such method, known as nested interpolants represents programs as nested word automata [3], which have the same expressive power as the visibly pushdown grammars used in our paper. Also based on interpolation is the Whale algorithm [2], which combines partial exploration of the execution paths (underapproximation) with the overapproximation provided by a predicatebased abstract post operator, in order to compute summaries that are sufficient to prove a given safety property. Another technique, similar to Whale, although not handling recursion, is the Smash algorithm [15] which combines may- and mustsummaries for compositional verification of safety properties. These approaches are, however, different in spirit from ours, as their goal is proving given safety properties of programs, as opposed to computing the summaries of procedures independently of their calling context, which is our case. We argue that summary computation can be applied beyond safety checking, e.g., to prove termination [5], or program equivalence. The technique of under-approximation is typically used for bug discovery, rather than certification of correctness. For instance, bug detection based on under-approximation has been developed for non-recursive C programs with arrays [18]. Our approach in orthogonal, as we consider more complex control structures (possibly recursive procedure calls) but simpler data domains (scalar values such as integers). Paper organization. After introducing the basic definition in Section 2, we present, in Section 3, our model for programs, a semantics based on nested words and another one, equivalent, based on derivations of the underlying grammar. Then, in Section 4, we present our main contribution which is a program transformation underapproximating the semantics of the input program. In Section 5, we define a class of programs for which the underapproximation is complete. Finally, after reporting on experiments in Section 6 we conclude in Section 7.  2 2.1  Preliminaries Grammars  Let Σ be an alphabet, that is a finite non-empty set of symbols. We denote by Σ˚ the set of finite words over Σ including ε, the empty word. Given a word w P Σ˚ , let |w| denote its length and let pwqi , with 1 ď i ď |w|, be the i-th symbol of w.  5  By pwqi...j , with 1 ď i ď j ď |w|, we denote the subword pwqi . . . pwqj of w. For a word w P Σ˚ and Σ1 Ď Σ, we denote by wÓΣ1 the result of erasing all symbols of w not in Σ1 . A context-free grammar (or simply grammar) is a tuple G “ xΞ, Σ, ∆y, where Ξ is a finite nonempty set of nonterminals, Σ is an alphabet, such that Ξ X Σ “ H, and ∆ Ď Ξ ˆ pΣ Y Ξq˚ is a finite set of productions. A production pX, wq P ∆ is often conveniently noted X Ñ w. Also define head pX Ñ w q “ X and tail pX Ñ wq “ w. Given two strings u, v P pΣYΞq˚ , a production pX, wq P ∆ pX,wq{j  and 1 ď j ď |u|, we define a step u ùùùùùñG v if, and only if, puqj “ X and v “ puq1 ¨ ¨ ¨ puqj´1 ¨ w ¨ puqj`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ puq|u| . We omit pX, wq or j above the arrow when it is not important. In this notation and others, when G is clear from the context, we omit it. Step sequences (including the empty sequence) are defined using the reflexive transitive closure of the step relation ñ ù G , denoted ñ ù ˚G . For ˚ instance, X ñ ù G w means there exists a sequence of steps that produces the word w P pΣ Y Ξq˚ , starting from X. We call any step sequence v ñ ù ˚G w a ˚ derivation whenever v P Ξ and w P Σ . The language produced by G, starting with a nonterminal X is the set LX pGq “ tw P Σ˚ | X ñ ù ˚G wu. By defining a control word to be a sequence of productions γ P ∆˚ , we can annotate step sequences as expected: ε P ∆˚ is the control word for empty step γ sequences, and given a control word γ of length n we write u ñ ù G v whenever there exists w0 , . . . , wn P pΞ Y Σq˚ such that pγq1  pγq2  pγqn  u “ w0 ùùñG w1 ùùñG . . . wn´1 ùùñG wn “ v . Given a nonterminal X P Ξ and a set Γ Ď ∆˚ of control words (a.k.a control γ set), we denote by L̂X pΓ, Gq “ tw P Σ˚ | Dγ P Γ : X ñ ù wu the language generated by G using only control words in Γ.  2.2  Visibly Pushdown Grammars  To model the control flow of procedural programs we use languages generated by visibly pushdown grammars, a subset of context-free grammars. In this setting, p “ ΣYxxΣYΣyy, where x Σ “ txxa | a P Σu words are defined over a tagged alphabet Σ represents procedure call sites and Σyy “ tayy | a P Σu represents procedure return p ∆y is a grammar that sites. Formally, a visibly pushdown grammar G “ xΞ, Σ, has only productions of the following forms, for some a, b P Σ: XÑa  X Ñ aY  X Ñ x a Y byy Z .  It is worth pointing that, for our purposes, we do not need a visibly pushdown grammar to generate the empty string ε. Each tagged word generated by visibly pushdown grammars is associated a nested word [3] the definition of which we briefly recall. Given a finite alphabet Σ, a nested word over Σ is a pair pw, ;q, where ; Ď t1, . . . , |w|u ˆ t1, . . . , |w|u is a set of nesting edges (or simply edges) where: 1. i ; j only if i ă j; edges only go forward; 2. ||tj | i ; ju|| ď 1 and ||ti | i ; ju|| ď 1; no two edges share a call/return position; 6  3. if i ; j and k ; ` then it is not the case that i ă k ď j ă `; edges do not cross. Intuitively, we associate a nested word to a tagged word as follows: there is an edge between tagged symbols x a and byy if and only if both symbols are produced by the same derivation step. Finally, let w_nw denote the mapping which given a tagged word in the language of a visibly pushdown grammar returns the nested word thereof. Example 2.1. For the tagged word w “ τ1 x τ2 τ1 x τ2 τ4 τ2 y τ3 τ2 y τ3 , w_nwpwq “ pτ1 τ2 τ1 τ2 τ4 τ2 τ3 τ2 τ3 , t2 ; 8, 4 ; 6uq is the associated nested word.   2.3  Integer Relations  Given a set S, let ||S|| denote its cardinality. We denote by Z the set of integers. Let x “ xx1 , . . . , xd y be a tuple of variables, for some d ą 0. We define by x1 the primed variables of x to be the tuple xx11 , x12 , . . . , x1d y. We consider implicitly that all variables range over Z. We denote by |x| “ d the length of the tuple x, and for a tuple y “ xy1 , . . . , ye y, we denote by x ¨ y “ xx1 , . . . , xd , y1 , . . . , ye y their concatenation. For two tuples of variables t and s such that |t| “ |s| “ k, Źk we denote by t “ s the conjunction i“1 ti “ si . řd A linear term t is a linear combination of the form a0 ` i“1 ai xi , where a0 , . . . , ad P Z. An atomic proposition is a predicate of the form t ď 0, where t is a linear term. We consider formulae in the first-order logic over atomic propositions t ď 0, also known as Presburger arithmetic. A valuation of x is a function ν : x Ñ Ý Z. The set of all valuations of x is denoted by Zx . If x “ xx1 , . . . , xd y and ν P Zx , then νpxq denotes the tuple xνpx1 q, . . . , νpxd qy. An arithmetic formula Rpx, y1 q defining a relation R Ď Zx ˆ Zy is evaluated with respect to two valuations ν1 P Zx and ν2 P Zy , by replacing each x P x by ν1 pxq and each y 1 P y1 by ν2 pyq in R. The composition of two relations R1 Ď Zx ˆ Zy and R2 Ď Zy ˆ Zz is denoted by R1 ˝ R2 “ txu, vy P Zx ˆ Zz | Dt P Zy . xu, ty P R1 and xt, vy P R2 u. We denote y Ď x if y “ xxi1 , . . . , xi` y, for a sequence of indices 1 ď i1 ă . . . ă i` ď d of x. For a valuation ν P Zx and a tuple y Ď x, we denote by νÓy P Zy the projection of ν onto variables y, i.e. νÓxy1 ,...,yk y “ xνpy1 q, . . . , νpyk qy. Finally, given two valuations I, O P Zx , we denote by I ¨O the valuation Ipxq¨Opxq, and we define Zxˆx “ tI ¨O | I, O P Zx u.  2.4  Parikh Images  Let Θ “ tθ1 , . . . , θk u be a linearly ordered subset of the alphabet Σ. For a symbol a P Σ its Parikh image is defined as P kΘ paq “ ei if a “ θi , where ei is the k-dimensional vector having 1 on the i-th position and 0 everywhere else. Otherwise, if a P ΣzΘ, let P kΘ paq “ 0 where 0 is the k-dimensional vector with 0 everywhere. For a word w P Σ˚ of length n, we define P kΘ pwq “ řn 1 Furthermore, let P kΘ pLq “ tP kΘ pwq | w P Lu for any i“1 P kΘ ppwqi q. ˚ language L Ď Σ . 1 We  adopt the convention that the empty sum evaluates to 0.  7  2.5  Labelled Graphs  In this paper we use of the notion of labelled graph G “ xQ, L, δy, where Q is a finite set of vertices, L is a set of labels whose elements label edges as defined by ` the edge relation δ Ď Q ˆ S ˆ Q. We denote by q Ñ Ý q 1 the fact that pq, `, q 1 q P δ. A path π in G is an alternating sequence of vertices and edges whose endpoints `1 `2 `n are vertices. Sometimes, π is conveniently written as q0 ÝÑ q1 ÝÑ . . . qn´1 ÝÑ qn w  and further abbreviated q0 Ý Ñ qn where w “ `1 . . . `n .  3  Integer Recursive Programs  We consider in the following that programs are collections of procedures calling each other, possibly according to recursive schemes. Formally, an integer program is an indexed tuple P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y, where P1 , . . . , Pn are procedures. Each out init procedure is a tuple Pi “ xxi , xin , Fi , ∆i y, where xi are the local i , xi , Si , qi 2 in variables of Pi (xi X xj “ H for all i ‰ j), xi , xout Ď xi are the tuples of input i and output variables, Si are the control states of Pi (Si X Sj “ H, for all i ‰ j), qiinit P Si zFi is the initial, and Fi Ď Si (Fi ‰ H) are the final states of Pi , and ∆i is a set of transitions of one of the following forms: Rpxi ,x1 q  • q ÝÝÝÝÝiÑ q 1 is an internal transition, where q, q 1 P Si , and Rpxi , x1i q is a Presburger arithmetic relation involving only the local variables of Pi ; z1 “Pj puq  • q ÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ q 1 is a call, where q, q 1 P Si , Pj is the callee, u are linear terms out over xi , z Ď xi are variables, such that |u| “ |xin j | and |z| “ |xj |. The 1 call is said to be terminal if q P Fi . It is well-known that terminal calls can be replaced by internal transitions.  The call graph of a program P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y is a directed graph with vertices P1 , . . . , Pn and an edge pPi , Pj q, for each Pi and Pj , such that Pi has a call to Pj . A program is recursive if its call graph has at least one cycle, and non-recursive if its call graph is a dag. Ťn In the rest of this paper, we denote by F pPq “ i“1 Fi the set of final states of the program P, by nFpPi q the set Si zFi of non-final states of Pi , and by Ťn nFpPq “ i“1 nFpPq be the set of non-final states of P.  3.1  Simplified syntax  To ease the description of programs defined in this paper, we use a simplified, human readable, imperative language such that each procedure of the program conforms to the following grammar:3 P ::“ proc Pi pid ˚ q begin var id ˚ S0 ; S end S0 ::“ assume f | goto `` | havoc id ` | id Ð t S ::“ S0 | S; S | id Ð Pi pt˚ q; S0 | Pi pt˚ q; S0 | return id 2 Observe that there are no global variables in the definition of integer program. Those can be encoded as input and output variables to each procedure. 3 Our simplified syntax does not seek to capture the generality of integer programs. Instead, our goal is to give a convenient notation for the programs given in this paper and only those.  8  The local variables occurring in P are denoted by id, linear terms by t, Presburger formulae by f , and control labels by `. Each procedure consists in local declarations followed by a sequence of statements. Statements may carry a label. Program statements can be either assume statements4 , assignments, procedure calls (possibly with a return value), return to the caller (possibly with a value), non-deterministic jumps goto `1 or . . . or `n , and havoc x1 , x2 , . . . , xn statements5 . In order to simplify the upcoming technical developments, we forbid empty procedures, procedures starting with a call or a return, i.e. each procedure must start with a statement generated by the S0 nonterminal. We consider the usual syntactic requirements (used variables must be declared, jumps are well defined, no jumps outside procedures, etc.). We do not define them, it suffices to know that all simplified programs in this paper comply with the requirements. A program using the simplified syntax can be easily translated into the formal syntax (Fig. 1). Example 3.1. Figure 1 shows a program in our simplified imperative language and its corresponding integer program P. Formally, P “ xP y, where P is the only procedure in the program, defined as: P  “  xtx, zu, txu, tzu, tq1init , q2 , q3 , εu, q1init , tεu, tt1 , t2 , t3 , t4 uy  Since P calls itself once (within the call transition t2 ), this program is recursive.   3.2  Semantics  We are interested in computing the summary relation between the values of the input and output variables of a procedure. To this end, we give the semantics of a program P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y as a tuple of relations, denoted JqK in the following, describing, for each non-final control state q P nFpPi q of a procedure Pi , the effect of the program when started in q upon reaching a state in Fi . The summary of a procedure Pi is the relation corresponding to its unique initial state, i.e. Jqiinit K. An interprocedurally valid path is represented by a tagged word over an p which maps each internal transition t to a symbol τ , and each call alphabet Θ, p In the sequel, we denote by Q the transition t to a pair of symbols x τ, τ y P Θ. nonterminal corresponding to the control state q, and by τ P Θ the alphabet symbol corresponding to the transition t of P. Formally, we associate P a visibly p ∆y, such pushdown grammar, denoted in the rest of the paper by GP “ xΞ, Θ, that Q P Ξ if and only if q P nFpPq and: R (a) Q Ñ τ P ∆ if and only if t : q ÝÑ q 1 and q 1 P F pPq R  (b) Q Ñ τ Q1 P ∆ if and only if t : q ÝÑ q 1 and q 1 P nFpPq z1 “Pj puq  (c) Q Ñ x τ Qinit τ y Q1 P ∆ if and only if t : q ÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ q 1 . j It is easily seen that interprocedurally valid paths in P and tagged words in GP are in one-to-one correspondence. In fact, each interprocedurally valid path of P between state q P nFpPi q and a state of Fi , where 1 ď i ď n, corresponds exactly to one tagged word of LQ pGP q. 4 assume  φ is executable if and only if the current values of the variables satisfy the Presburger formula φ. 5 havoc assigns non deterministically chosen integers to x , x , . . . , x . n 1 2  9  Example 3.2. (contd. from Ex. 3.1) The visibly pushdown grammar GP corresponding to P is given in Fig. 1 (c). In the following, we use superscripts a, b, c to distinguish productions of the form (a) Q Ñ τ , (b) Q Ñ τ Q1 or (c) Q Ñ x τ Qinit τ y Q1 , respectively. The language LQinit pGP q generated by GP j 1 init starting with Q1 contains the word w “ τ1 x τ2 τ1 x τ2 τ4 τ2 y τ3 τ2 y τ3 , of which w_nwpwq “ pτ1 τ2 τ1 τ2 τ4 τ2 τ3 τ2 τ3 , t2 ; 8, 4 ; 6uq is the corresponding nested word. The word w corresponds to an interprocedurally valid path where P calls itself twice. The control words γ1 “ pb1 pc2 pb1 pc2 pa4 pa3 pa3 and γ2 “ pb1 pc2 pa3 pb1 pc2 pa4 pa3 γ1 γ2 both produce w in this case, i.e. Qinit ùñ w and Qinit ùñ w.  1 1 The semantics of a program is the union of the semantics of the nested words corresponding to its executions, each of which being a relation over input and output variables. To define the semantics of a nested word, we first associate to p an integer relation ρτ , defined as follows: each τ P Θ R • for an internal transition t : q ÝÑ q 1 P ∆i , we define ρτ ” Rpxi , x1i q Ď Zxi ˆ Zxi ; z1 “Pj puq  • for a call transition t : q ÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ q 1 P ∆i , we define a call relation ρx τ ” 1  xj pxin “ uq Ď Zxi ˆ Zxj , a return relation ρτ y ” pz1 “ xout ˆ Zxi j j q Ď Z Ź 1 xi xi and a frame relation φτ ” xPxi zz x “ x Ď Z ˆ Z . Intuitively, the frame relation copies the values of all local variables, that are not involved in the call as return value receivers (z), across the call. We define the semantics of the program P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y in a top-down manner. Assuming a fixed ordering of the non-final states in the program, i.e. nFpPq “ xq1 , . . . , qm y, the semantics of the program P, denoted JPK, is the tuple of relations xJq1 K, . . . , Jqm Ky. For each non-final control state q P nFpPi q where xi 1 ď i ď n, we denote by JqK Ď ZŤ ˆ Zxi the relation (over the local variables of procedure Pi ) defined as JqK “ αPLQ pGP q JαK. It remains to define JαK, the semantics of the tagged word (or equivalently interprocedural valid path) α. Out of convenience, we define the semantics of its corresponding nested word w_nwpαq “ pθ, ;q over alphabet Θ, and define JαK “ Jw_nwpαqK. For a nesting relation ; Ď t1, . . . , |θ|u ˆ t1, . . . , |θ|u, we define ;i,j “ tps ´ pi´1q, t ´ pi´1qq | ps, tq P ; X ti, . . . , ju ˆ ti, . . . , juu, for some i, j P t1, . . . , `u, i ă j. Finally, we define Jpθ, ;qK Ď Zxi ˆ Zxi as follows: $ ’ if |θ| “ 1 &ρpθq1 ρpθq1 ˝ Jppθq2...|θ| , ;2,|θ| qK if |θ| ą 1, 1 ; j for no j ’ % CaRet jθ ˝ Jppθqj`1...|θ| , ;j`1,|θ| qK if |θ| ą 1, 1 ; j for a j  where, in the last case, which corresponds to call transition t P ∆i˘, we have ` pθq1 “ pθqj “ τ and define CaRet jθ “ ρx τ ˝ Jpθq2...j´1 , ;2,j´1 qK ˝ ρτ y X φτ .  Example 3.3. (contd. from Ex. 3.2) The semantics of a given the nested word θ “ pτ1 τ2 τ1 τ2 τ4 τ2 τ3 τ2 τ3 , t2 ; 8, 4 ; 6uq is a relation between valuations of tx, zu, given by: ` ` ˘ JθK “ ρτ1 ˝ pρx τ2 ˝ ρτ1 ˝˘ pρx τ2 ˝ ρτ4 ˝ ρτ2 y q X φτ2 ˝ ρ τ3 ˝ ρ τ y q X φ τ 2 ˝ ρ τ3 2  One can verify that JθK ” x “ 2 ^ z 1 “ 4, i.e. the result of calling P with input valuation x “ 2 is an output valuation z “ 4.  10  Finally, we introduce a few useful notations. An interprocedural valid path α is said to be feasible whenever JαK ‰ H. We denote by JPKq the component of JPK corresponding to q P nFpPq. Notice that JPKq P Zxi ˆ Zxi , i.e. is a relation over the valuations of the local variables of the procedure Pi if q is a state of Pi , i.e. q P Si . Slightly abusing notations, we define LPi pGP q as LQinit pGP q and i x x i i JPKPi as JPKqiinit . Clearly we have that JPKPi Ď Z ˆ Z .  3.3  A Semantics of Depth-First Derivations  We present an alternative, but equivalent, program semantics, using derivations of visibly pushdown program grammars, instead of the generated (nested) words. This semantics brings us closer to the notion of under-approximation defined in the next section. We start by defining depth-first derivations, that have the following informal property: if X and Y are two nonterminals produced by the application of one rule, then the steps corresponding to a full derivation of the form X ñ ù ˚ u will be applied without interleaving with the steps corresponding to a derivation of the form Y ñ ù ˚ v. In other words, once the derivation of X has started, it will be finished before the derivation of Y begins. For an integer tuple α “ xα1 , . . . , αn y, we denote by }α}max “ maxni“1 αi . For a set of symbols S Ď Ξ Y Σ, and a set of positive integers I Ď N, we define S I “ txxiy | x P S, i P Iu. Given a word w P pΞ Y Σq˚ of length n ě 0, and a n-dimensional vector α “ xα1 , . . . , αn y P Nn , we define wα as the birthdatexα y xα y annotated word (bd-word) pwq1 1 . . . pwqn n over the alphabet pΞ Y ΣqN . We denote wxxcyy “ wc , where c P N and c “ xc, . . . , cy P N|w| . For instance, abcx1,2,3y “ ax1y bx2y cx3y and abcxx2yy “ ax2y bx2y cx2y . pZ,wq{j Let G “ xΞ, Σ, ∆y be a grammar and u ùùùùñ v be a step, for some production pZ, wq P ∆ and 1 ď j ď |u|. If α P N|u| is a vector of birthdates, the corresponding birthdate-annotated step (bd-step) is defined as folpZ,wq{j  lows: uα ùùùùñ v β if and only if puα qj “ Z xiy and v β “ puα q1 ¨ ¨ ¨ puα qj´1 ¨ wxx}α}max `1yy ¨ puα qj`1 ¨ ¨ ¨ puα q|u| . Example 3.4. Consider the grammar G “ xtX, Y, Zu, ta, bu, ∆y with rules pX,Y Zq  pY,aY q  ∆ “ tX Ñ Y Z, Y Ñ aY | ε, Z Ñ Zb | εu. Then X x0y ùùùùñ Y x1y Z x1y ùùùùñ pZ,Zbq  pY,εq  pZ,εq  ax2y Y x2y Z x1y ùùùùñ ax2y Y x2y Z x3y bx3y ùùùñ ax2y Z x3y bx3y ùùùñ ax2y bx3y and pX,Y Zq pY,aY q pY,εq pZ,Zbq pZ,εq X x0y ùùùùñ Y x1y Z x1y ùùùùñ ax2y Y x2y Z x1y ùùùñ ax2y Z x1y ùùùùñ ax2y Z x3y bx3y ùùùñ x2y x3y a b are birthdate-annotated step sequences.  A birthdate annotated step is further said to be depth-first whenever, in the above definition of a bd-step, we have, moreover, that i is the most recent birthdate among the nonterminals of u , i.e. i “ max tj | P kΞtju puα q ‰ 0u. We write this fact as follows uα ù ñ v β . A birthdate annotated step sequence is said to df  pγq1 {j1  be depth-first if all of its steps are depth-first. Finally, a step sequence w0 ùùùùñ pγqn {jn  w1 . . . wn´1 ùùùùñ wn for some control word γ is said to be depth-first, written γ w0 ùñ wn , if there exist vectors α1 P N||P kΞ pw1 q|| , . . . , αn P N||P kΞ pwn q|| such that df xx0yy pγq1 {j1 w0 ùùùùñ df  α  pγqn {jn  n´1 w1α1 . . . wn´1 ùùùùñ wnαn holds.  df  11  Example 3.5. (contd. from Ex. 3.4) Consider the grammar G from Example pX,Y Zq  pY,aY q  pZ,Zbq  pY,q  pZ,q  3.4. Then X ùùùùñ Y Z ùùùùñ aY Z ùùùùñ aY Zb ùùùñ aZb ùùùñ ab is not pX,Y Zq  pY,aY q  pY,q  pZ,Zbq  a depth-first derivation, whereas X ùùùùñ Y Z ùùùùñ aY Z ùùùñ aZ ùùùùñ pZ,q  aZb ùùùñ ab is a depth-first derivation.  p ∆y Since we are dealing with visibly pushdown grammars GP “ xΞ, Θ, init 1 corresponding to programs P, for every production Q Ñ Ý x τ Qj τ y Q P ∆ we have Qinit ‰ Q1 . Hence, we can assume wlog that for all productions p P ∆, j all nonterminals occurring in tail ppq are distinct (e.g. X Ñ Z Z is not allowed). As we show next, under that assumption, a control word uniquely identifies a depth-first derivation: p ∆y be a visibly pushdown grammar corresponding Lemma 3.1. Let GP “ xΞ, Θ, γ γ to a program P, Q P Ξ be a nonterminal, Q ù ñ u and Q ù ñ v be two depth-first df  df  derivations of GP . Then they differ in no step, hence u “ v. Proof. By contradiction, suppose that there exists a step that differs in the two derivations from Q with control word γ P ∆˚ . Thus, there exists an integer pγq1  pγqi  i, 1 ď i ă |γ|, such that Q “ w0 ùñ w1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wi´1 ùñ wi and wi contains two occurrences of the nonterminal head ppγqi`1 q, that is, there exists p1 ‰ p2 pwi qp1 “ pwi qp2 “ head ppγqi`1 q. Two cases arise: 1. pwi qp1 and pwi qp2 result from the occurrence of some pγqj with j ď i which contradicts that all nonterminals occurring in tail ppγqj q are distinct. 2. pwi qp1 and pwi qp2 result from the occurrence of pγqk and pγql with k ‰ l respectively. Hence in the bd-step sequence thereof, their birthdate necessarily differ. Therefore there is only one occurence of head ppγqi`1 q with the most recent birthdate which contradicts the existence of two distinct depth-first derivations. Consequently, in a visibly pushdown grammar corresponding to a program, a control word uniquely determines a step sequence, and, moreover, if this step sequence is a derivation, the control word determines the word produced by it. This remark leads to the definition of an alternative semantics of programs, based on control words, instead of produced words. To this end, for each non-final control location q P nFpPi q, of a program P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y, where 1 ď i ď n, we define the semantics of a control word γ that induces a depth-first γ p ∆y, as a set JγK Ď Zx ˆ Zx , derivation Q ù ñ w of the grammar GP “ xΞ, Θ, df  where x “ x1 ¨ . . . ¨ xn is the set of variables in P. The definition of JγK is by induction on the structure of γ: ( (a) if γ “ Q Ñ Ý τ then JγK “ I ¨ O | xIÓxi , OÓxi y P ρτ , where Q P Ξ corresponds to q P nFpPi q; (b) if γ “ pQ Ñ Ý τ Q1 q ¨ γ 1 then  ( JγK “ I ¨ O | DJ . xIÓxi , JÓxi y P ρτ and J ¨ O P Jγ 1 K where Q, Q1 P Ξ correspond to q, q 1 P nFpPi q;  12  (c) if γ “ pQ Ñ Ý x τ Qinit τ y Q1 q ¨ γ 1 then JγK is given by j tI ¨ O | DJ, K, L P Zx . xIÓxi , JÓxj y P ρx τ , J ¨ K P Jγ1 K,  xKÓxj , LÓxi y P ρτ y , xIÓxi , LÓxi y P φτ , L ¨ O P Jγ2 Ku ,  where Qinit , Q1 P Ξ correspond to qjinit (the initial control location of Pj ), j γ1  γ2  df  df  q 1 P nFpPi q, and Qinit ù ñ w1 , Q1 ù ñ w2 , γ 1 “ γ1 γ2 , respectively; since γ is j the control word of a depth-first derivation, the derivations of Qinit and Q1 j are unique, and will not interleave with each other. The following lemma proves the equivalence of the semantics of a (tagged) word generated by a visibly pushdown grammar and that of a control word that produces it. p ∆y be a visibly pushdown grammar for a program Lemma 3.2. Let GP “ xΞ, Θ, P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y, x “ x1 ¨ . . . ¨ xn be the concatenation of all tuples of local variables in P, Q P Ξ be a nonterminal corresponding to a non-final control γ p˚ location q P nFpPi q, and Q ù ñ α be a depth-first derivation of GP , where α P Θ df  and γ P ∆˚ . Then, we have: JγK “ I ¨ O P Zxˆx | xIÓxi , OÓxi y P JαK  (  .  Ý τ , we have α “ τ , Proof. By induction on |γ| ą 0. If |γ| “ 1, i.e. γ “ Q Ñ hence JαK “ Jw_nwpαqK “ ρτ and the equality follows trivially. If |γ| ą 1, let γ “ p ¨ γ 1 , for some p P ∆ and some γ 1 P ∆˚ . We distinguish two cases, based on the type of p: γ1  • p “ Q Ñ Ý τ Q1 : in this case α “ τ ¨ β and Q1 ù ñ β is a depth-first df  1 derivation of GP . By the induction ( hypothesis, since |γ | ă |γ|, we have 1 Jγ K “ J ¨ O | xJÓxi , OÓxi y P JβK .  JγK “ tI ¨ O | DJ . xIÓxi , JÓxi y P ρτ and xJÓxi , OÓxi y P JβKu “ tI ¨ O | xIÓxi , OÓxi y P Jw_nwpαqKu “ tI ¨ O | xIÓxi , OÓxi y P JαKu  • p“QÑ Ý x τ Qinit τ y Q1 : in this case α “ x τ β1 τ y β2 and GP has depthj γ1  γ2  df  df  first derivations Qinit ù ñ β1 and Q1 ù ñ β2 . We have two symmetrical j cases: either γ 1 “ γ1 γ2 or γ 1 “ γ2 γ1 . We consider the first case in the following: JγK  “  tI ¨ O |  DJ, K, L P Zx . xIÓxi , JÓxj y P ρx τ , J ¨ K P Jγ1 K, xKÓxj , LÓxi y P ρτ y , xIÓxi , LÓxi y P φτ , L ¨ O P Jγ2 Ku  We apply the induction hypothesis to γ1 and γ2 , since |γ1 | ă |γ| and |γ2 | ă |γ|, and obtain: JγK  DJ, K, L P Zx . xIÓxi , JÓxj y P ρx τ , xJÓxj , KÓxj y P Jβ1 K, xKÓxj , LÓxi y P ρτ y , xIÓxi , LÓxi y P φτ , xLÓxi , OÓxi y P Jβ2 Ku “ tI ¨ O | xIÓxi , OÓxi y P Jw_nwpαqKu “ tI ¨ O | xIÓxi , OÓxi y P JαKu “  tI ¨ O |  13  Consequently, the semantics of a program P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y can be equivalently defined considering the sets Ť γ JγKu , JPKq “ txIÓxi , OÓxi y | I ¨ O P Qù ñ w df for each non-final state q P nFpPi q of the procedure Pi of P.  4  Underapproximating the Program Semantics  In what follows we define context-free language underapproximations by filtering out derivations. In particular, in this section, we define a family of underapproximations of JPK, called bounded-index underapproximations. Then we show that each k-index underapproximation of the semantics of a (possibly recursive) program P coincides with the semantics of a non-recursive program computable from P and k.  4.1  Index-bounded derivations  The central notion of this section are index-bounded derivations, i.e. derivations in which each step has a limited budget of nonterminals. This notion is the key to our underapproximation method. For a given integer constant k ą 0, a word u P pΣ Y Ξq˚ is said to be of index k, if u contains at most k occurrences of nonterminals (formally, |uÓΞ | ď k ). A step u ñ v is said to be k-indexed, denoted u ùñ v, if and only if both u and pkq  v are of index k. As expected, a step sequence is k-indexed if all its steps are k-indexed. For instance, both derivations from Ex. 3.5 are of index 2. Lemma 4.1. For every grammar G “ xΞ, Σ, ∆y the following properties hold: (1) ùñ˚ Ď ùùùñ˚ for all k ě 1 pkq  (2) ñ ù “  pk`1q  Ť8 k“1  ùñ˚ pkq  (3) for all X, Y P Ξ, XY ùñ˚ w P Σ˚ if and only if there exist w1 , w2 P Σ˚ , pkq  such that w “ w1 w2 and either: (i) X ùùùñ˚ w1 and Y ùñ˚ w2 , or pk´1q  pkq  (ii) Y ùùùñ˚ w2 and X ùñ˚ w1 . pk´1q  pkq  Proof. The proof of points (1) and (2) follow immediately from the definition of ùñ˚ . Let us now turn to the proof of point (3) (only if). First we define w1 and pkq  w2 . Consider the step sequence XY ùñ˚ w and look at the last step. It must pkq  be of the form uZv ùñ˚ uyv “ w, where u, v, y P Σ˚ , and one of the following pkq  must hold: Z has been generated from either X or Y . Suppose that Z stems from Y (the other case is treated similarly). In this case, transitively remove from the step-sequence all the steps transforming the rightmost occurrence of 14  Y . Hence we obtain a step sequence XY ùñ˚ w1 Y . Then w2 is the unique pkq  word satisfying w “ w1 w2 . Since XY ùñ˚ w1 Y , by removing the occurrence of pkq  Y in rightmost position at every step, we find that X ùùùñ˚ w1 , and we are pk´1q  done. Having Z stemming from X yields Y ùùùñ˚ w2 . For the proof of the pk´1q  other direction (if) assuming (i) (the other case is similar), it is easily seen that XY ùñ˚ w1 Y ùñ˚ w1 w2 . pkq  pkq  The previous definitions extend naturally ` ˘˚ to bd-steps and bd-step sequences, and we define Υpkq “ twβ P pΞ Y ΣqN | |wβ ÓΞN | ď ku the set of bd-words with at most k occurrences of nonterminals. We write the fact that a bd-step sequence uα ñ˚ v β is both k-indexed and depth-first as uα ùùùñ˚ v β . For any df pkq  symbol X P Ξ and constant k ą 0, we define the languages: pkq  LX pGq “ tw P Σ˚ | X ùñ˚ wu pkq  Γ  df pkq  γ  pGq “ tγ P ∆ | Du , v β P Υpkq : uα ùùùñ v β u . ˚  α  df pkq  Example 4.1. (contd. from Ex. 3.2) Inspecting the grammar GP from Ex.3.2 reveals that n n LQinit pGP q “ tpτ1 x τ2 q τ4 pτ2 y τ3 q | n P Nu . 1 For each value of n we give a 2-index derivation capturing the word: repeat n times the steps pb1 pc2  pa 3  Qinit ùùñ τ1 x τ2 Qinit ñ τ1 x τ2 Qinit 1 1 τ2 y Q3 ù 1 τ2 y τ3 followed by the step pa 4  Qinit ùñ τ4 . 1 p2q  Therefore the 2-index approximation of GP shows that LQinit pGP q “ LQinit pGP q. 1 1  Example 4.2. (contd. from Ex. 3.5) For the grammar G from Ex. 3.5, we obtain the following control sets: Γdf p1q Γdf p2q  “ pY, aY q˚ pY, εq Y pZ, Zbq˚ pZ, εq “ pX, Y ZqpY, aY q˚ pY, εqpZ, Zbq˚ pZ, εqY pX, Y ZqpZ, Zbq˚ pZ, εqpY, aY q˚ pY, εq Y Γdf p1q .   We recall a known result. Proposition 1 ([20]). For all k ě 1, G “ pΞ, Σ, ∆q and X P Ξ, we have pkq LX pGq “ L̂X pΓdf pkq , Gq. Finally, given k ě 1, we define the k-index semantics of P as JPKpkq “ xJq1 Kpkq , . . . , Jqm Kpkq y, where nFpPq “ tq1 , . . . , qm u and the k-index semantics of a non-final control state q P nFpPi q of a procedure Pi of the program P is the pkq relation JqK “ JPKq Ď Zxi ˆ Zxi , defined as: Ť γ JPKpkq JγKu . q “ txIÓxi , OÓxi y | I ¨ O P Qù ùùñw df pkq 15  pY, aY q  pZ, Zbq pY, εq  tY utZu  tZu  pY, aY q  pZ, εq pY, εq  pX, Y Zq  tXu  tY, Zu  0 pZ, εq  pZ, Zbq  tZutY u  pY, εq  tY u pZ, εq  pZ, Zbq  pY, aY q  Figure 2: The graph Adf pkq pGq for k ě 2 and for the grammar G of Ex. 3.5  4.2  Depth-first index-bounded control sets  For a bd-word wα , let rwα s “ P kΞt}α}max u pwα q ¨ P kΞt}α}max ´1u pwα q ¨ ¨ ¨ P kΞt0u pwα q . Each symbol in rwα s is a ||Ξ||-dimensional vector, that is rwα s P pN||Ξ|| q˚ . Therefore with a slight abuse, we can view each of these tuples as a multiset on Ξ. Moreover, each tuple P kΞtiu pwα q in rwα s is the multiset of nonterminals that occur in wα with the same birthdate 0 ď i ď }α}max , and the elements of rwα s are ordered in the reversed order of their birthdates. For instance, the first tuple P kΞt}α}max u pwα q is the multiset of the most recently added nonterminals. Notice that for each bd-word u we have rus “ 0 if u P pΣN q˚ . Finally, let 0 be the identity element for concatenation, i.e. rwα s ¨ 0 “ 0 ¨ rwα s “ rwα s. x0y x1y x1y Example 4.3. (contd. from Ex. 3.5) For the bd-step“sequence ù ù ‰ X ñ “ Y Z ‰ ñ ax2y Y x2y Z x1y ñ ù ax2y Y x2y Z x3y bx3y (Ex. 3.5) we have X x0y “ tXu, Y x1y Z x1y “ “ ‰ “ ‰ tY, Zu, ax2y Y x2y Z x1y “ tY u ¨ tZu and ax2y Y x2y Z x3y bx3y “ tZu ¨ tY u .   The r.s operator is lifted from bd-words to sets of bd-words, i.e. subsets of ˘˚ “ ‰ pΣYΞqN . The set Υpkq is of particular interest in the following developments. “ ‰ “ ‰ Next we define the graph Adf pkq pGq “ x Υpkq , p∆˚ , ¨q, Ñy, where Υpkq is the set of vertices, ∆ is the set of edge labels and Ñ is the edge relation, defined as: `  pZ,wq  vr ÝÝÝÑ w r if and only if: • vr “ pr v q1 ¨ vrt , where pr v q1 P N||Ξ|| , and P kΞ pZq ď pr v q1 , i.e. Z occurs with maximal birthdate vr, that is, it occurs in pr v q1 , and • w r “ P kΞ pwq ¨ ppr v q1 ´ P kΞ pZqq ¨ vrt , i.e. Z is removed from its multiset pr v q1 , r and the nonterminals of w are added, with maximal birthdate to obtain w. γ  r in Adf pkq pGqu. For example, Next, define LpAdf pkq pGqq “ tγ P ∆˚ | vr Ý Ñ w df pkq Fig. 2 shows the A graph for the grammar G from Ex. 3.5. The next lemma proves that the paths of Adf pkq pGq represent the control words of the depth-first derivations of G of index k. In the following, we omit the argument G from Γdf pkq pGq, or Adf pkq pGq, when it is clear from the context.  16  Lemma 4.2. Given a grammar G “ xΞ, Σ, ∆y, and k ą 0, for each X P Ξ and γ γ P ∆˚ , there exists a derivation X ùùùñ w, for some w P Σ˚ , if and only if df pkq  γ  rXs Ý Ñ 0 in Adf pkq pGq. γ  Proof. “ñ” We shall prove the following more general statement. Let uα ùùùñ df pkq  wβ be a k-indexed depth-first bd-step sequence. By induction on |γ| ě 0, we ‰ γ “ show the existence of a path ruα s Ý Ñ wβ in Adf pkq . “ ‰ For the base case |γ| “ 0, we have uα “ wβ which yields ruα s “ wβ and “ ‰ since uα P Υpkq by definition of Γdf pkq we have that ruα s P Υpkq and we are done. pZ,xq For the induction step |γ| ą 0, let v η ùùùñ wβ be the last step of the sequence, df pkq  for some pZ, xq P ∆, i.e. γ “ σ ¨ pZ, xq with σ P ∆˚ . By the induction hypothesis, σ Adf pkq has a path ruα s Ý Ñ rv η s. Let rv η s “ v1 ¨ vrt , where v1 “ prv η sq1 P N|Ξ| , and |Ξ| ˚ q is a sequence of multisets “vrt Pβ ‰pN pkq “ ‰ of nonterminals. It remains to show that w P Υ , P kΞ pZq ď v1 and wβ “ P kΞ pxq ¨ pv1 ´ P kΞ pZqq ¨ vrt to conclude ‰ ‰ pZ,xq “ γ “ that Adf pkq has an edge rv η s ÝÝÝÑ wβ , hence a path ruα s Ý Ñ wβ . pZ,xq{j  Since v η ùùùùñ wβ for some 1 ď j ď |v η | we have that pv η qj “ Z xiy df pkq  where i “ max tj | P kΞtju pv η q ‰ 0u and wβ “ pv η q1 . . . pv η qj´1 ¨ xxx}η}max `1yy ¨ pv η qj`1 . . . pv η q|vη | . It is easily seen that }β}max “ }η}max ` 1. Moreover, since i is the maximal birthdate among the non-terminals of v η , we have rv η s “ P kΞtiu pv η q . . . P kΞt0u pv η q, hence v1 “ P kΞtiu pv η q and vrt “ P kΞti´1u pv η q . . . P kΞt0u pv η q. Also we have P kΞtju pwβ q “ 0 for all j, i ă j ď }η}max , P kΞtiu pwβ q “ P kΞtiu pv η q´ P kΞtiu pZ xiy q and P kΞt`u pwβ q “ P kΞt`u pv η q for all `, 0 ď ` ă i. Using the foregoing properties of wβ the following equalities are easy to check: “ β‰ w “ P kΞt}η}max `1u pwβ q ¨ P kΞt}η}max u pwβ q . . . P kΞt0u pwβ q “ P kΞt}η}max `1 u pwβ q ¨ P kΞtiu pwβ q ¨ P kΞti´1u pwβ q . . . P kΞt0u pwβ q “ P kΞ pxq ¨ P kΞtiu pwβ q ¨ P kΞti´1u pwβ q . . . P kΞt0u pwβ q “ P kΞ pxq ¨ pP kΞtiu pv η q ´ P kΞtiu pZ xiy qq . . . P kΞt0u pwβ q “ P kΞ pxq ¨ pv1 ´ P kΞ pZqq ¨ P kΞti´1u pwβ q . . . P kΞt0u pwβ q “ P kΞ pxq ¨ pv1 ´ P kΞ pZqq ¨ P kΞti´1u pv η q . . . P kΞt0u pv η q “ P kΞ pxq ¨ pv1 ´ P kΞ pZqq ¨ vrt “ ‰ This concludes that wβ “ P kΞ pzq ¨ pv1 ´ P kΞ pZqq ¨ vrt , and since wβ P Υpkq , we ‰ ‰ pZ,xq “ γ “ obtain that rv η s ÝÝÝÑ wβ is an edge in Adf pkq , and finally that ruα s Ý Ñ wβ is a path in Adf pkq . γ rÝ Ñw r be a path of Adf pkq pGq. “ð” We prove a more general statement. Let u We show by induction on |γ| that there exist bd-words uα , wβ P Υpkq , such that “ ‰ γ ruα s “ u r, wβ “ w, r and uα ùùùñ wα . df pkq “ ‰ r“w r P Υpkq then The base case |γ| “ 0 is trivial, because u r and since u there exists uα P Υpkq such that ruα s “ u r, and we are done. For the induction step |γ| ą 0, let γ “ σ¨pZ, xq, for some production pZ, xq P ∆ and σ P ∆˚ . By the induction hypothesis, there exist bd-words uα , v η P Υpkq 17  σ  σ  pZ,xq  r “ ruα s Ý r is a path in Adf pkq , and uα ùùùñ v η is a such that u Ñ rv η s ÝÝÝÑ w df pkq  k-index bd-step sequence. By the definition of the edge relation in Adf pkq , it follows that rv η s “ P kΞtiu pv η q ¨ vrt where i “ max tj | P kΞtiu pv η q ‰ 0u. Moreover, there exists j, 1 ď j ď |v η | such that pv η qj “ Z xiy since P kΞ pZq ď P kΞtiu pv η q. Now define wβ “ pv η q1 . . . pv η qj´1 ¨ xxx}η}max `1yy ¨ pv η qj`1 . . . pv η q|vη | . It is routine “ ‰ pZ,xq{j r “ wβ which concludes the to check v η ùùùùñ wβ holds. Next we show, w df  proof. w r vt “P kΞ pxq¨pP kΞtiu pv η q´P kΞ pZqq¨r “P kΞt}η}max `1u pxxx}η}max `1yy q¨pP kΞtiu pv η q´P kΞtiu pZ xiy qq¨r vt vt “P kΞt}η}max `1u pwβ q¨pP kΞtiu pv η q´P kΞtiu pZ xiy qq¨r “P kΞt}η}max `1u pwβ q¨pP kΞtiu pv η q´P kΞtiu pZ xiy qq¨ P kΞti´1u pv η q . . . P kΞt0u pv η q Since i “ max tj | P kΞtiu pv η q ‰ 0u; P kΞt`u pwβ q “ P kΞt`u pv η q for 0 ď ` ă i and P kΞtiu pwβ q “ P kΞtiu pv η q´P kΞtiu pZ xiy q show that “P kΞt}η}max `1u pwβ q¨P kΞtiu pwβ qP kΞti´1u pwβ q . . . P kΞt0u pwβ q “P kΞt}η}max `1u pwβ q¨P kΞtiu pwβ qP kΞti´1u pwβ q . . . P kΞt0u pwβ q “ ‰ “ wβ  Consequently, we have the following (also proved in [22]): Corollary 1. For all k ě 1, G “ pΞ, Σ, ∆q and X P Ξ, we have Γdf pkq is regular.  4.3  Bounded-index Underapproximations of Control Structures  We start describing our program transformation, from a recursive program to a non-recursive program in which all computation traces correspond to words generated by an index-bounded grammar. In the beginning we choose to ignore the data manipulations, and give the non-recursive program only in terms of transitions between control locations and (non-recursive) calls. Then we show that the execution traces of this new program match the depth-first indexbounded derivations of the visibly pushdown grammar of the original program. Let P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y be a recursive program. For the moment, let us assume that P has no (local) variables, and thus, all the labels of the internal transitions, as well as all the call, return and frame relations are trivially true. As we did previously, we assume a fixed ordering q1 , . . . , qm on the set nFpPq of non-final p ∆y be the visibly pushdown grammar associated states of P. Let GP “ xΞ, Θ, with P, where each non-final state q of P is associated a nonterminal Q P Ξ. Then, for a given constant K ą 0, we define a non-recursive program HK that captures only the traces of P corresponding to K-index depth-first derivations of GP (Algorithm 1). Formally, we define HK “ xquery 0 , query 1 , . . . , query K y, i.e. the program is structured in K ` 1 procedures, such that: 18  • query 0 consists of a single statement assume false, i.e. no execution going through a call of query 0 is possible, • all executions of query k , for each 1 ď k ď K correspond to k-index depth-first derivations of GP . We distinguish between grammar productions of type (a) Q Ñ Ý τ , (b) Q Ñ Ý τ Q1 and (c) Q Ñ Ý x τ, Qinit τ y Q1 (see Ex. 3.2) of the visibly pushdown grammar j p are finite sets, we associate each nonterminal Q P Ξ p ∆y. Since Ξ and Θ G “ xΞ, Θ, p an integer 1 ď Iτ ď ||Θ||, p an integer 1 ď IQ ď ||Ξ||, each alphabet symbol τ P Θ and define the productions by the following formulae: ł πa px, yq ” x “ IQ ^ y “ Iτ pQÑ Ý τ qP∆ ł πb px, y, zq ” x “ IQ ^ y “ Iτ ^ z “ IQ 1 pQÑ Ý τ Q1 qP∆ ł ` πc px, y, z, t, sq ” x “ IQ ^ y “ Ix τ ^ 1 qP∆ pQÑ Ý x τ Qinit τ y Q j ˘ z “ IQinit ^ t “ Iτ y ^ s “ IQ1 j It is easy to see that the sizes of the πa , πb and πc formulae are linear in the size of P (there is one disjunctive clause per production of GP , and each such production corresponds to a transition of P). The translation of P into H can hence be implemented as a linear time source-to-source program transformation. Algorithm 1: proc query k pXq for 1 ď k ď K begin var PC, y, z ; asgnk PC Ð X ; 0: k start : goto prodka or prodkb or prodkc ; k proda : assume Dτ. πa pPC, τ q ; asgnk assume true ; a: return; prodk havoc (y) ; b: assume Dτ. πb pPC, τ, yq ; asgnk PC Ð y ; b: goto startk ; k prodc : havoc (y,z) ; assume Dτ, τ 1 . πc pPC, τ, y, τ 1 , zq ; ndetk : goto swapk or asgnkc ; k swap : swap (y, z) ; asgnk PC Ð z ; c: query k´1 pyq ; goto startk ; end  /* Q Ñ τ */  /* Q Ñ τ Q1 */  1 1 /* QÑτ Qinit j τ Q */  Next, we show a mapping from the paths of Adf pkq onto the feasible interprocedural valid paths of query k . To relate these paths, we need to introduce the 19  “ ‰ p Given s P Υpkq Y tsink u and p P ∆ define δps, pq “ s1 if s Ý Ñ s1 holds in Adf pkq p for some s1 , otherwise (s Ý Ñ s1 holds for no s1 ) then δps, pq “ sink . The output mapping λ is defined as follows: k´|r v| v| 1. λptXu ¨ vr, pX, τ qq “ startk´|rv| prodk´|r asgna startk´|rv|`1 , if vr ‰ ε; a k k k 2. λptXu, pX, τ qq “ start proda asgna k´|r v| k´|r v| 3. λptXu ¨ vr, pX, τ X 1 qq “ startk´|rv| prodb asgnb startk´|rv| k´|r v| k´|r v| 1 4. λptXu ¨ vr, pX, X2 qq “ start prodc ndetk´|rv| ( τ X1 τinit init 1 2 5. λp Q , Q ¨ vr, pQ , τ Q qq “ k´|r v|  k´|r v |´1  k´|r v |´1  asgnc asgn startk´|rv|´1 prodb ( 0 init 1 1 6. λp Q , Q ¨ vr, pQ , τ qq “ k´|r v|  k´|r v |´1  k´|r v|  k´|r v |´1  k´|r v |´1  asgnb  startk´|rv|´1 k´|r v |´1  startk´|rv|  k´|r v |´1  startk´|rv|´1  v |´1 swapk´|rv| asgn asgn0 startk´|rv|´1 prodk´|r asgna a ( c init 1 1 2 7. λp Q , Q ¨ vr, pQ , τ Q qq “ k´|r v |´1  swapk´|rv| asgnc asgn0 startk´|rv|´1 prodb asgnb 8. λps, pq “ K, for all s and p, such that δps, pq “ sink holds. Figure 3: Definition of the mappings δ and λ for SC kQ . notion of gsm mappings.  Definition 1 ([14]). A generalized sequential machine, abbreviated gsm, is a 6-tuple S “ xK, Σ, ∆, δ, λ, q1 y where (1) K is a finite non-empty set of states; (2) Σ and ∆ respectively are input and output alphabet; (3) δ and λ are mappings from K ˆ Σ into K and ∆˚ , respectively; (4) q1 P K is the start state. The functions δ and λ are extended by induction to K ˆ Σ˚ by defining for every state q, x P Σ˚ , and y P Σ: • δpq, εq “ q and λpq, εq “ ε. • δpq, xyq “ δpδpq, xq, yq and λpq, xyq “ λpq, xqλpδpq, xq, yq. The operation defined by Spxq “ λpq1 , xq for each x P Σ˚ is called a gsm mapping. “ ‰ We define the gsm SC kQ “ x Υpkq Y tsink u, ∆, L, δ, λ, rQsy upon Adf pkq , where L denotes the statement labels found in query 0 , . . . , query k ; and the mappings δ and λ are given by the rules of Fig. 3. p ∆y, and k ą 0, for Lemma 4.3. For a visibly pushdown grammar G “ xΞ, Θ, each Q P Ξ the set of feasible interprocedural valid paths of query k pQq coincides γ with the set tSC kQ pγq | rQs Ý Ñ 0 in Adf pkq u. Proof. The feasible interprocedural valid paths of query k pQq at Algorithm 1 δ  δ  δn´1  0 1 matches sequences of the form σ0 ÝÑ σ1 ÝÑ . . . ÝÝÝÑ σn , where each σi P Ξ˚ is a stack, i.e. a possibly empty sequence of frames each containing a snapshot of the value of the local variable PC, δi P ∆ are productions of G. The sequence of stacks σ0 , σ1 , . . . , σn are snapshots of values of the local variable PC between two consecutive visit to a start label or between the last visit to a start label and the last return. Instances of such consecutive visits are given by startk , prodka , asgnka ; or startk , prodka , asgnka , return, startk`1 (when returning from a previous call); or startk , prodkc , ndetk , swapk , asgnkc , startk´1 (immediately after entering the call query k´1 ). When Algorithm 1 is started with a call to query k pQq, the first stack in the trace is Q. The set of stack sequences are generated by a labelled graph defined  20  by the following rules, where the stack on both sides of each rule are words w P Ξ˚ such that |w| ď k. pQ,τ q  (a) Q ¨ σ ÝÝÝÑ σ pQ,τ Q1 q  (b) Q ¨ σ ÝÝÝÝÝÑ Q1 ¨ σ pQ,xxτ Q1 τ y Q2 q  pQ,xxτ Q1 τ y Q2 q  (c) we have either (i) Q ¨ σ ÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ Q1 ¨ Q2 ¨ σ, or (ii) Q ¨ σ ÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ Q2 ¨ Q1 ¨ σ Following the previous definition, we find that the set of sequences of control γ labels tSC kQ pγq | Q Ý Ñ εu coincides with the feasible interprocedural valid path of query k pQq. γ Next we show that Q Ý Ñ ε is a valid stack sequence of query k pQq if and only γ  if rQs Ý Ñ 0 in Adf pkq pGq. For this, consider the following relation between the “ ‰ r P Υpkq : we write σ Î w stacks σ P Ξ˚ such that |σ| ď k and words w r if and only if exactly one of the following holds: (1) |σ| “ |w| r and, for all 1 ď i ď |w| r : tpσqi u “ pwq r i , or r ` 1, pwq r 1 “ tpσq1 , pσq2 u, and for all 1 ă i ď |w| r : tpσqi`1 u “ pwq r i. (2) |σ| “ |w| The proof goes by induction and shows the following stronger statement relating the reachable stacks and the states of Adf pkq reachable from rQs: for any stack γ γ sequence Q Ý Ñ σ, there exists a path rQs Ý Ñw r in Adf pkq , such that σ Î w, r and vice versa. By putting together the previous result about the feasible interprocedural valid paths of query k pQq we find that they coincide with the set tSC kQ pγq | γ rQs Ý Ñ 0 in Adf pkq u.  4.4  Bounded-index Underapproximations of Programs  Algorithm 1 implements the transformation of the control structure of a recursive program P into a non-recursive program HK “ xquery 0 , . . . , query K y, which simulates its K-index derivations (actually, the control words thereof). In this section we extend this construction to programs with integer variables and data manipulations (Algorithm 2), by defining a set of procedures query k , for all 0 ď k ď K, such that each procedure query k has five sets of local variables, all of the same cardinality as x: two sets, named xI and xO , are used as input variables, whereas the other three sets, named xJ , xK and xL are used locally by query k . Besides, each query k has local variables called PC, τ , y, z and input k variable X. There are no output variables in query k . Let Vquery denote the k K 1 K tuple of local variables of query , and let VH “ Vquery ¨ . . . ¨ Vquery be the tuple of all variables of HK . For two tuples of variables x and y of equal length, and a valuation ν P Zx , we denote by νry{xs the valuation that maps pyqi into pνpxqqi , for all 1 ď i ď |x|. The following lemma is needed in the proof of Thm. 1. p ∆y be a visibly pushdown grammar for a program Lemma 4.4. Let GP “ xΞ, Θ, P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y, let x “ x1 ¨ . . . ¨ xn be the tuple of variables in P, and let HK “ xquery 0 , . . . , query K y be the program defined by Algorithm 2. Given a nonterminal Q P Ξ, corresponding to a non-final control state q P nFpPq, γ P ∆˚ ,  21  Algorithm 2: proc query k pX, xI , xO q for 1 ď k ď K begin var xJ , xK , xL ; var PC, τ, y, z ; asgnk PC Ð X ; 0: startk : goto prodka or prodkb or prodkc ; k proda : havoc (τ ); assume πa pPC, τ q; /* Q Ñ τ */ asgnk assume ρτ pxI , xO q; a: return; prodk havoc (τ, y); b: assume πb pPC, τ, yq; /* Q Ñ τ Q1 */ havoc (xJ ); assume ρτ pxI , xJ q; xI Ð xJ ; asgnk PC Ð y; b: goto startk ; k prodc : havoc (τ, y, z); 1 assume πc pPC, x τ, y, τ y , zq; /* QÑxxτ Qinit j τ y Q */ havoc (xJ , xK , xL ); assume ρx τ pxI , xJ q ; /* call relation */ assume ρτ y pxK , xL q ; /* return relation */ assume φτ pxI , xL q ; /* frame relation */ ndetk : goto swapk or asgnkc ; swapk : swap(y, z); swap(xJ , xL ); swap(xK , xO ); asgnk : xI Ð xL ; c PC Ð z; query k´1 py, xJ , xK q; goto startk ; end  22  Example call query  4.4. Let 2  us  consider  pQinit 1 , p 1 0 q, p 1 2 qq  an  following  pa 4  execution Qinit 1  c pb 1 p2  ùñ  of  query  for  the  τ1 x τ2 Qinit τ2 y Q 3 1  ùñ  pa 3  τ1 x τ2 Qinit τ2 y τ3 ùñ τ1 x τ2 τ4 τ2 y τ4 . 1  In the table below, the first row (labelled PC) gives the value of local variable PC when control hits the labelled statement given at the second row (labelled ip). The third row (labelled xI {xO ) represents the content of the two arrays. xI {xO “ p a b qp c d q says that, in xI , x has value a and z has value b; in xO , x has value c and z has value d. PC Qinit ´ Q2 ´ ´ 1 ip start2 prod2b ppb1 q start2 prod2c ppc2 q swap2 xI {xO p 1 0 qp 1 2 q p 1 0 qp 1 2 q p 1 0 qp 1 2 q p 1 0 qp 1 2 q p 1 0 qp 1 2 q PC Q3 ´ Qinit ´ 1 1 ip start1 proda ppa3 q start2 prod2a ppa4 q xI {xO p 1 0 qp 1 2 q p 1 0 qp 1 2 q p 0 0 qp 42 0 q p 0 0 qp 42 0 q The execution of query 2 pQinit 1 , p 1 0 q, p 1 2 qq starts on row 1, column 1 and proceeds until the call to query 1 pQ3 , p 1 0 q, p 1 2 qq at row 2, column 1 (the out of order case). The latter ends at row 2, column 2, where the execution of query 2 pQinit 1 , p 1 0 q, p 1 2 qq resumes. Since the execution is out of order, and the previous havocpxJ , xK , xL q results into xJ “ p 0 0 q, xK “ p 42 0 q and xL “ p 1 0 q (this choice complies with the call relation), the values of xI {xO are updated to p 0 0 q{p 42 0 q.  p ˚ , and 1 ď k ď K, such that Q ùùγùñ w, we have: wPΘ df pkq  JγK “  !`  ) ˘ IÓxI ¨xO rx ¨ x{xI ¨ xO s | I ¨ O P JSC kQ pγqK K  where JγK Ď Zxˆx and JSC kQ pγqK Ď ZVH . Proof. By induction on |γ| ą 0, applying a case split on the type of the first production in γ. The following theorem summarizes the first major result in this paper, namely that any K-index underapproximation of the semantics of a recursive program P can be computed by looking at the semantics of a non-recursive program HK , obtained from P by a syntactic source-to-source transformation. Theorem 1. Let P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y be a program, x “ x1 ¨ . . . ¨ xn be the tuple of variables in P, and let q P nFpPi q be a non-final control state of out init Pi “ xxi , xin , Fi , ∆i y. Moreover, let HK “ xquery 0 , . . . , query K y i , xi , Si , qi be the program defined by Algorithm 2. For any 1 ď k ď K, we have: r r JPKpkq q “ txpI ÓxI rx{xI sqÓxi , pI ÓxO rx{xO sqÓxi y |  r P JHK Kquery k , IpXq r Ir ¨ O “ Qu .  p ∆y be the visibly pushdown grammar corresponding to Proof. Let GP “ xΞ, Θ, P. By definition, we have ! ) Ť γ JPKpkq “ xIÓ , OÓ y | I ¨ O P JγK xi xi q Qù ùùñw df pkq 23  γ  ”Ď” Let Q ùùùñ w be a derivation of GP , and I ¨ O P JγK be a tuple from Zxˆx . df pkq  γ  By Lemma 4.2, rQs Ý Ñ 0 is a path in Adf pkq pGP q, and by Lemma 4.3, SC kQ pγq is  a feasible interprocedurally valid path of query k pQq. By´ Lemma¯4.4, there exists rO r such that Ir ¨ O r P JSC k pγqK, and I ¨ O “ IÓ r x ¨x rx ¨ x{xI ¨ xO s. tuples I, Q  I  O  We obtain thus I “ Ir ÓxI rx{xI s and O “ Ir ÓxO rx{xO s. k rO r P ZVquery r P JHK Kquery k and IpXq r ”Ě” Let I, , such that Ir ¨ O “ Q. Then there exists a feasible interprocedurally valid path π of query k pQq, such that r P JπK. By Lemma 4.3, there exists a control word γ P ∆˚ , such that Ir ¨ O ´ ¯ γ r x ¨x rx ¨ x{xI ¨ xO s P JγK. By rQs Ý Ñ 0 and π “ SC kQ pγq. By Lemma 4.4, IÓ I O γ  Lemma 4.2, we have that Q ùùùñ w is a derivation of GP . We can conclude df pkq  that xpIr ÓxI rx{xI sqÓxi , pIr ÓxO rx{xO sqÓxi y P JPKq . As a last point, we observe that the bounded-index sequence tJPKpkq u8 k“1 satisfies several conditions that advocate its use in program analysis, as an underapproximation sequence. The subset order and set union is extended to tuples of relations, point-wise. JPKpkq Ď JPKpk`1q for all k ě 1 pA1q Ť8 pkq JPK “ JPK pA2q k“1 Condition (A1) requires that the sequence is monotonically increasing, the limit of this increasing sequence being the actual semantics of the program (A2). These conditions follow however immediately from the two first points of Lemma 4.1. To decide whether the limit JPK has been reached by some iterate JPKpkq , it is enough to check that the tuple of relations in JPKpkq is inductive with respect to the statements of P. This can be implemented as an SMT query.  5  Completeness of Index-Bounded Underapproximations for Bounded Programs  In this section we define a class of recursive programs for which the precise summary semantics of each program in that class is effectively computable. We show for each program P in the class that (a) JPK “ JPKpkq for some value k ě 1, bounded by a linear function in the total number locpPq of control states in P, and moreover (b) the semantics of Hk is effectively computable (and so is that of JPKpkq by Thm. 1). Ť8 Given an integer relation R Ď Zn ˆ Zn , its transitive closure R` “ i“1 Ri , where R1 “ R and Ri`1 “ Ri ˝ R, for all i ě 1. In general, the transitive closure of a relation is not definable within decidable subsets of integer arithmetic, such as Presburger arithmetic. In this section we consider two classes of relations, called periodic, for which this is possible, namely octagonal relations, and finite monoid affine relations. Octagonal relation An octagonal relation is defined by a finite conjunction of constraints of the form ˘x ˘ y ď c, where x and y range over the set x Y x1 , and c is an integer constant. The transitive closure of any octagonal relation has been shown to be Presburger definable and effectively computable [8].  24  Linear affine relation A linear affine relation is defined by a formula Rpx, x1 q ” Cx ě d ^ x1 “ Ax ` b, where A P Znˆn , C P Zpˆn are matrices and b P Zn , d P Zp . R is said to have the finite monoid property if and only if the set tAi | i ě 0u is finite. It is known that the finite monoid condition is decidable [7], and moreover that the transitive closure of a finite monoid affine relation is Presburger definable and effectively computable [12, 7]. We define a bounded-expression b to be a regular expression of the form b “ w1˚ . . . wd˚ , where d ě 1 and each wi is a non-empty word. A language (not necessarily context-free) L over alphabet Σ is said to be bounded if and only if L is included in (the language of) a bounded expression b. Theorem 2 ([21]). Let G “ pΞ, Σ, ∆q be a grammar, and X P Ξ be a nonterminal, such that LX pGq is bounded. Then there exists a linear function B : N Ñ N pkq such that LX pGq “ LX pGq for some 1 ď k ď Bp||Ξ||q. If the grammar in question is GP , for a program P, then clearly ||Ξ|| is bounded by the number of control locations in P, by the definition of GP . The class of programs for which our method is complete is defined below: p ∆q be its corresponding Definition 2. Let P be a program and GP “ pΞ, Θ, visibly pushdown grammar. Then P is said to be bounded periodic if and only if: 1. LX pGP q is bounded for each X P Ξ; p is periodic. 2. each relation ρτ occurring in the program, for some τ P Θ, p2q  Example 5.1. (continued from Ex. 4.1) Recall that LQinit pGP q “ L init pGP q ` ˘n ` ˘n ` 1 ˘˚ ˚ ` Q1˘˚ which equals to the set t τ1 x τ2 τ4 τ2 y τ3 | n ě 0u Ď τ1 τ2 x τ4 τ2 y τ3 .  Concerning condition 1, it is decidable [14] and previous work [16] defined a class of programs following a recursion scheme which ensures boundedness of the set of interprocedurally valid paths. This section shows that the underapproximation sequence tJPKpkq u8 k“1 , defined in Section 4, when applied to any bounded periodic programs P, always yields JPK in at most BplocpPqq steps, and moreover each iterate JPKpkq is computable and Presburger definable. Furthermore the method can be applied as it is to bounded periodic programs, without prior knowledge of the bounded expression b Ě LQ pGP q. The proof goes as follows. Because P is bounded periodic, Thm. 2 shows that the semantics JPK of P coincide with its k-index semantics JPKpkq for some 1 ď k ď BplocpPqq. Hence, the result of Thm. 1 shows that for each q P nFpPq, pkq the k-index semantics JPKq “ txIÓxI , IÓxO y | I ¨ O P JHK Kquery k , IpXq “ Qu, pkq that is, the semantics JPKq is computed from that of procedure query k called with X “ Q. Then, because P is bounded, we show in Thm. 3 that every procedure query k of program H is flattable (Def. 3). Moreover, since the only transitions of H which are not from P are equalities and havoc, all transitions of H are periodic. Since each procedure query k is flattable then JPK is computable in finite time by existing tools, such as Fast [6] or Flata [9, 8]. In fact, these tools are guaranteed to terminate provided that (a) the input program is flattable; and (b) loops are labelled with periodic relations. Definition 3. Let P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y be a non-recursive program and GP “ p ∆q be its corresponding visibly pushdown grammar. Procedure Pi is said pΞ, Θ, 25  to be flattable if and only if there exists a bounded and regular language R over p such that JPKP “ Ť Θ, i αPLP pGP qXR JαK. i  Notice that a flattable program is not necessarily bounded (Def. 2), but its semantics can be computed by looking only at a bounded subset of interprocedurally valid paths. The proof that the procedures query k are flattable relies on grammar based reasoning, and, in particular, on control-sets with relative completeness properties. Let us now turn to our main result, Theorem 3 stated next, whose proof is organized as follows. First, Proposition 2 roughly states that provided LpGq is bounded, then a bounded subset of the k-index depth-first derivations suffices to capture Lpkq pGq for some k. The proof of this proposition is split into Theorem 4, Lemma 5.1 and Lemma 5.2. The rest of the proof uses Lemma 4.3 which roughly states that there is a well-behaved mapping from the k-index depth-first derivations of GP from Q to the runs of query k pQq for every value of k and Q. Theorem 3. Let P “ xP1 , . . . , Pn y be a bounded program, then, for any k ě 1, procedure query k of program H is flattable.  5.1  Bounded languages with bounded control sets  The following result was proved in [13]: Theorem 4 (Thm. 1 from [13], also in [20]). For every regular language L over alphabet Σ there exists a bounded expression bΓ such that P kΣ pLXbΓ q “ P kΣ pLq. Next we prove a result characterizing a subset of derivations sufficient to capture a bounded context-free language. But first, given a grammar G “ pΞ, Σ, ∆q and X P Ξ define df pkq  ΓX df pkq  Observe that ΓX tomaton.  γ  “ tγ P ∆˚ | rXs Ý Ñ 0 in Adf pkq u .  is a regular language, because Adf pkq is a finite state au-  Lemma 5.1. Let G “ pΞ, Σ, ∆q be a grammar and X P Ξ be a nonterminal, such that for all p P ∆, X does not occur in tail ppq. Also LX pGq Ď pa1 w1 q˚ . . . pad wd q˚ where a1 , . . . , ad are distinct symbols of Σ none of which occurs in w1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wd . Then, for each k ě 1 there exists a bounded expression bΓ pkq df pkq over ∆ such that LX pGq “ L̂X pbΓ X ΓX , Gq. Proof. We first establish the claim that for each k ě 1, there exists a bounded expression bΓ over ∆ such that P k∆ pΓdf pkq XbΓ q “ P k∆ pΓdf pkq q. By Corollary 1, Γdf pkq is a regular language, and by Theorem 4, there exists a bounded expression bΓ over ∆ such that P k∆ pΓdf pkq X bΓ q “ P k∆ pΓdf pkq q which proves the claim. Define A “ ta1 , . . . , ad u and assume ∆ is given as a linearly ordered set of γ m productions tp1 , . . . , pm u. Then for u such that X ñ ù u, we have P kA puq “ P k∆ pγq ˆ Π where Π is the matrix of m rows and d columns where row i is given by P kA ptail ppi qq. Next, let γ1 , γ2 be two control words such that P k∆ pγ1 q “ P k∆ pγ2 q and each γi (i “ 1, 2) generates a word ui of LX pGq, that is γi X ùñ ui . We conclude from the above that P kA pu1 q “ P kA pu2 q. Moreover, the  26  assumption LX pGq Ď pa1 w1 q˚ . . . pad wd q˚ where a1 , . . . , ad are distinct symbols shows that u1 ÓA “ u2 ÓA . Furthermore, because no symbol of A occurs in w1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wd we find that u1 “ u2 . df pkq  pkq  pkq  To show LX pGq “ L̂X pbΓ X ΓX , Gq we prove that LX pGq Ď L̂X pbΓ X df pkq ΓX , Gq the other direction being immediate because of Proposition 1 which pkq says that LX pGq “ L̂X pΓdf pkq , Gq and because only those control words γ such that head ppγq1 q “ X matters. γ df pkq So, let u P L̂X pΓX , Gq be a word, and X ùùùñ u be a depth-first derivation df pkq P k∆ pΓX  df pkq df pkq P k∆ pΓX q, there  of u. Since X bΓ q “ exists a control word β P Γdf pkq X bΓ such that P k∆ pβq “ P k∆ pγq. Also because no production p P ∆ is such that tail ppq contains an occurrence of X, we find that pβq1 “ pγq1 . Finally, Lemma 3.1 shows that given β P Γdf pkq , there exist a (unique) word u1 β  such that X ùùùñ u1 , hence u1 “ u as shown above. df pkq  For the rest of this section, let G “ pΞ, Θ, ∆q be a visibly pushdown grammar (we ignore for the time being the distinction between tagged and untagged alphabet symbols), and X0 P Ξ be an arbitrarily chosen nonterminal. Let b “ w1˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ wd˚ be a bounded expression 6 over alphabet Θ and define r “ pa1 w1 q˚ . . . pad wd q˚ such that ta1 , . . . , ad u and the bounded expression b r Θ are disjoint. Next, let `i “ |ai wi | for every 1 ď i ď d and let Gb “ r r pΞb , Θ Y ta1 , . . . , ad u, δ b q be the regular grammar where ! ) r psq Ξb “ qr | 1 ď s ď d ^ 1 ď r ď `s ! ) r psq psq δb “ qi Ñ pas ws qi qi`1 | 1 ď s ď d ^ 1 ď i ă `s Y ! ) psq ps1 q q`s Ñ pas ws q`s q1 | 1 ď s ď s1 ď d . psq pxq r holds is routine. Checking tw | q1 ñ˚ w q1 for some 1ďsďxďdu “ Lpbq r b ’ ’ Next, given G and G , define G “ pΞ , Θ Y ta1 , . . . , ad u, ∆’ q such that r 7 LX ’ pG’ q “ LX0 pGq k Lpbq. 0  ) ( ! psq r pxq psq pxq • Ξ’ “ X0’ Y rqr Xqy s | X P Ξ, qr , qy P Ξb , s ď x • ∆’ is the set containing for every 1 ď s ď x ď d a production X0’ Ñ psq pxq rq1 X0 q1 s, and: – for every production X Ñ γ P ∆, ∆’ has a production pxq b if qpsq ; r Ñ γ qy P ∆  pxq rqpsq r Xqy s Ñ γ  r  6 Recall  (1)  that each wi is a non-empty word. ˚ two languages L1 Ď Σ˚ 1 and L2 Ď Σ2 their asynchronous product, denoted L1 k L2 , is the language L over the alphabet Σ “ Σ1 Y Σ2 such that w P L iff the projections of w to Σ1 and Σ2 belong to L1 and L2 , respectively. Observe that the L1 k L2 depends on L1 , L2 and also their underlying alphabet Σ1 and Σ2 . 7 Given  27  – for every production X Ñ γ Y P ∆, ∆’ has a production pzq  pxq pxq rqpsq r Xqy s Ñ γ rqt Y qy s pzq  if qpsq r Ñ γ qt  P ∆b ; (2) r  – for every production X Ñ τ Z σ Y P ∆, ∆’ has a production pzq  p`q  pxq puq pxq rqpsq r Xqy s Ñ τ rqt Zqv s σ rqk Y qy s pzq  if qpsq r Ñ τ qt psq  p`q  b P ∆b and qpuq v Ñ σ qk P ∆ ; (3) r  puq  – for every production q1 Ñ as qv  r  P δ b , ∆’ has a production r  psq  puq pxq rq1 Xqpxq y s Ñ as rqv Xqy s .  (4)  ∆’ has no other production. psq  pxq  Next we define the mapping ξ which maps each nonterminal rqr Xqy s P Ξ’ onto X, X0’ onto X0 , every ai , 1 ď i ď d, onto ε and maps any other terminal (Θ) onto itself. Then ξ is naturally extended to words over Θ Y ta1 , . . . , ad u Y Ξ’ . Next we lift ξ to productions of ∆’ such that the mapping of a production is defined by the mapping of its head and tail. The lifting of ξ to sequences of productions and sets of sequences of productions is defined in the obvious way. From the above definition we observe that given a derivation D’ ” X0’ ñ psq pxq rq1 X0 q1 s ùñ˚ w in G’ , ξ maps D’ onto a derivation of G of the form X0 ñ X0 ùñ˚ wÓΘ . Lemma 5.2. Let G “ pΞ, Θ, ∆q be a visibly pushdown grammar, X0 P Ξ be a nonterminal such that LX0 pGq Ď b for a bounded expression b “ w1˚ . . . wd˚ . Let ta1 , . . . , ad u be a set of d symbols disjoint from Θ. Then for every k ě 1, the following hold: 1. Let i1 , . . . , id P N we have pkq  pkq  w1i1 . . . wdid P LX0 pGq iff pa1 w1 qi1 . . . pad wd qid P LX ’ pG’ q ; 0  2. Given a control set Γ over ∆’ such that pkq  L̂X ’ pΓ X Γdf pkq pG’ q, G’ q “ LX ’ pG’ q 0  0  then the control set Γ1 “ ξpΓq over ∆ satisfies pkq  L̂X0 pΓ1 X Γdf pkq pGq, Gq “ LX0 pGq . Proof. The proof of point 1 is by induction. As customary, we show the following stronger statement: let k ě 1 and w P pΘ Y ta1 , . . . , ad uq˚ ¨ Θ, we have puq puq psq psq rqr Xqv s ùñ˚ w iff qr ñ˚ w qv and X ùñ˚ wÓΘ . The proof of the if pkq  pkq  psq qr  puq  direction is by induction on the length of ñ˚ w qv . r psq puq b i “ 1. Then qr Ñ τ qv P ∆ . Two cases can occur: (i) τ P Θ; or (ii) τ P ta1 , . . . , ad u. 28  In case (i), we conclude from X ùñ˚ wÓΘ that w“w ÓΘ “τ and X Ñ τ P ∆, pkq  psq puq rqr Xqv s  hence that  psq  ’  puq  Ñ τ P ∆ , and finally that rqr Xqv s ùñ˚ w. Case pkq  (ii) is not allowed since w must end with a symbol in Θ. w hnlj psq ps1 q puq i ą 1. Then qr ñ τ qr1 ñ ˝ ñ˚ τ y qv . As seen previously, two cases can occur: (i) τ P ta1 , . . . , ad u; or (ii) τ P Θ. In case (i), because w “ τ y and τ R Θ we find that X ùñ˚ wÓΘ “ yÓΘ . Hence the induction hypothesis shows pkq  that  ps1 q puq rqr1 Xqv s ps1 q  psq  ˚  puq  ùñ y. Finally the definition of G’ shows that rqr Xqv s Ñ pkq  puq  puq  psq  τ rqr1 Xqv s P ∆’ , hence that rqr Xqv s 1  ps q  puq  ùñ˚ τ rqr1 Xqv s ùñ˚ τ y “ w and we are done. pkq  pkq  For case (ii) (τ P Θ), we do a (sub)case analysis according to the first production rule used in the derivation X ùñ˚ wÓΘ . pkq  psq  • X Ñ τ . Then X ùñ˚ wÓΘ “ τ . On the other hand qr pkq  ps1 q  ñ τ qr1  ñ  puq  ˝ ñ˚ τ y qv and our assumption on w “ τ y shows that y ends with a symbol in Θ. Hence a contradiction since wÓΘ “ τ does not coincide with the projection of w “ τ y. psq  • X Ñ τ Y . Then X ùñ τ Y ùñ˚ τ yÓΘ “ wÓΘ . Also qr pkq  pkq  ps1 q  ñ τ qr1  ñ  puq  ˝ ñ˚ τ y qv . The induction hypothesis applied on Y ùñ˚ yÓΘ and pkq  ps1 q  puq  qr1 ñ˚ y qv  ps1 q  puq  shows that rqr1 Y qv s ùñ˚ y. Finally, X Ñ τ Y P ∆ and  pkq r ps1 q psq puq b Ñ τ qr1 P ∆ show that rqr Xqv s Ñ τ psq puq ps1 q puq that rqr Xqv s ùñ˚ τ rqr1 Y qv s ùñ˚ τ y “ pkq pkq psq qr  ps1 q  puq  rqr1 Y qv s P ∆’ , hence w and we are done.  • X Ñ τ X1 σ X2 . Then X ùñ τ X1 σ X2 ùñ˚ τ w1 ÓΘ σ w2 ÓΘ “ wÓΘ . pkq puq  prq  pkq  Moreover, since qs ñ˚ w qv and τ, σ P Θ we find that there exist prq pbq pb1 q pdq puq qs ñ τ qa ñ˚ τ w1 qa1 ñ τ w1 σ qc ñ˚ τ w1 σ w2 qv . Hence, the definition of G’ shows that pb1 q  puq pbq pdq puq rqprq s Xqv s Ñ τ rqa X1 qa1 s σ rqc X2 qv s .  On the other hand, since X1 X2 ùñ˚ w1 ÓΘ w2 ÓΘ (simply delete τ and pkq  σ), Lemma 4.1 shows that either X1 ùùùñ˚ w1 ÓΘ and X2 ùñ˚ w2 ÓΘ ; pk´1q  pkq  or X1 ùñ˚ w1 ÓΘ and X2 ùùùñ˚ w2 ÓΘ . Let us assume the latter holds pkq  pk´1q  (the other being treated similarly). Applying the induction hypothepbq pb1 q pdq puq sis, we find that rqa X1 qa1 s ùñ˚ w1 and rqc X2 qv s ùùùñ˚ w2 , pkq  prq  pk´1q puq  hence we conclude the case with the k-index derivation rqs Xqv s ùñ˚ pkq  τ  pbq pb1 q pdq puq rqa X1 qa1 s σ rqc X2 qv s  ˚  ùñ τ pkq  29  pbq pb1 q rqa X1 qa1 s σ w2  ˚  ùñ τ w1 σ w2 . pkq  The “only if” direction is proved similarly, this time by induction on the length psq puq of the derivation rqr Xqv s ùñ˚ w. pkq  For the proof of point 2 the “Ď” direction is obvious by definition of depth-first derivations. For the reverse direction “Ě” point 1 combined with the assumption shows that for every i1 , . . . , id P N the following equivalence holds: pkq  w1i1 . . . wdid P LX0 pGq iff pa1 w1 qi1 . . . pad wd qid P L̂X ’ pΓ X Γdf pkq , G’ q . 0  So let D ” X0’ ùñ˚ w be a depth-first k-index derivation of G’ with control pkq  word conforming to Γ. Now consider ξpDq, it defines again a depth-first k-index derivation except that this time the control word conforms to ξpΓq. Further, the definition of ξ shows that the word generated by ξpDq results from deleting the symbols ta1 , . . . , ad u from w “ pa1 w1 qi1 ¨ ¨ ¨ pad wd qid . To conclude, observe that pkq w1i1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wdid P LX0 pGq and we are done. pkq  The following proposition shows that LQ pGP q is captured by a subset of depth-first derivations whose control words belong to some bounded expression. p ∆q be a visibly pushdown grammar, X0 P Ξ be Proposition 2. Let G “ pΞ, Θ, a nonterminal such that LX0 pGq is bounded. Then for each k ě 1 there exists a pkq bounded expression bΓ over ∆ such that L̂X0 pbΓ X Γdf pkq , Gq “ LX0 pGq. Proof. Since LX0 pGq is bounded there exists a bounded expression b “ w1˚ . . . wd˚ such that LX0 pGq Ď b. Next, define ta1 , . . . , ad u be an alphabet disjoint from Θ. Lemma 5.2 pkq shows that for every i1 , . . . , id P N the equivalence w1i1 . . . wdid P LX0 pGq iff pkq  pkq  0  0  pa1 w1 qi1 . . . pad wd qid P LX ’ pG’ q holds. Next, applying Lemma 5.1 on LX ’ pG’ q (whose assumptions holds by definition of G’ ) we obtain a bounded expression pkq bΓ’ over ∆’ such that L̂X ’ pbΓ’ X Γdf pkq , G’ q “ LX ’ pG’ q. Our next step 0  0  pkq  is to apply the results of Lemma 5.2 (second point) to obtain that LX0 pGq “ L̂X0 pξpbΓ’ q X Γdf pkq q, Gq. Finally, since bΓ’ is a bounded expression, and ξ is an homomorphism we have that ξpbΓ’ q is bounded (see Lem. 5.3), hence included in a bounded expression and we are done by setting bΓ to ξpbΓ’ q.  5.2  Proof of Theorem 3  We recall two results from Ginsburg [14]. Theorem 5 (Theorem 3.3.2, [14]). Each gsm mapping preserves regular sets. Lemma 5.3 (Lemma 5.5.3, [14]). Spw1˚ . . . wn˚ q is bounded for each gsm S and all words w1 , . . . , wn . And finally, the proof that query k is flattable.  30  # identity 210 leq 152 parity 384 plus 462 times2 210  k“2 t 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.53 0.14  fp no no no no no  # 330 240 606 728 330  k“3 t 0.22 0.27 0.54 2.54 0.35  fp yes no no no yes  k“4 t 328 0.41 828 1.31 994 9.20 #  fp yes yes yes  Table 1: Experiments with recursive implementations of basic arithmetic functions and predicates [1]. of Theorem. 3. Since P is bounded periodic we can apply Proposition 2 showing the existence of a bounded expression bΓ over ∆ such that L̂Q pbΓ XΓdf pkq , GP q “ Ť pkq pkq LQ pGP q. Hence we find that JPKq coincides with αPLpkq pGP q JαK which in Q Ť turn is equal to αPL̂Q pbΓ XΓdf pkq ,GP q JαK. γ  Lemma 3.2 shows that for all control word γ P ∆˚ such that Q ù ñ α we df ( have that JγK “ I ¨ O | xIÓxi , OÓxi y P JαK . This enables the use of Lemma 4.3 showing that such control word γ is such that JγK “ JSC kQ pγqK. This is saying the semantics of γ in P can be obtained by computing that of SC kQ pγq in query k . We then conclude from Lem. 5.3 and Thm. 5, that SCkQ pbΓ q is a bounded and regular language. Back to JHKquery k , we find that Ť Ť JHKquery k “ αPL k pGH q JαK “ αPL k pGH qXSCk pbΓ q JαK query  query  Q  and that JHKquery k is flattable since SCkQ pbΓ q is a bounded regular set.  6  Experiments  We have implemented the proposed method in the Flata verifier [17] and experimented with several benchmarks. The Flata tool is publicly available8 and the benchmarks used in this section are given in the repository. First, we have considered several programs from external sources [1], that compute arithmetic functions or predicates in a recursive way such as identity (identity), plus (addition), times2 (multiplication by two), leq (comparison), and parity (parity checking). It is worth noting that all of these programs have bounded index visibly pushdown grammars, i.e. LpGP q is of bounded index, for each program P P tidentity, plus, times2, leq, parityu, the stabilization of the under-approximation sequence is thus guaranteed. For all our benchmarks, the condition that the tuple of relation JPKpkq is inductive with respect to the statements of P is met for k ď 3. Table 1 shows the results, giving the size (#) of each under-approximation query k (the number of transitions) and the time (t) needed to compute its summary (in seconds). The column fp indicates whether the fixpoint check was successful. The platform used for all experiments is MacBookPro with Intel Core i7 2, 3 GHz with 16 GB of RAM. Next, we have considered two generalizations of the McCarthy 91 function [10], a well-known verification benchmark that has long been a challenge. We have automatically computed precise summaries of its generalizations Fa (Table 8 https://github.com/filipkonecny/flata  31  F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 F7 F8  k“2 t 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.08  # 32 72 128 200 288 392 512 648  " Fa pxq “  fp no no no no no no no no  # 50 114 204 320 462 630 824 1044  k“3 t 0.07 0.74 0.30 0.44 0.63 0.82 0.86 1.09  fp no no no no no no no no  x ´ 10 pFa qa px ` 10 ¨ a ´ 9q  # 68 156 280 440 636 868 1136 1440  k“4 t 0.09 1.55 1.59 4.02 5.97 7.54 14.23 12.87  fp yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes  if x ě 101 if x ď 100  Table 2: Generalized McCarthy Fa Experiments. The function F2 is the original McCarthy91 function.  G11 G12 G13 G14  # 72 72 72 72  k“2 t 0.06 0.08 0.08 0.08  fp no no no no  " Gb pxq “  # 114 114 114 114  k“3 t 0.74 1.53 5.07 7.07  x ´ 10 GpGpx ` bqq  fp no no no no  # 156 156 156 156  k“4 t 1.55 n/a n/a n/a  fp yes ? ? ?  if x ě 101 if x ď 100  Table 3: Generalized McCarthy Gb Experiments. The function G11 is the original McCarthy91 function.  32  G11 pxq G12 pxq  G13 pxq  G14 pxq  91 if x ď 100 x ´ 10 if x ě 101 91 if x ď 100 and 2|x ` 1 92 if x ď 100 and 2|x x ´ 10 if x ě 101 91 if x ď 100 and 3|x ` 1 92 if x ď 100 and 3|x 93 if x ď 100 and 3|x ` 2 x ´ 10 if x ě 101 91 if x ď 100 and 4|x ` 3 92 if x ď 100 and 4|x ` 2 93 if x ď 100 and 4|x ` 1 94 x ď 100 and 4|x x ´ 10 if x ě 101  Table 4: Automatically computed summaries for the generalized McCarthy Gb functions (for index k “ 3). 2) and Gb (Table 3) above for a “ 2, . . . , 8 and b “ 12, 13, 14. For the Fa functions, the computed summaries are given by: " 91 if x ď 100 Fa pxq “ for all a “ 1, . . . , 8 . x ´ 10 if x ě 101 The computed summaries for the Gb functions are given in Table 4. The visibly pushdown grammars corresponding to the recursive programs implementing the Fa , Gb functions are not bounded. In the case of the Fa function, the under-approximation sequence reaches a fixpoint after 4 iterations. In the case of Gb , for b “ 12, 13, 14, the summary of query 3 is the expected result. However, due to the limitations of the Flata tool, which is based on an acceleration procedure without abstraction, we could not compute the summary of query 4 , and we could not verify automatically that the fixpoint has been reached.  7  Conclusions  We have presented an underapproximation method for computing summaries of recursive programs operating on integers. The underapproximation is driven by bounding the index of derivations that produce the execution traces of the program, and computing the summary, for each index, by analyzing a nonrecursive program. We also present a class of programs on which our method is complete. Finally, we report on an implementation and experimental evaluation of our technique. Acknowledgements. Pierre Ganty is supported by the EU FP7 2007–2013 program under agreement 610686 POLCA, by the Madrid Regional Government under CM project S2013/ICE-2731 (N-Greens) and RISCO: RIgorous analysis of Sophisticated COncurrent and distributed systems, funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness No. TIN2015-71819-P (2016–2018). Pierre thanks Thomas Reps for pointing out inconsistencies in the examples. 33  References [1] Termination Competition 2011. http://termcomp.uibk.ac.at/termcomp/ home.seam. [2] A. Albarghouthi, A. Gurfinkel, and M. Chechik. Whale: An interpolationbased algorithm for inter-procedural verification. In VMCAI ’12, volume 7148 of LNCS, pages 39–55. Springer, 2012. [3] R. Alur and P. Madhusudan. Adding nesting structure to words. JACM, 56(3):16, 2009. [4] M. F. Atig and P. Ganty. Approximating petri net reachability along context-free traces. In FSTTCS ’11, volume 13 of LIPIcs, pages 152–163. Schloss Dagstuhl, 2011. [5] A. P. B. Cook and A. Rybalchenko. Summarization for termination: no return! Formal Methods in System Design, 35:369–387, 2009. [6] S. Bardin, A. Finkel, J. Leroux, and L. Petrucci. Fast: Fast acceleration of symbolic transition systems. In CAV ’03, volume 2725 of LNCS, pages 118–121. Springer, 2003. [7] B. Boigelot. Symbolic Methods for Exploring Infinite State Spaces. PhD thesis, University of Liège, 1998. [8] M. Bozga, R. Iosif, and F. Konečný. Fast acceleration of ultimately periodic relations. In CAV ’10, volume 6174 of LNCS, pages 227–242. Springer, 2010. [9] M. Bozga, R. Iosif, and Y. Lakhnech. Flat parametric counter automata. Fundamenta Informaticae, 91(2):275–303, 2009. [10] J. Cowles. Knuth’s generalization of mccarthy’s 91 function. In ComputerAided reasoning: ACL2 case studies, pages 283–299. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000. [11] J. Esparza, S. Kiefer, and M. Luttenberger. Newtonian program analysis. JACM, 57(6):33:1–33:47, 2010. [12] A. Finkel and J. Leroux. How to compose presburger-accelerations: Applications to broadcast protocols. In FSTTCS ’02, volume 2556 of LNCS, pages 145–156. Springer, 2002. [13] P. Ganty, R. Majumdar, and B. Monmege. Bounded underapproximations. Formal Methods in System Design, 40(2):206–231, 2012. [14] S. Ginsburg. The Mathematical Theory of Context-Free Languages. McGrawHill, Inc., New York, NY, USA, 1966. [15] P. Godefroid, A. V. Nori, S. K. Rajamani, and S. Tetali. Compositional maymust program analysis: unleashing the power of alternation. In POPL ’10, pages 43–56. ACM, 2010. [16] G. Godoy and A. Tiwari. Invariant checking for programs with procedure calls. In SAS ’09, volume 5673 of LNCS, pages 326–342. Springer, 2009. 34  [17] H. Hojjat, F. Konečný, F. Garnier, R. Iosif, V. Kuncak, and P. Rümmer. A verification toolkit for numerical transition systems - tool paper. In FM, pages 247–251, 2012. [18] D. Kroening, M. Lewis, and G. Weissenbacher. Under-approximating loops in C programs for fast counterexample detection. In CAV ’13: Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. on Computer Aided Verification, LNCS, pages 381–396. Springer, 2013. [19] G. Lalire, M. Argoud, and B. Jeannet. Interproc. //pop-art.inrialpes.fr/people/bjeannet/bjeannet-forge/ interproc/index.html.  http:  [20] M. Latteux. Mots infinis et langages commutatifs. Informatique Théorique et Applications, 12(3), 1978. [21] M. Luker. A family of languages having only finite-index grammars. Information and Control, 39(1):14–18, 1978. [22] M. Luker. Control sets on grammars using depth-first derivations. Mathematical Systems Theory, 13:349–359, 1980. [23] T. Reps, S. Horwitz, and M. Sagiv. Precise interprocedural dataflow analysis via graph reachability. In POPL ’95, pages 49–61. ACM, 1995. [24] M. Sharir and A. Pnueli. Two approaches to interprocedural data flow analysis. In Program Flow Analysis: Theory and Applications, chapter 7, pages 189–233. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1981.  35

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
