Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_3312

Abstract:
Combined Top-Down and Bottom-Up Approaches to Performance-guaranteed Integrated Task and Motion Planning of Cooperative Multi-agent Systems ?,1  arXiv:1607.07797v2 [cs.RO] 15 Dec 2016  Rafael Rodrigues da Silva a,2 , Bo Wu a , Jin Dai a , Hai Lin a a  Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556 USA.  Abstract We propose a hierarchical design framework to automatically synthesize coordination schemes and control policies for cooperative multiagent systems to fulfill formal performance requirements, by associating a bottom-up reactive motion controller with a top-down mission plan. On one hand, starting from a global mission that is specified as a regular language over all the agents’ mission capabilities, a mission planning layer sits on the top of the proposed framework, decomposing the global mission into local tasks that are in consistency with each agent’s individual capabilities, and compositionally justifying whether the achievement of local tasks implies the satisfaction of the global mission via an assume-guarantee paradigm. On the other hand, bottom-up motion plans associated with each agent are synthesized corresponding to the obtained local missions by composing basic motion primitives, which are verified safe by differential dynamic logic (dL), through a Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solver that searches feasible solutions in face of constraints imposed by local task requirements and the environment description. It is shown that the proposed framework can handle dynamical environments as the motion primitives possess reactive features, making the motion plans adaptive to local environmental changes. Furthermore, on-line mission reconfiguration can be triggered by the motion planning layer once no feasible solutions can be found through the SMT solver. The effectiveness of the overall design framework is validated by an automated warehouse case study. Key words: Multi-agent systems, formal verification, motion and mission planning, differential dynamical logic, controller synthesis.  1  Introduction  Cooperative multi-agent systems refer to as a class of multiagent systems in which a number of homogeneous and/or heterogeneous agents collaborating in a distributed manner via wireless communication channels in order to accomplish desirable performance objectives cooperatively. Representing a typical class of cyber-physical systems (CPS), cooperative multi-agent systems has become a powerful analysis and design tool in the interdisciplinary study of control theory and computer science due to the great potential in both academia and industry, ranging from traffic manage? This paper was not presented at any IFAC meeting. Corresponding author R. R. da Silva. Tel. +1-574-631-3736. Fax +1-574-6314393. Email addresses: rrodri17@nd.edu (Rafael Rodrigues da Silva), bwu3@nd.edu (Bo Wu), jdai1@nd.edu (Jin Dai), hlin1@nd.edu (Hai Lin). 1 This work is supported by NSF-CNS-1239222, NSF-EECS1253488 and NSF-CNS-1446288 2 The first author would like to appreciate the scholarship support by CAPES/BR, BEX 13242/13-0  Preprint submitted to Automatica  ment systems, power grids, robotic teams to smart manufacturing systems, see e.g. [1–5] and the references therein. Mission and motion planning are two fundamental problems in the context of cooperative multi-agent systems and have received considerable attention in recent years. To pursue satisfaction of desired performance requirements, planning methods for cooperative multi-agent systems can generally be divided into two categories: bottom-up and topdown approaches. Bottom-up approaches design local control rules and inter-agent coordination mechanisms to fulfill each agent’s individual tasks, while sophisticated collective behavior of cooperative multi-agent systems manages to ensure certain global properties. Such approaches have gained remarkable success in achieving various mission and motion planning purposes, including behavior-based coordination [1], consensus-type motion planning [29] and local high-level tasks [9]. The bottom-up approach scales well but generally lacks formal performance guarantees, except for certain properties like consensus [29], rendezvous [33] or related formation control [34]. In contrary, starting from a global mission, top-down design methods complements bottom-up ones by following a “divide-and-conquer”  16 December 2016  with a set of feasible motion plans for a fair dynamic environment, i.e. the changes in the environment do not lead any agent to a deadlock. However, if it fails to obtain feasible motion plans or an agent gets in a deadlock, feedbacks can be provided to adjust each agent’s mission plan by exploiting necessary coordinations. Our main contributions lie in  Global m ission  Top-dow n Not feasible  M ission plan 1  Decom position ...  M ission plan N  Local m otion planning M otion plan 1  Bottom -up  M otion plan N ... Local m otion contr oller s design  M otion contr oller 1  ...  (1) We apply formal methods to solve both the mission and the motion planning problems of cooperative multiagent systems, based on which provably correct mission plans are obtained and feasible motion plans are synthesized through correct-by-construction. (2) Our proposed framework shows great improvement of the scalability issues. On one hand, in the topdown mission planning stage, we use assume-guarantee paradigm [23] to compositionally verify the correctness of all the mission plans, mitigating the “state explosion” issues; on the other hand, we synthesize the corresponding motion controllers by using SMT solver and thus finite abstractions of the environment [24] is avoided. (3) Although the given global mission is not necessarily reactive, our proposed framework does provide solutions for both mission and motion plans that are reactive. First, we develop a modification of the L∗ learning algorithm [25] such that it can be applied for local mission planning even the agent’s model is not known a priori; secondly, by composing safe motion primitives, the designed motion controller can reactively interact with (possibly) uncertain environment and with other agents. For example, collisions with either obstacles or other agents are avoided.  M otion contr oller N  Fig. 1. Overall framework  paradigm, in which the global mission is decomposed into a series of local tasks for each agent based on their individual sensing and actuating capabilities, and accomplishment of the local missions ensures the satisfaction of the global specification via synchronized [13] [14] or partiallysynchronized [15] [16] multi-agent coordination. Despite the guarantee of achieving complex high-level global mission and motion plans, top-down design methods lack flexibility and scalability in local control policy design due to their requirement for proper abstraction models. Additionally, the planning complexity quickly becomes prohibitively high as the number of partitioned regions and agents increase, which further hampers the applicability of the abstraction based methods in many practical circumstances. We are therefore motivated to combine both top-down mission planning procedure with bottom-up motion planning techniques to develop a scalable, reactive and correct-bydesign approach for cooperative multi-agent systems that accomplishes high-level global tasks in uncertain and dynamic environments. Our basic idea in this paper is illustrated by the design framework shown in Fig. 1.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Previous work related to multi-agent coordination and control are briefly reviewed in Section 2. After introducing necessary preliminaries in Section 3, Section 4 presents the formal statement of our problem, along with a motivating example that are used throughout the rest of the paper. Section 5 solves the top-down problem while Section 6 solves the bottom-up design problem. Section 7 concludes the paper.  Given a global mission in the form of regular languages over the mission capabilities of the underlying cooperative multi-agent system, our proposed framework solves the mission planning problem by introducing a learning-based topdown mission decomposition framework [20], which decomposes the global mission into local tasks that are consistent with each agent’s capabilities. Based on the given local tasks, we solve the corresponding integrated task and motion planning problem of the multi-agent systems by extending our previous results of bottom-up compositional design approach called CoSMoP (Composition of Safe Motion Primitives) [21] from single agent to multi-agent circumstances. First, CoSMoP designs a series of motion controllers (primitives) offline that are verified safe by differential dynamic logic (dL) [22] to form necessary building blocks of complex maneuvers for each agent. Next, with the learned local task specification and a scenario map, CoSMoP synthesizes the corresponding integrated task and motion plan via appropriate composition of simple motion primitives whose correctness is justified by using the Satisfiability Modular Theories (SMT) solver and by modular incremental verification procedures. The mission and motion planning problem can be solved successfully if the motion planning layer comes up  2  Related Work  In this paper, we leverage guidance from this relatively broad body of literature to develop a formal framework to solve the mission and motion planning problems of cooperative multi-agent systems. It is worth noting that the proposed framework shows great features of both bottom-up and topdown design methods. Using such a framework, we demonstrate how formal synthesis and verification techniques can facilitate the design of coordination and control protocols for cooperative multi-agent systems. 2.1  Multi-Agent Systems  The increasing interest in improving the expressiveness of mission and/or motion planning specifications draws our at-  2  a computationally tractable fragment of computation tree logic (CTL) specifications were also investigated by Partovi and Lin [18]. Following a top-down architecture, Kloetzer and Belta [15] solved the multi-agent coordination problem from a global LTL specification, by model checking the composed behavior of all agents in a centralized manner; the results were extended in [19], in which optimality and robustness properties of the synthesized motion plans were taken into consideration. “Trace-closed” regular specifications were investigated in [14] [16] to automatically deploy cooperative multi-agent teams. Karaman and Frazzoli [13] addressed the mission planning and routing problems for multiple uninhabited aerial vehicles (UAV), in which the given LTL specifications can be systematically converted a set of constraints suitable to a mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) formulation.  tention to specifying desired multi-agent behavior in the form of formal languages, such as regular languages and temporal logics including linear temporal logic (LTL) and computation tree logic (CTL) [10], which provide formal means of specifying high-level performance objectives due to their expressive power. A common two-layered architecture is usually deployed in the synthesis problems of the formal specifications [38] [39]. Based on constructing appropriate finite-state abstractions of not only the underlying dynamical system, but the working environment as well, a control strategy [40], usually represented by a finite state automaton, is synthesized for the satisfaction of the high-level specifications by using formal methods, including model checking [10], supervisory control theory [41] [42] and reactive synthesis [40]. This synthesis procedure leads to a hierarchical control structure with a discrete planner that is responsible for the high-level, discrete plan and a corresponding low-level continuous controller. Simulations and bisimulation relations are established [10] as a proof that the continuous execution of the low-level controller preserves the correctness of the high-level discrete plans [3] [43]. 2.2  Furthermore, even though powerful model checking tools have been exploited [24] [27] to synthesize control protocols for formal specifications, these approaches generate open-loop strategies and cannot handle reactive specifications; furthermore, those synthesis methods which work for reactive control protocols [43] are severely limited by their high computational complexity. To mitigate this problem, Wongpiromsarn et al. [49] employed a receding horizon process where a controller only repeatedly worked out a plan for a short time horizon ahead of the current status. Nevertheless, the proposed results have difficulty handling cooperative tasks for multi-agent systems that involved close inter-agent cooperation.  Bottom-up Synthesis  One of the most highlighted bottom-up methods in literature can be categorized as the behavior-based [1] approaches, which coordinate multiple agents by composing pre-defined behaviors or distributed learning algorithms from artificial intelligence [6]. It turns out, however, that much of this behavior-based work possesses empirical features that leads to a trial-and-error design process, and therefore lacks guarantees of high-level performance objectives. Recent studies [7] [8] have accounted for performance verification of behavior-based schemes; nevertheless, the contribution are mainly made to single-agent cases. To accomplish high-level tasks of cooperative multi-agent systems, many attempts have been made in the context of bottom-up design. Filippidis et al. [9] proposed a decentralized control architecture of multi-agent systems to address local linear temporal logic (LTL) [10] specifications while obeying inter-agent communication constraints; however, the agents therein did not impose any constraints on other agents’ behavior. Guo and Dimarogonas [11] considered the synthesis of motion plans associated with each agent to fulfill corresponding local LTL specifications by developing a partially decentralized solution which formed clusters of dependent agents such that all individual tasks can be finished in an orderly manner. To overcome the computational issues, the results were further extended in [12] by involving receding horizon planning techniques. 2.3  2.4  Symbolic Motion Planning  Control theory has been widely involved to develop performance-guaranteed solutions of planning problems. The classical reach-avoid planning and point-to-point motion planning algorithms [2] [26] aim to steer an intelligent agent from a given initial position to some desirable final configuration while avoiding the collision with any obstacles along the way by utilizing various graph search techniques. Nevertheless, exact solutions to this problem are generally intractable, and various efforts have been devoted to efficiently overcoming the computational burden [27] [28]. It turns out that extension of single-agent planning algorithms to multi-agent cases can be non-trivial, whereas many attempts have been made to achieve different multi-agent coordination and control purposes, such as consensus [29] [30], flocking [31] [32], rendezvous [33] and formation control [34] of multi-agent systems. Fulfillment of these coordination goals is ensured by control theoretical analysis and deductive verification, including Lyapunov stability [29] [31] analysis, barrier certificates [35], differential dynamic logic [22], and game theory [36] [37]. However, these traditional planning and coordination approaches guarantee the steady-state performance of the underlying multi-agent systems, whereas satisfaction of more complex and temporal specifications is not considered.  Top-down Synthesis  Karimadini and Lin [17] studied task decomposition problems of cooperative multi-agent systems, and necessary and sufficient conditions were derived under which the global tasks can be retrieved by the assigned local specifications in the sense of bisimulation [10]. Task decomposition from  3  2.5  where Q is a finite set of states, Σ is a finite set (alphabet) of events, q0 ∈ Q is an initial state, δ : Q × Σ → Q is a partial transition function and Qm ⊆ Q is the set of the marked (accepting) states.  Integrated Task and Motion Planning  Traditionally, the high-level task planner for mobile robots sits on top of the motion planner [44]. The task planner sees the world as abstracted symbols and ignores details in geometric or physical constraints, which may cause infeasibility in the motion planning. Therefore, a recent trend is towards an Integrated Task and Motion Planning (ITMP). Earlier efforts in ITMP, such as Asymov [45] and SMAP [46], were still based on abstractions of the working environment and used a symbolic planner to provide a heuristic guidance to the motion planner. Recent work, such as [47] and [48], introduced a “semantic attachment,” i.e. a predicate that is solved by a motion planner, to the symbolic planner. An overview of the recent developments in the symbolic motion planning can be found in [4], where the task planning problem is reduced to model checking. Since these methods are based on abstracted symbolic models of the environments, it is a common assumption that the working environment is known or static and the robot is the only moving object (or the robot itself carries other movable objects). However, in practice, a robot often shares its workspace with others robots or even humans, and the environment often changes over time in a way that is hard to predict.  The transition function δ can be generalized to δ : Q × Σ∗ → Q in the usual manner [50]. The language generated by G is defined as L(G) := {s ∈ Σ∗ |δ(q0 , s) is defined.}; while Lm (G) = {s ∈ Σ∗ |s ∈ L(G), δ(q0 , s) ∈ Qm } stands for the language that is marked by G. The language that is accepted by a DFA is called a regular language. We focus our study on regular languages in the sequel. For a non-empty subset Σ0 ⊆ Σ and a word s over Σ, we use the “natural projection” to form a word s0 over Σ0 from s by eliminating all the events in s that does not belong to Σ0 . Formally, we have Definition 2 (Natural Projection) For a non-empty subset Σ0 ⊆ Σ, the natural projection P : Σ∗ → Σ0∗ is inductively defined as P () =   P (s)σ, if σ ∈ Σ0 , ∀s ∈ Σ∗ , σ ∈ Σ, P (sσ) = P (s), otherwise. 0∗  3  Preliminaries  Given a family of event sets {Σi }, i = 1, 2, . . . , N , with their SN union Σ = i=1 Σi , we let Pi denote the natural projection from Σ to Σi . For a finite set of regular languages Li ⊆ Σ∗i , i = 1, 2, . . . , N , the synchronous product of {Li }, denoted by ||ni=1 Li , is defined as follows.  In this section, we introduce the basic concepts and notations that are used throughout this paper to describe cooperative multi-agent systems and their desired properties. 3.1  ∗  The set-valued inverse projection P −1 : 2Σ → 2Σ is of P defined as P −1 (s) = {t ∈ Σ∗ : P (t) = P (s)}.  Regular Languages  Definition 3 (Synchronous Product) [51] For a finite set of regular languages Li ⊆ Σ∗i , i = 1, 2, . . . , N ,  For a finite set Σ, we let 2Σ and |Σ| denote the powerset and the cardinality of Σ, respectively; furthermore, let Σ∗ , Σ+ and Σω denote the set of finite, non-empty finite and infinite sequences that consist of elements from Σ. A finite sequence w composing of elements in Σ, i.e., w = w(0)w(1) . . . w(n), is called a word over Σ. The length of a word w ∈ Σ∗ is denoted by |w|. For two finite words w1 and w2 , let w1 w2 denote the word obtained by concatenating w1 and w2 . A finite word s ∈ Σ∗ is said to be a prefix of another word tΣ+ , written as s ≤ t, if there exists a word u such that t = su.  ||ni=1 Li = {t ∈ Σ∗ |∀i : Pi (t) ∈ Li }. Equivalently, ||ni=1 Li = 3.2  Tn  i=1  (1)  Pi−1 (Li ).  Differential Dynamic Logic  The Differential Dynamic Logic dL verifies a symbolic hybrid system model, and, thus, can assist in verifying and finding symbolic parameters constraints. Most of the time, this turns into an undecidable problem for model checking [22]. Yet, the iteration between the discrete and continuous dynamics is nontrivial and leads to nonlinear parameter constraints and nonlinearities in the dynamics. Hence, the model checking approach must rely on approximations. On the other hand, the dL uses a deductive verification approach to handling infinite states, it does not rely on finitestate abstractions or approximations, and it can handle those nonlinear constraints.  Given a finite event set Σ, a subset of words in Σ∗ is called a (finite) language over Σ. For a language K ⊆ Σ∗ , the set of all prefixes of words in K is said to be the prefix-closure of K, denoted by K, that is, K = {s ∈ Σ∗ |∃t ∈ Σ∗ : st ∈ K}, where st denotes the concatenation of two words s and t. K is said to be prefix-closed if K = K. In practice, we use deterministic finite automata to recognize languages. Definition 1 (Deterministic Finite Automaton) A deterministic finite automaton (DFA) is a 5-tuple  The hybrid systems are embedded to the dL as hybrid programs, a compositional program notation for hybrid systems.  G = (Q, Σ, q0 , δ, Qm ),  4  terms of interpretations of a finite alphabet Σ ∈ {AP, R} on finite traces over a finite sequence ρ of consecutive instants of time with length K, meaning that ρ(k) is the interpretation of Σ at instant of time k ∈ Nρ , Nρ = {0, ..., K}. Moreover, the arithmetic terms of an arithmetic constraint R ∈ R are variables x over a domain D ∈ {Z, R} valuated at instants i and, thus, are called arithmetic temporal terms a.t.t.,  Definition 4 (Hybrid Program) A hybrid program [22] (α and β) is defined as:  α, β ::=  x1 := θ1 , ..., xn := θn |?χ | α; β | α ∪ β | α∗ | x01 := θ1 , ..., x0n := θn &χ  where: • x is a state variable and θ a first-order logic term. • χ is a first-order formula. • x1 := θ1 , ..., xn := θn are discrete jumps, i.e. instantaneous assignments of values to state variables. • x01 := θ1 , ..., x0n := θn &χ is a differential equation system that represents the continuous variation in system dynamics. x0i := θi is the time derivative of state variable xi , and &χ is the evolution domain. • ?χ tests a first-order logic at current state. • α; β is a sequential composition, i.e. the hybrid program β will start after α finishes. • α ∪ β is a nondeterministic choice. • α∗ is a nondeterministic repetition, which means that α will repeat for finite times.  Definition 6 (Arithmetic Temporal Term) A CLTLB(D) arithmetic temporal term (a.t.t.) ϕ is defined as: ϕ ::= x | where  and  −1  ϕ|  −1  ϕ  stands for next and previous operator.  Therefore, a CLTLB(D) formula is a LTL formula over the a.t.t. defined as below. Definition 7 (Formula) A CLTLB(D) formula (φ, φ1 and φ2 ) is defined as,  φ, φ1 , φ2 ::=  Thus, we can define the dL formula, which is a first-order dynamic logic over the reals for hybrid programs.  p | R(ϕ1 , ..., ϕn ) | ¬φ | φ1 ∧ φ2 | φ | −1 φ | φ1 Uφ2 | φ1 Sφ2  where, Definition 5 (dL formulas) A dL formula [22] (φ and ψ) is defined as:  • p ∈ AP is a atomic proposition, and R ∈ R is a relation over the a.t.t. such as, for this work, we limit itP to linear n equalities or inequalities, i.e. R(ϕ1 , ..., ϕn ) ≡ i=1 ci · ϕi #c0 , where # ≡ h=, <, ≤, >, ≥i and ci , ϕi ∈ D. • , −1 , U and S stands for usual next, previous, until and since operators on finite traces, respectively.  φ, ψ ::= χ | ¬φ | φ ∧ ψ | ∀xφ | ∃xφ | [α]φ | hαiφ where: • [α]φ holds true if φ is true after all runs of α. • hαiφ holds true if φ is true after at least one runs of α.  Based on this grammar, it can also use others common abbreviations, including:  dL uses a compositional verification technique that permits the reduction of a complex hybrid system into several subsystems [22]. This technique divides a system ψ → [α]φ in an equivalent formula ψ1 → [α1 ]φ1 ∧ ψ2 → [α2 ]φ2 , where each ψi → [αi ]φi can be proven separately. In our approaches we use this technique backwards, we prove a set of dL formulas ψi → [αi ]φi , where each one is the ith motion primitive model, and we use the SMT to compose an equivalent ψ → [α]φ that satisfies a mission task. Therefore, the synthesized hybrid system performance is formally proven. 3.3  • Standard boolean, such as true, f alse, ∨ and →. • 3φ that stands for trueUφ, and it means that φ eventually holds before the last instant (included). • φ that stands for ¬3¬φ, and it means that φ always holds until the last instant. • Last[φ] that stands for 3(¬ true) ∧ φ, where ¬ true on finite trace is only true at last instant. Thus, it means that φ is true at the last instant of the sequence ρ. A CLTLB(D) formula is verified in a Bounded Satisfiability Checking (BSC) [53]. Hence, it is interpreted on a finite sequence ρ with length K. Therefore, ρ(k)  p means that p holds true in the sequence ρ at instant k (p ` ρ(k)).  Counter Linear Temporal Logic Over Constraint System  Definition 8 (Semantics) The semantics of a CLTLB(D) formula φ at an instant k ∈ Nρ is as follow:  We express the specification of an autonomous mobile robot using Counter Linear Temporal Logic Over Constraint System CLTLB(D) defined in [52]. This language is interpreted over Boolean terms p ∈ AP or arithmetic constraints R ∈ R belong to a general constraint system D, where AP is a set of atomic propositions and R is a set of arithmetic constraints. Thus, the semantics of a CLTLB(D) formula is given in  • • • •  5  ρ(k)  p ⇐⇒ p ` ρ(k). ρ(k)  R(ϕ1 , ..., ϕn ) ⇐⇒ R(ϕ1 , ..., ϕn ) ` ρ(k). ρ(k)  ¬φ ⇐⇒ ρ(k) 2 φ. ρ(k)  φ1 ∧ φ2 ⇐⇒ ρ(k)  φ1 ∧ ρ(k)  φ2 .  • ρ(k)  • ρ(k)   φ ⇐⇒ ρ(k + 1)  φ. −1 φ ⇐⇒ ρ(k − 1)  φ.  ∃i ∈ [k, K] : ρ(i)  φ2 ∧ • ρ(k)  φ1 Uφ2 ⇐⇒ . ∀j ∈ [k, i − 1] : ρ(j)  φ1  ∃i ∈ [0, k] : ρ(i)  φ2 ∧ . • ρ(k)  φ1 Sφ2 ⇐⇒ ∀j ∈ [i + 1, k] : ρ(j)  φ1  4 4.1  Problem formulation A Motivating Example Fig. 2. Warehouse layout  As a motivating example, let us consider a cooperative MRS with N robots in an automated warehouse as shown in Fig. 2. The global mission is to deploy the robots to move newly arrived goods to respectively designated workspaces. Additionally, the robots are Pioneer P3-DX robots 3 which is fully programmable and includes a dedicated motion controller with encoder feedback. Moreover, this robot can be simulated with the MobileSim 4 . This application permits to simulate all current and legacy models of MobileRobots/ActivMedia mobile robots such as Pioneer 3 DX and AT. Moreover, full source code is available under the GPL for understanding the simulation implementation, customizing and improving it.  bileEye 9 which shows the sensor readings and trajectories. Hence, each robot dynamics is simulated in MobileSim, and each controller is implemented in a C++ custom application that both run on Linux Computers. These computers are connected through Ethernet, and each robot controller connects via a TCP port to MobileSim and other robot neighbors. Therefore, all examples presented in this paper can be implemented in a custom C++ application using both the Pioneer SDK and the SMT solver (e.g. Z3). This article illustrates the control system design using a simple example shown in the Fig. 2. Denote NA = {1, ..., N }, we initially assume N = 2 and all the robots Ri , i ∈ NA have the identical communication, localization and actuation capabilities. Our design framework can be extended to involve N > 2 robots with different capabilities and other scenarios like search and rescue as well, and it will be presented an example with N = 10.  Furthermore, the Pioneer P3-DX robot has a software developing kit called Pioneer SDK 5 which allows developing its control system in custom C++ applications with third-part libraries such as an SMT solver. Particularly, the examples presented in this paper are implemented using two libraries from this kit: ARIA 6 and ARNL 7 . The ARIA brings an interface to control and to receive data from MobileSim accessible via a TCP port and is the foundation for all other software libraries in the SDK such as the ARNL. Moreover, the ARNL Navigation library 8 provides a MobileRobots’ proprietary navigation technology that is reliable, high quality and highly configurable and implement an intelligent navigation and positioning capabilities to this robot. Different localization (positioning) methods are available for various sensors such as LIDAR, Sonar, and GPS. Furthermore, commands can be sent to a custom application implementing those libraries by using a graphical interface called Mo-  This robot team may share its workspace with humans and deal with unexpected obstacles such as a box that falls from a shelf. Some goods must be moved first before the others can be picked up, some maybe quite heavy and require two robots to move; therefore coordination between robots is needed for the safety as well as the accomplishment of the global task. 4.2  3  http://www.mobilerobots.com/ResearchRobots/PioneerP3DX.aspx, retrieved 05-18-2016. 4 http://www.mobilerobots.com/Software/MobileSim.aspx, retrieved 05-18-2016. 5 http://www.mobilerobots.com/Software.aspx, retrieved 05-182016. 6 http://www.mobilerobots.com/Software/ARIA.aspx, retrieved 05-18-2016. 7 http://www.mobilerobots.com/Software/NavigationSoftware.aspx, retrieved 05-18-2016. 8 http://www.mobilerobots.com/Software/NavigationSoftware.aspx, retrieved 05-18-2016.  6  Cooperative Mission Planning Problem  Motivated by the fact that the accomplishment of missions among cooperative multi-agent systems shows strong eventdriven features, we characterize the mission planning problem within the discrete-event system (DES) formalism [50]. For a cooperative multi-agent system that consists of N interacting agents, let ΣiM I denote the set of missions that can be accomplished by the i-th agent, i ∈ NA . In practical mission planning problems, events in ΣiM I shall represent the sensing, and actuating capabilities of the underlying agent; i and execution of an event σM I indicates that the i-th agent may accomplish a certain action. The “global” missions are 9  http://www.mobilerobots.com/Software/MobileEyes.aspx, trieved 05-18-2016.  re-  R1 pO1  R1 dO1 aW1  r1  tion. The design objective of the mission planning is to dei compose the global mission into local tasks KM I, i ∈ NA , i i such that ||i∈NA KM I |= KM I , i.e., ||i∈NA KM I ⊆ KM I . That is, the collective team behavior should not exceed the global mission. In summary, the top-down design objective is to solve the following distributed cooperative tasking problem.  start  R2 dO2 aW2  R2 pO2  r2  r2  R2 pO2  R2 pO2  R1 pO1  R1 dO1 aW1  Problem 1 (Cooperative Mission Planning) Given a nonempty and prefix-closed global mission KM I and ΣM I , local mission sets ΣiM I , i ∈ NA of each robot, systematically find i locally feasible mission plans KM I for each robot such that i ||i∈NA KM I |= KM I .  r1  Fig. 3. Global specification  then captured by the S union of mission capabilities of all agents, i.e., ΣM I = i∈NA ΣiM I . For the clarity of presentation, we assume that the mission transition diagram of each agent Ri is given by a prefix-closed regular language i i∗ KM I ⊆ ΣM I .  The team mission for the automated warehouse example is as shown in Fig. 3. All the horizontal events of the same column and all the vertical events of the same row are identical. 4.3  The mission alphabet ΣiM I , i ∈ NA of the motivating example are listed in Table 1 with an explanation of the corresponding service and mission capabilities.  i Given the local mission plan KM I for each robot Ri , the underlying integrated task and motion planning problem is to implement the task with safety guarantees.  Table 1 ΣiM I Event  Explanation  Ri pOj  Robot Ri picks up object Oj .  Ri dOj aWk  Robot Ri drops off Oj at workspace k.  ri  Robot Ri returns to its original position.  Oj Away  Oj is moved away  Integrated task and motion planning  The description of the scenario environment is essential for the integrated task and motion planning problem. Hence, we first define the scene description which provides the basic information of the robot workspace. Since the Pioneer P3DX robot is a ground vehicle, its workspace can be specified in 2D. Definition 9 (Scene Description) Scene description is a tuple M = hO, A, Bi:  i, j, k = 1, 2  • Obstacles O: a set of polygon obstacles described by line segments oj , j ∈ NO specified by two points oi = h(xi , yi ), (xf , yf )i, where NO = {1, ..., |O|}; • Agents A: a set of robots Ri ∈ A : Ri = hl, qr,0 i, i ∈ NA which are represented as a square described by their length l and their initial state qr,0 . • Objects B: a set of movable objects bj = hl, qb,0 i, j ∈ NB which are specified as an square described by their length bi .l and their initial state qb,0 , where NB = {1, ..., |B|}.  Inter-agent communication for the purpose of multi-agent coordination are considered at this point by imposing extra constraints on events shared by more than one agent. For each agent Ri , i ∈ NA , we associate a pair of request and response communication events, respectively as follows: Σreq,i = {?σ|(∃j 6= i)σ ∈ (ΣiM I ∩ ΣjM I )}, and Σres,i = {!σ|(∃j 6= i)σ ∈ (ΣiM I ∩ ΣjM I )},  The states variables of the robots and objects are defined over instants of time indicating the execution ending events of the primitives. Those instants of time are defined by k ∈ Z≥0 , as defined in Sec. 3.3, and it denotes the time instant that the kth action has been taken. Thus, we denote the robot Ri state variables as qri , i ∈ NA : qri = hx, y, αi which represents the robot pose, where x, y ∈ Z specify the position in mm and α ∈ R is angle in degrees. Hence, a CLTLB(D) formula 2(qri .x = qri .x), for example, means that the robot state variable x value at instant k should be always equal to the value of x at k + 1. Correspondingly, the object state variables are expressed as qbj , j ∈ NB : qbj = hx, y, p, ai which describes its 2D position hx, yi :  where a request event indicates that the underlying agent sends a message through the communication channel, and a response event indicates a message reception. In the warehouse example, Oj Away is a communication event where ?Oj Away denotes a request event that some robot wants the Oj to be moved away. !Oj Away denotes a response event that some robot moves Oj away and notifies the robot who made the request. The team task KM I ⊆ Σ∗M I is given in the form of a prefixclosed regular language associated with its DFA representa-  7  x, y ∈ Z, and p and a are Boolean propositions that p holds true when the robot is carrying this object, and a holds true when another robot is taking this object away from its initial position. Next, we define a scene description for the particular scenario as shown in Fig. 2  refers to actions that a robot can execute, such as moving to some place, picking up objects and so on. Such actions are designed underlying low-level control law from which the generated trajectories are guaranteed to be safe considering both the environment geometrics and kinematics.  Example 1 The Fig. 2 a scene of an automated warehouse which two robots must drop two objects off in two different workspaces. Note that the origin (0, 0) is at the center of the workspace. The robots are represented as black filled squares with side length 400mm which start at bottom left of this warehouse, i.e. A = [h400, (−2000, −1000, 0.0)i, h400, (−2000, −2000, 0.0)i]. The objects are initially at bottom right of the warehouse and are depicted as black filled square too with side length 100mm, i.e. B = [h100, (2000, −1000, f alse, f alse)i, h100, (1900, −1000, f alse, f alse)i]. The obstacles refers to the four boundary lines that limits the scene which are formally specified as a set of line segments [h(−2500, −2500), (2500, −2500)i, h(2500, −2500), (2500, 2500)i, h(2500, 2500), (2500, −2500)i, h(2500, −2500), (−2500, −2500)i] ⊂ O and to the two walls that separate the workspaces shown  as gray squares, i.e. h(0, 0), (0, 2500)i, h(−1000, 0), (1000,  0)i ⊂ O. The challenge in this scene is that the objects are adjacent to each other; therefore, a plan that includes both robots picking them up at same time requires a cooperative behavior. 2  5  Top-down design and Task Decomposition  This section concerns with Problem 1 and derives a systematical approach to decompose the global task into feasible local tasks. In our previous work [54], a counterexampleguided and learning-based assume-guarantee synthesis framework was proposed. We adopt this framework in the top-down layer in Fig. 1 to automatically learn the local i missions KM I. KM I Decom position ...  K 1M I  KNM I  No  Assum e-guar antee Com positional Ver ification Yes  Counter exam ples?  Yes  M odify Assum ptions?  No  Problem 2 (Reactive Motion Planning) Given a team of i robots A and their mission plans KM I : i ∈ NA , the scene description M, and the trace length K i for each robot Ri , solve an integrated task and motion planning problem by splitting it into three steps. First, design a set of safe motion primitives P i for each robot Ri and respective motion primitives specification φiP (M). A safe motion primitive π i,j ∈ P i : j ∈ NPi = {1, ..., |P i |} for the robot Ri is a certified controller which guarantees a safety property and can be reactive changing its control values based on actual sensor readings. The motion primitives specification φiP (M) is a CLTLB(D) formula which specifies the safe motion primitives by defining constraints for the state variables and the given scene description M. Second, for each i robot Ri , check if the mission plans KM I are satisfiable for the scene M in a fair environment using the controllers P i for each robot Ri . An environment is fair when all moving and static obstacles that are not in the scene description do not lead any robot to a deadlock. Third, for all plans i i i KM I that are satisfiable, find a trace s with length K i i i for each robot Ri , where s (k) = hqr (k), δ (k)i at instant k ∈ N i = {1, ..., K i }. Qir is a sequence of assigned values for robot Ri states such as qri (k) ∈ Qir : qri (k) = hx, y, αi are the values at instant k. Qiπ is a sequence of assigned primitives such as δ i (k) ∈ Qiπ is a motion primitive at instant k that defines to robot Ri what primitive π i,j ∈ δ i (k) to take at qri (k − 1) to go to qri (k).  • Task decomposition Obtain a prefix-closed and feasible i local mission KM I for robot Ri from the global mission KM I . • Compositional verification We determine whether or not the collective behaviors of each agent can satisfy the global mission by deploying a compositional verification [54] procedure with each behavior module being a comi ponent DFA that recognizes KM I . In particular, to mitigate the computational complexity, we adopt an assumeguarantee paradigm for the compositional verification and modify L∗ algorithm [25] to automatically learn appropriate assumptions for each agent. • Counterexample-guided synthesis If the local missions fail to satisfy the global specification jointly, the compositional verification returns a counterexample indicating i that all the KM I , i ∈ NA share a same illegal trace that violates the global mission. We present such counterexample to re-synthesize the local missions.  Note that we are restricted to take at most K i actions in each i i mission plan KM I and robot Ri . The motion controller δ (k)  We illustrate the task decomposition using the automated warehouse example in Section II. In the framework shown  Success  Fig. 4. Learning-based coordination and mission planning framework.  Fig. 4 shows the flowchart of the automatic task decomposition and coordination framework that solves Problem 1 by executing the following steps iteratively.  8  R1 pO1  start  R1 dO1 aW1  r1  start  1 (a) KM I for robot R1 R2 pO2  start  R2 dO2 aW2  i in Fig. 4, local missions KM I , i = 1, 2 are obtained by i KM I = Pi (KM I ) as shown in Fig. 5, where Pi stands for the natural projection [50] from the global mission set ΣM I to the mission set ΣiM I of the i-th robot, i ∈ NA . Under the assumption that the global mission is feasible, i.e., KM I = K M I , we point out that every mission specification i KM I is locally feasible.   Ti (t) =  2 htrueiKM I hAi  1 1, if hDFA(t)iKM I hKM I i is true. 0. otherwise  (2)  where DFA(t) is a deterministic finite automaton that generates t and accepts t. In the warehouse example, an appropriate assumption A for robot R1 is depicted in Fig. 6. 2 Next, we check whether or not KM I |= A, which turns out to be true in the warehouse example. Thus one can conclude that the joint behavior of the two robots can cooperatively accomplish the global mission.  i Given a series of feasible local missions KM I for i = 1, 2, the next question is whether or not the fulfillment of all local missions can imply the satisfaction of the global one. This question is addressed by deploying a compositional i verification procedure [54]. Specifically, by setting KM I as the i-th behavior module, the compositional verification justifies whether or not M1 ||M2 |= KM I using an assumeguarantee scheme. In the assume-guarantee paradigm for compositional verification, a formula to be checked is a triple hAiM hP i, where M is a module component, P is a property and A is an assumption about M ’s environment, which can also be represented by a DFA. The formula is true if whenever M is part of a system satisfying A, then the system must also guarantee the property P , i.e., ∀E, E||M |= A implies that E||M |= P . For the warehouse example, we check the achievement of KM I by following an asymmetric proof rule.  2  r2  in next conjecture by splitting states in M , and L∗ iterates the aforementioned process to update M with respect to S. For the purpose of compositional verification, we modify L∗ by using the following family of dynamical membership queries.  r2  Fig. 5. Robots’ specifications  1 hAiKM I hKM I i  R2 dO1 aW2  Fig. 6. Assumption A for robot R1 .  2 (b) KM I for robot R2  1  R2 pO2  S Remark 1 In case where ΣM I = i∈NA ΣiM I , the compositional verification procedure essentially justifies the separability of the global mission KM I [51] with respect to ΣiM I , i ∈ NA , i.e., KM I = ||i∈NA Pi (KM I ); while the assume-guarantee paradigm avoids “state explosion” in the compositional verification. In case KM I is not separable, the compositional verification fails and returns a counterexample t ∈ Σ∗M I indicating a violation of the global mission. We present such counterexample to re-synthesize the local i i missions by resetting KM I := KM I − Pi (t). It has been shown in [55] that, under the assumption that the independence relation induced by the distribution is transitive, KM I can always possess a non-empty separable sublanguage. 6  Bottom-up Design and Integrated Task and Motion Planning  2 1 htrueiKM I ||KM I hKM I i  This section solves the Problem 2 and illustrates it through the warehouse example. This section is based on extensions of our previous work [21] to multi-robot coordinations. In [21], a bottom-up approach called CoSMoP (Composition of Safe Motion Primitives) was proposed. It features a two layer hierarchical motion planning as shown in Fig. 7 for each robot. The global layer synthesizes an integrated task and motion plan for the local layer considering only geometric constraints from a given scene description M. If this layer finds a satisfiable plan, the motion supervisor in the local layer implements a designed sequence of controller executions satisfying all kinematic and geometric constraints.  Here A denotes an assumption about the environment (in2 cluding mission plan KM I performed by robot R2 ) in which robot R1 is placed. To automatically generate appropriate assumptions, we consider the L∗ learning algorithm proposed in [25]. L∗ creates a series of observation tables to incrementally record and maintain the information whether traces in Σ∗ belong to U . An observation table is a three-tuple (S, E, T ) consisting of: a non-empty finite set S of prefix-closed traces, a non-empty finite set E of suffix-closed traces and a Boolean function, called a membership query, T : (S ∪ SΣ)E → {0, 1}. Once the observation table is closed and consistent [25], a candidate DFA M (S, E, T ) = (Q, q0 , δ, Qm ) over the alphabet Σ is constructed. If L(M ) = U , where L(M )is the generated language of M [50], then the oracle returns “True” with the current DFA M ; otherwise, a counterexample c ∈ (U − L(M )) ∪ (L(M ) − U ) is generated by the oracle. L∗ then adds all its prefixes c to S, which reflects the difference  CoSMoP solves Problem 2 in three stages. First, it designs offline a set of safe motion primitives P i∗ for each robot Ri to provide necessary maneuvers to complete a given task. We omit the index i from now on because the controllers are identical for all robots in this paper. Second, for each primitive π j ∈ P ∗ : j ∈ NP , it designs offline the corresponding  9  vehicle is stopped, and the obstacle runs into it. This property does not use the ICC (Inevitable Collision State) concept [57] because the limited range of the sensors readings and the limited knowledge assumed about the moving obstacles kinematics give limited awareness of the environment. Therefore, the controller cannot ensure that it will always find a collision-free motion. The robots motion σ is a sequence of arcs u ∈ σ in twodimensional space such that the translational velocity is nonnegative, the absolute value of the angular velocity is Ω and the maximum cycle time is . An arc u ∈ σ : σ = {u1 , u2 , ..., un } is specified by the translational v and angular ω velocities and cycle time T , i.e. u = hv, ω, T i. The domain of the arcs is U = {u ∈ R3 : v ≥ 0, |ω| ≤ Ω, 0 ≤ T ≤ }. Several types of robots can realize a motion σ, such as differential drive, Ackermann drive, single wheel drive, synchro drive, or omni drive robots [58]. Therefore, the trajectory realized by the Pioneer P3-DX is a motion σ. Furthermore, this motion can be modeled in dL to find a set Usaf e ⊆ U such that ensures the passive safety property.  Fig. 7. CoSMoP framework.  specification φjπ in CLTLB(D) formula to the global layer, where φjπ is a specification to be satisfied and the conjunction the specifications for all primitives is denominated V motion primitives specification φP (M), i.e. φP (M) ≡ j∈NP φjπ . Finally, it composes a sequence of safe motion primitives i to ensure the local mission KM I and the motion primitives specification φP (M). It is solved automatically and distributively for each robot Ri . The following subsections will formally describe each of these steps illustrating with the Example 1. 6.1  The primitive GoT o implements an extended Dynamic Window Approach [59] (DWA) algorithm to avoid not only static obstacles but the ones that can be moving at a velocity up to V . We extend a path planning algorithm implemented in the ARNL library that synthesizes and executes trajectories to a given destination based on a map that can be generated using Mapper3 10 . This algorithm synthesizes two trajectories: global and local trajectories. The global trajectory is a roadmap generated by an A* that considers only the static obstacles represented on the map, such as walls. The local trajectory is the trajectory implemented using a DWA algorithm that drives along the global trajectory while avoiding unmapped obstacles such as the other robots.  Design of Safe Motion Primitives  In the warehouse scenario, each robot Ri requires five primitives such that P ∗ = {π 1 , ..., π 5 }, where π 1 = GoTo, π 2 = PickUp, π 3 = DropOff, π 4 = ?ObjAway (i.e. request to take an object away), π 5 = !ObjAway (i.e. respond that an object is taken away). 6.1.1  In summary, the DWA control searches for an arc u∗ at every cycle time that maximizes towards the target while avoiding a collision with obstacles that can be moving up to velocity V . It is organized in two steps. (i) First it searches for the dynamic window Udw that is a range of admissible (v, ω) pair that results in safe trajectories that the robot can realize in a short time frame T ≤  such as Udw ⊆ Usaf e . A safe trajectory is the one that does not lead to a collision with an obstacle detected by the sensors readings. (ii) Then, it finds u∗ ∈ Udw that chooses a (v, ω) pair that maximizes the progress towards the closest next destination in the global trajectory.  GoTo  The controller π 1 = GoTo synthesizes trajectories towards a goal position based on the actual sensors readings to avoid static and moving obstacles. It can guarantee safety concerning collisions not only for the obstacles described in the scene description M but for other obstacles such as non-controlled agents (e.g. humans or felt down boxes) and neighbors robots. Therefore, this controller allows local and distributed trajectory synthesis that satisfies safety properties for multi-agent systems.  Such control system must satisfy a safety property φ1saf e after all its executions assuming that it starts in a state that satisfies φ1pre and arrives in a state that satisfies φ1post . The Fig. 8 shows a representation of this model in a transition system. Since φ1saf e depends on the environment dynamics because it must be guaranteed after all executions of π 1 , we  The Pioneer P3-DX robot implements an embedded controller for the translational v and the angular ω velocities based on the maximum acceleration A, deceleration b and angular velocity Ω. Hence, the GoTo controller is responsible for finding v ∗ and ω ∗ realizable in a cycle time T that specify a motion to drive the robot forward reducing the time to destination and guaranteeing the passive safe property [56]. This property means that the vehicle will never actively collide, i.e. the collision can only occur when the  10  http://www.mobilerobots.com/Software/Mapper3.aspx, trieved 05-18-2016.  10  re-  φ1pre ∧ φ1saf e  φ1saf e  ν  µ  start  φ1saf e ∧ φ1post  π1  π1  ···  π1  ω  start  φ2pre  true  ν  µ π2  φ2pos π2  ···  π2  ω  Fig. 8. Dynamic transition of the GoTo controller.  Fig. 9. Dynamic transition of the PickUp controller.  call this property tight coupled. Furthermore, this formula is specified as a passive safety property defined in [60] as,  PROOF. From Model 1 in [60], if a translational velocity v satisfies the condition saf e for given position and parameters, then the acceleration can be any value between −b and A. Since we assume that the minimum velocity for the robot is zero (v ≥ 0), then the saf e condition only constraint the maximum of velocity v. However, the maximum translational velocity vmax is the velocity v maximum that could be reached in the next sampling time. Thus, if saf e holds true, the robot is allowed to accelerate up to A, and the maximum velocity is vmax + A. Otherwise, the robot must brake, and the maximum velocity is vmax − b.     v2 v φ1saf e ≡ v = 0 ∨ k p − po k∞ > +V 2b b where pr , po are the closest position of the robot and the nearest obstacle, respectively. The added feature in the extended DWA is that the robot will take a circular trajectory if the condition saf e, as defined below, holds true; otherwise, it will stop. This condition is a first-order logic formula which constraints the robot state variables considering the delay caused by the cycle time.  6.1.2      A A 2 saf e ≡ kpr − po k∞ > +1  + v b 2   v2 v + A + +V + 2b b  Pick Up and Leave  We assume that the objects in the warehouse will be picked up and dropped off by robot’s gripper with a fixed robot pose, as presented in [21]. Hence, it must satisfy a property φ2pos that ensures that the robot is carrying the object after picking it up assuming that it starts in a state that satisfies φ2pre that guarantee that the robot is in front of the object. In contrast to the GoTo primitive, this primitive is non-tight coupled controller, meaning that φ2saf e should be guaranteed only in the last state after finite executions π 2 . The transition system of this controller is shown in Fig. 9. Therefore, these properties do not depend on the robot dynamics and do not need to be verified in dL.  Finally, the controller is verified for φ1saf e . Theorem 10 [60] If the controller GoTo starts in a state that satisfies φ1saf e , it will always satisfies it. φ1pre ∧ φ1saf e → [(α1 )∗ ]φ1saf e  6.1.3 where φ1pre constraint only the parameters (e.g. A > 0, b > 0, Ω > 0 and  > 0) and does not depend on any environment state, (α1 )∗ is the hybrid program presented in Model 1 in [60], and it models the execution of the controller GoTo in dL for a dynamic environment with moving obstacles with maximum velocity V .  We assume that the robot is stopped temporarily during the communication events. For the request controller π 4 , the robot sends a request to have object j moved away and waits until it receives a response message. It then continues the next planned action. The response controller π 5 means that the robot will send a message to indicate that the object j is being moved. These primitives do not require tightly coupled safety property either, so they are not verified in dL.  To guarantee passive safety, we solve the condition saf e and add the velocity variation with maximum acceleration A for maximum cycle time  (i.e. A) to find the maximum value for the translational velocity setpoint v ∗ .  6.2  Corollary 10.1 A circular trajectory is safe if the controller setpoint u∗ ∈ Usaf e : u∗ = hv ∗ , ω ∗ , T ∗ i such as Usaf e = {u ∈ R3 : 0 ≤ v < ν(saf e), −Ω ≤ ω ≤ Ω, 0 ≤ T ≤ },  Design of the Motion Primitives Specification  From the local layer, we need to specify constraints for each designed controller π j ∈ P ∗ : j ∈ NP to the global layer. The conjunction of these constraints is called the motion primitive specification φiP (M) and is shown in the Fig. 7 as one of the inputs for the constraint generator. These constraints are formulas φjπ in CLTLB(D) which allow the global layer to omit the kinematic constraints implemented in the controller so only geometric constraints will be considered. The CLTLB(D) is an extension of linear temporal logic (LTL) for bounded satisfiability checking (BSC) [53] that the models consist of temporal logic rather than transition systems; thus, the problem encoding can be more compact    vmax + A if saf e holds true vmax − b otherwise s   2 A V 2kpr − po k∞ 2 =b · +1  + + b b b   A −b· +1 −V b  ν(saf e) = vmax  Request and Response to Move Object Away  11  and elegant. Moreover, it is possible to encode CLTLB(D) into satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) [52] and use SMT solver to check if the specification can be satisfied.  The constraints defined in the specifications φjπ : j ∈ NP can be modeled in the dL hybrid program using the operator ?χ. Therefore, the dL formula of resulting plan si is,  The formulas φjπ are specifications which constrains the states q(k − 1)i and q(k)i generated in the robot Ri global layer. A state q(k) is assigned values for states variables in the environment at instant k and the primitive taken between instants k − 1 and k. Hence, this state is defined as q(k) ∈ [qr (k) ∈ Qr ]∪[qbj (k) ∈ Qb ]∪[π(k) ∈ Qπ ] : k ∈ Nρ , where Qr , Qb and Qπ are sequences of assigned values to robot and object states variables at each instant k and assigned motion primitive to take between instants k − 1 and k, respectively. Each φjπ must ensure that, for any plan si for the robot Ri , the following two conditions hold:  δ,1 δ,1 δ,1 δ,1 ∗ φδ,1 pre ∧ φsaf e → [(α ) ; ?(φsaf e ); ?(φpost ); δ,2 δ,1 δ,2 δ,2 ∗ ?(φδ,2 saf e ∧ φpre ); (α ) ; ?(φsaf e ); ?(φpost );  ··· i  δ,k δ,k The specifications φδ,k saf e , φpre and φpost are safety properties in dL formulas for the primitive assigned at instant k (i.e. δ i (k) ∈ P : k ∈ N i ). If those conditions hold true, any plan generated in the global layer that satisfies φP (M) will guarantee the safety properties. Furthermore, the reachable states after any execution of the controller π δ,k ∈ P assigned in δ(k) will be constraint to satisfies iniδ,k δ,k δ,k tially φδ,k and it pre ∧ φsaf e , φsaf e after any execution of π  6.2.1  start  ν  µ π δ,1  π δ,1  ···  π δ,1  υ  π δ,2  ···  i  i  δ,K φδ,K saf e ∧ φpost  π δ,K  i  ω  Since the controllers π δ,k can be reactive, we assume that they will execute finite times until reaching the goal state δ,k that satisfies φδ,k post . Thus, the safety property φsaf e must be ensured in the intermediate states. Let αδ,k is the dL hybrid program that models π δ,k , thus, the transition system can be modeled using dL formulas as in the figure below.  start  i,1 φi,1 pre ∧ φsaf e  i,2 i,2 φi,1 post ∧ φpre ∧ φsaf e  ν  µ [αδ,1∗ ]φi,1 saf e  [αδ,2∗ ]φi,2 saf e  Theorem 12 There exists a trajectory between q i (k−1) and q i (k) which satisfies the controller safety property φ1saf e ,  φi,K post  ···  [αδ,K∗ ]φi,K saf e  GoTo  The controller π 1 requires a tightly coupled safety property; thus we need to ensure that φ1saf e is satisfiable for at least one trajectory between any planned q i (k − 1) and q i (k) states. However, we assume φ1pre ≡ true and φ1post ≡ true here because these properties do not depend on the geometry or dynamics in the environment, considering that all parameters are correctly assigned (e.g. A > 0 ≡ true). These assumptions leave the primitive free to drive the robot to the positions required by the other primitives. Note that φ1saf e is also an invariant property, as shown in Theorem 10, so we can use it to reason the existence of a safe trajectory. The global layer omits dynamic constraints; as a result, it is assumed that the minimum robot velocity is zero (v > 0), and the obstacles are static (V = 0). From the Corollary 2.1 in [21], the Go To specification φ1π in CLTLB(D) should guarantee that there exists a trajectory that the robot fits in between the initial and goal state using a linear arithmetic relation.  PROOF. The transition system of the plan si is represented in the figure below. δ,1 δ,2 δ,2 φδ,1 saf e ∧ φpost ∧ φpre ∧ φsaf e  i  In the next subsections, the specifications φjπ for each safe motion primitive are designed.  i  Theorem 11 If a plan s with size K satisfies φP (M) (i.e. si  φP (M)) for a given scene description M and the safe V motion primitives are safe (i.e. ∀j∈NP φjpre ∧ φjsaf e → [(αj )∗ ]φjsaf e is valid), then this plan is also safe (i.e. si  V δ,k k∈N φsaf e ).  φδ,1 saf e  i  V We know that ∀j∈NP φjpre ∧φjsaf e → [(αj )∗ ]φjsaf e is valid, it means that any initial state that satisfies φjpre ∧ φjsaf e can execute any finite times π j modeled as hybrid program αj that it will lead to a state that is safe, i.e. satisfies φjsaf e . Hence, it is sufficient that the global layer find a plan si that satisfies φP (M) to satisfy the Eq.3 and, consequently, the safety property of all motion primitives for the robot Ri in the scene description M.  δ,k+1 δ,k+1 will satisfy φδ,k before execute the next post ∧ φsaf e ∧ φpre δ,k+1 assigned controller π .  δ,1 φδ,1 pre ∧ φsaf e  i  By applying the rules [; ] and [?] [22], we find the equivalent formula,   δ,1 δ,1 δ,1 δ,1 ∗ φδ,1 pre ∧ φsaf e → [(α ) ](φsaf e ) → φpost →   δ,2 δ,2 δ,2 δ,2 ∗ φδ,2 saf e ∧ φpre → [(α ) ](φsaf e ) → φpost → (3) ···   i δ,K i δ,K i δ,K i δ,K i ∗ φδ,K ) ](φsaf saf e ∧ φpre → [(α e ) → φpost  • For each k ∈ N i , φδ,k saf e is satisfiable for at least one i trajectory between q (k − 1) and q i (k). δ,k i • For each k ∈ N i , q i (k − 1)  φδ,k pre and q (k)  φpost .  i  i  δ,K δ,K δ,K ∗ δ,K ?(φδ,K ) ]φsaf e → φpost saf e ∧ φpre ); (α  ω  12  i,j i,j,y i,j, y i,j,x i,j, x j • rlef t,o ≡ (¬isY )?rlef t,o ∧ rlef t,o : rlef t,o ∧ rlef t,o ; i,j i,j,y i,j, y i,j,x i,j, x • rright,o ≡ (¬isY j )?rright,o ∧rright,o : rright,o ∧rright,o ; j i,j,y j j a .l • rbelow,o ≡ qri .y ≤ mk · qri .x + bk − 2i (1 + mk ); i,j, y • rbelow,o ≡  qri .y ≤ mjk ·  qri .x + bjk −  ai .l 2 (1  + mjk );  i,j,x • rbelow,o ≡ qri .x ≤ mjk · qri .y + bjk +  • • (a)  (b) i,j rabove,o  •  i,j rbelow,o  and  •  n i qr }  •  i,j rlef t,o  Fig. 10. Regions and in (a) and i,j rright,o (b). a sequence of n waypoints { q i , ..., if there in exists r  which the robot Ri starts at the initial state qri and reaches a goal state n qri that satisfies the following two conditions. First, all pairs of states l−1 qri and l qri in this sequence (i.e. l ∈ {1, ..., n}) are in region below, above, left or right of all objects line segments oj : j ∈ NO . Second, the environment is fair, meaning that obstacles not in the scene description do not lead the robot Ri executing the primitive GoTo (i.e. π 1 ) to a deadlock. In this definition, it is used the a.t.t. operator l as shorthands for l implications of (e.g. 2 = ), where l = 0 means no implication.  • • • • • • • • • •  PROOF. First, since it is a fair environment, then a trajectory that is safe for static obstacles is enough to ensure the existence a safe trajectory for a dynamic environment with moving obstacles. Second, the robot states qri and qri constrained in one of the regions below, above, left or right of a line segment oj , as shown in the Fig. 10, ensure the existence of a safe trajectory. This safe trajectory may be straight line trajectory that guarantees φ1saf e by using the Corollary 2.1 in [21]. Moreover, those regions intersect with each other, causing the existence of waypoints which is inside of more than one of these areas. Hence, it allows finding intermediate trajectories to link two states which are not in the same region. Therefore, if a sequence of waypoints { qri , ..., n qri } is found, there is a composition of two or more straight trajectories which leads a initial state qri to a goal state n qri . Furthermore, those trajectories and their composition satisfy the safety property φ1saf e when executing the primitive GoTo. Therefore, any pair of states qri and satisfy the following specification,  • •  • • • the operator (relation)?value1 : value2 returns value1 if relation holds true, otherwise value2. i,j i,j i,j i,j Note that if a constraint rbelow,o , rabove,o , rlef t,o or rright,o holds true, then the states qri and qri are in the regions below, above, left or right, respectively.  And similarly we have φi,B GoT o to avoid colliding into objects that are not being carried (i.e. ¬qbj .p) and not away (i.e. ¬gbj .a). Thus, the initial qri and goal qri states should be to the left, right, below or above  i,j of all objects (i.e. rlef ≡ max( qri .x, qri .x) ≤   t,b  i,j qbj .x−di,j , rright,b ≡ min( qri .x, qri .x) ≥ qbj .x+di,j ,   i,j i,j rbelow,b ≡ max( qri .y, qri .y) ≤ qbj .y − di,j , rabove,b ≡   b .l+a .l j j i min( qri .y, qri .y) ≥ qb .y + di,j , where di,j = ), 2  qri for robot i should  h φi,O ≡ ∀j ∈ N :2 (π = GoTo) → O GoT o i,j i,j i,j i,j rbellow,o ∨ rabove,o ∨ rlef t,o ∨ rright,o  j ai .l 2 (1 + mk ); i,j, x rbelow,o ≡ qri .x ≤ mjk · qri .y + bjk + a2i .l (1 + mjk ); i,j,y rabove,o ≡ qri .y ≥ mjk · qri .x + bjk + a2i .l (1 + mjk ); i,j, y rabove,o ≡ qri .y ≥ mjk · qri .x + bjk + a2i .l (1 + mjk ); i,j,x rabove,o ≡ qri .x ≥ mjk · qri .y + bjk − a2i .l (1 + mjk ); i,j, x rabove,o ≡ qri .x ≥ mjk · qri .y + bjk − a2i .l (1 + mjk ); i,j,y j j j ai .l i i rlef t,o ≡ qr .y ≤ m⊥ · qr .x + b⊥,i − 2 (1 + m⊥ ); i,j, y j j a .l rlef t,o ≡ qri .y ≤ m⊥ · qri .x + b⊥,i − 2i (1 + mj⊥ ); i,j,x j j j ai .l i i rlef t,o ≡ qr .x ≤ m⊥ · qr .y + b⊥,i + 2 (1 + m⊥ ); i,j, x rlef qri .x ≤ mj⊥ · qri .y + bj⊥,i + a2i .l (1 + mj⊥ ); t,o ≡ i,j,y rright,o ≡ qri .y ≥ mj⊥ · qri .x + bj⊥,f + a2i .l (1 + mj⊥ ); i,j, y rright,o ≡ qri .y ≥ mj⊥ · qri .x + bj⊥,f + a2i .l (1 + mj⊥ ); i,j,x rright,o ≡ qri .x ≥ mj⊥ · qri .y + bj⊥,f − a2i .l (1 + mj⊥ ); i,j, x rright,o ≡ qri .x ≥ mj⊥ · qri .y + bj⊥,f − a2i .l (1 + mj⊥ ); j isY ≡ |oj .yf − oj .yi | ≤ |oj .xf − oj .xi |; o .x −o .x o .y −o .y mjk = (isY j )? ojj .xff −ojj .xii : ojj .yff −ojj .yii ; o .y −o .y o .x −o .x mj⊥ = (¬isY j )? − ojj .yff −ojj .yii : − ojj .xff −ojj .xii ; bjk = (isY j )?oj .yi − mjk · oj .xi : oj .xi − mjk · oj .yi ; bj⊥,i = (¬isY j )?oj .yi − mj⊥ · oj .xi : oj .xi − mj⊥ · oj .yi ; bj⊥,f = (¬isY j )?oj .yf −mj⊥ ·oj .xf : oj .xf −mj⊥ ·oj .yf ;  i h φi,B ≡ ∀j ∈ N : 2 (π = GoTo) ∧ ¬qbj .p ∧ ¬qbj .a → B GoT o i i,j i,j i,j i,j rlef ∨ r ∨ r ∨ r t,b right,b bellow,b above,b  , where i,j i,j,y i,j, y i,j,x i,j, x • rbelow,o ≡ (isY j )?rbelow,o ∧rbelow,o : rbelow,o ∧rbelow,o ;  Finally, the robot should’t change any object state (i.e. plstatic ≡ qbl .p = qbl .p and alstatic ≡ qbl .a = qbl .a) when  i,j i,j,y i,j, y i,j,x i,j, x • rabove,o ≡ (isY j )?rabove,o ∧rabove,o : rabove,o ∧rabove,o ;  13  j,l, y j,l, x j • bj,l above,o ≡ (isY )?babove,o : babove,o ;  executing GoT o, so, we have, φiGoT o  j,l, y j,l, x j • bj,l lef t,o ≡ (¬isY )?blef t,o : blef t,o ;  i h ^  plstatic ∧ alstatic ∧ ≡2 π = GoTo →  j,l, y j,l, x j • bj,l right,o ≡ (¬isY )?bright,o : bright,o ;  l∈NB  φi,O GoT o  6.2.2  ∧  φi,B GoT o  PickUp and DropOff  We assume that the robot can only pick up the object when qr2 .α = 0°. Hence, to pick an object up, the robot cannot be carrying any object (i.e. ¬qbl .p) and will carry the object j (i.e. pj,l qbl .p) ∧ (j 6= l → ¬ qbl .p)). carry ≡ (j = l → Also, the robot initial and goal states will not change (i.e. i ≡ (qri .x = qri .x) ∧ (qri .y = qri .y) ∧ (qri .α = rstatic i,j i qr .α)) and it will be posing in front of object (i.e. robject ≡ j j i i i (qr .α = 0.0) ∧ (qr .y = qb .y) ∧ (qr .x = qb .x − d)),  y • bj,l, below,o ≡  qbj .y ≤ mlk ·  x • bj,l, below,o ≡  qbj .x ≤ mlk ·  y • bj,l, above,o ≡  qbj .y ≥ mlk ·  x • bj,l, above,o ≡  qbj .x ≥ mlk ·  y • bj,l, lef t,o ≡  qbj .y ≤ ml⊥ ·  x • bj,l, lef t,o ≡  qbj .x ≤ ml⊥ ·  y • bj,l, right,o ≡  qbj .y ≥ ml⊥ ·  x bj,l, right,o  qbj .x ≥ ml⊥ ·  •  ≡  bj .l l 2 (1 + mk ); b .l qbj .y + blk + j2 (1 + mlk ); b .l qbj .x + blk + j2 (1 + mlk ); b .l qbj .y + blk − j2 (1 + mlk ); b .l qbj .x + bl⊥,i − j2 (1 + ml⊥ ); b .l qbj .y + bl⊥,i + j2 (1 + ml⊥ ); b .l qbj .x + bl⊥,f + j2 (1 + ml⊥ ); b .l j qb .y + bl⊥,f − j2 (1 + ml⊥ );  qbj .x + blk −  Therefore, h  φiDropOf f ≡ ∀j ∈ NB : 2 π = DropOffj →  i ^  i,j l l i (pj,l ) ∧ (¬ q .p) ∧ (a ) ∧ r ∧ b carry b static static lef t  h  φiP ickU p ≡ ∀j ∈ NB : 2 π = P ickU pj → i ^ i,j i (¬qbl .p ∧ pj,l ) ∧ r ∧ r carry static object  ∀l∈NB ∧ φi,B DropOf f  ∀l∈NB  Accordingly, we drop the object off at the same angle. Thus, the robot should be carrying the object j (i.e. pj,l carry ≡ (j = l → qbl .p) ∧ (j 6= l → ¬qbl .p)) and, then, not (i.e. ¬ qbl .p). Moreover, the robot will not change its the initial and final i states (i.e. rstatic ) and the object will be left next to it at 0o i,j i (i.e. blef t ≡ (qr .α = 0.0) ∧ ( qbj .y = qri .y) ∧ ( qbj .x = qri .x + d)). However, we cannot leave the object over other objects. Therefore, the next object position should be to the left, right, below or above of all other objects (i.e. bj,l lef t,b ≡    j j,l j,l j q .y ≤ qbl .y − db , bright,b ≡ qb .y ≥ qbl .y +  b  , bj,l dj,l , bj,l qbj .x ≤ qbl .x − dj,l b above,b ≡ b below,b ≡   bj .l+bl .l qbj .x ≥ qbl .x + dj,l , where dj,l ), b b = 2  ∧ φi,O DropOf f  Finally, we allow changing the object position only if the robot leaves it. h φicarry ≡ ∀j ∈ NB :2 (π 6= DropOffj ) → i ( qbj .x = qbj .x) ∧ ( qbj .y = qbj .y)  6.2.3  Request and Response to Move Object Away  The abstraction of request controller u4 constraints that the object state qbj .a must change from f alse to true (i.e. j aj,l qbj .a) ∧ (j 6= l → change ≡ (¬qb .a) ∧ (j = l → ¬ qbj .a)) before continuing the rest of the task. Also i the robot is static (i.e. rstatic and plstatic ) in a position that provide enough space for other robots to pick the rei,j quested object up (i.e. robot Ri away from object i, raway ≡      b .l j j qri .x ≤ qb − (bj .l + ai .l) ∨ qri .x ≥ qb + j2 ∨ qri .y ≤    qbj − a2i .l ∨ qri .y ≥ qbj + a2i .l ). Thus,  φi,B DropOf f ≡ ∀j, l ∈ NB , j 6= l : h  2 (π = DropOffj ) ∧ (¬qbl .p) ∧ (¬qbl .a) →  i j,l j,l j,l bj,l ∨ b ∨ b ∨ b lef t,b right,b below,b above,b Similarly, neither over an obstacle. Hence the object should be left to the left, right, below or above of all obstacles ,  hh φiReq ≡ ∀j ∈ NB : 2 (π = Reqj ) →  i ^  i i,j plstatic ∧ aj,l ∧ r ∧ r static away change  h φi,O ≡∀j ∈ B, l ∈ O : 2 (π = DropOffj ) → DropOf f i j,l j,l j,l bj,l lef t,o ∨ bright,o ∨ bbelow,o ∨ babove,o  l∈NB  For the response controller u5 , its abstraction also constraints i that the robot is static (i.e. rstatic and plstatic and alsatic ≡ l l ( qb .a = qb .a)). Furthermore, the object must already be picked up (i.e. qbj .p) and the robot state must eventually  , where j,l, y j,l, x j • bj,l below,o ≡ (isY )?bbelow,o : bbelow,o ;  14  provide enough space for another robot to pick up their i,j objects (i.e. raway ). Hence,    _ (π = Reql ) U (π = GoTo) ∨  ri ≡  l∈NB     = ai .qr,0 .α) ∧ qri .x = ai .qr,0 .x) ∧ (qri .y = ai .qr,0 .y)     !Oj Away ≡ π = GoTo U (π = DropOffj )U(π = Resj )  h φiRes ≡ ∀j ∈ NB : 2 (π = Resj ) → i  ^  i i,j ∧ ♦raway plstatic ∧ alsatic ∧ rstatic qbj .p ∧  (qri .α  l∈NB  6.3  Then we encode the sequential DFA mission plan with 1 nested until operator U. For example,  KM I in Fig. 5a is en coded in CLTLB(D) as (R1 pO1 )U (R1 dO1 aW1 )U(r1 ) .  Composition of safe motion primitives  6.3.2  The composition of safe motion primitives is implemented in the global layer as shown in the Fig. 7 based on the i generated local mission plan KM I . Specifically, we assume that the following are given, i • a local mission KM I presented by a DFA; • a scene description M; V • a motion primitive specification φiP (M) ≡ j∈N  Ui  The motion primitive specifications φiP (M) for each robot Ri are the conjunctions of the specifications from each single motion primitive. For the Example 1, the specification is, φiP (M) ≡φiGoT o ∧ φiP ickU p ∧ φiLeave ∧ φicarry ∧  φΠj .  φiReq ∧ φiRes Now we can compose the motion primitives by encoding the i local mission plan KM I and the motion primitive specificai tions φP (M) to Z3 SMT solver [61]. If the specifications are satisfiable, the SMT solver will output a feasible plan si .  i First, we encode KM I as a CLTLB(D) specification to the SMT solver online. With these encoding, we can check if i KM I is satisfiable in the scene description M for available safe motion primitives. If yes, we find a roadmap hQir , δ i i with minimum trace length K i at the global layer that can be executed at the local layer. If the bottom-up motion planning i finds that the KM I is not feasible, it will provide feedback to require and initiate inter-agent coordination in the topdown mission planning, resulting in the re-allocation of the i local missions KM I.  6.3.1  Each state variable defined in the CLTL(D) specifications are encoded as an array of variables in the SMT solver, because Z3 is a decision procedure for the combination of quantifierfree first-order logic with theories for linear arithmetic [61]. For example, a robot Ri state qri .x is encoded as an array qr .x[k] such that k ∈ Nρ . A object state is encoded as a two dimensional array such that each element qbj .x is qb [j].x[k], where j ∈ NB and k ∈ Nρ . Further, each motion primitives π(k) ∈ Qπ will be an array such that each element is π[k], where k ∈ N because we do not assign any value at initial state.  i Encoding of the local mission plan KM I  We encode each event σ ∈ ΣiM I into a symbol that represents a CLTLB(D) formula that describes which reactive motion controllers can be executed. For the Example 1, the events {Ri pOj, Ri dOj aWk , ri , Oj Away} can be encoded as:  Ri pOj ≡ (π = GoTo) ∨  The a.t.t. operator can be encoded by adding or subtracting the array index, for instance, qr .x ≡ qr .x[k + 1] at instant k. Therefore, a state formula ψ, which is a formula defined as ψ ≡ p | R(ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ..., ϕn ) | ¬ψ | ψ1 ∧ ψ2 , can be encoded to quantifier-free first-order logic formulas Ψ[k], where k ∈ Nρ is the instant that ψ holds true. For instance, if ψ ≡ qb0 .p, then Ψ[2] holds true if qb0 .p holds true at instant 2.   (π = Reql ) U  _ ∀l∈NB ,l6=j      π = DropOffj  Ri dOj aW1 ≡ (π = GoTo) ∨  _  Encoding to SMT solver   (π = Reql ) U  Encoding temporal logic quantifiers to first order logic re quires quantifiers ∀ and ∃ in relation to the time instants. The ¬qbj .p ∧ (−1500 ≤ qbj .x ≤ −1000) ∧ (2000 ≤ qbj .y ≤ 2500) quantifier ∀k ∈ Nρ : Ψ[k] can be implemented using for   loop. The ∃k ∈ Nρ : Ψ[k] can be encoded by using an auxil_ Ri dOj aW2 ≡ (π = GoTo) ∨ (π = Reql ) U iary variable j such as ∀k ∈ Nρ : (k = j) → Ψ[k] ∧ j ∈ Nρ and, then, also encoded using a for loop. Therefore, we can ∀l∈NB ,l6=j   encode CLTLB(D) quantifiers to Z3, for example, j j j ¬qb .p ∧ (1500 ≤ qb .x ≤ 1000) ∧ (2000 ≤ qb .y ≤ 2500) ∀l∈NB ,l6=j    •  15  j  ψ ⇐⇒ j ∈ Nρ ∧ Ψ[j]   V   h  2 Hence, a new plan s2 is generated for R2 that satisfies K̃M I 5 including a response primitive π ,  (k < j → Ψ1 [k])∧ i • ψ1 Uψ2 ⇐⇒ (k = j → Ψ2 [k]) ∧ j ∈ Nρ V • 2ψ ⇐⇒ k∈Nρ Ψ[k] h i V • ♦ψ ⇐⇒ k∈Nρ k = j → Ψ[k] ∧ j ∈ Nρ k∈Nρ  s2 = {hπ1 , (1650, −1000, 0)i, hπ2 , (1650, −1000, 0)i, hπ5 , (1650, −1000, 0)i, hπ1 , (1201, 2000, 0)i, hπ3 , (1201, 2000, 0)i, hπ1 , (−2000, −2000, 0)i}  • Last[ψ] ⇐⇒ Ψ[K]  • ψ1 U(ψ2 ...UψN ) ⇐⇒  h V  (k < j1 → Ψ1 [k])∧  k∈N ρ     (j1 ≤ k < j2 → Ψ2 [k])∧ i · · · ∧ (k = jN → ΨN [k]) ∧     j , ..., jN ∈ Nρ ∧    1 j1 < j2 < · · · < jN  Note that those plans are safe to moving obstacles including other agents. For example, when the robot R1 is executing the primitive GoTo to go to pose (1750, −1000, 0) (i.e. hπ1 , (1750, −1000, 0)i), it may encounter the robot R2 executing GoTo to go to pose (1201, 2000, 0) (i.e. hπ1 , (1201, 2000, 0)i). Thus, those robots will generate locally safe circular trajectories to avoid each other with low computation as shown in Fig. 12. Additionally, if the environment is fair, those trajectories will lead them to the goal position. If it is not and our assumption cannot be guaranteed, the robots will always be in the safe state. Hence, we can update the scene description M and search for new plans si at current state in a receding horizon strategy.  Finally, let ϕ1 and ϕ2 be a.t.t.’s, the functions max(ϕ1 , ϕ2 ) and min(ϕ1 , ϕ2 ) are encoded with SMT function ite, i.e. max(ϕ1 , ϕ2 ) ≡ ite(ϕ1 > ϕ2 , ϕ1 , ϕ2 ) and min(x, y) ≡ ite(ϕ1 < ϕ2 , ϕ1 , ϕ2 ). Now, we can define a task specification in CLTLB(D) and find an integrated task and motion plan si for the scenario in the Example 1 as shown below. Example 2 If we encode the mission plans in Fig. 5 to the scene description in Example 1, the local motion plan for robots 1 and 2 will be,  s1 = {hπ4 , (−2000, −2000, 0)i, hπ1 , (1750, −1000, 0)i, hπ2 , (1750, −1000, 0)i, hπ1 , (−1250, −200, 0)i, hπ1 , (−1501, 2000, 0)i, hπ3 , (−1501, 2000, 0)i, hπ1 , (−2000, −1000, 0)i} s2 = {hπ1 , (1650, −1000, 0)i, hπ2 , (1650, −1000, 0)i, hπ1 , (1201, 2000, 0)i, hπ3 , (1201, 2000, 0)i, hπ1 , (−2000, −2000, 0)i}  Fig. 12. An illustration of trajectories generated by GoTo when two robots cross each other. Gray robots are initial and red are last positions. Circular trajectories are assigned towards the goal position while avoiding the collision, where the translational velocity is adjusted to ensure the safety property.  However, the robot R1 plan s1 requires another robot to move the object 2 away. Therefore, the request event 1 ?O2 Away must be added to the mission plan KM I . This feedback information will be used in the mission planning level to check the feasibility of the re-allocated mission plans. To establish the inter-robot coordination, we first add a pair of request-response events (?O2 Away, !O2 Away) to the local missions in order to maintain well-posedness of the multi-robot system. The modified specifications, 1 2 deemed as K̃M I and K̃M I , are illustrated in Fig. 11, respectively. Next, we recall the compositional verification procedure stated in Section III to examine whether or not i M̃1 ||M̃2 |= KM I , where M̃i = K̃M I , i = 1, 2. It turns out that the new missions are satisfiable and the global mission can be accomplished jointly. start  ?O2 Away  R1 pO1  R1 dO1 aW1  Example 3 Now, we present a scenario that tests the scalability of the proposed approach. The scenario includes a square room with 10 robots and 10 objects as defined above, h O = h(−5000, −5000), (5000, −5000)i, h(5000, −5000), (5000, 5000)i, h(5000, 5000), (−5000, 5000)i, h(−5000, 5000), (−5000, −5000)i  h A = h500, (−4000, 0, 0.0)i, h500, (−4000, −1000, 0.0)i,  r1  h500, (−4000, −2000, 0.0)i, h500, (−4000, −3000, 0.0)i, h500, (−4000, −4000, 0.0)i, h500, (−3000, 0, 0.0)i, h500, (−3000, −1000, 0.0)i, h500, (−3000, −2000, 0.0)i, i h500, (−3000, −3000, 0.0)i, h500, (−3000, −4000, 0.0)i  1 (a) K̃M I  start  R2 pO2  !O2 Away  R2 dO2 aW2  i  r2  2 (b) K̃M I  Fig. 11. New local missions for each robot.  16  h B = h100, (4000, −1000, f alse, f alse)i,  ?Oi+1 Away  start  h100, (3800, −1000, f alse, f alse)i, h100, (3600, −1000, f alse, f alse)i, h100, (4000, −2000, f alse, f alse)i, h100, (3800, −2000, f alse, f alse)i, h100, (3600, −2000, f alse, f alse)i, h100, (4000, −3000, f alse, f alse)i, h100, (3800, −3000, f alse, f alse)i, h100, (4000, −4000, f alse, f alse)i, i h100, (3800, −4000, f alse, f alse)i .  start  _  ?Oi+1 Away  ?Oi+1 Away  Ri pOi  Ri pOi  !Oi−1 Away  Ri pOi  start  Ri dOi aWi  ri  !Oi−1 Away  Ri dOi aWi  ri  !Oi−2 Away  Ri dOi aWi  ri  Finally, the robots R8 and R1 0 must respond to robots R7 and R9 , respectively. Hence, their new local missions (i.e. i = {8, 10}) are:  ri  start  Ri pOi  !Oi−1 Away  Ri dOi aWi  ri  After synthesizing those local missions in the top-down layer and, consequently, the integrated task and motion plans in the global layer of the bottom-up layer, the robots start executing this plan. The Fig. 13 shows the initial instant, when the robots R3 , R6 , R8 and R1 0 departed from the home position to the designed objects to pick up them. Other robots are requesting them to move the corresponding objects. Subsequently, these robots have responded the moving object away for corresponding requesting robot after these objects being picked up. This communication event is shown in the Fig. 14 in the moment that robot R6 responded to robot R5 and R4 and R5 started to go pick its object up. When a robot crossed another robot way, the robot changes its trajectory reacting to the movement of the other robot every cycle time, as shown in the Fig. 15, 16 and 17. Finally, the Fig. 18 shows that all objects are dropped off to their designed position.  where,  dO(i,j) ≡ (π = GoTo) ∨  ri  Therefore, the robots R3 and R6 must respond to robots R1 and R2 , and to robots R1 and R2 , accordantly. Consequently, the local missions for these robots (i.e. i = {3, 6}) are:  The global mission is decomposed in a set of local missions i KM I : i ∈ NA = {1, ..., 10} such as, Ri dOi aWi  Ri dOi aWi  Furthermore, besides to require to move other objects, the robots R2 and R5 respond a request to robots R1 and R4 , respectively. Hence, these robots local mission (i.e. i = {2, 5}) are:  The main challenges added in this scenario are: first, we added strings of three objects that should require coordination with more then two robots to pick up them; second, the room is small enough to lead the robots to often cross the way of each other. Hence, we not only add number of robots, which also adds computational effort, but we add complexities in the problem.  Ri pOi  Ri pOi  Equivalently, for robots R7 and R9 (i.e. i = {7, 9}):  start  start  ?Oi+2 Away   (π = Reql )  ∀l∈NB ,l6=j  Ri dOj aW1 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (−4250, 4000) Ri dOj aW2 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (−3250, 4000) Ri dOj aW3 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (−2250, 4000) Ri dOj aW4 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (−1250, 4000) Ri dOj aW5 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (−250, 4000) Ri dOj aW6 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (750, 4000) Ri dOj aW7 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (1750, 4000) Ri dOj aW8 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (2750, 4000) Ri dOj aW9 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (3750, 4000)  7  Ri dOj aW10 ≡ dO(i,j) U(¬qbj .p ∧ qbj .(x, y) = (4750, 4000)  Conclusion  In this paper, we proposed a new framework in multi-agent system design by combining the formal top-down task decomposition and bottom up integrated task and motion planning (ITMP) approach CoSMoP in an iterative way.  However, after checking the satisfiability of those local missions, it is found out that the robot R1 requires to move the objects 2 (i.e. ?O2 Away) and 3 (i.e. ?O3 Away), and, similarly, the robot R4 for its respective objects. Likewise, robots R2 requires to move the object 1, what robots R5 , R7 and R9 also requires for their corresponding objects. Thus, new local missions are generated in coordination layer coni sidering those new assumptions such as K̃M I for robots R1 and R4 (i.e. i = {1, 4}) are:  Our unified framework can decompose the global mission into local missions based on which we synthesize the motion plan with pre-designed motion controllers that are proven to be safe (no active collision). Coordinations are added as necessary based on the feedbacks of CosMoP to guarantee the accomplishment of the global mission. The efficacy of the proposed method is shown in solving a warehouse example.  17  Fig. 16. This instant shows the changes in the robot R10 planned trajectory because of robot R2 movements comparing with the instant at Fig. 15. The robot R6 just drop its object off and is heading its home position, while the robot R3 is arriving at its drop off position. Thee robot R105 responded the OAway event to robot R4 .  Fig. 13. Initial instant of the scenario with 10 robots and 10 objects. The robots start in their home positions, and the red robot has his planned trajectory at this instant shown in blue line. The robots that are requesting an OAway event have question marks above them. The filled dot lines in the bottom right are the objects. The others dots on top are the desired position of the objects specified in the global mission.  Fig. 17. The robot R4 is avoiding others robots in its way, while the robot R10 is arriving to its drop off position. The robot R3 is heading to its home position, where the robot R6 have already arrived.  Fig. 14. The instant that robot R6 picked an object up and responded the OAway event of robot R5 . The response is shown with a exclamation mark above the robot.  Fig. 18. All objects where successfully left in their specified position, and the robots R1 and R4 are approaching to their home position.  Fig. 15. The robot R10 in red is going to drop off position when the robot R2 is in his way.  18  References [1] R. C. Arkin, Behavior-based robotics.  [21] R. Rodrigues da Silva, B. Wu, and H. Lin, “Formal design of robot integrated task and motion planning,” in Decision and Control (CDC), 2016 IEEE 55th Annual Conference on, 2016, submitted.  MIT press, 1998.  [22] A. Platzer, Logical analysis of hybrid systems: proving theorems for complex dynamics. Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.  [2] H. Choset, K. Lynch, S. Hutchinson, G. Kantor, W. Burgard, L. Kavraki, and S. Thrun, Principles of robot motion: theory, algorithms, and implementations. MITPress, Boston, 2005.  [23] C. S. Păsăreanu, D. Giannakopoulou, M. G. Bobaru, J. M. Cobleigh, and H. Barringer, “Learning to divide and conquer: applying the l* algorithm to automate assume-guarantee reasoning,” Formal Methods in System Design, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 175–205, 2008.  [3] G. E. Fainekos, A. Girard, H. Kress-Gazit, and G. J. Pappas, “Temporal logic motion planning for dynamic robots,” Automatica, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 343–352, 2009. [4] H. Lin, “Mission accomplished: An introduction to formal methods in mobile robot motion planning and control,” Unmanned Systems, vol. 2, no. 02, pp. 201–216, 2014.  [24] C. Belta, A. Bicchi, M. Egerstedt, E. Frazzoli, E. Klavins, and G. J. Pappas, “Symbolic planning and control of robot motion [grand challenges of robotics],” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 61–70, 2007.  [5] R. R. Negenborn, B. De Schutter, and J. Hellendoorn, “Multi-agent model predictive control for transportation networks: Serial versus parallel schemes,” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 353–366, 2008.  [25] D. Angluin, “Learning regular sets from queries and counterexamples,” Information and computation, vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 87–106, 1987. [26] S. M. LaValle, Planning algorithms. 2006.  [6] J. Ferber, Multi-agent systems: an introduction to distributed artificial intelligence. Addison-Wesley Reading, 1999, vol. 1.  Cambridge university press,  [27] A. Bhatia, L. E. Kavraki, and M. Y. Vardi, “Sampling-based motion planning with temporal goals,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2010 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2010, pp. 2689– 2696.  [7] D. M. Lyons, R. C. Arkin, P. Nirmal, and S. Jiang, “Designing autonomous robot missions with performance guarantees,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on. IEEE, 2012, pp. 2583–2590.  [28] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 846–894, 2011.  [8] D. M. Lyons, R. C. Arkin, S. Jiang, T.-M. Liu, and P. Nirmal, “Performance verification for behavior-based robot missions,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 619–636, 2015.  [29] R. Olfati-Saber and R. M. Murray, “Consensus problems in networks of agents with switching topology and time-delays,” IEEE Transactions on automatic control, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 1520–1533, 2004.  [9] I. Filippidis, D. V. Dimarogonas, and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “Decentralized multi-agent control from local ltl specifications,” in 2012 IEEE 51st IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC). IEEE, 2012, pp. 6235–6240.  [30] W. Ren, “On consensus algorithms for double-integrator dynamics,” Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1503– 1509, 2008.  [10] C. Baier, J.-P. Katoen, and K. G. Larsen, Principles of model checking. MIT press, 2008. [11] M. Guo and D. V. Dimarogonas, “Multi-agent plan reconfiguration under local ltl specifications,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 218–235, 2015.  [31] R. Olfati-Saber, “Flocking for multi-agent dynamic systems: Algorithms and theory,” IEEE Transactions on automatic control, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 401–420, 2006.  [12] J. Tumova and D. V. Dimarogonas, “Multi-agent planning under local ltl specifications and event-based synchronization,” Automatica, vol. 70, pp. 239–248, 2016.  [32] M. M. Zavlanos, H. G. Tanner, A. Jadbabaie, and G. J. Pappas, “Hybrid control for connectivity preserving flocking,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2869–2875, 2009.  [13] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Linear temporal logic vehicle routing with applications to multi-uav mission planning,” International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 1372– 1395, 2011.  [33] D. V. Dimarogonas and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “On the rendezvous problem for multiple nonholonomic agents,” IEEE Transactions on automatic control, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 916–922, 2007.  [14] Y. Chen, X. C. Ding, A. Stefanescu, and C. Belta, “Formal approach to the deployment of distributed robotic teams,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 158–171, 2012.  [34] J. A. Fax and R. M. Murray, “Information flow and cooperative control of vehicle formations,” IEEE transactions on automatic control, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 1465–1476, 2004.  [15] M. Kloetzer and C. Belta, “Automatic deployment of distributed teams of robots from temporal logic motion specifications,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 48–61, 2010.  [35] D. Panagou, D. M. Stipanović, and P. G. Voulgaris, “Distributed coordination control for multi-robot networks using lyapunov-like barrier functions,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 617–632, 2016.  [16] X. C. Ding, M. Kloetzer, Y. Chen, and C. Belta, “Automatic deployment of robotic teams,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 75–86, 2011.  [36] E. Semsar-Kazerooni and K. Khorasani, “Multi-agent team cooperation: A game theory approach,” Automatica, vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 2205–2213, 2009.  [17] M. Karimadini and H. Lin, “Guaranteed global performance through local coordinations,” Automatica, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 890–898, 2011.  [37] J. R. Marden, G. Arslan, and J. S. Shamma, “Cooperative control and potential games,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1393–1407, 2009.  [18] A. Partovi and H. Lin, “Assume-guarantee cooperative satisfaction of multi-agent systems,” in 2014 American Control Conference. IEEE, 2014, pp. 2053–2058. [19] A. Ulusoy, S. L. Smith, X. C. Ding, C. Belta, and D. Rus, “Optimality and robustness in multi-robot path planning with temporal logic constraints,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 889–911, 2013.  [38] P. Tabuada and G. J. Pappas, “Linear time logic control of discretetime linear systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 1862–1877, 2006. [39] M. Kloetzer and C. Belta, “A fully automated framework for control of linear systems from temporal logic specifications,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 287–297, 2008.  [20] J. Dai and H. Lin, “Automatic synthesis of cooperative multi-agent systems,” in 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control. IEEE, 2014, pp. 6173–6178.  19  [40] R. Bloem, B. Jobstmann, N. Piterman, A. Pnueli, and Y. Sa‘ar, “Synthesis of reactive (1) designs,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 78, no. 3, pp. 911–938, 2012.  [60] S. Mitsch, K. Ghorbal, and A. Platzer, “On provably safe obstacle avoidance for autonomous robotic ground vehicles.” in Robotics: Science and Systems, 2013.  [41] P. J. Ramadge and W. M. Wonham, “Supervisory control of a class of discrete event processes,” SIAM journal on control and optimization, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 206–230, 1987.  [61] L. De Moura and N. Bjørner, “Z3: An efficient SMT solver,” in Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems. Springer, 2008, pp. 337–340.  [42] C. G. Cassandras and S. Lafortune, Introduction to discrete event systems. Springer Science & Business Media, 2009. [43] H. Kress-Gazit, G. E. Fainekos, and G. J. Pappas, “Temporal-logicbased reactive mission and motion planning,” IEEE transactions on robotics, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1370–1381, 2009. [44] J.-C. Latombe, Robot motion planning. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012, vol. 124. [45] S. Cambon, F. Gravot, and R. Alami, “Overview of asymov: Integrating motion, manipulation and task planning,” in Intl. Conf. on Automated Planning and Scheduling Doctoral Consortium, 2003. [46] E. Plaku and G. D. Hager, “Sampling-based motion and symbolic action planning with geometric and differential constraints,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2010 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2010, pp. 5002–5008. [47] Z. Littlefield, A. Krontiris, A. Kimmel, A. Dobson, R. Shome, and K. E. Bekris, “An extensible software architecture for composing motion and task planners,” in Simulation, Modeling, and Programming for Autonomous Robots. Springer, 2014, pp. 327–339. [48] C. Dornhege, P. Eyerich, T. Keller, S. Trüg, M. Brenner, and B. Nebel, “Semantic attachments for domain-independent planning systems,” in Towards Service Robots for Everyday Environments. Springer, 2012, pp. 99–115. [49] T. Wongpiromsarn, U. Topcu, and R. M. Murray, “Receding horizon temporal logic planning,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 2817–2830, 2012. [50] C. G. Cassandras and S. Lafortune, Introduction to discrete event systems. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. [51] Y. Willner and M. Heymann, “Supervisory control of concurrent discrete-event systems,” International Journal of Control, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1143–1169, 1991. [52] M. M. Bersani, A. Frigeri, A. Morzenti, M. Pradella, M. Rossi, and P. S. Pietro, “Bounded reachability for temporal logic over constraint systems,” in Temporal Representation and Reasoning (TIME), 2010 17th International Symposium on. IEEE, 2010, pp. 43–50. [53] M. Pradella, A. Morzenti, and P. S. Pietro, “Bounded satisfiability checking of metric temporal logic specifications,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), vol. 22, no. 3, p. 20, 2013. [54] J. Dai and H. Lin, “Automatic synthesis of cooperative multi-agent systems,” in Decision and Control (CDC), 2014 IEEE 53rd Annual Conference on, Dec 2014, pp. 6173–6178. [55] L. Lin, A. Stefanescu, and R. Su, “On distributed and parameterized supervisor synthesis problems,” Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 777–782, 2016. [56] K. Macek, D. A. V. Govea, T. Fraichard, and R. Siegwart, “Towards safe vehicle navigation in dynamic urban scenarios,” Automatika, 2009. [57] T. Fraichard and H. Asama, “Inevitable collision statesa step towards safer robots?” Advanced Robotics, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1001–1024, 2004. [58] T. Bräunl, Embedded robotics: mobile robot design and applications with embedded systems. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. [59] D. Fox, W. Burgard, S. Thrun et al., “The dynamic window approach to collision avoidance,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 23–33, 1997.  20

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
