Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_3607

Abstract:
1  Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks for Dynamic MR Image Reconstruction  arXiv:1712.01751v2 [cs.CV] 26 Jan 2018  Chen Qin*† , Jo Schlemper*, Jose Caballero, Anthony N. Price, Joseph V. Hajnal and Daniel Rueckert Fellow, IEEE  In order to accelerate MRI acquisition, most approaches consider undersampling the data in k-space (frequency domain). Due to the violation of the Nyquist sampling theorem, undersampling introduces aliasing artefacts in the image domain. Images can be subsequently reconstructed by solving an optimisation problem that regularises the solution with assumptions on the underlying data, such as smoothness, sparsity or, for the case of dynamic imaging, spatio-temporal redundancy. Past literature has shown that exploiting spatiotemporal redundancy can greatly improve image reconstruction quality compared to compressed sensing (CS) based single frame reconstruction methods [1], [2]. However, the limitations of these optimisation based approaches are the following: firstly, it is non-trivial to propose an optimisation function without introducing significant bias on the considered data. In addition, the manual adjustments of hyperparameters are nontrivial. Secondly, these optimisation problems often involve highly nonlinear, non-convex terms. As a consequence, the majority of approaches resort on iterative algorithms to reconstruct the images, in which often neither attaining the global minimum nor convergence to a solution is guaranteed. Furthermore, the reconstruction speeds of these methods are often slow. Proposing a robust iterative algorithm is still an active area of Index Terms—Recurrent neural network, convolutional neural research. network, dynamic magnetic resonance imaging, cardiac image In comparison, deep learning methods are gaining popularity reconstruction for their accuracy and efficiency. Unlike traditional approaches, the prior information and regularisation are learnt implicitly from data, allowing the reconstruction to look more natural. I. I NTRODUCTION However, the limitation is that so far only a handful of AGNETIC Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive approaches exist [3], [4] for dynamic reconstruction. Hence, the imaging technique which offers excellent spatial reso- applicability of deep learning models to this problem is yet to be lution and soft tissue contrast and is widely used for clinical fully explored. In particular, a core question is how to optimally diagnosis and research. Dynamic MRI attempts to reveal both exploit spatio-temporal redundancy. In addition, most deep spatial and temporal profiles of the underlying anatomy, which learning methods do not exploit domain-specific knowledge, has a variety of applications such as cardiovascular imaging which potentially enables the networks to efficiently learn data and perfusion imaging. However, the acquisition speed is representation by regulating the mechanics of network layers, fundamentally limited due to both hardware and physiological hence boosting their performances. constraints as well as the requirement to satisfy the Nyquist In this work, we propose a novel convolutional recurrent sampling rate. Long acquisition times are not only a burden neural network (CRNN) method to reconstruct high quality for patients but also make MRI susceptible to motion artefacts. dynamic MR image sequences from undersampled data, termed CRNN-MRI, which aims to tackle the aforementioned prob† Corresponding author: Chen Qin. (Email address: c.qin15@imperial.ac.uk) lems of both traditional and deep learning methods. Firstly, *These authors contributed equally to this work. we formulate a general optimisation problem for solving C. Qin, J. Schlemper, J. Caballero and D. Rueckert are with the Biomedical Image Analysis Group, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, accelerated dynamic MRI based on variable splitting and SW7 2AZ London, UK. alternate minimisation. We then show how this algorithm J. V. Hajnal, and A. N. Price are with with the Division of Imaging Sciences and Biomedical Engineering Department, King’s College London, St. Thomas’ can be seen as a network architecture. In particular, the Hospital, SE1 7EH London, U.K. proposed method consists of a CRNN block which acts as the  Abstract—Accelerating the data acquisition of dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) leads to a challenging ill-posed inverse problem, which has received great interest from both the signal processing and machine learning communities over the last decades. The key ingredient to the problem is how to exploit the temporal correlations of the MR sequence to resolve aliasing artefacts. Traditionally, such observation led to a formulation of a non-convex optimisation problem, which was solved using iterative algorithms. Recently, however, deep learning based-approaches have gained significant popularity due to their ability to solve general inverse problems. In this work, we propose a unique, novel convolutional recurrent neural network (CRNN) architecture which reconstructs high quality cardiac MR images from highly undersampled k-space data by jointly exploiting the dependencies of the temporal sequences as well as the iterative nature of the traditional optimisation algorithms. In particular, the proposed architecture embeds the structure of the traditional iterative algorithms, efficiently modelling the recurrence of the iterative reconstruction stages by using recurrent hidden connections over such iterations. In addition, spatio-temporal dependencies are simultaneously learnt by exploiting bidirectional recurrent hidden connections across time sequences. The proposed method is able to learn both the temporal dependency and the iterative reconstruction process effectively with only a very small number of parameters, while outperforming current MR reconstruction methods in terms of computational complexity, reconstruction accuracy and speed.  M  2  proximal operator and a data consistency layer corresponding Furthermore, these methods are not able to exploit the prior to the classical data fidelity term. In addition, the CRNN knowledge that can be learnt from the vast number of MRI block employs recurrent connections across each iteration step, exams routinely performed, which should be helpful to further allowing reconstruction information to be shared across the guide the reconstruction process. multiple iterations of the process. Secondly, we incorporate Recently, deep learning-based MR reconstruction has gained bidirectional convolutional recurrent units evolving over time popularity due to its promising results for solving inverse and to exploit the temporal dependency of the dynamic sequences compressed sensing problems. In particular, two paradigms and effectively propagate the contextual information across have emerged: the first class of approaches proposes to use time frames of the input. As a consequence, the unique CRNN convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn an end-to-end architecture jointly learns representations in a recurrent fashion mapping, where architectures such as SRCNN [10] or U-net evolving over both time sequences as well as iterations of the [11] are often chosen for MR image reconstruction [12], [13], reconstruction process, effectively combining the benefits of [14], [15]. The second class of approaches attempts to make traditional iterative methods and deep learning. each stage of iterative optimisation learnable by unrolling the To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work applying end-to-end pipeline into a deep network [9], [16], [17], [18], RNNs for dynamic MRI reconstruction. The contributions of [19]. For instance, Hammernik et al. [9] introduced a trainable this work are the following: Firstly, we view the optimisation formulation for accelerated parallel imaging (PI) based MRI problem of dynamic data as a recurrent network and describe reconstruction termed variational network, which embedded a a novel CRNN architecture which simultaneously incorporates CS concept within a deep learning approach. ADMM-Net [17] the recurrent relationship of data over time and iterations. was proposed by reformulating an alternating direction method Secondly, we demonstrate that the proposed method shows of multipliers (ADMM) algorithm to a deep network, where promising results and improves upon the current state-of-the-art each stage of the architecture corresponds to an iteration in dynamic MR reconstruction methods both in reconstruction the ADMM algorithm. More recently, Schlemper et al. [18] accuracy and speed. Finally, we compare our architecture to 3D proposed a cascade network which simulated the iterative CNN which does not impose the recurrent structure. We show reconstruction of dictionary learning-based methods and were that the proposed method outperforms the CNN at different later extended for dynamic MR reconstructions [3]. Most undersampling rates and speed, while requiring significantly approaches so far have focused on 2D images, whereas only a few approaches exist for dynamic MR reconstruction [3], [4]. fewer parameters. While they show promising results, the optimal architecture, training scheme and configuration spaces are yet to be fully II. R ELATED W ORK explored. One of the main challenges associated with recovering an More recently, several ideas were proposed, which integrate uncorrupted image is that both the undersampling strategy deep neural networks with model-based optimisation methods and a-priori knowledge of appropriate properties of the image to solve inverse problems [20], [21]. In contrast to these papers, need to be taken into account. Methods like k-t BLAST and which proposed to deal with a fidelity term and a regularisation k-t SENSE [5] take advantage of a-priori information about term separately, we integrate the two terms in a single deep the x-f support obtained from the training data set in order network, so that the network can be trained end-to-end. In to prune a reconstruction to optimally reduce aliasing. An addition, as we will show, we integrate a hidden connection alternative popular approach is to exploit temporal redundancy over the optimisation iteration to enable the information used to unravel from the aliasing by using CS approaches [1], [6] or for the reconstruction at each iteration to be shared across all CS combined with low-rank approaches [2], [7]. The class of stages of the reconstruction process, aiming for an iterative methods which employ CS to the MRI reconstruction is termed algorithm that can fully benefit from information extracted at as CS-MRI [8]. They assume that the image to be reconstructed all processing stages. As to the nature of the proposed RNN has a sparse representation in a certain transform domain, and units, previous work involving RNNs only updated the hidden they need to balance sparsity in the transform domain against state of the recurrent connection with a fixed input [22], [23], consistency with the acquired undersampled k-space data. For [24], while the proposed architecture progressively updates instance, an example of successful methods enforcing sparsity the input as the optimisation iteration increases. In addition, in x-f domain is k-t FOCUSS [1]. A low rank and sparse previous work only modelled the recurrence of iteration or time reconstruction scheme (k-t SLR) [2] introduces non-convex [25] exclusively, whereas the proposed method jointly exploits spectral norms and uses a spatio-temporal total variation norm both dimensions, yielding a unique architecture suitable for in recovering the dynamic signal matrix. Dictionary learning the dynamic reconstruction problem. approaches were also proposed to train an over-complete basis of atoms to optimally sparsify spatio-temporal data [6]. These III. C ONVOLUTIONAL R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORK methods offer great potential for accelerated imaging, however, FOR MRI RECONSTRUCTION they often impose strong assumptions on the underlying data, requiring nontrivial manual adjustments of hyperparameters A. Problem Formulation depending on the application. In addition, it has been observed Let x ∈ CD denote a sequence of complex-valued MR that these methods tend to result in blocky [9] and unnatural images to be reconstructed, represented as a vector with reconstructions, and their reconstruction speed is often slow. D = Dx Dy T , and let y ∈ CM (M << D) represent the  3  undersampled k-space measurements, where Dx and Dy are width and height of the frame respectively and T stands for the number of frames. Our problem is to reconstruct x from y, which is commonly formulated as an unconstrained optimisation problem of the form: argmin R(x) + λky − Fu xk22 x  (1)  Here Fu is an undersampling Fourier encoding matrix, R expresses regularisation terms on x and λ allows the adjustment of data fidelity based on the noise level of the acquired measurements y. For CS and low-rank based approaches, the regularisation terms R often employed are `0 or `1 norms in the sparsifying domain of x as well as the rank or nuclear norm of x respectively. In general, Eq. 1 is a non-convex function and hence, the variable splitting technique is usually adopted to decouple the fidelity term and the regularisation term. By introducing an auxiliary variable z that is constrained to be equal to x, Eq. 1 can be reformulated to minimize the following cost function via the penalty method: argmin R(z) + λky − Fu xk22 + µkx − zk22  (2)  individually parameterise each step. In our formulation, we model each optimisation stage (i) as a learnt, recurrent, forward encoding step fi (x(i−1) , z(i−1) ; θ, y, λ, Ω). The difference is that now we use one model which performs proximal operator, however, it also allows itself to propagate information across iteration, making it adaptable for the changes across the optimisation steps. The detail will be discussed in the following section. The different strategies are illustrated in Fig 1. B. CRNN for MRI reconstruction RNN is a class of neural networks that makes use of sequential information to process sequences of inputs. They maintain an internal state of the network acting as a "memory", which allows RNNs to naturally lend themselves to the processing of sequential data. Inspired by iterative optimisation schemes of Eq. 3, we propose a novel convolutional RNN (CRNN) network. In the most general scope, our neural encoding model is defined as follows, xrec = fN (fN −1 (· · · (f1 (xu )))),  (5)  x,z  where µ is a penalty parameter. By applying alternate minimisation over x and z, Eq. 2 can be solved via the following iterative procedures: z(i+1) = argmin R(z) + µkx(i) − zk22  (3a)  x(i+1) = argmin λky − Fu xk22 + µkx − z(i+1) k22  (3b)  z  in which xrec denotes the prediction of the network, xu is the sequence of undersampled images with length T and also the input of the network, fi (xu ; θ, λ, Ω) is the network function for each iteration of optimisation step, and N is the number of iterations. We can compactly represent a single iteration fi of our network as follows:  x  where x(0) = xu = FH u y is the zero-filled reconstruction taken as an initialisation and z can be seen as an intermediate state of the optimisation process. For MRI reconstruction, Eq. 3b is often regarded as a data consistency (DC) step where we can obtain the following closed-form solution [18]:  (i−1) x(i) + CRNN(x(i−1) rnn = xrec rec ),  x(i) rec  =  DC(x(i) rnn ; y, λ0 , Ω),  (6a) (6b)  where CRNN is a learnable block explained hereafter, DC (i) is the data consistency step treated as a network layer, xrec is the progressive reconstruction of the undersampled image λ0 H (i) H (i) (0) (i) x(i+1) = xu at iteration i with xrec = xu , xrnn is the intermediate ( DC(z ; y, λ0 , Ω) = F ΛFz + 1+λ0 Fu y, reconstruction image before the DC layer, and y is the 1 if k 6∈ Ω Λkk = 1 acquired k-space samples. Note that the variables xrec , xrnn are if k ∈ Ω 1+λ0 (4) analogous to x, z in Eq. 3 respectively. Here, we use CRNN in which F is the full Fourier encoding matrix (a discrete to encode the update step, which can be seen as one step Fourier transform in this case), λ0 = λ/µ is a ratio of of a gradient descent in the sense of objective minimisation, regularization parameters from Eq. 4, Ω is an index set of the or a more general approximation function regressing the (i+1) − x(i) , i.e. the distance required to move acquired k-space samples and Λ is a diagonal matrix. Please difference z refer to [18] for more details of formulating Eq. 4 as a data to the next state. Moreover, note that in every iteration, consistency layer in a neural network. Eq. 3a is the proximal CRNN updates its internal state H given an input which is operator of the prior R, and instead of explicitly determining discussed shortly. As such, CRNN also allows information to the form of the regularisation term, we propose to directly be propagated efficiently across iterations, in contrast to the learn the proximal operator by using a convolutional recurrent sequential models using CNNs which collapse the intermediate feature representation to z(i) . neural network (CRNN). In order to exploit the dynamic nature and the temporal Previous deep learning approaches such as Deep-ADMM net [17] and method proposed by Schlemper et al. [18] unroll the redundancy of our data, we further propose to jointly model the traditional optimisation algorithm. Hence, their models learn a recurrence evolving over time for dynamic MRI reconstruction. sequence of transition x(0) → z(1) → x(1) → · · · → z(N ) → The proposed CRNN-MRI network and CRNN block are shown x(N ) to reconstruct the image, where each state transition at in Fig. 2(a), in which CRNN block comprised of 5 components: stage (i) is an operation such as convolutions independently 1) bidirectional convolutional recurrent units evolving over parameterised by θ, nonlinearities or a data consistency step. time and iterations (BCRNN-t-i), However, since the network implicitly learns some form of 2) convolutional recurrent units evolving over iterations only proximal operator at each iteration, it may be redundant to (CRNN-i),  4  (a) Traditional Optimisation  (c) CRNN-MRI (𝑖)  argmin  (𝑖) 𝑥𝑟𝑒𝑐  CRNN  𝑥𝑟𝑒𝑐  𝐳  ⨁ 𝐳  DC  𝑖  DC  𝑖  𝐳  (b) CNN (0)  𝑥𝑟𝑒𝑐  CNN(1)  𝐳  1  DC  (𝑖−1)  …  CNN(i)  𝑥𝑟𝑒𝑐  𝐳  𝑖  DC  Fig. 1: (a) Traditional optimisation algorithm using variable splitting and alternate minimisation approach, (b) the optimisation unrolled into a deep convolutional network incorporating the data consistency step, and (c) the proposed architecture which models optimisation recurrence. 1  𝑖  𝐱 𝑟𝑒𝑐  (a) CRNN-MRI  Ω  DC  ⨁  k-space samples  𝐱 𝑟𝑒𝑐  2  𝐱 𝑟𝑒𝑐  DC  DC  DC  ⨁  ⨁  ⨁  (1) 𝐇5  (2) 𝐇5  𝐇5  Unfolding (iteration)  (1)  𝐇4  (1)  𝐇3  (1)  𝐇2  (1)  𝐇𝟏  𝐇4  CRNN  𝑁  𝐱 𝑟𝑒𝑐  (b)  (2)  (N)  Layer 5 (CNN)  (N)  Layer 4 (CRNN-i)  (N)  Layer 3 (CRNN-i)  (N)  Layer 2 (CRNN-i)  (N)  Layer 1 (BCRNN-t-i)  𝐇4  ..  CNN  𝐇3  (2)  𝐇3  ..  CRNN-i  𝐇2  (2)  𝐇2  ..  CRNN-i 𝐇1  (2)  𝐇1  CRNN-i  𝐱 𝑟𝑒𝑐  𝐇𝑙,𝑡−1)  𝐇𝑙,𝑡  𝑖  (c)  𝑖−1  𝐱 𝑟𝑒𝑐  Feed-forward convolution  Recurrent convolution (iteration)  Recurrent convolution (time)  1  𝐱𝑢  BCRNN-t-i  𝑖  𝑖  …  𝐇 𝑙,𝑡−1  …  𝐇𝑙,𝑡−1  𝑖−1  𝑖−1  𝐇𝑙,𝑡  𝑖  𝐇𝑙,𝑡+1  𝑖  𝑖−1  …  𝐇 𝑙,𝑡+1  …  𝑖  𝐇𝑙,𝑡  𝐇𝑙,𝑡+1  𝐇𝑙  𝑖  𝑖  𝐇 𝑙,𝑡  𝑖  𝐇𝑙,𝑡−1  𝑁−1  𝐱 𝑟𝑒𝑐  𝐇𝑙,𝑡+1  𝑖  𝐇𝑙−1, 𝑡−1  𝑖  𝐇𝑙−1,𝑡  𝑖  𝐇𝑙 𝐇𝑙  𝑖  𝑖  𝑖  𝐇𝑙−1, 𝑡+1  Fig. 2: (a) The overall architecture of proposed CRNN-MRI network for MRI reconstruction. (b) The structure of the proposed (0) network when unfolded over iterations, in which xrec = xu . (c) The structure of BCRNN-t-i layer when unfolded over the time sequence. The black arrows indicate feed-forward convolutions. The blue arrows and red arrows indicate recurrent convolutions over iterations and the time sequence respectively.  3) 2D convolutional neural network (CNN), 4) residual connection and 5) DC layers. We introduce details of the components of our network in the following subsections. 1) CRNN-i: As aforementioned, we encapsulate the iterative optimisation procedures explicitly with RNNs. In the CRNNi unit, the iteration step is viewed as the sequential step in the vanilla RNN. If the network is unfolded over the iteration dimension, the network can be illustrated as in Fig. 2(b), where information is propagated between iterations. Here we use H  to denote the feature representation of our sequence of frames (i) throughout the network. Hl denotes the representation at layer l (subscript) and iteration step i (superscript). Therefore, at (i−1) iteration (i), given the input Hl−1 and the previous iteration’s (i−1) (i) hidden state Hl , the hidden state Hl at layer l of a CRNNi unit can be formulated as: (i)  (i)  (i−1)  Hl = σ(Wl ∗ Hl−1 + Wi ∗ Hl  + Bl ).  (7)  Here ∗ represents convolution operation, Wl and Wi represent the filters of input-to-hidden convolutions and hiddento-hidden recurrent convolutions evolving over iterations  5  (i)  respectively, and Bl represents a bias term. Here Hl is backward direction. Therefore, for the formulation of BCRNNthe representation of the whole T sequence with shape t-i unit, given (1) the current input representation of the l-th (batchsize, T, nc , Dx , Dy ), where nc is the number of channels layer at time frame t and iteration step i, which is the output which is 2 at the input and output but is greater while processing representation from (l − 1)-th layer H(i) l−1,t , (2) the previous inside the network, and the convolutions are computed on the iteration’s hidden representation within the same layer H(i−1) , l,t → − (i) last two dimensions. The latent features are activated by the (3) the hidden representation of the past time frame H l,t−1 , and rectifier linear unit (ReLU) as a choice of nonlinearity, i.e. ← −(i) the hidden representation of the future time frame H l,t+1 , then σ(x) = max(0, x). of the current l-th layer of time The CRNN-i unit offers several advantages compared to the hidden state representation (i) frame t at iteration i, H with shape (batchsize, nc , Dx , Dy ), l,t independently unrolling convolutional filters at each stage. can be formulated as: Firstly, compared to CNNs where the latent representation − →(i) − → − → (i) (i−1) from the previous state is not propagated, the hidden-to-hidden H l,t = σ(Wl ∗ Hl−1,t + Wt ∗ H il,t−1 + Wi ∗ Hl,t + B l ), ← −(i) ← −(i) ← − iteration connections in CRNN-i units allow contextual spatial (i) (i−1) H l,t = σ(Wl ∗ Hl−1,t + Wt ∗ H l,t+1 + Wi ∗ Hl,t + B l ), information gathered at previous iterations to be passed to the − →(i) ← −(i) (i) Hl,t = H l,t + H l,t , future iterations. This enables the reconstruction step at each (8) iteration to be optimised not only based on the output image Similar to the notation in Section III-B1, W represents the t but also based on the hidden features from previous iterations, evolving over time. When where the hidden connection convolutions can "memorise" the filters of recurrent convolutions (1) l = 1 and i = 1, H = x , that is the t-th frame of u t 0,t useful features to avoid redundant computation. Secondly, as undersampled input data, and when l = 1 and i = 2, ...T , the iteration number increases, the effective receptive field of a (i) (i−1) H = x , which stands for the t-th frame of the rec t 0,t CRNN-i unit in the spatial domain also expands whereas CNN intermediate reconstruction result from iteration i − 1. For resets it at each iteration. This property allows the network to − (i) ← −(i) (0) → H , and , they are set to be zero initial hidden H H l,t l,0 l,T +1 further improve the reconstruction by allowing it to have better states. contextual support. In addition, since the weight parameters The temporal connections of BCRNN-t-i allow information are shared across iterations, it greatly reduces the number to be propagated across the whole T time frames, enabling it to of parameters compared to CNNs, potentially offering better learn the differences and correlations of successive frames. The generalization properties. filter responses of recurrent convolutions evolving over time In this work, we use a vanilla RNN to model the recurrence express dynamic changing biases, which focus on modelling due to its simplicity. Note this can be naturally generalised the temporal changes across frames, while the filter responses to other RNN units, such as long short-term memory (LSTM) of recurrent convolutions over iterations focus on learning the and gated recurrent unit (GRU), which are considered to have spatial refinement across consecutive iteration steps. In addition, better memory properties, although using these units would we note that learning recurrent layers along the temporal significantly increase computational complexity. direction is different to using 3D convolution along the space 2) BCRNN-t-i: Dynamic MR images exhibit high temporal and temporal direction. 3D convolution seeks invariant features redundancy, which is often exploited as a-priori knowledge to across space-time, hence several layers of 3D convolutions are regularise the reconstruction. Hence, it is also beneficial for the required before the information from the whole sequence can network to learn the dynamics of sequences. To this extent, we be propagated to a particular time frame. On the other hand, propose a bidirectional convolutional recurrent unit (BCRNN- learning recurrent 2D convolutions enables the model to easily t-i) to exploit both temporal and iteration dependencies jointly. and efficiently propagate the information through time, which BCRNN-t-i includes three convolution layers: one on the input also yields fewer parameters and a lower computational cost. which comes into the unit from the previous layer, one on In summary, the set of hidden states for a CRNN block −(i) → − (i) the hidden state from the past and future time frames and (i) (i) ← to update at iteration i is H = {Hl , Hl,t , H l,t , H l,t }, for the one on the hidden state from the previous iteration of l = 1, . . . , L and t = 1, . . . , T , where L is the total number of the unit (Fig. 2(c)). Note that we simultaneously consider layers in the CRNN block and T is the total number of time temporal dependencies from past and future time frames, and frames. the encoding weights are shared for both directions. The output for the BCRNN-t-i layer is obtained by summing the feature maps learned from both directions. The illustration figure of C. Network Learning the unit when it is unfolded over time sequence is shown in Given the training data S of input-target pairs (xu , xt ), the Fig. 2(c). network learning proceeds by minimizing the pixel-wise mean As we need to propagate information along temporal squared error (MSE) between the predicted reconstructed MR dimensions in this unit, here we introduce an additional index t image and the fully sampled ground truth data: in the notation to represent the variables related with time frame X 1 2 (i) L (θ) = kxt − xrec k2 (9) t. Here Hl,t represents feature representations at l-th layer, n S → − (i) (xu ,xt )∈S time frame t, and at iteration i, H l,t denotes the representations calculated when information is propagated forward inside the where θ = {Wl , Wi , Wt , Bl }, l = 1 . . . L, and nS stands ← −(i) BCRNN-t-i unit, and similarly, H l,t denotes the one in the for the number of samples in the training set S. Note that  6  the total number of time sequences T and iteration steps N assumed by the network before performing the reconstruction is a free parameter that must be specified in advance. The network weights were initialised using He initialization [26] and it was trained using the Adam optimiser [27]. During training, gradients were hard-clipped to the range of [−5, 5] to mitigate the gradient explosion problem. The network was implemented in Python using Theano and Lasagne libraries.  aliasing artefact. The evaluation was done via a 3-fold cross validation. The minibatch size during the training was set to 1, and we observed that the performance can reach a plateau within 6 × 104 backpropagations. B. Evaluation Method  We compared the proposed method with the representative algorithms of the CS-based dynamic MRI reconstruction, such as k-t FOCUSS [1] and k-t SLR [2], and two variants of IV. E XPERIMENTS 3D CNN networks named 3D CNN-S and 3D CNN in our experiments. The built baseline 3D CNN networks share the A. Dataset and Implementation Details same architecture with the proposed CRNN-MRI network but The proposed method was evaluated using a complexall the recurrent units and 2D CNN units were replaced with valued MR dataset consisting of 10 fully sampled short-axis 3D convolutional units, that is, in each iteration, the 3D CNN cardiac cine MR scans. Each scan contains a single slice block contain 5 layers of 3D convolutions, one DC layer and a SSFP acquisition with 30 temporal frames, which have a residual connection. Here 3D CNN-S refers to network sharing 320 × 320 mm field of view and 10 mm thickness. The weights across iterations, however, this does not employ the raw data consists of 32-channel data with sampling matrix hidden-to-hidden connection as in the CRNN-i unit. The 3D size 192 × 190, which was then zero-filled to the matrix size CNN-S architecture was chosen so as to make a fair comparison 256 × 256. The raw multi-coil data was reconstructed using with the proposed model using a comparable number of network SENSE [28] with no undersampling and retrospective gating. parameters. In contrast, 3D CNN refers to the network without Coil sensitivity maps were normalized to a body coil image weight sharing, in which the network capacity is N = 10 times and used to produce a single complex-valued reconstructed of that of 3D CNN-S, and approximately 12 times more than image. In experiments, the complex valued images were backthat of our first proposed method (Proposed-A). transformed to regenerate k-space samples, simulating a fully Reconstruction results were evaluated based on the followsampled single-coil acquisition. The input undersampled image ing quantitative metrics: MSE, peak-to-noise-ratio (PSNR), sequences were generated by randomly undersampling the structural similarity index (SSIM) [29] and high frequency k-space samples using Cartesian undersampling masks, with error norm (HFEN) [30]. The choice of the these metrics was undersampling patterns adopted from [1]: for each frame the made to evaluate the reconstruction results with complimentary eight lowest spatial frequencies were acquired, and the sampling emphasis. MSE and PSNR were chosen to evaluate the overall probability of k-space lines along the phase-encoding direction accuracy of the reconstruction quality. SSIM put emphasis was determined by a zero-mean Gaussian distribution. Note on image quality perception. HFEN was used to quantify the that the undersampling rates are stated with respect to the quality of the fine features and edges in the reconstructions, matrix size of raw data, which is 192 × 190. and here we employed the same filter specification as in [30], The architecture of the proposed network used in the [31] with the filter kernel size 15 × 15 pixels and a standard experiment is shown in Fig. 2: each iteration of the CRNN deviation of 1.5 pixels. For PSNR and SSIM, it is the higher block contains five units: one layer of BCRNN-t-i, followed the better, while for MSE and HFEN, it is the lower the better. by three layers of CRNN-i units, and followed by a CNN unit. For all CRNN-i and BCRNN-t-i units, we used a kernel size k = 3 and the number of filters was set to nf = 64 for C. Results Proposed-A and nf = 128 for Proposed-B in Table I. The CNN The comparison results of all methods are reported in Table I, after the CRNN-i units contains one convolution layer with where we evaluated the quantitative metrics, network capacity k = 3 and nf = 2, which projects the extracted representation and reconstruction time. Numbers shown in Table I are mean back to the image domain which contains complex-valued values of corresponding metrics with standard deviation of images expressed using two channels. The output of the CRNN different subjects in parenthesis. Bold numbers in Table I block is connected to the residual connection, which sums indicate the better performance of the proposed methods than the output of the block with its input. Finally, we used DC the competing ones. Compared with the baseline method (k-t layers on top of the CRNN output layers. During training, the FOCUSS and k-t SLR), the proposed methods outperform them iteration step is set to be N = 10, and the time sequence by a considerable margin at different acceleration rates. When for training is T = 30. Note that this architecture is by no compared with deep learning methods, note that the network means optimal and more layers can be added to increase the capacity of Proposed-A is comparable with that of 3D CNN-S ability of our network to better capture the data structures. and the capacity of Propose-B is around one third of that of 3D While the original sequence has size 256 × 256 × T , we extract CNN. Though their capacities are much smaller, both Proposedpatches of size 256 × Dpatch × T , where Dpatch is the patch A and Proposed-B outperform 3D CNN-S and 3D CNN for size and the direction of patch extraction corresponds to the all acceleration rates by a large margin, which shows the frequency-encoding direction. Note that since we only consider competitiveness and effectiveness of our method. In addition, Cartesian undersampling, the aliasing occurs only along the we can see a substantial improvement of the reconstruction phase encoding direction, so patch extraction does not alter the results on all acceleration rates and in all metrics when the  7  TABLE I: Performance comparisons (MSE, PSNR:dB, SSIM, and HFEN) on dynamic cardiac data with different acceleration rates. MSE is scaled to 10−3 . The bold numbers are better results of the proposed methods than that of the other methods. Method  k-t FOCUSS  k-t SLR  3D CNN-S  3D CNN  Proposed-A  Proposed-B  -  -  338,946  3,389,460  262,020  1,040,132  6×  MSE PSNR SSIM HFEN  0.592 (0.199) 32.506 (1.516) 0.953 (0.040) 0.211 (0.021)  0.371( 0.155) 34.632 (1.761) 0.970 (0.033) 0.161 (0.016)  0.385 (0.124) 34.370 (1.526) 0.976 (0.008) 0.170 (0.009)  0.275 (0.096) 35.841 (1.470) 0.983 (0.005) 0.138 (0.013)  0.261 (0.097) 36.096 (1.539) 0.985 (0.004) 0.131 (0.013)  0.201 (0.074) 37.230 (1.559) 0.988 (0.003) 0.112 (0.010)  9×  MSE PSNR SSIM HFEN  1.234 (0.801) 29.721 (2.339) 0.922 (0.043) 0.310(0.041)  0.846 (0.572) 31.409 (2.404) 0.951 (0.025) 0.260 (0.034)  0.929 (0.474) 30.838 (2.246) 0.950 (0.016) 0.280 (0.034)  0.605 (0.324) 32.694 (2.179) 0.968 (0.010) 0.215 (0.021)  0.516 (0.255) 33.281 (1.912) 0.972 (0.009) 0.201 (0.025)  0.405 (0.206) 33.379 (2.017) 0.979 (0.007) 0.173 (0.021)  11×  MSE PSNR SSIM HFEN  1.909 (0.828) 27.593 (2.038) 0.880 (0.060) 0.390 (0.023)  1.237 (0.620) 29.577 (2.211) 0.924 (0.034) 0.327 (0.028)  1.472 (0.733) 28.803 (2.151) 0.925 (0.022) 0.363 (0.041)  0.742 (0.325) 31.695 (1.985) 0.960 (0.010) 0.257 (0.029)  0.688 (0.290) 31.986 (1.885) 0.964 (0.009) 0.248 (0.033)  0.610 (0.300) 32.575 (1.987) 0.968 (0.011) 0.227 (0.030)  15s  451s  8s  8s  3s  6s  Capacity  Time  images and their corresponding error maps from different reconstruction methods. As one can see, our proposed model (Proposed-B) can produce more faithful reconstructions for those parts of the image around the myocardium where there are large temporal changes. This is reflected by the fact that RNNs effectively use a larger receptive field to capture the characteristics of aliasing seen within the anatomy. For the 3D CNN approaches, it is also observed that it is not able to denoise the background region. This could be explained by the fact that 3D CNN only exploits local information due to the small filter sizes it used, while in contrast, the proposed CRNN improves the denoising of the background region because of its larger receptive field sizes. Their temporal profiles at x = 120 are shown in Fig. 5. Similarly, one can see that the proposed model has overall much smaller error, faithfully modelling the dynamic data. This suggests its capability to learn motion Fig. 3: Mean PSNR values (Proposed-B) vary with the number compensation implicitly between frames although the network of iterations at test time on data with different acceleration is trained for the dynamic image reconstruction. It could be rates. Here ac stands for acceleration rate. due to the fact that spatial and temporal features are learned separately in the proposed model while 3D CNN seeks invariant feature learning across space and time. number of network parameters is increased for the proposed In terms of speed, the proposed RNN-based reconstruction method (Proposed-B), and therefore we will only show the is faster than the 3D CNN approaches because it only results from Proposed-B in the following. The number of performs convolution along time once per iteration, removing iterations used by the network at test time is set to be the the redundant 3D convolutions which are computationally same as the training stage, which is N = 10, however, if expensive. Reconstruction time of 3D CNN and the proposed the iteration number is increased up to N = 17, it shows an methods reported in Table I were calculated on a GPU GeForce improvement of 0.324dB on average. Fig. 3 shows the model’s GTX 1080, and the time for k-t FOCUSS and k-t SLR were performance varying with the number of iterations at test time. calculated on CPU. In fact, for accelerated imaging, higher undersampling factors significantly add aliasing to the initial zero-filled reconstruction, V. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION making the reconstruction more challenging. This suggests that while the 3D CNN possesses higher modelling capacity owing In this work, we have demonstrated that the presented to its large number of parameters, it may not necessarily be network is capable of producing faithful image reconstructions an ideal architecture to perform dynamic MR reconstruction, from highly undersampled data, both in terms of various presumably because the simple CNN is not as efficient as quantitative metrics as well as inspection of error maps. propagating the information across the whole sequence. In contrast to unrolled deep network architectures proposed A comparison of the visualization results of a reconstruction previously, we modelled the recurrent nature of the optimisation from 9× acceleration is shown in Fig. 4 with the reconstructed iteration using hidden representations with the ability to  8  Fig. 4: The comparison of reconstructions on spatial dimension with their error maps. (a) Ground Truth (b) Undersampled image by acceleration factor 9 (c,d) Proposed-B (e,f) 3D CNN (g,h) 3D CNN-S (i,j) k-t FOCUSS (k,l) k-t SLR  Additionally, current analysis only considers a single coil setup. In the future, we will also aim at investigating such methods in a scenario where multiple coil data from parallel MR imaging can be used jointly for higher acceleration acquisition. To conclude, inspired by variable splitting and alternate minimisation strategies, we have presented an end-to-end deep learning solution, CRNN-MRI, for accelerated dynamic MRI reconstruction, with a forward, CRNN block implicitly learning iterative denoising interleaved by data consistency layers to Fig. 5: The comparison of reconstructions along temporal enforce data fidelity. In particular, the CRNN architecture is dimension with their error maps. (a) Ground Truth (b) Under- composed of the proposed novel variants of convolutional sampled image by acceleration factor 9 (c,d) Proposed-B (e,f) recurrent unit which evolves over two dimensions: time and iterations. The proposed network is able to learn both the 3D CNN (g,h) 3D CNN-S (i,j) k-t FOCUSS (k,l) k-t SLR temporal dependency and the iterative reconstruction process effectively, and outperformed the other competing methods in retain and propagate information across the optimisation steps. terms of computational complexity, reconstruction accuracy Compared with 3D CNN models, the proposed methods have a and speed for different undersampling rates. much lower network capacity but still have a higher accuracy, reflecting the effectiveness of our architecture. This is due to R EFERENCES the ability of the proposed RNN units to increase the receptive [1] H. Jung, J. C. Ye, and E. Y. Kim, “Improved k–t BLAST and k–t SENSE field size while iteration steps increase, as well as to efficiently using FOCUSS,” Physics in medicine and biology, vol. 52, no. 11, p. propagate information across the temporal direction. In addition, 3201, 2007. our network also offers very fast reconstruction on a GPU [2] S. G. Lingala, Y. Hu, E. Dibella, and M. Jacob, “Accelerated dynamic MRI exploiting sparsity and low-rank structure: K-t SLR,” IEEE GeForce GTX 1080 compared with other competing methods. Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1042–1054, 2011. In this work, we modeled the recurrence using the relatively [3] J. Schlemper, J. Caballero, J. V. Hajnal, A. Price, and D. Rueckert, “A simple (vanilla) RNN architecture. For the future work, we will deep cascade of convolutional neural networks for dynamic MR image reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.02422, 2017. explore other recurrent units such as LSTM or GRU. As they are [4] D. Batenkov, Y. Romano, and M. Elad, “On the global-local dichotomy trained to explicitly select what to remember, they may allow in sparsity modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03446, 2017. the units to better control the flow of information and could [5] J. Tsao, P. Boesiger, and K. P. Pruessmann, “k-t BLAST and k-t SENSE: Dynamic MRI with high frame rate exploiting spatiotemporal reduce the number of iterations required for the network to correlations,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1031– generate high-quality output. In addition, we have found that the 1042, 2003. majority of errors between the reconstructed image and the fully [6] J. Caballero, A. N. Price, D. Rueckert, and J. V. Hajnal, “Dictionary learning and time sparsity for dynamic MR data reconstruction,” IEEE sampled image lie at the part where motion exists, indicating Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 979–994, 2014. that motion exhibits a challenge for such dynamic sequence [7] R. Otazo, E. Candès, and D. K. Sodickson, “Low-rank plus sparse reconstruction, and CNNs or RNNs trained for reconstruction matrix decomposition for accelerated dynamic MRI with separation of background and dynamic components,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, loss cannot fully learn such motion compensation implicitly vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 1125–1136, 2015. during training. Thus it will be interesting to explore the [8] M. Lustig, D. L. Donoho, J. M. Santos, and J. M. Pauly, “Compressed benefits of doing simultaneous motion compensation and image sensing mri,” IEEE signal processing magazine, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 72–82, reconstruction for the improvement in the dynamic region. 2008.  9  [9] K. Hammernik, T. Klatzer, E. Kobler, M. P. Recht, D. K. Sodickson, T. Pock, and F. Knoll, “Learning a variational network for reconstruction of accelerated MRI data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00447, 2017. [10] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang, “Learning a deep convolutional network for image super-resolution,” in European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2014, pp. 184–199. [11] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation,” Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 234–241, 2015. [12] D. Lee, J. Yoo, and J. C. Ye, “Deep artifact learning for compressed sensing and parallel MRI,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01120, 2017. [13] Y. S. Han, J. Yoo, and J. C. Ye, “Deep learning with domain adaptation for accelerated projection reconstruction MR,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01135, 2017. [14] S. Wang, Z. Su, L. Ying, X. Peng, and D. Liang, “Exploiting deep convolutional neural network for fast magnetic resonance imaging,” in ISMRM 24th Annual Meeting and Exhibition, 2016. [15] S. Wang, N. Huang, T. Zhao, Y. Yang, L. Ying, and D. Liang, “1D Partial Fourier Parallel MR imaging with deep convolutional neural network,” in ISMRM 25th Annual Meeting and Exhibition, vol. 47, no. 6, 2017, pp. 2016–2017. [16] J. Adler and O. Öktem, “Learned primal-dual reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06474, 2017. [17] J. Sun, H. Li, Z. Xu et al., “Deep ADMM-Net for compressive sensing mri,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016, pp. 10–18. [18] J. Schlemper, J. Caballero, J. V. Hajnal, A. Price, and D. Rueckert, “A deep cascade of convolutional neural networks for MR image reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00555, 2017. [19] J. Adler and O. Öktem, “Solving ill-posed inverse problems using iterative deep neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04058, 2017. [20] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, S. Gu, and L. Zhang, “Learning deep cnn denoiser prior for image restoration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03264, 2017. [21] J. Chang, C.-L. Li, B. Póczos, B. Kumar, and A. C. Sankaranarayanan, “One network to solve them all—solving linear inverse problems using deep projection models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.09912, 2017. [22] K. Gregor, I. Danihelka, A. Graves, D. Rezende, and D. Wierstra, “Draw: A recurrent neural network for image generation,” in Proceedings of The 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015, pp. 1462–1471. [23] M. Liang and X. Hu, “Recurrent convolutional neural network for object recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 3367–3375. [24] J. Kuen, Z. Wang, and G. Wang, “Recurrent attentional networks for saliency detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 3668–3677. [25] Y. Huang, W. Wang, and L. Wang, “Bidirectional recurrent convolutional networks for multi-frame super-resolution,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015, pp. 235–243. [26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2015, pp. 1026–1034. [27] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014. [28] K. P. Pruessmann, M. Weiger, M. B. Scheidegger, P. Boesiger et al., “SENSE: sensitivity encoding for fast MRI,” Magnetic resonance in medicine, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 952–962, 1999. [29] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE transactions on image processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004. [30] S. Ravishankar and Y. Bresler, “Mr image reconstruction from highly undersampled k-space data by dictionary learning,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1028–1041, 2011. [31] X. Miao, S. G. Lingala, Y. Guo, T. Jao, M. Usman, C. Prieto, and K. S. Nayak, “Accelerated cardiac cine mri using locally low rank and finite difference constraints,” Magnetic resonance imaging, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 707–714, 2016.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
