Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_394

Abstract:
S URVEY M AN: Programming and Automatically Debugging Surveys Emma Tosch  Emery D. Berger  arXiv:1406.5572v1 [cs.PL] 21 Jun 2014  School of Computer Science University of Massachusetts, Amherst Amherst, MA 01003 {etosch,emery}@cs.umass.edu  Abstract Surveys can be viewed as programs, complete with logic, control flow, and bugs. Word choice or the order in which questions are asked can unintentionally bias responses. Vague, confusing, or intrusive questions can cause respondents to abandon a survey. Surveys can also have runtime errors: inattentive respondents can taint results. This effect is especially problematic when deploying surveys in uncontrolled settings, such as on the web or via crowdsourcing platforms. Because the results of surveys drive business decisions and inform scientific conclusions, it is crucial to make sure they are correct. We present S URVEY M AN, a system for designing, deploying, and automatically debugging surveys. Survey authors write their surveys in a lightweight domain-specific language aimed at end users. S URVEY M AN statically analyzes the survey to provide feedback to survey authors before deployment. It then compiles the survey into JavaScript and deploys it either to the web or a crowdsourcing platform. S URVEY M AN’s dynamic analyses automatically find survey bugs, and control for the quality of responses. We evaluate S URVEY M AN’s algorithms analytically and empirically, demonstrating its effectiveness with case studies of social science surveys conducted via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.  1.  Introduction  Surveys and polls are widely used to conduct research for industry, politics, and the social sciences. Businesses use surveys to perform market research to inform their spending and product strategies [4]. Political and news organizations use surveys to gather public opinion, which can influence political decisions and political campaigns. A wide range of  social scientists, including psychologists, economists, health professionals, political scientists, and sociologists, make extensive use of surveys to drive their research [3, 6, 13, 20]. In the past, surveys were traditionally administered via mailings, phone calls, or face-to-face interviews [8]. Over the last decade, web-based surveys have become increasingly popular as they make it possible to reach large and diverse populations at low cost [5, 27, 32, 33]. Crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon’s Mechanical Turk make it possible for researchers to post surveys and recruit participants at scales that would otherwise be out of reach. Unfortunately, the design and deployment of surveys can seriously threaten the validity of their results: Question order effects. Placing one question before another can lead to different responses than when their order is reversed. For example, a Pew Research poll found that people were more likely to favor civil unions for gays when this question was asked after one about whether they favored or opposed gay marriage [23]. Question wording effects. Different question variants can inadvertently elicit wildly different responses. For example, in 2003, Pew Research found that American support for possible U.S. military action in Iraq was 68%, but this support dropped to 43% when the question mentioned possible American casualties [24]. Even apparently equivalent questions can yield quite different responses. In a 2005 survey, 51% of respondents favored “making it legal for doctors to give terminally ill patients the means to end their lives” but only 44% favored “making it legal for doctors to assist terminally ill patients in committing suicide.” [24] Survey abandonment. Respondents often abandon a survey partway through, a phenomenon known as breakoff. This effect may be due to survey fatigue, when a survey is too long, or because a particular question is ambiguous, lacks an appropriate response, or is too intrusive. If an entire group of survey respondents abandon a survey, the result can be selection bias: the survey will exclude an entire group from the population being surveyed.  [Copyright notice will appear here once ’preprint’ option is removed.]  1  2014/6/24  Inattentive or random respondents. Some respondents are inattentive and make arbitrary choices, rather than answering the question carefully. While this problem can arise in all survey scenarios, it is especially acute in an on-line setting where there is no direct supervision. To make matters worse, there is no “right answer” to check against for surveys, making controlling for quality difficult. Downs et al. found that nearly 40% of survey respondents on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk answered randomly [9]. So-called attention check questions aimed at screening inattentive workers are ineffective because they are easily recognized. An unfortunately typical situation is that described by a commenter on a recent article about taking surveys on Mechanical Turk: If the requester is paying very little, I will go as fast as I can through the survey making sure to pass their attention checks, so that I’m compensated fairly. Conversely, if the requester wants to pay a fair wage, I will take my time and give a more thought out and non random response. [11]  SURVEYMAN$ staFc$analysis$ (§3)$  SURVEY.CSV" (§2)$ Compile()me*errors* Survey*sta)s)cs*  SURVEYMAN$ dynamic$ analysis$ (§5)$  SURVEYMAN$ compiler$&$ runFme$ (§4)$  RESULTS.CSV Survey*errors* Random* respondents*  Web$or$Crowdsourcing$Pla3orm$  Figure 1: Overview of the S URVEY M AN system. VEY M AN ’s  dynamic analysis operates on information from the static analysis and the results of the survey to identify survey errors and inattentive respondents. Table 1 summarizes the analyses that S URVEY M AN performs.  While all of the above problems are known to practitioners [19], there is currently no way to address them automatically. The result is that current practice in deploying surveys is generally limited to an initial pilot study followed by a full deployment, with no way to control for the potentially devastating impact of survey errors and inattentive respondents. From our perspective, this is like writing a program, making sure it compiles, and then shipping it—to run on a system with hardware problems. 1.1  SURVEYMAN*system*  S URVEY M AN  In this paper, we adopt the view that surveys are effectively programs, complete with logic, control flow, and bugs. We describe S URVEY M AN, which aims to provide a scientific footing for the development of surveys and the analysis of their results. Using S URVEY M AN, survey authors use a lightweight domain-specific language to create their surveys. S URVEY M AN then deploys their surveys over the Internet, either by hosting it as a website, or via crowdsourcing platforms. The key idea behind S URVEY M AN is that by giving survey authors a way to write their surveys that steers them away from unnecessary ordering constraints, we can apply static analysis, randomization, and statistical dynamic analysis to locate survey errors and ensure the quality of responses. Overview: Figure 1 depicts the S URVEY M AN workflow. Survey authors create surveys using the S URVEY M AN programming language. The S URVEY M AN static analyzer checks the S URVEY M AN program for validity and reports key statistics about the survey prior to deployment. If the program is correct, S URVEY M AN’s runtime system can then deploy the survey via the web or a crowdsourcing platform: each respondent sees a differently-randomized version. S UR 2  Domain-Specific Language. We designed the S URVEYM AN language in concert with social scientists to ensure its usability and accessibility to non-programmers (§2). The approach we take leverages the tools that our target audiences use: because social scientists extensively use both Excel and R, which both feature native support for comma-separated value files, we adopt a tabular format that can be entered directly in a spreadsheet and saved as a .csv file. S URVEY M AN’s domain-specific language is simple but captures most features needed by survey authors, including a variety of answer types and branching based on answers to particular questions. In addition, because S URVEY M AN’s error analysis depends on randomization, its language is designed to maximize S URVEY M AN’s freedom to randomize question order, question variants, and answers. A user writing a survey with S URVEY M AN can optionally specify a partial order over questions by grouping questions into blocks, identified by number. All questions within the same block may be asked in any order, but must strictly precede the following block (i.e., all the questions in block 1 precede those in block 2, and so on). Static Analysis. S URVEY M AN statically analyzes the survey to verify that it meets certain criteria, such as that all branches point to a target, and that there are no cycles (§3). It also provides additional feedback to the survey designer, indicating potential problems with the survey that it locates prior to deployment. Compiler and Runtime System. S URVEY M AN can then deploy the survey either on the web with S URVEY M AN acting as a webserver, or by posting jobs to a crowdsourcing platform such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (§4). Each survey is delivered as a JavaScript and JSON payload that 2014/6/24  Static Analyses Well-formedness Survey statistics Entropy  §3.1 §3.2 §3.2  Ensures survey is a DAG and other correctness checks Min, max, and avg. # questions in survey; finds short-circuits and guides pricing Measures information content of survey; higher is better  Correlated Questions Question Order Bias Question Wording Variant Bias Breakoff Inattentive or Random Respondents  §5.1 §5.2 §5.3 §5.4 §5.5  Reports redundant questions which can be eliminated to reduce survey length Reports questions whose results depend on the order in which they are asked Reports questions whose results depend on the way they are worded Finds problematic questions that lead to survey abandonment Identifies unconscientious respondents so they can be excluded in analysis  Dynamic Analyses  Table 1: The analyses that S URVEY M AN performs on surveys and their deployment. manages presentation and flow through the survey, and performs per-user randomization of question and answer order subject to constraints placed by the survey author. When a respondent completes or abandons a survey, S URVEY M AN collects the survey’s results for analysis. Dynamic Analyses. To find errors in a deployed survey, S URVEY M AN performs statistical analyses that take into account the survey’s static control flow, the partial order on questions, and collected results (§5). These analyses can identify a range of possible survey errors, including question order bias, wording variant bias, questions that lead to breakoff, and survey fatigue. S URVEY M AN reports each error with its corresponding question, when applicable. It also identifies inattentive and random respondents. The survey author can then use the resulting report to refine their survey and exclude random respondents. Note that certain problems with surveys are beyond the scope of any tool to address [33]. These include coverage error, when the respondents do not include the target population of interest; sampling error, when the make-up of the respondents is not representative of the target of interest; and non-response bias, when respondents to a survey are different from those who choose not to or are unable to participate in a survey. S URVEY M AN can help survey designers limit non-response bias due to abandonment by diagnosing and fixing its cause (breakoff or fatigue). Evaluation. Our collaborators in the social sciences developed a number of surveys in S URVEY M AN, which were deployed on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (§6). We describe these experiences with S URVEY M AN and the results of the deployment, which identified a number of errors in the surveys as well as random respondents. 1.2  Contributions  The contributions of this paper are the following: • Domain-Specific Language. We introduce the S URVEY-  M AN domain-specific language for writing surveys, which enables error detection and quality control by relaxing ordering constraints (§2, §4). 3  • Static Analyses. We present static analyses for identify-  ing structural problems in surveys (§3). • Dynamic Analyses. We present dynamic analyses to  identify a range of important survey errors, including question variant bias, order bias, and breakoff, as well as inattentive or random respondents (§5). • Experimental Results. We report on a deployment of  S URVEY M AN with social scientists and demonstrate its utility (§6).  2.  S URVEY M AN Domain-Specific Language  2.1  Overview  The S URVEY M AN programming language is a tabular, lightweight language aimed at end users. In particular, it is designed to both make it easy for survey authors without programming experience to create simple surveys, and let more advanced users create sophisticated surveys. Because of its tabular format, S URVEY M AN users can enter their surveys directly in a spreadsheet application, such as Microsoft Excel. Unlike text editors or IDEs, spreadsheet applications are tools that our target audience knows well. S URVEY M AN can read in .csv files, which it then checks for validity (§3), compiles and deploys (§4), and reports results, including errors (§5). A key distinguishing feature of S URVEY M AN’s language is its support for randomization, including question order, question variants, and answers. From S URVEY M AN’s perspective, more randomization is better, both because it makes error detection more effective and because it provides experimental control for possible biases (§5). S URVEY M AN is designed so that survey authors must go out of their way to state when randomization is not to be used. This approach encourages authors to avoid imposing unnecessary ordering constraints. Basic Surveys: To create a basic survey, a survey author simply lists questions and possible answers in a sequence of rows. When the survey is deployed, all questions are presented in a random order, and the order of all answers is also randomized. 2014/6/24  B LOCK 1 1 1 1 1 1  Q UESTION What is your gender?  O PTIONS Male Female Other United States India Other  What country do you live in?  E XCLUSIVE  O RDERED  2 3 3  2 2 2 2 2  What state do you live in?  Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California  TRUE TRUE TRUE TRUE TRUE  3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3  How much time do you spend on Mechanical Turk?  Less than 1 hour per week. 1-2 hours per week. 2-4 hours per week. 4-8 hours per week. 8-20 hours per week. 20-40 hours per week. More than 40 hours per week. Fruitful way to spend time. Primary source of income. Secondary source of income. To kill time. I find the tasks to be fun. I am currently unemployed.  TRUE TRUE TRUE TRUE TRUE TRUE TRUE  Check all the reasons why you use Mechanical Turk.  B RANCH  FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE  Figure 2: An example survey written using the S URVEY M AN domain-specific language, adapted from Ipeirotis [16]. For clarity, a horizontal line separates each question, and a double horizontal line separates distinct blocks, which optionally define a partial order: all questions in block i appear in random order before questions in blocks j > i. When blocks are not specified, all questions may appear in a random order. This relaxed ordering enables S URVEY M AN’s error analyses. Ordering Constraints: Survey authors can assign numbers to questions that they wish to order; we use the terminology of the survey literature and call these numbers blocks. Multiple questions can have the same number, which causes them to appear in the same block. Every question in the same block will be presented in a random order to each respondent. All questions inside blocks of a lower number will be presented before questions inside higher-numbered blocks. S URVEY M AN’s block construct has additional features that can give advanced survey authors finer-grained control over ordering (§2.3). Logic and Control Flow: S URVEY M AN also includes both logic and control flow in the form of branches depending on the survey taker’s responses. Each answer can contain a target branch (a block), which is taken if the survey taker chooses that answer. 2.2  Syntax  Figure 2 presents a sample S URVEY M AN program, a survey from a Mechanical Turk demographic survey modified to illustrate S URVEY M AN’s features [16]. Every S URVEY M AN program contains a first row of column headers, which indicate the contents of the following rows. The only mandatory columns are Q UESTION and O PTIONS; all other columns are optional. If a given column is not present, its default value is used. The columns may appear in any order. 4  Column Q UESTION O PTIONS B LOCK E XCLUSIVE O RDERED B RANCH R ANDOMIZE F REETEXT C ORRELATED  Description The text for a question Answer choices, one per row Numbers used to partially order questions Only one choice allowed (default) Present options in order For this response, go to this block Randomize option orders (default) Allow text entry, optionally constrained Used to indicate questions are correlated  Table 2: Columns in S URVEY M AN. All except the first two (Q UESTION and O PTIONS) are optional.  Blocks. Each question can have an optional B LOCK number associated with it. Blocks establish a partial order. Questions with the same block number may appear in any order, but must precede all questions with a higher block number. If no block column is specified, all questions are placed in the same block, meaning that they can appear in any order. Questions and Answers. The Q UESTION column contains the question text, which may include HTML. Users may wish to specify multiple variants of the same question to control for or detect question wording bias. To do this, users place all of the variants in a particular block and have every question branch to the same target. 2014/6/24  The survey author specifies each question as a series of consecutive rows. A row with the Q UESTION column filled in indicates the end of the previous question and the start of a new one. All other rows leave this column empty (as in Figure 2). O PTIONS are the possible answers for a question. S UR VEY M AN treats a row with an empty question text field as belonging to the question above it. These may be rendered as radio buttons, checkboxes, or freetext. If there is only one option listed and the cell is empty, this question text is presented to the respondent as instructions. Radio Button or Checkbox Questions. By default, all options are E XCLUSIVE: the respondent can only choose one. These correspond to “radio button” questions. If the user specifies a E XCLUSIVE column and fills it with false, the respondent can choose multiple options, which are displayed as “checkbox” questions. Ordering. By default, options are unordered; this corresponds to nominal data like a respondent’s favorite food, where there is no ordering relationship. Ordered options include so-called Likert scales, where respondents rate their level of agreement with a statement; when the options comprise a ranking (e.g., from 1 to 5); and when ordering is necessary for navigation (e.g., for a long list of countries). When options are unordered, they are presented to each respondent as one of m! possible permutations of the answers, where m is the number of options. To order the options, the user must fill in a O RDERED column with the value T RUE. When they are ordered, they can still be randomized: they are either presented in the forward or backwards order. The user can only force the answers to appear in exactly the given order by also including a R ANDOMIZE column and filling in the value FALSE. Unordered options eliminate option order bias, because the position of each option is randomized. They also make inattentive respondents who always click on a particular option choice indistinguishable from random respondents. This property lets S URVEY M AN’s quality control algorithm simultaneously identify both inattentive and random responses. Branches. The B RANCH column provides control flow through the survey when the survey designer wants respondents who answer a particular question one way to take one path through the survey, while respondents who answer differently take a different path. For example, in the survey shown in Figure 2, only when respondents answer that they live in the United States will they be asked what state they live in. During the survey, branching is deferred until the end of a block, as Figure 3(a) depicts. By avoiding premature branching, this approach ensures that all users answer the same questions, regardless of randomization. It also avoids the biasing of question order that would result by forcing branches to appear in a fixed position. 5  Branching from a particular question response must go to a higher numbered block, preventing cycles. 2.3  Advanced Features  S URVEY M AN several advanced features to give survey authors more control over their surveys and their interaction with S URVEY M AN. Correlated questions. S URVEY M AN lets authors include a C ORRELATED column to assist in quality control. S UR VEY M AN checks for correlations between questions to see if any redundancy can be removed, since shorter surveys help reduce survey fatigue. However, sometimes correlations are desired, whether to confirm a hypothesis or as a form of quality control. S URVEY M AN thus lets authors mark sets of questions as correlated by filling in the column with arbitary text: all questions with the same text are assumed to be correlated. S URVEY M AN will then only report if the answers to these questions are not correlated. If not, this information can be used to help identify inattentive or adversarial respondents. Advanced Blocks Notation So far, we have described blocks as if they were limited to non-negative integers. In fact, S URVEY M AN’s block syntax is more general1 . There are three kinds of blocks: top-level blocks, indicated by a single number; nested blocks, indicated by numbers separated by periods; and floating blocks, indicated by alphanumerics, which can move around inside their parent blocks. We describe each in terms of their interaction with other blocks and with branches. Figure 3(b) gives an example of each. Top-level Blocks. A survey is composed of blocks. If there are no blocks (i.e., the survey is completely flat), we say that all questions belong to a single, top-level block (block 1). Only one branch question is allowed per top-level block. Additionally, branch question targets must also be top-level blocks, though they cannot be floating blocks (described below). Nested Blocks. As with outlines, a period in a block indicates hierarchy: we can think of blocks numbered 1.1 and 1.2 as being contained within block 1. All questions numbered 1.1 precede all questions numbered 1.2, and both strictly precede blocks with numbers 2 or higher. Floating Blocks. Survey authors may want certain questions to be allowed to appear anywhere within a containing block. For example, a survey author might want questions to appear within block 1, but does not care whether they appear before or after other questions contained in that block (e.g., questions with block numbers 1.1 and 1.2). Such questions can be placed in floating blocks. A question is marked as 1 Formally,  the syntax of blocks is given by the following regular expression: [1-9][0-9]*(.[a-z1-9][0-9]*)*.  2014/6/24  BLOCK&1& BLOCK&1& Q1& Q3& &(a)&branch'to'2' '(b)&branch'to'3&  BLOCK&1&  BLOCK&1.B&  BLOCK&1.1&  BLOCK&1.1&  BLOCK&1.B&  BLOCK&1.2&  BLOCK&1.2&  Q2&  BLOCK&2& BLOCK&2&  BLOCK&2&  BLOCK&3&  (a) In this example of survey branches, the respondent is asked the branching question (Q3) as the second question. The execution of this branch is deferred until the respondent answers Q2, the last question in the block.  (b) Two different instances of a survey with top-level blocks (1 and 2), nested blocks (1.1 and 1.2), and a floating block (1.B). The floating block can move anywhere within block 1, while the other blocks retain their relative orders (§2.3).  Figure 3: Examples of branches and blocks. floating by using a block name that is an alphanumeric string rather than a number. In this case, the survey author could give a floating question the block number 1.A. That block is contained within block 1, and the question is free to float anywhere within that block. The string itself has no effect on ordering; for example, blocks 1.A and 1.B can appear in any order inside block 1. All questions in the same floating block float together inside their containing block.  3.  3.2  Static Analyses  S URVEY M AN provides a number of static analyses that check the survey for validity and identify potential issues. 3.1  Consistent Block Branch Types: S URVEY M AN computes the branch type of every block. A block can contain no branches in the block (NONE) or exactly one branch question (ONE). It can also be a block where all of the questions have branches to the same destination (ALL). This is the approach used to express question variants, where just one of a range of semantically-identical questions is chosen. In this case, questions can only differ in their text; only one of the variants (chosen randomly) will be asked.  Well-Formedness  After successfully parsing its .csv input, the S URVEY M AN analyzer verifies that the input program itself is well-formed and issues warnings, if appropriate. It checks that the header contains the required Q UESTION and O PTION columns. It warns the programmer if it finds any unrecognized headers, since these may be due to typographical errors. S URVEY M AN also issues a warning if it finds any duplicate questions. It then performs more detailed analysis of branches: Top-Level Branch Targets Only: S URVEY M AN verifies that the target of each branch in the survey is a top-level block; that is, it cannot branch into a nested block. This check takes constant time.  Survey Statistics and Entropy  If a program passes all of the above checks, S URVEY M AN produces a report of various statistics about the survey, including an analysis of paths through the survey. If we view a path through the survey as the series of questions seen and answered, the computation of paths would be intractable. Consider a survey with 16 randomizable blocks, each having four variants and no branching. We thus have 16! total block orderings; since we choose from four different questions, we end up with 216! unique paths. Fortunately, the statistics we need require only computations of the length of paths rather than the contents of the path. The number of questions in each block can be computed statically. We thus only need to consider the branching between these blocks when computing path lengths.  Forward Branches: Since the survey must be a DAG, all branching must be to higher-numbered blocks. S URVEY M AN verifies that each branch target id is larger than the id of the block that the branch question belongs to.  Minimum Path Length: Branching in surveys is typically related to some kind of division in the underlying population. When surveys have sufficient branching, it may be possible for some respondents to answer far fewer questions than the survey designer intended – they may short circuit the survey. Sometimes this is by design: for a survey only interested in curly-haired respondents, the survey can be designed so that answering “no” to “Do you have curly hair?” sends the  6  2014/6/24  respondent straight to the end. In other cases, this may not be the intended effect and could be either a typographical error or a case of poor survey design. S URVEY M AN reports the minimum number of questions a survey respondent could answer while completing the survey. Maximum Path Length: A survey that is too long can lead to survey fatigue. Surveys that are too long are also likelier to lead to inattentive responses. S URVEY M AN reports the number of questions in the longest path through the survey to alert authors to this risk. Average Path Length: Backends such as Amazon Mechanical Turk require the requester to provide a time limit on surveys and a payment. The survey author can use the average path length through the survey to estimate the time it would take to complete, and from that compute the baseline payment. S URVEY M AN computes this average by generating a large number of random responses to the survey (currently, 5000) and reports the mean length. Maximum Entropy: Finally, S URVEY M AN reports the entropy of the survey. This number roughly corresponds to the complexity of the survey. If the survey has very low entropy (few questions or answers), the survey will require many respondents for S URVEY M AN to be able to identify inattentive respondents. Surveys with higher entropy provide S URVEYM AN with greater discriminatory power. For a survey of n questions each with mi responses, S URVEY M AN computes a conservative upper bound on the entropy on the survey as n log2 (max{mi |1 ≤ i ≤ n}).  4.  Compiler and Runtime System  Once a survey passes the validity checks described in Section 3.1, the S URVEY M AN compiler transforms it into a payload that runs inside a web page (§4.1). S URVEY M AN then deploys the survey, either by acting as a webserver itself, or by posting the page to a crowdsourcing platform and collecting responses (§4.2). Display of questions and flow through the survey are managed by an interpreter written in JavaScript (§4.3). After all responses have been collected, S URVEY M AN performs the dynamic analyses described in Section 5. 4.1  Compilation  inside an XML payload which is handled by AMT. The embedded interpreter handles randomization, the presentation of questions and answers, and communication with the S URVEY M AN runtime. 4.2  Survey Execution  We describe how surveys appear to a respondent on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk; their appearance on a webserver is similar. When a respondent navigates to the webpage displaying the survey, they first see a consent form in the HIT preview. After accepting the HIT, they begin the survey. The user then sees the first question and the answer options. When they select some answer (or type in a text box), the next button and a S UBMIT E ARLY button appear. If the question is instructional and is not the final question in the survey, only the next button appears. When the respondent reaches the final question, only a S UBMIT button appears. Each user sees a different ordering of questions. However, each particular user’s questions are always presented in the same order. The random number generator is seeded with the user’s session or assignment id. This means that if the user navigates away from the page and returns to the HIT, the question order will be the same upon second viewing. S URVEY M AN displays only one question at a time. This design decision is not purely aesthetic; it also makes measuring breakoff more precise, because there is never any confusion as to which question might have led someone to abandon a survey. 4.3  Interpreter  Execution of the survey is controlled by an interpreter that manages the underlying evaluation and display. This interpreter contains two key components. The first handles survey logic; it runs in a loop, displaying questions and processing responses. The second layer handles display information, updating the HTML in response to certain events. In addition to the functions that implement the state machine, the interpreter maintains three global variables: • Block Stack: Since the path through a survey is deter-  mined by branching over blocks, and since only forward branches are permitted, the interpreter maintains blocks on a stack. • Question Stack: Once a decision has been made as  S URVEY M AN transforms the survey into a minimal JSON representation wrapped in HTML, which is executed by the interpreter described in Section 4.3. The JSON representation contains only the bare minimum information required by the JavaScript interpreter for execution, with analysis-related information stripped out. Surveys can be targeted to run on different platforms; S URVEY M AN supports any platform that allows the use of arbitrary HTML. When the platform is the local webserver, the HTML is the final product. When posting to Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (AMT), S URVEY M AN wraps the HTML  The S URVEY M AN interpreter is first initialized with the survey JSON, which is parsed into an internal survey representation and then randomized using a seeded random number  7  2014/6/24  to which block is being executed (e.g., after a random selection of a block), the appropriate questions for that block are placed on the question stack. • Branch Reference Cell: If a block contains a branch, this  value stores its target. The interpreter defers executing the branch until all of the questions in the block have been answered.  generator. This randomization preserves necessary invariants like the partial order over blocks. It then pushes all of the top-level blocks onto the block stack. It then pops off the first block and initializes the question stack, and starts the survey. One question appears at a time, and the interpreter manages control flow to branches depending on the answers given by the respondent.  5.  Dynamic Analyses  After collecting all results, S URVEY M AN performs a series of tests to identify survey errors and inattentive or random respondents. Table 3 provides an overview of the statistical tests used for each error and each possible combination of question types tested. Different tests are required depending on whether the questions have answers that are ordered or unordered. This section assumes some basic familiarity with standard statistical tests as well as non-parametric statistical tests; for the latter, we refer readers to Efron’s classic paper on the bootstrap method [10] and Wasserman’s excellent text on non-parametric statistics [35]. 5.1  Correlated Questions  S URVEY M AN analyzes correlation in two ways. The C OR RELATED column can be used to indicate sets of questions that the survey author expects to have statistical correlation. Flagged questions can be used to validate or reject hypotheses and to help detect bad actors. Alternatively, if a question not marked as correlated is found to have a statistically significant correlation, then S URVEY M AN flags it. Questions are compared pair-wise. S URVEY M AN supports automated correlation analysis only between exclusive (radio button) questions. These questions may be ordered or unordered. For two questions such that at least one of them is unordered, S URVEY M AN returns the χ2 statistic, its p-value, and computes Cramer’s V to determine correlation. It also uses Cramer’s V when comparing an unordered and an ordered question. Ordered questions are compared using Spearman’s ρ. In practice, S URVEY M AN rarely has sufficient data to return confidence intervals on such point estimates. Instead, it simply flags the pair of questions. This survey author can act on this information in two ways. First, the survey author may decide to shorten the survey by removing one or more of the correlated questions. It is ultimately the responsibility of the survey author to use good judgement and domain knowledge when deciding to remove questions. Second, the survey author could use discovered correlations to assist in identification of cohorts or bad actors by updating the entries in the C ORRELATED column appropriately. 5.2  Question Order Bias  To compute order bias, S URVEY M AN uses the MannWhitney U test for ordered questions and the χ2 statistic 8  for unordered questions. In each case, S URVEY M AN attempts to rule out the null hypothesis that the distributions of responses are the same regardless of question order. For each question pair (qi , qj ), where i 6= j, S URVEYM AN partitions the sample into two sets: Si<j , the set of questions where qi precedes qj , and Sj<i , the set of questions where qi follows qj . S URVEY M AN assumes each set is independent. We outline below how to test for bias in qi when qj precedes it (the other case is symmetric), both for ordered and unordered questions. Ordered Questions: Mann-Whitney U Statistic 1. Assign ranks to each of the options. For example, in a Likert-scale question having options Strongly Disagree, Disagree, Agree, and Strongly Agree, assign each the values 1 through 4. 2. Convert each answer to qi in Si<j to its rank, assigning average ranks to ties. 3. Convert each answer to qj in Sj<i to its rank, assigning average ranks to ties. 4. Compute the U statistic over the two sets of ranks. If the probability of computing U is less than the critical value, there is a significant difference in the ordering. Unordered Questions: χ2 Statistic 1. Compute frequencies fi<j for the answer options of qi in the set of responses Si<j . We use these values to compute the estimator. 2. Compute frequencies fj<i for answer options qi in the set of responses Sj<i . These form our observations. 3. Compute the χ2 statistic on the data set. The degrees of freedom will be one less than the number of answer options, squared. If the probability of computing such a number is less than the value at the χ2 distribution with these parameters, there is a significant difference in the ordering. S URVEY M AN computes these values for every unique question pair, and reports questions with an identified order bias. 5.3  Question Wording Variant Bias  Wording bias uses almost the same analysis approach as order bias. Instead of comparing two sets of responses, S URVEYM AN compares k sets of responses, where k corresponds to the number of variants. As with order bias, S URVEY M AN reports questions whose wording variants lead to a statistically significant difference in responses. 5.4  Breakoff vs. Fatigue  S URVEY M AN identifies and distinguishes two kinds of breakoff: breakoff triggered at a particular position in the survey, and breakoff at a particular question. Breakoff by position is often an indicator that the survey is too long. 2014/6/24  E RROR Correlated Questions Question Order Bias Question Wording Variant Bias Inattentive or Random Respondents  B OTH O RDERED Spearman’s ρ Mann-Whitney U-Test Mann-Whitney U-Test Nonparametric bootstrap over empirical entropy  B OTH U NORDERED Cramer’s V χ2 χ2 Nonparametric bootstrap over empirical entropy  O RDERED -U NORDERED Cramer’s V N/A N/A N/A N/A  Table 3: The statistical tests used to find particular errors. Tests are conducted pair-wise across questions; each column indicates whether the pairs of questions both have answers that are ordered, both unordered, or a mix. Breakoff by question may indicate that a question is unclear, offensive, or burdensome to the respondent. Since S URVEY M AN randomizes the order of questions whenever possible, it can generally distinguish between positional breakoff and question breakoff without the need for any statistical tests. To identify both forms of breakoff, S UR VEY M AN reports ranked lists of the number of respondents who abandoned the survey by position and by question. A cluster around a position indicates fatigue or that the compensation for the survey, if any, is inadequate. A high number of abandonments at a particular question indicates a problem with the question itself.  Please say both words aloud. Which one would you say? definitely antidote-athon probably antidote-athon probably antidote-thon definitely antidote-thon  Figure 4: An example question used in the phonology case study (§6.1). • Research Question 1: Is S URVEY M AN usable by sur-  vey authors and sufficiently expressive to describe their surveys? • Research Question 2: Is S URVEY M AN able to identify  5.5  survey errors?  Inattentive or Random Respondents  When questions are unordered, inattentive respondents (who, for example, always click on the first choice) are indistinguishable from random respondents. The same analysis thus identifies both types of respondents automatically. This analysis is most effective when the survey itself has a reasonable maximum entropy, which S URVEY M AN computes in its static analysis phase (§3.2). The longer a survey is and the more question options it has, the greater the dimensionality of the space. Random respondents will exhibit higher entropy than non-random respondents, because they will uniformly fill the space. We thus employ an entropy-based test to identify them. S URVEY M AN first removes all respondents who did not complete the survey, since their entropy is artificially low and would appear to be non-random respondents. S URVEY M AN then computes the empirical probabilities for each question’s answer options. Then for every response r, it calculates a score based on entropy: scorer = Pn p(o r,qi ) log2 (p(or,qi )). S URVEY M AN uses the booti=1 strap method to define a one-sided 95% confidence interval. It then reports any respondents whose score falls outside this interval.  6.  Evaluation  We evaluate S URVEY M AN’s usefulness in a series of case studies with surveys produced by our social scientist colleagues. We address the following research questions: 9  • Research Question 3: Is S URVEY M AN able to identify  random or inattentive respondents? 6.1  Case Study 1: Phonology  The first case study is a phonological survey that tests the rules by which English-speakers are believed to form certain word combinations. This survey was written in S URVEY M AN by a colleague in the Linguistics department at the University of Massachusetts with limited guidance from us (essentially an abbreviated version of Section 2). The first block asks demographic questions, including age and whether the respondent is a native speaker of English. The second block contains 96 Likert-scale questions. The final block consists of one freetext question, asking the respondent to provide any feedback they might have about the survey. Each of the 96 questions in the second block asks the respondent to read aloud an English word suffixed with either of the pairs “-thon/-athon” or “licious/-alicious” and judge which sounds more like an English word. An example appears in Figure 4. Our colleague first ran this survey in a controlled experiment (in-person, without S URVEY M AN) that provides a goldstandard data set. We ran this survey four times on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk between September 2013 and March 2014 to test our techniques. Static Analysis: This survey has a maximum entropy of 195.32; the core 96 questions have a maximum entropy of 192 bits. There is no branching in this survey, so without 2014/6/24  How odd is the number 3? Not very odd. Somewhat not odd. Somewhat odd. Very odd.  Figure 5: An example question used in the psycholinguistics case study (§6.2). breakoff, the minimum, maximum, and average path lengths are all 99 questions long. Dynamic Analysis: The first run of the survey was early in S URVEY M AN’s development and functioned primarily as a proof of concept. There was no quality control in place. We sent the results of this survey to our colleagues, who verfied that random respondents were a major issue and were tainting the results, demonstrating the need for quality control. The latter three runs were performed at different times of day under slightly different conditions (e.g., time of day); all three permitted breakoff. S URVEY M AN detected random respondents in all three cases. S URVEY M AN found approximately 6% of the respondents to the first two surveys were inattentive or random. We used minimal Mechanical Turk qualifications (at least one HIT done with an 80% or higher approval rate) to filter the first survey, so we expected to see fewer random respondents. Somewhat surprisingly, we found that qualifications made no difference: the second run, launched in the morning on a work day without qualifications, produced similar results to the first. The third run was launched on a weekend night and approximately 15% of respondents were identified as responding randomly. Upon looking closely at these respondents, we saw strong positional preferences (i.e., respondents were repeatedly clicking the same answer), corroborating S URVEY M AN’s findings. Because the survey lacks structure—effectively it consists of only one large block, with no branching—and consists of roughly uniform questions, we did not expect to find any biases or other errors, and S URVEY M AN did not report any.  Every question in one of these floating blocks has slightly different wording for both question and options. The other block contains one question asking the respondent about their native language. Because the first block is floating, this question can appear either at the beginning or the end of the survey. We launched this survey on a weekday morning. It took about a day to reach our requested level of 150 respondents. Static Analysis: The maximum entropy for the survey is 34 bits. Since there is no true branching in the survey, every respondent sees the same number of questions, unless they submit early. The maximum, minimum, and average survey lengths are all 17 questions. Dynamic Analysis: S URVEY M AN found no significant breakoff or order bias, but it did find that several questions exhibited marked wording variant bias. These were for the numbers 463, 158, 2. For the number 463, these pairs had significantly different responses: 1. How well does the number 463 represent the category of odd numbers? and How odd is the number 463? 2. How well does the number 463 represent the category of odd numbers? and How good an example of an odd number is the number 463? 3. How odd is the number 463? and How good an example of an odd number is the number 463? While these questions may have appeared to the survey author to be semantically identical, they in fact lead to substantial differences in the responses. This result confirms our colleagues’ hypothesis, which is that previous studies are flawed because they do not take question variant wording bias into account. 6.3  Case Study 3: Labor Economics  The second case study is a test of what psychologists call prototypicality and was written in the S URVEY M AN language by another one of our colleagues in the Linguistics department; as with our other colleague, she wrote this survey with only minimal guidance from us. In this survey, respondents are asked to use a scale to rank how well a number represents its parity (e.g., “how odd is this number?”). The goal is to test how people respond to a categorical question (since numbers are only either even or odd) when given a range of subjective responses. There are 65 questions in total. The survey is composed of two blocks. The first block is a floating block that contains 16 floating subblocks of type A LL; that is, only one randomlychosen question from the possible variants will be asked.  Our final case study is a survey about wage negotiation, conducted with a colleague in Labor Studies. The original design was completely flat with no blocks or branching. There were 38 questions that were a mix of Likert scales, checkbox, and other unordered questions. The survey asked for demographic information, work history, and attitudes about wage negotiation. Our collaborator was interested in seeing whether complete randomization would have an impact on the quality of results. We worked with her to write a version of the survey that comprised both a completely randomized version and a completely static version: a respondent is randomly given one of the two versions. This approach lets us to collect data under nearly identical conditions, since each respondent is equally likely to see the randomized or the static version. We launched this survey on a Saturday and obtained 69 respondents. We observed extreme survey abandonment: none of the respondents completed the survey. The maximum number of questions answered was 26.  10  2014/6/24  6.2  Case Study 2: Psycholinguistics  Static Analysis: S URVEY M AN reports that this survey has a maximum entropy of 342 bits, which is extremely high; some questions have numerous options, such as year of birth. Every path is of length 40, as expected.  the only survey specification language we are aware of that is extensible, open source, and has an active community of users. Unlike S URVEY M AN, none of these provide for randomization or error analyses.  Dynamic Analysis: The analysis of breakoff revealed both positional and question breakoff. 72.5% of the breakoff occurred in the first six positions, suggesting that the compensation for the survey was insufficient ($0.10 USD). 52% of the instances of breakoff also occurred in just five of the questions, shown in Table 6. These results illustrate the impact of randomization on diagnosing breakoff. If question order were fixed for the whole population, we would not be able to determine whether question or position was causing breakoff. In the ordered version, the seven questions are all demographic. It is reasonable to conclude that some respondents find these demographic questions to be problematic, leading them to abandon the survey. This suggests that the survey author should consider placing these questions at the end of the survey, or omitting them if possible.  7.2  7.  Related Work  7.1  Survey Languages  Table 4 provides an overview of previous survey languages and constrasts them with S URVEY M AN. Standalone DSLs. Blaise is a language for designing survey logic and layout [22]. Blaise programs consist of named blocks that contain question text, unique identifiers, and response type information. Control flow is specified in a rules block, where users list the questions by unique identifier in their desired display order. This rules block may also contain data validation rules, such that an Age field be greater than 18. Similarly, QPL is a language and deployment tool for web surveys sponsored by the U.S. Government Accountability Office [34]. Neither language supports randomization or identifies survey errors. Embedded DSLs. Topsl [17] and websperiment [18] embed survey structure specifications in general-purpose programming languages (PLT Scheme and Ruby, respectively). Topsl is a library of macros to express the content, control flow, and layout of surveys; Websperiment provides similar functionality. Both provide only logical structures for surveys and a means for customizing their presentation. Neither one can detect survey errors or do quality control.  Web Survey Tools  There are numerous tools for deploying web-based surveys, including Qualtrics, SurveyMonkey, instant.ly, and Google Consumer Surveys [12, 15, 26, 31]. Because these survey tools impose a strict order on questions and offer no way to express variants, they cannot control for question ordering or question choice bias. Some of these systems, like Google Consumer Surveys, offer the ability to randomize the order of answers, but not questions [12]. None of these systems address the problem of debugging survey errors or inattentive respondents. 7.3  Survey Analyses  Despite the fact that surveys are a well-studied topic—a key survey text from 1978 has over 11,000 citations [8])—there has been surprisingly little work on approaches to automatically address survey errors. We are aware of no previous work on identifying any other errors beyond breakoff. Peytchev et al. observe that there is little scholarly work on identifying breakoff and attribute this to a lack of variation in question characteristics or randomization of question order, which S URVEY M AN provides [25]. Inattentive Respondents. Several researchers have proposed post hoc analyses to identify inattentive respondents, also known as insufficent effort responding [14]. Meade et al. describe a technique based on multivariate outlier analysis (Mahalanobis distance) that identifies respondents who are consistently far from the mean of a set of items [21]. Unfortunately, this technique assumes that legitimate survey responses will all form one cluster. This assumption can easily be violated if survey respondents constitute multiple clusters. For example, politically conservative individuals might answer questions on a health care survey quite differently from politically liberal individuals. In any event, there is no compelling reason to believe clusters will be distributed normally around the mean. Other ad hoc techniques aimed at identifying random or low-effort respondents include measuring the amount of time spent completing a survey, adding CAPTCHAs, and measuring the entropy of responses, assuming that low-effort respondents either choose one option or alternate between options regularly [36]; none of these reliably distinguish lazy or random respondents from real respondents.  XML-Based Specifications. At least two attempts have been made to express survey structure using XML. The first is SuML; the documentation for this schema is no longer available and its specification is not described in its paper [1]. A recent XML implementation of survey design is SQBL [29, 30]. SQBL is available with a WYSIWYG editor for designing surveys [28]. It offers default answer options, looping structures, and reusable components. It is  As far as we are aware, S URVEY M AN’s language is the first to combine branches with randomized control flow. Dijkstra’s Guarded Command notation requires non-deterministic choice among any true cases in conditionals [7]. It should  11  2014/6/24  7.4  Randomized Control Flow  Question Please choose one. In which country were you born? In what year were you born? In which country do you live in now? In the past, have you ever asked your manager or boss for an increase in pay or higher wage?  Count 12 12 5 4 3  Version All Static Static Static Fully Randomized  Figure 6: The top five question breakoffs found in the psycholinguistics case study (§6.3). L ANGUAGE  T YPE  Blaise [22] QPL [34] Topsl [17] websperiment [18] SuML [1] SQBL [30] S URVEY M AN  Standalone DSL Standalone DSL Embedded DSL Embedded DSL XML schema XML schema Standalone DSL  L OOPS  Q UESTION R ANDOMIZATION  E RROR D ETECTION  R ANDOM R ESPONDENT D ETECTION  3  3  3  3 3 3  Table 4: Feature comparison of previous survey languages and S URVEY M AN. come as no surprise that Dijkstra’s language does not support G OTO statements; S URVEY M AN supports branches from and to randomized blocks. 7.5  Crowdsourcing and Quality Control  Barowy et al. describe AUTO M AN, an embedded domainspecific language that integrates digital and human computation via crowdsourcing platforms [2]. Both AUTO M AN and S URVEY M AN have shared goals, including automatically ensuring quality control of respondents. However, AUTO M AN’s focus is on obtaining a single correct result for each human computation. S URVEY M AN instead collects distributions of responses, which requires an entirely different approach.  8.  Conclusion and Future Work  This paper reframes surveys and their errors as a programming language problem. It presents S URVEY M AN, a programming language and runtime system for implementing surveys and identifying survey errors and inattentive respondents. Pervasive randomization prevents small biases from being magnified and enables statistical analyses, letting S UR VEY M AN identify serious flaws in survey design. We believe that this research direction has the potential to have significant impact on the reliability and reproducibility of research conducted with surveys. S URVEY M AN is available for download at http://www.surveyman.org.  Acknowledgments  Presley Pizzo, and Brian Smith; John Foley, Molly McMahon, Alex Passos, and Dan Stubbs; and fellow PLASMA lab members Dan Barowy, Charlie Curtsinger, and John Vilk for valuable discussions during the evolution of this project.  References [1] M. Barclay, W. Lober, and B. Karras. SuML: A survey markup language for generalized survey encoding. In Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, page 970. American Medical Informatics Association, 2002. [2] D. W. Barowy, C. Curtsinger, E. D. Berger, and A. McGregor. AUTO M AN: A platform for integrating human-based and digital computation. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems Languages and Applications, OOPSLA ’12, pages 639–654, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM. [3] A. J. Berinsky, G. A. Huber, and G. S. Lenz. Evaluating online labor markets for experimental research: Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk. Political Analysis, 20(3):351–368, 2012. [4] G. A. Churchill Jr and D. Iacobucci. Marketing research: methodological foundations. Cengage Learning, 2009. [5] M. P. Couper. Designing Effective Web Surveys. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA, 1st edition, 2008. [6] D. De Vaus. Surveys in social research. Psychology Press, 2002. [7] E. W. Dijkstra. Guarded commands, nondeterminacy and formal derivation of programs. Commun. ACM, 18(8):453– 457, Aug. 1975. [8] D. A. Dillman. Mail and telephone surveys, volume 3. Wiley New York, 1978.  This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. CCF-1144520. The authors would like to thank our social science collaborators at the University of Massachusetts, Sara Kingsley, Joe Pater,  [9] J. S. Downs, M. B. Holbrook, S. Sheng, and L. F. Cranor. Are your participants gaming the system?: Screening Mechanical Turk workers. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on  12  2014/6/24  Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’10, pages 2399– 2402, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.  [29] S. Spencer. A case against the skip statement, 2013. Unpublished.  [10] B. Efron. Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife. The Annals of Statistics, 7(1):pp. 1–26, 1979.  [30] S. Spencer. The simple questionnaire building language, 2013. [31] SurveyMonkey, Inc. Surveymonkey. http://surveymonkey. com, 2013.  [11] G. Emanuel. Post A Survey On Mechanical Turk And Watch The Results Roll In: All Tech Considered: NPR. http: //n.pr/1gqklTx, Mar. 2014.  [32] R. Tourangeau, F. Conrad, and M. Couper. The Science of Web Surveys. Oxford University Press, 2013.  [12] I. Google. Google consumer surveys. http://www.google. com/insights/consumersurveys/home, 2013.  [33] P. D. Umbach. Web surveys: Best practices. New Directions for Institutional Research, 2004(121):23–38, 2004.  [13] J. J. Horton, D. G. Rand, and R. J. Zeckhauser. The online laboratory: Conducting experiments in a real labor market. Experimental Economics, 14(3):399–425, 2011.  [34] U.S. Government Accountability Office. Questionnaire programming language. http://qpl.gao.gov/qpl6ref/01. php, 2009.  [14] J. L. Huang, P. G. Curran, J. Keeney, E. M. Poposki, and R. P. DeShon. Detecting and deterring insufficient effort responding to surveys. Journal of Business and Psychology, 27(1):99–114, 2012.  [35] L. Wasserman. All of Nonparametric Statistics (Springer Texts in Statistics). Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 2006.  [15] Instant.ly. Instant.ly. http://instant.ly, 2013. [16] P. Ipeirotis. Demographics of Mechanical Turk. Technical Report NYU working paper no. CEDER-10-01, 2010.  [36] D. Zhu and B. Carterette. An analysis of assessor behavior in crowdsourced preference judgments. In Proceedings of the SIGIR 2010 Workshop on Crowdsourcing for Search Evaluation (CSE 2010), pages 21–26, 2010.  [17] M. MacHenry and J. Matthews. Topsl: A domainspecific language for on-line surveys. In O. Shivers and O. Waddell, editors, Proceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGPLAN Workshop on Scheme and Functional Programming, pages 33–39, Snowbird, Utah, Sept. 22, 2004. Technical report TR600, Department of Computer Science, Indiana University. http://www.cs.indiana.edu/cgi-bin/ techreports/TRNNN.cgi?trnum=TR600. [18] G. MacKerron. Implementation, implementation, implementation: Old and new options for putting surveys and experiments online. Journal of Choice Modelling, 4:20–48, 2011. [19] E. Martin. Survey questionnaire construction. Technical Report Survey Methodology #2006-13, Director’s Office, U.S. Census Bureau, 2006. [20] W. Mason and S. Suri. Conducting behavioral research on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Behavior research methods, 44(1):1–23, 2012. [21] A. W. Meade and S. B. Craig. Identifying careless responses in survey data. Psychological methods, 17(3):437, 2012. [22] S. Netherlands. Blaise : Survey software for professionals. http://www.blaise.com/ShortIntroduction, 2013. [23] Pew Research Center. Question Order | Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. http://www.people-press.org/methodology/ questionnaire-design/question-order/, 2014. [24] Pew Research Center. Question Wording | Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. http://www.people-press.org/methodology/ questionnaire-design/question-wording/, 2014. [25] A. Peytchev. Survey breakoff. Public Opinion Quarterly, 73(1):74–97, 2009. [26] I. Qualtrics. Qualtrics.com. http://qualtrics.com, 2013. [27] D. J. Solomon. Conducting web-based surveys, August 2001. [28] S. Spencer. Canard question module editor. https://github. com/LegoStormtroopr/canard, 2013.  13  2014/6/24

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
