Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3734

Abstract:
ZETA FUNCTIONS ASSOCIATED TO ADMISSIBLE REPRESENTATIONS OF COMPACT p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  arXiv:1707.08485v1 [math.GR] 26 Jul 2017  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH Abstract. Let G be a profinite group. A strongly admissible smooth repL resentation ̺ of G over C decomposes as a direct sum ̺ ∼ = π∈Irr(G) mπ (̺) π of irreducible representations with finite multiplicities mπ (̺) such that for every positive integer n the number rn (̺) of irreducible constituents of dimension n is finite. Examples arise naturally in the representation theory of reductive groups over non-archimedean local fields. In this article we initiate an investigation of the Dirichlet generating function X X∞ mπ (̺) rn (̺)n−s = ζ̺ (s) = n=1 π∈Irr(G) (dim π)s associated to such a representation ̺. Our primary focus is on representations ̺ = IndG H (σ) of compact p-adic Lie groups G that arise from finite dimensional representations σ of closed subgroups H via the induction functor. In addition to a series of foundational results – including a description in terms of p-adic integrals – we establish rationality results and functional equations for zeta functions of globally defined families of induced representations of potent pro-p groups. A key ingredient of our proof is Hironaka’s resolution of singularities, which yields formulae of Denef-type for the relevant zeta functions. In some detail, we consider representations of open compact subgroups of reductive p-adic groups that are induced from parabolic subgroups. Explicit computations are carried out by means of complementing techniques: (i) geometric methods that are applicable via distance-transitive actions on spherically homogeneous rooted trees and (ii) the p-adic Kirillov orbit method. Approach (i) is closely related to the notion of Gelfand pairs and works equally well in positive defining characteristic.  Contents 1. Introduction 2. Basic concepts and preliminaries 3. Twist similarity classes and admissibility properties 4. Induced representations of potent pro-p groups via the orbit method 5. A Denef-type formula for globally induced representations 6. Groups acting on rooted trees and multiplicity-free representations 7. Examples of induced representations of potent pro-p groups References 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20E18; 20C15, 20G25, 22E50, 11M41. We acknowledge support by DFG grant KL 2162/1-1.  2 10 14 20 26 40 44 57  2  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  1. Introduction In recent years the subject of representation growth has advanced with a primary focus on zeta functions enumerating (i) irreducible representations of arithmetic lattices and compact p-adic Lie groups, (ii) twist isoclasses of irreducible representations of finitely generated nilpotent groups; for instance, see [38, 3, 4, 5, 1] and [52, 46, 21], or the relevant surveys [35, 55]. The aim of this paper is to introduce and study a new, more general zeta function that can be associated to any ‘suitably tame’ infinite dimensional representation of a group. Our focus is on admissible smooth representations of compact p-adic Lie groups that arise from finite dimensional representations of closed subgroups via the induction functor. In addition to a series of foundational results that include a description in terms of p-adic integrals and provide a springboard for further investigations, we establish in Theorem D rationality results and functional equations for zeta functions of globally defined families of induced representations of potent pro-p groups. 1.1. Background on representations zeta functions. A group G is said to be representation rigid if, for each positive integer n, its number of (isomorphism classes of) irreducible complex representations of degree n, denoted rn (G), is finite. In the spirit of [27] theP sequence rn (G), n ∈ N, is encoded in a Dirichlet −s generating function ζG (s) = ∞ n=1 rn (G)n , yielding the conventional representation zeta function of G. If G has polynomially bounded representation growth, then ζG (s) converges and defines a holomorphic function on a right half-plane {s ∈ C | Re(s) > α(G)}, where the abscissa of convergence α(G) reflects the polynomial degree of representation growth. In favourable circumstances the function extends meromorphically to a larger domain, possibly the entire complex plane. For a semisimple complex algebraic group G = G(C) the representation zeta function ζG (s), encoding irreducible rational representations, is also known as the Witten zeta function; see [57]. The analytic properties of such zeta functions have been studied thoroughly, using the available classification of irreducible representations in terms of highest weights; e.g., see [37, 38]. We are concerned with groups where a similar classification is either impracticable or way out of reach. Recent advances in [3, 4, 5] concern the representation zeta functions of arithmetic lattices in semisimple locally compact groups (mostly in characteristic 0) and their local Euler factors. The latter are, de facto, representation zeta functions enumerating irreducible continuous representations of compact p-adic Lie groups. The main focus has been on the following aspects: abscissae of convergence, possible meromorphic continuations and pole spectra. There are fundamental connections to Margulis super-rigidity and the classical Congruence Subgroup Problem; for instance, a quantitative refinement of the Congruence Subgroup Conjecture, due to Larsen and Lubotzky [38], has been reduced to the original conjecture in [5].  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  3  In these investigations the main tools are: Lie-theoretic techniques, the Kirillov orbit method, the character theory of finite groups and Clifford theory, all in parallel with algebro-geometric, model-theoretic and combinatorial methods from p-adic integration. This includes, among others, Deligne–Lusztig theory for representations of finite groups of Lie type, Hironaka’s resolution of singularities in characteristic 0 and aspects of the Weil conjectures regarding zeta functions of smooth projective varieties over finite fields. Most relevant for our purposes are the results of Avni, Klopsch, Onn and Voll in [2, 3], including a ‘Denef formula’ for the representation zeta functions of principal congruence subgroups of compact p-adic Lie groups that arise from a global Lie lattice over the ring of integers of a number field; compare [18]. 1.2. Zeta functions associated to admissible representations. Our motivation is to analyse more general enumeration problems than the one underlying past research on representation growth. Let G be a profinite group; in due course we specialise to the case, where G is a compact p-adic Lie group. \ Key examples are the completions G = G(O S ) and G = G(Op ) of arithmetic groups G(OS ) with respect to the profinite topology or the p-adic topology associated to a non-archimedean prime p; here G denotes a semisimple affine group scheme over the ring of S-integers OS of a number field. In addition we are interested in the principal congruence subgroups of the groups G(Op ). In order to develop flexible methods for enumerating irreducible representations by their degrees according to natural weights, we shift emphasis and attach a zeta function to every ‘well behaved’ infinite dimensional representation of G. This point of view is motivated also by geometric applications, for instance, in the context of cohomology growth, where such representations are supported on direct limits of cohomology groups arising from systems of finite coverings of a fixed topological space; see [47]. In particular, in the realm of number theory the relevant profinite groups acting on such direct limits are completions of arithmetic groups as described above; e.g., see [28]. Technically, we consider admissible smooth representations of G over C, a concept which arises in number theory mainly through the study of automorphic representations, e.g., in the context of the Langlands program. Admissible smooth representations of reductive groups over p-adic fields have been studied thoroughly since the 1970s, starting from the work of Casselman as well as Bernstein and Zelevinsky; compare [12, 45]. Let Irr(G) denote the set of all irreducible smooth representations of the profinite group G, up to isomorphism, and note that each π ∈ Irr(G) is finite dimensional. AnLadmissible smooth representation ̺ of G decomposes as a direct sum ̺ ∼ = π∈Irr(G) mπ (̺) π of irreducible representations with finite multiplicities mπ (̺). We say that ̺ is strongly admissible if, in addition, for every positive integer n the number rn (̺) of irreducible constituents of dimension n is finite; in this case we define the zeta function of the representation ̺ as the Dirichlet generating function (1.1)  ζ̺ (s) =  ∞ X n=1  rn (̺)n−s =  X  π∈Irr(G)  mπ (̺) (dim π)s  (s ∈ C).  4  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  This raises the fundamental question which infinite dimensional ̺ are moreover polynomially strongly admissible, i.e., for which ̺ the zeta function ζ̺ has finite abscissa of convergence α(̺) and thus converges in the non-empty right half-plane {z ∈ C | Re(z) > α(̺)}. Of course, the property can easily be formulated in terms of conditions on the multiplicities mπ (̺); however, the latter are typically difficult to access. We remark that the definition gives a natural generalisation of the conventional representation zeta function of a profinite group G: indeed, ζG (s) = ζ̺reg (s + 1) for the regular representation ̺reg = IndG 1 (1) of G; see Example 2.5. Generally, we are interested in relations between the algebraic properties of a polynomially strongly admissible representation ̺ of the profinite group G and the analytic properties of the associated zeta function ζ̺ . Depending on the context, different types of properties become relevant. Analytic properties of ζ̺ comprise, for instance: its abscissa of convergence, meromorphic extension, the location of zeros and poles, and possibly functional equations. Regarding algebraic properties of ̺, the emphasis lies on conditions which do not refer directly to the multiplicities mπ (̺) of the irreducible constituents. The new zeta function defined in (1.1) transforms well with respect to basic operations on admissible representations, e.g., passing to the smooth dual, forming direct sums and tensor products. This suggests that other standard, but more sophisticated operations on representations transform the zeta functions in a controllable way. In this paper we study in detail representations ̺ = IndG H (σ) of G that are obtained by induction from representations σ of a closed subgroup H ≤c G. The induction functor is a central tool for producing infinite dimensional representations from finite dimensional ones. 1.3. Summary of main results. In dealing with profinite groups, it is often convenient to pass to open subgroups. In Section 3 we establish that various admissibility properties for a smooth representation ̺ of a profinite group G are common properties of the twist similarity class of ̺ defined there. In particular, if ̺ is polynomially strongly admissible, the abscissa of convergence α(̺) is an invariant of the corresponding twist similarity class. We recall that a finitely generated profinite group G is representation rigid if and only if it is FAb, i.e., if every open subgroup K ≤o G has finite abelianisation K/[K, K]; see [7, Prop. 2]. We introduce the following refined notion: G is FAb relative to a closed subgroup H ≤c G if K/(H ∩ K)[K, K] is finite for every open subgroup K ≤o G. In Theorem 3.8 we establish the following natural characterisation. Theorem A. Let H ≤c G be a closed subgroup of a finitely generated profinite group G. The following statements are equivalent. (a) The group G is FAb relative to H. (b) The functor IndG H preserves strong admissibility. (c) The induced representation IndG H (1H ) is strongly admissible. It is an open problem to characterise finitely generated profinite groups with polynomial representation growth. Theorem A leads to the following refined  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  5  question: Under what conditions on H ≤c G does the induction functor IndG H preserve polynomially strong admissibility? In Proposition 3.10, we provide a partial answer in the special setting, where G is a compact p-adic Lie group for some prime p; our result can be regarded as a generalisation of [39, Prop. 2.7]. Proposition B. Let H ≤c G be a closed subgroup of a compact p-adic Lie group G. If G is FAb relative to H then IndG H (σ) is polynomially strongly admissible for every finite dimensional smooth representation σ of H. For uniformly powerful – more generally, for finitely generated torsion-free potent – pro-p groups the Kirillov orbit method provides a powerful tool for handling the characters of smooth irreducible representations; see [23]. In Section 4 we generalise the approach used, for instance, in [2, 3, 4] to describe zeta functions of induced representations for potent pro-p groups. One of our key results is Proposition 4.4; it provides a formula for the relevant zeta function in terms of a p-adic integral. We refer to Sections 4.2 and 5.1 for an explanation of the notation k·kp appearing in the integrands; the canonical p-adic measure is recalled in Remark 5.4. Proposition C. Let o be a compact discrete valuation ring of characteristic 0 and residue characteristic p, with uniformiser π. Put p = πo and q = |o/p|. Let g be an o-Lie lattice and h an o-Lie sublattice of g. Write m + 1 = dimo g − dimo h. Let r ∈ N0 be such that G = exp(π r g) is a potent pro-p group with potent subgroup H = exp(π r h) ≤c G. Then the zeta function of ̺ = IndG H (1H ) is given by the following integral formulae. (1) Writing W = {w ∈ Homo (g, f) | w(h) ⊆ o}, where f is the fraction field of o, we have −1−s  [ Z r(m+1) {Pfaff k (w) | 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋} dµ(w), ζ̺ (s) = q p  w∈W  where µ denotes the normalised Haar measure satisfying µ(Homo (g, o)) = 1 (2) For simplicity, suppose further that the o-module g decomposes as a direct sum g = k ⊕ h. Interpreting Homo (k, o) as the o-points V(o) of the m + 1dimensional affine space V over Spec(o), let X denote the projectivisation PV over Spec(o). For 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋, the map w 7→ Pfaff k (w) induces a sheaf of ideals Ik on X, and −1−s  Z X kℓ −ℓ(m+1) −1 r(m+1) max π Ik p q ζ̺ (s) = (1 − q )q dµX,p , ℓ∈Z  X(o)  0≤k≤⌊n/2⌋  where µX,p denotes the canonical p-adic measure on X(o).  In Proposition 4.6 we obtain a concrete version of this formula, based on a particular choice of coordinates. We illustrate the usefulness of the explicit formula in Section 7 by computing the zeta functions of various representations induced from Borel or parabolic subgroups. In Theorem 5.1 we obtain results on the rationality of globally induced representations, their abscissae of convergence and local functional equations. This  6  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  generalises similar results for conventional representation zeta functions, for instance, in [33] and [3]. Our result is a consequence of a general discussion of certain zeta functions which are obtained as an infinite series of Igusa integrals, similar to the one appearing in part (2) of Proposition C. We think that this approach is of independent interest, since it is very flexible and provides a new perspective on the abscissa of convergence. Let K0 be a number field with ring of integers OK0 . Fix a finite set S of maximal ideals of OK0 and let OK0 ,S = {a ∈ K0 | |a|p ≤ 1 for p 6∈ S} denote the ring of S-integers in K0 . We consider number fields K that arise as finite extensions of K0 . Let OS = OK,S denote the integral closure of OK0 ,S in K. For a maximal ideal p E OS we write κp = OS /p for the residue field and denote its cardinality by qp . Furthermore, Op = OK,S,p denotes the completion of OS with respect to p and we fix a uniformiser πp so that Op has the valuation ideal πp Op . Let g be an OK0,S -Lie lattice. For every finite extension K of K0 and every maximal ideal p E OS we consider the Op -Lie lattice gp = Op ⊗OK0 ,S g and, for r ∈ N0 , its principal congruence sublattices gp,r = πpr gp . For any given K and p, the Lie lattice gp,r is potent for all sufficiently large integers r so that Gp,r = exp(gp,r ) is a potent pro-p group; we say that such r are permissible for gp . Theorem D. As in the set-up described above, let g be an OK0 ,S -Lie lattice and let h ⊆ g be a Lie sublattice of codimension m + 1 = dimOK0 ,S g − dimOK0 ,S h. Suppose that h is a direct summand as a submodule of the OK0,S -module g. For maximal ideals p E OK,S , where K ranges over finite extensions of K0 , and for positive integers r that are permissible for gp and hp , we consider the induced representation G (1Hp,r ) ̺p,r = IndHp,r p,r associated to the pro-p groups Gp,r = exp(gp,r ) and Hp,r = exp(hp,r ). (1) For each p there is a complex-valued function Zp of a complex variable s that is rational in qp−s with integer coefficients so that for all permissible r, r(m+1)  ζ̺p,r (s) = (1 − qp−1 )qp  Zp (s).  (2) The real parts of the poles of the functions Zp , for all p, form a finite subset Pg,h ⊆ Q. (3) There is a finite extension K1 of K0 such that, for all maximal ideals p E OK,S , arising for extensions K1 ⊆ K, and for all permissible r, the abscissa of convergence of the zeta function ζ̺p,r satisfies α(ζ̺p,r ) = max Pg,h . (4) There are a rational function F ∈ Q(Y1 , Y2 , X1 , . . . , Xg ) and a finite set T of maximal ideals of OK0 with S ⊆ T such that the following holds: For every maximal ideal p0 E OK0 not contained in T there are algebraic integers λ1 = λ1 (p0 ), . . . , λg = λg (p0 ) ∈ C× so that for every finite extension K of K0 and every maximal ideal p dividing p0 , Zp (s) = F (q −f , q −f s , λ1f , . . . , λgf ),  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  7  where q = qp0 and f = [κp : κp0 ] denotes the inertia degree of p over K0 . Furthermore the following functional equation holds: ζ̺p,r (s)| q→q−1 = q f (m+1)(1−2r) ζ̺p,r (s). λj →λ−1 j  The theorem is a consequence of our general discussion of certain zeta functions in Section 5; these functions are defined as infinite series of Igusa integrals, similar to the one in part (2) of Proposition C. This class of zeta functions is comparatively general and it is well suited to our applications. The proof of the rationality relies on Hironaka’s resolution of singularities, which yields a formula of Denef-type. Moreover, the functional equation is obtained along the lines of Denef and Meuser [18] and Voll [54]. The zeta functions treated here differ slightly from the ones considered before and our account provides a simplification of the still more general discussion in [54]. Concerning the abscissa of convergence we include a new approach which relies on the specific shape the zeta functions considered here. In Corollary 5.9 we deduce from statement (3) in Theorem D that the abscissa of convergence is attained on a set of primes with positive Dirichlet density; indeed, statement (3) can be seen as a strengthening of [3, Theorem B]. In Theorem 6.3 we record an interesting class of examples, arising geometrically from distance-transitive actions of profinite groups on spherically homogeneous rooted trees. This result is based on ideas of Bekka, de la Harpe and Grigorchuk discussed in the appendix of [9]. Theorem E. Let Tm be a spherically homogeneous rooted tree with branching sequence m = (mn )n∈N in N≥2 . Let G ≤c Aut(Tm ) act distance transitively on the boundary ∂Tm , and let P = Pξ ≤c G be the stabiliser of a point ξ ∈ ∂Tm . Then (G, P ) is a Gelfand pair; more precisely, the induced representation ̺∂ = IndG representation and a P (1P ) decomposes as a direct sum of the trivial Qn−1 mj for each n ≥ 1. unique irreducible constituent πn of dimension (mn −1) j=1 In particular, the zeta function of ̺∂ is ζ̺∂ (s) = 1 +  ∞ X  (mi − 1)−s  i=1  with abscissa of convergence α(̺∂ ) = 0.  i−1 Y  mj−s  j=1  Recall that (G, P ) is a Gelfand pair if the induced representation IndG P (1P ) is multiplicity-free; for an introduction to Gelfand pairs we refer the reader to [26]. The zeta function of an induced representation of a Gelfand pair (G, P ) enumerates a subset of all irreducible representations of G, which suggests that Gelfand pairs are of special interest in our setting. As an application of these new methods we obtain in Proposition 6.5 an explicit formula for the zeta functions associated to representations induced from maximal (1, n)-parabolic subgroups to GLn+1 (o), where o is a compact discrete valuation ring. This approach works in arbitrary characteristic and complements the Kirillov orbit method described above.  8  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  1.4. Further discussion and open problems. 1.4.1. Our investigations are naturally related to the representation theory of reductive groups over p-adic fields or non-archimedean local fields in general; compare Remark 2.3. For simplicity, consider the reductive group G = GLn (Qp ). We would like to gain a detailed understanding of the smooth irreducible representations of G, which match via the local Langlands correspondence, established by Harris–Taylor [29] and Henniart [31], with certain representations of the Weil–Deligne group of Qp . Consider a smooth irreducible representation ̺ of G and its restriction ̺|K to the maximal compact subgroup K = GLn (Zp ). The following question is fundamental: describe the decomposition of ̺|K into irreducible components. For n = 2, Casselman [14] obtain detailed results, but for larger degrees an answer seems to be unknown. Already specific cases are of interest. For instance, the unramified principal series representations constitute a large class of smooth irreducible representations of G. These representations are induced to G from 1-dimensional representations on a Borel subgroup B. As KB = G, the restriction of such a representation to K is induced from K ∩ B. The study of zeta functions of induced representations thus provides a quantitative approach to the decomposition problem for unramified principal series representations. The decomposition into irreducible GL3 (Zp )-constituents of unramified principal series representations of GL3 (Qp ) was determined by Onn and Singla [43], completing results of Campbell and Nevins [13]. They used direct representation-theoretic considerations and, as a consequence, deduced a formula for the associated zeta function. It is interesting to conduct similar investigations for supercuspidal representations of G; Nevins [42] has made steps in this direction. 1.4.2. In this article we consider, for simplicity, only smooth representations of profinite groups G over the complex field C. More generally, one could derive many of our results also for representations over fields F that are not necessarily algebraically closed and possibly have positive characteristic. Indeed, if the base field F is not algebraically closed, one can incorporate without much trouble the action of the absolute Galois group into the treatment; it is not so clear how to deal with Schur indices, but there is no extra complication in the important case, where G is a pro-p group for an odd prime p. Furthermore, if F has positive characteristic ℓ > 0, there is no problem provided that G has trivial pro-ℓ-Sylow subgroup. 1.4.3. Dirichlet generating functions have also been employed to study the distribution of finite dimensional irreducible representations of finitely generated nilpotent groups. For such a group Γ one defines and studies the zeta function enumerating twist-isoclasses of irreducible representations of Γ; for instance, see [52, 46, 21]. Many theorems on representation zeta functions, e.g., regarding rationality, pole spectra and functional equations, have analogues in the twist-isoclass setting; the Kirillov orbit method can be adjusted to take into  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  9  account twist-isoclasses and thus yields a basic tool. It is natural to investigate – in analogy to our approach in this paper – zeta functions ζ̺ associated to infinite dimensional twist-invariant representations ̺ of a finitely generated nilpotent group Γ that are completely reducible into finite dimensional irreducible constituents: the Dirichlet series ζ̺ encodes the finite multiplicities of entire twist-isoclasses rather than individual constituents. Natural examples occur again in the form of arithmetic groups: the representation ̺ spanned by all finite dimensional subrepresentations of the (co-)induced representation IndΓ∆ (1∆ ), where Γ = G(O) for a unipotent affine group scheme G over the ring of integers O of a number field, and ∆ = H(O) for a subgroup H ⊆ [G, G]. 1.4.4. Our results on induced representations of compact p-adic Lie groups can be seen as a starting point for further investigations. In particular, the general setting of induced representations provides many new tractable examples and significantly more flexibility to vary input parameters. To indicate possible future directions we formulate the following concrete open questions. Problem 1.1. Jaikin-Zapirain [33, Section 7] computed the conventional representation zeta function of SL2 (R), where R is a compact discrete valuation ring of odd residue characteristic, and observed that it only depends on the residue field cardinality and not on the characteristic or isomorphism type of R itself. The same phenomenon occurs in our setting, for zeta functions associated to induced representations; see [43, Theorem 6.5] and Proposition 6.5 below. Find further examples or, possibly, counter-examples of this phenomenon in the context of induced representations. Give an explanation of the invariance of the zeta function where it holds. Problem 1.2. One of the key invariants of a representation zeta function is its abscissa of convergence. The abscissa of the conventional representation zeta function is explicitly known for FAb compact p-adic Lie groups of small dimension and fully understood for norm-1 groups of p-adic division algebras; see [33, 3, 58] and [38, Theorem 7.1]. However, there is no general interpretation, even at the conjectural level. In our new setting, Propositions 7.1, 7.2 and Theorem 7.3 provide the abscissae of convergence of zeta functions associated to some families of induced representations. Determine the abscissae for further families of induced representations. For instance, consider representations of open compact subgroups of reductive padic groups that are induced from (maximal) parabolic subgroups. Can the results be explained in terms of the root systems? Problem 1.3. The conventional representation zeta functions of SL3 (o) and SU3 (o) over a compact discrete valuation ring o of characteristic 0 display an Ennola-type duality; see [3, 4]. The examples of induced representations in Propositions 7.1 and 7.2 do not suggest a similar form of duality, but form merely the beginning of a comprehensive analysis.  10  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Study systematically the zeta functions of induced representations in groups of Type A2 and determine when an Ennola-type duality holds. Find an explanation for this duality. 1.5. Organisation. In Section 2 we recall some standard notions from the representation theory of totally disconnected locally compact groups. Based on suitable refinements, we introduce zeta functions associated to strongly admissible smooth representations. In Section 3 we study the robustness of strong admissibility under the induction functor and introduce in this context the notion of relative FAb-ness. In Section 4 we develop a p-adic formalism to compute the zeta functions of induced representations between uniform pro-p groups. Our main tool is the Kirillov orbit method, with special care taken for p = 2. In Section 5 we establish the rationality of the local factors of globally defined families of induced representations; we also study their abscissae of convergence and prove functional equations. In Section 6 we produce, with surprisingly little effort, instructive examples of zeta functions of induced representations, arising geometrically for groups acting on rooted trees. In Section 7 we give many concrete examples of zeta functions of induced representations of potent pro-p groups. 2. Basic concepts and preliminaries In this section we recall some standard notions from the representation theory of totally disconnected locally compact groups; see [12, 45]. Based on suitable refinements, we introduce zeta functions associated to strongly admissible smooth representations. 2.1. Admissible smooth representations. Let G be a totally disconnected locally compact topological group; for instance, G could be a reductive p-adic group such as G = GLn (Qp ). Observe that G is automatically Hausdorff, as {1} ≤c G. A complex representation of G is given by a homomorphism ̺ : G → GL(V̺ ), where V̺ is a vector space over C. All representations we consider are over C, and we usually drop the specification ‘complex’; compare Section 1.4.2. Depending on the situation, it is convenient to denote a representation of G either by the vector space V̺ acted upon, or by the homomorphism ̺ : G → GL(V̺ ), or by the pair (̺, V̺ ). A vector v ∈ V̺ is said to be smooth with respect to ̺ if its stabiliser StabG (v) = {g ∈ G | ̺(g).v = v} is open in G. The vector subspace V̺∞ = {v ∈ V̺ | v is smooth with respect to ̺} is ̺-invariant and gives rise to a sub-representation ̺∞ = (̺∞ , V̺∞ ). The representation ̺ is said to be smooth if V̺ = V̺∞ ; equivalently, ̺ is smooth if the map G × V̺ → V̺ is continuous when G is equipped with its natural topology and V̺ is equipped with the discrete topology. We recall that the totally disconnected compact topological groups are precisely the profinite groups. The assertions of the following lemma are easy to prove and well known; see [12, Sec. 2.2].  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  11  Lemma 2.1. Let G be a profinite group. (1) Every smooth representation of G is semisimple, i.e., it decomposes as a direct sum of (smooth) irreducible constituents. (2) The smooth irreducible representations of G are precisely the finite dimensional irreducible continuous representations of G; in particular, each of these factors through a finite continuous quotient of G. Remark 2.2. The lemma has the following consequence for a totally disconnected locally compact topological group G. If (̺, V̺ ) is a smooth representation of G and if K ≤o G is a compact open subgroup of G then the restriction ̺|K is semisimple and all its irreducible constituents are finite dimensional. If, in addition, (̺, V̺ ) is irreducible and |G : K| countable then dim V̺ is countable. A typical example of this situation is: G = GLn (Qp ) and K = GLn (Zp ). A smooth representation (̺, V̺ ) of a totally disconnected locally compact topological group G is said to be admissible if for every compact open subgroup K ≤o G the space of fixed vectors V̺K = {v ∈ V̺ | ∀g ∈ K : ̺(g).v = v} has finite dimension. Remark 2.3. According to a classical result in the representation theory of reductive p-adic groups, every smooth irreducible representation of a reductive p-adic group G is admissible; see [53, Ch. II, 2.8]. It is worth noting that this result holds in great generality. Firstly, it applies to irreducible representations over any – not necessarily algebraically closed [10, Prop. 2] – field of characteristic different from p. Secondly, the statement remains valid, when G is the group of rational points of a reductive group over a local field of positive characteristic. In view of Remark 2.2, this provides a wide range of interesting admissible smooth representations of profinite groups, where it is natural to study the multiplicities of irreducible components. 2.2. Polynomially strongly admissible representations. Let G be a profinite group. We denote by Irr(G) the set of (isomorphism classes of) smooth irreducible – i.e. finite dimensional irreducible continuous – representations of G. For simplicity, we usually do not distinguish notationally between representations and isomorphism classes of representations. It is easy to see that a representation (̺, V̺ ) of G is admissible smooth if and only if it decomposes as a direct sum M m(π, ̺) · Vπ , (2.1) V̺ ∼ = π∈Irr(G)  where the multiplicity m(π, ̺) of π in ̺ is finite for each π ∈ Irr(G). We say that an admissible smooth representation (̺, V̺ ) of G is strongly admissible if, for every d ∈ N, the number X m(π, ̺) Rd (̺) = π∈Irr(G) dim π≤d  12  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  of its irreducible constituents of dimension at most d is finite. Furthermore, we define the zeta function of a strongly admissible smooth representation (̺, V̺ ) of G to be the formal Dirichlet series X ζ̺ (s) = m(π, ̺)(dim π)−s , π∈Irr(G)  where s denotes a complex variable. Remark 2.4. If G is finitely generated as a profinite group, it is known that G has only finitely many irreducible representations of any given finite dimension if and only if G is FAb, meaning that every open subgroup H ≤o G has finite abelianisation H/[H, H]; compare [7]. Consequently, for a FAb finitely generated profinite group every admissible smooth representation is strongly admissible. We say that (̺, V̺ ) is polynomially strongly admissible if there exists r ∈ R>0 such that Rd (̺) = O(dr ), i.e., if there are r, C ∈ R>0 such that for every d ∈ N, X m(π, ̺) = Rd (̺) ≤ Cdr . π∈Irr(G) dim π≤d  Equivalently, (̺, V̺ ) is polynomially strongly admissible if its (polynomial) degree of irreducible constituent growth, defined as deg(̺) = inf{r ∈ R>0 | Rd (̺) = O(dr )} ∈ R≥0 ∪ {∞}, is finite. For a polynomially strongly admissible smooth representation (̺, V̺ ) of G the formal Dirichlet series ζ̺ (s) converges (absolutely) and defines an analytic function on a right half-plane {s ∈ C | Re(s) > α(̺)}, where α(̺) ∈ R ∪ {−∞} denotes the abscissa of convergence. In fact, if ̺ is infinite dimensional then α(̺) = deg(̺). Example 2.5. The profinite group G acts via right translations on the space V = C ∞ (G, C) of all locally constant functions, i.e. continuous functions when C is equipped with the discrete topology, from G to C: (g f )(x) = f (xg)  for g ∈ G, f ∈ C ∞ (G, C), x ∈ G.  The resulting ‘regular’ representation ̺reg is admissible smooth if G has only finitely many irreducible representations of any given finite dimension. As remarked above, this is for instance the case if G is finitely generated and FAb. In this case the formal Dirichlet series X (dim π)1−s ζ̺reg (s) = π∈Irr(G)  is equal to ζG (s − 1), a shift of the conventional representation zeta function ζG (s) of G that enumerates irreducible complex representations of G and has been the sole focus of study until now; compare Section 1. ⋄  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  13  Finally, we take interest in yet another finiteness condition. An admissible smooth representation ̺ of the profinite group G is said to have bounded multiplicities, if there exists M ∈ N such that m(π, ̺) ≤ M for all π ∈ Irr(G). Remark 2.6. This concept arises naturally in two ways. Firstly, there are prominent examples, such as multiplicity-free representations associated to Gelfand pairs; compare Section 6. Secondly, the abscissa of convergence of the zeta function associated to any smooth representation ̺ of G with bounded multiplicities yields a lower bound for the abscissa of convergence of the conventional representation zeta function of G. Definition 2.7 (Admissibility properties). We refer to the properties of being admissible, strongly admissible, polynomially strongly admissible or having bounded multiplicities collectively as properties of type (A). 2.3. Tensor products and induced representations. Let G be a profinite group. The contragredient representation ̺∨ of a smooth representation ̺ of G is the the smooth part (̺∗ )∞ of the abstract dual representation ̺∗ . The tensor product (̺ ⊗ ϑ, V ⊗C U) of two smooth representations (̺, V ) and (ϑ, U) of G, defined via (̺ ⊗ ϑ)(g).(v ⊗ u) = ̺(g).v ⊗ ϑ(g).u  for g ∈ G, v ∈ V , u ∈ U,  is a smooth representation of G. By considering the tensor product ̺ ⊗ ̺∨ of an infinite dimensional admissible smooth representation ̺ with its contragredient representation ̺∨ , one sees that admissibility need not be preserved under tensor products. Let H ≤c G be a closed subgroup. The restriction ResG H (ϑ) of a smooth representation ϑ of G is a smooth representation of H, but, clearly, admissibility need not be preserved. Conversely, the induced representation ̺ = IndG H (σ) of a smooth representation (σ, W ) of H is constructed as follows: G acts on V̺ = {f ∈ C ∞ (G, W ) | ∀h ∈ H ∀x ∈ G : f (hx) = σ(h).f (x)} via right translation (̺(g).f )(x) = (g f )(x) = f (xg)  for g, x ∈ G, f ∈ V̺ .  In calling the representation ‘induced’ rather than ‘co-induced’, we follow [49, I.§2.5] rather than [48, VII.§6]. We note that in the context of profinite groups the notions of induced, compactly induced and co-induced representations are in fact all the same. The next proposition is a consequence of Frobenius reciprocity; compare [12, Sec. 2.4]. Proposition 2.8. Let G be a profinite group and H ≤c G a closed subgroup. If σ is an admissible smooth representation of H, then IndG H (σ) is an admissible smooth representation of G. The induction functor is one of the key tools to construct new representations from known ones and, in particular, interesting infinite dimensional representations from finite dimensional ones.  14  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  3. Twist similarity classes and admissibility properties Throughout this section G denotes a profinite group and H ≤c G a closed subgroup. Given an admissible smooth representation (σ, W ) of H, we are keen to study the zeta function ζ̺ attached to the induced representation ̺ = IndG H (σ). With this aim we develop conditions which ensure that ̺ is (polynomially) strongly admissible. Furthermore, we establish that the abscissa of convergence α(̺) of ζ̺ is rather robust: it is, in fact, an invariant of the twist similarity class of σ, defined below. 3.1. Tensor products and twist similarity. Let G be a profinite group. We say that two smooth representations (̺, V ) and (̺′ , V ′ ) of G are twist similar to one another if there are non-zero finite dimensional smooth representations (ϑ, U) and (ϑ′ , U ′ ) and a homomorphism f : V ⊗C U → V ′ ⊗C U ′ of G-representations with finite dimensional kernel and cokernel. Note that, in particular, all finite dimensional smooth representations of G are twist similar to one another. Proposition 3.1. Let ̺, ϑ be a smooth representations of a profinite group G, and suppose that 1 ≤ dim ϑ < ∞. Then ̺ has a property of type (A) if and only if ̺ ⊗ ϑ has the same property. Moreover, if ̺ and ̺ ⊗ ϑ are polynomially strongly admissible then ζ̺ and ζ̺⊗ϑ have the same abscissa of convergence: α(̺) = α(̺ ⊗ ϑ). Proof. Note that each property of type (A) is inherited by sub-representations. Denoting by ϑ∨ the contragredient representation of ϑ acting on Vϑ∨ = Vϑ∨ , we observe that the trivial representation 1G occurs in ϑ ⊗ ϑ∨ . Hence ̺ is a sub-representation of ̺ ⊗ ϑ ⊗ ϑ∨ . Consequently, it suffices to show: (i) if ̺ has a property of type (A) then ̺ ⊗ ϑ has the same property; (ii) if ̺ and ̺ ⊗ ϑ are polynomially strongly admissible then α(̺ ⊗ ϑ) ≤ α(̺). For smooth irreducible representations σ, π ∈ Irr(G), we recall that HomG (Vπ ⊗C Vϑ , Vσ ) ∼ = HomG (Vπ , , Vϑ∨ ⊗C Vσ ) = HomG (Vπ , Hom(Vϑ , Vσ )) ∼ as C-vector spaces. Taking dimensions, we deduce from Schur’s lemma that the multiplicity of σ in π ⊗ ϑ and the multiplicity of π in σ ⊗ ϑ∨ are the same: (3.1)  m(σ, π ⊗ ϑ) = m(π, σ ⊗ ϑ∨ ).  Fix σ ∈ Irr(G) and, for π ∈ Irr(G), write π | σ ⊗ ϑ∨ to indicate that π is a constituent of σ ⊗ ϑ∨ , equivalently, that m(π, σ ⊗ ϑ∨ ) > 0 . If ̺ is admissible, then (2.1) and (3.1) yield: X X m(π, ̺) m(σ, π ⊗ ϑ). (3.2) m(σ, ̺ ⊗ ϑ) = m(π, ̺) m(σ, π ⊗ ϑ) = π∈Irr(G) σ|π⊗ϑ  π∈Irr(G) π|σ⊗ϑ∨  Since σ ⊗ ϑ∨ and all π ⊗ ϑ are finite dimensional, this shows: if ̺ is admissible (respectively strongly admissible) then ̺⊗ϑ is admissible (respectively strongly admissible).  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  15  For all σ, π ∈ Irr(G) with σ | π ⊗ ϑ we infer from (3.1) that (3.3)  dim σ ≤ (dim π)(dim ϑ)  and  dim π ≤ (dim σ)(dim ϑ).  If ̺ has multiplicities bounded by M, then (3.2), (3.1) and the first inequality in (3.3) yield X m(π, ̺) m(σ, π ⊗ ϑ) m(σ, ̺ ⊗ ϑ) = π∈Irr(G) π|σ⊗ϑ∨  ≤M  X  m(π, σ ⊗ ϑ∨ )(dim π)  π∈Irr(G) π|σ⊗ϑ∨  dim ϑ dim σ  ≤ M(dim ϑ)2 , so that ̺ ⊗ ϑ has multiplicities bounded by M(dim ϑ)2 . Finally, suppose that ̺ is polynomially strongly admissible, so that ζ̺ (s) converges absolutely for Re(s) > α(̺). Without loss of generality we may assume that ̺ is infinite dimensional and consequently α(̺) ≥ 0. For all real s > α(̺), we use (3.2) and the second inequality in (3.3) to obtain X ζ̺⊗ϑ (s) = m(σ, ̺ ⊗ ϑ)(dim σ)−s σ∈Irr(G)  =  X  m(π, ̺)  X  m(π, ̺)  X  m(π, ̺)  π∈Irr(G)  ≤  π∈Irr(G)  m(σ, π ⊗ ϑ)(dim σ)−s  X  m(σ, π ⊗ ϑ)(dim σ)  σ∈Irr(G) σ|π⊗ϑ  π∈Irr(G)  =  X  σ∈Irr(G) σ|π⊗ϑ  (dim ϑ)s+1 (dim π)s+1  (dim ϑ)s+2 (dim π)s  = (dim ϑ)s+2 ζ̺ (s). Consequently, ̺ ⊗ ϑ is polynomially admissible and α(̺ ⊗ ϑ) ≤ α(̺).    Corollary 3.2. Let ̺ be a smooth representation of a profinite group G. The properties of type (A) that hold for ̺ are common properties of the twist similarity class of ̺. If ̺ is polynomially strongly admissible, then also the abscissa of convergence α(̺) is an invariant of the twist similarity class of ̺. 3.2. Induction and restriction of smooth representations. Let H ≤c G be a closed subgroup of a profinite group G. Clearly, the restriction functor ResG H preserves twist similarity classes. Hence, for any smooth representation ̺ of G, the properties of type (A) of ResG H (̺) only depend on the twist similarity class of ̺. The next proposition shows that this conclusion also holds for the induction functor.  16  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Proposition 3.3. Let H ≤c G be a closed subgroup of the profinite group G, and let σ, σ ′ be twist similar non-zero smooth representations of H. If IndG H (σ) ′ has a property of type (A) then IndG (σ ) has the same property. H Furthermore, if IndG (σ) is polynomially strongly admissible then the abscissa H G of convergence α(IndH (σ)) depends on σ only up to twist similarity. Proof. Properties of type (A) are inherited by sub-representations. Hence, by an argument similar to the one starting the proof of Proposition 3.1, it suffices to consider the special cases (i) σ ′ = σ ⊗ τ and (ii) σ ′ = σ ⊕ τ for a finite dimensional smooth representation τ of H; furthermore, it is enough to show that, if IndG H (σ) is polynomially strongly admissible in these cases, then G ′ α(IndH (σ )) ≤ α(IndG H (σ)). First suppose that σ ′ = σ ⊗ τ . We choose a finite dimensional smooth representation ϑ of G such that τ injects into the restriction ResG H (ϑ). Then G G G G G ′ ∼ IndH (σ ) = IndH (σ ⊗ τ ) injects into IndH (σ ⊗ ResH (ϑ)) = IndH (σ) ⊗ ϑ, and Proposition 3.1 implies that, if IndG H (σ) has a property of type (A), then G IndH (σ ⊗ τ ) has the same property. Furthermore, if IndG H (σ) is polynomially G G ′ strongly admissible then α(IndH (σ )) ≤ α(IndH (σ) ⊗ ϑ) = α(IndG H (σ)). Now suppose that σ ′ = σ ⊕ τ . Choose a smooth irreducible constituent π of σ and observe that τ is a sub-representation of σ ⊗ π ∨ ⊗ τ . If IndG H (σ) has a property of type (A) then, by the argument above, the same property holds for G ∨ IndG H (σ ⊗ π ⊗ τ ) and hence for the sub-representation IndH (τ ). Furthermore, if IndG H (σ) is polynomially strongly admissible then we obtain G G G G ′ α(IndG H (σ )) = α(IndH (σ) ⊕ IndH (τ )) = max{α(IndH (σ)), α(IndH (τ ))} G G ∨ ≤ max{α(IndG H (σ)), α(IndH (σ ⊗ π ⊗ τ ))} = α(IndH (σ)).   The following result generalises [39, Cor. 2.3]. Proposition 3.4. Let H ≤o G be an open subgroup of the profinite group G. G The functors IndG H and ResH preserve all the properties of type (A). In addition, the functors preserve the abscissa of convergence for polynomially strongly admissible representations. Proof. We only discuss the polynomially strongly admissible case; the other properties follow from similar arguments based on Frobenius reciprocity. Let σ ∈ Irr(H) and π ∈ Irr(G) be smooth irreducible representations of H G and G respectively. If π occurs in IndG H (σ), or equivalently σ occurs in ResH (π), then dim σ ≤ dim π ≤ |G : H| dim σ. For all s ∈ R≥0 this yields the inequalities X m(π̃, IndG (σ)) 1 |G : H| H (3.4) ≤ ≤ , s s (|G : H| dim σ) (dim π̃) (dim σ)s π̃∈Irr(G)  (3.5)  X m(σ̃, ResG (π)) 1 |G : H|s+1 H ≤ ≤ (dim π)s (dim σ̃)s (dim π)s σ̃∈Irr(H)  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  17  Let ϑ be a polynomially strongly admissible representation of H. If ϑ is finite dimensional so is IndG H (ϑ), and there is nothing further to show. Suppose that ϑ has infinite dimension so that α(ϑ) ≥ 0. Using (3.4), we deduce that |G : H|−s ζϑ (s) ≤ ζIndGH (ϑ) (s) ≤ |G : H| ζϑ (s)  for all s ∈ R≥0  so that α(ϑ) = α(IndG H (ϑ)). Similarly, the claim for the restriction functor follows from (3.5).    Example 3.5. While induction from and restriction to an open subgroup preserve properties of type (A), these functors can substantially alter algebraic properties of the associated zeta functions. Therefore our rationality results for zeta functions of induced representations of potent pro-p groups in Section 5 (compare Remark 5.2) do not automatically extend to general compact p-adic Lie groups; it remains an open problem to generalise the results of JaikinZapirain [33]. To illustrate the underlying issue we construct, for every prime p, a compact p-adic Lie group G, an open uniformly powerful pro-p subgroup H ≤o G of index 2 and a polynomially strongly admissible representation ̺ of G such that ζResGH (̺) (s) is a rational function in Q(p−s ), whereas ζ̺ (s) cannot be expressed as a rational function in Q({n−s | n ∈ N}). Let U be a uniformly powerful pro-p group which has an irreducible representation ηn of degree pn for every integer n ≥ 0. For instance, take U to be the 3-dimensional p-adic Heisenberg group. Define H = U × Zp and G = H ⋊ C2 , where the generator τ of C2 acts as the identity on U and by inversion on Zp . Fix a 1-dimensional irreducible representation χ of Zp such that χ(−t) 6= χ(t) for some t ∈ Zp . Consider the irreducible pn -dimensional representations πn = ηn ⊗ 1 and σn = ηn ⊗ χ of H. Observe that the representation πn is τ -invariant, thus πn extends to an irreducible representation αn of G. However, the construction gives σn 6= σnτ and thus yields an irreducible representation βn of G of degree τ 2pn such that ResG H (βn ) = σn ⊕ σn . Choose a sequence (mn )n∈N ∈ {0, 1}N which is not eventually periodic. The smooth representation ̺=  ∞ M  2(1 − mn )αn ⊕  n=0  ∞ M  mn βn  n=0  of G is polynomially strongly admissible. By construction, we have ResG H (̺) =  ∞ M  2(1 − mn )πn ⊕  n=0  n=0  and a short calculation yields ζResGH (̺) (s) =  ∞ M  ∞ X n=0  2p−ns =  mn σn ⊕  ∞ M n=0  2 . 1 − p−s  mn σnτ ,  18  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  However, the Dirichlet series defining the zeta function of the representation ̺ converges at 1 and evaluates to ∞ ∞ X 2 3X −n n −1 ζ̺ (1) = (2 − 2mn )p + mn (2p ) = mn p−n . − −1 1−p 2 n=0 n=0 P∞ The sequence (mn )n∈N was chosen so that the number n=0 mn p−n is irrational, and we conclude that ζ̺ (s) cannot be expressed by as a rational function in {n−s | n ∈ N} with coefficients in Q. 3.3. Strong admissibility of induced representations. Let H ≤c G be a closed subgroup of a profinite group G. As recorded in Proposition 2.8, the functor IndG H preserves admissibility. However, strong admissibility is in general not preserved by induction. For example, the regular representation of a finitely generated profinite group G is strongly admissible if and only if G is FAb. The latter means that every open subgroup K ≤o G has finite abelianisation; see Section 2. We introduce a relative FAb-condition to deal with induced representations in general. Definition 3.6. We say that G is FAb relative to H if for every open subgroup K ≤o G the abelian quotient K/(H ∩ K)[K, K] is finite. Remark 3.7. (a) Note that G is FAb if and only if it is FAb relative to the trivial subgroup. In general, G is FAb relative to a closed normal subgroup N Ec G exactly if the group G/N is FAb. (b) The group G is FAb relative to H if and only if for every open normal subgroup K Eo G the index of H[K, K] in G is finite. (c) Suppose that H1 ≤c H2 ≤c G are closed subgroups of G. Obviously, if G is FAb relative to H1 then G is FAb relative to H2 . The converse holds if H1 is open in H2 , because |H2 [K, K] : H1 [K, K]| ≤ |H2 : H1 | for every K Eo G. Theorem 3.8. Let H ≤c G be a closed subgroup of a finitely generated profinite group G. The following statements are equivalent. (a) The group G is FAb relative to H. (b) The functor IndG H preserves strong admissibility. (c) The induced representation IndG H (1H ) is strongly admissible. Proof. In order to prove that (c) implies (b), we suppose that IndG H (1H ) is strongly admissible. All finite dimensional smooth representations of H are twist similar to one another, thus Proposition 3.3 shows that IndG H (σ) is strongly admissible for every finite dimensional smooth representation σ of H. Let ϑ be any strongly admissible representation of H. For every d ∈ N we obtain X (ϑ)) = m(σ, ϑ)Rd (IndG Rd (IndG H (σ)) < ∞, H σ∈Irr(H)  because ϑ and IndG H (σ) are implies Rd (IndG (σ)) = 0. H  strongly admissible and, furthermore, dim(σ) > d  We prove that (b) implies (a) by contraposition. Suppose that G is not FAb relative to H. Take an open normal K Eo G such that for L = (H ∩ K)[K, K]  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  19  the abelian quotient K/L is infinite. The representation IndK L (1L ) is infinite dimensional and decomposes into 1-dimensional representations of K, each occurring with multiplicity 1. In particular, using the embedding IndK L (1L ) ֒→ K K IndH∩K (1H∩K ), we conclude that IndH∩K (1H∩K ) contains an infinite number of distinct 1-dimensional representations. For the finite dimensional represenG G tation σ = IndH K∩H (1K∩H ), we conclude that IndH (σ) = IndH∩K (1H∩K ) is not strongly admissible as it contains infinitely many irreducible constituents of dimension at most |G : K|. Finally, we prove that (a) implies (c), again by contraposition. Suppose that IndG H (1H ) is not strongly admissible. We find a positive integer d and an infinite sequence (πi , Vi )∞ i=1 of distinct d-dimensional smooth irreducible representations of G which occur in IndG H (1H ). For every i ∈ N there is a non-zero vector vi in the space Vi which is fixed by H. Setting Ni = ker(πi ), we observe that G/Ni is a finite subgroup of GLd (C). By a classical theorem of Jordan (see [15, (36.13)] or [19, Thm. 5.7]) there exist m = m(d) ∈ N and open normal subgroups Ai Eo G of index at most m so that Ni ⊆ Ai and Ai /Ni is abelian for all i ∈ N. As G is finitely generated, it contains only a finite number of open subgroups of index at most m. Hence we find A Eo G such that I = {i ∈ N | A = Ai } is infinite. For each i ∈ I the stabiliser of vi in G contains the group H[A, A]. Therefore the distinct irreducible representations (πi )i∈I all occur in the induced representation IndG H[A,A] (1H[A,A] ). In particular, this representation is not finite dimensional and the index of |G : H[A, A]| is infinite. We conclude that G is not FAb relative to H.  3.4. Polynomially strong admissibility and compact p-adic Lie groups. A profinite group G has polynomial representation growth, as defined in [38], if and only if the regular representation of G is polynomially strongly admissible; see Example 2.5. As yet no simple characterisation of profinite groups of polynomial representation growth is known, not even at a conjectural level. The regular representation is obtained by inducing the trivial representation from the trivial subgroup; on that account we formulate the following more general problem. Problem 3.9. Under what conditions on H ≤c G does the induction functor IndG H preserve polynomially strong admissibility? The next result and its proof generalise [39, Prop. 2.7]. Let p be a prime. We refer to [20] for the relevant structure theory of compact p-adic analytic groups. Proposition 3.10. Let H ≤c G be a closed subgroup of a compact p-adic Lie group G. If G is FAb relative to H then IndG H (σ) is polynomially strongly admissible for every finite dimensional smooth representation σ of H. Proof. We may assume that H and G are uniformly powerful pro-p groups and that σ = 1H is the trivial representation. Indeed, there are open uniformly powerful pro-p subgroups H ∗ ≤o H and G∗ ≤o G such that H ∗ ≤ G∗ . By Proposition 3.3, it suffices to consider σ = IndH H ∗ (1H ∗ ), thus we may assume  20  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  that H = H ∗ and σ = 1H . By Proposition 3.4, we may assume further that G = G∗ . Clearly, the property of being relatively FAb is also inherited. Let g = log(G) and h = log(H) denote the powerful Zp -Lie lattices associated to G and H. The lower p-series of G, given by G1 = G and Gn = n−1 (Gn−1 )p [Gn−1 , G] for n ≥ 2, satisfies Gn = Gp = exp(pn−1 g) for all n ∈ N. Since G is FAb relative to H, we find r ∈ N0 such that Gr+1 ⊆ H[G, G]. Observe that [G, G] is powerfully embedded in G, hence H[G, G] is uniformly powerful and log(H[G, G]) = h + [g, g]. This yields pr g ⊆ h + [g, g]. For n ∈ N this implies that p2n+r g ⊆ h+[pn g, pn g], equivalently G2n+r+1 ⊆ H[Gn+1 , Gn+1 ], using again that [Gn+1 , Gn+1] is powerfully embedded in G. For n ∈ N let ψn denote the G-sub-representation of IndG H (1H ) spanned by all n irreducible sub-representations of dimension at most p . Let (η, Vη ) ∈ Irr(G) be an irreducible constituent of ψn . As G is monomial, there are an open subgroup K ≤o G and a linear character χ : K → C× such that η = IndG K (χ). Note that n |G : K| = dim η ≤ pn and so Gn+1 = Gp ⊆ K. The commutator group [Gn+1 , Gn+1 ] lies in the kernel of η and so every Hfixed vector in Vη is also fixed by [Gn+1 , Gn+1 ]. We conclude that η occurs in IndG H[Gn+1 ,Gn+1 ] (1H ) with the same multiplicity as in ψn . Denoting by isog (h) = g ∩ (Qp ⊗Zp h) the isolator of h in g (compare [25, §3]), we obtain in total Rpn (IndG H (σ)) ≤ dim ψn ≤ |G : HG2n+r+1 | = |g : h + p2n+r g| ≤ Cp2(dim(G)−dim(H))n , where C = pr(dim(G)−dim(H)) |isog (h) : h| ∈ R>0 is independent of n.    4. Induced representations of potent pro-p groups via the orbit method Throughout this section p denotes a prime. Every p-adic Lie group contains a compact open pro-p group that is uniformly powerful; we refer to [20] for the general theory of p-adic analytic groups. A pro-p group G is called potent if [G, G] ⊆ G4 for p = 2 and γp−1 (G) ⊆ Gp for p > 2; there is an analogous definition for Zp -Lie lattices. Finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p groups are a natural generalisation of uniformly powerful pro-p groups, and for all such groups the Kirillov orbit method provides a powerful tool for handling the characters of smooth irreducible representations; see [24, 23]. In this section we describe the representation zeta functions of induced representations for finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p groups generalising the approach used, for instance, in [2, 3, 4]. There is a bijective correspondence between isomorphism classes of smooth irreducible representations of a profinite group G and the corresponding irreducible complex characters. We will interpret elements of Irr(G) in a flexible way as isomorphism classes of representations or characters, as befits the situation. 4.1. Potent pro-p groups. Let G be a finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p group. Then G is saturable (in the sense of Lazard) and we denote by  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  21  g = log(G) the associated potent Zp -Lie lattice; compare [34, 22]. We make repeatedly use of the following basic lemma. Lemma 4.1. Let G be a finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p group with associated potent Zp -Lie lattice g. Then the logarithm map log : G → g transforms the multiplicative Haar measure on G to the additive Haar measure on g. Proof. It suffices to verify that the measures of cosets of open subgroups forming a base of neighbourhoods of 1 in G are preserved under the logarithm map. This follows from the fact that the multiplicative cosets xN of any open powerfully embedded normal subgroup N Eo G are mapped to the additive cosets log(x)+n of the associated Zp -Lie sublattice n ≤ g; see the argument in [20, Cor. 6.38] or [22, Lem. 4.4].  The adjoint action of G on g is related to conjugation in G via g  X = log(g exp(X)g −1)  for g ∈ G and X ∈ g.  We fix an isomorphism (4.1)  Qp /Zp → µp∞ (C),  a = a + Zp 7→ aC, −m  for m ∈ N. In this way the for instance, by decreeing that p−m C = e2πip Pontryagin dual of the additive compact group g can be realised as g∨ = g∨Zp = Hom(g, Qp /Zp ). We denote the neutral element of g∨ , i.e. the zero map, by 0. The co-adjoint action of G on g∨ is given by −1  (g ω)(X) = ω(g X)  for g ∈ G, ω ∈ g∨ and X ∈ g.  At the level of Lie lattices there is a corresponding co-adjoint action of g on g∨ given by (Y.ω)(X) = ω([X, Y ]) for X, Y ∈ g and ω ∈ g∨ . The Kirillov orbit method for p-adic analytic pro-p groups yields a bijective correspondence G\g∨ → Irr(G), G.ω 7→ χω between the collection G\g∨ = {G.ω | ω ∈ g∨ } of co-adjoint orbits and the set Irr(G) of irreducible complex characters of G. If p is odd, the correspondence is canonical and can be made explicit via the formula X 1 (4.2) χω (x) = |G.ω|− /2 ω e (log(x))C for ω ∈ g∨ and x ∈ G, ω e ∈G.ω  where we make use of the isomorphism (4.1); see [23]. If p = 2, the expression (4.2) for χω (x) remains valid whenever x lies in the open subgroup G2 , but does not hold in general; see [33, Thm. 2.12]. For ω ∈ g∨ we write πω for a representation of G affording χω so that dim πω = χω (1) = |G.ω| /2 = |G : StabG (ω)| /2 . 1  1  There is a useful Lie-theoretic description of the stabiliser StabG (ω). The stabiliser of ω in g under the co-adjoint action is stabg (ω) = {Y ∈ g | Y.ω = 0},  22  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  which can also be interpreted as the radical of an alternating bilinear form associated to ω. It is a fact that log(StabG (ω)) = stabg (ω) (see [33, Lem. 2.3]) and hence |G : StabG (ω)| = |g : stabg (ω)|. Now consider a (finitely generated torsion-free) potent subgroup H ≤c G and its associated potent Zp -Lie lattice h ≤ g. The inclusion map igh : h → g induces a surjective restriction map rhg : g∨ → h∨ . For η ∈ h∨ we consider the rhg -fibres over elements of the co-adjoint orbit H.η. For ω ∈ g∨ we define the intersection number in(ω, η) = |G.ω ∩ (rhg )−1 (H.η)|. With this terminology we obtain the following application of the Kirillov orbit method to induced representations for all odd primes. Proposition 4.2. Suppose that p > 2. Let G be a finitely generated torisonfree potent pro-p group, with associated Zp -Lie lattice g, and H ≤c G a potent subgroup, with associated Zp -Lie lattice h. Let ω ∈ g∨ and η ∈ h∨ . Then the multiplicity of πω in the induced representation IndG H (πη ) is given by the formula  m πω , IndG (π ) = η H  in(ω, η) . |G.ω|1/2 |H.η|1/2  Proof. Frobenius reciprocity, Lemma 4.1 and the orthogonality relations for irreducible characters of h yield  G m πω , IndG H (πη ) = hχω , IndH (χη )i  = hResG H (χω ), χη i Z = χω (y)χη (y) dµH (y) H  = |G.ω|  −1/2  |H.η|  −1/2  X X Z  ω e ∈G.ω ηe∈H.η  = |G.ω|− /2 |H.η|− /2 in(ω, η). 1  1  h  ω e (Y )C ηe(Y )C dµh (Y )    We now specialise to the situation where we induce the trivial representation 1H from a subgroup H to G. We stress that the next result is valid also for p = 2. Proposition 4.3. Let G be a finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p group, with associated Zp -Lie lattice g, and H ≤c G a potent subgroup, with associated Zp -Lie lattice h. The zeta function of ̺ = IndG H (1H ) is given by ζ̺ (s) =  X  ω∈g∨ rhg (ω)=0  |g : stabg (ω)| /2 1  −1−s  .  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  23  Proof. First suppose that p is an odd prime. Applying Proposition 4.2 to η = 0, hence πη = π0 = 1H and H.η = {0}, this is a simple computation: X  −s/2 |G.ω|−1 m πω , IndG ζ̺ (s) = H (π0 ) |G.ω| ω∈g∨  (4.3)  X |G.ω ∩ (rhg )−1 ({0})| −1−s 1 = |G.ω| /2 |G.ω| ω∈g∨ X −1−s 1 |g : stabg (ω)| /2 . = ω∈g∨ rhg (ω)=0  Now suppose that p = 2. In this case the Kirillov orbit method involves a choice, which makes it difficult to establish a possible analogue of Proposition 4.2. However, we obtain a canonical correspondence by considering suitable equivalence classes of irreducible characters. We say that ϑ, ϑe ∈ Irr(G) are G2 -equivalent if they restrict to the same character on G2 , i.e., ϑ|G2 = ϑe|G2 . Denote by Z the group of linear characters of G that factor through the elementary abelian quotient G/G2 . The group Z acts on Irr(G) by multiplication and, as G/G2 is abelian, the G2 -equivalence classes are exactly the Z-orbits in Irr(G). For ω ∈ g∨ let ξω denote the sum of all ϑ ∈ Irr(G) that are G2 -equivalent to χω , i.e. the character associated to the G2 -equivalence class of χω , and let σω denote a representation affording ξω . For ω1 , ω2 ∈ g∨ the characters χω1 and χω2 are G2 -equivalent if and only if there are g ∈ G and τ ∈ Z such that g ω1 τ = ω2 , equivalently if ω1 , ω2 lie in the same orbit under the indicated action of the direct product G × Z on g∨ . As explained in [33], the Kirillov orbit method yields a bijective correspondence (G × Z).ω 7→ ξω between the (G×Z)-orbits in g∨ and the characters associated to G2 -equivalence classes in Irr(G). Moreover, the formula X 1 ω e (log(x))C ξω (x) = |G.ω|− /2 ω e ∈(G×Z).ω  holds for all x ∈ G. Indeed, both functions are Z-invariant and hence vanish on G r G2 ; furthermore, by (4.2) the functions agree on G2 . Since all characters in a G2 -equivalence class have the same degree, a slight modification of the argument in (4.3) suffices to complete the proof: replace the terms |G.ω|−1, πω and  |G.ω∩(rhg )−1 ({0})| |G.ω|  by |(G ×Z).ω|−1, σω and  |(G×Z).ω∩(rhg )−1 ({0})| |(G×Z).ω|  respectively.    4.2. o-Lie lattices. Let o be a compact discrete valuation ring of characteristic 0, residue characteristic p and residue field cardinality q. Fix a uniformiser π so that the valuation ideal of o takes the form p = πo. Let f denote the fraction field of o, a finite extension of Qp . We denote by e(f, Qp ) the absolute ramification index of f.  24  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Let g be an o-Lie lattice. We take interest in the family of finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p groups G that arise as G = exp(π r g) for all sufficiently large r ∈ N0 . The codifferent of f over Qp is the fractional ideal {x ∈ f | ∀y ∈ o : Trf|Qp (xy) ∈ Zp }. It lies in the kernel of the non-trivial character Trf|Qp  ∼ =  → µp∞ (C) f −−−→ Qp → Qp /Zp − of the additive group f. The different Df|Qp is the inverse of the codifferent and thus an ideal of o, say pδ , where δ = δ(f) ∈ N0 satisfies δ ≥ e(f, Qp ) − 1 with equality if and only if e(f, Qp ) is prime to p. Using [π −δ ·] : f → f, a 7→ π −δ a, we obtain a map Homo (g, f) → Hom(g, Qp ),  ψ 7→ Trf|Qp ◦ [π −δ ·] ◦ ψ  that induces a non-canonical isomorphism ∼ =  g∨ = g∨o = Homo (g, f/o) − → Hom(g, Qp /Zp ). Consider ω ∈ g∨ and choose w ∈ Homo (g, f) such that ω(X) = w(X) + o for X ∈ g. The alternating o-bilinear form Aw : g × g → f,  Aw (X, Y ) = w([X, Y ])  induces the alternating o-bilinear form Aω : g × g → f/o,  Aω (X, Y ) = ω([X, Y ]) = Aw (X, Y ) + o.  The o-submodule stabg (ω) is equal to the radical of Aω , which can be described in terms of Aw as rad(Aω ) = {Y ∈ g | ∀X ∈ g : Aw (X, Y ) ∈ o}, and the index |g : stabg (ω)| can be expressed in terms of the invariant factors of the o-submodule rad(Aω ) of g. The latter are closely related to the Pfaffians of the alternating o-bilinear form Aw , which are defined as follows. Let n = dimo g. For 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋, the degree-k Pfaffian of Aw is the fractional ideal Pfaff k (w) of f generated by the elements k q X Y ” 1 “ sgn(σ) Aw (Y(2j−1)σ , Y(2j)σ ) = det (Aw (Yi , Yj )1≤i,j≤2k ) , k 2 k! j=1 σ∈Sym(2k)  where Y1 , . . . , Y2k run through spanning sets of o-submodules of dimension 2k in g. As indicated the elements generating the degree-k Pfaffian can be regarded as square roots of suitable determinants (up to an irrelevant choice of sign). If Y = (Y1 , . . . , Yn ) is any o-basis of g, then the structure matrix [Aw ]Y ∈ Matn (f) of Aw with respect to Y is alternating. Furthermore, its elementary divisors π ν1 (w) , . . . , π νn (w) , where ν1 (w), . . . , νn (w) ∈ Z ∪ {∞} with ν1 (w) ≤ . . . ≤ νn (w), come in pairs: ν2j−1 (w) = ν2j (w) for 1 ≤ j ≤ ⌊n/2⌋. Finally, we see that Pk Pfaff k (w) = p j=1 ν2j−1 (w) for 1 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋,  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  and this leads to 1  |g : stabg (ω)| /2 = q 2 1  Pn  i=1  max{−νi (w),0}  =  [  {Pfaff k (w) | 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋}  25  p  ,  where kSkp = max{|x|p | x ∈ S} for ∅ 6= S ⊆ f. As a consequence of Propositions 3.10 and 4.3 we obtain the following result. Proposition 4.4. Let g be an o-Lie lattice with an o-Lie sublattice h such that |g : h + [g, g]| < ∞. Write m + 1 = dimo g − dimo h. Let r ∈ N0 be such that G = exp(π r g) is a finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p group with potent subgroup H = exp(π r h) ≤c G. Then G is FAb relative to H and the zeta function of ̺ = IndG H (1H ) is given by the following integral formulae. (1) Writing W = {w ∈ Homo (g, f) | w(h) ⊆ o}, we have Z [ −1−s r(m+1) {Pfaff k (w) | 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋} dµ(w), ζ̺ (s) = q p  w∈W  where µ denotes the normalised Haar measure satisfying µ(Homo (g, o)) = 1 (2) For simplicity, suppose further that the o-module g decomposes as a direct sum g = k⊕h. Interpreting Homo (k, o) as the o-points V(o) of m+1-dimensional affine space V over Spec(o), let X denote the projectivisation PV over Spec(o). For 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋, the map w 7→ Pfaff k (w) induces a sheaf of ideals Ik on X, and −1−s  Z X kℓ −ℓ(m+1) −1 r(m+1) max π Ik p dµX,p , q ζ̺ (s) = (1 − q )q ℓ∈Z  X(o)  0≤k≤⌊n/2⌋  where the suggestive notation kπ kℓ Ik kp is employed in anticipation of a formal definition in (5.2) and µX,p denotes the canonical p-adic measure on X(o); see Remark 5.4. Proof. From |g : h + [g, g]| < ∞ we infer that |G : H[G, G]| < ∞ so that G is FAb relative to H. In the described set-up the formula for ζ̺ provided by Proposition 4.3 translates directly into the first integral formula. To derive the second formula write Homo (k, f) r {0} as a disjoint union of the sets π ℓ Homo (k, o) r π ℓ+1 Homo (k, R o) and recall that the canonical p-adic measure µX,p is normalised so that X(o) dµX,p = q −m |X(o/p)| = (1 − q −m−1 )/(1 − q −1 ) where we use that X is the projective m-dimensional space.  Remark 4.5. By definition Pfaff 0 (w) = o is the degree-0 Pfaffian of any form w ∈ Homo (g, f). This means, that the ideal sheaf I0 is the structure sheaf OX of X. In addition, the assumption |g : h + [g, g]| < ∞ implies that the image prk ([g, g]) of the projection of [g, g] to the complement k is of finite index; i.e., π ε k ⊆ prk ([g, g]) for some non-negative integer ε ∈ Z. Since Pfaff 1 (w) = w(prk ([g, g])) ⊇ π ε w(k), we deduce that the ideal sheaf I1 contains π ε OX . Next we formulate the two integral formulae more explicitly, subject to a choice of coordinates. For simplicity, we suppose that the o-module g decomposes as a direct sum g = k ⊕ h. Fix an o-basis Y = (Y1 , . . . , Yn ) of g such that  26  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Y1 , . . . , Ym+1 span the complement k of h in g and Ym+2 , . . . , Yn span h. Denoting by (ci,j,k )i,j,k the structure constants of the o-Lie lattice g with respect to P the basis Y, we have [Yi , Yj ] = nk=1 ci,j,k Yk for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n. The commutator matrix of g with respect to Y is the alternating matrix of linear homogeneous forms   Xn ci,j,k Tk ∈ Matn (o[T1 , . . . , Tn ]). R(T) = R(T1 , . . . , Tn ) = k=1  i,j  {0, . . . , ⌊n/2⌋}  For k ∈ we denote by Pk ⊆ o[T1 , . . . , Tn ] the collection of degree-k Pfaffians of the matrix R(T), i.e. square roots of principal 2k × 2k-minors of R(T); in particular, P0 = {1}. Furthermore, we set Fk = {f (T1 , . . . , Tm+1 , 0, . . . , 0) | f ∈ Pk } ⊆ o[T1 , . . . , Tm+1 ]  and Fk (x) = {f (x) | f ∈ Fk } for x ∈ fm+1 . Observe that Fk consists of homogeneous polynomials of degree k so that for f ∈ Fk and (y1 : . . . : ym+1 ) ∈ Pm (o) the value f (y1 , . . . , ym+1 ) is independent of the particular choice of homogeneous coordinates up to a unit in o. With this notational set-up, we obtain the following concrete version of Proposition 4.4, based on a choice of coordinates. Proposition 4.6. Let g be an o-Lie lattice with an o-Lie sublattice h such that |g : h + [g, g]| < ∞. Suppose that the o-module g decomposes as a direct sum g = k ⊕ h, and put m + 1 = dimo k = dimo g − dimo h. Let Y = (Y1 , . . . , Yn ) be an o-basis of g such that Y1 , . . . , Ym+1 (respectively Ym+2 , . . . , Yn ) form an o-basis of k (respectively h), and let Fk , depending on Y, be defined as above. Let r ∈ N0 such that G = exp(π r g) is a finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p group with potent subgroup H = exp(π r h) ≤c G. Then G is FAb relative to H and the zeta function of ̺ = IndG H (1H ) is given by the following formulae: Z [ −1−s {Fk (x) | 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋} ζ̺ (s) = q r(m+1) dµ(x), p  fm+1  where µ denotes the normalised Haar measure satisfying µ(om+1 ) = 1, and −1−s  Z X −1 r(m+1) −ℓ(m+1) kℓ dµPm ,p (y), max ζ̺ (s) = (1−q )q q π Fk (y) p ℓ∈Z  Pm (o)  0≤k≤⌊n/2⌋  where µPm ,p denotes the canonical p-adic measure on Pm (o); see Remark 5.4. Examples based on this concrete formula are discussed in Section 7 below.  5. A Denef-type formula for globally induced representations Let K0 be a number field with ring of integers OK0 , and fix a finite set of closed points S ⊆ Spec(OK0 ). Let OK0 ,S = {a ∈ K0 | |a|p ≤ 1 for closed points p 6∈ S} denote the ring of S-integers in K0 . We consider number fields K that arise as finite extensions of K0 . Let OS = OK,S denote the integral closure of OK0 ,S in K. For a maximal ideal p E OS we write κp = OS /p for the residue field and we denote its cardinality by qp .  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  27  Furthermore, Op = OK,S,p denotes the completion of OS with respect to p and we fix a uniformiser πp so that Op has the valuation ideal πp Op. OK ⊆ OS = OK,S ⊆ K | | | OK0 ⊆ OK0 ,S ⊆ K0  Op = OK,S,p D πp Op κp ∼ = Op /πp Op ∼ = OS /p  qp = |κp |  Let g be an OK0,S -Lie lattice. For every finite extension K of K0 and every maximal ideal p E OS we consider the Op -Lie lattice gp = Op ⊗OK0 ,S g and, for r ∈ N0 , its principal congruence sublattices gp,r = πpr gp . Observe that, for any given K and p, the Lie lattice gp,r is potent for all sufficiently large integers r so that Gp,r = exp(gp,r ) is a finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p group; we say that such r are permissible for gp . With these preparations we formulate the main result of this section. Theorem 5.1. As in the set-up described above, let g be an OK0,S -Lie lattice with an OK0 ,S -Lie sublattice h such that |g : h + [g, g]| < ∞. Suppose that h is a direct summand as a submodule of the OK0 ,S -module g, and put m + 1 = dimOK0 ,S g − dimOK0 ,S h. For closed points p ∈ Spec(OK,S ), where K ranges over finite extensions of K0 , and for positive integers r that are permissible for gp and hp , we consider the induced representation G  (1Hp,r ) ̺p,r = IndHp,r p,r associated to the pro-p groups Gp,r = exp(gp,r ) and Hp,r = exp(hp,r ). (1) For each p there is a complex-valued function Zp of a complex variable s that is rational in qp−s with integer coefficients so that for all permissible r, r(m+1)  ζ̺p,r (s) = (1 − qp−1 )qp  Zp (s).  (2) The real parts of the poles of the functions Zp , for all p, form a finite subset Pg,h ⊆ Q. (3) There is a finite extension K1 of K0 such that, for all closed points p ∈ Spec(OK,S ), arising for extensions K ⊇ K1 , and for all permissible r, the abscissa of convergence of the zeta function ζ̺p,r satisfies α(ζ̺p,r ) = max Pg,h . (4) There are an open dense subscheme Spec(OK0 ,T ) ⊆ Spec(OK0 ,S ) and a rational function F ∈ Q(Y1 , Y2 , X1 , . . . , Xg ) such that the following holds: For every closed point p0 ∈ Spec(OK0,T ) there are algebraic integers λ1 = λ1 (p0 ), . . . , λg = λg (p0 ) ∈ C× so that for every finite extension K of K0 and every closed point p ∈ Spec(OK,T ) lying above p0 , Zp (s) = F (q −f , q −f s , λ1f , . . . , λgf ), where q = qp0 and f = [κp : κp0 ] denotes the inertia degree of p over K0 . Furthermore the following functional equation holds: F (q f , q f s , λ1−f , . . . , λg−f ) = −q f m F (q −f , q −f s , λf1 , . . . , λfg ).  28  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  This theorem is a consequence of Theorems 5.8 and 5.19 below, which hold for a larger class of integrals of Igusa type described in (5.3). Indeed, the zeta functions of induced representations are of the required form due to the formula given in Proposition 4.4. As discussed in the introduction, our proof proceeds along the lines of [18, 54]. Our approach is of independent interest, because we work on a different domain of integration and we modified the zeta functions with some infinite series, which is conceptually adapted to our applications. Remark 5.2. The assertions in (1), (2) and (3) of Theorem 5.1 have local analogues for Lie lattices that are defined over the valuation ring of a p-adic field; i.e. a finite extension field of some Qp . In fact, the proof of the underlying Theorem 5.8 given in Section 5.2.2 carries over directly if the base field K0 is assumed to be a p-adic field (instead of a number field). Note that there are Zp -Lie lattices g which cannot be defined globally; this means, there is no Lie lattice h defined over the ring of S-integers OS of a number field and a prime ideal p E OS such that Op ∼ = g. = Zp and Op ⊗OS h ∼ 5.1. p-Adic integrals. We continue to use the notation set up above and write (5.1)  OS = OK,S ,  Op = OK,S,p,  π = πp  for short. Let X be a smooth integral projective scheme over Spec(OK0 ,S ), and let m be the dimension of the generic fibre XK0 . Let d ∈ N and let I = (Ij )dj=0 and J = (Jj )dj=0 be two collections of coherent sheaves of ideals on X. Assumption 5.3. We assume throughout that I0 = J0 = OX is the structure sheaf of X, and γOX ⊆ Ij0 for some non-zero γ ∈ OK0,S and some j0 ∈ {1, . . . , d}. A sheaf of ideals I on X defines a continuous function kIkp on the compact space X(Op ) by (5.2)  kIkp (x) = max{|f (x)|p | f ∈ Ix },  where Ix = I · OX,x denotes the stalk of I at x ∈ X(Op ). We are interested in weighted combinations of such functions. For ℓ ∈ Z we define (π jℓ Ij )dj=0  p  := max qp−jℓ kIj kp 0≤j≤d  and likewise for J . Remark 5.4. On the compact topological space X(Op) we consider the canonical p-adic measure µX,p defined by Batyrev in [8, Def. 2.6]. This measure is locally defined in terms of differential forms, i.e. sections of the canonical bundle ωX/Op . It can be defined without assuming the existence of a global gauge form, on which Weil’s original approach [56] was based. Here we will mainly use the following property of the canonical p-adic measure: for every point x ∈ X(κp ), the fibre Y over x in X(Op ) has measure µX,p(Y ) = qp−m ; in particular, µX,p(X(Op )) = qp−m |X(κp )| as shown in [8, Thm. 2.7].  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  29  Fix once and for all a positive integer c ∈ N. We consider the local zeta function (5.3) Z X −s −1 −ℓc Zp (s) = ZX,I,J ,p (s) = qp (π jℓ Ij )dj=0 p (π jℓ Jj )dj=0 p dµX,p. X(Op )  ℓ∈Z  For instance, in the setting of Proposition 4.4, we encounter such zeta functions for c = m + 1. In such applications the collections I and J may very well contain zero ideal sheaves; however, these do not contribute to the local zeta function. It follows from Remark 4.5 that Assumption 5.3 holds in this case. The next lemma shows that these assumptions guarantee the convergence of the infinite series in (5.3).  Lemma 5.5. Under Assumption 5.3 the series Zp (s) converges absolutely for all s ∈ C with Re(s) > c/j0 . Proof. First we carry out the summation over all non-negative integers. For ℓ ≥ 0, the functions (π jℓ Ij )dj=0 p and (π jℓ Jj )dj=0 p have value 1 at every x ∈ X(Op), because I0 = J0 = OX . We deduce that Z ∞ ∞ X X −s −1 −ℓc qp−ℓc µX,p(X(Op )) (π jℓ Ij )dj=0 p (π jℓ Jj )dj=0 p dµX,p = qp X(Op )  ℓ=0  ℓ=0  µX,p (X(Op)) = , 1 − qp−c  with absolute convergence independently of s ∈ C. It remains to sum over all negative integers. Using γOX ⊆ Ij0 to justify the second inequality below, we observe that for all s ∈ C with Re(s) > c/j0 , ∞ X  qpℓc  ℓ=1  ≤  ∞ X ℓ=1  Z  X(Op )  qpℓc  Z  (π −jℓ Ij )dj=0 kπ  −j0 ℓ  −s p  (π −jℓ Jj )dj=0  −Re(s) Ij0 kp dµX,p  ≤  X(Op )  =  ∞ X  −1 p  dµX,p  ℓ(c−Re(s)j0 )  qp  −Re(s)  |γ|p  ℓ=1 c−Re(s)j0 −Re(s) qp |γ|p c−Re(s)j0 1 − qp  µX,p(X(Op ))  µX,p(X(Op )).   The infimum of all σ ∈ R such that the series Zp (σ) converges is called the abscissa of convergence α(Zp ) of the local zeta function Zp ; as seen above, the series Zp (s) converges absolutely to an analytic function on the half-plane {s ∈ C | Re(s) > α(Zp)}. The computation of the integral defining the local zeta function Zp is rather simple if the ideal sheaves in I and J are monomial in the following sense. Definition 5.6. Let k be a field and let Y be a regular scheme over Spec(k). An ideal sheaf I on Y is called monomial if for all y ∈ Y the ideal Iy E OY,y  30  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Q is of the form Iy = ri=1 zici OY,y , where z1 , . . . , zr are regular parameters at y and c1 , . . . , cr ∈ N0 are suitable exponents; cf. [36, (3.16)]. Let X be a smooth scheme over Spec(OS ). Observe that for every a ∈ Spec(OS ), the fibre Xa is a regular scheme over Spec(k), where k = κp if a = p is a closed point and k = K otherwise. An ideal sheaf I on X is monomial, if it is locally principal and for all a ∈ Spec(OS ) the ideal sheaf I · OXa on the fibre Xa over a is monomial. Many authors refer to a monomial sheaf of ideals as a sheaf of ideals of a divisor with simple normal crossings. Hironaka’s famous resolution of singularities [32] implies that over a field of characteristic 0 any ideal sheaf can be transformed into a monomial one using a suitable sequence of blow-ups. We will use the following version of this result, which is explained in [36, Thm. 3.26]. By a variety over a field k we mean an integral, separated scheme of finite type over Spec(k). Theorem 5.7 (Hironaka Monomialisation Theorem). Let X be a smooth variety over some field k of characteristic 0 and let I be an ideal sheaf on X. There are a smooth variety Y over k and a projective morphism h : Y → X such that the ideal sheaf h∗ (I) is monomial and h restricts to an isomorphism between the complements of the closed subvarieties defined by h∗ (I) and I. 5.2. The abscissa of convergence. We continue to use the notation set up above. In this section we study the abscissa of convergence of the zeta functions Zp = ZX,I,J ,p , for finite extensions K of K0 and closed points p ∈ Spec(OS ), as defined in (5.3). The main result is the following theorem. Theorem 5.8. In the set-up described above, including Assumption 5.3, the following statements hold. (1) For every finite extension K of K0 and every closed point p ∈ Spec(OS ), there is a rational function Fp ∈ Q(X, Y ) such that Zp (s) = Fp (qp , qp−s ). (2) The real parts of the poles of the functions Zp , for all K and p as above, form a finite set P = PX,I,J ⊆ Q of rational numbers. (3) There is a finite extension K1 of K0 such that, for all K and p as above satisfying K1 ⊆ K, the abscissa of convergence of Zp satisfies α(Zp) = max P . The proof of the theorem is described in Section 5.2.2. Here we briefly discuss an interesting consequence. Let K1 be a finite extension of K0 with the properties described in part (3) of the theorem. If a maximal ideal p0 of OK0 ,S is unramified in K1 and admits a prime divisor p1 E OK1 ,S of inertia degree 1 over p0 , then the completions (K0 )p0 and (K1 )p1 coincide and hence Zp0 = Zp1 , in particular α(Zp0 ) = α(Zp1 ). By the Chebotarev Density Theorem [41, VII (13.6)] the set of such primes p0 E OK0 ,S has Dirichlet density at least [K1 : K0 ]−1 .  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  31  Corollary 5.9. The set of closed points p0 ∈ Spec(OK0 ,S ) satisfying α(Zp0 ) = max P has positive Dirichlet density. 5.2.1. The abscissa of convergence of certain Dirichlet series. We discuss a general result on a family of power series. Let Q((Q))[[t]] be the ring of formal power series in t over the field of Laurent series Q((Q)) in an indeterminate Q. Fix integers d, u ∈ N and two collections λ = (λj )dj=0 , β = (βj )dj=0 of integral linear forms λj , βj : Z1+u → Z for 0 ≤ j ≤ d. We say that an integral linear form λ : Z1+u → Z is strictly negative if λ(v) < 0 for every v ∈ N01+u r {0}. It is convenient for us to write the elements of Z1+u as pairs (ℓ, n) where ℓ ∈ Z and n = (n1 , . . . , nu ) ∈ Zu . The following assumptions are analogous to those in Assumption 5.3. Assumption 5.10. We assume throughout: (i) λ0 is strictly negative, (ii) β0 = 0, and (iii) there are an index j0 ∈ {1, . . . , d} and a ∈ N such that βj0 (ℓ, n) = aℓ for all (ℓ, n) ∈ Z1+u . For every integer N ≥ 0 and vectors ε = (ε0 , . . . , εd ), δ = (δ0 , . . . , δd ) ∈ Zd+1 with δ0 = 0 we define a power series   X X − min λj (ℓ,n)+εj − min βj (ℓ,n)+δj λ,β Q 0≤j≤d t 0≤j≤d ΞN,ε,δ (Q, t) = (5.4) ℓ∈Z n∈(Z≥N )u ∈ Q((Q))[[t]].  To simplify the notation, we write ΞN,ε,δ in place of Ξλ,β N,ε,δ . Let us verify that (5.4) defines an element of Q((Q))[[t]] r Q((Q))[t]. The variable t only occurs with non-negative exponents since β0 = 0 and δ0 = 0. Consider summands contributing to the coefficient of te , for some fixed exponent e ≥ 0. By Assumption 5.10 (iii), the relevant summands only occur for ℓ ≥ −(e+δj0 )/a. By Assumption 5.10 (i), λ0 is strictly negative; hence every monomial Qk te occurs only a finite number of times and, moreover, k is bounded below in terms of ℓ and thus in terms of e. Finally, we observe that the coefficients are all positive; as ℓ decreases, we pick up non-zero terms of increasing degree in t, thus ΞN,ε,δ 6∈ Q((Q))[t]. Lemma 5.11. In the above setting, including Assumption 5.10, the following statements hold. (1) The power series ΞN,ε,δ is a rational function over Q, i.e., ΞN,ε,δ ∈ Q(Q, t). (2) There is a finite set Pe ⊆ (Z × N0 ) r {(0, 0)} such that, for all N, ε and δ, the rational function ΞN,ε,δQcan be written as the quotient of an element of Q[Q, Q−1 , t] by a power of (A,B)∈Pe (1 − QA tB ). (3) The real parts of poles of ΞN,ε,δ (q −1 , q −s ), for all N, ε, δ and q ∈ R>1 , form a non-empty finite subset Pλ,β ⊆ Q. (4) The maximum max Pλ,β is a pole for every ΞN,ε,δ (q −1 , q −s ) as in (3). (5) The inversion property Ξ1,0,0 (Q−1 , t−1 ) = (−1)u+1 Ξ0,0,0 (Q, t) holds.  32  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Proof. We only sketch the proof, as the lemma is essentially a paraphrase of known results; see [54, Prop. 2.10] and [3, Prop. 4.5]. Furthermore, we may assume that N = 0 as ΞN,ε,δ (Q, t) = Ξ0,ε′ ,δ′ (Q, t) for ε′j = εj + λj (0, N, . . . , N) and δj′ = δj + βj (0, N, . . . , N), where 0 ≤ j ≤ d. For simplicity we drop N from the notation altogether. Decompose Z × N0u into a finite number of disjoint rational cones C(ε, δ)± j,k , ± for 0 ≤ j, k ≤ d, such that on each C(ε, δ)j,k the minimum in the exponent of Q is attained by λj + εj , the minimum in the exponent of t is attained by βk + δk , and ℓ is positive or non-positive according to the attached sign. Introducing new variables we may describe each cone with the cone of positive solutions of a linear integral inhomogeneous system of equations. The generating function of such a cone is known to be rational (see [51, Ch. I]) and so we obtain (1). Moreover, the denominator of the generating function of each cone is of the Q form γ (1 − X γ ) where the product runs over the finitely many completely fundamental solutions γ of the corresponding homogeneous system. Making the suitable substitutions we obtain a finite set Pe with the properties stated in (2). Observe that (0, 0) 6∈ Pe as Ξ(Q, t) is a well-defined power series, as explained just after the defining equation (5.4). Statement (3) is a direct consequence of (2), as n o A Pλ,β ⊆ − B ∈ Q | (A, B) ∈ Pe and B 6= 0 , and the inversion property (5) follows from [50, Prop. 8.3]. It remains to justify (4). We give more details than provided in [3], where the corresponding discussion appears to be short if not incomplete. Fix q > 1. As a first step we show that the abscissae of convergence of Ξε,δ (q −1 , q −s ) and Ξ0,0 (q −1 , q −s ) agree. Define E = max{|εi | | 0 ≤ i ≤ d} and ∆ = max{|δi | | 0 ≤ i ≤ d}. Fix (ℓ, n) ∈ Z × N0u , and choose indices j, k ∈ {0, . . . , d} such that min βi (ℓ, n) = βj (ℓ, n) and  0≤i≤d  min βi (ℓ, n) + δi = βk (ℓ, n) + δk .  0≤i≤d  Then βj (ℓ, n) ≤ βk (ℓ, n), whereas βk (ℓ, n) + δk ≤ βj (ℓ, n) + δj , and we conclude −∆ ≤ δk ≤ (βk (ℓ, n) + δk ) − βj (ℓ, n) ≤ δj ≤ ∆. A similar inequality relates the minima of λi (ℓ, n) and λi (ℓ, n)+εi . We conclude that, for every σ ∈ R for which at least one of the two series Ξε,δ (q −1 , q −σ ) and Ξ0,0 (q −1 , q −σ ) converges, q −E−|σ|∆ Ξ0,0 (q −1 , q −σ ) ≤ Ξε,δ (q −1 , q −σ ) ≤ q E+|σ|∆ Ξ0,0 (q −1 , q −σ ). Hence the abscissae of convergence of the two series are equal. Consider the abscissa of convergence of Ξ0,0 (q −1 , q −s ). Pick (A, B) ∈ Pe with B 6= 0 such that −A/B is maximal among all the pairs (A, B) ∈ Pe. By (2), the series Ξ0,0 (q −1 , q −s ) converges absolutely for Re(s) > −A/B (as for ordinary Dirichlet series this can be seen by looking at the Taylor series).  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  33  Let σ ∈ R such that Ξ0,0 (q −1 , q −σ ) converges. The term (1 − QA tB ) corresponds to some extremal ray in some cone C(0, 0)± j,k in the decomposition chosen above. As Ξ0,0 is a series in Q and t with non-negative integral P∞ coefficients −1 −σ we may sum over the extremal ray to obtain Ξ0,0 (q , q ) ≥ i=0 q (−A−Bσ)i = 1/(1−q −A−Bσ ). This implies σ > −A/B , and thus −A/B is the abscissa of convergence.  5.2.2. Local abscissae of convergence and the proof of Theorem 5.8. Recall the notation set up in Section 5.1, in particular (5.1) and Assumption 5.3. Consider the generic fibre XK0 of the scheme X, equipped with the ideal sheaf LK0 which is the product of all non-zero ideals Ij,K0 and Jj,K0 . To simplify the notation, Q we assume that all Ij,K0 and Jj,K0 are non-zero, so that LK0 = dj=0 Ij,K0 Jj,K0 ; in general, the ideal sheaves that are zero have to be removed. By Hironaka’s Theorem 5.7, there is a monomialisation h : Y → XK 0 of the ideal sheaf LK0 . If a product of non-zero ideals is monomial, then each of the ideals in the product is monomial. For 0 ≤ j ≤ d we conclude that h∗ (Ij,K0 ) (respectively h∗ (Jj,K0 )) is the sheaf of ideals of an effective divisor Dj (respectively Cj ) with simple normal crossings; say X (j) X (j) Dj = NE E and Cj = ME E. E∈T  E∈T  Here T denotes the finite set of smooth prime divisors, defined over K0 , occurring in the co-support of h∗ (LK0 ). Let D disc denote the discrepancy divisor, that is, the divisor defined by the image of the canonical map h∗ (ωXK0 ) ⊗ ωY∨ → OY , where ωX denotes the canonical bundle on a variety X. The support of D disc is contained in T , thus we may write X D disc = (νE − 1)E E∈T  for certain νE ∈ N. These parameters are relevant for our purposes, as they describe the pullback of the canonical p-adic measure; see Section 5.3. For any finite extension K of K0 we obtain a monomialisation hK : YK → XK . As the divisors in T are smooth, they decompose into a disjoint union of prime divisors defined over K. Let p ∈ Spec(OS ) be a closed point. Since h is birational, we may pull back the integral defining Zp to Y and we obtain (5.5) Z X −1 −s d d −cℓ dh∗ (µX,p ). π jℓ h−1 (Jj ) j=0 π jℓ h−1 (Ij ) j=0 qp Zp (s) = ℓ∈Z  Y (Kp )  p  p  We point out two subtleties in connection with the formula (5.5). Firstly, the scheme X is projective and hence X(Op ) = X(Kp ). Secondly, the symbol h−1 (Ij ) denotes the sheaf-theoretic inverse image of the OX -module Ij , which is not an OY -module; a similar remark applies to Jj .  34  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Given an open subset V ⊆o Y (Kp ), we define the restricted zeta function Zp [V ](s) by the formula obtained from (5.5) by restricting the domain of integration to V . We denote by αp (V ) the abscissa of convergence of Zp [V ]. Observe that V ⊆o W ⊆o Y (Kp ) implies αp (V ) ≤ αp (W ). Definition 5.12. Let K be a finite extension of K0 and let p ∈ Spec(OS ) be a closed point. We define the local abscissa of convergence at y ∈ Y (Kp ) by αp (y) = inf{αp (V ) | y ∈ V ⊆o Y (Kp )}. Lemma 5.13. In the above setting, for any open compact subset V ⊆ Y (Kp ) the abscissa of convergence of Zp [V ] is αp (V ) = sup{αp (y) | y ∈ V }. Proof. Clearly, V is an open neighbourhood of all of the points that it contains, thus αp (V ) ≥ sup{αp (y) | y ∈ V }. Conversely, let ε > 0. For every y ∈ V we find an open neighbourhood Wy of y in V such that αp (Wy ) < αp (y) + ε. SinceSV is compact, we find a finite number of points y1 , . . . , yn ∈ V such that V = {Wyi | 1 ≤ i ≤ n}. We deduce that αp (V ) ≤ max{αp (Wyi ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} < sup{αp (y) | y ∈ V } + ε.  As ε tends to 0, we obtain αp (V ) ≤ sup{αp (y) | y ∈ V }.    Consider a point y ∈ Y (Kp ). We use the monomialisation h : Y → XK0 to compute Zp [V ] for small coordinate neighbourhoods V of y. Set T (y) = {E ∈ T | y ∈ E} and observe that u := |T (y)| ≤ m = dim(Y ). Locally at y, we can complement the collection of local equations gE for E ∈ T (y) by m − u further elements to obtain a regular system of parameters. Locally at x := h(y) ∈ X(Op ), the ideal Ij , for j ∈ {0, . . . , d}, is finitely generated, since X is noetherian. Moreover, the sheaf h−1 (Ij ) generates the monomial ideal h∗ (Ij,K0 ), therefore we obtain Y (j) N gE E kh−1 (Ij )kp = |w|p E∈T (y)  p  locally at y for some regular function w with w(y) 6= 0. Similar considerations apply to the ideals Jj . Therefore, if we choose V ∼ = pN Opm to be a small coordinate neighbourhood, we obtain  Y (j) d d NE jℓ+δj jℓ −1 gE π h (Ij ) j=0 = π p  π jℓ h−1 (Jj )  d  j=0 p  E∈T (y)   Y = π jℓ+εj  E∈T (y)  j=0 p  M  (j) d  gE E  j=0 p  .  for certain integers δj , εj ∈ Z. The canonical p-adic measure is locally defined by differential forms, thus the pullback h∗ (µX,p) is transformed according to the discrepancy divisor. Writing T (y) = {E1 , . . . , Eu }, we deduce that the zeta  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  function Zp [V ] is given by Z X −cℓ qp Zp [V ](s) = ℓ∈Z  max π jℓ+δj  pN Opm 0≤j≤d  · max π jℓ+εj 0≤j≤d  N (u−m)−a  (†)  = qp  Yu  i=1  (j) i  ME  xi  −1 p  Yu  i=1  πa  (j) i  NE  xi  Yu  i=1  35  −s p νEi −1  xi  p  dµ(x)  (1 − qp−1 )u ΞN,ε,δ (qp−1 , qp−s ),  where µ denotes the normalised Haar measure satisfying µ(Opm ) = 1. Here ΞN,ε,δ (Q, t) is equal to X X  −  Q    min (εj +(j−c)ℓ+  0≤j≤d     Pu (j) (j) − min (δ +jℓ+ N n ) (M −ν )n ) j j i Ei i=1 E i=1 E  Pu  i  t  0≤j≤d  i  ℓ∈Z n∈Zu ≥N  and thus a power series of the form studied in Section 5.2.1. By our general (0) (j ) (0) assumptions we have NE = NE 0 = ME = 0 for all E ∈ T and some j0 > 0; so this series satisfies Assumption 5.10. Proposition 5.14. (1) Every point y ∈ Y (Kp ) has an open neighbourhood V such that αp (y) = αp (V ). (2) Let K be a finite extension of K0 and, for i ∈ {1, 2}, let ιi : K → Kpi be a completion. For y ∈ Y (K) the local abscissa does not depend on the completion, that is αp1 (ι1 (y)) = αp2 (ι2 (y)). (3) The local abscissa at y ∈ Y (Kp ) depends only on T (y) = {E ∈ T | y ∈ E}. Proof. The coordinate neighbourhoods on which the formula (†) holds form a neighbourhood base at y. By Lemma 5.11 the abscissa of convergence does not depend on N, hence (1) holds. Let y ′ be another point in some completion Kp′ and assume that T (y ′) = T (y). On small coordinate neighbourhoods of y and y ′, we have formulae of the form (†). In these formulae, different N, ε, δ and q may occur. However, by Lemma 5.11 these parameters do not change the abscissa of convergence and the assertions follow.  Proof of Theorem T 5.8. For a subset U ⊆ T we consider the closed smooth S K0 subscheme EU = E∈U E ⊆ Y and the open subscheme EU◦ = EU r E ∈U / E ◦ of EU . The closed points y ∈ EU are concisely the ones which satisfy T (y) = U. By Proposition 5.14 the local abscissa is constant on all points of EU◦ and we denote this abscissa by α(U). Since Y is projective, the space Y (Kp ) is compact. Therefore it can be covered by a finite number of disjoint open coordinate neighbourhoods on which the zeta function is given by a local formula as in (†). Now Lemma 5.11 implies that Zp (s) is rational in qp and qp−s . Moreover, the real parts of all poles of Zp are contained in a finite union of finite sets of the form Pλ,β as in Lemma 5.11. Let p ∈ Spec(OS ) be a closed point. It follows from Lemma 5.13 that the abscissa of convergence of Zp is equal to (5.6)  αp (Y (Kp )) = max{α(U) | U ⊆ T and EU◦ (Kp ) 6= ∅}.  36  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Each of the schemes EU◦ is of finite type over K0 , thus there is a finite extension K1 of K0 satisfying EU◦ (K1 ) 6= ∅ whenever EU◦ is not the empty scheme. Suppose that K1 ⊆ K. Then (5.6) shows that αp (Y (Kp )) is independent of K and p; thus α(Zp ) = max P .  5.3. The functional equation. In this section we prove part (4) of Theorem 5.1. We first consider the case K = K0 and, to simplify the notation, it is convenient to use the short notation OS = OK,S etc. introduced for K. Using this notation we construct in (5.7) the rational function F featuring in Theorem 5.1. In a second step we go back to the original general notation and establish the functional equations for arbitrary extensions K of K0 . Consider the scheme X over Spec(OS ) as in Section 5.1. We would like to obtain a monomialisation of the ideal sheaves Ij and Jj over Spec(OS ). For fields of positive characteristic a Monomialisation Theorem is not known and so we should not expect to achieve monomialisation globally. However, we can obtain a monomialisation on the generic fibre and expand it to some open set U ⊆o Spec(OS ). It is straightforward to deduce the following result from Hironaka’s Monomialisation Theorem. Theorem 5.15 (Generic Monomialisation). Let X be a smooth integral projective scheme over Spec(OS ) and let I be an ideal sheaf on X. There are a non-empty open subset U ⊆o Spec(OS ), a smooth integral projective scheme Y over U and a projective morphism h : Y → XU such that h∗ (I) is monomial and h restricts to an isomorphism between the complements of the closed sets defined by h∗ (I) and I. We consider the sheaf of ideals L defined as the product over all Ij and Jj which are non-zero on X. As in Section 5.2.2, we assume that all Ij and Q Jj are non-zero, so that L = dj=0 Ij Jj . We apply the generic Monomialisation Theorem to L. Hence, after enlarging S, we may assume that there is a smooth integral projective scheme Y over Spec(OS ) and a birational projective morphism h : Y → X such that h∗ (L) is monomial. The structure morphism X → Spec(OS ) is a flat morphism of finite type between noetherian schemes and is hence open. Enlarging S again if necessary, we may assume that the complement of the closed scheme Z defined by L surjects onto Spec(OS ). The fact that h is birational enables us to compute the zeta integral on Y instead of X. Indeed, let p ∈ Spec(OS ) be a closed point. The map h : Y(Op ) → X(Op) is an homeomorphism, ignoring sets of measure zero, and consequently Z X d −1 ∗ d −s −ℓc dh (µX,p ) π jℓ h∗ (Jj ) j=0 π jℓ h∗ (Ij ) j=0 qp Zp (s) = ℓ∈Z  Y(Op )  p  p  If the product of two ideal sheaves is monomial, then each of the ideal sheaves is monomial. Therefore the morphism h : Y → X is actually a monomialisation for each of the ideals Ij and Jj separately. We will denote the inverse images of these ideals by Iej = h∗ (Ij ), Jej = h∗ (Jj ) and Le = h∗ (L).  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  37  These ideal sheaves are locally principal, hence they define effective Cartier divisors on Y. For j ∈ {0, . . . , d}, let Dj (respectively Cj ) denote the divisor defined by Iej (respectively Jej ). Since Y is an integral noetherian separated regular scheme, there is, in fact, no difference between Cartier and Weil divisors on Y; see [30, II.6.11]. Let T denote the set of prime divisors occurring in P D = dj=0 Cj + Dj . Hence we may write X (j) X (j) Dj = NE E and Cj = ME E, for j ∈ {0, . . . , d}, E∈T  (j)  E∈T  (j)  (0)  where NE , ME ∈ Z are certain non-negative integers. Note that ME = (0) NE = 0 for all E ∈ T . We enlarge S such that all the all prime divisors in T and all their intersections are smooth over Spec(OS ). Now we consider the pullback h∗ (µX,p ) of the canonical p-adic measure. The ∨ image of the canonical morphism of OY -modules h∗ ωX ⊗ ωY → OY is a locally principal ideal sheaf M, which defines the discrepancy divisor D disc , an effective Cartier divisor. Its support is contained in the support of D and so X (νE − 1)E D disc = E∈T  for certain multiplicities νE −1 ∈ N0 . Note that M is a monomial sheaf of ideals. The pullback of the canonical p-adic measure satisfies h∗ (µX,p) = kMk T p µY,p . For every set U ⊆ T of prime divisors, the intersection EU = E∈U E is a smooth scheme over Spec(OS ). For every finite commutative OS -algebra L, we write bU (L) = |EU (L)| for the number of L-rational points of EU . We will consider the case where L is a finite extension of a residue field κp of Op . Proposition 5.16. In the above situation for almost all closed points p ∈ Spec(OS ) the following formula holds: X (−1)|W \U | (qp − 1)|U | bW (κp ) ΞU (qp−1 , qp−s ), Zp (s) = qp−m U ⊆W ⊆T  where the sum runs over all pairs (U, W ) of subsets U ⊆ W ⊆ T and ΞU (Q, t) =  X  −  Q    min ((j−c)ℓ+  0≤j≤d  P    (j) E∈U (ME −νE )nE )  −  t    min (jℓ+  0≤j≤d  P  E∈U   (j) NE n E )  .  ℓ∈Z (nE )E ∈NU  Proof. It suffices to establish the equation X Zp (s) = qp−m (qp − 1)|U | cU (κp ) ΞU (qp−1 , qp−s ), U ⊆T  where cU (L) = |{a ∈ Y(L) | ∀E ∈ T : a ∈ E ←→ E ∈ U}|. For then the proposition follows from the principle of inclusion and exclusion X bW (L)(−1)|W \U | , cU (L) = U ⊆W ⊆T  where the sum runs over all sets W lying between U and T .  38  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  The proof is very similar to the proof of [54, Thm. 2.1]. We only give a brief sketch. Take a κp -rational point a ∈ Y(κp ). Let Ta denote the subset of T consisting of those divisors passing through a. Write Ta = {E1 , . . . , Er } for r = |Ta |, say. By construction the divisors have a simple normal crossing in a, thus we find a regular local system of OY,a of the form π, g1 , g2 , . . . , gm such that gi is the defining equation of Ei at a, for i ∈ {1, . . . , r}. On the p-adic open set Wa = {y ∈ Y(Op ) | y ≡ a (mod p)}, the following equalities hold: Yr  kIej kp =  (j)  NE  i=1  gi  i  p  Yr  kJej kp =  ,  (j)  ME  i=1  gi  i  p  ,  kMkp =  Yr  νEi −1  i=1  gi  p  .  For any given ℓ ∈ Z this allows us to evaluate the integral over Wa as follows  Z  π jℓ h∗ (Ij )  Wa  = = =  Z  d  −s  j=0 p  max π jℓ  Wa 0≤j≤,d  Z  π jℓ h∗ (Jj )  Yr  max π  (πOp )m 0≤j≤d  i=1  jℓ  (j) i  NE  gi  −s  −1  j=0 p  dh∗ (µX,p )  max π jℓ  p  Yr  d  (j)  NE xi i i=1  0≤j≤d −s  Yr  max π  p  i=1  jℓ  0≤j≤d  (j) i  ME −νEi +1  gi  Yr  −1  dµY,p p  (j)  ME −νEi +1 xi i i=1  −1  dµ(x)  p   Pr Pr (j) (j) min (jℓ+ i=1 (ME −νEi )ni )+s min (jℓ+ i=1 NE ni )  (qp − 1)r X 0≤j≤d qp qpm r n∈N  i  0≤j≤d  i  Now the proposition follows by grouping the finitely many κp -rational points according to the prime divisors on which they lie.  Lemma 5.11 (1) and (5) imply that ΞU is rational and has the following inversion property. Lemma 5.17. For every set U ⊆ T of prime divisors the formal sum ΞU (Q, t) ∈ Q((q))[[t]] is a rational function in Q(Q, t). The functions Ξ satisfy the inversion property X ΞU (Q−1 , t−1 ) = (−1)|U |+1 ΞV (Q, t) V ⊆U  for all U ⊆ T . We record a simple combinatorial lemma. Lemma 5.18. Let V ⊆ W be finite sets and z some indeterminate. Then X  V ⊆U ⊆W  (z − 1)|U | (−z)|W \U | = (−1)|W \V | (z − 1)|V | .  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  39  Proof. Say |W | = n and |V | = r ≤ n and write ∆ = W r V . (−1)n−r (z − 1)r = ((z − 1) − z)n−r (z − 1)r =  n−r X  n−r j  j=0  =  X   (−1)n−r−j (z − 1)r+j z n−r−j  (−1)n−r−|H| (z − 1)r+|H| z n−r−|H|  H⊆∆  X  =  (−1)|W \U | (z − 1)|U | z |W \U | .    V ⊆U ⊆W  Let f be a positive integer, and let Lf denote the unique extension of κp of degree f . For simplicity we write bU (p, f ) = bU (Lf ). We proceed along the lines of [18]; see [16] for an overview of the relevant results on ℓ-adic cohomology. Write EU = EU × κp , where κp denotes the algebraic closure of κp . Then, by the ℓ-adic Lefschetz fixed point principle, we obtain 2(m−|U |)  bU (p, f ) =  X i=0   (−1)i Tr ϕf |H i (EU , Qℓ ) ,  where ϕ denotes the endomorphism induced by the Frobenius automorphism. In particular, we get an expression 2(m−|U |)  bU (p, f ) =  X  g(U,i)  (−1)  i  i=0  X  λfU,i,j  j=1  in terms of the eigenvalues λU,i,j , for 1 ≤ j ≤ g(U, i) := dim H i (EU , Qℓ ), of ϕ acting on the ℓ-adic cohomology H i (EU , Qℓ ). Poincaré duality in ℓ-adic cohomology implies the functional equation of the Weil zeta function (‡)  −f (m−|U |)  bU (p, −f ) = qp  bU (p, f ).  By construction, the schemes EU are smooth and projective (hence proper) over Spec(OS ); recall that S was enlarged to achieve this. By the smooth proper base change theorem (see [16, §6.8] or [17, Thm. (3.1), p. 62]) the ith ℓ-adic Betti number is independent of the chosen place p. In particular, the number of Frobenius eigenvalues is the same for all p. Let Υ be the set of all triples υ = (U, i, j) satisfying U ⊆ T , 0 ≤ i ≤ m − |U| and 1 ≤ j ≤ g(U, i). Consider the polynomial ring Q(Y1 , Y2)[X] := Q(Y1 , Y2)[Xυ | υ ∈ Υ] over the field of rational functions Q(Y1 , Y2 ), where X denotes the whole collection of independent variables Xυ . For every U ⊆ T , we set 2(m−|U |)  bU (X) =  X i=0  (−1)  g(U,i) i  X j=1  XU,i,j ,  40  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  and we define the rational function F = F (Y1, Y2 , X) X m = Y (−1)|W \U | (Y1−1 − 1)|U | bW (X) ΞU (Y1 , Y2 ) 1 (5.7) U ⊆W ⊆T  ∈ Q(Y1 , Y2 )[X].  As explained above, we now revert to the original notation. It remains to establish the functional equations for arbitrary finite extension K of K0 . Let K be a finite extension of K0 of inertia degree f , and let p ∈ Spec(OS ) be a closed point over p0 ∈ Spec(OK0 ,S ). As in the statement of Theorem 5.1, set q = qp0 . The preceding discussion yields Zp (s) = F (q −f , q −f s , (λfυ )υ∈Υ ), where the λfυ are the corresponding Frobenius eigenvalues as above. Theorem 5.19. In the above setting, the function F satisfies for every positive integer f the functional equation fm F (q f , t−f , (λ−f F (q −f , tf , (λfυ )υ∈Υ ), υ )υ∈Υ ) = −q  where t is any indeterminate. Proof. The following calculation, based on (‡), Lemma 5.17 and Lemma 5.18 as indicated, proves the functional equation: F (q f , t−f , (λ−f υ )υ∈Υ ) X = qf m (−1)|W \U | (q −f − 1)|U | bW (p, −f ) ΞU (q f , t−f ) U ⊆W ⊆T  = qf m  X  (−1)|W \U | (q −f − 1)|U | q −f (m−|W |) bW (p, f ) ΞU (q f , t−f )  by (‡)  U ⊆W ⊆T  =  X  (−1)|W \U | (q −f − 1)|U | q f |W | bW (p, f ) (−1)|U |+1ΞV (q −f , tf )  by 5.17  V ⊆U ⊆W ⊆T  =−  X  (−q f )|W \U | (q f − 1)|U | bW (p, f ) ΞV (q −f , tf )  V ⊆U ⊆W ⊆T  =−  X  (−1)|W \V | (q f − 1)|V | bW (p, f ) ΞV (q −f , tf )  by 5.18  V ⊆W ⊆T  = −q f m F (q −f , tf , (λfυ )υ∈Υ ).    6. Groups acting on rooted trees and multiplicity-free representations In this section we describe a geometric situation which leads to a transparent treatment of zeta functions associated to certain admissible representations. In particular, this yields a straightforward description of the zeta function asGL (o) sociated to the induced representation IndPξ n+1 (1Pξ ) from a maximal (1, n)parabolic subgroup Pξ to the compact p-adic Lie group GLn+1 (o); see Proposition 6.5 for details.  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  41  Central to the geometric approach is a suitable notion of (weak) 2-transitivity. Definition 6.1. The action of a group G on a metric space (X, d), from the right by isometries, is called distance transitive if for all x1 , x2 , y1 , y2 ∈ X with d(x1 , x2 ) = d(y1 , y2) there is an element g ∈ G with xi g = yi g for i ∈ {1, 2}. More specifically, if G is a profinite group acting distance transitively on a rooted tree T there is a geometric way to compute the zeta function of the representation of G on the space C ∞ (∂T , C) of locally constant functions on the boundary ∂T . The corresponding method was used by Bartholdi and Grigorchuk [6] for specific groups. In [9], Bekka and de la Harpe discuss a general approach based on reproducing kernels; in collaboration with Grigorchuk, they treat groups acting on rooted trees in detail in an appendix. We briefly review the theoretic background and produce a formula for the zeta function. As an application we compute the zeta functions of induced representations of certain compact p-adic analytic groups that are not torsion-free potent pro-p. 6.1. Trees and distance transitive actions. Let m = (mi )i∈N be an integer sequence with mi ≥ 2 for all i ∈ N. We define the associated spherically homogeneous rooted tree Tm as follows. The vertices of level n ≥ 0 are finite sequences w = (w1 , . . . , wn ) of length n with wi ∈ {0, . . . , mi − 1}. We write |w| = n to indicate that w is of level n. The root of Tm is the empty sequence. There is an edge between a vertex v of level n and a vertex w of level n + 1 if and only if v is a prefix of w. Let Lm (n) denote the set of vertices of level n in Tm . For any two vertices v and w we write pre(v, w) for the longest common prefix of v and w, regarded as a vertex of Tm . The boundary ∂Tm of Tm is the space of geodesic rays in Tm starting at the root, that is, the profinite topological space of infinite sequences (ξi )i∈N with ξi ∈ {0, . . . , mi − 1}. For any n ∈ N0 , we write ξ(n) for the prefix of ξ of length n and we say that the geodesic ray ξ passes through ξ(n). The longest common prefix of ξ, η ∈ ∂Tm is denoted pre(ξ, η), which is a vertex of Tm unless ξ = η. There is a natural metric d on ∂Tm given by 1 d(ξ, η) = for all ξ, η ∈ ∂Tm with ξ 6= η. 1 + |pre(ξ, η)| The same formula defines also a metric on Lm (n). Let Aut(Tm ) denote the profinite group of rooted automorphisms of Tm . Lemma 6.2. A closed subgroup G ≤c Aut(Tm ) acts distance transitively on ∂Tm if and only if it acts distance transitively on each layer Lm (n), n ∈ N0 . Proof. First suppose that G ≤c Aut(Tm ) acts distance transitively on the boundary ∂Tm . Let n ∈ N0 and, for i ∈ {1, 2}, let xi , yi ∈ Lm (n) such that d(x1 , x2 ) = d(y1 , y2). Choose geodesic rays ξi passing through xi and ηi passing to yi with d(ξ1, ξ2 ) = d(η1 , η2 ). Then there exists g ∈ G such that ξi g = ηi for i ∈ {1, 2}, and hence xi g = yi . Conversely, suppose that G acts distance transitively on each layer. For i ∈ {1, 2}, consider ξi , ηi ∈ ∂Tm such that d(ξ1, ξ2 ) = d(η1 , η2 ). For each  42  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  n ∈ N0 , the set Kn = {g ∈ G | ξi (n)g = ηi (n) for i ∈ {1, T 2}} ⊆ G is closed and non-empty. As G is compact, we find an element g ∈ n Kn . Evidently, ξi g = ηi for i ∈ {1, 2}.  Let G ≤c Aut(Tm ) act distance transitively on ∂Tm and consider the space C (∂Tm , C) of locally constant complex valued functions on the boundary. We study the representation ̺∂ of G on C ∞ (∂Tm , C) defined by ∞  (̺∂ (g).f )(x) = (g f )(x) = f (xg)  for all g ∈ G and f ∈ C ∞ (∂Tm , C).  Let ξ ∈ ∂Tm be a point on the boundary and let P = Pξ = stabG (ξ) denote the stabiliser in G; the group P is called a parabolic subgroup of G. As G acts transitively on the boundary, it follows that ̺∂ is isomorphic to the induced repG resentation IndG P (1P ). We recall that (G, P ) is called a Gelfand pair if IndP (1P ) is multiplicity-free or, equivalently, if the convolution algebra of P -bi-invariant locally constant functions on G is commutative; compare [11, §45] or [26]. The following theorem is essentially due to Bekka, de la Harpe and Grigorchuk; see [9, Prop. 10]. For completeness we include a short proof. Theorem 6.3. Let G ≤c Aut(Tm ) act distance transitively on ∂Tm and let P = Pξ ≤c G be a parabolic subgroup. Then (G, P ) is a Gelfand pair and the representation ̺∂ decomposes as a direct sum of the trivial representation and Qn−1 a unique irreducible constituent πn of dimension (mn − 1) j=1 mj for each n ≥ 1. In particular, the zeta function of the representation ̺∂ is ζ̺∂ (s) = 1 +  ∞ X  (mi − 1)  i=1  with abscissa of convergence α(̺∂ ) = 0.  −s  i−1 Y  mj−s  j=1  Proof. For n ∈ N0 , let Pn ≤o G be the stabiliser of the vertex ξ(n) for the lim IndG action of G on the layer Lm (n). Observe that IndG Pn (1Pn ), P (1P ) = − → G where IndPn (1Pn ) is simply the permutation representation C[Lm (n)] of G on the vertices of level n. We claim that dimC EndG (C[Lm (n)]) = n + 1. From this it follows, for n ≥ 1, that C[Lm (n)] = C[Lm (n − 1)] ⊕ Vπn for some πn ∈ Irr(G) that does not yet occur as a constituent of C[Lm (n − 1)] and satisfies Yn−1 dimC πn = |Lm (n)| − |Lm (n − 1)| = (mn − 1) mj . j=1  It remains to establish the claim. Frobenius reciprocity implies  dimC EndG (C[Lm (n)]) = dimC HomPn (1Pn , C[Lm (n)]) = |Lm (n)/Pn |. As G acts distance transitively, the Pn -orbits in Lm (n) correspond bijectively to the possible distances from the vertex ξ(n). Finally, the number of prefixes of any vertex of level n is exactly n + 1.  Remark 6.4. Theorem 6.3 applies, in particular, to G = Aut(Tm ). Variation of the sequence m = (mi )i∈N allows one to construct induced representations with various different zeta functions. For instance, if we apply the theorem to  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  43  the d-regular tree Tm with mi = d for all i and some fixed integer d ≥ 2, then −s the zeta function of the representation on the boundary is ζ̺∂ (s) = 1 + (d−1) 1−d−s which admits a meromorphic continuation to the complex plane. By contrast, suppose that the sequence (mi )i∈N tends to infinity with i. In this case the zeta function ζ̺∂ (s) cannot be extended analytically and the vertical axis Re(s) = 0 is the natural boundary; see [40, Thm. VI.2.2]. 6.2. Induction from maximal (1, n)-parabolic subgroups to GLn+1 (∆). In this section o denotes a complete discrete valuation ring with maximal ideal p and finite residue field κ = o/p of cardinality q. Let π ∈ p denote a uniformiser. We emphasise that here o may have positive characteristic, e.g., o = Fp [[t]]. Consider a central division algebra d of index d over the fraction field f of o so that dimf d = d2 . It is known that d contains a unique maximal o-order ∆. Up to isomorphism, d and ∆ can be described explicitly, in terms of the index d and a second invariant r satisfying 1 ≤ r ≤ d and gcd(r, d) = 1; see [44, §14] and the more explicit description given in Section 7.4. Here it suffices to fix a uniformiser Π ∈ d so that ∆ has maximal ideal P = Π∆. Recall P∞ thatk every element of ∆ can be written as a converging power series k=0 ck Π with coefficients coming from any set of representatives for the elements of the residue field ∆/P, which is a finite field of size q d . Fix n ∈ N, and consider the general linear group GLn+1 (∆) with a maximal parabolic subgroup Pξ which is the stabiliser of a point ξ ∈ Pn (∆) under the right GLn+1 -action. For instance, if ξ0 = (1 : 0 : . . . : 0), then   GL1 (∆) 0 ··· 0  ∆   ≤ GLn+1 (∆). Pξ0 =  .  .. GL (∆)  n  ∆  Proposition 6.5. For all ξ ∈ Pn (∆) the pair (GLn+1 (∆), Pξ ) is a Gelfand pair GL (∆) and the induced representation ̺ = IndPξ n+1 (1Pξ ) has the zeta function   q dn − 1 −s  (q d(n+1) − 1)−s −ds ζ̺ (s) = 1 + q + . qd − 1 1 − q −dns  Proof. Consider the (left) projective n-space Pn (∆). Concretely, we describe elements x in terms of homogeneous coordinates x = (x0 : . . . : xn ), where (x0 , . . . , xn ) ∈ ∆n is primitive, i.e., has at least one entry not contained in P, and (x0 : . . . : xn ) = (zx0 : . . . : zxn ) for all units z ∈ ∆× . We construct a rooted tree T representing Pn (∆) as follows. The root ε is the unique vertex of level 0 and, for each k ∈ N, the vertices of level k are the points of Pn (∆/Pk ). There is an edge between the root and every vertex of level 1. Moreover, a vertex x ∈ Pn (∆/Pk ) of level k and a vertex y ∈ Pn (∆/Pk+1 ) of level k + 1 are connected by an edge if and only if x ≡ y mod Pk . The boundary of T is ∂T ∼ = Pn (∆) since ∆ is complete. Note that T is spherically homogeneous and T ∼ = Tm for m1 = |Pn (∆/P)| = (q d(n+1) − 1)/(q d − 1) and dn mk = q for k ≥ 2.  44  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  The group GLn+1 (∆) acts on the tree T from the right. We show below that the action on the boundary is distance transitive. Consequently, Theorem 6.3 implies that (GLn+1 (∆), Pξ ) is a Gelfand pair and ∞ X q −dnks ζ̺ (s) = 1 + (|Pn (∆/P)| − 1)−s + |Pn (∆/P)|−s (q dn − 1)−s k=0  =1+   q d(n+1) − q d −s qd  −1  q dn − 1 −s   +   q d(n+1) − 1 −s qd  (q dn − 1)−s  1 1 − q −dns  −1 (q − 1)−s  −ds =1+ q + . qd − 1 1 − q −dns It remains to show that GLn+1 (∆) acts distance transitively on Pn (∆). Since GLn+1 (∆) acts transitively on Pn (∆), it suffices to show that the group P0 = Pξ0 acts transitively on the spheres around ξ0 = (1 : 0 : . . . : 0) ∈ Pn (∆). Let x, y ∈ Pn (∆) lie on such a sphere, that is, x ≡ ξ0 ≡ y mod Pk but x 6≡ ξ0 mod Pk+1 and y 6≡ ξ0 mod Pk+1 for some k ≥ 0. Note that, for k = 0, the first congruence holds trivially for all x, y. We need to find g ∈ P0 such that xg = y. We may write x = (x0 : Πk u1 : . . . : Πk un )  d(n+1)  and  y = (y0 : Πk v1 : . . . : Πk vn ),  where x0 ≡ y0 ≡ 1 mod Pk and u = (u1, . . . , un ), v = (v1 , . . . , vn ) ∈ ∆n are primitive. There is a matrix h ∈ GLn (∆) such that uh = v, since GLn (∆) acts transitively Pn on primitive vectors. Furthermore, we find a1 , . . . , an ∈ ∆ such k that Π i=1 ui ai = y0 − x0 . Thus   1 0 ··· 0   a1  ∈ P0 g= .   .. h an  has the property that xg = y.    7. Examples of induced representations of potent pro-p groups Let o be the ring of integers of a p-adic field f, with maximal ideal p E o and finite residue field κ = o/p of cardinality q. Let π ∈ p denote a uniformiser. 7.1. Induction from a Borel subgroup to GLr3 (o). We consider the general linear group G = GL3 (o) and, for r ∈ N, its principal congruence subgroup  Gr = ker GL3 (o) → GL3 (o/pr ) .  Let B ≤c G be the Borel subgroup consisting of upper triangular matrices, and set B r = B ∩ Gr . Our aim is to compute the zeta function of the induced r representation IndG B r (1B r ). We remark that the zeta function of the induced representation IndG B (1B ) has already been computed by Onn and Singla [43, Thm. 6.5], using direct representation-theoretic considerations. Let g = gl3 (o) denote the o-Lie lattice of 3 × 3-matrices and let b denote the sublattice of all upper triangular matrices. The groups Gr and B r are finitely  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  45  generated torsion-free potent pro-p groups whenever r ≥ 2e for p = 2 and r ≥ e(p − 2)−1 for p > 2, where e denotes the ramification index of f over Qp ; compare [3, Prop. 2.3]. In this case π r g (respectively π r b) regarded as a Zp -Lie lattice, is the Lie lattice associated to Gr (respectively B r ). Proposition 7.1. In the set-up described above and subject to r ≥ 2e for p = 2 and r ≥ e(p − 2)−1 for p > 2, the zeta function of the representation r ̺ = IndG B r (1B r ) is ζ̺ (s) = q 3(r−1)  q 1−3s (q − q −s )(u(q s ) − qu(q −s )) (1 − q −s )(1 − q 1−6s )  where u(X) = X 2 − 2X + 1 − 2X −1 + X −2 − X −3 . The abscissa of convergence is α(̺) = 1/6. It would be interesting to find an interpretation of the value 1/6 for the abscissa of convergence; compare the discussion in the introduction. Note that from the given formula it is easy to verify that ζ̺ satisfies a functional equation, in accordance with Theorem 5.1. Proof of Proposition 7.1. We indicate how the result can be obtained, by applying the method described in Section 4.2. As most steps consist of simple computations we leave the verification of some details to the reader. Consider the o-basis (Ei,j )3i,j=1 of g which consists of all elementary matrices; i.e., the only non-zero entry of Ei,j is a 1 in position (i, j). The subalgebra k of strictly lower triangular matrices is a complement of b in g, and the matrices Ei,j with j < i form a basis of k. Using the commutator relations [Ei,j , Es,t ] = δj,s Ei,t − δi,t Es,j , one can determine the commutator matrix R(T) ∈ Mat9 (Z[Ti,j | 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 3]), introduced in Section 4.2, for a set of variables Ti,j corresponding to the chosen basis of elementary matrices Ei,j . Substituting T2,1 = x, T3,2 = y, T3,1 = z and Ti,j = 0 whenever i ≤ j we obtain the reduced commutator matrix   0 0 0 z 0 −z −x y 0 0 0 0 0 0 −z x −x 0   0 z 0 0 y −y 0 0 0   −z −x 0 0 0 · · ·  · · · 0   0  x −y 0 0 · · · · · · 0 R(x, y, z) =  . .. .. ..  ..   . 0 y . . . z x  0 0     . . . . . . . . −y 0 . . 0 . . ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ···  An easy (but, if done by hand, lengthy) calculation yields the sets Fk of degreek Pfaffians. Removing those Pfaffians, whose modulus cannot dominate the others, we obtain kF0 (x, y, z)kp = 1,  kF1 (x, y, z)kp = kx, y, zkp ,  kF2 (x, y, z)kp = kx2 , y 2, z 2 kp ,  kF3 (x, y, z)kp = kx2 y, xy 2kp .  46  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  Hence Proposition 4.6 yields the formula Z 3r k1, x2 , y 2, z 2 , x2 y, xy 2k−1−s dµ(x, y, z) ζ̺ (s) = q p f3  3r  3r  −1  = q + q (1 − q )  ∞ X ℓ=1  q  3ℓ  Z  |  P2 (o)  kπ −2ℓ , π −3ℓ I3 k−1−s dµP2 ,p , p {z } (∗)  where I3 is the sheaf of ideals on P2 /o generated by the image of O(3)∨ = O(−3) after pairing with the sections x2 y and xy 2 of the 3rd twisting sheaf O(3). The fibres of the reduction map P2 (o) → P2 (κ) admit global charts and via these charts the contribution to the integral (∗) from any one fibre can be written as an integral over πo2 . Thus it remains to compute the integral over every fibre. Let (x̄ : ȳ : z̄) ∈ P2 (κ) be a point in projective coordinates. (a) There are q(q−1) many points satisfying x̄, ȳ 6= 0. In these fibres the integral has constant value q −2 q −3ℓ−3ℓs and working out the geometric series, we obtain the overall contribution ∞ X q −3s 3r −1 −2 q −3ℓs = q 3r (1 − q −1 )2 q (1 − q ) · q(q − 1) · q 1 − q −3s ℓ=1 to ζ̺ (s). (b) There are q points satisfying x̄ 6= 0 and ȳ = 0. In these fibres one can compute the integral by distinction of the cases |y|p ≥ q −ℓ and |y|p < q −ℓ . Similarly, there are q points satisfying x̄ = 0 and ȳ 6= 0; these points yield the same contributions, because the integral formula is symmetric in x and y. We obtain the overall contribution q 3r 2(1 − q −1 )  q −2s − q −1−5s (1 − q −3s )(1 − q −2s )  to ζ̺ (s). (c) Finally, the integral over the fibre of the remaining point (0 : 0 : 1) is more intricate: the resulting 3-dimensional summation, over ℓ and the valuations of x and y, can be calculated by choosing a suitable cone decomposition of the parameter space. For example, we first considered the case where x and y have the same valuation and then used the symmetry in x and y to treat the remaining cases. Skipping the details, we record the overall contribution  1−9s 3r −1 3 q −1−2s +q −4s +q 1−6s q (1 − q ) + (1−q−3sq )(1−q1−6s ) (1−q −2 )(1−q 1−6s )  2(q −1−4s +q −6s +q −1−8s ) 2q −2−2s 2q 1−8s + (1−q−2 )(1−q + + −1 )(1−q −2s ) (1−q −2 )(1−q −2s )(1−q 1−6s ) (1−q −2s )(1−q −3s )(1−q 1−6s ) to ζ̺ (s). Addition and simplification yields the explicit formula.    7.2. Induction from a Borel subgroup to Ur3 (o). Let e be a quadratic extension field of f and let oe denote the ring of integers of e. Denote the non-trivial Galois automorphism of e over f by σ.  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  47  Let U3 be the unitary group scheme over o associated to the extension oe and  0 0 1 the non-degenerate hermitian matrix W = 0 1 0 . We study the group 1 0 0  G = U3 (o) = {g ∈ GL3 (oe ) | σ(g)tr W g = W }  of o-rational points and its principal congruence subgroups Gr = G ∩ GLr3 (oe ) as in Section 7.1. Further we write B and B r = B ∩ GLr3 (oe ) to denote the Borel subgroups of upper triangular matrices in G and Gr respectively. Consider the o-Lie lattice u3 = {Z ∈ Mat3 (oe ) | σ(Z)tr W + W Z = 0}. The groups Gr and B r are finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p groups whenever r ≥ 2e for p = 2 and r ≥ e(p − 2)−1 for p > 2, where e denotes the ramification index of f over Qp . In this case π r u3 , regarded as a Zp -Lie lattice, is the Lie lattice associated to Gr . Proposition 7.2. Suppose that p is odd and that e is unramified over f. In the set-up described above and subject to r ≥ e(p − 2)−1 , the zeta function of the r representation ̺ = IndG B r (1B r ) is ζ̺ (s) = q  3(r−1) q  1−2s  (q − q −s )(q −s u(q s ) + qu(q −s )) (1 − q 1−6s )  where u(X) = X 2 + X + X −2 . The abscissa of convergence is α(̺) = 1/6. As before, it would be interesting to find an interpretation for the value 1/6; it is highly suggestive that the abscissa agrees with the one found in Proposition 7.1. From the given formula it is easy to verify that ζ̺ satisfies a functional equation, in accordance with Theorem 5.1. A similar formula holds in case e is ramified over f, however the resulting zeta function does not admit a functional equation. In the ramified case the denominator is still (1 − q 1−6s ), whereas the numerator is given by a more complicated formula. Proof of Proposition 7.2. Since p is odd, the canonical map oe ⊗o u3 → gl3 (oe ) is an isomorphism of oe -Lie lattices. Since e is unramified over f, we find δ ∈ o× e ro 2 × with δ ∈ o . Then 1, δ form an o-basis for oe and σ(δ) = −δ. Let k ≤ u3 be the Lie sublattice of strictly lower triangular matrices; clearly k ⊕ b = u3 , and the matrices 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 A= δ00 , B= 1 0 0 , C = 000 0 δ 0  0 −1 0  δ 0 0  form an o-basis for k. Consider an o-linear map ω : u3 → f that vanishes on b, and put u = ω(A), v = ω(B) and w = ω(C). We need to find the symplectic minors of the symplectic form ω̃ on u3 , given by ω̃(X, Y ) = ω([X, Y ]) for X, Y ∈ u3 . The symplectic minors are invariant under base change. As oe ⊗o u3 ∼ = gl3 (oe ) we simply need to compare the basis A, B, C with the basis E2,1 , E3,2 , E3,1 used in the proof of Proposition 7.1. In the notation used there, we obtain x = 21 (v + δ −1 u), y = 12 (δ −1 u − v) and z = δ −1 w. Observe that |v + δ −1 u|p =  48  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  max{|u|p, |v|p }, Because u, v ∈ o and 1, δ are o-linearly independent. We finally get the formula Z 3r k1, u2, v 2 , w 2 , u3, v 3 k−1−s dµ(u, v, w). ζ̺ (s) = q p f3  Now the explicit formula can be computed as in the proof of Proposition 7.1.  7.3. Induction from a maximal parabolic subgroup to GLrn (o). Let n, t ∈ N such that n = t + t′ with 1 ≤ t ≤ t′ := n − t. We consider the general linear group G = GLn (o) and, for r ∈ N, its principal congruence subgroup Gr = ker(GLn (o) → GLn (o/pr )). We are interested in the maximal parabolic subgroup of type (t, n − t), defined by  H = Hn,t = (gij ) ∈ GLn (o) | gij = 0 for i ≤ t < j   0 ··· 0 .. ..  ..  . . .  GLt (o)   0 ··· 0  = , ··· o o  .  . . . . . . . . GLn−t (o)  o ··· o  and we set H r = H ∩ Gr . The groups Gr and H r are finitely generated torsionfree potent pro-p groups whenever r ≥ 2e for p = 2 and r ≥ e(p−2)−1 for p > 2, where e denotes the ramification index of f over Qp . Our aim is to compute the Gr zeta function of the induced representation Ind H r (1B r ) for such r. Qm −j For m ∈ N0 , define Vq (m) = j=1 (1 − q ), viz. the volume of GLm (o) with respect to the additive Haar measure on Matm,m (o). For a subset J = {x1 , . . . , x|J| } ⊆ {1, . . . , t} with x1 < . . . < x|J| we write |J| Y Vq (t)Vq (n − t) Vq (xj − xj−1 )−1 , Vn,t (J) = Vq (t − x|J| )Vq (n − t − x|J| ) j=1  with the convention x0 = 0.  Theorem 7.3. In the set-up described above and subject to r ≥ 2e if p = 2 and r r ≥ e(p − 2)−1 if p > 2, the zeta function of the representation ̺ = IndG H r (1B r ) is X Y q −j(n−j)s (7.1) ζ̺ (s) = q rt(n−t) Vn,t (J) . 1 − q −j(n−j)s j∈J J⊆{1,...,t}  The abscissa of convergence is α(̺) = 0. Remark 7.4. Even though the formula in (7.1) seems complicated, it is rather easy to evaluate the occurring terms for small values of t. For instance, for t = 1 we obtain   −(n−1)−(n−1)s  q −(n−1)s −(n−1) r(n−1) r(n−1) 1 − q 1+ 1−q ζ̺ (s) = q = q . 1 − q −(n−1)s 1 − q −(n−1)s  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  49  This formula will be generalised in Section 7.4. It should also be compared with the formula obtained in Proposition 6.5. The proof of Theorem 7.3 requires some preparations. For N, k ∈ N0 , a composition of length k of N is a k-tuple u = (u1, . . . , uk ) of positive integers such that N = u1 + . . . + uk ; we put N(u) = N and λ(u) = k. In particular, the empty tuple is a composition of 0 of length 0. We denote by Comp(N) the set of all compositions of N. Set g = gln (o), and let h = {(Xij ) ∈ g | Xij = 0 for i ≤ t < j} denote the parabolic o-Lie sublattice of type (t, n−t), related to H. We identify the quotient g/h with the o-lattice Matt,t′ (o) of t × t′ -matrices, by projecting onto the upper right t × t′ -block. Furthermore, we identify the f-dual space (g/h)∗ = Homo (g/h, f) with the f-vector space Matt′ ,t (f) via the trace form Matt′ ,t (f) × Matt,t′ (o) → f, | {z } | {z } ∼ =(g/h)∗  (M, X) 7→ Tr(MX),  ∼ =g/h  and we identify the Pontryagin dual (g/h)∨ ∼ = Homo (g/h, f/o) with the space Matt′ ,t (f/o); compare Section 4.2. Indeed, writing M ∈ Matt′ ,t (f/o) for the image of M ∈ Matt′ ,t (f), we obtain an isomorphism Matt′ ,t (f/o) → (g/h)∨ ,  M 7→ ωM ,  ωM : g/h → f/o,  where  ωM (X) = Tr(MX) + o  for M ∈ Matt′ ,t (f).  In order to apply Proposition 4.3, we need to calculate |g : stabg (ω)| for every form ω ∈ (g/h)∨ . We make use of the Levi subgroup L ≤c H. This is the group of block diagonal matrices  L = (gij ) ∈ H | gij = 0 for j ≤ t < i ∼ = GLt (o) × GLn−t (o), and accordingly we write elements of L as pairs (g, h) ∈ GLt (o) × GLn−t (o). The action of L on (g/h)∨ ∼ = Matt′ ,t (f/o) via the co-adjoint representation is described explicitly by  (g, h).M = hMg −1 for (g, h) ∈ L and M ∈ Matt′ ,t (f); indeed, for X ∈ Matt,t′ (o) ∼ = g/h we obverse that  (g, h).ωM (X) = Tr(Mg −1 Xh) = Tr(hMg −1 X) = ωhM g−1 (X).  Next we determine an explicit set of orbit representatives for the L-orbits in Matt′ ,t (f/o). To this end we introduce the parameter set Ξ = Ξn,t consisting of all pairs ξ = (u, γ), where u is a composition satisfying N(u) ≤ t and γ = (γ1 , . . . , γλ(u) ) is a strictly increasing sequence of negative integers so that γ1 < . . . < γλ(u) < 0. For ξ = (u, γ) ∈ Ξ we define ( Pk−1 P γk if j=1 uj < i ≤ kj=1 uj , αi (ξ) = where 1 ≤ i ≤ t, 0 if N(u) < i,  50  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  and we associate to ξ the matrices   π α1 (ξ)       Mξ =    0  .  .. 0  π α2 (ξ) .. ··· ···       .  αt (ξ)  ∈ Mat ′ (f) π  t ,t  0  ..  .  0  and Mξ ∈ Matt′ ,t (f/o). The elementary divisor theorem implies that M = Mn,t = {Mξ | ξ ∈ Ξ} is a system of representatives of the L-orbits in Matt′ ,t (f/o). Since |g : stabg (ω)| is constant on the co-adjoint orbit of a form ω with regard to L, it suffices to determine, for ξ ∈ Ξ, the index |g : stabg (ωMξ )| and the size of the L-orbit of Mξ . Lemma 7.5. Let ξ = (u, γ) ∈ Ξ. The stabiliser of ωMξ in g satisfies  g : stabg (ωMξ )  1/2  λ(u)  =  Y  q −uiγi (n−ui −2  Pi−1  j=1  uj )  .  i=1  Lemma 7.6. Let ξ = (u, γ) ∈ Ξ and put N = N(u). The L-orbit of Mξ has the cardinality λ(u)  Y Pi−1 Vq (t)Vq (n − t) Vq (ui )−1 q −(n−N )γi ui + j=1 (γi −γj )ui uj . |L.Mξ | = Vq (t − N)Vq ((n − t) − N) i=1  We postpone the proofs of the lemmata and explain first how Theorem 7.3 can be deduced.  Proof of Theorem 7.3. For any composition u, we set λ(u) Y Vq (t)Vq (n − t) Wu = Vq (ui )−1 . Vq (t − N(u))Vq ((n − t) − N(u)) i=1  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  51  It follows from Proposition 4.3 and from Lemmata 7.5 and 7.6 that ̺ = r IndG H r (1B r ) satisfies X −1−s 1 |g : stabg (ω)| /2 ζ̺ (s) = q rt(n−t) ω∈(g/p)∨  =q  X  rt(n−t)  λ(u)  Y  L.Mξ  X  Wu  X  =q  Wu  λ(u)  Y  j=1  2  q N (u)γi ui −γi ui −  i=1  ξ=(u,γ)∈Ξ rt(n−t)  Pi−1  uj )(1+s)  i=1  ξ=(u,γ)∈Ξ  = q rt(n−t)  q ui γi (n−ui −2  λ(u)  Y  q ui γi (n−ui −2  P  j<i (γi +γj )ui uj  Pi−1  j=1  uj )s  q ui γi (n−ui −2  Pi−1  j=1  uj )s    .  i=1  ξ=(u,γ)∈Ξ  Let ξ = (u, γ) ∈ Ξ. Since γ1 < γ2 < . . . < γλ(u) < 0 is strictly increasing, we Pλ(u) may write γi = − k=i βk for certain positive integers β1 , . . . , βλ(u) ∈ N. Using this reparametrisation, we obtain ζ̺ (s) = q  rt(n−t)  X  λ(u)  Wu  ξ=(u,γ)∈Ξ  =q  rt(n−t)  X  Y  =q  X  Wu  uj )s  Y  q −ui  Pλ(u) k=i  βk (n−ui −2  P  j<i  uj )s  β1 ,β2 ,..., i=1 βλ(u) ∈N  Wu  ∞ X  β1 =1  X  λ(u)  N ∈{0,...,t} u∈Comp(N )  j=1  λ(u)  X  N ∈{0,...,t} u∈Comp(N )  = q rt(n−t)  Pi−1  i=1  N ∈{0,...,t} u∈Comp(N ) rt(n−t)  q ui γi (n−ui −2  Wu  Y  k=1  ···  ∞  X  q  −  Pλ(u) k=1  βk  Pk  i=1  ui (n−ui −2   Pi−1  j=1  uj )s  βλ(u) =1  q−  Pk  1 − q−  i=1  ui (n−ui −2  Pk  i=1  Pi−1  ui (n−ui −2  j=1    uj )s  Pi−1  j=1  uj )s  ,  wherePthe last step is derived using the geometric series. Finally, we write xk = ki=1 ui for k ∈ {1, . . . , λ(u)}. Then every composition u yields a set J = Ju = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xλ(u) } ⊆ {1, . . . , t}  and every such set J corresponds uniquely of the number N = Pi−1 Pkto a composition max(J). This proves the theorem since i=1 ui (n−ui −2 j=1 uj ) = xk (n−xk ) and Wu = Vn,t (J).  Proof of Lemma 7.5. Let ξ = (u, γ) ∈ Ξ. As explained in Section 4.2, the index |g : stabg (ωMξ )| can be computed via the Pfaffians of the symplectic form Aξ : g × g → f,  ^ Aξ (X, Y ) = wMξ ([X, Y ] + h) := Tr(Mξ [X, Y ]),  52  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  where Ze ∈ Matt,t′ (o) denotes the projection of Z ∈ g onto its upper right t × t′ block. The elementary n × n-matrices Ei,j , with entry 1 in position (i, j) and entries 0 elsewhere, form an o-basis of g. A short calculation yields  α (ξ)  if j1 = i2 , j2 = i1 + t and i1 ≤ t π i1 α (ξ) i Aξ (Ei1 ,j1 , Ei2 ,j2 ) = −π 2 if j2 = i1 , j1 = i2 + t and i2 ≤ t .  0 otherwise Thus g, equipped with the form Aξ , decomposes into an orthogonal direct sum of subspaces of three different types.  Type 1. For i > t and j ∈ / {t + 1, . . . , 2t}, the space oEi,j is contained in the radical of Aξ , this means, Aξ (Ei,j , X) = 0 for all X ∈ g. Type 2. For 1 ≤ i ≤ t and j > 2t, the free o-module of rank 2 spanned by Ei,j and Ej,i+t is orthogonal to all other elementary matrices. The form Aξ restricted to this space has the Pfaffian pαi (ξ) . For each i with 1 ≤ i ≤ t there are (n − 2t) possible choices for a corresponding index j. Type 3. For 1 ≤ i, j ≤ t the o-module of rank 3 spanned by Ei,j ,Ej,i+t and Ei+t,j+t is orthogonal to all other elementary matrices. The form Aξ restricted to this space has the degree-1 Pfaffian pmin(αi (ξ),αj (ξ)) . The sequence of numbers αi (ξ), i ∈ {1, . . . , t}, is increasing. Thus we can determine the maximal Pfaffian of Aξ , and hence |g : stabg (ωMξ )| /2 = q − 1  Pt  i=1  αi (ξ)(n−2i+1)  = q−  Pλ(u) i=1  γi ui (n−ui −2  P  j<i  uj )  .    Proof of Lemma 7.6. Let ξ = (u, γ) ∈ Ξ and put N = N(u). We compute the stabiliser StabL (Mξ ) of Mξ ∈ Matt′ ,t (f/o) and its volume with respect to the normalised additive Haar measure on Matt,t (o) × Matt′ ,t′ (o). For simplicity we denote by vol the normalised additive Haar measure on any implicitly given o-lattice. Suppose (g, h) ∈ L = GLt (o) × GLt′ (o) lies in the stabiliser of Mξ . Write     A C B X g= and h = U V D Y with A, B ∈ MatN,N (o),  C, U tr ∈ MatN,t−N (o),  V ∈ Matt−N,t−N (o),  Y ∈ Matt′ −N,t′ −N (o).  D, X tr ∈ Matt′ −N,N (o),  Let Mξ◦ denote the upper left N × N-block of the matrix Mξ . The assumption hMξ = Mξ g is equivalent to the following three conditions (i) BMξ◦ − Mξ◦ A ≡o 0, (ii) DMξ◦ ≡o 0, (iii) Mξ◦ C ≡o 0.  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  53  Writing D = (dij ), we observe that condition (ii) is equivalent to dij ∈ p−αj (ξ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ t′ −N and 1 ≤ j ≤ N. Thus the set Z2 of all matrices D ∈ Matt′ −N,N (o) that satisfy condition (ii) has volume Yλ(u) YN ′ ′ q γi ui (t −N ) . q αj (ξ)(t −N ) = vol(Z2 ) = i=1  j=1  Similarly, writing C = (cij ), we see that condition (iii) means: cij ∈ p−αi (ξ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ N and j ≤ t − N. Thus the volume of the set Z3 of all matrices C ∈ MatN,t−N (o) that satisfy condition (iii) is Yλ(u) YN q γi ui (t−N ) . q αi (ξ)(t−N ) = vol(Z3 ) = i=1  i=1  Since αi (ξ) < 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ N, the matrices C and D vanish modulo π. Consequently, the square matrices A, B, V, Y are invertible over o. Now consider condition (i). Writing A = (aij ) and B = (bij ), we see that condition (i) is equivalent to (7.2)  aij π αi (ξ) ≡o bij π αj (ξ)  for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N.  Let Z1 denote the set of all pairs (A, B) ∈ GLN (o) × GLN (o) satisfying (7.2). We observe that, if (A, B) ∈ Z1 , then A is contained in the group G(ξ) = {(zij ) ∈ GLN (o) | zij  GLu1 (o) pγ2 −γ1  GLu2 (o)  o = . ..  .. . o ···  ∈ π αj (ξ)−αi (ξ) o for i ≤ j}  ··· pγλ(u) −γ1 .. ..  . .  . .. . pγλ(u) −γλ(u)−1  o GLuλ(u) (o)  Moreover, for any A ∈ G(ξ), there are matrices B such that (A, B) ∈ Z1 and each entry bij ∈ o is uniquely determined modulo π −αj (ξ) . We deduce that vol(Z1 ) = vol(G(ξ))  N Y  q  αk (ξ)N  =  λ(u)  Y  λ(u)  vol(GLui (o))q  N γi ui  i=1  k=1  Y  q  (γi −γj )ui uj  j=i+1    .  Recalling that vol(GLm (o)) = Vq (m) for m ∈ N, we combine the three volume computations to conclude that vol(StabL (Mξ )) = vol(Z1 ) vol(Z2 ) vol(Z3 ) vol(GLt−N (o)) vol(GLt′ −N (o)) ′  = Vq (t − N)Vq (t − N)  λ(u)  Y  ′  Vq (ui )q (t+t −N )ui γi +  i=1  Pλ(u)  j=i+1 (γi −γj )ui uj   .  The claim now follows from the observation that the orbit length can be expressed in terms of the volume as follows: |L.Mξ | = |L : StabL (Mξ )| =  Vq (t)Vq (n − t) . vol(StabL (Mξ ))    54  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  7.4. Induction from a maximal (1, n)-parabolic subgroup to GLdr n+1 (∆). Let o be a compact discrete valuation ring of characteristic 0, residue characteristic p and residue field cardinality q. Fix a uniformiser π so that the valuation ideal of o takes the form p = πo. Let f denote the fraction field of o, a finite extension of Qp , and consider a central division algebra d of index d over f so that dimf d = d2 . It is known that d contains a unique maximal o-order ∆. Up to isomorphism, d and ∆ can be described explicitly, in terms of the index d and a second invariant h satisfying 1 ≤ h ≤ d and gcd(h, d) = 1; see [44, §14]. Fix n ∈ N and set G = GLn+1 (∆). For r ∈ N, we take interest in the principal congruence subgroup  Gdr = ker GLn+1 (∆) → GLn+1 (∆/π r ∆) . The maximal parabolic subgroup   GL1 (∆) 0 ··· 0  ∆   ≤ GLn+1 (∆) H = .  .. GLn (∆)  ∆  gives rise to a subgroup H dr = H ∩ Gdr ≤c Gdr . The groups Gdr and H dr are finitely generated torsion-free potent pro-p groups whenever r ≥ 2e for p = 2 and r ≥ e(p−2)−1 for p > 2, where e denotes the ramification index of f over Qp ; compare [3, Prop. 2.3].  Proposition 7.7. In the set-up described above and subject to r ≥ 2e for p = 2 and r ≥ e(p − 2)−1 for p > 2, the zeta function of the induced representation dr ̺ = IndG H dr (1H dr ) is −dn(1+s) rnd2 1 − q ζ̺ (s) = q . 1 − q −dns Proof. The division algebra d contains a splitting field e that is unramified of degree d over f. Thus e = f(ξ), where ξ is a primitive (q d − 1)th root of unity, and e|f is a cyclic Galois extension. The ring of integers in e is o[ξ]. Furthermore there exists a uniformiser Π ∈ d so that Πd = π  and  Πx = σ(x)Π  for all x ∈ e, h  where σ is the generator of Gal(e|f) satisfying σ(ξ) = ξ q . In this way we obtain an f-basis (ξ i Πj )0≤i,j≤d−1 for d that is at the same time an o-basis for ∆: Xd−1 Xd−1 o ξ i Πj . ∆= j=0 i=0 P Pd−1 i j The reduced trace trd|f (x) of an element x = d−1 j=0 ai,j ξ Π satisfies i=0  Xd−1 i ai,0 ξ . trd|f (x) = Tre|f i=0  Observe that the symmetric f-bilinear trace form e × e → f, (x, y) 7→ Tre|f (xy) restricts to a symmetric o-bilinear form o[ξ] × o[ξ] → o that is non-degenerate,  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  55  i.e. non-degenerate modulo p at the level of residue fields. Consequently, the f-bilinear pairing ∆ × d → f, (x, y) → 7 trd|f (xy) induces isomorphisms and Homo (∆, f/o) ∼ Homo (∆, f) ∼ = d/Π−d+1 ∆. =d For m = m0 d + m1 with m0 ≥ 0 and 0 ≤ m1 ≤ d − 1, we take a closer look at the related o-bilinear form βm : ∆ × ∆ → f,  (x, y) 7→ trd|f (xyΠ−m ) = π −m0 trd|f (xyΠ−m1 ).  Its structure matrix with respect to the o-basis (ξ i Πj )0≤i,j≤d−1 of ∆, ordered as (1, ξ, . . . , ξ d−1, Π, ξΠ, . . . , ξ d−1 Π, . . . . . . , Πd−1 , ξΠd−1 , . . . , ξ d−1 Πd−1 ), takes the shape     A0   A1  ···   −m0 Am1 Bm = π       πAm1 +2 ··· πAd−1        ∈ Matd2 (o), πAm1 +1      where Ai ∈ Matd (o) denotes the structure matrix of the o-bilinear form o[ξ] × o[ξ] → o,  (x, y) 7→ Tre|f (xσ i (y))  with respect to the o-basis (1, ξ, . . . , ξ d−1). Since each of the latter forms is non-degenerate, we infer that the elementary divisors of Bm are π −m0 , with multiplicity (m1 + 1)d, and π −m0 +1 , with multiplicity (d − m1 − 1)d. We consider the o-Lie lattice g = gln+1 (∆). The elementary matrices Eij , with 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n + 1, form a ∆-basis of the left ∆-module g. Let h denote the maximal parabolic o-Lie sublattice of g that is spanned as a ∆-submodule by those Eij satisfying (i, j) = (1, 1) or i ≥ 2. For m ∈ N0 with m ≥ d − 1, we take interest in the o-linear form X wm : g → f, z = zij Eij 7→ trd|f (z1,n+1 Π−m ) 1≤i,j≤n+1  and the induced o-linear form ωm : g → f/o, z 7→ wm (z) + o. Clearly, wm (h) = {0} ⊆ o. Furthermore, the co-adjoint action of the Levi subgroup   GL1 (∆) 0 ··· 0  0   ≤ GLn+1 (∆), L= .  .. GLn (∆)  0  associated with h, on Homo (g, f) maps W = {w ∈ Homo (g, f) | w(h) ⊆ o} to itself. We observe that, modulo Homo (g, o), the L-orbits on W are parametrised  56  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  by the elements wm , m ≥ d − 1. Furthermore, the volume of Wm = L.wm + Homo (g, o) is equal to ( (q dn − 1)q dn(m−d) if m ≥ d, µ(Wm ) = 1 if m = d − 1, where µ denotes the Haar measure normalised so that µ(Homo (g, o)) = 1. We choose a total order ≺ on index pairs {(k, l) | 1 ≤ k, l ≤ n + 1} such that (1, 1) ≺ (1, n + 1) ≺ (n + 1, n + 1) ≺ (1, 2) ≺ (2, n + 1) ≺ (1, 3) ≺ (3, n + 1) ≺ . . . ≺ (1, n) ≺ (n, n + 1) ≺ any (k, l) with k 6= n + 1 and l 6= 1. Let Y denote the o-basis of g consisting of the basis elements ξ i Πj Ekl ,  where 0 ≤ i, j ≤ d − 1 and 1 ≤ k, l ≤ n + 1,  ordered according to (i, j, k, l) < (i′ , j ′ , k ′ , l′ )  ⇔   ′ ′   (k, l) ≺ (k , l ), or (k, l) = (k ′ , l′ ) and j < j ′ , or   (k, l) = (k ′ , l′ ) and j = j ′ and i < i′ .  Evaluating the commutator matrix R(T) of the o-Lie lattice g with respect to Y at the point xm corresponding to wm , we obtain   B0   B1     B2     .. .  ∈ Mat(n+1)2 d2 (o), R(xm ) =    Bn−1         where  and     0 Bm 0 tr 0 Bm  ∈ Mat3d2 (o) B0 = −Bm tr 0 −Bm 0 B1 = . . . = Bn−1 =    0 Bm tr −Bm 0    ∈ Mat2d2 (o)  each have elementary divisors π −m0 , with multiplicity 2(m1 + 1)d, and π −m0 +1 , with multiplicity 2(d − m1 − 1)d, the remaining d2 elementary divisors of B0  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  57  being π ∞ = 0. This gives |g : stabg (ωm )| /2 = 1  [  {Pfaff k (wm ) | 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊d2 (n+1)2/2⌋}  p  = kPfaff nd2 (w)kp = |(π −m0 )(m1 +1)dn (π −m0 +1 )(d−m1 −1)dn |p = q nd(m−(d−1)) . dr  Thus, by Proposition 4.4, the zeta function of ̺ = IndG H dr (1H dr ) is given by ! ∞ [ X −1−s 2 ζ̺ (s) = q rnd {Pfaff k (wm ) | 0 ≤ k ≤ ⌊d2 (n+1)2/2⌋} µ(Wm ) p  m=d−1  =q =q  rnd2  rnd2  2  = q rnd  1+   ∞ X  m=d  1+ 1−q    −1−s q dn − 1 q dn(m−d) q nd(m−(d−1))  −dn  1 − q −dn(1+s) . 1 − q −dns    q −dns 1 − q −dns    !   References  [1] A. Aizenbud and N. Avni, Representation growth and rational singularities of the moduli space of local systems, Invent. Math. 204 (2016), 245–316. [2] N. Avni, B. Klopsch, U. Onn, and C. Voll, Representation zeta functions of some compact p-adic analytic groups, Zeta functions in algebra and geometry, Contemp. Math., vol. 566, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2012, pp. 295–330. , Representation zeta functions of compact p-adic analytic groups and arithmetic [3] groups, Duke Math. J. 162 (2013), 111–197. , Similarity classes of integral p-adic matrices and representation zeta functions [4] of groups of type A2 , Proc. London Math. Soc. 112 (2016), 267–350. [5] , Arithmetic groups, base change, and representation growth, Geom. Funct. Anal. 26 (2016), 67–135. [6] L. Bartholdi, and R. I. Grigorchuk, On parabolic subgroups and Hecke algebras of some fractal groups, Serdica Math. J. 28 (2002), 47–90. [7] H. Bass, A. Lubotzky, A. R. Magid and S. Mozes, The proalgebraic completion of rigid groups, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Geometric and Combinatorial Group Theory, Part II (Haifa, 2000), Geom. Dedicata 95 (2002), 19–58. [8] V. V. Batyrev, Birational Calabi-Yau n-folds have equal Betti numbers, New trends in algebraic geometry (K. Hulek et al., eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999. [9] M. B. Bekka, and P. de la Harpe, Irreducibility of Unitary Group Representations and Reproducing Kernels Hilbert Spaces, Expo. Math. 21 (2003), 115–149. [10] C. Blondel, Quelques propriétés des paires couvrantes, Math. Ann. 331 (2005), 243–257. [11] D. Bump, Lie groups, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2013. [12] C. J. Bushnell and G. Henniart, The local Langlands conjecture for GL(2), SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 2006. [13] P. S. Campbell, M. Nevins, Branching rules for unramified principal series representations of GL(3) over a p-adic field, J. Algebra 321 (2009), 2422–2444.  58  STEFFEN KIONKE AND BENJAMIN KLOPSCH  [14] W. Casselman, The restriction of a representation of GL2 (k) to GL2 (o), Math. Ann. 206 (1973), 311–318. [15] C. W. Curtis, and I. Reiner, Representation Theory of Finite Groups and Associative Algebras, Wiley, New York, 1988. [16] V. I. Danilov, Cohomology of algebraic varieties, in Algebraic geometry II, 1–125, Encyclopaedia Math. Sci., 35, Springer, Berlin, 1996. [17] P. Deligne et al., Cohomologie étale, Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie SGA 4 21 , Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1977. [18] J. Denef, and D. Meuser, A functional equation of Igusa’s local zeta function, Amer. J. Math. 113 (1991), 1135–1152. [19] J. D. Dixon, The structure of linear groups, Van Nostrand-Reinhold Company, London, 1971. [20] J. D. Dixon, M. P. F. du Sautoy, A. Mann, and D. Segal, Analytic pro-p groups, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999. [21] D. H. Dung and C. Voll, Uniform analytic properties of representation zeta functions of finitely generated nilpotent groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 369 (2017), 6327–6349. [22] J. González-Sánchez, On p-saturable groups, J. Algebra 315 (2007), 809–823. [23] J. González-Sánchez, Kirillov’s orbit method for p-groups and pro-p groups, Comm. Algebra 37 (2009), 4476–4488. [24] J. González-Sánchez and A. Jaikin-Zapirain, On the structure of normal subgroups of potent p-groups, J. Algebra 276 (2004), 193–209. [25] J. González-Sánchez, and B. Klopsch, Analytic pro-p groups of small dimension, ,J. Group Theory 12 (2009), 711–734. [26] B. H. Gross, Some applications of Gelfand pairs to number theory, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 24 (1991), 277–301. [27] F. J. Grunewald, D. Segal and G. Smith, Subgroups of finite index in nilpotent groups, Invent. Math. 93 (1988), 185–223. [28] G. Harder, Eisenstein cohomology of arithmetic groups. The case GL2 , Invent. Math. 89 (1987), 37–118. [29] M. Harris and R. Taylor, The geometry and cohomology of some simple Shimura varieties, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2001. [30] R. Hartshorne, Algebraic geometry, Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg, 1977. [31] G. Henniart, Une preuve simple des conjectures de Langlands pour GL(n) sur un corps p-adique, Invent. Math. 139 (2000), 439–455. [32] H. Hironaka, Resolution of singularities of an algebraic variety over a field of characteristic zero. I, II, Ann. of Math. (2) 79 (1964), 109–203; ibid. 205–326. [33] A. Jaikin-Zapirain, Zeta function of representations of compact p-adic analytic groups, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 19 (2006), 91–118. [34] B. Klopsch, On the Lie theory of p-adic analytic groups, Math. Z. 249 (2005), 713–730. [35] B. Klopsch, Representation growth and representation zeta functions of groups, Note Mat. 33 (2013), 107–120. [36] J. Kollár, Lectures on resolution of singularities, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2007. [37] Y. Komori, K. Matsumoto and H. Tsumura, On Witten multiple zeta-functions associated with semisimple Lie algebras II, J. Math. Soc. Japan 62 (2010), 355–394. [38] M. Larsen and A. Lubotzky, Representation growth of linear groups, J. Eur. Math. Soc. 10 (2008), 351–390. [39] A. Lubotzky and B. Martin, Polynomial representation growth and the congruence subgroup growth, Israel J. Math. 144 (2004), 293–316. [40] S. Mandelbrojt, Dirichlet Series - Principles and Methods, D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht 1972. [41] J. Neukirch, Algebraic number theory, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.  ZETA FUNCTIONS FOR REPRESENTATIONS OF p-ADIC LIE GROUPS  59  [42] M. Nevins, On branching rules of depth-zero representations, J. Algebra 408 (2014), 1–27. [43] U. Onn and P. Singla, On the unramified principal series of GL(3) over non-Archimedean local fields, J. Algebra 397 (2014), 1–17. [44] I. Reiner, Maximal orders, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003. [45] D. Renard, Représentations des groupes réductifs p-adiques, Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 2010. [46] T. Rossmann, Topological representation zeta functions of unipotent groups, J. Algebra 448 (2016), 210–237. [47] P. Sarnak and S. Adams, Betti numbers of congruence groups, Israel J. Math. 88 (1994), 31–72. [48] J.-P. Serre, Local Fields, Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg, 1979. , Galois Cohomology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002. [49] [50] R. P. Stanley, Combinatorial reciprocity theorems, Advances in Math. 14 (1974), 194– 253. [51] , Combinatorics and commutative algebra, second ed., Birkhäuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 1996. [52] A. Stasinski and C. Voll, Representation zeta functions of nilpotent groups and generating functions for Weyl groups of type B, Amer. J. Math. 136 (2014), 501–550. [53] M. F. Vignéras, Reprśentations l-modulaires d’un groupe réductif p-adique avec l 6= p, Birkhäuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 1996. [54] C. Voll, Functional equations for zeta functions of groups and rings, Ann. of Math. (2) 172 (2010), 1181–1218. , Zeta functions of groups and rings—recent developments, in: Groups St Andrews [55] 2013 (ed. C. M. Campbell e. a.), 469–492, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2015. [56] A. Weil, Adeles and Algebraic Groups, Birkhäuser Basel, 1982. [57] E. Witten, On quantum gauge theories in two dimensions, Comm. Math. Phys. 141 (1991) 153–209. [58] M. Zordan, Poincaré series of Lie lattices and representation zeta functions of arithmetic groups, preprint: arXiv:1704.04165. Mathematisches Institut, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany E-mail address: Steffen.Kionke@uni-duesseldorf.de Mathematisches Institut, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany E-mail address: klopsch@math.uni-duesseldorf.de

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
