Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_3252

Abstract:
Distributed Selection in O (log n) Time with O (n log log n) Messages  arXiv:1511.00715v4 [cs.DS] 11 Dec 2017  Piotr Berman and Junichiro Fukuyama Department of Computer Science and Engineering The Pennsylvaina State University {berman, jxf140}@cse.psu.edu  Abstract. We consider the selection problem on a completely connected network of n processors with no shared memory. Each processor initially holds a given numeric item of b bits allowed to send a message of max (b, lg n) bits to another processor at a time. On such a communication network G, we show that the kth smallest of the n inputs can be detected in O (log n) time with O (n log log n) messages. The possibility of such a parallel algorithm for this distributed k-selection problem has been unknown despite the intensive investigation on many variations of the selection problem carried out since 1970s. The main trick of our algorithm is to simulate the comparisons and swaps performed by the AKS sorting network, the n-input sorting network of logarithmic depth discovered by Ajtai, Komlós and Szemerédi in 1983. We also show the universal time lower bound lg n for many basic data aggregation problems on G, confirming the asymptotic time optimality of our parallel algorithm. Keywords: the selection problem, distributed selection, AKS sorting network, communication network, comparator network  1 Introduction The classical k-selection problem finds the kth smallest of given n numeric items. We consider it on a completely connected network G of n processors with no shared memory, each holding exactly one item of b bits initially. A processor node in G may send a message of max (b, lg n)-bits at any parallel step. As the performance metrics, we minimize the parallel running time, and/or the total number of messages as the measure of amount of information transmitted on G. The parallel selection problem for connected processors with no shared memory has been extensively investigated for various network topologies, cases of how n inputs are distributed, and other constraints [1,2,3,4], as well as on the parallel comparison tree (PCT) and parallel random access machine (PRAM) models with shared memories [5,6,7]. In this paper we focus on the above case, calling it the k-distributed selection problem on a communication network G. As suggested in [1], this case of G has become increasingly significant for the contemporary distributed computing applications such as sensor networks and distributed hash tables: It is common in their performance analysis to count messages arriving at  2  Piotr Berman and Junichiro Fukuyama  the designated destinations assuming constant time per delivery (called hops), rather than count how many times messages are forwarded by processor nodes. The considered network G models it well. The distributed selection problem in this particular network case is one of the long time research topics in parallel algorithms. The results are included in the work such as [1,3,8,9]. The following summarizes only a few most closely related to our interest: Let w stand for the number of processors initially holding one or more inputs. The algorithm Frederickson and Johnson developed in [8] finds the  k messages on a completely connected or starkth smallest item with O w log w shaped processor network. Santoro et al [3] discovered in 1992 an algorithm with the expected number of messages bounded by O (w log log min(k, n − k) + w log w). The more recent result of [1] explores a case when the processor network has any diameter D > 1. It presents a parallel algorithm with the average time bound O (D logD n) that is asymptotically optimal under some probabilistic assump tions, and one with the deterministic time bound O D log2D n . The first contribution of this paper is a parallel algorithm for the distributed k-selection problem that runs in time O (log n) with total O (n log log n) messages on G. We will prove the following theorem after formulating the problem. Theorem 1. The kth smallest of n inputs can be computed distributedly on a communication network G in time O (log n) with O (n log log n) messages. t u Such a parallel algorithm has been unknown in the long research history on the selection problem. Satisfying the constraint oftotal O (n log log n) messages, it improves the parallel time bound O D log2D n in [1] when log2 D  log n: On a processor network with diameter D, a message can be sent to anywhere forwarded by O (D) processors. So the theorem means the parallel time bound O (D log n)  D log2D n. Our algorithm simulates the comparisons and swaps performed by the AKS sorting network, the n-input sorting network of O (log n) depth discovered by Ajtai, Komlós and Szemerédi in 1983 [10]. Known for the difficulty of its performance analysis, the AKS sorting network itself has been a research subject in parallel algorithm. Paterson [11] simplified its construction. Seiferas [12] further clarified it with the estimate that the depth can be at most 7·6.07 lg n = 48.79 lg n layers of 1/402.15-halvers. Here an ε-halver ( ∈ (0, 1)) is a comparator network of a constant depth to re-order n inputs [11,13], such that for every z ∈ [0, n/2] ∩ Z, the left half of the output includes at most εz items among the z largest inputs, and the right half at most εz among the z smallest inputs. In the recent work by Goodrich [14], the constant factor of the total O (n log n) nodes is significantly reduced although its depth bound is O (n log n). The overall research interest on the AKS sorting network has been simpler understanding and reduction of the constant factor of the asymptotic quantities. In order to design our parallel algorithm for the distributed selection problem, we devise an n-input comparator  network of depth O (log log n) that reduces strangers to at most O n log−c n for any given constant c > 0. Here a stranger is the zth largest input (1 ≤ z ≤ n) that exists in the left half of the output despite z > 21 n, or in the right half despite z ≤ 21 n. Formally we show:  Efficient Distributed Selection Algorithm  3  Theorem 2. For every c ∈ R+ , and n ∈ Z+ that is a sufficiently large power of 6, there exists a comparator network H to re-order n inputs satisfying the following two. i) The output includes less than n lg−c n strangers. and ii) The depth is at most 1296cd 15 lg lg n where dε stands for the minimum depth of an ε-halver. t u Such H will be constructed from given 1/5-halvers through comparator networks we devise in Section 3 as gadgets. A 1/5-halver of a depth at most 2 · 721 is built in Appendix with the classical result of Gabber and Galil on expander graphs [15]. Consequently the depth of H is at most 2592 · 721 c lg lg n. This value would be even far larger if ε-halvers with some smaller ε were used. Our parallel algorithm for the distributed selection problem mimics this H also. Our third result is the running time lower bound lg n for many data aggregation problems on G. The class of problems having the lower bound is huge including the selection problem and many others. The following statement will be confirmed as a corollary to the theorem we will show in Section 6. Corollary 1. Any parallel algorithm takes at least lg n steps in the worst case to compute each of the following three problems on a communication network distributedly: i) the k-selection problem on n inputs each of at least dlg ne + 1 bits; ii) the problem of finding the sum of n inputs; iii) the problem of counting numeric items among n inputs, each exceeding a given threshold. t u By our formulation in Section 2, the statement assumes that each of the n processor nodes holds one numeric item at time 0. The corollary shows the asymptotic time optimality of our parallel algorithm as well. The rest of the paper consists as follows. In Section 2, we define general terminology showing related facts. After devising our gadgets from ε-halvers in Section 3, we will prove Theorem 2 in Section 4, Theorem 1 in Section 5, and the universal lower bound lg n in Section 6, followed by concluding remarks in Section 7.  2 General Terminology and Related Facts In this paper, a communication network G means a collection of n processor nodes each two of which are connected, capable of exchanging a message of max (b, lg n) bits at a parallel step where b ∈ Z+ is given. We consider a computational problem P whose input is a set of n numeric items of b bits distributed over G, i.e., every processor holds exactly one input item at time 0. A parallel algorithm A is said to compute P on G distributedly in time t with m messages, if all the bits of the computed result from the n inputs are stored at a designated processor node after the tth parallel step with total m messages. Messages may be exchanged asynchronously on G.  4  Piotr Berman and Junichiro Fukuyama  A comparator network H is a directed acyclic graph of 2-input comparators. For notational convenience, we say that the width of H is the maximum number of nodes of the same depth. In the standard terminology, a numeric item input to a comparator is called wire. We may call an ordered set of wires array, for which the set theoretical notation is used. The AKS sorting network is a comparator network that sorts n inputs with a depth Θ (log n) and the width at most n, performing O (n log n) comparisons. We observe here that the kth smallest of n items distributed over G can be detected in O (log n) time with O (n log n) messages the following way. We design such a parallel algorithm A so that a processor node v in G simulates from time ct to c(t + 1) (c : a constant, t ∈ N) a comparator of depth t in the AKS sorting network H. We mean by “simulate” that v receives two items from other nodes to send their minimum and/or maximum to anywhere on G. Due to the width of the AKS sorting network, and since G is completely connected, n processors in G can simulate all the swaps and copying performed by H. This way A sorts the n inputs in O (log n) steps, then fetches the kth smallest. Our parallel algorithm improves the above so that the number of messages is reduced to O (n log log n).  3 Devising Gadgets from Expander Graphs for Selection In this section, we devise some comparator networks S for the design of our parallel algorithm. Such an S re-orders given distinct m numeric items where m ∈ 2Z. For a constant ε ∈ (0, 1), consider a bipartite graph (V1 , V2 , E) such that |V1 | = |V2 | = 21 m and ε|Γ (U ) | > (1 − ε) min (ε|Vi |, |U |) ,  (1)  for every subset U of V1 or V2 , where Γ (U ) denotes the neighbor set of U . The sets V1 and V2 represent the left and right halves of the input, respectively, and an edge in E a comparison between the two items. It is straightforward to check that a comparator network S derived from (1) in the obvious manner is an ε-halver. An expander is a graph G whose expansion ratio |Γ (U ) |/|U | is above a constant greater than 1 for any node set U meeting some condition such as |U | ≤ 12 |V (G)|. The bipartite graph G = (V1 , V2 , E) is an expander in this sense whose explicit construction is given in the aforementioned Gabber-Galil result. We demonstrate in Appendix that it leads to a 1/5-halver of depth 2 · 721 , and also an ε-halver of a constant depth for any given ε can be explicitly constructed. The AKS sorting network sorts numeric items with ε-halvers. It is well-known in spectral graph theory that the minimum expansion ratio is good if |U |/|V (G)| is bounded and the second largest eigenvalue λ (G) of G is small. In [16], a d-regular graph called ramanujan√graph is explicitly constructed with the asymptotically optimal bound λ (G) ≤ 2 d − 1, improving the GabberGalil result. However not much is known beyond this point regarding the explicit construction of an ε-halver.  Efficient Distributed Selection Algorithm  5  Fig. 1. Three Comparator Networks T (C), U (C) and V (C)  Our gadgets S for the selection problem is constructed from a given ε-halver below. For any comparator network C with 2s inputs and outputs, construct the three comparator networks T (C), U (C) and V (C) as in Fig. 1. They are on 4s, 3s and 4s inputs with 2, 2 and 6 layers of C, respectively. Let S0 be an ε-halver. Recursively construct Si = V (Si−1 )  and Si0 = U (Si ),  for i ∈ Z+ ,  and define εi = ε2i−1 + 10ε3i−1 , where ε0 = ε. Consider the following property P of a comparator network.   P (q, l, s, r) q, l ∈ Z+ and s, r ∈ (0, 1) : i) The comparator network re-orders m inputs (m ∈ qZ+ ) by l layers of εhalvers. ii) For any given z ∈ Z+ at most m q , there are no more than rz items each of rank at most z in the left s of the output.  Si satisfies the property P 2i+1 , 6i , 12 , εi , and Si0 the property  P 3 · 2i , 2 · 6i , 23 , 2εi . In Fig. 2 illustrating Si , consider each z ≤ m q where q = 2i+1 . Let us call an item z-stranger if it has a rank at most z, existing in the left 1 − 1q of the considered layer. The figure shows the upper bounds on the ratios of z-strangers: Each number in black indicates the upper bound on the number of z-strangers in the current component divided by z. Each number in red indicates that in the current and its left components divided by z.  6  Piotr Berman and Junichiro Fukuyama  Fig. 2. Upper Bounds on the z-Stranger Ratios in Si  In particular, there are 2εi−1 z or less z-strangers in the component L ∪  R. As it satisfies the property P 2i , 6i−1 , 12 , εi−1 , the output of L includes 2ε2i−1 z or less z-strangers. One can check the other bounds to verify the property  P 2i+1 , 6i , 12 , εi of Si . Similarly, Si0 satisfies P 3 · 2i , 2 · 6i , 23 , 2εi .  Fig. 3. To See the Property P̂ of Ŝi  Now let ε=  1 . 5  Construct Ŝi by recursively replacing the second layer of T (Si−1 ) by Ŝi−1 , where Ŝ0 = S0 . Define  ε̂i = ε̂i−1  1 + εi−1 2    for i = Z+ ,  and  ε̂0 = ε.  Efficient Distributed Selection Algorithm  7  Here we slightly generalize the definition of a stranger given in Chapter 1: The item of rank z is a stranger if z ≤ m 2 and it is in the left half of the considered layer, or if z > m and it is in the right half. 2   i  Each Ŝi (1 ≤ i ≤ 4) satisfies P̂ 2i+1 , 6 5+4 , ε̂i−1 , ε̂i where:   Property P̂ (q, l, r, r0 ) q, l ∈ Z+ and r, r0 ∈ (0, 1) :  i) The comparator network re-orders m inputs (m ∈ qZ+ ) by l layers of εhalvers. ii) If there are at most rm strangers in the input, there are at most r0 m strangers in the output. In Fig. 3 illustrating Ŝi , let l and r be the numbers of strangers output from L and R, respectively, so l ≤ r ≤ 12 ε̂i−1 m. They are both bounded by h = 12 mε̂i−1 εi−1 since each half of the first layer1 is Si−1 . The rank of the median of m inputs is 1 4 m − r + l in the input of C that is a Ŝi−1 . So the total number of strangers in the left half of the output is bounded by 1 1 1 mε̂i−1 + (r − l) + l ≤ mε̂i−1 + h = mε̂i . 4 4 2   i This proves the condition ii) of P̂ 2i+1 , 6 5+4 , ε̂i−1 , ε̂i . The first condition is straightforward to check. In addition, construct Ŝ by vertically aligning Ŝ0 , Ŝ1 , Ŝ2 , Ŝ3 and Ŝ4 , so that all the m outputs of Ŝi−1 are input to Ŝi . It satisfies P̂ (32, 315, 1, ε̂), where ε̂ = ε̂4 < 0.02314. We also denote and ε0 = 2ε3 < 0.002644,   so S and S 0 satisfies P 16, 216, 12 , ε0 and P 24, 432, 23 , ε0 , respectively. We will use the obtained S, S 0 and Ŝ in the next section. S = S3 ,  S 0 = S30 ,  4 Reducing Strangers by a Comparator Network of Depth O (log log n) We prove Theorem 2 by explicitly building the desired comparator network H from given ε-halvers where ε = 1/5. Assume without loss of generality that the n inputs to H have distinct values2 . Here are the construction rules. 1  2  Here 12 mε̂i−1 ≤ 12 m2−i for ε = 51 and i ≤ 4. So we can use the property P 2i , 6i−1 , 12 , εi−1 of Si−1 . For s elements of a same value g, regard that they are valued g + δ, g + 2δ, . . . , g + sδ for an infinitesimal number δ > 0. All the statements in our proof remain true with this change.  8  Piotr Berman and Junichiro Fukuyama  Fig. 4. Maximum Stranger Ratios in the Segment j = 7  • There are segments j = 0, 1, 2, . . . , jmax − 1 of H where jmax = bc lg lg nc. The segment j > 0 re-orders the n outputs of j − 1 with a constant number of layers of ε-halvers. • The segment j = 0 consists of Ŝ on n inputs. • Partition the left half of the input to the jth segment into subarrays L0 , L1 , . . . , Lj−1 , Lj from the left to right in that order, satisfying  −i−1 2 n, if 0 ≤ i ≤ j − 1, |Li | = 2−i n, if i = j. So |Lj | = |Lj−1 |. • Symmetrically, define R0 , R1 , . . . , Rj−1 , Rj in the right half from the right to left. • The jth segment performs the following four operations. - split: Split Lj−1 into its halves re-naming them Lj−1 and Lj . Split Rj−1 into Rj−1 and Rj also. - compare-even-pairs: Apply S 0 or S to every pair L2i and L2i+1 (i = 0, 1, . . .) currently existing in the left half. Apply S 0 if they have the different sizes and S otherwise. Also perform it in the right half symmetrically. - compare-odd-pairs: Same except for pairing L2i+1 with L2i+2 . - swap-center: Apply Ŝ to Lj ∪ Rj . • If j is odd, perform compare-even-pairs and swap-center simultaneously, then compare-odd-pairs. Further perform split and compare-even-pairs, each once in that order. If j is even, perform the same operations switching the parity. The segment j = 7 is illustrated in Fig. 4.  Efficient Distributed Selection Algorithm  9  Each segment consists of at most 64 = 1296 layers of ε-halvers by the property P of S and S 0 , and P̂ of Ŝ. The total depth of H does not exceed 1296cd 15 lg lg n as claimed. Let ε0 and ε̂ be as in the previous section, and let ∆=  1 . 10  Denote by li,j and ri,j the number of strangers in Li and Ri of the jth segment, respectively. Our invariant is i X  li0 ,j ≤ ∆j−i+1 |Li |,  and  i0 =0  i X  ri0 ,j ≤ ∆j−i+1 |Ri |,  (2)  i0 =0  for every j and i such that 0 ≤ j < jmax and 0 ≤ i ≤ j. We prove it as a lemma. Lemma 1. (2) holds for each j and i. Proof. Show (2) by induction on j. The 0th segment consists of Ŝ. The invariant is true by its property P̂ (16, 315, 1, ε̂). Assume true for j − 1 and prove true for j. We only show the induction step for the left half of the jth segment when j is odd. The other cases are handled similarly. Fig. 4 illustrates the induction step for j = 7. Let li0 be the number of strangers in Li of the jth segment at the considered moment. It meets the following bound right after compare-even-pairs and swapcenter.  0 j−i−1 , if i ≤ j − 2 and i is even, ε ∆ 0 li ∆j−i , if i ≤ j − 2 and i is odd, ≤ |Li |  ε̂ + ∆2 , if i = j − 1. The third row of Fig. 4 shows the same numbers in the RHS. They mean slightly stronger than the above: The right number in lth box (l = 1, 2, 3) indicates the upper bound on the number of strangers in L2l−1 ∪ L2l divided by |L2l |. The correctness of the bounds is due to the properties P and P̂ of the used S 0 and Ŝ. The bound ε̂ + ∆2 of the case i = j − 1 is justified as follows: Its ∆2 comes from that of the case i = j − 2 as the median of Lj−1 ∪ Rj−1 differs from that of all n by at most ∆2 |Lj−1 |. Also there are no more than |Lj−1 |ε̂ elements in Lj−1 greater than the median of Lj−1 ∪ Rj−1 . After compare-odd-pairs and split,  ε0 ∆j−1 , if i = 0,   0 0 j−i−2    ε ε∆ + 2∆j−i , if 1 ≤ i ≤ j − 4 and i is odd,  0 li ε0 ∆j−i−1 + 2∆j−i+1 , if 2 ≤ i ≤ j − 3 and i is even, ≤ |Li |   if i = j − 2, ε0 ε̂ + ∆2 ,    if j − 1 ≤ i ≤ j, 2 ε̂ + ∆2 , as indicated in the 4th row of Fig. 4.  10  Piotr Berman and Junichiro Fukuyama  Likewise, right after the 2nd compare-even-pairs, one can check li0 ≤ ∆j−i+1 − ∆j−i+2 , |Li | for each i ≤ j. These mean the jth invariant completing the induction step. The lemma follows. t u Hence, the total number of strangers in the output of H is bounded by 2∆|Ljmax −1 | < ∆2−c lg lg n+3 < n lg−c n. This proves Theorem 2.  5 Selection in O (log n) Time with O (n log log n) Messages on a Communication Network We show Theorem 1 in this section. Our parallel algorithm for the distributed k-selection problem on a communication network G mimics the comparator network H given by Theorem 2 and three AKS sorting networks. Keep assuming that n is a sufficiently large power of 6 and the inputs have distinct values. Let q = lg n. Choose c = 2 in Theorem 2, so the output of H includes less than n lg−2 n strangers. Numeric expressions in this section omit obvious floor/ceiling functions if any. We first describe the algorithm focusing on the case k = n2 . Algorithm 1 for Finding the Median of n Inputs: 1. Apply H to the given n inputs. Let L and R be its left and right halves of the output, respectively, and C be an empty array. n 2. Arbitrarily partition L into 2q subarrays each of q items naming them n . L1 , L2 , . . . , L 2q 3. Find the maximum value li in each Li . n by an AKS sorting network. Add the elements of L to 4. Sort the l1 , l2 , . . . , l 2q i −2 n C for every i such that li is among the largest n lg n of l1 , l2 , . . . , l 2q . 5. Perform Steps 2–4 to R symmetrically to update C. 6. Sort the elements of C by another AKS sorting network. Find its median, returning it as the median of all n. Each AKS sorting network used above re-orders at most 2n lg−1 n inputs. This allows us to detect the median with a sufficiently small number of comparisons, leading to O (n log log n) messages. We confirm the correctness of the algorithm first. Lemma 2. Algorithm 1 correctly finds the median of all n inputs. Proof. Let i be an index such that li is not among the largest n lg−2 n of n . If an element of L were a stranger or the median of n, the largest l1 , l2 , . . . , l 2q i −2 n lg n items would be all strangers, contradicting Theorem 2. So no element  Efficient Distributed Selection Algorithm  11  of L − C is a stranger or the median. The same is true for R − C except that the median is not included. Steps 4 and 5 remove the same number of items from the both halves, each neither a stranger nor the median. Hence Step 6 correctly finds the median of all. t u We now describe how to run Algorithm 1 on the communication network G. Find our implementation below noting two remarks. - Regard that there are 2n processor nodes in G instead of n, since any of them at odd and even time slots can play two different roles. - Every processor in G can help simulate any of the four comparator networks the way mentioned in Section 2: It can receive two numeric items from other nodes to send their minimum and/or maximum to anywhere in G. Implementation of Algorithm 1 on G: Simulate two AKS sorting networks in Steps 4 and 5 with extra n processors. Then select the elements of C in O (log n) time as follows. Initially the first node of each Li is notified if li ∈ C. Move items in L∩C by sending messages so that L∩C is held by the consecutive smallest numbered nodes. To find the message destinations, construct, right after li are sorted in Step n nodes whose leaves are the first nodes of all 4, a complete binary tree T of 2q n . (For simplicity identify the first node with L L1 , L2 , . . . , L 2q i itself.) Started from the leaves, recursively compute the number of Li ⊂ C existing in the subtree T 0 rooted at each node of T . Then, started at the root of T , compute the number of Li ⊂ C existing outside T 0 to the left: It is recursively sent from the parent of the current node. Pass it to its left child. Add the total number of Li ⊂ C under the left child and send the value to the right child. This way every leaf of T is informed of the number of Li ⊂ C to its left. The leaf disseminates the information to all the nodes in the same Li . Each node is now able to compute the message destination so L ∩ C is held by the consecutive smallest numbered nodes. Merge L ∩ C with R ∩ C similarly. Perform Step 6 with a simulated AKS sorting network on the obtained C. This completes the description of our implementation. Algorithm 1 correctly runs on G in O (log n) time with O (log log n) messages. One can check it with Lemma 2 noting that: - The simulated H runs in O (log log n) time with O (n log log n) messages. - Each of the three simulated AKS sorting networks runs in O (log n) time with O (n) messages. - It takes O (n) messages each of less than lg n bits to construct C. This verifies Theorem 1 for k = n2 . Selecting an item but the median is done similarly. Assume without loss of generality that we want the kth smallest item such that k < n2 . We can detect  12  Piotr Berman and Junichiro Fukuyama  it by adding extra n − 2k elements valued −∞ to the input array. This changes no asymptotic bounds we showed so far. We have constructed a parallel algorithm on G that distributedly computes the kth smallest of the n inputs in O (log n) time with O (n log log n) messages. We now have Theorem 1.  6 The Universal Parallel Time Lower Bound lg n on a Communication Network In this section, we show that it takes at least lg n steps to compute many basic data aggregation problems on a communication network G including the distributed selection problem. Consider a parallel algorithm to compute a function f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) ∈ {0, 1} where x1 , x2 , . . . , xn are input numeric items of b-bits distributed over G. Such f is said to be critical everywhere if there exist x1 , x2 , . . . xn such that f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xi−1 , x̂i , xi+1 , . . . , xn ) 6= f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xi−1 , xi , xi+1 , . . . , xn ) , (3) for each index i = 1, 2, . . . , n and some b-bit numeric item x̂i . Below we prove the time lower bound lg n to compute such f as the following theorem. Theorem 3. Let f be a function on n inputs critical everywhere. It takes at least lg n parallel steps in the worst case to compute f on a communication network distributedly. t u By the theorem, we will have the statement mentioned in Section 1. Corollary 1. Any parallel algorithm takes at least lg n steps in the worst case to compute each of the following three problems on a communication network distributedly: i) the k-selection problem on n inputs each of at least dlg ne + 1 bits; ii) the problem of finding the sum of n inputs; iii) the problem of counting numeric items among n inputs, each exceeding a given threshold. Proof. i): Given such an algorithm on n inputs x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , let f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) be the least significant bit of the kth smallest input. Such a function f is critical everywhere: Choose xi = 2(i − 1) for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. If k > 1, let x̂i = xk − 1, otherwise x̂i = 1. (All of these numbers are dlg ne + 1-bit integers.) These satisfy (3). By the theorem, the algorithm takes at least lg n steps to compute such f on a communication network distributedly. ii), iii): Shown similarly to i) by choosing f as the least significant bit of the sum of n inputs, and that of the number of inputs exceeding a given threshold, respectively. t u Consider the class of problems to compute on a communication network distributedly such that any particular bit of the computed result is a function critical everywhere. It is very large containing many aggregation problems such as the above three, each with the parallel running time lower bound lg n on G.  Efficient Distributed Selection Algorithm  13  We prove the theorem. Denote by vi the ith processor node of G, and by xi the numeric item held by vi at time 0. Also let A be a parallel algorithm to compute f on G distributedly. Since f is critical everywhere, there exists an input set X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } such that (3). Assume f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) = 1 without loss of generality, written as f (X) = 1. We focus on the computation performed by A on the input set X. For time t ≥ 0 and index i = 1, 2, . . . , n, define the set Vi,t of nodes in G recursively as follows. - Vi,0 = {vi } at time t = 0. - Vi,t = Vi,t−1 ∪ Vj,t−1 if vj sends a message to vi at time t ≥ 1. Otherwise Vi,t = Vi,t−1 . Vi,t is the set of processors vj such that the values of xj can possibly affect the computational result at vi at time t. Let tmax be the time when A terminates on X, and vi be the processor that decides f (X) = 1 at time tmax . The size of Vi,tmax must be n; otherwise A decides f (X) = 1 at vi with no information on some input xj , contradicting that f is critical everywhere. The following lemma formally confirms it. Lemma 3. |Vi,tmax | = n. Proof. By the equivalence between an algorithm and Boolean circuit [17], there exists a Boolean circuit C to compute f (X), which is converted from A by the reduction algorithm. Construct the subgraph of C that decides f (X) = 1 at vi as follows: For each t = 0, 1, . . . , tmax , with the algorithm running on X at each processor vj and the exchanged messages, inductively construct a Boolean circuit to decide each bit of the computed result stored at vj at time t. For the time t = tmax and processor vi , we have a circuit C 0 that decides f (X) = 1 only from xj such that vj ∈ Vi,tmax . The existence of C 0 means f (X) = 1 if all xj such that vj ∈ Vi,tmax have the values specified by X. If |Vi,tmax | < n, this contradicts that f is critical everywhere satisfying (3). Hence |Vi,tmax | = n. t u We also have |Vj,t | ≤ 2t for each t and j. It is because |Vj,t | = |Vj,t−1 ∪ Vl,t−1 | ≤ 2 · 2t−1 = 2t if a processor vl sends a message to vj at time t ≥ 1. Threfore, lg n = lg |Vi,tmax | ≤ tmax . Theorem 3 follows.  7 Concluding Remarks and Open Problems The depth bound 1296cd 51 c lg lg n we showed in Theorem 2 could be further improved by devising different gadgets using ε-halvers, or different expander graphs. It is interesting to find its limit. It is also possible to improve the aforementioned estimate in [12] on the constant of the O (log n) depth of a sorting network. In addition, it is good to ask if Ω (log log n) messages are necessary to compute the the distributed selection problem in O (log n) time on a communication network.  14  Piotr Berman and Junichiro Fukuyama  Appendix: Explicit Construction of a 1/5-Halver An (m, q, d)-expander graph is a bipartite graph (V1 , V2 , E) such that |V1 | = |V2 | = m, the maximum degree is at most q, and    |U | |Γ (U ) | ≥ 1 + d 1 − |U |, m for  every U ⊆ V1. Gabber and Galil demonstrated [15] how to explicitly construct √  an m̂2 , 7, 2−2 3 -expander graph for every m̂ ∈ Z+ . Below we build a 15 -halver from such an expander graph. For any bipartite graph S = (V1 , V2 , E) such that |V1 | = |V2 |, denote by G = f (S) the digraph (V1 , E 0 ) such that (vi , wj ) ∈ E iff (vi , vj ) ∈ E 0 where vi is the ith vertex of V1 and wj the jth of V2 . Also denote S = f −1 (G). Let Gh (h ∈ Z+ ) be the digraph (V1 , E 00 ) such that (v, w) ∈ E 00 iff there exists a path of length h from v to w in G. Let S be the bipartite graph from the Gabber-Galil construction, and G = f (S). Construct  S 0 = f −1 Gh , where h = 21. We show that the bipartite graph S 0 satisfies (1) for ε = 15 and every subset U of V1 . It suffices to verify |Γ (U ) | ≥ c(1 − ε)m for a vertex set U of G such that |U | ≥ cεm, and any c ∈ (0, 1]. It is further sufficient to assume c = 1 in the following argument. Let Ui be the neighbor set of U in Gi such that |U | = εm. With the recurrence √  ! |Ui+1 | 2− 3 |Ui | |Ui | ≥ 1+ 1− , m 2 m m we calculate |Umh | > 0.806 > 1 − ε for h = 21 and ε = 51 . This confirms that a maximum degree at most 7h is sufficient to achieve (1). Switch V1 and V2 and construct S 00 = f −1 (f (S)h ). Our 15 -halver is the undirected bipartite graph (V1 , V2 , E) such that E consists all the edges in S 0 and S 00 . It has a maximum degree at most 2 · 721 . For building the comparator network H of Theorem 2, we must consider a case when m is a sufficient of 6 but not a square. If so, construct  √ large power √  2 2− 3 an ε-halver from the b mc , 7, 2 -expander graph. It is straightforward to check that h = 21 is still sufficient to achieve ε = 51 .  References 1. Kuhn, F., Locher, T., Wattenhofer, R.: Tight bounds for distributed selection. In: Proc. of the 19th Annual ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pp. 145-153. ACM Press (2007)  Efficient Distributed Selection Algorithm  15  2. Kempe, D., Dobra, A., Gehrke, J.: Gossip-based computation of aggregate information. In: Proc. of the 44th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 482–491. IEEE Press (2003) 3. Santoro, N., Sidney, J.B., Sidney S.J.: A distributed selection algorithm and its expected communication complexity. Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 100, pp. 185–204. Elsevier (1992) 4. Frederickson, G.N.: Tradeoffs for Selection in distributed networks. In: Proc. of the 2nd Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pp. 154–160. ACM Press (1983) 5. Pardalos, P., Rajasekaran, S., Reif, J., Rolim, J.: Handbook on randomized computing. Kluwer Academic Publishers (2001) 6. Chaudhuri, S., Hagerup, T., Raman, R.: Approximate and exact deterministic parallel selection. LNCS, vol. 711, pp. 352–361. Springer (1993) 7. Ajtai, M., Komlós, J., Steiger, W.L., Szemerédi, E.: Optimal parallel selection has complexity O (log log n). Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 38, pp. 125–133. Academic Press (1989) 8. Frederickson, G.N., Johnson, D.B.: The complexity of selection and ranking in X + Y and matrices with sorted columns, J. Comput. System Sci., vol. 24 (2), pp. 197–208 Elsevier (1982). 9. Santoro, N., Suen, E.: Reduction techniques for selection in distributed files. IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 38, pp. 891–896. IEEE Press (1989) 10. Ajtai, M., Komlós, J., Szemerédi, E.: Sorting in c log n parallel steps. Combinatorica, vol. 3, pp. 1–19. Springer (1983) 11. Paterson, M.: Improved sorting networks with O(log N) depth. Algorithimica, vol. 5, pp. 65–92. Springer (1990) 12. Seiferas, J. L.: Sorting networks of logarithmic depth, further simplified. Algorithmica, vol. 53, pp. 374–384. Springer (2007) 13. Baddar, S. W. A., Batcher, K. E.: Designing sorting networks. Springer (2011) 14. Goodrich, M.T.: Zig-zag sort: a simple deterministic data-oblivious sorting algorithm running in O(n log n) time. In: Proc. of Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pp. 684–693. ACM Press (2014) 15. Gabber, O., Galil, Z.: Explicit Construction of Linear-Sized Superconcentrators. J. Computer and System Sciences, vol. 22, pp. 407–420. Academic Press (1981) 16. Lubotzky, A., Phillips, R., Sarnak, P.: Explicit Expanders and the Ramanujan Conjectures. In: Proc. of Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pp. 240– 246. ACM Press (1986) 17. Papadimitriou, C. H.: Computational Complexity. Addison-Wesley (1994)

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
