Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_3689

Abstract:
Optimal high-level descriptions of dynamical systems David H. Wolpert∗ dhw@santafe.edu  Joshua A. Grochow* jgrochow@santafe.edu Simon DeDeo*† sdedeo@indiana.edu  Eric Libby* elibby@santafe.edu  arXiv:1409.7403v2 [cs.IT] 3 Jun 2015  June 4, 2015  Abstract To analyze high-dimensional systems, many fields in science and engineering rely on highlevel descriptions, sometimes called “macrostates,” “coarse-grainings,” or “effective theories”. Examples of such descriptions include the thermodynamic properties of a large collection of point particles undergoing reversible dynamics, the variables in a macroeconomic model describing the individuals that participate in an economy, and the summary state of a cell composed of a large set of biochemical networks. Often these high-level descriptions are constructed without considering the ultimate reason for needing them in the first place. Here, we formalize and quantify one such purpose: the need to predict observables of interest concerning the high-dimensional system with as high accuracy as possible, while minimizing the computational cost of doing so. The resulting State Space Compression (SSC) framework provides a guide for how to solve for the optimal high-level description of a given dynamical system, rather than constructing it based on human intuition alone. In this preliminary report, we introduce SSC, and illustrate it with several informationtheoretic quantifications of “accuracy”, all with different implications for the optimal compression. We also discuss some other possible applications of SSC beyond the goal of accurate prediction. These include SSC as a measure of the complexity of a dynamical system, and as a way to quantify information flow between the scales of a system.  ∗ †  Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM, 87501 School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University, 901 E. 10th St., Bloomington, IN 47408  1  Contents 1 Introduction  3  2 State space compression 2.1 The benefit of state space compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2 Basic concepts and notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 4 5  3 Illustrations of our notation  8  4 Related work 9 4.1 Causal states & computational mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 4.2 State aggregation, decomposition, and projection methods . . . . . . . . . . . 11 4.3 Generally applicable accuracy costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 5 Accuracy costs 14 5.1 Exogenously provided accuracy costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 5.2 Information-theoretic accuracy costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 6 Computation costs 18 6.1 Defining computation cost in terms of X, Y, π, φ, and γ . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 6.2 Computation cost measures based on theoretical computer science . . . . . . . 19 7 The full SSC objective function 20 7.1 The trade-off between accuracy cost and computation cost . . . . . . . . . . . 20 7.2 Heuristics for minimizing the SSC objective function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 8 Applications of SSC – beyond improving prediction 22 8.1 A form of complexity motivated by SSC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 8.2 Using SSC to define information flow among scales of a system . . . . . . . . 24 9 Conclusions  25  2  1 Introduction Historically, scientists have defined the “level”, “scale”, or “macrostate” of a system in an informal manner, based on insight and intuition. In evolutionary biology, for example, a macrostate may be defined by reference to species count, despite a great degree of within-species diversity, fundamental dependencies between organisms, and complicated subunits such as tissues and cells which can also reproduce. In economics, the macrostates of the world’s socio-economic system are often defined in terms of firms, industrial sectors, or even nation-states, neglecting the internal structure of these highly complex entities. How do we know that these choices for the macrostates are the best ones? Might there be superior alternatives? How do we even quantify the quality of a choice of macrostate? Given an answer to this question, can we solve for the optimal macroscopic state space with which to analyze a system? This is the general problem of state space compression. Stated more formally, the first step in State Space Compression (SSC) is to specify a measure of the quality of any proposed map xt → yt used to compress a dynamically evolving “fine-grained” variable xt into a dynamically evolving “coarse-grained” variable yt .1 We will take a utilitarian approach in deciding what makes for a good compression of the dynamics of a system: state space compression has a practical benefit, and quantifying that benefit as an objective function drives our analysis. Given such an objective function and an evolving fine-grained variable xt , we can try to solve for the best map compressing xt into a higher-scale macrostate yt . The dynamics of such an optimally chosen compression of a system can be viewed as defining its emergent properties. Indeed, we may be able to iterate this process, producing a hierarchy of scales and associated emergent properties, by compressing the macrostate y to a yet higher-scale macrostate y′ . In this preliminary report we formalize and quantify one objective function for compressing a high-dimensional state: The need to predict observables of interest concerning the highdimensional system with as high accuracy as possible, while minimizing the computational cost of doing so. Many of the observables of interest that are theoretically and experimentally analyzed in the sciences are considered interesting precisely because they make good macrostates according to this objective function: we use them because they lower the resultant computation and measurement costs while still accurately predicting a given observable of interest. For instance, in physics, macrostates of a fine-grained system reference thermodynamic variables, such as temperature or pressure, that characterize relevant features which can be measured and used for accurate prediction of many observables of interest — at very little computation cost. Our objective function also provides several natural ways to construct a hierarchy of scales, extending from less-compressed spaces (higher computation cost but more accurate predictions) to more-compressed spaces (less computation cost but less accurate predictions). For example, we can use the values in the less compressed spaces to give (perhaps additive) corrections to predictions from the more compressed spaces. After introducing this SSC framework and relating it to other work in the literature, we illustrate it by investigating several information-theoretic quantifications of “accuracy”, all with different implications for the optimal compression. We end with a discussion of some other 1  Here we will use the term “coarse-graining” interchangeably with “compression”, and so will allow arbitrary coarse-graining maps. There is a large literature that instead interprets the term “coarse-graining” to refer to the special case where x is the spatial position of a set of N particles and we wish to map each x to the spatial position of m < N “effective particles”. See [97] for a review. There is also work that interprets the term “coarse-graining” to refer to the special case where x is a network structure, and we wish to map each x to a smaller network (see [55, 20]). For discussion of the general problem of coarse-graining for computational, cognitive, biological and social systems see, e.g., [68, 35, 36, 67, 37] and references therein.  3  possible applications of SSC, over and above the motivational one of improving our ability to predict the future. These include the use of SSC as a measure of the “complexity” of a dynamic system, and the use of it to quantify information flow among the scales of a system.  2 State space compression 2.1 The benefit of state space compression As mentioned, we adopt the view that the benefit of a candidate compression X → Y is to reduce the cost of computing the dynamics over X. More precisely, our job as scientists is to find a compression map π : X → Y, dynamical laws φ for evolution over Y, and a map ρ from Y to the observable of interest, such that the future values yt ∈ Y accurately predict the associated observable of interest (defined in terms of xt ∈ X), while the three maps π, φ, ρ are relatively easy to compute. Stated prosaically, we wish to simulate the dynamics of xt , using a simulation that optimally trades off its computation and measurement costs with its accuracy in predicting some observable of interest concerning future values of x. From the perspective of coding theory, we are using a lossy code to encode a system’s fine-grained state as an element in a (usually) smaller space, evolving that compressed state, and then using it to predict the observables of interest concerning the future fine-grained state. It is important to emphasize that in measuring the quality of a candidate π, φ, ρ we are often not interested in predicting a given microstate xt in toto. Instead, there are certain observables associated with xt that we are interested in reconstructing. An example of this is in studies of bird flocks, where we are often not interested in predicting where each individual bird is at some future time, but rather the location of the center of mass of birds. (See Ex. 1 below.) It is also important to emphasize that there are at least two general types of “accuracy” concerning our predictions of such observables such that we might be interested in. A key issue in many compressions is how closely the predicted observable of interest matches its actual value. In such cases, it makes sense to use a distance measure over the values of the observable to quantify the accuracy of predictions. When we are not provided such a distance measure exogenously, it may make sense to use an information-theoretic measure, e.g., a variant of mutual information [27, 77]. There are other cases though where we are interested not in how accurately a prediction based on a particular yt matches a truth based on the associated xt , but rather in how accurately the entire distribution over (predictions based on) yt matches the associated distribution based on xt . (For example, this is the case when we are interested in accurately predicting future expectation values, or managing measures of risk such as expected variance.) In these situations a measure like Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence may be most appropriate. In this paper will be concerned with the prediction of the entire future evolution of a system, rather than a value at a single, particular moment in the future. This reflects the fact that typically we are interested in future behavior, which is an inherently multi-timestep phenomenon. By requiring that the compression / decompression accurately reconstructs the time-series as a whole, we ensure that it captures the dynamics of the system. In addition to SSC’s role in the sciences, where it is often implicitly a central issue in how we choose to analyze a nature-given system, in engineering the problem of optimal design of a system will very often reflect the tradeoffs considered in SSC. So results concerning SSC might be helpful in such design — or benefit from what has been learned about such design. An obvious example of this central role of SSC’s tradeoffs in engineering is in the design of 4  predictive coding algorithms, e.g., for compressing movies so that they can be streamed across the internet to an end-user with minimal bandwidth requirements while still maintaining high fidelity (as perceived by that end-user). Another example occurs in CPU design and the problem of branch prediction. In modern CPUs, whenever a conditional “if-then-else” statement is encountered, the CPU first guesses— based on certain heuristics and a record of previous branches—which branch of the conditional to take. It starts speculatively computing as though that branch were taken; if it later discovers that it guessed wrong, it terminates the speculative computation and continues along the correct branch, having incurred a delay for guessing incorrectly. We see here the tradeoff between accuracy and computation cost: it only makes sense to do branch prediction if there is a computationally efficient predictor that is correct most of the time. In any other case, branch prediction would end up wasting more CPU cycles than it saves. Branch prediction is enormously successful in practice, partly because, based on the prior distribution of how most people (or compilers) write and use conditional statements, relatively simple heuristics give (almost shockingly) accurate results. Interestingly, some of the best branch predictors are in fact based on (very) simple models of neurons, as suggested in the discussion below (see, e.g., Ref. [58]). In many cases, maps x → y that are good compressions of a dynamical system in the sense just outlined have the property that the dynamics of yt is (first-order) Markovian. (Indeed, as mentioned below, obeying exactly Markovian dynamics is a core component of the definition of a “valid compression” considered in [104, 46, 45, 57].) Even if the best compression is not Markovian, so long as we are considering a good compression of xt into yt , once we set the initial value of y often we can well-approximate the future values of yt with a Markovian process, with little further information needed from later xt to correct that dynamics. (As discussed below, this is the desideratum defining “good compression” considered in [54, 53, 89].) For these reasons, we often restrict attention to compressed spaces whose associated dynamics are Markovian. This is not a requirement of SSC however. Finally, we note that compressing the state space of a system to reduce computation cost while maintaining predictive accuracy is not only a core requirement of how human scientists and engineers build their models of physical systems. It is also often a core requirement of those systems themselves. In particular, it is a guiding principle for how the human nervous system operates. Computation is very costly for a biological brain, in terms of heat generated that needs to be dissipated, calories consumed, etc. Moreover, at an abstract level, the (fitness-function mediated) “goal” of one’s senses and the associated computational processes in the brain is to produce a compressed description of the environment that the brain then uses to produce accurate predictions of the future state of certain fitness-relevant attributes of the environment all at minimal caloric cost [25, 66, 100].2 So in “designing” the human brain, natural selection is faced with the precise problem of optimal state space compression as we have formulated it. This suggests that we may be able to construct powerful heuristics for optimal SSC by considering how the human nervous system processes information.  2.2 Basic concepts and notation Throughout this paper we adopt the convention that upper case variables indicate either a space or a random variable defined over that space, with the context making the meaning clear; lower case variables indicate elements of a space or values taken by a random variable, again with 2  Recent work has suggested that biological individuality itself—cells, organisms, species—may be understood as the emergence of new coarse-grained partitions over the biochemical world [67].  5  the context making the meaning clear. We also adopt the convention of letting the context make clear whether we are talking about a probability distribution or a probability density function, the associated meanings of conditional distributions, and other standard conventions from probability and statistics. In addition, the measures of the integrals we write will all be implicitly matched to the associated space. So when we use the integral symbol for a countable space, we are implicitly using the counting measure, turning that integral into a sum. Formalizing the issues discussed in Sec. 2.1 leads to the following definitions. The first four are specified exogenously by the problem being studied: 1. The microstate x ∈ X, which evolves in time according to a stochastic process P(xt , . . . ), which in particular specifies a prior distribution over the value of x at a current time t0 ; 2. A space of possible values of an observable of interest Ω, and an associated observation conditional distribution O(ω ∈ Ω | x), which may be deterministic.3 3. A (typically) real-valued accuracy function C : Ω × Ω → R—usually a metric— quantifies how good a predicted value is compared to the true observable; 4. A weight function W(t) used to determine the relative importance of predictions for the observable at all moments in the future. When dealing with stochastic processes one may have a distribution over predictions as opposed to a single prediction at each time step. In this case, it may make sense to replace (3) with a function that gives some sort of measure of the difference between two probability distributions over Ω, rather than the difference between two points from Ω. The remaining three objects are chosen by the scientist, possibly, as we suggest here, by SSC optimization: 5. A macrospace or compressed space Y, with elements y, called macrostates, that evolve according to a stochastic process φt,t0 (yt | yt0 ); 6. A compression distribution, π(y | x), which compresses x to y (and may be a deterministic function); 7. A prediction distribution ρ(ω ∈ Ω | y) which gives the prediction for the observable based on the compressed state y. Although there may be many applications in which the dynamics of the microspace and/or the macrospace are first-order Markovian, we do not require this. Furthermore, we also do not require φ and P to be time-homogeneous. We will sometimes refer to the compression distribution as an “encoding” distribution, and refer to the prediction distribution as a “decoding” distribution. We will typically apply the metric C on the observable space to compare the distribution ρ(ω | yt ) with the distribution O(ω | xt ). As an example of a microstate process, there could be a time-homogenous Markov chain with generator p, set by Nature, and a marginal distribution at time 0, P(x0 ), set by a scientist  3  In addition to allowing stochastic dynamics, whenever it was natural to use a function f : A → B between two spaces, we instead use the more general setting of a conditional distribution d f (b|a).  6  (albeit implicitly). The scientist may want to predict the future of the system, the a priori probability, with initial condition x0 . In this case the full Markovian process is given by P(x0 , x1 , . . .) = P(x0 )Π∞ t=1 p(xt | xt−1 )  (1)  Three terms will contribute to our overall state compression objective function. The first is the average future value of the accuracy function, evaluated under W(t). We call this the accuracy cost. The second term is the average future computation cost of iterating both φ and ρ. The third term is the cost of evaluating π once—or otherwise performing a measurement, e. g., of the physical world—to initialize y. Although for simplicity we include this in the computation cost, in general it is just a quantification of mapping an initial x to an initial y. This may have nothing to do with “computation”, per se. For example, it may reflect a process of physically measuring an initial value x, with a noisy observation apparatus producing a value z ∈ Z according to a distribution P(z | x), where the observed initial value z is then mapped to the starting R value of our simulation via a distribution P(y0 | z) that we set. In this case π(y | x) = dz P(y0 | z)P(z | x), where P(z | x) might be more accurately described as a “measurement cost”. Whenever we write “computation cost,” it should be understood in this more general manner. Unless specified otherwise, we take the weight function W(t) to be a probability distribution over t. A particularly important type of W(t) is a simple future geometric discounting function, W(t) ∝ [1 − γ]t . This is often appropriate when there is a priori uncertainty on how far into the future the scientist will end up running the computation.4 As alternatives, we could consider the (undiscounted) average accuracy cost and average computation cost over some temporal window t ∈ [0, T ]. Another alternative, for computations known to halt, is to consider the average of those two costs from t = 0 to the (dynamically determined) halting time. Formally, this means extending the definition of W to be a function of both t and yt . We, the scientists, are provided the original stochastic process P(xt′ | xt ) and determine the observable O and weight function W(t) that capture aspects of the system that interest us. Our task is to choose the compression function π, associated space Y, compressed state dynamics φ, and prediction map ρ to the space of observables, such that π, φ, and ρ are relatively simple to calculate, compared to the dynamics of xt directly, and the resultant accuracy costs are minimal (e. g., the resultant predictions for O(xt′ ) for t′ > t are minimal distortions of the true values). The best such tuple {π, Y, φ, ρ} is the one that best trades off the (average) quality of the reconstructed time series with the costs of implementing π and calculating the dynamics of yt . In essence, a good state compression is like a good encoding of a video movie: it produces a compact file that is simple to decode, and from which we can recover the characteristics of the original movie that the human user is attuned to, with high accuracy. SSC is a general framework, and its use requires that we make explicit choices for things such as the accuracy and the computation costs. Rather than provide discipline-independent prescriptions, we emphasize that the problem at hand should determine the choices adopted for the various terms described. For example, one would expect that quite often using several different accuracy costs would all provide physical insight into what is truly driving the dynamics across X. So in practice, it may be beneficial to consider several accuracy costs, not just one.  4  Also see the literature on decision theory, where geometric discounting with a constant γ is justified as necessary to maintain consistency across time in how a decision-maker makes a decision, and especially the literature on reinforcement learning and dynamic programming [114].  7  3 Illustrations of our notation In this section we present several high-level illustrations to help clarify the meaning of our notation and to give an indication of how SSC could be applied in various settings. Example 1. Consider a flock of N labelled birds exhibiting coordinated flight [18, 3, 26]. The mass of each bird is fixed. The microstate of the flock, x, is the phase space position of the flock, i.e., the positions and velocities of all N birds; in particular, the space of microstates is then X = (R3 )2N . The stochastic dynamics P(xt | x0 ) of the microstate is given by some bird-level rule governing how each bird’s acceleration is determined by its current position and velocity as well as the positions and velocities of other birds in the flock. For the purposes of this example, we assume that higher-order derivatives of the positions of the birds—e.g., their accelerations—are not relevant if we know the positions and velocities of all the birds. Suppose we are interested in predicting the center of mass of the flock at all future times; thus our observable space Ω will be R3 , corresponding to the center of mass, and the observation conditional distribution O(ω | x) is a deterministic function O : R6N → R3 giving the center of mass. We take as our accuracy cost C : Ω × Ω → R the Euclidean distance between two points in Ω = R3 . One way to successfully predict the position of the center of mass is to evolve the stochastic dynamics of the microstate. This may be computationally challenging for large N since X = R6N . As an alternative, a successful state space compression of the microstate dynamics would be a map from the high-dimensional vector x to some other much smaller-dimensional vector of “sufficient statistics”, y, such that we can easily and accurately compute the evolution of y into the future and at each future moment t recover the center of mass of the flock from yt . For example, it may be that due to the details of the microstate dynamics, a macrostate y comprising the R3 × R3 × (R3 )3 = R15 vector {Position of the center of mass of the flock; Momentum of the entire flock; Components of a Gaussian ellipsoid fit to the shape of the flock}, can be easily and accurately evolved forward in time, without concern for any other information in x not reflected in those fifteen real numbers. Since one component of this particular y is precisely the quantity we are interested in (i.e. the position of the flock’s center of mass), we can recover this information from yt with ρ : Y → Ω which in this case is a projection. Since (by hypothesis) the evolution of y is accurate, this is a good state compression, with a small combined value of the computation cost of the dynamics of Y and the Euclidean error of the prediction of the center of mass. Example 2. Consider an agent-based simulation of the behavior of N humans in a set of interacting firms in an economy evolving in real time, where each player has time-varying observational data concerning the history of the entire economy and a (time-varying) set of endowments. The microstate x at each moment is the set of associated observation vectors and endowment sets of each of the N players. Let the dynamics of the system be a set of stochastic rules for each of the players describing what move it makes at each moment as a function of its current observation vector and endowment set. Say that what we are interested in is the total GDP of the economy specified in x, and in particular with how that GDP depends on some exogenous parameter of the system that an external regulator can set. We take the space of observables Ω to be R≥0 , representing the total GDP, and the observation map O(x) to be the total GDP of the economy specified by x. We 8  take the accuracy function C : Ω × Ω → R to be the absolute value of the difference between the simulated and actual GDP. Even if we posit a precise microscopic stochastic dynamics xt , and therefore how GDP depends on the exogenous parameter, it may be very challenging to calculate the GDP for any particular value of the exogenous parameter.. On the other hand, depending on the details of the microscopic rules for how the agents behave, it may be that we can coarse-grain X into a compressed space Y that specifies only the current state of each of the firms—not any individuals within the firms, or non-firm individuals— and that we can both evolve y ∈ Y accurately and then infer the GDP at each time t very accurately knowing only yt . In this case the coarse-graining of the economy into characteristics of the firms in the economy is a good compression of the state space of the economy. However it may be that this state compression does not work well, giving large expected error for the prediction of future GDP. It may be that some other state compression, e.g., that couples the states of players from multiple firms at once, results in better predictions. In this example, if we could find that better compression, it would provide major insight into what drives the evolution of the economy. Working with often highly restricted classes of π’s and φ’s this is the aggregation problem of economics [23, 49]. Example 3. Consider a cylinder of fixed dimensions with a moveable partition separating it into two half-partitions, with an ideal gas on each side of the partition. Let z be the position of the partition. Our microspace X will thus be the space of configurations of the particles in each of the ideal gases, together with the position z of the partition. Assume that at some time t0 the partition has a pre-fixed value of z, and there is a pre-fixed temperature and pressure of the two ideal gases, with higher values of both in the ideal gas lying above the partition, at higher values of z. Assume that at time t1 the partition starts sliding towards smaller values of z at a very slow (essentially adiabatic) constant and pre-fixed rate, stopping when the system reaches equilibrium. Suppose, however, that we do not know t1 ; it is instead distributed according to a Gaussian distribution centered about some particular time. Let the observable of interest be the temperatures and pressures of the two ideal gases; the observable space Ω is thus R4≥0 (with temperatures in Kelvin). We take our accuracy function C : R4≥0 × R4≥0 → R to be Euclidean distance, for simplicity. Consider the compressed space Y which consists only of the position z of the partition. In this case, given the current value yt , we can perfectly predict the future values yt′ with t′ > t, i. e., the future positions of the partition, since we know the rate of movement of the partition. In turn, because we know the dimensions of the cylinder and the initial temperatures and pressures of the two ideal gases, we can calculate the temperatures and pressures of the two gases at time t using knowledge of the position of the partition. That is, the prediction map ρ : Y → Ω computes the pressures and temperatures of the two ideal gases based solely on the position of the partition. (The “knowledge” of the initial values of the temperatures and pressures are built in to the map ρ, but ρ itself is just a function of z, since that is all that is present in the compressed space Y.) So in this case, the compression map π : x → y = z is perfect, in that it allows perfect prediction of the future states of the observables that we are interested in.  4 Related work 4.1 Causal states & computational mechanics While the basic idea of coarse-graining has a long history in the physical sciences, so has the recognition of the troublingly ad hoc nature of many coarse-grainings used in practice [31]. 9  Ref. [32] was an important early analysis of this issue, introducing the notion of causal states, with the associated mathematics known as computational mechanics [29]. Causal states have been the workhorse of a extensive body of of work over the last thirty years; for a recent review, see Ref. [30]. To illustrate the central idea, suppose we are given an ergodic and stationary stochastic process generating bi-infinite time-series’ of the form {. . . , s−1 , s0 , s1, . . .}. An associated causal state at time 0 is a maximal set ǫt of “past” semiinfinite strings s0← ≡ {. . . , s−1 , s0 } such that the probability distribution of any particular “future” semi-infinite string, s0→ ≡ {s1 , s2, . . .} conditioned on any member of ǫt is the same. So all past semi-infinite strings that are in the same causal set result in the same distribution over possible future semi-infinite strings. In the sense that it is maximal, a causal state is an optimal compression of the original time-series when our goal is perfect knowledge of the future. The dynamics of the causal states is given by a (stationary, ergodic) unifilar Hidden Markov Model, which is called an “ǫ-machine”. Any ǫ-machine fixes an associated stationary distribution over its causal states. The statistical complexity of the machine is defined as the entropy of that distribution over the causal states. There are several ways one might try to interpret computational mechanics in terms of SSC. Neither the dynamics of the variable st , nor that of the causal states, can be exactly identified with the dynamics of SSC’s fine-grained space. However because causal states are optimal predictors of the future, the only information they discard is that which is irrelevant to future prediction. This would suggest that we identify the causal states with a coarse-graining close to, but not necessarily identical with, SSC’s fine-grained space. An alternative interpretation is to identify each past semi-infinite string st← as a fine-grained state xt of SSC. In particular, since any such string fixes the associated causal state ǫ(s0← ), it fixes the distribution over the sequence of future causal states, and therefore the distribution over all ′ of the subsequent past strings, st←>t . Under this interpretation of computational mechanics, the next value s1 can be viewed as ω0 , a (noisy) observation of x0 , and the causal state ǫ(s0← ) can be seen as y0 , a compression of x0 . Note though that this interpretation of an ǫ-machine always results in an SSC scenario where X is infinite, the dynamics over xt is ergodic and stationary, and every xt+1 is uniquely determined by (xt , ωt ). It does not provide a way to relate other kinds of SSC scenario to computational mechanics. Refs. [104, 102] analyze ergodic and stationary bi-infinite strings in terms of ǫ-machines, treating statistical complexity as a term in an objective function, V. If we adopt the second interpretation of computational mechanics in terms of SSC suggested above, then the role of statistical complexity in V is loosely analogous to the role of the compression term involving π in the computation cost of SSC’s objective function. Note though that the term in SSC’s objective function based on the computation cost of iterating φ has no obvious analogue in V. In addition, the analysis in [104, 102] does not consider exogenously specified accuracy costs / observation operators. Nonetheless, the similarity between the work in [104, 102] and SSC suggests that we can extend computational mechanics by coarse-graining causal states. Such a coarse-graining would mean that we no longer have maximal predictive power. However it may result in a more than compensating reduction in computation cost. Several papers [103, 28, 112] have suggested using the information bottleneck method [116] to coarse-grain causal states this way, to reduce the complexity of an ǫ-machine representation. Ref. [111] provided a thermodynamic account of this process, and Ref. [79] provides the first explicit treatment for ǫ-machines based on timeseries data; this latter reference found, among other things, that it was generally more accurate to derive these coarse-grained machines from more fine-grained models, rather than from the data directly. 10  This new work quantifies accuracy as the average KL divergence between the optimal prediction of the future distribution, and that made using a coarse-graining over causal state. (See the discussion at the end of Sec. 5.2.3 involving KL divergence as an accuracy cost.) The goal is to optimize that accuracy given a constraint on “coding cost” (measured by the mutual information between the new, coarse-grained causal states and the future distribution). The objective function then becomes (Ref. [28, 112]) a linear combination of coding and accuracy costs, which using the notation of that paper can be written as a minimization of ← − → − L(β) = I[ X ; R] − βI[R; X ],  (2)  where β provides a single parameter to govern the trade-off between coding costs. By optimizing this objective function we find the “internal states”, R (similar to the compressed states Y → − of SSC), that are as predictive as possible of the future, in that I[R; X ] is large, while at the same time minimizing the coding cost. The “memory cost”, loosely analogous to SSC’s computation cost, is the first term of L(β), ← − I[ X ; R]. It measures the coding costs of a soft-clustering of the original causal states; i.e., a probabilistic map between the original causal states and the coarse-grained space R. One can also imagine a hard clustering (i.e., a deterministic many-to-one map) from the original space; in this case, the coding cost reduces to H(R), the statistical complexity of the new machine. The second term of L(β) is analogous to the accuracy cost of SSC. In Eq. 2, we maximize mutual information between the model state and the semi-infinite future; considering all future times of equal prior importance is common choice [19, 111, 119]. The more general approach is to consider a weight, W(t), that would make, for example, the near-term future more important to predict than times that are more distant. In contrast, as described below, in SSC’s use of mutual information as an accuracy cost, we iteratively evolve the coarse-grained state further and further into the future, and at each iteration evaluate the mutual information between the coarse-grained state at that moment and the fine-grained state at that moment.  4.2 State aggregation, decomposition, and projection methods As early as 1961 [107], one finds discussions of the tradeoff between accuracy cost, the computation cost of a compressed model, and the cost of finding a good compressed model– precisely the three costs we consider.5 This led to studies of aggregating or “lumping” the states of Markov chains in order to construct compressed (in our language) Markov chains [5, 107, 23, 49, 118]. Since some systems do not admit any good aggregations, the limitations of aggregation and lumpability methods have recently been fleshed out [64, 65]. The “finite state projection method” (FSP) [85, 84] is a similar method, developed to map a microstate of a chemical reaction network evolving according to a chemical master equation to a compressed version to speed up simulation of the evolution of that network. Though designed for evolving such reaction networks, the FSP is applicable whenever the set of possible microstates X is countable and the stochastic process generating xt is a Poisson process. The idea behind the FSP is to select a large subset X ′ ⊂ X and group all the states in X ′ into one new, absorbing state. The stochastic process rate constants connecting the elements of X \ X ′ and governing the probability flow from X \ X ′ into X ′ are not changed. The goal is to choose X ′ to be large and at the same time to have the total rate of probability flowing from X \ X ′ into 5  Where we include in the “computation cost of a compressed model” the initial cost of compressing a finegrained state into a compresed state.  11  X ′ be small. While somewhat ad hoc, the FSP has been found to work well in the domain for which it was constructed. These same three costs are also important in control theory and reduced-order modeling [81, 76, 83, 123, 51, 24, 4, 98, 12, 1, 39, 7]. However typically in this work and the aforementioned working on lumpability and FSP the computation cost of the compressed (“reduced”) model is not included in the objective function being optimized, and when it is considered it is typically replaced with the simple proxy of the dimension of the compressed space. It is probably true that in general this dimension is not a bad proxy for computation cost. However there are many specific cases where the actual cost of running the computation in the reduced space would differ considerably from what one would expect based on the dimension of that space. For example, much of this work in control theory restricts itself to computations in the compressed space that work by (local) linear transformation. One would expect that the dimension of the compressed space is often a poor proxy to the computation cost for such computation, for certain sparsities, ranks, and condition numbers of the reduced system — actual computation cost might be smaller with a slightly higher-dimensional compression whose dynamics is significantly sparser, compared to a lower-dimensional but dense one. There are many other properties that might affect the computation cost of evolving the compressed system, both in theory and in practice. As far as we are aware, these issues have not been considered in any great depth. While focusing on accuracy cost as aggregation methods do, reduced-order modeling has typically considered algorithms of the following sort (see the above-referenced books and surveys for details). First we compute a subspace of the fine-grained space that we believe captures key features of the dynamics. Typically this is done by performing a variant of the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD - which often goes by the alternative names of “principal component analysis”, “proper orthogonal decomposition”, or “Karhunen–Loeve expansion”) and then choosing the most significant singular directions (corresponding to the largest singular values in the SVD). There is some art in choosing how many directions to project onto, but often a sharp drop-off is observed in the singular value spectrum, and it is this cutoff that is chosen. This somewhat ad hoc, though well-motivated, choice of cutoff is essentially the only place that there is even an implicit concern for the computation cost of the evolving the reduced system. (Balanced truncation [81, 63, 62, 8, 70] offers a more principled way to select the cutoff, or “truncation,” point, but still does not explicitly take into account the computation cost of the compressed model.) However we choose the subspace, the next step is to project the dynamics over the fine-grained space onto this subspace (“Galerkin projection”) and then run the associated (linear) dynamics. Other methods have also been proposed, under the umbrella term of Krylov iteration, that can frequently make it easier to solve for the optimal compression (again, in terms of accuracy cost), using iterative methods rather than computing the SVD directly. But the end goal, and the way in which accuracy and computation cost of the reduced model are taken into account, are essentially the same in the pure SVD-based methods. More recently, so-called local SVD (or POD) methods have been proposed [88], in which a model is built as above, but instead of being a model of the whole space, it is only designed to model a local portion of the state space. Many local models are then “glued” together, for example, by training a classifier (using standard techniques from machine learning) to decide which of the local models should be used at any given point or trajectory. Yet another set of approaches is the Mori–Zwanzig family of methods [83, 123]. These are most naturally viewed as an expansion of the (fine-grained) dynamics in terms of time, truncating the expansion beyond a certain number of steps in the past. However the survey of 12  Beck, Lall, Liang, and West [12] emphasizes the close relationship between Mori–Zwanzig and the methods of reduced-order modeling discussed above. Polynomial chaos, used in uncertainty quantification, also has a similar flavor: at a high level, it involves expanding in terms of certain nice polynomials and then truncating this expansion.6 Israeli and Goldenfeld [54] also consider the relationship between coarse-graining and the computational cost of prediction, in the context of cellular automata. They consider certain spatial coarse-grainings, which are required to “commute” with the micro-dynamics, in that if one evolves the microdynamics and then coarse-grains, this gives the same result as coarse-graining first and then and evolving the coarse dynamics. They show that even this highly restricting class of compressions of cellular automata can make certain “computationally irreducible” automata easier to predict. They generally measure ease of prediction by a qualitative measure: for example, certainly the CA became easier to predict if it was initially Turing-complete, but the compressed version is not. It would also be natural in this setting to provide a more quantitative measure of “ease of prediction.” However, in addition to only considering a limited class of coarse-grainings, they also do not consider an exogenously specified accuracy cost. Rather, they consider any valid coarse-graining of a CA to be giving some information about (the dynamics of) that CA. Despite these qualifications, this is nonetheless a particularly interesting result suggesting that even limited kinds of state-space compression can be successful in reducing the computational cost of prediction. We suspect that all of these methods will prove useful in certain instances of state-space compression. However it is not immediately obvious how to incorporate more general (or more nuanced) notions of computation cost directly into these methods.  4.3 Generally applicable accuracy costs Another thread of work has tried to define whether a map xt → yt is a “valid” compression, without trying to rank such maps or find an optimal solution. For example, the work in [46, 45, 57, 41, 40] starts with the set of four variables x0 , y0 , xt and yt , where t is some fixed value greater than 0, and y0 is produced by applying a proposed compression map to x0 , while yt is produced by applying that same map to xt . It then considers yt to be a valid compression of xt if the associated dynamics yt is (first-order) Markovian. The work in [54, 53, 89] is also concerned with these four variables, x0 , y0 , xt and yt . Here the stochastic relationship of these four variables is used to assign a real-valued quality measure to the map xt → yt , rather than specify whether it is (not) a valid compression. This quality measure is based on the amount of extra information that is needed from x0 , in addition to the value y0 , for us to accurately predict yt . One difference between this work and SSC in that this work does not take computation or measurement cost into account. In [121], optimal compression was implicitly defined in terms of how accurately a compressed description of a system could predict the fine-grained description. Related work in [122] implicitly defined optimal state compression in terms of how different probability distributions were at coarse-grained and fine-grained scales. As with the works discussed above, these works do not consider computation cost, at least not directly. These previous studies related to state compression makes compelling points, and generally accords with intuition. However one striking feature of this previous work is that none of it considers what a state compression of a fine-grained dynamics xt is for. As a result, some 6  Technically, polynomial chaos does a compression of a probability distribution on the fine-grained space, rather than compressing the fine-grained space itself. But this compression of the probability distribution is still implemented in terms of truncating an expansion.  13  aspects of this earlier work makes no sense from an SSC perspective when applied in certain scenarios. For example, if yt is just a constant, not evolving in time, then the dynamics yt is perfectly Markovian, of first-order. So this state space compression, x → constant, is a “valid” compression, according to some of this earlier work. Similarly, suppose that extra information from the fine-grained value x0 cannot provide extra help in predicting the future value yt beyond just knowing y0 . This would imply that extra information about xt cannot provide extra help in predicting the future value yt beyond just knowing y0 . It might seem that in this case x → y should be deemed a “good” state compression. After all, if extra future information about future fine-grained states xt cannot help us predict future compressed states, then dynamics in the compressed space is “autonomous”, essentially independent of xt . This is the motivation for much of the analysis in [89], for example. However this reasoning differs in important ways from the motivations of SSC. In particular, say we used this reasoning to argue along with [89] that we have a good state space compression π : x → y if the conditional mutual information I(yt ; x0 | y0 ) is small, i.e., if knowing x0 does not help us predict yt any more than knowing y0 does. With this criterion, we would say that the compression map that sends x to a uniformly noisy value of y, which is statistically independent of x, is a “good state space compression”; it results in I(yt ; x0 | y0 ) = 0. In contrast, most SSC objective functions would not assign a high value to such a π . There are also important features of SSC’s focus on the full compression / decompression loop that are absent from this earlier work. For instance, the earlier work considers only the compression π, with no associated “decompression” map ρ that maps Y to an observable of interest. In contrast, we consider the case where one is interested in “decompressing” future values of y, to make predictions of observable functions of xt . In addition, this earlier work assumes that future values of yt are obtained by iteratively applying π to xt . Instead, we allow dynamics in yt to evolve according to an arbitrary map φ from an initial value y0 = π(x0 ). This means that rather than just assign value to a compression map π, we assign value to a triple (π, φ, ρ).7  5 Accuracy costs In this section, we show how one can quantify accuracy cost (i. e., negative reconstruction accuracy). We do this both when an accuracy function is exogenously provided, and when it is not — in which case it may make sense to use an information-theoretic accuracy cost.  5.1 Exogenously provided accuracy costs We begin with an example of accuracy cost appropriate for the case that the dynamics are Markovian. Z Z E (π, φ, ρ; P) ≡ d∆t dx0 dx dω dy0 dy dω′ ∆t>0  W(∆t)P(x0 )π(y0 | x0 )P∆t (x | x0 )O(ω | x)φ∆t (y | y0 )ρ(ω′ | y)C(ω, ω′ ) (3) 7  To state this more formally, note that in this earlier work the Bayes net relating the four variables is P(yt | xt )P(y0 | x0 )P(xt | x0 ). In contrast, the Bayes net relating those four variables in SSC is P(yt | y0 )P(y0 | x0 )P(xt | x0 ). This difference reflects the fact that this earlier work is ultimately concerned with different issues from those central to SSC.  14  In the integrand, C(ω, ω′ ) is the cost if our simulation using the compressed space predicts that the observable has the value ω′ when it is actually ω. ρ(ω′ | y) is the distribution (typically a single-valued function) for how we convert the state y of the compressed space into such a prediction of the value of the observable. φ∆t and P∆t are the first-order Markov chains of our simulation over the compressed space, and of the actual fine-grained system state, respectively. π is the distribution by which we compress the initial state of the fine-grained state, and finally, P(x0 ) is the a priori probability that we will be interested in simulating the fine-grained system that starts in state x0 . Several variants of Eq. (3) for accuracy cost are possible, even in the Markovian case. For example, one might be interested in a worst-case accuracy cost over the initial states, rather than an average. More generally, if the fine-grained dynamics and/or our simulation are not first-order Markovian, then Eq. (3) would have to be modified accordingly. (We don’t present that modification here because in general it can be very messy.)  5.2 Information-theoretic accuracy costs If an accuracy function C is not supplied and is not obvious to construct, it may be appropriate to replace Eq.(3) with an information-theoretic definition of accuracy cost. Similarly, if in the problem at hand it’s more natural to compare the distribution over values of predicted observables with the distribution over values of actual observables, then again a (different) information-theoretic definition of accuracy cost may be appropriate. We consider both of those variants of Eq.(3) in the rest of this subsection. 5.2.1 Accuracy cost based on mutual information for two time-steps We begin by focusing on the special case in which there are only two time steps, t0 and ∆t. Suppose that we know ω′∆t and want to treat that value as a prediction of ω∆t . A natural informationtheoretic measure is the mutual information between the predicted value of ω′∆t ∈ Ω made after state compression and the actual future value of the observable ω∆t , generated by the Markov process P over X and the observable distribution O. Although intuitively straight-forward, the fully formal equation for this accuracy cost is a bit complicated. This is because the random variables whose mutual information we are evaluating are coupled indirectly, through an information channel that goes through the time-0 conditional distribution π. Writing it out, this accuracy cost is: E∆t (π, φ, ρ; P) = −IPπ,φ,ρ;P (Ω′∆t ; Ω∆t )  (4)  where the negative sign reflects the fact that large mutual information corresponds to low misfit C, and where the joint probability Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , ω∆t ) defining the mutual information at time ∆t is given by the marginalization  Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , ω∆t )  ≡  Z  dx0 P(x0 )Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , ω∆t , x0 )  (5)  where Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , ω∆t , x0 ) is defined as Z dy0 dy∆t π(y0 | x0 )φ(y∆t | y0 )ρ(ω′∆t | y∆t )P(x∆t | x0 )O(ω∆t | x∆t ). (6) 15  Intuitively, the distribution Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , ω∆t , x0 ) couples ω′∆t and ω∆t by stochastically inferring y∆t from ω′∆t , then “backing up” from y∆t to y0 and on to x0 , and finally evolving forward stochastically from x0 to get an x∆t and thereby ω∆t .8 When there is no exogenously specified observable, we may simply take the microstate to be the observable, and ask about the mutual information between the future microstate and the future macrostate. This is essentially why mutual information has been used in other work related to SSC [104, 102, 54, 53, 89]. However our information-theoretic accuracy cost should be distinguished from these other information-theoretic costs in temrs of which mutual information is considered, and what it is conditioned on. In [89] the analogous accuracy cost, defined for the values of a process at a pair of times t0 and t1 > t0 , is the conditional mutual information I(Y∆t ; Xt0 | Yt0 ). Although there are scenarios in which both this cost and the cost E∆t (π, φ; P) in Eq. (4) are minimal,9 there are also scenarios in which the cost I(Yt1 ; Xt0 | Yt0 ) achieves its minimal value even though the cost E∆t (π, φ; P) is maximal. For example, the latter occurs if π is pure noise, so that dynamics in y implies nothing whatsoever about dynamics of x.10 5.2.2 Accuracy cost based on mutual information for more than two time-steps The natural extension of Eq. (4) to multiple times is Z E (π, φ, ρ; P) = d∆t W(∆t)E∆t (π, φ, ρ; P) Z = − d∆t W(∆t)IPπ,φ,ρ;P (Ω′∆t ; Ω∆t )  (7)  with Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , ω∆t ) defined as in Eq. (5) for all values of ∆t. However, the following example illustrates a subtle but important problem with this formula: Example 4. Consider a discrete-time system with X = {0, 1} with dynamics P(xt+1 | xt ) = δxt+1 ,xt , and let Y = X but with non-stationary dynamics that swaps the two values at every time step. Suppose π : {0, 1} → {0, 1} is the identity map. Then at the initial time t0 , the map ρeven : Y → X defined by ρeven (0) = 0 and ρeven (1) = 1 is a perfect predictor of xt0 from yt0 ; indeed, this same predictor works perfectly at every time that is an even number of steps from t0 . At those times t that are an odd number of steps from t0 , xt can still be perfectly predicted from yt , but now by a different map ρodd : Y → X, which swaps the two values (ρodd (0) = 1 and ρodd (1) = 0). In such a situation, mutual information is maximal at all moments in time. However, there is no single, time-invariant map ρ that allows us to interpret yt as a perfect prediction for the associated xt . One way to resolve this problem is to modify that accuracy cost to force the prediction map from Y to Ω to be time-invariant. To state this formally, return to the motivation for using 8  By the data processing equality, including ρ in this definition cannot increase the associated mutual information, and arguably it should be removed, as essentially spurious. That would result in a mutual information between Y and Ω, not between Ω′ and Ω. For pedagogical simplicity though, here we look at the mutual information involving Ω′ , the prediction made via ρ. 9 For example, this occurs if all of the conditional distributions π, φ and P(x∆t | x0 ) are deterministic, measurepreserving functions, so that the dynamics in y uniquely specifies dynamics in x. 10 This distinction between these two measures reflects the fact that they are motivated by different desiderata. The cost I(Y∆t ; Xt0 | Yt0 ) is motivated by the observation that if it is zero, then there is no extra information transfer from the dynamics of X that is needed to predict the dynamics of Y, once we know the initial value yt0 , and in this sense dynamics in Y is “autonomous” from dynamics in X.  16  information theory in the first place: by constructing a space of codewords and an associated (prefix-free) coding function that allow us to map any value in Y to a value in Ω, taking as our accuracy cost the minimal expected length of those codewords (over all codes). To make this expected codelength precise, we need to define an encoding function. So construct a Z and a (time-invariant) encoding function f such that for any y, ω, there is a z ∈ Z such that f (y, z) = ω. From one t to the next, given yt , we have to choose a zt so that we can recover ωt = O(xt ) by evaluating (the time-invariant) function f (yt , zt ). We then want to choose a code for Z that minimizes the length of (codewords for) z’s that allow us to recover x from y, averaged over time according to W and over pairs (ω′t , ωt ) according to Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′t , ωt ). So we are interested in the t-average of expectations of (lengths of codewords specifying) z’s where those expectations are evaluated under Pπ,φ,ρ;P(x′t , xt ). This is just the expectation under the single distribution given by t-averaging the distributions Pπ,φ,ρ;P(x′t , xt ). Write that single t-averaged distribution as Z ′ P π,φ,ρ(ω , ω) ≡ dt W(t)Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′t , ωt ) (8) The associated minimum of expected codelengths of z’s is just HP π,φ,ρ (Ω | Ω′ ). To normalize this we can subtract it from the entropy of the marginal, HP π,φ,ρ (Ω). (Note that this entropy of the marginal is fixed by P, independent of π, φ or ρ.) This gives us the change in the expected length of codewords for specifying values ωt that arises due to our freedom to have those codewords be generated with a different code for each value of the prediction ω′t . Since higher accuracy corresponds to lower accuracy cost, this motivates an information-theoretic accuracy cost given by C (π, φ, ρ; P) = −IP π,φ,ρ (Ω′ ; Ω)  (9)  This information-theoretic accuracy cost is the mutual information under the t-average of Pπ,φ,ρ (ω′t , ωt ), rather than Eq. (4)’s t-average of the mutual information under the individual Pπ,φ,ρ(ω′t , ωt )’s. 5.2.3 Alternative information-theoretic accuracy costs While it seems that the distribution Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , ω∆t ) is often a good one to consider, and often we will want to use an information-theoretic accuracy cost, in some circumstances we may not be directly concerned with the mutual information of Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , ω∆t ). For example, in accuracy costs that are not information-theoretic, all we are concerned with is the average discrepancy between the prediction ρ(yt ) and the truth ωt . We do not try to “normalize” that average discrepancy. If it so happens that the distribution over ωt is close to a delta function, independent of xt , and ρ(yt ) just so happens to equal the center of that delta function, we typically say that the accuracy of the prediction is high; we do not try to normalize for the fact that ωt could be accurately predicted even without access to the value yt , due to the fact that it is generated by a distribution that is almost a delta function. In the context of our accuracy cost based on expected codelengths, this suggests that we not try to normalize the conditional entropy, HP π,φ,ρ (Ω | Ω′ ), by subtracting it from HP π,φ,ρ (Ω). In other words, to most closely align with what the term “accuracy cost” means in the context of accuracy costs that are not information- theoretic (i.e., based on accuracy functions), we may want to use that conditional entropy as our information-theoretic accuracy cost, rather than the related mutual information, −IP π,φ,ρ (Ω; Ω′ ). To be precise, in some circumstances we may want to use C (π, φ, ρ; P) = HP π,φ,ρ (Ω | Ω′ ) 17  (10)  This accuracy cost will be small if and only if for every prediction ω′t that arises (with significant probability) there is always a unique associated ωt that occurs (with high probability, and averaged over times t). Whether or not you could far more accurately make that prediction by using ω′ than if you didn’t have access to ω′ is irrelevant — after all, you do have access to it. Another example of why we may not want to use Eq. (9) to quantify an accuracy cost is the well-known fact that mutual information in general has a substantial “artifact” arising via the prior distribution over either of its two random variable arguments.11 This is one of the reasons that people often replace mutual information with measures like channel capacity (which, like HP π,φ,ρ (Ω | Ω′ ), only depends on the conditional distribution Pπ,φ,ρ(ωt | ω′t )). As a final example of why we may not want to use Eq. (9), recall it was motivated by presuming that “... we know ω′∆t and want to treat that value as a prediction of ω∆t ”. This use of compressed space computation motivated the accuracy costs discussed above. However there are other reasons to run a computation over a compressed space rather than original space. Some of these are naturally formulated using information-theoretic accuracy costs. An important example of this is when the microstate Markov process P∆t (x | x0 ) (or the observable O, for that matter) is not deterministic, and our goal is to use x0 to predict the future evolution of the entire distribution over ω∆t given by O(ω∆t | x∆t )P(x∆t | x0 ), rather than predict the specific future values ω∆t . In particular, in many situations it may prove useful to use Monte Carlo sampling of the distribution over Y values, Pπ,φ,ρ;P(ω′∆t , x0 ), as an approximation to Monte Carlo sampling of O(ω∆t | x∆t )P(x∆t | x0 ). (For example, this is often the case in the kinds of situations where we might want to use particle filters or some of the techniques of uncertainty quantification.) A natural accuracy cost for this kind of situation is Z Z d∆t W(∆t) dx0 P(x0 )KL[Pπ,φ,ρ;P(Ω′∆t | x0 ) || Pπ,φ,ρ;P(Ω∆t | x0 )] C (π, φ, ρ; P) ≡ − ∆t>0  (11) where the notation “KL[P(A | b) || R(A)]” means the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the two distributions over values a ∈ A given by P(a | b) and R(a) [27, 77].12  6 Computation costs The core concern of SSC is how to choose π, φ, and ρ in a way that minimizes computation cost without sacrificing too much accuracy cost. To quantify this goal we need to quantify the computation cost associated with any tuple (π, φ, ρ; P) (with the associated X, Y and O being implied). This section discusses possible quantifications. We emphasize again that we are not advocating for any one particular quantification of computation or measurement cost, nor even that one be selected from among the list we consider here. As with most aspects of the SSC framework, the computation/measurement cost should be selected appropriately for the problem at hand. We consider three sources of motivation for the computation costs we present: (1) theoretical computer science, (2) information theory, and (3) pragmatism. Although theoretical computer science, and the field of computational complexity in particular, has had a solid quantification of computational resources since the 1960s [48], the types of quantifications considered 11  As an extreme example, if we have covarying random variables A and B and A is almost constant, then the mutual information I(A; B) is very close to zero, even if the conditional distribution P(b | a) is highly accurate. 12 Note that there is not the same issue here involving dynamic changes to how we match each element of y with an element of x that arose in our analysis of accuracy cost based on mutual information. The reason is that both of the distributions in the Kullback–Leibler divergence are defined over the exact same space.  18  do not lend themselves easily to application of optimization techniques. Thus we also consider costs motivated by information theory that we hope are more tractable for optimization. As a final comment, we note that even if we wish to use a mathematical expression for computation cost, often it makes sense to be purely pragmatic, and ignore many of the subtleties discussed above. This is discussed below, in Sec. 7.2.  6.1 Defining computation cost in terms of X, Y, π, φ, and γ Suppose we are concerned with an arbitrary computation, independent of any consideration of state compression. In this case x ∈ X would be a specification of some initial data of that computation, Y would be the state of our computer, π would be a function that uses x (in combination with a specification of the computer program) to initialize the state of the computer, and φ would be the dynamics of the computer. A halt state of the computer is a fixed point of φ. The combination of the computer architecture and the compiler determine both π and φ. So changing either one would change π and φ, even if they do not change the quantity ultimately computed, i.e., do not change the map from an initial data set x to an associated attractor in Y. In general, all those choices of π and φ that result in the same “quantity ultimately computed” will have different computation costs, as the term is used below. The same quantity can be computed using many different programs, all differing in the cost to run those programs.  6.2 Computation cost measures based on theoretical computer science There are many ways to quantify computation cost. Indeed, quantifying scaling relationships among some of the different kinds of computation cost is a core concern of the entire field of computational complexity [82, 52]. One of the kinds of computation cost considered in computational complexity is the running time of the computation. This is also often a primary concern of real-world SSC, where we are interested in expected “wall-clock” time of a simulation. If we restrict attention to von Neumann architectures, then for many purposes this cost can be lower bounded by the sum of the expected codelength of messages that a CPU sends to its RAM, over all iterations of the computer. As a practical issue, this measure is often accessible via profiling of the program (P or φ as the case might be) that is running on the computer. This can then be used to guide the search for a (π, φ, ρ) that optimizes the trade-off between computation cost and accuracy cost (see Sec. 7). Often, though, we want a more broadly applicable specification of computation cost, represented as a mathematical expression; at a minimum this is needed for any kind of mathematical analysis. One obvious way to do this is to use Algorithmic Information Content (AIC), i.e., to quantify computation cost as the minimal size of a Turing machine that performs the desired computation [22]. However as has often been remarked, AIC has the major practical problem that how one measures the size of a Turing machine T (i.e., what universal Turing machine one chooses to use to emulate the running of T ) is essentially arbitrary. Furthermore, AIC is formally uncomputable, so one has to settle for results concerning asymptotic behavior. To get around this issue, people sometimes “approximate” the AIC of a string, e.g., with its length after Lempel–Ziv compression. However this in essence reduces AIC to Bayesian maximum a posterior coding, where the prior probability distribution is implicit in the Lempel–Ziv algorithm. (There are also further problems in using either Lempel–Ziv—see, e. g., [101]—or AIC—see, e. g., [69].) 19  There are several reasonable variants of AIC that might also be appropriate for some types of analysis of SSC. One set of such variants are the many versions of Rissanen’s (minimum) description length (MDL [95, 11]). Another one, quite close to the measure of running time mentioned above, is logical depth [16]. However logical depth is still subject to the practical difficulties associated with AIC.  7 The full SSC objective function Formally speaking, once we have defined both an accuracy cost function and a computation cost function, we are faced with a multi-objective optimization problem of how to choose π, φ, and ρ in order to minimize both cost functions. There are many ways to formalize this problem. For example, as is common in multi-objective optimization, we might only wish to find the set of triples (π, φ, ρ) that lie on the Pareto front of those two functions. Alternatively, we might face a constrained optimization problem. For example, we might have constraints on the maximal allowed value of the accuracy cost, with our goal being to minimize computation cost subject to such a bound. Or conversely we might have constraints on the maximum allowed computation cost (say, in terms of minutes or dollars), with our goal being to minimize accuracy cost subject to such a bound. In this paper, for simplicity we will concentrate on ways to reduce the multi-objective optimization problem into a single-objective optimization problem. To do this requires that we quantify the trade-off between computation and accuracy costs in terms of an overall SSC objective function that we want to minimize. Such an objective function maps any tuple (π, φ, ρ; P) (with the associated X, Y, and O being implied) into the reals. The associated goal of SSC is to solve for the π, φ and ρ that minimize that function, for any given P, X, and O.  7.1 The trade-off between accuracy cost and computation cost Perhaps the most natural overall SSC objective function is simply a linear combination of the computation cost and accuracy cost: K(π, φ, ρ; P) ≡ κC (π, φ, ρ; P) + αE (π, φ, ρ; P)  (12)  As mentioned throughout the paper, the computation/measurement cost C can (in many situations, should) include the cost of mapping the original state to the compressed state. In this case, the computation cost C might include a term of the form, e. g., Hπ,P (Y0 ). When all these costs are defined information-theoretically, this quantity has a nice interpretation as the minimum of the expected number of bits that must be transmitted to “complete the compressiondecompression circuit”, i. e., the average number of bits needed to map x0 → y0 → yt → ω′t .  (13)  There are some interesting parallels between these objective functions and various “complexity measures” that have been proposed in the literature to map a (bit string representation of) infinite time-series xt to a real number, in particular those that are based on Turing machines. The cost of computing π can be viewed as (analogous to) the length of a Turing machine that takes in x0 and produces y0 . The remainder of the computation cost can be viewed as analogous to the time it takes to run a Turing machine for the dynamics of y0 . Finally, the accuracy cost term can be viewed as analogous to the amount of extra information that must be added to 20  the result of running that Turing machine to generate (an approximation to) the full observable time-series of interest, ω′t . So if we were to just minimize the computation cost of π, the resultant value is analogous to the algorithmic information content of (an infinite string representation of) the time series of all values xt . Minimizing the combined computation cost of π, φ, and ρ is instead analogous to the logical depth of ω′t . On the other hand, the sum of the cost of π and the cost of ρ is analogous to the “description length” of the time series ω′t [95, 11]. So minimizing the sum of those two terms is analogous to using one of the MDL algorithms. The SSC objective function Eq. (12) combines the concerns of all three of these complexity measures. (This relation of SSC and complexity measures is returned to in Sec. 8 below.)  7.2 Heuristics for minimizing the SSC objective function Because truly optimizing the SSC objective function—or doing some variant of the original multi-objective optimization—will often be quite difficult (if not formally uncomputable), there are several heuristics one might employ that could still yield advantages over the ad hoc nature of intuitive state space compressions. We already started on this path when we decided to focus on the situation where φ is firstorder Markovian (that being a “simpler” dynamics to calculate than higher-order stochastic processes, of the type that are typically used in time-series reconstruction using delay embeddings). An obvious next step—common in real-world instances of SSC, like those discussed in Sec. 4—is to fix Y ahead of time to some space substantially smaller than X, rather than try to optimize it. (In the case of Euclidean X, Y will also be a Euclidean space of much smaller dimension; for finite X, Y is also finite, but far smaller.) We may still optimize over π, φ, and ρ, but in this heuristic the choice of Y is fixed, decreasing the size of the search space dramatically. Another heuristic that will often also make sense is to restrict the set of compression maps π that are considered, for example, to some parametrized class of maps. In particular, when Y is Euclidean, we can restrict π so that it cannot encode an arbitrary dimensional space x ∈ X in an arbitrarily small dimensional y ∈ Y with perfect accuracy, for example by restricting π to a class of maps that are all continuously differentiable of a certain order, or Lipschitz. Without such restrictions, there will often be “valid” π that depend sensitively on all infinitely many digits of x, such as the position along a space-filling curve; as a practical matter, such π are impossible to compute. Even if we wish to consider π that are distributions instead of functions, a parametrized family of distributions (e. g., a parametrized class of Gaussian processes) might prove fruitful. Optimizing the SSC objective function then amounts to optimizing over the parameter space of the chosen class of maps. Note that to evaluate the minimum computation cost for a given map from x0 to values yt would be equivalent to solving for the optimal compilation of a given computer program down to machine code. In real computers, design of optimal compilers is still a very active area of research; calculating the cost of such an optimized compilation will not be possible in general.13 Even calculating such costs for the abstracted version of real-world computers will likely prove intractable. However it should be possible to put bounds on such costs. Moreover, purely pragmatically, one can run a search algorithm over the space of φ’s, finding a good (if not optimal) compilation, and evaluate its associated cost. Examples of heuristic ways to approach SSC are already present in related work, as discussed in Sec. 4. 13  Indeed, even if we allowed an infinitely expandable RAM, such a cost would be uncomputable, in general.  21  8 Applications of SSC – beyond improving prediction Although our SSC framework is most directly concerned with simplifying prediction of the future of a dynamical system, it may have other advantage for analyzing dynamic systems as well. As a particularly simple example, SSC provides a generic method of comparing systems: If two systems of the same type, e. g. two networks, or two economies have very similar optimal SSC compressions, this means that the “underlying” dynamics of them is quite similar. Intriguingly, this is true even for completely different types of systems: If an economy has some good state-space compression that very similar to a good state-space compression of some multicellular organism, that tells us that in an important sense, that economy “is” a multicellular organism, and vice-versa. In the remainder of this section we present two other possible uses of SSC beyond the domain of simplifying prediction that are somewhat more speculative.  8.1 A form of complexity motivated by SSC Suppose we have a compression of a system that substantially reduces the value of the objective function K compared to its “null compression” value (i.e., the value for the identity compression that actually leaves the original space X unchanged). Formally, using “id” to indicate an identity map (with the spaces it operates varying and implicit), such a choice of Y, π, φ, and ρ results in a value of K(π, φ, ρ; P) − K(id, id, id; P) , K(id, id, id; P)  (14)  close to −1 (assuming the objective function is guaranteed non-negative). When this ratio is close to −1, the compression provides an emulator of the dynamical system that is both easy to evolve computationally and that accurately predicts the future of that dynamical system. When it is large however (i. e., only barely below zero), either the emulation is not very compressed (i.e., computationally difficult to evolve) or it is a poor predictor of the future of the underlying system, or both. Accordingly, we define compression complexity as minπ,φ,ρ K(π, φ, ρ; P) K(id, id, id; P)  (15)  ranging from 0 for highly compressible (non-complex) systems to 1 for highly incompressible (complex) systems. Note that compression complexity is defined with respect to a given accuracy cost and associated observation operator. So the same fine-grained system may be characterized as “complex” or “not complex” depending on what one wants to predict concerning its future state. Compression complexity of a dynamical system is loosely similar to algorithmic information complexity (AIC) of a string, viewed as a dynamical system. (Perhaps more precisely, it is similar to techniques related to AIC that allow “noisy” reproduction of the string, e.g., minimal description length techniques.) However there are some important differences. To illustrate these, recall that algorithmic information complexity (AIC) is high both for random strings and for “complex” strings. In contrast, SSC compression complexity is low for random strings. More precisely, consider the case where Ω = X, O is the identify map, and the finegrained dynamics is IID noise, i.e., p(xt+1 | xt ) = p(xt+1 ) with a high entropy H(Xt ). Suppose as well that accuracy cost is the time-averaged form of mutual information defined in Eq. (9), −IP π,φ,ρ (X ′ ; X). For this situation, no choice of π, φ, and ρ results in smaller accuracy cost than 22  when no compression is used. So if our SSC objective function were accuracy cost alone, we would conclude that compression complexity is high (just like with AIC). However consider compressing X to a Y that only contains a single element. We lose nothing in accuracy cost. But computation cost is now zero. So the value of the full SSC objective function is greatly reduced. This illustrates that “a fine-grained dynamics that is IID noise” is assigned a small compression complexity. When compression complexity is low, the compressed system {Y, π, φ, ρ} may provide substantial physical insight into the dynamics P of the microstate X, since the compressed system intuitively tell us “what’s important about X’s time-evolution”. As an example, similar to Ex. 2 above, consider a never-ending (multi-stage) noncooperative game among many players that models an economy where the players are employees of many firms interacting with one another. Also posit a particular learning rule whereby the players jointly determine their dynamic behavior. The dynamics of such a game is a stochastic process in a very high-dimensional space. However if its compression complexity is low, then the optimal state compression of that dynamics provides a relatively small set of coarse-grained variables whose dynamics captures the salient aspects of the full underlying game.14 Potentially each component of that optimal coarse-grained macrostate is a characteristic of a separate one of the firms that are being modeled. Intriguingly though, it may well be that the macrostate instead reflects characteristics of the joint behavior of multiple firms, or of sets of individuals spread across multiple firms. This would suggest that the proper way to model this economy is not on a firm-by-firm basis, but rather in terms of macrostate variables that involve the states of multiple firms and individuals simultaneously. Analogously, this is precisely what happens in quantum mechanics: a description of a multiparticle system cannot merely describe the individual states of the particles, but must also include correlations between the particles, i. e. their entanglement. As defined above, compression complexity is normalized, by the value K(id, id, id; P). This is not always appropriate, e.g., if there is some concrete physical meaning associated with the value of the objective function. In such cases, there are several possible modifications to the definition of compression complexity that may make sense. For example, in some situations it may be appropriate to quantify complexity as minπ,φ,ρ K(π, φ, ρ; P). As always with SSC, the precise scenario being analyzed should motivate the precise definitions that are used. Unlike many other complexity measures, compression complexity is tailored to measuring the complexity of dynamic systems. Indeed, in its simplest form, it does not apply to static objects like images. There are various modifications of compression complexity that can apply to static objects though. For example, if we have a generative process that creates images, we could measure the compression complexity of the generative process that produces that image. We also note that in general, as a system evolves its optimal state space compression will change. So as we go from t to t +1 to t +2, etc., if evaluate the associated values of compression complexity taking each of those successive times as the “initial time”, in general we would expect that complexity to undergo a dynamic process. This may provide a useful framework for analyzing informal suppositions of many fields concerning how complexity evolves in time, e.g., concerning how the complexity of large biological systems changes in time. Finally, we emphasize again that we do not promote compression complexity as “the” way to measure complexity. Rather we are simply highlighting that it has many aspects which match well to characteristics of complexity that have been proposed in the past, and that it may lead to novel insight into physical phenomena. 14  Note that the optimizing π in general may be highly nonlinear, and that it may be that the optimizing φ cannot be interpreted as a multi-stage game involving the coarse-grained variables.  23  8.2 Using SSC to define information flow among scales of a system Many measures of “information flow” in a stochastic dynamical system like causal information flow [6], transfer entropy [99, 91, 92], and Granger causality [60] are motivated by considering the flow between physically distinct subsystems of an overall dynamic system. This makes them inherently ill-suited to quantifying information flow among the scales of a single system, in which one would expect there to be a priori “biases” reflecting the fact that behavior at different scales of a single system cannot be completely independent. In fact, the complete opposite is typically the case: the dynamics of the more detailed scale typically completely determine the dynamics of the less detailed scale. As an example of the difficulties such biases cause for those measures of information flow, the most straightforward application of transfer entropy (taking k = l = 1, in Schreiber’s notation) would quantity the information flow from Yt to Xt+1 as the conditional mutual information Iπ,φ;P (Xt+1 ; Yt | Xt ). However this is identically zero, regardless of π, φ, and P. (Note that this is not exactly the case for the calculations of transfer entropy between scales made in [117], since they do not adopt this most straight-forward use of transfer entropy. However the same kinds of statistical biases still apply. From a certain perspective, these biases mean that the very notion of information flowing from a high scale to a small scale of a single system is specious. Nonetheless, going back at least to the seminal work of Maynard-Smith and others, researchers have presumed that information does “flow” from the high (coarse-grained) scale down to the low (fine-grained) scale of a biological system organisms [109, 108, 117, 34]. Indeed, Maynard-Smith averred that not only does such high-to-low scale information flow exist, but that it has increased in each major transition in biological evolution. More recent work has also emphasized the role that information flow between scales may play in understanding the emergence of social complexity [37] and even biological individuality [67] itself. A similar phenomenon is seen in intuitive descriptions of computational algorithms, e.g., as implemented on Turing machines or with Von Neumann architectures. For example, consider an algorithm that determines whether its input is a prime number or not. On the one hand, the behavior of this algorithm is completely specified by its code: how it moves bits around in memory and combines them. On the other hand, the low-level bit-wise behavior of this algorithm may be viewed as being “determined” by its high-level characterization as a search for primality. When at some point the algorithm takes one branch of a conditional “if” statement rather than another, do we say that it took that branch because the memory was just in a certain position, or because (to give an example) the number 6 that was input to the algorithm is not prime? The SSC framework provides ways to formalize the information flowing from a high scale down to a low scale of a single system which are more directly grounded in the relation between the behaviors at different scales of a single system than are measures like transfer entropy. The basic idea is to first use SSC to solve for the scale(s) at which to analyze the system, rather than rely on the scale(s) being pre-specified in an ad hoc manner. We then define the associated information flow from the coarse scale to the fine scale by treating (φ, ρ) as specifying an information channel between Y and the observable function of X. We refer to any such quantification based on SSC as inter-scale causality, in analogy with “Granger causality”. As an example of inter-scale causality, one might argue that the amount of information needed to construct the current value of x, given any particular estimate of it based on the value of y, is an appropriate measure of the “information flow” from the coarse-scale to the fine scale. This can be quantified as the entropy of xt , evaluated under the probability distribution conditioned on the value yt−1 . Expressing this in terms of observables and predictions for them  24  rather than directly in terms of x and y, averaging over yt−1 , and then averaging over t, we arrive at the measure Z − d∆t W(∆t)HPπ,φ,ρ;P (Ω∆t | Ω′∆t−1 ) (16) (using the notation of Sec. 5.2). A slight variant of this measure arises if we wish to normalize each of the conditional entropies HPπ,φ,ρ;P (Ω∆t | Ω′∆t−1 ) by subtracting it from HPπ,φ,ρ;P (Ω∆t ). This difference tells us how much extra information about the value of ωt is provided by ω′t−1 , beyond the prior information concerning ωt . With this normalization our measure of information flow becomes Z − d∆t W(∆t)IPπ,φ,ρ;P (Ω′∆t ; Ω∆t ) (17) This is just the time-averaged mutual information, a natural candidate for an informationtheoretic accuracy cost. However as discussed above, to avoid the problem that two variables can have perfect mutual information by being either perfectly correlated or perfectly anti-correlated at any given time step—and whether they are correlated or anti-correlated at each time step can change without changing the preceding value—it may make more sense to replace the above quantity with the mutual information of the time average, or even with the conditional entropy of the time average, HP π,φ,ρ (Ω | Ω′ ). Any such alternatives based on the concerns raised in the discussion of accuracy cost Sec. 5.2 should be treated carefully though. Here we are interested in quantifying information flow from the time series over Ω′ (predicted from the time series over Y) to the time series over Ω (the observable applied to the time series over X). We are not interested in formalizing how accurately we can predict ωt from ω′t (or yt ). It is worth emphasizing the essential difference between this kind of SSC-based measure of information flow between scales and measures of it like the transfer entropy [99] between scales. Measures like transfer entropy only depend on how much the time series yt tells us about xt that does not arise through direct dependence of xt on xt−1 . For example, if xt → yt is a single-valued invertible mapping, then yt+1 will have high mutual information with xt+1 , even though there is no novel information that flows from yt+1 to xt+1 , only different echoes of xt . Transfer entropy is explicitly designed to remove such effects arising from the direct dependence of xt on xt−1 . However this “direct dependence” that transfer entropy is designed to ignore is precisely what we want to capture when considering information flow among scales. In particular, it is precisely what the measures suggested in Eq. (16) and Eq. (17) are designed to capture, due to how Pπ,φ,ρ;P is defined. Simply put, information flow between scales of a single system is fundamentally different from information flow between physically separate systems, and therefore should be quantified differently.  9 Conclusions This preliminary report has presented a new framework for understanding how we construct higher-level descriptions of complex systems. We have introduced the problem through a series of illustrations, defined the key quantities, and provided three explicit examples of how this framework can be applied to basic problems in biology, economics, and physics. Having built an intuition for the method, we then compared this framework to a number of influential suggestions in the literature. 25  Our framework makes explicit two core questions for both the scientist and engineer: how accurate a theory is, and how difficult it is to work with. We have presented new theoretical results for how to quantify the answers to these questions, and how to combine them into a single objective function. By formalizing the goals of a scientist engaged in providing a coarse-grained description of a system, state space compression allows us to compare and contrast a wide variety of systems. It provides novel ways to address long-standing problems that arise both within fields and between disciplines, where the question of “how much to ignore” becomes critical.  Acknowledgements We thank Daniel Polani, Eckehard Olbrich, Nils Bertschinger, Nihat Ay, Cris Moore, and James O’Dwyer for helpful discussion. We also thank the Santa Fe Institute for support. In addition this paper was made possible through the support of Grant No. TWCF0079/AB47 from the Templeton World Charity Foundation. The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of Templeton World Charity Foundation. S. D. thanks the City University of New York’s Initiative for the Theoretical Sciences for their hospitality during the course of this work. S. D. was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant EF-1137929. J. A. G. and E. L. acknowledge the support of Santa Fe Institute Omidyar Fellowships.  References [1] Athanasios Antoulas and Dan Sorensen, Approximation of large-scale dynamical systems: an overview, International Journal of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science 11(5):1093–1121, 2001. [2] K. B. Athreya and P. E. Ney, Branching processes, Springer–Verlag, New York, 1972. [3] Alessandro Attanasi, Andrea Cavagna, Lorenzo Del Castello, Irene Giardina, Tomas S Grigera, Asja Jelić, Stefania Melillo, Leonardo Parisi, Oliver Pohl, Edward Shen, et al., Information transfer and behavioural inertia in starling flocks, Nature Physics 10 (2014), no. 9, 691–696. [4] Antoulas, Athanasios C. Approximation of large-scale dynamical systems. With a foreword by Jan C. Willems. Advances in Design and Control, 6. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, PA, 2005. [5] Pierre Auger, R Bravo de La Parra, Jean-Christophe Poggiale, E Sánchez, and L Sanz, Aggregation methods in dynamical systems and applications in population and community dynamics, Physics of Life Reviews 5 (2008), no. 2, 79–105. [6] Nihat Ay and Daniel Polani, Information flows in causal networks, Advances in Complex Systems 11 (2008), no. 01, 17–41. [7] Zhaojun Bai, Krylov subspace techniques for reduced-order modeling of large-scale dynamical systems, Applied Numerical Mathematics 43 (2002), no. 1, 9–44.  26  [8] V. Balakrishnan, Q. Su, and C.-K. Koh. Efficient balance-and-truncate model reduction for large scale systems. Purdue University ECE Tech. Report TR-ECE 00-15, 2000. [9] Abhijit V. Banerjee, Arun Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and Matthew O. Jackson, Gossip: Identifying central individuals in a social network, MIT Department of Economics Working Paper, 2014. [10] Alain Barrat, Marc Barthelemy, and Alessandro Vespignani, Dynamical processes on complex networks, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2008. [11] Andrew Barron, Jorma Rissanen, and Bin Yu, The minimum description length principle in coding and modeling, Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on 44 (1998), no. 6, 2743–2760. [12] Beck, C. L., Lall, S., Liang, T., and West, M. Model reduction, optimal prediction, and the Mori–Zwanzig representations of Markov chains, IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, 2009. [13] Charles H Bennett, Logical reversibility of computation, IBM journal of Research and Development 17 (1973), no. 6, 525–532. [14]  , The thermodynamics of computation—a review, International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21 (1982), no. 12, 905–940.  [15]  , Time/space trade-offs for reversible computation, SIAM Journal on Computing 18 (1989), no. 4, 766–776.  [16]  , Logical depth and physical complexity, The Universal Turing Machine A HalfCentury Survey, Springer, 1995, pp. 207–235.  [17]  , Notes on landauer’s principle, reversible computation, and maxwell’s demon, Studies In History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies In History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34 (2003), no. 3, 501–510.  [18] William Bialek, Andrea Cavagna, Irene Giardina, Thierry Mora, Edmondo Silvestri, Massimiliano Viale, and Aleksandra M Walczak, Statistical mechanics for natural flocks of birds, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (2012), no. 13, 4786–4791. [19] William Bialek, Ilya Nemenman, and Naftali Tishby, Predictability, complexity, and learning, Neural Computation 13 (2001), no. 11, 2409–2463. [20] Neli Blagus, Lovro Šubelj, and Marko Bajec, Self-similar scaling of density in complex real-world networks, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 391 (2012), no. 8, 2794–2802. [21] Lenore Blum, Felipe Cucker, Michael Shub, and Steve Smale, Complexity and real computation, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 1998. [22] Gregory J Chaitin, Algorithmic information theory, vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, 2004. [23] Pierre André Chiappori and Ivar Ekeland, New developments in aggregation economics, Annu. Rev. Econ. 3 (2011), no. 1, 631–668. 27  [24] Chorin, Alexandre J. and Hald, Ole H., Stochastic tools in mathematics and science. Third edition. Texts in Applied Mathematics, 58. Springer, New York, 2013. [25] Andy Clark, Whatever next? predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36 (2013), no. 03, 181–204. [26] Iain D Couzin, Collective cognition in animal groups, Trends in cognitive sciences 13 (2009), no. 1, 36–43. [27] T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of information theory, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1991. [28] Felix Creutzig, Amir Globerson, and Naftali Tishby. Past-future information bottleneck in dynamical systems, Physical Review E 79(4):041925, 2009. [29] J. P. Crutchfield, The calculi of emergence: computation, dynamics, and induction, Physica D, 75:11–54, 1994. [30] J. P. Crutchfield, Between order and chaos, Nature Physics, 8:17–24, 2012. [31] J. P. Crutchfield and B. S. McNamara, Equations of motion from a data series, Complex Systems, 1:417–452, 1987. [32] J. P. Crutchfield and K. Young, Inferring statistical complexity, Phys. Rev. Let., 63:105– 108, 1989. [33] Eric Davidson and Michael Levin, Gene regulatory networks, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 (2005), no. 14, 4935–4935. [34] PCW Davies, The epigenome and top-down causation, Interface Focus 2 (2012), no. 1, 42–48. [35] Simon DeDeo, Effective theories for circuits and automata, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 21(3):037106, 2011. [36] Simon DeDeo, Group minds and the case of Wikipedia, Human Computation 1:1:5-29 (2014). arXiv:1407.2210. [37] Simon DeDeo, Major transitions in political order, Information and Causality: From Matter to Life, Cambridge University Press, 2015. [38] Simon DeDeo and David C. Krakauer, Dynamics and processing in finite self-similar networks, Journal of The Royal Society Interface 9 (2012), no. 74, 2131–2144. [39] Kun Deng. Model reduction of Markov chains with applications to building systems. Ph.D. thesis, U. Illinois Urbana–Champaign, 2012. [40] Salem Derisavi, A symbolic algorithm for optimal markov chain lumping, Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, Springer, 2007, pp. 139–154. [41] Salem Derisavi, Holger Hermanns, and William H Sanders, Optimal state-space lumping in markov chains, Information Processing Letters 87 (2003), no. 6, 309–315.  28  [42] Raoul Dillenschneider and Eric Lutz, Comment on“minimal energy cost for thermodynamic information processing: Measurement and information erasure”, Physical Review Letters 104 (2010), no. 19, 198903. [43] K.-I. Goh, G. Salvi, B. Kahng, and D. Kim, Skeleton and fractal scaling in complex networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006), 018701. [44] Leslie Ann Goldberg, Martin Grohe, Mark Jerrum, and Marc Thurley, A complexity dichotomy for partition functions with mixed signs, arXiv:0804.1932 [cs.CC], 2009. [45] Olof Görnerup and Martin Nilsson Jacobi, A method for inferring hierarchical dynamics in stochastic processes, Advances in Complex Systems 11 (2008), no. 01, 1–16. [46]  , A method for finding aggregated representations of linear dynamical systems, Advances in Complex Systems 13 (2010), no. 02, 199–215.  [47] Nicholas J Guido, Xiao Wang, David Adalsteinsson, David McMillen, Jeff Hasty, Charles R Cantor, Timothy C Elston, and JJ Collins, A bottom-up approach to gene regulation, Nature 439 (2006), no. 7078, 856–860. [48] J. Hartmanis and R. E. Stearns, On the computational complexity of algorithms, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 117 (1965), 285–306. MR 0170805 (30 #1040) [49] Werner Hildenbrand, Aggregation theory, Entry for The New Palgrave of Economics 2 (2007). [50] Mike Holcombe and WML Holcombe, Algebraic automata theory, vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, 2004. [51] Holmes, Philip, Lumley, John L., Berkooz, Gahl, Turbulence, coherent structures, dynamical systems and symmetry. Second edition. Cambridge Monographs on Mechanics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2012. [52] John E Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Ullman Rotwani, Jd: Introduction to automata theory, languages and computability, 2000. [53] N. Israeli and N. Goldenfeld, Computational irreducibility and the predictability of complex physical systems, Physical Review Letters 92 (2004), 074105. [54] Navot Israeli and Nigel Goldenfeld, Coarse-graining of cellular automata, emergence, and the predictability of complex systems, Physical Review E 73 (2006), no. 2, 026203. [55] Shalev Itzkovitz, Reuven Levitt, Nadav Kashtan, Ron Milo, Michael Itzkovitz, and Uri Alon, Coarse-graining and self-dissimilarity of complex networks, Physical Review E 71 (2005), no. 1, 016127. [56] Matthew O. Jackson, Tomas Rodriguez-Barraquer, and Xu Tan, Social capital and social quilts: Network patterns of favor exchange, American Economic Review 102 (2012), no. 5, 1857–97. [57] Martin Nilsson Jacobi and Olof Goernerup, A dual eigenvector condition for strong lumpability of Markov chains, arXiv preprint arXiv:0710.1986, 2007.  29  [58] Daniel A. Jiménez, Improved latency and accuracy for neural branch prediction, ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 23 (2005), no. 2, 197–218. [59] Leo P Kadanoff, Wolfgang Götze, David Hamblen, Robert Hecht, EAS Lewis, VV Palciauskas, Martin Rayl, J Swift, David Aspnes, and Joseph Kane, Static phenomena near critical points: theory and experiment, Reviews of Modern Physics 39 (1967), no. 2, 395. [60] Maciej Kamiński, Mingzhou Ding, Wilson A Truccolo, and Steven L Bressler, Evaluating causal relations in neural systems: Granger causality, directed transfer function and statistical assessment of significance, Biological cybernetics 85 (2001), no. 2, 145–157. [61] Marek Kimmel and David E. Axelrod, Branching processes in biology, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York, 2002. [62] Georgios Kotsalis, Alexandre Megretski, and Munther A. Dahleh. Balanced truncation for a class of stochastic jump linear systems and model reduction for hidden Markov models. IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, 53(11):2543–2557, 2008. [63] Georgios Kotsalis and Anders Rantzer. Balanced truncation for discrete time Markov jump linear systems. IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, 55(11):2606–2611, 2010. [64] Kotsalis, G. and Shamma, J.S., A counterexample to aggregation based model reduction of Hidden Markov Models, 2011 50th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control and European Control Conference (CDC-ECC), 6558–6563, 2011. [65] Kotsalis, G. and Shamma, J.S., A fundamental limitation to the reduction of Markov chains via aggregation, 2012 50th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), 1449–1454, 2012. [66] David C Krakauer, Darwinian demons, evolutionary complexity, and information maximization, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 21 (2011), no. 3, 037110. [67] David Krakauer, Nils Bertschinger, Eckehard Olbrich, Nihat Ay, and Jessica C. Flack. The information theory of individuality, arXiv:1412.2447, 2014. [68] David Krakauer, Jessica C. Flack, Simon DeDeo, Doyne Farmer, and Daniel Rockmore, Intelligent data analysis of intelligent systems, Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis IX, 8–17, 2010. [69] James Ladyman, James Lambert, and Karoline Wiesner, What is a complex system?, European Journal for Philosophy of Science 3 (2013), no. 1, 33–67. [70] S. Lall and C. Beck. Error-bounds for balanced model-reduction of linear time-varying systems, IEEE Trans. Automatic Control 48(6):946–956, 2003. [71] Rolf Landauer, Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process, IBM journal of research and development 5 (1961), no. 3, 183–191. [72]  , Minimal energy requirements in communication, Science 272 (1996), no. 5270, 1914–1918.  [73]  , The physical nature of information, Physics letters A 217 (1996), no. 4, 188–193. 30  [74] S. Lloyd, Physical measures of complexity, 1989 Lectures in Complex Systems (E. Jen, ed.), Addison Wesley, 1990. [75] Seth Lloyd, Use of mutual information to decrease entropy: Implications for the second law of thermodynamics, Physical Review A 39 (1989), no. 10, 5378. [76] Lorenz, Edward N., Empirical orthogonal functions and statistical weather prediction, Scientific Report No. 1, Statistical Forecasting Project, MIT Dept. of Meteorology, 1956. [77] D.J.C. Mackay, Information theory, inference, and learning algorithms, Cambridge University Press, 2003. [78] OJE Maroney, Generalizing landauer’s principle, Physical Review E 79 (2009), no. 3, 031105. [79] Sarah Marzen and J. P. Crutchfield, Circumventing the curse of dimensionality in prediction: causal rate-distortion for infinite-order Markov processes, arXiv:1412.2859, 2014. [80] Andrea Montanari and Amin Saberi, The spread of innovations in social networks, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (2010), no. 47, 20196–20201. [81] Moore, Bruce C. Principal component analysis in linear systems: controllability, observability, and model reduction, IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, vol. AC-26, no. 1, 17–32, 1981. [82] Cristopher Moore and Stephan Mertens, The nature of computation, Oxford University Press, 2011. [83] Mori, Hazime. Transport, collective motion, and Brownian motion. Prog. Theoret. Phys. 33(3):423–455, Mar 1965. [84] Brian Munsky and Mustafa Khammash, The finite state projection algorithm for the solution of the chemical master equation, The Journal of chemical physics 124 (2006), 044104. [85]  , The finite state projection approach for the analysis of stochastic noise in gene networks, Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on 53 (2008), no. Special Issue, 201– 214.  [86] Mark EJ Newman, The structure and function of complex networks, SIAM review 45 (2003), no. 2, 167–256. [87] David Papo, Massimiliano Zanin, Jos?Angel Pineda-Pardo, Stefano Boccaletti, and Javier M. Buld? Functional brain networks: great expectations, hard times and the big leap forward, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 369 (2014), no. 1653, 20130525. [88] Peherstorfer, B., Butnaru, D., Willcox, K. & Bungartz, H.J. Localized discrete empirical interpolation method. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 36(1):A168-A192, SIAM, 2014. [89] Oliver Pfante, Nils Bertschinger, Eckehard Olbrich, Nihat Ay, and Jürgen Jost, Comparison between different methods of level identification, Tech. Report 11-035, Santa Fe Institute, 2013. 31  [90] Martin B Plenio and Vincenzo Vitelli, The physics of forgetting: Landauer’s erasure principle and information theory, Contemporary Physics 42 (2001), no. 1, 25–60. [91] Mikhail Prokopenko and Joseph T Lizier, Transfer entropy and transient limits of computation, Scientific reports 4 (2014), 5394. [92] Mikhail Prokopenko, Joseph T Lizier, and Don C Price, On thermodynamic interpretation of transfer entropy, Entropy 15 (2013), no. 2, 524–543. [93] Stephen R Proulx, Daniel EL Promislow, and Patrick C Phillips, Network thinking in ecology and evolution, Trends in Ecology & Evolution 20 (2005), no. 6, 345 – 353. [94] Filippo Radicchi, José J. Ramasco, Alain Barrat, and Santo Fortunato, Complex networks renormalization: Flows and fixed points, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008), 148701. [95] Jorma Rissanen, A universal prior for integers and estimation by minimum description length, The Annals of statistics (1983), 416–431. [96] Takahiro Sagawa and Masahito Ueda, Minimal energy cost for thermodynamic information processing: measurement and information erasure, Physical Review Letters 102 (2009), no. 25, 250602. [97] Marissa G Saunders and Gregory A Voth, Coarse-graining methods for computational biology, Annual review of biophysics 42 (2013), 73–93. [98] Wilhelmus HA Schilders, Henk A Van der Vorst, and Joost Rommes, Model order reduction: theory, research aspects and applications, vol. 13, Springer, 2008. [99] Thomas Schreiber, Measuring information transfer, Physical Review Letters 85 (2000), no. 2, 461–464. [100] Reza Shadmehr, Maurice A Smith, and John W Krakauer, Error correction, sensory prediction, and adaptation in motor control, Annual review of neuroscience 33 (2010), 89–108. [101] Cosma Shalizi, Complexity, entropy and the physics of gzip, 2003, http://vserver1.cscs.lsa.umich.edu/˜ crshalizi/notebooks/cep-gzip.html. [102] Cosma Rohilla Shalizi, Causal architecture, complexity and self-organization in the time series and cellular automata, Ph.D. thesis, University of Wisconsin–Madison, 2001. [103] , C. R. Shalizi and J. P. Crutchfield, Information bottlenecks, causal states, and statistical relevance bases: how to represent relevant information in memoryless transduction, Advances in Complex Systems 5(1):91–95, 2002. [104] Cosma Rohilla Shalizi and Cristopher Moore, What is a macrostate? subjective observations and objective dynamics, arXiv preprint cond-mat/0303625, 2003. [105] Robert Shaw, The dripping faucet as a model chaotic system, Aerial Press, Santa Cruz, CA, 1984, Science Frontier Express Series. ISBN 0-942344-05-7. [106] Kousuke Shizume, Heat generation required by information erasure, Physical Review E 52 (1995), no. 4, 3495. 32  [107] Herbert A Simon and Albert Ando, Aggregation of variables in dynamic systems, Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society (1961), 111–138. [108] J. Maynard Smith, Time in the evolutionary process, Studium Generale 23 (1970), 266– 272. [109] J Maynard Smith, The concept of information in biology, Philosophy of Science 67 (2000), no. 2, 177–194. [110] Chaoming Song, Shlomo Havlin, and Hernan A. Makse, Self-similarity of complex networks, Nature 433 (2005), no. 7024, 392–395. [111] Susanne Still, Information bottleneck approach to predictive inference, Entropy 16 (2014), no. 2, 968–989. [112] susanne Still, James P. Crutchfield, and Christopher J. Ellison. Optimal causal inference: Estimating stored information and approximating causal architecture. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 20(3):037111, 2010. [113] Susanne Still, David A. Sivak, Anthony J. Bell, and Gavin E. Crooks, Thermodynamics of prediction, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012), 120604. [114] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1998. [115] Ross M. Thompson, Ulrich Brose, Jennifer A. Dunne, Robert O. Hall Jr., Sally Hladyz, Roger L. Kitching, Neo D. Martinez, Heidi Rantala, Tamara N. Romanuk, Daniel B. Stouffer, and Jason M. Tylianakis, Food webs: reconciling the structure and function of biodiversity, Trends in Ecology & Evolution 27 (2012), no. 12, 689 – 697. [116] Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William Bialek, The information bottleneck method, arXiv:physics/0004057, 2000. [117] Sara Imari Walker, Luis Cisneros, and Paul CW Davies, Evolutionary transitions and top-down causation, arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.4808, 2012. [118] Langford B White, Robert Mahony, and Gary D Brushe, Lumpable hidden markov models-model reduction and reduced complexity filtering, Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on 45 (2000), no. 12, 2297–2306. [119] Karoline Wiesner, Mile Gu, Elisabeth Rieper, and Vlatko Vedral, Information-theoretic lower bound on energy cost of stochastic computation, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Science 468 (2012), no. 2148, 4058–4066. [120] D. H. Wolpert, The minimal entropy generated during an irreversible computation, In preparation, 2014. [121] D. H. Wolpert and W. Macready, Self-dissimilarity: An empirically observable complexity measure, Unifying Themes in Complex Systems, New England Complex Systems Institute, 2000, pp. 626–643. [122]  , Using self-dissimilarity to quantify complexity, Complexity 12 (2007), 77–85.  [123] Zwanzig, Robert. Problems in nonlinear transport theory. In Systems far from equilibrium (Garrido, L., ed.), 198–225, 1980. 33

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
