Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3317

Abstract:
arXiv:1803.00294v1 [math.GR] 1 Mar 2018  AUT-INVARIANT WORD NORM ON RIGHT ANGLED ARTIN AND RIGHT ANGLED COXETER GROUPS MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI Abstract. We prove that the Aut-invariant word norm on right angled Artin and right angled Coxeter groups is unbounded (except in few special cases). To prove unboundedness we exhibit certain characteristic subgroups. This allows us to ﬁnd unbounded quasimorphisms which are Lipschitz with respect to the Aut-invariant word norm.  Let W be a right angled Artin group or a right angled Coxeter group. The full automorphism group, AutpW q, is a classical object studied both from combinatorial and geometrical point of view ([12], [7] and references therein, for right angled Artin groups we refer to a survey [14]). The examples of AutpW q include AutpFn q and AutpZ n q “ GLn pZq. If W is a right angled Artin group, then AutpW q interpolates between these two groups. In this paper we study the standard action of AutpW q on W in the relation to the Aut-invariant word norm on W . This word norm is defined analogously to the standard word norm when one requires invariance under the full automorphism group. For free groups and surface groups such norms were already studied in [3, 2]. Theorem 0.1. Let W be a right angled Artin or a right angled Coxeter group. The Aut-invariant word norm on W is bounded if and only if n W “ Z n , n ą 1 or W “ D8 ˆ C2m , where D8 is the infinite dihedral group and C2 is the group of order 2. The outline of the proof is as follows. First we determine which special subgroups of W are (almost) characteristic. Passing to the quotients allows us to reduce the problem to simpler Artin and Coxeter groups. Unboundedness is proven by finding unbounded quasimorphism on W which are Lipschitz with respect to the Aut-invariant word 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 51,20. Key words and phrases. Artin groups, Coxeter groups, quasimorphisms, Autinvariant norm. 1  2  MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  norm. It follows that if the Aut-invariant word norm is unbounded, there exist elements w P W which are undistorted in this norm. 1. Aut-invariant word norm and quasimorphisms In this paper we are interested in the Aut-invariant word norms. However, to prove our main result, we need to introduce a slightly broader class of norms. We say that two norms |¨|1 and |¨|2 are bi-Lipschitz equivalent, if there exist C P R such that C ´1 |¨|2 ď |¨|1 ď C|¨|2 . Suppose G is a finitely generated group and H ď AutpGq. Let S Ď G be a finite set such that S̄ “ HS “ tψpsq | ψ P H, s P Su generates G. By |¨|S̄ we denote the word norm associated to the subset S̄, i.e.: |x|S̄ “ mintn | x “ s1 . . . sn , where si P S̄ for each iu. This norm is H-invariant, i.e., |x|H “ |ψpxq|H for ψ P H. We define the H-invariant word norm on G to be the bi-Lipschitz equivalence class of |¨|S̄ . It is straightforward to show that this definition does not depend on the choice of S. Usually we refer to the H-invariant norm as to a genuine norm on G, implicitly choosing a representative of the bi-Lipschitz equivalence class. Example 1.1. (1) If H “ teu, then |¨|H is the standard word norm on a finitely generated group. (2) If H “ InnpGq, then |¨|H is the bi-invariant word norm. If G is a Coxeter group, the bi-invariant norm is equivalent to the reflection norm. Bi-invariant norms were studied in [10, 4]. (3) Let H “ AutpGq. If G is a free group, then |¨|H is equivalent to the primitive norm. If G is a surface group, then |¨|H is equivalent to the simple loops norm (see [3]). We are interested in the special case when H “ AutpGq. For simplicity we write |¨|Aut “ |¨|AutpGq when the group G is understood. The norm |¨|Aut is called the Aut-invariant word norm. For more detailed discussion on H-invariant word norms we refer to [3]. Let W be a right angled Artin or Coxeter group. In what follows, we need to focus not on |¨|Aut directly, but on |¨|H0 where H0 is a certain finite index subgroup of AutpW q. Due to the following lemma, these norms are equivalent.  AUT-INVARIANT WORD NORM ON GRAPH PRODUCTS  3  Lemma 1.2. Let H0 ď H ď AutpGq and let H0 be finite index in H. Then |¨|H and |¨|H0 are equivalent. Proof. Let S be a finite subset of G such that S̄ “ HS generates G. Since #pS̄{H0 q “ #pH{H0 q#pS̄{Hq, there exists a finite subset S 1 of G satisfying S̄ “ H0 S 1 . Thus |¨|S̄ can be used to define both |¨|H and |¨|H0 .  Let us recall a notion of a quasimorphism. A function q : G Ñ R is called a quasimorphism if |qpaq ´ qpabq ` qpbq| ă D for some D P R and all a, b P G. A quasimorphism is homogeneous if qpxn q “ nqpxq for all n P Z and all x P G. Homogeneous quasimorphisms are constant on conjugacy classes, i.e., qpxq “ qpyxy ´1q for all x, y P G. The homogenisation of q is defined by qpxs q q̄pxq “ lim . sÑ8 s The function q̄ is a homogeneous quasimorphism. Moreover, there exists C P R such that |qpxq ´ q̄pxq| ă C for every x P G. We refer to [5] for further details. An element x P G is undistorted in a norm |¨| if there exists a positive real number C such that |xn | ą Cn for all n P Z. Otherwise x is distorted. If x is undistorted in the Aut-invariant word norm, we call it Aut-undistorted. Otherwise x is Aut-distorted. The relation between quasimorphisms and H-invariant word norms is explained in the following Lemma. Lemma 1.3 ([3], Lemma 1.5). Let G be a group and let H ď AutpGq. Let S Ď G be a finite set such that S̄ “ HS generates G. If there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism q : G Ñ R bounded on S̄ and such that qpxq ‰ 0, then x is undistorted in |¨|H . 2. Graph products of abelian groups Right angled Coxeter groups and right angled Artin groups are graph products of abelian groups. In Section 4 we prove a more general version of Theorem 0.1 which involves all graph products of finitely generated abelian groups. This generality allows us to bring right angled Artin and Coxeter groups in a common framework. In this section we collect results on graph products of abelian groups and their automorphisms groups. We follow mainly [9].  4  MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Let Γ be a simplicial graph, V its vertex set and E its edge set. Let tGv uvPV be a collection of finitely generated abelian groups. The graph product given by Γ and tGv uvPV is the group W pΓ, tGv uq “ ˚tGv uvPV {N, where ˚tGv uvPV is the free product of groups Gv , and N is the normal subgroup generated by rGx , Gy s, px, yq P E. Let W be a graph product of finitely generated abelian groups. A cyclic group is primary if its order is a power of a prime number. It easy to see that there exists a graph Γ and a collection tGv uvPV such that W is isomorphic to W pΓ, tGv uq and each Gv is primary or infinite cyclic. Thus without loss of generality we may always assume that W is a graph product where each Gv is either primary cyclic or infinite cyclic. Throughout this section and Section 3, Γ is a finite simplicial graph, V its vertex set and tGv uvPV a collection of cyclic groups, each primary or infinite. Let WΓ “ W pΓ, tGv uq. For each v P V we fix a generator of Gv . Abusing notation, we call this generator again by v making no distinction between the generator of Gv and the vertex v. Given a vertex v P V , by Stpvq “ tw P V | rw, vs “ eu denote the star of v in Γ and by Lkpvq “ Stpvq ´ tvu the link of v in Γ. We define two partial preorders on V by: vďw v ďs w  ðñ ðñ  Lkpvq Ď Stpwq, Stpvq Ď Stpwq.  The preorder ď was already defined in [8] (see [8, Lemma 2.1] for the proof of transitivity of ď). Following [9], we describe generators of AutpWΓ q. They are grouped in four families. Since V generates WΓ , in the definitions below it amounts to specify maps from V to WΓ . In every case it is routine to check that a given map extends to an automorphism. (1) Let γ be an automorphism of Γ such that #Gv “ #Gγpvq . The automorphisms of W defined by the permutation of V given by γ is called a labelled graph automorphism. (2) A factor automorphism is an automorphism defined by: # vm z “ v ψv pzq “ z z ‰ v, where v P V , m P Z and pm, #Gv q “ 1. Note that if #Gv “ 8, then m “ ˘1.  AUT-INVARIANT WORD NORM ON GRAPH PRODUCTS  5  (3) Let v, w P V and v ‰ w. A dominated transvection is an automorphism having one of the following two forms: aq #Gv “ 8 and v ď w, then # vw z “ v τv,w pzq “ z z ‰ v, bq #Gv “ pk , #Gw “ pl , and v ďs w, then # vw q z “ v τv,w pzq “ z z ‰ v, where q “ maxt1, pl´k u and p is prime. (4) Let v P V and K a connected component of Γ´Stpvq. A partial conjugation is an automorphism defined by: # vzv ´1 z P K σv,K pzq “ z z R K. The pure automorphism group of W , denoted Aut0 pW q, is the subgroup of AutpW q generated by factor automorphisms, dominated transvections and partial conjugations. Proposition 2.1. Aut0 pW q is a normal finite index subgroup in AutpW q. Proof. Let F be a group generated by labelled graph automorphisms. It is shown in [9] that Aut0 pW q and F generate AutpW q. The group Aut0 pW q is invariant under conjugations by elements from F , thus Aut0 pW q is normal. Let F ˙ Aut0 pW q be the semidirect product defined by the conjugation action of F on Aut0 pW q. The natural homomorphism F ˙ Aut0 pW q Ñ AutpW q is onto. Since Aut0 pW q is finite index in F ˙ Aut0 pW q, it is so in AutpW q.  Due to Proposition 2.1 and Lemma 1.2 we have. Corollary 2.2. AutpWq-invariant word norm and Aut0 pW q-invariant word norm are equivalent. 3. Aut0 -invariant subgroups Assume that G is a group, H ď AutpGq and N ď G is an H-invariant subgroup. Let p : G Ñ G{N be the quotient map and let us define p˚ : H Ñ AutpG{Nq be p˚ pψqpgNq “ ψpgqN.  6  MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Suppose |¨|i is a norm on Gi , i “ 1, 2. A map f : G1 Ñ G2 is Lipschitz with respect to |¨|1 and |¨|2 if there exists C P R such that |f pxq|2 ď C|x|1 for every x P G. Lemma 3.1. The quotient map p : G Ñ G{N is Lipschitz with respect to |¨|H and |¨|p˚ pHq . Proof. Let S Ď G be a finite set such that S̄ “ HS generates G. Thus ppS̄q “ p˚ pHqppSq generates G{N and we can use S̄ to define |¨|H and ppS̄q to define |¨|p˚ pHq . Since p maps generators to generators, we have  that |¨|ppS̄q ď |¨|S̄ . Corollary 3.2. Let N ď WΓ be an Aut0 pWΓ q-invariant subgroup and let p : WΓ Ñ WΓ {N. If ppxq P WΓ {N is Aut-undistorted, then x is Aut-undistorted. Proof. Let H “ Aut0 pWΓ q. Note that we always have |¨|Aut ď |¨|p˚ pHq . Due to Lemma 3.1 and Corollary 2.2, p : WΓ Ñ WΓ {N is Lipschitz with respect to the Aut-invariant word norms. A pre-image of an undistorted element by a Lipschitz function is undistorted.  Let WΓ “ W pΓ, tGv uq be a graph product of cyclic groups, where each Gv is primary or infinite. Given X Ď V , we define WX to be the subgroup of WΓ generated by X. The group WX is called a standard subgroup of WΓ and is isomorphic to W pΓpXq, tGv uvPX q, where ΓpXq is the full subgraph of Γ spanned by X. A standard retraction is the map RX : WΓ Ñ WX defined by: # z zPX RX pzq “ e z R X. By KX we denote the kernel of RX . Lemma 3.3. Let X Ď V . The group KX is invariant under factor automorphisms and partial conjugations. Proof. Let ψ P AutpWΓ q be a factor automorphism or a partial conjugation. We shall define a map ψ0 P AutpWX q such that the following diagram commutes WΓ  RX  ψ  WΓ  WX ψ0  RX  WX .  AUT-INVARIANT WORD NORM ON GRAPH PRODUCTS  7  Then invariance of KX under ψ follows immediately. For ψ “ φv , a factor automorphism, we define: if v R X, then ψ0 “ id; if v P X, then ψ0 “ φv P AutpWX q. For ψ “ σv,K , a partial conjugation, we define: if v R X, then ψ0 “ id; if v P X, then # vzv ´1 z P X X K ψ0 pzq “ z z R X X K. In each case it is clear that ψ0 ˝ RX pzq “ RX ˝ ψpzq for each z P V , thus the diagram commutes.  In general KX is not invariant under dominated transvections. Suppose that there exist v R X and w P X such that #Gv “ 8 and v ď w. Then τv,w is well defined and v P KX , but τv,w pvq “ vw R KX . In Lemma 3.5 we show that existence of such v and w is the only reason why KX is not invariant under dominated transvections. Let ďτ be the relation defined on V by v ďτ w ðñ τv,w is well defined, i.e.: v ďτ w if either a) #Gv “ 8 and v ď w or b) #Gv “ pk , #Gw “ pl and v ďs w. Lemma 3.4. The relation ďτ is a partial preorder. Proof. It follows from the fact that ď and ďs are partial preorders.  Let Y be a set and ď a relation on Y . A subset X of Y is called a lower cone if for every t P X and s P Y such that s ď t, we have s P X. Lemma 3.5. If X Ď V is a lower cone with respect to ďτ , then KX is Aut0 pWΓ q-invariant. Proof. Due to Lemma 3.3 it is enough to show that KX is invariant under dominated transvections. Let τv,w P AutpWΓ q be a dominated transvection. By definition v ďτ w. We follow the strategy of Lemma 3.3. If w R X then we define ψ0 “ id. If w P X, then v P X since X is a lower cone. We define ψ0 “ τv,w P AutpWX q.  Corollary 3.6. Let X Ď V be a lower cone and let RX : WΓ Ñ WX be a standard retraction. If RX pxq P WX is Aut-undistorted, then x P WΓ is Aut-undistorted.  8  MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Proof. KX “ KerpRX q is Aut0 pWΓ q-invariant. We apply Corollary 3.2.  Denote v „τ w ðñ v ďτ w and w ďτ v. Since ďτ is a partial preorder, it defines a partial order on equivalence classes of „τ . We denote this partial order again by ďτ . Equivalence classes of „τ fall into 3 types which we describe below. Let X Ď V be an equivalence class of „τ . If for some v P X we have #Gv “ 8, then #Gx “ 8 for every x P X. If there exist v, w P X, v ‰ w such that w and v commute, then every two elements of X commute. In this case WX is free abelian. If there exist v, w P X such that w and v do not commute, then every two elements of X do not commute. In this case WX is a free group. If for some v P X we have #Gv “ pk , then #Gx “ plx for some lx P N for every x P X. Note that in this case WX is always abelian and finite. If X1 and X2 are equivalence classes and there exist v1 P X1 and v2 P X2 such that v1 and v2 commute, then every element of X1 commute with every element of X2 . In this case we say that X1 and X2 commute. 4. Proof of the main theorem In this section we prove the following theorem which is a generalisation of Theorem 0.1 from the introduction. Theorem 4.1. Let Γ be a finite graph, V its vertex set and let tGv uvPV be a family of finitely generated abelian groups. The Aut-invariant word m norm on WΓ is bounded if and only if WΓ “ Z n ˆ D8 ˆ F , where n ‰ 1 and F is finite. If the Aut-invariant word norm on WΓ is unbounded, then WΓ has Aut-undistorted elements. The proof of Theorem 4.1 is by induction on the number of equivalence classes of „τ and it is preceded by a number of lemmata. Lemma 4.2 and Lemma 4.3 are used for the basis of induction. In Lemma 4.4 we introduce quasimorphisms we use in the proof. Finally, in Lemma 4.5 we show the main technical result needed for the inductive step. Lemma 4.2. The Aut-invariant word norm on the infinite dihedral group D8 is bounded.  AUT-INVARIANT WORD NORM ON GRAPH PRODUCTS  9  Proof. Let S “ ta, bu and S̄ “ AutpD8 qS. Let w P D8 . Then w is an alternating product of a and b. If the length of this product is odd, then w is a conjugate of a or b, and w P S̄. If the length is even, then w is a product of a or b and a conjugate of a or b, then |w|S̄ ď 2.  Lemma 4.3. Let Γ be a finite graph, V its vertex set and tGv uvPV a family of primary or infinite cyclic groups. Assume that „τ has only one equivalence class. Then there are two cases: a) WΓ “ Fn , a free group, then WΓ has Aut-undistorted elements, b) WΓ “ Z n , n ą 1 or WΓ is finite and then the Aut-invariant word norm is bounded. Proof. a) WΓ “ Fn . If n “ 1, then AutpWΓ q “ t˘1u and clearly every non-trivial element of Z is Aut-undistorted. If n ą 2, let S “ txu where x P Fn is a base element. The set S̄ “ AutpWΓ qS is the set of all primitive elements of Fn and it generates Fn . In [2] it is shown that there exist non-zero homogeneous quasimorphisms on Fn , which are bounded on S̄. Thus by Lemma 1.3, Fn has Aut-undistorted elements. b) WΓ “ Z n , n ą 1. For simplicity suppose n “ 2. If n ą 2 the proof goes along the same lines. Let S “ tp1, 0qu, then S̄ “ AutpZ 2 qS “ tpa, bq | a, b are relatively primeu. For pm, nq P Z 2 , we have pm, nq “ p1, n ´ 1q ` pm ´ 1, 1q, thus  |pm, nq|S̄ ď 2. Lemma 4.4. Let G “ G1 ˚G2 , G1 ‰ e, G2 ‰ e and G ‰ D8 . There exists a non-zero homogeneous quasimorphism on G bounded on G1 Y G2 . Proof. A function f : G Ñ R is odd if f px´1 q “ f pxq´1 for every x P G. Note that if G ‰ C2k , where C2 is the group of order 2, then there exists a non-zero odd function on G. Assume that G1 or G2 is not of the form C2k . Below we describe a construction from [13, Section 3.2] of so called split quasimorphisms. Let σ1 : G1 Ñ R and σ2 : G2 Ñ R be bounded odd functions such that one of them is non-zero. Let x P G and let x “ x1 x2 . . . xn be the normal form of x in the free product, i.e. xi P Gspiq and spiq ‰ spi ` 1q. Then σ1 ˚ σ2 pxq “ σsp1q px1 q ` . . . ` σspnq pxn q is an unbounded quasimorphism. It follows that the homogenisation of σ1 ˚ σ2 is non-zero and is bounded on G1 Y G2 .  10  MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  If G “ C2k1 ˚ C2k2 and k1 ą 1 or k2 ą 1, then G is non-elementary word  hyperbolic, and the lemma follows from [6, Theorem A’]. Lemma 4.5. Let Γ be a finite graph, V its vertex set and tGv uvPV a family of primary or infinite cyclic groups. Let M Ď V be an equivam lence class of „τ . Suppose WΓ “ WM ˚ pZ n ˆ D8 ˆ F q, where n ‰ 1 and F is finite. Then WΓ has Aut-undistorted elements, provided that WΓ ‰ D8 . Proof. The class M is minimal. Indeed, assume by contradiction that v P M, w P V ´ M and w ďτ v. If #Gw ă 8, then Stpwq Ď Stpvq and w commutes with v which leads to a contradiction. If #Gw “ 8, then Lkpwq Ă Stpvq and since n ą 1, there exists w 1 P Lkpwq which commutes with v, again a contradiction. Let RM : WΓ Ñ WM be a standard retraction. It follows from Corollary 3.6 that if WM has Aut-undistorted elements, then WΓ has Autundistorted elements and the lemma is proven. Let us assume that WM has no Aut-undistorted elements. Since M is an equivalence class, it follows that WM “ Z n , n ą 1 or WM is finite. Now we show that in this case M is also a maximal class. Assume by contradiction that v P M and w P V ´ M and v ďτ w. If WM is finite, then Stpvq Ď Stpwq and v commutes with w which leads to a contradiction. If WM “ Z n , then Lkpvq Ď Stpwq and there exists v 1 P Lkpvq which commutes with w, again a contradiction. We showed that M is maximal and minimal. Thus if a dominated transvection τv,w is well defined, then v, w P M or v, w P V ´ M. Let pWM Y WV ´M qWΓ “ tyxy ´1 | y P WΓ , x P WM Y WV ´M u. It is clear that pWM Y WV ´M qWΓ is preserved by dominated transvections, factor automorphisms and partial conjugations. It follows that pWM Y WV ´M qWΓ is an Aut0 pWΓ q-invariant subset. Assume that WΓ ‰ D8 and let q be a homogeneous quasimorphism from Lemma 4.4, where G1 “ WM and G2 “ WV ´M . Let S “ V and S̄ “ Aut0 pWΓ qS. If x P S̄, then x “ yx0 y ´1 , where x0 P WM Y WV ´M and y P WΓ . We have qpxq “ qpx0 q, thus q is bounded on S̄. Due to Lemma 1.3 and Corollary 2.2, WΓ has Aut-undistorted elements.  Proof of Theorem 4.1. We may assume that for every v P V the group Gv is primary or infinite cyclic (see Section 2).  AUT-INVARIANT WORD NORM ON GRAPH PRODUCTS  11  m Let us first note, that if WΓ “ Z n ˆ D8 ˆ F , n ‰ 1, F finite, then the Aut-invariant word norm on WΓ is bounded. Indeed, |¨|Aut is bounded on Z n and D8 (Lemma 4.3 and Lemma 4.2) and Cartesian product of groups with bounded Aut-invariant word norms has bounded Autinvariant word norm.  Now we proceed by induction on the number of equivalence classes of „τ . The case when Γ has exactly one equivalence class was considered in Lemma 4.3. Let M Ă Γ be a maximal equivalence class. Then V ´ M is a lower cone. It follows from Corollary 3.6 that if WM ´V has Aut-undistorted elements, then so has WM . Let us assume that WM ´V has no Aut-undistorted elements. Let ΓpV ´Mq be the full subgraph of Γ spanned by vertices V ´M. The relation „τ defined with respect to ΓpV ´ Mq has less equivalence classes then the relation „τ defined with respect to Γ. Thus, by induction m hypothesis, we have WV ´M “ Z n ˆ D8 ˆ F , n ‰ 1, F finite. Let us remind that if v P V ´ M commutes with some w P M, then v commutes with every element of M. We define L “ tv P V ´ M | rv, ws ‰ e for w P Mu. If L is empty, then WΓ “ WM ˆ WV ´M and the theorem easily follows. m1 Let us assume that L is non-empty. We have WL “ Z n1 ˆ D8 ˆ F 1, where F 1 is finite. Note that the set of vertices generating Z n1 is a minimal equivalence class in V , thus if n1 “ 1, then by Corollary 3.6, WΓ has Aut-undistorted elements. Thus let us assume that n1 ‰ 1. The set M Y L is a lower cone in Γ. Indeed, if v P L and w ďτ v, then Lkpwq Ă Stpvq Ă V ´ M, thus w P L. Hence WΓ has Autundistorted elements provided that WM ‰ C2 or WL ‰ C2 (Lemma 4.5 and Corollary 3.6). There is one last case to consider, namely WM “ WL “ C2 . Let v0 P V be the generator of WL and w the generator of WM . Note that v0 P F . Indeed, otherwise v0 would be a generator of a D8 factor of WV ´M . Then the other generator of D8 , say v1 , would commute with w and then Stpwq Ď Stpv1 q which gives w ďτ v1 . This contradicts maximality of w. Thus v0 P F and m m`1 WΓ “ Z n ˆ D8 ˆ xw, v0 y ˆ F {xvy “ Z n ˆ D8 ˆ F {xvy,  a group with bounded Aut-invariant word norm.    12  MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  5. Problems Problem 5.1. For which WΓ there exist a non-zero homogeneous Autinvariant (or Aut0 pWΓ q-invariant) quasimorphism on WΓ ? If there exists a non-zero homogeneous AutpGq-invariant quasimorphism on G, then the Aut-invariant word metric is automatically unbounded. For WΓ “ Fn , Problem 5.1 was posed by Miklós Abért (see [1, Question 47]). The answer is positive if WΓ is the free group of rank two [3, Theorem 2]. We say that x P G is Aut-bounded, if there exists C P R such that |xn |Aut ă C for every n P Z. Problem 5.2. Is every Aut-distorted element of WΓ also Aut-bounded? If x P WΓ is Aut-undistorted, does there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism q : WΓ Ñ R which is Lipschitz with respect to the Autinvariant word norm and such that qpxq ‰ 0? Problem 5.3. Characterise Aut-distorted and Aut-undistorted elements of WΓ . For free groups, Theorem 2.10 in [3] provides a simple characterisation of Aut-undistorted (or bounded) elements. References [1] Miklós Abért. Some questions. http://www.renyi.hu/„abert/questions.pdf. [2] Valery Bardakov, Vladimir Shpilrain, and Vladimir Tolstykh. On the palindromic and primitive widths of a free group. J. Algebra, 285(2):574–585, 2005. [3] M Brandenbursky and M. Marcinkowski. Aut-invariant norms and Autinvariant quasimorphisms on free and surface groups. ArXiv:1702.01662. [4] Michael Brandenbursky, Światosław R. Gal, Jarek Kędra, and MichałMarcinkowski. The cancellation norm and the geometry of bi-invariant word metrics. Glasg. Math. J., 58(1):153–176, 2016. [5] Danny Calegari. scl, volume 20 of MSJ Memoirs. Mathematical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 2009. [6] Danny Calegari and Koji Fujiwara. Stable commutator length in wordhyperbolic groups. Groups Geom. Dyn., 4(1):59–90, 2010. [7] Ruth Charney, Kim Ruane, Nathaniel Stambaugh, and Anna Vijayan. The automorphism group of a graph product with no SIL. Illinois J. Math., 54(1):249– 262, 2010. [8] Ruth Charney and Karen Vogtmann. Finiteness properties of automorphism groups of right-angled Artin groups. Bull. Lond. Math. Soc., 41(1):94–102, 2009.  AUT-INVARIANT WORD NORM ON GRAPH PRODUCTS  13  [9] L. J. Corredor and M. A. Gutierrez. A generating set for the automorphism group of a graph product of abelian groups. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 22(1):1250003, 21, 2012. [10] Światosław R. Gal and Jarek Kędra. On bi-invariant word metrics. J. Topol. Anal., 3(2):161–175, 2011. [11] Mauricio Gutierrez and Adam Piggott. Rigidity of graph products of abelian groups. Bull. Aust. Math. Soc., 77(2):187–196, 2008. [12] Mauricio Gutierrez, Adam Piggott, and Kim Ruane. On the automorphisms of a graph product of abelian groups. Groups Geom. Dyn., 6(1):125–153, 2012. [13] Cristina Pagliantini and Pascal Rolli. Relative second bounded cohomology of free groups. Geom. Dedicata, 175:267–280, 2015. [14] Karen Vogtmann. GLpn, Zq, OutpFn q and everything in between: automorphism groups of RAAGs. In Groups St Andrews 2013, volume 422 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 105–127. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2015. Regensburg Universität & Uniwersytet Wrocławski E-mail address: marcinkow@math.uni.wroc.pl

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
