Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_3053

Abstract:
arXiv:1711.03239v2 [cs.PL] 17 Nov 2017  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications Osbert Bastani  Rahul Sharma  Stanford University USA obastani@cs.stanford.edu  Microsoft Research India rahsha@microsoft.com  Alex Aiken  Percy Liang  Stanford University USA aiken@cs.stanford.edu  Stanford University USA pliang@cs.stanford.edu  Abstract  static analysis [4, 11, 23, 25, 31, 38]. In particular, tools have been designed to infer properties of missing code, including taint flow properties [13], function models [18, 19], and callback control flow [20]. While these approaches are incomplete, and may not infer sound specifications, current static analyses used in production already rely on user-provided specifications [14], and as we will show, tools that automatically infer specifications can outperform human analysts. We propose an algorithm based on dynamic analysis that infers library specifications summarizing points-to effects relevant to a flow-insensitive points-to analysis. Our algorithm works by iteratively guessing a candidate specification, and then checking whether this candidate is “correct”. More precisely, we want to only infer specifications that must be included in any sound set of specifications, thus avoiding spurious specifications that cause false positives. There are two constraints that make our problem substantially more challenging than previously studied settings:  When analyzing programs, large libraries pose significant challenges to static points-to analysis. A popular solution is to have a human analyst provide points-to specifications that summarize relevant behaviors of library code, which can substantially improve precision and furthermore handle missing code such as native code. We propose Atlas, a tool that automatically infers points-to specifications. Atlas synthesizes unit tests that exercise the library code, and then infers points-to specifications based on observations from these executions. Atlas automatically infers specifications for the Java standard library, and produces better results for a client static information flow analysis on a benchmark of 46 Android apps compared to using existing handwritten specifications.  1  Introduction  When analyzing programs, dependencies on large libraries can significantly reduce the effectiveness of static analysis, since libraries frequently contain (i) native code that cannot be analyzed, (ii) use of challenging language features such as reflection, and (iii) deep call hierarchies that reduce precision. For example, the implementation of the Vector class in OpenJDK 1.7 uses multiple levels of call indirection and calls the native function System.arrayCopy. A standard workaround is to use specifications that summarize the relevant behaviors of library functions [14, 47]. For a one-time cost of writing specifications for the library, the precision and soundness of the static analysis can improve dramatically when analyzing any client code. However, many libraries contain a large number of functions, making writing specifications for the entire library expensive [8, 47]. Additionally, manually written specifications are often error prone [18]. Finally, every time the library code is updated, the specifications must be updated. To address these issues, approaches have been proposed for automatically inferring specifications for library code, both based on dynamic analysis [3, 7, 29, 34, 35] and on  • Points-to effects cannot be summarized for a library function in isolation, e.g., in Figure 1, set, get, and clone all refer to the mutual field f. Furthermore, f is not from the library implementation; it is a ghost field that must be invented by the inference algorithm. Thus, a guessed candidate must simultaneously summarize the points-to effects of set, get, and clone. • In practice it is often difficult or impossible to instrument library code (e.g., native code); we assume only blackbox access. To address these challenges, we introduce path specifications to describe points-to effects of library code. Each path specification summarizes a single points-to effect of a combination of functions. An example is: For two calls box.set(x) and box.get(), the return value of get may alias x. Path specifications have two desirable properties: (i) we can check if a candidate path specification is correct using inputoutput examples, and (ii) correctness of path specifications is independent. These two properties imply that we can infer path specifications incrementally. In particular, we propose an active learning algorithm that infers specifications by  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 2017. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 1  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  boolean test() { Object in = new Object(); // o_in Box box = new Box(); // o_box box.set(in); Object out = box.get(); return in == out; }  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang class Box { // library Object f; void set(Object ob) { f = ob; } Object get() { return f; } Box clone() { Box b = new Box(); // o_clone b.f = f; return b; }}  Figure 1. An example of a program using the Box class in the library (right), and the implementation of the library functions set, get, and clone in the Box class. actively identifying promising candidate specifications, and then automatically checking their correctness. We implement our algorithm in a tool called Atlas,1 which infers path specifications for functions in Java libraries. In particular, we evaluate Atlas by using it to infer specifications for the Java standard library, including the Collections API, which contains many functions that exhibit complex points-to effects. We evaluate Atlas using a standard static explicit information flow client [6, 7, 16, 17] on a benchmark of 46 Android apps. Our client uses handwritten points-to specifications for the Java standard library [8, 47]. Over the course of two years, we have handwritten a number of pointsto specifications tailored to finding information flows in apps we analyzed, including those in our benchmark. However, these specifications remain incomplete. We use Atlas to infer specifications for classes in six commonly used packages in the Java standard library. Atlas inferred more than 5× as many specifications as the existing, handwritten ones. We show that using the specifications inferred by Atlas instead of the handwritten ones improves the recall of our information flow client by 52%. Moreover, we manually wrote ground truth specifications for the most frequently used subset of classes in the Collections API, totalling 1,731 lines of code, and show that Atlas inferred the correct specifications (i.e., identical to handwritten ground truth specifications) for 97% of these functions. Finally, we show that on average, using specifications more than halves the number of false positive points-to edges compared to directly analyzing the library implementation— in particular, the library implementation contains deep call hierarchies, which our points-to analysis is insufficiently context-sensitive to handle. Our contributions are: • We introduce path specifications, and prove that they are sufficiently expressive to precisely model the library code when using a standard flow-insensitive points-to analysis. • We formulate the problem of inferring path specifications as a language inference problem and design a novel specification inference algorithm. • We implement our approach in Atlas, and use it to infer a large number of useful specifications for the 1 Atlas  Java standard library. In particular, we show that our specification inference tool can automatically replicate and even improve the results of our existing static information flow client.  2  Overview  Consider the program test shown in Figure 1. We assume that the static analysis resolves aliasing using Andersen’s analysis [5], a context- and flow-insensitive points-to analysis; our approach also applies to cloning-based context- and object-sensitive extensions [43]. To determine that variables in and out may be aliased, the points-to analysis has to reason about the heap effects of the set and get methods in the Box class. The analyst can write specifications for library functions class that summarize their heap effects with respect to the semantics of the points-to analysis. For example, consider the Stack class in the Java library: its implementation extends Vector, which is challenging to analyze due to deep call hierarchies and native code. The following are the specifications for the Stack class, implemented as code fragments that overapproximate the heap effects of the methods: class Stack { Object f; void push(Object ob) { f = ob; } Object pop() { return f; }}  In contrast to the implementation, the specifications for Stack are very simple and easy to analyze. In fact, these specifications are not only sound but also precise, since we are considering a flow-insensitive points-to analysis that collapses arrays into a single field. A typical approach is to write specifications lazily [8, 47]— the analyst examines the program being analyzed, identifies the library functions most relevant to the static analysis, and writes specifications for them. The effort put in writing specifications helps reduce the labor required to discharge false positives.2 The analyst can trade off between manual effort and soundness by expending more effort as needed to increase the completeness of the library specifications. Atlas helps bootstrap the specification writing process by automatically inferring points-to specifications. In accordance with the goal of reducing false positives, Atlas 2 In  contrast to the recurring cost of debugging false positives, the cost of implementing specifications is amortized over many programs.  stands for AcTive Learning of Alias Specifications. 2  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Testing specifications. Path specifications satisfy two key requirements. The first requirement is that we can check the precision of a single path specification. For example, for the specification s box , consider the program test shown in Figure 1. This unit test satisfies three properties:  prioritizes the precision of the inferred specifications by employing a two-phase approach. In the first phase, Atlas infers specifications guaranteed to be precise. In particular, each inferred specification s comes with a witness, which intuitively is a unit test that proves the precision of s by exhibiting the heap effects specified by s. In the second phase, Atlas inductively generalizes the specifications inferred in the first phase, devising a large number of checks to minimize the possibility of imprecision.  • It satisfies the assumptions of s box , since thisset and thisget are aliased. • It does not induce any other relations between the variables at the interface of the Box class (i.e., ob, thisset , i, thisget , and r get ). • It returns the consequent of s box , i.e., whether ob and r get point to the same object.  Specification search space. The main challenge in inferring points-to specifications is to formulate the search space of candidate specifications. Naïvely searching over the space of code fragments is ineffective because specifications are highly interdependent, i.e., the specification of a library function is dependent on the specifications of other functions. For example, the specifications for each of the methods in the Box class all refer to the shared field f. Thus, to infer precise specifications, the naïve algorithm would have to guess a code fragment for every the functions in the library (or at least in a class) before it can check for precision; the likelihood that it could make a correct guess is tiny. Our key insight is that while specifications cannot be broken at function boundaries, we can decompose them in a different way. In particular, we propose path specifications, which are independent units of points-to effects. Intuitively, a path specification is a dataflow path an object might take through library code. An example of a path specification is s box = ob d thisset → thisget d r get .  Since test returns true, any sound set of specifications must include s box , so s box is precise. We refer to such a unit test as a witness for the path specification. In summary, long as we can find a witness for a candidate path specification s, then we can guarantee that s is precise. One caveat is that even if test returns false, s box may still be precise. Therefore, to check if a candidate path specification s is precise, our algorithm can synthesize a unit test P similar to test and execute it. If P returns true, then our algorithm concludes that s is precise; otherwise, it (conservatively) concludes that s is imprecise. Note that s may be precise even if P returns false; this possibility is unavoidable since executions are underapproximations. We use heuristics to ensure that our algorithm rarely concludes that precise specifications are imprecise. We describe our unit test synthesis algorithm in detail in Section 5.4. The second requirement of path specifications that they are independent, i.e., given a set of path specifications for which each specification has a witness, then the set as a whole is precise in the sense that it is a subset of any sound set of path specifications. In other words, we can use a potential witness to check the precision of a path specification in isolation. Thus, our specification inference algorithm can focus on inferring individual path specifications.  (1)  This path specification roughly has the following semantics: • Suppose that an object o enters the library code as the parameter ob of set; then, it is associated with the receiver thisset of the set method (the edge ob d thisset ). • Suppose that in the client program, thisset is aliased with thisget (the edge thisset → thisget ); then, o enters the get method. • Then, o exits the library as the return value r get of get.  Specification inference. Our specification inference algorithm uses two inputs:  In particular, the dashed edges ob d thisset and thisget d r get represent the effects of library code, and the solid edge thisset → thisget represents an assumption about the effects of client code. Then, the path specification says that, if the points-to analysis determines that thisget and thisset are aliased, then ob is transfered to r get , which intuitively means that ob is indirectly assigned to r get . More precisely, the semantics of s box is the following logical formula: Alias  Transfer  (thisset −−−→ thisget ) ⇒ (ob −−−−−−→ r get ).  • Library interface: The type signature of each function in the library. • Blackbox access: The ability to execute a library function on a chosen input and obtain the corresponding output. In the first phase (described in Section 5.2), Atlas randomly guesses a candidate path specification s, synthesizes a potential witness for s, and retains s if this unit test returns true. This process is repeated a large number of times to obtain a large but finite set of precise path specifications. In general, to soundly model library code, an infinite number of path specifications may be required. For example, the path specifications required to soundly model set, get, and  (2)  A  Here, an edge x − → y says that program variables x and y satisfy a binary relation A. We describe path specifications in detail in Section 4. 3  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA y ←x  (assign)  (allocation)  Assign  (store)  Store[f ]  o = (x ← X ())  Transfer → ε | Transfer Assign | Transfer Store[f ] Alias Load[f ]  New  o −−−→ o  x −−−−−→ y y .f ← x  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  (load)  y ← x .f Load[f ]  Transfer → ε | Assign Transfer | Load[f ] Alias Store[f ] Transfer  σ  (backwards)  x −→ y  Alias → Transfer New New Transfer  σ  y −→ x x −−−−−−→ y y ← m(x ) y ← m(x ) (call parameter) (call return) Assign Assign x −−−−−→ pm rm −−−−−→ y x −−−−−−→ y  FlowsTo → New Transfer  Figure 3. Productions for the context-free grammar C pt . The start symbol of C pt is FlowsTo.  Figure 2. Rules for constructing a graph G encoding the relevant semantics of program statements.  3  clone are ob d thisset ( → thisclone d r clone )∗  Background on Points-To Analysis  We consider programs with assignments y ← x (where x, y ∈ V are variables), allocations x ← X () (where X ∈ C is a type), stores y.f ← x and loads y ← x .f (where f ∈ F is a field), and calls to library functions y ← m(x) (where m ∈ M is a library function). For simplicity, we assume that each library function m has a single parameter pm and a return value rm . An abstract object o ∈ O is an allocation statement o = (x ← X ()). A points-to edge is a pair x ,→ o ∈ V × O. A static points-to analysis computes points-to edges Π ⊆ V × O. Our results are for Andersen’s analysis, a flowinsensitive points-to analysis [5], but generalize to objectand context-sensitive extensions based on cloning [43]. We describe the formulation of Andersen’s analysis as a contextfree language reachability problem [21, 22, 32, 40, 41].  (3)  → thisget d r get . These specifications say that if we call set, then call clone n times in sequence, and finally call get (all with the specified aliasing between receivers and return values), then the parameter ob of set is transfered to the return value of get. Thus, in the second phase (described in Section 5.3), we inductively generalize the set S of path specifications in the first phase to a possibly infinite set. We leverage the idea that a path specification is simply a sequence of variables, ∗ in particular, s ∈ Vpath where Vpath are the variables in the library interface. Thus, a set of path specifications is a formal language over the alphabet Vpath . As a consequence, we can frame the inductive generalization problem as a language inference problem: given (i) the finite set of positive examples from phase one, and (ii) an oracle we can query to determine whether a given path specification s is precise (though this oracle is noisy, i.e., it may return false even if s is precise), ∗ . the goal is to infer a (possibly infinite) language S ⊆ Vpath We devise an active language learning algorithm to solve this problem. Our algorithm proposes candidate inductive generalizations of S, and then checks the precision of these candidates using a large number of synthesized unit tests. Unlike phase one, we may introduce imprecision even if all the unit tests pass; we show empirically that precision is maintained. Finally, our algorithm infers a regular set of path specifications. In theory, no regular set may suffice to model the library code and more expressive language inference techniques might be required [10]. But we find that, in practice, regular sets are sufficient (see Section 7.3). In our example, suppose that phase one infers  Graph representation. First, our static analysis constructs a labeled graph G representing the program semantics. The vertices of G are V ∪ O. The edge labels are Σpt = {Assign, New, Store, Load, Assign, New, Load, Store} that encode the semantics of program statements. The rules for constructing G are in Figure 2. For example, the edges extracted for the program test in Figure 1 are the solid edges in Figure 4. Transitive closure. Second, our static analysis computes e of G according to the context-free the transitive closure G α grammar C pt in Figure 3. A path y 99K x in G is a sequence of edges σ1  σ2  σk  x −−→ v 1 −−→ ... −−→ y e contains (i) the edges such that α = σ1 ...σk ∈ Σ∗pt . Then, G α  σ  x− → y in G, and (ii) if there is a path x 99K y in G such that A  ∗  A⇒ = α (where A is a nonterminal of C pt ), the edge x − → y. e using dynamic programming; see [26]. We can compute G The first production in Figure 3 constructs the transfer  ob d thisset → thisclone d r clone → thisclone d r clone → thisget d r get .  Transfer  relation x −−−−−−→ y, which says that x may be “indirectly assigned” to y. The second production constructs the “backwards” transfer relation. The third production constructs  Then, phase two would inductively generalize it to (3). Finally, our tool automatically converts these path specifications to the equivalent code fragment specifications shown in Figure 1 (right). These code fragment specifications can be used in place of (or in the absence of) library implementations while analyzing a client.  Alias  the alias relation x −−−→ y, which says that x may alias y. The fourth production computes the points-to relation, i.e., FlowsTo e x ,→ o whenever o −−−−−−→ x ∈ G. 4  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA FlowsTo  FlowsTo New  o in  Transfer  in  Assign  Store[f]  o box Transfer  thisset  Assign  New  Transfer  in  Assign  o box  ob  r get  Transfer  New Transfer Assign  box  Load[f]  thisset  thisget  out Assign  Transfer  Assign  Transfer  ob  o in  out  Assign  r get  New Transfer Assign  box  thisget  Alias  Alias Alias  Transfer  (thisset −−−−→ thisget ) ⇒ (ob −−−−−−→ r get )  e computed by the static analysis with the library code, and the right-hand side Figure 4. The left-hand side shows the graph G e shows G computed with path specifications (the relevant path specification is shown below the graph). The solid edges are the e when graph G extracted from the program test shown in Figure 1. In addition, the dashed edges are a few of the edges in G computing the transitive closure. We omit backward edges (i.e., with labels A) for clarity. Vertices and edges corresponding to library code are highlighted in red.  4  where zi , w i ∈ Vmi for library function mi ∈ M. We require that w i and zi+1 are not both return values, and that w k is a return value. For clarity, we typically use the syntax  Path Specifications  Suppose that our static analysis could analyze the library implementation, and that while computing the transitive e contains a path closure, G β1  A1  z 1 d w 1 → z 2 d ... d w k −1 → zk d w k .  βk  Ak −1  Semantics. Given path specification (4), for each i ∈ [k], define the nonterminal Ai in the grammar C pt to be  z 1 99K w 1 −−→ ... −−−−→ zk 99K w k . Here, z 1 , w 1 , ..., zk , w k ∈ Vpath , where Vpath contains the parameters and return values of library functions, β 1 , ..., βk ∈ Σ∗pt , A1 , ..., Ak−1 ∈ are nonterminals in C pt , and    Transfer if w i = rmi and zi+1 = pmi +1    Ai = Alias if w i = pmi and zi+1 = pmi +1    Transfer if w i = pm and zi+1 = rm . i i +1   ∗  A⇒ = β 1A1 ...βk −1Ak−1 βk .  Also, define the nonterminal A by ( Transfer if z 1 = pm1 A= Alias if z 1 = rm1 .  A e Then, our static analysis would add edge z 1 − → w k to G as well. Path specifications ensure that the static analysis computes these edges when the library code is unavailable. In particular, as above, a path specification says that if β1  Then, the path specification corresponds to adding a rule ! k −1 Û Ai A e ⇒ (z 1 − e w i −−→ zi+1 ∈ G → w k ∈ G)  βk  A1  e z 1 99K w 1 −−→ z 2 , ..., zk 99K w k ∈ G, A e as well. then the static analysis must add z 1 − → w k to G For example, while analyzing test in Figure 1 with the library code on the right available, the analysis sees the path Store[f]  Alias  (4)  i=1  to the static points-to analysis. The rule also adds the backA e but we omit it for clarity. We refer wards edge w k − → z 1 to G, to the antecedent of this rule as the premise of the path specification, and the consequent of this rule as the conclusion of the path specification. Continuing our example, the path specification s box shown in (1) has the semantics  Load[f]  ob −−−−−−→ thisset −−−→ thisget −−−−−→ r get . ∗  Since Transfer ⇒ = Store[f] Transfer Load[f], the analysis Transfer  adds edge ob −−−−−−→ r get . As we describe below, the path specification s box shown in (1) ensures that this edge is added e when the library code is unavailable. to G  Alias  Transfer  (thisset −−−→ thisget ) ⇒ (ob −−−−−−→ r get ). Alias  Syntax. Let Vprog be the variables in the program (i.e., excluding variables in the library), let Vm = {pm , rm } be the parameter and Ð return value of library function m ∈ M, and let Vpath = m ∈M Vm be the visible variables (i.e., variables at the library interface). A path specification is a sequence  This rule says that if the static analysis computes thisset −−−→ Transfer e then it must add ob −− e For exthisget ∈ G, −−−−→ r get to G. ample, this rule is applied in Figure 4 (right) to compute Transfer  ob −−−−−−→ r get . The middle column of Figure 5 shows examples of candidate path specifications for the library code shown in the first column.  ∗ z 1w 1z 2w 2 ...zk w k ∈ Vpath ,  5  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Code Fragment Specifications  void set(Object ob) { f = ob; } Object get() { return f; }  void set(Object ob) { f = ob; } Object clone() { return f; }  void set(Object ob) { f = ob; } Object get() { return f; } Box clone() { Box b = new Box(); // ~o_clone b.f = f; return b; }}  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  Candidate Path Specifications  Synthesized Unit Test  ob d thisset → thisget d r get  boolean test() { Object in = new Object(); // o_in Box box = new Box(); // o_box box.set(in); Object out = box.get(); return in == out; }  ✓  ob d thisset → thisclone d r clone  boolean test() { Object in = new Object(); // o_in Box box = new Box(); // o_box box.set(in); Object out = box.clone(); return in == out; }  ✗  ob d thisset ( → thisclone d r clone )∗ → thisget d r get  boolean test0() { Object in = new Object(); // o_in Box box0 = new Box(); // o_box box0.set(in); Object out = box0.get(); return in == out; } boolean test1() { Object in = new Object(); // o_in Box box0 = new Box(); // o_box box0.set(in); Box box1 = box0.clone(); Object out = box1.get(); return in == out; } boolean test2() { Object in = new Object(); // o_in Box box0 = new Box(); // o_box box0.set(in); Box box1 = box0.clone(); Box box2 = box1.clone(); Object out = box2.get(); return in == out; } ...  ✓  Figure 5. Examples of hypothesized library implementations (left column), an equivalent set of path specifications (middle column), and the synthesized test cases to check the precision of these specifications (right column), with a check mark ✓ (indicating that the tests pass) or a cross mark ✗ (indicating that the tests fail). e∗ (P) denote the true set of relations for a Precision. Let G program P (i.e., relations that hold dynamically for some execution of P); note that because the library code is omitted from analysis, we only include relations between proe∗ (P). Then, given path specifications S, gram variables in G e let G(P, S) denote the points-to edges computed using S for e+ (P, S) = G(P, e S) \ G e∗ (P) be the false positives, and P, let G e− (P, S) = G e∗ (P) \ G(P, e S) be the false negatives. let G e− (P, S) = ∅. We say S and Specification set S is sound if G S ′ are equivalent (written S ≡ S ′) if for very program P, e S) = G(P, e S ′). Finally, S is precise if for every sound G(P, ′ ′ S , S ∪ S ≡ S ′. In other words, using S computes no false positive points-to edges compared to any sound set S ′. We say a single path specification s is precise if {s} is precise. We have the following result, which follows by induction:  particular, a program P is a potential witness for a candidate path specification s if P returns true only if s is precise. If P is a potential witness for s, and upon execution, P in fact returns true, then we say P is a witness for s. The last column of Figure 5 shows potential witnesses for the candidate path specification in the middle column; a green check indicates the potential witness returns true (we say P passes), and a red check indicates it returns false or raises an exception (we say P fails). Note that P may return false even if s is precise. This property is inevitable since executions are underapproximations; we show empirically that if s is precise, then typically the potential witness synthesized by our algorithm passes. Soundly and precisely modeling library code. It is not obvious that path specifications are sufficiently expressive to precisely model library code. In this section, we show that path specifications are in fact sufficiently expressive to do so in the case of Andersen’s analysis (and its cloning-based context- and object-sensitive extensions). More precisely, for  Theorem 4.1. For any set S of path specifications, if each s ∈ S is precise, then S is precise. Witnesses. Our algorithm needs to synthesize unit tests that check whether a candidate path specification s is precise. In 6  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications Library Interface M (Input)  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Unit Test Synthesis (§5.4) for Noisy Oracle O (§5.1)  Learned Automaton M̂ (§5.3)  Sampled Positive Examples S 0 (§5.2)  Generated Code Fragments C (§A)  5  Specification Inference Algorithm  In this section, we describe our algorithm for inferring path specifications. Our system is summarized in Figure 6, which also shows the section where each component is described in detail. 5.1  Overview  ∗ be the set of all path specLet the target language S ∗ ⊆ Vpath ifications that are precise. By Theorem 4.1, S ∗ is precise. The goal of our algorithm is to infer a set of path specifications that approximates S ∗ as closely as possible.  Figure 6. An overview of our specification inference system. The section describing each component is in parentheses.  Inputs. Recall that our algorithm is given two inputs: (i) the library interface, and (ii) blackbox access to the library functions. We use these two inputs to construct the noisy oracle and positive examples as describe below.  any implementation of the library, there exists a (possibly infinite) set of path specifications such that the points-to sets computed using path specifications are both sound and at least as precise as analyzing the library implementation:  Noisy oracle. Given a path specification s, the noisy oracle ∗ O : Vpath → {0, 1} (i) always returns 0 if s is imprecise, and (ii) ideally returns 1 if s is precise (but may return 0). This oracle is implemented by synthesizing a potential witness P for s and returning the result of executing P. We describe how we synthesize a witness for s in Section 5.4.  e be the points-to sets computed with Theorem 4.2. Let G(P) e S) is the library code. Then, there exists S such that G(P, e S) ⊆ G(P). e sound and G(P, We give a proof in Appendix C. Note that the set S of path specifications may be infinite. This infinite blowup is unavoidable since we want the ability to test the precision of an individual path specification. In particular, the library implementation may exhibit effects that require infinitely many unit tests to check precision (e.g., the path specifications shown on the third row of Figure 5).  Positive examples. Phase one of our algorithm constructs a set of positive examples: our algorithm randomly samples ∗ , and then uses O to candidate path specifications s ∼ Vpath determine whether each s is precise. More precisely, given ∗ } of random samples, it constructs a set S = {s ∼ Vpath positive examples S 0 = {s ∈ S | O(s) = 1}. We describe how ∗ we sample s ∼ Vpath in Section 5.2.  Regular sets of path specifications. Since the library implementation may correspond to an infinite set of path specifications, we need a mechanism for describing such sets. In ∗ , particular, since a path specification is a sequence s ∈ Vpath we can think of a set S of path specifications as a formal ∗ language S ⊆ Vpath over the alphabet Vpath . Then, we can express an infinite set of path specifications using standard representations such as regular expressions or context-free grammars. We make the empirical observation that the set of path specifications corresponding to the library implementation is a regular language. There is no particular reason that this fact should be true, but it holds for all the Java library functions we have examined so far. For example, consider the code fragment shown in the first column of the third row of Figure 5. This specification corresonds to the set of path specifications shown as a regular expression in the middle column of the same line (tokens in the regular expression are highlighted in blue for clarity).  Language inference problem. Phase two of our algorithm inductively generalizes S 0 to a regular set of path specifications. We formulate this inductive generalization problem as follows: Definition 5.1. The language inference problem is to, given the noisy oracle O and the positive examples S 0 ⊆ S ∗ , infer a language Sˆ that approximates S ∗ as closely as possible. In Section 5.3, we describe our algorithm for solving this problem. Our algorithm outputs a regular language Sˆ = L(M̂), where M̂ is a finite state automaton—e.g., given S 0 = {ob thisset thisclone r clone thisget r get }, our language inference algorithm returns an automaton encoding the regular language ob thisset (thisclone r clone )∗ thisget r get . 5.2  Sampling Positive Examples  ∗ We sample a path specification s ∈ Vpath by building it one variable at a time, starting from s = ε (where ε denotes the empty string). At each step, we ensure that s satisfies the path specification constraints, i.e., (i) zi and w i are parameters or return values of the same library function, (ii) w i and zi+1  Static analysis with path specifications. To perform static analysis with regular sets of path specifications, we convert the path specifications into equivalent code fragments and then analyze the client alongwith the code fragments. We describe our algorithm for doing so in Appendix A. 7  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang Our algorithm initializes M̂ to be the FSA representing the finite language S 0 . In particular, it initializes M̂ to be the prefix tree acceptor [30], which is the FSA where the underlying transition graph is the prefix tree of S 0 , the start state is the root of this prefix tree, and the accept states are the leaves of this prefix tree. Then, our algorithm iteratively considers merging pairs of states of M̂. More precisely, given two states p, q ∈ Q (without loss of generality, assume q , q init ), Merge(M̂, p, q) is the FSA obtained by (i) replacing transitions  are not both return values, and (iii) the last variable w k is a return value. In particular, given current sequence s, the set T (s) ⊆ Vpath ∪ {ϕ} of choices for the next variable (where ϕ indicates to terminate and return s) is: • If s = z 1w 1z 2 ...zi , then the choices for w i are T (s) = {pm , rm }, where zi ∈ {pm , rm }. • If s = z 1w 1z 2 ...zi w i , and w i is a parameter, then the choices for zi+1 are T (s) = Vpath . • If s = z 1w 1z 2 ...zi w i , and w i is a return value, then the choices for zi+1 are T (s) = {z ∈ Vpath | z is a parameter} ∪ {ϕ}.  σ  σ  σ  (r − → q) becomes (r − → p),  At each step, our algorithm samples x ∼ T (s), and either constructs s ′ = sx and continues if x , ϕ or returns s if x = ϕ. We consider two sampling strategies.  σ  (q − → r ) becomes (p − → r ),  (ii) adding p to Q fin if q ∈ Q fin , and (iii) removing q from Q. Our algorithm makes a single pass over all the states Q. We describe how a single step proceeds: let q be the state being processed in the current step, let Q 0 be the states that have been processed so far but not removed from Q, and let M̂ be the current FSA. For each p ∈ Q 0 , our algorithm checks whether merging q and p overgeneralizes the language, and if not, greedily performs the merge. More precisely, for each p ∈ Q 0 , our algorithm constructs  Random sampling. We choose x ∼ T (s) uniformly at random at every step. Monte Carlo tree search. We can exploit the fact that certain choices x ∈ T (s) are much more likely to yield a precise path specification than others. To do so, note that our search space is structured as a tree, where each vertex corresponds ∗ , the root corresponds to the prefix ε, edges to a prefix in Vpath are defined by T , and leaves correspond to candidate path specifications. We can sample x ∼ T (s) using Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) [12], a search algorithm that learns over time which choices are more likely to succeed. In particular, MCTS keeps ∗ track of a score Q(s, x) for every visited s ∈ Vpath and every x ∈ T (s). Then, the choices are sampled according to the distribution Õ ′ 1 Pr[x | s] = e Q (s,x ) where Z = e Q (s,x ) . Z ′  M diff = Merge(M̂, q, p) \ M̂,  Whenever a candidate s = x 1 ...x k is found, we increase the score Q(x 1 ...x i , x i+1 ) (for each 0 ≤ i < k) if s is a positive example (O(s) = 1) and decrease it otherwise (O(s) = 0):  which represents the set of strings that are added to L(M̂) if q and p are merged. Then, for each s ∈ M diff up to some maximum length N (we take N = 8), our algorithm queries O(s). If all queries pass (i.e., O(s) = 1), then our algorithm greedily accepts the merge, i.e., M̂ ← Merge(M̂, q, p) and continues to the next q ∈ Q. Otherwise, it considers merging q with the next p ∈ Q 0 . Finally, if q is not merged with any state p ∈ Q 0 , then our algorithm does not modify M̂ and adds q to Q 0 . Once it has completed a pass over all states in Q, our algorithm returns M̂. For example, suppose our language learning algorithm is given a single positive example  Q(x 1 ...x i , x i+1 ) ← (1 − α)Q(x 1 ...x i , x i+1 ) + α O(s).  ob thisset thisclone r clone thisget r get .  x ∈ T(s)  We choose the learning rate α = 1/2. 5.3  Then, our algorithm constructs the finite state automaton  Language Inference Algorithm ob  r  this  this  r get  thisget  clone clone q init −−→ q 1 −−−−−set −→ q 2 −−−−−−−−→ q 3 −−−−−→ q 4 −−−−−−→ q 5 −−−→ q fin .  Our language inference algorithm is based on RPNI [30], modified to leverage access to the noisy oracle. In particular, whereas RPNI takes as input a set of negative examples, we use the oracle to generate them on-the-fly. Our algorithm learns a regular language Sˆ = L(M̂) represented by the (nondeterministic) finite state automaton (FSA) M̂ = (Q, Vpath , δ, q init , Q fin ), where Q is the set of states, δ : Q × Vpath → 2Q is the transition function, q init ∈ Q is the start state, and Q fin ⊆ Q are the accept states. If there is a single accept state, we denote it by q fin . We denote transitions σ q ∈ δ (p, σ ) by p − → q.  Our algorithm fails to merge q init , q 1 , q 2 , or q 3 with any previous states. It then tries to merge q 4 with each state {q init , q 1 , q 2 , q 3 }; the first two merges fail, but merging q 4 with q 2 produces q init  ob  q1  thisset  q2  r clone  thisclone  q3 8  thisget  q4  r get  q fin .  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  input  ob d thisset → thisclone → r clone → thisget → r get  analysis to compute relation e for P. Therefore, if P witnesses s, then s is guaranteed to be precise.  skeleton  ??.add(??); ?? = ??.clone(); ?? = ??.get(??);  fill holes  list.add(in); List listClone = list.clone(); Object out = listClone.get(??);  initialization & scheduling  Object in = new Object(); List list = new List() list.add(in); List listClone = list.clone(); Object out = listClone.get(0); return in == out;  Skeleton construction. Our algorithm first constructs the skeleton of the unit test. In particular, a witness for s must include a call to each function m 1 , ..., mk , where the variables zi , w i ∈ Vmi are parameters or return values of mi , since the graph G extracted from the unit test must by definition contain edges connecting the w i to zi+1 . For each function call y ← m(x), the argument x and the left-hand side variable y are left as holes ?? to be filled in subsequent steps. Fill holes. Second, our algorithm fills the holes in the skeleton corresponding to reference variables. In particular, for each pair of function calls ??y,i ← mi (??x,i ) and ??y,i+1 ← mi+1 (??x,i+1 ), it fills the holes ??y,i and ??x,i+1 depending Ai  on the edge w i −−→ zi+1 :  Figure 7. Steps in the witness synthesis algorithm for a candidate path specification for Box. Code added at each step is highlighted in blue. Scheduling is shown in the same line as initialization.  • Case Ai = Transfer: In this case, w i is a return value and zi+1 is a parameter. Thus, the algorithm fills ??y,i and ??x,i+1 with the same fresh variable x. • Case Ai = Transfer: This case is analogous to the case Ai = Transfer. • Case Ai = Alias: In this case, w i and zi+1 are both parameters. Thus, the algorithm fills ??y,i and ??x,i+1 with the same fresh variable x, and additionally adds to the test an allocation statement x ← X ().  Then, the specifications of length at most N in M diff are ob thisset (thisclone r clone )0 thisget r get ob thisset (thisclone r clone )1 thisget r get ... ob thisset (thisclone r clone )N thisget r get ,  We show in Theorem 5.2, the added statements ensure that P is a potential witness for s.  all of which are accepted by our noisy oracle O. Therefore, our algorithm greedily accepts this merge and continues. The remaining merges fail and our algorithm returns this automaton. 5.4  Initialization. Third, our algorithm initializes the remaining reference variables and primitive variables in the unit test. In particular, function calls y ← mi (x) may have additional parameters that need to be filled. For Theorem 5.2 to hold, we require that remaining reference variables are filled with the value null. However, this approach is likely to synthesize unit tests that fail (by raising exceptions) even when s is precise. Therefore, we alternatively use a heuristic where we allocate a fresh variable for each reference variable. For allocating reference variables that are passed as arguments to constructors, we have to be careful to avoid infinite recursion; for example, a constructor Integer(Integer i); should be avoided. Our algorithm uses a shortest-path algorithm to generate the smallest possible initialization statements; see Appendix B.3 for details. With this approach, we can no longer guarantee that P is a witness and our oracle may be susceptible to false positives. In our evaluation, we show that this heuristic substantially improves recall with no reduction in precision. Primitive variables can be initialized arbitrarily, but the choice of initialization affects whether P is a witness when s is precise. We initialize primitive variables using default values (0 for numeric variables and true for boolean variables) that work well in practice.  Unit Test Synthesis  We describe how we synthesize a unit test that is a potential witness for a given specification s = (z 1 d w 1 → ... → zk d w k ), relegating  details to Appendix B. Recall that the semantics Ók −1 Ai A e ⇒ (z 1 − e Then, of s are −→ zi+1 ∈ G → w k ∈ G). i=1 w i − consider a program P that satisfies the following properties: • The conclusion of s does not hold statically for P with A e ∅). empty specifications, i.e., z 1 − → w k < G(P, Ai  e {s}) • The premise of s holds for P, i.e., w i −−→ zi+1 ∈ G(P, for each i ∈ [k − 1]. A  • For every set S of path specifications, if z 1 − → wk ∈ e S), then S ∪ {s} is equivalent to S. G(P, Intuitively, if program P is a potential witness for path spece then ification s with premise ψ and conclusion ϕ = (e ∈ G), s is the only path specification that can be used by the static 9  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  400,000  we demonstrate the usefulness of the specifications inferred by Atlas for a static information flow analysis, comparing to the existing, handwritten specifications, even though many of these specifications were designed specifically for the apps in our benchmark. Second, we evaluate the precision and recall of Atlas by comparing to ground truth specifications; furthermore, we demonstrate the effectiveness of using specifications by showing that ground truth specifications significantly decreases false positives compared to analyzing the actual library implementation. Finally, we analyze some of the choices made when designing our algorithm. To compare how two different sets of specifications impact the results of a static analysis, we examine the ratio of the sizes of the computed relations. We preprocess these sizes in two ways. First, we only consider relations between program variables. Second, we subtract off trivial relations that can be computed even when no points-to specifications are provided (i.e., all library functions are treated as no-ops with respect to heap effects). For example, for computed points-to edges, the metric we use is  Jimple LOC  300,000  200,000  100,000  0  programs  Figure 8. Jimple lines of code of the apps in our benchmark. Scheduling. Fourth, our algorithm determines the ordering of the statements in the unit test. There are many possible choices of statement ordering, which affect whether P is a witness when s is precise. There are hard constraints on the ordering (in particular, a variable must be defined before it is used) and soft constraints (in particular, statements corresponding to edges w i → zi+1 for smaller i should occur earlier in P). Our scheduling algorithm produces an ordering that satisfies the hard constraints while trying to satisfy as many soft constraints as possible. It does so using a greedy strategy, i.e., it orders the statements sequentially from first to last, choosing at each step the statement that satisfies the hard constraints and the most soft constraints; see Appendix B.4.  R pt (S, S ′) =  where Π(S) ⊆ V × O is the set of points-to edges computed using specifications S, and Π(∅) ⊆ V × O is the set of trivial points-to edges. We base our evaluation on a benchmark of Android apps, including a mix of malicious and benign apps given to us by a major security company. These apps include various functionalities, such as games, battery managers, wallpaper apps, flashlights, etc. We show the sizes of these apps in Jimple lines of code (Jimple is the intermediate representation used by Soot) in Figure 8. The malware in this benchmark consist primarily of apps that leak user information, such as contacts, location, or SMS messages. Our information flow client is designed to find such malicious behaviours.  Guarantees. Then, we have the following guarantee for the unit test synthesis algorithm: Theorem 5.2. The unit test P synthesized for path specification s is a potential witness for s. We give a proof in Appendix E.  6  Implementation  We have implemented our specification inference algorithm as Atlas. We use Atlas to infer specifications for a client static information flow analysis for Android apps [6, 7, 16, 17]. The client is built on Chord [28] modified to use Soot [42] as a backend. It computes an Andersen-style, 1-object-sensitive, flow- and path-insensitive points-to analysis. Based on these points-to sets, it computes an explicit information flow analysis [33], between sources such as location, contacts, and device information, and sinks such as the Internet and SMS messages. Our tool omits analyzing the Java standard library (version 7), and instead analyzes client code and userprovided code fragment specifications. We have handwritten several hundred code fragment specifications, including many written specifically for our benchmark of android apps.  7  |Π(S) \ Π(∅)| , |Π(S ′) \ Π(∅)|  7.1  Comparison to Our Existing Specifications  Over the course of two years, we have handwritten points-to specifications for our static information flow client for 90 classes in the Java standard library. These specifications were written as needed for the apps that we analyzed, including the apps in our benchmark. The most time consuming aspect of developing the existing specifications was not writing them (they total a few thousand lines of code), but identifying which functions required summaries. Thus, they cover many fewer functions than the handwritten ground truth specifications described in Section 7.2, but are tailored to finding information flows for apps in our benchmark. We compare the quality of the inferred specifications to these handwritten specifications, in particular, aiming to improve our information flow client. We focus on inferring specifications for the commonly used packages java.lang, java.util, java.io, java.nio, java.net, and java.math;  Evaluation  In this section, we evaluate the ability of Atlas to infer points-to specifications for the Java standard library. First, 10  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 0.9  5.0  atlas vs. true (points-to)  atlas vs. handwritten (flows)  6.0 implementation vs. true (points-to)  1  6.0  4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0  0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1  0.0  programs  0  (a)  programs  (b)  5.0 4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.0  programs  (c)  Figure 9. In (a), we show the ratio of nontrivial information flows discovered using Atlas versus existing specifications. We show the ratio of nontrivial points-to edges discovered using (b) Atlas versus ground truth and (c) ground truth versus implementation. The ratios are sorted from highest to lowest for the 46 benchmark programs with nontrivial points-to edges. Note that some values exceeded the graph scale. 7.2  all the specifications we have manually written for the Java standard library are for classes in these packages.  Comparison to Ground Truth  To evaluate the precision and recall of our inferred specifications, we compare to ground truth specifications. Because of the manual effort required to write ground truth specifications, we do so only for the 12 classes in the Java Collections API that are most frequently used by our benchmark (98.5% of calls to the Collections API target these 12 classes). We focus on the Java Collections API (namely, classes that implement the Collection or Map interfaces), because it requires by far the most complex points-to specifications.  Inferred specifications. We used a total of 12 million random samples for phase one, which ran in 44.9 minutes. Phase two of our algorithm ran in 31.0 minutes; the initial FSA had 10,969 states, and the final FSA had 6,855 states. We compare our inferred specifications to the handwritten ones. Most strikingly, Atlas infers 5× as many specifications as the existing, handwritten ones—Atlas infers specifications for 878 library functions, whereas handwritten specifications cover only 159 library functions. Furthermore, Atlas infers 89% of the handwritten specifications. We manually examined the 5 false negatives (i.e., handwritten specifications that Atlas fails to infer) for the Collections API. Each one is due to a false negative in the unit test synthesis. For example, the function subList(int,int) in the List class requires a call of the form subList(0, 1) to retrieve the first object in the list. Similarly, the function set(int,Object) in the List class requires an object to already be in the list or it raises an index out-of-bounds exception. The potential witnesses synthesized by Atlas fail to exercise the relevant behaviors in these instances. Finally, we manually examined more than 200 of the inferred specifications; all of them were precise, which is strong evidence that our tool has very few if any false positives despite the heuristics we employ.  Inferred specifications. We examine the top 50 most frequently called functions in our benchmark (in total, accounting for 95% of the function calls). We count a specification as correct if it is identical to the specification we would have written by hand; for specifications with multiple statements, we count each statement fractionally. The recall of our algorithm is 97% (i.e., we inferred the correct specification for 97% of the 50 functions) and the precision is 100% (i.e., each specification is as precise as the true specification). Points-to sets. To show the quality of the specifications inferred by Atlas, we study the ratio R pt (S atlas , S true ) of using specifications inferred by Atlas to using ground truth specifications. We found that using Atlas does not compute a single false positive points-to edge compared to using ground truth specifications, i.e., the precision of Atlas is 100%. Thus, 1−R pt (S atlas , S true ) is the rate of false negative points-to edges when using Atlas. Figure 9 (b) shows R pt (S atlas , S true ) for each app in our benchmark, sorted by magnitude. This ratio is 1.0 for almost half of the programs, i.e., for almost half the programs, there are no false negatives. The median recall is 99.0%, and the average recall is 75.8%.  Information flows. To show how Atlas can improve upon our existing handwritten specifications, we study the ratio R flow (S atlas , S hand ) of information flows computed using Atlas versus using the existing, handwritten specifications. A higher ratio (R flow > 1) says that Atlas has higher recall, and a lower ratio (R flow < 1) says that handwritten specifications have higher recall. Figure 9 (a) shows R(S atlas , S hand ). Overall, Atlas finds 52% more information flows compared to the handwritten specifications. The size of this gap is noteworthy because we have already analyzed these apps over the past few years—many of the existing specifications were written specifically for this benchmark.  Benefits of using specifications. We show that using specifications can greatly improve the precision and soundness of a static analysis. In particular, we compare the ground truth specifications to the library implementation, i.e., the class files comprising the actual implementation of the Collections API (developed by Oracle). We compute the ratio 11  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  R pt (S impl , S true ) of analyzing the library implementation S impl to analyzing the ground truth specifications S true . This ratio measures the number of false positives due to analyzing the library implementation instead of using ground truth specifications, since every points-to edge computed using the implementation but not the ground truth specifications is a false positive. Figure 9 (c) shows this ratio R pt (S impl , S true ). For a third of programs, the false positive rate is more than 100% (i.e., when R pt ≥ 2), and for four programs, the false positive rate is more than 300% (i.e., R pt ≥ 4). The average false positive rate is 115.2%, and the median is 62.1%. Furthermore, for two of the programs, there are false negatives (i.e., R pt < 1) due to unanalyzable calls to native code. 7.3  the existing, handwritten specifications, and is furthermore very close to ground truth. In addition, we have shown that Atlas can substantially improve recall on an information flow client compared to the handwritten specifications, despite the fact that we have already written specifications specifically for apps in this benchmark. Thus, Atlas substantially improves the practicality of using specifications to model hard-to-analyze code in static analysis. We believe that the remaining gap can be bridged by the human analyst.  8  Inferring specifications for library code. Techniques have been proposed for mining specifications for library code from executions, e.g., taint specifications (i.e., whether taint flows from the argument to the return value) [13], functional specifications of library functions [19], specifications for x86 instructions [18], and specifications for callback control flow [20]. In contrast, points-to specifications that span multiple functions are more complex properties. One approach is to infer points-to specifications using data gathered from deployed instrumented apps [9]. In contrast, our algorithm actively synthesizes unit tests that exercise the library code and requires no instrumentation of deployed apps. Another approach is to interact with a human analyst to infer specifications [1, 8, 47]. These approach guarantee soundness, but still require substantial human effort, e.g., in [8], the analyst may need to write more than a dozen points-to specifications to analyze a single app. Finally, [2] uses a static approach to infer callgraph specifications for library code.  Design Choices  Finally, we compare the performance of different design choices for our specification inference algorithm; in particular, we infer specifications for 733 library functions in the Java Collections API using different design choices. Positive examples: random sampling vs. MCTS. We sample two million candidate path specifications using each sampling algorithm. Random sampling found 3,124 positive examples, whereas MCTS found 10,153. Object initialization: null vs. instantiation. Each of the 11,613 positive examples passed the unit test constructed using instantiation, but only 7,721 passed when using null initialization, i.e., instantiation finds 50% more specifications. As discussed above, even with this heuristic, we estimate that the false positive rate of our tool is zero. 7.4  Related Work  Inferring program properties. There has been work inferring program invariants from executions [29], including approaches using machine learning [34–36]. The most closely related work is [10], which uses an active learning strategy to infer program input grammars for blackbox code. In contrast, our goal is to infer points-to specifications for library code. There has also been work on specifications encoding desired properties of client programs (rather than encoding behaviors of the library code), both using dynamic analysis [7, 11, 23, 25, 31, 38] and using static analysis [4, 45].  Discussion  As we have seen, using ground truth substantially improves precision and soundness compared to analyzing the library implementation—for the one-time cost of writing specifications, we can eliminate imprecision due to deep call hierarchies and unsoundness due to native code, dynamically loaded code, reflection, etc. In fact, such an approach is already used in production static analysis systems to handle hard-to-analyze code [14]. However, manually writing specifications that are complete or close to complete is impractical—writing ground truth specifications for just 12 classes took us more than a week of time and contains 1,731 lines of code, but there are more than 4,000 classes in the Java standard library. Typically, manual effort is focused on writing specifications for the most commonly used functions, but this approach leaves a long tail of missing specifications [8]. Moreover, handwritten specifications can be error prone to write [18]. Finally, libraries grow over time—for example, the Java 9 standard library contains more than 2,000 new classes—so specifications must be maintained over time. We have shown that Atlas automatically covers an order of magnitude more of the Java Collections API compared to  Static points-to analysis. There is a large literature on static points-to analysis [5, 15, 27, 37, 44], including formulations based on set-constraints and context-free language reachability [21, 22, 32, 41]. Recent work has focused on improving context-sensitivity [24, 39, 40, 43, 46]. Using specifications in conjunction with these analyses can improve precision, scalability, and even soundness. One alternative is to use demand driven static analyses to avoid analyzing the entire library code [41]; however, these approaches are not designed to work with missing code, and furthermore do not provide much benefit for demanding clients that require analyzing a substantial fraction of the library code. 12  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications  9  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Conclusion  [16] Yu Feng, Saswat Anand, Isil Dillig, and Alex Aiken. 2014. Apposcopy: Semantics-based detection of android malware through static analysis. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering. ACM, 576–587. [17] Adam P Fuchs, Avik Chaudhuri, and Jeffrey S Foster. 2009. Scandroid: Automated security certification of android. (2009). [18] Stefan Heule, Eric Schkufza, Rahul Sharma, and Alex Aiken. 2016. Stratified synthesis: automatically learning the x86-64 instruction set. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation. ACM, 237–250. [19] Stefan Heule, Manu Sridharan, and Satish Chandra. 2015. Mimic: Computing models for opaque code. In Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering. ACM, 710–720. [20] Jinseong Jeon, Xiaokang Qiu, Jonathan Fetter-Degges, Jeffrey S Foster, and Armando Solar-Lezama. 2016. Synthesizing framework models for symbolic execution. In Software Engineering (ICSE), 2016 IEEE/ACM 38th International Conference on. IEEE, 156–167. [21] John Kodumal and Alex Aiken. 2004. The set constraint/CFL reachability connection in practice. ACM Sigplan Notices 39, 6 (2004), 207–218. [22] John Kodumal and Alexander Aiken. 2005. Banshee: A scalable constraint-based analysis toolkit. In SAS, Vol. 5. Springer, 218–234. [23] Ted Kremenek, Paul Twohey, Godmar Back, Andrew Ng, and Dawson Engler. 2006. From uncertainty to belief: Inferring the specification within. In Proceedings of the 7th symposium on Operating systems design and implementation. USENIX Association, 161–176. [24] Percy Liang and Mayur Naik. 2011. Scaling abstraction refinement via pruning. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 46. ACM, 590–601. [25] Benjamin Livshits, Aditya V Nori, Sriram K Rajamani, and Anindya Banerjee. 2009. Merlin: specification inference for explicit information flow problems. ACM Sigplan Notices 44, 6 (2009), 75–86. [26] David Melski and Thomas Reps. 2000. Interconvertibility of a class of set constraints and context-free-language reachability. Theoretical Computer Science 248, 1 (2000), 29–98. [27] Ana Milanova, Atanas Rountev, and Barbara G Ryder. 2002. Parameterized object sensitivity for points-to and side-effect analyses for Java. In ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, Vol. 27. ACM, 1–11. [28] Mayur Naik, Alex Aiken, and John Whaley. 2006. Effective static race detection for Java. Vol. 41. ACM. [29] Jeremy W Nimmer and Michael D Ernst. 2002. Automatic generation of program specifications. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes 27, 4 (2002), 229–239. [30] Jose Oncina and Pedro Garcia. 1992. Identifying regular languages in polynomial time. Advances in Structural and Syntactic Pattern Recognition 5, 99-108 (1992), 15–20. [31] Murali Krishna Ramanathan, Ananth Grama, and Suresh Jagannathan. 2007. Static specification inference using predicate mining. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 42. ACM, 123–134. [32] Thomas Reps. 1998. Program analysis via graph reachability. Information and software technology 40, 11 (1998), 701–726. [33] Andrei Sabelfeld and Andrew C Myers. 2003. Language-based information-flow security. IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications 21, 1 (2003), 5–19. [34] Rahul Sharma and Alex Aiken. 2014. From invariant checking to invariant inference using randomized search. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification. Springer, 88–105. [35] Rahul Sharma, Aditya V Nori, and Alex Aiken. 2012. Interpolants as classifiers. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification. Springer, 71–87. [36] Rahul Sharma, Eric Schkufza, Berkeley Churchill, and Alex Aiken. 2013. Data-driven equivalence checking. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 48. ACM, 391–406. [37] Olin Shivers. 1991. Control-flow analysis of higher-order languages. Ph.D. Dissertation. Citeseer.  Specifications summarizing the points-to effects of library code can be used to increase precision, recall, and scalability of running a static points-to analysis on any client code. By automatically inferring such specifications, Atlas fully automatically achieves all of these benefits without the typical time-consuming and error-prone process of writing specifications by hand. We believe that Atlas is an important step towards improving the usability of static analysis in practice.  References [1] Aws Albarghouthi, Isil Dillig, and Arie Gurfinkel. 2016. Maximal specification synthesis. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 51. ACM, 789– 801. [2] Karim Ali and Ondřej Lhoták. 2013. Averroes: Whole-program analysis without the whole program. In European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming. Springer, 378–400. [3] Rajeev Alur, Pavol Černỳ, Parthasarathy Madhusudan, and Wonhong Nam. 2005. Synthesis of interface specifications for Java classes. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 40, 1 (2005), 98–109. [4] Glenn Ammons, Rastislav Bodík, and James R Larus. 2002. Mining specifications. ACM Sigplan Notices 37, 1 (2002), 4–16. [5] Lars Ole Andersen. 1994. Program analysis and specialization for the C programming language. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Cophenhagen. [6] Steven Arzt, Siegfried Rasthofer, Christian Fritz, Eric Bodden, Alexandre Bartel, Jacques Klein, Yves Le Traon, Damien Octeau, and Patrick McDaniel. 2014. Flowdroid: Precise context, flow, field, object-sensitive and lifecycle-aware taint analysis for android apps. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 49, 6 (2014), 259–269. [7] Osbert Bastani, Saswat Anand, and Alex Aiken. 2015. Interactively verifying absence of explicit information flows in Android apps. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 50, 10 (2015), 299–315. [8] Osbert Bastani, Saswat Anand, and Alex Aiken. 2015. Specification inference using context-free language reachability. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 50. ACM, 553–566. [9] Osbert Bastani, Lazaro Clapp, Saswat Anand, Rahul Sharma, and Alex Aiken. 2017. Eventually Sound Points-To Analysis with Missing Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.03436 (2017). [10] Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang. 2017. Synthesizing program input grammars. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation. ACM, 95–110. [11] Nels E Beckman and Aditya V Nori. 2011. Probabilistic, modular and scalable inference of typestate specifications. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 46. ACM, 211–221. [12] Cameron B Browne, Edward Powley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M Lucas, Peter I Cowling, Philipp Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez, Spyridon Samothrakis, and Simon Colton. 2012. A survey of monte carlo tree search methods. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 4, 1 (2012), 1–43. [13] Lazaro Clapp, Saswat Anand, and Alex Aiken. 2015. Modelgen: mining explicit information flow specifications from concrete executions. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. ACM, 129–140. [14] Facebook. 2017. Adding models. (2017). http://fbinfer.com/docs/ adding-models.html [15] Manuel Fähndrich, Jeffrey S Foster, Zhendong Su, and Alexander Aiken. 1998. Partial online cycle elimination in inclusion constraint graphs. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 33, 5 (1998), 85–96. 13  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  [38] Sharon Shoham, Eran Yahav, Stephen J Fink, and Marco Pistoia. 2008. Static specification mining using automata-based abstractions. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 34, 5 (2008), 651–666. [39] Yannis Smaragdakis, George Kastrinis, and George Balatsouras. 2014. Introspective analysis: context-sensitivity, across the board. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 49. ACM, 485–495. [40] Manu Sridharan and Rastislav Bodík. 2006. Refinement-based contextsensitive points-to analysis for Java. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 41. ACM, 387–400. [41] Manu Sridharan, Denis Gopan, Lexin Shan, and Rastislav Bodík. 2005. Demand-driven points-to analysis for Java. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 40. ACM, 59–76. [42] Raja Vallée-Rai, Phong Co, Etienne Gagnon, Laurie Hendren, Patrick Lam, and Vijay Sundaresan. 1999. Soot-a Java bytecode optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 1999 conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collaborative research. IBM Press, 13. [43] John Whaley and Monica S Lam. 2004. Cloning-based context-sensitive pointer alias analysis using binary decision diagrams. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 39. ACM, 131–144. [44] Robert P Wilson and Monica S Lam. 1995. Efficient context-sensitive pointer analysis for C programs. Vol. 30. ACM. [45] Jinlin Yang, David Evans, Deepali Bhardwaj, Thirumalesh Bhat, and Manuvir Das. 2006. Perracotta: mining temporal API rules from imperfect traces. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Software engineering. ACM, 282–291. [46] Xin Zhang, Ravi Mangal, Radu Grigore, Mayur Naik, and Hongseok Yang. 2014. On abstraction refinement for program analyses in Datalog. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 49, 6 (2014), 239–248. [47] Haiyan Zhu, Thomas Dillig, and Isil Dillig. 2013. Automated inference of library specifications for source-sink property verification. In Asian Symposium on Programming Languages and Systems. Springer, 290– 306.  14  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications  A  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Static Points-To Analysis with Regular Sets of Path Specifications  z  (initial parameter)  z  In this section, we describe how to run our static pointsto analysis in conjunction with a possibly infinite regular set S of path specifications (assumed to be represented as an FSA, i.e., S = L(M̂)). In particular, our static analysis converts S to a set S˜ of code fragment specifications, which are replacements for the library code that have the same points-to effects as encoded by S. Given path specifications S, our static analysis constructs ˜ i.e., G(P, S) = equivalent code fragment specifications S, ˜ ˜ G(P, S). In other words, S has the same semantics as S with respect to our static points-to analysis. One detail in our def˜ may contain additional inition of equivalence is that G(P, S) vertices corresponding to variables and abstract objects in the code fragment specifications; we omit these extra vertices and their relations at the end of the static analysis.  (initial return)  z  (final return) (Ai = Alias)  Converting a Single Path Specification  into an equivalent set of code fragment specifications, where Ai = Alias for each i and z 1 is a parameter. Let the code fragment specifications S˜ corresponding to s be:  ... mk = {w k ← zk .fk −1 },  z  w  z  w  (Ai = Transfer)  p− → q −−→ r ∈ M̂, z = pm , w = rm wX(), t ← z.fp , w.fr ← t ∈ m  (Ai = Transfer)  p− → q −−→ r ∈ M̂, {z, w } ⊆ {pm , rm } z ← X (), t ← w.fr , z.fp ← t ∈ m w  q init − → q −−→ q fin ∈ M̂, {z, w } ⊆ {pm , rm } w ←z ∈m  Since each fi is a fresh field, there is only one edge labeled Store[fi ] and only one edge labeled Load[fi ]. Thus, this proAlias ˜ and duction can only be triggered if (i) zi −−−→ w i ∈ G(P, S),  ˜ = G(P, {s}) ∪ G ′(P, S), ˜ Proposition A.1. We have G(P, S) ′ ˜ ˜ where G (P, S) consists of the edges in G(P, S) that refer to ˜ vertices corresponding to variables and abstract objects in S.  Transfer  ˜ If triggered, (ii) for some vertex x, x −−−−−−→ ti ∈ G(P, S). Transfer ˜ For the static analysis adds an edge x −−−−−−→ ti+1 to G(P, S). i = 1, the only vertices x satisfying the second condition are Alias ˜ x = z 1 and x = t 1 . By induction, if w i −−−→ zi+1 ∈ G(P, S) for each i, we have  ˜ SupProof. (sketch) First, we show that G(P, {s} ⊆ G(P, S). Ai  pose that the premise of s holds, i.e., zi −−→ w i+1 ∈ G for Transfer  each i. Then, the static analysis computes z 1 −−−−−−→ w k ∈ Transfer ˜ as G(P, {s}); we need to show that z 1 −−−−−−→ w k ∈ G(P, S) well. Note that we have  Transfer ˜ z 1 −−−−−−→ ti ∈ G(P, S) Transfer  ˜ t j −−−−−−→ ti ∈ G(P, S)  Load[f 1 ]  for each j ≤ i. None of the ti are part of an Assign edge except t 1 and tk ; for the latter, the production Transfer → Transfer ˜ Transfer Assign triggers and we get z 1 −−−−−−→ w k ∈ G(P, S). ˜ that does not refer to This edge is the only one in G(P, S) vertices extracted from the code fragments, so the claim follows. □  ˜ z 1 −−−−−−→ w 1 −−−→ z 2 −−−−−−→ t 2 ∈ G(P, S) Load[f ]  Alias 2 2 ˜ t 2 −−−−−−→ w 2 −−−→ z 3 −−−−−−→ t 3 ∈ G(P, S)  ... Load[f  w  Transfer → Transfer Store[f ] Alias Load[f ].  where f 1 , ...fk−1 ∈ F are fresh fields and t 2 , ..., tk −1 are fresh variables. Then:  ]  z  p− → q −−→ r ∈ M̂, z = pm , w = pm t ← z.fp , w.fr ← t ∈ m  Transfer  m 2 = {t 2 ← z 2 .f 1 , w 2 .f 2 ← t 2 }  Store[f  w  By induction, the static analysis computes z 1 −−−−−−→ ti ∈ ˜ for each i ∈ [k −1]. Thus, the static analysis computes G(P, S) Transfer ˜ as claimed. z 1 −−−−−−→ w k ∈ G(P, S), ˜ ⊆ G(P, S) ∪ Next, we show the converse, i.e., that G(P, S) ′ ˜ G (P, S). First, note that the only production with Store[f ] is  m 1 = {w 1 .f 1 ← z 1 }  Store[f ]  z  p− → q −−→ q fin ∈ M̂, z = rm , w = rm t ← X (), z.fp ← t, w ← t ∈ m  Figure 10. Rules for generating code fragment specifications from path specifications defined by a finite state automaton M̂ = (Q, Vpath , δ, q init , Q fin ), where for simplicity we assume M̂ has a single accept state q fin .  s = (z 1 d w 1 → ... → zk d w k )  Alias  w  p− → q −−→ q fin ∈ M̂, z = pm , w = rm w ← z.fp ∈ m  z  For intuition, we begin by describing how to convert a single path specification  Store[f 1 ]  w  q init − → q −−→ r ∈ M̂, z = rm , w ∈ {pm , rm } t ← X (), z ← t, w.fr ← t ∈ m  (final parameter)  (initial final)  A.1  w  q init − → q −−→ r ∈ M̂, z = pm , w ∈ {pm , rm } w.fr ← z ∈ m  ]  Alias k −1 k −1 ˜ tk −1 −−−−−−−−→ w k −1 −−−→ zk −−−−−−−−→ w k ∈ G(P, S).  15  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  Candidate (Regular Expression)  Candidate (Finite State Automaton)  ob d thisset → thisget d r get  ob d thisset  → thisclone d r clone → thisget d r get  ∗  q init  ob  q1  thisset  qf  thisget  q2  q init  ob  q1  thisset  qf  thisget  q2  r get  r get  Code Fragments  q fin  q fin  r clone  thisclone  q3  q init  ob  q1  ob d thisset → thisget d r get  thisset  qf  thisget  q2  r get  thisclone  q3  + ob d thisset → thisclone d r clone → thisget → r get  r clone  qg  + ob d thisset → thisclone d r clone → thisclone d r clone → thisget d r get  thisget  thisclone  q4 thisget  r clone  qh  q fin  void set(Object ob) { f = ob; } Object get() { return f; }  void set(Object ob) { f = ob; } Object get() { return f; } Box clone() { Box b = new Box(); // ~o_clone b.f = f; return b; }}  void set(Object ob) { f = ob; } Object get() { return f; return g; return h; } Box clone() { Box b = new Box(); // ~o_clone b.g = f; b.h = g; return b; }}  Figure 11. Examples of candidate code fragment specifications (left column), and the equivalent path specifications as a regular expression (middle column) and as a finite state automaton (right column). A.2  B  Converting a Regular Set of Path Specifications  Our construction generalizes straightforwardly to constructing code fragment specifications from M̂. For each state q ∈ Q, we introduce a fresh field fq ∈ F . Intuitively, transitions into q correspond to stores into fq , and transitions coming out of q correspond to loads into fq . In particular, we include statements in m according to the rules in Figure 10. The following guarantee follows similarly to the proof of Proposition A.1:  Unit Test Synthesis Algorithm  In this section, we describe our algorithm for synthesizing a unit test to check correctness of a candidate path specification. For example, in Figure 12, the synthesized unit test contains exactly the external edges in the candidate’s premise: Alias  Transfer  thisadd −−−→ thisclone , r clone −−−−−−→ thisget . Upon executing this unit test, the candidate’s conclusion  ′  ˜ = G(P, S) ∪ G (P, S), ˜ Proposition A.2. We have G(P, S) ′ ˜ where G (P, S) is defined as before.  Transfer  in −−−−−−→ out holds dynamically. Therefore, this unit test witnesses the correctness of the given candidate. Our algorithm first constructs a skeleton containing a call to each function in the specification. Then, it (i) fills in holes with variable names, (ii) initializes variables, and (iii) orders (or schedules) statements. The last step also adds a statement returning whether the candidate’s conclusion holds. There are certain constraints on the choices that ensure that the synthesized unit test is a valid witness. Even with these constraints, a number of additional choices remain. Each choice produces a valid unit test, but some of these unit tests may not pass even if the candidate specification is correct. We describe the choices made by our algorithm, which empirically finds almost all correct candidate specifications.  In Figure 11, we show examples of path specifications (first column), the corresponding FSA (middle column), and the generated code fragment specifications. For example, in the second line, the transitions ob  thisset  thisget  r get  q init −−→ q 1 −−−−−→ q 2 −−−−−→ q 3 −−−→ q fin generate the specifications for set (the first two transitions, with field f = fq2 ) and get (the last two transitions), and the self-loop thisclone  r clone  q 2 −−−−−−−→ q 6 −−−−→ q 2 generates the specification for clone. 16  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications B.1  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA ob d thisadd → thisclone d r clone → thisget d r get  Skeleton Construction  To witness correctness of the candidate path specification, the synthesized unit test must exhibit exactly the external edges in its premise. In particular, the unit test must include a call to each function in the candidate. Our algorithm constructs a skeleton consisting of these calls, for example, the skeleton on the second step of Figure 12. A symbol ??, called a hole, is included for each parameter and return value of each function call, and must be filled in with a variable name. B.2  Filling Holes  The external edges in the candidate specification impose constraints on the arguments that should be used in each function call. In particular, the synthesized unit test must exhibit every behavior encoded by the external edges in the candidate specification: • Alias: For an aliasing edge pmi −−−→ pmi +1 , the algorithm has to ensure that the arguments pmi (passed to mi ) and pmi +1 (passed to mi+1 ) are aliased. Transfer  • Transfer: For a transfer edge rmi −−−−−−→ pmi +1 , the algorithm has to use the return value of mi as the argument passed to mi+1 (and similarly for backwards  fill holes  list.add(in); List listClone = list.clone(); Object out = listClone.get(??);  initialization & scheduling  Object in = new Object(); List list = new List() list.add(in); List listClone = list.clone(); Object out = listClone.get(0); return in == out;  Then, our algorithm computes the connected components in this graph. For each connected component, the algorithm chooses a fresh variable name, and each hole in that connected component is filled with this variable name. For example, for the candidate in Figure 12, our algorithm computes the following partitions:  Transfer  transfer edges pmi −−−−−−→ rmi +1 ). For example, the holes in the skeleton in Figure 12 are filled so that the following premises are satisfied: Transfer  thisadd −−−→ thisclone , r clone −−−−−−→ thisget .  {ob}, {thisadd , thisclone }, {r clone , thisget }, {r get },  One issue is that internal edges may be self-loops, in which case more than two parameters may need to be aliased. For example, consider the following candidate:  and fills the corresponding holes with the variables names in, list, listClone, out,  ob d thisadd → thisclone d thisid → thisget d r get .  ??.add(??); ?? = ??.clone(); ?? = ??.get(??);  Figure 12. Steps in the unit test synthesis algorithm (right) for a candidate path specification for List (left). Code added at each step is highlighted in blue. Scheduling is shown in the same line as initialization—it chooses the final order of the statements. This figure is a duplicate of Figure 7, and is shown here for clarity.  Alias  Alias  skeleton  respectively. Similarly, for (5), we compute partitions  (5)  {ob}, {thisadd , thisclone , thisget }, {r clone }, {r get }.  For the unit test for this candidate, the three calls to add, clone, and get must all share the same receiver:  The variable names are the same as those chosen in Figure 12.  list.add(in); List listClone = list.clone(); Object out = list.get(??);  B.3  Variable Initialization  We describe primitive variables and reference variables separately. For the case of initializing reference variables, we describe two different strategies: • Null: Whenever possible, initialize to null. • Instantiation: Whenever possible, use constructor calls. The first strategy ensures that the unit test does not exhibit additional transfer and alias edges beyond those in the candidate specification. The second strategy may produce a unit test that does not witness correctness, since it may include spurious edges not in the premise of the candidate. However, certain functions require that some of their arguments are not null; for example, the put function in the Hashtable class. We show empirically that the second variant identifies  Our algorithm partitions the holes into subsets that must be aliased—since aliasing is a transitive relation, every hole in a subset has to be aliased with every other hole in that subset. To do so, the algorithm constructs an undirected graph where the vertices are the holes, and an edge (h, h ′) ∈ E connects two holes h and h ′ in the following cases: • There is an external edge wmi → zmi +1 in the candidate specification, where h is the hole corresponding to wmi and h ′ is the hole corresponding to zmi +1 . • There is an internal edge pmi d pmi in the candidate specification, where h is the hole corresponding to the pmi on the left-hand side and h ′ is the hole corresponding to the pmi on the right-hand side. 17  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  a number of candidates missed by the first, and that these additional specifications are in fact correct.  X1, ..., Xk, we recursively define the constructor  Primitive initialization. We initialize all primitive variables with 0 (except characters, which are initialized as ’a’). In our experience, the only important choice of primitive value is the index parameter passed to functions such as get, which retrieve data from collections. Choosing the index = 0 retrieves the single object the unit test previously added to the collection. Testing more primitive values is possible but has so far been unnecessary.  Therefore, devising a constructor call to instantiate an object of type X amounts to computing a path in G with root X. Paths to every reachable vertex can be efficiently computed using a standard dynamic programming algorithm. Furthermore, we can add a weight w e to each edge in e ∈ E. Then, the Í shortest path (i.e., the path minimizing the total weight v ∈T eT ,v ) can similarly be efficiently computed. We choose all weights w e = 1 for each e ∈ E. For example, suppose that the List class has a single constructor List(Object val). Then, our algorithm constructs a hypergraph with two vertices and two edges:  CT (X) = new X(CT (X1), ..., CT (Xk)).  Reference initialization using null. Reference variables for which aliasing relations hold must be instantiated (unless they have already been initialized as the return value of a function call). Any other reference variable is initialized to null. For example, in Figure 12, the variables list and out must be instantiated, but cloneList has already been initialized as the return value of clone. In general, the unit test we synthesize calls the constructor with the fewest number of arguments; primitive arguments are initialized as before, and reference arguments are initialized using null.  V = {Object, List} E = {(Object, []), (List, [Object])}. Then, the path corresponding to List is the tree T = which corresponds to the constructor call  List Object ,  new List(new Object())  used to instantiate variables of type List. As with initializing primitive variables, multiple choices of constructor calls could be used, but selecting a single constructor suffices has been sufficient so far.  Reference initialization using instantiation. In this approach, we have to synthesize constructor calls when empty constructors are unavailable. For example, if the only constructor for the List class was List(Object val), then we would have to initialize an object of type Object as well:  B.4  Statement Scheduling  Note that the unit test now contains both function call statements as well as variable initialization statements added in the previous step. All the added variable initialization statements can be executed first, so it suffices to schedule the function call statements. There are two kinds of constraints on scheduling function calls. First, consider edges of the form  List list = new List(new Object());  We encode the problem of synthesizing a valid constructor call as a directed hypergraph reachability problem. A directed hypergraph is a pair G = (V , E), where V is a set of vertices, and edges e ∈ E have the form e = (h, B), where h ∈ V is the head of the edge, and B ⊆ V is its body. For our purposes, B is a list rather than a set, and may contain a single vertex multiple times. We construct a hypergraph G = (V , E) where vertices correspond to classes, and edges to constructors:  Transfer  rmi −−−−−−→ pmi +1 in the premise of the candidate path specification; they impose hard constraints on the schedule, since mi must be called before mi+1 so its return value can be transfered to  • Vertices: A vertex v ∈ V is a library class. • Edges: An edge e = (h, B) ∈ E is a constructor, where h is the class of the constructed object and B is the list of classes of the constructor parameters.  Transfer  pmi +1 (edges of the form pmi −−−−−−→ rmi +1 impose hard constraints as well). For example, in Figure 12, the edge Transfer  r clone −−−−−−→ thisget imposes the hard constraint that the call to clone must be scheduled before the call to get. Then, any of the following orderings is permitted:  For convenience, we also include primitive types as vertices in G, along with an edge representing the “empty constructor”, which returns the initialization value described above. Now, a path T in the hypergraph G = (V , E) is a finite tree with root vT ∈ V (called the root of the path), such that for each vertex v ∈ T , v and its (ordered) children [v 1 , ..., vk ] are an edge eT ,v = (v, [v 1 , ..., vk ]) ∈ E. Note that for each leaf v of T , there must necessarily be an edge (v, []) ∈ E, since v has no children. Also, we say a vertex v ∈ V is reachable is there exists a path with root v. In our setting, a path in our hypergraph G corresponds to a call to a constructor—for each vertex X ∈ T with children  [add, clone, get], [clone, add, get], [clone, get, add]. We use soft constraints to choose among schedules satisfying the hard constraints. Empirically, we observe that the order of the functions in the specification is typically the same as the order in which they must be called for the conclusion to be exhibited dynamically. More precisely, function mi should be called before function m j whenever i < j. In our example, the soft constraint says that add should be scheduled before both clone and get. 18  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA ∗  Our algorithm iteratively constructs a schedule [i 1 , ..., i k ] of the function calls F = {m 1 , ..., mk }. At iteration t, it selects the tth function call mi t from the remaining calls Ft ⊆ F . It does so greedily, by identifying the choices G t ⊆ Ft that satisfy the hard constraints, and then selecting mi t ∈ G t to be optimal according to the soft constraints. These conditions uniquely specify mi t , since our soft constraints are a total ordering. Our algorithm keeps track of the remaining statements Ft as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), which includes an edge mi → m j for each hard constraint that mi should be scheduled before m j . Then, G t is the set of roots of Ft . Furthermore, our algorithm maintains G t as a priority queue, where the priority of mi is i (the highest priority element in G t is the element with the smallest index i). We initialize F 1 = F ; then, G 1 is the subset of vertices in F 1 without a parent. Updates are computed as follows:  such that A ⇒ = β 1α̃ 1 ...α̃ k −1 βk in C pt , where ( Transfer if z 1 = pm1 A= Alias if z 1 = rm1 and   Assign    α̃ i = Assign    New New   Then, we prove that the conclusion of Theorem 4.2 holds for S constructed with this algorithm. C.2  G ⊆ G(S).  In Figure 12, F 1 has three vertices add (priority 1), clone (priority 2), and get (priority 3), and a single edge clone → get, and G 1 includes add and clone. Therefore, the selected schedule is [add, clone, get].  FlowsTo  For simplicity, we focus on points-to edges o −−−−−−→ x; the alias and transfer relations follow similarly. Suppose that FlowsTo  Proof of Equivalence Theorem  α0  β1  α1  βk  αk  x 99K z 1 99K w 1 99K ... 99K w k 999K y,  (6)  where α = α 0 β 1α 1 ...βk α k . This decomposition suggests that the following path specification may be applied to derive  Assumption C.1. Let Flib be fields accessed by the library and Fprog be fields accessed by the program, and let the shared fields be Fshare = Flib ∩ Fprog . We assume Fshare = ∅.  Transfer  x −−−−−−→ y: z 1 d w 1 → ... → zk d w k .  We can remove this assumption by having the static analysis treat accesses to library fields in the program as calls to getter and setter library functions.  (7)  At a high level, our proof has two parts. First, we prove the case where the segments of α in the program do not contain field accesses, i.e., α ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ , where Σfree = {Assign, Assign, New, New}  Converting the Library Implementation to Path Specifications  Σprog = {Store[f ], Load[f ], Store[f ], Load[f ] | f ∈ Fprog }  First, we describe how to convert the library implementation into a set S of transfer and proxy object specifications. A specification of the form  Σlib = {Store[f ], Load[f ], Store[f ], Load[f ] | f ∈ Flib }. Second, we show how “nesting” of fields allows us to reduce the general case to the case α ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib ∪ Σprog )∗ . In particular, by Assumption C.1, the library field accesses and program field accesses do not match one another. As previously discussed, this assumption can be enforced by a purely syntactic program transformation where accesses to library fields in the program are converted into calls to getter and setter functions.  z 1 d w 1 → ... → zk d w k . is included in S if there exist paths β1  New  o −−−−−−→ y ∈ G(S); then, there must exist a path o −−−→ ∗ α x 99K y, where Transfer ⇒ = α. This path passes into and out of library functions, leading to a decomposition  We prove Theorem 4.2, relegating the proof of technical lemmas to Appendix D. To simplify the proof, we assume the following:  C.1  Proof Overview  Let G denote the points-to sets computed by running the static analysis with the library implementation available, and G(S) denote the points-to sets computed by running the static analysis with the path specifications S. We have to prove that G = G(S); the direction G(S) ⊆ G follows easily, since a path specification s is included in S exactly when the library implementation would imply the same logical formula as the semantics of s. The challenging direction is to show that S is sound, i.e.,  1. The highest priority function call mi t in G t is removed from both G t and from Ft . 2. For each child mi of mi t in Ft , we determine if mi is now a root of Ft (i.e., none of its parents are in Ft ). 3. For every child mi that is now a root of Ft , we add mi to G t with priority i.  C  if w i = pmi and zi+1 = rmi +1 if w i = rmi and zi+1 = pmi +1 if w i = pmi and zi+1 = pmi +1 .  βk  z 1 99K w 1 , ..., zk 99K w k 19  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  Consider a path of the form (6) such that α ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ . We need to show that in this case, we derive the edge  is “equivalent” to α̃ i . Intuitively, for α̃ i = Assign, we show that the sequence of statements represented by α i exhibits the same semantics as a single assignment. For example, y ← x, z ← y has the same points-to effects as z ← x (assuming y is temporary). We leverage the correspondence established by formulating points-to analysis as context-free language reachability:  Transfer  x −−−−−−→ y ∈ G(S), where S is constructed as in Section C.1. Our proof of this claim relies on two results. The first result says that for such a path, the conclusion of (7) holds when each w i is connected to zi+1 by α i : Proposition C.2. For any path of the form (6) such that α ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ we have (i) the case w i = r i and zi+1 = r i+1 ∗ cannot happen, and (ii) Transfer ⇒ = β 1α 1 β 2 ...α k−1 βk .  sequence of statements = sequence α ∈ Σ∗ . For example, the first sequence of statements above corresponds to (Assign Assign), and the second to Assign. Using this correspondence, we can reduce reasoning about sequences of statements with equivalent semantics to studying equivalence classes of strings α ∈ Σ∗ :  As a consequence of this result, we know that the path specification (7) is contained in S. The second result says that the premise of (7) holds for our case: Proposition C.3. For any path of the form (7) such that α ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ , we have ∗  Ai ⇒ = αi  (∀i ∈ [k − 1])  ∗  (∀i ∈ {0, k}).  Ai ⇒ = αi  equivalent sequences of statements  γ αδ ∈ L(C pt ) ⇔ γ βδ ∈ L(C pt ) (∀γ , δ ∈ Σ∗ ).  Theorem C.4. Theorem 4.2 holds for any α ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ . Transfer  Proof. Consider an edge x −−−−−−→ y ∈ G derived by the static analysis using the library implementation. We claim that this edge is derived by the static analysis when using  γ  Transfer  β  Proof. By definition, γ α βδ ⇔ γ α ′ βδ ⇔ γ α ′ β ′δ .  x −−−−−−→ z 1 −−−−−−→ w k −−−−−−→ y ∈ G(S), Transfer  so the static analysis derives x −−−−−−→ y ∈ G(S), as claimed.  δ  □  In particular, Lemma C.5 shows that sequencing is welldefined for equivalence classes:  FlowsTo  Now, we know that any points-to edge o −−−−−−→ y ∈ G Transfer  [α] [β] = [α β],  has the form o −−−→ x −−−−−−→ y. Since we have shown Transfer  that x −−−−−−→ y ∈ G(S), the static analysis also derives  (9)  since different choices α ′ ∈ [α] and β ′ ∈ [β] yield the same equivalence class, i.e., [α β] = [α ′ β ′]. Abstractly, Σ∗ is a semigroup, with sequencing as the semigroup operation; then, Lemma C.5 shows the equivalence relation is compatible with the semigroup operation, so the quotient Σ/∼ is a semigroup with semigroup operation (9). For convenience, we let ϕ denote an element of the equivalence class of strings such that  □  In the remainder of the section, we introduce the technical machinery that enables us to reason about “equivalence” of the semantics of different sequences of statements. Then, we describe how we prove Propositions C.2 & C.3. Finally, we reduce Theorem 4.2 to Theorem C.4. C.3  γ  o 99K v 99K w 99K x,  Lemma C.5. If [α] = [α ′] and [β] = [β ′], then [α β] = [α ′ β ′].  Transfer  derives its conclusion, i.e., z 1 −−−−−−→ w k ∈ G(S). Therefore, we have  o −−−−−−→ y ∈ G(S), so the result follows.  δ  the first results in x ,→ o if and only if the second does. For example, [Assign Assign] = [Assign]. Then, equivalence is compatible with sequencing:  Transfer  FlowsTo  α  o 99K v 99K w 99K x,  path specifications, i.e., x −−−−−−→ y ∈ G(S). By Proposition C.2, we conclude that (7) is in S. Furthermore, by Proposition C.3, the premise of (7) holds, so the static analysis  New  (8)  In other words, α can be used interchangeably with β in any string without affecting whether the string is contained in L(C pt ). We use [α] = {β ∈ Σ∗ | α ∼ β } to denote the equivalence class of α ∈ Σ∗ . Then, [α] = [β] if for any two paths  Transfer  of the path specification (7), i.e., z 1 −−−−−−→ w k ∈ G(S). In summary, we have the following result:  Transfer  equivalence classes . [α] ⊆ Σ∗  In particular, α, β ∈ Σ∗ are equivalent if  Therefore, we can conclude that when running the static analysis using path specifications, we derive the conclusion  Transfer  =  Equivalent Semantics  for all γ , δ ∈ Σ∗ , γ ϕδ < L(C pt ).  Proving Propositions C.2 & C.3 requires reasoning about the equivalence of the semantics of sequences of statements in P. For example, to prove Proposition C.2, we show that each α i  (10)  In other words, [ϕ] describes sequences of statements that can never be completed to a valid flows-to path. 20  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications C.4  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 1. By Lemma C.7, we can write α = γ σ βτδ , where (σ , τ ) ∈ ∆prog and β ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ , such that  Proofs of Propositions C.2 & C.3  Now, we describe how to prove that under the conditions of Proposition C.2, [α i ] = [α̃ i ], which suffices to prove the proposition. We focus on the case α̃ i = Assign; the other cases are similar. We need the following technical lemma (we give a proof in Appendix D.1):  γ  With this lemma, since α̃ i = Assign, wmi = rmi and αi zmi +1 = pmi , so the path wmi 99K zmi +1 has form  This procedure must terminate, since α has finitely many pairs of store and load statements. Theorem 4.2 follows. □  Assign  wmi = rmi −−−−−→ yi 99K x i+1 −−−−−→ pmi +1 = zmi +1 ,  D  where α i = Assign α i′ Assign. By Lemma C.6,  D.1  Since (New α) ∈ L(C pt ), we cannot have [α i ] = [ϕ], so  Proof of Lemma C.6  We first show the following lemma, which completely characterizes the subgroupoid of elements Σ∗free ⊆ Σ∗ :  [α i ] = [Assign] = [α̃ i ],  Lemma D.1. We have  as claimed. We have also proven the claim in Proposition C.3 ∗ that Ai ⇒ = α i (with Ai = Transfer) also follows. The other claims in Propositions C.2 & C.3 follow similarly. □  [Assign] [Assign] = [Assign] [Assign] [Assign] = [ϕ] [Assign] [Assign] = [ϕ]  Reduction of Theorem 4.2 to Theorem C.4  To handle field accesses, we use the fact that pairs of terminals (Store[f ], Load[f ]) and (Load[f ], Store[f ]) in strings α ∈ L(C pt ) are matching. Therefore, can identify an innermost nested pair (σ , τ ) such that the string β between σ and τ contains no field accesses, i.e., β ∈ Σfree . Furthermore, by Assumption C.1, library field accesses and program field accesses do not match one another. In particular, the set of matching program field accesses is Ø ∆prog = {(Store[f ], Load[f ]), (Load[f ], Store[f ])}.  [Assign] [Assign] = [Assign] [Assign] [New New] = [ϕ] [New New] [Assign] = [New New] [Assign] [New New] = [Assign] [New New] [Assign] = [ϕ] [New New] [New New] = [ϕ]. Proof. We show the first relation; the others follow similarly. First, we show that if γ Assign δ ∈ L(C pt ), then γ Assign Assignδ ∈ L(C pt ). There must exist a derivation  f ∈ Fprog  Lemma C.7. For any α ∈ L(C pt ), either α ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ , or there exists a pair of terminals (σ , τ ) ∈ ∆prog such that α = γ σ βτδ , where γ , δ ∈ Σ∗ and β ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ .  FlowsTo ⇒ ... ⇒ Transfer uδ ⇒ Transfer Assign uδ  The next step is to characterize [σ βτ ]: Lemma C.8. For any (σ , τ ) ∈ ∆prog and β ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib  Proof of Technical Lemmas  We prove the technical lemmas used in Appendix C.  [α i ] = [Assign] [α i′] [Assign] ∈ {[Assign], [ϕ]}.  C.5  δ  Alias ˜ therefore, 4. By Theorem 4.2, we have w −−−→ t ∈ G(S); Transfer ˜ as well. v 999999K u ∈ G(S) 5. Recursively apply the procedure to α ′ = γ Assign δ .  [Assign] [α] [Assign] ∈ {[Assign], [ϕ]}.  α i′  τ  2. By Lemma C.8, [σ ] [β] [τ ] = [Assign]. 3. By Lemma C.9, [β] = [New New].  Lemma C.6. For any α ∈ Σ∗free , we have  Assign  β  σ  y 99K v − → w 99K t → − u 99K x .  ⇒ ... ⇒ γ Assign δ  )∗ ,  since the only production in C pt containing the terminal symbol Assign is Transfer → Transfer Assign. Therefore, the following derivation also exists:  [σ ] [β] [τ ] ∈ {[Assign], [ϕ]}. Finally, β must be an aliasing relation: Lemma C.9. For any β ∈ Σ∗ ,  FlowsTo ⇒ ... ⇒ Transfer δ  [Store[f ]] [β] [Load[f ]] = [Assign] ⇒ [β] = [New New]  ⇒ Transfer Assign uδ  [Load[f ]] [β] [Store[f ]] = [Assign] ⇒ [β] = [New New].  ⇒ Transfer Assign Assign uδ ⇒ ...  Now, if α ∈ Σ∗free , we are done. Otherwise, putting the three lemmas together, we perform the following procedure:  ⇒ γ Assign Assign δ, 21  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang  i.e., γ Assign Assign δ ∈ L(C pt ). By a similar argument, it follows that if γ Assign Assign δ ∈ L(C pt ), then γ Assign δ ∈ L(C pt ), so [Assign] [Assign] = [Assign]. □  Proof. Suppose that γ Store[f ] New New Load[f ] δ ∈ L(C pt ). Then, we must have derivation FlowsTo ⇒ ... ⇒ uγ Transfer uδ ⇒ uγ Store[f ] Alias Load[f ] uδ  It follows directly that if α ∈ Σ∗free , then  ⇒ ...  [α] ∈ {[ϕ], [ϵ], [Assign], [Assign], [New New]}.  ⇒ γ Store[f ] α Load[f ] δ,  In particular, for α ′ ∈ Σ∗free , [Assign] [α ′] ∈ {[Assign], [ϕ]}, so the lemma follows by taking α ′ = α Assign. □ D.2  so we also have derivation FlowsTo ⇒ ... ⇒ uγ Transfer uδ  Proof of Lemma C.7  ⇒ uγ Assign uδ  If we replace the terminal symbols σ ∈ Σfree with ϵ in C pt , then C pt is a parentheses matching grammar where each “open parentheses” Store[f ] (resp., Load[f ]) must be matched with a corresponding “closed parentheses” Load[f ] (resp., Store[f ]). Also, by Assumption C.1, Σlib ∩ Σprog = ∅. Now, we prove by induction on the length of α. The base case α = ϵ is clear. If α ∈ Σ∗ does not contain a pair of matched parentheses (Store[f ], Load[f ]) ∈ Σ2prog , then α ∈ (Σfree ∪ Σlib )∗ , so we are done. Otherwise, for any such pair of matched parentheses, we can express α = γ σα ′τδ . By induction, the lemma holds for α ′, so we can write α = γ ′σ ′ β ′τ ′δ ′ as in the lemma. Therefore, we have  ⇒ ... ⇒ γ Assign Load[f ] δ . Thus, γ Assign δ ∈ L(C pt ). The converse follows similarly, as does the second claim. □ Lemma D.3. For any β ∈ Σ∗ \ {ϵ }, we have [β] = [Assign] ⇔ β ∈ L(C pt , Transfer) [β] = [Assign] ⇔ β ∈ L(C pt , Transfer) [β] = [New New] ⇔ β ∈ L(C pt , Alias). Proof. We first show the forward implication. If [β] = [Assign], then New Assign ∈ L(C pt ), so New β ∈ L(C pt ). Therefore, there must exist a derivation  α = (γ σγ )σ β (τ δ τδ ), ′  ′ ′  ′ ′  so the claim follows. □ D.3  FlowsTo ⇒ New Transfer ⇒ ... ⇒ New β,  Proof of Lemma C.8  so β ∈ L(C pt , Transfer). The other two cases follow similarly. Now, we show the backward implication. Suppose that β ∈ L(C pt , Transfer). We prove by structural induction on the derivation of β from Transfer. Since β , ϵ, β cannot have been produced by Transfer ⇒ ϵ. If β is produced by Transfer → Transfer Assign, then β = β ′Assign, where β ′ ∈ L(C pt , Transfer). By induction, [β ′] = [Assign], so  We show the case (σ , τ ) = (Store[f ], Load[f ]), where f ∈ Fprog ; the case (σ , τ ) = (Load[f ], Store[f ]) is similar. First, suppose that γ σ βτδ ∈ L(C pt ). Then, there must exist a derivation of form FlowsTo ⇒ ... ⇒ uγ Transfer uδ ⇒ uγ Transfer σ Alias τ uδ  [β] = [β ′] [Assign] = [Assign] [Assign] = [Assign],  ⇒ ...  where the last step follows from Lemma D.1. Next, if β is produced using the production  ⇒ γ σ βτδ, so the following derivation exists:  Transfer → Transfer Store[f ] Alias Load[f ],  FlowsTo ⇒ ... ⇒ uγ Transfer uδ  then β = β ′ Store[f ] β ′′ Load[f ], where β ′ ∈ L(C pt , Transfer) and β ′′ ∈ L(C pt , Alias). By induction, [β ′] = [Assign] and [β ′′] = [New New], so  ⇒ uγ Transfer Assign uδ ⇒ ... ⇒ γ Assign δ .  β = [β ′] [Store[f ]] [β ′′] [Load[f ]]  The converse follows similarly, so the claim follows. □  = [Assign] [Store[f ]] [New New] [Load[f ]]  D.4  = [Assign],  Proof of Lemma C.9  where the last step follows from Lemma D.2 and Lemma D.1. The remaining cases follow similarly. □  We show two preliminary lemmas. Lemma D.2. We have [Store[f ]] [New New] [Load[f ]] = [Assign]  Now, suppose that [Store[f ]] [β] [Load[f ]] = [Assign]. Since  [Load[f ]] [New New] [Store[f ]] = [Assign].  New Store[f ] New New Load[f ] ∈ L(C pt ), 22  Active Learning of Points-To Specifications  Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA • Case Ai = Transfer: Then, w i is a return value and zi+1 is a parameter. Then, the unit test synthesis algorithm assigns the return value of mi to the argument of mi+1 , i.e., the edges  we have New Store[f ] β Load[f ] ∈ L(C pt ), so the following derivation must exist: FlowsTo ⇒ New Store[f ] Alias Load[f ]  Assign  ⇒ ...  where G is the graph extracted from P. Therefore, we  ⇒ New Store[f ] β Load[f ],  Transfer  have (w i −−−−−−→ zi+1 ) ∈ G(P, ∅). • Case Ai = Transfer: This case is analogous to the case A = Transfer. • Case Ai = Alias: Then, w i and zi+1 are both parameters. Then, w i and zi+1 are both parameters. Then, the unit test synthesis algorithm allocates a new object and passes it as a parameter to each mi and mi+1 , i.e., the edges  i.e., β ∈ L(C pt , Alias). Finally, by Lemma D.3, we have [β] = [New New]. The second case follows similarly. □  E  Proof of Correctness of Unit Test Synthesis  In this section, we sketch a proof of Theorem 5.2, which says that the unit tests synthesized by our algorithm are potential witnesses. E.1  Assign  w i −−−−−→ x −−−−−→ zi+1 ∈ G,  New  Assign  New  Assign  o −−−→ x −−−−−→ w i ∈ G and o −−−→ x −−−−−→ zi+1 ∈ G.  General Condition  Alias  Therefore, we have (w i −−−→ zi+1 ) ∈ G(P, ∅).  First, we establish a general condition for P to be a potential witness:  Ai  Second, consider all edges w −−→ z, where w, z ∈ Vlib and Ai ∈ {Transfer, Transfer, Alias}, that are contained in the premise of s. By inspection, of the edges in G as described above, the only additional edges in G(P, ∅) of this form are:  Proposition E.1. Let s be a path specification with premise (e 1 ∈ G) ∧ ... ∧ (ek ∈ G). A program P is a potential witness of s if the set of edges {e 1 , ..., ek } in the premise of s exactly equals   w, z ∈ Vlib and A w− → z ∈ G(P, ∅) . A ∈ {Transfer, Transfer, Alias}  Transfer  Transfer  • The self-loops zi −−−−−−→ zi and w i −−−−−−→ w i (since there is a production Transfer → ϵ in the points-to grammar C pt ). Ai  Proof. Let P be a potential witness for s, and suppose that the conclusion of s is (e ∈ G). Let S be a set of path specifications that computes e for P, i.e., e ∈ G(P, S). We need to show that for any such S, S ∪ {s} is equivalent to S. Clearly, S ∪ {s} has higher or equal recall than S, so it suffices to show that it also has higher or equal precision than S. Consider an arbitrary program P ′. Then, if s is used during the computation G(P, S ∪ {s}), then at that point, the premise of s holds for G, i.e., e 1 , ..., ek ∈ G. Since the graph for P is contained in the graph for P ′, and our static analysis is monotone, we have e ∈ G(P, S) ⊆ G(P ′, S), i.e., e is computed without s. Thus, G(P ′, S ∪ {s}) = G(P ′, S), so S ∪ {s} equivalent to S as claimed. □  • The backward edges zi+1 −−→ w i , where we have Ai ∈ {Transfer, Transfer}). If these edges were added to the premise of s for P, then by Proposition E.1, we could conclude that P is a potential witness of s. However, these edges are in G(P, S) for any program P and any specifications S, so we can add them to the premise of s without affecting its semantics. It follows that if P is a witness for s ′, and s ′ is equivalent to s, then P is a witness for s as well. Therefore, P is a witness for s as claimed. □  E.2 Proof Sketch of Theorem 5.2 Let s = z 1 → w 1 d ... → zk d w k . Since the function calls are treated as no-ops by the static analysis (according to the definition of a potential witness), they do not add any edges to the extracted graph G except for assignments to and from parameters and return values. The only other edges in the graph G extracted from P are those corresponding to the allocation statements added to P in the initialization step. First, we show that the edges in the premise of s are contained in G(P, ∅). For an edge w i → zi+1 , there are three possibilities—either Ai = Transfer, Ai = Transfer, or Ai = Alias: 23

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
