Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_3427

Abstract:
arXiv:1609.07870v1 [math.RT] 26 Sep 2016  On Morita and derived equivalences for cohomological Mackey algebras Markus Linckelmann and Baptiste Rognerud Abstract By results of the second author, a source algebra equivalence between two p-blocks of finite groups induces an equivalence between the categories of cohomological Mackey functors associated with these blocks, and a splendid derived equivalence between two blocks induces a derived equivalence between the corresponding categories of cohomological Mackey functors. The main result of this paper proves a partial converse: an equivalence (resp. Rickard equivalence) between the categories of cohomological Mackey functors of two blocks of finite groups induces a permeable Morita (resp. derived) equivalence between the two block algebras.  1  Introduction  Let p be a prime and O a complete local principal ideal domain with residue field k = O/J(O) of characteristic p; we allow the case O = k. Let G be a finite group. The blocks of OG are the primitive idempotents in Z(OG). For b a block of OG, denote by coMack(G, b) the abelian category of cohomological Mackey functors of G associated with b, with coefficients in the category mod(O) of finitely generated O-modules. The second author showed in [8] that if two block algebras OGb and OHc of finite groups G and H are splendidly Morita or derived equivalent, then coMack(G, b) and coMack(H, c) are equivalent or derived equivalent, respectively. We show that a Morita or Rickard equivalence between coMack(G, b) and coMack(H, c) induces a Morita or derived equivalence between OGb and OHc. Theorem 1.1. Let G, H be finite groups, b a block of OG and c a block of OH. An equivalence between the abelian categories coMack(G, b) and coMack(H, c) (resp. a Rickard equivalence between their chain homotopy categories) induces a permeable Morita equivalence (resp. a derived equivalence) between the block algebras OGb and OHc. If O has characteristic zero, we obtain a converse to [8, Proposition 4.5]. Corollary 1.2. Suppose that O has characteristic zero. The abelian categories coMack(G, b) and coMack(H, c) are equivalent if and only if b and c are splendidly Morita equivalent. By a result of Scott [9] and Puig [5], two blocks are splendidly Morita equivalent if and only if they have isomorphic source algebras. Theorem 1.1 will be proved in Section 4 as a consequence of the description of the category coMack(G, b) in terms of a source algebra of b in [3], and the two theorems below. Corollary 1.2 follows from this and Weiss’ criterion [10], implying that if char(O) = 0, then a permeable Morita equivalence is splendid. 1  Theorem 1.3. Let A and B be symmetric O-algebras. Let X be a finitely generated O-free Amodule and let Y be a finitely generated O-free B-module. Suppose that A is isomorphic to a direct summand of X as an A-module, and that B is isomorphic to a direct summand of Y as a B-module. Set E = EndA (X) and F = EndB (Y ). A Morita equivalence between E and F induces a Morita equivalence between A and B which restricts to an equivalence between add(X) and add(Y ). A Rickard equivalence between two algebras A and B consists of a bounded complex X of A-B-bimodules and a bounded complex Y of B-A-bimodules such that the terms of X, Y are finitely generated projective as left and right modules, such that we have homotopy equivalences X ⊗B Y ≃ A in the homotopy category K(A ⊗O Aop ) of finitely generated A-A-bimodules and Y ⊗A X ≃ B in the corresponding homotopy category K(B ⊗O B op ). A Rickard equivalence induces a derived equivalence between A and B. Theorem 1.4. Let A and B be symmetric O-algebras. Let X be a finitely generated O-free Amodule and let Y be a finitely generated O-free B-module. Suppose that A is isomorphic to a direct summand of X as an A-module, and that B is isomorphic to a direct summand of Y as a B-module. Set E = EndA (X) and F = EndB (Y ). A Rickard equivalence between E and F induces a derived equivalence between A and B. Since the categories of cohomological Mackey functors in the statement of Theorem 1.1 are equivalent to the module categories of the corresponding Mackey algebras, the notion of Rickard equivalences extends in the obvious way to categories of cohomological Mackey functors. By results of Rickard in [6] and [7], if two symmetric O-algebras are derived equivalent, then they are Rickard equivalent, but such a Rickard equivalence may not be related in an obvious way to a given derived equivalence. This is essentially the reason why the conclusions in the theorems above are formulated in terms of derived equivalences rather than Rickard equivalences. Notation. For A an algebra, we denote by Aop the opposite algebra. An A-module is a unital left module, unless stated otherwise. We denote by mod(A) the category of finitely generated Amodules, and we identify mod(Aop ) with the category of finitely generated unital right A-modules. For U a finitely generated A-module, we denote by add(U ) the full subcategory of mod(A) consistig of all modules which are isomorphic to finite direct sums of summands of U . We denote by Ch(A) the category of chain complexes of finitely generated A-modules, and by K(A) the corresponding homotopy category. Remark 1.5. For the purpose of proving Theorems 1.3 and 1.4 it would be sufficient to require that every projective indecomposable A-module is isomorphic to a direct summand of X, or equivalently, that the category proj(A) of finitely generated projective A-modules is contained in the category add(X). Since A is symmetric, this condition is equivalent to X having a generator and a cogenerator as a direct summand. This is the condition which appears in work of Auslander [1], introducing the notion of representation dimension, and subsequently in work of Iyama [2], where the finiteness of the representation dimension of Artin algebras is proved. It is tempting to speculate, whether the above theorems might possibly be of some use towards Broué’s abelian defect conjecture, by playing the conjecture back to a question of derived equivalences between certain endomorphism algebras with interesting structural properties.  2  2  On relatively O-injective modules  Let A be an O-algebra. Suppose that A is free of finite rank as an O-module. Let U be a finitely generated left A-module. The module U is called relatively O-projective if U is isomorphic to a direct summand of A ⊗O V for some O-module V . Thus U is projective if and only if U is relatively O-projective and O-free. If U is indecomposable and relatively O-projective, then U is isomorphic to a direct summand of either A or A/π n A for some positive integer n, because an indecomposable O-module is isomorphic to either O or O/π n O for some positive integer n. Dually, U is called relatively O-injective if U is isomorphic to a direct summand of HomO (A, V ) for some O-module V , where the left A-module structure on HomO (A, V ) is given by (b · ϕ)(a) = ϕ(ab) for all a, b ∈ A and ϕ ∈ HomO (A, V ). As before, if U is indecomposable relatively O-injective, then U is isomorphic to a direct summand of either A∗ = HomA (A, O) or of HomO (A, O/π n O) for some positive integer n. Note that for n = 1 this yields the injective k ⊗O A-modules. It is well-known that if U is O-free, then U is relatively O-injective if and only if k ⊗O U is injective as a k ⊗O A-module; we include short proofs of this and related facts for the convenience of the reader. Lemma 2.1. Let A be an O-algebra which is free of finite rank as an O-module, and let U be an A-module which is free of finite rank as an O-module. Then U is projective if and only if k ⊗O U is a projective k ⊗O A-module. Proof. If U is projective, then k ⊗O U is obviously projective as a k ⊗O A-module. Suppose conversely that k ⊗O U is a projective k ⊗O A-module. Then there is a projective A-module P such that k ⊗O P ∼ = k ⊗O U as A-modules. Since P is projective, it follows that the obvious map k ⊗ P → k ⊗O P ∼ = O U lifts to a map P → U . This map is surjective by Nakayama’s lemma (we use here that U is finitely generated as an O-module). Since both P and U are O-free of the same rank (equal to the dimension of k ⊗O U ), it follows that the map P → U obtained in this way is an isomorphism. Lemma 2.2. Let A be an O-algebra which is free of finite rank as an O-module, and let U be an A-module which is free of finite rank as an O-module. Then U is relatively O-injective if and only if the right A-module U ∗ = HomO (U, O) is projective. Proof. Since duality preserves finite direct sums and since U is projective (resp. relatively Oinjective) if and only if all direct summands of U have the same property, we may assume that U is indecomposable. Since also U is O-free, it follows that U is relatively O-injective if and only if U is isomorphic to a direct summand of A∗ = HomO (A, O). Applying O-duality, this is the case if and only if U ∗ is isomorphic to a direct summand of A∗∗ ∼ = A as a right A-module, hence if and only if U ∗ is projective as a right A-module. Lemma 2.3. Let A be an O-algebra which is free of finite rank as an O-module, and let U be an A-module which is free of finite rank as an O-module. Then U is relatively O-injective if and only if k ⊗O U is an injective k ⊗O A-module. Proof. We may assume that U is indecomposable. If U is relatively O-injective, then U is isomorphic to a direct summand of A∗ = HomO (A, O). Thus k ⊗O U is isomorphic to a direct summand of (k ⊗O A)∗ = Homk (k ⊗O A, k), and hence k ⊗O U is injective as a k ⊗O A-module. Suppose conversely that k ⊗O U is injective as a k ⊗O A-module. Then k ⊗O U is isomorphic to a direct 3  summand of the k-dual (k ⊗O A)∗ of k ⊗O A. Thus the k-dual (k ⊗O U ∗ ) of k ⊗O U is isomorphic to a direct summand of the regular right k ⊗O A-module k ⊗O A, hence is projective as a right k ⊗O A-module. By the obvious version of Lemma 2.1 for right modules, the O-dual U ∗ of U is a projective right A-module. Thus U is relatively O-injective, by Lemma 2.2. Let A be a finite-dimensional k-algebra. The k-dual U ∗ of a right A-module U is then a left A-module, and for any idempotent e in A, we have a canonical isomorphism (U e)∗ ∼ = e(U ∗ ) of left eAe-modules. This isomorphism is induced by restricting k-linear maps U → k to U e. It can be regarded as a special case of an adjunction isomorphism: since U e ∼ = U ⊗A Ae, we have a natural isomorphism Homk (U ⊗A Ae, k) ∼ = HomA (Ae, Homk (U, k)). The left side is (U e)∗ , and the right side is HomA (Ae, U ∗ ) ∼ = e(U ∗ ). Applied to U = eA this yields an isomorphism of left eAe-modules ∗ ∼ ∗ e((eA) ) = (eAe) . We use this in the proof of the following lemma. Lemma 2.4. Let A be a finite-dimensional k-algebra. Suppose that for any primitive idempotent i in A the left A-module Ai is injective if and only if the right A-module iA is injective. Let J be a set of pairwise orthogonal representatives P of the conjugacy classes of primitive idempotents j with the property that Aj is injective. Set e = j∈J j. Then the k-algebra eAe is selfinjective. Proof. By the assumptions, the right A-module eA is both projective and injective. Thus its k-dual (eA)∗ = Homk (eA, k) is a projective and injective left A-module. It follows that any indecomposable direct summand of (eA)∗ is isomorphic to a direct summand of Ae, by the choice of e. The indecomposable direct summands of Ae in any decomposition of Ae are pairwise nonisomorphic. Similarly for eA. Since Ae and eA have the same number of indecomposable direct factors, it follows that (eA)∗ ∼ = Ae as left A-modules. Multiplying both modules on the left by e yields an isomorphism of left eAe-modules e(eA)∗ ∼ = eAe. The left side is isomorphic to (eAe)∗ , and hence eAe is injective as a left eAe-module as required. If a finite-dimensional k-algebra A has the property that for any primitive idempotent i the left A-module Ai is injective if and only if the right A-module iA is injective, then clearly any block algebra of A and any algebra Morita equivalent to A inherit the analogous property. This property applies to the Yoshida type endomorphism algebras. This will follow from some general considerations, based on the usual translation between direct summands of a module and projective modules over its endomorphism algebra. Lemma 2.5. Let A be a finite-dimensional k-algebra, X a finite-dimensional left A-module, and set E = EndA (X). Let M be a direct summand of X. (i) If HomA (X, M ) is injective as an E op -module, then M is injective as an A-module. (ii) If HomA (M, X) is injective as an E-module, then M is projective as an A-module. Proof. Suppose that HomA (X, M ) is injective as an E op -module. Let ι : M → N be an injective A-homomorphism. We need to show that ι is split. The map η : HomA (X, M ) → HomA (X, N ) sending ϕ ∈ HomA (X, M ) to ι ◦ ϕ is an injective homomorphism of E op -modules. Thus η is split injective. Therefore there is an E op -homomorphism ǫ : HomA (X, N ) → HomA (X, M ) satisfying ǫ ◦ η = Id, the identity on HomA (X, M ). By the usual general abstract nonsense, ǫ is induced by an A-homomorphism π : N → M ; that is, we have ǫ(ψ) = π ◦ ψ. Since ϕ = ǫ(η(ϕ)) = π ◦ ι ◦ ϕ for all ϕ ∈ HomA (X, M ). Applying this with ϕ a projection of X onto M implies that π ◦ ι = IdM , and hence ι is split. Thus M is an injective A-module. This proves (i). The proof of (ii) is dual; we 4  sketch the steps. Let π : N → M be a surjective A-homomorphism. Precomposing with π induces an injective homomorphism β : HomA (M, X) → HomA (N, X), which by the assumptions, is split injective. Any splitting of β is induced by precomposing with an A-homomorphism M → N , which is then shown to be a section of π. This proves (ii). We will use the following elementary fact on tensor products of finitely generated projective modules. Lemma 2.6. Let A be an O-algebra which is finitely generated as an O-module. Let e be an idempotent in A. Suppose that U is a projective left A-module which is a finite direct sum of direct summands of Ae, or that V is a projective right A-module which is a finite direct sum of direct summands of eA. The inclusions eU ⊆ U and V e ⊆ V induce an isomorphism V e ⊗eAe eU ∼ = V ⊗A U . Proof. The maps V e ⊗eAe eU → V ⊗A U induced by the inclusions eU ⊆ U and V e ⊆ V are a natural transformation from the bifunctor (U, V ) 7→ V e ⊗eAe eU to the bifunctor (U, V ) 7→ V ⊗A U . This natural transformation is O-linear in both arguments, so it suffices to show that it yields an isomorphism if U = Ae or if V = eA. If U = Ae, then V e ⊗eAe eU = V e ⊗eAe eAe ∼ = Ve ∼ = V ⊗A Ae = V ⊗A U . A similar argument shows that if V = eA, then we have an isomorphism V e ⊗eAe eU ∼ = V ⊗A U , proving the statement. Lemma 2.7. Let A be an O-algebra which is finitely generated as an O-module. Let U be a bounded complex of finitely generated projective A-modules. Suppose that k ⊗O U has a contractible direct summand W as a complex of k ⊗O A-modules. Then U has a contractible direct summand V such that k ⊗O V = W . Proof. Set Ā = k ⊗O A and Ū = k ⊗O U . Since U is bounded, the algebra EndCh(A) (U ) is finitely generated as an O-module, and EndCh(Ā) (Ū ) is finite-dimensional. Denote by C the ideal in EndCh(A) (U ) of chain maps ψ : U → U which satisfy ψ ∼ 0; that is, C is the kernel of the canonical algebra homormophism EndCh(A) (U ) → EndK(A) (U ). Similarly, denote by D the kernel of the canonical algebra homomorphism EndCh(Ā) (Ū ) → EndK(Ā) (Ū ). Since the components of U are projective, any homotopy Ū → Ū [−1] lifts to a homotopy U → U [−1]. It follows that the canonical map C → D is surjective. The summand W of Ū corresponds to an idempotent η in EndCh(Ā) (Ū ). Since W is contractible, this idempotent is contained in D. Thus, by standard lifting theorems, there is an idempotent η̂ in C which lifts η. Thus V = η̂(U ) is a contractible direct summand of U which lifts W . The following result identifies bounded complexes of finitely generated modules which are both projective and injective. Lemma 2.8. Let A be a finite-dimensional k-algebra. Let U be a bounded chain complex of finitely generated projective A-modules. Suppose that U has no nonzero contractible direct summand as a chain complex, and that for any bounded above acyclic chain complex C in Ch(A) we have HomK(A) (C, U ) = {0}. Then the components of U are injective. Proof. Let α : U → IU be an injective resolution of U ; that is, IU is a bounded above chain complex of finitely generated injective A-modules and α is a quasi-isomorphism. Denote by α the image of  5  α in HomK(A) (U, IU ). Consider the associated exact triangle in K(A), U  α  / IU  / C(α)  / U [1]  Since α is a quasi-isomorphism, it follows that its cone C(α) is acyclic. By the assumptions on U , the morphism C(α) → U [1] in this triangle is zero. Therefore, by a standard property of triangulated categories (see e. g. [12, Lemma 3.4.9]), the morphism α is a split monomorphism in K(A). That is, there exists a chain map δ : IU → U such that δ ◦ α ∼ IdU . Since U is bounded, the algebra EndCh(A) (U ) is finite-dimensional. We use as before the fact that idempotents in this algebra correspond to direct summands of U as a chain complex, and that contractible direct summand correspond to those idempotents which are in the kernel of the canonical algebra homomorphism EndCh(A) (U ) → EndK(A) (U ). By the assumptions on U , this kernel contains no idempotents, and hence is contained in the radical J(EndCh(A) (U )). Since δ ◦ α maps to the identity in EndK(A) (U ), it follows that δ ◦ α is invertible in EndCh(A) (U ). Thus the chain map β = (δ ◦ α)−1 ◦ δ satisfies β ◦ α = IdU . This shows that U is isomorphic to a direct summand of IU . In particular, the components of U are injective.  3  Proof of Theorems 1.3 and 1.4  An O-algebra A is symmetric if A is free of finite rank as an O-module, and if A is isomorphic to its O-dual A∗ as an A-A-bimodule. One of the special features of a symmetric O-algebra A is that the two duality functors with respect to A and O are isomorphic; that is, for any left A-module U , there is an isomorphism HomA (U, A) ∼ = U ∗ of right A-modules which is natural in U . More precisely, any choice of a bimodule isomorphism A ∼ = A∗ induces such an isomorphism of duality ∗ functors as follows: if s ∈ A is the image of 1 under a bimodule isomorphism A ∼ = A∗ , then the ∗ map sending ϕ ∈ HomA (U, A) to s◦ ϕ ∈ U is an isomorphism, for any A-module U . The naturality implies in particular that this isomorphism is an isomorphism as right EndA (U )-modules. Lemma 3.1. Let A be a finite-dimensional k-algebra and let X be a finite-dimensional A-module. Set E = EndA (X). If X has a direct summand isomorphic to A as an A-module, then X is projective as an E-module. If in addition A is symmetric, then X ∗ is projective as an E op -module. Proof. If A is isomorphic to a direct summand of X, then HomA (A, X) is a projective E-module, and clearly HomA (A, X) ∼ = X. If in addition A is symmetric, then we have a natural isomorphism Hom (X, A), and this is a projective E op -module. X∗ ∼ = A Proposition 3.2. Let A be a symmetric k-algebra and X a finite-dimensional A-module. Suppose that A is isomorphic to a direct summand of X. Set E = EndA (X). Let U be a direct summand of X. The following are equivalent. (i) The A-module U is projective. (ii) The E op -module HomA (X, U ) is injective. (iii) The E-module HomA (U, X) is injective.  6  Proof. If HomA (X, U ) is an injective E op -module, then by Lemma 2.5 (i) the A-module U is injective, hence also projective, since we assume that A is symmetric. Thus (ii) implies (i). Similarly, if HomA (U, X) is injective, then by Lemma 2.5 (ii) the A-module U is projective. Thus (iii) implies (i). In order to show that (i) implies (ii) and (iii), it suffices to show that HomA (X, A) is an injective E op -module and that HomA (A, X) is an injective E-module. Thus it suffices to show that their duals HomA (X, A)∗ and HomA (A, X)∗ are projective as modules over E and E op , respectively. Since A is symmetric, we have a natural isomorphism HomA (X, A) ∼ = Homk (X, k) = X ∗ . The naturality implies in particular, that these isomorphisms are isomorphisms as E op -modules. Thus we have an isomorphism of E-modules HomA (X, A)∗ ∼ = X, and this is a projective E-module by Lemma 3.1. Similarly, note that HomA (A, X) ∼ = X ∗ , which is = X, and hence that HomA (A, X)∗ ∼ op indeed a projective E -module, again by Lemma 3.1. Proof of Theorem 1.3. We use the notation of Theorem 1.3. By Proposition 3.2 and Lemma 2.3, projective indecomposable modules over E and F which are also relatively O-injective, correspond to the indecomposable summands of A and B, respectively. Denote by e an idempotent in E such that e(X) ∼ = A, and denote by f an idempotent in F such that f (Y ) ∼ = B. Then Ee is a direct sum of indecomposable E-modules which are projective and relatively O-injective, and any indecomposable E-module which is projective and relatively O-injective is isomorphic to a direct summand of Ee. The right E-module eE, the left F -module F f and the right F -module f F have the analogous properties. Let M be an E-F -module and N an F -E-bimodule inducing a Morita equivalence; that is, M , N are finitely generated projective as left and right modules, and we have bimodule isomorphisms M ⊗F N ∼ = E and N ⊗E M ∼ = F . A Morita equivalence between E and F preserves projective indecomposables which are also relatively O-injective. Thus N ⊗E Ee ∼ = N e is a direct sum of summands of F f . In particular, f N e is projective as a f F f -module. Similarly, eM , as a right F -module, is a direct sum of summands of f F , and hence eM f is projective as a right f F f -module. Using Lemma 2.6, applied to E and F instead of A and B, we have isomorphisms eEe ∼ = eM ⊗F N e ∼ = eM f ⊗f F f f N e Exchanging the roles of E and F shows similary that f F f ∼ = f N e ⊗eEe eM f , and that eM f and f N e are both projective as left and as right modules. Thus the bimodules eM f and f N e induce a Morita equivalence between eEe and f F f . Since eEe ∼ = EndA (e(X)) ∼ = EndA (A) ∼ = Aop and op ∼ similarly f F f = B , passing to opposite algebras yields a Morita equivalence between A and B. We need to show that this Morita equivalence restricts to an equivalence between add(X) and add(Y ). It suffices to show that the equivalence mod(A) ∼ = mod(B) sends add(X) to add(Y ). Since A and B are symmetric, it suffices to show that f N e ⊗eEe − sends add(X ∗ ) to add(Y ∗ ). Let V be an A-module in add(X). Then HomA (V, X) is a projective E-module. Since N ⊗E − is an equivalence of categories, it follows that N ⊗E HomA (V, X) is a projective F -module. Thus there is a B-module W in add(Y ) such that N ⊗E HomA (V, X) ∼ = HomB (W, Y ) as F -modules. Multiplying by f yields an isomorphism of f F f -modules f N ⊗E HomA (V, X) ∼ = f HomB (W, Y ) ∼ = HomB (W, B) Since f N is a direct sum of summands of eE, it follows from Lemma 2.6 that the left side is isomorphic to f N e ⊗eEe eHomA (V, X) ∼ = f M e ⊗eEe HomA (V, A) 7  ∼ V ∗ and HomB (W, B) ∼ Since A and B are symmetric, we have HomA (V, A) = = W ∗ . This shows that ∗ ∗ ∗ ∼ f N e ⊗eEe V = W , and hence the functor f N e ⊗eEe − sends add(X ) to add(Y ∗ ) as claimed. Proof of Theorem 1.4. We use the notation of Theorem 1.4. Let M be a bounded complex of E-F -module and N a bounded complex F -E-bimodule inducing a Rickard equivalence; that is, the components of M , N are finitely generated projective as left and right modules, and we have homotopy equivalences of chain complexes of bimodules M ⊗F N ≃ E and N ⊗E M ≃ F . Denote by e an idempotent in E such that e(X) ∼ = A, and denote by f an idempotent in F such that f (Y ) ∼ = B. Multiplying the above homotopy equivalences by e and f on both sides yields homotopy equivalences chain complexes of eEe-eEe-bimodules eM ⊗F N e ≃ eEe and of f F f -f F f -bimodules f N ⊗E M f ≃ f F f . We will show that there are quasi-isomorphisms eM f ⊗f F f f N e → eM ⊗F N e f N e ⊗eEe eM f → f N ⊗E M f whose restriction to the left and to the right are homotopy equivalences, and we will then see that this implies that the functors eM f ⊗f F f − and f N e ⊗eEe − induce inverse derived equivalences. The complex N e ∼ = N ⊗E Ee is a bounded complex of finitely generated projective F -modules. We will show that Ne ∼ = N0 ⊕ N1 for some contractible complex N1 and a complex N0 whose components consist of finite direct sums of summands of F f . In order to show this, by Lemma 2.7, we may assume that O = k. Since Ee is injective, we have HomK(E) (C, Ee) = {0} for any acyclic bounded above complex C of finitely generated E-modules. Since N ⊗E − induces an equivalence of homotopy categories of chain complexes K(E) ∼ = K(F ), it follows that we have HomK(F ) (D, N e) = {0} for any acyclic bounded above complex D of finitely generated F -modules. It follows from Lemma 2.8, that the indecomposable direct summands of N e which are not contractible consist of injective F -modules, hence of sums of summands of F f . Reverting to general O, multiplying the previous isomorphism by f on the left yields an isomorphism of chain complexes of f F f -modules fNe ∼ = f N0 ⊕ f N1 such that f N0 is a bounded complex of finitely generated projective f F f -modules, and f N1 is a bounded contractible complex. The same argument shows that we have an isomorphism of chain complexes of right F -modules eM ∼ = M0 ⊕ M1 where M0 is a complex of right F -modules which are finite direct sums of summands of f F , and M1 is a contractible complex of right F -modules. Thus, as before, multiplying this isomorphism on the right by f yields an isomorphism of chain complexes of right f F f -modules eM f ∼ = M0 f ⊕ M1 f such that M0 f is a bounded complex of finitely generated projective right f F f -modules and M1 f is a bounded contractible complex. Thus we have decomposition as complexes of right eEe-modules eM ⊗F N e = M0 ⊗F N e ⊕ M1 ⊗F N e ∼ = 8  M0 f ⊗f F f f N e ⊕ M1 ⊗F N e where we have made use of Lemma 2.6 for the isomorphism. We also have eM f ⊗f F f f N e = M0 f ⊗f F f f N e ⊕ M1 f ⊗f F f f N e In both of these isomorphisms, the right most terms are contractible as chain complexes of right eEe-modules, because M1 f is contractible as a chain complex of right f F f -modules. Thus we have a chain map of complexes of eEe-eEe-bimodules eM f ⊗f F f f N e → eM ⊗F N e ≃ eEe which restricts to a homotopy equivalence as a chain map of complexes of right eEe-modules, and, by the analogous argument, restricts to a homotopy equivalence as a chain map of complexes of left eEe-modules. In particular, this bimodule chain map is a quasi-isomorphism. Similarly, we have a bimodule quasi-isomorphism f N e ⊗eEe eM f → f N ⊗E M f ≃ f F f which restricts to homotopy equivalences on the left and on the right. We show next that the functor eM f ⊗f F f − from Ch(f F f ) to Ch(eEe) preserves quasiisomorphisms. We use the right f F f -chain complex decomposition eM f = M0 f ⊕ M1 f above. If β : V → V ′ is a quasi-isomorphism in Ch(f F f ), then IdeMf ⊗ β : eM f ⊗f F f V → eM f ⊗f F f V ′ decomposes as a direct sum of chain maps of complexes of O-modules M0 f ⊗f F f V → M0 f ⊗f F f V ′ and M1 f ⊗f F f V → M1 f ⊗f F f V ′ . The first of these is a quasi-isomorphism because M0 f is a bounded complex of projective right f F f -modules. The second is trivially a quasi-isomorphism, since both M1 f ⊗f F f V and M1 f ⊗f F f V ′ are acyclic, as M1 f is contractible as a complex of right f F f -modules. Thus the functor eM f ⊗f F f − induces a functor on derived categories; similarly for f N e ⊗eEe −. These two functors are inverse to each other as functors on the derived categories. Indeed, since the above bimodule chain map eM f ⊗f F f f N e → eEe is a homotopy equivalence as chain map of complexes of right eEe-modules, it follows that for any complex U in Ch(eEe), the induced chain map eM f ⊗f F f f N e ⊗eEe U → U is a homotopy equivalence as a chain map of complexes of O-modules, hence a quasi-isomorphism as a chain map of complexes of eEe-modules. The result follows. Remark 3.3. The above proof does not show that the quasi-isomorphisms eM f ⊗f F f f N e → eM ⊗F N e and f N e ⊗eEe eM f → f N ⊗E M f are homotopy equivalences as bimodule chain maps. It also does not show that eM f and f N e are projective as complexes of left and right modules. In particular, this proof does not show that eM f and f N e are Rickard complexes, and it seems unclear whether the induced derived equivalence preserves the subcategories of chain complexes over add(X) and add(Y ).  4  Proof of Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.2  The proof of Theorem 1.1 is played back to the theorems 1.3 and 1.4, together with description of cohomological Mackey functors in terms of source algebras of blocks in [3], extending ideas going back to Yoshida [11]. 9  Proposition 4.1. Let A be a source algebra of a block of a finite group with defect group P . Set X = ⊕Q A ⊗OQ O and E = EndA (X), where in the direct sum Q runs over the subgroups of P . For ι a primitive idempotent in E, the following are equivalent. (i) E ◦ ι is a relatively O-injective left E-module. (ii) ι ◦ E is a relatively O-injective right E-module. (iii) ι(X) is isomorphic to a projective indecomposable left A-module. Proof. Note that A is a symmetric O-algebra and that A is isomorphic to the summand indexed by the trivial group 1 in the direct sum X = ⊕Q A ⊗OQ O. Thus the result follows from Proposition 3.2, combined with Lemma 2.3. Proof of Theorem 1.1. Denote by P a defect group and by A a source algebra of the block b of OG. Similarly, denote by Q a defect group and by B a source algebra of the block c of OH. Set X = ⊕R A ⊗OR O, where R runs over the subgroups of P , and set E = EndA (X). Similarly, Y = ⊕T A ⊗OT O, where T runs over the subgroups of Q, and set F = EndB (Y ). It follows from Theorem 1.3 (resp. Theorem 1.4) that if E and F are Morita equivalent (resp. Rickard equivalent) then A and B are permeable Morita equivalent (resp. derived equivalent). By [3, Theorem 1.1] we have coMack(G, b) ∼ = mod(E op ) and coMack(H, c) ∼ = mod(F op ), whence the result. A permeable Morita equivalence between block algebras over k need not be splendid; see [8, Remark 4.7]. In characteristic zero, however, permeable Morita equivalences are splendid. Proposition 4.2. If O has characteristic zero, then a permeable Morita equivalence between two blocks of finite group algebras over O is splendid. Proof. Let B, B ′ be block algebras of some finite group algebras over O, with defect groups P , P ′ , respectively. Let M be a B-B ′ -bimodule inducing a permeable Morita equivalence. Then M ⊗B ′ − sends the p-permutation B ′ -module B ′ ⊗OP ′ O to the p-permutation B-module M ⊗OP ′ O. In particular, M is free as a left OP -module, as a right OP ′ -module, and M ⊗OP ′ O is a permutation OP -module. Note that since M is free as a right OP ′ -module, the quotient M ⊗OP ′ O is isomorphic ′ to the fixpoints M P in M with respect to the right action of P ′ on M . Weiss’ criterion [10, Theorem 2] (adapted to the more general coefficient ring O in [5, Appendix 1]), applied to P × P ′ and the normal subgroup 1 × P ′ instead of G and N , respectively, implies that M is a permutation O(P × P ′ )-module. Proof of Corollary 1.2. If B and B ′ are splendidly Morita equivalent, then their associated categories of cohomological Mackey functors are equivalent by [8, Proposition 4.5]. Conversely, if char(O) = 0 and if the categories of cohomological Mackey functors of B, B ′ are equivalent, then B, B ′ are permeable Morita equivalent by Theorem 1.1, hence splendidly Morita equivalent by Proposition 4.2.  5  A remark on nilpotent blocks  By results of Puig in [4] and [5], if a block b of a finite group algebra OG is nilpotent, then OGb is Morita equivalent to OP , and if O has characteristic zero, then the converse holds as well. Thus, if char(O) = 0, then Corollary 1.2 implies that b is nilpotent with a source algebra isomorphic to 10  OP if and only if coMack(G, B) ∼ = coMack(P ). For derived equivalences, Theorem 1.1 yields the following. Theorem 5.1. Let G be a finite group and b a block of OG. Suppose that O has characteristic zero. If the categories coMack(G, b) and coMack(P ) are Rickard equivalent, then b is nilpotent, with defect groups isomorphic to P . Proof. Suppose that the categories coMack(G, b) and coMack(P ) are Rickard equivalent. Then, by Theorem 1.1, the algebras OGb and OP are derived equivalent. Since OP is split local, it follows from [12, 6.7.5] that OGb and OP are Morita equivalent. Thus, by [5, Theorem 8.2], b is nilpotent with defect groups isomorphic to P .  References [1] M. Auslander, Representation dimension of Artin algebras. Lecture notes, Queen Mary College, London (1971). [2] O. Iyama, Finiteness of representation dimension, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 131 (2002), 1011–1014. [3] M. Linckelmann, On equivalences for cohomological Mackey functors, Represent. Theory 20 (2016), 162–171. [4] L. Puig, Nilpotent blocks and their source algebras, Invent. Math. 93 (1988), 77–116. [5] L. Puig, On the local structure of Morita and Rickard equivalences between Brauer blocks, Progress in Math. 178, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel (1999) [6] J. Rickard, Derived equivalences as derived functors, J. London Math. Soc. 43 (1991), 37–48. [7] J. Rickard, Splendid equivalence: derived categories and permutation modules, Proc. London Math. Soc. 72 (1996), 331–358. [8] B. Rognerud, Equivalences between blocks of cohomological Mackey algebras, Math. Z. 280 (2015), 421–449. [9] L. L. Scott, unpublished notes (1990). [10] A. Weiss, Rigidity of p-adic p-torsion, Ann. of Math. 127 (1988), 317–332. [11] T. Yoshida, On G-functors (II): Hecke operators and G-functors, J. Math. Soc. Japan 35 (1983), 179–190. [12] A. Zimmermann, Representation theory: A Homological Algebra Point of View. Algebra and Applications, Springer International Publishing (2014).  11

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
