Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_3897

Abstract:
Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming  1  arXiv:cs/0309003v1 [cs.PL] 1 Sep 2003  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications MARCO BOZZANO1,2 , GIORGIO DELZANNO2 and MAURIZIO MARTELLI2 1 ITC-IRST  Via Sommarive 18, Povo, 38050 Trento, Italy (e-mail: bozzano@irst.itc.it) 2 Dipartimento  di Informatica e Scienze dell’Informazione Università di Genova Via Dodecaneso 35, 16146 Genova - Italy (e-mail: {giorgio,martelli}@disi.unige.it)  submitted 1 January 2003; revised 1 January 2003; accepted 1 January 2003  Abstract The overall goal of this paper is to investigate the theoretical foundations of algorithmic verification techniques for first order linear logic specifications. The fragment of linear logic we consider in this paper is based on the linear logic programming language called LO (Andreoli and Pareschi 1990) enriched with universally quantified goal formulas. Although LO was originally introduced as a theoretical foundation for extensions of logic programming languages, it can also be viewed as a very general language to specify a wide range of infinite-state concurrent systems (Andreoli 1992; Cervesato 1995). Our approach is based on the relation between backward reachability and provability highlighted in our previous work on propositional LO programs (Bozzano et al. 2002). Following this line of research, we define here a general framework for the bottom-up evaluation of first order linear logic specifications. The evaluation procedure is based on an effective fixpoint operator working on a symbolic representation of infinite collections of first order linear logic formulas. The theory of well quasi-orderings (Abdulla et al. 1996; Finkel and Schnoebelen 2001) can be used to provide sufficient conditions for the termination of the evaluation of non trivial fragments of first order linear logic. KEYWORDS: Linear logic, fixpoint semantics, bottom-up evaluation  1 Introduction The algorithmic techniques for the analysis of Petri Nets are based on very well consolidated theoretical foundations (Esparza and Melzer 2000; Karp and Miller 1969; Mayr 1984; Esparza et al. 1999; Finkel 1993; Silva et al. 1998). However, several interesting problems, e.g., the coverability problem, become undecidable when considering specification languages more expressive than basic Petri Nets. In this setting, validation of complex specifications is often performed through simulation and testing, i.e., by “executing” the specification looking for design errors, e.g., as in the methodology based on the construction of the reachability graph of Colored Petri Nets (Jensen 1997). In order to study algorithmic techniques for the analysis of a  2  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  vast range of concurrency models it is important to find a uniform framework to reason about their characteristic features. In our approach we will adopt linear logic (Girard 1987) as a unified logical framework for concurrency. Linear logic provides a logical characterization of concepts and mechanisms peculiar of concurrency like locality, recursion, and non determinism in the definition of a process (Andreoli and Pareschi 1990; Kobayashi and Yonezawa 1995; Martı́-Oliet and Meseguer 1991); communication via synchronization and value passing (Cervesato 1995; Miller 1993); internal state and updates to its current value (Andreoli and Pareschi 1990; Miller 1996); and generation of fresh names (Cervesato et al. 1999; Miller 1993). Provability in fragments of linear logic can be used as a formal tool to reason about behavioral aspects of the concurrent systems (Bozzano et al. 2002; McDowell et al. 1996). The overall goal of this paper is to investigate the theoretical foundations of algorithmic verification techniques for specifications based on first order linear logic. The fragment we consider in this paper is based on the linear logic programming language called LO (Andreoli and Pareschi 1990) enriched with universally quantified goal formulas. Apart from being a logic programming language, the appealing feature of LO is that it can also be viewed as a rich specification language for concurrent systems: • Specification languages like Petri Nets and multiset rewriting over first order atomic formulas can be naturally embedded into propositional LO (see, e.g., (Cervesato 1995; Bozzano et al. 2002)). • First order LO specifications can be used to specify the internal state of processes with structured data represented as terms, thus enlarging the class of systems that can be formally specified in the logic. In this context universal quantification in goal formulas has several interesting interpretations: it can be viewed either as a sort of hiding operator in the style of π-calculus (Miller 1993), or as a mechanism to generate fresh names as in (Cervesato et al. 1999). Before discussing in more details the technical contributions of our work, we will briefly illustrate the connection between Petri Nets and linear logic, and between reachability and provability in the corresponding formal settings. The bridge between the two paradigms is the proofs as computations interpretation of linear logic proposed in (Andreoli 1992) and in (Miller 1996). Linear Logic and Concurrency A Petri Net can be represented by means of a multiset-rewriting system over a finite alphabet, say p, q, r , . . ., of place names. One possible way of expressing multiset rewrite rules in linear logic is based on the (multiplicative disjunction) is interpreted as a following idea. The connective multiset constructor, whereas the connective ◦− (reversed linear implication) is interpreted as the rewrite relation. Both connectives are allowed in the LO fragment. For instance, as shown in (Cervesato 1995) the LO clause &  q ◦− p  & & &  &  p  p  q  t  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  3  can be viewed as a Petri Net transition that removes a token from places p and q and puts two tokens in place p, one in q, and one in t . According to the proofs as computations interpretation (Andreoli 1992), a top-down derivation in linear logic consists of a goal-directed sequence of rule applications. If we look at the initial goal as a multiset of atomic formulas (places) representing the initial marking of a Petri Net, then each application of an LO clause like the one illustrated above (backchaining in the terminology of (Andreoli 1992)) simulates the firing of a Petri Net transition at the corresponding marking. Furthermore, the overall top-down derivation corresponds to one of the possible executions of the net, leading from the initial marking to one of the target states. Thanks to the presence of other connectives, LO supports more sophisticated mechanisms than the ones available in simple Petri Nets. For instance, in (Andreoli and Pareschi 1990) and & (additive conAndreoli and Pareschi use LO clauses with occurrences of junction) in their body to express what they called external and internal concurrency. Additive conjunction can be used, in fact, to simulate independent threads of execution running in parallel. In our previous work (Bozzano et al. 2002), we made a first attempt to connect techniques used for the validation of Petri Nets with evaluation strategies of LO programs. Specifically, in (Bozzano et al. 2002) we defined an effective procedure to compute the set of linear logic goals (multisets of atomic formulas) that are consequences of a given propositional program, i.e., a “bottom-up” evaluation procedure for propositional LO programs. Our construction is based on the backward reachability algorithm of (Abdulla et al. 1996) used to decide the so called control state reachability problem of Petri Nets (i.e., the problem of deciding if a given set of upward closed configurations are reachable from an initial one). The algorithm works as follows. Starting from a set of target states, the algorithm computes symbolically the transitive closure of the predecessor relation (i.e., the transition relation read backwards) of the Petri Net taken into consideration. The algorithm is used to check safety properties: if the algorithm is executed starting from the set of unsafe states, then the corresponding safety property holds if and only if the initial marking is not in the resulting fixpoint. In order to illustrate the connection between backward reachability for Petri Nets and provability in LO, we first observe that LO program clauses of the form &  & &  p  q  q ◦− ⊤  succeed in any context containing at least one occurrence of p and two occurrences of q. In other words they can be used to symbolically represent sets of markings that are closed upwards with respect to the multiset inclusion relation. Now, suppose we represent a Petri Net via an LO program P and the set of target states using a collection T of LO program clauses with ⊤ in the body. Then, the set of facts (i.e., multisets of atomic formulas) that are logical consequences of the LO program P ∪ T will represent the set of markings that are backward reachable from the target states. The algorithm we presented in (Bozzano et al. 2002) is based on this idea, and it extends the backward reachability algorithm for Petri Nets of (Abdulla et al. 1996)  4  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  to the more general case of propositional LO programs (i.e., with nested conjunctive and disjunctive goals). First Order Linear Logic By lifting the logic language to first order, the resulting specification language becomes much more interesting and flexible than basic Petri Nets. In the extended setting, the logic representation of processes can be enriched with a notion of internal state and with communication mechanisms in which values can be passed between different processes. As an example, the following LO clause &  idle(Y )  p(alice, wait , stored (Y )) ◦− p(alice, use, stored (Y ))  can be interpreted as a transaction of a protocol during which the process named Alice (currently knowing Y ) synchronizes with a monitor controlling the resource Y , checks that the monitor is idle and then enters the critical section in which she uses the resource Y . By instantiating the free variables occurring in such a rule, we obtain a family of transition rules that depend on the domain used to define the content of messages. In this setting the universal quantification in goal formulas can be used to generate fresh values, as in the following rule: &  init ◦− ∀x· idle(x )  init  Intuitively, the demon process init creates new resources labeled with fresh identifiers. The above illustrated connection between provability and reachability immediately gives us a well-founded manner of extending the algorithmic techniques used for the analysis of Petri Nets to the general case of first order linear logic specifications. Our Contribution The conceptual and technical contributions of our work can be summarized as follows. (1) Combining ideas coming from the semantics of logic programming (Bossi et al. 1994; Falaschi et al. 1993) and from symbolic model checking for infinite state systems (Abdulla et al. 1996; Finkel and Schnoebelen 2001), in this paper we present the theoretical foundations for the definition of a procedure for the bottom-up evaluation of first order LO programs with universally quantified goals. By working in the general setting of linear logic, we obtain a framework that can be applied to other specification languages for concurrent systems like multiset rewriting over first order atomic formulas (Cervesato et al. 1999). The bottom-up evaluation procedure can also be viewed as a fixpoint semantics that allows us to compute the set of all goals that are linear logical consequences of a given (extended) LO program. The fixpoint semantics is based on an effective fixpoint operator and on a symbolic and finite representation of an infinite collection of first order provable LO goals. As previously mentioned, the possible infiniteness of the set of provable goals is due to LO program clauses with the constant ⊤, which represent sets of goals which are upward-closed with respect to the multiset inclusion relation. The symbolic  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  5  representation is therefore crucial when trying to prove properties of infinite systems like parameterized systems, i.e., systems in which the number of individual processes is left as a parameter of the specification (e.g., mutual exclusion protocols for multi-agent systems (Bozzano 2002)). Intuitively, such a representation is obtained by restricting our attention to logical consequences represented via multisets of first order atomic formulas. As an example, the formula &  p(A, use, stored (X ))  p(B , use, stored (X )) ◦− ⊤  can be used to denote all multisets of ground atomic formulas containing an instance of the clause head. As the constant ⊤ is provable in any context, in the previous example we obtain a symbolic representation of the infinite set of unsafe states generated by the following minimal violation of mutual exclusion for a generic resource represented via the shared variable X : at least two different processes are in their critical section using a shared resource. (2) Besides the connection with verification of concurrent systems, the new fixpoint semantics for first order LO programs represents an alternative to the traditional top-down execution of linear logic programs studied in the literature (Andreoli 1992). Thus, also from the point-of-view of logic programming, we extend the applicability of our previous work (Bozzano et al. 2002) (that was restricted to the propositional case) towards more interesting classes of linear logic programs. (3) The termination of the fixpoint computation cannot be guaranteed in general; first order LO programs are in fact Turing complete. However, we present here sufficient conditions under which we can compute a symbolic representation of all logical consequences of a non trivial first order fragment of LO with universal quantification in goal formulas. As a direct consequence of this result, we obtain that provability is decidable in the considered fragment. To our knowledge, this result uncovers a new decidable fragment of first order linear logic. The fragment taken into consideration is not only interesting from a theoretical point of view, but also as a possible abstract model for “processes” with identifiers or local values. Though the emphasis of this work is on the theoretical grounds of our method, we will illustrate the practical use of our framework with the help of a verification problem for a mutual exclusion protocol defined for a concurrent system which is parametric in the number of clients, resources, and related monitors. Other practical applications of this method are currently under investigation. Preliminary results in this direction are shown in the PhD thesis of Marco Bozzano (Bozzano 2002). Finally, we remark that a very preliminary version of this work appeared in the proceedings of FLOPS 2001 (Bozzano et al. 2001). 1.1 Outline of the Paper The terminology and some notations used in the paper are presented in Appendix Appendix A. To improve the readability of the paper, the proofs of some lem-  6  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  mas are given in Appendix Appendix B. In Section 2, we will discuss related works. In Section 3 we will recall the main definitions of the fragment LO of (Andreoli and Pareschi 1990), presented here with universal quantification in goal formulas. In order to illustrate the use of LO as a specification logic for concurrent systems, in the same section we will briefly describe how multiset rewriting (extended with quantification) can be embedded into LO. This connection represents a natural entry point into the world of concurrency. In fact, the relationship between multiset rewriting, (Colored) Petri Nets, and process calculi has been extensively studied in the literature (see e.g., (Cervesato 1995; Farwer 1999; Farwer 2000; Meseguer 1992; Martı́-Oliet and Meseguer 1991)). Finally, we will present an example of use of LO as a specification language for concurrent systems, and discuss the relationships between (bottom-up) LO provability and verification techniques based on (infinite-state) model checking. In Section 4, we will introduce a non effective fixpoint semantics for linear logic programs. To simplify the manipulation of non ground terms, we will first lift the top-down (proof theoretical) semantics of LO to the non ground level, by introducing a new proof system in which sequents may have formulas with free variables. In Section 5, we will introduce a general framework for the bottom-up evaluation of LO programs. The bottom-up procedure is based on a finite representation of infinite sets of logical consequences, and on an effective fixpoint operator working on sets of symbolic representations. The bottom-up procedure can be seen as a symbolic version of the semantics presented in Section 4. The reason for introducing two different semantic definitions is to ease the proof of soundness and completeness, which is split into the proof of equivalence of the effective semantics with respect to the non-effective one, and the proof of equivalence of the non-effective semantics with respect to the operational one. In Section 6, we will investigate sufficient conditions for the termination of the bottom-up evaluation. In Section 7, we will discuss the possible application of the resulting method as a verification procedure for infinite-state parameterized systems. In Section 8, we will address possible future directions of research. In Section 9, we will address some conclusions. 2 Related Works To our knowledge, our work is the first attempt to connect algorithmic techniques used in symbolic model checking with declarative and operational aspects of first order linear logic programming. In (Bozzano et al. 2002), we have considered the relation between propositional LO and Petri Nets. Specifically, in (Bozzano et al. 2002) we have shown that the bottom-up semantics is computable for propositional LO programs (because of the relationship of this problem with the coverability problem of Petri Nets). Furthermore, in (Bozzano et al. 2002) we have shown that the bottom-up evaluation of propositional LO programs enriched with the constant 1 is not computable in a finite number of steps (otherwise one could decide the equivalence problem for Petri Nets). We point out here that an original contribution of the paper consists in extending the construction we used for proving the computability of the bottom-up construc-  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  7  tion of propositional LO programs to first order LO specifications. This way, we have established a link with more complex models of concurrency. Clearly, in the first order case provability becomes undecidable. In the paper we present a non trivial special case of first order LO programs in which the bottom-up semantics is still computable. Extending the bottom-up evaluation to LO programs enriched with the constant 1 is a possible future direction of research (see Section 8 for a discussion). In (Harland and Winikoff 1998), Harland and Winikoff present an abstract deductive system for bottom-up evaluation of linear logic programs. The left introduction plus weakening and cut rules are used to compute the logical consequences of a given formula. Though the framework is given for a more general fragment than LO, it does not provide an effective procedure to evaluate programs. In (Andreoli et al. 1997), Andreoli, Pareschi and Castagnetti define an improved top-down strategy for propositional LO based on the Karp-Miller’s covering graph of Petri Nets, i.e., a forward exploration with accelerations. The relation between Rewriting, (Colored) Petri Nets and Linear Logic has been investigated in previous works like (Cervesato 1994; Cervesato 1995; Engberg and Winskel 1990; Meseguer 1992; Martı́-Oliet and Meseguer 1991). Our point-of-view is based on the proofs as computations metaphor proposed in (Andreoli and Pareschi 1990; Andreoli 1992; Miller 1996), whereas our connection with models for concurrency is inspired to works in this field like (Cervesato 1994; Cervesato 1995; Delzanno and Martelli 2001; Kobayashi and Yonezawa 1994; Miller 1993; Miller 1996). As an example, in (Cervesato 1994; Cervesato 1995), Cervesato shows how to encode Petri Nets in different fragments of linear logic like LO, Lolli (Hodas and Miller 1990), and Forum (Miller 1996) exploiting the different features of these languages. Algorithmic aspects for verification of properties of the resulting linear logic specifications are not considered in the works mentioned above. In (Farwer 1999; Farwer 2000), Farwer presents a possible encoding of Colored Petri Nets in Linear Logic and proposes a combination of the two formalisms that could be used to model object systems. The problem of the decidability of provability in fragments of linear logic has been investigated in several works in recent years (Lincoln 1995; Lincoln et al. 1992; Lincoln and Scedrov 1994). Specifically, in (Kopylov 1995), Kopylov has shown that the full propositional linear affine logic containing all the multiplicatives, additives, exponentials, and constants is decidable. Affine logic can be viewed as linear logic with the weakening rule. Propositional LO belongs to such a sub-structural logic. Provability in full first order linear logic is undecidable as shown by Girard’s translation of first order logic into first order linear logic (Girard 1987). The same holds for first order affine logic (Girard’s encoding can also be viewed as an encoding into affine logic (Lincoln 1995)). First order linear logic without modalities, i.e., without the possibility of re-using formulas, is decidable (Lincoln and Scedrov 1994). In (Cervesato et al. 1999), Cervesato et al. use a formalism based on multiset-rewriting and existential quantification that can be embedded into our fragment of linear logic to specify protocol rules and actions of intruders. In (Durgin et al. 1999), it is shown that reachability in multiset rewriting with existential quantification is undecidable by a reduction from Datalog with quantification in goal formulas. The  8  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  fragment they consider however is much more general than the monadic fragment of LO∀ . Monadic LO∀ can be viewed as a fragment of first order linear affine logic with restricted occurrences of the exponentials (program clauses are re-usable) and severe restrictions on the form of atomic formulas. We are not aware of previous results on similar fragments.  3 The Logic Programming Language LO LO (Andreoli and Pareschi 1991) is a logic programming language based on a fragment of LinLog (Andreoli 1992). Its mathematical foundations lie on a prooftheoretical presentation of a fragment of linear logic defined over the linear connectives −◦ (linear implication, we use the reversed notation H ◦− G for G −◦ H ), & (multiplicative disjunction), and the constant ⊤ (additive (additive conjunction), identity). In this section we present the proof-theoretical semantics, corresponding to the usual top-down operational semantics for traditional logic programming languages, for an extension of LO. First of all, we consider a slight extension of LO which admits the constant ⊥ in goals and clause heads. More importantly, we allow the universal quantifier to appear, possibly nested, in goals. This extension is inspired by multiset rewriting with universal quantification (Cervesato et al. 1999). The resulting language will be called LO∀ hereafter. Following (Andreoli and Pareschi 1991), we give the following definitions. &  Definition 3.1 (Atomic Formulas) Let Σ be a signature with predicates including a set of constant and function symbols L and a set of predicate symbols P, and let V be a denumerable set of variables. An atomic formula over Σ and V has the form p(t1 , . . . , tn ) (with n ≥ 0), where p ∈ P and t1 , . . . , tn are (non ground) terms in TΣV . We denote the set of such atomic formulas as AV Σ. We are now ready to define LO∀ programs. The class of D-formulas correspond to multiple-headed program clauses, whereas G-formulas correspond to goals to be evaluated in a given program. Definition 3.2 (LO∀ programs) Let Σ be a signature with predicates and V a denumerable set of variables. The classes of G-formulas (goal formulas), H-formulas (head formulas), and D-formulas (program clauses) over Σ and V are defined by the following grammar: G | G & G | ∀x· G | A | ⊤ | ⊥ ...  &  &  H ::= A  &  G ::= G  A | ⊥  D ::= H ◦− G | D & D | ∀x· D where A stands for an atomic formula over Σ and V. An LO∀ program over Σ and V is a D-formula over Σ and V. A multiset of goal formulas will be called a context hereafter.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  9  Remark 3.3 Given an LO∀ program P , in the rest of the paper we often find it convenient to view P as the set of clauses D1 , . . . , Dn . Every program clause Di has the form ∀ (H ◦− G) standing for ∀x1 . . . xk . (H ◦− G), where F V (H ◦− G) = {x1 , . . . , xk }. Formally, this is justified by the following logical equivalences (Girard 1987): !(D1 & D2 ) ≡ !D1 ⊗ !D2 ∀x· (D1 & D2 ) ≡ ∀x· D1 & ∀x· D2 For the sake of simplicity, in the following we usually omit the universal quantifier in D-formulas, i.e., we consider free variables as being implicitly universally quantified. Definition 3.4 (LO∀ Sequents) Let Σ be a signature with predicates and V a denumerable set of variables. An LO∀ sequent has the form P ⊢ Σ′ G1 , . . . , Gk , where P is an LO∀ program over Σ and V, G1 , . . . , Gk is a context (i.e., a multiset of goals) over Σ and V, and Σ′ is a signature such that Σ ⊆ Σ′ . According to Remark 3.3, structural rules (exchange, weakening and contraction) are allowed on the left-hand side, while on the right-hand side only the rule of exchange is allowed (for the fragment under consideration, it turns out that the rule of weakening is admissible, while contraction is forbidden). We now define provability in LO∀ . Definition 3.5 (Ground Instances) Let Σ be a signature with predicates and V a denumerable set of variables. Given an LO∀ program P over Σ and V, the set of ground instances of P , denoted Gnd(P ), is def defined as follows: Gnd(P ) = {(H ◦−G) θ | ∀ (H ◦−G) ∈ P }, where θ is a grounding substitution for H ◦− G (i.e., it maps variables in F V (H ◦− G) to ground terms in TΣ ). The execution of a multiset of G-formulas G1 , . . . , Gk in P corresponds to a goaldriven proof for the sequent P ⊢ Σ G1 , . . . , Gk . According to this view, the operational semantics of LO∀ is given via the uniform (focusing) (Andreoli 1992) proof system presented in Figure 1, where P is a set of clauses, A is a multiset of atomic b , where formulas, and ∆ is a multiset of G-formulas. We have used the notation H H is a linear disjunction of atomic formulas A1 . . . An , to denote the multiset b = ǫ, where ǫ is the empty multiset). A1 , . . . , An (by convention, ⊥ &  &  Definition 3.6 (LO∀ provability) Let Σ be a signature with predicates and V a denumerable set of variables. Given an LO∀ program P and a goal G, over Σ and V, we say that G is provable from P if there exists a proof tree, built over the proof system of Figure 1, with root P ⊢Σ G, and such that every branch is terminated with an instance of the ⊤r axiom. &  The concept of uniformity applied to LO requires that the right rules ⊤r , r, & r , ⊥r , ∀r have priority over bc, i.e., bc is applied only when the right-hand side of a sequent is a multiset of atomic formulas (as suggested by the notation A in  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli P ⊢Σ G1 , G2 , ∆  P ⊢Σ ∆ P ⊢Σ ⊥, ∆  P ⊢Σ G1  &  P ⊢Σ ⊤, ∆  ⊤r  &  10  G2 , ∆  P ⊢Σ G1 , ∆ r  P ⊢Σ G1 & G2 , ∆  &r  P ⊢Σ G, A  P ⊢Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆ ⊥r  P ⊢Σ G2 , ∆  bc (H ◦− G ∈ Gnd(P ))  ∀r (c 6∈ Σ)  b,A P ⊢Σ H  P ⊢Σ ∀x· G, ∆  Fig. 1. A proof system for LO∀ Figure 1). The proof system of Figure 1 is a specialization of more general uniform proof systems for linear logic like Andreoli’s focusing proofs (Andreoli 1992) and Forum (Miller 1996). Rule bc is analogous to a backchaining (resolution) step in traditional logic programming languages. Note that according to the concept of resolution explained above, bc can be executed only if the right-hand side of the current LO∀ sequent consists of atomic formulas. As an instance of rule bc, we get the following proof fragment, which deals with the case of clauses with empty head: .. .. P ⊢Σ A, G P ⊢Σ A  bc  provided ⊥ ◦− G ∈ Gnd(P ) Given that clauses with empty head are always applicable in atomic contexts, the degree of non-determinism they introduce in proof search is usually considered unacceptable (Miller 1996) and in particular they are forbidden in the original presentation of LO (Andreoli and Pareschi 1991). However, the computational model we are interested in, i.e., bottom-up evaluation, does not suffer this drawback. Clauses with empty head often allow more flexible specifications. LO clauses having the form H ◦− ⊥ simply remove the resources associated with H from the right-hand side of the current sequent (H is rewritten into the empty multiset). On the contrary, LO clauses having the form H ◦− ⊤ can be viewed as termination rules. In fact, when a backchaining step over such a clause is possible, we get a successful (branch of a) computation, independently of the current context A, as shown in the following proof scheme: P ⊢Σ ⊤, A b,A P ⊢Σ H  ⊤r bc  provided H ◦− ⊤ ∈ Gnd(P ) This observation is formally stated in the following proposition (we recall that 4 is the multiset inclusion relation). Proposition 1 (Admissibility of the Weakening Rule) Given an LO∀ program P and two multisets of goals ∆, ∆′ such that ∆ 4 ∆′ , if P ⊢Σ ∆ then P ⊢Σ ∆′ .  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  11  Proof By simple induction on the structure of LO∀ proofs. Admissibility of the weakening rule makes LO∀ an affine fragment of linear logic (Kopylov 1995). Note that all structural rules are admissible on the left hand side (i.e., on the program part) of LO∀ sequents. Finally, rule ∀r can be used to dynamically introduce new names during the computation. The initial signature Σ must contain at least the constant, function, and predicate symbols of a given program P , and it can dynamically grow thanks to rule ∀r . Remark 3.7 Particular attention must be paid to the constants introduced in a derivation. They cannot be extruded from the scope of the corresponding universal quantifier. For this reason, every time rule ∀r is applied, a new constant c is added to the current signature, and the resulting goal is proved in the new signature. The idea is that all terms appearing on the right-hand side of a sequent are implicitly assumed to range over the relevant signature. This behavior is standard in logic programming languages (Miller et al. 1991). Example 3.8 Let Σ be a signature with a constant symbol a, a function symbol f and predicate symbols p, q, r , s. Let V be a denumerable set of variables, and u, v , w , . . . ∈ V. Let P be the program 1. r (w ) ◦− q(f (w )) s(w ) &  2. s(z ) ◦− ∀x· p(f (x )) 3. ⊥ ◦− q(u) & r (v ) &  4. p(x )  q(x ) ◦− ⊤  The goal s(a) is provable from P . The corresponding proof is shown in Figure 2 (where we have denoted by bc (i) the application of the backchaining rule over clause number i of P ). Note that the notion of ground instance is now relative to the current signature. For instance, backchaining over clause 3 is possible because the corresponding signature contains the constant c (generated one level below by the ∀r rule), and therefore ⊥ ◦− q(f (c)) & r (c) is a valid instance of clause 3.  3.1 Simulating Multiset Rewriting over First Order Atoms In this section we will focus our attention on the relationship between multiset rewriting over first order atoms and first order LO theories. We will conclude by showing how enriching logic theories with universal quantification can provide a way to generate new values. The connection between multiset rewriting systems over (first order) atomic formulas and (first order) LO theories has been studied, e.g., in (Cervesato 1994; Cervesato et al. 1999). In (Cervesato 1994) Cervesato presents different possible  12  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli ⊤r P ⊢Σ,c ⊤, s(c) ⊤r  P ⊢Σ,c p(f (c)), q(f (c))  P ⊢Σ,c p(f (c)), q(f (c))  bc (4)  &  P ⊢Σ,c ⊤  bc (4) &  P ⊢Σ,c p(f (c)), q(f (c)), s(c)  r  s(c) bc (1)  P ⊢Σ,c p(f (c)), r (c) &r  P ⊢Σ,c p(f (c)), q(f (c)) & r (c) bc (3)  P ⊢Σ,c p(f (c)) ∀r P ⊢Σ ∀x· p(f (x )) P ⊢Σ s(a)  bc (2)  Fig. 2. An example of LO∀ proof encodings of multiset rewriting (without function symbols) in linear logic. Specifically, he first presents an encoding in the multiplicative fragment of intuitionistic linear logic (MILL), where multiplicative conjunction ⊗ (“tensor”) and linear implication are used as multiset constructor and rewrite relation, respectively. As an example, the formula p ⊗ q −◦ r ⊗ s represents a rewrite rule in which p and q are rewritten into r and s (⊗ denotes the “tensor”). As highlighted in Remark 5.12 of (Cervesato 1994) an equivalent encoding can be given by choosing a fragment of classical linear logic contained in LO in which multiplicative disjunction and reverse linear implication are used as multiset constructor and rewrite relation, respectively. As an example, the formula p q ◦−r s represents a rewrite rule in which p and q are rewritten into r and s. This is the encoding we will adopt in our work. The duality of the two encodings is a consequence of the following property: (p ⊗ q −◦ r ⊗ s)⊥ ≡ p ⊥ q ⊥ ◦− r ⊥ s ⊥ , where a ⊥ is the linear logic negation of a. Furthermore, it depends on the way proofs are interpreted as computations, i.e., on whether “rewrite rules” are encoded as formulas that occur on the left- or on the right-hand side of a sequent. In Section 5.2.2 of (Cervesato 1994) Cervesato also presents an encoding of Petri Nets in LO that allows one to simulate the execution of a net using an LO topdown derivation of the resulting program. In Section 5 of (Cervesato et al. 1999) the encoding of multiset rewriting over first order atomic formulas (MSR) is extended to first order MILL with existential quantifiers. Thanks to its logical nature, the duality with the first order fragment of LO still holds. To illustrate the main ideas behind the interpretation of LO as multiset rewriting, let us first define the following class of LO formulas. &  &  &  An ◦− B1  &  &  ...  ...  &  &  ∀(A1  Bm )  &  Definition 3.9 We call LO rewrite rule any LO formula having the following form  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications P ⊢Σ p(a), p(f (f (b))), q(b), q(b), q(f (f (b))) .. .. r P ⊢Σ p(a) p(f (f (b))) q(b) q(b) q(f (f (b)))  13  &  &  {p(a), p(f (f (b))), q(b), q(b), q(f (f (b)))}  &  &  &  bc  ↑  P ⊢Σ p(a), p(f (b)), q(b), q(f (b)) . .. r . &  &  p(f (b))  q(b)  &  &  P ⊢Σ p(a)  {p(a), p(f (b)), q(b), q(f (b))}  q(f (b))  ↑  bc P ⊢Σ p(a), p(b), q(f (b)) . .. r .  {p(a), p(b), q(f (b))}  &  p(b)  &  &  P ⊢Σ p(a)  q(f (b))  Derivation  Rewriting  Fig. 3. Multiset rewriting over first order atomic formulas as LO proof construction where A1 , . . . , An and B1 , . . . , Bm are atomic formulas over Σ and V. As usual, the notation ∀ (H ◦− G) stands for the universal quantification of clause H ◦− G over its free variables. LO formulas having the form depicted above can be interpreted as multiset rewriting rules in which rewriting can be performed only at the level of atomic formulas as in the MSR framework defined in (Cervesato et al. 1999). Specifically, let P be a set of LO rewrite rules (as in Def. 3.9). Now, consider a goal formula G having the form C1 . . . Ck where C1 , . . . , Ck are ground atomic formulas over Σ. It is easy to verify that any derivation starting from P ⊢Σ G and built using LO proof rules amounts to a sequence of multisets rewriting steps, where is interpreted as multiset constructor. &  &  &  Example 3.10 Let Σ be a signature with two constant symbols a and b, one function symbol f and two predicate symbols p, q. Let V be a denumerable set of variables and x , y ∈ V. Let P consists of the LO clause &  q(f (y)) ◦− p(f (x ))  q(y)  &  &  ∀x , y. p(x )  q(f (x ))  &  &  and G = p(a) p(b) q(f (b)). Figure 3 shows one possible sequence of applications of the above clause that starts from the sequent P ⊢Σ G (we have underlined atomic formulas selected in the application of the bc rule).  From the previous example, we can observe the following properties. All derivations built using LO rewrite rules of Def. 3.9 consist of applications of r and bc. Thus, they have no branching (all derivations form a single line). The combination of a sequence of applications of the r rule and of the backchaining rule has the following effect: the head of a ground instance of a rule in P is matched against a sub-multiset in the current goal; the selected multiset is replaced by the body of the rule. Clearly, this property allows us to simulate multiset rewriting over first order atomic formulas by using LO rewrite rules. &  &  14  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Now, let F1 be the clause q(b)  &  &  p(f (f (b)))  q(b)  &  &  p(a)  q(f (f (b))) ◦− ⊤  If we enrich P with F1 , then we can transform the partial derivation of Figure 3 into an LO proof as shown below (where δ stands for the derivation fragment of Figure 3): P ⊢Σ ⊤ δ  ⊤r bc  It is important to note that the same effect can be achieved by adding any formula with ⊤ that contains a sub-multiset of the right-hand side of the last sequent in the derivation of Figure 3. As an example, let F2 be the formula &  p(a)  q(b) ◦− ⊤  If we enrich P with F2 , then we can transform the partial derivation of Figure 3 into an LO proof as shown below (again, δ stands for the derivation fragment of Figure 3): P ⊢Σ ⊤, p(f (f (b))), q(b), q(f (f (b))) δ  ⊤r bc  More in general, let P be a set of LO rewrite rules over Σ and V, and M, M′ two multisets of ground atomic formulas (two configurations). Furthermore, let H , G the b = M′ and (possibly empty) -disjunctions of ground atomic formulas such that H b G = M. Then, the provability of the sequent P , H ◦− ⊤ ⊢ G precisely characterizes the problem of coverability for the multiset (configuration) M′ , namely P , H ◦− ⊤ ⊢ G is provable if and only if there exists a sequence of multiset rewriting steps defined over the theory P that, starting from M, reaches a configuration N that covers M′ , i.e., such that M′ 4 N . This is a straightforward consequence of the properties of clauses like H ◦− ⊤ (it succeeds only if a sub-multiset of the right-hand side of the current sequent matches b ) and of the fact that, when working with LO rewrite rules, derivations have no H branching. In other words the only way we can transform a partial derivation like the one in Figure 3 into a proof is to apply (once and only once since derivations form a single line) the clause with ⊤ (i.e., the target configuration is reached). Coverability is strictly related to the verification problem of safety properties for concurrent systems (Abdulla et al. 1996; Finkel and Schnoebelen 2001). For instance, as shown in (Bozzano et al. 2002), this property allows one to describe properties like coverability for a marking of a Petri Net. In Section 3.3, we will show how to exploit this property in the more general case of first order specifications. In Section 8 we will discuss a possible characterization of reachability for two configurations using derivability in an extension of LO. We conclude this section by discussing how universal quantification can be used in order to enrich the expressiveness of LO rewrite rules. &  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  15  The Role of Universal Quantification In the proofs as computations interpretation of logic programs, universal quantification is a logical operator which provides a way to generate new values. From a logical perspective, this view of universal quantification is based on its proof-theoretical semantics in intuitionistic logic (Miller et al. 1991). We will define first order rewrite rules with universal quantification taking inspiration from (Cervesato et al. 1999), where a similar logic fragment, called MSR, is defined. In (Cervesato et al. 1999), MSR is used for the specification and analysis of security protocols. Given the direct relationship between (first order) multiset rewriting and (first order) linear logic, it should be evident that multiset rewriting with universal quantification is the counterpart of LO with universal quantification. Having this idea in mind, we extend the notion of LO rewrite rule as follows. Definition 3.11 We call LO quantified rewrite rule any LO formula having the following form An ◦− ∀x1 , . . . , xn · (B1  &  &  ...  ...  &  &  ∀(A1  Bm ))  where A1 , . . . , An and B1 , . . . , Bm are atomic formulas over Σ and V. The operational semantics of LO theories consisting of LO quantified rewrite rules should be clear by looking at the LO proof rule for universally quantified goal formulas: they are eliminated by introducing new constants. This operational behavior naturally corresponds to the extension of multiset rewriting with fresh name generation defined in (Cervesato et al. 1999). Remark 3.12 As mentioned at the beginning of this section, we remark that in (Cervesato et al. 1999) the logic MSR is compared with a fragment of linear logic which turns out to be dual with respect to ours, and therefore existential quantification is used in place of universal quantification. Specifically, an MSR rule is defined as A −◦ ∃x . B , meaning that A evolves into B by creating a new name for x . In LO with universal quantification the same effect is obtained via the clause A ◦− ∀x . B . In fact, in the goal driven proof system of LO a computation step is obtained by resolution (i.e., reducing the conclusion of a clause to its premise). The reader may refer to (Cervesato 1994; Cervesato 1995; Cervesato et al. 1999; Cervesato et al. 2000) for a more formal treatment of the relationship between multiset rewriting and LO. 3.2 Specification of Concurrent Systems The connection with multiset rewriting allows us to think about LO as a specification language for concurrent systems. We will illustrate this idea with the help of the following example. We consider here a distributed test-and-lock protocol for a net with multiple resources, each of which is controlled by a monitor. The protocol is as follows. A set of resources, distinguished by means of resource identifiers, and an arbitrary set of processes are given. Processes can nondeterministically request access to any resource. Access to a given resource must be  16  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  exclusive (only one process at a time). Mutual exclusion is enforced by providing each resource with a semaphore. Given a propositional symbol init , we can encode the initial states of the system as follows: 1. init ◦− init think & &  2. init ◦− init  m(x , unlocked )  3. init ◦− ⊥ The atom think represents a thinking (idle) process, while the first order atom m(x , s) represents a monitor for the resource with identifier x and associated semaphore s. The semaphore s can assume one of the two values locked or unlocked . Clause 1 and clause 2 can modify the initial state by adding, respectively, an arbitrary number of thinking processes and an arbitrary number of resources (with an initially unlocked semaphore). Finally, using clause 3 the atom init can be removed after the initialization phase. The core of the protocol works as follows: 4. think ◦− wait (x ) 5. wait (x ) ◦− think m(x , locked ) ◦− think  &  &  &  7. use(x )  m(x , unlocked ) ◦− use(x )  &  6. wait (x )  m(x , locked )  m(x , unlocked )  Using clause 4, a process can non-deterministically request access to any resource with identifier x , moving to a waiting state represented by the atom wait (x ). Clause 5 allows a process to go back to thinking from a waiting state. By clause 6, a waiting process can synchronize with the relevant monitor and is granted access provided the corresponding semaphore is unlocked. As a result, the semaphore is locked. The atom use(x ) represents a process which is currently using the resource with identifier x . Clause 7 allows a process to release a resource and go back to thinking, unlocking the corresponding semaphore. Remark 3.13 In the previous specification we have intentionally introduced a flaw which we will disclose later (see Section 7). Uncovering of this flaw will allow us to explain and better motivate the use of the universal quantifier for the generation of new names. 3.3 Linear Logic and Model Checking One of the properties we would like to establish for the specification given in the previous example is that it ensures mutual exclusion for any resource used in the system. One of the difficulties for proving this kind of properties is that the specification taken into consideration has an infinite number of possible configurations (all possible rewritings of the goal init ). In this paper we will define techniques that can be used to attack this kind of verification problems by exploiting an interesting connection between verification and bottom-up evaluation of LO programs.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications Infinite State Concurrent Systems  Linear Logic Specification  transition system transition current state initial state upward-closed set of states forward reachability backward reachability  LO program and proof system rule instance goal formula initial goal LO clause with ⊤ top-down provability bottom-up provability  17  Fig. 4. Reachability versus provability Let us consider again the protocol specification given in Example 3.2. The mutual exclusion property can be formulated as the following property over reachable configurations. Let S be the set of multiset of atomic formulas (i.e., a configuration) reachable in any derivation from the goal init . The protocol ensures mutual exclusion for resource x if and only if for any A ∈ S , i.e., any reachable configuration, {use(x ), use(x )} is not a sub-multiset of A. In other words, all goal formulas containing two occurrences of the formula use(x ) represent possible violations of mutual exclusion for resource x . Following from the previous observation, a possible way of proving mutual exclusion for our sample protocol is to show that no configurations having the form {use(x ), use(x ), . . .} can be reached starting from the initial states. This verification methodology can be made effective using a backward exploration of a protocol specification as described in (Abdulla et al. 1996). Specifically, the idea is to saturate the set of predecessor configurations (i.e., compute all possible predecessor configurations of the potential violations) and then check that no initial state occurs in the resulting set. This verification strategy can be reformulated in a natural way in our fragment of linear logic. First of all, LO formulas with the ⊤ constant can be used to finitely represent all possible violations as follows: &  def  U = ∀x· use(x )  use(x ) ◦− ⊤  Backward reachability amounts then to compute all possible logical consequences of the LO specification of the protocol and of the formula U . In logic programming this strategy is called bottom-up provability. If the goal init is in the resulting set, then there exists an execution (derivation) terminated by an instance of the axiom ⊤ that leads from init to a multiset of the form use(x ), use(x ), A for some x and some multiset of atomic formulas A. Thus, the use of clauses with ⊤ to represent violations (and admissibility of weakening) allows us to reason independently of the number of processes in the initial states. Following (Abdulla et al. 1996), formulas like ∀x . use(x ) use(x ) ◦− ⊤ can be viewed as a symbolic representation of upwardclosed sets of configurations. On the basis of these observations, the relationship between reachability and derivability sketched in the previous sections can be extended as shown in Figure 4. &  18  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  In order to exploit this connection and extend the backward reachability strategy in the rest of the paper we will define a bottom-up semantics for first order LO programs. We will define our semantics via a fixpoint operator similar to the TP operator used for logic programs. The fixpoint semantics will give us an effective way to evaluate bottom-up an LO program, and thus solve verification problems for infinite-state concurrent systems as the one described in this section.  4 A Bottom-up Semantics for LO∀ The proof-theoretical semantics for LO∀ corresponds to the top-down operational semantics based on resolution for traditional logic programming languages like Prolog. In this paper we are interested in finding a suitable definition of bottom-up semantics that can be used as an alternative operational semantics for LO∀ programs. More precisely, we will define an effective and goal-independent procedure to compute all goal formulas which are provable from a given program P . This semantics extends the one described in (Bozzano et al. 2002), which was limited to propositional LO programs. In the following, given an LO∀ program P , we denote by ΣP the signature comprising the set of constant, function, and predicate symbols in P . 4.1 Non-ground Semantics for LO∀ Before discussing the bottom-up semantics, we lift the definition of operational semantics to LO∀ programs. Following (Bozzano et al. 2002), we would like to define the operational semantics of a program P as the set of multisets of atoms which are provable from P . This could be done by considering the ground instances of LO∀ program clauses (see Definition 3.5). However, in presence of universal quantification in goals, this solution is not completely satisfactory. Consider, in fact, the following example. Take a signature with a predicate symbol p and two constants a and b, and consider the LO∀ program consisting of the axiom ∀x· p(x ) ◦− ⊤ and the program consisting of the two clauses p(a) ◦− ⊤ and p(b) ◦− ⊤. The two programs would have the same ground semantics (i.e., consisting of the two singleton multisets {p(a)} and {p(b)}). However, the LO∀ goal ∀x· p(x ) succeeds only in the first program, as the reader can verify. In order to distinguish the two programs, we need to consider the non ground semantics. In particular, our aim in this section will be to extend the so-called C-semantics of (Falaschi et al. 1993) to first order LO. First of all, we give the following definition. Definition 4.1 (Clause Variants) Given an LO∀ program P , the set of variants of clauses in P , denoted V rn(P ), is defined as follows: def  V rn(P ) = {(H ◦− G) θ | ∀ (H ◦− G) ∈ P and θ is a renaming of the variables in F V (H ◦− G) with new variables}. Now, we need to reformulate the proof-theoretical semantics of Section 3 (see  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  19  P ⊢Σ Gθ, A bc (H ◦− G) ∈ V rn(P ) b θ, A P ⊢Σ H  Fig. 5. Backchaining rule working over non ground goals Figure 1). According to the C-semantics of (Falaschi et al. 1993), our goal is to define the set of non ground goals which are provable from a given program P with an empty answer substitution. Slightly departing from (Falaschi et al. 1993), we modify the proof system of Figure 1 as follows. Sequents are defined now over non ground goals. The backchaining rule of Figure 1 is replaced by the new rule shown in Figure 5 (where, as usual, A denotes a multiset of atomic formulas). The rightintroduction rules and the axioms are as in Figure 1. This proof system is based on the idea of considering a first order program as the (generally infinite) collection of (non ground) instances of its clauses. By instance of a clause H ◦− G, we mean a clause H θ ◦− Gθ, where θ is any substitution. The reader can see that, with this intuition, the set of goals provable from the system modified with the backchaining rule shown in Figure 5 corresponds to the set of non ground goals which are provable with an empty answer substitution according to (Falaschi et al. 1993). This formulation of the proof system is the proof-theoretical counterpart of the bottom-up semantics we will define in the following. All formulas (and also substitutions) on the right-hand side of the sequents in the proof system obtained from Figure 1 by replacing the backchaining rule with the rule of Figure 5 are implicitly assumed to range over the set of non ground terms over Σ. Every time rule ∀r is fired, a new constant c is added to the current signature, and the resulting goal is proved in the new signature (see Remark 3.7). Rule bc denotes a backchaining (resolution) step, where θ indicates any substitution. For our purposes, we can assume Dom(θ) ⊆ F V (H ) ∪ F V (G) (we remind that F V (F ) denotes the free variables of F ). Note that H ◦− G is assumed to be a variant, therefore it has no variables in common with A. According to the usual concept of uniformity, bc can be executed only if the right-hand side of the current sequent consists of atomic formulas. Rules ⊤r , r , & r and ⊥r are the same as in propositional LO. A sequent is provable if all branches of its proof tree terminate with instances of the ⊤r axiom. Clearly, the proof system obtained by considering the rule of Figure 5 is not effective, however it will be sufficient for our purposes. An effective way to compute the set of goals which are provable from the above proof system will be discussed in Section 5. We give the following definition, where ⊢Σ denotes the provability relation defined by the proof system of Figure 1 in which the backchaining rule has been replaced by the rule of Figure 5. &  Definition 4.2 (Operational Semantics) Given an LO∀ program P , its operational semantics, denoted O(P ), is given by def  O(P ) = {A | A is a multiset of (non ground) atoms in AV ΣP and P ⊢ΣP A}.  20  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Intuitively, the set O(P ) is closed by instantiation, i.e., Aθ ∈ O(P ) for any substitution θ, provided A ∈ O(P ). Note that the operational semantics only include multisets of (non ground) atoms, therefore no connective (including the universal quantifier) can appear in the set O(P ). However, the intuition will be that the variables appearing in a multiset in O(P ) must be implicitly considered universally quantified (e.g., {p(x ), q(x )} ∈ O(P ) implies that the goal ∀x· (p(x ) q(x )) is provable from P ). Also note that the information on provable facts from a given program P is all we need to decide whether a general goal (possibly with nesting of connectives) is provable from P or not. In fact, according to LO∀ proof-theoretical semantics, provability of a compound goal can always be reduced to provability of a finite set of atomic multisets. &  4.2 Fixpoint Semantics for LO∀ We will now discuss the bottom-up semantics. In order to deal with universal quantification (and therefore signature augmentation), we extend the definitions of Herbrand base and (concrete) interpretations given in (Bozzano et al. 2002) as follows. Let SigP be the set of all possible extensions of the signature ΣP associated to a program P with new constants. The definition of Herbrand base now depends explicitly on the signature, and interpretations can be thought of as infinite tuples, with one element for every signature Σ ∈ SigP . From here on the powerset of a given set D will be indicated as ℘(D ). We give then the following definitions. Definition 4.3 (Herbrand Base) Given an LO∀ program P and a signature Σ ∈ SigP , the Herbrand base of P over Σ, denoted HB Σ (P ), is given by def  V HB Σ (P ) = MS(AV Σ ) = {A | A is a multiset of (non ground) atoms in AΣ }.  Definition 4.4 (Interpretations) Given an LO∀ program P , a (concrete) interpretation is a family of sets {IΣ }Σ∈Sig P , where IΣ ∈ ℘(HB Σ (P )) for every Σ ∈ SigP . In the following we often use the notation I for an interpretation to denote the family {IΣ }Σ∈Sig P . Interpretations form a complete lattice where inclusion and least upper bound are defined like (component-wise) set inclusion and union. In the following definition we therefore overload the symbols ⊆ and ∪ for sets. Definition 4.5 (Interpretation Domain) Interpretations form a complete lattice hD, ⊆i, where: • • • •  D = {I | I is an interpretation}; I ⊆ J if and only if IΣ ⊆ JΣ for every Σ ∈ SigP ; the least upper bound of I and J is {IΣ ∪ JΣ }Σ∈SigP ; the bottom and top elements are ∅ = {∅Σ }Σ∈Sig P and {HB Σ (P )}Σ∈Sig P , respectively.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  21  Before introducing the definition of fixpoint operator, we need to define the notion of satisfiability of a context ∆ (a multiset of goal formulas) in a given interpretation I . For this purpose, we introduce the judgment I |=Σ ∆ ◮ C, where I is an input interpretation, ∆ is an input context, and C is an output fact (a multiset of atomic formulas). The judgment is also parametric with respect to a given signature Σ. The need for this judgment, with respect to the familiar logic programming setting (Gabbrielli et al. 1995), is motivated by the arbitrary nesting of connectives in LO∀ clause bodies. The satisfiability judgment is modeled according to the rightintroduction rules of the connectives. In other words, the computation performed by the satisfiability judgment corresponds to top-down steps inside our bottom-up semantics. Intuitively, the parameter C must be thought of as an output fact such that C + ∆ is valid in I . The notion of output fact will simplify the presentation of the algorithmic version of the judgment which we will present in Section 5. The notion of satisfiability is modeled according to the right-introduction (decomposition) rules of the proof system, as follows (we remind that ’+’ denotes multiset union). Definition 4.6 (Satisfiability Judgment ) Let P be an LO∀ program, Σ ∈ SigP , and I = {IΣ }Σ∈Sig P an interpretation. The satisfiability judgment |=Σ is defined as follows: I |=Σ ⊤, ∆ ◮ C for any fact C in AV Σ; I |=Σ A ◮ C if A + C ∈ IΣ ; I |=Σ ∀x· G, ∆ ◮ C if I |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆ ◮ C, with c 6∈ Σ (see remark 4.7); I |=Σ G1 & G2 , ∆ ◮ C if I |=Σ G1 , ∆ ◮ C and I |=Σ G2 , ∆ ◮ C; &  I |=Σ G1  G2 , ∆ ◮ C if I |=Σ G1 , G2 , ∆ ◮ C;  I |=Σ ⊥, ∆ ◮ C if I |=Σ ∆ ◮ C. Remark 4.7 When using the notation I |=Σ ∆ ◮ C we always make the implicit assumption that ∆ is a context defined over Σ (i.e., term constructors in ∆ must belong to Σ). As a result, also the output fact C must be defined over Σ. This assumption, which is the counterpart (see Remark 3.7) of an analogous assumption for proof systems like the one in Figure 1, i.e., with explicit signature notation, will always and tacitly hold in the following. For example, note that in the ∀-case of the |=Σ definition below, the newly introduced constant c cannot be exported through the output fact C. This is crucial to capture the operational semantics of the universal quantifier. The satisfiability judgment |=Σ satisfies the following properties. Lemma 1 For every interpretation I = {IΣ }Σ∈Sig P , context ∆, and fact C, I |=Σ ∆ ◮ C if and only if I |=Σ ∆, C ◮ ǫ. Proof See Appendix Appendix B.  22  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Lemma 2 For any interpretations I1 = {(I1 )Σ }Σ∈Sig P , I2 = {(I2 )Σ }Σ∈SigP , . . . , context ∆, and fact C, i . if I1 ⊆ I2 and I1 |=Σ ∆ ◮ C then I2 |=Σ ∆ ◮ C; S∞ ii . if I1 ⊆ I2 ⊆ . . . and i=1 Ii |=Σ ∆ ◮ C then there exists k ∈ N s.t. Ik |=Σ ∆ ◮ C. Proof See Appendix Appendix B. We are now ready to define the fixpoint operator TP . Definition 4.8 (Fixpoint Operator TP ) Given an LO∀ program P and an interpretation I = {IΣ }Σ∈SigP , the fixpoint operator TP is defined as follows: def  TP (I ) = {(TP (I ))Σ }Σ∈Sig P ; b θ + C | (H ◦− G) ∈ V rn(P ), θ is (TP (I ))Σ = {H any substitution, and I |=Σ Gθ ◮ C}. def  Remark 4.9 In the previous definition, θ is implicitly assumed to be defined over Σ, i.e., θ can only map variables in Dom(θ) to terms in TΣV . The following property holds. Proposition 2 (Monotonicity and Continuity) For every LO∀ program P , the fixpoint operator TP is monotonic and continuous over the lattice hD, ⊆i. Proof Monotonicity. Immediate from the definition of TP and item i of Lemma 2. Continuity. We prove that TP is finitary, i.e., for any sequence of interpretations I1 ⊆ I2 ⊆ . . . S∞ S∞ S∞ we have that TP ( i=1 Ii ) ⊆ i=1 TP (Ii ), i.e., for every Σ ∈ ΣP , (TP ( i=1 Ii ))Σ ⊆ S∞ S∞ ( i=1 TP (Ii ))Σ . Let A ∈ (TP ( i=1 Ii ))Σ . By definition of TP , there exist a variant b θ + C and H ◦− G of a clause in P , a substitution θ, and a fact C s.t. A = H S∞ ◮ C. By item ii of Lemma 2, we have that there exists k ∈ N s.t. I |= Gθ Σ i=1 i b θ + C ∈ (TP (Ik ))Σ ⊆ Ik |=Σ Gθ ◮ C. Again by definition of TP , we get A = H S∞ ( i=1 TP (Ii ))Σ . Monotonicity and continuity of the TP operator imply, by Tarski’s Theorem, that lfp(TP ) = TP ↑ω . The fixpoint semantics of a program P is then defined as follows.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  23  Definition 4.10 (Fixpoint Semantics) Given an LO∀ program P , its fixpoint semantics, denoted F (P ), is defined as follows: def  F (P ) = (lfp(TP ))ΣP = (TP ↑ω({∅Σ }Σ∈SigP ))ΣP . We conclude this section by proving the following fundamental result, which states that the fixpoint semantics is sound and complete with respect to the operational semantics (see Definition 4.2). Theorem 1 (Soundness and Completeness) For every LO∀ program P , F (P ) = O(P ). Proof F (P ) ⊆ O(P ). We prove that for every k ∈ N, for every signature Σ ∈ SigP , and for every context ∆, TP ↑k |=Σ ∆ ◮ ǫ implies P ⊢ Σ ∆. The proof is by lexicographic induction on (k , h), where h is the length of the derivation of TP ↑k |=Σ ∆ ◮ ǫ. - If ∆ = ⊤, ∆′ , obvious; - if ∆ = A and A ∈ (TP ↑k )Σ , then there exist a variant H ◦− G of a clause in P , a b θ + C and TP ↑k −1 |=Σ Gθ ◮ C. By Lemma fact C and a substitution θ s.t. A = H ◮ 1, this implies TP ↑k −1 |=Σ Gθ, C ǫ. Then by the inductive hypothesis we have b θ, C, i.e., P ⊢Σ A follows by bc rule; P ⊢Σ Gθ, C, from which P ⊢Σ H - if ∆ = ∀x· G, ∆′ and TP ↑k |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ ǫ, with c 6∈ Σ, then by the inductive hypothesis we have P ⊢Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ from which P ⊢Σ ∀x· G, ∆′ follows by ∀r rule; - if ∆ = G1 & G2 , ∆′ , TP ↑k |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ ǫ, and TP ↑k |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ ǫ, then by the inductive hypothesis we have P ⊢ Σ G1 , ∆′ and P ⊢ Σ G2 , ∆′ , from which P ⊢ ′ Σ G1 & G2 , ∆ follows by & r rule; - if ∆ = G1 G2 , ∆′ and TP ↑k |=Σ G1 , G2 , ∆′ ◮ ǫ, then by the inductive hypothesis we have P ⊢Σ G1 , G2 , ∆′ , from which P ⊢Σ G1 G2 , ∆′ follows by r rule; - if ∆ = ⊥, ∆′ and TP ↑k |=Σ ∆′ ◮ ǫ, then by the inductive hypothesis we have P ⊢Σ ∆′ , from which P ⊢Σ ⊥, ∆′ follows by ⊥r rule. &  &  &  O(P ) ⊆ F (P ). We prove that for every signature Σ ∈ SigP and for every context ∆, if P ⊢Σ ∆ then there exists k ∈ N s.t. TP ↑k |=Σ ∆ ◮ ǫ. The proof is by induction on the derivation of P ⊢Σ ∆. - If ∆ = ⊤, ∆′ , then for every k ∈ N, TP ↑k |=Σ ∆ ◮ ǫ; b θ, A, with H ◦− G a variant of a clause in P , θ substitution, and P ⊢ - if ∆ = H Σ Gθ, A, then by the inductive hypothesis we have that there exists k ∈ N s.t. TP ↑k |=Σ Gθ, A ◮ ǫ. Then, by Lemma 1, TP ↑k |=Σ Gθ ◮ A. By definition of TP , b θ + A ◮ ǫ; b θ + A ∈ (TP ↑k +1 )Σ , which implies TP ↑k +1 |=Σ H H - if ∆ = ∀x· G, ∆′ and P ⊢Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ , with c 6∈ Σ, then by the inductive hypothesis we have that there exist k ∈ N s.t. TP ↑k |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ ǫ, from which TP ↑k |=Σ ∀x· G, ∆′ ◮ ǫ follows;  24  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  - if ∆ = G1 & G2 , ∆′ , P ⊢Σ G1 , ∆′ and P ⊢Σ G2 , ∆′ , then by the inductive hypothesis we have that there exist k1 , k2 ∈ N s.t. TP ↑k1 |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ ǫ and TP ↑k2 |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ ǫ. By taking k = max {k1 , k2 }, by item i of Lemma 2 and monotonicity of TP (Proposition 2) we get TP ↑k |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ ǫ and TP ↑k |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ ǫ, from which TP ↑k |=Σ G1 & G2 , ∆′ ◮ ǫ follows; - if ∆ = G1 G2 , ∆′ or ∆ = ⊥, ∆′ , the conclusion follows by a straightforward application of the inductive hypothesis. &  Example 4.11 Let Σ be a signature including the constant symbols a and b, a function symbol f , and the predicate symbols p, q, r , let V be a denumerable set of variables and x , y ∈ V, and let P be the following LO∀ program: &  1. r (f (b))  p(a) ◦− ⊤  2. p(x ) ◦− ⊤ 3. q(y) ◦− (∀x· p(x )) & r (y) Let I0 = {∅Σ }Σ∈Sig P , and let us compute I1 = TP (I0 ). Using clauses 1 and 2, we get that (see Definitions 4.6 and 4.8) (I1 )Σ contains the multisets of atoms of the form {r (f (b)), p(a)} + A, and {p(t )} + A, where A is any multiset of (possibly nonV ground) atoms in AV Σ , while t is any (possibly non ground) term in TΣ . Similarly (I1 )Σ′ , for a generic signature Σ′ such that Σ ⊆ Σ′ , contains all multisets of the V above form where A and t are taken from, respectively, AV Σ′ and TΣ′ . For instance, let c be a new constant not appearing in Σ. The set (I1 )Σ′ will contain, e.g., the multisets {p(c)}, {p(f (c)), q(b)}, and so on. Now, consider the substitution θ = [y 7→ f (b)] and the following corresponding instance of clause 3: q(f (b)) ◦− (∀x· p(x )) & r (f (b)). Assume we want to compute an output fact C for the judgment I1 |=Σ (∀x· p(x )) & r (f (b)) ◮ C. By definition of |=, we have to compute I1 |=Σ (∀x· p(x )) ◮ C and I1 |=Σ r (f (b)) ◮ C. For the latter judgment we have that, e.g., I1 |=Σ r (f (b)) ◮ p(a). For the first judgment, by definition of |=, we must compute I1 |=Σ,c p(c) ◮ C, where c is a new constant not in Σ. As {p(c)} is contained in (I1 )Σ,c , we can get that I1 |=Σ,c p(c) ◮ ǫ. We can also get I1 |=Σ,c p(c) ◮ p(a) (in fact {p(c), p(a)} is also contained in (I1 )Σ,c . By applying the & -rule for |=, we get that I1 |=Σ (∀x· p(x )) & r (f (b)) ◮ p(a). Therefore, by applying clause 3 we get that, e.g., the multiset {q(b), p(a)} is in (I2 )Σ = (TP (I1 ))Σ .  5 An Effective Semantics for LO∀ The fixpoint operator TP defined in the previous section does not enjoy one of the crucial properties we required for our bottom-up semantics, namely its definition is not effective. This is a result of both the definition of the satisfiability judgment  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  25  (whose clause for ⊤ is clearly not effective) and the definition of interpretations as infinite tuples. In order to solve these problems, we first define the (abstract) Herbrand base and (abstract) interpretations as follows. Definition 5.1 (Abstract Herbrand Base) Given an LO∀ program P , the Herbrand base of P , denoted HB(P ), is given by def  HB(P ) = HB ΣP (P ). Definition 5.2 (Abstract Interpretations) Given an LO∀ program P , an interpretation I is any subset of HB(P ), i.e., I ∈ ℘(HB(P )). In order to define the abstract domain of interpretations, we need the following definitions. Definition 5.3 (Instance Operator ) Given an interpretation I and a signature Σ ∈ SigP , we define the operator InstΣ as follows: InstΣ (I ) = {Aθ | A ∈ I , θ substitution over Σ}. Definition 5.4 (Upward-closure Operator ) Given an interpretation I and a signature Σ ∈ SigP , we define the operator U pΣ as follows: U pΣ (I ) = {A + C | A ∈ I , C fact over Σ}. Remark 5.5 Note that, as usual, in the previous definitions we assume the substitution θ and the fact C to be defined over the signature Σ. The following definition provides the connection between the (abstract) interpretations defined in Definition 5.2 and the (concrete) interpretations of Definition 4.4. The idea behind the definition is that an interpretation implicitly denotes the set of elements which can be obtained by either instantiating or closing upwards elements in the interpretation itself (where the concepts of instantiation and upward-closure are made precise by the above definitions). The operation of instantiation is related to the notion of C-semantics (Falaschi et al. 1993) (see Definition 4.2), while the operation of upward-closure is justified by Proposition 1. Note that the operations of instantiation and upward-closure are performed for every possible signature Σ ∈ SigP . Definition 5.6 (Denotation of an Interpretation) Given an (abstract) interpretation I , its denotation [[I ]] is the (concrete) interpretation {[[I ]]Σ }Σ∈SigP defined as follows: def  [[I ]]Σ = InstΣ (U pΣ (I ))  def  (or, equivalently, [[I ]]Σ = U pΣ (InstΣ (I )))·  Two interpretations I and J are said to be equivalent, written I ≃ J , if and only if [[I ]] = [[J ]]. The equivalence of the two different equations in Definition 5.6 is stated in the following proposition.  26  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Proposition 3 For every interpretation I , and signature Σ ∈ SigP , InstΣ (U pΣ (I )) = U pΣ (InstΣ (I ))· Proof Let (A + C)θ ∈ InstΣ (U pΣ (I )), with A ∈ I . Then (A + C)θ = (Aθ) + Cθ ∈ U pΣ (InstΣ (I )). Conversely, let Aθ + C ∈ U pΣ (InstΣ (I )), with A ∈ I . Let B be a variant of C with new variables (not appearing in A, θ, and C) and θ′ be the substitution with domain Dom(θ) ∪ F V (B) and s.t. θ′ |Dom(θ) = θ and θ′ maps B to C. Then Aθ + C = Aθ′ + Bθ′ = (A + B)θ′ ∈ InstΣ (U pΣ (I )). We are now ready to define the symbolic interpretation domain. In the following we will use the word abstract to stress the connection between our symbolic semantics and the theory of abstract interpretation. Our abstraction does not loose precision but it allows us to finitely represent infinite collections of formulas. As previously mentioned, the idea is that of considering interpretations as implicitly defining the sets of elements contained in their denotations. Therefore, differently from Definition 4.5, now we need to check containment between denotations. Furthermore, as we do not need to distinguish between interpretations having the same denotation, we simply identify them using equivalence classes with respect to the corresponding equivalence relation ≃. Definition 5.7 (Abstract Interpretation Domain) Abstract interpretations form a complete lattice hI, ⊑i, where • • • •  I = {[I ]≃ | I is an interpretation}; [I ]≃ ⊑ [J ]≃ if and only if [[I ]] ⊆ [[J ]]; F the least upper bound of [I ]≃ and [J ]≃ , written [I ]≃ [J ]≃ , is [I ∪ J ]≃ ; the bottom and top elements are [∅]≃ and [ǫ]≃ , respectively.  The following proposition provides an effective and equivalent condition for testing the ⊑ relation (which we call entailment relation) over interpretations. We will need this result later on. Proposition 4 (Entailment between Interpretations) Given two interpretations I and J , [[I ]] ⊆ [[J ]] if and only if for every A ∈ I , there exist B ∈ J , a substitution θ, and a fact C (defined over ΣP ) s.t. A = Bθ + C. Proof If part. We prove that for every Σ ∈ SigP , [[I ]]Σ ⊆ [[J ]]Σ . Let A′ = Aθ′ + C ′ ∈ U pΣ (InstΣ (I )) = [[I ]]Σ , with A ∈ I and θ′ , C ′ defined over Σ. By hypothesis, there exist B ∈ J , a substitution θ, and a fact C (defined over ΣP ) s.t. A = Bθ + C. Therefore, A′ = Aθ′ + C ′ = (Bθ + C)θ′ + C ′ = Bθθ′ + (Cθ′ + C ′ ) ∈ U pΣ (InstΣ (J )) = [[J ]]Σ (note that θθ′ and Cθ′ + C ′ are both defined over Σ because ΣP ⊆ Σ). Only if part. Let A ∈ I , then A ∈ [[I ]]ΣP (note that A is defined over ΣP by definition of interpretation). Then, by the hypothesis we have that A ∈ [[J ]]ΣP = U pΣP (InstΣP (J )), i.e., there exist B ∈ J , a substitution θ, and a fact C (defined over ΣP ) s.t. A = Bθ + C.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  27  We now define the abstract satisfiability judgment I Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ, where I is an input interpretation, ∆ is an input context, C is an output fact, and θ is an output substitution. Remark 5.8 As usual, the notation I Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ requires that ∆, C, and θ are defined over the signature Σ. As a consequence, the newly introduced constant c in the ∀-case of the Σ definition below cannot be exported through the output parameters C or θ. The judgment Σ can be thought of as an abstract version of the judgment |=Σ (compare Definition 4.6). We now need one more parameter, namely an output substitution. The idea behind the definition is that the output fact C and the output substitution θ are minimal (in a sense to be clarified) so that they can be computed effectively given a program P , an interpretation I , and a signature Σ. The output substitution θ is needed in order to deal with clause instantiation, and its minimality is ensured by using most general unifiers in the definition. As the reader can note, the sources of non-effectiveness which are present in Definition 4.6 (e.g., in the rule for ⊤)) are removed in Definition 5.9 below. We recall that the notation θ1 ↑ θ2 denotes the least upper bound of substitutions (see Appendix Appendix A). Definition 5.9 (Abstract Satisfiability Judgment ) Let P be an LO∀ program, I an interpretation, and Σ ∈ SigP . The abstract satisfiability judgment Σ is defined as follows: ⊤, ∆ ◮ ǫ ◮ nil ;  I  Σ  I  Σ  I  Σ  I  Σ  I  Σ  G1  I  Σ  ⊥, ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ if I  A ◮ C ◮ θ if there exist B ∈ I (variant), B ′ 4 B, A′ 4 A, |B ′ | = |A′ |, C = B\B ′, and θ = mgu(B ′ , A′ )|F V (A,C) ; ∀x· G, ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ if I  Σ,c  G[c/x ], ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ, with c 6∈ Σ (see Remark 5.8);  G1 & G2 , ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ if I Σ G1 , ∆ ◮ C1 ◮ θ1 , I Σ G2 , ∆ ◮ C2 ◮ θ2 , D1 4 C1 , D2 4 C2 , |D1 | = |D2 |, θ3 = mgu(D1 , D2 ), C = C1 + (C2 \D2 ), and θ = (θ1 ↑ θ2 ↑ θ3 )|F V (G1 ,G2 ,∆,C) ; G2 , ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ if I Σ  Σ  G1 , G2 , ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ;  ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ.  &  We recall that two multisets in general may have more than one (not necessarily equivalent) most general unifier and that using the notation mgu(B ′ , A′ ) we mean any unifier which is non-deterministically picked from the set of most general unifiers of B ′ and A′ (see Appendix Appendix A). Example 5.10 Let us consider a signature with a function symbol f and predicate symbols p, q, r , s. Let V be a denumerable set of variables, and u, v , w , . . . ∈ V. Let I be the interpretation consisting of the two multisets {p(x ), q(x )} and {r (y), p(f (y))} (for simplicity,  28  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  hereafter we omit brackets in multiset notation), and P the program 1. r (w ) ◦− q(f (w )) 2. s(z ) ◦− ∀x· p(f (x )) 3. ⊥ ◦− q(u) & r (v ) Let us consider (a renaming of) the body of the first clause, q(f (w ′ )), and (a renaming of) the first element in I , p(x ′ ), q(x ′ ). Using the second case for the ΣP judgment, with A = A′ = q(f (w ′ )), B = p(x ′ ), q(x ′ ), B ′ = q(x ′ ), we get I  ΣP  q(f (w ′ )) ◮ p(x ′ ) ◮ [x ′ 7→ f (w ′ )].  Let us consider now (a renaming of) the body of the second case, ∀x· p(f (x )), and another renaming of the first element, p(x ′′ ), q(x ′′ ). From the ∀-case of the definition of ΣP , I ΣP ∀x· p(f (x )) ◮ C ◮ θ if I ΣP ,c p(f (c)) ◮ C ◮ θ, with c 6∈ ΣP . Now, we can apply the second case for ΣP ,c . Unfortunately, we can’t choose A′ to be p(f (c)) and B ′ to be p(x ′′ ). In fact, by unifying p(f (c)) with p(x ′′ ), we should get the substitution θ = [x ′′ 7→ f (c)] and the output fact q(x ′′ ) (note that x ′′ is a free variable in the output fact) and this is not allowed because the substitution θ must be defined on ΣP , in order for I ΣP ∀x· p(f (x )) ◮ C ◮ θ to be meaningful. It turns out that the only way to use the second clause for ΣP ,c is to choose A′ = B ′ = ǫ, which is useless in the fixpoint computation (see Example 5.13). Finally, let us consider (a renaming of) the body of the third clause, ⊥ ◦− q(u ′ ) & r (v ′ ). According to the & -rule for the ΣP judgment, we must first compute C1 , C2 , θ1 and θ2 such that I ΣP q(u ′ ) ◮ C1 ◮ θ1 and I ΣP r (v ′ ) ◮ C2 ◮ θ2 . To this aim, take two variants of the multisets in I , p(x ′′′ ), q(x ′′′ ) and r (y ′ ), p(f (y ′ )). Proceeding as above, we get that I  ΣP  q(u ′ ) ◮ p(x ′′′ ) ◮ [u ′ 7→ x ′′′ ] and I  ΣP  r (v ′ ) ◮ p(f (y ′ )) ◮ [v ′ 7→ y ′ ].  Now, we can apply the & -rule for the ΣP judgment, with D1 = p(x ′′′ ), D2 = p(f (y ′ )), and θ3 = [x ′′′ 7→ f (y ′ )]. We have that θ1 ↑ θ2 ↑ θ3 = [u ′ 7→ f (y ′ ), v ′ 7→ y ′ , x ′′′ 7→ f (y ′ )]. Therefore, we get that I  ΣP  q(u ′ ) & r (v ′ ) ◮ p(x ′′′ ) ◮ [u ′ 7→ f (y ′ ), v ′ 7→ y ′ , x ′′′ 7→ f (y ′ )].   The following lemma states a simple property of the substitution domain, which we will need in the following. Lemma 3 For every interpretation I , context ∆, fact C, and substitution θ, if I then Dom(θ) ⊆ F V (∆) ∪ F V (C). Proof Immediate by induction on the definition of  Σ  ∆◮C ◮θ  Σ.  The connection between the satisfiability judgments |=Σ and Σ is clarified by the following lemma (in the following we denote by < the converse of the sub-multiset relation, i.e., A < B if and only if B 4 A).  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  29  Lemma 4 For every interpretation I , context ∆, fact C, and substitution θ, i . if I Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ then [[I ]] |=Σ ∆θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ for every substitution θ′ and fact C ′ < Cθ; ii . if [[I ]] |=Σ ∆θ ◮ C then there exist a fact C ′ , and substitutions θ′ and σ s.t. I Σ ∆ ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ , θ|F V (∆) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (∆) , C ′ θ′ σ 4 C. Proof See Appendix Appendix B. The satisfiability judgment  Σ  also satisfies the following properties.  Lemma 5 For any interpretations I1 , I2 , . . . , context ∆, fact C, and substitution θ, i . if I1 ⊑ I2 and I1 Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ then there exist a fact C ′ , and substitutions θ′ and σ s.t. I2 Σ ∆ ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ , θ|F V (∆) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (∆) , C ′ θ′ σ 4 Cθ; F ′ ii . if I1 ⊑ I2 ⊑ . . . and ∞ Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ then there exist k ∈ N, a fact C , i=1 Ii ′ ′ ′ ′ and substitutions θ and σ s.t. Ik Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ , θ|F V (∆) = (θ ◦ σ)|F V (∆) , C ′ θ′ σ 4 Cθ.  Proof See Appendix Appendix B. We are now ready to define the abstract fixpoint operator SP : I → I. We will proceed in two steps. We will first define an operator working over interpretations (i.e., elements of ℘(HB(P ))). With a little bit of overloading, we will call the operator with the same name, i.e., SP . This operator should satisfy the equation [[SP (I )]] = TP ([[I ]]) for every interpretation I . This property ensures soundness and completeness of the symbolic representation. After defining the operator over ℘(HB(P )), we will lift it to our abstract domain I consisting of the equivalence classes of elements of ℘(HB(P )) w.r.t. the relation ≃ defined in Definition 5.6. Formally, we first introduce the following definition. Definition 5.11 (Symbolic Fixpoint Operator SP ) Given an LO∀ program P and an interpretation I , the symbolic fixpoint operator SP is defined as follows: b + C) θ | (H ◦− G) ∈ V rn(P ), I SP (I ) = {(H def  ΣP  G ◮ C ◮ θ}.  Note that the SP operator is defined using the judgment ΣP . Proposition 5 states that SP is sound and complete w.r.t TP . In order to prove this, we need to formulate Lemma 6 below.  30  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Notation Let P be an LO∀ program, and Σ, Σ1 ∈ SigP be two signatures such that Σ1 ⊆ Σ. Given a fact C, defined on Σ, we use ⌈C⌉Σ→Σ1 to denote any fact which is obtained in the following way. For every constant (eigenvariable) c ∈ (Σ \ Σ1 ), pick a new variable in V (not appearing in C), let it be xc (distinct variables must be chosen for distinct eigenvariables). Now, ⌈C⌉Σ→Σ1 is obtained by C by replacing every c ∈ (Σ\Σ1 ) with xc . For instance, if C = {p(x , f (c)), q(y, d )}, with c ∈ (Σ\Σ1 ) and d ∈ Σ1 , we have that ⌈C⌉Σ→Σ1 = {p(x , f (xc )), q(y, d )}. Given a context (multiset of goals) ∆, defined on Σ, we define ⌈∆⌉Σ→Σ1 in the same way. Similarly, given a substitution θ, defined on Σ, we use the notation ⌈θ⌉Σ→Σ1 to denote the substitution obtained from θ by replacing every c ∈ (Σ \ Σ1 ) with a new variable xc in every binding of θ. For instance, if θ = [u 7→ p(x , f (c)), v 7→ q(y, d )], with c ∈ (Σ \ Σ1 ) and d ∈ Σ1 , we have that ⌈θ⌉Σ→Σ1 = [u 7→ p(x , f (xc )), v 7→ q(y, d )]. Using the notation [[I ]] |=Σ1 ⌈∆⌉Σ→Σ1 ◮ ⌈C⌉Σ→Σ1 we mean the judgment obtained by replacing every c ∈ (Σ\Σ1 ) with xc simultaneously in ∆ and C. Newly introduced variables must not appear in ∆, C, or I . When Σ and Σ1 are clear from the context, we simply write ⌈C⌉, ⌈∆⌉, and ⌈θ⌉ for ⌈C⌉Σ→Σ1 , ⌈∆⌉Σ→Σ1 , and ⌈θ⌉Σ→Σ1 . Finally, we use ξΣ1 →Σ (or simply ξ if it is not ambiguous) to denote the substitution which maps every variable xc back to c (for every c ∈ (Σ\Σ1 )), i.e., consisting of all bindings of the form xc 7→ c for every c ∈ Σ \ Σ1 . Clearly, we have that ⌈F ⌉ξ = F , for any fact or context F , and ⌈θ⌉ ◦ ξ = θ for any substitution θ. Note that, by definition, ⌈C⌉Σ→Σ1 and ⌈∆⌉Σ→Σ1 are defined on Σ1 , while ξΣ1 →Σ is defined on Σ. Lemma 6 Let P be an LO∀ program, I an interpretation, and Σ, Σ1 ∈ SigP two signatures, with Σ1 ⊆ Σ. i . If I Σ1 ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ then I Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ; ii . If [[I ]] |=Σ ∆ ◮ C then [[I ]] |=Σ1 ⌈∆⌉Σ→Σ1 ◮ ⌈C⌉Σ→Σ1 . Proof See Appendix Appendix B. Proposition 5 For every LO∀ program P and interpretation I , [[SP (I )]] = TP ([[I ]]). Proof [[SP (I )]] ⊆ TP ([[I ]]). b +C)θ ∈ SP (I ), We prove that for every Σ ∈ SigP , [[SP (I )]]Σ ⊆ TP ([[I ]])Σ . Assume (H with H ◦− G a variant of a clause in P and I ΣP G ◮ C ◮ θ. Assume also that A = b + C)θ + D)θ′ ∈ InstΣ (U pΣ (SP (I ))) = [[Sp(I )]]Σ . We have that I ΣP G ◮ C ◮ θ ((H implies I Σ G ◮ C ◮ θ by item i of Lemma 6 (remember that ΣP ⊆ Σ). Therefore, by item i of Lemma 4, we get [[I ]] |=Σ Gθθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ for any fact C ′ < Cθ. Taking  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  31  C ′ = Cθ + D, it follows that [[I ]] |=Σ Gθθ′ ◮ Cθθ′ + Dθ′ . Therefore, by definition of b θθ′ + Cθθ′ + Dθ′ ∈ (TP ([[I ]]))Σ , i.e., A ∈ (TP ([[I ]]))Σ . TP , we have H TP ([[I ]]) ⊆ [[SP (I )]]. We prove that for every Σ ∈ SigP , Tp([[I ]])Σ ⊆ [[SP (I )]]Σ . Assume A ∈ (TP ([[I ]]))Σ . By definition of TP , there exist a variant of a clause H ◦− G in P , a fact C and a b θ + C and [[I ]] |=Σ Gθ ◮ C. substitution θ (defined over Σ) s.t. A = H By item ii of Lemma 6 we have that [[I ]] |=Σ Gθ ◮ C implies [[I ]] |=ΣP ⌈Gθ⌉ ◮ ⌈C⌉ (hereafter, we use the notation ⌈·⌉ for ⌈·⌉Σ→ΣP ). From H ◦− G in P , we know that G is defined on ΣP . It follows easily that ⌈Gθ⌉ = G⌈θ⌉, so that [[I ]] |=ΣP G⌈θ⌉ ◮ ⌈C⌉. By item ii of Lemma 4, there exist a fact C ′ , and substitutions θ′ and σ (defined over ΣP ) s.t. I ΣP G ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ , ⌈θ⌉|F V (G) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (G) , and C ′ θ′ σ 4 ⌈C⌉. b + C ′ )θ′ ∈ SP (I ). By definition of SP , we have (H b θ +C = H b ⌈θ⌉ξ +⌈C⌉ξ = (note that by hypothesis θ′ ◦σ and ⌈θ⌉ coincide Now, A = H for variables in G, and are not defined on variables in H which do not appear in G b θ′ σξ + ⌈C⌉ξ < H b θ′ σξ + C ′ θ′ σξ = ((H b + C ′ )θ′ )σξ ∈ because H ◦− G is a variant) H ′ ′ b [[(H + C )θ ]]Σ ⊆ [[SP (I )]]Σ . The following corollary holds. Corollary 1 For every LO∀ program P and interpretations I and J , if I ≃ J then SP (I ) ≃ SP (J ). Proof If I ≃ J , i.e., [[I ]] = [[J ]], we have that TP ([[I ]]) = TP ([[J ]]). By Proposition 5, it follows that [[SP (I )]] = [[SP (J )]], i.e., SP (I ) ≃ SP (J ). Corollary 1 allows us to safely lift the definition of SP from the lattice h℘(HB (P )), ⊆i to hI, ⊑i. Formally, we define the abstract fixpoint operator as follows. Definition 5.12 (Abstract Fixpoint Operator SP ) Given an LO∀ program P and an equivalence class [I ]≃ of I, the abstract fixpoint operator SP is defined as follows: def  SP ([I ]≃ ) = [SP (I )]≃ where SP (I ) is defined in Definition 5.11. For the sake of simplicity, in the following we will often use I to denote its class [I ]≃ , and we will simply use the term (abstract) interpretation to refer to an equivalence class, i.e., an element of I. The abstract fixpoint operator SP satisfies the following property. Proposition 6 (Monotonicity and Continuity) For every LO∀ program P , the abstract fixpoint operator SP is monotonic and continuous over the lattice hI, ⊑i.  32  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Proof Monotonicity. We prove that if I ⊑ J , then SP (I ) ⊑ SP (J ), i.e., [[SP (I )]] ⊆ [[SP (J )]]. To prove the latter condition, we will use the characterization given by Proposition 4. Assume b + C)θ ∈ SP (I ), with H ◦− G a variant of a clause in P and I ΣP G ◮ C ◮ θ. A = (H By item i of Lemma 5, there exist a fact C ′ , and substitutions θ′ and σ (note that they are defined over ΣP ) s.t. J ΣP G ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ , θ|F V (G) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (G) , C ′ θ′ σ 4 Cθ. Let Cθ = C ′ θ′ σ + D, with D a fact defined over ΣP . By definition of b + C ′ )θ′ ∈ SP (J ). SP , B = (H b + C)θ = H b θ + Cθ = H b θ′ σ + C ′ θ′ σ + D (note in fact that by hypothesis Now, A = (H ′ θ σ and θ coincide for variables in G, and are not defined on variables in H which do not appear in G because H ◦− G is a variant). Therefore, we have that A = b θ′ σ + C ′ θ′ σ + D = Bσ + D. H Continuity. F∞ F∞ We show that SP is finitary, i.e., if I1 ⊑ I2 ⊑ . . ., then SP ( i=1 Ii ) ⊑ i=1 SP (Ii ), F∞ F∞ i.e., [[SP ( i=1 Ii )]] ⊆ [[ i=1 SP (Ii )]]. Again, we will use the characterization given b + C)θ ∈ SP (F∞ Ii ), with H ◦− G a variant of by Proposition 4. Assume A = (H i=1 F∞ a clause in P and i=1 I1 ΣP G ◮ C ◮ θ. By item ii of Lemma 5, there exist k ∈ N, a fact C ′ , and substitutions θ′ and σ (note that they are defined over ΣP ) s.t. Ik ΣP G ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ , θ|F V (G) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (G) , C ′ θ′ σ 4 Cθ. Let Cθ = C ′ θ′ σ + D, with D a fact defined over ΣP . By definition of b + C ′ )θ′ ∈ SP (Ik ). SP , B = (H b + C)θ = H b θ′ σ + C ′ θ′ σ + D = Bσ + D. Exactly as above, we prove that A = (H Corollary 2 For every LO∀ program P , [[lfp(SP )]] = lfp(TP ). Let Fsym (P ) = lfp(SP ), then we have the following main theorem. Theorem 2 (Soundness and Completeness) For every LO∀ program P , O(P ) = F (P ) = [[Fsym (P )]]ΣP . Proof From Theorem 1 and Corollary 2. The previous results give us an algorithm to compute the operational and fixpoint semantics of a program P via the fixpoint operator SP . Example 5.13 Let us consider a signature with a constant symbol a, a function symbol f and predicate symbols p, q, r , s. Let V be a denumerable set of variables, and u, v , w , . . . ∈ V.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  33  Let us consider the program P given below. 1. r (w ) ◦− q(f (w )) 2. s(z ) ◦− ∀x· p(f (x )) 3. ⊥ ◦− q(u) & r (v ) &  4. p(x )  q(x ) ◦− ⊤  From clause 4, and using the first rule for ΣP , we get SP (∅) = [{{p(x ), q(x )}}]≃ . For simplicity, we omit the class notation, and we write SP ↑1 = SP (∅) = {{p(x ), q(x )}}. We can now apply the remaining clauses to the element I = {p(x ), q(x )} (remember that SP ([I ]≃ ) = [SP (I )]≃ ). From the first clause (see Example 5.10) we have I ΣP q(f (w ′ )) ◮ p(x ′ ) ◮ [x ′ 7→ f (w ′ )]. It follows that (r (w ′ ), p(x ′ ))[x ′ 7→ f (w ′ )] = r (w ′ ), p(f (w ′ )) ∈ SP ↑2 . As the reader can verify (see discussion in Example 5.10), clause 2 does not yield any further element, and the same holds for clause 3, therefore (changing w ′ into y for convenience) SP ↑2 = {{p(x ), q(x )}, {r (y), p(f (y))}}. Now, we can apply clause 3 to the elements in SP ↑2 . According to Example 5.10, we have that I ΣP q(u ′ ) & r (v ′ ) ◮ p(x ′′′ ) ◮ [u ′ 7→ f (y ′ ), v ′ 7→ y ′ , x ′′′ 7→ f (y ′ )]· Therefore we get that (p(x ′′′ ))[u ′ 7→ f (y ′ ), v ′ 7→ y ′ , x ′′′ 7→ f (y ′ )] = p(f (y ′ )) ∈ SP ↑3 . Clause 2 cannot be applied yet, for the same reasons as above. Also, note that the element r (y), p(f (y)) is now subsumed by p(f (y ′ )). Therefore we can assume SP ↑3 = {{p(x ), q(x )}, {p(f (y ′ ))}}. Finally, we can apply clause 2 to SP ↑3 , using the ∀-rule for the ΣP judgment. Take c 6∈ ΣP , and consider a renaming of the last element in SP ↑3 , p(f (y ′′ )). Consider (a renaming of) clause 2, s(z ′ ) ◦− ∀x· p(f (x )). We have that I ΣP ,c p(f (c)) ◮ ǫ ◮ nil , with nil being the empty substitution. Therefore we get that I ΣP ∀x· p(f (x )) ◮ ǫ ◮ nil , from which s(z ′ ) ∈ SP ↑4 . The reader can verify that no further clauses can be applied and that SP ↑4 is indeed the fixpoint of SP , therefore we have that SP ↑4 = SP ↑ω = {{p(x ), q(x )}, {p(f (y ′ ))}, {s(z ′ )}}. Note that F (P ) is defined to be [[lfp(SP )]]ΣP , therefore it includes, e.g., the elements s(a) (see Example 3.8), p(f (f (y ′′ ))) and p(f (f (y ′′ ))), q(x ′′ ).  6 Ensuring Termination In general the symbolic fixpoint semantics of first order LO programs is not computable (see also the results in (Cervesato et al. 1999)). In fact, the use of first order terms can easily lead to LO programs that encode operations over natural numbers. In this section, however, we will isolate a fragment of LO∀ for which termination of the bottom-up evaluation algorithm presented in Section 5 is guaranteed. An application of these results will be presented in Section 7. First of all, we will introduce  34  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  some preliminary notions that we will use later on to prove the decidability of our fragment. 6.1 The Theory of Well Quasi-Orderings In the following we summarize some basic definitions and results on the theory of well quasi-orderings (Higman 1952; Milner 1985; Abdulla et al. 1996). A quasiorder ⊑ on a set A is a binary relation over A which is reflexive and transitive. In the following it will be denoted (A, ⊑). Definition 6.1 (Well Quasi-Ordering) A quasi-order (A, ⊑) is a well quasi-ordering (wqo) if for each infinite sequence a0 a1 a2 . . . of elements in A there exist indices i < j such that aj ⊑ ai .1 We have the following results, according to which a hierarchy of well quasi-orderings can be built starting from known ones. In the following b r will denote the set {1, . . . , r }, r being a natural number, and |w | the length of a string w . Proposition 7 (From (Higman 1952)) i . If A is a finite set, then (A, =) is a wqo; ii . let (A, ⊑) be a wqo, and let As denote the set of finite multisets over A. Then, (As , ⊑s ) is a wqo, where ⊑s is the quasi-order on As defined as follows: given S = {a1 , . . . , an } and S ′ = {b1 , . . . , br }, S ′ ⊑s S if and only if there exists an injection h : n b→b r such that bh(j ) ⊑ aj for 1 ≤ j ≤ n; iii . let (A, ⊑) be a wqo, and let A∗ denote the set of finite strings over A. Then, (A∗ , ⊑∗ ) is a wqo, where ⊑∗ is the quasi-order on A∗ defined in the following way: w ′ ⊑∗ w if and only if there exists a strictly monotone (meaning that c| → |w d′ | such that j1 < j2 if and only if h(j1 ) < h(j2 )) injection h : |w ′ w (h(j )) ⊑ w (j ) for 1 ≤ j ≤ |w |. We are ready now to study the class of monadic LO∀ specifications. 6.2 Monadic LO∀ Specifications The class of specifications we are interested in consists of monadic predicates without function symbols. Intuitively, in this class we can represent process that carry along a single information taken from a possibly infinite domain (universal quantification introduces fresh names during a derivation). Definition 6.2 (Monadic LO∀ Specifications) The class of monadic LO∀ specifications consists of LO∀ programs built over a signature Σ including a finite set of constant symbols L, no function symbols, and a finite set of predicate symbols P with arity at most one.  1  Note that our ⊑ operator corresponds to the ⊒ operator of (Abdulla and Jonsson 2001). Here we adhere to the classical logic programming convention.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  35  Definition 6.3 (Monadic Multisets and Interpretations) The class of monadic multisets consists of multisets of (non ground) atomic formulas over a signature Σ including a finite set of constant symbols L, no function symbols, and a finite set of predicate symbols P with arity at most one. An interpretation consisting of monadic multisets is called a monadic interpretation. Example 6.4 Let Σ be a signature including a constant symbols a, no function symbols, and predicate symbols p, q and r (with arity one), and s (with arity zero). Let V be a denumerable set of variables, and x , y, . . . ∈ V. Then the clause r (x )  &  &  q(x )  s ◦− (p(x )  &  &  p(x )  p(a)) & ∀v· r (v )  is a monadic LO∀ specification, and the multiset {p(x ), q(y), q(x ), s} is a monadic multiset.  We have the following result. Proposition 8 The class of monadic multisets is closed under applications of SP , i.e., for every interpretation I , if I is monadic then SP (I ) is monadic. Proof Immediate by Definition 5.11 and Definition 5.9. Following Proposition 4, we define the entailment relation between multisets of (non ground) atomic formulas, denoted ⊑m , as follows. For the sake of simplicity, in the rest of this section we will apply the following convention. Consider a monadic multiset. First of all, we can eliminate constant symbols by performing the following transformation (note that there are no other ground terms other than constants in this class). For every atom p(a), where p is a predicate symbol with arity one and a is a constant symbol in Σ, we introduce a new predicate symbol with arity zero, let it be pa , and we transform the original multiset by substituting pa in place of p(a). The resulting set of predicate symbols is still finite (note that the set of constant and predicate symbols of the program is finite). It is easy to see that entailment between multisets transformed in the above way is a sufficient condition for entailment of the original multisets (note that the condition is not necessary, e.g., I cannot recognize that p(a) entails p(x )). Without loss of generality, we assume hereafter to deal with a set of predicate symbols with arity one (if it is not the case, we can complete predicate with arity less than one with dummy variables) and without constant symbols (otherwise, we operate the transformation previously described). Definition 6.5 Given two multisets A and B, A ⊑m B if and only if there exist a substitution θ and a multiset C such that A = Bθ + C. Then, we have the following property.  36  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Proposition 9 If A ⊑m B then [[A]] ⊆ [[B]]. Proof It follows from Definition 5.6 and Proposition 4. Let M be a monadic multiset with variables x1 , . . . , xk . We define Mi as the multiset of predicate symbols having xi as argument in M, and S (M) as the multiset {M1 , . . . , Mk }. For instance, given the monadic multiset M defined as {p(x1 ), q(x1 ), p(x1 ), q(x2 ), r (x2 ), q(x3 ), r (x3 )}, S (M) is the multiset consisting of the elements M1 = ppq, M2 = qr , and M3 = qr , i.e., S (M) = {ppq, qr , qr } (where ppq denotes the multiset with two occurrences of p and one of q, and so on). Given two multisets of multisets of predicate symbols S = {M1 , M2 , . . . Mk } and T = {N1 , N2 , . . . , Nr }, let S ⊑s T if and only if there exists an injective mapping h from {1, . . . , r } to {1, . . . , k } such that Ni 4 Mh(i) for i : 1, . . . , r . As an example, {ppp, tt , qq, rrr } ⊑s {pp, q, rr } by mapping: pp into ppp (pp 4 ppp), q into qq (q 4 qq), and rr into rrr (rr 4 rrr ). On the contrary, {ppp, rr , t , qq} 6⊑s {pq, q, rr }, in fact there is no multiset in the set on the left hand side of the previous relation of which pq is a sub-multiset. The following property relates the quasi order ⊑s and the entailment relation ⊑m . Lemma 7 Let M and N be two monadic multisets. Then S (M) ⊑s S (N ) implies M ⊑m N . Proof Let S (M) = {M1 , M2 , . . . Mk } and S (N ) = {N1 , N2 , . . . , Nr }. Furthermore, let h be the injective mapping from {1, . . . , r } to {1, . . . , k } such that Ni 4 Mh(i) . By construction of M and N , it is easy to see that for every i ∈ {1, . . . , r } we can isolate atomic formulas Ai1 , . . . , Aiz in N (corresponding to the cluster of variables Ni ), where z is the cardinality of Ni , and atomic formulas Bi1 , . . . , Biz in M (corresponding to the cluster of variables Mh(i) ), such that the conditions required by Definition 6.5 are satisfied. As an immediate consequence of this lemma, we obtain the following property. Proposition 10 The entailment relation ⊑m between monadic multisets is a well-quasi-ordering. Proof The conclusion follows from the observations below (in the following we denote by < the converse of the sub-multiset relation, i.e., A < B if and only if B 4 A): - the < relation is a well quasi-ordering by Dickson’s Lemma (which is a consequence of Proposition 7, see also (Dickson 1913)). Intuitively, multiset inclusion is equivalent to the component-wise ordering of tuples of integers denoting the occurrences of the finite set of predicate symbols in a multiset;  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  37  - since ⊑s is built over elements ordered with respect to the well quasi-ordering <, ⊑s is in turn a well quasi-ordering by item ii of Proposition 7; - as a consequence of Lemma 7, ⊑s being a well quasi-ordering implies that ⊑m is a well quasi-ordering.  We can now formulate the following proposition, which states that the bottomup fixpoint semantics is computable in finite time for monadic LO∀ specifications. This results relies on the following facts: in the case of monadic specifications, each interpretation computed via bottom-up evaluation consists of monadic multisets, and the entailment relation between monadic multisets is a well quasi-ordering (therefore eventually the fixpoint computation stabilizes). Proposition 11 Let P be a monadic LO∀ specification. Then there exists k ∈ N such that Fsym (P ) F = ki=0 SP ↑k (∅). Proof We first note that the denotation of a monadic interpretation I is defined in terms of the denotation of its elements (monadic multisets). Thus, a monadic interpretation I represents an upward closed set w.r.t. to the ordering ⊑m . Furthermore, the sequence of interpretations computed during a fixpoint computation forms an increasing sequence with respect to their denotation. The result follows then from Propositions 8, 9, 10, and known results on well quasi-orderings which guarantee that any infinite increasing sequence of upward-closed sets eventually stabilizes (see (Finkel and Schnoebelen 2001)). 7 An Example In this section we show how the bottom-up semantics of Section 5 can be applied for verifying the test-and-lock protocol given in Section 3.2. In order to run the experiments described hereafter, we have built a prototypical verification tool implementing the bottom-up fixpoint procedure (backward reachability algorithm) described in Section 5. Following the guidelines and programming style described in (Elliott and Pfenning 1991), we have implemented an interpreter for the relevant first order fragment of LO, enriched with the bottom-up evaluation procedure described in Section 5. The verification tool has been implemented in Standard ML. Let us consider again the test-and-lock protocol given in Section 3.2. Using our verification tool, we can now automatically verify the mutual exclusion property for the protocol. The specification of unsafe states is simply as follows: &  8. use(x )  use(x ) ◦− ⊤  Note that the test-and-lock specification can be transformed into a monadic one. In fact, the second argument can be embedded into the predicate m so as to define the two predicates munlocked and mlocked . In some sense, the specification is implicitly  38  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli ⊤r P ⊢Σ init, ⊤, m(a, locked ), m(a, locked ) P ⊢Σ init, use(a), use(a), m(a, locked ), m(a, locked )  bc (8) ∗  bc (6  P ⊢Σ init, wait(a), wait(a), m(a, unlocked ), m(a, unlocked )  )  ∗)  bc (4  P ⊢Σ init, think , think , m(a, unlocked ), m(a, unlocked )  ∗)  P ⊢Σ init, think , think P ⊢Σ init  bc (2 ∗  bc (1  )  Fig. 6. Incorrect test-and-lock protocol: a trace violating mutual exclusion {init} {use(x ), use(x )} {m(x , unlocked ), use(x ), wait(y)} {m(x , unlocked ), use(x ), use(y), m(y, locked )} {m(x , locked ), use(x ), m(y, unlocked ), m(y, unlocked ), think } {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), wait(y), think } {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), use(y), m(y, locked ), use(z ), m(z , locked )} {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), use(y), m(y, locked ), wait(z )} {wait(x ), m(y, unlocked ), m(y, unlocked ), wait(z )} {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), think , think } {use(x ), m(x , unlocked ), think }  Fig. 7. Fixpoint computed for the incorrect test-and-lock protocol monadic since the second argument is defined over a finite set of states. Therefore termination of the fixpoint computation is guaranteed by Proposition 11. Running the verification algorithm, we actually find a mutual exclusion violation. The cor∗ responding trace is shown in Figure 6, where bc (i ) denotes multiple applications of clause number i. The problem of the above specification lies in clause 2: &  2. init ◦− init  m(x , unlocked )  In fact, using an (externally quantified) variable x does not prevent the creation of multiple monitors for the same resource. This causes a violation of mutual exclusion when different processes are allowed to concurrently access a given resource by different monitors. Figure 7 (where, for readability, we re-use the same variables in different multisets) also shows the fixpoint computed for the incorrect version of the protocol: note that the singleton multiset containing the atom init is in the fixpoint (this amounts to saying that there exists a state violating mutual exclusion which is reachable from the initial configuration of the protocol). Luckily, we can fix the above problem in a very simple way. As we do not care about what resource identifiers actually are, we can elegantly encode them using universal quantification in the body of clause 2, as follows: &  2′ . init ◦− init  ∀x· m(x , unlocked )  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  39  .. .. P ⊢Σ,c,d use(c), wait(d ), think , m(c, locked ), m(d , unlocked ) P ⊢Σ,c,d wait(c), wait(d ), think , m(c, unlocked ), m(d , unlocked ) P ⊢Σ,c,d wait(c), wait(d ), use(c), m(c, locked ), m(d , unlocked )  bc (6) bc (7) bc (6)  P ⊢Σ,c,d wait(c), wait(d ), wait(c), m(c, unlocked ), m(d , unlocked )  bc (4)  P ⊢Σ,c,d think , wait(d ), wait(c), m(c, unlocked ), m(d , unlocked ) P ⊢Σ,c,d think , think , wait(c), m(c, unlocked ), m(d , unlocked ) P ⊢Σ,c,d think , think , think , m(c, unlocked ), m(d , unlocked ) P ⊢Σ,c,d init, think , think , think , m(c, unlocked ), m(d , unlocked )  bc (4) bc (4) bc (3) ′∗  P ⊢Σ init, think , think , think P ⊢Σ init  bc (2 ∗  bc (1  )  )  Fig. 8. A correct version of the test-and-lock protocol: example trace {use(x ), use(x )} {m(x , unlocked ), use(x ), init} {m(x , unlocked ), use(x ), wait(y)} {m(x , unlocked ), use(x ), use(y), m(y, locked )} {m(x , locked ), use(x ), m(y, unlocked ), m(y, unlocked ), think } {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), wait(y), think } {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), use(y), m(y, locked ), use(z ), m(z , locked )} {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), use(y), m(y, locked ), wait(z )} {wait(x ), m(y, unlocked ), m(y, unlocked ), wait(z )} {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), init} {m(x , unlocked ), m(x , unlocked ), think , think } {use(x ), m(x , unlocked ), think }  Fig. 9. Fixpoint computed for the correct test-and-lock protocol Every time a resource is created, a new constant, acting as the corresponding identifier, is created as well. Note that by the operational semantics of universal quantification, different resources are assigned different identifiers. This clearly prevents the creation of multiple monitors for the same resource. An example trace for the modified specification is shown in Figure 8 (where P is the program consisting of clauses 1, 2’, 3 through 8 (see Section 3.2)). Now, running again our verification tool on the corrected specification (termination is still guaranteed by Proposition 11), with the same set of unsafe states, we get the fixpoint shown in Figure 9. The fixpoint contains 12 elements and is reached in 7 steps. As the fixpoint does not contain init , mutual exclusion is verified, for any number of processes and any number of resources. We conclude by showing how it is possible to optimize the fixpoint computation.  40  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli {use(x ) , use(x )} {m(x , y) , m(x , z )} {m(x , unlocked ) , use(x ) {m(x , unlocked ) , use(x ) {m(x , unlocked ) , use(x ) {use(x ) , m(x , unlocked )  , use(y) , m(y, z )} , wait(y)} , init} , think }  Fig. 10. Fixpoint computed using invariant strengthening for the test-and-lock protocol Specifically, we show that it is possible to use the so called invariant strengthening technique in order to reduce the dimension of the sets computed during the fixpoint evaluation. Invariant strengthening consists of enlarging the theory under consideration with new clauses (e.g., additional clauses representing further unsafe states). We remark that this technique is perfectly sound, in the sense that if no property violations are found in the extended theory, then no violations can be found in the original one (i.e., proofs in the original theory are still proofs in the extended one). One possibility might be to apply the so-called counting abstraction, i.e., turn the above LO∀ specification into a propositional program (i.e., a Petri net) by abstracting first order atoms into propositional symbols (e.g., wait (x ) into wait , and so on), and compute the structural invariants of the corresponding Petri net. However, this strategy is not helpful in this case (no meaningful invariant is found). We can still try some invariants using some ingenuity. For instance, consider the following invariant: &  9 · m(x , y)  m(x , z ) ◦− ⊤  For what we said previously (different resources are assigned different identifiers) this invariant must hold for our specification. Running the verification tool on this extended specification we get the fixpoint in Figure 10, containing only 6 elements and converging in 4 steps. A further optimization could be obtained by adding the invariant use(x ) m(x , unlocked ) ◦− ⊤ (intuitively, if someone is using a given resource, the corresponding semaphore cannot be unlocked). In this case the computation converges immediately at the first step. &  8 Reachability and Extensions of LO In this paper we have focused our attention on the relationship between provability in LO and coverability for the configuration of a concurrent system. Following (Bozzano et al. 2002), in order to characterize reachability problems between two “configurations” (goal formulas) we need an extra feature of linear logic, namely the logical constant 1. Differently from clauses with ⊤, clauses of the form A1 . . . An ◦− 1 make a derivation succeed if and only if the right-hand side of the current sequent matches an instance of A1 . . . An , i.e., all resources must be used in the corresponding derivation. Going back to the notation used in Section 3.1, let P be a set of LO rewrite rules over Σ and V, and M, M′ two multisets of ground atomic formulas (two config&  &  &  &  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  P , D ⊢Σ,c 1  41  1r  P , D ⊢Σ,c p(f (a)), p(f (b)), q(b), q(c) P , D ⊢Σ p(f (a)), p(b), q(f (b))  bc (D) bc (1)  Fig. 11. Reachability as provability in LO∀ &  urations). Furthermore, let H , G the (possibly empty) -disjunctions of ground b = M′ and G b = M. Then, the provability of the seatomic formulas such that H quent P , H ◦− 1 ⊢1 G precisely characterizes the reachability of configuration M′ from the initial configuration M via a sequence of multiset rewriting steps defined over the theory P (see (Bozzano et al. 2002)). Again, this is a straightforward consequence of the properties of clauses like H ◦− 1 and of the fact that, when working with LO rewrite rules, derivations have no branching. Example 8.1 Let us go back to Example 3.10 of Section 3.1 (compare the definitions of the formulas F1 and F2 given there). Let F1′ be the formula q(b)  &  &  p(f (f (b)))  q(b)  &  &  p(a)  q(f (f (b))) ◦− 1  and F2′ be the formula &  p(a)  q(b) ◦− 1  &  &  and G = p(a) p(b) q(f (b)). If we enrich P with F1′ , instead of F1 , then we can transform the partial derivation of Figure 3 into an LO proof as shown below (where δ stands for the derivation fragment of Figure 3): P ⊢Σ 1 δ  1r bc  The resulting LO proof also shows that from the multiset {p(a), p(b), q(f (b))} we can reach the multiset {p(a), p(f (f (b))), q(b), q(b), q(f (f (b)))} after a finite number of rewriting steps defined in accordance with P . Note that on the contrary (compare with Example 3.10), if we enrich P with F2′ , it is not possible to turn the partial derivation of Figure 3 into an LO proof. In fact, every rewriting step will give us larger and larger multisets and the formula F2′ never becomes applicable.  Particular attention must be paid to the constants introduced in a derivation. They cannot be extruded from the scope of the corresponding universal quantifier. For this reason, the formulas representing target configurations must be generalized by introducing universally quantified variables in place of constants introduced in a derivation. For the sake of brevity, we will illustrate the connection between provability and reachability in the extended setting through the following example.  42  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli Infinite State Concurrent Systems  Linear Logic Specification  transition system transition current state initial state single final state upward-closed set of states reachability Pre operator Pre ∗ operator  LO program and proof system rule instance goal formula initial goal axiom with 1 axiom with ⊤ provability TP operator lfp(TP )  Fig. 12. Reachability versus provability Example 8.2 Let Σ be the signature of Example 3.10. Let P consists of the clause q(y)  q(w ))  &  &  q(f (y)) ◦− ∀w . (p(f (x ))  &  &  &  1. p(x )  &  Now, let D be the clause ∀x . p(f (a)) p(f (b)) q(b) q(x ) ◦− 1, and let G be the goal p(f (a)) p(b) q(f (b)). The universal quantifier is used here to generalize the representation of the target configuration. In fact, new constants will be introduced and associated to the predicate q in the derivation of the goal G. As an example, a possible derivation is shown in Figure 11 (where we have omitted applications of the r rule for simplicity). The last backchaining step in Figure 11 is possible because of the universal quantifier used in D . It would not be possible to define D as p(f (a)) p(f (b)) q(b) q(c) ◦− 1. In fact, the resulting initial sequent would violate the side condition of the ∀r proof rule that requires the freshness of the new constants introduced in a proof.  &  &  &  &  &  &  The extension of the fixpoint semantics presented in this paper to more general linear logic languages (e.g., languages that include 1) is a possible future direction for our research. 9 Conclusions In this paper we have investigated the connections between techniques used for symbolic model checking of infinite-state systems (Abdulla et al. 1996; Finkel and Schnoebelen 2001) and provability in fragments of linear logic (Andreoli and Pareschi 1990). The relationship between the two fields is illustrated in Figure 12. From our point of view, linear logic can be used as a unifying framework for reasoning about concurrent systems (e.g., Petri Nets, multiset rewriting, and so on). In (Bozzano et al. 2002), we have applied algorithms previously developed for Petri Nets in order to derive bottom-up evaluation strategies for proposition linear logic. Conversely, in the current paper we have shown that the use of linear logic and the related bottom-up evaluation strategies can have interesting application for the automated verification of infinite-state systems in which processes are described via colored formulas. Several applications of the ideas presented in this paper can be found in (Bozzano 2002), and (Bozzano and Delzanno 2002).  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  43  Apart from verification purposes, the new fixpoint semantics can also be useful to study new applications of linear logic programming (e.g., for active databases as discussed in (Harland and Winikoff 1998)). For this purpose, it might be interesting to extend the bottom-up evaluation framework to richer linear logic languages. Possible directions of research include languages with a richer set of connectives (e.g., Linlog (Andreoli 1992)), or languages with more powerful type theories (e.g., LLF (Cervesato and Pfenning 2002)).  Acknowledgments We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers of the paper for their helpful comments.  Appendix A Some Notations Multisets A multiset with elements in D is a function M : D → N. If d ∈ D and M is a multiset on D , we say that d ∈ M if and only if M(d ) > 0. For convenience, we often use the notation for sets (allowing duplicated elements) to indicate multisets, when no ambiguity arises from the context. For instance, {a, a, b}, where a, b ∈ D , denotes the multiset M such that M(a) = 2, M(b) = 1, and M(d ) = 0 for all d ∈ D \ {a, b}. Sometimes we simply write a, a, b for {a, a, b}. Finally, given a set D , MS(D ) denotes the set of multisets with elements in D . We define the following operations on multisets. Let D be a set, M1 , M2 ∈ MS(D), and n ∈ N, then: ǫ is defined s.t. ǫ(d ) = 0 for all d ∈ D (empty multiset); (M1 + M2 )(d ) = M1 (d ) + M2 (d ) for all d ∈ D (union); (M1 \M2 )(d ) = max {0, M1(d ) − M2 (d )} for all d ∈ D (difference); (M1 ∩ M2 )(d ) = min{M1 (d ), M2 (d )} for all d ∈ D (intersection); (n ·M)(d ) = nM(d ) for all d ∈ D (scalar product); M1 6= M2 if and only if there exists d ∈ D s.t. M1 (d ) 6= M2 (d ) (comparison); M1 4 M2 if and only if M1 (d ) ≤ M2 (d ) for all d ∈ D (inclusion); (M1 •M2 )(d ) = max {M1 (d ), M2 (d )} for all d ∈ D (merge); |M1 | = Σd∈D M1 (d ) (cardinality). We use the notation of a P formal sum i ∈ I Mi to denote the union of a family of multisets Mi , with i ∈ I , I being a finite set. It turns out that (MS(D ), 4) has the structure of a lattice (the lattice is complete provided a greatest element is added). In particular, merge and intersection are, respectively, the least upper bound and the greatest lower bound operators with respect to the multiset inclusion operator 4. Signatures Given a set of formulas P , we denote by ΣP the signature comprising the set of constant, function, and predicate symbols in P . We assume to have an infinite set V of variable symbols, usually noted x , y, z , etc. In order to deal with signature augmentation (due to the presence of universal quantification over goals) we also need an infinite set E of new constants (called eigenvariables). We denote by SigP the set of signatures which comprise at least the symbols in ΣP (and possibly some eigenvariables). TΣV denotes the set of non ground terms over Σ, i.e., the set of terms built over  44  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Σ ∪ V where V is a denumerable set of variables. (A non ground term may have free variables; a ground term is also non ground). AV Σ denotes the set of non ground atoms over Σ, i.e., atomic formulas built over non ground terms over Σ. Multisets of atoms over AV Σ are also called facts throughout the paper, and usually noted A, B, C, . . .. Substitutions and Multiset Unifiers We inherit the usual concept of substitution (mapping from variables to terms) from traditional logic programming. We always consider a denumerable set of variables V, and substitutions are usually noted θ, σ, τ , . . . We use the notation [x 7→ t , . . .], where x is a variable and t is a term, to denote substitution bindings, with nil denoting the empty substitution. The application of a substitution θ to F , where F is a generic expression (e.g., a formula, a term, . . . ) is denoted by F θ. A substitution θ is said to be grounding for F if F θ is ground, in this case F θ is called a ground instance of F . Composition of two substitutions θ and σ is denoted θ ◦ σ, e.g., F (θ ◦ σ) stands for (F θ)σ. We indicate the domain of a substitution θ by Dom(θ), and we say “θ defined on a signature Σ” meaning that θ can only map variables in Dom(θ) to terms in TΣV . Substitutions are ordered with respect to the ordering ≤ defined in this way: θ ≤ τ if and only if there exists a substitution σ s.t. τ = θ ◦ σ. If θ ≤ τ , θ is said to be more general than τ ; if θ ≤ τ and τ ≤ θ, θ and τ are said to be equivalent. Finally, F V (F ), for an expression F , denotes the set of free variables of F , and θ|W , where W ⊆ V, denotes the restriction of θ to Dom(θ) ∩ W . We need the notion of most general unifier (mgu). The definition of most general unifier is somewhat delicate. In particular, different classes of substitutions (e.g., idempotent substitutions) have been considered for defining most general unifiers. We refer the reader to (Eder 1985; Lassez et al. 1988; Palamidessi 1990) for a discussion. Most general unifiers form a complete lattice with respect to the ordering ≤, provided a greatest element is added. For our purposes, we do not choose a particular class of most general unifiers, we only require the operation of least upper bound of two substitutions w.r.t ≤ to be defined and effective. The least upper bound of θ1 and θ2 is indicated θ1 ↑ θ2 . We refer the reader to (Palamidessi 1990) for the definition of the least upper bound. The only property which we use in this paper is that θ1 ≤ (θ1 ↑ θ2 ) and θ2 ≤ (θ1 ↑ θ2 ), for any substitutions θ1 and θ2 . We assume ↑ to be commutative and associative. We need to lift the definition of most general unifier from expressions to multisets of expressions. Namely, given two multisets A = {a1 , . . . , an } and B = {b1 , . . . , bn } (note that |A| = |B|), we define a most general unifier of A and B, written mgu(A, B), to be the most general unifier (defined in the usual way) of the two vectors of expressions ha1 , . . . , an i and hbi1 , . . . , bin i, where {i1 , . . . , in } is a permutation of {1, . . . , n}. Depending on the choice of the permutation, in general there is more than one way to unify two given multisets (the resulting class of mgu in general will include unifiers which are not equivalent). We use the notation θ = mgu(A, B) to denote any unifier which is non deterministically picked from the set of most general unifiers of A and B.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  45  Appendix B Proofs of Some Lemmas Proof of Lemma 1 If part. By induction on the derivation of I |=Σ ∆, C ◮ ǫ. - If ∆ = ⊤, ∆′ , obvious; - if ∆ = A and A + C ∈ IΣ , then also I |=Σ A ◮ C holds; - if ∆ = ∀x· G, ∆′ and I |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ , C ◮ ǫ, with c 6∈ Σ, then by the inductive hypothesis I |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ C, which implies I |=Σ ∀x· G, ∆′ ◮ C; - if ∆ = G1 & G2 , ∆′ , I |=Σ G1 , ∆′ , C ◮ ǫ and I |=Σ G2 , ∆′ , C ◮ ǫ, by the inductive hypothesis I |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ C and I |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ C, which implies I |=Σ G1 & G2 , ∆′ ◮ C; - if ∆ = G1 G2 , ∆′ or ∆ = ⊥, ∆′ , the conclusion follows by a straightforward application of the inductive hypothesis. &  Only if part. By induction on the derivation of I |=Σ ∆ ◮ C. - If ∆ = ⊤, ∆′ , obvious; - if ∆ = A and A + C ∈ IΣ , then also I |=Σ A, C ◮ ǫ holds; - if ∆ = ∀x· G, ∆′ and I |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ C, with c 6∈ Σ, then by the inductive hypothesis I |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ , C ◮ ǫ, which implies I |=Σ ∀x· G, ∆′ , C ◮ ǫ; - if ∆ = G1 & G2 , ∆′ , I |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ C and I |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ C, by the inductive hypothesis I |=Σ G1 , ∆′ , C ◮ ǫ and I |=Σ G2 , ∆′ , C ◮ ǫ, which implies I |=Σ G1 & G2 , ∆′ , C ◮ ǫ; - if ∆ = G1 G2 , ∆′ or ∆ = ⊥, ∆′ , the conclusion follows by a straightforward application of the inductive hypothesis. &  Proof of Lemma 2 i . By induction on the derivation of I1 |=Σ ∆ ◮ C. - If ∆ = ⊤, ∆′ , obvious; - if ∆ = A and A + C ∈ (I1 )Σ , then A + C ∈ (I2 )Σ , because I1 ⊆ I2 , therefore I2 |=Σ A ◮ C; - if ∆ = ∀x· G, ∆′ and I1 |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ C, with c 6∈ Σ, then by the inductive hypothesis I2 |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ C, which implies I2 |=Σ ∀x· G, ∆′ ◮ C; - if ∆ = G1 & G2 , ∆′ , I1 |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ C and I1 |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ C, by the inductive hypothesis I2 |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ C and I2 |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ C, which implies I2 |=Σ G1 & G2 , ∆′ ◮ C; - if ∆ = G1 G2 , ∆′ or ∆ = ⊥, ∆′ , the conclusion follows by a straightforward application of the inductive hypothesis. S∞ ii . By induction on the derivation of i=1 Ii |=Σ ∆ ◮ C. &  - If ∆ = ⊤, ∆′ , then for every k ∈ N, Ik |=Σ ∆ ◮ C; S∞ - if ∆ = A and A + C ∈ ( i=1 Ii )Σ , there exists k ∈ N s.t. A + C ∈ (Ik )Σ , i.e., Ik |=Σ A ◮ C;  46  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli S∞ - if ∆ = ∀x· G, ∆′ and i=1 Ii |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ C, with c 6∈ Σ, then by the inductive hypothesis there exists k ∈ N s.t. Ik |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ C, therefore Ik |=Σ ∀x· G, ∆′ ◮ C; S∞ S∞ - if ∆ = G1 & G2 , ∆′ , i=1 Ii |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ C and i=1 Ii |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ C, by the inductive hypothesis there exist k1 , k2 ∈ N s.t. Ik1 |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ C and Ik2 |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ C. By taking k = max {k1 , k2 }, by i we get Ik |=Σ G1 , ∆′ ◮ C and Ik |=Σ G2 , ∆′ ◮ C, which implies Ik |=Σ G1 & G2 , ∆′ ◮ C; - if ∆ = G1 G2 , ∆′ or ∆ = ⊥, ∆′ , the conclusion follows by a straightforward application of the inductive hypothesis. &  Proof of Lemma 4 i . By induction on the derivation of I  Σ  ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ.  - If ∆ = ⊤, ∆′ , obvious; - assume ∆ = A, with B ∈ I (variant), B ′ 4 B, A′ 4 A, C = B \B ′ , and θ = mgu(B ′ , A′ )|F V (A,C) . We want to prove that [[I ]] |=Σ Aθθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ for every substitution θ′ and fact C ′ < Cθ, i.e., Aθθ′ + Cθθ′ + Dθ′ ∈ [[I ]]Σ for every substitution θ′ and fact D. Now, Aθθ′ + Cθθ′ + Dθ′ = (Aθ + Cθ + D)θ′ = (A′ θ + (A\A′ )θ + (B\B ′ )θ + D)θ′ = (remember that B ′ 4 B) (A′ θ + (A\A′ )θ + (Bθ\B ′θ) + D)θ′ = Bθθ′ + ((A\A′ )θθ′ + Dθ′ ) ∈ [[I ]]Σ ; - if ∆ = ∀x· G, ∆′ and I Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ C ◮ θ, with c 6∈ Σ, then by the inductive hypothesis we have that [[I ]] |=Σ,c G[c/x ]θθ′ , ∆′ θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ for every substitution θ′ and fact C ′ < Cθ (where θ′ and C ′ are defined over Σ, c). Assuming that the variable x is not in the domain of θθ′ (it is always possible to rename the universally quantified variable x in ∀x· G), we have that [[I ]] |=Σ,c Gθθ′ [c/x ], ∆′ θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ , and, by definition of the judgment, we get [[I ]] |=Σ ∀x· (Gθθ′ ), ∆′ θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ , i.e., [[I ]] |=Σ (∀x· G, ∆′ )θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ , for every substitution θ′ and fact C ′ defined over Σ, c (and therefore also for every substitution θ′ and fact C ′ defined over Σ), with C ′ < Cθ; - assume ∆ = G1 & G2 , ∆′ and I Σ G1 & G2 , ∆′ ◮ C ◮ θ. We need to prove that [[I ]] |=Σ (G1 & G2 , ∆′ )θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ for every substitution θ′ and fact C ′ < Cθ, i.e., that [[I ]] |=Σ (G1 & G2 , ∆′ )θθ′ ◮ Cθθ′ + F θ′ for every substitution θ′ and fact F . By definition of Σ , we have that there exist facts C1′ 4 C1 , C2′ 4 C2 with |C1′ | = |C2′ |, and substitutions θ1 , θ2 , θ3 s.t. θ3 = mgu(C1′ , C2′ ), I  Σ  C = C1 + (C2 \C2′ ),  G1 , ∆′ ◮ C1 ◮ θ1 and I  θ = (θ1 ↑ θ2 ↑ θ3 )|F V (∆,C) , Σ  G2 , ∆′ ◮ C2 ◮ θ2 ·  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  47  By the inductive hypothesis, we have that [[I ]] |=Σ (G1 , ∆′ )θ1 θ1′ ◮ C1 θ1 θ1′ + D1 θ1′ and [[I ]] |=Σ (G2 , ∆′ )θ2 θ2′ ◮ C2 θ2 θ2′ + D2 θ2′ for every substitutions θ1′ , θ2′ and facts D1 , D2 . By choosing D1 = (C2 \C2′ )θ1 + F1 and D2 = (C1 \C1′ )θ2 + F2 , we have, for every substitutions θ1′ , θ2′ and facts F1 , F2 , [[I ]] |=Σ (G1 , ∆′ )θ1 θ1′ ◮ (C1 + (C2 \C2′ ))θ1 θ1′ + F1 θ1′ , [[I ]] |=Σ (G2 , ∆′ )θ2 θ2′ ◮ (C2 + (C1 \C1′ ))θ2 θ2′ + F2 θ2′ · By definition of θ, we have that there exist substitutions γ1 , γ2 , γ3 and τ s.t. τ = θ1 ◦ γ1 , τ = θ2 ◦ γ2 , τ = θ3 ◦ γ3 , and θ = τ|F V (∆,C) · Now, let F1 be a variant of F θ′ with new variables, and define the substitution θ1′ s.t. Dom(θ1′ ) = Dom(γ1 ◦ θ′ ) ∪ F V (F1 ) (clearly these two ′ ′ ′ ′ latter sets are disjoint), θ1|Dom(γ ′ = γ1 ◦ θ and F1 θ1 = F θ . Do the 1 ◦θ ) ′ same for F2 , i.e., let it be another variant of F θ with new variables, and define θ2′ in the same way, so that Dom(θ2′ ) = Dom(γ2 ◦ θ′ ) ∪ F V (F2 ), ′ ′ ′ ′ θ2|Dom(γ ′ = γ2 ◦ θ , and F2 θ2 = F θ . 2 ◦θ ) From the definition of τ it follows that (G1 , ∆′ )θ1 θ1′ = (G1 , ∆′ )θ1 γ1 θ′ = (G1 , ∆′ )θθ′ , and similarly (G2 , ∆′ )θ2 θ2′ = (G2 , ∆′ )θθ′ . Also, (C1 + (C2 \ C2′ ))θ1 θ1′ = Cθ1 θ1′ = Cθθ′ . We also have that (C2 + (C1\C1′ ))θ2 θ2′ = (C2 + (C1\C1′ ))θ2 γ2 θ′ = (C2 + (C1\ C1′ ))τ θ′ = (C2 +(C1\C1′ ))θ3 γ3 θ′ = (remember that C1′ 4 C1 ) (C2 θ3 +(C1 θ3\ C1′ θ3 ))γ3 θ′ = (remember that θ3 is a unifier of C1′ and C2′ ) (C2 θ3 + (C1 θ3\ C2′ θ3 ))γ3 θ′ = (note that C2′ θ3 = C1′ θ3 4 C1 θ3 ) ((C2 θ3 + C1 θ3 )\C2′ θ3 )γ3 θ′ = (note that C2′ 4 C2 ) (C1 θ3 + (C2 θ3 \C2′ θ3 ))γ3 θ′ = (C1 + (C2 \C2′ ))θ3 γ3 θ′ = Cθ3 γ3 θ′ = Cθθ′ . By putting everything together, the inductive hypotheses become [[I ]] |=Σ (G1 , ∆′ )θθ′ ◮ Cθθ′ + F θ′ and [[I ]] |=Σ (G2 , ∆′ )θθ′ ◮ Cθθ′ + F θ′ , from which the thesis follows by definition of |=Σ ; - if ∆ = G1 G2 , ∆′ and I Σ G1 , G2 , ∆′ ◮ C ◮ θ, then by the inductive hypothesis we have that [[I ]] |=Σ (G1 , G2 , ∆′ )θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ , for every substitution θ′ and fact C ′ < Cθ. Therefore, [[I ]] |=Σ G1 θθ′ , G2 θθ′ , ∆′ θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ , and, by definition of the judgment, we get [[I ]] |=Σ (G1 G2 , ∆)θθ′ ◮ C ′ θ′ ; - if ∆ = ⊥, ∆′ , the conclusion follows by a straightforward application of the inductive hypothesis. &  &  ii . By induction on the derivation of [[I ]] |=Σ ∆θ ◮ C. - If ∆ = ⊤, ∆′ , take C ′ = ǫ, θ′ = nil , and σ = θ;  48  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli - assume [[I ]] |=Σ Aθ ◮ C and Aθ + C ∈ [[I ]]Σ = U pΣ (InstΣ (I )). Then there exist B ∈ I , a fact D, and a substitution τ (defined on Σ) s.t. Aθ + C = Bτ + D. We can safely assume, thanks to the substitution τ , that B is a variant of an element in I . Also, we can assume that Dom(τ ) ⊆ F V (B) and Dom(θ) ∩ Dom(τ ) = ∅. Now, take the substitution γ s.t. Dom(γ) = (Dom(θ) ∩ F V (A)) ∪ Dom(τ ), γ|Dom(θ)∩F V (A) = θ|Dom(θ)∩F V (A) and γ|Dom(τ ) = τ · We have that Aγ + C = Bγ + D. Let A′ 4 A and B ′ 4 B be two maximal sub-multisets s.t. A′ γ = B ′ γ, ρ = mgu(A′ , B ′ ), and θ′ = ρ|F V (A)∪F V (B\B′ ) . By definition of the Σ judgment, we have that I Σ A ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ , where C ′ = B\B ′. As γ is a unifier for A′ ,B ′ , while ρ = mgu(A′ , B ′ ), we have that there exists a substitution σ s.t. γ = ρ ◦ σ. Therefore, θ|F V (A) = γ|F V (A) = (ρ ◦ σ)|F V (A) = (ρ|(F V (A)∪F V (B\B′ )) ◦ σ)|F V (A) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (A) , as required. Furthermore, since Aγ + C = Bγ + D and A′ 4 A, it follows that A′ γ + (A\A′ )γ + C = B ′ γ + (B\B ′)γ + D, i.e., (A\A′ )γ + C = (B\B ′ )γ + D. By this equality and maximality of A′ and B ′ , we get that necessarily (B\B ′ )γ 4 C (otherwise, (B\B ′ )γ and (A\A′ )γ would have elements in common). Therefore, C ′ θ′ σ = (B\B ′)θ′ σ = (B\B ′ )ρσ = (B\B ′)γ 4 C, as required; - if ∆ = ∀x· G, ∆′ and [[I ]] |=Σ,c (G[c/x ], ∆′ )θ ◮ C, with c 6∈ Σ, then by the inductive hypothesis there exist a fact C ′ , and substitutions θ′ and σ (defined over Σ, c) s.t. I  Σ,c  G[c/x ], ∆′ ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ ,  θ|F V (G[c/x ],∆′) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (G[c/x ],∆′) , and C ′ θ′ σ 4 C. By definition of the Σ judgment, we get that I  Σ  ∀x· G, ∆′ ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ ·  The conclusion follows (remember that we must ensure that C ′ , θ′ and σ are defined over Σ) by the following crucial observations: · Dom(θ′ ) ⊆ (F V (G[c/x ], ∆′ ) ∪ F V (C ′ )) by Lemma 3; · θ′ does not map variables in G[c/x ], ∆′ to the eigenvariable c. In fact we know that θ does not map variables in G[c/x ], ∆′ to c (by hypothesis) and we know that (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (G[c/x ],∆′) = θ|F V (G[c/x ],∆′) ; · θ′ does not map variables in C ′ to c and C ′ itself does not contain c. In fact we know that C does not contain c (by hypothesis) and also that C ′ θ′ σ 4 C; · we can safely assume that Dom(σ) does not contain variables mapped to c. Intuitively, these bindings are useless. Formally, we can restrict  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  49  the domain of σ to variables that are not mapped to c: with this restriction, the equalities θ|F V (G[c/x ],∆′) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (G[c/x ],∆′) and C ′ θ′ σ 4 C still hold. - assume ∆ = G1 & G2 , ∆′ and [[I ]] |=Σ (G1 & G2 ∆′ )θ ◮ C. We need to prove that there exist a fact C ′ and substitutions θ′ and σ s.t. I Σ G1 & G2 , ∆′ ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ , θ|F V (G1 ,G2 ,∆′ ) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (G1 ,G2 ,∆′ ) , C ′ θ′ σ 4 C. By definition of |=Σ , we have that I |=Σ (G1 , ∆′ )θ ◮ C and I |=Σ (G2 , ∆′ )θ ◮ C· By the inductive hypothesis, we have that there exist facts C1 , C2 and substitutions θ1 , θ2 , σ1 , σ2 s.t. I  Σ  G1 , ∆′ ◮ C1 ◮ θ1 and I  Σ  G2 , ∆′ ◮ C2 ◮ θ2 ,  θ|F V (G1 ,∆′ ) = (θ1 ◦ σ1 )|F V (G1 ,∆′ ) , θ|F V (G2 ,∆′ ) = (θ2 ◦ σ2 )|F V (G2 ,∆′ ) , C1 θ1 σ1 4 C and C2 θ2 σ2 4 C. Now, let D1 4 C1 and D2 4 C2 s.t. D1 θ1 σ1 = D2 θ2 σ2 = C1 θ1 σ1 ∩ C2 θ2 σ2 . Let τ be the substitution (θ1 ◦ σ1 )|F V (G1 ,∆′ ,C1 ) ∪ (θ2 ◦ σ2 )|F V (G2 ,∆′ ,C2 ) ; τ is well defined because θ1 ◦ σ1 and θ2 ◦ σ2 both behave like θ on variables in F V (G1 , ∆′ ) ∩ F V (G2 , ∆′ ), and C1 , C2 do not have variables in common except for variables in G1 , G2 , ∆′ (note that new variants of elements in I are chosen every time the judgment Σ is computed). Now, D1 and D2 are unified by τ , because D1 τ = D1 θ1 σ1 = D2 θ2 σ2 = D2 τ . Therefore, there exists θ3 = mgu(D1 , D2 ) s.t. τ ≥ θ3 (θ3 is more general than τ ). Also, τ ≥ θ1 σ1 ≥ θ1 and τ ≥ θ2 σ2 ≥ θ2 . Therefore, τ is an upper bound for {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 } and there exist θ′ = (θ1 ↑ θ2 ↑ θ3 )|F V (G1 ,G2 ,∆′ ,C) , and a substitution γ s.t. τ = θ′ ◦ γ. Now we can apply the definition of Σ (rule for & ) and we get that I  Σ  G1 & G2 , ∆′ ◮ C ′ ◮ θ′ ,  where C ′ = C1 + (C2 \D2 ). Letting σ = γ, we can prove the thesis. First of all, since θ′ ◦ σ = θ′ ◦ γ = τ , and by definition of τ , we have that θ|F V (G1 ,G2 ,∆′ ) = (θ′ ◦ σ)|F V (G1 ,G2 ,∆′ ) . It remains to prove that C ′ θ′ σ 4 C holds. Now, we have C ′ θ′ σ = C ′ τ = C1 τ +C2 τ\D2 τ = C1 τ +C2 τ\D2 θ2 σ2 = C1 τ + C2 τ \(C1 θ1 σ1 ∩ C2 θ2 σ2 ) = C1 τ + C2 τ \(C1 τ ∩ C2 τ ) 4 C. The last passage holds because C1 τ 4 C and C2 τ 4 C (by definition of τ and by the inductive hypothesis) and relies on the following property of multisets: A 4 D and B 4 D implies A + B\(A ∩ B) 4 D; - if ∆ = G1 G2 , ∆′ of ∆ = ⊥, ∆′ , the conclusion follows by a straightforward application of the inductive hypothesis. &  Proof of Lemma 5 i . Assume I1 Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ and I1 ⊑ I2 . By item i of Lemma 4, [[I1 ]] |=Σ ∆θ ◮ Cθ. By item i of Lemma 2, [[I2 ]] |=Σ ∆θ ◮ Cθ. The conclusion then follows from item ii of Lemma 4;  50  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  F∞ ii . Assume i=1 Ii Σ ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ and I1 ⊑ I2 ⊑ . . .. By item i of Lemma 4, F∞ [[ i=1 Ii ]] |=Σ ∆θ ◮ Cθ, i.e., as it can be readily verified from Definition 5.6 S∞ and Definition 5.7, i=1 [[Ii ]] |=Σ ∆θ ◮ Cθ. By item ii of Lemma 2, there exists k ∈ N s.t. [[Ik ]] |=Σ ∆θ ◮ Cθ. The conclusion then follows from item ii of Lemma 4. Proof of Lemma 6 i . By simple induction on the derivation of I Σ1 ∆ ◮ C ◮ θ. ii . By induction on the derivation of [[I ]] |=Σ ∆ ◮ C. - If [[I ]] |=Σ ⊤, ∆ ◮ C, immediate; - assume [[I ]] |=Σ A ◮ C and A+C ∈ [[I ]]Σ . It follows that there exist B ∈ I , a fact D, and a substitution θ (defined on Σ) such that A + C = Bθ + D. Note that B is defined on ΣP by definition of (abstract) interpretation. Now, ⌈A⌉ + ⌈C⌉ = ⌈A + C⌉ = ⌈Bθ + D⌉ = ⌈Bθ⌉ + ⌈D⌉ = (remember that B is defined on ΣP ⊆ Σ1 ) B⌈θ⌉ + ⌈D⌉. We can conclude that ⌈A⌉ + ⌈C⌉ ∈ [[I ]]Σ1 (note that B ∈ I and ⌈θ⌉, ⌈D⌉ are defined on Σ1 ), it follows that [[I ]] |=Σ1 ⌈A⌉ ◮ ⌈C⌉; - assume [[I ]] |=Σ ∀x· G, ∆ ◮ C and [[I ]] |=Σ,c G[c/x ], ∆ ◮ C, with c 6∈ Σ. From Σ1 ⊆ Σ we get Σ1 , c ⊆ Σ, c, therefore we can apply the inductive hypothesis. It follows that [[I ]] |=Σ1 ,c ⌈G[c/x ], ∆⌉ ◮ ⌈C⌉ if and only if [[I ]] |=Σ1 ,c ⌈G[c/x ]⌉, ⌈∆⌉ ◮ ⌈C⌉ if and only if (remember that c 6∈ Σ\Σ1 because c 6∈ Σ) [[I ]] |=Σ1 ,c ⌈G⌉[c/x ], ⌈∆⌉ ◮ ⌈C⌉. By definition of |= (remember that c 6∈ Σ implies c 6∈ Σ1 ), we get [[I ]] |=Σ1 ∀x· ⌈G⌉, ⌈∆⌉ ◮ ⌈C⌉ if and only if [[I ]] |=Σ1 ⌈∀x· G, ∆⌉ ◮ ⌈C⌉ (we assume x to be disjoint with the variables introduced by the ⌈·⌉ construction); - the remaining cases follow by a straightforward application of the inductive hypothesis. References Abdulla, P. A., Cerāns, K., Jonsson, B., and Tsay, Y.-K. 1996. General Decidability Theorems for Infinite-State Systems. In Proceedings 11th Annual International Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS’96). IEEE Computer Society Press, New Brunswick, New Jersey, 313–321. Abdulla, P. A. and Jonsson, B. 2001. Ensuring Completeness of Symbolic Verification Methods for Infinite-State Systems. Theoretical Computer Science 256, 1-2, 145–167. Andreoli, J.-M. 1992. Logic Programming with Focusing Proofs in Linear Logic. Journal of Logic and Computation 2, 3, 297–347. Andreoli, J.-M. and Pareschi, R. 1990. Linear Objects: Logical Processes with Built-In Inheritance. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Logic Programming, D. Warren and P.Szeredi, Eds. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 495–510. Andreoli, J.-M. and Pareschi, R. 1991. Linear Objects: Logical Processes with Built-In Inheritance. New Generation Computing 9, 3-4, 445–473. Andreoli, J.-M., Pareschi, R., and Castagnetti, T. 1997. Static Analysis of Linear Logic Programming. New Generation Computing 15, 4, 449–481.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  51  Bossi, A., Gabbrielli, M., Levi, G., and Martelli, M. 1994. The s-Semantics Approach: Theory and Applications. Journal of Logic Programming 19-20, 149–197. Bozzano, M. 2002. A Logic-Based Approach to Model Checking of Parameterized and Infinite-State Systems. Ph.D. thesis, Università di Genova. Bozzano, M. and Delzanno, G. 2002. Automated Protocol Verification in Linear Logic. In Proceedings 4th International Conference on Principles and Practice of Declarative Programming (PPDP’02). ACM Press, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 38–49. Bozzano, M., Delzanno, G., and Martelli, M. 2001. An Effective Bottom-Up Semantics for First Order Linear Logic Programs. In Proceedings 5th International Symposium on Functional and Logic Programming (FLOPS’01), H. Kuchen and K. Ueda, Eds. LNCS, vol. 2024. Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, Japan, 138–152. Bozzano, M., Delzanno, G., and Martelli, M. 2002. An Effective Fixpoint Semantics for Linear Logic Programs. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 2, 1, 85–122. Cervesato, I. 1994. Petri Nets as Multiset Rewriting Systems in a Linear Framework. Unpublished manuscript. Draft available from URL http://theory.stanford.edu/∼iliano/forthcoming.html. Cervesato, I. 1995. Petri Nets and Linear Logic: a Case Study for Logic Programming. In Proceedings 1995 Joint Conference on Declarative Programming (GULP-PRODE’95), M. Alpuente and M. I. Sessa, Ed. Palladio Press, Marina di Vietri, Italy, 313–318. Cervesato, I., Durgin, N., Kanovich, M., and Scedrov, A. 2000. Interpreting Strands in Linear Logic. In Proceedings 2000 Workshop on Formal Methods and Computer Security (FMCS’00), H. Veith, N. Heintze, and E. Clarke, Eds. Chicago, Illinois. Cervesato, I., Durgin, N., Lincoln, P., Mitchell, J., and Scedrov, A. 1999. A Meta-notation for Protocol Analysis. In 12th Computer Security Foundations Workshop (CSFW’99), R. Gorrieri, Ed. IEEE Computer Society Press, Mordano, Italy, 55–69. Cervesato, I. and Pfenning, F. 2002. A Linear Logical Framework. Information and Computation 179, 1, 19–75. Delzanno, G. and Martelli, M. 2001. Proofs as Computations in Linear Logic. Theoretical Computer Science 258, 1-2, 269–297. Dickson, L. E. 1913. Finiteness of the Odd Perfect and Primitive Abundant Numbers with n Distinct Prime Factors. American Journal of Mathematics 35, 413–422. Durgin, N., Lincoln, P., Mitchell, J., and Scedrov, A. 1999. Undecidability of bounded security protocols. In Workshop on Formal Methods and Security Protocols (FMSP’99), R. Gorrieri, Ed. Trento, Italy. Eder, E. 1985. Properties of Substitutions and Unifications. Journal of Symbolic Computation 1, 31–46. Elliott, C. and Pfenning, F. 1991. A Semi-Functional Implementation of a HigherOrder Logic Programming Language. In Topics in Advanced Language Implementation, P. Lee, Ed. MIT Press, 289–325. Engberg, U. and Winskel, G. 1990. Petri nets as models of linear logic. In Proceedings of Colloquium on Trees in Algebra and Programming, A. Arnold, Ed. LNCS, vol. 389. Springer-Verlag, Copenhagen, Denmark, 147–161. Esparza, J., Finkel, A., and Mayr, R. 1999. On the Verification of Broadcast Protocols. In Proceedings 14th International Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS’99). IEEE Computer Society Press, Trento, Italy, 352–359. Esparza, J. and Melzer, S. 2000. Verification of safety properties using integer programming: Beyond the state equation. Formal Methods in System Design 16, 159–189. Falaschi, M., Levi, G., Martelli, M., and Palamidessi, C. 1993. A Model-Theoretic Reconstruction of the Operational Semantics of Logic Programs. Information and Computation 103, 1, 86–113.  52  M. Bozzano, G. Delzanno and M. Martelli  Farwer, B. 1999. A Linear Logic View of Object Petri Nets. Fundamenta Informaticae 37, 3, 225–246. Farwer, B. 2000. Linear Logic Based Calculi for Object Petri Nets. Logos Verlag. PhD thesis. Finkel, A. 1993. The minimal coverability graph for petri nets. In Advances in Petri Nets 1993, G. Rozenberg, Ed. LNCS, vol. 674. Springer Verlag, 210–243. Finkel, A. and Schnoebelen, P. 2001. Well-Structured Transition Systems Everywhere! Theoretical Computer Science 256, 1-2, 63–92. Gabbrielli, M., Dore, M. G., and Levi, G. 1995. Observable semantics for Constraint Logic Programs. Journal of Logic and Computation 5, 2, 133–171. Girard, J.-Y. 1987. Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science 50:1, 1–102. Harland, J. and Winikoff, M. 1998. Making Logic Programs Reactive. In Proceedings Workshop on Transactions and Change in Logic Databases (Dynamics’98). Manchester, UK, 43–58. Higman, G. 1952. Ordering by divisibility in abstract algebras. Proceedings London Mathematical Society 2, 326–336. Hodas, J. and Miller, D. 1990. Representing Objects in a Logic Programming Language with Scoping Constructs. In Proceedins of 7th International Conference on Logic Programming, D. H. Warren and P. Szeredi, Eds. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 511–526. Jensen, K. 1997. Coloured Petri-Nets. Basic Concepts, Analysis Methods and Practical Use. Volume 1, 2 and 3. Monographs in Theoretical Computer Science. Springer-Verlag. Karp, R. M. and Miller, R. E. 1969. Parallel Program Schemata. Journal of Computer and System Sciences 3, 2, 147–195. Kobayashi, N. and Yonezawa, A. 1994. Type-Theoretic Foundations for Concurrent Object-Oriented Programming. In Proceedings 9th Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems, Languages and Applications (OOPSLA’94). SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 29. Portland, Oregon, 31–45. Kobayashi, N. and Yonezawa, A. 1995. Asynchronous Communication Model based on Linear Logic. Formal Aspects of Computing 7, 2, 113–149. Kopylov, A. P. 1995. Decidability of Linear Affine Logic. In Proceedings 10th Annual International Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS’95), D. Kozen, Ed. IEEE Computer Society Press, San Diego, California, 496–504. Lassez, J.-L., Maher, J., and Marriott, K. 1988. Unification Revisited. In Foundations of Deductive Databases and Logic Programming, J. Minker, Ed. Morgan Kaufmann, 587–625. Lincoln, P. 1995. Deciding provability of linear logic formulas. In Advances in Linear Logic. London Mathematical Society Lecture Notes Series, vol. 222. Cambridge University Press. Lincoln, P., Mitchell, J., Scedrov, A., and Shankar, N. 1992. Decision problems for propositional linear logic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 56, 239–311. Also in the Proceedings of the 31th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, St Louis, Missouri, October 1990, IEEE Computer Society Press. Also available as Technical Report SRI-CSL-90-08 from SRI International, Computer Science Laboratory. Lincoln, P. and Scedrov, A. 1994. First Order Linear Logic Without Modalities is NEXPTIME-Hard. Theoretical Computer Science 135, 139–154. Martı́-Oliet, N. and Meseguer, J. 1991. From Petri Nets to Linear Logic through Categories: A Survey. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science 2, 4, 297–399.  Model Checking Linear Logic Specifications  53  Mayr, E. W. 1984. An Algorithm for the General Petri Net Reachability Problem . SIAM J. Comput. 13, 441–460. McDowell, R., Miller, D., and Palamidessi, C. 1996. Encoding Transition Systems in Sequent Calculus. In Proceedings Linear Logic 96 Tokyo Meeting, J.-Y. Girard, M. Okada, and A. Scedrov, Eds. ENTCS, vol. 3. Elsevier, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan. Meseguer, J. 1992. Conditional Rewriting Logic as a Unified Model of Concurrency. Theoretical Computer Science 96, 1, 73–155. Miller, D. 1993. The π-Calculus as a Theory in Linear Logic: Preliminary Results. In Proceedings Workshop on Extensions of Logic Programming, E. Lamma and P. Mello, Eds. LNCS, vol. 660. Springer-Verlag, Bologna, Italy, 242–265. Miller, D. 1996. Forum: A Multiple-Conclusion Specification Logic. Theoretical Computer Science 165, 1, 201–232. Miller, D., Nadathur, G., Pfenning, F., and Scedrov, A. 1991. Uniform Proofs as a Foundation for Logic Programming. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 51, 125–157. Milner, E. C. 1985. Basic wqo- and bqo-theory. In Graphs and Orders, I. Rival, Ed. D. Reidel Publishing Company, 487–502. Palamidessi, C. 1990. Algebraic properties of idempotent substitutions. In Proceedings 17th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP ’90), M. S. Paterson, Ed. LNCS, vol. 443. Springer Verlag, Warwick University, England, 386–399. Silva, M., Teruel, E., and Colom, J. 1998. Linear Algebraic and Linear Programming Techniques for the Analysis of Place/Transition Net Systems. In Lectures in Petri Nets. I: Basic Models, G. Rozenberg and W. Reisig, Eds. LNCS, vol. 1491. Springer-Verlag, 309–373.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
