Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_3470

Abstract:
A Variable Density Sampling Scheme for Compressive Fourier Transform Interferometry A. Moshtaghpour, V. Cambareri, P. Antoine, M. Roblin, L. Jacques.  arXiv:1801.10432v2 [cs.IT] 15 Feb 2018  February 16, 2018 Abstract Fourier Transform Interferometry (FTI) is an appealing Hyperspectral (HS) imaging modality in that applications demand high spectral resolution such as fluorescence microscopy. However, the effective resolution of FTI is indeed limited due to the durability of biological elements when exposed to illuminating light, since over-exposed elements become unable to fluoresce, i.e., photo-bleaching phenomenon. In this context, the acquisition of biological HS volumes based on sampling the Optical Path Difference (OPD) axis at Nyquist rate leads to unpleasant trade-offs between spectral resolution, quality of the HS volume, and light exposure intensity. In this paper we propose two variants of the FTI imager, i.e., Coded Illumination-FTI (CI-FTI) and Coded Aperture FTI (CA-FTI), based on the theory of compressed sensing. These schemes efficiently modulate light exposure temporally (in CI-FTI) or spatio-temporally (in CA-FTI). Leveraging a variable density sampling strategy, we provide optimal illumination and aperture coding strategies, so that the light exposure imposed on a biological specimen is minimized while the spectral resolution is preserved. Our theoretical analysis consists of two parts: (i) the trade-off between exposure intensity and the quality of the acquired HS volume for a fixed spectral resolution; (ii) the best HS volume quality for a fixed spectral resolution and constrained exposure intensity budget. Our contributions can be adapted to an FTI imager without hardware modifications. The reconstruction of HS volumes from compressive sensing FTI measurements relies on an `1 -norm minimization problem promoting a 3D sparsity prior. Numerically, we support the proposed methods on synthetic data and simulated compressed sensing measurements (from actual FTI measurements) under various scenarios. In particular, the HS volume of biological samples can be reconstructed with a three-to ten-fold reduction in the exposure intensity.  1  Introduction  A HyperSpectral (HS) volume refers to a three-dimensional (3D) data cube associated to stacks of 2D spatial images along the spectral axis, i.e., one monochromatic image for each wavenumber. Each spatial location records the variation of transmitted or reflected light intensity along a large number of spectral bands from that location in a scene. Since chemical elements have unique spectral signatures, referred to as their fingerprints, observing the dense spectral content of an HS volume, instead of an RGB image, provides accurate information about the constituents of a scene. This has made HS imaging appealing in a wide range of applications, e.g., agriculture [1], food processing [2], chemical imaging [3], and biology [4–6]. Due to the extremely large amount of data stored in an HS volume, also referred to as HS cube, the acquisition and processing of these volumes encounters significant challenges. For example, in airborne applications it is required to transmit the volumes with the size of several gigabytes to the 1  ground station. In biological applications, the designers of HS imagers face a myriad of trade-offs related to photon efficiency, acquisition time, spectral resolution, and cost. Whilst there have been major developments in different HS imagers1 , there is a lack of comprehensive study on several devices, e.g., Fourier Transform Interferometry (FTI). FTI is an HS imaging modality that has shown promising results in the acquisition of high spectral resolution biological HS volumes, specially in fluorescence spectroscopy. In this application a biological specimen is stained by some fluorescent dyes that fluoresce with a unique spectrum when they are exposed to light. Since each fluorescent dye binds to a certain protein, this technique is highly used for determining the localization, concentration, and growth of certain target malignant tumors. As described in Sec. 2.2, FTI consists in a Michelson interferometer [8] with one moving mirror. Besides, the raw FTI measurements are intermediate data, i.e., the Fourier coefficients of the actual HS volume with respect to the spectral domain. Shannon-Nyquist sampling theory states that for a fixed wavenumber range, the spectral resolution of an HS volume is proportional to the number of FTI measurements (see Sec. 2.2). This fact is simultaneously a blessing and a curse in fluorescence spectroscopy, where high spectral resolution is highly desirable for biologists. One may record more FTI measurements, thereby over-exposing fluorescent dyes. As a consequence, the ability of the dyes to fluoresce fades during the experiments. This phenomenon, that is due to the photochemical alteration of the dyes, is called photo-bleaching[9]. Therefore, the resolution of an HS volume is limited by the durability of the fluorescent dyes when exposed to the illumination. An alternative is to reduce light intensity in a fashion that is inversely proportional to the increase in the number of FTI measurements, resulting in a low input Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). Considering all these facts, our main motivation in this paper is to reduce photo-bleaching in fluorescence spectroscopy using FTI. However, this requires delicate compromises between the goals of achieving high spectral resolution and high SNR while minimizing the light exposure imposed on the specimen. As described in Sec. 3 and 4, we propose two compressive sensing-FTI imagers, i.e., Coded Illumination-FTI (CI-FTI) and Coded Aperture-FTI (CA-FTI), that are optimal in the sense of minimizing the light exposure on the biological specimen. In the CI-FTI scheme the light source is coded (activated) during few time intervals, while in CA-FTI at each time interval the illumination is activated on a set of spatial locations. Both models amount to an incomplete set of FTI measurements which need to be processed to recover the biological HS volume. However, recovering a high-quality HS volume from such incomplete data is challenging. The common approach is to solve a minimum energy problem which is equivalent to applying the inverse Fourier transform on the (properly zero-padded) incomplete measurements [10]. As a consequence of this approach, the recovered HS volume contains unwanted side-lobes that degrade the accuracy of the reconstruction and makes it hardly usable for medical purposes. A better reconstruction alternative would be predicting or interpolating the values of the missing FTI measurements. This seems challenging since, intrinsically, the Fourier coefficients are highly oscillating. However, Donoho [11], Candes and Tao [12] introduced the theory of Compressed Sensing (CS) that enables, under certain conditions, the recovery of a signal from a small set of linear measurements. In this paper we resort to this theory for HS volume recovery from the incomplete measurements taking via CI-FTI and CA-FTI. We adapt both models such that the requirements for the theory of CS will hold. A critical aspect of this adaptation consists in the way that FTI measurements are sub-sampled. The common results in CS theory, i.e., based on Uniform Density Sampling (UDS), are inefficient in the setting 1  See [7] for a comprehensive classification of different HS acquisition methods.  2  of FTI. Our first observation started from the fact that most informative FTI measurements are concentrated around lower frequencies[13]. However, we here consider the sampling strategy as a degree of freedom in the system model. Leveraging the recent work of Kramher and Ward [14] in the field of Variable Density Sampling (VDS) we propose an optimal coding strategy for CA-FTI and CI-FTI schemes. Although VDS based methods are new in the field of HS imaging [15, 16], they have received considerable interest in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) applications where the recorded data is the 2D Fourier transform of an image. Our work differs in the sense that the practical FTI devices entail 3D signals whose 1D Fourier transform (with respect to spectral domain) is recorded.  1.1  Contributions  The main objective of this paper is to establish a compressive sensing scheme for FTI, i.e., reducing the total number of optical path difference (OPD) measurements compared to common (Nyquist rate) FTI and still allowing reliable and robust estimation of hyperspectral data volumes. We show that this compressive FTI enables hyperspectral imaging when total light exposure is a critical parameter, such as in biological confocal microscopy where special fluorescent dyes inserted in a biological sample suffer from photo-bleaching. In fact, our work also studies this context when light exposure is considered as a fixed resource to be distributed equally over all measurements. More precisely, our work is driven by the following questions: (i) For a fixed spectral resolution, to which extent can we reduce the amount of light exposure on the observed specimen and still allow robust reconstruction of HS data? (ii) For a fixed exposure intensity budget and spectral resolution, what is the best illumination allocation per OPD sample (or time interval) and per pixel? These questions are answered through these two main contributions. • Illumination/aperture coding: We propose two novel compressive sensing-FTI frameworks, based on coded illumination and coded aperture techniques. The first system codes globally the light source, i.e., whether the full biological sample is globally highlighted or not per time slot, whilst in the second we allow the illumination of each spatial location of the specimen to be independently coded over time (e.g., thanks to a spatial light modulator inserted in the optical system before the FTI). The reconstruction of the HS volume resorts to the theory of CS, by leveraging an HS low-complexity prior, i.e., spectral or joint spatiospectral sparsity models. By using a particular VDS scheme [14] we derive uniform (i.e., valid for all biological HS volumes) optimal reconstruction bounds in the sense of minimum amount of exposure and its distribution for both CI-FTI and CA-FTI models. Table 1, as described in Sec. 1.2, summarizes our first contribution with respect to the state-of-the-art HS acquisition techniques. • Biologically-friendly constrained exposure coding: In the above-mentioned compressive sensing-FTI systems we only take into account the distribution of the exposure in time and spatial dimensions; while illumination intensity is another parameter that can be adapted during the experiment. Suppose that in fluorescence spectroscopy the tolerance of the fluorescent dyes, in terms of the exposure budget, is given by the biologists, e.g., according to the specification of fluorescent dyes. This leads us to study the effect of allocating the total amount of exposure budget for acquiring compressive FTI measurements on the reconstruction performance. Interestingly it appears that full (Nyquist rate) sampling does not result in the best HS volume reconstruction. 3  To the best of our knowledge, this paper provides the first theoretical analysis of (i) compressive sensing FTI method and (ii) an application of VDS of the Fourier coefficients outside of the context of MRI (see Sec. 1.2). In the sequel, beside the synthetic experiments, we validate our contribution by performing the proposed compressive sensing schemes on the practical FTI measurements recorded with respect to the Nyquist sampling rate.  1.2  Related works  Hyperspectral imaging is an appealing area of research for the application of CS theory, in terms of acquisition[13, 15–24] and processing [25–28]. Prior works [17–19] demonstrate three types of Coded Aperture Snapshot Imager (CASSI). The imager in [17], termed as Dual Disperser CASSI (DD CASSI), contains two dispersive elements and an aperture in between. The input scene is measured as a 2D multiplexed spectral projection. The corresponding sensing operator is equivalent to a cyclic S-matrix (i.e., an alteration of the Hadamard matrix) and the solution of the system is estimated from under-determined measurements using the expectation maximization algorithm. A variant of CASSI, called Single Disperser CASSI (SD CASSI), that includes only one dispersive element is presented in [18], wherein a 2D multiplexed spatio-spectral projection of the scene is measured and the HS volume is recovered via an `2,1 optimization problem. In [19], the idea of single-shot CASSI in [17] and [18] is extended to an imager that collects multiple shot measurements. The authors in [20] and [21], proposed a convex optimization formulation in order to reconstruct the HS volume from its Gaussian measurements. The convex objective function in [20] penalizes both the trace norm and the sum of the Total Variation (TV) norms of the all 2D images; whereas in [21] the sum of TV norms is replaced by `2,1 mixed-norm of the data matrix inferring a joint-sparse structure in the HS volume. Recently, the feasibility of the theory of CS in fluorescence spectroscopy has been shown in [13, 15, 16]. The proposed microscope as in [16] and [15] directly (as opposed to the interferometric methods) scans the spectral dimension, meaning that the resolution of the HS volume depends on the resolution of the photo-detector. Both works target the problem of acquiring high spatial resolution HS volume from compressive measurements using Hadamard sensing model. The authors in [16] compared the uniform and half-half density samplings in their implementation while [15] employs a multilevel sampling strategy [29] for the same microscope in [16] in addition to taking into account the photonic noise as well as the lens Point Spread Function (PSF). The first compressive sensing-FTI is introduced in [13] by sub-sampling the Optical Path Difference (OPD) dimension of the interferometric signals. The authors in [13, 23, 24] showed that the notion of variable density sampling has a potential benefit in capturing more informative samples. Recently, a versatile scheme for fluorescence microscopy has been appeared in the literature [22]. It applies when the acquisition of the HS volume is done consecutively in the axial domain such that at every axial point the light source is modulated by a waveform. The CS measurements are essentially formed by recording deterministically the primitive part of axial domain. A post-processing approach to increase the spectral resolution of an FTI, i.e., Sagnac interferometer, coupled with structured light source is demonstrated in [30]. The objective of [30] is to mitigate the physical limitation for achieving a high resolution HS volume; nonetheless this approach increases photo-bleaching significantly. On the other hand, the works [25–28] tackle the problem of computing the abundance fraction of endmembers in the context of blind [25] or non-blind unmixing [27] and [28]. However, the difference of our contribution in this paper with the aforementioned works is fourfold. First, we target the problem of compressive HS volume acquisition; second, the physical model of the FTI device imposes the Fourier sensing operator (since it captures interferometric information) 4  that brings about challenges different from Gaussian sensing operator; third, we study the trade-off between the spectral resolution of the HS volume and the photo-bleaching; and forth, we focus on the application of the notion of VDS in the field of interferometric HS imaging. Prior studies on variable density CS focus on certain signals, e.g., 1D signals [31], 2D spatial images [14, 29, 32–35]. A VDS is computed in [31] through a convex optimization problem whose performance depends on the parameter tuning. Based on the statistical model of natural images [35] proposed an alternative method. A block sampling CS model is introduced in [32, 33] using the results of RIP-less analysis in [36]. A novel multi-level sampling scheme is proposed in [15, 29] in order to exploit the level-sparsity feature of some natural images, e.g., in MRI. A RIP-based guarantee is presented in [14] in which the sampling density is controlled by the bound of local coherence between sensing and sparsity bases. Besides, a number of empirical VDS methods exist in the literature including [13, 16, 37]. An example of a 3D HS acquisition is considered in [15] using filter banks for scanning spectral domain. Our work differs in the sense that we study an FTI method based on multiplexing the spectral information.  ✓  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓  RSE: Random S-matrix Ensembles RHE: Random Hadamard Ensembles LFE: Low-pass Fourier Ensembles DC: Discrete Cosine UDS: Uniform Density Sampling  3D low-rank  Analytical  ✓  ✓ ✓ ✓  ✓ ✓  ✓ ✓  Strategy  ✓  ✓ ✓  Sampling Operator  ✓ ✓ ✓  Prior model Spatial sparsity  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓  Numerical  Hardware  Study type  Spectral sparsity  M. Gehm et al.[17] A. Wagadarikar et al.[18] H. Arguello et al.[19] M. Golbabaee et al.[20] M. Golbabaee et al.[21] V. Studer et al.[16] B. Roman et al.[15] A. Moshtaghpour et al.[13] M. Woringer et al.[22] CI-FTI CA-FTI  Direct  Interferometric  Spectrometry  DW Dirac DC Dirac Dirac Dirac Dirac DW Dirac Dirac DW  DW DW DW TV DW DW DW DW Dirac DW DW  RSE RSE RSE RGM RGM RHE RHE RFE LFE RFE RFE  UDS UDS UDS — — Half-half Multi-level VDS Deterministic VDS VDS  RGM: Random Gaussian Mixtures RFE: Random Fourier Ensembles RFE: Random Fourier Ensembles DW: Discrete Wavelet VDS: Variable Density Sampling  Table 1: Comparison of the related acquisition modalities in HS imaging. In direct spectrometry the spectral dimension is recorded by either wavelength filtering, grating, or prism. Half-half sampling strategy means half of the M measurements is taken from the lowest frequency components and the other half is taken by randomly sub-sampling the rest of the remaining samples.  1.3  Paper Organization  This paper is organized as follows. We start by providing preliminary introduction to the theory of CS, with an emphasis on sensing with random ensembles of orthonormal systems, and the acquisition model of a conventional FTI imager. The problem formulation and theoretical analysis 5  of CI-FTI and CA-FTI frameworks are presented in Sec. 3 and Sec. 4, respectively. The concept of fixed-illumination budget both for CI-FTI and CA-FTI, as well as its de-noising impact, is revealed in Sec. 5. Sec. 6 focuses on a comprehensive synthetic and experimental tests of our schemes demonstrating the efficiency of the proposed methods when the fluorochromes in a biological sample undergone photo-bleaching. Finally, we conclude with some remarks and perspectives in Section 7.  1.4  Notations  Domain dimensions are represented by capital letters, e.g., K, M, N . Vectors, matrices, and data cubes are denoted by bold symbols. For a cube U ∈ CN3 ×N1 ×N2 , U = (u1 , ⋯, uN1 N2 ) ∈ CN3 ×N1 N2 corresponds to the folded matrix representation of U , i.e., compacting its two last dimensions, while ⊺ the vectorization of U reads u = vec(U ) ∶= (u⊺1 , ⋯, u⊺N1 N2 ) ∈ CN1 N2 N3 . When this is clear from the context, we assimilate 3-D data in CN1 ×N2 ×N3 with their vector and matrix representations, e.g., identifying U with U . For any matrix (or vector) V ∈ CM ×N , V ⊺ and V ∗ represent the transposed and the conjugate transpose of V , respectively, and V ⊗ W denotes the Kronecker product of two matrices V and W . The `p -norm of u reads ∥u∥p ∶= (∑i ∣ui ∣p )1/p , for p ≥ 1. The identity matrix of dimension N is represented as I N , JN K ∶= {1, ⋯, N }. For a subset Ω ⊂ JN K of cardinality ∣Ω∣, the restriction of a vector u ∈ CN (or a matrix Φ ∈ CM ×N ) to the components (or the columns) indexed in Ω is denoted by uΩ (or ΦΩ ). We always consider that the restriction operator has a higher precedence than the adjoint or transposition operators, e.g., Φ∗Ω ∶= (ΦΩ )∗ . Finally, given a random event E, P(E) denotes the probability that it occurs, and we use the asymptotic relations f ≲ g (or f ≳ g), also denoted by f = O(g) (resp. f = Ω(g)), if f ≤ c g (resp. g ≤ c f ) for two functions f and g and some value c > 0 independent of their parameters.  2  Preliminaries  In this section we first provide the main tools from CS theory so that the role of variable density sampling becomes clear. Next, an overview of common FTI system, from a continuous model to a discrete model and possible noise models, is described. We complete this section by the mentioning the suitable sparsity models for the application of FTI in fluorescence spectroscopy.  2.1  Compressive Sensing: From Uniform to Variable Density Sampling  When restricted to signal sensing with random orthonormal basis ensembles [11, 12] (e.g., random Fourier or Hadamard ensembles), CS theory targets the recovery of a “low-complexity” signal x ∈ CN from a vector of noisy measurements y = Φ∗Ω x + n, where Φ ∈ CN ×N is an orthonormal sensing system and Ω ⊂ JN K is a set of indices chosen at random with ∣Ω∣ = M ≪ N , and n accounts for some additive observation noise. The low-complexity nature of x generally amounts to assuming it K-sparse, i.e., with ∥x∥0 ∶= ∣supp(x)∣ ≤ K, or at least well approximated by a sparse signal, i.e., compressible. In order to estimate x from y, Φ∗Ω is generally required to satisfy the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP) [38] defined hereafter. Definition 1. Let A ∈ CM ×N . For K ≤ N , the restricted isometry constant δK associated to A is the smallest number δ for which (1 − δ)∥x∥22 ≤ ∥Ax∥22 ≤ (1 + δ)∥x∥22 6  (1)  holds for all K-sparse vectors x ∈ CN . Alternatively, if (1) holds for δ = δK , we say that A satisfies the RIP of order K and constant δK . When the RIP holds and the observation noise is bounded, i.e., ∥n∥ ≤ ε for some ε > 0, the Basis Pursuit DeNoise (BPDN) program expressed as x̂ = arg min ∥u∥1  s.t. ∥y − Au∥2 ≤ ε,  (2)  u∈CN  provides an accurate estimate of the original signal. Proposition 1 (Proposition 4.2 [14]). Assume that the restricted isometry constant δ5K of A ∈ CM ×N satisfies δ5K < 31 . Let x ∈ CN and assume noisy measurements y = Ax + n with ∥n∥2 ≤ ε. Then the solution x̂ of (2) satisfies ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤  2σK (x)1 √ K  + ε,  (3)  where σK (x)1 ∶= ∥x − HK (x)∥1 is the best K-term approximation error in the `1 -sense, and where HK is the hard thresholding operator that maps all but the K largest-magnitude entries of the argument to zero. In particular, the reconstruction is exact, i.e., x̂ = x, if x is K-sparse and ε = 0. More generally, if the signal x has a sparse or compressible representation in a general orthonormal basis Ψ ∈ CN ×N (e.g., in a wavelet basis), i.e., x = Ψs where the vector of coefficients s ∈ CN is K-sparse or compressible, one must ensure that Φ∗Ω Ψ respects the RIP. Interestingly, according to [39], choosing each of the M elements of Ω uniformly at random in JN K, i.e., according to a Uniform Density Sampling (UDS) gives that, √ with probability exceeding 1 − N −c log  3  (K)  , the restricted isometry constant of the matrix A =  N ∗ M ΦΩ Ψ  M ≳ δ −2 µ2 K log3 (K) log(N ),  satisfies δK ≤ δ, if  (4)  √ where µ is an upper bound on the mutual coherence 2 of A, i.e., µmut (A) ∶= N max`,j ∣a`,j ∣ ≤ µ. However, the impact of this result is unfortunately limited in the case where, for instance, Φ and Ψ are the discrete Fourier and wavelet bases, respectively. This is in fact an important special combination appearing in, e.g., Magnetic Resonance Imaging [40], radio-interferometry [41] and in the compressive FTI √ scheme considered in this paper (see Sec.3 and Sec. 4). The coherence in this case is µmut (A) = N and (4) states that all samples are required for reconstruction (M ≳ N ), although the signal can be highly sparse in the wavelet basis. Fortunately, this limitation is actually induced by the way Ω is built, i.e., according to a UDS of the columns of Φ. Adopting a Variable Density Sampling (VDS) scheme allows us to break this “coherence barrier” [14, 15, 29, 31, 35]. Of interest for our analysis, [14] shows in particular that the number of measurements in (4) can be reduced by assigning higher sampling probability to the columns of Φ that are highly coherent with the columns the of sparsity basis Ψ. This probability is determined by the local coherence of the sensing basis over the sparsity basis, i.e., the quantity ∗ loc µloc ` (Φ, Ψ) ∶= µ` (Φ Ψ) with µloc ` (A) ∶= max ∣a`,j ∣, 1≤j≤N  A ∈ CN ×N .  √ 2 In some references, e.g., [15], it is defined as µmut (Φ, Ψ) ∶= N max`,j ∣⟨φ` , ψ j ⟩∣.  7  (5)  Proposition 2 (RIP for VDS [14]). Let Φ ∈ CN ×N and Ψ ∈ CN ×N be orthonormal sensing and sparsity bases, respectively, with µloc ` (Φ, Ψ) ≤ κ` for some values κ` ∈ R+ . Let us define κ ∶= (κ1 , ⋯, κN )⊺ . Suppose K ≳ log(N ), M ≳ δ −2 ∥κ∥22 K log3 (K) log(N ),  (6)  and choose M (possibly not distinct) indices ` ∈ Ω ⊂ JN K i.i.d. with respect to the probability distribution η on JN K given by κ2 η(`) ∶= ` 2 . (7) ∥κ∥2 √ Consider the diagonal matrix D = diag(d) ∈ RM ×M with dj = 1/ η(Ωj ), j ∈ JM K. Then with 3 probability exceeding 1−N −c log (K) , the restricted isometry constant δK of the preconditioned matrix √1 DΦ∗ Ψ satisfies δK ≤ δ. Ω M  We will see later that this VDS offers new means for compressive FTI. Note that, in practice, although Φ∗Ω models the analog/optical sensing procedure of a growing number of CS applications (e.g., in compressive MRI or radio-interferometry), the conditioning by D proposed in Prop. 2 is rather achieved by post-processing (digitally) the acquired data [14]. Therefore, our estimation of the HS data will rather follow this straightforward adaptation of Prop. 1, also tuned to an analysis-based sparsity framework [42] that better suits the rest of our developments. Corollary 1. Assume that the restricted isometry constant δ5K of  √1 DΦ∗ Ψ ∈ CM ×N satisfies Ω M = Φ∗Ω x+n with ∥ √1 Dn∥2 ≤ ε. M  δ5K < 31 . Let x ∈ CN be a signal observed by the noisy sensing model y Then x̂ = arg minu∈CN ∥Ψ∗ u∥1 s. t. ∥ √1 D (y − Φ∗Ω u) ∥2 ≤ ε, M  (8)  satisfies ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤  2σK (Ψ∗ x)1 √ K  + ε.  (9)  Proof. The proof involves three steps: (i) in Prop. 1 let x = Ψs and A = Φ∗Ω Ψ; (ii) precondition the matrix A according to Prop. 2 so that it satisfies RIP; (iii) apply a change of variable u → Ψ∗ u using the fact that Ψ is an orthonormal basis. In Sec. 4 and Sec. 5, we will leverage Prop. 2 and Cor. 1 in order to characterize the sample complexities and the stability of our two compressive FTI strategies, namely coded illumination FTI (Theorem 1) and coded aperture FTI (Theorem 2).  2.2  Acquisition Model of Conventional (Nyquist)-FTI  This section describes the principles of FTI acquisition, its continuous observation model and its important discretization into a forward model that can be inverted numerically. We also discuss the main sources of noise that corrupt FTI.  8  Figure 1: Operating principle of Fourier transform interferometry.  2.2.1  Continuous Model  The operating principle of a conventional FTI, called hereafter Nyquist FTI, is based on Michelson interferometry [8] (see, e.g., [43] for a detailed survey on FTI). As shown in Fig. 1 (top), a parallel beam of coherent light is divided into two beams by a beam-splitter. The two beams are reflected back by the respective mirrors, and interfere after being recombined by the beam-splitter. The intensity of the resulting beam is later recorded by a standard imaging sensor, which captures one image per mirror position. In biological applications, the recorded signal is multiplexed by the absorption or reflectance spectrum of the constituents. In the orthonormal coordinate system {e1 , e2 , e3 } ⊂ R3 , a coherent wide-band plane wave traveling along e3 -direction at point q ∶= (q1 , q2 , q3 )⊺ ∈ R3 and time t may be formulated as ∞ Ẽ(q; t) = ∫0 Ẽ0 (q1 , q2 ; ν)ei(2πq3 ν−ωt) dν where ν is the wavenumber, ω is the angular frequency of the wave and Ẽ0 (q1 , q2 ; ν) represents the amplitude of light at (q1 , q2 ; ν). For the sake of readability we omit the representation of (q1 , q2 ) in the following as well as in Fig. 1. Since a coherent light is a collection of monochromatic waves, we proceed by assuming that a monochromatic plane wave, corresponding to a wavenumber ν, incidences the biological specimen, i.e., Ẽ(q3 ; ν; t) = Ẽ0 (ν)ei(2πq3 ν−ωt) . This beam can be written as follows after traveling through the sample E(q3 ; ν; t) = E0 (ν)ei(2πq3 ν−ωt) , (10) where the absorption or reflectance spectrum H(ν) of the specimen is multiplexed in E0 (ν) = Ẽ0 (ν)H(ν). This beam is divided into two beams by the beam-splitter with the reflection constant αr and the transmission constant αt . The incident beams at the beam-splitter read E1 (q3 ; ν; t) = αr αt E0 (ν)ei(2πq3 ν−ωt) , E2 (q3′ ; ν; t) = αr αt E0 (ν)e  i(2πq3′ ν−ωt)  ,  (11) (12)  where q3 and q3′ are the distances that the two beams have traveled so far. Therefore, the recombined beam ET (q3 , q3′ ; ν; t) = E1 (q3 ; ν; t) + E1 (q3′ ; ν; t). We define OPD parameter3 ξ ∶= q3′ − q3 . In Fig. 3  Note that the medium in FTI is the air with unit reflective index.  9  1 there is a one-to-one correspondence between time slot, mirror position and OPD value. The value ξ = 0 associates to a mirror position when the two arms are equally distanced from the beam-splitter. Let IT (ξ; ν) ∶= ∣ET (q3 , q3′ ; ν; t)∣2 be the flux for a fixed wavenumber simplified as IT (ξ; ν) = c ∣E0 (ν)∣2 (1 + cos(2πνξ)) ,  (13)  for some c > 0 depending only on αr and αt . By assuming a coherent wide-band wave spanning the full range of wavenumbers, the total intensity recorded by the detector can be written as ∞  IT (ξ) = ∫0 IT (ξ; ν) dν = IDC + I(ξ),  (14)  with IDC = c ∫0 ∣E0 (ν)∣2 dν = 21 IT (0). After removing the DC component, it is easy to show that the AC part I, termed as interferogram, is the Fourier transform of ∣E0 (∣ν∣)∣2 , i.e., the symmetrization of ν ∈ R+ → ∣E0 (ν)∣2 around ν = 0, up to an omitted constant multiplicative factor (i.e., c/2): ∞ I(ξ) = IT (ξ) − 21 IT (0) = ∫−∞ ∣E0 (∣ν∣)∣2 e−i2πνξ dν. (15) ∞  Consequently, computing the inverse Fourier transform of the interferogram and restricting it to the positive spectral axis yields the spectrum ∣E0 (ν)∣2 of the observed specimen. Note that the setup is calibrated in a “sample-out” stage (in which the specimen is removed from the device) in order to estimate the light source spectra ∣Ẽ0 (ν)∣2 (and its possible attenuation by the optical setup). Finally, the target spectrum can be found as H 2 (ν) = ∣E0 (ν)∣2 /∣Ẽ0 (ν)∣2 . Since by having ∣E0 (ν)∣2 the estimation of H(ν) is straightforward, we simplify the model and denote hereafter the FTI measurements Y and the target HS volume X as the collection of all interferograms I(ξ) and intensities ∣E0 (ν)∣2 for all spatial locations, respectively. In other words Y ∶= I(ξ; q1 , q2 ) and X ∶= ∣E0 (ν; q1 , q2 )∣2 . Remark 1. In practice, it may be difficult to design an FTI device where the location of the OPD origin, as required by (15), is known in advance. Fortunately, the location of ξ = 0 can be obtained through two methods: (i) by looking for the OPD point where the intensity of the recorded signal is twice the value of the empirical mean of the recorded signal, or (ii) by identifying the interferogram maximum, which occurs at the OPD origin from (15). Note that the knowledge of the OPD origin is also critical to define our two VDS FTI schemes, as will be clear in Secs 3 and 4. 2.2.2  Discrete Model  As for any digital sensor, FTI actually proceeds by capturing discrete samples of the continuous volume Y and by processing it in order to reconstruct a discretized version of X , these two discretizations having to respect the Shannon-Nyquist sampling theorem. Mathematically, the discrete FTI measurements are gathered in a cube Y ∈ RNξ ×N1 ×N2 approximating Y over Np ∶= N1 N2 pixels and Nξ OPD points. Similarly, the discrete HS volume is represented by a data cube X ∈ RNν ×N1 ×N2 approximating X over Np pixels and Nν = Nξ wavenumber samples. Assuming Nξ is even and positioning the OPD origin on the spectral index kξ = Nξ /2, the sampling rules are thus Y kξ ,k1 ,k2 ∶= Y((kξ − 21 Nξ )∆ξ ; k1 ∆1 , k2 ∆2 ),  (16)  X kν ,k1 ,k2 ∶= X ((kν −  (17)  1 2 Nν )∆ν ; k1 ∆1 , k2 ∆2 ),  with kξ , kν ∈ JNξ K, k1 ∈ JN1 K and k2 ∈ JN2 K, and given positive sampling periods ∆ξ , ∆1 , ∆2 , and ∆ν . 10  From Shannon-Nyquist theorem, for a fixed OPD sampling period ∆ξ and range ξmax ∶= Nξ ∆ξ /2 (with Nξ samples) an HS volume with wavenumber resolution ∆ν ∶= 1/(Nξ ∆ξ ) and range νmax ∶= 1/(2∆ξ ) can be reached. As a result, by increasing the number of OPD samples the final HS volume will contain spectral information with higher details. However, since for a constant light source the total light exposure of an observed biological specimen is proportional to Nξ , this increase is limited in practice by the risk of photo-bleaching [9]. Thus, a trade-off between spectral resolution and photo-bleaching must be found. Finally, if Y Nyq and X ∈ RNξ ×Np denote the matrix folding (see Sec. 1.4) of the cube Y and X , respectively, the acquisition process of Nyquist-FTI can be formulated in matrix form as Y Nyq = F ∗ X + N Nyq ,  (18)  where F ∈ CNξ ×Nξ is the one-dimensional (1D) Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) basis, N Nyq = Nyq Nξ ×Np models additive noise. Equivalently, this description can be also arranged [nNyq 1 , ⋯, nNp ] ∈ R into a vector form, i.e., y Nyq = Φ∗ x + nNyq , (19) with Φ ∶= I Np ⊗ F , y Nyq ∶= vec(Y Nyq ), x ∶= vec(X), and nNyq ∶= vec(N Nyq ). Note that the signals ∣E0 (ν)∣2 and I(ξ) are real-valued since, from (15), I(ξ) is the Fourier transform of the even function ∣E0 (∣ν∣)∣2 , the complex-valued DFT matrix can be replaced with the Hartley matrix [44]. More precisely, the vector y Nyq ∈ CN ≃ R2N contains only N independent real observations that can be captured using the unitary Hartley matrix. 2.2.3  Noise Model Identification and Estimation  In practice, FTI experiments are of course corrupted by different noise sources. Let us list and assess the impact of the main ones. First, there is the observation noise that mainly results from the combination of camera’s electronic noise, such as thermal noise, quantization noise and photon noise. Electronic noise is commonly assumed additive, independent of the observations, and distributed as Gaussian and homoscedastic noise, i.e., with constant variance for all measurements. Quantization noise is induced by the digitization of the observations. Strictly speaking, this is not noise but a deterministic distortion. However, when the bit-depth is large, i.e., when each measurement is quantized over a large number of bits, the quantization distortion is also well modeled by an additive, heteroscedastic Gaussian noise, i.e., assuming a quantizer with high resolution. Finally, a shot noise, as we call it photon noise(also known as Poisson noise) is signal dependent and associated to the quantized nature of light, i.e., camera sensors record light intensity by integrating individual photons’ energies over a given time interval. Photon noise is generally modeled by a Poisson distribution, whose variance is equal to its mean. Therefore, for large photon counts, which is typically the case of FTI, the impact of photon noise vanishes before electronic and quantization noise. Consequently, since these noise sources are independent and the interferogram in (18) is already DC-free, we can assume that the FTI discrete observations are corrupted by an additive, zero-mean, ho2 moscedastic Gaussian noise with variance σobs , i.e., denoting this general noise by N obs ∈ RNξ ×Np , obs 2 Nj,` ∼i.i.d. N (0, σobs ) for all OPDs j ∈ JNξ K and pixels ` ∈ JNp K. Given the recorded discrete and 2 noisy FTI measurements y rec , the parameter σobs can be estimated using, e.g., the Robust Median 2 (RM) estimator [45, 46], as we did in Sec. 6. Knowing σobs , the energy of the observation noise,  11  i.e., of the difference between the recorded FTI measurements y rec and the noiseless measurements y noiseless , can be bounded using the Chernoff-Hoeffding bound [47], i.e., √ 2 ∥y rec − y noiseless ∥22 = ∥nobs ∥22 ≤ ε2obs ∶= σobs (N + cobs N ), (20) which holds with high probability for cobs = O(1). Second, modeling noise is the consequence of discretization of (i) the domain of X in (17) and of (ii) the continuous FTI sensing realized by the actual optical setup. More precisely, we assumed the sensing model Φ∗ x where the sensing matrix Φ∗ can be treated as a linear operator RNξ ×Np → RNξ ×Np that accepts a discrete signal as an input. While the actual FTI sensing operator, [0, 1]3 → RN , maps a three dimensional continuous signal into a discrete N -length signal. Up to our knowledge there is no explicit formulation for this model miss-match, although some papers, e.g., [15, 29] suggested solving an infinite dimensional inverse problem where the effect of modeling noise can be minimized. However, studying the modeling noise is not the scope of this paper and can be addressed in our future investigations. There may be two other data corruption sources, both referred here as instrument noise. The first occurs due to the instrument calibration which may induce an error in determining the OPD origin. We will see in the following that this point is important for applying VDS strategies. We omit this error by assuming an exact calibration process. The second is called point spread effect [15] that is the description of an imaging sensor response to a point-wise emission of light. However, taking this effect into account is not the objective of this paper. In a nutshell, after merging the main aforementioned noise sources, which have zero mean and are independent of each other, we can bound the energy of the resulting noise, which we refer to as Nyquist noise N Nyq in (18). By definition, this is the difference between the Nyquist or recorded FTI measurements (y Nyq = y rec ) and the sensing model as follows: ∥y Nyq − Φ∗ x∥2 = ∥y rec − y noiseless + y noiseless − Φ∗ x∥2 obs  = ∥n  quan  +n  ∥2  ≤ εobs + εquan .  (21) (22) (23)  Thereby, we have ∥nNyq ∥2 ≤ εNyq with εNyq ≈ εobs + εquan . Since the two noises have zero mean and are independent, the Nyquist noise will have zero mean and variance σNyq ∶= σobs + σquan . However, having i.i.d. noise that effects every FTI measurements with zero mean and variance 2 σNyq , we can assume one of three types of Bounded-Energy-Noise (BEN) assumptions: (BEN-F) Bounded-energy full noise  The whole noise vector has bounded energy, i.e., ∥nNyq ∥2 ≤ εNyq .  (BEN-Pix) pixel noise  Bounded-energy  The energy of the noise at every √ pixel, including all OPDs, should be ∥2 ≤ εNyq / Np , ∀j ∈ JNp K. bounded as ∥nNyq j  (BEN-OPD) Bounded-energy OPD noise  The energy of the noise at every OPD should √ point, including all pixels, ⊺ Nyq ) be bounded as ∥ (n̄Nyq N , ∀` ∈ JN K, where n̄ is the ∥ ≤ ε / 2 Nyq ξ ξ ` ` th Nyq ` row of N .  Obviously each of (BEN-Pix) or (BEN-OPD) implies a general assumption (BEN-F) but not viceversa. In Sec. 4 we consider BEN-Pix assumption for CI-FTI model while for CA-FTI model in Sec. 5 the BEN-F assumption suffices for our developments. 12  2.3  Sparse Models for a Biological HS Volume  We here describe the sparsity models4 that we will assume on HS data for solving problems of the form (8). More precisely, once we choose this type of optimization problem, the choice of sparsity basis Ψ becomes a degree of freedom. Since an HS volume is a collection of 2D spatial images along the spectral domain, its sparsity model can be exploited both in the spectral or spatial domain. In this paper we consider two kinds of sparsity models, as listed below. • Spectral sparsity: Every spatial location of X corresponds to a spectrum of the biological specimen, i.e., the mixture of the spectral signatures of the fluorescent dyes injected into the specimen. In general, these spectral signatures follow smooth curves (see e.g., Fig. 5) whose coefficients, using suitable transforms such as Haar wavelets, have sparse/compressible representations. Mathematically, it writes X = Ψ1D S  or  x = Ψs,  Ψ ∶= I Np ⊗ Ψ1D ,  s ∶= vec(S),  (24)  where Ψ1D is a 1D Haar wavelet basis. In Sec. 4 we leverage this model for our analysis. • Joint spectral-spatial sparsity: Moreover, for every wavenumber index, an HS volume is restricted to a monochromatic image. As any natural image, these monochromatic images are sparse/compressible in some domain, e.g., 2D Haar wavelet basis Ψ2D . Combining this spatial sparsity model with the spectral sparsity model promotes a 3D HS sparsity model, written as X = Ψ1D SΨ⊺2D or x = Ψs, Ψ ∶= Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D . (25) We will use this model for CA-FTI in Sec. 5. The choice of the Haar wavelet basis is for the sake of analysis, and can be substituted with other wavelet bases.  3  Coded Illumination-FTI (CI-FTI)  In this section we focus on a simple modification of the FTI module., i.e., the coding of the global illumination. This is the most obvious adaptation, specially when the FTI module is combined with, e.g., a confocal microscope where the light illumination can be programmed. We first describe the principles of a CI-FTI system. Next, the problem of HS reconstruction is tackled.  3.1  Acquisition Strategy  We here refer to coded illumination as a technique that activates the light source in a portion of time slots, i.e., codes temporally the light distribution. Recall that in Nyquist-FTI, the light source is illuminating during Nξ time slots associated to the OPD indices kξ ∈ JNξ K. Without loss of generality, let us assume a light source with constant intensity over time, i.e., ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 in Sec. 2.2.1 is fixed. The total amount of exposure on every location of the biological specimen is then 4  Of course there are many options for sparsity models. We here choose a reasonable model according to the data we are going to acquire. Improving this sparsity model is indeed appealing, though it is beyond the scope of this paper. Moreover, note that we must be able to compute an exact/approximate local coherence of the corresponding matrix.  13  Figure 2: Illustration of (top) coded illumination-FTI and (bottom) coded aperture-FTI systems.  equal to Nξ ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 . The idea here is to reduce this amount to Mξ ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 by activating the light source M during Mξ OPD samples (equivalently, time slots) corresponding to a subset Ωξ = {kξ` }`=1ξ ⊂ JNξ K with cardinality Mξ . For the sake of providing a general model for selecting the OPD samples in Ωξ , we introduce a probability mass function (pmf) p(j) ∶= P[β = j] of a random variable (r.v.) β ∈ JNξ K such that Ωξj ∼iid β for j ∈ JMξ K. This results in recording the collection of interferograms I ((kξ − Nξ /2)∆ξ ) at OPD indices kξ ∈ Ωξ and pure noise at kξ ∈ JNξ K ∖ Ωξ for all spatial locations. The acquisition model of CI-FTI is then as follows Y CI = F ∗Ωξ X + N , or y CI = (I Np ⊗ F ∗Ωξ )x + n,  (26)  N  p where Ω = ⋃`=1 {Nξ (` − 1) + Ωξ } contains the indices associated to all selected entries of y Nyq , and Nyq N ∶= N Ωξ ∈ RMξ ×Np , or n = vec(N ), is the measurement noise. As mentioned in Sec. 2.2.3, we assume here that the noise energy per every pixel is bounded (BEN-Pix). The reason of this choice will become clear when we decouple the reconstruction problem into sub-problems (see Lemma 1).  3.2  HS Reconstruction Method and Guarantee  Given the noisy CI-FTI measurements in (26), we propose the following convex optimization problem for recovering the HS volume, i.e., √ ∗ x̂ = argmin∥Ψ⊺ u∥1 s. t. ∥D ξ (y CI (27) j − F Ωξ uj )∥2 ≤ εCI Mξ , ∀j ∈ JNp K, u∈RN  where D ξ ∈ RMξ ×Mξ is a diagonal matrix containing the probability of selecting the OPD indices such that (D ξ )jj = p(Ωξj )−1/2 , and εCI is a bound for measurement noise such that ∀j ∈ JNp K, √ ∥D ξ nj ∥2 ≤ εCI M . For the sake of separability of the reconstruction problem in Lemma 1, we assume a spectral sparsity prior for solving Problem (27), i.e., Ψ = I Np ⊗ Ψ1D . Following these assumptions we can decompose Problem (27) into small-size problems for which we can then find a recovery guarantee. Lemma 1. Problem (27) can be decoupled into Np subproblems √ ∗ x̂j = argmin∥Ψ⊺1D u∥1 s. t. ∥D ξ (y CI j − F Ωξ uj )∥2 ≤ εCI Mξ , Nξ  u∈R  14  ∀j ∈ JNp K.  (28)  Np  Proof. Since ∥Ψ⊺ u∥1 = ∑ ∥Ψ⊺1D uj ∥1 , according to the argument in [48, pp. 337] the proof is j=1  straightforward. The advantage of considering problem (28) over (27) is twofold. First, Eq. (6) shows that an HS volume that is K-sparse in Ψ basis can be reconstructed with high probability (w.h.p) from M = O(∥κ∥22 K log3 (K) log2 (N )) with respect to the local coherence of Φ∗ = I Np ⊗ F and Ψ. This bound is not tight for the case of block diagonal sensing matrix here. In the following, we provide an improved measurement bound. The second advantage is that solving problem (27) relies on high performance and storage requirements while, even for large Np , problem (28) can be solved in parallel using usual computers. This becomes more important when a part of the under-study biological specimen is fluorescent-free and recorded as black pixels or pure noise. Thus, the number of parallel subproblems in (28) can be reduced further by discarding the black pixels from the optimization problem. Our approach for developing a recovery guarantee for an HS volume using Problem (28) is to first consider a single arbitrary column of X, e.g., xj , and to derive a performance bound leveraging Corollary 1 and Proposition 2. This result is then extended to the all columns of X. According to Proposition 2, by selecting Mj ≳ δ −2 ∥κ∥22 Kj log3 (Kj ) log(Nξ ) OPD indices with respect to the pmf in 1 −c log3 (Kj ) (7), RIP of order Kj holds for the matrix √ D ξ F Ωξ Ψ1D with probability at least 1−Nξ , Mj and with the local coherence function computed with respect to F and Ψ1D . Then, Corollary 1 states that the j th column of X can be reconstructed via (28) up to an error ∥xj − x̂j ∥2 ≤  2σKj (Ψ⊺1D xj )1 √ + εCI . Kj  (29)  Corollary 1 and Proposition 2 provide uniform guarantee in the sense that the recovery is guaranteed for all possible Kj -sparse signals. Therefore, if for a fixed Kξ we select Mξ ≳ δ −2 ∥κ∥22 Kξ log3 (Kξ ) log(Nξ ) −c log3 (K )  ξ OPD samples, with probability at least 1 − Nξ the reconstruction of every column of the HS volume satisfies 2σKξ (Ψ⊺1D xj )1 √ + εCI , ∀j ∈ JNp K. (30) ∥xj − x̂j ∥2 ≤ Kξ  Finally, since ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤ ∑j ∥xj − x̂j ∥2 , we can bound the estimation error of the whole HS image as follows Np 2σ (Ψ⊺ x ) ⎛ Kξ 1D j 1 ⎞ √ ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤ ∑ + Np εCI . (31) ⎠ Kξ j=1 ⎝ Remark 2. The error bound in (31) can be tightened with respect to the biological application. For instance, in fluorescence spectroscopy only a group of spatial locations might be labeled by fluorochromes. As a consequence the recorded interferogram at those locations will be pure noise and they can be discarded from recovery process. In other words, if Kp number of pixels are labeled by fluorescent dyes leads to Kp meaningful interferograms in the recorded FTI measurements. In this case, the process of HS volume recovery from CI-FTI measurements requires solving Kp subproblems of the form (28). Thereby, the error bound can be tightened as Kp  ⎛ 2σKξ (Ψ⊺1D xj )1 ⎞ √ + Kp εCI . ⎠ Kξ j=1 ⎝  ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤ ∑  15  (32)  The rest of our analysis relies on the evaluation of the pmf of selecting the OPD indices. See Appendix A for more details. Before providing the final result we would have to make a prediction of εCI with respect to noise corrupting the actual FTI measurements, i.e., εNyq . To do so, we expand the fidelity term in (28) associated to the ground-truth signal x: Mξ  1  ∗ 2 ∥D ξ (y CI j − F Ωξ xj )∥2 = ∑ `=1  p(Ωξ` )  2  − F ∗Ωξ xj ) . (y Nyq ξ Ω` ,j  (33)  `  2  Define z` ∶= p(Ωξ` )-1/2 (y Nyq − F ∗ ξ xj ) . Then z1 , ⋯, zMξ will be an independent trial process with ξ Ω`  Ω` ,j  identical mean value, i.e.,  Nξ  2  Nyq ∥22 . − F xj ∥22 = ∥nNyq z̄ ∶= E[z` ] = ∑ (yk,j − F k xj ) = ∥y Nyq j j  (34)  k=1  Thereby, the law of large numbers states that for sufficiently large Mξ the following holds with high probability: Mξ  ∑ z` ≈ Mξ z̄.  (35)  `=1  √ By assuming pixel-wise bounded noise (see Sec.2.2.3) i.e., for all j we have ∥nNyq ∥2 ≤ εNyq / Np , j an upper bound for (33) can be obtained as √ ∗ x )∥ ≤ ε − F ∥D ξ (y CI (36) Nyq Mξ /Np . j Ωξ j 2 √ By comparing (36) with the fidelity term in Problem (28) we can choose εCI ≈ εNyq / Np . Lemma 2. Given the 1D Fourier basis Φ = F ∗ and 1D Haar wavelet Ψ1D , we have ∥κ∥22 ≲ log(Nξ ),  and  p(`) = CNξ min{1, ∣` −  Nξ −1 2 ∣ },  (37)  where CNξ is chosen such that p be a pmf. For the proof see Appendix A. Our main result for the CI-FTI scheme is given below. Theorem 1 (Coded illumination-FTI). Fix integers Kξ , Kp , and Mξ such that Kξ ≳ log(Nξ ) and Mξ ≳ Kξ log3 (Kξ ) log2 (Nξ ).  (38)  M  Select Mξ OPD indices Ωξ = {kξ` }`=1ξ ⊂ JNξ K, i.i.d. according to the pmf p(kξ ) ∶= P[kξ` = kξ ] = CNξ min{1, ∣kξ −  Nξ −1 2 ∣ },  ∀kξ ∈ JNξ K,  (39)  where CNξ is chosen such that p be a pmf. Then given noisy CI-FTI measurements as in (26), the √ HS volume can be approximated via (27) with εCI ≈ εNyq / Np up to an error Kp  ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤ ∑ ( j=1 −c log3 (Kξ )  with probability at least 1 − Nξ  2σKξ (Ψ⊺1D xj )1 K √ ) + εNyq √ p . Kξ Np  . 16  (40)  Proof. A combination of Prop. 2, Cor. 1 Lemma 1, and Lemma 2 with Eq. (31) completes the proof. In words, this theorem states that the pmf associated to the optimum sampling strategy follows a two-sided power-law decay centered at zero OPD point ξ = 0. As discussed in Sec. 2.2, zero OPD point can be determined prior to FTI acquisition process and be used for developing the abovementioned sampling strategy. Moreover, by leveraging this VDS strategy the amount of required light exposure for successful HS recovery behaves of the order of Kξ , i.e., for typical HS volumes Kξ ≪ Nξ . However, following the calculation of κ in Appendix A, it is seen that the use of a UDS strategy gives Mξ ≳ Nξ Kξ log3 (Kξ ) log(Nξ ), meaning that the reduction in light exposure is not possible.  4 4.1  Coded Aperture-FTI (CA-FTI) Acquisition Strategy  An alternative to reduce the light exposure on biological specimen is to code the light distribution in the spatial domain, rather than OPD domain (i.e., as in the CI-FTI scheme). This can be done by using a coded aperture or a spatial light modulator [17, 49] so that, at the `th OPD point sampling time, only M̃` spatial locations are exposed. This is exemplified in Fig. 2 (bottom). Recall that the light source in Nyquist-FTI, during every OPD scan, exposes Np spatial locations of the biological specimen, i.e., indexed by kp ∈ JNp K. Under a constant-intensity light source, the total exposure at every OPD point on the whole biological sample is equal to Np ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 . Using a coded aperture, this amount can be reduced to M̃` ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 for every `th OPD value such that M̃` ≪ Np . In other words, the total exposure during Nyquist-FTI acquisition (i.e., N ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 , N ∶= Nξ Np ) will be decreased to Nξ M ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 where M = ∑j=1 M̃` . After acquiring the sub-sampled FTI measurements, the above-mentioned argument is equivalent to say that for every j th spatial location we have recorded Mj OPD indices belonging to a Nξ Np set Ωj ⊂ JNξ K such that M = ∑`=1 M̃` = ∑j=1 Mj . Therefore, we can define a CA-FTI measurement th associated to the j spatial location as y j ∈ RMj , i.e., y j = F ∗Ωj xj + nj ,  nj ∶= N Nyq , ∀j ∈ JNp K. Ωj ,j  (41)  We can now construct the collection of all CA-FTI measurement y CA ∶= [y ⊺1 , ⋯, y ⊺Np ]⊺ ∈ RM such that y CA = Φ∗Ω x + n, Φ ∶= I Np ⊗ F , n ∶= nNyq ∈ RM , (42) Ω N  M  p where Ω = ⋃j=1 {Nξ (j − 1) + Ωj` }`=1j contains the indices associated to all selected entries of y Nyq . As dictated by CS, the aperture pattern must be generated at random. Let p(`, j) ∶= P[(β1 , β2 ) = (`, j)] be a pmf of activating the j th spatial location at the `th OPD point, i.e., a pmf of a bivariate random variable (β1 , β2 ) ∼ P for β1 ∈ JNξ K and β2 ∈ JNp K such that Ωj` ∼iid (β1 , β2 ) for ` ∈ JMj K. This probabilistic pattern generation model is considered as a degree of freedom in the following analysis. As an objective of this work, the optimum aperture generation strategy is presented in Theorem 2.  17  4.2  HS Reconstruction Method and Guarantee  Given the noisy CA-FTI measurements as in (42), an HS volume x can be reconstructed via the convex optimization problem √ (43) x̂ = argmin∥Ψ⊺ u∥1 s. t. ∥D(y CA − Φ∗Ω u)∥2 ≤ εCA M , u∈RN  √ where εCA is a bound for measurement noise such that ∥Dn∥2 ≤ εCA M with high probability, D ∶= blockdiag[D 1 , ⋯, D Np ] and D j is a diagonal matrix containing the values of the pmf associated to the recorded OPD points for the j th spatial location such that D j`` = p(Ωj` , j)−1/2 . For generality of our model we consider a joint spectral-spatial HS sparsity model in Problem (43) that can be written as x = Ψs where Ψ ∶= Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D . Contrary to the CI-FTI optimization Problem (27), Problem (43) cannot be decoupled into sub-problems since ∥Ψ⊺ u∥1 is not expandable and since the set Ω in this case is not separable anymore. Therefore, we tackle the reconstruction problem of the full HS volume at once. Following Proposition 2, the preconditioned matrix √1 DΦ∗Ω Ψ has the RIP M  −c log3 (K)  of order K with probability at least 1 − N , provided that M ≳ δ ∥κ∥22 K log3 (K) log(N ) CA-FTI measurements are recorded with respect to the pmf p(`) ∶= p(kξ , kp ) =  −2  κ2` , ` = kξ + Nξ (kp − 1), ∀kξ ∈ JNξ K, ∀kp ∈ JNp K, ∥κ∥22  (44)  where the function κ is a bound for the local coherence µ(Φ∗ Ψ) with Φ = I Np ⊗ F and Ψ = Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D . Thus, leveraging Corollary 1, the estimation error of an HS volume via (43) can be bounded as 2σ (Ψ⊺ x)1 ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤ K√ + εCA . (45) K  For estimating εCA we use the same procedure as for the CI-FTI case. The term ∥Dn∥22 can be written as M  ∥Dn∥22 = ∥D(y CA − Φ∗Ω x)∥22 = ∑  `=1  1 p(Ω` )  2  CA ∣yΩ − Φ∗Ω` x∣ . `  (46)  2  CA − Φ∗Ω` x∣ . Then z1 , ⋯, zM will be an independent trial process Let us define z` ∶= p (Ω` )−1/2 ∣yΩ ` with identical mean value, i.e., N  2  z̄ ∶= E[z` ] = ∑ (ykCA − Φ∗k x) = ∥nNyq ∥22 .  (47)  k=1  Recall that we here assume that full noise energy influencing the Nyquist measurements is bounded, as explained in Sec. 2.2.3, i.e., ∥nNyq ∥2 ≤ εNyq . Thereby, using the law of large numbers we obtain, w.h.p., √ ∥D(y CA − Φ∗Ω x)∥2 ≤ εNyq M . (48) Comparing (48) with the fidelity term in Problem (43) gives εCA ≈ εNyq . The analysis of the CA-FTI system is completed by evaluating the pmf in (44). Lemma 3. Given Φ = I Np ⊗ F and Ψ = Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D where Ψ1D and Ψ2D are the 1D Haar and 2D Haar wavelet bases, respectively, we have ∥κ∥22 ≲ Np log(Nξ ),  and  p(`, j) =  C Nξ Np  min{1,  where CNξ is chosen such that p be a pmf. 18  1 ∣`−  Nξ 2  }, ∣  ∀` ∈ JNξ K, ∀j ∈ JNp K,  (49)  For the proof see Appendix B. The main result of our recovery guarantee for CA-FTI is provided in the following theorem. Theorem 2 (Coded Aperture-FTI). Fix integers K and M such that K ≳ log(N ) and M ≳ Np K log3 (K) log(Nξ ) log(N ).  (50)  Program a coded aperture that picks a total number of M spatial locations at Nξ OPD points, i.i.d. and according to the pmf p(kξ , kp ) = CNξ min{1, Np ∣kξ 1−Nξ /2∣ }, ∀kξ ∈ JNξ K, ∀kp ∈ JNp K,  (51)  where CNξ is chosen such that p be a pmf. Then, given noisy CA-FTI measurements as in (42), the HS volume can be approximated via (43) with εCA ≈ εNyq , up to an error ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤ with probability at least 1 − N −c log  3  (K)  2σK (Ψ⊺ x)1 √ K  + εNyq ,  (52)  .  Proof. A combination of Prop. 2, Cor. 1 and Lemma 3 with Eq. (43),(45) completes the proof. According to (51), for a fixed OPD point, the spatial locations are exposed uniformly at random; while for a fixed spatial location the probability of exposing that location obeys a twosided power-law decay distribution centered at OPD origin. In addition, since for natural HS volumes Np K ≪ N , the amount of light exposure on the biological specimen can be significantly decreased by leveraging the characterized VDS strategy. Note that an UDS strategy would require M ≳ N K log3 (K) log(N ), which is equivalent to over exposing the specimen.  5  Constrained-Exposure Coding  As aforementioned, in fluorescence spectroscopy the type of the injected fluorescent dyes (and therefore their tolerance to exposure) is known. In this section, we follow up the proposed CI/CAFTI schemes assuming that the maximum exposure that a fluorescent dye can tolerate is given a priori. Let ∣Ẽtot ∣2 ∶= Nξ ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 be the total exposure on each spatial location in the Nyquist-FTI system, with ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 denoting the intensity received per OPD sample if a Nyquist mode is used. In Sec. 3 and Sec. 4 we described two proposed methods under the assumption that the intensity of the light source ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 is fixed. We here let the total amount of light exposure, or exposure budget ∣Ẽtot ∣2 be constrained, while recalling that we assume throughout that noise does not depend on ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 .  5.1  Constrained-exposure CI-FTI  Let ∣Ẽ0′ ∣2 be the constant intensity of the light source. The total exposure on every pixel in CI-FTI is then Mξ ∣Ẽ0′ ∣2 . Since in constrained-exposure CI-FTI this value is fixed by Nξ ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 , the intensity of the light source can be increased by an Nξ /Mξ factor, i.e., ∣Ẽ0′ ∣2 = Nξ /Mξ ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 , without causing photo-bleaching. Thus, the acquisition model of CI-FTI in (26) can be adapted to constrainedexposure CI-FTI, i.e., Y ′CI =  Nξ ∗ Mξ F Ωξ X  + N , or Y ′CI = 19  Nξ ∗ Mξ (F Ωξ X  +  Mξ Nξ N ),  (53)  meaning that Y ′CI = Nξ /Mξ Y CI when the noise in (26) is attenuated by the factor Mξ /Nξ , i.e., ′ εCI = Mξ /Nξ εCI . Therefore, Theorem 1 applies to the case of constrained-exposure by replacing ′ the value εNyq with εNyq . As a result the error bound in (40) is improved as Kp  ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤ ∑ ( j=1  2σKξ (Ψ⊺1D xj )1 Mξ K p √ , ) + εNyq √ Kξ Nξ Np  (54)  meaning that leveraging the prior information about the exposure-budget can boost the quality of HS recovery in the sense of denoising. This is verified numerically in Sec. 6.  5.2  Constrained-exposure CA-FTI  Recall that in the CA-FTI model every j th pixel is exposed Mj times during the full CA-FTI acquisition. This results in a total amount of exposure, Mj ∣Ẽ0′ ∣2 , under the constant-intensity illumination assumption. Moreover, given the total number of CA-FTI measurements M , Mj is a Binomial random variable, i.e., B(Nξ , M /N ). Following the measure concentration inequalities for sub-Gaussian distributions [50], we can show that the value of Mj is very close to its expected value with high probability, i.e., Mj ≃ M /Np . Therefore, the spatial locations of an HS volumes can be assumed to be equally exposed, and Thus, the light intensity can be globally (instead of pixel-wise) adjusted. For a constrained-exposure budget Nξ ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 , the intensity of the light source can be increased up to ∣Ẽ0′ ∣2 = N /M ∣Ẽ0 ∣2 . The acquisition model of constrained-exposure CA-FTI, with respect to (42), then reads y ′CA =  N ∗ M ΦΩ x + n,  or y ′CA =  N M  (Φ∗Ω x +  M N n) .  (55)  Similarly to the discussion for constrained exposure CI-FTI, (55) means that y ′CA = N /M y CA when the Nyquist noise is attenuated by the factor M /N . Thereby, the recovery guarantee for constrained-exposure CA-FTI model can be re-stated from Theorem 2 where εNyq should be replaced by M /N εNyq so that the error bound in (52) is improved as ∥x − x̂∥2 ≤  2σK (Ψ⊺ x)1 √ K  + εNyq M N.  (56)  In view of Eq. (54) and (56), by increasing the number of FTI measurements the noise term increases. Thus, given the constrained-exposure, recording full FTI measurements does not yield to the best recovery quality. Indeed, the optimum number of FTI measurements is the outcome of the trade-off between the sparse approximation and the noise term.  6  Numerical Results  For verifying the performance of the proposed compressive sensing-FTI methods we conduct three simulation scenarios. In the first scenario we examine the optimality of the proposed VDS strategies for CI-FTI and CA-FTI in (39) and (51) for any arbitrary sparse HS data by tracing the phase transition curves. The second scenario consists of following up the performance of proposed FTI frameworks with constrained/unconstrained-exposure budget on a simulated biological HS volumes. For all the experiments we report the Reconstruction SNR, i.e., RSNR ∶= −10 log10 E∥x − x̂∥22 /∥x∥22 where E denotes the expectation taken over several trails. The reconstructions are done with SPGL1 [51, 52] (for the experiments in Sec. 6.1 and Sec. 6.2) or using the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) introduced in [53] (for Sec. 6.3). 20  6.1  Noiseless synthetic HS volume  We generate a sparse matrix S of size (Nξ , N p) = (512, 82 ) with row (and column) sparsity level Kξ = 4 (and Kp = 4). The indices of Kξ columns (and Kp rows) are chosen uniformly at random and the non-zero coefficients are generated at random with respect to a normal distribution. A synthetic HS volume X is then generated as X = ΨS where Ψ = Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D for CA-FTI (and Ψ = I Np ⊗ Ψ1D for CI-FTI). Next, we form the Nyquist-FTI measurements y Nyq = ΦNyq x. The entries of a subset Ω is then chosen i.i.d. at random with respect to a pmf, i.e., a generalization of (39) and (51), characterized as follows (CI-FTI) (CA-FTI)  pα (kξ ) = CNξ ,α min{1, ∣kξ −N1ξ /2∣α }, 1 pα (kξ , kp ) = CNξ ,α min{1, Np ∣kξ −N α }, ξ /2∣  (57)  where the parameter α ∈ {0, 1, 1.5, 2, 8} controls the slope of the VDS strategy. For α = 0 it reduces to a UDS strategy. We also considered the optimal VDS strategy, i.e., κ = µloc in Prop. 2 which is numerically computable. An illustration of the corresponding pmf is provided in Fig. 3. It is clear that the pmf for α = 1 matches the optimal pmf curve with ∥κ∥22 = 14.24 which is closer to the optimal value than other slopes. It also confirms the fact that the proposed VDS is near-optimal. The CI/CA-FTI measurements are later simulated by restricting the Nyquist measurements to the selected subset Ω. For a fixed measurement ratio M /N this procedure is repeated for 50 independent Monte-Carlo trials. We trace the phase transition curves in Fig. 4 which shows the probability of successful recovery against the number of measurements. We count a recovery as a success if ∥x̂ − x∥22 ≤ 10−10 ∥x∥22 . The plot shows that the value α = 1 (i.e., models the proposed VDS strategy) can reach 100% chance of successful recovery at M /N > 0.2 (or M /N > 0.5) for CA-FTI (or CI-FTI); while for UDS strategy it cannot be achieved even in case of full sampling. 10−1  Opt., ∥µloc ∥22 = 6.15 α = 0, ∥κ∥22 = 512 α = 1, ∥κ∥22 = 14.24 α = 2, ∥κ∥22 = 1341  p(kξ )  10−2  10−3  10−4 -255  0  256  index (kξ ) Figure 3: An example of different sampling strategies pα (kξ ) in (57) for Nξ = 512. The value of ∥κ∥22 is an indicator of sampling optimality. Smaller values amount to a tighter sample complexity bound in (6). The same trend is expected for the phase transition curves as well, which is confirmed in Fig. 4.  6.2  Synthetic biological HS volume  We simulate a biological HS volume of size (Nξ , Np ) = (1024, 642 ), see Fig. 5, by mixing the coefficients of three spectral bands of a synthetic biological RGB image, i.e., taken from [54], with 21  100  100  CA-FTI  80 60 40  P[Success] × 100  P[Success] × 100  CI-FTI Optimum α=0 α=1 α = 1.5 α=2 α=8  20 0  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9  80 60 40 20 0  1  Measurement ratio (M /N )  Optimum α=0 α=1 α = 1.5 α=2 α=8  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9  1  Measurement ratio (M /N )  Figure 4: Phase transition comparison of proposed VDS (α = 1) against UDS (α = 0) and other VDS strategies in the frameworks of CI-FTI and CA-FTI.  the spectrum of three fluorochromes. The Nyquist measurements are formed as y Nyq = ΦNyq x+nNyq ∥x∥2  2 where nNyq `,k ∼i.i.d. N (0, σNyq ) and σNyq is fixed such that 10 log ( ∥nNyq ∥2 ) ≈ 20 dB. The CI/CA-FTI 2  measurements for the unconstrained-exposure budget are generated as explained in the previous experiment where we set α = 1, to simulate the proposed VDS strategy. While for the case of -exposure budget the values of ground truth HS volume are amplified by the factor N /M , as explained in Sec. 5. The results are obtained over 10 Monte-Carlo trials. Fig. 6 depicts the reconstruction SNR in dB as a function of the number of measurements. The HS volumes are reconstructed by solving two types of problems: (i) the CS-based `1 -minimization problem (27) or (43); and (ii) the Minimal Energy (ME) problem [10], i.e., applying the pseudo-inverse of the sensing operator on the measurements. For CA-FTI the quality of ME reconstruction even for large number of measurements does not reach CS reconstruction quality. For CI-FTI the performance of ME solution at M /N ≥ 0.4 gets almost identical to the performance of CS solution. For both cases this advocates the necessity of promoting sparsity prior in the reconstruction problem; and in continuation, designing the best VDS strategy. The illustrated quality for ME recovery is indeed achieved from the proposed VDS strategy, otherwise it would be doomed in case of UDS. However, we observed that assuming the sparsity basis Ψ = Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D in (27) can improve the performance of CS solution (black circle-curve). The analysis of considering this sparsity basis in order to find sufficiently tight sample-complexity bound is still ongoing. A simple application of Corollary 1 leads to the same result of Theorem 2 which we believe (and it is shown in Fig. 6) that it is not tight enough. Furthermore, the curves confirm that, by fixing the total exposure budget, performing the proposed illumination/aperture coding with higher intensity light source (instead of operating Nyquist-FTI with lower light intensity) improves the reconstruction quality. For sufficiently large number of measurements, the RSNR in dB decreases linearly as a function of number of measurements which parallels with (54) and (56). In Fig. 7 we illustrate three spatial maps, associated to kξ ∈ (545, 620, 702), of the reconstructed HS volumes. This figure is one instance of the Monte-Carlo trials in the experiment of Fig. 6, for M /N = 0.1. It can be seen that for both systems the HS volume recovered with CS-based formulation preserves the spatial configuration of the specimen, although the RSNR for CI-FTI may not be satisfactory. However, as mentioned in Sec. 1, the main motivation for studying 22  kν = 545  kν = 620  kν = 702  100  Fluorochrome spectra  Intensity  Ground truth RGB  Alexa Fluor 488 Alexa Fluor 610-R-PE R-PER (phycoerythrin)  0 0  545 620 702 Wavenumber index (kν )  1024  Figure 5: A synthetic biological RGB image (left); three spectral bands of the generated ground truth HS volume (middle); the known spectral signatures of three fluorochromes (right). 35  35 CI-FTI  CA-FTI  30  30  25  25  RSNR (dB)  RSNR (dB)  ≈ 7 dB  20 Fig.7(a)  CS, Uncon. Exp., Ψ = I Np ⊗ Ψ1D  15  CS, Con. Exp.,  10  ME, Con. Exp. Fig.7(b)  5 0  Ψ = I Np ⊗ Ψ1D  ME, Uncon. Exp.  Fig. 7(c)  CS, Uncon. Exp.  10 5  Ψ = Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9  Fig.7(e) ≈ 11 dB  15 CS, Con. Exp. ME, Uncon. Exp.  CS, Uncon. Exp., Ψ = Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D CS, Con. Exp.,  20  Fig.7(d)  1  Measurement ratio (M /N )  0  Fig. 7(f)  ME, Con. Exp.  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9  1  Measurement ratio (M /N )  Figure 6: The reconstruction performance of CI/CA-FTI systems solved by `1 minimization (CS) and ME problem with the constrained/unconstrained exposure budget. For a CI-FTI system, the influence of considering the sparsity basis as Ψ = Ψ2D ⊗ Ψ1D is also illustrated in black.  FTI is to acquire HS volumes with high spectral resolution, i.e., limited by the life-time of the fluorochromes. Note that the spatial resolution is determined by physical characteristics of the 2D imaging sensor in Fig. 1. In order to illustrate the ability of proposed systems in preserving the spectral information, Fig. 8 compares the spectral content of the reconstructed HS volumes, in the previous experiment, at spatial location (k1 , k2 ) = (57, 44). The artifacts in the solution of ME problem is obvious and they are sufficiently prominent for causing a false detection in interpreting the biological HS volumes. The CS-based solution in CI-FTI successfully follows the ground truth spectrum, though there are minor disturbances; nevertheless, the solution of CA-FTI almost perfectly matches the ground truth signal.  6.3  Experimental data  We first scanned a thin layer of a cell (i.e., Convallaria, lily of the valley, cross section of rhizome with concentric vascular bundles) stained on a glass slide, using a confocal microscope (with the 40x objective) equipped with FTI and LUXEON A DS100 light source [55]. This device, called HYPE, is used for the experiments done in [4]. The Nyquist-FTI measurements of size (Nξ , Nx , Ny ) = (1024, 128, 128), with OPDmax = 2.537 µm, was obtained during all the experiments in this section.  23  (a) CS, CI-FTI  (57,44)  Con. Exp.  (d) CS, CA-FTI  RSNR = 13.59 dB  (57,44)  Fig. 8(a)  Con. Exp.  RSNR = 27.37 dB  Fig. 8(b)  (b) CS, CI-FTI  Uncon. Exp.  RSNR = 12.99 dB  (e) CS, CA-FTI  Uncon. Exp.  RSNR = 21.56 dB  (c) ME, CI-FTI  Con. Exp.  RSNR = 5.15 dB  (f ) ME, CA-FTI  Con. Exp.  RSNR = 8.18 dB  Figure 7: An example of the reconstructed HS volumes from 10% of the total measurements (exposure). The spectral content at the spatial location indicated by a white square is shown in Fig. 8. 100  100  (a) CI-FTI  80 Ground truth CS, Con. Exp. CS, Uncon. Exp. ME, Con. Exp.  60 40  Intensity  Intensity  80  20 0 -20  (b) CA-FTI  Ground truth CS, Con. Exp. CS, Uncon. Exp. ME, Con. Exp.  60 40 20 0  1  545620 702  1024  Wavenumber index (kν )  -20  1  545620 702  1024  Wavenumber index (kν )  Figure 8: The spectrum of the reconstructed HS volumes in Fig. 7 at spatial location (k1 , k2 ) = (57, 44).  By changing the current level of the light source from I min = 100 mA to Imax = 700 mA (with ∆I = 25 mA) we acquired 25 sets of Nyquist-FTI measurements, i.e., each corresponds to one light intensity level5 . This exhaustive acquisition enables us to simulate constrained-exposure compressive sensing-FTI (see below). An RM estimator proposed in [45] is later applied on the whole 3D data cubes in order to estimate σNyq . Our first observation was that the slope of the curve of the estimated σNyq versus the light intensity in mA was equal to 1.44 × 10−4 . This very small slope confirms the fact that the Nyquist noise is almost independent of the light intensity. A CI-FTI system with constrained-exposure budget is simulated as follows. Given a reference current level of the light source, e.g., Iref = 100 mA as for the black curve in Fig, 9, we assume that the (relative6 ) constrained-exposure budget is equal to Iref Nξ . Thus, for every other current levels, I(mA), we are allowed to set Mξ (I, Iref ) = Iref I Nξ , e.g., Mξ (700, 100)/Nξ = 14.28%. Without loss of generality, the optimum pmf, i.e., associated to κ = µloc , for sub-sampling OPD axis is adopted in 5 This assumption is validated according to the specification of the light source [55], where it is shown that the relative luminous flux is proportional to the forward current. 6 Remind that the flux of the light source is proportional to its current level.  24  20  100  (a) Iref = 100 mA  Fig. 11(c)  15 ≈ 6 dB Fig. 11(e)  10  IRef IRef IRef IRef  ≈ 6 dB  5 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  = = = =  100 200 300 400  0.5  mA mA mA mA  0.6  Fig. 11(b)  0.7  0.8  0.9  Normalized intensity  RSNR (dB)  Fig. 11(d)  Mξ /Nξ = 0.14 Mξ /Nξ = 1  0  100  (b) Iref = 200 mA Ground truth Mξ /Nξ = 0.29 Mξ /Nξ = 1  0  1  100  200  Wavenumber index (kν )  Measurement ratio (Mξ /Nξ ) Figure 9: The reconstruction quality of CI-FTI system with constrained-exposure budget. For each curve, the (relative) exposure budget is constrained to Iref Nξ ; and thus Mξ (I, Iref )/Nξ = Iref /I for I ∈ {Iref , Iref +25, ⋯, 700} mA. Subsampling the OPD axis at higher light intensity results always in superior reconstruction.  Ground truth  Figure 10: The (partial) spectra of the reconstructed HS volumes, associated to the four marked instances in Fig. 9, at the center spatial location. Performing the proposed VDS strategy, even at the maximum compression ratio, significantly improves the quality of the reconstructed spectrum, especially in denoising.  this experiment. For the HS reconstruction we assume the sparsity basis as Ψ = Ψ2D ⊗Ψ1D and thus we solve problem (27). Based on our observations this sparsity model (over Ψ = I Np ⊗ Ψ1D ) results in superior visual quality of the reconstructed HS volumes. Since the Nyquist-FTI measurements recorded at I(mA) = 700 mA has the highest SNR, the reconstructed HS volume from this data is taken as the ground truth volume, e.g., for the purpose of computing the RSNR. For the sake of obtaining fair RSNR values, all the reconstructed spectra are scaled so that their `2 -norm is equal to −1/2 Np . The reason of this scaling is twofold: (i) to compute the RSNR values independently of the light intensity (since by increasing the light intensity, the intensity of the reconstructed spectrum increases); (ii) to reduce the effect of some corruption sources, e.g., saturated pixels, diffraction (due to the non-transparent frontiers of the sample), false error computation of individual spectra (due to the displacement of the sample during the experiment), or the remained light intensity in the chamber of the microscope. In Fig. 9, the RSNR of the CI-FTI system is illustrated for four constrained-exposure budgets, i.e., 100Nξ , 200Nξ , 300Nξ , and 400Nξ mA. The strong message of these results is that for a fixed exposure-budget, an application of the proposed CI-FTI method always results in a superior HS volume reconstruction. For instance, for 100Nξ mA exposurebudget, sub-sampling 14.28% (or 23.5%) of the OPD axis instead of full sampling, yields about 6 dB (or 9 dB) gain in the RSNR. These curves are obtained through one Monte-Carlo realization. The reconstructed HS volumes corresponding to four marked points in Fig. 9 are shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. The spectra at the centered pixels is depicted in Fig. 11. As shown, the amplitude of the noise in the spectra recovered from fully sampled FTI measurements is significantly larger than the ones in the spectra obtained from subsampled FTI measurements. In Fig. 11, for the sake of visual comparison, we demonstrate the spatial maps of the HS volumes, which associates to 594 nm wavelength (where the maximum amplitude of the averaged spectra happens). As it was expected, because of the low light intensity, e.g., at 100 mA and 200 mA, the visual quality of the HS volumes is significantly degraded due to noise ; while subsampling the OPD axis allows us to increase the light intensity up to 700 mA where the SNR takes its maximum value. It is worth mentioning that the parallel frontiers in Fig. 11 are due to the transparency of the specimen, not  25  (a) 700 mA, 100 % (b) 100 mA, 100 % Ground truth at 594 nm RSNR = 6.3 dB  4x (a)  4x (b)  (c) 700 mA, 14.2 % RSNR = 12.3 dB  4x (c)  (d) 200 mA, 100 % RSNR = 11.2 dB  4x (d)  (e) 700 mA, 28.5 % RSNR = 16.9 dB  4x (e)  Figure 11: The spatial maps of the reconstructed HS volumes at 594 nm wavelength.  due to the artifacts of the objective lenses.  7  Conclusion  We have proposed two versions of compressive sensing Fourier transform interferometry in the sense that the light exposure can be compressed temporally and spatially in order to maximize the spectral resolution of the resulting hyperspectral volumes, i.e., equivalent to minimize photo-bleaching phenomenon. These methods are practically plausible without any modification of interferometer. The first proposed system, called Coded illumination-FTI, consists in binary modulation of illuminating light before exposing the biological sample; while the second system, referred as Coded Aperture-FTI, involves a spatial light-modulation/aperture that allows spatio-temporal light coding. By invoking the theory of compressed sensing and by deriving a variable density sampling strategy, the two proposed frameworks are proved to reach the optimum uniform recovery guarantee. Furthermore, the impact of promoting fluorochrome life-time as a constraint has been analyzed. Our theoretical analyses were verified via exhaustive numerical tests for three cases: (i) noiseless synthetic arbitrary sparse HS data, (ii) simulated biological HS volume, and (iii) Experimental FTI measurement. However, future investigations can be followed in several directions. For instance, assuming other discrepancy source, e.g., Poisson noise, quantization [56], instrumental response, or taking into account the structure of the fluorochrome spectra in order to improve the HS recover. Tracing the best low-complexity prior model, e.g., low-rankness, group sparsity, dictionary-based sparsity, shearlet, or TV sparsity models is the scope of our future work.  A  Proof of Lemma 2  Let’s first recall the 1D Fourier and Haar wavelet bases. Definition 2 (One-dimensional Haar wavelet basis). Fix N = 2r for some r ∈ N. The onedimensional Haar wavelet basis consists of the functions {ψ̃j }N j=1 ∶= {ψ} ∪ {hn,` ∶ n = 0, ⋯, r − 1, ` =  26  0, ⋯, 2n − 1}, where ψ(t) = 2−r/2 , 0 ≤ t < 2r  (58)  is the mother wavelet function and n−r ⎧ ⎪ 2 2 ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ n−r hn,` (t) = ⎨−2 2 ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ 0  `2r−n ≤ t < (` + 12 )2r−n (` + 12 )2r−n ≤ t < (` + 1)2r−n . otherwise  (59)  Definition 3 (One-dimensional Fourier basis). Fix N = 2r for some r ∈ N. The one-dimensional N  Fourier basis consists of the functions {φk } 2  , where  k=− N +1 2  k 1 φk (t) = √ e2πi N t , 0 ≤ t < N. N  (60)  Since µloc k (A) = max ∣⟨φk , ψ̃j ⟩∣ we decouple the proof into computation of three values: 1≤j≤N  1. ∣⟨φk , ψ⟩∣, 2. ∣⟨φ0 , hn,` ⟩∣, 3. ∣⟨φk≠0 , hn,` ⟩∣. The first two cases can be easily calculated as ∣⟨φk , ψ⟩∣ = {  1 k=0 , 0 k≠0  (61)  ∣⟨φ0 , hn,` ⟩∣ = 0.  (62)  For the third case we proceed by direct computation as follows (`+ 12 )2r−n −1  ⟨φk≠0 , hn,` ⟩ =  2  ∑  n−r 2  (`+1)2r−n −1 −r 2  −2πi2−r kj  2 e  −  j=`2r−n  2  ∑  n−r 2  −r  2 2 e−2πi2  −r kj  (63)  j=(`+ 12 )2r−n  ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¶ ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶ ∶=s1 ∶=s2  Separate computation of s1 and s2 yields n  −n  2r−n−1 −1  s1 = 2 2 −r e−2πik`2  ∑  −r kj  e−2πi2  ,  (64)  j=0 n  1  −n  s2 = 2 2 −r e−2πik(`+ 2 )2  2r−n−1 −1  ∑  e−2πi2  −r kj  .  (65)  j=0  By replacing (64) and (65) in (63) and taking he absolute value we get RRR2r−n−1 −1 RR −n−1 R −2πi2−r kj RRR R ∣ ⟨φk≠0 , hn,` ⟩ ∣ = 2 RRR ∑ e RRR ∣1 − e−2πik2 ∣ RRR j=0 RRR n 2 sin2 πk2−n−1 = 2 2 −r ∣ sin πk2−r ∣ n −r 2  27  (66) (67)  Since , for a fixed k, the maximum value of 2n/2 sin2 πk2−n−1 happens when 2n ≈ 1.12 ∣k∣ we can write √ 2−r ∣k∣ 0.69 ≤√ . ∣ ⟨φk≠0 , hn,` ⟩ ∣ ≈ 1.39 (68) −r ∣ sin πk2 ∣ ∣k∣ In the last inequality we used the fact that ∣ sin πx∣ ≥ 2∣x∣ for ∣x∣ ≤ 1/2. Hence max∣⟨φk , ψ̃j ⟩∣ ≤ j  c min{1, √1 } where c is a constant. Therefore, the bound on the local coherence of the matrix ∣k∣  A = F W ∗ where F and W are the 1D discrete Fourier and 1D discrete Haar wavelet matrices, respectively, writes 1 µloc }. (69) ` (A) ≤ κ` ∶= c min{1, √ ∣` − N /2∣ Thus, it can be shown that ∥κ∥22 ≲ log(N ).  (70)  Eq. (70) implies (38) and from (7) we have η(`) = CN min{1,  1 }, ∀` ∈ JN K, ∣` − N /2∣  (71)  which implies (39). The constant CN should be chosen such that ∑N `=1 η(`) = 1.  B  Proof of Lemma 3  It remains to compute κ` and ∥κ∥2 associated to matrix A = (I Np ⊗ F )(W ∗2D ⊗ W ∗1D ). By using the properties of Kronecker product we can write A = (I Np W ∗2D ) ⊗ (F W ∗1D ). Thus, assuming ` ∶= kξ + Nξ (kp − 1) for kξ ∈ JNξ K and kp ∈ JNp K we have ∗ ∗ loc µloc ` (A) ∶= µkξ ,kp (A) = max∣(F W 1D )kξ ,jξ ∣ . max∣(I Np W 2D )kp ,jp ∣ . jξ  jp  (72)  ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶ ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¶ =∶µloc (I Np W ∗2D ) k  =∶µloc (F W ∗1D ) k  p  ξ  From (69) we have ∗ µloc kξ (F W 1D ) ≤ c min{1, √  1  (73)  }. ∣kξ − Nξ /2∣  Noting that a 2D basis can be decomposed into a Kronecker product of 1D basis leads to the following we evaluation ∗ ∗ loc ∗ ∗ µloc kp (I Np W 2D ) =∶ µk1 ,k2 (I Np W 2D ) = max∣(I N1 W 1D )k1 ,j1 ∣ . max∣(I N2 W 1D )k2 ,j2 ∣, j1  j2  (74)  ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¶ ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¶ =∶µloc (I N1 W ∗1D ) k 1  =∶µloc (I N2 W ∗1D ) k 2  where kp ∶= k1 + N1 (k2 − 1) for k1 ∈ JN1 K and k2 ∈ JN2 K. Let ek be the k th canonical basis, thus with respect to Definition 2 we can write −r  22 ∣(I N1 W ∗1D )k1 ,j ∣ = ∣⟨ek1 , ψ̃j ⟩∣ = { n−r 2 2  ψ̃j = ψ . ψ̃j = hn,` , n = 0, ⋯, r − 1, ` = 0, ⋯, 2n − 1 28  (75)  √ ∗ ∗ loc Therefore, µloc k1 (I N1 W 1D ) = µk2 (I N2 W 1D ) ≤ 1/ 2. Combining this with (74), (73), and (72) results in c 1 loc µloc }, (76) min{1, √ ` (A) ∶= µkξ ,kp (A) ≤ κ` ∶= Nξ 2 ∣k − ∣ ξ  2  and thus N  ∥κ∥22 = ∑ κ2` `=1 Nξ  (77)  Np  1 c2 } min{1, N ∣kξ − 2ξ ∣ kξ =1 kp =1 4  = ∑ ∑  (78)  N  ξ c2 1 = Np ∑ min{1, } N 4 ∣kξ − ξ ∣ kξ =1  (79)  2  ≤  c2 Np log(Nξ ). 4  (80)  Finally, the pmf associated to CA-FTI can be formulated from (76) and (80) as p(kξ , kp ) =  CNξ Np  min{1,  1 ∣kξ −  Nξ 2 ∣  }.  (81)  Acknowledgment We would like to thank Gilles Puy for his enlightening advices on estimation of the power of the noise affected by VDS. This work has been supported by the Fonds de la Recherche ScientifiqueFNRS under F.R.I.A. grant.  References [1] F. Lacar, M. Lewis, and I. Grierson, “Use of hyperspectral imagery for mapping grape varieties in the barossa valley, south australia,” in IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), vol. 6, 2001, pp. 2875–2877. [2] A. Gowen, C. O’Donnell, P. Cullen, G. Downey, and J. Frias, “Hyperspectral imaging - an emerging process analytical tool for food quality and safety control,” Trends in Food Science & Technology, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 590 – 598, 2007. [3] V. Farley, M. Chamberland, P. Lagueux, A. Vallières, A. Villemaire, and J. Giroux, “Chemical agent detection and identification with a hyperspectral imaging infrared sensor,” in Proceedings SPIE, vol. 6661, 2007, p. 66610L. [4] C. Leonard, A. Errachid, J. Daubie, D. Beghuin, P.-J. Courtois, M.-P. Mingeot-Leclercq, and D. Tyteca, “Hyperspectral analysis of laurdan emission spectra in red blood cells and giant unilamellar vesicles,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 108, no. 2, p. 622a, 2015.  29  [5] D. Yudovsky, A. Nouvong, and L. Pilon, “Hyperspectral imaging in diabetic foot wound care,” Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 1099–1113, 2010. [6] G. Lu and B. Fei, “Medical hyperspectral imaging: a review,” Journal of biomedical optics, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 010 901–010 901, 2014. [7] R. G. Sellar and G. D. Boreman, “Comparison of relative signal-to-noise ratios of different classes of imaging spectrometer,” Applied optics, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 1614–1624, Mar 2005. [8] A. A. Michelson and E. W. Morley, “On the relative motion of the earth and of the luminiferous ether,” Sidereal Messenger, vol. 6, pp. 306–310, 1887. [9] A. Diaspro, G. Chirico, C. Usai, P. Ramoino, and J. Dobrucki, Photobleaching. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2006, pp. 690–702. [10] E. J. Candès, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 489–509, 2006. [11] D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, 2006. [12] E. J. Candès and T. Tao, “Near-optimal signal recovery from random projections: Universal encoding strategies?” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 5406–5425, 2006. [13] A. Moshtaghpour, K. Degraux, V. Cambareri, A. Gonzalez, M. Roblin, L. Jacques, and P. Antoine, “Compressive hyperspectral imaging with Fourier transform interferometry,” in 3rd International Traveling Workshop on Interactions between Sparse models and Technology, 2016, pp. 27–29. [14] F. Krahmer and R. Ward, “Stable and robust sampling strategies for compressive imaging,” IEEE transactions on image processing, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 612–622, 2014. [15] B. Roman, A. C. Hansen, and B. Adcock, “On asymptotic structure in compressed sensing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.4178, 2014. [16] V. Studer, J. Bobin, M. Chahid, H. S. Mousavi, E. Candès, and M. Dahan, “Compressive fluorescence microscopy for biological and hyperspectral imaging,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 109, no. 26, pp. E1679–E1687, 2012. [17] M. Gehm, R. John, D. Brady, R. Willett, and T. Schulz, “Single-shot compressive spectral imaging with a dual-disperser architecture,” Optics express, vol. 15, no. 21, pp. 14 013–14 027, 2007. [18] A. Wagadarikar, R. John, R. Willett, and D. Brady, “Single disperser design for coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging,” Applied optics, vol. 47, no. 10, pp. B44–B51, 2008. [19] H. Arguello and G. R. Arce, “Code aperture optimization for spectrally agile compressive imaging,” JOSA A, vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 2400–2413, 2011.  30  [20] M. Golbabaee and P. Vandergheynst, “Joint trace/tv norm minimization: A new efficient approach for spectral compressive imaging,” in IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), 2012, pp. 933–936. [21] ——, “Hyperspectral image compressed sensing via low-rank and joint-sparse matrix recovery,” in IEEE International Conference On Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). Ieee, 2012, pp. 2741–2744. [22] M. Woringer, X. Darzacq, C. Zimmer, and M. Mir, “Faster and less phototoxic 3D fluorescence microscopy using a versatile compressed sensing scheme,” Optics express, vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 13 668–13 683, Jun 2017. [23] A. Moshtaghpour, V. Cambareri, K. Degraux, A. C. Gonzalez Gonzalez, M. Roblin, L. Jacques, and P. Antoine, “Coded-illumination fourier transform interferometry,” in the Golden Jubilee Meeting of the Royal Belgian Society for Microscopy (RBSM), 2016, pp. 65–66. [24] A. Moshtaghpour, V. Cambareri, L. Jacques, P. Antoine, and M. Roblin, “Compressive hyperspectral imaging using coded fourier transform interferometry,” in Signal Processing with Adaptive Sparse Structured Representations workshop (SPARS), 2017. [25] Q. Zhang, R. Plemmons, D. Kittle, D. Brady, and S. Prasad, “Joint segmentation and reconstruction of hyperspectral data with compressed measurements,” Applied optics, vol. 50, no. 22, pp. 4417–4435, 2011. [26] C. Li, T. Sun, K. F. Kelly, and Y. Zhang, “A compressive sensing and unmixing scheme for hyperspectral data processing,” IEEE transactions on image processing, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1200–1210, 2012. [27] G. Martı́n, J. M. Bioucas-Dias, and A. Plaza, “HYCA: A new technique for hyperspectral compressive sensing,” IEEE transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 2819–2831, 2015. [28] M. Golbabaee, S. Arberet, and P. Vandergheynst, “Compressive source separation: Theory and methods for hyperspectral imaging,” IEEE transactions on image processing, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 5096–5110, 2013. [29] B. Adcock, A. C. Hansen, C. Poon, and B. Roman, “Breaking the coherence barrier: A new theory for compressed sensing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.0561, 2013. [30] H. Choi, D. Wadduwage, P. T. Matsudaira, and P. T. So, “Depth resolved hyperspectral imaging spectrometer based on structured light illumination and fourier transform interferometry,” Biomedical optics express, vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 3494–3507, 2014. [31] G. Puy, P. Vandergheynst, and Y. Wiaux, “On variable density compressive sampling,” IEEE signal processing letters, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 595–598, 2011. [32] C. Boyer, J. Bigot, and P. Weiss, “Compressed sensing with structured sparsity and structured acquisition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.01619, 2015. [33] J. Bigot, C. Boyer, and P. Weiss, “An analysis of block sampling strategies in compressed sensing,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 2125–2139, 2016. 31  [34] E. Candès and J. Romberg, “Sparsity and incoherence in compressive sampling,” Inverse problems, vol. 23, no. 3, p. 969, 2007. [35] Z. Wang and G. R. Arce, “Variable density compressed image sampling,” IEEE transactions on image processing, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 264–270, 2010. [36] E. J. Candès and Y. Plan, “A probabilistic and ripless theory of compressed sensing,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 7235–7254, 2011. [37] M. Lustig, D. L. Donoho, J. M. Santos, and J. M. Pauly, “Compressed sensing MRI,” IEEE signal processing magazine, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 72–82, 2008. [38] E. J. Candès and T. Tao, “Decoding by linear programming,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 4203–4215, 2005. [39] H. Rauhut, “Compressive sensing and structured random matrices,” Theoretical foundations and numerical methods for sparse recovery, vol. 9, pp. 1–92, 2010. [40] B. Adcock, A. C. Hansen, and B. Roman, “A note on compressed sensing of structured sparse wavelet coefficients from subsampled fourier measurements,” IEEE signal processing letters, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 732–736, 2016. [41] Y. Wiaux, L. Jacques, G. Puy, A. M. Scaife, and P. Vandergheynst, “Compressed sensing imaging techniques for radio interferometry,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, vol. 395, no. 3, pp. 1733–1742, 2009. [42] M. Elad, P. Milanfar, and R. Rubinstein, “Analysis versus synthesis in signal priors,” Inverse problems, vol. 23, no. 3, p. 947, 2007. [43] R. Bell, Introductory Fourier transform spectroscopy.  Elsevier, 2012.  [44] R. N. Bracewell, “Discrete hartley transform,” JOSA, vol. 73, no. 12, pp. 1832–1835, 1983. [45] D. L. Donoho and I. M. Johnstone, “Ideal spatial adaptation by wavelet shrinkage,” bBiometrika, pp. 425–455, 1994. [46] C. Taswell, “The what, how, and why of wavelet shrinkage denoising,” Computing in science & engineering, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 12–19, 2000. [47] W. Hoeffding, “Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables,” Journal of the American statistical association, vol. 58, no. 301, pp. 13–30, 1963. [48] R. T. Rockafellar, Convex analysis.  Princeton university press, 2015.  [49] M. F. Duarte, M. A. Davenport, D. Takhar, J. N. Laska, T. Sun, K. E. Kelly, R. G. Baraniuk et al., “Single-pixel imaging via compressive sampling,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 25, no. 2, p. 83, 2008. [50] F. Chung and L. Lu, “Concentration inequalities and martingale inequalities: a survey,” Internet Mathematics, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 79–127, 2006.  32  [51] E. Vandenberg and M. P. Friedlander, “SPGL1: A solver for large-scale sparse reconstruction,” June 2007, http://www.cs.ubc.ca/labs/scl/spgl1. [52] ——, “Probing the pareto frontier for basis pursuit solutions,” SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 890–912, 2008. [53] M. S. Almeida and M. Figueiredo, “Deconvolving images with unknown boundaries using the alternating direction method of multipliers,” IEEE transactions on image processing, vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 3074–3086, 2013. [54] P. Ruusuvuori, A. Lehmussola, J. Selinummi, T. Rajala, H. Huttunen, and O. Yli-Harja, “Benchmark set of synthetic images for validating cell image analysis algorithms,” in 16th European signal processing conference, 2008, pp. 1–5. [55] “LUXEON A DS100 specification sheet,” DS100-pdf, accessed: February 16, 2018.  https://www.lumileds.com/uploads/298/  [56] A. Moshtaghpour, L. Jacques, V. Cambareri, K. Degraux, and C. De Vleeschouwer, “Consistent basis pursuit for signal and matrix estimates in quantized compressed sensing,” IEEE signal processing letters, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 25–29, 2016.  33

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
