Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_3973

Abstract:
arXiv:1709.06328v1 [cs.CV] 19 Sep 2017  Fitting Generalized Essential Matrices from Generic 6ˆ6 Matrices and its Applications João R. Cardoso Instituto Politécnito de Coimbra  Pedro Miraldo Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa  jocar@isec.pt  pmiraldo@isr.tecnico.ulisboa.pt  Abstract  cameras to build up this stereo pair [2], see Fig. 1(a). However, these cameras have, among several disadvantages, a limited field of view. To overcome this, some authors have developed new camera systems. Special emphasis has been devoted to omnidirectional cameras, which can be either set up using catadioptric camera systems (combination of perspective cameras with mirrors) [4, 5, 6], or multiperspective camera systems [7, 8], both ensuring a wider field of view. In most of these cases, these omnidirectional cameras are in practice non-central (e.g. see for example [9] for omnidirectional catadioptric cameras). Other types of imaging sensors that, due to physical constraints, cannot be modeled by the perspective camera model of sensors, have been defined. Examples include pushbroom cameras [10] or refractive imaging devices [11]. Cameras that cannot be modeled by the perspective camera model are called non-central. To handle with any type of camera (central or noncentral), here we consider a pair of camera systems that are parameterized by the general camera model [12, 13, 14]. In this model, camera pixels are mapped onto generic 3D straight lines in the world. If all of these 3D lines intersect in a single point, the system will be central (see Fig. 1(a)), otherwise it is non-central (see Fig. 1(b)). For a central camera stereo problem, one can defined a 3 ˆ 3 matrix that encodes the incident relation between projection lines of both cameras [1, 2]. This matrix is called essential. However, in the case of general camera systems, such a matrix cannot be used because the required constraints are not fulfilled. Instead, it can be proved that there is a 6ˆ6 matrix that expresses the incident relation between the projection lines (two general camera systems) [15, 16]. Such a matrix is called generalized essential and has a special block structure, involving rotation and skew-symmetric matrices of order 3. In general, computer vision problems where this matrix has to be determined are affected with noise and the result is a matrix of order 6 that fails to fit the structure characterizing the generalized essential matrices. In these cases, one needs to find the closest generalized essential matrix from a generic 6 ˆ 6 matrix. From a mathe-  This paper addresses the problem of finding the closest generalized essential matrix from a given 6 ˆ 6 matrix, with respect to the Frobenius norm. To the best of our knowledge, this nonlinear constrained optimization problem has not been addressed in the literature yet. Although it can be solved directly, it involves a large amount of 33 constraints, and any optimization method to solve it will require much computational time. Then, we start by converting the original problem into a new one, involving only orthogonal constraints, and propose an efficient algorithm of steepest descent-type to find the goal solution. To test the algorithm, we evaluate with both synthetic and real data. From the results with synthetic data, we conclude that the proposed method is much faster than applying general optimization techniques to the original problem with 33 constraints. To conclude and to further motivate the relevance of our method, we develop an efficient and robust algorithm for estimation of the general relative pose problem, which will be compared with the state-of-the-art techniques. It is shown, in particular, that some existing approaches to solving the relative pose estimation problem can be considerably improved, if combined with our method for estimating the closest generalized essential matrix. Real data to validate the algorithm is used as well.  1. Introduction The estimation of the relative camera position is a classical problem in computer vision. It can be defined as finding the rigid transformation between two cameras with different external parameters [1, 2]. For example, one of the most common strategies for scene reconstruction, known as passive techniques, is to use a pair of stereo cameras, i.e. two cameras looking at the same scene at different positions. These techniques have also been used in robot vision applications, such as visual odometry [3]. Usually, due to their simplicity, authors use perspective 1  Left Camera Rays  Ra ys  Left Camera Rays  s aR er am  E“  Ri  E“p tR  (a) Central Camera Systems  „  E R  Rig ht C  ay  pLq  li  gh tC  pRq  di  am era  pLq  di  pRq  li   R 0 (b) General Camera Systems  Figure 1: Representation of the differences between central and general camera systems, Figs. (a) and (b), respectively. In this paper we address the general case, in which the camera system does not have a single view point. matical point of view, this is a nonlinear constrained matrix optimization problem. It is nonconvex which raises many difficulties to find a global minimum. Examples of applications that require the estimation of generalized essential matrices are: the computation of the minimal relative pose position for general camera models [17]; the estimation of the camera motion using multiple multi-perspective camera systems [7, 8]; general structurefrom-motion algorithms [18, 19]; and the estimation of the camera absolute pose using known coordinates of 3D straight lines [20]. Since the special structure of generalized essential matrices involves many nonlinear constraints (a rotation matrix and its product with a skew-symmetric matrix), finding the correct parameters of these matrices may slow down significantly the algorithms. An important advantage of having a method to approximate general essential matrices from generic 6 ˆ 6 matrices, is to allow us to get rid off some of those constraints (or, at least, to reduce the tolerance of these constraints in the optimization processes) to turn the algorithms faster. In this paper, we show that the problem under investigation can be reformulated as an optimization problem with only orthogonal constraints. Then, we present an efficient algorithm for finding a solution. In addition, we give theoretical arguments to explain why the problem has a global minimum. Some open questions will be pointed out. We recall that methods for problems with orthogonal constraints are available in the literature [21, 22, 23, 24], but its difficulty depends significantly on the objective function. In our problem, the objective function is not easily to handle, which raises many challenging issues. Techniques from matrix theory and optimization on manifolds are required. The method proposed in this paper aims at approximating a generalized essential matrix E, from a general 6 ˆ 6 matrix A, with the assumption that the latter was estimated by ignoring some of the generalized essential constraints.  Our motivation for developing such a method is two-fold: 1) when, for some reason, methods that estimate A do not consider the generalized essential matrix constraints (such as DLT techniques), or at least do not consider them at all, methods such as ours are helpful to obtain a true generalized essential matrix; and 2) when a large tolerance for the generalized essential constraints is used to speed up the computation of A, in complex optimization techniques, methods like ours can be used at the end to correct the constraints. Experiments illustrating the latter situation will be presented in Sec. 6. It shall be stressed out that the main goal of this work is not to propose a technique for the well-known problem of estimating a generalized essential matrix from a set of projection lines (as did in [25] for general camera systems and [26] for multi-camera systems), but instead, to estimate E from a previously computed A by other techniques. However, to reinforce the importance of our method, we propose a new approach for the general relative pose problem, which results from a combination of known techniques with posterior estimation of the closest generalized essential matrix. We recall that, for the central case, similar approximation techniques have been used in pose position estimation. For example, in [27], for central perspective cameras, the author estimates a true essential matrix with respect to the Frobenius norm, by firstly using DLT techniques to compute a rough estimative to the 3 ˆ 3 essential matrix. He proved that this method performs almost as well as the best iterative algorithms, being faster in many cases. More recently, other methods have been developed using similar approximation techniques for the central perspective camera; see, for instance, [28, 29]. We believe that the method we are proposing in this paper will contribute for the development of similar techniques, but for general camera models. One of the possible applications for our approach (note that there are several other types of applications) is to first 2  2. Problem Definition and Direct Solutions  run [17] in a noisy data, to get inliers and outliers; then, use a method to estimate the generalized essential matrix from a set of inliers 3D projection lines; finally, depending on the method used in the previous step, if the result given does not fulfill satisfactory the generalized essential constraints, one needs to run a method like ours. This procedure will be illustrated in Secs. 5 and 6.  For a better understanding of the generalized essential matrix parametrization, we first revisit the simpler case of the regular essential matrix corresponding to Fig. 1(a). An essential matrix aims at representing the incident relation between two projection lines of two cameras looking at the same 3D points in the world. The rigid transformation between both coordinate systems is taken into account. Without loss of generality, it is assumed that both cameras are represented at the origin of each coordinate system, ensuring that all the 3D projection lines of each camera pass through the origin of the respective camera coordinate system. Under this assumption, one can represent 3D projecpLq tion lines by the respective directions, here denoted as di pRq and di for ith 3D projection lines that must intersect in the world, where pLq and pRq represent the left and right rays, respectively. Moreover, we assume that the transformation between both camera systems is given by a rotation matrix R P SOp3q and a translation vector t P R3 . Using this formulation, an essential matrix E P R3ˆ3 can be defined by:  1.1. Notation Small regular letters denote scalars, e.g. a; small bold letters denote vectors, e.g. a P Rn ; and capital bold letters denote matrices, e.g. A P Rnˆm . In a matrix A, Api:j,k:lq P Rpj´i`1qˆpl´k`1q denotes the submatrix composed by the lines from i to j and columns from k to l. We represent general projection lines using Plücker coordinates [30]: “ ‰T l P R6 „ dT mT , such that dT m “ 0 (1) where d P R3 and m P R3 are the line direction and moment, respectively. The operator „ denotes a vector that can be represented up to a scale factor. The hat operator represents the skew-symmetric matrix pb. ||X|| that linearizes the cross product, i.e. a ˆ b “ a denotes the Frobenius norm (also known as L2 -norm) of the matrix X, which can be defined as a function of the trace: ` ˘ 2 ||X|| “ trace XT X . (2)  pLq T  di  pRq  Edi  . “ 0, such that E “ p tR.  (3)  Hence, the problem of finding the closest essential matrix X˚ from a general A P R3ˆ3 , may be formulated as:  R P SOp3q stands for the group of rotation matrices of order 3, i.e., the group of orthogonal matrices with determinant equal to 1. To conclude, diagpa1 , a2 , . . . , an q denotes an n ˆ n diagonal matrix, with diagonal entries equals to a1 , a2 , . . . , an , expmpAq represents the matrix exponencial of A, and the asterisk symbol in A˚ denotes a minimizer of an optimization problem.  argmin }A ´ X} , s.t. X P R3ˆ3 is an essential matrix. X  (4) It has an explicit solution (see, for instance, Theorem 5.9 in [1]): . λ1 ` λ2 X˚ “ U diagpσ, σ, 0q VT , with σ “ 2  1.2. Outline of the Paper  (5)  where the 3 ˆ 3 orthogonal matrices U and V and scalars λ1 , λ2 are given by the singular value decomposition of A:  This paper is organized as follows. In the next section we start by revisiting the similar, but simpler, problem of finding the closest essential matrix arising in central camera systems. Then we formulate mathematically the problem under investigation in this work and explain how it could be solved in a straightforward fashion. In Sec. 3, we reformulate the original problem and derive an efficient solution for it. In Sec. 4, our method is compared with the direct solution using synthetic data. In Sec. 5, we design a new algorithm for the general relative pose problem (with nonminimal data), incorporating the technique proposed here for the generalized essential matrix approximation. Results with the motivation on the use of our technique are shown in Sec. 6 (including the evaluation of the method proposed in Sec. 5). Experimental results are discussed in the respective experimental sections. Finally, in Sec. 7, some conclusions are drawn.  A “ U diagpλ1 , λ2 , λ3 q V.  (6)  It turns out that, for the non-central case (the one addressed in this paper), and since the perspective constraints are note verified, we cannot represent the 3D projection lines only with its directions [12]. One has to parametrize these 3D projection lines using a general 3D straight lines representation (unconstrained 3D straight lines), see pLq Fig. 1(b). Let us represent lines of both cameras as li pRq and li , represented in each coordinate system and parameterized by Plücker coordinates (see Sec. 1.1). The incident relation between both 3D projection lines is given by: pLq T  li 3  pRq  E li  “ 0, such that E P X ,  (7)  where E P R6ˆ6 is a generalized essential matrix [15, 16, 31] and X denotes the set of generalized essential matrices: "„  * p tR R p X “ : R P SOp3q, t is skew-symmetric . R 0 (8) As observed in (8), a generalized essential matrix has a special form. It is built up by block matrices that depend on rotation and translation parameters. Likewise most algorithms for the estimation of essential matrices, in many situations E is estimated without enforcing the respective constraints. This happens, in particular, when using DLT techniques [2] or iterative schemes that do not take into account all the constraints, to speed up the respective process. One of the goals of this paper is to estimate a true generalized essential matrix (i.e., a matrix satisfying the constraints associated with (8)) that is closest to a general A P R6ˆ6 with respect to the Frobenius norm. Formally, this problem can be formulated as: argmin  first, represents the problem independently from the translation parameters, which means that only orthogonal constraints will be involved (Sec. 3.1). Then, we propose an efficient algorithm to solve the reformulated optimization problem (Sec. 3.2). To conclude this section, a pseudocode of the algorithm will be included (Sec. 3.3).  3.1. Reformulation of the Problem Since our goal is to represent the problem independently from the translation parameters, we start by eliminating the skew-symmetric constraints in (9). To ease the notation, we . . define the following submatrices: A11 “ Ap1:3,1:3q ; A12 “ . . Ap1:3,4:6q ; A21 “ Ap4:6,1:3q ; and A22 “ Ap4:6,4:6q . We start by finding a workable expression for the objective function in terms of R and p t: . 2 f pR, tq “ }X ´ A} ›„  „ ›2 › A11 A12 p tR R ›› › “ › ´ A21 A22 R 0 › “ }A11 ´ p tR}2 ` }A12 ´ R}2 `  2  ||X ´ A||  X  .  (9)  subject to X P X  “  The critical part in the previous optimization problem is to ensure that X belongs to the space of solutions X . There is however a trivial way of ensuring this, which can be derived directly from (8). These constraints are associated with the fact that X must be built up by stacking both R and p tR. This corresponds to the following optimization problem: argmin  }A21 ´ R}2 ` }A22 }2 }A11 ´ p tR}2 ` ` T ˘ trace pA12 ´ RT qpA12 ´ Rq ` ` ˘ trace pAT21 ´ RT qpA21 ´ Rq ` }A22 }2 .(11)  Attending to the linearity of the trace function and the fact that }RT R}2 “ }I}2 “ 3, the following expression is obtained for the objective function: f pR, tq “ }A11 ´ p tR}2 ´ ` ˘ 2 trace pA12 ` A21 qT R ` α, (12)  ||X ´ A||  X  subject to XTp1:3,4:6q Xp1:3,4:6q “ I  where: ›„ › 0 . α “ 6 ` ›› A21  Xp4:6,1:3q ´ Xp1:3,4:6q “ 0 Xp4:6,4:6q “ 0  ›2 A12 ›› A22 ›  (13)  . . is a constant. Let us denote M “ A11 and N “ pA12 ` T A21 q . With respect to the Frobenius norm, it is wellknown and easy to show that the nearest skew-symmetric p t˚ from a given generic matrix B P R3ˆ3 is the so-called skew-symmetric part of B (check Theorem 5.3 in [32] with P “ I): B ´ BT p . (14) t˚ “ 2 . T T T Hence, we can replace p t “ pMR ´pMR q q{2 in (12), yielding:  Xp1:3,1:3q XTp1:3,4:6q ` Xp1:3,4:6q XTp1:3,1:3q “ 0 (10) Some drawbacks associated with (10) are related with the large amount of constraints. In total, 33 constraints are involved, being many of them quadratic. As we shall see in the experimental results, this will increase significantly the computational time required to fit the generalized essential matrix. In the next section, we derive an efficient algorith to solve (9), that exploits the particular features of the objective function and of the constraints.  ›2 . 1 › gpRq “ ›M ` RMT R› ´ 2tracepNRq ` β, 4  3. An Efficient Solution  (15)  where:  Now, we describe a method for the efficient approximation of the generalized essential matrix from a given 6 ˆ 6 matrix, with respect to the Frobenius norm. Our approach,  ›„ › 0 . β “ 6 ` ›› A21 4  ›2 1 A12 ›› ` }A11 }2 . › A22 2  (16)  which shows that  Writing again the Frobenius norm in terms of the trace of a matrix gives:  r ´ X˚ } ď 2. 0 ď }X ˘ ` 1 gpRq “ trace pMT Rq2 ´ 2 trace pNRq ` β, (17) 2  r « X˚ . For instance, This means that if  « 0 then X ´1 r if  “ 10 , then X « X˚ with an error not greater that r and X˚ are generalized essential 2ˆ10´1 . Note that both X matrices. Once a local minimum R˚ of (18) has been computed, the corresponding skew-symmetric matrix p t˚ needed in (9) will be: ` ˘T MRT˚ ´ MRT˚ p t˚ “ . (22) 2 Hence, the required nearest generalized essential matrix from A will be, therefore, given by: „  p t˚ R˚ R˚ X˚ “ . (23) R˚ 0  with β being the constant given in (16). This allows a new reformulation of the problem (9) as: argmin  gpRq  R  (18)  subject to R P SOp3q, which has only orthogonal constraints.  3.2. Solving the Problem Many optimization problems with orthogonal constraints have been investigated in the last two decades; see for instance [21, 23, 24, 33]. The right framework to deal with this kind of problems is to regard them as optimization problems on matrix manifolds. Tools from Riemaniann geometry, calculus on matrix manifolds, and numerical linear algebra are required. Similar techniques can be used in our particular problem (18), because the set of rotation matrices SOp3q is a manifold. It has also a structure of Lie group (see [34]) and is a compact set. We recall that this latter property guarantees the existence of at least a global minimum for (18); see Part III of [35]. However, the complicated expression of the objective function gpRq turns hard to find an explicit expression for those global minima. In addition, the lack of convexity of our problem (neither the objective function nor the constraints are convex) may only guarantee the approximation of local minima. It turns out however that some numerical experiments (not showed in this paper) suggest that the approximation produced by Algorithm 1, in Sec. 3.3, is indeed the global one. We could observe this because different initial guesses X0 led to convergence to the same matrix. Unfortunately, a theoretical confirmation that Algorithm 1 always converges to a global minimum is still unknown. Nevertheless, it can be guaranteed that when A is close to being a generalized essential matrix (this happens in many practical situations, as shown later in Section 4), a local minimizer for (18) will be very close to the global one. To give more insight into this claim, let us consider the original formulation (9) and r a local minimizer, by X˚ a global minimizer denote by X and assume that r “ , }A ´ X} (19)  The algorithm we will propose in Sec. 3.3 is of steepest descent type. Loosely speaking, these methods are essentially based on the property that the negative of the gradient of the objective function points out the direction of fastest decrease. For more details on general steepest descent methods see, for instance, [35, Sec. 8.6] or [36, Ch. 3]. In our situation, one has to account the constraint that R must be a rotation matrix and so our algorithm will evolve on the manifold SOp3q. Hence we have to resort to steepest descent methods on matrix manifolds (see [34, Ch. 3]). For particular manifolds, tailored methods exploiting its special features have been proposed by many authors. For instance, for the complex Stiefel manifold, Manton [23, Alg. 15] proposed a modified steepest descent method based on Euclidean projections, where the length of the descent direction is calculated by the Armijo’s step-size rule. This method has been adapted and improved by Abrudan et al. in [33, Table II] for the manifold of unitary matrices, where geodesics replace the Euclidean projections. When dealing with manifolds that are Lie groups, geodesics are defined upon the matrix exponential, which is a much studied matrix function [37]. The strategy adopted for the steepest descent algorithm to be described below has been inspired in [23, 33] and we refer the reader to those papers for more technical details. The particular nature of the objective function (17) is exploited in order to improve the efficiency of the method. In particular, we propose a specific technique to choose an initial guess (thus reducing the number of iterations) and avoid expensive methods based on Schur decompositions and Padé approximation for the computation of matrix exponentials. Before displaying the steps of our algorithm, one needs to find the Euclidean and the Riemannian gradients of the objective function. After some calculations (see [38] for  for a certain positive value . Since }A ´ X˚ } ď , we have r ´ X˚ } }X  “ ď  }X̃ ´ A ` A ´ X˚ } r ´ A} ` }A ´ X˚ } }X  ď 2  (21)  (20) 5  Algorithm 1 Given a 6ˆ6 matrix A P R6ˆ6 , this algorithm approximates the closest generalized essential matrix E P X from A for a given tolerance tol.  formulae on derivatives of the trace function), the Euclidean gradient of g at (17) is: . ∇gpXq “ MXT M ´ 2NT , (24) and the Riemaniann gradient is: . grad gpXq “ ∇gpXq ´ X∇gpXqT X.  M Ð A11 ; N Ð pA12 ` A21 qT ; k Ð 0; X0 P SOp3q is an initial guess; 5: µ0 Ð 1; 6: error Ð 1; 7: Choose a tolerance tol; 8: while error > tol do 9: ∇gpXk q Ð MXTk M ´ 2NT ; 10: Zk Ð ∇gpXk q XTk ´ Xk ∇gpXk qT ; 11: zk Ð 0.5 tracepZk ZTk q; 12: Pk Ð expmp´µk Zk q; 13: Qk Ð P2k ; 14: while gpXk q ´ gpQk Xk q ě µk zk do 15: Pk Ð Qk ; 16: Qk Ð Pk Pk ; 17: µk Ð 2µk ; 18: while gpXk q ´ gpQk Xk q ă 0.5µk zk do 19: Pk Ð expmp´µk Zk q; 20: µk Ð 0.5µk ; 21: Xk`1 Ð Pk Xk ; 22: error Ð }Xk`1 ´ Xk }; 23: k Ð k ` 1; 24: R Ð Xk ; T 25: p t “ „ 0.5 pMR ´ RMT q;  p tR R . 26: E Ð R 0 1: 2: 3: 4:  (25)  T  Note that grad gpXqX is a “tangent vector” that is actually a skew-symmetric matrix. Geodesics on SOp3q (i.e., curves giving the shortest path between two points in the manifold) can be defined through the matrix exponential as: Gptq “ Gp0q expmpµSq,  (26)  3ˆ3  where S P R is a skew-symmetric matrix representing a translation and µ is a real scalar. Algorithm 1 summarizes the mains steps of our method.  3.3. Algorithm In a few words, Algorithm 1 starts with an initial approximation X0 P SOp3q, finds the skew-symmetric matrix pgrad gpXqq XT (the gradient direction on the manifold), and performs several steps along geodesics until convergence. The positive scalar µk controls the length of the “tangent vector” and, in turn, the overall convergence of the algorithm. To find an almost optimal µk , the algorithm uses the Armijo’s step-size rule as did in [23]. Now we draw our attention for some important computational remarks about the algorithm. • As the algorithm runs, the function g, which involves the computation of traces of products of matrices, is called several times. Note that the efficient computation of tracepABq does not require matrix products. Instead, it can be carried out through the formula: ÿ tracepABq “ pA ˝ Bqpi,jq , (27)  • Note that the trace of any skew-symmetric S matrix is always zero and so:  i,j  detpexpmpSqq “ expmptracepSqq “ 1.  where the operator ˝ denotes the Hadamard product, i.e. entry-wise product. If A and B are matrices of order n, the direct computation of the matrix product AB needs Opn3 q operations, while the trace at (27) just requires Opn2 q;  (29)  This guarantees that matrices Xk do not leave the rotation manifold SOp3q; and  • The exponential of the 3 ˆ 3 skew-symmetric matrix ´µk Zk in lines 12 and 19 of the algorithm can computed by means of the well-known Rodrigues’ formula [39]: ` ˘2 expmp´µk Zk q “ I`sin pµk qZTk `p1´cos pµk qq ZTk , (28) which involves (at leading cost) the computation of just one matrix product. The direct use of the MATLAB function expmp.q (which is based on the scaling and squaring method combined with Padé approximation) would be much more expensive. 6  • To conclude, we remark that the choice of the initial guess X0 influences the running time of the algorithm. An obvious choice for X0 would be the identity matrix I of order 3. It turns out that other choices of X0 may reduce significantly the number of iterations in the algorithm. In our experiments, we have chosen as the initial guess the rotation matrix that maximizes 2 trace pNRq of the sum defining gpRq in (17). We recall that this problem has an explicit solution based on the singular value decomposition of N (see [40, Sec. 12.4]): ´ ¯ r “ U diag 1, 1, detpUVT q VT , R (30)  (a) As a function of the computational speed.  (b) As a function of the number of iterations.  (c) As a function of the computational speed.  (d) As a function of the number of iterations.  Figure 2: Comparison between the method presented in this paper against general optimization techniques applied to (10), as a function of the variation of the Noise Level. The Tolerance value is set to 10´9 and 10´6 . We evaluate the methods for both the computational speed and the number of iterations, Figs. (a) & (b), and (c) & (d), for the Tolerance level of 10´9 and 10´6 , respectively.  (a) As a function of the computational speed, for a Noise Level of 10´1 .  (b) As a function of the number of iterations, for a Noise Level of 10´1 .  (c) As a function of the computational speed, for a Noise Level of 5.10´1 .  (d) As a function of the number of iterations, for a Noise Level of 5.10´1 .  Figure 3: Comparison between Algorithm 1 and general optimization techniques applied to (10), as a function of the Tolerance considered in the algorithms. The colors of the curves and associated algorithms are identified in Fig. 2. We have considered two distinct values to the Noise Level: 10´1 and 5.10´1 , which correspond to the cases in which our method performed worst than general optimization techniques, but just in terms of the number of iterations (see Fig. 2). We evaluate the methods for both the number of iterations and computational speed, Figs. (b) & (d) and (a) & (c) respectively.  7  a Noise Level equal to 10´1 and to 5.10´1 1 , and select a Tolerance value ranging from 10´15 to 1. The results for both the computational speed and the number of iterations are shown in Figs. 3(a) &3(c) and 3(b) & 3(d), respectively. Likewise the previous case, for each level of tolerance, 103 random trials were generated. Next, we discuss these experimental results.  with U and V being the orthogonal matrices arising in the singular value decomposition of NT , that is, NT “ r ď gpIq, it is expected UDVT . Since, in general, gpRq r will be more close to the minimizer than that X0 “ R X0 “ I.  4. Implementation of Our Method  4.2. Discussion  In this section, Alg. 1 is compared with general optimization techniques applied to the direct formulation of the problem (10), using synthetic data.  As observed in Figs. 2(a) and 2(c), our method is significantly faster than the general optimization techniques. Its computational speed rarely changes as a function of the deviation from the generalized essential matrix constraints. In fact, as shown in Figs. 3(a) and 3(c), which represents the worst scenario for OUR method, it can be seen that it performs 103 times faster than any other method. While our method requires less than 10´4 seconds, the other methods can take between 0.1 and 0.5 seconds. This is a remarkable advantage of our method for applications requiring real-time computations, such as the camera relative pose estimation, which will be addressed later in Sec. 6. In Figs. 2(b) and 2(d) one can observe that, contrarily to general optimization techniques, the relationship between the number of iterations and Noise Level is nearly linear. With the exception of the sqp method, for low levels of noise, in general our method requires less iterations. However, as described in the previous paragraph, the computational speed is significantly lower for any Noise Level, independently of the number of the required iterations. In addition to the evaluation in terms of deviation from the true generalized essential matrices, we have also compared the proposed method with general optimization techniques as a function of the tolerance in the algorithms. We have considered a Noise Level of 10´1 and 5.10´1 , which causes the worst results for OUR method when evaluating in terms of deviation from a generalized essential matrix. In all results displayed in Fig. 3(a) and 3(c), OUR method was significantly faster than any other algorithm, despite the fact that, for low levels of tolerance, the number of iterations required by our method being usually higher. Still regarding the evaluation in terms of Tolerance, from Figs. 3(b) and 3(d) one can easily see that, in the direct solutions, the number of iterations varies dramatically for different levels of noise. While, for OUR method, that variation is less significant.  4.1. Experimental Results Our method (here denoted as OUR) is tested against the following widely used general optimization techniques: interior-point: Solution of (10), by the interiorpoint method [41]; sqp: Solution of (10) by the sequential quadratic programming method [42]; active-set: Solution of (10) by the active-set method [43]. Likewise the general optimization techniques, OUR algorithm was optimized (part of it was implemented in C++), and can be accessed from MATLAB. All the results shown below were implemented on this framework. For the data-set, we first generate random rotation matrices R P SOp3q and random translation vectors t P R3 . With these rotation and translation elements, we build a generalized essential matrix E P X , as defined in (7). To carry out the experiments, we propose a variation of the deviation of a generic matrix in R6ˆ6 from a true generalized essential matrix. The procedure is as follows: we first generate an error matrix Ω P R6ˆ6 , in which the respective elements are randomly generated from a normal distribution with standard deviation equal to the variable Noise Level, and then compute the “noisy” matrix as A “ E ` Ω. All the aforementioned methods are then applied. Two tolerance values for the algorithms were selected, 10´9 & 10´6 , and we change the variable Noise Level from 10´3 to 101 . Results for both the computational speed and the number of iteration are displayed in Figs. 2(a) & 2(c) and 2(b) & 2(d), respectively. For each value of the Noise Level, 103 random trials were generated. In addition to the evaluation of the deviation from the generalized essential matrix constraints, we have tested the proposed method against general optimization algorithms as a function of the tolerance of the algorithms as well (here denoted as Tolerance value). For that purpose, we fixed  5. An Application in a Relative Pose Problem To further motivate the contributions of our method, we start by simplifying the approach of Li et al. [25], by incorporating the generalized essential matrix approximation 1 These values for the Noise Level have been chosen to illustrate the case where our method performed worst than the other methods, with respect to the number of iterations.  8  provided in Algorithm 1. Other examples showing the advantages of our method will be presented later in Sec. 6, involving real applications. Let us consider the general relative pose, which can be defined as: „  R pRq pLq T E li l “ 0, (31) R 0 i . for all i “ 1, . . . , N , which represents (7), with E “ p tR. After some algebraic manipulation one can rewrite this equation, as: pLq T  di  pRq  E di  pLq T  ` di  pRq  R mi  pLq T  ` mi  (a) Example of the simulated world scene.  pRq  R di  “ 0. (32) The problem unknowns are E and R. Then, isolating the unknowns using the Kronecker product, one has:  (b) Example of the correspondence between image points.  Figure 4: Representation of the simulated environment created for the evaluation. At Fig. (a) we show the 3D scene simulated, including: the set of 3D points; the camera system; and the subset of the path that the camera must follow. Fig (b) shows an example of the projection of the 3D points in one image frame, and its correspondence with the projected points in the previous frame.  ˆ  ˙ pLq T pRq T di b di vecpEq` looooooooooomooooooooooon piq  aE  ˆ  pRq T di  pLq T di  pRq T di  pLq T di  ˙  Then, we set-up a “noisy” generalized essential matrix A (i.e. a matrix that do not fully verify the underlying constraints of the generalized essential matrix) as: « ff r R r E A“ r , (36) R 0  b ` b vecpRq “ 0. loooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooon piq  aE  (33) Now, from a set of matching inverse projection lines, i.e. i “ 1, . . . N , one can write: AE vecpEq ` AR vecpRq “ 0,  and find X that best fits A using Algorithm 1, thus ensuring that X is a true generalized essential matrix. After the computation of such X, we can decompose it as t and R easily: » fi ´s2,3 ` s3,2 (37) R “ Xp1:3,4:6q , and 2t “ –´s3,1 ` s1,3 fl , ´s1,2 ` s2,1  (34)  where AE P RN ˆ9 and AR P RN ˆ9 are matrices that piq piq result from stacking the rows of aE and aR , respectively, for i “ 1, . . . , N . Solving for E, after a few algebraic manipulations, (34) can be rewritten as: ´ ¯ AR A:R ´ I AE vecpEq “ 0, (35)  where S “ Xp1:3,1:3q RT .  where the : stands for the pseudo inverse matrix. Now, the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) method can be used to get a unique solution for E (see [2]). When considering noisy data, there is no guarantee that the estimative for E is an essential matrix, that is, E “ p tR may not be valid. In addition, one needs to take into account r “ that, using SVD, E will be estimated such that }vecpEq} r denotes an estimate of E), which means that, even 1 (here E r is a true essential matrix, the underlying in the case when E . translation in E “ p tR would be estimated up to a scale factor. r one can find an esNow that we have the estimation E, timate solution for R by using, for instance, the methods in [2, 25, 7] or any other that estimate a rotation matrix from r the given data-set. Let us denote such an estimation by R.  (38)  Notice that t is estimated up to a scale factor. Then, to recover the correct scale (let us call it λ), we replace λt and R in (34), and thus get an estimate of λ that minimizes this equation. This concludes the computation of the general relative pose estimation.  6. Results in real applications This section includes practical examples illustrating how Algorithm 1 can be combined with other techniques to improve the results. In Sec. 6.1 more advantages of using generalized essential matrix approximations are evidenced, in a relative pose problem for general catadioptric cameras. In Sec. 6.2 we use a framework of multi-camera system to test the method 9  where h pXq “  N ÿ  pLq T  li  pRq  X li  ,  (40)  i“0 pLq  pRq  li and li represent the matching between the image projection lines on left and right cameras, respectively, and N is the number of matching points. We consider six distinct methods for the computation of the relative pose, based on the estimation of the generalized essential matrix: Full Denotes the relative pose estimation that aligns 3D straight lines in the world to ensure that they intersect, by the optimization problem (39). A tolerance of 10´9 was considered for the constraints; Without Constraints Denotes a method similar to Full, i.e. the problem of (39). However, in this case, a different value of 10´1 was considered for the tolerance of constraints;  Figure 5: Results for the distribution of the computational time required for computing the camera relative pose, for each of the methods described in Sec. 6.1.  OUR + WC: Consists in, first, estimating an initial solution using the Without Constraints method and, then, applying OUR method to estimate a true generalized essential matrix (Algorithm 1), with tolerance 10´9 for the constraints;  proposed in Sec. 5 against the state-of-the-art techniques. In Sec. 6.3 another application of Algorithm 1, using real data, will be shown. To conclude this section, in Sec. 6.4, we discuss the experimental results.  interior-point + WC: Same as OUR + WC but now the approximation is given by solving (10) with the interior-point;  6.1. A Relative Pose Problem with Non-Central Catadioptric Cameras  SQP + WC: Same as interior-point + WC, but with the approximation of (10) obtained with the sqp algorithm;  Let us consider a relative position estimation problem, using a non-central catadioptric camera, composed with a perspective camera and a spherical mirror [9, 44]. We synthetically generate a set of 3D points in the world (see Fig. 4(a)) and, then, define a path for the camera. While the camera is following the path, we compute the projection of the 3D points onto the image of the catadioptric camera system [44] (see Fig. 4(b)). Then, with the knowledge of the matching between pixels at consecutive image frames, we aim at computing the rotation and translation parameters ensuring the intersection of the respective inverse projection lines resulting from the images of the 3D points in consecutive image frames, in the world. A general technique to handle this problem can be mathematically formulated as (X is a matrix in R6ˆ6 ): argmin  active-set + WC: Same as interior-point + WC but now (10) is solved by active-set. The results for the distribution of the computational time required to compute each image frame are shown in Fig. 5 (box plot graph). These results are commented later in Sec. 6.4. Note that now we are dealing with a different optimization problem from (10), despite the constraints coincide.  6.2. A Multi-Camera System Framework In this experiment we consider a multi-perspective camera system, with six cameras. We consider the following four methods:  h pXq  ,  Xp4:6,4:6q “ 0  Lin + OUR: This is the method described in the Sec 5, which simulates a non-central multi camera system with N cameras lying on a plane, followed by the application of Algorithm 1; it was implemented in C++ and tested inside the framework OpenGV [45]2 ;  Xp1:3,1:3q XTp1:3,4:6q ` Xp1:3,4:6q XTp1:3,1:3q “ 0 (39)  2 The C++ code of this method as well the Algorithm 1 will be available when the paper is accepted.  X  subject to XTp1:3,4:6q Xp1:3,4:6q “ I Xp4:6,1:3q ´ Xp1:3,4:6q “ 0  10  Figure 6: Comparison between the method presented in this paper, denoted as Lin+OUR (proposed in Sec. 5) against stateof-the-art techniques, as a function of the variation of the Noise Level (i.e. pixel noise). The Tolerance in OUR method is set to 10´9 . We evaluate in terms of the errors in the translation and rotation parameters, considering the mean and median in each of the evaluation parameters. In the first two graphics, Lin+OUR and Lin curves are overlaped. However, from two graphics on the right (errors in the translation), Lin+OUR gives significantly better results than Lin. work of general camera models, and known coordinates of 2D straight lines in the world coordinate system [20]. We consider a non-central catadioptric camera (with a spherical mirror) and moved the camera along a path in the lab. 3D lines in the world are associated with a set of pixels in the image (see Fig. 7). The goal is to find the generalized essential matrix E that aligns the 3D inverse projection lines from these pixels with the known 3D straight lines in the world, in order to guarantee their intersection. This problem can be solved by the same strategy proposed in the previous subsection, i.e. by using the optimization problem of (39), but in this case with the following objective function:  GE: This method, which has been proposed in [26], computes the relative pose for the specific case of multiperspective cameras, which is the case we are dealing with; NonLin: An iterative technique also included in [26], for the specific case of multi-perspective cameras; Lin: The method proposed in [25]; recall that while GE and NonLin are intended just for multi-perspective cameras, this one can be applied to general camera models. All the previously defined methods were evaluated as a function of the noise in the image space, ranging from zero to five pixels. For each level of noise, we randomly select 103 trials, and compute the relative pose for each method. Then, for each level of noise, we compute the mean and median of the solution for all trials. The results are shown in Fig. 6. In addition to these results, we also show the computational time required for the computation of each of the aforementioned algorithm, presented above. The results are shown in Tab. 1 and their discussion is included below.  h pXq “  147[µs] 281[µs] 6868[µs] 298[µs]  (41)  pWq  Table 1: Results for the computational time required by each algorithm, for the tests shown in Fig. 6.  GE Lin NonLin Lin+OUR  pCq  X li,j ,  where: li represent the known 3D straight lines in the pCq world; li,j the inverse projection lines corresponding pixels that are images of the ith line; Ni are the number of image pixels that are images of the line i; and M is the number of known 3D straight lines in the world. We consider the six methods proposed in Sec. 6.1. A comparison between the trajectories of OUR + WC3 method and the FULL are shown in Fig. 7. The distribution of the required computational time for each frame is shown at Fig. 8.  To conclude the experimental results, we apply Algorithm 1 to an absolute pose estimation problem in the frame-  Computational Time  pWq T  li  i“0 j“0  6.3. Experiments with Real Data  Algorithms  Ni M ÿ ÿ  6.4. Discussion of the Results In this section we discuss the experimental results shown in the previous subsections. We start by analysing the results of the approximation of general 6 ˆ 6 matrices, in which we compare the performance of the proposed method against the direct solution (these are the main results of this 3 Notice that the other approximate techniques would give the same results as OUR + WC. The difference between them depends only on the required computational time.  11  of the direct solution and to see the advantages on the approximation of E from a previously computed A, we presented three experiments whose results are commented in the following subsections. 6.4.1 Figure 7: Results obtained with real images. At the left, we show an example of an image acquired by the noncentral catadioptric camera. On the right, we show the results for the trajectory (top view) computed with the FULL and OUR+WC methods, described in Sec. 6.1.  Evaluation in a non-central catadioptric relative pose problem  When considering the experiments carried out in Sec. 6.1, first, we conclude that increasing the tolerance of constraints on the FULL algorithm (i.e. not fully considering the underlying constraints of the generalized essential matrix (39)) and, then, recover a true generalized essential matrix, by Algorithm 1, leads to significant savings in computational time. See the comparison between FULL and all the other methods in Figs. 5 and 8. In fact, it can be seen that the differences between OUR + WC and Without Constraints (the optimization without fully considering the underlying constraints of the generalized essential matrix) can be neglected, while this does not happen for the direct solution. We recall that the Without Constraints method does not produce a true generalized essential matrix, while the other ones do. In addition, from Fig. 4, one can conclude that this procedure (compute A and then find the closest X) does not diminishing significantly the results. To conclude, one can see that estimating for A and, then, find X that approximates A (see (9)) will result in a much faster algorithm than looking directly for X.  Figure 8: Distribution of the computational time obtained for the absolute pose problem using a real non-central catadioptric camera. We consider all the algorithms described in Sec. 6.1.  6.4.2  A new generalized essential relative pose estimation solution using our method  When compared with [25], our method does not inject the r into the original constraint (35) (rewritnoisy estimated R ing this as a function of the translation). Instead, we put the estimated essential and rotation matrices in a matrix A P R6ˆ6 , as shown in (36), and then find the closest true generalized essential matrix. In this way, the error does not propagate through the estimation of the rotation matrix into the translation parameters. From the results shown in Fig. 6, namely in the errors of the translation parameters, one can observe that our method improves the results of Lin. From Tab. 1 one can see that differences between Lin+OUR and Lin are neglected (less than 20µs). Although OUR and Lin are methods for general cameras, these tests were performed in a framework of multiperspective camera systems (these systems can be modeled by a general camera model). Then, we compare Lin+OUR and Lin with GE and NonLin, which are specific methods for the computation of the relative pose for these types of imaging devices. With the respect to errors, still from Fig. 6, one can conclude that the NonLin is the method that gives  paper) in a non-central catadioptric relative camera pose. Then, we discuss the comparison (again) between the general relative camera pose method proposed in Sec. 5, against the state-of-the-art approaches, in a relative camera pose estimation of multi-perspective cameras. To conclude, we discuss the experiments with real data, in which we compare performance of our approximation technique against the direct solution, in an absolute pose problem. In all these tests, we have imposed m “ 100 as the maximum number of iterations for Algorithm 1. It is worth noting that the algorithm has never reached such a number of iterations, which means that it always converged. Notice that one of the main contributions of this paper (Sec. 3) is not to estimate the relative pose of an imaging device, but, instead, to find generalized essential matrices from general 6 ˆ 6 matrices (that do not verify (10)). However, to motivate the proposed method, i.e. to show the advantages of using our method when compared with the use 12  better results, while the GE give slightly better results that Lin+OUR approach. When considering the computational time, see Tab. 1, the GE is the faster, while the NonLin is significantly slower than any other method. To conclude, we would like to stress out that our method, being a general technique (contrarily to GE and NonLin), gives good results, overcoming the method Lin, namely when considering the translation errors, without requiring more computational time. 6.4.3  To further motivate the use of fitting techniques and our method, we propose a solution to the estimation of the relative pose problem using general camera models, that implicitly uses our method. It is based on existing techniques combined with our fitting method, after a previously estimated “noisy” 6 ˆ 6 matrix, which has been computed with the purpose of being a generalized essential matrix. To conclude the paper, we presented some results to show the motivation of using approximating techniques such as the one presented in this paper, in real applications. We evaluate our method against the direct solution in a relative and absolute pose problems (the latter with real data), in which we prove that: 1) estimating A (general 6 ˆ 6 matrix) and then fitting E (a true generalized essential matrix) speed up significantly the required computational time; and 2) does not degrade significantly the results. We also concluded that, contrarily with the direct solution, when using our method the required additional computational time (i.e. the computation time that is required after the estimation of A) can be neglected. In addition, we tested the proposed solution for the general relative pose problem in a problem of a relative multi-perspective camera pose estimation, and showed that our method is competitive with the current state-of-the-art method for general camera models, with respect to either the absolute errors and the computational time.  Validation using Real Data  To conclude the experimental results, we validate the proposed fitting technique (Algorithm 1) against the direct solution (with the above mentioned general optimization techniques on the problem defined in (10)) in a real application of an absolute camera pose estimation, when using noncentral catadioptric cameras, see Fig. 7. When considering the results of Fig. 8, one can easily see that, while the use of the direct solution and all the three general optimization techniques will have an impact on the computation time (see the results for interior-point+WC, SQP+WC, and active-set against Without Constraints), the difference between OUR+WC and Without Constraints can be neglected, being much faster than the FULL technique. Still from Fig. 7, one can conclude that approximating X (a true generalized essential matrix) from a general matrix A does not degrade significantly the results, being much faster than estimating X directly (that is shown by comparing FULL and OUR+WC in Fig. 8). In fact, although these tests have different goals (one is related with the relative camera pose and the other with the absolute pose), these results are very similar to the ones presented in Sec. 6.1, validating the results using synthetic data.  References [1] Y. Ma, S. Soatto, J. Košecká, S. S. and Sastry (2001) An Invitation to 3-D Vision: From Images to Geometric Models, Springer Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics. 1, 3 [2] R. Hartley, and A. Zisserman, A. (2004) Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press. 1, 4, 9 [3] D. Nister, O. Naroditsky, and J. Bergen (2004) Visual odometry, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 1:652–659. 1  7. Conclusions This paper addresses the fitting of generalized essential matrices, from general 6 ˆ 6 matrices, and its implications. We have presented a novel technique to estimate a generalized essential matrix, that is close to a general 6 ˆ 6 matrix which, to the best of our knowledge, has not been yet addressed in the literature, despite the fact that there are some direct solutions (which can be solved with general iterative techniques) that can be used to find such a solution. Our contributions are: first, we express the problem using only orthogonal constraints and, then, we propose a specific optimization technique to find efficiently the goal solution. We test our method with synthetic data, comparing the use of our approximation techniques against the direct solution and general optimization techniques.  [4] V. Nalwa (1996) A true omnidirectional viewer, technical report, Bell Laboratories. 1 [5] S. Nayar (1997) Catadioptric Omnidirectional Camera, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 482–488. 1 [6] B.Micusik, T.Pajdla (2004) Autocalibration & 3D Reconstruction with Non-central Catadioptric Cameras, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) pp. 58–65. 1 [7] J. H. Kim, H. Li and R. Hartley (2010) Motion Estimation for Nonoverlapping Multicamera Rigs: Linear Al13  gebraic and L8 Geometric Solutions, IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 32(6):1044– 1059. 1, 2, 9  [20] P. Miraldo, H. Araujo, and N. Gonçalves (2015) Pose Estimation for General Cameras Using Lines, IEEE Trans. Cybernetics, 45:2156–2164. 2, 11  [8] G. H. Lee, M. Pollefeys, F. and Fraundorfer (2014) Relative Pose Estimation for a Multi-Camera System with Known Vertical Direction, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 540–547. 1, 2  [21] A. Edelman, T. Arias, and S. Smith (1998) The geometry of algorithms with orthogonal constraints, SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 20:303– 353. 2, 5 [22] B. Jiang and Y.-H. Dai (2015) A framework of constraint preserving update schemes for optimization on Stiefel manifold, Mathematical Programming, Series A, 153:535–575. 2  [9] R. Swaminathan, M. D. Grossberg, and S. K. Nayar (2002) Non-Single Viewpoint Catadioptric Cameras: Geometry and Analysis, Int’l J. Computer Vision, 66(3):211–229. 1, 10  [23] J. Manton (2002) Optimization Algorithms Exploiting Unitary Constraints, IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, 50:635–650. 2, 5, 6  [10] R. Gupta, and R. I. Hartley (1997) Linear Pushbroom Cameras, IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 19(9):963–975. 1  [24] Z. Wen and W. Yin (2013) A feasible method for optimization with orthogonality constraints, Mathematical Programming, Series A, 142:397–434. 2, 5  [11] T. Treibitz, Y. Y. Schechner, and H. Singh (2008) Flat Refractive Geometry, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1–8. 1  [25] H. Li, R. Hartley, and J-H. Kim (2008) A linear approach to motion estimation using generalized camera models, IEEE Proc. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1-8. 2, 8, 9, 11, 12  [12] M. Grossberg and S. Nayar (2001) A General Imaging Model and a Method for Finding its Parameters, IEEE Proc. Int’l Conf. Computer Vision (ICCV), 2:108–115. 1, 3  [26] L. Kneip and H. Li (2014) Efficient Computation of Relative Pose for Multi-Camera Systems, IEEE Proc. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 446-453. 2, 11  [13] P. Sturm and S. Ramalingam (2004) A Generic Concept for Camera Calibration, Proc. European Conf. Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 1–13. 1  [27] R. Hertley (1997) In Defence of the Eight-Point Algorithm, IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 19:580-593. 2  [14] P. Miraldo and H. Araujo (2013) Calibration of Smooth Camera Models, IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(9):2091–2103. 1  [28] K. Yamaguchi, D. McAllester, and R. Urtasun (2013) Robust Monocular Epipolar Flow Estimation, IEEE Proc. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1863-1869. 2  [15] R. Pless (2003) Using Many Cameras as One, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2:587–593. 1, 4 [16] P. Sturm (2005) Multi-View Geometry for General Camera Models, IEEE Proc. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 1: 206–212. 1, 4  [29] J. Zaragoza, T-J. Chin, M. S. Brown, and D. Suter (2013) As-Projective-As-Possible Image Stitching with Moving DLT, IEEE Proc. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2339-2344. 2  [17] H. Stewénius, D. Nistér, M. Oskarsson, and K. Åström (2005) Solutions to Minimal Generalized Relative Pose Problems, Workshop on Omnidirectional Vision 2, 3  [30] H. Pottmann, and J. Wallner (2001) Computational Line Geometry, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 3  [18] S. Ramalingam, S. K. Lodha, and P. Sturm (2006) A generic structure-from-motion framework, Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 103:218–228. 2  [31] P. Miraldo and H. Araujo (2015) Generalized essential matrix: Properties of the singular value decomposition, Image and Vision Computing, 34:45–50. 4  [19] E. Mouragnon, M. Lhuillier, M. Dhome, F. Dekeyser, and P. Sayd (2009) Generic and real-time structure from motion using local bundle adjustment, Image and Vision Computing, 27:1178–1193. 2  [32] J. R. Cardoso, C. S. Kenney, and F. Silva Leite (2003), Computing the square root and logarithm of a real P orthogonal matrix, Applied Numerical Mathematics, 46:173–196. 4 14  [33] T. Abrudan, J. Eriksso, and V. Koivunen (2008) Steepest Descent Algorithms for Optimization Under Unitary Matrix Constraint, IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing, 56:635–650. 5 [34] P.-A. Absil, R. Mahony, and R. Sepulchre (2007) Optimization Algorithms on Matrix Manifolds, Princeton University Press, New Jersey, USA. 5 [35] D. Luenberger, Y. Ye (2008) Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Third Ed., Springer: New York. 5 [36] J. Nocedal, S. Wright (1999) Numerical Optimization. Springer-Verlag: New York. 5 [37] C.B. Moler, C.F. Van Loan (2003) Nineteen dubious ways to compute the exponential of a matrix, twentyfive years later, SIAM Rev. 45: 3–49. 5 [38] H. Lütkepohl (1996) Handbook of Matrices, Jonh Wiley and Sons, 1996. 5 [39] R. Murray, L. Li, and S. Sastry (1994) A Mathematical Introduction to Robotic Manipulation. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,. 6 [40] G. Golub, and C. Van Loan (1996) Matrix Computations. Third Ed., Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore and London. 6 [41] Y. Nesterov and A. Nemirovskii (1994) InteriorPoint Polynomial Algorithms in Convex Programming, SIAM: Studies in Applied and Numerical Mathematics. 8 [42] P. T. Boggs and J. W. Tolle (1995) Sequential Quadratic Programming, Acta Numerica, 4:1–51. 8 [43] K. G. Murty and F. T. Yu (1988) Linear Complementarity, Linear and Nonlinear Programming Berlin: Heldermann. 8 [44] A. Agrawal, Y. Taguchi, and S. Ramalingam (2010) Analytical Forward Projection for Axial Non-Central Dioptric and Catadioptric Cameras, Proc. European Conf. Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 129-143. 10 [45] L. Kneip and P. Furgale (2014) OpenGV: A Unified and Generalized Approach to Real-Time Calibrated Geometric Vision, IEEE Proc. Int’l Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1-8; 10  15

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
