Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_399

Abstract:
KSR: A Semantic Representation of Knowledge Graph within a Novel Unsupervised Paradigm  arXiv:1608.07685v6 [cs.LG] 16 Dec 2017  Han Xiao♠ State Key Lab. of Intelligent Technology and Systems, National Lab. for Information Science and Technology, Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China Almighty.Xiao.Han@iCloud.com; ♠ Correspondence Author: http://www.semantics.top Abstract Knowledge representation is a long-history topic in AI, which is very important. A variety of models have been proposed for knowledge graph embedding, which projects symbolic entities and relations into continuous vector space. However, most related methods merely focus on the datafitting of knowledge graph, and ignore the interpretable semantic expression. Thus, traditional embedding methods are not friendly for applications that require semantic analysis, such as question answering and entity retrieval. To this end, this paper proposes a semantic representation method for knowledge graph (KSR), which imposes a two-level hierarchical generative process that globally extracts many aspects and then locally assigns a specific category in each aspect for every triple. Since both aspects and categories are semantics-relevant, the collection of categories in each aspect is treated as the semantic representation of this triple. Extensive experiments show that our model outperforms other state-of-the-art baselines substantially.  1  Introduction  To facilitate the application of knowledge in statistical learning methods, continuous vectorial representations of entities/relations are necessary. Thus, knowledge graph embedding (KGE) is proposed to fulfill this motivation. Specifically, KGE represents a symbolic triple (h, r, t) as real-valued vector (h, r, t), each of which corresponds to head entity, relation and tail entity, respectively. Currently, a variety of embedding methods are emerging, including translation-based models such as TransE [Bordes et al., 2013] and many following variants, neural network based models such as NTN [Socher et al., 2013], generative models such as TransG [Xiao et al., 2016b] etc. As a major methodology of knowledge representation, translation-based models (e.g., TransE), adopt the principle of geometric translation, formally as h + r ≈ t. Intuitively, the corresponding objective aims at fitting the translation-based principle for knowledge representations by minimizing the data fitting error.  Though these models have achieved great success, the representation of these models is still not semantically interpretable, which may be a major flaw and harm the potential applications. As a known fact, in the traditional methods, it is almost impossible to exactly extract the specific semantics from geometric points. For the example of TransE, the representation of “Table” is (0.82, 0.51, ...), which could hardly tell anything meaningful, such as being a furniture, being a daily tool, not an animal, etc. However, without semantics, the gap between knowledge and language remains, limiting the task of knowledge applications and natural language understanding (NLU). For an instance, in Freebase, Stanford University is represented as an abstract symbol “/m/06pwq”, while a semantically interpretable representation for this entity is more preferred as Stanford University = (University:Yes, Animal:No, Location: Palo Alto, ...). Such representation can be extremely useful in many areas, such as question answering over knowledge base. For example, there is a query “Which private university is famous in Palo Alto?”. First, the linguistic features such as University, Private and Palo Alto are extracted from the query. Then, by matching the linguistic features of query with the semantic knowledge representations such as (University:Yes, Type:Private, Location:Palo Alto,...), the answer of entity Stanford University is retrieved. In summary, knowledge benefits computational linguistics with our semantic representation. Notably, we introduce a term knowledge feature to describe some knowledge semantic aspects, such as being a university or not (University), geographical position (Location), etc. To semantically represent knowledge, our model leverages a two-level hierarchical generative process for entity/relation representations. In next paragraph, we introduce the principal idea of our model, that a novel unsupervised paradigm, exemplified in Figure 1. Applying this paradigm into knowledge representation, we propose our method KSR, which is specifically presented in Figure 2. Referring to Figure 1, there exists a question “How to categorize these objects?”. Addressed by the Shape of objects, two clusters are grouped as “Square(S)” and “Star(T)”, while focused on the feature Content, three clusters are generated as “Hallow(H)”, “Slash(L)” and “Solid(D)”. In summary, Shape and Content are the distinguished views for clustering, which are also called knowledge feature (i.e. Feature = View). By  Figure 1: This figure illustrates the principal idea, described in Introduction. Simply, we leverage the cluster ambiguity in the manner of multi-view clustering to construct semantic representation. gathering the information of clusters in each view/feature, the semantic representations are formed. For the instance in the right-bottom figure, (S,D) indicates a solid square, where the first/second dimension corresponds to Shape/Content feature in a latent manner. Similarly as the above principal paradigm, our methodology leverages a two-level hierarchical generative process for semantic representation. Figure 2 illustratively exemplifies the generative process of our model. First, the first-level process generates many knowledge features/views with different semantics, such as University and Location. Then, the second-level process groups the entities/relations/triples, according to the corresponding semantic features/views. Last, summarizing the cluster identification within each feature/view, KSR constructs the semantic representation of knowledge elements. For the example of Tsinghua University, the Yes category (a.k.a cluster identification) is assigned for University feature, while the Beijing category (a.k.a cluster identification) is assigned for Location feature. By exploiting the multi-view clustering form, knowledge are semantically organized, as Tsinghua University = (University:Yes, Location:Beijing). It is noted that, cluster identification could be in various forms, and in this model, it is the membership degree for clusters (i.e. a probabilistic distribution), rather than the linguistic lexicons (e.g. Yes, Beijing, etc.). Besides, all the knowledge features (e.g. University) are latent concepts, such as the first dimension of learned vectors. This exemplified dimension corresponds to the semantics of University in a latent style rather than in a linguistic description. However, with the aid of entity description, we can easily map the latent features and categories into the human-readable words. Contributions: (1.) We have proposed a novel unsupervised paradigm for semantic representation, which leverages the ambiguity of clustering by multi-view methodology. (2.) Inspired by this novel paradigm, we have proposed a new  Figure 2: This figure demonstrates the generative process of KSR from the clustering perspective. The original knowledge are semantically clustered from multiple views or knowledge features. Specifically, knowledge features such as Location, are generated from the first-level generative process, denoting the types of the clusters. The category such as Beijing in each knowledge feature, is generated from the second-level generative process. model to represent knowledge graph with good semantic interpretation. (3.) We have proposed a semantic method for entity retrieval with our knowledge representation, which provides a potential application for jointing knowledge and language.  2  Related Work  TransE [Bordes et al., 2013] is a pioneering work for the translation-based methods, which translates the head entity to the tail one by the relation vector, formally as h + r ≈ t. This geometric principle has been adopted by many following works. The following variants transform entities into different subspaces, almost based on the same principle. ManifoldE [Xiao et al., 2016a] opens a classic branch, where the translation is applied based on a manifold. TransH [Wang et al., 2014] leverages the relation-specific hyperplane to embed the entities. TransR [Lin et al., 2015b] utilizes the relationrelated matrix to rotate the embedding space. Similar researches also contain TransG [Xiao et al., 2016b], TransA [Xiao et al., 2015], TransD [Ji et al., 2016] and TransM [Fan et al., 2014]. Further researches incorporate additional structural information into embedding. PTransE [Lin et al., 2015a] takes relation paths into account, simultaneously involving the information and confidence level of the path in knowledge graph. [Wang et al., 2015] leverages the rules to concentrate on the embeddings for the complex relation types such as 1-N, N1 and N-N. SSE [Guo et al., 2015] aims at analyzing the geometric structure of embedding topologies and then based on these discoveries, designs a semantically smoothing score function. Also, KG2E [He et al., 2015] involves Gaussian analysis to characterize the uncertain concepts of knowledge graph. [Zhong et al., 2015a] aligns the knowledge graph with the corpus and then jointly conducts knowledge and word  embedding. However, the necessity of the alignment information limits this method both in performance and practice. Thus, [Zhong et al., 2015b] proposes a joint method that only aligns the freebase entity to the corresponding wiki-page. SSP [Xiao et al., 2017] extends the translation-based embedding methods from the triple-specific model to the TextAware model by encoding textual descriptions of entities. There are also some other work such as HOLE [Nickel et al., 2015], SE [Bordes et al., 2011], NTN [Socher et al., 2013] and RESCAL [Nickel et al., 2012], etc.  3  Methodology  3.1  Model Description  We leverage a two-level hierarchical generative process to semantically represent the knowledge elements (entities/relations/triples) as follows. For each triple (h, r, t) ∈ ∆: (First-Level) Draw a knowledge feature fi from P(fi |r): 1. (Second-Level) Draw a subject-specific category zi from P(zi ) ∝ P(zi |h)P(zi |r)P(zi |t, fi ) 2. (Second-Level) Draw an object-specific category yi from P(yi ) ∝ P(yi |t)P(yi |r)P(yi |zi , fi )  In the above process, ∆ is the set of golden triples. All the parameters of P(fi |r), P(zi |h), P(zi |r), P(yi |t), P(zi |r), P(yi |r) are learned by the training procedure, and P(f ), P(h), P(r), P(t) are uniformly distributed, indicating that they can be safely omitted with simple mathematical manipulation. The head-specific category (zi ) and tail-specific category (yi ) are discriminated as the active and passive forms respectively, or the subject- and object-relevant expressions. For example, Shakespeare Did Write (subject-related) and Macbeth Was Written By (object-related) of (Shakespeare, Write, Macbeth) are semantically differentiated as subject- and objectspecific. Thus, it is better to sample the category from the head and tail entities of fact triples, respectively. However, for a single entity e, the subject- and objectcategory should be consistent, mathematically P (zi |e) = P (yi |e). Because, no matter the entity (e.g. Standford University) is a subject or an object, the semantics is identical. Also, it is noteworthy that the terms involved with relations are distinguished for being subject or objective, stated in the last paragraph. Regarding P(zi |yi , fi ), since one triple is too short to imply more facts, the head- and tail-specific semantics or both distributions over categories should be proximal enough to represent this exact triple fact. To this end, we constrain the category generation and impose a Laplace prior for the category distributions.  Figure 3: The probabilistic graph of generative process. The outer navy plate corresponds to the first-level and the inner red one corresponds to the second-level. The specific form of each factor is introduced in Methodology. Firstly, we enforce that zi and yi correspond to the same category. Thus, the case that zi 6= yi is forbidden in our model, so P(zi |yi , fi ) = δzi ,yi ♠ . For the example of Location feature of the triple (Yangtze River, Event, Battle of Red Cliffs), we assume that the i-th feature is location. The situation where zi is location:China and yi is location:America, is not allowed in our model, because one triple is so short that it could only talk about one exact thing as usual. Thus, only the case such as “zi is location:China and yi is the same as zi (location:China)”, can be accepted. Secondly, as argued, the generative process should sample the same category for the subject- and object-specific positions, but with different probabilities. Formally, though zi = yi is guaranteed, due to P(zi |h, r, t) 6= P(yi |h, r, t), we should also discuss the corresponding sampling probabilities rather than the sampled category, which is the point of this paragraph. The difference between sampling probabilities and sampled items is illustrated in [Murphy, 2012]. For the example in last paragraph, if the head entity suggests the subject-specific location feature samples the category of China with probability 95% (P(zlocation = China) = 0.95) and America with 5% (P(zlocation = America) = 0.05), then the tail is supposed to suggest the object-specific feature to be sampled as China category with much higher probability than America, (P(ylocation = China)  P(ylocation = America)). We expect the head and tail could tell one exact story, so we should guarantee the coherence between the sampling distributions, or P(zi ) ≈ P(yi ). Thus, a Laplace prior is imposed to approximate both distributions, or mathi |t)| )δzi ,yi , ematically: P(zi |t, fi , σ) ∝ exp(− |P(zi )−P(y σ |P(zi )−P(yi )| P(yi |zi , fi , σ) ∝ exp(− )δzi ,yi , where σ is σ hyper-parameter for Laplace Distribution and P(zi ), P(yi ) are presented in the generative process. Figure 2 is the corresponding probabilistic graph model, with which we could work out the joint probability. Notably, as some statistical literature introduced, for brevity, we re♠  δzi ,yi is 1 only if zi = yi , otherwise, it is 0.  [h, r, t, zk , yk |f =k , σ] = [zk |h][zk |r][yk |t][yk |r][zk , yk |f =k , r, σ]  (1) F irst−Level:F eature M ixture  }|  z [h, r, t] =  n X  ( [f =k |σ]  k=1  d X  ) [h, r, t, zk=i , yk=j |f =k , σ]  =  i,j=1  . place P(a|b) = [a|b] . The formulation is presented with the equations of (1) and (2), n is the total knowledge feature number and d is the category number for each feature. Notably, the generative probability [h, r, t] of the triple (h, r, t) is our score function. It is natural to adopt the most possible category in the specific knowledge features as the semantic representation. Suggested by the probabilistic graph (Figure 3), the exactly inferred representation for an entity Se = (Se,1 , Se,2 , ..., Se,n ) or a relation Sr = (Sr,1 , Sr,2 , ..., Sr,n ) is Se,i = arg maxdc=1 [zi = c|e] and Sr,i = arg maxdc=1 [zi = c|r][yi = c|r].  3.2  Objective & Training  The maximum data likelihood principle is employed for training. We maximize the ratio of likelihood of the true triples to that of the false ones. Our objective is as follows♥ : X X ln[h, r, t] − ln[h0 , r0 , t0 ] (3) (h,r,t)∈∆  (h0 ,r 0 ,t0 )∈∆0  where ∆ is the set of golden triples and ∆0 is the set of false triples, generating from negative sampling. The specific formula of [h, r, t] is presented in the previous subsection (Equation 2) and all the unknown distribution parameters such as [zi |r] should be learned by SGD. This training procedure is very similar to that in [Xiao et al., 2016a]. As to the efficiency, theoretically, the time complexity of our training algorithm is O(nd) where n is the feature number and d is the category number for each feature. If nd ≈ d0 where d0 is the embedding dimension of TransE, our method is comparative to TransE in terms of efficiency while this condition is practically satisfied. In the real-word dataset FB15K, regarding the training time, TransE costs 11.3m and KSR costs 13.4m, which is almost the same. Also, for a comparison, in the same setting, TransR needs 485.0m and KG2E costs 736.7m. Note that TransE is almost the fastest embedding method, which demonstrates that our method is nearly the most efficient.  3.3  Analysis from the Clustering Perspective (Focus on Comprehensibility)  Essentially, regarding the mixture form of Equations (1) and (2), our method takes the spirit of mixture model at both first♥ For numerical computation reasons, in fact, we optimize the Pn Pd lower bound of score function as k=1 [fk |σ]ln( i,j=1 [zk = i, yk = j|fk , σ][h, r, t|zk = i, yk = j, fk , σ]). ♠ =i zk is short for zk = i, and it is similar for other cases.  Second−Level:Category M ixture  n X  z( [f =k |σ]  k=1  d X  }| [zk=i , yk=j |f =k , σ][h, r, t|zk=i , yk=j , f =k , σ]  { ){ ♠  (2)  i,j=1  and second-level, which could be further analyzed from the clustering perspective. The second-level generative process clusters the knowledge elements (entities/relations/triples) according to knowledge feature/view. These features/views stem from the first-level process, mathematically according to all the probabilistic terms involved with f =i . Furthermore, the first-level generative process adjusts different knowledge feature spaces with the feedback from the second-level. Mathematically, the feed-back corresponds to [z1...n , y1...n , f |h, r, t]. In essence, knowledge are semantically organized in a multi-view clustering form, Thus, by modeling the multi-view clustering nature, KSR is semantically interpretable. According to Figure 2, the knowledge features are generated from the first-level process, which means discovering different features/views for clustering. Then, in each knowledge feature, a specific category is assigned for every entity/relation/triple, which is the second-level process. And this process is equivalently explained as calculating the cluster identifications by grouping entities/relations in different features/views. Last, summarizing the cluster identification within each feature/view, KSR constructs the semantic representation of knowledge elements. For example, Tsinghua University belongs to Yes cluster in University feature/view and belong to Beijing cluster in Location feature/view. In summary, our model represents this entity semantically, as Tsinghua University = (University:Yes, Location: Beijing).  4 4.1  Experiments Experimental Settings  Datasets. Our experiments are conducted on public benchmark datasets that are the subsets of Freebase. About the statistics of these datasets, we refer the readers to [Xiao et al., 2016a] and [Xie et al., 2016]. The entity descriptions of FB15K are the same as DKRL [Xie et al., 2016], each of which is a small part of the corresponding wiki-page. Implementation. We implemented TransE, TransH, TransR, TransG and ManifoldE for comparison, we directly reproduce the claimed results with the reported optimal parameters. The optimal settings of KSR are the learning factor α = 0.01, margin γ = 2.5 and Laplace hyper-parameter σ = 0.04. For a fair comparison within the same parameter quantity, we adopt three settings for dimensions: S1(n = 10, d = 10), S2(n = 20, d = 10) and S3(n = 90, d = 10) where n denotes the number of knowledge features and d indicates the number of semantic categories. We train the model until convergence but stop at most 2,000 rounds. However, regarding TransG and ManifoldE, which are trained  Table 1: Evaluation results of Entity Classification. Metrics Random TransE TransH TransR ManifoldE KSR(S1) KSR(S2) KSR(S3)  T@25 39.5 82.7 82.2 82.4 86.4 90.7 91.4 90.2  T@50 30.5 77.3 71.5 76.8 82.2 85.6 87.6 86.1  T@75 26.0 74.2 71.4 73.6 79.6 83.3 85.1 83.1  Table 2: Evaluation results of Knowledge Graph Completion. FB15K Methods TransE TransH KSR(S1) HOLE KSR(S2) TransR KG2E TransG∗ ManifoldE∗ KSR(S3)  MRR (Filter) Head Tail 35.6 40.1 33.9 39.1 36.5 42.6 37.8 44.2 25.1 30.0 34.2 40.0 40.0 45.5  HITS@10(%) Raw Filter 48.5 66.1 45.7 64.4 51.2 70.4 73.9 52.6 75.8 48.2 68.7 47.5 71.5 53.1 79.7 52.1 79.8 52.9 82.1  more than 10,000 rounds for convergence, we have re-trained these models within 2,000 rounds for a fair comparison.  4.2  Entity Classification  Motivation. To testify our semantics-specific performance, we conduct the entity classification prediction. Since the entity type such as Human Language, Artist and book Author represents some semantics-relevant sense, thus this task could justify KSR indeed addressed the semantic representation. Regarding Evaluation Protocol, please refer to [Xiao et al., 2017]. Results. Evaluation results are reported in Table 1, noting that S1, S2 and S3 means different settings for knowledge features and semantic categories. We could observe that: KSR outperforms all the baselines in a large margin, demonstrating the effectiveness of KSR. Entity types represent some level of semantics, thus the better results illustrate that our method is indeed more semantics-specific.  4.3  Knowledge Graph Completion  Motivation. This task is a benchmark task, a.k.a “Link Prediction”, which concerns the identification ability for triples. Many NLP tasks could benefit from Link Prediction, such as relation extraction [Hoffmann et al., 2011]. Regarding Evaluation Protocol, please refer to [Xiao et al., 2016b]. ∗ These models are retrained within 2,000 rounds for a fair comparison.  Results. Evaluation results are reported in Table 2, we could observe that: (1) KSR outperforms all the baselines substantially, justifying the effectiveness of our model. Theoretically, the effectiveness originates from the semanticsspecific modeling of KSR. (2) Within the same parameter scale (i.e., the number of total parameters in these models are comparable), compared to TransE, KSR improves 6.5% relatively, while compared to TransR, KSR improves 19.5%. The comparison illustrates KSR benefits from high-dimensional settings on knowledge features and categories.  4.4  Semantic Analysis: A Case Study  We conduct a case study to analyze the semantics of our model. For brevity, we explore the FB15K datasets with KSR (n = 10, d = 3) which employs 10 knowledge features and for each feature assigns 3 categories. In fact, FB15K is more complex to approach than this setting, thus many minor features and categories have to be suppressed. The consideration of this setting is to facilitate visualization presentation. First, we analyze the specific semantics of each feature. We leverage the entity descriptions to calculate the joint probability by the corresponding occurrence number of word w in the textual descriptions of an entity e and the inferred feature-category Se,i of that entity. There=j =c fore, P [w , zi ] ∝ # {∃e ∈ E, wj ∈ De ∧ Se,i = c} = δ e∈E wj ∈De and Se,i =c , where De is the set of words in the description of entity e, and regarding Se,i the reader could refer to the subsection of Model Description. Then, we list the significant words in each category for each feature. In this way, the semantics of features and categories could be explicitly interpreted. We directly list the results in Table 3. There are six significant features, which are presented with categories and significant words as evidence. This result strongly justifies our motivation of KSR. Notably, the other four features are too vague to be recognized, because KSR is a latent space method similar to LDA. Finally, we present the semantic representations for three entities of different types: Film, Sport and Person. (1.) (Star Trek) = (Film:Related, American:Related, Sports:Unrelated, Person:Unrelated, Location :Unrelated, Drama:Related). Star Trek is a television series produced in American. Thus our semantic representations are quite coherent to the semantics of the entity. (2.) (Football Club Illichivets Mariupol) = (Film:Unrelated, American:Unrelated, Sports:Related, Art:Unrelated, Persons:Multiple, Location:Related). Its textual description is “Football Club Illichivets Mariupol is a Ukrainian professional football club based in Mariupol”, which is accordant with the semantic representation. Note that, football club as a team is composed by multiple persons, which is the reason for Multiple Persons Related. (3.) (Johnathan Glickman)=(Film:Related, American:Unrelated, Sports:Unrelated, Art:Unrelated, Person:Single, Location:Unrelated). This person is a film producer, while we could not search out any nationality information about this person, but our semantic representation could still be interpretable. Finally, we also present the semantic representations for relation. For example, (Country Capital) = (Film:Unrelated,  Table 3: Features with Significant Semantics in Semantic Analysis. Notably, No corresponds to other meaningless or uninterpreted words, such as Is, The, Of, Lot, Good, Well, ... No. Features Categories (Significant Words) 1 Film Yes (Film, Director, Season, Writer), Yes (Awarded, Producer, Actor), No 2 American No, No, Yes (United, States, Country, Population, Area) 3 Sports No, No, Yes (Football, Club, League, Basketball, World Cup) 4 Art Yes(Drama, Music, Voice, Acting), Yes (Film, Story, Screen Play), No 5 Persons No, Multiple (Team, League, Roles), Single(She, Actress, Director, Singer) 6 Location Yes (British, London, Canada, Europe, England), No, No Film is highly correlated with Art and Person, which is accordant with our common knowledge. Location indicates the geographical position outside U.S., thus it is loosely related to American.  4.6  Figure 4: The heatmap of correlations between knowledge features in KSR. Darker color indicates higher correlation. American:Unrelated, Sports:Unrelated, Art:Unrelated, Person:Unrelated, Location:Related). As a common sense, a capital is a location, not sports or art, thus our semantic representations are reasonable.  4.5  Semantic Analysis: Statistic Justification  We conduct statistical analysis in the same setting as the previous subsection. Firstly, we randomly select 100 entities and manually check out the correctness of semantic representations by common knowledge. There are 68 entities, the semantic representations for which are totally correct and also 19 entities, the representations for which are incorrect at only one feature. There are just 13 entities in which the corresponding representations are incorrect at more than one feature. Thus, the result proves the strong semantic expressive ability of KSR. Secondly, if two features (both with category Yes) co-occur in a semantic representation of an entity/relation, this knowledge element (entity/relation) contributes to the correlation between the two features. We make a statistics of the correlation and draw a heatmap in Figure 4, where the darker color corresponds to higher correlation. Looking into the details, those Sports:Related entities would distribute all over the world, so they are almost American:Unrelated. The result shows that correlation between the two features is loose.  Entity Retrieval  In this subsection, we motivate an application of language processing with semantic knowledge representation. Simply, given a sentence regarded with an entity, the task is to retrieve the specific entity. According to section 4.4, we have obtained the joint distribution of [w, zi ]. As to a specific sentence as s = (w1 , w2Q , ...wn ), we employ a naive Bayesian n assumption:[s, zi ] = t=1 [w=wt , zi ], and take [zi |s] as the semantic representation of this sentence. Last, we retrieve the entity with the cosine similarity between the semantic representations of sentence and entities. Totally, there are three sub-tasks: single factoid, multiple factoid and inferential factoid. Single factoid task deals with the descriptions which recall only one entity. There list some cases. (1.) Who proposes the Relativity Theory? Albert Einstein. (2.) Which company is best at Multi-Media? Adobe Systems Incorporated. (3.) What is the Chinese province with capital Taiyuan? Shan-Xi. Multiple factoid task processes the sentences which involve several entities. There list some cases. (1.) Which provinces are the neighbor of Beijing? Tianjin, Hebei. (2.) Which countries are the neighbor of China? Burma, Vietnam, India. Inferential factoid task requires strong reasoning ability, which means the answer is not a direct snip of current corpus. There lists one case. (1.) The people in which Chinese province are richest? Macao, Su-Zhou, Hong Kong, JiangSu, Zhe-Jiang. The results of entity retrieval demonstrates the potentials of semantic representations, which are founded on the effectiveness of KSR. This method provides a potential for jointing knowledge and language.  5  Conclusion  We propose a new model for Knowledge Semantic Representation (KSR), which is a two-level hierarchical generative process to semantically represent knowledge. The model is able to produce interpretable representations. We also evaluate our method with extensive studies. Experimental results justify the effectiveness and the capability of semantic expressiveness.  References [Bordes et al., 2011] Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston, Ronan Collobert, Yoshua Bengio, et al. Learning structured embeddings of knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011. [Bordes et al., 2013] Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2787–2795, 2013. [Fan et al., 2014] Miao Fan, Qiang Zhou, Emily Chang, and Thomas Fang Zheng. Transition-based knowledge graph embedding with relational mapping properties. In Proceedings of the 28th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information, and Computation, pages 328–337, 2014. [Guo et al., 2015] Shu Guo, Quan Wang, Bin Wang, Lihong Wang, and Li Guo. Semantically smooth knowledge graph embedding. In Proceedings of ACL, 2015. [He et al., 2015] Shizhu He, Kang Liu, Guoliang Ji, and Jun Zhao. Learning to represent knowledge graphs with gaussian embedding. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages 623–632. ACM, 2015. [Hoffmann et al., 2011] Raphael Hoffmann, Congle Zhang, Xiao Ling, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Daniel S Weld. Knowledge-based weak supervision for information extraction of overlapping relations. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies-Volume 1, pages 541–550. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011. [Ji et al., 2016] Guoliang Ji, Shizhu He, Liheng Xu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Knowledge graph embedding via dynamic mapping matrix. 2016. [Lin et al., 2015a] Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Modeling relation paths for representation learning of knowledge bases. Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2015. [Lin et al., 2015b] Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yang Liu, and Xuan Zhu. Learning entity and relation embeddings for knowledge graph completion. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015. [Murphy, 2012] Kevin P Murphy. Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective. MIT press, 2012. [Nickel et al., 2012] Maximilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, and Hans-Peter Kriegel. Factorizing yago: scalable machine learning for linked data. In Proceedings of the 21st international conference on World Wide Web, pages 271–280. ACM, 2012.  [Nickel et al., 2015] Maximilian Nickel, Lorenzo Rosasco, and Tomaso Poggio. Holographic embeddings of knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.04935, 2015. [Socher et al., 2013] Richard Socher, Danqi Chen, Christopher D Manning, and Andrew Ng. Reasoning with neural tensor networks for knowledge base completion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 926–934, 2013. [Wang et al., 2014] Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng Chen. Knowledge graph embedding by translating on hyperplanes. In Proceedings of the TwentyEighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1112–1119, 2014. [Wang et al., 2015] Quan Wang, Bin Wang, and Li Guo. Knowledge base completion using embeddings and rules. In Proceedings of the 24th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015. [Xiao et al., 2015] Han Xiao, Minlie Huang, Yu Hao, and Xiaoyan Zhu. TransA: An adaptive approach for knowledge graph embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.05490, 2015. [Xiao et al., 2016a] Han Xiao, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan Zhu. From one point to a manifold: Knowledge graph embedding for precise link prediction. In Proceedings of the 25th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2016. [Xiao et al., 2016b] Han Xiao, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan Zhu. TransG : A generative model for knowledge graph embedding. In Proceedings of the 29th international conference on computational linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016. [Xiao et al., 2017] Han Xiao, Minlie Huang, Lian Meng, and Xiaoyan Zhu. SSP: Semantic space projection for knowledge graph embedding with text description. In Proceedings of the THIRTY-FIRST AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017. [Xie et al., 2016] Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, Jia Jia, Huanbo Luan, and Maosong Sun. Representation learning of knowledge graphs with entity descriptions. 2016. [Zhong et al., 2015a] Huaping Zhong, Jianwen Zhang, Zhen Wang, Hai Wan, and Zheng Chen. Aligning knowledge and text embeddings by entity descriptions. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 267–272, 2015. [Zhong et al., 2015b] Huaping Zhong, Jianwen Zhang, Zhen Wang, Hai Wan, and Zheng Chen. Aligning knowledge and text embeddings by entity descriptions. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 267–272, 2015.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
