Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_3112

Abstract:
A Next-Generation Data Language Proposal by Eugene Panferov, e@bestmx.net 2015  Abstract This paper attempts to explain the consequences of the relational calculus not allowing relations to be domains of relations, and to suggest a solution for the issue. On the example of SQL we describe the consequent problem of the multitude of different representations for relations; analyze in detail the disadvantages of the notions “TABLE” and “FOREIGN KEY”; and propose a complex solution which includes brand new data language, abandonment of tables as a representation for relations, and relatively small yet very significant alteration of the data storage concept, called “multitable index”.  2  1. Introduction In the year 1972 E. F. Codd stated his anticipation as follows: "In the near future, we can expect a great variety of languages to be proposed for interrogating and updating data bases." It is now 2015. The only data language of any significance is SQL. He was not wrong, we were too slow. This paper is intended to contribute to the great variety of data language proposals. This paper attempts to explain the consequences of the relational calculus (as defined in section 3 of [2]) not allowing relations to be domains of relations and to suggest a solution for the issue. In section 2 we discuss the state of the art in general terms. In section 3 we particularly focus on the severity of the problem of the multitude of different representations for relations in SQL (which originates from the relational calculus). We analyze in detail the disadvantages of the notions “TABLE” and “FOREIGN KEY”; expose the complete redundancy of the “JOIN” operation. In section 4 we propose a “multitable index”.and demonstrate its relevance to the previously discussed problems. In section 5 we highlight the principal mental step to the design of a next-generation datalanguage. In section 6 we propose a brand new data language that is capable of dealing with relations between relations having single notion of a relation uniformly applicable to all relations (including those of higher order). The proposed language attempts to overcome the following apparent flaws of SQL: –  human language mimicking –  which leads to inconsistent, completely inextensible, and needlessly complicated syntax  –  mixing relational operations together and with the output  –  imperative DDL  –  impossibility of relations between relations –  which leads to non-homogenous representation and undermines the relation abstraction itself, lowering the level of programming  The proposed language abandons the notion of table and provides: –  frugal, extensible, functional-style syntax  –  higher than SQL level of programming (no surrogate keys, no foreign keys)  –  explicit and independent notions of relational operations and I/O operations  –  declarative DDL  –  single unified representation for relations capable of adopting another relation as a domain  3  2. State Of The Art SQL is the uncontested data language of today and hence it will be our focus. SQL is a huge, unbelievable success. It is the most successful non-imperative algorithmic language [9]. It is the only non-imperative language commonly accepted by the ignorant majority of which the only way of thinking is strictly imperative. Yet SQL is not perfect, and its use is waning. As environment is constantly changing, imposing new requirements and creating opportunities, SQL remains basically unchanged, keeping initial imperfections and adopting chiefly minor improvements. Although, it must be mentioned that SQL is slowly approaching a noble goal. In the 70s data languages were seen as sub-languages of general-purpose languages [2]. SQL, on the contrary, used to stand alone at first, and now a general purpose language is growing around and from within SQL. Do not confuse this purely SQL's phenomenon with PL/SQL or similar procedural dialects. Markus Winand gave us great overview [11] of the recent SQL's evolutions. So, nowadays, when computers are powerful beyond comprehension, more powerful than the Founding Fathers of Computer Science could dream of, we do not have a data base interrogation (sub)language of a level as high as it was meant to be. We are still choosing “how many bytes to reserve for a surrogate key”. On the other hand hordes of uneducated no-SQL proponents who simply did not get the idea of high level programming are trying to abolish everything that SQL has achieved, pushing us down to the level of imperative (general purpose) languages where a programmer is obliged to take care of every byte and the most advanced data management tool is a garbage collector. Moreover, ISO encourages abandonment of the relational model by facilitating XML manipulation [7] within SQL – the apparent sign of decay, not to mention the utmost inherent failure of XML itself. We propose an opposite way, the way up, to the higher than SQL level of programming.  3. What We Have category  item  A very typical approach to database design is Entity-Relation diagrams. It is a very intuitive and informative way of visualizing data structure [10] (to declutter our diagrams we omit minimum cardinality for “M”s and maximum cardinality for “1”s for they are 0 and 1 respectively). In the example above we have two entities and one relation between them. Let us map them into a relational database. The entities will be mapped as tables, and the relation will be mapped as a foreign key.  4  Category Id name  Item Id category_id name  But tables are supposed to represent relations! From the perspective of relational algebra the Item and Category entities are relations. So, we have three relations: Category, Item, and the relation between them. Why do we represent two of them properly (as it meant to be) and at the same time simulate the third one by low level programming of foreign keys? Is there a real need for a nonhomogenous representation? Is the relation “item belongs to category” any worse or better than relations item or category? 3.1. The price of foreign keys Foreign keys are very low-level relatively to tables. Compare a table representing a relation versus a foreign key representing a relation: CREATE TABLE category ( Id INT, name TEXT ); Here you just declare: these two attributes constitutes a relation. You do not care how the association between them will be built and maintained. With this declaration you can freely manipulate pairs (id,name) and apply whatever relational operations to the relation category. CREATE TABLE item ( Id INT, category INT REFERENCES category(id), name TEXT ); Here you have created a fake attribute category for the relation item, you have defined its type which have no correspondence to any domain knowledge entity (remember? Domain knowledge is “item belong to category” – it says nothing about integers), and then you command to your RDBMS to check your input in order to keep obvious garbage out (in other words, this “references” directive defines a subset of the integer, making the type of this fake attribute more relevant). You have created a relation manually! You are involved in the very internals of the representation. The maintenance is up to you. The interpretation is up to you too. The system does not recognize this representation as a relation. You can not apply relational operations to it. 3.2. The price of joins A join creates a relation from existing relations . At first glance, it looks a reasonably useful operation, but practice reveals that the resulting relation already exists... always. Let us select something from the first example “item-->category”: SELECT category.name, item.name  5 FROM category, item WHERE category.id = item.category_id The relation highlighted with bold, is already in our database, but it is hidden behind the foreign key (underlined). And it is not “new” information created inside the database, this information is put inside the database on purpose. Every pair of tables you ever join, you already MADE JOINABLE! A significant part of a programmer's labor is to make all joins precisely predictable. A programmer must make sure all joins will result in a set of relations that are meant to be stored. No join will reveal any new information. Joins do merely convert relation representations, and they do this job each time we are accessing information. Moreover, a programmer is forced to codify this conversion routine itself for many relations separately. It is a resource consuming operation of which the result we already know. 3.3. The price of link-tables Because foreign keys are not capable of representing many-to-many relations, there is another alternative representation for relations: link-tables. It is also a low-level simulation of relations, it also compromises the idea of RDBMS by rivaling tables. And it is available for extra price. Given the simplest case of a relation many-to-many: genre  book_genre  book  The most recommended mainstream way to represent it in terms of tables is: book_genre  book  book_id genre_id  id title author ...  genre id name  Let us select genres of a book X: SELECT genre.name FROM book_genre, genre, book WHERE book.title = X AND book_id = book.id AND genre_id = genre.id Nothing unusual, all three tables properly joined according to the foreign keys provided. But, look, book_genre is a relation on the cartesian product of book and genre. All information we want to retrieve is located inside this product. In other words we need to perform a search of the dimension (book, genre). What do we do in the select above? We produce a cartesian product of book, genre, and book_genre itself! And then we perform a search of the dimension twice bigger than needed. Easy to see that an RDBMS appears now even less relational. 3.4. The diversity of representations  6 Please, do not confuse these two representations, they have nothing in common and are not related at all. A foreign key (as a representation for relations) is not a part of a link-table representation for relation since in this case a foreign key itself DOES NOT represent any particular relation. However, this diversity has its price too: all foreign keys in a database come in two varieties: (a) representing a relation (b) not representing a relation, so that you have a set of absolutely indistinguishable objects with opposite semantic. Moreover, there are more than these two alternative representations of a relation in SQL. Some RDBMSes introduce subclasses and inheritance. Needless to say that a subclass is a relation on a class, therefore, we have another rival representation. Some RDBMSes introduce complex types, arrays, collections (aka “nested tables” (sic!)) which are sort of relation representations too. Let us take a look at the oracle documentation [13]: ---- a collection is defined as: CREATE OR REPLACE TYPE emp AS OBJECT ( e_name VARCHAR2(53), s_sec VARCHAR2(11), addr VARCHAR2(113) ); ---- You can create a table with this object This is a relation, no more and no less, yet another representation! Which representation should we choose for a particular relation? Is there any method to choose representations from this multitude? Why so many representations? This representation zoo is the price of the “table” notion. 3.5. The price of tables A typical RDBMS suggests the following mapping: relation → table; domain → attribute. Note that a table can not adopt another table as an attribute. Therefore, there simply is no room for relations between relations. Taking in account that a typical domain knowledge contains a whole hierarchy of relations with the majority of them being relations between relations, with tables we can represent only SOME of them. Once we represent any relation with a table we prevent table representations for all relations that includes the current one and all that are included by the current one. The representation of the former takes link-tables and foreign-keys. The representation of the latter takes complex types and collections. This is why we are stockpiling alternative representations. And it is not a solution at all. An RDBMS controls relations represented as tables, which are (as we just demonstrated) a mere part of the data model. The model really consists of many more relations having alternative representations, so that our data model resides partially (and mostly) outside the system constituted of tables. As only the tables are considered “relations” by an RDBMS, on what premises do you call your data model “relational”?  7  4. What Do We Have To Have Any domain knowledge is not a plain set of relations, it is always a whole hierarchy of relations. And not surprisingly only a minority of relations are leaves of this hierarchy. Typically a majority of relations adopt other relations as domains. First of all we must make relations between relations possible. In order to achieve this, we have to improve slightly the definition of the relation, making it self recurrent (for definitions we use an intuitive BNF-like notation [5]): relation domains domains domain domain  ::= ::= ::= ::= ::=  domains graph domain domains domain relation scalar_type  It is very important from the standpoint of the set theory that a relation (being a set) might play a role of a domain. Exactly this is missing in relational calculus and relational algebra as defined by Codd in [2] and [1] The “scalar_type” is merely a predefined set, provided by an underlying computational system, for example “number” or “string of characters” (that were considered basic types by E. F. Codd in his original definition of the relational model of data) Everything is plain and clear in this definition except for the mysterious “graph” that is yet to be defined. (A relation's graph is defined in the set theory, see [8]) Let's say we have a binary relation ρ between two sets A and B:  ρ A  B  keys  keys  1 4 7 9  2 3 8 9  a representation  Relation graph G(ρ) = {12,13,48,49,73,99}  This is the relation graph  Assuming we already have the domains A and B somehow represented, we only have to represent the edges of the graph. Therefore we may treat a relation graph as a set. Finite set. And every finite set can be represented as a set of integers. In this particular example we have the relation graph represented as a set of six integers. Let us create an index on this set:  8  50 25 12 13  75 48  49 73  99  This index (by-design) represents the graph of the relation ρ The primary purpose of a relation graph is to answer the question: “whether a tuple is a member of the relation”. This is the question an index is supposed to answer too. A graph and an index share the purpose and share representation. Because of this, from our perspective: a relation graph IS an index. If a key is missed on this index it is not a member of ρ. If a key is on this index then its node contains a primary key reference to the element of the domain. Furthermore, nothing prevents this index from holding storage node references. We did not impose any restrictions on the domains A and B – these are just sets – therefore, these domains of the relation ρ can be relations. We have just created a relation between relations. It is merely an index. The only novelty is that attributes of this index come from different tables. It is a significant novelty. But contemporary software (with very little improvement) could handle such indexes. Also we can treat it as usual relation, as we just did few paragraphs before and succeeded. Strictly speaking an index is a very special relation – a relation with linear order? But it is still a relation anyway, and it contains all information we need. Thus, introduction of multitable indexes will allow us to store relations between relations and treat them as other relations. So that we would stick with single unified representation for relations, that leads to a homogenous (rather to say self-similar) recursive representation of domain knowledge. Also, multitable indexes put joins out of the job. Since we can just store relations between relations we do not have to recalculate them repeatedly.  5. Paradigm Shift As we demonstrated, tables are incapable of representing relations. But tables already replaced the very idea of relations. Everybody think of relations as a “geeky euphemism” for tables [6]. It is gross, but it is very strong public opinion, and despite being unexpressed, it is probably the principal cause of SQL's waning. Tables aren't relations! – Indexes are!  9  6. The Language Proposal We need a language to be pure, simple, and coherent. Notation must be clear, unambiguous, and intuitively human readable (but not alike a human language, in fact resemblance of a human language does only complicate understanding [3]). Ideally, similar objects must be described by the similar sentences of the language, while dissimilar ones be described by easily distinguishable sentences. Also, we want to keep a number of keywords and unique syntax constructs to the bare minimum. As everything is already invented, we will try to stick with s-expressions [4] and follow the functional style. Abolish human language mimicking. Decades of practical use of SQL worldwide proved “ordinary” humans incapable of speaking SQL despite its intend to be human-friendly. Today's SQL has become completely a machine-to-machine language. There is no need to keep the useless legacy handicap. Separate relational operations. We want an explicit notation for projection and pure relational selection (without “order by”, “limit” etc). Separate output operation and make it explicit. It allows us to further purify scripting, and at the same time enrich output formatting. Split context. In SQL we had to deal with certain limitations on SELECT depending on its context. In some context certain clauses are disallowed. We want to get rid of this complication by introducing two distinguishable contexts (relational (where any selection is possible) and non-relational (where no selection possible)) and a predefined (fixed) set of operations that cause context shift (e.g. “order by” takes relational object and returns nonrelational object). Declutter the notation. We will keep the notation free from meaningless variety of separators – space is enough. For example, if we want to construct a triple, we have to provide triple members (and optionally their order), like this: ( x1, x2, x3 ). The question is what information the comma symbol adds to this notation? The only right answer is: void. Because of this, we simply discard the garbage, so we got: ( x1 x2 x3 ). This seemingly superficial change in fact is a very significant improvement to the syntax. It effectively removes the whole parasite idea of “in between”, which ordinarily causes whole series of tiny annoying problems (particularly nasty in machine generated scripting (beginning with “duplicate separator”)). Make basic types and relations interchangeable. This is the pivot point of the language. It makes the language capable of expressing relations between relations. Introduce variables and assignments. SQL does not provide a room for assignments, they are totally alien to the SQL's structure, yet strongly demanded (recently the “WITH” clause (which is primarily a counterintuitive assignment) was introduced into SQL). Our variables will be IMMUTABLE, will have a single transaction lifespan and visibility, will be interchangeable with relations in every context except for data definition, and will represent only sets of tuples (subsets of arbitrary relations, practically). Assignments have no need to be calculated immediately. Make DML returning value. Since we have explicit output operations, and separated relational operations, and we have assignments, then we can spare the whole “RETURNING” clause by making DML return affected rows by default. And since we may utilize a return value only explicitly, then we can just discard it by not utilizing it. Keep types as few as possible. The epoch of counting bytes has passed. There is no need in keeping several different types for integers, also we do not see any high level application for bitwise operations and related stuff. We now want computers to count their bytes (if they are concerned). On the other hand we provide a useful tool for constructing complex types of  10 arbitrary complexity, namely relations – we do not need to anticipate all possible user's wishes by maintaining a library of fancy peculiar types which will be rarely known and never used (because user's wishes always prove themselves more peculiar than our wildest anticipation). Respect the fact that a relation is a function of its primary key. Indeed we can treat them as functions all the way long and that gives us an opportunity to create a procedural language later on. Typographic Convention: To describe syntax we will use BNF. We will type terminals in bold font, keeping their literal value, if this value is predefined. We will type terminals plain UPPERCASE, if their value is variable. We will give lowercase identifiers for non-terminals. We will highlight rules of particular significance with red sign ::= NOTE: These BNF snippets are not the actual grammar used in the prototype software. These are designed for better understanding, using broader set of tokens and redundant rules, these describe the language from the perspective of a user. The actual grammar differs to these BNF snippets since it is designed for different purpose (see file: “parser.y” in the source code).  6.1. Data Definition definition definition definition domains domains domain domain type type // we will  ::= relation ( NAME domains ) ::= domain ( NAME domains ) ::= function ( NAME domains ) expression ::= domain ::= domains domain ::= type ::= ( NAME type ) ::= TYPE_NAME ::= RELATION_NAME define expression later  There are three classes of relations (they are all relations in any sense): simple relation – a relation which tuples are defined by a user, domain – a relation which always contains all possible tuples, function – a relation which tuples are formally defined (can be calculated and cannot be altered). Examples: Let there be a tiny public library: genre  department  book_genre  book  author  available  Assuming hereafter that we have predefined scalar types: timestamp, text, int, real  11 The definition of this library will look like: relation relation relation relation relation relation  (author (name text) (birthdate timestamp)) (book author (title text) timestamp) (genre text) (book_genre book genre) (department text) (available book department)  Now let us illustrate a domain definition: domain (point2d real real) domain (circle (radius real) (center point2d)) relation (my_circle circle) In the example above circle is a set of all possible circles. While my_circle is a set of user defined circles – user himself controls which tuples do belong to the latter set. Domains play a role of complex types. Of course we can select from them too, if we can determine finiteness of a set prior to output, then why not. Of course we are assuming laziness. Laziness is so natural in a transactional context – the entire workflow is already cut by checkpoints.  6.2. Arithmetic We like sex. expression ::= ( OPERATOR list ) expression ::= ( member OPERATOR list ) expression ::= ( TYPE_NAME expression ) // this is a typecast list ::= member list ::= list member member ::= CONST member ::= NAME member ::= selection member ::= expression // we will define selection later To keep some operators (namely comparison) easily readable for everyone we decided to allow alternative placement of an operator within an expression, nevertheless we prefer prefix notation. Examples: (+ 1 2 3 4 5) (& (> (-17) (* 1 2 3 (-5))) (“xcf” < “fgh”)) function (avg2 (a real) (b real)) (/ (+ a b) 2) (+ (int “123”) 4) // operator type is defined by the type of the first operand // however, we will be glad to get rid of operator overloading  12  6.3. Selection What information do we need to provide to a system in order to select all tuples of a relation? The relation name – and nothing more! So that selection operation basically looks like: (author) (book) selection ::= ( NAME ) selection ::= ( NAME list ) selection ::= ( NAME : expression ) list ::= member list ::= list member member ::= selection member ::= expression member ::= CONST member ::= . // this is a shorthand for a non-captured domain // and probably this one too selection ::= ( NAME list : expression ) Here the list acts like a positional reference to the relation's domains, so that selection may be treated as function call. The expression after “:” acts like a “where” clause, it is a filter of the relation's tuples. These both are equivalent in any sense. Examples: (author “Dawkins” “1941”) (author :(name ~ “A.*”)) (book (author :(name ~ “A.*”)) (text) (timestamp)) // here “meaningless” selections (text) and (timestamp) stand for // non-captured arguments // the two last domains of a book may be of any value. // Surely we must create a shorthand for this. (book (author :(name ~ “A.*”)) . .) // all books of all authors with the name's initial “A”  6.4. Tuple Constructors And Set Constructors Quite naturally, for tuple construction we will employ Cartesian product, for set construction we will employ union operation, and we will create the following notation for them: product ::= { list } union ::= ( list ) list ::= member // sets  list member member member  ::= ::= ::= ::=  list member CONST expression selection  we do not see a practical reason for explicit construction of empty  13  Examples: {1 2 “txt”} (1 2 3) ({1 2} {3 4}) {(1 2) 3}  // // // //  a triple of two integers and one text a set of integers a set of two pairs of integers also a set of two pairs: {1 3} and {2 3}  Of course we can do all the same with functions and selections: put selections into their arguments, and put function calls into selections and arbitrary combine them with constructors. All functions accept SETS instead of each argument and they act as if they are “MAPPED” by each argument (see, for example, “map” function definition in Haskell). Examples: {(author) “he is author”} // we extend each selected tuple ((genre) “bore”) // we extend a selected set (avg2 (1 2 3) 3) // == ((avg2 1 3) (avg2 2 3) (avg2 3 3))  6.5. Join-like Operation Since we have all relations between relations explicitly defined, the data scheme is a graph. So that a pathfinding problem can be formalized. It gives us very powerful operation: finding a connection between a relation and another relation's subset. connection ::= { NAME selection }  Example: // select “all genres of the given author” {genre (author 'Dawkins' ?)} The difference to the “JOIN” is that we do not have to specify the exact connection between relations (are being searched). On the contrary! We command a computer to find this connection and utilize. Please, refer to the “Data Definition” example, a path from the genre to the book is clearly visible there. However, it's semantic is not specified, we (as we designed this data scheme) know what it means. We think this operation must return a Cartesian product of the two relations involved in the search. We are not sure about a return value in case there is no connection between given relations.  14  6.7. Projection Operation As we are tampering with the parenthesis notation, we have no option but to employ this notation again (not because of the style, but because of the resolving of expressions). Please, note: since domains themselves could be relations you may apply projection operation to them as well. projection ::= [ selection list ] list ::= member list ::= list member member ::= DOMAIN_NAME member ::= [ DOMAIN_NAME list ] // possible the closure, // in order to utilize projection in a relational context selection ::= projection Examples: [(book) author title] [(book_genre . (genre 'sci-fi')) [book author]] [(book_genre . (genre 'sci-fi')) [book [author name] title]]  6.8. Data Management The most difficult and even controversial matter is the UPDATE operation. In the perspective of a pure relational system it is rather doubtful if this operation have even a right to exist. It is no-brainer in a context of old-school tables keeping spreadsheets of junk fields. But in our system, every field matters (remember we put all insignificant fields aside), so that changing a field value is in fact creating an entirely different tuple. Where by “different” I mean a tuple semantic. What is a reason of changing “Shakespeare” record into “Dawkins” record? If you want to, I strongly suggest “add / remove” procedure. The most sensible apology for update operation are probable data input mistakes. So that keeping them in mind I propose the following syntax: command ::= add RELATION_NAME set command ::= remove RELATION_NAME set command ::= update RELATION_NAME set ( list ) set ::= product set ::= union set ::= selection list ::= member list ::= list member member ::= DOMAIN_NAME expression member ::= DOMAIN_NAME CONST // plus “remove cascade” written in a single word command ::= abolish RELATION_NAME set  15  Examples: add genre {“bore”} add author ({“Dawkins” “1941”} {“Homer” “800 BC”}) remove book (book . “War And Piece” .) // removal with respect to another relation remove book (genre “bore”) update author (author) (name (capitalize name)) update author (book:(title ~ “A.*”) ( name (capitalize name) birthdate “1910” ) Thus, we achieve significant improvement in notation for DML operations referring multiple relations, such as notoriously ugly “DELETE FROM FROM” and “UPDATE FROM” We are not sure about positional “field” assignments, but they may be possible too.  6.9. Assignments, Laziness, Transactions We have quite a structure in our database. Putting a tuple into a relation may require several tuples in other relations. Assume we do not have “Homer” and we try to add “Ulysses”. add book ((author “Homer”) “Ulysses” “750 BC”) it will cause data integrity error. So that we do: add author {“Homer” “800 BC”} add book {(author “Homer”) “Ulysses” “750 BC”} commit Here we have a point of optimization. Common sense tells us that we do not need do explicitly select a tuple we just added to a relation, we may maintain a sort of a pointer left over the DML operation. Perhaps this particular imperfection would be algorithmically detectible, and possible for a machine to optimize, but pointers will also improve the outfit of the notation (if there are more than one of them, of course): Homer = add author ('Homer' '800 BC') add book {(Homer) 'Ulysses' '750 BC'} commit Theoretically (taking transaction qualities in account) we may naturally introduce laziness into DML. Everything we did before commit we actually did not, we only put plans for the operation we need to perform. It looks like laziness perfectly fits this application. Also we can defer error reporting until a commit point, allowing a user to temporarily “violate” some constraints. Because it is just a plan that have no immediate effect on a database, you can even think  16 about it as an unfinished sentence. This is a good problem to think about. Do we really need the immense multitude of these oldschool options affecting the behavior of transactions? Can we, in our new environment, put this cultural pluralism to an end by creating a single (or few?) firmly defined behavior that always makes sense? Also assignments will be useful to break complicated selections. Dawkins = ('Dawkins' '1941-03-26') His_Books = (book (Dawkins) . .) (book_genre (His_Books) .) Note: we do not demand assignments to be materialized, we also appreciate them as nominators. This is another ground for laziness. In order to make fun with variables as less messy as possible we constitute the following principles: – variables are immutable – the visibility and the lifespan is a single transaction – the type always is “set of tuples” – variables are interchangeable with relations (variable can and only can substitute relations in every context) Note: the parenthesis around variables, it is a selection, hence NAME terminal can not be an expression, but selection can.  The definition of assignment is: assignment ::= NAME = command assignment ::= NAME = selection while variable usage is already defined above, you can put variable's name in any context where you can put relation's name (except for the DML statements... but, wait, why not?). Thus, a variable's simplest usage comes wrapped in parenthesis, as shown in examples above. By the way it is an unconditional selection, and we may do conditional selections (from variables) as well. A = (author:(name ~ “A.*”)) B = (A:(birthdate > “1940”)) C = (A . “1940”)  6.10. Output output ::= output selection output ::= output formatting selection Here we define WHERE we want TO LOCALAZE all nasty output formatting stuff that breaks relational model and makes SQL astray. The formatting features themselves are out of the scope of this article.  17 Strict isolation of the output formatting allows us to define much more sophisticated and diverse format methods. We are free to do literally anything with our selection result, since in the context of the “output” operation it is no longer in the relational context and we are not limited to relational operations.  6.11. PL All in all we inevitably will need procedural language. However, it is out of the article's scope, easy to observe that we can turn our transactions into procedures – stored parameterized transactions. Also we already introduced pure functions. Also the proposed language seems to be capable of seamless incorporation in a functional workflow.  6.12. Plausibility Of The Example There you could have noticed damn few “attributes” in the relations I have pictured, which is very unlike “real” 100-fields tables. There is a reason, besides an educational purpose, to keep this example data structure so seemingly oversimplified. All those 100-field tables (being results of “optimization”) ARE NOT RELATIONS. Most of their numerous fields are not their domains (usually only few of the fields are, while the rest represent all sorts of META-information or information somehow linked to relation tuples and should be stored separately). We suppose that only significant fields must constitute a data definition while all the rest should be TOASTed aside (see [12]). However, it is a very disputable topic, if we need that dangerous distinction between “significant” and “insignificant” and where the margin should be drawn.  6.13. Style Questions – case sensitivity – assignment syntax (there is an opportunity for several alternatives, will they be useful?) – filter symbol ( “:” doesn't look good, while usual set-comprehension “|” looks even worse) – arithmetic notation (shall we allow operator sign to appear second on a list) – product and union parenthesis (there is a reasonable opinion (opposing to the current proposal) to use “{}” for enumerated sets or unions and to use “()” for cartesian products)  7. Conclusion In this paper we have demonstrated the following: – Traditional SQL paradigm has several severe flaws – Multitable indexes are not any more complicated than ordinary indexes  18 – A multitable index itself is a relation between relations – The following alteration of the data language paradigm is required: – We better think of all indexes as relations, and stop thinking of tables as relations – A single column table represents an enumerable type – The idea of a multicolumn table must perish – The idea of foreign key must perish – By manipulating index's content we define a relation graph All these above provides us A UNIFORMITY of relations. Relations of all types are treated equally and could be represented recursively. Compact functional-style notation of the proposed language allows seamless embedding in general purpose languages.  19  Bibliography 1: E. F. Codd, A Relational Model Of Data For Large Shared Data Banks, 1970 2: E. F. Codd, Relational Completeness Of data Base Sublanguages, 1972 3: E. W. Dijkstra, On The Foolishness Of Natural Language Programming, 2005 4: M. Sperber et al, Revised6 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme, 2007 5: T. R. N. Rao, The Panini-Backus Form in Syntax of Formal Languages, 1998 6: Gordon Everest, Tableitis, https://sites.google.com/a/umn.edu/geverest/home/datamodeling-course/-tableitis 7: ISO/IEC 9075-14 XML-Related Specifications (SQL/XML), http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=53686 8: Binary Relations, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_relation#Formal_definition 9: Programming Language Popularity, http://langpop.com/ 10: Crow Foot Notation , http://www.tdan.com/view-articles/7474 11: Modern SQL in PostgreSQL, http://www.slideshare.net/MarkusWinand/modern-sql 12: TOAST, http://www.postgresql.org/docs/8.3/static/storage-toast.html 13: Collections, http://docs.oracle.com/cd/B10501_01/appdev.920/a97269/pc_18col.htm

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
