Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_366

Abstract:
Uncountably many quasi-isometry classes of groups of type F P Robert P. Kropholler  Ian J. Leary∗  Ignat Soroko†  arXiv:1712.05826v1 [math.GR] 15 Dec 2017  December 19, 2017  Abstract In [8] one of the authors constructed uncountable families of groups of type F P and of n-dimensional Poincaré duality groups for each n ≥ 4. We show that the groups constructed in [8] comprise uncountably many quasi-isometry classes. We deduce that for each n ≥ 4 there are uncountably many quasi-isometry classes of acyclic n-manifolds admitting free cocompact properly discontinuous discrete group actions.  1  Introduction  Throughout this article, the phrase ‘continuously many’ will be used to describe sets having the cardinality of the real numbers. In [8] one of the authors exhibited continuously many isomorphism types of groups of type F P , extending the work of Bestvina and Brady [1], who constructed the first examples of groups of type F P that are not finitely presented. We extend these results still further, by showing that the groups constructed in [8] fall into continuously many quasi-isometry classes. Bestvina-Brady associate a group BBL to each finite flag complex in such a way that the homological properties of the group BBL are controlled by those of the flag complex L. In particular, in the case when L is acyclic but not contractible, BBL is type F P but not finitely presented. In [8], a group GL (S) is associated to each connected finite flag complex L and each set S ⊆ Z in such a way that the homological properties of GL (S) e In the case when L and L e are both are controlled by those of L and its universal cover, L. acyclic, each GL (S) is type F P . The construction of GL (S) generalizes that of BBL , and in particular GL (Z) is BBL . Our first main theorem is as follows. ∗  Partially supported by a Research Fellowship from the Leverhulme Trust. Partially supported by NSF Grants DMS-1107452, 1107263, 1107367 and ‘RNMS:Geometric Structures and Representation Varieties’ (the GEAR Network) 0 This work was started at MSRI, Berkeley (during the program Geometric Group Theory), where research is supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMS-1440140. It was completed at INI, Cambridge, during the programme Nonpositive curvature, group actions and cohomology, where research is supported by EPSRC grant EP/K032208/1. The authors thank both MSRI and INI for their support and hospitality. †  1  Theorem 1. For each fixed finite connected flag complex L that is not simply-connected, there are continuously many quasi-isometry classes of groups GL (S). The invariant that we rely on to distinguish the groups GL (S) is the invariant that was introduced by Bowditch [2] in his construction of continuously many quasi-isometry classes of 2-generator groups. (Grigorchuk’s construction of such a family, using growth rate to distinguish the groups [7], is no help to us because the groups GL (S) all have exponential growth.) To a graph Γ Bowditch associates a set H(Γ) of natural numbers, consisting of the lengths of loops in Γ that are taut in the sense that they are not consequences of shorter loops. He describes the relationship between H(Γ) and H(Γ′ ) in the case when Γ and Γ′ are quasi-isometric. When Γ is the Cayley graph associated to a group presentation satisfying the C ′ (1/6) small cancellation condition, the set H(Γ) is equal to the set of lengths of the relators of the presentation. Our proof involves estimating the set H(Γ(S)), where Γ(S) is the Cayley graph associated to the natural generating set for GL (S). The natural presentation for GL (S) contains relators whose lengths are parametrized by the absolute values of the members of S, but it also contains many relators of length 3, and does not satisfy the C ′ (1/6) condition. To apply Bowditch’s technique we need a lower bound for the word lengths of elements in the kernel of the map GL (S) → GL (T ) for S ⊆ T , in terms of T − S. The Cayley graph Γ(S) embeds naturally in a CAT(0) cubical complex. Our lower bound on word length uses this embedding and an easy lemma concerning maps between CAT(0) spaces. In the statement, the singular set for a map consists of all points at which it is not a local isometry. Lemma 2. Let f : X → Y be a continuous map of CAT(0) metric spaces, and suppose that x 6= x′ but f (x) = f (x′ ). Then the distance dX (x, x′ ) is at least twice the distance from x to the singular set for f . In the final section of this article, we study the behaviour of the Bowditch length spectrum of a Cayley graph under the operation of taking certain semi-direct products with infinitely generated right-angled Coxeter groups. Such semi-direct products arise when applying Davis’s trick to the groups GL (S) [5, 6]. For each S ⊆ Z one constructs a group J(S) which is the semi-direct product of GL (S) and a suitable Coxeter group, together with maps J(S) → J(T ) for S ⊆ T . Our aim is to estimate H(Λ(S)), where Λ(S) is a Cayley graph of the group J(S). Once again, the main problem is to give lower bounds for the word lengths of elements of the kernel of the map J(S) → J(T ). Roughly speaking, we show that short elements in this kernel give rise to short elements in the kernel of GL (S) → GL (T ). The main result of this section, Theorem 13, is too technical to state in this introduction, but instead we give one of its applications. Corollary 3. For each d ≥ 4 there is a closed aspherical d-manifold admitting continuously many quasi-isometry classes of regular acyclic covers. In contrast to the geometric methods used throughout the rest of the article, the proof of Theorem 13 is purely algebraic. It would be interesting to have a geometric proof of this theorem and conversely to have algebraic proofs of our results concerning GL (S).  2  Acknowledgements The authors thank Noel Brady and Martin Bridson for their interest in this project and for stimulating discussions about it. We also thank them both for having posed the question of whether the groups GL (S) fall into continuously many quasi-isometry classes, which initiated the project.  2  Background  There are various types of Cayley graphs, but we shall need just one type which we shall call the simplicial Cayley graph Γ(G, S) associated to the group G and generating set S. This is the simplicial graph with vertex set G and edge set the 2-element sets of the form {g, gs} for some s ∈ S. This definition could be made for any S ⊆ G; the fact that S generates G is equivalent to the graph Γ(G, S) being connected. Any simplicial graph with a free, transitive G-action on its vertex set is isomorphic as a graph with G-action to Γ(G, S) for some S. The action of G on the edges of Γ(G, S) is free if and only if S contains no element of order two. Next we recall some material from [2] concerning quasi-isometries and Bowditch’s taut loop length spectrum. Since we change the language slightly we restate some of the results from [2] in our terms: the proofs are identical to the originals. Each graph Γ that we consider will be connected, simplicial, and will be viewed as a metric space via the path metric dΓ , in which each edge has length one. The induced metric on the vertex set of a Cayley graph Γ(G, S) is thus the S-word length metric on the group G. For k > 0 an integer, recall that a function f : X → Y between metric spaces is k-Lipschitz if dY (f (x), f (x′ )) ≤ k.dX (x, x′ ) for all x, x′ ∈ X. Following Bowditch [2], we say that graphs Γ and Λ are k-quasi-isometric if there exist a pair of k-Lipschitz maps of vertex sets φ : V (Γ) → V (Λ) and ψ : V (Λ) → V (Γ) so that dΓ (x, ψ ◦ φ(x)) ≤ k for each vertex x of Γ and similarly dΛ (y, φ ◦ ψ(y)) ≤ k for each vertex y of Λ. Graphs are quasi-isometric if they are k-quasi-isometric for some integer k > 0. We remark that the above definition is not the standard one; see for example [3, I.8.14] for the standard definition of a quasi-isometry between metric spaces. We leave it as an exercise to check that graphs Γ, Λ are quasi-isometric as above if and only if the metric spaces (Γ, dΓ ) and (Λ, dΛ ) are quasi-isometric in the usual sense. An edge loop of length l in a (simplicial) graph Γ is a sequence v0 , . . . , vl of vertices such that v0 = vl and {vi−1 , vi } is an edge for 1 ≤ i ≤ l. For a graph Γ and an integer constant l, let Γl denote the 2-complex whose 1-skeleton is the geometric realization of Γ, with one 2-cell attached to each edge loop in Γ of length strictly less than l. An edge loop of length l in Γ is said to be taut if it is not null-homotopic in Γl . Bowditch’s taut loop length spectrum H(Γ) for the graph Γ is the set of lengths of taut loops. We are interested in the 2-complex Γl only to define taut loops: if Γ′ is any subcomplex with Γ ⊆ Γ′ ⊆ Γl so that the induced map on fundamental groups π1 (Γ′ ) → π1 (Γl ) is an isomorphism, then an edge loop is taut if and only if it is not null-homotopic in Γ′ . Bowditch defines subsets H, H ′ ⊆ N to be k-related if for all l ≥ k 2 + 2k + 2, whenever l ∈ H then there is some l′ ∈ H ′ with l/k ≤ l′ ≤ lk and vice-versa. He then proves Lemma 4. If (connected) graphs Γ and Λ are k-quasi-isometric, then H(Γ) and H(Λ) 3  are k-related. In our terms, the lemmas that Bowditch uses to prove the above result are as follows. Lemma 5. H(Γ) is equal to the set of l ∈ N for which the induced map of fundamental groups π1 (Γl ) → π1 (Γl+1 ) is not an isomorphism. For any fixed l, let iΓ,l denote the inclusion of Γ in the 2-complex Γl . Lemma 6. If φ : Γ → Λ and ψ : Λ → Γ form a k-quasi-isometry between Γ and Λ, then for any l ≥ k 2 + 2k + 2 there are homotopies iΓ,l ◦ ψ ◦ φ ≃ iΓ,l  and iΛ,l ◦ φ ◦ ψ ≃ iΛ,l .  Next we review some material from [1, 8]. A flag complex or clique complex is a simplicial complex in which every finite set of mutually adjacent vertices spans a simplex. Let T denote the circle R/Z, viewed as a CW-complex with Qone vertex at 0 + Z ∈ R/Z and one edge. For a finite set V let TV denote the product v∈V Tv , where Tv denotes a copy of T. Non-empty subcomplexes of TV are in bijective correspondence with simplicial complexes with vertex set contained in V . If L is a flag complex with vertex set V , let TL denote the corresponding subcomplex of TV . This complex is aspherical, and its fundamental group is the right-angled Artin group AL associated to L, with generators corresponding to the vertices of L, subject only to the relations that v and w commute whenever {v, w} is an edge of L. The universal covering space XL of TL has a natural cubical structure, and is a CAT(0) cubical complex. The additive group structure in T = R/Z defines a map l : TV → T, e L to be the regular covering of TL induced and hence a map lL : TL → T. Define T by pulling back the universal covering of T along lL . The Bestvina-Brady group BBL e L ), or equivalently the kernel of the map is defined to be the fundamental group π1 (T AL → Z of fundamental groups induced by l : TL → T. Bestvina and Brady showed that many properties of BBL are determined by properties of L. In the case when L is acyclic but not simply connected, BBL is type F P but not finitely presented [1]. Let fL : XL → R be the map of universal coverings induced by lL . This map has the following properties: if we identify each n-cube of XL with [0, 1]n then its restriction to each n-cube is equal to an affine map; the image of each vertex of XL is an integer; the image of each n-cube of XL is an interval of length n. We view fL as defining a height e L , with covering group BBL . function on XL . There is a regular covering map XL → T In [8] this is generalized, under the extra assumption that L be connected. For each (S) set S ⊆ Z, a CAT(0) cubical complex XL is defined, together with a regular branched (S) e L , and the group GL (S) is by definition the covering group for this covering map XL → T (S) covering. The only branch points of this covering are the vertices of XL whose height is not in S, and the stabilizer in GL (S) of each branch point is a subgroup isomorphic to the fundamental group π1 (L). (In particular, the construction is non-trivial only when L is not simply-connected.) If S ⊆ T ⊆ Z, there is a regular branched covering map (S) (T ) XL → XL , branched only at vertices of height in T − S, and the branched covering (S) XL → TL factors through this. If S ⊆ T then there is a surjective group homomorphism (S) (T ) GL (S) → GL (T ), and the branched covering map XL → XL is equivariant for this homomorphism. The group GL (Z) is equal to BBL . 4  (S)  The height function on XL induces a GL (S)-invariant height function on XL for e L has only one vertex of each integer height, the group GL (S) acts each S ⊆ Z. Since T (S) transitively on the vertices of XL of each height. The intersection of the 2-skeleton (S) of XL and the 0-level set (i.e., the points of height 0) is a simplicial graph Γ whose 0-skeleton is the vertices of height 0. Orbits of edges in Γ correspond to AL -orbits of squares in XL , or equivalently to edges of L. If 0 ∈ S then GL (S) acts freely on Γ, and so Γ can be identified with a simplicial Cayley graph for GL (S). This gives a natural choice of generators for GL (S) when 0 ∈ S, in bijective correspondence with the directed edges of L. Under the composite map GL (S) → GL (Z) = BBL → AL the element corresponding to the directed edge from vertex x to vertex y maps to the element xy −1 . To give a presentation for GL (S) with this generating set, we first fix a finite collection Ω of directed loops in L that normally generates π1 (L). In other words, if one attaches discs to L along the loops in Ω, one obtains a simply-connected complex. Three families of relators occur in this presentation, which we call P (L, Ω): • (Edge relations) for each directed edge a with opposite edge a, the relation aa = 1; • (Triangle relations) for each directed triangle (a, b, c) in L the relations abc = 1 and a−1 b−1 c−1 = 1; • (Long cycle relations) for each n ∈ S − {0} and each (a1 , . . . , al ) ∈ Ω the relation an1 an2 · · · anl = 1. Another crucial property of these presentations is that only the long relations corresponding to n ∈ S hold in GL (S): if (a1 , . . . , al ) ∈ Ω is not null-homotopic in L, then an1 an2 · · · anl 6= 1 for n ∈ / S ∪ {0}. We close by giving some references for more general background material. For CAT(0) spaces we suggest [3], and for homological finiteness conditions such as the F P property we suggest [4]. Each of these topics is also covered briefly in the appendices to [6], which is our recommended source for Coxeter groups.  3  Bounding word lengths by CAT(0) distances  Our first task is to establish Lemma 2, as stated in the Introduction. Recall that a singular point of a map between CAT(0) spaces is a point at which the map is not a local isometry. Proof. (Lemma 2). As in the statement, let x, x′ ∈ X be distinct points such that f (x) = f (x′ ), and suppose that the geodesic arc γ from x to x′ does not pass through the singular set. In this case, f ◦ γ is a locally geodesic arc in Y , whose end points are both equal to f (x). In a CAT(0) space any locally geodesic arc is a geodesic arc, and the unique geodesic arc from f (x) to f (x′ ) = f (x) is the constant arc of length 0. This contradiction shows that γ must pass through the singular set. The claim follows. Lemma 7. Let L be a finite flag complex of dimension d. For any S ⊆ Z √ the distance (S) from the 0-level set in the CAT(0) space XL to a vertex of height n is |n|/ d + 1. 5  Proof. By symmetry it suffices to consider the case n > 0. Let γ be a path starting at (S) a vertex v of height n, and moving at unit speed in XL to the 0-level set. Minimizing the length of γ is equivalent to maximizing the speed of descent, i.e., minimizing the derivative of fL ◦ γ. The initial direction of travel of the path γ can be represented by a point of the link, (S) LkX (v), of v in X = XL . This is a simplicial complex in which each m-cube C of (S) XL that is incident on v contributes one (m − 1)-simplex, consisting of the unit tangent vectors at v that point into C. (S) If we identify an m-cube C of XL with [0, 1]m , then fL restricted to C is equal to (t1 , . . . , tm ) 7→ t1 + t2 + · · · + tm + r for√some integer r. The gradient of fL on the cube C is the vector (1, 1, . . . , 1), of length m. Thus any path γ of fastest descent leaves v travelling in the direction of the long diagonal of a cube C of maximal dimension whose highest √ vertex is v. If m < n then the path will reach the unique lowest vertex v ′ of C before it reaches the 0-level set; at this vertex a new choice of cube C ′ of maximal dimension with v ′ as its highest vertex should be made. (S) If w is any vertex of X = XL then the cubes of X that have w as their highest vertex correspond to a subcomplex of LkX (w) called the descending or ↓-link, Lk↓X (w). e Each descending link Lk↓X (w) is isomorphic to either L or its universal covering space L, depending only on whether the height of w lies in S. In particular, each descending link has dimension equal to d, the dimension of L. It follows that we can √ always find at least one unit speed path γ starting at v with 1 and there is no path descending faster. Hence the distance constant rate of descent d + √ from v to the 0-level set is n/ d + 1 as claimed. For S ⊆ Z, define m(S) := min{|n| : n ∈ S}.  Lemma 8. Suppose that L is d-dimensional and that 0 ∈ S ⊆ T ⊆ Z, and take the standard generating set for GL (S) and GL (T ). The word length of p any non-identity element in the kernel of the map GL (S) → GL (T ) is at least m(T − S) 2/(d + 1). (S)  Proof. The Cayley graph Γ(S) for GL (S) is embedded in the 0-level set in X := XL , (T ) and similarly Γ(T ) is embedded in the 0-level set in Y := XL . Moreover the branched covering map X → Y induces the natural quotient map Γ(S) → Γ(T ). Let v be a (S) height 0 vertex of X = XL . Each standard generator for GL (S) is represented by the diagonal of a square of X so for any g ∈ √GL (S) the triangle inequality tells us that the word length l(g) satisfies dX (v, gv) ≤ 2l(g). Now g is in the kernel of the map to GL (T ) if and only if gv and v map to the same vertex of Y . Singular points for the map X → Y are vertices w whose heights lie in T − S, and by Lemma 7 these √ have √ By Lemma 2 it follows that d (v, gv) ≥ 2m(T −S)/ d+1 dX (v, w) ≥ m(T −S)/ d + 1. X p √ and hence l(g) ≥ dX (v, gv)/ 2 ≥ m(T − S) 2/(d + 1).  4  Digression on convexity  The arguments used in the previous section can be used to show that the 0-level sets are very rarely convex or even quasi-convex. The material in this section is not needed for our main theorem. 6  (S)  Corollary 9. The 0-level set in XL is convex if and only if L is a single simplex. In (S) this case XL = XL does not depend on S. (S)  Proof. If L is a d-simplex then XL = XL is a copy of Rd+1 and the 0-level set is an affine subspace. For the converse, if L is any flag complex other than a single simplex, then (S) L will contain at least two maximal simplices. If v is any vertex of XL of height one, the directions defined by the barycentres of these two maximal simplices give distinct geodesic paths from v to the 0-level set that are both locally distance minimizing, with end points x, x′ of height 0. Within the geodesic arc from x to x′ , at most one point can locally minimize distance to v; the assumption that this geodesic arc lies in the 0-level set leads to a contradiction. e does and Corollary 10. If either L contains two simplices of maximal dimension d, or L (S) Z − S is infinite, then the 0-level set in XL is not quasi-convex. Proof. We give only a sketch. Let θ = θ(d) be the angle in Rd+1 between the vector (1, 1, . . . , 1) and one of the coordinate hyperplanes. Let v be a vertex of height N in (S) X := XL . If L has a unique simplex of dimension d, then N should be chosen in Z − S, otherwise N may be arbitrary. In this case there are two distance-minimizing geodesic paths from v to the 0-level set, with end points x and x′ as above, corresponding to leaving v in the directions given by the barycentres of two distinct d-dimensional simplices of the descending link. We view x, x′ and other points that depend on them as functions of N. The angle at v between these two geodesics is at least the constant 2θ. The geodesic triangle with vertices x, x′ and v is isoceles √ with angle at least 2θ between the two equal sides. The length of the equal sides is N/ d + 1. √ If y is the midpoint of the geodesic arc ′ from x to x , it follows that dX (v, y) ≤ N√cos(θ)/ d + 1. By increasing N this distance can be made arbitrarily smaller than N/ d + 1, the distance from v to the 0-level set. Hence for any k, there is an N so that y is not in the k-neighbourhood of the 0-level set. Thus the 0-level set is not quasi-convex.  5  Taut loop length spectra for GL(S)  Throughout this section we fix a finite connected non-simply connected flag complex L. For S a subset of Z containing 0, let Γ(S) denote the Cayley graph of GL (S) with respect to the standard generators. We give partial information concerning the taut loop length spectrum H(Γ(S)). As in [2], it will be convenient to assume that elements of S grow quickly. p Define α = α(L) by α = 2/(d + 1), where d is the dimension of L. For a finite set Ω of loops in S that normally generates π1 (L), let β(L, Ω) be the maximum of the lengths of the loops in Ω, and define β(L) to be the minimum value of β(L, Ω) over all such Ω. Choose an integer constant C = C(L) so that C > β/α and Cα > 3. For F any subset n of N, define S(F ) = {0} ∪ {C 2 : n ∈ F }. With these definitions we prove a statement that is identical to [2, Proposition 1]. Proposition 11. If F, F ′ are subsets of N so that Γ(S(F )) and Γ(S(F ′)) are quasiisometric then the symmetric difference of F and F ′ is finite. 7  Theorem 1 follows immediately from this proposition. To prove the proposition we first describe H(Γ(S(F ))). Theorem 12. For any F ⊆ N, the set H(Γ(S(F ))) is contained in the disjoint union S n n n n {3} ∪ n∈N [αC 2 , βC 2 ]. The set H(Γ(S(F ))) ∩ [αC 2 , βC 2 ] is non-empty if and only if n ∈ F . Also 3 is in H(Γ(S(F ))) if and only if L is not 1-dimensional. 0  Proof. The choice of C ensures that 3 < αC 2 and that for all n βC 2 < αC 2 which implies that the union is disjoint. Since Γ = Γ(S(F )) is a simplicial Cayley graph, the edge relations aa = 1 do not contribute to H(Γ), but the triangle relations imply that 3 ∈ H(Γ) whenever L has dimension at least two. If F = ∅ then the presentation P (L, Ω) contains only relations of length at most 3, so H(Γ) is either empty if L is 1-dimensional or is equal to {3} otherwise. It remains to establish three statements n  n+1  • If n ∈ F then H(Γ(S(F ))) ∩ [αC 2 , βC 2 ] 6= ∅; n  n  • If n ∈ / F then H(Γ(S(F ))) ∩ [αC 2 , βC 2 ] = ∅; S n n • If k > 3 and k ∈ / n∈N [αC 2 , βC 2 ] then k ∈ / H(Γ(S(F ))). n  n  The second and third of these statements can be grouped together into a single fourth statement: S n n • If k > 3 and k ∈ / n∈F [αC 2 , βC 2 ] then k ∈ / H(Γ(S(F ))). For the first statement, let F ′ = F − {n}, and consider the covering map Γ(S(F ′)) → Γ(S(F )). The group GL (S(F ′ )) acts freely on Γ(S(F ′ )), so we may attach free orbits of 2-cells to Γ(S(F ′ )) to make a simply-connected Cayley 2-complex ∆. Now let K be the kernel of the map GL (S(F ′ )) → GL (S(F )), or equivalently the covering group for the regular covering Γ(S(F ′)) → Γ(S(F )). The quotient ∆/K is a 2-complex with 1-skeleton the graph Γ(S(F )) and fundamental group K. We know that any non-identity element n of K has word length at least αC 2 and that there is a non-identity element of K of word n length βC 2 . The shortest non-identity element of K defines a loop in Γ(S(F )) ⊆ ∆/K that must be taut, since it is not null-homotopic in ∆/K whereas every strictly shorter loop in Γ(S(F )) is null-homotopic in ∆/K. It remains to prove the fourth statement. Fix an integer k > 3 that is not an element S n n n of n∈F [αC 2 , βC 2 ]. Choose n ∈ N maximal so that βC 2 < k, if such n exists, and define n := −1 in the case when 3 < k < αC. Now let F ′ := F ∩[0, n], where by definition [0, −1] = ∅. Once again, consider the covering map Γ(S(F ′)) → Γ(S(F )). Since every n relator in the presentation for GL (S(F ′ )) has length at most βC 2 , we may build a Cayley 2-complex ∆ with 1-skeleton Γ(S(F ′ )) in which each 2-cell is attached to a loop of length n at most βC 2 . Now suppose that γ is a loop of length k in Γ(S(F )). If γ lifts to a loop in Γ(S(F ′)) then it cannot be taut, since every loop in Γ(S(F ′ )) is null-homotopic in ∆. If on the other hand γ lifts to a non-closed path in Γ(S(F ′)) then it corresponds to a non-identity element of the kernel of the map GL (S(F ′ )) → GL (S(F )) of word length at m most k. But the shortest element in the kernel of this map has length at least αC 2 , m where m is the least element of S(F ) − S(F ′ ). By choice of n, we have that k ≤ βC 2 , m m and by hypothesis k ∈ / [αC 2 , βC 2 ]. This contradiction shows that the loop γ cannot be taut. 8  Proof. (Propostion 11). For any l ∈ [αC 2 , βC 2 ] and l′ ∈ [αC 2 , βC 2 ] for some n m > 0, we have that l′ /l ≥ C 2 . Hence if H(Γ(S(F ))) and H(Γ(S(F ′))) are k-related n and n is in the symmetric difference of F and F ′ then C 2 < k. n  6  n  n+m  n+m  Semidirect products  A right-angled Coxeter group is a group W admitting a presentation in which the only relators are that each generator has order two and that certain pairs of generators commute. A simplicial graph K gives rise to a right-angled Coxeter group WK , with generators the set V (K) of vertices of K and as commuting pairs the ends of each element of the edge set E(K). Now suppose that a group G acts as automorphisms of the graph K. This induces an action of G on WK by automorphisms, permuting the given generators for WK , and so there is a semidirect product group J = WK ⋊G. Identify G with its image inside the semidirect product J. A choice of generating set for G together with a choice of G-orbit representatives in V (K) gives rise to a generating set for J. Now suppose that S 7→ G(S) is a functor from the category of subsets of Z with inclusions as morphisms to the category of finitely generated groups and surjective homomorphisms; for example S 7→ GL (S) is such a functor for any connected finite flag complex L. Suppose further that G(∅) acts freely cocompactly on a (simplicial) graph K(∅) in such a way that any two vertices in the same G(∅)-orbit are at edge path distance at least four. For S ⊆ Z, define K(S) to be the quotient of K(∅) by the kernel of the map G(∅) → G(S), so that G(S) acts freely cocompactly on the graph K(S). For S ⊆ Z, define J(S) to be the semidirect product WK(S) ⋊G(S). Then S 7→ J(S) is another functor from subsets of Z and inclusions to finitely generated groups and surjective group homomorphisms. Fix a finite generating set for J(∅) consisting of a finite generating set for G(∅) and a set of V ′ of G(∅)-orbit representatives in V (K(∅)). As generating set for J(S), take the image of our given generating set for J(∅), and as generating set for G(S) take the image of our given generating set for G(∅). For each S, the generating set for G(S) is a subset of the generating set for J(S), and its complement consists of generators that are in the kernel of the map J(S) → G(S). It will be useful to have a presentation for J(S) in terms of our generating set. Since G(∅) acts freely on the graph K(∅), the Coxeter relators between all of the generators for WK(∅) are consequences of a finite set of relators indexed by the orbit representatives of vertices and edges in K(∅). To describe these relations, we choose a set E ′ of G(∅)-orbit representatives of edges in K(∅), in such a way that each e ∈ E ′ is incident on at least one v ∈ V ′ . For each u ∈ V = V (K(∅)), let gu ∈ G(∅) be the unique element such that gu .u ∈ V ′ . Now define an integer N1 by N1 := max{l(gu ) : u is incident on some edge in E ′ }, where l(g) denotes the word length of g ∈ G(∅). The relations in our presentation for J(S) are of the following kinds: • v 2 for each v ∈ V ′ ; • relators (vgu ugu−1)2 , where e ∈ E ′ , u and v are the vertices incident on e and v ∈ V ′ ; 9  • the relators in a presentation for G(S). Note that J(S) is finitely presented whenever G(S) is, and that the relators of the second kind are of length at most 4N1 + 4. In the theorem below we write lJ(S) and lG(S) for the word length with respect to these generating sets. Theorem 13. Take notation and hypotheses as in the paragraphs above, and define N := 2N1 . For all S ⊆ T ⊆ Z, if w ∈ J(S) is in the kernel of J(S) → J(T ) and lJ(S) (w) > N then there is g ∈ G(S) − {1} with lG(S) (g) ≤ lJ(S) (w) so that g is in the kernel of G(S) → G(T ). Proof. In the case when w is not in the kernel of the map J(S) → G(S), we may take g = w, the image of w, since this element is in the kernel of G(S) → G(T ) and lG(S) (g) ≤ lJ(S) (w). Before starting the remaining (more difficult) case, we recall Tits’ solution to the word problem for a right-angled Coxeter group [6, Theorem 3.4.2]. If w = v1 v2 · · · vl is a word in the standard generators for a right-angled Coxeter group that represents the identity, then w can be reduced to the trivial word using some sequence of moves of two types: • if v, v ′ are Coxeter generators that commute, replace the subword vv ′ by v ′ v; • replace a subword vv by the trivial subword. The kernel of the map J(S) → G(S) is the right-angled Coxeter group W (S) := WK(S) . Let w be in the kernel of this map as well as in the kernel of the map J(S) → J(T ). Pick a shortest word in the generators for J(S) representing w, and write this word in ′ the form w = hP 0 v1 h1 v2 h2 · · · hn−1 vn hn , where each vi ∈ V , each hi ∈ G(S), and so that lJ(S) (w) = n + ni=0 lG(S) (hi ). Now define gi = h0 h1 · · · hi−1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. We have that w = h0 v1 h1 v2 h2 · · · hn1 vn hn = (g1 v1 g1−1 )(g2 v2 g2−1 ) · · · (gn vn gn−1 ). This second expression for w will not be reduced in general, but each subword gi vi gi−1 is equal to one of the standard Coxeter generators for the subgroup W (S). By hypothesis w is non-trivial in W (S) but is in the kernel of the map W (S) → W (T ). Hence there must be a Tits move that can be applied to the image of this expression in W (T ) that cannot be applied to the same expression in W (S). If there is a Tits move of the second type that can be applied in W (T ) but not in W (S), this implies that there exist i and j with 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n so that gi = gj ∈ G(T ), but gi 6= gj ∈ G(S). If on the other hand there is a Tits move of the first type that can be applied in W (T ) but not in W (S), there exist 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n so that gi = gj gu ∈ G(T ) but gi 6= gj gu ∈ G(S), where gu is one of the elements that takes a vertex of some edge in E ′ to a vertex in V ′ , and so by definition of N1 , lG(S) (gu ) ≤ lG(∅) (gu ) ≤ N1 . Define an element of J(S) by w ′ := vi hi vi+1 · · · hj−1 vj , where i and j are as above. Since the expression w = h0 v1 h1 v2 h2 · · · hn vn is of minimal length in terms of our generators for J(S), the length of the defining expression for w ′ is also minimal. But lJ(S) (w ′ ) is greater than or equal to the length of its image in G(S), hi hi+1 · · · hj−1 = gi−1 gj . Thus lJ(S) (w ′) ≥ lG(S) (gi−1gj ). Depending which sort of Tits move was applied, gi−1 gj is either a non-trivial element of the kernel of the map G(S) → G(T ) or differs from such an element 10  by some gu . Let g be this element of the kernel, and note that lG(S) (g) ≤ lG(S) (gi−1 gj )+N1 . Since w maps to the identity element of G(S) and the image in G(S) of w ′ is a path whose endpoints are at distance at least lG(S) (gi−1 gj ), we see that lJ(S) (w) ≥ 2lG(S) (gi−1gj ). Putting these inequalities together we obtain lG(S) (g) ≤ lJ(S) (w)/2 + N1 . If lJ(S) (w) > N = 2N1 , this implies that lG(S) (g) ≤ lJ(S) (w) as required. Now we specialize to the case of interest; the case when G(S) is the group GL (S) for some finite flag complex L that is connected but not simply connected. In this case, Theorem 13 allows us to prove an analogue of Theorem 12 for the semidirect product J(S) := WK(S) ⋊GL (S). We define constants α = α(L), β := β(L) and C := C(L) as in the previous section, and for F ⊆ N we define S(F ) ⊆ N as before. Finally, we define M := 4N1 + 4, which depends on both L and on the action of G(∅) on K(∅), and we denote by Λ(S(F )) the Cayley graph Γ(J(S(F ))). Theorem 14. For any F ⊆ N, the set H(Λ(S(F ))) is contained in the union [0, M] ∪ S n n n n 2n [αC , βC 2 ]. If αC 2 > M, then H(Λ(S(F ))) ∩ [αC 2 , βC 2 ] is non-empty if and n∈N only if n ∈ F . Proof. Since the presentation for GL (S(∅)) has only relators of length at most 3, we see that our presentation for J(S(∅)) consists of relators of length at most M. This verifies the claim in the case when F = ∅. As in the proof of Theorem 12, it suffices to verify two claims: • If n ∈ F and αC 2 > M then H(Λ(S(F ))) ∩ [αC 2 , βC 2 ] 6= ∅; S n n • If k > M and k ∈ / n∈F [αC 2 , βC 2 ], then k ∈ / H(Λ(S(F ))). n  n  n  These statements can be verified exactly as in Theorem 12. For the first, we consider F ′ := F − {n} and look at the covering map Λ(S(F ′)) → Λ(S(F )). Attach free J(S)orbits of 2-cells to Λ(S(F ′)) to make a simply-connected Cayley complex ∆, and let K ′ be the kernel of the map J(S(F ′ )) → J(S(F )). The quotient ∆/K ′ has 1-skeleton Λ(S(F )) and fundamental group K ′ . As before, we know that there is an element of K ′ ∩G(S(F ′ )) n of length βC 2 and that any non-identity element of this subgroup has length at least n αC 2 . Since M = 4N1 + 4 > N = 2N1 , Theorem 13 tells us that the word length of any n non-identity element of K ′ is also at least αC 2 . Now the shortest non-identity element of K ′ defines a taut loop in the required range. n For the second statement, given such a k, take n maximal so that βC 2 < k, let F ′ := F ∩ [0, n], and consider the covering map Λ(S(F ′ )) → Λ(S(F )). As before, we can build a Cayley 2-complex ∆ with 1-skeleton Λ(S(F ′ )) in which each 2-cell is attached to n a loop of length at most max{M, βC 2 }. If γ is a loop in Λ(S(F )) of length k, then either γ is not taut, or the lift of γ to Λ(S(F ′ )) is a non-closed path. In the second case one obtains a non-identity element in the kernel of the map J(S(F ′ )) → J(S(F )) of length at most k. Since k > M > N, Theorem 13 tells us that there is a non-identity element of length at most k in the kernel of the map G(S(F ′)) → G(S(F )), which cannot happen. This contradiction shows that γ cannot be taut. The next two corollaries follow easily by the same proofs as in the previous section. Corollary 15. If F , F ′ are subsets of N so that Λ(S(F )) and Λ(S(F ′)) are quasiisometric, the symmetric difference of F and F ′ is finite. 11  Corollary 16. For any L that is not simply-connected, and any graph K(∅) with a free GL (∅)-action, there are continuously many quasi-isometry classes of groups J(S). The reason why Corollary 16 is of value concerns the use of the Davis trick [6] to construct non-finitely presented Poincaré duality groups, as described in [8, Sec. 18]. The starting point is a 2-complex L for which each GL (S) is type F P ; for this group there is a finite 2-complex that is an Eilenberg-Mac Lane space K(GL (∅), 1). For any n ≥ 4, one can find a compact n-manifold V with boundary that is also a K(GL (∅), 1). Now let K be the 1-skeleton of the barycentric subdivision of a triangulation of the boundary of V , and let K(∅) be the 1-skeleton of the induced triangulation of the boundary of the universal cover of V , with GL (∅) acting via deck transformations. For this choice of K(∅), the group J(∅) contains a finite-index torsion-free subgroup J ′ that is the fundamental group of a closed aspherical n-manifold M, and such that regular covering M(S) of M with fundamental group the kernel of J ′ → J(S) is acyclic for each S ⊆ Z. One deduces that each J(S) contains a finite-index torsion-free subgroup that is a Poincaré duality group of dimension n. Since the inclusion of a finite-index subgroup is always a quasi-isometry, Corollary 16 implies Corollary 17. For each n ≥ 4 there are continuously many quasi-isometry classes of non-finitely presented n-dimensional Poincaré duality groups. It remains to prove Corollary 3 from the introduction. This follows from the above discussion by the Schwarz-Milnor Lemma [3, I.8.19], which tells us that the acyclic covering manifold M(S) is quasi-isometric to J(S).  References [1] M. Bestvina and N. Brady, Morse theory and finiteness properties of groups, Invent. Math. 129 (1997), 445–470. [2] B. H. Bowditch, Continuously many quasiisometry classes of 2-generator groups, Comm. Math. Helv. 73 (1998), 232–236. [3] M. R. Bridson and A. Haefliger, Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften 319, Springer-Verlag (1999). [4] K. S. Brown, Cohomology of Groups, Grad. Texts in Math. 87, Springer-Verlag (1982). [5] M. W. Davis, The cohomology of a Coxeter group with group ring coefficients, Duke Math. J. 91 (1998) 297–314. [6] M. W. Davis, The geometry and topology of Coxeter groups, London Mathematical Series Monographs Series 32, Princeton University Press (2008). [7] R. I. Grigorchuk, Degrees of growth of finitely generated groups and the theory of invariant means (English translation) Math. U.S.S.R. Izv. 25 (2) (1985) 259–300. [8] I. J. Leary, Uncountably many groups of type F P , arXiv:1512.06609v2, 35 pages.  12

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
