Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_4106

Abstract:
arXiv:1611.03671v1 [math.CO] 11 Nov 2016  Well-Quasi-Ordering versus Clique-Width: New Results on Bigenic Classes⋆ Konrad K. Dabrowski1 , Vadim V. Lozin2 and Daniël Paulusma1 1  School of Engineering and Computing Sciences, Durham University, Science Laboratories, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom {konrad.dabrowski,daniel.paulusma}@durham.ac.uk 2 Mathematics Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom v.lozin@warwick.ac.uk  Abstract. Daligault, Rao and Thomassé asked whether a hereditary class of graphs well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation has bounded clique-width. Lozin, Razgon and Zamaraev recently showed that this is not true for classes defined by infinitely many forbidden induced subgraphs. However, in the case of finitely many forbidden induced subgraphs the question remains open and we conjecture that in this case the answer is positive. The conjecture is known to hold for classes of graphs defined by a single forbidden induced subgraph H, as such graphs are well-quasi-ordered and are of bounded clique-width if and only if H is an induced subgraph of P4 . For bigenic classes of graphs, i.e. ones defined by two forbidden induced subgraphs, there are several open cases in both classifications. In the present paper we obtain a number of new results on well-quasi-orderability of bigenic classes, each of which supports the conjecture.  1  Introduction  Well-quasi-ordering is a highly desirable property and frequently discovered concept in mathematics and theoretical computer science [17,21]. One of the most remarkable results in this area is Robertson and Seymour’s proof of Wagner’s conjecture, which states that the set of all finite graphs is well-quasi-ordered by the minor relation [26]. One of the first steps towards this result was the proof of the fact that graph classes of bounded treewidth are well-quasi-ordered by the minor relation [25] (a graph parameter π is said to be bounded for some graph class G if there exists a constant c such that π(G) ≤ c for all G ∈ G). The notion of clique-width generalizes that of treewidth in the sense that graph classes of bounded treewidth have bounded clique-width, but not necessarily vice versa. The importance of both notions is due to the fact that many algorithmic problems that are NP-hard on general graphs become polynomial-time solvable when restricted to graph classes of bounded treewidth or clique-width. ⋆  Research supported by EPSRC (EP/K025090/1 and EP/L020408/1). An extended abstract of this paper appeared in the proceedings of IWOCA 2016 [12].  For treewidth this follows from the meta-theorem of Courcelle [6], combined with a result of Bodlaender [2]. For clique-width this follows from combining results from several papers [8,16,19,24] with a result of Oum and Seymour [23]. In the study of graph classes of bounded treewidth, we can restrict ourselves to minor-closed graph classes, because from the definition of treewidth it immediately follows that the treewidth of a graph is never smaller than the treewidth of its minor. This restriction, however, is not justified when we study graph classes of bounded clique-width, as the clique-width of a graph can be much smaller than the clique-width of its minor. In particular, Courcelle [7] showed that if G is the class of graphs of clique-width 3 and G ′ is the class of graphs obtainable from graphs in G by applying one or more edge contraction operations, then G ′ has unbounded clique-width. On the other hand, the clique-width of a graph is never smaller than the clique-width of any of its induced subgraphs (see, for example, [9]). This allows us to restrict ourselves to classes of graphs closed under taking induced subgraphs. Such graph classes are also known as hereditary classes. It is well-known (and not difficult to see) that a class of graphs is hereditary if and only if it can be characterized by a set of minimal forbidden induced subgraphs. Due to the minimality, the set F of forbidden induced subgraphs is always an antichain, that is, no graph in F is an induced subgraph of another graph in F . For some hereditary classes this set is finite, in which case we say that the class is finitely defined, whereas for other hereditary classes (such as, for instance, bipartite graphs) the set of minimal forbidden induced subgraphs forms an infinite antichain. The presence of these infinite antichains immediately shows that the induced subgraph relation is not a well-quasi-order. In fact there even exist graph classes of bounded clique-width that are not well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation: take, for example, the class of cycles, which all have clique-width at most 4. What about the inverse implication: does wellquasi-ordering imply bounded clique-width? This was stated as an open problem by Daligault, Rao and Thomassé [14] and a negative answer to this question was recently given by Lozin, Razgon and Zamaraev [22]. However, the latter authors disproved the conjecture by giving a hereditary class of graphs whose set of minimal forbidden induced subgraphs is infinite. Hence, for finitely defined classes the question remains open and we conjecture that in this case the answer is positive. Conjecture 1. If a finitely defined class of graphs G is well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation, then G has bounded clique-width. We emphasize that our motivation for verifying Conjecture 1 is not only mathematical but also algorithmic. Should Conjecture 1 be true, then for finitely defined classes of graphs the aforementioned algorithmic consequences of having bounded clique-width also hold for the property of being well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation. A class of graphs is monogenic or H-free if it is characterized by a single forbidden induced subgraph H. For monogenic classes, the conjecture is true. 2  In this case, the two notions even coincide: a class of graphs defined by a single forbidden induced subgraph H is well-quasi-ordered if and only if it has bounded clique-width if and only if H is an induced subgraph of P4 (see, for instance, [13,15,20]). A class of graphs is bigenic or (H1 , H2 )-free if it is characterized by two incomparable forbidden induced subgraphs H1 and H2 . The family of bigenic classes is more diverse than the family of monogenic classes. The questions of well-quasi-orderability and having bounded clique-width still need to be resolved. Recently, considerable progress has been made towards answering the latter question for bigenic classes; see [10] for the most recent survey, which shows that there are currently eight (non-equivalent) open cases. With respect to wellquasi-orderability of bigenic classes, Korpelainen and Lozin [20] left all but 14 cases open. Since then, Atminas and Lozin [1] proved that the class of (K3 , P6 )free graphs is well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation and that the class of (2P1 + P2 , P6 )-free graphs is not, reducing the number of remaining open cases to 12. All available results for bigenic classes verify Conjecture 1. Moreover, eight of the 12 open cases have bounded clique-width (and thus immediately verify Conjecture 1), leaving four remaining open cases of bigenic classes for which we still need to verify Conjecture 1. Our Results Our first goal is to obtain more (bigenic) classes that are well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation and to support Conjecture 1 with further evidence. Our second and more general goal is to increase our general knowledge on wellquasi-ordered graph classes and the relation to the possible boundedness of their clique-width. Towards our first goal we prove in Section 4 that the class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 )-free graphs (which has bounded clique-width [11]) is well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation. In Section 5 we also determine, by giving infinite antichains, two bigenic classes that are not, namely the class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P4 )-free graphs, which has unbounded clique-width [11], and the class of (P1 + P4 , P1 + 2P2 )-free graphs, for which boundedness of the cliquewidth is unknown (see Fig. 1 for drawings of the five forbidden induced subgraphs). Consequently, there are nine classes of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs for which we do not know whether they are well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation, and there are two open cases left for the verification of Conjecture 1 for bigenic classes. We refer to Open Problems 1 and 3, respectively, in Section 6 where we also give an exact description of the state-of-the-art for results on well-quasi-orderability and boundedness of clique-width for bigenic classes of graphs. Towards our second goal, we aim to develop general techniques as opposed to tackling specific cases in an ad hoc fashion. Our starting point is a very fruitful technique used for determining (un)boundedness of the clique-width of a graph class G. We transform a given graph from G via a number of elementary graph 3  operations that do not modify the clique-width by “too much” into a graph from a class for which we do know whether or not its clique-width is bounded. It is a natural question to research how the above modification technique can be used for well-quasi-orders. We do this in Section 3. The permitted elementary graph operations that preserve (un)boundedness of the clique-width are vertex deletion, subgraph complementation and bipartite complementation. As we will explain in Section 3, these three graph operations do not preserve well-quasiorderability. We circumvent this by investigating whether these three operations preserve boundedness of a graph parameter called uniformicity. This parameter was introduced by Korpelainen and Lozin [20], who proved that every graph class G of bounded uniformicity is well-quasi-ordered by the so-called labelled induced subgraph relation, which in turn implies that G is well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation. Korpelainen and Lozin [20] proved that boundedness of uniformicity is preserved by vertex deletion. We prove that this also holds for the other two graph operations. The above enables us to focus on boundedness of uniformicity. However, we cannot always do this: there exist graph classes of unbounded uniformicity that are well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. As such, we sometimes need to rely only on the labelled induced subgraph relation directly. Hence, in Section 3 we also show that the three permitted graph operations, vertex deletion, subgraph complementation and bipartite complementation, preserve well-quasi-orderability by the labelled induced subgraph relation. As explained in Section 6, we believe that this graph modification technique will also be useful for proving well-quasi-orderability of other graph classes. As such, we view the results in Section 3 as the second main contribution of our paper.  2P1 + P2  P1 + P4  P1 + 2P2  P2 + P3  P2 + P4  Fig. 1. The forbidden induced subgraphs considered in this paper.  2  Preliminaries  The disjoint union (V (G) ∪ V (H), E(G) ∪ E(H)) of two vertex-disjoint graphs G and H is denoted by G + H and the disjoint union of r copies of a graph G is denoted by rG. The complement of a graph G, denoted by G, has vertex set V (G) = V (G) and an edge between two distinct vertices if and only if these 4  vertices are not adjacent in G. For a subset S ⊆ V (G), we let G[S] denote the subgraph of G induced by S, which has vertex set S and edge set {uv | u, v ∈ S, uv ∈ E(G)}. If S = {s1 , . . . , sr } then, to simplify notation, we may also write G[s1 , . . . , sr ] instead of G[{s1 , . . . , sr }]. We use G \ S to denote the graph obtained from G by deleting every vertex in S, i.e. G \ S = G[V (G) \ S]. We write H ⊆i G to indicate that H is isomorphic to an induced subgraph of G. The graphs Cr , Kr , K1,r−1 and Pr denote the cycle, complete graph, star and path on r vertices, respectively. The graph K1,3 is also called the claw. The graph Sh,i,j , for 1 ≤ h ≤ i ≤ j, denotes the subdivided claw, that is, the tree that has only one vertex x of degree 3 and exactly three leaves, which are of distance h, i and j from x, respectively. Observe that S1,1,1 = K1,3 . We let S denote the class of graphs, each connected component of which is either a subdivided claw or a path. For a set of graphs {H1 , . . . , Hp }, a graph G is (H1 , . . . , Hp )-free if it has no induced subgraph isomorphic to a graph in {H1 , . . . , Hp }; if p = 1, we may write H1 -free instead of (H1 )-free. For a graph G = (V, E) and a vertex u ∈ V , the set NG (u) = {v ∈ V | uv ∈ E} denotes the (open) neighbourhood of u in G and NG [u] = NG (u)∪{u} denotes the closed neighbourhood of u. We may write N (u) and N [u] instead of NG (u) and NG [u] if this is unambiguous. A graph is bipartite if its vertex set can be partitioned into (at most) two independent sets. The biclique Kr,s is the bipartite graph with sets in the partition of size r and s respectively, such that every vertex in one set is adjacent to every vertex in the other set. Let X be a set of vertices of a graph G = (V, E). A vertex y ∈ V \ X is complete to X if it is adjacent to every vertex of X and anti-complete to X if it is non-adjacent to every vertex of X. Similarly, a set of vertices Y ⊆ V \ X is complete (resp. anti-complete) to X if every vertex in Y is complete (resp. anticomplete) to X. A vertex y ∈ V \ X distinguishes X if y has both a neighbour and a non-neighbour in X. The set X is a module of G if no vertex in V \ X distinguishes X. A module X is non-trivial if 1 < |X| < |V |, otherwise it is trivial. A graph is prime if it has only trivial modules. A quasi order ≤ on a set X is a reflexive, transitive binary relation. Two elements x, y ∈ X in this quasi-order are comparable if x ≤ y or y ≤ x, otherwise they are incomparable. A set of elements in a quasi-order is a chain if every pair of elements is comparable and it is an antichain if every pair of elements is incomparable. The quasi-order ≤ is a well-quasi-order if any infinite sequence of elements x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . in X contains a pair (xi , xj ) with xi ≤ xj and i < j. Equivalently, a quasi-order is a well-quasi-order if and only if it has no infinite strictly decreasing sequence x1 x2 x3 · · · and no infinite antichain. For an arbitrary set M , let M ∗ denote the set of finite sequences of elements of M . Any quasi-order ≤ on M defines a quasi-order ≤∗ on M ∗ as follows: (a1 , . . . , am ) ≤∗ (b1 , . . . , bn ) if and only if there is a sequence of integers i1 , . . . , im with 1 ≤ i1 < · · · < im ≤ n such that aj ≤ bij for j ∈ {1, . . . , m}. We call ≤∗ the subsequence relation. Lemma 1 (Higman’s Lemma [18]). If (M, ≤) is a well-quasi-order then (M ∗ , ≤∗ ) is a well-quasi-order. 5  Labelled Induced Subgraphs and Uniformicity To define the notion of labelled induced subgraphs, let us consider an arbitrary quasi-order (W, ≤). We say that G is a labelled graph if each vertex v of G is equipped with an element lG (v) ∈ W (the label of v). Given two labelled graphs G and H, we say that G is a labelled induced subgraph of H if G is isomorphic to an induced subgraph of H and there is an isomorphism that maps each vertex v of G to a vertex w of H with lG (v) ≤ lH (w). Clearly, if (W, ≤) is a well-quasiorder, then a class of graphs X cannot contain an infinite sequence of labelled graphs that is strictly-decreasing with respect to the labelled induced subgraph relation. We therefore say that a class of graphs X is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation if it contains no infinite antichains of labelled graphs whenever (W, ≤) is a well-quasi-order. Such a class is readily seen to also be well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation. We will use the following three results. Lemma 2 ([1]). The class of P6 -free bipartite graphs is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Lemma 3 ([1]). Let k, ℓ, m be positive integers. Then the class of (Pk , Kℓ , Km,m )-free graphs is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Lemma 4 ([1]). Let X be a hereditary class of graphs. Then X is well-quasiordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation if and only if the set of prime graphs in X is. In particular, X is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation if and only if the set of connected graphs in X is. Let k be a natural number, let K be a symmetric square 0, 1 matrix of order k, and let Fk be a graph on the vertex set {1, 2, . . . , k}. Let H be the disjoint union of infinitely many copies of Fk , and for i = 1, . . . , k, let Vi be the subset of V (H) containing vertex i from each copy of Fk . Now we construct from H an infinite graph H(K) on the same vertex set by applying a subgraph complementation to Vi if and only if K(i, i) = 1 and by applying bipartite complementation to a pair Vi , Vj if and only if K(i, j) = 1. In other words, two vertices u ∈ Vi and v ∈ Vj are adjacent in H(K) if and only if uv ∈ E(H) and K(i, j) = 0 or uv ∈ / E(H) and K(i, j) = 1. Finally, let P(K, Fk ) be the hereditary class consisting of all the finite induced subgraphs of H(K). Let k be a natural number. A graph G is k-uniform if there is a matrix K and a graph Fk such that G ∈ P(K, Fk ). The minimum k such that G is k-uniform is the uniformicity of G. The following result was proved by Korpelainen and Lozin. The class of disjoint unions of cliques is a counterexample for the reverse implication. Theorem 1 ([20]). Any class of graphs of bounded uniformicity is well-quasiordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. 6  3  Permitted Graph Operations  It is not difficult to see that if G is an induced subgraph of H, then G is an induced subgraph of H. Therefore, a graph class X is well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation if and only if the set of complements of graphs in X is. In this section, we strengthen this observation in several ways. First, we define the operation of subgraph complementation as follows. Definition 1. Subgraph complementation in a graph G is the operation of complementing a subgraph of G induced by a subset of its vertices. Applied to the entire vertex set of G, this operation coincides with the usual complementation of G. However, applied to a pair of vertices, it changes the adjacency of these vertices only. Clearly, repeated applications of this operation can transform G into any other graph on the same vertex set. Therefore, unrestricted applications of subgraph complementation may transform a well-quasi-ordered class X into a class containing infinite antichains. However, if we bound the number of applications of this operation by a constant, we preserve many nice properties of X, including well-quasi-orderability with respect to the labelled induced subgraph relation. Next, we introduce the following operation: Definition 2. Bipartite complementation in a graph G is the operation of complementing the edges between two disjoint subsets X, Y ⊆ V (G). Note that applying a bipartite complementation between X and Y has the same effect as applying a sequence of three subgraph complementations: with respect to X, Y and X ∪ Y . Finally, we define the following operation: Definition 3. Vertex deletion in a graph G is the operation of removing a single vertex v from a graph, together with any edges incident to v. 3.1  Operations on Labelled Graphs  Let k ≥ 0 be a constant and let γ be a graph operation. A graph class G ′ is (k, γ)-obtained from a graph class G if the following two conditions hold: (i) every graph in G ′ is obtained from a graph in G by performing γ at most k times, and (ii) for every G ∈ G there exists at least one graph in G ′ obtained from G by performing γ at most k times. We say that γ preserves well-quasi-orderability by the labelled induced subgraph relation if for any finite constant k and any graph class G, any graph class G ′ that is (k, γ)-obtained from G is well-quasi-ordered by this relation if and only if G is.  7  Lemma 5. The following operations preserve well-quasi-orderability by the labelled induced subgraph relation: (i) Subgraph complementation, (ii) Bipartite complementation and (iii) Vertex deletion. Proof. We start by proving the lemma for subgraph complementations. Let X be a class of graphs and let Y be a set of graphs obtained from X by applying a subgraph complementation to each graph in X. More precisely, for each graph G ∈ X we choose a set ZG of vertices in G; we let G′ be the graph obtained from G by applying a complementation with respect to the subgraph induced by ZG and we let Y be the set of graphs G′ obtained in this way. Clearly it is sufficient to show that X is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation if and only if Y is. Suppose that X is not well-quasi-ordered under the labelled induced subgraph relation. Then there must be a well-quasi-order (L, ≤) and an infinite sequence G1 , G2 , . . . of graphs in X with vertices labelled with elements of L, such that these graphs form an infinite antichain under the labelled induced subgraph relation. Let (L′ , ≤′ ) be the quasi-order with L′ = {(k, l) : k ∈ {0, 1}, l ∈ L} and (k, l) ≤′ (k ′ , l′ ) if and only if k = k ′ and l ≤ l′ (so L′ is the disjoint union of two copies of L, where elements of one copy are incomparable with elements of the other copy). Note that (L′ , ≤′ ) is a well-quasi-order since (L, ≤) is a well-quasiorder. For each graph Gi in this sequence, with labelling li , we construct the graph G′i (recall that G′i is obtained from Gi by applying a complementation on the vertex set ZGi ). We label the vertices of V (G′i ) with a labelling li′ as follows: – set li′ (v) = (1, li (v)) if v ∈ ZGi and – set li′ (v) = (0, li (v)) otherwise. We claim that when G′1 , G′2 , . . . are labelled in this way they form an infinite antichain with respect to the labelled induced subgraph relation. Indeed, suppose for contradiction that G′i is a labelled induced subgraph of G′j for some i 6= j. This means that there is a injective map f : V (G′i ) → V (G′j ) such that li′ (v) ≤′ lj′ (f (v)) for all v ∈ V (G′i ) and v, w ∈ V (G′i ) are adjacent in G′i if and only if f (v) and f (w) are adjacent in G′j . Now since li′ (v) ≤′ lj′ (f (v)) for all v ∈ V (G′i ), by the definition of ≤′ we conclude the following: – li (v) ≤ lj (f (v)) for all v ∈ V (G′i ) and – v ∈ ZGi if and only if f (v) ∈ ZGj . Suppose v, w ∈ V (Gi ) with w ∈ / ZGi (v may or may not belong to ZGi ) and note that this implies f (w) ∈ / ZGj . Then v and w are adjacent in Gi if and only if v and w are adjacent in G′i if and only if f (v) and f (w) are adjacent in G′j if and only if f (v) and f (w) are adjacent in Gj . Next suppose v, w ∈ ZGi , in which case f (v), f (w) ∈ ZGj . Then v and w are adjacent in Gi if and only if v and w are non-adjacent in G′i if and only if f (v) and f (w) are non-adjacent in G′j if and only if f (v) and f (w) are adjacent in Gj . 8  It follows that f is an injective map f : V (Gi ) → V (Gj ) such that li (v) ≤ lj (f (v)) for all v ∈ V (Gi ) and v, w ∈ V (Gi ) are adjacent in Gi if and only if f (v) and f (w) are adjacent in Gj . In other words Gi is a labelled induced subgraph of Gj . This contradiction means that if G1 , G2 , . . . is an infinite antichain then G′1 , G′2 , . . . must also be an infinite antichain. Therefore, if the class X is not well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation then neither is Y . Repeating the argument with the roles of G1 , G2 , . . . and G′1 , G′2 , . . . reversed shows that if Y is not well-quasi-ordered under the labelled induced subgraph relation then neither is X. This completes the proof for subgraph complementations. Since a bipartite complementation is equivalent to doing three subgraph complementations one after another, the result for bipartite complementations follows. Finally, we prove the result for vertex deletions. Let X be a class of graphs and let Y be a set of graphs obtained from X by deleting exactly one vertex zG from each graph G in X. We denote the obtained graph by G − zG . Clearly it is sufficient to show that X is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation if and only if Y is. Suppose that Y is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. We will show that X is also well-quasi-ordered by this relation. For each graph G ∈ X, let G′ be the graph obtained from G by applying a bipartite complementation between {zG } and N (zG ), so zG is an isolated vertex in G′ . Let Z be the set of graphs obtained in this way. By Lemma 5.(ii), Z is well-quasiordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation if and only if X is. Suppose G1 , G2 are graphs in Z with vertices labelled from some well-quasi-order (L, ≤). Then for i ∈ {1, 2} the vertex zGi has a label from L and the graph Gi − zGi belongs to Y . Furthermore if G1 − zG1 is a labelled induced subgraph of G2 − zG2 and lG1 (zG1 ) ≤ lG2 (zG2 ) then G1 is a labelled induced subgraph of G2 . Now by Lemma 1 it follows that Z is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Therefore X is also well-quasi-ordered by this relation. Now suppose that Y is not well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Then Y contains an infinite antichain G1 , G2 , . . . with the vertices of Gi labelled by functions li which takes values in some well-quasi-order (L, ≤). For each Gi , let G′i be a corresponding graph in X, so Gi = G′i − zG′i . Then in G′i we label zG′i with a new label ∗ and label all other vertices v ∈ V (G′i ) with the same label as that used in Gi . We make this new label ∗ incomparable to all the other labels in L and note that the obtained quasi order (L ∪ {∗}, ≤) is also a well-quasi-order. It follows that G′1 , G′2 , . . . is an antichain in X when labelled in this way. Therefore, if Y is not well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation then neither is X. This completes the proof. ⊓ ⊔ Note that the above lemmas only apply to well-quasi-ordering with respect to the labelled induced subgraph relation. Indeed, if we take a cycle and delete a vertex, complement the subgraph induced by an edge or apply a bipartite 9  complementation to two adjacent vertices, we obtain a path. However, while the set of cycles is an infinite antichain with respect to the induced subgraph relation, the set of paths is not. 3.2  Operations on k-Uniform Graphs  We now show that our graph operations do not change uniformicity by “too much” either. The result for vertex deletion was proved by Korpelainen and Lozin. Lemma 6. Let G be a graph of uniformicity k. Let G′ , G′′ and G′′′ be graphs obtained from G by applying one vertex deletion, subgraph complementation or bipartite complementation, respectively. Let ℓ′ , ℓ′′ and ℓ′′′ be the uniformicities of G′ , G′′ and G′′′ , respectively. Then the following three statements hold: (i) ℓ′ < k < 2ℓ′ + 1 [20]; (ii) k2 ≤ ℓ′′ ≤ 2k; (iii) k3 ≤ ℓ′′′ ≤ 3k. Proof. The first inequality of Part (i) is trivial. The second inequality of Part (i) was proved in [20]. We prove Parts (ii) and (iii) below. Let G be a graph of uniformicity k, let X be a set of vertices in G and let G′′ be the graph obtained from G by applying a complementation with respect to the subgraph induced by X. Let ℓ′′ be the uniformicity of G′′ . By symmetry, to prove Part (ii), it is sufficient to prove that ℓ′′ ≤ 2k. Since G is a k-uniform graph, it must belong to P (Fk , K) for some Fk and some K, so it is an induced subgraph of H(K). Consider the graph obtained from Fk by replacing each vertex v of Fk by two non-adjacent vertices v and v ′ . Apply a complementation with respect to {1′ , 2′ , . . . , k ′ } and let Fk′ be the obtained graph. In other words, if v ∈ V (Fk ) then NFk′ (v) = NFk (v) ∪ {w′ | w ∈ NFk (v)} and NFk′ (v ′ ) = NFk (v) ∪ {w′ | w ∈ V (Fk ) \ NFk [v]}. ′ Let K ′ be a 2k × 2k matrix indexed by {1, 2, . . . , k, 1′ , 2′ , . . . , k ′ } with Ki,j = ′ ′ = Ki′ ,j = 1 − Ki′ ,j ′ = Ki,j . This means that H(K ′ ) is formed from H(K) by adding a copy of each vertex that has the same neighbourhood and then applying a complementation with respect to the set of newly-created vertices. Similarly, G′′ can be obtained from G by replacing each vertex in X by a copy with the same neighbourhood and then applying a complementation with respect to the set of newly-created vertices. Therefore G′′ is an induced subgraph of H(K ′ ). Therefore G′′ is a 2k-uniform graph.  ′ Ki,j ′  Part (iii) follows from similar arguments to those for Part (ii). (Also note that if we weaken the bounds in Part (iii) to k8 ≤ ℓ′′′ ≤ 8k then the result follows immediately from combining Part (ii) with the fact that a bipartite complementation is equivalent to a sequence of three subgraph complementations.) ⊓ ⊔ 10  4  A New Well-Quasi-Ordered Class  In this section we show that (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 )-free graphs are well-quasiordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. We divide the proof into several sections, depending on whether or not the graphs under consideration contain certain induced subgraphs or not. We follow the general scheme that Dabrowski, Huang and Paulusma [11] used to prove that this class has bounded clique-width, but we will also need a number of new arguments. 4.1  Graphs containing a K5  We first consider graphs containing a K5 and prove the following lemma. Lemma 7. The class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 )-free graphs that contain a K5 is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Proof. Let G be a (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 )-free graph. Let X be a maximal (by set inclusion) clique in G containing at least five vertices. Claim 1. Every vertex not in X has at most one neighbour in X. This follows from the fact that X is maximal and G is 2P1 + P2 -free. Suppose there is a P3 in G \ X, say on vertices x1 , x2 , x3 in that order. Since |X| ≥ 5, we can find y1 , y2 ∈ X none of which are adjacent to any of x1 , x2 , x3 . Then G[y1 , y2 , x1 , x2 , x3 ] is a P2 + P3 . This contradiction shows that G \ X is P3 -free and must therefore be a union of disjoint cliques X1 , . . . , Xk . We say that a clique Xi is large if it contains at least two vertices and that it is small if it contains exactly one vertex. Claim 2. If x ∈ X is adjacent to y ∈ Xi and Xj (with i 6= j) is large, then x can have at most one non-neighbour in Xj . For contradiction, assume that x is non-adjacent to z1 , z2 ∈ Xj . Since |X| ≥ 5 and each vertex that is not in X has at most one neighbour in X, there must be a vertex x′ ∈ X that is non-adjacent to y, z1 and z2 . Then G[z1 , z2 , x′ , x, y] is a P2 + P3 , a contradiction. We consider several cases: Case 1: G \ X contains at most one clique. Then the complement of G is a bipartite graph. Moreover, since the complement of 2P1 + P2 is an induced subgraph of P6 , we conclude that the complements of graphs in our class form a subclass of P6 -free bipartite graphs, which are wellquasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation by Lemmas 2 and 5.(i). Case 2: G \ X does not contain large cliques. In this case, the structure of graphs can be described as follows: take a collection of stars and create a clique on their central vertices and then add a number (possibly zero) of isolated vertices. In other words, applying subgraph complementation once (to the clique X), we obtain a graph which is a disjoint union 11  of stars and isolated vertices. Clearly, a graph every connected component of which is a star or an isolated vertex is P6 -free bipartite and hence by Lemmas 2 and 5.(i) we conclude that graphs in our class are well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Case 3: G \ X contains exactly one large clique. Without loss of generality, assume that X1 is large and the remaining cliques X2 , . . . , Xk are small. Suppose there are ℓ distinct vertices x1 , . . . , xℓ ∈ X, each of which has a neighbour in X2 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk . By Claim 2, each of these vertices has at most one non-neighbour in X1 . But then ℓ ≤ 2, since otherwise a vertex of X1 has more than one neighbour in X. Therefore, by deleting at most two vertices from G we transform it to a graph from Case 1 plus a number of isolated vertices. Lemma 4 allows us to ignore isolated vertices, while Lemma 5.(iii) allows the deletion of finitely many vertices. Therefore, in Case 3 we deal with a set of graphs which is well-quasiordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Case 4: G \ X contains at least two cliques that are large. Suppose there is a vertex x ∈ X that has a neighbour outside of X. By Claim 2, x has at most one non-neighbour in each large clique. Therefore, at most two vertices of X have neighbours outside of X, since otherwise each large clique would have a vertex with more than one neighbour in X. But then by deleting at most two vertices we transform G into a P3 -free graph (i.e. a graph every connected component of which is a clique). It is well-known (and also follows from Lemma 4) that the set of P3 -free graphs is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Therefore, by Lemma 5.(iii), the same is true for graphs in Case 4. ⊓ ⊔ 4.2  Graphs containing a C5  By Lemma 7, we may restrict ourselves to looking at K5 -free graphs in our class. We now consider the case where these graphs have an induced C5 . Lemma 8. The class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 , K5 )-free graphs that contain an induced C5 has bounded uniformicity. Proof. To prove this, we modify the proof from [11], which shows that this class of graphs has bounded clique-width. Let G be a (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 , K5 )-free graph containing a C5 , say on vertices v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 , v5 in order. Our goal is to show that the graph G has bounded uniformicity and hence, by Lemma 6.(i), in the proof we can neglect any set of vertices that is bounded in size by a constant. Let Y be the set of vertices adjacent to v1 and v2 (and possibly to other vertices on the cycle). If y1 , y2 ∈ Y are non-adjacent, then G[v1 , v2 , y1 , y2 ] would be a 2P1 + P2 . Therefore, Y is a clique. This clique has at most two vertices, since otherwise three vertices of Y together with v1 and v2 would create a K5 . Therefore, the set of all vertices with two consecutive neighbours on the cycle is finite and hence can be neglected (removed from the graph). We may therefore 12  assume that each vertex not on the cycle has at most two neighbours on the cycle and if it has two such neighbours, they must be non-consecutive vertices of the cycle. Now let W be the set of vertices whose unique neighbour on the cycle is v1 . If y1 , y2 ∈ W are non-adjacent, then G[v3 , v4 , y1 , v1 , y2 ] would be a P2 + P3 . If y1 , y2 ∈ W are adjacent, then G[y1 , y2 , v2 , v3 , v4 ] would be a P2 + P3 . Therefore, W contains at most one vertex, and hence the set of all vertices with exactly one neighbour on the cycle can be removed from the graph. Let X be the set of vertices with no neighbours on the cycle. X must be an independent set, since if two vertices in x1 , x2 ∈ X are adjacent, then G[x1 , x2 , v1 , v2 , v3 ] would induce a P2 + P3 in G. For i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, let Vi be the set of vertices not on the cycle that are adjacent to vi−1 and vi+1 , but non-adjacent to all other vertices of the cycle (subscripts on vertices and vertex sets are interpreted modulo 5 throughout this proof). For each i, the set Vi must be independent, since if x, y ∈ Vi are adjacent then G[x, y, vi−1 , vi+1 ] is a 2P1 + P2 . We say that two sets Vi and Vj are consecutive (respectively opposite) if vi and vj are distinct adjacent (respectively non-adjacent) vertices of the cycle. We say that a set X or Vi is large if it contains at least three vertices, otherwise it is small. We say that a bipartite graph with bipartition classes A and B is a matching (co-matching) if every vertex in A has at most one neighbour (nonneighbour) in B, and vice versa. Dabrowski, Huang and Paulusma proved the following claims about the edges between these sets (see Appendix A for a proof). Claim Claim Claim Claim Claim Claim  1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.  ([11]) ([11]) ([11]) ([11]) ([11]) ([11])  G[Vi ∪ X] is a matching. If Vi and Vj are opposite, then G[Vi ∪ Vj ] is a matching. If Vi and Vj are consecutive, then G[Vi ∪ Vj ] is a co-matching. If Vi is large, then X is anti-complete to Vi−2 ∪ Vi+2 . If Vi is large, then Vi−1 is anti-complete to Vi+1 . If Vi−1 , Vi , Vi+1 are large, then Vi is complete to Vi−1 ∪ Vi+1 .  We also prove the following claim: Claim 7. Suppose two consecutive sets Vi and Vi+1 are large and a vertex y ∈ Vi is not adjacent to a vertex z ∈ Vi+1 . Then every vertex x ∈ X ∪ Vi+3 is either complete or anti-complete to {y, z}. To prove this, suppose for contradiction that this is not the case. Without loss of generality, we may assume that that x is adjacent to y but not to z. Since Vi is large it contains at least two other vertices, say a and b. Then z is adjacent to both a and b (since G[Vi ∪Vi+1 ] is a co-matching), while x is adjacent neither to a nor to b (since G[Vi ∪ X] and G[Vi ∪ Vi+3 ] are matchings). But then G[x, y, a, z, b] is a P2 + P3 , a contradiction. We are now ready to prove the lemma. We may delete from G the vertices v1 , . . . , v5 and all vertices in every small set X or Vi . Let G′ be the resulting 13  graph. In order to show that G′ has bounded uniformicity, we split the analysis into the following cases. Case 1: All sets V1 , . . . , V5 are large. From the above claims we conclude that any two consecutive sets are complete to each other and any two opposite sets are anti-complete to each other. Also, X is anti-complete to each of them. Therefore G′ is 6-uniform. Case 2: Four sets Vi are large, say V1 , . . . , V4 . Then V1 and V4 form a matching, while any other pair of these sets are either complete or anti-complete to each other. Also, X is anti-complete to each of them. Therefore G′ is 5-uniform. Case 3: Three consecutive sets Vi are large, say V1 , V2 , V3 . Then V2 is complete to V1 and V3 , while V1 and V3 are anti-complete to eachother. Also, X is anti-complete to V1 and V3 forms a matching with V2 . Therefore G′ is 4-uniform. Case 4: Three non-consecutive sets Vi are large, say V1 , V3 , V4 . Then X is anti-complete to each of them. From the above claims we know that V1 forms a matching with both V3 and V4 , while V3 and V4 form a co-matching. Also, from Claim 7 we conclude that whenever two vertices y ∈ V3 and z ∈ V4 are non-adjacent, then either none of them has a neighbour in V1 or they both are adjacent to the same vertex of V1 . Therefore, if we complement the edges between V3 and V4 , then G′ transforms into a graph in which every connected component is one of the following graphs: K3 , P3 , P2 , P1 . Each of these graphs is an induced subgraph of P1 + P3 (also known as the paw), so the obtained graph is 4-uniform. By Lemma 6.(iii), it follows that G[V1 ∪ V3 ∪ V4 ] is 12-uniform and so G′ is 13-uniform. Case 5: Two consecutive sets Vi are large, say V3 , V4 . This case is similar to the previous one, where the role of V1 is played by X. Thus G′ is 12-uniform. Case 6: Two non-consecutive sets Vi are large. Then X is anti-complete to each of them and hence the graph is obviously 3uniform. Case 7: At most one set Vi is large. Then G′ is obviously 2-uniform. Since the above cases cover all possibilities, this completes the proof. 14  ⊓ ⊔  4.3  Graphs containing a C4  By Lemmas 7 and 8, we may restrict ourselves to looking at (K5 , C5 )-free graphs in our class. We prove the following structural result. Lemma 9. Let G be a (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 , K5 , C5 )-free graph containing an induced C4 . Then by deleting at most 17 vertices and applying at most two bipartite complementations, we can modify G into the disjoint union of a (P2 + P3 )-free bipartite graph and a 3-uniform graph. Proof. In order to prove the lemma, we again modify the proof from [11], which shows that this class of graphs has bounded clique-width. Let G be a (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 , K5 , C5 )-free graph containing a C4 induced by the vertices v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 in order. We interpret subscripts on vertices modulo 4 in this proof. Let Y be the set of vertices adjacent to v1 and v2 (and possibly to other vertices on the cycle). If y1 , y2 ∈ Y are non-adjacent, then G[v1 , v2 , y1 , y2 ] would be a 2P1 + P2 . Therefore, Y is a clique. This clique has at most two vertices, since otherwise three vertices of Y together with v1 and v2 would create a K5 . Therefore, after deleting at most 2 × 4 = 8 vertices, we may assume that no vertex of the graph contains two consecutive neighbours on the cycle. Let V1 denote the set of vertices adjacent to v2 and v4 , and let V2 denote the set of vertices adjacent to v1 and v3 . For i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}, let Wi denote the set of vertices whose only neighbour on the cycle is vi . If a set Wi contains at most one vertex then we may delete this vertex. Thus, deleting at most four vertices, we may assume that every set Wi is either empty of contains at least two vertices. Finally, let X be the set of vertices with no neighbour on the cycle. Dabrowski, Huang and Paulusma proved the following claims about the edges between these sets (see Appendix B for a proof). Claim 1. ([11]) Vi is independent for i ∈ {1, 2}. Claim 2. ([11]) Wi is independent for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. Claim 3. ([11]) X is independent. Claim 4. ([11]) Wi is anti-complete to X for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. Claim 5. ([11]) For i ∈ {1, 2} either Wi or Wi+2 is empty. Therefore, we may assume by symmetry that W3 = ∅ and W4 = ∅. Note that in our arguments so far we have deleted at most 12 vertices. We now argue as follows: Any vertices of X that do not have neighbours in V1 ∪ V2 must be isolated vertices of the graph. Since adding isolated vertices to a P2 + P3 -free bipartite graph maintains the property of it being P2 + P3 -free and bipartite, we may therefore assume that every vertex in X has a neighbour in V1 ∪ V2 . Let X0 denote the subset of X whose vertices have neighbours both in V1 and V2 , let X1 denote the subset of X whose vertices have no neighbours in V1 and let X2 denote the subset of X whose vertices have no neighbours in V2 . Let V0 denote the set of vertices in V1 ∪ V2 adjacent to at least one vertex of X0 and let V10 = V1 ∩ V0 and V20 = V2 ∩ V0 . If V10 or V20 contains at most one 15  vertex then we may delete this vertex. This would cause X0 to become empty. Therefore, by deleting at most one vertex, we may assume that either both V10 and V20 each contain at least two vertices or else V10 , V20 and X0 are all empty. We will show that G[X0 ∪ V0 ] is 3-uniform and can be separated from the rest of the graph using at most two bipartite complementations. To do this, we first prove the following additional claims. Claim 6. Every vertex of X0 has exactly one neighbour in V10 and exactly one neighbour in V20 and these neighbours are adjacent. First, we observe that if a vertex x ∈ X0 is adjacent to y ∈ V1 and to z ∈ V2 , then y is adjacent to z, since otherwise G[x, y, v2 , v1 , z] is an induced C5 . This implies that if x has the third neighbour y ′ ∈ V1 ∪ V2 , then G[x, z, y, y ′ ] is a 2P1 + P2 . This contradiction proves the claim. Claim 7. Every vertex of V0 is adjacent to exactly one vertex of X0 . Let v be a vertex in V0 . Without loss of generality, assume that v belongs to V10 . Suppose that v has at least two neighbours in X0 , say x and x′ , and at least one non-neighbour, say x′′ . Let v ′′ be the neighbour of x′′ in V10 . Then G[v ′′ , x′′ , x, v, x′ ] is a P2 + P3 . This contradiction shows that if v has at least two neighbours in X0 , then it must be adjacent to all the vertices of X0 . Since every vertex of X0 has exactly one neighbour in V10 it follows that v is the only vertex of V10 , a contradiction. We conclude that v (and hence every other vertex of V0 ) has exactly one neighbour in X0 . Claim 8. V10 is complete to V2 and V20 is complete to V1 . Suppose v ∈ V10 is non-adjacent to y ∈ V2 and let x be the unique neighbour of v in X0 . Since y is non-adjacent to v, it cannot be the unique neighbour of x in V2 . Therefore y must be non-adjacent to x. It follows that G[x, v, v1 , y, v3 ] is a P2 + P3 , a contradiction. The second part of the claim follows by symmetry. Claim 9. Every vertex in W1 ∪ W2 ∪ X1 ∪ X2 is either complete or anti-complete to Vi0 for i = 1, 2. Suppose a vertex w ∈ W1 ∪ W2 ∪ X1 ∪ X2 has both a neighbour v and a nonneighbour v ′ in V10 . Let x and x′ be the neighbours of v and v ′ , respectively, in X0 . Recall that x and x′ must be non-adjacent to w. Then G[v ′ , x′ , w, v, x] is a P2 + P3 , a contradiction. By Claims 8 and 9, every vertex outside V10 ∪ V20 ∪ X0 is either complete or anticomplete to V10 and either complete or anti-complete to V20 . Applying at most two bipartite complementations, we may therefore disconnect G[V10 ∪ V20 ∪ X0 ] from the rest of the graph i.e. remove all edges between vertices in V10 ∪ V20 ∪ X0 and vertices outside V10 ∪ V20 ∪ X0 . By Claims 6, 7 and 8 it follows that G[V10 ∪ V20 ∪ X0 ] is a 3-uniform graph. We may now assume that X0 is empty. Let H be the graph obtained from G by deleting the vertices of the original cycle. Note that V (H) = X1 ∪ V1 ∪ W1 ∪ X2 ∪ V2 ∪ W2 . It remains to show that H is a (P2 + P3 )-free bipartite graph. We claim that H is bipartite with independent sets X1 ∪ V1 ∪ W1 and X2 ∪ V2 ∪ W2 . To show this, it suffices to prove that H has no triangles, because all 16  other odd cycles are forbidden in G (and hence in H). We know that X1 ∪ V1 is an independent set and X2 ∪ V2 is an independent set. Also, W1 and W2 are independent and the vertices of X have no neighbours in W1 ∪ W2 . It follows that in H vertices in X1 an can only have neighbours in V2 and vertices of X2 can only have neighbours in V1 , so no triangle in H contains a vertex of X. By symmetry, if H[x, y, z] is a triangle then we may therefore assume that x ∈ W1 , y ∈ V2 and z ∈ V1 ∪ W2 . Now G[x, y, z, v1 ] is a 2P1 + P2 , a contradiction. It follows that H is bipartite. Moreover, it is (P2 + P3 )-free. This completes the proof. ⊓ ⊔ Since P2 + P3 is an induced subgraph of P6 , it follows that every (P2 + P3 )free graph is P6 -free. Combining Lemma 9 with Theorem 1 and Lemmas 2, 5.(ii) and 5.(iii) we therefore obtain the following corollary. Corollary 1. The class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 +P3 , K5 , C5 )-free graphs containing an induced C4 is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. 4.4  (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 )-free graphs  Theorem 2. The class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 )-free graphs is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Proof. Graphs in the class under consideration containing an induced subgraph isomorphic to K5 , C5 or C4 are well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation by Lemmas 7 and 8 and Corollary 1, respectively. The remaining graphs form a subclass of (P6 , K5 , K2,2 )-free graphs, since C4 = K2,2 and P2 + P3 is an induced subgraph of P6 . By Lemma 3, this class of graphs is wellquasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. Therefore, the class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P3 )-free graphs is well-quasi-ordered by the labelled induced subgraph relation. ⊓ ⊔  5  Two New Non-Well-Quasi-Ordered Classes  In this section we show that the classes of (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P4 )-free graphs and (P1 + P4 , P1 + 2P2 )-free graphs are not well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation. The antichain used to prove the first of these cases was previously used by Atminas and Lozin to show that the class of (2P1 + P2 , P6 )-free graphs is not well-quasi-ordered with respect to the induced subgraph relation. Because of this, we can show show a stronger result for the first case. Theorem 3. The class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P4 , P6 )-free graphs is not well-quasiordered by the induced subgraph relation. Proof. Let n ≥ 2 be an integer and consider a cycle C4n , say x1 −x2 −· · ·−x4n −x1 . We partition the vertices of this cycle into three sets as follows as follows: X = {xi | i ≡ 0 or 2 mod 4}, Y = {xi | i ≡ 1 mod 4}, Z = {xi | i ≡ 3 mod 4}. 17  Let G4n be the graph obtained from C4n by connecting every vertex of Y to every vertex of Z (see also Fig. 2). Atminas and Lozin showed that the resulting graphs are (2P1 + P2 , P6 )-free and form an infinite antichain with respect to the induced subgraph relation [1]. x3 x4  x2  x5  x1  x6  x12  x7  x11  x8  x10 x9  Fig. 2. The Graph G4n from Theorem 3 when n = 3.  It remains to prove that G4n is (P2 + P4 )-free. We argue as in the proof of [11, Theorem 1 (iv)]. For contradiction, suppose that G4n contains an induced subgraph I isomorphic to P2 + P4 . Let I1 and I2 be the connected components of I isomorphic to P2 and P4 , respectively. Since G4n [Y ∪Z] is complete bipartite, I2 must contain at least one vertex of X. Since the two neighbours of any vertex of X are adjacent, any vertex of X in I2 must be an end-vertex of I2 . Then, as Y and Z are independent sets, I2 contains a vertex of both Y and Z. As I1 can contain at most one vertex of X (because X is an independent set), I1 contains a vertex u ∈ Y ∪ Z. However, G4n [Y ∪ Z] is complete bipartite and I2 contains a vertex of both Y and Z. Hence, u has a neighbour in I2 , which is not possible. This completes the proof. ⊓ ⊔ The graphs G4n in the above proof are obtained from cycles in the same way that walls were transformed in [11] to show unboundedness of clique-width for (2P1 + P2 , P2 + P4 )-free graphs (The sets A, B and C in [11] correspond to the sets Y, X and Z, respectively, in the proof above). In fact the construction in [11] is also P6 -free by the same arguments as in [1], so we obtain the following: Remark 1. The class of (2P1 + P2 , P2 +P4 , P6 )-free graphs has unbounded cliquewidth. For our second class, we need a new construction. 18  Theorem 4. The class of (P1 + P4 , P1 + 2P2 )-free graphs is not well-quasiordered by the induced subgraph relation. Proof. Let n ≥ 3 be an integer. Consider a cycle C4n , say x1 − x2 − · · ·− x4n − x1 . We partition the vertices of C4n as follows: X = {xi | i ≡ 0 or 1 mod 4}, Y = {xi | i ≡ 2 or 3 mod 4}. Next we apply a complementation to each of X and Y , so that in the resulting graph X and Y each induce a clique on 2n vertices with a perfect matching removed. Let G4n be the resulting graph (see also Fig. 3).  x3 x4  x2  x5  x1  x6  x12  x7  x11  x8  x10 x9  Fig. 3. The Graph G4n from Theorem 4 when n = 3.  Suppose, for contradiction that G4n contains an induced P1 + 2P2 . Without loss of generality, the set X must contain three of the vertices v1 , v2 , v3 of the P1 + 2P2 . Since every component of P1 + 2P2 contains at most two vertices, without loss of generality we may assume that v1 is non-adjacent to both v2 and v3 . However, every vertex of G4n [X] has exactly one non-neighbour in X. This contradiction shows that G4n is indeed (P1 + 2P2 )-free. Every vertex in X has exactly one neighbour in Y and vice versa. This means that any K3 in G4n must lie entirely in G4n [X] or G4n [Y ]. Since G4n [X] or G4n [Y ] are both complements of perfect matchings and every vertex of P1 + P4 lies in one of three induced K3 ’s, which are pairwise non-disjoint, it follows that G4n is P1 + P4 -free. It remains to show that the graphs G4n form an infinite antichain with respect to the induced subgraph relation. Since n ≥ 3, every vertex in X (resp. Y ) has 19  at least two neighbours in X (resp. Y ) that are pairwise adjacent. Therefore, given x1 , we can determine which vertices lie in X and which lie in Y . Every vertex in X (resp. Y ) has a unique neighbour in Y (resp. X) and a unique nonneighbour in X (resp. Y ). Therefore, by specifying which vertex in G4n is x1 , we uniquely determine x2 , . . . , x4n . Suppose G4n an induced subgraph of G4m for some m ≥ 3. Then n ≤ m due to the number of vertices. By symmetry, we may assume that the induced copy of G4n in G4m has vertex x1 of G4n in the position of vertex x1 in G4m . Then the induced copy of G4n must have vertices x2 , . . . , x4n in the same position as x2 , . . . , x4n in G4m , respectively. Now x1 and x4n are non-adjacent in G4n . If n < m then x1 and x4n are adjacent in G4m , a contradiction. We conclude that if G4n is an induced subgraph of G4m then n = m. In other words {G4n | n ≥ 3} is an infinite antichain with respect to the induced subgraph relation. ⊓ ⊔  6  State of the Art and Future Work  In this section we summarise what is currently known about well-quasiorderability and boundedness of clique-width, taking in to account the results proved in this paper. We also give a number of directions for future work. Given four graphs H1 , H2 , H3 , H4 , the class of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs and the class of (H3 , H4 )-free graphs are equivalent if the unordered pair H3 , H4 can be obtained from the unordered pair H1 , H2 by some combination of the operations (i) complementing both graphs in the pair and (ii) if one of the graphs in the pair is K3 , replacing it with P1 + P3 or vice versa. If two classes are equivalent, then one of them is well-quasi-ordered with respect to the induced subgraph relation if and only if the other one is [20]. Similarly, if two classes are equivalent, then one of them has bounded clique-width if and only if the other one does [13]. We use this terminology in the remainder of this section. 6.1  Well-Quasi-Ordering  Atminas and Lozin [1] proved that the class of (K3 , P6 )-free graphs is well-quasiordered by the induced subgraph relation, while the class of (2P1 + P2 , P6 )-free graphs is not. Updating the classification in [20] with these two results and the three results proved in this paper (Theorems 2–4) leads to the following classification: Theorem 5. Let G be a class of graphs defined by two forbidden induced subgraphs. Then: 1. G is well-quasi-ordered with respect to the labelled induced subgraph relation if it is equivalent to a class of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs such that one of the following holds: (i) H1 or H2 ⊆i P4 ; (ii) H1 = sP1 and H2 = Kt for some s, t; 20  (iii) H1 ⊆i 3P1 and H2 ⊆i 2P1 + P3 or P6 ; (iv) H1 ⊆i 2P1 + P2 and H2 ⊆i P2 + P3 or P5 . 2. G is not well-quasi-ordered with respect to the induced subgraph relation if it is equivalent to a class of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs such that one of the following holds: (i) neither H1 nor H2 is a linear forest (disjoint union of paths); (ii) H1 ⊇i 3P1 and H2 ⊇i 3P1 + P2 , 3P2 or 2P3 ; (iii) H1 ⊇i 2P2 and H2 ⊇i 4P1 or 2P2 ; (iv) H1 ⊇i 2P1 + P2 and H2 ⊇i 4P1 , P2 + P4 or P6 ; (v) H1 ⊇i P1 + P4 and H2 ⊇i P1 + 2P2 . Note that in Theorem 5 every class that is well-quasi-ordered with respect to the induced subgraph relation is also well-quasi-ordered with respect to the labelled induced subgraph relation (see [1,20] and Theorem 2). This agrees with a conjecture of Atminas and Lozin [1] stating that these concepts coincide for hereditary classes X precisely when X is defined by a finite collection of forbidden induced subgraphs. Theorem 5 leaves us with nine open cases. Open Problem 1 Is the class of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation when: (i) H1 = 3P1 and H2 ∈ {P1 + 2P2 , P1 + P5 , P2 + P4 }; (ii) H1 = 2P1 + P2 and H2 ∈ {P1 + 2P2 , P1 + P4 }; (iii) H1 = P1 + P4 and H2 ∈ {P1 + P4 , 2P2 , P2 + P3 , P5 }. In relation to Open Problem 1, we mention that the infinite antichain for (P1 + P4 , P1 + 2P2 )-free graphs was initially found by a computer search. This computer search also showed that similar antichains do not exist for any of the remaining nine open cases. As such, constructing antichains for these cases is likely to be a challenging problem and this suggests that many of these classes may in fact be well-quasi-ordered. Some of these remaining classes have been shown to have bounded clique-width [3,4,5,10]. We believe that some of the structural characterizations for proving these results may be useful for showing well-quasi-orderability. Indeed, we are currently trying to prove that the classes of (K3 , P1 + P5 )-free graphs and (K3 , P2 + P4 )-free graphs are well-quasi-ordered via a special type of graph partition that avoids rainbow triangles and rainbow anti-triangles. 6.2  Clique-Width  The following theorem from [10] describes exactly for which pairs (H1 , H2 ) the (un)boundedness of the clique-width of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs has been determined. Theorem 6. Let G be a class of graphs defined by two forbidden induced subgraphs. Then: 21  1. G has bounded clique-width if it is equivalent to a class of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs such that one of the following holds: (i) H1 or H2 ⊆i P4 ; (ii) H1 = sP1 and H2 = Kt for some s, t; (iii) H1 ⊆i P1 +P3 and H2 ⊆i K1,3 +3P1 , K1,3 +P2 , P1 +P2 +P3 , P1 +P5 , P1 + S1,1,2 , P6 , S1,1,3 or S1,2,2 ; (iv) H1 ⊆i 2P1 + P2 and H2 ⊆i P1 + 2P2 , 2P1 + P3 , 3P1 + P2 or P2 + P3 ; (v) H1 ⊆i P1 + P4 and H2 ⊆i P1 + P4 or P5 ; (vi) H1 ⊆i 4P1 and H2 ⊆i 2P1 + P3 ; (vii) H1 , H2 ⊆i K1,3 . 2. G has unbounded clique-width if it is equivalent to a class of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs such that one of the following holds: (i) H1 6∈ S and H2 6∈ S; / S and H2 6∈ S; (ii) H1 ∈ (iii) H1 ⊇i K1,3 or 2P2 and H2 ⊇i 4P1 or 2P2 ; (iv) H1 ⊇i 2P1 + P2 and H2 ⊇i K1,3 , 5P1 , P2 + P4 or P6 ; (v) H1 ⊇i 3P1 and H2 ⊇i 2P1 + 2P2 , 2P1 + P4 , 4P1 + P2 , 3P2 or 2P3 ; (vi) H1 ⊇i 4P1 and H2 ⊇i P1 + P4 or 3P1 + P2 . This leaves us with the following eight non-equivalent open cases. Open Problem 2 Does the class of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs have bounded or unbounded clique-width when: (i) (ii) (iii) (iv)  H1 H1 H1 H1  = 3P1 and H2 ∈ {P1 + S1,1,3 , P2 + P4 , S1,2,3 }; = 2P1 + P2 and H2 ∈ {P1 + P2 + P3 , P1 + P5 }; = P1 + P4 and H2 ∈ {P1 + 2P2 , P2 + P3 } or = H2 = 2P1 + P3 .  A potential direction for future research related to determining boundedness of clique-width is investigating linear clique-width for classes defined by two forbidden induced subgraphs. Indeed, it is not hard to show that k-uniform graphs have bounded linear clique-width. Again, we can use complementations and vertex deletions when dealing with this parameter. 6.3  Well-Quasi-Ordering versus Clique-Width  We recall that all known results for bigenic classes of graphs verify Conjecture 1. Note that Conjecture 1 is verified directly if a graph class has bounded cliquewidth. Brandstädt, Le and Mosca [4] proved that the class of (P1 + P4 , P1 + P4 )free graphs (and thus the class of (2P1 + P2 , P1 + P4 )-free graphs) has bounded clique-width. Using results from [3], the same authors proved in [5] that the class of (P1 + P4 , P5 )-free graphs (and thus the class of (2P2 , P1 + P4 )-free graphs) has bounded clique-width. Dabrowski, Dross and Paulusma [10] showed that the classes of (K3 , P1 + 2P2 )-free graphs, (K3 , P1 + P5 )-free graphs and (2P1 + P2 , P1 + 2P2 )-free graphs all have bounded clique-width. Hence, there are only two (non-equivalent) bigenic classes of graphs left for which Conjecture 1 needs to be verified. We state these two open cases below. 22  Open Problem 3 Is Conjecture 1 true for the class of (H1 , H2 )-free graphs when: (i) H1 = K3 and H2 = P2 + P4 or when (ii) H1 = P1 + P4 and H2 = P2 + P3 ? As can be seen from Open Problems 1 and 2, for both classes we know neither whether they are well-quasi-ordered by the induced subgraph relation nor whether their clique-width is bounded.  References 1. A. Atminas and V. V. Lozin. Labelled induced subgraphs and well-quasi-ordering. Order, 32(3):313–328, 2015. 2. H. L. Bodlaender. A linear-time algorithm for finding tree-decompositions of small treewidth. SIAM Journal on Computing, 25(6):1305–1317, 1996. 3. A. Brandstädt and D. Kratsch. On the structure of (P5 ,gem)-free graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 145(2):155–166, 2005. 4. A. Brandstädt, H.-O. Le, and R. Mosca. Gem- and co-gem-free graphs have bounded clique-width. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science, 15(1):163–185, 2004. 5. A. Brandstädt, H.-O. Le, and R. Mosca. Chordal co-gem-free and (P5 ,gem)-free graphs have bounded clique-width. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 145(2):232–241, 2005. 6. B. Courcelle. The monadic second-order logic of graphs III: tree-decompositions, minor and complexity issues. Informatique Théorique et Applications, 26(3):257– 286, 1992. 7. B. Courcelle. Clique-width and edge contraction. Information Processing Letters, 114(1–2):42–44, 2014. 8. B. Courcelle, J. A. Makowsky, and U. Rotics. Linear time solvable optimization problems on graphs of bounded clique-width. Theory of Computing Systems, 33(2):125–150, 2000. 9. B. Courcelle and S. Olariu. Upper bounds to the clique width of graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 101(1–3):77–114, 2000. 10. K. K. Dabrowski, F. Dross, and D. Paulusma. Colouring diamond-free graphs. Proc. SWAT 2016, LIPIcs, 53:16:1–16:14, 2016. 11. K. K. Dabrowski, S. Huang, and D. Paulusma. Bounding clique-width via perfect graphs. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, (in press). 12. K. K. Dabrowski, V. V. Lozin, and D. Paulusma. Well-quasi-ordering versus cliquewidth: New results on bigenic classes. Proc. IWOCA 2016, LNCS, 9843:253–265, 2016. 13. K. K. Dabrowski and D. Paulusma. Clique-width of graph classes defined by two forbidden induced subgraphs. The Computer Journal, 59(5):650–666, 2016. 14. J. Daligault, M. Rao, and S. Thomassé. Well-quasi-order of relabel functions. Order, 27(3):301–315, 2010. 15. P. Damaschke. Induced subgraphs and well-quasi-ordering. Journal of Graph Theory, 14(4):427–435, 1990. 16. W. Espelage, F. Gurski, and E. Wanke. How to solve NP-hard graph problems on clique-width bounded graphs in polynomial time. Proc. WG 2001, LNCS, 2204:117– 128, 2001.  23  17. A. Finkel and P. Schnoebelen. Well-structured transition systems everywhere! Theoretical Computer Science, 256(1–2):63–92, 2001. 18. G. Higman. Ordering by divisibility in abstract algebras. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, s3–2(1):326–336, 1952. 19. D. Kobler and U. Rotics. Edge dominating set and colorings on graphs with fixed clique-width. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 126(2–3):197–221, 2003. 20. N. Korpelainen and V. V. Lozin. Two forbidden induced subgraphs and well-quasiordering. Discrete Mathematics, 311(16):1813–1822, 2011. 21. J. B. Kruskal. The theory of well-quasi-ordering: A frequently discovered concept. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 13(3):297–305, 1972. 22. V. V. Lozin, I. Razgon, and V. Zamaraev. Well-quasi-ordering does not imply bounded clique-width. Proc. WG 2015, LNCS, 9224:351–359, 2016. 23. S.-I. Oum and P. D. Seymour. Approximating clique-width and branch-width. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 96(4):514–528, 2006. 24. M. Rao. MSOL partitioning problems on graphs of bounded treewidth and cliquewidth. Theoretical Computer Science, 377(1–3):260–267, 2007. 25. N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph minors. IV. Tree-width and well-quasiordering. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 48(2):227–254, 1990. 26. N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph minors. XX. Wagner’s conjecture. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 92(2):325–357, 2004.  24  A  Proofs of the Claims in Lemma 8 from [11, Lemma 10]  Claim 1. G[Vi ∪ X] is a matching. Indeed, if some vertex x in Vi (respectively X) is adjacent to two vertices y1 , y2 in X (respectively Vi ), then G[vi+2 , vi+3 , y1 , x, y2 ] is a P2 + P3 . Claim 2. If Vi and Vj are opposite, then G[Vi ∪ Vj ] is a matching. Suppose for contradiction that x ∈ V1 is adjacent to two vertices y, y ′ ∈ V3 . Then G[v2 , x, y, y ′ ] would be a 2P1 + P2 , a contradiction. Claim 3. If Vi and Vj are consecutive, then G[Vi ∪ Vj ] is a co-matching. Suppose for contradiction that x ∈ V1 is non-adjacent to two vertices y, y ′ ∈ V2 . Then G[x, v5 , y, v3 , y ′ ] is a P2 + P3 , a contradiction. Claim 4. If Vi is large, then X is anti-complete to Vi−2 ∪ Vi+2 . Suppose for contradiction that V3 is large and x ∈ X has a neighbour y ∈ V1 . Then since V3 is large and both G[X∪V3 ] and G[V1 ∪V3 ] are matchings, there must be a vertex z ∈ V3 that is non-adjacent to both x and y. Then G[x, y, v3 , v4 , z] is a P2 + P3 , a contradiction. Claim 5. If Vi is large, then Vi−1 is anti-complete to Vi+1 . Suppose for contradiction that V2 is large and x ∈ V1 has a neighbour y ∈ V3 . Since V2 is large and each vertex in V1 ∪ V3 has at most one non-neighbour in V2 , there must be a vertex z ∈ V2 that is adjacent to both x and y. Now G[x, y, v2 , z] is a 2P1 + P2 , a contradiction. Claim 6. If Vi−1 , Vi , Vi+1 are large, then Vi is complete to Vi−1 ∪ Vi+1 . Suppose for contradiction that V1 , V2 , V3 are large and some vertex x ∈ V1 is nonadjacent to a vertex y ∈ V2 . Since V3 is large and G[V2 ∪ V3 ] is a co-matching, there must be two vertices z, z ′ ∈ V3 , adjacent to y. By the previous claim, since V2 is large, z, z ′ must be non-adjacent to x. Therefore G[x, v5 , z, y, z ′] is a P2 + P3 , which is a contradiction.  B  Proofs of the Claims in Lemma 9 from [11, Lemma 11]  Claim 1. Vi is independent for i ∈ {1, 2}. If x, y ∈ Vi were adjacent then G[x, y, vi+1 , vi+3 ] would be a 2P1 + P2 . Claim 2. Wi is independent for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. If x, y ∈ Wi were adjacent then G[x, y, vi+1 , vi+2 , vi+3 ] would be a P2 + P3 . Claim 3. X is independent. If x, y ∈ X were adjacent then G[x, y, v1 , v2 , v3 ] would be a P2 + P3 . Claim 4. Wi is anti-complete to X for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. If x ∈ X were adjacent to y ∈ Wi then G[x, y, vi+1 , vi+2 , vi+3 ] would be a P2 +P3 . Claim 5. For i ∈ {1, 2} either Wi or Wi+2 is empty. Therefore, we may assume by symmetry that W3 = ∅ and W4 = ∅. To show this, first suppose that vertices x ∈ W1 and y ∈ W3 are adjacent. Then 25  G[v1 , v2 , v3 , y, x] is a C5 , which is a contradiction. Therefore, W1 is anti-complete to W3 . If both W1 and W3 are non-empty then by our earlier assumption they must each contain at least two vertices. Suppose that x ∈ W1 and y, z ∈ W3 . In this case G[x, v1 , y, v3 , z] is a P2 + P3 , a contradiction. We conclude that at least one of W1 and W3 must be empty. Without loss of generality, we assume that W3 is empty. Similarly, we assume that W4 is empty.  26

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
