Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_4714

Abstract:
What Can This Robot Do? Learning Models from Appearance and Experiments 1  1  arXiv:1712.05497v1 [cs.AI] 15 Dec 2017  Ashwin Khadke and Manuela Veloso Abstract— When presented with an unknown robot (subject) how can an autonomous agent (learner) figure out what this new robot can do? The subject’s appearance can provide cues to its physical as well as cognitive capabilities. Seeing a humanoid can make one wonder if it can kick balls, climb stairs or recognize faces. What if the learner can request the subject to perform these tasks? We present an approach to make the learner build a model of the subject at a task based on the latter’s appearance and refine it by experimentation. Apart from the subject’s inherent capabilities, certain extrinsic factors may affect its performance at a task. Based on the subject’s appearance and prior knowledge about the task a learner can identify a set of potential factors, a subset of which we assume are controllable. Our approach picks values of controllable factors to generate the most informative experiments to test the subject at. Additionally, we present a metric to determine if a factor should be incorporated in the model. We present results of our approach on modeling a humanoid robot at the task of kicking a ball. Firstly, we show that actively picking values for controllable factors, even in noisy experiments, leads to faster learning of the subject’s model for the task. Secondly, starting from a minimal set of factors our metric identifies the set of relevant factors to incorporate in the model. Lastly, we show that the refined model better represents the subject’s performance at the task.  I. I NTRODUCTION Consider the case where a robot is presented with another robot that the former knows little about. How would it go about interpreting what this new robot can do? The appearance could provide some cues. If the new robot has an arm, one might wonder if it can lift or throw objects. Appearances can convey information about not just the physical tasks that a robot can potentially perform but also it’s cognitive capabilities. Seeing a robot equipped with a camera and microphone could make one wonder if can recognize faces, detect hand gestures or interpret voice commands. How would one determine if the new robot can perform any or all of the appearance-deduced tasks? Moreover, although physical appearances can provide rich cues in interpreting what tasks a new robot can perform they are not sufficient to identify the caveats and strengths at performing these tasks. The robots Roomba and Braava appear similar and are both used for cleaning floors. But the Roomba can clean carpets and not wet floors, which is exactly the opposite of what Braava can do. Building a model of the new robot’s capabilities at a task by passively observing it operate, can be a solution. But what if it were possible to communicate with it and request it to perform a task in certain scenarios? 1  School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA  In this paper we tackle the problem of an autonomous agent, learner, making a model of another autonomous agent, subject, in performing a particular task, when it is possible for the former to experiment with the latter at that task. The outcomes of these experiments can be non-deterministic. We assume that the learner knows the appearance of the subject and can infer what tasks the subject can potentially perform based on that. We thus name the model as Appearance Based Model (ABM). Apart from the subject’s inherent capabilities, certain extrinsic factors may affect the subject’s performance at the task. We assume that a subset of these factors are controllable and the learner can choose values for such factors in the experiments it conducts. We provide an approach for the learner to pick values for controllable factors in an experiment that generate the most informative outcomes. We call the assignment of controllable factors in an experiment as a query and this approach of actively picking the assignment as active-querying. Based on prior knowledge about the task and the appearance of the robot, we assume that the learner knows the set of relevant factors that may affect the subject’s performance. First we present our approach to learn a model when the learner knows exactly the set of factors that need to be incorporated in the model. Further, starting with a minimal set of factors, we present a method for the learner to identify relevant factors that need to be added to refine the model. We demonstrate the usefulness of our active querying approach at modeling a soccer playing humanoid robot perform a BallKick task. We show that active-querying leads to faster learning of the subject’s model than passively observing it perform. To show the effectiveness of our model refinement approach, we introduce a shortcoming in the subject that is triggered by a particular factor. We initialize the model excluding this factor and, show that our algorithm identifies the missing factor and including it leads to a better model. II. R ELATED W ORK The idea of learning by experimentation isn’t new. [1] describes LEX, a program that learns heuristics to solve indefinite integration problems by generating practice problems to solve. ABMs can deal with tasks and experiments with non-deterministic outcomes which LEX can’t. Additionally, an ABM can capture the notion of how good a subject is at performing a certain task. [2] presents EXPO, a framework for refining the internal model of a planning domain by experimentation. Imperfections in the model may create discrepancies between what a planner expects and what happens when a plan is executed.  EXPO hypothesizes corrections to the model and generates experiments to test these hypotheses. Contrary to ABMs, EXPO does not handle non-deterministic experiments or planning environments. DIDO [3] is framework for learning models that capture the effects of applying certain Motor Operations on objects in the environment. While learning these effects, rather than considering the amount of information gained by experimenting with a particular object, DIDO randomly picks objects to test on. Our approach to learn ABMs explicitly reasons about information gain while selecting values for controllable factors in an experiment. [4] is one of the earliest works to pose the problem of actively learning a world model in a reinforcement learning context. Reasoning about information gain in deciding what actions to perform, in building a world model, is a common approach in SLAM. [5], [6] and [7] are some works that address this problem. III. A PPEARANCE BASED M ODELS Suppose the learner is presented with a legged robot (subject) equipped with cameras. Of the possible tasks the learner may interpret as the subject being capable of, such as kicking a ball, walking over obstacles or climbing stairs, say the learner chooses to model the subject at the kicking task. Based on prior knowledge about the task, the learner might incorporate factors such as size of the ball, turf on which the subject is executing the task, position of the ball with respect to the player before it kicks. Turf is a factor most likely beyond the learner’s control. Position and ball size seem likely to be controllable. In every experiment the learner commands the subject to kick a ball in a particular direction from a particular position on the given turf and observes the direction the ball is kicked. Here we introduce the notation for Appearance Based Model (ABM) for a task T . A. Definition Model MT = (SIT,OUT,FF,DK) • OUT - Set of random variable(s) denoting the out1 come(s) of task T . Outcome is an instantiation of OUT. • SIT= CNTX ∪ COMM. – COMM - Variables denoting the commands given to the subject for task T . – CNTX - Set of extrinsic factors that affect OUT. – Situation, Command and Context are instantiations of SIT, COMM and CNTX respectively. • Frequency Function (F F {X, Y }) returns the set of joint probability distributions of observing variables in X given variables in Y . X ⊂ OUT, Y ⊂ SIT ∪ OUT. • Domain Knowledge (DK) – Sets SIT and OUT for the task T .  – ATT o ∀o OUT are the sets of additional variables that may affect the outcome variable o, but unac2 counted in the model . – Dependencies amongst variables in SIT and OUT MBallKick = (SIT, OUT, FF, DK) SIT = {KDc, Position, Turf , BallSize}, OUT = {KDo} CNTX = {Position, Turf , BallSize}, COMM = {KDc}, ATT KDo = {BallColor}, FF{OUT, S} = P(KDo∣S)∀S ⊂ SIT DK KDo ⫪ KDc, Position, BallSize, Turf The ABM for the BallKick task is as shown above. Here, Position represents the location of the ball with respect to the subject. KDc and KDo denote the commanded and observed kick direction respectively. KDo is None if the subject attempts but fails to kick the ball or doesn’t attempt to kick. The former may be because of it’s inability to kick in certain positions. The latter may mean it doesn’t detect the ball or doesn’t know how to perform a kick. Position  {Left, Middle, Right} Turf  {Grass, Synthetic, Sand}, BallSize  {Small, Large} KDc  {Left, Mid, Right}, KDo  {Left, Mid, Right, None} Here the set OUT is singleton. In general this may not be the case. Moreover, a variable in OUT may depend on another variable in the set. The learner requesting the subject to perform the task in certain Context is equivalent to making interventional queries to the model. We propose using a Causal Bayesian Network (CBN) to represent FF. CBNs capture the causal dependence of Outcomes on Commands and Context and, simplify learning when queries are interventional. IV. L EARNING ABM S Here we describe our approach to learn an ABM for a particular task. The sets SIT and OUT are assumed part of DK. Our approach learns FF by actively selecting Situations and observing the subject perform the task in these Situations. A. Using a CBN to represent the Frequency Function •  •  •  •  2  1  An instantiation of a set of variables is a dictionary mapping variables in the set to values in their domain. Context ← ∪xCNTX {x ∶ xval } where xval Dom(x)  FF ≡ (G, θ) , where G ≡ (χ, E) is the underlying directed acyclic graph and parameters θ quantify the conditional probability tables associated with G. χ = SIT ∪ OUT. Variables in OUT are dependent on some or all variables in SIT and may also depend on other variables in OUT. Specifically, ∀(xi , xj )  E, xi  χ and xj  OUT. The set E is specified in DK. Q ⊂ SIT is the set of variables the learner can control. A Query is an instantiation of Q. An Experiment is an instance of the subject performing the task under a Query. An Observation is an instantiation of χ at the end of an experiment 3  FF captures distributions of o marginalized over the variables in ATT o . In experiments with the subject these variables are assigned values randomly. 3 Overloaded notation. FF{X,Y} denotes P(X∣Y) but just FF denotes the Causal Bayesian Network associated with the Frequency Function.  •  COMM⊂ Q. Q∩CNTX need not be empty. These are the set of controllable factors.  We assume that all dependencies among variables, included in the model, are known and are part of DK associated with the task. Learning FF is then equivalent to learning the parameters θ for the underlying graph G.  with respect to p can be quantified as (1) Errorp (θ ) = ∫θ KLχ (θ∣∣θ )p(θ)dθ ′  KLχ (θ∣∣θ ) = ∑  (1)  KL(Pθ (Xi ∣u)∣∣Pθ′ (Xi ∣u)  ∑  ′  (2)  Xi χ uD(Ui )  θ̃ = arg min Errorp (θ ) ′ ′  (3)  Risk(p) = Errorp (θ̃)  (4)  θ  B. Active Learning for CBN We assume that dependencies known in DK are sufficient for the learner to construct a network structure G. Additionally, the learner has a prior p(θ) over the parameters of G. We use the active learning algorithm presented in [8] to build ′ our posterior p . We describe it here in short. We assume all random variables in FF are Multinomial and θ parametrize the conditional probability tables. Specifically, θXi ∣ui = (θxi 1∣ui , ⋯, θxi ri ∣ui ) denotes the vector of probabilities for different values of Xi when the parents of Xi χ in G have value ui . We use Bayesian estimation to learn parameters θ i.e. we learn a distribution p(θ) over possible parameter values. Dirichlet distribution, parameterized + by hyperparameters αj R and α⋆ = ∑j αj , is the conjugate prior for Multinomial. We make the assumption of parameter independence as in [9], i.e. parameters associated with each node are independent as well as parameters of a node for different states of parent variables are also independent. With parameter independence and all variables in FF being Multinomial, we have a Dirichlet distribution for every θXi ∣ui where αxi j∣ui is the hyperparameter for θxi j∣ui . In each Experiment the learner choses a Query and requests the subject to perform the task. Based on the Observation the learner updates the prior p(θ) to obtain the ′ posterior p (θ) and proceeds to the next Experiment by setting ′ p to p. The learning algorithm must address two issues, how to update p(θ) based on Query and Observation and, what Query to pick next based on current estimate of p(θ). Since the nodes in Q are not sampled but assigned (Query is interventional), it doesn’t make sense to update parameters corresponding to these nodes. As the underlying representation is a CBN, updating parameters of variables that are ancestors of variables in Q also doesn’t make sense. We call variables that are neither in Q nor are an ancestor to a variable in Q as Updateable. Given a prior p(θ), Query and the obtained Observation we do standard Bayesian update on the parameter distribution of only the Updateable variables. To generate a Query from the current estimate of p(θ) we need a metric to evaluate how good the current estimate is. We can then quantify the improvement in the estimate brought about by different queries and pick the one which ⋆ leads to the most improvement. Let θ be the true param′ eters of the model and θ be the point estimate evaluated ⋆ ′ using p(θ). KLχ (θ ∣∣θ ) ≡ KL(Pθ⋆ (χ)∣∣Pθ′ (χ)), where Pθ′ (χ) represents the joint distribution of variables in χ when ′ parameterized with θ , can be used as measure of error for ⋆ our point estimate. We don’t know θ , but we do have p(θ), which is our belief of what the optimal θ is given the prior ′ and Observations. Thus the Error in our point estimate θ  ′  θ̃, the point estimate that minimizes the Error with respect to our current estimate p, turns out to be ∫ p(θ)dθ i.e. Ep (θ). We use Risk of a distribution, defined in equation (4), as the measure of quality for the estimate p(θ). Lower the Risk, better the estimate. For a CBN with Multinomial variables, using the simplification in (2), the Risk of a distribution p can be expressed as in (5). Risk(p) = ∑  ∑  i uD(Ui )  Pθ̃ (u)δ(αxi1 ∣u , ⋯, αxiri ∣u )  (5)  ri  δ(αxi1 ∣u , ⋯, αxiri ∣u ) = ∑ (HαXi ∣u + j=1 αxi j∣u αxi ⋆∣u  (Ψ(αxi j∣u + 1) − Ψ(αxi ⋆∣u + 1)))  (6)  ri  αxi j∣u αxi j∣u HαXi ∣u = − ∑ α ln( α ) xi ⋆∣u  j  (7)  xi ⋆∣u  In equation (6), Ψ(α) = Γ (α)/Γ(α), where Γ denotes the ′ Gamma function and Γ its derivative. We would want to see Observations that reduce the Risk associated with our estimate p. For a particular Query q we take expectation over possible Observations to evaluate the Expected Posterior Risk (EPR) for that Query. Lower the EPR better the Query. ′  EPR(p, q) = EΘ∼p(θ) (EX∼PΘ (χ∣Q=q) (Risk(p ))) ′  (8)  ′  In (8) p represents the posterior obtained after updating prior p with sample drawn from PΘ (χ∣Q = q). For a CBN with only one child node X taking values xi ∀i  {1, ⋯, r} and all it’s parent nodes U being in Q, EPRX is as shown in (9) EPRX (p, q) = ∑ Pθ̃ (xj ∣q) ∑ Pθ̃′ (u)δ(αx1 ∣u , ⋯, αxr ∣u ) (9) ′  ′  u  j  EPR(p, q) = ∑  ∑  Pθ̃ (u∣q)EPRXi (p, u)  (10)  i uD(Ui )  In (9), θ̃ and αxj ∣u denote the parameters for posterior p (θ) corresponding to θ̃ and αxj ∣u in prior p(θ). For a general CBN the EPR decomposes as in (10). Moreover, it is easier to compute ”reduction in Risk” ∆(χ∣q) = Risk(p) - EPR(p,q) than evaluating the EPR for a Query. Subtracting (10) from (5) and approximating Pθ̃′ (u) in (9) by Pθ̃ (u) we get ′  ′  ′  ∆(χ∣q) ≈ ∑  ∑  Pθ̃ (u∣q)∆(Xi ∣u)  (11)  i uD(Ui )  ∆(Xi ∣u) = Pθ̃ (u)(HαXi ∣u − ∑j Pθ̃ (xj ∣u)Hα′X ∣u ) (12) i  Algorithm (1) picks the Query that gives the highest ∆(χ∣q).  Algorithm 1 LearnFF(DK, maxIter) From DK Construct G ≡ (χ, E) Initialize Q, α p(θ) ← Dirichlet(α), iter ← 0 while iter < maxIter do Query ← BestQuery(p(θ), Q) Observation, Context ← Experiment(Query) p(θ) ← Update(p(θ), Query, Context, Observation) end while F F ← (G, p(θ)) Algorithm 2 BestQuery(p(θ), Q) maxDelQ ← −∞ θ̃ = ∫ θp(θ)dθ for q  Dom(Q) do ∆(χ∣q) ← ∑ ∑ Pθ̃ (u∣q)∆(Xi ∣u)  Imax = min(En(P̂o∣CObs ), En(P̂Aoj ))  (15)  In equation (14), D(Aoj ) denotes domain of Aoj and En(P) returns the entropy of distribution P. P̂I∣j (i) denotes the fraction of times variable I had value i when J⊂Parents(I) took values as specified in j, in the past Experiments. Since variables in ∪i ATT i are sampled randomly and, independently of the Context, P̂Aoj (a) ≈ P̂Aoj ∣CObs (a). Thus I in equation (14) is approximately the Mutual Information of ’o’ and Aoj given CObs. This makes R the Coefficient of Mutual Information. If Roj,CObs is greater than a threshold, the learner incorporates Aoj in CNTX, updates G by adding Aoj as a parent to variable o and creates conditional probability tables of o for the updated graph G. We identify Attributes solely based on Observations in the Experiments. Algorithm 3 IdenDep(P̂ , AT To , CNTObs, RTh, MinSamp) AttIncluded ← [ ] for Aoj  AT To do for c  CNTObs do V ← Valid(∪aD(Aoj ) {P̂o∣a,c }, MinSamp) if Size(V ) > 2 then valid P̂Aoj ∣c ← NormalizeValid(P̂Aoj ∣c , V )  i uD(Ui )  if ∆(χ∣q) > maxDelQ then maxDelQ ← ∆(χ∣q) qbest ← q end if end for return qbest  valid  Po∣c ← ∑ P̂o∣a,c P̂Aoj ∣c (a) aV  valid  I ← En(Po∣c ) − ∑ En(P̂o∣a,c )P̂Aoj ∣c (a) aV  C. Model Refinement Every subject may have a slightly different set of Factors that affect their performance at a task. Consider the ball kick task. If the subject only detects balls of a certain color, a variable BallColor should be added to CNTX. The learner may not always know what exactly to include in the contexts (CNTX). We present an approach to identify variables to include in the set CNTX. We assume ∀o OUT the learner knows a set of Attributes (ATT o ). These are variables that may influence the distribution of o, but are not included in the model. Moreover, ATT i ∩ ATT j = ∅ for i ≠ j. Including all of them would result in a model that is unnecessarily large and difficult to learn. Starting with a minimal set of variables in CNTX and observing Outcomes in the Experiments, we present an approach to identify variables that need to be added to the model. In every Experiment, values for variables in ∪i AT Ti are randomly chosen, independent of the choice of Context. Let CNTObs be the set of Contexts observed till the current Experiment. At the end of every Experiment the learner estimates P (o∣Aoj ,CObs) ∀o  OU T and Aoj  AT To , where CObs  CNTObs. The learner includes Aoj in CNTX if the distributions of o for different values of Aoj are drastically different in at least one observed Context, CObs. We define a metric Roj,CObs to evaluate the variation in distributions of o for different values of Aoj in a particular CObs. Roj,CObs = I = En(P̂o∣CObs ) −  ∑ aD(Aoj )  I Imax  En(P̂o∣a,CObs )P̂Aoj (a)  Imax ← min(En(Po∣c ), En(P̂Aoj ∣c )) R← II max if R > RTh then AttIncluded.append(Aoj ) break end if end if end for end for return AttIncluded valid  Algorithm (3) presents the above idea. Input set of distributions P̂ includes ∪Aoj ATT o (∪aD(Aoj ),cCNTObs {P̂o∣a,c }) and ∪Aoj ATT o ,cCNTObs {P̂Aoj ∣c }. We call a distribution valid if the number of samples used to estimate it is at least MinSamp. The function ’Valid’ returns a set V , such that ∀aV P̂o∣a,c is valid. The function ’NormalizeValid’ normalizes the distribution of Aoj given Context c, over subset of values identified by V . Algorithm (4) summarizes the model refinement approach. ’Modify’ adds nodes corresponding to the identified Attributes to the graph G, makes connections such that the added Attributes are parents of appropriate outcome nodes, removes conditional probability tables corresponding to the modified outcome nodes and creates conditional probability tables corresponding to the new connections.  (13)  V. E XPERIMENTS  (14)  We used the humanoid robot, NAO, as subject for our experiments. We show results for modeling the robot at the  Algorithm 4 FFMCorrect(DK, maxIter, RTh, MinSamp) From DK Construct G ≡ (χ, E) Initialize Q, α, AT To ∀ o OUT Initialize P̂ , p(θ) ← Dirichlet(α) iter ← 0, CNTObs ← ∅ while iter < maxIter do AttAdded ← {} Query ← BestQuery(p(θ), Q) Attr ← SampleUniform(∪oOU T AT To ) Observation, Context ← Experiment(Query, Attr) CNTObs ← CNTObs ∪ Context p(θ) ← Update(p(θ), Query, Context, Observation) P̂ ← Update(P̂ , Query, Context, Observation) for o  OU T do AttAdded[o] ← IdenDep(P̂ , ATT o , CNTObs, RTh, MinSamp) end for p(θ), G, Q ← Modify(p(θ), G, Q, AttAdded) end while F F ← (G, p(θ))  BallKick task discussed before. Tryouts are a common way of selecting players for a soccer team. Tryouts for a robot soccer team are an apt scenario to apply our active experimentation approach and hence the choice of this particular task. Our approach builds a model, but without knowing the true model of the subject we cannot say how good the learned model is. So we programmed the robot to behave according to a predefined model. Specifically, we defined a Frequency Function for the predefined model to reflect the behavior of a right-footed player at the BallKick task. To determine how close a learned model is to the predefined model, we used the KL Divergence of the joint distribution of variables in OUT, KLOUT (θpredefined ∣∣θlearned ) as defined in equation (2), as an error measure. We show that active experimentation leads to faster convergence to the true model than passively observing the subject perform the task. Moreover, we show that our model refinement approach is able to identify the correct set of missing factors and that the refined model better represents the true model.  KDc  P  KDo Fig. 1. CBN of predefined subject model at BallKick task. P stands for Position, KDc and KDo for kick direction commanded and observed respectively.  P  KDc  BS  KDo Fig. 2. CBN of the predefined subject model at the BallKick task. BS stands for BallSize and the rest are as defined in Fig (1).  perception and actuation, sometimes the robot ended up kicking in directions it wasn’t commanded to. Fig. (3) shows that despite the noisy experiments our approach converged faster to the predefined model.  Fig. 3. Trend in KLOUT (θpredefined ∣∣θactive ) and KLOUT (θpredefined ∣∣θrandom ).  A. Passive vs Active Passively observing the subject perform the task, where you don’t control the scenarios in which you witness the subject, is equivalent to randomly picking Contexts to build a model. We learned a model using our approach and another model by randomly picking Contexts. Fig. (1) depicts the underlying CBN for this model. We experimented with a single ball on a synthetic turf. Thus the variables Turf and BallSize are dropped from the model. A subtle point to note, the Experiments are noisy. The robot was programmed to behave according to the predefined model i.e. when the learner chose a particular Context, the value of KDo sampled from the Frequency Function of this predefined model was given as command to the robot. However, owing to noisy  Fig. 4. Trend in KLOUT (θpredefined ∣∣θlearned ). Red point depicts the Experiment in which the learner added attribute BallSize to the ABM. Learning curve for a model initialized with the correct set of factors is in green.  P  KDc  BS  BC  KDo Fig. 6. Initial CBN of the learner’s model of the subject at the BallKick task. BC stands for BallColor and the rest are as defined in Fig. (2). The dotted nodes belong to ATT KDo and are initially not incorporated in the model. The learner randomly picks values for variables in ATT KDo  Fig. 5. Trend in KLOUT (θpredefined ∣∣θlearned ). Red points depict Experiments at which the learner incorporated an attribute in the ABM. Green curve shows learning trend for a model initialized with the correct set of factors. This plot shows results from a simulated subject.  B. Model Refinement We programmed the robot to detect balls of any color but only a specific size. If presented with a ball of a different size, the subject wouldn’t detect and thus won’t kick i.e. KDo would be None. Fig. (2) depicts the underlying CBN for the predefined model. The learner starts with a model as depicted in Fig. (6). Initially, ball size and color are part of the Attribute set i.e. the learner choses ball size and color randomly. Using Observations from the experiments, the learner correctly identified the missing variable to be BallSize and learned the Frequency Function for the refined model. The blue curve in Fig. (4) shows the trend in KL Divergence while learning this model. To show that incorporating relevant Attributes yields a model, better representative of the subject, we learned another model including BallSize from the start. The trend in KL Divergence for this model is depicted by the green curve in Fig. (4). As is seen, the model that includes the variable BallSize gets closer to the predefined model. Moreover, post refinement the learning trends for both models are almost the same. We tested in simulation, how our approach fares as the number of Attributes increase. The robot could only detect balls of a certain size and KDo was sampled randomly when playing on Sand. Experiments had noise (10% of the time KDo was sampled randomly). As seen in Fig (5), including all the relevant Attributes gives a better model. More the number of missing factors, more the number of Experiments needed to identify them all. Moreover, it becomes progressively harder. As an Attribute gets included, possible Contexts increase. The active learning algorithm avoids repeating Contexts and thus estimating valid P̂o∣a,c requires more Experiments.  VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK As robots become increasingly ubiquitous the problem of building models of unknown robots becomes all the more relevant. An autonomous repairman may need to test a subject to quickly identify defects. A moderator or a coach robot may need to identify strengths of a particular team member in deciding what tasks to assign it to. To the best of our knowledge, the problem of building models of unknown robots, based on appearance and active experimentation is novel and yet unexplored. We proposed an approach to solve this problem and presented results of experiments with a NAO robot. Even when experiments are noisy, the learner is able to identify relevant factors that dictate the subject’s behavior and build a model of the same. How to utilize these learned models in planning and decision making is a very relevant future direction that we intend to explore. Moreover, we assumed that experimenting with the subject in any Context has the same cost. Depending upon the task this may be quite far from reality. Learning models in such scenarios is another interesting problem. R EFERENCES [1] T. M. Mitchell, P. E. Utgoff, and R. Banerji, “Readings in knowledge acquisition and learning,” B. G. Buchanan and D. C. Wilkins, Eds. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1993, ch. Learning by Experimentation: Acquiring and Refining Problem-solving Heuristics, pp. 504–517. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=170641.170690 [2] Y. Gil, “Acquiring domain knowledge for planning by experimentation,” CARNEGIE-MELLON UNIV PITTSBURGH PA DEPT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE, Tech. Rep., 1992. [3] P. D. Scott and S. Markovitch, “Experience selection and problem choice in an exploratory learning system,” Machine Learning, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 49–67, Aug 1993. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00993060 [4] J. Schmidhuber, “Curious model-building control systems,” in Neural Networks, 1991. 1991 IEEE International Joint Conference on. IEEE, 1991, pp. 1458–1463. [5] H. J. S. Feder, J. J. Leonard, and C. M. Smith, “Adaptive mobile robot navigation and mapping,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 650–668, 1999. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/02783649922066484 [6] F. Bourgault, A. A. Makarenko, S. B. Williams, B. Grocholsky, and H. F. Durrant-Whyte, “Information based adaptive robotic exploration,” in in Proceedings IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS, 2002, pp. 540–545. [7] C. Stachniss and W. Burgard, “Exploring unknown environments with mobile robots using coverage maps,” in Proceedings of the 18th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, ser. IJCAI’03. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2003, pp. 1127–1132. [Online]. Available: http: //dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1630659.1630821 [8] S. Tong and D. Koller, “Active learning for parameter estimation in bayesian networks,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, ser. NIPS’00. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2000, pp. 626–632. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3008751.3008842 [9] D. Heckerman, D. Geiger, and D. M. Chickering, “Learning bayesian networks: The combination of knowledge and statistical data,” Machine Learning, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 197–243, Sep 1995. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022623210503

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
