Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_4307

Abstract:
What Is The Collision Probability And How To Compute It  arXiv:1711.07060v2 [cs.SY] 14 Jan 2018  Richard Altendorfer and Christoph Wilkmann  Abstract—We revisit the computation of probability of collision in the context of automotive collision avoidance (the estimation of a potential collision is also referred to as conflict detection in other contexts). After reviewing existing approaches to the definition and computation of collision probability we argue that the fundamental quantity that is required to answer a question like ”What is the probability of collision within the next three seconds?” is a collision probability rate. We derive a general expression for the distribution of the collision probability rate and demonstrate that it exactly reproduces distributions obtained by large-scale Monte-Carlo simulations. This expression is valid for arbitrary prediction models including process noise. We derive an approximation for the distribution of the collision probability rate that can be computed on an embedded platform. In order to efficiently sample this probability rate distribution for determination of its characteristic shape an adaptive method to obtain the sampling points is proposed. The probability of collision is then obtained by one-dimensional numerical integration over the time period of interest. We also argue that temporal collision measures such as time-to-collision should not be calculated as separate or even prerequisite quantities but that they are properties of the distribution of the collision probability rate.  we derive a general expression valid for arbitrary prediction models including process noise. Inclusion of process noise is crucial for collision avoidance systems since it allows to encode the uncertainty in the relative motion of the host and the colliding vehicle. This uncertainty is particularly relevant for predictions over several seconds where it is unknown whether the colliding vehicle keeps its motion, accelerates or slows down, or whether the host vehicle driver perceives the risk and slows down, for example. The basis of our derivations are the distributions pt (x, y, ẋ, ẏ, ẍ, ÿ), t ∈ ∆T of the predicted relative state ξ − (t) of the colliding vehicle. The predicted state ξ − (t) is a nonstationary stochastic process. In the remainder of this paper the time dependence of ξ − (t) and its elements will be suppressed, however the temporal dependence of probability distributions will be indicated by p → pt where appropriate. In the next section Monte-Carlo simulations of two collision scenarios are performed and it is shown that the result is naturally represented by a collision probability rate.  I. INTRODUCTION  II. T HE COLLISION PROBABILITY GROUND TRUTH : LARGE - SCALE M ONTE -C ARLO SIMULATIONS  The implementation of a collision mitigation or collision avoidance system requires in general the computation of a collision probability in order to assess the criticality of the current traffic situation as well as its evolution in the shortterm future. Sometimes, in a separate calculation, see e. g. [1],[2] an estimate of the time-to-collision (TTC) is computed. There are two fundamentally different approaches to computing a collision probability that are known to the authors: 1) probability of the spatial overlap of the host vehicle with the colliding vehicle’s probability distribution, see e. g. [3], [4], and 2) probability of penetrating a boundary around the host vehicle, see e. g. [5],[6]. There is currently no satisfying way to compute the collision probability over a time period: there is a heuristic proposal to pick the maximal collision probability over that period as the collision probability for that time period [5],[1], and there is a rather involved calculation valid only for piecewise linear trajectories penetrating a line interval to directly compute the collision probability over a time period while ignoring process noise [6]. In the following we will derive an expression of the probability of penetrating a boundary around the host vehicle in a time period ∆T = [t1 , t2 ]. This will be the result of the temporal integration of the probability rate for which R. Altendorfer is with Driver Assistance Systems, ZF TRW, Germany  richard.altendorfer@zf.com C.  Wilkmann  is  with  RWTH  Christoph.Wilkmann@rwth-aachen.de  Aachen,  Germany  In order to obtain ground truth data for the collision probability Monte-Carlo simulations are performed. The target vehicle on a possibly colliding path with the host vehicle is modeled by the state vector ξ = (x y ẋ ẏ ẍ ÿ)> and the dynamical system as specified in appendix B. Accelerations are deliberately included in the state in order to demonstrate that accelerated motions can be handled. The target vehicle is chosen to be detected by a radar sensor mounted at the middle of the front bumper of the host vehicle with standard radar measurements also specified in app. B. The starting point for an individual simulation is a sample point in state space ξi− where the target vehicle is some distance away from the host vehicle - either directly in front or coming from the right side, see fig. 1. This sample point is drawn from a multivariate Gaussian distribution characterized by its mean vector and covariance matrix. The covariance matrix is taken from steady state1 at this mean vector using the discrete algebraic Riccati equation (25) as detailed in app. B. An instance ξi− of an initial state of the target vehicle is − drawn as a sample of N (ξ − ; µ− ξ , P∞ ). This state is predicted using the stochastic state equation (22) until it crosses the host vehicle boundary or a certain time limit is exceeded. The time until the crossing is recorded and a new simulation with a new sample of initial conditions is started. Examples of colliding 1 Strictly speaking there is no steady state at those points since the system is non-linear and the relative speed is not zero. Nevertheless the solution of the Riccati equation is still representative if the filter settles within a smaller time period than the time period in which the state changes significantly.  trajectories starting from an initial position in front of the host vehicle are depicted in fig. 1. We have performed simulations of Ntraj = 1 · 107 trajectories for the two starting points. The result is represented by a histogram of the number of collisions that occur within a histogram bin, i. e. time interval, with respect to time. Hence simulating colliding trajectories naturally leads to a collision probability rate. An example is given in fig. 2 where the bins are normalized by the total number of trajectories Ntraj and the chosen bin width of dt = 0.05s to obtain a collision probability rate. In addition, the collision probability rate integrated by simple midpoint quadrature from 0 to time t is shown. In this example the probability of collision with the target vehicle reaches a threshold of 40%, for example, within the first 4.88s. The asymptotic value of the collision probability as t → ∞ indicates the overall probability of collision over all times. The main contribution of this paper will be to derive formulae that reproduce this collision probability and collision probability rate. In the following two sections we will review existing approaches to computing a collision probability. III. C OLLISION PROBABILITY FROM 2D SPATIAL OVERLAP This is the probability of the spatial overlap between the host vehicle and the colliding vehicle as proposed in [3], [4]. In [3] the variables of the relevant probability distribution are either defined by the relative two-dimensional position and relative orientation (x, y, ψ), or by the distribution of the difference of independent probability distributions of global two-dimensional position and orientation as in [4]. It is not explained how higher order derivatives necessary for prediction such as ẋ, ẏ, ... have been dealt with (e. g. by marginalization). Then in [3] the collision probability is obtained as the integral over the pdf of relative position and orientation over a collision volume D ZZZ PC (t) = p (x, y, ψ) dxdydψ (1) x,y,ψ∈D  which in turn is approximated as the convolution of independent probability distributions of global two-dimensional position of both host and colliding vehicle - orientation is ignored. Note that even this two-dimensional integral, i. e. the cumulative distribution function of a bivariate Gaussian, cannot be solved in closed form; however, numerical approximation schemes exist [7]. By further ignoring the x−y-covariance the multivariate Gaussian decouples so that integration can be factored into one-dimensional Gaussian distributions [3]. In [4], the collision probability is computed as the integral of the product of the two global distributions. A problem of deriving a collision probability from 2D spatial overlap is that this approach directly yields a collision probability for a specific time, see fig. 3. Hence it does not allow to answer the question ”What is the probability of collision within the next three seconds?” because integration of the collision probability over time does not yield a collision probability over a certain time period as already pointed out  in [6]. In particular, time is not a random variable that can be marginalized over and the integral over a time interval ∆T : R P (t)dt as in [8] has dimension of time and does not ∆T C constitute a probability. A rather heuristic proposal to solve this problem has been to pick the maximal collision probability over a time period as the collision probability for that period [5],[1]. Another issue is that the collision probability is determined by the presence of the colliding object anywhere inside the entire area of the host vehicle. It could, for example be in the center of the host vehicle, which would be a catastrophic event and much too late for collision avoidance. What we are actually interested in is the probability of the colliding object touching and/or penetrating the boundary of the host vehicle. This requires a different approach than integration over state space as in eq. (1). Some existing approaches that consider a boundary instead of a state space volume for the computation of a collision probability are reviewed in the next section. IV. C OLLISION PROBABILITY AT BOUNDARY A probabilistic approach to computing the probability of penetrating a boundary - instead of the probability of a spatial overlap - has been proposed in [6]. Their method is based on the probability density of a so-called time-to-go which is the time to cross a straight, axis-aligned boundary assuming a constant velocity model. The derived collision probability refers to a time period and not just a time instant. It is only applicable to straight paths or combinations of piecewise straight paths and does not take into account more complex geometries such as a rectangle. Another limitation is that process noise is not considered. This method is an extension of the approach discussed [5] in the sense that the uncertainty of the initial condition is included. A different, semi-probabilistic approach is taken in [2] where the time-to-collision of a 2D constant velocity model with respect to the host vehicle’s front boundary at x = 0 is computed. This TTC is then inserted into the prediction equation to arrive at     x + tẋ 0 x   y + tẏ     → y − ẋ ẏ  (2)  ẋ   ẋ  ẏ ẏ Then the second component of this vector is singled out and interpreted as a probabilistic expression. Its distribution as a function of the initial condition is determined by MonteCarlo simulation and integrated over the host vehicle’s front boundary to obtain a collision probability at the TTC. As in the previous approaches more complex geometries as well as process noise are not considered. The approaches discussed above all rely on a time-togo or TTC as a prerequisite quantity - either probabilistic or non-probabilistic. As we will show in the next section, such a temporal collision measure is not necessary for the computation of a collision probability. Instead, we show that the fundamental quantity to compute the collision probability is the collision probability rate.  10  10  shape of initial x-y covariance sample collision trajectories  x [m]  5  x [m]  5  shape of initial x-y covariance sample collision trajectories  0  0  -5  -5 -10  -5  0  5  10  -10  -5  0  y [m]  5  10  y [m]  (a) The target is coming from the front (µx , µy ) = (10, 0) m  (b) The target is coming from the front right (µx , µy ) = (10, 10) m  0.09  0.5 collision probability rate collision probability  0.45  P(t) from 2D overlap TTC x  0.08  0.4  0.07  0.35  0.06  0.3  P(t) []  collision probability rate [s -1 ], collision probability []  Fig. 1. Samples of simulated colliding trajectories for vehicles initially coming from the front (a) and from the front right (b) side. The number of drawn trajectories colliding with the edges of the host vehicle indicate for the ratio of colliding the respective edge compared to the total number of collisions.  0.25  0.05 0.04  0.2  0.03  0.15 0.1  0.02  0.05  0.01  0 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  0 2  3  4  t [s]  Fig. 2. Collision probability rate as a function of time for (µx , µy ) = (10, 0) m based upon Ntraj = 1·107 trajectories. Also shown is the collision probability obtained by integrating over time.  V. C OLLISION PROBABILITY RATE AT BOUNDARY  5  6  We have seen that simulating colliding trajectories naturally gives us a probability rate and that a collision probability rate allows us to perform temporal integration to arrive at a collision probability for an extended period of time. The expression for the collision probability rate will be derived on the basis of a theorem on boundary crossings of stochastic vector processes. For sake of lucidity of arguments we restrict ourselves to one of the four straight boundaries of the host vehicle, see fig. 4; extension to the other boundaries is straightforward. We start with the prediction of the pdf of the state vector (see eq. (22) in app. B) of a colliding object from an initial condition at t = 0 to a future time t where process noise  8  Fig. 3. Example of collision probability over time.  (parametrized by its covariance matrix Q) is explicitly incorporated: t,Q  A. Derivation of collision probability rate  7  t [s]  prediction : p0 (x, y, ẋ, ẏ, ẍ, ÿ) 7−→ pt (x, y, ẋ, ẏ, ẍ, ÿ)  (3)  In order to cast the following expressions into a more readable format we define a probability distribution with fewer variables by marginalization (see app. A for marginalization of Gaussian densities) over the accelerations: Z Z pt (x, y, ẋ, ẏ) := pt (x, y, ẋ, ẏ, ẍ, ÿ)dẍdÿ. (4) ẍ∈R ÿ∈R  What we are looking for is an expression for dPC+ (Γf ront , t) dt dP +  (5)  i. e. the collision probability rate dtC with dimension [s−1 ] at time t for the front boundary Γf ront . The superscript + is  used to denote that this probability rate is referring to boundary crossings from outside to inside. We start with the probability of the colliding object being inside an infinitesimally thin strip at the boundary Γf ront (see fig. 4) Z Z Z dPC+ (Γf ront , t) = pt (x0 , y, ẋ, ẏ) dxdydẋdẏ y∈Iy ẋ≤0 ẏ∈R  Here, since we are only interested in colliding trajectories, i. e. trajectories that cross the boundary from outside to inside, we do not fully marginalize over ẋ but restrict the x−velocity to negative values at the boundary. A collision probability rate can now be obtained by dividing the unintegrated differential dx by dt; in that way the “flow” of the target vehicle through the host vehicle boundary is described at x0 with velocity ẋ ≤ 0: Z Z Z dPC+ (Γf ront , t) = − pt (x0 , y, ẋ, ẏ) ẋ dydẋdẏ (6) dt y∈Iy ẋ≤0 ẏ∈R  Here, since the velocity is restricted to negative values a minus sign is required to obtain a positive rate. This intuitive derivation can be corroborated as well as generalized in a mathematically rigorous way by invoking a result on crossings of a surface element by a stochastic vector process described in the following box:  x Front boundary:  front  yL  yR  dx Infinitesimally thin strip  x0  Iy  left  y right  Host vehicle  rear Fig. 4. Horizontal view of the host vehicle rectangle with local Cartesian coordinate system and coordinate origin at the middle of the front boundary characterized by x = 0 and y ∈ [yL , yR ] = Iy .  In order to apply eq. (7) to the front boundary Γf ront as in fig. 4 we need to perform the following identifications:2 ζ(t) = (x, y)  >  Γf ront = {(x, y) : x − x0 = 0 ∧ y ∈ Iy } g(x) = x − x0 >  nΓf ront (x) = (−1, 0) ds(x) = dy  (9)  Probability rate and probability for boundary crossings Hence we obtain for the intermediate expectation operator of stochastic vector processes Here two expressions are given for the probability rate and n o the probability for crossings of a surface by a stochastic E hnΓf ront (x), ζ̇(t)i+ ζ(t) = x = vector process that were stated in [9] and generalized in Z Z [10]. − ẋ pt (ẋ, ẏ|x, y) dẋdẏ (10) Let ζ(t) be a continuously differentiable n−dimensional ẋ≤0 ẏ∈R vector stochastic process with values x ∈ Rn . The probn ability densities pt (x) and pt (ẋ, x) exist where ẋ ∈ R dP + are the values of ζ̇(t). Let the region S ∈ Rn be bounded and the collision entry rate dtC as in eq. (7) becomes by the smooth surface ∂S defined by the smooth function   g as ∂S = {x : g(x) = 0} and let Γ ⊆ ∂S be a subset Z Z Z + dPC of that surface. Let nΓ (x) be the surface normal at x (Γf ront , t) = −  ẋ pt (ẋ, ẏ|x0 , y)dẋdẏpt (x0 , y)dy dt directed towards the interior of the region. + − y∈Iy ẋ≤0 ẏ∈R Then the entry rate dPdt and the exit rate dPdt through Γ Z Z Z at time t is given by =− ẋ pt (x0 , y, ẋ, ẏ) dydẋdẏ (11) Z n o ± dP y∈Iy ẋ≤0 ẏ∈R (Γ, t) = E hnΓ (x), ζ̇(t)i± ζ(t) = x pt (x)ds(x) dt x∈Γ which is identical to eq. (6). Because of the simple projection (7) of the velocity onto the surface normal hnΓf ront (x), ζ̇(t)i+ = where h·, ·i is the scalar product, ds(x) is an infinitesimal ẋ for the front boundary this expression could be further surface element of Γ at x and (·)+ := max(·, 0) and simplified by marginalization over ẏ. − (·) := − min(·, 0). The computation above applies to the front boundary of The probability of entries and exits through the surface the host vehicle. In order to cover all four boundaries of the subset Γ within a time interval ∆T = [t1 , t2 ] is given by host vehicle the collision probabilities of the four boundaries Zt2 can be added since the crossing events through the different dP ± ± P (Γ, t1 , t2 ) = (Γ, t) dt (8) dt t1  These results hold for general non-stationary processes.  2 Unlike in the box above we now do not distinguish anymore between a stochastic process and its values.  boundaries are mutually exclusive. Hence the total collision probability rate is given by dPC+ (Γhost dt  vehicle , t)  = dPC+ dPC+ (Γf ront , t) + (Γright , t)+ dt dt dPC+ dPC+ (Γlef t , t) + (Γrear , t) (12) dt dt  The collision probability over a certain time period can then be obtained by one-dimensional numerical integration over time as in eq. (8). The derivation above relied on a couple of assumptions. Here we want to comment on whether these assumptions pose any restrictions on the application of the derived collision probability rate on more general scenarios. a) Rectangular boundary: The boundary of the host vehicle is modeled as a rectangle, however by the theorem stated in the box above the formula can be applied to any subsets of smooth surfaces, including higher dimensional ones for three-dimensional objects, for example. b) Point distribution: The relative state of the colliding object is modeled by a point distribution. In many ADAS applications the object state is indeed modeled by a single reference point and possibly additional attributes such as width and length. This is partly due to the fact that the estimation of extended objects is still an active area of research, for an overview see [11]. On the other hand, our approach can be executed in parallel for distributions of points representative of the colliding vehicle’s geometry [12] or for individual point distributions of a Gaussian mixture model, for example. c) State vector: the state vector ξ of the colliding object needs to contain 2D relative position (x y)> and 2D relative velocity (ẋ ẏ)> . In many ADAS applications the target vehicle dynamics is modeled directly in relative coordinates. For state vectors that do not contain the 2D relative velocity but other quantities such as the velocity over ground (see e. g. [13]), a probabilistic transformation to relative velocities must be performed first.  B. Implementation For further computations - especially in the Gaussian case - it will be convenient to marginalize over ẏ and rewrite eq. (11) in terms of a conditional probability: Z Z dPC+ (Γf ront , t) = −pt (x0 ) ẋ pt (ẋ, y|x0 ) dẋdy (13) dt ẋ≤0 y∈Iy  For general distribution functions the integral in eq. (13) cannot be computed in closed form and numerical integration methods must be used. Even in the bivariate Gaussian case there is no explicit solution known to the authors. However, by a Taylor-expansion with respect to the off-diagonal element of the inverse covariance matrix of p(y, ẋ|x0 ) as detailed in app. C, the integral can be factorized into one-dimensional  Gaussians and solved in terms of the standard normal onedimensional cumulative distribution function Φ. To zeroth order the integration yields: dPC+ (Γf ront , t) = − N (x0 ; µx , σx ) dt    −µẋ|x0 · µẋ|x0 Φ σ̃ẋ|x0   2 N (0; µẋ|x0 , σ̃ẋ|x0 ) σ̃ẋ|x 0  · −      yR − µy|x0 yL − µy|x0 · Φ −Φ σ̃y|x0 σ̃y|x0 !  + O Σ−1 (14) 12 Here, if Σ ∈ q R2×2 is the covariance q matrix of p(ẋ, y|x0 ), |Σ| |Σ| then σ̃ẋ|x0 = Σyy and σ̃y|x0 = Σẋẋ , see app. C where the integration has also been carried out to first order in Σ−1 12 . Expression (14) can be computed on an embedded platform using the complementary error function available in the C math library.3 In the next section an extensive numerical study using the above formulae and Monte-Carlo simulations is presented. VI. N UMERICAL S TUDY A numerical study has been carried out to address the following questions: • Is the expression for calculating the collision probability rate from eq. (11) consistent with the results from large scale Monte-Carlo simulations? • How does the approximation (14) perform in comparison with the numerical integration of the derived expression for the collision probability rate? • Can the computational effort be reduced by increasing ∆t and still accurately calculating the collision probability rate? A. Is the expression of collision probability rate corroborated by Monte-Carlo simulation? In order to address the first question, large scale MonteCarlo simulations as described in sec. II have been performed. Collision probability rates were calculated based on 1 · 107 sample trajectories for each of the two initial conditions − − − Ni (ξ − ; µ− ξ i , P∞ ), where µξ i is shown in table I, and P∞ is calculated using eq. (25) with the matrices defined in appendix B. The two initial conditions (i ∈ {f, f r}) describe a starting point directly in front of the host vehicle, and in front to the right at an angle of 45 degrees with respect to the host vehicle. Table II shows the number of collisions divided into the respective boundaries of the host vehicle where the impact or boundary crossing occurred for the two different simulations. The resulting histograms of the collision probability rates are shown in fig. 5 together with the numerical integration of 3 Φ is related to the error function erf and complementary error function     √ √ erfc by Φ(x) = 21 erfc −x = 12 − 12 erf −x . 2  2  TABLE I M EAN OF INITIAL CONDITIONS FOR M ONTE -C ARLO SIMULATIONS i HH f µ− ξ µ− 10 x [m] µ− 0 y [m]   m µ− −2 ẋ  s  m µ− 0.1 ẏ h s i − m µẍ s2 −0.2 h i m µ− 0.0 ÿ s2  HH  fr 10 10 −2 −1.6 −0.001 −0.01  TABLE II N UMBER OF COLLISIONS AT HOST VEHICLE BOUNDARIES FOR 1 · 107 SIMULATED TRAJECTORIES WITH DIFFERENT INITIAL CONDITIONS  PP PP i Γj P P f ront right lef t rear P  f  fr 106  4.46 · 36874 6196 0 4.50 · 106  1.40 · 106 2.88 · 106 2 0 4.28 · 106  the collision probability rate as well as the difference between the simulation and the calculation. The difference is calculated by evaluating the collision probability rate at the same time as the mid points of the histogram bins. As can be seen in fig. 5, the numerical integration of the collision probability rate accurately reproduces the collision probability rate from the Monte-Carlo simulations. In order to illustrate the increase in accuracy as a function of the number of simulated trajectories, fig. 6 shows the differences between simulation and numerical integration with increasing amount of simulated trajectories for collisions at the right side of the host vehicle in the front scenario. B. Does the approximation by Taylor-expansion accurately reproduce the exact result? In order to be able to compute the collision probability rate efficiently on an embedded platform, an approximation of the exact expression (eq. (11)) was derived in eq. (14). Fig. 7 shows the differences between this approximation as well as a higher-order approximation where the pdf is Taylor-expanded to linear order with respect to the off-diagonal element of the inverse covariance matrix around 0 (see app. C) and the numerical integration. As can be seen, the higher-order approximation reduces the error to a large extent while it can be still calculated efficiently on an embedded platform using the complementary error function. C. An adaptive method to sample the collision probability rate over ∆T Above, the approximations of the exact expression for calculating the collision probability rate were evaluated at small time increments of ∆t = 0.05s. Thus, the calculation over the entire time period of interest (e.g 8s as used above)  and for every relevant object could induce a substantial computational burden. In order to reduce this effort, we propose an adaptive method to sample the collision probability rate function with variable – in general larger – time increments ∆t over the time period of interest while still capturing the characteristics of this function, in particular its shape around the maximum. The sampling starting point is based upon the non-probabilistic TTCs for single, straight boundaries using a one-dimensional constant acceleration model. Those TTCs for penetrating the front, left, and right boundaries can then be used as initial condition for the start of the sampling iteration of the collision probability rate.4 To reproduce the collision probability rate without substantial loss of information but with lower computational effort, the following algorithm is proposed: • Calculate the times of penetrating the front, left and right boundaries based upon the non-probabilistic TTCs described above. • Calculate the collision probability rate for each time. Pick the time with the maximum collision probability rate as a starting point. • Move left and right from this starting point with equally spaced ∆t1 > ∆t and calculate the collision probability rate at these time points. Stop on each side if the collision dP + probability rate has reached a lower threshold of dtC low . • While moving left and right, check if the slope of the collision probability rate has changed its sign. • On every slope sign change, calculate the collision probability rate around this time interval with decreased ∆t2 < ∆t1 . Examples of this implementation can be found in fig. 8 for the front and front-right scenarios. It can be seen that the collision probability rate as well as the integrated collision probability over a certain time period can be determined with considerably fewer sampling points while still capturing the shape of the functions to be approximated. VII. W HAT IS THE TTC? There are various approaches to computing the TTC. In [2], the TTC is computed as the mean of the time distribution of reaching the x0 boundary of the car as a function of the initial conditions assuming a constant speed model; process noise is not considered. This is also presented in [1]; in addition the time distribution for reaching the x0 boundary as a function of the initial conditions assuming a constant acceleration model is calculated by Monte-Carlo-simulation and its mean values depending upon the initial condition setup is given - again, process noise for this motion model is not considered. However these simple temporal quantities do not fully capture the characteristics of horizontal plane collision scenarios as will be shown below. In fig. 9 the collision probability rate is plotted together with the constant acceleration motion TTCs for the x- and ydirections for an initial position at the front, right side. Both 4 Due to the low probability of penetration the non-probabilistic TTC for the rear boundary is not considered for the determination of the sampling starting point.  0.5  0.5 Monte-Carlo histogram numerical integration of exact expression  0.45  0.4  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  0.4  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  Monte-Carlo histogram numerical integration of exact expression  0.45  0.35 0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15  0.35 0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15  0.1  0.1  0.05  0.05  0  0 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  2  3  4  5  t [s]  (a) Front scenario total collision probability rate  8  10-3  2 numerical integration - Monte-Carlo histogram  numerical integration - Monte-Carlo histogram  1.5  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  1.5  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  7  (b) Front-Right scenario total collision probability rate  10-3  2  6  t [s]  1  0.5  0  -0.5  1  0.5  0  -0.5  -1  -1  -1.5  -1.5 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  2  3  4  5  t [s]  6  7  8  t [s]  (c) Front scenario total collision probability rate difference  (d) Front-Right scenario total collision probability rate difference  Fig. 5. The histogram resulting from Monte-Carlo simulation is shown together with the numerical integration of the expression for the collision probability rate for front (a) and front-right (b) scenario. The differences between simulation and numerical integration are calculated by evaluating the numerical integration at the same time as the mid points of the histogram bins and shown in (c) and (d).  10-3  5 4.5  2 1.5  4  collision probability rate [s-1 ]  collision probability rate [s-1 ]  3 2.5  3.5 3 2.5 2 1.5  3.5 3 2.5 2 1.5  1  1  1  0.5  0.5  0.5  0  0 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  0 1  2  3  t [s]  (a) Simulation based on 1 · 105 trajectories.  Monte-Carlo histogram numerical integration of exact expression  4.5  4  3.5  10-3  5 Monte-Carlo histogram numerical integration of exact expression  4.5  4  collision probability rate [s-1 ]  10-3  5 Monte-Carlo histogram numerical integration of exact expression  4  5  6  7  8  t [s]  (b) Simulation based on 1 · 106 trajectories.  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  t [s]  (c) Simulation based on 1 · 107 trajectories.  Fig. 6. The collision probability rate for the right side of the host vehicle for the front scenario is shown comparing the results from Monte-Carlo simulation with increasing amount of simulated trajectories (a)-(c) with the calculated collision probability rate of the numerical integration of the expression for the collision probability rate eq. (11). The process noise PSD for both coordinates is q̃x = q̃y = 1.0125m2 s−5 .  TTCs in x- and y-direction are significantly different from the time of the maximum of the collision probability rate. Since the bulk of the colliding trajectories go through two sides front and right (see also fig. 1b) - only a collision model that takes into account the full geometry of the host vehicle can yield accurate results. In fig. 10 the collision probability rate is plotted together with the constant acceleration motion TTCs (i. e. their mean  values) for the x-direction for an initial position that is straight in front of the vehicle hence almost all trajectories pass through the front boundary. Nevertheless the maximum of the probability rate occurs before the mean of the TTC. This difference increases as the process noise increases as can be seen in fig. 11. This is due to the fact that the time of the maximum is strongly influenced by the factor pt (x0 ) in eq. (13); an increased level of process noise leads to a faster  10-7 approx. - num. integration higher order approx. - num. integration  4  approx. - num. integration higher order approx. - num. integration  10  2  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  10-4  12  0  -2  -4  -6  8  6  4  2  0  -8  -2  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  2  3  4  5  t [s]  6  7  8  t [s]  (a) Front scenario  (b) Front-Right scenario  Fig. 7. Differences between numerical integration and two approximations of the exact expression of the collision probability rate (eq. (11)). The first approximation (solid line) ignores the non-diagonal entries of the covariance matrix while the second approximation (dashed line) Taylor-expands the pdf to linear order with respect to the off-diagonal elements of the inverse covariance matrix around 0.  0.35 starting point with increment of 0.5s with increment of 0.2s around max linear-order approximation linear-order approximation with reduced samples  0.4  starting point with increment of 0.5s with increment of 0.2s around max linear-order approximation linear-order approximation with reduced samples  0.3  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  0.5  0.3  0.2  0.25  0.2  0.15  0.1  0.1 0.05  0  0  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  2  3  4  t [s]  5  6  7  8  t [s]  (a) Front scenario collision probability rate  (b) Front-Right scenario collision probability  0.6  0.5 Monte-Carlo simulation linear-order approximation linear-order approximation with reduced samples  0.5  Monte-Carlo simulation linear-order approximation linear-order approximation with reduced samples  0.45  collision probability []  collision probability []  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.35 0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1  0.1  0.05  0  0  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  t [s]  (c) Front scenario collision probability rate  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  t [s]  (d) Front-Right scenario collision probability  Fig. 8. Examples for reducing the number of calculations to determine the collision probability rate and the integrated collision probability. (a) and (c) show the results for the front scenario and (b) and (d) for the front-right scenario. The used parameters in these examples are ∆t1 = 0.5s, ∆t2 = 0.2s and + dPC dt low  = 0.01. In doing so the number of calculations for the collision probability rate could be reduced from 120 (using a fixed sampling increment of ∆t = 0.05s) to 13 for the front scenario and to 16 for the front-right scenario, respectively.  spreading of pt (x0 ) and hence the maximum is reached earlier. The above discussion shows that temporal collision characteristics are encoded by the distribution of the collision  probability rate which incorporates the full geometry of the host vehicle as well as process noise during prediction. A quantity called TTC could then be defined as one of the  0.18 collision probability rate TTC x  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  0.16  TTC y  0.14 0.12 0.1  0.14 collision probability rate TTC x  0.12  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  characteristic properties of this distribution such as the mode or the mean or the median or as a property of the integrated collision probability rate, e. g. the time when the collision probability exceeds a certain threshold.  0.1  0.08  0.06  0.04  0.02  0.08 0 2  0.06  3  4  5  6  7  8  t [s] 0.04 0.02 0 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  Fig. 11. Collision probability rate and mean of constant acceleration TTC for an initial condition almost in front of the vehicle: (x, y) = (10, 0)m. The process noise PSD for both coordinates has been increased to q̃x = q̃y = 0.1013m2 s−5 .  t [s]  Fig. 9. Collision probability rate and mean of constant acceleration TTC for an initial condition at the front, right side of the vehicle: (x, y) = (10, 10)m. The process noise PSD for both coordinates is q̃x = q̃y = 0.0405m2 s−5 .  0.4 collision probability rate TTC  collision probability rate [s -1 ]  0.35  x  0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1  geometries such as a single line segment do not properly characterize the true collision probability rate distributions. The ground truth collision probability rate distribution has been obtained by Monte-Carlo simulations and reproduced by our derived collision probability rate expression. We have also implemented an approximation of the collision probability rate expression that can be computed in closed form on an embedded platform. This approximate formula provided collision probability rate distributions that are almost indistinguishable from distributions obtained by numerical integration for the scenarios considered in this paper. In order to efficiently sample this probability rate distribution for determination of its characteristic shape we have worked out an adaptive method to obtain the sampling points. IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Helpful clarifications by Prof. Georg Lindgren are gratefully acknowledged.  0.05 0 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  t [s]  Fig. 10. Collision probability rate and mean of constant acceleration TTC for an initial condition almost in front of the vehicle: (x, y) = (10, 0)m. The process noise PSD for both coordinates is q̃x = q̃y = 0.0101m2 s−5 .  VIII. C ONCLUSIONS As detailed in our literature review a common approach to compute a collision probability is via temporal collision measures such as time-to-collision or time-to-go. In this paper, however, we have pursued a different approach, namely the derivation of a collision probability rate without temporal collision measures as an intermediate or prerequisite quantity. A collision probability rate then affords the provision of a collision probability over an extended period of time by temporal integration. We have also shown that computations of TTCs using assumptions based on the shape of trajectories or the prediction dynamics (disregard of process noise), or on simple  A PPENDIX A. Partitioned Gaussian densities In many calculations in stochastic estimation there is a need to marginalize over certain elements of a state vector or to obtain lower dimensional distributions by conditioning with respect to certain elements. For these calculations the original state vector ξ can be rearranged or partitioned such that xr denotes the remaining state vector and xm denotes the states to be marginalized over or which are used for conditioning.   xr ξ= (15) xm Hence the mean vector µ and covariance matrix Σ can be partitioned into     Σrr Σrm µr µ= , Σ= (16) µm Σ> rm Σmm The following two well-known results on multivariate Gaussians are used in this paper:  a) Marginalization: The probability density of ξ marginalized with respect to xm is Z p (xr ) = p (ξ) dxm = N (xr ; µr , Σrr ) (17) xm  b) Conditioning: The probability density of ξ conditioned on xm is  covariance matrix R(tk ). The measurement function h is given by typical radar measurements (r, φ, ṙ), i. e.  p x2 + y 2 y   h(ξ) = arctan x  x ẋ+y ẏ √ 2 2 x +y  (24) ∂h ∂ξ  p (ξ|xm ) = p (xr |xm ) = N xr ; µr|m , Σr|m    (18)  with µr|m = µr + Σrm Σ−1 mm (xm − µm )  (19)  > Σr|m = Σrr − Σrm Σ−1 mm Σrm  (20)  and H = is its linearization. − The covariance matrix P∞ at steady state can be determined by the the discrete algebraic Riccati equation using the matrices defined above: − − > P∞ = F P∞ F − > − > −F P∞ H HP∞ H +R  −1  − > HP∞ F  +Q B. Dynamical system The vehicle kinematics is characterized by a sixdimensional state vector > ξ = x y ẋ ẏ ẍ ÿ (21)  (25)  C. Evaluation of the 2D integral for the collision probability rate The integral Z Z ẋ pt (y, ẋ|x0 ) dydẋ (26)  The dynamical model is a discrete-time equivalent white noise jerk model (see e. g. [14])  ẋ≤0 y∈Iy  in eq. (13) for the collision probability rate cannot be computed in closed form if the covariance matrix of pt (y, ẋ|x0 ) is not diagonal. Instead of a full numerical 2D integration where scheme we Taylor-expand the 2D pdf with respect to the off  ∆t2k diagonal element of the inverse covariance matrix around 0 to 1 0 ∆tk 0 0 2  2  a certain order and then integrate. For a general 2D Gaussian ∆t k  0 1 0 ∆tk 0 2   pdf p(x1 , x2 ) = N (ξ; µ, Σ) with ξ = (x1 , x2 )> and mean µ  1 0 ∆tk 0  F (∆tk ) = 0 0  and covariance matrix Σ the Taylor-expansion to linear order 0 0 0 1 0 ∆tk    with respect to Σ−1 12 reads 0 0 0 0 1 0      q q 0 0 0 0 0 1 N (ξ; µ, Σ) = N x1 ; µ1 , Σ̃11 N x2 ; µ2 , Σ̃22    q with ∆tk = tk+1 −tk . The corresponding predicted covariance − −1 matrix is denoted by P (tk+1 ). The process noise ν(tk ) · −Σ12 (x1 − µ1 )N x1 ; µ1 , Σ̃11 is modeled by a white, mean-free Gaussian process with    q covariance matrix Q · (x2 − µ2 )N x2 ; µ2 , Σ̃22  5  ∆t4 ∆t3 ∆tk k k q̃ 0 q̃x 0 q̃x 0  20 x 8 6 2   ∆t5 ∆t4 ∆t3 +O (Σ−1 k k k  0 12 ) q̃ 0 q̃ 0 q̃  ξ − (tk+1 ) = F (∆tk )ξ(tk ) + ν(tk )   4  ∆tk q̃  Q(∆tk ) =  8 x  0  3  ∆tk  6 q̃x 0  20  y  ∆t3 k q̃x 3  0 ∆t4 k 8  q̃y  0 ∆t3 k q̃y 6  0 ∆t2 k q̃x 2  0  (22)  y  8  ∆t2 k q̃x 2  0 ∆t3 k 3  q̃y  0  0  ∆tk q̃x  ∆t2 k q̃y 2  0  6  0  y      q̃ y  2  0  ∆tk q̃y ∆t2 k  where q̃x , q̃y are the jerk power spectral densities (PSD) in xand y-direction of the underlying continuous noise process. Discrete-time equivalent noise – as opposed to discrete-time counterpart noise – has been deliberately chosen because the power spectral density as characterizing noise parameter is independent of ∆tk . Hence ∆tk in prediction can be changed arbitrarily without adjusting the power spectral density. The measurement model is z(tk ) = h(ξ − (tk )) + r(tk )  (23)  where z(tk ) is the measurement and the measurement noise r(tk ) is modeled by a white, mean-free Gaussian process with  Σ12 with Σ−1 12 = − |Σ| and Σ̃11 = the following integral  |Σ| Σ22 , Σ̃22  =  |Σ| Σ11 .  This leads to  Zx1u Zx2u x1 p(x1 , x2 )dx1 dx2 = x1l x2l  !  #x1u q x1 − µ1 p − Σ̃11 N x1 ; µ1 , Σ̃11 · 2Σ̃11 x1l " !#x2u 1 x2 − µ2 · erf p 2 2Σ̃22 x2l " !#x1u   q Σ̃11 x1 − µ1 −1 −Σ12 x1 Σ̃11 N x1 ; µ1 , Σ̃11 − erf p · 2 2Σ̃11 x1l   x2u q  2 · Σ̃22 N x2 ; µ2 , Σ̃22 + O (Σ−1 12 ) "  µ1 erf 2  x2l  We expand with respect to the off-diagonal entry of the inverse covariance since this is the element that prevents factorization into one-dimensional Gaussians. We have checked that Taylor-expansion with respect to the off-diagonal entry of the covariance matrix leads to less accurate results to first order. R EFERENCES [1] J. Jansson and F. Gustafsson, “A framework and automotive application of collision avoidance decision making,” Automatica, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 2347–2351, 2008. [2] M. M. Muntzinger, S. Zuther, and K. Dietmayer, “Probability estimation for an automotive pre-crash application with short filter settling times,” in Proceedings of IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2009, pp. 411– 416. [3] J. Jansson, “Collision avoidance theory: With application to automotive collision mitigation,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping University Electronic Press, 2005. [4] A. Lambert, D. Gruyer, and G. Saint Pierre, “A fast monte carlo algorithm for collision probability estimation,” in Control, Automation, Robotics and Vision, 2008. ICARCV 2008. 10th International Conference on. IEEE, 2008, pp. 406–411. [5] M. Prandini, J. Hu, J. Lygeros, and S. Sastry, “A probabilistic approach to aircraft conflict detection,” IEEE Transactions on intelligent transportation systems, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 199–220, 2000. [6] P.-J. Nordlund and F. Gustafsson, Probabilistic conflict detection for piecewise straight paths. Linköping University Electronic Press, 2008. [7] A. Genz, “Numerical computation of rectangular bivariate and trivariate normal and t probabilities,” Statistics and Computing, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 251–260, 2004. [8] A. Eidehall and L. Petersson, “Statistical threat assessment for general road scenes using monte carlo sampling,” IEEE Transactions on intelligent transportation systems, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 137–147, 2008. [9] Y. K. Belyaev, “On the number of exits across the boundary of a region by a vector stochastic process,” Theory of Probability & Its Applications, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 320–324, 1968. [10] G. Lindgren, “Model processes in nonlinear prediction with application to detection and alarm,” The Annals of Probability, pp. 775–792, 1980. [11] L. Mihaylova, A. Y. Carmi, F. Septier, A. Gning, S. K. Pang, and S. Godsill, “Overview of bayesian sequential monte carlo methods for group and extended object tracking,” Digital Signal Processing, vol. 25, pp. 1–16, 2014. [12] P. Broßeit, M. Rapp, N. Appenrodt, and J. Dickmann, “Probabilistic rectangular-shape estimation for extended object tracking,” in Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2016 IEEE. IEEE, 2016, pp. 279–285. [13] R. Altendorfer, “Observable dynamics and coordinate systems for automotive target tracking,” in Proceedings of IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2009, pp. 741–746. [14] Y. Bar-Shalom, X. R. Li, and T. Kirubarajan, Estimation with Applications to Tracking and Navigation. Wiley, 2001.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
