Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_4510

Abstract:
Popular Conjectures as a Barrier for Dynamic Planar Graph Algorithms Amir Abboud˚  arXiv:1605.03797v1 [cs.DS] 12 May 2016  1  1  and Søren Dahlgaard:2  Stanford University, abboud@cs.stanford.edu University of Copenhagen, soerend@di.ku.dk  2  Abstract The dynamic shortest paths problem on planar graphs asks us to preprocess a planar graph G such that we may support insertions and deletions of edges in G as well as distance queries between any two nodes u, v subject to the constraint that the graph remains planar at all times. This problem has been extensively studied in both the theory and experimental communities over the past decades and gets solved millions of times every day by companies like Google, Microsoft, and Uber. The best known algorithm performs queries and updates in Õpn2{3 q time, based on ideas of a seminal paper by Fakcharoenphol and Rao [FOCS’01]. A p1 ` εq-approximation ? algorithm of Abraham et al. [STOC’12] performs updates and queries in Õp nq time. An algorithm with a more practical Oppoly log nq runtime would be a major breakthrough. However, such runtimes are only known for a p1 ` εq-approximation in a model where only restricted weight updates are allowed due to Abraham et al. [SODA’16], or for easier problems like connectivity. In this paper, we follow a recent and very active line of work on showing lower bounds for polynomial time problems based on popular conjectures, obtaining the first such results for natural problems in planar graphs. Such results were previously out of reach due to the highly non-planar nature of known reductions and the impossibility of “planarizing gadgets”. We introduce a new framework which is inspired by techniques from the literatures on distance labelling schemes and on parameterized complexity. Using our framework, we show that no algorithm for dynamic shortest paths or maximum weight bipartite matching in planar graphs can support both updates and queries in amortized 1 Opn 2 ´ε q time, for ε ą 0, unless the classical all-pairs-shortest-paths problem can be solved in truly subcubic time, which is widely believed to be impossible. We extend these results to obtain strong lower bounds for other related problems as well as for possible trade-offs between query and update time. Interestingly, our lower bounds hold even in very restrictive models where only weight updates are allowed.  ˚  Part of the work was performed while visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, Berkeley, CA. Research partially supported by Virginia Vassilevska Williams’s NSF Grants CCF-1417238 and CCF-1514339, and BSF Grant BSF:2012338. : Part of this work was done while the author was visiting Stanford University. Research partly supported by Mikkel Thorup’s Advanced Grant DFF-0602-02499B from the Danish Council for Independent Research under the Sapere Aude research career programme.  1  Introduction  The dynamic shortest paths problem on planar graphs is to preprocess a planar graph G, e.g. the national road network, so that we are able to efficiently support the following two operations: • At any point, we might insert or remove an edge pu, vq in G, e.g. in case a road gets congested due to an accident. Such updates are subjected to the constraint that the planarity of the graph is not violated. We may also consider another natural variant in which we are only allowed to update the weights of existing edges. • We want to be able to quickly answer queries that ask for the length of the shortest path between two given nodes u and v, in the most current graph G. This is a problem that gets solved millions of times every day by companies like Google, Microsoft, and Uber on graphs such as road networks with many millions of nodes. It is thus a very important question in both theory and practice whether there exists data structures that can perform updates and (especially) queries on graphs with n nodes in polylogarithmic or even nop1q time. Shortest paths problems on planar graphs provide an ideal combination of mathematical simplicity and elegance with faithful modeling of realistic applications of major industrial interest. The literature on the topic is too massive for us to survey in this paper: the current draft of the book “Optimization Problems in Planar Graphs” by Klein and Mozes [42] dedicates four chapters to the algorithmic techniques for shortest paths by the theory community. While near-optimal algorithms are known for most variants of shortest paths on static planar graphs, the dynamic setting has proven much more challenging. Since an s, t-shortest path in a planar graph can be found in near-linear time (linear time for non-negative weights) [39, 28], there is a naïve algorithm for the dynamic problem that spends Õpnq time on queries. After progress on other related problems on dynamic planar graphs [29, 30, 24, 31, 61, 44, 39], the first sublinear bound was obtained in the seminal paper of Fakcharoenphol and Rao [28], which introduced new techniques that led to major results for other problems like Max Flow (even on static graphs) [17, 47]. The amortized time per operation was Opn2{3 log7{3 nq and Opn4{5 log13{5 nq if negative edges are allowed, and follow up works of Klein [43], Italiano et al. [40], and Kaplan et al. [41] reduced the runtime to Opn2{3 log5{3 nq (even allowing negative weights), and 5{3 n most recently, Gawrychowski and Karczmarz [33] reduced it further to Opn2{3 loglog q. In fact 4{3 log n ? these algorithms give a trade-off on the update and query time of Õpn{ rq and Õprq, for all r. The problem has also been extensively studied from an engineering viewpoint on real-world transportation networks (see [21] for a survey). State of the art algorithms [13, 20, 22, 34, 60] are able to exploit further structure of road networks (beyond planarity) and process updates to networks with tens of millions of nodes in milliseconds. In a recent SODA’16 paper, Abraham et al. [6] study worst case bounds under a restricted but realistic model of dynamic updates in which a base graph G is given and one is allowed to perform only weight updates subject to the following constraint: For any updated graph G1 it must hold that dG pu, vq ď dG1 pu, vq ď M ¨ dG pu, vq for all u, v and some parameter M . (Note that this will hold if, for example, the weight of each edge only changes to within a factor of M .) In this model, the authors obtain a p1 ` εq-approximation algorithm that maintains updates in Oppoly log n ¨ M 4 {ε3 q time. ? Without this restriction, the best known p1 ` εq-approximation algorithms use Õp nq updates [44, 7]. Thus, when M is small, this model allows for a major improvement over the above results which 1  require polynomial time updates. But is it enough to allow for exact algorithms with subpolynomial updates? Such a result would explain the impressive experimental performance of state of the art algorithms. On the negative side, Eppstein showed that Ωplog n{ log log nq time is required in the cell probe model [27] for planar connectivity (and therefore also shortest path). However, an unconditional logωp1q n lower bound is far beyond the scope of current techniques (see [18]). In recent years, much stronger lower bounds were obtained for dynamic problems under certain popular conjectures [57, 54, 3, 46, 38, 5, 19]. For example, Roditty and Zwick [57] proved an n2´op1q lower bound for dynamic single source shortest paths in general graphs under the following conjecture. Conjecture 1 (APSP Conjecture). There exists no algorithm for solving the all pairs shortest paths (APSP) problem in general weighted (static) graphs in time Opn3´ε q for any ε ą 0. However, the reductions used in these results produce graphs that are fundamentally non-planar, such as dense graphs on three layers, and popular approaches for making them planar, e.g. by replacing each edge crossing with a small “planarizing gadget”, are provably impossible (this was recently shown for matching [36] and is easier to show for problems like reachability and shortest paths). Due to this and other challenges no (conditional) polynomial lower bounds were known for any natural problem on (static or dynamic) planar graphs. On a more general note, an important direction for future research on the fine-grained complexity of polynomial time problems (a.k.a. Hardness in P) is to understand the complexity of fundamental problems on restricted but realistic classes of inputs. A Recent result along these lines is the observation that the n2´op1q lower bound for computing the diameter of a sparse graph [56] holds even when the treewidth of the graph is Oplog nq [4]. In this paper, we take a substantial step in this direction, proving the first strong (conditional) lower bounds for natural problems on planar graphs.  1.1  Our Results  We present the first conditional lower bounds for natural problems on planar graphs using a new framework based on several ideas for conditional lower bounds on dynamic graphs combined with ideas from parameterized complexity [50, 51] and labeling schemes [32]. We believe that this framework is of general interest and might lead to more interesting results for planar graphs. Our framework shows an interesting connection between dynamic problems and distance labeling and also slightly improves the result of [32] providing a tight lower bound for distance labeling in weighted planar graphs (this is discussed in Section 1.2). Our first result is a conditional polynomial lower bound for dynamic shortest paths on planar graphs. Like several recent results [64, 2, 1, 5, 58, 19], our lower bound is based on the APSP conjecture. Perhaps the best argument for this conjecture is the fact that it has endured decades of extensive algorithmic attacks. Moreover, due to the known subcubic equivalences [64, 1, 58], the conjecture is false if and only if several other fundamental graph and matrix problems can be solved substantially faster. Theorem 1. No algorithm can solve the dynamic APSP problem in planar graphs on N nodes with amortized query time qpN q and update time upN q such that qpN q ¨ upN q “ OpN 1´ε q for any ε ą 0 unless Conjecture 1 is false. This holds even if we only allow weight updates to G. Thus, under the APSP conjecture, there is no hope for a very efficient dynamic shortest paths algorithm on planar graphs with provable guarantees. We show that an algorithm achieving Opn1{2´ε q 2  time for both updates and queries is unlikely, implying that the current upper bounds achieving Õpn2{3 q time are not too far from being conditionally optimal. Furthermore, our result implies that any algorithm with subpolynomial query time must have linear update time (and the other way around). Thus, the naïve algorithm of simply computing the entire shortest path every time a query is made is (conditionally) optimal if we want nop1q update time. An important property of Theorem 1 is that our reduction does not even violate planarity with respect to a fixed embedding. Thus, we give lower bounds even for plane graph problems, which in many cases allow for improved upper bounds over flexible planar graphs (e.g. for reachability[23, 11]). Moreover, our graphs are grid graphs which are subgraphs of the infinite grid, a special and highly structured subclass of planar graphs. Finally, as stated in Theorem 1 our lower bound holds even for the edge weight update model of Abraham et al. [6], where each edge only ever changes its weight to within a factor of M ą 1. While they obtain fast polylogpnq time p1 ` εq-approximation algorithm in this model, we show that an exact answer with the same query time likely requires linear update time and that an algorithm with Opn1{2´ε q runtime for both is highly unlikely. Thus, further theoretical restrictions need to be added in order to explain the impressive performance on real road networks. We also extend Theorem 1 to the case in which we only need to maintain one s, t distance (the s, t-shortest path problem). While this problem is equivalent to the APSP version in general (as we may connect s and t to any two nodes u, v we wish to know the distance between) this may violate planarity and especially a fixed embedding. We show that this problem exhibits similar trade-offs under Conjecture 1 even if we are only allowed to update weights. Finally, we note that in the case of directed planar graphs allowing negative edge weights our techniques can be extended to show the same hardness result for any approximation under Conjecture 1. Next, we seek a lower bound for the unweighted version of the problem, which arguably, is of more fundamental interest. Typically, a conditional lower bound under the APSP conjecture for a weighted problem can be modified into a lower bound for its unweighted version under the Boolean Matrix Multiplication (BMM) Conjecture [25, 57, 64, 3, 1]. While for combinatorial algorithms the complexity of BMM is conjectured to be cubic, it is known that using algebraic techniques there is an Opnω q algorithm, where ω ă 2.373 [63, 49]. When reducing to dynamic problems, however, lower bounds under BMM are often under a certain online version of BMM for which, Henzinger et al. [38] conjecture that there is no truly subcubic algorithms, even using algebraic techniques. This Online Matrix Vector Multiplication (OMv) Conjecture is stated formally in Section 5. The OMv conjecture implies strong lower bounds for many dynamic problems on general graphs [38], via extremely simple reductions [3, 38]. Our next result is a significantly more involved reduction from OMv to dynamic shortest paths on planar graphs, giving unweighted versions of the theorems above. The lower bounds are slightly weaker but they still rule out algorithms with subpolynomial update and query times, even in grid graphs. We remark that all lower bounds under the APSP conjecture in this paper, such as Theorem 1, also hold under OMv. Theorem 2. No algorithm can solve the dynamic APSP problem in unit weight planar graphs on N nodes with amortized query time qpN q and update time upN q such that maxpqpN q2 ¨ upN q, qpN q ¨ upN q2 q “ OpN 1´ε q for any ε ą 0 unless the OMv conjecture of [38] is false. This holds even if we only allow weight updates. 1  For instance, Theorem 2 shows that no algorithm is likely to have Opn 3 ´ε q amortized time for 1 both queries and updates. It also shows that if we want to have nop1q for one we likely need n 2 ´op1q 3  time for the other. Combined with previous results, our theorems reveal a mysterious phenomenon: there are two contradicting separations between planar graphs and small treewidth graphs, in terms of the time complexity of dynamic problems related to shortest paths (under popular conjectures). To illustrate these separations, consider the dynamic s, t-shortest path problem and the dynamic approximate diameter problem. For s, t-shortest path, planar graphs are much harder, they require n1{3´op1q update or query time by Theorem 2 (under OMv), while on small (polylog) treewidth graphs there is an algorithm achieving polylog updates and queries [6]. On the other hand, for approximate diameter, planar graphs are provably easier under the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH). A naive algorithm that runs the known Õpnq time static algorithm for p1 ` εq approximate diameter on planar graphs after each update [62], shatters an n2´op1q SETH-based lower bound for a p4{3 ´ δq approximation for diameter on graphs with treewidth Oplog nq [3]1 . We demonstrate the potential of our framework to yield further strong lower bounds for important problems in planar graphs by proving such a result for another well-studied problem in the graph theory literature, namely Maximum Weight Matching. Maintaining a maximum matching in general dynamic graphs is a difficult task: the best known algorithm by Sankowski [59] has an Opn1.495 q amortized update time, and it is better than the simple Opmq algorithm (that looks for an augmenting path after every update) only in dense graphs. Recent results show barriers for much faster algorithms via conjectures like OMv and 3-SUM [3, 46, 38, 19]. To our knowledge, this Opmq update time is the best known for planar graphs and no lower bound is known. Meanwhile, there has been tremendous progress on approximation algorithms [53, 12, 52, 14, 16, 15, 37, 45, 55, 10], both on general and planar graphs, as well as for the natural Maximum Weight Matching (see the references in [26] for the history of this variant). Planar graphs have proven easier to work with in this context: the state of the art deterministic algorithm for ? maintaining a p1 ` εq-maximum matching in general graphs has Op mq update time [35], while in planar graphs the bound is Op1q [55]. We show a strong polynomial lower bound for Max Weight Matching on planar graphs, that holds even for bipartite graphs with a fixed embedding into the plane and even in grid graphs. The lower bound is similar to Theorem 1 and shows a trade-off between query and update time. Theorem 3. No algorithm can solve the dynamic maximum weight matching problem in bipartite planar graphs on N nodes with amortized update time upN q and query time qpN q such 1 that maxpqpN q, upN qq “ OpN 2 ´ε q for any ε ą 0 unless Conjecture 1 is false. Furthermore, if qpN q ě upN q the algorithm cannot have qpN q ¨ upN q “ OpN 1´ε q. This holds even if the planar embedding of G never changes. Finally, we use our framework to show lower bounds for various other problems, like dynamic girth and diameter. We also argue that our bounds can be turned into worst-case bounds for incremental and decremental versions of the same problems.  1.2  Techniques and relations to distance labeling  To prove the results mentioned above we introduce a new framework for reductions to optimization problems on planar graphs. As mentioned we combine ideas from previous lower bound proofs 1 This lower bound follows from observing that the reduction from CNF-SAT to dynamic diameter [3] produces graphs with logarithmic treewidth. For more details on an analogous observation w.r.t. the lower bound for diameter in static graphs, see [4].  4  for dynamic graph problems with an approach inspired by the framework of Marx for hardness of parameterized geometric problem (via the Grid Tiling problem) [50, 51] and a graph construction from the research on labelling schemes by Gavoille et al. [32]. Gavoille et al. [32] used a family of grid-like graphs to prove an (unconditional) lower bound of ? ? Ωp nq on the label size of distance labeling in weighted planar graphs along with a Op n log nq upper bound. (A full discussion of distance labeling schemes is outside the scope of this paper. For details on this we refer to [32, 9, 8]). In this paper we generalize their family of graphs to a family of grid graphs capable of representing general matrices with weights in rpolypnqs via shortest paths ? distances. Using our construction with the framework of [32], we obtain a tight Ωp n log nq lower bound on the size of distance labeling in weighted planar graphs (and even grid graphs). Our main approach works by reducing from the pmin, `q-Matrix-Multiplication problem which is known to be equivalent to APSP (see [64]): Given two n ˆ n matrices A, B with entries in rpolypnqs, compute a matrix C “ A ‘ B such that Cri, js “ minkPrns Ari, ks ` Brk, js. By concatenating grid graphs from the family described above we are able to represent one of the matrices in the product and we can then simulate the multiplication process via updates and shortest paths queries. In a certain intuitive sense, our connection between dynamic algorithms and labeling schemes is ? the reverse direction of the one shown by Abraham et al. [7] to obtain their Õp N q update time p1 ` εq-approximation algorithm for dynamic APSP. Their algorithm utilizes a clever upper bound for the so-called forbidden set distance labeling problem, while our lower bound constructions have a clever lower bound for labeling schemes embedded in them.  2  A grid construction  In order to reduce to problems on planar graphs we will need a planar construction, which is able to capture the complications of problems like OMv and APSP. To do this we will employ a grid construction based on the one used in [32] to prove lower bounds on distance labeling for planar graphs. Our construction takes a matrix as input and produces a grid graph representing that matrix. We first present a boolean version similar to the one from [32] and then modify it to obtain a version taking matrices with integer entries as input. This modified matrix also immediately leads ? to a tight Ωp n log nq lower bound for distance labeling in planar graphs with weights in rpolypnqs when combined with the framework of [32]. Definition 1. Let M be a boolean R ˆ C matrix. We will call the following construction the grid embedding of M : Let GM be a rectangular grid graph with R rows and C columns. Denote the node at intersection pi, jq by ui,j (u1,1 is top-left and uR,C is bottom-right). Add C nodes a1 , . . . , aC and edges pu1,j , aj q above GM . Similarly add the nodes b1 , . . . , bR and edges pui,C , bi q to the right of GM . Now subdivide each vertical edge adding the node vi,j above ui,j , and subdivide each horizontal edge adding the node wi,j to the right of ui,j . Finally, for each entry of M such that Mi,j “ 1 add the node xi,j and edges pvi,j , xi,j q and pwi,j , xi,j q to the graph. The weights of GM are as follows: Each edge pui,j , vi`1,j q and paj , v1,j q has weight 2j ´ 1. Each edge pwi,j , ui`1,j q and pwi,C , bi q has weight 2R ´ 2. The edge pui,j , wi,j q has weight 2. All remaining edges have weight 1. We will call the two-edge path vi,j Ñ xi,j Ñ wi,j a shortcut from vi,j to wi,j as it has length 1 less than the path vi,j Ñ ui,j Ñ wi,j . Clearly, the grid embedding of a R ˆ C matrix has OpRCq nodes. 5  It is also easy to see that such a grid embedding is a subgraph of a 2R ` 1 ˆ 2C ` 1 rectangular grid. The construction of Definition 1 for a 3 ˆ 3 matrix can be seen in Figure 1.  110 011 010  a1  a2  1  3 1  1  a3 5  1 2  1  4  3  1  3  v3,2  5  x3,2  5  u3,2 w3,2  b1 b2 b3  Figure 1: Illustration of the construction of Definition 1. The shortest path from a2 to b2 is highlighted in red. Most edge weights are omitted for clarity. Proposition 1. Let M be a boolean R ˆ C matrix and let GM be its grid embedding as defined in Definition 1. Then for any 1 ď i ď R, 1 ď j ď C and i ă k ď R the shortest path distance from ui,j to bk is exactly pk ´ iq ¨ 2j ` 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q if Mk,j “ 0 and pk ´ iq ¨ 2j ` 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ´ 1 otherwise. Proof. Consider any shortest path from any ui,j to bk . Such a path must always go either “right” or “down” (if i “ k the path must always go right). Essentially for every step to the left we pay at least 4R ´ 1 but can at most save 2R: paying 2R going left and 2R going right, possibly saving 1 with a shortcut, and saving 2 for each vertical edge. Now we will show the claim by induction on the sum i ` j. Clearly, for uR,C to bR the distance is exactly 2R. Now consider ui,j and assume k ą i as the case of k “ i is trivial. There are three cases to consider: 1. The path from ui,j goes through wi,j and then ui,j`1 . By the induction hypothesis this path has length at least 2R ` pk ´ iq ¨ 2pj ` 1q ` 2R ¨ pC ´ jq ´ 1 ě 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ` pk ´ iq ¨ 2j . 2. The path from ui,j goes through vi`1,j and then xi`1,j , wi`1,j , and ui`1,j`1 . This path is only available if Mi`1,j “ 1. If k “ i ` 1, this distance is exactly 2j ´ 1 ` 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q . 6  Otherwise, by the induction hypothesis, it is at least pk ´ i ´ 1q ¨ 2pj ` 1q ` 2R ¨ pC ´ jq ´ 1 ` 2j ` 2R ´ 1 ě pk ´ iq ¨ 2j ` 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q for k ą i ` 1 3. The path from ui,j goes through vi`1,j and then ui`1,j . By the induction hypothesis, if Mk,j “ 1, the length of this path is pk ´ i ´ 1q ¨ 2j ` 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ´ 1 ` 2j “ pk ´ iq ¨ 2j ` 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ´ 1 and otherwise it is pk ´ i ´ 1q ¨ 2j ` 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ` 2j . It is easy to verify that taking the path down and right as illustrated in Figure 1 gives exactly the distances in the proposition, finishing the proof. The following useful property of our grid construction follows. Corollary 1. Let M and GM be as in Proposition 1. Then for any 1 ď k ď R, 1 ď j ď C, the distance between aj and bk in GM is exactly determined by whether Mk,j “ 1. In this case the distance is 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ` 2jk ´ 1 and it is 2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ` 2jk otherwise. The following generalization for matrices with integer weights will be useful when reducing from APSP. Definition 2. Let M be a R ˆ C matrix with integer weights in t0, . . . , Xu. We will call the following construction the grid embedding of M . Let GM be the grid embedding from Definition 1 for the all ones matrix of size R ˆ C and multiply the weight of each edge by X 2 . Furthermore, for each edge pvi,j , xi,j q increase its weight by Mi,j . Corollary 2. Let M be a R ˆ C matrix with integer weights in t0, . . . , Xu and let GM be its grid embedding. Then for any 1 ď k ď R, 1 ď j ď C, the distance between aj and bk in GM is exactly X 2 ¨ p2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ` 2jk ´ 1q ` Mk,j Corollary 2 follows from Corollary 1 by observing that any path from aj to bk not using the shortcut at intersection pk, jq has distance at least X 2 ¨ p2R ¨ pC ´ j ` 1q ` 2jkq and since Mk,j ă X 2 this distance is longer than using the shortcut. We remark that it would have been sufficient to multiply the weights by pX ` 1q instead of X 2 , but we do so to simplify a later argument.  3  Hardness of dynamic APSP in planar graphs  We will first show the following, simpler theorem and then generalize it to show trade-offs between query and update time. Theorem 4. No algorithm can solve the dynamic APSP problem in planar graphs on N nodes with 1 amortized update and query time OpN 2 ´ε q for any ε ą 0 unless Conjecture 1 is false. This holds even if only weight updates are allowed. 7  The main idea in proving Theorem 4 is to reduce from the APSP problem by first reducing to pmin, `q-Matrix-Mult and use the grid construction from Section 2 to represent the matrices to be multiplied. We then perform several shortest paths queries to simulate the multiplication process. Below, we first present a naïve and faulty approach explaining the main ideas of the reduction. We then show how to mend this approach giving the desired result. Attempt 1. Consider the following algorithm for solving an instance, A ‘ B of the pmin, `q-MatrixMult problem, where A and B are n ˆ n matrices. We may assume that A and B have integer weights in t0, . . . , Xu for some X “ polypnq. We let the initial graph of the problem be the grid embedding GB of B according to Definition 2 along with a special vertex t. Also add the edges pbk , tq for each 1 ď k ď n. Now we wish to construct C “ A ‘ B one row at a time. Such a row is a pmin, `q-product of a row in A and the entire matrix B. Thus, for each row, i, of A we have a phase as follows: 1. For each 1 ď k ď n update the weight of the edge pbk , tq to be Ai,k . 2. For each 1 ď j ď n query the distance between aj and t. The idea of each phase is that the distance between aj and t should correspond to the value of Ci,j “ mink Ai,k ` Bk,j . Observe, that the distance from aj to t using the edge pbk , tq is exactly X 2 ¨ p2n ¨ pn ´ j ` 1q ` 2jk ´ 1q ` Bk,j ` Ai,k by Corollary 2. The dominant term in this expression increases with k and thus no matter what Bk,j and Ai,k are (for k ą 1), the shortest path from aj to t will simply pick k “ 1 minimizing the above expression. If we instead set the weight of each edge pbk , tq to X 2 ¨ 2jpn ´ kq ` Ai,k we get the distance of using this edge to be X 2 ¨ p2n ¨ pn ´ j ` 1q ` 2jk ´ 1q ` Bk,j ` Ai,k ` X 2 ¨ 2jpn ´ kq “ X 2 ¨ p2npn ` 1q ´ 1q ` Bk,j ` Ai,k . It follows that the shortest path from aj to t is free to pick any k while only affecting the Bk,j ` Ai,k term, which means that the shortest distance will be achieved by picking the k minimizing this term, which would give us exactly X 2 ¨ p2npn ` 1q ´ 1q ` Ci,j . This approach therefore allows us to correctly calculate C “ A ‘ B. However, the weight of the edge pbk , tq now depends on which aj we are querying implying that we have to update this weight for each aj leading to a total of Opn3 q updates. By using this approach we are thus not able to make any statement about the time required for updates. We may try to assign edges and weights differently, but such approaches run into similar issues. Observe that the graph created has N “ Opn2 q nodes. Thus, if we were able to perform only Opn2 q total queries and updates the result of Theorem 4 would follow. ♦ In order to circumvent this dependence on j when assigning weights to the edges pbk , tq we instead replace t by another grid whose purpose is to “normalize” the distance for each aj . By doing this we can connect the grids with edges whose weight is independent of j. This step deviates significantly from the construction of [32] and is inspired by the grid tiling framework of Marx [50, 51]. Proof of Theorem 4. We follow the same approach as in Attempt 1, but with a few changes. Define the initial graph G as follows: Let GB be as before and let G1B be the grid embedding of B mirrored along the vertical axis with all shortcuts removed. Now for each 1 ď k ď n add the edge pbk , b1k q and define G to be this graph. Now we perform a phase for each row i of A as follows: 8  1. For each 1 ď k ď n set the weight of the edge pbk , b1k q to be X 2 ¨ p2pn ` 1qpn ´ kqq ` Ai,k . 2. For each j query the distance between aj and a1n´j`1 . An example of this construction for n “ 3 can be seen in Figure 2.  a2  a1  a3  a'3  X2  a'2  a'1  5X2 X2·16+Ai,1 X2+B2,1  b1  X2  b'1 X2·8+Ai,2  b2  b'2 Ai,3  b3  b'3  Figure 2: Example of a phase in the graph G in the reduction of Theorem 4. The highlighted path illustrates a shortest path between a1 and a13 as an example of a query. Most edge weights have been omitted for clarity. From the query between nodes aj and a1n´j`1 above during phase i we can determine the entry Ci,j of the output matrix. To see this, consider the distance from aj to a1n´j`1 at the time of query. This path has to go via some edge pbk , b1k q. From Corollary 2 we know that this distance is exactly dG paj , a1n´j`1 q “ dpaj , bk q ` wpbk , b1k q ` dpb1k , a1n´j`1 q “ X 2 ¨ p2n ¨ pn ´ j ` 1q ` 2jk ´ 1q ` Bk,j ` X 2 ¨ p2pn ` 1qpn ´ kqq ` Ai,k ` X 2 ¨ p2n ¨ j ` 2pn ´ j ` 1qkq “ X 2 ¨ 2npn ` 1q ` X 2 ¨ 2kpn ` 1q ` X 2 ¨ 2pn ` 1qpn ´ kq ` Bk,j ` Ai,k ´ X 2 “ X 2 ¨ 4npn ` 1q ´ X 2 ` Bk,j ` Ai,k . The crucial property that our construction achieves is that the dominant term of this expression is independent of k. Thus, the shortest path will choose to go through the edge pbk , b1k q that minimizes Bk,j ` Ai,k , implicitly giving us Ci,j . Subtracting X 2 ¨ p4npn ` 1q ´ 1q from the queried distance gives exactly the value of Ci,j and the algorithm therefore correctly computes C. Following the analysis from Attempt 1 we have that any algorithm with an amortized running 1 time of OpN 2 ´ε q for both updates and queries contradicts Conjecture 1.  3.1  Trade-offs  Theorem 4 above shows that no algorithm can perform both updates and queries in amortized time 1 OpN 2 ´ε q unless Conjecture 1 is false. We will now show how to generalize these ideas to show Theorem 1. 9  Proof of Theorem 1. The proof follows the same structure as the proof for Theorem 4, but instead of reducing from pmin, `q-Matrix-Mult on n ˆ n matrices we reduce from an unbalanced version. Let A and B be n ˆ nβ and nβ ˆ nα matrices respectively for some 0 ă α, β ď 1. We define the initial graph G from B in the same manner as in Theorem 4. We then have a phase for each row i of A as follows: 1. For each 1 ď k ď nβ set the weight of the edge pbk , b1k q to be X 2 ¨ p2pnα ` 1qpnβ ´ kqq ` Ai,k . 2. For each 1 ď j ď nα query the distance between aj and a1nα ´j`1 . The entry Ci,j is exactly the distance dG paj , a1nα ´j`1 q from the ith phase minus X 2 ¨p4nβ pnα `1q´1q. The correctness of the above reduction follows directly from the proof of Theorem 4 as well as Corollary 2. Now observe that the graph G from the above reduction has N “ Θpnα`β q nodes and we perform a total of Opn1`α q queries and Opn1`β q updates2 – that is, at most Opnq updates per row and Opnq queries per column. Any algorithm solving this problem must use total time n1`α`β´op1q time unless Conjecture 1 is false. It follows that either updates must take nα´op1q amortized time or queries must take nβ´op1q amortized time. Assume now that an algorithm exists such that queries take OpN γ q amortized time for any 0 ă γ ă 1. We wish to show that this algorithm cannot perform updates in amortized time OpN 1´γ´ε q for any ε ą 0. Pick β “ γ ` ε{2 and set α “ 1 ´ β. We now use the above reduction to create a dynamic graph G with N “ Opnα`β q “ Opnq nodes. Since queries do not take nβ´op1q time it follows from the above discussion that updates must take nα´op1q “ n1´γ´ε{2´op1q time. Since this is polynomially greater than OpN 1´γ´ε q the claim follows.  4  Hardness of dynamic maximum weight matching in bipartite planar graphs  In this section we will demonstrate the generality of our reduction framework by showing Theorem 3. Proof of Theorem 3. We start by showing how to reduce from pmin, `q-Matrix-Mult to minimum weight perfect matching, where the weight of such a matching corresponds to the shortest path distance between aj and a1n´j`1 similar to the proof of Theorem 1. We then describe how to use this reduction further to get a problem instance for maximum weight matching. Let A, B be an instance to the pmin, `q-Matrix-Mult problem of sizes n ˆ nβ and nβ ˆ nα respectively. Consider the grid embedding GB of B. We first replace each node of GB by two nodes connected by an edge of weight 0. For aj , ui,j , xi,j , and vi,j denote the corresponding nodes with superscript d and u (for “down” and “up”). For bi and wi,j denote the corresponding nodes with superscript l and r (for “left” and “right”). Now, for each original edge in GB we replace it as follows keeping its weight: d q • pui,j , vi,j q Ñ puui,j , vi,j  r • pui,j , wi,j´1 q Ñ puui,j , wi,j´1 q  l q • pui,j , wi,j q Ñ pudi,j , wi,j  d , xu q • pvi,j , xi,j q Ñ pvi,j i,j  u • pui,j , vi`1,j q Ñ pudi,j , vi`1,j q  l q • pxi,j , wi,j q Ñ pxdi,j , wi,j  2  We also perform Opnα`β q updates to create the initial graph (depending on the model), however we will choose α and β such that this term is dominated.  10  u q • paj , v0,j q Ñ padj , v0,j  r , bl q • pwi,C , bi q Ñ pwi,C i  This construction is illustrated in Figure 3. We call this modified grid structure ḠB . Observe that there are no edges between “up” and “left” vertices or between “down” and “right”. It follows that the graph is bipartite and that these two sets of nodes make up the two partitions.  vu2,2 vd2,2  xu2,2 xd2,2 uu2,2  ud2,2  l r w2,2 w2,2  Figure 3: Grid construction for minimum weight perfect matching. Thick edges correspond to original edges and have the same weight as in GB . Thin edges have weight 0. We now replace the grids GB and G1B by ḠB and Ḡ1B in the initial graph G from the proof of Theorem 1. The edges pbk , b1k q are replaced by pbrk , b1lk q. We will use the following observation. Proposition 2. The graph resulting from joining two grids ḠB in the way of Figure 2 has a unique perfect matching. Proof. It is easy to see that simply matching all weight 0 edges gives a perfect matching. Thus we need to show that this is the only perfect matching. We will show the claim by a simple “peeling” argument. Observe that au1 only has one incident edge, so the edge pau1 , ad1 q must be in any perfect matching u only has one adjacent edge, so and we may “peel” away these two nodes. It now follows that v1,1 u d pv1,1 , v1,1 q has to be in any perfect matching and we may peel away these nodes. Now uu1,1 only has u , uu , etc. This peels away the entire first column. Now each one adjacent edge and so on for v2,1 2,1 l with only one adjacent edge. Peeling xui,1 has only one adjacent edge matching this leaves each wi,1 these nodes away leaves us with a smaller grid and we may start the argument over with a2 . By doing this we see that the edge joining bri and b1li cannot be in a perfect matching as pbri , bli q has to be. Thus we can repeat the same argument on the second grid. We now add two additional nodes s and t to the initial graph and perform a phase for each row i of A as follows: 1. For each 1 ď k ď nβ set the weight of the edge pbrk , b1lk q to be X 2 ¨ p2pnα ` 1qpnβ ´ kqq ` Ai,k .  11  2. For each 1 ď j ď nα do the following three steps: 1) add the edges ps, auj q and pt, a1u nα ´j`1 q, 2) query the minimum weight perfect matching, 3) delete the two edges. d 1d Since the edges ps, auj q and pt, a1u nα ´j`1 q have to be in any perfect matching this leaves aj and anα ´j`1 unmatched. Any perfect matching now has to “connect” these two nodes by a path of original (weight ą 0) edges. The weight of a perfect matching in G then corresponds to the length of a shortest path from aj to a1nα ´j`1 in the graph from the proof of Theorem 1. It follows that we get the same trade-offs for minimum weight perfect matching as for APSP with the exception that the trade-off only holds when qpN q ě upN q since we perform Op1q updates for each query. To show the same result for maximum weight matching we may simply perform the following two changes: 1) pick a sufficiently large integer y and set the weight of each edge to y minus its weight 2 in the above reduction, and 2) when adding the edges ps, auj q and pt, a1u nα ´j`1 q assign them weight y such that any maximum weight matching has to include these two edges and will have weight  y2 `  N ´4 ¨ y ´ dG˚ paj , a1nα ´j`1 q , 2  where G˚ denotes the corresponding graph in the proof of Theorem 1.  5  Unweighted  The proofs of the previous sections rely heavily on the weighted grid from Section 2. We may generalize the ideas to the unweighted case by instead using the grid of Definition 1 and subdividing the edges giving us somewhat weaker bounds. This gives us Theorem 2. The problem we reduce from is the online matrix-vector problem from [38]. We may define this problem as follows: Let M be a n ˆ n matrix and let v 1 , . . . , v n be n boolean vectors arriving in an online fashion. The task is to pre-process M such that we can output the product M v i for each i before seeing v i`1 . It was conjectured in [38] that this problem takes n3´op1q time, while the best ? 3 Ωp log nq known upper bound is n {2 [48]. Known reductions from [64] show that this conjecture implies a n1`α`β´op1q bound for the following problem: Let α, β ą 0 be fixed constants and let M be a boolean nβ ˆ nα matrix (see [38] for the details). After preprocessing M , n boolean vector pairs β α pu1 , v 1 q, . . . , pun , v n q P t0, 1un ˆ t0, 1un arrive one at a time and the task is to compute pui qT M v i before being presented with the i ` 1th vector pair for every i. We will use this problem called the OuMv problem to reduce to unit weight dynamic APSP in planar graphs below. Proof of Theorem 2. Consider the reduction from Theorem 1 using a nβ ˆ nα grid. We will use a similar approach to solve the OuMv problem below. Let M be the nβ ˆ nα matrix of the OuMv problem and create GM according to Definition 1 (note that this grid embedding is different from the one used in the proof of Theorem 1). We also add G1M similarly to the proof of Theorem 1. We then subdivide each edge into a path of the same length. We also add to G a path of length 2pnα ` 1qpnβ ´ kq connecting bk and b1k for each 1 ď k ď nβ . We then disconnect bk and b1k from this path. We perform a phase as follows for each vector pair pui , v i q: 1. For each k such that uik “ 1 connect bk and b1k to their respective path. 2. For each j such that vji “ 1 query the distance from aj to a1nα ´j`1 . 12  3. Remove all the edges added in step 1. If the answer to any of the queries during the ith phase is 4npn ` 1q ´ 1 the answer to the ith product is 1 and otherwise the answer is 0. This follows from Corollary 1 in the same way as Theorem 1. By subdividing the edges we get a graph with N “ Opn2β`α ` n2α`β q nodes. We perform Opn1`α q queries and Opn1`β q updates. It follows from the OMv conjecture that the entire process must take n1`β`α´op1q time, thus either updates take nα´op1q time or queries take nβ´op1q time. We will assume that qpN q ě upN q and note that the other case follows symmetrically. Assume that some algorithm can perform queries in N γ for some 13 ď γ ă 21 . We wish to show that this algorithm cannot perform updates in time N 1´2γ´ε for any ε ą 0. To do this, pick β “ γ ` ε{3 and α “ 1 ´ 2β. Note that β ě α (corresponding to qpN q ě upN q). Thus the graph has N “ Opn2β`α q “ Opnq nodes. It now follows by the above discussion that the algorithm cannot perform updates faster than nα´op1q “ N 1´2γ´2ε{3`op1q which proves the claim. Finally, observe that by using an n ˆ n matrix in the above reduction (i.e. α “ β “ 1) we see that 1 at least one of updates and queries have to take n 3 ´op1q amortized time (similar to Theorem 4). To see that we may do the above reduction while keeping the dynamic graph G as a grid graph, observe that we may multiply the weight of each edge before subdividing by a large enough constant and then “zig-zag” the subdivided edges in order to fit the grid structure. This is illustrated in Figure 4.  a1  a2  a3 b1 b2  b'1 b'2  Figure 4: Illustration of the grid created in the proof of Theorem 2. Dashed edges correspond to possible shortcuts. Note that the lengths of the edges are not to scale!  6  Dynamic s, t-shortest path and related problems  In Section 3 we showed a lower bound for the trade-off between query and update time for dynamic APSP in grid graphs conditioned on Conjecture 1. Here we will argue that the proof of Theorem 1 can be extended to show similar lower bounds for dynamic problems, where the algorithm only needs to maintain a single value such as s, t-shortest path, girth, and diameter. We also note that the above techniques for proving bounds in unweighted graphs also apply to the theorem below. Theorem 5. No algorithm can solve the s, t-shortest path, girth (directed), or diameter problems in planar graphs on N nodes with amortized update time upN q and query time qpN q such that 13  1  maxpqpN q, upN qq “ OpN 2 ´ε q for any ε ą 0 unless Conjecture 1 is false. Furthermore, if qpN q ě upN q the algorithm cannot have qpN q ¨ upN q “ OpN 1´ε q. This holds even if the planar embedding of G never changes. Proof. We note that the proof follows the exact same structure as the proof of Theorem 1 and only mention the changes needed to be made. For s, t-shortest path and diameter we add two additional nodes s, t to the initial graph G and when performing a query of the distance between aj and a1nα ´j`1 we instead insert edges ps, aj q and pt, a1nα ´j`1 q of sufficiently high weight so that this is the longest distance in the graph and query the s, t distance. For girth we direct all horizontal edges of G to the right, all vertical edges of the left grid down and all vertical edges of the right grid up. When doing a query we add the directed edge pa1nα ´j`1 , aj q with weight 1, and the length of the shortest cycle then corresponds to the shortest path from aj to a1nα ´j`1 plus 1. In the above reductions, the condition qpN q ě upN q comes from the fact that we perform Op1q updates for every query we make and the argument from Theorem 1 thus breaks down if we try to argue for slower updates than queries. This makes sense from an upper bound perspective: clearly, any algorithm with qpN q ď upN q could simply perform a query for every update, store the answer, and then provide queries in Op1q time.  7  Weight updates  We mentioned in the previous sections that the results hold even if we only allow weight updates instead of edge insertions/deletions. In [6] they considered this model in which the algorithm is supplied with an initial graph G and a promise that for any updated graph G1 we have dG pu, vq ď dG1 pu, vq ď M ¨ dG pu, vq for all u, v P G and some parameter M ą 1. The only operations allowed are weight updates and queries. We note that all the above results for weighted graphs also hold in this model. As a proof sketch, consider the result of Theorem 1: The only edges whose weight changes are the “in-between” edges pbk , b1k q whose weights are always between X 2 ¨ p2pnα ` 1qpnβ ´ kq and X 2 ¨ p2pnα ` 1qpnβ ´ kqq ` X. Similarly, for s, t-shortest path and diameter: Assume that the edge ps, aj q has weight y when added in the reduction of Theorem 5. We may instead initialize the graph G with an edge ps, aj q of weight y for each 1 ď j ď nα , increase each edge to have weight M ¨ y and then instead of adding the edge ps, aj q we decrease its weight back to y. We do the same for t and the nodes a1j . By picking y sufficiently large we may ensure that an edge of weight M ¨ y cannot be on the shortest path from s to t. Furthermore these changes can still be done while maintaining the graphs as grids.  8  Worst-case bounds for partially dynamic problems  Our reductions above work in the fully dynamic setting, where edge insertions and deletions (or weight increments and decrements) are allowed. We now show that, using standard techniques, we can turn these amortized bounds into worst-case bounds for the same problem in the incremental and decremental (only insertions/increments or deletions/decrements allowed). We will show the result for dynamic APSP and note that the method is the same for the other problems. 14  Corollary 3. No algorithm can solve the incremental or decremental APSP problem for planar graphs on N nodes with worst-case query time qpN q and update time upN q such that qpN q¨upN q “ OpN 1´ε q for any ε ą 0 unless Conjecture 1 is false. Proof. We present the argument for the problem when we are given an initial graph G and are only allowed to increase weights on edges. The proof uses the same rollback technique employed before in several papers (see e.g. [3]). First we create the same initial graph, G, as in the proof of Theorem 1. We set the initial weight of the edges pbk , b1k q to be X 2 ¨ p2pnα ` 1qpnβ ´ kqq. During the phase of each row i of A we keep track of all memory changes made by the incremental data structure while increasing each edge to have weight X 2 ¨ p2pnα ` 1qpnβ ´ kqq ` Ai,k . We then perform each distance query and instead of deleting the incremented edges, we “roll back” the data structure using the memory changes we kept track of, thus restoring G to its initial state. By doing this we solve the pmin, `q-Matrix-Mult problem in the exact same way as in Theorem 1. However, we cannot ensure any requirement on the amortized running time, as the rollback operations may essentially “restore all credit” to the data structure in the sense of amortized analysis. Thus, the time bounds only apply to worst-case running times. Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge Shay Mozes, Oren Weimann and Virginia Vassilevska Williams for helpful comments and discussions.  References [1] Amir Abboud, Fabrizio Grandoni, and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Subcubic equivalences between graph centrality problems, APSP and diameter. In Proc. 26th ACM/SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1681–1697, 2015. [2] Amir Abboud and Kevin Lewi. Exact weight subgraphs and the k-sum conjecture. In Proc. 40th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), pages 1–12, 2013. [3] Amir Abboud and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Popular conjectures imply strong lower bounds for dynamic problems. In Proc. 55th IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 434–443, 2014. [4] Amir Abboud, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, and Joshua R. Wang. Approximation and fixed parameter subquadratic algorithms for radius and diameter in sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2016, Arlington, VA, USA, January 10-12, 2016, pages 377–391, 2016. [5] Amir Abboud, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, and Huacheng Yu. Matching triangles and basing hardness on an extremely popular conjecture. In Proc. 47th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 41–50, 2015. [6] Ittai Abraham, Shiri Chechik, Daniel Delling, Andrew V. Goldberg, and Renato F. Werneck. On dynamic approximate shortest paths for planar graphs with worst-case costs. In Proc. 27th ACM/SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 740–753, 2016. 15  [7] Ittai Abraham, Shiri Chechik, and Cyril Gavoille. Fully dynamic approximate distance oracles for planar graphs via forbidden-set distance labels. In Proc. 44th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 1199–1218, 2012. [8] Stephen Alstrup, Søren Dahlgaard, Mathias Bæk Tejs Knudsen, and Ely Porat. Sublinear distance labeling for sparse graphs. CoRR, abs/1507.02618, 2015. [9] Stephen Alstrup, Cyril Gavoille, Esben Bistrup Halvorsen, and Holger Petersen. Simpler, faster and shorter labels for distances in graphs. In Proc. 27th ACM/SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 338–350, 2016. [10] Abhash Anand, Surender Baswana, Manoj Gupta, and Sandeep Sen. Maintaining approximate maximum weighted matching in fully dynamic graphs. In Conference on the Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS), pages 257–266, 2012. [11] Rinat Ben Avraham, Haim Kaplan, and Micha Sharir. A faster algorithm for the discrete fréchet distance under translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1501.03724, 2015. [12] Surender Baswana, Manoj Gupta, and Sandeep Sen. Fully dynamic maximal matching in o (log n) update time. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2011 IEEE 52nd Annual Symposium on, pages 383–392. IEEE, 2011. [13] Reinhard Bauer. Dynamic speed-up techniques for dijkstra?s algorithm. Master’s thesis, Institut für Theoretische Informatik-Universität Karlsruhe (TH), page 41, 2006. [14] Aaron Bernstein and Cliff Stein. Fully dynamic matching in bipartite graphs. In Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages 167–179. Springer, 2015. [15] Aaron Bernstein and Cliff Stein. Faster fully dynamic matchings with small approximation ratios. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 692–711. SIAM, 2016. [16] Sayan Bhattacharya, Monika Henzinger, and Giuseppe F Italiano. Deterministic fully dynamic data structures for vertex cover and matching. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 785–804. SIAM, 2015. [17] Glencora Borradaile, Philip N. Klein, Shay Mozes, Yahav Nussbaum, and Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Multiple-source multiple-sink maximum flow in directed planar graphs in near-linear time. In Proc. 52nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 170–179, 2011. [18] Raphaël Clifford, Allan Grønlund, and Kasper Green Larsen. New unconditional hardness results for dynamic and online problems. In Proc. 56th IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 1089–1107, 2015. [19] Søren Dahlgaard. On the hardness of partially dynamic graph problems and connections to diameter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.06705, 2016. To appear at ICALP’16. [20] Daniel Delling, Andrew V Goldberg, Thomas Pajor, and Renato F Werneck. Customizable route planning. In Experimental algorithms, pages 376–387. Springer, 2011. 16  [21] Daniel Delling, Peter Sanders, Dominik Schultes, and Dorothea Wagner. Engineering route planning algorithms. In Algorithmics of large and complex networks, pages 117–139. Springer, 2009. [22] Daniel Delling and Dorothea Wagner. Landmark-based routing in dynamic graphs. In Experimental algorithms, pages 52–65. Springer, 2007. [23] Krzysztof Diks and Piotr Sankowski. Dynamic plane transitive closure. In Algorithms–ESA 2007, pages 594–604. Springer, 2007. [24] Hristo N Djidjev, Grammati E Pantziou, and Christos D Zaroliagis. Computing shortest paths and distances in planar graphs. In Automata, Languages and Programming, pages 327–338. Springer, 1991. [25] Dorit Dor, Shay Halperin, and Uri Zwick. All-pairs almost shortest paths. SIAM Journal on Computing, 29(5):1740–1759, 2000. [26] Ran Duan and Seth Pettie. Linear-time approximation for maximum weight matching. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 61(1):1, 2014. [27] David Eppstein. Dynamic connectivity in digital images. Information Processing Letters, 62(3):121–126, 1997. [28] Jittat Fakcharoenphol and Satish Rao. Planar graphs, negative weight edges, shortest paths, and near linear time. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 72(5):868–889, 2006. See also FOCS’01. [29] Greg N Frederickson. Data structures for on-line updating of minimum spanning trees, with applications. SIAM Journal on Computing, 14(4):781–798, 1985. [30] Zvi Galil and Giuseppe F Italiano. Maintaining biconnected components of dynamic planar graphs. Springer, 1991. [31] Zvi Galil, Giuseppe F Italiano, and Neil Sarnak. Fully dynamic planarity testing. In Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 495–506. ACM, 1992. [32] Cyril Gavoille, David Peleg, Stéphane Pérennes, and Ran Raz. Distance labeling in graphs. Journal of Algorithms, 53(1):85–112, 2004. See also SODA’01. [33] Pawel Gawrychowski and Adam Karczmarz. Improved bounds for shortest paths in dense distance graphs. CoRR, abs/1602.07013, 2016. [34] Robert Geisberger, Peter Sanders, Dominik Schultes, and Christian Vetter. Exact routing in large road networks using contraction hierarchies. Transportation Science, 46(3):388–404, 2012. [35] Madhu Gupta and Rongkun Peng. Fully dynamic (1+ e)-approximate matchings. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2013 IEEE 54th Annual Symposium on, pages 548–557. IEEE, 2013.  17  [36] Rohit Gurjar, Arpita Korwar, Jochen Messner, Simon Straub, and Thomas Thierauf. Planarizing gadgets for perfect matching do not exist. In Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2012, pages 478–490. Springer, 2012. [37] Meng He, Ganggui Tang, and Norbert Zeh. Orienting dynamic graphs, with applications to maximal matchings and adjacency queries. In Algorithms and Computation, pages 128–140. Springer, 2014. [38] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, Danupon Nanongkai, and Thatchaphol Saranurak. Unifying and strengthening hardness for dynamic problems via the online matrix-vector multiplication conjecture. In Proc. 47th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 21–30, 2015. [39] Monika R Henzinger, Philip Klein, Satish Rao, and Sairam Subramanian. Faster shortest-path algorithms for planar graphs. journal of computer and system sciences, 55(1):3–23, 1997. [40] Giuseppe F Italiano, Yahav Nussbaum, Piotr Sankowski, and Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Improved algorithms for min cut and max flow in undirected planar graphs. In Proceedings of the forty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 313–322. ACM, 2011. [41] Haim Kaplan, Shay Mozes, Yahav Nussbaum, and Micha Sharir. Submatrix maximum queries in monge matrices and monge partial matrices, and their applications. In Proceedings of the twenty-third annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 338–355. SIAM, 2012. [42] Philip Klein and Shay Mozes. Optimization algorithms for planar graphs, 2014. Book draft available at http://planarity.org. [43] Philip N Klein. Multiple-source shortest paths in planar graphs. In SODA, volume 5, pages 146–155, 2005. [44] Philip N Klein and Sairam Subramanian. A fully dynamic approximation scheme for shortest paths in planar graphs. Algorithmica, 22(3):235–249, 1998. [45] Tsvi Kopelowitz, Robert Krauthgamer, Ely Porat, and Shay Solomon. Orienting fully dynamic graphs with worst-case time bounds. In Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages 532–543. Springer, 2014. [46] Tsvi Kopelowitz, Seth Pettie, and Ely Porat. Higher lower bounds from the 3sum conjecture. In Proc. 27th ACM/SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1272–1287, 2016. [47] Jakub Łącki, Yahav Nussbaum, Piotr Sankowski, and Christian Wulff-Nilsen. Single source–all sinks max flows in planar digraphs. In Foundations of Computer Science (focs), 2012 Ieee 53rd Annual Symposium on, pages 599–608. IEEE, 2012. [48] Kasper Green Larsen and Ryan Williams. Faster online matrix-vector multiplication. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.01695, 2016. [49] François Le Gall. Powers of tensors and fast matrix multiplication. In Proceedings of the 39th international symposium on symbolic and algebraic computation, pages 296–303. ACM, 2014. 18  [50] Dániel Marx. On the optimality of planar and geometric approximation schemes. In Foundations of Computer Science, 2007. FOCS’07. 48th Annual IEEE Symposium on, pages 338–348. IEEE, 2007. [51] Dániel Marx. The square root phenomenon in planar graphs. In ICALP (2), page 28, 2013. [52] Ofer Neiman and Shay Solomon. Simple deterministic algorithms for fully dynamic maximal matching. ACM Transactions on Algorithms (TALG), 12(1):7, 2015. See also STOC’13. [53] Krzysztof Onak and Ronitt Rubinfeld. Maintaining a large matching and a small vertex cover. In Proceedings of the forty-second ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 457–464. ACM, 2010. [54] Mihai Patrascu. Towards polynomial lower bounds for dynamic problems. In Proc. 42nd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 603–610, 2010. [55] David Peleg and Shay Solomon. Dynamic (1+ ε)-approximate matchings: a density-sensitive approach. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 712–729. SIAM, 2016. [56] Liam Roditty and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Fast approximation algorithms for the diameter and radius of sparse graphs. In Proc. 45th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 515–524, 2013. [57] Liam Roditty and Uri Zwick. On dynamic shortest paths problems. Algorithmica, 61(2):389–401, 2011. See also ESA’04. [58] Barna Saha. Language edit distance and maximum likelihood parsing of stochastic grammars: Faster algorithms and connection to fundamental graph problems. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2015 IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on, pages 118–135. IEEE, 2015. [59] Piotr Sankowski. Faster dynamic matchings and vertex connectivity. In Proc. 18th ACM/SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 118–126, 2007. [60] Dominik Schultes and Peter Sanders. Dynamic highway-node routing. In Experimental Algorithms, pages 66–79. Springer, 2007. [61] Sairam Subramanian. A fully dynamic data structure for reachability in planar digraphs. In Algorithms-ESA’93, pages 372–383. Springer, 1993. [62] Oren Weimann and Raphael Yuster. Approximating the diameter of planar graphs in near linear time. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 12(1):12, 2016. See also ICALP’13. [63] Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Multiplying matrices faster than coppersmith-winograd. In Proceedings of the forty-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 887–898. ACM, 2012. [64] Virginia Vassilevska Williams and Ryan Williams. Subcubic equivalences between path, matrix and triangle problems. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2010 51st Annual IEEE Symposium on, pages 645–654. IEEE, 2010.  19

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
