Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_447

Abstract:
GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  arXiv:1802.09077v1 [math.GR] 25 Feb 2018  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  A BSTRACT. On torsion Grigorchuk groups we construct random walks of finite entropy and power-law tail decay with non-trivial Poisson boundary. Such random walks provide near optimal volume lower estimates for these groups. In particular, for the first Grigorchuk group G we show that its volume growth function vG,S pnq satisfies that log 2 « 0.7674, λ0 is the posilimnÑ8 log log vG,S pnq{ log n “ α0 , where α0 “ log λ0 3 2 tive root of the polynomial X ´ X ´ 2X ´ 4.  1. I NTRODUCTION Let Γ be a finitely generated group and let S be a finite generating set of Γ. The word length lS pγq of an element γ P Γ is the smallest integer n ě 0 for which there exists s1 , . . . , sn P S Y S ´1 such that γ “ s1 . . . sn . The growth function vΓ,S pnq counts the number of elements with word length lS pγq ď n, that is vΓ,S pnq “ #tγ P Γ : lS pγq ď nu. A finitely generated group Γ is of polynomial growth if there exists 0 ă D ă 8 and a constant C ą 0 such that vΓ,S pnq ď CnD . It is of exponential growth if there exists λ ą 1 and c ą 0 such that vΓ,S pnq ě cλn . If vΓ,S pnq is sub-exponential but Γ is not of polynomial growth, we say Γ is a group of intermediate growth. The first examples of groups of intermediate growth are constructed by Grigorchuk in [29]. Grigorchuk groups are indexed by infinite strings ω in t0, 1, 2u8 (whose definitions are recalled in Subsection 2.4). Following [29], for any such ω, we associate automorphisms a, bω , cω , dω of the rooted binary tree. Consider the group Gω generated by S “ ta, bω , cω , dω u. For the string ω “ p012q8 , the corresponding group is called the first Grigorchuk group, which was introduced in Grigorchuk [28]. By [29], if ω is eventually constant then Gω is virtually abelian (hence of polynomial growth); otherwise Gω is of intermediate growth. The group Gω is periodic (or torsion) if and only if ω contains all three letters 0, 1, 2 infinitely often. A long-standing open question, since the construction of Grigorchuk groups of intermediate growth in [29], is to find the asymptotics of their growth functions. Among them the first Grigorchuk group G “ G012 has been the most investigated. In Grigorchuk [29], it was shown that ` ˘ exppcn1{2 q ď vG,S pnq ď exp Cnβ , where β “ log32 31. The upper bound above which shows that G is of sub-exponential growth is based on norm contracting property. The property considered in [29] is as follows. There is an integer d ě 2 and an injective homomorphism ψ “ pψi qdi“1 from a Key words and phrases. Grigorchuk groups, growth function, Poisson boundary. The work of the first named author is supported by the ERC grant GroIsRan. 1  2  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  finite index subgroup H of G into Gd such that for any h P H, with respect to word length |¨| “ lS on G, (1.1)  d ÿ  |ψi phq| ď η|h| ` C  i“1  for some constant C ą 0 and contraction coefficient η P p0, 1q. Later Bartholdi in [4] has shown that there exist choices of norm that achieve better contraction coefficient than the word length lS , and therefore a better upper bound for growth. His upper bound in [4] states that vG,S pnq ď exp pCnα0 q log 2 3 2 where α0 “ log λ0 « 0.7674, where λ0 is the positive root of the polynomial X ´ X ´ 2X ´ 4. 1{2 The lower bound en proved by Grigorchuk uses what he calls anti-contraction prop1{2 erties on G. It remained open whether vG,S grows strictly faster than en until Leonov [36] introduced an algorithm ` ˘which led to better anti-contraction coefficient ` and showed ˘ that vG,S pnq ě exp cn0.504 . Bartholdi [5] obtained that vG,S pnq ě`exp cn0.5157 . In ˘ the thesis of Brieussel [13], Corollary 1.4.2 states that vG,S pnq ě exp cn0.5207 . Let µřbe a probability measure on a group Γ. A function f : Γ Ñ R is µ-harmonic if f pxq “ yPG f pxyqµpyq for all x P Γ. Among several definitions of the Poisson boundary of pΓ, µq, also called the Poisson-Furstenberg boundary, one is formulated in terms of the measure theoretic boundary that represents all bounded µ-harmonic functions on Γ, see [34]. In particular the Poisson boundary of pΓ, µq is trivial if and only if all bounded µharmonic functions ř on Γ are constant. The (Shannon) entropy of a measure µ is defined as Hpµq “ ´ gPΓ µpgq log µpgq. When Γ is finitely generated, the entropy criterion of Kaimanovich-Vershik [34] and Derriennic [22] provides a quantitative relation between the growth function of Γ and the tail decay of a measure µ of finite entropy and non-trivial Poisson boundary on Γ, see more details reviewed in Subsection 2.1. In this paper we construct probability measures with non-trivial Poisson boundary on torsion Grigorchuk groups. The measures are chosen to have finite entropy and explicit control over their tail decay, that is, with an upper bound on µ ptg : lS pgq ě nuq . The main contribution of the paper is that on a collection of Grigorchuk groups, including these indexed by periodic strings containing three letters 0, 1, 2, we construct such measures with good tail decay that provide near optimal volume lower estimates. Our main result Theorem 8.3 specialized to the first Grigorchuk group G012 is the following. log 2 Theorem 1.1. Let α0 “ log λ0 « 0.7674, where λ0 is the positive root of the polynomial X 3 ´ X 2 ´ 2X ´ 4. For any  ą 0, there exists a constant C ą 0 and a non-degenerate symmetric probability measure µ on G “ G012 of finite entropy and nontrivial Poisson boundary, where the tail decay of µ satisfies that for all r ě 1,  µ ptg : lS pgq ě ruq ď C r´α0 ` . As a consequence, for any  ą 0, there exists a constant c ą 0 such that for all n ě 1, ` ˘ vG,S pnq ě exp c nα0 ´ . We construct measures of non-trivial Poisson boundary needed for the proof of Theorem 1.1 by introducing and studying some asymptotic invariants of the group, related to the diameter and shape of what we call "quasi-cubic sets" and "uniformised quasi-cubic sets" (see Subsection 1.1 where we sketch the proof). The main problem we address is how to  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  3  use the geometric and algebraic structure of the groups to construct measures with good control over the tail decay such that careful analysis of the induced random walks on the Schreier graph can be performed to show non-triviality of the Poisson boundary. The volume lower bound in Theorem 1.1 matches up in exponent with Bartholdi’s upper bound in [4]. In particular, combined with the upper bound we conclude that the volume exponent of the first Grigorchuk group G exists and is equal to α0 , that is lim  nÑ8  log log vG,S pnq “ α0 . log n  It was open whether the limit exists. Our argument applies to a large class of ω satisfying certain assumptions, see Theorem 8.3. In particular the assumption of the theorem is verified by all periodic strings containing 3 letters 0, 1, 2, or strings that are products of 201 and 211. For general ω, volume upper bounds on Gω are based on the norm contracting property (1.1) first shown in Grigorchuk [29], and suitable choices of norms are given in the work of Bartholdi and the first named author [8]. Combined with upper bounds from [8], we derive the following two corollaries from Theorem 8.3. For a periodic string ω that contains all three letters 0, 1, 2, we show that the volume exponent of Gω exists. Let Mi , i P t0, 1, 2u, be matrices defined as fi fi » fi » » 1 0 0 2 1 0 2 0 1 M0 “ – 0 2 1 fl , M1 “ – 0 1 0 fl , M2 “ – 1 2 0 fl . 1 0 2 0 1 2 0 0 1 Corollary 1.2. Let ω P t0, 1, 2u8 be a periodic string ω “ pω0 . . . ωq´1 q8 of period q which contains all three letters 0, 1, 2. Then the growth exponent of the Grigorchuk group Gω exists and log log vGω ,S pnq “ αω , lim nÑ8 log n where αω “  q log 2 log λ  and λ “ λω0 ...ωq´1 is the spectral radius of the matrix Mω0 . . . Mωq´1 .  By [29, Theorem 7.2] the family tGω u provides a continuum of mutually non-equivalent growth functions. When ω is not periodic, Grigorchuk showed in [29] that for some choices of ω, the growth of Gω exhibits oscillating behavior: limnÑ8 log log vGω pnq{ log n does not exist. Together with upper bounds from [8], our lower bounds show that given numbers α ď β in rα0 , 1s, there exists a Gω which realizes these prescribed numbers as lower and upper volume exponents. Corollary 1.3. For any α, β such that α0 ď α ď β ď 1, where α0 « 0.7674 is the volume exponent of G012 , there exists ω P t0, 1, 2u8 such that the Grigorchuk group Gω satisfies log log vGω ,S pnq “ α, log n log log vGω ,S pnq lim sup “ β. log n nÑ8 lim inf nÑ8  We mention that for some groups of intermediate growth there is no way to obtain a near optimal lower bound of the growth function using tail decay of measures of nontrivial Poisson boundary. There are extensions of the first Grigorchuk group that are of intermediate growth, where the growth function can be arbitrarily close to exponential but any random walk with finite α0 -moment has trivial Poisson boundary, see Remark 9.2 at the end of the paper.  4  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  F IGURE 1.1. Orbital Schreier graph of the right most ray o “ 18 under the action of the first Grigorchuk group. 1.1. Sketch of the arguments for the first Grigorchuk group. For a nilpotent group Γ and any probability measure µ on Γ, it is known that the Poisson boundary of pΓ, µq is trivial. For non-degenerate measure µ on a finitely generated nilpotent group this result is due to Dynkin and Maljutov [23], for a general case see Azencott [1, Proposition 4.10]. If we assume that the growth function is sub-exponential, then as a corollary of the entropy criterion, any finitely ř supported measure µ on Γ (more generally, any measure µ on Γ of finite first moment gPΓ lS pgqµpgq ă 8) has trivial Poisson boundary. If the growth of Γ α is bounded by vΓ,S ř pnq ď exppCn q for some 0 ă α ă 1, then all measures with finite αmoment, that is gPΓ lS pgqα µpgq ă 8, have trivial Poisson boundary (see Corollary 2.3). Since the volume growth of the first Grigorchuk group G “ G012 satisfies vG,S pnq ď exppCnα0 q by [4], we have to look for measures with infinite α0 -moment in order to have non-trivial Poisson boundary. The first Grigorchuk group G is generated by four automorphisms a, b, c, d of the rooted binary tree (in Subsection 2.4 we recall the definition of these automorphisms, see also Figure 2.1). The group G acts on the boundary of the tree BT by homeomorphisms. The orbital Schreier graph S of o is a half line as shown in Figure 1.1, where o “ 18 is the right most ray of the tree. In [24] random walks with non-trivial Poisson boundary are used to show that for Gω , where ω is not eventually constant and contains only finite number of 2 (for example ω “ p01q8 ), its volume growth satisfies ` ˘ vGω ,S pnq ě exp c n{ log1` n . The measures with non-trivial Poisson boundary constructed in [24] come from transient symmetric random walks on Z, where it is well-known and easy to see what is the best tail condition on such measures on Z. The situation remained completely unclear for other Grigorchuk groups with ω containing all three letters infinitely often. Since for such ω the group Gω is torsion, the argument in [24] relying on an infinite order element cannot be applied. Here we need to introduce a new construction of meausures for the first Grigorchuk group. Consider the groupoid of germs of the action G ñ BT. The isotropy group Gx of the groupoid of germs of G at x P BT is the quotient of the stabilizer Gx of x by the subgroup of elements of G that act trivially in a neighborhood of x. For the first Grigorchuk group G, at x in the orbit o ¨ G, Gx is isomorphic to pZ{2Zq ˆ pZ{2Zq and its elements can be listed as tid, b, c, du. See more details in Section 3. Given a group element g, we denote its germ  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  5  at x by Φg pxq, which is the germ of gτ ´1 in the neighborhood of x where τ is a finitary automorphism of the tree such that x ¨ g “ x ¨ τ . This does not depend on the choice of τ , see precise definition in formula (3.3)). Our goal is to construct a non-degenerate probability measure µ on G such that along the µ-random walk trajectory pWn q8 n“1 , the coset of ΦWn poq in Go { xby stabilizes with probability 1. Such almost sure stabilization provides non-trivial events in the tail σ-field of the random walk, which implies the Poisson boundary of pG, µq is non-trivial. Our first construction of a measure with controlled (but not near optimal) tail decay and non-trivial Poisson boundary on G is of the form µ “ 12 puS ` ηq, where uS is the uniform measure on S “ ta, b, c, du and η is a symmetric measure supported on the subgroup Hb of G. Here Hb is the subgroup of G that consists of g P G such that germs Φg pxq are in xby for all x P o ¨ G. For such a measure µ, if the η-induced random walk on the orbit of o is transient, then the Poisson boundary of µ is non-trivial, see Remark 3.4. In the situation of ω containing only 0 and 1 infinitely often, the subgroup Hb contains an infinite order element ab, thus in this case one can apply well known results for random walks on xaby “ Z. For the first Grigorchuk group, the subgroup Hb is locally finite and the orbit of o under Hb is not the full orbit o ¨ G, but rather rays cofinal with 18 such that at locations 3k ` 1, k ě 1, the digits are 1 (see Lemma 6.2). Since the subgroup Hb is locally finite, unlike Z there is no "simple random walk" on it that one can take convex combinations of convolution powers of the corresponding measure to produce a measure with transient induced random walk on the orbit of o. Rather, we build the measures from a sequence of group elements satisfying an injectivity property for their action on the orbit o ¨ G. For g1 , g2 , . . . P G, we say the sequence satisfies the cube independence property on o ¨ G if for any n ě 1 and x P o ¨ G, the map from the hypercube to the orbit t0, 1un Ñ o ¨ G pε1 , . . . εn q ÞÑ x ¨ gnεn . . . g1ε1 is injective. We call the set Fn “ tgnεn . . . g1ε1 : pε1 , . . . εn q P t0, 1un u an n-quasi-cubic set and the uniform measure uFn on Fn an n-quasi-cubic measure. Given such a sequence pgn q, we take convex combination over all n-quasi-cubic measures and their inverses. The cube independence property guarantees that for such measures, the induced random walks on the orbit of o satisfy good isoperimetric inequalities. We prove a sufficient criterion for such induced random walks to be transient in Proposition 5.4.  F IGURE 1.2. Portrtrait of ζ 3 pacq in the first Grigorchuk group. More generally, words ζ n paxq, where x “ c or x “ d, represents an element in the stabilizer of level n, and the labels (sections) at the vertices of level n are ax or xa.  6  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Our choice of elements satisfying the cube independence property on G is closely related to words that are known to have what is called asymptotically maximal inverted orbit growth, see [7]. Let ζ be the substitution on tab, ac, adu˚ defined as ζ : ab ÞÑ abadac, ac ÞÑ abab, ad ÞÑ acac.  (1.2) n  pacqq8 n“1  achieves asymptotic maximal inverted orbit growth, see the proof of Then pζ [7, Proposition 4.7]. With considerations of germs in mind, we take the sequence to be gn “ ζ n pacq if n ” 0, 1 mod 3 and gn “ ζ n padq if n ” 2 mod 3. Then gn has xbygerms for n ” 1, 2 mod 3 and has xcy-germs for n ” 0 mod 3. For our construction it is important that this sequence pgn q satisfies the cube independence property. As an illustration of Proposition 5.4, in Subsection 5.2 we find an optimal moment condition for measures on G which induce transient random walks on the orbit of o “ 18 . A near optimal measure can be taken to be of the form η0 “  8 ÿ  ¯ ´ cn uFn ` uFn´1 ,  n“1 1`  where cn “ C2nn , Fn is the n-quasi-cubic set formed by g1 , . . . , gn and uF is the uniform measure on F . In Section 6 we explain how to use the subsequence g1 , g2 , g4 , g5 , g7 , g8 , . . . of only xby-germs and a related sequence that is more adapted to Hb to produce finite entropy symmetric measures supported on Hb such that the induced random walks `on the orbit of ˘ o are transient. In particular it already provides a volume lower bound exp cn0.57 for G better than previously known bounds, see Corollary 6.4. However taking a measure supported on Hb is too restrictive, see the remark at the end of Section 6. In Section 7 we carry out the main construction which removes this restriction and produces measures with non-trivial Poisson boundary and near optimal tail decay. We now give an informal sketch of the construction. Return to the "full" cube independent sequence pgn q8 n“1 . The measure η0 built from this sequence has near optimal tail decay among measures that induce transient random walks on the Schreier graph. However in the sequence we have germs of both types: gn has xby-germs for n ” 1, 2 mod 3 and has xcy-germs for n ” 0 mod 3. One can check that xγy-coset of ΦWn poq does not stabilize for any γ P tb, c, du, where Wn is the random walk driven by 21 puS ` η0 q. With the goal to achieve almost sure stabilization of xby-coset of ΦWn poq along the random walk trajectory, we want to perform modifications to the elements used in the construction of η0 that prevent such stabilization, namely these gn with xcy-germs. It turns out for such considerations, transience of the induced random walks on the Schreier graph is not sufficient. To observe almost sure stabilization of xby-coset of ΦWn poq for a µ-random walk Wn , we need to show a weighted sum of the Green function GPµ over the Schreier graph is finite, see the criterion in Proposition 3.3: ÿ GPµ po, xqµ ptg P G : pg, xq is not a xby -germuq ă 8. xPo¨G  Thus the behavior of the Green function of the induced random walk is essential. Informally we call a ray x P BT that carries a non-xby germ a bad location. Assume that the Green function GPµ po, xq decays with distance dS po, xq, then to control the effect of xcygerm elements, it is to our advantage to push the bad locations to be further away from the ray o. Note that when we perform modifications to the measure, all terms in the summation are affected: both the Green function of Pµ and the µ-weights on the bad locations.  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  7  Recall that for n divisible by 3, gn “ ζ n pacq, it is in the n-level stabilizer and the section at any vertex v in level n is in tac, cau. Therefore gn has 2n bad locations on the Schreier graph and the distance of these locations to o is bounded by C2n . To move these locations further from o, without causing disturbances globally, we rely on certain branching properties of the group. Let kn be an integer divisible by 3, we introduce a conjugation of the generator c that swaps on level kn ` 2 the section at 1kn `2 with the section at its sibling. Explicitly, take the element hkn which is in the rigid stabilizer of 1kn and acts as baba in the subtree rooted at 1kn . Denote by ckn the conjugate ckn “ h´1 kn chkn . The portrait of ckn is illustrated in Figure 1.3. For n and kn both divisible by 3, take g̃n “ ζ n packn q. Then g̃n still has 2n locations on the Schreier graph such that pg̃n , xq is a c-germ, but now the distance of these locations to o is comparable to 2n`kn . We remark that the parameters pkn q need to be chosen carefully: the word length of element g̃n is approximately 2kn p2{η0 qn , therefore if kn is too large, the tail decay wouldn’t be near n´α0 ; on the other hand if kn is not sufficiently large then the effect it introduces is not strong enough to achieve the goal of stabilization. In the end we will take kn « A log n with constant A large enough.  F IGURE 1.3. A portrtrait of ck , for k ” 0 mod 3. There are k ` 3 levels of the tree that shown on the picture. The portrait is the same as the portrait of c up to level k, while at level k ` 2 left and right branches are permuted. Take a parameter sequence pkn q, in the cube independent sequence pgn q, keep these gn such that n ” 1, 2 mod 3 and replace these gn with n ” 0 mod 3 by the modified element g̃n . This modified sequence satisfies the cube independence property, we can form the n-quasi-cubic sets and define a measure η of the same form as η0 using this sequence. It is possible that with some choice like cn “ 2´nβ , β close to 1 and kn “ A log n, one can observe almost sure stabilization for the resulting measure 12 puS ` ηq. However for such a measure µ we didn’t manage to obtain good enough estimates on the induced Green function to verify the summability condition. Here the issue is that because of the modifications, the induced transition kernel on the Schreier graph becomes more singular (compared to the one induced by η0 ).  8  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  F IGURE 1.4. A conjugated element cv , in usual notation on the first Grigorchuk group. The levels of the form 3j ´ 1 are traced with dotted lines. There are two possiblities for the portraits between 3j ´ 1 and 3j ` 2. Here the picture is shown for indexing vertex v “ 11p11˚q . . . p11˚qp110qp111qp110qp110q110. To overcome this difficulty, we randomize over the choice of conjugates ckn to produce less singular induced transition kernels. We take a collection of conjugates cv of c, indexed by vertices v of the form 11 loooooooomoooooooon 11 ˚ 11 ˚ . . . 11˚ 110, where at ˚ the digit can be 0 or kn digits  1, see Figure 1.4. Given such a conjugate cv , as before apply ` ˘ the substitution ζ to obtain g̃nv “ ζ n pacv q. We call an n-quasi-cubic set formed by g̃jv with each v a random vertex chosen uniformly from the corresponding indexing set a uniformised quasi-cubic set. The final measure we take is of a similar form to η discussed in the previous paragraph, but involves what we call uniformised quasi-cubic measures. For more detailed description of these measures see Example 7.10. Although the construction appears to be more complicated, the resulting induced transition kernel is more homogeneous. For such transition kernels, techniques from Barlow-Grigor’yan-Kumagai [3] based on what is called the Meyer’s construction and the Davies method for off-diagonal heat kernel estimates of jumping processes can be applied. In this way we obtain good enough decay estimate for the induced Green function in terms of the Schreier graph distance on the orbit of o. Together with explicit estimates of the µ-weights at bad locations we show the weighted sum of Green function over the Schreier graph is finite with appropriate choice of parameters. The construction provides finite entropy measures on G with near optimal tail decay and non-trivial Poisson boundary. 1.2. Organization of the paper. Section 2 reviews background on Poisson boundary and its connection to growth, groups acting on rooted trees and some basic properties of Grigorchuk groups. In Section 3 we formulate the criterion for stabilization of cosets of germ  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  9  configurations. Section 4 provides quick examples of measures (without explicit tail control) with non-trivial Poisson boundary on the first Grigorchuk group. In Section 5 we define the cube independence property and show how to build explicit measures with transient induced random walks from sequences satisfying this property. Section 6 discusses measures with restricted germs on the first Grigorchuk group that induce transient random walks on the orbit of 18 , in particular volume lower bounds such measures provide and their limitations. Section 7 contains the main result of the paper: we construct finite entropy measures on Gω with near optimal tail decay and non-trivial Poisson boundary, where ω satisfies what we call Assumption pFrpDqq. In Section 8 we derive volume lower estimates for Gω from measures constructed in Section 7. We close the paper with a few remarks and questions. Conventions that are used throughout the paper: ‚ We consider right group actions Γ ñ X and write the action of group element g on x P X as x ¨ g. ‚ Given a probability measure µ on Γ, we say µ is non-degenerate if its support generates G as a semigroup. Let X1 , X2 , . . . be i.i.d. random variables with distribution µ on Γ and Wn “ X1 . . . Xn . We refer to pWn q8 n“1 as a µ-random walk. ‚ On a regular rooted tree T, given a vertex u P T and v P T Y BT, uv denotes the concatenation of the strings, that is the ray with prefix u followed by v. Given u, v P T Y BT, u ^ v denotes the longest common prefix of u and v. ‚ Given a finite set F , uF denotes the uniform distribution on F . ‚ Let v1 , v2 two non-decreasing functions on N or R, v1 À v2 if there is a constant C ą 0 such that v1 pxq ď v2 pCxq for all x in the domain. Let » be the equivalence relation that v1 » v2 if v1 À v2 and v2 À v1 . Note that for finitely generated infinite groups, the » equivalence class of the growth function does not depend on the choice of generating set. 2. P RELIMINARIES 2.1. Boundary behavior of random walks and connection to growth. We recall the notion of the invariant σ-field and the tail σ-field of a random walk. Let µ be a probability measure on a countable group Γ. For x P Γ, let Px be the law of the random walk trajectory pW0 , W1 , . . .q starting at W0 “ x. Endow the space of infinite trajectories GN with the usual Borel σ-field A. The shift s : ΓN Ñ ΓN acts by spg1 , g2 , . . .q “ pg2 , g3 , . . .q. The invariant σ-field I is defined as I “ tA P A : s´1 pAq “ Au, it is also referred to as the stationary σ-field. There is a correspondence between I and the space of bounded µ-harmonic functions on Γ. In particular, the invariant σ-field I is trivial (i.e. any event A P I satisfies Px pAq “ 0 or 1) if and only if all bounded µ-harmonic functions are constant, see [34]. ´n The intersection A8 “ X8 A is called the tail σ-field or exit σ-field of the random n“0 s walk. When µ is aperiodic, the Px -completion of A8 and the Px -completion of I coincide. Therefore for µ aperiodic, all bounded µ-harmonic functions are constant if and only if the tail σ-field A8 is Px -trivial for some (hence all ) x P Γ. The (Shannon) entropy of a probability measure µ on Γ is ÿ Hpµq “ ´ µpgq log µpgq. gPΓ  10  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  In the case that the measure µ has finite entropy Hpµq ă 8, the (Avez) asymptotic entropy of µ is defined as ` ˘ H µpnq hµ “ lim . nÑ8 n The entropy criterion of Kaimanovich-Vershik [34] and Derriennic [22], states that for µ of finite entropy, all bounded µ-harmonic functions are constant if and only if the Avez asymptotic entropy hµ “ 0. Given a probability measure of finite entropy and non-trivial Poisson boundary on a finitely generated group Γ, by the entropy criterion and the Shannon theorem, one can derive lower estimate for the volume growth of Γ from the tail decay of the measure. The following lemma extends [24, Lemma 6.1]. Lemma 2.1. Let Γ be a finitely generated group and |¨| “ lS a word distance on Γ. Suppose Γ admits a probability measure µ of finite entropy such that the Poisson boundary pΓ, µq is nontrivial. Let ÿ %n “ inf tr ą 0 : µ ptg : |g| ě ruq ă 1{nu and φprq “ |g|µpgq. g:|g|ďr  Then there exists a constant c “ cpΓ, µq ą 0 such that vΓ,S pRn q ě exp pcnq where Rn “ nφp%n q. Proof. If the measure µ has finite first moment, in other words the function φprq is bounded, then Γ has exponential growth. In this case the claim is true. In what follows we assume that φprq Ñ 8 as r Ñ 8. Let µ% be the truncation of measure µ at radius %, that is µ% pgq “ µpgq1t|g|ď%u . Because of the triangle inequality |gh| ď |g| ` |h|, we have ÿ ÿ |g|µpnq |g|µ% pgq “ nφp%q. % pgq ď n g  g  It follows from Markov inequality that µpnq % ptg : |g| ě Ruq ď  nφp%q . R pnq  For all n ě 2 , the total mass of the convolution power µ%n satisfies ÿ 1 n n µpnq %n pgq “ p1 ´ µptg : |g| ą %n uqq ě p1 ´ 1{nq ě . 4 g Take Rn “ 8nφp%n q, then 1 nφp%n q 1 ´ “ . 4 Rn 8 Denote by h the asymptotic entropy of µ. By the entropy criterion, non-triviality of Poisson boundary of pG, µq is equivalent to h ą 0. By Shannon’s theorem, for any  ą 0, there exists a constant N such that for any n ą N , there is a finite set Vn Ă G such that µpnq pVn q ě 1 ´  and µpnq pBpe, Rn qq ě µpnq %n pBpe, Rn qq ě  e´nph`q ď µpnq pxq ď e´nph´q for x P Vn . Consider the intersection Vn1 “ tg : |g| ď Rn u X Vn , we have 1 ´  ď µpnq pVn1 q ď |Vn1 | max1 µpnq pgq ď |Vn1 |e´nph´q . gPVn 8  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  Choose  ą 0 to be a constant less than large,  1 2  11  mint1{8, hu. We obtain that for all t sufficiently  vS pRn q ě |Vn1 | ě  1 1 nh e2 . 16   We record the following two corollaries of Lemma 2.1. Corollary 2.2. Suppose that Γ admits a probability measure µ of finite entropy with nontrivial Poisson boundary. Suppose µ satisfies µ ptg : |g| ě ruq ď  C , rα `prq  where α P p0, 1q and ` is a slowly varying function such that `pxq „ `pxb q as x Ñ 8 for some b ą 0. Then there exists a constant c “ cpΓ, µq ą 0 such that vS pnq ě exppcnα `pnqq. Proof. Let f be the asymptotic inverse of rα `prq, then f pxq „ pr`# prqq1{α , where `# is the de Bruijn conjugate of `, see [12, Proposition 1.5.15.]. Let żr dx φ̃prq “ . α `pxq x 1 Then φ̃prq „  1 1´α {`pxq, 1´α x  see [12, Proposition 1.5.8.]. It follows that  Rn “ 4nφp%n q ď C1 nφ̃pf pnqq ď C2 n1{α `# pnq´1`1{α {`pn1{α `# pnq1{α q. Under the assumption that `pxq „ `pxb q for some b ą 0, we have `# pxq „ 1{`pxq and the bound simplifies to Rn ď Cpn{`pnqq1{α . By Lemma 2.1, we have there exists constants C, c ą 0 which depend on µ such that ´ ¯ vS Cpn{`pnqq1{α ě exppcnq. Since the asymptotic inverse of px{`pxqq1{α is xα `pxq in this case, we conclude that there exists a constant c “ cpΓ, µq ą 0 such that vS pnq ě exppcnα `pnqq.  α  Corollary 2.3. Let Γ be a finitely generated group such that vΓ prq À er , where α P p0, 1q. Then any probability measure µ on Γ with finite α-moment ÿ |g|α µpgq ă 8 gPG  has finite entropy and trivial Poisson boundary. ř Proof. We first show that µ has finite entropy. Write M “ gPG |g|α µpgq. Let X1 be a ř8 random variable with distribution µ and Z “ k“1 k1Bpe,2k qzBpe,2k´1 q pX1 q. Then HpX1 q ď  8 ÿ k“1  P pZ “ kq H pX1 |Z “ kq ` HpZq.  12  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  We have 8 ÿ  P pZ “ kq H pX1 |Z “ kq ď  k“1  8 ÿ  ˇ ˇ P pZ “ kq log ˇBpe, 2k qˇ  k“1  ďC  ÿ  |g|α µpgq ă 8.  gPG  For Z, by the inequality ´a log a ď 2e M , 2pk´1qα HpZq “ ´  8 ÿ  ´1  ?  a and the Markov inequality PpZ “ kq ď  PpZ “ kq log PpZ “ kq ď 2e´1  k“1  8 ÿ  PpZ “ kq1{2 ă 8.  k“1  We conclude that µ has finite entropy. Suppose on the contrary µ has non-trivial Poisson boundary. Since µ has finite αmoment, we have %n “ inftr : µptg : |g| ě ruq ď 1{nu ď r1{α , ÿ φprq “ |g|µpgq “ opr1´α q as r Ñ 8. g:|g|ďr  Therefore by Lemma 2.2, we have that vW,T pRn q Á en where Rn {n1{α Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8. This contradicts the upper bound vΓ prq À expprα q.  2.2. Permutational wreath products. Let Γ be a group acting on a set X from the right. Let A be a group, ř the permutational wreathřproduct W “ A oX Γ is defined as the semidirect product X A ¸ Γ, where Γ acts on X A by permuting coordinates. The support suppf of f : X Ñ A consists of points of x P X such that f pxq ‰ idA . Elements of ř ř X A are viewed as finitely supported functions X Ñ A. The action of Γ on X A is τg f pxq “ f px ¨ gq. ´1 It follows that supppτ ř g f q “ psuppf q ¨ g . Elements in W “ A oX Γ are recorded as pairs pf, gq where f P X A and g P Γ. Multiplication in W is given by  pf1 , g1 qpf2 , g2 q “ pf1 τg1 f2 , g1 g2 q. When Γ and A are finitely generated, W “ A oX Γ is finitely generated as well. For more information about Cayley graphs of permutational wreath products, see [7, Section 2]. 2.3. Groups acting on rooted trees. We review some basics for groups acting on rooted trees. For more background and details, we refer to [10, Part 1], [20, Chapter VIII] or [38, Chapter 1]. Let d “ pdj qjPN be a sequence of integers, dj ě 2 for all j P N. The spherically symmetric rooted tree Td is the tree with vertices v “ v1 . . . vn with each vj P t0, 1, . . . , dj ´1u. The root is denoted by the empty sequence H. Edge set of the tree is tpv1 . . . vn , v1 . . . vn vn`1 qu. The index n is called the depth or level of v, denoted |v| “ n. Denote by Tnd the finite subtree of vertices up to depth n and Ln the vertices of level n. The boundary BTd of the tree Td is the set of infinite rays x “ v1 v2 . . . with vj P t0, 1, . . . , dj ´ 1u for each j P N. The group of automorphisms AutpTd q of the rooted tree is the group of tree automorphisms that fix the root H. The group AutpTd q admits the following canonical isomorphism ψ : AutpTd q Ñ AutpTsd q ot0,1,...,d1 ´1u Sd1 ,  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  13  where Sd is the permutation group on the set t0, 1, . . . , d ´ 1u, and s is the shift on the sequences, spd1 , d2 , . . .q “ pd2 , d3 , . . .q. We refer to the isomorphism ψ as the wreath recursion. As the isomorphism is canonical, we omit ψ and identify an automorphism and its image under ψ: for g P AutpTd q, write g “ pg0 , . . . , gd1 ´1 q τ1 pgq where the sections gj P AutpTsd q and τ1 pgq P Sd1 . The section gj represents the action of g on the subtree Tj rooted at the vertex j. The permutation τ1 pgq describes how the subtrees rooted at j, j P t0, 1, . . . , d1 ´ 1u are permuted. We refer to τ1 pgq as the root permutation of g. Apply the wreath recursion n times, we have ψ n : AutpTd q Ñ AutpTsn d q oLn AutpTnd q, g ÞÑ pgv qvPLn τn pgq, where finitary permutation τn pgq is the projection of g to the automorphism group of the finite tree Tnd , and gv is called the section of g at vertex v. Since the isomorphism ψ n is canonical, we write g “ pgv qvPLn τn pgq. Let G be a subgroup of AutpTd q. Given a vertex u P Td , the vertex stabilizer StG puq consists of these elements in G that fix u, that is StG puq “ tg P G : u ¨ g “ uu. The n-th level stabilizer StG pLn q consists of the automorphisms in G that fixes all the vertices on level n, StG pLn q “ XvPLn StG pvq. The rigid vertex stabilizer of u in G, denoted by RistG puq, consists of the automorphisms in G that fix all vertices not having u as a prefix. An element g P RistG puq only acts on the subtree rooted at u: if |u| “ n, then under the wreath recursion ψ n , the finitary permuation τn pgq is equal to identity, and the section gv is equal to identity for any v ‰ u. Since automorphisms in different rigid vertex stabilizers on the same level act on disjoint subtrees, they commute with other other. The rigid n-th level stabilizer is defined as ź RistG pLn q “ RistG puq. uPLn  We now recall the definitions of branch groups. Let T be a rooted tree of constant valency d and G be a subgroup of AutpTq acting level transitively. (1) If all rigid n-th level stabilizers RistG pLn q, n P N, have finite index in G, then we say G is a branch group. (2) We say G is a regular branch group if it acts on a regular tree T of constant valency d, and there exists a finite index subgroup K ă G such that K d is contained in ψpKq as a finite index subgroup, that is pK, . . . , K q is a finite index subgroup of loooomoooon d copies  ψpKq. In this case we say G is branching over K. The group of automorphisms of the subtree rooted at u is embedded in AutpTd q as rigid vertex stabilizer of u by (2.1)  ιp¨ : uq : AutpTusn d q Ñ AutpTsn d q oLn AutpTnd q h ÞÑ pgv q, where gu “ h and gv “ e for any v ‰ u.  It follows from the definition that if G is branching over K, then for any vertex u P T, RistG puq contains K as a subgroup. In particular, we have that ιph, uq P K for any h P K, u P T.  14  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  2.4. Grigorchuk groups. The groups tGω u were introduced by Grigorchuk in [29] as first examples of groups of intermediate growth. We recall below the definition of these groups. Let t0, 1, 2u be the three non-trivial homomorphisms from the 4-group pZ{2Zq ˆ pZ{2Zq “ tid, b, c, du to the 2-group Z{2Z “ tid, au. They are ordered in such a way that 0, 1, 2 vanish on d, c, b respectively. For example, 0 maps id, d to id and b, c to a. Let 8 Ω “ t0, 1, 2u be the space of infinite sequences over letters t0, 1, 2u. The space Ω is endowed with the shift map s : Ω Ñ Ω, spω0 ω1 . . .q “ ω1 ω2 . . .. Given an ω P Ω, the Grigorchuk group Gω acting on the rooted binary tree is generated by ta, bω , cω , dω u, where a “ pid, idqε, ε transposes 0 and 1, and the automorphisms bω , cω , dω are defined recursively according to ω as follows. The wreath recursion sends ψn : Gsn ω Ñ Gsn`1 ω ot0,1u S2 by ψn pbsn ω q “ pωn pbq, bsn`1 ω q , ψn pcsn ω q “ pωn pcq, csn`1 ω q , ψn pdsn ω q “ pωn pdq, dsn`1 ω q . The string ω determines the portrait of the automorphisms bω , cω , dω by the recursive definition above. The first Grigorchuk group corresponds to the periodic sequence ω “ p012q8 and is often denoted as G012 . See Figure 2.1 for the portraits of these tree automorphisms.  F IGURE 2.1. Portraits of generators of the first Grigorchuk group. By [29], if ω is eventually constant, then Gω has polynomial growth; otherwise Gω is of intermediate growth. When ω contains infinitely many of each of the three symbols t0, 1, 2u, Gω is an infinite torsion group. The following substitutions are used to obtain words with asymptotically maximal inverted orbit growth in [8, Section 3.2]. Define self-substitutions ζi , i P t0, 1, 2u, of  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  15  tab, ac, adu by (2.2)  ζ0 : ab ÞÑ abab, ac ÞÑ acac, ad ÞÑ abadac, ζ1 : ab ÞÑ abab, ac ÞÑ adacab, ad ÞÑ adad, ζ2 : ab ÞÑ acabad, ac ÞÑ acac, ad ÞÑ adad. ˚  ˚  It is understood that ζωn sends tabsn`1 ω , acsn`1 ω , adsn`1 ω u to tabsn ω , acsn ω , adsn ω u by the rules specified above, for example if ωn “ 0, then ζωn pabsn`1 ω q “ absn ω absn ω . ˚ One step wreath recursion gives that for w P tab, ac, adu , # pawa, wq if ζωn pwq contains an even number of a, (2.3) ψn pζωn pwqq “ pwa, awqε if ζωn pwq contains an odd number of a. This formula is used in [8, Section 3.2] (where there is a misprint), see also lecture notes of Bartholdi [6, Section F]. It follows from 2.3 that if g P Gsn`1 ω can be represented by a word in tabsn`1 ω , acsn`1 ω , adsn`1 ω u, then the substitution ζωn can be applied to g and the resulting image in Gsn ω does not depend on the choice of the representing word. The composition ζω0 ˝ . . . ˝ ζωn maps such g P Gsn`1 ω into Gω . Usually, the recursion on the first Grigorchuk group G012 is recorded as (2.4)  a “ pid, idqε, b “ pa, cq, c “ pa, dq, d “ pid, bq.  Compared with the general notation for Gω , the following identification is made: ω “ p012q8 and (2.5)  b “ bω “ cs2 ω “ dsω , c “ bsω “ cω “ ds2 ω , d “ bs2 ω “ csω “ dω .  Note that under this identification, when applying the substitutions ζi along the string ω “ p012q8 , we have the substitution ζ mentioned in the Introduction: ζ : ab ÞÑ abadac, ac ÞÑ abab, ad ÞÑ acac. For example, for n ” 0 mod 3, ζωn´1 “ ζ2 and ζωn´1 pabsn ω q “ acsn´1 ω absn´1 ω adsn´1 ω , ζωn´1 pacsn ω q “ acsn´1 ω acsn´1 ω , ζωn´1 padsn ω q “ adsn´1 ω adsn´1 ω in general notation. By the identification explained in (2.5), ζωn´1 can be written as the substitution ζ. We mention another useful substitution on G012 : the substitution σ on ta, b, c, du˚ such that (2.6)  σpaq “ aca, σpbq “ c, σpcq “ d, σpdq “ b.  It gives an homomorphism from G012 to itself. The substitution σ is used in the proof of 1{2 the anti-contraction property which leads to the lower bound en by Grigorchuk [29]. It also appears in Lysionok’s recursive presentation of the group G012 in [37]. In later sections where only the first Grigorchuk group is discussed we will adopt the usual notation as in (2.4). One should keep in mind the identification discussed above to avoid possible confusions with general notation for Gω . 2.5. Sections along a ray. A tree automorphism can be described by its portrait, see for example [10, Section 1.4]. For our purposes, it is useful to describe an automorphism by its sections along a ray (finite or infinite) which it fixes. Let T be the rooted binary tree. Let g P AutpTq and suppose v P T is a vertex such that v ¨ g “ v. Write v “ v1 v2 . . . vn . Since v is fixed by g, g is completely described by its sections at v̌1 , v1 v̌2 , . . . , v1 . . . vn´1 v̌n and v, where v̌j denotes the opposite of vj ,  16  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  F IGURE 2.2. A portrait of ra, bscra, bs´1 along 10 v̌j “ 1 ´ vj . More formally, under the wreath recursion, g “ pg0 , g1 q (there is no root permutation because v is fixed by g). Then record gv̌1 and continue to perform wreath recursion to gv1 . Record the section gv1 v̌2 and continue with gv1 v2 . The procedure stops when we reach level n and record the sections at v and its sibling. For an automorphism g which fixes an infinite ray v “ v1 v2 . . . P BT, g is described by the collection of sections tgv1 ...v̌n unPN . When all the sections gv1 ...v̌n P S2 , following the terminology of [10, Definition 1.24], we say that the automorphism g is directed along the infinite ray v, . For example, in the Grigorchuk group Gω , the generators bω , cω , dω are directed along the ray 18 . When v ¨ g “ v and all the sections gv1 ...v̌n are represented by short words from an explicit collection, we draw the picture of these sections along v to describe the element g. Although this picture is not a portrait in the strict sense, it effectively describes how g acts on the tree. Example 2.4. Take in the first Grigorchuk group the element g “ ra, bscra, bs´1 . Then the vertex 10 is fixed by g. The portrait of g along 10 is given by g0 “ cac, g11 “ id and g10 “ b. See Figure 2.2. 3. S TABILIZATION OF GERM CONFIGURATIONS The main purpose of this section is to formulate and prove Proposition 3.3 which provides a sufficient condition for stabilization of cosets of germ configurations. We recall the notion of germs of homeomorphisms. Let X be a topological space. A germ of homeomorphism of X is an equivalence class of pairs pg, xq where x P X and g is a homeomorphism between a neighborhood of x and a neighborhood of gpxq; and two germs pg1 , x1 q and pg2 , x2 q are equal if x1 “ x2 and g1 , g2 coincide on a neighborhood of x1 . A composition pg1 , x1 qpg2 , x2 q is defined if and only if x1 ¨ g1 “ x2 . The inverse of the a germ pg, xq is pg, xq´1 “ pg ´1 , x ¨ gq. A groupoid of germs of homeomorphisms on X is a set of germs of homeomorphisms of X that is closed under composition and inverse, and that contains all identity germs pidX , xq, x P X . Let G be a group acting by homeomorphisms on X from the right. Its groupoid of germs, denoted by G, is the set of germs tpg, xq : g P G, x P X u. For x P X , the isotropy group of G at x, denoted by Gx , is the set of germs tpg, xq : g P StG pxqu. In other words, Gx is the quotient of the stabilizer StG pxq by the subgroup of G which consists of elements acting trivially on a neighborhood of x.  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  17  Suppose there is a group L acting by homeomorphisms on X such that for any point x P X , the orbits x ¨ L “ x ¨ G and the isotropy group Lx of its groupoid L is trivial. We refer to such an L as an auxiliary group with trivial isotropy. Write conjugation of a germ pg, xq P Gx by σ P L as ` ˘ pg, xqσ :“ σ ´1 gσ, x ¨ σ P Gx¨σ . It’s easy to see that since L has trivial isotropy groups, if x ¨ σ1 “ x ¨ σ2 for σ1 , σ2 P L, then pg, xqσ1 “ pg, xqσ2 . With the auxiliary group L chosen, let Ĝ be the groupoid of germs of the group xG, Ly. The isotropy group Ĝx is called the group of germs in [24]. Notation 3.1. Let G ñ X by homeomorphisms and L be an auxiliary group with trivial isotropy. Suppose the isotropy group Ĝo of Ĝ is non-trivial at some point o P X . Let Ho ť Ĝo be a proper subgroup of Ĝo . For each point x P o ¨ G, fix a choice of σx P L such that o ¨ σx “ x. Let ! ) Hx :“ pg, xq P Ĝx : pσx gσx´1 , oq P H0 , then Hx is a proper subgroup of Ĝx . Let H “ HpHo q be the following sub-groupoid of G: (3.1)  H :“ tpg, xq : g P G, x P o ¨ G, pgσ ´1 , xq P Hx where σ P L, x ¨ g “ x ¨ σu.  We now discuss some examples of groupoid of germs of groups of acting on rooted trees. Let G ă AutpTd q, then G acts on the boundary of the tree X “ BTd by homeomorphisms. Let L be the subgroup of AutpTd q that consists of all finitary automorphisms. In other words, an element g P AutpTd q is in L if there exists a finite level n such that all sections gv for v P Ln are trivial. The group L is locally finite. For G ă AutpTd q, we use the group LG “ tγ P L : x ¨ γ P x ¨ G for all x P BTu as an auxiliary group with trivial isotropy groups. In particular if G acts level transitively, then L is used as the auxiliary group. The isotropy groups of the groupoid of germs are easy to recognize in directed groups (called spinal groups in [10, Chapter 2]). Example 3.2. Let Gω be a Grigorchuk group and o “ 18 . For any ω, Gω acts level transitively. Use the finitary automorphisms L as the auxiliary group. From the definition of the group we have that if x R o ¨ Gω , that is x is not cofinal with 18 , then the isotropy group pGω qx is trivial. For ω eventually constant, say eventually constant 0, we have that pdω , oq “ pid, oq and pbω , oq “ pcω , oq in pGω q´o . In¯ this case for x cofinal with 18 , pGω qx » Z{2Z. For ω not eventually constant then Ĝω “ pGω qx “ tid, b, c, du for x cofinal with 18 . In this case x  a group element g has γ-germ at x, where γ P tb, c, du, if there is a finite level n such that the section of g at x1 . . . xn is γsn ω . When ω is not eventually constant, the subgroup xby “ tid, bu is a proper subgroup of Ĝo . We refer to the corresponding sub-groupoid Hb “ Hpxbyq of G as the groupoid of xby-germs. The groupoid of xcy-germs (xdy-germs resp.) is defined in the same way from the subgroup tid, cu (tid, du resp.) of Ĝo . Proposition 3.3 below provides a sufficient condition for stabilization of H-cosets of germs based on the Green function of the induced random walk on the orbit. This criterion is applied to verify non-triviality of Poisson boundary for the measures with good control  18  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  over tail decay constructed in Section 7 on Grigorchuk groups. Given a probability measure µ on G, its induced transition kernel Pµ on an orbit o ¨ G is given by ÿ µpgq1ty“x¨gu . Pµ px, yq “ gPG  The Green function GPµ px, yq of the Pµ -random walk is GPµ px, yq “  8 ÿ  Pµn px, yq.  n“0  We refer to the book [40, Chapter I] for general background on random walks on graphs. In many situations, estimates on transition probabilities of the induced Pµ -random walk are available while the µ-random walk on the group G is hard to understand. Proposition 3.3. Let G be a countable group acting by homeomorphisms on X from the right and L be an auxiliary group with trivial isotropy. Assume that the isotropy group Ĝo is nontrivial at some point o P X and Ĝo “ Go . Let µ be a non-degenerate probability measure on G. Let Pµ be the induced transition kernel on the orbit o ¨ G and GPµ the Green function of the Pµ -random walk. Suppose there exists a proper subgroup Ho ť Ĝo such that ÿ (3.2) GPµ po, xqµ ptg P G : pg, xq R Huq ă 8, xPo¨G  where H “ HpH0 q is the sub-groupoid of G associated with Ho defined in (3.1). Then the Poisson boundary of pG, µq is non-trivial. Remark 3.4. Suppose µ have the following additional property: there exists a finite subset V Ď o ¨ G such that for any element g in the support of µ, pg, xq P H for all x R V , then the condition in Proposition 3.3 is equivalent to GPµ po, oq ă 8. In other words, the induced Pµ -random walk is transient on the orbit o ¨ G. In this special case the claim is given by [24, Proposition 2]. For example, it can be applied to measures of the form µ “ 21 pν ` ηq, where ν is of finite support and for any element g in the support of η, pg, xq P H for all x P o ¨ G. In this case we say η is supported on a subgroup of restricted germs. It is natural to consider G as an embedded subgroup of the (unrestricted) permutational wreath product Ĝo o oo¨G G as follows. ´ś ¯ Denote by W the semi-direct product xPo¨G Ĝx ¸ G. Record elements of W as pairs pΦ, gq, where g P G and Φ assigns each point x P o ¨ G an element in the isotropy group Ĝx at x. Denote by suppΦ the set of points x where Φpxq is not equal to identity of Gx . The action of G on ‘xPo¨G Ĝx is given by pτg Φqpxq “ σΦpx ¨ gqσ ´1 , where σ P L satisfies x ¨ σ “ x ¨ g. One readily checks that τ is a well-defined (doesn’t ś depend on the choice of σ) left action of G on xPo¨G Ĝx . Multiplication in W is given by pΦ, gqpΦ1 , g 1 q “ pΦτg Φ1 , gg 1 q. The semi-direct product W is isomorphic to the permutational wreath product Ĝx o oo¨G G. We now describe an embedding ϑ : G ãÑ W. Fact 3.5. Let ϑ : G Ñ W by defined as ϑpgq “ pΦg , gq such that for x P o ¨ G, (3.3)  Φg pxq “ pgσ ´1 , xq P Gx , where σ P L, x ¨ g “ x ¨ σ.  Then ϑ is a monomorphism.  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  19  Proof. Let g1 , g2 P G and σ1 , σ2 P L such that x ¨ g1 “ x ¨ σ1 , x ¨ g1 g2 “ x ¨ g1 σ2 . Then ` ˘σ´1 Φg1 pxq pg1 ¨ Φg2 q pxq “ pg1 σ1´1 , xq g2 σ2´1 , x ¨ g1 1 “ pg1 σ1´1 , xqpσ1 g2 σ2´1 σ1´1 , x ¨ g1 σ1´1 q “ pg1 g2 σ2´1 σ1´1 , xq “ Φg1 g2 pxq. It follows that ϑ is homomorphism. It is clearly injective.  Proof of Proposition 3.3. Let X1 , X2 . . . be i.i.d. random variables on G, Wn “ X1 . . . Xn . Let ϑ : G Ñ W, ϑpgq “ pΦg , gq, be the embedding as described in Fact 3.5. Along the random walk trajectory Wn , consider the Ho -coset of the germ at o. Denote by π pΦWn poqq the (right) coset of ΦWn poq in Go {Ho . By the rule of multiplication in W, ` ˘σ´1 ΦWn`1 poq “ ΦWn poq ΦXn`1 po ¨ Wn q n , σn P L, o ¨ Wn “ o ¨ σn . Therefore the event ( ` ˘( π pΦWn poqq ‰ π ΦWn`1 poq “ ΦXn`1 po ¨ Wn q R Ho¨Wn . By definition of the sub-groupoid of germs H, ( ΦXn`1 po ¨ Wn q R Ho¨Wn “ tpXn`1 , o ¨ Wn q R Hu . Then 8 ÿ  8 ÿ ` ` ˘˘ P π pΦWn poqq ‰ π ΦWn`1 poq “ P ppXn`1 , o ¨ Wn q R Hq n“0 8 ÿ  n“0  ÿ ÿ  “  µpgq1tpg,xqRHu P px “ o ¨ Wn q  n“0 xPo¨G gPG  ÿ “  GPµ po, xqµ ptg : pg, xq R Huq .  xPo¨G  If the summation is finite, by the Borel-Cantelli lemma, π pΦWn poqq stabilizes a.s. along the random walk trajectory pWn q. For each coset γHo in Ĝo {Ho , consider the tail event ! ) AγHo “ lim π pΦWn poqq “ γHo . nÑ8  Given γ P Ĝo “ Go , let g P G be a group element such that o ¨ g “ o and Φg poq “ γ. Note that Pid pAHo q “ Pg pAγHo q and for any m P N, Pid pAHo q “ Pg pAγHo q ě µpmq pg ´1 qPid pAγHo q , Pid pAγHo q ě µpmq pgqPg pAγHo q “ µpmq pgqPid pAHo q . Since µ is non-degenerate, there exists a finite m such that µpmq pgq, µpmq pg ´1 q ą 0. Then Pid pAHo q “ 0 would imply Pid pAγHo q “ 0 for all `γ P Go . On the other ˘ hand since π pΦWn poqq stabilizes with probability 1, we have Pid YγHo PGo {Ho AγHo “ 1. It follows that Pid pAHo q ą 0. Since Pid pAγHo q ě µpmq pgqPid pAHo q ą 0, it follows that Pid pAH0 q ă 1. We conclude that AHo is a non-trivial tail event and the Poisson boundary of pG, µq is non-trivial.   20  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  The boundary behavior of random walk in Proposition 3.3 can be viewed as a lamplighter boundary. Under the embedding ϑ : g ÞÑ pΦg , gq, we refer to Φg as the germ configuration of g. Let pWn q be a random walk on G with a non-degenerate step distribution µ. If (3.2) holds, then for every point x P o ¨ G, the coset of ΦWn pxq in Ĝx {Hx stabilizes with probability one along an infinite trajectory of the random walk pWn q. Thus ś ś if we view x Ĝx {Hx as the space of germ configurations mod x Hx , then when stabilization occurs, we have a limit configuration ΦW8 in this space of cosets. Endowed with the hitting distribution, it can be viewed as a µ-boundary. 4. MEASURES WITH NONTRIVIAL P OISSON BOUNDARIES ON THE FIRST G RIGORCHUK GROUP In this section, we give quick examples of non-degenerate symmetric probability measures on the first Grigorchuk group with non-trivial Poisson boundary. Choices of such measures with better quantitative control over the tail decay will be discussed in Section 6 and Section 7. Recall that the first Grigorchuk group G “ G012 acts on the rooted binary tree, and it is generated by ta, b, c, du where a “ p1, 1qε, b “ pa, cq, c “ pa, dq, d “ p1, bq. As explained in Example 3.2, the generators b, c, d have nontrivial germs at o “ 18 . The isotropy group of G at o is Go » pZ{2Zq ˆ pZ{2Zq. List the elements of Go as tid, b, c, du, where b stands for the germ pb, oq, similarly c and d stand for the corresponding germs. Take the following proper subgroup of Go : Ho “ tid, bu. The group L of finitary automorphisms of the rooted binary tree plays the role of the auxiliary group. Recall the definition of the sub-groupoid Hb “ HpHo q as in (3.1), which we will refer to as the sub-groupoid of b-germs. Now consider the subgroup Hb ă G which consists of group elements that only have trivial or b-germs, that is (4.1)  Hb “ tg P G : pg, xq P Hb for all x P 18 ¨ Gu.  Given an element in G, one can recognize whether it is in Hb from its sections in a deep enough level. Fact 4.1. Let g P G be a group element. Then g P Hb if and only if there exists k P N such that the section gv is in the set tid, a, bu for all v P L3k . Proof. The “if” direction follows from definition of Hb . We show the only if direction. Since G is contracting, for any g P G, there exists a finite level n such that all sections gv , v P Ln , are in the nucleus N “ tid, a, b, c, du. Perform the wreath recursion down further 1 or 2 levels such that n ” 0 mod 3. Suppose on the contrary there exists a vertex v P Ln such that the section is c or d. Then pg, v18 q is a c-germ or d-germ, a contradiction with g P Hb . Thus the level n satisfies the condition in the statement.  A key property we will use is that the orbit of 18 under the action of Hb is infinite. Recall the notation ιpg, uq as defined in (2.1), which denotes the automorphism in the rigid stabilizer of u that acts as g in the subtree rooted at u. Note that for any n P N, ιpra, bs, 1n q P G. Explicitly we have ιpra, bs : 1n q “ σ n pababq where σ is the homomorphism given by substitution a ÞÑ cac, b ÞÑ d, c ÞÑ b, d ÞÑ c. More generally, ιpg, uq P G  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  21  F IGURE 4.1. Portrtrait of σ k pababq in the first Grigorchuk group in usual notation. If k is divisible by 3, then the element belongs to Hb (the group with germs equal to the germ of b or trivial.) G  for any g P K “ xra, bsy and any vertex u P T, because G ` is regularly ˘ branching over k the subgroup K, see [10, Proposition 1.25]. The portrait of ι ra, bs, 1 is drawn in Figure ` ˘ 4.1. The subset tι ra, bs, 13k : k ě 0u is contained in Hb . Since 18 ¨ ra, bs “ 10018 , it follows that ` ˘ 18 ¨ ι ra, bs, 13k “ 13k`1 0018 . Therefore the orbit 18 ¨ Hb is infinite. By [24, Theorem 4], we can take a measure with non-trivial Poisson boundary of the form µ “ 21 pν ` ηq, where suppν “ ta, b, c, du and η is a symmetric measure supported on Hb with transient induced random walk on the orbit 18 ¨ Hb . Existence of such a measure η is deduced from the fact that the orbit 18 ¨ Hb is infinite by the following lemma. It is [24, Lemma 7.1] with the assumption of A being finitely generated dropped. Since the subgroup Hb is not finitely generated, we include a proof of the lemma. Let A be a countable group and B a subgroup of A. Given a probability measure η on A, recall that the induced transition kernel Pη on the (left) cosets of B is ÿ Pη pBx, Byq “ ηpgq1tBxg“Byu , gPA  where x, y P A and Bx, are cosets of B. We say the measure η is transient with respect řBy 8 to B if GPη pB, Bq “ n“0 Pηn pB, Bq ă 8. Lemma 4.2. Let A be a countable group and B ă A a subgroup of infinite index. Then there exists a non-degenerate symmetric probability measure η on A that is transient with respect to B. Apply Lemma 4.2 to the group Hb and its subgroup Hb X StG p18 q. Since the orbit 18 ¨ Hb is infinite, there is a symmetric measure η on Hb such that the induced random walk Pη on 18 ¨ Hb is transient. Let uS be uniform on the generating set S “ ta, b, c, du and take µ “ 12 puS ` ηq. Since obviously the Dirichlet forms of Pµ and Pη satisfies EPµ ě 21 EPη , by comparison principle (see for example [40, Corollary 2.14]), the induced random walk Pµ on 18 ¨ G is transient as well. Since η is supported on the subgroup Hb with only b-germs and ν is of finite support, as explained in Remark 3.4, transience of  22  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Pµ verifies the condition (3.2) in Proposition 3.3. We conclude that pG, µq has non-trivial Poisson boundary. Proof of Lemma 4.2. First take a symmetric measure µ on A such that µpidq “ 21 and the support of µ generate the group A. The induced random walk Pµ on the cosets BzA is irreducible since suppµ generates A. Since BzA is infinite, Pµ admits no non-zero invariant vector in `2 pBzAq, therefore Pµn pB, Bq Œ 0 as n Ñ 8 by strict convexity of a Hilbert space. Now we prove that if Pµn pB, Bq Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8, then some convex linear combinations of convolution powers of µ, that is measures of the form 8 8 ÿ ÿ η“ cn µpnq , cn “ 1, cn ě 0, n“1  n“1  induce transient random walks on BzA. Following [11], we call η a discrete subordination of µ. Let ψ be a smooth strictly increasing functionřon p0, 8q such that ψp0q “ 0, ψp1q “ 8 1. Suppose that we have expansion ψp1´sq “ 1´ n“1 cn sn for |s| ď 1 with coefficients cn ě 0. Then one can take 8 ÿ µψ :“ I ´ ψpI ´ µq “ cn µpnq . n“1  The class of functions ψ that are suitable for this operation is the Bernstein functions, see the book [39] and [11]. The induced random walk transition operator Pµ is a self-adjoint operator acting on I´P 2 ` pA{Bq. Denote by Es µ the spectral resolution of I ´ Pµ , ż1 I ´ Pµ “ sdEsI´Pµ . 0  Then  ż1 ψpsqdEsI´Pµ .  I ´ Pµψ “ ψ pI ´ Pµ q “ 0  It follows that  ż1 Pµ2n pB, Bq “ ψ  @ D p1 ´ ψpsqq2n d EsI´Pµ 1B , 1B . 0 1´Pµ  2 Since there A is no non-zero E Pµ -invariant vector in ` pBzAq, limsÑ0` Es I´Pµ N psq “ Es 1B , 1B , then in particular N psq Ñ 0 as s Ñ 0`. Since 8 ÿ n“0  Pµ2n pB, Bq ψ  8 ż1 ÿ  “  “ 0. Write  ż1 2n  s´1 dN ˝ ψ ´1 psq,  p1 ´ ψpsqq dN psq “  n“0 0  0  to make the Green function finite, it suffices to take some ψ such that N ˝ ψ ´1 psq ď cs1` for some  ą 0 near 0. For example one can take the measure ν on p0, 8q such that 1  νppx, 8qq “ N p1{xq 1` , x ě 1, ş and ψ to be the Bernstein function with representing measure ν, ψpsq “ p0,8q p1 ´ ř8 e´st qνpdtq. Note that the coefficients cn in the expansion ψp1 ´ sq “ 1 ´ n“1 cn sn are positive. We conclude that for this choice the Pµψ -random walk on BzA is transient.   GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  23  As explained in the proof of Lemma 4.2, the measure η with transient induced random walk on the orbit of o is obtained from discrete subordination of some non-degenerate measure on Hb . We wish to point out that in general, the measure η does not necessarily have finite entropy. In Section 5, we develop a direct method to construct measures with transient induced random walks such that the resulting measures have finite entropy and explicit tail decay bounds. Unlike the general Lemma 4.2, this construction heavily relies on the structure of the groups under consideration. This will be crucial in applications to growth estimates. 5. F URTHER CONSTRUCTION OF MEASURES WITH TRANSIENT INDUCED RANDOM WALK  5.1. Measures constructed from cube independent elements. In this subsection we describe a construction of measures with transient induced random walks. It is particularly useful in groups acting by homeomorphisms possessing a rich collection of rigid stabilizers. Transience of the induced random walk is deduced from `2 -isoperimetric inequalities. Let P be a transition kernel on a countable graph X. We assume that P is reversible with respect to π, that is πpxqP px, yq “ πpyqP py, xq. The Dirichlet form of P is defined by 1 ÿ pf pxq ´ f pyqq2 P px, yqπpxq. EP pf q “ 2 x,yPX Denote by }f }`2 pπq the `2 -norm of f with respect to the measure π. Given a finite subset Ω Ă X, denote by λ1 pΩq the smallest Dirichlet eigenvalue: ! ) λ1 pΩq “ inf EP pf q : suppf Ď Ω, }f }`2 pπq “ 1 . An inequality of the form λ1 pΩq ě ΛpπpΩqq is referred to as an `2 -isoperimetric inequality. It is also known as a Faber-Krahn inequality. The following isoperimetric test for transience is from [32, Theorem 6.12]. It is a consequence of the connection between `2 -isoperimetric inequalities and on-diagonal heat kernel upper bound, see Coulhon [16, Proposition V.1] or Grigor’yan [33]. Proposition 5.1 (Isoperimetric test for transience [32]). Suppose v0 “ inf xPX πpxq ą 0. Assume that λ1 pΩq ě ΛpπpΩqq holds for all finite non-empty subset Ω Ă X, where Λ is a continuous positive decreasing function on rv0 , 8q. If ż8 ds ă 8, 2 v0 s Λpsq then the Markov chain P on X is transient. The best possible choice of the function Λ is defined as the `2 -isoperimetric profile ΛP of P , ΛP pvq :“ inf tλ1 pΩq : Ω Ă X and πpΩq ď vu . A useful way to obtain lower bounds on ΛP is through `1 -isoperimetry. By Cheeger’s inequality (see [35, Theorem 3.1]) ˆ ˙2 1 |BP Ω| (5.1) λ1 pΩq ě , 2 πpΩq  24  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  ř where |BP Ω| “ xPΩ,yPΩc πpxqP px, yq is the size of the boundary of Ω with respect to pP, πq. In what follows we will consider Pµ on X induced by a symmetric probability measure µ on G, G ñ X. In this case Pµ is symmetric and reversible with respect to π ” 1. Lemma 5.2. Let G be a countable group acting on X, o P X be a point such that the orbit o ¨ G is infinite. Suppose there is a sequence of finite subsets Fn Ď G with |Fn | Õ 8 as n Ñ 8 and a constant c0 ą 0 such that inf |x ¨ Fn | ě c0 |Fn |.  xPo¨G  Let pλn q be a sequence of positive numbers such that  ř8 n“1  λn “ 1 and  8 ÿ  1 ă 8. p|F λ | n ´ |Fn´1 |q n“1 n Let µ“  8 ¯ ÿ λn ´ uFn ` uFn´1 , 2 n“1  where uF denotes the uniform measure on the set F . Then the induced Pµ -random walk on o ¨ G is transient. ¯ ´ Proof. Denote by Pn the transition kernel on o¨G induced by the measure 12 uFn ` uFn´1 . Under the assumption that inf xPo¨H |x ¨ Fn | ě c0 |Fn |, we have that for any set U Ă o ¨ G with |U | ď c20 |Fn |, |BPn U | c0 ě . |U | 4 Indeed, the size of the boundary is given by ÿ ÿ 1 ÿ 1` ˘ 1U c px ¨ gq ` 1U c px ¨ g ´1 q . |BPn U | “ Pn px, yq “ |F | 2 n gPF xPU,yPU c xPU n  The assumption that inf xPo¨H |tx ¨ Fn u| ě c0 |Fn | implies that for any x, ÿ ÿ 1U c px ¨ gq “ |x ¨ Fn | ´ 1U px ¨ gq ě c0 |Fn | ´ |U |. gPFn  It follows that for |U | ď  gPFn c0 2 |Fn |,  |BPn U | 1 c0 |Fn | ´ |U | c0 ě ě . |U | 2 |F0 | 4 We mention that the argument above is well-known, it is a step in the proof of the CoulhonSaloff-Coste isoperimetric inequality [17]. By Cheeger’s inequality (5.1), the `2 -isoperimetric profile of Pn satisfies 1 ´ c0 ¯2 c0 ΛPn pvq ě for all v ď |Fn |. 2 4 2 ř8 Now the random walk induced by µ is the convex linear combination Pµ “ n“1 λn Pn . By definition it is clear that EPµ ě λn EPn . Therefore we have a piecewise lower bound on ΛPµ : ´c ı 1 ´ c0 ¯2 c0 0 ΛPµ pvq ě λn for v P |Fn´1 |, |Fn | , n P N. 2 4 2 2  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  25  Plug the estimate into the isoperimetric test for transience, we have ż8 8 ÿ ds 1 ď C . 2 Λ psq s λ p|F | ´ |Fn´1 |q Pµ n 1 n“1 n If the summation on the right hand side of the inequality is finite, then by Proposition 5.1, the induced random walk Pµ is transient.  Example 5.3. Suppose there is a sequence of Fn satisfying the assumption of Lemma 5.2 with volume |Fn | „ θn . Then one can choose the sequence pλn q to be λn “ C θ´n n1` for any  ą 0. The resulting convex linear combination µ as in the statement of the lemma induces transient random walk on the orbit of o. The condition in Lemma 5.2 forces Fn X StG pxq to be small for all x in the orbit. Such sets are not common to observe, especially in the situation of totally non-free actions. In applications to Grigorchuk groups, the subsets Fn are built from a sequence of elements which satisfy an injective property which we refer to as "cube independence" defined below. We have mentioned the definition of cube independence property for k “ 1 in the Introduction, now we formulate a more general definition. For a sequence of elements g1 , g2 , . . . P G, we say the sequence satisfies the cube independence property on x0 ¨ G with parameters k “ pkn q 8 n“1 , kn P N, if for any n ě 1 and x P x0 ¨ G, the map t0, 1, . . . , k1 u ˆ . . . ˆ t0, 1, . . . , kn u Ñ x0 ¨ G pε1 , . . . εn q ÞÑ x ¨ gnεn . . . g1ε1 is injective. When the parameters kn are constant 1, we omit reference to k and say the sequence has the cube independence property. Any other ordering of the elements g1 , . . . , gn in the definition would serve the same purpose, but we choose to formulate it this way because in examples we consider it is easier to verify inductively. By definition it is clear that cube independence property is inherited by subsequences. Proposition 5.4. Suppose g1 , g2 , . . . P G is a sequence of elements satisfying the cube independence property on the orbit x0 ¨ G with k “ pkn q, kn P N. Let Fn “ tgnεn . . . g1ε1 : εj P t0, 1, . . . , kj u, 1 ď j ď nu . For any  ą 0, let µ“  ÿ n  ´ ¯ C n1` uFn ` uFn´1 , 2p1 ` k1 q . . . p1 ` kn q  where C is the normalizing constant such that µ has total mass 1. Then µ is a symmetric probability measure on G of finite entropy such that the induced Pµ -random walk on x0 ¨ G is transient. Proof. By śndefinition of cube independence property, śn we have for all x P x0 ¨ G, |x ¨ Fn | “ |Fn | “ j“1 p1 ` kj q. Choose λn “ C n1` j“1 p1 ` kj q´1 , then 8 8 ÿ 1 1 2 ÿ ´1´ ď2 “ n ă 8. λ p|Fn | ´ |Fn´1 |q λ |F | C n“1 n“1 n n n“1 n 8 ÿ  26  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  ´ ¯ ř8 Therefore by Lemma 5.2, the convex combination µ “ n“1 λ2n uFn ` uFn´1 induces transient random walk on the orbit o ¨ G. The entropy of µ is bounded by Hµ p1q ď  8 ÿ  λn log |Fn |  n“1  ˜ ¸ n ź n1` śn “C log p1 ` kj q ă 8, j“1 p1 ` kj q n“1 j“1 śn where the series is summable because j“1 p1 ` kj q ě 2n . 8 ÿ   Remark 5.5. As mentioned in the Introduction, we refer to the set Fn as an n-quasi-cubic set and the measure uFn an n-quasi-cubic measure. By definition bounds on the length of elements g1 , g2 , . . .řgive explicit estimates of the truncated moments and tail decay of n µ. More precisely, if j“1 p1 ` kj q|gj | ď `n , then maxt|g|, g P Fn u ď `n and for the measure µ in Corollary 5.4, µ pBpe, `n qc q ď  C1 n1` . p1 ` k1 q . . . p1 ` kn q  One way to produce a cube independent sequence is to select suitable elements from level stabilizers. Lemma 5.6. Let G ă AutpTd q and suppose that gn P G satisfies that gn P StG pLn q and the root permutation of the section pgn qv has no fixed point for all v P Ln . Then the sequence pgn qně0 has the cube independence property on 18 ¨ G. Proof. Given x P 18 ¨ G, we need to show injectivity of the map t0, 1un Ñ 18 ¨ G pε1 , . . . εn q ÞÑ x ¨ gnεn . . . g1ε1 . Since xg2 , . . . , gn y is in the stabilizer of level 2, we have that the first two digits of y “ x ¨ gnεn . . . g1ε1 is x1 x2 ¨ g1 . Combined with the assumption on the root permutation of pg1 qv , v P L1 , the second digit of y is different from x2 if and only if ε1 “ 1. Thus ε1 ε1 x ¨ gnεn . . . g1ε1 “ x ¨ gnn . . . g11 implies ε1 “ ε11 . The same argument recursively shows that εj “ ε1j for all 1 ď j ď n.  5.2. Critical constant of recurrence. In this subsection we consider an explicit sequence of cube independent elements on the first Grigorchuk group G, obtained by applying certain substitutions. As an application of Proposition 5.4, we evaluate the critical constant for recurrence of pG, StG p18 qq. The notion of critical constant for recurrence of pG, Hq, where H is a subgroup of G, is introduced in [25]. For a group G equipped with a length function l and a subgroup H ă G of infinite index, the critical constant for recurrence crt pG, Hq with respect to l, is defined as the sup β, where the sup is over all β ě 0 such that there exists a symmetric probability measure µ on G with transient induced random walk on HzG and µ has finite β-moment with respect to l on G: ÿ lpgqβ µpgq ă 8. gPG  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  27  When G is finitely generated and l is the word distance on a Cayley graph of G, we omit reference to l. For the rest of this subsection, G denotes the first Grigorchuk group G012 and we use the usual notation for G as in (2.4). By [25, Theorem 2], for H the stabilizer StG p18 q, the critical constant crt pG, StG p18 qq ă 1. We show that indeed crt pG, StG p18 qq is equal to the growth exponent of the permutational wreath product pZ{2Zq oS G, S “ 18 ¨ G. Theorem 5.7. Let G be the first Grigorchuk group. Then log 2 , log λ0 where λ0 is the postivie root of the polynomial X 3 ´ X 2 ´ 2X ´ 4, α0 « 0.7674. crt pG, StG p18 qq “ α0 “  The proof of Theorem 5.7 consists of two parts. To show the lower bound, we construct an explicit measure with transient induced random walks on the orbit of 18 by applying Proposition 5.4. Recall the substitutions ζ of tab, ac, adu˚ , which is used to produce words with asymptotic maximal inverted orbit growth in [7, Proposition 4.7], ζ : ab ÞÑ abadac, ac ÞÑ abab, ad ÞÑ acac. By direct calculation ζpabq “ pb, abaqε, ζpacq “ pca, acq, ζpadq “ pda, adq. Fact 5.8. Let w be a word in the alphabet tab, ac, adu such that it has even number of a’s. Then ζ n pwq is in the n-th level stabilizer, and the section at the vertex v “ x1 . . . xn is given by # w if x1 ` . . . ` xn ” n mod 2 n pζ pwqqv “ awa if x1 ` . . . ` xn ” n ´ 1 mod 2. Proof. The claim can be verified by induction on n. For w with even number of a’s, ζpwq “ pawa, wq. Note that if w has even number of a’s then so does ζpwq. Applied to ζ n´1 pwq, we have ζ n pwq “ paζ n´1 pwqa, ζ n´1 pwqq. Then the induction hypothesis on ζ n´1 pwq implies the statement on ζ n pwq.  8  By Fact 5.8 and Lemma 5.6, we have that pζ n pacqqn“1 form a cube independent sequence. With considerations of germs in mind (although not relevant in this subsection), we prefer to take the following sequence. Example 5.9. As mentioned in the Introduction, take the following sequence of elements pgn q8 n“1 in G: # ζ n pacq if n ” 0, 1 mod 3 (5.2) gn “ ζ n padq if n ” 2 mod 3. Then by Fact 5.8 and Lemma 5.6, pgn q has the cube independence property. With this sequence of cube independent elements, take the n-quasi-cubic sets Fn “ tgnεn . . . g1ε1 : εj P t0, 1u, 1 ď j ď nu . and the convex combination (5.3)  η0 “  8 ¯ ÿ C n1` ´ ´1 u ` u F n Fn 2n n“1  28  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  where C ą 0 is the normalization constant such that η0 is a probability measure. Then by Proposition 5.4, the η0 -induced random walk on the orbit of 18 is transient. By definition the length of gn can be estimated by eigenvalues of the matrix associated with the substitution ζ. Record the number of occurrences of ab, ac, ad in a word w as a column vector lpwq, then by definition of the substitution ζ, we have lpζpwqq “ M lpωq where the matrix M is » fi 1 2 0 M “ – 1 0 2 fl . 1 0 0 It follows that ¨ ˛ 0 ` ˘ |ζ n pacq| “ 2 2 2 M n ˝ 1 ‚, 0 ¨ ˛ 0 ` ˘ |ζ n padq| “ 2 2 2 M n ˝ 0 ‚. 1 Therefore |gn | ď Cλn0 , where λ0 is the spectral radius of M , that is the positive root of the characteristic polynomial X 3 ´ X 2 ´ 2X ´ 4. Proof of lower bound in Theorem 5.7. Consider the measure η0 defined in (5.3) which induces a transient random walk on the orbit of 18 by Corollary 5.4. Since n n ÿ ÿ maxt|g| : g P Fn u ď |gj | ď C λn0 “ C 1 λn0 , j“1  j“1  it follows that  ` ˘ Cn1` . η0 g : |g| ě C 1 λn0 ď 2n log 2 This tail estimate implies that for any β ă log λ0 , µ has finite β-moment. Since the η0 induced random walk on the orbit of 18 is transient, it implies log 2 crt pG, StG p18 qq ě α0 “ . log λ0  The upper bound crt pG, StG p18 qq ď α0 is a consequence of the volume growth estimate of W “ pZ{2Zq oS G in [7]. Proof of upper bound in Theorem 5.7. We show a slightly stronger statement: for any nondegenerate probability measure µ on G with finite α0 -moment, the induced random walk on the orbit of 18 is recurrent. Suppose the claim is not true, let µ be a probability measure on G with finite α0 -moment and transient induced random walk on the orbit of 18 . On W , let ν be the uniform measure on the lamp group at o “ 18 , that is ν is uniform on tid, δo1 u. Since the random walk induced by µ on the orbit 18 ¨ G is transient, the measure ζ “ 21 pµ ` νq has non-trivial Poisson boundary by [9, Proposition 3.3]. On the other hand the volume growth functions satisfy vG,S prq ď vW,T prq À expprα0 q  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  29  by [7, Lemma 5.1]. Since ζ has finite α0 -moment, Lemma 2.3 implies pW, ζq has trivial Poisson boundary, which is a contradiction.  Note that in the definition of the critical constant crt pG, Hq we restrict to symmetric random walks on G. A priori the critical constant might become strictly larger if one includes non-symmetric random walks. For example, for G “ Z and H “ t0u, crt pZ, t0uq “ 1 while biased random walk of finite range, for example µp1q “ 1 ` p and µp´1q “ 1 ´ p, p P p0, 1{2q, is transient. However the upper bound proved above shows that the critical constant of pG, StG p18 qq remains α0 if we take sup of moment over all measures with transient induced random walk on the orbit of 18 . Remark 5.10. The measure η0 with transient induced random walk defined in (5.3) can be used to show volume lower estimates for certain extensions of the first Grigorchuk group. For example, consider "double Grigorchuk groups" as in [25] which are defined as follows. Take an ω P t0, 1, 2u8 such that ω is not a shift of p012q8 and not eventually constant. Take the directed automorphism g “ bω as defined in Subsection 2.4, that is bω is a generator of the group Gω . Let Γ be the group generated by S 1 “ ta, b, c, d, gu. Since Γ has generators from two strings, it is called a double Grigorchuk group. For example, for the group Gpmq in [25, Corollary 2], the corresponding string is ω “ pp012qm 22q8 . Using the measure η0 one can show an improvement of [25, Corollary 2]. At o “ 18 , the isotropy group of the groupoid of germs of Γ is strictly larger than G. Take H “ G and apply Proposition 3.3 to the measure µ “ 12 puS 1 ` η0 q, where η0 is the measure on G defined in (5.3), then we have that µ has non-trivial Poisson boundary. It follows by Corollary 2.2 that for any  ą 0, there exists c ą 0 such that for all n ą 1, ` ˘ vΓ,S 1 pnq ě exp cnα0 { log1` n . We remark that there is a gap in the proof of [25, Proposition 4.1], in which in order to guaranteethat the measure ν considered has finite entropy, one needs to strengthen the assumption in the statement to vΓ2 ,T2 pnq ď exp pCnγ q for all n, for some γ ă 1, C ą 0 (assuming for infinitely many n is not sufficient). 6. M ORE EXAMPLES OF MEASURES WITH RESTRICTED GERMS ON THE FIRST G RIGORCHUK GROUP In this section we exhibit more examples of symmetric measures on the first Grigorchuk group with non-trivial Poisson boundary of the form 21 puS `ηq, where η is supported on the subgroup Hb which consists of elements with only trivial or b-germs. Compared to Section 4, the improvement is that the measures have finite entropy and explicit tail estimates. As a consequence we derive volume lower bounds for G012 from these measures, which can already be better than previously known estimates, see Corollary 6.4. Throughout this section denote by G the first Grigorchuk group and S the standard generating set ta, b, c, du. Recall the subgroup Hb which consists of elements of G that have only trivial or b-germs defined in (4.1). We have the following example of a sequence of elements in Hb which satisfies the cube independence property. Example 6.1. Take the sequence of elements pgn q satisfying the cube independence property defined in (5.2). From the definition, we have that for n ” 1, 2 mod 3, gn P Hb ; while for n ” 0 mod 3, gn has c-germs. Filter out the elements with c-germs and keep the subsequence g1 , g2 , g4 , g5 , g7 , g8 . . . with b-germs. For convenience of notation, relabel the elements as ĥ2k´1 “ g3k´2 , ĥ2k “ g3k´1 , k P N.  30  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  With the sequence pĥn q in Example 6.1, take the corresponding quasi-cubic sets ! ) Ĥn “ ĥεnn . . . ĥε11 : εj P t0, 1u, 1 ď j ď n . For any  ą 0, take cn “  C n1` 2n  and  η1 “  8 ¯ ÿ cn ´ uĤn ` uĤn´1 . 2 n“1  Then by Proposition 5.4, the induced random walk Pη1 on 18 ¨ Hb is transient. Let uS be uniform on the generating set S “ ta, b, c, du and µ1 “ 12 puS ` η1 q. Then by comparison principle [40, Corollary 2.14], the random walk Pµ1 on 18 ¨ G is transient. Since η1 is supported on the subgroup Hb and uS has finite support, by Proposition 3.3, pG, µ1 q has non-trivial Poisson boundary. Since η1 has finite entropy and uS is of finite support, µ1 also has finite entropy. We now estimate its tail decay. From the length estimate of the elements gn , we have n ˇ ˇ ÿ 3 n ˇ ˇ maxt|h| : h P Ĥn u ď ˇĥj ˇ ď C 1 λ02 , j“1  where λ0 is the spectral radius of M , the positive root of the characteristic polynomial X 3 ´ X 2 ´ 2X ´ 4. Therefore as explained in the remark after Corollary 5.4, ´ ´ ¯ ¯ Cn1` 3 n c µ1 B e, C 1 λ02 . ď 2n In other words, 2 c µ1 pB pe, rq q ď Cr´ 3 log2 λ0 log1` r. By Corollary 2.2, we conclude that ´ ¯ 2 vG prq ě exp cr 3 log2 λ0 { log1` r . The exponent in the bound is 3 log2 λ0 “ 23 α0 « 0.5116. This estimate is non-trivial in the 2 sense that the exponent is strictly larger than 1{2, however it is worse than the lower bound exppr0.5153 q proved in Bartholdi [5]. It is clear that in the construction of η1 , skipping every third element in the cube independent sequence pgn q leads to a significant loss. We can improve the construction by choosing another cube independent sequence that is more adapted to Hb . Note the following property of Hb . Lemma 6.2. The subgroup Hb defined as in (4.1) is locally finite. The orbit 18 ¨ Hb is 18 ¨ Hb “ tx “ x1 x2 . . . P BT : x is cofinal with 18 , x3i`1 “ 1 for all i P Nu. Proof. We first show Hb is locally finite. Let h1 , . . . , hk be a finite collection of elements in Hb . By Fact 4.1, there exists a level 3n, n P N such that for every hj , its sections on level 3n are in the set tid, a, bu. It follows that xh1 , . . . , hk y is a subgroup of xa, by oL3n AutpT3n q, where T3n is the finite rooted binary of 3n levels. Since xa, by is finite, we conclude that xh1 , . . . , hk y is finite. Recall that for any n P N, ra, bs is in the rigid stabilizer of 1n . When n ” 0 mod 3, the element ιprb, as : 1n q has b-germs. Consider the collection ιprb, as : 1n q and ιprb, as2 : 1n q, n “ 0, 3, . . .. Since 18 ¨ baba “ 1018 and 18 ¨ babababa “ 11018 , it follows that the set x “ x1 x2 . . . P BT where x is cofinal with 18 and x3i`1 “ 1 for all i P N is contained in the orbit 18 ¨ Hb .  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  31  Consider the projection of G to the abelian group xb, c, dy “ Z{2Z ˆ Z{2Z. Note that if the the projection of g is not in the subgroup xby, then g R Hb . ř Indeed under the wreath recursion to level 3, g “ pgv qvPL3 τ , the projections satisfy ḡ “ vPL3 ḡv . Thus ḡ R xby implies at least one of the sections gv satisfies that ḡv R xby. Therefore the claim follows from induction on length of g. Next we show that for any h P Hb , x “ 18 ¨ h satisfies x3i`1 “ 1 for all i P N. This can be seen by induction on word length of h. For |h| “ 1, h “ a or h “ b, the claim is true. Suppose the statement is true for |h| ă n. For h of length |h| “ n, take a word w of length n representing h and perform the wreath recursion to level 3. We claim that if h P Hb then all sections wv , v P L3 , have even number of a’s. As a consequence of the claim, the 4-th digit of 18 ¨ h is 1. To verify the claim, if wv1 v2 v3 has odd number of a’s, then by the definitions of the generators we have that the projection of the section at its sibling wv1 v2 v̌3 to xb, c, dy is not contained in xby. This contradicts with the assumption that h P Hb . Apply the induction hypothesis to h111 , we conclude that x “ 18 ¨ h satisfies x3i`1 “ 1 for all i P N.  Observe that since the subgroup Hb acts trivially on levels 3k ` 1, at the corresponding levels we can use the substitution σ instead of ζ, where σ is the substitution on ta, b, c, du˚ given by σpaq “ aca, σpbq “ c, σpcq “ d, σpdq “ b. When applied to a word in tab, ac, adu˚ , σ always doubles its length while typically the substitution ζ results in a multiplicative factor larger than 2. Define a sequence of words phn q8 n“1 by ` 2 ˘k´1 h2k´1 “ ζ ˝ σ ζpacq and h2k “ pζ 2 ˝ σqk´1 ˝ ζ 2 padq. Note that ζpacq “ abab and ζ 2 padq “ abababab, thus h2k “ h22k´1 . b Lemma 6.3. The sequence of elements phn q8 n“1 belong to the subgroup H and satisfy the 8 b cube independence property on the orbit 1 ¨ H .  Proof. Note that σpababq “ pid, ababq. By definition of σ, we have that for any word w, σpwq “ pw1 , wq where w1 isDin xa, dy. Since any element γ in the finite dihedral group @ a, d|a2 “ d2 “ 1, padq4 “ 1 satisfies γ 4 “ 1, it follows that if σpw4 q “ pid, w4 q for ` ˘j ` ˘j any word w. Since σpababq “ pacq4 , we have σ ˝ ζ 2 ˝ σ ζpacq “ pid, ζ 2 ˝ σ ζpacqq ` 2 ˘k´1 for all j ě 1. Combined with Fact 5.8, h2k´1 “ ζ ˝ σ ζpacq is in the level stabilizer of the level 3k ´ 2. Moreover in the level 3k ´ 2, at a vertex v P 13k´2 ¨ Hb , the section belongs to tac, cau; otherwise the section is trivial. Since h2k “ h22k´1 , h2k is in the level stabilizer of the level 3k ´ 1 and at a vertex v P 13k´1 ¨ Hb , the section belongs to tad, dau; otherwise the section is trivial. From the description of the sections we conclude that hn P Hb and by Lemma 5.6 they form a cube independent sequence.  With this cube independent sequence we perform the same procedure as before. Take the quasi-cubic sets Hn “ thεnn . . . hε11 : εj P t0, 1u, 1 ď j ď nu , and form the convex combination 8 ¯ ÿ C n1` cn ´ uHn ` uHn´1 with cn “ . η2 “ 2 2n n“1  32  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Let µ2 “ 12 puS ` η2 q. By Proposition 5.4 and Proposition 3.3, we have that pG, µ2 q has non-trivial Poisson boundary. The length of the elements phn q can be estimated using the substitution matrices. We obtain the following: Corollary 6.4. For any  ą 0, there exists a non-degenerate symmetric probability measure µ on G “ G012 of the form µ “ 12 puS ` ηq of finite entropy and nontrivial Poisson boundary, where η is supported on the subgroup Hb and the tail decay of µ satisfies 2  µ pBpe, rqc q À r´ log2 λ1 log1` r. The number λ1 is the largest real root of the polynomial X 3 ´15X 2 `44X ´32, 0.5700. As a consequence, ´ ¯ 2 vG pnq Á exp n log2 λ1 { log1` n .  2 log2 λ1  «  Proof. For a word w in tab, ac, adu˚ , recall that lpωq records the number of occurrences of ab, ac, ad as a column vector. Then lpσpwqq “ Alpωq where the matrix is » fi 0 1 0 A “ – 1 1 2 fl . 1 0 0 Recall the matrix M that lpζpwqq “ M lpωq. Then ˇ “ ˇ` ˘k ˇ ˇ 2 ˇ ζ ˝ σ pababqˇ “ 2  2  fi » ‰ ` 2 ˘k 2 2 M A – 0 fl . 0  Let λ1 be the largest real eigenvalue of the matrix fi » 6 5 4 M 2 A “ – 2 5 4 fl . 2 3 4 In other words λ1 is the largest real root of the characteristic polynomial X 3 ´ 15X 2 ` 44X ´ 32. Numerically λ1 « 11.3809. It follows that n{2  |hn | ď Cλ1 . Therefore from definition of η2 we have that the tail of µ2 “ 12 puS ` η2 q satisfies ´ ´ ¯c ¯ n1` n{2 À n . µ2 B e, λ1 2 The statement follows.  One cannot have a measure µ with the following property: µ “ 21 pν ` ηq, where η is supported on the subgroup Hb with smaller germ group xby and ν is of finite support, pG, µq has non-trivial Poisson boundary and η has finite α-moment for α close to the critical constant crt pG, StG p18 qq. The main drawback is that the action of any element in Hb fixes the digits x3k`1 , k P N as explained in Lemma 6.2. The orbit of 18 under Hb is much smaller than its orbit under G. Indeed by norm contracting calculations one can bound from above the growth of pZ{2Zq o18 ¨Hb Hb with respect to the induced word distance and show that a measure η on Hb with transient induced random walk on the orbit of o cannot have tail decay close to r´α0 .  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  33  7. M AIN CONSTRUCTION OF MEASURES OF NON - TRIVIAL P OISSON BOUNDARY ON G RIGORCHUK GROUPS In this section we prove our main result on existence of measures on Gω with non-trivial Poisson boundary and near optimal tail decay, where ω satisfies the following assumption. Notation 7.1. We say the string ω satisfies Assumption pFrpDqq, where D P N, if for every integer k ě 0, the string ωkD . . . ωkD`D´1 contains at least one of the following two substring: t201, 211u. "Fr" in the notation stands for frequency. Given a string ω that satisfies Assumption pFrpDqq, define pmk q8 k“0 and Iω as follows: ‚ for each k let mk be the smallest number in t0, . . . , D ´ 3u such that ωkD`mk ωkD`mk `1 ωkD`mk `2 P t201, 211u ; ‚ let Iω be the set Iω :“ tkD ` mk ` 3 : k ě 0u. Note that by definition D ě 3. The value of D is not important, as long as it is finite. Let π be a permutation of letters t0, 1, 2u and πpωq be the string pπpωqqi “ πpωi q. Then by definition of Grigorchuk groups it is clear that Gω is isomorphic to Gπpωq . We call ω ÞÑ πpωq a renaming of letters. We may also take a finite shift of ω if the resulting string is more convenient. Example 7.2. The following examples of ω satisfies Assumption pFrpDqq with some finite D depending on the sequence: ‚ Up to a renaming of letters t0, 1, 2u, every periodic sequence ω which contains all three letters. ‚ A sequence of the form p012qi1 1j1 . . . p012qik 1jk . . . with all ik , jk uniformly bounded. ‚ A word obtained by concatenating powers of 201 and 211. 7.1. Distance bounds on the Schreier graph. In this subsection we review some elementary facts about distances on the orbital Schreier graph of 18 under action of Gω . Let o “ 18 P BT and denote by Sω its Schreier graph under the action of Gω : the vertex set of Sω is o ¨ Gω and two vertices x, y P o ¨ Gω are connected by an edge labelled with s P ta, bω , cω , dω u if y “ x ¨ s. The Schreier graph Sω can be constructed by applying global substitution rules, see for example [30, Section 7]. Let dSω denote the graph distance on the Schreier graph Sω . Because the unlabelled Schreier graph of o does not depend on the sequence ω, it follows that the graph distance also doesn’t depend on ω. For this reason we can omit reference to ω and write dS for the graph distance. It is convenient to read the distance dS from the Gray code enumeration of the orbit o ¨ Gω . Explicitly, for x “ x1 x2 . . . P BT, flip all digits of x to the ray x̌1 x̌2 . . . where x̌i “ 1 ´ xi . The Grey code of x is x̄ “ x̄1 x̄2 . . . where x̄i “ x̌1 ` . . . ` x̌i  mod 2.  Note that for x cofinal with 18 , its Gray code x̄ has only finitely many 1’s . We regard such an x̄ as an element in t0u Y N represented by a binary string. Then on the Schreier graph of o, dS px, yq “ |x̄ ´ ȳ| . 8  The distance to 1 constant 0.  is particularly easy to read because the Gray code of the point 18 is  34  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Fact 7.3. Let x P BT be a point that is cofinal with 18 . Let npxq “ maxtk : xk “ 0u. Then 2npxq´1 ď dS px, 18 q ď 2npxq ´ 1. Proof. We dS px, 18 q “ |x̄|. Since the maximum index of digit 0 in x is npxq, the Grey code of x is of the form u1000 . . . where u is a prefix of length npxq ´ 1.  For general points a similar upper bound holds. Fact 7.4. Let x, y be two points cofinal with 18 . Denote by s the shift on strings. Then dS px, yq ď 2n dS psn x, sn yq ` 2n ´ 1. Proof. Write x and y in Gray codes. The Grey code of x is x “ usn x, where u is some prefix of length n, similarly ȳ “ vsn y, where v is some prefix of length n. It follows that dS px, yq “ |x̄ ´ ȳ| ď |usn x ´ usn y| ` |usn y ´ vsn y| ď 2n dS psn x, sn yq ` 2n ´ 1.  As a consequence we have the following estimate of displacement. Recall that |¨|Gω denotes the word length in the group Gω equipped with generating set ta, bω , cω , dω u. Lemma 7.5. Let g P Gω and g “ pgv qvPLn τ be its wreath recursion to level n. Then for x “ x1 x2 . . . P BT, ´ ¯ dS px, x ¨ gq ď 2n |gx1 ...xn |Gsn ω ` 1 . Proof. Write x “ vx1 , where v is the prefix v “ x1 . . . xn and x1 “ sn x. Then x ¨ g “ pv ¨ τ qx1 ¨ gv . Therefore dS px, x ¨ gq ď 2n dS px1 , x ¨ gv q ` 2n ´ 1 ď 2n p|gv | ` 1q.  7.2. Construction of the measures . Throughout the rest of this section we assume that ω satisfies Assumption pFrpDqq. The sketch for the first Grigorchuk group in the Introduction and explicit descriptions in Example 7.10 may help to understand the definitions. To avoid possible confusion about indexing, keep in mind that the string ω P t0, 1, 2u8 starts with ω0 , ω “ ω0 ω1 . . . while tree vertices are recorded as v “ v1 v2 . . .. First take a sequence of words obtained by substitutions: # ζω0 ˝ . . . ζωn´1 pabsn ω q if ωn´1 ‰ 2, (7.1) gn “ ζω0 ˝ . . . ζωn´1 pacsn ω q if ωn´1 “ 2. The sequence pgn q has the cube independence property by Lemma 5.6. From its definition in (7.1), gn has b-germs if ωn´1 ‰ 2 and c-germs if ωn´1 “ 2. Our goal is to construct a symmetric measure on Gω such that along the corresponding random walk trajectory pWn q, the xby-coset of the germ ΦWn p18 q stabilizes. To this end we introduce modifications to these gn with c-germs. The modifications are performed by taking conjugations of generators csj ω . Recall the notation that ι ph, vq denotes the group element in the rigid stabilizer of v and acts as h in the subtree rooted at v. The following fact about rigid stabilizers will be used repeatedly.  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  35  Fact 7.6. For n P N, let γ be the letter in tb, c, du be such that ωn´1 pγq “ id. Then for any vertex v P Ln , rγ sn ω , as is in the rigid stabilizer RistGω pvq and |ι prγsn ω , as , vq| ď 2n`2 . Proof. The claim that rγ sn ω , as is in the rigid stabilizer RistGω pvq is equivalent to that G n Kn “ xrγsn ω , asy s ω is in RistGω pvq, where γ P tb, c, du is the letter that ωn´1 pγq “ id. Note that γ “ γn is determined by ωn´1 , although we omit the subscript to lighten notation. The claim can be shown by induction on n. For n “ 1, let y be a letter y ‰ γ, then payω aγω q2 “ pid, aγsω aγsω q, the claim is true. Suppose it is true for n ´ 1. For n, let y be a letter such that ωn´2 pyq “ id if ωn´2 ‰ ωn´1 ; and y ‰ γ if ωn´2 “ ωn´1 . Then in either case, paysn´1 ω aγsn´1 ω q2 “ pid, aγsn ω aγsn ω q and it is easy to check that paysn´1 ω aγsn´1 ω q2 P Kn´1 . Similarly pysn´1 ω aγsn´1 ω aq2 “ paγsn ω aγsn ω , idq. We have verified the induction step for rγsn ω , as and the claim follows. To see the length estimate, for g P Kn , let w be a reduced word representing g and apply the substitution a ÞÑ aya, b ÞÑ b, c ÞÑ c, d ÞÑ d to the word w, where y is a letter such that ωn´2 pyq “ id if ωn´2 ‰ ωn´1 ; and y ‰ γ if ωn´2 “ ωn´1 . Then the resulting word w1 satisfies that |w1 | ď 2|w| and its image h in Gsn´1 ω satisfies h “ pid, gq. This is because g can be written as a product of elements of g g the form ra, γsn ω s , rγsn ω , as where g P Gsn ω , and the substitution induces a homomorphism from Gsn ω to Gsn´1 ω . The image of aw1 a in Gsn´1 ω is pg, idq. Therefore starting from rγsn ω , as at vertex v, apply this substitution procedure recursively up the levels, we obtain a word of length 2n`2 such that its image in Gω is ι prγsn ω , as , vq.  For k, n P N both divisible by D, define the set Wkn of vertices of depth k such that ui “ 1 except for those i with n ` i P Iω , (7.2)  Wkn :“ tu P Lk : u “ u1 . . . uk , ui “ 1 if n ` i R Iω u .  Recall that the set Iω is defined in Notation 7.1. The cardinality of the set Wkn is 2k{D . Given an integer j, denote by j̄ the residue of j mod D, j̄ P t0, . . . , D ´ 1u. We now define the set Vkj which will be the index set of a collection of conjugates of the element 1 pj ` D ´ j̄ ` kq csj ω in Gj “ Gsj ω . Let k be an integer divisible by D, write `pk, jq “ D j and define Vk the collection of vertices ! ) (7.3) Vkj :“ 1D´j̄ u1m`pj,kq `2 0 : u P Wkj`D´j̄ , where m` is defined in Notation 7.1, m` P t0, . . . , D ´ 3u. In words, Vkj is obtained from the set Wkj`D´j̄ by appending some 1’s as prefix to match with D-blocks and adding 1m`pj,kq `2 0 at the end. It is important that any v P Vkj ends with digit 0. The cardinality of the set Vkj is 2k{D , the same as the cardinality of Wkj`D´j̄ . Given a vertex v “ v1 . . . vk1 P Vkj , where k 1 “ D ´ j̄ ` k ` m`pj,kq ` 3 denotes the length of v, take the following sequence of elements in Gj “ Gsj ω : # id if vi “ 1 v (7.4) hi :“ ι prbsj`i´2 ω , as , v1 . . . vi´2 q if vi “ 0. By definition of Vkj in (7.3), if vi “ 0 then the string ωj`i´3 ωj`i´2 ωj`i´1 is either 201 or 211. Since the digit ωj`i´3 in this case must be 2, by Fact 7.6, rbsj`i´2 ω , as is in the rigid  36  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  F IGURE 7.1. A conjugated element for v “ 110, the only label c is at v (the corresponding ray is red). The picture shows a turn over 201 on the left and a turn over 211 on the right, in general notation. stabilizer of the vertex v1 . . . vi´2 in Gj . The letter following ωj`i´3 is different from 2, therefore rbsj`i´2 ω , as acts as bsj`i´1 ω a on the right subtree. Since hvi is in the rigid stabilizer of v1 . . . vi´2 , it is easy to verify recursively that by definition of the elements hvi in (7.4), we have 18 ¨ hv1 hv2 . . . hvk1 “ v18 . For each v P Vkj , take the conjugation of csj ω in Gj (7.5)  cvj :“ phv1 hv2 . . . hvk1 q  ´1  csj ω phv1 hv2 . . . hvk1 q .  We have the following description of the element cvj . The portrait of an element along a ray segment is explained in Subsection 2.5. Lemma 7.7. Let v P Vkj , D|k and write k 1 “ |v| the length of v. The vertex v is fixed by cvj and along the ray segment v the only nontrivial sections of cvj are at tv1 . . . vi 0 : ωj`i ‰ 1, 0 ď i ď k 1 ´ 1u. Among these, for i ď k 1 ´ 2 and ωj`i ‰ 1, if vi`2 “ 0 then the section at v1 . . . vi 0 is bsj`i`1 ω absj`i`1 ω , otherwise the section is a. For i “ k 1 ´ 1, at level k 1 , the only non-trivial section is csj`k1 ω at v. Proof. For those indices i such that vi “ 0, conjugation by hvi is nontrivial only in the subtree rooted at v1 . . . vi´2 , where the section is conjugated by rbsj`i´2 ω , as. Effect of conjugation by rbsj`i´2 ω , as is drawn explicitly in Figure 7.1 with subscripts omitted. The portrait of cvj is obtained by applying these conjugations one by one (where every nontrivial conjugation corresponding to a 0 in v results in a turn illustrated in the pictures).  Remark 7.8. The reason we need 201 or 211 in Assumption pFrpDqq to perform these conjugations is the following: the digit 2 is needed for rb, as to be in the rigid stabilizer at the corresponding level, the second digit different from 2 implies rb, as acts as ab, ba on the next level, and the last digit 1 implies that the sections of c that gets swapped are c and id. As a consequence, cvj fixes the ray 18 and vertices of the form 1m 0. It is possible that the arguments can work through under the weaker assumption that one can find 20 or 21 in every D-block, but it simplifies calculations to assume the third digit is 1.  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  37  Next we apply the substitutions ζx to acvj , which is an element in Gj , to obtain an element in Gω . Given j and a vertex v P Vkj where D|k, define ` ˘ (7.6) g̃jv :“ ζω0 ˝ . . . ˝ ζωj´1 acvj . Lemma 7.9. The element g̃jv is well defined (the substitutions ζωi ’s can be applied). It is in the j-th level stabilizer and when ωj´1 ‰ 1, the sections of g̃jv at vertices of Lj are in ( acvj , cvj a . Proof. As explained in the proof of Fact 7.6, in Gj each non-trivial hvi which is defined to ˚ be ι prbsj`i´2 ω , as , v1 . . . vi´2 q, it can be represented as a reduced word in tab, ac, adu , where b is understood as bsj ω , so do c, d. It follows that after applying the conjugations to c, the element cvj can be represented either by a reduced word of the form wa, where w P tab, ac, adu˚ , or by γw where γ P tb, c, du and w P tab, ac, adu˚ . In first case acvj can be represented by a word in tba, ca, dau˚ , in the second case it can be represented by a word in tab, ac, adu˚ . In either case the substitutions ζωi can be applied to acvj . The second claim follows from (2.3).  Let pkn q be a sequence of increasing positive integers divisible by D to be determined later, kn ! n. For n divisible by D, we proceed to construct a measure υn on Gω which will replace the n-quasi-cubic measure. First take the following sets Fj,n , 1 ď j ď n. ‚ For an index j such that ωj´1 “ 2 and n ´ kn `ă j˘ ď n, define Fj,n to be the following set of elements g̃jv “ ζω0 ˝ . . . ˝ ζωj´1 acvj , ! ) j 8 |1 ě n ´ j ` D (7.7) Fj,n :“ g̃jv | v P V2k and ^ v| , n where u ^ v denotes the longest common prefix of two rays u and v. The set Fj,n j is indexed by the subset of V2k which consists of vertices with prefix 1n´j`D . n 2kn ´pn´j`j̄q  D . The cardinality of Fj,n is 2 ‚ For indices j P t1, . . . , nu other than those with ωj´1 “ 2 and n ´ kn ă j ď n as specified above, keep the single element gj and set Fj,n “ tgj u, where gj is defined in (7.1). In what follows n is always an integer divisible by D. Take the direct product n ź (7.8) Fn “ Fi,n  i“1 n  and the product of the hypercube t0, 1u with Fn , Λn “ t0, 1un ˆ Fn .  (7.9)  Define θn : Λn Ñ Gω to be the map θn pp, γqq “ γnn . . . γ11 , where  “ p1 , . . . , n q P t0, 1un and γ “ pγ1 , . . . , γn q, γi P Fi,n . Take the measure υn on Gω to be the push-forward of the uniform measure uΛn under θn , that is |tp, γq P Λn : θn pp, γqq “ gu| . |Λn | In other words, a random element with distribution υn can be obtained as follows. Take independent random variables ti , γi | 1 ď i ď nu where for each i, i is uniform on t0, 1u (7.10)  υn pgq “  38  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  and γi is uniform on the set Fi,n . Then the group element γnn . . . γ11 has distribution υn . We refer to υn as a uniformised n-quasi-cubic measure. For the purpose of symmetrization, set the measure υ̌n to be ˘ ` υ̌n pgq “ υn g ´1 . Finally, for β P p0, 1q, take the convex combination of the measures (7.11)  µβ “  1 1 uS ` 2 2  ÿ  Cβ 2´nβ pυn ` υ̌n q ,  nPN,D|n  where uS is the uniform measure on the generating set ta, bω , cω , dω u, Cβ ą 0 is the normalization constant such that µβ is a probability measure. Note that although suppressed in the notations, the measure µβ depends on the sequence pkn q. Example 7.10. We explain the definitions on the first Grigorchuk group G “ G012 , in the usual notation as in (2.4). The correspondence between two systems of notations (usual and general) on G is explained in (2.5). The defining string of G is p012q8 “ 01p201q8 , with a shift of two digits it satisfies Assumption FrpDq, D “ 3. In Notation 7.1, for the shifted string ω “ p201q8 , we have mk “ 0 and Iω “ 3N. On G the sequence pgn q defined in formula (7.1) is # gj “  ζ j pacq if j ” 0, 1 mod 3, ζ j padq if j ” 2 mod 3,  in the usual notation. This sequence has appeared in Subsection 5.2 and Section 6. Among them those gj with j ” 0 mod 3 have c-germs, for which we will perform the conjugations. In what follows k is divisible by 3 and n ” 2 mod 3 (where 2 comes from the shift of two digits from p012q8 to p201q8 ). The set Wkn defined in (7.2) is Wkn “ tu : |u| “ k and u3j`1 “ u3j`2 “ 1 for all j ě 0u . In other words, Wkn consists of vertices of length k that are concatenations of segments 111 and 110. For j ” 0 mod 3, the set Vkj defined in (7.3) is ! ) Vkj “ 11u110 : u P Wkj`2 , that is vertices of the form 11 p11˚q . . . p11˚q 110, where at ˚ the digit can be 0 or 1. The looooooomooooooon k digits  Vkj is b  cardinality of the set 2 . Note that the set Vkj is contained in the Hb -orbit of the vertex 12`k`3 , where H is the subgroup of G which consists of elements with only xbygerms, see Figure 7.2. Figure 1.4 draws the portrait of a conjugated element cv “ cvj indexed by v P Vkj as defined in (7.5). Note that since p012q8 is of periodicity 3, for all j ” 0 mod 3, cvj is the same element, thus we can omit reference to j. For n ” 2 mod 3, take a parameter kn divisible by 3. In the sequence pgj qnj“1 , for these j ď n ´ kn or j ” 1, 2 mod 3, let Fj,n “ tgj u; for these j such that j ” 0 mod 3 k{3  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  39  F IGURE 7.2. Grey and black vertices are on the orbit of the rightmost ray under Hb . These are vertices of the form p˚qp˚ ˚ 1qp˚ ˚ 1q . . . . The subsets of grey vertices on levels ” 2 mod 3 show vertices that are in the indexing set for conjugaction in the definition of cv . They are of the from p11qp11˚qp11˚q . . . . Grey verticies of any level are prefixes of such allowed vertices. and n ´ kn ă j ď n, replace gj by the set Fj,n defined in (7.7), which is $ , ’ / & . j v n´j`3 p11˚q . . . p11˚q 110 and v has prefix 1 . Fj,n “ ζ pac q : v “ 11 looooooomooooooon ’ / % 2kn digits  The uniformised n-quasi-cubic measure υn can be described as follows. For 1 ď j ď n, independently choose each γj uniformly from the set Fj,n , and choose an independent random variable p1 , . . . , n q uniformly from t0, 1un , then the random group element γnn . . . γ1n has distribution υn . Finally the measure µβ defined with parameter sequence pkn q in (7.11) is a convex combination of uS , S “ ta, b, c, du and the uniformised n-quasi-cubic measures υn and their inverses υ̌n , over all n ” 2 mod 3. 7.3. Non-triviality of the Poisson boundary. The goal of this subsection is to show that with some appropriate choices of β and A, the measure µβ defined in (7.11) with kn “ A tlog2 nu has non-trivial Poisson boundary. Recall that as explained in Example 3.2, the isotropy group of the groupoid of germs of Gω ñ BT at 18 is isomorphic to Z{2Z ˆ Z{2Z “ xby ˆ xcy. An element g P Gω has only xby-germs if and only if there is a level n such that all sections gv are in tid, a, bsn ω u, v P Ln . Let H “ xby ă pGω qo and Hb be the set of germs that are either trivial or b as in (3.1). To apply Proposition 3.3, we need to verify that the summation ÿ ` (˘ GPµβ po, xqµβ g P G : pg, xq R Hb xPo¨G  is finite, where Pµβ is the transition kernel on o ¨ G induced by µβ . To this end we show the following upper estimate on the Green function.  40  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  1 Corollary 7.11. Let β P p1 ´ D , 1q and kn “ A tlog2 nu. For any  ą 0, there exists a constant C “ Cpβ, D, q ą 0 such that for any x, y P 18 ¨ G, the Green function satisfies ˙β´1 ˆ 1´β 2A dS px, yq plog2 dS px, yqq´ 1`β p D ´q . GPµβ px, yq ď C 2A log2 dS px, yq  Corollary 7.11 is proved in Subsection 7.5. For the µβ -weights in the summation, we have the following. Proposition 7.12. Let υn be defined as in (7.10) and o “ 18 . Let f : R` Ñ R` be a non-increasing function such that there exists constants D1 P pD, 8q, 1 f p2xq ě 2´ D1 for all x ě 1. f pxq  Then there exists a constant C “ CpD1 q ă 8 such that ÿ  f pdS po, xqq υn  `  g P G : pg, xq R Hb  (˘  ` ˘ ď C2n f 2n`2kn .  xPo¨G  The same inequality holds with υn replaced by υ̌n . Proposition 7.12 is proved in Subsection 7.6. With these two estimates we prove that for some appropriate choice of parameters, along the random walk trajectory the xby-coset of the germ at 18 stabilizes. ˘ ` 1 ,1 Theorem 7.13. Let ω be a string satisfying Assumption pFrpDqq. Then for β P 1 ´ D and integer A ą Dp1`βq 2p1´βq divisible by D, the measure µβ on Gω defined as in (7.11) with kn “ A tlog2 nu has non-trivial Poisson boundary. Proof. We show that the summation ÿ ` (˘ GPµβ po, xqµβ g P G : pg, xq R Hb xPo¨G  is finite, then non-triviality of the Poisson boundary pGω , µβ q follows from Proposition 3.3. ` ˘ 1´β 2A Let  ą 0 be a small constant such that 1`β D ´  ą 1. By Corollary 7.11, there is a constant C ă 8 only depending on β, D,  such that ˆ ˙β´1 1´β 2A dS px, yq GPµβ px, yq ď C plog2 dS px, yqq´ 1`β p D ´q . log2A d px, yq S 2 ´ ¯β´1 ´ 1´β 2A ´ s plog2 sq 1`β p D q . Then f satisfies the assumption of PropoLet f psq “ C log2A s 2  sition 7.12 with D1 “  1 1´β  ą D. By Proposition 7.12,  (˘ υn ` υ̌n ` g P G : pg, xq R Hb 2 xPo¨G ÿ (˘ υn ` υ̌n ` g P G : pg, xq R Hb ď f pdS po, xqq 2 xPo¨G ` ˘ ďC 1 2n f 2n`2kn , ÿ  GPµβ po, xq  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  41  where C 1 is a constant depending only on β. Summing up this estimate to µβ , ÿ (˘ ` GPµβ po, xqµβ g P G : pg, xq R Hb xPo¨G  ÿ ÿ  f pdS po, xqq2´nβ  ďCβ D|n xPo¨G  ďCβ C 1  ÿ  (˘ υn ` υ̌n ` g P G : pg, xq R Hb 2  ˘ ` 2´nβ 2n f 2n`2kn  D|n  ˆ ďCβ C 1 C  ÿ  2np1´βq  D|n  ďCβ C 1 C  8 ÿ  1´β  2n`2kn pn ` 2kn q2A  ˙β´1  2A ´ 1´β 1`β p D ´q  pn ` 2kn q  2A  n´ 1`β p D ´q .  n“1  In the last step we plugged in kn “ A tlog2 nu. Since we have follows that the summation is finite.  1´β 1`β  ` 2A D  ˘ ´  ą 1, it   The rest of the section is devoted to the proofs of Corollary 7.11 and Proposition 7.12. 7.4. Estimates on the induced transition kernel. In this subsection we give some bounds on the transition kernel Pµβ , which will be used to derive Green function upper bounds. We use definitions and notations from Subsection 7.2. By the definition of the set Fj,n in (7.7) we have the following: Fact 7.14. Let j be an index such that ωj´1 “ 2 and n ´ kn ă j ď n. Then on the finite level n ` D ` 1, the action of any element g̃jv P Fj,n is the same as the element gj . Proof. This is because in the definition of Fj,n , the ray segment v is required to satisfy |v ^ 18 | ě n ´ pj ´ j̄q ` D. The first level that sees the difference between the portraits of g̃jv and gj is ě n ` D ` 2.  Because of the previous fact, the following uniqueness property is inherited from pgn q. n  n  Lemma 7.15. Let x P Ln`D`1 . Suppose pi , γi qi“1 , p˜ i , γ̃i qi“1 P Λn are such that x ¨ γnn . . . γ11 “ x ¨ γ̃n˜n . . . γ̃1˜1 . Then i “ ˜i for all 1 ď i ď n. We derive a displacement estimate from Lemma 7.5 and description of elements in Fj,n from Lemma 7.7 and Lemma 7.9. Lemma 7.16. Let j be an index such that ωj´1 “ 2 and n ´ kn ă j ď n. Let g̃jv P Fj,n , then for any x P 18 ¨ G, # j`1 ˘ ` 2j`|s x^sv|`4 if |sj`1 x ^ sv| ě n ´ j ` D, v dS x, x ¨ g̃j ď 2j`2 if |sj`1 x ^ sv| ă n ´ j ` D. Proof. We show the second bound first. Since by definitions, v has prefix 1n´j`j̄`D , |sj`1 x ^ sv| ă n ´ j ` D implies that |sj`1 x ^ 18 | ă n ´ j ` D. In this case the action of g̃jv on x is the same as gj , that is x ¨ g̃jv “ x ¨ gj . Therefore ˘ ` dS x, x ¨ g̃jv “ dS px, x ¨ gj q ď 2j`2 .  42  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Now suppose |sj`1 x ^ sv| ě n ´ j ` D. By definition of g̃jv and Lemma 7.9, depending řj parity of i“1 xi , we need to consider psj xq ¨ acvj or psj xq ¨ cvj a. By description of cvj in Lemma 7.7 and the distance bound in Lemma 7.5, we have that for any ray y, dS py, y ¨ cvj q ď 2|y^v|`4 . Since ˘ ` ˘ ` ˘ ( ` dS x, x ¨ g̃jv ď 2j max dS psj x, sj x ¨ acvj q, dS psj x, sj x ¨ cvj aq , the claim follows.  Lemma 7.16 implies that max dS px, x ¨ γq ď 2j`2kn `2D`4 .  γPFj,n  By the triangle inequality, for any x and  P t0, 1un , max dS px, x ¨ γnn . . . γ11 q ď 2n`2kn `2D`5 .  γPFn  The purpose of introducing the conjugations cvj and randomizing over v in the construction of the measure υn is to average so that the tail decays of measures is lighter than the maximum indicated above. Lemma 7.17. We have the following upper bounds: (i): Let j be a level such that n ´ kn ď j ď n and ωj´1 “ 2. For any ` such that n ď ` ď j ` 2kn ` 2D ` 4 and x P 18 ¨ G, ` (˘ 1 uFj,n γ : dS px, x ¨ γq ě 2` ď 2´ D p`´nq`2 . (ii): For any p1 , . . . , n q P t0, 1un , n ď ` ď n ` 2kn ` 2D ` 5 and x P 18 ¨ G, ` (˘ 1 uFn γ : dS px, x ¨ γnn . . . γ11 q ě kn 2` ď 8kn 2´ D p`´nq . Proof. (i). By Lemma 7.16, for such `, ˇ ` (˘ ` v ˇ j`1 (˘ uFj,n γ : dS px, x ¨ γq ě 2` ď uFj,n g̃3j : ˇs x ^ sv ˇ ě ` ´ j ´ 4 . j Recall that Fj,n is indexed by strings v P V2k and |18 ^ v| ě n ´ j ` D. The numˇ j`1 ˇ n ber of such strings v such that ˇs x ^ sv ˇ ě ` ´ j ´ 4 is bounded from above by 1 2 D pD´j̄`2kn ´p`´j´3qq , because the first ` ´ j ´ 3 digits of v is prescribed to agree with 1 1sj`1 x. By definition, the size of Fj,n is 2 D p2kn ´pn´j`j̄qq . Therefore, for the uniform measure on Fj,n , we have that  uFj,n  `  ˇ ˇ (˘ 2 D1 p2kn ´p`´j`j̄´3´Dqq 1 v g̃3j : ˇsj`1 x ^ sv ˇ ě ` ´ j ´ 4 ď ď 4 ¨ 2´ D p`´nq . 1 2 D p2kn ´pn´j`j̄qq  (ii). Since for i ď n ´ kn , Fi,n “ tgi u, by triangle inequality we have for all x, ` ˘ n´kn dS x, x ¨ γn´k . . . γ11 ď 2n´kn `3 . n  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  43  For indices i ą n ´ kn , ` ` (˘ n´kn `1 ˘ uFn γ : dS x, x ¨ γnn . . . γn´k ě kn 2` n `1 (˘ ` ` j`1  ˘ ďuFn γ : Dj, n ´ kn ă j ď n and dS x ¨ γnn . . . γj`1 , x ¨ γnn . . . γj j ě 2` n ÿ ` (˘ sup uFj,n γj : dS px, x ¨ γj q ě 2` ď 8 j“n´kn `1 xP1 ¨G 1  ď4kn 2´ D p`´nq . Combining the two parts, we obtain (˘ ` uFn γ : dS px, x ¨ γnn . . . γ11 q ě kn 2` (˘ ` ` n´kn ˘ ě kn 2` ´ 2n´kn `3 ďuFn γ : dS x, x ¨ γnn . . . γn´k n 1  ď8kn 2´ D p`´nq .  Because of the modifications, the induced transition kernel Pµβ on the Schreier graph Sω is not comparable to a transition kernel expressed in terms of the distance function dS px, yq. Indeed the jump kernel Pµβ px, ¨q depends on the location x, rather than the distance dS px, ¨q. The following upper bounds somewhat consider the worst scenario. 1 ă Proposition 7.18. Consider µβ defined in (7.11) with kn “ A tlog2 nu, where 1 ´ D β ă 1 and A is an integer divisible by D. There exists constant C “ CpD, βq ă 8 such that: (i): For any x, y P 18 ¨ G ,  Pµβ px, yq ď CdS px, yq´1´β plog2 dS px, yqq  1 `βq 2Ap1´ D  plog2 log2 dS px, yqq  1 1` D  .  (ii): For any x P 18 ¨ G, ÿ 1 2Apβ´ D q 1` 1 Pµβ px, yq ď Cr´β plog2 rq plog2 log2 rq D . y:dS px,yqěr  ÿ  1 q 2Apβ´ D  dS px, yq2 Pµβ px, yq ď Cr2´β plog2 rq  1 1` D  plog2 log2 rq  .  y:dS px,yqďr  Proof. (i). Given x, y, write `px, yq “ log2 dS px, yq and let n0 “ min tn : `px, yq ď n ` 2kn ` 2D ` 5u . Then for n ă n0 , y R x ¨ θn pΛn q. For n ě n0 , either y R x ¨ θn pΛn q, in this case υn does not contribute to Pµβ px, yq; or by Lemma 7.15 there is a unique  P t0, 1un such that there exists γ P Fn with x ¨ γnn . . . γ11 “ y. In the latter case, 1 Pυn px, yq “ n uFn ptγ : x ¨ γnn . . . γ11 “ yuq ď 2´n . 2 Moreover, by the second claim in Lemma 7.17, if n ă `px, yq ` log2 kn , ´! )¯ 1 Pυn px, yq ď n uFn γ : dS px, x ¨ γnn . . . γ11 q ě 2`px,yq 2 1 8 ď n kn 2´ D p`px,yq´n´log2 kn q . 2 Since the induced transition probability Pυ̌n px, yq “ Pυn py, xq, it satisfies the same bound in terms of `px, yq.  44  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Split Pµβ px, yq into two parts: `px,yq ÿ  an pPυn px, yq ` Pυ̌n px, yqq 2 něn0 ÿ an II “ pPυn px, yq ` Pυ̌n px, yqq , 2 I“  ną`px,yq  where the coefficients are an “ Cβ 2´βn . For the first part, the upper bound on Pυn px, yq above implies Iď  `px,yq ÿ něn0  8an 1` D1 ´ 1 p`px,yq´nq kn 2 D 2n  1  “ 2´ D `px,yq`3  `px,yq ÿ něn0  1  ď ACβ 2´ D `px,yq`3  Cβ 1` 1 kn D 1 np1´ `βq D 2  `px,yq ÿ  1  1  2´np1´ D `β q plog2 `px, yqq1` D  něn0 1 1 `β q 1 ´D `px,yq ´n0 p1´ D  ďC2  2  1  plog2 `px, yqq1` D .  Since n0 ` 2kn0 ď `px, yq ď n0 ` 2kn0 ` 2D ` 5, we have 1  1  1  I ď C 1 2´ D `px,yq 2´p`px,yq´2kn0 qp1´ D `β q plog2 `px, yqq1` D 1  1  ď C 1 2´`px,yqp1`βq `px, yq2Ap1´ D `βq plog2 `px, yqq1` D “ C 1 dS px, yq´1´β plog2 dS px, yqq  1 2Ap1´ D `βq  plog2 log2 dS px, yqq  1 1` D  .  For the second part, from the bound Pυn px, yq ď 2´n we deduce II ď Cβ 2´p1`βq`px,yq “ Cβ dS px, yq´1´β . Combine these two parts we obtain statement (i). (ii). To bound the tail, note that ÿ  Pυn px, yq “  y:dS px,yqěr  ÿ  Pυ̌n px, yq “  y:dS px,yqěr  1 2n 1 2n  ÿ  uFn ptγ : d px ¨ γnn . . . γ11 , xq ě ruq ,  Pt0,1un  ÿ  uFn  ´! ´ ¯ )¯ ´1 γ : d x ¨ pγnn . . . γ11 q , x ě r .  Pt0,1un  Then it follows from Lemma 7.16 that for n ď log2 r ď n ` 2kn ` 2D ` 5, 1 2  ÿ y:dS px,yqěr  pPυn ` Pυ̌n q px, yq ď sup uFn x,  ´! ´ ¯ )¯ ´1 γ : d x ¨ pγnn . . . γ11 q , x ě r  1 1 1` D ´D plog2 r´nq  ď 8kn  2  .  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  45  ( Let n0 “ min n : 2n`2kn `2D`5 ě r . Then ÿ  Pµβ px, yq ď  log ÿ2 r něn0  y:dS px,yqěr  log ÿ2 r  ď  ÿ  an  y:dS px,yqěr  ÿ 1 pPυn ` Pυ̌n q px, yq ` 2 nąlog  1 1 1` D ´D plog2 r´nq  8an kn  2  ÿ `  něn0  an 2  r  an  nąlog2 r 1 1 1` D plog2 r´n0 q ´D  ď C 1 2´βn0 kn0  2  ` Cβ r´β ,  where in the last step the assumption that β ą 1{D is used. By definition of n0 , we have that ÿ 2A β´ 1 1` 1 Pµβ px, yq ď C 1 r´β plog2 rq p D q plog2 log2 rq D . y:dS px,yqěr  Finally, for the truncated second moment, by the tail bound obtained above, we obtain ÿ  2  dS px, yq Pµβ px, yq ď  log ÿ2 r j“1  y:dS px,yqďr  ÿ  p2j q2  Pµβ px, yq  y:dS px,yqě2j´1  1` 1 2A β´ 1 ď Cr2´β plog2 rq p D q plog2 log2 rq D .   1 7.5. Upper bounds on the Green function. Throughout this subsection β P p1 ´ D , 1q and kn “ A tlog2 nu, and the measure µβ is defined in (7.11). The following on-diagonal upper bound does not depend on the choice of pkn q because by construction, on the finite level Ln the transition kernel induced by υn coincide with the one induced by uFn . The same argument as in Lemma 5.2 implies that the ηβ -induced random walk on the orbit 18 ¨ Gω admits the following on-diagonal upper bound.  Proposition 7.19. Let Pµβ be the transition kernel on 18 ¨ Gω induced by µβ . Then there exists a constant C “ Cpβq ă 8 such that for t P N, sup x,yP18 ¨G  Pµt β px, yq ď  C . t1{β  Proof. Let Pn be the transition kernel on the orbit of o induced by 12 pυn ` υ̌n q. As in the proof of Lemma 5.2, from Lemma 7.15 we derive that for a set U Ă o ¨ Gω with volume |U | ď 2n´1 , |BPn U | 1 ě . |U | 2 Then by the Cheeger inequality (5.1) and the fact that Pµβ is a convex combination of Pn ’s, we have that the `2 -isoperimetric profile of Pµβ satisfies ΛPµβ p2n´1 q ě  Cβ ´nβ 2 , n ě 1. 2  That is, ΛPµβ pvq ě cβ v ´β for v ě 1. Such a lower bound for the `2 -isoperimetric profile implies the stated upper bound, see [16, Proposition II.1] or [33, Theorem 1.1].   46  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  We will need an off-diagonal upper bound on Pµt β , which can be deduced from the Meyer’s construction and the Davies method as in Barlow-Grigor’yan-Kumagai [3]. Originally, the Davies method [18, 19] was developed to derive Gaussian off-diagonal upper bounds. It was extended to more general Markov semigroups in [14]. It has been successfully applied to jump processes, see for example [2, 3, 15] and references therein. Let Jpx, yq be a symmetric transition kernel on a countable set X. For technical reasons, it is more convenient to consider continuous time random walk. Let Pt be the associated heat semigroup and ppt, x, yq its transition density. The following proposition follows from the proof of heat kernel upper bound in [3, Section 3], see also [15, Section 4.4]. It states that if we have an on-diagonal upper bound and upper bounds on the tail of Jpx, ¨q and growth of truncated second moment of Jpx, ¨q, then the Davies method provides an offdiagonal upper bound on ppt, x, yq. Note that a uniform volume condition µpBρ px, rqq — V prq is not required for such an upper bound. Proposition 7.20 ([3]). Let Jpx, yq be a symmetric transition kernel on a countable set X and let ρ be a metric on X. Suppose (i): There exists 0 ă C0 ă 8 and β ą 0 such that for all t ą 0, we have C0 . t1{β  sup ppt, x, xq ď xPX  (ii): There exists an increasing function φ : p0, 8q Ñ p0, 8q such that φp2rq ď cφ φprq for all r ą 0 and for all x P X, r ą 0, ÿ 1 , Jpx, yq1tρpx,yqąru ď φprq yPX ÿ  ρ2 px, yqJpx, yq1tρpx,yqďru ď  yPX  r2 . φprq  Then there exists a constant C “ C pC0 , cφ , βq ą 0 such that for any x, y P X and t ď φpρpx, yqq, ppt, x, yq ď  Ct φ pρpx, yqq  1 1` β  `t  sup  Jpu, vq.  ρpu,vqěρpx,yq  Since this bound is crucial in the argument for non-triviality of the Poisson boundary but the formulation of Proposition 7.20 is not the same as in [3], we explain its proof for the reader’s convenience at the end of this subsection. Plugging in the bounds in Propositions 7.19 and 7.18, we obtain an off-diagonal upper bound for the transition probability and the upper bound on the Green function stated in Corollary 7.11. We remark that these bounds are not sharp, however it is sufficient for our purposes. Proof of Corollary 7.11. Let J “ Pµβ be the induced jumping kernel on the Schreier graph and ppt, x, yq be the heat kernel of the corresponding jumping process in continuous time. By Proposition 7.19, the lower bound on `2 -isoperimetric profile of J implies sup ppt, x, yq ď x,yPX  C t1{β  .  Let 1 ´2Apβ´ D q´  φprq “ rβ plog2 rq  ,  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  47  then by Proposition 7.18, we have that there exists a constant C “ Cpβ, D, q ă 8 such that ÿ C Jpx, yq1tdS px,yqąru ď . φprq yPX ÿ  ρ2 px, yqJpx, yq1tdS px,yqďru ď  yPX  Cr2 . φprq  Plugging these bounds in Proposition 7.20, we have that for t ď φpdS px, yqq, Ct  ppt, x, yq ď  φ pdS px, yqq  1 1` β  `t  sup  Jpu, vq.  dS pu,vqědS px,yq  Note that φ pdS px, yqq  1 ´p1` β q  ˆ “  dS px, yq log2A 2 dS px, yq  ˙´1´β  2A  1  plog2 dS px, yqq´p D ´qp1` β q .  By Proposition 7.18, there exists C “ Cpβ, q ą 0 ˆ ˙´1´β 2A dS px, yq sup Jpu, vq ď C plog2 dS px, yqq´p D ´q . 2A log2 dS px, yq dS pu,vqědS px,yq Combining these two parts, we obtain that for t ď φpdS px, yqq, ˙´1´β ˆ 2A dS px, yq plog2 dS px, yqq´p D ´q , ppt, x, yq ď Ct 2A log2 dS px, yq where C is a constant only depending on β, D, . Compared with the on-diagonal bound ppt, x, yq ď Ct´1{β , note that for t in the interval φ1 pdS px, yqq ď t ď φpdS px, yqq, where ˙β ˆ β 2A r plog2 rqp D ´q 1`β , φ1 prq “ 2A log2 r it is better to use the on-diagonal bound. We conclude that the heat kernel satisfies that for all t ą 0, # + ˆ ˙´1´β 1 2A d px, yq S ppt, x, yq ď C min t´ β , t plog2 dS px, yqq´p D ´q . log2A 2 dS px, yq It is elementary and well-known that when Jpx, xq ě α ą 0, the continuous time transition probability and discrete time transition probabilities are comparable, because the former is a Poissonization of the later, see for example [21, Subsection 3.2]. By [21, Theorem 3.6], the discrete time transition probability Pµt β px, yq ď Cppt, x, yq where C ą 0 is a constant that only depends on µβ pidq. Therefore Pµt β px, yq admits the same upper bound as ppt, x, yq with C a larger constant. To obtain the estimate on the Green function, sum up the transition probability upper bound over t P 0 Y N, Gµβ px, yq “  8 ÿ t“0  Pµt β px, yq “  φ1 pdÿ S px,yqq t“0  Pµt β px, yq `  ÿ tąφ1 pdS px,yqq  Pµt β px, yq.  48  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  For the first part, we have φ1 pdÿ S px,yqq  Pµt β px, yq  t“0  φ1 pdÿ S px,yqq  ˙´1´β 2A dS px, yq ďC plog2 dS px, yqq´p D ´q t 2A log2 dS px, yq t“0 ˆ ˙´1´β 2A dS px, yq ď Cφ1 pdS px, yqq2 plog2 dS px, yqq´p D ´q 2A log2 dS px, yq ˆ ˙β´1 1´β 2A dS px, yq plog2 dS px, yqq´ 1`β p D ´q . “C 2A log2 dS px, yq  For the second part, ÿ Pµt β px, yq ď tąφ1 pdS px,yqq  ˆ  ÿ  Ct´1{β  tąφ1 pdS px,yqq 1 C φ1 pdS px, yqq1´ β 1 ´ 1{β ˆ ˙β´1 1´β 2A C dS px, yq “ plog2 dS px, yqq´ 1`β p D ´q . 2A 1 ´ 1{β log2 dS px, yq  ď  Combining these two parts, we obtain the stated upper bound on the Green function.  Proof of Proposition 7.20 following [3]. First split the jumping kernel J into two parts: J1R px, yq “ Jpx, yq1tρpx,yqďRu and J2R px, yq “ Jpx, yq1tρpx,yqąRu . Let pR pt, x, yq be transition density of the jumping process with jump kernel J1R . Then as a consequence of the Meyer’s construction, see [3, Lemma 3.1], we have › › (7.12) ppt, x, yq ď pR pt, x, yq ` t ›J2R ›8 . The Dirichlet forms satisfy # EJ pf, f q ´ EJ1R pf, f q ď  2 4 }f }2  +  sup  ÿ  xPX  yPX  Jpx, yq1tρpx,yqąru  2  ď 4 }f }2 {φpRq.  It follows that 4t  4t  sup pR pt, x, yq ď e φpRq sup ppt, x, yq ď Ce φpRq t´1{β . x,y  x,y  By [16], this bound turns into Nash inequality ˆ 2p1`βq }f }2 ď C EJ1R pf, f q `  ˙ 4 2 2β }f }2 }f }1 φpRq  Then by [14, Theorem 3.25], for any function ψ on X, ˆ ˙ 1 4t ´β 2 (7.13) pR pt, x, yq ď C2 t exp ` 72ΛR pψq t ´ ψpyq ` ψpxq , φpRq where C2 ą 0 is a constant and the quantity ΛR pψq is defined as › › › › ( ΛR pψq2 “ max ›e´2ψ Γpeψ , eψ q›8 , ›e2ψ Γpe´ψ , e´ψ q›8 , ÿ ΓR pf, gqpxq “ pf pyq ´ f pxqqpgpyq ´ gpxqqJ1R px, yq. yPX  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  49  Take a parameter λ ą 0 and for any two points x0 ‰ y0 , take the function ψpxq “ λ pρpx, x0 q ´ ρpx, y0 qq` . Note that ψ is λ-Lipschitz with respect to the metric ρ. Then by the inequality pez ´ 1q2 ď z 2 e2|z| , z P R and Assumption (ii), we have ÿ ρ2 px, yqJpx, yq1tρpx,yqďRu e´2ψpxq Γpeψ , eψ qpxq ď λ2 e2λR yPX 2 2λR  ďλ e  R2 {φpRq.  The same calculation applies to ´ψ, therefore ΛR pψq2 ď λ2 e2λR φ2 pRq. The inequality (7.13) evaluated at points x0 , y0 states ˆ ˙ 4t pR pt, x0 , y0 q ď C2 t´1{β exp ` 72pλRq2 e2λR t{φpRq ´ λρpx0 , y0 q φpRq ˆ ˙ 4t ď C2 t´1{β exp ` 72e3λR t{φpRq ´ λρpx0 , y0 q . φpRq We now restrict to the case t ď φpρpx0 , y0 qq. Choose λ and R to be β ρpx0 , y0 q, 3p1 ` βq ˆ ˙ 1 φpRq λ“ log . 3R t  R“  We conclude that for t ď φpρpx, yqq, pR pt, x, yq ď  Ct . φpρpx, yqq1`1{β  The statement is obtained by combining this bound with (7.12).  7.6. Proof of Proposition 7.12. In addition to the Green function estimates, we need to bound the probability under µβ that a point x carries a germ pg, xq not in Hb . We estimate contributions of each υn and υ̌n as in the statement of Proposition 7.12. Proof of Proposition 7.12. To lighten notation, write H “ Hb for the sub-groupoid of xbygerms, o “ 18 , G “ Gω and d “ dS . Let pγ, q be a random variable with uniform distribution on the set Λn defined in (7.9) and write γ  “ γnn . . . γ11 . Then by definition of the measure υn in (7.10), ˜ ¸ ÿ ÿ f pdpo, xqq υn ptg P G : pg, xq R Huq “ E f pd po, xqq 1tpγ  ,xqRHu , xPo¨G  xPo¨G  where expectation is taken with respect to uniform distribution on Λn . Recall the multiplication rule in the groupoid of germs: ` n´1 ˘ pγ  , xq “ pγnn , xq γn´1 , x ¨ γnn . . . pγ11 , x ¨ γnn . . . γ22 q . Since H is a sub-groupoid, it follows that the indicator is bounded by 1tpγ  ,xqRHu ď  n´1 ÿ i“0  1tpγ n´i ,x¨γnn ...γ n´i`1 qRHu . n´i n´i`1  50  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Therefore ˜  ¸ ÿ  f pd po, xqq 1tpγ  ,xqRHu  E xPo¨G  ˜  n´1 ÿ  ď  ¸ ÿ  f pd po, xqq 1tpγ n´i ,x¨γnn ...γ n´i`1 qRHu  E i“0  n´i  xPo¨G  n´1 1 ÿ E “ 2 i“0  ˜  n 1 ÿ “ E 2 j“1  ˜  n´i`1  ¸ ¯¯ ´ ´ ` n´i`1 ˘´1 1tpγn´i ,xqRHu f d o, x ¨ γnn . . . γn´i`1  ÿ xPo¨G  ¸ ´ ´ ¯¯ ´ f d o, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n 1tpγj ,xqRHu  ÿ  .  xPo¨G  Similarly, for υ̌n we have ÿ f pdpo, xqq υ̌n ptg P G : pg, xq R Hx uq xPo¨G  ¸  ˜ ÿ “E xPo¨G  1  ˜  n´1 ÿ  ď  f pd po, xqq 1tpγ ´1 ...γn´n ,xqRHu ¸ ÿ  E i“0  n 1 ÿ E “ 2 j“1  xPo¨G  f pd po, xqq 1!´γ ´i`1 ,x¨γ ´1 ...γ ´i ¯RH) i`1  1  i  ˜  ¸ ÿ  ` ` ˘˘ j´1 f d o, x ¨ γj´1 . . . γ11 1tpγ ´1 ,xqRHu  .  j  xPo¨G  Recall that by the definition of Fn in (7.8), only for those levels j such that ωj´1 “ 2, an element γj P Fj,n has germs not in H. Therefore the summation is over 1 ď j ď n with ωj´1 “ 2. We split the sums into j ď n ´ kn and n ´ kn ă j ď n. For n ´ kn ă j ď n such that ωj´1 “ 2, by definition of the set Fj,n in (7.7), an element γj P Fj,n is of the form ` ˘ γj “ g̃jv “ ζω0 ˝ . . . ˝ ζωj´1 acvj . j`D´j̄ where v “ 1D´j̄ u1m`1 0, u P W2k , m “ m`pj,2kn q P t0, 1, . . . , D ´ 3u and n 8 |1 ^ v| ě n ´ j ` D. It follows from Lemma 7.7 that the collection of points which carry germs not in H is exactly ` ˘ ( Bpj, vq : “ x : g̃jv , x R H # + j`1 ÿ m`2 8 “ x : x “ x1 . . . xj`1 v2 . . . vD´j̄`2kn 1 01 : j ` 1 ` (7.14) xi is odd . i“1 j  In particular, the cardinality of this set is 2 and on the Schreier graph the distance from a point in this set to 18 is comparable to 2j`2kn . Lemma 7.21. Let n ´ kn ă j ď n be a level such that ωj´1 “ 2 and g̃jv P Fj,n . Suppose f : R Ñ R is a non-increasing function. Let pγ, q be a random variable with uniform distribution on the set Λn defined in (7.9). ` ˘ (i): Let x be a point such that g̃jv , x R H, then ´ ´ ´ ¯¯¯ ` ˘ 1 1` 2 ´ E f d o, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n ď f 2j`2kn ` f p2n q kn D 2´ D pj`2kn ´nq .  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  (ii): Let x be a point such that  51  ´` ˘ ¯ ´1 g̃jv , x R H, then  ˘ ˘˘˘ ` ` ` ` 1 1` 2 j´1 ď f 2j`2kn ` f p2n q kn D 2´ D pj`2kn ´nq . E f d o, x ¨ γj´1 . . . γ11 ` ˘ ( Proof of Lemma 7.21. (i). Let x be a point from the set Bpj, vq “ x : g̃jv , x R H as described in (7.14). Let q0 be the position of the first occurrence of 0 in sn`D x. Note that by (7.14), 2 ď q0 ď D ´ j̄ ` 2kn ` D. ´ ´m the substring in We first claim that for all m P tj ` 1, . . . , nu, in x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γm q0 ´1 positions n ` D ` 1 to n ` D ` q0 remains 1 0. To see this, denote by z the length n ` D ` 1 prefix of x, z “ x1 . . . xn`D`1 , and consider the section at z: (7.15) ´ ´ ¯ ¯ ´ ¯ ` ´ ˘ ´ ´ ´ ´m m ´ γj`1j`1 . . . γm “ γj`1j`1 γj`2j`2 . ´ ´j`1 . . . γm z¨γ j`1 ...γ m´1 z  z  z¨γj`1  j`1  m´1  Note that by (7.14), z has 1n`D´j as suffix. Recall that by Fact 7.14 the action of γ` is the same as g` on the finite level Ln`D`1 . By definitions of the elements g` in (7.1) and Lemma 7.5 we have that dpy, y ¨ g` q ď 2``2 for any y P Ln`D`1 . It follows that ´ ¯ ´ d z, z ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γ`´` ď 2j`3 ` . . . ` 2``2 ď 2``3 ´ 1. Therefore ´ ¯ ´ ¯ ` ˘ ´ ´ d 1n`D`1 , z ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γ`´` ď d 1n`D`1 , z ` d z, z ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γ`´` ď 2j`1 ´ 1 ` 2``3 ´ 1. ´  It follows in particular since D ě 3, for ` ď n, the pn`D`1q-th digit of z¨γj`1j`1 . . . γ`´` remains 1. From the description of sections of γ`´1 we have that in the product (7.15) every factor belongs to the set tid, bsn`D`1 ω u Y tcusn`D`1 ω u , where cusn`D`1 ω is the section at 1 of cusn`D ω , that is cusn`D ω “ pωn`D pcq, cusn`D`1 ω q, u P Wkn`D for some k. Action of any element from this set of possible sections fixes the vertex 1q0 ´2 0. The claim follows. By the claim shown in the previous paragraph, the`digit 0˘ at the pn`D `q0 q-th position ensures that for any pγ, q and any point x such that g̃jv , x R H, ´ ¯ ´ d o, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n ě 2n`D`1 . Denote by Aj pxq the event * " ´ ¯ 1 ´ Aj pxq “ pγ, q : d x, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n ě dpo, xq . 2 Since f is assumed to be non-increasing, we have ´ ´ ´ ¯¯¯ ´ E f d o, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n ´ ´ ´ ¯¯ ¯ ´ ´ ´ ¯¯ ¯ ´ ´ “E f d o, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n 1Aj pxqc ` E f d o, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n 1Aj pxq ˆ ˙ ` ˘ 1 ďf d po, xq ` f 2n`D P pAj pxqq . 2  52  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Since dpo, xq ě 2j`2kn `2 , we have ¯ ´ ´ ¯ ´ P pAj pxqq ď P d x, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n ě 2j`2kn ˆ ´ n ¯ ÿ ´ ´ ´ P d x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γ`´` , x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γ``1``1 ě ď `“j`1  1 2j`2kn n´j  ˙  1  ď pn ´ jq2´ D pj`2kn ´n´log2 pn´jq´log2 kn q . In the last step we applied Lemma 7.17. We have proved (i). ´ ´m m (ii). The proof of (ii) is similar, with γj`1j`1 . . . γm replaced by γm . . . γ11 . We omit the repetition.  We now return to the proof of Proposition 7.12. For 1 ď j ď n ´ kn and ωj´1 “ 2, γj “ gj , we have # + j`1 ÿ 8 Bj “ tx : pgj , xq R Hu “ x : x1 . . . xj`1 1 , j ` 1 ` xi is odd . i“1  Since γj “ gj in this case, we can write ˜ ¸ ¯¯ ÿ ´ ´ ´j`1 E f d o, x ¨ γj`1 . . . γn´n 1tpγj ,xqRHu xPo¨G  ´ ´ ´ ¯¯¯ ´ E f d o, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n .  ÿ “ x:pgj ,xqRH  Note that if we choose x uniform from Bj and pγ, q uniform from Λn , then in x ¨ ´ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n the distribution of the first n digits is uniform on t0, 1un . Therefore ´ ´ ´ ¯¯¯ ´ E f d o, x ¨ γj`1j`1 . . . γn´n  ÿ x:pgj ,xqRH  ď2j EuLn pf pdp1n , zqqq ď 2j  n ÿ  f p2n´i q2´i .  i“0  For n ´ kn ă j ď n, use (i) in Lemma 7.21. Combining these two parts, we obtain ˜ ¸ n ¯¯ ÿ ÿ ´ ´ ´j`1 ´n E f d o, x ¨ γj`1 . . . γn 1tpγj ,xqRHu j“1 n´k ÿn  ď j“1  xPo¨G  2j  n ÿ  n ÿ  f p2n´i q2´i `  i“0  ďC2n´kn f p2n q ` C  ¯ ´ ` ˘ 1 1` 2 2j f 2j`2kn ` f p2n q kn D 2´ D pj`2kn ´nq  j“n´kn `1 n ÿ  ` ˘ ` ˘ 2j f 2j`2kn ď C 1 2n f 2n`2kn .  j“n´kn `1 1  In the last line we applied the assumption on f that f p2xq ě 2´1{D f pxq and D1 ą D ě 3.  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  53  The calculation for υ̌n is similar. For 1 ď j ď n ´ kn , use the fact that the first j´1 is uniform, we have pj ´ 1q-digits of x ¨ γ11 . . . γj´1 ˜ ¸ ¯¯ ÿ ´ ´ ´ E f d o, x ¨ γ11 . . . γj´1j´1 1tpγ ´1 ,xqRHu j  xPo¨G  ď 2j EuLj pf pd po, zqqq ď 2j  j ÿ  f p2j´i q2´i .  i“0  Combine with (ii) in Lemma 7.21, we conclude that ¸  ˜  n ÿ  ÿ E  j“1 n´k n ´1 ÿ  ď j“1  `  `  f dS o, x ¨  j´1 γj´1  . . . γ11  ˘˘  1tpγ ´1 ,xqRHu j  .  xPo¨G  2j  j ÿ  f p2j´i q2´i ` `  i“0  n ÿ  ´ ` ¯ ˘ 1 1` 2 2j f 2j`2kn ` f p2n q kn D 2´ D pj`2kn ´nq  j“n´kn n ÿ  ďC2n´kn f p2n´kn q ` C  ` ˘ ` ˘ 2j f 2j`2kn ď C 1 2n f 2n`2kn .  j“n´kn 1  In the last line we applied the assumption on f that f p2xq ě 2´1{D f pxq and D1 ą D ě 3.  8. A PPLICATIONS TO VOLUME LOWER ESTIMATES OF G RIGORCHUK GROUPS In this section we derive volume lower estimate for Gω from Theorem 7.13, where ω satisfies Assumption pFrpDqq as defined in Notation 7.1. Throughout the section we use notations for Gω as reviewed in Subsection 2.4. Let ω be a string that satisfies Assumption pFrpDqq and µβ be a measure with nontrivial Poisson boundary as in Theorem 7.13. The construction of µβ is in Subsection 7.2. Recall that µβ is built from measures υn , n P DN. We bound the length of elements in the support of υn . Let Mi be the matrix associated with the substitution ζi , i P t0, 1, 2u, such that lpζi pωqq “ Mi lpωq where lpωq is the column vector that records occurrence of ab, ac, ad in ω. Explicitly » fi » fi » fi 2 0 1 2 1 0 1 0 0 M0 “ – 0 2 1 fl , M1 “ – 0 1 0 fl , M2 “ – 1 2 0 fl . 0 0 1 0 1 2 1 0 2 Define the number Lω n to be ¨  (8.1)  Lω n :“  `  1  1  1  ˘  ˛ 1 Mω0 . . . Mωn´1 ˝ 1 ‚. 1  Lemma 8.1. Let υn be defined as in (7.10) and Lω n be as in (8.1). Then supt|g| : g P suppυn u ď 22kn `2D`4 Lω n. Proof. An element in the support of υn is of the form g “ γnn . . . γ11 , where γj P Fj,n . For those indices j such that Fj,n “ tgj u, we have ¨ ˛ 1 ` ˘ |γj | ď 2 2 2 Mω0 . . . Mωj´1 ˝ 1 ‚. 1  54  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  Otherwise γj “ g̃jv for some v as in (7.6). By definition of cvj in (7.5) we have ˇ vˇ ˇcj ˇ G  sj ω  ď1`2  2knÿ `2D  |hvi | Gsj ω ,  i“1  hvj  where is defined in (7.4). The element ι prbsj`i´2 ω , as , v1 . . . vi´2 q can be obtained by applying the substitutions σi . We have |hvi | Gsj ω ď 2i`1 . Therefore 2knÿ `2D ˇ vˇ ˇacj ˇ G j ď 2 ` 2 |hvi | Gsj ω ď 22kn `2D`2 . s ω i“1  Since  g̃jv  is obtained by applying substitutions ζi to acvj , ¨  ˇ vˇ ` ˇg̃j ˇ ď 22kn `2D`2 2 From the triangle inequality |g| ď ÿ |g| ď 2Lω j ` jăn´kn  řn j“1  2  2  ˘  ˛ 1 Mω0 . . . Mωj´1 ˝ 1 ‚. 1  |γj |, we have for g P suppυn ,  ÿ  2kn `D`4 ω 22kn `D`2 2Lω Ln . j ď2  n´kn ďjďn   We obtain a tail estimate of µβ as an immediate corollary of Lemma 8.1. Corollary 8.2. Let µβ be defined as in (7.11) with parameters β ą 0 and pkn q, kn ď n. Then µβ is of finite entropy and there exists constant C ą 0 depending on β, D such that ´ ` ˘c ¯ C µβ B id, 22kn Lω ď nβ . n 2 ˘k n ` , the entropy Proof. Since the size of the support of υn is bounded by |Λn | ď 2n 22kn of µβ is bounded by ÿ ÿ ` ˘ Hpµβ q ď C 2´nβ Hpυn q ď C 2´nβ n ` 2kn2 ă 8. D|n  D|n  By Lemma 8.1, supt|g| : g P suppυn u ď 22kn `2D`4 Ln , thus ´ ` ÿ ˘c ¯ 1 ď Cβ ď C2´nβ . µβ B id, 22kn Lω n jβ 2 jěn´2D  Combine Theorem 7.13 with the tail estimate in Corollary 8.2 we deduce the following. Theorem 8.3. Let ω be a string satisfying Assumption pFrpDqq. For any  ą 0, there exists a constant C “ CpD, q ą 0 and a non-degenerate symmetric probability measure µ on Gω of finite entropy and nontrivial Poisson boundary with tail decay c ´1` µ pBpid, Lω , n q q ď Cn  where the number Lω n is defined in (8.1). As a consequence, there exists constant c “ cpD, q such that for all n ě 1, ` 1´ ˘ vGω ,S pLω . n q ě exp cn  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  55  Proof. Given  ą 0, take maxt1 ´ , 1 ´ 1{Du ă β ă 1. By Theorem 7.13 there exists A ą 0 such that the measure µβ with kn “ A tlog2 nu has non-trivial Poisson boundary ω on Gω . Note that Lω n`1 ě 2Ln for any n and ω. By Corollary 8.2, ´ ` ˘c ¯ C µβ B id, n2A Lω ď nβ . n 2 Then the tail estimate stated follows. The volume lower bound follows from Lemma 2.1.  Applied to periodic strings which contain all three letters, we obtain Corollary 1.2 stated q log 2 in the Introduction. By [8, Proposition 4.6], the set of quantities log λω , where λω is the spectral radius of Mω0 . . . Mωq´1 , coming from periodic ω containing all three letters is dense in rα0 , 1s. Therefore the volume exponents of the collection tGω u, where ω is a periodic string with all three letters, form a dense subset of rα0 , 1s. Proof of Corollary 1.2. Up to a renaming of letters t0, 1, 2u, a periodic string ω containing all three letters satisfies Assumption pFrpDqq with D “ 2q. For the tail estimate in ω n{q Theorem 8.3, note that the length Lω where λ “ λω0 ...ωq´1 is the n satisfies Ln ď 3λ spectral radius of Mω0 . . . Mωq´1 . Therefore by Theorem 8.3, for any  ą 0, there exists a constant c ą 0 such that for all n ě 1, vGω pnq ě exppcnα´ q, log 2 where α “ qlog λ . By [8, Proposition 4.4], for such a period string ω, the permutation wreath extension Wω “ pZ{2Zq oS Gω has growth ´ q log 2 ¯ vWω pnq » exp n log λ .  The statement follows.  We now consider strings ω in t201, 211u˚ to prove Corollary 1.3. The strategy to choose a string to approximate a prescribed volume function follows [8]. The main result of [8] states that any sub-multiplicative function that grows uniformly faster than exp pnα0 q can be realized as the growth function of some permutational wreath extension Wω “ pZ{2Zq oS Gω , ω P t0, 1, 2u8 . Roughly speaking, the procedure relies on the fact that the string 201 exhibits the sum contracting coefficient η0 while for the string 211 the coefficient is 1 (no sum-contraction). Careful choice of length pik , jk q in the product p201qi1 p211qj1 p201qi2 p211qj2 . . . of these two types of strings allows to approximate prescribed volume function as in [8, Section 5]. Proof of Corollary 1.3. Let ω P t201, 211u8 . By the volume estimate [8, Corollary 4.2] and [8, Lemma 5.1, Corollary 5.2], we have that there exists a constants C, c ą 0 such that exppcnq ď vWω ,T pLω n q ď exppCnq, where Wω is the permutation wreath product pZ{2Zq oS Gω . Let f : R` Ñ R` be a function such that f p2Rq ď f pRq2 ď f p2R{η0 q, where η0 is the real root of X 3 ` X 2 ` X ´ 2. For such a function f , the proof in [8, Section 5] produces a string ω is the form p012qi1 2j1 p012qi2 2j3 . . . such that the volume growth of Wω is equivalent to f . For this result, one can use a string of the form p201qi1 p211qj1 p201qi2 p211qj2 . . . instead. This is because the properties of p012qn and 2n in [8, Lemma 5.3 ] are satisfied  56  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  by 201 and 211. Following the notations of [8], similar to [8, Lemma 5.3 ], there exists constants A1 ď 1, B 1 ě 1 such that for all V P ∆1 and n P N, η pV, p201qn q ě η03n A1 , ηpV, p211qn q ď 23n B 1 . Using this property of p201qn instead of p012qn and p211qn instead of 2n , the proof in [8, Section 5] carries over verbatim and shows the following: for a prescribed function f : R` Ñ R` be a function such that f p2Rq ď f pRq2 ď f p2R{η0 q, there exists a string ω P t201, 211u8 such that the volume growth of Wω is equivalent to f . By Theorem 8.3, since ω P t201, 211u8 satisfies AssumptionpDq with D “ 3, we have that for any  ą 0, there exists a constant c ą 0 such that for all n ě 1, ` 1´ ˘ vGω ,S pLω . n q ě exp cn Combined with the estimates on vWω pnq we have that if the volume of Wω is equivalent to f , then for any  ą 0 there exists c ą 0 such that ¯ ´c  exp  log f pnq ď vGω ,S pnq ď f pnq. n The statement follows by choosing an f satisfying the condition f p2Rq ď f pRq2 ď f p2R{η0 q with lower exponent α and upper exponent β.  9. F INAL REMARKS AND QUESTIONS 9.1. On Gω without Assumption pFrpDqq. When the string ω does not satisfy Assumption pFrpDqq in Notation 7.1, the construction in Section 7 does not apply. For example, consider strings of the form 0i1 1i1 2i1 0i2 1i2 2i2 . . . where in Ñ 8 as n Ñ 8. It is known from [29] that if the sequence pin q grows rapidly, the growth of Gω for such ω is close to exponential along a subsequence. However different ideas are needed to obtain good volume lower estimates for these ω’s. For any ω that is not eventually constant, one can apply the construction that takes a measure with restricted germs as in Section 6 to obtain measures with non-trivial Poisson boundary. The same argument that proves Corollary 6.4 extends to general ω, we omit the detail here. For the periodic string ωt “ p0t´2 12q8 , by Theorem 1.2 explicit calculation shows that when t Ñ 8, the the volume exponent αωt “ limnÑ8 1 ´ αωt „  log log vG  0t´2 12  log n  pnq  satisfies  c as t Ñ 8, t  for some number c ą 0. This kind of dependence on frequencies of the letters can be observed in general strings. Given ω P t0, 1, 2u8 , let `n pxq count the number of occurrences of the symbol x in the first n digits, x P t0, 1, 2u. Let θn “  1 min t`n p0q, `n p1q, `n p2qu . n  Then there exists absolute constants c, C ą 0 such that n1´Cθn { log1` n À log vGω ,S pnq À n1´cθn .  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  57  9.2. Critical constant of the Liouville property. Kaimanovich and Vershik conjectured in [34] that any group of exponential growth admits a probability measure with non-trivial Poisson boundary. In a very recent preprint [27], Frisch, Hartman, Tamuz and Ferdowsi answered this conjecture positively. In [27] the authors completely characterize countable groups that can admit random walks with non-trivial Poisson boundary: a countable group G admits a probability measure with non-trivial Poisson boundary if and only if it admits a quotient with infinite conjugacy class property. In particular, for a finitely generated group G, there exists a symmetric probability measure µ of finite entropy and non-trivial Poisson boundary on G if and only if G is not virtually nilpotent. On a finitely generated group that is not virtually nilpotent one can then ask whether tail decay of measures with non-trivial Poisson boundary provides useful information about the growth of the group. Similar in flavor to the critical constant of recurrence (see Subsection 5.2), given a countable group Γ equipped with a length function l, one can define the critical constant of the Liouville property of Γ with respect to l to be sup β where the sup is over all β ě 0 such that there exists a non-degenerate symmetric probability measure µ on Γ with ř finite entropy and non-trivial Poisson boundary such that µ has finite β-moment, that is gPΓ lpgqβ µpgq ă 8. When Γ is finitely generated and l is the word length we omit reference to l. For example, for the lamplighter group pZ{2Zq o Z and polycyclic groups that are not virtually nilpotent, the critical constant of the Liouville property is 1; while for pZ{2Zq o Z2 it is 2 and for pZ{2Zq o Z3 , d ě 3, it is 8. These examples are of exponential growth. For intermediate growth groups, the critical constant of the Liouville property is bounded from above by the upper growth exponent. Results in this paper imply that for ω periodic containing all letters 0, 1, 2, the volume exponent of the Grigorchuk group Gω , the critical constant of recurrence of pGω , StGω p18 qq and the critical constant of Liouville property of Gω all coincide. By [24], these three exponents are equal to 1 on Gω where ω contains exactly two letters infinitely often. Recall that the FC-center of a group Γ, ZFC pΓq, consists of elements with finite conjugacy classes. By [1, Theorem IV. 1], for any non-degenerate measure µ on Γ, bounded µ-harmonic functions are constant on ZFC pΓq. As a consequence, the critical constant of the Liouville property for Γ with respect to l is the same as its quotient Γ{ZFC pΓq with respect to the quotient length function ¯l. On the other hand, the volume growth of Γ can be much faster than that of Γ{ZFC pΓq. For example, it is known that FC-central extensions of the first Grigorchuk group can have growth arbitrarily close to exponential and have arbitrarily large Følner function, see the remarks below. Therefore one cannot expect random walks with non-trivial Poisson boundary to provide near optimal lower bound on general intermediate growth groups. The Gap Conjecture (strong version) of Grigorchuk asks if the growth of a finitely ? generated group being strictly smaller than e n implies that it is polynomial. A weaker formulation of the conjecture, called the Gap Conjecture with parameter β, asks if growth β strictly smaller than en implies polynomial growth. There are related gap conjecture type questions regarding various asymptotic characteristics of the groups, see the survey of Grigorchuk [31] for more information. If the Gap Conjectures of Grigorchuk, strong or weak, hold true, one can ask (having in mind the results of this paper) whether stronger statements hold true for any group Γ of super-polynomial growth: let Γ be a finitely generated group of super-polynomial growth, is it true that there exists a finite entropy measure µ with power-law tail decay bound, that is µ ptg : |g|S ě ruq ď Cr´β for some C, β ą 0,  58  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  such that the Poisson boundary of pΓ, µq is non-trivial? Can one always choose such µ with β ě 1{2 ´ ? Remark 9.1. The following construction provides FC-central extensions. Let F be a group equipped with a finite generating set S (typically a free group or free product). Suppose we have a sequence of quotients F Ñ Γk , k P N, and F Ñ G. Each quotient group is marked with the generating set S. Let Rk be the largest radius r such that in the Cayley graph of pΓk , Sq, the ball of radius r around id is the same as the ball of same radius around id in the Cayley graph pG, Sq. Take the the universal group of the sequence pΓk q, Γ “ F{ pX8 k“1 ker pF Ñ Γk qq . Suppose pΓk , Sq is a sequence of marked finite groups such that with respect to pG, Sq, Rk Ñ 8 as k Ñ 8. Then the group Γ is an FC-central extension of G. To see this, first note that G is a quotient of Γ. Suppose w P kerpF Ñ Γq, then it is in kerpF Ñ Γk q for every k. It follows that w is in kerpF Ñ Gq because Rk Ñ 8 as k Ñ 8. We need to show any element γ P ker pΓ Ñ Gq has finite conjugacy class in Γ. Let w be a word in S Y S ´1 which represents γ, where γ P kerpΓ Ñ Gq. Since lim Rk “ 8, there is a finite k0 such that for k ą k0 , the ball of radius |w| around id in Γk agrees with the ball of same radius in G. In particular the image of w in Γk with k ą k0 is identity. Therefore the conjugacy class of γ is contained in the product of Γk , 1 ď k ď k0 . Since each Γk is assumed to be finite, we conclude that the conjugacy class of γ is finite. Remark 9.2. In [26] it is shown that intermediate growth groups can have arbitrarily large Følner functions. The groups are obtained as direct products of piecewise automatic groups with returns. Each factor group Γk (represented as a piecewise automatic group with return PApτ1 , τ2 , ik , jk q) is a finite quotient of the free product F “ Z{2Z ˚ pZ{2Z ˆ Z{2Zq. Let S “ ta, b, c, du be a generating set of the free product, Z{2Z “ xay and Z{2Z ˆ Z{2Z “ tid, b, c, du. Because the action of the first Grigorchuk group G on the tree is contracting, this sequence pΓk , Sq satisfies the property that with respect to pG, Sq, Rk Ñ 8 as k Ñ 8. In other words pΓk , Sq converges to pG, Sq as k Ñ 8 in the ChabautyGrigorchuk topology, which is also called the Cayley topology. Then the universal group of the sequence pΓk q (referred to as direct product of piecewise automatic groups in [26]), Γ “ F{ pX8 k“1 ker pF Ñ Γk qq, is an FC-central extension of G. By [26], Γ is of intermediate growth and its Følner function can be arbitrarily large with suitable choices of parameters. In particular the growth of Γ can be arbitrarily close to exponential. Since the group Γ is torsion, by [1, Theorem IV. 1], for any measure µ on Γ, bounded µ-harmonic functions factor through the quotient Γ{ZFC pΓq “ G. Since the growth of G is bounded by exp pnα0 q, it follows that any measure µ on Γ with finite α0 -moment has trivial Poisson boundary. R EFERENCES [1] Robert Azencott, Espaces de Poisson des groupes localement compacts, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 148, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1970. MR0501376 [2] Martin T. Barlow, Richard F. Bass, Zhen-Qing Chen, and Moritz Kassmann, Non-local Dirichlet forms and symmetric jump processes, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 361 (2009), no. 4, 1963–1999. MR2465826 [3] Martin T. Barlow, Alexander Grigor’yan, and Takashi Kumagai, Heat kernel upper bounds for jump processes and the first exit time, J. Reine Angew. Math. 626 (2009), 135–157. MR2492992 [4] Laurent Bartholdi, The growth of Grigorchuk’s torsion group, Internat. Math. Res. Notices 20 (1998), 1049– 1054. MR1656258 , Lower bounds on the growth of a group acting on the binary rooted tree, Internat. J. Algebra [5] Comput. 11 (2001), no. 1, 73–88. MR1818662  GROWTH OF PERIODIC GRIGORCHUK GROUPS  [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34]  59  , Growth of groups and wreath products, Groups, graphs and random walks, 2017, pp. 1–76. MR3644003 Laurent Bartholdi and Anna Erschler, Growth of permutational extensions, Invent. Math. 189 (2012), no. 2, 431–455. MR2947548 , Groups of given intermediate word growth, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 64 (2014), no. 5, 2003– 2036. MR3330929 , Poisson-Furstenberg boundary and growth of groups, Probab. Theory Related Fields 168 (2017), no. 1-2, 347–372. MR3651055 Laurent Bartholdi, Rostislav I. Grigorchuk, and Zoran Šuniḱ, Branch groups, Handbook of algebra, Vol. 3, 2003, pp. 989–1112. MR2035113 A. Bendikov and L. Saloff-Coste, Random walks on groups and discrete subordination, Math. Nachr. 285 (2012), no. 5-6, 580–605. MR2902834 N. H. Bingham, C. M. Goldie, and J. L. Teugels, Regular variation, Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 27, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989. MR1015093 Jérémie Brieussel, Croissance et moyennabilité de certains groupes d’automorphismes d’un arbre enraciné, thése de doctorat, université Diderot Paris 7, 2008. E. A. Carlen, S. Kusuoka, and D. W. Stroock, Upper bounds for symmetric Markov transition functions, Ann. Inst. H. Poincaré Probab. Statist. 23 (1987), no. 2, suppl., 245–287. MR898496 Zhen-Qing Chen and Takashi Kumagai, Heat kernel estimates for jump processes of mixed types on metric measure spaces, Probab. Theory Related Fields 140 (2008), no. 1-2, 277–317. MR2357678 Thierry Coulhon, Ultracontractivity and Nash type inequalities, J. Funct. Anal. 141 (1996), no. 2, 510–539. MR1418518 Thierry Coulhon and Laurent Saloff-Coste, Isopérimétrie pour les groupes et les variétés, Rev. Mat. Iberoamericana 9 (1993), no. 2, 293–314. MR1232845 E. B. Davies, Explicit constants for Gaussian upper bounds on heat kernels, Amer. J. Math. 109 (1987), no. 2, 319–333. MR882426 , Heat kernels and spectral theory, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics, vol. 92, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989. MR990239 Pierre de la Harpe, Topics in geometric group theory, Chicago Lectures in Mathematics, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2000. MR1786869 Thierry Delmotte, Parabolic Harnack inequality and estimates of Markov chains on graphs, Rev. Mat. Iberoamericana 15 (1999), no. 1, 181–232. MR1681641 Yves Derriennic, Quelques applications du théorème ergodique sous-additif, Conference on Random Walks (Kleebach, 1979) (French), 1980, pp. 183–201, 4. MR588163 E. B. Dynkin and M. B. Maljutov, Random walk on groups with a finite number of generators, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 137 (1961), 1042–1045. MR0131904 Anna Erschler, Boundary behavior for groups of subexponential growth, Ann. of Math. (2) 160 (2004), no. 3, 1183–1210. MR2144977 , Critical constants for recurrence of random walks on G-spaces, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 55 (2005), no. 2, 493–509. MR2147898 , Piecewise automatic groups, Duke Math. J. 134 (2006), no. 3, 591–613. MR2254627 Joshua Frisch, Yair Hartman, Omer Tamuz, and Pooya Vahidi Ferdowsi, Choquet-Deny groups and the infinite conjugacy class property, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.00751 (2018). Rostislav I. Grigorchuk, On Burnside’s problem on periodic groups, Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 14 (1980), no. 1, 53–54. MR565099 , Degrees of growth of finitely generated groups and the theory of invariant means, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 48 (1984), no. 5, 939–985. MR764305 , Some problems of the dynamics of group actions on rooted trees, Tr. Mat. Inst. Steklova 273 (2011), no. Sovremennye Problemy Matematiki, 72–191. MR2893544 , Milnor’s problem on the growth of groups and its consequences, Frontiers in complex dynamics, 2014, pp. 705–773. MR3289926 Alexander Grigor’yan, Analysis on graphs, Lecture Notes, available at https://www.math.unibielefeld.de/ grigor/aglect2.pdf. , Heat kernel upper bounds on a complete non-compact manifold, Rev. Mat. Iberoamericana 10 (1994), no. 2, 395–452. MR1286481 V. A. Kaı̆manovich and A. M. Vershik, Random walks on discrete groups: boundary and entropy, Ann. Probab. 11 (1983), no. 3, 457–490. MR704539  60  ANNA ERSCHLER AND TIANYI ZHENG  [35] Gregory F. Lawler and Alan D. Sokal, Bounds on the L2 spectrum for Markov chains and Markov processes: a generalization of Cheeger’s inequality, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 309 (1988), no. 2, 557–580. MR930082 [36] Yu. G. Leonov, A lower bound for the growth function of periods in Grigorchuk groups, Mat. Stud. 8 (1997), no. 2, 192–197, 237. MR1685935 [37] I.G. Lysionok, A system of defining relations for the Grigorchuk group, Mat. Zametki 38 (1985), 503–511. [38] Volodymyr Nekrashevych, Self-similar groups, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, vol. 117, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2005. MR2162164 [39] René L. Schilling, Renming Song, and Zoran Vondraˇ cek, Bernstein functions, Second, De Gruyter Studies in Mathematics, vol. 37, Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 2012. Theory and applications. MR2978140 [40] Wolfgang Woess, Random walks on infinite graphs and groups, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics, vol. 138, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000. MR1743100  A NNA E RSCHLER — D ÉPARTEMENT DE MATHÉMATIQUES ET APPLICATIONS , É COLE NORMALE SUPÉRIEURE , CNRS, PSL R ESEARCH U NIVERSITY, 45 RUE D ’U LM , 75005 PARIS — anna.erschler@ens.fr T IANYI Z HENG — D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS , UC S AN D IEGO , 9500 G IMAN D R . L A J OLLA , CA 92093 — tzheng2@math.ucsd.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
