Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_4624

Abstract:
arXiv:1307.1738v1 [cs.LO] 5 Jul 2013  Towards Extracting Explicit Proofs from Totality Checking in Twelf ∗ Yuting Wang  Gopalan Nadathur  University of Minnesota, USA yuting@cs.umn.edu  University of Minnesota, USA gopalan@cs.umn.edu  Abstract The Edinburgh Logical Framework (LF) is a dependently type λ-calculus that can be used to encode formal systems. The versatility of LF allows specifications to be constructed also about the encoded systems. The Twelf system exploits the correspondence between formulas and types to give specifications in LF a logic programming interpretation. By interpreting particular arguments as input and others as output, specifications can be seen as describing nondeterministic functions. If particular such functions can be shown to be total, they represent constructive proofs of metatheorems of the encoded systems. Twelf provides a suite of tools for establishing totality. However, all the resulting proofs of meta-theorems are implicit: Twelf’s totality checking does not yield a certificate that can be given to a proof checker. We begin the process here of making these proofs explicit. We treat the restricted situation in Twelf where context definitions (regular worlds) and lemmas are not used. In this setting we describe and prove correct a translation of the steps in totality checking into an actual proof in the companion logic M2 . We intend in the long term to extend our translation to all of Twelf and to use this work as the basis for producing proofs in the related Abella system.  1.  Introduction  The Edinburgh Logical Framework (LF) is a general framework for formalizing systems that are presented in a rulebased and syntax-directed fashion [2]. LF is based on a dependently-typed λ-calculus and, as such, supports the higher-order abstract syntax approach to representing binding structure. Because of its features, LF has proven to be extremely versatile in encoding formal systems such as programming languages and logics. One of the purposes for specifying a formal system is to be able to prove properties about it; such properties are usually called meta-theorems. There are two approaches to doing this relative to LF specifications. One of these approaches is implemented by the Twelf system that is ∗ Draft  of January 9, 2018  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. Copyright c  ACM [to be supplied]. . . $15.00  based on according a logic programming interpretation to LF specifications [4, 8]. In essence, Twelf interprets types as relations and thereby transforms the question of validity of a relation into one about the inhabitation of a type. Twelf also allows such relations to be moded, i.e., it lets some arguments to be designated as inputs and others to be identified as outputs. Relations thus define non-deterministic functions from inputs to outputs. Twelf complements such a treatment with tools for determining if particular relational specifications represent total functions from ground inputs to ground outputs. When the relations are about types that specify particular aspects of formal systems, something that is possible to do in the rich types language of LF, such verifications of totality correspond to implicit, constructive proofs of meta-theorems. The second approach is to proving meta-theorems is to do this explicitly within a suitable logic. The M2 logic has been described for the specific purpose of constructing such proofs over LF specifications [9, 10]. Meta-theorems are represented by M2 formulas and proved by applying the derivation rules in M2 . A successful proof returns a certificate in the form of a proof term that can be checked independently by another (simpler) program. Of the two approaches, totality checking has proven to be vastly more popular: a large number of verifications based on it have been described in the literature. By contrast, although an automatic theorem prover based on M2 has been developed [9], it has, to our knowledge, not been used in many reasoning tasks. However, there is a potential drawback to using totality checking in verification: this process does not yield an outcome that can be provided to a third party that can, for instance, easily check its correctness. This paper begins an effort to address the abovementioned shortcoming by developing a method for extracting an explicit proof from totality checking. In this first step, we limit ourselves to a subset of the kinds of verification treated by Twelf. In particular, we do not consider meta-theorems that require the use of contexts (defined via regular worlds in Twelf) and also disallow the use of lemmas in specifications. In this setting, we describe and prove correct a procedure for obtaining a proof in M2 from the work done by Twelf towards establishing totality. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 recalls LF and its interpretation in Twelf and introduces some associated terminology needed in the paper. Section 3 describes totality checking. The components that make it up have been presented in different settings (e.g., see [6, 8, 11]) and some aspects (such as output coverage checking) have not been described in the formality needed for what we do in this paper. Thus, this section represents our attempt to  describe these aspects with in a coordinated and precise fashion. Section 4 presents the M2 logic. Section 5 finally tackles the generation of M2 proofs from totality checking. Section 6 concludes the paper with a brief discussion of future directions to this work.  2.  The Edinburgh Logical Framework  We provide a brief summary of the Edinburgh Logical Framework (LF) in this section and explain its use in encoding the syntax and derivation rules of formal systems. We then introduce the Twelf system that provides LF specifications a logic programming interpretation, which becomes a basis for proving meta-theoretic properties of systems encoded in LF. We conclude the section with the definitions of a few technical notions like substitution and unification related to LF that will be needed in later parts of this paper. 2.1  Syntax and Typing Judgments  The syntax of LF is that of a λ-calculus that has three categories of expressions: kinds, type families and objects. Kinds classify type families and type families classify objects. The special kind for types is type. We use the symbol a for type level constants, c for object level constants and x for object-level variables. The different categories of expressions are given by the rules below; we use K, possibly with subscripts, as a schematic variable for kinds, A and B for type families, M and N for objects, and U and V for either type families or objects. Kinds Type Families Objects  K ::= type | Πx : A.K A, B ::= a | Πx : A.B | A M M, N ::= c | x | λx : A.M | M N  Here, λ and Π are binding operators. LF is dependently typed in the sense that kinds and type families might depend on object terms: we have kinds of the form Πx : A.K and type families of the form Πx : A.B, where Π binds occurrences of the (object) variable x of type A in the kind K and type family B, respectively. We write Πx1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An .B as an abbreviation for Πx1 : A1 . . . . Πxn : An .B and similarly for Πx1 : A1 . . . . Πxn : An .K. The expression Πx : A.B will also be written as A → B if the variable x does not occur in B. We take → to be a right associative operator. LF terms are constructed relative to signatures, denoted schematically by Σ, that keep track of types and kinds assigned to constants, and contexts, denoted schematically by Γ, that keep track of types assigned to variables. Signatures and contexts are given by the following rules: Signatures Contexts  Σ ::= · | Σ, a : K | Σ, c : A Γ ::= · | Γ, x : A  Here, · denotes the empty sequence. Since Πx1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An .B has list of binders that look like an LF context, we will sometimes write it as ΠΓ.B where Γ = x1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An . LF is equipped with rules for deriving the following judgments: Γ `Σ M ≡ N and Γ `Σ A ≡ B for equality between objects and types; ` Σ, `Σ Γ and Γ `Σ K representing the validity of signatures, contexts and kinds; and Γ `Σ A : K and Γ `Σ M : A asserting the well-typedness of type families and objects. Fig.1 shows the rules for the last two judgments; the full collection can be found in [3]. We will sometimes leave the signature implicit in these judgments, writing them simply as Γ ` A : K and Γ ` M : A. The notation U [V /x]  used in the rules stands for the capture avoiding substitution of V for the variable x in U . The equality relation ≡ between type families and objects corresponds to βη-conversion. The LF type theory guarantees that every well-typed LF term has an unique βη-long normal form called its canonical form. Thus, two well-typed LF terms are equal iff their canonical forms are identical up to a renaming of bound variables. We will often confuse a well-typed LF term with its canonical form. 2.2  LF as a Specification Language  LF can be used to encode varied formal systems via the types as judgments, objects as proofs and inhabitation as provability principles. We illustrate this aspect by considering the encoding of the untyped λ-calculus; this example will be used also in later parts of the paper. The object system syntax is given by the following rule: M ::= λx.M | M1 M2 We shall represent these terms using the LF type tm and object-level constants app : tm → tm → tm and abs : (tm → tm) → tm. The precise encoding d·e is given as follows: dxe = x  dM N e = app dM e dN e  dλx.M e = abs (λx : tm.dM e)  Note that we are representing binding in the λ-calculus here by binding in LF. For example, λx.x is encoded as an LF term abs (λx : tm.x). Object system judgments are typically represented in LF via types. Thus, consider the call-by-name evaluation relation between the λ-terms that is defined by the following rules: M  λx.M 0 λx.M  λx.M  evAbs  M 0 [N/x]  V  MN V  evApp  This relation can be represented by the LF type family eval : tm → tm → type: the judgment M  N would then be encoded as the LF type eval dM e dN e. The derivability of a judgment M  N then boils down to the inhabitation of eval dM e dN e in LF. To determine such inhabitation, we introduce the following object-level constants into the LF signature: eval-app : ΠM : tm.ΠM 0 : tm → tm.ΠN : tm.ΠV : tm. eval M (abs M 0 ) → eval (M 0 N ) V → eval (app M N ) V . eval-abs : ΠM : tm → tm.eval (abs M ) (abs M ).  Given these constants, the object system derivation λx.x  λx.x  evAbs  x[λy.y/x]  λy.y  (λx.x) (λy.y)  λy.y  evAbs evApp  would be represented by the LF object eval-app (abs (λx : tm.x)) (λx : tm.x) (abs (λy : tm.y)) (abs (λy : tm.y))(eval-abs (λx : tm.x)) (eval-abs (λy : tm.y)).  This expression has the type eval (app (abs (λx : tm.x)) (abs (λy : tm.y))) (abs (λy : tm.y))  which is the LF encoding of (λx.x) (λy.y)  λy.y. Suppose that our object system also encompasses typing judgments of the form ∆ . M : T where ∆ = x1 : T1 , . . . , xn : Tn : such a judgment asserts that M has type T under the assumption that, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, xi has type Ti . Moreover, let these judgments be defined by the rules ∆, x : T1 . M : T2 ∆ . (λx.M ) : T1 → T2  ofAbs  ∆ . M : T1 → T2 ∆ . N : T1 ofApp ∆ . M N : T2  with the ofAbs rule having the side condition that x does not occur in ∆. We use the LF type ty and the LF (object-level) constant arr : ty → ty → ty to represent the types of the  Valid Families: a : K ∈ Σ `Σ Γ Γ `Σ a : K Γ, x : A `Σ B : K Γ `Σ λx : A.B : Πx : A.K  Γ, x : A `Σ B : type Γ `Σ Πx : A.B : type  Γ `Σ A : Πx : B.K Γ `Σ M : B Γ `Σ A M : K[M/x]  Γ `Σ A : K  Γ `Σ K 0 Γ `Σ K ≡ K 0 Γ `Σ A : K 0  Valid Objects: c : K ∈ Σ `Σ Γ Γ `Σ c : A Γ, x : A `Σ M : B Γ `Σ λx : A.M : Πx : A.B  x : A ∈ Γ `Σ Γ Γ `Σ x : A  Γ `Σ M : Πx : A.B Γ `Σ N : A Γ `Σ M N : B[N/x]  Γ `Σ M : A  Γ `Σ A0 : type Γ `Σ M : A  Γ `Σ A ≡ A0  0  Figure 1. Rules for Valid Type Families and Objects object system: the d·e mapping is extended to λ-calculus types in such a way that dT1 → T2 e = arr dT1 e dT2 e. The typing rules for the λ-calculus can then be encoded in LF using the signature: of : tm → ty → type. of-app : ΠM : tm.ΠN : tm.ΠT1 : ty.ΠT : ty. of M (arr T1 T ) → of N T1 → of (app M N ) T . of-abs : ΠM : tm.ΠT1 : ty.ΠT : ty. (Πx : tm.of x T1 → of (M x) T ) → of (abs M ) (arr T1 T )  We assume here that ∆.M : T is encoded as d∆e ` dM e : dT e, where d∆e is an LF context resulting from transforming every xi : Ti in ∆ into xi : tm, yi : of xi dTi e. LF expressions contain a lot of verbose type information. This situation can be eased by making some of the outermost binders in the types assigned to object level constant implicit by using tokens beginning with uppercase letters for the variables they bind. Thus, the constants for encoding the evaluation and typing rules for the λ-calculus can be shown by means of the following signature: eval-app : eval M (abs M 0 ) → eval (M 0 N ) V → eval (app M N ) V. eval-abs : eval (abs M ) (abs M ). of-app : of M (arr T1 T ) → of N T1 → of (app M N ) T. of-abs : (Πx : tm.of x T1 → of (M x) T ) → of (abs M ) (arr T1 T ).  When we make the binding implicit in this way, it will always be the case that the types for the bound variables can be uniquely inferred by a type reconstruction process [7]. When showing terms, we will also leave out the arguments for constants that correspond the implicitly bound variables, assuming that these too can be inferred. Using this convention, the LF object for the evaluation derivation considered earlier can be written as follows: eval-app (eval-abs : eval (abs (λx : tm.x)) (abs (λx : tm.x))) (eval-abs : eval (abs (λy : tm.y)) (abs (λy : tm.y)))  The missing arguments of eval-app and the two occurrences of eval-abs will be filled in here by type reconstruction. 2.3  Twelf and Logic Programming in LF  Twelf is a tool based on LF that uses the representation principles just discussed for specifying and reasoning about formal systems. Twelf permits A ← B as an alternative syntax for B → A, treating ← as a left associative operator. An important idea underlying Twelf is that LF types can be given a logic programming interpretation so that they can be executed. The full description of the operational semantics  of Twelf can be found in [4]. We consider here only the interpretation for constant definitions of the form c : a M 1 . . . M n ← a M 11 . . . M 1n ← . . . ← a M m 1 . . . M m n where a : Πx1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An .type is an LF type family. In the logic programming setting, this definition of c is called a clause that has a M1 . . . Mn as its head and a Mi1 . . . Min (1 ≤ i ≤ m) as its premises. We think of such a clause in the same way we would a Prolog clause. Thus, we call the type family a a predicate and we think of the clause as one for a. Given a set of clauses for a, we query Twelf for the solutions of goals of the form M : a M10 . . . Mn0 . Twelf interprets this as a question that asks if a well-formed term of type a M10 . . . Mn0 exists, treating M and the free variables in M1 , . . . , Mn as logic variables. Twelf performs goal-directed proof search using backchaining similar to Prolog, using unification to instantiate logic variables as needed to solve the inhabitation question [4]. We assume that the search will be based on trying the premises in left to right order. 2.4  Substitution and Unification in LF  A substitution σ in LF is a type-preserving mapping from variables to objects that differs from the identity at only finitely many places. We write σ as (M1 /x1 , . . . , Mn /xn ) where Mi /xi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) are the only non-identity mappings. For any LF term t, t[σ] is the term obtained by applying σ in a capture avoiding way to the free variables in t. Substitutions transform terms that are well-typed in one context into ones that are well-typed in another context, something that is asserted by the judgment Γ `Σ σ : Γ0 that is defined by the following rules: Γ `Σ · : ·  subst-ept  Γ `Σ M : A[σ]  Γ `Σ σ : Γ0  Γ `Σ (σ, M/x) : (Γ0 , x : A)  subst-typ  Given a σ and a Γ0 , there is a unique Γ with the smallest domain such that Γ `Σ σ : Γ0 is derivable. We shall intend to pick out this Γ when we use this judgment in later sections. We will also want to use the judgment Γ `Σ σ : Γ0 when the domain of σ is a subset of that of Γ0 . We will assume in this case that the domain of σ is extended with identity substitutions to match that of Γ0 . If Γ is the context x1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An , we write Γ[σ] to represent the context x1 : A1 [σ], . . . , xn : An [σ]. The composition of substitutions σ ◦ θ is defined as follows: ·◦θ =·  (σ, M/x) ◦ θ = (σ ◦ θ, M [θ]/x)  The following lemmas are easily proved by induction on typing derivations related to substitutions:  Lemma 1. If Γ2 `Σ σ1 : Γ1 and Γ3 `Σ σ2 : Γ2 are derivable then so is Γ3 `Σ σ1 ◦ σ2 : Γ1 [σ2 ]. 0  sr-app : subred (eval-app Dev1 Dev2 ) (of-app Dty1 Dty2 ) Dty ← subred (Dev1 : eval M (abs M 0 ))  0  Lemma 2. If Γ `Σ σ : Γ and Γ `Σ U : V are derivable then so is Γ `Σ U [σ] : V [σ]. A unification problem S is a finite multiset of equations {ti = si | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} where, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, ti and si are LF terms of the same kind or type. A substitution σ such that ti [σ] = si [σ] for all i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ n is a unifier for S. It is a most general unifer (mgu) if for any unifer θ of S there exists a substitution γ such that for any term t we have t[θ] = t[σ][γ]. Not every unification problem in LF has an mgu and unifiability is also not decidable in general. However, these properties hold when all occurrences of free variables in the terms determining the unification problem are strict as per the following definition [5]. Definition 3. An occurrence of a free variable is strict if it is not in the argument of a free variable and all its arguments are distinct bound variables. We will also be interested often in matching, i.e., unification where free variables occur in the terms on only one side of the equations. In this case decidability and the existence of most general solutions follows if every free variable has at least one strict occurrence in the terms. We refer to a term that satisfies this property as a strict term. Given a context Γ = x1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An we will often write M Γ to mean M x1 . . . xn . Similarly, given a substitution σ = (M1 /x1 , . . . , Mn /xn ) we will write M σ to mean M M1 . . . Mn .  3.  Totality Checking in Twelf  Under the logic programming interpretation of LF specifications in Twelf, a type family a : ΠΓ.type represents a relation between its arguments. This relation can be read as a meta-theorem about the system specified by interpreting particular arguments as inputs and others as outputs. For instance, the subject reduction theorem for the λ-calculus (STLC) states that the evaluation preserves types: for all terms E and V and types T , if E  V and · . E : T hold, then · . V : T holds. Based on our encoding of evaluation and typing for the λ-calculus, we can define the following type family: subred : eval E V → of E T → of V T → type. By assigning E, V , T and the first two arguments to subred as inputs and the third argument to subred as output, the proof search for subred D1 D2 D3 becomes directional: it queries the existence of a derivation D3 for of V T given derivations D1 for eval E V and D2 for of E T . Thus, we can interpret subred operationally as a non-deterministic function that computes a ground output D3 from ground inputs E, V, T, D1 , D2 . If we can show that this function is total, i.e., that, given any ground terms for the inputs, proof search will be able to find a satisfying ground term for the output in a finite number of steps, then we would have obtained a constructive proof for the subject reduction theorem. Twelf uses the above approach to interpret meta-theorems as totality assertions and their proofs as totality checking. In Twelf notation, the subject reduction theorem is expressed as follows: subred : eval E V → of E T → of V T → type. %mode subred +D1 +D2 -D3 .  (Dty1 : of M (arr T1 T2 )) (of-abs (Dty3 : Πx : tm.of x T1 → of (M 0 x) T2 )) ← subred (Dev2 : eval (M 0 N ) V ) (Dty3 N (Dty2 : of N T1 )) (Dty : of V T ). sr-abs : subred eval-abs Dty Dty.  Figure 2. LF signature for subred %total D (subred D  ).  The mode declaration that begins with %mode designates the explicit arguments prefixed by + as inputs and those prefixed by - as outputs; such a designation must be extended to also include the implicit arguments. The declaration that begins with %total asserts that subred represents a total non-deterministic function in the indicated mode. This declaration also identifies an argument on which to base a termination argument as we shall see presently. To facilitate totality checking, the user must provide clauses for deriving typing judgments of the kind in question. For subred, these clauses might be the ones shown in Fig 2. Observe that these clauses essentially describe a recursive method for constructing a derivation of the output type given ones for the input types; the object constants sr-app and sr-abs are used to encode these constructions. Totality checking in Twelf is broken into mode checking, termination checking, input coverage checking and output coverage checking; it can be shown that the successful completion of each of these checks ensures totality of the non-deterministic function. Our interest is in extracting a proof from Twelf’s verification process. For this, we only need to know the structure of each of the checks and we elide a discussion of how they guarantee totality. 3.1  Mode Checking  Given a type family a : Πx1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An .type, we shall refer to the variables x1 , . . . , xn as its parameters. A mode declaration assigns polarities p1 , . . . , pn to these parameters, where pi is either a positive polarity + that designates xi to be an input parameter or a negative polarity - that designates xi to be an output parameter. A mode declaration for a is well-defined if for any i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n, such that pi = +, the parameters occurring in Ai have polarity +. Thus, the input parameters in a type family with a well-defined mode never depend on its output parameters; this property is necessary for assigning a meta-theorem reading to the moded type family. The binder of a type family with a well-defined mode can always be rearranged so that it has the form a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .type, where ΓI and ΓO contain parameters that are assigned only positive and negative polarities, respectively. In the following discussion, we will consider only type families with well-defined modes whose binders also have this special form. A type family a with a well-defined mode represents the meta-theorem that given any ground terms r̄ for the parameters in ΓI , there exists a derivation D : a r̄ s̄ that computes ground terms s̄ for the parameters in ΓO . We write this meta-theorem formally as ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>. The requirement that input parameters must not depend on output parameters provides us a means for extending polarity assignments for explicit parameters to cover also  the implicit parameters. For example, consider the mode declaration %mode subred +D1 +D2 -D3 that designates the first two explicit parameters for subred as input the last as output. The elaborated kind of subred is:  is determined by the mode checking algorithm described in the Twelf manual [6].  ΠE : tm.ΠV : tm.ΠT : ty.eval E V → of E T → of V T → type  Termination checking verifies that, given a well-moded LF signature and a goal whose input arguments are ground, backchaining on any clause will result in a finite computation. Termination is checked using a termination ordering. The fundamental termination ordering used in Twelf is the subterm ordering: M  N if M is a strict subterm of N . For example, the totality declaration %total D (subred D ) tells Twelf to verify termination of subred using the subterm ordering on its first argument that has type eval E V . Other orderings such as lexicographical ordering and simultaneous ordering are also supported [6]. Termination checking assumes that the input arguments involved in termination ordering are ground, a condition that must hold if the signature is well-moded and mode consistent and the input arguments of the original goal are all ground. For every clause, it checks that the input arguments of premises involved in termination ordering are smaller than corresponding inputs in the clause head. For instance, the two premises in sr-app have Dev1 and Dev2 , respectively, as their first (explicit) argument. These are strict subterms of the input eval-app De1 De2 in the head of sr-app. The following theorem is proved in [8].  Since the implicit parameters E, V , and T occur in the types of the first two explicit parameters, well-definedness of mode dictates that they have the polarity +. Correspondingly, the meta-theorem represented by subred is ∀E : tm, V : tm, T : ty, D1 : eval E V, D2 : of E T. ∃D3 : of V T.∃D : subred E V T D1 D2 D3 .>.  Given a type family a with a well-defined mode, mode checking verifies that the clauses for a that represent a proof for the relevant meta-theorem respect the moding, i.e., that, given ground terms for the input parameters, if backchaining on the clause succeeds, then it will result in ground terms being produced for the output parameters. To formalize mode checking, we need the definitions of groundedness with respect to a context and of input and output consistency [8]. Definition 4. An LF term M is ground with respect to an LF context Γ if all variables in the canonical form of M are bound in Γ. Observe that ground terms are a special instance of this definition, i.e., they are terms that are ground with respect to the empty context. Definition 5. Let a : Πx1 : A1 , . . . , xn : An .type be a type family and let p1 , . . . , pn be a well-defined mode for a. We say that a M1 . . . Mn is input consistent relative to Γ if for all i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ n and pi = + it is the case that Mi is ground with respect to Γ. Similarly, a M1 . . . Mn is output consistent relative to Γ if for all i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ n and pi = - it is the case that Mi is ground with respect to Γ. A term that a is applied to is called an input argument or an output argument, depending on whether it corresponds to an input parameter or an output parameter. Variables occurring in input arguments (output arguments) are called input variables (resp. output variables). Definition 6. Let a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .type be a type family with a well-defined mode, where ΓI is x1 : A01 , . . . , xk : A0k and ΓO is xk+1 : A0k+1 , .., xn : A0n . Let c : A ← A1 ← · · · ← Am be a clause for a where A = a M1 . . . Mn and Ai = a Mi1 . . . Min for 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Let Γ0 be the context containing only the input variables that have a strict occurrence in A and for 1 ≤ i ≤ m let Γi be the context Γi−1 , Γi0 , where Γi0 contains only the output variables that have a strict occurrence in Ai . The clause c is mode consistent if, for 1 ≤ i ≤ m, Ai is input consistent relative to Γi−1 and A is output consistent relative to Γm . A type family a is well-moded if it has a well-defined mode and every clause for a is mode consistent. An LF signature is well-moded if every type family in it is well-moded. The restriction to only strict occurrences in the above definition is based on the fact that the instantiations of only variables that have such occurrences are guaranteed to be ground when matching with a ground term. As an example of the application of these definitions, it is easy to see that the mode provided for subred is well-defined and that sr-app and sr-abs are mode consistent. Thus the type family subred and the LF signature in Fig. 2 are wellmoded. The definition of mode consistency formalizes what  3.2  Termination Checking  Theorem 7. Given a well-moded and termination-checked LF signature Σ, every execution path for a well-typed and input consistent goal A will have only finitely many steps. By the theorem if a type family a passes mode checking and termination checking, then any call to a with ground inputs will terminate. This does not, however, guarantee that a can be interpreted as a total function from its ground inputs to its ground outputs: for some ground inputs the execution might not be able to make progress. For this stronger guarantee, it must pass the input and output coverage checking. 3.3  Input Coverage Checking  Coverage checking is the general problem of deciding whether any closed term is an instance of at least one of a given set of patterns [11]. For example, in functional programming languages such as ML, coverage checking is used to decide if a function definition is exhaustive over a given data type. The complexity of coverage checking depends on the underlying term algebra. In ML which only involves simple types and prefix polymorphism, the coverage checking is simple. Coverage checking is significantly more complex in LF since it contains dependent types and we also have to consider patterns with variables of higher-order type. A coverage goal and a coverage pattern in LF are both given by a term and a context with respect to which it is ground. Definition 8. A coverage goal or pattern is a valid LF typing judgment Γ `Σ U : V , where U is either an object or type and V is either a type or kind. A coverage goal or pattern represents the collection of closed terms obtained by instantiating the variables in the context. Given a set of coverage patterns and a coverage goal, the task, as already noted, is to determine if every instance of the goal is an instance of one of the patterns. One possibility is that the goal is immediately covered by one of the patterns in the set.  Definition 9. A coverage goal Γ `Σ U : V is immediately covered by a pattern Γ0 `Σ U 0 : V 0 if there exists a substitution Γ `Σ σ : Γ0 such that Γ `Σ U 0 [σ] : V 0 [σ] and U ≡ U 0 [σ], V ≡ V 0 [σ]. A coverage goal is immediately covered by a finite set of patterns if it is immediately covered by one of the patterns in the set. In the more general case, different instances of the coverage goal may be covered by different patterns. Definition 10. Γ `Σ U : V is covered by a set of patterns P if, for every (ground) substitution σ such that · `Σ σ : Γ, it is the case that · `Σ U [σ] : V [σ] is immediately covered by P. If it can be shown that the given coverage goal is immediately covered by the given set of patterns, then the task of coverage checking is obviously done. If the goal is not immediately covered by the patterns, then we consider applying a splitting operation to the goal. Splitting uses knowledge of the signature to generate a set of subgoals whose simultaneous coverage implies coverage of the original goal. We consider here only a restricted form of the operation defined in [11] that disallows splitting on variables of function type and hence the use of context definitions (regular worlds) in Twelf proofs. Definition 11. Let Γ `Σ U : V be a coverage goal and let Γ be Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 where Ax is an atomic type. Suppose that for every constant c : ΠΓc .Ac in Σ it is the case that either the unification problem (Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ) does not have a solution or it has an mgu. Splitting is then applicable in this case and it generates the following set of subgoals: 0  {Γ , Γ2 [σ] `Σ U [σ] : V [σ] | c : ΠΓc .Ac ∈ Σ, (Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ) is unifiable and σ is its mgu and Γ0 `Σ σ : (Γ1 , x : Ax , Γc )}. Note that splitting is finitary, i.e., its application produces only finitely many subgoals from a given goal. The following theorem, proved in [11], shows that splitting preserves the coverage: Theorem 12. Let Γ `Σ U : V be a coverage goal and let {Γi `Σ Ui : Vi | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} result from it by splitting. Γ `Σ U : V is covered by a set of patterns iff Γi `Σ Ui : Vi is covered for i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The general notion of coverage checking described here is specialized in Twelf to input coverage checking that verifies that there is some clause to backchain on for any call to a with ground inputs. The coverage patterns and goal to be used in the framework of general coverage checking for this purpose are defined as follows. Definition 13. For a given type family a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .type in a well-moded LF signature Σ, the input coverage goal is ΓI ` a ΓI : ΠΓO .type. Corresponding to a clause c for a whose head is a M1 . . . Mn , let σcI be the substitution (M1 /x1 , . . . , Mk /xk ) where k is the length of ΓI and let ΓcI be the context containing the variables occurring in M1 , . . . , Mk . The set of input patterns for a relative to Σ then consists of the following: {ΓcI `Σ a σcI : ΠΓO [σcI ].type | c is a clause for a in Σ}. The input coverage patterns for a are derived from the clauses for a by fixing the input arguments to a to be those for the head of the respective clause. Moreover, these arguments in the input coverage goal are set to be variables. Thus, if coverage checking as per Definition 10 verifies that this goal  is covered by the corresponding patterns, then any call to a with ground input arguments and variables for the output arguments will match the head of at least one clause for a, thus guaranteeing the possibility of backchaining on it. A terminating procedure for (input) coverage checking that is based on a repeated use of splitting and immediate coverage is described for LF in [11]. We do not present this procedure here since our interest is in the extraction of an explicit proof from the results of totality checking. In particular, we assume that we are presented at the outset with a sequence of splitting operations applied to an input coverage goal that lead to a set of subgoals that pass immediate coverage checking. 3.4  Output Coverage Checking  The premises in a clause for the type family correspond to recursive calls. The output arguments in such recursive calls could potentially limit the success set. Since coverage checking based on input coverage assumes success any time the input arguments in a goal match those in the head of a clause, it is necessary to verify that the output arguments of premises do not falsify this assumption. We describe here a method for ensuring that this is the case; this presentation is a formalization of what we understand output coverage checking to be in Twelf [6]. One way in which the success set may get constrained is if a output variable appears in an input argument. Output freshness is a criterion designed to avoid such a possibility. Definition 14. A clause c : A ← A1 ← · · · ← Am satisfies the output freshness property iff, for 1 ≤ i ≤ m, the sets of output and input variables of Ai are disjoint. We assume output freshness for clauses in what follows. A more involved requirement is that the form of the output arguments not limit the coverage of the clause. To formalize this we first identify output coverage goals and patterns. Definition 15. Let a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .type be a type family in a well-moded LF signature Σ, where ΓI is x1 : A01 , . . . , xk : A0k and ΓO is xk+1 : A0k+1 , . . . , xn : A0n . Further, let c : A ← A1 ← · · · ← Am be a clause in Σ, where A is a M1 . . . Mn and, for 1 ≤ i ≤ m, Ai is a Mi1 . . . Min . Finally, for 1 ≤ i ≤ m, let σiI be the substitution (Mi1 /x1 , . . . , Mik /xk ). Then the output coverage pattern for Ai is ΓiI , ΓiO `Σ Ai : type where ΓiI and ΓiO are contexts formed respectively from the input and output variables of Ai . The output coverage goal for Ai is ΓiI ; ΓO [σiI ] `Σ a σiI ΓO : type. Intuitively, the output coverage pattern corresponding to a premise Ai is Ai itself. The output coverage goal, on the other hand, is obtained by retaining the inputs to Ai while maximally generalizing its outputs. To check if an output coverage goal is covered by the single pattern, we may split on an output variable but a way that ensures no variable other than the one being split on is instantiated. Definition 16. Let ΓI ; ΓO `Σ A : type be an output coverage goal where ΓO is Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 for some atomic type Ax . Suppose that for every constant c : ΠΓc .Ac in Σ it is the case that either Ax is not an instance of Ac or there is a most general substitution σ such that Ax = Ac [σ]; such a substitution must obviously not instantiate any variable in ΓI , ΓO . Then, output splitting generates the set of subgoals {ΓI ; Γ1 , Γc0 , Γ2 [σ] `Σ A[σ] : type | c : ΠΓc .Ac ∈ Σ, Ax is an instance of Ac , σ 0 is a  most general substitution such that Ax = Ac [σ 0 ], 0  0  σ = ((c Γc )[σ ]/x, σ ) and  Γc0  4.1  `Σ σ : Γc ).}  Eventually we want every output coverage subgoal that is produced by splitting to be equivalent to the sole output coverage pattern for each premise. Immediate output coverage captures the relevant equivalence notion.  Γ `Σ σ : Γ1  An output coverage goal is covered by an output coverage pattern if every subgoal that is produced from it by some applications of output splitting is immediately covered by the pattern. In summary, output coverage checking ensures output freshness for every clause in the signature and it further checks that the output coverage goal for every premise of every clause is covered by the corresponding output coverage pattern for the premise.  Explicit Proofs for Meta-Theorems  Meta-theorems about formal systems can also be stated and proved in a logic. The logic M2 is designed for doing this based on the LF encodings of such systems [10]. M2 is a constructive logic formally presented via a sequent calculus. Formulas in M2 have the form ∀Γ1 .∃Γ2 .>, where Γ1 and Γ2 are valid LF contexts. The universal (existential) quantification is omitted when Γ1 (Γ2 ) is empty. As we can see, the formulas in M2 are limited to the Π10 form, where all existential quantifiers follow the universal ones. Although this may not seem very expressive, we have seen in Section 3 that every theorem proved through totality checking has this form. The judgments in the sequent calculus are of the form Γ; ∆ −→ P ∈ F , where F is a formula, P is a proof term, ∆ is a set of assumptions and Γ is a valid LF context containing all free variables occurring in P and F . Proof terms and assumptions are defined as follows: Proof Terms:  P ::= let y = x σ in P | LΓ.P |  Assumptions:  split x as hΓi in P | hσi ∆ ::= · | ∆, P ∈ F  A meta-theorem represented by the formula ∀Γ1 .∃Γ2 .>, is proved by deriving the judgment ·; · −→ P ∈ ∀Γ1 .∃Γ2 .>. The proof term P is obtained as an output of the derivation. The resulting P represents a total function, as shown by the following theorem that is proved in [9]. Theorem 18. If ·; · −→ P ∈ ∀Γ1 .∃Γ2 .> is derivable for some P , then for every closed substitution · `Σ σ1 : Γ1 there exists a substitution · `Σ σ2 : Γ2 [σ1 ]. As an example of this theorem, recall from Section 3 the formula stating the subject reduction theorem: ∀E : tm, V : tm, T : ty, D1 : eval E V, D2 : of E T. ∃D3 : of V T.∃D : subred E V T D1 D2 D3 .>.  If we can get a proof term for this formula, then we can conclude that for any closed terms D1 : eval E V and D2 : of E T , there exists a term D3 : of V T . Given the adequacy of the LF encoding, we can conclude the subject reduction theorem holds for the actual system. The subsections that follow present the derivation rules for M2 .  Γ; ∆1 , x ∈ ∀Γ1 .F1 , ∆2 , y ∈ F1 [σ] −→ P ∈ F2 ∀-L  Γ; ∆1 , x ∈ ∀Γ1 .F1 , ∆2 −→ let y = x σ in P ∈ F2 Γ, Γ1 ; ∆1 , x ∈ ∃Γ1 .>, ∆2 −→ P ∈ F  Definition 17. An output coverage goal ΓI ; ΓO `Σ M 0 : type is immediately covered by an output coverage pattern Γ0 `Σ M : type if M ≡ M 0 [σ] for a substitution σ that only renames variables and is such that Γ `Σ σ : ΓI , ΓO .  4.  The Quantifier Rules  0  ∃-L Γ; ∆1 , x ∈ ∃Γ1 .>, ∆2 −→ split x as hΓ1 i in P ∈ F Γ, Γ1 ; ∆ −→ P ∈ F  Γ `Σ σ : Γ1  ∀-R Γ; ∆ −→ LΓ1 .P ∈ ∀Γ1 .F  ∃-R  Γ; ∆ −→ hσi ∈ ∃Γ1 .>  Figure 3. Quantifier Rules The quantifier rules for M2 that are presented in Fig. 3 are the most basic ones for the logic. If we ignore the proof terms in boxes, we can see that these rules are similar to the conventional ones for an intuitionistic logic. The ∃-L and ∀-R rules introduce fresh eigenvariables to the context. The ∀-L rule instantiates an assumption with a witnessing substitution to get a new assumption. ∃-R finds a witnessing substitution and finishes the proof. Note that weakening is implicit in ∃-R. 4.2  Recursion  The recursion rule is Γ; ∆, x ∈ F −→ P ∈ F recur Γ; ∆ −→ µx ∈ F.P ∈ F with the proviso that µx ∈ F.P must terminate in x. This rule adds the goal formula as an inductive hypothesis to the set of assumptions. For a proof based on this rule to be valid, the proof term must represent a terminating computation as the side condition guarantees. This condition is presented formally in Definition 7.8 of [9] using the termination ordering on LF terms that was discussed in Section 3.2. 4.3  Case Analysis  The case analysis rule considers all the possible top-level structures for a ground term instantiating an eigenvariable x of atomic type Ax in the context Γ in a judgment of the form Γ; ∆ −→ P ∈ F . Since Ax is atomic, the only cases to consider are those where the head of the term is a constant from the LF signature. To state the rule, we need to extend the definition of proof terms with a case construct: Patterns: Cases: Proof Terms:  R ::= Γ0 ; Γ00 . M Ø ::= · | Ø, R 7→ P P ::= ... | case x of Ø  The case rule is Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ Ø ∈ F case Γ; ∆ −→ case x of Ø ∈ F where Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 is a valid permutation of Γ and Ax depends on all the variables in Γ1 . The new judgment Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ Ø ∈ F is derived by considering all constants in Σ whose target type unifies with Ax . The derivation rules for this judgment are shown in Fig. 4. The siguni rule produces a new premise (and a new case in the proof term) for every constant c in Σ that has a type ΠΓc .Ac  Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ Ø ∈ F signonuni, Ax and Ac do not unify  signempty Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→· ∗ ∈ F  Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ,c:ΠΓc .Ac Ø ∈ F  Γ0 , Γ2 [σ]; ∆[σ] −→ P ∈ F [σ]  Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ Ø ∈ F siguni  Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ,c:ΠΓc .Ac Ø, (Γ0 ; Γ2 [σ] . (c Γc )[σ] 7→ P ) ∈ F Γ0 ` σ : (Γ1 , x : Ax , Γc ) where σ = mgu(Ax = Ac , x = c Γc )  Figure 4. Rules for Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ Ø ∈ F proofs generated from clauses  such that Ac unifies with Ax . The situation where Ax and Ac do not unify is dealt with by the signonuni rule. Interpretation of Proof Rules  At an intuitive level, the proof rules of M2 function as follows: • recur introduces an inductive hypothesis as an assump-  tion, usually as the first step, reading proofs upwards; • ∀-L followed by ∃-L corresponds to an application of the  inductive hypothesis;  D1 case initial analysis step steps  4.4  • ∀-R introduces hypotheses into the context;  the context.  5.  Explicit Proofs from Totality Checking  Totality checking is a proof verification tool that asserts if the user-defined LF signatures represent proofs for metatheorems. This section describes an algorithm for generating M2 proofs from totality checking that does not use contexts and lemmas and the proof for its correctness. The algorithm consists of two steps. Firstly, a well-moded type family, which can always be stated as a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .type where ΓI contains input parameters and ΓO contains output parameters, is translated into an M2 formula ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>. Secondly, an M2 proof tree for the sequent ·; · −→ P ∈ ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .> is generated by applying M2 proof rules translated from totality checking until a complete proof tree is built. The validity of those applications is guaranteed by totality checking, as we will show in the correctness proof for the algorithm. In the following subsections, we first give an overview of the proof generation process. Then we discuss the individual steps for constructing the proof tree. Finally, we prove the correctness of the proof generation algorithm. 5.1  Overview of the Proof Generation  Totality checking verifies that an LF signature provided by user represents a total function that computes ground outputs from ground inputs. This interpretation of proofs is translated into an M2 proof tree as shown in Fig. 5. The proof tree consists of several segments, each consisting of applications of proof rules translated from different components in totality checking. It is constructed as follows: first there is an initial step that introduces an inductive hypothesis and other hypotheses. Then follows the case analysis steps that translate input coverage checking into applications of case. Then every clause for a in the LF signature is translated into a proof branch. For each frontier sequent resulting from case analysis steps, there exists a proof branch that, when instantiated, is the proof for that sequent. Plugging in the proof for those frontier sequents finishes the proof.  Dj  Di  .. . case S1  ...  ...  Dl  .. . case Sk  Do  ...  ΓI ; ∆ −→ ∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>  Dp  ...  .. . case Sn case  .. . ·; · −→ ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>  Figure 5. Overview of the Proof Generation  • case corresponds to case analysis on a hypothesis; • ∃-R finishes a proof branch by constructing witness from  ...  For simplicity we omit proof terms in M2 sequents in the following discussions. The translation can be extended to generate M2 proofs with proof terms in a straightforward manner. The proof term for the end sequent in a translated proof represents a total function, whose termination property is ensured by termination checking. 5.2  Initial Step  Starting with the initial sequent ·; · −→ ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>, we apply the recur rule to introduce the goal formula as an inductive hypothesis. Then we apply the ∀-R rule to introduce hypotheses in ΓI into the LF context. ΓI ; ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .> −→ ∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .> ·; ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .> −→ ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .> ·; · −→ ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>  ∀-R recur  Figure 6. Introducing Hypotheses 5.3  Case Analysis Steps  In this phase, we translate input coverage checking into applications of the case rule. We assume that input coverage checking succeeds and returns a sequence of splitting operations that leads to subgoals covered by input patterns. We show that every splitting operation can be translated into an application of case. In Section 3.3, we described that splitting on the variable x in an input coverage goal Γ1I , x : Ax , Γ2I `Σ A : ΠΓO .type produces a subgoal Γ0 , Γ2I [σ] `Σ A[σ] : ΠΓO [σ].type for every constant c : ΠΓc .Ac such that Ac and Ax unifies and Γ0 `Σ σ = mgu(Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ) : (Γ1I , x : Ax , Γc ). From the definitions of case in Section 4.3, we can see that splitting on a variable x : A corresponds exactly to case analysis of x. To formally prove the equivalence, we define a relation between input coverage goals and M2 sequents: Definition 19. Let ≡I be a binary relation between input coverage goals and M2 sequents. G ≡I S holds if and only  if G is an input coverage goal ΓI `Σ A : ΠΓO .type and S is an M2 sequent ΓI ; ∆ −→ ∃ΓO .∃D : A ΓO .> where ∆ = ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>.  Definition 23. Let S be an M2 sequent Γ; ∆ −→ F and σ be a substitution such that Γ0 `Σ σ : Γ. The instantiation of S under σ is Γ0 ; ∆[σ] −→ F [σ].  We overload the ≡I relation with finite sets of coverage goals and M2 sequents:  The following lemma shows that immediate coverage in input coverage checking can be reflected into instantiation of M2 sequents.  Definition 20. Given a finite set of input coverage goals G = {Gi | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} and M2 sequents S = {Si | 1 ≤ i ≤ n}, G ≡I S if and only if Gi ≡I Si for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Then we have the following lemma: Lemma 21. Given G ≡I S where G is Γ1I , x : Ax , Γ2I `Σ A : ΠΓO .type and S is Γ1I , x : Ax , Γ2I ; ∆ −→ ∃ΓO .∃D : A ΓO .>, if G is the set of subgoals resulting from splitting on x in G and S is the set of frontier sequents resulting from applying case to x in S, then G ≡I S. Proof. Let Gi be a subgoal Γ0 , Γ2I [σ] `Σ A[σ] : ΠΓO [σ].type resulting from splitting for some constant c : ΠΓc .Ac such that Ac and Ax unifies and Γ0 `Σ σ = mgu(Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ) : (Γ1I , x : Ax , Γc ). By the definition of case analysis, there must be a sequent Si = Γ0 , Γ2I [σ]; ∆ −→ ∃ΓO [σ].∃D : A[σ] ΓO [σ].> resulting from applying siguni. Thus we have Gi ≡I Si by the definition of ≡I . Since goals in G one-to-one correspond to sequents in S, we have G ≡I S. The following lemma leads to an algorithm for translating splittings to applications of case: Lemma 22. Given a set of input coverage goals G and a partial M2 proof with frontier sequents S such that G ≡I S, if for some Gk ∈ G such that Gk = Γ1I , x : Ax , Γ2I `Σ A : ΠΓO .type, splitting on x results in a new set of coverage goals G0 , then applying the case rule on x in Sk where Gk ≡I Sk results in a partial M2 proof with frontier sequents S0 such that G0 ≡I S0 . Proof. The coverage goals Gi ∈ G for i 6= k and frontier sequents Si ∈ S for i 6= k are still present and related by ≡I after splitting and applying case. The new coverage goals generated by splitting are related to the new frontier sequents generated by applying case by Lemma 21. Starting with the partial M2 proof resulting from the initial step, we translate input coverage checking into applications of case. We maintain a set of input coverage goals G and a partial proof with frontier sequents S such that G ≡I S for the translation. Initially, G is a singleton containing ΓI `Σ a ΓI : ΠΓO .> and S is a singleton containing ΓI ; ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .> −→ ∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .> that is the frontier sequent of the proof in Figure 6. By Lemma 22, for every splitting operation on some Gi ∈ G, we are able to apply the case rule to the corresponding frontier sequent Si ∈ S where Gi ≡I Si to get G0 and S0 such that G0 ≡I S0 . In the end, we get a set of input coverage goals G0 that are immediately covered and a partial proof tree with frontier sequents S0 such that G0 ≡I S0 . 5.4  Generating Proof Trees from Clauses  Let G0 = {Gi | 1 ≤ i ≤ n0 } and S0 = {Si | 1 ≤ i ≤ n0 }, where G0 ≡I S0 , be the input coverage goals and sequents resulting from case analysis steps. To finish the M2 proof, we need to derive sequents in S0 . For this we define the instantiation of an M2 sequent:  Lemma 24. Given an input coverage goal G0 and an input coverage pattern G such that G0 is immediately covered by G under a substitution σ, if S and S 0 are M2 sequents for which G ≡I S and G0 ≡I S 0 hold, then S 0 is the instantiation of S under σ. Proof. Straightforward from definitions of immediate coverage, instantiation and ≡I relation. Let Gi ∈ G and Si ∈ S where Gi ≡I Si and G ≡I S where G is a pattern derived from a clause c that immediately covers Gi . We are going to translate c into an M2 proof with the end sequent S. By Lemma 24, the instantiation of the proof for S under the substitution for the immediate coverage of Gi by G is a proof for Si . The instantiation of a proof generated from a clause is also a valid proof, which we will prove after describing the translation of clauses. 5.4.1  Translation of Clauses into Proofs  We first describe the translation of clauses into M2 proofs. Let a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .type be a type family where ΓI = x1 : A1 , ..., xk : Ak and ΓO = xk+1 : Ak+1 , ..., xn : An , c : a M1 ... Mn ← a M11 ... M1n ← ... ← a Mm1 ... Mmn be a clause for a, σcI = (M1 /x1 , ..., Mk /xk ) be the substitution containing input arguments to the head and ΓcI be the context containing variables in σcI . The input coverage pattern G derived from c is ΓcI `Σ a σcI : ΠΓO [σcI ].type. Let S be the sequent ΓcI ; ∆ −→ ∃ΓO [σcI ].∃D : a σcI ΓO .> such that G ≡I S, where ∆ contains the inductive hypothesis ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>. The M2 proof for S is translated from the operational interpretation of c as a function that computes ground outputs from ground inputs. Starting with the input arguments to the head, this function recursively calls a. Each recursive call to a is represented by a premise a Mi1 ... Min for some i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ m. After the recursive calls, it constructs outputs from initial inputs and the results of recursive calls. We describe the translation from c to a proof for S as a recursive procedure. In the base step, we translate the construction of outputs into an application of the ∃-R rule. In each recursive step, we translate a recursive call to a into applications of ∀-L, ∃-L and case rules and recursively generate the sub-proof. Before describing the translation steps, we present some notations that will be used in our discussion and an alternative definition of output coverage checking in order to simplify the discussion. Definition 25. Let a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .type be a type family with well-defined mode, where ΓI = x1 : A01 , ..., xk : A0k and ΓO = xk+1 : A0k+1 , .., xn : A0n . Let c : A ← A1 ← ... ← Am be a clause for a where A = a M1 ... Mn and Ai = a Mi1 ... Min for 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Let σcI = (M1 /x1 , ..., Mk /xk ) be the substitution containing input arguments to the head of c. A set of contexts {Γci | 0 ≤ i ≤ m} is recursively defined as follows: Γc0 contains input variables in A and Γci = Γci−1 , Γi0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ m where Γi0 contains output variables in Ai and  the variable Di : Ai . A set of sequents {Sci | 0 ≤ i ≤ m} is defined where Sci = Γci ; ∆i −→ ∃ΓO [σcI ].∃D : a σcI ΓO .> The following lemma relates this definition to mode checking: Lemma 26. Given a clause c, the context Γci as defined in Definition 25 is a superset of the context Γi as defined in Definition 6 for i such that 0 ≤ i ≤ m. Proof. It is easy to see that Γi can be obtained by removing variables Dj for 1 ≤ j ≤ i and variables that do not have a strict occurrence in the type of c from Γci . By this lemma and the definition of mode consistency, we know that for a constant c : A ← A1 ← ... ← Am the input variables to Ai are contained in Γci−1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ m. The output coverage goals and patterns in Definition 15 are redefined as follows: the output coverage pattern for Ai is now Γci−1 , ΓiO `Σ Ai : type and the output coverage goal for Ai is now Γci−1 , ΓO [σiI ] `Σ a σiI ΓO : type. This is a superfluous change from Definition 15: since the context ΓiI containing input variables to Ai is closed and a subset of Γci−1 , splitting and immediate coverage will never affect variables that are not in ΓiI . Thus splitting and immediate coverage in Definition 16 and 17 are adopted to this new definition in a straightforward manner. By the definition, Sc0 is the sequent S. We construct a proof for S by recursively constructing proofs for {Sci | 0 ≤ i ≤ m}. In the base step we construct a proof for Scm . In the recursive steps we construct proof for Sci−1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Base Step. In the base step we translate the construction of outputs into an application of ∃-L to Scm as shown in Figure 7. By Definition 25, Γcm contains D1 : Γcm `Σ σm : (ΓO [σcI ], D : a σcI ΓO ) Γcm ; ∆m −→ ∃ΓO [σcI ].∃D : a σcI ΓO .>  ∃-L  A1 , ..., Dm : Am . Letting Mk+1 , ..., Mn be the output arguments to the head of c and σcO = (Mk+1 /xk+1 , ..., Mn /xn ), σm = (σcO , (c Dm ..., D1 )/D) in Figure 7. Lemma 27. Γcm `Σ σm : (ΓO [σcI ], D : a σcI ΓO ) holds. Proof. By the definition of mode consistency and Lemma 26, A is output consistent relative to Γcm . Thus Γcm contains all free variables in σcO . By the well-typedness of A, Γcm `Σ σcO : ΓO [σcI ] holds. Thus we have Γcm `Σ c Dm ... D1 : A  Γcm `Σ σm : (ΓO [σcI ], D : a σcI ΓO )  Γci−1 ; ∆0i−1 −→ F  Γci−1 ; ∆i−1 −→ F where  ∆0i−1  = ∆i−1 , ∃Γ  O  [σiI ].∃Di  :  a σiI  ∃-L  ∀-L ΓO .>  and F = ∃ΓO [σcI ].∃D : a σcI ΓO .>  Figure 8. Applying the Inductive Hypothesis cases the output arguments in Ai are not variables. For example, in the subred example, the first premise of eval-app is subred (Dev1 : eval M (abs M 0 )) (Dty1 : of M (arr T1 T )) (of-abs (Dty3 : Πx : tm.of x T1 → of (M 0 x) T )) which has an output of-abs Dty3 . By applying the inductive hypothesis on Dev1 and Dty1 , we get an new variable D3 : of (abs M 0 ) (arr T1 T ) in the context. We need to perform an inversion (case analysis) on D3 to introduce the output variable Dty3 into the context. The inversion consists of case rules translated from the output coverage checking. The translation is similar to translating input coverage checking. First we define a relation between output coverage goals and M2 sequents. Definition 28. Let ≡O be a binary relation between output coverage goals and M2 sequents. G ≡O S iff G is an output coverage goal ΓI , ΓO `Σ A : type where ΓI contains input parameters and ΓO contains output parameters and S is an M2 sequent ΓI , ΓO , D : A; ∆ −→ F where ∆ contains the inductive hypothesis and F = ∃ΓO [σcI ].∃D : a σcI ΓO .>. Definition 29. Given a finite set of output coverage goals G = {Gi | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} and M2 sequents S = {Si | 1 ≤ i ≤ n}, G ≡O S if and only if Gi ≡O Si for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Then the following lemma holds:  Figure 7. Finishing the Proof by Applying ∃-R Rule  Γcm `Σ σcO : ΓO [σcI ]  Γci−1 , ΓO [σiI ], Di : a σiI ΓO ; ∆0i−1 −→ F Γci−1 `Σ σiI : ΓI  subst-typ  Recursive Steps. For i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ m, we create a proof tree for Sci−1 by first translating the recursive call represented by Ai = a Mi1 ... Min and then recursively generating the proof for Sci . A recursive call can be translated to an application of the inductive hypothesis in the M2 proof as shown in Figure 8, in which σiI = (Mi1 /x1 , ..., Mik /xk ) is a substitution containing input arguments to Ai . In the simple case when the output arguments Mik+1 ...Min to Ai are variables, the frontier sequent resulting from applying ∀-L and ∃-L is exactly Sci . By recursively generating the proof for Sci we finish the translation. However, in many  Lemma 30. Given G ≡O S where G is ΓI , Γ1O , x : Ax , Γ2O `Σ A : type and S is ΓI , Γ1O , x : Ax , Γ2O , D : A; ∆ −→ F , if G is the set of subgoals resulting from splitting on x in G and S is the set of sequents resulting from applying case rule to x in S, then G ≡O S. Proof. Similar to Lemma 21. Note that all free variables in F are bound in ΓI . Since variables in ΓI are not instantiated by splitting in output coverage checking, they are also not instantiated by applying the corresponding case rule in the M2 proof. Thus F remains the same after applying case. By Lemma 30, we can prove a lemma similar to Lemma 22, from which we derive an algorithm for translating output coverage checking. Let Sc0 i−1 be the frontier sequent resulting from applying the inductive hypothesis (as shown in Figure 8) and G0ci be the output coverage goal for Ai . By the definition of ≡O and output coverage goals, we have G0ci ≡O Sc0 i−1 . Let Gci be the output coverage patterns for Ai . By Definition 25 and output coverage patterns, we have Gci ≡O Sci . The output coverage checking performs a sequence of splitting operations to G0ci and returns a set of subgoal G0 immediately covered by Gci . Those splitting operations are translated into applications of case rules to the frontier sequent Sc0 i−1 , resulting in a partial proof with frontier sequents S0 such that G0 ≡O S0 . To relate the frontier sequents in S0 to Sci , we prove the following lemma, which reflects the immediate  coverage in output coverage into equivalence between M2 sequents up to renaming. Lemma 31. Given an output coverage goal G0 and an output coverage pattern G such that G0 is immediately covered by G, if G ≡O S and G0 ≡O S 0 then S 0 is the instantiation of S under σ which is a substitution that only renames variables. Proof. Similar to Lemma 24. Because we restricted the instantiation of immediate coverage to an substitution that only renames variables in output coverage checking, it is reflected into equivalence between M2 sequents up to renaming. 0  0  By applying Lemma 31 to G ≡O S and Gci ≡O Sci , we have that for every S 0 ∈ S0 , S 0 is an instantiation of Sci under a renaming substitution. The following lemma shows that instantiations of M2 proofs under renaming substitutions are also valid proofs. Lemma 32. Let S 0 be an instantiation of S under a renaming substitution, if S has a M2 proof, then so does S 0 . Proof. By induction on the structure of the proof for S and case analysis of the rule applied to S. The proof for most of cases is straightforward. When the rule applied is case, the proof relies on the fact that for a unification problem, compositions of mgus with renaming substitutions are still mgus. At this point, we recursively generate a proof for Sci and apply Lemma 32 to get proofs for sequents in S0 . This finishes the construction of the proof for Sci−1 . 5.4.2  Correctness of the Translation of Clauses  The following lemma shows that proofs translated from clauses are valid: Lemma 33. Given a clause c : A ← A1 ← ... ← Am , the input coverage pattern G derived from c and the M2 sequent S such that G ≡I S. The algorithm for translating clauses to M2 proofs generate an M2 proof for S from c. Proof. We define M2 sequents {Sci | 0 ≤ i ≤ m} as in Definition 25. By the definition we have S = Sc0 . We prove that the algorithm constructs a correct proof for S by induction on i. In the base case, Lemma 27 guarantees the ∃-R is correctly applied to get a proof for Scm . In the inductive case, assume we have a correct proof for Sci for some i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ m, we prove that applications of ∀-L, ∃-L and case rules to Sci−1 are correct. By the definition of mode consistency in Definition 6 and Lemma 26, the context Γci−1 in the premise of ∀-L, Γci−1 `Σ σiI : ΓI , contains all variables in σiI . Thus this premise holds by LF typing rules and ∀-L is correctly applied. The correctness of ∃-L and case rules is obvious from their definitions. By Lemma 30 and Lemma 31, after applying those rules we get a partial proof with frontier sequents S, which is completed by applying Lemma 32 to the proof for Sci . 5.4.3  Correctness of the Instantiation of Proofs  As described in the beginning of Section 5.4, we have to instantiate the proof generated from clauses to derive frontier sequents in the partial proof resulting from case analysis steps. In general, the provability of an M2 sequent is not closed under instantiations. For instance, a case rule might no longer be applicable after an instantiation because the side condition for case, that every unification problem must  either has an mgu or no solution, may no longer hold after the instantiation. In our case, an M2 proof to be instantiated is translated from a totality checked clause, which has a particular structure such that the same rules can be applied to prove the instantiation of the M2 sequent. Specifically, it does not use recur rule and case rules in it are translated from splitting in output coverage checking, which only involves matching problems instead of general unification problems. From those observations, we can prove the following instantiation lemma. Lemma 34. If D is an M2 proof generated from clauses as described in Section 5.4.1 for the sequent S = Γ; ∆ −→ F , then given any substitution Γ0 `Σ σ : Γ and an instantiation S 0 of S under σ there exists a proof D0 for S 0 . Proof. The proof is by induction on the structure of D and case analysis of the rule applied to S in D. The important case is for the case rule, in which we prove that the structure of the case are maintained under instantiation. Proof for other cases is straightforward. See Theorem 38 in the appendix for the details. 5.5  Correctness of the M2 Proof Generation  We have shown that almost all applications of the M2 rules in our proof generation are correct, except for recur rule in the initial step which has a side condition that the proof term must represent a terminating computation. Given an totality checked LF signature Σ and a type family a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .type in Σ such that ΓI = x1 : A1 , ..., xk : Ak , an M2 proof for ·; · −→ P ∈ F is generated by the translation algorithm, where F = ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .> and P = µx ∈ F.L(x1 : A1 , ..., xk : Ak ).P 0 . Intuitively, the translation algorithm should reflect the termination ordering in totality checking to that in the proof term P . Then the termination property of P is guaranteed by the termination checking. To formally prove that, we need an instantiation lemma for termination ordering. The following lemma proves that subterm ordering holds under instantiation. Lemma 35. Let  be the subterm ordering between LF terms. If M  N and σ is an substitution, then M [σ]  N [σ]. Proof. The formal definition of  is described in [8]. The proof is by a straightforward induction on the derivation rules for . By this lemma, the same property can be proved easily for lexicographical and simultaneous ordering. These are all orderings supported by M2 . Then we prove that the termination property holds for P . Lemma 36. If P = µx ∈ F.L(x1 : A1 , ..., xk : Ak ).P 0 is the proof term generated by the translation algorithm, then P terminates in x. Proof. Suppose every recursive call x M1 ... Mk in the proof term occurs in a position such that x1 , ..., xk are instantiated by σ = σ1 ◦ ... ◦ σm where σi for 1 ≤ i ≤ m are substitutions in case rules along the execution path and σ is their compositions, we have to prove that M1 , ..., Mk are smaller than x1 [σ], ..., xk [σ] relative to some termination ordering. In our translated proofs, a recursive call corresponds to a premise A in some clause c. Let M1 , ..., Mk be the input arguments to A and M10 , ..., Mk0 be the input arguments to the head of c. By termination checking we have M1 , ..., Mk is smaller than M10 , ..., Mk0 relative to the termination ordering.  In the proof term P 0 , the recursive call occurs in a position where x1 , ..., xn are instantiated by the case rules translated from input coverage checking. Letting σ be the composition of substitutions in those case rules, we have xi [σ] = Mi0 [σ 0 ] for i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ k, where σ 0 is the substitution for instantiating the proof translated from c, as described in Section 5.4. By the translation algorithm, this recursive call has the form x (M1 [σ 0 ]) ... (Mk [σ 0 ]). Applying Lemma 35 to the order between M1 , .., Mk and M10 , .., Mk0 , we get (M1 [σ 0 ])...(Mk [σ 0 ]) is smaller than x1 [σ], ..., xk [σ] relative to the termination ordering.  Another direction of ongoing inquiry is the correspondence between the formalization and validation of meta-theorems in the LF/Twelf framework and in the two-level logic framework of Abella [1]. It has previously been shown that specifications in LF can be translated into clause definitions in the specification logic used in Abella in a way that preserves essential structure [12]. By exploiting this correspondence, it appears possible to transform M2 (and possibly M+ 2 ) proofs over LF specifications into Abella proofs over the related Abella specifications. The results of this paper and its extension would then yield a path to proofs in another tried and tested logical setup.  Then we have our main theorem: Theorem 37. Given an LF signature Σ that is totality checked without using contexts and lemmas, for every type family a : ΠΓI .ΠΓO .> in Σ, the proof generation algorithm generates an M2 proof for ·; · −→ P ∈ ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>. Proof. We prove that every application of an M2 rule is valid. 1. Obviously, the application of ∀-R in the initial step is correct. 2. The applications of case rules translated from input coverage checking are correct by Lemma 22. 3. The translation from clauses to M2 proofs are correct by Lemma 33. By instantiating those proofs the frontier sequents resulting from translating input coverage checking are proved, which is proved by Lemma 24. The instantiated proofs are valid by Lemma 34. 4. Finally, the application of recur rule in the initial step is correct by Lemma 36. Since all the proof rules are correctly applied, we get an M2 proof for ·; · −→ P ∈ ∀ΓI .∃ΓO .∃D : a ΓI ΓO .>.  6.  Conclusions and Future Works  This paper has described a method for transforming totality checking in a restricted version of Twelf into explicit proofs in the logic M2 . We have also proved this method correct. Towards this end, we have adapted arguments for the correctness of particular components of totality checking into an argument for the correctness of the generated M2 proof. Since M2 is a consistent formal logic with established metaproperties, the existence of such a transformation boosts our confidence in totality checking. More importantly, the transformation yields explicit objects that can be traded as proof certificates and whose correctness can be checked independently of the procedure that generated them. As we have noted already, we have not considered the entire class of specifications for which Twelf supports totality checking. One limitation is that we have not considered the proof of properties that are parameterized by changing signatures that adhere to constraints that are finitely described via regular worlds descriptions in Twelf. Another limitation is that we have not allowed for clauses that contain calls to predicates other than the predicate being defined. We believe our work can be extended to treat totality checking in this more general setting. However, we will need a richer target logic than M2 . In particular, the proofs we produce will have to be in the logic M+ 2 that extends M2 with judgments with generalized contexts and that contains rules for lemma applications. We plan to examine this issue more carefully in the near future.  Acknowledgments:This work has been partially supported by the NSF Grant CCF-0917140. Opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.  References [1] A. Gacek, D. Miller, and G. Nadathur. A two-level logic approach to reasoning about computations. J. of Automated Reasoning, 49(2):241–273, 2012. [2] R. Harper, F. Honsell, and G. Plotkin. A framework for defining logics. In 2nd Symp. on Logic in Computer Science, pages 194–204, Ithaca, NY, June 1987. [3] R. Harper, F. Honsell, and G. Plotkin. A framework for defining logics. Journal of the ACM, 40(1):143–184, 1993. [4] F. Pfenning. Logic programming in the LF logical framework. In G. Huet and G. D. Plotkin, editors, Logical Frameworks, pages 149–181. Cambridge University Press, 1991. [5] F. Pfenning. Unification and anti-unification in the Calculus of Constructions. In G. Kahn, editor, 6th Symp. on Logic in Computer Science, pages 74–85. IEEE, July 1991. [6] F. Pfenning and C. Schürmann. Twelf User’s Guide, 1.4 edition, Dec. 2002. [7] B. Pientka. An insider’s look at LF type reconstruction: everything you (n)ever wanted to know. Journal of Functional Programming, 23(1):1–37, Jan. 2013. [8] E. Rohwedder and F. Pfenning. Mode and termination analysis for higher-order logic programs. In Proceedings of the European Symposium on Programming, pages 296–310, Apr. 1996. [9] C. Schürmann. Automating the Meta Theory of Deductive Systems. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Oct. 2000. CMU-CS-00-146. [10] C. Schürmann and F. Pfenning. Automated theorem proving in a simple meta-logic for LF. In C. Kirchner and H. Kirchner, editors, 15th Conf. on Automated Deduction (CADE), volume 1421 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 286–300. Springer, 1998. [11] C. Schürmann and F. Pfenning. A coverage checking algorithm for LF. In Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics: 16th International Conference, TPHOLs 2003, volume 2758 of LNCS, pages 120–135. Springer, 2003. [12] Z. Snow, D. Baelde, and G. Nadathur. A meta-programming approach to realizing dependently typed logic programming. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Principles and Practice of Declarative Programming (PPDP), pages 187–198, 2010.  Instantiation Theorem for M2  A.  Theorem 38. If D is an M2 proof generated from clauses as described in Section 5.4.1 for the sequent S = Γ1 , Γ2 ; ∆ −→ F where Γ1 contains input parameters and Γ2 contains output parameters, then given any substitution Γ10 `Σ σ1 : Γ1 there exists a proof for S 0 = Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→ F [σ1 ].  Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ] `Σ σ ◦ σ1 : Γ3 [σ10 ]. Note that Γ3 [σ10 ] = Γ3 [σ1 ]. We apply ∃-R to conclude this case: Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ] ` σ[σ1 ] 0 Γ1 , Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→  D0 Γ1 , Γ2 ; ∆1 , ∀Γ3 .F3 , ∆2 , F3 [σ] −→ F1  Γ1 , Γ2 ; ∆1 , ∀Γ3 .F3 , ∆2 −→ F1  ∀-L  0  Applying I.H to D , we get D00 Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆1 [σ1 ], (∀Γ3 .F3 )[σ1 ], ∆2 [σ1 ], F3 [σ][σ1 ] −→ F1 [σ1 ]  Since ∀Γ3 .F3 is a closed term (an inductive hypothesis got from applying recur), we have (∀Γ3 .F3 )[σ1 ] = ∀Γ3 .F3 . The proof above is equivalent to D00 Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆1 [σ1 ], ∀Γ3 .F3 , ∆2 [σ1 ], F3 [σ][σ1 ]  D00 Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆1 [σ1 ], ∀Γ3 .F3 , ∆2 [σ1 ], F3 [σ][σ1 ] −→ F1 [σ1 ] Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆1 [σ1 ], ∀Γ3 .F3 , ∆2 [σ1 ] −→ F1 [σ1 ]  ∀-L  Γ10 , x : Ax [σ1 ], Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→ F [σ1 ]  case  For a constant c : ΠΓc .Ac in Σ, the unification problem becomes (Ax [σ1 ] = Ac , x = c Γc ), which is equivalent to (Ax = Ac , x = c Γc )[σ1 ] since σ1 does not contain variables in ΠΓc .Ac . If (Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ) does not have a solution, so does (Ax [σ1 ] = Ac , x = c Γc ). Thus we can apply the same signonuni rule in this case. If (Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ) has an mgu σ, according to the translation algorithm the original proof looks like: D1 Γ0 , Γ2 [σ]; ∆[σ] −→ F [σ]  D0 Γ1 , Γ2 , Γ3 ; ∆ −→ F ∀-R Γ1 , Γ2 ; ∆ −→ ∀Γ3 .F  D2 Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ F  Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ,c:ΠΓc .Ac F  siguni  Γ0 ` σ : (Γ1 , x : Ax , Γc ) where σ = mgu(Ax = Ac , x = c Γc )  Because this is translated from splitting in output coverage checking, we have σ = (σid , (c Γc )[σc ]/x, σc ) and Γ0 = Γ1 , Γc0 according to Def. 16, where σid is an identity substitution for Γ1 and σc is the substitution for Γc . Since Γc is disjoint from Γ1 , we have Γ1 , Γc0 `Σ σc : Γc . The proof above is equivalent to  By I.H, we have 00  D Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ], Γ3 [σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→ F [σ1 ]  We conclude this case by applying ∀-R:  Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→ (∀Γ3 .F )[σ1 ]  Since σ1 only instantiate input variables and case rules are applied only on output variables, x and variables in Γ2 will not be instantiated by σ1 (but their types will). For a constant c : ΠΓc .Ac in Σ, we solve the unification problem (Ac = Ax , x = c Γc ). If it does not have a solution, signonuni is applied. If it has an mgu, siguni is applied. If it has an unifier but not an mgu, case rule is not applicable. Thus in a correct proof such as D, the last situation does rise. We prove that after the instantiation, the same rule can be applied to get a correct application of case rule. The application of case rule after unification looks like: Γ10 , x : Ax [σ1 ], Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→Σ F [σ1 ]  Case: ∀-R. The proof looks like:  D00 Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ], Γ3 [σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→ F [σ1 ]  ∃-L  D0 Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ F case Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→ F  −→ F1 [σ1 ]  Let σ10 = (σ1 , σid ) where σid is an identity substitution such that Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ] `Σ σ10 : Γ1 , Γ2 . Applying Lemma. 1 to Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ] `Σ σ10 : Γ1 , Γ2 and Γ1 , Γ2 `Σ σ : Γ3 , we get Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ] `Σ σ ◦ σ10 : Γ3 [σ10 ]. Since Γ3 is closed, Γ3 [σ10 ] = Γ3 . We apply ∀-L to conclude this case, where D000 is the derivation for Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ] `Σ σ ◦ σ10 : Γ3 : D000  ∃Γ3 [σ1 ].>  Case: case. This is the only non-trivial case. The proof looks like:  Proof. By induction on the structure of D. According to the last rule used in D, there are the following cases: Case: ∀-L. The proof looks like Γ1 , Γ2 `Σ σ : Γ3  : Γ3 [σ1 ]  D1 Γ1 , Γc0 , Γ2 [σ]; ∆ −→ F  ∀-R  Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ,c:ΠΓc .Ac F  Case: ∃-L. The proof looks like:  D00 Γ10 , Γc0 , Γ2 [σ][σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ]  By I.H., we have D00 Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ], Γ3 [σ1 ]; ∆1 [σ1 ], ∃Γ3 [σ1 ].>, ∆2 [σ1 ] −→ F [σ1 ]  We apply ∃-L to conclude this case:  Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆1 [σ1 ], ∃Γ3 [σ1 ].>, ∆2 [σ1 ] −→ F [σ1 ]  siguni  By applying I.H. to D1 , we get the following proof:  D0 Γ1 , Γ2 , Γ3 ; ∆1 , ∃Γ3 .>, ∆2 −→ F ∃-L Γ1 , Γ2 ; ∆1 , ∃Γ3 .>, ∆2 −→ F  D00 Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ], Γ3 [σ1 ]; ∆1 [σ1 ], ∃Γ3 [σ1 ].>, ∆2 [σ1 ] −→ F [σ1 ]  D2 Γ1 , x : Ax , Γ2 ; ∆ −→Σ F  ∃-L  Case: ∃-R. The proof looks like: Γ1 , Γ2 ` σ : Γ3 ∃-R Γ1 , Γ2 ; ∆ −→ ∃Γ3 .>  Let σ10 = (σ1 , σid ) where σid is an identity substitution such that Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ] `Σ σ10 : Γ1 , Γ2 . Applying Lemma. 1 to Γ10 , Γ2 [σ1 ] `Σ σ10 : Γ1 , Γ2 and Γ1 , Γ2 `Σ σ : Γ3 , we have  −→ F [σ1 ]  Let σ10 = (σ1 , σid ) such that Γ10 , Γc0 `Σ σ10 : (Γ1 , Γc0 ), we have Γ10 , Γc0 `Σ σc ◦ σ10 : Γc . Let σ 0 = (σid , (c Γc )[σc ◦ σ10 ]/x, σc ◦ σ10 )  Γ10 , Γc0  such that `Σ σ 0 : (Γ10 , x : Ax [σ1 ], Γc ). If σ 0 is an mgu for (Ax [σ1 ] = Ac , x = c Γc ), then we get a proof after instantiation using siguni rule: D00 Γ10 , Γc0 , Γ2 [σ1 ][σ 0 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→ F [σ1 ] Γ10 , x  D20  : Ax [σ1 ], Γ2 [σ1 ]; ∆[σ1 ] −→Σ,c:ΠΓc .Ac F [σ1 ]  siguni  where D20 is the rest of the instantiated proof. Here we use the fact that Γ2 [σ][σ1 ] = Γ2 [(σ1 , (c Γc )[σc ◦ σ10 ]/x, σc ◦ σ10 )] = Γ2 [σ1 ][σ 0 ]. We then prove that σ 0 is indeed an mgu for (Ax [σ1 ] = Ac , x = c Γc ).  1. σ 0 is a unifier. Since σ is an mgu for (Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ), we have Ax [σ] = Ac [σ] which is equivalent to Ax = Ac [σc ]. Thus Ax [σ1 ][σ 0 ] = Ax [σ1 ] = Ac [σc ][σ1 ] = Ac [σc ◦ σ10 ] = Ac [σ 0 ]. Also x[σ 0 ] = (c Γc )[σc ◦ σ10 ] = (c Γc )[σ 0 ]. 2. σ 0 is an mgu. Let σ2 = (σ12 , M/x, σc2 ) be a unifier for (Ax [σ1 ] = Ac , x = c Γc ) such that Γ2 `Σ σ2 : (Γ10 , x : Ax [σ1 ], Γc ). Let σ100 = (σ1 , σid ) such that Γ10 , x : Ax [σ1 ], Γc `Σ σ100 : (Γ1 , x : Ax , Γc ). We have σ100 ◦ σ2 as a unifer for (Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ) such that Γ2 `Σ σ100 ◦ σ2 : (Γ1 , x : Ax , Γc ). Since σ is an mgu for (Ax = Ac , x = c Γc ), there exists some σ3 = (σ13 , σc3 ) such that Γ2 `Σ σ3 : (Γ1 , Γc0 ) and σ◦σ3 = σ100 ◦σ2 . From σ◦σ3 = σ100 ◦σ2 , we have σ13 = σ1 ◦ σ12 and σc ◦ σ3 = σc2 . Letting σ4 = (σ12 , σc3 ), we prove that σ2 = σ 0 ◦ σ4 . For this we need to prove the following: • σ12 = σid ◦ σ4 . This is obvious. • σc2 = (σc ◦σ10 )◦σ4 . We have σ10 ◦σ4 = (σ1 ◦σ12 , σc3 ) = (σ13 , σc3 ) = σ3 . Thus σc2 = σc ◦ σ3 = σc ◦ (σ10 ◦ σ4 ) = (σc ◦ σ10 ) ◦ σ4 . • M = (c Γc )[σc ◦ σ10 ][σ4 ]. Since x[σ2 ] = (c Γc )[σ2 ], i.e., M = (c Γc )[σ2 ], we have M = (c Γc )[σc2 ] = (c Γc )[(σc ◦ σ10 ) ◦ σ4 ] = (c Γc )[σc ◦ σ10 ][σ4 ] Thus, for any unifier σ2 for (Ax [σ2 ] = Ac , x = c Γc ) there exists a substitution σ4 such that σ2 = σ 0 ◦ σ4 . We conclude that σ 0 is an mgu for (Ax [σ2 ] = Ac , x = c Γc ).

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
