Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_4515

Abstract:
Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach (Technical Report) Andrzej Mizera1 , Jun Pang1,2 , and Qixia Yuan1? 1  arXiv:1501.01779v4 [cs.CE] 25 Oct 2016  2  University of Luxembourg, FSTC, Luxembourg University of Luxembourg, SnT, Luxembourg firstname.lastname@uni.lu  Abstract. Probabilistic Boolean networks (PBNs) is a well-established computational framework for modelling biological systems. The steady-state dynamics of PBNs is of crucial importance in the study of such systems. However, for large PBNs, which often arise in systems biology, obtaining the steady-state distribution poses a significant challenge. In fact, statistical methods for steady-state approximation are the only viable means when dealing with large networks. In this paper, we revive the two-state Markov chain approach presented in the literature. We first identify a problem of generating biased results, due to the size of the initial sample with which the approach needs to start and we propose a few heuristics to avoid such a pitfall. Second, we conduct an extensive experimental comparison of the two-state Markov chain approach and another approach based on the Skart method and we show that statistically the two-state Markov chain has a better performance. Finally, we apply this approach to a large PBN model of apoptosis in hepatocytes.  1  Introduction  Systems biology aims to study biological systems from a holistic perspective, with the goal to provide a comprehensive, system-level understanding of cellular behaviour. Proper functioning of a living cell requires a finely-tuned and orchestrated interplay of many complex processes. Complex interactions within a biological system lead to emergent properties which are crucial for sustaining life. Therefore, understanding the machinery of life requires the use of holistic approaches which enable the study of a system as a whole, in contrast to the reductionist approach. Computational modelling plays a prominent role in the field of systems biology. Construction and analysis of a computational model for some biological process enables the systematisation of available biological knowledge, identification of missing biological information, provides formal means for understanding and reasoning about the concerted interplay between different parts of the model, finally reveals directions for future experimental work which could provide data for better understanding of the process under study. Unfortunately, computational modelling of biological processes that take place in a living cell poses significant challenges with respect to the size of the state-space that ?  Supported by the National Research Fund, Luxembourg (grant 7814267) and partially by Google Summer of Code 2014.  2  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  needs to be considered. Modelling of certain parts of cellular machinery such as gene regulatory networks (GRNs) or signal transduction pathways often leads to dynamical models characterised by huge state-spaces of sizes that surpass the sizes of any human-designed systems by orders of magnitude. Therefore, profound understanding of biological processes asks for the development of new methods and approaches that would provide means for formal analysis and reasoning about such huge systems. In this study we concentrate on the analysis of the steady-state dynamics of biological processes, in particular GRNs, modelled as discrete-time Markov chains (DTMCs). This is the case, for example, when the biological system under study is cast into the mathematical/computational framework of probabilistic Boolean networks (PBNs) [1,2]. In these or other discrete-time models, e.g., dynamic Bayesian networks, the real (considered as continuous) time is not modelled. Instead, the evolution of the system is abstracted as a sequence of consecutive events. These coarse-grained models have been successfully applied in many systems biology studies and proved their predictive power [3]. In fact, for the study of large regulatory systems they remain the only reasonable solution. Extrapolating the ordinary differential equations model of a single elementary building block of the network (e.g., a gene) to the whole large system would result in a prohibitively complex model. However, moving towards a higher-level description by ignoring the molecular details allows to grasp the system-level behaviour of the network [4]. In consequence, these coarse-grained formalisms are broadly applied in systems biology studies of systems where the predictions of exact reaction times are not of main interest. For example, this is the case in the study of dynamical attractors of a regulatory network, which seem to depend on the circuit wiring rather than kinetic constants (such as production rates or interaction rates) [5]. In this sense modelling biological systems with more abstract, high-level view formalisms has certain unquestionable advantages. One of the key aspects in the analysis of such dynamic systems is the comprehension of their steady-state (long-run) behaviour. For example, attractors of such systems were hypothesised to characterise cellular phenotypes [6]. Another complementary conjecture is that attractors correspond to functional cellular states such as proliferation, apoptosis, or differentiation [7]. These interpretations may cast new light on the understanding of cellular homeostasis and cancer progression [1]. In this work, we focus on the computation of steady-state probabilities which are crucial for the determination of long-run influences and sensitivities. These are measures that quantify the impact of genes on other genes, considered collectively or individually, and that enable the identification of elements with highest impact. In this way they provide insight into the control mechanisms of the network. So far the huge-state space, which often characterises dynamical models of biological systems, tempers the application of the above mentioned techniques in the analysis of realistic biological systems. In fact, approximations with the use of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques are the only viable solution to this problem [8]. However, due to the difficulties with the assessment of the convergence rate to the steadystate distribution (see, e.g., [9]), certain care is required when applying these methods in practice. A number of statistical methods exists, which allow to empirically determine when to stop the simulation and output estimates. We employ in our study: (1) the  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach  3  two-state Markov chain approach [10] and (2) the Skart batch-means method of [11]. The two-state Markov chain approach was introduced in 1992 by Raftery and Lewis; and Shmulevich et al. [8] proposed its application to the analysis of PBNs in 2003. However, to the best of our knowledge, since then it has not been widely applied for the analysis of large PBNs. In this paper, we aim to revive its usage for approximating steady-state probabilities of large PBNs, which often arise in computational systems biology as models of full-size genetic networks. We identify a problem concerned with the choice of the initial sample size in the two-state Markov chain approach. As we show, an unconscious choice may lead to biased results. We propose a few heuristics to avoid this problem. By extensive experiments, we show that the two-state Markov chain approach outperforms the Skart method in most cases, where the batch-means Skart method is considered the current state-of-the-art approach. In this way we show that the two-state Markov chain is often the optimal choice for the analysis of large PBN models of biological systems. Structure of the paper. After presenting some preliminaries in Section 2, we describe the two-state Markov chain approach in Section 3 and identify a problem of generating biased results, due to the size of the initial sample with which the approach needs to start. We then propose some heuristics for the approach to avoid unfortunate initialisations. We perform an extensive evaluation and comparison of the two-state Markov chain approach and the Skart method in Section 4 on a large number of randomly generated PBNs. In most cases, the two-state Markov chain approach seems to have a better performance in terms of computational cost. Finally, we apply the two-state Markov chain approach to study a large PBN model of apoptosis in hepatocytes consisting of 91 nodes in Section 5. We compute the steady-state influences and long-run sensitivities and confirm previously formulated hypothesis. We conclude our paper with some discussions in Section 6.  2 2.1  Preliminaries Finite discrete-time Markov chains (DTMCs)  Let S be a finite set of states. A (first-order) discrete-time Markov chain is an S-valued stochastic process {Xt }t∈N with the property that the next state is independent of the past states given the present state. Formally, P(Xt+1 = st+1 | Xt = st , Xt−1 = st−1 , . . . , X0 = s0 ) = P(Xt+1 = st+1 | Xt = st ) for all st+1 , st , . . . , s0 ∈ S. Here, we consider time-homogenous Markov chains, i.e., chains where P(Xt+1 = s0 | Xt = s), denoted Ps,s0 , is independent of t for any states s, s0 ∈ S. The transition matrix P = (Ps,s0 )s,s0 ∈S satisfies Ps,s0 > 0 and ∑s0 ∈S Ps,s0 = 1 for all s ∈ S. We denote by π a probability distribution on S. If π = π P, then π is a stationary distribution of the DTMC (also referred to as the invariant distribution). A path of length n is a sequence s1 → s2 → · · · → sn such that Psi ,si+1 > 0 and si ∈ S for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. State q ∈ S is reachable from state p ∈ S if there exists a path such that s1 = p and sn = q. A DTMC is irreducible if any two states are reachable from each other. The period of a state is defined as the greatest common divisor of the lengths of all paths that start and end in the state. A DTMC is aperiodic if all states in  4  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  S are of period 1. A finite state DTMC is called ergodic if it is irreducible and aperiodic. By the famous ergodic theorem for DTMCs [12] an ergodic chain has a unique stationary distribution being its limiting distribution (also referred to as the steady-state distribution given by limn→∞ π0 Pn , where π0 is any initial probability distribution on S). In consequence, the limiting distribution for an ergodic chain is independent of the choice of π0 . The steady-state distribution can be estimated from any initial distribution by iteratively multiplying it by P. The evolution of a first-order DTMC can be described by a stochastic recurrence sequence Xt+1 = φ (Xt ,Ut+1 ), where {Ut }t∈N is an independent sequence of uniformly distributed real random variables over [0, 1] and the transition function φ : S × [0, 1] → S satisfies the property that P(φ (s,U) = s0 ) = Ps,s0 for any states s, s0 ∈ S and for any U, a real random variable uniformly distributed over [0, 1]. When S is partially ordered and when the transition function φ (·, u) is monotonic for all u, then the Markov chain is said to be monotone ([13,14]). 2.2  Probabilistic Boolean networks (PBNs)  A PBN G(V, F ) consists of a set of binary-valued nodes (also known as genes) V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } and a list of sets F = (F1 , F2 , . . . , Fn ). For each i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} the set (i) (i) (i) Fi = { f1 , f2 , . . . , fl(i) } is a collection of predictor functions for node vi , where l(i) is (i)  the number of predictor functions for vi . Each f j ∈ Fi is a Boolean function defined with respect to a subset of nodes referred to as parent nodes of vi . There is a probability (i) (i) distribution on each Fi ∈ F: c j is the probability of selecting f j ∈ Fi as the next l(i)  (i)  predictor for vi and it holds that ∑ j=1 c j = 1. We denote by vi (t) the value of node vi at time point t ∈ N. The state space of the PBN is S = {0, 1}n and it is of size 2n . The state of the PBN at time t is given by s (t) = (v1 (t), v2 (t), . . . , vn (t)). The dynamics of the PBN ∞ . We consider here independent PBNs where predictor is given by the sequence (ss(t))t=0 functions for different nodes are selected independently of each other. The transition from s (t) to s (t + 1) is conducted by randomly selecting a predictor function for each node vi from Fi and by synchronously updating the node values in accordance with the selected functions. There are N = ∏ni=1 l(i) different ways in which the predictors can be selected for all n nodes. These combinations are referred to as realisations of the (1) (2) (n) PBN and are represented as n-dimensional function vectors f k = ( fk1 , fk2 , . . . , fkn ) ∈ F1 ×F2 ×. . .×Fn , where k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} and ki ∈ {1, 2, . . . , l(i)}. A realization selected (i) at time t is referred to as f (t). Due to independence, P( f k ) = P( f (t) = f k ) = ∏ni=1 cki . In PBNs with perturbations, a perturbation parameter p ∈ (0, 1) is introduced to sample the perturbation vector γ (t) = (γ1 (t), γ2 (t), . . . , γn (t)), where γi (t) ∈ {0, 1} and P(γi (t) = 1) = p for all t and i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. Perturbations provide an alternative way to regulate the dynamics of a PBN: the next state is determined as s(t +1) = f (t)(ss(t)) if γ (t) = 0 and as s(t + 1) = s(t) ⊕ γ (t) otherwise, where ⊕ is the exclusive or operator for vectors. The perturbations, by the latter update formula, allow the system to move from any state to any other state in one single transition, hence render the underlying Markov chain irreducible and aperiodic. Therefore, the dynamics of a PBN with perturbations can be viewed as an ergodic DTMC [15]. The transition matrix is given by Ps,s0 = (1 −  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach 0  5  0  p)n ∑Nk=1 1 [ f k (s)=s0 ] P( f k ) + (1 − (1 − p)n )pη(s,s ) (1 − p)n−η(s,s ) , where 1 is the indicator function and η(s, s0 ) is the hamming distance between states s, s0 ∈ S. According to the ergodic theory, adding perturbations to any PBN assures the long-run dynamics of the resulting PBN is governed by a unique limiting distribution, convergence to which is independent of the choice of the initial state. However, the perturbation probability value should be chosen carefully, not to dilute the behaviour of the original PBN. In this way the ‘mathematical trick’, although introduces some noise to the original system, allows to significantly simplify the analysis of the steady-state behaviour, which is often of interest for biological systems. The density of a PBN is measured with its function number and parent nodes numF ω(i), where n is the number ber. For a PBN G, its density is defined as D(G) = 1n ∑Ni=1 of nodes in G, NF is the total number of predictor functions in G, and ω(i) is the number of parent nodes for the ith predictor function. Within the framework of PBNs the concept of influences is defined; it formalizes the impact of parents nodes on a target node and enables its quantification ([23]). The concept is based on the notion of a partial derivative of a Boolean function f with respect to variable x j (1 ≤ j ≤ n): ∂ f (x) = f (x( j,0) ) ⊕ f (x( j,1) ), ∂xj where ⊕ is addition modulo 2 (exclusive OR) and for l ∈ {0, 1} x( j,l) = (x1 , x2 , . . . , x j−1 , l, x j+1 , . . . , xn ). The influence of node x j on function f is the expected value of the partial derivative with respect to the probability distribution D(x): I j ( f ) = ED  h ∂ f (x) i ∂xj  n ∂ f (x) o =P = 1 = P{ f (x( j,0) ) 6= f (x( j,1) )}. ∂xj (i)  Let now Fi be the set of predictors for xi with corresponding probabilities c j for j = (i)  (i)  1, . . . , l(i) and let Ik ( f j ) be the influence of node xk on the predictor function f j . Then, the influence of node xk on node xi is defined as: l(i)  Ik (xi ) =  (i)  ∑ Ik ( f j  j=1  (i)  )·cj .  The long-term influences are the influences computed when the distribution D(x) is the stead-state distribution of the PBN. We define and consider in this study two types of long-run sensitivities. Definition 1. The long-run sensitivity with respect to selection probability perturbation is defined as (i)  (i)  sc [c j = p] = kπ̃[c j = p] − πkl ,  6  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  where k · kl denotes the l-norm, π is the steady-state distribution of the original PBN, (i) (i) p ∈ [0, 1] is the new value for c j , and π̃[c j = p] is the steady-state probability distribution of the PBN perturbed as follows. The jth selection probability for node xi is (i) (i) replaced with c̃ j = p and all ck selection probabilities for k ∈ I− j = {1, 2, . . . , j − 1, j + 1, . . . , l(i)} are replaced with (i)  (i)  (i)  c̃k = ck + (c j − p) ·  (i)  ck  (i)  ,  ∑l∈I− j cl  The remaining selection probabilities of the original PBN are unchanged. Definition 2. The long-run sensitivity with respect to permanent on/off perturbations of a node xi as sg [xi ] = max{kπ̃[xi ≡ 0] − πkl , kπ̃[xi ≡ 1] − πkl }, where π, π̃[xi ≡ 0], and π̃[xi ≡ 1] are the steady-state probability distributions of the original PBN, of the original PBN with all f (i) ∈ Fi replaced by f˜(i) ≡ 0, and all f (i) ∈ Fi replaced by f˜(i) ≡ 1, respectively. Notice that the definition of long-run sensitivity with respect to permanent on/off perturbations is similar but not equivalent to the definition of long-run sensitivity with respect to 1-gene function perturbation of [23].  3 3.1  The Two-state Markov Chain Approach Description  We recall the two-state Markov chain approach originally introduced in [10]. The twostate Markov chain approach is a method for estimating the steady-state probability of a subset of states of a DTMC. In this approach the state space of an arbitrary DTMC is split into two disjoint sets, referred to as meta states. One of the meta states, numbered 1, is the subset of interest and the other, numbered 0, is its complement. The steadystate probability of meta state 1, denoted q, can be estimated by performing simulations of the original Markov chain. For this purpose a two-state Markov chain abstraction of the original DTMC is considered. Let {Zt }t>0 be a family of binary random variables, where Zt is the number of the meta state the original Markov chain is in at time t. {Zt }t>0 is a binary (0-1) stochastic process, but in general it is not a Markov chain. However, as argued in [10], a reasonable assumption is that the dependency in {Zt }t>0 (k) (k) falls off rapidly with lag. Therefore, a new process {Zt }t>0 , where Zt = Z1+(t−1)k , will be approximately a first-order Markov chain for k large enough. A procedure for determining appropriate k is given in [10]. The first-order Markov chain consists of the two meta states with transition probabilities α and β between them. See Figure 1 for a conceptual illustration of the construction of this abstraction. The steady-state probability estimate q̂ is computed from a simulated trajectory of the original DTMC. The key point is to determine the optimal length of the trajectory.  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach 0  7  1 A  D E 1 ↵  B  C  (a) Original DTMC  0  1  1  ↵  (b) Two-state DTMC  Fig. 1: Conceptual illustration of the idea of the two-state Markov chain construction. (a) The state space of the original discrete-time Markov chain is split into two meta states: states A and B form meta state 0, while states D, C, and E form meta state 1. The split of the state space into meta states is marked with dashed ellipses. (b) Projecting the behaviour of the original chain on the two meta states results in a binary (0-1) stochastic process. After potential subsampling, it can be approximated as a first-order, two-state Markov chain with the transition probabilities α and β set appropriately.  Two requirements are imposed. First, the abstraction of the DTMC, i.e., the two-state Markov chain, should converge close to its steady-state distribution π = [π0 π1 ]. For(k) (k) mally, t satisfying |P[Zt = i | Z0 = j] − πi | < ε for a given ε > 0 and all i, j ∈ {0, 1} needs to be determined. t is the so-called ‘burn-in’ period and determines the part of the trajectory of the two-state Markov chain that needs to be discarded. Second, the estimate q̂ is required to satisfy P[q − r 6 q̂ 6 q + r] > s, where r is the required precision and s is a specified confidence level. This condition is used to determine the length of the second part of the trajectory used to compute q̂, i.e., the sample size. Now, the total required trajectory length of the original DTMC is then given by M + N, where M = 1 + (t − 1)k and N = 1 + (dn(α, β )e − 1)k, where t = dm(α, β )e. The functions m and n depend on the transitions probabilities α and β and are given by   2 ε(α+β ) log max(α,β αβ (2 − α − β ) Φ−1 ( 21 (1 + s)) ) and n(α, β ) = , m(α, β ) = log (|1 − α − β |) (α + β )3 r2 where Φ−1 is the inverse of the standard normal cumulative distribution function. The expressions for m and n were originally presented in [10]. Derivations however were not provided and the expressions contain two oversights: in the formula for m the absolute value is missing in the denominator and in the formula for n the inverse of Φ should be used instead of Φ. We provide detailed derivations of the expressions for m and n in the Appendices A and B, respectively. Since α and β are unknown, they need to be estimated. This is achieved iteratively in the two-state Markov chain approach of [10]. It starts with sampling an arbitrary initial length trajectory, which is then used for estimating the values of α and β . M and N are calculated based on these estimates. Next, the trajectory is extended to reach the required length, and α and β values are re-estimated. The new estimates are used to  8  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  re-calculate M and N. This process is iterated until M + N is smaller than the current trajectory length. Finally, the resulting trajectory is used to estimate the steady-state probability of meta state 1. For more details, see [10]. The two-state Markov chain approach can be viewed as an aggregation method for reducing the state space. Generically, aggregation methods aggregate groups of nodes in the original Markov chain in accordance with a given partition function, which leads to a smaller transition graph. In principle, the aggregation can be any Markov chain over this smaller transition system. What remains is the choice of the specific aggregation which is determined by the choice of the transition probabilities. The partition function is also used to obtain the so-called projection of the original process, i.e., the realisation of the original Markov chain is projected through the partition function. Ideally, the aggregated chain and the projected realisation should coincide. However, since the projection is in general not Markovian, the aggregation which is “closest” to the projection is considered instead and the “closeness” has to be appropriately defined. The problem of finding the optimal partition function in the case where the distance between the projection and the aggregation is quantified by the Kullback-Leibler divergence rate (KLDR) has been recently studied, see, e.g., [16,17,18]. The focus in these works is on finding the optimal partition function, for which the KLDR distance between the projection and aggregation is minimised. In our case the partition function which classifies the original states into the two meta states is specified by the biological question under study. As shown in [17] and [18], for a given partition function, the aggregation closest to the projection can be analytically obtained provided the steady-state distribution of the original chain is available. The steady-state probabilities are however our goal, thus these techniques cannot be exploited for the determination of α and β transition probabilities. The iterative, statistical estimation of the transition probabilities for the aggregation remains the only viable solution. 3.2  The choice of the initial sample size  Given good estimates of α and β , the theory of the two-state Markov chain presented above guarantees that the obtained value satisfies the imposed precision requirements. However, the two-state Markov chain approach starts with generating a trajectory of the original DTMC of an arbitrarily chosen initial length, i.e., M0 + N0 = 1 + (m0 − 1)k + 1 + (n0 − 1)k, where m0 it the ‘burn-in’ period and n0 is the sample size of the two-state Markov chain abstraction. An unfortunate choice may lead to first estimates of α and β that are biased and result in the new values of M and N such that M + N is either smaller or not much larger than the initial M0 + N0 . In the former case the algorithm stops immediately with the biased values for α, β and, more importantly, with an estimate for the steady-state probability that does not satisfy the precision requirements. The second case may lead to the same problem. As an example we considered a two24 (0.0020214) and β = 24 state Markov chain with α = 11873 25 (0.96). The steady-state probability distribution was [0.997899 0.002101]. With k = 1, ε = 10−6 , r = 10−3 , 1 s = 0.95, m0 = 5, and n0 = 1, 920 the first estimated values for α and β were 1918 (0.0005214) and 1, respectively. This subsequently led to M = 2 and N = 1, 999, resulting in a request for the extension of the trajectory by 76. After the extension, the 1 new estimates for α and β were 1997 and 1, respectively. These estimates gave M = 2,  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach  9  N = 1, 920, and the algorithm stopped. The estimated steady-state probability distribution was [0.99950 0.00050], which was outside the pre-specified precision interval given by r. Independently repeating the estimation for 104 times resulted in estimates of the steady-state probabilities that were outside the pre-specified precision interval 90% of times. Given the rather large number of repetitions, it can be concluded that the specified 95% confidence interval was not reached in this case. The reason for the biased result is the unfortunate initial value for n0 and the fact that the real value of α is small. In the initialisation phase the value of α is underestimated and dn(α, β )e calculated based on the estimated values of α and β is almost the same as n0 . Hence, subsequent extension of the trajectory does not provide any improvement to the underestimated value of α since the elongation is short and the algorithm halts after the next iteration. To identify and avoid some of such pitfalls, we consider a number of cases and formulate some of the conditions in which the algorithm may fail to achieve the specified precision. Let n0 be the initial size of the sample used for initial estimation of α and β . We assume that neither α nor β is zero. Then, the smallest possible estimates for both α and β are greater than n10 . Let us set an upper bound value for n0 to be 104 . For most cases this boundary value is reasonable and we expect n0 to be much smaller. Notice however that this is the case only if the real values of α and β are larger than 10−4 . We just mention here that in general the selection of a proper value for n0 heavily depends on the real values of α and β , which are unknown a priori. From what was stated above, it follows that both first estimates for α and β are greater than 10−4 . The following cases are possible. – If both α and β are small, e.g., less than 0.1, then we have that 10−4 < α, β < 0.1 and n(α, β ) > 72, 765 as can be seen by investigating the n(·, ·) function. In this case the sample size is increased more than 7-fold which is reasonable since the two-state Markov chain seems to be bad-mixing by the first estimates of the values for α and β and the algorithm asks for a significant increase of the sample size. We therefore conclude that the bad-mixing Markov chain case can be properly handled by the algorithm. – Both first estimates of α and β are close to 1. If α, β ∈ [0.7, 0.98], the value of n(α, β ) is larger than 19, 000. If both α, β > 0.98 than the size of the sample drops, but in this case the Markov chain is highly well-mixing and short trajectories are expected to provide good estimates. – The situation is somewhat different if one of the parameters is estimated to be small and the other is close to 1 as in the example described above. The extension to the trajectory is too small to significantly change the estimated value of the small parameter and the algorithm halts. Considering the above cases leads us to the observation that the following situation needs to be treated with care: The estimated value for one of the parameters is close to 1 n0 , the value of the second parameter is close to 1, and n(α, β ) is either smaller or not significantly larger than n0 . First approach: pitfall avoidance. In order to avoid this situation, we determine n0 which in principle could lead to initial inaccurate estimates of α or β and such that the  10  Mizera, Pang and Yuan 0.01 0.001 0.0001 0.9 0.95 0.975 0.9 0.95 0.975 0.9 0.95 0.975 n0 ∈ 0/ [2, 136] 0/ [2, 1161] [2, 1383] [2, 1582] [2, 11628] [2, 13857] [2, 15847] r s  Table 1: Ranges of integer values for n0 that do not satisfy the ‘critical’ condition n(α, β ) < 2 n0 for the given values of r and s.  next sample size given by dn(α, β )e would practically not allow for an improvement of the estimates. We reason as follows. As stated above, the ‘critical’ situation may take place when one of the parameters is estimated to be very small, i.e., close to n10 , and the increase in the sample size is not significant enough to improve the estimate. If the initial estimate is very small, the real value is most probably also small, but the estimate is not accurate. If the value is underestimated to the lowest possible value, i.e., n10 , on average the improvement can take place only if the sample size is increased at least by n0 . Therefore, with the trade-off between the accuracy and efficiency of the method in mind, we propose the sample size to be increased at least by n0 . Therefore, the ‘critical’ situation condition is n(α, β ) < 2 n0 . By analysing the function n(·, ·) as described in details in Appendix D, we can determine the values of n0 that are ‘safe’, i.e., which do not satisfy the ‘critical’ condition. We present them in Table 1 for a number of values for r and s. Second approach: controlled initial estimation of α and β . The formula for n is asymptotically valid for a two-state Markov chain provided that the values for α and β are known. However, these values are not known a priori and they need to be estimated. Unfortunately, the original approach does not provide any control over the quality of the initial estimate of the values of these parameters. In certain situation, e.g., as in the case discussed above, the lack of such a control mechanism may lead to results with worse statistical confidence level than the specified one given by s. In the discussed example s = 95%, but this value was not reached in the performed experiment. In order to address this problem, we propose to extend the initial phase of the two-state approach algorithm in the following way. The algorithm samples a trajectory of the given Markov chain and estimates the values of α and β . It might be the case that an arbitrarily chosen initial sample size is not big enough to provide non-zero estimates for the two parameters. If this is the case, the initial sample size is doubled and the trajectory is elongated to collect a sample of required size. This is repeated iteratively until non-zero estimates for both α and β are obtained. We introduce the following notation: α̂ and β̂ are the non-zero estimates of the values of α and β , respectively. Furthermore, let n0 be the sample size used to obtain first non-zero estimates α̂ and β̂ , i.e., n0 is either the initial sample size or it is two to power some multiple of the initial sample size. Once the non-zero estimates are available, the algorithm computes the sample size required to reach the s confidence level that the true value of min(α, β ) is within a certain interval. For definiteness, let us assume from now on that α̂ < β̂ , which suggests that min(α, β ) = α. During the execution of the procedure outlined in the following the inequality may be inverted. If this is the case, the algorithm makes corresponding change in the consideration of α and β .  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach  11  The aim is to have a good estimate for α. Notice that the smallest possible initial value of α̂ is greater than n10 . We refer to n10 as the resolution of estimation. Given the resolution, one cannot distinguish between values of α in the interval (α̂ − n10 , α̂ + n10 ). In consequence, if α ∈ (α̂ − n10 , α̂ + n10 ), then the estimated value α̂ should be considered as optimal. Hence, one could use this interval as the one which should contain the real value with specified confidence level. Nevertheless, although the choice of this interval usually leads to very good results, as experimentally verified, the results are obtained at the cost of large samples which make the algorithm stop immediately after the initialisation phase. Consequently, the computational burden is larger than would be required by the original algorithm to reach the desired precision specified by r and s parameters in most cases. In order to reduce this unnecessary overhead, we consider the interval (α̂ − α̂2 , α̂ + α̂2 ), which is wider than the previous one whenever α̂ > n10 and leads to smaller sample sizes. The two-state Markov chain consists of two states 0 and 1, i.e., the two meta states of the original DTMC. We set α as the probability of making the transition from state 0 to state 1 (denoted as 0 → 1). The estimate α̂ is computed as the ratio of the number of transitions from state 0 to state 1 to the number of transition from state 0. Let n0,α be the number of transitions in the sample starting from state 0. Let Xi , i = 1, 2, . . . , n0,α , be a random variable defined as follows: Xi is 1 if ith transition from meta-state 0 is 0 → 1 and 0 otherwise. Notice that state 0 is an accessible atom in the terminology of the theory of Markov chains, i.e., the Markov chain regenerates after entering state 0, and hence the random variables Xi , i = 1, 2, . . . , n0,α , are independent. They are Bernoulli distributed with parameter α. The unbiased estimate of the population variance from the samn ple, denoted σ̂ 2 , is given by σ̂ 2 = α̂ · (1 − α̂) · n0,α0,α−1 . Due to independence, σ̂ 2 is also the asymptotic variance and, in consequence, the sample size that provides the specified confidence level for the estimate of the value of α is given by nα,s (α̂, n0,α ) =  2 n0,α Φ−1 ( 21 (1+s)) α̂ · (1 − α̂) · n0,α −1 · . α̂/2 β . Then, given that The Markov chain is in state 0 with steady-state probability α+β the chain reached the steady-state distribution, the expected number of regenerations, n·β i.e., returns to meta state 0, in a sample of size n is given by α+β . Therefore, the sample size used to estimate the value of α with the specified confidence level s is given by nα = α+β β · nα,s (α̂, n0,α ). As the real values of α and β are unknown, the estimated  values α̂ and β̂ can be used in the above formula. If the computed nα is bigger than the current number of transitions n0,α , we extend the trajectory to reach nα transitions from 0 to 1 and re-estimate the values for α and β using the extended trajectory. We repeat this process until the computed nα value is smaller than the number of transitions used to estimate α. In this way, good initial estimates for α and β are obtained and the original two-state Markov chain approach using the formula for n(α, β ) is run. Third approach: simple heuristics. When performing the initial estimation of α and β , we require both the count of transitions from meta state 0 to meta state 1 and the count of transitions from meta-state 1 to meta state 0 be at least 3. If this condition is not  12  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  satisfied, we proceed by doubling the length of the trajectory. In this way the problem of reaching the resolution boundary is avoided. Our experiments showed that this simple approach in many cases led to good initial estimates of the α and β probabilities.  4  Evaluation  We implemented the two-state Markov chain approach with the simple heuristics presented in Section 3 and the Skart method of [11] in the tool ASSA-PBN, which was specially designed for steady-state analysis of large PBNs [19] (see Section 2.2 for the theoretical background of PBNs). We verified with experiments that with use of the simple heuristics, the two-state Markov chain approach could meet the predefined precision requirement even in the case of an unlucky initial sample size. For the steadystate analysis of large PBNs, applications of these two methods necessitate generation of trajectories of significant length. To achieve this in an efficient way, we applied the alias method [20] to sample the consecutive trajectory state. This enables ASSA-PBN, for example, to simulate 4, 800 steps within 1s for a 2, 000 nodes PBN (state-space of size 22,000 ). We choose the Skart method [11] as a reference for the evaluation of the performance of the two-state Markov chain approach. The Skart method is a successor of ASAP3, WASSP, and SBatch methods, which are all based on the idea of batch means [11]. It is a procedure for on-the-fly statistical analysis of the simulation output, asymptotically generated in accordance with a steady-state distribution. Usually it requires an initial sample of size smaller than other established simulation analysis procedures [11]. In a brief, high-level summary, the algorithm partitions a long simulation trajectory into batches, for each batch computes a mean and constructs an interval estimate using the batch means. Further, the interval estimate is used by Skart to decide whether a steady state distribution is reached or more samples are required. For a more detailed description of this method, see [11]. The Skart method differs in two key points with the two-state Markov chain approach. First, it specifies the initial trajectory length to be at least 1, 280, while for the two-state Markov chain approach this information is not provided. Second, the Skart method applies the student distribution for skewness adjustment while the two-state Markov chain approach makes use of the normal distribution for confidence interval calculations. To compare the performance of the two methods, we randomly generated 882 different PBNs using ASSA-PBN. ASSA-PBN can randomly generate a PBN which satisfies structure requirements given in the form of five input parameters: the node number, the minimum and the maximum number of predictor functions per node, finally the minimum and maximum number of parent nodes for a predictor function. We generated PBNs with node numbers from the set {15, 30, 80, 100, 150, 200, 300, 400, 500, 1000, 2000}. We assigned the obtained PBNs into three different classes with respect to the density measure D: dense models with density 150–300, sparse models with density around 10, and in-between models with density 50–100. The two-state Markov chain approach and the Skart method were tested on these PBNs with precision r set to the  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach 0  k tTS ≤ tSkart tSkart ≤ tTS  5  10  15  20  69.83% 55.10% 41.02% 31.03% 25.86% 30.38% 18.68% 11.10% 7.39% 5.49%  25  13 30  22.76% 20.05% 4.43% 3.74%  Table 2: Performance comparison of the Skart and the two-state MC methods. Explanations in the text.  node number  method precision  trajectory size 1,000 time cost (s) trajectory size 2,000 time cost (s)  the two-state Markov chain 0.01 0.005 0.001 35,066 6.19 64,057 20.42  133,803 3,402,637 23.53 616.26 240,662 5,978,309 67.60 1722.86  0.01 37,999 7.02 63,674 20.65  Skart 0.005  0.001  139,672 3,272,940 24.39 590.26 273,942 5,936,060 78.53 1761.05  Table 3: Approximate steady-state analysis of two large PBNs.  values in {10−2 , 5 × 10−3 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−4 , 8 × 10−5 , 5 × 10−5 }. We set ε to 10−10 for the two-state Markov chain approach and s to 0.95 for both methods. The experiments were performed on a HPC cluster, with CPU speed ranging between 2.2GHz and 3.07GHz. ASSA-PBN is implemented in Java and the initial and maximum Java virtual machine heap size were set to 503MB and 7.86GB, respectively. We collected 5263 results with the information on the PBN node number, its density class, the precision value, the estimated steady-state probabilities computed by the two methods, and their CPU time costs. The steady-state probabilities computed by the two methods are comparable in all the cases (data not shown in the paper). For each experimental result i, we compare the time costs of the two methods. Let tTS (i) and tSkart (i) be the time cost for the two-state Markov chain approach and the Skart method, respectively. We say that the two-state Markov chain approach is by k per cent faster than the k . The definition for the Skart method to be faster Skart method if (tSkartt (i)−t(i)TS (i)) > 100 Skart than the two-state Markov chain approach is symmetric. In Table 2 we show the percentage of cases in which the two-state Markov chain approach was by k per cent faster than Skart and vice versa for different k. In general, in about 70% of the results, the two-state Markov chain was faster than Skart. It is also clear that the number of cases the two-state Markov chain approach was faster than Skart is larger than in the opposite case. We show in Table 3 the trajectory sizes and the time costs for computing steadystate probabilities of two large PBNs using the two-state Markov chain approach and the Skart method for different precision requirements. The two analysed PBNs consist of 1, 000 and 2, 000 nodes, which give rise to state spaces of sizes exceeding 10300 and 10600 , respectively.  5  A Biological Case study  A multicellular organism consists of cells that form a highly organised community. The number of cells in this system is tightly controlled by mechanisms that regulate the cell  14  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  division and the cell death. One of these mechanisms is the programmed cell death, also referred to as apoptosis: if cells are damaged, infected, or no longer needed, the intracellular death program is activated, which leads to fragmentation of the DNA, shrinkage of the cytoplasm, membrane changes and cell death without lysis or damage to neighbouring cells. This process is regulated by a number of signaling pathways which are extensively linked by cross-talk interactions. In [21], a large-scale Boolean network of apoptosis in hepatocytes was introduced, where the assigned Boolean interactions for each molecule were derived from literature study. In [22], the original multi-value Boolean model was cast into the PBN framework: a binary PBN model, so-called ‘extended apoptosis model’ which comprised 91 nodes (state-space of size 291 ) and 102 interactions was constructed, see Figure 2 in Appendix E for the wiring of the PBN model. With respect to the original multi-value Boolean model of [21], the PBN model was extended as described in [22]. For example, the possibility of activation of NF-κB through Caspase 8 (C8*) was included. The model was fitted to steady-state experimental data obtained in response to six different stimulations of the input nodes, see [22] for details. As can be seen from the wiring of the network, the activation of complex2 (co2) by RIP-deubi can take place in two ways: 1) by a positive feedback loop from activated C8* and P → tBid → Bax → smac → RIP-deubi → co2 → C8*-co2 → C8*, and 2) by the positive signal from UV-B irradiation (input nodes UV(1) or UV(2)) → Bax → smac → RIP-deubi → co2. The former to be active requires the stimulation of the type 2 receptor (T2R). The latter way requires complex1 (co1) to be active, which cannot happen without the stimulation of the TNF receptor-1. Therefore, RIP-deubi can activate co2 only in the condition of co-stimulation by TNF and either UV(1) or UV(2). In consequence, it was suggested in [22] that the interaction of activation of co2 via RIPdeubi is not relevant and could be removed from the model in the context of modelling primary hepatocyte. However, due to the problem with efficient generation of very long trajectories in optPBN toolbox, quantitative analysis was hindered and this hypothesis could not be verified ([22]). In this work, we take up this challenge and we quantitatively investigate the relevancy of the interaction of activation of co2 via RIP-deubi. We perform an extensive analysis in the context of co-stimulation by TNF and either UV(1) or UV(2): we compute long-term influences of parent nodes on the co2 node and the long-run sensitivities with respect to various perturbations related to specific predictor functions and their selection probabilities. For this purpose we apply the two-state Markov chain approach as implemented in our ASSA-PBN tool [19] to compute the relevant steady-state probabilities for the best-fit models described in [22]. Due to the efficient implementation, the ASSA-PBN tool can easily deal with trajectories of length exceeding 2 × 109 for this case study. We consider 20 distinct parameter sets of [22] that resulted in the best fit of the ‘extended apoptosis model’ to the steady-state experimental data in six different stimulation conditions. In [22], parameter estimation was performed with steady-state measurements for the nodes apoptosis, C3ap17 or C3ap17 2 depending on the stimulation condition considered, and NF-κB. The optimisation procedure used was Particle Swarm and fit score function considered was the sum of squared errors of prediction (SSE) and  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach TNF and UV(1) IRIP-deubi Ico1 IFADD Best fit Min Max Mean Std  0.2614 0.0000 0.3145 0.2087 0.0735  0.9981 0.9979 0.9988 0.9982 0.0002  0.9935 0.9935 0.9944 0.9937 0.0002  15  TNF and UV(2) IRIP-deubi Ico1 IFADD 0.2615 0.0000 0.3146 0.2088 0.0735  0.9980 0.9979 0.9990 0.9982 0.0002  0.9936 0.9936 0.9947 0.9938 0.0003  Table 4: Long-term influences of RIP-duebi, co1, and FADD on co2 in the ‘extended apoptosis model’ in [22] under the co-stimulation of both TNF and UV(1) or UV(2).  the sum was taken over the three nodes in the six stimulation conditions. We took all the optimisation results from the three independent parameter estimation runs of [22], each containing 7500 parameter sets. We sorted them increasingly with respect to the cost function value obtained during optimisation, removed duplicates, and finally took the first 20 best-fit parameter sets. As mentioned above, we fix the experimental context to co-stimulation of TNF and either UV(1) or UV(2). We note that originally in [21] UV-B irradiation conditions were imposed via a multi-value input node UV which could take on three values, i.e., 0 (no irradiation), 1 (300 J/m2 UV-B irradiation), and 2 (600 J/m2 UV-B irradiation). In the model of [22], UV input node was refined as UV(1) and UV(2) in order to cast the original model into the binary PBN framework. Therefore, we consider in our study two cases: 1) co-stimulation of TNF and UV(1) and 2) co-stimulation of TNF and UV(2). Node co2 has two independent predictor functions: co2 = co1 ∧ FADD or co2 = (co2) (co2) co1 ∧ FADD ∧ RIP-deubi. The selection probabilities are denoted as c1 and c2 , respectively. Their values have been optimised in [22]. We start with computing the influences with respect to the steady-state distribution, i.e., the long-term influences on co2 of each of its parent nodes: RIP-deubi, co1, and FADD, in accordance with the definition in Section 2.2. Notice that the computation of the three influences requires several joint steady-state probabilities to be estimated with the two-state Markov chain approach, e.g., (co1=1,FADD=1,RIP-deubi=0) or (co1=1,FADD=0). Each probability determines a specific split of the original Markov chain. For example, in the case of the estimation of the joint steady-state probability for (co1=1,FADD=0), the states of the underlying Markov chain of the apoptosis PBN model in which co1=1 and FADD=0 constitute meta state 1 and all the remaining states form meta state 0. Therefore, the estimation of influences is computationally demanding. The summarised results for the 20 parameter sets are presented for the costimulation of TNF and UV(1) or TNF and UV(2) in Table 4. They are consistent across the different parameter sets and clearly indicate that the influence of RIP-deubi on co2 is small compared to the influence of co1 or FADD on co2. However, the influence of RIP-deubi is not negligible. We take the analysis of the importance of the interaction between RIP-deubi and co2 further and we compute various long-run sensitivities with respect to selection probabil(co2) ity perturbation. In particular, we perturb the selection probability c2 by ±5%, i.e.,  16  Mizera, Pang and Yuan TNF and UV(1) (co2)  c2  +5%  Best fit Min Max Mean Std  0.0003 0.0002 0.0008 0.0005 0.0001  −5%  0.0002 0.0002 0.0008 0.0005 0.0001  TNF and UV(2) =0  +5%  0.0011 0.0003 0.0014 0.0009 0.0003  0.0002 0.0002 0.0012 0.0004 0.0002  −5%  0.0004 0.0002 0.0007 0.0004 0.0001  =0 0.0011 0.0002 0.0013 0.0009 0.0003  Table 5: Long-run sensitivities w.r.t selection probability perturbations for the ‘extended apoptosis model’ of [22] under the co-stimulation of TNF and UV(1) or TNF and UV(2).  we set the new value by multiplying the original value by (1 ± 0.05), and compute in line with Definition 1 how the joint steady-state distribution for (apoptosis,C3ap17,NFκB) differs from the non-perturbed one with respect to the l1 norm, i.e., ||·||1 . We notice that the computation of the full steady-state distribution for the considered PBN model of apoptosis is practically intractable, i.e., it would require the estimation of 291 values. Therefore, we restrict the computations to the estimation of eight joint steady-state probabilities for all possible combinations of values for (apoptosis,C3ap17,NFκB), i.e., the experimentally measured nodes. Each estimation is obtained by a separate run of the two-state Markov chain approach with the split into meta states determined by the considered probability as explained above in the case of the computation of long-term influences. To compare the estimated distributions we choose the l1 norm after [24], where it is used in the computations of similar types of sensitivities for PBNs to these defined in Section 2.2. Notice that the l1 norm of the difference of two probability distributions on a finite sample space is twice the total variation distance. The latter is a wellestablished metric for measuring the distance between probability distributions defined as the maximum difference between the probabilities assigned to a single event by the (co2) two distributions (see, e.g., [25]). Additionally, we check the difference when c2 is (co2) set to 0 (and, in consequence, c1 is set to 1). The obtained results for the 20 parameter sets in the conditions of co-stimulation of TNF and UV(1) and co-stimulation of TNF and UV(2) are summarised in Table 5. In all these cases, the sensitivities are very small. (co2) Therefore, the system turns to be insensitive to small perturbations of the value of c2 . Also the complete removal of the second predictor function for co2 does not cause any drastic changes in the joint steady-state distribution for (apoptosis,C3ap17,NF-κB). Finally, we compute the long-run sensitivity with respect to permanent on/off perturbations of the node RIP-deubi in accordance with Definition 2. As before, we consider the joint steady-state distributions for (apoptosis,C3ap17,NF-κB) and we choose the l1 -norm. The results, given in Table 6, show that in both variants of UV-B irradiation the sensitivities are not negligible and the permanent on/off perturbations of RIP-deubi have impact on the steady-state distribution. To conclude, all the obtained results indicate that in the context of co-stimulation of TNF and either UV(1) or UV(2) the interaction between RIP-deubi and co2 plays a certain role. Although the elimination of the interaction does not invoke significant  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach RIP-deubi f. pert.  Best fit  Min  Max  Mean  Std  TNF & UV(1) TNF & UV(2)  0.3075 0.3097  0.0130 0.0105  0.3595 0.3612  0.2089 0.2105  0.0823 0.0827  17  Table 6: Long-run sensitivities w.r.t permanent on/off perturbations of RIP-deubi for the ‘extended apoptosis model’ of [22].  changes to the considered joint steady-state distribution, the long-term influence of RIPdeubi on co2 is not negligible and may be important for other nodes in the network other than apoptosis, nodeC3ap17, or NF-κB.  6  Discussion and Conclusion  In this paper, we focused on two statistical methods for estimating steady-state probabilities of large PBNs: the two-state Markov chain approach and the Skart method. The Skart method follows a continuous development [11], while the two-state Markov chain approach was originally introduced by Raftery and Lewis in 1992, and only recently it was explored for the analysis of a relatively large PBN model in [22]. To revive the application of the two-state Markov chain approach, we propose a few heuristics to avoid a problem with the size of the initial sample which can lead to biased results. By extensive experiments, we show that the two-state Markov chain approach outperforms the Skart method in most cases. In the end, we illustrated the usability of the two-state Markov chain approach on a realistic biological system. Our work in the current paper is closely related to statistical model checking [26,27], a simulation-based approach using hypothesis testing to infer whether a stochastic system satisfies a property. Most current tools for statistical model checking are restricted for bounded properties which can be checked on finite executions of the system. In recent year, both the Skart method and the perfect simulation algorithm have been explored for statistical model checking of steady state and unbounded until properties [28,29], which was considered as a future step of statistical model checking [30]. The perfect simulation algorithm for sampling the steady-state of an ergodic DTMC is based on the indigenous idea of the backward coupling scheme originally proposed by Propp and Wilson in [13]. It allows to draw independent samples which are distributed exactly in accordance with the steady-state distribution of a DTMC. However, due to the nature of this method, each state in the state space needs to be considered at each step of the coupling scheme. Of course, a special, more efficient variant of this method exists. If a DTMC is monotone, then it is possible to sample from the steady-state distribution by considering the maximal and minimal states only [13,14]. For example, this approach was exploited in [28] for model checking large queuing networks. Unfortunately, it is not applicable in the case of PBNs with perturbations. In consequence, the perfect simulation algorithm is only suited for at most medium-size PBNs and large-size PBNs are out of its scope. Thus, in this paper we have only compared the performance of the two-state Markov chain approach with the Skart method. Moreover, in this study we have identified a problem of generating biased results by the original two-state Markov chain approach and have proposed three heuristics  18  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  to avoid wrong initialisation. Finally, we demonstrated the potential of the two-state Markov chain approach on a study of a large, 91-node PBN model of apoptosis in hepatocytes. The two-state Markov chain approach facilitated the quantitative analysis of the large network and the investigation of a previously formulated hypothesis regarding the relevance of the interaction of activation of co2 via RIP-deubi. In the future, we aim to investigate the usage of the discussed statistical methods for approximate steady-state analysis in a wide project on systems biology. For instance, we will further apply them to develop new techniques for minimal structural interventions to alter steady-state probabilities, which will enable the synthesis of optimal control strategies for large regulatory networks. Acknowledgment. Experiments presented in this paper were carried out using the HPC facilities of the University of Luxembourg [31] (http://hpc.uni.lu).  References 1. Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E.R., Zhang, W.: From boolean to probabilistic boolean networks as models of genetic regulatory networks. Proceedings of the IEEE 90(11) (2002) 1778–1792 2. Trairatphisan, P., Mizera, A., Pang, J., Tantar, A.A., Schneider, J., Sauter, T.: Recent development and biomedical applications of probabilistic Boolean networks. Cell Communication and Signaling 11 (2013) 46 3. Albert, R., Othmer, H.G.: The topology of the regulatory interactions predicts the expression pattern of the segment polarity genes in Drosophila melanogaster. Journal of Theoretical Biology 223(1) (2003) 1–18 4. Bornholdt, S.: Less is more in modeling large genetic networks. Science 310(5747) (2005) 449–451 5. Wagner, A.: Circuit topology and the evolution of robustness in two-gene circadian oscillators. PNAS 102(33) (2005) 11775–11780 6. Kauffman, S.A.: Homeostasis and differentiation in random genetic control networks. Nature 224 (1969) 177–178 7. Huang, S.: Genomics, complexity and drug discovery: insights from boolean network models of cellular regulation. Pharmacogenomics 2(3) (2001) 203–222 8. Shmulevich, I., Gluhovsky, I., Hashimoto, R.F., Dougherty, E.R., Zhang, W.: Steady-state analysis of genetic regulatory networks modelled by probabilistic Boolean networks. Comparative and Functional Genomics 4(6) (2003) 601–608 9. Cowles, M.K., Carlin, B.P.: Markov chain Monte Carlo convergence diagnostics: A comparative review. J. American Statistical Association 91(434) (1996) 883–904 10. Raftery, A.E., Lewis, S.: How many iterations in the Gibbs sampler? Bayesian Statistics 4 (1992) 763–773 11. Tafazzoli, A., Wilson, J.R., Lada, E.K., Steiger, N.M.: Skart: A skewness- and autoregression-adjusted batch-means procedure for simulation analysis. In: Proc. 2008 Winter Simulation Conference. (2008) 387–395 12. Norris, J.: Markov Chains. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press (1998) 13. Propp, J., Wilson, D.: Exact sampling with coupled markov chains and applications to statistical mechanics. Random Structures & Algorithms 9(1) (1996) 223–252 14. Bušić, A., Gaujal, B., Vincent, J.M.: Perfect simulation and non-monotone markovian systems. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Performance Evaluation Methodologies and Tools. ValueTools ’08, Brussels, ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering) (2008) 27:1–27:10  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach  19  15. Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E.R.: Probabilistic Boolean Networks: The Modeling and Control of Gene Regulatory Networks. Philadelphia PA: SIAM Press (2010) 16. Deng, K., Mehta, P.G., Meyn, S.P.: A simulation-based method for aggregating Markov chains. In: Proceedings of the 48th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Shanghai, IEEE (December 2009) 4710–4716 17. Deng, K., Mehta, P.G., Meyn, S.P.: Optimal Kullback-Leibler aggregation via spectral theory of Markov chains. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 56(12) (2011) 2793–2808 18. Geiger, B.C., Petrov, T., Kubin, G., Koeppl, H.: Optimal KullbackLeibler aggregation via information bottleneck. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 60(4) (2015) 1010–1022 19. Mizera, A., Pang, J., Yuan, Q.: ASSA-PBN: a tool for approximate steady-state analysis of large probabilistic Boolean networks. In: Proc. 13th International Symposium on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis. LNCS, Springer (2015) Available at http:// satoss.uni.lu/software/ASSA-PBN/. 20. Walker, A.: An efficient method for generating discrete random variables with general distributions. ACM Trans. on Mathematical Software 3(3) (1977) 253–256 21. Schlatter, R., Schmich, K., Vizcarra, I.A., Scheurich, P., Sauter, T., Borner, C., Ederer, M., Merfort, I., Sawodny, O.: ON/OFF and beyond - a Boolean model of apoptosis. PLOS Computational Biology 5(12) (2009) e1000595 22. Trairatphisan, P., Mizera, A., Pang, J., Tantar, A.A., Sauter, T.: optPBN: An optimisation toolbox for probabilistic boolean networks. PLOS ONE 9(7) (2014) 23. Shmulevich, I., Dougherty, E.R., Kim, S., Zhang, W.: Probabilistic Boolean networks: a rule-based uncertainty model for gene regulatory networks. Bioinformatics 18(2) (2002) 261–274 24. Qian, X., Dougherty, E.R.: On the long-run sensitivity of probabilistic Boolean networks. Journal of Theoretical Biology 257(4) (2009) 560–577 25. Levin, D.A., Peres, Y., Wilmer, E.L.: Markov Chains and Mixing Times. American Mathematical Society (2009) 26. Younes, H.S., Simmons, R.: Probabilistic verification of discrete event systems using acceptance sampling. In: Proc. 14th Conference on Computer Aided Verification. Volume 2404 of LNCS., Springer (2002) 223–235 27. Sen, K., Viswanathan, M., Agha, G.: On statistical model checking of stochastic systems. In: Proc. 17th Conference on Computer Aided Verification. Volume 3576 of LNCS., Springer (2005) 266–280 28. El Rabih, D., Pekergin, N.: Statistical model checking using perfect simulation. In: Proc. 7th Symposium on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis. Volume 5799 of LNCS. (2009) 120–134 29. Rohr, C.: Simulative model checking of steady state and time-unbounded temporal operators. Transactions on Petri Nets and Other Models of Concurrency 8 (2013) 142–158 30. Legay, A., Delahaye, B., Bensalem, S.: Statistical model checking: An overview. In: Proc. 1st Conference on Runtime Verification. Volume 6418 of LNCS., Springer (2010) 122–135 31. Varrette, S., Bouvry, P., Cartiaux, H., Georgatos, F.: Management of an academic HPC cluster: The UL experience. In: Proc. Conference on High Performance Computing & Simulation, IEEE CS (2014) 959–967  20  A  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  Derivation of the number of “burn-in” iterations  Let {Zt }t≥0 be a discrete-time two-state Markov chain as given in Figure 1b. Zt has the value 0 or 1 if the system is in state 0 or state 1 at time n, respectively. The transition probabilities satisfy 0 < α, β < 1 and the transition matrix for this chain has the following form   1−α α P= . β 1−β Matrix P has two distinct eigenvalues: 1 and λ = (1 − α − β ). Notice that |λ | < 1. The chain is ergodic and the unique steady-state distribution is π = [π0 π1 ] = β α ]. Let Eπ (Zt ) denote the expected value of Zt for any fixed t ≥ 0, with re[ α+β α+β α spect to the steady-state distribution π. We have that Eπ (Zt ) = α+β . The m-step transition matrix can be written, as can be checked by induction, in the form     λm α −α π π · Pm = 0 1 + , (1) π0 π1 α + β −β β where λ is the second eigenvalue of P. Suppose we require m to be such that the following condition is satisfied        P[Zm = 0 | Z0 = j] P[Zm = 1 | Z0 = j] − π0 π1 < ε ε  (2)  for some ε > 0. For any vector v = [v1 v2 . . . vn ]T ∈ Rn we use |v| to denote [|v1 | |v2 | . . . |vn |]T , where T is the transposition operator. If e0 = [1 0] and e1 = [0 1], then for j ∈ {0, 1} we have that   P[Zm = 0 | Z0 = j] P[Zm = 1 | Z0 = j] = e j Pm . (3) With (1) and (3), condition (2) can be rewritten as  ej         λm α −α π0 π1 · − π0 π1 < ε ε . + π0 π1 α + β −β β  For j = 0 and j = 1 the above simplifies to    λm  · α −α < ε ε α +β  and     λm  · −β β < ε ε , α +β  respectively. Therefore, it is enough to consider the following two inequalities λ mα <ε α +β  and  λ mβ < ε, α +β  which, since α, β > 0, can be rewritten as |λ m | <  ε(α + β ) α  and  |λ m | <  ε(α + β ) . β  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach  21  Equivalently, m has to satisfy |λ m | <  ε(α + β ) . max(α, β )  By the fact that |λ m | = |λ |m this can be expressed as |λ |m <  ε(α + β ) . max(α, β )  Then, by taking the logarithm to base 10 on both sides3 , we have that   ε(α + β ) m · log (|λ |) < log max(α, β ) and in consequence, since |λ | < 1 and log |λ | < 0,   ε(α+β ) log max(α,β ) . m> log (|λ |)  B  Derivation of the sample size  By the Law of Large Numbers for irreducible positive recurrent Markov chains Z n → n π1 a. s. with n → ∞, where Z n = 1n ∑t=1 Zt . Now, by a variant of the Central Limit Theorem for non-independent random variables4 , for n large, Z n is approximately norα 2 = 1 αβ (2−α−β ) , see mally distributed with mean π1 = α+β and asymptotic variance σas n (α+β )3 Section C for the derivation of the asymptotic variance. Let X be the standardised Z n , i.e., Z n − π1 √ . X= σas / n If follows that X is normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 1, i.e., X ∼ N(0, 1). Now, we require n to be such that the condition P[π1 − r ≤ Z n ≤ π1 + r] = s is satisfied for some specified r and s. This condition can be rewritten as P[−r ≤ Z n − π1 ≤ r] = s, and further as  3  4  √ √ n Z n − π1 n √ P[−r · ≤ ≤ r· ] = s, σas σas / n σas  In fact, by the formula for change of base for logarithms, the natural logarithm (ln), the logarithm to base 2 (log2 ), or a logarithm to any other base could be used to calculate m instead of log. Notice that m does not depend on the choice of the base of the logarithm! Notice that the random variables Zt , Zt+1 which values are consecutive states of a trajectory are correlated and are not independent.  22  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  which is  √ √ n n P[−r · ≤ X ≤ r· ] = s. σas σas  Since X ∼ N(0, 1) and N(0, 1) is symmetric around 0, it follows that P[0 ≤ X ≤ r · and  √ n s ]= σas 2  √ n 1 s 1 P[X ≤ r · ] = + = (1 + s). σas 2 2 2  Let Φ(·) be the standard normal cumulative distribution function. Then the above can be rewritten as √ n 1 ) = (1 + s). Φ(r · σas 2 Therefore, if we denote the inverse of the standard normal cumulative distribution function with Φ −1 (·), we have that r·  √ n 1 = Φ −1 ( (1 + s)). σas 2  In consequence, n=   C  2 σas r Φ −1 ( 12 (1+s))  2 =   αβ (2−α−β ) (α+β )3 r Φ −1 ( 12 (1+s))  2 .  Derivation of the asymptotic variance  √ d By the Central Limit Theorem for stationary stochastic processes5 n(Z n − π1 ) → − 2 2 N(0, σas ) as n → ∞, where σas is the so-called asymptotic variance given by ∞  2 σas = Varπ (Z j ) + 2 ∑ Covπ (Z j , Z j+k )  (4)  k=1  and Varπ (·) and Covπ (·) denote the variance and covariance with respect to the steady2 . First, observe that E (Z · state distribution π, respectively. We proceed to calculate σas π n α Zn+1 ) = α+β (1 − β ): Zn · Zn+1 6= 0 if and only if the chain is state 1 at time n and remains in 1 at time n + 1, i.e., Zn = Zn+1 = 1. The probability of this event at steady α state is α+β (1 − β ). Then, by the definition of covariance, we have that the steady-state 5  After discarding the ‘burn-in’ part of the trajectory, we can assume that the Markov chain in a stationary stochastic process.  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach  23  covariance between consecutive random variables of the two-state Markov chain, i.e., Covπ (Zn , Zn+1 ) is Covπ (Zn , Zn+1 ) = Eπ [(Zn − Eπ (Zn ))(Zn+1 − Eπ (Zn+1 ))]   α α )(Zn+1 − ) = Eπ (Zn − α +β α +β   α α2 = Eπ Zn Zn+1 − (Zn + Zn+1 ) + α +β (α + β )2 = Eπ (Zn Zn+1 ) −  α α2 (Eπ (Zn ) + Eπ (Zn+1 )) + α +β (α + β )2  α(1 − β ) α2 α2 −2 + α +β (α + β )2 (α + β )2 αβ (1 − α − β ) . = (α + β )2  =  Further, we have that Varπ (Zn ) = π0 · π1 =  αβ (α+β )2  (variance of the Bernoulli distribu-  tion) and it can be shown that Covπ (Zn , Zn+k ) = (1 − α − β )k · Varπ (Zn ) for any k ≥ 1. Now, according to Equation (4), we have ∞  2 σas = Varπ (X j ) + 2 ∑ Covπ (X j , X j+k ) k=1 ∞ αβ αβ = + 2 (1 − α − β )k · ∑ (α + β )2 (α + β )2 k=1  =  ∞ αβ 2αβ + · ∑ (1 − α − β )k (α + β )2 (α + β )2 k=1  αβ 2αβ 1−α −β + · (α + β )2 (α + β )2 α +β αβ (2 − α − β ) = . (α + β )3 =  In consequence, Z n is approximately normally distributed with mean  α α+β  and variance  1 αβ (2−α−β ) n (α+β )3 .  D  Derivations for the pitfall avoidance heuristics  We start with analysing the minimum values n(·, ·) can attain. The function is considered on the domain D = (0, 1] × (0, 1] and, as mentioned before, the estimated values of α and β are within the range [ n10 , 1]. Computing the partial derivatives, equating them to zero, and solving for α and β yields α = −β , which has no solution in the considered domain. Hence, the function has neither local minimum nor maximum on D. Let us fix  24  Mizera, Pang and Yuan  β for a moment and consider n(α, β ) as a function of α. We denote it as nβ (α). By differentiating with respect to α, we obtain  ∂ 1 β α2 − β 2 − 4 α + 2 β r2 nβ (α) = , where cr,s = 2 . 4 ∂α cr,s (α + β ) Φ−1 1 (1 + s) 2  p By equating topzero and solving for α we get two solutions: α1 = 2 − β 2 − 2β + 4 and α2 = 2 + β 2 − 2β + 4. Since the second solution is always greater than 1 on the (0, 1] interval, only the first solution is valid. The sign of the second derivative of nβ (α) with respect to α at α1 is negative. This shows that for any fixed β , nβ (α) grows on the interval [ n10 , α1 ], attains its maximum at α1 and decreases on the interval [α1 , 1]. Notice that n is symmetric, i.e., n(α, β ) = n(β , α). Thus the minimumvalue for  n could  attain 1 1 1 α and β estimated from a sample of size n0 is given by min n n0 , n0 , n n0 , 1 . After evaluating n we get     1 1 (n0 − 1) · n0 n0 − 1 1 n , ,1 = . = and n n0 n0 4 cr,s n0 cr,s · (1 + n0 )3 Now, to avoid the situation where the initial estimates of α and β lead to n(α, β ) < 2 n0 , it is enough to make sure that given r and s the following condition is satisfied: min(n( n10 , n10 ), n( n10 , 1)) > 2 n0 . This can be rewritten as   (8 cr,s − 1) n0 + 1 ≤ 0   2 cr,s n30 + 6 cr,s n20 + (6 cr,s − 1) n0 + 2 cr,s + 1 ≤ 0  Both inequalities can be solved analytically. Given that n0 > 0, the solution of the first inequality is ( n0 ∈ [− 8·cr,s1 −1 , ∞) cr,s < 18 (5) n0 ∈ 0/ cr,s > 18 . The solution of the second inequality is more complicated, but can be easily obtained with computer algebra system software (e.g., MapleTM ). In Table 1 we present some solutions for a number of values for r and s.  Reviving the Two-state Markov Chain Approach  E  25  The Boolean model of apoptosis  Fig. 2: The wiring of the probabilistic Boolean model of apoptosis originally introduced in [22].

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
