Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_489

Abstract:
Learning Complex Swarm Behaviors by Exploiting Local Communication Protocols with Deep Reinforcement Learning  arXiv:1709.07224v1 [cs.MA] 21 Sep 2017  Maximilian Hüttenrauch1 and Adrian Šošić2 and Gerhard Neumann1 Abstract— Swarm systems constitute a challenging problem for reinforcement learning (RL) as the algorithm needs to learn decentralized control policies that can cope with limited local sensing and communication abilities of the agents. Although there have been recent advances of deep RL algorithms applied to multi-agent systems, learning communication protocols while simultaneously learning the behavior of the agents is still beyond the reach of deep RL algorithms. However, while it is often difficult to directly define the behavior of the agents, simple communication protocols can be defined more easily using prior knowledge about the given task. In this paper, we propose a number of simple communication protocols that can be exploited by deep reinforcement learning to find decentralized control policies in a multi-robot swarm environment. The protocols are based on histograms that encode the local neighborhood relations of the agents and can also transmit task-specific information, such as the shortest distance and direction to a desired target. In our framework, we use an adaptation of Trust Region Policy Optimization to learn complex collaborative tasks, such as formation building, building a communication link, and pushing an intruder. We evaluate our findings in a simulated 2D-physics environment, and compare the implications of different communication protocols.  I. INTRODUCTION Nature provides many examples where the performance of a collective of limited beings exceeds the capabilities of one individual. Ants transport prey of the size no single ant could carry, termites build nests of up to nine meters in height, and bees are able to regulate the temperature of a hive. Common to all these phenomena is the fact that each individual has only basic and local sensing of its environment and limited communication capabilities to its neighbors. Inspired by these biological processes, swarm robotics [1], [2], [5] tries to emulate such complex behavior with a collective of rather simple entities. Typically, these robots have limited movement and communication capabilities and can sense only a local neighborhood of their environment, such as distances and bearings to neighbored agents. Moreover, these agents have limited memory systems, such that the agents can only access a short horizon of their perception. As a consequence, the design of control policies that are capable of solving complex cooperative tasks becomes a non-trivial problem. A common approach to program these systems is by extracting rules from the observed behavior Calculations for this research were conducted on the Lichtenberg high performance computer of the TU Darmstadt. 1 Maximilian Hüttenrauch and Gerhard Neumann are with the School of Computer Science, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK  {mhuettenrauch,gneumann}@lincoln.ac.uk 2 Adrian Šošić is with the neering, Technische Universität  Department of Electrical EngiDarmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany  adrian.sosic@spg.tu-darmstadt.de  their natural counterparts. Kube et al [13], for example, investigate the cooperative prey retrieval of ants to infer rules on how a swarm of robots can fulfill the task of cooperative box-pushing. Similar work can be found e.g. in [16], [12], [19]. However, extracting these rules can be tedious and the complexity of the tasks that we can solve via explicit programming is limited. In this paper, we want to learn complex swarm behavior using deep reinforcement learning [17], [22], [23], [10] based on the locally sensed information of the agents such that the desired behavior can be defined by a reward function instead of hand-tuning simple controllers of the agents. Swarm systems constitute a challenging problem for reinforcement learning as the algorithm needs to learn decentralized control policies that can cope with limited local sensing and communication abilities of the agents. Most collective tasks require some form of active cooperation between the agents. For efficient cooperation, the agents need to implement basic communication protocols such that they can transmit their local sensory information to neighbored agents. Learning such communication protocols simultaneously to learning the behavior of the agents seems to be out of reach of current reinforcement learning algorithms, which explains the limited success of deep reinforcement learning for such swarm systems. However, using prior knowledge about the given task, simple communication protocols can be defined much more easily than directly defining the behavior. In this paper, we propose and evaluate several simple communication protocols that can be exploited by deep reinforcement learning to find decentralized control policies in a multi robot swarm environment. Our communication protocols are based on local histograms that encode the neighborhood relation of an agent to other agents and can also transmit task-specific information such as the shortest distance and direction to a desired target. The histograms can deal with the varying number of neighbors that can be sensed by a single agent depending on its current neighborhood configuration. These protocols are used to generate high dimensional observations for the individual agents that is in turn exploited by deep reinforcement learning to efficiently learn complex swarm behavior. We base our algorithm on Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [21], a state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning algorithm. The resulting algorithm provides an integrated learning framework that is specifically tailored to the swarm setting. Our approach is able to learn decentralized control policies in an end-to-end fashion, as mappings from local sensory input to actions, without the need for complex  feature engineering. In summary, our method addresses the emerging challenges of decentralized swarm control in the following way: 1) Homogeneity: explicit sharing of policy parameters between the agents 2) Partial observability: efficient processing of actionobservation histories through windowing and parameter sharing 3) Communication: usage of histogram-based communication protocols over simple features To demonstrate our framework, we formulate three cooperative learning tasks in a simulated swarm environment. The environment is inspired by the Colias robot [3] (see Figure 1), a modular platform with two wheel motor-driven movement and various sensing systems.  Fig. 1: A Colias robot. This platform provides the basis for our simulation experiments.  II. BACKGROUND  that are fitted to the monte-carlo returns. The objective is to be maximized subject to a fixed constraint on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence of the policy before and after the parameter update, which ensures the updates to the new policy’s parameters θ are bounded, in order to avoid divergence of the learning process. The overall optimization problem is summarized as   πθ Â(s, a) maximize E πθold (1) θ subject to E[DKL (πθold ||πθ )] ≤ δ.  In this section, we provide a short summary of Trust Region Policy Optimization and formalize our learning problem domain.  The problem is approximately solved using the conjugate gradient optimizer after linearizing the objective and quadratizing the constraint.  A. Trust Region Policy Optimization  B. Problem Domain  Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) is an algorithm to optimize control policies in single-agent reinforcement learning problems [21]. These problems are formulated as Markov decision processes (MDP) which are compactly written as a tuple hS, A, P, R, γi. In an MDP, an agent chooses an action a ∈ A via some policy π(a | s), based on its current state s ∈ S, and progresses to state s0 ∈ S according to a transition function P (s0 | s, a). After each step, the agent is assigned a reward r = R(s, a), provided by a reward function R which judges the quality of its decision. The goal of the agent is to find a policy which maximizes the cumulative reward achieved over a certain period of time. In TRPO, the policy is parametrized by a parameter vector θ containing weights and biases of a neural network. In the following, we denote this parameterized policy as πθ . The reinforcement learning objective is expressed as finding a new policy that maximizes the expected advantage function of the current policy, i.e.,   πθ Â(s, a) , J TRPO = E πθold  Building upon the theory of single-agent reinforcement learning, we can now formulate the problem domain for our swarm environments. Instead of considering only one single agent, we consider multiple agents of the same type, which interact in the same environment. Because of their limited sensory input, each agent can only obtain a local observation o from the vicinity of its environment and is, hence, only partially informed about the global system state s ∈ E. The global system state is in this case comprised of the local states of all agents and additional attributes of the environment. In order to cope with this limitation, the agents need to make use of their observation histories to successfully solve a global collaborative task [20]. Considering a homogeneous system, we assume that all agents execute the same distributed policy, now defined as a mapping of histories h of past actions a and observations o within some finite horizon η. The global task of the agents is encoded in the reward function R(s, a), where we from now on write a to denote the joint action vector of the whole swarm.  where Â is an estimate of the advantage function of the current policy πold which is defined as Â(s, a) = Qπold (s, a) − π Vold (s). Herein, state-action value function Qπold (s, a) is typically estimated by a single trajectory rollout while for the value function V πold (s) rather simple baselines are used  Currently, the majority of the deep reinforcement learning literature focuses on the single-agent scenario and there are only few approaches tackling the multi-agent problem. One of these approaches can be found in [15], where the authors use a variation of the deep deterministic policy gradient  Paper Outline: In Section II, we review the concepts of TRPO and describe our problem domain. In Section III, we show in detail how we tackle the challenges of modeling observations and the policy in the partially observable swarm context, and how to adapt TRPO to our setup. In Section IV, we present the model and parameters of our agents and introduce three tasks on which we evaluate our proposed observation models and policies.  C. Related Work  (b) range histogram  (c) bearing histogram  (d) joint histogram  (a) local agent configuration  Fig. 2: Schematic illustration of the histogram-based observation model.  algorithm [14] to learn a centralized Q-function for each policy. While this accounts for some reasoning about the other agents behavior, the linear increase in dimensionality of joint observation and action spaces makes scaling this algorithm to many agents very hard. Another algorithm, tackling the credit assignment problem, can be found in [8]. Here, a baseline of other agents’ behavior is subtracted from a centralized critic to reason about the quality of a single agent’s behavior. However, this approach is only possible in scenarios with discrete action spaces since it requires marginalization over the agents’ action space. Finally, a different line of work concerning the learning of communication models between agents can be found in [7]. A good example of rule based behavior is found in [5] where a group of swarming robots transports an object to a goal. Further comparable work can be found in [6] for aggregation, [18] for flocking, or [9] for foraging. III. M ULTI -AGENT L EARNING WITH L OCAL C OMMUNICATION P ROTOCOLS In this section, we briefly discuss the used model and state representation of a single agent. Subsequently, we introduce different communication protocols based on neighborhood histograms that can be used in combination to solve complex swarm behaviors. Our algorithm relies on deep neural network policies of special architecture that can exploit the structure of the high-dimensional observation histories. We present this network model and subsequently discuss small adaptations we had to make to the TRPO algorithm in order to apply it to this cooperative multi-agent setting. A. Single Agent Model The local state of a single agent is modeled by its 2D position and orientation, i.e., si = [xi , y i , φi ] ∈ S = {[x, y, φ] ∈ R3 : 0 ≤ x ≤ xmax , 0 ≤ y ≤ ymax , 0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π}. The robot can only control the speed of its wheels. Therefore, we apply a force to the left and right side of the agent, similarly to the wheels of the real robot. Our model of a single agent is inspired by the Colias robot, but the underlying principles can be straightforwardly applied to other swarm settings with limited observations.  B. Communication Protocols Our communication protocols are based on histograms that can either encode neighborhood relations or distance relations to different points of interest. 1) Neighborhood Histograms: The individual agents can observe distance and bearing to neighbored agents if they communicate with this agent. We assume that the agents are constantly sending a signal, such that neighbored agents can localize the sources. The arising neighborhood configuration is an important source of information and can be used as observations of the individual agents. One of the arising difficulties in this case is to handle changing number of neighbors which would result in a variable length of the observation vector. Most policy representations, such as neural networks, expect a fixed input dimension. One possible solution to this problem is to allocate a fixed number of neighbor relations for each agent. If an agent experiences less neighborhood relations, standard values could be used such as a very high distance and 0 bearing. However, such an approach comes with several drawbacks. First of all, the size of the resulting representation scales linearly with the number of agents in the system and so does the number of parameters to be learned. Second, the execution of the learned policy will be limited to scenarios with the exact same number of agents as present during training. Third, a fixed allocation of the neighbor relation inevitably destroys the homogeneity of the swarm, since the agents are no longer treated interchangeably. In particular, using a fixed allocation rule requires that the agents must be able to discriminate between their neighbors, which might not even be possible in the first place. To solve these problems, we propose to use histograms over observed neighborhood relations, e.g., distances and bearing angles. Such a representation inherently respects the agent homogeneity and naturally comes with a fixed dimensionality. Hence, it is the canonical choice for the swarm setting. For our experiments, we consider two different types of representations: 1) concatenated one-dimensional histograms of distance and bearing and 2) multidimensional histograms. Both types are illustrated in Figure 2. The one-dimensional representation has the advantage of scalability, as it grows linearly with the number of features. The downside is that  potential dependencies between the features are completely ignored. 2) Shortest Path Partitions: In many applications, it is important to transmit the location of a point of interest to neighbored agents that can currently not observe this point due to their limited sensing ability. We assume that an agent can observe bearing and distance to a point of interest if it is within its communication radius. The agent then transmits the observed distance to other agents. Agents that can not see the point of interest might in this case observe a message from another agent containing the distance to the point of interest. The distance of the sending agent is added to the received distance to obtain the distance to the point of interest if we would use the sending agent as a via point. Each agent might now compute several of such distances and transmits the minimum distance it has computed to indicate the length of the shortest path it has seen. The location of neighbored agents including their distance of the shortest path information is important knowledge for the policy, e.g. for navigating to the point of interest. Hence, we adapt the histogram representation. Each partition now contains the minimum received shortest path distance of an agent that is located in this position. C. Weight Sharing for Policy Networks The policy maps sequences of past actions and observations to a new action. We use histories of a fixed length as input to our policy and a feed-forward deep neural network as architecture. This architecture was chosen because initial experiments with recurrent neural networks have led to poor results and because small history lengths are often sufficient for swarm behaviors if the communication protocols provide enough useful information. As a single observation can be constituted of multiple histograms or partitions, our observation space can already be quite high dimensional. Using a history of observations further adds to the dimensionality of the input to the network. To cope with such high input dimensionality, we propose a weight sharing approach. Each action-observation pair in an agent’s history is first processed independently with a network using the same weights. After this initial reduction in dimensionality, the hidden states are concatenated in a subsequent layer and finally mapped to an output. The independent layers can formally be described as li,k = f (Wi li−1,k + bi ) with k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , η}, i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , I}, where {Wi } and {bi } are weight matrices and bias vectors, f (·) is an activation function, and I is the number of independent hidden layers. The input to the first layer is defined as l0,k = ak−1 ⊕ ok , where ⊕ denotes concatenation of vectors. Note, that W1 , b1 to WI , bI are shared for the whole length of the history, reducing the number of parameters necessary to process the history. Let m0 = lI,0 ⊕ lI,1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ lI,η be the concatenation of independent hidden states, then the combining layers of our  at−η , ot−η+1  at−η+1 , ot−η+2  at−1 , ot l0,η  l0,2  l0,1  128  128  l1,1  ...  128  ...  16  l1,2  16  16  l2,1  l1,η  l2,2  l2,η  m0 16 × η m1 2 m2 action  Fig. 3: This diagram shows a model of our proposed policy with I = 2 and J = 1. The numbers inside the boxes denote the dimensionalities of the hidden layers. The plus sign denotes concatenation of vectors.  policy model are given by mj = f (WI+j mj−1 + bI+j ) with j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , J}, where J is the number of combined hidden layers. The output mJ at the last layer is used as the action vector for the agent. The homogeneity of agents is achieved by using the same set of parameters for all policies. A diagram of the architecture is shown in Figure 3. D. Adaptations to TRPO In order to apply TRPO to our multi-agent setup, some small changes to the original algorithm have to be made, similar to the formulation of [11]. First, since we assume homogeneous agents, we can have one set of parameters of the policy shared by all agents. Since the agents cannot rely on the global state, the advantage function is redefined as A(h, a). In order to estimate this function, each agent is assigned the same global reward r in each time step and all transitions are treated as if they were executed by a single agent. IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP In this section, we describe our three experimental setups and the underlying robot model that has been used in our simulation. A. Colias The Colias robot consists of a base module housing a motion controller for two wheel-driven movement and three shortrange IR bump sensors, and several extension modules, e.g. a long-range IR module with six IR sensors, a camera module and Bluetooth communication. Furthermore, it has an ambient light sensor. For this work, we rely solely on the data of short and long range IR sensors and the ambient light sensor. The agents are able to move with a maximum speed of approximately 35 cm/s. In case of active object detection, the short range IR sensors have a range of 3 cm and the long  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.0  0.0 0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  (a) edge task  0.8  1.0  0.0 0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  0.0  (b) link task  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  (c) push task  Fig. 4: Illustration of the three cooperative tasks used in this paper. The green dots represent the agents, where the green ring segments located next to the agents indicate the short range IR front sensors. The outer green circles illustrate the maximum range in which distances / bearings to other agents can be observed, depending on the used observation model. (a) Edge task: The red rings show the penalty zones where the agents are punished, the outer green rings indicate the zones where legal edges are formed. (b) Link task: The red dots correspond to the two points that need to be connected by the agents. (c) Push task: The red dot represents the intruder, who tries to reach the point marked by the black dot (a simulated light source), while the agents try to push it as far away as possible.  range IR sensors have a range of 10 cm. Signals transmitted by other agents can be received and reliably processed (in terms of distance and bearing estimation) up to a distance of 20 cm. The platform itself is still under development and, thus, we have not been able to deploy the learned policies, yet. Generally, our observation model is comprised of the raw sensor readings of the short and long range IR sensors (later denoted as ’sensor’ in the evaluations). Furthermore, we augment this observation representation with the communication protocols developed in Section 3. Our model also accounts for noise in the estimation since no precise positions are provided to the agents. We consider the following dimensionality of observations: • Short range IR: 3 • Long range IR: 6 • Ambient light sensor: 1 • 1D histogram over distances: 7 • 1D histogram over bearing: 8 • 2D histogram/partition over distances and bearing: 56 (7 × 8) Discretizing in this way leads to a resolution of 3 cm in distance and π/4 in angle in the histogram representation. Note, that either 1D or 2D histograms are used, not both at the same time. Additional features are added depending on the task and will be explained in the experiments section. Our simulation is running a realistic 2D physics engine (Box2D), allowing for correct physical interaction of the bodies of the agents. B. Policy Architecture We decided for a policy model with three hidden layers, i.e. I = 2 and J = 2. The first two layers process the observation-action pairs (ak−1 , ok ) of each timestep in a  history individually and map it into hidden layers of size 128 and 16. The output of the second layer is then concatenated to form the input of the third hidden layer which eventually maps to the two actions for the left and right motor. For example in the case of an observation representation using a 2D histogram with dimensionality 56 and 8 previous timesteps instead of having to process an input vector of size 8 × 56 = 544 we can map the 56 dimensions of a single timestep into a 16 dimensional space and concatenate this representation to a 128 dimensional representation. C. Tasks The focus of our experiments is on tasks where agents need to collaborate to achieve a common goal. For this purpose, we designed the following three scenarios: Task 1: Building a Graph In the first task, the goal of the agents is to find and maintain a certain distance to each other. This kind of behavior is required, for example, in surveillance tasks, where a group of autonomous agents needs to maximize the coverage of a target area while maintaining their communication links. We formulate the task as a graph problem, where the agents (i.e. the nodes) try to maximize the number of active edges in the graph. Herein, an edge is considered active whenever the distance between the corresponding agent lies in certain range. The setting is visualized in Figure 4a. In our experiment, we provide a positive reward for each edge in a range between 10 cm and 16 cm, and further give negative feedback for distances smaller than 7 cm. Accordingly, the reward function is R(s, a) =  M X M X i=1 m>i  1[0.1,0.16] (dim ) − 5  M X M X i=1 m>i  1[0,0.07] (dim ),  8,000  6,000  6,000  Average Returns  Average Return  8,000  4,000 2,000  η=2.0 η=4.0 η=8.0  0 0  200  400 600 TRPO Iterations  800  4,000 2D 1D d + b d b sensor  2,000 0  1000  (a) Comparison of different history lengths η. (2D histogram)  0  200  400 600 TRPO Iterations  800  1000  (b) Comparison of different observation models. (η = 2)  Fig. 5: Learning curves for the edge task. The curves show the mean values plus / minus one standard deviation, computed from eight learning trials. Legend: 2D: two-dimensional histogram over distances and bearings, 1D: two independent histograms over distances and bearing, d: distance only histogram, b: bearing only histogram, sensor: no histogram. p (xi − xm )2 + (yi − ym )2 denotes the Euwhere dim = clidean distance between the centres of agent i and agent m and ( 1 if x ∈ [a, b], 1[a,b] (x) = 0 else is an indicator function. Note that we omit the dependence of dim on the system state s to keep the notion simple. Task 2: Establishing a Communication Link The second task adds another layer of difficulty. While maintaining a network, the agents have to locate and connect two randomly placed points in the state space. A link is only established successfully if there are communicating agents connecting the two points. Figure 4c shows an example with an active link spanned by three agents between the two points. The task resembles the problem of establishing a connection between two nodes in a wireless ad hoc network [4], [24]. In our experiments, the distance of the two points is chosen to be larger than 75 cm, requiring at least three agents to bridge the gap in between. The reward is determined by the length of the shortest distance between the two points dopt (i.e. a straight line) and the length of the shortest active link dsp spanned by the agents, (d  opt  R(s, a) =  dsp  0  if link is established otherwise.  In this task, we use the shortest path partitions as communication protocol. Each agent communicates the shortest path it knows to both points of interests, resulting in two 2-D partitions that are used as observation input for a single time step.  Task 3: Pushing an Intruder In the third task, a group of Colias robots (the defenders) shall prevent another Colias robot (the intruder) from reaching a specified target position. The task is similar to the box-pushing in [Kube1998] problem but more challenging because the intruder adds additional dynamics to the problem. The target position is indicated by a light source which allows the intruder to determine its Euclidean distance to the target via the ambient light sensor. The defenders however are only informed about the distance of the intruder to the light position when they are within its communication range, the light position itself is not part of the agents’ observation. The policy of the intruder is modeled by a phototaxis behavior and is not part of the learning process. The reward is computed based on the current distance of the intruder to the target position. The distance is given by p dlp = (xp − xl )2 + (yp − yl )2 where the position by the light is given by a point (xl , yl ) and the intruder’s position by (xp , yp ), the reward function is R(s, a) = dlp . In addition to the standard sensor readings, we give the agents the ability to distinguish the intruder from other agents. This additional information is encoded in two extra dimensions for range and bearing in the observation representation. For this task, we tested different observation protocols, i.e. the neighborhood histograms as well as the shortest path partitions, where the intruder’s position was used as point of interest. V. RESULTS We evaluate each task in a standardized environment of size 1 m × 1 m where we initialize ten agents randomly in the scene. Of special interest is how the amount of information provided to the agents affects the overall system  2DSP 2D 1D sensor  300  Average Returns  Average Returns  400  200 100 0  2DSP 2D 1D sensor  100  50  0 0  200  400 600 TRPO Iterations  800  1000  0  (a) link task  200  400 600 TRPO Iterations  800  1000  (b) push task  Fig. 6: Learning curves for (a) the link task and (b) the push task, obtained for different observation models and a fixed history length of η = 2. The curves show the mean values plus / minus one standard deviation based on eight learning trials. Legend: 2DSP: two dimensional histogram over shortest paths, 2D: two-dimensional histogram over distances and bearings, 1D: two independent histograms over distances and bearing, sensor: no histogram.  performance. Herein, we have to keep in mind the general information-complexity trade-off, i.e., high-dimensional local observations generally provide more information about the global system state but, at the same time, result in a more complex learning task. Recall that the information content is mostly influenced by two factors: • the length of the history, • the composition of the observation. A. Edge Task First, we evaluate how the history length η affects the system performance. Figure 5a shows an evaluation for η = {2, 4, 8} and a weight sharing policy using a two-dimensional histogram over distances and bearings. Interestingly, we observe that longer observation histories do not show an increase in the performance. Either the increase in information could not counter the effect of increased learning complexity, or a history length of η = 2 is already sufficient to solve the task. We use these findings and set the history length to η = 2 for the remainder of the experiments. Next, we analyze the impact of the observation model. Figure 5b shows the results of the learning process for different observation modalities. The first observation is that, irrespective of the used mode, the agents are able to establish a certain number of edges. Naturally, a complete information of distances and bearing yields the best performance. However, the independent histogram representation yields comparable results two the two dimensional histogram. Again, this is due to the aforementioned complexity trade-off where a higher amount of information makes the learning process more difficult. B. Link Task We evaluate the link task with raw sensor measurements, count based histograms over distance and bearing, and the  more advanced shortest path histograms over distance and bearing. Based on the findings of the edge task we keep the history length at η = 2. Figure 6a shows the results of the learning process where each observation model was again tested and averaged over 8 trials. Since at least three agents are necessary to establish a link between the two points, the models without shortest path information struggle to reliably establish the connection. Their only chance is to spread as wide as possible and, thus, cover the area between both points. Again, it is interesting to see that independent histograms over counts seem to be favorable over the 2D histogram. However, both versions are surpassed by the 2D histogram over shortest paths which yields information about the current state of the whole network of agents, currently connected to each of the points. C. Push Task The push task turned out to be the hardest challenge. Given only the information about the current distance and bearing to neighboring agents, the defenders were unable to find a strategy to prevent the intruder from reaching the light position. Only when agents have access to the shortest path to the intruder, they are able to push him away from its goal. However, we would like to further investigate how to improve the agents’ behavior to successfully execute the task. VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, we demonstrated that histograms over simple local features can be an effective way for processing information in robot swarms. The central aspect of this new model is its ability to handle arbitrary system sizes without discriminating between agents, which makes it perfectly suitable to the swarm setting where all agents are identical and the number of agents in the neighborhood varies with time. We use these protocols and an adaptation of TRPO for  the swarm setup to learn cooperative decentralized control policies for a number of challenging cooperative task. The evaluation of our approach showed that this histogram-based model leads the agents to reliably fulfill the tasks. Interesting future directions include, for example, the learning of an explicit communication protocol. Furthermore, we expect that assigning credit to agents taking useful actions should speedup our learning algorithm. R EFERENCES [1] A review of swarm robotics tasks. Neurocomputing, 172(C):292 – 321, 2016. [2] J. Alonso-Mora, E. Montijano, M. Schwager, and D. Rus. Distributed multi-robot formation control among obstacles: A geometric and optimization approach with consensus. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 5356– 5363, 2016. [3] F. Arvin, J. Murray, C. Zhang, and S. Yue. Colias: An autonomous micro robot for swarm robotic applications. International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, 11(7):113, 2014. [4] P. Basu and J. Redi. Movement control algorithms for realization of fault-tolerant ad hoc robot networks. IEEE Network, 18(4):36–44, 2004. [5] J. Chen, M. Gauci, and R. Groß. A strategy for transporting tall objects with a swarm of miniature mobile robots. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 863–869, 2013. [6] N. Correll and A. Martinoli. Modeling and designing self-organized aggregation in a swarm of miniature robots. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 30(5):615–626, 2011. [7] J. Foerster, Y. M. Assael, N. de Freitas, and S. Whiteson. Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, pages 2137– 2145. 2016. [8] J. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. arXiv:1705.08926, 2017. [9] D. Goldberg and M. J. Mataric. Robust behavior-based control for distributed multi-robot collection tasks. Technical report, University of Southern California Los Angeles United States, 2000. [10] S. Gu, T. Lillicrap, Z. Ghahramani, R. E. Turner, and S. Levine. Q-prop: Sample-efficient policy gradient with an off-policy critic. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. [11] J. K. Gupta, M. Egorov, and M. Kochenderfer. Cooperative multiagent control using deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Adaptive and Learning Agents Workshop, 2017. [12] N. R. Hoff, A. Sagoff, R. J. Wood, and R. Nagpal. Two foraging algorithms for robot swarms using only local communication. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, pages 123–130, 2010. [13] C. Kube and E. Bonabeau. Cooperative transport by ants and robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 30(1):85 – 101, 2000. [14] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1509.02971, 2015. [15] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch. Multiagent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. arXiv:1706.02275, 2017. [16] A. Martinoli, K. Easton, and W. Agassounon. Modeling swarm robotic systems: a case study in collaborative distributed manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 23(4-5):415–436, 2004. [17] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015. [18] C. Moeslinger, T. Schmickl, and K. Crailsheim. Emergent flocking with low-end swarm robots, pages 424–431. 2010. [19] S. Nouyan, R. Gross, M. Bonani, F. Mondada, and M. Dorigo. Teamwork in self-organized robot colonies. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 13(4):695–711, 2009.  [20] F. A. Oliehoek. Decentralized POMDPs, pages 471–503. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. [21] J. Schulman, S. Levine, P. Moritz, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. Trust region policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1889–1897, 2015. [22] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. [23] Y. W. Teh, V. Bapst, W. M. Czarnecki, J. Quan, J. Kirkpatrick, R. Hadsell, N. Heess, and R. Pascanu. Distral: robust multitask reinforcement learning. arXiv:1707.04175, 2017. [24] U. Witkowski, M. A. M. El Habbal, S. Herbrechtsmeier, A. Tanoto, J. Penders, L. Alboul, and V. Gazi. Ad-hoc network communication infrastructure for multi-robot systems in disaster scenarios. In Proceedings of the IARP/EURON Workshop on Robotics for Risky Interventions and Environmental Surveillance, 2008.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
