Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_4142

Abstract:
arXiv:1309.1780v1 [cs.CE] 6 Sep 2013  Software Abstractions and Methodologies for HPC Simulation Codes on Future Architectures A. Dubey, S. Brandt, R. Brower, M. Giles, P. Hovland, D.Q. Lamb, F. Löffler, B. Norris, B, O’Shea, C. Rebbi, M. Snir, R. Thakur September 10, 2013  Large, complex, multi-scale, multi-physics simulation codes, running on high performance computing (HPC) platforms, have become essential to advancing science and engineering. Progress in computational science, together with the adoption of high-level frameworks and modular approaches, have enabled large code development efforts such as FLASH [1, 7, 9], Cactus [5, 6], Enzo [10, 11] and the Lattice QCD code suite [2, 3, 4]. These codes simulate multi-scale, multi-physics phenomena with unprecedented fidelity on petascale platforms, and are used by large communities. Increasing the capabilities of these codes and maintaining their ability to run on future platforms are as crucial to these communities as continued improvements in instruments and facilities are to experimental scientists. However, the ability of code developers to do these things faces a serious challenge with the paradigm shift underway in platform architecture from coarse grained parallelism with few highly capable processors, to fine grained parallelism with many less capable and more heterogeneous processors. The complexity of the future platforms makes it essential to approach this challenge cooperatively as a community. We need to develop common abstractions, frameworks, programming models and software development methodologies that can be applied across a broad range of complex simulation codes, and common software infrastructure to support them. We believe that such an infrastructure is critical to the deployment of existing and new large, multi-scale, multi-physics codes on future HPC platforms. Furthermore, such an infrastructure should be assembled by a collaborative effort of the teams that develop and maintain such codes – that is, by the people that own the problem, not by people that own solutions looking for a problem. The needs of the expert programmers who are developing complex, high-performance simulation codes are quite different than the needs of the broader community. Furthermore, the number of such software developers is small; their needs are therefore often ignored. There is need to foster cooperation among the small number of teams that develop such codes, leading to a more viable ecosystem; and cooperation of these teams with computer science researchers and vendors, leading to a better understanding of the needs of this small community. Also, there is usually a gap between computer science research in areas such as code abstractions and transformations and high-level scientific application software. The gap exists for many reasons, including lack of communication between the communities involved, limits on extensibility and adaptability of scientific software, and differing real and perceived requirements by different application domains. It would be beneficial to the applications community with HPC to overcome these and other barriers to finding and implementing broad, reusable solutions and common software infrastructure 1  to support the deployment of existing and new multi-scale, multi-physics codes on future HPC platforms. This would also be a huge leap forward for the concerned science domains. A similar transformation took place in the 1990s when the groups developing large scientific codes recognized the need for adopting software engineering practices to sustain code reliability in face of rapid capability growth. Each group went its own way and customized some of the prevalent ideas for its own use, many times developing their own tools. However, a close examination of the adopted practices reveals a surprising number of commonalities; object-oriented design, version control, coding standards, unit testing, regression testing, verification frameworks, release policies, contribution policies etc. A shared infrastructure would not only have reduced development costs, but would have facilitated code sharing. To understand the kind of change software must undergo to adapt to new computing platforms, we first consider the current characteristics of the codes in our target community. They are typically implemented in one or more of C, C++, or Fortran. Parallel computations are implemented primarily using MPI, OpenMP, or a hybrid approach. Underlying the particular simulation implementations are a variety of mesh types, with or without adaptive refinement support, and a number of implicit and explicit solvers with one or more implementations of each method. Applicationspecific (I/O-intensive) checkpointing schemes are typically used for fault tolerance and to provide restart capabilities. Some simulation codes rely on externally developed numerical libraries, while others are mostly self-contained, with few external dependencies. The report of the 2011 Workshop on Exascale Programming Challenges [8] discusses in depth many of the challenges that scientific software is facing in the near future, ranging from programming models to runtime systems. Many of these challenges are not limited to extreme scales and are present even now in HPC codes as they are faced with ever increasing levels of parallelism and heterogeneity at any scale. We briefly overview these software challenges • Numerical methods and frameworks. Certain disruptive architecture changes may require rethinking of numerical approaches. Identifying the methods critical to our target communities will be critical in assessing the applied mathematics research and development required to effectively use future platforms. A number of numerical frameworks provide a means of integrating a number of solution methods and underlying data structures. Adapting the framework to new platforms is one way in which multiple applications can successfully migrate to new paradigms without significant reimplementation of application code. • Programming Models. The programming model (e.g., MPI) used in a particular application and its supporting infrastructure is a fundamental, pervasive aspect of the implementation. Switching between programming models is labor-intensive and may require significant redesign of key algorithms, as well as massive code rewrites. At the same time, it is difficult to estimate a priori the benefits of moving to a different programming model, for example, when switching from a pure distributed memory MPI-based implementation to a model that supports a global shared memory view. • Performance Portability. Effective utilization of HPC resources is historically a balancing act between portability and performance. On one hand, extensive performance optimizations of certain key computations are crucial for achieving good performance on a certain platform. On the other hand, making such changes permanent negatively impacts code readability and performance on other platforms. it is important to identify and eliminate barriers to enabling  greater flexibility in choosing among different optimized implementations. Another critical aspect of future performance portability is the ability to support different levels and types of parallelism. • Resilience. Current codes’ reliance on checkpointing for error correction will be prohibitively expensive on large-scale systems; hence, new ways of ensuring resilience are required, which may involve changes in programming models, runtimes, and application design and implementation. • Productivity and Maintainability. Alternative technical approaches to managing increased levels of parallelism, heterogeneity and other architectural features have different impact on programmer effort and software maintainability. Furthermore, complex codes do not allow easy testing of new concepts and thus slow down advances in both the scientific and numerical approaches. We must understand the current and desired mode of development in our target communities to guide the approach to design decisions. It is a given that the changes will be disruptive, but the degree of disruption can be reduced by working together as a community. We are working on conceptualization of a Software Institute to address these concerns, and are conducting workshops under the project that bring together domain experts in several scientific fields and manufacturing sectors, software developers who are involved in implementing and optimizing many of the large codes for these fields and sectors, researchers in applied computer science, and hardware and software vendors in a series of workshops and focus groups to gather a variety of perspectives and broad expertise. The goal of the workshops has been, and will continue to be defining and developing possible approaches toward common abstractions and frameworks. This exercise can potentially produce a three-fold benefit to the S2I2 program and to the community: (1) several large scientific and engineering codes ready for and adaptable to generations of heterogeneous and many-core platforms; (2) a common software infrastructure that is applicable across a broad range of science and engineering application domains; and (3) a model for interaction between computer science research and application development that takes interesting and promising research ideas from simplified problems to real world applications.  References [1] FLASH user’s guide. URL http://flash.uchicago.edu/site/flashcode/user_support/flash4_ug. [2] The chroma library for lattice http://usqcd.jlab.org/usqcd-docs/chroma.  field  theory,  .  URL  [3] Quda: A library for qcd on gpus, . URL http://lattice.github.com/quda. [4] Usqcd sofware releases, . URL http://usqcd.jlab.org/usqcd-software. [5] G. Allen, W. Benger, T. Goodale, H.-C. Hege, G. Lanfermann, A. Merzky, T. Radke, E. Seidel, and J. Shalf. The cactus code: a problem solving environment for the grid. In The Ninth International Symposium on High-Performance Distributed Computing, 2000. Proceedings, pages 253–260, Pittsburgh, PA, August 2000.  [6] Cactus Computational Toolkit URL http://www.cactuscode.org/. [7] A. Dubey, K. Antypas, M.K. Ganapathy, L.B. Reid, K. Riley, D. Sheeler, A. Siegel, and K. Weide. Extensible component-based architecture for FLASH, a massively parallel, multiphysics simulation code. Parallel Computing, 35(10-11):512–522, 2009.  [8] Exascale Programming Challenges Report. Ascr programming challenges for exascale computing. http://science.energy.gov/~/media/ascr/pdf/program-documents/docs/ProgrammingChallengesW 2011. [9] B. Fryxell, K. Olson, P. Ricker, F. X. Timmes, M. Zingale, D. Q. Lamb, P. MacNeice, R. Rosner, J. W. Truran, and H. Tufo. FLASH: An adaptive mesh hydrodynamics code for modeling astrophysical thermonuclear flashes. Astrophysical Journal, Supplement, 131:273–334, November 2000. doi: 10.1086/317361. [10] M.L. Norman, G.L. Bryan, R. Harkness, J. Bordner, D. Reynolds, B. O’Shea, and R. Wagner. Petascale Computing: Algorithms and Applications, chapter Simulating Cosmological Evolution with Enzo, pages 83–102. Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2008. Arxiv preprint arXiv:0705.1556. [11] B. W. O’Shea, G. Bryan, J. Bordner, M. L. Norman, T. Abel, R. Harkness, and A. Kritsuk. Introducing Enzo, an AMR cosmology application. In T. Plewa, L. Timur, and V.G. Weirs, editors, Adaptive Mesh Refinement – Theory and Applications, volume 41 of Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering. Springer, 2005.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
