Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_4842

Abstract:
1  Mutual Information in Frequency and its Application to Measure Cross-Frequency Coupling in Epilepsy arXiv:1711.01629v2 [q-bio.NC] 15 Mar 2018  Rakesh Malladi, Member, IEEE, Don H Johnson, Fellow, IEEE, Giridhar P Kalamangalam, Nitin Tandon, and Behnaam Aazhang, Fellow, IEEE  Abstract—We define a metric, mutual information in frequency (MI-in-frequency), to detect and quantify the statistical dependence between different frequency components in the data, referred to as cross-frequency coupling and apply it to electrophysiological recordings from the brain to infer crossfrequency coupling. The current metrics used to quantify the cross-frequency coupling in neuroscience cannot detect if two frequency components in non-Gaussian brain recordings are statistically independent or not. Our MI-in-frequency metric, based on Shannon’s mutual information between the Cramér’s representation of stochastic processes, overcomes this shortcoming and can detect statistical dependence in frequency between non-Gaussian signals. We then describe two data-driven estimators of MI-in-frequency: one based on kernel density estimation and the other based on the nearest neighbor algorithm and validate their performance on simulated data. We then use MI-in-frequency to estimate mutual information between two data streams that are dependent across time, without making any parametric model assumptions. Finally, we use the MI-infrequency metric to investigate the cross-frequency coupling in seizure onset zone from electrocorticographic recordings during seizures. The inferred cross-frequency coupling characteristics are essential to optimize the spatial and spectral parameters of electrical stimulation based treatments of epilepsy. Index Terms—Mutual information in frequency; dependent data; Cramér’s spectral representation; cross-frequency coupling; epilepsy; seizure onset zone.  I. I NTRODUCTION Epilepsy is a very common neurological disorder affecting nearly 1% of the world’s population. Epilepsy is characterized by repeated, unprovoked seizures. Nearly a third of all epilepsy patients have medically refractory epilepsy (medication is not effective in these patients). For these patients, surgical resection of the seizure onset zone (SOZ) (the regions of the brain responsible for generating and sustaining seizure activity [3]) or electrical stimulation are possible treatment options. However, the efficacy of these treatments is variable and almost always never results in a cure [4], [5]. There is tremendous interest in leveraging the recent advances in electrical stimulation This work is funded in part by grant 1406447 from National Science Foundation and Texas Instruments and was done at Rice University. A portion of this work was presented at Cosyne [1] and Asilomar [2]. Rakesh Malladi is with LinkedIn Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA. Don H Johnson and Behnaam Aazhang are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, TX. Giridhar P Kalamangalam is with Department of Neurology at University of Florida, Gainesville, FL. Nitin Tandon is with Department of Neurosurgery at University of Texas Health Center, Houston, TX. E-mail: malladirakesh@gmail.com, {dhj, aaz}@rice.edu, Giridhar.Kalamangalam@neurology.ufl.edu, Nitin.Tandon@uth.tmc.edu.  [6] and optogenetics [7] to develop spatiotemporally specific approaches to treat epilepsy. A crucial step in this endeavor is to develop an understanding of the coupling between neuronal oscillations in different frequency bands during seizures. This coupling or statistical dependence across frequency components between signals is referred to as cross-frequency coupling (CFC) [8], [9]. Our main objective is to learn the dynamics of cross-frequency coupling during seizures in epilepsy patients from the electrocorticographic (ECoG) data. Elaborating the characteristics of epileptic seizures using cross-frequency coupling between ECoG data has been the focus of many papers. CFC has been used to predict the onset of seizure in [10] and detect epileptic seizures in [11]. CFC has also been used to localize the area for surgical resection in epilepsy patients [12]–[14]. Variations in CFC from preictal (before a seizure) to ictal (during a seizure) to postictal (after a seizures) in epilepsy patients have been analyzed in [15], [16]. In addition, the CFC in interictal stages is compared with that around seizures in [11], [17]–[19]. In this paper, we study CFC within and between various regions inside the seizure onset zone to determine the dominant frequencies involved in seizures and to learn the variations in coupling strength between various spatial regions inside SOZ. The results from this study are crucial to optimize the spectral and spatial parameters of next generation epilepsy treatments. Cross-frequency coupling or dependence across frequencies in the data could be in a single recording or between recordings, not necessarily at the same frequency. Coherence can identify if two frequency components are statistically independent or not and quantify the dependence for linear, Gaussian processes [20]. There is no such equivalent metric for nonGaussian signals. Since the time-series data recorded from the brain are neither linearly related nor Gaussian, neuroscientists typically use heuristic metrics that cannot identify if two frequency components are statistically independent or not and can only capture second-order dependencies. Some of the popular heuristics estimate the phase-amplitude, amplitudeamplitude, phase-phase coupling between the low and high frequency components in the electrophysiological recordings from brain [8], [21]–[23]. In fact, a recent review article on CFC metrics suggests the use of cross-frequency ‘correlation’ instead of ‘coupling’ to describe these heuristic CFC metrics [22]. Furthermore, a list of confounds affecting the current CFC metrics is provided in [22]. A more comprehensive metric that detects statistical independence and thereby, capture both  2  linear and nonlinear dependencies, would be invaluable in determining how neuronal oscillations at various frequencies are involved in the computation, communication, and learning in the brain. Here we propose a new methodology or metric to estimate the cross-frequency coupling (CFC) in neuroscience that overcomes the challenges of the existing approaches and as a proof-of-concept, we infer CFC characteristics of epileptic seizures using our metric. Mutual information in frequency (MI-in-frequency), defined for linear Gaussian processes using coherence in [24], [25], can indeed be further developed into a general technique to estimate CFC. Inspired by prior work [26], we define MIin-frequency between two frequencies in a signal (or two signals) as the Shannon’s mutual information (MI) between the Cramér’s spectral representations [27], [28] of the two signals at the corresponding frequencies. Cramér’s spectral representation transforms a time-domain stochastic process into a stochastic process in the frequency domain, the samples of which can be estimated at each frequency from the timedomain data samples [29]. MI-in-frequency metric is equivalent to coherence measures for linear, Gaussian signals and can be thought of as ‘coherence’ for non-Gaussian signals. The MI-infrequency metric is one of the three mutual information based metrics used in [26] to analyze linear relationships between seismic data and [26] is not focussed on defining a single metric to capture the statistical dependence across frequency. We extend this approach to define a single metric, MI-infrequency, to capture statistical dependencies across frequency for both linear and nonlinear data and use it measure CFC in the brain. We then describe two data-driven algorithms – one based on kernel density estimation (KDMIF) and the other based on nearest neighbor estimation (NNMIF) – to estimate MI-infrequency without assuming any parametric model of the data. We considered these two approaches since they outperformed other approaches in estimating MI from i.i.d. data and there is no clear winner between them [30], [31]. We also demonstrate the superiority of MI-in-frequency over existing CFC metrics by comparing against modulation index [8], [21], a commonly used CFC metric, on simulated data. In addition to estimating CFC between ECoG data, we use MI-in-frequency to develop a data-driven estimator for mutual information (MI). Note that MI estimation is a solved problem if the data samples are i.i.d. [32] or are sampled from linear, Gaussian processes [24], [25], [33], [34]. As mentioned earlier, real-world data is neither independent across time nor Gaussian and the underlying model is often unknown. Our data-driven MI estimation algorithm applies to dependent data, without making any parametric model assumptions. The key idea is to make the problem computationally tractable by focussing only on those frequencies in the two data streams that are statistically dependent, which are identified by MI-in-frequency metric. Our MI estimator converges to the true value for Gaussian models and we validate its performance on nonlinear models. Finally, we apply the MI-in-frequency estimators to infer the cross-frequency coupling in the seizure onset zone (SOZ), by analyzing electrocorticographic (ECoG) data from the SOZ of 9 patients with medial temporal lobe epilepsy in whom a total of 25 seizures were recorded. We investigate the dynamics of  CFC in preictal, ictal and postictal periods within one SOZ electrode and between electrodes in different regions in the SOZ. We observe an increase in coupling in gamma and ripple high-frequency oscillations during seizures, with the largest increase within a SOZ electrode and a very small increase between electrodes in different regions inside SOZ. In addition, low-frequency coupling and linear interactions between SOZ electrodes also increase during the postictal state. II. C RAMÉR ’ S S PECTRAL R EPRESENTATION OF S TOCHASTIC P ROCESSES Consider a stochastic processes X (t) , t ∈ R. Let SX (ν) for ν ∈ R be the spectral distribution function of X and sX (ν), its power spectral density, if it exists. Two basic spectral representations are associated with the stochastic process X (t) - power spectral distribution and Cramér’s representation [27], [28]. The Cramér’s representation of X (t) and its key properties are stated in the following theorem. Theorem 1. (page 380 in [28]) Let X (t) be a second order stationary, mean-square continuous and zero mean stochastic process. Then there exists a complex-valued, finite-variance, e (ν) in the frequency domain orthogonal increment process X ν ∈ R, such that R∞ j2πνt e (ν) , X (t) = e dX −∞ h i h i e (ν) = 0, and E |dX e (ν) |2 = dSX (ν) . with E dX e (ν) = X eR (ν) + j X eI (ν) satisfying the above The process X theorem is the spectral process or the Cramér’s representation e (ν) is the complex random variable representing of X (t). dX the amplitude of oscillation in the interval from ν to ν + dν in X (t). The integral in Theorem 1 is a Fourier-Stieltjes integral. Intuitively, Theorem 1 decomposes X (t) into an orthogonal increment complex process in the frequency domain.  e −ν = Furthermore, if the X (t) is real-valued, then X     e ? ν , E dX eR ν dX eI ν = 0, and X       eR (ν) 2 = E dX eI (ν) 2 = 1 dSX (ν) . (1) E dX 2 We have the following theorem for the special case of a realvalued Gaussian process X (t). Theorem 2. (page 385 in [28]) Let X (t) be a real-valued stationary, mean-square continuous Gaussian process with zero mean and power spectral distribution function SX (ν) , ν ∈ R. eR (ν) Then the real and imaginary parts of its spectral process X eI (ν) are zero mean, mutually independent, identically and X distributed Gaussian processes satisfying (1). Example: Consider the zero mean stationary Gaussian process X (t) = A cos (2πν0 t + Θ), where A is Rayleigh random variable with parameter σA that is independent of Θ, which is uniform in [0, 2π). The increments of the spectral process of X (t) are all zero, except at ν = ±ν0 , where the increment is A2 exp (±jΘ) [28]. This implies that the sample e (ν) has two jumps path of the real part of spectral process X of same magnitude and direction at frequencies ±ν0 , while that of the imaginary part has two jumps of same magnitude,  3  but opposite directions at ±ν0 . The magnitude of the jump at ν0 in the real and imaginary parts is A2 cos Θ and A2 sin Θ respectively, both of which are Gaussian random variables with 2 mean zero and variance 12 σA . This spectral process is intuitive because we know X (t) has all its energy only at frequencies ±ν0 and the variance of the increments of the spectral process e (ν) is equal to the differential power spectral distribution dX of X (t) which is nonzero only at ±ν0 . We therefore expect e (ν) with non-zero all sample paths of the random process X probability to be constant, except for jumps at ±ν0 . Note that if the process is wide sense-stationary and Gaussian, then power spectral distribution would have all the information about the process and its relationship with Cramér’s representation is given by Theorem 2. Otherwise, power spectral distribution only captures the second-order dependencies in the process. Since ECoG signals are not Gaussian, we use Cramér’s representation to transform a time-domain stochastic process into a stochastic process in the frequency domain.  2  is zero except at ν = 0, where the spectral increment is A2 , 2 and at ν = ±2ν0 , where the increment is A4 exp (±j2Θ). As a result, the frequency components at ±ν0 in X and at frequencies {0, ±2ν0 } in Y are statistically dependent and hence the MI-in-frequency obtained from (2) at these frequency pairs will be positive. In addition, the frequency components in Y at ν ∈ {0, ±2ν0 } are dependent and hence the MI-infrequency within Y at these frequencies will also be positive. A. Gaussian Inputs to LTI Filters Let’s now consider the special case where X (t), a Gaussian process with power spectral density sX (ν) serves as the input to a linear, time-invariant (LTI) filter with transfer function H1 (ν) and Y (t) is output observed in additive colored noise (white noise W (t) passed through a LTI filter with transfer function H2 (ν)). The processes X (t) and Y (t) are related by y (t) = h1 (t) ∗ x (t) + h2 (t) ∗ w (t) ,  III. M UTUAL I NFORMATION IN F REQUENCY  (4)  where ∗ denotes convolution operation, x(t), y(t) and w(t) are We first define MI between frequencies within a pro- sample paths of X (t), Y (t) and W (t) respectively. W is cess and between two processes in continuous time. We a Gaussian process with power spectral density sW (ν) and then extend this definition to discrete-time stochastic pro- independent of X. h1 (t) and h2 (t) are continuous-time impulse e (νi ) and dYe (νj ), the increments of cesses. Consider dX responses of LTI filters, whose transfer functions are H1 (ν) spectral processes or the Cramér’s representation of X(t) and H2 (ν) respectively. Let dX e (ν), dW f (ν) and dYe (ν) be and Y (t) at frequencies νi and νj respectively. Let the joint the spectral process increments of the Gaussian processes X, probability density of the four dimensional random vector W and Y . We have from Theorem 2, e (νi ) and dYe (νj ) of the real and imaginary parts of dX     eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ∼N 0, 1 sX (ν) I , dX eR (νi ) , dX eI (νi ) , dYeR (νj ) , dYeI (νj ) . be denoted by P dX 2    fR (ν) , dW fI (ν) ∼N 0, 1 sW (ν) I , The corresponding two-dimensional marginal densities are dW (5)  2 eR (νi ) , dX eI (νi ) , P dYeR (νj ) , dYeI (νj ) . The MI-inP dX where N (µ, Σ) represents Gaussian distribution with mean µ frequency between X (t) at νi and Y (t) at νj is defined as and covariance Σ, 0 is the two element zero vector and I is MIXY (νi , νj ) the 2 × 2 identity matrix. In addition, we can show for the    e e e e model in (4) that = I dXR (νi ) , dXI (νi ) ; dYR (νj ) , dYI (νj ) ,    eR (νi ),dX eI (νi ),dY e (ν ),dY eI (νj ) e (ν) + H2 (ν) dW f (ν) . P dX dYe (ν) = H1 (ν) dX (6)  R j  , = E log (2) eR (νi ),dX eI (νi ) P dY eR (νj ),dY eI (νj ) P dX The proof of (6) is in the appendix. The MI-in-frequency where I ({·, ·} ; {·, ·}) is the standard mutual information defined in (2) is further simplified for the model in (4) using between two pairs of two dimensional real-valued random (5), (6) and stated in the following theorem. vectors [34]. The MI between two different frequencies νi , νj Theorem 3. For the model given in (4), the MI between X (t) in the same process Y (t) is similarly defined as at frequency νi and Y (t) at frequency νj is zero, when νi 6= νj        MIY Y νi , νj =I dYeR νi ,dYeI νi ; dYeR νj ,dYeI νj . (3) and the MI between X (t) and Y (t) at frequency νi = νj = ν 6= 0 is The MI between the components of Y at frequencies νi =   eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeR (ν) νj = MIXY (ν, ν) = 2 × I dX  ν, MIY Y (ν, ν),  is ∞, a consequence of the fact that dYeR (ν) , dYeI (ν) is a continuous-valued random vector |H1 (ν)|2 sX (ν)  = log 1 + |H . (7) 2 2 (ν)| sW (ν) whose conditional differential entropy is not lower bounded. MI-in-frequency defined in (2), (3) is a non-negative number. If The proof of the above theorem is in the appendix. Note MI-in-frequency between two frequencies is zero, then they are that at ν = X and Y is  0, the MI-in-frequency between  eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeR (ν) , which is just half independent and if not, MI-in-frequency is a measure of the sta- equal to I dX tistical dependence between the two frequency components. MI- of the right hand side of (7). We intuitively expect different in-frequency between two processes is not symmetric in general, frequency components in the Gaussian input and its output i.e., MIXY (νi , νj ) 6= MIXY (νj , νi ). However, it is symmetric from a linear system to be independent and Theorem 3 confirms within a process, i.e., MIY Y (νi , νj ) = MIY Y (νj , νi ). that the proposed definition of MI-in-frequency agrees with Example: Continuing with our example in section II, let this intuition. In addition, the MI between X and Y is ∞ 2 X (t) = A cos (2πν0 t + Θ) and Y (t) = X (t) . Then dYe (ν) when |H2 (ν) | = 0, since the components of X and Y at  4  such ν are linearly related. The MI between two different frequencies in Y (t), generated from (4), is zero due to the linearity of the filters and Gaussian inputs. Furthermore, we can also show for the Gaussian processes X and Y related by (4) that MI-in-frequency is related to coherence CXY (ν) ∈ [0, 1], by MIXY (ν, ν) = − log (1 − CXY (ν)). The proof is in the appendix. This result implies MI-infrequency between Gaussian processes related by (4) can be estimated with the coherence. In addition, Theorem 3 also shows that MI-in-frequency between Gaussian processes related by (4) can be estimated by estimating the mutual  eR (νi ) , dX eI (νi ) and dYeR (νj ), a information between dX three dimensional estimate as opposed to a four dimensional estimate in general.  B. Discrete-time Stochastic Processes  A. Kernel Density Based MI-in-frequency (KDMIF) Estimator 1) Estimation of Samples of Spectral Process Increments: The first step of the algorithm is estimating the samples of spectral process increments of X and Y from N dependent data samples. We assume there is a finite memory in both these processes and choose a value for a parameter Nf , which is much larger than the length of dependence or memory in the data and determines the frequency resolution of our MI-infrequency estimates. We assume data in different windows are independent of each other. Ideally, consecutive windows should be separated to ensure no dependence across windows and avoid the dependence across the window boundaries, but our simulation results demonstrate that not separating the windows doesn’t affect performance significantly. N samples of X are split into Ns non-overlapping windows with Nf = NNs data points in each window. Let us denote the samples in lth window of X and Y respectively by two Nf element one-dimensional vectors, xl and yl , for l = 1, 2, · · · , Ns . Let us now focus on estimating samples of the random  e (λi ). Let F xl (α) denote the discrete-time variable dX Fourier transform (DTFT) of xl at normalized frequency α. For λi = Nif ∈ [0, 1] and i ∈ [0, Nf − 1], let us define de xl (λi ) l and integrated Fourier spectrum, x e (λi ), by  We now extend the definition of MI-in-frequency between continuous-time stochastic processes in (2), (3) to discretetime stochastic processes. In practice, we only have access to data samples from a real-valued, discrete-time stochastic process, sampled at a given Nyquist sampling frequency Fs . Sampled signals have periodic spectra, with a period equalling Fs . In addition, components in the process with frequencies in i the range [Fs /2, Fs ] correspond to negative frequencies [35].   P xl (λi ) = F xl (λi ) and x el (λi ) = F xl (λm ) . (8) Therefore, the actual frequency content in the signal is confined de m=0 to [0, Fs /2]. We use normalized frequency λ = Fνs ∈ [0, 0.5] to el (λi ) describe the frequency axis in case of discrete-time stochastic It is stated in [29] that the random variable for which x processes, instead of ν which was used for continuous-time is just one realization, tends to the spectral process of X stochastic processes. The MI-in-frequency between discrete- at λi in mean of order γ, for any γ > 0, as the number time processes is therefore obtained by replacing νi , νj by of samples goes to infinity and assuming the underlying the normalized frequencies λ1 , λ2 ∈ [0, 0.5] in (2), (3). distribution is stationary and satisfies a mixing assumption. xl (λi ), which is the increment in x el (λi ) between λi Multivariate autoregressive models, commonly used to model Also, de electro-physiological signals recorded from brain [20], [36], and λi + dλ, is just the DTFT of the samples in window are a special case of the discrete-time equivalent of (4). The l. Calculating the DTFT with the FFT for each of the Ns an Nf × Ns matrix, whose ith analytic expression for MI at frequency λ for such discrete- windows separately  yields  1 2 Ns x (λi ) = de x (λi ) , de x (λi ) , · · · , de x (λi ) is the time Gaussian processes is therefore similarly obtained by row, de e (λi ), complex-valued vector containing N samples of dX replacing the frequencies ν by λ in (7), which is also equal s i the spectral process increments of X at λ = . The lth to − log (1 − CXY (λ)). This shows that for the special case i Nf of discrete-time Gaussian processes, MI-in-frequency metric is element of de x (λi ), de xl (λi ) = de xlR (λi ) + ide xlI (λi ), is a e equivalent to coherence and the definitions in [24], [25]. particular realization of dX (λi ). A similar procedure is used to obtain the Ns samples of the spectral process increments of Y at λj = Njf , j ∈ [0, Nf − 1] and the resulting samples are  1  IV. DATA -D RIVEN E STIMATION OF MI- IN - FREQUENCY denoted by de y (λj ) = de y (λj ) , de y 2 (λj ) , · · · , de y Ns (λj ) . We describe two data-driven estimators–a kernel density 2) Estimating MI-in-frequency: The MI-in-frequency based (KDMIF) and a nearest neighbor based (NNMIF) estimate  is now the  obtained from  l Ns samples, l c XY (λi , λj ), between estimator to estimate MI-in-frequency, MI de xlR λi , de xlI λi and de yR λj , de yI λj , for λi component of X and λj component of Y . The input to l = 1, 2, · · · , Ns , using a kernel density based plug-in both these algorithms are the N samples of X and Y . The nonparametric estimator [32]. The Ns data samples are split first step in both KDMIF and NNMIF estimators involves into Ntr training and Nts test samples. The training data is e (λi ) used to estimate the four-dimensional joint probability density estimating the samples of spectral process increments dX  e eR (λi ) , dX eI (λi ) , dYeR (λj ) , dYeI (λj ) . The density is and dY (λj ), of X at λi and of Y at λj respectively. In the P dX second step, the KDMIF estimator uses the kernel density based estimated using a kernel density estimator with Gaussian MI estimator [32], [37], whereas NNMIF estimator uses the kernels, the optimal bandwidth matrix selected using smoothed k-nearest neighbor based MI estimator [32], [38] to estimate cross-validation criterion [37] and implemented using ‘ks’ e (λi ) package in R [39]. The joint density is marginalized to estimate MI from the samples of spectral process increments, dX  e eR (λi ) , dX eI (λi ) and and dY (λj ). the two-dimensional densities, P dX  5   P dYeR (λj ) , dYeI (λj ) , by recognizing that the bandwidth matrix for the two-dimensional marginal is the appropriate 2 × 2 sub-matrix from the 4 × 4 bandwidth matrix of the joint density. The estimates of the joint and the marginal densities at the Nts test samples are plugged into the following equation (9) to estimate MI-in-frequency. c XY (λi , λj ) MI b P P = N1ts log b l    l de xlR (λi ),de xlI (λi ),de yR (λj ),de yIl (λj )    .  l (λ ),de b de P de xlI (λi ) P yR yIl (λj ) xlR (λi ),de j  (9)  B. Nearest Neighbor Based MI-in-frequency (NNMIF) Estimator 1) Estimation of Samples of Spectral Process Increments: The first step in the nearest neighbor based MI-in-frequency estimator is exactly same as that of KDMIF estimator. Following the steps described in section IV-A1, we estimate de xl (λi ) and l de y (λj ), for l = 1, 2, · · · , Ns , the Ns samples of the spectral process increments of X at λi and Y at λj respectively. 2) Estimating MI-in-frequency: MIXY (λi , λj ) is now estimated from de xl (λi ) ∈ R2 and de y l (λj ) ∈ R2 , for l = 1, 2, · · · , Ns using nearest neighbor based MI estimator [38]. We apply the first version of the algorithm in e (λi ) and [38] to two-dimensional random variables dX e c dY (λj ) to compute MIXY (λi , λj ). Consider the joint four  e (λi ) , dYe (λj ) ∈ R4 . The distance dimensional space dX between two data points with indices l1 , l2 ∈ [1, Ns ] is calculated using the infinity norm, according to  max kde xl1 (λi ) − de xl2 (λi ) k, kde y l1 (λj ) − de y l2 (λj ) k . Let l denote the  distance between the data sample de xl (λi ) , de y i (λj ) and its K th nearest neighbor, for l = 1, 2, · · · , Ns . We used K = 3 in this paper [30]. Let e (λi ) and nlx and nly denote the number of samples of dX e dY (λj ) within an infinity norm ball of radius less than l centered at de xl (λi ) and de y i (λj ) respectively. From [38], the MI-in-frequency between X and Y at normalized frequencies λi and λj is given by c XY (λi , λj ) = ψ (K) + ψ (Ns ) MI Ns   P − N1s ψ nlx + 1 + ψ nly + 1 , (10) l=1  where ψ (·) is the Digamma function.  of independence. The permuted MI estimates will be almost zero since the permutations make the spectral processes almost c XY (λi , λj ), is independent. If the actual MI estimate, MI judged larger than all the permuted Np estimates, then there is a statistically significant dependence between the processes at these frequencies.  V. MI BETWEEN DATA WITH T EMPORAL D EPENDENCIES We now use MI-in-frequency to estimate mutual information between dependent data. The data-driven MI estimator, summarized in Algorithm 1, takes in N samples of X and Y as input and outputs the mutual information between X and Y , Î (X; Y ), c XY (λi , λj ), where λi = i , λj = j , by estimating MI Nf Nf ∀ (i, j) such that i, j ∈ [0, Nf − 1]. Algorithm 1: Mutual Information Estimator Data: (x [n] , y [n]), for x [n] , y [n] ∈ R, n ∈ [0, N − 1]. Result: Î (X; Y ) Algorithm: c XY (λi , λj ) at all possible pairs (λi ,λj ), A) Estimate MI using either the KDMIF or the NNMIF estimator. Identify the sets Λx , Λy , such that for each λip ∈ Λx  c XY λi , λj is there exists a λjq ∈ Λy such that MI p q statistically significant and vice-versa. Let P, Q respectively denote the cardinality of Λx , Λy .   e (Λx ) = dX e (λi ) , · · · , dX e (λi ) ∈ R2P , B) Let dX 1    P 2Q dYe (Λy ) = dYe (λj1 ) , · · · , dYe λjQ ∈ R . The mutual information between X and Y is given by   1 e (Λx ) ; dYe (Λy ) , Î dX Î (X; Y ) = max(P,Q) where the right hand side is estimated from Ns i.i.d. samples using any nonparametric MI estimator [32].  A. Identifying Coupled Frequencies  The first step in our MI estimator involves estimating the c XY (λi , λj ), between λi = i frequency MI-in-frequency, MI Nf C. Significance Testing component in X and λj = Njf component in Y , for all The statistical significance of the MI-in-frequency estimates (i, j) such that i, j ∈ [0, Nf − 1] using either the KDMIF obtained from both KDMIF and NNMIF estimators is now (section IV-A) or the NNMIF (section IV-B) algorithms. tested using the following procedure. We permute the samples Statistical significance of the resulting estimates is assessed in the vector de x (λi ) randomly and estimate the MI-in- using the procedure described in section IV-C. The resultant frequency between the permuted vector and the Ns samples MI-in-frequency estimates across all frequency pairs can be of dYe (λj ). Instead of adding random phase or permuting graphically visualized by plotting the statistically significant the phase time series, which are typically used to test the MI-in-frequency estimates on a two-dimensional image grid, statistical significance of phase-amplitude coupling metrics whose rows and columns correspond to frequencies of X and [40], we permute the samples of spectral process increments Y respectively. Let Λx and Λy respectively denote the set since our metric can detect coupling across phase and amplitude of frequency components of X and Y , such that for each exists at least one λjq ∈ Λy for which jointly. This process is repeated Np times to obtain Np λip ∈ Λx , there  c XY λi , λj is statistically significant and vice-versa. permuted MI-in-frequency estimates, under the null hypothesis MI p q  6  B. Estimating Mutual Information The final step in our algorithm estimates MI between the spectral process increments of X and Y at frequencies in Λx and Λy respectively. With P, Q denoting the cardinality of e (Λx ) and dYe (Λy ) denote the 2P Λx , Λy respectively, let dX and 2Q-dimensional random vector comprising the spectral process increments of X, Y at all frequencies in Λx and Λy respectively. We already computed Ns i.i.d. samples of these two random vectors to estimate MI-in-frequency estimates in the previous step of this algorithm. The desired MI estimate e (Λx ) is computed from the mutual information between dX and dYe (Λy ), which is estimated using the k-nearest neighbor based estimator developed in [38], according to   1 e (Λx ) ; dYe (Λy ) . Î (X; Y ) = Î dX (11) max (P, Q) The MI estimator in (11) can be further simplified for discrete-time Gaussian processes. Without loss of generality, consider two Gaussian processes X and Y , related by y[n] = h1 [n] ∗ x[n] + h2 [n] ∗ w[n],  (12)  Finally, as we mentioned earlier, MI estimation between Gaussian processes is a solved problem in the sense that we can analytically compute it if the covariance of the Gaussian processes is known [3] and there are several estimators whose performance is thoroughly analyzed [4]. MI in frequency for Gaussian processes is analyzed by Brillinger [24]. In this paper, we extended Brillinger’s work to define MI-in-frequency for any process. In the following section, we use simulated data to validate that the extensions we proposed to any process in this paper are still in agreement with the prior work on Gaussian processes and also work for non-Gaussian processes. VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION ON S IMULATED DATA The performance of the data-driven MI-in-frequency and mutual information estimators described in section IV and section V respectively is validated on simulated data. The statistical significance of the estimates was assessed using the procedure described in section IV-C. In addition, we compare the performance of the MI-in-frequency estimators against modulation index [8], [9], [22], a commonly used phaseamplitude coupling metric in neuroscience.  where h1 [n], h2 [n] are linear time-invariant (LTI) filters and W is white Gaussian noise independent of X. For the model A. Comparing the KDMIF and NNMIF Estimators Consider two stochastic processes X and Y , where X is a in (12), which is the discrete-time equivalent of (4), the datawhite Gaussian process with standard deviation σx and Y is driven estimation in (11) can be further simplified to obtained by NP f /2 1 i c Î (X; Y ) = Nf MIXY (λi ; λi ) , where λi = Nf . (13) y[n] = h[n] ∗ x[n] + w[n], (15) i=0  This result is obtained because linear models do not introduce where W is a white Gaussian process with standard deviation cross-frequency dependencies and because negative frequencies σw that is independent of X and h[n] is a linear time-invariant do not carry any extra information. Furthermore, the relation- filter. We compared the performance of the kernel density ship between the MI and the MI-in-frequency for two processes based and nearest neighbor based estimators by benchmarking the estimates against the true value of MI-in-frequency and related by (12) is stated in the following theorem. the mutual information between X and Y for the model in Theorem 4. Consider two discrete-time Gaussian stochastic (15). We used two different filers: a two-tap low pass filter, processes X and Y related by (12). The mutual information h[n] = [β, 1 − β] , for β ∈ [0, 1] and a 33-tap bandpass filter between these processes, a scalar, is given by with passband in [0.15, 0.35] normalized frequency range. We 0.5 observed that modulation index, a popular CFC metric, was R I (X; Y ) = MIXY (λ, λ) dλ. (14) unable to correctly detect and quantify the strength of cross0 frequency coupling for both these models. The proof of the above theorem is in the appendix. This 1) Lowpass Filter: The samples of X and Y are generated theorem means that MI between two Gaussian processes over from (15) with σx = σw = 1 and a lowpass filter with unitthe entire time can be obtained by integrating the contribution impulse response [β, 1 − β], for various values of β ∈ [0, 1]. from each frequency component. It is easy to see that the right The true value of MI-in-frequency at normalized frequency hand side of (13) is just the Riemann sum of the integral on the λ ∈ [0, 0.5] is obtained substituting the parameters of this right hand side of (14), which converges to the true value as model in (7) and is plotted in Fig. 1a for β = 0.5. In addition, Nf tends to infinity. This implies our MI estimator converges the MI-in-frequency estimated by the KDMIF and NNMIF to the true value for discrete-time Gaussian processes. algorithms from N = 64 × 104 data samples, with Nf = Note that the MI estimation algorithm does not make any 64, Ns = 104 is also plotted in Fig. 1a. It is seen that the parametric assumptions on the underlying model between estimates from both algorithms follow the true value closely, X and Y . The computation of MI via (11) can be greatly without the knowledge of the underlying model. In addition, simplified by clustering the frequencies in Λx and Λy into we evaluate the bias and the rate of convergence of both these groups such that there are no significant dependencies across algorithms as a function of Ns , with Nf = 64 in Fig. 1b. groups and using the chain rule of mutual information. In The bias is defined as the average value of the ratio of MI-inaddition, if we observe after the first step that significant MI  frequency estimate and its true value in the passband of the in-frequency estimates occur only at (λi , λi ) ,∀i ∈ 0, Nf − 1 , lowpass filter. We observe that the NNMIF algorithm converges then the MI can be estimated using (13). faster and has lower bias than the KDMIF algorithm. We now  1  0.8 KDMIF NNMIF  0  0  0.25  0.6 102  0.5  103  Mutual Information  True Value KDMIF NNMIF 0.35  0.36  1.1  0.7  Bias  MI between X and Y at 6  7  True Value Kernel Density Based Nearest Neighbor Based  0.26  0.16 0  104  0.5  Number of Samples, Ns  6  (a) MI-in-frequency  1  -  (b) Bias of the Estimators  (c) Mutual Information  KDMIF NNMIF  True Value KDMIF NNMIF 0  0.25  6  (a) MI-in-frequency  0.8  0.5  0.6 102  103  Number of Samples, Ns (b) Bias of the Estimators  104  Mutual Information  0.4  0  0.4  1  0.8  Bias  MI between X and Y at 6  Fig. 1. Comparing the performance of the kernel density based and nearest neighbor based estimators, KDMIF and NNMIF respectively, on simulated generated from (15) using a two-tap lowpass filter. In Fig. 1a, the MI-in-frequency estimates obtained from KDMIF and NNMIF estimators along with the true value of MI-in-frequency are plotted against the normalized frequency λ for β = 0.5. Fig. 1b plots the bias (mean of the ratio of the estimate and the true value in the filter passband) against the number of data samples used for estimation for β = 0.5. Fig. 1c plots the MI estimate between X and Y obtained from kernel density and nearest neighbor algorithms along with the true value of MI for β ∈ [0, 1].  True Value Kernel Density Based Nearest Neighbor Based  0.2  0  0.5  1  1.5  2  <w (c) Mutual Information  Fig. 2. Comparing the performance of the kernel density based and nearest neighbor based estimators, KDMIF and NNMIF respectively, on simulated generated from (15) using a 33-tap bandpass filter with passband in [0.15, 0.35] normalized frequency. In Fig. 2a, the MI-in-frequency estimates obtained from KDMIF and NNMIF estimators along with the true value of MI-in-frequency are plotted against the normalized frequency λ for σw = 1. Fig. 2b plots the bias (mean of the ratio of the estimate and the true value in the filter passband) against the number of data samples used for estimation for σw = 1. Fig. 2c plots the plots the MI estimate between X and Y from kernel density and nearest neighbor algorithms along with the true value of MI for different values of σw ∈ [0.5, 2].  use both these algorithms to estimate the mutual information and Y , as evident from Fig. 2a, Fig 2c respectively. In addition, between X and Y for β ∈ [0, 1]. The analytical expression for nearest neighbor based MI-in-frequency algorithm runs faster the true value of MI1 for this model is derived in [41]. It is than kernel density based algorithm. We, therefore, conclude evident from Fig. 1c that the MI estimates obtained from the that the nearest neighbor based MI-in-frequency algorithm nearest neighbor based estimator is closer to the true value outperforms kernel density based algorithms and only depict than those from the kernel density based estimator. the results obtained from nearest neighbor based algorithm in 2) Bandpass Filter: The samples of X are generated from the remainder of the paper. a standard white Gaussian random process with σx = 1 and those of Y are generated from (15) using a 33-tap finite- B. Comparison with Modulation Index impulse-response bandpass filter with passband in [0.15, 0.35] We now compare the effectiveness of MI-in-frequency normalized frequency range for different values of noise against modulation index in detecting cross-frequency coupling, standard deviation, σw ∈ [0.5, 2]. We used the kernel density using the simulated model commonly used to validate CFC and the nearest neighbor based algorithms to estimate the MImetrics [21], [22], [42]. Modulation index quantifies the relain-frequency and the mutual information between X and Y . tionship between the phase and amplitude envelopes extracted The true value of MI-in-frequency is obtained from (7) and by the Hilbert transform [8]. Consider two random cosine of mutual information is numerically calculated using power waves, sl [n] and sh [n], at frequencies fl and fh respectively. spectral density (chapter 10 in [34]). It is clear from Fig. 2b Let fs denote the sampling frequency. The samples of timethat the nearest neighbor based algorithm converges to the true series X and Y are generated from the following model: value faster than the kernel density based algorithm. The nearest     neighbor based algorithm also provides more accurate estimates sl [n] = A cos 2π fl n + θ , sh [n] = A cos 2π fh n + θ fs fs of both MI-in-frequency and mutual information between X x[n] = sl [n] + w1 [n], y[n] = (1 + sl [n]) sh [n] + w2 [n], (16) 1 Note that for this particular model, mutual information is equal to the directed information from X to Y and the analytical expression is given in equation (18) in [41].  where A is a Rayleigh random variable with parameter 1 and θ is a uniformly distributed random variable between 0 and  45  1.2  60 75 90 5 15  30  45  60  75  90  30 45  0.24  60 75 90  0  5 15  Frequency of X (Hz)  30  45  60  75  90  2.4  5 15 30 45  1.2  60 75 90  0  5 15  Frequency of X (Hz)  (a) MI-in-frequency  30  45  60  75  90  0  Frequency of X (Hz)  (b) Modulation Index  Frequency of Y (Hz)  30  0.48  5 15  Frequency of Y (Hz)  2.4  5 15  Frequency of Y (Hz)  Frequency of Y (Hz)  8  0.048  5 15 30 45  0.024  60 75 90 5 15  30  45  60  75  90  0  Frequency of X (Hz)  (c) MI-in-frequency  (d) Modulation Index  4 8  1.1  12 16 0  4  8  12  16  6j (#2!5 cycles=sample) c Y Y (λi , λj ) (a) MI  0  4.4  0 4 8  2.2  12 16 0  4  8  12  16  6j (#2!5 cycles=sample) c XY (λi , λj ) (b) MI  0  Mutual Information  2.2  0  6i (#2!5 cycles=sample)  6i (#2!5 cycles=sample)  Fig. 3. Comparing the performance of MI-in-frequency against modulation index in detecting cross-frequency coupling in data generated from (16). In Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b, MI-in-frequency estimates obtained from nearest neighbor algorithm and modulation index are plotted respectively, when fl = 5 Hz and fh = 60 Hz in (16). Fig. 3c and Fig. 3d respectively plot the MI-in-frequency estimates and modulation index estimates, when fl = 15 Hz and fh = 60 Hz in (16).  2.8  1c MIXY 2  (60 ; 260 ) ^I (X; Y ) 1.6  0.4 0  5  10  <w (c) MI between X and Y  Fig. 4. (a) MI-in-frequency estimates from the nearest neighbor based algorithm between the frequency components within the random processes Y , obtained from the single cosine data-generation model, (18) with σw = 1. Note that the MI-in-frequency estimates along the principal diagonal are not plotted, since they are equal to ∞. (b) MI-in-frequency estimates between random processes X and Y related by the single cosine data-generation model with σw = 1. It is clear that MI-in-frequency estimator correctly identifies the pairwise frequency dependencies. (c) MI-in-frequency between X at λ0 and Y at 2λ0 , c XY (λ0 , 2λ0 ), obtained from (10) along with the MI estimate between X and Y , Î (X; Y ), obtained from Algorithm 1 for various values of the noise MI standard deviation, σw .  2π that is independent of A. w1 [n], w2 [n] are samples of i.i.d estimated CFC (note the smearing in Fig. 3d, when compared to white Gaussian noise process with standard deviation 1. We Fig. 3b) [22], [42]. In addition, we tested modulation index on generated samples from this model with fl = 5 Hz, fh = 60 data generated from (15) and (17) and found that modulation Hz and fs = 200 Hz. MI-in-frequency between X and Y is index is unable to detect the cross-frequency coupling for these estimated using the nearest neighbor based algorithm from relationships. This is not surprising since the modulation index N = 40 × 104 samples with Ns = 104 and plotted in Fig. 3a. like metrics are tuned to detect CFC when the underlying Modulation index between X and Y estimated by using the coupling is of the form in (16), whereas the MI-in-frequency Matlab toolbox [21], with the amplitude envelope estimated defined in this paper overcomes this shortcoming, as evident by the Hilbert transform and is plotted in Fig. 3b. It is clear from its performance on various simulated models. that both MI-in-frequency and modulation index successfully detect the cross-frequency coupling between 5 Hz component C. Nonlinear Models of X and {55, 60, 65} Hz components of Y for these parameter We now consider square nonlinearity, where the random values. We then generated X and Y from (16) with fl = 15 processes X and Y are related by Hz and all other parameter values unchanged. Fig. 3c plots the y[n] = x[n]2 + w[n], (17) MI-in-frequency estimates obtained via NNMIF algorithm and as expected, we detect the CFC between 15 Hz component of where w[n] is white Gaussian noise with standard deviation X and {45, 60, 75} Hz components of Y . However, modulation σw . Modulation index was not able to detect and quantify index, depicted in Fig. 3d, was not able to correctly detect the the cross-frequency coupling for this model. We estimated CFC between X and Y for these parameter values. In addition, the MI-in-frequency between frequency components within Y , the strength of the modulation index decreased from around c MIY Y (λi , λj ), between the frequency components of X and 0.5 when fl = 5 Hz in Fig. 3b to 0.05 when fl = 15 Hz in c XY (λi , λj ), and the mutual information between X and Y , MI Fig. 3d. This is because metrics like modulation index can only Y , Î (X; Y ), from N = 32 × 104 samples of X and Y with detect the CFC correctly with good frequency resolution only Ns = 104 , for different values of noise standard deviation, when one of the frequencies involved is very small compared σw ∈ [0, 10]. Computing the true value of MI-in-frequency and to the other frequency. Otherwise, the bandwidth of the filter mutual information is nontrivial because of the nonlinearity. The used to extract the phase and the amplitude envelope should performance of the algorithms is assessed by checking if they be larger, which will reduce the frequency resolution in the detect the cross-frequency coupling at expected frequency pairs  4 8  0.9  12 16 0  4  8  12  !5  16  0  1  4.4  0 4 8  2.2  12 16 0  4  8  12  !5  16  6j (#2 cycles=sample)  6j (#2 cycles=sample)  c Y Y (λi , λj ) (a) MI  c XY (λi , λj ) (b) MI  0  Mutual Information  1.8  0  6i (#2!5 cycles=sample)  6i (#2!5 cycles=sample)  9  ^I (X; Y )  0.6  0.2 0  5  10  <w (c) MI between X and Y  Fig. 5. (a) MI-in-frequency estimates from the nearest neighbor based algorithm between the frequency components within the random processes Y , obtained from the two cosine data-generation model, (19). The MI-in-frequency estimates are not plotted along the diagonal, since they are equal to ∞. (b) MI-in-frequency estimates between random processes X and Y related by the two cosine data-generation model. It is clear that MI-in-frequency estimator correctly identifies the pairwise frequency dependencies between X and Y . (c) Î (X; Y ), the MI estimate between X and Y obtained from Algorithm 1 for various values of the noise standard deviation, σw . 4 6 A1 , A2 , and λ1 = 32 . As before, the frequency , λ2 = 32 components of X are statistically independent. However, after some basic algebra, it is easy to see that the all possible pairs of frequency components of Y in {0, λ2 − λ1 , 2λ1 , λ2 + λ1 , 2λ2 } 1) Random Cosine with Squared Nonlinearity: The samples are statistically dependent, except for (2λ1 , 2λ2 ) frequency pair, and we expect to see statistically significant MI-in-frequency of X are generated from a random cosine wave, estimates between these frequency components. This is conx[n] = A cos (2πλ0 n + θ) , (18) firmed by Fig. 5a, which plots the MI-in-frequency estimates within Y , generated with σw = 1 and obtained by the NNMIF where A is a Rayleigh random variable with parameter 1, algorithm. The pairwise frequency dependencies between X θ is a uniform random variable between 0 and 2π that is and Y occur at (λ1 , 0), (λ1 , λ2 − λ1 ), (λ1 , 2λ1 ), (λ1 , λ2 + λ1 ), 4 independent of A and λ0 = 32 . It is easy to see that frequency (λ2 , 0), (λ2 , λ2 − λ1 ), (λ2 , λ2 + λ1 ) and (λ2 , 2λ2 ). Fig. 5b components of X are statistically independent and this is plots the estimates of pairwise MI-in-frequency between X confirmed by the NNMIF estimator. However, because of and Y generated with σw = 1 and obtained by the datathe square nonlinearity in (17), the DC component of Y and driven NNMIF algorithm using (10). The algorithm correctly the 2λ0 component of Y will be statistically dependent and identifies all the dependent frequency pairs and P = 2, Q = 5. this is confirmed by Fig. 4a, which plots the MI-in-frequency We then apply the algorithm described in section V and plot between components of Y generated with σw = 1 using the estimates the MI for different values of noise standard the NNMIF algorithm. The common information between deviation σw in Fig. 5c. Again, the MI decreases with increasing these two processes will be present between λ0 component of noise power, as expected. These different models validate X and the {0, 2λ0 } components of Y . This cross-frequency the superiority of MI-in-frequency over other existing metrics dependence is confirmed by Fig. 4b, which plots the estimates to detect cross-frequency coupling and also demonstrate the of MI-in-frequency between X and Y obtained by the NNMIF performance and accuracy of the data-driven MI-in-frequency algorithm from (10): we observe that significant dependencies and MI estimators. occur only at (λ0 , 0) and (λ0 , 2λ0 ) frequency pairs. As a result, P = 1, Q MI estimate from  = 2. The  Algorithm 1,  VII. CFC IN S EIZURE O NSET Z ONE 1 e e e Î (X; Y ) = 2 Î dX(λ0 ); dY (0), dY (2λ0 ) is plotted in Epilepsy is a common neurological disorder characterized Fig. 4c. The MI estimate decreases with increasing σw as by repeated, unprovoked seizures. The seizure onset zone expected. In addition, we note for this model that the DC (SOZ) comprises regions of the brain that are responsible for component of Y does not contain any extra information about generating and sustaining seizures [3]. Surgical resection of the X,given the 2λ0 component of  Y . Therefore, we expect  seizure onset zone is the prescribed treatment for a large portion 1 1 e e e c XY (λ0 ; 2λ0 ), a re= 2 MI 2 Î dX(λ0 ); dY (0), dY (2λ0 ) of medically refractory epilepsy patients with focal epilepsy. sult verified in Fig. 4c, since the two curves are very close. However, surgical resection risks damage to critical functional 2) Two Random Cosines with Squared Nonlinearity: The zones that are frequently adjacent or even overlapping with samples of random process X are generated according to the seizure focus, depending on location of the focus [45]. An ideal solution might be a closed-loop neuromodulation strategy x[n] = A1 cos (2πλ1 n + θ1 ) + A2 cos (2πλ2 n + θ2 ) , (19) that stimulates the epileptic [41], [46] and other networks [47] where A1 , A2 are independent Rayleigh random variables at the optimal frequency with spatial and temporal specificity with parameter 1, θ1 , θ2 are independent uniformly distributed [6], [7]. In this paper, we focus on learning more about the random variables between 0 and 2π that are independent of characteristic frequencies and the spatial specificity of epileptic  and by checking if the mutual information estimates decrease with increasing noise power as expected. We considered two different models for the stochastic process X, such that its samples are dependent across time.  10  TABLE I C LINICAL D ETAILS OF THE PATIENTS A NALYZED .  Patient  Number of Seizures Analyzed  Age/Sex  P1  3  22/M  P2  3  61/M  P3  2  29/M  P4  3  21/F  P5  3  24/M  P6  3  35/M  P7  3  26/M  P8  3  41/M  P9  2  18/F  Seizure Onset Zone RAH 1-2, RPH 4, RAMY 2-3 LAH 2-4, LPH 2 PD 4, 5 LF 28, LP 4 MST 1, TP 1, HD 1 LPH 5, 6, LPSM 8, LMH 5, RMH 4, 5, RPSM 7 AH 3-5, PH 4 AMY 2, 3 AH 1, 2, 5, PH 5 TOP 3, 4 LAH 5, LAMY 3 RAH 3-5, LPH 6, RPH 5-7  Outcome of Surgery Class IA Class IIIA Class IA Class IA Class IB Class IA Class IIB N/A Class IB  The full forms of the electrodes in seizure onset zone column in Table I: RAH - right anterior hippocampus, RPH - right posterior hippocampus, RAMY - right amygdala, PD - posterior hippocampal depth, MST - mid-subtemporal lobe, TP - temporopolar, HD - hippocampal depth and AST - anterior sub-temporal lobe, LMH - left mid hippocampus, AH - anterior hippocampus, PH - posterior hippocampus, AMY - amygdala, TOP - temporo-occipito-parietal. The outcomes are in Engel epilepsy surgery outcome scale [43], [44]: “Class IA - completely seizure free since surgery, class IB - non disabling simple partial seizures only since surgery, class IIB - rare disabling seizures since surgery (‘almost seizure-free’), class IIIA - worthwhile seizure reduction, class IV - no worthwhile improvement".  networks. Specifically, we investigate cross-frequency coupling between various regions in the seizure onset zone during the evolution of seizures and identify the frequencies with strong coupling. We estimate the cross-frequency coupling (CFC) from ECoG data recorded from the SOZ electrodes using our nearest neighbor based MI-in-frequency estimator. We infer the characteristics of CFC within and between various regions inside the seizure onset zone. We analyzed ECoG data, sampled at Fs = 1 kHz, from a total of 25 seizures recorded from nine patients with medial temporal lobe epilepsy. Clinical details of the patients, along with the seizure onset zone identified from ECoG data [41], are summarized in Table I. The seizure start and end time were marked by the neurologist. We analyzed ECoG recordings from SOZ electrodes during preictal (window spanning up to 3 minutes immediately before the seizure starts), ictal (during seizures) and postictal (window spanning up to 3 minutes immediately after the seizure ends) periods. We only focussed on the oscillations in alpha (7.5-12.5 Hz), beta (12.5 - 30 Hz), gamma (30-80 Hz) and ripples (80-200 Hz), excluding 60 Hz line noise and its harmonics. The CFC oscillations are analyzed at spectral resolution of 10 Hz by choosing Nf = 100, and the exact frequencies considered are {10, 20, · · · , 200} Hz, excluding {60, 120, 180} Hz. The resulting 17×17 CFC matrix from each ECoG electrode and between all pairs of ECoG electrodes in the SOZ is estimated using nearest neighbor based estimator (section IV-B) during preictal, ictal and postictal periods during all the twenty five seizures.  1 5 7 11 13 17 19 20 1  5 7  1113  171920  Fig. 6. Binary mask plotting the frequency pairs with statistically significant differences across ahypotheses tested after applying false discovery rate correction. White and black colored regions represent frequency pairs with and without statistically significant variation respectively.  CFC within a SOZ electrode, between two electrodes in the same anatomical region and between electrodes in different anatomical regions. For instance, consider patient P1. ECoG electrodes in the SOZ of patient P1 are grouped into three different anatomical regions–RAH, RPH, and RAMY (Table I). We estimated 5 CFC matrices, one per SOZ electrode, to infer the average CFC within an electrode in SOZ in this patient. We estimated 20 CFC matrices between all pairs of electrodes in the SOZ. Of these, 4 CFC matrices (2 to learn the CFC between the 2 SOZ electrodes in RAH and 2 to learn the CFC between the 2 SOZ electrodes in RAMY regions) are grouped to learn the average CFC between electrodes in the same We then grouped the ECoG electrodes into distinct anatom- anatomical region in SOZ. The remaining 16 CFC matrices are ical regions based on their label and analyzed the average grouped to learn the CFC between different regions inside the  11  1.9  1 5 7  0.7  1 5 7  1  11 13 17 19 20 1  57  1113  171920  0.2  (a) Preictal period  0.4  1 5 7  0.3 11 13  -0.2  11 13  17 19 20 1  57  1113  171920  -0.2  (b) Difference between ictal and preictal period  17 19 20 1  57  1113  171920  -0.8  (c) Difference between postictal and ictal period  Fig. 7. Cross-frequency coupling within an electrode inside the seizure onset zone. In Fig. 7a, MI-in-frequency estimates over the frequencies {10, 20, · · · , 200} Hz excluding {60, 120, 180} Hz are obtained from each electrode in SOZ during preictal period and the median of the resulting CFC estimates from all the SOZ electrodes in the twenty five seizures from the nine temporal lobe epilepsy patients analyzed is plotted. In Fig. 7b, MI-in-frequency estimates are obtained from each electrode in SOZ in the ictal period and the difference between the median CFC estimate in ictal and preictal period is plotted. Similarly, Fig. 7c plots the difference in the median CFC between postictal and ictal periods.  0.1  1 5 7  0.2  1 5 7  0.05  11 13 17 19 20 1  57  1113  171920  (a) Preictal period  0  0.26  1 5 7  0.1  11 13 17 19 20 1  57  1113  171920  0  (b) Difference between ictal and preictal period  0.13  11 13 17 19 20 1  57  1113  171920  0  (c) Difference between postictal and ictal period  Fig. 8. Cross-frequency coupling between electrodes in different regions inside the seizure onset zone. In Fig. 8a, MI-in-frequency estimates over the frequencies {10, 20, · · · , 200} Hz excluding {60, 120, 180} Hz are obtained between electrodes in different SOZ regions during the preictal period and the median of the resulting CFC estimates from the twenty five seizures in the nine temporal lobe epilepsy patients analyzed is plotted. In Fig. 8b, MI-in-frequency estimates are obtained between electrodes in different SOZ regions from the ictal period and the difference between the median CFC estimate from the ictal and preictal period is plotted. Similarly, Fig. 8c plots the difference in the median CFC between postictal and ictal periods.  SOZ. The estimated CFC matrices are grouped into these three spatial categories for all the nine patients during preictal, ictal and postictal periods. We only presented the results for CFC within a SOZ electrode and between electrodes in different SOZ regions during preictal, ictal and postictal periods.  level of 0.01 to account for multiple comparisons [49]. The frequency pairs with significant statistical variation across all the hypotheses considered are depicted using a binary mask in Fig. 6, in which black and white colored regions respectively represent frequency pairs without statistically significant variation and with statistically significant variation. Lack of statistical significance at the black regions in Fig. 6 could be because of insufficient data or could be due to a neuronal transition mechanism as the brain moves from preictal to ictal to postictal state. It is important to note that if we tested only a subset of the thirteen hypotheses, then some of the frequency pairs in black colored regions in Fig. 6 could become statistically significant.  We used the permutation procedure outlined in section IV-C to estimate the CFC under the null hypothesis and assess the significance of the estimated CFC values across the six conditions considered (CFC during preictal, ictal, postictal periods within a SOZ electrode and between electrodes in different SOZ regions) using Wilcoxon signed-rank test [48]. We also used the Wilcoxon signed-rank test to identify the frequency pairs with significant variation in CFC between preictal and ictal periods and between ictal and postictal periods, The median CFC within an electrode in SOZ during preictal, both within a SOZ electrode and between electrodes in different ictal and postictal periods grouped across all twenty five SOZ regions (four hypotheses in total). In addition, we used seizures in nine patients analyzed is plotted in Fig. 7. In the Mann-Whitney U-test [48] to identify frequency pairs Fig. 7a, median CFC in the preictal period is plotted, while the with significant changes in CFC within a SOZ electrode and difference between median CFC in the ictal and preictal period, between electrodes in different SOZ regions across preictal, and between postictal and ictal period is plotted in Fig. 7b ictal and postictal periods (three hypotheses in total). We and Fig. 7c respectively. We need to multiply the binary mask estimated 3621 p-values in total (13 × 17 × 16 + 5 × 17) in Fig. 6 with the plots in Fig.7 to obtain frequency pairs and applied false discovery rate correction at a significance with significant statistical variation. The (i, j)th element in  12  the matrix in Fig. 7a is the median MI-in-frequency between the 10i and 10j Hz frequency components during preictal period across all SOZ electrodes in the twenty five seizures analyzed. The principal diagonal in the three CFC matrices is not plotted since MI-in-frequency between same frequencies in a signal is infinity. It is clear from this figure that ripple frequencies are heavily synchronized during preictal stage within an electrode in SOZ. The synchronization between all frequency pairs, particularly in gamma and ripples, seemed to increase during the seizure when compared to just before the seizure. And finally, the synchronization between highfrequency bands decreased, and low frequencies become more synchronized amongst themselves and with high-frequencies in the postictal period compared to the ictal period within an electrode in SOZ. The median CFC between electrodes in different SOZ regions grouped across all twenty five seizures in nine patients analyzed is plotted in Fig. 8. We need to multiply the binary mask in Fig. 6 with the plots in Fig. 8 to obtain frequency pairs with significant statistical variation. The median CFC during the preictal period is plotted in Fig. 8a. It is clear from the principal diagonal that neighboring regions in SOZ have weak linear interactions (possibly due to their spatial proximity) just before a seizure starts. From Fig. 7a and Fig. 8a, it is clear that the CFC strength is much lower between regions when compared to within an electrode. From Fig. 8b, we observe a small increase in CFC between regions as the brain transitions to seizure state. However, the increase is much smaller between regions when compared to the increase observed in Fig. 7b, which suggests that different SOZ regions potentially drive the rest of the brain into a seizure state independently, which implies any non-surgical treatment should target these different regions simultaneously to disrupt the epileptic network. As the brain transitions to postictal state, we observe a sharp increase in linear coupling between electrodes in different SOZ regions, which suggests that postictal periods, unlike ictal periods, are characterized by an increase in linear interactions. These results highlight the role of gamma and ripple highfrequency oscillations (HFOs) during seizures and the dynamic reorganization of synchronization between neuronal oscillations inside the seizure onset zone during the course of a seizure. These results also suggest that multiple regions inside the seizure onset zone might have to be targeted simultaneously using neuromodulation techniques to control seizure activity. VIII. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSIONS Detecting and quantifying relationships between multiple data streams recorded from a physical system is of interest in many science and engineering disciplines. However, since the underlying model is often unknown and nonlinear, detecting and quantifying the relationships in data is very challenging in most real-world applications. Brownian distance covariance [50], maximal information coefficient [51] are some of the recent works that attempt to overcome this challenge in the most general case. Furthermore, in neuroscience, we are also interested in decomposing the relationships in frequency domain and estimating cross-frequency coupling (CFC) from  electrophysiological recordings. Motivated to understand nonlinear frequency coupling in electrophysiological recordings from the brain and inspired by [26], we defined MI-in-frequency between stochastic processes that are not necessarily Gaussian and estimated it using data-driven estimators. We found that the nearest neighbor based MI-in-frequency estimator outperforms the kernel-based MI-in-frequency estimator. MI-in-frequency can be thought of as ‘coherence’ for non-Gaussian signals. At a first glance, CFC could be estimated by first filtering the data into appropriate frequency bands and then applying the techniques in [21], [50], [51]. However, [22] summarizes all the caveats and confounds in estimating CFC using this approach. In contrast, the MI-in-frequency metric estimates CFC without explicitly band-pass filtering the data into appropriate frequency bands. We then compared the performance of MI-in-frequency against modulation index [8], [21], a popular CFC metric used to measure phase-amplitude coupling that involves bandpass filtering, on simulated data and observed that MI-in-frequency outperforms the existing metrics used to estimate CFC. The main advantages of the MI-in-frequency approach over existing methods to estimate CFC are that it detects statistical independence, detects dependencies across phase and amplitude jointly, applies to linear and nonlinear dependencies, and is not dependent on parameters like the filter bandwidth. Our approach will need more data when compared with coherence since MIin-frequency detects both linear and nonlinear dependencies in frequency. From the simulation results on linear models, we need about 103 samples to be within 10% of the true value. For the ECoG data sampled at 1 kHz and a desired spectral resolution of 10 Hz, this implies the total number of data samples is of the order of 100 seconds or a couple of minutes, which is roughly the size of preictal, ictal and postictal windows used in section VII. In summary, we developed a metric to detect statistical independence in frequency which outperforms existing CFC metrics and for the first time, utilized frequency domain to estimate mutual information over time between dependent data. The MI-in-frequency metric can be further extended along several directions and some of them are outlined here. We can move to wavelet based analysis to improve the fixed time-frequency resolution of our Fourier-based approach in future work. The assumption of data stationarity in observation window (also assumed by most CFC metrics) can be potentially relaxed by utilizing time-frequency distributions and developing heuristics to measure the dependencies across frequency. However, the inherent trade-off involved is that we are not guaranteed to detect statistical independence. It is also possible to define and estimate conditional MI-in-frequency to eliminate indirect coupling estimated between two signals because of a third signal which is coupled to both. We then apply the MI-in-frequency estimators to infer the coupling between neuronal oscillations before, during and after seizures in the seizure onset zone. Spatially, we used the electrode labels to identify the different regions in the SOZ. This is just one possible way to analyze the spatial variation in CFC. Some of the other possible options include using the distance between electrodes or using the underlying neuronal  13  1.6  1 5 7  0.16  1 5 7  0.8  11 13 17 19 20 1  57  1113  171920  (a) Within a SOZ electrode  0.1  seizure activity and will serve as the first step towards the development of a patient-specific, closed-loop, non-surgical treatment for epilepsy.  0.08  11 13  IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  17 19 20 1  57  1113  171920  0  (b) Between electrodes in different SOZ regions  Fig. 9. Cross-frequency coupling during interictal periods. In Fig. 9a, MIin-frequency estimates over the frequencies {10, 20, · · · , 200} Hz excluding {60, 120, 180} Hz are obtained from each electrode in SOZ during interictal period and the median of the resulting CFC estimates from all the SOZ electrodes in patients P1 and P2 is plotted. In Fig. 9b, MI-in-frequency estimates over the frequencies {10, 20, · · · , 200} Hz excluding {60, 120, 180} Hz are obtained between electrodes in different SOZ regions during the interictal period and the median of the resulting CFC estimates in patients P1 and P2 is plotted.  cell types to split the electrodes into different regions in SOZ. Our MI-in-frequency metric provides a framework that can be utilized to learn the CFC characteristics for any desired spatial grouping. In addition, the frequency resolution of our estimated CFC was constant and wavelet transform, instead of Fourier transform, can be utilized to provide greater resolution at lower frequencies. We observed that the high-frequency synchronization within an ECoG electrode in SOZ increases during seizures and decreases immediately after the seizure, which is accompanied by an increase in low-frequency coupling. However, the coupling between different anatomical regions in SOZ does not increase noticeably during seizures and is also followed by a large increase in linear interactions immediately after a seizure. These observations suggest that seizure activity is characterized by nonlinear interactions and is potentially due to the independent efforts by various regions within SOZ, which implies that all these regions are potential spatial targets for electrical stimulation. Furthermore, we did a preliminary investigation to learn if there are the differences in CFC between interictal periods and seizure periods. Fig. 9 plots the CFC within an ECoG electrode and between ECoG electrodes in different regions in SOZ during interictal period in two patients (P1 and P2). Comparing Fig. 9 with Fig. 7a and Fig. 8a, it looks like the CFC within a SOZ electrodes at higher frequencies slightly increases, while CFC between electrodes in different regions across the diagonal (or equivalently, linear interactions) slightly decreases as the brain transitions from interictal to preitctal periods. We plan to extend this analysis to a larger patient cohort. Building a real-time seizure prediction system utilizing the variations in CFC between interictal and seizure periods is the focus of our current [52] and future work. In addition, the CFC characteristics were patient-specific and we presented the median CFC across all the patients considered. Going forward, the MI-in-frequency metric should be applied to infer the CFC between channels in SOZ and outside SOZ to learn how SOZ drives the rest of the brain into a seizure state in each epilepsy patient. The results from such an analysis will improve our understanding of the CFC mechanisms underlying  The authors wish to thank Suganya Karunakaran for the helpful discussions on statistical hypothesis testing and proofreading the manuscript. R EFERENCES [1] R. Malladi, D. H. Johnson, G. Kalamangalam, N. Tandon, and B. Aazhang, “Measuring cross-frequency coupling using mutual information and its application to epilepsy,” in Cosyne Abstracts, Salt Lake City, USA, 2017. [2] ——, “Data-driven estimation of mutual information using frequency domain and its application to epilepsy,” in Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, 2017. [3] H. O. Lüders, I. Najm, D. Nair, P. Widdess-Walsh, and W. Bingman, “The epileptogenic zone: general principles,” Epileptic Disorders, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1–9, 2006. [4] F. Rosenow and H. Lüders, “Presurgical evaluation of epilepsy,” Brain, vol. 124, no. 9, pp. 1683–1700, 2001. [5] G. K. Bergey, M. J. Morrell, E. M. Mizrahi, A. Goldman, D. KingStephens, D. Nair, S. Srinivasan, B. Jobst, R. E. Gross, D. C. Shields et al., “Long-term treatment with responsive brain stimulation in adults with refractory partial seizures,” Neurology, vol. 84, no. 8, pp. 810–817, 2015. [6] S. Sunderam, B. Gluckman, D. Reato, and M. Bikson, “Toward rational design of electrical stimulation strategies for epilepsy control,” Epilepsy & Behavior, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 6–22, 2010. [7] E. Krook-Magnuson and I. Soltesz, “Beyond the hammer and the scalpel: selective circuit control for the epilepsies,” Nature neuroscience, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 331–338, 2015. [8] R. T. Canolty, E. Edwards, S. S. Dalal, M. Soltani, S. S. Nagarajan, H. E. Kirsch, M. S. Berger, N. M. Barbaro, and R. T. Knight, “High gamma power is phase-locked to theta oscillations in human neocortex,” Science, vol. 313, no. 5793, pp. 1626–1628, 2006. [9] R. T. Canolty and R. T. Knight, “The functional role of cross-frequency coupling,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 506–515, 2010. [10] C. Alvarado-Rojas, M. Valderrama, A. Fouad-Ahmed, H. FeldwischDrentrup, M. Ihle, C. Teixeira, F. Sales, A. Schulze-Bonhage, C. Adam, A. Dourado et al., “Slow modulations of high-frequency activity (40–140 Hz) discriminate preictal changes in human focal epilepsy,” Scientific reports, vol. 4, 2014. [11] K. Edakawa, T. Yanagisawa, H. Kishima, R. Fukuma, S. Oshino, H. M. Khoo, M. Kobayashi, M. Tanaka, and T. Yoshimine, “Detection of epileptic seizures using phase–amplitude coupling in intracranial electroencephalography,” Scientific reports, vol. 6, 2016. [12] M. Guirgis, Y. Chinvarun, M. del Campo, P. L. Carlen, and B. L. Bardakjian, “Defining regions of interest using cross-frequency coupling in extratemporal lobe epilepsy patients,” Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 026011, 2015. [13] S. A. Weiss, A. Lemesiou, R. Connors, G. P. Banks, G. M. McKhann, R. R. Goodman, B. Zhao, C. G. Filippi, M. Nowell, R. Rodionov et al., “Seizure localization using ictal phase-locked high gamma a retrospective surgical outcome study,” Neurology, vol. 84, no. 23, pp. 2320–2328, 2015. [14] S. Liu, Z. Sha, A. Sencer, A. Aydoseli, N. Bebek, A. Abosch, T. Henry, C. Gurses, and N. F. Ince, “Exploring the time–frequency content of high frequency oscillations for automated identification of seizure onset zone in epilepsy,” Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 13, no. 2, p. 026026, 2016. [15] H. Zhou, Y. Li, Y.-L. Hsin, and W. Liu, “Phase-amplitude coupling analysis for seizure evolvement using Hilbert Huang transform,” in IEEE 38th Annual International Conference of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1022–1025. [16] R. Zhang, Y. Ren, C. Liu, N. Xu, X. Li, F. Cong, T. Ristaniemi, and Y. Wang, “Temporal-spatial characteristics of phase-amplitude coupling in electrocorticogram for human temporal lobe epilepsy,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 128, no. 9, pp. 1707–1718, 2017.  14  [17] M. Amiri, B. Frauscher, and J. Gotman, “Phase-amplitude coupling is elevated in deep sleep and in the onset zone of focal epileptic seizures,” Frontiers in human neuroscience, vol. 10, 2016. [18] M. Cotic, Y. Chinvarun, M. del Campo, P. L. Carlen, and B. L. Bardakjian, “Spatial coherence profiles of ictal high-frequency oscillations correspond to those of interictal low-frequency oscillations in the ecog of epileptic patients,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 76–85, 2016. [19] B. Frauscher, N. von Ellenrieder, F. Dubeau, and J. Gotman, “Different seizure-onset patterns in mesiotemporal lobe epilepsy have a distinct interictal signature,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 128, no. 7, pp. 1282– 1289, 2017. [20] L. Faes and G. Nollo, Multivariate frequency domain analysis of causal interactions in physiological time series. INTECH Open Access Publisher, 2011. [21] A. C. Onslow, R. Bogacz, and M. W. Jones, “Quantifying phase– amplitude coupling in neuronal network oscillations,” Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, vol. 105, no. 1, pp. 49–57, 2011. [22] J. Aru, J. Aru, V. Priesemann, M. Wibral, L. Lana, G. Pipa, W. Singer, and R. Vicente, “Untangling cross-frequency coupling in neuroscience,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology, vol. 31, pp. 51–61, 2015. [23] R. Pascual-Marqui, P. Faber, T. Kinoshita, Y. Kitaura, K. Kochi, P. Milz, K. Nishida, and M. Yoshimura, “The dual frequency RV-coupling coefficient: a novel measure for quantifying cross-frequency information transactions in the brain,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05343, 2016. [24] D. R. Brillinger, “Second-order moments and mutual information in the analysis of time series,” Recent Advances in Statistical Methods, pp. 64–76, 2002. [25] R. Salvador, A. Martinez, E. Pomarol-Clotet, J. Gomar, F. Vila, S. Sarro, A. Capdevila, and E. Bullmore, “A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure,” Neuroimage, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 279–289, 2008. [26] D. R. Brillinger and A. Guha, “Mutual information in the frequency domain,” Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, vol. 137, no. 3, pp. 1076–1084, 2007. [27] H. Cramér and M. Leadbetter, Stationary and related stochastic processes: sample function properties and their applications, ser. Wiley series in probability and mathematical statistics. Tracts on probability and statistics. Wiley, 1967. [28] H. J. Larson and B. O. Shubert, Probabilistic models in engineering sciences. Wiley, 1979, vol. 2. [29] D. R. Brillinger, Time Series: Data Analysis and Theory. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2001. [30] S. Khan, S. Bandyopadhyay, A. R. Ganguly, S. Saigal, D. J. Erickson III, V. Protopopescu, and G. Ostrouchov, “Relative performance of mutual information estimation methods for quantifying the dependence among short and noisy data,” Physical Review E, vol. 76, no. 2, p. 026209, 2007. [31] E. Schaffernicht, R. Kaltenhaeuser, S. S. Verma, and H.-M. Gross, “On estimating mutual information for feature selection,” in International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks. Springer, 2010, pp. 362–367. [32] Q. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and S. Verdú, “Universal estimation of information measures for analog sources,” Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 265–353, 2009. [33] M. Pinsker, Information and information stability of random variables and processes, ser. Holden-Day series in time series analysis. HoldenDay, 1964. [34] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons, 2012. [35] A. V. Oppenheim, R. W. Schafer, J. R. Buck et al., Discrete-time signal processing. Prentice Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989, vol. 2. [36] E. Pereda, R. Q. Quiroga, and J. Bhattacharya, “Nonlinear multivariate analysis of neurophysiological signals,” Progress in Neurobiology, vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 1–37, 2005. [37] D. W. Scott, Multivariate density estimation: theory, practice, and visualization. John Wiley & Sons, 2015. [38] A. Kraskov, H. Stögbauer, and P. Grassberger, “Estimating mutual information,” Physical Review E, vol. 69, no. 6, p. 066138, 2004. [39] T. Duong et al., “ks: Kernel density estimation and kernel discriminant analysis for multivariate data in R,” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 1–16, 2007. [40] D. Dvorak and A. A. Fenton, “Toward a proper estimation of phase– amplitude coupling in neural oscillations,” Journal of Neuroscience Methods, vol. 225, pp. 42–56, 2014.  [41] R. Malladi, G. Kalamangalam, N. Tandon, and B. Aazhang, “Identifying seizure onset zone from the causal connectivity inferred using directed information,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 1267–1283, Oct 2016. [42] J. I. Berman, J. McDaniel, S. Liu, L. Cornew, W. Gaetz, T. P. Roberts, and J. C. Edgar, “Variable bandwidth filtering for improved sensitivity of cross-frequency coupling metrics,” Brain Connectivity, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 155–163, 2012. [43] J. Engel, “Update on surgical treatment of the epilepsies summary of the second international palm desert conference on the surgical treatment of the epilepsies (1992),” Neurology, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1612–1612, 1993. [44] C. Tonini, E. Beghi, A. T. Berg, G. Bogliun, L. Giordano, R. W. Newton, A. Tetto, E. Vitelli, D. Vitezic, and S. Wiebe, “Predictors of epilepsy surgery outcome: a meta-analysis,” Epilepsy Research, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 75–87, 2004. [45] U. Gleissner, R. Sassen, M. Lendt, H. Clusmann, C. Elger, and C. Helmstaedter, “Pre-and postoperative verbal memory in pediatric patients with temporal lobe epilepsy,” Epilepsy research, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 287–296, 2002. [46] S. Karunakaran, M. J. Rollo, K. Kim, J. A. Johnson, G. P. Kalamangalam, B. Aazhang, and N. Tandon, “The interictal mesial temporal lobe epilepsy network,” Epilepsia, 2017. [47] K. Kim, A. D. Ekstrom, and N. Tandon, “A network approach for modulating memory processes via direct and indirect brain stimulation: toward a causal approach for the neural basis of memory,” Neurobiology of learning and memory, vol. 134, pp. 162–177, 2016. [48] G. W. Corder and D. I. Foreman, Nonparametric statistics: A step-by-step approach. John Wiley & Sons, 2014. [49] Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg, “Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pp. 289–300, 1995. [50] G. J. Székely, M. L. Rizzo et al., “Brownian distance covariance,” The annals of applied statistics, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1236–1265, 2009. [51] D. N. Reshef, Y. A. Reshef, H. K. Finucane, S. R. Grossman, G. McVean, P. J. Turnbaugh, E. S. Lander, M. Mitzenmacher, and P. C. Sabeti, “Detecting novel associations in large data sets,” Science, vol. 334, no. 6062, pp. 1518–1524, 2011. [52] S. Hooper, E. Biegert, M. Levy, J. Pensock, L. V. D. Spoel, X. Zhang, T. Zhang, N. Tandon, and B. Aazhang, “On developing an FPGA based system for real time seizure prediction,” in Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, 2017.  X. A PPENDIX a) Proof of (6): We have from (4), R∞ R∞ y(t) = h1 (t − τ )x(τ )dτ+ h2 (t − τ )w(τ )dτ (20) −∞  ⇒  R∞  −∞  ej2πνt dYe (ν) =  −∞  +  R∞  h2 (t − τ )  −∞  =  R∞  ej2πνt  −∞  R∞  −∞  =  e  −∞ R∞ j2πντ  e  R∞  e (ν) dτ ej2πντ dX  −∞  f (ν) dτ (from Theorem 1) dW  e (ν)+ h1 (t − τ )e−j2πν(t−τ ) dτ dX  −∞ R∞ j2πνt R∞  j2πνt  h1 (t − τ )  −∞  e  R∞  R∞  f (ν) (21) h2 (t − τ )e−j2πν(t−τ ) dτ dW  −∞  n o e (ν)+H2 (ν) dW f (ν) . H1 (ν) dX  (22)  −∞  e (ν) + H2 (ν) dW f (ν) . =⇒ dYe (ν) = H1 (ν) dX b) Proof of Theorem 3: We will first prove that MIXY (ν1 , ν2 ) is zero, when X and Y are related by (4) and ν1 6= ν2 . Since the processes X (t) and W (t) are independent, their spectral processes are also independent. In addition, we also know from Theorem 2 that the spectral increments of the Gaussian process X (t) are independent. It is clear from   (6) that given H1 (ν) and H2 (ν), dYeR (ν2 ) , dYeI (ν2 ) is  15  completely determined by the two-dimensional random    veceR (ν2 ) , dX eI (ν2 ) and dW fR (ν2 ) , dW fI (ν2 ) , both tors dX of which  are independent of the two-dimensional random eR (ν1 ) , dX eI (ν1 ) when ν1 6= ν2 . This implies the vector dX     e eR (ν1 ) , dX eI (ν1 ) , MI between dYR (ν2 ) , dYeI (ν2 ) and dX which is defined as MIXY (ν1 , ν2 ), is zero. We will now derive the analytical expression for MIXY (ν,ν), for ν 6= 0. Let H1 (ν)=H1R (ν)+jH1I (ν) and H2 (ν)=H2R (ν)+ jH2I (ν). We can see from (5), (6) that   dYeR (ν) , dYeI (ν) ∼N 0, 12 sX (ν) |H1 (ν) |2 +   1 2 I , (23) 2 sW (ν) |H2 (ν) | where N represents Gaussian distribution, 0 is a two element zero vector and I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. In addition,      eR (ν),dX eI (ν),dYeR (ν),dYeI (ν) ∼N 0, Σ11 Σ12 , (24) dX Σ21 Σ22 where Σ11 = 12 sX (ν) I, Σ22 = 12 σY2e (ν) I, σY2e (ν) =  sX (ν) |H1 (ν) |2 + sW (ν) |H2 (ν) |2 , I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix and 0 is a four element zero vector. In addition,  1  1 sX (ν) H1R (ν) sX (ν) H1I (ν) T 2 2 Σ12 = Σ21 = . − 12 sX (ν) H1I (ν) 21 sX (ν) H1R (ν) Now, the MI between X and Y at frequency ν is given by    eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeR (ν) , dYeI (ν) MIXY (ν, ν) = I dX   eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeR (ν) + = I dX   eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeI (ν) |dYeR (ν) I dX (25) =I     eR (ν) ,dX eI (ν) ; dYeR (ν) + dX   eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeI (ν) , I dX  (26)  where (25) follows from the chain rule of mutual information [34] and (26) follows because the real and imaginary parts of the spectral process of a Gaussian process are independent  eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) , dYeR (ν) from Theorem 2. In addition, dX is a Gaussian distributed random vector with zero mean and covariance matrix Σ0 , which is easily obtained from (24). Since the mutual information between components of a Gaussian random vector depends only on the determinants of the joint distribution’s covariance matrices and that of marginals [34], we can easily show that 1 2   eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeR (ν) = 1 log |Σ11 |( 02 σYe ) I dX 2 |Σ | |H1 (ν)|2 sX (ν)  = 12 log 1 + |H . (27) 2 2 (ν)| sW (ν) Similarly, we can also show that   eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ;dYeI (ν) = I dX 1 2  log 1 +  |H1 (ν)|2 sX (ν)  |H2 (ν)|2 sW (ν) .  (28)  From (26), (27) and (28), we have   eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeR (ν) MIXY (ν, ν) = 2 × I dX |H1 (ν)|2 sX (ν)  . (29) = log 1 + |H 2 2 (ν)| sW (ν) At ν = 0, MI-in-frequency between X and Y is equal to    eR (ν) , dX eI (ν) ; dYeR (ν) , since the imaginary part of I dX Y is zero. c) Relationship between MI in frequency and coherence: The coherence CXY (ν) ∈ [0, 1] between two processes X and Y related by (4) is given by CXY (ν) =  |sXY (ν)|2 sX (ν)sY (ν)  =  |H1 (ν)|2 sX (ν) sX (ν)|H1 (ν)|2 +sW (ν)|H2 (ν)|2 .  ⇒ − log (1 − CXY (ν)) = log 1 +  |H1 (ν)|2 sX (ν)  |H2 (ν)|2 sW (ν)  = MIXY (ν, ν) .  (30)  d) Proof of Theorem 4: Now we consider two discretetime Gaussian stochastic processes X [n] and Y [n] that are related by y[n] = h1 [n] ∗ x[n] + h2 [n] ∗ w[n],  (31)  where h1 [n] and h2 [n] are the impulse responses of two discrete-time linear, time-invariant filters. (31) is the discretetime equivalent of (4). It was shown in chapter 10 in [33] that mutual information between the discrete-time Gaussian stochastic processes X [n] and Y [n] is related to coherence according to I (X; Y ) = −  0.5 R  log (1 − CXY (λ)) dλ.  (32)  0  From (30) and (32), we have I (X; Y ) =  0.5 R 0  MIXY (λ, λ) dλ.  (33)

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
