Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4949

Abstract:
CONTINUITY OF DISCRETE HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  arXiv:1307.4447v4 [math.GT] 15 Jul 2016  SEBASTIAN HURTADO Abstract. Let M and N be two closed C ∞ manifolds and let Diffc (M ) denote the group of C ∞ diffeomorphisms isotopic to the identity. We prove that any (discrete) group homomorphism between Diffc (M ) and Diffc (N ) is continuous. We also show that a non-trivial group homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) implies that dim(M ) ≤ dim(N ) and give a classification of such homomorphisms when dim(M ) = dim(N ).  1. Introduction Let M be a C ∞ manifold and let Diffc (M ) be the group of C ∞ diffeomorphisms of M which are isotopic to the identity and compactly supported (if M is noncompact). A well known theorem of Mather, Herman, Thurston and Epstein states that Diffc (M ) as a discrete group is simple (see [4]). In [11], Filipckewicz proved the following result: Given two C ∞ manifolds M and N , the groups Diffc (M ) and Diffc (N ) are isomorphic (as discrete groups) if and only if the manifolds M and N are C ∞ diffeomorphic. Moreover, if such an isomorphism exists should be given by conjugation with a fixed element of Diff(M ). Filipckewicz’s theorem implies in particular that two different smooth exotic 7-spheres have different diffeomorphism groups. The focus of this paper is the study of abstract group homomorphisms between groups of diffeomorphisms. We will make no assumptions on the continuity of the homomorphisms. Let M and N be two manifolds and let Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) be a group homomorphism. Observe that the simplicity of these groups imply that Φ is either trivial or injective. Date: July 18, 2016. 1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 00A30; Secondary 00A22, 03E20. 1  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  2  Some examples of homomorphisms of the type Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) are the following: (1) Inclusion: If M ⊂ N is an open submanifold of N , the inclusion gives a homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ). (2) Coverings: If p : N → M is a finite covering, every diffeomorphism f ∈ Diffc (M ) can be lifted to a diffeomorphism f˜ of N . These lifts in many cases give a group homomorphism. For example, this is the case when p is an irregular cover (i.e. Deck(M/N ) = {Id}), as in this case he lift f˜ of any diffeomorphism f is unique. (3) Bundles: The unit tangent bundle U T (M ), the Grassmannian Grk (M ), consisting of k-planes in T (M ), product bundles, symmetric products and other bundles over M admit a natural action of Diffc (M ). Observe that all the homomorphisms described above are in some sense continuous maps from Diffc (M ) to Diffc (N ) in their usual C ∞ topologies. The main result of this paper shows that this is always the case when M is closed. Before stating our main result we need the following definition: Definition 1.1. For any compact subset K ⊆ M , let DiffK (M ) denote the group of diffeomorphisms in Diffc (M ) supported in K. A group homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is weakly continuous if for every compact set K ⊆ M , the restriction Φ|DiffK (M ) of Φ to DiffK (M ) is continuous in the weak topology, see 2.3. Our main theorem is the following: Theorem 1.2. Let M and N be C ∞ manifolds. If Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is a discrete group homomorphism, then Φ is weakly continuous. It is worth pointing out that there is no assumption on the dimensions of the manifolds. As a consequence of Theorem 1.2, we will obtain a classification of all possible homomorphisms in the case when dim(M ) ≥ dim(N ). Mann [17] gave a classification of all the non-trivial homomorphisms Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) in the case that N is 1-dimensional. She  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  3  showed using one dimensional dynamics techniques (Kopell’s lemma, Szekeres theorem, etc.) that M must be one dimensional and that these homomorphisms are what she described as “topologically diagonal”. In the case when M = N = R, topologically diagonal means that Φ is given in the following way: Take a collection of finite disjoint open intervals Ij ⊂ R and diffeomorphisms fj : M → Ij . For each diffeomorphism g ∈ Diffc (R) the action of Φ(g) in the interval Ij is given by conjugation by fj , i.e. Φ(g)(x) = fi gfi−1 (x) for every x ∈ Ii . The action is defined to be the identity everywhere else. We will prove a generalization of the previous result: Theorem 1.3. Let M and N be C ∞ manifolds, let N be closed and dim(M ) ≥ dim(N ). If Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is a non-trivial homomorphism of groups, then dim(M ) = dim(N ) and Φ is “extended topologically diagonal”. The definition of extended topologically diagonal is given in Subsection 3.12 and is a generalization of what we previously described as topologically diagonal by allowing the possibility of taking finite coverings of M and embedding them into N , see definition 3.12. Observe that as a corollary of Theorem 1.3 we obtain another proof of Filipckewicz’s theorem. The result also gives an affirmative answer to a question of Ghys (see [12]) asking whether a non-trivial homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) implies that dim(N ) ≥ dim(M ). The rigidity results we obtain can be compared to analogous results obtained by Aramayona-Souto [2], who proved similar statements for homomorphisms between mapping class groups of surfaces and to deep results of Margulis about rigidity of lattices in linear groups. (See [22], Chapter 5). 1.1. Ingredients and main idea of the proof. The key ingredient in the proof of Theorem 1.2 is a theorem of E. Militon. This theorem says roughly that given a sequence hn converging to the identity in Diffc (M ) sufficiently fast (a geometric statement), one can construct a finite subset S of Diffc (M ), such that the group generated by S contains the sequence hn and such that the word length lS (hn ) (See 2.2) of each diffeomoprhism hn in the alphabet S is bounded by a sequence kn not depending on hn (an algebraic statement), see 2.3 for the correct statement. Militon’s theorem is a generalization of a result of Avila [3]  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  4  about Diff(S 1 ) and is related to results of Calegari-Freedman [6]. Militon’s result is strongly related to the theme of distortion elements in geometry group theory (See Gromov [13], Chapter 3). An element f of a finitely generated group G with generating set S is called distorted n if lim lS (fn ) = 0. n→∞  Consider for example the group BS(2, 1) = {a, b|bab−1 = a2 }. This group can be thought as the group generated by the functions a : x → n x + 1 and b : x → 2x in Diff(R). Observe that bn ab−n = a2 for every n and therefore a is distorted (In some sense a is “exponentially” distorted). An element f ∈ Diffc (M ) is said to be recurrent in Diffc (M ) if f satisfies that lim inf dC ∞ (f n , Id) = 0, for example an irrational rotation in S 1 is recurrent (See 2.3). A corollary of Militon’s theorem is that any recurrent element in Diffc (M ) is distorted in some finitely generated subgroup of Diffc (M ). Even more, it implies that such an element is“arbitrarily distorted” in the sense that f could be made as distorted as one wants (See ?? for a precise definition). For a nice exposition of the concept of distortion in transformation groups and the definition of the different types of distortion, see [6]. Observe that distorted elements are preserved under group homomorphisms and therefore if one wants to understand the existence of a group homomorphism, it might be fruitful to understand the distortion elements of the groups involved in the homomorphism. One example of this approach can be seen in the work of Franks and Handel [10]. They proved that any homomorphism from a large class of higher rank lattices Γ (For example SL3 (Z)) into Diffµ (S) (the group of diffeomorphisms of a surface preserving a measure µ) is finite using the fact that Γ has distorted elements and showing that any distorted element f ∈ Diffµ (S) fixes the support of the measure µ. For a more concrete statement of this and a clear exposition, see [9]. The main idea of how to use Militon’s theorem to obtain our rigidity results is illustrated in section 2.2 with a motivating example that encloses the main idea of Theorem 1.2 and is the heart of this paper. 1.2. Outline. The paper is divided as follows. In section 2, we will use Militon’s theorem to prove Lemma 2.1, which is the main tool to prove Theorem 1.2. In section 3, we prove Theorem 1.3 assuming that Φ is  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  5  weakly continuous, this section is independent of the other sections. In section 4, we establish some general facts about two constructions in group actions on manifolds that we will use for the proof of Theorem 1.2. In section 5, we show that Φ is weakly continuous using the results on section 2 and the facts discussed in section 4, finishing the proof of theorems 1.2 and 1.3. Finally, in section 6, we end up with some questions and remarks related to this work. 1.3. Acknowledgements. The author would like to thank the referee, Kathryn Mann, Benson Farb and especially Emmanuel Militon for useful comments and corrections on a previous version of this paper. The author is in debt with his advisor, Ian Agol, for his help, encouragement and support. 2. Main technique This is the most important section of the chapter, we will prove Lemma 2.1 which is a slightly weaker version of Theorem 1.2. The main ingredient in the proof of Lemma 2.1 is Theorem 2.3. We will discuss a motivating example in subsection 2.2 which avoids some necessary technicalities in the proof of Lemma 2.1 but contains the central point of our discussion. 2.1. Notation. Throughout this section and for the rest of this chapter we make use of the following notation: M and N denote C ∞ manifolds, Diffc (M ) will be the group of C ∞ diffeomorphisms which are compactly supported and isotopic to the identity. The letter Φ will always be a discrete group homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) unless stated otherwise. For a compact set K, we let DiffK (M ) be the subgroup of Diffc (M ) consisting of diffeomorphisms supported in a compact set K. We will consider Diffc (M ) as a topological space endowed with the weak topology, this topology is metrizable and we will denote by d any metric that induces such topology. For more information about the weak topology see 2.3. We are now in position of stating the main lemma of this section. Lemma 2.1. Let M and N be C ∞ manifolds, let K be any compact subset of M and let Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) be a discrete group homomorphism. Suppose hn is a sequence in DiffK (M ) such that lim dC ∞ (hn , Id) = 0  n→∞  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  6  Then {Φ(hn )} contains a subsequence converging to a diffeomorphism H, which is an isometry for a C ∞ Riemannian metric on N . Observe that the isometry H in Lemma 2.1 is necessarily homotopic to the identity, and therefore if the manifold N does not admit a metric with isometries homotopic to the identity (as for example is the case when N is a closed surface of genus g ≥ 2), the previous theorem implies the continuity of the homomorphism Φ restricted to DiffK (M ). Before stating Militon’s theorem, we will need the following standard definition: Definition 2.2. Let G be a finitely generated group and let S be a finite generating set. We assume that S = S −1 . Given an element g ∈ G, the word length lS (g) of g in s is defined as the minimum integer n such that g can be expressed as a product g = s1 s2 ...sn where each si ∈ S. In a more technical language, lS (g) is the distance of g to the identity in the Cayley graph corresponding to S. We are now in position of stating Militon’s theorem: Theorem 2.3. Let M be a compact manifold. There exist two sequences {n } → 0 and {kn } of positive real numbers such that for any sequence hn of diffeomorphisms in Diffc (M ) satisfying: dC ∞ (hn , Id) ≤ n there exists a finite set S ⊂ Diffc (M ) such that: (1) hn belongs to the subgroup generated by S (2) lS (hn ) ≤ kn Remark 2.4. The previous theorem is also true in the case where M is not compact and Diffc (M ) is replaced with DiffK (M ) for a compact subset K of M . Remark 2.5. The set S depends on the sequence hn , but the sequences {n } and {kn } are independent of the choice of hn . This result is a generalization of a Theorem of Avila [3], who proved the same result for Diffc (S1 ) case. The proof of the theorem is related to a construction of Calegari-Freedman [6], who showed that an irrational rotation of S2 is “arbitrarily distorted” in Diffc (S2 ).  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  7  For sake of completeness, we give a rough summary of how Theorem 2.3 is proved in [3], [19]. The proof of Theorem 2.3 has two steps: The first step is to show that an element in Diffc (M ) close to the identity can be written as a product of commutators of elements which are close to the identity, this step is proved using a KAM theory technique. The first step allows one to reduce the general case to the case where all the fn ’s are commutators supported in small open balls. The second step consist of using a finite set of diffeomorphisms to encode the sequence {fn } into a finite S, this step uses some clever algebraic tricks similar to the ones used in the proof of the simplicity of Diffc (M ) by Thurston (see [4], p. 23). The tricks depend heavily on the fact that the fn ’s are products of commutators. To give a hint of how powerful Theorem 2.3 can be for our purposes, observe the following: Let hn be a sequence in Diffc (M ) supported in a compact set K and converging to the identity in Diffc (M ) as in Theorem 2.3. As a consequence of Theorem 2.3, the sequence {hn } is generated by a finite set of diffeomorphisms S and therefore the set Φ(S) generates a group containing {Φ(hn )}. As a consequence, there exists a compact set K 0 ⊂ N (Namely, the union of the support of the generators) such that every element of the sequence {Φ(hn )} is supported in K 0 . This statement is not easy to deduce by elementary means. The following example is fundamental and contains the main idea in the proof of Lemma 2.1: 2.2. Motivating example. Let S2 be the 2-sphere and let Φ : Diffc (S2 ) → Diffc (S2 ) be a homomorphism of groups. As a consequence of Theorem 1.3 we are going to show that Φ is induced by conjugation via an element of Diff(S2 ). In particular, f and Φ(f ) turned out being conjugates as diffeomorphisms for every f ∈ Diffc (S2 ). In the next proposition we show that this is true for the most basic diffeomorphisms of S2 , namely rotations in SO(3). Proposition 2.6. Let S2 be the 2-sphere and let Φ : Diffc (S2 ) → Diffc (S2 ) be a group homomorphism. For any rotation R in SO(3), we have that C := Φ(R) preserves a Lipschitz metric g. If the metric g happens to be C ∞ then C is conjugate to a rotation in Diffc (S2 ). Proof. (Sketch) First consider the case when R is a finite order rotation. In this case, the diffeomorphism C is an element of finite order,  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  8  let say of order n. If we take anyPRiemannian metric g 0 in S2 and we n−1 consider the average metric g = i=0 (C i )∗ g 0 , it is easy to check that g is a Riemannian metric that is invariant under C . It follows from the uniformization theorem of Riemann surfaces that g is conformally equivalent to the standard metric in S2 . This implies that C is conjugate to a conformal map of finite order of S2 (an element of P SL2 (C)) and this easily implies that C is conjugate to a finite order rotation in SO(3). Now consider the case when R has infinite order (an irrational rotation). We want to imitate the proof of the finite order case: Let g 0 be an arbitrary Riemannian metric and consider the sequence of average Pn 1 i ∗ 0 metrics gn = n i=0 (C ) g . If an appropriate subsequence of {gn } converges to a metric g, the metric g would be invariant under C and we would be able to conclude that C is conjugate to a rotation arguing in the same way as in the finite order case. The problem is that to obtain such a convergent subsequence, we need the sequence {(C n )∗ (g 0 )} to not behave badly. The idea then is to obtain bounds in the derivatives of powers of C which would assure that the sequence of average metrics gn have a nice convergent subsequence. Therefore, we are going to show that kD(C n )k ≤ K, for some fixed constant K and every integer n. Suppose such a constant K does not exist, then there is a subsequence {C mn } such that kD(C mn )k → ∞. Passing through a subsequence, we can assume that the sequence of rotations Rmn is convergent, let’s assume it converges to the identity (if Rmn converges to another rotation, a similar argument works). Furthermore, we can kn assume that kD(C mn )k ≥ ee and that dC ∞ (Rmn , Id) ≤ n , for the constants n and kn in Theorem 2.3. Using Theorem 2.3, we can find a finite set S = {s1 , s2 . . . sl } such that lS (Rmn ) ≤ kn for every n and therefore we can express Rmn = Qln j=1 sij for some integers ln ≤ kn . If we take a constant L such that for each generator kD(Φ(sm ))k ≤ L for every m ≤ l, we obtain: g(n) = kDC  mn  k = kD  ln Y j=1  ln Y  Φ(sij ) k ≤ kD(Φ(sij ))k ≤ Lkn j=1  This give us a contradiction: On the one hand the sequence kD(C mn )k kn diverges superexponentially (greater than ee ), and on the other hand,  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS  9  it diverges at most exponentially (less than Lkn ). It is not difficult to show this imply gn has a convergent subsequence converging to a metric that a priory might be not smooth, see the proof of 2.1 for more details.  To promote the metric g in the previous proposition to an actual C ∞ metric we need to have control over higher derivatives of diffeomorphisms. We would also need an analog for higher order derivatives of the the fact that for any f, g ∈ Diff(S2 ), the inequality kD(f ◦ g)k ≤ kD(f )kkD(g)k holds. The purpose of the next two subsections is to set up the right framework to achieve these tasks. 2.3. Norms of derivatives. In the next two sections we will define “norms” k.kr of any element in Diffc (M ) whose purpose is to measure how big the r-derivatives of a diffeomorphism are. We are going to use the word “norm” to refer to them but the functions k.kr are not in any sense related to the various definitions of norms in the literature. This and the next subsection are technical and might be a good idea to skip them in a first read. If the reader decides to do that, he/she should have in mind that the r-norm k.kr of a diffeomorphism is an analog of kD(.)k for the the r-derivative and to take a look at Lemma 2.11, where using the chain rule, we will obtain for any f, g ∈ Diffc (M ) a bound for kf ◦ gkr in terms of the r-norms of the diffeomorphisms f and g. The group Diff(M ) has a natural topology known as the “weak topology”. This topology is defined as follows: Take a locally finite covering by coordinate charts {(Ui , φi )}i of M . For every diffeomorphism f ∈ Diffc (M ), every compact set K ⊂ Ui such that f (K) ⊂ Uj , every integer r ≥ 0 and every real number i,j  > 0, there is a neighborhood NK, (f ) of f defined as the set of all diffeomorphisms g ∈ Diff(M ) such that g(K) ⊂ Uj and such that for every 0 ≤ k ≤ r: −1 k kDk (φj ◦ f ◦ φ−1 i ) − D (φj ◦ g ◦ φi )k ≤   Where for any function f : Rn → Rn , Dk (f ) denotes any k-partial derivative of a component of f .  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 10  The topology induced in Diffc (M ) as a subset of Diff(M ) happens to be metrizable, Diffc (M ) is actually a Frechét manifold (see [15] for more details about this topology). We will denote by “dC ∞ ” any metric which induces such topology in Diffc (M ). For the proof of Lemma 2.1 we will need our norm k.kr to have two properties. The first property is that the r-norm should be able to tell when the r-derivatives of a sequence of diffeomorphisms {fn } is diverging or not. The second property is to have a bound for the r-norm of f ◦ g in terms of the r-norms of f and g. Based on these needs and the definition of the topology of Diffc (M ), we will define for an integer r ≥ 1 the r-norms in Diffc (M ) as follows: Let’s start first with the case when M ⊆ Rn is an open subset. In this case, we define for any compactly supported diffeomorphism f ∈ Diffc (M ) and for any r ≥ 1, kf kr = max  ∂rf ∂xi1 ∂xi2 ..∂xir  The maximum is taken over all the partial derivatives of the different components of f and over all the points x ∈ M . In order to define k.kr for an arbitrary manifold, we use a covering set {Ui }i of M by coordinate charts satisfying the following properties: (1) Each Ui is diffeomorphic to a closed ball of Rn by some diffeomorphism φi . (2) (int(Ui ), φi ) is a system of coordinate charts for M . (3) Every compact set K intersects a finite number of Ui ’s. The existence of such covering follows easily from the paracompacity of M . Let fix a compact set K in M . After choosing an arbitrary covering with the properties above, we define for every f ∈ DiffK (M ): kf kr,K = sup kφj ◦ f ◦ φ−1 i kr i,j  The supremum is taken over all (i, j)’s such that Ui ∩K 6= ∅, Uj ∩K 6= ∅, and such the expression φj ◦ f ◦ φ−1 is well defined. The set of (i, j)’s i satisfying these properties is finite and therefore the above expression is always finite.  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 11  Remark 2.7. Whenever the compact set K is clear in our context we will suppress the subindex K and denote k.kr,K by k.kr , but it is important to take into account that k.kr is depending on K. Lemma 2.8. Let fn be a sequence in DiffK (M ). Suppose there exist constants C and Cr (for every r ≥ 1) such that the following holds: (1) kD(fn )k ≤ C (2) kfn kr ≤ Cr for n sufficiently large (depending on r) Then there is a subsequence of {fn } converging in the C ∞ topology to a diffeomorphism f satisfying kD(f )k ≤ C and kf kr ≤ Cr . Proof. From the bound kD(fn )k ≤ C, we conclude that the sequence fn is equicontinuous, and by Arzela-Ascoli’s theorem we obtain a subsequence fn0 of fn converging uniformly to a continuous map f : K → M . Similarly, for a fixed integer r ≥ 1, the inequality kfn0 kr ≤ Cr implies there is a subsequence fn00 of fn0 such that the first (r − 1) derivatives of fn00 converge uniformly in any fixed coordinate chart intersecting K. Using Cantor’s diagonal argument, we obtain a subsequence fn000 of fn00 , such that all the r-derivatives of fn000 converge uniformly, for every coordinate charts involving K. This implies that the map f is C ∞ . Using that kD(fn )k ≤ C, we can obtain that f is bi-Lipschitz and therefore invertible. In conclusion f is a diffeomorphism and satisfies kD(f )k ≤ C.  Observe that even though our definition of the k.kr norms depends strongly on the choice of coordinates charts, the previous statement is independent of the particular choice. 2.3.1. Metrics. In the proof of Lemma 2.1, we will also need to be able to measure when a sequence of metrics gn is “diverging” in the C ∞ sense: For a metric g = we define:  P  i,j  gi,j dxi dxj defined in an closed sets U ⊆ Rn ,  ( maxi,j,x∈U |gi,j (x)| for r = 0 kgkr = maxi,j kgi,j kr for r ≥ 1  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 12  We defined the previous norm k.kr just for metrics defined in closed subsets of Rn , the reason being that this shorten the use of new terminology and the length of our proofs. In the same spirit of Lemma 2.8, if a sequence of metrics gn defined in a closed set U ⊂ Rn satisfy that kgn kr ≤ Dr for some fixed constants Dr , it is easy to show hat gn has a subsequence converging to a C ∞ metric g uniformly in each compact set. We will need to make use of the following fact, which is an easy consequence of the chain rule: Lemma 2.9. Let U , V be closed sets of Rn . Let g be any Riemannian metric defined in U and let H : V → U be a diffeomorphism. Suppose for every r ≥ 1, there exist constants Cr , Dr such that: (1) kgkr ≤ Dr (2) kHkr ≤ Cr Then, there are constants Dr0 , just depending on Ck and Dk for k ≤ r + 1, such that kH ∗ (g)kr ≤ Dr0 for every r. Remark 2.10. H ∗ (g) denotes the pullback of g under H. 2.3.2. Main inequality. The next lemma is the analog for higher derivatives of the inequality kD(f ◦ g)k ≤ kD(f )kkD(g)k that we announced previously. Lemma 2.11. For every integer r ≥ 2, there exist constants Cr such that for any f, g ∈ Diffc (M ) the following inequality holds: kf ◦ gkr ≤ Cr (max {kf kl + kgkl })r+1 1≤l≤r  Proof. We will first consider the case when M = Rn . Applying the chain rule r times to each of the components of the partial derivatives of f ◦ g we obtain a sum of terms. Each term in this sum is the product of at most r + 1 partial derivatives of some fi ’s and gj ’s (fi , gj denote components of f and g). The number of terms in this sum is at most a constant Cr (just depending on r and the dimension of M ) and each of the terms is less than kf kl + kgkl for some 1 ≤ l ≤ r, therefore: kf ◦ gkr ≤ Cr (max {kf kl + kgkl })r+1 1≤l≤r  For an arbitrary manifold M , we take a covering by coordinate charts (Ui , φi ) as in the definition of the r-norm. For every pair (i, j) such that ((f ◦ g)−1 (Uj )) ∩ Ui 6= ∅ and every coordinate chart (Uk , φk ) such that f −1 (Uk ) intersects the set ((f ◦ g)−1 (Uj )) ∩ Ui , we have that:  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 13  −1 −1 kφj ◦ f ◦ g ◦ φ−1 i kr = kφj ◦ f ◦ φk ◦ φk ◦ g ◦ φi kr −1 r+1 ≤ Cr (max {kφj ◦ f ◦ φ−1 k kl + kφk ◦ g ◦ φi kl }) 1≤l≤r  ≤ Cr (max {kf kl + kgkl })r+1 1≤l≤r  In the previous equation, the first inequality follows from the Rn case proved previously. We can conclude the following: r+1 kf ◦ gkr = sup kφj ◦ f ◦ g ◦ φ−1 i kr ≤ Cr (max {kf kl + kgkl }) 1≤l≤r  i,j   2.4. Proof of Lemma 2.1. The following lemma is the only place where we use Militon’s theorem. Roughly, the lemma claims that there exists a compact set K ⊂ Diffc (N ) such that for any sequence hn converging to the identity and n sufficiently large, Φ(hn ) is as close to K as one wants. More precisely: Lemma 2.12. Let M and N be two manifolds, let K be any compact subset of N , and let Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) be a group homomorphism. There exists a compact set K 0 and constants C and Cr such that: For every sequence hn in DiffK (M ) such that lim dC ∞ (hn , Id) = 0  n→∞  The following holds for n sufficiently large: (1) Φ(hn ) is supported in K 0 . (2) kD(Φ(hn ))k ≤ C. (3) kΦ(hn )kr ≤ Cr . Remark 2.13. How large n has to be in order to kΦ(hn )kr ≤ Cr to hold might depend on each particular r. The r-norms k.kr in N are defined with respect to the compact set K 0 in (1). In the proof of Lemma 2.12 we will use the following technical fact, which is a consequence of Lemma 2.11. Lemma 2.14. Fix an integer r ≥ 2. Let Ci be the constants defined in 2.12 and s1 , s2 . . . sk be elements of Diffc (M ). Let L be a constant such that: (1) ksj ki ≤ L, for every 1 ≤ i ≤ r and 1 ≤ j ≤ k. (2) max {Ci , 2} ≤ L 1≤i≤r  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 14  for every k ≥ 1 the following inequality holds: 2k  ks1 ◦ s2 · · · ◦ sk kr ≤ L(r+2)  Proof. The proof goes by induction on k, the case k = 1 is obvious. Suppose it holds for an integer k. Using Lemma 2.11, we have that: ks1 ◦ s2 · · · ◦ sk+1 kr ≤ L( max {ks1 ◦ s2 . . . sk ki + ksk+1 ki })r+1 1≤i≤r  ≤ L( max {ks1 ◦ s2 . . . sk ki + L})r+1 1≤i≤r  2k  ≤ L(L(r+2) + L)r+1 2k  ≤ L(2L(r+2) )r+1 2k+1  ≤ L(Lr+1 L(r+2)  )  2k+1 +(r+2)  = L(r+2)  Using that the inequality (r + 2)2k+1 + (r + 2) ≤ (r + 2)2(k+1) holds for r ≥ 1, the results follows for k + 1.  Proof. (Lemma 2.12): Existence of K 0 : The proof goes by contradiction. Suppose such a compact set K 0 ⊂ N does not exist, using Cantor’s diagonal argument one can finds a sequence hn → Id such that the supports of Φ(hn ) are not contained in any compact set. Passing to a subsequence we can assume that dC ∞ (hn , Id) ≤ n for the sequence {n } in Theorem 2.3. Using theorem 2.3 we obtain a finite set S = {s1 , s2 . . . sl } such that the sequence {hn } is contained in the group generated by S. Applying Φ the same is true for the sequence {Φ(hn )} and S 0 = {Φ(s1 ), Φ(s2 ) . . . Φ(sl )}, therefore the support of all the Φ(hn )’s lies in the compact set K 00 given by the union of the supports of the elements in S 0 , which gives us a contradiction. Bound for kD(.)k: Suppose that no such constant C exists. Using a diagonal argument we can find a sequence hn ∈ DiffK (M ) converging to the identity and such that the sequence g(n) := kD(Φ(hn ))k diverges. Furthermore, passing to a subsequence we can assume that dC ∞ (hn , Id) ≤ n and that lim log(g(n)) = ∞, for the constants n and kn n→∞ kn defined in Theorem 2.3.  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 15  Using Theorem 2.3 we can find a finite set S = {s1 , s2 . . . sl } in Diffc (M ) generating a group containing al the hn ’s and such that lS (hn ) ≤ Qn kn for every n. Therefore, we have that hn = lj=1 sij for some constants ln ≤ kn . If we take a constant L such that kD(Φ(si ))k ≤ L for every generator si we get that: g(n) = kD(Φ(hn ))k =  ln Y  D(Φ(sij )) ≤  j=1  Therefore the inequality diverges. fact that log(g(n)) kn  ln Y  kD(Φ(sij ))k ≤ Lln ≤ Lkn  j=1 log(g(n)) kn  ≤ log(L) holds, contradicting the  Bound for k.kr : The proof is similar to the previous case, but we will need to use Lemma 2.14. Suppose that for a fixed integer r such constant Cr does not exist. In that case, we can find a sequence hn converging to the identity and such that g(n) := kΦ(hn )kr diverges. Passing to a subsequence, we can further assume that dC ∞ (hn , Id) ≤ n and also that: log log(g(n)) lim (1) =∞ n→∞ kn For the sequences (n ) and (kn ) in Lemma 2.3. Using Lemma 2.3, we can find a finite set S generating a subgroup of Diffc (M ) where the inequality lS (hn ) ≤ kn holds for every n. Let L be a constant such that kΦ(g)kr ≤ L for every g ∈ S and which satisfies the hypothesis of Lemma 2.14. Using Lemma 2.14, we have that: 2kn  g(n) = kΦ(hn )kr ≤ L(r+2) Taking logarithms in both sides we obtain:  log log(g(n)) ≤ 2kn log(r + 2) + log(log(L)) which contradicts (1).  Finally, we will formulate Lemma 2.1 one more time and finish its proof. Lemma 2.1. Let M and N be C ∞ manifolds and let Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) be a group homomorphism. Suppose that hn is a sequence in Diffc (M ) supported in a compact set K and such that lim dC ∞ (hn , Id) = 0  n→∞  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 16  Then {Φ(hn )} has a convergent subsequence, converging to a diffeomorphism H, which is an isometry for a C ∞ Riemannian metric on N. Proof. From Theorem 2.12 we conclude that given a fixed integer r ≥ 1, for n large enough the inequality kΦ(hn )kr ≤ Cr holds . Using Lemma 2.8 we can extract a convergent subsequence from {Φ(hn )} which is converging to a C ∞ diffeomorphism H. Even more, taking powers of hn we have the following: For every fixed integer k, the sequence hkn → Id and then the inequality kΦ(hkn )kr ≤ Cr holds for n large enough. Therefore we can conclude that kH k kr ≤ Cr for every integer k. Fix a Riemannian metric g 0 on N and consider the sequence of metrics: n 1 X k ∗ 0 gn = (H ) g n + 1 k=0 (The notation (H k )∗ g 0 denotes the pullback of the metric g 0 under the diffeomorphism H k ). Next, we will show that the sequence gn has a subsequence converging to a C ∞ metric g, which is invariant under H. To simplify the rest of the proof we will use the following notation. Take coordinate charts (Ui , φi ) of N as in the definition of the k.kr norms (See 2.3). For any metric g in N , let g i be the metric defined in the closed set φi (Ui ) ⊂ Rn obtained by pull back, more concretely ∗ g i := (φ−1 i ) g. Going back to our proof, observe that a diagonal argument shows that gn has a convergent subsequence if and only if in any coordinate chart, the corresponding sequence of metrics has a convergent subsequence. More concretely, we just need to show that for any fixed integer i, the sequence of metrics {gni }n (as defined in the previous paragraph) have a convergent subsequence. Pn 1 k ∗ 0 i Observe that gni = n+1 k=0 ((H ) g ) . From (1) on Theorem 2.12 the diffeomorphism S H is supported in a compact set, therefore for each fixed i the set k H k (Ui ) is contained in the union of a finite number of Uj ’s and so we can assume it intersects non-trivially the sets Ul for 1 ≤ l ≤ j. We define Dr := max kg l kr . 1≤l≤j  For every integer k and each x ∈ Ui , the point H k (x) lies in the interior of Ul for some 1 ≤ l ≤ j. Thus we have that ((H k )∗ g)i =  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 17 ∗ l (φl ◦ H k ◦ φ−1 i ) g in a small ball around x. Using the inequalities −1 k kφl ◦ H ◦ φi k ≤ Cr and kg l k ≤ Dr , we can apply Lemma 2.9 to obtain constants Dr0 such that 0 ≤ k((H k )∗ g)i kr ≤ Dr0 for every integer r ≥ 1. The previous inequality implies that kgni kr ≤ Dr0 for every n ≥ 1 and therefore our sequence {gni }n has a convergent subsequence as we wanted.  In conclusion, we can extract from the sequence gn a subsequence converging to a C ∞ metric g. To finish our proof we just need to show that the metric g is non-degenerate and invariant under H. Non degeneracy: As the inequality kD(H k )k ≤ C holds for every integer k, we conclude that for each vector v ∈ T M , each of the metrics gn satisfy the inequality: g 0 (v, v) ≤ gn (v, v) ≤ C 2 g 0 (v, v) C2 This implies that any convergent subsequence of {gn } converge to a non-degenerate metric and so our g is non-degenerate. Invariance under H: For any vector v ∈ T N , we have: kH ∗ gn (v, v) − gn (v, v)k =  k(H n+1 )∗ g(v,v)−g(v,v)k n+1  ≤ (C + 1) kg(v,v)k n+1  Taking limits for our subsequence in the previous inequality we obtain that the metric g is invariant under H.  As a corollary, we obtain a proof of Theorem 1.2 in the case N is non compact. Corollary 2.15. Let M and N be C ∞ manifolds and suppose that N is non compact, any group homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is weakly continuous. Proof. Let K be any compact set in M . Arguing by contradiction, suppose hn is a sequence converging to the identity in DiffK (M ) but such that Φ(hn ) is not converging to the identity. We can suppose that dC ∞ (Φ(hn ), Id) ≥ C > 1 for every n ≥ 1. By Lemma 2.1 there is subsequence of Φ(hn ) converging to an isometry H in N and by (1) in Theorem 2.12 the isometry H should be the identity outside a compact set K 0 of N , therefore H is the identity everywhere contradicting that dC ∞ (Φ(hn ), Id) ≥ C > 1.   CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 18  3. Continuous case 3.1. Notation. Let M and N denote two C ∞ manifolds of dimension m and n respectively. For the rest of this section we will assume that N is closed. If U is an open subset of M , we define: GU = {f ∈ Diffc (M )| supp(f ) ⊂ U } We recall the definition of “ weak continuity” given in section 1. Definition 3.1. For any compact subset K ⊆ M , let DiffK (M ) denote the group of diffeomorphisms in Diffc (M ) supported in K. A group homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is weakly continuous if for every compact set K ⊆ M , the restriction Φ|DiffK (M ) of Φ to DiffK (M ) is continuous. Remark 3.2. If M is closed, this definition is equivalent to Φ being continuous in the usual sense. 3.2. Weak Continuity vs Continuity. The concept of weak continuity for a group homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is not equivalent to our homomorphism Φ being continuous in the weak topology of Diffc (M ) and one should not expect such continuity to hold. For example, take the open unit ball B ⊂ Rn . The homomorphism induced by the inclusion i : B → Rn is a group homomorphism which is not a continuous map in the weak topology: Take a sequence of diffeomorphisms fn supported in small disjoint balls Bn contained in B such that each Bn is centered at a point pn and has radius rn in such a way that the sequence pn converges to a point in ∂ B̄ , the radii rn → 0 and such that Dpn (fn ) = 2Id. The sequence fn converges to the identity in Diffc (B) in the weak topology because restricted to every compact set K ⊂ B, the sequence fn is the identity for large n. Nonetheless fn does not converge in Diffc (Rn ) and therefore Φ is not continuous. In this section, we will assume that Φ is always weakly continuous. The main purpose of this section is to establish the following result: Theorem 3.3. If Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is a non-trivial weakly continuous homomorphism of groups, then dim(M ) ≤ dim(N ). If dim(M ) = dim(N ), then Φ is extended topologically diagonal. The definition of “extended topologically diagonal” will be given in 3.12 . The assumption of weak continuity results to be very strong for  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 19  a homomorphism between groups of diffeomorphisms. As a proof of that, we recall the following classic result (See [20], Ch. 5): Theorem 3.4. (Montgomery, Zippin) Let Φ be a continuous homomorphism from a finite dimensional Lie group G to the group Diffc (M ) of C ∞ diffeomorphisms of a manifold M . Then the map π : M × G → M given by π(x, g) = Φ(g)x is a C ∞ map in both variables (x, g) simultaneously. Corollary 3.5. If Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is weakly continuous and X is a compactly supported vector field in M generating a flow ft ∈ Diffc (M ), then Φ(ft ) is a flow in Diffc (N ) generated by some vector field Y supported in N . Proof. H(t) = Φ(ft ) defines a homomorphism from R to Diff(M ). H(t) is continuous by the weak continuity of Φ and therefore is a C ∞ flow by Theorem 3.4. We obtain that Φ(ft ) is generated by some vector field Y in N .  In our proofs, we will use the following known fact. For a proof of this fact, see [4]. Lemma 3.6. (Fragmentation property) Let M be a manifold and B be an open cover of M , then Diffc (M ) is generated by the following set: C = {f ∈ Diffc (M ) such that supp(f ) ⊂ B0 , for some B0 ∈ B} In the next two subsections we will construct some examples of homomorphisms between groups of diffeomorphisms when dim(M ) = dim(N ).  3.3. Examples. When dim(M ) = dim(N ), there are two fundamental ways of constructing examples of homomorphisms of the type Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ). The first one is to embed a finite number of copies of M into N and to act in such copies in the obvious way (topologically diagonal). The second one consist of homomorphisms coming from lifting diffeomorphisms of M to a covering N . The main theorem of this section shows that if Φ is continuous, all possible homomorphisms are combinations of these two examples. We will discuss these two fundamental examples in more detail:  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 20  3.3.1. Topologically diagonal. Definition 3.7. A homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is topologically diagonal if there exists a finite collection of disjoint open sets Ui ⊆ N and diffeomorphisms ρi : M → Ui , so that for every f ∈ Diffc (M ) we have: ( ρi ◦ f ◦ ρ−1 if x ∈ Ui i (x) Φ(f )(x) = x otherwise The fact that Ui is a finite collection is necessary. Even though we may be able to embed an infinite collection of M ’s in a closed manifold N , if the collection is not finite, the homomorphism Φ is not well defined.To illustrate better this point, observe the following: Let M = Rn and suppose there is an infinite collection of open sets Ui ⊂ N giving rise to a homomorphism Φ as in 3.7. Take a diffeomorphism f supported in the unit ball around the origin in Rn , such that f (0) = 0 and Df (0) = 2Id. Using the notation of ρi as in 3.7, consider the sequence ρi (0) = pi in N . {pi }i is an infinite sequence by assumption and therefore has an accumulation point p in N \ ∪i Ui . We have that D(Φ(f ))(pi ) = 2Id, and by continuity we have that D(Φ(f ))(p) = 2Id. It’s not difficult to see by the compactness of N that there is a another set of points qi → p such that Φ(f )qi = qi and that D(Φ(f ))(qi ) = Id, which implies that D(Φ(f ))(p) = Id, a contradiction. 3.3.2. Finite coverings. Many times when N is a finite covering of M there is a homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) obtained by lifting a given f ∈ Diffc (M ) to an appropriate diffeomorphism f˜ of N . For example, if M and N are closed hyperbolic surfaces, every diffeomorphism of M isotopic to the identity can be lifted to the universal covering H2 (Hyperbolic plane). Even more, it can be lifted to a unique homeomorphism f 0 : H2 → H2 such that f 0 restricts to the identity in ∂H2 = S1 . This lift commutes with all the covering translations, and so one can project f 0 to a diffeomorphism f˜ of our covering surface N . One can check that ffg = f˜g̃ by the uniqueness of these lifts. Therefore, we obtain a homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ). Unfortunately, this is not true for all covering maps π : M → N . 2 For example, if we let M = N = S1 and π : S1 → S1 , the obvious  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 21  2 cover, any of the lifts of the rotation r2 in S1 of order 2, has order 4, and therefore it is impossible to construct a homomorphism Φ that commutes with p. The obstruction as we will see, comes from the fact that π1 (Diffc (S1 )) ∼ = Z is generated by a full rotation around the circle 2 and that π : S1 → S1 corresponds to the subgroup 2Z of Z. In a more precise way, we have the following situation: Let G = Diffc (M ), H be the group consisting of lifts of elements of G to N and L be the group of deck transformations corresponding to the covering map π : M → N , we have an exact sequence of discrete groups: (2)  e→L→H→G→e  We are interested in understanding when this sequence splits. For sake of completeness, we mention a useful criterion for proving this. For a proof, see [5] p.104. Lemma 3.8. The sequence e → L → H → G → e splits if and only if the two following conditions are satisfied: • The natural map H → Out(L) lifts to Aut(L). • The element in H 3 (G, Z(L)) defined by the exact sequence is trivial (Z(L) denotes the centralizer of L). As a consequence of Theorem 1.2 (whose proof will be given in section 5) our homomorphism Φ : G → H is continuous (when M and N are closed) and therefore showing that the previous sequence splits discretely is equivalent to show it splits continuously. Therefore, we just need to understand in which case there exists a continuous homomorphism Φ : G → H which splits our sequence. Observe that H is a covering of G, and so the existence of such continuous section Φ is equivalent to the covering H being trivial: H as a topological space should consist of the union of disjoint copies of G. This happens if and only if every element of L lies in different components of H. In conclusion, our sequence splits if there is no deck covering transformation L isotopic to the identity in H. In conclusion, our exact sequence (2) splits if and only if there is no deck transformation L of the covering π : N → M , which is isotopic to the identity in Diffc (N ).  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 22  Observe that if there is a path γ ∈ H connecting the identity to a non-trivial deck transformation L, projecting γ down to G we obtain a loop γ 0 representing a non-trivial element in π1 (G, e), the fundamental group of G based at the identity. To obtain a more precise statement of when this happens, we will need the following definition: Take an arbitrary point x ∈ M , there is a natural evaluation map Ex : Diffc (M ) → M given by Ex (f ) = f (x) and so we have a natural homomorphism of fundamental groups: Ex ∗ : π1 (Diffc (M ), e) → π1 (M, x) Observe the following fact: Proposition 3.9. A closed loop γ ∈ π1 (G, e) has a lift to H connecting the identity to a non-trivial deck transformation if and only if Ex ∗ (γ) 6∈ π1 (N ). Proof. In one direction, if a loop γ ∈ π1 (G, e) satisfies Ex ∗ (γ) 6∈ π1 (N ), the lift of Ex ∗ (γ) to N is not a closed loop. Therefore, the lift of γ to H ⊂ Diffc (N ) starting at the identity has to have the other endpoint in a non-trivial lift of the identity of Diffc (M ), that is, a non-trivial deck transformation. The other direction is trivial.  Summarizing all the previous discussion, we have the following criterion: Lemma 3.10. Let π : N → M be a covering map. There exists a unique continuous homomorphism π ∗ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) such that for every f ∈ Diffc (N ), the following diagram commutes: π ∗ (f )  N −−−→   πy  N  π y  M −−−→ M f  if and only if Ex∗ (π1 (Diffc (M ), e)) ⊂ π1 (N ). Observe that if ft is a path in Diffc (M ) representing a loop α of π1 (Diffc (M ), e) based at the identity and γs is a loop based at x representing an element of π1 (M ), the family of paths {ft (γs )} give us a homotopy between the loops γ and (Ex∗ (ft ))−1 γ(Ex∗ (ft )). This shows  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 23  that the image of Ex ∗ is a central subgroup of π1 (M ). In particular, we obtain the following useful corollary: Corollary 3.11. If π : N → M is a covering map and π1 (M ) is center-less, then there is a homomorphism π ∗ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) as in Lemma 3.10. 3.4. Extended topologically diagonal. Based on the previous two examples we make the following definition: Definition 3.12. A homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is extended topologically diagonal (See Figure 3.4) if there exists a finite collection of disjoint open sets Ui ⊆ N and a set of finite coverings πi : Mi → M , together with a collection of diffeomorphisms ρi : Mi → Ui such that: For every f ∈ Diffc (M ), the following holds: ( ρi ◦ πi∗ (f ) ◦ ρ−1 if x ∈ Ui i (x) Φ(f )(x) = x otherwise Where πi∗ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (Mi ) are the homomorphisms coming from the finite coverings πi as in the previous subsection. Remark 3.13. The coverings have to be finite in order for Φ to be an actual homomorphism into Diffc (N ). See the comments at the end of 3.3.1. We will illustrate the previous definition with the following example: Example 3.1. Let M be the once punctured 2-dimensional torus and let N be the closed orientable surface of genus 3. Take M1 to be a copy of M and M2 to be the twice punctured torus (which is a double cover of M ) as in Figure 3.4. We embed M1 and M2 into N as illustrated in Figure 3.4 and obtain a homomorphism Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ). We are now in position to give a proof of the main result of this section. 3.5. Proof of Theorem 3.3. In order to prove Theorem 3.3, we will need to make the following definitions: Definition 3.14. For any group G ⊆ Diffc (N ), we define: supp1 (G) = {p ∈ N such that g(p) 6= p for some g ∈ G}  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 24  Figure 1. An extended topologically diagonal embedding For each x ∈ M , let’s define: \ supp1 (Φ(GBr )) Sx = r>0  where Br is an open ball of radius r around x. We construct the sets Sx thinking of constructing the maps ρi in the definition of extended topologically diagonal. We would like to show that Sx consists of a discrete set of points and that the correspondence Sx → x give us a collection of coverings from some open sets of N to M . Let N 0 := N \fix(Φ(Diffc (M ))) be the set of points in N that are not fixed by the action of Diffc (M ). Lemma 3.15. Let Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) be a non-trivial homomorphism, for every x ∈ M we have the following: (1) Sx is a non-empty set. (2) For any f ∈ Diffc (M ), Φ(f )Sx = Sf (x) . (3) N 0 = ∪x∈M Sx . Proof. We start with the proof of item (3). If p ∈ N 0 , there is an element f0 in Diffc (M ) such that Φ(f0 )(p) 6= p. Using the fragmentation property, we can express f as a product of diffeomorphisms supported in balls of radius one an so we obtain a diffeomorphism f1 supported in B1 ⊂ M such that Φ(f1 )(p) 6= p. We can iterate this inductive procedure and construct a diffeomorphism fn ∈ Diffc (M ) supported in a ball Bn of radius at most 1/n, such that Bn ⊂ Bn−1 and such that  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 25  Φ(fn )p 6= p. We define x := follows.  T  n  Bn . It is clear that p ∈ Sx , so item (3)  Item (2) follows by conjugating f and applying Φ. Item (1) is a direct consequence of (2) and (3).  The following two lemmas are technical lemmas needed for the proof of Lemma 3.18. Lemma 3.16. Given x0 ∈ M and U ⊆ M an open set containing x0 , there exists a neighborhood Nx0 of x0 in M and a continuous map Ψ : Nx0 → GU such that for every x ∈ Nx0 we have that Ψ(x)(x0 ) = x. Proof. Using coordinate charts is enough to check the case when M = Rn and x0 = 0. For 1 ≤ i ≤ n, let Xi be vector fields in Rn supported in U such that {Xi (0)}i is a linearly independent set of vectors. If fti are the flows generated by Xi , we have that fti ∈ GU . We define for t = (t1 , t2 . . . , tn ) ∈ (−, )n , the map ρ : (−, )n → Rn by ρ(t) = ft11 ft22 . . . ftnn (0). By our choice of Xi ’s, for sufficiently small , ρ is a diffeomorphism onto a small neighborhood N0 of 0 ∈ Rn . If ρ−1 (x) = (t1 (x), t2 (x), . . . , tn (x)), we can define the map Ψ : N0 → GU by Ψ(x) = ft11 (x) ft22 (x) . . . ftnn (x) . Ψ is clearly continuous and Ψ(x)(0) = x.  Lemma 3.17. Let Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diff(N ) be a weakly continuous homomorphism and let p be a point in N . There are no n + 1 pairwise disjoint open subsets Ui ⊂ M , i = 1, 2, . . . , n + 1, such that every subgroup Φ(GUi ) does not fix p. Proof. Suppose that such a point p exists. As a consequence of the simplicity of GUi , any element of GUi can be written as a product of a finite number of flows. Therefore, for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n + 1, there exists a flow fti supported in Ui , such that Φ(fti ) does not fix p. Observe that the vector fields Xi generating the flows Φ(fti ) satisfy that Xi (p) 6= 0. Also, as Φ(fti ) and Φ(ftj ) commute, we have that [Xi , Xj ] = 0 for every i, j. Let’s take a maximal collection of vector fields C = {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xk } in N such that X1 (p), X2 (p), . . . , Xk (p) are linearly independent and  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 26  such that all the Xj ’s comes from flows in different Φ(GUi )’s. Observe that k must be less or equal to n, therefore we can assume w.l.o.g. that if ft is any flow in GUn+1 and Y is the vector field corresponding to the flow Φ(ft ), then Y (p) is a linear combination of elements in {X1 (p), X2 (p), . . . , Xk (p)}. If we consider the open set: U = {q ∈ N | X1 (q), X2 (q), . . . , Xk (q) are linearly independent} We have that the vector fields in C define a foliation F on U by Frobenius integrability theorem. Let L be the leaf of F containing p. Observe that as Y (p) is a linear combination of elements of {X1 (p), X2 (p), . . . , Xk (p)} and [Y, Xi ] = 0, then we have that Y is tangent everywhere to the leaves defined by C. It also follows that if q ∈ U , then Φ(gt )q ∈ U for every t. In conclusion, we have that Φ(gt ) necessarily preserves L. As the diffeomorphism gt was an arbitrary flow in GUn+1 , we have obtained a non-trivial homomorphism Ψ : GUn+1 → Diff(L). Even more, the image of this map is abelian, since if Y and Z are vector fields coming from Φ(GUn+1 ), both Y and Z commute with all the elements of C, and therefore Y and Z can be shown to be linear combination of vector fields in C. This contradicts the simplicity of GUn+1 .  Lemma 3.18. If x, y are 2 distinct points on M , then Sx ∩ Sy = ∅. Proof. From Lemma 3.17, for any n + 1 different points x1 , x2 . . . , xn+1 in M we have that Sx1 ∩ Sx2 ∩ · · · ∩ Sxn+1 = ∅. Let k be the largest integer such that there exist x1 , x2 , . . . , xk distinct points on M such that Sx1 ∩ Sx2 ∩ · · · ∩ Sxk 6= ∅. We are going to show that k = 1. Take p be an arbitrary point in Sx1 ∩ Sx2 ∩ · · · ∩ Sxk . By Lemma 3.16, we can find pairwise disjoint neighborhoods Nxi of M and continuous maps Ψi : Nxi → Diffc (M ), such that Ψi (y)(xi ) = y for every y ∈ Nxi . Even more, we can suppose that the support of the elements in the image of Ψi and Ψj have disjoint support if i 6= j. Let V =  Q  Nxi ⊆ M k , we define the map Ψ : V → N given by:  i  Ψ(y1 , y2 , . . . , yk ) = Φ(  Y Ψi (yi ))(p) i  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 27  Ψ isQcontinuous because Φ and all the Ψi ’s are continuous. Observe Q that ( Ψi (yi ))(xl ) = yl for every 1 ≤ l ≤ k, therefore Φ( Ψi (yi ))(p) ∈ i  i  Sy1 ∩Sy2 ∩· · ·∩Syk by property (2) in Lemma 3.15. By maximality of k, we obtain that Ψ is injective. It follows then that dim(M k ) ≤ dim(N ) and therefore k = 1 and dim(M ) = dim(N ).  As a corollary of the last paragraph we obtain: Corollary 3.19. If Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is a weakly continuous homomorphism and dim(N ) < dim(M ), then Φ is trivial. Corollary 3.20. If Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) is a weakly continuous homomorphism of groups and dim(M ) = dim(N ), then for each p ∈ N 0 we have that Φ(Diffc (M ))p is an open set of M . Using the previous corollary, we obtain that for our set N 0 := N \ fix(Φ(Diffc (M ))) defined before Lemma 3.15, we have that N 0 = ∪i Ui where each Ui is an open set defined as Ui := Φ(Diff(M ))pi for some point pi ∈ N 0 . Observe that each Ui is a connected open set where the action of Diffc (M ) is transitive. To finish the proof of Theorem 3.3, we just need to show the following: Lemma 3.21. If Φ(Diffc (M )) acts transitively on N , then there is a C ∞ covering map π : N → M such that for every f ∈ Diffc (M ) the following diagram commutes: Φ(f )  N −−−→   πy  N  π y  M −−−→ M f  In other words, Φ = π ∗ as in subsection 3.3.2. Proof. Let π : N → M be the map defined by π(p) = x if p ∈ Sx . Observe that the map is well defined by Lemma 3.18 and is surjective by our transitivity assumption. Next, we will show that π is locally a C ∞ diffeomorphism. Using Lemma 3.16, we can find a neighborhood Nx of M and a continuous map Ψ : Nx → Diffc (M ) such that Ψ(y)(x) = y for every y ∈ Nx . We can define the map ρ : Nx → N given by ρ(y) = Φ(Ψ(y))(p)  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 28  Observe that ρ is continuous because Φ is weakly continuous and injective because ρ(y) ∈ Sy and Lemma 3.18. We also have that π◦ρ = Id which implies that π is a covering map. To show that π is a C ∞ map it is enough to show that ρ is a C ∞ diffeomorphism onto its image. The fact that ρ is smooth follows from Lemma 3.4: It’s enough to prove that the image of a C ∞ embedded curve γ passing through x is a C ∞ curve. Given γ, we can construct a C ∞ compactly supported vector field X such that γ is a flow line of this vector field. X defines a flow ft and by Lemma 3.5 we have that Φ(ft ) is a C ∞ flow. Observe that ρ(ft (x)) ∈ Sft (x) = Φ(ft )Sx . Using that ρ is locally a homeomorphism for t sufficiently small we have that ρ(ft (x)) = Φ(ft )p and therefore ρ(γ) is smooth.  4. Blow-ups and gluing of actions In the proof of Theorem 1.2 we are going to make use of the following two constructions on group actions on manifolds: 4.1. Blow-ups. Given a closed manifold N and a closed embedded submanifold L ⊂ N of positive codimension, let Diffc (N, L) be the group of diffeomorphisms of N preserving L setwise. Suppose we have a group G ⊆ Diffc (N, L). We will show how to construct a natural action of G in N σ , where N σ is the manifold obtained by blowing up N along L. Intuitively, the blow-up N σ is obtained by compactifying N \L by the unit normal bundle of L in N . More concretely, let fix a Riemannian metric on N and let N (L) be the unit normal bundle of our submanifold L in that metric. The normal neighborhood theorem states that the map: p0 : N (L) × (0, ) → N Defined by sending (v, t) to the point γv (t) in N at distance t along the geodesic with initial vector v, is a diffeomorphism onto a neighborhood of L for sufficiently small . We now define formally N σ , the blow-up of N along L, as follows: N σ = (N (L) × [0, )) ∪ (N \L)/p0 . N σ is a compact manifold with N (L) as its boundary and there is a canonical smooth map π : N σ → N . The smooth structure on the blow-up N σ does not depend on the metric, N σ can be also described  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 29  as the compactification of N \L by the set of directions up to positive scale in ∪ (Tq N/Tq L). q∈L  In order to describe the smooth structure on N σ in more detail, suppose for the rest of this section that L consists of a single point p (the more general case can be treated in a similar way). Let x1 , x2 , . . . , xn be coordinate charts around p in N , where xi (p) = 0 for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n and let v be a direction up to positive scale in Tp (N ). Without loss of generality, assume that in our coordinate charts we have that v = hv1 , v2 , . . . , vn−1 , 1i. Then, there is a corresponding set of coordinate charts ξ1 , ξ2 , . . . , ξn−1 , xn around v in N σ , where v corresponds to the point ξi = vi , xn = 0 and the change of coordinates for xn > 0 is given by xj = xn ξj . The next lemma is the main fact that we need about blow-ups of actions and implies that for a given group action Φ : G → Diffc (N ), preserving a submanifold L, there is a corresponding action Φ0 : G → Diffc (N σ ) in the corresponding blow-up N σ , more precisely: Lemma 4.1. There is a “blow-up” map σ : Diffc (N, L) → Diffc (N σ ) such that for every h ∈ Diffc (N, L) the following diagram commutes: σ(h)  N σ −−−→   πy  Nσ  π y  N −−−→ N h  Even more, σ is a group homomorphism. Proof. For any h in Diffc (N ) we will define σ(h) as follows: If x ∈ N σ \ ∂N σ we define σ(h)(x) = h(x). On the boundary ∂N σ , we can define σ(h) as the projectivization (up to positive scale) of the map Dh(p) : Tp N → Tp N . It is easy to see that σ(h) is continuous. We need to check that σ(h) is a smooth map: Suppose that in our coordinate charts x1 , x2 , . . . , xn around p in N , the diffeomorphism h is given locally by h = (h1 , . . . , hn ), where p correspond to 0 ∈ Rn and h(0) = 0. Given a direction v (up to positive scale) at the origin, such as v = hv1 , v2 , . . . , vn−1 , 1i, there exists some j such that ∇hj (p)(vi , 1) 6= 0, so we can assume that ∇hj (p)(vi , 1) > 0. In our coordinate charts ξ1 , ξ2 , . . . , ξn−1 , xn explained previously, we have that σ(h) is given by σ(h) = (hσ1 , hσ2 , . . . , hσn ) where:  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 30  ( hσi (ξ, xn ) =  hi (xn ξ,xn ) hj (xn ξ,xn )  if i 6= j  hj (xn ξ, xn )  if i = j  Where ξ := hξ1 , ξ2 , . . . , ξn−1 i and xn 6= 0. When xn = 0 (in the boundary), we have that: hi (xn ξ, xn ) ∇hi (0)hξ, 1i = xn →0 hj (xn ξ, xn ) ∇hj (0)hξ, 1i  hσi (ξ, 0) = lim  Additionally, observe that that ∇hj (0)(ξ, 1) 6= 0.  ∂ h (xn ξ, xn ) ∂xn j  = ∇hj (xn ξ, xn )(ξ, 1) and  All the previous formulas imply that the derivatives of any order of σ(h) exist for points in the boundary ∂N σ and therefore σ(h) belongs to Diffc (N σ ). We still need to show that σ : Diffc (N, L) → Diff(N σ ) is a group homomorphism, more precisely, we need to show that for any f, g ∈ Diffc (N, L), the equality σ(f g) = σ(f )σ(g) holds. This equality is obvious for points in N σ \∂N σ and it follows from the chain rule for points in ∂N σ .  For more details and other aspects about the previous blow-up construction, see ([16], sec 2.5). A related blow-up for diffeomorphisms is studied in great detail in [1]. 4.2. Gluing actions along a boundary. Given N1 and N2 two compact manifolds with non-empty boundary, suppose there is a diffeomorphism α : ∂N 1 → ∂N 2 . Denote N = N 1 ∪ N 2 the manifold obtained by gluing N 1 and N 2 along the boundary using α. Suppose we have actions Φi : G → Diffc (N i ) in such a way that the actions of every element g ∈ G coincide in the common boundary. More precisely, suppose that for each g ∈ G, the equality Φ2 (g) = α ◦ Φ1 (g) ◦ α−1 holds for points in ∂N 2 . In general, if we glue Φ1 (g) and Φ2 (g) along the common boundary, we will not obtain a C ∞ diffeomorphism of N . Nonetheless, the following theorem of Parkhe (See [21]) gives a way to modify the actions in such a way that the resulting glued action of G in our manifold N is a truly C ∞ action.  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 31  Theorem 4.2. There are homeomorphisms Ψ1 and Ψ2 of N 1 and N 2 with the following property: i (1) For any f ∈ Diffc (N i ), the map Ψi f Ψ−1 i ∈ Diffc (N ) 1 2 (2) If f1 ∈ Diffc (N ) and f2 ∈ Diffc (N ) coincide in the common boundary, then the diffeomorphism f defined by Ψi fi Ψ−1 in N i i ∞ for i = 1, 2 is a C diffeomorphism of N . Therefore, if we define new homomorphisms Φ0i : G → Diffc (Ni ) 0 0 by Φ0i (g) = Ψi Φi (g)Ψ−1 i , we can glue both Φ1 and Φ2 to obtain a 0 homomorphism Φ : G → Diffc (N ). 5. Proof of theorem 1.2 In this section, we will use the results of section 2 together with the facts discussed in section 4 to give a proof of Theorem 1.2. This result along with Theorem 3.3 completes also the proof of Theorem 1.3. From now on, we denote G = Diffc (Rn ). As in section 3, if B is an embedded open ball contained in Rn , we denote: GB = {f ∈ Diffc (M )| supp(f ) ⊂ B} In the proof of Theorem 1.2 we are going to make use of the following basic fact: Lemma 5.1. Φ is weakly continuous if for some ball B ⊂ M whose closure is a closed ball embedded in M , we have that the restriction Φ|GB of Φ to the subgroup GB is continuous. Proof. Conjugating with elements of Diffc (M ) we get that for any embedded ball B 0 , the homomorphism Φ|Diffc (B 0 ) is continuous. From the proof of the fragmentation lemma (Lemma 2.1.8 in [4]) , one obtains that if the sequence fn tending to Id is supported in a compact set K and C is a finite covering of K by sufficiently small balls, then for large n, the diffeomorphisms fn can be written as products of diffeomorphisms supported in open sets of C. Furthermore, we can achieve this with at most k factors for each open set of C (for some constant k) and it can be done in such a way that these diffeomorphisms are also converging to the identity.  We will proceed to give a sketch of our main result, Theorem 1.2. Sketch of the proof of Theorem 1.2. The proof goes by induction in the dimension of N . Consider any open ball B whose closure is a closed ball embedded in M . By Lemma 5.1, to show that Φ is weakly continuous, it is enough to show that Φ is weakly continuous when we restrict  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 32  to the subgroup GB . We are going to use many times the following fact: Φ is weakly continuous if the following condition holds: There is no sequence fn in GB , such that fn → Id and Φ(fn ) → A, where A is a non-trivial isometry in some Riemannian metric on N . This fact is an immediate consequence of Lemma 2.1. Assume such non-trivial isometry A exists. If we take a ball B 0 disjoint from B, the actions of GB 0 and A commute. If A has a non-trivial fixed point set L, then GB 0 preserves L setwise, a manifold of lower dimension than N . Therefore, we can blow-up the action at L and show by induction that Φ is continuous. If A acts freely instead, we will obtain an action of GB 0 on the space N 0 := N/H, where H = hAi is the closure of the subgroup generated by A. If the group H is infinite, N 0 is a manifold of lower dimension than N and we can proceed to prove the continuity by induction. If H is finite, we will show a way to replace H by a similar infinite group of isometries Ĥ to proceed as in the case where H is infinite.  In the proof of Theorem 1.2, we are going to make use of the following known fact: Lemma 5.2. If N is a closed Riemannian manifold and H is a nontrivial closed connected subgroup of the group of isometries of N , then fix(H) = {p ∈ N | h(p) = p for every h ∈ H} is a closed submanifold of positive codimension. We will also need the following technical lemma: Lemma 5.3. If Φ : Diffc (B0 ) → Diffc (N 0 ) is a weakly continuous homomorphism, then there exists an embedded open ball B2 ⊂ B1 and a point p ∈ N 0 such that for any diffeomorphism f supported in B2 , the equality Φ(f )p = p holds. Proof. Define n = dim(N ) + 1 and consider an arbitrary point p ∈ N . For 1 ≤ i ≤ n, let Ui be disjoint embedded balls contained in B1 . Using Lemma 3.17, we conclude that for at least one of these balls, which we denote by B2 , the restricted homomorphism Φ|GB2 fixes p.   CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 33  By Lemma 5.1, Theorem 1.2 is a direct consequence of the following: Lemma 5.4. Let N be a closed manifold. If Φ : Diffc (Rm ) → Diffc (N ) is a group homomorphism, then Φ is weakly continuous. Proof. We proceed by induction on the dimension of N . The proof for the case n = 0 is trivial and the case n = 1 is proved in [17]. Let B de the unit ball in Rn . Suppose that Φ is not weakly continuous. By Lemma 2.1, there is a ball B0 ⊂ B strictly contained in B and a sequence fn ∈ GB0 such that fn → Id and Φ(fn ) → A, where A is a non-trivial isometry for some Riemmanian metric on N . Define H := hAi, H is a closed subgroup of the Lie group of isometries of N . We can further suppose that B0 is strictly contained in B. For the rest of the proof, we let B1 ⊆ B be an embedded ball disjoint from B0 , Observe that as B0 and B1 are disjoint, the groups Φ(GB0 ) and Φ(GB1 ) commute. First we show that we can assume H acts freely:  Lemma 5.5. If H does not act freely, then Φ is weakly continuous. Proof. Suppose that H does not act freely. We can replace our group H with a non-trivial closed subgroup and assume that L = fix(H) 6= ∅. By Lemma 5.2, L is a closed submanifold of positive codimension. Observe that the action of Φ(GB1 ) on N commutes with the action of H and therefore L is invariant under Φ(GB1 ). Using Lemma 4.1 we can blow-up the action Φ at L to obtain an action Φσ : GB1 → N σ . This new action preserves the boundary ∂N σ = N (S), and therefore we obtained a homomorphism Φσ |∂N σ : Diffc (Rm ) → Diff(∂N σ ) that by induction is weakly continuous. To prove that Φ is weakly continuous, we will need to define the following objects: Let N 1 and N 2 be two copies of N σ . Additionally, let N 0 := N 1 ∪ N 2 , be the manifold obtained by gluing N 1 , N 2 in the obvious way. Finally, consider the homomorphisms Φi : GB1 → Diffc (N i ) equal to Φσ for i = 1, 2. Observe that the previous homomorphisms define an action of GB1 on N 0 , but this action might not be smooth in the submanifold corresponding to the glued boundaries. Using the gluing theorem described  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 34  in section 4.2, we can conjugate the actions in each N i by homeomorphisms and obtain a smooth action Φ0 : GB1 → Diffc (N 0 ). We are now going to make use of the following trick: We will show that Φ0 is weakly continuous using the induction hypothesis and then we will show that the continuity of Φ0 implies the continuity of Φ. Let’s show that Φ0 : GB1 → Diffc (N 0 ) is weakly continuous. By Lemma 2.1, it is enough to show the following: If fn ∈ GB1 is a sequence such that fn → Id and Φ0 (fn ) → A, where A is an isometry for N 0 , then A is trivial. By induction, the restriction of Φ0 to the submanifold corresponding to the glued boundaries is continuous, therefore A is trivial in a codimension one submanifold. As any orientation-preserving isometry that is trivial in a codimension one submanifold is trivial everywhere, we obtain that A must be trivial. Now we show that the weak continuity of Φ0 implies Φ is weakly continuous as well. Let fn be a sequence in GB1 such that fn → Id and Φ(fn ) → A, where A is an isometry of N . From the previous paragraph, we have that Φ0 (fn ) → Id. This implies that Φσ (fn ) → Id (at least topologically) and therefore Φ(fn ) → Id. In conclusion, A must be trivial and by Lemma 2.1, the homomorphism Φ is continuous.  We can now assume that the action of H in N is free. Next, we will prove that if H is infinite, then Φ is continuous. Lemma 5.6. If H is infinite and acts freely, then Φ is weakly continuous. Proof. Let B1 a ball in M disjoint from B0 . The actions of Φ(GB1 ) and H on the manifold N commute. If we let N 0 := N/H, then N 0 is a smooth manifold because the action is free. The dimension of N 0 is lower than the dimension of N , moreover, we have that Φ descends to a homomorphism Φ0 : GB1 → Diffc (N 0 ). By induction, Φ0 is continuous. Let p ∈ N 0 be an arbitrary point. By Lemma 5.3, there is a ball B2 ⊆ B1 such that Φ0 (GB2 )p = p. Therefore, Φ(GB2 ) preserves the manifold Hp = {h(p) | h ∈ H}, furthermore we can assume that the dimension of Hp is lower than the dimension of N . In conclusion, we obtain a homomorphism Φ00 : GB2 → Diffc (Hp )  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 35  that by induction is continuous. We are going to deduce the weak continuity of Φ from the continuity of Φ0 and Φ00 . By Lemma 2.1, it is enough to show that if fn ∈ GB2 is a sequence such that fn → Id and Φ(fn ) → A, where A is an isometry of N , then A = Id. Take a point q ∈ Hp , we are going to show that A(q) = q and that the derivative Dq (A) of A at q is trivial. Given that A is an isometry of some metric, these two facts are enough to show that A is trivial. The fact that A(q) = q, follows from the fact that Φ00 (fn ) → Id. We now prove that the derivative Dq A is trivial. We can split the tangent space Tq (N ) of N at q as follows: Tq (N ) = Tq (Hp ) ⊕ W Where Tq (Hp ) is the tangent space of Hp at q and W is the orthogonal complement of Tq (Hp ) in Tq (N ). Observe that as Φ00 (fn ) → Id, then Dq A preserves Tq (Hp ) and Dq |Tq (Hp ) = Id. In a similar way, considering the fact that Φ0 (fn ) → Id, if we let πW denote the orthogonal projection of Tq (N ) onto W , we have that πW ◦ Dq A = Id These two facts imply that the linear map Dq (A) must be the identity: Dq (A) has a matrix decomposition in blocks, each block corresponding to the subspaces Tq (Hp ) and W . In this decomposition, Dq A is an upper triangular matrix and the diagonal blocks are the identity, therefore, all the eigenvalues of Dq A are equal to one. Since A is an isometry, Dq A is an orthogonal matrix will all its eigenvalues equal to one and therefore Dq A must be the identity. In conclusion, we have that A(q) = q and Dq A = Id. As A is an isometry, A must be trivial.  The only remaining case to finish the proof of Theorem 5.4 is the case where H is a finite group and H acts freely on N . We will show that if Φ were not continuous, we can replace H with an infinite group of isometries Ĥ that would reduce the proof of this case to the previous two lemmas.  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 36  Lemma 5.7. If H is finite and acts freely, one of the following alternatives hold: (1) Φ is weakly continuous. (2) There exists a metric on N and an infinite subgroup of isometries Ĥ of N , together with an embedded ball B 0 ⊆ Rn such that the action of Φ(GB 0 ) commutes with the action of Ĥ. Proof. Let N0 := N , H0 := H and N1 := N0 /H0 . The homomorphism Φ descends to a homomorphism Φ1 : GB1 → Diff(N1 ) as the groups GB1 and H0 commute with each other. One can check that if Φ1 is continuous, then Φ is continuous. Therefore, if Φ1 is not continuous, there is a sequence fn,1 ∈ GB1 such that fn,1 → Id and such that Φ1 (fn,1 ) → A1 ∈ Diff(N1 ), where A1 is a non-trivial isometry on some metric on N1 . Let H1 = hA1 i. If H1 does not act freely or H1 is infinite, we can use lemmas 5.5 and 5.6 to conclude that Φ1 is continuous, therefore we can assume H1 is finite and fixed point free. We are now in the same situation we were at the beginning of the proof of this lemma. For that reason, we can repeat this procedure infinitely many times as follows: We construct for each integer k, the following objects: A ball Bk ⊂ B disjoint from the balls Bj for j < k, a closed manifold Nk = Nk−1 /Hk−1 and a group homomorphism Φk : GBk → Diff(Nk ) descending from Φk−1 . Together with a sequence {fn,k } ∈ GBk such that as n → ∞, we have that fn,k → Id and Φk (fn,k ) → Ak , where Ak is a non-trivial isometry on some metric on Nk and the group Hk = hAk i is a non-trivial finite group of diffeomorphisms acting freely on Nk . Observe that the only way this procedure can’t be repeated infinitely times is if for some k, the homomorphism Φk were weakly continuous, but this would imply that Φ is weakly continuous, therefore we can assume the previous objects are defined for every integer k ≥ 1. Next, we are going to show how to get an infinite group of isometries for N from our Hk ’s. Let’s define: Ĥk = {h ∈ Diffc (N ) | h is a lift of some diffeomorphism hk ∈ Hk } Each diffeomorphism hk of Hk can be lifted to a diffeomorphism of N : The diffeomorphism Ak is the limit of the sequence Φk (gn,k ), we consider the sequence {Φ(gn,k )} that consist of lifts of Φk (gn,k ), by Lemma 2.1 this sequence has a convergent subsequence converging to  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 37  a diffeomorphism A0k of N which is necessarily a lift of Ak . Observe that in fact Ĥk is a finite subgroup of Diffc (N ) and that Ĥk−1 ⊂ Ĥk , being this last inclusion strict. S We define the group Ĥ := k≥0 Ĥk . Observe that Ĥ is necessarily an infinite group. We will prove that Ĥ is invariant under a Riemannian metric on N in a similar way that we prove Lemma 2.1. In order to do that, we will show the following bounds: Lemma 5.8. Every h ∈ Ĥ satisfies the following bounds: (1) khkr ≤ Cr for every r ≥ 1. (2) kD(h)k ≤ C. For the constants C, Cr in Lemma 2.12 Proof. We will prove by induction in k that for every h ∈ Ĥk , there exists a sequence hn ∈ GB such that hn → Id and Φ(hn ) → h. By lemma 2.12, this is enough to show that such bounds in the derivatives hold. This statement is obvious for k = 0. Suppose it is true for j ≤ k − 1. Consider the projection homomorphism Ψ : Ĥk → Hk and observe that the kernel of Ψ is exactly Ĥk−1 . By definition Hk = hAk i. First, we will show that Ak has a lift to N belonging to Ĥk and satisfying our induction hypothesis. Consider the sequence fn,k ∈ GBk such that as n → ∞, we have that fn,k → Id and Φk (fn,k ) → Ak as in the construction of the Ak ’s. We have that for every n, the diffeomorphism Φ(fn,k ) is a lift of Φk (fn,k ) to Diffc (N ). Using Lemma 2.1, we can find a subsequence fni ,k of fn,k , such that Φ(fni ,k ) → A0k , where A0k is a diffeomorphism of N . The diffeomorphism A0k is necessarily a lift of Ak and therefore A0k belongs to Ĥk and satisfies our induction hypothesis. To finish the induction, observe that as Hk is cyclic, every element of Ĥk is a product of an element of ker(Ψ) = Ĥk−1 and a power of A0k . Therefore, to conclude that every element of Ĥk satisfies the induction hypothesis, it is enough to show that if f, g ∈ Ĥk satisfy the induction hypothesis, then f g satisfies the hypothesis too. This is easy to prove, if there exist sequences {fn }, {gn } such that fn → Id, gn → Id and  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 38  such that Φ(fn ) → f , Φ(gn ) → g, then the sequence {fn gn } satisfies that fn gn → Id and Φ(fn gn ) → f g.  To conclude the proof of Lemma 5.7, we would proceed in a similar way as we did in Lemma 2.1, we will show that Ĥ preserves a Riemannian metric g in N as follows: Take an arbitrary metric g 0 for N and average g with respect to the groups Ĥn . More precisely, consider the sequence of metrics: gn =  1 X |Ĥk |  h∗ (g 0 )  h∈Hˆk  Observe that gn is invariant under Ĥn . Therefore, if there is a subconvergent sequence of gn converging to a metric g, then g is invariant under Ĥ. To ensure the existence of such subconvergent subsequence using the same argument used in the proof of Lemma 2.1 taking into account the bounds obtained in Lemma 5.8. In conclusion, Ĥ is an infinite group of isometries of N . To finish the proof of Lemma 5.7, take an embedded ball B 0 ⊂ B in N disjoint from all the balls Bn and apply Lemma 5.6.   6. Questions and Remarks. 6.1. Higher dimensions. Maybe the most natural question to ask in view of Theorem 1.3 is wether it is possible to obtain a characterization of homomorphisms Φ : Diffc (M ) → Diffc (N ) in the case that dim(M ) < dim(N ). All the known homomorphisms known to the author are built from pieces, each piece coming from some natural bundles over M or over Symmk (M ) (the set of unordered k points in M ). These bundles could be products, coverings, or somewhat similar to the tangent bundle or other bundles where one has some kind of linear action in the fiber. The pieces are glued along submanifolds where the actions in both sides agree. 6.2. Lower regularity. One might expect similar results for the groups Diffrc (M ) of C r diffeomorphisms of a manifold M . Some of the techniques here might apply to such problems in the case when r ≥ 2 or r ≥ 3. One of the reasons to believe it is possible to do so is that r Diff∞ c (M ) ⊂ Diffc (M ) and therefore one might be able to show some sort of continuity for homomorphisms of the type Φ : Diff∞ c (M ) →  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 39  Diffr (M ) using Militon’s theorem. It is important to point out that Militon’s theorem might be very difficult to generalize to the C r category: One of the main steps in the proof of Militon’s Theorem uses a KAM technique and such techniques typically have a loss of regularity if r < ∞. In the topological category things seem to be much more difficult as every homeomorphim f ∈ Homeo0 (M ) is arbitrarily distorted (See [6]). 6.3. Discrete homomorphisms between Lie groups. One might also try to understand discrete homomorphisms between simple Lie groups. For example, one can show that any discrete homomorphism from SO(3) to itself is conjugate to the standard one. The same is true for SL2 (R). For SL2 (C), the situation is a little bit different, one can use a non trivial field automorphism of C, to get a homomorphism from Sl2 (C) to itself that is not conjugate to the standard one. Nonetheless, one can show that any of the homomorphism between Sl2 (C) and itself come from this construction. An observation worth mentioning is that if the homomorphism Φ is measurable, then Φ is continuous and in fact C ∞ (See [22], Ap. B.3). Therefore, a non standard homomorphism is necessarily not measurable (as in the examples for SL2 (C) described above). Other more difficult set of questions related to the Zimmer program (see [7]) come from asking wether a discrete homomorphism of groups from a simple lie group G to Diffc (M ) comes from a standard embedding. For example, Matsumoto[18] shows that any action of P SL2 (R) in Diffc (S 1 ) is conjugate to the standard action. One might wonder if that is also the case for S 2 and P SL3 (R): 6.3.1. Question. Does every homomorphism Φ : P SL3 (R) → Diff(S 2 ) is conjugate to the standard embedding? Using the fact that P SL2 (C) acts in S 2 and SO(3) ⊂ P SL2 (C) one can compose the action of P SL2 (C) by a non trivial field automorphism of C to obtain a non standard action of SO(3) in S 2 , nonetheless one can still ask if the following is true in the volume preserving setting: 6.3.2. Question. Does there exist a homomorphism Φ : SO(3) → Diffµ (S 2 ) that is not conjugate to the standard one?  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 40  For this type of questions, the technique used here does not seem to work as the distortion elements in any linear group are at most exponentially distorted. Nevertheless, studying the distorted elements involved might give some useful information. 6.4. Distortion elements in groups of diffeomorphisms. It is worth pointing out that Militon’s theorem implies that if M is a closed manifold and f is an infinite order isometry on M then f is arbitrarily distorted. The converse to this statement is not true, there are examples of diffeomorphisms f in Diffc (M ) that are not isometries but are still recurrent (f is recurrent if satisfies lim inf n dC ∞ (f n , Id) = 0) and therefore arbitrarily distorted as a consequence of Militon’s theorem. Some of these examples can be constructed using the Anosov-Katok method. For example, one can use the construction in [14] to obtain such examples. 6.4.1. Question. Is it possible to obtain a classification of all possible distorted (or arbitrarily distorted as defined in [6]) elements in Diffc (S 1 ) or Diffc (S 2 )? This might be useful to show that certain discrete groups can’t act by diffeomorphisms on S 1 and S 2 . References [1] Gregory Arone and Marja Kankaanrinta, On the functoriality of the blowup construction Bull. Belg. Math. Soc. Simon Stevin Volume 17, Number 5 (2010), 821-832. [2] J. Aramayona, J. Souto Rigidity phenomena in mapping class groups. [3] A. Avila, Distortion elements in Diffc (R/Z) arXiv:0808.2334 [math.DS], 2008. [4] A. Banyaga, The structure of classical diffeomorphism groups. [5] Kenneth Brown, Cohomology of groups Graduate Texts in Mathematics 87, Springer Verlag, ISBN 0-387-90688-6, MR 0672956 [6] Danny Calegari, Michael H Freedman, Distortion in transformation groups. arXiv:math/0509701 [math.DS], 2005. [7] David Fisher, Groups acting on manifolds: around the Zimmer program arXiv:0809.4849 [math.DS], 2008. [8] R. P. Filipkiewicz (1982). Isomorphisms between diffeomorphism groups. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 2, pp 159-171. [9] John Franks, Distortion in groups of circle and surface diffeomorphisms. arXiv:0705.4054 [math.DS], 2006. [10] John Franks, Michael Handel, Distortion Elements in group actions on surfaces. arXiv:math/0404532v2 [math.DS], 2004. [11] R. P. Filipkiewicz (1982). Isomorphisms between diffeomorphism groups. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 2, pp 159-171.  CONTINUITY OF HOMOMORPHISMS OF DIFFEOMORPHISM GROUPS 41  [12] E. Ghys, Prolongements des diffomorphismes de la sphre. Enseign. . Math. (2) 37 (1991), no. 1-2, 45-59. [13] M. Gromov Asymptotic invariants of infinite groups. Geometric group theory. Volume 2 Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge(1993), 1-295 [14] M.R. Herman, construction of some curious diffeomorphisms of the Riemann sphere Math. Soc. (2) 34(1986), 375-384 [15] Hirsch, Morris W. Differential topology. Vol. 33. New York: Springer-verlag, 1976. [16] Peter Kronheimer and Tomasz Mrowka, Monopoles and three-manifolds New Mathematical Monographs, 10, Cambridge University Press. 2007. [17] Kathryn Mann, Homomorphisms between diffeomorphism groups. arXiv:1206.1196 [math.GT], 2012. [18] Shigenori Matsumoto, Numerical invariants for semiconjugacy of homeomorphisms of the circle Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 98 (1986), 163-168 [19] Emmanuel Militon, lments de distorsion du groupe des diffomorphismes isotopes l’identit d’une varit compacte. arXiv:1005.1765 [math.DS], 2012. [20] D. Montgomery and L. Zippin, Topological transformation groups. Wiley(Interscience), New York. 1955. [21] Kiran Parkhe, Smooth gluing of group actions and applications arXiv:1210.2325 [math.DS] 2012. [22] Robert J. Zimmer, Ergodic theory and semisimple groups University of California, Berkeley, USA E-mail address: shurtado@math.berkeley.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
