Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4529

Abstract:
arXiv:1707.05581v4 [math.GR] 8 Sep 2017  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS HUNG CONG TRAN Abstract. We develop a theory of strongly quasiconvex subgroups of an arbitrary finitely generated group. Strong quasiconvexity generalizes quasiconvexity in hyperbolic groups and is preserved under quasiisometry. Strongly quasiconvex subgroups are more reflexive than stable subgroups defined by Durham-Taylor, and they also capture the geometry of ambient groups. We prove that strongly quasiconvex subgroups have many properties analogous to those of quasiconvex subgroups of hyperbolic groups. We show a strong connection between strong quasiconvexity and lower relative divergence, and we suggest a classification of strongly quasiconvex subgroups by using lower relative divergence. We give complete descriptions of strong quasiconvexity and stability in relatively hyperbolic groups. Additionally, we characterize strongly quasiconvex special subgroups and stable special subgroups of two dimensional right-angled Coxeter groups, and we use these results to study Morse boundary of right-angled Coxeter groups. We prove that two notions of strong quasiconvexity and stability are equivalent in a rightangled Artin group AΓ (except for the case of finite index subgroups) and we also characterize non-trivial strongly quasiconvex subgroups of infinite index in AΓ (i.e. non-trivial stable subgroups in AΓ ) by quadratic lower relative divergence. These results strengthen the work of Koberda-Mangahas-Taylor on characterizing purely loxodromic subgroups of right-angled Artin groups.  1. Introduction One method to understand the structure of a group G is to investigate subgroups of G. Using this approach, one often investigates subgroup H ≤ G whose geometry reflects that of G. Quasiconvex subgroup of hyperbolic group is a successful application of this approach. This is well-known that a quasiconvex subgroup of a hyperbolic group is also hyperbolic. Generalizing quasiconvex subgroups of hyperbolic groups, Dahmani introduced the first definition of relatively quasiconvex subgroups of relatively hyperbolic groups in [Dah03]. Then Osin proposed a substantially different definition of relatively quasiconvex subgroups of relatively hyperbolic groups in [Osi06]. In [Hru10], Hruska proved these two definitions are equivalent to each other. In the same paper, Hruska also proved that a relatively quasiconvex subgroup of a relatively hyperbolic group is also relatively hyperbolic with peripheral Date: September 11, 2017. 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20F67, 20F65. 1  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  2  structure inherited from the one of the ambient group but the subgroup is not necessarily hyperbolic. Quasiconvexity is not as useful for arbitrary finitely generated groups since quasiconvexity depends on a choice of generating set and, in particular, is not preserved under quasi-isometry. In [DT15b], Durham-Taylor introduce a strong notion of quasiconvexity in finitely generated groups, called stability, which is preserved under quasi-isometry. Stability agrees with quasiconvexity when ambient groups are hyperbolic. Moreover, the stable subgroups of mapping class groups are precisely the convex cocompact subgroups defined by Farb-Mosher in [FM02] and the such type of subgroups of mapping class groups is a primary motivation for the concept stable subgroups of a finitely generated group (see [DT15b]). The study of stable subgroups has received much attention in recent years, for examples: Koberda-Mangahas-Taylor [KMT], Aougab-Durham-Taylor [ADT], Antolı́n-Mj-Sisto-Taylor [AMST], Abbott-Behrstock-Durham [ABD], and others. However, a stable subgroup of a finitely generated group is always hyperbolic no matter the ambient group is hyperbolic or not (see [DT15b]). In some sense, the geometry of a stable subgroup does not reflect completely that of the ambient group. Therefore, we introduce another concept of quasiconvexity, called strong quasiconvexity, which is strong enough to be preserved under quasi-isometry and reflexive enough to capture the geometry of ambient groups. Definition 1.1. Let G be a finite generated group and H a subgroup of G. We say H is strongly quasiconvex in G if for every K ≥ 1, C ≥ 0 there is some M = M (K, C) such that every (K, C)–quasigeodesic in G with endpoints on H is contained in the M –neighborhood of H. Outside hyperbolic setting, there are many strongly quasiconvex subgroups that are not stable. For example, non-hyperbolic peripheral subgroups of a relatively hyperbolic group and non-hyperbolic hyperbolically embedded subgroups of a finitely generated group are non-stable strongly quasiconvex subgroups (see [DS05] and [Sis16]). In Section 7, we also provide many examples of non-stable strongly quasiconvex subgroups in right-angled Coxeter groups. However, there is a strong connection between strong quasiconvexity and stability. More precisely, a subgroup is stable if and only if it is strongly quasiconvex and hyperbolic (see Theorem 4.8). In some sense, we define strong quasiconvexity from stability but taking out the hyperbolicity to make subgroups better reflect the geometry of the ambient group. Additionally, we can study stable subgroups in a finitely generated group via investigating its strongly quasiconvex subgroups. More specifically, in this paper, we study strong quasiconvexity in relatively hyperbolic groups, right-angled Coxeter groups, and right-angled Artin groups and that leads to many results on stability in these such groups that were unknown before (see Sections 6, 7 and 8). We remark that the study of stability of right-angled Coxeter groups in  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  3  this paper also help us understand connectedness of Morse boundary of these groups. We characterize a strongly quasiconvex subgroup via the completely super linear lower relative divergence of the ambient group with respect to the subgroup. This characterization helps us characterize a stable subgroup via lower relative divergence and hyperbolicity. It is well-known that ordinary quasiconvex subgroups fail to satisfy many properties analogous to those of quasiconvex subgroups of hyperbolic groups. However, we prove that strongly quasiconvex subgroups have many those such properties (see Sections 4 and 5). Especially, there is a nice connection between the boundary of a strongly quasiconvex subgroup and the boundary of the ambient group that is analogous to one in hyperbolic setting. We also prove that the lower relative divergence of a group with respect to a strongly quasiconvex subgroup is diverse. Therefore, this suggests a classification of strongly quasiconvex subgroups by using lower relative divergence. 1.1. Some properties of strongly quasiconvex subgroups. It is wellknown that a quasiconvex subgroup H of a hyperbolic group G is finitely generated and undistorted (see [Sho91]) and H has finite index in its commensurator (see [KS96]). In addition, the intersection between two quasiconvex subgroups of a hyperbolic group is also a quasiconvex subgroup (see [Sho91]) and the collection of quasiconvex subgroups of a hyperbolic group has finite height and finite width (see [GMRS98]). In this paper, we also prove that strongly quasiconvex subgroups of arbitrary finitely generated groups also have analogous properties. Theorem 1.2. Let G be an arbitrary finitely generated group. Then: (1) If H is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of G, then H is finitely generated, undistorted subgroup and H has finite index in its commensurator. (2) If H1 and H2 are arbitrary strongly quasiconvex subgroups of G, then H1 ∩ H2 is strongly quasiconvex in G, H1 , and H2 . (3) If H = {H1 , · · · , Hℓ } is a finite collection of strongly quasiconvex subgroups of G, then H has finite height, finite width, and bounded packing. In [AMST], Antolı́n-Mj-Sisto-Taylor prove that if H is a finite collection of stable subgroups of a finitely generated group G, then H has finite height, finite width, and bounded packing in G. The above theorem strengths their work to strongly quasiconvex subgroups. Due to the lack of hyperbolicity of an arbitrary finitely generated group G and its strongly quasiconvex subgroups, the proof for these properties is more challenging. Combining Theorem 1.2 with the work of Sageev [Sag95, Sag97] and Hruska-Wise [HW09], we have as an immediate Corollary: Corollary 1.3. Suppose H is a strongly quasiconvex codimension 1 subgroup of a finitely generated group G. Then the corresponding CAT(0) cube complex is finite dimensional.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  4  In hyperbolic setting, the inclusion map H ֒→ G of a quasiconvex subgroup H into G induces a topological embedding of the Gromov boundary of H into the Gromov boundary of G and the image of this embedding is also the limit set of H in the Gromov boundary of G. Moreover, if H1 and H2 are two quasiconvex subgroups of a hyperbolic group G, then the limit set Λ(H1 ∩ H2 ) of the subgroup H1 ∩ H2 is the intersection ΛH1 ∩ ΛH2 of limit sets of H1 and H2 (see [Gro93]). In order to prove a strongly quasiconvex subgroup has similar properties as a quasiconvex subgroup of a hyperbolic group has as above, we need a boundary on finitely generated groups. In [Cor], Cordes introduces Morse boundary of proper geodesic metric spaces which generalizes the contracting boundary on CAT(0) spaces (see [CS15]). More importantly, Morse boundary is a quasi-isometry invariant and it agrees with Gromov boundary on hyperbolic spaces (see [Cor]). In this paper, we also prove a connection between strong quasiconvexity and Morse boundary that is similar to the one in hyperbolic setting. Theorem 1.4. Let G be a finitely generated group. Then (1) If H is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of G, then the inclusion i : H ֒→ G induces a topological embedding î : ∂M H → ∂M G of the Morse boundary of H into the Morse boundary of G such that î(∂M H) = ΛH, where ΛH is the limit set of H in the Morse boundary ∂M G of G. (2) If H1 and H2 are strongly quasiconvex subgroups of G, then H1 ∩ H2 is strongly quasiconvex in G and Λ(H1 ∩ H2 ) = ΛH1 ∩ ΛH2 . 1.2. Strong quasiconvexity and lower relative divergence. Lower relative divergence was introduced by the author in [Tra15] to study geometric connection between a geodesic space and its subspaces. Roughly speaking, relative divergence measures the distance distortion of the complement of the r–neighborhood of a subspace in the whole space when r increases. Lower relative divergence is proved to be preserved under quasi-isometry (see Proposition 4.9 in [Tra15]). Therefore, we can define lower relative divergence on a pair of groups (G, H), where G is finitely generated and H ≤ G, via some (any) Cayley graph of G. We refer the reader to Section 2 for precise definitions. In [CS15], Charney-Sultan introduce the concept of lower divergence of quasi-geodesic to study Morse quasi-geodesics in CAT(0) spaces. Later, Arzhantseva-Cashen-Gruber-Hume in [ACGH] use the concept of CharneySultan to study Morse quasi-geodesics in arbitrary geodesic metric spaces. We remark that lower relative divergence introduced by the author agrees with lower divergence introduced by Charney-Sultan on quasi-geodesics (see Theorem 4.12 in [Tra15]). In this paper, we generalize the work of CharneySultan and Arzhantseva-Cashen-Gruber-Hume to characterize Morse subsets in arbitrary geodesic metric spaces via lower relative divergence.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  5  Theorem 1.5. Let X be a geodesic space and A a subset of X of infinite diameter. Then A is Morse in X if and only if the lower relative divergence of X with respect to A is completely super linear. Applying the above theorem, we also characterize strongly quasiconvex subgroups via lower relative divergence. Theorem 1.6. Let G be a finitely generated group and H infinite subgroup of G. Then H is strongly quasiconvex in G if and only if the lower relative divergence of G with respect to H is completely super linear. It is proved in [Tra15] the lower relative divergence of a hyperbolic group with respect to a quasiconvex subgroup is at least exponential. The author in [Tra] also proves that lower relative divergence of a non-hyperbolic group with respect to a stable subgroup can be any polynomials. In this paper, we also prove a similar result but applying on non-stable strongly quasiconvex subgroups. Theorem 1.7. For each d ≥ 2 there is a non-hyperbolic group Gd together with a non-stable strongly quasiconvex subgroup whose lower relative divergence is a polynomial of degree d. The above theorem shows that the lower relative divergence with respect to strongly quasiconvex subgroups are diverse and, therefore, the theorem, suggests a classification of strongly quasiconvex subgroups using lower relative divergence of ambient groups with respect to them. Question 1.8. Is lower relative divergence of a CAT(0) group with respect to an infinite strongly quasiconvex subgroup at least quadratic? 1.3. Strong quasiconvexity and stability in relatively hyperbolic groups. In this paper, we fully describe strongly quasiconvex subgroups and stable subgroups of relatively hyperbolic groups. We remark that in relatively hyperbolic group setting, strongly quasiconvex subgroups and stable subgroups are distinct from relatively quasiconvex subgroups defined by Dahmani [Dah03] and Osin [Osi06]. We first come up with the description of strongly quasiconvex subgroups of relatively hyperbolic groups. Theorem 1.9. Let (G, P) be a finitely generated relatively hyperbolic group and H finitely generated undistorted subgroup of G. Then the following are equivalent: (1) The subgroup H is strongly quasiconvex in G. (2) The subgroup H ∩P g is strongly quasiconvex in P g for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. (3) The subgroup H ∩ P g is strongly quasiconvex in G for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. In [ADT], Aougab-Durham-Taylor characterize stability in relatively hyperbolic groups whose peripheral subgroups are one-ended and have linear  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  6  divergence. In this paper, we give a complete characterization of stable subgroups of arbitrary relatively hyperbolic groups. Corollary 1.10. Let (G, P) be a finitely generated relatively hyperbolic group and H finitely generated undistorted subgroup of G. Then the following are equivalent: (1) The subgroup H is stable in G. (2) The subgroup H ∩ P g is stable in P g for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. (3) The subgroup H ∩ P g is stable in G for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. 1.4. Strong quasiconvexity, stability and Morse boundary of rightangled Coxeter groups. In this paper, we also establish a characterization of strongly quasiconvex special subgroups of two-dimensional right-angled Coxeter groups. Theorem 1.11. Let Γ be a simplicial, triangle free graph with vertex set S and K subgroup of GΓ generated by some subset S1 of S. Then the following conditions are equivalent: (1) The subgroup K is strongly quasiconvex in GΓ . (2) If S1 contains two non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle σ, then S1 contains all vertices of σ. (3) Either |K| < ∞ or the lower relative divergence of GΓ with respect to K is at least quadratic. An immediate corollary of the above theorem is a characterization of stable special subgroups of two-dimensional right-angled Coxeter groups. Corollary 1.12. Let Γ be a simplicial, triangle free graph with vertex set S and K subgroup of GΓ generated by some subset S1 of S. Then the following conditions are equivalent: (1) The subgroup K is stable in GΓ . (2) The set S1 does not contain a pair of non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle in Γ. The above corollary can be used to prove some connectedness of Morse boundary of right-angled Coxeter groups: Corollary 1.13. If the simplicial, triangle free graph Γ contains an induced loops σ of length greater than 4 such that the vertex set of σ does not contain a pair of non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle in Γ, then the Morse boundary of right-angled Coxeter group GΓ is not totally disconnected. We remark that Behrstock in [Beh] constructs example of certain rightangled Coxeter groups which contain a closed hyperbolic surface stable subgroup and prove that the Morse boundaries of these groups are not totally disconnected. We believe that the approach of Behrstock can also be generalize to proofs of Corollaries 1.12 and 1.13. If so, our proofs of Corollaries  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  7  1.12 and 1.13 can be considered as alternative ways. However, we remark that the method in [Beh] can not be used to study strongly quasiconvex subgroups in right-angled Coxeter groups as in Theorem 1.11. Conjecture 1.14. The Morse boundary of a right-angled Coxeter group GΓ is not totally disconnected if and only if the defining graph Γ contains an induced loops σ of length greater than 4 such that the vertex set of σ does not contain a pair of non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle in Γ. 1.5. Strong quasiconvexity, stability, and lower relative divergence in right-angled Artin groups. As we discussed above, two notions of strong quasiconvexity and stability are equivalent in hyperbolic setting. Outside hyperbolic setting, there are many strongly quasiconvex subgroups that are not stable. A natural question arises on the existence of nonhyperbolic ambient group on which two notions of strongly quasiconvex subgroup of infinite index and stable subgroup are equivalent: Question 1.15. Is there any non-hyperbolic ambient group setting on which two notions of strongly quasiconvex subgroup of infinite index and stable subgroup are equivalent? In other word, is there any non-hyperbolic ambient group setting on which all strongly quasiconvex subgroups of infinite index are hyperbolic? The following theorem answers above question: Theorem 1.16. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a non-trivial, infinite index subgroup of the right-angled Artin group AΓ . Then the following are equivalent: (1) H is strongly quasiconvex. (2) H is stable. (3) The lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is quadratic. (4) The lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is completely super linear. The above theorem also shows that linear and quadratic functions are the only functions which are lower relative divergence in right-angled Artin groups in the non-trivial case (i.e. the defining graph of the ambient group is simplicial, finite, connected and the subgroup is non-trivial and of infinite index). The most surprising fact obtained from the above theorem is the equivalence between strong quasiconvexity and stability (except for the trivial case of finite index subgroups) in non-hyperbolic settings. In [KMT], Koberda-Mangahas-Taylor give several characterizations of purely loxodromic subgroups in right-angled Artin groups. One of these is the equivalence between purely loxodromic subgroups and stable subgroups. The above theorem also strengthens the work of Koberda-Mangahas-Taylor in [KMT] to provide several alternative characterizations of purely loxodromic subgroups in right-angled Artin groups.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  8  Corollary 1.17. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a non-trivial, finitely generated, infinite index subgroup of the right-angled Artin group AΓ . Then the following are equivalent: (1) H is purely loxodromic. (2) H is strongly quasiconvex. (3) The lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is quadratic. (4) The lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is completely super linear. We conjecture that similar characterizations can be obtained for convex cocompact subgroups of mapping class groups. 1.6. Some questions. Hierarchically hyperbolic groups were recently introduced by Behrstock, Hagen, and Sisto [BHS17] to provide a uniform framework in which to study many important families of groups, including mapping class groups, right-angled Coxeter groups, most 3-manifold groups, right-angled Artin groups and many others. In [ABD], Abbott-BehrstockDurham prove a complete characterization of stability in hierarchically hyperbolic groups. As we discussed above, strong quasiconvexity and stability both generalize the notion quasiconvexity of hyperbolic groups but they are two different notions in general. So far we obtained several results about strong quasiconvexity in right-angled Artin groups and right-angled Coxeter groups and we remark again that these such groups are also hierarchically hyperbolic. Therefore, it would be nice if we can characterize strong quasiconvexity in hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Question 1.18. Characterizing strong quasiconvexity in hierarchically hyperbolic groups? We also hope there is a connection between strong quasiconvexity and stability in some certain hierarchically hyperbolic groups which is analogous to the one in right-angled Artin groups. Question 1.19. What are conditions on a hierarchically hyperbolic group so that all strongly quasiconvex subgroups of infinite index are stable? There is also a natural question that arises on the existence of hierarchically hyperbolic structure on a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of a hierarchically hyperbolic group. Question 1.20. Is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of a hierarchically hyperbolic group hierarchically hyperbolic? In [Sis16], Sisto proves that a hyperbolically embedded subgroup is strongly quasiconvex. We hope to obtain a converse statement. Question 1.21. Under what conditions, a strongly quasiconvex subgroup is hyperbolically embedded?  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  9  In [Osi16], Osin characterizes acylindrically hyperbolic groups using hyperbolically embedded subgroups. Therefore, the answer to the above question may give some connection between two notions of strongly quasiconvex subgroups and acylindrically hyperbolic groups. Acknowledgments. I want to thank Prof. Christopher Hruska, Prof. Ruth Charney, Prof. Jason Behrstock, Prof. Thomas Koberda, Prof. François Dahmani, and Hoang Thanh Nguyen for their very helpful conversations. I also thank Matthew Haulmark for advice that improved the exposition of the paper. Lastly, I want to thank Anthony Genevois for many helpful discussions. 2. Preliminaries In this section, we review some well-known concepts in geometric group theory: geodesic spaces, geodesics, quasigeodesics, quasi-isometry, quasiisometric embedding, and Morse subsets. We also discuss some recently developed concepts: relative divergence, geodesic divergence, and geodesic lower divergence. Definition 2.1. Let (X, dX ) and (Y, dY ) be two metric spaces and the map Φ from X to Y a (K, L)–quasi-isometric embedding if for all x1 , x2 in X the following inequality holds:  (1/K) dX (x1 , x2 ) − L ≤ dY Φ(x1 ), Φ(x2 ) ≤ K dX (x1 , x2 ) + L.  If, in addition, NL Φ(X) = Y , then Φ is called a (K, L)–quasi-isometry. Two spaces X and Y are quasi-isometric if there is a (K, L)–quasi-isometry form X to Y . The special case of a quasi-isometric embedding where the domain is a connected interval in R (possibly all of R is called a (K, L)–quasi-geodesic. A geodesic is a (1, 0)–quasi-geodesic. The metric space X is a geodesic space if any pair of points in X can be joined by a geodesic segment. Definition 2.2. Let X be a geodesic space and A a subset of X. Let r be any positive number.  (1) Nr (A) = x ∈ X dX (x, A) < r (2) ∂Nr (A) = x ∈ X dX (x, A) = r (3) Cr (A) = X − Nr (A). (4) Let dr,A be the induced length metric on the complement of the r– neighborhood of A in X. If the subspace A is clear from context, we can use the notation dr instead of using dr,A . Definition 2.3. A subset A of a geodesic metric space X is Morse if for every K ≥ 1, C ≥ 0 there is some M = M (K, C) such that every (K, C)– quasigeodesic with endpoints on A is contained in the M –neighborhood of A. We call the function M a Morse gauge.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  10  Before we define the concepts of relative divergence, geodesic divergence, and geodesic lower divergence, we need to build the notions of domination and equivalence which are the tools used by these concepts. Definition 2.4. Let M be the collection of all functions from [0, ∞) to [0, ∞]. Let f and g be arbitrary elements of M. The function f is dominated by the function g, denoted f  g, if there are positive constants A, B, C and D such that f (x) ≤ Ag(Bx) + Cx for all x > D. Two functions f and g are equivalent, denoted f ∼ g, if f  g and g  f . The function f is strictly dominated by the function g, denoted f ≺ g, if f is dominated by g and they are not equivalent. We say a function f in M is completely super linear if for every choice of C > 0 the collection of x ∈ [0, ∞) such that f (x) ≤ Cx is bounded. Remark 2.5. The relations  and ≺ are transitive. The relation ∼ is an equivalence relation on the set M. If f  g in M and f is completely super linear, then g is also completely super linear. Therefore, if f ∼ g in M and one of them is completely super linear, then the other is also completely super linear. Let f and g be two polynomial functions in the family M. We observe that f is dominated by g if and only if the degree of f is less than or equal to the degree of g and they are equivalent if and only if they have the same degree. All exponential functions of the form abx+c , where a > 1, b > 0 are equivalent. Therefore, a function f in M is linear, quadratic or exponential... if f is respectively equivalent to any polynomial with degree one, two or any function of the form abx+c , where a > 1, b > 0. Definition 2.6. Let {δρn } and {δρ′n } be two families of functions of M, indexed over ρ ∈ (0, 1] and positive integers n ≥ 2. The family {δρn } is dominated by the family {δρ′n }, denoted {δρn }  {δρ′n }, if there exists constant n  δ ′M n . Two families L ∈ (0, 1] and a positive integer M such that δLρ ρ n ′n n {δρ } and {δρ } are equivalent, denoted {δρ } ∼ {δρ′n }, if {δρn }  {δρ′n } and {δρ′n }  {δρn }. We say a family {δρn } of functions in M is completely super linear if there is some n0 ≥ 3 such that δρn0 are completely super linear for all ρ ∈ (0, 1]. Remark 2.7. A family {δρn } is dominated by (or dominates) a function f in M if {δρn } is dominated by (or dominates) the family {δρ′n } where δρ′n = f for all ρ and n. The equivalence between a family {δρn } and a function f in M can be defined similarly. Thus, a family {δρn } is linear, quadratic, exponential, etc. if {δρn } is equivalent to the function f where f is linear, quadratic, exponential, etc.. If {δρn }  {δρ′n } and {δρn } is completely super linear, then {δρ′n } is also completely super linear. Therefore, if {δρn } ∼ {δρ′n } and one of them is completely super linear, then the other is also completely super linear.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  11  We now review the concept of relative divergence which was originally introduced by the author in [Tra15]. Definition 2.8 (Relative divergence in spaces). Let X be a geodesic space and A a subset of X of infinite diameter. For each ρ ∈ (0, 1] and positive integer n ≥ 2, we define two functions σρn , δρn : [0, ∞) → [0, ∞] as follows: For each positive r, if there is no pair of x1 , x2 ∈ ∂Nr (A) such that dr (x1 , x2 ) < ∞ and d(x1 , x2 ) ≥ nr, we define σρn (r) = ∞. Otherwise, we define σρn (r) = inf dρr (x1 , x2 ) where the infimum is taken over all x1 , x2 ∈ ∂Nr (A) such that dr (x1 , x2 ) < ∞ and d(x1 , x2 ) ≥ nr. For each r, let δρn (r) = sup dρr (x1 , x2 ) where the supremum is taken over all x1 , x2 ∈ ∂Nr (A) such that dr (x1 , x2 ) < ∞ and d(x1 , x2 ) ≤ nr. The family of functions {σρn } is the lower relative divergence of X with respect A, denoted div(X, A) and the family of functions {δρn } is the upper relative divergence of X with respect A, denoted Div(X, A). Convention 2.9. Let X be a geodesic space and A a subset of X of infinite diameter. Let {σρn } be the lower relative divergence of X with respect to A. Assume that Nr0 (A) = X for some r0 . Therefore, ∂Nr (A) = ∅ for each r > r0 . This implies that for each ρ ∈ (0, 1] and positive integer n ≥ 2 σρn (r) = ∞ for r > r0 . Definition 2.10 (Relative divergence in groups). Let G be a finitely generated group and H its subgroup. We define the lower relative divergence of G with respect to H, denoted div(G, H), to be the lower relative divergence of the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) with respect to H for some (any) finite generating set S. Similarly, we define the upper relative divergence of G with respect to H, denoted Div(G, H), to be the upper relative divergence of the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) with respect to H for some (any) finite generating set S. Remark 2.11. We first remark that the subgroup H in the above definition is not required to be finitely generated. Moreover, the relative divergence is a pair quasi-isometry invariant concept (see Proposition 4.3 and Proposition 4.9 in [Tra15]). This implies that the relative divergence on a finitely generated group does not depend on the choice of finite generating sets of the ambient group. Also, the lower relative divergence div(G, H) is dominated by the upper relative divergence Div(G, H) with a mild condition on the pair (G, H) (see Theorem 4.14 in [Tra15]). We now come up with geodesic divergence and geodesic lower divergence. Definition 2.12 (Geodesic divergence). The divergence of two geodesic rays α and β with the same initial point x0 in a geodesic space X, denoted Divα,β , is a function g : (0, ∞) → (0, ∞] defined as follows. For each positive r, if there is no path outside the open ball with radius r about x0 connecting α(r) and β(r), we define g(r) = ∞. Otherwise, we define g(r) is the infimum  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  12  on the lengths of all paths outside the open ball with radius r about x0 connecting α(r) and β(r). The divergence of a bi-infinite geodesic γ, denoted Divγ , is the divergence of the two geodesic rays obtained from γ with the initial point γ(0). Definition 2.13 (Geodesic lower divergence). Let α be a bi-infinite geodesic. For any r > 0 and t ∈ R, if there is no path from α(t − r) to α(t + r) that lies outside the open ball of radius r about α(t), we define ρα (r, t) = ∞. Otherwise, we let ρα (r, t) denote the infimum of the lengths of all paths from α(t − r) to α(t + r) that lies outside the open ball of radius r about α(t). Define the lower divergence of α to be the growth rate of the following function: ldivα (r) = inf ρα (r, t) t∈R  Remark 2.14. The geodesic divergence is a classical notion related to curvature and the geodesic lower divergence was originally introduced by Charney-Sultan in [CS15]. In general, these concepts measure different aspects of a bi-infinite geodesic in a geodesic space. More precisely, let α be a bi-infinite geodesic in a geodesic space X. It is not hard to see that ldivα ≤ Divα and two functions are not the same in general. However, ldivα ∼ Divα if α is a periodic geodesic (i.e. there is an isometry g of X such that gα = α). Also, the lower divergence ldivα of α in X is equivalent to the lower relative divergence div(X, α) of X with respect to α. The proof of this fact is similar to the proof of Proposition 6.6 in [Tra15] and we leave it to the reader. 3. Characterizing Morse subsets via lower relative divergence In most parts of this section, we characterize Morse subsets with infinite diameter in term of the lower divergence related to them. This result will be used to characterize strongly quasiconvex subgroups defined in Section 4. We also study behaviors of geodesic rays in finite neighborhood of some Morse subsets and this result will be applied to study the height of strongly quasiconvex subgroups later. Proposition 3.1 (Completely super linear relative divergence implies Morse). Let X be a geodesic space and A a subset of X of infinite diameter. If the lower relative divergence {σρn } of X with respect to A is completely super linear, then A is Morse in X. Proof. Let n0 ≥ 3 and ρ0 ∈ (0, 1] such that σρn00 is a completely super linear function. Let γ : [a, b] → X be an arbitrary (K, L)–quasi-geodesic in X connecting two points in A. By Lemma 1.11 of [BH99] III.H, we can find a continuous quasi-geodesic c : [a, b] → X such that: (1) c(a) = γ(a) and c(b) = γ(b).  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  13   (2) ℓ(c|[t,t′ ] ) ≤ K1 d c(t), c(t′ ) + L1 , where K1 ≥ 1, L1 ≥ 0 only depend on K and L. (3) The Hausdorff distance between γ and c is less than C, where C only depends on K and L. Therefore, it is sufficient to prove that c lies in some M –neighborhood of A, where M only depends on K1 , L1 , n0 and the function σρn00 . Let t0 ∈ [a, b]  such that c(t0 ) is the farthest point from A and let m = d c(t0 ), A . If m ≤ 2L1 , then c obviously lies in some M –neighborhood of A, where M only depends on L1 . Therefore, we can assume that m > 2L1 . We claim that if m > 2L1 , then σρn00 2Km1 n0 ≤ (4K1 +2)m. Let m1 = 2Km1 n0 , t1 ∈ [a, t0 ] and t2 ∈ [t0 , b] such that c(t1 ), c(t2 ) both lie in ∂Nm1 (A) and c[t1 , t2 ] lies outside Nm1 (A). We consider two cases. Case 1: ℓ(c|[t1 ,t2 ] ) ≤ 4K1 m Since d c(t0 ), A) = m and d c(t1 ), A) = 2Km1 n0 , then the length ℓ(c|[t1 ,t0 ] )  is bounded below 1 − 2K11 n0 m. Similarly, the length ℓ(c|[t0 ,t2 ] ) is bounded  below 1 − 2K11 n0 m. Therefore, the length ℓ(c|[t1 ,t2 ] ) is bounded below by  2 − K11n0 m. This implies that  L1 1 ℓ(c|[t1 ,t2 ] ) − d c(t1 ), c(t2 ) ≥ K1 K1 1  L1 1 2− m− ≥ K1 K1 n0 K1 1  m  L1 m + 1− − ≥ K1 K1 n0 K1 K1 m L1 m m m  + − ≥ ≥ n0 ≥ K1 2K1 K1 K1 2K1 n0 Also, the path c([t1 , t2 ]) lies outside fore, σρn00  m 2K1 n0   –neighborhood of A. There-  m  ≤ ℓ(c|[t1 ,t2 ] ) ≤ 4K1 m. 2K1 n0  Case 2: ℓ(c|[t1 ,t2 ] ) > 4K1 m We can choose t3 and t4 in [t1 , t2 ] (t3 < t4 ) such that ℓ(c|[t3 ,t4 ] ) = 4K1 m.  Since m1 ≤ d c(t3 ), A ≤ m, we can choose a point u in ∂Nm1 (A) such that the geodesic α1 connecting u, c(t3 ) lies outside Nm1 (A) and its length is bounded above by m. Similarly, we can choose a point v in ∂Nm1 (A) such that the geodesic α2 connecting v, c(t Nm1 (A) and its S4 ) lies outside S length is bounded above by m. Let β = α1 c[t1 , t2 ] α2 . Then β is a path outside Nm1 (A) that connects two points u and v on ∂Nm1 (A). Moreover, the length of β is bounded above by (4K1 + 2)m by the construction. Also,  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  14   1 L1 d(u, v) ≥ d c(t3 ), c(t4 ) − 2m ≥ ℓ(c|[t3 ,t4 ] ) − − 2m K1 K1 L1 L1 m  ≥ 4m − − 2m ≥ 2m − ≥ m ≥ n0 . K1 K1 2K1 n0 Therefore, σρn00  m  ≤ ℓ(β) ≤ (4K1 + 2)m. 2K1 n0  Since σρn00 is a completely super linear function, then there is an upper bound on m depending on K1 and n0 . Therefore, c lies in some M – neighborhood of A, where M only depends on K1 , L1 , n0 and the function σρn00 .  The following two lemmas will be used to compute the lower relative divergence of geodesic spaces with respect to their Morse subsets. Most techniques for the proof of these lemmas were studied from [ACGH]. Lemma 3.2. Suppose γ is a concatenation of two (L, 0)–quasi-geodesics γ1 and γ2 , where γ1 , γ2 , and γ are all parametrized by arc length. Let C > 1 and r > 0 such that the distance between two endpoints a, c of γ is at least r and the length of γ is at most Cr. For each ρ ∈ (0, 1] and L′ > L + C + C/ρ + 1, there exist an (L′ , 0)–quasi-geodesic α parametrized by arc length connecting two points a, c such that the image of α lies ρr–neighborhood the image of γ and the length of α is bounded above by the length of γ. Proof. For each path β parametrized by arc length we will abuse notation to identify β to its image. Moreover, for each pair of points u and v on β we denote dβ (u, v) to be the length of the subpath of β connecting u and v. If γ is an (L′ , 0)–quasi-geodesic, then α = γ is a desired quasi-geodesic. We now assume that γ is not an (L′ , 0)–quasi-geodesic. Since d(a, c) ≥ r ≥ dγ (a, c)/C > dγ (a, c)/L′ , then there is a maximal subsegment [x, y]γ of γ such that d(x, y) = dγ (x, y)/L′ by the continuity of γ. It is obvious that x and y can not both lie in the same path γ1 or γ2 . Therefore, we can assume x ∈ γ1 and y ∈ γ2 . Let [x, y] be a geodesic connecting x, y and α = [a, x]γ1 ∪ [x, y] ∪ [y, c]γ2 . We parametrized α by arc length and we will prove that α is an (L′ , 0)–quasi-geodesic. Let u and v be an arbitrary two points in α. If u and v both lie in the same one of these segments [a, x]γ1 , [x, y], or [y, c]γ2 , then dα (u, v) ≤ L′ d(u, v). We now consider the remaining three cases. Case 1: One of these points u, v lies in [a, x]γ1 and the other lies in [x, y]. We can assume that u lies in [a, x]γ1 and v lies in [x, y]. We observe that d(u, y) > dγ (u, y)/L′ by the maximality of [x, y]γ and the continuity of γ. Therefore,  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  15  dγ (u, y) − d(v, y) = L′ dγ (u, x) dγ (u, x) + dγ (x, y) − d(v, y) = + d(x, y) − d(v, y) = = L′ L′ dγ (u, x) dγ (u, x) + d(x, v) dα (u, v) = + d(x, v) ≥ = L′ L′ L′ ′ or dα (u, v) ≤ L d(u, v). Case 2: One of these points u, v lies in [y, c]γ2 and the other lies in [x, y]. Using symmetric argument as in Case 1, we can prove dα (u, v) ≤ L′ d(u, v). Case 3: One of these points u, v lies in [a, x]γ1 and the other lies in [y, c]γ2 . We can assume that u lies in [a, x]γ1 and v lies in [y, c]γ2 . We observe again that d(u, v) > dγ (u, v)/L′ by the maximality of [x, y]γ and the continuity of γ. Also, it is not hard to see dα (u, v) ≤ dγ (u, v). This implies that d(u, v) > dα (u, v)/L′ or dα (u, v) ≤ L′ d(u, v). Therefore, α is an (L′ , 0)-quasi-geodesic parametrized by arc length connecting a and c. It is not hard to see the length of α is less than or equal to the length of γ. In order to see that the path α lies completely inside ρr–neighborhood of γ, we observe that d(u, v) ≥ d(u, y) − d(v, y) ≥  d(x, y) =  Cr dγ (x, y) < = ρr. ′ L C/ρ   Lemma 3.3. For each C > 1 and ρ ∈ (0, 1] there is a constant L = L(C, ρ) ≥ 1 such that the following holds. Let r be an arbitrary positive number and γ a continuous path with the length less than Cr. Assume the distance between two endpoints x and y is at least r. Then there is an (L, 0)– quasi-geodesic α connecting two points x, y such that the image of α lies in the ρr–neighborhood of γ and the length of α is less than or equal to the length of γ. Proof. Let x0 = x and x1 be the last point on γ such that d(x0 , x1 ) = ρr/4. Similarly, we define xi = y if d(xi−1 , y) < ρr/2 or to be the last point on γ such that d(xi−1 , xi ) = ρr/4. By construction, we observe that d(xi , xj ) ≥ ρr/4 if i 6= j and y = xn for some n ≤ 4C/ρ. Let α1 be a concatenation of geodesics [x0 , x1 ][x1 , x2 ] · · · [xn−1 , xn ]. Then α1 connects two points x, y, the length of α1 is less than or equal to the length of γ, and α1 lies completely inside (ρr/2)–neighborhood of γ. Using Lemma 3.2 for each integer 1 ≤ i ≤ ⌊n/2⌋, there are (L2 , 0)–quasigeodesics (where L2 only depends on C and ρ) from x2(i−1) to x2i such that the concatenation α2 of these with subpath [x2⌊n/2⌋ , xn ]α1 of α1 satisfying the following conditions: (1) α2 lies completely inside (ρr/4)–neighborhood of α1 . (2) The length of α2 is less than or equal to the length of α1 .  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  16  Repeating this process at most d times (d ≤ n) until we get an (Ld , 0)– quasi-geodesic αd (where Ld only depends on C and ρ) connecting two points x and y satisfying the following conditions: (1) αd lies completely inside (ρr/2d )–neighborhood of αd−1 . (2) The length of αd is less than or equal to the length of αd−1 . Therefore, the length of the (Ld , 0)–quasi-geodesic αd is less than the length of γ. Also, ρr ρr ρr + + · · · + d < ρr. 2 4 2 This implies that αd lies in the ρr–neighborhood of γ. Therefore, L = Ld is the desired number only depending on C and ρ.  Proposition 3.4 (Morse implies completely super linear relative divergence). Let X be a geodesic space and A a subset of X of infinite diameter. If A is Morse in X, then the lower relative divergence {σρn } of X with respect to A is completely super linear. Proof. We will prove the stronger result that σρn is completely super linear for all n ≥ 5 and ρ ∈ (0, 1]. Let µ be the Morse gauge of A and assume for the contradiction that σρn00 is not completely super linear for some n0 ≥ 5 and ρ0 ∈ (0, 1]. Then there is C > 0 for which there is an unbounded sequence of numbers rm and paths γm satisfying (1) Each path γm lies outsides the (ρ0 rm )–neighborhood of A and their endpoints xm , ym lie in ∂Nrm (A). (2) d(xm , ym ) ≥ n0 rm and ℓ(γm ) ≤ Crm . ′ be a geodesic of length less than 2r that connects x For each m, let γm m m ′′ be a geodesic of length less than and some point um in A. Similarly, let γm ′ ∪ γ ∪ γ ′′ . 2rm that connects ym and some point vm in A. Let γ m = γm m m Then γ m is a path of length at most (C + 4)rm that connects two points um , vm on A with d(um , vm ) ≥ (n0 − 4)rm ≥ rm . By Lemma 3.3, for each m there is an (L, 0)–quasi-geodesic αm (L does not depend on m) connecting two points um , vm satisfying (1) ℓ(αm ) ≤ ℓ(γ m ) ≤ (C + 4)rm . (2) αm lies in the (ρ0 rm /2)–neighborhood of γ m . ′ is contained By triangle inequality, each (ρ0 rm /2)–neighborhood of γm ′′ in the open ball B(xm , 2rm + ρ0 rm /2) and (ρ0 rm /2)–neighborhood of γm is contained in the open ball B(ym , 2rm + ρ0 rm /2). Since d(xm , ym ) ≥ n0 rm ≥ 5rm , the intersection between two open balls B(xm , 2rm + ρ0 rm /2) and B(ym , 2rm + ρ0 rm /2) is empty. Therefore, two (ρ0 rm /2)–neighborhoods ′ and γ ′′ have an empty intersection. Since α of γm m is connected and αm m ′ and γ ′′ , α can not lie intersects with both (ρ0 rm /2)–neighborhoods of γm m m ′ ∪ γ ′′ . This implies that completely inside the (ρ0 rm /2)–neighborhood of γm m there is a point sm on αm that lies in the (ρ0 rm /2)–neighborhood of γm . Since each path γm lies outside the (ρ0 rm )–neighborhood of A, the point sm must lie outside the (ρ0 rm /2)–neighborhood of A.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  17  Recall that each αm is an (L, 0)–quasi–geodesic with endpoints on A and A is Morse in X with Morse gauge µ. Each path γm must lie completely inside the µ(L, 0)–neighborhood of A. In particular, each point sm must lie inside the µ(L, 0)–neighborhood of A. Therefore, µ(L, 0) ≥ ρ0 rm /2 for all m which contradicts to the choice of sequence rm . Therefore, σρn is completely super linear for all n ≥ 5 and ρ ∈ (0, 1].  The following theorem is deduced from Propositions 3.1 and 3.4. Theorem 3.5 (Characterization of Morse subsets). Let X be a geodesic space and A a subset of X of infinite diameter. Then A is Morse in X if and only if the lower relative divergence of X with respect to A is completely super linear. We now study behavior of geodesic rays in finite neighborhood of some Morse subset. We first start with a technical lemma that basically refers to “quasigeodesic approximation” of some certain concatenations of geodesics. Lemma 3.6. Let γ = γ1 γ2 γ3 be the concatenation of three geodesics γ1 , γ2 , and γ3 . If there is a number r > 0 such that ℓ(γ1 ) < r, ℓ(γ2 ) = 20r, and ℓ(γ3 ) < r, then there is a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic α with the same endpoints of γ and α ∩ γ2 6= ∅. Proof. For each path β parametrized by arc length we will abuse notation to identify β to its image. Moreover, for each pair of points u and v on β we denote dβ (u, v) to be the length of the subpath of β connecting u and v. Let a and b be the endpoints of γ1 , let b and c be the endpoints of γ2 , and let c and d be the endpoints of γ3 . We claim that there are points x1 ∈ γ1 and y1 ∈ γ2 such that d(x1 , y1 ) ≤ 5r and the concatenation α1 = [a, x1 ]γ1 ∪ [x1 , y1 ] ∪ [y1 , c]γ2 is a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic, where [x1 , y1 ] is a geodesic connecting x1 , y1 . If the concatenation β = γ1 γ2 is a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic, then we can choose x1 = y1 = b and α1 = β. We now assume that β is not a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic. Since d(a, c) ≥ d(b, c) − d(a, b) ≥ 19r and dβ (a, c) ≤ d(a, b) + d(b, c) ≤ 21r, d(a, c) > dβ (a, c)/5. Therefore, there is a maximal subsegment [x1 , y1 ]β of β such that d(x1 , y1 ) = dβ (x1 , y1 )/5 by the continuity of β. It is obvious that x1 and y1 can not both lie in the same path γ1 or γ2 . Therefore, we can assume x1 ∈ γ1 and y1 ∈ γ2 . Obviously, d(x1 , y1 ) = dβ (x1 , y1 )/5 ≤ ℓ(β)/5 ≤ 5r. Moreover, α1 is a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic by using the same argument as in Lemma 3.2. Similarly, there are points x2 ∈ γ3 and y2 ∈ γ2 such that d(x2 , y2 ) ≤ 5r and the concatenation α2 = [b, y2 ]γ2 ∪ [y2 , x2 ] ∪ [x2 , d]γ3 is a (5, 0)– quasigeodesic, where [y2 , x2 ] is a geodesic connecting y2 , x2 . Let α = [a, x1 ]γ1 ∪ [x1 , y1 ] ∪ [y1 , y2 ]γ2 ∪ [y2 , x2 ] ∪ [x2 , d]γ3 .  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  18  Then α ⊂ α1 ∪ α2 and α ∩ γ2 6= ∅. We now prove that α is a (5, 0)– quasigeodesic. Let u and v be arbitrary two points in α. We consider several cases. If two points u and v both lies in α1 , then dα1 (u, v) ≤ 5d(u, v) because α1 is a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic. Also, dα (u, v) = dα1 (u, v) by the construction of α and α1 . This implies that dα (u, v) ≤ 5d(u, v). We also obtain a similar inequality if two points u and v both lies in α2 . In the remaining case, u and v does not lie in the same path α1 or α2 . Therefore, one of two points u and v must lie in [a, x1 ]γ1 ∪ [x1 , y1 ] (say u) and the remaining point must lie in [y2 , x2 ] ∪ [y2 , d]γ3 (say v). Since the length of [a, x1 ]γ1 ∪ [x1 , y1 ] is less than 6r, d(a, u) ≤ 6r. Similarly, d(d, v) ≤ 6r. Therefore, d(u, v) ≥ d(a, d) − d(a, u) − d(d, v) ≥ d(b, c) − d(a, b) − d(c, d) − 12r ≥ 20r − r − r − 12r ≥ 6r. Also, dα (u, v) ≤ ℓ(α) ≤ ℓ(γ) ≤ 22r. Therefore, dα (u, v) ≤ 5d(u, v). Therefore, α is a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic.  Proposition 3.7. Let X be a geodesic space and A a µ–subset of X. Then there is a constant D > 0 such that the following hold. If γ : [0, ∞) → X is a geodesic ray that lies in some finite neighborhood of A, then there is C > 0 such that γ|[C,∞) lies in the D–neighborhood of A. Proof. Assume that γ lies in the r–neighborhood of A for some r > 0. For each i ≥ 1 let γi = γ|[20(i−1)r,20ir] . Then each γi is a geodesic of length 20r. Since γ lies in the r–neighborhood of A, for each i ≥ 0 there is a geodesic βi of length less than r that connects γ(20ir) and A. By Lemma 3.6 for each i ≥ 1 there is a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic αi with the same endpoints with the concatenation βi−1 γi βi such that αi ∩ γi 6= ∅. Since each αi is a (5, 0)–quasigeodesic with endpoints in A, αi lies entirely inside the µ(5, 0)–neighborhood of A. We recall that αi ∩ γi 6= ∅. Therefore, there is ti ∈ [20(i − 1)r, 20ir] such that γ(ti ) lies in the µ(5, 0)–neighborhood of A. Therefore, for each i ≥ 1 each geodesic γ|[ti ,ti+1 ] has endpoints in the µ(5, 0)–neighborhood of A. This implies that γ|[ti ,ti+1 ] lies in some D– neighborhood of A, where D only depends on µ. Set C = t1 then γ|[C,∞) lies in the D–neighborhood of A obviously.  4. Strong quasiconvexity, stability, and lower relative divergence In this section, we proposed concept of strongly quasiconvex subgroups. We show the connection between strongly quasiconvex subgroups and stable subgroups and we characterize these subgroups using lower relative divergence. We also study some basic properties of strongly quasiconvex subgroups that are analogous to properties of quasiconvex subgroups in hyperbolic groups.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  19  Definition 4.1. Let Φ : A → X be a quasi-isometric embedding between geodesic metric spaces. We say A is strongly quasiconvex in X if the image Φ(A) is Morse in X. We say A is stable in X if for any K ≥ 1, L ≥ 0 there is an R = R(K, L) ≥ 0 so that if α and β are two (K, L)–quasi-geodesics with the same endpoints in Φ(A), then the Hausdorff distance between α and β is less than R. Note that when we say A is strongly quasiconvex (stable) in X we mean that A is strongly quasiconvex (stable) in X with respect to a particular quasi-isometric embedding Φ : A → X. Such a quasi-isometric embedding will always be clear from context, for example an undistorted subgroup H of a finitely generated group G. The following proposition provides with some basic facts about strong quasiconvexity. Proposition 4.2. Suppose that A, B, X are geodesic metric spaces and f  g  B → A → X are quasi-isometric embeddings. (1) If B is strongly quasiconvex in X via g ◦ f , then B is strongly quasiconvex in A via f . (2) If B is strongly quasiconvex in A via f and A is strongly quasiconvex in X via g, then B is strongly quasiconvex in X via g ◦ f . Proof. We first prove Statement (1) of the above proposition. More precisely, we are going to prove that f (B) is Morse in A. For each K ≥ 1 and L ≥ 0 let γ be an arbitrary (K, L)–quasi-geodesic in A that connects two points in f (B). Then g(γ) is (K ′ , L′ )–quasigeodesic in X that connects two points  in g f (B) , where K ′ , L′ depend only on K, L, and the quasi-isometry embedding g. Since B is strongly quasiconvex in X via g ◦ f , then g(γ)  lies in some M –neighborhood of g f (B) , where M depend only on K ′ and L′ . Again, g is a quasi-isometry embedding. Therefore, γ lies in some M ′ –neighborhood of f (B), where M ′ depends only on K, L, f and the quasi-isometry embedding g. This implies that B is strongly quasiconvex (stable) in A via f . We now prove Statement (2) of the above proposition. More precisely, we are going to prove that (g ◦ f )(B) is Morse in X. For each K ≥ 1 and L ≥ 0 let α be an in X that connects two  arbitrary (K, L)–quasi-geodesic  points in g f (B) . Since g f (B) ⊂ g(A) and g(A) is Morse subset in X, then α lies in some M –neighborhood of g(A), where M depends only on K and L. Also, g : A → X is a quasi-isometry embedding. Then there is a (K1 , L1 )–quasigeodesic β in A that connects two points in f (B) such that the Hausdorff distance between g(β) and α is bounded above by C, where K1 , L1 , C depend only on K, L, M , and the quasi-isometry embedding g. Also, f (B) is a Morse subset of A. Then β lies in some M1 –neighborhood f (B), where M1 depends only on K1 and L1 . Again, g : A → X is a quasi isometry embedding. Then g(β) lies in some M2 –neighborhood of g f (B) , where M2 depends only on M1 and the map g. Therefore, α lies in the  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  20   (M2 + C)–neighborhood of g f (B) . Therefore, B is strongly quasiconvex in X via g ◦ f .  The following proposition gives the exact relationship between strongly quasiconvex and stable subspaces. Proposition 4.3. Let Φ : A → X be a quasi-isometric embedding between geodesic metric spaces. Then A is stable in X if and only if A is strongly quasiconvex and hyperbolic. Proof. One direction of the above proposition is deduced from Remark 3.1 and Lemma 3.3 in [DT15b]. We now prove that if A is strongly quasiconvex and hyperbolic, then A is stable in X. For any K ≥ 1, L ≥ 0 let α and β are two (K, L)–quasi-geodesics with the same endpoints in Φ(A). Since Φ(A) is Morse in X, there is a constant C ≥ 0 not depending on α and β such that α and β both lies in the C–neighborhood of Φ(A). This is an easy exercise that there are constants K1 ≥ 1, L1 ≥ 0, D ≥ 0 not depending on α and β and two (K1 , L1 )–quasi-geodesics α1 and β1 with the same endpoints in A such that the Hausdorff distance between Φ(α1 ), α and the Hausdorff distance between Φ(β1 ), β are both bounded above by D. Since A is a hyperbolic space and Φ is a quasi-isometric embedding, the Hausdorff distance between Φ(α1 ) and Φ(β1 ) is bounded above by some constant D1 which does not depend on α and β. Therefore, the Hausdorff distance between α and β is bounded above by D1 + 2D. Therefore, A is stable in X.  We now come up with concepts of strongly quasiconvex subgroups and stable subgroups. Definition 4.4. Let G be a finite generated group and S an arbitrary finite generating set of G. Let H be a finite generated subgroup of G and T an arbitrary finite generating set of H. The subgroup H is undistorted in G if the natural inclusion i : H → G induces a quasi-isometric embedding from the Cayley graph Γ(H, T ) into the Cayley graph Γ(G, S). We say H is stable in G if Γ(H, T ) is stable in Γ(G, S). We remark that stable subgroups were proved to be independent of the choice of finite generating sets (see Section 3 in [DT15b]). Definition 4.5. Let G be a finite generated group and H a subgroup of G. We say H is quasiconvex in G with respect to some finite generating set S of G if there exists some C > 0 such that every geodesic in the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) that connects a pair of points in H lies inside the C–neighborhood of H. We say H is strongly quasiconvex in G if H is a Morse subset in the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) for some (any) finite generating set S. Remark 4.6. If H is a quasiconvex subgroup of a group G with respect to some finite generating set S, then H is also finitely generated and undistorted in G (see Lemma 3.5 of [BH99] III.Γ). However, we emphasis that the  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  21  concept of quasiconvex subgroups depend on the choice of finite generating set of the ambient group. This is clear that if H is a Morse subset in the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) with some finite generating set S, then H is also a quasiconvex subgroup of G with respect to S. In particular, H is finitely generated and undistorted in G. Therefore, the strong quasiconvexity of a subgroup does not depend on the choice of finite generating sets by the Statement (1) in Proposition 4.2. Moreover, if a finitely generated group G acts properly and cocompactly in some space, then H is a strongly quasiconvex (stable) subgroup of G if and only if H is strongly quasiconvex (stable) in X via some (any) orbit map restricted on H. The following theorem is a direct consequence of Theorem 3.5 Theorem 4.7 (Characterizing strongly quasiconvex subgroups). Let G be a finitely generated group and H infinite subgroup of G. Then H is strongly quasiconvex in G if and only if the lower relative divergence of G with respect to H is completely super linear. We also obtain several characterizations of stable subgroups by the following theorem and the proof can be deduced from Proposition 4.3 and Theorem 4.7. Theorem 4.8 (Characterizing stable subgroups). Let G be a finitely generated group and H infinite subgroup of G. Then the following are equivalent. (1) H is stable in G. (2) H is hyperbolic and strongly quasiconvex in G (3) H is hyperbolic and the lower relative divergence of G with respect to H is completely super linear. We now study some basic results about strongly quasiconvex subgroups related to subgroup inclusion and subgroup intersection. Lemma 4.9. (Proposition 9.4, [Hru10]). Let G be a group with a finite generating set S. Suppose xH and yK are arbitrary left cosets of subgroups of G. For each constant L there is a constant L′ = L′ (G, S, xH, yK, L) so that in the metric space (G, dS ) we have NL (xH) ∩ NL (yK) ⊂ NL′ (xHx−1 ∩ yKy −1 ). Proposition 4.10. Let G be a finitely generated group, A a subgroup of G, and B a subgroup of A. Then (1) If A is finitely generated, undistorted in G and B is strongly quasiconvex in G, then B is strongly quasiconvex in A. (2) If B is strongly quasiconvex in A and A is strongly quasiconvex in G, then B is strongly quasiconvex in G Proof. We note that if subgroups A is undistorted in G, then B is undistorted in A if and only if B is undistorted in G. Therefore, the above proposition is a direct result of Proposition 4.2.   ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  22  We remark that Statement (1) in Proposition 4.10 can be strengthen by the following proposition. Proposition 4.11. Let G be a finitely generated group and A undistorted subgroup of G. If H is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of G, then H1 = H ∩ A is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of A. In particular, H1 is finitely generated and undistorted in A. Proof. We fix finite generating sets S and T for G and A respectively. Let f : Γ(A, T ) → Γ(G, S) be a quasi-isometry embedding which is an extension of the inclusion A ֒→ G. We will prove that H1 is a Morse subset of Γ(A, T ). For each K ≥ 1 and L ≥ 0 let α be an arbitrary (K, L)–quasi-geodesic in Γ(A, T ) that connects two points in H1 . Since f : Γ(A, T ) → Γ(G, S) is a quasi-isometry embedding which is an extension of the inclusion A ֒→ G, then f (α) is a (K ′ , L′ )–quasigeodesic in Γ(G, S) that connects two points in H1 and f (α) lies in some D–neighborhood of A in Γ(G, S), where K ′ , L′ , D depend only on K, L and the map f . Since H is a Morse subset in Γ(G, S), f (α) also lies in some D1 –neighborhood of H in Γ(G, S), where D1 depends only on K ′ and L′ . By Lemma 4.9, there is M = M (G, S, A, H, D, D1 ) such that f (α) lies in the M –neighborhood of H1 = H ∩ A in Γ(G, S). Again, f : Γ(A, T ) → Γ(G, S) is a quasi-isometry embedding which is an extension of the inclusion A ֒→ G. Then, α lies in some M ′ –neighborhood of H1 in Γ(A, T ), where M ′ depend only on M and the map f .  The following proposition is a direct result of Propositions 4.10 and 4.11. Proposition 4.12. Let G be a finitely generated group and H1 , H2 strongly quasiconvex subgroups of G. Then H1 ∩ H2 is strongly quasiconvex in H1 , H2 , and G. Quasiconvex subgroups in hyperbolic groups have well-known properties that they have finite height and therefore, they have finite index in their commensurators. We will show that strongly quasiconvex subgroups in general also have these properties. Definition 4.13. Let G be a group and H a subgroup. (1) Conjugates g1 Hg1−1 , · · · gk Hgk−1 are essentially distinct if the cosets g1 H, · · · , gk H are distinct. (2) H has height at most n in G if the intersection of any (n + 1) essentially distinct conjugates is finite. The least n for which this is satisfied is called the height of H in G. (3) The width of H is the maximal cardinality of the set {gi H : |gi Hgi −1 ∩ gj Hgj −1 | = ∞}, where {gi H} ranges over all collections of distinct cosets. Similarly, given a finite collection H = {H1 , · · · , Hl }. (1) Conjugates g1 Hσ(1) g1−1 · · · gk Hσ(k) gk−1 are essentially distinct if the cosets g1 Hσ(1) , · · · , gk Hσ(k) are distinct.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  23  (2) The finite collection H of subgroups of G has height at most n if the intersection of any (n + 1) essentially distinct conjugates is finite. The least n for which this is satisfied is called the height of H in G. (3) The width of H is the maximal cardinality of the set −1 −1 | = ∞}, ∩ gσ(j) Hσ(j) gσ(j) {gσ(i) Hσ(i) : |gσ(i) Hσ(i) gσ(i)  where {gσ(i) Hσ(i) } ranges over all collections of distinct cosets. Definition 4.14. Let G be a group and H a subgroup. The commensurator of H in G, denoted CommG (H) is defined as CommG (H) = { g ∈ G | [H : H ∩ gHg−1 ] < ∞, [gHg−1 : H ∩ gHg−1 ] < ∞ }. Theorem 4.15. Let H = {H1 , · · · , Hℓ } be a finite collection of strongly quasiconvex subgroups of a finitely generated group G. Then H has finite height. Proof. By Proposition 3.7 there is a constant D > 0 such that the following hold. If γ : [0, ∞) → Γ(G, S) is a geodesic ray in the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) that lies in some finite neighborhood of Hi , then there is C > 0 such that γ|[C,∞) lies in the D–neighborhood of Hi . Let g1 Hσ(1) g1−1 · · · gk Hσ(k) gk−1 be T essential distinct conjugates with infinite intersection gi Hσ(i) gi−1 . T Since the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) is proper and gi Hσ(i) gi−1 is an infinite strongly quasiconvex subgroups, there is a geodesic ray γ : [0, ∞) → Γ(G, the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) that lies in some finite neighborhood of T S) in −1 gi Hσ(i) gi . Therefore, for each i the ray γ lies in some finite neighborhood of gi Hσ(i) . This implies that the ray gi−1 γ lies in some finite neighborhood of Hσ(i) . Thus, there is some Ci > 0 such that gi−1 γ|[Ci ,∞) lies in the D– neighborhood of Hσ(i) . In other word, γ|[Ci ,∞) lies in the D–neighborhood of gi Hσ(i) . Therefore, all left cosets gi Hσ(i) intersect some ball B(a, D). But there is a uniform bound N on the number of cosets of subgroups in H intersecting any metric ball of radius D. Thus, the collection H has finite height.  Corollary 4.16. If H is an infinite strongly quasiconvex subgroup of a finitely generated group G, then H has finite index in its commensurator CommG (H). We know prove that a strongly quasiconvex subgroup have bounded packing and finite widith. We first recall the concept of bounded packing subgroups in [HW09]. Definition 4.17. Let G be a finitely generated group and Γ a Cayley graph with respect to a finite generating set. A subgroup H has bounded packing in G if, for all D ≥ 0, there exist N ∈ N such that for any collection of N distinct cosets gH in G, at least two are separated by a distance of at least D.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  24  Similarly, a finite collection H = {H1 , · · · , Hℓ } of subgroups of G has bounded packing if, for all D ≥ 0, there exist N ∈ N such that for any collection of N distinct cosets gHi with Hi ∈ H, at least two are separated by a distance of at least D. Lemma 4.18. Let (X, d) be a geodesic space. Let A, B, and C be Morse subsets of X with a Morse gauge µ. For each D > 0 there is a number D ′ depending on D and µ such that if A, B, and C are pairwise D-close, then the intersection ND′ (A) ∩ ND′ (B) ∩ ND′ (C) is not empty. Proof. Let x ∈ ND (A) ∩ ND (B) y ∈ ND (B) ∩ ND (C) z ∈ ND (C) ∩ ND (A). Let u be a point in a geodesic [y, z] connecting y and z such that d(x, u) = d x, [y, z] . Let γ1 be the concatenation of two geodesics [x, u] and [u, y]. Similarly, let γ2 be the concatenation of two geodesics [x, u] and [u, z]. Then γ1 and γ2 are both (3, 0)–quasigeodesic. The proof of this claim is quite elementary and the reader can also see the proof of this claim in the proof of Lemma 2.2 in [Cor]. Since γ1 , γ2 , and [y, z] are all (3, 0)–quasigeodesic and A, B, and C are all µ–Morse subsets of X, then there is a number D ′ depending on D and µ such that γ1 ⊂ ND′ (B) γ2 ⊂ ND′ (A) [y, z] ⊂ ND′ (C) In particular, u belongs to the intersection ND′ (A) ∩ ND′ (B) ∩ ND′ (C). Therefore, this intersection is not empty.  Lemma 4.19 (Lemma 4.2 in [HW09]). Suppose H ≤ G has height 0 < n < ∞ in G. Choose g ∈ G so that gH 6= H, and let K = H ∩ gHg −1 . Then K has the height less than n in H. Theorem 4.20. Let H be a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of a finitely generated group G. Then H has bounded packing in G. The proof of the above theorem follows the same line of argument as Theorem 4.8 in [HW09]. At some point in the proof of Theorem 4.8 in [HW09], Hruska-Wise need to use the thinness of a triangle in a hyperbolic space. However, due to the lack of hyperbolicity in group G and subgroup H in the above theorem, we need to use Lemma 4.18 instead. Proof. Fix finite generating sets S and T for G and H respectively. By Theorem 4.15, we know that the height of H in G is finite. We will prove the theorem by induction on height. If the height of H in G is zero, then H is a finite group. Therefore, H has bounded packing by Corollary 2.6  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  25  in [HW09]. We now assume by induction that the theorem holds for every finitely generated group G0 and strongly quasiconvex subgroup H0 with the height of H0 in G0 less than the height of H in G. Let H be a set of left cosets gH which are pairwise D-close. We are going to prove that the cardinality of H is bounded by a number depending on D. We can translating H so we may assume that H ∈ H. Observe that if d(gH, H) < D then gH = hxH for some h ∈ H and x ∈ B(1, D). It follows that the left cosets gH intersecting ND (H) lie in at most |B(1, D)| distinct H–orbits. Thus it suffices to bound the number of elements of H in the orbit H(gH) for each fixed g ∈ / H. If we let K = H ∩ gHg−1 , then Lemma 4.19 shows that the height of K in H is less than the height of H in G. Since K is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup H, the inductive hypothesis applied to K ≤ H gives for each D ′ a number M ′ = M ′ (D ′ ) so that any collection of M ′ distinct cosets hK in H contains a pair separated by a dT –distance at least D ′ . Furthermore, the proof of Lemma 4.2 in [HW09] shows that there is a well-defined map hgH → hK taking left cosets of H in the orbit of gH to left cosets of K. A similar argument shows that this map is bijective. In order to complete the proof, we will show that D–closeness of distinct cosets h1 gH and h2 gH in (G, dS ) implies D ′ –closeness of the corresponding cosets h1 K and h2 K in (H, dT ) for some D ′ depending on D. The proof of this step in Theorem 4.8 in [HW09] requires the thinness of a triangle. However, we need to use Lemma 4.18 for our situation. In fact, there is D1 depending on D such that ND1 (H) ∩ ND1 (h1 gH) ∩ ND1 (h2 gH) contains an element u. By Lemma 4.9, there is number D2 depending on D1 but is independent of the choice of hi ∈ H such that ND1 (H) ∩ ND1 (hi gH) ⊂ ND2 (hi K). Therefore, u ∈ ND2 (h1 K) ∩ ND2 (h2 K). In other word, dS (h1 K, h2 K) < D2 . Since H is an undistorted subgroup of G, then dT (h1 K, h2 K) < D ′ for some D ′ depending on D, as desired.  Theorem 4.21. Let H = {H1 , · · · , Hℓ } be a finite collection of stable subgroups of a finitely generated group G. Then H has bounded packing in G. Further, H has finite width. Proof. First, let M be a collection of coset of subgroups in H which are pairwise D–close. By Theorem 4.20, for each i = 1, 2, · · · , ℓ there is a Ni ≥ 0 such that the number of coset of Hi in M is at most Ni . Therefore, the number of elements of M is at most ΣNi . Thus, H has bounded packing. Arguing as in the proof of Theorem 4.15, we see that any two conjugates of subgroups in H with infinite intersection have cosets uniformly close together. Therefore, H has finite width.   ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  26  5. Morse boundaries and strong quasiconvexity We recall basic properties of a quasiconvex subgroup in a hyperbolic group that the subgroup is also hyperbolic groups and the subgroup inclusion induces a topological embedding of the Gromov boundary of the subgroup into the Gromov boundary of the ambient group. Moreover, the image of this topological embedding is identical to the limit set of the subgroup inside the ambient group. Also, the intersection of two quasiconvex subgroups is again a quasiconvex subgroup and the limit set of the intersection of two quasiconvex subgroups is equal to the intersection of limit sets of the two subgroups. In this section, we prove some analogous properties for strongly quasiconvex subgroups in general. We first review the concept of Morse boundary in [Cor]. Definition 5.1. Let M be the set of all Morse gauges. We put a partial ordering on M so that for two Morse gauges N, N ′ ∈ M, we say N ≤ N ′ if and only if N (K, L) ≤ N ′ (K, L) for all K, L. Definition 5.2. Let X be a proper geodesic space. The Morse boundary of X with basepoint p, denoted ∂M Xp , is defined to be the set of all equivalence classes of Morse geodesic rays in X with initial point p, where two rays α, α′ : [0, ∞) → X are equivalent if there exists a constant K such that dX α(t), α(t) < K for all t > 0. We denote the equivalence class of a ray α in ∂M Xp by [α]. On ∂M Xp , we could build a topology as follows: Consider the subset of the Morse boundary N ∂M Xp = { x | The class x contains at least an N –Morse geodesic rays α with α(0) = p }. N X by: x → x as n → ∞ if and only if there We define convergence in ∂M p n exists N –Morse geodesic rays αn with αn (0) = p and [αn ] = xn such that every subsequence of αn contains a subsequence that converges uniformly on compact sets to a geodesic ray α with [α] = x. The closed subsets F in ∂M Xp are those satisfying the condition   {xn } ⊂ F and xn → x ⇒ x ∈ F.  We equip the the Morse boundary ∂M Xp with the direct limit topology ∂M Xp = lim ∂N X . − → M p M  Let A be a subset of X with basepoint p. The limit set ΛA of A in ∂M Xp is the set of all points c in ∂M Xp represented by rays based at p that lie in some finite neighborhood of A. Remark 5.3. The direct limit topology on ∂M Xp is independent of basepoint p (see Proposition 3.5 in [Cor]). Therefore, we can assume the basepoint is fixed, suppress it from the notation and write ∂M X. Moreover, Morse boundary is a quasi-isometry invariant (see Proposition 3.7 [Cor]). Therefore, we define the Morse boundary of a finitely generated group G,  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  27  denoted ∂M G, as the Morse boundary of its Cayley graph. We also define the limit set of a subgroup H of G in ∂M G accordingly. We define an action of G on ∂M G as follows. For each element g in G and [α] in ∂M G, g[α] = [β], where α and β are two rays at the basepoint in some Cayley graph of G such that the Hausdorff distance between gα and β is finite. Definition 5.4. Let X and Y be proper geodesic metric spaces and p ∈ X, p′ ∈ Y . We say that f : ∂M Xp → ∂M Yp′ is Morse preserving if given N in N X to ∂ N ′ Y ′ . M there exists an N ′ in M such that f injectively maps ∂M p M p The following proposition shows that if a quasi-isometric embedding defines a strongly quasiconvex subspace then it induces a Morse preserving map. This proposition is a key lemma for the proof of the fact that inclusion map of a strongly quasiconvex subgroup into a finitely generated group induces a topological embedding on Morse boundaries. Proposition 5.5. Let X, A be two proper geodesic spaces and A is strongly quasiconvex in X via the map f . Then for each Morse gauge N there is another Morse gauge N ′ such that for every N –Morse geodesic ray γ : [0, ∞) → A there is an N ′ –Morse geodesic ray with basepoint f γ(0) in X bounded Hausdorff distance from f (γ) (.i.e. f induces a Morse preserving map). Proof. Since f is a quasi-isometry embedding, f (γ) is a (K, L)–quasi-geodesic, where K, L only depends on the quasi-isometry embedding constants of f . Also f (γ) is Morse with the Morse gauge N1 depending only on the Morse gauge N and the map f (see the proof of Statement (2) of Proposition 4.2). Since X is a proper geodesic space and f (γ) is a (K, L)–Morse quasi geodesic with Morse gauge N1 , there is a geodesic ray α based at f γ(0) in X bounded Hausdorff distance D from f (γ) where D only depends on K, L, and the Morse gauge N1 . This implies that D only depends on the Morse gauge N and the map f . Since the Hausdorff distance between f (γ) and α is D and f (γ) is N1 –Morse, the ray α is N ′ –Morse where N ′ only depends on D and the Morse gauge N1 . Therefore, N ′ only depends on the Morse gauge N and the map f .  Theorem 5.6. Let X, A be two proper geodesic spaces and A is strongly quasiconvex in X via the map f . Then f induces a topological embedding ∂M f : ∂M A → ∂M X such that ∂M f (∂M A) = Λf (A). Proof. The fact that f induces a topological embedding ∂M f : ∂M A → ∂M X is a direct result of Proposition 5.5 via Proposition 4.2 in [Cor]. However, we need to check that ∂M f (∂M A) = Λf (A). We first recall the construction of the map ∂M f from Proposition 4.2 in [Cor]. Fix a point p in A and let q = f (p). By Proposition 5.5, for each Morse gauge N there is another Morse gauge N ′ such that for every N –Morse geodesic ray α based at p there is an N ′ –Morse geodesic ray β with basepoint q in X bounded Hausdorff distance from f (α). We define  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  28   ∂M f [α] = [β], then ∂M f : ∂M A → ∂M X is a topological embedding (see the proof of Proposition 4.2 in [Cor]). Obviously, ∂M f (∂M A) ⊂ Λf (A) by the construction. We now prove the opposite inclusion. Let c be an arbitrary element in Λf (A). There is a Morse geodesic ray β1 based at q in X such that c = [β1 ] and β1 lies in some finite neighborhood of f (A). Since f is a quasi-geometric embedding, there is a quasi-geodesic α1 based at p in A such that the Hausdorff distance between f (α1 ) and β1 is finite. Therefore, f (α1 ) is also a Morse quasi-geodesic. This implies that α1 is also a Morse quasi-geodesic in A by Statement (1) of Proposition 4.2. Also, A is a proper geodesic space. Then there is a Morse geodesic ray α based at p in X such that the Hausdorff distance between α and α1 is finite. Thus, the Hausdorff distance between f (α) and f (α1 ) is also finite. This implies that the Hausdorff distance between f (α) and β1 is finite. By  the construction of ∂M f we have ∂M f [α] = [β] for some geodesic ray β based at q such that the Hausdorff distance between f (α) and β is finite. Therefore, Hausdorff distance between β and β1 is finite. This implies that  c = [β1 ] = [β] = ∂M f [α] ∈ ∂M f (∂M A). Therefore, ∂M f (∂M A) = Λf (A).  We now come up with the main theorem of this section. Theorem 5.7. Let G be a finitely generated group. Then (1) If H is a finitely generated strongly quasiconvex subgroup of G, then the inclusion i : H ֒→ G induces a topological embedding î : ∂M H → ∂M G such that î(∂M H) = ΛH. (2) If H1 and H2 are finitely generated strongly quasiconvex subgroups of G, then H1 ∩ H2 is strongly quasiconvex in G and Λ(H1 ∩ H2 ) = ΛH1 ∩ ΛH2 . Proof. The Statement (1) is a direct result of Theorem 5.6. Therefore, we only need to prove Statement (2). The fact that H1 ∩H2 is strongly quasiconvex in G is a result of Proposition 4.12. Since H1 ∩ H2 ⊂ H1 , Λ(H1 ∩ H2 ) ⊂ ΛH1 . Similarly, Λ(H1 ∩ H2 ) ⊂ ΛH2 . Therefore, Λ(H1 ∩ H2 ) ⊂ ΛH1 ∩ ΛH2 . We now let c be an arbitrary element in ΛH1 ∩ ΛH2 . Then there is geodesic ray γ based at e in some Cayley graph Γ(G, S) such that γ lies in some finite neighborhoods of H1 and H2 . We need to prove that γ lies in some finite neighborhood of H1 ∩ H2 . Since γ lies in some finite neighborhoods of H1 and H2 , there is an infinite sequence (gn ) of G–vertices on γ and two group elements u, v such that gn u ∈ H1 and gn v ∈ H2 . Therefore, gn g1−1 = (gn u)(g1 u)−1 = (gn v)(g1 v)−1 ∈ H1 ∩ H2 . This implies that (gn ) lies in some finite neighborhood of H1 ∩ H2 . Also H1 ∩ H2 is Morse in Γ(G, S) and all elements in (gn ) are pairwise different. Therefore, γ lies in some finite neighborhood of H1 ∩ H2 . Thus, c is also an element in Λ(H1 ∩ H2 ).   ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  29  6. Strong quasiconvexity and stability in relatively hyperbolic groups In this section, we investigate strongly quasiconvex subgroups and stable subgroups in relatively hyperbolic groups. We first recall the concepts of coned off Cayley graphs and relative hyperbolic groups. Definition 6.1. Given a finitely generated group G with Cayley graph Γ(G, S) equipped with the path metric and a finite collection P of subgroups of G, one can construct the coned off Cayley graph Γ̂(G, S, P) as follows: For each left coset gP where P ∈ P, add a vertex vgP , called a peripheral vertex, to the Cayley graph Γ(G, S) and for each element x of gP , add an edge e(x, gP ) of length 1/2 from x to the vertex vgP . This results in a metric space that may not be proper (i.e. closed balls need not be compact). Definition 6.2 (Relatively hyperbolic group). A finitely generated group G is hyperbolic relative to a finite collection P of subgroups of G if the coned off Cayley graph is δ–hyperbolic and fine (i.e. for each positive number n, each edge of the coned off Cayley graph is contained in only finitely many circuits of length n). Each group P ∈ P is a peripheral subgroup and its left cosets are peripheral left cosets and we denote the collection of all peripheral left cosets by Π. We now review some known results on relatively hyperbolic subgroups including undistorted subgroups and peripheral subgroups in relatively hyperbolic groups, relations between quasigeodesics in Cayley graphs and coned off Cayley graphs. Theorem 6.3. [Hru10, Theorem 1.5 and Theorem 9.1] Let (G, P) be a finitely generated relatively hyperbolic group and let H be a finitely generated undistorted subgroup of G. Let S be some (any) finite generating set for G. Then (1) There is a constant A = A(S) such that for each geodesic c in the coned off Cayley graph Γ̂(G, S, P) connecting two points of H, every G–vertex of c lies within the A–neighborhood of H with respect to the metric dS . (2) All subgroups of H of the form H ∩ P g where g ∈ G, P ∈ P and |H ∩ P g | = ∞ lie in only finitely many conjugacy classes in H. Furthermore, if O is a set of representatives of these conjugacy classes then (H, O) is relatively hyperbolic. Theorem 6.4. [DS05, Corollary 1.14] A relatively hyperbolic group (G, P) is hyperbolic if each peripheral subgroup in P is hyperbolic. Lemma 6.5. [Hru10, Lemma 8.8] Let (G, P) be a finitely generated relatively hyperbolic group with a finite generating set S. For each K ≥ 1 and L ≥ 0 there is A = A(K, L) > 0 such that the following holds. Let α be a (K, L)–quasigeodesic in Γ(G, S) and c a geodesic in Γ̂(G, S, P) with the same  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  30  endpoints in G. Then each G–vertex of c lies in the A–neighborhood of some vertex of α with respect to the metric dS . Lemma 6.6. [DS05, Lemma 4.15] Let (G, P) be a finitely generated relatively hyperbolic group. Then each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P is strongly quasiconvex in G. Moreover, each D–neighborhood of peripheral left coset is M –Morse in Cayley graph of G where the Morse gauge M only depends on D and the choice of finite generating set of G. The following theorem provides with characterizations of strongly quasiconvex subgroups in relatively hyperbolic groups and this is the main theorem of this section. Theorem 6.7. Let (G, P) be a finitely generated relatively hyperbolic group and H finitely generated undistorted subgroup of G. Then the following are equivalent: (1) The subgroup H is strongly quasiconvex in G. (2) The subgroup H ∩P g is strongly quasiconvex in P g for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. (3) The subgroup H ∩ P g is strongly quasiconvex in G for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. Proof. The implications “(1) ⇒ (2) ⇒ (3)” are direct results from Propositions 4.10, 4.12, and Lemma 6.6. We now prove the implication “(3) ⇒ (1)”. Let S be a finite generating set of G and let A0 = A0 (S) be the constant in Statement (1) of Theorem 6.3. Let K ≥ 1 and L ≥ 0 arbitrary. Let A = A(K, L) be constant in Lemma 6.5. By Lemma 4.9 there is a constant A1 > 0 such that for each t ∈ B(e, A0 ) ∩ G and P ∈ P NA (tP ) ∩ NA+A0 (H) ⊂ NA1 (tP t−1 ∩ H). Let µ be the maximum of all Morse gauge functions of all set of the form NA1 (tP t−1 ∩ H) where |t|S < A0 and P ∈ P. Let D = K(2A + 1) + L + µ(K, L) + A0 + A + A1 + 1. Let α : [a, b] → Γ(G, S) be an arbitrary (K, L)–quasigeodesic in Γ(G, S) that connects two points h1 and h2 in H. By Lemma 1.11 of [BH99] III.H, we can assume that α is continuous and  ℓ(α|[t,t′ ] ) ≤ KdS α(t), α(t′ ) + L. We will show that α lies in the D–neighborhood of H. Let c be a geodesic in Γ̂(G, S, P) that connects two points h1 and h2 and let h1 = s0 , s1 , · · · , sn = h2 be all G–vertices of c. By the choice of A0 , all G–vertices si lie in the A0 –neighborhood of H. Also by the choice of A, there is ti ∈ [a, b] such that  dS si , α(ti ) < A. We consider t0 = s0 and tn = sn . Therefore, each point α(ti ) lies in the (A0 + A)–neighborhood of H. It is sufficient to show that  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  31  each α(Ii ) lies in the D–neighborhood of H where Ii is a closed subinterval of [a, b] with endpoints ti−1 and ti . We consider two cases. Case 1: Two G-vertices si−1 and si are adjacent in Γ(G, S). Then the distance between two points α(ti−1 ) and α(ti ) with respect to the metric dS is bounded above by 2A + 1. Therefore,  ℓ(α|Ii ) ≤ KdS α(ti−1 ), α(ti ) + L ≤ K(2A + 1) + L. Also, α(ti ) lies in the (A + A0 )–neighborhood of H. Therefore, α(Ii ) lies in the D–neighborhood of H by the choice of D. Case 2: Two G-vertices si−1 and si are not adjacent in Γ(G, S). Therefore, si−1 and si both lie in the same peripheral left coset gP . Since dS (gP, H) ≤ dS (si , H) < A0 , gP = htP for some h ∈ H and |t|S < A0 . Observe that the endpoints of α(Ii ) both lies in NA (htP ) ∩ NA+A0 (H). Therefore, the endpoints of h−1 α(Ii ) both lies in NA (tP ) ∩ NA+A0 (H) ⊂ NA1 (tP t−1 ∩ H). Since h−1 α is also a (K, L)–quasigeodesic, h−1 α(Ii ) lies entirely in the µ(K, L)–neighborhood of the set NA1 (tP t−1 ∩ H). Therefore, h−1 α(Ii ) lies in (µ(K, L) + A1 )–neighborhood of the  set H. Translating by h, we see that α(Ii ) also lies in the µ(K, L) + A1 –neighborhood of the set H. By the choice of D, α(Ii ) lies in D–neighborhood of the set H. Therefore, subgroup H is strongly quasiconvex in G.  An immediate corollary is characterizations of stable subgroups in relatively hyperbolic groups. Corollary 6.8. Let (G, P) be a finitely generated relatively hyperbolic group and H finitely generated undistorted subgroup of G. Then the following are equivalent: (1) The subgroup H is stable in G. (2) The subgroup H ∩ P g is stable in P g for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. (3) The subgroup H ∩ P g is stable in G for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. Proof. We can see that (1) implies (2) and (1) implies (3) easily. In fact, if the subgroup H is stable in G, then H is strongly quasiconvex in G and H is hyperbolic (see Theorem 4.8). Therefore, H ∩ P g is strongly quasiconvex in H, P g , and G by Proposition 4.12 and Lemma 6.6. In particular, H ∩ P g is hyperbolic because H is a hyperbolic group. Therefore, H ∩ P g is stable in P g and G by Theorem 4.8. The equivalence between (2) and (3) can also be seen easily from Theorems 4.8 and 6.7. We now prove that (3) implies (1). By the hypothesis, H ∩ P g is strongly quasiconvex in G for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. Therefore, H is strongly quasiconvex in G by Theorem 6.7. Also H ∩ P g is hyperbolic for each conjugate P g of peripheral subgroup in P. Therefore, the subgroup H is also hyperbolic by Statement (2) of Theorem 6.3 and Theorem 6.4. Therefore, the subgroup H is stable in G by Theorem 4.8.   ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  32  7. Strong quasiconvexity, stability in right-angled Coxeter groups and related lower relative divergence In this section, we investigate strongly quasiconvex subgroups and stable subgroups in right-angled Coxeter groups. More precisely, we characterize strongly quasiconvex (stable) special subgroups in two dimensional right-angled Coxeter groups. Also for each integer d ≥ 2 we construct a right-angled Coxeter group together with a non-stable strongly quasiconvex subgroup whose lower relative divergence is exactly polynomial of degree d. We remark that these are also first examples of groups together with non hyperbolic subgroups whose lower relative divergence are polynomial of degree d (d ≥ 2). 7.1. Some backgrounds in right-angled Coxeter groups. This subsection provides with background on right-angled Coxeter groups. Definition 7.1. Given a finite, simplicial graph Γ, the associated rightangled Coxeter group GΓ has generating set S the vertices of Γ, and relations s2 = 1 for all s in S and st = ts whenever s and t are adjacent vertices. Let S1 be a subset of S. The subgroup of GΓ generated by S1 is a rightangled Coxeter group GΓ1 , where Γ1 is the induced subgraph of Γ with vertex set S1 (i.e. Γ1 is the union of all edges of Γ with both endpoints in S1 ). The subgroup GΓ1 is called a special subgroup of GΓ . Any of its conjugates is called a parabolic subgroup of GΓ . Definition 7.2. Given a finite, simplicial graph Γ, the associated Davis complex ΣΓ is a cube complex constructed as follows. For every k–clique, T ⊂ Γ, the special subgroup GT is isomorphic to the direct product of k copies of Z2 . Hence, the Cayley graph of GT is isomorphic to the 1–skeleton of a k–cube. The Davis complex ΣΓ has 1–skeleton the Cayley graph of GΓ , where edges are given unit length. Additionally, for each k–clique, T ⊂ Γ, and coset gGT , we glue a unit k–cube to gGT ⊂ ΣΓ . The Davis complex ΣΓ is a CAT(0) cube complex and the group GΓ acts properly and cocompactly on the Davis complex ΣΓ (see [Dav08]). Remark 7.3. Let Γ be a finite simplicial graph with vertex set S and Γ1 the induced subgraph of Γ generated by some subset T of S. Then the Davis complex ΣΓ1 embeds isometrically in the Davis complex ΣΓ . Moreover, the (1) Cayley graph ΣΓ1 of the group GΓ1 embeds isometrically in the Cayley (1)  graph ΣΓ of the group GΓ . We also remark that a Davis complex ΣΓ is a two dimensional cube complex if and only if the defining graph Γ is triangle free and contains at least one edge. Definition 7.4. Let Σ be a CAT(0) cube complex. In Σ, we consider the equivalence relation on the set of midcubes of cubes generated by the rule that two midcubes are related if they share a face. A hyperplane, H, is the  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  33  union of the midcubes in a single equivalence class. We define the support of a hyperplane H, denoted N (H), to be the union of cubes which contain midcubes of H. Remark 7.5. Let Γ be a finite simplicial graph with vertex set S and ΣΓ the associated Davis complex. Each hyperplane in ΣΓ separates ΣΓ into two convex sets. It follows that the distance between a pair of vertices with respect to the metric dS equals the number of hyperplanes in ΣΓ separating those vertices. For a generator v, let ev denote the edge from the basepoint 1 to the vertex v. Any edge in ΣΓ determines a unique hyperplane, namely the hyperplane containing the midpoint of that edge. Denote by Hv the hyperplane containing the midpoint of ev . For a cube in ΣΓ , all of the parallel edges are labeled by the same generator v. It follows that all of the edges crossing a hyperplane H have the same label v, and we call this a hyperplane of type v. Obviously, if two hyperplanes with the types v1 and v2 cross, then v1 and v2 commute. Since GΓ acts transitively on edges labeled v, a hyperplane is of type v if and only if it is a translate of the standard hyperplane Hv . Obviously, the star subgroup GSt(v) is the stabilizer of the hyperplane Hv and GSt(v) can also be considered as vertices of the support N (Hv ) of Hv . Therefore, the subgroup gGSt(v) g−1 is the stabilizer of the hyperplane gHv and gGSt(v) can also be considered as vertices of the support N (gHv ) of gHv . 7.2. Strongly quasiconvex special subgroup and stable special subgroup characterizations in right-angled Coxeter groups. In this subsection, we establish characterizations of strongly quasiconvex special subgroups and stable special subgroups in two dimensional right-angled Coxeter groups in term of defining graphs. As a consequence, we give a criterion on simplical, triangle free graphs that guarantee whose associated right-angled Coxeter groups possess Morse boundaries which are not totally disconnected. We first develops some results in right-angled Coxeter groups that help establish the characterizations of strongly quasiconvex (stable) special subgroups in two dimensional right-angled Coxeter groups. Lemma 7.6. Let Γ be a simplicial graph with vertex set S. Let K be a special subgroup of GΓ generated by some subset S1 of S and Γ1 the subgraph of Γ (1) induced by S1 . For each g ∈ GΓ γ is the shortest path in ΣΓ that connects g (1) to some point in K if and only if γ is a geodesic in ΣΓ and each hyperplane (1) crossed by some edge of γ does not intersect the Cayley graph ΣΓ1 of K. (1)  Proof. We first assume that γ is the shortest path in ΣΓ that connects g (1) to some point h in K. Obviously, γ must be a geodesic in ΣΓ connecting h and g. Let n be the length of γ. Then, the geodesic γ along the direction from h to g is the concatenation of n edges e1 e2 · · · en where each edge ei is labelled by some vertex si in S. Therefore, g = h(s1 s2 · · · sn ).  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  34  Assume for the contradiction that there is a hyperplane Hi crossed by the (1) edge ei intersects ΣΓ1 . We choose the smallest number i with that property. In particular, si ∈ S1 ⊂ K. We claim that for each j < i each hyperplane Hj crossed by edge ej of γ intersects Hi . Indeed, each hyperplane Hj (j < i) (1) (1) does not intersect ΣΓ1 by the choice of i. Moreover, ΣΓ1 is connected then (1)  (1)  there is a path α in ΣΓ1 that connects h and a point u in Hi ∩ ΣΓ1 . Let β is the path in Hi that connects u to the midpoint of ei . Therefore, each hyperplane Hj (j < i) must intersect the concatenation αβ. However, each hyperplane Hj (j < i) does not intersect α because it does not intersect (1) ΣΓ1 . This implies that each hyperplane Hj (j < i) intersects Hi . Therefore, sj commutes to si for each j < i. Thus, g = h(s1 s2 · · · si−1 si si+1 · · · sn ) = (hsi )(s1 s2 · · · si−1 si+1 · · · sn ). The above equality shows that there is path of length n − 1 that connects g to the point hsi ∈ K. This is a contradiction. Therefore, each hyperplane (1) crossed by some edge of γ does not intersect the Cayley graph ΣΓ1 . (1)  We now assume that γ is a geodesic in ΣΓ and each hyperplane crossed (1) by some edge of γ does not intersect the Cayley graph ΣΓ1 . Let γ ′ be an (1)  (1)  arbitrary path in ΣΓ that connects g to some point h1 in K. Since ΣΓ1 (1)  is connected, there is a path α′ in ΣΓ1 that connects h and h1 . Therefore, hyperplanes crossed by edges of γ intersect the concatenation α′ γ ′ . Also, (1) these hyperplanes do not intersect α′ since they do not intersect ΣΓ1 . Therefore, all these hyperplanes must intersect γ ′ . This implies that ℓ(γ) ≤ ℓ(γ ′ ). (1) Therefore, γ is the shortest path in ΣΓ that connects g to some point in K.  Lemma 7.7. Let Γ be a simplicial graph with vertex set S. Let K be a special subgroup of GΓ generated by some subset S1 of S. Let σ be an induced 4–cycle with two pairs of non-adjacent vertices (a1 , a2 ) and (b  1 , b2 ) such that a1 , a2 both lie in S1 but b1 does not. Then dS (b1 b2 )n , K = 2n and dS (b1 b2 )n b1 , K = 2n + 1.  Proof. We will only prove that dS (b1 b2 )n , K = 2n and the argument for the remaining equality is identical. Let Γ1 the subgraph of Γ induced by (1) S1 . Let g = (b1 b2 )n and γ the geodesic in ΣΓ connecting the identity element e and g. Therefore, the geodesic γ along the direction from e to g traces the word (b1 b2 )n and let Hi be the hyperplane crossed by the ith edge of γ. Since the hyperplane H1 is labelled by b1 ∈ / S1 , H1 does not (1) intersect ΣΓ1 . Also the geodesic γ is labelled by non-commuting elements b1 and b2 alternatively. This implies that Hi does not intersect Hj for i 6= j. In particular, Hi does not intersect H1 for i 6= 1. This implies that Hi (1) does not intersect ΣΓ1 for i 6= 1 either. By Lemma 7.6, the geodesic γ is the shortest path that connects (b1 b2 )n and some point in K. Therefore,  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  35   dS (b1 b2 )n , K = ℓ(γ) = 2n. Using a similar argument we also obtain the equality dS (b1 b2 )n b1 , K = 2n + 1.  Proposition 7.8. Let Γ be a simplicial graph with vertex set S. Let K be a special subgroup of GΓ generated by some subset S1 of S. Assume that there is an induced 4–cycle σ with two pairs of non-adjacent vertices (a1 , a2 ) and (b1 , b2 ) such that a1 , a2 both lie in S1 but b1 does not. Then K is not strongly quasiconvex in GΓ . Proof. By Theorem 4.7, this is sufficient to prove that the lower relative divergence of GΓ with respect to K is not completely super linear. Let {σρn } (1)  be the lower relative divergence of ΣΓ with respect to K. We claim that for each n ≥ 2 and ρ ∈ (0, 1] σρn (r) ≤ (4n + 2)r for each r > 1. Indeed, for each r > 1 choose an integer m in [r, 2r]. If m = 2k for some integer k, we choose x = (b1 b2 )k . Otherwise, m = 2k + 1 for some integer k and we choose x = (b1 b2 )k b1 . Therefore, dS (x, K) = m by Lemma 7.7. We choose y = (a1 a2 )mn x. Then   dS (y, K) = dS (a1 a2 )mn x, K = dS x, (a1 a2 )−mn K = dS (x, K) = m. Since x commutes with both a1 and a2 , y = x(a1 a2 )mn . This implies that there is a geodesic γ connecting x, y and γ traces the word (a1 a2 )mn . Obviously, dS (x, y) = ℓ(γ) = 2mn. By the construction, each vertex of γ is element of the form x(a1 a2 )i or  i x (a1 a2 ) a1 in GΓ . Again, x commutes with both a1 and a2 . Therefore,    dS x(a1 a2 )i , K = dS (a1 a2 )i x, K = dS x, (a1 a2 )−i K = dS (x, K) = m > r   and dS x (a1 a2 )i a1 , K = m > r similarly. Therefore, the path γ lies outside the r–neighborhood of K. (1) Since r ≤ dS (x, K) = m ≤ 2r, there is a path γ1 in ΣΓ connecting x and some point u in ∂Nr (K) such that γ1 lies outside the r–neighborhood of K and its length is bounded above by r. In particular, dS (x, u) ≤ r. Similarly, (1) there is a path γ2 in ΣΓ connecting y and some point v in ∂Nr (K) such that γ2 lies outside the r–neighborhood of K and its length is bounded above by r. In particular, dS (x, u) ≤ r. Therefore, dS (u, v) ≥ dS (x, y) − dS (x, u) − dS (y, v) ≥ 2mn − r − r ≥ (2n − 2)r ≥ nr. We observe that γ = γ1 ∪ γ ∪ γ2 is the path outside the r–neighborhood of K that connects two points u, v in ∂Nr (K). Also, ℓ(γ) = ℓ(γ1 ) + ℓ(γ) + ℓ(γ2 ) ≤ r + 2mn + r ≤ (4n + 2)r. Therefore, σρn (r) ≤ (4n + 2)r for each r > 1. This implies that the lower relative divergence of GΓ with respect to K is not completely super linear. Therefore, K is not strongly quasiconvex in GΓ by Theorem 4.7.   ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  36  Proposition 7.9. Let Γ be a simplicial, triangle free graph with vertex set S and K subgroup of GΓ generated by some subset S1 of S. We assume that if S1 contains two non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle σ, then S1 contains all vertices of σ. If K is an infinite subgroup of GΓ , then the lower relative divergence of GΓ with respect to K is at least quadratic (1)  Proof. Let {σρn } be the lower relative divergence of ΣΓ with respect to K. We claim that for each n ≥ 3 and ρ ∈ (0, 1] σρn (r) ≥ (r − 1)(ρr − 1) for each r > 0. In fact, if σρn (r) = ∞, then the above inequality is true obviously. Otherwise, let γ be an arbitrary path outside Nρr (K) that connects two points x and y (1) in ∂Nr (K) such that dS (x, y) ≥ nr. Let γ1′ be a shortest geodesic in ΣΓ that connects x and some point h1 in K. Similarly, let γ2′ be a shortest geodesic (1) in ΣΓ that connects y and some point h2 in K. Therefore, dS (x, h1 ) = dS (y, h2 ) = r obviously. This implies that dS (h1 , h2 ) ≥ dS (x, y) − dS (x, h1 ) − dS (y, h2 ) ≥ (n − 2)r ≥ r. Let Γ1 the subgraph of Γ induced by S1 . We connect h1 and h2 by (1) a geodesic α = e1 e2 · · · em of length m in the Cayley graph ΣΓ1 of K. Obviously m ≥ r and each edge ei of α is labelled by some vertex si in S1 . Let Hi be the hyperplane crossed by the edge ei of α. Then each Hi must intersect γ1′ ∪ γ ∪ γ2′ . However, Hi does not intersect γ1′ ∪ γ2′ by Lemma 7.6. Therefore, each hyperplane Hi must intersect some edge fi of γ. Let h0 , h1 , h2 , · · · , hm be all vertices of α such that hi−1 and hi are endpoints of ei . For 1 ≤ i ≤ m let gi be the endpoint of the edge fi of γ that lies in the same component of ΣΓ − Hi containing gi . Let αi be a the geodesic in the support of Hi that connects hi and gi . By the convexity of the graph of (1) (1) ΣΓ1 in the graph ΣΓ each αi is the concatenation of two geodesic βi and βi′ (1)  (1)  such that βi lies entirely in ΣΓ1 and βi′ intersects ΣΓ1 only at the common endpoint h′i ∈ K of βi and βi′ . We set mi = ℓ(βi′ ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Then mi ≥ ρr since gi lies outside the ρr–neighborhood of K. We assume that βi′ = ei1 ei2 · · · eimi then each edge eij of βi′ is labelled by an element in Lk(si ) and the first edge ei1 is labelled by a vertex not in S1 . We claim that for each 1 ≤ i ≤ m − 1 there is at least (mi − 1) hyperplanes crossed by βi′ intersect the subpath γi of γ connecting gi , gi+1 . Since Γ is triangle free, no pair of different vertices in Lk(si ) are adjacent. This implies that no pairs of hyperplanes crossed by two different edges of βi′ intersects. Since the first edge ei1 of βi′ is labelled by a vertex not (1) in S1 , the hyperplane crossed by ei1 does not in intersect ΣΓ1 . Therefore, no (1)  subsequent hyperplane crossed by βi′ intersects ΣΓ1 either. We now consider ′ . the possibility a hyperplane crossed by βi′ intersects βi+1  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  37  If the hyperplane crossed by the first edge ei1 of βi′ does not in intersect ′ no subsequent hyperplane crossed by βi′ intersects βi+1 either. There′ fore, all mi hyperplanes crossed by βi intersect the subpath γi of γ. If the ′ , then edge ei is labelled by a vertex hyperplane crossed by ei1 intersect βi+1 1 a in Lk(si ) ∩ LK(si+1 ). Since Γ is triangle free, two vertices si and si+1 are not adjacent. We claim that the hyperplane crossed by the second edge ei2 ′ . Otherwise, the second edge ei of β ′ is labelled of βi′ does not intersect βi+1 2 i by a vertex b other than a in Lk(si ) ∩ LK(si+1 ). Therefore, four points a, b, si , and si+1 are all vertices of an induced 4–cycle σ in Γ. Moreover, two non-adjacent vertices si and si+1 both lie in S1 but a does not. This is a contradiction. Therefore, the hyperplane crossed by the second edge ei2 of ′ . This also implies that hyperplanes crossed edge βi′ does not intersect βi+1 ′ ′ . Thus, all these hyperplanes i ej (2 ≤ j ≤ m) of βi does not intersect βi+1 must intersect the subpath γi of γ. Therefore, there is exactly (mi − 1) hyperplanes crossed by βi′ intersect the subpath γi of γ. For 1 ≤ i ≤ m − 1 the length of the subpath γi of γ is at least (mi − 1) because there is at least (mi − 1) hyperplanes crossed by βi′ intersect the subpath γi . This implies that ′ , βi+1  ℓ(γ) ≥ Σm−1 i=1 ℓ(γi ) ≥ (m − 1)(mi − 1) ≥ (r − 1)(ρr − 1). Therefore, σρn (r) ≥ (r − 1)(ρr − 1) for each r > 0. This implies that the lower relative divergence of GΓ with respect to K is at least quadratic.  The following theorem establishes characterizations of strongly quasiconvex subgroups in two dimensional right-angled Coxeter groups. This theorem is a direct result of Propositions 7.8, 7.9 and Theorem 4.7. This is also the main theorem of this section. Theorem 7.10. Let Γ be a simplicial, triangle free graph with vertex set S and K subgroup of GΓ generated by some subset S1 of S. Then the following conditions are equivalent: (1) The subgroup K is strongly quasiconvex in GΓ . (2) If S1 contains two non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle σ, then S1 contains all vertices of σ. (3) Either |K| < ∞ or the lower relative divergence of GΓ with respect to K is at least quadratic. Question 7.11. Is lower relative divergence of a CAT(0) group with respect to an infinite strongly quasiconvex subgroup at least quadratic? The following corollary is a direct result of Theorem 7.10. The corollary establishes characterization of stable subgroups in two dimensional rightangled Coxeter groups. Corollary 7.12. Let Γ be a simplicial, triangle free graph with vertex set S and K subgroup of GΓ generated by some subset S1 of S. Then the following conditions are equivalent:  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  38  (1) The subgroup K is stable in GΓ . (2) The set S1 does not contain a pair of non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle in Γ. Proof. Assume that S1 does not contain any pair of non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4-cycle of Γ. Then the subgroup K is hyperbolic (see Corollary 12.6.3 in [Dav08]). Also the subgroup K is strongly quasiconvex in GΓ by Theorem 7.10. Therefore, K is stable subgroup by Theorem 4.8. We now assume that S1 contains a pair of non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4-cycle σ of Γ. We will prove that K is not stable in GΓ . If K is not strongly quasiconvex in GΓ , then K is not stable in GΓ by Theorem 4.8. Otherwise, S1 contains all vertices of the induced 4–cycle σ by Theorem 7.10. This implies that K is not hyperbolic by Corollary 12.6.3 in [Dav08]. Thus, K is not stable in GΓ .  Question 7.13. Can we characterize all strongly quasiconvex (stable) subgroups of right-angled Coxeter groups using defining graphs? We guess that the recent work of Abbott-Behrstock-Durham [ABD] can help us characterize all stable subgroups of right-angled Coxeter groups using defining graphs. However, characterizing all strongly quasiconvex subgroups of right-angled Coxeter groups using defining graphs is still a difficult question. The following corollary give a criterion on two dimensional right-angled Coxeter groups to possess Morse boundaries which are not totally disconnected. We remark that the first example of a right-angled Coxeter group whose Morse boundary is not totally disconnected was constructed by Behrstock in [Beh]. The following corollary generalizes his example in some sense. Corollary 7.14. If the simplicial, triangle free graph Γ contains an induced loops σ of length greater than 4 such that the vertex set of σ does not contain a pair of non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle in Γ, then the Morse boundary of right-angled Coxeter group GΓ is not totally disconnected. Proof. Since the vertex set S1 of the loop σ satisfies hypothesis of Corollary 7.12, the subgroups Gσ generated by S1 is a stable subgroup in GΓ . Also, the Morse boundary of Gσ is topologically embedded in the Morse boundary of GΓ (see Theorem 5.6) and the Morse boundary of Gσ is a topological circle. This implies that the Morse boundary of GΓ also contains a circle and therefore, it is not totally disconnected.  Conjecture 7.15. The Morse boundary of a right-angled Coxeter group GΓ is not totally disconnected if and only if the defining graph Γ contains an induced loops σ of length greater than 4 such that the vertex set of σ does not contain a pair of non-adjacent vertices of an induced 4–cycle in Γ. 7.3. Higher relative lower divergence in right-angled Coxeter groups. In this subsection, we construct right-angled Coxeter groups together with non-stable strongly quasiconvex subgroups whose lower relative divergence  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  39  are arbitrary polynomials of degrees at least 2. We remark that the author in [Tra] also constructed various examples of right-angled Coxeter groups whose lower relative divergence with respect to some subgroups are arbitrary polynomials of degrees at least 2. However, all subgroups on those examples are stable and in this subsection we work on the cases of nonstable subgroups. We first establish connection between lower relative divergence of certain pairs of right-angled Coxeter groups and divergence of some certain geodesics in their Davis complexes. This connection is a key ingredient for main examples in this subsection. Lemma 7.16. Let Γ be a simplicial graph with the vertex S and let u, v be two non-adjacent vertices of Γ. Let Ω be a new graph by coning off two points u, v of Γ with a new vertex t and let S = S ∪ {t}. Let x, y be (1) endpoints of a path γ in ΣΩ − N1 (GΓ ). If g1 , g2 be two elements in GΓ such that dS (x, GΓ ) = dS (x, g1 ) and dS (y, GΓ ) = dS (x, g2 ), then g1−1 g2 lies in the subgroup I generated by u and v. Proof. We can assume that x and y both lie in GΩ . Let γ1 be a geodesic (1) (1) in ΣΩ connecting x, g1 and γ2 be a geodesic in ΣΩ connecting y, g2 . We can assume that γ1 along the direction from g1 to x is the concatenation (1) γ1 = e1 e2 · · · em of edges of ΣΩ . Similarly, γ2 along the direction from g2 to (1) y is the concatenation γ2 = f1 f2 · · · fn of edges of ΣΩ . We claim that two edges e1 and f1 are crossed by the same hyperplane which is labelled by t. We first recall that GΓ is a subgroup generated by S and S − S = {t}. Also γ1 is the shortest geodesic that connects g1 and GΓ . Then, the first edge e1 of γ1 is labelled by t and we call H the hyperplane crossed by e1 . By Remark 7.5 the vertex set of the support of H is g1 GSt(t) . Also, each (1)  element in g1 GSt(t) has distance 0 or 1 from GΓ . This implies that H ∩ ΣΩ lies in the 1–neighborhood of GΓ . In particular, H does not intersect γ. (1) Also, H does not intersect the Cayley graph ΣΓ of GΓ . Thus, H intersects the path γ2 . Moreover, H must intersect the first edge f1 of γ2 because (1) H ∩ ΣΩ lies in the 1–neighborhood of GΓ . This fact implies that g1 , g2 are both vertices of the support of H. In other word, g1 and g2 lie in the same left coset of GSt(t) or g1−1 g2 lies in GSt(t) . Also, g−1 g2 lies in GΓ and GΓ ∩ GSt(t) = I which is the subgroup generated by u and v. Thus, g1−1 g2 lies in the subgroup I.  Lemma 7.17. Let Γ be a simplicial graph with the vertex S and let u, v be two non-adjacent vertices of Γ. Let Ω be a new graph by coning off two points u, v of Γ with a new vertex t and let S = S ∪{t}. Let I be the subgroup (1) generated by u and v. Then for each x in ΣΓ dS (tx, GΓ ) = dS (x, I) + 1. Proof. We assume that x lies in GΓ and let n = dS (x, I). Let γ be a geodesic (1) of length n in ΣΓ that connects x to some point h in I. We can express  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  40  (1)  γ = e1 e2 · · · en as a concatenation of edges in ΣΓ , where each edge ei is labelled by some element si ∈ S. Therefore, x = h(s1 s2 · · · sn ). Let γ1 = tγ then γ1 is a geodesic that connects th and tx. Moreover, we can express γ1 = f1 f2 · · · fn where each edge fi is the translation of edge ei of γ by t. In particular, each edge fi is also labelled by si . Since th = ht, there is an edge e′1 labelled by t with endpoints h and th. We construct γ = e′1 ∪ γ1 and we claim that γ is the shortest geodesic that connects tx and GΓ . (1) (1) (1) We first prove that γ is a geodesic in ΣΩ . Since the inclusion ΣΓ ֒→ ΣΩ (1) is an isometric embedding, γ is also a geodesic in ΣΩ . Therefore, γ1 = tγ (1) is a geodesic in ΣΩ . Since γ1 is labelled by elements in S and the first edge e′1 of γ is labelled by t ∈ / S, the hyperplane crossed by e′1 does not intersect (1) γ1 . Therefore, γ is a goedesic in ΣΩ . We now prove that γ is the shortest geodesic that connects tx and GΓ . By Lemma 7.6, it is sufficient to prove that each hyperplane crossed by some (1) edge of γ does not intersect the Cayley graph ΣΓ of GΓ . Since GΓ is the subgroup generated by S and the hyperplane H crossed by the first edge e′1 (1) of γ is labelled by t, H does not intersect ΣΓ . Assume for the contradiction (1) that hyperplane Hi crossed by some edge fi of γ intersects ΣΓ . We choose i is the smallest number with that property. In particular, Hi must intersect H and therefore, si commutes to t. This implies that si = u or si = v. Therefore, si is an element in I. By the choice of i, each hyperplane Hj crossed by edge fj (j < i) does (1) not intersect ΣΓ . Therefore, each Hj must intersect Hi . This implies that si commutes to all sj for j < i. Therefore, x = h(s1 s2 · · · si−1 si si+1 · · · sn ) = (hsi )(s1 s2 · · · si−1 si+1 · · · sn ). (1)  This implies that there is a path in ΣΓ with length n − 1 that connects x to the element hsi ∈ I which is a contradiction. Thus, each hyperplane (1) crossed by some edge of γ does not intersect the Cayley graph ΣΓ of GΓ . Therefore, the path γ is the shortest geodesic that connects tx and GΓ . This implies that dS (tx, GΓ ) = ℓ(γ) = ℓ(γ1 ) + 1 = ℓ(γ) + 1 = dS (x, I) + 1.  Proposition 7.18. Let Γ be a simplicial graph with the vertex S and let u, v be two non-adjacent vertices of Γ. Let Ω be a new graph by coning off two points u, v of Γ with a new vertex t and let S = S ∪ {t}. Let α be the bi-infinite geodesic containing the identity e labelled by u and v alternatively. Then Σ  (1)  Σ  (1)  Divα Ω  div(GΩ , GΓ )  Divα Γ , Σ  (1)  Σ  (1)  where Divα Ω and Divα Γ respectively.  (1)  (1)  are geodesic divergence of α in ΣΩ and ΣΓ  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  41  Proof. Let I be a subgroup generated by u and v. Then the geodesic α (1) (1) is the Cayley graph of I in ΣΩ and ΣΓ . Therefore, the lower relative (1) (1) divergence of ΣΩ and ΣΩ with respect to the path α are equivalent to the lower relative divergence of these spaces with respect to I. Also by Remark 2.14, the lower relative divergence of a geodesic space with respect to a periodic bi-infinite geodesic is equivalent to the divergence of the geodesic in the space. Therefore, this is sufficient to prove (1)  (1)  (1)  div(ΣΩ , I)  div(ΣΩ , GΓ )  div(ΣΓ , I). (1)  Let {σρn } be the lower relative divergence of ΣΩ with respect to GΓ , let (1)  {σρn } be the lower relative divergence of ΣΩ with respect to I, and let {σρn } (1)  be the lower relative divergence of ΣΓ with respect to I. We will prove that for each n ≥ 2 and ρ ∈ (0, 1] σρn (r) ≤ σρn (r) ≤ σρ2n (r) + 2r for each r > 1. We first prove the left inequality. If σρn (r) = ∞, the left inequality is true obviously. Otherwise, let x, y be an arbitrary point in ∂Nr (GΓ ) such that (1) there is a path outside Nr (GΓ ) in ΣΩ that connects x and y and dS (x, y) ≥ nr. Let g1 , g2 be two elements in GΓ such that dS (x, GΓ ) = dS (x, g1 ) and dS (y, GΓ ) = dS (x, g2 ). Then g1 , g2 both lie in the same left coset gI of the subgroup I by Lemma 7.16. (1) (1) (1) Since element g in GΩ acts isometrically on ΣΩ , div(ΣΩ , gI) = div(ΣΩ , I) = {σρn }. This is obvious that dS (x, gI) = dS (x, GΓ ) = r and dS (y, gI) = dS (y, GΓ ) = r. Also, any path that lies outside some s–neighborhood of GΓ also lies outside the s–neighborhood of gI because gI is a subset of GΓ . Therefore, σρn (r) ≤ (1)  (1)  σρn (r). This implies that div(ΣΩ , I)  div(ΣΩ , GΓ ). We now prove the second inequality σρn (r) ≤ σρ2n (r)+ 2r for each r > 1. If σρ2n (r) = ∞, then the inequality is true obviously. Otherwise, let x1 , y1 be (1)  arbitrary two points in ∂Nr (I) ⊂ ΣΓ such that there is a path outside Nr (I) (1) (1) connecting x1 , y1 and dS (x1 , y1 ) ≥ (2n)r. Since the inclusion ΣΓ ֒→ ΣΩ is an isometric embedding, dS (x1 , y1 ) = dS (x1 , y1 ) ≥ (2n)r. (1) Let β be an arbitrary path outside Nρr (I) in ΣΓ connecting x1 and y1 . Then the path β1 = tβ connects two points tx1 and ty1 . By Lemma 7.17, (1) β1 lies outside the (ρr + 1)–neighborhood of GΓ in ΣΩ and dS (tx1 , GΓ ) = dS (x1 , I) = r + 1 and dS (ty1 , GΓ ) = dS (y1 , I) = r + 1. This implies that there is a geodesic β2 with length 1 that lies outside the (1) r–neighborhood of GΓ in ΣΩ and β2 connects tx1 with some point x2 ∈ Nr (GΓ ). Similarly, there is a geodesic β3 with length 1 that lies outside  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  a0  a0 a1 a2 a3  b1  42  ad−1 ad  b0  a1 a2 a3  b1  ad−1  ad  b0 bd−1 bd  b2 b3 b4  bd−1  b2 b3 b4  t  bd  Γd  Ωd  Figure 1. Graph Ωd is constructed from graph Γd by coning off two non-adjacent vertices ad , bd by a new vertex t. (1)  the r–neighborhood of GΓ in ΣΩ and β3 connects ty1 with some point y2 ∈ Nr (GΓ ). By Lemma 7.17, this is not hard to see there is a path outside (1) the r–neighborhood of GΓ in ΣΩ that connects tx1 and ty1 . Therefore, we (1) can construct another path outside the r–neighborhood of GΓ in ΣΩ that connects x2 and y2 obviously. Moreover, dS (x2 , y2 ) ≥ dS (tx1 , ty1 ) − dS (tx1 , x2 ) − dS (ty1 , y2 ) ≥ dS (x1 , y1 ) − dS (tx1 , x2 ) − dS (ty1 , y2 ) ≥ 2nr − 1 − 1 ≥ nr. Also β = β2 ∪ β1 ∪ β3 is the path outside the ρr–neighborhood of GΓ connecting x2 and y2 . Therefore, σρn (r) ≤ ℓ(β) ≤ ℓ(β2 ) + ℓ(β1 ) + ℓ(β3 ) ≤ 1 + ℓ(β) + 1 ≤ ℓ(β) + 2r. (1)  (1)  This implies that σρn (r) ≤ σρ2n (r)+2r. Therefore, div(ΣΩ , GΓ )  div(ΣΓ , I). Thus, Σ  (1)  Σ  (1)  Divα Ω  div(GΩ , GΓ )  Divα Γ .  We are now ready to construct the main examples for this subsection and we start with defining graphs. More precisely, for each integer d ≥ 2 a graph Ωd and its subgraph Γd are constructed as in Figure 1. We remark that the graph Γd was originally constructed by Dani-Thomas [DT15a] to study divergence of right-angled Coxeter groups and the graph Ωd is a variation of Γd . However, we are going to use these pairs of graphs to construct corresponding pairs of right-angled Coxeter groups with desired lower relative divergence in this paper. Proposition 7.19 (Proposition 3.19 in [Tra16]). For each d ≥ 2, let Γd be the graph as in Figure 1. Let αd be a bi-infinite geodesic containing e and (1) labeled by · · · ad bd ad bd · · · . Then the divergence of αd in ΣΓd is equivalent to the polynomial of degree d.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  43  We remark that the above proposition was proved in [Tra16] but the proof based mostly on the work of Dani-Thomas in [DT15a]. Using a similar argument as in Proposition 3.19 in [Tra16] we also obtain an analogous proposition as follows. Proposition 7.20. For each d ≥ 2, let Ωd be the graph as in Figure 1. Let αd be a bi-infinite geodesic containing e and labeled by · · · ad bd ad bd · · · . (1) Then the divergence of αd in ΣΩd is equivalent to the polynomial of degree d. We now state the main theorem of this subsection. Theorem 7.21. For each d ≥ 2 we construct the graph Ωd and the subgraph Γd as in Figure 1. Then GΓd is a non-stable strongly quasiconvex subgroup of GΩd and the lower relative divergence of GΩd with respect to GΓd is equivalent to the polynomial of degree d. Proof. By Propositions 7.18, 7.19, and 7.20, the lower relative divergence of GΩd with respect to GΓd is equivalent to the polynomial of degree d. In particular, GΓd is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of GΩd by Theorem 4.7. However, the subgroup GΓd is not hyperbolic because the graph Γd contains an induced 4–cycle. This implies that GΓd is not a stable subgroup of GΩd .  8. Strong quasiconvexity, stability, and lower relative divergence in right-angled Artin groups In this section, we prove that two notions of strong quasiconvexity and stability are equivalent in the right-angled Artin group AΓ (except for the case of finite index subgroups). We also characterize non-trivial strongly quasiconvex subgroups of infinite index in AΓ (i.e. non-trivial stable subgroups in AΓ ) by quadratic lower relative divergence. These results strengthen the work of Koberda-Mangahas-Taylor [KMT] on characterizing purely loxodromic subgroups of right-angled Artin groups. 8.1. Some backgrounds in right-angled Artin groups. Definition 8.1. Given a finite simplicial graph Γ, the associated rightangled Artin group AΓ has generating set S the vertices of Γ, and relations st = ts whenever s and t are adjacent vertices. Let S1 be a subset of S. The subgroup of AΓ generated by S1 is a rightangled Artin group AΓ1 , where Γ1 is the induced subgraph of Γ with vertex set S1 (i.e. Γ1 is the union of all edges of Γ with both endpoints in S1 ). The subgroup AΓ1 is called a special subgroup of AΓ . A reduced word for a group element g in AΓ is a minimal length word in the free group F (S) representing g. Definition 8.2. Let Γ1 and Γ2 be two graphs, the join of Γ1 and Γ2 is a graph obtained by connecting every vertex of Γ1 to every vertex of Γ2 by an edge.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  44  Let J be an induced subgraph of Γ which decomposes as a nontrivial join. We call AJ a join subgroup of AΓ . A reduced word w in AΓ is called a join word if w represents element in some join subgroup. If β is a subword of w, we will say that β is a join subword of w when β is itself a join word. Definition 8.3. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. A group element g in AΓ is loxodromic if g is not conjugate into a join subgroup. If every nontrivial group element in a subgroup H of AΓ is loxodromic, then H is purely loxodromic. Definition 8.4. Let Γ be a finite simplicial graph with the set S of vertices. Let T be a torus of dimension |S| with edges labeled by the elements of S. Let XΓ denote the subcomplex of T consisting of all faces whose edge labels span a complete subgraph in Γ (or equivalently, mutually commute in AΓ ). XΓ is called the Salvetti complex. Remark 8.5. The fundamental group of XΓ is AΓ . The universal cover X̃Γ of XΓ is a CAT(0) cube complex with a free, cocompact action of AΓ . (1) Obviously, the 1-skeleton X̃Γ of X̃Γ is the Cayley graph of AΓ with respect to the generating set S. Consequently, reduced words in AΓ correspond (1) to geodesics in X̃Γ , which we call combinatorial geodesics. We refer to (1) distance in X̃Γ as combinatorial distance. If Γ1 is an induced subgraph of (1) a Γ, then there is a natural isometric embeddings of the 1-skeleton X̃Γ1 of (1)  X̃Γ1 into the 1-skeleton X̃Γ of X̃Γ . Theorem 8.6 (Theorem 1.1, Theorem 5.2, and Corollary 6.2 in [KMT]). Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a finitely generated subgroup of AΓ . Then the following are equivalent. (1) H is a purely loxodromic subgroup. (2) H is stable. (3) There exists a positive number N = N (H) such that for any reduced word w representing h ∈ H, and any join subword w′ of w, we have ℓ(w′ ) ≤ N . The following corollary is a direct consequence of the above theorem. Corollary 8.7. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph with the vertex set S such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a nontrivial finitely generated purely loxodromic subgroup. Then there is a positive (1) constant M such that every geodesic in the Cayley graph X̃Γ connecting points in H lies in the M –neighborhood of H. The properties of hyperplanes of X̃Γ in the following remark were observed by Behrstock-Charney in [BC12]. Remark 8.8. Each hyperplane in X̃Γ separates X̃Γ into two convex sets. It follows that the combinatorial distance between a pair of vertices equals the number of hyperplanes in X̃Γ separating those vertices.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  45  For a generator v, let ev denote the edge from the basepoint 1 to the vertex v. Any edge in X̃Γ determines a unique hyperplane, namely the hyperplane containing the midpoint of that edge. Denote by Hv the hyperplane containing the midpoint of ev . For a cube in X̃Γ , all of the parallel edges are labeled by the same generator v. It follows that all of the edges crossing a hyperplane H have the same label v, and we call this a hyperplane of type v. Since AΓ acts transitively on edges labeled v, a hyperplane is of type v if and only if it is a translate of the standard hyperplane Hv . For a vertex v of the graph Γ let lk(v) denote the subgraph of Γ spanned by the vertices adjacent to v and let st(v) denote the subgraph spanned by v and lk(v). Obviously, ASt(v) is a join subgroup and Alk(v) is a subgroup of ASt(v) . We call such subgroup ASt(v) star subgroup. Lemma 8.9 (Lemma 3.1 in [BC12]). Let H1 = g1 Hv and H2 = g2 Hw . Then (1) H1 intersects H2 if and only if v, w commute and g1−1 g2 ∈ Alk(v) Alk(w) . (2) There is a hyperplane H3 intersecting both H1 and H2 if and only if there is u in st(v) ∩ st(w) such that g1−1 g2 ∈ Alk(v) Alk(u) Alk(w) . 8.2. Lower relative divergence of a right-angled Artin group with respect to a purely loxodromic subgroup. In this section, we compute the lower relative divergence of a right-angled Artin group with respect to a purely loxodromic subgroup (i.e. a stable subgroup). We first prove the quadratic upper bound for the lower relative divergence of a right-angled Artin group with respect to a loxodromic subgroup and we need the following lemmas. Lemma 8.10. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph with the vertex set S such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a non-trivial, finitely generated purely loxodromic subgroup of AΓ . There is a positive number K such that for each element g in AΓ and each pair of commuting generators (s1 , s2 ) in S |i| + |j| − |g|S − 1. K Proof. By Theorem 8.6, there is a positive integer N such that for any reduced word w representing h ∈ H, and any join subword w′ of w, we have ℓ(w′ ) ≤ N . Let K = N + 1 and we will prove that dS (gsi1 sj2 , H) ≥  dS (gsi1 sj2 , H) ≥  |i| + |j| − |g|S − 1. K  Let m = dS (gsi1 sj2 , H). Then there is an element g1 in AΓ with |g1 |S = m and h in H such that h = gsi1 sj2 g1 . Since si1 sj2 is an element in some join subgroup of AΓ and |g1 |S = m, then h can be represented by a reduced word w that is a product of at most (|g|S + 1 + m) join subwords. Also, the length of each join subword of w is bounded above by N . Therefore, the length of  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  46   w is bounded above by N |g|S + m + 1 . Also, ℓ(w) ≥ |si1 sj2 |S − |g1 |S − |g|S ≥ |i| + |j| − m − |g|S . This implies that  |i| + |j| − m − |g|S ≤ N |g|S + m + 1 . Therefore, dS (gsi1 sj2 , H) = m ≥  N |i| + |j| |i| + |j| − |g|S − ≥ − |g|S − 1. N +1 N +1 K   Lemma 8.11. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph with the vertex set S such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a on-trivial, finitely generated purely loxodromic subgroup of AΓ and h an arbitrary element in H. There is a number L ≥ 1 such that for each positive integer m ≥ L2 and generator s in S there is a path α outside the (m/L−L)– neighborhood of H connecting sm and hsm with the length bounded above by Lm. Proof. Let M = diam Γ, K the positive integer as in Lemma 8.10 and k = |h|S . Let L = 2(k + 1)(M + 1) + K + k + M + 1. Choose a reduced word w = sǫ11 sǫ22 · · · sǫkk , where si ∈ S and ǫi ∈ {−1, 1} that represents element h. For each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , k} let ti be a vertex in St(si ) and wi = sǫ11 sǫ22 · · · sǫi i . Then the length of each word wi is bounded above by k, wi+1 = wi sǫi i , and wk = w that represents element h. We now construct a path α0 outside the (m/L − L)–neighborhood of H connecting sm and w1 tm 1 with the length bounded above by 2(M +1)m. Since M = diam Γ, we can choose positive integer n ≤ M and n + 1 generators u0 , u1 , · · · , un in S such that the following conditions hold: (1) u0 = s and un = t1 . (2) uj and uj+1 commutes where j ∈ {0, 1, 2, · · · , n − 1}. m For each j ∈ {0, 1, 2, · · · , n − 1} let βj be a path connecting um j and uj+1 of length 2m with vertices m−1 m m m 2 m m m um uj+1 , um−2 um j , uj uj+1 , uj uj+1 , · · · , uj uj+1 , uj j+1 , · · · , uj+1 . j  By Lemma 8.10, the above vertices must lie outside the (m/K−1)–neighborhood of H. Therefore, these vertices also lies outside the (m/L−L)–neighborhood of H. Therefore, βj is a path outside the (m/L − L)–neighborhood of H ǫ1 m m ǫ1 m m connecting um j and uj+1 . Since w1 t1 = s1 t1 = t1 s1 , then we can connect m tm 1 and w1 t1 by an edge βn labelled by s1 . Let α0 = β0 ∪ β1 ∪ · · · ∪ βn . Then, it is obvious that the path α0 outside the (m/L − L)–neighborhood of H connecting sm and w1 tm 1 with the length bounded above by 2(M + 1)m. By similar constructions as above, for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , k − 1} there is a path αi outside the (m/L − L)–neighborhood of H connecting wi tm i with the length bounded above by 2(M + 1)m. We can also and wi+1 tm i+1  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  47  construct a path αk outside the (m/L − L)–neighborhood of H connecting m with the length bounded above by 2M m. Let α = α ∪ htm 0 k and hs α1 ∪ · · · ∪ αk . Then, it is obvious that the path α outside the (m/L − L)– neighborhood of H connecting sm and hsm with the length bounded above by 2(k + 1)(M + 1)m. By the choice of L we observe that the length of α is also bounded above by Lm.  Proposition 8.12. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph with the vertex set S such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a non-trivial, finitely generated purely loxodromic subgroup of AΓ . Then the lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is at most quadratic. Proof. Let h be an arbitrary group element in H and L ≥ 1 a constant as in Lemma 8.11. Since each cyclic subgroup in a CAT(0) group is undistorted (see Corollary III.Γ.4.8 and Theorem III.Γ.4.10 in [BH99]), there is a positive integer L1 such that |hk |S ≥  |k| − L1 for each integer k. L1 (1)  Let {σρn } be the lower relative divergence of X̃Γ with respect to H. We will prove that function σρn (r) is bounded above by some quadratic function for each n ≥ 2 and ρ ∈ (0, 1].   Choose a positive integer m ∈ L(L + r), 2L(L + r) and a generator s in S. Then, there is a path α0 outside the (m/L − L)–neighborhood of H connecting sm and hsm with the length bounded above by Lm. It is obvious that the path α0 also lies outside the r–neighborhood of H by the choice of m. Choose a positive integer k which lies between L1 nr + 8L(L + r) + L1  and L1 nr + 8L(L + r) + L1 + 1 . Let α = α0 ∪ hα0 ∪ h2 α0 ∪ · · · ∪ hk−1 α0 . Then, α is a path outside the r–neighborhood of H connecting sm , hk sm with the length bounded above by kLm. By the choice of k and m, the  length of α is bounded above by 2L1 L2 (L + r) nr + 8L(L + r) + L1 + 1 . Since r ≤ dS (sm , H) ≤ m, then there is a path γ1 outside Nr (H) connecting sm and some point x ∈ ∂Nr (H) such that the length of γ1 is bounded above by m. By the choice of m, the length of γ1 is also bounded above by 2L(L + r). Similarly, there is a path γ2 outside Nr (H) connecting hk sm and some point y ∈ ∂Nr (H) such that the length of γ2 is bounded above by 2L(L + r). Let α = γ1 ∪ α ∪ γ2 then α is a path outside Nr (H) connecting x, y and  the length of α is bounded above by 2L1 L2 (L+r) nr+8L(L+r)+L1 +1 +4L(L+r). Therefore, for each ρ ∈ (0, 1]  dρr (x, y) ≤ 2L1 L2 (L + r) nr + 8L(L + r) + L1 + 1 + 4L(L + r).  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  48  Also, dS (x, y) ≥ dS (sm , hk sm ) − dS (sm , x) − dS (hk sm , y)  k ≥ |hk |S − 2m − 2L(L + r) − 2L(L + r) ≥ − L1 − 8L(L + r) L1  ≥ nr + 8L(L + r) − 8L(L + r) ≥ nr. Thus, for each ρ ∈ (0, 1]  σρn (r) ≤ 2L1 L2 (L + r) nr + 8L(L + r) + L1 + 1 + 4L(L + r). This implies that the lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is at most quadratic.  We now establish the quadratic lower bound for the lower relative divergence of a right-angled Artin group with respect to a loxodromic subgroup. Proposition 8.13. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph with the vertex set S such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a non-trivial, finitely generated purely loxodromic subgroup of AΓ . Then the lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is at least quadratic. Proof. By Corollary 8.7, there is a positive integer M such that every geo(1) desic in the Cayley graph X̃Γ connecting points in H lies in M –neighborhood of H. By Theorem 8.6, there is another positive integer N such that for any reduced word w representing h ∈ H, and any join subword w′ of w, we have (1) ℓ(w′ ) ≤ N . Let {σρn } be the lower relative divergence of X̃Γ with respect to H. We will prove that for each n ≥ 9 and ρ ∈ (0, 1] 2M + 3N + 2 r−1  . ρr − 3N ) − 2r for each r > σρn (r) ≥ 3N + 1 ρ Let u and v be an arbitrary pair of points in ∂Nr (H) such that dr (u, v) < ∞ and dS (u, v) ≥ nr. Let γ be an arbitrary path that lies outside the ρr– neighborhood of H connecting  u and v. We will prove that the length of γ r−1 is bounded below by 3N +1 ρr − 3N ) − 2r. (1)  Let γ1 be a geodesic of length r in X̃Γ connecting u and some point x (1) in H. Let γ2 be another geodesic of length r in X̃Γ connecting v and some (1) point y in H. Let α be a geodesic in X̃Γ connecting x and y. Then α lies in the M –neighborhood of H. Choose a positive integer m such that r < (3N + 1)m + 1 < 2r. Since dS (x, y) ≥ dS (u, v) − 2r ≥ (n − 2)r ≥ 7r, there is a subpath α1 with length (3N +1)m+1 of α such that α1 ∩ B(x, 2r)∪B(y, 2r) = ∅. Also, the lengths of γ1 and γ2 are both r. This implies that (γ1 ∪ γ2 ) ∩ Nr (α1 ) = ∅. Since γ ∩ Nρr (H) = ∅ and α1 ⊂ NM (H), then γ ∩ Nρr−M (α1 ) = ∅. Also, ρr − M > ρr/2. Thus, γ ∩ Nρr/2 (α1 ) = ∅. Let γ = γ1 ∪ γ ∪ γ2 . Then, γ ∩ Nρr/2 (α1 ) = ∅.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  a  c  b  49  d  Figure 2 We assume that α1 = e0 w1 e1 w2 · · · em wm , where each ei is an edge labelled by some generator ai in S, each wi is a subpath of α1 of length exactly 3N . For each i ∈ {0, 1, 2, · · · , m} let Hi be the hyperplane intersecting ei and vi a point in Hi ∩ γ. For each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m} let βi be the subpath of γ connecting vi−1 and vi . If there is some hyperplane of type b that intersects two hyperplanes Hi−1 and Hi for some i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m}, then ei−1 wi corresponds to a word w that represents an element in Alk(ai−1 ) Alk(b) Alk(ai ) by Lemma 8.9. Also, the length of w is 3N + 1. Then w has some reduced spelling that is a product of 3 join words and so one of the join words in this latter spelling has length greater than N . This contradicts the choice of N . Therefore, no hyperplane intersects both Hi−1 and Hi for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m}. Also, γ lies outside the (ρr/2)–neighborhood of α1 . We have the following basic fact: ℓ(βi ) ≥ ρr/2 + ρr/2 − ℓ(wi ) ≥ ρr − 3N. Therefore, ℓ(γ) = ℓ(γ)−2r ≥  m X i=1  ℓ(βi )−2r ≥ m(ρr−3N )−2r ≥  r−1  ρr−3N )−2r. 3N + 1  Thus, σρn (r) ≥  r−1  2M + 3N + 2 . ρr − 3N ) − 2r for each r > 3N + 1 ρ  or the lower relative divergence of G with respect to H is at least quadratic.  The following theorem is obtained from Propositions 8.12 and 8.13. Theorem 8.14. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph with the vertex set S such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a nontrivial, finitely generated purely loxodromic subgroup of AΓ . Then the lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is exactly quadratic. We now construct an example of a right-angled Artin group AΓ together with a non-virtually cyclic subgroup H such that the lower relative divergence of the pair (AΓ , H) is exactly quadratic. Corollary 8.15. Let Γ be the graph as in Figure 2. Let AΓ be the associated right-angled Artin group and H the subgroup of AΓ generated by two elements ada and dad. Then H is a free subgroup of rank 2, and the lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is exactly quadratic.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  50  Proof. This is obvious that the subgroup K generated by two elements a and d is a free group of rank 2. Since H is a subgroup of K generated by two elements ada and dad, H is also a free group of rank 2. It is obvious that any join subword of a reduced word in AΓ representing a non-trivial group element in H is an element in the set {a, a−1 , a2 , a−2 , d, d−1 , d2 , d−2 }. Therefore, H is a loxodromic subgroup by Theorem 8.6. This implies that the lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is exactly quadratic by the main theorem.  8.3. Main theorem. Lemma 8.16. Let K be a simplicial, finite graph (K is not necessarily connected) and Γ the coned-off graph of K with cone point v. If H is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of the right-angled Artin group AΓ , then H is trivial or H has finite index in AΓ . Proof. We assume that H is nontrivial and we will prove that H has finite index in AΓ . Since AΓ = AK × hvi, it is sufficient to prove that H ∩ AK has finite index in AK and v n lies in H for some n 6= 0. We first assume for the contradiction that H ∩ hvi is a trivial group. Since v commutes with all vertices of Γ, v commutes with all elements in H. Therefore, v n Hv −n = H for all n. Also, v i H 6= v j H for i 6= j. This is a contradiction by Theorem 4.15. Therefore, v n lies in H for some n 6= 0. We now assume again for the contradiction that H ∩ AK has infinite index in AK . Then there is a infinite sequence (gn ) of distinct elements in AK such that gi (H ∩ AK ) 6= gj (H ∩ AK ) for i 6= j. This is not difficult to see that gi H 6= gj H for i 6= j. Since v n lies in H and v n commutes with all gi , then the infiniteTcyclic group generated by v n is a subgroup of each gi Hgi−1 . Therefore, gi Hgi−1 is an infinite subgroup. This again contradicts to Theorem 4.15. Therefore, H ∩ AK has finite index in AK . This implies that H has finite index in AΓ .  Lemma 8.17. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph and K be an induced star subgraph st(v). For each g1 and g2 in AΓ there is a finite sequence of conjugates of star subgroups g1 AK g1−1 = Q0 , Q1 , · · · , Qm = g2 AK g2−1 such that Qi−1 ∩ Qi is infinite for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m}. Proof. Let S be the vertex set of Γ and n = |g1−1 g2 |S . We will prove the above lemma by induction on n. If n = 0, then g1 = g2 . Therefore, the conclusion is true obviously. We now assume that n = 1. Then there is a vertex u such that g2 = g1 uǫ , where ǫ = 1 or ǫ = −1. Since Γ is finite and connected, there is a finite sequence of vertices of u = u0 , u1 , u2 , · · · , uℓ = v such that ui−1 is adjacent to ui for each i ∈ {1, 2, 3, · · · , ℓ}. Let Pi = g1 ASt(ui ) g1−1 and Pi′ = g2 ASt(ui ) g2−1 for each i ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, · · · , ℓ}. This is not hard to ′ check Pi−1 ∩ Pi and Pi−1 ∩ Pi′ are infinite for each i ∈ {1, 2, 3, · · · , ℓ}. Moreover, P0 = P0′ because g2 = g1 uǫ , where ǫ = 1 or ǫ = −1. Therefore, the conclusion is true for n = 1 obviously.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  51  Assume the conclusion is true for all n ≤ k for some k ≥ 1. We will prove that the conclusion is true for n = k + 1. In fact, if |g1−1 g2 |S = k + 1, then there is g3 in AΓ such that |g1−1 g3 |S = k and |g3−1 g2 |S = 1. By the inductive hypothesis, there is a finite sequence of conjugates of star subgroups g1 AK g1−1 = L0 , L1 , · · · , Lm1 = g3 AK g3−1 such that Li−1 ∩ Li is infinite for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m1 }. Similarly, there is a finite sequence of conjugates of star subgroups g3 AK g3−1 = L′0 , L′1 , · · · , L′m2 = g2 AK g2−1 such that L′i−1 ∩ L′i is infinite for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m2 }. Therefore, there is a finite sequence of conjugates of star subgroups g1 AK g1−1 = Q0 , Q1 , · · · , Qm = g2 AK g2−1 such that Qi−1 ∩ Qi is infinite for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m}. This implies that the conclusion is true for n = k + 1.  Proposition 8.18. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a non-trivial, infinite index subgroup of the right-angled Artin group AΓ . If H is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup, then H is free. Proof. We first observe that H is finitely generated and each conjugate of H is also a strongly quasiconvex subgroup. We now prove that for each vertex v of Γ and g ∈ AΓ the subgroup gHg−1 ∩ Ast(v) is trivial. We assume for the contradiction that g0 Hg0−1 ∩ Ast(v) is not trivial for some vertex v and some g0 ∈ AΓ . We claim that gHg−1 ∩ Ast(v) has finite index in Ast(v) for all g ∈ AΓ In fact, since g0 Hg0−1 is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup and Ast(v) is an undistorted subgroup, then g0 Hg0−1 ∩ Ast(v) is a strongly quasiconvex subgroup of Ast(v) by Proposition 4.11. Therefore, g0 Hg0−1 ∩ Ast(v) has finite index in Ast(v) by Lemma 8.16. We now prove that gHg−1 ∩ Ast(v) has finite index in Ast(v) for all g ∈ AΓ . By Lemma 8.17, there is a finite sequence of conjugates of star subgroups g0−1 Ast(v) g0 = Q0 , Q1 , · · · , Qm = g−1 Ast(v) g such that Qi−1 ∩ Qi is infinite for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m}. Since g0 Hg0−1 ∩ Ast(v) has finite index in Ast(v) , H ∩g0−1 Ast(v) g0 has finite index in Q0 = g0−1 Ast(v) g0 . Also, subgroup Q0 ∩Q1 is infinite. Then, H ∩ Q1 is not trivial. Using a similar argument as above, we obtain H ∩ Q1 has finite index in Q1 . Repeating this process, we have H ∩ g −1 Ast(v) g has finite index in g−1 Ast(v) g. In other word, gHg−1 ∩ Ast(v) has finite index in Ast(v) . By Theorem 4.15, there is a number n such that the intersection of any (n+1) essentially distinct conjugates of H is finite. Since H has infinite index in AΓ , there is n + 1 distinct element g1 , g2 , · · · gn+1 such that gi H 6= gj H for each i 6= j. Also, gi Hgi−1 ∩ Ast(v) has finite index in Ast(v) for each i. Then T T (∩gi Hgi−1 ) Ast(v) also has finite index in Ast(v) . In particular, gi Hgi−1 is infinite which is a contradiction. Therefore, for each vertex v of Γ and g ∈ AΓ the subgroup gHg−1 ∩ Ast(v) is trivial. This implies that H is a free group by Theorem 1.2 in [KMT].   ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  52  We are now ready for the main theorem in this section. Theorem 8.19. Let Γ be a simplicial, finite, connected graph such that Γ does not decompose as a nontrivial join. Let H be a non-trivial, infinite index subgroup of the right-angled Artin group AΓ . Then the following are equivalent: (1) H is strongly quasiconvex. (2) H is stable. (3) The lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is quadratic. (4) The lower relative divergence of AΓ with respect to H is completely super linear. Proof. The implication “(1) ⇒ (2)” is obtained from Theorem 4.8 and Proposition 8.18. The implication “(2) ⇒ (3)” is deduced from Theorem 8.14. The implication “(3) ⇒ (4)” is trivial and the implication “(4) ⇒ (1)” follows Theorem 4.8.  References [ABD]  [ACGH]  [ADT] [AMST]  [BC12] [Beh] [BH99]  [BHS17]  [Cor] [CS15] [Dah03] [Dav08]  [DS05]  Carolyn Abbott, Jason Behrstock, and Matthew Gentry Durham. Largest acylindrical actions and stability in hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Submitted. arXiv:1705.06219. Goulnara N. Arzhantseva, Christopher H. Cashen, Dominik Gruber, and David Hume. Characterizations of Morse quasi-geodesics via superlinear divergence and sublinear contraction. Submitted. arXiv:1601.01897. Tarik Aougab, Matthew Gentry Durham, and Samuel J. Taylor. Middle recurrence and pulling back stability. Submitted. arXiv:1609.06698. Yago Antolı́n, Mahan Mj, Alessandro Sisto, and Samuel J. Taylor. Intersection properties of stable subgroups and bounded cohomology. Submitted. arXiv:1612.07227. Jason Behrstock and Ruth Charney. Divergence and quasimorphisms of rightangled Artin groups. Math. Ann., 352(2):339–356, 2012. Jason Behrstock. A counterexample to questions about boundaries, stability, and commensurability. Submitted. arXiv:1705.03984. Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, I: Curve complexes for cubical groups. Geom. Topol., 21(3):1731– 1804, 2017. Matthew Cordes. Morse boundaries of proper geodesic metric spaces. Preprint. arXiv:1502.04376. Ruth Charney and Harold Sultan. Contracting boundaries of CAT(0) spaces. J. Topol., 8(1):93–117, 2015. François Dahmani. Combination of convergence groups. Geom. Topol., 7:933– 963, 2003. Michael W. Davis. The geometry and topology of Coxeter groups, volume 32 of London Mathematical Society Monographs Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2008. Cornelia Druţu and Mark Sapir. Tree-graded spaces and asymptotic cones of groups. Topology, 44(5):959–1058, 2005. With an appendix by Denis Osin and Sapir.  ON STRONGLY QUASICONVEX SUBGROUPS  53  [DT15a]  Pallavi Dani and Anne Thomas. Divergence in right-angled Coxeter groups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 367(5):3549–3577, 2015. [DT15b] Matthew Gentry Durham and Samuel J. Taylor. Convex cocompactness and stability in mapping class groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 15(5):2839–2859, 2015. [FM02] Benson Farb and Lee Mosher. Convex cocompact subgroups of mapping class groups. Geom. Topol., 6:91–152, 2002. [GMRS98] Rita Gitik, Mahan Mitra, Eliyahu Rips, and Michah Sageev. Widths of subgroups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 350(1):321–329, 1998. [Gro93] M. Gromov. Asymptotic invariants of infinite groups. In Geometric group theory, Vol. 2 (Sussex, 1991), volume 182 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 1–295. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1993. [Hru10] G.C. Hruska. Relative hyperbolicity and relative quasiconvexity for countable groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 10(3):1807–1856, 2010. [HW09] G. Christopher Hruska and Daniel T. Wise. Packing subgroups in relatively hyperbolic groups. Geom. Topol., 13(4):1945–1988, 2009. [KMT] Thomas Koberda, Johanna Mangahas, and Samuel J. Taylor. The geometry of purely loxodromic subgroups of right-angled Artin groups. To appear in Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. [KS96] Ilya Kapovich and Hamish Short. Greenberg’s theorem for quasiconvex subgroups of word hyperbolic groups. Canad. J. Math., 48(6):1224–1244, 1996. [Osi06] Denis V. Osin. Relatively hyperbolic groups: Intrinsic geometry, algebraic properties, and algorithmic problems. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 179(843):1– 100, 2006. [Osi16] D. Osin. Acylindrically hyperbolic groups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 368(2):851–888, 2016. [Sag95] Michah Sageev. Ends of group pairs and non-positively curved cube complexes. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 71(3):585–617, 1995. [Sag97] Michah Sageev. Codimension-1 subgroups and splittings of groups. J. Algebra, 189(2):377–389, 1997. [Sho91] Hamish Short. Quasiconvexity and a theorem of Howson’s. In Group theory from a geometrical viewpoint (Trieste, 1990), pages 168–176. World Sci. Publ., River Edge, NJ, 1991. [Sis16] Alessandro Sisto. Quasi-convexity of hyperbolically embedded subgroups. Math. Z., 283(3-4):649–658, 2016. [Tra] Hung Cong Tran. Purely loxodromic subgroups in right-angled Coxeter groups. Submitted. arXiv:1703.09032. [Tra15] Hung Cong Tran. Relative divergence of finitely generated groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 15(3):1717–1769, 2015. [Tra16] Hung Cong Tran. Divergence of Morse geodesics. Geom. Dedicata, 180:385– 397, 2016. Department of Mathematics, The University of Georgia, 1023 D. W. Brooks Drive, Athens, GA 30605, USA E-mail address: hung.tran@uga.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
