Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_4243

Abstract:
Margins of discrete Bayesian networks Robin J. Evans  arXiv:1501.02103v2 [math.ST] 30 Jan 2017  January 31, 2017 Abstract Bayesian network models with latent variables are widely used in statistics and machine learning. In this paper we provide a complete algebraic characterization of Bayesian network models with latent variables when the observed variables are discrete and no assumption is made about the state-space of the latent variables. We show that it is algebraically equivalent to the so-called nested Markov model, meaning that the two are the same up to inequality constraints on the joint probabilities. In particular these two models have the same dimension. The nested Markov model is therefore the best possible description of the latent variable model that avoids consideration of inequalities, which are extremely complicated in general. A consequence of this is that the constraint finding algorithm of Tian and Pearl (2002) is complete for finding equality constraints. Latent variable models suffer from difficulties of unidentifiable parameters and non-regular asymptotics; in contrast the nested Markov model is fully identifiable, represents a curved exponential family of known dimension, and can easily be fitted using an explicit parameterization.  1  Introduction  Directed acyclic graph (DAG) models, also known as Bayesian network models, are widely used multivariate models in probabilistic reasoning, machine learning and causal inference (Bishop, 2007; Darwiche, 2009; Pearl, 2009). These models are defined by simple factorizations of the joint distribution, and in the case of discrete or jointly Gaussian random variables, are curved exponential families of known dimension. The inclusion of latent variables within Bayesian network models can greatly increase their flexibility, and also account for unobserved confounding. However, this flexibility comes at the cost of creating models that are not easy to explicitly describe when considered as marginal models over the observed variables. Latent variable models generally do not have fully identifiable parameterizations, and contain ‘singularities’ that lead to non-regular asymptotics (Drton, 2009a). In addition, using them may force a modeller to specify a parametric structure over the latent variables, introducing additional assumptions that are generally difficult to test and may be unreasonable. If no parametric assumptions are made about the latent variables, and no assumption is made about their state-space, this leads to an implicitly defined marginal model. The marginal model has the advantage of avoiding some of the assumptions made by a parametric latent variable model, however no explicit  1  0 1  2  3  4  Figure 1: A directed acyclic graph on five vertices.  characterization of the model is available, and nor is there any obvious method for fitting it to data. Example 1.1. Consider the DAG on five vertices shown in Figure 1. The graph represents a multivariate model over five random variables X0 , X1 , X2 , X3 and X4 , with the restriction that the joint density factorizes as p(x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) = p(x0 ) · p(x1 ) · p(x2 | x0 , x1 ) · p(x3 | x2 ) · p(x4 | x0 , x3 ); here, for example, p(x3 | x2 ) represents the conditional density of X3 given X2 . This model arises naturally in the context of dynamic treatment regimes and longitudinal exposures (Robins, 1986): X1 and X3 represent treatments and X2 and X4 some outcome of interest. The treatments are randomized, though the second treatment X3 may depend upon the first outcome X2 , for example a dose may be dynamically adjusted. Since the outcomes are measured on the same patient, they are assumed to be correlated due to a common cause X0 , which might represent an underlying health status, as well as genetic and lifestyle factors. If we treat X0 as a latent variable, the marginal model over the remaining observed variables (X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 ) is the collection of probability distributions that can be written in the form p(x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) Z p(x0 ) · p(x1 ) · p(x2 | x0 , x1 ) · p(x3 | x2 ) · p(x4 | x0 , x3 ) dx0 . =  (1)  X0  That is, any (X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 )-margin of a distribution which factorizes according to the DAG over all five variables, for any state-space or distribution of X0 1 . ⊥ X1 | X2 From (1) we can deduce that the conditional independence X3 ⊥ holds in the marginal model; i.e. p(x3 | x1 , x2 ) = p(x3 | x2 ).  (2)  In addition this model satisfies the so-called Verma constraint of Robins (1986) (see also Verma and Pearl, 1990), because the expression X p(x2 | x1 ) · p(x4 | x1 , x2 , x3 ) (3) q(x4 | x3 ) ≡ x2  1 In  general it is sufficient to assume hidden variables are uniform on (0, 1); for this particular graph, we can choose X0 to be finite and discrete without loss of generality provided it has a sufficiently large number of states.  2  M  N L  Figure 2: Diagrammatic representation of the probability simplex (dashed outline) and a marginal model (M, in blue) sitting strictly within the associated nested model (N , in red); note the two models have the same dimension. Any parametric latent variable model will be contained strictly within M, but it may have a smaller dimension and be non-regular (an example is shown as L). The ‘ordinary Markov model’ is not shown, but contains N and would generally have larger dimension. does not depend upon x1 (see Example 3.2). The set of distributions satisfying both (2) and (3) is a so-called nested Markov model (Richardson et al., 2017). If the four observed variables are binary these equations represent four independent constraints, and the nested model is therefore an 11-dimensional subset of the 15-dimensional probability simplex. It is not immediately clear whether or not this nested model is the same as the marginal model defined by (1): in principle the marginal model might impose additional restrictions beyond (2) and (3). This begs the question, is the set of distributions that satisfy (1) characterized by (2) and (3)? The answer turns out to be ‘almost’, in the sense that the set of distributions that can be written in the form (1) is a full-dimensional subset of the set that satisfy (2) and (3), though there are additional inequality constraints. This situation is represented by Figure 2, which shows the marginal model (M, in blue) lying strictly within the nested model (N , in red), but the two having the same dimension. This paper shows that this result holds generally for all models of this kind. That is, the constraints on the model are precisely those derived from the algorithm of Tian and Pearl (2002), as represented by the statistical model of Richardson et al. (2017). Existing approaches to the problem of describing Bayesian network models with hidden variables either make use of parametric structure on the latent 3  variables (for example, Silva and Ghahramani, 2009; Anandkumar et al., 2013), or are restricted to testing conditional independences and do not consider constraints such as (3). This latter category includes the ancestral graph models of Richardson and Spirtes (2002) and the equivalent2 models on acyclic directed mixed graphs (ADMGs) of Richardson (2003); these pure conditional independence models, which we refer to as the ordinary Markov models, generally have a larger dimension than any latent variable model, so using them as a proxy leads to a loss of power to distinguish between certain kinds of model. On the other hand parametric hidden variable models suffer from various problems caused by the choice of state-space. They may be ‘too large’, in the sense that the dimension of the full model is greater than the dimension of the model over the observed data, thereby introducing identifiability problems. They may also be ‘too small’, in that unwanted additional restrictions are implied by the parametric structure, and therefore the models have a smaller dimension than the marginal model: this is depicted by the curve labelled L in Figure 2. Paradoxically, it may even be the case that a hidden variable model is ‘too large’ and ‘too small’ at the same time! For example, if we use a latent variable in Example 1.1 with the simplest possible state-space in which everything is binary, then the full model over all five variables has dimension 12; however, we have already established that the dimension of the marginal model over the observed variables is at most 11, so the model is clearly over-parameterized. In fact, it can be shown that the dimension of this latent variable model over the observed variables is only 10, so an additional artificial restriction is present due to the choice of a binary latent variable model (see Appendix A). If X0 is given enough states, the latent variable model and the marginal model coincide for graphs such as the one in Figure 1, a fact we will exploit in our proofs. However, this latent variable model is less useful for statistical inference because it is generally massively over-parameterized.  1.1  A Short Algebra Tutorial  This paper makes use of some results from real algebraic geometry, which provides powerful tools for analysing these complicated sets of distributions. All our statistical models are collections of distributions within the probability simplex that satisfy certain constraints. The constraints on a Bayesian network model are conditional independences, and can be represented as the requirement that certain polynomials in the probabilities are equal to zero; for example the conditional independence X1 ⊥ ⊥ X3 | X2 is equivalent to p(x2 ) · p(x1 , x2 , x3 ) − p(x1 , x2 ) · p(x2 , x3 ) = 0  ∀x1 , x2 , x3 .  A set defined by the zeros of polynomials is said to be an algebraic variety, or sometimes an algebraic set. In addition to equality constraints, these models will satisfy polynomial inequalities; i.e. p(xV ) ≥ 0. A set defined by a combination of polynomial equalities and inequalities is said to be semi-algebraic; this category includes many common finite-dimensional statistical models. Semi-algebraic sets have the nice property that when we eliminate one of the variables or 2 The models are equivalent if selection variables are not present, which is the case throughout this paper.  4  project onto a linear subspace, they remain semi-algebraic, generally known as the Tarski-Seidenberg theorem (see, for example, Basu et al., 1996, Theorem 2.72). A consequence of this is that the margin of any model defined by a semi-algebraic set is also defined by a semi-algebraic set. The Zariski closure of a set is the smallest algebraic variety that contains it; the fact that this is well-defined is a significant result in algebraic geometry. For a semi-algebraic set one can informally think of its Zariski closure as the set obtained by keeping the equality constraints and ‘throwing away’ the inequality constraints. Semi-algebraic sets have many interesting properties, but they are not necessarily ‘nice’ from a statistical perspective, in the sense of leading to regular asymptotics. For this we need our set to be a manifold, i.e. to be locally Euclidean.  1.2  Contribution  In this paper we show that marginal models with finite discrete observed variables are algebraically equivalent to the appropriate nested Markov model, in the sense that the Zariski closures of the marginal model and the nested model are the same. A consequence of this is that a margin of a DAG model and its nested counterpart have the same dimension, and differ only by inequality constraints. The marginal model defined by (1) in Example 1.1 is indeed 11dimensional, and is algebraically defined by (2) and (3); however, the marginal model also satisfies polynomial inequality constraints that the nested model does not. The result can be interpreted as showing that the constraint finding algorithm of Tian and Pearl (2002) is ‘complete’, in the sense that there are no other equality constraints to find without making further assumptions. This means that we have, for the first time, a full algebraic characterization of margins of Bayesian network models. It also shows that the nested model represents a sensible and pragmatic approximation to the marginal model: inequality constraints are typically extremely complicated, so the nested model—which has a factorization criterion, separation criteria, and a discrete parameterization (Richardson et al., 2017)—is much easier to work with, and can easily be fitted with existing algorithms (Evans and Richardson, 2010). In addition, the nested model inside the probability simplex is a manifold and therefore regular whenever the joint distribution is positive, whereas the marginal model may have a boundary that lies strictly inside the simplex. The nested model therefore has better statistical properties than the marginal model, in the sense that data generated from any strictly positive distribution will lead to regular asymptotics. Causal discovery methods such as the FCI algorithm that use conditional independence constraints could, in principle, be extended to the constraints implied by nested models (Spirtes et al., 2000); our main result shows that is ‘as good as it gets’, in the sense that there are no other equality constraints to test without making further (e.g. parametric) assumptions. Thus, this paper probes the limits of what it is possible to learn about causal models with hidden variables from observational data. We work with a class of hyper-graphs called mDAGs, with which we associate marginals of DAG models (Evans, 2016). The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces DAG models, their margins and 5  0 1  2  3  4  Figure 3: A conditional directed acyclic graph with three random vertices (0, 2, 4) and two fixed vertices (1, 3).  mDAGs, and carefully defines the problem of interest. Section 3 describes the nested Markov property. Section 4 describes latent variable models that can be used to represent the marginal model without loss of generality, and Section 5 contains the main results of the paper. Finally, in Section 6 we show that a large class of marginal models represent smooth manifolds, and provide some discussion.  2  Directed Graphical Models  We begin with some elementary graphical definitions. Definition 2.1. A directed graph, G(V, E), consists of a finite set of vertices, V , and a collection of edges, E, which are ordered pairs of distinct elements of V . If (v, w) ∈ E we denote this by v → w, and say that v is a parent of w; the set of parents of w is denoted by paG (w). Similarly w is a child of v, and the child set is denoted by chG (v). A directed graph is acyclic if there is no sequence of edges v1 → v2 → · · · → vk → v1 for k > 1. We call such a graph a directed acyclic graph, or DAG. Graphs are best understood visually: an example of a DAG with five vertices and five edges is given in Figure 1. We will require the following generalization of a DAG that allows for two separate types of vertex. ˙ 3 Definition 2.2. A conditional DAG G(V, W, E) is a DAG with vertices V ∪W and edge set E, with the restriction that no vertex in W may have any parents. The vertices in V are the random vertices, and W the fixed vertices; these two sets are disjoint. If W = ∅, this reduces to the ordinary definition of a DAG. We denote fixed vertices with square nodes, and random ones with round nodes: see the example in Figure 3.  2.1  Graphical Models  A graphical model arises from the identification of a graph with a collection of multivariate probability distributions; see Lauritzen (1996) for an introduction. Each vertex v ∈ V represents a random variable Xv taking values in a finite state-space Xv , and a model for their joint distribution is determined by the structure of the graph. With a conditional DAG G we associate a collection 3 Here  and throughout ∪˙ denotes a disjoint union of sets.  6  of probability measures P (· | xW ) on XV ≡ ×v∈V Xv , indexed by xW ∈ XW . Mathematically, fixed nodes play a similar role to the ‘parameter nodes’ used by Dawid (2002). Following Lauritzen (1996), we say a probability kernel P over XA given XB is a non-negative function q : XA × XB → R such that xA q(xA | xB ) = 1 for all xB ∈ XB . A kernel behaves much like a conditional probability distribution, but no assumption is made about any distribution over the indexing set XB . We apply the usual definitions for marginalizing and conditioning in kernels: q(xA | xB ) ≡  X  q(xA , xC | xB ),  q(xA | xB , xC ) ≡  xC  q(xA , xC | xB ) . q(xC | xB )  If q(xA | xB , xC ) does not depend upon xB then we will denote it q(xA | xC ), and say that XA ⊥ ⊥ XB | XC [q]. Here, and elsewhere, we use the shorthand V W for V ∪ W in subscripts. Definition 2.3. Let p(xV | xW ) be a probability kernel over XV indexed by XW . We say that p obeys the factorization criterion with respect to a DAG G if it factorizes into univariate kernels as Y p(xV | xW ) = p(xv | xpa(v) ), xV W ∈ XV W . (4) v∈V  The definition reduces to the familiar factorization criterion for DAGs if W = ∅. The extra generality will be useful for discussing Markov properties which involve factorization of the distribution into conditional pieces. The fixed vertices are analogous to variables that have been conditioned upon; if p satisfies (4) then, after renormalization, it also satisfies the factorization criterion for the same DAG with all vertices random. The definition of a Bayesian network can be extended to the case where no joint density exists by insisting that each random variable Xv can be written as a measurable function of Xpa(v) and an independent noise variable; we call this the structural equation property. If the density exists the two criteria are equivalent, and since we work with discrete variables this condition is always satisfied. Although the factorization property is often simpler to work with for practical purposes such as modelling and fitting, the structural equation property is useful in proofs. The well-known global Markov property based on d-separation is also equivalent to the structural equation property (Pearl, 2009). Example 2.4. A distribution P with density p obeys the factorization criterion for the graph in Figure 1 if the density has the form p(x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) = p(x0 ) · p(x1 ) · p(x2 | x0 , x1 ) · p(x3 | x2 ) · p(x4 | x0 , x3 ). Such distributions are precisely those which satisfy the conditional independences X1 ⊥ ⊥ X0 ,  X3 ⊥ ⊥ X0 , X1 | X2 ,  X4 ⊥ ⊥ X1 , X2 | X0 , X3 .  Example 2.5. A kernel p obeys the factorization criterion for the conditional DAG in Figure 3 if it can be written as p(x0 , x2 , x4 | x1 , x3 ) = p(x0 ) · p(x2 | x0 , x1 ) · p(x4 | x0 , x3 ). 7  1  2  3  4  Figure 4: An mDAG representing the DAG in Figure 1, with the vertex 0 treated as unobserved.  2.2  Latent Variables and mDAGs  We now introduce the possibility that some of the random variables are unobserved or latent, leaving the marginal distribution over the remaining observed variables. We represent the collection of margins of DAG models using a larger class of hyper-graphs called mDAGs (‘marginal DAGs’). These avoid dealing with latent variables directly, instead introducing additional edges to represent them. For example, the DAG in Figure 1, with the vertex 0 treated as a latent variable, is represented by the mDAG in Figure 4. Define an abstract simplicial complex B over V as a collection of non-empty subsets of V such that (i) {v} ∈ B for every v ∈ V , and (ii) if A ∈ B and B ⊆ A with B 6= ∅, then B ∈ B. Definition 2.6. An mDAG, G(V, W, E, B), is hyper-graph consisting of a conditional DAG with random vertices V , fixed vertices W and directed edge set E, together with an abstract simplicial complex B over V , called the bidirected faces. We say that G ′ (V ′ , W ′ , E ′ , B ′ ) is a subgraph of G if V ′ ⊆ V , E ′ ⊆ E, B ′ ⊆ B, and W ′ ⊆ V ∪ W : that is, each component is contained within the previous one, but random vertices may become fixed. The mDAG was introduced by Evans (2016), without the additional generality of fixed vertices. This aspect changes very little to the theory of these graphs, but is necessary for understanding the nested Markov model; note that bidirected faces only involve the random vertices. As with conditional DAGs, when representing mDAGs graphically the fixed vertices are drawn as square nodes and random vertices as circles. The bidirected simplicial complex is represented by its maximal non-trivial elements (i.e. those of size at least 2), called the bidirected hyperedges, or just edges. These are drawn in red, as in Figure 5(a); in this case W = {6} and the maximal sets of B are {1, 2}, {2, 3, 4}, and {3, 4, 5}. With each mDAG, G, we can associate a conditional DAG Ḡ by replacing each maximal element B ∈ B (of size at least 2) with a new random vertex u, such that the children of u are precisely the vertices in B. The new vertex u becomes the ‘unobserved’ variable represented by the bidirected edge B. We call Ḡ the canonical DAG associated with G. The mDAG in Figure 5(a) is thus associated with the canonical DAG in Figure 5(b). Our interest in mDAGs lies in their representation of the margin of the associated canonical DAG, and so we define our model in this spirit; see Evans (2016). ˙ , and let Ḡ be the Definition 2.7. Let G be an mDAG with vertices V ∪W ˙ ∪W ˙ . A kernel p over XV indexed by XW is canonical DAG with vertices V ∪U 8  1  2  3  6  4  5  (a)  1  u1  2  3 u2 u3  6  4  5  (b) Figure 5: (a) An mDAG, G, and (b) a DAG with hidden variables, Ḡ, representing the same model (the canonical DAG).  9  said to be in the marginal model for G if there exists a kernel q that factorizes according to Ḡ, and Z q(xV , xU | xW ) dxU . p(xV | xW ) = XU  That is, the margin of q over XV is p. Denote the collection of such kernels by M(G). In other words, the marginal model is the collection of kernels that could be constructed as the margin of a Bayesian network with latent variables replacing the bidirected edges. If G is a DAG then the marginal model is just the usual model defined by the factorization. A latent variable model corresponding to a canonical DAG Ḡ (i.e. possibly with parametric or distributional assumptions on the latent variables) always lies within the marginal model corresponding to the mDAG G. This should not be taken as meaning that the marginal model supersedes all latent variable models, since sometimes the additional parametric assumptions made in a latent variable model are crucial to their utility. For example, representing hidden Markov models and phylogenetic tree models using an mDAG leads to a bidirected hyper-edge containing all vertices; the marginal models are therefore saturated, and rather uninteresting from the perspective statistical inference. From the definitions above it may seem as though the set of marginal DAG models that can be represented by mDAGs is restricted to cases where the latent variables have no parents; in fact this does not cause any loss of generality, since all marginal DAG models can be represented in this way (see Evans, 2016).  2.3  Districts and Sterile Vertices  Definition 2.8. A collection of random vertices C ⊆ V in an mDAG G is bidirected-connected if for any distinct v, w ∈ C, there is a sequence of vertices v = v0 , v1 , . . . , vk = w all in C such that, for each i = 1, . . . , k, the pair {vi−1 , vi } ∈ B. A district of an mDAG is an inclusion maximal bidirected-connected set of random vertices. More informally, a district is a maximal set of random vertices joined by the red edges in an mDAG. It is easy to see from the definition that districts form a partition of the random vertices in an mDAG. The mDAG in Figure 4, for example, contains three districts, {1}, {3} and {2, 4}. Districts inspire a useful reduction of mDAGs, via the following special subgraph. Definition 2.9. Let G be an mDAG containing random vertices C ⊆ V . Then G[C] is the subgraph of G with (i) random vertices C and fixed vertices paG (C) \ C; (ii) those directed edges w → v such that v ∈ C (and w ∈ paG (C)); (iii) the bidirected simplicial complex BC ≡ {B ∩ C : B ∈ B(G)}. G[C] is therefore the subgraph induced over C, together with parents of C and edges directed towards C. Any edges (whether directed or bidirected) between the newly fixed vertices are removed. 10  1  2  3 (b)  (a)  1  2  3  4  (c) Figure 6: Subgraphs corresponding to factorization of the graph in Figure 4 into districts. Parent nodes of the district are drawn as squares.  For the graph in Figure 4 the subgraphs G[{1}], G[{3}] and G[{2, 4}] are shown in Figures 6(a), (b) and (c) respectively. Note in particular that the edge 2 → 3 is not in the subgraph G[{2, 4}]. Definition 2.10. Let G be an mDAG with random vertices V . For an arbitrary set C ⊆ V , define sterileG (C) ≡ C \ paG (C). In words sterileG (C) is the subset of C whose elements have no children in C. We say a set C is sterile if C = sterileG (C). Proposition 2.11. Let G be an mDAG with districts D1 , . . . , Dk . A probability kernel p is in the marginal model for G if and only if p(xV | xW ) =  k Y  gi (xDi | xpa(Di )\Di ),  i=1  where each gi is a probability kernel in the marginal model for G[Di ]. In addition, p is in the marginal model for G only if for every v such that chG (v) = ∅, the marginal distribution X p(xV | xW ) p(xV \v | xW ) = xv  is in the marginal model for G[V \ {v}]. Proof. Consider the factorization of the canonical DAG Ḡ. The first result follows from grouping the factors according to districts and noting that there is no overlap in the variables being integrated out. The second result follows from noting that if v has no children, the variable xv only appears in a single factor, and that factor is a conditional distribution that integrates to 1. It follows from this result that to characterize the marginal model we need only consider mDAGs containing a single district, since other models can always be reduced to combinations of such graphs.  11  1  2  1  3  2  (a)  3 (b)  Figure 7: (a) An mDAG on three vertices representing a saturated model; (b) the bidirected 3-cycle, the simplest non-geared mDAG.  2.4  Relationship between mDAGs and ADMGs  Previous papers considering marginal and nested models for DAGs have used acyclic directed mixed graphs, which are the restriction of mDAGs with random vertices so that each bidirected edge has size two (Richardson, 2003; Shpitser et al., 2012; Evans and Richardson, 2014; Richardson et al., 2017). From the perspective of the nested Markov property this distinction is unimportant: if we replace any bidirected simplicial complex with all its subsets of size 2, we obtain a conditional ADMG that represents the same model under the nested Markov property. However, if we consider the marginal model the models are not equal, as the restriction to pairwise independent latent parents will sometimes introduce additional inequality constraints. The marginal model for the mDAG in Figure 7(b) is strictly smaller than the one for 7(a) (Fritz, 2012, Proposition 2.13), for example. See Evans (2016) for a more detailed discussion. It follows from the results of this paper that there is no difference in equality constraints between graphs that differ only in this manner; algebraically the model defined by having a single latent parent for several variables is the same as having separate parents for each pair of vertices. The mDAGs in Figure 7 both represent marginal models of full dimension, for example. Hence, in terms of model dimension, nothing is lost by using ADMGs instead of mDAGs.  3  Nested Markov Property  The nested Markov property imposes constraints on a joint distribution that mimic those satisfied by the marginal model, including conditional independences and the Verma constraint in Example 1.1 (Richardson et al., 2017). It is defined in the following recursive way, which is a modification of the algorithm of Tian and Pearl (2002). Definition 3.1 (Nested Markov Property). A kernel p over XV indexed by XW obeys the nested Markov property for an mDAG G(V, W ) if V = ∅, or both:  12  1. p factorizes over the districts D1 , . . . , Dl of G: p(xV | xW ) =  l Y  gi (xDi | xpa(Di )\Di )  i=1  where each gi is a kernel which (if l ≥ 2 or W \ paG (V ) 6= ∅) obeys the nested Markov property with respect to G[Di ]; and 2. for each v ∈ V such that chG (v) = ∅, the marginal kernel X p(xV | xW ) p(xV \v | xW ) = xv  obeys the nested Markov property with respect to G[V \ {v}]. The set of kernels that obey the nested Markov property for G is the nested Markov model, denoted by N (G). The condition that l ≥ 2 or W \ paG (V ) 6= ∅ in the first criterion of this definition is simply to prevent an infinite recursion of the definition: all the graphs invoked recursively have either fewer random vertices or fewer vertices overall than their predecessor in the recursion. When we reach a graph with a single random vertex v such that all fixed vertices are parents of v, then any kernel p(xv | xpa(v) ) satisfies the nested Markov property. Example 3.2. Consider again the mDAG in Figure 4. Applying criterion 1 to this graph implies that p(x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) = g1 (x1 ) · g24 (x2 , x4 | x1 , x3 ) · g3 (x3 | x2 ) for some g1 , g3 and g24 obeying the nested Markov property with respect to the mDAGs in Figures 6(a), (b) and (c) respectively. Applying the second criterion to g24 and the now childless vertex 2 (see Figure 6(c)) gives X g24 (x2 , x4 | x1 , x3 ) = h(x4 | x3 ), x2  for some function h independent of x1 (by a further application of the first criterion); this is precisely the Verma constraint. The marginal model implies additional conditions on joint distributions because, although it satisfies the properties used to define the nested model, these properties are not sufficient to describe it. In particular, for p to be in the marginal model, the kernel g24 must satisfy Bell’s inequalities (see, for example, ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2011, Section 4.1). The nested Markov property is ‘sound’ with respect to marginal models, in the sense that all constraints represented by the former also hold in the latter. Theorem 3.3. For any mDAG G we have M(G) ⊆ N (G). Proof. This follows from the fact that the nested Markov model is defined in terms of constraints which are proven in Proposition 2.11 to be satisfied by the marginal model. 13  3.1  Parameterizing Sets  Definition 3.4. Let G be an mDAG. A subset of random vertices S ⊆ V is called intrinsic if S is a district in any graph which can be obtained by iteratively applying graphical operations of the form 1 and 2 in Definition 3.1 (i.e. taking the graph G[D] for a district D, or G[V \ {v}] for a sterile vertex v). Given an intrinsic set, S, define H = sterileG (S) to be the recursive head, and T = paG (S) the tail, associated with S (note that H and T are disjoint). The collection of all recursive heads in G is denoted by H(G). There is a one-to-one correspondence between intrinsic sets and recursive heads (Evans and Richardson, 2015). Throughout we will use H and T to indicate recursive heads and tails respectively, with the context making it clear which intrinsic set is being referred to. Define A(G) ≡ {H ∪ A | H ∈ H(G), A ⊆ T } to be the parameterizing sets of G. This collection of sets is so-called because it (locally) describes the set of distributions (or kernels) contained in the nested and marginal models, as we prove in Section 5. Conversely, non-empty sets not in A(G) are called the constrained sets, and locally describe the set of constraints imposed by the nested and marginal models. Example 3.5. The mDAG in Figure 4 has districts {1}, {3} and {2, 4}, so these are all intrinsic sets. Further, in the subgraph G[{2, 4}] the vertices 2 and 4 have no children, so we can marginalize either to see that respectively {4} and {2} are intrinsic sets. The corresponding recursive heads and tails are then: S {1}  H {1}  T ∅  {2} {3}  {2} {3}  {1} {2}  {4} {2,4}  {4} {2,4}  {3} {1,3}  A {1} {2}, {1,2} {3}, {2,3}  .  {4}, {3,4} {2,4}, {1,2,4}, {2,3,4}, {1,2,3,4}  Note that every non-empty subset of V is represented in A except for {1, 3}, {1, 2, 3}, {1, 4} and {1, 3, 4}. These are the ‘constrained sets’; the first two correspond to the conditional independence, X1 ⊥ ⊥ X3 | X2 in (2), and the others to the Verma constraint (3). Intrinsic sets and recursive heads consist only of random vertices, while tails may include both random and fixed vertices. Proposition 3.6. Let C be a bidirected-connected set in an mDAG G; then there exists an intrinsic set S such that C ⊆ S and sterileG (S) ⊆ sterileG (C). Proof. The district containing C is intrinsic by definition, so there exists an intrinsic set containing C; let S be a minimal intrinsic set (by inclusion) containing C. By the definition of intrinsic sets S is a district in some graph reached by iteratively applying the operations 1 and 2 to G: applying operation 1 again gives the graph G[S]. 14  Suppose for contradiction that there exists v ∈ sterileG (S)\ sterileG (C); then v∈ / C, since otherwise some child of v would be in C, and therefore in S. In addition, v is childless in the subgraph G[S], so we can remove v under operation 2 of Definition 3.1. In the resulting strictly smaller graph, C is still contained within one district, say S ′ , since C is bidirected-connected; in addition S ′ is also intrinsic, so we have found a strictly smaller intrinsic set S ′ ⊇ C, and reached a contradiction. We use the △ operator to denote the symmetric difference of two sets: A△B ≡ (A \ B) ∪ (B \ A). Given a collection of sets Ai , i = 1, . . . , k indexed by a finite set I, let k i  Ai ≡ A1 △A2 △ · · · △Ak .  i=1  denote the symmetric difference of all the Ai . That is, it is the set containing precisely those elements a which appear in an odd number of the sets Ai . The following result gives a characterization of the parameterizing sets in terms of symmetric differences which will be fundamental to our proof of the main results in this paper. Lemma 3.7. A set A ∈ A(G) if and only if there exists a bidirected-connected set C = {v1 , . . . , vk } in G, and sets Ai , i = 1, . . . , k, satisfying {vi } ⊆ Ai ⊆ {vi } ∪ paG (vi ), such that A=  k i  Ai = A1 △ · · · △Ak .  (5)  i=1  Proof. Suppose that A ∈ A(G); then H ⊆ A ⊆ H ∪ T for some head-tail pair (H, T ), with associated intrinsic set S. Then let C = S, since intrinsic sets are by definition bidirected-connected. Now consider sets A′ of the form (5); start with Ai = {vi }, so that A′ = S, and we will adjust the sets Ai to obtain A′ = A. We always have that A′ contains H, because each vi ∈ H appears in Ai and, by sterility of heads, in no other set Aj . Each vertex t ∈ T is (by definition) the parent of some vertex vj(t) ∈ S, so we can either include or exclude it from A′ (as required) just by replacing Aj(t) = {vj(t) } by {vj(t) , t}. Hence we just do this to include vertices in A \ S ⊆ T and exclude vertices in S \ A ⊆ T . Conversely, suppose that A is of the form (5) for some bidirected-connected set C; let S be an intrinsic set satisfying the conditions of Proposition 3.6, and (H, T ) be its associated head-tail pair. Then the head H = sterileG (S) ⊆ sterileG (C). Each vi ∈ H ⊆ C appears in A, since vi ∈ Aj if and only if i = j. Also A ⊆ C ∪ paG (C) ⊆ S ∪ paG (S) = H ∪ T , so A ∈ A(G).  3.2  Parameterization of the nested model  The nested Markov model can be parameterized with parameters indexed by head-tail sets (Evans and Richardson, 2015), and the parameterization defines a smooth bijection between an open subset of a real vector space (i.e. the parameter space) and the model (the set of probability distributions). This has 15  some nice consequences that we now state (for proofs see Evans and Richardson, 2015). In particular, for a fixed state-space XV W the set N (G) is a smooth manifold within the strictly positive probability simplex, and has dimension Y X |XT | (|Xh | − 1). d(G, XV W ) ≡ h∈H  H∈H(G)  In the all-binary case this reduces to d(G, XV W ) ≡  X  2|T | .  H∈H(G)  Our main result will show that M(G) always has the same dimension as N (G). Indeed, the parameterization of N (G) will in principle also serve as a parameterization of M(G), except that one would also have to restrict the parameter space in order to enforce the inequality constraints; of course, this is currently impractical since the inequality constraints are not generally known.  4  Geared mDAGs  In this section we introduce a special class of mDAGs which we term ‘geared’. For marginal models relating to such graphs, the state-space of the hidden vertices can be restricted without loss of generality, making proofs considerably easier. In Section 5 we prove our main result first for geared graphs, and then extend the result to the general case. Definition 4.1. Let G be an mDAG with bidirected simplicial complex B. We say that G is geared if the maximal elements of B satisfy the running intersection property. That is, there is an ordering of the edges B1 , . . . , Bk such that for each j > 1, there exists s(j) < j with [ Bi = Bj ∩ Bs(j) . Bj ∩ i<j  In other words, the vertices that are contained in both Bj and any previous edge are all contained within one such edge Bs(j) . A particular ordering of the elements of B which satisfies running intersection is called a gearing of G.4 Example 4.2. The simplest non-geared mDAG is the bidirected 3-cycle, depicted in Figure 7(b); there is no way to order the bidirected edge sets {1, 2}, {2, 3}, {1, 3} in a way which satisfies the running intersection property, since whichever edge is placed last in the ordering shares a different vertex with each of the two other edges. 4 The term ‘geared’ is chosen because a collection of bidirected edges which satisfies running intersection may appear rather like ‘cogs’ in a set of gears: see Figure 5. The definition is equivalent to the requirement that the simplicial complex B is vertex decomposable (Provan and Billera, 1980), and is also closely related to the notion of decomposability in an undirected or directed graph. Indeed the term ‘decomposable’ is used by Fox et al. (2014) to describe the same idea. We avoid using this terminology because of its existing meaning in connection with undirected and directed graphical models: for example, ordinary DAGs are trivially geared, but they may or may not be decomposable in the original sense (Lauritzen, 1996).  16  The following fact about geared subgraphs of mDAGs will allow us to generalize our later results to graphs which are not geared. Lemma 4.3. Let G be an mDAG with parameterizing sets A(G). For any A ∈ A(G) there exists a geared mDAG G ′ ⊆ G, such that A ∈ A(G ′ ). Proof. By Lemma 3.7, A is of the form (5) for some bidirected-connected set C. Let G ′ have the same vertices (random and fixed) and directed edges as G, but be such that the set C is singly connected by bidirected edges (i.e. the edges are all of size 2 and removing any of them will cause C to be disconnected) chosen to be a subgraph of G. Then G ′ is geared by standard properties of trees and running intersection, and using Lemma 3.7 again we have A ∈ A(G ′ ).  4.1  Functional Models  The key property of geared graphical models is that we can find a finite discrete latent variable model that is the same (over the observed variables) as the marginal model; that is, if the latent variables have a sufficiently large state-space then they do not impose additional restrictions on the observed distribution. This is achieved by letting each observed variable be a deterministic function of its latent and observed parents. We illustrate this with an example. Example 4.4. Consider the mDAG in Figure 8(a) representing the instrumental variables model, used to model non-compliance in clinical trials; here, for example, X1 represents a randomized treatment, X2 the treatment actually taken, and X3 a patient’s outcome or response, such as survival. Suppose that each of these quantities is binary, taking values in {0, 1}. Conceptually, it can be useful to posit the existence of two different potential outcomes X3 (0), X3 (1) for the survival response, one for each level of the treatment; X3 (0) is the patient’s outcome given that they choose not to take the treatment (so that X2 = 0) and X3 (1) is their outcome given that they do (X2 = 1). For example, if X3 (0) = 0 and X3 (1) = 1 then the patient survives if they take the treatment but dies if they do not. This pair of values is known as a patient’s response type. Of course, we can only ever observe one of these outcomes in a given patient, the one corresponding to the observed value of X2 . Similarly, we can conceive of two versions of the treatment X2 (0), X2 (1) depending upon the assigned value of X1 , this pair being called the patient’s compliance type. For example, X2 (0) = X2 (1) = 0 means that the patient will not take the treatment, regardless of whether or not they are assigned to the treatment group. These concepts have proved fruitful in causal inference, as they enable discussion of whether treatments have effects at the level of individual patients, rather than just over the entire population on average (Neyman, 1923; Rubin, 1974; Richardson et al., 2011). Now, since the latent variable (say U ) with children {2, 3} can take any value, we can—without loss of generality—assume that it includes the pair (X3 (0), X3 (1)), or equivalently a function f3 : X2 → X3 that determines, given the observed X2 , which value X3 will take. In this case X3 is still a measurable function of its parents U and X2 . Similarly we can assume U includes a function f2 : X1 → X2 that determines X2 given an observed X1 . An observation for a particular patient can be obtained by drawing a random treatment assignment X1 , a random compliance type for the patient f2 , and a 17  f2 , f3 1  2  3  1  (a)  2  3  (b)  Figure 8: (a) An mDAG representing the instrumental variables model; (b) a DAG with functional latent variables equivalent to the potential outcomes model of instrumental variables.  random response type f3 , and then evaluating (X1 , X2 , X3 ) = (X1 , f2 (X1 ), f3 (f2 (X1 ))). The key point is that one can place a distribution over (X1 , f2 , f3 ) and obtain a distribution over the observed variables (X1 , X2 , X3 ). The only requirement for the distribution to be Markov with respect to this particular graph is that X1 ⊥ ⊥ {f2 , f3 }, as depicted in Figure 8(b). The functional construction outlined above is mathematically equivalent to potential outcomes, and provides a model that is somewhat simpler to study than the general latent variable model. In fact, any geared mDAG can be reduced to a latent variable model in the way described above, something we now proceed to show.  4.2  Remainder Sets  Given a single-district, geared mDAG with at least one bidirected edge and a gearing B1 , . . . , Bk , define [ Bi Rj ≡ Bj \ i<j  (taking R1 ≡ B1 ) to be the remainder set associated with Bj . Remainder sets partition V , so for a random vertex v ∈ V , define r(v) to be the unique j such that v ∈ Rj . Now say that an ordering < on the vertices in V respects the gearing if for v ∈ Ri and w ∈ Rj , we have v < w whenever i > j; in other words, all the vertices in Rk precede all those in Rk−1 , etc; such an ordering always exists. For each v ∈ V with r(v) = j, let [ Ri ; π(v) = i>j v∈Bi  that is, the remainders associated with all bidirected edges which contain v and are later than j in the ordering. Then define a collection of functions Fv ≡ {f : Xpa(v) × Fπ(v) → Xv }, where FA = ×a∈A Fa and F∅ = X∅ = {1}. This is valid recursive definition, since all the vertices in π(v) precede v in an ordering which respects the gearing.  18  Example 4.5. The mDAG in Figure 8(a) has only one bidirected edge and therefore is trivially geared with R1 = B1 = {2, 3}. This leads to the sets F2 = {f2 : X1 → X2 },  F3 = {f3 : X2 → X3 },  which are precisely the sets of functions for compliance type and response type respectively. Example 4.6. Consider the mDAG in Figure 5, and order the bidirected edges as B1 = {1, 2}, B2 = {2, 3, 4} and B3 = {3, 4, 5}, giving respective remainder sets R1 = {1, 2}, R2 = {3, 4} and R3 = {5}. The ordering 5 < 4 < 3 < 2 < 1 of the random vertices respects the gearing, and we have π(1) = π(5) = ∅,  π(3) = π(4) = {5},  π(2) = {3, 4}.  In this case then F5 = {f : X3 → X5 }  F4 = {f : X2,3,6 × F5 → X4 }  F3 = {f : X1 × F5 → X3 } F1 = {f : {1} → X1 }  F2 = {f : F3,4 → X2 }  Alternatively, if we order the bidirected edges as {2, 3, 4}, {1, 2}, {3, 4, 5}, then we could take 5 < 1 < 2 < 3 < 4, and π(1) = π(5) = ∅,  π(3) = π(4) = {5},  π(2) = {1};  this yields F2 = {f : F1 → X2 }, with other collections Fv remaining unchanged.  4.3  Functional Models for Geared Graphs  If a vertex v is contained within exactly one bidirected edge, B, then without loss of generality we can assume that the latent variable corresponding to B contains all the residual information about how Xv should behave given the values of its visible parents, Xpa(v) . In other words, the latent variable associated with B includes a (random) function fv : Xpa(v) → Xv which, once instantiated, ‘tells’ Xv = fv (Xpa(v) ) which value it should take for each value of its other parents, exactly as in Example 4.5.5 All the randomness of Xv is collapsed into fv and Xpa(v) . If v is contained within two or more bidirected edges, say Bi and Bj , we might say that Bi tells Xv what value to take for every value of its visible parents and the other latent variables. However, it is not clear how to define such a function until the state-space associated with the other latent parents (i.e. Bj ) has already been fixed. The decomposable structure of geared graphs makes it possible to iteratively fix state-spaces for latent variables without loss of generality. To see this, suppose we have a single-district, geared mDAG G with remainder sets R1 , . . . , Rk , and form the canonical DAG Ḡ by replacing each bidirected edge Bi in G with a new vertex ui , such that chḠ (ui ) = Bi . Compare, for example, the structure of the graphs in Figures 5(a) and (b). 5 Equivalently,  one could take a deterministic function fv and introduce an ‘error term’ Ev so that Xv = fv (Xpa(v) , Ev ), as in the non-parametric structural equation models of Pearl (2009).  19  1  f1 , f2  2  3 f3 , f4 f5  6  4  5  Figure 9: A DAG with functional latent variables, associated with a gearing of the mDAG in Figure 5(a).  2  3 f3 , f4 f5  6  4  Figure 10: Subgraph of the DAG in Figure 9 containing the vertex 4 and its parents.  Note that each vertex v ∈ Rk has a single latent parent uk in Ḡ. Then, without loss of generality, incorporate the function fv : XpaG (v) → Xv into the latent variable Uk . We ‘replace’ Uk with the collection of such functions f Rk ∈ F Rk . Each vertex v ∈ Rk−1 has latent parent uk−1 and possibly also uk ; but since the state-space of Uk has been fixed as FRk , we can define fv : Xpa(v) ×FRk → Xv for those v with latent parents uk−1 and uk , and just fv : Xpa(v) → Xv otherwise. These functions fRk−1 can be integrated into Uk−1 , and the process repeated for i = k − 2, . . . , 1. We end up with latent variables Ui taking values in FRi for i = 1, . . . , k. For example, with the first gearing given in Example 4.6 for the graph in Figure 5(a), we would have U1 = (f1 , f2 ),  U2 = (f3 , f4 ),  U3 = (f5 ).  Associating each variable Ui with the vertex ui leads to the DAG in Figure 9. Notice that, for each v ∈ V , the function fv is contained within a parent variable of v. In addition, all the arguments of the function fv are also parents of v. For example, take v = 4, whose parents are drawn separately in Figure 10. The function f4 ∈ F4 is generated as part of the latent variable U2 = (f3 , f4 ), 20  and the associated vertex u2 is indeed a parent of 4. In addition, F4 = {f : X2,3,6 × F5 → X4 }, so the arguments of the function f4 , namely X2 , X3 , X6 and f5 , all correspond to vertices which are also parents of 4. Thus, in setting X4 = f4 (X2 , X3 , X6 , f5 ) we ensure that X4 is a well defined function of its parent variables. In fact using this construction we can set Xv = fv (fπ(v) , Xpa(v) ) for every v ∈ V , which is well defined because the directed part of the original mDAG is acyclic. The following result shows that the resulting conditional distribution over XV given XW is in the marginal model for the original mDAG. Theorem 4.7. Let G be a geared mDAG, and Ri , i = 1, . . . , k be the remainder sets corresponding to some gearing of G. Suppose we generate functions fv ∈ Fv according to a distribution in which (fv | v ∈ Ri ) ⊥ ⊥ (fw | w ∈ V \ Ri ), for each i = 1, . . . , k, and then define Xv = fv (fπ(v) , Xpa(v) ),  v ∈ V.  Then the induced conditional distribution on XV given XW is in the marginal model for G. Proof. For each bidirected edge Bi , define the random variable Ui = (fv | v ∈ Ri ). The Ui s are represented by exogenous variables on the DAG Ḡ, and the conditions given in the statement of the theorem ensures they are all independent. The structural equation property for Ḡ will therefore be satisfied if each Xv is a well defined function of its parents in the graph. In other words, the three components fv , fπ(v) and Xpa(v) must all be determined from random variables which are parents of v in Ḡ. This holds for Xpa(v) by definition. Additionally v ∈ Ri implies that v ∈ Bi , and that therefore the variable Ui ≡ (fv : v ∈ Ri ) is a parent variable of Xv . Lastly suppose w ∈ π(v); this happens if and only if w, v ∈ Bj for some j > i, in which case w ∈ Rj for the minimal such j by the running intersection property of the gearing. Then fw is contained in Uj , which is also a parent variable of Xv . In fact it is not hard to see that any distribution in the marginal model of a geared graph can be generated in the way described in Theorem 4.7. Since each of these latent variables takes values in a finite collection of functions, this means that the marginal model of a geared graph is equivalent to a latent variable model in which all the random variables (latent and observed) are finite and discrete. It follows from this that marginal models for geared mDAGs are semi-algebraic sets by the Tarski-Seidenberg theorem (Basu et al., 1996, Chapter 2). Example 4.8. Consider the marginal model for the graph in Figure 4. In this case the vertices 2 and 4 are each contained in only one bidirected edge, so  21  without loss of generality this edge could be replaced in the canonical DAG (Figure 1) with a latent variable taking values in F2 × F4 where F2 ≡ {f : X1 → X2 },  F4 ≡ {f : X3 → X4 }.  That is, the latent variable may be assumed to be U = (f2 , f4 ), where f2 and f4 respectively assign values to X2 and X4 given particular values of X1 and X3 . For non-geared graphs such as that in Figure 12(a), there is no clear way to write the marginal model as a latent variable model without possible loss of generality. It is therefore not possible for us to prove that marginal models corresponding to non-geared mDAGs are semi-algebraic; however, we conjecture that they indeed are. Our results will show that for a sufficiently large latent state-space the dimension of the latent variable model becomes the same as that of the nested model, but it is at least conceivable that there are non-polynomial inequality constraints on the marginal model for non-geared graphs.  4.4  Generating Distributions for Geared mDAGs  Let G be a single-district, geared mDAG, with gearing given by remainder sets R1 , . . . , Rk ; assign a probability distribution ρi to each collection of functions Ui ≡ (fv | v ∈ Ri ). Suppose we draw values for variables Ui = (fv )v∈Ri independently according to ρi , and use them to generate values for the observed variables XV for each possible value of the fixed vertices XW . The resulting (conditional) distribution over XV given XW is, by Theorem 4.7, in the marginal model for G. S Let π(Ri ) ≡ v∈Ri π(v) and fA ≡ (fv | v ∈ A). Define p[ρk , . . . , ρ1 ](xV | xW ) =  X  ρk (fRk ) · · ·  X  ρ1 (fR1 ),  (6)  fR1 ∈Φ1 (fπ(R1 ) ,xV W )  fRk ∈Φk (xV W )  where Φi (fπ(Ri ) , xV W ) = {fRi | fv (xpa(v) , fπ(v) ) = xv for each v ∈ Ri };  (7)  that is, Φi (fπ(Ri ) , xV W ) is precisely the set of functions fRi that, given the indicated values of parents variables, jointly evaluate to xRi . Hence (6) is a sum over all the combinations of functions fV that, given the input XW = xW , recursively evaluate to xV . The function p[·] takes distributions over the functions fV and returns a kernel over XV indexed by XW . For brevity we will generally denote this by X X p[ρk , . . . , ρ1 ] = ρk · · · ρ1 , Φk  Φ1  with the dependence upon xV W left implicit. It may be helpful to think of this as an over-parameterized family of kernels for XV given XW , with parameters ρ1 , . . . , ρk . The mapping p[·] is clearly smooth (infinitely differentiable), and its image defines the marginal model. Hence we will be able to deduce various aspects of the model’s geometry by studying p[·] and its derivatives. Choosing ρi (fRi ) = 1 for each i (up to a constant of proportionality which, for simplicity, we do not 22  write explicitly) induces the uniform distribution on XV for each xW ∈ XW ; we denote this kernel by p0 ≡ p[1, . . . , 1]. Clearly p0 is contained within M(G) for any mDAG G—as, in fact, is any distribution corresponding to all variables being independent. Example 4.9. For the instrumental variables model in Figure 8 (if we consider X1 to be fixed), we have X ρ(f2 , f3 ) p[ρ](x2 , x3 | x1 ) = Φ(x123 )  where Φ(x123 ) = {(f2 , f3 ) : f2 (x1 ) = x2 , f3 (x2 ) = x3 }. Example 4.10. In the case of the mDAG in Figure 5(a) we have three bidirected edges and remainder sets, and the gearing used in Figure 9 gives X X X p[ρ3 , ρ2 , ρ1 ] = ρ3 (f5 ) ρ2 (f3 , f4 ) ρ1 (f1 , f2 ), Φ3  Φ2  Φ1  where Φ1 = {(f1 , f2 ) | f1 = x1 , f2 (f3 , f4 ) = x2 } Φ2 = {(f3 , f4 ) | f3 (x1 ) = x3 , f4 (x2 , x3 , x6 , f5 ) = x4 } Φ3 = {f5 | f5 (x3 ) = x5 }.  5  Main Results  In this section we provide our main results, showing that the marginal model M(G) has the same dimension as the nested model. This is done first for geared mDAGs, and the result is then extended to general graphs. For geared graphs, the marginal model is just the image of the infinitely differentiable function p[·] described in the previous section. Such functions can be locally approximated at a particular point, say p0 = p[1, . . . , 1], by the linear map given by the derivative of p[·]. This column space of this linear map (also called the pushforward map) gives the linear space that approximates the model at p0 , also known as the tangent space. We will show that the tangent space to the marginal model at p0 is equal to the tangent space of the nested model N (G) at p0 . To do this we take a basis of the tangent space of N (G), and for every vector λ in the basis we explicitly construct a vector δ such that the directional derivative of p[·] with respect to δ is equal to λ. This shows that each λ is also contained in the tangent space of M(G). Since the marginal model is contained within the nested model, it will then follow from results in algebraic geometry that the two models coincide in a neighbourhood of p0 . For non-geared graphs we have do slightly more work, showing that we can combine maps from different geared sub-graphs to obtain the same result.  23  5.1  Vector Spaces and Tangent Cones  A probability kernel p(xV | xW ) can be thought of equally as a vector with entries indexed by XV W , or a real function with domain XV W . The following decomposition of the vector space R|XV | will prove useful. Definition 5.1. For any A ⊆ V , let ΛA be the subspace of R|XV | consisting of vectors p such that P (i) ya ∈Xa p(ya , xV \a ) = 0 for each a ∈ A and xV \{a} ∈ XV \{a} ; (ii) p(xV ) = p(yV ) whenever xA = yA .  In other words, considered as a function p : XV → R, the value of p ∈ ΛA only depends upon xA , and its sum over xa for a ∈ A (keeping the other arguments fixed) is 0. In particular Λ∅ is the subspace spanned by the vector of Q 1s. The dimension of ΛA is a∈A (|Xa | − 1); in the case where all the variables are binary, each ΛA has dimension one and is the same as the space spanned by the corresponding column of a log-linear design matrix. It is simple to check that the spaces ΛA are all orthogonal, and the real vector space R|XV | can be decomposed as the direct sum M R|XV | = ΛA . A⊆V  Definition 5.2. Let A be a subset of Rk containing a point x. The tangent cone of A at x is the set of vectors of the form v = lim ηn−1 (vn − x) n→∞  where ηn → 0 and each vn ∈ A. A tangent cone is a cone, but may or may not be a vector space, depending upon whether the set A is regular at x. If A is defined by the image of a differentiable bijective map then the tangent cone is a vector space, and the same as the image of the pushforward map. This is the case with the nested model N (G), which has an explicit and smooth parameterization (Evans and Richardson, 2015). Its tangent cone at the uniform distribution p0 is the vector space M ΛA , (8) TSn0 ≡ A∈A(G)  where A(G) are the parameterizing sets; this can be deduced by looking directly at the parameterization. As noted in Section 4, any marginal model M(G) also contains the uniform distribution p0 (xV | xW ) ≡ |XV |−1 ,  xV ∈ XV , xW ∈ XW ,  at which point all variables are totally independent. The tangent cone of the marginal model M(G) at p0 is also the vector space (8), which forms the main result of this section.  24  Theorem 5.3. The tangent cone of M(G) at p0 , denoted TC0 , is the vector space M TC0 = TSn0 ≡ ΛA . A∈A  That TC0 ⊆ TSn0 follows from the fact that M(G) ⊆ N (G). The proof of the reverse inclusion is delayed until the end of the section.  5.2  Results for Geared Graphs  Definition 5.4. Let λ : XA → R; we say that λ is A-degenerate (or just degenerate) if for each a ∈ A, and xA\a ∈ XA\a , X λ(ya , xA\a ) = 0. ya  It is not hard to see that the set of A-degenerate functions is isomorphic to the vector space ΛA ; both formulations will be useful. Definition 5.5. Given a degenerate function εi : FRi → R, define Di (εi ) = lim η −1 {p[1, . . . , 1 + ηεi , . . . , 1] − p[1, . . . , 1, . . . , 1]} , η↓0  so that Di (εi ) is a vector in R|XV W | , the directional derivative of the ith component of p[·] with respect to εi . For sufficiently small η > 0, the vector 1 + ηεi is non-negative and therefore a valid distribution over FRi (up to the normalizing constant); it follows that Di (εi ) ∈ TC0 , the tangent cone of M(G) at p0 . Let Ti = {Di (εi ) | εi degenerate}. Since the function p[·] is differentiable at [1, . . . , 1] it follows that Ti is a vector space, and also that the vector space T1 + · · · + Tk is contained within the tangent cone of M at the uniform distribution. We will show that T1 + · · · + Tk is in fact the same as (8). It will be useful to define the following collection of supersets of Φi , for B ⊆V: ΦB i (fπ(Ri ) , xV W ) ≡ {fRi | fv (xpa(v) , fπ(v) ) = xv for each v ∈ Ri ∩ B}.  (9)  That is, the collection of functions fRi such that, given inputs fπ(Ri ) and xpa(Ri )\Ri , the values of fB∩Ri jointly evaluate to xB∩Ri . Note that ΦB i = Φi for any B ⊇ Ri . Lemma 5.6. Let C ⊆ Ri , with sterileG (C) ⊆ A ⊆ C ∪ paG (C) and E ⊆ π(C). Then for every degenerate function λ : XA × FE → R, there exists a degenerate function δ : FC → R such that X δ(fC ) = λ(xA , fE ), fRi ∈Φi  where Φi is given by (7). In addition,  X |XRi \B |λ(xA , fE ) if C ⊆ B δ(fC ) = 0 otherwise. B fRi ∈Φi  25  Proof. See appendix, Section B.2. Note that if we set E = ∅, the above result shows that for any λ ∈ ΛA there exists a δ such that η −1 {p[1, . . . , 1 + ηδ, . . . , 1] − p[1, . . . , 1, . . . , 1]}   X X X X  ··· = η −1 ηδ(fC ) ··· 1   Φk  Φi  Φi−1  Φ1  = λ.  Hence ΛA ≤ Ti (i.e. ΛA is a subspace of Ti ) for any A such that sterileG (C) ⊆ A ⊆ C ∪ paG (C) and C ⊆ Ri . The next result forms the backbone for proving Theorem 5.3: it extends Lemma 5.6 to sets C that are not contained within a single remainder set. Lemma 5.7. Let C be a bidirected-connected set, and for each i define Ci ≡ C ∩ Ri ; let I ≡ {i | Ci 6= ∅}. For sterileG (Ci ) ⊆ Ai ⊆ Ci ∪ paG (Ci ), let i A= Ai . i∈I  Then ΛA ≤ Tl , where l is the minimal element of I. Proof. By Lemma B.5 (see Appendix), there exists a rooted tree Π with vertices I, such that i → j in Π only if there exist vi ∈ Ri ∩ C and vj ∈ Rj ∩ C with vj ∈ π(vi ). In particular i → j only if Cj ⊆ π(vi ). Let l be the root node of Π, and for each j ∈ chΠ (l) denote by Πj the rooted tree with root j formed only from the descendants of j. Let λi : XAi → R be arbitrary Ai -degenerate functions for each i ∈ I. Then starting with vertices which have no children (i.e. the leaves of the tree), and using Lemma 5.6, recursively define δi for i ∈ I as the degenerate function of fCi such that X Y δj (fCj ), δi (fCi ) = λi (xAi ) Φi  j∈chΠ (i)  where the empty product is defined to be equal to 1. Then X X XX X Y δj (fCj ). ··· δl (fCl ) = λl (xAl ) ··· Φk  Φl+1 Φl  Φk  Φl+1 j∈chΠ (l)  P  For each i ∈ I an expression of the form Φi δi (fCi ) is only a function of fCα (and xAi ) for α ∈ chΠ (i) and Π is a tree, so the sum factorizes into components only involving the descendants of each j ∈ chΠ (l): X X Y X ··· δl (fCl ) = λl (xAl ) δj (fCj ). Φk  Φ1  j∈chΠ (l)  Φs s∈deΠ (j)  But then for each j the factor represents a disjoint sub-tree Πj with root node j, so we can just iterate this process within each factor, and get Y = (10) λi (xAi ). i∈I  26  f1 , f2 1  2  1  2  f3  3  4  f4  3  (a)  4 (b)  Figure 11: (a) an mDAG on 4 variables, and (b) a DAG with hidden variables corresponding to a gearing of the mDAG in (a). It follows that any function of the form (10) lies in Tl . Since ΛA is spanned by such functions by Lemma B.3 (see Appendix B) it follows that ΛA ≤ Tl . Corollary 5.8. For geared graphs G, we have M ΛA ≤ T 1 + · · · + T k . A∈A(G)  Proof. Reformulating Lemma S 3.7 slightly, S for any A ∈ A(G) there exists a bidirected-connected set C = i Ci = i {vi1 , . . . , viki }, where Ci = C ∩ Ri (we have changed nothing other than to label the vertices vij by which remainder set they are contained in). Then A is of the form   i j i i j  Ai  Ai = A= i  i,j  j  for some sets Aji such that {vij } ⊆ Aji ⊆ {vij } ∪ paG (vij ). Applying Lemma 3.7 in reverse to the bidirected-connected set Ci shows that a Ai ≡ j Aji is in A(G), and therefore satisfies sterileG (Ci ) ⊆ Ai ⊆ Ci ∪ paG (Ci ). Then by Lemma 5.7 the space ΛA is contained in some Ti , i = 1, . . . , k.  Example 5.9. In the IV model from Figure 8 (see Examples 4.5 and 4.9) has a saturated nested model with the following parameterizing sets: head H {1} {2} {3}  tail T ∅ {1} {1, 2}  parametrizing sets A {1} . {2}, {1,2} {3}, {1,3}, {2,3}, {1,2,3}  Indeed, taking the functional parameterization suggested in Example 4.9, one can see that altering the distribution of the compliance functions f2 will affect the distribution of X2 conditional on X1 , which is why Λ2 and Λ12 are contained in TC0 . For example, to introduce a correlation between X1 and X2 whilst keeping the marginal distributions fixed, we can increase the proportion 27  of ‘compliers’ (that is the people for whom f2 (0) = 0, f2 (1) = 1) and decrease the proportion of ‘defiers’ (f2 (0) = 1, f2 (1) = 0). Similarly, modifying the distribution of f3 gives us Λ3 and Λ23 . Obtaining the directional derivatives in Λ13 and Λ123 requires modifying the distribution of f2 , f3 jointly. Example 5.10. Consider the single-district, geared mDAG in Figure 11(a); the nested Markov model for this graph is saturated (i.e. has no constraints), and thus its tangent space at p0 is of full dimension. Correspondingly, one can check that A(G) consists of all non-empty subsets of {1, 2, 3, 4}: head H {1} {2} {1,2} {3} {1,3} {4} {2,4} {3,4}  tail T ∅ ∅ ∅ {2} {2} {1} {1} {1,2}  parametrizing sets A {1} {2} {1,2} . {3}, {2,3} {1,3}, {1,2,3} {4}, {1,4} {2,4}, {1,2,4} {3,4}, {1,3,4}, {2,3,4}, {1,2,3,4}  Let us now see how our previous results apply to the marginal model in this case. Consider the gearing B1 = {1, 2} R1 = {1, 2}  B2 = {1, 3} R2 = {3}  B3 = {2, 4} R3 = {4}  and ordering 4 < 3 < 1 < 2 which respects this gearing. This leads to the hidden variable model in Figure 11(b); here f 3 : X2 → X3  f 4 : X1 → X4  f 1 : F3 → X1  f 2 : F4 → X2 .  Applying Lemma 5.6 to each remainder set in turn tells us that Λ1 + Λ2 + Λ12 ≤ T1 ,  Λ3 + Λ23 ≤ T2 ,  Λ4 + Λ14 ≤ T3 .  We can apply Lemma 5.7 with the connected set C = {1, 2, 3, 4} to find that ΛA ≤ T1 , where A is a set of the form A = {1, 2}△A2△A3 and {3} ⊆ A2 ⊆ {2, 3},  {4} ⊆ A3 ⊆ {1, 4};  this gives us any A ∈ {{3, 4}, {1, 3, 4}, {2, 3, 4}, {1, 2, 3, 4}}, and so Λ34 + Λ134 + Λ234 + Λ1234 ≤ T1 . Repeating with C = {1, 2, 3} and {1, 2, 4} respectively gives Λ13 + Λ123 ≤ T1 and Λ24 + Λ124 ≤ T1 . Thus for every non-empty A ⊆ {1, 2, 3, 4} there is some i ∈ {1, 2, 3} such that ΛA ≤ Ti , and therefore the tangent cone of M(G) at the uniform distribution is the same as that of the saturated model on four variables. In other words the nested model and marginal model are both of full dimension. Evans (2012) shows that the marginal model associated with this graph induces some inequality constraints on the joint distribution, and so the nested and marginal models are not identical. 28  1  2  1  2  1  2  4  3  4  3  4  3  (a)  (b)  (c)  Figure 12: (a) the bidirected 4-cycle, and (b), (c) two geared subgraphs.  5.3  Extension to non-geared graphs  Corollary 5.8 put us in a position to prove Theorem 5.3 for geared graphs; however it does not so far extend to the general case, because we cannot fix the state-spaces of the latent variables without a gearing. In this section we will show that the tangent cone of a general marginal model at the uniform distribution is the vector space spanned by the tangent cones of its geared subgraphs, and that therefore the problem can be reduced to geared graphs. Proposition 5.11. Let G be an arbitrary mDAG containing geared subgraphs G1 , . . . , Gk . Suppose that, for each subgraph and a suitable gearing ΛAi ≤ TC0 (Gi ) as a consequence of the earlier results in this section. Then ΛA1 + · · · + ΛAk ≤ TC0 (G). In other words, the tangent cone of G includes the vector space spanned by all the tangent cones of the subgraphs. Proof. First consider the case W = ∅ and k = 2, from which the general result will follow similarly. Let p1 ∈ M(G1 ) ⊆ M(G) be formed by random functions fV according to a gearing of G1 , and p2 ∈ M(G2 ) ⊆ M(G) by random functions f˜V according to a gearing of G2 . Let Uv be independent Bernoulli( 21 ) variables, and define a new distribution by setting Zv = Uv fv (fπ(v) , Zpa(v) ) + (1 − Uv )f˜v (f˜π̃(v) , Zpa(v) ); i.e. we randomly (and independently of all other vertices) choose one of the mechanisms fv or f˜v to generate Zv . Denote Xv ≡ fv (fπ(v) , Zpa(v) ) and Yv ≡ f˜v (f˜π(v) , Zpa(v) ). Note that although fv and f˜v are independent the values of Xv and Yv are not, since they share parent variables. Denote the resulting joint distribution of ZV by p. We have p ∈ M(G) since we are still generating each variable as a random function of its parents and some independent noise, which clearly satisfies the structural equation property for Ḡ.  29  Splitting into cases indexed by B ≡ {v : Uv = 1}, we have X P (ZV = zV ) = P (UB = 1, UV \B = 0, XB = zB , YV \B = zV \B ) B⊆V  =  1  2|V |  X  P (XB = zB , YV \B = zV \B ).  (11)  B⊆V  It follows from the proof of Lemma 5.7 that if A1 ∈ A(G1 ) and λA1 ∈ ΛA1 then there exists a degenerate δ(fCi ) such that X X X ··· δ(fCi ) · · · 1 = λA1 (xA1 ) Φk  Φi  Φ1  and from Lemma 5.6 that  X X X |XV \B |λA1 (xA1 ) if Ci ⊆ B 1= ··· δ(fCi ) · · · 0 otherwise. B B B Φk  (12)  Φ1  Φi  Similarly, given A2 ∈ A(G2 ) and λA2 ∈ ΛA2 there exists a δ̃(f˜Cj ) satisfying equivalent conditions over f˜s. Now since the functions used to generate XV and YV are independent, P (XB = zB , YV \B = zV \B )    X X  X X X X ρ̃1  ρ1   ρ̃k · · · (ρ̃j + η δ̃) · · · (ρi + ηδ) · · · ρk · · · = ΦB k  ΦB 1  ΦB i  = |XB |−1 + ηc1 λA1    V \B  Φ̃k  |XV \B |−1 + ηc2 λA2  = |XV |−1 + η(c′1 λA1 + c′2 λA2 ) + O(η 2 ).  V \B  Φ̃j  V \B  Φ̃1    The first equality above follows just from consideration of which functions we need to evaluate to which values in order to obtain XB = zB and YV \B = zV \B (although this expression apparently factorizes, note that both factors can depend upon all of zV ). Note that possibly c′i = 0, depending on which of the conditions from (12) are satisfied. However, certainly c′i > 0 for some subsets B, so plugging this back into (11) we get P (ZV = zV ) = |XV |−1 + η(c′′1 λA1 + c′′2 λA2 ) + O(η 2 ), where c′′i > 0. Then by an appropriate choice of scaling for each λAi we see that ΛA1 + ΛA2 ≤ TC0 (G). For non-empty W , we can draw ZW = XW = YW as a uniform random variable, and then look at XV | XW ; the proof is otherwise the same. Example 5.12. The bidirected 4-cycle in Figure 12(a) is not geared, and therefore we cannot apply our earlier results to it directly. The nested model for this graph is equivalent to the model defined by the constraints X1 ⊥ ⊥ X3 and X2 ⊥ ⊥ X4 , and has parameterizing sets A(G) = {{1}, {2}, {1, 2}, {3}, {2, 3}, {1, 2, 3}, {4}, {1, 4}, {1, 2, 4}, {3, 4}, {1, 3, 4}, {2, 3, 4}, {1, 2, 3, 4}}, 30  which are also the bidirected-connected sets of vertices. The two subgraphs in Figures 12(b) and (c), say G1 and G2 , are geared, however, and have parameterizing sets A(G1 ) = {{1}, {2}, {1, 2}, {3}, {2, 3}, {1, 2, 3}, {4}, {3, 4}, {2, 3, 4}, {1, 2, 3, 4}} A(G2 ) = {{1}, {2}, {1, 2}, {3}, {4}, {1, 4}, {1, 2, 4}, {3, 4}, {1, 3, 4}, {1, 2, 3, 4}}; L  we have A∈A(Gi ) ΛA ≤ TC0 (Gi ) for i = 1, 2 by Corollary 5.8. Note that A(G1 ) ∪ A(G2 ) = A(G), and therefore by applying Proposition 5.11 with these graphs, we find that M M M ΛA ≤ TC0 (G). ΛA + ΛA = A∈A(G)  A∈A(G2 )  A∈A(G1 )  It follows that the marginal model is also defined by the independences X1 ⊥ ⊥ X3 and X2 ⊥ ⊥ X4 , possibly with some additional inequality constraints. We are now in a position to put together these ideas and prove the main result for general mDAGs. Proof of Theorem 5.3. Suppose first that G is geared. p[1, . . . , 1 + ηεi , . . . , 1] obeys the nested Markov property for any degenerate function εi and η sufficiently small that 1 + ηεi is positive; it follows that Ti ≤ TC0 for each i, and that therefore using Corollary 5.8, M ΛA ≤ T 1 + · · · + T k A∈A(G)  is also contained in TC0 , by the differentiability of p[·] at (1, . . . , 1). Now for general G, and each A ∈ A(G), there exists a geared subgraph G ′ of G such that ΛA ≤ TC0 (G ′ ) by Lemma 4.3. Then applying Proposition 5.11, we see that the space spanned by these subspaces is contained within the tangent cone for G: M ΛA ≤ TC0 (G). A∈A(G)  If a distribution is in the marginal model then it is also in the nested model, and therefore TC0 is contained within the tangent space TSn0 of N (G) at p0 , which has dimension Y X |XT | (|Xh | − 1) dim(TSn0 ) = h∈H  H∈H(G)  =  X  dim(ΛA );  A∈A(G)  Q the second equality here follows from dim(ΛA ) = h∈A (|Xh | − 1) and X X Y Y dim(ΛA ) = (|Xh | − 1) = |XT | (|Xh | − 1). H⊆A⊆H∪T  H⊆A⊆H∪T h∈A  31  h∈H  Then combining M  ΛA ≤ TC0 ⊆ TSn0  A∈A(G)  with the dimension of TSn0 gives the result. As a corollary of this result, within a neighbourhood of p0 the models M(G) and N (G) are the same. This is because N (G) is parametrically defined via polynomials, and therefore its Zariski closure is an irreducible variety (see, e.g. Cox et al., 2007, Proposition 4.5.5). For algebraic varieties V1 , V2 , if V1 ⊆ V2 and V2 is irreducible, then either V1 has a strictly smaller dimension than V2 , or they are identical. The results about the tangent space show that the Zariski closures of M and N have the same dimension, and therefore they are the same. This means that, locally to p0 , the models themselves are also the same.  6  Smoothness of the marginal model  The results of Section 5, together with the smoothness of the nested model, allow us to show that for geared graphs, the interior of the marginal model is a smooth manifold. Theorem 6.1. For a geared graph G and state-space XV W , the relative interior of the marginal model M(G) is a manifold of dimension d(G, XV W ), and its boundary is described by a finite number of semi-algebraic constraints. Proof. The nested Markov model is parametrically defined (with a polynomial parameterization), and therefore its Zariski closure is an irreducible variety (see, e.g. Cox et al., 2007, Proposition 4.5.5). Furthermore Evans and Richardson (2015) give a diffeomorphism between the set of strictly positive distributions obeying the nested Markov property, and an open parameter set. It follows that N (G) is a manifold on the interior of the simplex (see, for example, Kass and Vos, 1997, Appendix A). As noted in the previous section, the marginal model for a geared graph is a semi-algebraic set. Since the M(G) ⊆ N (G) and these two sets have the same Zariski closure, it follows that M(G) is defined from N (G) by a finite number of additional polynomial inequalities. It further follows that it is also a manifold at any point these inequality constraints are not active. It follows from Theorem 6.1 that the interior of the marginal model for a geared mDAG is a curved exponential family of dimension d(G, XV W ), and that therefore the nice statistical properties of these models can be applied. For example, the maximum likelihood estimator of a distribution within the model will be asymptotically normal and unbiased, and the likelihood ratio statistic for testing this model has an asymptotic χ2 -distribution. For non-geared mDAGs we cannot assume that the latent variables are discrete without loss of generality, so it is conceivable that these marginal models may be defined by non-polynomial inequalities on the probabilities. We conjecture, however, that a result akin to Theorem 6.1 does hold for general graphs. For a point on the boundary defined by an active inequality constraint, the asymptotic distribution of the likelihood ratio statistic may be much more 32  p̂ ×  M  p̂m  N  p̂n  Figure 13: Diagramatic representation of estimation with the marginal model. The thicker line represents the marginal model, and its thinner extension the nested model. The unconstrainted MLE is shown as p̂, and its projection to MLEs under the marginal and nested models as p̂m and p̂n respectively. Note that p̂m is on the boundary of the model M; if the true data generating distribution is on the boundary this generally leads to irregular asymptotics.  complicated (Drton, 2009b); in general it is a mixture of χ2 -distributions, and this mixture will vary depending upon the unknown truth. A possible advantage of the nested model is that we can guarantee that the true distribution does not lie on the boundary of N if the MLE consists of strictly positive probabilities, because the boundary only consists of distributions with at least some zero probabilities; the same cannot be said for M. This is depicted in Figure 2, in which the MLE under the nested model (p̂n ) is in the interior of N , but the MLE for the marginal model p̂m lies on the boundary of M. Inequality constraints are generally much more complicated than equality constraints, and efforts to characterize them fully in DAGs with latent variable models have been limited by computational challenges. Evans (2012), generalizing a result first given by Pearl (1995), provides a graphical criterion for obtaining some inequalities, but deriving a complete set of bounds may be an NP-hard problem (ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2011).  6.1  Model Fitting  In theory we can exactly fit the marginal model for a geared graph using a latent variable model of the kind derived in Section 4. In practice this model is massively over-parameterized and unidentifiable, with the state-space of sets Fv being potentially very large even for modest graphs; this will cause problems for most standard fitting algorithms. We can restrict the state-space of the latent variables to something more managable to obtain some latent variable model L(G) ⊆ M(G); in general the inclusion will be strict, as in the example in the introduction and as depicted in Figure 2. However, for any graph G—whether geared or not—and any latent variable model we have L(G) ⊆ M(G) ⊆ N (G). Fitting the nested model by maximum likelihood (ML) is straightforward using the algorithm in Evans and Richardson (2010), and a latent variable model can be fitted using (for example) an EM algorithm. A measure of goodness-of-fit for these two models can be used to bound the goodness-of-fit of the marginal model, and thus potentially used to confirm or refute the marginal model. Fitting the marginal model directly is likely to be extremely difficult for general graphs: see the discussion in Evans (2016).  33  Acknowledgements We thank Angelos Armen for a very close reading and substantial comments, as well as the associate editor and two anonymous referees for their suggestions.  References A. Anandkumar, D. Hsu, A. Javanmard, and S. Kakade. Learning linear Bayesian networks with latent variables. In Proceedings of The 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28, pages 249–257, 2013. S. Basu, R. Pollack, and M.-F. Roy. Algorithms in real algebraic geometry. Springer, 1996. C. M. Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer, 2007. D. Cox, J. Little, and D. O’Shea. Ideals, varieties, and algorithms: an introduction to computational algebraic geometry and commutative algebra. Springer, 2007. Third Edition. A. Darwiche. Modeling and reasoning with Bayesian networks. Cambridge University Press, 2009. A. P. Dawid. Influence diagrams for causal modelling and inference. International Statistical Review, 70(2):161–189, 2002. W. Decker, G.-M. Greuel, G. Pfister, and H. Schönemann. Singular 4-1-0 — A computer algebra system for polynomial computations. http://www.singular.uni-kl.de, 2016. M. Drton. Discrete chain graph models. Bernoulli, 15(3):736–753, 2009a. M. Drton. Likelihood ratio tests and singularities. Annals of Statistics, 37(2): 979–1012, 2009b. R. J. Evans. Graphical methods for inequality constraints in marginalized DAGs. In Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP), 2012. R. J. Evans. Graphs for margins of Bayesian networks. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 43(3):625–648, 2016. R. J. Evans and T. S. Richardson. Maximum likelihood fitting of acyclic directed mixed graphs to binary data. In Proceedings of the 26th conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-08), 2010. R. J. Evans and T. S. Richardson. Markovian acyclic directed mixed graphs for discrete data. Annals of Statistics, 42:1452–1482, 2014. R. J. Evans and T. S. Richardson. Parameterization of the discrete nested Markov model. In preparation, 2015. C. J. Fox, A. Käufl, and M. Drton. On the causal interpretation of acyclic mixed graphs under multivariate normality. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 2014.  34  T. Fritz. Beyond Bell’s Theorem: Correlation scenarios. New J. Phys, 14: 103001, 2012. R. E. Kass and P. W. Vos. Geometrical foundations of asymptotic inference. John Wiley & Sons, 1997. S. L. Lauritzen. Graphical Models. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK, 1996. J. Neyman. Sur les applications de la théorie des probabilités aux experiences agricoles: Essai des principes. Roczniki Nauk Rolniczych, 10:1–51, 1923. In Polish; English translation by D. Dabrowska and T. Speed in Statist. Science 5 463–472, 1990. J. Pearl. On the testability of causal models with latent and instrumental variables. In Proceedings of the 11th conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-95), pages 435–443, 1995. J. Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2009. J. Provan and L. Billera. Decompositions of simplicial complexes related to diameters of convex polyhedra. Mathematics of Operations Research, 5(4): 576–594, 1980. T. S. Richardson. Markov properties for acyclic directed mixed graphs. Scand. J. Statist., 30(1):145–157, 2003. T. S. Richardson and P. Spirtes. Ancestral graph Markov models. Annals of Statistics, 30(4):962–1030, 2002. T. S. Richardson, R. J. Evans, and J. M. Robins. Transparent parameterizations of models for potential outcomes. Bayesian Statistics, 9:569–610, 2011. T. S. Richardson, R. J. Evans, J. M. Robins, and I. Shpitser. Nested Markov properties for acyclic directed mixed graphs. arXiv:1701.06686, 2017. J. Robins. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained exposure period-application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathematical Modelling, 7(9):1393–1512, 1986. D. B. Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(5):688–701, 1974. I. Shpitser, T. S. Richardson, J. M. Robins, and R. J. Evans. Parameter and structure learning in nested Markov models. In UAI-12 (Workshop on Causal Structure Learning), 2012. R. Silva and Z. Ghahramani. The hidden life of latent variables: Bayesian learning with mixed graph models. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10:1187–1238, 2009. P. Spirtes, C. Glymour, and R. Scheines. Causation, Prediction and Search. MIT press, 2000.  35  J. Tian and J. Pearl. On the testable implications of causal models with hidden variables. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-02), pages 519–527, 2002. G. ver Steeg and A. Galstyan. A sequence of relaxations constraining hidden variable models. In Proceedings of the 27th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-11), 2011. T. S. Verma and J. Pearl. Equivalence and synthesis of causal models. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-90), pages 255–268, 1990.  A  Degenerate Binary State-Space  Consider the model from Example 1.1 where we take all five variables to be binary. The model can be written as X p(x0 ) · p(x1 ) · p(x2 | x1 , x0 ) · p(x3 | x2 ) · p(x4 | x3 , x0 ) p(x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) = x0  = p(x1 ) · p(x3 | x2 ) ·  X  p(x0 ) · p(x2 | x1 , x0 ) · p(x4 | x3 , x0 ) .  x0  |  {z  p∗ (x2 ,x4 |x1 ,x3 )  }  The dimension of the model is therefore the sum of the dimensions of these three factors (of which the first two are 1 and 2 respectively). For the final factor, assuming X0 is binary means it may be written as X p(x0 ) · p(x2 | x1 , x0 ) · p(x4 | x3 , x0 ) p∗ (x2 , x4 | x1 , x3 ) = x0  = α · q(x2 | x1 ) · q(x4 | x3 ) + (1 − α) · r(x2 | x1 ) · r(x4 | x3 ) (13)  for some distributions q, r. This is a parametric definition of a variety over the probabilities p(x2 , x4 | x1 , x3 ), and using the computational algebra package Singular (Decker et al., 2016) we explicitly found the polynomial constraints that define it6 . It turns out that the set of such probabilities that can be written in the form (13) has dimension 7, and therefore the total dimension of the latent variable model is 1 + 2 + 7 = 10.  B B.1  Technical Proofs Degenerate Functions  We present a series of Lemmas which build up to showing that we can construct degenerate functions from finite sums and products of degenerate functions with simpler argument sets. 6 For the code used and the resulting polynomial constraints, see http://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/~ evans/bell.html. As well as the usual marginal independence constraints, the latent variable model implies an additional cubic polynomial constraint on the observed conditional probabilities (for which we were unable to find a nice interpretation).  36  Lemma B.1. Let λ be a discrete (A ∪ B)-degenerate function, for A ∩ B = ∅. Then λ can be written as a finite sum X λiA λiB λ= i  of A-degenerate functions  λiA ,  and B-degenerate functions λiB .  Proof. Since a matrix can be written as a sum of rank one matrices, clearly we can find (not necessarily degenerate) functions such that the result holds. But now suppose that the λiA are not degenerate over a ∈ A, and consider ! X X i i λA (xA\a , ya ) λiB (xB ) λA (xA ) − ya  i  =  X  λiA (xA )λiB (xB )  −  XX ya  i  = λ(xA , xB ) −  X  λiA (xA\a , ya )λiB (xB )  i  λ(ya , xA\a , xB )  ya  = λ(xA , xB ).  Thus we can replace each λiA with the degenerate function ! X i i i λA (xA\a , ya ) λ̃A (xA ) ≡ λA (xA ) − ya  and not affect the result. By repeating the argument we can assume that each λiA is degenerate in every a ∈ A, and each λiB degenerate in every b ∈ B. Lemma B.2. Let λ be a discrete (A△B)-degenerate function. Then λ can be written as a finite sum X j j λA λB λ= j  of A-degenerate functions λjA , and B-degenerate functions λjB . Proof. Let A′ = A \ B and B ′ = B \ A and D = A ∩ B, so that A△B = A′ ∪ B ′ , A = A′ ∪ D and B = B ′ ∪ D; note that A′ , B ′ and D are all disjoint. For each yD ∈ XD , define a degenerate function ηD (·; yD ) : XD → R by Y  ηD (xD ; yD ) = α−1 |Xd |1{xd =yd } − 1 . d∈D  where α = d∈D |Xd | · (|Xd | − 1) and 1 denotes an indicator function. One can verify easily that X ηD (xD ; yD ) = 0 Q  xd ∈Xd  for any yD and xD\d , and that X  ηD (xD ; yD )2 = 1;  yD ∈XD  37  in particular the last expression is independent of xD . Now, let λ be a discrete (A△B)-degenerate function, and using Lemma B.1 write it as λ=  j X  λjA′ λjB ′  i=1  where λjA′ and λjB ′ are respectively A′ and B ′ degenerate. Then for each k ∈ j jk j XD , define λjk A = λA′ ηD (·; k) and λB = λB ′ ηD (·; k). Clearly each of these is degenerate in A = A′ ∪ D and B = B ′ ∪ D respectively. Further, j X X  jk λjk A λB =  j X X  λjA′ λjB ′ ηD (·; k)2  i=1 k∈XD  i=1 k∈XD  =  j X  λjA′ λjB ′  i=1  =  j X  X  ηD (·; k)2  k∈XD  λjA′ λjB ′  i=1  = λ.  a Lemma B.3. Let λ : XA → R be an A-degenerate function, and let A = i∈I Ai for some finite collection of sets {Ai : i ∈ I}. Then there exists a finite collection of Ai -degenerate functions λji : XAi → R for i ∈ I, j ∈ J, such that XY j λ= λi . j∈J i∈I  Proof. This just follows from repeatedly applying Lemma B.2.  B.2  Proof of Lemma 5.6  Lemma B.4. Let X and Y be finite sets, define F = {f : X → Y}, and take λ : Y → R. Then for any A ⊆ Y and x ∈ X , X X λ(f (x)) = |Y||X|−1 λ(y), f ∈F f (x)∈A  y∈A  and if x1 6= x2 , X  λ(f (x2 )) = |A||Y||X|−2 ·  f ∈F f (x1 )∈A  X  λ(y).  y∈Y  In particular note that if λ is degenerate, the last expression is zero.  38  Proof. Clearly if A = Y, then X X λ(f (x)) = λ(f (x)) f ∈F  f ∈F f (x)∈Y  = |Y||X|−1  X  λ(y),  y∈Y  since there are exactly |Y||X|−1 functions in F such that f (x) = y for each y ∈ Y. The first result follows in general by applying the result for A = Y to the function λ′ (y) = λ(y)1{y∈A} . The second result follows by similar combinatorical methods. Proof of Lemma 5.6. It is clear that we only need prove the result for E = ∅, since we can just incorporate fE as though they were observable parents of C, and the result is the same. First consider the case C = {v}; let L = paG (v) and take any set K ⊆ L. Let λ : Xv × XK → R be a degenerate function, and for each f : XL × Fπ(x) → Xv , define X δ(f ) = λ(f (yL , gπ(v) ), yK ). yL ∈XL gπ(v) ∈Fπ(v)  Then for fixed xv , xL , fπ(v) , X  δ(f ) =  f ∈Fv f (xL ,fπ(v) )=xv  X  X  λ(f (yL , gπ(v) ), yK )  f ∈Fv yL ∈XL f (xL ,fπ(v) )=xv gπ(v) ∈Fπ(v)  =  X  X  λ(f (yL , gπ(v) ), yK ).  yL ∈XL f ∈Fv gπ(v) ∈Fπ(v) f (xL ,fπ(v) )=xv  But since λ is degenerate, the inner sum is zero unless both xL = yL and fπ(v) = gπ(v) by Lemma B.4. This leaves =  X  λ(f (xL , fπ(v) ), xK )  f ∈Fv f (xL ,fπ(v) )=xv  = |Xv ||XL ||Fπ(v) |−1 · λ(xv , xK ) again by Lemma B.4, where the constant represents the number of distinct functions f ∈ Fv such that f (xL , fπ(v) ) = xv . Hence the result holds for C = {v}. Now consider a general C ⊆ Ri ; we prove the result by induction on the size of C. Given any sterileG (C) ⊆ A ⊆ C ∪ paG (C), we first claim that we can write A = A1 △A2 where sterileG (Ci ) ⊆ Ai ⊆ Ci ∪ paG (Ci ) for i = 1, 2 and disjoint non-empty C1 , C2 with C1 ∪ C2 = C. To see this pick C2 = {w}, C1 = C \ {w} for some w ∈ sterileG (C), and then set A1 = (A ∪ sterileG (C1 )) ∩ (C1 ∪ paG (C1 )) and A2 = A \ A1 . Clearly A1 satisfies the required conditions. Since w was chosen to be sterile in C we 39  have w ∈ / A1 and therefore w ∈ A2 ; in addition, the only elements of A not contained in A1 are those which are neither in C1 nor paG (C1 ); but since they are in C ∪ paG (C), they must instead be in {w} ∪ paG (w). Hence the claim holds. Now first suppose that λ = λ1 · λ2 for degenerate functions λi : XAi → R. By the induction hypothesis, we can find degenerate δ1 , δ2 such that X δ1 (fC1 ) = c1 · λ1 (xA1 ) fv (x,f )=xv v∈C1  X  δ2 (fC2 ) = c2 · λ2 (xA2 ).  fv (x,f )=xv v∈C2  (Here we have written fv (x, f ) for fv (xL , fπv ) to reduce notational clutter.) Then letting E = Ri \ C, X X X X δ1 (fC1 ) · δ2 (fC2 ) δ1 (fC1 ) · δ2 (fC2 ) = fv (x,f )=xv v∈Ri  fv (x,f )=xv fv (x,f )=xv fv (x,f )=xv v∈C2 v∈C1 v∈E  = c0  X  X  δ1 (fC1 ) · δ2 (fC2 )  fv (x,f )=xv fv (x,f )=xv v∈C2 v∈C1  = c0  X  δ1 (fC1 )  fC1 ∈FC1 fC1 (x)=xC1  X  δ2 (fC2 )  fC2 ∈FC2 fC2 (x)=xC2  = c0 c1 c2 · λ1 (xA1 ) · λ2 (xA2 ). However a general degenerate function λ : XA → R can be written as a finite linear combination X j j λ1 · λ2 λ= j  of degenerate functions λji : XAi → R, so the result follows by linearity of summations. For the final part, note that if v ∈ C \ B, then the summation over ΦB i will include every function fv ∈ Fv . Since δ is degenerate and a function of fv , the sum is 0. On the other hand, if v ∈ (Ri ∩ B) \ C, then δ is not a function of fv and summing over all Fv just involves |Xv | identical terms. Lemma B.5. Let G be a single-district, geared mDAG, and C a bidirectedconnected set of vertices. There exists a rooted tree ΠC with vertex set IC = {i | Ri ∩ C 6= ∅}, and edges i → j only if there exist vj ∈ Rj ∩ C and vi ∈ Ri ∩ C such that vj ∈ π(vi ). Proof of Lemma B.5. First construct a directed graph Π∗ on IC in which i → j precisely when there exist vj ∈ Rj ∩ C and vi ∈ Ri ∩ C such that vj ∈ π(vi ). Note that vj ∈ π(vi ) implies r(vj ) > r(vi ), so Π∗ is acyclic. 40  Let j be the minimal element of IC ; we claim that for any other i ∈ IC , there is always a directed path in ΠC from j to i. To see this, note that since C is bidirected-connected, there is a bidirected path in G from some vj ∈ C ∩ Rj to vi ∈ C ∩ Ri ; given such a path, ρ, trim it so that only the end-points are in C ∩ Rj and C ∩ Ri respectively. If ρ is just vj ↔ vi , then we are done, since vj ∈ π(vi ) by definition of π. Otherwise, ρ begins vi ↔ vk ↔ · · · for some vk ∈ Rk ∩ C, where i > k > j. So we can apply an inductive argument to find a path from j to k in Π∗C , and the edge vi ↔ vk implies that k → i in Π∗C . Now, Π∗C is a connected DAG with a unique root node j, so we can simply take any singly connected subgraph ΠC to fulfil the conditions of the lemma.  41

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
