Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_4368

Abstract:
Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  Lars Mescheder 1 Andreas Geiger 1 2 Sebastian Nowozin 3  arXiv:1801.04406v2 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2018  Abstract Recent work has shown local convergence of GAN training for absolutely continuous data and generator distributions. In this paper, we show that the requirement of absolute continuity is necessary: we describe a simple yet prototypical counterexample showing that in the more realistic case of distributions that are not absolutely continuous, unregularized GAN training is not always convergent. Furthermore, we discuss regularization strategies that were recently proposed to stabilize GAN training. Our analysis shows that GAN training with instance noise or zerocentered gradient penalties converges. On the other hand, we show that Wasserstein-GANs and WGAN-GP with a finite number of discriminator updates per generator update do not always converge to the equilibrium point. We discuss these results, leading us to a new explanation for the stability problems of GAN training. Based on our analysis, we extend our convergence results to more general GANs and prove local convergence for simplified gradient penalties even if the generator and data distribution lie on lower dimensional manifolds. We find these penalties to work well in practice and use them to learn a generative image model of all 1000 Imagenet classes in a single GAN with little hyperparameter tuning.  1. Introduction Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) are powerful latent variable models that can be used to learn complex real-world distributions. Especially for images, GANs have emerged as one of the dominant approaches for generating new realistically looking samples after the model has been trained on some dataset. However, while very powerful, GANs can be hard to train and in practice it is often observed that gradient descent 1  MPI Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zürich, Switzerland Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Lars Mescheder <lars.mescheder@tue.mpg.de>. 3  Method  unregularized (Goodfellow et al., 2014) WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017) WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017) DRAGAN (Kodali et al., 2017) Instance noise (Sønderby et al., 2016) ConOpt (Mescheder et al., 2017) Gradient penalties (Roth et al., 2017) Gradient penalty on real data only Gradient penalty on fake data only  Local convergence (a.c. case)  ! % % ! ! ! ! ! !  Local convergence (general case)  % % % % ! ! ! ! !  Table 1. Convergence properties of different GAN training algorithms for general GAN-architectures. Here, we distinguish between the case where both the data and generator distributions are absolute continuous (a.c.) and the general case where they may lie on lower dimensional manifolds.  based GAN optimization does not lead to convergence. As a result, a lot of recent research has focused on finding better training algorithms (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Kodali et al., 2017; Sønderby et al., 2016; Roth et al., 2017) for GANs as well as gaining better theoretically understanding of their training dynamics (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Mescheder et al., 2017; Nagarajan & Kolter, 2017; Heusel et al., 2017). Despite practical advances, the training dynamics of GANs are still not completely understood. Recently, Mescheder et al. (2017) and Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) showed that local convergence and stability properties of GAN training can be analyzed by examining the eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the the associated gradient vector field: if the Jacobian has only eigenvalues with negative real-part at the equilibrium point, GAN training converges locally for small enough learning rates. On the other hand, if the Jacobian has eigenvalues on the imaginary axis, it is generally not locally convergent. Moreover, Mescheder et al. (2017) showed that if there are eigenvalues close but not on the imaginary axis, the training algorithm might require intractably small learning rates to achieve convergence. While Mescheder et al. (2017) observe eigenvalues close to the imaginary axis in practice, this observation does not answer the question if eigenvalues close to the imaginary axis are a general phenomenon and if yes, whether they are indeed the root cause for the training instabilities that people observe in practice.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  A partial answer to this question was given by Nagarajan & Kolter (2017), who showed that for absolutely continuous data and generator distributions1 all eigenvalues of the Jacobian have negative real-part. As a result, GANs are locally convergent for small enough learning rates in this case. However, the assumption of absolute continuity is not true for common use cases of GANs, where both distributions lie on lower dimensional manifolds (Sønderby et al., 2016; Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017). In this paper we show that this assumption is indeed necessary: by considering a simple yet prototypical example of GAN training we analytically show that (unregularized) GAN training is not always locally convergent. We also discuss how recent techniques for stabilizing GAN training affect local convergence on our example problem. Our findings show that neither Wasserstein GANs (WGANs) (Arjovsky et al., 2017) nor Wasserstein GANs with Gradient Penalty (WGAN-GP) (Gulrajani et al., 2017) nor DRAGAN (Kodali et al., 2017) converge on this simple example for a fixed number of discriminator updates per generator update. On the other hand, we show that instance noise (Sønderby et al., 2016; Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017), zero-centered gradient penalties (Roth et al., 2017) and consensus optimization (Mescheder et al., 2017) lead to local convergence. Based on our analysis, we give a new explanation for the instabilities commonly observed when training GANs based on discriminator gradients orthogonal to the tangent space of the data manifold. We also introduce simplified gradient penalties for which we prove local convergence. We find that these gradient penalties work well in practice, allowing us to learn a generative image model of all 1000 Imagenet classes in a single GAN. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • We identify a simple yet prototypical counterexample showing that (unregularized) gradient descent based GAN optimization is not always locally convergent • We discuss if and how recently introduced regularization techniques stabilize training • We introduce simplified gradient penalties and prove local convergence for the regularized GAN training dynamics All proofs can be found in the supplementary material. 1  Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) also proved local convergence for a slightly more general family of probability distributions where the support of the generator is equal to the support of the true data distribution near the equilibrium point. Alternatively, they show that their results also hold when the discriminator satisfies certain (strong) smoothness conditions. However, the conditions are usually hard to satisfy in practice without prior knowledge about the support of the true data distribution.  2. Instabilities in GAN training 2.1. Background GANs are defined by a min-max two-player game between a discriminative network Dψ (x) and generative network Gθ (z). While the discriminator tries to distinguish between real data point and data points produced by the generator, the generator tries to fool the discriminator. It can be shown (Goodfellow et al., 2014) that if both the generator and discriminator are powerful enough to approximate any realvalued function, the unique Nash-equilibrium of this two player game is given by a generator that produces the true data distribution and a discriminator which is 0 everywhere on the data distribution. Following the notation of Nagarajan & Kolter (2017), the training objective for the two players can be described by an objective function of the form L(θ, ψ) = Ep(z) [f (Dψ (Gθ (z)))] + EpD (x) [f (−Dψ (x))] (1) for some real-valued function f . The common choice f (t) = − log(1 + exp(−t)) leads to the loss function considered in the original GAN paper (Goodfellow et al., 2014). For technical reasons we assume that f is continuously differentiable and satisfies f 0 (t) 6= 0 for all t ∈ R. The goal of the generator is to minimize this loss whereas the discriminator tries to maximize it. Our goal when training GANs is to find a Nash-equilibrium, i.e. a parameter assignment (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) where neither the discriminator nor the generator can improve their utilities. GANs are usually trained using Simultaneous or Alternating Gradient Descent (SimGD and AltGD). Both algorithms can be described as fixed point algorithms (Mescheder et al., 2017) that apply some operator Fh (θ, ψ) to the parameter values (θ, ψ) of the generator and discriminator, respectively. For example, simultaneous gradient descent corresponds to the operator Fh (θ, ψ) = I + h v(θ, ψ), where v(θ, ψ) denotes the gradient vector field   −∇θ L(θ, ψ) v(θ, ψ) := . (2) ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) Similarly, alternating gradient descent can be described by an operator Fh = F2,h ◦ F1,h where F1,h and F2,h perform an update for the generator and discriminator, respectively. Recently, it was shown (Mescheder et al., 2017) that local convergence of GAN training near an equilibrium point (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) can be analyzed by looking at the spectrum of the Jacobian Fh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) at the equilibrium: if Fh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) has eigenvalues with absolute value bigger than 1 , the training algorithm will generally not converge to (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). On the other hand, if all eigenvalues have absolute value smaller  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge? y  y  Definition 2.1. In the Dirac-GAN, the true (univariate) data distribution pD is given by pD = δ0 and the generator is given by pθ = δθ . The discriminator is given given by a linear function: Dψ (x) = ψ · x.  Dψ (x)  p D = δ0  pθ = δθ  pD = δ0  p θ = δθ  Dψ (x)  x  x  z  (a) t = t0  (b) t = t1  Figure 1. Visualization of the counterexample showing that in the general case, gradient descent GAN optimization is not convergent: (a) In the beginning, the discriminator pushes the generator towards the true data distribution and the discriminator’s slope increases. (b) When the generator reaches the target distribution, the slope of the discriminator is largest, pushing the generator away from the target distribution. This results in oscillatory training dynamics that never converge.  than 1, the training algorithm will converge to (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) with linear rate O(|λmax |k ) where λmax is the eigenvalue of F 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) with the biggest absolute value. If all eigenvalues F 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) are on the unit circle, the algorithm can be convergent, divergent or neither, but if it is convergent it will generally converge with a sublinear rate. A similar result (Khalil, 1996) also holds for the (idealized) continuous system     θ̇(t) −∇ψ L(θ, ψ) = (3) ∇θ L(θ, ψ) ψ̇(t) which corresponds to training the GAN with infinitely small learning rate: if all eigenvalues of the Jacobian v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) at a stationary point (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) have negative real-part, the continuous system converges locally to (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) with linear convergence rate. On the other hand, if v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) has eigenvalues with positive real-part, the continuous system is not locally convergent. If all eigenvalues have zero realpart, it can be convergent, divergent or neither, but if it is convergent, it will generally converge with a sublinear rate. For simultaneous gradient descent linear convergence can be achieved if and only if all eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ) have negative real part (Mescheder et al., 2017). This situation was also considered by Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) who examined the asymptotic case of step sizes h that go to 0 and proved local convergence for absolutely continuous generator and data distributions under certain regularity assumptions. 2.2. The Dirac-GAN Simple experiments, simple theorems are the building blocks that help us understand more complicated systems. Ali Rahimi - Test of Time Award speech, NIPS 2017  In this section, we describe a simple yet prototypical counterexample which shows that in the general case, unregularized GAN training is neither locally nor globally convergent.  Note that in the Dirac-GAN, both the generator and the discriminator have exactly one parameter. This situation is visualized in Figure 1. In this setup, the GAN training objective (1) is given by L(θ, ψ) = f (ψθ) + f (0)  (4)  While using linear discriminators might appear restrictive, the class of linear discriminators is in fact as powerful as the class of all real-valued functions for this example: when we use f (t) = − log(1 + exp(−t)) and we take the supremum over ψ in (4), we obtain (up to scalar and additive constants) the Jensen-Shannon divergence between pθ and pD . The same holds true for the Wasserstein-divergence, when we use f (t) = t and put a Lipschitz constraint on the discriminator (see Section 3.1). We show that the training dynamics of GANs lead to divergent behavior in this simple setup. Lemma 2.2. The unique equilibrium point of the training objective in (4) is given by θ = ψ = 0. Moreover, the Jacobian of the gradient vector field at the equilibrium point has the two eigenvalues ±f 0 (0) i which are both on the imaginary axis. We now take a closer look at the training dynamics produced by various algorithms for training the Dirac-GAN. First, we consider the (idealized) continuous system in (3): while Lemma 2.2 shows that the continuous system is generally not linearly convergent to the equilibrium point, it could in principle converge with a sublinear convergence rate. However, this is not the case as the next lemma shows: Lemma 2.3. The integral curves of the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ) do not converge to the Nash-equilibrium. More specifically, every integral curve (θ(t), ψ(t)) of the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ) satisfies θ(t)2 + ψ(t)2 = const for all t ∈ [0, ∞). Note that our results do not contradict the results of Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) and Heusel et al. (2017): our example violates Assumption IV in Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) that the support of the generator distribution is equal to the support of the true data distribution near the equilibrium. It also violates the assumption in Heusel et al. (2017) that the optimal discriminator parameter vector is a continuous function of the current generator parameters2 . In fact, unless θ = 0, 2 This assumption is usually even violated by WassersteinGANs, as the optimal discriminator parameter vector as a function of the current generator parameters can have discontinuities near the Nash-equilibrium. See Section 3.1 for details.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  2.3. Where do instabilities come from? Our simple example shows that naive gradient based GAN optimization does not always converge to the equilibrium point. To get a better understanding of what can go wrong for more complicated GANs, it is instructive to analyze these instabilities in depth for this simple example problem. (a) SimGD  (b) AltGD  Figure 2. Training behavior of the Dirac-GAN. The starting iterate is marked in red.  there is not even an optimal discriminator parameter vector for the Dirac-GAN. Indeed, we find that two-time scale updates as suggested by Heusel et al. (2017) do not help convergence towards the Nash-equilibrium (see Figure 16 in the supplementary material). However, our example seems to be a prototypical situation for (unregularized) GAN training which usually deals with distributions that are concentrated on lower dimensional manifolds (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017). We now take a closer look at the discretized system. Lemma 2.4. For simultaneous gradient descent, the Jacobian of the update operator Fh (θ, ψ) has p eigenvalues λ1/2 = 1 ± hf 0 (0)i with absolute values 1 + h2 f 0 (0)2 at the Nash-equilibrium. Independently of the learning rate, simultaneous gradient descent is therefore not stable near the equilibrium. Even stronger, for every initial condition and learning rate h > 0, the norm of the iterates (θk , ψk ) obtained by simultaneous gradient descent is monotonically increasing. The behavior of simultaneous gradient descent on our example problem is visualized in Figure 2a. Similarly, for alternating gradient descent we have Lemma 2.5. For alternating gradient descent with ng generator and nd discriminator updates, the Jacobian of the update operator Fh (θ, ψ) has eigenvalues  λ1/2  α2 =1− ± 2  s  α2 1− 2  2 − 1.  (5)  √ with α := ng nd hf 0 (0). For α ≤ 2, all eigenvalues are hence on the unit circle. Moreover for α > 2, there are eigenvalues outside the unit circle. Even though Lemma 2.5 shows that alternating gradient descent does not converge linearly to the Nash-equilibrium, it could in principle converge with a sublinear convergence rate. However, this is very unlikely because – as Lemma 2.3 shows – even the continuous system does not converge. Indeed, we empirically found that alternating gradient descent oscillates in stable cycles around the equilibrium and shows no sign of convergence (Figure 2b).  To understand the instabilities, we have to take a closer look at the oscillatory behavior that GANs exhibit both for the Dirac-GAN and for more complex systems. An intuitive explanation for the oscillations is given in Figure 1: when the generator is far from the true data distribution, the discriminator pushes the generator towards the true data distribution. At the same time, the discriminator becomes more certain, which increases the discriminator’s slope (Figure 1a). Now, when the generator reaches the target distribution (Figure 1b), the slope of the discriminator is largest, pushing the generator away from the target distribution. As a result, the generator moves away again from the true data distribution and the discriminator has to change its slope from positive to negative. After a while, we end up with a similar situation as in the beginning of training, only on the other side of the true data distribution. This process repeats indefinitely and does not converge. Another way to look at this is to consider the local behavior of the training algorithm near the Nash-equilibrium. Indeed, near the Nash-equilibrium, there is nothing that pushes the discriminator towards having zero slope on the true data distribution. Even if the generator is initialized exactly on the target distribution, there is no incentive for the discriminator to move to the equilibrium discriminator. As a result, training is unstable near the equilibrium point. This phenomenon of discriminator gradients orthogonal to the data distribution can also arise for more complex examples: as long as the data distribution is concentrated on a low dimensional manifold and the class of discriminators is big enough, there is no incentive for the discriminator to produce zero gradients orthogonal to the tangent space of the data manifold and hence converge to the equilibrium discriminator. Even if the generator produces exactly the true data distribution, there is no incentive for the discriminator to produce zero gradients orthogonal to the tangent space. When this happens, the discriminator does not provide useful gradients for the generator orthogonal to the data distribution and the generator does not converge. Note that these instabilities can only arise if the true data distribution is concentrated on a lower dimensional manifold. Indeed, Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) showed that under some suitable assumptions - gradient descent based GAN optimization is locally convergent for absolutely continuous distributions. Unfortunately, this assumption may not be satisfied for data distributions like natural images to  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  posed in the original GAN paper (Goodfellow et al., 2014) leads to convergence of the continuous system, albeit with an extremely slow convergence rate. A more detailed discussion and an analysis of Consensus optimization (Mescheder et al., 2017) can be found in the supplementary material. (b) Non-saturating GAN  3.1. Wasserstein GAN  (c) WGAN (nd = 5)  (d) WGAN-GP (nd = 5)  The two-player GAN game can be interpreted as minimizing a probabilistic divergence between the true data distribution and the distribution produced by the generator (Nowozin et al., 2016; Goodfellow et al., 2014). This divergence is obtained by considering the best-response strategy for the discriminator, resulting in an objective function that only contains the generator parameters. Many recent regularization techniques for GANs are based on the observation (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017) that this divergence may be discontinuous with respect to the parameters of the generator or may even take on infinite values if the support of the data distribution and the generator distribution do not match.  (e) Consensus optimization  (f) Instance noise  (g) Gradient penalty  (h) Gradient penalty (CR)  (a) Standard GAN  Figure 3. Convergence properties of different GAN training algorithms using alternating gradient descent with recommended number of discriminator updates per generator update (nd = 1 if not noted otherwise). The shaded area in Figure 3c visualizes the set of forbidden values for the discriminator parameter ψ. The starting iterate is marked in red.  which GANs are commonly applied (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017). Moreover, even if the data distribution is absolutely continuous but concentrated along some lower dimensional manifold, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field will be very close to the imaginary axis, resulting in a highly ill-conditioned problem. This was observed by Mescheder et al. (2017) who examined the spectrum of the Jacobian for a data distribution given by a circular mixture of Gaussians with small variance.  To make the divergence continuous with respect to the parameters of the generator, Wasserstein GANs (WGANs) Arjovsky et al. (2017) replace the Jensen-Shannon divergence used in the original derivation of GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) with the Wasserstein-divergence. As a result, Arjovsky et al. (2017) propose to use f (t) = t and restrict the class of discriminators to Lipschitz continuous functions with Lipschitz constant equal to some g0 > 0. While a WGAN converges if the discriminator is always trained until convergence, in practice WGANs are usually trained by running only a fixed finite number of discriminator updates per generator update. However, near the Nash-equilibrium the optimal discriminator parameters can have a discontinuity as a function of the current generator parameters: in the Dirac-GAN, the optimal discriminator has to move from ψ = −1 to ψ = 1 when θ changes signs. As the gradients get smaller near the equilibrium point, the gradient updates do not lead to convergence for the discriminator. Overall, the training dynamics are again determined by the Jacobian of the gradient vector field near the Nash-equilibrium: Lemma 3.1. WGANs trained with simultaneous or alternating gradient descent with a fixed number of discriminator updates per generator update and a fixed learning rate h > 0 do generally not converge to the Nash equilibrium for the Dirac-GAN.  3. Regularization strategies As we have seen in Section 2, unregularized GAN training does not always converge to the Nash-equilibrium. In this section, we discuss how several regularization techniques that have recently been proposed, influence convergence of the Dirac-GAN. Interestingly, we also found that the non-saturating loss pro-  The training behavior of the WGAN is visualized in Figure 3c. We stress that this analysis only holds if the discriminator is trained with a fixed number of discriminator updates (as it is usually done in practice). More careful training that ensures that the discriminator is kept exactly optimal or two-timescale training (Heusel et al., 2017) might be able to ensure convergence for the WGAN.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  y Dψ (x)  x  (a) Example with instance noise  (b) Eigenvalues  Figure 4. Dirac-GAN with instance noise. While unregularized GAN training is inherently unstable, instance noise can stabilize it: (a) Near the Nash-equilibrium, the discriminator is pushed towards the zero discriminator. (b) As we increase the noise level σ from 0 to σcritical , the real part of the eigenvalues at the equilibrium point becomes negative and the absolute value of the imaginary part becomes smaller. For noise levels bigger than σcritical all eigenvalues are real-valued and GAN training hence behaves like a normal optimization problem.  The convergence properties of WGANs were also considered by Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) who showed that even for absolutely continuous densities and infinitesimal learning rates, WGANs are not always locally convergent. We also found that WGAN-GP (Gulrajani et al., 2017) does not converge for the Dirac-GAN (Figure 3d). Please see the supplementary material for details. 3.2. Instance noise A common technique to stabilize GANs is to add instance noise (Sønderby et al., 2016; Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017), i.e. independent Gaussian noise, to the data points. While the original motivation was to make the probabilistic divergence between data and generator distribution well-defined for distributions that do not have common support, this does not clarify the effects of instance noise on the training algorithm itself and its ability to find a Nash-equilibrium. Interestingly, however, it was recently shown (Nagarajan & Kolter, 2017) that in the case of absolutely continuous distributions, gradient descent based GAN optimization is - under suitable assumptions - locally convergent. Indeed, when we apply instance noise to the Dirac-GAN we have: Lemma 3.2. When using Gaussian instance noise with standard deviation σ, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field are given by p λ1/2 = f 00 (0)σ 2 ± f 00 (0)2 σ 4 − f 0 (0)2 . (6) In particular, all eigenvalues of the Jacobian have negative real-part at the Nash-equilibrium if f 00 (0) < 0 and σ > 0. Hence, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent are both locally convergent for small enough learning rates. Interestingly, Lemma 3.2 shows that there is a critical noise 2 level given by σcritical = |f 0 (0)|/|f 00 (0)|. If the noise level  is smaller than the critical noise level, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian have non-zero imaginary part which results in a rotational component in the gradient vector field near the equilibrium point. If the noise level is larger than the critical noise level, all eigenvalues of the Jacobian become real-valued and the rotational component in the gradient vector field disappears. The optimization problem is best behaved when we select σ = σcritical : in this case we can even achieve quadratic convergence for h = |f 0 (0)|−1 . The effect of instance noise on the eigenvalues is visualized in Figure 4b, which shows the traces of the two eigenvalues as we increase σ from 0 to 2σcritical . Figure 3f shows the training behavior of the GAN with instance noise, showing that instance noise indeed creates a strong radial component in the gradient vector field which makes the training algorithm converge. 3.3. Zero-centered gradient penalties Motivated by the success of instance noise to make the f divergence between two distributions well-defined, Roth et al. (2017) derived a local approximation to instance noise that results in a zero-centered3 gradient penalty for the discriminator. In our simple example, a penalty on the squared norm of the gradients of the discriminator (no matter where) results in the regularizer γ R(ψ) = ψ 2 . (7) 2 This regularizer does not include the weighting terms considered by Roth et al. (2017). However, the same analysis can also be applied to the regularizer with the additional weighting, yielding almost exactly the same results (see Section D.2 of the supplementary material). Lemma 3.3. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field for the gradient-regularized GAN at the equilibrium point are given by r γ γ2 λ1/2 = − ± − f 0 (0)2 . (8) 2 4 In particular, for γ > 0 all eigenvalues have negative real part. Hence, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent are both locally convergent for small enough learning rates. As for instance noise, there is a critical regularization parameter γcritical = 2|f 0 (0)| that results in a locally rotation free vector field. A visualization of the training behavior of the Dirac-GAN with gradient penalty is shown in Figure 3g. Figure 3h illustrates the training behavior of the GAN with gradient penalty and critical regularization (CR). In particular, we see that near the Nash-equilibrium the vector field 3 In contrast to the gradient regularizers used in WGAN-GP and DRAGAN which are not zero-centered.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  does not have a rotational component anymore and hence behaves like a normal optimization problem.  4. General convergence results In Section 3 we analyzed the convergence properties of various regularization strategies on the Dirac-GAN. In this section, we consider general GAN problems. First, we introduce two simplified versions of the zero-centered gradient penalty proposed by Roth et al. (2017). We then show that these gradient penalties allow us to extend the convergence proof by Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) to the case where the generator and data distribution do not locally have the same support.4 As a result, our convergence proof for the regularized training dynamics also holds for the more realistic case where both the generator and data distributions may lie on lower dimensional manifolds. 4.1. Simplified gradient penalties Our analysis suggests that the main effect of the zerocentered gradient penalties proposed by Roth et al. (2017) on local stability is to penalize the discriminator for deviating from the Nash-equilibrium. The simplest way to achieve this is to penalize the gradient on real data alone: when the generator distribution produces the true data distribution and the discriminator is equal to 0 on the data manifold, the gradient penalty ensures that the discriminator cannot create a non-zero gradient orthogonal to the data manifold without suffering a loss in the GAN game. This leads to the following regularization term:   γ (9) R1 (ψ) := EpD (x) k∇Dψ (x)k2 . 2 Note that this regularizer is a simplified version of to the regularizer derived by Roth et al. (2017). However, our regularizer does not contain the additional weighting terms and penalizes the discriminator gradients only on the true data distribution. We also consider a similar regularization term given by   γ (10) R2 (θ, ψ) := Epθ (x) k∇Dψ (x)k2 2 where we penalize the discriminator gradients on the current generator distribution instead of the true data distribution. Note that on the Dirac-GAN from Section 2, both regularizers reduce to the gradient penalty from Section 3.3 whose behavior is visualized in Figure 3g and Figure 3h. 4.2. Convergence In this section we present convergence results for the regularized GAN-training dynamics for both regularization terms 4  Assumption IV in Nagarajan & Kolter (2017)  R1 (ψ) and R2 (ψ) under some suitable assumptions.5 Let (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) denote an equilibrium point of the regularized training dynamics. In our convergence analysis, we consider the realizable case, i.e. we assume that there are generator parameters that make the generator produce the true data distribution: Assumption I. We have pθ∗ = pD and Dψ∗ (x) = 0 in some local neighborhood of supp pD . Like Nagarajan & Kolter (2017), we assume that f satisfies the following property: Assumption II. We have f 0 (0) 6= 0 and f 00 (0) < 0. An extension of our convergence proof for f (t) = t (as in WGANs) can be found in the supplementary material. The convergence proof is complicated by the fact that for neural networks, there generally is not a single equilibrium point (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ), but a submanifold of equivalent equilibria corresponding to different parameterizations of the same function. We therefore define the reparameterization manifolds MG and MD . To this end, let   h(ψ) := EpD (x) |Dψ (x)|2 + k∇x Dψ (x)k2 . (11) The reparameterization manifolds are then defined as MG := {θ | pθ = pD }  MD := {ψ | h(ψ) = 0}. (12)  To prove local convergence, we have to assume some regularity properties for MG and MD near the equilibrium point. To state these assumptions, we need g(θ) := Epθ (x) [∇ψ Dψ (x)|ψ=ψ∗ ] .  (13)  Assumption III. There are -balls B (θ∗ ) and B (ψ ∗ ) around θ∗ and ψ ∗ so that MG ∩ B (θ∗ ) and MD ∩ B (ψ ∗ ) define C 1 - manifolds. Moreover, the following holds: (i) if v ∈ Rn is not in the tangent space of MD at ψ ∗ , then ∂v2 h(ψ ∗ ) 6= 0. (ii) if w ∈ Rm is not in the tangent space of MG at θ∗ , then ∂w g(θ∗ ) 6= 0. While formally similar, the two conditions in Assumption III have very different meanings: the first condition is a simple regularity property that means that the geometry of MD can be locally described by the second derivative of h. The second condition implies that the discriminator is strong enough so that it can detect any deviation from the equilibrium generator distribution. Indeed, this is the only point where we assume that the class of representable discriminators is sufficiently expressive (and excludes, for example, the trivial case Dψ = 0 for all ψ). 5  Our results also hold for any convex combination of R1 and R2 and the regularizer with the additional weighting terms derived by Roth et al. (2017). See the supplementary material for details.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  We are now ready to state our main convergence result. To this end, consider the regularized gradient vector field   −∇θ L(θ, ψ) ṽi (θ, ψ) := . (14) ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) − ∇ψ Ri (θ, ψ) Theorem 4.1. Assume Assumption I, II and III hold for (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). For small enough learning rates, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent for ṽ1 and ṽ2 are both convergent to MG × MD in a neighborhood of (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Moreover, the rate of convergence is at least linear. Theorem 4.1 shows that GAN training with our gradient penalties is convergent when initialized sufficiently close the equilibrium point. While this does not show that the method is globally convergent, it at least shows that near the equilibrium the method is well-behaved. 4.3. Stable equilibria for unregularized GAN training As we have seen in Section 2, unregularized GAN training does not always converge to the Nash-equilibrium. However, this does not rule out the existence of stable equilibria for every GAN architecture. In Section E of the supplementary material, we identify two forms of stable equilibria that may exist for unregularized GAN training (Energy Solutions and Full-Rank Solutions). However, such solutions require much more expressive discriminators and it is not yet clear under what conditions such solutions exist for high dimensional data distributions.  5. Experiments 2D-Problems Measuring convergence for GANs is hard for high dimensional problems, because we lack an evaluation metric that can reliably detect non-convergent behavior. We therefore first examine the behavior of the different regularizers on simple 2D examples where we can assess convergence using an estimate of the Wasserstein-1-distance. To this end, we run 5 different training algorithms on 4 different 2D-examples for 6 different GAN architectures. For each method, we try both stochastic gradient descent and RMS-Prop with 4 different learning rates. For the R1 , R2 and WGAN-GP regularizers we try 3 different regularization parameters. For each method and architecture, we pick the best hyperparameter setting. We train all method for 50k iterations. Please see the supplementary material for details. The results are shown in Figure 5. We see that the R1 and R2 regularizers perform similarly and they achieve slightly better results than unregularized training or training with WGAN-GP. In the supplementary material we show that the R1 and R2 regularizers find solutions where the discriminator is 0 in a neighborhood of the true data distribution, whereas unregularized training and WGAN-GP converge  (a) 2D Gaussian  (b) Line segment  (c) Circle  (d) Four line segments  Figure 5. Wasserstein-1-distance to true data distribution for 4 different 2D-data-distributions, 6 different architectures (small bars) and 5 different training methods. Here, we abbreviate WGANGP with 1 and 5 discriminator update(s) per generator update as WGP-1 and WGP-5.  to energy solutions which we define in Section E.1 of the supplementary material.  Imagenet To test how well the gradient penalties from Section 4.1 perform on more complicated tasks, we train a convolutional GAN consisting of ResNet-architectures (He et al., 2016b) with 55 layers for both the generator and discriminator on the ILSVRC dataset (Russakovsky et al., 2015). While we find that unregularized GAN training quickly leads to mode-collapse on this architecture, our simple R1 -regularizer enables stable training. Some samples from the model after 35 epochs of training and more details on the experimental setup can be found in the supplementary material.  6. Conclusion In this paper, we analyzed the stability of GAN training on a simple yet prototypical example. Due to the simplicity of the example, we were able to analyze the convergence properties of the training dynamics analytically and we showed that (unregularized) gradient based GAN optimization is not always locally convergent. Our findings also show that WGANs and WGAN-GP do not always lead to local convergence whereas instance noise and zero-centered gradient penalties do. Based on our analysis, we extended our results to more general GANs and we proved local convergence for simplified zero-centered gradient penalties under suitable assumptions. In the future, we would like to extend our theory to the non-realizable case and examine the effect of finite sampling sizes on the GAN training dynamics.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  References Abadi, Martín, Barham, Paul, Chen, Jianmin, Chen, Zhifeng, Davis, Andy, Dean, Jeffrey, Devin, Matthieu, Ghemawat, Sanjay, Irving, Geoffrey, Isard, Michael, Kudlur, Manjunath, Levenberg, Josh, Monga, Rajat, Moore, Sherry, Murray, Derek Gordon, Steiner, Benoit, Tucker, Paul A., Vasudevan, Vijay, Warden, Pete, Wicke, Martin, Yu, Yuan, and Zheng, Xiaoqiang. Tensorflow: A system for largescale machine learning. In 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2016, Savannah, GA, USA, November 2-4, 2016., pp. 265–283, 2016. Arjovsky, Martín and Bottou, Léon. Towards principled methods for training generative adversarial networks. CoRR, abs/1701.04862, 2017. Arjovsky, Martín, Chintala, Soumith, and Bottou, Léon. Wasserstein GAN. CoRR, abs/1701.07875, 2017. Barratt, Shane and Sharma, Rishi. A note on the inception score. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01973, 2018. Berthelot, David, Schumm, Tom, and Metz, Luke. BEGAN: boundary equilibrium generative adversarial networks. CoRR, abs/1703.10717, 2017. Bertsekas, Dimitri P. Nonlinear programming. Athena scientific Belmont, 1999. Goodfellow, Ian J., Pouget-Abadie, Jean, Mirza, Mehdi, Xu, Bing, Warde-Farley, David, Ozair, Sherjil, Courville, Aaron C., and Bengio, Yoshua. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2014, December 8-13 2014, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, pp. 2672–2680, 2014. Gulrajani, Ishaan, Ahmed, Faruk, Arjovsky, Martín, Dumoulin, Vincent, and Courville, Aaron C. Improved training of wasserstein gans. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 5769–5779, 2017. He, Kaiming, Zhang, Xiangyu, Ren, Shaoqing, and Sun, Jian. Identity mappings in deep residual networks. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2016 - 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV, pp. 630–645, 2016a. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0_38. He, Kaiming, Zhang, Xiangyu, Ren, Shaoqing, and Sun, Jian. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016b.  Heusel, Martin, Ramsauer, Hubert, Unterthiner, Thomas, Nessler, Bernhard, and Hochreiter, Sepp. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 6629–6640, 2017. Khalil, Hassan K. Nonlinear systems. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 2(5):5–1, 1996. Kodali, Naveen, Abernethy, Jacob D., Hays, James, and Kira, Zsolt. How to train your DRAGAN. CoRR, abs/1705.07215, 2017. Krizhevsky, Alex and Hinton, Geoffrey. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009. Liu, Ziwei, Luo, Ping, Wang, Xiaogang, and Tang, Xiaoou. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015. Mescheder, Lars M., Nowozin, Sebastian, and Geiger, Andreas. The numerics of gans. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 1823–1833, 2017. Nagarajan, Vaishnavh and Kolter, J. Zico. Gradient descent GAN optimization is locally stable. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 5591–5600, 2017. Nowozin, Sebastian, Cseke, Botond, and Tomioka, Ryota. f-gan: Training generative neural samplers using variational divergence minimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 271–279, 2016. Paszke, Adam, Gross, Sam, Chintala, Soumith, Chanan, Gregory, Yang, Edward, DeVito, Zachary, Lin, Zeming, Desmaison, Alban, Antiga, Luca, and Lerer, Adam. Automatic differentiation in pytorch. 2017. Radford, Alec, Metz, Luke, and Chintala, Soumith. Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015. Roth, Kevin, Lucchi, Aurélien, Nowozin, Sebastian, and Hofmann, Thomas. Stabilizing training of generative adversarial networks through regularization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 2015–2025, 2017. Russakovsky, Olga, Deng, Jia, Su, Hao, Krause, Jonathan, Satheesh, Sanjeev, Ma, Sean, Huang, Zhiheng, Karpathy, Andrej, Khosla, Aditya, Bernstein, Michael, Berg, Alexander C., and Fei-Fei, Li. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y. Salimans, Tim, Goodfellow, Ian, Zaremba, Wojciech, Cheung, Vicki, Radford, Alec, Chen, Xi, and Chen, Xi. Improved techniques for training gans. In Lee, D. D., Sugiyama, M., Luxburg, U. V., Guyon, I., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, pp. 2234–2242. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016a. Salimans, Tim, Goodfellow, Ian J., Zaremba, Wojciech, Cheung, Vicki, Radford, Alec, and Chen, Xi. Improved techniques for training gans. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 2226–2234, 2016b. Sønderby, Casper Kaae, Caballero, Jose, Theis, Lucas, Shi, Wenzhe, and Huszár, Ferenc. Amortised MAP inference for image super-resolution. CoRR, abs/1610.04490, 2016. Tieleman, Tijmen and Hinton, Geoffrey. Lecture 6.5rmsprop: Divide the gradient by a running average of its recent magnitude, 2012. Zhao, Junbo Jake, Mathieu, Michaël, and LeCun, Yann. Energy-based generative adversarial network. CoRR, abs/1609.03126, 2016.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge? Supplementary material  A. Preliminaries In this section we first summarize some results from the theory of discrete dynamical systems. We also prove a discrete version of a basic convergence theorem for continuous dynamical systems from Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) which allows us to make statements about training algorithms for GANs for finite learning rates. Afterwards, we summarize some results from Mescheder et al. (2017) about the convergence properties of simultaneous and alternating gradient descent. Moreover, we state some eigenvalue bounds that were derived by Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) which we need to prove Theorem 4.1 on the convergence of the regularized GAN training dynamics. A.1. Discrete dynamical systems In this section, we recall some basic definitions from the theory of discrete nonlinear dynamical systems. For a similar description of the theory of continuous nonlinear dynamical systems see for example Khalil (1996) and Nagarajan & Kolter (2017). In this paper, we consider continuously differentiable operators F : Ω → Ω acting on an open set Ω ⊂ Rn . A fixed point of F is a point x̄ ∈ Ω such that F (x̄) = x̄. We are interested in stability and convergence of the fixed point iteration F (k) (x) near the fixed point. To this end, we first have to define what we mean by stability and local convergence: Definition A.1. Let x̄ ∈ Ω be a fixed point of a continuously differentiable operator F : Ω → Ω. We call x̄ • stable if for every  > 0 there is δ > 0 such that kx − x̄k < δ implies kF (k) (x) − x̄k <  for all k ∈ N. • asymptotically stable if it is stable and there is δ > 0 such that kx − x̄k < δ implies that F (k) (x) converges to x̄ • exponentially stable if there is λ ∈ [0, 1), δ > 0 and C > 0 such that kx − x̄k < δ implies kF (k) (x) − x̄k < Ckx − x̄kλk  responding algorithm linearly convergent. Moreover, if x̄ is exponentially stable, we call the infimum of all λ so that (15) holds for some C > 0 the convergence rate of the fixed point iteration. As it turns out, local convergence of fixed point iterations can be analyzed by examining the spectrum of the Jacobian of the fixed point operator. We have the following central Theorem: Theorem A.2. Let F : Ω → Ω be a C 1 -mapping on an open subset Ω of Rn and x̄ ∈ Ω be a fixed point of F . Assume that the absolute values of the eigenvalues of the Jacobian F 0 (x̄) are all smaller than 1. Then the fixed point iteration F (k) (x) is locally convergent to x̄. Moreover, the rate of convergence is at least linear with convergence rate |λmax | where λmax denotes the eigenvalue of F 0 (x̄) with the largest absolute value. Proof. See Bertsekas (1999), Proposition 4.4.1. For the proof of Theorem 4.1 in Section D, we need a generalization of Theorem A.2 that takes into account submanifolds of fixed points. The next theorem is a discrete version of Theorem A.4 from Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) and we prove it in a similar way: Theorem A.3. Let F (α, γ) define a C 1 -mapping that maps some domain Ω to itself. Assume that there is a local neighborhood U of 0 such that F (0, γ) = (0, γ) for γ ∈ U . Moreover, assume that all eigenvalues of J := ∇α F (α, 0) |α=0 have absolute value smaller than 1. Then the fixed point iteration defined by F is locally convergent to M := {(0, γ) | γ ∈ U } with linear convergence rate in a neighborhood of (0, 0). Moreover, the convergence rate is |λmax | with λmax the eigenvalue of J with largest absolute value. Proof. In the following, we write F (α, γ) = (F1 (α, γ), F2 (α, γ)), so that the fixed point iteration can be written as  (15)  for all k ∈ N. If x̄ is asymptotically stable fixed point of F , we call the algorithm obtained by iteratively applying F locally convergent to x̄. If x̄ is exponentially stable, we call the cor-  αk+1 = F1 (αk , γk ) γk+1 = F2 (αk , γk ).  (16)  We first examine the behavior of F1 near (0, 0). To this end, we develop F1 into a Taylor-Series F1 (α, γ) = Jα + g1 (α, γ)  (17)  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  We first show that for any c > 0 we have kg1 (α, γ)k ≤ ckαk sufficiently close to (0, 0): because F1 (0, γ) = 0 for all γ close to 0, g1 (α, γ) must be of the form g1 (α, γ) = h1 (α, γ)α with h1 (0, 0) = 0. This shows that for any c > 0 there is indeed an open neighborhood V of (0, 0) so that |g1 (α, γ)| ≤ ckαk for all (α, γ) ∈ V . According to Bertsekas (1999), Proposition A 15, we can select for every  > 0 a norm k · kQ on Rn such that kJαkQ < (|λmax | + )kαkQ  (18)  for α ∈ Rn where |λmax | denotes the eigenvalue of J with the largest absolute value. Hence, for (α, γ) ∈ V , kF1 (α, γ)kQ ≤ kJαkQ + kg1 (α, γ)kQ < (|λmax | +  + c)kαkQ  (19)  Because we can make c +  as small as we want, this shows that kαk k ≤ Cλk kα0 k for some C > 0 and λ ∈ [0, 1), if α0 and all γl for l = 0, . . . , k − 1 are sufficiently close to 0 . We therefore have to show that the iterates γk stay in a given local neighborhood of 0, i.e. kγk k ≤ d for some d > 0, when α0 and γ0 are initialized sufficiently close to 0. To show this, we develop F2 into a Taylor-series around 0: F2 (α, γ) = γ + g2 (α, γ).  (20)  Again, we see that g2 must be of the form g2 (α, γ) = h2 (α, γ)α, showing that kg2 (α, γ)k ≤ c0 kαkQ for some fixed constant c0 > 0 (note that in general h2 (0, 0) 6= 0). We therefore have  where L(θ, ψ) is the GAN training objective defined in (1). Similarly, alternating gradient descent can be described by an update operator of the form Fh = F2,h ◦ F1,h where F1,h and F2,h are given by   θ − h∇θ L(θ, ψ) F1,h (θ, ψ) = (23) ψ   θ F2,h (θ, ψ) = . (24) ψ + h∇ψ L(θ, ψ) Moreover, we defined the gradient vector field   −∇θ L(θ, ψ) v(θ, ψ) = . ∇ψ L(θ, ψ)  (25)  To understand convergence of simultaneous and alternating gradient descent, we have to understand when the Jacobian of the corresponding update operator has only eigenvalues with absolute value smaller than 1. Lemma A.4. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the update operator for simultaneous gradient descent are given by λ = 1 + hµ with µ the eigenvalues of v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Assume that v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) has only eigenvalues with negative real part. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the update operator Fh for simultaneous gradient descent are then all in the unit circle if and only if h<  1 | Re(λ)|  2 1+    Im(λ) Re(λ)  2  (26)  for all eigenvalues λ of v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Proof. For simultaneous gradient descent we have  kγk − γ0 k =  k−1 X  kg2 (αl , γl )k ≤  l=0  ≤  k−1 X l=0  k−1 X  c0 kαl kQ  Fh (θ, ψ) = (θ, ψ) + hv(θ, ψ)  l=0  Cc0 Cc λ kα0 kQ ≤ kα0 kQ 1−λ 0 l  (21)  (27)  and hence Fh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = I + hv 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Therefore the eigenvalues are given by λ = 1 + hµ with µ the eigenvalues of v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ).  1−λ Hence, if we initialize α0 within kα0 kQ ≤ 2CC 0 d and d γ0 within kγ0 k ≤ 2 , we have kγk k ≤ d for all k ∈ N, concluding the proof.  To see when |λ| < 1, we write µ = −a + ib with a, b ∈ R and a > 0. Then  A.2. Simultaneous and Alternating Gradient Descent  which is smaller than 1 if and only if  In this section, we recall some results by Mescheder et al. (2017) about the convergence properties of simultaneous and alternating gradient descent as algorithms for training generative adversarial networks. Recall that simultaneous gradient descent can be described by an update operator of the form   θ − h∇θ L(θ, ψ) Fh (θ, ψ) = (22) ψ + h∇ψ L(θ, ψ)  |λ|2 = (1 − ha)2 + h2 b2  h<  2a . a2 + b2  (28)  (29)  Dividing both the numerator and denominator by a2 shows the assertion. Lemma A.5. Assume that v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) has only eigenvalues with negative real part. For h > 0 small enough, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the update operator Fh for alternating gradient descent are then all in the unit circle.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  Proof. The Jacobian of the update operator Fh = Fh,2 ◦Fh,1 at an equilibrium is 0 0 Fh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = Fh,2 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) · Fh,1 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ).  (30)  However, we have 0 Fh,i (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = I + hvi0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ )  (31)  for i ∈ {1, 2} where     −∇θ L(θ, ψ) 0   0 v2 (θ, ψ) = ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) v1 (θ, ψ) =  (32) (33)  denote the components of the gradient vector field. Hence Fh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = I + h(v10 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) + v20 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ )) + h2 v20 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ )v10 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = I + hv 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) + O(h2 ). (34) The eigenvalues λ of Fh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) are hence given by λ = 1+ hµ + O(h2 ) where µ denote the eigenvalues of v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). In particular, if the real part of µ is negative and h > 0 small enough, 1 + hµ will be in the unit circle. Because the error is in O(h2 ), this also holds for λ for h small enough. In the proof of Theorem 4.1 we will use local coordinates, i.e. a diffeomorphism φ that maps a local neighborhood of (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) to an open subset of Rn+m . The vector field v and the update operator F then have the following representation in the local coordinates: Fhφ (α) := φ ◦ Fh ◦ φ−1 (α)  (35)  v φ (α) = φ0 (θ, ψ) · (v ◦ φ(α))  (36)  While in local coordinates, the simple relationships between Fhφ (α) and v φ (α) needed to prove Lemma A.4 and Lemma A.5 do not hold anymore, the spectrum can be described in the same way: Remark A.6. Assume (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) is a fixed point of Fh and a stationary point of v. Let α∗ = φ(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Then (Fhφ )0 (α∗ ) = φ0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ )Fh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ )φ0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ )−1  (37)  (vhφ )0 (α∗ )  (38)  0  ∗  = φ (θ , ψ  ∗  )vh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ )φ0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ )−1 .  Hence, (Fhφ )0 (α∗ ) and Fh0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) have the same spectrum. The same also holds for (v φ )0 (α∗ ) and v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Proof. This follows from the chain and product rules by using the fact that Fh (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) and v(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = 0. As we will see in the proof of Theorem 4.1, this allows us to apply Theorem A.3 to situations where the stationary points lie on a lower dimensional manifold instead of a space of the form {0}k × Rn+m−k .  A.3. Eigenvalue bounds When analyzing the convergence properties of GANs, we have to analyze the spectrum of real-valued matrices of the from   0 −B T (39) B −Q with Q symmetric positive definite. To this end, we need the following important theorem from Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) which gives explicit bounds on the real part of the eigenvalues: Theorem A.7. Assume J ∈ R(n+m)×(n+m) is of the following form:   0 −B T J= (40) B −Q where Q ∈ Rm×m is a symmetric positive definite matrix and B ∈ Rm×n has full column rank. Then all eigenvalues λ of J satisfy Re(λ) < 0. More precisely • if Im(λ) = 0 Re(λ) ≤ −  λmin (Q)λmin (B T B) (41) λmax (Q)λmin (Q) + λmin (B T B)  • if Im(λ) 6= 0 Re(λ) ≤ −  λmin (Q) 2  (42)  Proof. See Nagarajan & Kolter (2017), Lemma G.2. In Section E.1, we need a generalization of Theorem A.7. Using almost exactly the same proof as for Theorem A.7, we obtain Theorem A.8. Assume J ∈ R(n+m)×(n+m) is of the following form:   −P −B T J= (43) B −Q where P ∈ Rn×n is a symmetric positive semi-definite matrix, Q ∈ Rm×m is a symmetric positive definite matrix and B ∈ Rm×n has full column rank. Then all eigenvalues λ of J satisfy Re(λ) < 0. Proof. Let v T = (aT , bT ) denote some eigenvector of J with corresponding eigenvalues λ = λr + iλi , where λr , λi ∈ R. Then λr =  1 T v̄ (J + J T )v = −āT P a − b̄T Qb. 2  (44)  Because both P and Q are positive semi-definite, we have λr ≤ 0. Because Q is positive definite, it suffices to show that b 6= 0 to prove λr < 0. Assume that b = 0. Because v is an eigenvector of J, we have Ba − Qb = λb and therefore Ba = 0. Because B  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  has full-column rank, this shows a = 0 and hence v = 0. However, this contradicts the fact that v is an eigenvector of J. All in all, this show that b 6= 0 and thus λr ≤ −b̄T Qb < 0 as required.  Proof. The loss in (4) can be rewritten as L(θ, ψ) = f (θψ) + const  (51)  It is easy to check that the gradient vector field is given by For applying Theorems A.2, we have to show that the Jacobian of the update operator Fh only has eigenvalues with absolute value smaller than 1. For simultaneous and alternating gradient descent this can be achieved (Lemma A.4 and A.5), if the Jacobian of the gradient vector field v only has eigenvalues with negative real-part. While this condition suffices to prove convergence for small learning rates, Mescheder et al. (2017) showed that simultaneous and alternating gradient descent might still require intractably small learning rates if the imaginary part of the eigenvalues is large. However, in our case we have the following simple bound on the imaginary part of the eigenvalues: Lemma A.9. Let   −P −B T J= (45) B −Q where P ∈ Rn×n and Q ∈ Rm×m are symmetric. All eigenvalues λ of J then satisfy q | Im(λ)| ≤ λmax (B T B). (46) Note that this bound is independent from P and Q. Proof. Assume v, kvk = 1, is an eigenvector of J with eigenvalue λ. Then Im(λ) = v̄ T Ja v. with Ja := inequality  1 2i (J  (47)  − J T ). Hence, by the Cauchy-Schwarz  | Im(λ)| ≤ kvkkJa vk = kJa vk.  (48)  But, if v T = (aT , bT ), kJa vk2 = bBB T b + aB T Ba ≤ λmax (B T B).   v(θ, ψ) =  −f 0 (θψ)ψ f 0 (θψ)θ   .  (52)  Because L(θ, 0) = L(0, ψ) = const for all θ, ψ ∈ R, (θ, ψ) = (0, 0) is indeed a Nash-equilibrium for the game defined by (51). Because we assume f 0 (t) 6= 0 for all t ∈ R, we have v(θ, ψ) = 0 if and only if (θ, ψ) = (0, 0), showing that (0, 0) is indeed the unique Nash-equilibrium. Moreover, the Jacobian v 0 (θ, ψ) of v is given by   −f 00 (θψ)ψ 2 0 f (θψ) + f 00 (θψ)θψ   −f 0 (θψ) − f 00 (θψ)θψ . (53) f 00 (θψ)θ2  Evaluating it at the Nash equilibrium θ = ψ = 0, we obtain v 0 (0, 0) =    0 −f 0 (0) 0 f (0) 0   (54)  which has the eigenvalues ±f 0 (0)i. Lemma 2.3. The integral curves of the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ) do not converge to the Nash-equilibrium. More specifically, every integral curve (θ(t), ψ(t)) of the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ) satisfies θ(t)2 + ψ(t)2 = const for all t ∈ [0, ∞). Proof. Let R(θ, ψ) := 12 (θ2 + ψ 2 ). Then d R(θ(t), ψ(t)) dt = θ(t)v1 (θ(t), ψ(t)) + ψ(t)v2 (θ(t), ψ(t)) = 0, (55)  (49) showing that R(θ, ψ) is indeed constant for all t ∈ [0, ∞).  This shows | Im(λ)| ≤  q  λmax (B T B).  (50)  B. Proofs for the Dirac-GAN This section contains the proofs for our results from Section 2 and Section 3 on the properties of the Dirac-GAN. Lemma 2.2. The unique equilibrium point of the training objective in (4) is given by θ = ψ = 0. Moreover, the Jacobian of the gradient vector field at the equilibrium point has the two eigenvalues ±f 0 (0) i which are both on the imaginary axis.  Lemma 2.4. For simultaneous gradient descent, the Jacobian of the update operator Fh (θ, ψ) has p eigenvalues λ1/2 = 1 ± hf 0 (0)i with absolute values 1 + h2 f 0 (0)2 at the Nash-equilibrium. Independently of the learning rate, simultaneous gradient descent is therefore not stable near the equilibrium. Even stronger, for every initial condition and learning rate h > 0, the norm of the iterates (θk , ψk ) obtained by simultaneous gradient descent is monotonically increasing. Proof. The first part is a direct consequence of Lemma A.4.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  To see the the norms of the iterates (θk , ψk ) is monotonically increasing, we calculate 2 2 θk+1 + ψk+1  = (θk − hf 0 (θk ψk )ψk )2 + (ψk + hf 0 (θk ψk )θk )2 = θk2 + ψk2 + h2 f 0 (θk ψk )2 (θk2 + ψk2 ) ≥  θk2  +  ψk2 .  (56)  Lemma 2.5. For alternating gradient descent with ng generator and nd discriminator updates, the Jacobian of the update operator Fh (θ, ψ) has eigenvalues s 2 α2 α2 λ1/2 = 1 − ± 1− − 1. (5) 2 2 √ with α := ng nd hf 0 (0). For α ≤ 2, all eigenvalues are hence on the unit circle. Moreover for α > 2, there are eigenvalues outside the unit circle. Proof. The update operators for alternating gradient descent are given by   θ − hf 0 (θψ)ψ F1 (θ, ψ) = (57) ψ   θ F2 (θ, ψ) = . (58) ψ + hf 0 (θψ)θ Hence, the Jacobians of these operators at 0 are given by   1 −hf 0 (0) 0 F1 (0, 0) = (59) 0 1   1 0 F20 (0, 0) = . (60) hf 0 (0) 1 As a result, the Jacobian of the combined update operator is n  (F2nd ◦ F1 g )0 (0, 0) = F20 (0, 0)nd · F10 (0, 0)ng   1 −ng hf 0 (0) = . (61) nd hf 0 (0) −ng nd h2 f 0 (0)2 + 1 An easy calculation shows that the eigenvalues of this matrix are s 2 α2 α2 λ1/2 = 1 − ± 1− −1 (62) 2 2 √ with α = ng nd hf 0 (0) which are on the unit circle if and only if α ≤ 2.  Lemma 3.1. WGANs trained with simultaneous or alternating gradient descent with a fixed number of discriminator updates per generator update and a fixed learning rate h > 0 do generally not converge to the Nash equilibrium for the Dirac-GAN.  Proof. First, consider simultaneous gradient descent. Assume that the iterates (θk , ψk ) converge towards the equilibrium point (0, 0). Note that (θk+1 , ψk+1 ) 6= 0 if (θk , ψk ) 6= 0. We can therefore assume without loss of generality that (θk , ψk ) 6= 0 for all k ∈ N. Because limk→∞ ψk = 0, there exists k0 such that for all k ≥ k0 we have |ψk | < 1. For k ≥ k0 we therefore have      θk+1 1 −h θk = . (63) ψk+1 h 1 ψk For k ≥ k0 , the iterates are therefore given by       θk θk0 1 −h = Ak−k0 with A = . (64) ψk ψk0 h 1 However, the eigenvalues of A are given by λ1/2 = 1 ± √ hi which both have absolute value 1 + h2 > 1. This contradicts the assumption that (θk , ψk ) converges to (0, 0). A similar argument also hold for alternating gradient descent. In this case, A is given by  n  n   1 0 d 1 −h g 1 −hng = . (65) h 1 0 1 hnd 1 − h2 ng nd The eigenvalues of A as in (65) are given by s 2 h2 ng nh h2 ng nh 1− ± 1− − 1. 2 2  (66)  At least one of these eigenvalues has absolute value greater or equal to 1. Note that for almost all initial conditions (θ0 , ψ0 ), the the inner product between the eigenvector corresponding to the eigenvalue with modulus bigger than 1 will be nonzero for all k ∈ N. Since the recursion in (63) is linear, this contradicts the fact that (θk , ψk ) → (0, 0), showing that alternating gradient descent generally does not converge to the Nash-equilibrium either. Lemma 3.2. When using Gaussian instance noise with standard deviation σ, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field are given by p λ1/2 = f 00 (0)σ 2 ± f 00 (0)2 σ 4 − f 0 (0)2 . (6) In particular, all eigenvalues of the Jacobian have negative real-part at the Nash-equilibrium if f 00 (0) < 0 and σ > 0. Hence, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent are both locally convergent for small enough learning rates. Proof. When using instance noise, the GAN training objective (1) is given by h i Eθ̃∼N (θ,σ2 ) f (θ̃ψ) + Ex∼N (0,σ2 ) [f (−xψ)] . (67)  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  The corresponding gradient vector field is hence given by   −ψf 0 (θ̃ψ) ṽ(θ, ψ) = Eθ̃,x . (68) θ̃f 0 (θ̃ψ) − xf 0 (−xψ) The Jacobian ṽ 0 (θ, ψ) is therefore   −f 00 (θ̃ψ)ψ 2 −f 0 (θ̃ψ) − f 00 (θ̃ψ)θ̃ψ Eθ̃,x f 0 (θ̃ψ) + f 00 (θ̃ψ)θ̃ψ f 00 (θ̃ψ)θ̃2 + x2 f (−xψ) (69) Evaluating it at θ = ψ = 0 yields   0 −f 0 (0) (70) ṽ 0 (0, 0) = f 0 (0) 2f 00 (0)σ 2 whose eigenvalues are given by p λ1/2 = f 00 (0)σ 2 ± f 00 (0)2 σ 4 − f 0 (0)2 .  (71)  In particular, for γ > 0 all eigenvalues have negative real part. Hence, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent are both locally convergent for small enough learning rates. Proof. The regularized gradient vector field becomes   −f 0 (θψ)ψ ṽ(θ, ψ) = . (72) f 0 (θψ)θ − γψ The Jacobian ṽ 0 (θ, ψ) is therefore given by   −f 00 (θψ)ψ 2 −f 0 (θψ) − f 00 (θψ)θψ . (73) f 0 (θψ) + f 00 (θψ)θψ f 00 (θψ)θ2 − γ  whose eigenvalues are given by r γ γ2 λ1/2 = − ± − f 0 (0)2 . 2 4  Especially in the beginning of training, the discriminator can reject samples produced by the generator with high confidence (Goodfellow et al., 2014). When this happens, the loss for the generator may saturate so that the generator receives almost no gradient information anymore. To circumvent this problem Goodfellow et al. (2014) introduced a nonsaturating objective for the generator. In nonsaturating GANs, the generator objective is replaced with6 max Epθ (x) f (−Dψ (x)). (76) θ  In our example, this is maxθ f (−ψθ).  Lemma 3.3. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field for the gradient-regularized GAN at the equilibrium point are given by r γ γ2 − f 0 (0)2 . (8) λ1/2 = − ± 2 4  Evaluating it at θ = ψ = 0 yields   0 −f 0 (0) 0 ṽ (0, 0) = f 0 (0) −γ  C.1. Nonsaturating GAN  (74)  While the nonsaturating generator objective was originally motivated by global stability considerations, we investigate its effect on local convergence. A linear analysis similar to normal GANs yields Lemma C.1. The unique Nash-equilibrium for the nonsaturating GAN on the example problem is given by θ = ψ = 0. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field at the equilibrium are ±f 0 (0)i which are both on the imaginary axis. Proof. The gradient vector field for the nonsaturating GAN is given by  0  −f (−θψ)ψ v(θ, ψ) = . (77) f 0 (θψ)θ As in the proof of Lemma 2.2, we see that (ψ, θ) = (0, 0) defines the unique Nash-equilibrium for the nonsaturating GAN. Moreover, the Jacobian v 0 (θ, ψ) is   f 00 (−θψ)ψ 2 −f 0 (−θψ) + f 00 (−θψ)θψ . f 0 (θψ) + f 00 (θψ)θψ f 00 (θψ)θ2 (78) At θ = ψ = 0 we therefore have   0 −f 0 (0) v 0 (0, 0) = . (79) f 0 (0) 0 with eigenvalues λ1/2 = ±f 0 (0)i.  (75)  C. Other regularization strategies In this section we discuss further regularization techniques for GANs on our example problem that were omitted in the main text due to space constraints.  Lemma C.1 implies that simultaneous gradient descent is not locally convergent for a nonsaturating GAN and any learning rate h > 0, because the eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the corresponding update operator Fh all have absolute value larger than 1 (Lemma A.4). While Lemma C.1 also rules out linear convergence towards the Nash-equilibrium in the continuous case (i.e. for h → 0), the continuous 6  Goodfellow et al. (2014) used f (t) = − log(1 + exp(−t)).  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  training dynamics could in principle still converge with a sublinear convergence rate. Indeed, we find this to be the case for the Dirac-GAN. We have  The training dynamics are  convergent with logarith hence mic convergence rate O √1t .  Lemma C.2. For every integral curve of the gradient vector field of the nonsaturating Dirac-GAN we have  For a more formal proof, first note that w is nonincreasing by the first part of the proof. Moreover, for every  > 0 there is δ > 0 such that for w < δ:  d (θ(t)2 + ψ(t)2 ) = 2 [f 0 (θψ) − f 0 (−θψ)] θψ. dt  (80)  For concave f this is nonpositive. Moreover, for f 00 (0) < 0, the continuous training dynamics of the nonsaturating Dirac-GAN converge with logarithmic convergence rate. Proof. The gradient vector field for the nonsaturating DiracGAN is given by  0  −f (−θψ)ψ v(θ, ψ) = . (81) f 0 (θψ)θ Hence, we have d (θ(t)2 + ψ(t)2 ) = v1 (θ, ψ)θ + v2 (θ, ψ)ψ dt = 2θψ [f 0 (θψ) − f 0 (−θψ)] . (82) For concave f , we have f 0 (θψ) − f 0 (−θψ) ≤0 2θψ and hence  d (θ(t)2 + ψ(t)2 ) ≤ 0. dt  f 0 (0) −  ≤ φ̇ ≤ f 0 (0) +  00  2  ẇ ≤ (f (0) sin (2φ) + )w .  k∈Z  for t in a union of intervals QT ⊆ [0, T ] with total length at least βbαT c with some constants α, β > 0 which are independent of T . For these t ∈ QT we have sin2 (2φ(t)) ≥ f 00 (0) < 0, this shows   1 00 f (0) +  w(t)2 ẇ(t) ≤ 2  2  2  (83) w(t) ≤ (84)  (85) 4  ẇ = 4f (0)θ ψ + O(|θψ| ) = f 00 (0)w2 sin2 (2φ) + O(|w|4 ).  (86) (87)  When we ignore higher order terms, we can solve this system explicitly7 for φ and w: φ(t) = f 0 (0)(t − t0 ) w(t) = 7  (89) 2  −f 00 (0)t  +  f 00 (0) 4f 0 (0)  sin(4f 0 (0)(t − t0 )) + c  1 2.  Because  (94)  for t ∈ QT and  small enough. Solving the right hand formally yields  To intuitively understand why the continuous system converges with logarithmic convergence rate, note that near the equilibrium point have in polar coordi√ we asymptotically √ nates (θ, ψ) = ( w cos(φ), w sin(φ)):  00  (92)  This implies that for every time interval [0, T ], φ(t) is in  [ π π 3π π +k , +k (93) 8 2 8 2  1 −( 21 f 00 (0)  (90)  For solving the ODE we use the separation of variablestechnique and the identity Z sin(2ax) 2 sin2 (ax)dx = x − . (88) 2a  + )t + c  .  (95)  As w(t) is nonincreasing for t ∈ / QT and the total length of QT is at least βbαT c this shows that  Now assume that f 0 (0) 6= 0 and f 00 (0) < 0.  φ̇ = f 0 (0) + O(|w|1/2 )  (91)  2  w(T ) ≤  −( 12 f 00 (0)  1 . + )βbαT c + c  (96)  The training dynamics hence converge with logarithmic   convergence rate O √1t . Note that the standard choice f (t) = − log(1 + exp(−t)) is concave and satisfies f 00 (0) = − 14 < 0. Lemma C.1 is hence applicable and shows that the GAN training dynamics for the standard choice of f converge with logarithmic convergence rate in the continuous case. The training behavior of the nonsaturating GAN on our example problem is visualized in Figure 3b. C.2. Wasserstein GAN-GP In practice, it can be hard to enforce the Lipschitz-constraint for WGANs. A practical solution to this problem was given by Gulrajani et al. (2017), who derived a simple gradient penalty with a similar effect as the Lipschitz-constraint. The resulting training objective is commonly referred to as WGAN-GP.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  Similarly to WGANs, we find that WGAN-GP does not converge for the Dirac-GAN. A similar analysis also applies to the DRAGAN-regularizer proposed in (Kodali et al., 2017). The regularizer proposed by Gulrajani et al. (2017) is given by γ 2 R(ψ) = Ex̂ (k∇x Dψ (x̂)k − g0 ) (97) 2 where x̂ is sampled uniformly on the line segment between two random points x1 ∼ pθ (x1 ), x2 ∼ pD (x2 ). For the Dirac-GAN, it simplifies to R(ψ) =  γ (|ψ| − g0 )2 2  The corresponding gradient vector field is given by   −ψ ṽ(θ, ψ) = . θ − sign(ψ)γ(|ψ| − g0 )  (98)  (99)  Lemma C.3. WGAN-GP trained with simultaneous or alternating gradient descent with a fixed number of generator and discriminator updates and a fixed learning rate h > 0 does not converge locally to the Nash equilibrium for the Dirac-GAN. Proof. First, consider simultaneous gradient descent. Assume that the iterates (θk , ψk ) converge towards the equilibrium point (0, 0). For almost all initial conditions8 we have (θk , ψk ) 6= (0, 0) for all k ∈ N. This implies (100)  and hence limk→∞ |ψk+1 − ψk | = h|g0 | 6= 0, showing that (θk , ψk ) is not a Cauchy sequence. This contradicts the assumption that (θk , ψk ) converges to the equilibrium point (0, 0). A similar argument also holds for alternating gradient descent. The training behavior of WGAN-GP on our example problem is visualized in Figure 3d. As for WGANs, we stress that this analysis only holds if the discriminator is trained with a fixed number of discriminator updates per generator update. Again, more careful training that ensures that the discriminator is kept exactly optimal or two-timescale training (Heusel et al., 2017) might be able to ensure convergence for WGAN-GP. 8  Depending on γ, h and g0 modulo a set of measure 0.  Consensus optimization (Mescheder et al., 2017) is an algorithm that attempts to solve the problem of eigenvalues with zero real-part by introducing a regularization term that explicitly moves the eigenvalues to the left. The regularization term in consensus optimization is given by γ kv(θ, ψ)k2 2 γ = (k∇θ L(θ, ψ)k2 + k∇ψ L(θ, ψ)k2 ). (101) 2  R(θ, ψ) =  As was proved by Mescheder et al. (2017), consensus optimization converges locally for small learning rates h > 0 provided that the Jacobian v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) is invertible.9 Indeed, for the Dirac-GAN we have  Note that the gradient vector field has a discontinuity at the equilibrium point, as the gradient vector field takes on values with norm bigger than some fixed constant in every neighborhood of the equilibrium point. As a result, we have  |ψk+1 − ψk | = h|θk − γψk − sign(ψk )g0 |  C.3. Consensus optimization  Lemma C.4. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field for consensus optimization at the equilibrium point are given by λ1/2 = −γf 0 (0)2 ± if 0 (0)  (102)  In particular, all eigenvalues have a negative real part −γf 0 (0)2 . Hence, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent are both locally convergent using consensus optimization for small enough learning rates. Proof. As was shown by Mescheder et al. (2017), the Jacobian of the modified vector field ṽ at the equilibrium point is ṽ 0 (0, 0) = v 0 (0, 0) − γv 0 (0, 0)| v 0 (0, 0). In our case, this is  −γf 0 (0)2 f 0 (0)   −f 0 (0) −γf 0 (0)2 .  (103)  (104)  A simple calculation shows that the eigenvalues of ṽ 0 (0, 0) are given by λ1/2 = −γf 0 (0)2 ± if 0 (0).  (105)  This concludes the proof. A visualization of consensus optimization on the DiracGAN is given in Figure 3e. Unfortunately, consensus optimization has the drawback that it can introduce new spurious points of attraction to the GAN training dynamics. While this is usually not a problem 9 Mescheder et al. (2017) considered only the case of isolated equilibrium points. However, by applying Theorem A.3, it is straightforward to generalize their proof to the case where we are confronted with a submanifold of equivalent equilibrium points.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  for simple examples, it can be a problem for more complex ones like deep neural networks. A similar regularization term as in consensus optimization was also independently proposed by Nagarajan & Kolter (2017). However, Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) proposed to only regularize the component ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) of the gradient vector field corresponding to the discriminator parameters. Moreover, the regularization term is only added to the generator objective to give the generator more foresight. It can be shown (Nagarajan & Kolter, 2017) that this simplified regularization term can in certain situations also make the training dynamics locally convergent, but might be better behaved at stationary points of the GAN training dynamics that do not correspond to a local Nash-equilibrium. Indeed, a more detailed analysis shows that this simplified regularization term behaves similarly to instance noise and gradient penalties (which we discussed in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3) on the Dirac-GAN.  D. General convergence results In this section, we prove Theorem 4.1. To this end, we extend the convergence proof by Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) to our setting. We show that by introducing the gradient penalty terms Ri (θ, ψ), we can get rid of the assumption that the generator and data distributions locally have the same support. As we have seen, this makes the theory applicable to more realistic cases, where both the generator and data distributions typically lie on lower dimensional manifolds. D.1. Convergence proof To prove Theorem 4.1, we first need to understand the local structure of the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ). Recall that the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ) is defined as   −∇θ L(θ, ψ) v(θ, ψ) := (106) ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) with L(θ, ψ) = Ep(z) [f (Dψ (Gθ (z)))] + EpD (x) [f (−Dψ (x))] . (107) Lemma D.1. The gradient of L(θ, ψ) with respect to θ is given by  ∇θ L(θ, ψ) = Ep(z) f 0 (Dψ (Gθ (z)) [∇θ Gθ (z)]T  · ∇x Dψ (Gθ (z)) . (108) Similarly, the gradient of L(θ, ψ) with respect to ψ is given by ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) = Epθ (x) [f 0 (Dψ (x))∇ψ Dψ (x)] − EpD (x) [f 0 (−Dψ (x))∇ψ Dψ (x)] . (109)  Proof. This is just the chain rule. Lemma D.2. Assume that (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) satisfies Assumption I. The Jacobian of the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ) at (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) is then   T 0 −KDG v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = . (110) KDG KDD The terms KDD and KDG are given by KDD = 2f 00 (0) EpD (x) [∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)T ] (111) KDG = f 0 (0)∇θ Epθ (x) [∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)] |θ=θ∗  (112)  Proof. First note that by the definition of v(θ, ψ) in (106), the Jacobian v 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) of v(θ, ψ) is given by   −∇2θ L(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) −∇2θ,ψ L(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) . (113) ∇2θ,ψ L(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) ∇2ψ L(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) By Assumption I, Dψ∗ (x) = 0 in some neighborhood of supp pD . Hence, we also have ∇x Dψ∗ (x) = 0 and ∇2x Dψ∗ (x) = 0 for x ∈ supp pD . By taking the derivative of (108) with respect to θ and using ∇x Dψ∗ (x) = 0 and ∇2x Dψ∗ (x) = 0 for x ∈ supp pD we see that ∇2θ L(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = 0. To show (111) and (112), simply take the derivative of (109) with respect to θ and ψ and evaluate at it at (θ, ψ) = (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). We now take a closer look at the regularized vector field. Recall that we consider the two regularization terms   γ (114) R1 (θ, ψ) := EpD (x) k∇x Dψ (x)k2 2   γ R2 (θ, ψ) := Epθ (x) k∇x Dψ (x)k2 . (115) 2 As discussed in Section 4.1, the regularization is only applied to the discriminator. The regularized vector field is hence given by   −∇θ L(θ, ψ) ṽ(θ, ψ) := . (116) ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) − ∇ψ Ri (θ, ψ) Lemma D.3. The gradient ∇ψ Ri (θ, ψ) of the regularization terms Ri , i ∈ {1, 2}, with respect to ψ are ∇ψ R1 (θ, ψ) = γ EpD(x) [∇ψ,x Dψ (x)∇x Dψ (x)] (117) ∇ψ R2 (θ, ψ) = γ Epθ (x) [∇ψ,x Dψ (x)∇x Dψ (x)] . (118) Proof. These equations can be derived by take the derivative of (114) and (115) with respect to ψ. Lemma D.4. The second derivatives ∇2ψ Ri (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) of the regularization terms Ri , i ∈ {1, 2}, with respect to ψ at (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) are both given by LDD := γ EpD (x) [∇ψ,x Dψ∗ (x)∇ψ,x Dψ∗ (x)T ] . (119)  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  satisfy  By Assumption III, this can only hold if v is in the tangent space of MD at ψ ∗ .  Proof. ∇2ψ Ri (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ), i ∈ {1, 2}, can be computed by taking the derivative of (117) and (118) with respect to ψ and using the fact that ∇x Dψ∗ (x) = 0 in a neighborhood of supp pD .  Lemma D.6. Assume that Assumption III holds. If w 6= 0 is not in the tangent space of MG at θ∗ , then KDG w 6= 0.  Moreover, both regularization ∇θ,ψ Ri (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = 0.  terms  Moreover, we clearly have ∇θ,ψ R1 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = 0, because R1 does not depend on θ. To see that ∇θ,ψ R2 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = 0, take the derivative of (118) with respect to θ and use the fact that ∇x Dψ∗ (x) = 0 and ∇2x Dψ∗ (x) = 0 for x ∈ supp pD . As a result, the Jacobian ṽ 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) of the regularized gradient vector field at the equilibrium point is given by   T 0 −KDG 0 ∗ ∗ ṽ (θ , ψ ) = . (120) KDG KDD − LDD For brevity, we define MDD := KDD − LDD . To prove Theorem 4.1, we have to show that ṽ 0 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) is well behaved when restricting it to the space orthogonal to the tangent space of MG × MD at (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ): Lemma D.5. Assume that Assumptions II and III hold. If v 6= 0 is not in the tangent space of MD at ψ ∗ , then v̄ T MDD v < 0. Proof. By Lemma D.2, we have h i 2 v T KDD v = 2f 00 (0) EpD (x) (∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)T v)  (121)  and by Lemma D.4 h i 2 v T LDD v = γ EpD (x) k∇x,ψ Dψ∗ (x)vk .  (122)  By Assumption II, we have f 00 (0) < 0. Hence, v T MDD v ≤ 0 and v T MDD v = 0 implies ∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)T v = 0 and  ∇x,ψ Dψ∗ (x)v = 0  (123)  for all x ∈ supp pD .  Proof. By Lemma D.2, we have   KDG w = f 0 (0) ∇θ Epθ (x) [∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)] |θ=θ∗ w = f 0 (0)∂w g(θ). (127) for g(θ) := Epθ (x) [∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)] .  (128)  By Assumption III, this implies KDG w 6= 0 if w is not in the tangent space of MG at θ∗ . We are now ready to prove Theorem 4.1: Theorem 4.1. Assume Assumption I, II and III hold for (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). For small enough learning rates, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent for ṽ1 and ṽ2 are both convergent to MG × MD in a neighborhood of (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Moreover, the rate of convergence is at least linear. Proof. First note that by Lemma D.1 and Lemma D.3 v(θ, ψ) = 0 for all points (θ, ψ) ∈ MG × MD , because Dψ (x) = 0 and ∇x Dψ (x) = 0 for all x ∈ supp pD and ψ ∈ MD . Hence, MG × MD consists only of equilibrium points of the regularized gradient vector fields. Let Tθ∗ MG and Tψ∗ MD denote the tangent spaces of MG and MD at θ∗ and ψ ∗ . We now want to show that both simultaneous and alternating gradient descent are locally convergent to MG × MD for the regularized gradient vector field ṽ(θ, ψ). To this end, we want to apply Theorem A.3. By choosing local coordinates θ(α, γG ) and ψ(β, γD ) for MG and MD and using Remark A.6, we can assume without loss of generality that θ∗ = 0, ψ ∗ = 0 as well as MG = Tθ∗ MG = {0}k × Rn−k  Let  l    h(ψ) := EpD (x) |Dψ (x)|2 + k∇x Dψ (x)k2 .  (124)  Using the fact that Dψ (x) = 0 and ∇x Dψ (x) = 0 for x ∈ supp pD , we see that the Hessian of h(ψ) at ψ ∗ is  ∇2ψ h(ψ ∗ ) = 2 EpD (x) ∇ψ Dψ (x)∇ψ Dψ (x)T  + ∇ψ,x Dψ (x)∇ψ,x Dψ (x)T (125) The second directional derivate ∂v2 h(ψ) is therefore  ∂v2 h(ψ) = 2 EpD (x) |∇ψ Dψ (x)T v|2  + k∇x,ψ Dψ (x)vk2 = 0. (126)  MD = Tψ∗ MD = {0} × R  m−l  (129) .  (130)  This allows us to write10 ṽ(θ, ψ) = ṽ(α, γG , β, γD ) In order to apply Theorem A.3, we have to show that ∇(α,β) ṽ(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) only has eigenvalues with negative realpart. By Lemma D.2, ∇(α,β) ṽ(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) is of the form   0 K̃DG  T −K̃DG K̃DD − L̃DD   (131)  10 By abuse of notation, we simply write θ = (α, γG ) and ψ = (β, γD ).  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  where K̃DD , K̃DG and L̃DD denote the submatrices of KDD , KDG and LDD corresponding to the (α, β) coordinates. We now show that M̃DD := K̃DD − L̃DD is negative definite and K̃DG has full column rank. To this end, first note that ṽ T M̃DD ṽ = v T MDD v  (132)  with v T := (ṽ T , 0). Note that v ∈ / Tψ∗ MD for ṽ 6= 0. Hence, by Lemma D.5 we have that ṽ T M̃DD ṽ < 0 if ṽ 6= 0. As a result, we see that M̃DD is symmetric negative definite. Similarly, for wT := (w̃T , 0), the components of KDG w corresponding to the β-coordinates are given by K̃DG w̃. Again, we have w ∈ / Tθ∗ MG for w̃ 6= 0. Hence, by Lemma D.6 we have that KDG w 6= 0 if w̃ 6= 0. Because the components of KDG w corresponding to the γD coordinates are 0, this shows that K̃DG w̃ 6= 0. K̃DG therefore has full column rank. Theorem A.7 now implies that all eigenvalues of ∇(α,β) ṽ(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) have negative real part. By Lemma A.4, Lemma A.5 and Theorem A.3, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent are therefore both convergent to MG × MD near (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) for small enough learning rates. Moreover, the rate of convergence is at least linear. D.2. Extensions In the proof of Theorem 4.1 we have assumed that f 00 (0) < 0. This excludes the function f (t) = t which is used in Wasserstein-GANs. We now show that our convergence proof extends to the case where f (t) = t when we modify Assumption III as little bit: Remark D.7. When we replace h(ψ) with   h̃(ψ) := EpD (x) k∇x Dψ (x)k2  (133)  and MD with M̃D := {ψ | h̃(ψ) = 0} the results of Theorem 4.1 still hold for f (t) = t.  implies that pθ = pD and hence, by Lemma D.1, ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) = Ex∼pD [∇ψ Dψ (x)] − Ex∼pD [∇ψ Dψ (x)] = 0. (134) To see why Lemma D.5 still holds, first note that for f (t) = t, we have f 00 (0) = 0, so that by Lemma D.2 KDD = 0. Hence, v T MDD v = −v T LDD v. (135) We therefore have to show that v T LDD v 6= 0 if v is not in the tangent space of MD . However, we have seen in the proof of Lemma D.5 that h i 2 v T LDD v = γ EpD (x) k∇x,ψ Dψ∗ (x)vk . (136) Hence v T LDD v = 0 implies ∇x,ψ Dψ∗ (x)v = 0 for x ∈ supp pD and thus   ∂v2 h(ψ) = 2 EpD (x) k∇x,ψ Dψ (x)vk2 = 0. (137) By Assumption III, this can only be the case if v is in the tangent space of MD . This concludes the proof. In Section D.1, we showed that both regularizers R1 and R2 from Section 4.1 make the GAN training dynamics locally convergent. A similar, but slightly more complex regularizer was also proposed by Roth et al. (2017) who tried to find a computationally efficient approximation to instance noise. The regularizer proposed by Roth et al. (2017) is given by a linear combination of R1 and R2 where the weighting is adaptively chosen depending on the logits of Dψ (x) of the current discriminator at a data point x:   RRoth (θ, ψ) = Epθ (x) (1 − σ(Dψ (x)))2 k∇x Dψ (x)k2   + EpD (x) σ(Dψ (x)))2 k∇x Dψ (x)k2 (138) Indeed, we can show that our convergence proof extends to this regularizer (and a slightly more general class of regularizers): Remark D.8. When we replace the regularization terms R1 and R2 with  Proof. Almost everything in the proof of Theorem 4.1 still holds for these modified assumptions. The only thing that we have to show is that MG × MD still consists only of equilibrium points and that Lemma D.5 still holds in this setting. To see the former, note that by Lemma D.1 we still have ∇θ L(θ, ψ) = 0 for (θ, ψ) ∈ MG × MD , because we have ∇x Dψ (x) = 0 for ψ ∈ MD and x ∈ supp pD . On the other hand, for f (t) = t we also have ∇ψ L(θ, ψ) = 0 if θ ∈ MG , because for θ ∈ MG the definition of MG    R3 (θ, ψ) = Epθ (x) w1 (Dψ (x))k∇x Dψ (x)k2   + EpD (x) w2 (Dψ (x))k∇x Dψ (x)k2 (139) so that w1 (0) > 0 and w2 (0) > 0, the results of Theorem 4.1 still hold. Proof. Again, we have to show that MG × MD still consists only of equilibrium points and that Lemma D.5 still holds in this setting.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  However, by using ∇x Dψ (x) = 0 for x ∈ supp pD and ψ ∈ MD , it is easy to see that ∇ψ R3 (θ, ψ) = 0 for all (θ, ψ) ∈ MG × MD , which implies that MG × MD still consists only of equilibrium points.  To formulate Assumption III0 , we need  To see why Lemma D.5 still holds in this setting, note that (after a little bit of algebra) we still have ∇θ,ψ R3 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = 0 and 1 ∇2ψ R3 (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = (w1 (0) + w2 (0))LDD . (140) γ  Assumption III0 . There are -balls B (θ∗ ) and B (ψ ∗ ) around θ∗ and ψ ∗ so that MG ∩ B (θ∗ ) and MD ∩ B (ψ ∗ ) define C 1 - manifolds. Moreover, the following holds:  The proof of Lemma D.5 therefore still applies in this setting.  E. Stable equilibria for unregularized GAN training In Section 2, we have seen that unregularized GAN training is not always locally convergent to the equilibrium point. Moreover, in Section 4, we have shown that zero-centered gradient penalties make general GANs locally convergent under some suitable assumptions. While our results demonstrate that we cannot expect unregularized GAN training to lead to local convergence for general GAN architectures, there can be situations where unregularized GAN training has stable equilibria. Such equilibria usually require additional assumptions on the class of representable discriminators. In this section, we identify two types of stable equilibria. For the first class of stable equilibria, which we call Energy Solutions, the equilibrium discriminator forms an energy function for the true data distributions and might be a partial explanation for the success of autoencoder-based discriminators (Zhao et al., 2016; Berthelot et al., 2017). For the second class, which we call Full-rank solutions, the discriminator learns a representation of the data distribution with certain properties and might be a partial explanation for the success of batch-normalization for training GANs (Radford et al., 2015). E.1. Energy Solutions For technical reasons, we assume that supp pD defines a C 1 -manifold in this section. Energy solutions are solutions where the discriminator forms a potential function for the true data distribution. Such solutions (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) satisfy the following property: Assumption I0 . We have pθ∗ = pD , Dψ∗ (x) = 0, ∇x Dψ∗ (x) = 0 and v T ∇2x Dψ∗ (x)v > 0 for all x ∈ supp pD and v not in the tangent space of supp pD at x. We also need a modified version of Assumption III which ensures certain regularity properties of the reparameterization manifolds MG and MD near the equilibrium (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ).  g̃(ψ) := ∇θ Epθ (x) [Dψ (x)]  θ=θ ∗  .  (141)  (i) if v is not in the tangent space of MD at ψ ∗ , then ∂v g̃(ψ ∗ ) 6= 0. (ii) if w is not in the tangent space of MG at θ∗ , then there is x ∈ supp pD so that ∇θ Gθ∗ (x)w is not in the tangent space of supp pD at x ∈ supp pD . The first part of Assumption III0 implies that the generator gradients become nonzero whenever the discriminator moves away from an equilibrium discriminator. The second part of Assumption III0 means that every time the generator leaves the equilibrium, it pushes some data point aways from supp pD , i.e. the generator is not simply redistributing mass on supp pD . In Theorem E.2 we show that energy solutions lead to local convergence of the unregularized GAN training dynamics. For the proof, we first need a generalization of Lemma D.2: Lemma E.1. Assume that (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) satisfies Assumption I0 . The Jacobian of the gradient vector field v(θ, ψ) at (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) is then given by   T KGG −KDG 0 ∗ ∗ v (θ , ψ ) = . (142) KDG KDD The terms KDD and KDG are given by  KGG = − f 0 (0) Ep(z) [∇θ Gθ∗ (z)]T  ∇2x Dψ∗ (Gθ∗ (z))∇θ Gθ∗ (z)  (143)  KDD = 2f 00 (0) EpD (x) [∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)T ] (144) T  KDG = f 0 (0) ∇θ Epθ (x) [∇ψ Dψ∗ (x)] |θ=θ∗ (145) Proof. Almost all parts of the proof of Lemma D.2 are still valid. The only thing that remains to show is that ∇2θ L(θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = −KGG . To see this, just take the derivative of (108) with respect to θ and use the fact that ∇x Dψ (x) = 0 for x ∈ supp pD . We are now ready to formulate our convergence result for energy solutions: Theorem E.2. Assume Assumption I0 , II and III0 hold for (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Moreover, assume that f 0 (0) > 0. For small enough learning rates, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent for the (unregularized) gradient vector field v are both convergent to MG × MD in a neighborhood of (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Moreover, the rate of convergence is at least linear.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  Proof (Sketch). The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 4.1. First, note that MG × MD still only consists of equilibrium points. Next, we introduce local coordinates and show that for v not in the tangent space of MG at θ∗ , we have v T KGG v < 0. This can be shown using Lemma E.1, Assumption I0 and the second part of Assumption III0 .  Assumption I00 . We have pθ∗ = pD and ψ1∗ = 0. We again consider reparameterization manifolds, which we define as follows in this section: MG := {θ | pθ = pD } Moreover, let  Moreover, we need to show that for w not in the tangent T w 6= 0. This can be space of MD at ψ ∗ , we have KDG shown by applying the first part of Assumption III0 . The rest of the proof is the same as the proof of Theorem 4.1, except that we have to apply Theorem A.8 instead of Theorem A.7. Note that energy solutions are only possible, if the discriminator is able to satisfy Assumption III0 . This is not the case for the Dirac-GAN from Section 2. However, if we use a quadratic discriminator instead, there are also energy solutions to the unregularized GAN training dynamics for the Dirac-GAN. To see this, we can parameterize Dψ (x) as Dψ (x) := ψ1 x2 + ψ2 x.  (146)  It is easy to check that the Dirac-GAN with a discriminator as in (146) indeed has energy solutions: every (θ, ψ) with θ = 0 and ψ2 = 0 defines an equilibrium point of the Dirac-GAN and the GAN-training dynamics are locally convergent near this point if ψ1 > 0. Note however, that even though all equilbria with ψ1 > 0 are points of attraction for the continuous GAN training dynamics, they may not be attractors for the discretized system when ψ1 is large and the learning rate h is fixed. In general, the conditioning of energy solutions depends on the condition numbers of the Hessians ∇2x Dψ∗ (x) at all x ∈ supp pD . Indeed, the presence of ill-conditioned energy solutions might be one possible explanation why WGAN-GP often works well in practice although it is not even locally convergent for the Dirac-GAN. E.2. Full-Rank Solutions In practice, Dψ (x) is usually implemented by a deep neural network. Such discriminators can be described by functions of the form Dψ (x) = ψ1T ηψ2 (x) (147) with a vector-valued C 1 -functions ηψ2 and ψ = (ψ1 , ψ2 ). ηψ2 can be regarded as a feature-representation of the data point x. We now state several assumptions that lead to local convergence in this situation. The first assumption can be seen as a variant of Assumption I adapted to this specific situation:  M0D := {ψ | ψ1 = 0}. (148)    g(θ) = Epθ (x) ηψ2∗ (x) .  (149)  Assumption III now becomes: Assumption III00 . There is an -ball B (θ∗ ) around θ∗ so that MG defines a C 1 - manifold11 . Moreover, the following holds:   (i) The matrix EpD (x) ηψ2∗ (x)ηψ2∗ (x)T has full rank. (ii) if w is not in the tangent space of MG at θ∗ , then ∂w g(θ∗ ) 6= 0. We call a function ηψ2∗ that satisfies the first part of Assumption III00 a full-rank representation of pD . Moreover, if ηψ2∗ satisfies the second part of Assumption III00 , we call ηψ2∗ a complete representations, because the second part of Assumption III00 implies that every deviation from the Nash-equilibrium pθ∗ = pD is detectable using ηψ2∗ . In practice, complete full-rank representations might only exist if the class of discriminators is very powerful or the class of generators is limited. Especially the second part of Assumption III00 might be hard to satisfy in practice. Moreover, finding such representations might be much harder than finding equilibria for the regularized GAN-training dynamics from Section 4. Nonetheless, we have the following convergence result for GANs that allow for complete full-rank representations: Theorem E.3. Assume Assumption I0 , Assumption II and III0 hold for (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). For small enough learning rates, simultaneous and alternating gradient descent for the (unregularized) gradient vector field v are both convergent to MG × M0D in a neighborhood of (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ). Moreover, the rate of convergence is at least linear. Proof (Sketch). The proof is again similar to the proof of Theorem 4.1. We again introduce local coordinates and show that for w not in the tangent space of M0D at ψ ∗ , we have wT KDD w < 0. To see this, note that w must have a nonzero ψ1 component if it is not in the tangent space of M0D at ψ ∗ . However, using (111), we see that the submatrix of KDD corresponding to the ψ1 coordinates is given by   K̃DD = 2f 00 (0) EpD (x) ηψ2∗ (x)ηψ2∗ (x)T . (150) 11  Note that M0D is a C 1 -manifold by definition in this setup.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  This matrix is negative definite by Assumption II and the first part of Assumption III00 . Moreover, by applying (112), we see that the component of KDG w, w ∈ Rn , corresponding to the ψ1 coordinates is given by   ∂w g(θ∗ ) = f 0 (0)∇θ Epθ (x) ηψ2∗ (x) θ=θ∗ w. (151) Using the second part of Assumption III00 , we therefore see that for w not in the tangent space of MG at θ∗ , we have KDG w 6= 0. The rest of the proof is the same as the proof of Theorem 4.1.  For the Dirac-GAN from Section 2, we can obtain a complete full-rank representation, when we parameterize the discriminator Dψ as Dψ (x) = ψ exp(x), i.e. if we set ψ1 := ψ and ηψ2 (x) := exp(x). It is easy to check that ηψ2 indeed defines a complete full-rank representation and that the Dirac-GAN is locally convergent to (θ∗ , ψ ∗ ) = (0, 0) for this parameterization of Dψ (x).  F. Experiments In this section, we describe additional experiments and give more details on our experimental setup. If not noted otherwise, we always use the nonsaturating GAN-objective introduced by Goodfellow et al. (2014) for training the generator. For WGAN-GP we use the generator and discriminator objectives introduced by Gulrajani et al. (2017). 2D-Problems For the 2D-problems, we run unregularized GAN training, R1 -regularized and R2 -regularized GAN training as well WGAN-GP with 1 and 5 discriminator update per generator update. We run each method on 4 different 2D-examples for 6 different GAN architectures. The 4 data-distributions are visualized in Figure 7. All 6 GAN architectures consist of 4-layer fully connected neural networks for both the generator and discriminator, where we select the number of hidden units from {8, 16, 32} and use select either leaky RELUs (i.e. ϕ(t) = max(t, 0.2t)) or Tanh-activation functions. For each method, we try both Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and RMS-Prop with 4 different learning rates: for SGD, we select the learning rate from {5 · 10−3 , 10−2 , 2 · 10−2 , 5 · 10−2 }. For RMSProp, we select it from {5 · 10−5 , 10−4 , 2 · 10−4 , 5 · 10−4 }. For the R1 -, R2 - and WGAN-GP-regularizers we try the regularization parameters γ = 1, γ = 3 and γ = 10. For each method and architecture, we pick the hyperparameter setting which achieves the lowest Wasserstein-1-distance to the true data distribution. We train all methods for 50k iterations and we report the Wasserstein-1-distance averaged over the last  10k iterations. We estimate the Wasserstein-1-distance using the Python Optimal Transport package12 by drawing 2048 samples from both the generator and the true data distributions. The results are shown in Figure 5. The best solution found by each method on the “Circle”-distribution is shown in Figure 8. We see that the R1 - and R2 -regularizers converge to solutions for which the discriminator is 0 in a neighborhood of the true data distribution. On the other hand, unregularized training and WGAN-GP converge to energy solutions where the discriminator forms a potential for the true data distribution. Please see Section E.1 for details. CIFAR-10 To test our theory on real-world tasks, we train a DC-GAN architecture (Radford et al., 2015) with 3 convolutional layers and no batch-normalization on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009). We apply different regularization strategies to stabilize the training. To compare the different regularization strategies, we measure the inception score (Salimans et al., 2016a) over Wall-clock-time. We implemented the network in the Tensorflow framework (Abadi et al., 2016). For all regularization techniques, we use the RMSProp optimizer (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) with α = 0.9 and a learning rate of 10−4 . For the R1 and R2 regularizers from Section 4.1 we use a regularization parameter of γ = 10. For the WGAN-GP regularizer we also use a regularization parameter of γ = 10 as suggested by Gulrajani et al. (2017). We train all methods using 1 discriminator update per generator update except for WGAN-GP, for which we try both 1 and 5 discriminator updates The inception score (Salimans et al., 2016b) over time for the different regularization strategies is shown in Figure 6. As predicted by our theory, we see that the R1 and R2 regularizers from Section 4.1 lead to stable training whereas unregularized GAN training is not stable. We also see that WGAN-GP with 1 or 5 discriminator updates per generator update lead to similar final inception scores on this architecture. The good behavior of WGAN-GP is surprising considering the fact that it does not even converge locally for the Dirac-GAN. One possible explanation is that WGAN-GP oscillates in narrow circles around the equilibrium which might be enough to produce images of sufficiently high quality. Another possible explanation is that WGAN-GP converges to an energy or a full-rank solution (Section E) for this example. celebA We also train deep convolutional neural networks on the celebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015). We use a similar training setup as for the CIFAR-10 experiment, but we use a slightly different architecture (Table 3). In particular, we 12  http://pot.readthedocs.io  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  use a constant number of filters in each layer and we use additional preactivation ResNet-blocks (He et al., 2016b;a). We use 5 × 5 kernels for all convolutional and transposed convolutional layers, except for the ResNet-blocks, in which we use 3 × 3 kernels. We also find it helpful to multiply the output of the ResNet-blocks with 0.1. We implemented the network in the Tensorflow framework and use the RMSProp optimizer with α = 0.9 and a learning rate of 10−4 . As a regularization term, we use the R1 -regularizer with γ = 10. For the latent code z, we use a 256 dimensional Gaussian distribution. We find that the R1 successfully stabilizes training of this architecture. Some random samples can be seen in Figure 9. Imagenet For the Imagenet experiment, we use ResNetarchitectures both for the generator and discriminator, both having 55 layers in total. Both the generator and discriminator are conditioned on the labels of the input data. The architectures for the generator and discriminator that we use for the Imagenet experiment are shown in Table 4. As in the celebA-experiment, we use preactivation ResNet-blocks and Leaky RELU-nonlinearities everywhere. We also multiply the output of the ResNet blocks with 0.1. For the generator, we sample a latent variable z from a 256-dimensional uniform distribution on [−1, 1]256 and concatenate it with a 256 dimensional embedding of the labels. The resulting 512dimensional vector is then fed into the first fully connected layer of the generator. The discriminator takes as input an image and outputs a 1000 dimensional vector. Depending on the label of the input, we select the corresponding index in this vector and use it as the logits for the GAN-objective. We implemented the network in the Pytorch framework (Paszke et al., 2017) and use the RMSProp optimizer with α = 0.99,  = 10−5 and an initial learning rate of 10−4 . We use a batch size of 128 and we trained the networks on 4 GeForce GTx 1080 Ti GPUs for 35 epochs. Every 10 epochs, we anneal the learning rate by a factor of 2. We find that while training this GAN without any regularization quickly leads to mode collapse, using the R1 regularizers from Section 4.1 leads to stable training.13 Some random (unconditional) samples can be seen in Figure 10. Moreover, Figure 11 and Figure 12 show conditional samples for some selected Imagenet classes. While not completely photorealistic, we find that our model can produce convincing samples from all 1000 Imagenet classes.  Figure 6. Inception score over time for various regularization strategies. While the inception score can be problematic for evaluating probabilistic models (Barratt & Sharma, 2018), it still gives a rough idea about the convergence and stability properties of different training methods.  Layer Fully Connected Reshape TransposedConv2D TransposedConv2D TransposedConv2D  output size  filter  256 · 4 · 4 256 × 4 × 4 128 × 8 × 8 64 × 16 × 16 3 × 32 × 32  256 → 256 · 4 · 4 256 → 128 128 → 64 64 → 3  (a) Generator architecture Layer Conv2D Conv2D Conv2D Reshape Fully Connected  output size  filter  64 × 16 × 16 128 × 8 × 8 256 × 4 × 4 256 · 4 · 4 256 · 4 · 4  3 → 64 64 → 128 128 → 256 256 · 4 · 4 → 1  (b) Discriminator architecture Table 2. Architectures for CIFAR-10-experiment. 13  Under PyTorch, we sometimes still experienced some instabilities in the beginning of training, but these instabilities only occurred during the first 1000 iterations and could be fixed by restarting the training with a new random initialization. We did not experience any instabilities under Tensorflow.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  (a) 2D-Gaussian  (b) Line  (c) Circle  (d) Four lines  Figure 7. The four 2D-data distributions on which we test the different algorithms.  (a) unregularized  (b) R1  (c) R2  (d) WGAN-GP-1  (e) WGAN-GP-5  Figure 8. Best solutions found by the different algorithms for learning a circle. The blue points are samples from the true data distribution, the orange points are samples from the generator distribution. The colored areas visualize the gradient magnitude of the equilibrium discriminator. We find that while the R1 and R2 regularizers converge to equilibrium discriminators that are 0 in a neighborhood of the true data distribution, unregularized training and WGAN-GP converge to energy solutions (Section E.1).  (a) Training distribution  (b) Random samples  Figure 9. Results on the celebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015) (64 × 64) for a DC-GAN (Radford et al., 2015) based architecture with additional residual connections (He et al., 2016b). For both the generator and the discriminator, we do not use batch normalization and use a constant number of filters in each layer.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  (a) Training distribution  (b) Random samples  Figure 10. Unconditional results on the Imagenet dataset (Russakovsky et al., 2015) with resolution 128 × 128. The inception score is 18.5 ± 0.4.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  (a) tench  (b) papillon  (c) weevil  (d) admiral  (e) lighthouse  (f) bell cote  (g) castle  (h) dam  (i) dock  Figure 11. Class conditional results on the Imagenet dataset.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  (a) home theater  (b) jack-o’-lantern  (c) passenger car  (d) police van  (e) rugby ball  (f) ski  (g) trifle  (h) pizza  (i) valley  Figure 12. Class conditional results on the Imagenet dataset.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  Layer  Layer  output size  filter  Fully Connected Reshape TransposedConv2D  128 · 4 · 4 128 × 4 × 4 128 × 8 × 8  256 → 128 · 4 · 4 128 → 128  Resnet-Block (3x) TransposedConv2D  128 × 8 × 8 128 × 16 × 16  128 → 64 → 128 128 → 128  Resnet-Block (3x) TransposedConv2D  128 × 16 × 16 128 × 32 × 32  128 → 64 → 128 128 → 128  Resnet-Block (3x) TransposedConv2D  128 × 32 × 32 3 × 64 × 64  128 → 64 → 128 64 → 3  (a) Generator architecture Layer  output size  filter  Conv2D  128 × 32 × 32  3 → 128  Resnet-Block (2x) Conv2D  128 × 32 × 32 128 × 16 × 16  128 → 64 → 128 128 → 128  Resnet-Block (2x) Conv2D  128 × 16 × 16 128 × 8 × 8  Resnet-Block (2x) Conv2D Resnet-Block (2x) Reshape Fully Connected  output size  filter  Fully Connected Reshape  1024 · 4 · 4 1024 × 4 × 4  512 → 1024 · 4 · 4 -  Resnet-Block (4x) NN-Upsampling  1024 × 4 × 4 1024 × 8 × 8  1024 → 512 → 1024 -  Conv2D Resnet-Block (4x) NN-Upsampling  1024 × 8 × 8 1024 × 8 × 8 1024 × 16 × 16  1024 → 1024 1024 → 512 → 1024 -  Conv2D Resnet-Block (4x) NN-Upsampling  512 × 16 × 16 512 × 16 × 16 512 × 32 × 32  1024 → 512 512 → 256 → 512 -  Conv2D Resnet-Block (4x) NN-Upsampling  256 × 32 × 32 256 × 32 × 32 256 × 64 × 64  512 → 256 256 → 128 → 256 -  Conv2D Resnet-Block (4x) NN-Upsampling  128 × 64 × 64 128 × 64 × 64 128 × 128 × 128  256 → 128 128 → 64 → 128 -  Conv2D Resnet-Block (4x) Conv2D  64 × 128 × 128 64 × 128 × 128 3 × 128 × 128  128 → 64 64 → 32 → 64 16 → 3  (a) Generator architecture Layer  output size  filter  Conv2D  64 × 128 × 128  3 → 64  128 → 64 → 128 64 → 128  Resnet-Block (4x) Conv2D  64 × 128 × 128 128 × 64 × 64  64 → 32 → 64 64 → 128  128 × 8 × 8 128 × 4 × 4  128 → 64 → 128 128 → 128  Resnet-Block (4x) Conv2D  128 × 64 × 64 256 × 32 × 32  128 → 64 → 128 128 → 256  128 × 4 × 4 128 · 4 · 4 128 · 4 · 4  128 → 64 → 128 128 · 4 · 4 → 1  Resnet-Block (4x) Conv2D  256 × 32 × 32 512 × 16 × 16  256 → 128 → 256 256 → 512  (b) Discriminator architecture  Resnet-Block (4x) Conv2D  512 × 16 × 16 1024 × 8 × 8  512 → 256 → 512 512 → 1024  Table 3. Architectures for celebA-experiment.  Resnet-Block (4x) Conv2D  1024 × 8 × 8 1024 × 4 × 4  1024 → 512 → 1024 1024 → 1024  Resnet-Block (4x) Reshape  1024 × 4 × 4 1024 · 4 · 4  1024 → 512 → 1024 -  1024 · 4 · 4  1024 · 4 · 4 → 1000  Fully Connected  (b) Discriminator architecture  Table 4. Architectures for Imagenet-experiment.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  (a) Standard GAN  (b) Non-saturating GAN  (c) WGAN  (d) WGAN-GP  (e) Consensus optimization  (f) Instance noise  (g) Gradient penalty  (h) Gradient penalty (CR)  Figure 13. Convergence properties of different GAN training algorithms using simultaneous gradient descent. The shaded area in Figure 13c visualizes the set of forbidden values for the discriminator parameter ψ. The starting iterate is marked in red.  (a) Standard GAN  (b) Non-saturating GAN  (c) WGAN  (d) WGAN-GP  (e) Consensus optimization  (f) Instance noise  (g) Gradient penalty  (h) Gradient penalty (CR)  Figure 14. Convergence properties of different GAN training algorithms using alternating gradient descent with 1 discriminator update per generator update The shaded area in Figure 14c visualizes the set of forbidden values for the discriminator parameter ψ. The starting iterate is marked in red.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  (a) Standard GAN  (b) Non-saturating GAN  (c) WGAN  (d) WGAN-GP  (e) Consensus optimization  (f) Instance noise  (g) Gradient penalty  (h) Gradient penalty (CR)  Figure 15. Convergence properties of different GAN training algorithms using alternating gradient descent with 5 discriminator updates per generator update. The shaded area in Figure 15c visualizes the set of forbidden values for the discriminator parameter ψ. The starting iterate is marked in red.  Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?  (a) SimGD  (b) AltGD (nd = 1)  (c) AltGD (nd = 5)  Figure 16. Convergence properties of our GAN using two time-scale training as proposed in (Heusel et al., 2017). On our example problem, we do not see any sign of convergence when training with two time-scales. The starting iterate is marked in red.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
