Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4767

Abstract:
arXiv:1606.03140v2 [quant-ph] 1 Jul 2016  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM FOR GROUPS ARISING FROM NON-LOCAL GAMES WILLIAM SLOFSTRA Abstract. Tsirelson’s problem asks whether the commuting operator model for two-party quantum correlations is equivalent to the tensor-product model. We give a negative answer to this question by showing that there are nonlocal games which have perfect commuting-operator strategies, but do not have perfect tensor-product strategies. The weak Tsirelson problem, which is known to be equivalent to Connes embedding problem, remains open. The examples we construct are instances of (binary) linear system games. For such games, previous results state that the existence of perfect strategies is controlled by the solution group of the linear system. Our main result is that every finitely-presented group embeds in some solution group. As an additional consequence, we show that the problem of determining whether a linear system game has a perfect commuting-operator strategy is undecidable.  Contents 1. Introduction 2. Linear system games, hypergraphs, and solution groups 3. The embedding theorem and consequences 4. Presentations by involutions 5. The wagon wheel embedding 6. Pictures for groups generated by involutions 6.1. Pictures as planar graphs 6.2. Groups and labellings of pictures 7. Pictures over solution groups and hypergraphs 8. A category of hypergraphs 9. Cycles and outer faces 10. Pictures over suns 11. Stellar cycles and constellations 11.1. Structure of constellations 11.2. Stellar cycles 11.3. Covers versus copies 11.4. Cycles covered by other cycles 11.5. Proof of Theorem 11.4 12. Proof of the embedding theorem References 1  2 5 7 9 13 15 15 19 21 24 31 34 40 42 42 44 46 47 49 56  2  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  1. Introduction In a two-player non-local game, the players, commonly called Alice and Bob, are physically separated and unable to communicate. They each receive a question chosen at random from a finite question set, and reply with a response from a finite answer set. If the joint answers meet a predetermined winning condition dependent on the joint questions, then Alice and Bob win; otherwise they lose. The rules of the game, including the winning condition and distribution on questions, are completely known to Alice and Bob, and they can arrange in advance a strategy which will maximize their success probability. However, since they cannot communicate during the game, they may not be able to play perfectly, i.e. win with probability one. Classically, Alice and Bob’s strategy for a non-local game is described by a local hidden variable model. Bell’s famous theorem states that Alice and Bob can achieve better results than is possible with a local hidden variable model if they share an entangled quantum state [Bel64]. Since Bell’s discovery, non-local games have been heavily studied1 in physics, mathematics, and computer science; see [CHSH69, FC72, Cir80, AGR82, CHTW04, BPA+ 08, NPA08, JPPG+ 10, KV11, KKM+ 11, HBD+ 15] for a small sample of results. Despite this, a number of foundational questions remain open, chief among which is Tsirelson’s problem: A quantum strategy for a non-local game can be described as a set of measurement operators on Hilbert spaces HA and HB , along with a quantum state in the joint space H = HA ⊗ HB . We refer to this as the tensor-product model. While the tensor-product model is often the default, there is another choice: a quantum strategy can be described as a set of measurements and quantum state on a shared Hilbert space H, with the property that Alice’s measurement operators commute with Bob’s measurement operators. This commuting-operator model is used, for instance, in algebraic quantum field theory [HK64]. The observable consequences of a strategy in either model are captured by the correlation matrix of the strategy. If H is finite-dimensional, every correlation matrix arising from a commutingoperator strategy can be realized using a tensor-product strategy. Tsirelson’s problem asks whether this is true for a general Hilbert space. This problem has an interesting history. Tsirelson originally stated the problem in a survey on Bell inequalities [Tsi93], and claimed without proof that the two models gave rise to the same set of correlation matrices. He later retracted this claim, and posted the question to a list of open problems in quantum information theory [Tsi06]. Subsequent authors [NPA08, JNP+ 11, Fri12, NCPGV12, PT15, DP16, PSS+ 16] studying Tsirelson’s problem have 1  Usually under the name “Bell tests” or “Bell inequalities”. The term “non-local games” is more recent.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  3  defined the set of tensor-product strategies in several different ways. Paulsen and Todorov [PT15] (see also Dykema and Paulsen [DP16]) observe that these variations lead to a hierarchy of sets of correlation matrices Cq ⊆ Cqs ⊆ Cqa ⊆ Cqc , where Cq is the set of correlations arising from tensor-product strategies on finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, Cqs is the set of correlations arising from tensor-product strategies (on possibly infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces) with a vector state, Cqa = Cq is the set of correlations which are limits of correlations in Cq , and Cqc is the set of correlations arising from commuting-operator strategies. If we restrict to non-local games with question sets of size n and 2 2 answer sets of size m, then all these sets are convex subsets of Rm n , and none of the inclusions were previously known to be strict. Thus for each t ∈ {q, qs, qa} there is a Tsirelson problem asking whether Cqc = Ct . Ozawa, building on the work of Junge, Navascués, Palazuelos, Pérez-Garcı́a, Sholz, and Werner [JNP+ 11] and work of Fritz [Fri12], has shown that Cqc = Cqa if and only if Connes’ embedding conjecture is true [Oza13]. At the other end of the hierarchy, if Cq was equal to Cqc then every correlation matrix, whether commuting operator or tensor-product, would arise from a finite-dimensional Hilbert space. The “middle” version, which asks whether Cqc = Cqs , seems closest to Tsirelson’s original problem statement. The first main result of this paper is that there is a non-local game which can be played perfectly with a commuting-operator strategy, but which cannot be played perfectly using a tensor-product strategy with a vector state. Thus we resolve the middle version of Tsirelson’s problem by showing that Cqc 6= Cqs . This game is interesting from the perspective of quantum information and computation, where a non-local game is often regarded as a computational scenario in which better results can be achieved with entanglement as a resource. From this point of view, it is natural to ask how much entanglement is needed to play a game optimally, and in particular, whether every game can be played optimally on a finite-dimensional Hilbert space. The game we construct shows that this is not possible, at least if we allow commuting-operator strategies. Previously-known examples of this type have involved either quantum questions [LTW13, RV15] or infinite answer sets [MV14]. One reason we would have desired that every game have an optimal strategy on a finite-dimensional Hilbert space is that it would make it possible to determine the optimal winning probability of a non-local game over entangled strategies. At present the only known methods for this task, aside from bruteforce search over strategies, are variants of the Navascués-Pironio-Acı́n (NPA) hierarchy [NPA08, DLTW08]. Given a non-local game, the NPA hierarchy provides a sequence of upper bounds which converge to the optimal winning  4  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  probability in the commuting-operator model. However, the hierarchy does not provide, outside of special cases, a stopping criterion, i.e. a way to tell if the value will fall below a given threshold. Our second main result is that it is undecidable to determine if a non-local game can be played perfectly with a commuting-operator strategy. In particular, this implies that there is no stopping criterion for the NPA hierarchy which applies to all games. The games we consider are binary linear system games, so named because they arise from linear systems over Z2 . Such games have been studied previously in [CM14, Ark12, Ji13]. Cleve and Mittal implicitly associate a certain group to every linear system over Z2 , such that perfect tensor-product strategies for the game correspond to certain finite-dimensional representations of the group [CM14]. We call this group, which is analogous to the solution space of a linear system, the solution group. In [CLS16] it is shown that perfect commuting-operator strategies for a binary linear system game correspond to certain possibly-infinite-dimensional representations of the solution group. Solution groups form an interesting class of groups. They are finitely presented, but their presentations must satisfy a property which in [CLS16] is called local compatibility: if x1 · · · xn = 1 is a relation, where xi , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, are not necessarily distinct generators of the group, then the presentation must also contain the relations xi xj = xj xi for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n. This condition is natural from the perspective of quantum mechanics, where two observables commute if and only if the observables correspond to quantities which can be measured (or known) simultaneously. Group relations of this exact type can be found in contextuality theorems of Mermin and Peres [Mer90, Per90, Mer93]. Local compatibility is a priori a strong constraint on group presentations. Our primary result, on which our other two results are based, is that any finitely-presented group can be embedded in a solution group. This embedding theorem allows us to extend results from combinatorial group theory, such as the existence of a non-residuallyfinite group, to solution groups. Using non-residually-finite groups to recognize infinite-dimensional state spaces was previously proposed in [Fri13]. A number of open questions remain, such as whether there are other separations between the correlation sets Ct (m, n), and (assuming that Cqa 6= Cqc ) whether it is decidable to determine the optimal value of a non-local game over Cqa . The argument used in this paper cannot distinguish between Cqs and Cq , and we do not expect our methods to help with other separations between correlation sets. The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we give some background on binary linear system games, and introduce the solution group of a linear system. In Section 3, we state the embedding theorem for  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  5  solution groups, and prove our two main results as corollaries. The rest of the paper is concerned with the proof of the embedding theorem. The main technical tool used is pictures of groups. We give an overview of pictures tailored to solution groups in Sections 6 and 7; expert readers will want to skip or briefly review these sections on first reading. In dealing with pictures, it is more convenient to use hypergraphs instead of linear systems, and we introduce hypergraphs into our definitions immediately in Section 2. In Section 8 we develop a notion of morphisms between hypergraphs; the concept is similar to graph minors, but differs from standard notions of hypergraph minors as in [RS10]. The more technical aspects of the proof are contained in Sections 9-11; we suggest that the reader skim these sections on first reading and proceed to Section 12. For a second reading, Corollary 10.4 might provide a good initial target. One thing we do not provide is a definition of the correlation sets mentioned above, or a definition of binary linear system games; instead we defer to the excellent references listed above. 1.1. Acknowledgements. I thank Richard Cleve, Jason Crann, Zhengfeng Ji, Li Liu, Andrew Marks, Vern Paulsen, and Vincent Russo for many helpful discussions. I thank Richard Cleve and Li Liu for detailed comments on the manuscript, and Tobias Fritz for helpful suggestions. Any remaining errors are my own. 2. Linear system games, hypergraphs, and solution groups Binary linear system games are based on linear systems Ax = b over Z2 . It is convenient to think of linear systems in terms of hypergraphs. By a hypergraph, we mean a triple H = (V, E, A), where V = V (H) and E = E(H) are the sets of vertices and edges respectively, and A ∈ ZV≥0×E is the incidence matrix between V and E, so Ave ≥ 0 is the degree of incidence between edge e and vertex v. We sayP that v and e are incident if Ave > 0.PIf v ∈ V , then the degree of v is |v| = e Ave . Similarly if e ∈ E then |e| = v Ave . We say that H is simple if Ave ≤ 1 for all v ∈ V and e ∈ E, k-regular if |v| = k for all v ∈ V , and a graph if |e| = 2 for all e ∈ E. Note that this definition of hypergraphs allows both isolated vertices and isolated edges, i.e. vertices (resp. edges) which are incident to no edges (resp. vertices). A Z2 -vertex labelling of H is a function b : V → Z2 . With these conventions, there is a correspondence between linear systems Ax = b and simple hypergraphs H with a vertex labelling b. From this point of view, the edges of a hypergraph correspond to the variables of a linear system, and the vertices correspond to constraints. Similarly, pairs (H, b) where H is not necessarily simple correspond to linear systems Ax = b over Z2 with a choice of non-negative integer representatives for the coefficients Ave .  6  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  To any linear system Ax = b, we can associate a linear system non-local game G, and a group Γ [CM14, CLS16]. The group Γ is the focus of attention of this paper, and is defined as follows. Definition 2.1. Let H = (V, E, I) be a (not necessarily simple) hypergraph and let b be a function V → Z2 . The solution group Γ = Γ(H; b) associated to H and b is the group generated by {xe , e ∈ V } ∪ {J}, subject to relations: (1) x2e = 1 for all e ∈ E and J 2 = 1 (i.e. Γ is generated by involutions) (2) [xe , J] = 1 for all e ∈ E (i.e. J is central), (3) [xe , xe′ ] = 1 if there is some vertex v incident to both e and e′ , and (4)  Y  ve xA = J bv for all v ∈ V. e  e  The null solution group is the group Γ(H) := Γ(H, 0). We call the last two types of relations commuting relations and linear relations respectively. The definition of the linear relations assumes that E is ordered, but the choice of order is irrelevant because of the commuting relations. Note that if v and e are incident and Ave is even, then the linear relations Y A ′ Y A ′ xe′ve = J bv xe′ve = J bv and e′  e′ 6=e  are equivalent. However, the fact that Ave > 0 might still lead to commuting relations that wouldn’t hold otherwise. The one-dimensional representations π of Γ(H; b) in which π(J) 6= 1 correspond to the solutions of the linear system Ax = b. Higher-dimensional representations of Γ(H; b) with this property can be thought of as quantum solutions of Ax = b. This is justified by the following theorem, which relates solution groups to non-local games.  Theorem 2.2 ([CM14, CLS16]). Let Ax = b be a linear system over Z2 , where A is a non-negative integral matrix, let G be the associated linear system nonlocal game, and let Γ be the corresponding solution group. Then: • G has a perfect quantum commuting-operator strategy if and only if J 6= 1 in Γ. • G has a perfect quantum tensor-product strategy if and only if G has a perfect finite-dimensional quantum strategy, and this happens if and only if Γ has a finite-dimensional representation π with π(J) 6= 1.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  7  The first part of this theorem is due to [CLS16], while the second part is due to [CM14]. 3. The embedding theorem and consequences In light of Theorem 2.2, we would like to understand the structure (or lack thereof) of solution groups for linear system games. Recall that a presentation hS : Ri of a group G is a set S and subset R of the free group F (S) generated by S, such that G = F (S)/(R), where (R) is the normal subgroup generated by R. A group is finitely presented if it has a presentation hS : Ri where both S and R are finite. Our primary result is that understanding solution groups is as hard as understanding finitely presented groups. Theorem 3.1. Let G be a finitely presented group, let J ′ ∈ G be a central element with (J ′ )2 = 1, and let w1 , . . . , wn , n ≥ 0 be a sequence of elements in G such that wi2 = 1 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Then there is a hypergraph H, a vertex labelling function b : V (H) → Z2 , a sequence of edges e1 , . . . , en in H, and a homomorphism φ : G → Γ(H, b) such that φ is an embedding, φ(J ′ ) = J, and φ(wi ) = xei for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The hypergraph H, vertex labelling b and homomorphism φ can be explicitly constructed from a presentation of G. This is described in Sections 4 and 5. Theorem 3.1 is proved at the beginning of Section 5 via reduction to another embedding theorem. The proof of this latter embedding theorem (and hence the proof of Theorem 3.1) is completed in Section 12. In the remainder of this section, we prove two consequences of Theorem 3.1. The first is an answer to Tsirelson’s problem. Corollary 3.2. There is a linear system non-local game which has a perfect quantum commuting-operator strategy, but does not have a perfect quantum tensor-product strategy. Proof. Suppose that G is a finitely-presented group with a central element J ′ of order two, such that π(J ′ ) = 1 for every finite-dimensional representation π of G. By Theorem 3.1, there is an embedding of G in a solution group Γ which identifies J ′ with J. In particular, this implies that J 6= 1 in Γ, so the associated linear system non-local game G must have a perfect quantum commuting-operator strategy by the first part of Theorem 2.2. If π is a finitedimensional representation of Γ, then π(J) = π|G (J ′ ) = 1. By the second part of Theorem 2.2, the associated linear system non-local game does not have a perfect quantum tensor-product strategy. To finish the proof, we construct a group G with the above property. Consider Higman’s group H0 = ha, b, c, d : aba−1 = b2 , bcb−1 = c2 , cdc−1 = d2 , dad−1 = a2 i.  8  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  It is well-known that H0 has no non-trivial linear representations, and that the generators a, b, c, d of H0 have infinite order [Hig51, Ber94]. Let H = H0 × Z2 , and let J ∈ H denote the generator of the Z2 -factor. Let G be the HNN extension of H by the automorphism of ha, Ji ∼ = Z × Z2 sending J 7→ J and a 7→ aJ. By the properties of the HNN extension, H is a subgroup of G, and in particular J is non-trivial in G. Furthermore, we can construct a presentation for G from a presentation of H by adding a generator x and relations [x, J] = 1 and [x, a] = J. The former relation implies that J is central in G. Finally, if π is a finite-dimensional representation of G, then π|H0 is trivial, and in particular, π(a) = 1. But this implies that π(J) = π([x, a]) = 1, as required.    We note that any non-residually-finite group can be used in place of Higman’s group in the above proof. It would be interesting to know the smallest linear system for which the corresponding game can be played perfectly only with commuting-operator strategies. No effort is made to reduce the size of the linear system in the proof of Theorem 3.1, and the main construction from Section 5 depends on the number of variables and the total length of the relations in the presentation of G. If we naively follow the proof through for the group in Corollary 3.2, we get a linear system with roughly 600 variables and 450 linear relations. Making some obvious improvements in Section 4 can get this down to 400 variables and 300 relations. It seems likely that this is far from the smallest possible example. The second consequence concerns the difficulty of determining whether a non-local game has a perfect commuting-operator strategy. Corollary 3.3. It is undecidable to determine if a binary linear system game has a perfect commuting-operator strategy. Proof. By Theorem 2.2, determining if a binary linear system game has a perfect strategy is equivalent to determining if J 6= 1 in a solution group. Because Theorem 3.1 is constructive, this is in turn equivalent to the following decision problem: given a group presentation G = hS : Ri and a word J in the generators S such that J ∈ Z(G) and J 2 = 1, decide if J = 1 in G. We claim that the word problem for groups can be reduced to this latter problem. Indeed, given a finitely presented group K = hS : Ri and a word w ∈ F (S) in the generators of K, it is possible to recursively construct a finitely presented group Lw with the property that K is a subgroup of Lw if w 6= 1, and Lw is trivial if w = 1 (see [LS77, pg. 190], where this construction is attributed to Rabin). The presentation of Lw can be constructed by adding  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  9  generators and relations to the presentation of K. Let Hw be the result of applying this construction to the group K × Z, and let z be the generator of Hw corresponding to the Z-factor in K × Z. If w = 1, then Hw is trival, and z = 1. If w 6= 1, then K × Z is a subgroup of Hw , and the order of z is infinite. Finally, construct a group Gw by adding two generators x and J to the presentation of Hw , along with relations J 2 = [x, J] = 1, [s, J] = 1 for all generators s of Hw , and [x, z] = J. As in Corollary 3.2, if w 6= 1 then Gw is the HNN extension of the group Hw × Z2 by the automorphism of the subgroup hz, Ji ∼ = Z × Z2 sending J 7→ J and z 7→ zJ. Thus, if w 6= 1 then J 6= 1 in Gw . If w = 1, then z = 1 in Hw , and consequently J = [x, z] = 1 in Gw . This completes the reduction.  Although not used in either of the above corollaries, Theorem 3.1 also allows us to embed a finitely-presented group G in a solution group Γ so that a given set of involutions of G become generators of Γ. This can be used to prove that other tasks involving solution groups are undecidable. For instance, it is undecidable to determine if a generator xe of a null solution group is nontrivial. 4. Presentations by involutions We are interested primarily in groups which (a) have a distinguished central element of order ≤ two, and (b) are generated by involutions. For clarity in subsequent sections, we encode these conditions in two formal definitions. Definition 4.1. A group over Z2 is a group G with a distinguished central element J = JG such that J 2 = 1. A morphism G1 → G2 over Z2 is a group homomorphism sending JG1 7→ JG2 . Similarly, an embedding over Z2 is an injective morphism over Z2 . Note that J is allowed to be the identity in this definition. This is so that we can construct groups over Z2 by starting with some finite presentation, picking an element J ′ ∈ F (S), and adding relations (J ′ )2 = 1 and [J ′ , s] = 1 for all s ∈ S. By allowing J = 1, we can do this even if J ′ becomes trivial. Elements of F (S) are represented by words over {s, s−1 : s ∈ S}. Every element r ∈ F (S) can be represented uniquely as sa11 · · · sann , where ai ∈ {±1}, and ai = ai+1 whenever si = si+1 . A word meeting these conditions is said to be reduced. The number n is the length of r. The element r is said to be cyclically reduced if, in addition, sn = s1 implies that an = a1 . Definition 4.2. Given a set S, let F2 (S) = hS : s2 = 1, s ∈ Si. A presentation by involutions over Z2 for a group G is a set of generators S and a set of relations R ⊂ F2 (S) × Z2 such that G = F2 (S) × Z2 /(R), where (R) is  10  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  the normal subgroup generated by R. We denote presentations of this form by InvhS : Ri, and write G = InvhS : Ri when the meaning is clear. We use J (written in multiplicative notation) to denote the generator of the Z2 -factor in F2 (S) × Z2 . If G = InvhS : Ri, we can regard G as a group over Z2 by letting J = JG be the image of J ∈ F2 (S) × Z2 in G. Elements of F2 (S) are represented by words over S. Every element r ∈ F2 (S) × Z2 can be represented uniquely as J a s1 · · · sn , where a ∈ Z2 and s1 , . . . , sn is a sequence in S with si 6= si+1 . Again, a word of this form is said to be reduced, and n is called the length of r. If, in addition, sn 6= s1 then we say that r is cyclically reduced. We say that a set of relations R is cyclically reduced if every element of R is cyclically reduced. If R is a set of relations, the symmetrization of R is the set of relations sym R containing all relations of the form J a si si+1 · · · sn s1 · · · si−1 and J a si si−1 · · · s1 sn · · · si+1 , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, for every relation J a s1 · · · sn in R. Every group presented by involutions over Z2 has a presentation InvhS : Ri where R is cyclically reduced. The presentations InvhS : Ri and InvhS : Rsym i are equivalent (i.e. they define isomorphic groups), and if R is cyclically reduced then Rsym is cyclically reduced. By definition, solution groups are examples of groups presented by involutions over Z2 . Theorem 3.1 states that every finitely presented group over Z2 embeds (over Z2 ) in a solution group. The first step in proving Theorem 3.1 is showing that every finitely presented group embeds in a group presented by involutions. Proposition 4.3. Suppose (G, J) is a group over Z2 with finite presentation hS : Ri, and J ′ ∈ F (S) is a representative of JG . Let T be the set of indeterminates {zs1 , zs2 : s ∈ S}, and choose integers ks ≥ 1 for all s ∈ S. Finally, let φ : F (S) → F2 (T ) × Z2 be the morphism sending s 7→ (zs1 zs2 )ks . Then the induced morphism φ : G → K := InvhT : R′ i, where R′ := {φ(r) : r ∈ R} ∪ {JK φ(J ′ )} is an embedding over Z2 . Furthermore, if R ∪ {J ′ } is cyclically reduced then R′ is cyclically reduced. Proof. Let s1 , . . . , sn be a list of the elements of S, and let mi be the order of si in G. For convenience, we write zij in place of zsi ,j . Let 2 2 Di := hzi1 , zi2 : zi1 = zi2 = (zi1 zi2 )ksi mi = 1i,  the dihedral group of order ksi mi (if mi is infinite, then the last relation is omitted, so that Di is the infinite dihedral group). We define an increasing  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  11  sequence of groups G = K0 ⊆ K1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ Kn such that JG is in the centre Z(Ki ) for all i, as follows: Suppose that Ki−1 is defined. Observe that the subgroup hsi , JG i ⊆ G is abelian, and hence is isomorphic to either Zmi or m /2 Zmi × Z2 (where Z∞ := Z), depending on whether or not JG = si i . In the former case, let Ki be the amalgamated product of Ki−1 and Di , where we identify si ∈ Ki−1 with (zi1 zi2 )ksi in Di . Since G is a subgroup of Ki−1 , this amalgamated product is well-defined, and since JG ∈ Z(Ki−1 ) is identified with (zi1 zi2 )ksi ms /2 ∈ Z(Di ), we also get that JG belongs to the centre of Ki . When hsi , JG i = Zmi × Z2 , we let Ki be the amalgamated product of Ki−1 and Di × Z2 , where we identify si ∈ Ki−1 with (zi1 zi2 )ksi and JG ∈ Ki−1 with the generator J of Z2 in Di × Z2 . Once again, the amalgamated product is well-defined and JG ∈ Z(Ki ). Now it is not hard to see that Km has presentation hS ∪ {z11 , z12 , . . . , zm1 , zm2 , J} : R ∪ {zij2 = [zij , J] = 1 : 1 ≤ i ≤ m, j = 1, 2} ∪ {sj = (zi1 zi2 )ksj } ∪ {J = J ′ }i for all 1 ≤ m ≤ n. For Kn , this presentation is equivalent to the presentation InvhT : R′ i of the group K, and the isomorphism Kn ∼ = K identifies the inclusion G ⊆ Kn with the morphism φ : G → K. Finally, it is easy to see that if r ∈ R is cyclically reduced, then φ(r) is cyclically reduced. If J ′ is cyclically reduced, then Jφ(J ′ ) is also cyclically reduced.  Definition 4.4. A relation r = J a s1 · · · sn ∈ F2 (S) × Z2 is odd (resp. even) if a is odd (resp. even). Equivalently, a relation is odd (resp. even) if it is of the form r ′ = J (resp. r ′ = 1) for some r ′ ∈ F2 (S). The even part of the relation r = J a s1 · · · sn is r + = s1 · · · sn . If InvhS : Ri is a presentation by involutions over Z2 , then the corresponding even presentation over Z2 is InvhS : R+ i, where R+ = {r + : r ∈ R}. Similarly, if G is any group over Z2 , then the even quotient is G+ := G/(JG ) × Z2 . The group G+ is regarded as a group over Z2 with JG+ equal to the generator of the Z2 factor. It is easy to see that if G = InvhS : Ri, then G+ = InvhS : R+ i. For instance, the null solution group Γ(H) = Γ(H, 0) of a hypergraph H is the even quotient Γ(H, b)+ of the solution group Γ(H, b) for any b. Definition 4.5. Let J a s1 · · · sn be a reduced word for an element r ∈ F2 (S) × Z2 . The multiplicity of s ∈ S in r is mult(s; r) := |{1 ≤ i ≤ n : si = s}|. We say that s 6= t ∈ S are adjacent in r if either {s, t} = {si , si+1 } for some i = 1, . . . , n − 1 or {s, t} = {s1 , sn }.  12  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  The reason that we introduce numbers ks in Proposition 4.3 is that, for the proof of Theorem 3.1, we would like to work with relations r where mult(s; r) is even for all s. In fact, we will be able to handle slightly more general presentations, which we now define. Definition 4.6. We say that a presentation InvhS : Ri by involutions over Z2 is collegial if (a) the presentation is finite and cyclically reduced, (b) R ∩ {1, J} = R ∩ S = ∅, and (c) if mult(s; r0 ) is odd for some r0 ∈ R, and t is adjacent to s in some r1 ∈ R, then mult(t; r ′ ) is even for all r ′ ∈ R. Remark 4.7. Note that if InvhS : Ri is collegial, then every relation r ∈ R must have length at least four, i.e. r = J a s1 · · · sn where n ≥ 4. This is because relations of length zero and one are explicitly excluded by condition (b), relations of the form s2 , sts, s2 t, or ts2 are not cyclically reduced, and relations st and str, where s, t, r are distinct, do not satisfy condition (c). Corollary 4.8. Let G be a finitely presented group over Z2 , with a sequence of elements w1 , . . . , wn ∈ G such that wi2 = 1 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Then there is collegial presentation InvhS : Ri, and an embedding φ : G → K := InvhS : Ri over Z2 such that φ(wi ) ∈ S ⊂ K for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Proof. We can find a cyclically reduced presentation hS0 : R0 i for G in which JG is a generator, 1 6∈ R0 , and each wi has a representative wi′ ∈ F (S0) \ {1} (it is always possible to find such a presentation, since if necessary we can add an extra generator z, along with the relation z = 1, and use this as a representative of the identity). In particular, this gives us a presentation where JG is represented by a cyclically reduced non-identity element of F (S0 ), namely itself. Applying Proposition 4.3 to this presentation with ks = 2 (or any other even number) for all s ∈ S0 gives us an embedding φ of G in a finite presentation InvhT : R′ i, where R′ is cyclically reduced. Since all ks ’s are even, mult(t; φ(r)) is even for every r ∈ F (S0) and t ∈ T , and every relation in R′ has length ≥ 4. We conclude that InvhT : R′ i is collegial. Now let S = T ∪ {w1 , . . . , w n }, where w1 , . . . , w n are new indeterminates, and set R = R′ ∪ {wi φ(wi′ ) : 1 ≤ i ≤ n}, where φ : F (S0 ) → F2 (T ) × Z2 as in Proposition 4.3. Since wi does not appear in φ(wi′ ), the relation r = w i φ(wi′ ) is cyclically reduced. Furthermore, none  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  13  of the wi ’s are adjacent, and mult(s; r) is even for all s ∈ T and r ∈ R, so InvhS : Ri is collegial. But InvhS : Ri is plainly equivalent to InvhT : R′ i, so the corollary follows.  5. The wagon wheel embedding Using Corollary 4.8, the proof of Theorem 3.1 reduces to the following: Theorem 5.1. Let G be a group with a collegial presentation I = InvhS, Ri. Then there is a hypergraph W := W(I) and vertex labelling b := b(I) such that S ⊂ E(W), and the resulting map F (S) × Z2 → Γ(W, b) : s 7→ xs descends to an embedding G ֒→ Γ(W, b) over Z2 . Proof of Theorem 3.1 using Theorem 5.1. Let G be a group over Z2 with elements w1 , . . . , wn such that wi2 = 1 for i = 1, . . . , n. By Corollary 4.8, there is a collegial presentation I := InvhS : Ri and an embedding φ1 : G → K := InvhS : Ri over Z2 with φ1 (wi ) ∈ S for all i = 1, . . . , n. By Theorem 5.1, there is an embedding φ2 : K → Γ(W(I), b(I)) over Z2 with φ2 (s) = xs for all s ∈ S. The composition φ2 ◦ φ1 satisfies the conditions of Theorem 3.1.  Although we are still very far from being able to prove Theorem 5.1, in this section we shall describe the hypergraph W(I), which we call the wagon wheel hypergraph of I. The proof of Theorem 5.1 will be given in Section 12. The wagon wheel hypergraph can be defined for any (not necessarily collegial) presentation InvhS, Ri. Let R = {r1 , . . . , rm }, let ni be the length of ri , and write ri = J ai si1 · · · sini , where sij ∈ S. The wagon wheel hypergraph is a simple hypergraph W with vertex set V := {(i, j, k) : 1 ≤ i ≤ m, j ∈ Zni , 1 ≤ k ≤ 3}, and edge set E := S ⊔ {aij , bij , cij , dij : 1 ≤ i ≤ m, j ∈ Zni }. P As a result, if M := ki=1 ni , then W has 3M vertices and 4M + |S| edges. W has the following incidence relations for every 1 ≤ i ≤ m and 1 ≤ j ≤ ni : • s ∈ S is incident with (i, j, 1) if and only if sij = s,  • aij is incident with (i, j − 1, 2) and (i, j, 1), • bij is incident with (i, j, 1) and (i, j, 2), • cij is incident with (i, j, 2) and (i, j, 3), and • dij is incident with (i, j − 1, 3) and (i, j, 3).  14  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA s1  a1 b0  sn i 0, 1  a0  1, 1  b1  0, 2  a2  1, 2  c1  c0  2, 1  b2  d1  −1, 2  d0  c−1  −1, 3  0, 3  1, 3  s2  c2  d2  2, 2  a3  2, 3  3, 3  s3  3, 1  d3  b3  c3 3, 2  Figure 1. The portion of the wagon wheel hypergraph containing vertices Vi and all incident edges. To save space, (i, j, k) is written as j, k, and sij , aij , . . . are written as sj , aj , . . .. Note that the only edges incident with vertices Vi := {(i, j, k) : j ∈ Zni , 1 ≤ k ≤ 3} are the edges in Ei := {aij , bij , cij , dij : j ∈ Zni } and the edges si1 , . . . , sini . Furthermore, all the edges in Ei are incident with exactly two vertices, both belonging to Vi . The portion of the hypergraph W incident with Vi is shown in Figure 1. An example of a wagon wheel hypergraph for a small (non-collegial) presentation is shown in Figure 2. We also need to define the vertex labelling in Theorem 5.1. Definition 5.2. A I-labelling of W is a vertex labelling b : V → Z2 such that |b−1 (1) ∩ Vi | = ai mod 2 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m. For Theorem 5.1, we can choose any I-labelling. This is because all Ilabellings are equivalent in the following sense: Lemma 5.3. Let b and b′ be two I-labellings of W. Then there is an isomorphism Γ(W, b) → Γ(W, b′ ) which sends xs 7→ xs for all s ∈ S.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  y  z  x  v  15  u  Figure 2. An example of the wagon wheel hypergraph W(I) when I = Invhx, y, z, u, v : xyxz = xuvu = 1i. Proof. Suppose H is a hypergraph with incidence matrix A(H) and vertex (1) labelling b(0) . Given e ∈ E(H), let b(1) be the vertex labelling with bv = (0) bv + A(H)ve (i.e. we toggle the sign of all vertices incident with e according to multiplicity). Then there is an isomorphism ( xf f 6= e Γ(H, b(0) ) → Γ(H, b(1) ) : xf 7→ . Jxe f = e For W, since |b−1 (1) ∩ Vi | and |(b′ )−1 (1) ∩ Vi | have the same parity, it is easy to see that b|Vi can be transformed to b′ |Vi by toggling signs of vertices incident to edges e ∈ Ei as necessary. The lemma follows.  6. Pictures for groups generated by involutions In this section we give an overview of the main technical tool used in the proof of Theorem 5.1: pictures of groups. These pictures, which are dual to the somewhat better known van Kampen diagrams, are a standard tool in combinatorial group theory. The purpose of pictures is to encode derivations of group identities from a set of starting relations; see [Sho07] for additional background. Here we introduce a variant adapted to groups generated by involutions. 6.1. Pictures as planar graphs. By a curve, we shall mean the image of a piecewise-smooth function γ from a closed interval [a, b] (where a < b) to either the plane or the sphere. A curve γ is simple if γ(s) 6= γ(t) for all a ≤ s < t ≤ b, except possibly when s = a and t = b. The points γ(a) and γ(b) are called the endpoints of the curve. A curve has either one or two endpoints; if γ(a) = γ(b)  16  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  then the curve is said to be closed. A connected region (in the plane or on the sphere) is simple if its boundary is a simple closed curve. Definition 6.1. A picture is a collection (V, E, D), where (a) D is a closed simple region, (b) V is a finite collection of points, called vertices, in D, (c) E is a finite collection of simple curves, called edges, in D, and (d) for all edges e ∈ E and points p of e, (i) if e is not closed and p is an endpoint of e, then either p ∈ V , or p belongs to the boundary of D and is not the endpoint of any other edge; (ii) if e is closed and p is an endpoint of e, then p does not belong to the boundary of D; (iii) if p is not an endpoint of e, then p 6∈ V , and p does not belong to any other edge or the boundary of D. If an edge e contains a vertex v, then we say that e and v are incident. If e contains a point of the boundary of D, then we say that e is incident with the boundary. A picture is closed if no edges are incident with the boundary of D. The size of a G-picture P is the number of vertices in P. According to this definition, a picture is a type of planar embedding of a graph, albeit a graph where we can have multiple edges between vertices, loops at a vertex, and even closed loops which are not incident to any vertex. From this point of view, the boundary of D can be regarded as a special type of vertex; if we think of the picture as drawn on a sphere, then this vertex would naturally be drawn at infinity. An illustration of these two equivalent points of view is shown in Figure 3. However, it is more convenient not to include the boundary of D in the vertex set of a picture, and we stick with the convention of treating the boundary separately. In particular, the picture in Figure 3 has size 7. There is one important exception where we want to forget the boundary of D, and that is when the picture is closed. If this happens, we often want to think of the picture as embedded in the sphere, without the point at infinity being marked. An example of a closed picture on the sphere, as seen from two different positions, is given in Figure 4. To handle this case, we allow D to be the whole sphere, in which case the boundary is empty. Also note that we consider two pictures equal if they differ up to isotopy, either in the plane or on the sphere as appropriate. Such isotopies are allowed to move the  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  17  Figure 3. A picture embedded in a disk (left) and on the plane with the exterior of the disk shrunk down to a special vertex at infinity (right). 1  2  1  3  3  4  2  4  Figure 4. A closed picture embedded in the sphere seen (up to isotopy) with two different choices for the location of the point at infinity. Faces are distinguished by different colours. boundary of the simple region, as well as the location of endpoints of edges on the boundary, as long as endpoints are not identified. If P is a picture in D0 and D is a closed simple subregion of D0 , then the portion of P contained in D0 can be interpreted as a picture inside D. We do, however, have to make sure that boundary edges of the picture inside D do not have a common endpoint. This leads to two natural notions of the restriction of P to D. Definition 6.2. Let P be a picture in D0 , and let D be a closed simple region in D0 with interior D o . Given ǫ > 0, let D ǫ denote the ǫ-relaxation of D, and let D −ǫ denote the ǫ-contraction. Recall that a curve intersects the boundary of D transversally if, in every small disk around the intersection point, there are points of the curve which  18  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  =⇒  Figure 5. Pictures can be restricted to a region homotopic to a disk and bounded by a simple closed curve which is transverse to the picture. lie both on the interior and the exterior of D. We say that D is transverse to P if every edge which intersects the boundary of D does so transversally, and the boundary of D does not contain any vertices of P. The restriction of P to a transverse region D is the picture res(P, D) with vertex set V (P) ∩ D, and whose edges are the closures of the connected components of e ∩ D o , for e ∈ E(P). In other words, edges are cut off at the boundary, and edges which intersect the boundary at multiple points may be cut into multiple edges. For a general region D, the contraction D −ǫ will be transverse to P for small enough ǫ > 0. The restrictions res(P, D −ǫ ) are thus well-defined, and can be identified via isotopy with pictures in D. These pictures belong to a single isotopy class res(P, D), which we identify as the restriction of P to D. Similarly, the germ of D in P is the isotopy class germ(P, D) of res(P, D ǫ ) for small ǫ > 0. Unless otherwise noted, we assume that subregions are closed. If D is transverse to P, then res(P, D) and germ(P, D) agree. An example of this type of restriction is shown in Figure 5. In general, vertices in the boundary of D will not appear in res(P, D), but are preserved, along with all their outgoing edges, in germ(P, D). One way to get a simple region is to take a region D enclosed by a simple cycle in P. An example of this type, in which the germ is different than the restriction, is given in Figure 6. Definition 6.3. Let P be a picture in D0 . A simple cycle in P is a collection of edges whose union is a simple closed curve. A closed loop is an edge of P which is not incident to any vertex or to the boundary, and thus forms a simple cycle by itself. A face of P is an open connected region D of D0 which does not contain any points of P, and such that the boundary of D is a union of points of P and  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  ⇒  19  ⇒  Figure 6. The germ of the region enclosed by a simple cycle is computed by first taking an ǫ-relaxation of the region. In this case the cycle is facial, so the restriction would be empty. points in the boundary of D0 . An outer face is a face whose boundary contains points of the boundary of D0 . A simple cycle is facial if it is the boundary of a face. Every simple cycle in the disk bounds a unique simple region (the interior of the cycle), while a simple cycle on the sphere bounds two simple regions. A face does not have to be simple, but a facial cycle always bounds a simple face by definition. 6.2. Groups and labellings of pictures. Definition 6.4. Let G = InvhS : Ri. A G-picture is a picture P with every vertex v labelled by a relation r(v) ∈ R and every edge e labelled by a generator s(e) ∈ S, such that if e1 , . . . , en is the sequence of edges incident to v, read in counter-clockwise order with multiplicity from some starting point, then s(e1 )s(e2 ) · · · s(en ) ∈ {r(v)+ }sym . The boundary of P is the cyclic word bd(P) = s(e1 ) · · · s(en ) over S, where e1 , . . . , en is the list of edges incident with the boundary, read in counterclockwise order around the boundary of the disc, with multiplicity. If P is closed then we say that bd(P) = 1, the empty word. Two pictures P1 and P2 are equivalent if bd(P1 ) = bd(P2 ). The sign of a picture P is sign(P) = |{v ∈ V (P) : r(v) is odd}| mod 2. If D is a simple region and P is a G-picture, then res(P, D) and germ(P, D) both inherit the structure of a G-picture from P via restricting the labelling functions. Typically pictures use directed edges to represent inverses of generators, but this is not necessary for groups generated by involutions. As previously mentioned, the point of pictures is that they capture relations in the group, in the following sense:  20  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  Proposition 6.5 (van Kampen lemma). Let G = InvhS : Ri, let r be a word over S, and let a ∈ Z2 . Then r = J a in G if and only if there is a G-picture P with bd(P) = r and sign(P) = a. The original version of the van Kampen lemma goes back to [VK33]. The proof of this version is not substantially different than the proof of the original version, and we omit it. Example 6.6. A G-picture encodes a specific derivation of a group relation in the given presentation. Consider the Coxeter group S4 × Z2 over Z2 . This group has presentation G = Invhs1 , s2 , s3 : s1 s3 = s3 s1 , s1 s2 s1 = s2 s1 s2 , s2 s3 s2 = s3 s2 s3 i, and in particular is presented by involutions. An example of a G-picture showing that s1 s2 s3 s2 s1 = s3 s2 s1 s2 s3 is given in Figure 7. s2  s3  s2  s1  s1 s3  s3 s2  s1  s1  s3  s3 s2  s1  s2  Figure 7. A G-picture for G = S4 × Z2 showing that s1 s2 s3 s2 s1 = s3 s2 s1 s2 s3 . Vertex labels are omitted, as they can be deduced from the edge labels. Definition 6.7. Let D be a simple region of a G-picture P0 , and let P ′ = res(P, D) or germ(P, D). If P ′ is equivalent to a picture P ′′ , then we can cut out P ′ and glue in P ′′ in its place to get a new picture P1 . We refer to the process P0 ⇒ P1 as surgery. If P ′ has size zero,2 then we call P0 ⇒ P1 a null surgery. We say that P0 and P1 are equivalent via null surgeries if there is a sequence of null surgeries transforming P0 to P1 . An example of a surgery is shown in Figure 8. 2Size  zero pictures do not have vertices, but they can still have edges.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM s3 s2  21  s3 s1  s1  s1  s2  ⇒  s3  s1  s3  s1  s1 s2  s2  s2  s2 s1  =⇒  =⇒  s1  s3  s3 s2  s3  s1  s1  s1  s1 s3  s1 s2  s2 s1  s1  s3 s1 s3 s1  Figure 8. Surgery for an S4 × Z2 -picture with boundary relation s1 s2 s3 s3 s1 = s2 s1 s2 . Generators and relations are the same as in Example 6.6. 7. Pictures over solution groups and hypergraphs Let H be a hypergraph with vertex labelling function b : V (H) → Z2 . The solution group Γ(H, b) is finitely presented by involutions over Z2 ; to talk about Γ-pictures, we just need to pick a presentation of Γ(H, b). One candidate is the presentation from Definition 2.1. Q This presentation contains two types of relations: linear relations of the form xe = J a , and commuting relations of the form xe xe′ = xe′ xe . However, it will be more convenient to use a presentation without commuting relations: Definition 7.1. As a group presented by involutions over Z2 , we let Γ(H, b) = InvhS, Ri, where S = {xe : e ∈ E(H)} and R = {J bv xe1 · · · xen : all v ∈ V and all orderings e1 , . . . , en of the edges incident to v listed with multiplicity} Clearly any linear relation in R can be recovered from one linear relation and the commuting relations, while a commuting relation can be recovered from two linear relations as shown in Figure 9. Consequently, the relations in R do  22  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  x1  x1  x2 ⇒  x2  x1  x3 x2  x2 x4 x1  Figure 9. In a solution group with linear relation x1 x2 x3 x4 = J a , the commuting relation x1 x2 = x2 x1 can be represented pictorially in two different ways, depending on whether we use the presentation from Definition 2.1 (on the left), or the presentation from Definition 7.1 (on the right).  indeed give a presentation for Γ(H, b). We will always use the presentation in Definition 7.1 when working with Γ-pictures. Definition 7.2. Let H be a hypergraph. An H-picture is a picture P with a pair of labelling functions hV : V (P) → V (H) and hE : E(P) → E(H), such that for all v ∈ V (P) and e′ ∈ E(H), if we list the edges e1 , . . . , en of P incident to v with multiplicity then Ah(v)e′ = |{1 ≤ i ≤ n : h(ei ) = e′ }|. The boundary of an H-picture P is the cyclic word bd(P) = h(e1 ) · · · h(en ) over E(H), where as before e1 , . . . , en is the sequence of edges incident with the boundary, read counter-clockwise with multiplicity. The character of P is V (H) the vector ch(P) ∈ Z2 with ch(P)v = |h−1 V (v)| mod 2. It is easy to see that there is a one-to-one correspondence between Γ(H, b)pictures and H-pictures. If P is an H-picture, then the sign of the corresponding Γ-picture is the standard dot product ch(P) · b. The leads to the following restatement of the van Kampen lemma for H-pictures. Proposition 7.3 (van Kampen lemma). Let Γ(H, b) be a solution group. Then xe1 · · · xen = J a in Γ(H, b) if and only if there is an H-picture P with bd(P) = e1 · · · en and ch(P) · b = a. Example 7.4. Consider the solution group for the linear system (1)  x+y+z =1  (2)  x+y+z =0  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  23  The underlying hypergraph H of this system is shown below. x 1  y  2  z  This drawing of the hypergraph is also a closed H-picture P with character ch(P) = (1, 1). Since b = (1, 0) and ch(P) · b = 1, van Kampen’s lemma tells us that J = 1. Remark 7.5. Given a hypergraph H with incidence matrix A, let X ⊂ ZV2 be the set of vertex labellings b such that J 6= 1 in Γ(H, b), and let Y ⊂ ZV2 be the set of characters ch(P) of H-pictures P. It is not hard to see that X and Y are subspaces of ZV2 . Proposition 7.3 states that Y is the orthogonal subspace to X with respect to the standard bilinear product. By Theorem 2.2, X can be regarded as a quantum-information-theoretic analogue of the columnspace of A. From this point of view, Y is then an analogue of the left nullspace of A. If edge e is incident to vertex v in an H-picture P, then h(e) will be incident to h(v) in H. Consequently, the labelling function h in Definition 7.2 can be seen as a type of weak hypergraph homomorphism. If P is closed, and H and P are simple loopless graphs, then h will be an actual graph homomorphism if and only if h(v) 6= h(v ′ ) for all adjacent vertices v and v ′ in P. Furthermore, if this happens then h must be a planar graph cover. This motivates the following definition: Definition 7.6. Let H be a hypergraph. A closed H-picture P is a cover of H if every edge of P is incident with two distinct vertices v and v ′ such that h(v) 6= h(v ′ ). Size, equivalence, restriction to a region, surgery, and null surgery are all defined for H-pictures via the correspondence with Γ-pictures. For instance, the size of an H-picture is simply the number of vertices in the picture. Definition 7.7. Let H be a hypergraph, and let b : V (H) → Z2 be a vertexlabelling function. Two H-pictures P0 and P1 are b-equivalent (resp. characterequivalent) if bd(P0 ) = bd(P1 ) and ch(P0 ) · b = ch(P1 ) · b (resp. ch(P0 ) = ch(P1 )). An H-picture P is b-minimal (resp. character-minimal) if P has minimum size among all b-equivalent (resp. character-equivalent) pictures. Two pictures are character-equivalent if and only if they are b-equivalent for all vertex-labelling functions b. Thus a b-minimal picture is also characterminimal.  24  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  If P0 ⇒ P1 is a surgery in which a region P ′ is replaced by a b-equivalent (resp. character equivalent) region P ′′ , then P0 and P1 will be b-equivalent (resp. character-equivalent). As a result, if P is b-minimal (resp. characterminimal) then res(P, D) and germ(P, D) will be b-minimal (resp. characterminimal) for all simple regions D. We can also remove closed loops without changing the character-equivalence class: Lemma 7.8. Suppose P is a picture, and let P ′ be the same picture but with all closed loops deleted. Then P and P ′ are character-equivalent and have the same size. 8. A category of hypergraphs Definition 8.1. Let H = (V, E, A) be a hypergraph. A subhypergraph of H is a hypergraph H′ = (V ′ , E ′ , A′ ) with V ′ ⊂ V , E ′ ⊂ E, and A′ve = Ave for all v ∈ V ′ and e ∈ E ′ . In other words, a subhypergraph is simply a subset of V (H) ∪ E(H). Although this definition is substantially less restrictive than other notions of subhypergraphs in the literature, it is natural in the context of hypergraphs with isolated edges. Definition 8.2. If H′ is a subhypergraph of H, then the neighbourhood N (H′ ) of H′ is the subhypergraph with V (N (H′)) = V (H′ ), and E(N (H′ )) = E(H′ )∪{e ∈ E(H) : e is incident in H to some vertex v ∈ V (H′ )}. We say that H′ is open if H′ = N (H′). The proof of the following proposition is elementary, and we omit it. Proposition 8.3. Let H be a hypergraph. The collection of open subhypergraphs of H forms a topology on V (H) ∪ E(H). A subhypergraph H′ is closed in this topology if and only if, for all v ∈ V (H), if v is incident to e ∈ E(H′ ) then v ∈ V (H′ ). Definition 8.4. Let H1 and H2 be hypergraphs. A generalized morphism φ : H1 → H2 consists of a pair of morphisms φV : V (H1 ) → V (H2 ) ∪ {ε} and φE : E(H1 ) → E(H2 ) ∪ {ε}, such that, for all v ∈ V (H1 ), (1) if φV (v) 6= ε, then  X  ′ e∈φ−1 E (e )  for all e′ ∈ E(H2 ), and  A(H1 )ve = A(H2 )φ(v)e′ ,  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  (2) if φV (v) = ε, then  X  25  A(H1 )ve  e∈E(H1 )\φ−1 E (ε)  is even, and φE (e1 ) = φE (e2 ) for all edges e1 , e2 ∈ E(H1 ) \ φ−1 E (ε) incident to v. When there is no confusion, we write φ for both φV and φE . The composition φ2 ◦ φ1 of two morphisms φ1 : H1 → H2 and φ2 : H2 → H3 is defined by setting φ2 (ε) = ε. Proposition 8.5. (a) If v and e are incident in H1 , and φ : H1 → H2 is a generalized morphism with φ(v) ∈ V (H2 ), φ(e) ∈ E(H2 ), then φ(v) and φ(e) are incident in H2 . (b) If φ1 : H1 → H2 and φ2 : H2 → H3 are generalized morphisms, then φ2 ◦ φ1 is a generalized morphism. Proof. For part (a), let e′ = φ(e) ∈ E(H2 ). If v and e are incident in H1 , and φ(v) 6= ε, then A(H2 )φ(v)e′ ≥ A(H1 )ve > 0. So e′ and φ(v) are incident. For part (b), let φ = φ2 ◦ φ1 . If φ(v) 6= ε, then φ1 (v) 6= ε, so X X X A(H1 )ve A(H1 )ve = e∈φ−1 (e′ )  −1 ′′ ′ e′′ ∈φ−1 2 (e ) e∈φ1 (e )  =  X  A(H2 )φ1 (v)e′′ = A(H3 )φ(v)e′  ′ e′′ ∈φ−1 2 (e )  for all e′ ∈ E(H3 ). Next, suppose φ(v) = ε and φ1 (v) 6= ε. If e1 , e2 ∈ E(H1 ) \ φ−1 (ε) are both incident to v, then φ(e1 ) and φ(e2 ) belong to E(H2 ) \ φ−1 2 (ε) and are incident to φ1 (v) by part (a). Thus φ(e1 ) = φ(e2 ). Similarly, X X X A(H1 )ve = A(H1 )ve e∈E(H1 )\φ−1 (ε)  −1 ′ e′ ∈E(H2 )\φ−1 2 (ε) e∈φ1 (e )  =  X  A(H2 )φ1 (v)e′  e′ ∈E(H2 )\φ−1 2 (ε)  is even, since φ2 (φ1 (v)) = ε. Finally, suppose φ(v) = φ1 (v) = ε. If E(H1 ) \ φ−1 (ε) does not contain any edges incident with v, then part (2) of Definition 8.4 is trivially satisfied. Suppose on the other hand that E(H1 ) \ φ−1 (ε) contains edges incident with v. All such edges belong to E(H1 ) \ φ−1 1 (ε), and hence are sent by φ1 to  26  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  i a  1  2  c e  b  3′  d g  4 f 5  a′  1′  3  =⇒  e′  g′  c′  h 6  j  5′  7  j′  6′  k′  7′  k 8  Figure 10. A generalized morphism φ between two hypergraphs. Hyperedges are drawn as shaded regions. The morphism sends an edge or vertex x to x′ , with the following exceptions: φ(i) = φ(2) = φ(4) = ε, φ(b) = a′ , φ(d) = φ(f ) = φ(h) = c′ , and φ(8) = 6′ . some common edge e′ ∈ E(H2 ), where φ2 (e′ ) 6= ε. Conversely, any edge ′ of E(H1 ) \ φ−1 1 (ε) incident with v is sent by φ1 to e , and hence belongs to E(H1 ) \ φ−1 (ε). We conclude that all edges of E(H1 ) \ φ−1 (ε) incident with v are sent to φ2 (e′ ), and that X X A(H1 )ve A(H1 )ve = e∈E(H1 )\φ−1 (ε)  e∈E(H1 )\φ−1 1 (ε)  is even. Consequently φ is a generalized morphism.    Example 8.6. If e is a hyperedge in a hypergraph H, we can delete e to get a new hypergraph H \ e. There is a generalized morphism H → H \ e which sends e 7→ ε. Similarly, we construct other generalized morphisms by identifying edges, deleting isolated vertices, and collapsing vertices incident to an even number of edges (deleting a vertex and identifying all incident edges). An example of a series of these operations is shown in Figure 10. Another way we can construct generalized morphisms is through subhypergraphs. Proposition 8.7. Let H be a hypergraph.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  27  (a) If H′ is closed subhypergraph, then the function ( x x ∈ V (H′ ) ∪ E(H′ ) r : V (H) ∪ E(H) → V (H′ ) ∪ E(H′ ) ∪ {ε} : x 7→ ε otherwise is a generalized morphism H → H′ . (b) If H′ is an open subhypergraph, then the inclusion map ι : V (H′ ) ∪ E(H′ ) → V (H) ∪ E(H) : x 7→ x is a generalized morphism H′ → H. Proof. If H′ is any subhypergraph, then part (1) of Definition 8.4 holds for r and part (2) holds vacuously for ι. If H′ is closed and r(v) = ǫ, then r(e) = ǫ for all edges e incident to v, so part (2) of Definition 8.4 holds for r. If H′ is open, v ∈ V (H′ ), and e′ ∈ E(H) is incident to v, then e′ belongs to H′ , and hence part (1) holds for ι.  Definition 8.8. A subhypergraph H′ of H is a retract if there is a generalized morphism r : H → H′ such that r|H′ is the identity. Part (a) of Proposition 8.7 shows that every closed subhypergraph is a retract. Morphisms can also be constructed by gluing together morphisms over open subhypergraphs. Proposition 8.9. Let {Hi }i∈I be a family of open subhypergraphs of H such S that Hi = H, and let {φi }i∈I be a family of generalized morphisms φi : Hi → H′ such that φi |Hi ∩Hj = φj |Hi ∩Hj . Then there is a unique generalized morphism φ : H → H′ such that φ|Hi = φi . Proof. Clearly φ is uniquely defined as a function. Given v ∈ V (H), find Hi with v ∈ V (Hi ), so φ(v) = φi (v). Since Hi is open, if Ave (H) > 0 then e ∈ Hi and A(Hi )ve = A(H)ve . Consequently, if φ(v) 6= ε then X X X A(Hi )ve = A(H′ )φ(v)e′ A(H)ve = A(Hi )ve = e∈φ−1 (e′ )  e∈φ−1 (e′ ) e∈E(Hi )  ′ e∈φ−1 i (e )  since φi is a morphism. Similarly, if φ(v) = ε, then X X A(Hi )ve = A(H)ve = e∈E(H)\φ−1 (ε)  e∈E(Hi )\φ−1 (ε)  X  A(Hi )ve  e∈E(Hi )\φ−1 i (ε)  is even, and φ(e1 ) = φi (e1 ) = φi (e2 ) = φ(e2 ) for all edges e1 , e2 ∈ E(H)\φ−1 (ε) incident to v.  The functor from hypergraphs to null solution groups is natural with respect to generalized morphisms.  28  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  Proposition 8.10. Let φ : H1 → H2 be a generalized morphism. Then there is a morphism φ : Γ(H1 ) → Γ(H2 ) defined by ( 1 φE (e) = ε φ(xe ) = . xφ(e) otherwise Proof. The morphism, if it exists, will be uniquely determined by the values φ(xe ), e ∈ E(H1 ). To show that the morphism is well-defined, we need to show that n Y φ(xei ) = 1 (8.1) i=1  for every vertex v of H1 and ordering e1 , . . . , en of the edges incident to v, listed with multiplicity. Suppose that φ(v) = ε. If φ(ei ) = ε for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, then φ(xei ) = 1 for all i, so Equation (8.1) holds. If φ(ei ) 6= ε for some i, then n Y  Y  φ(xej ) =  j=1  xφ(ej ) = xK φ(ei ) = 1,  φ(ej )6=ε  P where the last equality holds because K = e∈E(H1 )\φ−1 (ε) Ave is even. Hence E Equation (8.1) holds in this case as well. If φ(v) 6= ε, then for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, either φ(ei ) = ε or φ(ei ) is incident to φ(v). We conclude that φ(xe1 ), . . . , φ(xen ) commute in Γ(H2 ). Consequently n Y i=1  φ(xei ) =  Y  Y  φ(xe )Ave =  e′ ∈E(H2 ) e∈φ−1 (e′ ) E  Y  A  ′  xe′φ(v)e = 1.  e′ ∈E(H2 )  We conclude that the morphism φ is well-defined.    As a consequence, open retracts are special: Corollary 8.11. If H′ is an open subhypergraph of H and a retract of H then Γ(H′ ) is a (semidirect factor) subgroup of Γ(H). Proof. Let r be the retraction morphism H → H′ , and let ι be the inclusion H′ → H. Then r ◦ ι is the identity on H′ , so the composition r ◦ ι : Γ(H′ ) → Γ(H) → Γ(H′ ) is the identity morphism, and consequently ι : Γ(H′ ) → Γ(H) must be injective. It also follows immediately that Γ(H) = N ⋊ Γ(H′ ), where N is the kernel of r : Γ(H) → Γ(H′ ).  Example 8.12. Consider the graph G of a cube, shown on the left in Figure 11, with vertices numbered for reference. The open neighbourhood of {1, 2, 3, 4} is the subhypergraph H with vertex set {1, 2, 3, 4} and edge set  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  5  5 6  8  1  29  7  1 2  4 3  6  8 7  2  4  9 3  Figure 11. In the hypergraph of the cube (left), the open neighbourhood of the bottom face is a retract. In the hypergraph on the right, this is no longer the case. {12, 23, 34, 14, 15, 26, 37, 48}. The morphism G → H which is the identity on H, and sends 5 7→ 1, 6 7→ 2, 7 7→ 3, 8 7→ 4, and 56 7→ 12, 67 7→ 23, 78 7→ 34, 58 7→ 14, is a retract of G onto H. On the other hand, if we subdivide the edge 12 with a vertex as shown on the right of Figure 11, then the open neighbourhood H of {1, 2, 3, 4, 9} is no longer a retract of G, since any retract must send 6 7→ 2 and 7 7→ 3, but 23 is not an edge of H. However, the open neighbourhood of {5, 6, 7, 8} is still a retract, since we can define the morphism as above but with edges 29 and 39 sent to 67, and vertex 9 sent to ε. Finally, we can also apply generalized morphisms to pictures. Proposition 8.13. Let φ : H1 → H2 be a generalized morphism, and let P be an H1 -picture with bd(P) = e1 · · · en . Construct a new picture P ′ as follows: (1) If e is an edge of P such that φ(h(e)) = ε, then delete e from P. (2) For all remaining edges e of P, change the label from h(e) ∈ E(H1 ) to φ(h(e)) ∈ E(H2 ). (3) If v is a vertex of P such that φ(h(v)) = ε, then at this point there is an even number of edges incident with v, and all have the same label. Delete v, and connect up the remaining incident edges so that no pair of edges cross. (4) For all remaining vertices v of P, change the label from h(v) ∈ E(H1 ) to φ(h(v)) ∈ E(H2 ).  30  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  g b  i  3  2  d c  a  7  f  4  ′  a 5  1  j  5 f  =⇒  j  k′  c  c′  ′  5′  1′  6 8  7′  3′  h  e  e  g′  k  j′ 6′  e′  k  6′ e′  k′  j′  5′ c′  Figure 12. The generalized morphism from Figure 10 applied to a picture. A choice must be made in regards to the edges formerly incident to vertex 4. We have chosen to connect 1′ − 3′ and 5′ − 7′ instead of 3′ − 7′ and 1′ − 5′ . Then P ′ is an H2 -picture of size less than or equal to the size of P, with bd(P ′ ) = φ(e1 ) · · · φ(en ), where ε is regarded as the empty word. Proof. To show that this picture is an H2 -picture, we need to show that there are A(H2 )v′ e′ edges labelled by e′ incident to any vertex labelled by v ′ in P ′ . But this follows immediately from the construction and part (1) of Definition 8.4. Since the construction does not add any vertices, the size of P ′ must be at most the size of P.  An example is given in Figure 12. Since step (3) in Proposition 8.13 requires choosing a matching on edges, the graph P ′ we end up with is not unique. One exception is when φ is one of the morphisms r or ι from Proposition 8.7; in this case, there is always a unique choice, and hence P ′ is uniquely determined. However, in general the different choices can defer by a sequence of null-surgeries. Definition 8.14. If φ : H1 → H2 is a generalized morphism and P is an H1 -picture, we use φ(P) to denote either the null-surgery equivalence class of pictures constructed in Proposition 8.13, or some arbitrarily chosen representative of this class. If r : H → H′ is the retraction morphism onto a closed subhypergraph, and P is a H-picture, then we also denote r(P) by P[H′ ]. If ι is the inclusion of an open subhypergraph H′ in H, and P is an H′ picture, then P and ι(P) are essentially identical. In this case, Proposition 8.13 states the obvious fact that every picture over H′ can be regarded as a  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  31  picture over H. Note that if such a picture is character (or b)-minimal as an H-picture, then it is also minimal as an H′ -picture; however, the converse is not true. 9. Cycles and outer faces In this section, we lay the foundation for the proof of Theorem 5.1 by looking at the interaction between pictures and cycles in hypergraphs. Definition 9.1. A cycle in a hypergraph H is a closed subhypergraph C which is a simple connected 2-regular graph. A cycle C is cubic if every vertex v ∈ V (C) has degree three in H. A C-cycle in an H-picture is a simple cycle C such that every edge of C is labelled by an edge of C. Lemma 9.2. Let C be a cycle in a hypergraph H, and suppose P is an Hpicture such that the edges of C do not appear in bd(P). Then every connected component of P[C] is a C-cycle. Proof. P[C] is a closed C-picture in which every vertex has degree two. As a result, every connected component will be a simple closed curve.  In several upcoming proofs, we will use the following measure of the complexity of P. Definition 9.3. If C is a cycle in H, and P is a H-picture, then we let #Cycle(P, C) denote the number of C-cycles in P. If Φ is a collection of cycles, we let X #Cycle(P, Φ) = #Cycle(P, C). C∈Φ  If we include incident vertices, then a C-cycle C is a closed C-picture, and thus the definition of cover from Definition 7.6 applies. If C is both facial and a cover of C, then we say that C is a facial cover. Note that closed loops are not covers.  Proposition 9.4. If C is a cubic cycle in H, and P is a character-minimal H-picture with no closed loops, then every facial C-cycle in P is a facial cover. Proof. Suppose that C is a facial C-cycle. Since C is not a loop at a vertex, and P has no closed loops, every edge of C must be incident to two distinct vertices of P. Suppose that C has an edge e connecting two vertices u0 and u1 with h(u0 ) = v = h(u1 ). By hypothesis, v has degree 3 in H, and thus is incident with e′ = h(e), another edge f ′ of C, and an edge g ′ which is not in C. Hence each vertex ui is incident with an edge fi belonging to C with h(fi ) = f ′ , and an edge gi not in C with h(gi ) = g ′ . Note that the edges f0  32  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  and f1 could be equal, as could g0 and g1 . Since C is facial, g0 and g1 must lie on the same side of C. Thus there is a surgery which removes u0 and u1 , connecting g0 with g1 and f0 with f1 , as shown below: g′ f′  v  g′ e′  v  ⇒ f′  g′ f′  But this means that P is not character-minimal.    A connected closed cover C of a cycle C is determined up to isotopy by an orientation of C, and the ply, that is, the size of h−1 (v) for any v ∈ V (C), where h : C → C is the labelling function. Definition 9.5. A C-cycle C is a copy of C if the labelling function h : C → C is a graph isomorphism, or equivalently if |h−1 (v)| = 1 for all v ∈ V (C). We are also interested in how different cycles interact. Lemma 9.6. Let C be a cycle in H, and let D be a simple region in a picture P. If C is a facial C-cycle in P, then either C is contained in D, or the edges of germ(C, D) form the boundaries of simple outer faces of germ(P, D). Proof. Suppose C is not contained in D. If germ(C, D) is empty, then the lemma is vacuously true. Otherwise, choose ǫ > 0 such that germ(P, D) = res(P, D ǫ ), and in particular such that C intersects the boundary of D ǫ transversally. Then C ∩ D ǫ is divided into a number of segments which start and end on the boundary of D ǫ . Thus every face of germ(C, D) will be a simple region whose boundary contains some (possibly disconnected) portion of the boundary of D ǫ . Each edge of germ(C, D) will be incident to exactly two such faces, and one of these two faces will be contained in F ∩ D ǫ , where F is a face in P bounded by C. Since F is a face, any face of germ(C, D) contained in F ∩ D ǫ will be a face of germ(P, D).  Lemma 9.7. Let C be a simple cycle in a picture P, let D be a simple region bounded by C, and let F be a simple outer face of germ(P, D). Then the edges of germ(P, D) in the boundary of F form a single simple path P with at least two edges. Furthermore, if we write the edges of P in order as e1 , . . . , en , then e1 and en are incident with the boundary of D, and e2 , . . . , en−1 belong to C. Proof. Every edge of bd(germ(P, D)) is incident to a vertex in C. If F is simple, then bd(germ(P, D)) must contain at least two edges. If these edges are incident with two or more vertices of C, then it follows from the definition of germ(P, D) that every outer face is a simple region with boundary of the  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  33  Figure 13. A picture in the disk, with four outer faces, two of which (shaded) form outer quadrilaterals. required form. If all the edges of bd(germ(P, D)) are incident with a single vertex in C, then all but one of the outer faces is simple, and the simple outer faces are bounded by a path formed by two edges of bd(germ(P, D)).  Definition 9.8. Let P be a picture in D0 , where D0 is not the whole sphere. An outer quadrilateral of P is the closure of a simple outer face F of P, whose boundary contains exactly three edges of P, together forming a path of length three. An outer quadrilateral must have a fourth side consisting of points in the boundary of D0 , hence the name. A picture with highlighted outer quadrilaterals is shown in Figure 13. Proposition 9.9. Let C be a cycle in H, and let C ′ be a cubic cycle such that |E(C) ∩ E(C ′ )| ≤ 1. If D is a region bounded by a C ′ -cycle C ′ , and C is a facial C-cycle, then either C is contained in D, or the edges of germ(C, D) form outer quadrilaterals of germ(P, D). Proof. By Lemma 9.6, we can assume that F is a simple outer face of germ(P, D) formed by the edges of germ(C, D). By Lemma 9.7, the edges of germ(C, D) in the boundary of F form a single path e0 , e1 , . . . , en+1 , where e0 and en+1 are incident with the boundary and e1 , . . . , en belong to C ′ , as shown below: e0  en+1 e1  e2  en  Since C ′ is cubic, it follows as well that n ≥ 1. Since |E(C) ∩ E(C ′ )| ≤ 1 and the edges e1 , . . . , en belong to both C and C ′ , we must have h(e1 ) = . . . = h(en ) = e′ , the unique element of E(C) ∩ E(C ′ ). Since C (and C ′ ) are simple graphs, the edge e′ is incident with exactly two vertices v and v ′ , and both Ave′ = Av′ e′ = 1. Thus n must be one, and we conclude that the closure of F is an outer quadrilateral.   34  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  f1 f2 2  e1  1  e2  e6 f6  3  6  f3 e3  e5 4  e4  5 f5  f4  Figure 14. The sun of size 6. 10. Pictures over suns In this section, we look at pictures over a specific family of hypergraphs: Definition 10.1. The sun of size n, where n ≥ 3, is the hypergraph with vertex set {1, . . . , n}, edge set {ei , fi : 1 ≤ i ≤ n}, and incidence relation ( ( 1 i=j 1 i∼ = j or i ∼ = j + 1 mod n Aifj = and Aiej = . 0 i 6= j 0 otherwise Note that a sun has a unique cycle. The sun of size n = 6 is shown in Figure 14. Proposition 10.2. Let H be a sun, and let P be a character-minimal Hpicture such that bd(P) does not contain any edges from the cycle C of H. Then P is character-equivalent to a character-minimal picture P ′ with no closed loops, in which every C-cycle is a facial cover. Furthermore, P ′ can be chosen so that every outer quadrilateral of P is an outer quadrilateral of P ′ . The last statement in this proposition implies in particular that if an edge e is part of an outer quadrilateral in P, then e is also an edge of P ′ , with the same label. The proof of Proposition 10.2 uses the following lemma. Lemma 10.3. If P is a closed picture over a sun H, then ch(P) = 0. Proof. Let n be the size of H, and let U be the closure of the complement of the cycle C of H, or in other words, the subhypergraph with vertex set {1, . . . , n} and edge set {f1 , . . . , fn }. Then every vertex in P[U] has degree one, so if P is closed then P[U] is a matching. Furthermore, if e is an edge of P[U] with  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  35  h(e) = fi , and endpoints at vertices v and v ′ , then h(v) = h(v ′ ) = i. We conclude that P has an even number of vertices labelled by i, so ch(P)i = 0 for every i.  Proof of Proposition 10.2. Without loss of generality, we can assume that every picture lies in a bounded region, rather than a sphere. As a consequence, every simple closed curve will bound a unique simple region. Suppose that C is a C-cycle in some H-picture P, and let D be the simple region bounded by C. For the purpose of this proof, we let NE(C, P) be the number of edges e in res(P, D) with h(e) ∈ U, where U is the closure of the complement of C, as in the proof of Lemma 10.3. We then set NE(P) :=  X  NE(C, P).  C a C-cycle  Now suppose we start with some character-minimal picture P = P0 with no edges from C in bd(P0 ). Our strategy will be to reduce NE(P0 ) via a sequence of surgeries. Let C be a C-cycle in P0 , and let D be the simple region bounded by C. Suppose e is an edge contained in D and incident with C, such that h(e) = fi for some i. Clearly e cannot be incident with the boundary of P0 , and since e is not a closed loop, we conclude that e is incident with two distinct vertices v0 and v1 with h(v0 ) = h(v1 ) = i. Let e, a0 , a1 be the sequence of edges incident with v0 , as they appear in counter-clockwise order, and let e, b0 , b1 be the edges incident with v1 as they appear in clockwise order. Then a0 , e, and b0 all lie in the boundary of a common face, as do a1 , e, and b1 (all these edges may lie in a common non-simple face, so we have to be careful with wording here). If h(a0 ) = h(b0 ) and h(a1 ) = h(b1 ), then we could delete e, v0 , and v1 , and connect ai with bi (shown in the diagram below, where we assume without loss of generality that h(a0 ) = ei ) ei−1  i  ei ⇒  fi ei−1  i  ei−1  ei  ei  to get a character-equivalent picture of smaller size, contradicting minimality. We conclude that we must have {h(e), h(aj ), h(bj )} = {ei−1 , ei , fi } for j = 0, 1. Thus we can perform the surgery where we make vj incident to e, aj , and bj ,  36  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  for j = 0, 1, (shown below, again with the assumption that h(a0 ) = ei ) ei−1  i  ei  ei−1 ⇒  fi i  ei  i  ei i  fi  ei  ei−1  ei−1  to get a new picture P1 . Since the surgery did not change the number or labels of vertices, P1 will be character-minimal and character-equivalent to P0 . Since bd(P0 ) does not contain any edges from C, the boundary of an outer quadrilateral of P0 must contain edges e1 , e2 , e3 , where h(e2 ) ∈ C, and e1 and e3 are the two unique edges of h−1 (U) which are incident with the endpoints of e2 . Since e is not incident to the boundary, the edges a0 , a1 , b0 , and b1 and the vertices v0 and v1 do not belong to an outer quadrilateral of P0 , and hence every outer quadrilateral of P0 will be an outer quadrilateral of P1 . Recall that e lies in D. Without loss of generality, we can assume that v0 belongs to C. By Lemma 9.2, v1 must also belong to a C-cycle. This creates two possible outcomes for NE(P1 ). First, suppose that both v0 and v1 lie on C. Then the surgery will “pinch” the region bounded by C, creating two C-cycles C0 and C1 connected by e, as shown below. a1  C  a0  C1 ⇒  e b1  a1 e b1  b0  C0  a0 b0  Any edge e′ 6= e in D will end up in the region bounded by C0 or the region bounded by C1 , so NE(C, P0 ) = NE(C1 , P1 ) + NE(C2 , P1 ) + 1. The other possibility is that v1 lies on a different C-cycle C ′ , where (since C-cycles cannot cross) C ′ lies in the interior of the region bounded by C. In this case, the surgery will connect C and C ′ to form a new cycle C ′′ , as shown below. a1 C  a0 a1  e  a0 e  b1  b1  b0  b0  ⇒ C′  C ′′  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  37  The edge e, along with all the edges inside the cycle C ′ , will end up on the outside of C ′′ . The only edges remaining in the region bounded by C ′′ are edges that belonged to D, so NE(C ′′ , P1 ) = NE(C, P0 ) − NE(C ′ , P0 ) − 1. In both cases, no other cycles are changed by the surgery, so we conclude that NE(P0 ) > NE(P1 ). Iterating this procedure, we get a sequence P0 , P1 , P2 , . . . of character-minimal pictures, all character-equivalent, such that the outer quadrilaterals of Pi are outer quadrilaterals of Pi+1 , and NE(Pi ) > NE(Pi+1 ). Since NE(Pi ) cannot decrease indefinitely, this process must terminate at a picture Pn with the property that if e ∈ h−1 (U) is incident with a C-cycle C, then e is not contained in the region bounded by C. Equivalently, we can say that res(Pn , D) is closed for every simple region D bounded by a C-cycle. Let P ′ be the picture Pn with all closed loops deleted. By Lemma 7.8, ′ P is character-minimal and character-equivalent to Pn (and hence P0 ). In addition, it is easy to see that all outer quadrilaterals of Pn will be outer quadrilaterals of P ′ , and that res(P ′ , D) will be closed for every simple region D bounded by a C-cycle in P ′ . Suppose D is a simple region bounded by a Ccycle such that res(P ′ , D) is non-empty. Since P ′ does not contain any closed loops, res(P ′ , D) must contain a vertex. But since res(P ′ , D) is closed, we must have ch(res(P ′ , D)) = 0 by Lemma 10.3, and hence we can delete res(P ′ , D) from P ′ to get a character-equivalent picture of smaller size, contradicting the minimality of P ′ . We conclude that res(P ′ , D) must be empty for every simple region bounded by a C-cycle, and hence every C-cycle in P ′ is facial. By Proposition 9.4, every C-cycle in P ′ is a facial cover, as required.  The following collorary is not needed for the proof of Theorem 5.1, but it does serve as a good example of how we will apply Proposition 10.2 in the following section. Corollary 10.4. Let H be theP sun of size n, let b : V (H) → Z2 be a vertex labelling function, and set b0 := ni=1 bi . Then the subgroup of Γ = Γ(H, b) generated by S = {xf1 , . . . , xfn } is isomorphic to K = Invhf1 , . . . , fn : f1 · · · fn = J b0 i. Proof. Clearly there is an H-picture P with bd(P) = f1 · · · fn and ch(P) = (1, . . . , 1), so xf1 · · · xfn = J b0 in Γ by Proposition 7.3. Conversely, suppose that xfi1 · · · xfik = J c holds in Γ. By Proposition 7.3 again, there is an H-picture P with bd(P) = fi1 · · · fik and ch(P) · b = c. Let P be the set of character-minimal pictures which are character-equivalent to P, and in which every C-cycle is a facial cover. By Proposition 10.2, P is non-empty, and since all elements of P have the same number of vertices, #Cycle(P ′ , C) is bounded for P ′ ∈ P. Let P ′ be an element of P which maximizes #Cycle(P ′ , C). If C is a C-cycle in P ′ which is not a copy of C,  38  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  then it is possible to cut C into two C-cycles as shown below, where the interior of C is a face of P. C  1  2  1  2  2  1  ⇒ 2  1  Since this surgery does not change the character or modify any other C-cycle in P, we get an element of P with more C-cycles than P ′ , a contradiction. We conclude that every C-cycle in P ′ is a facial copy. Since C is cubic, each C-cycle in P ′ must bound a unique face, even if P is a picture in a sphere. Let P ′′ be the picture constructed by contracting each one of these faces to a vertex, as shown below (for n = 6). f2 e2 f3  f1 2  e1  1  3 e3 f4  e4  5  f1  e6 6  4  f2  f6  ⇒  f3  f6  e5 f5  f4  f5  Since every edge in P ′ labelled by an ei must belong to a C-cycle by Lemma 9.2, every edge remaining in P ′′ is labelled by an fi for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n. If we label each vertex by the single relation J b0 f1 · · · fn , then P ′′ is a K-picture with bd(P ′′ ) = fi1 · · · fik and sign(P ′′ ) = c. By Proposition 6.5, the relation fi1 · · · fik = J c holds in K.  The proof techniques of Proposition 10.2 and Corollary 10.4 are illustrated by the following example. Example 10.5. Let H be the sun of size 4, and let K = hf1 , . . . , f4 : f1 f2 f3 f4 = 1i. It is not hard to see that the relation w := f1 f2 f3 f4 (f1 f2 f3 )2 = 1 holds in K. Given a K-picture with boundary word w, we can replace every vertex with a C-cycle to get an equivalent H-picture, for instance as shown in Figure 15c. However, there are H-pictures with boundary word w, as shown in Figure 15a, which do not come from a K-picture in this way. Nonetheless, if P is a minimal H-picture whose boundary contains only fi ’s, then the proofs of Proposition 10.2 and Corollary 10.4 provide a method to transform P to an equivalent picture which does come from a K-picture. The transformation process is shown in Figure 15. To finish the section, we prove one more technical lemma:  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  f3  f2  e3  e2  f4  f1  f3  e4  e1  e3  e2  f4 e1  e4  e2  f1  f2  f3  f3  f2  f1  e3 f4 e4  e4 e3  f3  e2  e1  e4  e1  e2  e3  e3 f4  e4  f2  f3  f1  f3  f2  f1  f3 e4  e2  f4  e3  e2 f2 e1  e2  e1  e1  e2  e4 f1  f2 e1  f2  f3  (a) A single C-cycle with an edge labelled by fi in its interior.  f1  f1  e3  39  e3  f4  e4 f1  f2 e1  (b) We remove the edge in the interior of the C-cycle using the surgery highlighted in blue. We now have a picture with two facial covers of C.  (c) By cutting and reattaching the edges highlighted in red, we can turn the two facial covers into three facial copies of C.  Figure 15. Using surgery, we turn a picture over the sun of size 4 into an equivalent picture where all C-cycles are facial copies. Lemma 10.6. Let P be a character-minimal picture with no closed loops over the sun H of size n. Then there is no cycle in P with edge labels contained in {ei , fi , fi+1 } for some fixed 1 ≤ i ≤ n (where fn+1 := f1 ). Proof. Suppose C is a cycle of this form, and let Ui be the closure of the subhypergraph {fi , fi+1 }. Since P has no closed loops, C must have at least one vertex. Since H is simple, C must have at least two vertices, and there cannot be two consecutive edges of C with the same label. Thus C[Ui ] is a (non-empty) matching between the vertices of C, where paired vertices must have the same label (either i or i+1, depending on whether the edge connecting them is labelled by an fi or fi+1 ). Since every vertex of C occurs in C[Ui ], C must consist of a sequence of vertices v1 , . . . , v2n , v2n+1 = v1 , such that v2i−1 and v2i are connected by an edge bi with h(bi ) ∈ {fi , fi+1 }, and v2i and v2i+1 are connected by an edge labelled by ei , i = 1, . . . , n. Let ai be the edge  40  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  incident to vi which is not in C. Since every vertex vi is incident to an edge of C labelled by ei , we conclude that ( ei−1 h(vi ) = i h(ai ) = , ei+1 h(vi ) = i + 1 where e0 := en and en+1 := e1 . But since h(v2i−1 ) = h(v2i ), this means that h(a2i−1 ) = h(a2i ) for all i = 1, . . . , n. Thus if we delete all the vertices and edges of C, we can connect a2i−1 and a2i along the path previously taken by bi to get a new H-picture P ′ which is character-equivalent to P. But the size of P ′ would then be strictly smaller than the size of P, contradicting minimality.  11. Stellar cycles and constellations In this section, we extend the results for suns from the previous section to more complicated hypergraphs through the notion of a constellation. The result is the “constellation theorem”, which will be the key to the proof of Theorem 5.1. Definition 11.1. Let H be a hypergraph with vertex labelling function b : V (H) → Z. A cycle C in H is b-stellar if (a) the neighbourhood N (C) is isomorphic to a sun, (b) N (C) is a retract of H, and (c) bv = 0 for all v ∈ V (C). Definition 11.2. Let H be a hypergraph with vertex labelling b : V (H) → Z2 . A b-constellation is a collection Φ of subhypergraphs of H satisfying the following properties: (a) If C ∈ Φ, then C is a cycle, the neighbourhood N (C) is isomorphic to a sun, and C is either: (i) b-stellar, or (ii) a sequence of edges e1 e2 · · · en (in order), n ≥ 3, such that ek belongs to a b-stellar cycle C ′ ∈ Φ for all 3 ≤ k ≤ n. (b) For every element C ∈ Φ, either: (i) there is an edge e in C which does not belong to any cycle in Φ\{C}, or (ii) there is another cycle C ′ ∈ Φ such that E(C) ∩ E(C ′ ) 6= ∅, and C ′ contains an edge e which does not belong to any cycle in Φ \ {C ′ }.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  41  5 6  8  1  7 2 9  4 3  Figure 16. A hypergraph based on Figure 11, but where the open neighbourhood of each face is a sun. (c) If C0 , C1 ∈ Φ, where C0 6= C1 , then |E(C0 ) ∩ E(C1 )| ≤ 1, and if neither C0 or C1 is b-stellar, then E(C0 ) ∩ E(C1 ) = ∅. If Φ is a b-constellation, then a cycle C in a picture P is a Φ-cycle if C is a C-cycle for some C ∈ Φ. Roughly speaking, property (a) in Definition 11.2 says that every cycle C in Φ is either stellar or (mostly) covered by other stellar cycles, while properties (b) and (c) state that the cycles in Φ do not overlap too much. Example 11.3. Consider the hypergraph H shown in Figure 16, and let b be the vertex labelling function with b9 = 1 and bv = 0 for v 6= 9. Let C1 , C2 , and C3 be the cycles with vertex sets {1, 2, 5, 6}, {1, 4, 5, 8}, and {3, 4, 7, 8} respectively, and let C4 be the cycle with vertex set {1, 2, 3, 4, 9}. As in Example 8.12, the neighbourhoods N (Ci ),i = 1, 2, 3, are retracts of H, and hence C1 ,C2 , and C3 are b-stellar. The cycle C4 is not a retract, nor is bv = 0 for all v ∈ V (C4 ), so C4 is not b-stellar. But N (C4 ) is a sun, and the edges 12, 14, and 34 belong to C1 , C2 , and C3 respectively. Thus Φ = {C1 , . . . , C4 } is a b-constellation. The cycle with vertex set {5, 6, 7, 8} is also b-stellar, and could be added to this constellation, but the cycle with vertex set {2, 3, 6, 7, 9} cannot be added since it is not b-stellar and shares edges with C4 . We can now state the main theorem of this section: Theorem 11.4 (Constellation theorem). Let H be a hypergraph with vertex labelling b, and let Φ be a b-constellation. Let P be an H-picture such that: (p.1) bd(P) does not contain any edges from any cycle C ∈ Φ, and (p.2) either b = 0 or P is closed.  42  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  Then P is b-equivalent to a picture P ′ such that all Φ-cycles in P ′ are facial copies. The rest of this section is concerned with the proof of Theorem 11.4. To aid the reader, the proof is split into a number of lemmas, which are in turn grouped into subsections. In all the lemmas, H will be a hypergraph and b will be a vertex labelling. We refer to the hypotheses (p.1) and (p.2) of Theorem 11.4 as necessary. 11.1. Structure of constellations. We start by proving two lemmas about constellations. Lemma 11.5. If Φ is a b-constellation in H, and e is an edge of H, then there are at most two cycles in Φ containing e. Proof. Suppose C is an element of Φ containing e. Since N (C) is a sun, C is cubic. Thus if v is an endpoint of e, then there is a unique edge f incident to v and not contained in C. If C ′ ∈ Φ \ {C} contains e, then C ′ must also contain f , since |E(C) ∩ E(C ′ )| ≤ 1. Hence if C ′ and C ′′ ∈ Φ \ {C} both contain e, then {e, f } ⊂ E(C ′ ) ∩ E(C ′′ ), and consequently C ′ = C ′′ .  Lemma 11.6. Let Φ be a b-constellation in H, and let Φ′ ⊆ Φ. If all elements of Φ′ are b-stellar or Φ′ contains all b-stellar elements of Φ, then Φ′ is a bconstellation. Proof. Every subset of Φ satisfies part (c) of Definition 11.2. If all elements of Φ′ are b-stellar, or Φ′ contains all b-stellar cycles in Φ, then Φ′ also satisfies part (a). If e is an edge of C ∈ Φ′ such that e does not belong to any element of Φ \ {C}, then clearly e does not belong to any element of Φ′ \ {C}. Suppose every edge of C ∈ Φ′ belongs to some element of Φ \ {C}. Then by definition there is a cycle C ′ ∈ Φ such that E(C) ∩ E(C ′ ) 6= ∅ and C ′ contains an edge e which does not belong to any cycle in Φ \ {C ′ }. If C ′ belongs to Φ′ , then we are done. If C ′ does not belong to Φ′ , then let e′ be the unique edge of E(C) ∩ E(C ′ ). By Lemma 11.5, the only cycles of Φ which contain e′ are C and C ′ , and hence no element of Φ′ \ {C} contains e′ .  11.2. Stellar cycles. Now we turn to the core of the argument: showing that C-cycles can be turned into facial covers if C is stellar. The proof relies on hypothesis (p.2) in the following way: Lemma 11.7. Suppose C is a b-stellar cycle in H, and P is a b-minimal Hpicture satisfying hypothesis (p.2). Then every C-cycle in P bounds a simple region D such that ch(germ(P, D)) · b = 0.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  43  Proof. If b = 0, then the lemma is vacuously true. If P is closed and ch(P)·b = 0, then P is b-equivalent to the empty picture. But since P is b-minimal, in this case P must have size zero, and again the lemma is vacuously true. Suppose that P is closed and ch(P) · b = 1. Since P is closed, we can think of P as a picture in the sphere, in which case every C-cycle bounds two simple regions D1 and D2 . Every vertex of P appears in one of germ(P, D1 ) or germ(P, D2 ), with only the vertices of C appearing in both. Hence ch(P) = ch(germ(P, D1 )) + ch(germ(P, D2 )) − ch(C). Since C is b-stellar, bv = 0 for all v ∈ V (C), so ch(C) · b = 0. Consequently, ch(germ(P, D1 )) · b + ch(germ(P, D2 )) · b = ch(P) · b = 1 and we conclude that one of ch(germ(P, Di )) · b, i = 1, 2 must be 0.    Lemma 11.8. Let Φ be a b-constellation in which every cycle C ∈ Φ is bstellar. Let P be an H picture satisfying (p.1) and (p.2). Then P is bequivalent to a b-minimal picture P ′ with no closed loops, such that every Φ-cycle in P ′ is facial. Proof. The proof is by induction on the size of Φ. If Φ is empty, then the lemma is true by Definition 7.7 and Lemma 7.8. Suppose the lemma is true for all b-constellations of size m, where m ≥ 0, and let Φ be a b-constellation of size m + 1 in which every cycle is b-stellar. If we pick an element C ∈ Φ, then Φ′ := Φ \ {C} will be a b-constellation of size m by Lemma 11.6, so that every H-picture satisfying (p.1) and (p.2) (with respect to Φ) will be b-equivalent to some b-minimal picture P, also satisfying (p.1) and (p.2), such that every Φ′ -cycle in P is facial. Thus, to show that the lemma holds for Φ, we can assume that we start with a picture P of this form. Let NF (P) denote the number of non-facial C-cycles in P, where C ∈ Φ is the cycle chosen above. Similarly to the proof of Proposition 10.2, our strategy will be to perform a sequence of surgeries, starting from P0 := P, each of which decreases NF (P). Suppose that P has a non-facial C-cycle C. By Lemma 11.7, there is a simple region D bounded by C such that ch(germ(P, D)) · b = 0. Let f : H → N (C) be a retract onto N (C), so that b := f (germ(P, D)) is an N (C)-picture. Recall that, since N (C) is open, P b can be regarded as an H-picture. By the definition an N (C)-picture like P of germ, the labels of edges and vertices in the boundary of the outer faces of germ(P, D) must belong to N (C). Since f is a retract, we conclude that the closures of the outer faces of germ(P, D) will be identical to the closures b and in particular, bd(P) b = bd(germ(P, D)). The of the outer faces of P, construction in Proposition 8.13 relabels or deletes vertices not in N (C), so b might not be character-equivalent to germ(P, D). But since C is b-stellar, P  44  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  b · b = 0. We conclude that bv = 0 for all v ∈ V (C), and consequently, ch(P) b is b-equivalent to germ(P, D). Since the size of P b is less than or equal to P the size of germ(P, D), and germ(P, D) is b-minimal, we also conclude that b is b-minimal as an H-picture. It follows that Pb is b-minimal (and hence P character-minimal) as an N (C)-picture. From, again, the definition of germ, b does not contain any edges from we know that bd(germ(P, D)) = bd(P)) C. Finally, N (C) is a sun, so we can apply Proposition 10.2 to Pb to get an b′ such that P b′ is character-equivalent to and of the same size N (C)-picture P b every C-cycle in P b′ is facial, every outer quadrilateral of P b is an outer as P, ′ ′ ′ b , and P b has no closed loops. In particular, P b is b-minimal quadrilateral of P and b-equivalent to germ(P, D), and every outer quadrilateral of germ(P, D) b′ . is an outer quadrilateral of P b′ . Clearly P1 is bLet P1 be the result of replacing germ(P, D) with P ′ ′ minimal and b-equivalent to P. Suppose C is a C -cycle in P1 , where C ′ ∈ Φ′ . Now bd(P) = bd(P1 ) does not contain any edges from the cycles of Φ, so by Lemma 9.2, every edge of P which is labelled by an edge of C ′ belongs to a unique C ′ -cycle, and the same holds for P1 . If C ′ contains a boundary edge e of b′ , then there is a C ′ -cycle C ′′ in P which also contains e. By hypothesis, C ′′ P is facial, and hence by Proposition 9.9, the edges of germ(C ′′ , D) form outer quadrilaterals in germ(P, D). But since the outer quadrilaterals of germ(P, D) b′ , the edges of C ′′ are unchanged in P1 . Since are also outer quadrilaterals of P e belongs to a unique C ′ -cycle in P1 , we must have C ′ = C ′′ , and hence C ′ is facial in P1 . On the other hand, if C ′ does not contain a boundary edge b′ , then C ′ either does not intersect D, or lies entirely inside of D. In of P the former case, C ′ will also be a facial C ′ -cycle in P, and will remain facial in P1 . In the latter case, C ′ would have to consist only of edges labelled by E ′ = E(C ′ ) ∩ E(N (C)). Since N (C) is a sun and |E(C ′ ) ∩ E(C)| ≤ 1, the intersection E ′ is either empty, or is equal to (in the notation of Definition b′ is character-minimal and has no 10.1) {ei , fi , fi+1 } for some i. But since P closed loops, Lemma 10.6 implies that Pb′ does not contain any cycles of this form. We conclude that every C ′ -cycle in P1 remains facial. Finally, every C-cycle in P1 belongs either to Pb′ or is inherited unchanged from P, with the consequence that NF (P1 ) < NF (P). Iterating this procedure, we get a sequence P0 = P, P1 , . . . , Pk of b-minimal pictures, all b-equivalent, such that all Φ′ -cycles in Pi are facial for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, and such that all Φ-cycles in Pk are facial. Deleting all closed loops from Pk finishes the proof.  11.3. Covers versus copies. For the next lemma, we show that if all Φ-cycles are facial covers, then we can turn Φ-cycles into facial copies.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  45  f f C  a  a  b  e  ⇒ b  a  e  b  e  e a  b f  f  Figure 17. Surgery in the proof of Lemma 11.9. Edges labelled by e and f are cut and reconnected to turn three Φ-cycles into four Φ-cycles. The edges of C are dashed, while the edges of C1 and C2 are dotted. Interiors of cycles are faces in P ′ and P ′′ . Lemma 11.9. Let Φ be a b-constellation. Suppose that P is an H-picture satisfying (p.1), and such that all Φ-cycles in P are facial covers. Then P is character-equivalent to a picture P ′ in which all Φ-cycles are facial copies. Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Corollary 10.4. Let P be the set of pictures which are character-equivalent to P, have the same size as P, and in which all Φ-cycles are facial covers. Since all elements of P have the same number of vertices, #Cycle(P ′ , Φ) is bounded across P ′ ∈ P. Let P ′ be an element of P which maximizes #Cycle(P ′ , Φ). Suppose that C is a C-cycle in P ′ which is not a copy of C, where C ∈ Φ has an edge e which does not belong to any other cycle in Φ. Since C is a cover, there are two distinct edges e1 and e2 in C with h(e1 ) = h(e2 ) = e. As in the proof of Corollary 10.4, we can cut C at e1 and e2 to get a new picture P ′′ , character-equivalent to P ′ , in which C has been replaced by two facial covers. By Lemma 9.2 and the hypothesis on e, the edges e1 and e2 are not contained in any other Φ-cycle. Thus all other Φ-cycles in P ′ are unchanged in P ′′ , and P ′′ will be an element of P with #Cycle(P ′ , Φ) < #Cycle(P ′′ , Φ), a contradiction. We conclude that if C ∈ Φ has an edge which does not belong to any other cycle in Φ, then all C-cycles in P ′ are facial copies. Now suppose that C is a C-cycle in P ′ which is not a copy of C, where every edge of C ∈ Φ belongs to some other cycle of Φ. By Definition 11.2, part (b), there is another cycle C ′ ∈ Φ such that E(C) ∩ E(C ′ ) = {e}, and C ′ contains an edge e′ which does not belong to any cycle in Φ \ {C ′ }. As above, there are  46  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  distinct edges e1 and e2 in C such that h(e1 ) = h(e2 ) = e. By Lemma 9.2, each edge ei belongs to a unique C ′ -cycle Ci , i = 1, 2. Since C1 and C2 are copies of C ′ , we must have C1 6= C2 . Let fi be the unique edge in Ci with h(fi ) = e′ . Thus we can construct a new picture P ′′ by cutting and reconnecting ei and fi , i = 1, 2, as shown in Figure 17. By Lemmas 9.2 and 11.5, C and Ci are the only Φ-cycles containing ei , while Ci is the only Φ-cycle containing fi . Thus all Φ-cycles in P ′′ , aside from those shown in Figure 17, are Φ-cycles in P ′ , and hence will be facial covers. Because C is a cover and C1 and C2 are copies, the new cycles created in Figure 17 will be facial covers. We conclude again that P ′′ will be an element of P with #Cycle(P ′ , Φ) < #Cycle(P ′′ , Φ), a contradiction. Thus every Φ-cycle in P ′ is a facial copy.  11.4. Cycles covered by other cycles. Finally, we prove two lemmas that will allow us to handle non-stellar cycles. Lemma 11.10. Let Φ′ ⊆ Φ be a pair of b-constellations. Suppose that P is an H-picture satisfying (p.1) with respect to Φ, such that all Φ′ -cycles in P are facial covers. Let C0 be a connected closed subhypergraph of C ∈ Φ \ Φ′ ,3 such that every edge of C0 is contained in an element of Φ′ . If C is a C-cycle in P, then: (a) C[C0 ] is a cover of C0 , and (b) if C0 is a connected component of C[C0 ], then all edges not contained in C and incident with a vertex of C0 lie on the same side of C. Proof. Let e be an edge of C with h(e) ∈ E(C0 ). By hypothesis and Lemma 9.2, e belongs to a C ′ -cycle C ′ , where C ′ ∈ Φ′ . Since C ′ is a facial cover, e has two distinct endpoints a and b with h(a) 6= h(b). We conclude that C[C0 ] is a cover of C0 . Now let x and y be the edges of P incident to a and b respectively, but not contained in C. Since |E(C) ∩ E(C ′ )| ≤ 1 and C is simple, we conclude that x and y belong to C ′ . Let D be a simple region bounded by C. By Proposition 9.9, since C ′ is facial the edges x,y, and e either belong to D, or form an outer quadrilateral in germ(P, D). It follows that x and y lie on the same side of C. Since C0 is connected, all edges not contained in C and incident to C0 lie on the same side of C.  Lemma 11.11. Let Φ′ ⊆ Φ be a pair of b-constellations. Suppose that P is a b-minimal picture with no closed loops satisfying (p.1) and (p.2), such that every Φ′ -cycle is a facial cover. If every edge of C ∈ Φ is contained in some element of Φ′ , then every C-cycle in P is a facial cover. 3In  other words, C0 is either equal to C, or a path in C.  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  47  Proof. Let C be a C-cycle. Applying Lemma 11.10 with C0 = C, we get immediately that C is a cover, and that the edges incident to C all lie on the same side of C. Suppose b = 0, and let D be a simple region bounded by C. If all the edges incident to C lie in D, then germ(P, D) is closed, and ch(germ(P, D)) · b = 0. Since P is b-minimal, germ(P, D) must be b-minimal, and this implies that germ(P, D) must have size zero, in contradiction of the fact that germ(P, D) contains C. Thus all the edges incident to C lie outside the interior of C, and we conclude that res(P, D) is closed. But once again, this implies that res(P, D) must have size zero, and since P has no closed loops, this implies that res(P, D) is empty. We conclude that C is facial. Now suppose that P is closed. Similarly to the proof of Lemma 11.7, the fact that P is b-minimal with size greater than zero implies that ch(P) · b = 1. Now C bounds two simple regions D1 and D2 in the sphere, where we assume that all edges incident to C are contained in D1 , so res(P, D2 ) is closed. If ch(res(P, D2 )) · b = 1, then res(P, D2 ) is b-equivalent to P, contradicting the b-minimality of P. Thus ch(res(P, D2 )) · b = 0, and as above, res(P, D2 ) must be empty. We conclude again that C is facial.  11.5. Proof of Theorem 11.4. Given a b-constellation Φ, let Φ0 be the set of b-stellar cycles in Φ, and let Φ1 be the set of cycles C ∈ Φ such that every edge of C belongs to a cycle in Φ0 . Then Φ0 ⊆ Φ1 , and by Lemma 11.6, Φ0 and Φ1 are b-constellations. Given a picture P0 satisfying (p.1) and (p.2), Lemma 11.8 states that we can find a b-equivalent picture P1 which is b-minimal and has no closed loops, such that every Φ0 -cycle in P1 is facial. By Proposition 9.4, every Φ0 -cycle in P1 is a facial cover. By Lemma 11.11, every Φ1 -cycle in P1 is also a facial cover. This leaves the cycles in Φ \ Φ1 . By definition, any element of Φ \ Φ1 is non-stellar. If a non-stellar cycle C ∈ Φ shares an edge with another cycle C ′ ∈ Φ, then C ′ must be b-stellar. Hence Φ \ Φ1 consists of the non-stellar cycles C ∈ Φ which have an edge e not contained in any element of Φ \ {C}. For the purpose of this proof, we say that such an edge e ∈ C is independent. By part (a) of Definition 11.2, every element C ∈ Φ \ Φ1 has either one or two independent edges. In the latter case, the two edges will be incident with a common vertex of C. Suppose that C is a C-cycle in P1 , where C ∈ Φ \ Φ′ . Let C0 be the path containing the non-independent edges of C, regarded as a closed subhypergraph. By Lemma 11.10, C[C0 ] is a cover of C0 , and since C0 is a path rather than a cycle, all connected components of C[C0 ] are copies of C0 . If C[C0 ] is non-empty, we can write C as a sequence C1 C2 · · · C2k−1C2k of paths Ci , where  48  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  C (2) C e ⇒  C1 e  a1  a2  e  C (1)  e  a1  a2  (a) one independent edge. C (2) C e1  e1  a1  g  ⇒  C1 a2  e2  e2  b  C  b  (1)  e1 a1  e2 a2  (b) two independent edges.  Figure 18. Surgery to cut apart the cycle C in the proof of Theorem 11.4. k ≥ 1, the path C2i−1 is a connected component of C[C0 ] for all i = 1, . . . , k, and the edges of C2i are labelled by independent edges of C for all i = 1, . . . , k. Let v1 (resp. v2 ) be the first (resp. last) vertex of C1 , and let f1 (resp. f2 ) be the edge of C2k (resp. C2 ) which is incident to v1 (resp. v2 ). The labels ai = h(vi ) are the endpoints of the path C0 in C. If C has one independent edge e, then e will join a1 and a2 , and h(f1 ) = h(f2 ) = e. By Lemma 11.10, every edge incident to C1 lies on the same side of C, so we can cut and reconnect f1 and f2 as shown in Figure 18a. If C has two independent edges, then we can do something similar. In this case, there will be an independent edge ei = h(fi ) incident to ai , i = 1, 2, and both edges will be incident with a third vertex b. Let g be the edge incident to b not in C. Since C is cubic, any cycle containing g must also contain either e1 or e2 . Since these edges are independent, g is not contained in any element of Φ. We can then cut f1 and f2 and reconnect them by adding two vertices labelled by b, and a edge labelled by g, as shown in Figure 18b. These surgeries are not as well behaved as those considered previously: When C has two independent edges, we end up increasing the size, so the result will no longer be b-minimal. When C has a single independent edge, it  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  49  is possible that f1 = f2 , in which case we create a closed loop. However, in both cases we split C into two cycles C (1) and C (2) , where C (1) is a facial copy of C, and C (2) [C0 ] has fewer connected components than C[C0 ]. Furthermore, we do not change any other C-cycle. And since we only change or add edges whose labels are not contained in any element of Φ\{C}, we conclude that C is the only Φ-cycle changed by this surgery. As a result we may repeat this type of surgery to get a picture P2 (not necessarily b-minimal, and possibly containing closed loops) which is character-equivalent to P1 , and in which every Φ-cycle is either a facial cover, or labelled only by independent edges. Let P be the collection of pictures which are character-equivalent to P2 , and in which every Φ-cycle is either a facial cover or labelled only by independent edges. Let P3 be an element of P of minimum size, and let P4 be the picture P3 with all closed loops deleted. Clearly P4 is also an element of P of minimum size. Suppose P4 has a C-cycle C which is not a facial cover for some C ∈ Φ. By definition, C is labelled by independent edges of C. Since P4 has no closed loops and C is simple, C has at least two edges. Consequently C must have two independent edges, say e1 and e2 . As above, let b be the vertex incident to both e1 and e2 , and let g be the edge incident to b and not in C. Since every edge of C is labelled by e1 or e2 , every vertex of C must be labelled by b. We can now argue similarly to Lemma 10.6: C must consist of a sequence of edges f1 , . . . , f2k , where h(f2i−1 ) = e1 and h(f2i ) = e2 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k. Let v1 , . . . , v2k be the vertices of C in order, so fi has endpoints vi and vi+1 , where v2k+1 := v1 , and let gi be the edge of P4 incident to vi with h(gi ) = g. Let P5 be the picture P4 with all the edges and vertices of C deleted, and g2i−1 and g2i joined into a single edge along the path taken by f2i−1 . Since the edges e1 , e2 , and g do not belong to any element of Φ \ {C}, this process does not create or change any other Φ-cycle. Thus P5 ∈ P, in contradiction of the minimality of P4 . We conclude that every Φ-cycle in P4 is a facial cover, and the theorem follows from Lemma 11.9.  12. Proof of the embedding theorem In this section we finish the proof of Theorem 5.1 (and thus complete the proof of Theorem 3.1). We continue with the notation from Section 5, so in particular I := InvhS : Ri is a presentation by involutions over Z2 , G is the group with presentation I, W := W(I) is the corresponding wagon wheel hypergraph, and R = {r1 , . . . , rm } is an ordered set of relations. Although we do not yet assume that I is collegial, for convenience we assume that the length ni of the relation ri is at least 4 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m (by Remark 4.7, this assumption holds if I is collegial). In addition, we make the following definitions:  50  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  Bi  ⇒  Bi  ⇒  Bi  Figure 19. To retract N (Wi ) onto N (Bi ), we remove intermediary vertices to get a simplified wagon wheel shape, and then fold this wagon wheel onto the central cycle. In the example shown above, ni = 4. • Let Wi be the closed subhypergraph of W containing vertices Vi and edges Ei . (The open neighbourhood N (Wi ) is shown in Figure 1.) • Let Ai , 1 ≤ i ≤ m be the cycle containing edges ai1 , bi1 , ai2 , bi2 , . . . , aini , bini . • Let Bi , 1 ≤ i ≤ m, be the cycle containing edges di1 , . . . , dini . • Let Cij , 1 ≤ i ≤ m, j ∈ Zni , be the cycle containing edges aij , bij , cij , dij , and ci,j−1. • Let Φ = {Cij : 1 ≤ i ≤ m, j ∈ Zni } ∪ {Bi : 1 ≤ i ≤ m}. Before we can prove Theorem 5.1, we need some preliminary lemmas. Lemma 12.1. If b is an I-labelling of W, then there is a well-defined morphism G → Γ(W, b) over Z2 sending s 7→ xs for all s ∈ S. Proof. There is a well-defined morphism F (S)×Z2 → Γ(W, b) over Z2 sending s 7→ xs . As can be seen from Figure P 1, there is a N (Wi )-picture P with bd(P) = si1 · · · sini and ch(P) · b = v∈Vi bv = ai . By Proposition 7.3, the relation ri holds in Γ(W, b) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.  Lemma 12.2. N (Bi ) is a retract of W for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Proof. Define r : W → N (Bi ) by   i′ 6= i ε r((i′ , j, k)) = ε i = i′ and k = 1 , and  (i, j, 3) i = i′ and k = 2, 3  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM   ε    ε r(e) = cij    dij  51  e∈S e ∈ Ei′ with i 6= i′ . e = cij e ∈ {aij , bij , dij }  It is clear that r is the identity on N (Bi ). The only vertices mapped to ε which are incident with edges in E(W) \ r −1 (ε) are the vertices (i, j, 1) for j ∈ Zni . For these vertices, the incident edges aij and bij are identified as required by condition (2) of Definition 8.4. Since r is the identity on N (Bi ), condition (1) of Definition 8.4 holds for the vertices (i, j, 3), 1 ≤ j ≤ ni . The vertices (i, j, 2) are incident with three edges of E(W)\r −1 (ε), namely ai,j+1 , cij , and bi,j , and these edges are mapped to the three edges di,j+1, cij , and di,j incident to (i, j, 3). We conclude that condition (1) of Definition 8.4 also holds for the vertices (i, j, 2), and hence r is a generalized morphism. The map r can be visualized as deleting everything outside of Wi to get a simplified wagon wheel shape, and then folding this wagon wheel onto N (Bi ). This is depicted in Figure 19.  Lemma 12.3. Let s = sij for some 1 ≤ i ≤ m and j ∈ Zni . If R is cyclically reduced, and mult(s; ri′ ) is even for all 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m, then N (Cij ) is a retract of W. Proof. We start by showing that N (Cij ) is a retract of N (Wi ). Since Wi depends only on the cyclic order of si1 · · · sini , we can assume without loss of generality that j = 1. Suppose that mult(s; ri ) = 2k, and let 1 = j1 < j2 < · · · < j2k ≤ ni be a list of the indices 1 ≤ l ≤ ni such that sil = s. Since R is cyclically reduced, ji+1 > ji + 1 for all i = 1, . . . , 2k − 1, and j2k < ni . For convenience, let Jr = {1, j2 , . . . , j2k }, Jl = {0, j2 − 1, . . . , j2k − 1}, Jrodd  = {1, j3 , j5 . . . , j2k−1 }, Jlodd = {0, j3 − 1, j5 − 1 . . . , j2k−1 − 1},  Jreven = {j2 , j4 , . . . , j2k },  and Jleven = {j2 − 1, j4 − 1, . . . , j2k − 1}.  These sets represent the indices of vertices and edges on the right and left of the cycles Cijp . To talk about edges which do not belong to these cycles, we also define J r = {j1 + 1, j1 + 2, . . . , j2 − 1, j3 + 1, . . . , j4 − 1, . . . , j2k−1 + 1, . . . , j2k − 1} and J l = {j2 + 1, j2 + 2, . . . , j3 − 1, j4 + 1, . . . , j5 − 1, . . . , j2k + 1, . . . , ni }.  52  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  Define qi : N (Wi ) → N (Ci1 ) by  ε      (i, 1, 1) qi ((i, j, k)) = ε    (i, 0, k)    (i, 1, k)  k k k k k  = 1 and j 6∈ Jr = 1 and j ∈ Jr , = 2, 3 and j 6∈ Jr ∪ Jl = 2, 3 and j ∈ Jlodd ∪ Jreven = 2, 3 and j ∈ Jrodd ∪ Jleven .   ai1 j ∈ Jrodd    b j ∈ Jreven i1 qi (aij ) = , bi0 j ∈ J l    ai2 j ∈ J r  odd even  ci0 j ∈ Jl ∪ Jr qi (cij ) = ci1 j ∈ Jrodd ∪ Jleven ,  ε j 6∈ Jr ∪ Jl ( s s′ = s qi (s′ ) = . ε s′ ∈ S \ {s}   ai1    b i1 qi (bij ) = bi0    ai2   di1 qi (dij ) = di0  d i2  j j j j  ∈ Jreven ∈ Jrodd , ∈ Jl ∈ Jr  j ∈ Jr j ∈ Jl , j ∈ Jr  The map qi can be visualized as deleting vertices and edges cij (the spokes of the wagon wheel) not in the cycles Cijp , and then folding up the cycles Cijp onto Ci1 , alternating the directions of the folds after each Cijp like a napkin. The smallest example, when k = 1, is depicted in Figure 20. As in the proof of Lemma 12.2, it follows that qi is a retract. Now we look at Wi′ for i′ 6= i. If mult(s; ri′ ) = 0, then define qi′ : N (Wi′ ) → N (Cij ) : x 7→ ε. If mult(s; ri′ ) > 0, then find j ′ such that si′ j ′ = s, and let f : N (Wi′ ) → N (Ci′ j ′ ) be the retract defined above onto N (Ci′ j ′ ). Now N (Ci′ j ′ ) and N (Cij ) are both suns, so there is an isomorphism g : N (Ci′ j ′ ) → N (Cij ) with g(s) = s, and we let qi′ = g ◦ f . The morphisms qi′ , 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m all send s′ ∈ S to either ε if s′ 6= s, or to s if s′ = s. If i′ 6= i′′ , then the open subhypergraphs N (Wi′ ) and N (Wi′′ ) have no vertices in common. All common edges of N (Wi′ ) and N (Wi′′ ) belong to S, so qi′ and qi′′ agree on the intersection. Every vertex of W belongs to some Wi . There may be elements s′ of S which do not appear in any relation ri′ , and hence do not belong to any N (Wi ); for these edges, we can add additional morphisms which send s′ 7→ ε. By Proposition 8.9, there is a  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  s  53  s Ci1  Ci1  s Ci1  ⇒  s  ⇒  s  Figure 20. To retract N (Wi ) onto N (Ci1 ), we remove intermediary vertices and edges, and then fold up the remaining cycles like a napkin. In the example above, ni = 4 and mult(s; ri ) = 2. In general, if mult(s; ri ) = 2k then we make k folds. morphism q : W → N (Cij ) which agrees with qi′ on N (Wi′ ), and in particular is a retract.  Lemma 12.4. Suppose I is collegial. Then there is an I-labelling b of W such that Φ is a b-constellation. Proof. Let b be any I-labelling such that • |b−1 (1) ∩ V (Wi )| ≤ 1 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m, • b((i, j, 2)) = b((i, j, 3)) = 0 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m and j ∈ Zni , and • if b((i, j, 1)) = 1, then either mult(sij , ri′ ) is odd for some 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m, or mult(sij ′ , ri′ ) is even for all j ′ ∈ Zni and 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m. We will show that Φ is a b-constellation. First, we observe that Bi is b-stellar for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Indeed, N (Bi ) is a sun, and by Lemma 12.2, N (Bi ) is a retract of W. Finally, b|Bi = 0, so Bi is b-stellar. Similarly, Lemma 12.3 implies that Cij will be b-stellar for 1 ≤ i ≤ m and j ∈ Zni as long as b((i, j, 1)) = 0 and mult(sij ; ri′ ) is even for all 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m. Suppose Cij is not b-stellar. If mult(sij ; ri′ ) is odd for some 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m, then by Definition 4.6, mult(si,j+1 ; ri′′ ) and mult(si,j−1 ; ri′′ ) are even for all 1 ≤ i′′ ≤ m. By the definition of b, we must have b((i, j + 1, 1)) = b((i, j − 1, 1)) = 0. Thus Ci,j+1 and Ci,j−1 are b-stellar, so Cij (which consists of edges aij , bij , cij , dij , ci,j−1) shares edges cij , dij , and ci,j−1 with b-stellar cycles. If mult(sij ; ri′ ) is even for all 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m, then we must have b((i, j, 1)) = 1. By the definition of b, this means that mult(sij ′ , ri′ ) is even for all 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m and j ′ ∈ Zni , and b((i, j + 1, 1)) = b((i, j − 1, 1)) = 0. It follows that Ci,j+1 and  54  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  Ci,j−1 are b-stellar, and once again Cij will share edges cij , dij , and ci,j−1 with b-stellar cycles. Thus Φ satisfies condition (a) of Definition 11.2. The cycle Cij is the only cycle in Φ containing edges aij and bij . Every edge dij of Bi is also contained in Cij , so Φ satisfies condition (b) of Definition 11.2. Finally, it is easy to see that |E(Cij ) ∩ E(Di′ )| ≤ 1 for all 1 ≤ i, i′ ≤ m and 1 ≤ i′ ≤ m, and (since ni ≥ 4 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m) that |E(Cij ) ∩ E(Ci′ j ′ )| ≤ 1 for all distinct (i, j) and (i′ , j ′ ). We showed above that if Cij is not b-stellar, then Ci,j+1 and Ci,j−1 are b-stellar, so there is no pair of non-b-stellar cycles in Φ with a common edge. Thus Φ satisfies condition (c) of Definition 11.2.  Lemma 12.5. Let P be a W-picture in which all Φ-cycles are facial copies, and such that all edges in bd(P) belong to S. Let G be the group with presentation I = InvhS; Ri, and let b be an I-labelling. Then there is a G-picture P ′ with bd(P ′ ) = bd(P) and sign(P ′ ) = ch(P) · b. Proof. Let W \ S denote the closed subhypergraph containing all vertices of W and all edges except those in S. Equivalently, W \ S is the subhypergraph with connected components Wi , 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Suppose that P0 is a connected component of P[W \ S]. Since bd(P) does not contain any edges from outside S, P0 must be closed. Since P0 is connected, there must be some 1 ≤ i ≤ m such that P0 is a Wi -picture. By Lemma 9.2, P0 contains a Φ-cycle. By hypothesis, every Φ-cycle in P0 is a facial copy, so every Cij -cycle will contain an edge labelled by dij . Thus P0 contains an edge labelled by dij for some j ∈ Zni , and by Lemma 9.2 again, P0 contains a Bi -cycle B. Since Bi ∈ Φ, B is also a facial copy, and hence consists of edges dˆj , j ∈ Zni , such that h(dˆj ) = dij . Let ĉj , j ∈ Zni , be the third edge incident to the common endpoint of dˆj and dˆj+1. Every edge dˆj is contained in a unique Cij -cycle Cj , which will consist of edges ĉj , dˆj , ĉj−1, and two additional edges âj and b̂j with h(âj ) = aij and h(b̂j ) = bij . Let P0′ = B ∪  [  Cj .  j∈Zni  The common endpoint of âj and b̂j has degree two in P[W \ S], while the endpoints of ĉj have degree three and are incident with ĉj , dˆj , dˆj+1 and ĉj , âj+1 , b̂j respectively. Hence P0′ contains every edge of P[W \ S] incident to a vertex of P0′ . Thus P0′ is a maximal connected subgraph of P[W \ S], so P0′ = P0 . In particular, we conclude that |h−1 (v) ∩ V (P0 )| = 1 for all v ∈ V (Wi ). Since b is an I-labelling, it follows that ch(P0 ) · b = ai .  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  55  Now let D(B) be the closure of the face bounded by B, let D(Cj ) be the closure of the face bounded by Cj , j ∈ Zni , and let  D(P0 ) := D(B) ∪  [  D(Cj ).  j∈Zni  Clearly P0 is contained in D(P0 ), and conversely every edge or vertex of P in D(P0 ) belongs to P0 . Since âj and b̂j belong to the boundary of D(Cj ) and are not contained in B or any Cj ′ , j ′ 6= j, we conclude that âj and b̂j belong to the boundary of D(P0 ). Every other edge of Cj belongs either to B, to Cj+1, or to Cj−1, so the boundary of D(P0 ) does not contain any other edges of Cj . Similarly, the boundary does not contain any edges of B, or any of the vertices (i, j, 3), j ∈ Zni . We conclude that D(P0 ) is bounded by the Ai -cycle A = â1 b̂1 · · · âni b̂ni . In particular, D(P0 ) is a simple region, and bd(germ(P, D(P0 ))) = si1 · · · sini or sini · · · si1 depending on the orientation of A. Since D(P0 ) contains only edges and vertices of P0 , if P1 is another connected component of P[W \ S], then D(P0 ) and D(P1 ) are completely disjoint. Thus, as in the proof of Corollary 10.4, we can collapse each region D(P0 ) to a single vertex labelled by ri = J ai si1 · · · sini to form a G-picture P ′ . Since the edges of S will be unchanged, bd(P) = bd(P ′ ). Since every vertex of P belongs to a unique connected component of P[W \ S], we conclude that sign(P ′ ) = ch(P) · b.   Proof of Theorem 5.1. Let G be the group with presentation InvhS : Ri, and suppose that I = InvhS : Ri is collegial. Let I + = InvhS : R+ i, and let G+ be the even quotient of G, as in Definition 4.4. By Lemma 12.4, we can choose an I-labelling b of W such that Φ is a b-constellation. Every b-stellar cycle is also 0-stellar, so Φ is also a 0-constellation by Definition 11.2. By Lemma 12.1, there are morphisms φ : G → Γ(W, b) and φ+ : G+ → Γ(W, 0), both sending s 7→ xs (note that 0 is an I + -labelling). To show that φ is injective, we start with φ+ . If φ+ (w) = 1 for some w ∈ F2 (S), then by Proposition 7.3 there is a W-picture P with bd(P) = w. By Theorem 11.4 (b = 0 case), we can choose P so that all Φ-cycles in P are facial copies. By Lemma 12.5, there is a G+ -picture P ′ such that bd(P ′ ) = bd(P), so w = 1 in G+ . Since φ+ (J a w) = 1 for a ∈ Z2 and w ∈ F2 (S) if and only if a = 0 and φ+ (w) = 1, it follows that φ+ is injective.  56  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  Now there is a commutative diagram G  φ  Γ(W, b)  q1 G+  q2 φ+  ,  Γ(W, 0)  where q1 and q2 are the quotient maps G → G+ = (G/(JG )) × Z2 and Γ(W, b) → Γ(W, 0) = (Γ(W, b)/(JΓ )) × Z2 by JG and JΓ := JΓ(W,b) respectively. Since JG is central of order ≤ two, we conclude that ker q1 = {1G , JG }. Since φ+ is injective, if φ(w) = 1 for w ∈ G, then q1 (w) = 1, and consequently w ∈ {1, JG }. Thus it remains only to show that φ(JG ) = 1 if and only if JG = 1 in G. By definition, φ(JG ) = JΓ , and if JΓ = 1, then by Proposition 7.3 there is a closed W-picture P with ch(P) · b = 1. Since P is closed, Theorem 11.4 again implies that we can choose P so that all Φ-cycles in P are facial copies. By Lemma 12.5, there is a closed G-picture P ′ such that sign(P ′ ) = 1, and we conclude that JG = 1 in G. Thus φ is injective.  References [AGR82]  Alain Aspect, Philippe Grangier, and Gérard Roger, Experimental Realization of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-Bohm gedankenexperiment : A New Violation of Bell’s Inequalities, Physical Review Letters 49 (1982), no. 2, 91–94. [Ark12] Alex Arkhipov, Extending and Characterizing Quantum Magic Games, arXiv:1209.3819 [quant-ph]. [Bel64] J. S. Bell, On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox, Physics 1 (1964), no. 3, 195–200. [Ber94] A. J. Berrick, Groups with no nontrivial linear representations, Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. 50 (1994), 1–11. [BPA+ 08] Nicolas Brunner, Stefano Pironio, Antonio Acı́n, Nicolas Gisin, André Allan Méthot, and Valerio Scarani, Testing the Dimension of Hilbert Spaces, Physical Review Letters 100 (2008), no. 21, 210503–4. [CHSH69] John F. Clauser, Michael A. Horne, Abner Shimony, and Richard A. Holt, Proposed Experiment to Test Local Hidden-Variable Theories, Physical Review Letters 23 (1969), no. 15, 880–884. [CHTW04] R. Cleve, P. Høyer, B. Toner, and J. Watrous, Consequences and limits of nonlocal strategies, 19th IEEE Annual Conference on Computational Complexity, 2004. Proceedings, 2004, pp. 236–249. [Cir80] B. S. Cirel’son, Quantum generalizations of Bell’s inequality, Letters in Mathematical Physics 4 (1980), no. 2, 93–100. [CLS16] Richard Cleve, Li Liu, and William Slofstra, Perfect commuting-operator strategies for linear system games, arXiv:1606.02278. [CM14] Richard Cleve and Rajat Mittal, Characterization of Binary Constraint System Games, Automata, Languages, and Programming, Lecture Notes in Computer  TSIRELSON’S PROBLEM AND AN EMBEDDING THEOREM  57  Science, no. 8572, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014, arXiv:1209.2729, pp. 320– 331. [DLTW08] Andrew C. Doherty, Yeong-Cherng Liang, Ben Toner, and Stephanie Wehner, The Quantum Moment Problem and Bounds on Entangled Multi-prover Games, 2012 IEEE 27th Conference on Computational Complexity (Los Alamitos, CA, USA), vol. 0, IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 199–210. [DP16] Kenneth J. Dykema and Vern Paulsen, Synchronous correlation matrices and Connes’ embedding conjecture, Journal of Mathematical Physics 57 (2016), no. 1, 015214. [FC72] Stuart J. Freedman and John F. Clauser, Experimental Test of Local HiddenVariable Theories, Physical Review Letters 28 (1972), no. 14, 938–941. [Fri12] Tobias Fritz, Tsirelson’s problem and Kirchberg’s conjecture, Reviews in Mathematical Physics 24 (2012), no. 05, 1250012. [Fri13] , On infinite-dimensional state spaces, Journal of Mathematical Physics 54 (2013), no. 5, 052107. [HBD+ 15] B. Hensen, H. Bernien, A. E. Dréau, A. Reiserer, N. Kalb, M. S. Blok, J. Ruitenberg, R. F. L. Vermeulen, R. N. Schouten, C. Abellán, W. Amaya, V. Pruneri, M. W. Mitchell, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, D. Elkouss, S. Wehner, T. H. Taminiau, and R. Hanson, Loophole-free Bell inequality violation using electron spins separated by 1.3 kilometres, Nature 526 (2015), no. 7575, 682–686. [Hig51] Graham Higman, A Finitely Generated Infinite Simple Group, Journal of the London Mathematical Society s1-26 (1951), no. 1, 61–64. [HK64] Rudolf Haag and Daniel Kastler, An Algebraic Approach to Quantum Field Theory, Journal of Mathematical Physics 5 (1964), no. 7, 848–861. [Ji13] Zhengfeng Ji, Binary Constraint System Games and Locally Commutative Reductions, arXiv:1310.3794 [quant-ph]. [JNP+ 11] M. Junge, M. Navascués, C. Palazuelos, D. Pérez-Garcı́a, V. B. Scholz, and R. F. Werner, Connes’ embedding problem and Tsirelson’s problem, Journal of Mathematical Physics 52 (2011), no. 1, 012102. [JPPG+ 10] M. Junge, C. Palazuelos, D. Pérez-Garcı́a, I. Villanueva, and M. M. Wolf, Unbounded Violations of Bipartite Bell Inequalities via Operator Space Theory, Communications in Mathematical Physics 300 (2010), no. 3, 715–739. [KKM+ 11] J. Kempe, H. Kobayashi, K. Matsumoto, B. Toner, and T. Vidick, Entangled Games Are Hard to Approximate, SIAM Journal on Computing 40 (2011), no. 3, 848–877. [KV11] Julia Kempe and Thomas Vidick, Parallel Repetition of Entangled Games, Proceedings of the Forty-third Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (New York, NY, USA), STOC ’11, ACM, 2011, pp. 353–362. [LS77] R.C. Lyndon and P.E. Schupp, Combinatorial group theory, Classics in Mathematics, Springer, 1977. [LTW13] Debbie Leung, Ben Toner, and John Watrous, Coherent state exchange in multi-prover quantum interactive proof systems, Chicago Journal of Theoretical Computer Science 19 (2013), no. 1, 1–18. [Mer90] N. David Mermin, Simple unified form for the major no-hidden-variables theorems, Physical Review Letters 65 (1990), no. 27, 3373–3376. , Hidden variables and the two theorems of John Bell, Reviews of Mod[Mer93] ern Physics 65 (1993), no. 3, 803–815.  58  WILLIAM SLOFSTRA  [MV14]  Laura Manc̆inska and Thomas Vidick, Unbounded Entanglement Can Be Needed to Achieve the Optimal Success Probability, Automata, Languages, and Programming, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, no. 8572, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 835–846. [NCPGV12] M. Navascués, T. Cooney, D. Pérez-Garcı́a, and N. Villanueva, A Physical Approach to Tsirelson’s Problem, Foundations of Physics 42 (2012), no. 8, 985–995. [NPA08] Miguel Navascués, Stefano Pironio, and Antonio Acı́n, A convergent hierarchy of semidefinite programs characterizing the set of quantum correlations, New Journal of Physics 10 (2008), no. 7, 073013. [Oza13] Narutaka Ozawa, About the Connes embedding conjecture, Japanese Journal of Mathematics 8 (2013), no. 1, 147–183. [Per90] Asher Peres, Incompatible results of quantum measurements, Physics Letters A 151 (1990), no. 3, 107–108. [PSS+ 16] Vern I. Paulsen, Simone Severini, Daniel Stahlke, Ivan G. Todorov, and Andreas Winter, Estimating quantum chromatic numbers, Journal of Functional Analysis 270 (2016), no. 6, 2188–2222. [PT15] Vern I. Paulsen and Ivan G. Todorov, Quantum Chromatic Numbers Via Operator Systems, The Quarterly Journal of Mathematics 66 (2015), no. 2, 677–692. [RS10] Neil Robertson and Paul Seymour, Graph minors XXIII. Nash-Williams’ immersion conjecture, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 100 (2010), no. 2, 181–205. [RV15] Oded Regev and Thomas Vidick, Quantum XOR Games, ACM Trans. Comput. Theory 7 (2015), no. 4, 15:1–15:43. [Sho07] Hamish Short, Diagrams and groups, The Geometry of the Word Problem for Finitely Generated Groups, Birkhäuser Basel, Basel, 2007. [Tsi93] B.S. Tsirelson, Some results and problems on quantum Bell-type inequalities, Hadronic Journal Supplement 8 (1993), 329–345. [Tsi06] B.S. Tsirelson, Bell inequalities and operator algebras, problem statement for website of open problems at TU Braunschweig (2006), available at http://web.archive.org/web/20090414083019/http://www.imaph.tu-bs.de/qi/problems/33.htm [VK33] E. R. Van Kampen, On Some Lemmas in the Theory of Groups, American Journal of Mathematics 55 (1933), no. 1, 268–273. Institute for Quantum Computing, University of Waterloo, Canada E-mail address: weslofst@uwaterloo.ca

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
