Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_4442

Abstract:
A Systematic Aspect-Oriented Refactoring and Testing Strategy, and its Application to JHotDraw Arie van Deursen1,2 , Marius Marin2 , and Leon Moonen2,1  arXiv:cs/0503015v1 [cs.SE] 5 Mar 2005  1  2  Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica (CWI), The Netherlands Software Evolution Research Lab, Delft Univ. of Technology, The Netherlands Arie.van.Deursen@cwi.nl, A.M.Marin@ewi.tudelft.nl, and Leon.Moonen@computer.org  Abstract. Aspect oriented programming aims at achieving better modularization for a system’s crosscutting concerns in order to improve its key quality attributes, such as evolvability and reusability. Consequently, the adoption of aspect-oriented techniques in existing (legacy) software systems is of interest to remediate software aging. The refactoring of existing systems to employ aspectorientation will be considerably eased by a systematic approach that will ensure a safe and consistent migration. In this paper, we propose a refactoring and testing strategy that supports such an approach and consider issues of behavior conservation and (incremental) integration of the aspect-oriented solution with the original system. The strategy is applied to the JH OT D RAW open source project and illustrated on a group of selected concerns. Finally, we abstract from the case study and present a number of generic refactorings which contribute to an incremental aspect-oriented refactoring process and associate particular types of crosscutting concerns to the model and features of the employed aspect language. The contributions of this paper are both in the area of supporting migration towards aspect-oriented solutions and supporting the development of aspect languages that are better suited for such migrations.  1 Introduction Aspect-oriented software development is a programming paradigm that addresses crosscutting concerns: behavior of a software system that is hard to decompose and isolate in existing paradigms (as object orientation) and requires its implementation to be spread across many different modules. Aspect-oriented software development aims to overcome these limitations by capturing such crosscutting behavior in a new modularization unit, the aspect, and offers (compile time) code generation facilities to weave aspect code into the rest of the system. Claimed benefits include improved evolvability and reusability of (parts of) the software system [12, 23]. Addressing the aforementioned modularization limitations and the resulting code scattering and tangling does not only pay off in the development of new applications but it will also have major benefits in existing software systems where these, and associated, problems have become known as software aging [33] or software entropy [24–26].  The adoption of aspect-orientation in existing software requires refactoring: code transformations that improve the internal structure of a system while preserving its external behavior. Existing work on aspect-introducing-refactorings has mainly focused on presenting aspect-oriented solutions to typical crosscutting problems, especially in the context of design patterns, and showing that this results in a better separation of concerns [19, 23, 31, 32]. Also tool support for aspect extensions of refactorings, such as method extraction, has been investigated [13]. We argue, however, that widespread adoption of aspect-oriented techniques in existing software systems is still hindered by a number of open issues: – Lack of a systematic approach to refactor legacy code to employ aspect-oriented solutions; – Proper understanding of the testing challenges that rise from behavior preserving migration towards a new or extended language, such as the development of an aspect-oriented fault model and the definition of an explicit test adequacy criterion; – Suitability of aspect languages. Analysis of crosscutting concerns that were identified in various object-oriented systems in earlier work ([29]) suggested that we might encounter difficulties when trying to refactor those concerns into aspects: the mechanisms offered by particular aspect languages, or the joint point model behind the language were not always sufficient to capture all types of concerns that were encountered; – Availability of aspect-oriented and non-aspect-oriented implementations of the same software system which can be used to show the evolution benefits of proposed solutions; and, more generally, – An overall assessment of the benefits of aspect-oriented software development. These issues are the principal motivation for the work described in this paper. To address them, we propose a language and system independent refactoring and testing strategy to adopt aspect-oriented solutions in legacy code. The strategy consists of a number of systematic steps that guide the transformation, ensure conservation of observable behavior and help one deal with the intricacies of aspect-oriented migrations. We demonstrate suitability of the proposed strategy in a case study in which we migrate JH OT D RAW, a (relatively) large and well-designed open source Java application, to AJ HOT D RAW, a corresponding aspect-oriented version which is based on A SPECT J, an aspect language extending Java with crosscutting functionality. Based on the difficulties that were encountered during our refactorings, we reflect on the suitability of particular (features of) aspect languages for this type of work (i.e. evolution of legacy systems as opposed to greenfield development). This provides designers of aspect languages with valuable insights into situations that require model or feature extensions to address these concerns. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In the next section we propose an aspect-oriented refactoring and testing strategy together with its accompanying fault model and test adequacy criterion. This is followed by a section that presents general considerations about the case study. Next, a number of selected crosscutting concerns are discussed on an individual basis, depicting the context in which they occur, the original and refactored implementation together with the benefits and drawbacks. In 2  Section 5, a number of generic refactorings are abstracted from the case study and associations are made between types of crosscutting functionality and the aspect language model and features. We conclude with a general discussion followed by an overview of related work, summary of our contributions and present some directions for future work.  2 The B ETTAR Refactoring Strategy The refactoring strategy we propose is called B ETTAR: its objective is to obtain Better Evolvability Through Tested Aspect Refactorings. We distinguish the following steps: Identification of Crosscutting Concerns: Search for candidate aspects using “aspect mining” techniques such as fan-in analysis or clone detection [6, 29, 36]. Assess the scattering and tangling implications of the current non-aspect-oriented solution to the crosscutting concerns identified. Aspect Design: Identify how the concern could be implemented as an aspect. Assess the pros and cons and compare these with the existing solution. Refactoring Design: Devise a sequence of (small) steps, refactoring the object solution to the aspect solution. This may involve various traditional object-oriented refactorings, in order to unplug the crosscutting concern from code implementing other concerns, in addition to refactorings moving functionality to aspects. Conduct trade-off analysis to determine whether the aspect benefits outweigh the refactoring costs. Test Suite Design: Conduct a baseline test on the existing implementation, and analyze the test adequacy of the current test suite with respect to the risks introduced by the aspect-oriented solution as well as by the refactoring process itself. If necessary, create or extend the test suite – see the next section for further details on this step. Execute and Test: Carry out the refactorings, and verify that the behavior of the system is unaltered by means of the test suite. In Section 4 we will apply these steps to various cross cutting concerns as occurring in the open source JH OT D RAW system. As the interplay between refactoring and testing, in particular in an aspect-oriented setting, has received very little attention in the literature so far, we start by elaborating the testing steps. 2.1 Ensuring Behavior Preservation while Refactoring to Aspects Refactoring is the process of changing a software system in such a way that it improves the code’s internal structure, without altering its external behavior [14]. In order to ensure the latter constraint, most literature on refactoring assumes the presence of a test suite that verifies the correct functional behavior of the system to be refactored. As long as this test suite is executed before and after each refactoring, we can assume that we will be warned as soon as one of our refactorings affects the correct behavior of the system. 3  In practice, however, the creation of such a test suite is challenged by a number of issues. These hold in the general (pure object-oriented) situation, as well as in a setting where the refactoring includes the introduction of aspects. These issues are: – To test effectively, testing should be based on a fault model. Such a fault model guides our search for test cases that give the highest probability of finding typical faults [4]. The adoption of aspects opens opportunities for different types of faults, calling for an explicit aspect-oriented fault model. – Systematic testing makes use of an explicit test adequacy criterion (see, e.g., [4]), usually expressed as a coverage percentage to be achieved in some coverage model. Refactoring changes the internal structure of the code. Since test adequacy is expressed in terms of code structures covered, a refactoring may very well affect coverage negatively — a phenomenon referred to as the antiextensionality axiom by Weyuker [38]. – In addition to new faults introduced by using aspects, the mechanics of actually carrying out a refactoring may lead to a new fault. For example, when we moved part of a method from a class to an aspect, we did not copy-paste all statements. At other times, refactorings affect the public interface of classes, for example when moving a public method. This implies that the test suite needs to be adapted as well, causing an extra risk of letting errors pass [11]. This calls for a testing approach that is dedicated to refactorings involving the introduction of aspects. In this section, we provide such an approach. In order to do so, we first propose an aspect-oriented fault model, as well as aspect-oriented test adequacy criteria. Note that such a model and criteria can never be complete: we believe, however, that our proposals represent an important first step. The specific faults that can be made while refactoring depend on the actual refactoring applied. Therefore, we will not provide a general fault model for refactorings, but will indicate typical faults and testing implications when discussing some of the individual refactorings that we have used. We will then also indicate whether the refactoring may require changes to existing test cases. The test strategy presented below is applicable to any development project making use of aspects, and as such is independent of our case study on JH OT D RAW. In the later sections we will discuss how we actually applied the proposed fault model and adequacy criteria when while refactoring JH OT D RAW to AJ HOT D RAW. 2.2 An Aspect-Oriented Fault Model A fault model identifies relationships and components of the system under test that are most likely to have faults [4]. We distinguish faults for inter-type declarations, pointcuts, and advice. Inter-type declarations are most error-prone (and most powerful) when used to create polymorphic functions. Therefore, our fault model for introductions is based on Binder’s existing fault models for polymorphism and inheritance [4, p.501]. Our model distinguishes the following faults that are specifically related to polymorphism in introductions and inter-type declarations: 4  – Wrong method name in introduction, leading to a missing or unanticipated method override. – Wrong class name in a member-introduction, leading to a method body in the wrong place in the class hierarchy. – Inconsistent parent declaration, resulting in a (sub)class that violates Liskov’s and Wing’s behavioral notion of subtyping [27] and/or Meyer’s design-by-contract rules for inheritance (such as require no more, ensure no less) [30]. – Inconsistent overridden method introduction, also resulting in a violation of behavioral subtyping. – Omitted parent interface resulting in a method that was intended to implement an interface method, but which now stands on its own. Faults in pointcuts will have the effect that advice code is activated at the wrong program execution points. Such faults include: – Wrong primitive pointcut, using, for example, a call instead of an execution construct. – Errors in the conditional logic combining the individual pointcut conditions. – Wrong type, method, field, or constructor pattern in pointcut. In particular, the use of * as a pattern wildcard or in string matching easily leads to too many join points. Furthermore, if the underlying classes are modified or extended, the wildcard may become erroneous without the compiler being able to notice this. Faults in advice will result in the wrong action at a certain point of execution. Such faults include: – Wrong advice specification (using before instead of after, using after with the wrong argument, etc.). – Wrong or missing proceed in around advice. – Wrong or missing advice precedence. – Advice code causing a method to break its class invariant or to fail to meet its postcondition. The fault model above states that aspect weaving should not conflict with class invariants or method pre- and postconditions. The safe route to follow is that class resulting from weaving is a proper subtype of the original class. Put in terms of design by contract, the class invariant of the resulting class cannot be weaker, its method preconditions cannot be stronger, and the postconditions cannot be weaker. Typical examples are “harmless” aspects which add logging or tracing. In this situation, existing code using the class need not be aware that new functionality has been woven into it. In other words, the test suite for the original classes should pass on the classes extended by introduction or advice as well, and doing so will help to find faults originating from improper extensions. An alternative route is that the aspect actually modifies the contract in a way that conflicts with the inheritance rules from design-by-contract. This may include changes in method pre- or postconditions, and may thus require weaving in additional code at all affected call sites. A typical example is an aspect that adds security checks: this may lead to additional exceptions which at some point should be handled in the original 5  application. Faults in this approach will not be restricted to the newly woven class, but may be at any call site in the application. This setting is much harder to test and immediate reuse of the test suite will not be possible. Similar distinctions are made by Clifton and Leavens [7], who discuss the relation between behavioral subtyping and aspect weaving, and distinguish observers from assistants. Rinard et al [34] classifies interactions between woven code and the original code, recognizing augmentation, narrowing, replacement, and combinations between them. The key concern of these authors is modular reasoning: in our setting it is modular testing, and reuse of test suites to woven classes. 2.3 Aspect-Oriented Test Adequacy A test adequacy criterion prescribes the elements of the implementation under test that need to be exercised by a test suite. The coverage achieved by a test suite is the percentage of elements actually exercised. In this section we formulate adequacy criteria for aspects targeting the faults presented in the previous section. Due to the mixed nature of an aspect definition, which can address both static and dynamic crosscutting using pointcuts, intertype declarations, and advice, it is not so easy to obtain a single criterion that allows us to make meaningful statements of the form “we have tested 75% of this aspect”. Instead, we will define different criteria for the various elements in an aspect definition. Introducing a new method m in a class C is akin to directly adding the method to C. Therefore, normal coverage goals such as statement or branch coverage apply. However, as we have seen in the fault model, the most powerful and dangerous introductions are those where polymorphic methods are added. Therefore, adequacy criteria explicitly based on exercising all possible polymorphic bindings are in place as well. Rountev et al [35] include an up to date overview of criteria for polymorphic bindings. They distinguish the all-receiver-classes criterion which requires exercising all possible classes of the receiver object at a call site, and the all-target-methods criterion which requires exercising all possible bindings between a call site and the methods that may be invoked by that site. The intertype declaration of a new supertype or interface for a given class changes the inheritance hierarchy it belongs to. This, again, calls for adequacy criteria taking polymorphic calls into account. Observe that these adequacy criteria take into account all call sites within the rest of the application. Thus, polymorphic coverage goals are not just a percentage of the aspect definition itself, but a percentage of how well affected call sites are covered. To deal with adequacy for pointcuts, we will say that a test case T exercises a pointcut P if T activates advice at a join point captured by P . An adequate test suite for a pointcut should maximize our chance of finding errors in the pointcut. We distinguish primitive pointcuts and compound pointcuts built from conditional operators. Primitive pointcut operators (such as call, cflow, and so on) can capture a multitude of join points. Which of these should we ensure we execute in order to maximize our chance of finding errors in the pointcut? In most cases we cannot answer this question, so an arbitrary join point will do. For signature or type matching involving 6  wild cards, we can arrive at the equivalent of traditional boundary testing by ensuring we have one case where the asterisk matches the empty string, and one where its match is non-empty. When matching types in a hierarchy, for example in a call(* Class+.*) expression, the class named is a boundary. Using the one × one criterion [4] insisting on one point on the boundary, and one just outside it, we would obtain one test case for Class, and one for each immediate superclass (interface) above it in the hierarchy. Tests for pointcut expressions composed from multiple conditions should exercise every relevant condition combination. In traditional testing, the most rigorous approach is to test each true/false combination, leading to 2N test cases for an expression with N conditions. Alternatively, the Each-Condition/All-Conditions criterion can be used which leads to N + 1 test cases by insisting on one test case for each condition making that condition true and all others false, in addition to one making all conditions true (for and logic, replacing true and false for or logic) [4]. Pointcut logic, however, is different from normal Boolean logic, for example in that certain operators (such as target) are primarily meaningful in combinations with others. Moreover, there are typical idioms for using pointcuts, such as a sequence of a general pointcut (such as all public calls) conjuncted with several exceptions (each using the negation operator) for classes or methods that are to be excluded from the pointcut. Test adequacy for advice itself can again be based on branch or statement coverage. It is most natural to compare advice with a method that is called at relevant join points. Thus, to achieve branch coverage for the advice, we do not need to exercise all branches at every join point: it suffices to find one join point at which we exercise all branches. Furthermore, it is natural to insist that each join point at which the advice is activated is exercised. Typically, a test suite achieving statement coverage for the full unwoven application will get a far way in covering all join points. One may be tempted to think that covering all captured join points also achieves adequate pointcut coverage. This, however, is not the case, since the pointcut may be defined as a complex expression, parts of which are used to prevent firing at a particular join point. Last but not least, there may be (abstract) reusable aspects whose pointcuts do not refer to particular (named) classes or methods they should be woven into. To test such aspects, a stub application needs to be created, to which the aspect can be applied. When creating these stubs, the test adequacy issues presented above can be used as a guideline, ensuring for example that it is indeed possible to exercise all conditions in the pointcut. As far as we can see, reusable aspects themselves provide no further test adequacy constraints. 2.4 The B ETTAR Testing Strategy The test strategy combining the fault model and various adequacy criteria consists of three steps: Responsibility-Based Testing (Black Box): Create or identify a functional test suite for the concern at hand. Focus on answering the question whether the implementation of the concern does what it is supposed to do. 7  Risk-Based Testing (Grey Box): Use the fault model to refine the test suite so that faults due to the refactoring process as well as the (aspect-oriented) target solution are most likely to be captured. Source-Based Test Adequacy Validation (White Box): Inspect the coverage of the test suite developed so far (either by running it on instrumented code or by manual analysis), and verify that relevant test adequacy criteria are indeed met. If not, return to the previous steps to create additional responsibility- or risk-based test cases until the adequacy criteria are fullfilled. If the refactorings do not affect the external interfaces of the classes under test, the test suite can be applied to both the original and the refactored system. This has the advantage that one can be certain that each new test also successfully passes on the old implementation. If refactoring does require making adaptations to the test suite, the following approaches are possible: – Refactor the test suite so that it exercises more global functionality instead of invoking the modified methods directly, making it more robust to future implementation changes but potentially making it harder to achieve the desired coverage; – Apply an additional refactoring to the application offering for example an additional interface abstracting away from implementation differences between the original and target solution; – As a last resort, we could give up on our attempt to apply the test suite to the original system, and apply new tests to the new system only, thereby losing them as safeguard against behavior modification during refactoring. In our case study we were never forced to do this, and could always refactor the test suite to permit testing of both versions.  3  AJ HOT D RAW: An Open Source Aspect-Oriented Showcase  To experiment with the feasibility of adopting aspect-oriented solutions in existing software and demonstrate the strategy proposed earlier, we have created AJ HOT D RAW: an aspect-oriented refactoring of JH OT D RAW,3 a relatively large and well-designed open source Java application. In order to allow other researchers to benefit from our work and to enable comparative software evolution research on a real-life aspect-oriented system, we decided to release AJ HOT D RAW as an open source project.4 The next sections give a description of the case study and motivate the choice for both the application and the refactoring language. 3.1 The JH OT D RAW Drawing Framework JH OT D RAW is a (GUI-based) framework for drawing technical and structured 2D graphics. The application was originally developed as an exercise to show a good use of 3 4  jhotdraw.org, version 5.4b1 ajhotdraw.sourceforge.net Note for the reviewer: we are currently in the process of cleaning up our refactored code, upgrading it to JHotDraw 6.0, and moving it to the sourceforge server (see the release plan on sourceforge). Our internal version is available upon request.  8  object oriented design patterns in a Java implementation. The fact that JH OT D RAW is considered a well-designed application makes it an ideal candidate for aspect-oriented migration as it is unlikely that evolvability improvements can be made otherwise. The version of JH OT D RAW analyzed consists of approximately 40,000 lines of code, 300 classes, and 2800 methods. The JH OT D RAW editor comprises drawing tools, a set of user defined (geometrical, image, text, etc.) figures, drawing views, and a collection of (tool and menu-associated) commands. A number of additionally supported features include (re-)storing drawings (from/)to storage devices, undo/redo activities for commands, and animation functions. 3.2 Evolving a JH OT D RAW Test Suite The version of JH OT D RAW under study was shipped without a test suite. At the time of writing, the most recent version (v6.0beta1) has a number of empty test classes, automatically generated using a Java doclet. The intent is to fill them with test cases, but so far these have not been made available.5 To safeguard our refactorings, we have developed our own functional test cases on a by need basis. Since we were, initially, not familiar with the JH OT D RAW code, the development of these test cases served as our program comprehension strategy ([10]): We formulated hypotheses on JH OT D RAW’s implementation, expressed them as test cases, and then attempted to refute them by running these test cases. The test suite that was developed passes on the original, pure object oriented version of JH OT D RAW, as well as on AJ HOT D RAW, the refactored, aspect-oriented version. Our test suite is based on the JUnit framework [3]. Moreover, where needed, we make use of Java 1.4 assertions to ensure that the alterations did not break invariants or pre- and postconditions. Since we did wanted to minimize the number of changes to the JH OT D RAW code, we injected these assertions by means of aspects. For ensuring invariants, the aspect contains an inter-type declaration giving relevant classes a boolean invariant method, as well as a pointcut ensuring this method is indeed checked before and after each public method. Observe that the assertion aspects are independent of our test suite, and can be woven into the production version of JH OT D RAW as well in order to simplify debugging. 3.3  AJ HOT D RAW Organization  AJ HOT D RAW is organized into two parts: (1) the main project is the A SPECT J implementation of the system, where the identified crosscutting concerns are refactored to aspects; (2) the test subproject (JHDTest) comprises all the test cases aimed at ensuring equivalence between the the original Java solution and the refactored A SPECT J one. The aspects are put in separate packages, one per concern. Changes to the original files are restricted just to removing concerns that have been migrated to aspects. 5  We have agreed with the JH OT D RAW maintainers that our test suite will be integrated in their project.  9  The tests suite can be compiled with and executed on the archived binary files (jar) of any of the two solutions. Building and executing the test suite is automated using A NT.6  4 Refactoring of Selected Concerns from JH OT D RAW Previously, we have employed fan-in analysis for the identification of crosscutting concerns in JH OT D RAW [29]. This resulted in 10 types of concerns that were candidates for refactoring into an aspect. In this section we discuss three of these concerns (persistence, contract enforcement, and undo) in considerable detail, covering the B ETTAR steps aspect design, refactoring design, and test suite design. A transparent, gradual process of refactoring is important for building confidence in the aspect-oriented solution. Therefore, our refactorings aim at maintaining the conceptual integrity and stay close to the original design. An additional advantage of this approach is that this preserves the understandability of the refactored system for the original maintainers. 4.1 Refactoring The Persistence Concern Aspect Design Drawings in JH OT D RAW are collections of figures that can optionally be stored and recovered (write/read operations) by the application. The concern denoting this functionality, persistence, is defined by the Storable interface that declares two methods, write(StorableOutput) and read(StorableInput). The entire hierarchy of storable elements in a drawing comprises 94 interfaces and classes, of which 40 belong to the Figure class hierarchy. Because the persistence concern is already distinguished in the original design, refactoring it to an aspect is fairly straightforward. The aspect can use introductions in order to have the persistent elements of a drawing (e.g., figures) implement the Storable interface. If not all variables comprising the state of the class are accessible through public getters and setters, the aspect will need access to private members as well. The A SPECT J way to achieve this is by declaring the aspect privileged. The implementation of the Storable interface also implies an interesting enforcement constraint: “Objects that implement this interface and that are resurrected by StorableInput have to provide a default constructor with no arguments.” This constraint cannot be enforced by A SPECT J. A similar situation occurs when refactoring bean objects (see the “Bean Aspect” example in [2]) that must define no-argument constructors. A concern related to persistence is serialization, which in JH OT D RAW is also implemented for the Figure hierarchy. According to Java API specification, classes requiring special handling during de-serialization, such as a number of figures in JH OT D RAW, must implement a special private method (readObject(ObjectInputStream)). A SPECT J does not support introduction of private members into target classes. The visibility of the inter-type declarations relates to the aspect and not to the target class. Although 6  ant.apache.org  10  already acknowledged as a shortcoming (see [2]) the language interpretation of visibility prevents a consistent refactoring of similar kinds (persistence and serialization) of crosscutting concerns. A summary of the various issues is provided in Figure 1. Refactoring Design The refactoring itself is fairly straightforward, and just consists of moving read and write method implementations to the persistence aspect. The complete refactoring of the persistence concern can generally be described as Extract Interface Implementation as discussed by [22]. Old situation Aspect solution  Objects requiring persistence implement the Storable interface. Implementation of Storable interface moved to aspect by means of introductions. Code size Remains the same Benefits All persistence related code in one aspect; classes oblivious of whether they can be made persistent. Risks Encapsulation broken since persistence aspect requires privileged access. A SPECT J issues Zero-argument constructor cannot be enforced; Private methods cannot be introduced. Fig. 1. Refactoring of the Persistence Concern  Test Suite Design Testing the persistence aspect is relatively simple. We nevertheless discuss it in some detail, since the way of testing can be reused for other more complicated concerns that we will discuss next. When refactoring persistence to an aspect we run a number of risks: The first is that in our aspect, we accidentally introduce a read or write method body for a given figure in the wrong class. The second is that we make an error when copy-pasting the body of a method to an aspect. Last but not least, our removal of the persistence code from, e.g., figures may be incomplete. In order to test persistence we proceed as follows: First, we create a top level StorableTest class, which has a test method that (1) creates a Storable (typically a figure), (2) writes it to a stream, (3) reads it back into a different object, and (4) checks the equivalence between the two. Next, the creation of the actual figure is deferred to subclasses of the StorableTest class using a virtual factory method. Thus, the test hierarchy mimics the hierarchy of classes to be stored. Finally, our equivalence checking method should be based on structure, not on object identity. Such a method is not included in the JH OT D RAW implementation. We injected this method into the class hierarchy using an aspect. Observe that a collection of static equivalence methods included in, for example the test class, would not work, since the equivalence method must be polymorphic – which can be achieved by means of introductions in an aspect but not by means of static methods. This strategy implements Binder’s Polymorphic Server Test test design pattern [4]. It can be used to verify that subclasses conform with superclass behavior, and that we are 11  setting up a correct polymorphic hierarchy. It requires exercising each superclass test case to every possible subclass. In other words, we can reuse the write-read-compare test case for every subclass of Storable. 4.2 Contract Enforcement in Commands Aspect Design JH OT D RAW makes use of the Command design pattern in order to separate the user interface from the underlying model, and in order to support such features as undoing and redoing user commands. Each command has to realize the Command interface, for which a default implementation is provided in the AbstractCommand class. The key method is execute, which takes care of actually carrying out the command (such as pasting text, inserting an image, etc.). Each execute method should start with a consistency check verifying that the underlying “view” exists. Therefore, each concrete implementation of execute starts with a call to the execute implementation in the superclass, which is always the one from the AbstractCommand. This is illustrated in Figure 2.  public class AbstractCommand implements Command { ... public void execute() { if (view() == null) { throw new JHotDrawRuntimeException( "execute should NOT be getting called when view() == null"); } } } public class PasteCommand extends AbtractCommand { ... public void execute() { super.execute(); ... } }  Fig. 2. Contract Enforcement using a super method idiom.  This is a typical example of what is called “contract enforcement” in the A SPECT J manual [2]. We implemented it using a pointcut capturing all execute methods, putting the check itself in the advice. Observe that mimicking the implementation where the check is in a super method is not possible in A SPECT J: super methods cannot be accessed when advising a method. The resulting solution is shown in Figure 3. The only surprise in this figure may be the within clause in the pointcut. It turns out that anonymous subclasses of AbstractCommand do not implement the consistency check. Such classes are used for simple commands such as printing, saving, and exiting the application. Since A SPECT J does not provide a direct way to exclude anonymous classes in a pointcut, we used the within operator to exclude executions occurring in the context of the top level object creating the full user interface. One can also argue that the anonymous classes should include the check (in which case the exclusion can be omitted from the pointcut), but at present we focus on keeping the behavior as it was, not on modifying it. 12  pointcut commandExecute(AbstractCommand aCommand) : this(aCommand) && execution(void AbstractCommand.execute()) && !within(*..DrawApplication.*); before(AbstractCommand aCommand) : commandExecute(aCommand) { if (aCommand.view() == null) { throw new JHotDrawRuntimeException("..."); } }  Fig. 3. Enforcing the consistency check using before advice.  The main benefit of the aspect approach is that consistency checks cannot be forgotten. This is illustrated by the anonymous classes, but also by one non-anoymous command,7 which does not extend the AbstractCommand default implementation. Consequently, it cannot reuse the consistency check using a supercall. Inspection of the execute implementation, however, clearly shows that the code exits with a null pointer exception in case the check fails. This suggests that the aspect that we are looking for should implement the check not only for the AbstractCommand class, but for all implementations of the Command interface. Again, our current implementation does not yet do this, but only injects the implementation in subclasses of AbstractCommand. A summary of the main issues in the Contract Enforcement refactoring is provided in Figure 4. Old situation  Each concrete execute invokes its super execute in order to conduct certain consistency checks. Aspect solution The consistency check is implemented as advice, which is invoked before each call to execute, as captured in a simple pointcut. Code size 17 explicit consistency calls replaced by one pointcut; consistency check itself moved from class to advice. Benefits Reliability: it becomes impossible to forget the consistency check. Omitted checks can be fixed automatically thanks to the refactoring. Risks Check required that omissions are not on purpose. A SPECT J issues No direct support to capture anonymous classes; Cannot refer to super methods in method advice. Fig. 4. Refactoring Contract Enforcement for Commands.  Refactoring Design The restructuring can generally be described as an Advise Method Overrides refactoring, as presented in Section 5. Test Suite Design Simple as the pointcut in Figure 3 may be, it nevertheless illustrates some of the issues involved in testing refactorings that make use of pointcuts. 7  Namely, the UndoableCommand.  13  First of all, adequate testing of the consistency check in the original (non-aspect) JH OT D RAW version would typically correspond to branch coverage. This yields two test cases for the top level execute method (one in which the consistency check passes, and one in which it fails) in addition to one dedicated test for the execute implementation in each subclass. Since the super call can be resolved statically, even polymorphic adequacy models will not add test cases to this. It is interesting to observe that such a test suite would not capture the subtleties involved in designing the aspect from Figure 3. For example, the test suite does not exercise anonymous classes, nor execute methods occurring outside the scope of AbstractCommand. The aspect-specific test adequacy criteria as discussed in Section 2.1, however, do suggest creating the relevant additional test cases. Inspection of the pointcut leads to the following tests: – Since AbstractCommand occurs in a type match, we would like to test classes just off this boundary as well, leading to a test case checking what happens for the Command interface itself. – Since the pointcut is a conditional expression, we also want to investigate what happens if one of the conditions fails. This means that we want to verify that the within clause does fire for anonymous classes. Actually creating these test cases may, however, not be as easy as it seems. Testability is affected by controllability and observability, which are poor for anonymous classes and join point execution. In order to verify (observe) that our pointcut from Figure 3 does indeed capture anonymous classes correctly, we created special advice used for testing purposes only, which keeps track where a certain pointcut expression has fired. To do this, we first refactored the aspect so that the individual conditions are in separate pointcuts, as shown in Figure 5. The production aspect uses these pointcuts to perform the consistency check at the right places. The testing aspect uses exactly the same pointcut definitions to weave in code that keeps track of where (i.e. at which joinpoints) those pointcuts have fired. This set of joinpoints is then used to verify intended behavior.  abstract aspect ContractEnforcementPointcut { pointcut commandExecute(AbstractCommand aCommand) : this(aCommand) && inExecuteMethod() && ! inAbstractClass() pointcut inAbstractClass() : within(*..DrawApplication.*); pointcut inExecuteMethod() { execution(void AbstractCommand.execute()); } }  Fig. 5. Separate pointcuts for each condition to improve aspect testability.  14  Concerning controllability, the instances of the anonymous classes are hard to access. They are normally activated via a mouse event, which must be mimicked in order to trigger the command’s execute method. We avoided the need for generating mouse events by using an aspect: we intercept the constructors for anonymous command classes, and collect them in a set: after the full application has been built we can apply the execute method to each command. 4.3 Refactoring the Undo Concern Background and Current Approach Support for “undo” is a newly added feature in the analyzed version of JH OT D RAW. As can be imagined, it is a concern that crosscuts across many different classes. More than 30 elements of the JH OT D RAW framework, comprising commands, tools and handles, have associated undo constructs to revert the changes spawned by their underlying activities. The discussion here will focus on the commands group, as it is the largest in terms of defined undo activities. Some participants in JH OT D RAW’s undo implementation are shown in Figure 6: – Each command is associated with one undo activity, whose method undo can be invoked to revert the command. – The undo activity is implemented in a nested class of the command, which is instantiated using a factory method called createUndoActivity. – The primary abstraction in the undo activity is the list of affected figures: when the command’s execute method is invoked, the relevant state of the affected figures is stored in the undo activity. – Undo activities are maintained on a stack by the undo manager.  DrawingEditor  UndoManager  *  <interface> Command execute() createUndoActivity()  undoActivity  AbstractCommand  ConcreteCommand  <interface> Undoable undo()  * affectedFigures  UndoableAdapter  has nested class  ConcreteUndoable  Fig. 6. Participants in JH OT D RAW’s undo implementation.  15  Figure  public class PasteCommand extends FigureTransferCommand { public void execute() { ... FigureSelection selection = (FigureSelection)Clipboard.getClipboard().getContents(); if (selection != null) { setUndoActivity(createUndoActivity()); ... //core command logic and other undo setup FigureEnumeration fe = insertFigures(...); getUndoActivity().setAffectedFigures(fe); ... } } }  Fig. 7. The original PasteCommand class.  Aspect Design The aspect solution to undo we propose consists of associating an undodedicated aspect to each undo-able command. The aspect implements the entire undo functionality for the given command, while the associated class remains oblivious to its secondary concern. By convention, for enforcing the relation with the command class, each aspect will consistently be named by appending “UndoActivity” to the name of the command class. In a successive step, the command’s nested UndoActivity class moves to the aspect. The factory methods for the undo activities (createUndoActivity()) also move to the aspect, from where they are introduced back into the associated command classes using inter-type declarations. The statements in the execute method that are responsible for setting up the undo activity, are taken out of the execute method, and woven into it by means of advice. In some cases the corresponding pointcut simply needs to capture all execute method calls; in other cases the pointcut is more complex, depending on the way the undo code is mixed with the regular code. As an example, consider the paste command, whose execute method consists of retrieving the selected figures from the clipboard, inserting them into the current view, and clearing the clipboard. All this is done in a single method, using local variables and if-then-else statements to deal with such situations as an empty clipboard. The undo aspect will require the same conditional logic, and access to the same data in the same order. The following aspect solutions are possible: – If all getters are side effect free, an approach is to setup the undo activity in a simple before advice. In JH OT D RAW, however, this is not the case, for example because of figure enumerators that have an internal state. – The alternative route is to intercept relevant getters, keep track of the data locally in the advice as well, and inject advice after all data has been collected. This is the approach we follow, but some of the pointcuts are somewhat artificial. Figure 8 illustrates such a pointcut in the undo aspect for the PasteCommand, which is also shown in figure 7. The execute callClipboardgetContents() pointcut captures the call that sets the reference to be checked by both the command’s core logic and the undo functionality in the aspect. – The last possibility is to refactor the long execute method into smaller steps using non-private methods. The extra method calls can be intercepted allowing smooth extension with setting up the undo activity, at the cost of creating a larger interface and breaking encapsulation. 16  public aspect PasteCommandUndoActivity { //store the Clipboard’s contents - common condition FigureSelection selection; pointcut execute_callClipboardgetContents() : call(Object Clipboard.getContents()) && withincode(void PasteCommand.execute()); after() returning(Object select) : execute_callClipboardgetContents() { selection = (FigureSelection)select; } ... pointcut executePasteCommand(PasteCommand cmd) : this(cmd) && execution(void PasteCommand.execute());  }  // Execute undo setup void after(PasteCommand cmd) : executePasteCommand(cmd) { // the same condition as in the advised method if(selection != null) { cmd.setUndoActivity(cmd.createUndoActivity()); ... cmd.getUndoActivity().setAffectedFigures(...); } }  Fig. 8. The undo aspect for PasteCommand.  The resulting system differs in two ways from the original design. First, the original design uses static nested classes to enforce a syntactical relation between the undo activity and its enclosing command class. Since the A SPECT J mechanisms do not allow introduction of nested classes, the post-refactoring association will only be an indirect one, based on naming conventions. This is a weaker connection than the one provided by the original solution. A second difference is that the visibility of certain methods has been altered, since A SPECT J cannot be used to introduce, for example, the required factory method as protected. Refactoring Design The complexity of the refactoring is determined by the complexity of unplugging undo from the commands themselves. We distinguish different levels of unpluggability: 1. The nested undo activity class of the command, and all its uses can be safely removed from the command. The fairly simple ChangeAttributeCommand class is an example in this category. 2. The command’s core logic makes use of some of the data stored in the undo activity. This is typically done for the list of affected figures. Since there is no real need for this, we could easily refactor the core logic so that it does not refer to the undo activity anymore. 3. The nested undo activity not only deals with undo, but also contains core logic needed for the proper execution of the command. An example is the InsertImageCommand: its undo activity contains a method called insertImage which actually inserts the image (instead of undoing it). We consider this a design violation. Our solution consists of applying traditional refactorings before starting with the aspect refactoring, so that the command does not depend on the undo activity anymore. 17  4. The nested undo activity is not only used for this particular command, but also for similar commands. This is the case for the PasteCommand. Our aspect refactoring will rename the undo activity, and hence requires a simple change to these commands. We anticipate that any non-trivial aspect refactoring will require similar objectoriented refactorings, before the crosscutting concern can be taken out of the available system. A more detailed discussion of the undo concern refactoring, accompanied by code snippets, is presented in [28]. Old situation  Each command’s execute sets up a corresponding undo activity, which is implemented through a nested class. Aspect solution One aspect per command, which contains the undo activity implementation, and introduces the association into the command. Execute method intercepted to setup the proper undo activity state. Code size Remains the same. Benefits Strong tangling between commands and their undo activity eliminated; commands are easier to understand. Risks Undo activity may require sophisticated pointcuts to intercept all relevant state modifications of the command; Refactoring of commands needed in order to unplug undo support from them. A SPECT J issues No support for introducing nested classes. Visibility affected since protected methods cannot be introduced. Modular reasoning affected by keeping track of data set in the advised method. Fig. 9. Refactoring Undo.  Test Suite Design In testing undo, we essentially combine the testing approaches of the persistence and contract enforcement concerns discussed previously. First of all, we create a reusable test suite at the Command level. This test can be used for any command subclass, and ensures that each subclass complies with then intended semantics. This test set takes care of: – Setting up an appropriate JH OT D RAW application in which a concrete command can be created. The actual command created is deferred to subclasses of the test class. – Bringing the application in a setting in which the execute can be carried out (for example, many commands require that some figures in the drawing are selected), and actually invoking it. – Comparing the effects of the command execution with the intended behavior — this step is specific to the actual command and deferred to subclasses. It usually consists of comparing the modified selected figures with a set of figures actually constructed in the test case. – Invoking the undo method on the command’s undo-activity, and comparing that the effects are indeed canceled. Again, this comparison typically involves the set of affected figures. 18  Thus, the test case follows the template method design pattern, and defers the details of certain steps to its subclasses. To test the various pointcuts, the approach described for contract enforcement was adopted, weaving in special advice that allowed us to observe which pointcut actually fires.  5 Contributing to the Catalog of Refactorings Several authors have proposed catalogs of aspect-oriented refactorings [22, 31, 32], in the spirit of Fowler’s catalog of object-oriented refactorings [14]. We were able to reuse several of these existing refactorings, such as Monteiro’s Encapsulate Implements with Declare Parents, and Move Method from Class to Inter-type, or Laddad’s Extract Method Calls refactoring which encapsulates calls to a method from multiple places into an aspect. In this section we add our contribution to these existing catalogs, casting some of the experiences we obtained from building AJ HOT D RAW into generally reusable refactorings. An open question is at what level of abstraction such refactorings should be defined. Is introducing some design pattern considered a refactoring? It is, but Fowler’s book has explicit refactorings described for just a few design patterns, not all. The reason for this is, most likely, that the mechanics for introducing such a design pattern can hardly be described in a reusable way, and for that reason the refactoring description would not add much useful information to the pattern description. In this respect an interesting approach is taken by Kerievsky [21], who explicitly addresses refactorings to patterns. He focuses on a subset of the design patterns, namely those for which common coding tricks are known that do not yet provide the benefits of using the full pattern, such as in his Replace Hard-Coded Notifications with Observer refactoring. A similar distinction holds for aspect refactorings. Introducing refactorings for each of the prototypical concerns listed in, for example, the A SPECT J programming guide [2] may not be particularly useful. But in some cases, the “old”, non-aspect solution can be reasonably well described (for example an Observer implementation following the guidelines from [15]), and it does make sense to describe how such an implementation can be refactored into an aspect solution (such as the one from [19]). If we look at the refactorings from Monteiro, these can be categorized as fairly technical, elementary refactorings, such as introducing an inter-type declaration [31]. The refactorings from Laddad [22] are more of a mixed style, some being elementary, others being closer to typical concerns from the A SPECT J manual. Below we try to provide some building blocks for creating refactoring descriptions that give concrete advice how certain concerns can be turned into aspects. Move Role to Aspect Though not discussed in the previous section, several of our refactorings involve the creation of an aspect-oriented implementation of a design pattern. As an example, JH OT D RAW contains several instantiations of the Observer pattern, which we essentially implemented according to the approach proposed by Hannemann and Kiczales [19]. 19  The participants in this pattern can be an observer or a subject. The existing JH OTD RAW implementation does have a separate interface for the observer role, but not for the subject role. We propose to refactor this and introduce a subject interface via an aspect in order to: (a) make the two different roles explicit, and (b) remove the observer pattern details from the primary concerns. Note that in some cases, one class can be involved in multiple design patterns adopting different roles for them. For example, a composite figure is a subject as well as an observer, listening to changes in its subfigures while being listened to by, for example, drawings. The total number of methods implemented by such multi-role classes can be substantial, making them hard to understand; a problem addressed by moving the roles to aspects. Thus, Move Role to Aspect creates an interface for a particular role in a design pattern, and superimposes this role on an existing class by means of an aspect. Move Observer to Aspect A more high level refactoring is to move an observer implementation into an aspect. This is a compound refactoring, involving three elementary steps: first, the Move Role to Aspect refactoring is applied twice, once for the subject and once for the observer role. Subsequently, the calls made in subjects to notify the observers of changes are captured into a pointcut and extracted into advice. Override Method with Advice for Overlapping Roles Just like one class can fullfil multiple roles from one or more different design patterns, one method can implement features related to multiple roles. This is common in Java Swing design and also occurs in one of our JH OT D RAW refactorings. This refactoring dealt with the CommandMenu, which acts as both view and controller for the interactive drawing editor of the application. The method exhibiting the overlapping roles, checkEnabled(), enables/disables menu items according to the status (executable/non-executable) of the command to be activated when the item is selected. Although the method belongs to the interface of the view component, allowing to set the view’s elements status, its implementation relies on controller decisions. The proposed refactoring places the method’s definition into the interface for the role to which it belongs, in this case, the view role, making it accessible to the developer of the GUI. Furthermore, the controller aspect uses an around advice to override the default behavior of the method and to make it context(command)-aware. Advise Method Overrides This refactoring aims at removing duplication arising from statements that are common to (the start or end of) all method overrides of a given (superclass) method. Such statements are replaced by advice to any refinement of the superclass method. Examples in JH OT D RAW include the contract enforcement we discussed previously (the check at the beginning of each execute method), as well as a call to the checkDamage method that is contained at the end of each execute method.  6 Discussion What did we learn from refactoring JH OT D RAW to aspects and validating behavior conservation by means of testing? 20  First of all, we once again learned that testing is actually needed for such refactorings. In several cases, we detected errors in our pointcuts, introductions, and copy-paste activities thanks to our test suite. Although all of us will agree with this need for testing, it is alarming, to say the least, that neither the popular textbooks on aspect-oriented programming (such as [23, 2, 16]) nor the existing work on aspect-oriented refactoring [22, 32] provides any advice on how to approach aspect-oriented testing in a systematic way. Second, our fault model as well as our adequacy criteria illustrate how easy it is to make errors during aspect-oriented programs, and how much needs to be done in order to have a reasonable chance of finding these errors using tests. Moreover, both the observability (did this pointcut fire?) and the controllability (which inputs will cause a pointcut to be exercised?) of aspect-oriented programs typically are problematic. Admittedly, at several points in time we were tempted to omit the testing since it seemed too complicated to create a test suite capable of achieving the required coverage. Testing tool support may very well help here: but this requires an adequacy model first, which is what we proposed in the paper. Concerning the refactorings themselves, our experiments illustrate that being oblvious to future extensions is not as easy as it may seem. For example, the undo concern was added only in version 5.4 of JH OT D RAW. Could this have been implemented as a separate aspect without modifying JH OT D RAW version 5.3? Our refactoring shows the direction this would take. But for some commands, such as the paste command, artificial pointcuts are needed, which are very brittle if the underlying primary logic in the command changes. For most cases, assessing the benefits of an aspect-oriented refactoring turned out to be a fairly subjective process that is hard to quantify. The aspect design step looks for such solutions that would enhance the system’s evolvability; that is, to achieve a better modularization for the, otherwise, scattered and tangled parts of a concern, and to provide an implementation that better reflects the concern-based reasoning over the system. It is not always apparent, however, in the context of a (relatively) large system as the analyzed case study, that the new, aspect solution surpasses the legacy one. Although we argue to have improved the separation of concerns, for some more complex refactorings, e.g, undo, the downfalls of the aspect-oriented implementation make it difficult to asses the improvements for the overall system, or even the gains in modular reasoning over the refactored crosscutting concern. Difficulties could also occur for less demanding refactorings as for example, contract enforcement, depending on the uniformity of the places where the contract needs to be enforced. Last but not least, it is striking that almost every refactoring we experimented with raised one or more issues concerning A SPECT J (such as visibility modifiers, nested classes, or anymous classes). Some of these limitations are quite technical in nature, and are likely to be resolved in future versions of A SPECT J. Also, other aspect-oriented frameworks, such as AspectWerkz 28 , may offer solutions to some of the issues. Other limitations are more fundamental (such as the constraint that a class should offer a zero-argument constructor or the inability to access super methods), and call for a more rigorous reconsideration of existing aspect-oriented models. 8  aspectwerkz.codehaus.org  21  7 Related Work An important part of research into the area of refactoring to aspect-orientation has analyzed aspect solutions to a number of (sometimes complex) concerns that typically crosscut the primary decomposition of a system [22, 19, 23]. The association between the concern and its aspect solution is an important indication of how a specific language model is intended to address types of crosscuttings. However, the specific implications of applying the refactorings in the context of a large system, where deviations from the examples used to describe the refactorings are very likely, are not considered. In this paper we showed some of the difficulties that arise when these solutions are applied to concerns in a large system. A number of authors investigated the possibility of building catalogs of aspect refactorings. Monteiro and Fernandes [32] proposed a set of code transformations from Java to A SPECT J specific modularization units, describing steps in a feature extraction process. The approach has followed the format used by Fowler [14] to describe objectoriented refactorings, and was further significantly extended [31]. The study emphasized the mechanics associated to code transformations as opposed to the relation with typical crosscutting concerns [22, 2, 19]. A similar list is also proposed by Iwamoto and Zhao [20], but the authors do not provide details about any of the specific refactorings. The attention tends to focus on potential conflicts between the aspect refactorings and the traditional, object-oriented ones. This issue is also addressed by Hanenberg et al [17], as well as Hannemann et al, who discuss the possibility of a refactoring approach based on a developer-tool dialog [18]. Specific techniques, like program slicing, are employed by Ettinger and Verbaere [13] to extract tangled code into method and further into advice, as an extension of the object-oriented refactoring to aspects. Closely related to the work described in this paper, Coady et al investigate the benefits of aspect-oriented solutions for evolving operating system code and for better managing its variability [8, 5]. To that end they describe, for example, how the prefetching concern can be separated from the page handling code in the FreeBSD kernel code [9]. Although their work aims at assessing the benefits of aspect-oriented software development, in contrast to the work presented in this paper, it has not led to a publicly available aspect-oriented and non-aspect-oriented version of the same software system which can be used for comparative experimental software evolution research by other researchers. However, none of this refactoring work mentions a testing strategy that accompanies the migration process. The attention given to testing in the context of aspect-orientation is limited and not with concerns to refactoring. Few published test adequacy criteria for aspect-oriented programming have been formulated: the only work we are aware of is by Alexander et al, who propose a candidate model and raise a number of research questions [1]. Ubayashi and Tamai [37] use model checking to verify object crosscutting properties in aspect-oriented programs. As a first attempt to define an approach for testing aspect-oriented programs, Zhao [39] proposes a data-flow-based unit testing. The tests are oriented towards aspect and class modules that can potentially be targeted by multiple aspects. Based on the modules’ accessibility three levels of testing are considered, i.e., intra-module, inter-module, and intra-aspect or intra-class. 22  8 Concluding Remarks Refactoring to aspect-orientation aims at improving the evolvability and reusability of a system. Important issues to be considered in this context are (1) the adequacy of the aspect solutions discussed by a number of authors when applied to a large application, (2) the assessment of the support for and improvements brought by refactoring to aspects, and (3) the challenges of behavior conservation when migrating to aspect-supported implementations. This paper addresses these problems by proposing a refactoring and testing strategy to guide the migration process, and successively by applying it to an open source Java system. The testing strategy aimed at ensuring migration consistency, introduces an aspect-oriented fault model and adequacy criteria. Further, aspect and refactoring designs are analyzed for selected concerns in the system under investigation, which also include new, complex examples of crosscuttings. The analysis consists of a proposed aspect solution, associated validating tests, and a trade-off review of the pre- and postrefactoring implementations. The difficulties in assessing overall improvements due to refactoring are turned into considerations about the suitability of the language features and model for better supporting the types of identified crosscutting concerns. We believe that the development of aspect languages could benefit from catalogs that associate types of crosscutting concerns to language mechanisms, and we provide further input for such catalogs. The paper’s main contributions are (1) an aspect-oriented fault model and adequacy criteria; (2) a refactoring strategy that emphasizes testing and the use of aspect-oriented solutions; (3) a detailed discussion of aspect refactorings and their testing implications, as carried out on an existing system; and (4) the initiation of an open source project that can be used to experiment with aspect-oriented testing and refactoring, and that can be used to compare an object with an aspect solution. The work described in this paper can be extended in various ways. First, we will continue to experiment with AJ HOT D RAW and other case studies, in order to further extend the fault model, adequacy criteria, and refactoring catalogs. Second we will use the proposed models and the experience gained from these case studies to come up with automated tool support for both testing and refactoring of aspect-oriented programs. Last but not least, we will analyze the risks and benefits of the various aspect solutions, and reflect on ways in which some of the limitations of the current solutions can be resolved. In order to put our work in a broader perspective, we would like to refer to Bray et al who state: “assessment of aspect-oriented software development in general is still arguably in its early days” [5]. We argue that one of the prerequisites for such an assessment is the availability of an aspect-oriented and non-aspect oriented version of the same software system. Our work aims to create such versions for a publicly available open source software system and thereby enables experimental comparative software evolution research to asses the benefits of aspect-orientation. Acknowledgments We would like to thank Magiel Bruntink (CWI), Hylke van Dijk (TU Delft), Marco Lormans (TU Delft), and Tom Tourwé (CWI), for reading earlier drafts of this paper. 23  Partial support was received from SENTERNovem, (Delft University of Technology, project MOOSE, ITEA 01002, and CWI, project IDEALS, hosted by the Embedded Systems Institute).  References 1. R. Alexander, J.M. Bieman, and A. A. Andrews. Towards the systematic testing of aspectoriented programs. Technical Report CS-4-105, Colorado State University, 2004. 2. The AspectJ Team. The AspectJ Programming Guide. Palo Alto Research Center, 2003. Version 1.2. 3. K. Beck and E. Gamma. Test infected: Programmers love writing tests. Java Report, 3(7):51– 56, 1998. www.junit.org. 4. R. V. Binder. Testing Object-Oriented Systems: Models, Patterns, and Tools. AddisonWesley, 2000. 5. S. Bray, M. Yuen, Y. Coady, and M. E. Fiuczynski. Managing variability in systems: Oh what a tangled OS we weave. In D. Beuche, K. Czarnecki, M. Mezini, C. Schwanninger, and M. Voelter, editors, Managing Variabilities Consistently in Design and Code (MVCDC OOPSLA04), 2004. 6. M. Bruntink, A. van Deursen, R. van Engelen, and T. Tourwé. An evaluation of clone detection techniques for identifying cross-cutting concerns. In Proc. of Int. Conf. on Software Maintenance (ICSM 2004). IEEE CS, 2004. 7. C. Clifton and G. Leavens. Obliviousness, modular reasoning, and the behavioral subtyping analogy. In Workshop on Software-Engineering Properties of Languages for Aspect Technologies (SPLAT’03), 2003. http://www.daimi.au.dk/˜eernst/splat03/. 8. Y. Coady and G. Kiczales. Back to the future: A retroactive study of aspect evolution in operating system code. In Mehmet Akşit, editor, Proc. of 2nd Int. Conf. on Aspect-Oriented Software Development (AOSD), pages 50–59. ACM Press, March 2003. 9. Y. Coady, G. Kiczales, M. Feeley, and G. Smolyn. Using AspectC to improve the modularity of path-specific customization in operating system code. In Proc. of 8th European Softw. Eng. Conf. (ESEC/FSE), pages 88–98. ACM Press, 2001. 10. A. van Deursen. Program comprehension risks and benefits in extreme programming. In E. Burd, P. Aiken, and R. Koschke, editors, Proc. 8th Working Conf. on Reverse Engineering (WCRE 2001), pages 176–185. IEEE CS Press, 2001. 11. A. van Deursen and L. Moonen. The video store revisited - thoughts on refactoring and testing. In M. Marchesi and G. Succi, editors, Proc. of 3nd Int. Conf. on Extreme Programming and Flexible Processes in Software Engineering (XP2002), pages 71–76. University of Cagliari, May 2002. 12. T. Elrad, M. Aksit, G. Kiczales, K. Lieberherr, and H. Ossher. Discussing aspects of AOP. Communcations of the ACM, 44(10):33–38, 2001. 13. R. Ettinger and M. Verbaere. Untangling: A slice extraction refactoring. In Proc. of 3rd Int. Conf. on Aspect-Oriented Software Development. ACM Press, 2004. 14. M. Fowler. Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code. Addison Wesley, 1999. 15. E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. Addison-Wesley, 1994. 16. J. D. Gradecki and N. Lesiecki. Mastering AspectJ - Aspect Oriented Programmingin Java. Wiley Publishing, Inc., 2003. 17. S. Hanenberg, C. Oberschulte, and R. Unland. Refactoring of aspect-oriented software. In Proc. of Net.ObjectDays Conference, pages 19–35. Springer-Verlag, 2003.  24  18. J. Hannemann, T. Fritz, and G. C. Murphy. Refactoring to aspects: an interactive approach. In Proc. of 2003 OOPSLA Workshop on Eclipse technology eXchange, pages 74–78. ACM Press, 2003. 19. J. Hannemann and G. Kiczales. Design pattern implementation in Java and AspectJ. In Proc. of 17th Annual ACM conf. on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA), pages 161–173. ACM Press, 2002. 20. M. Iwamoto and J. Zhao. Refactoring aspect-oriented programs. In Proc. of 4th AOSD Modeling With UML Workshop, UML’2003, San Francisco, California, USA, 2003. 21. J. Kerievsky. Refactoring to Patterns. Addison-Wesley, 2004. 22. R. Laddad. Aspect-oriented refactoring. www.theserverside.com, December 2003. 23. R. Laddad. AspectJ in Action - Practical Aspect Oriented Programming. Manning, 2003. 24. M. M. Lehman. On understanding laws, evolution and conservation in the large program life cycle. Journal of Systems and Software, 1(3):213–221, 1980. 25. M. M. Lehman. Programs, life cycles and laws of software evolution. Proceedings of the IEEE, 68(9):1060–1076, September 1980. Special Issue on Software Engineering. 26. M. M. Lehman, D. E. Perry, and J. F. Ramil. Implications of evolution metrics on software maintenance. In T. M. Koshgoftaar and K. Bennett, editors, Proc. of Int. Conf. on Softw. Maintenance (ICSM 1998), pages 208–217. IEEE CS Press, 1998. 27. B. Liskov and J. M. Wing. A behavioral notion of subtyping. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 16(6):1811–1841, 1994. 28. M. Marin. Refactoring JHotDraw’s Undo concern to AspectJ. In Proc. of First Workshop on Aspect Reverse Engineering (WARE). Delft University of Technology, 2004. 29. M. Marin, A. van Deursen, and L. Moonen. Identifying aspects using fan-in analysis. In Proc. of 11th Working Conf. on Reverse Engineering (WCRE2004). IEEE CS, 2004. 30. B. Meyer. Object-Oriented Software Construction. Prentice-Hall, 2nd edition, 1997. 31. M.P. Monteiro. Catalogue of refactorings for AspectJ. Technical Report UM-DI-GECSD200401, Universidade do Minho, 2004. 32. M.P. Monteiro and J.M. Fernandes. Object-to-aspect refactorings for feature extraction. In Proc. of 3rd Int. Conf. on Aspect-Oriented Software Development. ACM Press, 2004. Industry paper. 33. D. L. Parnas. Software aging. In Proc. of 16th Int. Conf. on Softw. Eng. (ICSE), pages 279–287. IEEE CS Press, 1994. 34. M. C. Rinard, A. Salcianu, and S. Bugrara. A classification system and analysis for aspectoriented programs. In Proc. of 12th ACM SIGSOFT Int. Symp. on Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE), pages 147–158. ACM Press, 2004. 35. A. Rountev, A. Milanova, and B. G. Ryder. Fragment class analysis for testing of polymorphism in Java software. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., 30(6):372–387, 2004. 36. P. Tonella and M. Ceccato. Migrating interface implementation to aspect oriented programming. In Proc. of Int. Conf. on Softw. Maintenance (ICSM 2004). IEEE CS Press, 2004. 37. N. Ubayashi and T. Tamai. Aspect-oriented programming with model checking. In Proc. of 1st Int. Conf. on Aspect-oriented software development (AOSD), pages 148–154. ACM Press, 2002. 38. E. Weyuker. The evaluation of program-based software test data adequacy criteria. Communications of the ACM, 31(6):668–675, June 1988. 39. J. Zhao. Data-flow-based unit testing of aspect-oriented programs. In Proc. of the 27th Annual IEEE Int. Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), pages 188– 197. IEEE CS, 2003.  25

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
