Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4351

Abstract:
ON WEAK FRAÏSSÉ LIMITS  arXiv:1711.09295v1 [math.LO] 25 Nov 2017  ZAKHAR KABLUCHKO AND KATRIN TENT Abstract. Using the natural action of S∞ we show that a countable hereditary class C of finitely generated structures has the joint embedding property (JEP) and the weak amalgamation property (WAP) if and only if there is a structure M whose isomorphism type is comeager in the space of all countable, infinitely generated structures with age in C. In this case, M is the weak Fraı̈ssé limit of C. This applies in particular to countable structures with generic automorphisms and recovers a result by Kechris and Rosendal [Proc. Lond. Math. Soc., 2007 ].  1. Introduction After writing the note [2] showing that the class of universal-homogenous structures is comeager in some appropriate space of structures, we noticed that the methods from the paper of Kechris and Rosendal [3] easily yield a stronger and more general result applying to weak Fraı̈ssé classes of finitely generated structures. Thus, the aim of the present note is to prove that for an arbitrary hereditary class C of finitely generated (not necessarily finite) structures, the space of all countable, infinitely generated structures with age in C contains a comeager subset of structures isomorphic to some countable structure M if and only if C has the weak Fraı̈ssé property and M is the weak Fraı̈ssé limit of C. As a corollary, this proves the existence and uniqueness of the weak Fraı̈ssé limit of a weak Fraı̈ssé class. We also explain how this in turn reproves the result by Kechris and Rosendal [3] on comeager conjugacy classes of automorphisms of such structures in the slightly more general setting of finitely generated structures. Similar results for classes of finite structures were obtained by Kruckman in his PhD thesis [4] using Banach–Mazur games on posets. 2. Background and the main result 2.1. Weak Fras̈sé limits. Let L be a countable language. For background on model theory we refer to [6]. Here and in what follows, the word ‘structure’ always means ‘L-structure’. Definition 2.1. Let C be a countable class of (isomorphism types of) finitely generated structures and assume that C is hereditary, that is closed under taking finitely generated substructures. We say that C is a weak Fraı̈ssé class if C satisfies 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary: 03C15; Secondary: 54E52, 60B99. Key words and phrases. Fraı̈ssé class, universality, homogeneity, comeager set, Baire property, Polish group actions. 1  2  ZAKHAR KABLUCHKO AND KATRIN TENT  (WAP) (Weak Amalgamation Property) For any A ∈ C there is some B ∈ C and embedding e : A −→ B such that for all B1 , B2 ∈ C and embeddings hi of B into Bi , i = 1, 2, there is some C ∈ C and embeddings gi of Bi into C, i = 1, 2, such that g1 ◦h1 ◦e = g2 ◦h2 ◦e. (JEP) (Joint Embedding Property) For any A, B ∈ C there is some D ∈ C containing A and B as a substructure. The class C is called a Fraı̈ssé class if in condition (WAP) we can choose B = A and e = id. The notion of Weak Amalgamation was first studied by Ivanov in [1]. For a structure M, the age of M is the class of isomorphism types of finitely generated substructures of M. Definition 2.2. Let C be a countable hereditary class of finitely generated structures and let M be a countable structure. (1) (C-Universality) We say that M is C-universal if age(M) = C. (2) (Weak C-Homogeneity) We say that M is weakly C-homogeneous if for any structure A ∈ C there is some B ∈ C and embedding e : A −→ B such that for any substructures B1 , B2 ⊂ M with (A1 , B1 ), (A2 , B2 ) isomorphic to (e(A), B) any isomorphism ϕ : (A1 , B1 ) → (A1 , B2 ) extends to an automorphism f of M with ϕ|A1 = f |A1 . (3) (Weak C-Saturation) For any structure A ∈ C there is some B ∈ C and embedding e : A −→ B such that for any D ∈ C containing B and any embedding h : B −→ M there is an embedding of D into M extending h ◦ e on A. The structure M is called C-homogeneous (C-saturated, respectively) if we can choose A = B and e = id. A countable structure M is called a (weak) Fraı̈ssé limit for C if it is C-universal and (weakly) C-homogeneous. We will show that a countable hereditary class C of finitely generated structures has a weak Fraı̈ssé limit if and only if C satisfies (JEP) and (WAP). 2.2. The space of structures and the action of S∞ . Let C be a countable hereditary class of finitely generated structures and let S be the set of all structures M defined on the universe ω (or any other fixed countable universe) with the following two properties: (i) the age of M is contained in C and (ii) M is not finitely generated. Metric on S: We endow S with the following metric: For two different structures M, N ∈ S we put d(M, N) = 2−k where k ∈ {0, 1, . . .} is minimal such that the substructures of M and N generated by the elements 0, 1, . . . , k are different, i.e. either these substructures have different universes as subsets of ω or their universes agree, but some constant, relation or function differs on the universe. Note that with this metric, S becomes a complete (ultra)metric space. Consequently, the Baire category theorem holds in S. Topology on S: For a finitely generated structure B whose isomorphism type is contained in C and such that dom B ⊂ ω, let OB be the set of all structures A ∈ S whose restriction to dom B coincides with B. It is easy to see that these sets (after discarding the empty ones)  3  form a basis of some topology T on S, see [2], and that T is the topology induced by the metric d on S. Proposition 2.3. The space (S, T ) is separable if and only if every structure from C that can be embedded into a countable, infinitely generated structure, is finite. Proof. Let (S, T ) be separable with a countable dense set {X1 , X2 , . . .}. Assume, by contraposition, that there is an infinite structure A0 ∈ C that can be embedded into some countable infinitely generated structure. Taking some infinite set U ⊂ ω as a universe, we can construct a structure A(U) isomorphic to A0 . The open sets of the form OA(U ) are non-empty, hence any such set contains some point of the form Xi . Since there are uncountably many possible U’s, there is at least one Xi contained in uncountably many sets of the form OA(U ) . Hence, Xi has uncountably many finitely generated substructures with pairwise different universes. But this is a contradiction. Conversely, if all finitely generated substructures of any M ∈ S are finite, then there are only countably many non-empty basic open sets of the form OB . By choosing a point in any such set, we obtain a countable dense subset of S, thus proving separability.  Action of S∞ on S: Consider S∞ , the permutation group on ω, as a Polish group with a neighbourhood basis of the identity consisting of pointwise stabilizers of finite sets. There is a natural continuous action of G = S∞ on S just given by the action g ∈ G on the domain ω of a structure and transferring the structure to the image. Under this action, the orbit of a structure M ∈ S is the class of structures isomorphic to M and the stabilizer GM consists of all automorphisms of M. Proposition 2.4. (cp. [3], Prop. 3.2) Let G be a closed subgroup of S∞ acting continuously on a topological space X and let x ∈ X. Then the following are equivalent: (1) The orbit of x under G is non-meager. (2) For any open subgroup V of G the orbit of x under V is somewhere dense. Proof. ¬(2) ⇒ ¬(1): Suppose that the orbit of x under some open subgroup V ≤ G is nowhere dense. Since V has countable index in G and the orbit of x under each coset gV is also nowhere dense, the orbit of x under G is meager. ¬(1) ⇒ ¬(2): Conversely, assume that the orbit of x under G is meager which means that it is contained in the countable union of closed nowhere dense sets Fn , n ∈ ω. Then the sets Kn = {g ∈ G : g(x) ∈ Fn } are closed in G and their union is all of G. At least one of the Kn has non-empty interior, so contains a translate of some open subgroup V . Thus the orbit of x under (all translates of) V is nowhere dense.  2.3. Main result. Recall that a subset of a topological space is called comeager if its complement is meager or, equivalently, if the set can be represented as a countable intersection of subsets with dense interior. Theorem 2.5. Let C be a countable hereditary class of finitely generated structures and let (S, T ) be the topological space of all countable structures on ω with age contained in C and which are not themselves finitely generated. The topology T is given by the metric d as above. Then the following are equivalent:  4  ZAKHAR KABLUCHKO AND KATRIN TENT  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)  The class C has a weak Fraı̈ssé limit M. There is a C-universal and weakly C-saturated structure M. The S∞ -orbit of some structure M is comeager in S. For some structure M the set of structures isomorphic to M is comeager in S. The class C satisfies (JEP) and (WAP). There is a C-universal weakly C-saturated structure M such that (*) holds: (*) any finitely generated substructure A of M is contained in a finitely generated substructure B ∈ M (not necessarily the one given by weak C-saturation) such that any D ∈ C containing a copy of B embeds over A into M. It follows in particular, that a weak Fraı̈ssé limit, if it exists, is unique up to isomorphism. Proof. (1) ⇒ (2): Let M ∈ S be a weak Fraı̈ssé limit of C. We have to show that M is weakly C-saturated, Let A ⊆ B ∈ C be as given by weak C-homogeneity. Assume that (A0 , B0 ) is an isomorphic copy of (A, B) in M. Let D ∈ C contain an isomorphic copy of B. By C-universality, M contains a substructure D0 isomorphic to D. By C-homogeneity, any isomorphism between the copy of A inside D0 and A0 can be extended to an automorphism of M, yielding an embedding of D over A0 into M as required. (2) ⇒ (3): Let M ∈ S be C-universal and weakly C-saturated. Then age(M) = C and thus the S∞ -orbit of M is dense. It now suffices to verify that the S∞ -orbit of M is non-meager: since the action of S∞ on the metric space S is continuous, it then follows from [5], Thm. 4.4 that the orbit is Gδ and hence comeager (given that it is dense). To see that the S∞ -orbit of M is non-meager, it suffices by Proposition 2.4 to see that for any open subgroup V ≤ S∞ the V -orbit of M is somewhere dense. We may assume that there is a finite set A0 such that V = GA0 is the pointwise stabilizer of A0 . Let A ⊂ M be the substructure generated by A0 and let B ∈ C be such that B contains an isomorphic copy of A and such that any extension of B can be embedded into M by weak C-saturation. Now since B ∈ age(M) we may assume that B ⊂ M. Let A′ denote the isomorphic copy of A inside B with A′0 denoting the finite set corresponding to A0 . Then V ′ = GA′0 is conjugate to GA0 in S∞ and it clearly suffices to prove the claim for V ′ . We claim that the V ′ -orbit of M is dense in OB : By C-saturation of M, any extension D of B can be embedded over A′ into M. This says that for some g ∈ V ′ we have g(M) ∈ OD , which is enough. (3) ⇔ (4): clear. (3) ⇒ (5): Let M ∈ S be an element whose orbit under G = S∞ is comeager. Since S is a Baire space, a comeager set is dense and thus we see that age(M) = C and hence (JEP) holds. It remains to prove that C satisfies (WAP). Let A ∈ C. Then M contains a substructure isomorphic to A and we may assume that A ⊂ M. Let A0 ⊂ A be a finite set generating A. Then the pointwise stabilizer of A0 in G is an open subgroup GA0 and by Proposition 2.4 the orbit of M under GA0 is dense in some basic open set OB for some finitely generated structure B. Thus, M ′ := f (M) ∈ OB for some f ∈ GA0 . Let A′ = f (A) be the structure (with domain contained in ω) obtained by transferring A by f . Then, M ′ ∈ OB ∩ OA′ meaning that B and A′ are substructures of M ′ . Let D be the substructure of M ′ generated by A′ and B. Then, OD ⊂ OA′ ∩ OB . To prove (WAP), let E, F ∈ C be structures containing D (and assume that the domains of E and F are embedded into ω). Since the orbit of M (and hence M ′ ) under GA0 is dense in OD , there exist g, h ∈ GA0 such  5  that g(M ′ ) ∈ OE and h(M ′ ) ∈ OF . Observe that both g and h equal to the identity map on A0 , hence g|A′ = h|A′ = id. Hence the substructure of M ′ generated by g −1 (E)∪h−1 (F ) ⊂ M ′ is the required weak amalgam over A′ . (5) ⇒ (6): Assume that C has (JEP) and (WAP). We will construct a C-universal and weakly C-saturated structure satisfying (*). Choose an enumeration (Ci )i∈ω of all isomorphism types in C. We construct M as the union of an ascending chain M0 ⊂ M1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ M of elements of C. Suppose that Mi is already constructed. If i = 2n is even, let Ai+1 be the structure embedding both Mi and Cn given by (JEP) and let Mi+1 ∈ C be the structure given by (WAP) for Ai+1 . We use the odd steps to ensure that the limit M is weakly C-saturated. For i = 2n + 1, let A ∈ C and let B ∈ C be as guaranteed by (WAP) where we assume that A ⊂ B. Let D ∈ C and assume we are given two embeddings f0 : B → Mi and f1 : B → D. Then we let Mi+1 ∈ C be the structure guaranteed to exist by (WAP). Assume now that we have A ⊂ B, D ∈ C and embeddings f0 : B → D and f1 : B → M. Since B is finitely generated, the image of f0 will be contained in some Mj . Thus, in order to guarantee the weak C-saturation of M, we have to ensure during the construction of the the Mi , that eventually, for some odd i ≥ j, the embeddings f0 : B → Mi and f1 : B → D were used in the construction of Mi+1 . This can be done since for each j there are – up to isomorphism – at most countably many possibilities. Thus there exists an embedding g1 : D → Mi+1 with f0 |A = g1 ◦ f1 |A . By the even stages, we have C ⊂ age(M). Conversely, the finitely-generated substructures of M are the substructures of the Mi . Since the Mi belong to C, their finitely-generated substructures also belong to C. Hence age(M) = C as required. Furthermore, since any finitely generated substructure A is contained in some Mi , the structure M2i satisfies (*) for A. (6) ⇒ (1): Let M ∈ S be C-universal and weakly C-saturated such that (*) holds. We have to show that M is weakly C-homogeneous. Let A0 ⊆ A1 ∈ C be as given by weak C-saturation. Assume that (B0 , B1 ) and (C0 , C1) are isomorphic copies of (A0 , A1 ) in M and that ϕ0 : (B0 , B1 ) → (C0 , C1) is an isomorphism. We want to extend ϕ0 |B0 to an automorphism of M by a back-and-forth construction. Suppose we have already constructed ϕ2i−1 : B2i−1 → C2i−1 with ϕ2i−1 |B0 = ϕ0 such that C2i−1 is an extension of C2i−2 satisfying (*). Let B2i be the substructure given by (*) containing the substructure of M generated by B2i−1 ∪ {i}. Then there is a copy C2i such that there is an isomorphism ϕ2i : (B2i−1 , B2i ) → (C2i−1 , C2i ) with ϕ2i |B0 = ϕ0 . Now let C2i+1 be the structure given by (*) containing the substructure of M generated by C2i ∪ {i} and choose an isomorphic copy B2i+1 of C2i +1 and an isomorphism ϕ2i+1 : (B2i , B2i+1 ) → (C2i , C2i +1 ) extending ϕ2i |B2i−1 .  Thus again ϕ2i+1 |B0 = ϕ0 and we continue. 2.4. Finding automorphisms with comeager conjugacy class. The proof of Theorem 2.5 was motivated by the methods from [3]. We now show how this in turn implies their result on comeager conjugacy classes.  6  ZAKHAR KABLUCHKO AND KATRIN TENT  For a Fraı̈ssé class C of finitely generated L-structures, let Cp denote the class of all systems of the form S = hA, ψ : B → Ci where A, B, C ∈ C, B, C ⊂ A and ψ is an isomorphism of B and C. An embedding of one system S = hA, ψ : B → Ci into another system T = hD, ϕ : E → F i is an embedding f : A → D such that f embeds B into E, C into F and such that f ◦ ψ ⊂ ϕ ◦ f . It thus makes sense to talk about (JEP) and (WAP) and hence about Weak Fraı̈ssé limits for Cp . We now consider comeagerness in the space Sp of structures (M, h) where M ∈ S and h ∈ Aut(M). Then, for any finitely generated substructure A of M and isomorphic finitely generated substructures B ⊂ A, C = h(B), the system S = hA, h|B : B → Ci is in Cp . As before, the space Sp is a complete metric space. The group Aut(M) is endowed with the usual topology of pointwise convergence. Remark 2.6. We could instead consider an expanded language Lp = L∪{f } containing a new symbol f for a partial function. Then Cp denotes the class of all structures A ∈ C expanded by an interpretation of the symbol f as an isomorphism f : B → C where A, B, C ∈ C and B, C ⊂ A. By embedding an Lp -structure A into an Lp -structure D, we may enlarge the domain of the function f inside A (contrary to the usual conventions). Note that we do not assume the Fraı̈ssé class C to consist of finite structures. Theorem 2.7. Let C be a Fraı̈ssé class of finitely generated structures with Fraı̈ssé limit M. Then the following are equivalent: (1) Cp has (JEP) and (WAP). (2) The weak Fraı̈ssé limit of Cp exists in Sp and has comeager isomorphism type in Sp . (3) There is f ∈ Aut(M) with comeager conjugacy class in Aut(M). If any of the above conditions holds, the weak Fraı̈ssé limit of Cp has the form (M, f ), where f ∈ Aut(M) has a comeager conjugacy class. Proof. (1) ⇒ (2): The proof of Theorem 2.5 (5) ⇒ (6) shows how to construct the weak Fraı̈ssé limit (N, g). It is left to show that g is an automorphism of N. For this it suffices to verify that g is defined on all of N and is surjective. Suppose not, so there is some a ∈ N where g is not defined. Since N is the weak Fraı̈ssé limit of Cp it is the countable union of systems Si = hNi , ϕi : Bi → Ci i for i < ω. Let i be minimal such that g is not defined on all of Ni . By weak Cp -saturation, there is some system T = hD, ϕ : E → F i extending Si such that any extension of T can be embedded over Si into N. Since C is a Fraı̈ssé class with Fraı̈ssé limit M, there is an embedding of D into M and by ultrahomogeneity of M, ϕ extends to an automorphism of ϕ̂ of M. Then ϕ̂ is defined on all of Ni ⊂ D. Let G be the substructure of M generated by D and ϕ̂(D). The system hG, ϕ̂|D : D → ϕ̂(D)i is in Cp and extends T , thus embeds over Ni into N, showing that g is defined on all of N. A similar argument shows that g is surjective. The proof of Theorem 2.5 (2) ⇒ (3) shows that the isomorphism type of (N, g) in Sp is comeager. (2) ⇒ (3): Suppose the class Cp has a weak Fraı̈ssé limit (N, g). To see that N is isomorphic to M it suffices to check that N is weakly C-saturated. Then both M and N have comeager isomorphism classes and thus must be isomorphic. Clearly we have age(N) = C.  7  To see that N is weakly C-saturated, let A ⊂ N be a finitely generated substructure, so A ∈ C. Consider the system hA, id : E → Ei where E is the substructure generated by the emptyset. Note that any partial isomorphism extens id : E → E. By (WAP) for Cp there is some system T = hB, ϕ : C → Di such that any system containing T embeds into N. Now let F ∈ C be a finitely generated structure containing the structure B. Then the system hF, ϕ : C → Di is in Cp and hence embeds into N over A. This shows that we can choose B to witness the weak C-saturation of N. It is left to prove that the conjugacy class of g is comeager in Aut(N). To see this note that the orbit of (N, g) under S∞ is comeager in the class Sp . Since g ∈ Aut(N), the orbit of S∞ under the stabilizer of N is exactly the orbit of g under conjugation in Aut(N). Since Aut(N) is a Polish group, the claim follows from the Kuratowski-Ulam theorem. (3) ⇒ (1): The same proof as Theorem 2.5 (5) ⇒ (6) and (6) ⇒ (1) shows the required.  References [1] A.A. Ivanov. Generic expansions of ω-categorical structures and semantics of generalized quantifiers. J. Symb. Log., 64(2):775–789, 1999. doi: 10.2307/2586500. [2] Z. Kabluchko and K. Tent. Universal-homogeneous structures are generic. Preprint, 2017. Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.06137. [3] A. S. Kechris and C. Rosendal. Turbulence, amalgamation, and generic automorphisms of homogeneous structures. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3), 94(2):302–350, 2007. ISSN 0024-6115. URL https://doi.org/10.1112/plms/pdl007. [4] A. Kruckman. Infinitary limits of finite structures. PhD Thesis, University of California, Berkeley, 2016. Available at http://pages.iu.edu/ akruckma/thesis.pdf. [5] R. L. Sami. Polish group actions and the Vaught conjecture. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 341(1):335–353, 1994. ISSN 0002-9947. URL https://doi.org/10.2307/2154625. [6] K. Tent and M. Ziegler. A course in model theory, volume 40 of Lecture Notes in Logic. Association for Symbolic Logic, La Jolla, CA; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2012. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139015417. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139015417. Zakhar Kabluchko: Institut für Mathematische Stochastik, Westfälische WilhelmsUniversität Münster, Orléans-Ring 10, 48149 Münster, Germany E-mail address: zakhar.kabluchko@uni-muenster.de Katrin Tent: Mathematisches Institut und Institut für Mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Einsteinstr. 62, 48149 Münster, Germany E-mail address: tent@wwu.de

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
