Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4946

Abstract:
arXiv:1601.02187v3 [math.GR] 14 Feb 2018  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK Abstract. We generalise the Karrass–Pietrowski–Solitar and the Nielsen realisation theorems from the setting of free groups to that of free products. As a result, we obtain a fixed point theorem for finite groups of outer automorphisms acting on the relative free splitting complex of Handel–Mosher and on the outer space of a free product of Guirardel– Levitt, as well as a relative version of the Nielsen realisation theorem, which in the case of free groups answers a question of Karen Vogtmann. We also prove Nielsen realisation for limit groups, and as a byproduct obtain a new proof that limit groups are CAT(0). The proofs rely on a new version of Stallings’ theorem on groups with at least two ends, in which some control over the behaviour of virtual free factors is gained.  1. Introduction In its original form, the Nielsen realisation problem asks which finite subgroups of the mapping class group of a surface can be realised as groups of homeomorphisms of the surface. A celebrated result of Kerckhoff [Ker1, Ker2] answers this in the positive for all finite subgroups, and even allows for realisations by isometries of a suitable hyperbolic metric. Subsequently, similar realisation results were found in other contexts, perhaps most notably for realising finite groups in Out(Fn ) by isometries of a suitable graph (independently by [Cul], [Khr], [Zim]; compare [HOP] for a different approach). In this article, we begin to develop a relative approach to Nielsen realisation problems. The philosophy here is that if a group G allows for a natural decomposition into pieces, then Nielsen realisation for Out(G) may be reduced to realisation in the pieces, and a gluing problem. In addition to just solving Nielsen realisation for finite subgroups of Out(G), such an approach yields more explicit realisations, which also exhibit the structure of pieces for G. We demonstrate this strategy for two classes of groups: free products and limit groups. In another article, we use the results presented here, together with the philosophy of relative Nielsen realisation, to prove Nielsen realisation for certain right-angled Artin groups ([HK]). The second-named author was supported by the SFB 701. 1  2  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  The early proofs of Nielsen realisation for free groups rely in a fundamental way on a result of Karrass–Pietrowski–Solitar [KPS], which states that every finitely generated virtually free group acts on a tree with finite edge and vertex stabilisers. In the language of Bass–Serre theory, it amounts to saying that such a virtually free group is a fundamental group of a finite graph of groups with finite edge and vertex groups. This result of Karrass–Pietrowski–Solitar in turn relies on the celebrated theorem of Stallings on groups with at least two ends [Sta1, Sta2]. Stallings’ theorem states that any finitely generated group with at least two ends splits over a finite group, which means that it acts on a tree with a single edge orbit and finite edge stabilisers. Equivalently: it is a fundamental group of a graph of groups with a single edge and a finite edge group. In the first part of this article, we generalise these results to the setting of a free product A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B in which we (usually) require the factors Ai to be finitely generated, and B to be a finitely generated free group. Consider any finite group H acting on A by outer automorphisms in a way preserving the given free-product decomposition, by which we mean that each element of H sends each subgroup Ai to some Aj (up to conjugation); note that we do not require the action of H to preserve B in any way. We then obtain a corresponding group extension 1→A→A→H→1 In this setting we prove (for formal statements, see the appropriate sections) Relative Stallings’ theorem (Theorem 2.7): A splits over a finite group, in such a way that each Ai fixes a vertex in the associated action on a tree. Relative Karrass–Pietrowski–Solitar theorem (Theorem 4.1): A acts on a tree with finite edge stabilisers, and with each Ai fixing a vertex of the tree, and with, informally speaking, all other vertex groups finite. Relative Nielsen realisation theorem (Theorem 7.5): Suppose that we are given complete non-positively curved (i.e. locally CAT(0)) spaces Xi realising the induced actions of H on the factors Ai . Then the action of H can be realised by a complete non-positively curved space X; in fact X can be chosen to contain the Xi in an equivariant manner. We emphasise that such a relative Nielsen realisation is new even if all Ai are free groups, in which case it answers a question of Karen Vogtmann. The classical Nielsen realisation for graphs immediately implies that a finite subgroup H < Out(Fn ) fixes points in the Culler–Vogtmann Outer Space (defined in [CV]), as well as in the complex of free splittings of Fn (which is a simplicial closure of Outer Space). As an application of the  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS  3  work in this article, we similarly obtain fixed point statements (Corollaries 5.1 and 6.1) for the graph of relative free splittings defined by Handel and Mosher [HM], and the outer space of a free product defined by Guirardel and Levitt [GL]. In the last section of the paper we prove Theorem 8.12. Let A be a limit group, and let A→A→H be an extension of A by a finite group H. Then there exists a complete compact locally CAT(κ) space X realising the extension A, where κ = −1 when A is hyperbolic, and κ = 0 otherwise. When κ = −1, the space X is of dimension at most 2. This theorem is obtained by combining the classical Nielsen realisation theorems (for free, free-abelian and surface groups – see Theorems 8.2 to 8.4) with the existence of an invariant JSJ decomposition shown by Bumagin– Kharlampovich–Myasnikov [BKM]. Note that, in general, having a graph of groups decomposition for a group G with CAT(0) vertex groups and virtually cyclic edge groups does not allow one to build a CAT(0) space for G to act on, and thus conclude that G is itself CAT(0); the JSJ decompositions of limit groups are however special in this respect, and the extra structure allows for the conclusion. This has been observed by Sam Brown in [Bro], where he developed techniques for building up a CAT(0) space for G to act on. Observe that we obtain optimal curvature bounds for our space X – it has been proved by Alibegović–Bestvina [AB] that limit groups are CAT(0), and by Sam Brown [Bro] that a limit group is CAT(−1) if and only if it is hyperbolic. Also, taking H to be the trivial group gives a new (more direct) proof of the fact that limit groups are CAT(0). Throughout the paper, we are going to make liberal use of the standard terminology of graphs of groups. The reader may find all the necessary information in Serre’s book [Ser]. We are also going to make use of standard facts about CAT(0) and non-positively curved (NPC) spaces, as well as more general CAT(κ) spaces; the standard reference here is the book by Bridson– Haefliger [BH]. Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank Karen Vogtmann for discussions and suggesting the statement of relative Nielsen realisation for free groups, Stefan Witzel for pointing out the work of Sam Brown, and the referee for extremely valuable comments. 2. Relative Stallings’ theorem In this section we will prove the relative version of Stallings’ theorem. Before we can begin with the proof, we need a number of definitions to  4  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  formalise the notion of a free splitting that is preserved by a finite group action. Convention. When talking about free factor decompositions A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B of some group A, we will always assume that at least two of the factors {A1 , . . . , An , B} are non-trivial. Definition 2.1. Suppose that φ : H → Out(A) is a homomorphism with a finite domain. Let A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B be a free factor decomposition of A. We say that this decomposition is preserved by H if and only if for every i and every h ∈ H, there is some j such that h(Ai ) is conjugate to Aj . We say that a factor Ai is minimal if and only if for any h ∈ H the fact that h(Ai ) is conjugate to Aj implies that j > i. Remark 2.2. Note that when the decomposition is preserved, we obtain an induced action H → Sym(n) on the indices 1, . . . , n. We may thus speak of the stabilisers StabH (i) inside H. Furthermore, we obtain an induced action StabH (i) → Out(Ai ) The minimality of factors is merely a way of choosing a representative of each H orbit in the action H → Sym(n). Remark 2.3. Given an action φ : H → Out(A), with φ injective and A with trivial centre, we can define A 6 Aut(A) to be the preimage of H = im φ under the natural map Aut(A) → Out(A). We then note that A is an extension of A by H: 1→A→A→H→1 and the left action of H by outer automorphisms agrees with the left conjugation action inside the extension A. Observe that then for each i we also obtain an extension 1 → Ai → Ai → StabH (i) → 1 where Ai is the normaliser of Ai in A. We emphasise that this construction works even when Ai itself is not centre-free. In this case it carries more information than the induced action StabH (i) → Out(Ai ) (e.g. consider the case of Ai = Z – there are many different extensions corresponding to the same map to Out(Z)). We will now begin the proof of the relative version of Stallings’ theorem. It will use ideas from both Dunwoody’s proof [Dun1] and Krön’s proof [Krö]1 of Stallings’ theorem, which we now recall. Convention. If E is a set of edges in a graph Θ, we write Θ − E to mean the graph obtained from Θ by removing the interiors of edges in E. 1We warn the reader that later parts of Krön’s paper are not entirely correct; we only  rely on the early, correct sections.  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS  5  Definition 2.4. Let Θ be a graph. A finite subset E of the edge set of Θ is called a set of cutting edges if and only if Θ − E is disconnected and has at least two infinite components. A cut C is the union of all vertices contained in an infinite connected complementary component of some set of cutting edges. The boundary of C consists of all edges with exactly one endpoint in C. Given two cuts C and D, we call them nested if and only if C or its complement C ∗ is contained in D or its complement D∗ . Note that C ∗ and D∗ do not need to be cuts. We first aim to show the following theorem which is implicit in [Krö]. Theorem 2.5 ([Krö]). Suppose that Θ is a connected graph on which a group G acts. Let P be a subset of the edge set of Θ, which is stable under the G-action. If there exists a set of cutting edges lying in P, then there exists a cut C whose boundary lies in P, such that C ∗ is also a cut, and such that furthermore for any g ∈ G the cuts C and g.C are nested. Sketch of proof. In order to prove this, we recall the following terminology, roughly following Dunwoody. We say that C is a P-cut if and only if its boundary lies in P. Say that a P-cut is P-narrow, if and only if its boundary contains the minimal number of elements among all P-cuts. Note that for each P-narrow cut C, the complement C ∗ is also a cut, as otherwise we could remove some edges from the boundary of C and get another P-cut. Given any edge e ∈ P, there are finitely many P-narrow cuts which contain e in its boundary. This is shown by Dunwoody [Dun1, 2.5] for narrow cuts, and the proof carries over to the P-narrow case. Alternatively, Krön [Krö, Lemma 2.1] shows this for sets of cutting edges which cut the graph into exactly two connected components, and P-narrow cuts have this property. Now, consider for each P-narrow cut C the number m(C) of P-narrow cuts which are not nested with C (this is finite by [Dun1, 2.6]). Call a Pnarrow cut optimally nested if m(C) is smallest amongst all P-narrow cuts. The proof of Theorem 3.3 of [Krö] now shows that optimally nested P-cuts are all nested with each other. This shows Theorem 2.5.  To use that theorem, recall Theorem 2.6 ([Dun1, Theorem 4.1]). Let G be a group acting on a graph Θ. Suppose that there exists a cut C, such that (1) C ∗ is also a cut; and (2) there exists g ∈ G such that g.C is properly contained in C or C ∗ ; and (3) C and h.C are nested for any h ∈ G. Let E be the boundary of C. Then G splits over the stabiliser of E , and the stabiliser of any component of Θ − G.E is contained in a conjugate of a vertex group.  6  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  Figure 1. A local picture of the graph Θ. Now we are ready for our main splitting result. Theorem 2.7 (Relative Stallings’ Theorem). Let φ : H → Out(A) be a monomorphism with a finite domain. Let A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B be a free product decomposition with each Ai and B finitely generated, and suppose that it is preserved by H. Let A be the preimage of H = im φ in Aut(A). Then A acts on a tree with finite quotient so that each Ai fixes a vertex, and no non-trivial subgroup of A fixes any edge. Note in particular that the quotient of the associated tree by A has a single edge. Proof. Before we begin the proof in earnest, we will give a brief outline of the strategy. First, we will define a variant of the Cayley graph for A in which the free product structure of A will be visible (in fact, a subgraph will collapse to the Bass-Serre tree of the free product decomposition of A). This graph will contain the different copies if Ai disjointly, separated by edges labelled with a certain label. We will then aim to show that there is a set of cutting edges just using edges with that label – which, using Theorem 2.6, will yield the desired action on a tree. Let Ai and B be finite generating sets of Ai and B, respectively (for all A which maps onto H under the i 6 n). We also choose a finite set H ⊂ S natural epimorphism A → H. Note that i Ai ∪ B ∪ H is a generating set of A. We define Θ to be aS variation of the (right) Cayley graph of A with respect to the generating set i Ai ∪ B ∪ H. Intuitively, every vertex of the Cayley graph will be “blown up” to a finite tree (see Fig. 1). More formally, the vertex set of Θ is V (Θ) = A t (A × {0, . . . , n})  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS  7  We adopt the notation that a vertex corresponding to an element in A will simply be denoted by g, whereas a vertex (g, i) in the second factor will be denoted by gi . We now define the edge set, together with a labelling of the edges by integers 0, 1, . . . , n, as follows: • for each g ∈ A and each i ∈ {0, . . . , n} we have an edge labelled by 0 connecting g to gi ; • for each g ∈ A, each i > 1 and each a ∈ Ai , we have an edge labelled by i from gi to (ga)i ; • for each g ∈ A, and each b ∈ B ∪ H, we have an edge labelled by 0 from g0 to (gb)0 . The group A acts on Θ on the left, preserving the labels. The action is free and co-compact. The graph Θ retracts via a quasi-isometry onto a usual Cayley graph of A by collapsing edges connecting g to gi . Also note that there are copies of the Cayley graphs of the Ai with respect to the generating set Ai in Θ, where each edge has the label i. Let Ω denote a graph constructed in the same way for the group A with S respect to the generating set Ai ∪ B. There is a natural embedding of Ω into Θ, and hence we will consider Ω as a subgraph of Θ. Note that this embedding is also a quasi-isometry. We will now construct n specific quasi-isometric retractions of Θ onto Ω. These will be used later to modify paths in order to avoid edges with certain labels. Let us fix i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. For each h ∈ H we pick a representative hi ∈ A thereof, such that hi Ai hi −1 = Aj for a suitable (and unique) j; for 1 ∈ H we pick 1 ∈ A as a representative. These elements hi are coset representatives of the normal subgroup A of A. Such a choice defines a retraction ρi : Θ → Ω in the following way: each vertex g is mapped to the unique vertex g 0 where g 0 ∈ A and g 0 hi = g for some hi ; the vertex gk is then mapped to (g 0 )k . An edge labelled by 0 connecting g to gk is sent to the edge connecting g 0 to (g 0 )k . The remaining edges with label 0 are sent in an A-equivariant fashion to paths connecting the image of their endpoints; the lengths of such paths are uniformly bounded, since (up to the A-action) there are only finitely many edges with label 0. Similarly, the edges of label k 6∈ {0, i} are mapped in an A-equivariant manner to paths connecting the images of their endpoints; again, their length is uniformly bounded. Each edge labelled by i is sent A-equivariantly to a path connecting the images of its endpoints, such that the path contains edges labelled only by some j (where j is determined by the coset of A the endpoints lie in); such a path exist by the choice of the representatives hi . Note that each such retraction ρi is a (κi , κi )-quasi-isometry for some κi > 1; we set κ = maxi κi .  8  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  Now we are ready to construct a set of cutting edges in Θ. Consider the ball BΩ (1, 1) of radius 1 around the vertex 1 in Ω (all of whose edges are labelled by 0). Since A is a nontrivial free product, the identity element disconnects the Cayley graph into at least two infinite components. Hence, BΩ (1, 1) disconnects Ω also into at least two infinite components; let us take two vertices of Ω, x and y, lying in distinct infinite components of Ω − BΩ (1, 1), and such that dΩ (1, x) = dΩ (1, y) > κ2 + 4 Now let E denote the set of all edges lying in the ball BΘ (1, κ2 +4) labelled by 0. We claim that E disconnects Θ into at least two infinite components. Note that Θ−E has finitely many components, since E is finite. By possibly choosing x, y even further from each other, it therefore suffices to show that E disconnects x from y (viewed as vertices of Θ). Suppose for a contradiction that there exists a path γ in Θ−E connecting x to y. Using any of the quasi-isometries ρi we immediately see that γ has to go through BΘ (1, κ2 +4), since ρi (γ) must intersect BΩ (1, 1). Note that if γ 0 ⊂ γ is a subpath lying completely in BΘ (1, κ2 + 4), then γ 0 only traverses edges with the same label (as γ does not intersect E). Thus, we can write γ as a concatenation γ = γ1 ∗ · · · ∗ γm where each γi intersects BΘ (1, κ2 + 4) only at edges of one label, and its endpoints lie outside of BΘ (1, κ2 + 4). We modify each γi by pre- and postconcatenating it with a path of length at most 4 (note that all the elements of H correspond to edges), so that it now starts and ends at Ω. Still, the new path (which we will continue to call γi ) intersects BΘ (1, κ2 + 1) only at edges labelled by a single label. Now we construct a new path γ 0 as follows. Suppose that ki is such that each edge in γi ∩ BΘ (1, κ2 + 1) has label ki . We put γi0 = ρki (γi ) Note that as ρki is a retraction onto Ω, and the endpoints of γi are in Ω, the path γi0 has the same endpoints as γi . Put 0 γ 0 = γ10 ∗ · · · ∗ γm  This is now a path joining x to y in Ω, and thus contains an edge e ∈ BΩ (1, 1) There exists an edge f in some γi , such that e lies in the image of f under the map ρki that we applied to γi . Since each ρk is an (κ, κ)-quasi-isometry, the edge f lies within BΘ (1, κ2 + 1). But then ρki (f ) is a path the edges of whom are never labelled by 0, and so in particular e 6∈ E, a contradiction. We now apply Theorem 2.5, taking P to be the set of edges labelled by 0. Let C denote the cut we obtain, and let F denote its boundary.  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS  9  To apply Theorem 2.6 we need to only show that for some g ∈ A we have g.C properly contained in C or C ∗ . Since C ∗ is infinite, it contains an element g ∈ A such that g.F 6= F . Taking such a g, we see that either g.C is properly contained in C ∗ (in which case we are done), or C is properly contained in g.C. In the latter case we have g −1 .C ⊂ C. We have thus verified all the hypotheses of Theorem 2.6. Since the boundary F of the final cut C is labelled by 0, upon removal of the open edges in A.F , the connected component containing 1i contains the entire subgroup Ai , since vertices corresponding to elements of this subgroup are connected to 1i by paths labelled by i. Thus Ai is a subgroup of a conjugate of a vertex group, and so it fixes a vertex in the associated action on a tree. It remains to show the triviality of edge stabilisers in A. In fact we will show that no non-trivial subgroup G < A fixes a narrow cut in Θ with boundary consisting only of edges labelled by 0. To this end, let C be such a cut, and F the set of edges forming the boundary of C. We begin by considering the subgraph Ω. Let Γ be an infinite component of Ω − F , and h ∈ H be arbitrary. There are infinitely many vertices v in Γ such that no edge emanating from v lies in F (as the latter is finite). Take one such vertex, and consider an edge e in its star which corresponds to right multiplication with h. Since h normalises A, it in fact connects Ω to h.Ω. On the other hand, there can be only a single component of h.Ω − F which is connected to Γ as the cut C is narrow: otherwise the components of h.Ω − F would lie in the same component of Θ − F , and F would fail the definition of a boundary of a cut. In summary, we have shown, that for each h, each infinite component Γ of Ω − F is connected (via an edge corresponding to right multiplication by h) to a unique infinite component of h.Ω − F . In other words, infinite components of Ω − F and h.Ω − F are in bijection to each other, where the bijection identifies components which are connected in Θ − F . Now, we can think of Ω as the Bass-Serre tree for the splitting of A, whose vertices have been “blown up” to Cayley graphs of the subgroups Ai . In particular, each edge labelled by 0 disconnects Ω. This implies that Ω − F , and hence each h.Ω − F , has exactly two components, both of which are infinite. Namely, if Ω−F would have more than two infinite components, or just a single one, the same would be true for Θ − F , violating narrowness of the cut F . It also implies that F ∩h.Ω consists of exactly one edge for each h. Since A acts freely on Ω, this implies the final claim of the theorem.  3. Blow-ups We make the convention that graphs of groups are always connected unless explicitly stated otherwise. Proposition 3.1 (Blow-up with finite edge groups). Let G be a graph of groups with finite edge groups. For each vertex v suppose that the associated  10  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  vertex group Gv acts on a connected space Xv in such a way that each finite subgroup of Gv fixes a point of Xv . Then there exists a connected space Y on which π1 (G) acts, satisfying the following: e (1) there is a π1 (G)-equivariant map π : Y → G; e fixed by Gv , then π −1 (w) is Gv -equivariantly (2) if w is a vertex of G isometric to Xv ; (3) every finite subgroup of G fixes a point of Y . Moreover, when the spaces Xv are compact, complete and CAT(0) then Y is a compact, complete CAT(0) space. e are left cosets of the vertex groups Gv of Proof. Recall that the vertices of G G; for each vertex w we pick an element zw ∈ G to be a coset representative of such a coset. We will build the space Y in two steps. First, we construct the preimage e and call it V . We define V to be the disjoint under π of the vertices of G, e and Xw is an union of spaces Xw , where w runs over the vertices of G, isometric copy of Xv , where v is the image of w under the quotient map e → G. We construct π : V → G e by declaring π(Xw ) = {w}. G We now construct an action of A = π1 (G) on V . Let us take Xw ⊂ V , and let a ∈ A. Let u = a.w, and note that its image in G is still v. The action of a on V will take Xw to Xu ; using the identifications Xw ' Xv ' Xu we −1 a. only need to say how a is supposed to act on Xv , and here it acts as zw We now construct the space Y by adding edges to V . e with terminal endpoint w and initial endpoint u. Let e be an edge of G Let Xe denote a copy of the unit interval. Now Ge is a finite subgroup of Gw , and so fixes a point in Xw seen as a subset of V . We glue the endpoint 1 of Xe to this point. Analogously, we glue the endpoint 0 to a point in Xu . Now, using the action of A, we equivariantly glue all the endpoints of the edges in the A-orbit of e. We proceed this way for all (geometric) edges. Note that this construction allows us to extend the definition of π. When all the vertex spaces are complete CAT(0), it is clear that so is Y.  Remark 3.2. Suppose that the spaces Xv in the above proposition are trees. Then the resulting space Y is a tree, and the quotient graph of groups is obtained from G by replacing v by the quotient graph of groups X//Gv . We will refer to the above construction as blowing up G by the spaces Xv . We warn the reader that our notion of a blow-up is not standard terminology (and has nothing to do with blow-ups in other fields). When dealing with limit groups, we will need a more powerful version of a blow-up. We will use a method by Sam Brown, essentially following [Bro, Theorem 3.1]; to this end let us start with a number of definitions and standard facts.  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 11  Definition 3.3. An n-simplex of type Mκ is the convex hull of n + 1 points in general position lying in the n-dimensional model space Mκ of curvature κ, as defined in [BH]. An Mκ -simplicial complex K is a simplicial complex in which each simplex is endowed with the metric of a simplex of type Mκ , and the face inclusions are isometries. Note that we will be interested in the case of n = 2 and negative κ, where the model space Mκ is just a suitably rescaled hyperbolic plane. Definition 3.4. Let K be a Mκ -simplicial complex of dimension at most 2. The link of a vertex v is a metric graph whose vertices are edges of K incident at v, and edges are 2-simplices of K containing v. Inclusion of edges into simplices in X induces the inclusion of vertices into edges in the link. The length of an edge in the link is equal to the angle the edges corresponding to its endpoints make in the simplex. Let us state a version of Gromov’s link condition adapted to our setting. Theorem 3.5 (Gromov’s link condition [BH, Theorem II.5.2] ). Let K be a Mκ -simplicial complex of dimension at most 2, endowed with a cocompact simplicial isometric action. Then K is a locally CAT(κ) space if and only if the link of each vertex in K is CAT(1). Of course, for a graph being CAT(1) is equivalent to having no non-trivial simple loop of length less than 2π. Lemma 3.6 ([Bro, Lemma 2.29]). For any 0 < θ < π and any A, C with C > A > 0, there exists k < 0 and a locally CAT(k) Mk -simplicial annulus with one locally geodesic boundary component of length A, and one boundary component of length C which is locally geodesic everywhere except for one point where it subtends an angle greater than θ. Lemma 3.7. Let Z be an infinite virtually cyclic group. Any two cocompact isometric actions on R have the same kernel, and the quotient of Z by the kernel is isomorphic to either Z or the infinite dihedral group D∞ . Proof. Clearly both actions on R can be made into actions on 2-regular trees with a single edge orbit and no edge inversions; each such action gives us a decomposition of Z into a graph of finite groups, where the kernel of the action is the unique edge group, and the quotient is as claimed. Let G1 and G2 denote the graphs of groups, and K1 and K2 denote the respective edge groups. Suppose that one of the graphs, say G1 , has only one vertex. Then K1 is also equal to the vertex group, and we have K2 6 K1 , since any finite group acting on a tree has a fixed point. If G2 also has a single vertex than K1 6 K2 by the same argument and we are done. Otherwise Z/K1 ' Z is a quotient of Z/K2 ' D∞ , which is impossible. Now suppose that both G1 and G2 have two vertices each. Let Gv be a vertex group of G1 . Arguing as before we see that it fixes a point in the  12  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  e 2 , and so some index 2 subgroup of Gv fixes an edge. Thus action of Z on G K1 ∩ K2 is a subgroup of K1 of index at most two. If the index is two, then the image of K1 in Z/K2 ' D∞ is a normal subgroup of cardinality 2. But D∞ does not have such subgroups, and so K1 6 K2 . By symmetry K2 6 K1 and we are done.  Let us record the following standard fact. Lemma 3.8. Let Z be an infinite virtually cyclic group acting properly by semi-simple isometries on a complete CAT(0) space X. Then Z fixes an image of a geodesic in X (called an axis). For the purpose of the next proposition, let us introduce some notation. Definition 3.9. A CAT(−1) M−1 -simplicial complex of dimension at most 2 with finitely many isometry classes of simplices will be called useful. Proposition 3.10 (Blow-up with virtually cyclic edge groups). Suppose that κ ∈ {0, −1}. Let G be a finite graph of groups with virtually cyclic edge groups. For each vertex v suppose that the associated vertex group Gv acts properly cocompactly on a connected complete CAT(κ) simplicial complex Xv by semi-simple isometries. Suppose further that (A1) there exists an orientation of geometric edges of G such that the initial vertex of every edge e is useful: that is, it is a vertex u with Xu useful; and (A2) when Xu is useful and e1 , . . . , en are all the edges of G incident at u carrying an infinite edge group, then the axes preserved by g −1 Xei g with i ∈ {1, . . . , n} and gi 6∈ Xei can be taken to be simplicial and pairwise transverse. Then there exists a connected complete CAT(κ) space Y on which π1 (G) acts cocompactly, satisfying the following: e (1) there is a π1 (G)-equivariant map π : Y → G; e fixed by Gv , then π −1 (w) is Gv -equivariantly (2) if w is a vertex of G isometric to Xv . Proof. We will proceed exactly as in the proof of Proposition 3.1, with two exceptions: firstly, we will rescale the spaces Xv before we start the construction; secondly, we will need to deal with infinite virtually cyclic edge groups. Let us first explain how to deal with the infinite edge groups, and then it will become apparent how we need to rescale the useful spaces. e with infinite stabiliser Ge (note that this Let e be an oriented edge of G is a slight abuse of notation, as we usually reserve Ge to be an edge group e The group is virtually cyclic, and so, in G rather than a stabiliser in G). by Lemma 3.8, fixes an axis in each of the vertex spaces corresponding to the endpoints of e (it could of course be two axes in a single space, if e is a loop). The actions on these axes are equivariant by Lemma 3.7, and the only difference is the length of the quotient of the axis by Ge ; we will denote the  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 13 − + two lengths by λ+ e and λe , where λe is the amount by which Ge translates the axis corresponding to the terminus of e, and λ− e to the origin. We claim that we can rescale the spaces Xv and orient the geometric edges so that for any edge e with infinite stabiliser we have the initial vertex − of e useful and λ+ e 6 λe . Let us assume that we have already performed a suitable rescaling – we will come back to it at the end of the proof. Let u denote the initial (useful) endpoint of e; let w denote the other endpoint of e. We replace each 2-dimensional simplex in Xu by the comparison simplex of type M− 1 – note that, in particular, this does not affect the 2 metric on the 1-skeleton of Xu , and hence does not affect the constant λ− e. b Let Xu denote the resulting space. bu we have generated, in Brown’s terminology, an excess angle δ (deIn X bu the distance between pending on u), that is in the link of any vertex x in X any two points which were of distance at least π in the link of x in Xu is bu . By possibly decreasing δ, we may assume at least π + 2δ in the link in X that δ < π3 , and that the distance between any two distinct vertices in a link bu is at least δ (this is possible since there are only finitely of a vertex in X bu ). We still many different isometry types of simplices in Xu , and so in X bu simplicially and isometrically. have Gu acting on X + Suppose that λe = λ− e . Then we take Xe to be a flat strip [0, 1] × R on which Ge acts by translating the R factor so that the quotient is isometric to [0, 1] × R/λ+ e Z. − then we take X to be the universal cover of an annulus from If λ+ = 6 λ e e e − Lemma 3.6 with boundary curves of length λ+ e and λe , and θ = π − δ. The space Xe is a CAT(ke ) Mke -simplicial complex for some ke < 0. We glue the preimage (in Xe ) of each of the boundary curves to the corresponding axis of Ge , so that the gluing is an Ge -equivariant isometry. The gluing along the preimage of the shorter curve (or both curves if they are of equal length) proceeds along convex subspaces, and so if the vertex space was CAT(µ) with µ 6 0, then the glued-up space is still locally CAT(µ) along the axis of Ge . The situation is different at the useful end: here we glue in along a nonconvex curve. We claim that the resulting space is still locally CAT(ke ) along this geodesic. This follows from Gromov’s link condition (Theorem 3.5), and bu we introduced a single the observation that in the link of any vertex of X path (a shortcut) of length at least π − δ between vertices whose distance before the introduction of the shortcut was at least π + 2δ. A simple closed curve which traverses both endpoints of the shortcut therefore had length at least 2π + 4δ before introducing the shortcut, and thus still has length > 2π + δ afterwards. Thus there is still no non-trivial simple loop shorter than 2π. We now use the action of A = π1 (G) to equivariantly glue in copies of Xe for all edges in the orbit of e. We proceed in the same way for all the other (geometric) edges.  14  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  Now we need to look at the curvature. The useful spaces have all been altered to be M− 1 -simplicial complexes, and so they are now CAT(− 12 ). If 2 we had any CAT(0) vertex spaces, then they remain CAT(0). The universal covers Xe of annuli are CAT(ke ) with ke < 0; the infinite strips are CAT(0). The gluing into the non-useful spaces did not disturb the curvature. A single gluing into a useful space did not disturb the curvature either, but the situation is more complicated when we glue more than one space Xe into bu , since we could have introduced multiple shortcuts of length at a single X least π − δ into a link of a single vertex. If a curve traverses one (or no) shortcut, then the argument given above shows that it has length at least 2π. If it traverses more more than 2, then (as δ < π/3), it also has length > 2π. In the final case where it goes through exactly two, note that the endpoints of the shortcuts are all distinct by the transversality assumption (A2). Hence, by the choice of δ, any path connecting these endpoints has length > δ, and so the total path has length > 2(π − δ) + 2δ as well. We conclude that our space Y is complete and CAT(k), where k is the maximum of the values ke , κ and − 21 . When κ = 0 we have k = 0 and we are done. Otherwise, observing that we had only finitely many edges in G, we have k < 0, and so we can rescale Y to obtain a CAT(−1) space, as claimed. We still need to explain how to rescale the vertex spaces. We order the vertices of the graph of groups G in some way, obtaining a list v1 , . . . , vm . The space Xv1 we do not rescale. Up to reorienting the geometric edges − running from v1 to itself we see that the constants λ+ e and λe for such edges + + satisfy λe 6 λe . We look at the full subgraph Γ of G spanned by the vertices v1 , . . . , vi . Inductively, we assume that the spaces corresponding to vertices in Γ have already been rescaled as required. Now we attach vi+1 to Γ, together with all edges connecting vi+1 to itself or Γ. If Xvi+1 is not useful, then we have no edges of the latter type, and all edges connecting vi+1 to Γ are oriented towards vi+1 . Clearly we can rescale Xv to be sufficiently small so that the desired inequalities are satisfied (note that there are only finitely many edges to consider). If Xvi+1 is useful then we can reorient all edges connecting vi+1 to Γ so that they run away from vi+1 . Now we can make Xvi+1 sufficiently big to satisfy the desired inequalities. We also reorient the edges connecting vi+1 to itself in a suitable manner.   4. Relative Karrass–Pietrowski–Solitar theorem The following theorem is a generalisation of a theorem of Karrass–Pietrowski– Solitar [KPS], which lies behind the Nielsen realisation theorem for free groups.  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 15  Theorem 4.1 (Relative Karrass–Pietrowski–Solitar theorem). Let φ : H → Out(A) be a monomorphism with a finite domain, and let A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B be a decomposition preserved by H, with each Ai finitely generated, nontrivial, and B a (possibly trivial) finitely generated free group. Let A1 , . . . , Am be the minimal factors. Then the associated extension A of A by H is isomorphic to the fundamental group of a finite graph of groups with finite edge groups, with m distinguished vertices v1 , . . . , vm , such that the vertex group associated to vi is a conjugate of the extension Ai of Ai by StabH (i), and vertex groups associated to other vertices are finite. Proof. The proof goes along precisely the same lines as the original proof of Karrass–Pietrowski–Solitar [KPS], with the exception that we use Relative Stallings’ Theorem (Theorem 2.7) instead of the classical one. We will prove the result by an induction on a complexity (n, f ) where n is the number of factors Ai , and f is the rank of the free group B in the decomposition. We order the complexity lexicographically. The cases of complexity (0, f ) follow from the usual Nielsen realisation theorem for free groups (see Theorem 8.2). Thus, for the inductive step, we assume a complexity (m, f ) with m > 0. We begin by applying Theorem 2.7 to the finite extension A. We obtain a graph of groups P with one edge and a finite edge group, such that each Ai lies up to conjugation in a vertex group, and no non-trivial subgroup of any factor Ai fixes an edge. Let v be any vertex of Pe. The group Pv is a finite extension of A ∩ Pv by a subgroup Hv of H. Let us look at the structure of Pv ∩ A more closely. Consider the graph of groups associated to the product A1 ∗ . . . An ∗ B and apply Kurosh’s theorem [Ser, Theorem I.14] to the subgroup Pv ∩ A. We obtain that Pv ∩ A is a free product of groups of the form Pv ∩ xAi x−1 for some x ∈ A, and a free group B 0 . Let us suppose that the intersection Pv ∩ xAi x−1 is nontrivial for some i and x ∈ A. This implies that a non-trivial subgroup G of Ai fixes the vertex x−1 .v. We also know that Ai fixes some vertex vi in Pe by construction, and thus so does G. If x−1 .v 6= vi , this would imply that G fixes an edge, which is impossible. Hence vi = x−1 .v and in particular we have that xAi x−1 6 Pv . Now suppose that Pv ∩yAi y −1 is non-trivial for some other element y ∈ A. Then x−1 .v = vi = y −1 .v, and so xy −1 ∈ A ∩ Pv . This implies that the two free factors Pv ∩ xAi x−1 and Pv ∩ yAi y −1 of Pv ∩ A are conjugate inside the group, and so they must coincide. We consider the action of A on the tree P̃ , and conclude that A is equal to the fundamental group of the graph of groups P̃ //A. The discussion above shows that:  16  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  i) The stabilizer of a vertex v ∈ P̃ has the structure −1 0 Pv ∩ A = xi(v,1) Ai(v,1) x−1 i(v,1) ∗ · · · ∗ xi(v,k) Ai(v,k) xi(v,k) ∗ B  where the indices i(v, k) are all distinct, and B 0 is some free group. ii) If a conjugate of Ai intersects some stabilizer of v non-trivially, then it stabilizes v. iii) For each i there is exactly one vertex v so that a conjugate of Ai appears as Ai(v,l) in the description above. iv) The edge groups in P̃ //A are trivial. Since the splitting which P defines is non-trivial, the index of Pv ∩ A in A is infinite, and thus A is not a subgroup of Pv for any v. Next, we aim to show that the complexity of each Pv ∩A is strictly smaller than that of A. To begin, note that the only way that this could fail is if there is some vertex w so that −1 0 Pw ∩ A = x1 A1 x−1 1 ∗ · · · ∗ x m Am x m ∗ B  for B 0 a free group. Since all edge groups in P̃ //A are trivial, A is obtained from Pw ∩ A by a free product with a free group. Such an operation cannot decrease the rank of B 0 , and in fact increases it unless the free product is trivial. But in the latter case we would have Pw ∩A = A, which is impossible. We have thus shown that each Pv is an extension Pv ∩ A → Pv → Hv where Hv is a subgroup of H, the group Pv ∩ A decomposes in a way which is preserved by Hv , and its complexity is smaller than that of A. Therefore the group Pv satisfies the assumption of the inductive hypothesis. We now use Proposition 3.1 (together with the remark following it) to construct a new graph of groups Q, by blowing P up at u by the result of the theorem applied to Pu , with u varying over some chosen lifts of the vertices of P . By construction, Q is a finite graph of groups with finite edge groups, and the fundamental group of Q is indeed A. Also, Q inherits distinguished vertices from the graphs of groups we blew up with. Thus, Q is as required in the assertion of our theorem, with two possible exceptions. Firstly, it might have too many distinguished vertices. This would happen if for some i and j we have Ai and Aj both being subgroups of, say, Pv , which are conjugate in A but not in Pv . Let h ∈ A be an element such that hAi h−1 = Aj . Since both Ai and Aj fix only one vertex, and this vertex is v, we must have h ∈ Pv , and so Ai and Aj are conjugate inside Pv . Secondly, it could be that the finite extensions of Ai we obtain as vertex groups are not extensions by StabH (i). This would happen if StabH (i) is not a subgroup of Hv . Let us take h ∈ A in the preimage of StabH (i), such that hAi h−1 = Ai . Then in the action on Pe the element h takes a vertex fixed by Ai to another such; if these were different, then Ai would fix an  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 17  edge, which is impossible. Thus h fixes the same vertex as Ai . This finishes the proof.  5. Fixed points in the graph of relative free splittings Consider a free product decomposition A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B with B a finitely generated free group. Handel and Mosher [HM] (see also the work of Horbez [Hor]) defined a graph of relative free splittings FS(A, {A1 , . . . , An }) associated to such a decomposition. Its vertices are finite non-trivial graphs of groups with trivial edge groups, and such that each Ai is contained in a conjugate of a vertex group; two such graphs of groups define the same vertex when the associated universal covers are Aequivariantly isometric. Two vertices are connected by an edge if and only if the graphs of groups admit a common refinement. In their article, Handel and Mosher prove that FS(A, {A1 , . . . , An }) is connected and Gromov hyperbolic [HM, Theorem 1.1]. Observe that the subgroup Out(A, {A1 , . . . , An }) of Out(A) consisting of those outer automorphisms of A which preserve the decomposition A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B acts on this graph. We offer the following fixed point theorem for this action on FS(A, {A1 , . . . , An }). Corollary 5.1. Let H 6 Out(A, {A1 , . . . , An }) be a finite subgroup, and suppose that the factors Ai are finitely generated. Then H fixes a point in the free-splitting graph FS(A, {A1 , . . . , An }). Proof. Theorem 4.1 gives us an action of the extension A on a tree T ; in particular A acts on this tree, and this action satisfies the definition of a vertex in FS(A, {A1 , . . . , An }). Since the whole of A acts on T , every outer automorphism in H fixes this vertex.  6. Fixed points in the outer space of a free product Take any finitely generated group A, and consider its Grushko decomposition, that is a free splitting A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B where B is a finitely generated free group, and each group Ai is finitely generated and freely indecomposible, that is it cannot act on a tree without a global fixed point (note that Z is not freely indecomposible in this sense). Grushko’s Theorem [Gru] tells us that such a decomposition is essentially unique; more precisely, if A = A01 ∗ · · · ∗ A0m ∗ B 0  18  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  is another such decomposition, then B ∼ = B 0 , m = n, and there is a permutation β of the set {1, . . . , n} such that Ai is conjugate to A0β(i) . In particular, this implies that the decomposition A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B is preserved in our sense by every outer automorphism of A. In [GL] Guirardel and Levitt introduced P O, the (projectivised) outer space of a free product. It has a structure of a ‘simplicial complex with missing faces’ – it is homeomorphic to a union of open simplices in a metric realisation of a simplicial complex. In particular, each open simplex contains a barycentre; the barycentres are equivalence classes of pairs (G, ι), where: (1) G is a finite graph of groups with trivial edge groups; (2) edges of G are given length 1; (3) for every i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, there is a unique vertex vi in G such that the vertex group Gvi is conjugate to Ai ; (4) all other vertices have trivial vertex groups; (5) every leaf of G is one of the vertices {v1 , . . . , vn }; (6) ι : π1 (G) → A is an isomorphism. The equivalence relation is given by postcomposing ι with an inner automorphism of A, and by multiplying the lengths of all edges of G by a positive constant. We also consider two pairs G, ι and G0 , ι0 equivalent if there exists an isometry ψ : G → G0 such that ι = ι0 ◦ ψ. Because of the essential uniqueness of the Grushko decomposition, the group Out(A) acts on P O by postcomposing the marking ι. We offer the following result for this action. Corollary 6.1. Let A be a finitely generated group, and let H 6 Out(A) be a finite subgroup. Then H fixes a barycentre in P O. Proof. Theorem 4.1 gives us an action of the extension A on a tree T , and we may assume that this action is minimal; in particular A acts on this tree, and this action satisfies the definition of a vertex in P O (with all edge lengths equal to 1). Since the whole of A acts on T , every outer automorphism in H fixes this vertex.  Note that P O has been shown in [GL, Theorem 4.2, Corollary 4.4] to be contractible. 7. Relative Nielsen realisation In this section we use Theorem 4.1 to prove relative Nielsen Realisation for free products. To do this we need to formalise the notion of a marking of a space. Definition 7.1. We say that a path-connected topological space X with a e is marked by a group A if and only if it comes equipped universal covering X with an isomorphism between A and the group of deck transformations of e X.  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 19  Remark 7.2. Given a space X marked by a group A, we obtain an isoe (where p denotes its morphism A ∼ = π1 (X, p) by choosing a basepoint pe ∈ X projection in X). Conversely, an isomorphism A ∼ = π1 (X, p) together with a choice of a lift e pe ∈ X of p determines the marking in the sense of the previous definition. Definition 7.3. Suppose that we are given an embedding π1 (X) ,→ π1 (Y ) of fundamental groups of two path-connected spaces X and Y , both marked. A map ι : X → Y is said to respect the markings via the map e ι if and only e e if e ι : X → Y is π1 (X)-equivariant (with respect to the given embedding π1 (X) ,→ π1 (Y )), and satisfies the commutative diagram e X   X  e ι  e /Y  ι   /Y  We say that ι respects the markings if and only if such an e ι exists. Suppose that we have a metric space X marked by a group A, and a group H acting on X. Of course such a setup yields the induced action H → Out(A), but in fact it does more: it gives us an extension 1→A→A→H→1 where A is the group of all lifts of elements of H to automorphisms of the e of X. universal covering X Definition 7.4. Suppose that we are given a group extension A→A→H We say that an action φ : H → Isom(X) of H on a metric space X realises the extension A if and only if X is marked by A, and the extension π1 (X) → G → H induced by φ fits into the commutative diagram A   '  π1 (X)  /A   /H  '  /G  /H  When A is centre-free, and we are given an embedding H 6 Out(A), we say that an action φ as before realises the action H → Out(A) if and only if it realises the corresponding extension. Now we are ready to state the relative Nielsen Realisation theorem for free products.  20  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  Theorem 7.5 (Relative Nielsen Realisation). Let φ : H → Out(A) be a homomorphism with a finite domain, and let A = A1 ∗ · · · ∗ An ∗ B be a decomposition preserved by H, with each Ai finitely generated, and B a (possibly trivial) finitely generated free group. Let A1 , . . . , Am be the minimal factors. Suppose that for each i ∈ {1, . . . , m} we are given a complete NPC space Xi marked by Ai , on which Stabi (H) acts in such a way that the associated extension of Ai by StabH (i) is isomorphic (as an extension) to the extension Ai coming from A. Then there exists a complete NPC space X realising the action φ, and such that for each i ∈ {1, . . . , m} we have a StabH (i)equivariant embedding ιi : Xi → X which preserves the marking. Moreover, the images of the spaces Xi are disjoint, and collapsing each Xi and its images under the action of H individually to a point yields a graph with fundamental group abstractly isomorphic to the free group B. As outlined in the introduction, the proof is very similar to the classical proof of Nielsen realisation, with our new relative Stallings’ and Karrass– Pietrowski–Solitar theorems in place of the classical ones. Proof. When φ is injective we first apply Theorem 4.1 to obtain a graph of e by groups G, and then use Proposition 3.1 and blow up each vertex of G f e the appropriate Xi ; we call the resulting space X. The space X is obtained e by taking the quotient of the action of A on X. If φ is not injective, then we consider the induced map H/ ker φ → Out(A) apply the previous paragraph, and declare H to act on the resulting space with ker φ in the kernel.  Remark 7.6. In the above theorem the hypothesis on the spaces Xi being complete and NPC can be replaced by the condition that they are semilocally simply connected, and any finite group acting on their universal covering fixes at least one point. Remark 7.7. On the other hand, when we strengthen the hypothesis and require the spaces Xi to be NPC cube complexes (with the actions of our finite groups preserving the combinatorial structure), then we may arrange for X to also be a cube complex. When constructing the blow ups, we may always take the fixed points of the finite groups to be midpoints of cubes, and then X is naturally a cube complex, when we take the cubical barycentric subdivisions of the complexes Xi instead of the original cube complexes Xi . Remark 7.8. In [HOP] Osajda, Przytycki and the first-named author develop a more topological approach to Nielsen realisation and the Karrass– Pietrowski–Solitar theorem. In that article, Nielsen realisation is shown first, using dismantlability of the sphere graph (or free splitting graph) of  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 21  a free group, and the Karrass–Pietrowski–Solitar theorem then follows as a consequence. The relative Nielsen realisation theorem with all free factors Ai being finitely generated free groups is a fairly quick consequence of the methods developed in [HOP] – however, the more general version proved here cannot at the current time be shown using the methods of [HOP]: to the authors knowledge no analogue of the sphere graph exhibits suitable properties. It would be an interesting problem to find a “splitting graph” for free products which has dismantling properties analogous to the ones shown in [HOP] to hold for arc, sphere and disk graphs. 8. Nielsen realisation for limit groups Definition 8.1. A group A is called fully residually free if and only if for any finite subset {a1 , . . . , an } ⊆ A r {1} there exists a free quotient q : A → F such that q(ai ) 6= 1 for each i. A finitely generated fully residually free group is called a limit group. Note that the definition immediately implies that limit groups are torsion free. The three most immediate classes of examples are free groups, free abelian groups, and surface groups. For each of these classes we have a Nielsen realisation results, and these will form a basis for an inductive argument. Theorem 8.2 ([Cul, Khr, Zim]). Let H be a finite subgroup of Out(Fn ), where Fn denotes the free group of rank n. There exists a finite graph X realising the given action H < Out(Fn ). Theorem 8.3. Let Zn → Zn → H be a finite extension of Zn . There exists a metric n-torus X realising this extension. Theorem 8.4 (Kerckhoff [Ker1, Ker2]). Let H be a finite subgroup of Out(π1 (Σ)) where Σ is a closed surface of genus at least 2. There exists a hyperbolic metric on Σ such that Σ endowed with this metric realises the given action H < Out(π1 (Σ)). We are going to use an inductive approach to limit groups; such an approach is possible since the class of limit groups coincides with the class of constructible limit groups (for this and other facts see [BF]). What is important for us is that this means that every limit groups has a well-defined level, which is a natural number. We do not need to recall the precise definition of the level; it will suffice to recall two facts: • the level of a limit group is equal to 0 if and only if the group is finitely generated and free; and  22  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  • a limit group A of level n either is a free product of two limit groups of level 6 n−1 or it admits a generalised abelian decomposition (which is a special kind of a graph of groups decomposition; see e.g. [BF] for details) and a proper epimorphism ρ : A → B to a limit group of level 6 n − 1, such that in particular every non-abelian, non-free and non-surface vertex group of the generalised abelian decomposition is mapped injectively by ρ. The crucial property of one-ended limit groups is that they admit JSJdecompositions invariant under automorphisms. Theorem 8.5 (Bumagin–Kharlampovich–Myasnikov [BKM, Theorem 3.13 and Lemma 3.16]). Let A be a one-ended limit group. Then there exists a finite graph of groups G with π1 (G) = A and the following additional properties. i) All vertex groups are finitely generated, and all edge groups are cyclic. ii) Every maximal abelian subgroup of A is conjugate to a vertex group of G. iii) Each vertex group is either a maximal abelian subgroup of A, a quadratically hanging subgroup (which implies that it is isomorphic to a finitely generated free group or a surface group) or a rigid subgroup. The latter two types are non-abelian. iv) Every edge in G connects a vertex carrying a maximal abelian subgroup to a vertex carrying a non-abelian group (qudratically hanging or rigid). e v) Any automorphism φ of A induces an A-equivariant isometry ψ of G such that the following diagram commutes A  e / Isom(G)  φ    A    cψ  e / Isom(G)  where cψ denotes conjugation by ψ. We will refer to the graph of groups G as the canonical JSJ decomposition. Note that for the naming of the various vertex groups we use the conventions of Bestvina–Feighn [BF]. Note also that the first description of a JSJ decomposition for limit groups very much like the above (without property (v)) can be found in the work of Sela [Sel]. The canonical JSJ decomposition has one additional property (see [BKM, Theorem 3.13(1)]) – it is universal, which in particular implies that given any graph of groups decomposition G0 of A, every rigid vertex group of the canonical JSJ decomposition is (up to conjugation) contained in a vertex group of G0 . Lemma 8.6. Let A be a one-ended limit group of level n, and let R be a rigid vertex group in the canonical JSJ decomposition G of A. Then R is a  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 23  surface group or a hyperbolic group isomorphic to a free product of finitely many limit groups of level less than n. Proof. Alibegović [Ali, Thm 3.3] showed that a limit group is hyperbolic if and only if its maximal abelian subgroups are cyclic. Let Z be a maximal abelian subgroup of R. There exists Z 0 , a maximal abelian subgroup of A, e fixes a vertex whose stabiliser which contains Z. But Z 0 , when acting on G, is maximal abelian. Thus Z also fixes this vertex, and also the (distinct) vertex corresponding to the nonabelian group R. Therefore Z fixes an edge e which implies that Z is cyclic. in G, The definition of level n tells us that either A is a non-trivial free product (which it cannot be, as it is one-ended), or it admits a graph of groups decomposition G0 and an epimorphism ρ : A → B to a limit group of level at most n − 1 such that ρ is injective on every non-abelian, non-free, nonsurface vertex group. If R is a surface group or a free group then we have proven the statement (note that A is not free, and hence n > 0). If R is not free and not a surface group, then the vertex group in G0 in which it lies (up to conjugation) is not free, not abelian, and not a surface group. Thus ρ maps R into B injectively, and so R is a finitely generated subgroup of a limit group of level at most n − 1. A result of Wilton [Wil, Lemma 4.7] now tells us that R is isomorphic to a free product of finitely many limit groups of level less than n.  We now need to discuss malnormality. Definition 8.7. Recall that a subgroup G 6 A is malnormal if and only if a−1 Ga ∩ G 6= {1} implies that a ∈ G for every a ∈ A. Following Sam Brown, we say that a family of subgroups G1 , . . . , Gn of A is malnormal if and only if for every a ∈ A we have that a−1 Gi a ∩ Gj 6= {1} implies that i = j and a ∈ Gi . We will use another property of limit groups and their canonical JSJ decompositions. Proposition 8.8 ([BKM, Theorem 3.1(3),(4)]). Let A be a limit group. Every non-trivial abelian subgroup of A lies in a unique maximal abelian subgroup, and every maximal abelian subgroup is malnormal. Corollary 8.9. Let Gv be a non-abelian vertex group in a canonical JSJ decomposition of a one-ended limit group A. Then the edge groups carried by edges incident at v form a malnormal family in Gv . Proof. Let Z1 and Z2 denote two edge groups carried by distinct edges, e and e0 say, incident at v. Without loss of generality we may assume that each of these groups is infinite cyclic. Suppose that there exists g ∈ Gv and a non-trivial z ∈ g −1 Z1 g ∩ Z2 . Each Zi lies in a unique maximal subgroup Mi of A. But then the abelian subgroup generated by z lies in both M1 and M2 , which forces M1 = M2 by uniqueness. Now g −1 M1 g ∩ M1 6= {1}  24  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  which implies that g ∈ M1 (since M1 is malnormal), and so g −1 Z1 g = Z1 , which in turn implies that z ∈ Z1 ∩ Z2 . The edges e and e0 form a loop in G, and so there is the corresponding element t in A = π1 (G). Observe that t commutes with z, and so the group ht, zi must lie in M1 . But this is a contradiction, as t does not fix any vertices e in G.  We are now going to use [Bro, Lemma 2.31]; we are however going to break the argument of this lemma in two parts. Lemma 8.10 (Brown). Let X be a connected M−1 -simplicial complex of dimension at most 2. Let A = π1 (X), and suppose that we are given a malnormal family {G1 , . . . , Gn } of infinite cyclic subgroups of A. Then, after possibly subdividing X, each group Gi fixes a (simplicial) axis ai in the universal cover of X, and the images in X of axes ai and aj for i 6= j are distinct. In the second part of [Bro, Lemma 2.31] we need to introduce an extra component, namely a simplicial action of a finite group H on X, which permutes the groups Gi up to conjugation. Lemma 8.11 (Brown). Let X be a locally CAT(−1) connected finite M−1 simplicial complex of dimension at most 2. Let A = π1 (X), and suppose that we are given a family {c1 , . . . , cn } of locally geodesic simplicial closed curves with images pairwise distinct. Suppose that we have a finite group H acting simplicially on X in a way preserving the images of the curves c1 , . . . , cn setwise. Then there exists a locally CAT(k) 2-dimensional finite simplicial complex X 0 of curvature k, with k < 0, with a transverse family of locally geodesic simplicial closed curves {c01 , . . . , c0n }, such that X 0 is Hequivariantly homotopic to X, and the homotopy takes c0i to ci for each i. Sketch of proof. The proof of [Bro, Lemma 2.31] goes through verbatim, with a slight modification; to explain the modification let us first briefly recount Brown’s proof. We start by finding two local geodesics, say c1 and c2 , which contain segments whose union is a tripod – one arm of the tripod is shared by both segments. We glue in a fin, that is a 2-dimensional Mk -simplex, so that one side of the simplex is glued to the shared segment of the tripod, and another side is glued to another arm (the intersection of the two sides goes to the central vertex of the tripod). This way one of the curves, say c1 , is no longer locally geodesic, and we replace it by a locally geodesic curve identical to c1 except that instead of travelling along two sides of the fin, it goes along the third side. The problem is that after the gluing of a fin our space will usually not be locally CAT(−1) (the third side of the fin introduces a shortcut in the link of the central vertex of the tripod). To deal with this, we first replace simplices in X by the corresponding Mk -simplices, and this creates an excess angle δ  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 25  (compare also the proof of Proposition 3.10). Then gluing in the fin does not affect the property of being locally CAT(k). We glue such fins multiple times, until all local geodesics intersect transversely; after each gluing we perform a replacement of simplices to generate the excess angle. Now let us describe what changes in our argument. When gluing in a fin, we need to do it H-equivariantly in the following sense: a fin is glued along two consecutive edges, say (e, e0 ), and H acts on pairs of consecutive edges. We thus glue in one fin for each coset of the stabiliser of (e, e0 ) in H. This way, when we introduce shortcuts in a link of a vertex, no two points are joined by more than one shortcut. Since we are gluing multiple fins simultaneously, we need to make the angle π − δ sufficiently close to π.  Note that when we say that the family {c01 , . . . , c0n } is transverse, we mean that each curve c0i intersects transversely with the other curves and itself. Theorem 8.12. Let A be a limit group, and let A→A→H be an extension of A by a finite group H. Then there exists a complete compact locally CAT(κ) space X realising the extension A, where κ = −1 when A is hyperbolic, and κ = 0 otherwise. When κ = −1, the space X is of dimension at most 2. Proof. The proof will be an induction on the level of A. Before we start, we will show that assuming the result holds for one-ended limit groups of level n, it holds for all limit groups of level n. Consider a limit group A which is not one-ended. We apply the classical version of Stallings theorem to A, and split it over a finite group. We will in fact apply the theorem multiple times, so that we obtain a finite graph of groups G0 with finite edge groups, with all vertex groups finitely generated and one-ended, and π1 (G0 ) = A; the fact that we only have to apply the theorem finitely many times follows from finite presentability of A (see [BKM, Theorem 3.1(5)]) and Dunwoody’s accessibility [Dun2]. The one-ended vertex groups are themselves finite extensions of limit groups, and so for each of them we have a connected metric space to act on by assumption. We now use Proposition 3.1 – the assumption on finite groups fixing points is satisfied since the vertex spaces are complete and CAT(0). We will now assume that A, and so A, is one-ended. As mentioned before, the proof is an induction on the level n of A. If n = 0 then A is a fintely generated free group and we are done by Theorem 8.2. Also, if A is a surface group or a finitely generated free-abelian group, then we are also done by Theorems 8.3 and 8.4.  26  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  We apply Theorem 8.5 and obtain a connected graph of groups G with π1 (G) = A (the canonical JSJ decomposition) for which we can extend the natural e to an action of A. Taking the quotient by A we obtain a action of A on G new graph of groups Γ with π1 (Γ) = A The edge groups of Γ are virtually cyclic, and the vertex groups are finite extensions of finitely generated free or free-abelian groups, or surface groups, or of other rigid vertex groups, which are hyperbolic and isomorphic to free products of finitely many limit groups of smaller level (in view of Lemma 8.6). Using Theorems 8.2 to 8.4 and the inductive hypothesis, for each vertex group Γv we construct a compact complete NPC space Xv marked by Av = A ∩ Γv , on which Γv /Av acts in such a way that the induced extension is ev is CAT(0). When Gv is hyperbolic, it is isomorphic to Γv . The space X actually CAT(−1) and at most 2-dimensional. In particular, this is the case for all vertices if A is hyperbolic (and therefore so are all vertex groups, being limit groups whose maximal Abelian subgroups are cyclic). eu is (at most) 2–dimensional and CAT(−1), we can easily trianWhen X gulate it Γu -equivariantly using convex simplices; we can then replace each 2-simplex by the corresponding 2-simplex of type M−1 , and the resulting eu and Xu have the structure of (at most) space is still CAT(−1). Thus, X 2-dimensional M−1 -simplicial complexes, the latter being finite. Moreover, we can triangulate it in such a way that each axis fixed by an infinite cyclic group carried by an edge incident at u is also simplicial. Observe that Γv /Av permutes these axes, and so each of the corresponding edge groups in Γ preserves such an axis as well. Now we apply Lemma 8.10 and conclude that distinct axes do not coincide. Thus we may use Lemma 8.11, and replace Xu by a new CAT(−1) M−1 -simplicial complex (after rescaling) of dimension at most 2, which has only finitely many isometry classes of simplices, and in which our axes intersect each other and themselves transversely. Observing that each infinite edge group preserves an axis in each of the relevant vertex spaces by Lemma 3.8, we apply Proposition 3.10, and take the resulting space to be X. The result is NPC in any case, and if A was hyperbolic (and therefore all vertex spaces were CAT(−1)), it is locally CAT(−1) as claimed.  References [Ali] [AB]  Emina Alibegović. A combination theorem for relatively hyperbolic groups. Bull. London Math. Soc. 37(2005), 459–466. Emina Alibegović and Mladen Bestvina. Limit groups are CAT(0). J. London Math. Soc. (2) 74(2006), 259–272.  NIELSEN REALISATION BY GLUING: LIMIT GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS 27  [BF]  [BH]  [Bro] [BKM]  [Cul]  [CV] [Dun1] [Dun2] [Gru] [GL] [HM] [HK] [HOP] [Hor] [KPS]  [Ker1] [Ker2] [Khr] [Krö] [Sel]  [Ser]  [Sta1] [Sta2]  Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Notes on Sela’s work: limit groups and Makanin-Razborov diagrams. In Geometric and cohomological methods in group theory, volume 358 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 1–29. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2009. Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. Samuel Brown. A gluing theorem for negatively curved complexes. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 93(2016), 741–762. Inna Bumagin, Olga Kharlampovich, and Alexei Miasnikov. The isomorphism problem for finitely generated fully residually free groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra 208(2007), 961–977. Marc Culler. Finite groups of outer automorphisms of a free group. In Contributions to group theory, volume 33 of Contemp. Math., pages 197–207. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984. Marc Culler and Karen Vogtmann. Moduli of graphs and automorphisms of free groups. Invent. Math. 84(1986), 91–119. M. J. Dunwoody. Cutting up graphs. Combinatorica 2(1982), 15–23. M. J. Dunwoody. The accessibility of finitely presented groups. Invent. Math. 81(1985), 449–457. I. Gruschko. Über die Basen eines freien Produktes von Gruppen. Rec. Math. [Mat. Sbornik] N.S. 8 (50)(1940), 169–182. Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. The outer space of a free product. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 94(2007), 695–714. Michael Handel and Lee Mosher. Relative free splitting and free factor complexes I: Hyperbolicity. arXiv:1407.3508. S. Hensel and D. Kielak. Nielsen realisation for untwisted right-angled Artin groups. arXiv:1410.1618. Sebastian Hensel, Damian Osajda, and Piotr Przytycki. Realisation and dismantlability. Geom. Topol. 18(2014), 2079–2126. Camille Horbez. The boundary of the outer space of a free product. arXiv:1408.0543. A. Karrass, A. Pietrowski, and D. Solitar. Finite and infinite cyclic extensions of free groups. J. Austral. Math. Soc. 16(1973), 458–466. Collection of articles dedicated to the memory of Hanna Neumann, IV. Steven P. Kerckhoff. The Nielsen realization problem. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 2(1980), 452–454. Steven P. Kerckhoff. The Nielsen realization problem. Ann. of Math. (2) 117(1983), 235–265. D. G. Khramtsov. Finite groups of automorphisms of free groups. Mat. Zametki 38(1985), 386–392, 476. Bernhard Krön. Cutting up graphs revisited—a short proof of Stallings’ structure theorem. Groups Complex. Cryptol. 2(2010), 213–221. Zlil Sela. Diophantine geometry over groups I: Makanin-Razborov diagrams. Publications Mathématiques de l’Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques 93(Sep 2001), 31–106. Jean-Pierre Serre. Trees. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003. Translated from the French original by John Stillwell, Corrected 2nd printing of the 1980 English translation. John R. Stallings. On Torsion-Free Groups with Infinitely Many Ends. Annals of Mathematics Second Series, 88(September 1968), 312–334. John R. Stallings. Group theory and three-dimensional manifolds. Yale University Press, New Haven,, 1971.  28  [Wil]  [Zim]  SEBASTIAN HENSEL AND DAWID KIELAK  Henry Wilton. Solutions to Bestvina & Feighn’s exercises on limit groups. In Geometric and cohomological methods in group theory, volume 358 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 30–62. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2009. Bruno Zimmermann. Über Homöomorphismen n-dimensionaler Henkelkörper und endliche Erweiterungen von Schottky-Gruppen. Comment. Math. Helv. 56(1981), 474–486.  Sebastian Hensel Mathematisches Institut Universität Bonn Endenicher Allee 60 D-53115 Bonn Germany hensel@math.uni-bonn.de  Dawid Kielak Fakultät für Mathematik Universität Bielefeld Postfach 100131 D-33501 Bielefeld Germany dkielak@math.uni-bielefeld.de

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
