Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4600

Abstract:
arXiv:1502.06374v3 [math.GR] 30 Sep 2017  ADJOINT REPRESENTATIONS OF BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA Abstract. Given a black box group Y encrypting PSL2 pFq over an unknown field F of unknown odd characteristic p and a global exponent E for Y (that is, an integer E such that yE “ 1 for all y P Y), we present a Las Vegas algorithm which constructs a unipotent element in Y. The running time of our algorithm is polynomial in log E. This answers the question posed by Babai and Beals in 1999. We also find the characteristic of the underlying field in time polynomial in log E and linear in p. Furthermore, we construct, in probabilistic time polynomial in log E, ‚ a black box group X encrypting PGL2 pFq – SO3 pFq, its subgroup Y˝ of index 2 isomorphic to Y and a probabilistic polynomial in log E time isomorphism Y˝ ÝÑ Y; ‚ a black box field K, and ‚ polynomial time, in log E, isomorphisms SO3 pKq ÝÑ X ÝÑ SO3 pKq. If, in addition, we know p and the standard explicitly given finite field Fq isomorphic to the field F then we construct, in time polynomial in log E, isomorphism SO3 pFq q ÝÑ SO3 pKq. Unlike many papers on black box groups, our algorithms make no use of additional oracles other than the black box group operations. Moreover, our result acts as an SL2 -oracle in the black box group theory. We implemented our algorithms in GAP and tested them for groups such as PSL2 pFq for |F| “ 115756986668303657898962467957 (a prime number).  1. Introduction 1.1. The principal results. Black box groups were introduced by Babai and Szemerédi [8] as an idealized setting for randomized algorithms for solving permutation and matrix group problems in computational group theory. A black box group is a black box (or an oracle, or a device, or an algorithm) operating with 0–1 strings of uniform length which encrypt (not necessarily in a unique way) elements of some finite group. In various classes of black box problems the isomorphism type of the encrypted group could be known in advance or unknown. We denote a black box group encrypting a group X by using the same letter in sans serif, X, and we apply the same convention to the strings x produced by X which correspond to the group element x P X. All black box groups in this paper are assumed to satisfy Axioms BB1–BB4 stated in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. In particular, we assume that for every black box Date: 30 September 2017. 1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 20P05, Secondary 03C65. 1  2  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  group X we are given a global exponent, that is, an integer E such that xE “ 1 for all x P X, and the computation of xE is feasible. In this paper, we present an algorithm which solves the old problem by Babai and Beals [6, Problem 10.1] that remained open since 1999. We prove the following theorem. Theorem 1.1. Let Y be a black box group encrypting Y “ PSL2 pFq, where F is an unknown finite field of unknown odd characteristic p and let E be a global exponent for Y. Assume also that |F| ě 7. Then there exists a Las Vegas algorithm which constructs a string representing a non-trivial unipotent element from Y in time polynomial in log E. In particular, the characteristic p of the underlying field can be found in time polynomial in log E and linear in p. For a discussion of randomized algorithms and, in particular, Las Vegas algorithms, see Section 1.3. In case of p “ 2, the Babai-Beals problem has been solved by Kantor and Kassabov [28], and in Section 4.9 we briefly discuss how our methods can also be applied to this case. We exclude small cases |F| ă 7 from consideration in this paper because they – and, more generally, black box recognition of classical matrix groups over small fields are comprehensively treated in the memoir by Kantor and Seress [29]. Note that, in Theorem 1.1, we do not have any information about the ground field of the group Y . However, we use some form of an upper bound on the size of this field which is implicitly present in the global exponent E. Note also that we construct a unipotent element without knowing its order and our algorithm is Las Vegas due to the unipotency test, Lemma 5.5. To find the characteristic of the underlying field, we construct a unipotent element and then find its order. In the special case when our black box group Y is explicitly represented by matrices, Theorem 1.1 takes the form that also remained unknown until now. Corollary 1.2. Let p be an odd prime number. Given matrices g1 , . . . , gm in the group GLn pFpk q of invertible matrices over a finite field Fpk of odd characteristic p which generate subgroup G isomorphic to SL2 pFpl q, pl ě 7, we can find in G a non-trivial unipotent element in probabilistic time polynomial in k, l, m, n and log p. Our algorithm is Las Vegas. Our next result is a solution to the problem of recognizing a black box group encrypting the group PSL2 pFq defined over an unknown field of unknown odd characteristic. Theorem 1.3. Let Y be a black box group encrypting PSL2 pFq, where F is an unknown field of unknown odd characteristic p and let E be a global exponent for Y. Assume also that |F| ě 7. Then we construct, in probabilistic time polynomial in log E, (a) a black box group X encrypting the group SO3 pFq, its subgroup Y˝ of index 2 isomorphic to Y and a probabilistic polynomial in log E time isomorphism Y˝ ÝÑ Y; (b) a black box field K, and (c) polynomial time, in log E, isomorphisms SO3 pKq ÝÑ X ÝÑ SO3 pKq.  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  3  Our algorithms are Las Vegas. If, in addition, we know p and the standard explicitly given finite field Fq of characteristic p isomorphic to F then we construct, in log Etime, an isomorphism SO3 pFq q ÝÑ SO3 pKq. Since, by Theorem 1.1, we can find the characteristic p of the underlying field in time linear in p and polynomial in log E, and also because finding efficient two-way isomorphisms between a black box field of order pn and an explicitly given standard field can be done in time linear in p and polynomial in time n log p (see Section 3), we have a stronger result: Corollary 1.4. Let X be a black box group encrypting SO3 pFq, where F is an unknown field of unknown odd characteristic p and let E be a global exponent for X. Assume also that |F| ě 7. Then we construct, in time linear in p and polynomial in log E, an isomorphism X ÐÑ SO3 pFq q, where Fq is the standard explicitly given finite field isomorphic to F. We note here that our algorithm fully replaces the so-called “SL2 -oracle”, an assumption of existence of two-way polynomial-time isomorphism between arbitrary black box group encrypting SL2 pFpk q and the group SL2 pFpk q over the standard explicitly given field Fpk . Moreover, we do not use discrete logarithm oracle on finite fields in our algorithms as opposed to majority of the existing algorithms for black box groups. (Given a generator x of F˚ and a random element y P F, a discrete logarithm oracle finds an integer k which satisfies xk “ y.) The first use of an “SL2 -oracle” appeared in 2001; quite a number of papers referring to SL2 oracle and discrete logarithm oracle followed [17, 18, 19, 20]. The present paper together with [13, 14] shows the way to eliminate discrete logarithm oracle and SL2 -oracle entirely from black box recognition problems for classical groups of odd characteristic. By replacing the axiom BB4 with BB5 (stated in Subsection 2.3), that is, removing the assumption of knowing a global exponent E for the black box groups and assuming to have a function which computes square roots of group elements, when exist, we have the following more general result. It explains, in particular, why the characteristic of the field is not used in our Theorems 1.1 and 1.3. Theorem 1.5. Y be a black box group which satisfies axioms BB1–BB3 and encrypts the group PSL2 pFq over some unknown finite field F of unknown odd characteristic p with |F| ě 7. Assume also that Axiom BB5 holds in Y. Then we can construct, in probabilistic time polynomial in log E, (a) a black box group X encrypting the group SO3 pFq, its subgroup Y˝ of index 2 isomorphic to Y and a probabilistic polynomial in log E time isomorphism Y˝ ÝÑ Y; (b) a black box field K, and (c) polynomial time, in log E, isomorphisms SO3 pKq ÝÑ X ÝÑ SO3 pKq.  Our algorithms are Las Vegas.  We record this result here, but its discussion will be published by us elsewhere; it is linked to work by Ahmavaara [1, 2, 3], Kustaanheimo [30], and other theoretical  4  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  physicists who attempted to build a model of quantum mechanics based on a very big prime field. Recently, this theory was revisited by Zilber [42] who used a model-theoretic approach to the idea of “quantization by looking at everything as if it happens in a finite field”. Our Theorem 1.5 appears to fit well into an emerging theory linking model theory with physics: in view of [42, Proposition 5.2], finite groups PGL2 pFq structurally approximate, in some explicitly defined sense, the Minkowski group PSL2 pCq. 1.2. A very brief outline of the proof. The proof of Theorem 1.3 will be achieved as a sequence of steps some of which are interesting on their own. (a) We construct a new black box group X encrypting SO3 pFq, a group which contains PSL2 pFq as a subgroup Y˝ of index 2, and map Y˝ ãÑ Y,  see Theorem 5.1. (b) Using involutions in X, we construct a black box projective plane P that encrypts the projective plane of the 3-dimensional space of the adjoint representation of PGL2 pFq » SO3 pFq on its Lie algebra l “ sl2 pFq. We describe how to produce random points in P, describe lines through two points, construct intersection of two lines, etc. We shall note here that we do not list the elements in P or in any line in P. Furthermore, the plane P has polarity induced by the Killing form on its underlying Lie algebra. The Lie algebra product induces on P a partial binary operation which we are able to compute using black box methods; we denote this operation by b, call cross product and systematically use in algorithms developed in the paper. (c) We introduce a set of tools which allows us to coordinatize P by homogeneous coordinates over a black box field K constructed in the projective plane P. To that end, we use a classical coordinatization of Desarguesian projective planes developed by Hilbert. (d) We use the action of X on P to construct a matrix representation X ÝÑ SO3 pKq. where SO3 pKq is realized as a group of 3 ˆ 3 matrices over the black box field K. (e) Coordinatizing SO3 pKq in a similar way, we construct an isomorphism SO3 pKq ÝÑ X. (f) The map SO3 pFq q ÝÑ SO3 pKq  is constructed from the isomorphism  Fq ÝÑ K from the explicitly given finite field F onto a black box field K. We use a result by Maurer and Raub [33] formulated in our paper as Theorem 3.1 to construct this isomorphism. This is a polynomial time algorithm which runs in time log |Fq |. (All known algorithms for the inverse isomorphism Fq ÐÝ K  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  5  are reduced to solving discrete logarithm problem in Fp , the prime subfield of Fq , so finding polynomial time algorithms which construct two-way isomorphisms represent a major open problem in algebraic cryptography). (g) Section 12 contains analysis of complexities of all algorithms used in the proof. 1.3. Monte-Carlo and Las Vegas algorithms. Recall that a Monte-Carlo algorithm is a randomized algorithm which gives a correct output with probability strictly bigger than 1{2. A special case of Monte–Carlo algorithms is a Las Vegas algorithm which either outputs a correct answer or reports failure. A detailed comparison of Monte–Carlo and Las Vegas algorithms, both from practical and theoretical point, can be found in [5]. By the nature of our axioms, many algorithms for black box groups (in the sense of Axioms BB1–BB4) are Monte-Carlo. In case of decision problems, where the output is “yes” or “no”, the error of a Monte–Carlo algorithm can be made arbitrarily close to 0 by repeatedly re-running it. So answers to questions of the kind “Is this black box group isomorphic to the given group?” can be made as precise as we wish. In this paper, algorithms are Las Vegas. 1.4. Terminology and notation. In what follows we make extensive use of the language of projective geometry, see, for example Coxeter [22] and Hartshorne [26]. Group theoretic terminology mostly follows [23]. 1.5. Organization of the paper. In Section 2, we discuss the axioms of black box groups. Section 3 contains a brief discussion of black box fields. In Section 4, we introduce morphisms and protomorphisms of black box groups and the crucially important procedure that we call “reification of an involution”. We also explain how our arguments work in even characteristic producing a unipotent element in PSL2 p2n q. In Section 5, we present applications of reification of involutions, in particular, we construct a black box group encrypting SO3 pFq from a black box group encrypting PSL2 pFq. In Section 6, we discuss the geometry of involutions in SO3 pFq, and in Section 7 we construct a black box projective plane and present algorithms for additional operations and relations coming from the underlying Lie algebra. In Section 8, we construct a black box subgroup encrypting Sym4 in a black box group encrypting SO3 pFq (it provides us with an orthogonal basis in the projective plane with a polarity) and in Section 9, we apply Hilbert’s coordinatization to the black box projective plane and construct a black box field. In Section 10, we prove Theorem 1.1 and in Section 11, we prove Theorem 1.3. In Section 12, we give the complexities of the procedures presented in this paper. 2. Black box groups 2.1. Axioms for black box groups. What follows are slightly modified BabaiSzmerédi axioms. The concept of a black box can be applied to rings, fields, and, as we can see in this paper, even to projective planes. So, we formulate our axioms for groups but use the wording which makes them applicable to other algebraic structures. This explains why we are using the length lpXq of strings produced by a black box X as a proxy for the complexity of a black box X: it is applicable to a variety of structures.  6  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  In our algorithms, we have to work with several black box groups at once and build new black boxes (sometimes for the same abstract group, sometimes for different groups) from existing ones. For that reason we specify the functionality of a family X of black boxes X by the following axioms. BB1 On request, each X produces a binary string of fixed length lpXq (which depends on X) encrypting a random (almost) uniformly distributed element from some fixed group X; this is done in probabilistic time polynomial in lpXq. BB2 Each X computes, in probabilistic time polynomial in lpXq, a string encrypting the product of two strings or an inverse of a string (that is, a string encrypting the inverse of an element given by a string). BB3 Each X decides, in probabilistic time polynomial in lpXq, whether two strings encrypt the same element in its group X – therefore identification of strings agrees with the canonical projection πX  ✲ X. X ......... If Axioms BB1–BB3 hold for a particular black box group X, we say that X is a black box over X, or that a black box X encrypts the group X. Notice that we are not making any assumptions of practical computability or the time complexity of the projection πX . We will discuss our set up and terminology further in Section 4.2. In respect of Axiom BB1, we note here that a black box group X encrypting a finite group X may not necessarily be given by generators: see, for example, discussion of black boxes for centralizers of involutions [11], or discussion of links between black box algebra and homomorphic encryption [12]. When a black box group X is given by some generators, that is, some strings x1 , x2 , . . . , xm in X such that X “ xπX px1 q, πX px2 q, . . . , πX pxm qy, then producing random elements from X can be done by using either the algorithm presented in [4, Theorem 1.1] or the algorithm called “the product replacement algorithm” [21]. It turned out that the product replacement algorithm is much more practical and we refer reader to [7, 32, 35, 36] for its detailed analysis. In this paper, we systematically build new black box groups from old ones, and use randomized algorithms for their constructions. In this situation, operations in these new black boxes are performed by randomized algorithms – this explains the randomization introduced in Axioms BB2 and BB3. A typical example of a black box group is provided by a group X generated in a big matrix group GLn prk q by several matrices x1 , . . . , xl . We can, of course, multiply, invert, compare matrices. Therefore computer routines for these operations together with the sampling of the product replacement algorithm run on a tuple of generators px1 , . . . , xl q can be viewed as a black box X encrypting the group X. 2.2. Global exponent and Axiom BB4. Notice that, even in routine examples, the number of elements of a matrix group X could be astronomical. This makes many natural questions about the black box X over X – for example, finding the order of X or the isomorphism type of X when X is given as a simple group of Lie type – inaccessible for all known deterministic methods. Even when X is cyclic, existing approaches to finding its order are conditional and involve either the discrete logarithm problem or prime factorization of large integers.  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  7  Nevertheless black box problems for finite groups frequently have a feature which makes them more accessible: BB4 We are given a global exponent of X, that is, a natural number E :“ EpXq such that ‚ xE “ 1 for all strings x produced by X; and ‚ log E is polynomially bounded in terms of lpXq. For example, if X is a black box group arising from a subgroup in the known ambient group G, the exponent of G can be taken for a global exponent of X. If we know the factorization of E into prime factors then we can find the order of any element x produced by X as the minimal divisor e of E such that xe “ 1. However, we wish to work with linear groups over fields of large characteristic where factorization of E is becoming unfeasible. Our approach allows us to avoid determination of orders of random elements from X and consequently avoid making any assumptions about the prime factorization of the global exponent. 2.3. Axiom BB5. It is important to observe that our proof of Theorem 1.3 uses the global exponent E and Axiom BB4 only for computing square roots of semisimple elements in Y and X (this is done by Tonelli-Shanks algorithm, Lemma 5.6). Therefore Axiom BB4 can be replaced by its corollary, Axiom BB5 – see Theorem 1.5. BB5 We are given a partial 1- or 2-valued function ρ of two variables on a subset S Ă X that computes, in probabilistic time polynomial in lpXq, square roots in cyclic subgroups of X in the following sense: if x P S and y P xxy has square roots in xxy then ρpx, yq is the set of these roots. In particular, ‚ if |x| is even, ρpx, 1q is the subgroup of order 2 in xxy; ‚ if |x| is even then, consecutively applying ρpx, ¨q to 2-elements in xxy, we can find 2-elements in xxy of every order present; ‚ if |x| is odd, and x P xxy then ρpx, xq is the unique square root of x in xxy. We emphasize that Axiom BB5 provides everything needed for construction of centralizers of involutions by the maps ζ0 and ζ1 , Section 4.7. Axiom BB5 follows from BB4 by Lemma 5.6, applied to the cyclic group xxy. 3. Black box fields We define black box fields using, by analogy with black box groups, Axioms BB1– BB3, with a few obvious changes in the wording, and with Axiom BB2 covering the addition, multiplication, and inversion in the field. The reader may wish to compare our exposition with [10]. We remind that, in this paper, we do not necessarily know the characteristic of the field. Therefore we slightly generalize the definition of a black box field given in [10, 33] by removing the assumption that the characteristic of the field is known. We refer the reader to [10, 33] for more details of black box fields of known characteristic. We shall be using some results about the isomorphism problem for black box fields of known characteristic p [33], that is, the problem of constructing an isomorphism and its inverse between a black box field K and an explicitly given finite field Fpn . The explicit data for a finite field of cardinality pn is defined to be a system of structure constants over the prime field, that is, n3 elements pcijk qni,j,k“1  8  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  of the prime field Fp “ Z{pZ (represented as integers in r0, p ´ 1s) so that Fpn becomes a field with ordinary addition and multiplication by elements of Fp , and multiplication determined by si sj “  n ÿ  cijk sk ,  k“1  where s1 , s2 , . . . , sn denotes a basis of Fpn over Fp . The concept of an explicitly given field of order pn is robust; indeed, Lenstra Jr. has shown in [31, Theorem 1.2] that for any two fields A and B of order pn given by two sets of structure constants paijk qni,j,k“1 and pbijk qni,j,k“1 an isomorphism A ÝÑ B can be constructed in time polynomial in n log p. By an efficient isomorphism between a black box field and an explicitly given finite field Fpn , we mean an algorithm constructing such an isomorphism in time polynomial in n and log p. One of the key results on black box fields belongs to Maurer and Raub [33]; its statement and proof can be reformulated to yield the following result. Theorem 3.1. Let K be a black box field of known characteristic p encrypting an explicitly given finite field Fpn and K0 the prime subfield of K. Then the isomorphism problem between K and Fpn can be efficiently reduced to the isomorphism problem between K0 and Fp . In particular, ‚ an efficient isomorphism K0 ÝÑ Fp can be extended in time polynomial in the input length lpKq to an efficient isomorphism K ÝÑ Fpn ; ‚ there exists an isomorphism Fpn ÝÑ K computable in polynomial in lpKq time. The existence of an efficient isomorphism K0 ÝÑ Fp would follow from solution of the discrete logarithm problem in K0 . In particular, this means that, for small primes p, every black box field of order pn is effectively isomorphic to Fpn . 4. Morphisms and protomorphisms This section contains crucial tools for our algorithms. They are based on a simple observation that a map φ  ✲ Y X .......... from a group to a group is a homomorphism of groups if and only if its graph F “ tpx, φpxqq : x P Xu is a subgroup of X ˆ Y . Essentially we treat homomorphisms of black box groups as black box groups on their own, see Section 4.4. With this principle, almost everything in this section is self-evident. First, we introduce some terminology. 4.1. Morphisms. Given two black boxes X and Y encrypting finite groups X and Y , respectively, we say that a map φ which assigns strings produced by X to strings produced by Y is a morphism of black box groups, if ‚ the map φ is computable in probabilistic time polynomial in lpXq and lpYq, and  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  9  ‚ there is a homomorphism φ : X Ñ Y such that the following diagram is commutative: φ  ✲ X .. .. .. πX .. .❄ φ ✲ X where πX and πY are the canonical respectively.  Y .. .. .. πY .. .❄ Y projections of X and Y onto X and Y ,  We shall say in this situation that a morphism φ encrypts the homomorphism φ. For example, morphisms arise naturally when a black box group X is given by a generating set and we replace a generating set for the black box group X by a more convenient one and run the product replacement algorithm for the new generating set; in fact, we replace a black box for X and deal with a morphism Y ÝÑ X from a new black box Y into X. We apply to morphisms and abstract homomorphisms the same notational convention as to the strings and elements, using the same letters in sans serifed or plain version, respectively. Since different strings produced by Y may represent the same element in Y , replacing strings φpxq by equivalent strings produces a new morphism φ1 which also encrypts φ and, for all the practical purpose is the same as φ. Slightly abusing terminology, we say that a morphism φ is an injection, or a surjection, etc., if φ has these properties. In accordance with standard conventions, hooked arrows ãÑ stand for injections; dotted arrows are reserved for homomorphisms, including natural projections πX  ✲ X; X ......... which are not necessarily morphisms, since, by the very nature of black box problems, we are not given an efficient procedure for constructing the projection of a black box onto the group it encrypts. 4.2. Black box subgroups and further remarks on terminology. If we have an injection φ YĂ ✲ X .. .. .. .. .. πX .. πY .. .. .❄ .❄ φ Y Ă ✲ X we say that Y is a black box subgroup of X encrypting Y ď X. We emphasize that a black box subgroup is a procedure and has to be treated as such especially when one writes a computer code for black box group algorithm. Notice that different black box subgroups may encrypt the same subgroup. Indeed, an element in Y can be encrypted by several different strings produced from X; it is important to take into consideration a possibility that not all of these strings are produced by Y. If elements πY py1 q, . . . , πY pyk q generate Y , we call strings y1 , . . . , yk generators of Y. Black box subgroups will be constructed in this paper in one of the following ways:  10  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  ‚ We pick some strings y1 , . . . , ym produced by the black box group X and we treat them as generators of a black box subgroup Y. We use the product replacement algorithm [21] for random sampling. ‚ Given black box subgroups Y1 , . . . , Yk in X, we generate a subgroup Y “ xY1 , . . . , Yk y by taking generating sets in Yi and combining them into a generating set in Y. ‚ If Y is the centralizer in X of an involution or a proto-involution in the sense of Section 4.6 then we apply the procedure described in Section 4.7 to “populate” Y and eventually find a generating set for Y. Terminology and conventions. Abusing terminology and notation, we write x P X for a string x produced by the black box group X and we say that x is an element of X. In the rest of the paper, a subgroup of a black box group is meant to refer to a black box subgroup. The order opxq (“ |x|) of x is opxq “ |x|. We shall refer to a string x P X as an involution, or a semisimple element, or a unipotent element, etc., if x P X is an element with these properties. If x P X is an involution, then CX pxq denotes a black box subgroup encrypting CX pxq, see Section 4.7 for a construction of CX pxq. Moreover, we refer to black box subgroups in X as to tori, unipotent groups, etc., if they encrypt subgroups in X with these properties. 4.3. Direct and semidirect products of black box groups. Assume that X encrypts X and Y encrypts Y . Then the black box X ˆ Y produces pairs of strings px, yq by sampling X and Y independently, with operations carried out componentwise in X and Y; of course, X ˆ Y encrypts X ˆ Y and lpX ˆ Yq “ lpXq ` lpYq. More generally, given black box groups X1 , . . . , Xn , we can define their direct product X “ X1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ Xn in an expected way, consecutively sampling strings xi P Xi to form a random n-tuple px1 , . . . , xn q and carrying out group operations on these n-tuples componentwise. Later in the paper, we will use semidirect products of black box groups. They arise in a situation when we have two black box group X and Y and a polynomial time in lpXq and lpYq procedure for the action of Y on X by automorphisms, X ˆ Y ÝÑ X,  px, yq ÞÑ xy ;  then X ¸ Y samples independent pairs px, yq of strings from X and Y with multiplication performed and inversion by the rules (1)  ´1  px1 , y1 q ˝ px2 , y2 q :“ px1 xy21, y1 y2 q and px, yq´1 :“ ppx´1 qy , y´1 q.  4.4. Morphisms as black box groups. Given a morphism φ  ✲ Y X .. .. .. .. .. πX .. πY .. .. .❄ .❄ φ ✲ Y X of black box groups, we can associate with it a black box subgroup Z ãÑ X ˆ Y which encrypts the graph F “ tpx, φpxq : x P Xqu of φ. The black box group Z  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  11  produces strings tpx, φpxqqu with x is sampled by the black box X and the natural projection is defined as πZ : Z ÝÑ F  px, φpxqq  ÞÑ  pπX pxq, φpπX pxqq.  In practice, this means that we find strings x1 , . . . , xk generating X with known images y1 “ φpx1 q, . . . , yk “ φpxk q in Y and then use the product replacement algorithm for the black box subgroup Z˚ “ xpx1 , y1 q, . . . , pxk , yk qy ãÑ X ˆ Y encrypting a subgraph t px, φpxqq u of the homomorphism φ. Random sampling of the black box Z˚ returns strings x P X with their images φpxq P Y already attached. 4.5. Protomorphisms. Let X and Y be two black box groups encrypting X and Y , respectively, and π the canonical projection of X ˆ Y onto X ˆ Y . A protomorphism Z between black box groups X and Y is a black box subgroup Z ãÑ X ˆ Y such that πZ pZq is the graph of a homomorphism from X to Y or from Y to X – the direction of homomorphism is not set here. We say that Z encrypts this homomorphism. Given a string x in a black box group X encrypting a group X, it is frequently useful to associate with x a black box for the graph of a specific automorphism of X, namely, the conjugation by πX pxq. It can be viewed as a black box subgroup Cx ãÑ X ˆ X, which produces strings py, yx q for random strings y P X, with group operations and equality relation defined in the obvious way. Treating a homomorphism X ÝÑ Y of black box groups X and Y as a black box subgroup in their direct product XˆY allows us to construct previously inaccessible objects – see, for example, “reification of involutions”, Section 4.8. 4.6. Amalgamation of local proto-automorphisms. Let X be a black box group encrypting a group X. Expanding the terminology from the previous section, a proto-automorphism F on X is a black box subgroup F ãÑ X ˆ X for the graph of an automorphism of X. Assume that black box subgroups Y1 , . . . , Yk of X are encrypting, respectively, subgroups Y1 , . . . , Yk of X, and assume that xY1 , . . . , Yk y “ X. Assume that φ1 , . . . , φk are automorphisms of subgroups Y1 , . . . , Yk , respectively, and Fi are proto-automorphisms on Yi encrypting φi , i “ 1, . . . , k. We say that the system of proto-automorphisms F1 , . . . , Fk is consistent if there exists a unique automorphism φ of X such that φi “ φ |Yi for all i “ 1, . . . , k. Theorem 4.1 (Amalgamation of local proto-automorphisms). If F1 , . . . , Fk is a consistent system of proto-automorphisms on black box subgroups in X, then F “ xF1 , . . . , Fk y is a proto-automorphism on X. Proof. The proof is self-evident.    We call F the amalgam of proto-automorphisms F1 , . . . , Fk . Theorem 4.2 (Augmentation of a black box group by a proto-involution). If A ãÑ X ˆ X  12  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  is a proto-automorphism on X encrypting an involutive automorphism α on X, we can construct an involutive automorphism α of A by setting α : px, x1 q ÞÑ px1 , xq for px, x1 q P A.  Then the semidirect product A ¸ t1, αu is a black box encrypting X ¸ xαy, with A canonically projecting onto X and α projecting to α. Proof. The proof is self-evident.    Theorems 4.1 and 4.2 provide the conceptional frame for a construction of a black group encrypting SO3 pFq » PGL2 pFq from a black box group encrypting PSL2 pFq, see Theorem 5.1. 4.7. Centralizer of a proto-involution. Let A ãÑ XˆX be a proto-involution on X defined in Section 4.6. Assume that A encrypts some involutive automorphism α P AutpXq of X. Later in the paper, we work in the situation when α is an external automorphism and α is not present as a string in the black box group. In this case, we do not have any access to α but we can make use of its graph. Given A, we shall construct a black box group, which we denote it as CX rAs, encrypting CX pαq. Let A “ tpx, xα q P X ˆ X | x P Xu be the graph of α. Obviously, by writing formally CX rAs “ tx P X | there exists y P X such that px, yq P A and x “ yu,  we get CX pαq “ CX rAs. We will construct a black box subgroup CX rAs ãÑ X which satisfies a similar condition CX rAs “ tx P X | there exists y P X such that px, yq P A and πX pxq “ πX pyqu,  and encrypts CX rAs. It follows from the arguments in [11, 16] that we have the map ζ “ ζ0 \ ζ1 :  ÝÑ CX pαq " α ´1 ζ0 pxq “ ipx if opxα x´1 q is even ? x q x ÞÑ α ´1 ζ1 pxq “ x x ¨ x if opxα x´1 q is odd, ? where ipxq is the unique involution and x is the unique square root of x in the cyclic group xxy of odd order. Notice that the map above can be written in the following way using the graph A of α instead of α. ζ:X  ζ : A ÝÑ CX rAs “ CX pαq " ζ0 ppx, yqq “ a ipyx´1 q px, yq ÞÑ ζ1 ppx, yqq “ yx´1 ¨ x  if opyx´1 q is even if opyx´1 q is odd.  Assume that X satisfies Axiom BB4 and has a global exponent E “ 2k m with m odd. If x P X is a string encrypting an element of even order then the last non-identity string in the sequence 2  1 ‰ xm , pxm q2 , pxm q2 , . . . , pxm q  2k´1  , pxm q  2k  “1  is an involution and denoted by ipxq. If x P X encrypts an element of odd order then y :“?xpm`1q{2 obviously satisfies 2 y “ x and is a square root of x in xxy; we denote y :“ x. Hence, we have the analogous map for the black box groups.  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  (2)  ζ : A ÝÑ CX rAs " ´1 ζ 0 ppx, yqq “ ipyx q a px, yq ÞÑ ζ 1 ppx, yqq “ yx´1 ¨ x  13  if opyx´1 q is even if opyx´1 q is odd.  If X is a simple group of Lie type then, as shown in [37], ζ1 pxq is defined for random x P X with probability Op1{nq where n is the Lie rank of X. Furthermore, the same calculation as in [11, Section 6] proves that elements πX pζ 1 px, yqq, for px, yq P A, are uniformly distributed over CX pαq. Therefore ζ 1 provides an efficient black box for CX rAs. If A is a graph of an inner automorphism corresponding to an element a P X, we denote CX rAs by CX paq. For the black box groups X encrypting PSL2 pFq or PGL2 pFq, where F is a finite field of odd characteristic, we can construct a generating set for CX paq in the following way, if needed. We know that CX paq “ T ¸ xwy, where T is the maximal torus containing the involution a and w inverts T. Since the map ζ 1 produces uniformly distributed elements in X, by [34, I.8], a set of size Oplog log |F|q consisting of random elements in C contains a generator for T with probability ą 1{2. Moreover, since the half of the elements in C are involutions inverting T, we can construct a generating set of size Oplog log |F|q for CX paq. The map ζ 0 is useful when we are interested mostly in involutions in CX rAs, as it happens, for example, in reification of involutions, see Section 4.8. 4.8. Reification of an involution. We approach the most fascinating part of the story: identification of an involution in X from its description. We shall call this procedure the reification of an involution; it is intensively used in the present paper and in [15]. Following the notation from the previous subsection, assume that A ãÑ Xˆ X is a proto-involution on X encrypting a specific inner automorphism of X, conjugation by an involution a P X. We want to find a string a in X that encrypts a. Let A ă X ˆ X be the graph of conjugation by a. Obviously, a P Y “ CX rAs, and, moreover, a P ZpY q. Denote by ΩpY q the subgroup generated by all involutions in ZpY q, then a P ΩpY q. Even more so, a probabilistic algorithm described in Section 4.7 gives us a black box group Y “ CX rAs encrypting Y . Now we apply to the subgroup (unknown to us) ΩpY q the algorithm proving the following lemma. Lemma 4.3. Assume that a black box group Y encrypts a subgroup Y in a simple group X of Lie type of odd characteristic and of Lie rank n. Assume also that we know a global exponent E for Y. Then there is a Las Vegas algorithm which constructs a black box group W ãÑ Y which encrypts an elementary abelian 2-group W ď Y which contains ΩpY q. The algorithm works in probabilistic time polynomial in lpYq, log E (the global exponent of Y), and n. Proof. Let i1 be an involution produced from a random element in Y by repeated square and multiply method. Then Y1 “ CY pi1 q is a black box subgroup encrypting a subgroup Y1 ď Y containing ΩpY q. Now, let i2 be a string encrypting an involution different from i1 produced by Y1 , then similarly Y2 “ CY1 pi2 q is a black box subgroup encrypting a subgroup Y2 ď Y1 containing ΩpY q. Continuing in this way, we descend to a black box subgroup Z ãÑ Y encrypting an abelian group Z containing ΩpY q. Now, by using the black box group Z, we construct the involutions in Z as  14  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  described in Section 4.7. Finally, we use these involutions and bounds from [38, pp. 192–193] to construct a generating set in a black box subgroup W ãÑ Y which encrypts an elementary abelian subgroup containing ΩpY q. If X is a simple group of Lie type of odd characteristic, then the length of chains of centralizers of involutions is bounded by a polynomial in its Lie rank, giving a crude upper bound of log |X|. Since elements of even order (hence involutions) in X are abundant by [27] and the number of involutions in ZpY q is bounded by a polynomial in the Lie rank of X, the process quickly produces a desired black box subgroup W ãÑ Y.  Since a is a string which encrypts an involution in an elementary abelian group in ZpY q, it belongs to an elementary abelian group W constructed in Lemma 4.3; after that, a can be identified by testing every possibility in W. These crude estimates show that the reification procedure works in probabilistic time polynomial in lpXq, log E (where E is the global exponent of X) and |W |. In this paper, reification of involutions is applied to SO3 pFq in odd characteristic. In this case, centralizers of involutions at the subsequent stages of the algorithm are either dihedral or abelian, and the black box subgroup W in the statement of Lemma 4.3 has order at most 4. Hence the procedure, in this case, is pretty fast. 4.9. Involutions in PSL2 p2n q. Let X be a black box group encrypting PSL2 p2n q for some n ě 2. A paper by Kantor and Kassabov [28] contains a construction of an involution in X, a result analogous to the results in this paper. We shall now show how involutions in PSL2 p2n q can be constructed by our methods. Take two non-commuting elements x and y of odd order. It is a well-known property of SL2 p2n q that either x and y belong to the same Borel subgroup in X – but in that case rx, ys is an involution, and we are done, or there is an involution a P X which inverts both x and y. We do not know a, but it is obvious that the proto-involution A ă X ˆ X corresponding to a contains the tuple ppxyqa , xyq “ pxa ya , xyq “ px´1 y´1 , xyq.  Now it follows from Equation (2) that  ζ 1 ppx´1 y´1 , xyqq “  a xy2 x ¨ x´1 y´1 .  It is easy to see that the calculation produces an involution in CX pAq unless xy2 x is already an involution. 5. Applications of reifications of involutions 5.1. Construction of SO3 pFq from PSL2 pFq. It will become clear later in this paper that black box groups PGL2 pFq – SO3 pFq are easier to analyze than SL2 pFq or PSL2 pFq because they contain more involutions. We extend a black box group encrypting PSL2 pFq to a black box group encrypting SO3 pFq using amalgamation of proto-automorphisms, Theorem 4.1, and augmentation of a black box group by a proto-involution, Theorem 4.2. If x P X is a non-trivial semisimple element, then we will denote the maximal torus in X containing x by Tx . Theorem 5.1. Let Y be a black box group encrypting a group Y “ PSL2 pFq, where F is an unknown finite field of unknown odd characteristic and |F| ě 7. Assume that we know a global exponent E for Y. Then there is an algorithm which constructs  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  15  a proto-involution Y˝ ãÑ Y ˆ Y on Y encrypting a diagonal automorphism d of Y . Moreover, if we take the automorphism d : px, x1 q ÞÑ px1 , xq for px, x1 q P Y˝  of Y˝ , then the semidirect product X “ Y˝ ¸ xdy is a black box group encrypting PGL2 pFq. The running time of the algorithm is polynomial in log E. Proof. We recall that Y has one conjugacy class of external involutive diagonal automorphisms [24, Table 4.5.1]. Let d be its representative, then CY pdq “ S ¸ xwy where S is a torus in Y of order p|F|´1q{2 or p|F|`1q{2 depending on |F| ” ´1 mod 4 or |F| ” 1 mod 4, respectively, and w is an involution inverting S. Observe that the order of the torus S is odd. Take an involution t P CY pdq inverting S and assume that t is contained in some maximal torus T . By the Frattini argument, Y ¨NY xdy pT q “ Y xdy and we can assume without loss of generality that d normalizes T. Notice that xT, Sy “ Y and d centralizes S and inverts every element in T . Therefore we can apply to Y amalgamation of proto-automorphisms and augmentation by a proto-involution, Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 4.2. Construction of tori T and S in Y with these properties goes as follows. We first construct an involution u P Y and its centralizer CY puq “ Tu ¸ xwy. Then, we find a random element y P Y such that the element z :“ uuy has odd order and set S :“ xzy. A black box for Tu can be set up (or a generating set for Tu can be found) by the arguments in Subsection 4.7. It follows from the well-known description of subgroups in PSL2 pFq that the subgroups Tu and S generate Y. Consider the amalgam of local proto-automorphisms α : Tu Ñ Tu , β : S Ñ S,  t ÞÑ t´1 s ÞÑ s  and let Y˝ be the resulting involutive proto-automorphism of Y. Note that the automorphism d : px, x1 q ÞÑ px1 , xq of Y˝ defined by the rule as in Theorem 4.2, so the black box group Y˝ ¸ xdy encrypts Y ¸ xdy. All we need to do now is to make sure that the automorphism d encrypts an external involutive automorphism of Y . Observe that if the element z belongs to a maximal torus of odd order in Y, then d encrypts an external involutive diagonal automorphism of Y . However, if the element z belongs to a maximal torus of even order in Y, then d must be the involution in this torus since d centralizes S. Therefore, d encrypts some inner automorphism of Y and we can construct the involution d in Y as a string by constructing the central involution in CY pdq. In this case, we reconstruct a random element y P Y and repeat our procedure as above. Note that the probability of finding an element y P Y such that the element z :“ uuy belongs to a maximal torus of odd order is at least 1{2.  5.2. Reification of involutions in SO3 pFq. Reification of proto-involutions, as described in Section 4.8, is the most important procedure involved in our construction of unipotent elements in SO3 pFq and in the proof of Theorem 1.3. We list some well-known properties of the group X » SO3 pFq » PGL2 pFq. Lemma 5.2. Let X » SO3 pFq » PGL2 pFq where F is a field of odd characteristic. Then:  16  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  ‚ Every non-trivial element in X is either semisimple or unipotent. ‚ Every non-trivial semisimple element z P X belongs to a unique torus Z ă X and centralizes an involution r P Z. ‚ If s and t are distinct involutions in X and z “ st is a semisimple element, the involution r in the torus Z containing z is the only involution in X which commutes with both s and t. For two distinct involutions s, t P X, we denote the only involution in X that commutes with both s and t, if such involution exists, as s b t. If it does not exist, then, in view of Lemma 5.2, the product st is a unipotent element. Theorem 5.3. Let X be a black box group encrypting X “ SO3 pFq, where F is an unknown finite field of unknown odd characteristic. Assume that |F| ě 7 and we know a global exponent E for X. Let s, t P X be two distinct involutions such that st is not a unipotent element. Then there is a Las Vegas algorithm constructing the involution j commuting with s and t. The running time of the algorithm is polynomial in log E. We shall write j “ s b t, treating b as a partial binary operation on the set of involutions and call it cross product. Proof. We set z :“ st. Note first that if |z| “ 2, then s and t commute and z is an involution commuting with them. If |z| ą 2, CX pπX pzqq is a torus containing an involution πX pjq and it is inverted by πX psq and πX ptq. Clearly, j commutes with s and t. By Lemma 5.2, such an involution j is unique in X. If the order of z is even, then j “ ipzq, see Section 4.7. If z has odd order, then observe that j centralizes Z “ xzy and inverts every element in the torus Ts containing s; construction of Ts is similar to construction of tori in the proof of Theorem 5.1. Since the order of z is odd, we have |Z| ě 3 and so X “ xTs , Zy. Now the involution j can be found by amalgamating local proto-automorphisms x ÞÑ x´1  x ÞÑ  x  on Ts on Z  and reifying the result, see Section 4.8. In X “ SO3 pFq where F is a finite field of odd characteristic with |F| ě 7, the last step can be run very efficiently due to the fact that involutions r P X have the property that ZpCX prqq “ xry, see details in Section 4.8.  5.3. Writing an element in SO3 pFq as a product of two involutions. It is well-known that any element of order ą 2 in SO3 pFq, where F is a finite field of odd characteristic, can be writen as a product of two involutions. The following lemma shows the same can be done in black box groups. Lemma 5.4. Let X be a black box group encrypting SO3 pFq, where F is a finite field of unknown odd characteristic and |F| ě 7. Then, with a given global exponent E for X, we can represent an arbitrary element x P X of order |x| ą 2 as a product of two involutions r and s from X in time polynomial in log E. In particular, this yields an involution r inverting x. This algorithm is Las Vegas. Proof. We take a random element y P X. By [25], the probability that X is generated by x and y is at least 1 ´ 2|F|12 `2 . Now, we reify the involution r that inverts x and  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  17  y. If we end up with a failure or a serendipitous discovery of a unipotent element, we need to repeat reification with other choice of y. When we have the involution r, we can decompose x “ r ¨ rx, where both r and s “ rx are involutions.  5.4. Unipotency test. The following lemma makes the algorithm in Theorem 1.1 Las Vegas. Lemma 5.5. Assume that X encrypts SO3 pFq where F is an unknown finite field of unknown odd characteristic with |F| ě 7. Let u P X of order bigger than 2 and r an involution inverting u – the latter can be found by Lemma 5.4. (a) Take a random element 1 ‰ t P CX prq with |t| ě 3. Then u is unipotent if and only if u ‰ ut and ru, ut s “ 1. (b) Assume that u is unipotent. Then U “ xuTr y is the maximal unipotent subgroup in X containing u, s inverts U, and B “ UTr is the Borel subgroup containing U. The algorithms in this Lemma run in probabilistic time polynomial in log E. Proof. To prove (a), observe that since |t| ě 3, t belongs to the torus Tr . Note that the elements of X are either semisimple or unipotent. If u is semisimple, then CX puq is the torus Tu . Since ru, ut s “ 1 and u P Tu , we have ut P Tu . Hence t P NX pTu q “ Tu ¸ xwy for some involution w inverting Tu . Since |t| ě 3, we conclude that t P Tu . This is a contradiction to the assumption u ‰ ut . Hence u is a unipotent element in X. If u is unipotent, then part (b) immediately follows from the structural facts about the groups SO3 pFq in odd characteristic and also provides the reverse implication in (a). By the arguments in Section 4.7, the black box for the subgroup Tr allows us to construct random conjugates of u by the random elements of Tr . Hence we can construct random elements from U and B.  5.5. Bisection of angles. Note that bisection of angles is the extraction of square roots in the group of rotations. In our setting, Axiom BB4 allows us to find square roots of elements in cyclic black box subgroups by virtue of the Tonelli-Shanks algorithm [39, 40]. Usually the Tonelli-Shanks algorithm is formulated only for multiplicative groups of finite fields and we include its more general formulation for completeness of exposition. Lemma 5.6 (The Tonelli-Shanks Algorithm). Let T be a cyclic black box group of known global exponent E. Let z be an element in T that has a square root in T. Then an element t P T such that t2 “ z can be found in probabilistic polynomial time in log E. Proof. We set E “ 2m n where p2, nq “ 1. Given t P T, we shall say that l is the 2-height of t, if |tn | “ 2l ; notice that this is equivalent to 2l being the largest power of 2 that divides the order |t| of t. We first construct an element x P T with maximal 2-height l, that is, the order |x| is divisible by the maximum power of 2 dividing the order of T. To do this, we construct a constant number of random elements in T and take the element with the biggest 2-height. Note that since T is cyclic, at least half of the elements of T have orders with maximal 2-height. If a chosen element does not have the biggest 2-height, then the procedure below fails, and we start our procedure by constructing  18  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  an element with bigger 2-height. Let x P T be an element with maximal 2-height l, that is, the order x is divisible by the maximum power of 2 dividing the order of T. If l ‰ 0, then x can not be a square in T, namely, there are no elements y P T such that y2 “ x. We set a :“ zpn`1q{2 ,  b :“ zn ,  c :“ xn .  Note that if b “ 1, then z has odd order and the element a is the desired square root of z. If b ‰ 1, then we run the loop: d  ‚ Find the smallest non-negative integer d such that b2 “ 1. ‚ If d ą 0 then repeat until d “ 0: l´d´1  Set a :“ ac2  ,  l  b :“ bc2 ´d ,  l´d  c :“ c2  ,  l :“ d.  ‚ When d “ 0, the element a is the desired square root of z.    Lemma 5.7. Let X be a black box group encrypting SO3 pFq, where F is an unknown finite field of unknown odd characteristic. Assume that |F| ě 7 and i, j P X are two conjugate involutions. Then, given an exponent E for X, we can find an involution x P X such that ix “ j in time polynomial in log E.  Proof. We set E “ 2m n where p2, nq “ 1, and set z “ ij. pn`1q{2 If the order of z is odd, that is, zn “ 1 then notice that iz “ j. Now, zpn`1q{2 j is an involution conjugating i to j. Assume now that the order of z is even and k “ ipzq is the involution in xzy, see Section 4.7. We denote by Y the subgroup in X encrypting PSL2 pFq; it is well-known that |X : Y| “ 2 and Y Ÿ X. Let T be the maximal torus in X containing k and T2 “ tt2 | t P Tu, then T2 is the subgroup of index 2 in T and T2 “ T X Y. Observe that z “ ij P T2 because i and j, being conjugate, simultaneously belong or do not belong to Y. We can now apply the Tonelli-Shanks algorithm for cyclic groups, Lemma 5.6, and find t P T such that t2 “ z “ ij; after that we have itj “ jt´1 itj “ jt´1 jjitj “ tjitj “ t2 jij “ j,  and x “ tj is an involution since j inverts t P T.    6. Geometry of involutions in PGL2 pFq » SO3 pFq Let X “ PGL2 pFq » SO3 pFq, where F is a finite field of odd characteristic. In this section, we see that actions of involutions from X control properties of every facet of the structure of the group and its Lie algebra. Involutions are multifunctional: they act as pointers to tori in the group X, to toric subalgebras in the Lie algebra l “ LiepXq of X, to points and to lines in the projective plane associated with l as F-vector space, and they control the canonical polarity on P . 6.1. The Lie algebra. Let M be the 2 ˆ 2 matrix algebra over F. We denote the elements of M by lower case Greek letters. The Lie algebra l “ sl2 pFq of the group X “ PGL2 pFq » SO3 pFq is the vector space of 2 ˆ 2 matrices of trace 0 with the Lie bracket rα, βs “ αβ ´ βα and the Killing form Kpα, βq “ Trpαβq. The isomorphism PGL2 pFq » SO3 pFq comes from the adjoint action of GL2 pFq on the Lie algebra l, that is, action by conjugation on l. The group PGL2 pFq is the image of this action and becomes the group of  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  19  automorphisms of l. Therefore it preserves the Killing form K on l, moreover, it coincides with the orthogonal group SO3 pl, Kq. The following property of matrices in M can be easily checked. Lemma 6.1. Let α P M be a non-scalar matrix. Then α2 is a scalar matrix if and only if Trpαq “ 0. Similarly, the following properties of l “ sl2 pFq can also be easily proven. Lemma 6.2. Let α, β P l, that is, Trpαq “ Trpβq “ 0.  (a) α is either non-degenerate and semisimple or α2 “ 0. (b) Trpα2 q “ ´ det α. As a consequence, Trpα2 q “ 0 if and only if α2 “ 0. (c) rα, βs “ 0 if and only if α and β are collinear, that is, one of them is a scalar multiple of another one. (d) Trpα, rα, βsq “ 0.  6.2. Projectivization of the Lie algebra: polarity. Now consider the projective space PpM q associated with the vector space M and the natural map ω : M r t0u ÝÑ PpM q. Notice that X “ PGL2 pFq is the image of GL2 pFq under this map. Denote by P “ ωplq the image of l in PpM q; it is a projective plane with polarity π induced by the Killing form on l. It follows from Lemmas 6.1 and 6.2(a) that I “ P XX is the set of involutions in X. By Lemma 6.2(b), the set Q “ P rI is a quadric in P determined by the quadratic form Trpα2 q (“ ´ det α by Lemma 6.2(b)). The group X has a natural action on PpM q induced by the action of GL2 pFq on M by conjugation. Obviously, X leaves invariant the projective plane P and its subsets I and Q. Moreover X acts on P by collineations and preserves the polarity π. There are two kinds of points in P : ‚ involutive (or toric, or semisimple, or regular ) – they form the set I; ‚ unipotent (or parabolic, or tangent ) – they are points on the quadric Q.  We shall call I the involution plane; it is a projective plane with a polarity, but with points of the corresponding quadric removed. For points a, b P P we shall write a K b if a P πpbq (which is equivalent to b P πpaq). If α, β P l are matrices representing a and b, respectively, then a K b is the same as Kpα, βq “ Trpαβq “ 0. Notice also that Q “ t a P P : a P πpaq u. 6.3. Projectivization of the Lie algebra: cross product. The Lie product r , s on l induces a partial binary operation on the plane P : namely, if a and b are distinct points in P represented by matrices α, β P l, respectively, then, in view of Lemma 6.2(c), rα, βs ‰ 0 and ωprα, βsq is defined as in Section 6.2 and does not depend on choice of α and β. We denote ωprα, βsq “ a b b and call it the cross product of a and b. Obviously, a b b “ b b a. The cross product has an obvious connection with the polarity:  20  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  Lemma 6.3. If a and b are distinct points in P then a K a b b and b K a b b, and, consequently, a b b “ πpaq ^ πpbq  is the point of intersection of the polar lines of a and b. Proof. The proof follows from Lemma 6.2(d).    Notice that action of X on P preserves the cross product. We use the term “cross product” and notation b to emphasize the analogy with the cross product of vectors in R3 , that is, the Lie algebra operation in the Lie algebra of SO3 pRq, the group of rotations of the 3-dimensional Euclidean space. The projective plane P with polarity and cross product is a combinatorial object that retains essential properties of the Lie algebra l “ sl2 ; we shall call it the projectivization of l. As we shall soon see, polarity and cross product can be constructed inside of the group X: first on the set I of involutions and then extended to the whole plane P by interpreting the points of the quadric Q as maximal unipotent subgroups of X. Moreover, these constructions can be carried out in a black box group X encrypting X. 6.4. Points. Now we turn our attention to involutions in X which will serve as points in our projective plane. In view of Lemma 6.2(b), a vector σ P l is semisimple in the Lie algebra sense if and only if Kpσ, σq ‰ 0 (that is, σ is regular in the terminology of the theory of quadratic forms) and nilpotent if and only if Kpσ, σq “ 0 (that is, σ is singular). Every semisimple element σ in l gives rise to an involution in X, the half-turn sσ around the one-dimensional vector subspace (it is also a Lie subalgebra) generated by σ: (3)  sσ : α ÞÑ  2Kpα, σq σ ´ α. Kpσ, σq  Observe that the half-turn sσ is not changed if we replace σ by a non-zero scalar multiple cσ. Lemma 6.4. An involution s “ ωpσq in X represented by a matrix σ is the halfturn around σ: ωpσq “ sσ . Proof. Indeed, in its adjoint action on l, every involution s from X has eigenvalues `1, ´1, ´1. If s “ ωpσq then obviously σ s “ σ is an eigenvector for s and eigenvalue `1. Obviously this means that then s “ sσ .  Denote the `1-eigenspace (the axis of the half-turn) s as ts . Obviously, ts is a 1-dimensional regular subspace of l and thus a Cartan subalgebra of l. If Ts is a torus in X containing s then ts “ LiepTs q, the Lie algebra of Ts . Lemma 6.5. Let i, j P I and i ‰ j, then i K j if and only if ij “ ji. Proof. By Lemma 6.4, i and j are half-turns. Now it easily follows from Equation 3 in Section 6.4 that they commute if and only if their axes are orthogonal, that is, if and only if i K j.   BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  21  Lemma 6.5 allows us to interpret the polarity restricted to the involution plane I within the group X: Lemma 6.6. If i P I then  πpiq X I “ t j P I | ij “ ji and i ‰ j u.  We shall denote πI piq “ πpiq X I. Similarly, we have the following result for the cross product: Lemma 6.7. If i, j P I are distinct involutions and k “ i b j P I then k “ πpiq ^ πpjq  is the only involution in X which commutes with the both i and j. Later in the paper, we shall extend the polarity and cross product to the whole projective plane P “ I Y Q. 6.5. Lines. For every involution s P I, its polar image πpsq in P can be described by taking its intersection with I: πI psq “ πpsq X I. It could happen that one or two points in πpsq X Q are missing from πI psq. Set q “ |F|. The centralizer C “ CX psq is a dihedral group of order 2pq ˘ 1q which contains the maximal torus Ts of order q ˘ 1 inverted by q ˘ 1 involutions in the coset C r Ts ; these involutions commute with s and therefore πI psq “ C r Ts . As we shall see in the next section, there are more lines on P . 6.6. The Weisfeiler plane. Every 1-dimensional subspace a in l is a Lie subalgebra of l and coincides with the Lie algebra LiepAq of some 1-dimensional algebraic subgroup A ă X. Assuming that |F| “ q, the latter belongs to one of the three conjugacy classes: ‚ non-split tori: cyclic subgroups of order q ` 1, ‚ maximal unipotent subgroups of order q, ‚ split tori: cyclic subgroups of order q ´ 1, see the paper by Boris Weisfeiler [41]. Therefore the set W of 1-dimensional algebraic subgroups A in X is in one-to-one correspondence A Ø LiepAq with the set of 1-dimensional Lie subalgebras of l and can be treated as a projective plane; we shall call the Weisfeiler plane and denote it by W . It will be convenient to identify W with the dual plane P ˚ of P and treat points of W as lines of P . For that we need to describe the incidence relation between points and lines. If A is 1-dimensional subgroup in X, the line ℓpAq associated with it contains (incident with) all involutions inverting A; if w is one of these involutions then ℓI “ ℓpAq X I coincides with the coset Aw. ‚ If A is a non-split torus, all q ` 1 points in ℓpAq are involutions. ‚ If A is a maximal unipotent subgroup, q points in ℓpAq are involutions in the Borel subgroup NX pAq inverting A, and the additional parabolic point in ℓpAq X C is ωpLiepAqq for A itself.  22  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  ‚ If A is a split torus, q ´ 1 points in ℓpAq are involutions inverting A; two additional parabolic points in ℓpAq X Q are ωpLiepU qq and ωpLiepV qq for two maximal unipotent subgroups U and V normalized by A. These three types of lines are called hyperbolic, parabolic, and elliptic, respectively. The parabolic lines are tangent lines to Q, that is, lines having exactly one point with Q in common. In I, a parabolic line appears as the coset U t of a maximal unipotent subgroup U in X with respect to an involution t inverting every element in U . 7. The black box projective plane and projectivization of the Lie algebra Let X be a black box group encrypting X “ PGL2 pFq » SO3 pFq where F is a finite field of odd characteristic and |F| ě 7. Using the black box X as a computational engine, we shall construct a black box projective plane P that encrypts the projective plane P discussed in Section 6. The elements or objects of P are points and lines. 7.1. Points. There are two types of points in P; regular and parabolic. A regular point is an involution in X; I is the set of all involutions in X. To produce a random regular point, we construct an involution from a random element in X by repeated square and multiply method and conjugate it by a random element. Note that a random element in X has even order with probability at least 1/4 [27]. A parabolic point a black box for a maximal unipotent subgroup U ă X; it is a point on the quadric Q “ P r I; to construct one is the principal aim of the paper. 7.2. Lines. There are two types of lines in P; toric and parabolic. A toric or regular line l is a black box for a subgroup T ¸ xwy where T ă X is a torus and w P X is an involution that inverts every element in T. A toric line is incident to the following points: ‚ If |T| “ q ` 1 then l is incident only to points represented by involutions in the coset Tw; ‚ If |T| “ q ´ 1 then l is incident to q ´ 1 points represented by involutions in the coset Tw and, in addition, two parabolic points which will be constructed later and correspond to two maximal unipotent subgroups normalized by T. It is convenient to specify a toric line using its polar image, that is, the involution in the torus T. A parabolic line (or tangent line) u is a black box for a subgroup U ¸ xty where U ă X is a maximal unipotent subgroup and t P X is an involution inverting every element in U – it exists and can be computed by Lemma 5.5(b). The line u is incident to two kinds of points: ‚ q regular points, involutions in the coset Ut; and ‚ U itself, seen as a point. 7.3. Cross product on I and a serendipity construction of a unipotent element. As we can see, we have immediate access only to points in I, that is, involutions in X. Our principal tool is the cross product provided by Theorem 5.3. In view of Lemma 6.7, the operation b on I encrypts the cross product on I.  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  23  For large q, the probability of hitting a unipotent element u by taking product of two random involutions s and t is O p1{qq, as can be seen from the following argument. Indeed, note that the number of involutions in X is q 2 where q “ |F| and for a fixed involution s, there are at most two unipotent subgroups normalized by s. Therefore, the number of unipotent elements of the form ssx , x P X, is at most 2pq ´ 1q. Therefore, the probability of this event is approximately O p1{qq and becomes astronomically small for a large field F. However if it happens by a sheer strike of luck, we get a unipotent element u “ st and a black box for the parabolic subgroup its maximal unipotent subgroup  B “ xuTs y ¸ Ts , U “ xuTs y,  (that is, a parabolic point) and the set Us of regular points in the corresponding parabolic line, see Lemma 5.5. Combining Theorem 5.3 with the arguments above, we have Theorem 7.1. There is probabilistic polynomial time Las Vegas algorithm which, given two involutions i, j P I, constructs either ‚ an involution i b j, or ‚ a black box subgroup U ¸ xiy “ U ¸ xjy where U is a maximal unipotent subgroup in X inverted by i and j. The black box for U represents a parabolic point in P which coincides with i b j in sense of Section 6.3. The strategy of our proof of Theorem 1.1 is to carry out a polynomial time chain of constructions in I which will force the serendipity moment, that is, the second bullet point in Theorem 7.1. In the next section, we shall describe tools for computations in I needed for that purpose. 7.4. A toolbox for the involution plane I. Constructions in this section are conditional on assumption that s b t P I is an involution for all involutions s and t that we encounter in our calculations – as it was explained in Section 7.3, this is what normally happens with very high probability. We shall expand our algorithms to the whole black box projective plane P in Section 7.5. 7.4.1. Polar image of a point in I. Let q “ |F|. Let t be an involution and Tt a torus containing it, and w an involution inverting Tt . ‚ If |Tt | “ q ` 1 then the polar line πptq is the coset Tt w, with random points in it generated in an obvious way with the help of a black box for Tt ă CX ptq. ‚ If |Tt | “ q ´ 1 then the polar line πptq is the coset Tt w together with two points represented by black boxes for maximal unipotent subgroups U and V normalized by Tt . At this stage we do not know how to construct U and V, but it will become clear after Theorem 1.1 is proven: we take a nontrivial unipotent element u, construct the maximal unipotent subgroup A and an involution s inverting A as in Lemma 5.5, and then construct an element x conjugating the involution sx “ t. Now Tt normalizes U “ Ax , and if r P CX ptq r Tt then Tt normalizes Ur “ V as well.  24  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  7.4.2. Polar image of a line in I. Let k be a line in P. Given a line, we can always find on it two distinct regular points, see Section 7.2; take points a ‰ b on k. Then πpkq “ a b b.  7.4.3. A line through two regular points. If s, t P I then the line s _ t through s and t is s _ t “ πps b tq. We shall note here that we do not list the points on the black box projective lines but we produce random elements on them when they are needed. 7.4.4. Intersection of two lines in I. If two lines k and l intersect in I, their intersection point k ^ l can be found as k ^ l “ π pπpkq _ πplqq .  7.5. Expansion of the toolbox from I to P. 7.5.1. Polarity in P. If U is a maximal unipotent subgroup in X seen as a parabolic point and t an involution inverting U which can be constructed by Lemmas 5.4 and 5.5, then πpUq is the tangent line Ut Y tUu through U. 7.5.2. Intersection of two lines. Since we have now polarity in P, the formula is the same as in 7.4.4. 7.5.3. Cross product in P. For two distinct points s, t P P, sbt  “ πpsq ^ πptq.  7.5.4. A line through parabolic points. Let s be an involution and U a parabolic point, that is, a maximal unipotent subgroup. Observe that if s inverts U then s belongs to the line tangent to Q at U. In this case, we have s _ U “ U Y Us.  Assume now that s does not invert U. In this case, the line s _ U is the polar line of the involution r which centralizes s and inverts U. Since r P CX psq, r inverts every element in the torus Ts . Therefore, r can be reified from the amalgamation of the the following proto-morphisms: Ts Ñ Ts , U Ñ U,  t ÞÑ t´1 u ÞÑ u´1 .  Moreover, since s and U belong to the line s _ U and s does not normalize U, the other missing point in this line is the unipotent group Us . Hence, in this case, we have s _ U “ Tr s Y tU, Us u. For the line passing through given two parabolic points U and V, we follow the similar procedure as above. Note that, in this case, the line U _ V is the polar line of the involution r which inverts both U and V. Therefore, r can be reified similarly and U _ V “ Tr w Y tU, Vu for some w P CX prq inverting Tr .  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  25  8. Construction of Sym4 It is well-known that there is only one conjugacy class of subgroups isomorphic to Sym4 in SO3 pFq over a finite field of odd characteristic. The fundamental procedure in the coordinatization of P is the construction of a black box subgroup encrypting Sym4 in a black box group encrypting SO3 pFq over a finite field of odd characteristic. As we shall soon see, a subgroup isomorphic to Sym4 provides us with a convenient basis triangle in P. Theorem 8.1. Let X be a black box group encrypting X “ SO3 pFq over an unknown finite field F of unknown odd characteristic and |F| ě 7. Then, given a global exponent E for X, there is a polynomial in log E time Las Vegas algorithm constructing a black box subgroup in X which encrypts a subgroup in X isomorphic to Sym4 . We precede our proof of Theorem 8.1 with a few lemmas. We work within the terminological conventions of Section 4.2 and apply to strings and black box subgroups of X the same terms as to corresponding elements and subgroups of X. We work under assumptions of Theorem 8.1. It is well-known that X has two conjugacy classes of involutions. We say that an involution is of `-type if the order of its centralizer is 2pq ´ 1q and ´-type if the order of its centralizer is 2pq ` 1q. Notice that CX piq “ Ti ¸ xwy where Ti is a torus of order pq ˘ 1q and w is an involution inverting Ti . We will consider the involutions of `-type if q ” 1 mod 4 and ´-type if q ” ´1 mod 4 so that the order of the corresponding torus is always divisible by 4; we will call them involutions of right type. We are looking for a 5-tuple pi, j, z, s, Ti q  where i P X is an involution of right type, j P X is an involution of right type which inverts Ti , z P X is an element of order 3 normalizing xi, jy and s P Ti is an element of order 4. We also set k “ ij and note that k is also of right type. Clearly xi, j, zy encrypts a subgroup isomorphic to Alt4 and xi, j, z, sy encrypts Sym4 . The crucial part of our construction is the search an element z P X of order 3 permuting some mutually commuting involutions i, j, k P X of right type. The following lemma provides explicit construction of such an element. Lemma 8.2. Let i, j, k P X be mutually commuting involutions of right type and x P X be an arbitrary element. Assume that y1 “ ijx has odd order m1 and set m1 `1 2  n1 “ y1  m2 `1 2  n2 “ y2  ´1  and s “ kxn1 . Assume also that y2 “ js has odd order m2 and set  ´1 . Then the element z “ xn´1 1 n2 permutes i, j, k, and z has order 3. ´1  ´1  Proof. Observe first that in1 “ jx and jn2 “ s. Since s “ kxn1 , we have jn2 “ kxn1 . ´1 ´1 ´1 Hence j “ kxn1 n2 “ kz . Now, we prove that jz “ i. Since jxn1 “ i, we have ´1 ´1 ´1 jz “ jxn1 n2 “ in2 . We claim that y2 P CX piq, which implies that n2 P CX piq, so ´1 ´1 jz “ in2 “ i. Now, since j P CX piq, y2 “ js P CX piq if and only if s “ kxn1 P CX piq. x x x n1 Moreover, since i “ j , s P CX piq if and only if k P CX pj q, equivalently, k P CX pjq and the claim follows. It is now clear that iz “ k since ij “ k, and z has order 3.  Lemma 8.3. Let X, i, j, k, y1 , y2 and z be as in Lemma 8.2. Then the probability 1 . that y1 and y2 have odd orders is bounded from below by 21 ´ 2|F|  26  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  Proof. We first note that the subgroup xi, zy – Alt4 is a subgroup of Y ď X where Y – PSL2 pFq, so the involutions i, j, k belong to a normal subgroup isomorphic to PSL2 pFq. Therefore it is enough to compute the estimate in Y. Notice that all involutions in Y are conjugate. Therefore the probability that y1 and y2 have odd orders is the same as the probability of the product of two random involutions from Y to be of odd order. The rest of computation is done in the underlying group Y “ πpYq. We set |F| “ q and we denote by a one of these numbers pq ˘ 1q{2 which is odd and by b the other one. Then |Y | “ qpq 2 ´ 1q{2 “ 2abq and |CY piq| “ 2b for any involution i P Y . Hence the total number of involutions is |Y | 2abq “ “ aq. |CY piq| 2b Now we compute the number of pairs of involutions pi, jq such that their product ij belongs to a torus of order a. Let T be a torus of order a. Then NY pT q is a dihedral group of order 2a. Therefore the involutions in NY pT q form the coset NY pT qzT since a is odd. Hence, for every torus of order a, we have a2 pairs of involutions whose product belong to T . The number of tori of order a is |Y |{|NY pT q| “ 2abq{2a “ bq. Hence, there are bqa2 pairs of involutions whose product belong to a torus of order a. Thus the desired probability is b q´1 1 1 bqa2 “ ě “ ´ . 2 paqq q 2q 2 2q  Proof of Theorem 8.1. Let E “ 2m n where p2, nq “ 1. We first construct an involution i P X of right type and an element s P CX piq of order 4. Let i P X be an involution constructed from a random element by taking its power using squareand-multiply method. To check whether i is an involution of right type or not, we search for an element s P C :“ CX piq of order 4. Note that a random element from C can be constructed efficiently by the arguments in Section 4.7. Note also that if i is of right type then C contains elements of order 4, otherwise, C does not contain elements of order 4. If i is of right type then, since C “ Ti ¸ xwy, where Ti is a torus of order q ˘ 1 and w is an involution which inverts Ti , a random element from C has order divisible by 4 with probability at least 1{4. As soon as we find an element y P C such that yn ‰ 1 and y2n ‰ 1, then we construct an element s P xyy of order 4 by repeated square-and-multiple method. If we can not find an element of order 4 in C, we deduce that i is not of right type and we start from the beginning. Let i P X be a right type involution. The coset Ti w of Ti in C consists of the involutions inverting Ti , so half of the elements of C are the involutions inverting Ti and half of the involutions in Ti w are of the same type as i. We construct an involution j P C and check whether j is an involution of right type by following the same arguments above. Finally, for commuting right type involutions i, j P X, we construct an element z of order 3 normalizing xi, jy by using Lemma 8.2. The probability of constructing 1 such an element z P X is at least 21 ´ 2|F| by Lemma 8.3. Hence xs, zy is a black box subgroup encrypting Sym4 .   BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  27  9. Coordinatization and a construction of a black box field To construct a black box field in X, all we need is to carry out Hilbert’s coordinatization of P [26] using our toolbox from Section 7. 9.1. The spinor basis. A construction from Section 8 yields a black box subgroup H encrypting Sym4 and we shall need to introduce special notation for some of its elements as they will play the central role in later calculations. We denote the three involutions in the 4-group E “ O2 pHq by e1 , e2 , e3 . If t1 , t2 , t3 are the centralizers in the Lie algebra l of their images πpe1 q, πpe2 q, πpe3 q, respectively, we know that they are orthogonal to each other and l “ t1 ‘ t2 ‘ t3 is the weight decomposition for the action of E on l and is therefore a grading of l: rt1 , t2 s “ t3 ,  rt2 , t3 s “ t1 ,  rt3 , t1 s “ t2 .  Moreover, an element z of order 3 from H cyclically permutes t1 , t2 , t3 , which allows us to select a basis in l made of ǫ1 P t1 ,  ǫ2 “ ǫz1 P t2 , and ǫ3 “ ǫz2 P t3 .  Since E lies in the commutator of H, the involutions ei P E have spinor norm 1 and therefore vectors ǫi can be chosen to satisfy Kpǫi , ǫi q “ 1 forming an orthonormal basis in l, Kpǫi , ǫj q “ δij . In particular, the quadric Q in P can be written by the equation x21 ` x22 ` x23 “ 0 in the coordinates x1 , x2 , x3 associated with the basis ǫ1 , ǫ2 , ǫ3 . In addition, the basis ǫ1 , ǫ2 , ǫ3 seen as a basis of the Lie algebra l obviously satisfies the Lie relations rǫ1 , ǫ2 s “ aǫ3 ,  rǫ2 , ǫ3 s “ aǫ1 ,  rǫ3 , ǫ1 s “ aǫ2 ,  for some fixed a P F˚q . What we found is an analogue of a spinor basis (or Pauli basis) from quantum mechanics and we will discuss these in detail elsewhere. 9.2. First steps towards the coordinatization of P. We know that ǫ1 , ǫ2 , ǫ3 form an orthonormal basis in l and e1 , e2 , e3 have homogeneous coordinates p1, 0, 0q, p0, 1, 0q, p0, 0, 1q; and the quadric Q is given in coordinates x1 , x2 , x3 associated with this basis by the equation x21 ` x22 ` x23 “ 0.  Following traditional notation, we represent lines in P by equations of the form X1 x1 ` X2 x2 ` X3 x3 “ 0 and treat the tuple rX1 , X2 , X3 s as the homogeneous coordinates of the line.  28  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  9.3. First steps in construction of a black box field. We shall now construct a black box field K. Towards this end, we take the set of points on the line e1 _ e3 for the extended field K Y t8u by assigning the coordinate x1 “ 0 to e3 and x1 “ 8 to e1 . We call the line e1 _ e3 the x1 -axis and similarly the line e2 _ e3 the x2 -axis. Taking into account that the coordinatization of P has to be consistent with the action of X, and, in particular, with the action of H on the basis e1 , e2 , e3 , we see that if we take the line e1 _ e2 for the line at infinity, we have the following: e2 “ p0, 8, 1q  r ✡❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏r r e3 “ p0, 0, 1q  e1 “ p8, 0, 1q  Here, 0 and 1 can be seen as elements of our future black box field K. The following is the same picture in homogeneous coordinates: e2 “r p0, 1, 0q  ✡❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ❏r ✡ r e3 “ p0, 0, 1q  e1 “ p1, 0, 0q  We shall gradually assign coordinates to more and more points in P, at every step ensuring that the coordinatization is consistent with the action of X on I and P and hence with the vector space structure on l. If a point x P P has coordinates x1 , x2 , x3 , we shall write x “ px1 , x2 , x3 q. Similarly, we denote lines by their coordinates, ℓ “ rX1 , X2 , X3 s which denote the line ℓ “ t px1 , x2 , x3 q | X1 x1 ` X2 x2 ` X3 x3 “ 0 u. We note that px1 , x2 , x3 q and rX1 , X2 , X3 s are homogeneous coordinates, they are defined up to multiplication by a non-zero scalar.  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  29  Observe that polarity has a very simple meaning in terms of homogeneous coordinates associated with an orthonormal basis: πppx1 , x2 , x3 qq “ rX1 , X2 , X3 s if and only if X1 “ x1 , X2 “ x2 , X3 “ x3 .  In particular, polar images of the base points ǫi have equations xi “ 0, i “ 1, 2, 3, and homogeneous coordinates πpǫ1 q “ r1, 0, 0s,  πpǫ2 q “ r0, 1, 0s,  πpǫ3 q “ r0, 0, 1s.  So we have, in the black box setup, the following picture. e2 “r p0, 1, 0q  ✡❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ r0, 0, 1s r1, 0, 0s✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ r ✡ ❏r e3 “ p0, 0, 1q  e1 “ p1, 0, 0q  r0, 1, 0s  We shall soon add new points to this picture. 9.4. The unity element in K. So far, we know which elements on the x1 -axis represent the point 0 and 8 and now we construct the unity element on the x1 axis. Let z be an element of order 3 in H which permutes the basis points e1 , e2 , e3 . Pick in NH pxzyq an involution d1 which commutes with e1 . Observe that E ¸ xd1 y is a dihedral group of order 8 and therefore ed21 “ e3 . Now turn to the use of homogeneous coordinates. Recall that e2 “ p0, 1, 0q and e3 “ p0, 0, 1q. There are two involutions which conjugate e2 and e3 (see Equation 3 in Section 6.4): sp0,1,1q pe2 q “ “ “ and  “ sp0,1,´1q pe2 q “ “ “ “  sp0,1,1q pp0, 1, 0qq  2p0 ¨ 0 ` 1 ¨ 1 ` 1 ¨ 0q p0, 1, 1q ´ p0, 1, 0q 02 ` 12 ` 12 p0, 0, 1q e3  sp0,1,´1q pp0, 1, 0qq  2p0 ¨ 0 ` 1 ¨ 1 ` p´1q ¨ 0q p0, 1, ´1q ´ p0, 1, 0q 02 ` 12 ` 12 p0, 0, ´1q e3  We can assign to d1 the coordinates p0, 1, 1q and set 2  d2 “ dz1 “ p1, 0, 1q and d3 “ dz1 “ p1, 1, 0q.  So we have now a richer picture:  30  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  e2 “ p0, 1, 0q  r ✡❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ r d3 “ p1, 1, 0q d1 “ p0, 1, 1q✡ r ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ r ❏r r e3 “ p0, 0, 1q d2 “ p1, 0, 1q  e1 “ p1, 0, 0q  9.5. More about H. We record for future use that the natural isomorphism H ÝÑ Sym4 , where Sym4 is seen as the symmetric group of the set t 0, 1, 2, 3 u in notation chosen in such a way that  In particular,  e1 ÞÑ p01qp23q e2 ÞÑ p02qp13q e3 ÞÑ p03qp12q  z ÞÑ p123q  dd23 “ d1 ,  d1 ÞÑ p23q d2 ÞÑ p13q . d3 ÞÑ p12q  ed13 “ e2 .  9.6. Affine coordinates. Taking, as we have already did, the line e1 _ e2 for the line at infinity and the lines x2 “ 0 and x1 “ 0 for the coordinate axes, we get e2 “ p0, 8, 1q  r ✡❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ r d3 “ p8, 8, 1q d1 “ p0, 1, 1q✡ r ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ ✡ ❏ r ❏r r✡ e3 “ p0, 0, 1q  d2 “ p1, 0, 1q  e1 “ p8, 0, 1q  Observe that this assignment of coordinates agrees with action by H. In particular, conjugation by d3 moves the points 0, 1, 8 on the x1 -axis to the points 0, 1, 8 on the x2 -axis, respectively. Therefore we can treat both coordinate axes as the two copies of the projective line K Y t8u over the black box field K that we will construct on the x1 -axis. Now on “this side of infinity”, on the affine plane x3 ‰ 0, the homogeneous coordinates of arbitrary point x can be written as px1 , x2 , 1q, where x1 “ px _ e2 q ^ pe1 _ e3 q and x2 “ px _ e1 q ^ pe2 _ e3 q are projections of x onto the coordinate axes, and we get the classical coordinatization of the affine plane [22]:  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  31  p0, 8, 1q r  ✡❏ ✄ ✡✄ ❏ ✡✄ ❏ ✡ ✄ ❏ r✡ ✄ ❏ p0, x2 , 1q ❛ ✡ ❛✄r px1 , x2 , 1q ❏ ❛ ✡ ✄ ❛❛❛ ❏ ✡ ❛❛❏ ✄ ✄r ✡ r ❛ ❏r p0, 0, 1q  px1 , 0, 1q  p8, 0, 1q  p0, x2 q r  r  rpx1 , x2 q  r px1 , 0q  p0, 0q  If x lies on the line at infinity x3 “ 0 then we can take any point x1 on the line e3 _ x, construct its affine coordinates px11 , x12 , 1q as above and take the triple px11 , x12 , 0q for the homogeneous coordinates of x. 9.7. Addition ‘ on K. Now we can introduce the field operations in the usual way, as shown on the following two diagrams, see Hartshorne [26] for details. We do this on the x1 -axis. Note that the set of points on this axis consists of involutions in CX pe2 q except e2 together with the two parabolic points – the two maximal unipotent subgroups inverted by e2 – if the involution e2 is of the `-type in the sense of Section 8. ✻ rc ❍❍ ❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍ ❍ ❍r ❍r r r  d1 “ p0, 1q r❍  e3 “ p0, 0q  b  a  ✲  a‘b  In terms of our toolbox, we first construct c “ pa _ e2 q ^ pd1 _ e1 q, then we construct the point at infinity on the line d1 _ b and denote it 8d1 ,b : 8d1 ,b “ pd1 _ bq ^ pe1 _ e2 q, then a ‘ b is the point of intersection of the line c _ d parallel to d1 _ b with the x1 -axis e1 _ e3 : a ‘ b “ pc _ 8d1 ,b q ^ pe1 _ e3 q. 9.8. Multiplication b on K.  32  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  e3 _ d3 d “ pa, aq r  ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ c “ p1, 1q r ❍❍ ❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍❍ ❍ ❍ r ❍r ❍r r r e3 “ p0, 0q  d2 “ p1, 0q  a  b  abb  In terms of our toolbox, we first construct the line x1 “ x2 as e3 _ d3 , then the point c “ p1, 1q as pe3 _ d3 q ^ pd2 _ e2 q,  and point d “ pa, aq as  d “ pe3 _ d3 q ^ pa _ e2 q,  then the point at infinity of the line b _ c as 8b,c “ pb _ cq ^ pe1 _ e2 q, the line through the point d parallel to b _ c as d _ 8b,c , and, finally, the product a b b as the point of intersection of that line with the x1 -axis e1 _ e3 : a b b “ pe1 _ e3 q ^ pd _ 8b,c q.  9.9. Inversion and negation in K. Forming the negative x ÞÑ a x and inversion x ÞÑ xa on K are much easier to compute than addition and multiplication. Here are two useful observations. If x “ pχ, 0, 1q is a point in the x1 -axis, sp0,0,1q pxq  “ “ “ “  “  sp0,0,1q ppχ, 0, 1qq  2p0 ¨ χ ` 0 ¨ 0 ` 1 ¨ 1q p0, 0, 1q ´ pχ, 0, 1q 02 ` 02 ` 12 p0, 0, 2q ´ pχ, 0, 1q p´χ, 0, 1q  ax  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  33  and sp1,0,1q pxq  “ “ “ “  “ “  sp1,0,1q ppχ, 0, 1qq  2p1 ¨ χ ` 0 ¨ 0 ` 1 ¨ 1q p1, 0, 1q ´ pχ, 0, 1q 12 ` 02 ` 12 pχ ` 1, 0, χ ` 1q ´ pχ, 0, 1q p1, 0, χq  p1{χ, 0, 1q xa .  Therefore the field operations of taking negative and inversion x ÞÑ a x,  x ÞÑ xa  on K are computable by single conjugations, that is, for a regular point x in πpe2 q, ax “ xe3 and xa “ xd2 .  This completes the construction of the black box field K. 9.10. Square roots in K. Given an element x P K, a number of polynomial time Las Vegas algorithms allow us to find a square root of x in K, if it exists. In our context, the Tonelli-Shanks algorithm, Lemma 5.6, is suitable for our purposes since the multiplicative group K˚ of K is isomorphic to a torus in X and inherits the global exponent from X. 10. Enforced serendipity: construction of unipotent elements The aim of this section is to prove Theorem 1.1. We start by presenting a test which decides whether an element in PGL2 pFq » SO3 pFq is unipotent or not when the characteristic of the field F is not known. This allows us to make our algorithm presented in Theorem 1.1 a Las Vegas algorithm. We will use the following lemma to locate a unipotent element in X. Lemma 10.1. Let q ” ´1 mod 4. Then, for random x, y P Fq , ´x2 ´ y 2 is a non-zero quadratic residue with probability 1{2 ´ 1{2q 2 . Proof. By [9, Theorem 10.5.1], for a fixed 0 ‰ c P Fq , the number of solutions of the equation ´x2 ´ y 2 “ c2 is q ` 1. Since there are pq ´ 1q{2 non-zero elements in Fq which are quadratic residue, ´x2 ´ y 2 is a quadratic residue with probability q2 ´ 1 1 1 pq ` 1qpq ´ 1q “ “ ´ 2 2 2 2q 2q 2 2q for random x, y P Fq . Hence the result follows.    Proof of Theorem 1.1. Let Y be a black box group encrypting PSL2 pFq over some unknown field of unknown odd characteristic p. Let E be an exponent for Y and E “ 2m n, p2, nq “ 1. First, we construct a black box group X encrypting SO3 pFq from the given black box group Y by using Theorem 5.1. Next, we construct three commuting involutions e1 , e2 , e3 in Y which we take for an orthogonal basis in our projective plane and the starting points for its coordinatization. Then we construct a black box subgroup H ă X encrypting Sym4 containing e1 , e2 , e3 (Theorem 8.1). Note that e1 , e2 , e3 , being involutions in Y, are right type involutions in X in the sense of Section 8.  34  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  Finally, by following the procedures described in Section 9, we have a black box field K with addition, ‘, and multiplication, b, together with the procedures for computing multiplicative and additive inverses. Let K be defined on the x1 -axis, that is, the elements of K Y t8u are the involutions in the coset Te2 e1 “ Te2 e3 ,  together with two parabolic points – the maximal unipotent subgroups normalized by e2 – if the involution e2 is of `-type in sense of Section 8, and we choose the involutions e3 and e1 for the roles of 0 and 8, respectively. We work in the affine plane x3 “ 1 in P as constructed in Section 9.6 with coordinates px1 , x2 , 1q. In these coordinates, the quadratic equation which defines the conic Q is x21 ‘ x22 ‘ 1 “ 0. Let d1 and d2 be the unit elements on the x2 -axis and x1 -axis, respectively, constructed as described in Subsection 9.4. Let d3 be the unit element that moves the x1 -axis to the x2 -axis coordinate-wise, see Subsection 9.6. Now, we distinguish the cases q ” 1 mod 4 and q ” ´1 mod 4 to construct a unipotent element in X. If q ” 1 mod 4, then the coset Te2 e3 has q ´ 1 involutions. Therefore, K has two missing points which are precisely the parabolic points on the x1 -axis. Since the x2 -coordinate of any point on x1 -axis is 0, in this case, there exists an element c P K such that c2 ‘ 1 “ 0. This means that, on the x1 -axis, the points with the homogeneous coordinates p˘c, 0, 1q lie on the conic Q so they are parabolic and the construction of one of these parabolic points gives a unipotent element in the black box group X. Observe that the multiplicative order of the elements ˘c P K is 4. Therefore, the construction of an element of order 4 in the multiplicative group of K gives us a unipotent element in X. To that end, we choose a random element u P K and construct the sequence 2  m  un , u2n , u2 n , . . . , u2  n  “1  by using the multiplication in K. Obviously, if 4 divides the multiplicative order of u, then the construction of this sequence for u produces a unipotent element; we detect it as a failure in reification of an involution at some step of construction. Because of probabilistic nature of our algorithms, there is a tiny possibility that the resulting element is semisimple – but we can use our unipotency test, Lemma 5.5, to decide whether this element is unipotent or not. If we can not find a unipotent element from this sequence, then we choose another element in K randomly and repeat this procedure. Note that at least half of the elements in K have multiplicative orders divisible by 4. If q ” ´1 mod 4, then the coset Te2 e3 has q ` 1 involutions. Since 4 does not divide q´1 in this case, there exists no element in K satisfying x21 ‘1 “ 0. Therefore, we should find a solution of the equation x21 ‘x22 ‘1 “ 0 in K. To this end, we search for random elements x, y P K such that ax2 ay2 has a square root in K, which can be checked by using Tonelli-Shanks algorithm. By Lemma 10.1, for random x, y P K, ax2 a y2 is a non-zero quadratic residue with probability 1{2 ´ 1{2q 2 . Assume that ax2 a y2 “ c2 for some c P K, and we compute this c P K by using TonelliShanks algorithm applied in K. Then we have x2 ‘ y2 ‘ c2 “ 0, or equivalently, y2 x2 d3 lies on the c2 ‘ c2 ‘ 1 “ 0. We set a “ x{c and b “ y{c. Now, recall that b x2 -axis and its coordinate is the same as the coordinate of the element b on the x1 -axis. Now, the intersection of the lines e1 _ bd3 and e2 _ a has the homogenous  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  35  coordinate pa, b, 1q. Clearly, the construction of this intersection point produces a candidate unipotent element in X. Finally, we use unipotency test, Lemma 5.5, to check that it is indeed a unipotent element. To find the characteristic of the underlying field, we compute the order of the unipotent element that we constructed.  We tested our algorithm in GAP for finding unipotent elements in SO3 pFp q for 30-digit primes like p “ 115756986668303657898962467957: it works. 11. Coordinatization of the action of X on I, Proof of Theorem 1.3 The proof of Theorem 1.3 (a) follows from Theorem 5.1 and the proof for part (b), namely, the construction of a black box field K, follows from the constructions in Section 9. 11.1. Construction of the morphism X ÝÑ SO3 pKq. The aim of this section is to represent the action of an arbitrary element x P X on the projective plane P by a 3 ˆ 3 matrix ϕpxq with coefficient in K. We shall consider several cases: Case 1. We set » fi » fi » fi 1 0 0 a1 0 0 a1 0 0 ϕpe1 q “ –0 a1 0 fl , ϕpe2 q “ – 0 1 0 fl , ϕpe3 q “ – 0 a1 0fl . 0 0 a1 0 0 a1 0 0 1  Case 2. Now we compute ϕpuq for an arbitrary involution u P X in “general position” in the sense that u does not commute with any of ei , i “ 1, 2, 3. If u P X then involutions ui “ eui , i “ 1, 2, 3, represent the vectors ǫui in the projective plane P. We can compute the homogeneous coordinates pui1 , ui2 , ui3 q of ui using construction from Section 9.6. The vector pui1 , ui2 , ui3 q is a scalar multiple of ǫui . We have to normalize it by finding a scalar ci P K such that c2i pu2i1 ` u2i2 ` u2i3 q “ 1  which is done by taking a square root d ci “ ˘  1 u2i1 ` u2i2 ` u2i3  (see Section 9.10). The choice of signs ˘ is dictated by the need to make the matrix ˆ ˙ ` ˘ uij U “ u1ij “ ci  an involution from SO3 pKq; that is, U has to have determinant 1 and be symmetric. The choice of signs could happen to be not unique and defined up to simultaneous change of two signs, that is, up to multiplication of U on the right by one of the matrices ϕpei q. Since U and ϕpei q are involutions, their product U ϕpei q can happen to be an involution if and only if U and ϕpei q commute, which is excluded by our choice of u. Case 3. Now let u P X be an involution not in general position, say u P CX pe1 q. Recall that C “ CX pe1 q is a dihedral group. If u “ e1 , we are in Case 1. If u ‰ e1 , we do random search for an involution v P X such that v and w :“ uv do not commute with any e1 , e2 , e3 (this condition is satisfied with probability 1 ´ Op 1q )). Then u “ vwv and we can compute ϕpvq and ϕpwq as in Case 2 and then compute ϕpuq “ ϕpvqϕpwqϕpvq.  36  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  Case 4. This is the general case. By Lemma 5.4, we know that every x P X is either an involution, or a product of two or three involutions, say x “ uv; so we compute ϕpxq “ ϕpuqϕpvq, where ϕpuq and ϕpvq are computed as in Cases 2 and 3. This gives us an algorithm constructing a morphism X ÝÑ SO3 pKq. 11.2. Construction of the morphism SO3 pKq ÝÑ X. It is well known that each element r in SO3 pKq is either an involution or product of two involutions. In case r is not an involtuion, we can write r as a product of two involutions using Lemma 5.4. Therefore it will suffice to compute ϕ´1 prq for an involution r P SO3 pKq. We shall think of r as matrix in the same orthonormal basis in which » » fi » fi fi 1 0 0 a1 0 0 a1 0 0 ϕpe1 q “ –0 a1 0 fl , ϕpe2 q “ – 0 1 0 fl , ϕpe3 q “ – 0 a1 0fl . 0 0 a1 0 0 a1 0 0 1  As it was with computation of ϕ, we can easily reduce computation of ϕ´1 prq to the case when r is in general position, that is, r does not commute with any ϕpei q, i “ 1, 2, 3. Being an involution, r is a symmetric matrix; denote its rows as r1 , r2 , r3 . Now construct in P points si which have in the homogeneous coordinates associated with the basis e1 , e2 , e3 the coordinated vectors ri , i “ 1, 2, 3. The preimage s “ ϕ´1 prq satisfies the condition esi “ si , i “ 1, 2, 3. and is in general position with respect to tei u; therefore s is uniquely defined by these conditions. We compute an involution t1 P X such that et11 “ s1 , Lemma 5.7. Then the element (not necessarily an involution) x “ st1 belongs to C “ CX pe1 q and sends e2 t1 1 to ex2 “ est 2 “ s2 P C. We solve the conjugation problem once more, this time in C, and identify this element x P C; it is defined uniquely up to multiplication by an element from E “ xe1 , e2 y, so we get a coset Ex as an answer. Now s P Ext1 , and, being in general position, is the only involution there.  11.3. Construction of a morphism SO3 pFq q Ñ SO3 pKq. Let Fq be a standard explicitly given finite field of order q and Fp be its prime subfield. Assume also that K0 is the prime subfield of K. Then the isomorphism Fp Ñ K0 can be extended to an isomorphism in time polynomial in the input length to an isomorphism Fq Ñ K [33]. 12. Complexities In this section, we compute the complexities of the main procedures presented in this paper. Let Y be a black box group encrypting PSL2 pFq for some finite field F of odd characteristic. Let µ denote an upper bound on the time requirement for each group operation in Y and ξ an upper bound on the time requirement, per element, for the construction of random elements of Y. Let E be a global exponent for Y. In the sequel, we are going to construct a black box group X encrypting SO3 pFq from the black box group Y. By the construction of this black box group X, see Subsection 4.3 and Theorem 5.1, the time requirement for each group operation in  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  37  X becomes at most 4µ, see Equation (1) in Subsection 4.3. An upper bound on the time requirement, per element, for the construction of random elements of X is 2ξ since we compute in the direct product Y ˆ Y. Moreover, E is replaced by 2E when we compute with the black box group X. For simplicity, we shall denote E as an exponent for both Y and X. We shall express complexities of our procedures in terms of µ, ξ and E. We set E “ 2m n where p2, nq “ 1. 12.1. Constructing an involution in Y (and in X). At least the quarter of elements in Y and in X are of even order [27, Corollary 5.3], therefore an involution can be constructed from a random element by repeated square-and-multiply method in time Opξ ` µ log Eq. 12.2. Centralizer of an involution s in Y (and in X). By the arguments at the end of Subsection 4.7, a generating set for CY psq and CX psq can be constructed in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. 12.3. Unipotency test, Lemma 5.5. For a given involution i P X and a random element x P X, the running time for our test which decides whether the element iix is unipotent or not is dominated by the complexity of the construction of CX piq. Therefore, the running time for our unipotency test is Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. 12.4. Reification of an involution in X, Theorems 5.1 and 5.3. We present the complexity for the algorithm in Theorem 5.3. The computation of the complexity for Theorem 5.1 is the same. Given two involutions s, t P X, we shall find the complexity of constructing the involution j :“ s b t, if exists, which commutes with both s and t. We set z “ st and check whether z has odd or even order which takes time Opµ log Eq. If z has even order then j P xzy can be computed in time Opµ log Eq, giving the total time Opµ log Eq. If z has odd order then, as in Subsection 12.2, CX psq can be constructed in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. At this point, we can check whether z is unipotent or not, see Subsection 12.3. Assume that z is not unipotent. Note that the elements in the generating set for CX psq which are not involutions can be taken to be generators for the torus Ts . Let STs be a generating set for Ts . By [34, I.8], we can take |STs | “ Oplog log |F|q. Clearly S “ STs Y tzu is a generating set for X and computing the action of j on S takes Opµ log log |F|q time. Hence, we run the product replacement algorithm on S to construct a random element x together with its conjugate xj . Since the elements of the form xj x´1 have odd orders with probability bounded from below by a constant, see [37], the construction of CX pjq takes Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq time. Finally, the involution j can be constructed from an element of even order from the torus in CX pjq by square-andmultiply method. Hence, if z has odd order, the construction of the involution j is Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq time. 12.5. A line through s and t. As this is an application of a reification of an involution, if the involution j :“ s b t exits then the total time needed to construct j is Opξ log log E`µ log E log log Eq. If j does not exist for these particular involutions s and t then the reification process returns a unipotent element u. In this case, we construct a parabolic line xuTs ys in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq.  38  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  12.6. Intersection of two non-parabolic lines k and l. Given involutions s1 , s2 , t1 , t2 P X, where s1 , s2 define a line k and t1 , t2 define a line l, the intersection of k and l, if exists, is the involution ps1 b s2 q b pt1 b t2 q. Therefore, it can be computed in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq, see Subsection 12.4. 12.7. Tonelli-Shanks algorithm for tori in X, Lemma 5.6. We follow the outline presented in the proof of Lemma 5.6. Let T be a cyclic black box group. We use the exponent E “ 2m n, n odd, for T. Let z P T be an element that has a square root in T. Checking whether z has odd or even order takes Opµ log Eq time. If |z| is odd then the square root of z, which is zp|z|`1q{2 , can be constructed in time Opµ log Eq. If |z| is even then we need to look for an element of maximal 2-height in T. Observe that the proportion of the elements of maximal 2-height in T is at least 1{2 and computing the 2-height of an arbitrary element takes Opµ log Eq time. The elements a, b, c and the corresponding non-negative integer d in the proof of Lemma 5.6 can be set up in time Opµ log Eq and Opµmq, respectively. As the recursion has at most m steps and each step takes at most Opµ log Eq time, the over all construction takes Opξ ` µm log Eq time. 12.8. Bisection of angles, Lemma 5.7. Given two conjugate involutions i, j P X, we shall find the complexity of constructing a conjugating involution x P X, that is, ix “ j. The construction of x involves finding the square root of z “ ij and construction of centralizers of involutions. Therefore it takes Opξ log log E ` µm log Eq time, see Subsection 12.7. Since m ă log E, we have Opξ log log E ` µ log2 Eq. 12.9. Representation of an arbitrary element as a product of involutions, Lemma 5.4. This is an another application of a reification of an involution, see Subsection 12.4. Hence it takes Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq time. 12.10. Addition and multiplication in K. As described in Subsections 9.7 and 9.8, addition and multiplication in K involve constant number of reifications of involutions. Hence they can be done in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. 12.11. Tonelli-Shanks algorithm in K. By Section 12.10, a multiplication in K can be done in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq, so following the computations in Section 12.7, Tonelli-Shanks algorithm in K runs in time Opξm log E log log E ` µm log2 E log log Eq. Since m ă log E, we have Opξ log2 E log log E`µ log3 E log log Eq. 12.12. Constructing a unipotent element and finding the characteristic, Theorem 1.1. The construction of three commuting involutions in a black box group Y encrypting PSL2 pFq over a field of odd characteristic involves only constructing involutions and their centralizers in Y. Therefore, by Subsection 12.1 and 12.2, it can be done in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. The construction of a black box group X encrypting SO3 from the black box group Y takes Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq time by Subsection 12.4. Construction of a black box subgroup encrypting Sym4 can be done in time Opξ log log E`µ log E log log Eq. Hence, we have a set-up for the projective plane and a black box field K in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. q ” 1 mod 4 : For a random element u P K, to check whether u has a multiplicative order divisible by 4 involves log E multiplications in K. Since each multiplication in K takes Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq time and the orders of the half of  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  39  the elements in K are divisible by 4, the construction of a unipotent element takes at most Opξ log E log log E ` µ log2 E log log Eq time. q ” ´1 mod 4 : By the complexity given in Subsection 12.11, finding elements x, y P K where ax a y is a quadratic residue takes time Opξ log2 E log log E ` µ log3 E log log Eq. Since the rest of the computation involves addition and multiplication in K, constructing lines and finding the intersections of lines, the overall construction takes time Opξ log2 E log log E ` µ log3 E log log Eq. 12.13. Morphism X Ñ SO3 pKq. We will find the complexity to represent an involution u P X in SO3 pKq when u does not commute with some commuting right type involutions e1 , e2 , e3 P X. Then, together with the computations in Subsection 12.9 the complexity of the representation of an arbitrary element follows. As in Subsection 12.12, we have a set up for the projective plane and a black box field K in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. Then, the computation of the homogenous coordinates for eui “ pui1 , ui2 , ui3 q involves finding intersections of the corresponding lines, so it takes Opξ log log E `µ log E log log Eq time. Normalization of eui “ pui1 , ui2 , ui3 q involves the computation of u2 `u12 `u2 and its square root ci in K. The computation of the quotient  1 u2i1 `u2i2 `u2i3  i1  i2  i3  takes Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq  time and the computation of square roots ci in K takes Opξ log2 E log log E ` µ log3 E log log Eq time, see Subsection 12.11. Hence, the normalization of eui can 2 3 be done in time Opξ log ´ E¯log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. The time needed to comuij pute the matrix U “ ci is Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. Hence adding all the complexities above, we get Opξ log2 E log log E ` µ log3 E log log Eq.  12.14. Morphism SO3 pKq Ñ X. Let r P SO3 pKq be an arbitrary element. To write r as a product of two involutions in SO3 pKq, we apply the same arguments in Lemma 5.4. In this case, we take any s P SO3 pKq and look for an involution t P SO3 pKq (a symmetric matrix of order 2) which inverts both r and s. Since r and s matrices over black box field K, to find such an involution t, we solve the corresponding systems of linear equations in K. Hence, this can be done in time Opξ log log E ` µ log E log log Eq. Now, let r P SO3 pKq be an involution. As in Subsection 12.13, it is enough to find the complexity for the construction of a black box group element r P X encrypting r when r does not commute with ϕpe1 q, ϕpe2 q, ϕpe3 q. Let r1 , r2 , r3 be the rows of r. Constructing the involutions s1 , s2 , s3 P P with the homogenous coordinates r1 , r2 , r3 involve only constant number of reifications of involutions and intersections of lines. Therefore, we can construct these involutions in time Opξ log log E`µ log E log log Eq. Constructing the desired involution r P X such that eri “ si involves two times bisection of angles and the construction of centralizers of involutions in X so it takes Opξ log log E ` µ log2 E log log Eq time by Subsections 12.2 and 12.8. Hence the running time for the construction of the black box group element encrypting r is Opξ log log E ` µ log2 E log log Eq. Acknowledgements This paper would have never been written if the authors did not enjoy the warm hospitality offered to them at the Nesin Mathematics Village in Şirince, Izmir Province, Turkey, in Summers 2011–17; our thanks go to Ali Nesin and to all volunteers, staff, and students who have made the Village a mathematical paradise.  40  ALEXANDRE BOROVIK AND ŞÜKRÜ YALÇINKAYA  We thank Adrien Deloro and Roman Kossak for many fruitful discussions, and Alexander Konovalov and Chris Stephenson who helped us to clarify links with the computer science. Our work was partially supported by the Marie Curie FP7 Initial Training Network MALOA (PITN-GA-2008-MALOA no. 238381) and by CoDiMa (CCP in the area of Computational Discrete Mathematics; EPSRC grant EP/M022641/1), and by The Dame Kathleen Ollerenshaw Trust. In the project, we were using the GAP software package by The GAP Group, GAP–Groups, Algorithms, and Programming, Version 4.8.4; 2016 (http://www.gap-system.org). References [1] Y. Ahmavaara, The structure of space and the formalism of relativistic quantum theory. I, J. Math. Physics 6 (1965), no. 1, 87–93. , The structure of space and the formalism of relativistic quantum theory. II, J. Math. [2] Physics 6 (1965), no. 2, 220–227. [3] , Structure of space and the formalism of relativistic quantum theory. III. IV, J. Math. Physics 7 (1966), no. 2, 197–204. [4] L. Babai, Local expansion of vertex-transitive graphs and random generation in finite groups, Proc. ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (1991), 164–174. [5] , Randomization in group algorithms: conceptual questions, Groups and Computation II (L. Finkelstein and W. M. Kantor, eds.), DIMACS Ser. Discrete Math. Theoret. Comput. Sci., vol. 28, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1997, pp. 1–17. [6] L. Babai and R. Beals, A polynomial-time theory of black box groups. I, Groups St. Andrews 1997 in Bath, I, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 260, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1999, pp. 30–64. [7] L. Babai and I. Pak, Strong bias of group generators: an obstacle to the “product replacement algorithm”, J. Algorithms 50 (2004), no. 2, 215–231, SODA 2000 special issue. [8] L. Babai and E. Szemerédi, On the complexity of matrix group problems, Proc. 25th IEEE Sympos. Foundations Comp. Sci. (1984), 229–240. [9] B. C. Berndt, R. J. Evans, and K. S. Williams, Gauss and Jacobi sums, Canadian Mathematical Society Series of Monographs and Advanced Texts, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1998, A Wiley-Interscience Publication. [10] D. Boneh and R. J. Lipton, Algorithms for black-box fields and their application to cryptography, Advances in Cryptology CRYPTO 96 (Neal Koblitz, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1109, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1996, pp. 283–297. [11] A. V. Borovik, Centralisers of involutions in black box groups, Computational and Statistical Group Theory (Las Vegas, NV/Hoboken, NJ, 2001), Contemp. Math., vol. 298, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2002, pp. 7–20. [12] A. V. Borovik and Ş. Yalçınkaya, Homomorphic encryption and black box algebra, arXiv:1709.01169, 2017. , Construction of Curtis-Phan-Tits system for black box classical groups, [13] arXiv:1008.2823v1. [14] , Steinberg presentations of black box classical groups in small characteristics, arXiv:1302.3059v1. [15] , Structural recognition of black box groups PGL3 pFq q, in preparation. [16] J. N. Bray, An improved method for generating the centralizer of an involution, Arch. Math. (Basel) 74 (2000), no. 4, 241–245. [17] P. A. Brooksbank, Fast constructive recognition of black-box unitary groups, LMS J. Comput. Math. 6 (2003), 162–197. , Fast constructive recognition of black box symplectic groups, J. Algebra 320 (2008), [18] no. 2, 885–909. [19] P. A. Brooksbank and W. M. Kantor, On constructive recognition of a black box PSLpd, qq, Groups and Computation III (W. M. Kantor and Á. Seress, eds.), Ohio State Univ. Math. Res. Inst. Publ., vol. 8, de Gruyter, Berlin, 2001, pp. 95–111. [20] , Fast constructive recognition of black box orthogonal groups, J. Algebra 300 (2006), no. 1, 256–288.  BLACK BOX GROUPS PSL2 pFq q  41  [21] F. Celler, C. R. Leedham-Green, S. H. Murray, A. C. Niemeyer, and E. A. O’Brien, Generating random elements of a finite group, Comm. Algebra 23 (1995), no. 13, 4931–4948. [22] H.S.M. Coxeter, Projective Geometry, Springer New York, 2003. [23] D. Gorenstein, R. Lyons, and R. Solomon, The Classification of the Finite Simple Groups. Number 1, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, vol. 40, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1994. , The Classification of the Finite Simple Groups. Number 3. Part I. Chapter A, [24] Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, vol. 40, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1998. [25] R. M. Guralnick, W. M. Kantor, and J. Saxl, The probability of generating a classical group, Comm. Algebra 22 (1994), no. 4, 1395–1402. [26] R. Hartshorne, Foundations of Projective Geometry, Lecture Notes, Harvard University, vol. 1966/67, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York, 1967. [27] I. M. Isaacs, W. M. Kantor, and N. Spaltenstein, On the probability that a group element is p-singular, J. Algebra 176 (1995), no. 1, 139–181. [28] W. M. Kantor and M. Kassabov, Black box groups isomorphic to PGLp2, 2e q, J. Algebra 421 (2015), 16–26. [29] W. M. Kantor and Á. Seress, Black Box Classical Croups, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 149 (2001), no. 708, viii+168. [30] P.E. Kustaanheimo, On the fundamental prime of a finite world, Annales Academiae Scientiarum Fennicae. Series A. 1, Mathematica-Physica, 1952. [31] H. W. Lenstra Jr., Finding isomorphisms between finite fields, Mathematics of Computation 56 (1991), no. 193, pp. 329–347. [32] A. Lubotzky and I. Pak, The product replacement algorithm and Kazhdan’s property (T), J. Amer. Math. Soc. 14 (2001), no. 2, 347–363. [33] U. Maurer and D. Raub, Black-box extension fields and the inexistence of field-homomorphic one-way permutations, Advances in Cryptology—ASIACRYPT 2007, Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 4833, Springer, Berlin, 2007, pp. 427–443. [34] D. S. Mitrinović, J. Sándor, and B. Crstici, Handbook of number theory, Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 351, Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, Dordrecht, 1996. [35] I. Pak, The product replacement algorithm is polynomial, Proc. FOCS’2000, The 41st Ann. Symp. on Foundations of Comp. Sci. (2001), 476–485. [36] , What do we know about the product replacement algorithm?, Groups and Computation III (W. M. Kantor and Á. Seress, eds.), Ohio State Univ. Math. Res. Inst. Publ., vol. 8, de Gruyter, Berlin, 2001, pp. 301–347. [37] C. W. Parker and R. A. Wilson, Recognising simplicity of black-box groups by constructing involutions and their centralisers, J. Algebra 324 (2010), no. 5, 885–915. [38] C. Pomerance, The expected number of random elements to generate a finite abelian group, Periodica Mathematica Hungarica 43 (2002), no. 1, 191–198. [39] D. Shanks, Five number-theoretic algorithms, Proceedings of the Second Manitoba Conference on Numerical Mathematics (Univ. Manitoba, Winnipeg, Man., 1972) (Winnipeg, Man.), Utilitas Math., 1973, pp. 51–70. Congressus Numerantium, No. VII. [40] A. Tonelli, Bemerkung über die auflösung quadratischer congruenzen, Nachrichten von der Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften und der Georg-Augusts-Universität zu Göttingen (1891), 344–346 (German). [41] B. Weisfeiler, On abstract monomorphisms of k-forms of PGLp2q, J. Algebra 57 (1979), 522–543. [42] B. Zilber, Perfect infinities and finite approximation, (2012, https://people.maths.ox.ac.uk/zilber/inf-to-finite.pdf). School of Mathematics, University of Manchester, UK; alexandre@borovik.net Department of Mathematics, Istanbul University, Turkey; sukru.yalcinkaya@istanbul.edu.tr

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
