Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_4278

Abstract:
OptLayer - Practical Constrained Optimization for Deep Reinforcement Learning in the Real World  arXiv:1709.07643v2 [cs.RO] 23 Feb 2018  Tu-Hoa Pham1 , Giovanni De Magistris1 and Ryuki Tachibana1 Abstract— While deep reinforcement learning techniques have recently produced considerable achievements on many decision-making problems, their use in robotics has largely been limited to simulated worlds or restricted motions, since unconstrained trial-and-error interactions in the real world can have undesirable consequences for the robot or its environment. To overcome such limitations, we propose a novel reinforcement learning architecture, OptLayer, that takes as inputs possibly unsafe actions predicted by a neural network and outputs the closest actions that satisfy chosen constraints. While learning control policies often requires carefully crafted rewards and penalties while exploring the range of possible actions, OptLayer ensures that only safe actions are actually executed and unsafe predictions are penalized during training. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on robot reaching tasks, both simulated and in the real world.  I. I NTRODUCTION Over the recent years, the rise of deep neural network architectures in multiple fields of science and engineering has come together with considerable achievements for deep reinforcement learning techniques, sometimes outperforming humans on high-dimensional problems such as Atari games [1] and Go [2]. The robotics field has also greatly benefitted from these advances, yielding impressive results on tasks otherwise difficult to model explicitly, e.g., manipulation from visual inputs [3] and robust locomotion on challenging terrains [4]. While visual understanding neural network pipelines can often be trained in an end-to-end fashion (e.g., inferring object poses directly from raw pixel information), robot motion is typically initialized in the real world from (partially) supervised learning, which supposes the availability of ground-truth data or expert demonstrations. In contrast, the discovery of robot motion behaviours from scratch is often limited to simulation due to time (to learn basic task features), safety (e.g., collisions), and other experimental constraints (e.g., resetting knocked-down obstacles to a chosen state). However, transferring control policies learned in simulation to reality remains a challenge, in particular due to model uncertainties (kinodynamics) [5] and variability between simulated and real observations [6]. Enabling deep reinforcement learning in the real world is thus crucial for tasks that cannot be learned in simulation and for which expert policies are not known. In this paper, we propose a practical method to constrain neural network predictions to lie within a domain defined by safety constraints (see Fig. 1). Our work capitalizes on the state of the art in multiple areas of robotic control, optimization and reinforcement learning (Section II). We summarize 1 IBM  Research AI, Tokyo, Japan.  (a) Unconstrained action predictions can be dangerous to run on a real robot.  (b) Explicit constraints can be incorporated to guarantee safe robot actions. Fig. 1.  3D reaching with obstacle avoidance using reinforcement learning.  the necessary technical background and important challenges for real-world reinforcement learning (Section III), in particular a strong dependency on the chosen reward structure. • We augment a neural network architecture with a constrained optimization layer, OptLayer, that enforces arbitrary constraints on the predicted robot actions (Section IV). OptLayer is fully differentiable, enabling future end-to-end learning under safety constraints. • We tackle the problem of safe reinforcement learning using OptLayer and propose a reward strategy that is simple to implement and readily compatible with existing policy optimization techniques (Section V). • Our approach makes exploration during training more efficient while always satisfying safety constraints. We demonstrate its effectiveness by learning 3D reaching with collision avoidance on an industrial manipulator, on tasks of increasing difficulty, both simulated and in the real world (Section VI). Finally, we discuss challenges we encountered, current limitations and future extensions of our work (Section VII). II. R ELATED W ORK Robot motion is traditionally achieved by solving a multiparameter optimization problem yielding a sequence of states achieving a given task (e.g., track a given end effector trajectory) while respecting constraints motivated by safety and performance (e.g., joint limits). When constraints and task objectives are respectively linear and quadratic in the robot variables, these problems can be formulated and solved as quadratic programs (QP) [7]. Still, the resulting control policy can be unsatisfactory due to uncertainties on the robot kinodynamic model and sensor feedback (e.g., during locomotion, errors on center of mass coordinates can invalidate  robot stability constraints), the chosen constraints being too conservative (making the motion suboptimal), or the task dynamics being non-trivial to model (e.g., finding the optimal trajectory to follow). Reinforcement learning (RL) techniques have demonstrated impressive results in this context. In [1], convolutional neural networks (CNN) were trained to play Atari games using only pixels and game score as inputs, achieving humanlevel performance on multiple games without need for expert demonstrations or feature engineering. A guided policy search (GPS) method was proposed by [3] to predict motor torques for a PR2 robot from image and joint state inputs only, training the policy in a data-efficient manner using supervised learning (SL) and local controllers trained by RL. An overview and benchmark of modern RL algorithms for continuous control (e.g., for robotic applications) was presented in [8], along with valuable reference implementations released to the community. We thus chose to build our work upon the top-performing benchmarked algorithm, Trust-Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [9], which we detail further in Section III-A. TRPO was notably used recently to discover dynamic locomotion behaviours such as crouching and jumping on simulated humanoids [4]. Applied in the real world, RL techniques require special attention to guarantee safe exploration during training, and safe execution at inference time. A thorough survey of safe RL was presented in [10], which classified techniques into two categories: those incorporating safety terms in the policy optimality criterion, and those modifying the exploration process using additional information. In particular, our work was inspired by [11], which proposed a new trust region method, Constrained Policy Optimization (CPO), to guarantee policy performance improvement with near-constraint satisfaction at each iteration, along with important results on convergence speed and worst-case constraint violation. Still, real-world robot experiments may require exact constraint satisfaction, though possibly at the cost of less (time and data) efficient training. Alternatively, constraints can be enforced on the neural network predictions directly: a priori, e.g., by placing limits on the range of possible actions before sampling [12]; or a posteriori, e.g., by ensuring that predictions do not send the robot’s end effector outside of a chosen bounding sphere, reprojecting it inside if needed [13]. Our approach extends these ideas by reshaping the range of possible actions at each time step to ensure that resulting predictions always satisfy the exact safety constraints (not approximations thereof), during both training and inference. Our work also benefitted from [14], which proposed a neural network architecture to solve QP optimization problems in the context of SL, with applications to Sudoku puzzles. We extend this research towards RL for real-world systems with physical constraints. III. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION In this section, we summarize the RL algorithm our work builds upon, TRPO (Section III-A). We then consider the motivating example of a 2D reaching task (Section III-B) and illustrate the limitations of RL without explicit consideration  of constraints (Section III-C), namely that learning a safe policy involves unsafe actions in the first place, with great sensitivity to the associated reward and cost structure. A. Reinforcement Learning Nomenclature We consider an infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) characterized by a tuple (S, A, P, R, ρ0 , γ), with S the set of states (e.g., robot joint configurations), A the set of actions (e.g., motor commands), P : S × A × S → [0, 1] the transition probability distribution to go from one state to another by taking a specific action, R : S × A × S → R the function of associated rewards, ρ0 : S → [0, 1] the initial state probability distribution, γ ∈ [0, 1) a discount factor. Denoting by π : S × A → [0, 1] a stochastic policy, the objective is typically to maximize the discounted  ∞ P i γ R(si , ai , si+1 ) , with expected return η(π) = E τ  i=0  τ = (s0 , a0 , . . . ) a state-action trajectory, s0 ∼ ρ0 , ai ∼ π(·|si ) and si+1 ∼ P (·|si , ai ). With the same notations, we denote by Qπ the state-action value function, Vπ the value function and Aπ the advantage function: "∞ # X l γ R(si+l , ai+l , si+l+1 ) , Qπ (si , ai ) = E si+1 ,ai+1 ,...  l=0  (1) " Vπ (si ) =  E  ai ,si+1 ,...  ∞ X  # γ l R(si+l , ai+l , si+l+1 ) , (2)  l=0  Aπ (s, a) = Qπ (s, a) − Vπ (s).  (3)  We consider in particular the case of a policy πθ parameterized by a vector θ (e.g., neural network parameters). In TRPO, the policy πθk is iteratively refined by solving the following optimization problem at each iteration k:   πθ (a|s) Aπθk (s, a) (4) θk+1 = argmax E s∼ρθk ,a∼πθk πθk (a|s) θ such that  with ρθ (s) =  E [DKL (πθk (·|s)||πθ (·|s))] ≤ δKL ,  s∼ρθk ∞ P i=0  (5)  γ i P (si = s) the discounted state-visitation  frequencies when actions are chosen according to πθ , DKL the Kullback-Leibler divergence (measuring how much two probability distributions differ from each other), and δKL a step size controlling how much the policy is allowed to change at each iteration. Eq. (4) is then solved numerically by sampling state-action trajectories following πθk and averaging over samples. Our work builds on top of the OpenAI Baselines reference implementation for TRPO1 , in which a neural network N predicts state values jointly with actions. In the rest of the paper, we refer to it as a procedure U PDATE N ETWORK (N , (si , ai , ri , vi )i ) that iteratively optimizes N from sequences of state-action-reward-value tuples (si , ai , ri , vi )i=0,...,N over finite horizon N .  end θelbow effector forearm target  upper arm θshoulder obstacle  T YPE rdist rcoll  rprox  R EWARD −dT −20βcoll if collision else 0 2 if dT ≤ 3 cm else 0  (a) 2-DoF robot, target and obstacle. (b) 2D-reaching reward structure. Fig. 2. 2D reacher description and rewards, with dT the distance between target and end-effector and βcoll ∈ {1, 5, 10, 50} a penalization coefficient.  B. Motivating Example We consider a 2-DoF robot with parallel revolute joints. The robot’s base link is rigidly linked to the world such that it evolves in a plane (x, y) perpendicular to the gravity vector −gz. Its two main links, upper arm and forearm, are of length 0.1 m. The task consists in reaching a target point with the robot’s end effector while avoiding a spherical obstacle, both on the plane (x, y). We denote by θ = (θshoulder , θelbow ) the robot’s joint angles, with θshoulder not limited and θelbow ∈ [−π, +π], and by θ̇, θ̈ its joint velocities and accelerations, respectively. We depict the 2D reacher environment, E2D , in Fig. 2a. Each episode is initialized as follows: 1) The robot is reset to the initial state θ = θ̇ = θ̈ = 0. 2) The target’s coordinates are randomly sampled following a uniform distribution of ±0.27 cm along x and y (possibly out of reach for the robot). 3) The obstacle is initialized following the same distribution. If it collides at initialization with the robot, its position is re-sampled until it is no more the case. We discretize time into N = 200 steps of duration ∆T = 0.01 s. The state vector si at step i, or time ti = i∆T , is: • pfa the 3D position of the forearm’s base, • θelbow the elbow joint angle, • θ̇ the joint velocities, • pee the 3D position of the end effector, • pt −pee the target position pt relative to the end effector, • po − pee the obstacle position po , also relative to pee . The robot is controlled in position by providing, at step i, the desired joint position at step i + 1. We define a zero-centered action ai as the joint step ∆θi = θi+1 − θi to perform between two consecutive time steps. Finally, executing ai in the environment yields three rewards, rdist (reward on low distance to target), rcoll (collision penalization), rprox (bonus on proximity to target), detailed in Fig. 2b. We denote by ri the total reward at step i. In order to assess the sensitivity of RL to the reward structure, we parameterize the collision reward rcoll with a coefficient βcoll ∈ {1, 5, 10, 50}. C. Preliminary Results We implement the environment E2D within the OpenAI Gym and Roboschool framework [15], which provides a unified interface to train and test neural network policies. 1 https://github.com/openai/baselines  We use the physics engine within Roboschool to monitor external collisions, between any robot link and the obstacle, and auto-collisions, between the end effector and the base. Throughout this paper, we take as neural network N a simple multilayer perceptron (MLP) with two hidden layers of size 32 each. At each step i, the environment produces a state vector si , which is fed into N to produce an action and value pair ai , vi . Executing ai in E2D results in a reward ri and an updated state si+1 . We construct such sequences (si , ai , ri , vi )i=0,...,N over episodes of up to N = 200 timesteps, interrupted in case of collision. On a 8-core computer, we train N on four instances of E2D in parallel, with the TRPO procedure U PDATE N ETWORK of Section IIIA. We report the evolution of the reward over 15000 episodes of training, for four values of βcoll , along with the cumulated number of collisions in Fig. 3. We observe the following: • The reward evolution throughout training is greatly dependent on the collision penalization weight. • With βcoll = 1, the low penalty associated to collisions rcoll = −20 results in collision avoidance never being learnt. The optimal strategy consists in quickly going to the target to get the proximity reward rprox and possibly hitting the obstacle to start a new episode. • Conversely, with βcoll = 50, the large penalty rcoll = −1000 results in fewer collisions but discourages exploration. The optimal strategy then consists in staying in the vicinity of the start pose and ignoring further targets. • βcoll = 5 and 10 (rcoll = −100 and −200, respectively) are comparable in terms of rewards, but the latter results in half the number of collisions. This confirms the importance of carefully crafting the reward structure. These results show that, without explicitly consideration of safety constraints during RL, it is difficult to learn a safe policy without violating such constraints many times. Overall, while we believe it is ultimately possible to design a reward structure that efficiently decreases collisions over time (e.g., empirically or by inverse reinforcement learning [16]), for the sake of RL in the real world, it is crucial to be able to learn to satisfy constraints without ever violating them. IV. C ONSTRAINED O PTIMIZATION L AYER A. OptLayer Architecture With x a vector of nx variables to optimize, we consider quadratic programs (QP) of the form: 1 T x Px + qT x 2 such that Gx ≤ h min x  and Ax = b.  (6) (7) (8)  Eq. (6) is a quadratic objective in x, with P a square matrix and q a vector of respective size nx × nx and nx ; Eq (7) a set of nin linear inequalities, with G and h of respective size nin × nx and nin ; and Eq (8) a set of neq linear equalities, with A and b of respective size neq × nx and neq . Our goal is to ensure that the action  coll  Cumulated collisions [10]  Reward [100]  4  =1  coll  4  =5  coll  4  = 10  2  2  2  2  0  0  0  0  2  2  2  2  4  4  4  4  6  6  6  6  0  10000  100  0  10000  20  50  0  10000  10  0 0  10000 Episode  0 0  Episode reward  10000 Episode  = 50  0  10000  0  10000 Episode  care is given to constraint matrices, which for robotic applications can be constant or affine in si , require auxiliary state variables, or activate only under particular conditions. Although only inequality constraints appear in the following exposition, equality constraints are treated the same way. 1) Objective matrices: We minimize the (squared) L2 ei : distance between optimization variables x and prediction a 1 1 T 1 ei ||2 = xT x − a e a eTi x + a ei . min ||x − a x 2 2 2 i  0 0  10000 Episode  Reward moving average  Collision count  θ̇min ≤ θ̇ ≤ θ̇max , Fig. 3. Reward and collision count for unconstrained 2D reaching task with collision penalization coefficient βcoll ∈ {1, 5, 10, 50}, averaged over three seeds. Moving average over 40 consecutive episode rewards. v Environment s  Agent  Neural network  World Constraint parameters  e a  s  OptLayer  a∗  (a) Prediction-correction architecture. OptLayer: min 12 xT Px + qT x such that Gx ≤ h and Ax = b x  c  Compute constraint violation cost  P, q, G, h, A, b ···  e a  s  Build constraint Init. matrices P,q,G optim. h,A,b var.  Optim. iter. 1  ∆x0 ∆y0 ∆λ0  Optim. iter. n  ∆µ0  +  ···  ∆xn−1 ∆yn−1 ∆λn−1 ∆µn−1  +  x0 , y0 , λ0 , µ0 x1 , y1 , λ1 , µ1 xn−1 , yn−1 , λn−1 , µn−1 xn , yn , λn , µn  (b) OptLayer computes the safe action a∗ that is closest to neural network e, while quantifying how much the latter violates safety constraints. prediction a Fig. 4.  OptLayer constrained optimization pipeline.  at predicted by a neural network N satisfies constraints such as Eqs. (7) and (8). In the following, we denote by ei the action predicted by the neural network N based on a the current state si . We propose a constrained optimization layer, OptLayer, that computes the action a∗i that is closest ei while also satisfying constraints depending on si . We to a depict the overall architecture in Fig. 4a. While multiple solutions are already available for solving QPs alone (as a forward pass), end-to-end neural network training requires a backward pass, in particular computing the gradients of the outputs with respect to the input parameters. We thus construct objective and constraint matrices as differentiable ei (Section IVexpressions of OptLayer’s inputs si and a B). We then solve the QP with an interior point method implemented as fully differentiable layers (Section IV-C). B. Quadratic Program Initialization Our first goal is to construct objective and constraint ei and si . Special matrices as differentiable expressions of a  (11)  Eq (11) thus defines a set of constraint matrices Gcst = [Inx , −Inx ]T and hcst = [∆T θ̇max , −∆T θ̇min ]T that are constant throughout the robot’s motion. 3) Constraint matrices affine in the state vector: Consider now joint position limits θmin , θmax : θmin ≤ θ ≤ θmax .  Select a∗ a∗ = xn ···  (10)  with θ̇min , θ̇max velocity limits specified by the manufacturer (typically, θ̇min = −θ̇max ). At step i + 1, approximating joint velocities θ̇i+1 with ∆θi /∆T yields the following inequalities on action hypothesis x = ∆θi , following Eq. (7): [Inx ]x ≤ [∆T θ̇max ] and [−Inx ]x ≤ [−∆T θ̇min ].  c  e a  (9)  eTi a ei does not depend on x, it does not affect the Since a optimum. Eq. (9) can thus be written as Eq. (6), with P = Inx the identity matrix of size nx × nx and q = −e ai . 2) Constant constraint matrices: In general, the constraints that affect a robot can be static or depend on its state. For the former, consider for example joint velocity limits:  5  10  0  coll  4  (12)  In this case, the range of possible actions depends on the current joint positions. Since θi+1 = θi + x, we have: [Inx ]x ≤ [θmax − θi ] and [−Inx ]x ≤ [θi − θmin ].  (13)  Since θi is a member of the state vector si , we can construct a selection matrix Hθ (with only 0 and ±1) such that [−θi , θi ]T = Hθ si . Eq. (13) defines a set of constraint matrices that are constant or affine in si : Gaff = [Inx , −Inx ]T and haff = Hθ si + [θmax , −θmin ]T . 4) Auxiliary state parameters: In some cases, constraint matrices may not be formulated as a simple function of si . Consider for example limits τmin , τmax on joint torques τ: τmin ≤ τ ≤ τmax .  (14)  With q, q̇, q̈ the robot’s generalized coordinates (constant base pose and joint angles θ), generalized velocities (zero base velocities 06 and joint velocities θ̇) and generalized accelerations (zero base accelerations 06 and joint accelerations θ̈), respectively, let H(q) be its mass matrix, C(q, q̇) the bias vector comprising Coriolis, centrifugal and gravitational forces, and Fbase the 6-element vector of the external forces and torques exerted at the robot’s (fixed) base. In the absence of other contact forces, the equations of motion are then:   Fbase H(q)q̈ + C(q, q̇) = . (15) τ  The first 6 rows of Eq. (15) allow the computation of Fbase . We take Hτ (q) and Cτ (q, q̇) as the rows indexed 7 and onwards in H(q) and C(q, q̇), respectively, such that:   06 τ = Hτ (q)q̈ + Cτ (q, q̇), with q̈ = . (16) θ̈ At step i, estimating θ̈i by forward difference θ̈i = (θ̇i+1 − θ̇i )/∆T and θ̇i+1 = (θi+1 − θi )/∆T = x/∆T yields: θ̇i x − . 2 ∆T ∆T Combining Eqs. (16) and (17) makes τi affine in x:     Hτ (qi ) 06 Hτ (qi ) 06 τi = + C (q, q̇) − . τ x θ̇i ∆T 2 ∆T θ̈i =  (17)  (18)  Since Hτ (qi ) and Cτ (qi , q̇i ) can not be expressed as a trivial function (e.g., linear) of si in its current form, we adjust the environment E to compute them internally and append them to si . Explicitly, we compute Hτ (qi ) and Cτ (qi , q̇i ) from the robot’s joint states and physical parameters using the KDL library [17] and store their elements as additional elements of si . The joint torque constraints of Eq. (14) can then be expressed following Eq. (7), with constraint matrices Gaux and haux assembled from si (extended) directly. 5) Conditional constraint matrices: Finally, some constraints may be active only under some conditions. We consider the collision avoidance constraints of [18]. We denote by Ll a convex object associated to a robot link l, pl the closest point between Ll and the environment, dl and nl the corresponding distance and unit vector, oriented towards pl . If dl is smaller than a threshold dM , named influence distance, then the following constraint is enabled: −ξ  dl − dm ≤ d˙l , dM − dm  (19)  with d˙l the distance velocity, dm a threshold security distance, and ξ a positive velocity damping coefficient. Intuitively, Eq. (19) ensures that the distance dl between the robot and its environment cannot decrease faster than a chosen rate while dm ≤ dl ≤ dM , and that dl strictly increases if dl < dm . Eq. (19) can be equivalently written as a constraint on q̇, with J(q, pl ) the Jacobian matrix of Ll at pl when obstacles are static (otherwise it suffices to adjust d˙l with their velocities):   dl − dm −ξ ≤ nTl J(q, pl ) q̇. (20) dM − dm Similarly to Section IV-B.4, the state vector si can be extended with the elements of J(q, pl )T nl to form constraint matrices Gcond and hcond . We also extend si with dl and denote by Hdl the selection matrix such that Hdl si = dl . With htest = [dM ] − Hdl si , conditional constraints and their activation can be expressed following: If {0 ≤ htest } , then enable {Gcond x ≤ hcond } .  (21)  Note that activation condition {0 ≤ htest } can only depend on state si , the action x being optimized subsequently.  C. Quadratic Program Solving 1) Assembling constraint matrices for batch solving: Using the notations of Section IV-B, we consider first a set of individual constraint matrices that are always active: Gcst , hcst , Gaff , haff , Gaux , haux . We concatenate them into base constraint matrices Gbase = [Gcst , Gaff , Gaux ]T and hbase = [hcst , haff , haux ]T to be considered at every step. When solving only one QP at a time, conditional constraints matrices Gcond , hcond can be appended to the complete constraint matrices G, h of Eq. (7) only when active, i.e.: ( T G = [Gbase , Gcond ] If {0 ≤ htest } : , (22) T h = [hbase , hcond ] ( G = Gbase otherwise : . (23) h = hbase However, deep neural networks are commonly trained using mini-batches of multiple input-output pairs in parallel. A technical consequence of parallel computing is that all elements processed together must be the same size. With Gsub (resp. hsub ) a submatrix of Gbase (resp. hbase ) of size that of Gcond (resp. hcond ), we replace Eq. (23) with: ( T G = [Gbase , Gsub ] . (24) If not {0 ≤ htest } : T h = [hbase , hsub ] G and h being of constant size thus enables batch solving. 2) Iterative resolution: Provided objective and constraint matrices P, q, G, h, A, b, we implement the interior point method for solving QPs described in [7]. With x still denoting the variables to optimize, λ slack variables for the QP, µ and y dual variables respectively associated to the inequality and equality constraints, finding the optimum x∗ amounts to solving a sequence of linear systems. First:      x −q P GT AT G −Inin 0nin ,neq  µ =  h  . (25) y b A 0neq ,nin 0neq ,neq We then use the solution to Eq. (25) to set x0 = x, y0 = y, and initialize λ0 and µ0 depending on the value of µ. We thus obtain a starting point (x0 , λ0 , µ0 , y0 ). The QP is then solved iteratively. For (xk , λk , µk , yk ) at iteration k, with Λk = diag(λk ) and Mk = diag(µk ), update directions are computed by solving linear systems of the form [7]:    ∆xk P 0nin ,nin GT AT 0nin ,nx   Mk Λk 0nin ,neq   ∆λk  = dk , (26)  G Inin 0nin ,nin 0nin ,neq ∆µk  A 0neq ,nin 0neq ,nin 0neq ,neq ∆yk with dk a vector depending on the current iteration (xk , λk , µk , yk ) and QP matrices P, q, G, h, A, b. [14] showed that such problems could be efficiently solved on the GPU and released a public implementation using the PyTorch framework. In our custom implementation, we solved Eqs. (25) and (26) using linear system solvers provided within the Tensorflow framework. We iteratively update xk+1 = xk + ∆xk , λk+1 = λk + ∆λk , µk+1 = µk +  1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19:  procedure B UILD T RAJ(E, N , O, constrained) S, V, R ← (), () . States, values, rewards e A∗ ← (), () A, . Predicted, optimal actions C ← () . Constraint violation costs s = E.reset(); end = false . Get initial state while not end do S.add(s) . Store current state e, v ← N (s) a . Predict action, value e) a∗ , c ← O(s, a . Constrain prediction e A.add(e a); V .add(v); A∗ .add(a∗ ); C.add(c) if constrained then s, r, end = E.do(a∗ ) . Respects constraints else s, r, end = E.do(e a) . Can violate constraints end if R.add(r) . Store reward end while e R, V, A∗ , C return S, A, end procedure  Fig. 5. Build a training trajectory for network N and optimization layer O in environment E. If constrained = false, execute raw predictions.  ∆µk , yk+1 = yk + ∆yk , for k = 0, . . . , kmax . While early stopping criteria can be employed for single QP solving, we take kmax constant for batch solving. Noting that the problems we solve typically converge in about 5 iterations, we empirically set kmax = 10. The final value for x is then e outputted as the action a∗ closest to the initial prediction a that satisfies all safety constraints. We depict the complete OptLayer pipeline in Fig. 4b. V. C ONSTRAINED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING We propose a reward strategy that ensures that safety constraints are never violated throughout training and is readily compatible with existing RL methods, such as TRPO. A. Trajectory Sampling Recall from Section III-B that for unconstrained RL, we collect sequences of state-action-reward-value tuples ei , ri , vi )i=0,...,N by iteratively executing neural network (si , a e in the environment E. Having established that predictions a executing unconstrained actions can be dangerous in the real world, we use OptLayer to produce corrected actions a∗ and execute those instead in E. Additionally, given constraint matrices A, b, G, h, it is possible to quantify how much e violate those. We define equality unconstrained predictions a and inequality violation costs ceq and cin , respectively: ceq = ||Ae a − b||,  (27)  cin = || max(Ge a − h, 0nin )||.  (28)  From Eq. (27), ceq increases any time Ae a 6= b, element-wise. Similarly, from Eq (28), only elements such that Ge a > h contribute to cin by taking the element-wise maximum with zero. In practice, the rows of A, b (resp. G, h) can be scaled with an arbitrary non-zero (resp. positive) coefficient without changing the QP solution. We thus uniformize their  individual contributions in ceq (resp. cin ) by normalization with the coefficients making each row of A (resp. G) of unit norm. We denote by c = ceq + cin the total constraint violation and compute it within OptLayer, together with a∗ . We define a procedure B UILD T RAJ in Fig. 5, that takes as inputs an environment E, a neural network N with OptLayer O, a flag constrained determining whether constrained or unconstrained actions are executed, and outputs states, raw predictions, rewards, values, corrected actions and ei , ri , vi , ai , ci )i . By setting constraint violation costs (si , a constrained = false, unconstrained actions are executed. We only do so in simulation. For real-world RL, we set constrained = true and only execute corrected actions. B. Policy Update Strategies With the procedure U PDATE N ETWORK described in Section III-A, we update the network N with sequences of the form (si , ai , ri , vi )i . We assess four ways to do so. 1) Unconstrained Predictions (UP): We run B UILD T RAJ with constrained = false and update N with ei , ri , vi )i ), as in SecU PDATE N ETWORK (N , (si , a tion III-B. This is our baseline for unconstrained RL. 2) Constrained - learn Predictions (CP): We run B UILD T RAJ with constrained = true and update ei , ri , vi )i ). Note N with U PDATE N ETWORK (N , (si , a that different state sequences are produced compared to UP, as corrected (not predicted) actions are executed. 3) Constrained - learn Corrections (CC): We run B UILD T RAJ with constrained = true and update N with U PDATE N ETWORK (N , (si , a∗i , ri , vi )i ). 4) Constrained - learn Predictions and Corrections (CPC): We run B UILD T RAJ with constrained = true and compute discounted rewards rei using constraint violation costs ci : rei = ri − ci . We first update N with raw predictions and discounted ei , rei , vi )i ). We rewards, U PDATE N ETWORK (N , (si , a update N a second time, using corrected actions and non-discounted rewards from initial sampling: U PDATE N ETWORK (N , (si , a∗i , ri , vi )i ). Intuitively, the CP policy update strategy amounts to considering OptLayer separately from the network and as part of the environment. In the CC strategy, we try to learn corrected actions directly, that can possibly greatly differ from initial neural network predictions. With CPC, we first associate raw predictions with discounted rewards before associating corrected actions with better rewards. VI. E XPERIMENTS We now illustrate the application of OptLayer in the context of RL to learn 3D reaching tasks using a 6-DoF industrial manipulator (Section VI-A), both in simulation (Section VI-B) and in the real world (Section VI-C). A. 3D Reaching with Obstacle Avoidance We perform our experiments on a 6-DoF industrial manipulator (Universal Robots UR5), equipped with a forcetorque sensor (Robotiq FT-150) and a gripper (Robotiq 3Finger Adaptive Robot Gripper). Although we do not use  rprox  (b) 3D-reaching reward structure.  Fig. 6. 3D reacher environment, with dT the distance between target and gripper. In simulation, obstacle (red) and target (green) are floating spheres. In reality, we position them using handles with visual markers.  the latter to actually grasp objects in our experiments, we keep it for the sake of realism, making it even more crucial to preserve safety. We control the robot by directly sending desired trajectories through the Robot Operating System (ROS) middleware, in joint space, without making use of any safety mechanism available. We define a 3D reacher environment, E3D , where the goal is to send consecutive joint commands to reach a target point in 3D while avoiding collisions with the environment and the robot itself. At any step i, joint states θi , θ̇i , θ̈i and actions ai = θi+1 − θi are now of size 6. The state vector si contains joint positions and velocities θi , θ̇i , end effector position taken at the center of the finger ends pee,i , and target, obstacle 3D positions relative to pee,i . Each episode is run following the same procedure as the 2D case, except for one adjustment, motivated by real-robot training. At the end of each episode, we reset the robot by replaying the trajectory in reverse. This is important since going back from end to initial pose by joint space interpolation can lead to collisions in between. We set the maximum number of time steps to N = 100, with duration ∆T = 0.1 s. We implement E3D to enable parallel training on multiple physical robots or simulation instances (Gazebo). B. Evaluating Policy Update Strategies To evaluate the UP, CP, CC and CPC policy update strategies, we initialize safety constraint matrices as described in Section IV. While we could formulate them manually based on the specifications of our robot system (UR5 robot, forcetorque sensor, gripper), it is in fact possible to partially automate their definition. We leverage the availability of standardized robot description formats (e.g., URDF, MJCF) often directly released by robot manufacturers. We thus automatically generate constraint matrices for joint limits by simply parsing kinematic and physical parameters from such files. For collision constraints, we manually construct convex hulls for every robot link to enable fast distance computation [19]. We then automate the formulation of collision constraint matrices from a set of distances to monitor, of the form {(gripper, forearm), (elbow, obstacle), . . . }. In total, we enforce 36 joint constraints (position, velocity, torque) and 20 collision constraints (robot, floating obstacle, environment). In simulation, we train neural networks on E3D using UP, CP, CC and CPC. For each policy update strategy, we report rewards and collisions throughout 7000 episodes in Fig. 7a.  CP  CC  CPC  7.5  7.5  7.5  7.5  5.0  5.0  5.0  5.0  2.5  2.5  2.5  2.5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  2.5  2.5  2.5  2.5  5.0  5.0  5.0  5.0  7.5  7.5  7.5  7.5  0 Cumulated collisions [10]  (a) UR5 robot, obstacle and target.  R EWARD −10dT −100 if collision else 0 10 if dT ≤ 5 cm else 0  Reward [100]  UP  T YPE rdist rcoll  5000  20  0  0  5000  5000  0.05  0.05  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.05 0  0  0.05  5000 Episode  Episode reward  0.05 0  5000 Episode  0  5000  0  5000 Episode  0.05 0  5000 Episode  Reward moving average  Collision count  (a) Reward and collision count. Moving average over 40 consecutive episodes.  UP CP CC CPC  T OTAL T IME 10 h19 min 12 h28 min 12 h22 min 12 h30 min  S T /E P 88 100 100 100  T IME /S T 60 ms 64 ms 64 ms 64 ms  E P TO R 5350 4950 N/A 3250  T IME TO R 7 h53 min 8 h49 min N/A 5 h48 min  (b) Training time over 7000 episodes E P, steps S T, average reward R = 700. Fig. 7. Training results for 3D reaching with a 6-DoF robot, with policy update strategies UP (unconstrained) and CP, CC, CPC (constrained).  We observe the following. First, unconstrained training with UC results in the robot successfully learning to reach (top left), but not in effectively learning collision avoidance (bottom left). In contrast, using OptLayer successfully ensures that collisions never happen for all policy update strategies. In particular, CP realizes rewards that are comparable to UP while never putting the robot at risk. Recall that in CP, from the perspective of the network, OptLayer can be seen as part of the environment, since the network is updated using e only. In constrast, updating the network raw predictions a using only corrected actions a∗ within CC does not enable learning to reach. We believe this is due to a∗ being initially e to be representative of the stochastic policy too far from a we optimize within TRPO, following Eq. (4). To do so e using successfully, CPC first updates the network with a discounted rewards prior to using a∗ . Subsequently, CPC appears to reach the performance of UP and CP with far fewer episodes. For example, a 700 average reward is reached in 5350 episodes by UP, 4950 by CP, 3250 by CPC. Detailed computation times (Fig. 7b) show that, though OptLayer induces some overhead (4 ms per step), the gain in terms of episodes makes CPC faster than UP even in terms of time. C. Real-World Experiments Having trained control policies in simulation, we execute them on a real robot. In these experiments, we position obstacle and target with respect to the robot using physical handles marked with 2D barcodes and tracked with an RGB camera. First, we consider a normal instance of E3D with  Fig. 8. From left to right: static obstacle, moving target; moving obstacle, moving target; static obstacle, static target learning on a real robot.  static target and obstacle. We execute the unconstrained policy learned with UP, NUP , to reach a target behind a balloon (Fig. 1a). While reaching was successful, the balloon was knocked down, illustrating that collision avoidance was not effectively learned. We do not use NUP further. In contrast, using the constrained policy learned with CPC, NCPC , results in successfully reaching the target while avoiding the balloon (Fig. 1b). As a qualitative example, we consider the case where the target is moving, carried by a toy train around a balloon (Fig. 8, left). Although NCPC was not explicitly trained on this task, the target was successfully followed without hitting the balloon. We then consider the case where the obstacle is also moving. Through the collision avoidance constraints of Eq. (19), we verify that bringing the obstacle close to the robot forces the latter to move away from it. These results illustrate that combining control policies learned on specific tasks with OptLayer can help adapt to changing conditions, while always maintaining safety. Finally, although position control policies can be learned in simulation for E3D , real-world training can be necessary, e.g., for tasks involving force control [20] and physical interaction with the environment [13]. We thus learn a simplified version of E3D , in which the real robot has to reach a static target without touching a static obstacle. For ease of visualization, we use a cake for the latter (Fig. 8, right), never hitting it over 6 h of training. Our approach can thus be used to learn a robot control policy from scratch without active human supervision. We present our complete experimental results in the supplementary material2 . VII. D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK Our work establishes that stochastic control policies can be efficiently coupled with constrained optimization to enable RL in the real world, where safety is crucial. Our method is simple to implement and readily compatible with existing RL techniques. We illustrated its application on neural network policies optimized with TRPO and demonstrated its effectiveness on a 3D reaching task with collision avoidance. Real-world robot experiments showed in particular that our system could accomodate reasonable changes in environment and task conditions, even without dedicated training. Still, our work is subject to some limitations in its current implementation. While we showed that our approach could speed up training by better exploiting unsafe predictions, 2 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7liBbk3VjWQ  learning control policies from scratch may remain too timeconsuming even for simple tasks. We would thus like to investigate novel strategies for action space exploration tailored to robotics. Another limitation is that formalizing safety constraints can be difficult, e.g., under dynamic model uncertainties. Even when constraints are well defined, their activation may be contingent on the accuracy of other perception systems (e.g., vision). Our work would thus benefit from further advances in learning perception and control under uncertainties [5], [6]. Next, we intend to tackle other challenging robot learning and control tasks, such as bipedal locomotion and multi-agent collaboration. In the long term, we plan to extend our approach to problems besides robotics, such as decision-making systems for finance or healthcare. R EFERENCES [1] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, 2015. [2] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van Den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam, M. Lanctot, et al., “Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search,” Nature, 2016. [3] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., 2016. [4] N. Heess, S. Sriram, J. Lemmon, J. Merel, G. Wayne, Y. Tassa, T. Erez, Z. Wang, A. Eslami, M. Riedmiller, et al., “Emergence of locomotion behaviours in rich environments,” arXiv, 2017. [5] P. Christiano, Z. Shah, I. Mordatch, J. Schneider, T. Blackwell, J. Tobin, P. Abbeel, and W. Zaremba, “Transfer from simulation to real world through learning deep inverse dynamics model,” arXiv, 2016. [6] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world,” in Proc. IEEE-RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., 2017. [7] J. Mattingley and S. Boyd, “Cvxgen: A code generator for embedded convex optimization,” Optimization and Engineering, 2012. [8] Y. Duan, X. Chen, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, and P. Abbeel, “Benchmarking deep reinforcement learning for continuous control,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016. [9] J. Schulman, S. Levine, P. Abbeel, M. Jordan, and P. Moritz, “Trust region policy optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015. [10] J. Garcıa and F. Fernández, “A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., 2015. [11] J. Achiam, D. Held, A. Tamar, and P. Abbeel, “Constrained policy optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017. [12] Y. F. Chen, M. Liu, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “Decentralized noncommunicating multiagent collision avoidance with deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2017. [13] S. Gu, E. Holly, T. Lillicrap, and S. Levine, “Deep reinforcement learning for robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2017. [14] B. Amos and J. Z. Kolter, “Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017. [15] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba, “Openai gym,” arXiv, 2016. [16] C. Finn, T. Yu, J. Fu, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Generalizing skills with semi-supervised reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Repr., 2017. [17] R. Smits, H. Bruyninckx, and E. Aertbeliën, “Kdl: Kinematics and dynamics library,” http://www.orocos.org/kdl, 2011. [18] F. Kanehiro, F. Lamiraux, O. Kanoun, E. Yoshida, and J.-P. Laumond, “A local collision avoidance method for non-strictly convex polyhedra,” Robot. Sci. Syst., 2008. [19] J. Pan, S. Chitta, and D. Manocha, “Fcl: A general purpose library for collision and proximity queries,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2012. [20] T. Inoue, G. De Magistris, A. Munawar, T. Yokoya, and R. Tachibana, “Deep reinforcement learning for high precision assembly tasks,” in Proc. IEEE-RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., 2017.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
